Plutarch's Lives, Vol. V (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
==============================================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 5. Completes the 6-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

te:

^Jrcsexttrb to

®I|e ICtbrarg

of the

Miss Maria Langton
Thru the Cttee. formed in
The Old Country to aid in the
loss caused by
The disastrous Fire of Feb. 14/90

PLUTARCH'S LIVES,

TRANSLATED FROM

THE ORIGINAL GREEK;

WITH

NOTES CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL,

AND A

LIFE OF PLUTARCH.

BY JOHN LANGHORNE, D.D.

AND

WILLIAM LANGHORNE, A.M.
IN SIX VOLUMES.

— — ,,^i

THE SECOND EDITION,

BY \\ ' .

THE REV. FRANCIS V^RANGHAM^ M?^. F.R.S.

WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS.

VOL. V.

LONDON:

Printed for J. Mawman; F. C. and J. Rivington; O. WiiJtrE and J, RosrasoN; J. WirjitR

W. CtARKE AND SoNS ; CaDELL AND DaVIES ; F. WiNORAVE ; C. I«AW ; J. ANli A. Arch ;
SCATCHERD AND LetTKRMAN ; B. AND R. CROSBY ; WHITE, COCHRAKE, AND CO. ; LoNGMAN,

Hurst, Reks, Ormk, and Brown ; J. Booker; J. Richardson; J. M. Richardson; Black,
Parry, and Co.; J. Hatcfiard; J. Murray; R. Scholey; R.Baldwin; Cradock and
Joy; T. Hamilton; J. Fallder; Gale, Curtis, and Fenser ; and G. and S. RoB^^:aoN ;
AKB Wilson and Sons, York,

1813,

fi

I ]


Printed by C. Baldwin* New BTidge-street, London.

CONTENTS

OF TRE

FIFTH VOLUME.

PAGE

XXXV. Phocion 1

XXXVI. Cato the Younger 46

Phocion and Cato the Younsrer

compared t , 123

XXXVIIT* \ ^^^^ ^'^^ Cleomen€s \ 131

yj ' > Tiberius and Caius Gracchus 198

Agis and Cleomenes and T. and C.

Gracchus compared 243

XLI. Demosthenes 249

XLIL Cicero 291

Demosthenes and Cicero co7npared 354

XLIII. Demetrius 361

* XLIV. Antony 423

Demetrius and Antony compared 509

THE

LIFE

OF

P H O C I O N

SUxMMARY.

Phocion^s glorij ohscnred hj the unhcq^pij circumstances of the i'nncs.
Difficult to govern republics in advcrsitj/. Just temperature of ion-
duct hard to be discovered. Excessive austerity of Cato. Whu
compared ivith Phocion. Phocion^s birth and character. His va-
rious obser\mtions. He serves under Chabrias ; their mutual re-
gard. He equalli/ studies politics and tvar : never flatters the
people. His different sayings. Reflections upon his character.
Esteem entertained for him by the Athenian allies. He gains ct
complete victory over Philip^s army in Eubtea. The allies refuse
to receive Charesfeet into their harbours. Phocion appointed to
supersede him. He gets possession of Megara, atid advises his
countrymen to makepeace ivith Philip: is placed at the head of the
adnmiistration. His opinion about the citizens demanded by Alex-
ander. He advises that prince to turn his arms against the Per*
sians : refuses his presents. His tvife. He carries his son to Lace-
dirmon, to be educated in all the rigour if the ancient discipline.
His conduct tvith respect to Harpdlus: prudertce on receivino- in-
telligence of Alexander's death : opinion on the Lamian tvar. He
defeats Micion. Victory, and subsequent defeat, of the confederate
Creeks in Thessaly. Phocion despatched embassador to Aidipater :
His second embassy. TJie Athenians obliged to receive a Macedo-
nian garrison. Tivelve thousand citizens excluded, 07i account of
their poverty, from a share in the government. Rigour and tyranny
of Antipater. Phocion^s prudence, and disititerestcdness. Death
ofDemades and his son. Phocion renders Nicanor hind and oblii^-
VOL. y. B

2 PHOCION.

ivg to ike Athenians. They arc deceived by PoJypcrchon. Nicanor
furms designs against the Pircetis. Phocion accused of treason.
Polyperchon sends him bound, in a cart, to Athens. The people
condemn him to death. His magnanimity. A poor man, named
Conopion, manages his Jiinernl. Repentance of the Athenians, and
honours paid by them to Phocion : Vengeance taken upon his
accusers.

DeMADES the orator^ by studying throughout
his whole administration to gratify the Macedonians
and Antipatcr, acquired considerable authority in
Athens. Whenever he found himself obliged by
that complaisance to propose laws, and to make
speeches, injurious to the dignity and the virtue of
his country, he used to say ; " He was excusable,
" because he came to the helm at a time, when the
" commonwealth was no more than a wreck." This
assertion, which in him was unwarrantable, applies
apparently with great accuracy to the administration
of Phocion. Demades was the very man, who
wrecked his country. He pursued such a vicious
plan both in his private and public conduct, that An-
tipater scrupled not to compare him, when he was
grown old, to " a sacrificed beast, all consumed ex-
" cept his tongue and his paunch*." But Phocion's
virtue found a strong and powerful adversary in the
times, and it*s glory was sullied and obscured in the
gloomy period of Greece's misfortunes. Yet Virtue
is not so weak, as Sophocles would make her, where
he says.

For not in adverse days the native spirit
lieniains, but flies *.

' This man, one of the demagogues of the day, and the venal tool
of Macedon, finally (as we shall see in the sequel of this Life) fell
a victim to his intrigues.*

- The tongue and the paimch were not consumed witli the rest of
the victim. The paunch was stuffed and served up at table, and the
tongue was burnt on the altar in honour of Mercury at the end of the
entertainment, when libations were poured upon it. Of this, there,
are many examples in Homer's Odyssey.

• Soph. Antig. 56\.

PHOCION. 8

All the advantage, which Fortune can truly be a€-
ifirmed to gain in her combats with the virtuous is,
her bringing upon them unjust reproach and censure,
instead of the honour and esteem which are their
due, and by that means lessening the confidence,
which the world would otherwise repose in their ex-
cellence.

It is imagined indeed that, when affairs prosper,
the people elated with their strength and success be-
have with greater insolence toward good ministers ;
but the very reverse is the case. Misfortunes always
sour their tempers ; the least thing will then disturb
them ; they take fire at trifles, and are impatient of
the least severity of expression. He, who reproves
their faults, seems to reproach them with their mis-
fortunes ; and every free address is considered as an
insult. As honey makes a wounded or ulcerated mem-
ber smart, so a remonstrance, though pregnant with
truth and good sense, frequently hurts and irritates
the distressed, if it is not gentle and mild in the ap-
plication. Hence Homer often expresses such things
as are pleasant by the word inenolkes, which signifies
what is ' symphonious to the mind,' what soothes
it*s weakness, and does not bear hard upon it's incli-
nations. Inflamed eyes love to dwell upon dark
dingy colours, and avoid such as are bright and glar-
ing. So it is with a state, in any series of ill advised
measures. Such is the timorous and relaxed condi-
tion of it's nerves, that it cannot bear the least whis-
per of alarm. Even upon the most necessary occa-
sions, when it is on the verge of irretrievable errors,
it is an arduous task to govern such a people ; for, if
the man who tells them truth falls the first sacrifice,
lie who flatters them perishes with them at last.

The sun, according to mathematicians ^, does not
move in the same direction with the heavens, nor yet
iu a direction quite opposite j but, circulating with

3 This name, in ancient times, was particularly given to astro*
Domers. «•

B 2

4. PIIOCION.

a gentle and almost insensible obliquity, gives to the
whole system a temperature essential to it's preser-
vation. Thus in a system of government, if a states-
man be determined to describe a straight line, and
in all things to thwart the wishes of the people, such
rigour must render his administration odious ; on the
otlier hand, if he suffer himself to be carried along
with their most erroneous motions, the government
will speedily be in a tottering and ruinous state.
The latter, however, is the more common error of
the two. But the politics which keep a middle
course, sometimes slackening and sometimes tight-
ening the reins, indulging the people in one point to
gain another more important, are tlie only measures
formed upon rational principles ; for a well-timed
condescension and moderate treatment will lead men
to concur in many useful schemes, into which they
could never be driven by despotism and violence.
This medium, it must be acknowledged, it is labori-
ous and difiicult to hit uj)on, because it requires a
mixture of dignity with gentleness ; but, when the
just temperature is gained, it presents the happiest
and most perfect harmony that can be conceived;
It is by this sublime harmony, that the Supreme
Beino: governs the world ; for nature is not drajrored
into obedience to his commands : his influence is in-
deed irresistible, but it is at the same time mild and
rational.

The effects of austerity were seen in the Younger
CatOr There was nothing engaging, or popular, in
his behaviour ; he never studied to oblige the peo-
ple, and therefore his weight in the administi-ation
was inconsiderable. Cicero observes, " He acted as
" if he had lived in the commonwealth of Plato, not
^' in the dregs of Romulus, and therefore he lost the
" consulate*.** His case appears to me to have been

4 Ep. ad Att. ii. 1. But we find nothing there of the repulse,
■which Cato met witli in his appHcation for the consulship. That
repulse, indeed, did not happen till eight year.i alter the date of this
tpisllc. >.

PHOCION. ««

the same with that of fruit, whicli comes out of sea-
son : people look upon it with pleasure and admira-
tion, but they make no use of it. Thus the old-fa-
shioned virtue of Cato, making it's appearance amidst
the luxury and corruption which lapse of years had
introduced, had all the splendour of reputation which
such a phenomenon could claim, but it did not suit
the exigencies of the state ; it was disproportioned to
the times, and too ponderous and unwieldy for use.
His circumstances indeed were not altogether like
those of Phocion, who did not come into the admi-
nistration till the state was sinking^ whereas Cato
had only to save the ship beating about in the storm.
At the same time we must allow, that he had not the
principal direction of her ; he did not sit at the helm:
he could only help to hand the sails, and the tackle.
Yet he maintained a noble conflict with Fortune, who
having determined to ruin the commonwealth, ef-
fected it by a variety of instruments, but with great
difficulty, by slow steps and gradual advances. So
near was Rome being saved by Cato, and Cato's
virtue ! With it we would compare that of Phocion :
not in a general manner, so as to say, they were both
persons of integrity and able statesmen — for there is
a difference between valour and valour*" : for instance,
between that of Alcibiades, and that of Epaminon-
das J the prudence of Themistocles, and that of

5 Extraordinary efforts are more necessary to save tlie poor re-
mains of a \vreck, than to keep a ship, yet whole and entire, from
sinking. *

^ This is admirably exemplified in Homer, and well described by
Pope in the valuable Preface to his translation of the Iliad, where he
characterises the courage of Achilles, as ' furious and untractable ;
that of Diomede, as forward, yet listening to advice and subject to
command ; that of Ajax as heavy and self-confiding ; that of Hec-
tor, as active and vigilant; that of Agamemnon, as inspirited by love
of empire and ambition ; that of Menelaus, as mixed with softness
and tenderness for his people,' Sec. S:c. So of the wisdom of Ulys-
ses and Nestor, he observes, that of the first is ' artificial and various;
of the latter natural, open, and regular.' Whereas the heroes of
Virgil and Statius, from their undistinguished characters, seem all
* brothers of one family.'*

e PHOCION.

Aristldes, were not the same ; justice was of one
kind in Numa, and in Agcsilaus of another — but the
virtues of Phocion and Cato were the same in the
most minute particular ; in impression, and Ibrm, and
colour, perfectly similar. Thus their severity of
manners was equally tempered with humanity, and
their valour with caution ; they had the same solici-
tude for others, and the same disregard for them-
selves: the same abhorrence of every thing base and
dishonourable, and the same firm attachment upon
all occasions to justice : so that it requires a very de-
licate expression, like the finely-discriminated sounds
of the organ^,to mark the differencein their characters.
It is universally agreed, that Cato was of an illus-
trious pedigree, of which we shall give some account
in his Life : and that of Phocion, we conjecture, was
not mean or obscure : for had he been the son of a
turner, as Idomeneus pretends *, it "would certainly

rut oiX^ifc-JTctv. The organ here mentioned was probably that in-
vented by Ctesibius, who (according to Athenaeus) placed in the
temple of Zephyrus at Alexandria a tube, which collecting air by
the appulsive motion of water emitted musical sounds, adapted
either by their strength to war, or by their lightness to festivity.
Hedylus, in his Elegies, mentions this organ under the title of Krpat?,

Zai^o/ToTxi -xcii TiSro <PiXov Zi(^vpy fjtiiTot vr.ov^
&pi.TToy f//tv QctTiXiv^ iKTiSuriv TO KF.PAS,

Thus we see, this instrument was capable of great variety and dis^
crimination of harmony. Claudian has, likewise, left us the follow-
ing description of it :

Ft qui lina^na levi detrudens murmura tactu,
Jnnumeras voces sesetis moderatiir alienee,

...

Jnlonnt erra-riiidiyito, peiiituFtjuetrahali
Vccte lahoranies in cafmina concitat undas.

Cornelius Scvcrus says, Ejii-ijuit generis, qui aqiiarum assullu an-
ram conciperet. But it's innnnicrcB voces (as Claudian calls them ) it's
* variety of expression,' is undoubtedly the reason, why Plutarch
mentions it in this place.

* Idomeneus of Lampsacus, an Epicurean, contemporary with
Ptolemy Lagus, wrote the Lives of the Socratic Philosophers. See
Voss. de Hist. Or. i. 11.

Hypcriucs wa.. one of the Ten Orators of Athens.*

PHOCION. 7

have been mentioned by Glaucippus the son of Hy-
perides, among a thousand other things, in the Trea-
tise which he wrote on purpose to disparage him.
Neither, if his birth had been low, would he have
had so excellent an education, or such a Hberal mind
and manners. It is certain, that when very young
he was a pupil of Plato, and subsequently of Xeno-
crates in the Academy : and, from the very first, he
distinguished himself by his strong application to the
most valuable studies. Duris informs us, that the
Athenians never saw him either laugh, or cry, or
make use of a public bath, or take his hand from
under his cloke when he was dressed to appear in
public. If he made an excursion into the country,
or marched out to war, he went always barefooted*,
and without his upper garment likewise, unless it
happened to be intolerably cold : and then his sol.
diers used to laugh, and say, " It is a sign of a
" sliarp winter ; Phocion has put his clothes on."

He was one of the most humane and best-temper-
ed of men ; and yet he had so ill-natured and forbid-
ding a look, that strangers were afraid to address him
without company. When Chares the orator there-
fore observed to the Athenians, " What terrible
*' brows Phocion had ;'* and they could not help
smiling at the remark, he said, " This brow of mine
" never gave one of you an hour of sorrow; but the
" laughter of these sneerers has cost their country
" many a tear." In like manner, though his mea-
sures were happy ones, and his counsels of the most
salutary kind, yet he introduced no flowers of rhe-
toric ; his speeches were concise, commanding, and
severe. For, as Zeno remarks, that a philosopher
should never suffer a syllable to come out of his
mouth, which is not strongly tinctured with sense,
so Phocion's oratory contained the most sense in the
fewest words. And this it seems, Polyeuctus the

* This, we are told by Xenophon in his Mem. Socr,, was likewisft
Socrates' custom.*

3

S PHOCION.

Sphcttian had in view, when he said ; " Demosthenes
" was tlie better orator, and Phocion the more
" persuasive speaker." His speeehes were to be es-
timated like coins, not for tlieir size, but for their in-
trinsic vahic. Agreeably to which we are told, that
one day when the theatre M-as full of people, Phocion
was observed behind the scenes wrapped up in
thouglit. ; upon which one of his friends observed to
him, " "What ! at your meditations, Phocion r'*
*' Yes," replied he, " I am meditating whether I
'' cannot shorten what I have to say to the Atheni-
** ans." And Demosthenes who despised the other
orators, used to Avhisper to his friends, whenc/er
Phocion got up, " Plere comes the pruning-hook of
** my periods *." But this is, perhaps, to be ascribed
to the excellence of his character ; since a word or a
nod, from a person revered for his virtue, is of more
weight than the most elaborate speeches of other
men.

In his youth he served under Chabrias t, at that
time the commander of the Athenian armies ; and,
as he paid him all proper attention, he gained like-
wise from him much military knowledge. In some
degree too he helped to correct the temper of Cha-
brias, Avhich was impetuous and uneven. For that ge-
neral, though at other times scarcely any thing could
move him, in the moment of action was most impe-
tuously vehement, and exposed his person with a
boldness uno-overned bv discretion. 1 his at last cost
him his lite, when he determined to get in before the
pther galleys to the isle of Chios, and attempted to
make good his Landing by dint of sword. Phocion,
whose prudence was equal to his courage, animated
him wlien he was too slow in his o})erations, and en-
deavoured to bring him to act coolly, when he was
unseasonably violent. This gained him the affection

* See tlie Life of Demosthenes, Vol. V.

f The I^ife of this general is written by Cornelius Nepos, and
many of his exploits are recorded by Xcnophon in his Ilellen., arid
Died, aic. xvi.*

PHOCION. <t

of Chabrfas, who was a man of candour and probity ;
and he assigned him commissions and enterprises of
great importance, which raised him to the notice of
the Greeks. Particularly in the sea-fight off Naxos,
Phocion being appointed to head the squadron on the
left, where the action was hottest, had a fine oppor-
tunity of distinguishing himself: and he made such
use of it, that victory soon declared for the Atheni-
ans*. This being the first advantage, which they
liad gained at sea in a dispute with Greeks since the
taking of their city, they expressed the highest re-
gard for Chabrias, and began to consider Phocion as
a person, in whom they should one day find an able
commander. The battle was won, during the celc^
bration of the Great Mysteries ; and Chabrias, in
commemoration of it, annually treated the Atheni-
ans with wine on the sixteenth day of Boedromion.

Some time after this, Chabrias sent Phocion to the
islands to demand their contributions, and offered
him a guard of twenty sail. But Phocion said, " If
" you send me against enemies, such a fleet is too
" small ; if to friends, a single ship is sufhcient."
He therefore went in his own galley, and by address-
ing himself to the cities and magistrates in an open
and humane manner succeeded so well, as to return
with a number of ships which the allies fitted out,
putting at the same time their respective quotas of
money on board.

Phocion not only honoured and paid his court to
Chabrias as long as he lived, but after his death con-
tinued his attentions to all who had belonged to him.
With his son Ctesippus he took peculiar pains, in
order to form him to virtue ; and though he found
nun very stupid and untractable, he still laboured to

* See Xenoph. ib. v.^ and Dlod. Sic. ib. 34. This action, in
which Pollis commanded the defeated fleet of the Lacedicnionians,
took place 01. c. 4., B. C. 377.

The isle of Naxos, the largest, pleasantest, and most productive
of the Cyclades, was celebrated for its wine, which accounts for
Chabrias' annual treat mentioned below.*

10 PHOCION.

correct, as well as to conceal, his errors. Once, in*
deed, his patience failed him. In one of his expedi-
tions, the young man was so troublesome with un-
seasonable questions and attempts to give advice, as
if he knew hov^^ to direct the operations better than
the general himself, that at last he exclaimed ; " O
*' Chabrias, Chabrias ! what a return do I make thee

for thy favours, in bearing with the impertinences

of thy son/'

He observed, that those who took upon them the
management of public affairs made two departments
of them, the civil and the military, which they shared
^s it v.ere by lot. Pursuant to this division, Eubulus,
Aristophon, Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and Hyperides
addressed the people from tlie Rostrum, and proposed
new edicts : while Diopithes, Menestheus, Leos-
thenes, and Chares raised themselves by the honours
and employments of the camp. But Phocion chose
rather to move in the walk of Pericles, Aristides,
and Solon, who excelled not only as orators but a»
generals, for he thought their fame more complete ;
each of these great men, to use the words of Archi-
lochus, appearing justly to claim

The palms of Mars, and laurels of the Muse ;

and he knew, that the tutelar goddess of Athens was
equally the patroness of arts and arms.

Formed upon these models, he kept the great
objects of peace and tranquillity constantly in view :
yet was he engaged in more wars tlian any person,
either of his own or of preceding times. Not that
he courted, or even applied for, the command ; but
lie did not decline it, when summoned bv the voice
of his conntrv. It is certain, that he was chosen cje-
ncral not less than forty-five times, without having
once attended at the election ; having been always
appointed in his absence, at the free motion of his
countrymen. Men of shallow understanding were
surprised that the people should set such a value upon

PHOCION. U

PhoGiOB, who generally opposed their inGlInatlons,
and never said or did any thing with a view to re-
commend himself. For, as princes divert themselves
at their meals with buffoons and jesters, so the Athe-
nians attended to the polite and agreeable address of
their orators merely by way of entertainment ; but
when the question was concerning so important a bu-
siness as the command of their forces, they returned
to sober and serious thinking, and selected the wisest
citizen and the man of the severest manners, who
had most steadily combated their capricious hu-
mours and desires. This he scrupled not to avow;
for one day, when an oracle from Delphi was read in.
the assembly, importing, ' That the rest of the Athe-
nians were unanimous in their opinions, and that
there w^as only one man who dissented from them ;'
Phocion came forward and told them, " They need
" not give themselves any trouble in seeking for this
" refractory citizen, as he was the man who did not
" like any of tiieir measures/' And at another time
in a public debate, when his opinion happened to be
received with universal applause, he turned to his
friends and said, " Have I inadvertently let slip
*' something: w^rono-?"

The Athenians were one day making a collection,
to defray the charge of a public sacrifice, and numbers
gave liberally. Phocion was importuned to contri-
bute among the rest, but he bade them apply to the
rich : " I should be ashamed," said he, "to give you
" any thing, and not pay this man w^hat I owe him ;'*
pointing, at the same time, to the usurer Callicles.
And, as they continued very clamorous and teasing,
he told them the following tale : " A cowardly fellow
once resolved to make a campaign ; but immedi-
ately upon his setting out, tiie ravens began to
croak^ upon which he laid down his arms and
stopped. As soon as the first alarm was a little
" over, he resumed his march. The ravens how-
^* ever renewing their croaking, he made a full stop,

12 PHOCION.

and said, * You may croak your hearts out if you

please, but you shall never taste my carcase.* "

The Athenians once insisting upon his leading
them against the enemy, and on his refusal telling
him, " Nothing could be more dastardly and spirit-
" less than his behaviour ;'* he answered, " You
" can neither make me valiant, nor can I make vou
" cowards ; but we know one another perfectly
" well.'*

Public affairs happening to be in a dangerous situ-
ation, the people were greatly exasperated against
him, and demanded an immediate account of his con-
duct. Upon which he only said, " My good friends,
" first get out of your difficulties."

During a war, however, they were generally hum-
ble and submissive ; and it was not till after peace
ivas made, that they began to talk vauntingly, and to
find fault with their general. As they were once re-
proaching Phocion with having robbed them of a
victory already in their hands, he replied, " It is
" happy for you, that you have a general who knows
*' you; otherwise, you would have been ruined long
« ago."

Having adiflerence with the Boeotians, which they
refused to settle by treaty, and proposed to decide
by the sword, Phocion said, " Good people, keep

to the m.ethod, in w^hich you have the advantage :

that is, talking, not fighting."

One day, determined not to follow his advice, his
countrymen refused to give him a hearing : upon
which he observed, " Though you can make me act
*' against my judgement, you shall never make me
** speak against it."

Demosthenes, one of the orators of the adverse
party, happening to say, " The Athenians will cer-
'■' tainlv kill you, Phocion, some time or other :" he
vmswered, " They may kill me, if they arc mad ;
" but they will kill you, if they are in their senses."

When PolyeuctLis tlie Sphettian advised the Athe-

'2

a

M

PHOCION. 13

tiians to make war upon PlnlijD, the weather being
hot and the orator a corpulent man, he ran himself
out of breath and perspired so violently, than he was
forced to take several draughts of cold water before
he could finish his speech. Phocion, seeing him in
this condition, thus addressed the assembly ; " You
*' have great reason to pass an edict for the war, up-
" on this man's recommendation ! For what may you
" not expect from him, when he marches under a
" load of armour against the enemy ; if in delivering
" to you, peaceable folks, a speech which he had
" composed at his leisure, he is ready to be suf-
" focated 1"

Lycurgus, the orator, one day said many dispa-
raging things of him in the general assembly ; and
among the rest stated his having given it as his opi-
nion, when Alexander demanded ten of their ora-
tors ^, that they should be delivered to him. " It is
" true," said Phocion, " I have given the people of
" Athens much good counsel, but they do not fol-
" low it."

There was then in Athens one Archibiades, who
got the name of ' Laconistes' by letting his beard
grow long in the Lacedoemonian manner, wearing a
thread-bare cloke, and keeping a very grave counte-
nance. Phocion finding one of his assertions much
contradicted in the assembly, called upon this man
to support the truth and rectitude of what he had
said. Archibiades however ranged himself on the
side of the people, and advised what he thought they
would most like to hear. Upon which Phocion, tak-
ing him by the beard, said, " What is all this heap
" of hair for ? Cut it off, cut it off."

Aristogiton, a public informer, paraded with his
pretended valour before the people, and pressed
them much to declare war. liut when the lists of
tjiose selected to serve were to be made out, this

^ For ttcMtuv we should here read TaA<T<>e6;v, as a little above we
sliould read TToXinKm instead o^roMruv. That they were ' orators,'
whom Alexander demanded, appears from Demosthenes- - -

U PHOCION.

swaggerer appeared with his leg bound up, and a
crutch under his arm. Phocion as he sat upon the
business, seeing him at some distance in this condi*
tion, called out to his secretary, " Put down Aris-
*' togiton a cripple and a coward.'*

All these sayings have something so severe in
them, that it seems strange a man of such austere
and unpopular manners should ever have gotten the
surname of ' the Good.' It is indeed difficult, but I
believe not impossible, for the same man to be both
rough and gentle, as some wines are both sweet and
sour : and, on the other hand, some men who have
a great appearance of gentleness in their temper, are
very harsh and vexatious to those who have to do
with them. In this case the saying of Hyperides to
the people of Athens deserves notice : " Don't ex-^
*' amine whether or not I am severe upon you, but
" whether or not I am so for my own sake." As if
it were avarice only, that makes a minister odious to
the people ; 'and the abuse of power to tlie pur-
poses of pride, envy, anger, or revenge did not ren-
der him equally obnoxious.

As to Phocion, he never exerted himself against
any one in his private capacity, or considered him as
an enemy : but he was inflexibly severe against every
one, who opposed his motions and designs for the
public good. His behaviour in other respects was
liberal, benevolent, and humane : lie was always
ready to assist the unfortunate ; and he pleaded even
for his enemy, if he happened to be in danger.
His friends one day finding fault with him, for hav-
ing appeared in behalf of a man whose conduct did
.not deserve it, he said, " The good have no need of
an advocate^." Aristogiton the informer, being con-
demned and committed to prison, entreated tjiic fa-
vour of Ph(n"ion to go and speak to him, and he com-
plied with the application. His friends dissuading

9 How does this, both in principle and expression, remind us of
Him, who tells us (Mark ii. 17.) * They, that be whole, have Ii»
need of the physician !'-^

PHOCION. IS

liim from it, he replied, " Let me alone, good peo-
** pie. Where would one rather speak to Aristogi-
" ton, than in a prison ?'*

When the Athenians sent out their fleets under
any other commander, the maritime towns and
islands in alliance with them regarded every such
commander as an enemy: they strengthened their
walls, closed their harbours, and conveyed their cat-
tle, slaves, women, and children out of the country
into the cities. But when Phocion had the com-
mand, the same people went out to meet him in their
own ships with chaplets on their heads, and every
expression of joy, and in that manner conducted him
to their homes.

Philip endeavoured privately to get footing in
Euboea, and for that purpose introduced forces from
Macedon, as well as practised upon the towns by
means of the petty princes. Upon this, Plutarch of
Eretria'° called in the Athenians, and implored them
to rescue the island out of the hands of the Macedo-
nians ; in consequence of which, they at first de-
spatched Phocion with a small body of troops, ex-
pecting that the Euboeans would immediately rise
xmd join him. But when he came, he found nothing
among them except treasonable designs, and disaf-
fection to their country ; for they were almost uni-
versally corrupted by Philip's money. He therefore
seized an eminence'^ separated from the plains of
Tamynae by a deep defile, and in that post secured
the best of his troops. As for the disorderly, the
talkative, and the cowardly part of the soldiers, if
they attempted to desert and steal out of the camp,
he ordered the officers to let them go. " For," said
he, " ii they stay here, such is their want of disei-

'° A town of Euboea, hod. Negropont, situated upon the Eun'pus.
See the Life of Demosthenes, Vol. V,

II

Instead of a-ox^vzroyjivov, as it stands in the original text, we
should read, aToxj^.s^/x-Evo!'. So says M. Du Soul: but we think
ttzox'waTcihiMov, « sloping' or * sloped,' which is uearer the text, more
likely to be the proper correction.

16 PHOCION.

*' l)line, that instead of being serviceabJe, they will be
*' prejudicial in the time of action ; and, as they will
'^ always be conscious that they fled from their co-
" lourS) we shall not have so much noise and calum-
" ny from them in Athens.'*

Upon the approach of the enemy, he ordered his
men to stand to their arms, but not attempt any
thing, till he had made an end of his sacrifice : and
whether it was that he wanted to gain time, or could
not easily discover the auspicious tokens, or was dc-.
sirous of drawing the enemy nearer to him, he was
long about it. In the mean while Plutarch, imagin-
ing that this delay was owing to his fear and irreso-
lution, charged at the head of the mercenaries ; and
the cavalry seeing him in motion could wait no
longer, but advanced against the enemy, though in
a scattered and irregular manner, as they happened
to issue out of the camp. The first iine being soon
broken, all the rest dispersed, and Plutarch himself
tied. A detachment from the enemy now attacked
the entrenchments, and endeavoured to make a
breach in them, supposing that the fate of the day
was decided. But at that instant Phocion had finish-
ed his sacrifice, and the Athenians sallying out of the
camp ieil upon the assailants, routed them, and cut
most of them to pieces in the trenches. Phocion
then gave the main-body directions to keep their
ground, in order to receive and cover such as were
dispersed in the first attack, while he with a select
party went and charged the enemy. A sharp con-
flict ensued, both sides behaving wath the utmost
spirit and intrepidity. Among the Athenians, Thal-
lus the son of Cineas, and Glaucus the son of Poly-
medes, who fought near the general's person, dis-
tinguished themselves the most. Clcophanes, like-
wise, did great service iji the action ; for he rallied
the cavalry and brought them up again, by calling
after them, and insisting that they should come to
the aid of their general, who was in danger. They
returned therefore to the charge, and by the assist-

PHOCION, i7

ance which they gave the infantry, secured the
victory.

Phocion after the battle drove Phitarch out of
Erctria, and made himself master of Zaretra, a fort
advantageously situated where the island draws to a
point, and the neck of land is defended on each side
by the sea. lie did not choose however, in conse-
quence of his victory, to take the Greeks prisoners ;
lest the Athenians, influenced by their orators, should
in the first motions of resentment pass some unjust
sentence upon them.

After this signal success, he sailed back to Athens.
The allies soon found the want of his goodness and
justice, and the Athenians saw his capacity and cou-
rage in a clear light. For Molossus, who succeeded
him, conducted the war so ill as to fall himself into
the enemy's hands. Philip, now rising in his designs
and his hopes, marched to the Hellespont with all
his forces, in order to seize at once on the Cherso-
nese, Perinthus, and Byzantium.

The Athenians determining to send succours to
that quarter, tlic orators prevailed upon tliem to give
that commission to Chares. Accordingly he sailed
to those parts, but did nothing worthy of the force,
with which he was entrusted. The cities would not
receive his fleet into their harbours; but under ge-
neral suspicion he beat about, raising contributions
where he could upon the allies, and at the same time
despised by the enemy. The orators, now taking
the other side, exasperated the people to such a de-
gree, that tliey repented of having sent any succours
to the Byzantians ; upon which Phocion rose up, and
told them, " They ought not to be angry at the sus-
picions of the allies, but at their own generals, whg
did not deserve to have any confidence placed in
them. For on their account," said he, " you are
regarded with an eye of jealousy by the very peo-
ple, who yet cannot be saved without your assist-
ance." This argument had such an effect upou

VOL. Vr C

a
a
(.'

a
a
a

18 PHOCION.

tliem, that they again changed their minds, and bade
Pliocion go himself with anotlier armament to the
succour of the alhcs on tlic Hellespont.

This contributed, more than any tiling else, to the
saving of Byzantimn. Phocion's reputation stood
already high : besides, Cleon a man of eminence in
Byzantium, who had formerly bden well acquainted
\vith him at the Academy, pledged his honour to the
city in his behalf. The Byzantians would then no
longer suffer him to eiicaitrp without, but opening
their gates received him into their city, and mixed
familiarly witli the Athenians ; who, delighted by
this confidence, were not only easy \vith respect to
provisions, and regular in their behaviour, but ex-
erted themselves with great spirit in every action.
By these means Philip was forced to retire from the
Hellespont, and he suffered not a little in his military
reputation ; for till then he had been deemed utterly
invincible. Phocion took some of his ships, and
recovered several cities which he had garrisoned ;
and, making descents in various parts of his terri-
tories, harassed and ravaged the illit country. But
at last, happening to be w^ounded by a party which
made liead against him, lie weighed anchor, and re-
turned home.

Sonie time after this, the Mcgarensians privately
applied to him for assistance ; and as he was afraid
that the matter would transpire, and the Baotians
w^ould be before-hand with him, he assembled the
people early in the morning, and gave them an ac-
count of the application. They had no sooner sanc-
tioned the proposal, than he ordered the trumpets
to sound as a signal for thcin to arm; after which,
he immediately marched to Mcgara, where he was
received with great joy. His first step was to fortify
Nisaea, and to build two strong walls between the city
and the port ; bv which means tlie town had a sufe
communication with the sea, and having little to
fear from the enemy on the land-side, was secured
m the Athenian interest.

PHOCION. 19

The Athenians being now in a state of decided
hostih'ty with PhiHp, the conduct of the war in PJio-
cion's absence was committed to otiier generals.
Bat upon his return from the islands he represented
to the people that, as Philip was peaceably disposed
and apprehensive of the issue of hostilities, it would
be more prudent to accept the proffered conditions.
And wiien one of those public barretors, who spend
their whole time in the court of Helicea ^-, and make
it their sole business to form impeachments, opposed
•him, and said ; " Dare you pretend, Phocion, to
" dissuade the Athenians from war, now that the
" sword is drawn ?'* " Yes," replied he, '' I dare ;
" though I know that thou wouldest be in my power
" in time of war, and I shall be in thine in time of
" peace." Demosthenes however carried it against
him in favour of war, which he advised the Atheni-
ans to make at the greatest distance tliey could from
Attica. This gave Phocion occasion to observe,
" My good friend, consider not so much where we
" shall fight, as liow we shall conquer. P'or victory
*' is tlie only thing, which can keep the war at a dis-
" tance : If we are beaten, every danger will soon be
" at our gates."

The Athenians did lose the day '^ ; after which,
the most factious and troublesome part of" the citi-
zens drew Charidemus to the hustings, and insisted
that he should have tlie command. This alarmed
the real well-wishers of their country so much, that
they called in the members of the Areopagus to their
assistance ; and it was not without many tears, and
the most earnest entreaties, that they prevailed upon
the assembly to place the administration in Phocion's
hands.

'^ For the solemn oath taken by the judges of this court see Pot-
ter, Archa-ol. Gr. I. xxi.*

^i PJutarch alludes, most probablj-, to the fatal action of Chte-
ronea, 01. ex. 3., B. C. 338, Charidemus subsequently took refuge
at the court of Darius (See Quint. Curt, iii, 2.) ; and for the noble
franknev":'^, with which he pointed out the superiority of Macedonian
steel to Persian gold, was by the order of that prince put to death,*

C 2

-0 PIIOCION.

His opinion was, that the other proposals of Phili'p
sliould be readily accepted, because they seemed to
be dictated by humanity : but when Demades mov-
ed, that Athens should be compreliended in the ge-
neral peace, and as one of the states of Greece,
should liave the same terms with the other cities,
Phocion said ; " This ouglit not to be agreed to, till
" it was known what conditions Philip required.*'
The times were against him, however, and he was
over-ruled. And when lie saw the Atlienians after-
ward repented, because they found themselves oblig-
ied to furnish Philip both with ships of war and with
cavalry, he remarked, " This was what I feared ;
" and upon this my opposition was founded. But
*' since you have signed the treaty, you must bear
its inconveniences without murmuring or despon-
dency ; remembering that your ancestors some-
" times gave law to their neighbours, and v/ere
" sometimes compelled to submit, but always did
" both with honour, and thus at once saved them-
^' selves and the rest of Greece."

When the intelligence of Philip*s deatlr' was
brought to Athens, he would not sulfcr any sacri-
fices or rejoicings to be made upon that account.
" Nothing," he said, " could evince greater mean-
" ness of spirit, than expressions of joy on the death
" of an enemy. What reason indeed is there for
" exultation, when the armv vv'ith v>hich you fouo-ht
*' at Cheronaga is lessened only by a single man r"

Demosthenes inveighed bitterly against Alexan-
der, when he was marching against Thebes ; the im-
jjolicy of this, Phocion readily perceived, and said,

•' What boots the god-like giant to provoke,
** Whose arm may sink us at a single stroke ■ ^'"

•♦ B. C. 336.*

'^ These words are addressed to Ulysses by his companions, in
order to restrain him from provoking the giant Poly pher.iu?, after
Miev had escaped out of his cave, and got on board tl.leir bhij;.
(Odyss. ix.ll>l.)

6i

t'.

PIIOCION. ^1

Wben you see such a dreadful lire near you, would
you plunge Athens into it ? For my part, I will not
suffer you to ruin yourselves, though your inclina-
" lions tend that way ; and to prevent such mea-
" sures, is my object in taking the command."

When Alexander had destroyed Thebes, he sent
to the Athenians, and demande<l tliat they should
deliver up to him Demosthenes, Lycurgus, Hype-
rides, and Charidemus. The whole assembly cast
their eyes upon Phocion, and frequently called upon
him by name. At last, he rose up ; and standing
by the side of one of his friends, wlio had the largest
share in his confidence and affection, expressed him-
self as follows : " The persons, whom Alexander de-
"• mands, have brouglit the commonwealth into such
" miserable circumstances, that if he demanded even
*' my friend Nicocles, I should vote for delivering
him up. For my own part, I should think it the
greatest happiness to die for you all. At the same
" time, I am not without compassion for the poor
" Thebans, who have taken refuge among us ; but
it is enough for Greece to weep over Thebes,
[without weeping over Athens too.] The best
measure then which we can take is, to intercede
" with the conqueror for both, and by no means to
" think of fighting."

The first decree, drawn up in consequence of these
deliberations, Alexander is said to have rejected, and
to have turned his back upon the deputies : but the
second he received, because it was brought by Pho-
cion, who (as his old counsellors informed him) stood
high in the esteem of his father PhiHp. He therefore
not only gave him a favourable audience, and granted
his request, but even listened to his advice. This
was to the following purport : " If tranquilhty was his
" object, to put an end to his wars ; if glory, to leave
" the Greeks in quiet, and turn his arms against the
" barbarians." In the course of their conference, he
made many observations so agreeable to Alexander's
disposition and sentiments, that his resentment against

22 PIIOCION.

tlie Atlienians was perfectly appeased, and he eveit
remarked, " The people of Athens must be very at-
" tentive to the affairs of Greece ; for, if any thing
*' happen to me, upon them will devolve the supreme
" direction." With Phocion in particular he entered
into obligations of friendship and hospitality, and
paid Inm greater honours than most of his own cour-
tiers were indu]"Td with. Nav, Duris informs us,
that afttr he had risen by the conquest of Darius tfr
superior greatness, and had omitted the wordchcnrthi^
the common form of salutation in his address to others,
he still retained it in writing to Phocion, and to nobo-
dy besides except Antipater. The same circumstance
is, also, recorded by Chares.

As to his munificence to Phocion, all agree that he
sent him a hundred talents. A\lien the money was
brought to Athens, Phocion demanded of the bear-
ers, " Why, among all the citizens of Athens, he
" alone should be singled out as the object of such
" bounty?'* " Because," they replied, " Alexander
looks upon you as the only honest and good man."
Then," said Phocion, " let him permit me always'
" to retain that character, as well as to deserve it."
After this, the envoys attended him home ; and when
they saw the frugality which reigned there, his wife-
baking bread, and himself drawing water and wash-
ing his own feet, they implored him the more urgent-
ly to receive the present. They told him, " It gave
"them real uneasiness, and was indeed absolutely
" intolerable, that the friend of so illustrious a prince
" should live in such a wretched manner." At that
instant, a poor old man happening to pass by in a
mean garment, Phocion asked them, " Whether tliey
*' thought worse of him, or of that man?" As they
entreated him not to make such a comparison, he
rejoined ; " Yet that man lives upon less than I do,
" and still has enough. In one word, it will be to no
purpose for m.e to have so much money, if I do not
use it ; and if I do, I shall bring both myself,
^* and the king your master, under the censure of

6C

PHOCION. 23

*^ the Athenians." Thus the money was carried
back from Alliens, and the wliole transaction was a
goqdJesson to the Greeks, tliat the man, who did not
stand in need of such a sum, vras richer than he that
could bestow it.

Displeased at the refusal of his present, Alexander
wrote to Phocion, " That lie could not number those
" among his friends, Vv'ho declined to receive his fa-
" vours.'* Yet Phocion, even then, would not take
the money. He desired the king, however, to set at
liberty Echecratides the sophist, and Athenodorus
the Imbrian ; as also Demaratus and Sparto two
Khodians, wlio had been apprehended for certain
crimes, and were detained in custody at Sardis.
Alexander immediately granted his request ; and af-
terward, when he sent Craterus into Macedon, he
ordered him to ijive Phocion his choice of one of the
four Asiatic cities Cios, Gergethus, Mylassa, and
J^lffia. At the same time he was to assure him, that
the king would be much more disobliged, if he re-
fused this second offer. But Phocion was not to be
prevailed upon, and Alexander died soon afterward.

Phocion's house is shown to this day in the borough,
of Melita, adorned vvith some plates of copper, but
otherwise plain and homely.

Of his first wife we have no account, except that
■she was the sister of Cej)hisodotus the statuary. The
other was a matron, not less celebrated among the
Athenians for her modesty, her prudence, and the
fsimplicity of her manners, than Phocion himself was
ibr his probity. It happened one day, when some
new tragedians were to act before a full audience,
one of the players, Vk^ho was to pers-oiiate the queen,
demanded a suitable mask (and attire), together vvith
a large train of attendants riclily dressed ; and, as all
these things v/ere not granted him, he was out of hu-
mour and refused to make his appearance, by which
means the Vvhoie business of the theatre was at a
stand. But Melanthius, who was at the charge of
the exhibition, pushed him in, and exclaimed,

24. PIIOCIOX.

" Thou scest Phocion's wife appear in public with a
" sinp;le inaid-scrvant ; and dost tlioii come hither to
" display thy pride, and to corrupt our women ?'*
As Melanlhius spoke loud enough to be heard, the
audience received what he had said with a thunder of
applause. When this second wife of Phocion enter-
tained in her house an Ionian lady, one of her friends,
the lady showed her her bracelets and necklaces, glit-
tering with all the magnificence that gold and jewels
could give them. Upon which, the good matron
said, " Phocion is my ornament, who is now called
" for the twentieth time to the command of the ar-
" mics of Athens '^'."

The son of Phocion was ambitious of trying his
skill in the games of the Panathcna?a ''", and his father
gave him leave, on condition that it was in the foot-
races : not as setting any value upon the victory, but
in order that the preparations and previous exercise
might be of service to him ; for the young man was
of a disorderly turn, and addicted to diinking. Pho-
cus (that was his name) gained tlie victory, and a
number of his acquaintance desired to celebrate it by
entertainments at their houses ; but that favour was
granted only to one. V,'hcn Phocion came to the
house, he saw every thing prepared in the most ex-
travagant manner; and among the rest, wine min-
gled with spices provided for washing the feet of the
guests. Upon which he called his son to him, and
said, '' Phocus, why do you suffer your friend thui^
*• to sully the honour ofyour victory^^?"

In order completely to correct in his son this incli-
nation to luxury, he carried him to Laced<cmon, and
placed him among the young men, w^ho were educated
in all the rigour of the ancient discipline. This gave
the Athenians no little offence, because it proved in

'^ Tlie liistory of Home, in the mother of tlie Gracchi, supplies a
parallel and more celebrated anecdote.*
• '7 See Liie Life of The?eus, I. 29. and not. (62.)

'*' The victory was obtained by means of abstemiousness and labo-
rious exercise, to which such indulgences \\e:e finite contra-y.

PHOCION. 25

\V'liat contempt he held the manners and customs of
iiis own country. Demades one day said to him,
" Why do not we persuade the people, Phocion, to
" adopt the Spartan form of government? If you
" choose it, I will propose a decree for it, and sup-
'* port it to the utmost of my power." " Yes, in-
*^ deed," replied Phocion ; " it would well become.
" you, with all those perfumes and that pride of dre^s
" about you, to launch out in praise of frugality and
" Lycurgus."

Alexander wrote to demand from the Athenians a
supply of ships, and the orators opposing it, the se-
nate asked Phocion his opinion. " I am of opinion,'*
said he, " that you should either have the sharpest
'^ swords yourselves, or keep upon good terms with
'•' those who have."

Pytheas the orator, when he first began to speak
in public, had a torrent of words, and the most con-
summate assurance. Upon which Phocion said, *' Is
" it for thee, who art but a novice among us, to prate
'* in this manner?"

When Harpalus had traitorously carried off Alex-
ander's treasures from Babvlon, and came with them
from Asia to Attica, a number of the mercenary ora-
tors flocked around him, in hopes of sharing the
spoil. He gave to each of them some small taste of
his wealth, but to Phocion he sent seven hundred
talents ; assuring him at the same time, that he might
command his whole fortune, ifhe would take him uur
der his protection. But his messengers found a dis-
agreeable recei)tion : Phocion told them, that" Har-
" palus should repent it, if he continued thus to cor-
" rupt the city ;" And the traitor, dejected at his
disappointment, stopped his hand. A i^^ days al-
tervt^ard a general assembly being held on this affair,
he found that the men who had taken his money, in
order to exculpate themselves, accused him to the
people ; while Phocion, who had declined accepting
^x\y part of it, was still desirous of serving him, as far
as might be consistent with the public good. Harpalus

L>6 I'HOCIOX.

therefore again paid his court to him, and took every
method to shake his integrity, but he found tiie for-
tress on all sides impregnable. He subsequently ap-
plied to Charicles, Phocion's son-in-liiw, and with a
degiee of success which gave just cause of offence ;
for all the world observed how intimate he was with
him, and that all his business passed through his
hands. He even employed Charicles upon the death
of his mistress Pythionice, who had brought him a
daughter, to get a superb monument erected over
her, and for that purpose furnislied him with enor-
mous sums. This commission, dishonourable as it
was in itself, became much more so by tlic manner
in which it was fulfilled. For the monument is still
to be seen at Hermus, on the road betv/een Athens
and Eleusis ; and there appears nothing in it an-
swerable to the amount of thirty talents, which was
the charge that Charicles broufirht in ^'\ After the
death of Harpalus, Charicles and Phocion took his
daughter under their guardianship, and educated her
with great care. At last, Charicles was called to an
account by the public for the money received from
Harpalus ; upon which he desired Phocion to sup-
port him with his interest, and to appear with him in
court. But Piiocion answered, " I made you my
son-in-law only for just and honourable purposes/*

The first person who brought the news of Alex-
ander's death, was Asclepiades the son of Hippar-
chus. But Dcmades advised the people not to give
any credit to it ; " For, if Alexander were dead,'*
said he, "the wliole world would smell the car-
" case-''." And Phocion likewise, observing tlie
Athenians elated and inclined to raise new conimo-

'9 Yet Pausaiiias savs, it was one of tlie most complete and curi-
ous perlbrmances of aJi the ancient works in Greece. According
to l)ini, it stood on tlie other side of tlie river Cephisus. (L.) Her-
mus was an Attic borough, in the tribe Acamantis, situated not f^v
from the Piraeus.*

^° This passage L=; commended by Denaetrius Phalcreys, as ex-
hibiting at once the united beauties oi' emphasis, allegory, and hy-
perbole.*

phocion: sr

tions, endeavoured to keep them quiet. Many of
the orators however ascended the Kostrum, and as-
sured the people that Asclepiades' tidings were true:
" Well then,'* said Phocion, "if Alexander is dead
" to-day, he will be so to-morrow, and the day fol-
'•' lowing ; so that we may deliberate upon that event
" at our leisure, and take our measures with safety.'*

When Leosthenes by his intrigues had involved
Athens in the Lamian-^ war, and saw how much
Phocion was displeased at it, he scoffingly asked him,
" What good he had done his coimtry, during the
" many years that he had been general ?" " And
" do^t thou think it nothing then," replied Phocion,
" for the Athenians to be buried in the sepulchres
*' of their ancestors?" As Leosthenes continued to
harangue the people in the most arrogant and pomp-
ous manner, Phocion said ; " Young man, your
*' speeches are like cypress-trees, large and lofty, but
" without fruit*" Hyperides rose up and said,
" Tell us then, when v»'ill it be proper for the Athe-
" nians to go to war ?" Phocion answered, "When
"' I see the young men keeping within the bounds of
" order and propriety, the rich liberal in their con-
" tribntions, and the orators no longer robbing the
" public."

Most people admired tlie forces raised by Leos-
thenes: when they asked Phocion however his opi-
nion of them, he re])lied, " I like them very well lor
" a short race", bat I dread the consequence of a

*i In the original it is the ' Grecian war ;' and it might, indeed,
be correctly so called, because it was carried on against the Mace-
donians by the Grecian confederates. But it was commonly deno-
minated the ' Lt\mian war,' from Antipater's being defeated and
shut up in Lamia. The Boeotians were the only nation, which did
not join the Grecian league. (Diod. Sic. xviii. 8 — 18.)

" Or rather, ' I think they may run very well from the starting-
post to the extremity of the course-; but I know not how they
will hold it back again.' The Greeks had two sorts of races:
the .stadium, in which they only ran forward to the goal ; and the
dolk/iiis, in which tliey <raii forward to the goal and back again.

?» PHOCIOX.

*' long one. Tlie supplies, the ships, tlie soldier"?,
•' are all very good ; but they are the last, tliat \vc
*' shall be able to produee." The event justified his
observation. Leosthencs, at first, gained hi;ih repu-
tation by hi€ exploits-, for he defeated the Bcrotians
in a pitched battle, and drove Antipatcr into Lainia.
On this the Athenians, buoyant upon the ride of iiope,
spent their time in mutual entertainments, and sacri-
tices to the gods. Many of them thought, likewise,
tiiat they had a fine o))portiHnty of rallying Phocion,
nnd asked him, " Whether he should not have wish-
'^ ed to have achieved such great things ?" " I cer-
*' tainly should," he replied, " but still I should
" liave advised not to attempt tliem *." And when
letters and messengers from the army came one afier
another, with accounts of farther successes, he said,
*•' When shall we have done conquering?"

Lcosthenes died soon afterward ; and the party
which wi>Jie<l the war to be continued, fearing that if
Phocion were elected general he would be for jjutting
an end to it, instructed an obscure man to make a
motion in the assembly importing, " Tiiat as an old
*' friend and school-fellow of Phocion, he desired the
" people to sj^arehim, and preserve him for the most
pressing occasions, because they had not another
worthy to be compared with him." At the same
time he v»as to recommend Antipliilus for the com-
mand. The Athenians embracing the ])ropoial,
Phocion stood up and told lliem, " He never was
*■- that man's sehool-feiiow, ueither had he any ac-
'- (jiiaiiitance with hiui ; but from this moment,"
liaid he turning to him, "■• 1 shall number thee among

* See also in liis Apoplitliegnis. — ' Tlio failureofcertnin measures
upoi> tl)e Continent, oi uhich Mr, lox did not approve, durinj; the
late war, gave him no opportunity ofreplyingas Phocion did. But,
if such an opportunity had occurred, lie vvouhl not have uanted
iinnnef^s to n»ake s;ic!i a rejJy; pailly tVoni confidence in his own
judgement, and partly from joy at the success of our countrj- and it'i
ulHes, though it should have far exceeded all reasonable expecta-
tions.' (Parr's Character ol" Fox, II. 571.)

PHOCIOK, 23

my best fiiencls, since thou hast advised what is

most agreeable to myself."

The Athenians were strongly inclined to prosecute
the war with the Boeotians, and Phocion at first as
strongly opposed it. His friends representing to
him, tliat this violent opposition of his would pro-
voke them to put him to death ; " They may do it,
" if they please," said he: " It will be unjustly, if I
" advise them for the best ; but justly, if I should
" prevaricate." When he saw, however, that they
were not to be dissuaded, and that they continued to
besiege him with their clamours, he ordered a herald
to make proclamation ; " That all the Athenians,
■" who were not more than sixty years above the age
" of puberty, should take live days* provisions, and
" follow him immediately from the assembly to the
" field -^"

This raised a considerable tumult, and the old
men began to exclaim against the order, and to walk
off. Upon which, Phocion said, " Does this disturb
" you ; when I, who am fourscore years old, shall be
" at your head ?" This short remonstrance had it's
effect ; it made them quiet and tractable. When
Micion marched a strong cor{)s of Macedonians and
mercenaries to lihamnus, and ravaged the sea-coast
and the adjacent country, Phocion with a body of
Athenians advanced against him. Upon this occa-
sion, a number of them were extremely impertinent,
in pretending to dictate or point out to him how to
proceed. One counselled him to secure such an emi-
nence, another to send his cavalry to such a post,
and a third to occupy such a place for a camp.
" Heavens 1" said Phocion, "how many generals we
" have, and how few soldiers !"

W1ien he had drawn up his army, one of the in-

^3 TiSi ux^i ilnKcvra trt.") xcp' ii?i;? has commonly been understood to
mean ' fiom ibuiteen to sixty;' but irom the ibllowing passage it
appears, that it should be understood as we have rendered it,

'O yap Ay^jtriAzoi, cjc, iT-/t Ti!r(r^^f(i}iavTx yiyoiuii A'P' 'HBH2, kxi i^pxTtiUi f vs;.";

aipsa-iif -jrc jm vs^«,»y. (Vit. Ag-es. Ed. Bryan, iii. 3l'(i.)

so PHOCION.

fantry advanced before the ranks ; but upon seeing
an enemy stepping forward to meet him, his heart
failed him, and be drew back to his post. Upon
which Phocion said, " Young man, aren't you
" ashamed to desert your station twice in one day ;
" tliat in which I had ])laccd you, and that in which
" you had placed yourself?" He then immediately
attacked the enemy, routed them, and killed srreat
numbers, among whom was their general Micion.
The confederate army of the Greeks in Thessaly
likewise defeated Antipater in a great battle, though
Jic had been joined by Leonatus and the Macedo-
nians from Asia. In this action Antiphilus com-
manded the foot, and Menon the Thessalian horse :
Leonatus was among the slain.

Soon after this, Craterus passed over from Asia
with a numerous army, and another battle was fought
at Cranon'"*, in which the Greeks were worsted.
The loss, indeed, was not considerable ; and it was
principally owing to the disobedience of the soldiers,
commanded by young officers who did not exert a
proper authority. But this joined to the intrigues of
Antipater among the cities, made the Greeks desert
the league, and shamefully betray the liberty of their
country. As Antipater marched directly toward
Athens, Demosthenes and Hyperides tied out of the
city. As for Deraades, he had not been able to any
extent to ansvvcr the lines laid upon him ; for he had
been seven times amerced for proposing edicts con-
trary to law. He had also been declared ' infamous,*
and incapable of speaking in the assembly. But now
finding liimself at full liberty, he moved for an order
that embassadors should be sent to Antipater with
full powers to treat of peace. The people, alarmed
at their present situation, called for Phocion, declar-
ing that he was the only man whom they could trust.
Upon which he said, " If you had followed my coiui-
" sels, we should not have had now to deliberate on

*4 A city of Thessaly Pelasgiotis^ in the plains of Tempo.*

PHOCION. SI

*' sucli an affair." Thus the decree passed, and
Phocion was despatched to Antipater, who then lay
w'ith his army in Cadmea'^, and was preparing to
enter Attica.

His first requisition was, that Antipater would
•finish the treaty before he left his camp. Craterus
said it was an unreasonable demand, that they should
remain there a burthen to their friends and allies,
when they might subsist at the expense of their ene-
mies. But Antipater took him by the hand, and
said, " Let us indulge Phocion in this particular."
As to the conditions, he insisted that the Athenians
should leave them to him, as he had done at Lamia
to their general Leosthenes.

Phocion went and reported this preliminary to the
Athenians, with which they of necessity complied ;
and he then returned to Thebes with other embassa-
dors, the principal of whom was Xenocrates the phi-
losopher. For such were the virtue and reputation
of the latter, that the Athenians thought there could
be nothing in human natiu'e so insolent, savage, and
ferocious, as not to feel some impressions of respect
and reverence at the sight of him. It happened,
however, otherwise with Antipater, through his ex-
treme brutality and antipathy to virtue : for though
he embraced the rest with great cordiality, he would
not even speak to Xenocrates ; which gave him oc-
casion to say, " Antipater does well in being asham-
" ed before me, and me only, of his injurious designs
" against Athens."

Xenocrates afterward attempted to speak, but An-
tipater in great anger interrupted him, and would
not suffer him to proceed '*'. To Phocion's discourse

^i Dacier without any necessity, supposes that Plutarch uses tlie
word ' Cadmea' ibr Boeotia. In a poetical way it is, indeed, capable
of being so understood; but it appears obviously iVom what follows,
that Antipater was then actually at Thebes, and probably in the
Cadinea or citadel.

-^ Yet he had beliaved to him v^'ith kindness, w^hen he was sent to
ransom the prisoners, Antipater, upon tliat occasion, took tlie ftrst

4

S2 PHOCIOK

however he gave attention, and replied that ho
should grant the Athenians peace, and consider
them as his friends, upon the Ibllowing conditions :
" In the first phice," said he, " they must dehvcrup
*' to me Demosthenes and Hyperides. They must,
" next, ])hice their government on the ancient tbot-
" ing, when none but the rich were advanced to the
" great offices of state. A third article is, that they
" must receive a garrison into Munychia : And a
" fourth, that they must pay the expenses of the
" war.'* All the new deputies, except Xenocrates,
thought themselves happy in these terms. But that
philosopher said, " Antipater deals favouraljly with
" us, if he considers us as slaves; but hardly, if he
*' looks upon- us as freemen." Phocion begged stre-
nuously for a remission of the article of the garrison ;
and Antipater is said to have answered, " We will
*' grant thee every thing, Phocion, excei)t what would
" be the ruin both of thee -' and of ourselves.'*
Others say, that Antipater asked Phocion, " Whe-
" ther, if he excused the Athenians on tlie subject of
*' the garrison, he would engage for their observing
" the other articles, and raising no new commo-
" tions ?" As Phocion hesitated at this (juestion,
CalHmedon surnamed Carabus, a violent man and an
enemy to popular government, started up and ex-
claimed ; " Antipater, why do you sufier this man
'■* to amuse you ? If he should give you his word.

opportunity of inviting liim to swpper; and Xenocrates nnswcrcd in
those verses- of Homer, which Ulysses addressed to Circe ((Wyss. x.
883.) when she was pressing hiai to partake of the delicacies she
had provided:

111 fits it me, whose friends are sunk to beasts,

To quart" thy bowls, and riot in thy feasts.

!Me would'stthou please? For them th)' cares employ;

And tliem to me restore, and me to joy.

Antipater was so charmed with the happy application of these
verses, that he released all the prisoners.

^7 As the Athenians had almost always, in their state of independ-
ence, proved ungrateful to their great public benefactors.*

PHOCIO^t' 3S

*' would you depend upon it, and not abide by your
*' first resolutions ?*'

Thus the Athenians were obliged to receive a
Macedonian garrison, which was commanded by
Menyllus a moderate man and the friend of Phocion.
But that precaution appeared to have been dictated
by a wanton vanity ; rather an abuse of power to the
purposes of insolence, than a measure necessary for
the conqueror's affairs ''^. It was more severely felt
by the Athenians, on account of the time at which
the garrison entered ; which was the twentieth day
of the month Boedromion, when they were celebrat-
ing the Great Mysteries, and the very day upon
which they carried the god Bacchus in procession
from the city to Eleusis. The disturbances experi-
enced in tlie ceremonies gave occasion to many to
reflect upon the difference of the divine dispensa-
tions, with respect to Athens in the present and in
ancient times : " Formerly," said they, '^ mystic
" visions were seen, and voices heard, to the great
" happiness of the republic, and the terror and asto-
" nishment of our enemies. But now during the
" same ceremonies, the gods look down without con-
" cern upon the severest misfortunes of Greece, and
*' suffer the holiest and what was once the most
" agreeable time in the year, to be profaned and ren-
" dered the date of our heaviest calamities."

A few days before, the Athenians had received an
oracle from Dodona, which warned them to secure
the promontories of Diana-^ against strangers. And
about this time, on washing the sacred fillets witii
which they bind the mystic beds, instead of their

^^ Our author, though in general a very able and refined politi-
cian, seems in this place to be out in his politics. For what, but a
garrison, could have supported an oligarchy in a nation so much in
love with popular government, or have restrained them from taking
up arms the very first opportunity?

^9 Supposed to be poetically so called, because mountainous
places and forests were generally sacred to that goddess. At least,
we know of no promontpTries in Attica, actually so decominated,
(See Callim. Hymn. DjaB.)

VOL, V. D

31 riiociON.

iiFAial lively purple they changed to a faint dead cb-
loiir. Wiiat added to the wonder waS; tha<- ail t!ie
Jineii belonging to private persons, wliich had been
washed in the same water, retained its foriner lustre.
And as a priest was washing a }>ig in that pa-rt ofthe
port called Cantharus^', alarge fish seized the hinder
parts, and devoured them as far as the belly; by
which the gods plainly announced, that they would
lose the lower parts of the city next the sea^ and
preserve the upper.

The garrison commanded by Menvllus did no kind
of injury to the citizens. But the number excluded,
by another article of the treaty (on account of their
poverty) from a share in the government, was up-
ward of twelve fhour.and- Such ofilicsf". as remain-
ed in Athens, appeared to be in a state of misery and
disgrace; and those who migrated t<> a city and
lands in Thrace, assigned them by Antipater, looked
upon themselves as no better than a conquered peo-
ple transported into a foreign country.

The death of Demosthenes in Calauria, and that
of Hyperides at Cieonaii, of which we have elsewhere
mven an account, m,ade the Athenians remember
Alexander and Philip with a degree of regret, vrhich
seemed almost inspired by affection ^\ They were
circumr.tanced indeed, at this time, precisely like
the countryman afterward upon Antigonus' death.
Those, who killed that prince and reigned in his
stead, were so oppressive and tyrannical, that a Phry-

3^ In the text it is fv yM^ufu mimvi, * in a dean part ofthe liarbour.'
But we choose to receive the correction, v.hich Fiorent. Christian
lias given us, in his nfte? upon Arlstoplianes' comedy of the
* Peace.' -There were three havens in the Piraeus, the principal of
which was called ' Cantliarus :' The other two nere the Aphrodi-'
sium, and the Zeum. Tlie passage in Aristophanes is : '

-' The cruel disposition of Antipater, who had insisted upon De-
mosthenes and, Hyperides being given up to his revenge, inade the
conduct of Philip aqd^ Alexander comparatively aniiaMe. (L.)
Calauria was an island situated at the extitmity of thuSaronicgulf-;
Clegno^, a city of Argolis.*

PHOCION. S3

gian peasant wlio was digging the ground, being
asked what he wAs seeking for, rcphed with a sigh,
" I am seekini^ for Anti£-onns." In the sanic man-
ner many of the Athenians nov/ expressed equal con-
cern, when they remembered the noble and generous
turn of mind in those kings, and how easily their
anger had always been appeased : whereas Antipa-
ter, who endeavoured to conceal his power under
the mask of a private man, a mean habit, and a plain
diet, was infinitely more rigorous to those under his
command, and in fact an oppressor and a tyrant. Yet,
upon Phocion's request, he recalled many persons
from exile : and to such, as he did not choose to re-
store to their own country, he granted a commodious
situ^fcion ; not forcing them to reside, like other
exiles, beyond the Ceraunian mountains^" and the
promontory of Tffinarus, but sufFering them to remain
in Greece and settle in Peloponnesus. Of this num-
ber was Agnonides, the informer.

In some otlier instances, likewise, he governed
with equity. He directed the police of Athens in a
just and moderate manner ; raising the modest and
the good to the principal employments, and v/holl}'
excluding from office the. dissatisfied and the sedi-
tious, so that having no opportunity to excite trou-
bles, the spirit of faction died av.ay : He taught them,
likewise, by little and little to love the country, and
apply themselves to agriculture. Perceiving too
that Xenocrates was paying the stranger's tax, he
proposed to give him his freedom : but he declined
the offer, saying ; " I v.'ill never become a member of
" that government, the establishment of which 1 was
" publicly delegated to oppose.'*

Menyllus one day offering Phocion a considerable
sum of money, the latter observed, " Menyllus is
** not a greater man than Alexander j neither have

32 These were an extensive chain of mountains In Epiriis. Tsna-
riis was a cape in Laconia, hod. C. Matapan, near which was a cave,
the Tccnaria; fauces of Virg. Georg. iv. 467.5 supposed to be the
entrance to the infernal regions.*

D 2

36 PHOCION.

" I greater reason now, than I then had, to receive
" a present.'* The governor however still pressed
him to take it, at least for his son Phocus ; but he
replied, " If Phocus becomes sober, his father's
" estate will be sufficient for him ; and, if he conti-
" nues dissolute, nothing will be so." To Antipater
he returned a most severe answer, when he wished
him to do something inconsistent with his probity.
" Antipater," said he, " cannot have me both for a
** friend and a flatterer." And Antipater himself
used to remark, " Of my two Athenian friends Pho-
" cion and Demades ; it is impossible either to in-
" fluence the one, or to satisfy the other." Phocion
indeed could produce his poverty, as a proof of his
virtue ; for, though he liad so often commanded the
Athenian armies, and had been honoured with the
friendship of so many kings, he grew old in indi-
gence : whereas Demades paraded with his wealth,
even in some instances of an illegal kind j foF there
was a law at Athens, that no foreigner should appear
in the chorusses upon the stage under the penalty
of a thousand drachmas, to be paid by the person
who Slave the entertainm.ent. Yet Demades in his
exhibition brought forward foreigners exclusively, to
the number of a hundred, and paid the thousand
drachmas' fine for each. And at the nuptials of his
son Demea he observed, " When I married your
" mother, the next neighbour hardly knew of it ; but
" to the expense of your marriage, kings and princes
" arc contributors."

The Athenians were continually Importuning Pho-
cion to persuade Antipater to withdrav^^ the garrison ;
but whether it was that he despaired of success, or
rather that he perceived the people under the fear of
that rod, more sober and submissive to government,
he always declined the commission. The only thing
which he asked and obtained of Antipater was, that
the money which the Athenians were to pay for the
charges of the war, should not be immediately ad-
vanced, but that a longer term sliould be granted*

PHOCION. 37

The Athenians, finding that Phocion wonld not inter-
fere in the affair of the garrison, appHed to Demades,
who readily undertook it. In consequence of this,
he and his son set off to Macedon. It should seem,
his evil genius led him thither ; for he arrived just at
the time when Antipater was in his last illness, and
when Cassander (now absolute master of every thing)
had intercepted a letter written by Demades to An-
tigonus in Asia, inviting him to come over and seize
Greece and Macedon, " which," he said, " hung
" only upon an old rotten stalk :" so he contemptu-
ously stiled Antipater. Cassander no sooner saw
him, than he ordered him to be arrested : and first
he killed his son before his eyes, and so near him,
that the blood spouted upon him and filled his
bosom ; after which, having reproached him with his
ingratitude and perfidy, he slew him likewise.

Antipater, a little before his death, had appointed
Polyperchon general, and given Cassander tlie com-
mand of a thousand men. But Cassander, far from
being satisfied with such an appointment, hastened
to seize the supreme power ; and immediately de-
spatched Nicanor to take the command of the gar-
rison from Menyllus, and to secure Munychia, before
the news of his father's death should have transpired.
This scheme was carried into execution ; and a few
days afterward, the Athenians receiving information
of Antipater's death accused Phocion of having been
privy to that event, and of having concealed it out
of friendship to Nicanor. Phocion, however, gave
himself no pain about it : on the contrary, he con-
versed familiarly with Nicanor, and by his assiduities
not only rendered him kind and obliging to the
Athenians, but inspired him with an ambition of dis-
tinguishing himself by exhibiting games and shows
to the people.

In the mean time Polyperchon, to whom the carQ
of the king's person liad been committed ^', in order

33 The sopi of Alexander by Roxana, who was yet very young;,

38 PHOCION.

to coimtcrmine Cassander wrote letters to the Athe-
nians, announcing, " That the king restored to them
" their ancient form of government ;" by which all
the people had access to public employments. This
was a snare laid for Phocion. For being desirous,
as quickly appeared from his actions, of making him-
self master of Athens, he was sensible that he coidd
not efrcct any thinp; so long as Phocion remained in
the Avay. He saw likewise, that his expulsion would
be no difficult task, when all who had been excluded
from a share in the administiation were re-adm.itted,
and the orators and public informers once more in
possession of the tribunals.

As these letters raised e'reat commotions amons:
the people, Nicanor was desired to speak ^^ to them
upon this subject in thePiraL^us; and for that pur-
pose he entered their assembly, trusting liis person
with Phocion. Dercyllus, who commanded for the
kin<]c in the adjacent country, laid a scheme to seize
him ; but Nicanor getting timely information of his
project guarded against it, and soon evinced that he
would wreak his vengeance on the city. Upon this,
Phocion was blamed tor having let him escape, when
he had him in his hands ; but he answered, " He

could confide in Nicanor's promises, and saw no
' reason to suspect him of any evil design. Be the

issue however,^* he subjoined, " what it may, I
" had rather be ibund sufrerin,'^, than doin^x what is
" unjust."

This answer of his, if we examine it with respect
to himself only, v.ill appear to be entirely the result
of fortitude and honour; but when we consider that
he hazarded the safety of his country, and (what is
more) that he vras general and first magistrate, I
know not whether he did not violate a stronger and

nnri wliowas subsecjriently with his motlier, S:c. put to death In- Cas-
sander. Sl-c the Life of A loi antler, Vol. I\'. p. '.'iS:'. not. ( i9S.)*

3* Nicanor know, that Polypcrchon's proposal to restore the demo-
rracv was merely a snare, and he wished to open the eyes of the
Athi-:ria:)K to his dceip:ns. iief Died. ^]c. xvi.

a

cc

PHOCION. 39

m.ore re^^pectable oblig-ation. It is In vain to allege,
that Phocion was afraid of involving Athens in a war,
and for that reason declined to apprehend Nicanor ;
and that he only urged the obligations of justice and
good faith, with a view of inducing that chieftain by
a grateful sense of such behaviour to be quiet, and
abstain from injuring tlie Athenians, For the truth
is, he had such confidence in Nicanor, that when he
received accounts from several quarters of his de-
signs upon the Pirseus, of his having ordered a body
of mercenaries to Salamis, and even bribed some of
the inhabitants of the Pir^^us, he v;oukl not give
them any credit. Nay, when Philomedes of the
borou/xh of Lampra got an edict inade, that all the
Athenians should take up arms and obey Phocion's
orders, he- never thought of acting upon it, till Nica-
nor had brought his troops out of Munychia, and
carried his trenches round the Pirsr^us. He woiild
then, indeed, have led the Athenians against him ;
but by this time they were become mutinous, and
looked upon liim with contempt.

At that juncture arrived Alexander the sonof Po-
lyperchon with an array, under pretence of assisting
the city against Nicanor ; but in reality to avail him-"
self of its i^atal divisions, and to seize it if possible for
himself For the exiles who entered the town alons:
with him, the foreigners, and the citizens who had
been stigmatised as ' infamous,' with other mean
people, resorted to him ; and all together made up a
strange disorderly assembly, by whose suffrages the
command w^as taken from Phocion, and other gene-
rals appointed in his stead : And had not Alexander
been seen alone near the walls in conference with
Nicanor, and by repeated interviews given the Athe-
nians cause of suspicion, the citv could not have
escaped the danger, in which it was then involved.
The orator Agnonides immediately singled out Pho-
cion, and accused him of treason ; which so much
alarmed Callimedon and Pericles'*, that they iied out

35 ' Pericics * here, looks like an erroneous reading. Wc subsC'' '

4.0 PHOCION.

of the city. Phocion, with such of his friends as still
adhered to him, repaired to Polyperchon. Solon of
Platae;i3 and Dinarclius of Corinth, who were deemed
the friends and confidents of Polyperchon, out of re-
gard to Phocion desired to be of the party. But
Dinarchus falling ill by the way, they were obliged
to stop many days at Elatea^^ In the mean time,
Archestratus ])roposed a decree, and Agnonides got
it passed, that deputies should be sent to Polyper-
chon v.'ith an accusation against Phocion.

The two parties reached Polyperchon at the same
time, as he was upon his march with the king^' near
Pharuges, a town of Phocis situated at the foot of
Mount Acrorium, now called Galate. There Poly-
perchon placed the king under a golden canopy, and
his friends on each side of him ; and before he pro-
ceeded to any other business, issued orders that Di-
narchus should be put to the torture, and afterward
despatched. This done, he gave the Athenians
audience. But as they filled the place with noise
and tumult, interrupting each other with mutual ac-
cusations to the council, Agnonides pressed forward,
and said ; " Put us all into one cage, and send us
^' back to Athens, to render an account of our con-
" duct.** This proposal made the king laugh : but
the iMacedonigns who attended upon that occasion,
and the strangers who were drawn thither by curi-
osity, were desirous of hearing the cause, and there-
fore made signs to the deputies to argue the matter
there. It was far from being conducted, however,
with impartiality. Polyperchon often interrupted
Phocion, who was at last so provoked, that he struck
his staff upon the ground, and would speak no more.

quently find not * Pericles,' but * Charicles,' mentioned along with
Calliniednn; and Charicles was Phocion's son-in-law.

s*' .A city of Phocis.*

3" This was Arrhidacus, the natural son of Philip. After some of
Alexander's generals for their own purposes had raised him to the
throne, he took the name of Philip, and reigned six years and a
few months. See the Life of Alexander, and note above referred
to, p. 58.

PHOCION. 41

Hegemon said, " Polyperchon himself could bear
" witness to his afFectionate regjard for the people ;"
and that general answered, " Do you come hither to
*' slander me before the king ?" Upon this the king
started up, and was going to run Hegemon through
with his spear ; but Polyperchon prevented him, and
the council immediately broke up.

The guards then surrounded Phocion and his
party, except a few, who being at some distance,
muffled themselves up and fled. Clitus carried the
prisoners to Athens, under colour of having them
tried there, but in reality only to have them put to
death, as persons already condemned. The manner
of conducting the business rendered it a still more
melancholy scene. The prisoners were carried in
carts through the Ceramicus to the theatre, where
Clitus shut them up till the Archons had assembled
the people. From this assembly neither slaves, nor
foreigners, nor persons stigmatised as ' infamous*
M^ere excluded ; the tribunal and the theatre were
open to all. The king's letter was then recited, the
purport of which was, " That he had found the pri-
'' soners guilty of treason ; but that he left it to the
" Athenians, as freemen who were to be governed
" by their own laws, to pass sentence upon them.'*

At the same time, CHtus presented them to the
people. The best of the citizens, when they saw
Phocion, appeared greatly dejected, and covering
their faces with their mantles began to weep. One
of them, however, had the courage to say, " Since
" the king leaves the determination of so important
" a matter to the people, it would be proper to com.-
" mand all slaves and strangers to depart." But the
populace, instead of agreeing to that motion, cried
out, " It would be much more proper to stone all
" the favourers of olio'archv, all the enemies of the
" people." After which no one attempted to offer
any thing in Phocion's behalf It was with much
difficulty that he himself got permission to speak.
At last /jilence being obtained, he said, " Do you

42 PHOCION.

" design to take away my life unjustly, or justly?"
Some of them answering, " Justly ;" he said, *' How
" can \ou know, whether, it will be iiistiv or not, if
" von do not hear me first ?" As he did not how-

if

ever find them in tlie least inclined to listen to him,
he advanced some paces forward, and said: " ('iti-
" zcns of Athens, 1 acknowledge that I have done
" vou injustice, and ibr mv faults in tlie aduiinistra-
" tion I adjiidge myself guilty of death "'' ; but why
" will you put to death these men, that have never
"injured you?" "Because," replied the popuiace,
" they are friends to you." Upon wliich he drew
back, and resigned himself quietly to his faie.
. Agnonides then read the decree, which he had
drawn up : according to this, the peo])le were to
pronounce by their sufiVages, whether the prisoners
appeared to be guilty or not; and, if guilty, tliey
v.ere to suffer death. V» hen the decree had been
read, some demanded an additional clause for putting
Phocion to the torture before execution, and in-
sisted that the rack and it's managers should be im-
mediately introduced. But Agnonides, observing
Clitus displeased at that proposal, and looking upon
it Jiimself as a barbarous and detestable thing, said ;
*•' When we take that villain Cailimedon, let us put
" him to the torture: but indeed, my fellow-citizens,
" I cannot consent that Phocion sliould have such
" hard measure." Upon this, one of the better-dis-
posed Athenians cried out, " Thou art certainly
" right; for if we torture Phocion, v/hat must we do
" to tliee ?" Tiiere was however hardly one nega-
tive, when the sentence of death was proposed : all
the people gave their voices standing ; and some of
them even crowned themselves with flowers, as if it
had been a matter of testivitv. With Phocion, there
were Nicocles, Thudippus, Hegemon, and Pythocles.
As lor Demetrius the Phalerean, Cailimedon, Chari-

"^"^ It vas the custom for the person accused to laj some penalty
upon liimsclf. Phocion chose the higlicst, thinking it might serve
to reconcile tlic Athenians to liis friends, but he was disappointed,

PIIOCION. 4^3

cles. arid some others who were absent, upon theitt
likewise the same sentence was passed.

• After the assembly v/as dismissed, tho convicts were
ordered to prison. The embraces oftheiriiiends and
rehitions melted them into tears; and they ail, except
Phocion, went on bewaihng their fate. His counte-
nance remained the same, as when the people sent
him out to command their armies, and the beholders
could not but* admire his invincible firmness and mag-
nanimity. Some of his enemies indeed reviled him
as he VvTnt along, and one of them even spit in his
face ; upon which he turned to the m.agistrates, and
said, " Will nobody correct (his fellow's rudeness?"
Thudippus, when he saw the executioner pounding
the hemlock, began to lament his hard fortune in
sufTerini? uniustlv on Phocion's account. " What
" then," said the venerable sage, " docs it not con-
" tent you to die with Phocion ?" One of his friends
asking him, whether or not he had any commands to
his son ; " Yes," said he, " by all means enjoin him
*' from me, to forget the ill treatment which I have
" experienced from tlie Athenians." And when Ni-
cocles, the most faithfuhcf his friends, entreated that
he would let him drink tiie poison before him ;
" This," said he, " Nicocles, is a hard request, and
" the thing must give me great uneasiness; but, since
" I have obliged you in every instance through life,
" I will do the same still"

When they eanie all to drink, the quantity proved
insufficient; and the executioner refused to prepare
more, except he had tv;elve drachmas paid hirn,
which was the price of a full drauQ-ht. As this oc-
casioned a troublesome deiav, Phocidn called one of
his friends, and said; " Since one cannot die gratis
" at Athen^, give. the man hivS irroney." The execur
tion occm-rcd on the nineteenth day of Munychion,
Vvhen there v/as a procession of horsemen in honour
of Jupiter. As the cavalcade passed by, some took
off their chaplets from their heads ; others shed tears,
»s they looked at the prison-doors ; and all who had

f4 PHOCION.

not hearts entirely savage, or were not corrupted by
rage and envy, considered it as most inipicus not to
have reprieved them at least for that day, if but to
have kept the city during it's festival unpolluted.

The enemies of Phocion however, as if something
had been wanting to their triumph, procured an or-
der that his body should not be suftered to remain
within the bounds of Attica, and that no Athenian
should furnish fire for the funeral-pile. No friend,
therefore, durst touch it ; but one Conopion, who
lived by such services, for a sum of money carried the
corj)se out of the territories of Eleusis, and got fire
for the burning of it in those of Megara. A woman
of Megara, who happened to assist at the cere-
mony with her m.aid-servants, raised a cenotaph upon
the spot, and performed the customary libations.
The bones she gathered up carefully into her lap,
carried them by night to her own house, and inter-
red them under the hearth. At the same time, she
thus addressed the domestic gods ; " Ye guardians of
" this place, to you I commit the remains of this
*' good man. Do you restore them to the sepulchre
" of his ancestors, when the Athenians shall once
" more hsten to the dictates of wisdom.'*

The interval was not long, before the situation of
their affairs taught them, what a vigilant magistrate
and what a guardian of the virtues of justice and so-
briety they had lost. The people erected his statue
in brass, and buried his remains at the public ex-
pense. Agnonides, his principal accuser, they put
to death, in consequence of a specific decree for that
purpose. Epicurus and Demophilus, the other two,
fled from Athens, but afterward fell into the hands of
Phocion's son, wlio punished them as they deserved.
This son of his was, in other respects, a worthless
man. He was in love with a slave, who belonged to
a trader in such matters ; and happening one day to
hear Theodorus the atheist contend in tlie Lyceum,
" That if it be no shame to ransom a friend, it is no
"shame to redeem a mistress;" the discourse was so

PHOCION. 45

flattering to his passion, that he immediately went
and released his female friend ^^

The proceedings against Phocion reminded the
Greeks of those against Socrates, as in both instances
equally unjust, and in their consequences to the city
where they took place, equally calamitous "

40

39 It appears from the ancient comedy, that it was no uncommon
thing for the young men of Athens to take their mistresses out of such
shops ; and, after they had released them from servitude, to marry
them.

•*° Socrates had been put to death eighty-two years before.
B. C. 400. (L.) la his case, however, the Athenians showed
greater I'everence for their rehgious rites, by reprieving the illus-
trious convict till the return of their sacred vessel from it's annual
voyage to Delos.*

■IG

THE

L I F E

OF

CATO THE YOUNGER.

SUMMARY.

Birth and character of Colo. His particular dispnxition : Firmness
and soUditij. He rescues a hoij of his orvn age. His povularity
among his co-evals: Indignation at Sylla^t cruelties: Fraternal
affection. He studies moral and p<Jitical philo:ophy. His first
public harangue. He strengthens h s coisiii Ldion o-j lahoriou--: ex-
ercise. He spends part of his nights in phi/u:,ophical conference;,
and refuses to comply with the co7-riipiJ'ashior>. of his times. Mar-
ries Atilin. Makes his first campaign tender GcUius : Re-esta-
blishes discipline in the troops wider his command: Visits Atheno-
dorus. Funercd-honours paid hy him to his hfother Ccvpio. He
visits Asia : His manner of travelling. His adventure at Anti-
och : Reception by Pompey. He returns Icing Deiotarus' presents :
Is elected quccstor. His rigorous discharge of the office. He has
S'jlla's bravoes summoned and cxcci:ted. His indefatigable dili-
gence. He purchases an account of the public expenditure from
Sylhi's time to his oivn : Refuse:^ to undertake any business^ ivhen
the senate is silting. His great reputation. He sets out for Im-
cania, but returns to apply far the tribuneship: Succeeds, arid im-
peaches Murena. Supports Cii ero in the affair of Catiline's con-
spiracy: Determines the senate to iiflict capilalpuni'ihrnent on the
conspirators. His sifters and ivivcs. He declares that he xvdl ne-
ver let Pompey enter armed info the city ; Intrepidly attends the
assembly of the people. Murena carries him off' into the temple of
Castor. Metellus, disappointed of his purpose, departs to Join
Pompey in Asia. Caio obtains a triumph for LucvJlus : Refusa'

CATO THE YOUN.GER. 47

/o s:ive Pompey and Ids soil his hvo nieces in marriage. Combina'
lion andintrigaes of Cccsar and Pompey. Cato, on Cicero's expos-
iidation, takes ilie oath injavour q/the Agrarian lav: : Arrested by
Ccesar's order, and immediately released: Smt to Cyprus. His
prudent advice to Ptolemy, king of Egypt. He exposes tosaleths
Jiirnitiire, S^c. of that prince : Quarrels toith Munatius, and is re-
conciled to him. His mode of conveying home the piihlic treasure.
Honours paid him on his return. lie opposes Cicero in his attempt
to annul Clodius' trihunitinl edicts : Prevails on Domitius to con-
test the considship tvitk Pompey and Cccsar. Solicits theprcctor-
ship, but xvit h out success ; Resists the distribution of the consular
provinces, proposed by Trehonius. Hisfruitless rep)resentativns to
Pompey. He proposes a laiv against corrupt elections. Deposit
made by the candidates. Envy excited by his virtue. He openly
accuses Pomp?y of aspiring to absolute poiuer ; Gets Favonius
elected cedile, and induces him to introduce simplicity into his
theatrical entertainments : Moves, that Pompey should be cre-
ated sole consul. His impartial conduct as judge. He offers Jiim- ,
self for the consulship, hut is rejected; Exposes Ccesar's designs to
the senate : Advises them to put every thing into Pompey'' s liands,
and leaves Rome ivith him. His good advice to Pompey : Why not
entrusted xmth the supreme naval command. Pompey's victory
owing to Cato'^s harangue. The depot at Dyrrhachium left in hi<;
charge after the ovcrthroiv at Pharsalia. He passes over into Afri-
ca ; joins Scipio and Varus. Undertakes the command and dtfence
of Utica. Receives intelligence ofScipio^s defeat; Encourages his
friends xvith some success, for a short time. Rejects the proposal of
expelling, or putting to the sword, the inhabitants of Utica. His
anxiety for the senators of his party. He refuses all intercession
ivith Cccsar in his favour .• Secures the escape of the senators ; d?.'
dines Lucius C^esar^s offer to procure his pardon : Discusses many
questions in philosophy after supper ; Inquires for his sword ; Re-
sents the attempts made to reconcile him to Ufi; Kills himself. Ces-
sar's fine observation on hearing of his daath. Death of Qaio^s
son.

48 CATO THE YOUNGER.

JL HE family of Cato had it*s first lustre and distinc-
tion from his great grand-father, Cato the Censor ', a
man whose virtue (as we have observed in his Life)
ranked him with persons of the highest reputation
and authority in Rome. The Utican Cato, of whom
"vve are now speaking, was left an orphan, together
with his brother Caepio and his sister Porcia. He
had also another sister called Servilia, but she was
only his sister by the mother's side". These orphans
were brought up in the house of Livius Drusus their
mother's brother, who at that time had great influ-
ence in the administration ; an influence acquired
by his extraordinary eloquence, eminent wisdom, and
loftiness of spirit, in which he vied with the best of
the Romans.

Cato, we are told, from his infancy discovered in
his voice, his look, and his very diversions a firmness
and solidity, which neither passion nor any thing else
could move. He pursued all his objects with a vi-
gour far above his years, and a resolution that nothing
could resist. Those, who were inclined to flatter
him, were sure to meet with a severe repulse; and
to those, who attempted to intimidate him, he was

' Cato tlie Censor, at a very late period in life, married Salonia,
the duu^liter of liis own steward. The family from that second
match, howevcrj flourished when that derived from the first became
extinct.

The genealog}', to m Inch reference is made at the end of the Cen-
sor's life, is here given more in detail from A. Gell. xiii. 19.

Cato the Censor
1. Wife '^ 2. Wife, daughter of Salonius

I I

Son, who died before Lis father Saloninus

I . A .

W.CaloNeiio?, Cors.A.U.C.OjG. Lucius Cato Marcus Cato, tribune

j ^ / His wifeby atiolherhusband

I I , A ^

Sou, who was iEdile& Priefor | Cato, Jr. Servilia, Ciepio Servi\ia Ur. m. Dr. m.

m. 1. AtiTia 2.I\Jarcia | { Luculius Silanui*

l)au};hicr ra. Brutus
^ Servilia was not his only sister by the mother's side. There were
three of them: One, the mother of Brutus who killed Caesar; ano-
tl)er married to LucLillus; and a third to Junius Silanus. Cxpio,
likewise, was his brother bv the mother's side.

1

CATO THE YOUNGEH. 49

still more imtractable. Scarcely any thing could
make him laugh, and it was but rarely that his coun-
tenance was softened to a smile. He was not quick-
ly, or easily, moved to anger ; but his resentment,
when once excited, was far from placable.

His apprehension was slow, and his learning came
with difficulty ; what he had once learned, however,
he long retained. It is, indeed, a common case for
persons of quick parts to have weak memories, but
what is most laboriously gained is always best pre-
served ; for every hard-earned acquisition of science
is a kind of annealing upon the mind. The iniflexi-
bility of his disposition seems, also, to have retarded
his progress in learning ^. For, to learn is to submit
to a new impression ; and those submit the most
easily, who have the least power of resistance. Thus
the young are more persuasible than the old, and the
sick than the healthful ; and, in general, assent is
most easily won from those, who are least able to find
objections. Yet Cato is said to have been very obe-
dient to his preceptor, and to have done whatever he
was injoincd ; only he would always inquire the rea-
son, and ask why it was injoincd. His preceptor
Sarpedon, indeed ('for that was his name) was a man
of engaging manners, who chose rather to govern by
reason, than by violence.

While Cato was yet a child, the Italian allies de-
manded to be admitted citizens of Rome. Popedins
8ilo, a man of great name as a soldier and of great
authority among his people, had a friendship with
Dri!8us, and lodged a long time in his house during
this application. As he was very familiar with the
cliiklren, he said to them one day, " Come, my
" good children, desire your uncle to assist us in
*' our solicitation for this freedom." Caepio smiled,
and readily gave his promise ; but Cato made no an-
svv'er. And as he was observed to look with a fixed

3 Ati(r7<re'.', ' slow to believe,' *; the common reading: but ^vs-ziK^ov^
in which we are warrantod by some MS,*?., a^-rees better ^Yilh what
follows.

VOL. V, E

so CATO THE YOUNGER.

ot^

and unkind eye upon the strangers, Popedlus con-
tinued ; " And you, my little man, uliat do you
" say ? Won't 30U give your guests your interest
"^vith your uncle, as well as your brother?"*' Cato
still refusing to answer, and a])pearing both by his
silence and by his looks inclined to deny the request,
Popcdius took him to the window and threatened, if
he would not promise, to throw him out. This he
did in a hareh tone, and at the same time gave him
several shakes, as if he was about to let him fall. But
as the child bore this a long time without any marks
of concern or apprehension, Popedius set him down,
and whispered to his friends, " This child is the glory
" of Italy. I verily believe, if he were a man, that
" we should not get a single vote among the peo-
" pie-"."

At another time, when a relation invited young
Cato with other children to celebrate his birth-day,
the greatest part of them went to play together in a
corner of the house. Their play was to mimic a court
of justice *, where some w ere accused in form, and
afterward carried to prison. One of them, a beau-
tiful boy, being condemned and shut up by a bigger
boy in a closet, called out to Cato ; who, as soon as
he understood what the matter was, ran to the door,
and pushing away those vvho stood there as guards
and attempted to oppose him, carried off the child
and v.cnt home in anger, most of the children march-
ins^ off with hira.

These things gained him great reputation, of

* Cato must at this time have been under four years of age. He
nas born B. C. 91. and Drosus, at whose house this affair took place,
died B. C. 91. (See Suppl. Liv. hxi. 34-.)*

'^ Cliildren's plays are often taken from vvhat is most familiar to
them. In other countries, they are commonly formed upon trifling
subjects; but the Roman children acted trials in the courts of jus-
tice, tlie command of armie.', triumphal processions, and in later
times the state of emperors. Suetonius informs us, that Nero com-
manded his young step-son Rufinus Cri^pinus (the son of Poppica)
to be thrown into the ^'ea, because he was said to delight in plays of
the iast-aientioBcd kind. (Ncr. xxxv.)

CATO THE YOUNGER. Si

■which the following is an extraordinary instance:
When Sylla wished to exhibit a tournament of boys,
which goes by the name of Troy ^ and is coijsidered
as a sacred exhibition, he selected two bands of young
gentlemen, and assigned them two captains : one of
these they easily accepted, on account of his being
the son of Sylla's wife, Metella ; but the other
named Sextus, though he was nephew to Pompey the
Great, they absolutely rejected, and would not go
out to exercise under him. Sylla then asking them,
" Whom they would have ?" they unanimously
cried out, " Cato ;" and Sextus himself readily
yielded the honour to him, as aboy of superior parts.
The friendship, which had subsisted between Sylla
and the father of Cato, induced him sometimes to
send for the young man and his brother Cagpio, and
to converse familiarly with them ; a favour, which
on account of his dignity he conferred upon very few.
Sarpedon thinking such an intercourse a great ad-
vantage to his scholar, both in point of honour and
safety, often took Cato to pay his respects to the
dictator. Sylla's house at that time looked like
nothing but a place of execution, such were the
numbers of people there tortured and put to death.
Cato who was now in his fourteenth year, seeing the
heads of many illustrious personages carried out,
and observing that the by-standers sighed in secret at
these scenes of blood, inquired of his preceptor.
Why somebody did not kill that man ?" " Be-
cause," he replied, " they fear him more than they
" hate him." " Why then," said Cato " don't you
give me a sword, that I may kill him, and deliver
my country from slavery ?" When Sarpedon
heard such a speech from the boy, and saw with
what a stern and angry look he uttered it, he was

^ The invention of this game is generally ascribed to Ascanius.
It was celebrated in the public circus by companies of boys, who
were furnished with arms suitable to their strength. They were
chosen, for the most part, outqf the noblest families in Rqme. §e«
an excellent desc;ripti<5nQfit, Vlrg. ^n. V. 5^5 — 6Q3.

' E 2

6i

ii

S2 CATO THE YorXGEn.

greatly alarmed, and Avatched him narrov.'ly after-
Avard, to prevent liis attempting some rash action.

When lie was yet but a child, he was asked one
day, " V\'hom he loved most ?" He answered, " Hi?
" brother." The inquirer then asked him, "Whom
" he loved next ?" and again he said, " His bro-
*' thcr :" " Whom in the third place?" and his reply
was still, " His brother :" and so on, till he discon-
tinued his questions. This affection increased with
his years ; so that when he was twenty years old, if
he supped, if he went out into the country, if he ap-
peared in the Forum, Coepio must be with him. But
he would not make use of perfumes, as Caepio did :
the whole course of his life, indeed, was strict and
austere ; So that, when Csepio was sometimes com-
mended for his temperance and sobriety, he would
say, " I may have some claim to these virtues, as
" compared with other men ; but, when I compare
*' myself with Cato, I seem a mere Sippius." This
was the name of a person, notoriously clfeminate and
luxurious.

After Cato had been appointed to the priesthood
of Apollo, he changed his dwelling, and took his
share of the paternal estate, which amounted to a
hundred and twenty talents. But, though his for-
tune was so considerable, his manner of living was
more frugal and simple than ever. He formed a
particular connexion with Antipatcr of Tyre, the
Stoic philosopher; and the knowledge, which he was
the most studious of acquiring, was the moral and
the political. He was carried to every virtue by an
impulse like that of inspiration ; but his principal at-
tachment was to justice, and justice of that severe and
inflexible kind, which is not to be moved by favour
or compassion \ He cultivated, also, the eloquence

7 Cicero, iu his Oration for Murasna, gives us a fine satire unon
those maxims of the stoics, which Cato made the rule of liis hfe, and
■which (as ho observes) were only fit to flourish within the Portico,
(L.) That sect indeed, by the rigouc.df their maxims, exemplitiedi
ihiiiummvynjifssvanmaivjuria*

CATO THE YOUNGER. 53

euited to popular assemblies ; for, as in a great city
there should be an extraordinary supply for war, so
in the political philosophy he thought there should
be a provision for troublesome times. Yet he did
not declaim before company, nor go to hear the ex-
ercises of other young men. And when one of his
friends said, " Cato, the world finds fault with your
" silence ;'* he answered, " No matter, so long as
" as it does not find fault with my life. I shall begin
" to speak, when I can avoid speaking things, which
*' don't deserve to be he&rd."

In the public hall called the Porcian, which had
been built by old Cato during his censorship, the tri-
bunes of the people used to hold their court. And
as tliere was a pillar which incommoded their
benches, they resolved either to remove it to a dis-
tance, or to take it entirely away. This was the first
thing, that drew Cato to the Rostra, and even then
it was against bis inclination. He opposed the de-
sign, however, most effectually, and gave an admira-
ble specimen both of his eloquence and his spirit.
For there was nothing of youthful sallies, or finical
affectation in his oratory ; all was rough, and sensi-
ble, and energetic. Nevertheless, amidst the short
and solid turn of the sentences, there was a crrace
that engaged the ear ; and witli the gravity to be
expected from liis manners, was intermixed some-
thing of humour and raillery, which had a most
agreeable eiffect. His voice was loud enough to be
heard by suck a multitude of people, and his strength
of utterance was so powerful and inexhaustible, that
he often spoke a whole day without being tired.

After he had gained his cause, he returned to his
former studies and silence. To strengthen his con-
stitution, he used the most laborious exercise. He ■
accustomed himself to go bare-headed botii in tlie
hottest and the coldest weather, and travelled on
foot at all seasons of the year. His friends wlio tra-
velled with him made use of horses, and- he joined
sometimes one and sometimes another for conversa-

4

54- CATO THE YOUNGER.

tion, as he went along. In times of sickness, bis
patience and abstinence were extraordinary. If he
happened to have a fever, he spent the whole day-
alone, suffering no person to approach him till he
found a sensible change for the better.

At entertainments they threw the dice for the
choice of the messes ; and if Cato lost the first choice,
his friends generally offered it to him, but he always
refused it; '' Venus %" said he, "forbids.'* At
first, he used to rise from the table after having drank
once ; but in process of time he came to love drink-
ing, and would sometimes spend the whole night
over his wine. This his friends excused by saying,*
That the business of the state employed him
throughout the day, and left him no time for con-
versation, and therefore he passed his evenings in
" discourse with the philosophers." And, when one
Memmius said in company " That Cato spent whole
nights in drinking;" Cicero retorted, "But you
cannot say, that he spends whole days in gaming."
Cato perceived that a great reformation was want-
ing in the manners and customs of his country, and
for that reason he determined to oppose the corrupt
fashions, which then prevailed. He observed, for
instance, that the richest and brightest purple was
the most worn, and therefore he went in black. Nay,
he often appeared in public after dinner, bare-footed
and without his gown. Not, that he affected to be
talked of for that singularity ; but he did it by way
of learning to be ashamed of nothing but what was
really shameful, and not to regard what depended
only on the estimation of the worlds

' The most favourable cast upon the dice was called 'Venus.' (L.)
To this Horace alludes, Od. I. vi. 18., III. vii. 25. ; upon which latter
passage Cruquius informs us, in talario hido, qui talis qiiaierim con-
itabaty * Venus' erat guanda singuli tali diverso vultu apparebant :
contra in tesserario ludo tribus tesseris ludebant, et numerus tersena-
rius sianrnus eratjactns vcl * Venus.'' See a former note.*
' 9 This principle, however, he carried too far: and there are few
things which youth should be more carefully taught to distinguish;

CATO THE YOUNGER. 55

A large estate falling to him by the death of a
cousin-german of the same name, he converted it
into money, to the amount of a hundred talents ;
and, when any of his friends wished to borrow a sum,
he lent it to them without interest. If he could not
otherwise supply them, he suffered even his own land
and slaves to be mortgaged for them to the treasury.

He never knew any woman before his marriage ;
and when he thoughthimself of a proper age for that
state, he entered into a treaty with Lepida, who had
before been contracted to Metellus Scipio, but upon
Scipio's having broken his engagement was then at
liberty. Before the marriage however could take
place, Scipio repented, and by his unremitting assi-
duities recovered the lady's favour. Provoked at
this ill-treatment, Cato wished toapply to the laws
for redress ; and as his friends over-ruled him in that
respect, youthful resentment impelled him to write
some iambics against Scipio, which had all the keen-
ness of Archilochus '% without his indelicate scur-
rility.

After this, he married Atilia the daughter of So^
ranus, who was the first, but not the only woman he
ever knew. In this respect Laelius, the friend of
Scipio Africanus, was happier than he ^^ ; for in the
course of a long life he had only one wife, and no in-
tercourse with any other woman.

In the Servile War'-, I mean that with Spartacus,
Gellius was general ; and Cato served in it as a vo-
lunteer, for the sake of his brother Cgepio, who was
at that time a tribune : but he could not distinguish

than what is essentially vicious, and what may be innocently followedj
in tlie usages of the world.*

'° This sarcastic writer by his verses drove Lycambes, of whose
daughter he had been disappointed in marriage, to hang himself
See Hor. Ep. I. xix. 25., A, P, 79. He was nearly contemporary
with Romulus.*

" Plutarch seems to us to have spoken thus feelingly, from hi§
own experience, of the happiness of the conjugal connexion lon^
continued with an affectionate wife.

'^ B. C. 73—71. See the Life of Crassus, III. 457 . not. (13.)

SS CATO THE YOUNGER.

his vivacity and courage as he wished, because the
•war was ill conducted. Amidst the effeminacy and
luxury however which then prevailed in the army,
he paid so much regard to discipline, and when oc-
casion served behaved with so mucli spirit and valour,
as well as coolness and capacity, that he appeared in
no degree inferior to Cato the Censor. Gellius made
hirn an offer of distinguished military rewards and
lionoursj but he would not accept or allow of them :
" I have done nothing," said he, " that deserves
*' such notice."

These things made him pass for a man of a strange
and singular turn. Besides, when a law was enacted,
that no man who solicited any office should take no-
menclators ''^ along with him, he was the only one
that obeyed it ; for, when he ai)plied for a tribune's
commission in the army, he had previously made
himself master of the names of all the citizens. Yet
for this he wj^s envied, even by those by whom he
was praised upon the occasion. The more they con-
sidered the excellence of his conduct, the more pain,
it gave them to think how hard it was to imitate.

With a tribune's commission he was sent into Ma-
cedon, where llubrius the pr^tor had the command.
His w ife, upon his departure, was in great distress ;
and we are told that Munatius one of his friends, in
order to comfort her, said, " Cheerly, Atilia; I will
" take care of your husband." " By all means,"
answered Cato. At the end of the first day's march,
after they had supped, he observed ; " Come, Muna-
*' tius, that you may the better perform your pro-
" mise to Atilia, you shall not leave me either day
'f or night." In consequence of which, he ordered
two beds in his own tent, and made a pleasant im-
provement upon the matter ; for as iMunatius con-

'' — Serviim qui dictet nominaflcevum

Quifodial lalus, et cogcit trans ponder a dexiram
Porrigere. (lior. Ep. I. vi. SO.)

Yet Cicero (pro Murfcn. xxxvi.) charges Cato with having liis
pomenclator ! Quid, qiiud hades nomendatorem I

CATO THE YOUNGER. ST

jstantiy slept by him, it was not he that took care of
Cato, but Cato who took care of him.

Cato carried along with liim fifteen slaves, two
freedmen, and four of his friends. These rode on
horseback, and he always went on foot ; yet he kept
np with them, and conversed with them all by turns.
When he joined the army, which consisted of several
legions, llubrius gave him the command of one. In
this post, he thought it nothing great or extraordi-
nary to be distinguished singly by his own virtue ; it
was his ambition to render all the troops, that were
under his care, like himself With this view, though
he lessened nothing of the authority which might in-
spire fear, he called in the support of reason to it's as-
sistance. By instruction and persuasion, as well as by
rewards and punishments, he formed them so well, that
it was hard to say whether his troops were more peace-
able or niore warlike, more valiant or more just. They
were dreadful to their enemies, and courteous to
their allies ; afraid to do a dishonourable thing, and
not afraid to do any thing in pursuit of honest praise.

Hence, though honour and fame were not his ob-
jects, they flowed in upon him : he, was held in uni-
versal esteem, and had the entire possession of his
soldiers' hearts. For, wliatever he commanded others
to do, he was the first to do himself. In his dress,
his manner of living, and his marching, he resembled
the private more than the officer; and at the same
time in virtue, in dignity of mind, and in strength of
eloquence he far exceeded all that had the name of
generals. By these means, he insensibly gained the
affections of his troops. And indeed virtue does not
attract imitation, except the person who gives the
pattern be beloved, as well as esteemed. Those,
who praise good men without loving them, only pay
a respect to their name, without cither sincerely ad-
miring their virtue, or having any inclination to foir
low their example.

At that time Jived at Pergamus a Stoic philosopher,
named Athenodorus and surnamcd Cordylio, in high

f§ CATO THE YOUNGER.

reputation for his knowledge. He was now grown
old, and had long resisted the applications of princes
and other great men, who wished to draw him to
their courts by offers of their friendship and very
considerable appointments- Cato thence concluded,
that it would be in vain to write or send any messen-
ger to him ; and as the laws gave him leave of ab-
sence for two months, he sailed to Asia and applied
to him in person, in contidence that his accomplish-
ments would carry his point. Neither was he disap-
pointed. By his arguments and the charms of his
conversation he drew him from his purpose, and
brought him back with him to the camp ; as happy
and as proud of his success, as if he had made a more
valuable capture, or performed a more glorious ex-
ploit than those of Pompey and Lucullus, who were
then subduing the provinces and kingdoms of the
east.

While he was with the army in Macedon, he re-
ceived information by letter, that his brother Caspio
had fallen sick at ^nus '^ in Thrace. The sea was
extremely rough, and no large vessel could be pro-
cured. He ventured however to sail from Thessalo-
nica in a small passage-boat, with two friends and
three servants, and having very narrowly escaped
drowning, arrived at ^nus just after Caspio had
expired. Upon this occasion, Cato showed the sen-
sibility of a brother, rather than the fortitude of a
philosopher. He wept, he groaned, he embraced
the dead body ; and, beside these and other tokens
of tli^ deepest sorrow, he expended vast sums upon
his tlineral. The spices and rich robes that were
burnt with him were very costly, and he erected a
monument for him of Thasian marble in the Forum

'^ .Enus, hod. Eno, was situated near the eastern mouth of tlie
Hebrus; Thessalonioa, mentioned belo\^% Mas a Macedonian city^
anciently culled Therrna [hod. Saloniki) on the Thermaic gulf; and
Thasus, hod. Thapso or Tasso, an island celebrated for it's quarries
of variegated marble, opposite to the mouth of the Nessus ©fF the
jouthern coast of Thrace. (See Plin. H. N. xxxvi. 6.)*

CATO THE YOUNGER. g§

at iEnus, which amounted to not less than eight
talents.

Some condemned these things as little congruous
to the modesty and simplicity, which Cato had in
general professed ; but they did not perceive, that
with all his iirmness and inflexibility to the solicita-
tions of pleasure, of terror, and of importunity, he
had great tenderness and sensibility in his nature.
Many cities and princes sent presents of considerable
value, in order to do honour to his obsequies, but he
would not accept any thing in money. All that he
would receive were spices and stuffs, and those too
only on condition of paying their full price.

He was left co-heir with Ga[?pio's daughter to his
estate ; but when they came to divide it, he would
not charge any part of the funeral-expenses to her
account. Yet though he acted so honourably in that
affair, and continued in the same upright path, there
was one ^^ who scrupled not to assert, that he passed
his brother's ashes through a sieve, in search of the
gold that might have been melted down. Surely that
waiter thought himself above being called to any ac-
count for his pen, as well as for his sword !

Upon the expiration of his commission, Cato w^as
honoured at his departure, not only with the common
good wishes for his health and praises of his conduct,
but with tears and the most affectionate embraces ;
the soldiers spread their garments in his way, and
kissed his hands : instances of esteem, which few ge-
nerals met with from the Romans in those times !

But before he returned to Rome, to solicit a share
in the administration, he resolved to visit Asia, and
observe with his own eyes the manners, customs, ami
strength of every province. At the same time he
was desirous to obhge Deiotarus king of Galatia,
who on account of the engagements of hospitality
that had subsisted between himself and Cato's father,
Jiad given him a most pressing invitation.

'^ Julius Csesar in his ' Anti-Cato.*
1

eo CATO THE YOUXGER.

His manner of travellinf]^ was as follows : Earlv
each morning he sent his baker and his cook to the
place where he intended to lodge the ensuing night.
These entered the town in a very modest and civil
manner; and if they found there no friend or ac-
quaintance of Cato or his family, they engaged lodg-
iiigs for him, and prepared his supper at an inn,
■without giving any one the least trouble. If there
happened to be no inn, they applied to the magis-
trates for quarters, and were always satisfied with
those assigned to them. Very often they were not
believed to be Cato's servants, but entirely disre-
garded ^^, because they did not assail the magistrates
with clamours and menaces ; so that their master
frequently arrived, before they could procure lodg-
ings. It was still worse, when Cato himself made his
appearance ; for the townsmen, seeing him seat him-
self on the luggage without speaking a word, took
him for a man of a mean and dastardly spirit. Some-
times however he would send to the magistrates, and
say, " Wretches, why do not you learn a proper hos-
*' pitality .^ You" will not find all that apply to you,
•• Catos. Do not then by your ill-treatment furnish
*' occasions of exerting their authority, to those who
*' only seek a pretence to take from you by violence,
" what you give with so much reluctance."

In Syria, we are told, he met with a ludicrous ad-
venture. When he came to Antioch, he saw a num-
ber of people ranged in good order without the gates.
On one side of the wav stood the youni:^ 'i^cn in their .
mantles, and on the other the boys in their best at-
tire. Some wore white robes, and had crowns upon
their heads : these were the priests, and the magis-
trates. Cato, imagining that this mngniticent recep-
tion was intended to do him honour, began to be
angry with his servants, who had been sent forward,
for not having prevented such a compliment. Ne-

'* Apparet servum hunc esse domini pauperis ■miserique. Ter,
Jjun. iii. 2.

CATO THE YOUNGER. 61

rertheless, he desired his friends to ahght, and walk-
ed with them toward these Antiochians. When they
were near enough to be spoken to, the master of the
ceremonies, an elderly man with a staff and a crown
in his hand, addressed himself first to Cato ; and
without so much as sahiting him inquired, " How
" far Demetrius was behind, and when he nnVht be
" expected." Demetrius was Pompey's freedman ;
nnd, as the eyes of all the world were then fixed up-
on Pompey, they paid more respect to this favourite
of his, than he liad any right to claim. Cato's friends
were seized with such a fit of laughter, that they
could not recover themselves, as they passed througli
the crowd. Cato himself in some confusion cried
out, " Alas poor city !" and said not another word*.
Afterward however he used always to laugh, when-
ever he told the stoiy.

But Pompey took care to prevent the people of
Asia from making any more mistakes of this kind,
for want of knowing Cato. For Cato on his arrival
at Ephesus going to pay his respects to Pompey, as
his superior in age and dignity, and as the com-
mander of such large armies ; Pompey, when he saw
him at some distance, did not wait to receive him
sitting, but rose up to meet him ; and gave him his
hand with the utmost cordiality. He said much like-
wise in commendation of his virtue, while he was
present, and spoke still more freely in his praise upon
his departure. Every one after this paid the highest
attention to Cato, and he was admired for what had
previously exposed him to contempt ; for they could
now see, that his sedate and subdued conduct was
the effect of his greatness of mind. Besides, it was
visible that Pompcy's behaviour to him was the con-
sequence rather of respect, than of love; and that,
though he expressed his admiration of him while pre-
sent, he was glad v/hen he was gone. For the other
young Romans, that came to see him, he pressed

* See the Life of Pompey, Vol; IV. p. 175.

62 CATO THE YOUNGER.

much to stay, and spend some time with him. Tq
Cato alone he gave no such invitation ; but, as if he
felt himself during his stay under some restraint in
his proceedings, readily dismissed him. Of all the
Romans however that returned to Rome, to Cato
alone he recommended his w'ife and children, who
indeed were his relations.

His fame now flying before him, the cities in his
\vav anxiously strove which should do him most ho-
nour by invitations, entertainments, and every other
mark of regard. Upon these occasions, Cato used
to desire his friends to look v/ell after him, lest he
should verify Curio's saying. Curio, who was one
of his particular friends and companions, but disap-
proved his austerity, asked him one day ; " Whether
*' he meant to visit Asia, when his time of service
" was expired ?" Cato replied, " Yes, certainly.'*
Upon which Curio said, " I am glad of that ; you
" will return a little more practicable :" using an ex*
pressive Latin word to that purpose''.

Deiotarus king of Galatia, being far advanced in
years, had sent for Cato, with a design to recommend
iiis children and all his family to his protection. As
soon as he came, he offered him a variety of valuable
presents, and urged him strongly to accept them ;
which importunity so much displeased him, that
though he came in the evening, he stayed only that
night, and went away at the tliird hour the next
morning. After he had proceeded a day's journey,
lie found at Pessinus a still greater number of pre-
sents, with letters entreating him to receive themj
" or if you refuse for yourself," said Deiotarus, *' at
*' least allow them to be taken by your friends, who
" deserve some reward for their services, and yet
" cannot expect it out of your own estate." Cato
however would give them no such permission, though

'7- Supposed to have been mansuetior. As Cato understood it in
a disadviintitgeous sense, we have rendered it by the word ' practica-
ble,' which conveys tbt same idea.

CATO THE YOUNGER. ^

he observed that some of them cast a longing eye
that way, and were visibly chagrined. " Corrup-
^' tion," said he^ " will never want a pretence : but
" you shall be sure to share with me, whatever I can
" get with justice and honour." He, therefore, re-
turned Deiotarus his presents.

When he was about to embark for Brundusium, his
friends advised him to put Caepio's remains on board
another vessel'^; but he declared, "that sooner
" than part with them he would part with his life," and
so set sail. This particular ship however, it is said,
happened to be in great danger, though all the rest
had a tolerable passage.

After his return to Rome, he spent his time either
in conversation with Athenodorus at home, or in the
Forum in the service of his friends. Though he was
of a proper age ^'^ to offer hhnself for the quaestorship,
he would not solicit it, till he had qualihed himself
for that ofiice by studying all the laws relative to it,
making inquiries of such as were experienced in it ;
and thus gaining a thorough knowledge of it's whole
intention and process. Immediately upon his enter-
ing on it, he introduced a considerable reformation
among the secretaries and other officers of the trea-
sury. The public papers, and the rules of court,
were what they were well versed in ; and as young
quaestors w^re continually coming into the direction,
who were ignorant of the laws and records, the un-
der-officers took upon them not only to instruct, but
to dictate to them, and were in fact quaestors them-
selves. This abuse Cato corrected. He applied
himself indeed with great vigour to the business, and
had not only the name and honour, but thoroughly
understood e\ery thing belonging to that depart-

'* From a prevalent superstition, that a dead body on board a ship
would raise a storm. Plutarch, by using the word ' happened ' just
below, shows that he did not concur in this consecrated ab.>^urdity.

'9 The legal age of becoming queestor was thirty-one, asdile tliirty-
six, pr£Btor thirty-eight, and consul forty-two. But Caty had aot
yet attained the lowest of these dates.*

e* CATO THE YOUNGER.

ment. Hence he made use of the secretaries only
as servants, in their true capacity ; correcting some-
times wilful abuses, and sometimes mistakes orioinat-
ing in ignorance. As the licence in which they had
Iiitherto lived had rendered them refractory, and they
hoped to secure themselves by flattering the other
quasstors, they boldly witlistood Cato. He therefore
dismissed the principal of them, whom he had de-
tected in a fraud in the division of an estate. Aijainst
another, he lodged an indictment for forgery. His
defence w^as undertaken by Lutatius Catulus, then
censor, a man w^hose authority was supported not
only by his high office, but still more by his reputa-
tion ; for injustice and regularity of life, he had dis-
tinguished himself above all the Romans of his time.
He was also a friend and a favourer of Cato, on ac-
count of his upright conduct, yet in this cause he
opposed him. Perceiving himself in the wrong, he
had recourse to entreaties : but Cato would not suf-
fer him to proceed, and on his persisting took occa-
sion to say, " It would be a great disgrace to you,
" Catulus, the censor and inspector of our lives and
" manners, to be turned out of court by my lictors.'*
Catulus ffave him a look, as if he intended to have
replied : he did not speak however, but either
throuii'li anij^er or shame went off silent and much dis-
concerted. Nevertheless, the man was not con-
demned. As the number of voices against him ex-
ceeded those for him only by one, Catulus craved
the assistance of Marcus Lollius, Cato's collegue ;
who though he had been prevented by sickness from
attending the trial, upon this application was brought
in a litter into court, and gave the casting voice in
favour of the defendant. Yet Cato would not restore
him to his employment, or pay him his stipend ; for
he considered the partial suffrage of Lollius as a
thing of no account.

The secretaries thus humbled and subdued, he
took the direction of the public papers and finances
into his own hand. By thcso means, he quickly

CATO THE YOUNGER. 6S

rendered the treasury more respectable tlian the
senate itself; and it Was common'y thought, as well
as said, that Cato had given the qu^estorship all the
dignity of the consulate. For having made it his
business to find out all the debts of long standing
due from private persons to the public, and what the
public was indebted to private persons in return, he
settled these affairs in such a manner, that the com-
monwealth couhl no longer either do or suffer any
injury in that respect ; strictly demanding and in-
sisting on the payment of whatever was owing to the
state, and at the same time readily and freely satisfy-
ing all who had claims upon it. This naturally gain-
ed him reverence among the people, when they saw
many obliged to pay who had hoped never to have
been called to account, and many receiving debts
which they had renounced as desperate. His prede-
cessors had often, through interest or persuasion, ac-
cepted false bills and pretended orders of senate 5
but nothing of that kind escaped Cato. There was
one order in particular, which he suspected to be
forged ; and though it had many witnesses to sup-*
port it, he would not allow it, till the consuls came
and declared it upon oath.

There had been a number of assassins employed
in the last proscription, to whom Sylla"" had given
twelve thousand drachmas for each head they
brought him. These were considered by all the
v/orld as most execrable villains ; yet no man had
ventured to bring them to justice. Cato, however,
summoned all who had received the public money
for such unjust services, and made them refund ; iii^
veighing at the same time, with equal reason and
severity, against their impious and abominable deeds.
Those vv^retches, thus disgraced and as it were pre-
judged, were afterward indicted for murther betbre
the judges, w^ho puni^iied them as they deserved.
All ranks of people rejoiced at these executions j

=' See his Life, III. 277.
VOL. \\ F

ee CATO THE younger.

they thought they saw the tyranny rooted out with
it's instruments, and Sylla himseh^ capitally punished
in the death of his ministers.

The people were also delighted with his indefati-
gable diligence ; for he always came to the treasury
before his collegues, and was the last that left it.
There was no assembly of the people, or meeting of
the senate, which he did not attend, in order to keep
a watchful eye upon all partial remissions of fines and
duties, and all unreasonable grants. Thus having
cleared the exchequer of informers and all such ver-
min, and filled it with treasure, he showed that it
was possible for the government to be rich without
oppressing the subject. At first, this conduct of his
was very obnoxious and odious to his collegues, but
in time it became highly agreeable : because by re-
fusing to give away any of the public money, or to
make any partial determination, he incurred the rage
of disappointed avarice for them all ; and to the im-
portunity of solicitation they were enabled to reply,
that they could do nothing without the consent of
Cato.

The last day of his office, he was conducted home
by almost the whole body of citizens. But he was
informed on the w^ay that some of the principal men
in Rome, wlio had great influence with Marcellus,
were besieging him in the treasury, and pressing him
to make out an order for sums which they pretended
to be due to them. Marcellus from his childhood
had been the friend of Cato, and a good quaestor
while he acted with him ; but when he acted alone,
he was too much influenced by personal regards for
petitioners, and by a natural inclination to oblige.
Cato, therefore, immediately turned back ; and find-
ing that Marcellus had already suffered himself to be
prevailed upon to make out the order, he called for
the registers and erased it, Marcellus all the while
standing by in silence. Not content with this, he
led him out of the treasury, and took him to his own
house. Marcellus however did not complain, either

CATO THE YOUNGER. 67

then or afterward, but continued tlie same friendship
and intimacy with liim to the last.

After the time of his qugestorship was expired,
Cato still turned a vigilant eye toward the treasury.
He had his servants there, dail}^ minuting down the
proceedings ; and he spent much time himself in
perusing the public accounts from the time of Sylla
to his own, a copy of which he had purchased for five
talents.

Whenever the senate was summoned to meet, he
was the first to attend, and the last to withdraw ; and
frequently, while the rest were slowly assembling,
he would sit down and read, holding his gown before
his book ; neither would he ever be out of town,
when there was a general summons of attendance.
Pompey, discovering that in all his unwarrantable
attempts he must find a severe and inexorable oppo-
nent in Cato, whenever he had a point of that kind
to carry, threw in his way either the cause of some
friend to plead, or some arbitration or other business
to call off his attention. But Cato soon perceived
the snare, and rejected all the applications of his
friends ; declaring that, when the senate was to sit,
he would nev^er undertake any other concern. For
his attention to the affairs of government was not,
like that of some others, guided by the views of
honour or profit, or left to mere chance or humour ;
but he thought a good citizen ought to be as solicit-
ous about the public, as a bee is about her hive. For
this reason he desired his friends, and others with
whom he had connexions in the provinces, to give
him an account of the edicts, important decisions,
and all other principal business there transacted.

He made a point of opposing Clodius, the seditious
demagogue, who was always bringing forward some
dangerous law or change in the constitution, or ac-
cusing the priests and vestals to the people. Among
the rest Fabia Terentia, the sister of Cicero's wife
and one of the vestals, was impeached, and in danger
of being condemned. But Cato defended the cause

F 2

68 CATO THE YOUNGER.

of tlicsc injured people so well, that Clodliis was
forced to withdraw in extreme confusion, and leave
the city. AVhen Cicero came to return him thanks,
he said, " You must thank your country, whose
'* service is the spring that guides all my actions."

His reputation became at last so great, tiiat a cer-
tain orator in a cause where only one witness was
produced, said to the judges, " The evidence of a
" single man is insufficient, even if that man were
*' Cato.'* It grew indeed into a kind of proverb,
when people were speaking of strange and incredible
things, to say, " I would not believe it, on the au-
" tliority even of Cato himself*

A man profuse in his expenses, and in all respects
of a worthless character, taking upon him one day
to speak in the senate in praise of temperance and
sobriety, Amnasus rose up and said, " Who can
" endure to hear a man that eats and drinks like
" Crassus, and builds like LucuUus, pretending to
" talk Hke Cato"^ ?'* Hence others who were disso-
lute and aI')andoncd in their lives, but preserved a
gravity and austerity in their discourse, came by way
of ridicule to be called ' Catos.'

His friends advised him to offer himself for the
tribuneship ; but he thought it was not yet time.
" An of^ceof such power and authority,'* he said, " he
*' considered as a violent medicine, which ought only
*' to be used in cases of necessity." As at that time
he had no public business to engage him, he took
his books and philosophers along with him, and set
out for Lucania, where he had an estate and an agree-
able country-retreat. By the way he met with a
number of horses, carriages, and servants belonging
(as he found) to Metellus Nepos, who was going to
Rome to apply for the tribuneship. This put him to
a stand : he remained for some time in deep thought,

-' — Curios simulant, et Bacchanalia vivimt. ( Juv. ii. 3.)

See the Life of LucuUus, IIL 386., where this reproof is ascribed
fo Cato.*

cc

CATO THE YOUNGER. 69

and then gave his people orders to turn back. To
his friends, who were surprised at this conduct, he
said ; " Know ye not that Metellus is formidable,
" even in his stupidity ? He now follows the coun-
sels of Pompey ; the state lies prostrate before
him ; and he will fall upon it, and crush it with the
" force of a thunderbolt. Is this, then, a time for
the pursuit of rural amusements .f* Let us rescue
our liberties, or die in their defence !" Upon the
remonstrance of his friends, however, he proceeded
to his farm ; and, after a short stay there, returned
to the city. He arrived in the evening, and early
the next morning went to the Forum, to offer him-
self as a candidate for the tribuneship in opposition
to Metellus : for to oppose is the nature of tliat
office, and it's power is chiefly negative ; insomuch,
that the dissent of a single voice is sufficient to annul
a measure, in which the whole assembly beside has
concurred.

Cato was, at first, attended by only a small num-
ber of his friends ; but as soon as his intentions be-
came public, he was immediately surrounded by all
the men of honour of his acquaintance, who gave
him the strongest encouragement, and solicited him
to apply for the tribuneship, not as it might imply a
favour conferred upon himself, but as it would be an
honour and an advantage to his fellow-citizens : ob-
serving at the same time that, though it had been
frequently in his power to have obtained this office
without the trouble of opposition, yet he now stepped
forth, regardless not only of that trouble, but even
of personal danger, when the liberties of his country
were at stake. Such was the zeal and eagerness of
the people pressing around him, that it was with the
utmost difficulty he made his way to the Forum.

Being appointed tribune, with Metellus among
the rest, he observed that great corruption had crept
into the consular elections. Upon this subject, he
concluded a severe charge to the people by affirming
on oath, that he would prosecute every one who

6

•70 CATO THE YOUNGER.

should offend in that way. He took care however
that Silanus '", who had married his sister Servilia,
should be excepted. But against Murasna, who by
means of bribery had carried the consulship at the
same time with Silanus, he laid an information. V>y
the laws of Rome, the person impeached has the
power to set a guard upon his accuser, that he may
have no opportunity of supporting a false accusation
by private arrangements before the trial. When the
person, who had been appointed Muracna's officer
upon this occasion, observed the liberal and candid
conduct of Cato, and that he sought only to sup-
port his information by fair and open evidence, he
W'as so struck with the excellence and dignity of his
character, that he would frequently wait upon him in
the Forum or at his house, and after inquiring whe-
ther or not he intended to proceed that day in the
business of the information, if Cato answered in the
negative, he made no scruple of leaving him. When
the trial came on, Cicero, who was then consul and
Murgena's advocate, by way of playing upon Cato,
threw out many pleasant things against the Stoics and
their paradoxical philosophy. This occasioned no
small mirth among the judges: upon which Cato only
observed with a smile, to those who stood next to him,
that Rome had indeed a most laughter-raising con-
sul". Murajiia acted a creditable and judicious part,

^^ From this passage it would appear, that Plutarch supposed
Cato capable of sacrificing principle to family connexions, [it was
not thus that Phocion felt, when he refused to screen Charicles, and
said ; ' I made you my son-in-law only for jr.st and honourable pur-
poses.' [Sec p. 26.*] But the fault lies ratlier in the historian,
than in the tribune. For, is it to be supposed, that the rigid virtue
of Cato should have descended to the most obnoxious circumstances
of predilection "i It is not possible to have a stronger instance of his
integrity, than his having refused the alHanceof Ponipey the (n'cat ;
tliough that refusal was impolitic, and attended with ill consequences
to the stale.

^3 The French and English translators have it, * a pleasant con-
sul.' But that docs not convey the sarcasm that Cato meant. ' Ri-
diculum eH, quod risnm Jlicit.' On 'the paradoxes of the Stoics,'
see Cic. Parad. See in this vol. Demosthenes and Cicero com-
pared.

CATO THE YOUNGER. 71

with regard to Cato; for after he was acquitted of
the charge which he had brought against him, he
consulted him upon all occasions of importance dur-
ing his consulship, respected him for his sense and
virtue, and indeed showed him every mark of ho-
nour and confidence throughout the whole of his ad-
ministration. Cato, on the bench and in council,
was the most rigid dispenser of justice ; but, in pri-
vate society, he was affable and humane.

Even before he was appointed tribune in Cicero's
consulship, he supported that magistrate in a most
seasonable manner, by many excellent measures dur-
ing the turbulent times of Catiline. This man, it is
well known, meditated nothing less than a total sub-
version of the Roman state ; but, by the spirited
counsels and conduct of Cicero, he was obliged to
fly from Rome without having effected his purpose.
Lentulus and Cethegus however, with the rest of the
conspirators, after having reproached Catiline for his
timidity and the feebleness of his enterprises, re-
solved to distino-uish themselves at least more effect-
ually. Their scheme was to burn the city, and de-
troy the empire by the revolt of the colonies and by
foreign wars. Upon the discovery of this conspiracy,
Cicero (as we have observed in his Life) called a
council ; when the first speaker, Silanus, gave it as
his opinion, that the conspirators should be punished
with the utmost rigour. This opinion was adopted
by the rest, till it came to Caesar. That eloquent
man, whose ambitious principles it suited rather to
encourage than to suppress innovations and dis-
turbances, urged, in his usual persuasive manner
the propriety of allowing the accused the privilege
of trial, and that they should only be taken into cus-
tody. This measure many of the senate, who were
under apprehensions from the people, thought it pru-
dent to adopt; and even Silanus retracted, and de-
clared he meant nothing more than imprisonment,
4;hat being the most rigorous punishment which a Ro-
man citizen could suffer.

Jr2 CATO THE YOUNGER.

This chanj^e of scnlinients in those who spoke firsfc
>vas followed by the rest, who itil strongly recom-
mended milder measures. But Cato, who was of a
contrary opinion, defended it with the greatest vehe-
mence, eloquence, and energy. He reproached Si-
lanus for his pusillanimity in having altered his reso-
lution. He attacked Caesar, and charged him with
a secret design of subverting the government, under
the plausible appearance of mitigatory speeches and
humane conduct ; and of intimidating likewise the
senate, even in a case where he had to fear for his
own person, and in which he might deem it an in-
stance of great good fortune, if he himself could be
exempted from the imputation and suspicion of
guilt — He, v/ho had openly and daringly attempted
to rescue from justice the enemies of the state, and
shown that, far from having any compassion for his
country when on the brink of destruction, he could
even pity and plead for the unnatural wretches who
had meditated it*s ruin, and grieve that their punish-
ment should prevent their design. This, it is said,
is the only oration of Cato's extant. Cicero had se-
lected a number of the quickest writers, whom he had
taught the art of abbreviating words by characters,
and had placed them in different parts of the senate-
house. Before his consulate, they had no short-hand
writers-'. Cato carried his point; and it was de-
creed, in conformity to his opinion, that the con-
spirators shouid suffer capital punishment.

As it is our intention to exhibit an accurate pic-
ture of the mind and manners of Cato, the least cir-
cumstance, that may contribute to mark them, ought
not to escape our notice. While he was w armly con-
testing his point with Csesar, and the eyes of the
i^'hole senate were upon the disputants, it is said that
a billet was brought in and delivered to Cnesar. Cato
immediately susj)ected him, and charged him with

-'i Dacicr supposes, that these * short-hand writers' were fir?t ein-
i>!oyed by (Cicero, during his consulate, in the cause of Mutaena ;
■jth'^rs refer the discovery of tht- art to his freedman Tiro,*

CATO THE YOUNGER. 73

some trattorons desis^n; and it v/as moved in tlie se-
nate, that the billet si)Oci'd be read aloud. Caesar de-
livered it to <L ato, who stood near him ; and fhe lat-
.ter had no sooner cast his eye upon it, than lie per-
ceived it to be in the hand-writins^ of his own sister
Servilia, who was passionately in love with Caesar,
and had been debauclied by liim. He therefore
threw it back to Caesar, saying, *' Take it, you sot,'*
and went on with his discourse. Cato was always
unfortunate among the women. This Servilia was
infamous ihr her commerce with Cicsar, and his other
sister Servilia was in still worse repute ; for, though
married to Lucullus, one of the first men in Rome,
by whom she also had a son, she had been divorced
for her insufferable irregularities. But what was
most disgraceful to Cato was, that the conduct of
his own wife Atilia was by no means unexception-
able ; and that, after having brought him two chil-
dren, he was obliged to part with her.

Upon his divorce from Atilia, he married Marcia the
daughter of Philip, a woman of good character ; but
this part of Cato's life, like the plot in the drama, is
involved and intricate. Thraseas*^, upon the autho-
rity of Munatius (Cato's particular friend, who lived
under the same roof with him), gives us the following
account of the matter: Among the friends and ac-
quaintance of Cato, some made a more open pro-
fiession of their sentiments than others. Of this class
Quintus Hortensius, a man of great dignity and po-
liteness, was one. Not contented merely .with the
friendship of Cato, he was desirous of a family-alli-
ance with him ; and for this purpose scrupled not to
request that his daughter Portia, who was already
married to Bibulus, and had two children by him,
might be lent him, as a fruitful soil for the purpose
of propagation. The thing itself, he owned, was
uncommon, but by no means unnatuial or impro-

^■» The celebrated Thraseas Pfrtus, upon whom Tacitus pro-
nounces such a noble panegj-rlc, Ann. xvi. 21., wrote the Life of
CatoT see Voss. de Hist. Lat, i. 26. He was put to death by Nevp.*

74 CATO THE YOUNGER.

per. For why should a woman in the flower of her
age either continue useless, till she is past child-bear-
ing, or overburthcn her husband with too large a fa-
mily ? The mutual use of women (he added) in vir-
tuous families would not only increase a virtuous off-
spring, but strengthen and extend the intercourse of
society. Besides, if Bibulus should be unwilling
wholly to give up his wife, she should be restored,
after she had done him the honour of an alliance to
Cato by her pregnancy. Cato answered, that he had
the highest regard for Hortensius' friendship, but he
could not think of his application for another man's
wife. Hortensius, however, vrould not suffer the
matter to rest here ; but when he found he could not
obtain Cato's daughter, he applied for his wife, al-
leging that she was yet a young woman, and Cato's
family already sufficiently large. This request he
could not possibly have urged, upon a supposition
that Cato had no regard for his wife ; for she was at
that very time pregnant. Notwithstanding, the lat-
ter, when he observed the violent inclination which
Hortensius had to be allied to him, did not abso-
lutely refuse him ; but said, it was necessary to con-
sult Marcia's father, Pliiiip, upon the occasion. To
Philip, therefore, application was made, and his
daughter was espoused to Hortensius in the presence
and with the consent of Cato^\ These circum-
stances are not related in the proper order of time ;
but, speaking of Cato's connexion with the women, I
was ]ed to mention them.

When the conspirators v.cre executed, and CiPsar
(who, on accoimt of the ciiarges brought against
him in the senate, vras obliged to throw liimself upon
the people) had infused a spirit of insurrection into
the worst and lowest of the citizens, Cato, appre-
hensive of the consequences, engaged the senate to
appease the multitude by a free-gift of corn. This

'i This transaction is so well attested by other (some of tlicm
contemporary) authors, that we can only admit and lament it, as an
undoubted and most infamous tact. See lUiuuId, OJ)scrv. Crit. 25.*

CATO THE YOUNGER. 75

cost twelve hundred and fifty talents a year ; but it
had the desired effect ■^.

Metellus, upon entering on his office as tribune,
held several seditious meetings, and published an
edict that Pompey should bring his troops into
Italy, under the pretext of saving the city from the
attempts of Catiline. Such was the pretence ; but
his real design was, to surrender the state into that
general's hands.

Upon the meeting of the senate, Cato, instead of
treating Metellus with his usual asperity, mildly ex-
postulated with him, and even had recourse to en-
treaty ; intimating, at the same time, that his fa-
mily had ever supported the interests of the nobility.
Metellus, who imputed Cato*s mildness to his fears,
was the more insolent upon that account, and most
audaciously asserted that he would carry his purpose
into execution, whether the senate would or not.
The voice, the air, the attitude of Cato were changed
in a moment ; and with all the force of eloquence
he declared, " That while he was living, Pompey
*' should never enter armed into the city." The se-
nate neither approved of the conduct of Cato, nor
of that of Metellus. The latter they considered as a
desperate and profligate madman, who had no other
aim than the general destruction and confusion of
the state. The virtue of Cato they regarded as a
kind of enthusiasm, which would ever lead him to
the adoption of violent measures in the cause of jus-
tice and the laws.

When the people came to vote for the edict, a
lumnber of aliens, gladiators, and slaves armed by
Metellus appeared in the Forum. He was followed
also by several of the commons, who were solicitous

'^ T])is is almost one-third more than the sum, said to have been
expended in the same distribution in the Lite of Cffsar, IV. 266.,
and even there it is incredibly large. But whatever snight be the
expense, the policy was bad ; for nothing more effectually weakens
the hands of government, than this method of bribing the populace,
and treatinf; them as injudicious nurses do frovrard children.

*iG CATO THE YOUNGER.

to introduce Pompcy in the hope of a revolution:
and his cause was strengthened by the praitorial
power of Caesar. Cato, on the otlier hand, had tlie
principal citizens on his side ; but they were rather
sharers in the injury, than auxiharies in it's removal.
The danger to which he was exposed appeared now
so imminent, that his family was under the utmost
concern. The greatest part of his friends and rela-
tions came to his house in tiic evening, and passed
the night without either eating or sleeping. His wife
and sisters bewailed their misfortunes with tears,
while he himself spent the evening with the utmost
confidence and tranquillity, encouraging the rest to
imitate his example. He supped, and went to rest
as usual ; and slept soundly, till awaked by his col-
legue Minutius Therm us. He then went to the
Porum accompanied by few, but met by many, who
advised him to take care of his person. When he saw
the temple of Castor surrounded by armed men, the
steps occupied by gladiators, and Metellus himself
seated on an eminence with Caesar, he turned round
to his friends, and asked, " Which is the more con-
" temptible ; the savage disposition, or the coward-
" ice, of him who brings such an army against one
" naked and unarmed ?" Upon this, he proceeded
to the place v/ith Thermus. Those who occupied the
steps fell back to make way for him, but would suffer
no one else to pass. ^lunatius only with some dif-
ficidty he drew along with him ; and as soon as he
entered, he took his seat between Caesar and Metel-
lus, that so he might prevent their discourse. This
embarrassed tlicm not a little, and wliat added to
their perplexity, was the countenance and approba.
tion tliat Cato received from all the honest men then
present; who, while they admired the firm and steady
spirit so strongly marked in his aspect, encouraged
him to persevere in the cause of liberty, and mutu-
ally agreed to exert themselves in his support.

Metellus, enraged at this, proposed to read the
edict. Cato put in his negative j and, that having

CATO THE YOUNGER. 77

no effect, he wrested it out of his hand. Metelhis
then attempted to repeat it from memory ; but Ther-
mus prevented him, by putting his hand upon his
mouth. When he found that too ineffectual, and
perceived that the people were gone over to the op-
posite party, he ordered his armed men to make a
riot, and throw the whole into confusion. Upon this
the people dispersed, and Cato was left alone, ex-
posed to a storm of sticks and stones. But Muracna,
though Cato had so lately laid an information against
him, w^ould not desert him. He defended him with
his gown from the danger to which he was exposed,
entreated the mob to desist from their violence, and
at length carried him off in his arms into the temple
of Castor. Metellus finding the benches deserted,
and his adversaries put to the rout, imagined that he
had gained his point, and again very modestly pro-
ceeded to confirm the edict. The opposition how-
ever quickly rallied, and advanced with shouts of
the greatest courage and confidence. Metellus' fac-
tion, supposing that by some means they had pro-
cured arms, were thrown into confusion, and imme-
diately took to flight. Upon the dispersion of these,
Cato came forward, and by his encouragement and
applause established a considerable party against Me-
tellus. The senate likewise voted, that Cato should
at all events be supported; and that an edict, so preg-
nant with every thing pernicious to order and good
government, and which had even a tendency to civil
war, should be opposed with the utmost vigour.

Metellus, however, still maintained his daring re-
solution ; but finding his friends intimidated by the
unconquered spirit of Cato, he came suddenly into
the open court, assembled thepeopie, said every thing
which he thought might render Cato odious to them;
and declared, that he would have nothing to do with
the arbitrary principles of that man, or his conspi-
racy against Pompey, whose disgrace Rome might
one day have severe occasion to repent.

Upon this, he immediately set off for Asia, to carry

78 CATO THE YOUXGER,

an account of these matters to Pompey. And Cato,
by ridding the commonwealtli of this troublesome
tribune, and crushing, as it were, in him tlie growing
power of that general, obtained the highest reputa-
tion. But what rendered liim still more popular,
was his having prevailed upon the senate to desist
fiom their purpose of voting Metellus ' infamous,'
and divesting him of the magistracy. His humanity
and moderation, in not insulting a vanquished enemy,
were admired by the people in general ; while men
of pohtical sagacity could see, that he thought it
prudent not to provoke Pompey too deeply.

Soon afterward, Lucullus returned from the war,
of which Pompey had the winding up and the glory,
and being rendered obnoxious to the people by the
impeachment of Caius Memmius, who opposed him
more from a view of making his court to Pompey
than from any personal hatred, incurred the risk
of losing his triumph. Cato however, partly because
Lucullus was allied to him by marrying his daughter
Servilia, and partly because he thought the proceed-
ings unfair, resisted JMemmius, and thus exposed
himself to extreme obloquy. But though divested
of his tribunitial office, as of a tyrannical authority,
he had still credit enough to banish Memmius from
the courts and from the lists. Lucullus therefore,
having obtained his triumph, attached himself to
Cato, as to the strongest bulwark against the power
of Pompey.

When Pompey returned from the war, confident
of his interest at Rome from the magnificent recep-
tion which he had every where experienced, he
scrupled not to send a requisition to the senate, tliat
they would defer the election of consuls till his
arrival, in order that he miglit support Piso. "While
they were hesitating about the matter, Cato, not
from any excessive solicitude about deferring the
election, but with a view of intercepting the hopes
and attempts of Pompey, remonstrated against the
measure and carried it in the negative. At this.

CATO THE YOUNGER. 1^

Ponipey was not a little disturbed ; and concluding
that, if Cato were his enemy, he would prove the
most formidable obstacle to his designs, he sent for
his friend Munatius, and commissioned him to de-
mand two of Cato*s nieces in marriage ; the elder for
himself, and the younger for his son. .Some say,
they were not Cato's nieces, but his daughters. Be
that as it may, when Munatius opened his commission
to Cato in the presence of his wife and sisters, the
women were not a little delighted with the splendour
of the alliance. But Cato without a moment's
hesitation replied, " Go, Munatius ; go, and tell
" Pompey, that Cato is not to be caught in a female
" snare.'^' Tell him at the same time, that I am
" sensible of the intended honour, and while he cou-
" tinues to act as lie ought to do, shall cherish that
" friendship for him which is superior to affinity : but
" I will never give hostages, against my country, to
" the glory of Pompey." The women, as it is natural
to suppose, were chagrined : and even the friends of
Cato blamed the severity of his answer. But Pompey
soon afterward gave him an opportunity of vindicat-
ing his conduct, by his open and notorious bribery
at a consular election, when money was publicly
paid in his garden to such of the tribes, as gave their
votes to his friend -^ " You see now," said Cato
to the v/omen, " what would have been the conse-
" quence of my alliance with Pompey. I should
" have had my share in all the aspersions, which are
" thrown upon him." And they owned, that he had
acted right in declining it. If it were proper, how-
ever, to judge from the event, it is clear that Cato
acted wrong upon this occasion. By suffering the
alliance in question to devolve to Cssar, the unites!
power of those two illustrious men nearly overturned
the Roman empire. The commonwealth it effectu-

''■y Literally, ' not to be circumvented through the apartment of
ihe ladies.'*

^* Lucius Afranius, See the Life of Pompey, Vol. IV. p. 180.

3

%0 CATO THE YOUNGER.

ally destroyed. But this would never have been the
case, had not Cato, alarmed even at the slighter
faults of Pompey, suffered him by thus strengthening
his hands to commit srreater crimes. These conse-
quences, however, were at tliistime only impending.
When i^uculhis had a dispute witli Pompey, con-
cerning their institutions in Ponlus (for each was
anxious to have his own sanctioned), as the former
was evidently injured, he had the support of Cato ;
wliile Pompey his junior in the senate, in order to
increase his popularity, proposed the Agrarian law
in favour of the army. This was opposed by Cato,
and rejected ; in consequence of which Pompey at-
tached himself to Ciodius, the most violent and
factious of the tribunes^ and about the same time
contracted his alliance with Ca?sar, to which Cato in
some measure led the way. '1 he thing was as fol-
lows : Cassar, upon his return from Spain, at once
sued for the consulship, and demanded a triumph.
But as the laws of Home required, that those who arc
candidates for tlie supreme magistracy should make
personal application, and those who are to enjoy a
triumph should remain without the walls, he peti-
tioned the senate that he miglu. be allowed to sue for
the consulship by proxy. The senate in general
agreed to his request ; and when Cato (the only one
that opposed it) found this to be the case, as soon as
it came to his turn, he continued his speech through-
out the whole day, aiid thus prevented the com-
pleting of any business. Cffisar therefore gave up
the affair of the triumph, entered the city, and ap-
plied at once for the considship and the interest of
Pompey. As soon as he was appointed consul, he
married Julia ; and as they had entered into a league
against the connnonwealth, one proposed, and the
other seconded, laws for the distribution of lands
among the [)Oor. Luculliis and Cicero, in conjunc-
tion with Bibulus the other consul, opposed them.
ButCa-o in particular, who ?.uspected the peinicious
consequences of Caesar's coiiiiexiou with Pompey,

CATO THE YOUNGER* 81

'was strenuous against the motion ; and observed, ft
was not the distribution of lands that he ieared, so
much as the rewards, which the cajolers of the
people might expect fi'om their favour.

In this, not only the senate agreed with him, but
many of the people also, who were offended by
Caesar's unconstitutional conduct. For whatever
the mo'-t violent and absurd of the tribunes proposed
for the pleasure of the mob, C^sar in mean and ab-
ject subservience to them ratified by the consular
authority. When he found his motion therefore
likely to be over-ruled, his party had recourse to
violence, pelted Bibulus the consul with dirt, and
broke the rods of his lictors. At length, when darts
began to be thrown and many were wounded, the
rest of the senate fled as fast as pos«iible out of the
Forum. Cato was the last, that left it ; and as he
walked slowly along, he frequently looked back, and
execrated the madness of the people. Not only the
Agrarian law therefore was passed, but the whole
senate was bound to take an oath that they would
confirm and support it, and those that should refuse
were sentenced to pay a heavy fine. Necessity
brought most of them into the measure ; for they
remembered the example of Metellus'-^, who had been
banished from Italy for refusing to comply, in a
similar instance, with the wishes of the people. Cato
was solicited by the tears of the female part of his
family, and the entreaties of his friends, to yield and
take the oath. But what principally prevailed upon
him v/as, the expostulations of the orator Cicero ;
who represented to him that there might be less vir-
tue, than he imagined, in one man's dissenting from
a decree established by the rest of the senate ; that
to expose himself to certain danger, without even the
})Ossibility of producing any good effect, was perfect
insanity ; and (what was still worse) to abandon the
commonwealth, for which he had undergone so many

29 Metellus Nuniidicus. See the Life of Marius, III. 158.
VOL. V. G

sg CATO THE YOUNGEIT.

toils, to the mercy of innovators and usurpers, would
look as if he were ((uite weary of his patriotic labours.
Cato, he added, might do without llomcj but Rome
could not do without Cato ; his friends could not do-
without him ; he himself in particular could not da
without his assistance and support, while the auda-
cious Clodius by means of Iiis tribunitial authority
■wasforniincf the most dancrerous machinations asrainst

Cj CD O

Iiim. By these and the like remonstrances, impor-
tuned at home and in the Forum, Cato (it is said)
was with diiliculty induced to take the oath ; and
his friend Favonius excepted, he was the last that
took it.

iLlated with this success, Caesar proposed another
act for distributing almost the whole province of
Campania among the poor. Cato alone opposed it.
And though Cffisar dragged him from tlie bench and
conveyed him to prison, he omitted not nevertheless^
as he passed, to exclaim in defence of liberty, to en-
large upon the consequences of the act, and to ex-
hort the citizens to put a stop to such proceedings.
The senate with heavy hearts, and all the virtuous
part of the people, followed Cato in silent indigna-
tion. Caesar was not inattentive to the public dis-
content, which this proceeding occasioned ; but am-
bitiously expecting some concessions on the part of
Cato, he proceeded to conduct him to prison. At
length however, when he found his expectations
vain, unable any longer to support the shame to which
this conduct exposed him, he instructed one of the
tribunes to rescue him from his officers. The people
notwithstanding, brought over to CiPsar's interest by
these public distributions, voted him the province of
Illyricum and all Gaul, together with four legions,
for the space of f ve years; though -Cato foretold
them, at the same time, that they were voting a
tyrant into the citadel of Rome. They moreover
created Clodius, contrary to the laws (for he was of
the patrician order) a tribune of the people, because
they knew that he would fully accede to their wishes
4

CATO THE YOUNGER. 83

with regard to the banishment of Cicero. Calpur-
nius Piso the father of CfEsar's wife, and Aukis Gabi-
iiins"" a minion of Pompey (as we are told by those
who knew him best), they created consuls.

Yet though they had every thing in their hands,
and had gained one part of the people by favour and
the other by fear, they were still afraid of Cato.
They remembered the pains, which it had cost them
to overbear him, and that their violent measures had
done them but little honour. Clodius, likewise, per-
ceived that he could not distress Cicero, while sup-
ported by Cato : yet this was his chief object, and
upon entering upon his tribunitial office he had an
interview with Cato ; when after paying him the
compliment of pronouncing him ' the honestest man
in Rome,' he proposed to him, as a testimony of his
sincerity, the government of Cyprus, an appointment
which (he said) had been solicited by many. Cato
answered that, far from being a favour, it was a
scheme of treachery and a disgrace ; upon which
Clodius fiercely and contemptuously replied, " If
" you are not pleased to go, you shall go displeased :'*
and, immediately applying to the senate, procured a
decree for Cato's expedition. Yet he neither fur-
nished him with a vessel, a soldier, or a servant ; two
secretaries excepted, one of whom was a notorious
thief, and the other a client of his own. Besides, as
if the charge of Cyprus and the opposition of Ptolemy
were not a sufficient employment, he ordered him
likewise to restore the Byzantine exiles. But his
view in all this was to keep Cato, as long as possible,
out of Rome.

Cato, thus obliged to depart, exhorted Cicero, who
was at the same time closely hunted by Clodius, by
no means to involve his country in a civil war, but
to vield to the necessitv of the times.

By means of his friend Canidius, whom he sent be-

3° The character of Gabinius was despicable in every respect, aS
appears from Cicero's Oration for Sextius. (xii., xliii.)

G 2

Si CATO THE YOUNGER.

fore him to Cyprus, he negociatcd with Ptolemy in
such a manner, that he yielded v/ithout coming to an
engagement ; for Cato gave him to understand, that
he should live not in a poor or abject condition, but
that he should be appointed high-priest to the Pa-
phian Venus ^^ While this was negociating, Cato
stopped at Rhodes, at once waiting for Ptolemy's
answer, and making preparations for the reduction
of the island.

In the mean time Ptolemy ^^ king of Egypt, who
had left Alexandria upon some quarrel and differ-
ence with his subjects, was on his way to Home, in
order to solicit his re-establishment from Cassar and
Pompey by means of the Roman arms. Being in-
formed that Cato was at Rhodes, he sent to him, in
the hope that he would wait upon him. But Cato,
■who at that time happened to have taken physic, told
his messenger that if Ptolemy wished to see him, he
might come himself: and upon his arrival he neither
went forward to meet him, nor did he so much as
rise from his seat, but saluted him as he would have
done a common person, and carelessly bade him sit
down. Ptolemy was somewhat hurt by it at first,
and surprised to meet with such a supercilious seve-
rity of manners in a man of Cato's mean dress and
appearance. When he entered into conversation
with him however concerning his affairs, and lieard
his free and nervous eloquence, he was easily soothed.
Cato, it seems, censured his impolitic application to
Rome ; represented to him the happiness vvhich he
had left, and told him that he was about to expose

31 This appointment seems but a poor exchange for a kingdom :
but when it is remembered that, in the Pagan theolog)', the priests of
the gods were not inferior in dignity to princes, and that most of
them were of royal families; when it is considered in what high re-
putation the Paphian Venus stood among the ancients, and what a
lucrative as well as honourable office that of her priest must have
been, from the offerings of the innumerable votaries v.ho came an-
nually to pay their devotions at her temple, it v.ill be allowed per-
haps that Ptolemy made no bad bargain for his little island.

"^ Surnamed Auktes.

CATO THE YOUNGER. 85

himself to the toils and plagues of attendance, the
meanness of bribery, and the avarice of the Roman
chiefs, which the whole kingdom of Egypt converted
into money could not satiate. He advised him to
return with his fleet, and be reconciled to his people,
offerino: him at the same time his attendance and
mediation ; and Ptolemy, restored by his statements
as it were from insanity to reason, admired his dis-
cretion and sincerity, and determined to follow his
advice. His friends, nevertheless, brought him back
to his former measures ; but he was no sooner at the
door of one of the magistrates of Rome, than he re-
pented his folly, and blamed himself for having re-
jected the virtuous counsels of Cato, as for having
disobeyed the oracle of a god.

Ptolemy of Cyprus, as Cato's good fortune would
have it, took himself off by poison. As he was said
to have left a full treasury, Cato having determined
to go to Byzantium sent his nephew Brutus to Cy-
prus because he had not sufficient confidence in Cani-
dius ; and when the exiles were reconciled to the
rest of the citizens, and all things quiet in Byzantium,
he proceeded to Cyprus himself. Here he found the
royal furniture very magnificent in vessels, tables,
jewels, and purple, all which were to be converted
into ready money. In the management of this af-
fair he was scrupulously exact, attended at the sales,
took the accounts himself, and brought every article
to the best market. Neither would he trust to the
common customs of sale-factors, auctioneers, bid-
ders, or even ]iis own friends ; but he had private
conferences with the purchasers, in which he urged
them to bid more, so that every thing went off at
the highest price. By these means he gave offence
to many of his friends, and almost unpardonably af-
fronted his particular intimate Munatius. Cajsar
likewise, in his Oration against him, availed himself
of this circumstance, and treated him very severely.
Munatius himself however informs us, that this mis-
understanding was occasioned not so much by Cato's

3

86 CATO THE YOUNGER.

distrust, as by his neglect of him, and by his own
jealousy of Canidiiis: for Munatius wrote Memoirs
of Cato, which Thraseas has principally followed.
In these he states, that he was among the last who
arrived at Cyprus, and thus found nothing but the
refuse of the lodgings ; that he went to Cato's apart-
ments, and was refused admittance, because Cato
was privately concerting something with Canidius ;
and that when he modestly complained of this con-
duct, he received a severe answer from Cato, who
observed (with Theophrastus) that " Too much
" love was frequently the occasion of hatred ; and
*'.thushe, because of the friendship with Vvdiich he
^' had been treated, was angry at the slightest inat-
" tention." He told him at the same time, that
*' He made use of Canidius as a necessary agent, and
*' because he had more confidence in him than in the
*' rest ; having found him honest, though he had
*' been there from the first, and had enjoyed many
'* opportunities of being otherwise." This conver-
sation, which he held in private with Cato, the latter
(he informs us) related to Canidius ; and this coming
to Munatius' knowledge, he would neither attend
Cato's entertainments, nor assist when summoned
at his councils. Cato threatening to punish him for
disobedience, and as is usual to take a pledge from
him^% Munatius paid no regard to it, but sailed for
Kome and long retained his resentment. Upon
Cato's return, he and Munatius, by means of Marcia,
who at that time lived with her husband, were both
invited to sup with Barca. Cato, who came in after
the rest of tlie company had taken their places, asked
where he should take his ? Barca answered, " Where
" he pleased." " Tlien," said he, " it shall be by
*' Munatius." Upon which he sat down next him, but

33 "When a magistrate refused a summons to the senate or public
council, the penalty was to take some piece of furniture out of his
house, and to detain it rill he attended. This tliey called, pignora
capcrc, "v^t/f* A«C:ii, (See Cic. Philipp. i. 5., De Orat. iii. 1.)

CATO THE YOUNGER. 87

sho^vcd him no other marks of friendship during
supper ; afterward however, at Marcia's request,
Cato wrote to say that he should be glad to see him.
Accordingly Munatius waited on him at his ov/n
house, and being entertained by Marcia till the rest
of the morning-visitors were gone, Cato came in and
embraced him with the utmost kindness. We ha\e
dwelt upon these little circumstances the longer, as
in our opinion they contribute not less than more
public and important actions, to ^le clear delinea-
tion and exhibition of character.

In this expedition Cato had acquired nearly seven
thousand talents of silver, and being under some ap-
prehensions on account of the length of his voyage,
he provided a number of vessels capable of holding
two talents and nvc hundred drachmas a-piece. To
each of these he tied a long cord, at the end of which
was fastened a large piece of cork, so that if any mis-
fortune should happen to the vessel, these buoys
might mark the spot where they lay. The whole
treasure however, except a very little, was conveyed
home in safety. Yet his two books of accounts,
which he kept with great miiuiteness, were both
lost ; one by shipwreck with his freedman Philargy-
Tus, who had embarked at Ccnchreas"^, and the other
by fire at Corcyra ; for the sailors, on account of tlie
coldness of the vv'cathcr, kept iires in the tents by
night, and thus the misfortune happened. Tins gave
Cato some concern ; though Ptolemy's servants,
whom he had brought over with him, were sufficient
vouchers for his conduct against enemies and in-
formers : for he did not intend these accounts merely
as a proof of his honesty, but to recommend the
same kind of accuracy to others.

As soon as his arrival with the fleet was notified
an Rome, tlie magistrates and priests and whole se-
nate, with multitudes of the people, went down to

3^ Cenclirese was the eastern port of Corinth ; and Corcyra is the
modern Corfu/^'

88 CATO THE YOUNGER.

the river to meet lum, and covered both it's banks,
so that his reception was something hke a triumph.
Yet there was an ill-timed hanglitiness in his con-
duct ; for though the consuls and pra3tors came to
wait upon him, he did not so mucli as attempt to
make the shore where they were, but rowed care-
lessly along in a royal six-oared galley, and did not
land till he came into port with his whole fleet. The
people, however, were struck with admiration at the
vast quantity of money that was cariied along the
streets ; and the senate in full assembly bestovred
the highest encomiums upon him, and voted him a
praetorship extraordinary ^% and the right of attend-
ing public shows in a prcEtcxta (or purple-bordered
gown) : but these honours he thought proper to de-
cline. At the same time he jjetitioned that they
Avould emancipate Nicias, one of Ptolemy's officers,
in favour of whose diligence and fidelity he bore
ample testimony.

Philip, tlie father of Marcia, was at that time con-
sul, and his collegue respected Cato no less for his
virtue, than Philip did for his alliance, so that he had
in some measure the whole consular interest in his
hands. When Cicero returned from that exile, to
which he had been sentenced by Ciodius, his influ-
ence was considerable ; and he scrupled not in Cio-
dius* absence, to pull down and destroy the tribuni-
tial edicts, which tiie latter had put up in the Capitol.
Upon this the renate was assembled, and Cicero on
Ciodius' accusation made his defence, alleging that
he had been illegally appointed tribune, and that
consequently e\^ry act and edict of his office was
null and void. Cato interrupted him and said,
" That he was indeed sensible, the whole administra-
" tion of Ciodius had been wicked and absurd ; but
" that if every act of his office were to be annulled,
^* all that he had himself done in Cyprus would be
" annulled likewise, because his commission issuing

55 A. U. C. 697. Cato was then only in his thirty-uighth year.

CATO THE YOUNGER. 89

** from a tribune illegally appointed could not be
*' valid : that Clodius, though he was of a patrician
*' family, had not been chosen tribune contrary to
" law, because he had previously been enrolled in
the order of plebeians by an act passed for that
purpose ; but that, if he had acted unjustly in liis
*' office, he was liable to a personal impeachment,
** while at the same tim.e the office itself retained it's
*' proper force and authority." This occasioned a
quarrel for some time between Cicero and Cato, but
they were subsequently reconciled *.

Caesar, upon his return from Gaul, was met by
Pompey and Crassus ; and it was agreed that the
two last should again be candidates for the consul-
ship, that Caesar should retain his government five
years longer, and that the best provinces, revenues,
and troops should be secured to themselves. This
was nothing less than a division of empire, and a plot
against the liberties of the commonwealth. A junc-
tion so alarming deterred many men of distinguished
rank and integrity from their design of offering them-
selves for the consulship. Cato however prevailed
on Lucius Domitius, who had married his sister, not
to give up the point, or resign his pretensions ; since
the contest was not then for the consulship, but for
the liberties of Rome. The sober part of the citizens
agreed, likewise, that the consular power should not
be suffered to grow so enormous by the union of
Crassus and Pompey ; but that at all events they
must be separated, and Domitius encouraged and
supported in the competition. They assured him,
at the same time, that he would have the voices of
many of the people, who were at present only silent
through fear. Pompey's party, apprehensive of this,
lay in wait for Domitius, as he went before day by
torch-light into the Campus Martins. His torch-
bearer was killed at the first stroke ; the rest were
v/ounded and fled, Cato and Domitius alone except-

S i i the L ife of Cicero, Vol. V.

so CATO THE YOUNGER.

cd': for Cato, though he had received a wound in
the arm, still detained Domitius on the spot, and
conjured him not to desert the cause of freedom
while he had life, but to oppose to the utmost those
enemies of their country, who showed what use they
intended to make of power by seeking it in such an
execrable manner.

Domitius liowever, unable to stand the shock, re-
tired, and Pompey and Crassus were elected con-
suls. Yet Cato did not shrink from the struggle, but
solicited a proctorship for himself; that he might
thence, as from a kind of fort, act against the con-
suls, instead of contending with them in the capacity
of a private citizen- The consuls, fearing that the
praetorial power of Cato would not be inferior even
to the consular authority, suddenly assembled a small
senate ; and obtained a decree, that those who were
elected praetors should immediately enter upon their
office ^% without waiting the usual time to see whe-
ther any charge would be adduced against them of
bribery and corruption. By these means they
brought in their own creatures and dependents, pre-
sided at the election, and gave money to the popu-
lace. Still, however, the virtue of Cato could not
totally lose it's weight. Th.ere were still those, who
had honesty enough to be ashamed of selling his in-
terest, and wisdom enough to think that it would be
of" service to the state, to elect him even at the pub-
lic expense. He was therefore nominated praetor by
the votes of the first-summoned tribe ^S but Pompey

•'!* There was always a time allotted between nomination and pos-
session ; tliat, if any undue means had been used in the canvas, they
might be detected. (L.) The convicted offenders were deprived of
their appointments, and occasionally gubjected to a heavy fine. ( See
Dio. xxxvi. 27-, xxxvii. 25.) Cato was now only of age to solicit,
not to exercise, the prtetorship.*

37 Called Prccr()<rntiva. Tlie centuries originally gave their votes
in succassion according to Servius Tullius' institution, but suhse-
<]uently the priority of voting was determined by lot : tliis was of the
j;reatest importance, for upon it usually depended the election.
Hence the derivative meanings oi prcerogntiva. (See Cic. pro Plane.
XX., pro Muracn. xviii. &c., De Div. II, xl.)*

CATO THE YOUNGER. 91

scandalously pretending that he heard it thunder,
broke up the assembly ; for it is not common with
the Romans to transact public^business, when it
thunders. Afterward by means of bribery, and by
the exclusion of the virtuous part of the citizens from
the assembly, they procured Vatinius to be returned
praetor instead of Cato. Those electors, it is said,
-who voted from such iniquitous motives, immedi-
ately, like so many culprits, ran away. To the rest,
who assembled and expressed their indignation, Cato
was empowered by one of tlie tribunes to address
himself in a speech ; in tlie course of which he fore-
told, as if inspired by some divine influence, all those
evils that then threatened the commonwealth, and
stirred up the people against Pompey and Crassus,
who in the consciousness of their cruiltv intentions
shrunk from the control of Cato's prastorial power.
On his return home he was followed by a greater
multitude, than all that had been appointed praetors
conjunctively.

When Cains Trebonius moved for the distribution
of the consular provinces, and proposed giving Spain
and Africa to one of the consuls and Syria and Egypt
to the other, together with fleets and armies, and an
unbounded power of making war and extending do-
minion ; the rest of the senate, thinking resistance
vain, forbore all o})position. Cato however, before
it was put to tliG vote, ascended the Rostrum In order
to speak, but he was limited to the space of two
hours ; and when he liad spent this time in repeti-
tions, instructions, and predictions, and was proceed-
ing in Ills discourse, tlie lictor dragged him down
from the Rostrum. Yet still, when below among the
people, he persisted to speak in behalf of liberty ;
and the people readily attended to him, and joined
in his indignation, till the lictor again laid hold of
him and turned him out of the Foriun. He at-
tempted, notwithstanding, to return to his place, and
excited the people to assist him ; which being done
more than once, Trebonius in a violent rage ordered

©« CATO TPIE YOUNGER.

him to prison. Thither he was followed by the pa-
pulace, to whom he addressed himself as he went,
till at last Tiebonius thronarh fear dismissed him.
Thus Cato was that day rescued. But afterward,
the people being partly over-awed and partly cor-
rupted, the consular faction, by force of arms, pre-
vented AquiJius, one of the tribunes, from comiui^
out of the senate-house into the assembly ; wounded
many, killed some, and thrust Cato, who said it thun-
dered, out of the Forum : so that the law was passed
by compulsion. This rendered Pompey so obnoxi-
ous, that the people were going to pull down his sta-
tues, but they were prevented by Cato. On a sub-
sequent day, when the law was proposed for the
allotment of Caesar's provinces, Cato addressing him-
self particularly to Pompey told him, with great con-
fidence, " He did not then consider, that he was
" taking Caesar upon his shoulders ; but when he
*' began to find his weight, and could neither support
" it nor shake it off, they would both sink together,
*' and crush the commonwealth in their fall : and
" then he would find, too late, that Cato's counsels
*' were no less salutary for himself, than intrinsically
*'just." Yet Pompey, though he had often heard
these things, in the confidence of his fortune and his
power despised them, and feared no reverse from the
part of Cfesar.

Cato was the following year appointed praitor, but
he can hardly be said to have contributed so much to
the dignity of that high office by the rectitude of his
conduct, as to have derogated from it by the mean-
ness of his dress ; for he would often go to the pra?-
torial bench without his robe and slioes, and thus sit
in judgem.ent, even in capital cases, upon some of
the first personages in Rome. Nay, it is even af-
firmed that he passed sentence, when he had drunk
after dinner, but that is not true, lie was resolved
to extirpate that extreme corruption, which then pre-
vailed among the people in elections of every kind ;
and, ' in order to effect this, he moved that a law

CATO THE YOUNGER. 9$

i-^liould be passed in the senate compelling every can-
didate, though no information should be laid against
him, to declare noon oath in what manner he had
obtained his election. This gave offence to the can-
didates, and to the more mercenary part of the peo-
ple. And as he was going in the morning to the tri-
bunal, he was so much insulted and pelted v/itli
stones by the mob, that the wliole court took to
flight, and he with difficulty escaped into the Ros-
trum. There he stood, and his firm and steady as-
pect soon hushed the clamours and disorders of the
populace ; so that, when he spoke upon the subject,
he was heard with a general silence ^®. The senate
publicly testified their approbation of his conduct ;
but he answered, that no compliment could be paid
to them at least for having deserted the praetor, and
declined to assist him when in manifest danger. This
measure considerably distressed the candidates : for
on one hand they were afraid of giving bribes, and
on the other they were apprehensive of losing their
election, if bribes should be given by their opponents.
They thought it best therefore jointly that each should
deposit five hundred sestertia"^, thatthey should then
canvass in a fair and legal manner, and that if any
one were convicted of bribery, he should forfeit
his deposit. Of this agreement Cato was appointed
guarantee, and the money was to be lodged in his
hand, but for that he accepted sureties. When the
day of election came, Cato stood next to the tribune

3^' This circumstance in Cato's life affords a good comment on the
following passage in Virgil. The laboured dignity and weight of
the fourth line, in particular, conveys a very strong and just idea of
Cato.

Ac veliili magno in popiilo cum scepe co'drta est

Seditio, scevitqiic aiiimis isinobile vulsus,

Jamqiic faces et saxa volant ; furor arijia munstrat ;

Turn, pietate gravem et meritis si forte virum quern

Conspexere, silent, arredi.ique auribus adstant.

lUe regit dictis animos, et pectora midcet. [Mn. i. 148, &c.)

39 Cicero speaks of this agreement, in one of his Epistles to At-
ticus (iv. 15.) ■ . .

94. CATO THE YOUNGER.

who presided, and as he examined the vote;?, one of
the depositing candidates appeared to have made use
of some fraud. He therefore ordered him to pay the
money to the rest. After comphmenting the inte-
grity of Cato however, tliey remitted the fine, and
said that the guilt was a sufficient punishment. Yet
Cato by this conduct rendered himself obnoxious to
many, who seemed displeased that he affected both
the legislative and the judicial power. There is
hardly any authority indeed so much exposed to en-
vy as the latter, and hardly any virtue so obnoxious
as that of justice, owing to the popular weight and in-
fluence, which it always carries along with it. For
though he, who virtuously administers justice, may
not be respected as a man of valour, nor admired
as a man of parts, yet his integrity is always pro-
ductive of love and confidence. Valour produces
fear, and parts create suspicion : they are distinc-
tions, moreover, which are rather given than ac-
quired. One arises from a natural acuteness, the
other from a natural firmness of mind. As justice,
however, is a virtue so easily practicable and attain-
able, the opposite vice is proportionably odious.

Thus Cato became generally obnoxious to the
leading men of Rome. Pompey in particular, whose
glory was to rise out of the ruins of his power, la-
boured with unwearied assiduity to ])rocure impeach-
ments against him. The incendiary Clodius, wlio
had again attached himself to that general, accused
Cato of having embezzled a quantity of the Cyprian
treasure, and of having raised an opposition to Pom-
pey, because the latter had refused to accept his
daughter in marriage. Cato on the other hand main-
tained, that though he was not so much as supplied
with a horse or a soldier by the government, he had
yet brought more treasure to the counnonwealth from
Cyprus, than Pompey had done froin so many wars
and triumphs over the harassed world. He asserted,
that he had never even wished for the alliance of
Pompey, not because he thougliihim unworthy, but

cc

cc

<c

CATO THE YOUNGER, 95

because of the difference of their political princi-
ples: " For my own part,'* said he, " I rejected the
" province offered me as an appendage to my praetor-
ship ; whereas Pompey arrogated some provinces
to himself, and some he bestowed upon his friends.
Nay he has at present, without even soliciting your
" consent, accommodated Caesar in Gaul with six
" thousand soldiers. Such forces, armaments, and
" horses are now, it seems, at the disposal of private
" men : and Pompey retains the title of commander
'' and genera], while he delegates to others the legions
" and the provinces ; and continues wathin the walls
" to preside at elections, the arbiter of the mob and
" the fabricator of sedition. From this conduct his
principles are obvious. He holds it but one step
from anarchy to absolute power ^°." Thus Cato
maintained his party against Pompey.

Marcus Favonius was the intimate friend and imi-
tator of Cato, as Apollodorus Phalereus '*' is said to
have been of Socrates, who transported him by his
discourses even to madness or intoxication. This
Favonius stood for the office of aedile, and apparently
lost it ; but Cato, upon examining the votes, and
finding them all written in the same hand, appealed
against the fraud, and the tribunes set aside the elec-
tion. Favonius was thereupon elected, and in the
discharge of the several offices of his magistracy, had
Cato's assistance, particularly in the theatrical en-
tertainments exhibited to the people. In these, Cato
displayed another specimen of his economy ; for he
did not allow the players and musicians crowns of
gold, but of wild olive, such as are used in the

4° This maxim has in almost every state been abundantly verified.
When ambitious men aim at absolute power, their first measure is to
impede the regular movement;; of the constitutional government by
throwing all into confusion, that they may ascend to monarchy, as,
iEneas went to the tin-one of Carthage, involved in a cloud.

4' See the end of Plato's Phsedo, and the beginning named Sym-
posium, From his passionate enthusiasm, he was surnamed ' Ha-
nicus.*

§6 CATO THE YOUNGER-

Olympic games. Instead of expensive presents, he
gave the Greeks beets and Jettiices and radishes and
par^-'ley ; and the Romans he presented with jugs of
wine, pork, figs, cucumbers, and faggots of wood.
Some ridiculed the meanness of his presents, while
others were delierhted with this relaxation from the
usual severity of his manners. And Favc/nius, wlio
appeared only as a common person among the spec-
tators, and had resigned the management of the whole
to Cato, declared this circumstance to tlie people,
and publicly applauded his conduct, exhorting him
to reward merit of every kind. Curio, the collegue
of Favonius, exhibited at the same time in the other
theatre a most magaiiicent entertaini'jeni: but the
peoi)le deserted him, and were much more enter-
tained with seeing Favonius act the private citizen,
and Cato the master of the ceremonies. This, how-
ever, he probably took upon him, only to show the
folly of troublesome and expensive preparations in
matters of mere amusemiCnt, and that the benevo-
lence and good humour suitable to such occasions
would have a far better eiFect.

When Scipio, Hypseeus, and Milo were candidates
for the consulship, and beside the usual infamous
practices of bribery and corruption, had recourse to
violence and murther and civil war, it was proposed
that Pompey should be appointed protector of the
election. But Cato opposed this, and said that the
laws ought not to owe their security to Pompey, but
that Pompey ought to owe his to the laws.

When the consular power however had been long
suspended, and the Forum was in some measure be-
sieged by three armies, Cato, that things might not
come to the worst, recommended to the senate to
confer that power upon Pompey as a favour, with
which his own influence would otherwise invest him,
and thus makc' a les evil the remedy for a greater.
Bibulus therefore, an agent of Cato, moved in the
senate, thai Pom.pcy should be created sole consul :

CATO THE YOUNGER. &7

adding, that his administration would either be of
eminent service to the state, or that at least, if the
commonwealth must have a master, it vrouid have
the satisfaction of being under the auspices of the
most illustrious man in Rome. Cato, contrar\^ to
every one's expectation, seconded the motion ; inti-
mating, that any government was preferable to anar-
chy, and tliat Pompey promised fair for a constitu-
tional administration, and for the preservation of the
city.

Pompey, having been thus elected consul, invited
Cato to his house in the suburbs, received him with
the warmest caresses and acknowdedgensents, and en-
treated him to assist in his measures, and to preside
at his councils. Cato replied, that he had neither
formerly opposed him out of private enmity, nor re-
cently supported him out of personal favour, but that
the welfare of the state had been his motive in both :
that in private he would assist him v.itii his counsel,
whenever he should be called upon ; but that in pub-
lic he should speak his sentiments, whether they
mif^ht be in his favour or not. And he did not fail
to act accordingly. For soon afterward, wdien Pom-
pey proposed severe punishments and penalties
against those who had been guilty of bribery, Cato
gave it as his opinion, that the past should be over-
looked, and the future only adverted to : as, if he
should scrutinise into former offences of that kind, it
would be difficult to say where it would enjd ; and
should he establish ex post facto penal laws, it would
be hard that those, who might be convicted of former
offences, should suffer for the breach of regulations
not then in existence. Subsequently likewise, when
impeachments v/ere brought against several persons
of rank, and some of Pompey 's friends among the
rest, Cato observing that Pompey favoured the lat-
ter reproved him with great freedom, and urged him
to the discharge of his duty. Pompey had enacted,
that encomiums should no longer be spolirn in favour
of the prisoner at the bar; and yet he gave into the

VOL. V. H

9S CATO THE YOUNGER.

court a written encomium '" on Munatius Plancirs,
when lie was upon his trial; but Cato, who was one
ol' the judges, instantly stopi)edhis cars, and Ibrbude
the apology to be read. Plancus, upon this, ob-
jected to Cato's remaining on the bench ; yet was he,
nevertheless, condemned. Cato, indeed, gave tlic
criminals in general no small perj)lexity ; tor they
were equally atiaid ol" having him for their judge,
and of o))jecting to him ; as in the latter case it was
generally understood, that they were unwilhng to
rely upon their innocence, and they were on that
account condemned. Nay, to object to the judge-
ment of Cato became a common subject of accusa-
tion and reproach.

Caesar, at the same time that he was prosecuting
the war in Gaul, was cultivating his interest in the
city, by all that friendship ancl munificence could
effect. Pompcy saw this, and waked as from a dream
to the warnings of Cato ; yet he still remained indo-
lent, and Cato, who perceived the political neces-
sity of opposing CV'sar, determined to oiFer himself
for the consulship, that he might thus oblige him
either to lay down his arms, or to discover his de-
signs. Cato's competitors were both men of credit ;
but Sulpitius'*^, wlio was one of them, had himself
derived considerable advantages Irom the authority
of Cato. Upon this account he was censured as un-
grateful, though Cato was not offended ; " Forvvhat
" wonder," said he, " is it, that wiuit a man csteenis
the highest happiness, he should be unwilling to
resign to another ?" He procured an act in the
senate that no candidate should canvass by means of
others. This exasperated the people, because it in-

-i^ Dion calls this an euloglum and a. petition, £V<4»vo» n ufXjcc Uvrit

Munatius Plancus, erroneously called ' Flaccus ' in the Greek,
was then tribune of the people, lie was accused by Cicero, and de-
fended by Pompey, but unanimously condemned.

•»J Tlie competitors were M. Claudius Marceilus, and Servius Sul-
pitius Rufus. Tlie former, accordinj^ to Dion (xl. 58.), was chosen
ibr his eloquence, and the latter for hia kuuwiedge of the laus.

CATO THE YOUNGER. S9

tcrcepted at once the means of cultivating favour
and of conveying bribes, and thus rendered the lower
order of citizens poor and insignificant. To this
act it was in some measure owing that he lost the
consulship ; for he consulted his dignity too much,
to canvass in a popular manner himself, and his friends
could not then do it for him.

A repulse, in this case, is for some time attended
with shame and sorrow, both to the candidate and
his friends. But Cato was so little affected by it,
that he anointed himself to play at ball, and walked
as usual after dinner with his friends in the Forum,
without his tunic and shoes : and Cicero, sensible
how much Rome stood in need of such a consul, at
once blamed his indolence v^ith regard to courting
the people upon this occasion, and his inattention
to future success ; though he had twice applied for
the prastorship. Cato answered, that his ill success
in the latter case was owing not to the aversion of
the people, but to the corrupt and compulsive mea-
sures used among them : whereas, in an application
for the consulship, no such measures could be used ;
and he felt therefore that the citizens were offended
by those manners, which it did not become a wise
man either to change for their sakes, or to retain and
by repeating his application to expose himself to a
repetition of the same ill success.

Caesar had, at this time, gained many hazardous
victories over warlike nations; and falling upon the
Germans, though then at peace with the Romans,
had slain three Iniiidred thousand of them. Many of
the citizens, on this occasion, voted a public thanks-
giving; but Cato was of a different opinion, and said,
" That Caesar ought to be given up to the nations
" whom he had injured, lest his conduct should bring a
" curse upon tlie city; yet the gods," hesaid, " should
" be thanked, notwithstanding, that they had not
" caused the soldiers to suffer for the madness and
" wickedness of their general, but had in mercy spared
" the state." Caesar, upon this, sent letters to the se-

n 2

100 CATO THE YOUNGER.

natc full of invectives against Cato. "When tliey
■^vere read, Cato rose with great calmness, and in a
speech so regular that it seemed premeditated, ob-
served with regard to the letters, as they contained
nothing but a little of CiEsar's buffoonery, they de-
served not to be answered: and then laying open the
whole plan of his conduct, more like a friend who
knew his bosom-counsels than an enemy, he showed
the senate that it v»as not the Britons'" or the Gauls,
but Ca2sar himself whom they had to fear. This
alarmed them so much, that the adherents of that
general were sorry they had produced the letters,
which occasioned it. Nothing, however, was at that
time resolved upon : it was only debated concerning
the propriety of appointing a successor to Caesar;
and when his friends required, that in that case Pom-
pey should likewise relinquish his army, and resign
his provinces; " Now," cried Cato, " is coming to
" pass the event, which I foretold ^\ It is obvious,
" that Coesar will have recourse to arms ; and that the
" povv'er, which he has obtained by deceiving the
" people, he will use to enslave them."" Cato,
however, had but little influence out of the senate,
for the people were bent on aggrandising Caesar; and
even the senate, though convinced by Cato's argu-
ments, were afraid of their resentment.

When inlelliii:ence arrived that Caesar had taken
Ariminum, and was advancing with his army tov/ard

■f* Amyot tlu'nks, \vc ouglitlscre to read repw-KvaK, tior ufirccvnuy,
*> But was not tliis very iiiipolitic in Cato ? Wiis it not a vain sacri-
fice to his ambition of prophecy? Caesar could not long remain un-
acquainted with what hud pai-Jied hi the senate ; and Cato's observa-
tion was therefore net much more discreet than it would be to tell a
madman, who had a flambeau in his hand, tlxxt he intended to buri\
a house. Cato in our opinion, v.ith ail his virtue, coiitributed not
less ta the destruction of the commonwealth than Cfcsar himself.
Wherefore did he idly exasperate that ambitious man, by objecting
against a public thanksgiving for his victories? There was a preju-
dice in this part of his conduct, which had but the shadow of virtue
to support it. Nay, it is more than probable that it was out of spite
to Caesar, that Cato gave the whole consular pouer to Poinpey. It
toust be remembered, that Casar had debauched Cato's sister.

4« mnn "

CATO THE YOUNGER. loi

Rome, the people in general, and even Pompey
himself, cast their eyes upon Cato, as the only per-
son who had originally foreseen his designs. " Had
" you, at that time," said Cato, " attended to ray
" counsels, you would neither now have feared the
" power; nor trusted in the counsels, of a single
man." Pompey replied, " That Cato had indeed
been a better prophet, but that he had himself
" acted a more friendly part." Cato then advised
the senate to put every thing into Pompey's hands ;
"' For the authors of great evils," he observed, "knev/
" best how^ to remove them." As Pompey perceived
that his forces were insufficient, and that even the
few he had w^ere by no means hearty in his cause, he
thought proper to leave the city. Cato being deter-
mined to follow him, sent his youngest son to Mu-
natius, w^ho was in the country of tlie Brutii, and
carried the eldest along with him. As his family,
and particularly his daughters, wanted a proper su-
perintendent, he took Marcia again, who was then
become a rich w^dow ; for Hortensius was dead, and
had left her his whole estate. This circumstance
gave Caesar occasion to reproach Cato with his
avarice, and to call him, ' the mercenary husband.'
" For why," said he, " did he part with her, if he
" had occasion for her himself? And, if he had not
" occasion for her, why did he take her again ? The
" reason is obvious. It was a bait for Hortensius*
" wealth. He lent her out young, that he might re-
" ceive her back rich." But, in answer to this, ont^
need only quote that passage of Euripides ^^,

Call Hercules a coward !

For It would be as absurd to reproach Cato with
covetousness, as it would be to charge Hercules
with cowardice. Whether or not the^ conduct of
Cato was altogether unexceptionable in this affair,

*^ This passage is in the first act of the ' Hercules Furens^' where
Amphitryon replies to Lycus, chai-ging Hercules with cowardice.

102 CATO THE YOUNGER.

is another question. As soon as he had re-married
Marcia, however, he resigned to her the charge of
his family, and followed Pompcy-

From that time, it is said, that he neither cut his
hair, nor shaved his beard, nor wore a garland ; but
was uniform in his dress, as in his angiiisli ibr Iiis
country. On which side soever victory might for a
wliile declare, he made no change upon that account
in his habit. Being appointed to the government of
►Sicily, he passed over to Syracuse ; and finding that
Asinius Pollio had arrived at Messana with a detach-
ment from the enemy, he sent to him to demand the
reason of his coming : but Pollio only answered his
question by another, and demanded of Cato in re-
turn the cause of those revolutions. When he was
informed that Pompey had evacuated Italy, and was
encamped at Dyrrhachium, " IIovv' mysterious,"
said he, ** are the ways of Providence ! as long as
" Pompey acted upon principles neither of wisdom
" nor of justice, he was invincible ; but, now that
" he would save the liberties of his country, his good
" fortune seems to have tbrsaken him. Asinius,'*
he said, " he could easily drive out of Sicily ; but as
" more considerable supplies were at hand, he was
*' unwilling to involve the island in war." He there-
fore advised the Svracusans to consult their safety
by joining the stronger party, and soon afterward set
sail. When he came to Pompey, his constant
opinion was, that the war should be procrastinated
in hopes of peace ; for that if they came to blows,
which party so ever might be successful, the event
would prove decisive against the liberties of the
state. He also prevailed upon Pomi)ey and the
council of war, that neither any city subject to the
Romans should be sacked, nor any Ptoman killed,
except in the field of battle. By this he gained great
glory, and through his mildness and humanity brought
over many to Pompey 's interest.

When he went into Asia lor the purpose of raising
jnen and ships, he took v.ith him his sister Ser\ihu>

CATO THE YOUNGER. 103

and a little boy that she had borne to Liiciilliis ; for,
since the death of her husband, she had lived with
her brother: and this circumstance of putting herself
under Cato's eye, and following him through the
severe discipline of camps, not a little contributed
to the recovery of her reputation ; yet Caesar did not
fail to asperse even Cato on her account.

Though Pompey's officers in Asia did not think
that they had much need of Cato's assistance, yet he
brought over the Rhodians to their party ; and leav^
ing there his sister Servilia and her son, he joined that
general's forces, which were now on a respectable
looting both by sea and land. It was upon this oc-
casion, that Pompey discovered his final views. At
first, he intended to have appointed Cato to the
supreme naval command ; and he iiad then not fewer
than five Inmdred men of war, beside an infinite
number of open galleys and tenders. But reflecting
himself, or being reminded by his friends, that Cato's
single principle was to rescue the commonwealth
from the government of an individual, and that if in-
vested with so considerable a power the moment
CtEsar should be vanquished, he would oblige Pompey
likewise to lay down his arms and submit to the
laws ; he changed his intentions, though he had
already mentioned them to Cato, and gave the com-
mand of the fleet to Bibulus. The zeal of Cato,
however, was not abated by this conduct. When
they were on the eve of battle at Dyrrhachium,
Pompeyhimself addressed and encouraged the army,
and ordered his ofiicers to do the same. Their ad-
dresses, notv/ithstanding, were coldly received. But
when Cato rose and spoke, upon the principles of
philosophy, concerning liberty, virtue, death, and
glory ; when by his impassioned action he showed
that he felt what he spoke, and that his eloquence
took it's glowing colours from his soul; when in
conclusion he invoked the gods, as witnesses of their
efforts for the preservation of their country — the plau-
dits of the army rent the skies, and the generals

104. CATO THE YOUNGER.

marclied forward in fall confidence of victory. They
fbugl.K, and were victorious; though Caesar's good
genius enabled liim to avail hiniNelf of the frigid
caution and diffidence of Poinpey, and rendered the
victory incomplete. But these things have been re-
lated in the IJfe of Pompey. Amidst the general
joy that followed this success, Cato alone mourned
over his Cv)anrry, and bewailed the fiital and cruel
ambition, which had covered the field with the bodies
of citizens slain by each other's hands. When
Pom]>ey in pursuit of Caesar proceeded to Thessaly,
and left in Dyrrhachium a large quantity of arms and
treasure, together v/ith some friends and relations, he
gave the vvhole in charge to Cato, with the command
hov»'ever of only fifteen cohorts ; for he was still
ati-aid of his repiiblican principles. If he should be
vanquished, indeed, he knew that Cato v/ould prove
faithful to hira ; but if he should be victor, he knew
at the same time, as above stated, that he would not
peimit him to reap the reward of conquest in the
sweets of absolute power. Cato, however, had the
satisfaction of being attended by many illustrious
persons in Dyrrhachium.

After the fatal overthrow at Pharsalia, he deter-
mined, in the event of Pompey's death, to conduct
the people under his charge to Italy, and then to re-
tire into exile, far from the cognisance of the tyrant's
power ; but, if he survived, to keep his little army
together for his future use. Vv^ith this design, he
passed into Corcyra, where the fleet was stationed ;
and would there have resigned his command to
Cicero, because he had been consul, and he himself
only privtor. But Cicero declined it, and set sail for
Italy. Pompey the younger resented tiiis defection,
and was about to lay violent hands on Cicero and
some others, had not Cato by private expostulation
prevented him, and thus saved the lives both of
Cicero and of all the rest.

Cato, supposing that Pompey the Great would
, make his escape into Egypt or Lybia, prepared to

CATO THE YOUNGER. 105

follow him with his small force, after having first
allowed to such as chose it the liberty of staying be-
hind. Upon reaching and coasting along the shores
of Africa, he met with Sextus, Pompey's younger
son, who acquainted him with his father's death.
This deeply afflicted the little band ; but as Pompey
was no more, they unanimously resolved to have no
other leader than Cato. Cato, out of compassion to
the honest men who had placed their confidence in
him, and because he would not leave them destitute
in a foreign country, took upon him the command.
He first made for Cyrene, and was received by the
people, though they had previously shut their gates
against Labienus. Here he understood that Scipio,
Pompey's father-in-law, was entertained by Jubaj
and that Appius Varus, to whom Pom.pey had given
the government of Africa, had joined them with his
forces. Cato therefore, as it was now winter, re-
solved to march to them by land. He iiad collected a
great many asses to carry water, and furnished him-
self also with considerable booty, as well as with a
number of carriages. He liad likev/ise in his train
some of the people called Psyili ''j who obviate the

■^7 These people were so called from their king Psyllus, whose
tomb was in the region of the Syrtes. Varro informs us, that to try
tlie legitimacy of their children, they suffer them to be bitten by a
venomous serpent ; and, if they survive the wound, they conclude
that tijey are not spurious. Crates Pergamenus says, there were a
people of this kind at Pares on the Hellespont, called Ophiogeneis,
whose touch alone was a cure for a serpent's bite. (Strabo xvii.
ascribes to the Tentyrites, an Egyptian people, the same virtue with
the Psyili in regard to crocodiles.*) Celsus observes, that the
Psyili suck out the poison from the wound, not by any superior skill
or quality, '^ut because they have courage enough to do it. [The
use of sucKing in the cure of wounds is recorded by Homer, and
Tacitus De Mor. Germ, (according to one reading at least of the
passage), and in much later times, is confirmed by the instance of
our own Eleanor, the queen of Edw. I.*] Some writers assert, that
the Psyili have an innate quality in their constitution poisonous to
serpents, and tliat the smell of it throws them into a profound sleep.
Pliny maintains, that every man has in himself a natural poison for
serpents, and tliat those creatures will shun the human saliva as
they would boiling water. The fasting saliva in particular, if it*

106 CATO THE YOUNGER.

bad effects of the bite of serpents by sucking out the
poison, and deprive the serpents themselves of their
ferocity by charms. During a continued marcli for
seven days, he was always foremost, though he
used neither horse nor chariot. Ever after the un-
fortunate battle of Pharsalia, he ate sitting ''% in-
tending it as an additional token of mourning, that
be never lay down except to sleep.

By the end of winter he reached the place of his
designation in Lybia, with an army of nearly ten
thousand men. The affairs of Scipio and Varus were
in a bad situation, on account of the misunderstand-
ing and distraction which prevailed between them,
and led them to pay their court with great servility
to Juba, a prince by his wealth and power now be-
come intolerably arrogant. For, Avhen he first gave
Cato audience, he seated himself between Scipio and
Cato. But Cato took up his chair, and removed it
to the other side of Scipio ; thus giving him the most
honourable place, though he was his enemy, and had
published a libel against him. Cato's adversaries
have not paid proper regard to his spirit upon this
occasion ; but they have been ready enough to blame
him for having put Philostratus"-^ in the middle, when
he was v»alking with him one day in Sicily, though

comes- within their mouths, occasion;; tlicir instant dcatli. Tf, there-
fore, we niriy behove tliat the liunum sahva is an antidote to the
poison of a serpent, thougli this is by no means a necessary conse-
quence of it's mortal eH'ect on the serpent itself, we shall have no
occasion to believe at the same time that the Psylli were endowed
with any peculiar qualities of this kind, but that their success in
these operations arose (as Celsus says) Ex midacia nsu conjtrmata.
They made, however, a considerable trade of it ; and we are assured,
that tliey liave been know n to import the African serpents into Italy
and other countries, in order to increase their emoluments, l^liny
says, they brought scorpions into Sicily, but they would not live in
that island. (L.) The prophet Jcremiali (viii. 17.) threatens those
whom he addresses v.ith ' cockatrices, which will not be charmed.'*

•^s Instead of reclining on a touch. The consul Varro did the
same after the b;ittle of Cann*. It was a ceremony of mourning.

49 This Philostratus is again mentioned in the Life of Antonj',
but as one who under the cloke of the Academic theory concealed
;ui Epicurean practice.*

CATO THE YOUNGER. 107

lie did It entirely in compliment to pliilosophy. In
this manner he humbled Jnba, "who had considered
Scipio and Varus as little more than his lieutenants ;
and he succeeded, also, in reconciling tliem to each
other.

The whole army then desii'cd him to take upon
himself the command, and Scipio and Varus readily
offered to resign it ; but he said, " He would not
transgress the laws, for the sake of which he was
waging war with the man that trampled upon
them ; nor, when he was only proprietor, take the
" command from a proconsul." For Scipio had been
appointed proconsul, and his name inspired the
generality with hopes of success ; as they thought,
that a Scipio could not be beaten in Africa'".

Scipio being established commander-in-chief was
inclined, for Juba's gratification, to put all the inha-
bitants of Utica ^^ to the sword, and to rase the city,
as a place engaged in the interest of Ca?sar. But
Cato would not suffer it : he inveighed loudly in
council affainst the desiirn, invokino; heaven and
earth to oppose it, and v/ith much difhculty rescued
that people from the meditated cruelty. After
which, partly upon their application and partly at the
request of Scipio, he agreed to accept the command
of the town, that it might neither willingly nor un-
wiUingly fall into Ca'sar's hands. It w^as a place in-
deed, very convenient and advantageous to those
who were masters of it ; and Cato added much to
it's strengtli. For he brought into it a vast quantity
of bread-corn, repaired the walls, erected toAvers, and
fortified it with ditches and ramparts. He then disr
armed all the youth of Utica, and posted them in the
trenches under his own eye : as for the rest of the
inhabitants, he kept them close within the walls ;

50 Arguing from the victory of Zama, and the destruction of
Carthage.*

i' Hod. Biserta, or Satcor, in Byzacene or Tunis. Thapsus
likewise, and Adrymetum (liod. Mahometta) mentioned below
were cities in the same kingdom, nearly opposite to Malta.*

108 CATO THE YOUNGER.

but, at the same time, he took great care that they
should suifer no injury of any kind from the Romans.
And from the supply of arms, money, and provisions,
which he sent in great quantities to the camp, Utica
was considered as the principal magazine.

The advice, which he had before given to Pompey,
he now gave to Scipio : " not to risk a battle with an
" able and experienced v/arrior, but to take the ad-
vantage of time, which most effectually blasts the
growth of tyranny." Scipio however in his rashness
despised these counsels, and upon one occasion even
scrupled not to reproach Cato himself with cowardice;
asking him, " Whether he could not be satisfied with
" sitting still himself within walls and bars, unless he
'* likewise hindered others from occasionally adopt-
" ing bolder measures ?'* Cato vv rote back, " That
'^ he was ready to cross over into Italy, with the horse
*' and foot which he had brought into Africa, and by
*' drawing Caesar upon himself to divert him from his
" design against Scipio." But Scipio only ridiculed
the proposal ; and it was plain that Cato now^ re-
pented his having resigned to him the command, as
he perceived that he would adopt no rational plan
for the conduct of the war ; and that, if he should
beyond all expectation succeed, he would behave
with no kind of moderation toward the citizens. It
was therefore Cato's judgement, and he declared it to
his friends, " That on account of the incapacity and
*' rashness of the generals, he could expect no happy
" termination of the struggle; and that, even if vic-
** tory should declare for them and Caesar be destroy-
" ed, for his part he would not remain in Rome, but
" fly from the cruelty and inhumanity of Scipio, who
*' had already begun to throw out harsh and insolent
*' menaces against many of the Romans."

The event took place sooner than he had expected.
About midnight a person arrived from the army,
whence he had been three days in coming, with in-
telligence that a great battle had been fouglit at
Thapsus ; that all was lost ; that Caesar was master

CATO THE YOUNGER. 109

of both the camps ; and that Scipio and Juba had
fled with a few troops, which had escaped the general
slaughter.

On the receipt of these tidings the people of
Utica, as might be expected amidst the apprehen-
sions of night and war, were in the utmost distrac-
tion, and could scarcely keep themselves within the
walls. But Cato making his appearance among the
citizens, who were running up and down the streets
with extreme confusion and clamour, encouraged
them in the best manner he could. To remove the
violence of their terror and astonishment, he told
them the case might not be so bad as it was repre-
sented, the misfortune being possibly exaggerated by
report ; and thus he calmed the present tumult. As
soon as it was light, he summoned to the temple of
Jupiter the three hundred, whom he made use of as
a council. These were Romans, who trafficked
there in merchandise and exchange of money : and
to them he added all the senators, and their sons.
While they were assembling, he entered the house
with the utmost composure and firmness of look, as
if nothing extraordinary had happened ; and read a
book, which he had in his hand. This contained an
account of the arms, stores, bows, and other imple-
ments of war, and the musters.

When they were met, he opened the matter with
commending the three hundred for the extraordinary
alacrity and fidelity, which they had shown in serving
the public cause with their purses, persons, and
counsels ; and exhorting them not to entertain dis-
cordant views, or to endeavour to save themselves
by flight. " For," continued he, " so long as you
" keep in a body, Ca2sar will not hold you in such
contempt, if you continue the war ; and you will
be more likely to be spared, if you have recourse
" to submission. I desire you will consider the
point thoroughly, and what resolution soever you
may take, I will not censure you. Should you
" feel yourselves inclined to go v/ith the stream of

ii

a
a

(C

cc

110 CATO THE YOUNGER.

" fortune, I shall impute the change to the necessif j
" of the times : on the other hand, should you bear
" up against their threatening aspeet, and continue
" to face danger in the cause of liberty, I will be
" your fellow-soldier as well as captain, till our coun-
try has experienced the last issues of her fiite — Our
country, which is not Utica or Adrymetum, but
Rome ; and she, by her vast cfibrts, has often re-
covered herself trom greater falls than this. Many
resources we, certainly, have at present for our
" protection and safety ; and the principal is, that
" Me have to struggle with a man, whose occasions
" oblige him to attend to various objects. Spain is
" gone over to young Pompey ; and Rome, as yet
unaccustomed to tlie yoke, is ready to s})urn it
from her, and to rise upon any prospect of change.
" Neither is danger to be declined. In this, you
may take your enemy for a pattern, who is prodigal
of his blood in the most unjust of causes ; whereas
if you succeed, you will live the happiest of lives, and
if you miscarry, the uncertainties of war will be ter-
minated by the most glorious of deaths. Delibe-
" rate, however, among yourselves as to the steps
" now to be taken, iirst entreating heaven to prosper
" your determinations, in a manner v/orthy tlie cou-
" rage and zeal which you have already displayed.'*
This speech of Cato inspired some with conlidence,
and even with hope, and the generality were so much
affected with his intrepid, generous, humane turn of
mind, that they almost forgot their present danger ;
and considering him as the only general that was in-
vincible, and superior to all fortune, they desired him
to " make what use he thought proper of their fbr-
" tunes and their arms ; for that it was better to die
" under his banner, than to save their lives at the
" expense of betraying so much virtue." One of
the council suggested the expediency of a decree for
enfranchising the slaves, and many approved the
motion : Cato hov/ever said, " He would not do
that, because it was neither just nor lav.ful ; but

cc

cc

cc

cc
cc
cc
cc

a

ii

CATO THE YOUNGER. Hi

' such as their masters would voluntarily discharge
he would receive, provided they were of a proper
" age to bear arms.'* This, many promised to do ;
and Cato withdrew, after having ordered lists to be
made out of all that should offer.

A little afterward, letters were brought him from
Juba and Scipio. Juba, who lay with a small corps
concealed in the mountains, desired to know Cato's
intentions ; proposing to wait for him, if he left Utica,
or to assist him, if he chose to stand a seige. Scipio
also lay at anchor under a promontory near Utica,
expecting his answer to a similar proposal.

Cato thouglit it advisable to detain the messengers,
till he should know the final determination of the
three hundred. All, that were of the senatorial
order, with great readiness enfranchised and armed
their slaves ; but as for the three hundred, who dealt
in traflic and loans of money at high interest, and
whose slaves are a considerable part of their fortune,
the impression which Cato's speech had made upon
them did not last long. As some bodies easily receive
heat, and with equal ease grow cold again after the
fire is removed, so the sisfht of Cato warmed and ex-
panded those traders ; but when they cckIUQ to dis-
cuss tlie matter among themselves, the dread of
Cassar soon put to flight their reverence for Cato
and for virtue. For " What are we,'* they argued,
" and what is the man, whose orders we refuse to
" receive ? Is it not Caisar, into whose hands the
" Vv'hole power of the R-oman empire is fallen ? And
" surely none of us is a Scipio, a Pompey, or a Cato,
" Shall we, at a time when their fears make all men
" entertain sentiments beneath their dignity, shall
" we in Utica contend for the libertv of Rome with a
man against whom Cato and Pompey the Great
durst not make a stand in Italy ? Shall we enfran-
chise our slaves to oppose CiJesar, who have no
more liberty ourselves, than that conqueror may
be pleased to leave us? Ah! wretches that we

4

a
a

112 CATO THE YOUNGER.

*' are ! Let us at last know ourselves, and send depu-
*' tics to intercede with him for mercy." This was
the language of the most moderate among the three
hundred : but the chief part of them lay in wait for
the senators, thinking that if they could seize upon
them, they should more easily make their peace with
Caisar. Cato suspected the change, but he uttered
no remonstrances against it : he only wrote to Scipio
and Juba, directing them to remain at a distance
ii'om Utica, because the three hundred were not to
be depended upon.

In the mean time, a considerable body of cavalry
who had escaped out of the battle approached Utica,
and despatched three men to Cato, though they
could come to no unanimous resohition. For some
were for joining Juba, some Cato, and some were
afraid to enter Utica. This account being brought
to Cato, he ordered Marcus Rubrius to attend to
the business of the three hundred, and quietly with-
out any compulsion to enrol the names of such as
offered to emancipate their slaves. He then went
out of tlic town, taking the senators along with him,
to a conference with the principal officers of the
cavalry. He entreated their officers not to abandon
so many Roman senators, nor to choose Juba rather
than Cato for their general ; but to unite and mutu-
ah'y contribute to each other's safety by entering the
city, which was impregnable in point of strength,
and had provisions and every tiling necessary for de-
fence for many years. The senators seconded this
aj)plication with prayers and tears. The officers
went to consult the troops under their commavid ;
and Cato, with the senators, sat down upon one of
tlie mounds to wait their answer.

At that moment Rubrius came up in great fury,
inveighing against the three hundre(i, v;ho (he said)
had behaved in a most disorderly manner, and v;ere
raising commotions in the city. Upon this, m.any
of the senators thought their condition desperate.

6i

CATO THE YOUNGER; 113

^.nd indulged the strong;est expressions of grief.
But Cato endeavoured to encourage them, and re-v
quested the three hundred to have patience.

Neitlier vv^as there any thing moderate in the pro-
posals of the cavalry. Their reply was, " That
" they neither desired to be in the pay of Juba, nor
" did they fear Caesar so long as they should have
" Cato for their general ; but to be shut up with
" Uticans, Phoenicians v/ho would change with the
" wind, was what they could not endure. For"
(said they) " if they are quiet now, yet when Caesar
" arrives, they Vv'ill betray us, and plot our destruc-
tion. Whoever therefore desires us to range un-
der his banners there, must first expel the Uticans,
or put them to the sword, and then invite us into
" a place clear of enemies and barbarians." These
proposals appeared to Cato extremely barl)arous and
savage ; he answered with mildness, however, " That
" he would confer with the three hundred about
" them." And then again entering the city, he ap-
plied to that set of men, v/ho now no longer out of
reverence to him dissembled or palliated their de-
signs, but openly expressed their resentment, that
any citizens should presume to lead them against
Cjpsar, with whom all contest was alike beyond
their power and their hopes. Nay, some went so far
as to say, " That tiie senators ought to be detained
" in the town, till Cjesar came." Cato let this pass^
as if he had not heard it ; and, indeed, he was a
little deaf

But being informed that the cavalry were march-
ing off, he was afraid that the three hundred would
take some desperate step with respect to the senators 5
and he therefore with his friends went in pursuit of
them. As he found they were already under march,
he rode after them. Witli pleasure they beheld him
approach, and exhorted him to go with them, and
save his life with theirs. Upon this occasion, it is
said, Cato slied tears, while he interceded with ex-
tended hands in bciialf of the senators. He even

VOL. V. I

11^ CATO THE YOUNGER.

turned the heads of some of their horses, and laid
hold on their armour, till he prevailed with them to
stay at least that day, in order to secure these un-
happy men's retreat.

^yhen he came back with them, and had com-
mitted the charge of the gates to some and the cita-
del to others, the three hundred were under great
apprehensions of being punished for their incon-
stancy, and sent to entreat him by all means to re-
turn and speak to them. But the senators would not
suffer him to go. They exclaimed, they woukl never
let their guardian and deliverer trust himself in the
hands of such perfidious and traitorous men. It was
now, indeed, that Cato's virtue appeared to all ranks
of men in U^ica in the clearest light, and command-
ed the highest love and admiration. Nothing could
be more evident, than that the most perfect integrity
was the 2;Lude of his actions. He had loner resolved
to put an end to his being, and yet he submitted to
inexpressible labours, cares, and conflicts for others;
that, after he had secured their lives, he might re-
linquish his own. For liis intentions in that respect
were obvious enough, though he endeavoured to
conceal them.

After having satisfied the senators therefore as
well as he could, he went alone to wait upon tlie
three hundred. '" They thanked him for the favour,
*' and implored him to trust them and make use of
" their services ; but as they were no Catos, and liad
not Cato's dignity of mind, they hoped he would
pity their v/eakness. They told him, they had
resolved to despatch deputies to Caesar, to in-
tercede first and principally in his behalf. If that
request should not be granted, they would have
" no obligation to him tor any favour to themselves;
*' but, as long as they had breath, they would fight
" tor Cato." Cato made his acknowledirements to
them for their regard, and advised them to send
immediately to intercede for themselves. *' For
" me," said he, " intercede not. It is for the con-

(C

cc

ii

CATO THE YOUNGER. ii^

it

qiiered to turn suppliants, and for those vvlio have
done an injury to beg pardon. For ivxy part, I
have been unconquered tliroughout life, and supe-
" rior in the thing in which I wished to be so ; for
in justice and honour I am superior even to Cesar.
Coesar is the vanquished, the falling man, being
no.w clearly convicted of those designs against liis
country, which he has long denied."
After he had thus spoken to the three hundred, he
left them ; and being informed tliat Ctesar w-as al-
ready on his march toward Utica, " Strange!" said
he, " it seems he takes us for men." He then went
to the senators, and cfesired them to hasten their
flight while the cavalry remained. He likewise shut
all the gates except that leading to the sea, appoint-
ed ships for those that were to depart, provided fbi^
good order in the town, redressed grievances, com-
posed disturbances, and furnished all that stood iii
need with the necessary provisions for the voyage.
About this time, IMarcus Octavius^' approached the
Y>lace with two legions; and, as soon as he had en-
camped, sent to desire Cato to settle v;ith him the
business of the com.mand. Cato gave the messen-
gers no answer, but turning to his friends said,
" Need we wonder that our cause has not prospered,
" when we retain our ambition on the very brink of

" ruin."

In the mean time, having received intelligence
that the cavalry on their departure were seizing the
goods of the Uticans as lawful prize, he hastened u^
to them, and snatched the plunder out of the hands
of the foremost ; upon which they all threw down
what they had taken, and retired in silence dejected
and ashamed. He then assembled the Uticans, and
applied to them in behalf of the three hundred, de-
siring them not to exasnerate Coasar against those
•Romans, but to act in concert with them, and con-
suit each other's safety.

5* The same, who had commanded Pon'!pe}''s fleet

I 9

ns CATO THE YOUNGER.

After tins, he returned to the sea-side to loolc nj^-
on the embarkation ; and such of liis friends and ac-
quaintances, as he could persuade to go, he embraced
and dismissed with great marks of affection. His sort
uas unwilHng to depart with the rest ; and he
thought it not right to insist upon his leaving a
father, to whom he was so stronijlv attached. There
was one Statyllius '*" a young man, who affected a
firmness of resolution above his years, and in all re-
spects studied to ap])ear like CatO, superior to pas-
sion. As this youth's enmity to Csesar v/as well
known, Cato desired him by all means to take ship
with the rest : and when he found him bent upon
staying, he turned to Apollonides the Stoic and De-
metrius the Peripatetic, and said ; " It is your busi-
" ness to reduce tliis man\s extravagance of mind,
" and to make hiuj see what is for his good." He
now dismissed all, except such as had business ofim-
])ortance with him ; and in concerns of this kind he
employed that night, and great part of the following
day.

Lucius ("sesar, a relation of the conqueror, who
intended to intercede for the three hui)dred, desired
Cato to assist Inm in composing a suitable speech.
" And for you," said he, " I shall tliink it an honour
*' to become the most hiimble sUpj)liant, and even to
*' throw myself at his feet." Cato, however, would
not suffer it : " If I chose," said lie, "' to be indebt-
" ed to C;esar for my life, I ought to go in person,
"and without anv mediator: but I will have no
" oblifiation to a tvrant in a business, bv which he
*' subverts the laws. And lie docs subvert the laws,
*' by saving as a master those, over whom he has no
*' rio:ht of authoritv. Nevertheless we will consider,
" if you please, how to make your application more
'* eftectual in behalf of the three hundred."

After lie had spent some time with Lucius Ca:^sar

5^ This brave younp: Koiuan was the ^ame who, after tlie battle of
rhilipj)i, went throujjh the enemy to inquire into the condition 0/
Brutus* camp, and was slain in his return by Caesar's sokliers.

CATC THE YOUNGER, 117

vpon this affair, lie recommended his son and his
friends to his protection, conducted him a httje on
his way, and then took his leave, and retired to his
own house. His son and the rest of his friends being-
there assembled, he discoursed with them a consi-
derable time, and amonn; other thinsrs chartjed the
young man to take no share in the administration :
" For the state of affairs," said he, '' is such, that it
*' is impossible for you to fill any office in a manner
" worthy of Cato ; and to do it otherwise, would be
" unwortliy of yourself."

In the evening, he went to the bath ; Vvhere be^
thinking himself of Statyllius, he called out aloud to
Apollonides, and said, " Have you lowered the pride
" of that young man ; and is he gone without bid-
'' ding us farewell ?" " No indeed," answered the
philosopher, " we have taken a great deal of pains
'• with him, but he continues as lofty and resolute as
"ever; he says he will stay, and certainly imitate
" your conduct." Cato then smiled, and replied,
*' That will soon be seen."

When he had bathed, he went with a large com-
pany to supper, at which he sate as he had always
done since the battle of Pharsalia ; for as we have
observed above, he never now lay down except to
sleep. All his friends, and the magistrates of Utica,
supped with hi.m. After supper, the wine was sea-
soned with nmch wit and learning; and many ques-
tions in philosophy were proposed and discussed. In
the course of the conversation, they came to the
' Paradoxes ' of the Stoics (for so their maxims are
commonly called), and to this in particular, "That
" the good man only is free, and all the bad are
** slaves '^" The Peripatetic, in pursuance of his

53 This \vas not only the sentiment of the Stoics, but of Socrates.
(L.) See Cic. Paradox, v. — and see a more divine authority, Gul. v. 1.
where mention is made of* the liberty, wherewith Christ hatli made
us free ' — an idea happily amplified by Covvper, at the end" of the
fifth book of his Task :

He is the freeman, whom the Truth makes free.
And all are slaves beside, &-c.*

US CATO THE YOrNGKR.

pfinciples, took up the argument against it. Upon
which Cato attacked him wiili great warmth, and in
a louder and more vehement accent than usnal, car-
ried on a most spirited discourse to a considerable
length. From the tenor of it the whole company
perceived, that he had determined to put an end to
his being, in order to extricate himself from the hard
conditions, upon wliich alone he could expect to
hold it.

As he found a deep and melancholy silence the
consequence of his harangue, he endeavoured to re-
cover the spirits of his guests, and to remove their
suspicions by talking of their present affairs, and ex-
pressing his fears both for his friends and partisans
M'ho were upon their voyage, and for those who had
to make their way through a parched and barbarous
country.

After the entertainment was finished, he took his
usual evening-walk with his friends, and having given
the officers of the cruards such orders as the occasion
required, retired to his chamber. The extraordi-
narv ardour, with w^hich he embraced his son and
his friends at this parting, revived all their suspi-
cions. He lay dowm, and began to read Plato's book
on the Immortality of the Soul ; but before he had
gone through with it he looked up, and took notice
that his sword was not at the head of his bed, where
it used to hang; for his son had talvcn it away, while
he was at supper. He therefore called his servant,
and asked him, " Vv'ho had taken away his sword ?**
As the servant made no answer, he returned to- his
book ; and after a while without any appearance of
haste or hurry, as if it was only by accident that he
called for the sword, he ordered him to bring it. The
servant still delayed to comply with his direction, and
he had patience till he had finished the perusal of his
book : he then called his servants one by one, and
in a louder tone demanded his sword. At last, he
struck one of them such a blow on the mouth, that
be hurt his own hand ; and growing more angry, and

CATO THE YOUNGER. 119

raising his voice still higher, he cried out, " I am be-
'' trayed, and dehvered naked to my enemy by my
" son and my servants." His son then ran in with
liis friends, and tenderlv embracinff him, had re-
course to tears and entreaties. But Cato rose up,
and vvith a stern and aweful look thus expressed him-
self: " When and where did I show any signs of dis-
" traction, that nobod)^ offers to dissuade me by ar-
*' gumentfrom any wrong purpose, which I may have
" adopted, but I must be prevented from pursuing
'' my resolutions by being disarmed t And you,
" young man, why do not you also bind your father,
*' and tie his hands behind his back, that vdien Cssar
*' comes he may find me utterly incapable of resist-
" ance ? As to a sword, I have no need of it to des-
" patch myself; for if I do but retain my breath a
" while, or dash my head against the wall, it will
" answer the purpose quite as well."

Upon his speaking in this manner, the young man
went out of the chamber weeping, and with him all
the rest, except Demetrius and Apollonides. To
these philosophers he addressed himself in a milder
tone \ " Are you also determined to make a man of
my age live, whether he will or not ? And do you
sit here in silence, to watch me ? Or do you bring-
any arguments to prove tliat, now Cato has no
" hopes from any other quarter, it is neither painful
'• nor dishonourable to implore mercy from his ene-
my. Why do not you begin a lecture in order to
inform me better ; that so, dismissing the opinions
" in which you and I have lived, we may through
" Caesar's means grow wiser, and thus have a still
" greater obligation to him? As yet, I have deter-
" mined nothing with respect to myself; but I ought
" to have it in my power to carry my purpose into
" execution, whenever I shall have formed it. And
" indeed I shall in some measure consult with you,
" for I shall proceed in my deliberations upon the
•^ principles of your philosophy. Be satisfied then,

120 CATO THE YOUXGER.

" and go teli my son, if persuasion prove insufficient,
*' not to have recourse to constraint."

They made no answer, but went out, the tears fall-
ing from their eyes as they withdrew. The sword
w^as sent in by a little boy. He drew and examined
it, and finding the point and the edg;c good, " Now,"
said he, " I am master of myself." Then laying
down the sword, he took up the book again, and (it
is said) re-perused the whole twice •'^ After which,
he slept so soundly, that he was heard by those who
were in waiting without. About midnight he called
for two of his freedmen, Cleanthes the physician,
and Butas whom he generally employed about public
business. The latter he sent to the port, to see whe-
ther all the Romans had put off to sea, and to bring
liim back information.

In the mean time, he ordered the physician to
dress his hand, which was inflamed by the blow he
had given his servant. This was some consolation to
the whole house, for they now thought that he had
dropped his design against his life. Soon after this,
Butas returned and informed him that they were all
got off except Crassus, who had been detained by
some business, but that he intended to embark very
soon, though the wind blew hard and the sea was
tempestuous. Cato upon this intelligence sighed in
pity of his friends on ship-board, and sent Butas down
again, that if any of them should have put back and
be in want of any thing, he might acquaint him with it.

By this time the birds began to sing, and Cato

i* Yet this very Dialogue condemns suicide in the strongest terms,
and injoins the philosopher not to think of deserting the post, in
which he has been stationed by Providence. Cicero's argument upon
the subject (Tusc. QuiE.st. i. 30.) with regard toVhxto'a jnsl a cnusa
moricndi (the command of the Deity, as implied in certain circum-
stances) would indeed wholly des^troy the object of the Dialogue,
\ as every one would readily magnify his petty dissatisfactions into in-
tolerable suffering.

It is impossible to read this minute detail, without being remhidod
pf our own Cato's

* It must be sc.' &c. .

CATO THE YOUNGER. 121

iell iigciin into a little skimber. Butas on his return
told him, that all was quiet in the harbour ; upon
which Cato ordered him to shut the door, having first
stretched himself on the bed, as if he designed to .sleep
out the rest of the night. But after Butas was gone,
he drew his sword, and stabbed liimself under the
breast. He could not however strike hard enough,
on account of the inflammation in his hand, and he
did not therefore instantly expire, but in the strug-
gle with death fell from the bed, and threw down a
little Greometrical table that stood bv.

This noise alarming the servants, they cried out,
and his son and his friends immediately entered the
room. They found him weltering in his blood, and
his bowels fallen out; but he was still alive, and
turned his eyes upon them. They were struck with
inexpressible horror. Tlie physician approached to
examine the wound, and finding the bowels unin-
jured he replaced them, and began to sew up the
wound. But as soon as Cato came a little to himself,
he thrust away \\\^ physician, tore open the wound,
plucked out his bowels again, and immediately ex--
pired.

In less time than one would think all the family
could have been informed of this sad event, the three
hundred were at the door ; and a little while after-
ward all the people of Utica thronged about it, with
one voice calling him "their benefactor, tlieir saviour,
" the only free and unconqucred of men." This they
did, though at the same time they had intelligence
that Caesar was approaching. Neither fear, nor flat-
tery toward the conqueror, nor the factious disputes
which prevailed among themselves, could divert them
from doing honour to Cato. They adorned the body
in a magnificent manner, and after a splendid pro-
cession buried it near the sea ; where his statue' now
stands, with a sword in the right hand.

This great business finished, they began to take
measures for saving themselves and their city. Cassar
had been informed, by persons who went to surrender

122 GATO THE YOUNGER.

themselves, that Cato remained in Utica, without any
thoughts of flight ; that he had provided tor tlie
escape of others indeed, but that he himself with his
friends and his son continued there without any ap-
pearance of fear or apprehension. Upon these cir-
cumstances, he could form no probable conjecture.
As it was an object with him, however, to get him
into his hands, he made all possible haste with his
army to tlie place. And when lie received intelli-
gence of his death, he is reported to have uttered
this short sentence ; '* Cato, 1 envy tliee thy death,

since thou couldest envy me the glory of saving

thy life." If Cato indeed had designed to owe
his life to Cffisar, he would not so much have tar-
nished his own honour, as have added to that of the
conqueror. What might have been the event, is un-
certain ; but in all probability, Caesar w^ould have in-
clined to the side of mercy.

Cato died at the age of forty-eight. His son suf-
fered nothing from CcEsar ; but he was rather im-
moral, it is said, and incurred some censure for hi»
conduct with respect to women. In Cappadocia he
lo<lged at the house of Marphadates, one of the royal
family, who had a very handsome wife ; and, as he
stayed there longer than decency could warrant, such
jokes as these were passed upon him : " Cato goes
" the morrow after the thirtieth day of the month."
" Porcius and Marphadates are tw^o friends, who
" have but one Soul ;" for the wife of Marphadates
was named Psyche [which signifies ' soul.'] " Cato
" is a gieat and generous man, and has a royal Soul."
By his death, hov.ever, he v/iped off all aspersions ;
for fighting at Philippi against Octavius Caesar and
Antony, in the cause of liberty, after his party gave
way, he disdained to fly. Instead of slipping out of
the action, he challenged the enemy to try their
strength with Cato, animated sucli^of his troops as
had stood their ground, and fell, by the acknowledge-
ment of his adversaries, a prodigy of valour.

Cato's daughter was much more admired for her

J

PHOCION AND CATO COMPARED. 123

^v'irtiies. She was not inferior to her father, either in
prudence ox in fortitude ; for being married to Bru-
tus, who killed Cassar, she was entrusted with the
s'ecret of the conspiracy, and as we have related in
Brutus* Life, put a period to her existence in a man-
ner worthy of her birth and of her character.

As for vStatyllius, who promised to imitate the con-
duct of Cato, he would have despatched himself soon
after him, but he was prevented by the philosophers.
He subsequently approved himself to Brutits a faith-
ful and able officer, and was slain in the battle of
Philippi.

PHOCION AND CATO THE YOUNGER

COMPARED. t

OF all the illustrious men, whom we have com-
pared together, Phocion and Cato the Younger ap-
pear to supply the most exact parallel. Their excel-
lences as men, as warriors, and as statesmen, are al-
most precisely alike. With similar combinations of
austerity and softness, of valour and prudence, of
anxiety for others and neglect of themselves, they
both united an extreme horror of every thing dis-
graceful, an unchangeable love of justice, and a
complete devotion to the cause of their country.
Both Vv-ell educated, and enured in early life to habits
of sobriety and fortitude, which enabled them to
brave the rigour of the coldest climates and the toils
of the most perilous warfare, they preserved them
unimpaired till death. Phocion was at first the pu-
pil of Plato, and subsequently of Xenocrates, the
most virtuous of the Grecian philosophers. Cato in
his orphanship was instructed by an enlightened
man, who paid particular attention to the cultiva-
tion of his heart» He was tardy in his perception,

6

I'it PHOCION AND

but tenacious in his retention ; and even his tardi-
ness arose chiefiy from his reluctance to receive any
mformation, without a full conviction of it's truth.

The sects iiowever, to which they resj)ectively at-
tached themselves, were of a totally different de-
scription. Phocion from the soft spring of the
Academy drank that mild and moderate philosophy,
■which Socrates had first recommended, us the surest
stimulus of moral virtue. In the hardness of Stoicism,
Cato found somethin'^ more analosrous to what we
may almost call the inflexibility of his natural charac-
ter. What indeed must have been his ardour in be-
half of that sect, when we see him incurring the
trouble of a journey to Asia, for the sole purpose of
brin2:ino: back with him the stoic Athenodorus? To
this difference of schools we may safely refer Phocion's
superior gentleness of behaviour. Not that- Cato,
with all his rigour of principle, wanted feeling : His
strong affection for his brotlier, and his deep concern
at his death, with the tender interest which he dis-
plaj^cd about his friends even to his last moments,
abundantly evince the contrary. In this respect in-
deed he is not inferior to Phocion himself, v.'hosc de-
voted regard for Chabrias (liis tutor in the art of war)
and to his son after him, is so justly an, object of our
admiration.

Botli Phocion and Cato lived at periods, when
their respective commonwealths retained only the
shadow of their ancient glory. Athens by her arro-
gance had lost the ascendency over Greece, wliich
she had acquired by her heroic resistance to the Per-
sians, and was now engaged in that deatli-blow to her
independence, the Peloponnesian war. Pericles too
had accelerated Iier ruin, by augmenting the inlhi-
ence of the people at the expense of the senate, and
thus givini]: lise to a swarm of factious demaijcoirues,
who were always at the service of the highest bidder.
'I he same corruption, consequent upon the same pro-
fligacy, Cato had to encounter in Rome. Ambitix^n
and avarice were grasping at all the offices of the state.

CATO THE YOUNGER COMPARED. 123

and the road to public honours was only open tt) cabal
and intrigue. The sage institutions oftheir ancestors
were trampled upon with impunity ; and, if now and
then a patriot endeavoured to revive their energy,
he invariably failed in the attempt.

Against the contagious example of his fellow-
citizens Phocion was armed bv his virtue. It seemed
indeed as if he had been sent by heaven at that criti-
cal period, to stem the torrent of vice, which was
hurrying Athens to her destruction. Unlike his
contemporaries, who limited themselves exclusively
to the Forum or to the field, he determined like
Solon, Aristides, and Pericles, to pursue distinction
in both : and accordingly, though his military re-
nown set him above all the generals of his age, he
paid unremitting attention to civil affairs ; in order
to resist with greater efficacy the traitorous orators,
who affected to retain them at their own disposal.
His eloquence, in conformity to his character, was
nervous and energetic ; marked rather by lofty sen-
timent than elaborate expression, and so powerfully
argumentative, as to excite alarm ia the breast even
of Demosthenes himself. In his political measures,
whether he triumphed or miscarried, he was still un-
shaken. Neither elated by victory, nor dejected by
defeat, he appeared, like the AntiEus of ancient
fable, to rise invigorated by depression. T'et, with
this inflexible iirmness in the cause of his country,
his mildness and his humauitv were unalterable : and
far from cherishing any unkind feelings toward those,
by whom he had been most vehemently opposed, he
was frequently seen in their adversity to offer them
consolation and support.

Cato, upon his engaging in public life, exhibited a
rigid attention to the laws and usages of Home. He
withheld from the army all illegal reward's : as
qua?stor, he revived the primitive severity of that
important office : He made a point of attending the
senate upon every occasion, to watch over the ma-
chinations oi^ faction j and after having previously

i'26 PHOCION AND

refused to sue for the tribunesbip, as soon as he
learned that Metellus (one of Pompcv's creatures)
^vas soHciting the appointment, he instantly became
a candidate, for the purpose of thwarting that cliiet-
tain's ambitious desiojns. His name was even iden-
titled with tliat of honesty : and such was the iniiu-
ence of his character that, in the aiiair of Catiline, he
entirely counteracted the effect of Cresar's artful
harangue^'. Intrepid in whatever respected his
coiuitry, he resisted with effect a pernicious motion
made b}- Metelius in Pompey's favour, though sur-
rounded by the furious satellites of thtit tribune ; and
withstood alike the menaces and the caresses of the
first triumvirate, before which Rome herself gave
way without a struggle. His disinterestedness he
evinced by the immense wealth which he brought
from Cyprus, and lodged witliout deduction in the
public treasury, and by declining the illegal privi-
leges voted to him by a grateful senate.

'ihis virtue indeed, the touchstone of great souls,
is not less observable in the character of Phocion,
who constantly rejected the muniiicent presents of
Alexander, at the risk of incurring his dangerous re-
sentment ; and at last, after a life of confidential in-
tercourse witli princes, died in a condition of honour-
able poverty. His reputation, as a statesman and a
W'arrior, was the fruit of his talents : to his virtues
he owed the sweeter enjoyments of domestic happi-
ness ; as he was married to a wife worthy of himself,
and not less esteemed than her husband for her
prudence, her modesty, and her simplicity. In this
respect Cato was less fortunate. Plis two sisters
were notorious for their misconduct : he was obliixed
to divorce his first wife, who had borne him two

is See Sail. Bell. Cat. 51., where Cato is admirably contrasted
witli Caesar.

Wtil did Iloraee say,

»■ Ctincta terrarum mhactn,

Prceter atroccm animunn CcAonh.

(^Od. II. i. 21.)

CATO THE YOUNGER COMPARED. 127

children ; and his second, the celebrated Marcia,
did not wholly escape the suspicion of irregularity.
Might it not be, that his excessive harshness of man-
ners, untempered by the gentleness of Phocion, con-
tributed to alienate from him his nearest connections?
In another regard Phocion had the advantage, as
having more generally and for a greater length of
time possessed the confidence of his countrymen.
In every emergency, Athens turns to him as the only
* pilot capable of weathering the storm. V Her chief
disasters arise from her rejection of his counsels ;
and by him alone they are corrected. But what
principally marks his disinterested patriotism is that,
notwithstanding all his military talents and his suc-
cesses, he is generally the friend and the advocate of
peace.

The virtues, likewise, of Cato won him the esteem
and the confidence of Rome ; and she regarded him
as alone able to detect, and to defeat the projects of
her guilty children. Plis sagacity indeed, in unveil-
ing the secret views of Pompey and Cajsar, appears
after the event perfectly prophetical : and he might
by his indefatigable exertions have protracted the
existence of her freedom, had slie not unhappily
envied, even while she admired his virtues. Still
more corrupt than Athens, from some unfounded
suspicions she rejected his application both for the
proctorship and the consulate, and willingly stretched
out her hands for the shackles prepared by the un-
natural ambition of her own sons. Perhaj)s it Vv^ould
have been better, if he had abated a httle of the im-
practicable rigour of his principles, instead of living
(according to the reproach of Cicero) " in the dregs
*' of Romulus, as if he had been a member of Plato's
" republic.'* Perhaps too it would have been better,
had he accepjted Pompey 's proffered alliance ; as it
might have given him an opportunity of directing
the views of that general to worthier objects, and
would most probably have rescued him from the
affinity of Caesar — an affinity, eventually so fatal to

12S niOClON AND

themselves, and to their common country. There
sire exigencies, in which the most austere morality
anust accommodate itself a little to circumstances ;
and, through attending to these, Phocion became a
more valuable citizen than Cato. Without descend-
ing to flatter Antipater, he led him by his powers of
conciliation to grant easier terms to the Athenians :
though he suffered himself to be duped by Nicanor,
in consequence of his too easy confidence ; a foible,
of which Cato was never the victim.

In respect to military talents and achievements,
Phocion has greatly the superiority. Frequently
summoned in the most honourable manner to the
command of the army, and that invariably during his
absence, at fourscore he is still found at it's head :
nor oufrht it to be adnu'tted that, notwithstandinsi^ the
heavy contributions which it was often necessary for
him to lay upon the allies, he so managed the matter,
as never to shake their attachment to Athens. On
the contrary, they opened their harbours to him
without distrust, after having closed them against
every other general. Neither was Cato without
ability in the art of war. Among his troops he em-
ployed reason as well as authority, set them a strik-
ing example of temperance, and ins])ired them with
the warmest attachment to his person. To the
courage indeed, which he kindled in his followers,
Pompey was indebted for the victory of Dyrrachium ;
and in Africa, where for some time after the battle
of Pharsalia he kept together the shattered remains
of that disastrous day, Scipio was defeated by C;jesar
only in consequence of having neglected Cato's ad-
vice. Of his patriotism he gave an affecting proof,
when at the very commencement of the civil war he
publicly put on mourning, inflicted upon himself
many painful privations, and continued in a state of
depression and melancholy till his death.

Had Phocion died quietly in his bed, something
would have appeared wanting to his glory. Towarrl
the conclusion of his life, the government fell into

CATO THE YOUNGER COMPARED. 12|?

the hands of a profligate mob, with whom he could
have neither sympathy nor interest, but must na-
turally be in disgrace for his very virtues. A pre-
text was speedily found to sacrifice him to their re-
sentment. Charged with treason at the tribunal oi
a frantic populace, he preserves all his elevation of
character ; after some fruitless attempt to make him-
self heard, observes a dignilied silence ; and marches
to the place of execution surrounded by a host of
clamorous and cowardly assassins, with as much
serenity as he had formerly led out their armies,
amidst the grateful acclamations of his fellow-citizens
to the field of victory.

Cato, who had preserved his life as long as he
thought it might possibly be of service, when he saw
Ceesar triumphant and the republic in the dust, de-
termined to bury himself among her ruins. But in
spite of the composure with which he first set about
the fulfilment of his project, his angry expostulation
with his interceding son, his violent treatment of the
hesitating slave, and finally his tearing out his bowels
after they had been replaced by the surgeon, gave ta
his catastrophe the characters of fury and despair.
Whether his refusal to make or to tolerate applica-
tion to Ca?sar in his own behalf arose from his pride,
which would not permit him to bend before a con-
queror, from his conviction that all application would
be ineffectual, or from his reluctance to live after so
many efforts for liberty in a land of slavery, it is dif-
ficult at this period to decide.

It may be affirmed however, with regard to the
deaths of these two great men, that Phocion in ex-
treme old age, a victim to his patriotism, receiving
his fate with the resignation of a sage and the firm-
ness of a hero, presents a much uoer picture than
Cato in robust manhood dyinsr bv his own hand :
especially as Caesar would most probably have par-
doned him, and he might in that case still have given
his country the valuable example of fortitude bear-
ing up against adversity. The spectacle of a great

VOL. V. K

130 PHOCION AND CATO COMPARED.

man struggling with ill-fortune (a sight pronounced
by an ancient writer, " worthy of a God ") is un-
doubtedly far more interesting as well as far more
useful, than that of one shrinking from the conflict
by an action, which whatever may be it's apparent
effort, is in reality a pusillanimous desertion of an
appointed post.

THE

L IVES

OF

AGISAND CLEO^XENES.

SUMMARY,

I. Ixion a symbol of ambitious men. Da?iger of ambition ; exempli-
Jied in the Gracchi. Genealogy ofAgis. His virtuous character.

Decline of Spartan discipline. First attempts of Agis to re-esta-
blish it. He gains his mother ; but is thiva)-ted by his collegue
Leonidas. Proposes the measure to the senate, and to the people.
His dispute with Leonidas ; rvho is impeached by Lysander, and
deposed. The Jiezo Ephori restore him, and are themselves in con-
sequence removed from their office by the tivo kings. Leonidasjlics.
Ageiilaus eludes the distribution of lands. Agis -marches to the
assistance of the Achceans against the /'Etnlians. Leonidas remounts
the throne. Admirable conduct of Cheloiiis, the ivife of Cleombro-
tus. Shefollotvs her htisband into banishment. Agis is given up
to his enemies by Amphares ; and strangled in prison : His
mother and grandmother undergo the same fate. Lidignation of
the Lacedcemonians.

II. Leonidas mairies his son Cleomenes to the wife of Agis* brother :
Character of Cleomenes. He resolves to realise the plans ofAgis*
His first campaign : He defeats the Achceans. Aratus takes
Mantinea. Cleomenes recalls Archedamui, the brother of Aoris,
who is immediately afterward assassinated by the Ephori : Gains a
great victory over the Achceans ; takes along with him the most re-
fractory Spartans, and gets the Ephori put to death. The Lace-

dcemonians have temples dedicated to Fear, Src. Cleomenes pro-
poses to the people the re-establishment of Lycurgus' laws. They
fomply. He ravages the territory of Megalopolis. His reputation

Is 2

1325 AGIS.

among the Greehs : Frugality of his table. He defeats the
Achceans, and negotiates vniih them. Araius invites the Macedo'
nians into Achcea ; treats Antigonus very ill; and causes the
negotiation vcith Cleomenes to be broken off. Cbomenes takes
Pellene, and Argos. Lojty ideajcrmed of the Spartans and their
Icing. CleoncBy Phlins, and Corinth form an clliance ivilh him.
He holds Antigonus in check at the Oncean mountains. Argos re-
volts ; and is retaken hy Cleomenes, vJio is forced however to
abandon it. Death of his txife Agiatis, and magnanimity of his
mother Cratesiclca. He takes Megalopolis by surprise ; and offers
to restore it to the inhabitantSy on condition that they ivill become his
allies. On their refusal, he gives it up to be jilunderedy lays u-aste
the territories of Argos, and insidtingly marches up to it's tvalls.
Is ruined by "want of money. Battle of Sellasia, tvhich he loses
through the treachery of Damoteles. He advises the Spartans to
receive Antigonus, and puts to sea. Antigonus'' humane behaviour
at Sparta. Therycion proposes to Cleomenes, that they should de-
stroy themselves ; but the latter regards suicide as a dastardly
measure. Manner in iuhich he is received by Ptolemy ; and subse-
quent change of treatment, upon the death of that prince. He de-
viands permission for himself and his friends to return to Pelo-
ponnesus, is accused (fa conspii-ccy, and conjined. Determines to
effect his escape. His success. He and his friends destroy them-
selves. His mother and children jtut to death, with the wife of
Panteus. Superstition of the Egyptians, with regard to Cleomenes.,

I. AGIS.

is not ^vithout an appearance of probability, that
some think the fable of Ixion designed to represent
the fate of ambitions men. Ixion took a cloud in-
stead of Juno to his arms, and the Centaurs were the
offspring of their union : the ambitious embrace
lionour, which is only the image of virtue ; and
governed by different impulses, actuated by emula-
tion and all the variety of passions, they produce
nothing pure and genuine ; the whole issue is of a
preposterous kind. The shepherds in Sophocles say
of their flocks.

AGIS. 133

Tliese still we follow, though our subject-band.
And constantly obey their mute command.

The same may be truly affirmed of those statesmen^
who govern according to the capricious and violent
inclinations of the people. They become slaves, to
srain the name of mas^istrates and rulers. As in a
ship, those at the oar can see what is before them
better than the pilot, and yet are often looking back
to him for orders ; so they, who take their measures
of administration only witli a view to popular ap^
plause, are called indeed the governors, but are in
fact only the slaves of the people.

The complete honest statesman has no farther re-
gard to the public opinion, than as the confidence
which it gains him facilitates his designs, and crowns
them with success. An ambitious yoiuig man may
be allowed indeed to value himself upon his great
and good actions, and to expect his portion of fame.
For virtues, as Theophrastus says, when they first
begin to grow in persons ofthat age and disposition,
are cherished and strengthened by praise, and after-
ward increase proportionably with the love of glory.
But an immoderate passion for fame in all affairs i3
dangerous, and in political matters destructive. Por,
joined to high authority, this passion drives those
that are possessed with it into folly and madness,
while they no longer deem that glorious which is
good, but deem that good which is glorious. As
Phocion therefore said to Antipater, when he desired
something of him inconsistent with justice, " You
" cannot have Phocion both for your friend, and
" your flatterer* ;'* this, or sometliing like it,
should be said to the multitude : " You cannot have
" the same man botli for your governor, and your
" slave." For that would be to exemplify the fable
of the serpent. The tail (it seems) one day quar-
xelled with the head, and instead of being forced
always to follow, insisted that it should lead in it's
turn. Accordingly^ it undertook the charge, and as

See p.

m.

134 AGIS.

it moved fonvard blindly, tore itself in a terrible
manner ; tlie head also iinnatnrally compelled to
follow a guide which could neither see nor hear, suf-
fered not a little. We observe many under the same
predicament, whose object is popularity in all the
steps of their administration. Attached entirely to
the capricious multitude, they produce such disor-
ders, as tb.ey can neither restrain nor rectify.

The>e observations on popularity were suggested
to us, by considering it's effects in the misfortunes of
Tioerins and Caius Gracchus. In point of disposi-
tion, of education, and of political principles, none
could exceed them ; yet they were ruined not so
much by an immoderate love of glory, as by a fear of
disgrace, which in it's outset was far from being
wrong. They had been so much obliged to the
people for their favour, that they were ashamed to
be behind-hand with them in marks of attention.
On the contrary, by the most acceptable services
they always studied to outdo the honours they re-
ceived ; and being still more honoured on account
of those services, the affection between them and the
people became at last so violent, that it forced them
into a situation where it would have been in vain to
say,

• Since we are wrong, 'tv.ere shameful to persist.'

These observations will be illustrated in the course
of dieir history.

With those two Romans let us compare two Spar-
tan kings, Agis and Cleomenes, who were not be-
hind them in popularity. Like the Gracchi, they
strove to enlarge the privileges of the people ; and
by restoring the just and glorious institutions which
had long fallen into disuse, they became like them
obnoxious to the great, who could not think of part-
ing v/ith the superiority w hich riches gave them, and
to which they had long been accustomicd. These
Spartans were not indeed brothers, but their actions

AGIS. 135

were of the same kindred and complexion, the source
of which was as follows :

When the love of money made it's way into Sparta,
and brought avarice and meanness in it's train on one
hand, and on the other, profusion and effeminacy
and luxury ; the state soon deviated from it's original
virtue, and sunk into contempt till the reign of Agis
and Leonidas. Agis was of the familj^ of Eurytiou
the son of Eudamidas, the sixth in descent from
Agesilaus, distinguished by his expedition into Asia
and for his eminence in Greece. Agesilaus was suc-
ceeded by his son Archidamus, who was slain by the
Messapians at Mandonium in Italv \ Ai^is, was the
eldest son of Archidamus, and being slain at Mega-
lopolis by Antipater, and leaving no issue, was suc-
ceeded by his brother Eudamidas. He was succeed-
ed by another Archidamus his son, and that prince
by another Eudamidas, who was likewise his son, and
the father of that Agis of whom we are now speak-
ing. Leonidas, the son of Cleonymus, Vvas of another
family (the Agideje) the eighth in that descent from
that Pausanias%who conquered Mardonius at Piatsese.
Pausanias w^as succeeded by his son Plistonax, and he

' We know of no such place as ' Mandonium.' We should pro-
bably read ' Manduriuin,' which is a city of Japygia mentioned by
the geographers. (Cellar.) See also Diod. Sic. xvi. 62, 6?>.

* This genealogy, drawn out a little more distinctly, stands thus :

Agid.e.
Pausanias

EURYTIONJD.X. ' 1

y\gesilaus Plistonax

i I

Archidafflus Pausanias

..A

Agis Eu'Jamiilas AgesipoFis Cleombrofiis

( , ^ .

Archidamu?, A^esipolis Cleomenes

Xa. ArchidaDiia

— A-_

Acrotatus, died before father, Cleonymns
Ei'damidas, Ri ~ j |

Agesilaus' sister Agesiotrata Areui Leonidas

Acis Archidamus Acrotatus Daughter Cleoji£\es.

ID. Cleombrotus

It is remarkable, that so many of the name of Agis should pecur

136 AGIS.

by another Pausania«!, who being banished to Tegea
left his kingdom to his eldest son Agesipolis. lie
dying without chil(h"en was succeeded by his brother
Cleombrotus, who left two sons, Agesipolis and
Cleomenes. Agesipolis, after a short reign, died
without issue ; and Cleomenes, who succeeded him
in the kingdom, after burying his eldest son Acro-
tatus, left another son Cleonymus behind him. He
did not however succeed to the kingdom, but Areus,
the son of Acrotatus and grandson of Cleomenes.
Areus being slain at Corinth, the crown descended
to his son Acrotatus, who was defeated and killed in
the battle of Megalopolis by the tyrant Aristodemus.
He left his wife pregnant, and as the child proved to
be a son, Leonidas the son of Cleonymus took the
guardianship of him, and his charge dying in his
minority, the crown came to himself. This prince
was not agreeable to his people. For, though the
corruption was general, and they all grew daily more
and more depraved, yet Leonidas was more remark-
able even than the rest for his deviation from tlie
customs of his ancestors. He had long been con-
versant in the courts of the Asiatic princes, particu-
larly in that of Seleucus ; and he had the indiscretion
to introduce the pomp of those courts into a Grecian
state, into a kingdom where the laws were the rules
of government.

Agis far exceeded not only him, but almost all the
kings who had reigned before him since the great
Agesilaus, in goodness of disposition and dignity of
mmd. For though brought up in the utmost afflu-
ence, and in all the indulgence that might be ex-
pected from female tuition under Ins mother Agesis-
trata and his grandmother Archidamia, who were
the richest persons in Laccdiemon, yet before he
reached the age of twenty, he had declared war

in the family of the Eurytionidae, and not one in that of the Agidac.
Seel. 111., not. (9.)

On the sul)ject of Pausanias' banishment to Tegea, see the Life
ofLycRiider, III. 2^'?.*

AGIS. 137

against pleasure ; and in order to prevent any vanity,
which the beauty of his person might liave sug-
gested, he discarded all unnecessar}^ ornament and
expense, and constantly appeared in a plain Lace-
daemonian cloke. In his diet, his bathing, and all
his exercises, he kept close to the Spartan simpli-
city ; and he often used to say, that the crown was
no farther an object of desire to him, than as it might
enable him to restore the laws and the ancient disci-
pline of his country.

The first symptoms of corruption and distemper in
their commonv/ealth appeared at the time, when the
Spartans had entirely destroyed the Athenian em-
pire, and began to bring gold and silver into Lace-
daemon. Nevertheless, the Agrarian law^ established
by Lycurgus still subsisting, and the lots of land
descending undiminished from tather to son, some
relics of order and equality were yet to be found,
which prevented other errors from being fatal. But
Epitadeus a man of high authority in Sparta, though
at the same time factious and iil-natured, being ap-
pointed one of the Ephori and having a quarrel with
his son, procured a law that all men should have li-
berty to alienate* their estates in their life-time, or
to bequeath them to whom they pleased at their
death. It was to indulge his private resentment, that
this man proposed the decree, which others from a
motive of avarice accepted and confirmed ; and thus
was abrogated the best institution in the world. Men
of fortune now extended their landed estates with-
out bounds, not scrupling to exclude the right heirs j
and wealth quickly coming into a few hands, the rest

' See the Life of Lycurgus, L 122.

4 It was good policy in the kings of England and France to procure
laws empowering the nobility to alienate their estates, and by those
means to reduce their power ; for the nobility were,- at that time, no
better than so many petty tyrants. (L.)

Solon had enacted a similar law (called, at Sparta, ' rlietra,')
but on a more limited scale; by which those, who tiad uo legitimate
male children, were enabled to bequeath their property^ as they
pleased. See his Life, I, 24.9., not. (4.8.)*

1S8 AGIS.

of the people were poor and miserable. The latter
found no leisure for liberal exercises ; being obh'ged
to drudge in mean employments for tlieir bread, and
consequently looking with envy and hatred upon the
rich. There lemained not above seven hundred of
the old Spartan families, of which perhaps one hun-
dred liad estates in land. The rest of the city was
occupied by an insigniticant rabble vvithout property
or honour, who had neitherheart nor spirit to defend
their country against v.ar.s abroad, and who were al-
ways watching an opportunity for changes and revo-
lutions at home.

For these reasons Agis thought it a noble under-
taking, as in fact it was, to restore the citizens to
their pristine equality, and thus to replenish Sparta
with respectable inhabitants. With this view, he
sounded the inclinations of his subjects. The young
men listened to him with a readiness far bcvond his
expectation : they adopted witii him the cause of
virtue, and for the sake of liberty changed their
manner of Jiving, with as little objection as they
^vould have changed their apparel. But most of the
old men, being far gone in corruption, were as much
afraid of the name of Lycurgus, as a fiigitive slave
when brought back is of that of his master. They
inveighed therefore against Agis for lamenting the
present state of things, and desiring to renovate the
ancient dignity of Sparta. On the other hand, Ly-
Sander the son of Libys, Mandroclidas the son of
Ecphanes, and Agesilaus not only approved his glo-
rious designs, but strenuously co-operated with them.

Lysander had considerable reputation and autho-
rity among the Spartans. No man understood the
interests of Greece better than Mandroclidas, and
with his shrewdness and capacity he had a proper mix-
ture of spirit. As for Agesilaus, he was uncle to the
king and a man of great eloquence, but at the same
time effeminate and avaricious. He was animated
Iwwever to this enterprise by his son liippomedon,
who had distinguished himself in pio.iiy wars, and was

6

AGIS. 139

respectable on account of the attachment of the Spar-
tan youth to his person. It must be acknowledged,
indeed, that Agesilaus' real incentive to embark in
the design, was the pressure of his debts, which he
hoped to throw off by a change in the constitution.

As soon as Agis had gained him, he endeavoured
with his assistance to bring his own mother into the
scheme. She was sister to Agesilaus, and by her ex-
tensive connexions, her wealth, aud the number of
people who owed her money had great influence in
Sparta, and a considerable share in the management
of public affairs. On the first intimation of the thing,
she was quite astonished, and earnestly dissuaded
the young man from measures, wliich she looked
upon as neither practicable nor salutary. But Agesi-
laus showed her that they might easily be eflected,
and that they w^ould prove of the utmost utility to
the state. The young prince likewise entreated his
mother to sacrifice her wealth to the advancement of
his glory, and to indulge his laudable ambition : " It
" is impossible," said he, " for me ever to vie with
" other kings in point of opulence. The domestics
" of an Asiatic grandee, nay, the servants of tlie
" stewards ^ of Ptolemy and Seleucus, are richer than
" all the Spartan kings put together. But if by so-
" briety, by simplicity of provision for the body,
" and by greatness of mind, I can accomplish some-
" thing which shall far exceed all their pomp and
" luxury, I mean the equal partition of property
'-.'• among all the citizens, I shall really become an il-
" lustrious prince, and have all the honour that such
" actions demand."

This address changed the opinions of the women.
They entered into the young man's glorious views ;
they caught the flame of virtue as it were by iu-
ration, and in their turn hastened and stimulated
Agis to carry his scheme into execution. They sent
for their friends, and recommended the afiair to

5 And yet even their wealth, enormous ss it was, was surpassed
in after-times by that of the freedmen of the Roman Csesars !"*

UO AGIS.

them ; and they did the same to the other matrons.
For they knew that the Lacedaemonians always
hearken to their wives, and that the women are per-
mitted to intermeddle more with pubHc, than the
men are with domestic concerns. This, indeed,
proved tlie principal obstruction and difficulty in
Agis' enterprise. The chief part of the wealth of
Sparta was now in the hands of the women : they
consequently opposed the reformation, not only be-
cause they knew they must forfeit those gratifications,
in which their deviation from the severer paths of so-
briety had brought them to place their happiness ;
but because they saw that they must also lose that
honour and power, which follow property. They
therefore applied to Leonidas the other king, and
desired him, as the older man, to put a stop to Agis'
projects.

Leonidas was inclined to serve the rich; but as he
feared the people, who were extremely desirous of
the change, lie did not openly oppose it. He strove
however in private to blast the design, by applying
to the magistrates; and invidiously represented,
" That Agis was offering the poor a share in the
" estates of the rich, as the price of absolute power ;
" and that the distribution of lands, and the cancel-
" ling of debts, was only a scheme to piu'chase guards
" for himself, not citizens for Sparta."

But Agis having procured Lysander to be elected
one of the Ephori, seized the first opportunity of pro-
posing his rhetra to the senate ; according to which,
" Debtors were to be released from their obligations,
" and lands divided in the following manner: — Those
" that lay between the valley of Pallene^' and Mount
*' Taygetus, as far as Malea and Sellasia, were to be
" distributed in four thousand five hundred equal
" lots ; fifteen thousand lots were to be made of the
" remaining territory, to be shared among the neigh-
" bouring inhabitants who were able to bear arms :

* A city of Arcadia, on the borders of Laconia.*

AGIS. HI

^' as to wbiit lay within tlie limits first mentioned,
** Spartans were to have the preference ; but if their
" number fell short, it was to be made up fi'om
" strangers, unexceptionable in point of person, con-
" dition, and education. These were to be divided
" into fifteen companies^, some of four, and some
*' of two hundred, who were to eat together, and to
" observe the discipline injoined by the laws of Ly-
" curgus."

The decree, being thus proposed in the senate, and
the members differing in their opinions upon it,Lysan-
der summoned an assembly of the people; in which
with Mandroclidas and Agesilaus he harangued the
citizens, and entreated them not to let the few in-
sult the many, or to view with unconcern the ma-
jesty of Sparta trodden under foot. They desired
them to recollect the ancient oracles, which bade
them beware of the love of money, a vice the most
ruinous to Sparta, as well as the late answer from
the temple of Pasiphaa, which had given them the
same warning. For Pasiphaa had a temple and an
oracle at Thalamiee ^. Some say, this Pasiphaa was
one of the daughters of Atlas, who had by Jupiter a

7 That this passage is corrupted, the late editors of Atnyot's
French version contend, both because fifteen was originally the
number, not of tables, but of guests at each table (See the Life of
Lycurgus, I. VIS), which is here incredibly extended to two,
and even four hundred; and because neither fifteen times two, nor
fifteen times four hundred make up the 4500 lots in question. Per-
haps we should read, as they suggest, ' three hundred tables of fif-
teen persons each..'*

^ Those who consulted this oracle lay down to sleep in the tern-*
pie, and the goddess revealed to them the object of their inquiries
in a dream. (L.) (Cic. De Div. i. 43., and Tertull. De Aninia, 46.
See also J. Meurs. Miscell. Lacon. i. 4.) The oracle to the same
purport was given them by Apollo,

Sparfam
Nulla re alia, nisi avaritin perituram ;

upon which Cicero justly remarks, that it was a warning not only to
those to whom it was addressed, but to every wealthy community
(De Off. ii. 22), and details the disorders, which were introduced
into Sparta by that fatal passion.*

142 AGI^.

son named Ammon. Others suppose her to be Cas-
sandra^, the daughter of Priam, m'Iio died at that
place, and might have received the name of Pasi-
phaa '° from answering the questions of all tliat con-
sulted her. But Phykirchus '^ affirms, she was no
otlier than Daphne the daughter of Amyclas, who
flying from the solicitations of Apollo hud been meta-
morphosed into a laurel, and subsequently honoured
by that deity with the gift of prophecy. Be that as
it may, it was affirmed that her oracle had com-
manded all the Spartans to return to the equality,
which the laws of Lycurgus originally injoined.

Last of all, king Agis entered the assembly, and
after a short speech declared, that he w^ould contri-
bute largely to the institution which he recommend-
ed. He would first resign to the community his own
great estate, consisting of arable and pasture land
and of six hundred talents in money ; and next his
mother and grandmother, with all his relations and
friends, who were the richest persons in Sparta,
would follow his example.

The people were astonished at the magnificence
of the young man's proposal, and rejoiced that now,
after the space of three hundred years, they had at
last found a king w'orthy of Sparta. Upon this Le-
onidas began openly and vigorously to oppose the
new regulations. He considered, that he should be
obliged to do the same w^ith his collegue, without

9 Pausanias would incline one to believe, that this was the goddess
Ino. * On the road between Oetylus and Thaliimia2,' says he, 'is the
temple of Ino. It is the custom of those who consult her to sleep in
her temple, and what they want to know is revealed to them in a
dream. In the court of the temple are two statues of brass, one of
Paphia [it ought to be ' Pasiphaa '] the other of the Sun. That
which is in the temple, is so covered with garlands and fillets, that it
is not to be seen ; but it is said to be oi' brass.' (iii. '26. )

Thalamias was on the gulf of Mcssenc.

" This writer, contemporary with Agis, had composed (beside
many works in mythology) a History of Greece, in twenty-eight
books, from Pyrrhus' expedition into Peloponnesus to the death of
Ptolemy Euergctes.*

AGIS. 14$

reeeiving from the people the same ackiiowledge-
ments ; that all hideed would be equally under a ne-
cessity of giving np their fortunes, while he who first
set the example would exclusively reap the honour.
He therefore demanded of Agis, " Whether or not
" he thouglit Lycurgus a just and good man ?" Agis
answering in the affirmative, Leonidas proceeded
thus : " But did Lycurgus ever order just debts to
" be cancelled, or bestov/ the freedom of Sparta
" upon strangers ? Wsls it not, on the other hand, his
^' opinion that his commonwealth could not be in a
" salutary state, except strangers were entirely ex-
" eluded ?" Agis rephed, " He was not surprised
" that Leonidas, who had been educated in a foreign
" country, and had children by an intermarriage
" with a Persian family, should be ignorant that
^' Lycurgus by banishing money had banished both
" debts and usury from Lacedtiemon. As for stran-
" gers, he excluded only those who were not likely
" to conform to his institutions, or fit to class with
" his people. For he did not dislike them merely as
*' strangers, his exceptions were to their manners
" and customs ; and he was afraid that, by mixing
" with his Spartans, they would infect them with
" their luxury, efteminacy, and avarice. Terpander,
" Thales, and Pherecydes'- were strangers ; yet, be-
" cause their poetry and philosophy moved in con-
" cert with the maxims of Lycurgus, they were held
" in high honour at Sparta. Even you commend
" Ecprepes, who when he was one of the Ephori,
*' retrenched tlie two strings, which Phrynis the mu-
" sician had added to the seven of the harp ; you
*' commend those who did the same by Timotheus ^^;

^'^ Terpander had first introduced music into Sparta, and it had
been revived there by Thales or Thaletas (not the philosopher so
called) whom Lycurgus had invited to that city. Pherecydes had
the glory of having been the tutor of Pythagoras, and first taught
in Greece, according to Cic. (Tusc. i. 16.) the immortality of the
soul.*

'3 Timotheus, the Milesian, a celebrated Dithyrambic poet and

144- AGIS.

" and yet you complain of our intending to banish
" superfluity, pride, and luxury from Sparta. Do you
" think tliat, in retrenching the swelhng and super-
" numerary graces of music, they had no farther
" view ; and that they were not afraid the excess
" and disorder would reach the hves and manners of
" the people, and destroy the harmony of the state?"
From this time, the common people followed Agis.
But the rich entreated Leonidas not to renounce
their cause; and they exerted their interest so ef-
fectually with the senate, whose chief power lay in
previously determining what laws should be propos-
ed to the people, that they carried it against the
rhetra by a majority of one. Lysander however,
being still in ofiice, resolved to impeach Leonidas
upon an ancient law, which forbids every descendent
of Hercules to have children by a stranger, and
makes it capital for a Spartan to settle in a foreign
country. These allegations he instructed others to
adduce against Leonidas, while he with his collegues
watched for a sign from heaven. It was customary
for the Ephori every ninth year, on a clear star-light
night, when there was no moon, to sit down and in
silence observe the heavens. If a star ha])pencd to
shoot from one part of them to another, they pro-
nounced the kings guilty of some crime against the
gods, and suspended them till they were re-establish-
ed by an oracle from Delphi or Olympia. Lysandei',
affirming that this sign had appeared to him, sum-
moned Leonidas to his trial, and produced witnesses
to prove that he had had two children by an Asiatic
woman, whom one of Seleucus' lieutenants had given
him to wife ; but that on her conceiving a strong dis-
like to him, he had reluctantly returned home, and
filled up the vacancy in the throne of Sparta. During
this suit he persuaded Cleombrotus, Leonidas' son-

musician. He added even a twelfth string to the harp, but for this
he was severely punished by the Spartans, who concluded that
luxury of sound would enervate the ^^eople.

AGIS. , 14^

in-law and a prince of the blood, '^to lay claim to the
crown. Leonidas, greatly terrified, tied to the altar
of Minerva in the Clialcioeciis ^^ as a supjDliant ; and
his daughter, leaving Cleombrotus, joined him in the
intercession. Thence, however, he was summoned
to the court of judicature ; and as he did not appear,
he was deposed, and th.e kiugdom adjudged to Cle'-
ombrotus.

Soon after this revolution, Lysander's magistracy
expired, and he quitted his office. The Ephori gf
the ensuing year listened to the supplication of Leo-
nidas, and consented to restore liini. They likewise
began a prosecution against Lysander and Mandro-
clidas for the cancelling of debts and distribution of
lands, which those magistrates had illegally sanc-
tioned. In this danger, these two persons persuad-
ed the kings to unite their interest, and to despise
the machinations of the Epliori. " These state-offi-
" cers," said they, " have no power, but what they
" derive from some difference between the kiufrs. In
" such a case, they have a right to support with their
" suffrage the prince, whose measures are the mOre sa-
" lutary, against the other ; but when the kings are
"■ unanimous, nothing can over-rule their determina-
" tions. To resist them then, is to fight against the
laws. For, as we said, they can only decide be-
tween the kings in case of disagreement ; when
their sentiments are the same, the Ephori have na
right to interpose."
Convinced by this argument, the kings entered
the place of assembly with their friends, where they
removed the Ephori from their seats, and appointed
others in their room. Of these new mac^istrates
Agesilaus was one. They then armed a great num-
ber of the youth, and released many out of prison ;
upon which their adversaries were struck with tenor,
expecting that many lives would be lost. They did

*■•* A temple of that goddess at Sparta, constructed entirelj of
brass. (L.) It was still in existence in Pausanias' time, (x. 5.)*
VOL. V. L

cc

ii

il6 AGIS.

not, however, put a single man to the sword : on the
contrary, Agis understanding that Agcsilaus design-
ed to kill Leonidas in his flight to Tegca, and had
planted assassins by the way for tliat purpose, gener-
ously sent a party of thirty men along with him, who
escorted him safe to that city.

Thus the business went on with all the success
which they could desire, and they had no farther op-
position to encounter. But this excellent regula-
tion, so worthy of Lacedasmon, miscarried through
the failure of one of its pretended advocates, the vile
disease of avarice in Agcsilaus. He was possessed
of a large and tine estate in land, but at the same
time deeply in debt ; and as he was neither able to
pay his debts nor willing to part with his land, he
represented to Agis, that if both his intentions were
carried jointly into execution, it would probably
raise considerable commotions in Sparta ; whereas,
if he first obliged the rich by the cancelling of debts,
they would afterward quietly and readily consent to
the distribution of lands. He drew Lysander, like-
wise, into the same snare. An order was therefore
issued for bringing in all bonds (the Lacedaemonians
call them ' Claria') and they were piled together in
the market-place and burnt. When the fire began
to blaze, the usurers and other creditors walked off in
great distress. But Agcsilaus scofHngly said, " He
" never saw a brighter, or a more glorious flame."

The common people demanded that an immediate
distribution of lands should also be made, and the
kings gave orders for it; but Agcsilaus found out
«ome pretence or, other for delay, till it was time for
Agis to take the field in behalf of the Achaeans, wHo
were allies of the, Spartans, and had applied to tliem
for succqurs. For they expected, that the ^^'^tolians
would march through the territories of Megara, and
enter Peloponnesus. Aratus therefore, the Achaean
general, assembled an army in order to prevent it,
;ind wrote to the Ephori for assistance.

These ofiicers immediately despatched Agis upon

AGIS. 14,7

that service ; and he set forward with the highest
hopes, on account of the spirit of his troops and
their attachment to his person. They were most of
them young men in very indifferent circumstances,
who being now released from their debts, and expect-
ing a division of lands on their return from the war,
strove to recommend themselves as much as possible
to Agis. It was a most agreeable spectacle to the
cities, to see them march through Peloponnesus with-
out committing the least violence, and with such
strictness of discipline that they were scarcely
heard as they passed. The Greeks said one to ano-
ther, " With what excellent order and decency must
" the armies under Agesilaus, Lysander, or Agesi-
" laus of old have moved ; when we find such exact
" obedience, such reverence in the Spartans to a ge-
" neral, who is perhaps the youngest man in the
*' whole army!" This young prince's simplicity of
diet indeed, his love of labour, and his affecting no
show either in his dress or arms above a private sol-
dier, made all the common people, as he passed, look
upon him with pleasure and admiration : but his
new regulations at Lacedgemon displeased the rich,
and they were afraid that he might raise commotions
every where among the commonalty, and incite them
to follow the example.

After Agis had joined Aratus at Corinth, in the
deliberations about meeting and fighting the enemy,
he displayed a proper courage and spirit, without
any enthusiastic or irrational flights. He gave it as
his opinion, " That they ought to bring on an en-
" gagement, and never suffer the war to enter the
" gates of Peloponnesus. Still, however, he was
" willing to do whatever Aratus thought most expe-
" dient, because he was the older man, and general
" of the Achaeans, whom he came not to com*
" mand or to control, but to assist in the war.'*

It must be confessed, that Bato ^^ of Sinope re-

'5 Author of a History of Persia.

Upon tlie whole subject of this expedition in favour of the Achae-

L 2

Ms A CIS.

latcs the story In another manner. He says, AratuS
■was anxious to engage, and that Agis declined it.
But Bato had never met witli what Aratus writes, as
an apology for himself upon this point. That gene-
ral informs us, " That as the husbandmen had al-
" most finished their harvest, he thought it better to
" let the enemy pass, than to liazard by a battle the
*' los^ of the wliole country." When Aratus there-
fore determined not to fight, and dismissed his allies
with compHments upon their readiness to serve him,
Agis who had gained great honour by his behaviour,
marched back to Sparta, where by this time internal
troubles and changes demanded his presence.

Agesilaus, still one of the Ephori, and delivered
from the pressure of debt wliich had weighed dowai
his spirits, scrupled no act of injustice that might
bring money into his coffers. lie even added to the
year a thirteenth month, though the proper period
for that intercalation was not yet come, and insisted
on the people's paying supernumerary taxes for that
month. Being afraid however of revenge from those
^vhom he had injured, and seeing himself hated by all
the world, he thought it necessary to maintain a
guard which always attended him to the senate-
house. As to the kings, he expressed an utter con-
tempt for one of them ^'^., and the respect which he
paid to the other he wished to have referred rather
to his being his kinsman, than to his wearing the
crown. In addition to all this, he pro])agated a re-
port, that he should be one of the Kphori the year fol-
lovvinG;. His enemies therefore, determined to liazard
an immediate attempt against him, openly brought
back Leonidas from 'i'egea, and placed him on the
throne. This the people beheld with pleasure ; for they
were angry at finding themselves duped, with respect
to the promised distribution of lands. Agesilaus

ans, there arc considerable doubts, both from argument and testi-
mony, of Plutarch's accuracy. See Mem. de I'Acad. des Belles
Lettres, Histoire, xiv *
^'' (.'leonibrotus.*

AGLS. 149

himself would scarcely have esca})e(l then' i*nry, had
not his son Hippomedon, who was held in great
esteem by the whole city on account of his valour,
interceded for his life.

Both the kings took sanctuary, Agis in Chalcioe-
cus, and Cleombrotus in the temple of Neptune. It
was against the latter, that Leonidas was most in-
censed ; and therefore passing Agis by, he went with
a party of soldiers to seize Cleombrotus, whom he
resentfully reproached with having conspired against
him though his son-in-law, deprived him of the king-
dom, and banished him from his country.

Cleombrotus had nothing to say in reply, but sat
in the deepest distress and silence. Chelonis, the
daughter of Leonidas, had looked upon the injury
done to her father as done to herself; and theretore,
when Cleombrotus robbed him of the crown, she left
him, in order to console her father in his misfortune.

As long as he remained in sanctuary, she stayed
with him, and when he fled, sym])athising with his
sorrow and full of resentment against Cleombrotus,
she attended him in his flight. But, when the for-
tunes of her father changed, she changed too. She
joined her husband, as a suppliant ; and was found
sitting by him with great marks of tenderness, and
her two children, one on each side, at her feet. The
whole company were deeply struck at the sight, and
could not refrain from tears, when thev considered
her goodness of heart and uncommon strength of afr
fection.

Chelonis then, pointing to her mourning habit
and her dishevelled hair, thus addressed Leonidas,
" It was not, my dear father, compassion for Cleom-
" brotus, which put me in this habit, and gave me
" this look of misery. My sorrows took their date
" with your misfortunes and your banishment, and
*' have ever since remained my familiar companions.
*' Now you have conquered your enemies, and are
*' again king of Sparta, should I still retain these en-
*' signs of affliction, or assume festival and royal or-.

150 AGIS.

" naments ; while the husband of my youth, ■whom
you yourself bestowed upon me, falls a victim to
your vengeance? If his own submission, if the
*' tears of his wife and children cannot propitiate
" you, he must suffer a severer punishment for his
*' offences than even you require : he must see his
*' beloved wiie die before him. For how can 1 live,
and support the sight of my own sex, after both
my husband and my father have refused to hearken
to my supplication ; when it appears that, both as
a wife and a daughter, I am born to be miserable
with my family ? If this poor man had any plausible
reasons for what he did, I invalidated them all by
" forsaking him to follow you. But you furnish him
*' with a sufficient apology for his misbehaviour, by
" showing that a crown is so bright and desirable an
" object, that a son-in-law must be slain and a
*' daughter utterly disregarded, where that is in
'* question."

Chelonis, after this supplication, rested her cheek
upon her husband's head, and with an eye dim and
languid through sorrow looked round on the specta-
tors. Leonidas consulted his friends upon the point,
and then commanded Cleombrotus to rise and go
into exile ; but he desired Chelonis to stay, and not
forsake so affectionate a father, who had thus kindly
granted her husband's life. Chelonis, however,
would not be persuaded. When her husband had
risen from the ground, she put one child into his
arms, and took the other herself; and after having
paid due homage at the altar, where they had taken
sanctuary, went with him into banishment. So that,
had not Cleombrotus been corrupted witli the love
of false glory, he must have thought exile with such
a woman a greater happiness than a kingdom without
her.

After Cleombrotus was thus expelled, the Ephori
removed, and others substituted in their place, Leo-
nidas laid a scheme to get Agis into his power.
At first he desired him to leave his sanctuarv, and

AGIS. 151

resume his share hi the government ; " For the peo-
" pie," he said, " thought he might well be pardoned,
" as a young man ambitious of honour ; and the
" rather because they, as well as he, had been de-
" ceived by the craft of Agesilaus.'* But when he.
found that Agis suspected him, and chose to stay
\vhere he was, he threw off the mask of kindness,
Amphares, Demochares, and Arcesilaus used to spend
much time with Agis, as being his intimate friends.
They likewise conducted him from the temple to the
bath, and after he had bathed, brought him back to
the sanctuary. Amphares had lately borrowed an
immense quantity of plate and other rich furniture
from Agesistrata, and he hoped that if he could de-
stroy the king and the princesses of his family, he
might keep those goods as his own. Upon this ac-
count, he is said to have first listened to the sugges-
tions of Leonidas, and to have endeavoured to bring
the Ephori, his collegues, to do the same.

As Agis however confined himself wholly to the
temple, with the exception of an occasional visit to
the bath, they resolved to make use of that opportu-
nity. One day, therefore, upon his return they met
him with a great appearance of friendship, and as
they conducted him on his way, conversed with much
freedom and gayety, which his youth and their inti-
macy with him seemed to warrant. But, when they
came to the turning of a street which led to the pri-
son, Amphares by virtue of his office arrested him :
" I take you into custody, Agis," said he, " in order
" to your giving an account to the Ephori of your^
" administration. " At the same time Demochares,
who was a tall strong man, wrapped his cloke about
his head, and dragged him off. The rest, as they had
previously concerted the thing, pushed him on be-
hind ; and, no one advancing to his rescue or assist-
ance, he was committed to prison.

Leonidas presently came, with a strong band of
mercenaries, to secure the prison without ; and the
Ephori entered it, with such senators as were of their

152 AGIS.

party. They began, as in a judicial process, with
demanding what he had to say in defence of his pro-
ceedings ; and, as the young prince only laughed at
their dissimulation, Amphares told him, " They
" would soon make him weep for his presumption."
Another of the Ephori, seeming inclined to put him
in a way of excusing and clearing himself, asked him,
" Whether Lvsander and Aojesilaus had not forced
" him into those measures ?" But Agis answered, " I
*' was forced by no man ; it was my attachment to
'* the institutions of Lycurgus, and my desire to
*' imitate him, which made me adopt his form of
** government." The same magistrate then demand-
ed, " "Whether he repented of what he had done ?"
To which he replied, " I shall never repent of so
" glorious a design, though I see death before my
'' eyes." Upon this, they passed sentence of death
upon him, and commanded the officers to carry him
into the Decas, which is a small apartment in the
prison, where they strangle malefactors. But the
officers durst not touch him, and the very mercenaries
declined it ; as deeming it impious to lay violent
hands upon a king '^ Demochares, observing this,
loaded them with reproaches, and threatened to
punish them. At the same time, he laid hold on
Agis himself, and thrust him into the dungeon.

By this time it was generally known that Agis' was
taken into custody, and there was a great concourse
of people at the prison-gates, with lanthorns and
torches. Among the numbers, who resented these
proceedings, were the mother and grandmother of
Agis, crying out and imploring that the king might
be heard and judged by the people in full assembly,

»' Thinking with our Shakspeare,

There's such divinity doth hedge a king,

That treason can but peep to what it would.

Acts httle ot'his wilh (Hamlet iv. 5.)

5iee also 1 Sam. xxiv. 5, 6.

It seems probable thatlbr ' Decays' above, wcsliould read ' Ceas,'
*.hr miui' of tlic prit^on at S}>arta.''

AGIS. 153

But this, instead of procuring him a respite, hastened
his execution ; for they were afraid he would be re^
scucd in the night, if the tumult honld increase.

As Agis was going to execution, he perceived one
of the otHcers lamenting his fate with tears, upon
which he said, " My friend, dry up your tears ; for,
" as I suffer innocently, I am in a better condition
" than those v/ho condemn me unjustly." So say-
ing, he cheerfully offered his neck to the executioner'^

Amphares then going to the gate, Agesistrata,
threvv^ herself at his feet, on account of their long in-
timacy and friendship. He raised her from the
ground and told her, " Her son should suffer no
" farther violence or injury." He added likewise,
she might go in and see him, if she pleased. She de-
sired that her mother might be admitted with her,
and Amphares assured her there would be no objec-
tion. When he had let them in, he commanded the
gates to be again locked, and Archidamia to be first
introduced. She was very old, and had lived in higli
honour and esteem among the Spartans. After she
was put to death, he ordered Agesistrata to walk in.
She did so, and beheld her son extended on the
ground, and her mother hanging by the neck. She
assisted the officers in taking Archidamia down,
placed the body by that of Agis, and wrapped it de-
cently up. Then embracing her son and kissing him,
she said, " My son, thy too great moderation, lenity,
" and humanity have ruined both thyself and us."
Amphares, who from the door observed and heard
all that passed, vvent up in the utmost fury to
Agesistrata, and cried out ; "If you approved
" your son's actions, you shall also have his reward."
fShe rose up to meet her fate, and said, with a sigh
for her countrv, " May all this be for the good pf
" Sparta !" '

'" According to Pausan. viii. 10., Agis fell in an expedition against
Megalopolis; but Plutarch's is the more generally I'eceived account,
which places his death 13. C. 211.**

154> . CLEOMENES.

When these events were reported in the city, and
tlie three corpses were carried out, the terror which
the sad scene inspired was not so great, but that the
people openly expressed their grief and indignation,
and their hatred of Leonidas and Aniphares. For
they were persuaded, that there had not been such a
train of villainous and impious actions at Sparta, since
the Dorians first inhabited Peloponnesus.

The majesty of the kings of Sparta had been held
in such veneration by their very enemies, that they
had scrupled to strike them, even when they had an
opportunity of doing so in battle. Hence it was that,
in the maiiy actions betAveen the Lacedaemonians and
the other Greeks, the former had lost only thei^'king
Cleombrotus (I.), who fell by a javelin, at the :attle
of Leuctra a little before the time of Philip of Mace-
don. As for Theopompus, who (as the Messenians
aflh'm) was slain by Aristomenes, the Lacedaemonians
deny it, and say he was only wounded. That, how-
ever, is a matter of some dispute : but it is certain,
that Agis was the first king of Lacedacmon put to
death by the Ephori ; and that lie suffered only for
having engaged in an enterprise eminently glorious
and truly worthy of Sparta ; though he was of an
age, at which even errors arc considered as pardon-
able. His friends indeed had more reason to com-
plain of him, than his enemies, for having saved
Leonidas, and trusted his associates, in the unsus-
picious generosity and goodness of his heart.

IL CXEOMENES.

After Agls was put to death, Leonidas intended
the same fate for his brother Archidamus ; but that
prince saved himself by a timely retreat. His wife
Agiatis however, who had been newly brought to
bed, was forced by the tyrant from her own house,
and given to his son Clcoinenes. Cleomenes was

CLEOMENES. 155

not yet quite come to years of maturity, but his
father was unwilhng that any other man should marry
her ; as slie was the daughter of Gyhppus, and heiress
to his large estate, and in beauty, as well as happiness
of temper and conduct, surpassed all the women of
Greece. She left nothing unattempted, to prevent
her being forced into this match, but all her efforts
proved ineffectual. When she was married there-
fore to Cleomenes, she made him a good and affec-
tionate wife, though she hated his father. Cleomenes
was passionately fond of her from the first, and his
attachment to his wife made tiim sympathise with her
on the mournful remembrance of Agis. He would
often ask her for the history of that unfortunate
prince, and listen with deep attention to her account
of his sentiments and his designs.

Cleomenes was ambitious of glory, and had a
native greatness of mind. Nature had moreover dis-
posed him to temperance and simplicity of manners,
equally with Agis ; but he had not his calmness and
moderation. His spirit had an ardour in it; and
there was an impetuosity in his pursuits of honour, or
whatever appeared to him under that character. He
held it most glorious, indeed, to reign over a willing
people ; but, at the same time, he held it not in-
glorious to subdue their reluctances, and bring them
even against their inclinations into the adoption of
salutary measures.

With the prevailing manners and customs of Sparta
he was dissatisfied. He saw, that ease and pleasure
were the chief objects with the people ; that the king
paid but little regard to public concerns, and if no-
body gave him any disturbance, chose to spend his
time in the enjoyments of affluence and luxury ; and
that individuals, entirely actuated by self-interest,
concerned themselves no farther in the business of
the state than they could turn it to their own emolu-
ment. And what rendered the prospect still more
melancholy, it appeared dangerous to make any
mention of training the youth to strong exercises and

J 56 CLEOMENES.

strict temperance, to persevering fortitude and nni-
versal equality, since the proposing of these tilings
had cost Agis his life.

It is said likewise, that Clcomenes had been in-
structed in philosophy at a very early period of life
by Spharrus the Borysthenite', who came to Lace-
daBmon, and taught the youth with great diligence
and success. SphcTrus was one of the princi])al dis-
ciples of Zeno the Citiean - ; and it seems that he ad-
mired the strength of genius, which he found in
Cleomenes, and added fresh incentives to his love of
glory. We are informed that, when Leonidas of old
was asked, " "What he thought of the poetry of
" Tyrtffius ;" he replied, " I think it well calculated
" to excite the courage of our youth : for the enthu-
siasm, with which it inspires them, makes them
fear no danger in battle." So the Stoic philoso-
phy^ may put persons of lofty and ticry s})irits upon
enterprises too desperate ; but, in those of a grave
and mild disposition, it will produce all the good
effects for which it was desired.

When Leonidas died, and Cleomenes came to the
crown, he observed that all ranks of men were utter-
ly corrupted. The rich had an eye only to private
profit and pleasure, and entirely neglected the public
interest. The common people, on account of the
meanness of their circumstances, had no spirit for
war, no ambition to instruct their children in the
Spartan exercises. Cleomenes himself possessed only

' Spha^rus was born toward tlic end of tlie reign of Ptolemy
Philadelplius, and flourished under that of Euergctrs. Diogenefe
Latirti',16 (vii. 177.) has given us a catalogue of his works, which
were considerable. He was first the scholar of Zeno, and after-
ward of Cieanthes.

The Borysthenes, Jwd. the Nieper, falls into the Black Sea.

- He was so called, to distinguish him from Zeno of Klea, a city
of Laconia, who flourished about two hundred years after the death
p:' Zeno the Citiean. Citium, of which the elder Zeno was a native,
was a town of Cyprus.

i From it's tendency to inspire a contempt of death, and a belief
jn the agency of Providence.

CLEOMEXES. 151

tlie name of king, while the power was in the hands
of the Ephori. He, therefbre, soon began to think
of changing the present posture of aflairs. He had
a friend called Xenares, united to him by such an
affection as the Spartans called ' inspiration.' Him
he first sounded ; inquiring of him, what kind of a
prhice Agis was, and by what steps and with what
associates he came into the way, which he subse-
quently pursued. Xenares at first consented readily
enough to satisfy his curiosity, and gave him an ex-
act narrative of all the proceedings. But v.'hen he
found that Cleomenes interested himself deeply in
the affair, and took such an enthusiastic pleasure in
the new schemes of Agis, as to desire to hear them
again and again, he reproved his distempered incli-
nations,' and at last entirely left liis company. He
did not however, acquaint any one with the cause of
their misunderstanding ; but only said, "Cleomenes
" knew very well." As Xenares so strongly opposed
the king's project, he thought others must be as little
disposed to come into it ; and he therefore concerted
the whole matter by himself. Under the persuasion,
that he could more easily effect his intended change
in the time of war than in that of peace, he embroil-
ed his country with the Achaeans, who had indeed
given suflicient occasion of complaint. For Aratus,
their great leader, had laid it down as a principle,
from the beginning of his administration, to reduce
all Peloponnesus into one body. This was the end,
which he had in view in his numerous expecliLions,
and in all his proceedings during the many years of
his administration. This, indeed, he was of opinion
was the only way to secure that peninsula against it's
foreign enemies. He had already succeeded with
most of its states ; the Lacedaemonians and Eleans,
and such of the Arcadians as were in the Lacedaemo-
nian interest, being all that stood out. And upon
Leonidas' death, he commenced hostilities against
the Arcadians, particularly those who bordered upon
the Achaeans, designing thus to try how the Lace-

< a

158 CLEOMENES.

(laemonlans stood inclined. As for Cleomenes, he
despised him as an inexperienced young man.

The Ephoii, Iiowever, sent Cleomenes to seize
Athenaeum^ near Bclbina. This place is one of the
keys of Laconia, and was then in dispute between
the Spartans and Megalopolitans. Cleomenes, ac-
cordingly, took and fortified it. Aratus, not making
any remonstrance, marched by night to surprise
Tegea and Orchomenus. But the persons who had
promised to betray those places to him, found their
hearts fail them, when they came to the point ; and
he retired, as he thought, undiscovered. Upon this,
Cleomenes wrote to him in a familiar way, desiring
to know, " Whither he had marched the night be-
" fore ?" Aratus answered, " That understanding
" his intention of fortifying Belbina, hehad intended
" by his last motion to prevent that measure.'*
Cleomenes humorously replied, " I am satisfied with

the account, which you give of your march ; but
" should be glad to know, why those torches and
" ladders were marching along with you."

Aratus could not help laughing at the jest ; and
inquired what kind of man this young prince was.
Upon which Dcmocrates, a Lacedaemonian exile, re-
plied, " If you design to do any thing against the
*' Spartans, you must do it quickly, before the spurs
*' of this cockrcl be grown."

Cleomenes, with a few horse and three hundred
foot, was now posted in Arcadia. The Ephori, ap-
prehensive of a war, commanded him home ; and he
obeyed. But, finding that in consequence of this re-
treat Aratus had seized Caphya.', they ordered him
again to take the field. Cleomenes made himself
master of Methydrium, and ravaged the territories of
Argos. Upon which the Acha?ans marched against

4 A temple of Minerva. Belbinais variously written. See Pau«
san. viii. ?>5. Polybius, a name of great weight in history, in his ac-
count of this quarrel, makes Cleomenes decidedly the aggressor.
He asserts likewise, that Archidamus fled from Sparta during Cleo-
menes' reign, and was put to death by his direction. See below.*

1

6C

CLEOMENES. 15^

him with twenty thousand foot and a thousand horse,
under the command of Aristomachus. Cleomenes
met him at Palantium, and offered him battle. But
Aratus, intimidated by this instance of the young
prince's spirit, dissuaded the general from engaging,
and retreated. This retreat exposed Aratus to re-
proach among the Achseans, and to scorn and con-
tempt among the Spartans, whose army consisted of
not more than five thousand men. Cleomenes,
elevated with this success, began to talk in a higher
tone among the people, and bade them remember an
expression of one of their ancient kings, who said ;

The Lacedaemonians inquired not usually about

the number of their enemies, but about the place

where they were to be found."

After this, he went to the assistance of the Eleans,
acjainst whom the Acha?ans had now turned their
arras ; attacked the latter at Lycceura, as they were
upon the retreat, and put them entirely to the rout ;
not only spreading terror through their whole army,
but killing great numbers, and making many prison-
ers. It was even reported among the Greeks, that
Aratus was in the number of the slain. Aratus,
availing himself in the best manner of the opportu-
nity, marched immediately to Mantinea, and coming
upon it by surprise took it, and secured it for the
Achaean s.

The Lacedaemonians, deeply affected by this loss,
opposed Cleomenes in his inclination for war. He
therefore bethought himself of recalling from Messene
Agis' brother Archidamus, to whom, in the other
family, the crown belonged ; imagining that the
power of the Ephori would be less formidable, when
the kingly government was constitutionally complete,
and had it's proper v/eight in the scale. The party
which had put Agis to death perceiving this, and
dreading vengeance from Archidamus, if he should
be established upon the throne, took the following
method to prevent it : They joined in inviting him
to come privately to Sparta, and even assisted him

160 CLEOMENES.

in bis return ; but tbey assassinated bim immediately
afterward. AVbetber it was against tbe consent of
Clcomenes, as Pbylarchus suj^poscs, or bis frierds
had persuaded liim to abandon tbat unliappy prin .':,
\vc cannot decide. Tbe cliief part of tbe blame bow
ever ihll upon tbose friends, wbo if be gave bis con-
sent, wei 1^ supposed to have teazed bim into it.

By tbis time, lie was resolved to carry bis intended
changes into immediate execution ; and lie therefore
bribed tbe Ephori to permit him to renew tbe war.
He gained over also many otbersby tbe assistance of
his mother Cratesiclea, who liberally supplied him
with money, and joined in his schemes of glory.
Nay, it is said tbat, tbough disinclined to marry again,
for her son's sake sbe accepted a man, Megistonoiis,
who had considerable interest and authority among
the people.

One of his first operations was, tbe going to seize
Leuctras a place within tbe dependencies of Megalo-
polis. Tbe Achaeans, under the command of Aratus,
hastened to it's relief; and a battle was fought near
the walls, in wiiich part of the Laced.xMnonian army
was beaten. But Aratus stopping the pursuit at a
defile which was in tbe wav, Lysiadas*" the Mc"alo-
politan, ottended at the order, encouraged the cavalry
about bim to pursue their advantage ; by which
means he entangled them among vineyards, ditches,
and other enclosures, v/here they were forced to break
their ranks, and fell into the utmost disorder. Clco-
menes, observing his opportunity, commanded tbe
Tarentines and Cretans to fall u})on them ; and
Lysiadas, after great exertions of valour, was defeat-
ed and slain. The Lacedaemonians, thus encouraged,
returned to tbe action with shouts of joy, and routed

5 By Polybius called Laodicea. This place must not be con-
founded with the Leuctra of B;votia, where Epaminondao gahied
his great victory.*

^ In the text it is * Lvdiadas.' But Polybius calls him ' Lyslailas ;'
and so elsewhere does Plutarch. I'ausanias (viii. 27.) says he did
cot full till some years afterward, when Cieomenes took Megalopolis.

CLEOMENES. 161

the whole Achcean army. After a considerable carn-
age, a truce was granted to the Survivors, and they
were permitted to bury their dead ; but Cleomenes
ordered the body of Lysiadas to be brought to him.
He then clothed it in robes of purple, and put a
crown upon it's head ; and, in this attire, sent it to
the gates of Megalopolis. This was the Lysiadas,
who restored liberty to that city, in which he was an
absolute prince, and united it to the Achgean league,

Cleomenes, highly elated with this victory, thought
if matters were once entirely at his disposal in Sparta,
the Achaeans would no longer be able to stand be-
fore him. For this reason he endeavoured to con-
vince his father-in-law Megistonous, that the yoke of
the Ephori ought to be broken, and an equal division
of property made ; by which Sparta would be enabled
to resume her ancient valour, and once more rise to
the empire of Greece. Megistonous assented, and
the king then admitted two or three other friends
into the scheme.

About that time, one of the Ephori, as he slept in
the temple of Pasiphaa \ had a most remarkablei
dream. He thought that, in the court where the
Ephori used to sit for the despatch of business, four
chairs were taken away, and only one left. And as
he was wondeiing at the change, he heard a voice
from the sanctuary announce, " This is best for
" Sparta.'* This vision he reported to Cleomenes,
who at fir ,t was much disconcerted, fearing that some
suspicion had led him to sound his intentions. But
when he found that there was no fiction in the case, he
was the more confirmed in his purpose ; and taking
with him such of the citizens as he thought most
likely to oppose it, he marched against Heraea and
Alsasa, two cities [of Arcadia] belonging to the
Achaean league, and took them. After this he laid
in a store of provisions at Orchomenus, and then be-
sieged Mantinea. At last he so harassed the Lace-

> S^e p. Ui., not. (80
VOL. V. H

irA CLEo:yrEXEs.

dfFmoiiians hv a variety of Ion": marches, that most
of them desired to be left in Arcadia ; and he return-
ed to Sparta with only the mercenaries. By the way
he communicated his design to such of them, as he
believed most attached to his interest, and advanced
slowly, that he might come upon the Ephori while
they were at supper.

When he approached the town, he sent Euryclidafi
before him to the liall where those magistrates used
to sup, upon pretence of his being charged with some
message relative to the army. He was accompanied
bv Thericion and Phoebis, and two other younff men
who had been educated with Cleomenes, and whom
the Spartans call ' Samothracians\' These were at
the head of a small party. Wliile Euryclidas was
holding the Ephori in discourse, the others ran upon
them witli their drawn swords, and slew them all ex-
cept Agesilaus, who was likewise thought to have
shared the same fate, for he was tlie first man that
fell ; but in a httle time he conveyed himself silently
out of the room, and crept into a small building,
which was tlie temple of Fear. This temple was
-generally shut, but at that time happened to be open.
As soon as he was within, he immediately barred the
door. The other four were despatched outright ;
and so were above ten more, who came to their
assistance. Those, tliat remained quiet, received
no harm ; nor were any prevented fi'om departing
the city. Nay, Agesilaus himself was spared, when
he ventured the next day out of the temple.

The Lacedaiinonians have not only temples dedi-

* All tlie comtnentators agree, that 2«///o9-p«)tss5 is a corruption,
Palmerius proposes to read llv^mc, ' Pythians.' Thus the Spartans
»;allc'd two persons, whom tiic king employed to consult the oracle
of Apollo, and who used to eat at the king's table. But nt/^»»? is
rery distant in 5-ound from Sctt/ye.^posr^;. The editor of the former
-lingUsh translation proposes, by no means unhappily, to read
jj«/e.*p£Tr«c, which is synonymous to irvvTf>>(pisi:. Proper regard ought
to be paid likewise to the coujecture of Bryan and Du Soul, wlio
otfer us Xot/x/Ki-xefiK^. This signities * persons wjio give the signal of
battle, prjefects, generals.'

CLEOMENES^ IC^

•eated to Fear, but also to Death, to Laiigliter, and to
many of the passions. Neither do tliey pay homage
to Fear, as one of the noxious and destroying d<i3mons,
but they consider it as the best cement of society*
Hence it was, that the Ephori (as Aristotle informs
us) when they entered upon their ofiice, caused pro-
clamation to be made that the people should shave
their upper lip, and be obedient to the laws, that
they might not be under the necessity of having re-
course to severity. As for the shaving of the upper
lip, all the design of that injunction, in my opinion,
is to teach the youth obedience in the smallest mat^
ters. And the ancients seem to me to have thought
that valour consists, not in being exempt from /ear,
but on the contrary, in feeling a fear of reproach and
a dread of infamy. For those, who stand most in
apprehension of the law, act witii the greatest intre*
pidity against the enemy ; and they, who are most
tender of their reputation, look with the least con^
cern upon other dangers. One of the poets has
therefore well pronounced,

■ ^Ingenuous sliarae resides witlij^'flr.

Hence Homer makes Helen say to lier father-iu-
law, Priam,

Before tliy presence, fatlier, I appear
^Vith conscious shame and i-evertiniui\Jear%

And in another place he remarks, the Grecian troops
\YithJcar and silence on their, chiefs attend.

For reverence, in vulgar minds, is generally the
concomitant of fear. And therefore the Lacedsemo-
nians placed the temple of Fear near the hall where

9 Pope, 11. iii. 172. The following quotation is from the same
Jbooly, V. 431.*

M 2 "

16* CLEOMENES.

the Epliori used to eat, in order to show that their
authority was nearly equal to the regal.

Next day, Cleomenes proscribed eighty of the ci-
tizens, whom he thought it necessary to expel; and
removed all the seats of the Ephori except one, in
"ivhich he designed to sit himself, to hear causes and
despatch other business. He then assembled tlie
people, in order to explain and defend what he had
done. His speech was to this effect : " The admi-
nistration was placed by Lycurgus in the hands of
the kings and the senate; and by them Sparta was
a long time governed, without any occasion for
" other magistrates. But as the Messenian war was
*' protracted to a great length, and the kings having
" the armies to command had not leisure to attend
^* to the decision of causes at home, they pitched
" upon some of their friends to be left as tlieir depu-
ties for that purpose, under the title of Ephori or
Inspectors. These at first behaved as substitutes
'* and servants to the kings ; but by little and little
*' they got the power into their own hands, and iii-
*' sensibly erected their office into an independent
" magistracy '°. A proof of this is a custom still re-
" maining, that when the Ephori send for the king,
" he refuses to hearken to the first and second mes-
*' sage, and does not attend them till they send a
*' third. Asteropus was the first of tlie Ephori, who
" many ages after their creation raised tlieir office to
" that height of authority. AV'hile they kei)t within
" the bounds of moderation, it was better to endure,
*' than to remove them ; but when by their usurpa-
*' tions they destroyed the ancient form of govern-
" ment, when they deposed some kings, put others
*' to death without any ibrm of trial, and threatened
those princes who were solicitous to see the divine

«

'° When the authority of the Icings was grown too enormous.
Theopompus found it necessary to curb it by the institution of the
Kphori. But they "ere not, as Cleomenes says, at their hrst esta-
blishment * substitutes and servant* to the kings.' See the Life of
Lycurgus, L 12L, not. (23.)

CLEOMENES. 165

" constitution of their country in it's primitive lus-
" tre, they became absolutely insupportable. Had
" it been possible, without the shedding of blood, to
" have exterminated those pests, which they had in-
" troduced into Lacedaemon ; such as luxury, super-
" fluous expense, debts, usury, and those still older
" evils, poverty and riches ; I should then have
" thought myself the happiest of kings. In curing
" the distempers of my country, I should have been
considered as the physician, whose lenient hand
heals, without giving pain. But, for what neces-
sity has obliged me to do, I have the authority of
Lycurgus ; who though neither king nor magis-
trate, hut only a private man, took upon him to
act as a king ^^, and appeared publicly in arms. The
consequence of which was that Charilaus, th^
'^ reigning prince, fled in consternation to the altar.
But, being a mild and patriotic king, he soon eur
tered into Lycurgus' designs, and accepted his
new form of government. These proceedings then
of your great legislator are an evidence, that it is
next to impossible to new-model a constitution
without the terror of an armed force. For my own
part, I have applied that remedy with the utmost
" moderation ; only ridding myself of such as op-
" posed the true interest of Lacedaemon. Among
" the rest I shall make a distribution of all the lands,
" and clear the people of their debts. From the
strangers I shall carefully select some of the best
and ablest, that they may be admitted citizens of
Sparta, and protect her with their arms ; and that
we may no longer see Laconia a prey to the JEtOy
lians and Illyrians, from the want of a sufficient
*' number of inhabitants interested in it's defence."

When he had finished his speech, he was the first-
to surrender his own estate into the public stock,
His father-in-law Megistonoiis, and his other friends,

" Lycurgus never assumed or aspired to regal authority, and
Clcotnenes mentions this, only to take off the odium from hinjself^
(See his Life.

cc
<(
cc

a
a
a
<c

c<

lea CLEOMEXES.

followed his example. The rest of tlic citizens did
the same ; and then the land was divided. He even
assigned lots for each of the persons, whom he had
driven into exile ; and declared that they should all
be recalled, when tranquillity had once more taken
place. Having filled up the number of citizens out
of the best of the inhabitants of the neighbouring
countries, he raised a body of four thousand foot,
■whom he taught to use the two-handed pike instead
of the javelin, and to hold their shields by a handle,
and not as before by a ring. He then applied him-
self to the education of the youth, and formed them
with all the strictness of the Lacedaemonian disci-
pline ; in the course of which, he was much assisted
by Sphasrus. Tkeir schools of exercise, and their
refectories, were soon brought into their ancient or-
der; some being reduced to it by compulsion, but
the chief ])art coming voluntarily into the noble train-
ing peculiar to Sparta. To prevent any offence how-
ever, that might be taken at the name of monarcliy
[^or single sovereignty], he made his brother Eucli-
das his partner in the throne ; and this was the only
time, that the Spartans had two kings of the same
family.

The Achjpans and Aratus, he observed, were per-
suaded that the late cliange had brought the Spartan
affairs into a doubtful and unsettled state ; and that
he would not dare to C[uit the city, while it was in
such a ferment. Ele therefore thought it would have
both its honour and utility, to show the enemy how
readily his troops would obey him. In consequence
of which he entered the Megalopolitan territories,
v/here he spread desolation, and made a very consi-
derable bootv. In one of his last marches, he seized
a company of comedians who were on the road from
Messene, built a stage in the enemy's country, pro-
posed a prize of forty minae to the best performer,
and spent a whole day in seeing them. ISot that he
set any great value upon such diversions, but he did
it as an insult to the enemv, in order to cviuce hi^

6

CLEOMENES. 167

superiority by this mark of contempt. For, among
the Grecian and royal armies, his was the only one
which had not a train of players, jugglers, singers,
and dancers of both sexes. No intemperance or
buffoonery, no public shows or feasts, except on the '
late occasion, were ever seen in his camp. Ihe
young men passed the principal part of their time in
the exercises, and the old men in teaching them.
Their hours of leisure were diverted with cheerful
discourse, which had all the smartness of Laconic
repartee. This kind of amusement had those advan-
tages, which we have mentioned in the Life of Ly-
curgus.

The king himself was the best teacher. Plain and
simple in his equipage and diet, assuming no kind of
pomp above a common citizen, he set a glorious ex-
ample of sobriety. This was no small advantage to
his affairs in Greece. When the Greeks addressed
themselves to other kings, they did not so much ad-
mire their wealth and magnificence, as execrate tlieir
pride and ostentation, their difficulty of access, and
their harslmess of behaviour to all who had business
at their courts. But when they applied to Cleomenes,
who not only bore the title but had all the lofty qua-
lities of a king, they saw no purple or robes of state,
no rich carriages, no mob of pages or of door-keep-
ers to be encountered. Neither had they their an-
swer, after great difficulties, from the mouth of se-
cretaries ^~ ; but they found him in an ordinary habit,
ready to meet them, and offer them his hand. He
received them with a cheerful countenance, and en-
tered into their business with the utmost ease and
freedom. This engaging n^anner gained their hearts,
and they declared that he was the only genuine de-
scendant of Hercules.

His common supper was short, and truly Laconic.

'" In the text it is yMjjjfA^xriav^ * by billets ;' but it should pro-
bably be read, as in the St. Germ. IMS. -^^v.u^ijjo.nm, ' secretaries;*
there being no instances in antiquity, that have come to our know-
ledge, of written answers to a personal application.

168 CLEOMENES.

There were only couches for three people ; but when
he entertained embassadors or strangers, two more
couches were added, and the table was a little better
furnished by the servants. Not that any curious
dainties or dessert were added ; only the dishes were
larger, and the wine more generous. For he blamed
one of his friends for having set before strangers
nothing but the coarse cake and black broth, which
they eat in their common refectories. " When we
*' have strangers to entertain," said he, " we need
*' not be such very rigid Lacedaemonians." After
supper, s\. three-legged stand was brought in, upon
which were placed a brass bowl full of wine, two
silver pots that held about a pint and a half a-piece,
and a few cups of the same metal. Such of the guests,
as were inclined to drink, made use of these vessels,
for the cup was not pressed upon any man against
his will. There was no music, nor was any thing of
the sort wanted : he entertained his company very
agreeably with his own conversation, sometimes ask-
ing questions, and sometimes telling stories. His
serious discourse was perfectly free from moroseness,
and his mirth from petulance and rusticity. The arts
which other princes used, of drawing men to their
purpose by bribery and corruption, he looked upon
as both iniquitous and impolitic. But to engage and
fix people in his interest by the charms of conversa-
lion, without fraud or guile, appeared to him an ho-
nourable method, and worthy of a king. For he re-
garded it as the true distinction between a hireling
and a friend, that the one is gained by money, and
the other by obligingness of behaviour.

The Mantineans were the first, who applied for his
assistance. They admitted him into their city in the
night ; and having by his help expelled the Achaean
garrison, they placed themselves under his protec-
tion. He re-established their laws and ancient form
of government, and retired the same day to Tegea.
Thence he made a circuit through Arcadia, and
marched down to Pherse in Achaiaj intending by

2

CLEOMENES. 169

this movement either to bring the Achaeans to a bat-
tle, or to make them look upon Aratiis in a mean
light, for having thus as it were abandoned the coun-
try to his destroying sword.

Hyperbatas was indeed general at that time, but
Aratus possessed the whole authority. The Achaeans
assembled their forces, and encamped at Dymseae ^^ near
Hecatorabaeum ; upon which Cleomenes marched up
to them, though it was deemed a rash step for him to
take post between Dymsese which belonged to the
enemy, and the Achagan camp. He boldly chal-
lenged the Achaeans however, and indeed forced
them to battle, in which he entirely defeated them,
killed great numbers upon the spot, and took many
prisoners. Lango was his next object, from which he
expelled an Achaean garrison, and then put the town
into the hands of the Eleans.

When the Achaean affairs were in this ruinous
state, Aratus, who used to be general every other
year, refused the command, though he was strongly
pressed to accept it. But it was certainly wrong,
when such a storm was raging, to quit the helm, and
leave the direction to another*. The first commands
of Cleomenes appeared to the Achaean deputies '*
sufficiently moderate ; afterward, however, he sent
envoys, and insisted on having the command him-
self In other matters, he said, he should not difler
with them, for he would restore them both the pri-
soners and their lands. The Achaeans agreed to a

'3 Polybius calls it ' Dymae.*

* And yet perhaps some Acliccan bard was found, even In those
da5rs, who with more poetry than accuracy could celebrate ' the
pilot that weatker'd the storm!'*

'♦ Tlie two French translators, and the English one employed by
Tonson, change /x-sTf** here into tsf^irpiu, without any necessity or
pretence of authority for it. We do not see why Cleomenes might
not possibly, in the first conditions which he proposed, demand
something less of the Achaeans, than their allowing him to be com-
mander-in-chief and governor of all Greece. (L.) It may be re-
marked that Plutarch, in the account of this Jiffair whicli he gives
in the Life of Aratus, varies considerably from the one before ub,*

170 CLEOMENES.

pacification upon these conditions, and invited
Cleomenes to Lerna'^', where a general assembly of
their state was to be lield. But Cleomenes, hasten-
ing his march too much, heated himself, and then
very imprudently drank cold water; the consequence
of which Vv'as, that he threw up a large quantity of
blood, and lost the use of his speech. He therefore
."^ent the Achaeans the most respectable of the pri-
soners, and putting off the meeting retired to Lace-
dcEmon.

• This ruined the aflfl\irs of Greece. Had it not been
for this, she might have recovered out of her pre-
sent distress, and have maintained herself against the
insolence and rapacity of the Macedonians. Aratus
either feared and distrusted Cleomenes, or envied
his unexpected success. He thought it intolerable,
that a young man newly sprung up should rob him
at once of the honour and power, which he had now
for three and thirty years possessed, and come into
a government which had been growing so long under
his auspices. For this reason, he first tried what his
interest and powers of persuasion would do, to keep
the Achceans from closing with Cleomenes ; but they
were prevented from attending to him by their ad-
miration of the great spirit of that prince, and their
conviction of the reasonableness of the Spartans,
who only sought to bring Peloponnesus back to it's
ancient model. Aratus then undertook what would
not have become any Grecian, but wdiat in him was
peculiarly dishonourable, and unworthy of all his
former conduct both in the cabinet and in the field :
He called Antigonus into Greece, and filled Pelo-
pomiesus with j\Iacedonians ; though in his youth he
had expelled them, and rescued the citadel of Co-
rinth out of their hands. He was even an enemy,
and an object of jealousy, to all kings. Antigonus,
in particular (as it appears from the writings, which

'•'= Seated on a marsh between Argos and Mycenae, and famous
for die Hydra, which Ilercyles destroyed,*

CLEOMENES. 171

he left behind him '^), he loaded with a thousand re-
proaches. He boasts that he had encountered and
overcome innumerable difficulties, in order to deliver
Athens from a Macedonian garrison ; and yet he
introduced those very Macedonians, armed as they
were, into his own country, into his own house, and
even into the women's apartment. At the same time
he could not bear that a Spartan king, a descendent
of Hercules, whose only ambition it was to restore
the ancient polity of his country, to correct it's
broken harmony, and to bring it back to the sober
Doric tone which Lycurgus had given it''', should
be declared general of the Sicyonians and Tric-
caeans '^. In order to avoid the coarse cake and the
short cloke, and (what he thought the greatest
grievance in the whole system of Cleomenes) the
abolishing of riches, and the rendering of poverty a
more supportable thing, he made Achaea truckle to
the diadem and purple of Macedonians and of Asiatic
grandees. To shun the appearance of submission to
Cleomenes, he offered sacrifices to the divinity of
Antigonus, and with a garland on his head sung
pteans in honour of a rotten Macedonian. These
things we adduce, not in accusation of Aratus, for
in many respects he was a great man, and wortliy of
Greece ; we mean only to point out with compassion
the weakness of human nature, which in dispositions
the best formed to virtue can produce no excellence
without some taint of imperfection.

When the Acheeans re-assembled at Argos, and
Cleomenes came down from Tegea to meet them,

^^ Aratus wrote a History of the Achocans, and of his own con-
duct.

'7 The music, hke the architecture, of the Dorians was remark-
able for it's simplicity. M. Ricard however, with the Latin transla-
tor and Amyot, tliinks that Plutarch, though he often ilkistrates
poHtical by physical harmony, only means in this place to refer to
the Doric origin of the Lacedaemonians.*

'^ This, probably, should be ' Trita;ans.' TTita?a was a city of
Pliocis, and comprehended in the league ; which could hardly be the
case .with Tricca, a cityof Tliessaly, or rather of Achxa. Paus. vi. 12.

ti

cc

ii

172 CLEOMENES.

the Greeks entertained strong hopes of peace. But
Aratiis, who had ah-eady settled the principal points
with Antigonus, fearing that Cleomenes, either by
his courteous mode of treating, or by force, w^ould
gain all he wanted from the people, proposed ;
That he should take three hundred hostages for
the security of his person, and enter the town
alone : or, if he declined that proposal, should
come to the place of exercise without the wails
called Cyllarabium ^^, and treat there at the head
of his army." Cleomenes remonstrated against the
injustice of these proceedings. He said," They should
" have made him these proposals at first ; and not
" now, when he was at their gates, distrust him, and
" shut him out." He therefore addressed to the Achas-
ans upon this subject a letter, almost filled with com-
plaints of Aratus ; and the applications of Aratus to
the people were little more than invectives against
the king of Sparta. The consequence w-as, that the
latter quickly retired, and despatched a herald to de-
clare war against the Achaeans. This herald (ac-
cording to Aratus) was sent, not to Argos, but to
yEgium ''^, in order that the Achasans might be en-
tirely unprepared. There were at this time great
commotions amono- the members of the Aclueau
league, and many towns were ready to fall off. For
the common people were longing for an equal distri-
bution of lands, and the extinction of their debts ;
while the better sort in general were displeased at
Aratus, and some of them highly provoked at his
having brought the Macedonians into Peloponnesus,
Encouraged by these misunderstandings, Cleo-
menes entered Achaia ; where he first took Pellenc
by surprise, and dislodged the Achaean garrison. He,
subsequently, made himself master of Pheneum and

"> From Cyllarbus, the son of Sthenelus.

^^ This was a maritime town of Achaja on the Corintliian bay,
and of course at a great distance from Argos. The intention of
Cleomenes was to take Arjjos by surprise, before the inhabitantsi
could receive intelligence of the war.

CLEOMENES. 173

Penteleum. As tlie Achseans were apprehensive of
a revolt at Corinth and Sicyon, they sent a body of
cavahy and some mercenaries from Argos, to guard
against any measures tending that way, and pro-
ceeded themselves to celebrate the Nemean games
at Argos. Upon this, Cleomcnes hoping (as it
eventually happened) that if he could come sud-
denly upon the city, while it was filled with multi-
tudes assembled to partake of the diversions, he
should throw all into the utmost confusion, marched
up to the walls by night, and seized the quarter called
Aspis, which lay above the theatre, notwithstanding
it's difficulty of access. This struck them all with
such terror, that no one thought of making any re-
sistance ; they agreed to receive a garrison, and gave
twenty of the citizens hostages for their acting as
allies to Sparta, and following the standard of Cleo-
mcnes as their general.

This action added greatly to the fame and autho-
rity of that prince. For the ancient kings of Sparta,
with all their endeavours, could never fix Argos in
their interest; and Pyrrhus himself, one of the ablest
of chieftains, though he forced his way into the town,
could not retain possession of it ; but lost his life in
the attempt, and had a considerable part of his army
cut in pieces. Hence the despatch and keenness of
Clcomenes were the more admired ; and they, who
before had laughed at him for declaring, that he
would tread in the steps of Solon and Lycurgus in -
the cancelling of debts and in an equal division of
property, were now fully persuaded, that he was the
sole cause of the entire change in the spirit and suc-
cess of the Spartans. In both respects they were
so contemptible before, and so little able to help
themselves, that the iEtolians made an inroad into
Laconia, and carried off fifty thousand slaves. Upon
which occasion, one of the old Spartans said, " The
" enemy had done them a kindness, by taking such
" a heavy charge off their hands." Ye't they had no
sooner returned to their primitive customs and <li*-

174 CLE0MENE8.

cipline, than as if Lycurgus himself had restored his
poHty, and invigorated it with his presence, they
gave the most extraordinarv' instances of valour and
obedience to their magistrates, in raising Sparta to
it's ancient superiority in Greece, and recovering
Peloponnesus.

Along with Argos, Cleonai and Phlius immedi-
ately came in*\ Aratus was at that time making an
inquisition at Corinth into the conduct of such, as
were reported to be in the Lacedeemonian interest.
But when the intelligence of their late losses reached
him, and he found that the city was falling off to
Cleomenes, and sought to get rid of the Achacans"-,
he was not a little alarmed. In this confusion he
could devise no better expedient, than that of calling
the citizens to council, while he stole away to the
gate, and finding a horse ready for him there, he
mounted and fled to Sicvon. The Corinthians were
in such haste to pay their compliments to Cleomenes,
that (as Aratus informs us) they killed or spoiled all
their Iiorscs. Cleomenes, he adds, hi^hlv censured
them for not havinsr seized him, but suffered him to
escape. Nevertheless Megistonous, he subjoins,
came to him on the part of that prince, and offered
to give him large sums, if he would deliver up the
citadel of Corinth, where he had an Achtean gar-
rison. But to this he replied, " That al^Iiirs did not
" then depend u})on him ; he must be governed by
" circumstances." So Aratus himself writes,

Cleomenes in his m.arch from Arc^os added tlie
Tra?zenians, Epidaurians, and Hermionians to the
number of his friends and allies ; and then went to
Corinth, and drew aline of circumvallation about the
citadel, which the Acha^ans refused to surrender.

^' Towns between Argos and Corlntli.

*- In the printed text it is Axctcav u'^x>.>.<>'.yr,iui /-a^.o/yjim"-, and
the L<atin and French Translators have followed it, rendering it to
this sense, ' and the Achasnns were hastening home:' but two INI SS.
give us ?aA5,iA£i)jv, referring to no;>,iv preceding, and witli the i'orini;'
English translator we choose to follow that reading.

CLEOMENES. 175

He sent, however, for the friends and stewards of
Aratus, and ordered them to take care of his house
and effects in that city. He likewise sent again to
that general by Tritymallus the Messenian, and pro-
posed that the citadel should be garrisoned half with
Achffians, and half with Lacedaiinonians; offering at
the same time to double the pension, which he then
received from Ptolemy [Euergetes] king of Egypt.
But Aratus, instead of accepting these conditions,
having despatched his son and other hostages to An-
tigonus, and persuaded the Aclia^ans to give orders
that the citadel of Corinth should be put into the
hands of that prince, Cieomenes immediately ra-
vaged the territories of Sicyon, and in pursuance of
a decree of the Corinthians seized on the whole
estate of Aratus. After Antigonus had passed Ge-
fania '^^ with a large army, Cieomenes thought it
more advisable to fortify the Onsean mountains ■*
than the Isthmus, and by the advantage of his post
to tire out the Macedonians, rather than hazard a
pitched battle with the highly disciplined Phalanx.
By this plan of operations Antigonus was greatly
perplexed. For he had neither laid in a sufiicient
quantity of provisions, nor could he easily force the
pass, where Cieomenes had stationed himself. He
attempted one night, indeed, to get into Pelopon-
nesus by the port of Lechasum -% but he was repulsed
with loss.

Cieomenes was highly encouraged by this success,
and his troops went to their evening's refreshment
with pleasure. Antigonus, on the other hand, was
excessively dispirited ; for he saw himself in so trou-
blesome a situation, that it was scarcely possible to

^3 A mountain between Megara and Corinth.

'■* This range of mountains extends from tlie Scironian rocks, on
the road to Attica, as far as mount Cithjeron. (Strab. viii.) They
were called op; c/ua., * the mountains of asses,' (L.) a name derived
(as the learned Bryant elaborately proves, in his Dissertation upon
the story of Balaam) from one of the objects of idolatry of the hea-
tlien world.*

-^ One of the two harbours of Corinth.

176 CLEOMENES.

find any resources, except such as were extremely
difficult of execution. At last he determined to
move to the promontory of Heracum '% and thence
to transport his troops in boats to Sicyon ; but that
required much time, and very considerable prepara-
tions. The following evening, however, some of
the friends of Aratus arrived from Argos by sea, hav-
ing been sent to acquaint him that the Argives were
revolting from Cleomenes, and proposed to invite
him to that city. Of this defection Aristotle was
the author, and he had found no great difficulty in
persuading the people into it, because Cleomenes
had not cancelled their debts, as he had given them
reason to expect. Upon this Aratus with fifteen hun*
dred men, whom he had received from Antigonus,
sailed to Epidaurus. But Aristotle, not waiting for
him, assembled the townsmen, and with the assist^.
ance of Timoxenus and a party of Acha^ans from
Sicyon attacked the citadel.

Cleomenes, receiving intelligence of this about
the second watch of the night, sent for Megistonoiis,
and in an angry tone ordered him to the relief of
Argos. For he it was, who had principally guaran-
teed the obedience of the Argives, and had thus
prevented the expulsion of such as were suspected.
Having despatched Megistonoiis upon this business,
the Spartan prince watched the motions of Antigo-
nus, and endeavoured to dispel the fears of the (Co-
rinthians ; assuring them, it was no serious affair that
had happened at Argos, but only an inconsiderable
timiult. jNIegistonoiis got into Argos, but was slain
in a skirmish there ; the garrison were hard pressed,
and messenger after messenger was sent to Cleo-
menes. Upon this he was afraid that the enemy,
after they had made themselves masters of Argos,
would block up the passages against him, and then
"go and ravage Laconia at their pleasure, and besiege

2^ Consecrated to Juno, on which stood a temple of that goddess.
See Liv. xxxii. '2^.*

CLEOMENES; 177

Sparta itself, wliich was now entirely defenceless. He
therefore decamped from Corinth, the consequence
of which was the loss of the town ; for Antigonus
immediately entered it, and placed a garrison there.
In the mean time Cleomenes, having collected his
forces which had been scattered in their march, at-
tempted to scale the walls of Argos ; but failing in
that enterprise, he broke open the vaults under the
quarter called Aspis, gained an entrance that way,
and joined his garrison, which still held out against
tlie Acha^ans. After this, he took some other quar-
ters of the city by assault ; and, ordering the Cre-
tan archers to ply their bows, quickly cleared the
streets of the enemy. But when he saw Antigonus
descending with his infantry from the heights into
the plain, and his cavalry already pouring into the
city, he thought it impossible to maintain his post.
He had now no other resource but to collect all his
men, and retire along the walls, which he accord-
ingly did without loss. Thus, after having achieved
the greatest exploits in a short space of time^ and
made himself master of almost the whole of Pelo-^
ponnesus in one campaign, he lost all in less time
than he had gained it; some cities immediately with-
drawing from his alliance, and others surrendering
themselves not long afterward to Antigonus.

Such was the ill success of this expedition. And
what was no less a misfortune, as he was marching
home, messengers from Lacedajmon met him in the
evening near Tegea, and informed him of the death
of his wife ; for whom his affection was so strong,
that amidst the current of his happiest success he
could not stay from her a whole campaign, but fre*
quently repaired to Sparta. No wonder then that a
young man, deprived of so beautiful and virtuous a
wife, should be extremely affected with the loss.
Yet his sorrow did not debase the dignity of his
mind. He spoke in the same accent ; he preser\^d
the same dress and look : he gave his orders to his
afficers, and provided for the security of T^gea.

VOL. v. N

178 CLEOMENES.

Next morning he entered Lacedsemon ; and, after
having paid a proper tribute to grief at liome M'ith
his mother and his cliildren, he appHed himself to
the concerns of state. Ptolemy, king of Egypt,
agreed to furnish him with succours ; but it was on
condition, that he sent him his mother and children as
hostages. This circumstance he knew not how^ to
communicate to his mother ; and whenever he at-
tempted to mention it to her, he was unable to pro-
ceed. She began to suspect there was something,
v.hich he Avas afraid to open to her ; and she asked
his friends, what it might be. At last, he ventured
to tell her ; upon which she burst into a fit of laugh-
ter, and said, " Was this the thing, which you have
" so lonq; hesitated to communicate ? Why do not
" you immediately put us on board a ship, and send
" this carcase of mine where you think it may be of

most use to Sparta, before age renders it good for

nothing, and sinks it into the grave ?'*

W1ien every thing was prepared for the voyage,
they went by land to Tasnarus, the army conducting
them to that port. Cratesiclea, being on the point
of embarking, took Cleomcnes alone into the temple
of Neptune, wlicre seeing him in great emotion and
concern, she threw her arms about liim and said ;
" King of tIieLaccdamionians,take care that when wc
" go out, no one percei\e us weeping, or doing any
*' thing unworthy of Sparta. This alone is in our
"power; the event is in the hands of God." After
she had given him tliis advice, and composed her
countenance, she went on board, with her little
grandson in her arms, and ordered the pilot to put
to sea as soon as possible.

Upon her arrival in Egypt, slie understood that
Ptolemy had received embassadors from Antigonus,
and seemed to listen to his proposals ; and on the
other hand, she was informed tliat Cleomenes, though
invited by the Acha^ans to a pacification, was afraid
upon her account to put an end to the war without
Ptolemy's- consent. In this 'iifiiculty she wrote tQ

CLEOMENES. 17^

lier son, to desire him " to do what he thought most
" advantageous and honourable for Sparta, and not
*' for the sake of an old woman and a child to live in
" constant fear of Ptolemy.'* Such, under adverse
fortune, was the behaviour of Cratesiclea.

After Antigonus had taken Tegea and plundered
Orchomenus and Mantinea, Cleomenes, now shut
up within the bounds of Laconia, enfranchised such
of the helots as could pay five Attic minsi for their
liberty. By this expedient he raised fitity talents ;
and having^ moreover armed and trained in the Ma-
cedonian manner two thousand of those helots, whom
he designed to oppose to the Leucaspides of Antigo-
nus, he engaged in a great and unexpected enter-
prise. Megalopolis was at that time as large and
powerful a city as Sparta. It was supported, besides,
by the Acheeans and Antigonus, whose troops lay on
each side of it. The Megalopolitans, indeed, had
been the foremost and the most eager of all the
Achseans in their application to Antigonus. Yet
this city Cleomenes resolved to surprise; for which
purpose he ordered his men to take five days* provi-
sions, and led them to Sellasia, as if he meditated an
inroad into the territories of Argos. But he turned
short and entered those of Megalopolis ; and, after
having refreshed his troops at Rhoetiura, m.arched by
Helicus"^'' directlv toward that citv. When he was
near it he sent Panteus forward with two companies
of Lacedsemonians to seize that part of the wall,
which was between the two towers, and which he
understood to be the least guarded ; and followed
himself, with the rest of his army, at the common
pace. Panteus finding not only that quarter, but a
considerable portion of the remainder of the wall
without defence, pulled it dow^n in some places, un-
dermined it in others, and put all the sentinels to the
sword. While he was thus employed, Cleomenes

.*7 Lubinus, from a passage in Pausanias, thinks it ought to be
read 'Helisson,' there beirg no such plaee as Helicus ia Arcadia.

N 2

180 CLEOMEXES.

came up, and entered the city with his forces, before
the Megalopolitans knew of his approach.

As soon as they were apprised of the misfortune,
whicli had befallen them, the chief part left the city,
taking along with them their money and otlier most
valuable effects. The rest made a stand, and though
they could not dislodge the enemy, yet by their resist-
ance they gave their fellow-citizens an opportunity of
escaping. There remained not above a thousand
men in the town, all the others having retired to
Messene with their wives and children, before there
was any possibility of pursuing them. A large pro-
portion even of those, who had armed and fought in
defence of the city got off, and very few were taken
prisoners. Of this number were Lysandridas and
Thearidas, two persons of high name and autho-
rity in Megalopolis. As they were such respectable
men, the soldiers carried them before Cleomenes.
Lysandridas no sooner saw Cleomenes, than he thus
addressed him : " Now,'* said he (in a loud voice,
because it was at a distance), " now, king of Sparta,
" you have an opportunity of doing an action much
" more glorious and princely than the late one, and
** of acquiring immortal honour." Cleomenes, guess-
ing at his aim, replied ; " You would not have me
*' restore you the town ?" " The very thing," said
Lysandridas, " which I would propose. I strongly
" advise you not to destroy so fine a city, but to fill it
" with firm frieiuls and faithful allies by restoring the
" Megalopolitans to their country, and becoming the
" saviour of so considerable a people." Cleomenes
paused a while, and then answered, " This is hard to
*' believe ; but be that as it may, let glory with us
*' always preponderate over interest." In conse-
quence of this determination he despatched the two
men to Messene, with a herald in his own name, to
oficr the Megalopolitans their town on condition
that they would renounce the Acha?ans, and declare
themselves his friends and allies.

Though Cleomenes however made so gracious and

CLEOMENES. 181

humane a proposal, Philopoemen would not suffer
the Megalopolitans to accept it, or to quit the
Achsean league '^ ; but assuring them that the king
of Sparta, instead of inclining to restore them their
city, was only anxious to get the citizens likewise in-
to his power, forced Thearidas and Lysandridas to
leave Messene. This is that Philopoemen, who was
subsequently the leading man among the Achaeans,
and (as we have related in his Life) one of the most
illustrious of the Greeks.

Upon this Cleomenes, who had hitherto kept the
houses and goods of the Megalopolitans with so
much care, that not the least thing had been embez-
zled, was enraged to such a degree, that he plun-
dered the whole, sent the statues and pictures to
Sparta, and levelled the greatest and best parts of the
city with the ground. He then marched home again,
being under some apprehensions that Antigonus
and the Achaeans would come upon him. They
made no motion, however, toward it, for they were
then holding a council at iEgium. Aratus mounted
the Rostrum upon that occasion, where he wept a
long time wiJi his robe before his face. They were
all much surprised and desired him to speak. At
last he said, " Megalopolis is destroyed by Cleo-
" menes." The Achaeans were astonished at so
heavy and sudden a blow, and the council immedi-
ately broke up. Antigonus made strenuous efforts to
go to tlie relief of the place ; but as his troops assem-
bled slowly from their winter-quarters, he ordered
them to remain where tliey were, and marched to
Argos with a considerable body of forces which he
had with him.

This caused the second enterprise of Cleomenes to
appear rash and desperate ; but Polybius, on the
contrary, informs us, that it was conducted with the
utmost foresight. For knovang (as he tells us) that

'^ Polybius, in his second !)ook, bestows just encomiums upon this
conduct of the Megalojiolitans, and as warmly censure^ the cruelty
ofCkonienes.

182 CLEOMENES.

the Macedonians were dispersed in winter-quarters,
and that Antigoiius lay in Argos with only his friends
and a few mercenaries about him, he entered tlie
territories of that city ; under the persuasion, that
eitlier the shame of suffering such an inroad would
provoke Antigonus to battle and expose him to a de-
feat, or that if he declined the combat, it would bring
iiini into disiepute with the Argives. The event
justified his expectation. When the people of Argos
sav/ their country laid waste, and every thing that
\vas valuable destroyed or carried off, they ran in
great displeasure to the king's gates, and besieged
them with their clamours, bidding him either go out
and fight, or else give place to his superiors. An-
tigonus however, like a wise and able general,
thought the censures of strangers no disgrace, in
comparison with his quitting a place of security and
rashly hazarding a battle, and therefore he persisted
in his first resolution. Cleomenes, in the mean time,
marched up to the very walls, insulted his enemies,
and before he retired spread desolation at his plea-
sure.

Soon after his return, he was informed that An-
tigonus was come to Tegea, with a design to enter
Laconia on that side. Upon this emergency he put
liis troops under march another way, and appeared
again before Argos by break of day, ravaging all the
adjacent fields. He did not now cut down the corn
with sithes and sickles, as people usually do, but beat
it down with wooden instruments in the form of
cimitars, as if this destruction was only an amuse-
ment to his soldiers in their march. Yet when they
would have set fire to Cyllarabis, the school of exer-
cise, he prevented it ; reflecting, that the ruin of
Megalopolis had been dictated by passion rather
than by reason.

Antigonus immediately returned to Argos, having
taken care to place guards in all the passes of tlie
mountains. But Cleomenes, as if he held him and
his operations in the utmost contempt, sent heralds

CLEOMENEF. 183

to demand the keys of Juno's temple, that lie might
sacrifice to the goddess. After he had indulged
himself in this insult on his enemy, and offered his
sacrifice under the walls of the temple which was
fast shut up, he led his troops ofr'to Phlius. In his
march thence he dislodged the garrison of Ologuntus,
and then proceeded by Orchomenus ; by which
means he not only mspired his subjects with fresh
courage, but made himself considered by the enemy
as an admirable general, and a man capable of the
most arduous undertakings. For with the strength
of a single city to oppose tlie whole power of the
Macedonians and Peloponnesians, and all the trea-
sures of the king, and not only to keep Laconia un-
touched, but to carry devastation into the enemy's
country, were indications of no common genius and
spirit.

He, who first termed money ' the sinews of busi-
ness,' seems principally to have had respect to the
business of war. And Demades, when the Atheni-
ans called upon him to equip their navy, and get it
out, though their treasury was very low, told them,
" They must think of baking bread, before they
" thought of an embarkation." It is also said that
the old Archidamus, at the beginning of the Peiopon-
nesian war, when the alHes desired that the quota of
each might be settled, replied, " War cannot be kept
" at a set diet-°." And in this case we may justly
observe that, as wrestlers strengthened by long ex-
ercises at last weary out those, who have equal skill
and agility, but not equal exercise ; so Antigonus,
coming to the war with vast funds, in process of time
exhausted and overcame Cleomenes, who could but
very slenderly pay his mercenaries, and give his
Spartans bread.

In all other respects the times favoured Cleomenes,
Antigonus being called home by the bad posture of

^9 This saying is belov\', in Demosthenes' Life, assigned to the
orator Crobylus, upon a ditFei-ent occasion,*

184 CLEOMENES.

his affairs. For, in his absence, the barbarians had
invaded and ravaged tlie whole ofMacedon. The
Illyrians in particular, descending with an immense
army from the north, had harassed the Macedo-
nians so much, that they were compelled to send for
Antigonus. Had the letters been brought a little
before the battle, that general would have immedi-
ately departed, and bidden the Achaeans a long fare-
"wel. But Fortune, who loves to make the greatest
affairs turn upon some minute circumstance, proved
on this occasion of what consequence a moment of
time may be^". As soon as the battle of Sellasia^'
\vas fought, and Cleomenes had lost his army and his
city, messengers arrived to call Antigonus home.
This was a deep aggravation of the Spartan king's
misfortunes. Had he held off, and avoided an action
only a day or two longer, he would have been under
no necessity of fighting ; and, after the Macedonians
were gone, he might have made peace with the
Achaeans upon what conditions he pleased. But
such, as we said, was his want of money, that he had
no resource but the sword ; and, therefore, as Poly-
bius informs us, with twenty thousand men he was
constrained to challenge thirty thousand.

Through the whole course of the action he showed
himself an excellent general; his Spartans behaved
with the utmost spirit, and his mercenaries fought
not ill ; his defeat w^as owing to the superior advan-
tage, which the Macedonians had in their armour.

3° Plutarch had this reflection from Polybius.

3' Polybius, in bis second book, has given a particular account of
this battle. Antigonus had twenty-eipht thousand foot, and twelve
hundred horse. The army of Cleomenes consisted only of twenty
thousand; but it was advantageously posted. He was encaiuned
on two mountains, which were almost inaccessilile, and separated
only by a narrow deiile. These he had fortified with strong ram-
parts, and a deep fo'^se ; so that Antigonus, after reconnoitring his
situation, did not think proper to attack him, but encamped at a
small distance on the plain. At length, through want of money
and provisions, Cleomenes was forced to come to action, and wa*
beaten.

CLEOMENES. 285

and to the weight and impetuosity of their phalanx.
Phylarchus indeed assures us, it was the treachery of
one of his officers, that ruined the affairs of Cleo-
inenes. Antigonus had ordered the IJlyrians and
Acarnanians secretly to take a circuit, and surround
that wing which was commanded by Euclidas the
brother of Cleomenes, while he was marshalling the
rest of his army. Cleomenes, viewing from an emi-
nence his adversary's arrangement, could not per-
ceive where the Illyrians and Acarnanians were
posted, and began to fear that they were designed for
some such manoeuvre. He therefore called Da-
moteles, whose business it was to guard against any
surprise, and ordered him to reconnoitre the enemy's
rear with particular care, and form the best conjec-
ture he could of the intended movements. Da-
moteles, who is said to have been bribed by An-
tigonus, assured him that " he had nothing to fear
*« from that quarter, for all was safe in the rear ;
<' neither was there any thing more to be done, but
<' to resist the attack upon his front." Cleomenes,
satisfied with this report, encountered Antigonus.
The Spartans charged with so much vigour, that
they drove back the Macedonian phalanx, and
eagerly pursued their advantage for about five fur-
longs. The king then, seeing Euclidas in the other
wing quite surrounded, stopped and exclaimed;
" Thou art lost, my dear brother, thou art lost, in
" spite of all thy valour ! But glorious is thy cxam-
" pie to our Spartan youth, and in the songs of our '
" matrons thou shalt be for ever recorded*^- !"

Euclidas and the wing he commanded being thus
cut off, the victors fell upon Cleomenes, who sceirig
his men in disorder, and unable to maintain the fight,
provided as well as he could for his own -ofety. it
is said, that great numbers of the mercenaries were

3i He acted like a brave soldier (as It appenrs from Poly bins'), but
not like a skilful officer. Instead of pouring do>vn upon the enemy
fiom die heights, and retiring as he found it convenient, he stood
still, and suftisred the Macedonians to intercept his retreat.

186 CLEOMENES.

killed ; and that, of six thousand Lacedaemonians,
not more than two hundred escaped.

When he reached Sparta, he advised the citizens
to receive Anligonns. " For my part,*' said he,

I am willing either to live or to die, as the one

or the other may be most for tlie interest of my
" country." Seeing the women running to meet the
few brave men, who had escaped with him, heljHng
to take off their armour, and presenting them with
wine, he retired into his own. house. After the
death of his wife, he had taken into keeping a young
wDman, who was a free-born native of Megalopolis.
She approached him, according to custom, with a
tender of her services on his return from the field.
But tliough both thirsty and weary, he would neitlier
drink nor sit down ; he only placed his hand against
a pillar, and his head upon his elbow armed as he
was ; and having rested a few moments, while he
considered what course to take, he repaired to Gy-
thium "^ with his friends. There they embarked on
board of vessels provided for that purpose^ and im-
mediately put to sea.

Upon the arrival of Antigonus, Sparta surrendered.
His behaviour to the inhabitants was mild and hu-
mane, and not unsuitable to the dignity of their re-
pubhc. For he offered them no kind of insult, but
restored to them their laws and polity ; and, after
having sacrificed to the gods, retired the third day.
He had learned, indeed, that Macedon was invoived
in a dangerous war, and that the barbarians were
ravaging the country. Besides, he was in a deep
consumption, and had a continual defiuxion upon
the lungs. He bore up however under his aflliction,
and wrestled with domestic wars, until a brilliant
and bloody victory over the barbarians enabled him
to die more gloriously, Phylarchus inlbrms us (and
it is not at all improbable) that he burst a vessel in

3^ A small citj' near the mouth of ti)e F.urotas, which served a*
the port of Sparta."*

CLEOMENES. 187

his lungs, with shouting in the battle : though it
was current in the schools, that in expressing his joy
after the victory, and crying out, " O glorious day 1"
he brought up a great quantity of blood, and fell
into a fever, of which he died. Thus much concern-
ing Antigonus.

From the isle of Cythera, where Cleomenes first
touched, he sailed to another island called ^Egialia.
There, he had formed a design to pass over to
Cyrene; when one of his friends named Therycion,
a man of high and intrepid spirit upon all occasions,
and one who always indulged himself in a lofty and
haughty turn of expression, came privately to him
and thus addressed him : " We have lost, my prince,
" the most noble of deaths, which we might have
" found in the battle ; though the world had heard
us boast, that Antigonus should never conquer the
king of Sparta, till he had slain him. Yet there is
a second opportunity, still offered us by glory and
" virtue. Whither then are we so absurdly sailing;
" flying a death that is near, and seeking one that is
" remote? If it is not dishonourable for the descen-
dents of Hercules to serve the successors of Philip
and Alexander, why do we not save ourselves a
long voyage by making our submission to An-
tigonus, who in all probability as much excels

it

" Ptolemy, as the Macedonians do the Egyptians ?
" But if we do not choose to be governed by a man,

((

(C

cc

(C

il

ii

a

who beat us in the field, why do we take one who
never conquered us, for our master? Is it that we
may exhibit our inferiority to two, instead of one,
by flying before Antigonus, and then going to flat-
ter Ptolemy ? Shall we say, that you go into Egypt
for your mother's sake ? It will be a glorious and
happy thing truly for her, to show Ptolemy's wives
her son from a king degraded into a captive and au
exile. ISIo! while we are yet masters of our
svvords,andare still in sight of Laconia,let us deliver
" ourselves from this miserable fortune, and make
our excuse for our past behaviour to those brave
men, who fell for Sparta at Sellasia. Or shall we

188 CLEOMENES.

(C

** rather sit down in Egypt, and inquire whom An*
tigonus has left satrap of Lacedeemon ?**
To this speech ofTherycion, CJeomenes repHed :
l^ost thou think then, wretch that thou art, dost
thou think by running into the arms of death, a
thing of all others the easiest to be found, to dis-
play thy courage and fortitude ? And dost thou
not consider, that this flight is still more dastardly
"than the former ? Better men than we have given
"way to their enemies, being either overset by for-
" tune, -or oppressed by numbers. But he, who
" faints through fear either of labour and pain, or of
the opinions and tongues of men, falls a victim to
his own cowardice. A voluntary death ought to
" be an action, not a retreat from action. For it is
an ungenerous thing, either to live or to die to
ourselves. All that thy expedient could possibly
effect, would be only to extricate us from our pre-
" sent misfortunes, without ansv;ering any purpose
either of honour or of utility. But I think that
neither thou, nor I, ought to desert all hopes for
our coimtry. If those hopes sliould desert us,
" death, when we seek for him, will not be hard to
" find." Therycion made no reply; but on the first
opportunity of quitting Cleomenes, he went down
to the shore, and stabbed himself

Cleomenes left ^gialia, and sailed to Africa,
where he was received by the king's ofhcers, and
conducted to Alexandria. "When he was first intro-
duced to Ptolemiy'^^, that prince behaved to him with
sufficient kindness and humanity ; but when U])on
farther trial of him, he discovered his strength of
understanding, and that his laconic and simple way
of conversing was mixed with a vein of wit and })lca-
santry ; when he saw that he did not in any instance
whatever dishonour his royal birth, or crouch to for-
tune, he began to take more pleasure in his discourse,
than in the mean sacrifices of complaisance and flat-
tery. He deeply repented likewise, and blushed at
the thought of having neglected such a man, and

»* Ptolemy Euergetes.

a
a

CLEOMENES. 189

given him up to Antigonus, who by conquering him
had acquired so much power and glory. He there-
fore now encouraged him with every mark of atten-
tion and respect, and promised to send him back to
Greece with a fleet and a supply of money, to re-
establish him in his kingdom. His present appoint-
ments amounted to four and twenty talents by the
year. Out of this, he maintained himself and his
friends in a sober and frugal manner, and employed
the rest in offices of humanity to such Greeks, as had
left their country and retired into Egypt.

But old Ptolemy died, before he could carry his
intentions in favour of Cleomenes into execution ;
and the court soon becoming a scene of debauchery
and drunkenness, w^here women bore the chief sway,
the business of Cleomenes w^as neglected. For the
new king^^ was so much corrupted with wine and
women, that in his more sober and serious hours he
would attend to nothing but the celebration of mys-
teries, and the beating of a drum round the palace ;
while the great affairs of state were left to his mis-
tress Agathoclea, and her mother, and Oenanthes
the infamous minister of his pleasures. It appears,
however, that at first some use was made of Cleo-
menes. For Ptolemy being afraid of his brother
Magas, who through his mother's interest was in
high favour with the army, admitted Cleomenes to
a consultation in his cabinet; the subject of which
was, whether or not he should destroy his brother.
All the rest voted for it, but Cleomenes strongly op-
posed it. He said, " The king, if it were possible,
*' ought to have more brothers, for the greater se-
" curity of the crown, and the better management
*' of affliirs." And when Sosibius, the king's princi-
pal favourite, replied ; " That the mercenaries could
" not be trusted, so Jong as Magas v/as alive," Cle-
omenes desired them to give themselves no concern
on that head : " For," said he, " above three thou-

55 Ptolemy Philopator,

180 CLEOMENES.

** sand of the mercenaries are Peloponneslans, who
" upon a nod from me will be ready with their
** arms^." Hence Ptolemy for the present consider-
ed Cleomenes not only as a steady friend, but a man
of power; but his weakness afterward, as is common
with people of little understanding, increasing his
timidity, he began to place his security in jealousy
and suspicion. His ministers were of the same stamp,
and they regarded Cleomenes, on account of his in-
terest with the mercenaries, as an object of appre-
hension ; insomuch that many were heard to say,
" He was a lion among a flock of sheep." Such in-
deed he seemed to be at that court, where with a
silent severity of aspect he observed all that passed.

Amidst these circumstances, he made no more
applications for ships or troops. But having learnt
that Antigonus .was dead, that the Achasans were
engaged in war with the >3itolians, and that affairs
called strongly for his presence in the troubles and
distractions which then reigned in Peloponnesus, he
desired only a conveyance thither for himself and
his friends. No one, however, listened to his appli-
cation. Tbe king, who spent his time in all kinds
of bacchanalian revels with women, could not possi-
bly hear him. Sosibius, the prime minister, thought
Ckomenes must prove a formidable and dangerous
man, if he were kept in Egy})t against his will ; and
that yet it was not safe to dismiss him, because of
his bold and enterprising spirit, and because he had
been an eye-witness of the distempered state of the
kingdom. For it was not in the power of money to
molHfy him. As the Ox Apis^^, though revelling to
all appearance in every imaginable delight, yet longs
after the liberty which nature gave him, desires to

36 Polybius gives a difierent and darker picture of Cleomenes*
conduct upon this occasion, and represents him as making this
speech only to confirm Ptolemy and Sosibius in their project of
niurtliering Magas.*

27 Wliich had a temple at Memphis, and was one of the chief ob- -
jects of Egyptian superstition.*

CLEOMENES. I9I

bound over the fields and pastures at his pleasure,
and discovers a manifest uneasiness under the hands
of the priest who feeds him, so Cleomenes could not
be satisfied with a soft and effeminate Hfe j but, like
Achilles,

Consuming cares lay heavy on his mind :

In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll,

And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul 38.

While his affairs were in this posture, Nicagoras the
Messenian, a man who under the pretence of friend-
ship concealed the most rancorous hatred ^^ of Cleo-
menes, came to Alexandria. He had formerly, it
seems, sold him a fine piece of ground ; and the king
either through want of money, or his continual en-
gagement in war, had neglected to pay him for it.
Cleomenes, who happened to be walking upon the
quay, saw this Nicagoras just landing from a mer-
chant-ship, and saluting him with great kindness, in-
quired, " What business had brought him to Egypt?"
Kicagoras returned the compliment with an equal
appearance of friendship, and answered, " I am
*' bringing some fine war-horses for the king."
Cleomenes laughed, and said, " I could rather have
" wished that you had brought him some female
*^ musicians and pathics ; for those are the cattle,

that the king at present likes best." Nicagoras,

a

iS Pope. Horn. II. i. 491.*

^'^ Of this hatred Polybius assigns the cause. Nicagoras had been
the friend of the murthered Archidamus, luid negociated his return
to Sparta, and had accompanied hini thither. Mis subsequent ran-
cour against Cleomenes seems to prove, but too well, the participa-
tion of that prince in the murther. Seep. 158., not. (4-. ) This, as
prejudicial to the character of his hero, Plutarch appears here to
have suppressed ; and yet, in the subjoined parallel, he admits the
probability of his guilt. It must be owned however that he is- too
partial to Cleomenes, probably in consequence of having followed
Phylarchus (though by his own confession, occasionally a fabulous
writer: see the Life of Themistocles, I. 858.) in preference to
Polybius, whom he perliaps suspected of an undue bias in favour o(
Aratus and the AdiKan?.^'

192 CLEOMENEg.

at that time, only smiled ; but a few days afterward
he reminded Cleomenes of the field, which he had
sold him, and requested to be paid for it ; pretend-
ing, " That he would not have given him any trou-
" blc about it, if he had not met with considerable
" loss in the disposal of his merchandise." Cleo-
menes assured him, " That he had nothing left, of
" what the kings of Egypt had given him ;'* upon
which Nicagoras, in his disappointment, acquainted
Sosibius with the joke upon the king. Sosibius re-
ceived the information with pleasure ; but, being de-
sirous to have something against Cleomenes that
Y/ould still fartlier exasperate Ptolemy, lie persuaded
Nicagoras to leave a letter behind him, asserting
that, " If the Spartan prince had received a supply
" of ships and men from the king of Egypt's bounty,
*' he would have made use of them in seizing Cyrene
" for himself.'* Nicagoras accordingly left the letter,
and set sail. Four days afterward, Sosibius carried
it to Ptolemy, as if it had just come to his hands ; and
having worked up the young prince to revenge, it
was resolved that Cleomenes should have a large
apartment assigned him, and be served there as
formerly, but not suffered to go out.

This was a heavy affliction to Cleomenes ; and the
following accident made his prospects still more
miserable. Ptolemy the son of Chrysermus, who
w^as an intimate friend of the king, had uniformly be-
haved to Cleomenes with the utmost civility ; they
seemed to like each other's company, and were upon
some terms of confidence. Cleomenes, in this dis-
tress, desired the son of Chrysermus to come and
speak to him. He accoi-dingly came and conversed
with him in the most plausible manner, endeavouring
to dispel his suspicions, and to apologise for the king.
But as he was going out of the apartment, without
observiniT that Cleomenes had followed him to the
door, he gave the keepers a severe reprimand, " ibr
"looking so carelessly after a wild beast, who if he
" escaped, could never in all probability be retaken.""

CLEOMENES. 193

Cleomcnes, having heard this, retired before Ptolemy
perceived him, and acquainted his friends with it.
Upon which they all dismissed their former hopes,
and taking the measures which anger dictated, re-
solved to revenge themselves of Ptolemy's injurious
and insolent behaviour, and then die as became
Spartans, instead of waiting long for their doom in
confinement, like victims fatted for the altar. For
they thought it insufferable that Cleomenes, after he
had disdained to come to terms with Antigonus, a
brave warrior and a man of action, should lingeringly
expect his fate from a prince, who assumed the cha-
racter of a priest of Cybele ; and who, after he had
laid aside his drum and v.as tired of his dance, would
find another kind of sport in putting him to death.

When they had formed their resolution, Ptolemy
happening to go to Canopus '^"^, they propagated a
report, tliat by the king's order Cleomenes was to be
released •, and as it was customary with the kings of
Egypt to send those, to whom they designed such a
favour, a supper and other tokens of friendship, the
friends of Cleomenes made ample provision for the
purpose, and sent it to the gate. By this stratagem
the keepers were deceived ; for they imagined, that
the whole had been sent by the king. Cleomenes
then offered sacrifice, with a chaplet of Hower^ upon
liis head, and afterward sat down with his friends to
the banquet, taking care that the keepers should
have large portions to regale them. It is said, that
he set about his enterprise sooner than he had in-
tended, because he found that one of the servants,
who was in the secret, had been out all night w'ith
his mistress. Fearing therefore the probability of a.
discovery, about mid-day, while the intoxication of
the preceding night still kept the guards fast asleep,
he put on his military tunic, having first opened the
seam of the left shoulder, and rushed out sword in

^° A city at the western mouth of the Nile, hod* Maadie.*
VOL. V. O

194 CLEOMENES.

hand, accompanied by his friends, who were thirteen
in number and accoutred in the same manner.

One of them named Hippotas, though lame, was
at first enabled by the spirit of the enterprise to keep
pace with them ; but afterward perceiving that they
went slower on his account, he desired them to kill
him, and not ruin the whole scheme by waiting for a
man, who could do them no service. By good for-
tune they found an Alexandrian leading a horse in
the street ; this they seized, and set Hippotas upon
it, and then moved swiftly through the streets, all
the way inviting the people to liberty. The people,
however, had only spirit enough left to praise and
admire the bold attempt of Cleomenes, but not one
of them ventured to follow or assist him.

Ptolemy the son of Chrysermus, happenirtg to come
out of the palace, three of them fell upon him, and
despatched him. Another Ptolemy, who was gover-
nor of the city, advanced to meet them in his chariot :
but they attacked and dispersed his officers and
guards, and dragging him out of the chariot, put him
likewise to the sword. They then marched to the
citadel, with a design to break open the prison and
attach the prisoners, who were no small number, to
their party ; but the keepers had prevented them, by
strongly barricadhig the gates. Cleomenes, thus
again disappointed, roamed up and down the city :
but he found that, instead of joining him, all men
cautiously avoided his party.

He therefore stopped and said to his friends, " It
" is no wonder that women govern a people, who fly
" from liberty ;" adding, " He hoped they would
" all die in a manner, that would reflect no dishonour
" upon him, or upon their own achievements."^
Upon this, Hippotas desired one of the younger men
to despatch him, and was the first that fell. After-
ward each of them without fear or delay fell upon
his own swordy except Panteus, who mlis the first
Bian that scaled the walls of Megalopolis, when it

CLEOMENES. 195

was taken by surprise. He was iii the flower of liis;
age, remarkable tor his beauty, and of a happier turn
than the rest of the youth for the Spartan discipHne,
which perfections had procured him a considerable
share of the king's regard ; and he now gave him
orders not to despatch himself, till he saw his prince
and all the rest breathless on the ground. Panteus
tried one after another with his dagger, as they lay,
lest some one should happen to be left with life in
him. On pricking Cleomenes in the foot, he per-
ceived a contortion in his face. He therefore kissed
him, and sat down by his side, till the breath was out
of his body ; and then, embracing the corpse, he
slew himself upon it.

Thus fell Cleomenes '*\ after he had been sixteen
years king of Sparta, and showed himself in all re-
spects the great man. When the report of his death
had spread over the city, Cratesiclea, though a
Woman of superior fortitude, sunk under the weight
of the calamity : she embraced the children of Cleo-
menes, and wept over them. The elder of them,
disengaging himself from her arms, got unsuspected
to the top of the house, and threw himself down
headlong. He was not killed however, though much
hurt : and when they took him up, he loudly ex-
pressed his grief and indignation, that they would
not suffer him to destroy himself

Ptolemy was no sooner informed of these things,
than he ordered the body of Cleomenes to be flayed *^
and nailed to a cross, and his children to be put to
death, together with his mother and the women her
companions. Among these was the wife of Panteus,
a woman of great beauty, and a most majestic pre-
sence. They had been but lately married, and their

4' B. C. 220.

4^ M. Ricard translates, * enclosed in a leather bag,' under an
idea that the dastardly tyrant's object was to protract the exposure
of his brave victim as long as possible. Arayot represents it aS
somewhere stated, that he even ordered him with that view to b»
ifnbalnied !*

O 2

196 CLEOMENES.

misfortunes overtook them amidst the first transport;?
of Jove. When her husband went with Cleomcnes
from Sparta, she was desirous of accompanying him ;
but she was prevented by her parents, who kept her
in close custody. Soon afterward liowever she pro-
vided herself with a horse and a little money, and
making her escape by night, rode at full speed to
TaBuarus, and there embarked on board a ship bound
for Egypt.' She reached her husband safely, and
readily and cheerfully shared with him in all the in-
conveniences of a foreign residence. When the
soldiers came to take Cratesiclea to the scaffold, she
]c.d her by the hand, assisted in bearing her robe,
and desirinsf her to exert all her courage ; thouixh
she was far from being afraid of death, and desired
no other favour, than that she might die before the
children. But when they arrived at the place of
execution, the children suffered before her eyes ;
and then Cratesiclea was despatched, uttering in her
extreme distress only these words, " O ! my cliildren !
" whitlier are you gone 1'*

The wife of Panteus, who was tall and strong, then
girt her robe about her, and in a silent and compos-
ed manner paid the last offices to each woman that
lay dead, winding up the bodies as well as her pre-
sent circumstances would admit. Last of all, she
prepared herself for the poniard, by letting down her
robe about her, and adjusting it in sucl\ a manner as
to need no assistance after death ; then calhng the
executioner to do his office, and permitting no other
person to approach her, she fell like a heroine. In
death she retained all the decorum, which she had
preserved in life; and the decency, which had been so
sacred with this excellent woman, still remained
about her ^^ Thus in this bloody tragedy, in which
the women contended to the last for the prize of

<3 Or, JU! Ovid says of Polyxenr,

l^unc qiioque cur a f nit peri es velai-e tegcndas.
Cum caderetf castigiie accvt servare puaoris. .

(Met. xiii. -tSO. )

CLEOMENES. 197

courage with the men, Laced^emon evinced that it is
impossible for fortune to conquer virtue.

A few days afterward the soldiers, who watched
the body of Cleomenes on the cross ""^ saw a great
snake winding about his head, and covering all his
face, so that no bird of prey durst touch it. This
struck the king with superstitious terrors, and led the
women to try a variety of expiations; for Ptolemy was
now persuaded, that he had caused the death of a
person who was a favourite of heaven, and something
more than mortal. The Alexandrians crowded to
the place, and called Cleomenes a hero, a son of the
gods : till the philosophers put a stop to their devo-
tions by assuring them, that as dead oxen breed
bees''^ and horses wasps ^^, and beetles rise out of
the putrefactions of asses ; so human carcasses, when
some of the moisture of the marrow is evaporatei^-
and it becomes of a thicker consistence, produce
serpents^'. The ancients, knowing this doctrine,
appropriated the serpent, rather than any other ani-
mal, to heroes.

4'* Lest the friends of the deceased should take it away by night.
Thus we find in Petronius' Ephesian matron, Miles qui c'nices asscr-
vabat, ne quia nd se-puUuram corpora detraherct : And thus we find
in another authority, which we shall not profane by mentioning it at
the same time with Petronius.

■^s This was the received opinion of antiquity as we find in Varro :
Piimum apes nnscuntur, partim ex apibus, partim ex bulnilo corpore

putrejacto; ItaqT.e Archelaifs in epigrammate ait ens esse, -Bos?

ip.?i^iv-,!5 TVfyioiny^ivcc. Tiy.vx-, Idem; [nTrav yjif fri^>]Kic, ytvia, f/jo(r^avii
fiiiXicrrrcci,

This is finely illustrated by Virgil, Georg. iv.

^^ Pressus humo bellator eqiius crabronis ori'go. (Ov. Met. S68.)

*7 Sunt qui, cum clauso putrejacta est spina sepulcro,

Mutari credant humanas nngue medullas. (Id. ib. 390.)

The above verses seem to be taken from some Greek lines of Ar-
chelaUs, addressed to Ptolemy on the subject of serpents being ge-
jicrated from the corruption of the human body.

Auvo^ ynvci-}' oifu, nr.vic, ^ifXcic crctTsvIe?, ]

THE

LIVES

OF

TIBERIUS & CAILS GRACCHUS.

SUMMARY.

\. Of the faOier and mother of the Gracchi: Educatinn,xchich thei/
rcccivefromthe lalier. Differences of their characters; their re^
senjblances. Tibaius' marriage; and campaig)is under Scipio

■ A fricanus the Younger* His qua;slorship. Bij his treaty xviih the
Nuniantiajis, he saves the arviy. Judgement of the jjepple, with re-,
gar d to this treaty, upon Manciniis and Tiberius. Custom of let-
ting to the poor the pidAic domains, abolished by the rich . Tiberius
undertakes to correct this abuse. Wisdom of his project; and his
speech in its favour. It is o^^posed by the tribune Octavius. He
brings forv:ard a second; and forbids all the other magistrates to
exercise their functions, till it is passed- He gets Octavius deprived
of the iribuneship. His Agrarian latv is adopted. He recoyn-
mends his tiife and children to the j^roteciion of the p)eople : pro-
poses that the money, bequeathed by Attcdus, shall be distributed
among the people. Titus Annius* puzzling question. Tiberius*
Jiaranguc, in justification of the deposing of Octavius. He devises
other laivs : xu favourable presages. He is encouraged by Blossius.
Fulvius Flaccus informs him, that a resolution is formed to de-
spatch him: Nasica leaves the senate-house for that purpose.
Tiberius is assassinated ; and his body thraivn into the Tiber,
Nasica is .obliged to quit Italy ; and dies at Pei'gamus, Resent-
vient of the people against Scipio Africanus.

II. Retired life of Cains Gracchus after Tiberius* death. Hotv he is
induced to pursue similar measures xvith his brother. He prevails
upon the toxvns of Sardinia to send the Roman troops a voluntary

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS, 199

supply of clothing: returns to Rome, and success full ij defends Mm-
selffriini charges brought against him upon that subject : is elected
tribune. His frst laxvs ; subsequent ones : tvise and moderate
suggestions in the senate, 8fC. Plan for constructing the public
roads. He is appoitiied tribune a second time. The senate engage
Livius Drusus, by impolitic concessions to the people, to supplant
Cains in their favour. Reflexions upon this conduct. He is apr
pointed commissioner for rebuilding and colonising Carthage.
Death of Scipio. Inauspicious omens. Cuius returns to Rome ;
mid miscarries in his application for a third tribuneship. One of
the lictors ofihe Consul Opimius killed by his partisans. Resentr
ment of the people, in consequence of the grief expressed by the se^
nate upon this occasion. They pass the night, as guards, before
his door^ His ivfe conjures him not to go to the Forum. Death
<f Fulvius ; and of Cains. Their bodies throxvn into the Tiber.
■Opimius is convicted of having accepted a bribe from Jugurtha.
Honours paid by the people to the memory ofihe Gracchi.

I. TIBERIUS GRACCHUS.

Having tlms presented you with the history of
Agis and Cleomenes, we have two Romans to com-
pare with them, and no less dreadful a scene of cala-
mities to exhibit in the Lives of Tiberius and Caius
Gracchus. They w^ere the sons of Tiberius Grac-
chus ; who though he w'as once honoured with the
censorship, twice with the consulate, and led up two
triumphs, derived still greater dignity from his vir-
tues \ Hence, after the death of Scipio w^ho con-
quered Annibal, he was thought w^orthy to marry
Cornelia the daughter of that great man, though he
had never been upon any terms of friendship, but
rather always at variance with him. It is said, that
he once caught a pair of serpents upon his bed ; and
that the soothsayers, after they had considered the
prodigy, advised him neither; to kill them both, nor

' Cicero (DeDiv. i. 18., and De Nat. Deor., ii. 4-.) passes the
liigliest encomiums upon his virtue and wisdom. He was grandson
to TubHus Sempronius.

200 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

to let thetn botli go. If he killed the male serpent,
they told him his own death would be the conse-
quence ; if the female, that of Cornelia. Tiberius
who loved his wife, and thought it more suitable for
himself to die fnst as much the older of the two,
killed the male, and set the female at liberty. Not
long alter this he died, leaving Cornelia, with twelve
children ■'.

The care of the house and the children now wholly
devolved upon Cornelia ; and she behaved with such
sobriety, so much parental affection and greatness of
mind, that Tiberius seemed not to have judged erro-
neously in choosing to die for so valuable a woman.
For though Ptolemy king of Egypt paid his addresses
to her, and offered her a share in his throne, she re-
fused him. During lier widowhood she lost all her
children except three, one daughter who was mar-
ried to Scipio the Younger, and two sons, Tiberius
and Caius, whose Lives we are now writing. These
Cornelia brought up with so much care, that though
they were indisputably of the noblest family, and
had the happiest disposition of all the Roman youth,
yet education was allovv'ed to have contributed still
more than nature to their perfection.

As in the statues and pictures of Castor and Pol-
lux, notwithstanding their general resemblance, there
yet is a difference between the make of him who de-
lighted in the cestus, and of the other whose province
was horsemanship; so while these young men strongly
resembled each other in point of valour, of temper-
ance, of liberality, of eloquence, and of magnani-
mity, there still appeared in their actions and political
conduct no small dissimilarity. This difference it
may not be amiss, before we proceed farther, to ex-
plain.

In the first place, Tiberius had a mildness in his
look, and a composure in his whole behaviour j
Caius, great vehemence and fire. So that when they

^ Cicero (lb., and ii. 29.) relates this story from tlie memoirs of
Caius the son of Tiberius Gracchus,

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 201

spoke in public, Tiberius showed considerable mo-
desty of action, and did not sliift his place ; Vvhereas
Caius was the first of the llomaiis, wlio in addressing
the people moved from one end of the Rostra to the
other, and threw his gov/n oti" his shoulder^. Tims
it is related of Cleon, of Athens, that he was tlie
first public speaker, who threw back his robe and
smote upon his thigh. The oratory of Cains was
strongly impassioned, and calculated to inspire ter-
ror ; that of Tiberius was of a gentler kind, and
chiefly adapted to excite pity.

The lanc:uaci:e of Tiberius was chastised and ela-
borate, that of Caius splendid and persuasive, ho,
in their manner of living, Tiberius was plain and
frugal ; Caius, when compared to other young Ro-
mans, temperate and sober, but in comparison with
his brother a prodigal and an epicure. Hence Dru-
sus objected to him, that he had bought Delphic ta-
bles ^ of silver only, but of most exquisite work-
manship, at the rate of twelve hundred and fifty
drachmas a pound.

Their tempers were no less different than their lan-
guage. Tiberius v;as mild and gentle, Caius high-
spirited and uncontrolled ; insomuch tliat in speak-
ing he would often be carried away by the violence
of his passion, exalt his voice above the regular
pitch, utter abusive expressions, and derange the
whole frame of his oration. For the purpose of
guarding against these excesses he ordered his ser-
vant Licinius, who was a sensible man, to stand with

3 Cicero (De Orat. iii. 56.) quotes a passage from one of Caius*
orations on the death of Tiberius, which strongly mariis the nervous
pathos of his eloquence : ' Qno me miser co7]feram ? In CapitO'
liumne f at frairis sanguine redandat. An domiim ? Matrfmne nt
tnif^ermn lamentantemijue videam, et ahjecfam?' Cicero oxerves,
that his action was no less animated than his eloquence: Qui^c sic nb
illo acta esse constabat ocidis, voce, gestii, iniviici ut iacrymas tenere
non possent.

The Cleon mentioned below, is frequently introduced in the Lives
of Pericles, Alcibiades, and Nicias.

* These, we suppose, were a kind of tripods.

202 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

a pitch-pipe ^ behind him when lie spoke in public,
and whenever he found him straining his voice or
breaking out into anger, to give him a softer key ;
upon wliich, his violence both of tone and passion
immediately abated, and he was instantly recalled to

propriety.

Such was the difference between the two brothers.
But in valour against their enemies, in justice to their
fellow-citizens, in attention to their duty as magis-
trates, and in self-government with respect to plea-
sure, they were perfectly alike. Tiberius was nine ^
years older than his brother ; consequently, their
political operations took place in ditierent periods.
This was a great disadvantage, and indeed the prin-
cipal thing which prevented their success. Had they
iiourished together and acted in concert, such an
imion would have added considerably to their force,
and perhaps might have rendered it irresistible. We
must, therefore, speak of each separately ; and we
shall begin with the eldest.

Tiberius, as he grew toward manhood, acquired
so extraordinary a reputation, that he was admitted
into the college of the augurs, rather on account of
his virtue than his high birth. Of the excellence of
his character we have, likewise, the fc)]lowing proof.
Appius Claudius who had been honoured both with
the consulate and the censorship, whose merit had
raised him to the rank of president of the senate, and
who jin sense and spirit was superior to all the Ko-
jnans of his time, supping one evening with the au-
gurs at a public entertainment, addressed himself to
Tiberius with great kihdness, and offered him his
ilaughter in marriage. Tiberius accepted the pro-
])osal with pleasure, and the contract being agreed
upon, Appius on returning home had no sooner en-
Icred the house, than he called aloud to his wife, and

■■ Cicero (ib. iii. 60.) calls tliis Khuriicola fslida ' an ivory pipe;'
and sayis it was intended not only to moderate his vehemence, but
also to sustain his voice, when on the decline: qua ilium ant ranis-
sum excitaiety aut a cuntentione revocaret*

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 205

said ; " Antistia, I have contracted our daughter
" Claudia/* Antistia, much surprised, exclaimed,
" Why so suddenly ? What need of such haste, un-
" less Tiberius Cxracchus be the chosen man ?"
Some writers, ^I know, relate the same story of Tibe-
rius the father of the Gracchi, and Scipio Africa-
nus : but most historians give it, as above stated ;
and Polybius in particular informs us, that after the
death of Africanus Cornelia's relations gave her to
Tiberius, in preference to all competitors, which is
a proof that her father left her disengaged.

The Tiberius, of whom we are writing, served in
Africa under the younger Scipio, who had married
his sister ; and as he lived in the same tent with the
general, he became immediately attentive to his ge-
nius and powers, which were daily productive of such
actions as might animate a young man to virtue, and
attract his imitation. With these advantages Tibe-
rius soon excelled ail of his age, in point both of dis-
cipline and of valour. At a siege of one of the
enemy's towns, he was the first that scaled the walls,
as we are told by Fannius \ who according to his
own account mounted it with him, and had a share
in the honour. In short Tiberius, while he staid with
the army, was much beloved, and as much regretted
when he left it.

After this expedition he was appointed quaestor,
and it fell to his lot to attend the consul Caius Man-
cinus ** in the Numantian war. Mancinus did not
want courage, but he was one of the most unfortu-
nate of the Roman generals. Yet, amidst a train of
severe accidents and desperate circumstances, Tibe-
rius farther distinguished himself, not only by his
courage and capacity, but (what did him still more
honour) by his respectful behaviour to his general,

* Among these was Livy (xxxviii. 57.) Tiberius was at this time
only twenty years of age.

7 This Fannius, the son-in-law of Lselius, was author of a His-
tory, and of certain Annals which were abridged by Brutus.

* He was consul with Einilius Lcpidus, A. U. C. 616.

501. TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

wliosc misfortunes had made lilni forget even his own
high authority. For, after liaving lost several im-
portant battles, he attempted to decamp in the night :
the Numantians perceiving this movement seized tlie
camp, and falling upon the fugitives made great
liavock of the rear. Not satisfied with this they sur-
rounded the whole army, and drove the Romans
upon impracticable ground, where there was no pos-
sibility of escape. Mancinus, now despairing of
making his way sword in hand, despatched a herald
to sohcit a truce and conditions of peace. The Nu-
mantians however would trust no man but Tiberius,
and they insisted on his being sent to treat. This
they did out of regard, not only to the young man
who bore so ilhistrious a character in the army, but
to the memory of his father, who had formerly made
war in Spain, and after having subdued several na-
tions granted the Numantians a peace, which through
his interest was ratified at Rome, and faithfully ob-
served. Tiberius was, accordingly, sent ; and in
his negotiation he judiciously complied with some ar-
ticles, in order to gain others, thus making a peace
which undoubtedly saved twenty thousand Roman
citizens, beside slaves and other retainers to the army.
Cut whatever was left in the camp, the Numan-
tians seized and pillaged. Among the rest they car-
ried ofi" the books and papers, whicli contained the
accounts of Tiberius' quasstorship. As it was a mat-
ter of importance to him to recover them, though
the Roman army was already under march, he re-
turned with a few friends to Numantia. Having
called out the magistrates of the place, he desired
them to restore him his books, lest his enemies should
take tlic opportunity of accusing him, when they
found tliat he had lost the means of defending him-
self The Numantians were delighted that this ac-
cident had enabled them to oblige him, and invited
him to enter their city. As he stood hesitating, they
drew nearer, and taking him by the hand earnestly
entreated him no longer to look upon them as ene-

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 205

mies, but to rank them among his friends, and to
place confidence in them as such. Tiberius thbught
it best to comply, both for the sake of his books,
and through fear of offending them by an appear-
ance of distrust. Accordingly he went into the town
with them, where the first thing they did was to pro-
vide a little collation, and to beg he would partake
of it. Afterward they returned him his books, and
desired he would take whatever else he chose amon^
the spoils. He declined accepting anything however
except some frankincense, to be used in the public
sacrifices, and at his departure embraced them with
great cordiality.

Upon his return to Rome, he found that the whole
business of the peace was considered in an obnoxious
and dishonourable light. In this danger, the rela-
tions and friends of the soldiers he had brought off,
who made a very considerable part of the people,
joined to support Tiberius ; imputing all the dis-
grace of what had been done to the general, and in-
sisting that the qusstor had saved so many citizens.
The generality of the citizens however would not
suffer the peace to stand ; but demanded that, in
this case, the example of their ancestors should be
followed; who, when their generals thought them-
selves happy in getting out of the hands of the Sam-
nites, by agreeing to such a league, had cjdivered
them naked to the enemy ^. The quaestors likewise
and tribunes, and all who had been concerned in
concluding the peace, they sent back in the same
condition, and devolved entirely upon them the
breach both of the treaty and of the oath that should
have confirmed it.

Upon this occasion, the people showed their affec-
tion and regard for Tiberius in a remarkable man-

9 This was about 183 years before, at Lhe Furcac Caudinn-,
B. C. 8'21. The generals sent back were the consuls Veturius Cai-
vinus and Posthunvius Albinus. (L.) Mancinus himself was tJie pro-
poser of the measure dow adopted, hut the Numantians sent^hira
back again.*

206 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

ner ; for they decreed, that the consul should be de^
livered up to the Numautians naked and in chains,
but that all the rest should be spared for Tiberius'
sake. Scipio, who had considerable authority and
interest at that time in Rome, seems to have con-
tributed to the procuring of this decree. He was
blamed notwithstanding for not having saved Man-
cinus, or used his best endeavours to get the peace
witli the Numantians ratified, which would not have
been granted at all, had it not been on account of
his friend and relation Tiberius. Many of these
complaints, however, seem to have arisen from the
ambitious and excessive zeal of Tiberius' friends,
and the sophists whom he had about him, and the
difference between him and Scipio was far from ter-
minating in irreconcileable enmity. Nay, Tiberius,
I am persuaded, would never have fallen into those
misfortunes which ruined him, had Scipio been at
home to assist him in his political conduct: but he
was ensasced in war with Numantia, when Tiberius
ventured to propose his new laws. It was on the
following occasion i

When the Romans in their wars made any acqui-
sitions of lands from their neighbours, they used
tbrmerly to sell part, to add part to the public de-
mesnes, and to distribute the rest among the neces-
sitous citizens ; reserving only a small rent to be
paid by each into the treasury. But when the rich
began to raise those rents, and to discharge their
poor tenants if they refused to pay them, a law was
iriade, that no man should be possessed of more than
five hundred acres of land. This statute for a while
restrained the avarice of the rich, and was of service
to the poor, who by virtue of it remained on their
lands at the old rents. Afterward, however, their
wealthy neic;hbours took their farms from them, and
])eld them in other names, though in tune they scru-
]>led not to claim them in their own. The poor, thus
expelled, neither gave in their names readily to the
levies, nor attended to the education of their chil-

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 207

dren. The consequence was, a want of freemen
throughout the whole of Italy ; for it was filled with
slaves and barbarians, who after the dispossessing of
the poorer citizens, cultivated the ground for the
rich proprietors. This disorder Caius Laelius, the
friend of Scipio, attempted to correct ; but finding
a formidable opposition from persons in power, and
fearing the matter could not be decided without the
sword, he gave it up. And hence he derived the
surname of Sapiens, ' the Wise ' or ' the Prudent,'
for the word appears to signify both ^'^. But Tiberius
was no sooner appointed tribune of the people, than
he embarked in the same enterprise ; urged to it, as
most authors inform us, by Diophanes the rhetorician
and Blossius the philosopher ; the former a Mityle-
nean exile, the latter a native of Cumse in Italy and
a particular friend of Antipater of Tarsus, with
whom he had become acquainted at Rome, and who
did him the honour to address to him some of hi>y
philosophical writings.

Some throw the blame upon his mother Cornelia.^
who used to reproach her sons, that she was still call-
ed the mother-in-law of Scipio, not the mother of
the Gracchi. Others say, Tiberius took this rash
step from a jealousy of Spurius Posthumius, who was
his co-eval and rival in oratory. On returning from
the wars, he found Posthumius (it seems) so much
before him in point of reputation and interest with
the people, that in order to recover his ground he
undertook this hazardous affair, which so effectuallv
secured him the popular attention. From his bro-
ther Caius we learn, that as Tiberius passed through
Tuscany on his way to Numantia and found the
country almost depopulated, there being scarcely any

'* Plutarch seeni* here to have followed some mistaken authority.
It was not this circumstance, but the abstemiousness of his life which:
procuredforLaehus the nameof the ' Wise.' LccUna eo did us est Sa-
piens, (jiiod nnn intcUigcret quid sitdvissimum esset (Cic. de Fin. ii. S )
not, as he adds, quia cui cor sapiat, ei non sapiat palatum ;; sed quia
jparvi id duQitrei.

%0

50S TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

husbandnicii and shepherds except slaves from fo-
reign and barbarous nations, he then first formed the
])roject which phmgcd them into so many misfor-
tunes. It is certain, however, that the people in-
flamed his spirit of entcri)rise and ambition by fixing
up writings on the porticos, walls, and monuments,
in which they implored him to restore their share of
the public lands to the poor.

Yet did he not frame the law^, without having con-
sulted some of the Romans most distin2;uished for
their virtue and authority. Among tlicse Vv'cre Cras-
sus the chief pontiff, Mutius Scasvola the lawyer,
"who at that time was also consul, and A])pius Clau-
dius his own father-in-law. There never indeed was
a milder statute enacted against so much injustice
and oppression. For they who deserved to have
been punished for their infringement on the rights
of the community, and fined lor holding the lands
contrary to law, were to receive a compensation for
giving up their groundless claims, and restoring the
estates to such of the citizens as were to be relieved.
But, though the reformation was conducted witli so
much tenderness, the people were satisfied : they
were willing to overlook what was ])ast, on condition
that they might be guarded against future usurjiations.

On the other hand, persons of property opposed
the law out of avarice, and the lawgiver out of a
spirit of resentment and malignity; endeavouring to
prejudice the people against the design, as if Tibe-
rius intended by the Agrarian law to throw every
thing into disorder, and to subvert the constitution.
But their attempts were vain. For, in this just and
glorious cause, Tiberius exerted an eloquence which
might have adorned a worse subject, and which no-
thing could resist. IIow great was he, when the
people were gathered about the Rostrum, and he
pleaded for the poor in such language as this ! " The
** wild beasts of Italy have their caves and dens to
" retire to for repose ; while the brave men, who
" spill their blood in her cause, have nothing left

2

TIBERIUS AND CAlUS GRACCHUS. 209

" except air and light. Without houses, without
" any settled habitations, they wander from place to ■
" place with their wives and children ; and their ge-
" nerals are but mocking, when on the eve of battle
" they exhort their soldiers to fight for their sepul-
*' chres and their domestic gods. For out of such
" numbers there is not perhaps a single Roman, who
" has an altar that has belonged to his ancestors, or
" a sepulchre in which their ashes rest. They fight ■
" and die, in order to advance the wealth and luxury
" of the great ; and they are called masters of the
" world, while they have not a foot of ground in
" their possession."

Such speeches as this, delivered by a man of so
much spirit, and flowing from a heart really interest-
ed in the cause, filled the people with an enthusiastic
fury, and none of his adversaries durst pretend to
answer him. Forbearing therefore the war of words,
they addressed themselves to Marcus Octaviusone of
the tribunes, a grave and modest young man, and an
intimate acquaintance of Tiberius. And although,
out of reverence for his friend, he at first declined
the task, upon a number of applications from men
of the first rank, he was induced to oppose him, and
to prevent the passing of the law. For the power of
the tribunes consists chiefly in their negative voice,
and if one of them stands out, the rest can effect
nothing.

Incensed by this behaviour, Tiberius dropped his
moderate bill, and proposed another more agreeable
to the commonalty, and more severe against the
usurpers ; directing them immediately to quit the
lands, which they held contrary to the former laws.
Upon this subject, daily disputes occurred between
Octavius and himself on the Rostra ; vet not one
abusive or disparaging word is said to have escaped
either of them, in all the heat of their debates. An
ingenuous disposition and liberal education indeed
will prevent of" restrain the saUies of passion, not
only during the free enjoyment of the bottle, but in

VOL. V. P

210 TIBERIUS AND GAIL'S GRACCHUS.

the ardour of contention about points of a superior
yiature.

Tiberius observing that Octavius was liable to suf-
fer by the bill, as having more land than the laws
allowed, desired him to renounce his opposition, and
offered at the same time to indemnify him out of his
own fortune, though that was not great. This pro-
posal being declined, Tiberius forbade all the other
magistrates to exercise their functions, till the Agra-
rian law was passed. He likewise put his own seal
upon the doors of the temple of Saturn, that the
quaestors might neither bring any thing into the trea-
sury, nor take any thing out ; and he threatened to
fine such of the praetors, as should attempt to disobey
his commands. This created such a terror, that
every department of government was at a stand.
Persons of large property clad themselves in mourn-
ing, and appeared in public with all the circum-
stances, which they thought might excite compas-
sion. Not satisfied with this, they conspired the
death of Tiberius, and suborned assassins to destroy
him. For which reason he appeared with a tuck,
such as is used by robbers, which the Romans call a
*Dolon^'.'

When the day appointed came, and Tiberius was
summoning the people to give their suffrages, a
party of the opulent ran off with the balloting ves-
sels ", which occasioned much confusion. Tiberius,
however, seemed strong enough to carry his point by
force, and his partisans were preparing to have re-
course to it J when Manlius and Fulvius, men of

" We fiod tins term used by Virgil, ^i^n. vii. 664-. It was a staff,
containing within it a concealed poignard, and had it's name from
dolus (' deceit').

'^ The original l^fia, signifies * an urn.' The Romans had two
sorts of vessels, which they used in ballotting. The first were open
vessels called cistce or cistellce, which contained the ballots before
they were distributed to the people; the others, with narrow necks,
were called sitcllce, and into these the people cast their ballots.
The latter were the vessels which are here said to have been car-
ried off.

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 211

GOTisiiIar dignity, fell at his feet, bafhed bis hands
with tears, and conjured him not to put his purpose
in execution. He now perceived how dreadful the
consequences of his attempt might be, and his rever-
ence for those two great men had it's ef&ct upon
him ; he therefore asked them, vAvdt they would ad-
vise him to do. They said, they were not capable of'
giving him any advice in so important an atiair, and
earnestly entreated him to refer it to the senate.
The senate assembled to deliberate upon it, but the
influence of the wealthy upon that body was such,
that their debates ended in nothing.

Tiberius then adopted a measure, which was nei-
ther equitable nor moderate. He resolved to remove
Octavius from the tribuneship, because there were
no other means to get his law passed. He addressed
him indeed in public first in a mild and friendly
manner, and taking him by the hand conjured him
to gratify the people, who asked nothing that was
unjust, and would only receive a small recompense
for the great labours and dangers which tliey had
experienced. But Octavius absolutely refused to
comply. Tiberius then declared, " That as it was not
" possible for two magistrates of equal authority,
" when they differed in such capital points, to go
*' through the remainder of their office without com-
ing to hostilities, he saw no other remedy but the
deposing one of them." He therefore desired
Octavius to take the sense of the people first with
respect to himself; assuring him that he woifld im-
mediately return to a private station, if the suffrages
of his fellow-citizens should so determine. As Og-'
tavius rejected this proposal too, Tiberiis told him
plainly, that he would put the question to the peo-
ple concerning him, if on farther consideration he
did not alter his mind.

Upon this, he dismissed the assembly. Next day,
he again convoked it ; and, when he had mounted
the Rostra, he made anoth-er effort to bring Octavius
to compliance. But finding him inflexible-, he pro^

P 3

it

212 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

posed a decree for depriving him of the tribiineshipj
and immediately put it to the vote. When out of the
five and thirty tribes seventeen had given their voices
for it, and there wanted only one more to reduce
Octavius to a private man, Tiberius ordered them to
5top, and once more apphcd to his collegue. He
embraced him with the utmost tenderness in the sight
ofthe people, and with the most pressing instances
entreated him neither to bring such a mark of in-
famy upon himself, nor to expose his friend to the im-
putation of having promoted such severe and violent,
measures. It was not without emotion, that Octa-
vius is said to have listened to these entreaties. His
eyes were filled with tears, and he stood a long time
silent. But when he looked toward the persons of
property, who were assembled in a body, shame and
the fear of losing himself in their opinion brought
him back to his resolution of running all risks, and
with a noble firmness he bade Tiberius do his plea-
sure. The bill therefore was passed, and Tiberius
ordered one of his freedmen to drag down Octavius
from the tribunal ; for he employed his own freed-
men as lictors. This ignominious mode of degrada-
tion rendered the case of Octavius still more pitiable.
The people, notwithstanding, fell upon him j but by
the assistance of those of the landed interest, who
came to his defence and kept off the mob, he escaped
with his life. A faithful servant of his however, who
stood before him to ward off the danger, had his eyes
torn out. This violence was much aq;ainst the will
of Tiberius, who no sooner saw the tumult rising,
than he hastened down to appease it.

The Agrarian law was then confirmed, and three
commissioners appointed to take a survey of the
lauds, and see them properly distributed. Tiberius
was one of the three, his father-in-law Appius Clau-
dius another, and his brother Caius Gracchus a third.
The latter was, at that time, making the campaign
under Scipio atNumantia. Tiberius, having carried
these pohits without opposition, next filled up the

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. *218

vacant tribune's seat ; into which he put not a man
of any note, but Mutius one of his own cHents.
These proceedings exceedingly exasperated the pa-
tricians, and as they dreaded the increase of his
power, they took every opportunity of insulting him
in the senate. When he desired, for instance (what
was nothing more than customary) a tent at the
public charge for his use in dividing the lands, they
refused him one, though such things had been fre-
fjuently granted upon much less important occasions.
And on the motion of Publius Nasica, he had only
nine oboli a day allowed for his e?ipenses. Nasica,
indeed, was become his avowed enemy ; for he had
a great estate in the public lands, and was of course
unwilling to be stripped of it.

At the same time, the people were more and more
enraged. One of Tiberius' friends happening to die
suddenly, and malignant spots appearing upon the
body, they loudly declared that the man had been
poisoned. They assembled at his funeral, took the
bier upon their shoulders, and carried it to the pile.
There tliey were confirmed in their suspicions ; for
the corpse burst, and emitted such a quantity of
corrupted humours, that it extinguished the fire.
Though more fire was brought, still the wood would
not burn till it was removed to another place ; and
it was with much difficulty at last, that the body was
consumed. Hence Tiberius took occasion to in-
cense the commonalty still more against the other
party. He put on mourning, and led his children
into the Forum, recommending them and their mo-
ther to the protection of the people, as giving up his
own life for lost.

About this time, died Attains ^^ Philopator ; and
Eudemus of Pergamus brought his will to Rome, by

'3 This was Attains III. the son of Eumenes II. and Stratoniep,
and the last king of Pergamus. He mounted the throne B. C. 138,
and reigned somewhat more than five years. He was not, however,
Burnamed ' Piiilopator,' but ' Philometor,' and so it stand? in the
(lermaiu ^IS.

£1^ TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUa

•which it appeared that he had left the Roman peo-
ple his heirs. Tiberius, endeavouring to avail him-
self of tills incident, immediately proposed a law;
" That all the readv monev which tlie k'luix had left
" should be distributed among the citizens, in order
" to enable them to provide working tools, and pro-
" ceed in the cultivation of their newly assigned
" lands. As to the cities likewise in the territories
" of Attains, the senate (he said) had noriglit to dis-
" pose of them, but the people, and he would refer
.** the business entirely to their judgement."

This embroiled him still farther with the senate ;
and one of their body, named Pompey, stood up
and said, " He was next neighbour to Tiberius,
" and had thus an opportunity of knowing that
'' Eudemus had brou<j;:ht him a roval diadem and a
*' purple robe, for his use when he was king of
" Rome." Quintus Metelhis said another severe
thing against him ; " During the censorship of your
" father, whenever he returned home after supper '*,

the citizens put out their lights, that they might
' not appear to indulge themselves at unseasonable

hours ; but you, at a late hour, have some of the

meanest and most audacious of thepeople aboutyou
" with torches in their hands." And Titus Annius
a man of no character in point of morals, but an
acute disputant and remarkable for the subf ilty both
of his questions and his answers, one day challenged
Tiberius, and offered to prove him guilty of a heinous
offence in having deposed one of his collegues, whose
person by the laws was sacred and inviolable. This
proposition raised a tumult in the audience, and Ti-
berius immediately went out and summoned an as-
sembly of the people, designing to accuse Annius of
the indignity which he had offered him. Annius made
his ai)pearance, but knowing himself greatly inferior
|)oth in eloquence and reputation, he had recourse

(C

a

Jcguc

'♦ ProbabJy from the public ball, wbcre be sopped with his col-

{<
<(

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 2U

to his old art, and requested leave only to ask him a
single question before the business was brought on.
Tiberius consenting, and silence being obtained,
Annius said ; " If you should be seeking to fix a
*' mark of disgrace and infamy upon me, and I should
appeal to one of your collegues and he should come
to my assistance, and you should be provoked at
his interference, would you deprive liim of his
" office ?" This question, it is said, so puzzled Tibe-
rius, that with all his readiness of speech and his as-
surance he could make no answer.

He therefore, for the present, dismissed the assem-
bly. He perceived however that the step which he
had taken, in deposing a tribune, had offended not
only the patricians, but the people also ; for by such
a precedent he appeared to have robbed that high
office of it's dignity, which till then had been pre-
served in the utmost security and honour. In con-
sequence of this reflexion, he again called the com-
mons together, and made a speech to them, from
which it may not be amiss to give an extract, as a
specimen of the power and strength of his eloquence :
The person of a tribune, I acknowledge, is sacred
and inviolable, because he is consecrated to the
people, and takes their interests under his pro-
tection. But when he deserts those interests,
and becomes an oppressor of the people ; when he

* retrenches their privileges, and takes away their
' liberty of voting, by those acts he deposes himself,

* for he no longer fulfils the end of his appointment.
' Otherwise, if a tribune should even demolish the
' Capitol, and burn the docks and naval stores, his
' person could not be touched. A man, who should
' do such things as those, might still be a tribune,
' though a vile one ; but he, who diminishes the
' privileges of the people, ceases to be a tribune of
' the people. Does it not shock you to think, that
' a tribune should be able to imprison a consul ; and

* the people not have it in their power to deprive a
' tribune of his authority, when he uses it against

6i

2ir, TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

" those by wliom it was conferred ? For the trl-
" billies, as well as the consuls, are elected by the
" people. Kingly government seems to compre-
" hend all authority in itself, and kings are conse-
*' crated with the most awful ceremonies : yet tlic
*' citizens expelled Tarquin, when his administration
*' became iniquitous ; and for the offence of one man
" the ancient government, under the auspices of
^' which Home was erected, was entirely abolished.
*' What is there in Rome so sacred and venerable
" as the vestal virgins, who keep the perpetual fire ?
" Yet, if any of them transgresses the rules of her
order, she is buried alive. For they, who are
guilty of impiety against the gods, lose that sacred
*' character, whicli through the gods alone they pos-
" sess. So a tribune, who injures the people, can be
*' no longer sacred and inviolable on tlie people's
*' account. He destroys that power, in which alone
" his strength resides. If it be just for him to be in-
" vested with the tribunitial autliority by a majority
*' of tribes, is it not more just for him to be deposed
by the suffrages of them all ? What is more sacred
and inviolable than the offerings in the temples of
the gods ? Yet no one pretends to hinder the peo-
*' pie from making use of them, or removing them
" wherever they please. And indeed that the tri-
" bune's office is not inviolable or irrcmoveable ap-
*' pears hence, that several have voluntarily laid it
" down, or have been discharged at their own re-
" quest.'* These were the heads of Tiberius' de-
fence.

His friends^ however, sensible of the menaces of
his enemies and their combination to destroy him,
were of opinion that he ought to make interest to get
the tribuneship continued to him another year. For
this purpose he devised additional laws, in order to se-
curethe commonalty on his side; viz. that for shorten-
ing the time of military service, and that for granting
an appeal from the judges to the people. The bench
of judges at that time consisted exclusively of sena-

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 217

tors, but he ordered an equal number of senators and
knights ; though it must be confessed, that his tak-
ing every possible method to reduce the power of
the patricians savoured more of obstinacy and re-
sentment, than of a regard for justice and the pubHc
good.

When the day came for putting it to the vote
whether or not these laws should be ratified, Tibe-
rius and his party, perceiving that their adversaries
were the strongest (for the whole of the people did
not attend), spun out the time in altercations with
the other tribunes, and at last he adjourned the as-
sembly to the day following. In the mean time he
entered the Forum with all the marks of distress,
and with tears in his eyes applied to the citizens,
assuring them, " He was afraid that his enemies
*' would demolish his house, and take his life before
" the next morning." This aifccted them so much,
that numbers erected tents before his door, and
guarded him throughout the night.

At day-break, the person who had the care of the
chickens which they use in augury brought them,
and set meat before them ; but they M^ould none of
them come out of their pen, though the man shook it
rery much, except one, and that one would not eat ^^ ;
it only raised up it's left wing, and stretched out it's
leg, and then went in again. This reminded Tibe-
rius of a former ill omen. He had a helmet, which
he wore in battle, finely ornamented and remarkably
magnificent ; two serpents, which had privately
crept into it, laid their eggs and hatched in it. Such
a bad presage made him more afraid of the other
given by the birds. Yet he set out for the Capitol,
as soon as he understood that the people were as-
ijembled there. But in going out of his house he
stumbled upon the threshold, and struck it with so
much violence, that the nail of his great toe was bro-

'^ When the chickens cat greedily, it was deemed a sign of good
fortune. S«e Cic. De Div. ii. [J t.

fl8 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

ken, and the blood flowed from the wound. When
he had proceeded a little on his way, he observed on
his left-hand two ravens fighting on the top of a
house ; and though he was attended, on account of
his dignity, by numbers of people, a stone which one
of the ravens threw down fell close by his foot.
This staggered the boldest of his partisans. But
Blossius '^ of Cum£e, one of his train, said ; " It would
*' be an insupportable disgrace if Tiberius the son
" of Gracchus, the grandson of Scipio Africanus,
*' and the protector of the people of Rome, should
^' through fear of a raven disappoint that people,
when they called him to their assistance. His
enenn'es," he assured him, " would not be satis-
fied with laughing at this false step ; they would
represent him to the commons, as having already
taken upon himself all the insolence of a tyrant."
At the same time, several messengers from his friends
in the Caj)itol came and desired him to make haste,
for every thing (they told him) went there according
to his wish.

At first, indeed, there was a most promising ap-
pearance. When the assembly saw him at a dis-
tance, they expressed their joy by the loudest accla-
mations ; on his approach they received him with
the utmo^it cordiality, and formed a circle about him,
to keep off all strangers. Mutius then began to call
over the tribes in order to proceed to business ; but
nothing could be done in the usual form, on account
of the disturbance made by the populace, who were
5till pressing forward. In the mean time, Fulvius^'
Flaccus a senator got upon an eminence, and know-
jug he could not be heard, made a sign with his hand
that he had something to say to Tiberius in private.
Tiberius having ordered the yjeople to make way,
Flaccus with much difficulty got up to him, and in-
formed him, " That those of the landed interest had

i^ In the printed text it is * Blastus ;' but one of the MSS. gives
us ' BIost.ius,' and all the translators have followed it.
*7 Not * Flavius,' as it is in the printed text.

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 2i9f

*' applied to the consul, while the senate was sitting;
" and as they could not bring that magistrate into
*' their views, they had resolved to despatch Tiberius
" themselves, and for that purpose had armed a
*' number of their friends and their slaves."

Tiberius no sooner communicated this intelliojence
to those about him, than they tucked up their gowns,
seized the halberts with which the Serjeants kept off
the crowd, broke them, and took the pieces to ward.
off any assault that mjght be made. Such as were at
a distance, much surprised at this incident, inquired,
the reason of it ; and Tiberius, finding they could
not hear him, touched his head with his hand, to sig-
nify the danger he was in. His adversaries seeing
this ran to the senate, and informed them that Tibe-
rius demanded the diadem, alleging that gesture as a
proof of it.

This raised a great commotion. Nasica called
upon the consul to defend the commonwealth, and
destroy the tyrant. The consul mildly answered,
" That he would not begin to use violence, neither
Vv'ould he put any citizen to death who was not
legally condemned ; but if Tiberius should either
*' persuade, or force, the people to decree any thing
'* contrary to the constitution, he would take care
" to annul it." Upon which Nasica started up, and
said, " Since the consul gives up his country, let all
*' who choose to support the lav/s follow me." So
saying, he covered his head with the skirt of his
robe and then advanced to the Capitol. Those who
followed him wrapped each his gown about his hand,
and made their v/ay through the crowd. On ac-
count of their superior quality, indeed, they met with
no resistance ; on the contrary, the people trampled
upon one another to get out of their way. Their at-
tendants had brought clubs and bludgeons with them
from home, and the patricians themselves seized the
feet of the benches, which the populace had broken
jn their flight. Thus armed, they made toward
Tiberius, knocking down such as stood before him.

ii

220 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

These being killed or dispersed, Tiberius likewise
fled. One of his enemies laid hold on his sown :
but he let it go, and continued his flight in his under-
garment. He happened, however, to stumble and
fall over some of the killed. As he was recovering
himself, Publius Satureius one of his collegues came
up openly, and struck him on the head with the
foot of a stool. The second blow was given him by
Lucius Rufus, who afterward valued himself upon it
as a glorious exploit. Above three hundred more
lost their lives by clubs and stones, but not a single
man by the sword ^^.

This is said to have been the first sedition in Rome,
since the expulsion of the kings, in which the blood
of any citizen was shed. All the rest, though neither
small in themselves nor about matters of trifling con-
sequence, were appeased by mutual concessions ; the
senate giving up something on one side through fear
of the people, and the people on the other out of re-
spect for the senate. Had Tiberius been treated
with moderation, it is probable that he would have
compromised matters in a much easier way ; and
certainly he might have been reduced without their
depriving him of his life, for he had not more than
three thousand men about him. But the conspiracy
was formed against him, it seems, rather to satisfy
the resentment and malignity of the rich, than tor
the reasons held out to the public. A strong proof
of this we have in their cruel and abominable treat-
ment of his dead body. For, notwithstanding the
entreaties of his brother, they would not permit him
to take away the corpse and bury it in the night,
but threw it into the river M^ith the other carcases.
Nor was this all : they banished some of his friends
without form of trial, and took others and put them
to death. Among the latter was Diophanes, the
rhetorician. One Gains Billius they shut up in a cask
with vipers, and other serpents, and left Jiim to perish

»s B. C. 133.

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS, 221

in that cruel manner. As for Blossius of Cumse, he
was carried before the consuls, and being interroga-
ted about the late proceedings declared, that he had
never failed to execute whatever Tiberius command-
ed ^^. " What then,'* said Nasica, " if Tiberius had
" ordered thee to burn the Capitol, would'st thou
" have done it ?'* At first he eluded the question,
and said, " Tiberius would never have given me such
" an order :'* But when many frequently repeated
the same inquiry, he replied, " In that case I should
*' have thought it perfectly right ; for Tiberius would
'^ never have laid such a com.mand upon me, if it had
" not been for the advantage of the people of Rome.'*
He escaped hovvever with his life, and afterward re-
paired to Aristonicus-° in Asia; where finding that
prince's affairs entirely ruined, he laid violent hands
on himself

The senate now, desirous to reconcile the people
to these acts of theirs, no longer opposed the Agra-
rian law ', but permitted them to elect another com-
missioner, in the room of Tiberius, for dividing the
lands. In consequence of which they chose Publius

'9 Laelius, in the Treatise written by Cicero under that name
(De Amic. xi.), gives a different account of the matter : ' Blos-
sias,' he says, ' after the murther of Tiberius, carae to him, while
he was in conference with the consuls Popilius Laenas and Publius
Rupilius, and earnestly implored pardon ; alleging in his defence
that, such was his veneration for Tiberius, he could not refuse to
do any thing which he desired.' ' If then,' said La;lius, ' he
had ordered you to set fire to the Capitol, would you have done
it?' 'That,' replied Blossius, * he would never have ordered
me to do; but, if he had, I should have obeyed him.' Blossius
does not upon this occasion appear, as Plutarch represents him, to
have been under a judicial examination.

2° Aristonicus was the bastard brother of Attalus ; and being
highly ofieaded at him, for having bequeathed his kingdom to the
lloraans, he attempted to gain possession of it by arms, and made
himself master of several towns. The Romans, the second year after
the death of Tiberius, sent against him Crassus the consul, whom he
defeated and took prisoner. The year following, however, Aristo-
nicus was defeated in his turn, and taken by Perpenna ; and after-
ward strangled by order of the Senate. See Justin xxxvi. 4 ,
rior. iJ. 20.

^n TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCKtUS.

Crassus, a relation of the Gracchi ; for Caius Grac-
chus had married his daughter Licinia. Cornehus
Nepos indeed says it was not the daughter of Cras-
sus, but of that Brutus, who m as honoured with a
triumph for his conquests in Lusitania : the generah-
ty of historians, however, confirm our present state-
ment. Nevertheless, the people were still much
concerned at the loss of Tiberius, and it was plain
tiiat they only waited for an opportunity of revenge.
Nasica was now threatened with an impeachment.
The senate therefore, dreading the consequence,
sent him into Asia, though there was no need of him
there. For the people, whenever they met him, did
not in the least suppress their resentment: on the
contrary, with all the violence of hatred they abused
him as an execrable wretch, a tyrant that had defiled
the holiest and most aweful temple in Rom.e with the
blood of a magistrate, whose person ought to have
been racred and inviolable.

For this reason Nasica privately quitted Italy,
though by his office as chief pontiff he was obliged
to attend the principal sacrifices ; and after wander-
ing a while from place to place in a foreign cou)itry,
died at Pergamus. Neither is it to be wondered at,
that the people had so unconquerable a dislike to
him : since 8cipio Africanus himself, who seems to
have been one of the greatest favouhites of the
Romans, as well as to have had a powerful claim to
their regard, was near forfeiting the ])opular affection ;
because when the news of Tiberius' death was brought
to Numantia, he had expressed himself in the Ho-
meric line.

So perish all, that in such crirrics engage ^'.

And subsequently, when Caius and Fuhius"- de-

^' In Minen'a's speech to Jupiter. (Odyss. i. 47.)
^* This trait is ascribeJ to Cato the tribune by Paterc. ii. 4., and
Val. Max. vi. 2.

The Lite of Scipio, mentioned below, is unfortunately lost.*

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 223

manded of him in an assembly of the people, what he
thought of Tiberius' death ; by his answer he gave
them to understand, that he was far from having ap-
proved his proceedings. After this, the commons
constantly interrupted him whenever he spoke in
public, though they had never before offered hnn any
such affront ; while, on the other hand, he scrupled
not to treat them with very severe language. But
these things we have related at large in the Life of
Scipio.

II. CAIUS GRACCHUS.

Whether it was that Caius Gracchus feared
his enemies, or sought to render them more obnoxious
to the people, he at first deserted the Forum, and
kept close in his own house ; like one who was either
sensible how much his family was reduced, or vA\o
intended to make public business no more his object :
so that some scrupled not to affirm he disapproved,
and even detested, his brother's administration. He
was indeed yet very young, not being so old as Tibe-
rius by nine years ; and Tiberius at his death was not
quite thirty. In a short time, however, it appeared
that he had a strong dislike, not only to idleness and
effeminacy, but also to intemperance and avarice.
And he improved his powers of oratory, as if he
deemed them the whigs, upon which he mu&t
rise to the high offices of state. These circumstances
proved, that he v/ould not long continue inactive.

In the defence of one of his friends named Vettius
he exerted so much eloquence, that the people were
charmed beyond expression, and borne away with
all the transports of enthusiasm. Upon this occasion
he showed, that other orators were no more than
children in comparison. The nobility had all their
former alarms renewed, and they began to take mea-

6

22i. TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

sures among themselves to prevent the advancement
of Cains to the tribunitial power.

It happened to fall to his lot to attend Orestes^*
the consul, in the capacity of qiisestor, in Sardinia.
This gave his enemies great pleasure. Cains himself
was not displeased at the appointment ; for he was
of a military turn, and had as good talents for the
camp as for the bar. Besides, he was under some
apprehension about taking a share in the administra-
tion, or appearing upon the Rostra ; and at the same
time he knew^, that he could not resist the importu-
nities of the people or of his friends. For these rea-
sons, he thought himself happy in the opportunity of
going abroad.

It is a common opinion, that of his own accord he
became a violent demagogue, and that he was much
more studious than Tiberius to make himself popular.
I3ut this is not the truth. On the contrary, it seems
to hav^ been rather necessity than choice, w^hich
brought him upon the public stage. For Cicero the
orator -* relates, that when Caius avoided all oJffices
in the state, and had resolved to live perfectly quiet,
his brother appeared to him in a dream, and thus ad-
dressed him ; " Why lingerest thou, Caius ? There
" is no alternative. The fates have decreed us both
" the same life, and the same death, in vindicating
" the rights of the people."

In Sardinia, Caius gave a noble specimen of every
virtue, eminently distinguishing himself among the
other young Romans, not only in his operations
against the enemy, and in acts of justice to such as
submitted"^^ but in his respectful and obliging beha-
viour to the general. In temperance, simplicity of

-3 Lucius Aurclius Orestes was consul with Emilius Lepidus
B. C. 127. So that Caius went quaestor into Sardinia, at the age
of 27.

^4 De Div. i. 26. See also Val. Max. i. 7. 6.*

^5 Thus illustrating, by anticipation, Virgil's direction to the
Romans :

Parcere siihjedis, et dchcllnre supcrbosJ*'

1

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCKUS. 225

diet, and love of labour he excelled even the ve-
terans.

There followed jt severd and sickly winter in Sar-
dinia, and the general demanded of the cities cloth-
ing for his men. But they despatched a deputa-
tion to RomCj to solicit an exemption from this
burthen. The senate listened to their request,
and ordered the general to devise some other me-
thod. As he was much perplexed however, upon
the occasion, and the soldiers in the mean time much
inconvenienced, Caius applied to the towns in person,
and prevailed upon them to send the Romans a
voluntary supply of clothing. News of this being
carried to Rome, and the whole looking like a pre-
lude to future attempts at popularity, the senate were
much disturbed at it. Another instance of their
jealousy they exhibited in their ungracious reception
of the embassadors of Micipsa, who came to acquaint
them that the king their master, out of regard to
Caius Gracchus, had sent their general in Sardinia a
large quantity ofcorn. The embassadors Vv'cre turn-
ed out of the house ; and the senate proceeded to de>
cree that the private men in Sardinia should be re-
placed, but that Orestes should remain, in order that
he might keep his quaestor with him. An account
of this being brought to Caius, his anger overcam.e
him so far, that he instantly went on board : and as
he made his appearance in Rome when none ex-
pected him, he was not only censured by his enemies,
but the people in general accounted it singular that
the qmestor should return before his general. An
information however being laid against him before
the censors, he obtained permission to speak for him-
self; which he did so eflectually, that tlie whole
court changed their opinions, and were persuaded
that he had been very much injured. For he told
tliem, " He had served twelve campaigns, whereas he
" was not obliged to serve more than ten : and that in
*' capacity of qusestor he had attended his general

VOL. V. Q

226 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHU:?.

" three years "^ though the law would have allowed
*' him to come home at the end of one." He was
the oi^ly man, he added, " who went out with a full
*' purse, and returned with an empty one ; while
" others, after having drank the wine which they
" carried out witli them, brought back the vessels
" filled with gold and silver."

After this, his enemies adduced other charges
against him. They accused him of having promoted
disaffection among the alues, and of having been con-
cerned in the conspiracy of Fregellag^^^ which about
that time came to light. He cleared himself, how-
ever, from all suspicion 5 and, having fully proved
his innocence, offered himself to the people as a can-
didate for the tribuneship. The patricians united
their forces to oppose him ; but such a number of
people poured in from all parts of Italy to support
his election, that many of them could not procure
lodgings, and the Campus Martius not being large
enough to contain them, they gave their voices from
the tops of houses. All that the nobility could gain
ef the people, and all the mortification that Caius en-
countered, v/as this 'y instead of being returned the
first, as he had flattered himself he should be, he was
returned the fourth. But when he had entered upon
his office, he soon became the leading tribune ; part-
ly by means of his eloquence, in v.hich he was far
superior to all the rest, and partly on account of the
misfortunes of his family, which gave him an oppor-
tunity of bewailing the cruel fate of his brother. For
with whatever subject he opened his harangue, be-
fore he brought it to a conclusion, he invariably led
the people back to that idea, and at the same time
reminded them of the different behaviour of their

*^ Great part of this speech is preserved by Aulas Gellius; but
there Caius says, he had been quaestor only two years. Bienniuvi
enimfui in proviiicui. (xii. 15.)

'■^^ A city ofLatiuni, which was destroyed by Lucius Opimius the
practof, B. C. 125u

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 227

ancestors : " Your forefathers," said he, " declared
" war against the Falisci, in order to revenge the
''^ cause of Genucius one of their tribunes, to whom
" that people had given scurrilous language ; and
" they thought capital punishment little enough for
*' Caius Veturius, because he alone did not make
*' way for a tribune, who was passing through the
" forum. Whereas you suffered Tiberius to be de-
" spatched with bludgeons before your eyes, and his
" dead body to be dragged by his murthevers from the
" Capitol through the middle of the city, in order to
" be thrown into the river. Such of his friends like-
" wise, as fell into their hands, were put to death
" without form of trial. Yet it is one of the regula-
" tions of our jurisprudence that, if any person under
" prosecution for a capital crime does not make his
" appearance, an officer is sent to his door in the
" morning to summon him by sound of trumpet, and
the judges will never pass sentence before this
public citation. So tender were our ancestors in
any matter, where the life of a citizen was con-
" cerned !'*

Having prepared the people by such speeches as
this, for his voice was strong enough to be heard by
the whole multitude, he proposed two laws. One
was, " That if the people deposed any magistrate,
" he should from that time be incapable of bearing
" any public office ;" the other, " That if any magi-
*' strate should banish a citizen without legal trial,
" the people should be authorised to take cognisance
" of the offence/* The first of these laws plainly re-
ferred to Marcus Octavius, whom Tiberius had de-
prived of the tribuneship ; and the second to Popi-
iius, who in his praetorship had banished Tiberius*
friends. In consequence of the latter, Popilius, afraid
to stand a trial, fled out of Italy. The other bill
Caius dropped, to oblige (as he said) his mother Cor-
nelia, who interposed in Octavius' behalf. The peo-
ple were perfectly satisfied ; for they honoured Cor-
nelia, not only on account of her children, but of her
' Q 2

2'JS TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

father. They afterward erected a statue to her-
with this inscription ;

C0IINELI.\, THE MOTHER OF THE GRACail.

There are several stately and popular expressions
of Caius Gracchus on record, concerning his mother.
To one of her ciiemics he said, " Darest thou jirc-
*'' tend to reject en Cornelia, the mother of Tiberius?'*
And as that person luul spent liis youth in an in-
famous manner, he asked, " Witli what front can'st
" thou put thyself upon a footing with Cornelia ?
" Hast tliou brought children, as she has done ? Yet
'' all Rome knows, that slie has lived longer than thou
" hast without sexual intercourse." ►Such was the
keenness of his language ; and many expressions
equally severe might be collected out of his writingy

Among the laws which he procured, v.'ith a view
of increasing the authority of the people and lessen-
ing that of the senate, one related to colonising and
dividing among the poor the public lands. Another
V>'as in favour of the army, who were thenceforth to
be clothed at the public charge without diminution
of their pay, and among whom none were to serve till
tliey were full seventeen years old. A third he
caused to be enacted for the benefit of the Italian
allies, who weve to have the same right of voting at
elections as the citizens of Rome. 13y a fouith the
markets were regulated, and the poor enabled to buy
bread-corn at a cheaper rate. A fifth had reference
to the courts of judicature, and indeed contributed
more than any thing else to retrench the power of the
senate. For before this senators were the only judges
in all causes, and upon that account their body was
formidable both to the equestrian order and to the
people. But to th.e three lumdred senators lie now
added three hundred kniglits, and decreed that the
judicial authority should be equally invested in the
joint number "^ In offering this bill he strenuously

2® The aMlhr.i itics of all antiquity are against Plutarch in tliis
•rticle. Ciuus rid not associate the kniglits and the senators in the

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 229

exerted himself in all respects, but there was one par-
ticular extremely remarkable : whereas the orators
before him, in all their addresses to the people, had
stood with their faces toward the senate-house and
the Comitiura, he then for the first time turned the
other way (that is, toward the Forum) and continued
to speak in that position ever afterward. Thus by a
small alteration in the posture of his body, he indi-
cated something very great, and as it were converted
the government from an aristocratic into a democra-
tic form^^. For by this action he intimated, that all
orators ought to address themselves to the people,
and not to the senate.

As the people not only ratified this law, but em-
powered him to select the three hundred out of the
equestrian order for judges, he found himself pos-
sessed of a kind of sovereign power. Even the
senate, in their deliberations, were willing to listen
to his advice; and he never gave them any, but such
as was suitable to their dignity. That wise and
moderate decree (for instance) was of his suggesting,
concerning the corn which Fabius, when proprietor
in Spain, sent from that country. Caius persuaded
the senate to sell the corn, and to return the money
to the Spanish states; and at the same time to cen-
sure Fabius, for having rendered the Roman govern-
ment odious and insupportable to the people of that
nation. This gained him great respect and favour in
the provinces.

He procured other decrees likewise for sending
out colonies, for making roads, and for building pub-
lic granaries. In all these matters he was appointed
supreme director, and yet he was far from account-
ing so much business a fatigue. On the contrary, he

judicial power, but vested that power in the knights exclusively ;
and they continued to enjoy it, till the consulship of Servilius Caepio,
for the space of sixteen or seventeen years. Velleius, Asconius,
Appian, Livy, and Cicero himself sufficiently prove this.

-9 For similar examples of the important efiects produced by a
change of situation, see the Lives of 'riieniistodcs, and of Camil-
lus, I. 341. 108 *

250 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

applied to the whole with as miicli activity, and de-
spatched it with as much ease, as if there had been
only one thing for him to manage ; so that they, who
both hated and feared the man, were struck with his
amazing industry and the celerity of his operations.
The people were charmed to see him followed by such
numbers of architects, artificers, embassadors, ma-
gistrates, military men, and men of letters. These
were all kindly received; yet, amidst his civilities he
preserved a dignity, addressing each according to
his capacity and station: by which he evinced the in-
justice of those, who censured him as a violent and
overbearing man. For he had even a more popular
manner in conversation, and in business, than in his
addresses from the Rostrum.

The work, in which he principally exerted himself,
was that of the public roads : in these he paid a re-
gard to beauty, as well as to use. They were drawn
in a straight line through the country, and either
paved with hewn stone, or made of a binding sand
brought thither for that purpose. When he met with
dells, or other deep holes made by land-floods, he
either filled them up with rubbish, or laid bridges
over them ; so that being levelled, and brought to a
perfect parallel on both sides, they afforded a regular
and elegant prospect throughout the whole. Besides,
he divided all the roads into miles, of nearly eight
furlongs each, and set up pillars of stone to mark the
divisions. He likewise erected other stones at pro-
per distances on each side of the way to assist travel-
lers, who rode without servants, to mount their
horses.

The people extolled his performances, and there
was no instance of their affection, that he might not
have anticipated. In one of his speeches he told
them, " There was one thing in particular, which he
" should esteem as a higher favour than all the rest,
" if they indulged him in it; and, if they denied it,
*' he would not complain." By this it was imagined,
that he meant the consulship ; and the commons ex-
pected, that he would desire to be consul and tri-

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 231

bune at the same time. When the day of election
of consuls arrived, and all were waiting with anxiety
to see what declaration he would make, he conducted
Caius Fannius into the Campus Martius, and joined
with his friends in the canvass- This greatly inclined
the scale on Fannius' side, and he was immediately
created consul. Caius himself likewise, without the
least appKcation or even having declared himself a
candidate, merely through the zeal and affection of
the people was appointed tribune the second time.

Finding however that the senate avowed their dis-
like of him, and that the regards of Fannius grew
cold, he devised new laws to secure the people in his
interest. Such were those for sending colonies to
Tarentum and Capua, and for granting the Latins all
the rights and privileges of Roman citizens. The
senate now apprehending that his power would soon
become wholly uncontrollable, adopted a new and
unprecedented method of drawing the people from
him, by gratifying tliem in every object of their
wishes, however contrary to the true interests of the
state.

Among the collegues of Caius Gracchus, was one
named Livius Drusus ; a man, who in birth and edu-
cation did not yield to any of the Romans, and who
in point of eloquence and wealth might vie witli the
greatest and most powerful men of his time. To him
the nobility applied, exhorting him to set himself up
against Caius, and join them in opposing him ; not
in the way of force, or in aught that might offend
the commons, but in directing all his measures to
please them and granting them things, which it would
have been honourable at the hazard of their utmost
resentment to withhold. .^

Drusu« «igreed to list in the service of the sefi4te,
and to apply all the power of his oflice to promote
their views. He therefore proposed laws, which had
nothing in them either creditable or advantageous to
the community. His sole design was, to outdo Caius

232 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS!.

in flattering and pleasing tlie multitude, and for this
purpose lie contended with him, like a comedian upon
a stage ^^. Thus the senate plainly disclosed, that it
was not so much the measures of Caius as the man
they disapproved, and tliat they were resolved to
take every method to humble or destroy him. For
when he obtained a decree for sending out two colo-
iiies only, which were to consist of some of the most
deserving citizens, they accused him of ingratiating
himself by undue methods with the plebeians. But
when Drusus sent out twelve, and selected three
hundred of the meanest of the people for each, they
patronised the entire scheme. When Caius divided
the public lands among the poor citizens, on condi-
tion that they should pay a small rent into the trea-
sury, they inveighed against him as a flatterer of the
populace ; but Drusus had their praise, for discharg-
ing the lands even of that acknov/ledgement. Caius
procured the Latins the privilege of voting as citizens
of Rome, and the patricians were oflended ; Dru-
sus, on the contrary, was abetted by them in a law
for exempting the Latin soldiers from being flogged,
though upon service, for any misdemeanor. In the
mean time, Drusus asserted in all his speeches that
tiie senate, out of their great regard for the com-
mons, had urged him to propose those advantageous
decrees. This was the only benefit accruino; from
his manoeuvres ; for, by these arts, the people became
better affected to the senate. Before, they had sus-
pected and hated the leaders of that body ; but Dru-
sus appeased their resentment, and removed their
aversion, by assuring them that the patricians had
been the prime movers of ail these popular laws.

J. . . .

J'^pThis was anciently, in man}"^ instances, a serious competition.
In one of tliem Alexander the Great was so deeply interested, as we
read in his Life (iV. 285.), that he declared, he would have given
hi'.lf his kingdom sooner than have seen his favourite surpassed; and,
in the times of the latter Roman emperors, it was carried to a mos^
dreadful height. See Gibbon, Ed. Svo., vii. 76.*

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 233

"What contributed most to satisfy the people, as to
the sincerity of Drusus* regard and the purity of his
intentions, was that in all his edicts he appeared not
to have the least view to his own interest. For he
eraployed others as commissioners for planting the
new colonies, and if an aftiiir of money was in question,
he declined all personal concern with it ; whereas
Caius, in the greatest and most important matters of
that kind, chose to place himself at the head.

Rubrius, one of his collegues, having procured an
order for rebuilding and colonising Carthage, which
had been destroyed by Scipio, it fell to the lot of
Caius to execute that commission, and in pursuance
thereof he sailed to Africa ^^ Drusus took advantage
of his absence to gain more ground upon him, and to
establish himself in the favour of the people. To lay
an information against Fulvius, he thought would be
very conducive to this end.

Fulvius was a particular friend of Caius, and his
assistant in the distribution of the lands. At the same
time he was a factious man, and known to be upon ill
terms with the senate. Others, beside the patricians,
suspected him of raising commotions among the al-
lies, and of privately exciting the Italians to revolt.
These things, indeed, v/cre rumoured without evi-
dence or proof; but Fulvius himself gave strengtli to
the report, by his quarrelsome and incorrect con-
duct. Caius, as his acquaintance, incurred his share
of the dislike, and this was one of the principal
things that brought on his ruin.

Besides, when Scipio African us died ^'" without any
previous sickness, and (as we have observed in his
Life) there appeared marks of violence upon his
body, most people laid it to the charge of Fulvius,
>vho Vv'as his avowed enemy, and had that very^ay
abused him from the Rostrum. Neither was Ca;ius
jiiimself unsuspected. Yet so execrable a crime as

y- B. C. 123. ^3 lie died B. C. 129, aged oQ*

234 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

this, committed against the first and most illustrious
man in Rome, escaped with impunity ; nay, it was
not even made a subject of inquiry. For the peo{)le
prevented any cognisance of it tmm being taken, out
of fear for Caius, lest upon a strict inquisition he
should have been found accessary to the murther.
But this happened some time before.

While Caius was employed in Africa in the re-esta-
blishment of Carthage, the name of which he changed
to Junonia^% he was interrupted by several inauspi-
cious omens. The staff of the first standard, between
the violent efforts of the wind to tear it away, and
those of the ensign to retain it, was snapped asun-
der. Another storm of wind blew the sacrifices from
the altars, and bore them beyond the bounds marked
out for the city ; and the wolves came and seized the
marks themselves, and carried them to a great dis-
tance. Caius however brought every thing under
good regulations in the space of seventy days, and
then returned to Rome, where he understood that
Fulvius was hard pressed by Drusus, and affairs de-
manded his presence. For Lucius Opimius^% who
was of the patrician party and very powerful in the
senate, had lately, through the opposition of Caius
and his support of Fannius. been unsuccessful in his
application for the consulship ; but now his interest
was greatly strengthened, and it was supposed that he
would certainly be chosen the following year. It was
expected hkewise, that the consulship would enable
him to ruin Caius, whose interest was already upon
the decline. By this time, indeed, the people were
cloyed with indulgence ; because there were many

33 Qiiam Junojertur terris magis omnibus unam
J Posthabitd coluisse Samo. (VJrg. ^n. i. 16.)

In these lines Virgil, who wrote them nearly a century after this
period, seems only to have adopted tlie populnr tradition.*

34 In the present text it is ' Hostilius,' but it should be ' Opimius;*
for he was consul the year following with Q. Fabius Maximus. Plu-
tarch himself calls him ' Opiniius' a little below; and this name,, like-
wise, occurs in one of the MISS.
4

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 23S

beside Caiiis, who flattered them in all the measures
of administration, and the senate witnessed it with
pleasure.

On his return, he removed his lodgings from the
Palatine hill to the neighbourhood of the Forum ; in
which he had a view to popularity, as many of the
meanest and most indigent of the commonalty dwelt
there. After this, he proposed the rest of his laws,
in order to their being ratified by the suffrages of the
people. The populace flocking to him from every
quarter, the- senate persuaded the consul Fannius to
command all persons who were not Romans by birth
to leave the city; upon this strange and unusual
proclamation, that none of the allies or friends of the
republic should remain in Rome, or though citizens
be permitted to vote, Caius in his turn published
articles of impeachment against the consul, and at
the same time declared that he would protect the
allies, if they would stay. He did not, however,
perform his promise. On the contrary ;, he suffered
the consul's lictors to drag away a person before his
eyes, who was connected with him by the ties of hos-
pitality, without afibrding him the least assistance ;
whether it was, that he feared to show how much his
strength was diminished, or did not choose (as he
alleged) to give his enemies, who only sought a pre-
tence for it, an opportunity of having recourse to
the sword.

He happened, moreover, to be at variance with
his collegues. The reason was this : there was a show
of gladiators to be exhibited to the people in the
Forum, and the chief part of the magistrates had
caused scaffolds to be erected around the place, in
order to let them out for hire. Caius insisted, that
they should be taken down, in order that the poor
might see the exhibition without paying for it. As
none of the proprietors regarded his orders, he
waited till the night preceding the show, and then
went with his own workmen, and demolished the
scaffolds. Next day, the populace saw the place

236 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

quite cleared of tliem, and of course admired him
as a man of superior spirit. But his collegues were
highly offended at his violent temper and measures.
This seems to have been the cause of his miscarriage
in his application for a third tribuneship ; for he had
a majority of voices, it seems, but his collegues are
said to have procured a fraudulent and unjust return.
Be that as it may, for it was a matter of some doubt,
it is certain that he did not bear his disappointment
■vvith patience, but when he saw his adversaries laugh,
he told them with too much insolence ; " Their laugh
" was of the sardonic ^^ kind, for they did not per-
" ceivehow much their actions were eclipsed by his."

After Opimius was elected consul, he prepared to
repeal many of Caius* laws, and to annul his esta-
blishment at Carthage, with a view of provoking him
to some act of violence, and of thus gaining an oppor-
tunity to destroy him. This treatment he bore for
some time ; but afterward at the instigation of his
friends, and of Fulvius in particular, he began to
raise an opposition once more against the consul.
Some say, his mother upon this occasion entered into
the intrigues of the party, and having privately taken
some strangers into pay, sent them to Rome in the
disguise of reapers ; and these things, they assert, are
enigmatically hinted at in her letters to her son. But
others affirm, that Corneha was much offended by
these measures.

When the day came, upon which Opimius was to
get those laws repealed, both parties early in the
morning posted themselves in the Capitol ; and after

35 It is not easy to see the propriety of tills expression, as it is here
used. The ' sardonic laugh was an involuntary distention of the
muscles of the mouth, occasioned by a poisonous plant ; and all those,
who died of tliis poison, had a smile upon their countenances. Hence
it came to signify, forced or affected laughter; but why the laughter
of (iracchus' opponents should be called forced or ' sardonic,' be^
cause they did not perceive his superiority, does not appear. It
mijjilit more properly have been so called, if thcv did perceive it. If
every species of unreasonable lau<,-hing indeed may be culled * sar-
donic,' it is not improper.

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 237

the consul had sacrificed, Qiiintus AntylKus one of
his hctors, who was carrvinff out the entrails of the
victims, cried to Fulvius and his friends ; " Stand off,
ye crew of traitors, and make way for honest
men." By some writers we are told that, along
with this scurrilous language, he stretched his naked
arm toward them in a form expressive of the utmost
contempt : upon which they immediately stabbed him
with long stiles, said to have been made expressly for
this very purpose.

The people were much chagrined at this act of
violence. As for the two chiefs, they made very dif-
ferent reflexions upon the event. Caius was con-
cerned at it, and reproached his partisans with hav-
ing given their enemies the pretext, which they had
long desired. Opimius rejoiced at the opportunity,
and excited the people to revenge. But, for the pre-
sent, they were dispersed by a heavy rain.

At an early hour the next day, the consul assem-
bled the senate ; and while he was addressing them
within, others exposed the corpse of Antylliiis naked
on a bier without, and (as it had been previously
concerted) carried it through the Forum to the senate-
house, making loud acclamations all the way. Opi-
mius knew the whole farce, but pretended to be much
surprised. The senate went out, and placing them-
selves round the corpse expressed their grief and in-
dignation, as if some dreadful misfortune had befallen
them. This scene however excited only Jiatred and
detestation in the breasts of the people, who could
not but remember that the nobility had killed Tiberius
Gracchus in the Capitol, though a tribune, and
thrown his body into the river; and yet now when
Antyllius a mere serjeant, who possibly did not de-
serve quite so severe a punishment, but by his im-
pertinence had brought it upon himself, lay exposed
in the Forum, the senate of Rome stood weeping
about him, and then attended the hireling to his fu-
neral, with no other view than to procure the death
of the only remaining protector of the people.

253 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

Upon their return to the house, they charged Opi-
mius the consul, by a formal decree, to take every
possible method for the preservation of the common-
wealth and the destruction of the tyrants. He tliere-
fore ordered the patricians to arms, and each of the
knights to attend with two servants well armed the
next morning. Fulvius on the other hand prepared
himself, and drew together a great crowd of people.

Caius, as he returned from the Forum, stood a long
time looking upon his father's statue, and after hav-
ing given vent to his sorrow in some sighs and tears,
retired without uttering a word. Many of the ple-
beians, who saw this, were moved with compassion ;
and declaring they should be the most dastardly of
beings, if they abundoned such a man to his enemies,
repaired to his house to guard him, and passed the
night before his door. 1 his they did in a very difl
ferent manner from those, who attended Fulvius upon
the same occasion. These passed their time in noise
and riot, in carousing and empty threats ; Fulvius
himself being the first man that was intoxicated, and
giving into many absurd expressions and actions un-
suitable to his years : whereas those dbout Caius were
silent, as in a time of public calamity ; and, with a
thoughtful regard to what was yet to come, kept
watch and took rest by turns.

Fulvius slept so soundly after his wine, that it was
with difficulty they awoke him at break of day. Fie
and his company then armed themselves v.ith the
Gallic spoils, which he had brought off in his consul-
ship upon his conquering that people; and thus ac-
coutred they sallied out, with loud menaces, to seize
the Aventine hill. As for Caius he would not arm,
but went out in his gown, as if he had been going
upon business into the Forum ; only he had a small
dagger under it

At the gate his wife threw herself at his feet, and
taking hold of him with one hand, and of her son
with the other, thus expressed herself : " You do not
" now leave me, my dear Caius, as formerly to go to

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. ^9

*' the Rostra in the capacity of tribune or lawgiver ;
" neither am I sending you oirt to a glorious war,
*' where if the common lot should fall to your share,
" my distress might at least have the consolation of
" honour. You expose yourself to the murtherers of
" Tiberius, unarmed indeed, as a man should go who
" had rather suffer than commit violence, but throw-
" ing away your life without any advantage to the
" community. Faction reigns ; outrage and the
" sword are the only measures of justice. Had your
" brother fallen before Numantia, the truce would
*' have restored us his body ; whereas now perhaps I
*' shall have to go a supplia,nt to some river or to the
" sea, to be shown where your remains may be found.
" For what confidence, after Tiberius' assassination,
" can we place either in the laws, or in the gods ?**

When Licinia had poured out these lamentations,
Caius disengaged himself as quietly as he could from
her arms, and walked forward with his friends in deep
silence. She caught at his gown, but in the attempt
fell to the ground, and lay a long time speechless.
At last, her servants seeing her in that condition took
her up, and carried her to her brother Crassus.

Fulvius, when all the party was assembled, lis-
tened to Caius' advice, and sent his younger son into
the Forum equipped liive a herald "^. He was a youth
of most engaging appearance ; and he approached
with great modesty, and tears in his eyes, to propose
terms of accommodation to the consul and the se-
nate. Upon this, many were disposed to hearken to
the proposal ; but Opimius said, " The criminals
" ought not to treat by heralds, but come in person
" to make their submission to the senate, and surren-
" der themselves to justice before they interceded for
" mercy." At the same time, he bade the young
man return with an account to this purport, or not
to return at all.

Caius, it is said, advised that they should go, and

3* Literally, * with a caduceus, or herald's vrand, ia his hand.*

240 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS*

endeavour to reconcile themselves to the senate.
But, as none of the rest acceded to that project,
Fulvius sent his son again with a renewal of their
former propositions. Opimius, who was in haste to
begin hostilities, immediately took the young man
into custody, and marched against Fulvius with a
numerous body of infantry, and a company of Cretan
archers. The latter galled their adversaries much,
and threw tliem into sucli confusion that they took
to flight. Fulvius hid himself in an old neglected
bath, where he was soon found, and with his eldest
son put to the sword. Caius was not seen to lift his
hand in the fray. On the contrary, he expressed the
utmost uneasiness at their coming to such extremi-
ties, and retired into the temple of Diana. There,
he would have despatched himself; but he was pre-
vented by Pomponius and Lichiius, the most faithfcil
of his friends, who took away his poignard, and per-
suaded him to try the alternative of flight. Upon
this occasion, he is said to have kneeled down, and
with uplifted hands to have prayed to the Deity of
the Temple ; " That the people of Rome, for their
" ungrateful and base desertion of him, miglit be.
" slaves for ever." Most of them indeed, on pro-
mise of impunity by proclamation, openly went over
to the other party.

The enemy pursued Caius with extreme eagerness?,
and came up with him at the Wooden bridge. His
two friends^", bidding him go forw-ard, ])Iaced
themselves before it, and suffered no man to pass, till
they were overpowered and slain. One of his ser-
vants, named Philocrates, accompanied Caius in his
fliirht. All encourafl'ed him to make the best of his
way, as they do a runner in the lists; but no one
assisted him or offered Iiim a horse, though he be-
sought them to do it, iov tlicy saw the enemy row
almost upon him. He got however a little before

3" Aiirelius Victor mentions two of Caius' fricntl«, ulio stopped
tlie pursuit of the enemy ; Pomponius at the Porta Trigeniina, and
La;toiiUs at the I'ons Sublicius.

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 241

them into a grove sacred to the Furies ^^ and there
closed the scene ; Philocrates first despatching him,
and afterward liimself. 8ome indeed affirm, that tliey
both fell alive into the enemy's hands, and tliat the
slave clung so close to his master, that they could not
reach the one, till they had cut the other in pieces.
We are told also that after a person, whose name is
not preserved, had cut off Caius' head and was bear-
ing away his prize, Septimuleius or.e of Opimius' "^
friends took it from him ; tor, at the beginning of the
action, the weight in gold had been offered by pro-
clamation either for his head, or for that of Fulvius.
Septimuleius carried it to Opimius upon the point of
a pike ; and, when placed in the scales, it was found
to weigh seventeen pounds eight ounces. For Sep-
timuleius had added fraud to his other villainies ; he
had taken out the brain, and filled the cavity with
molten lead. Those who brought in Fulvius' head,
being persons of no note, had no reward at all.

The bodies of Caius and Fulvius and the rest of
the slain, who were not fewer than three thousand,
w^ere thrown into the river. Their goods were con-
fiscated and sold, and their wives forbidden to go into
mourning. Licinia was, moreover, deprived of her
dowry. The most savage cruelty was exercised upon
Fulvius* vounffer son, who had never borne arms
against them nor appeared among the combatants,
but was imprisoned when he came with proposals of
peace, and put to death after \\\^ battle. But neither
this, nor any other instance of despotism, so sensibly
touched the people, as Opimius' building a temple
to Concord. For by that he appeared to claim
honour for what he had done, and in some sort to

3^ This grove was called Luciis Furina?, and was near the Pons
Sublicius. The goddess had a high priest called Flamen Furinalis,
and Furinalia or annual sacrifices. (Varro de L. L. v. See also
Fast. voc. Furinalia.)

39 Pliny (H N. xxxiii. 3.) and Valerius Maximus say, he was an
intimate acquaintance of Gracchus. Caius Gracchus fell B. C. 121,
aged 33.

VOL. v. R

242 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCFIUS.

triumph in the destruction of so many citizens.
Somebody therefore, in the night, wrote this line
under the inscription on the tem})le,

Concord's pure fane is by mad Discord rcai'd.

Opimius was the first consul who usurped tlie
power of a dictator, and condemned three tliousand
citizens without any form of justice, beside Caius
Gracchus and Fuivius Flaccus ; of whom one had
been honoured with the consulship and a triumph,
and tlie other both in virtue and reputation was
superior to all the men of Iiis time.

Opimius was vile enough to suffer himself to be
corru})tcd by money. At a subsequent period, when
on an embassy to jugurtha theNumidian, he accept-
ed a bribe ; and being called to account for it on
his return in a judicial way, he had the mortification
to crow old with that imamv upon him. At the
same time, he was hated and execrated by the com-
mons, who through his means had been reduced to a
state of tlic greatest humiliation. Those commons
quickly showed, how deeply they regretted and long-
ed for the Gracchi. They erected their statues in
one of the most public parts of the city, consecrated
the places where they had fallen, and offered to them
all first-fruits according to the season of the year.
Nay, many daily sacrificed and paid their devotions
there, as in the temples of the gods.

Cornelia is reported to have borne all these mis-
ibrtunes vvith a noble magnanimity, and to have said
of the consecrated places in particular, where her
sons lost their lives, " That they were monuments
" worthy of them." She took up her residence at
iJisenum, and made no alteration in her manner of
livincr. As she had manv fnends, her table was
always open for the purposes of hospitality. Greeks
and other men of letters she had constantly about
her, and all the kings in alliance with Rome ex-
pressed their regard by sending her presents, and re-

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 24S

celving the like civilities in return. She made her-
self very agreeable to her guests, by acquainting them
with many particulars of her father Africanus, and of
his manner of living. But what they most admired
in her was, that she could speak of her sons without
a sigh or a tear, and recount their actions and suffer-
ings, as if she had been giving a narrative of some
ancient heroes. Some therefore imagined, that age
and the heaviness of her misfortunes had deprived
her of her understanding and sensibility. But those,
who were of that opinion, seem rather themselves to
have wanted understanding ; ignorant as they were,
that a noble mind may by a liberal education be
enabled to support itself against distress, and that
though in the pursuit of rectitude Fortune may often
defeat the purposes of Virtue, yet Virtue in bearing
affliction can never lose her prerogative *^'*

AGIS AND CLEOMENES

COMPARED WITH

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

HAVING thus given the history of these great men.
sev(^rally, it remains that we take a view of them in
comparison with each other. Those who hated the

rrsp:s?-(», tv ^i T'j> ■^TciKTcni ro cpifnv ivMyi^c^'c, a TrcepuiTSiTc/A. The learned
Du Soul here proposes to read (^•j>-ci.TToij,iVii(; instead of (Pv?ixTTcf/jnoic^
and Kctxc, Ibr xaXx. There are indeed some MSS. authorities for those
readings, and the passage is capable of a good sense if we accept
them, viz. ' And that though Virtue, in striving to ayoid affliction,
P!ay be often overborne by Fortune,' &c. But we think the con-
trast sufficiently preserved, without altering the printed text. Tha
learned annotator will have (pv^ccr-fcwat here to signify vito, as it cer-
tainly often does ; but sometimes likewise it signifies observo, as ap-
pears from Hesiod,

E 2

244 AGLS AND CLEOMENES COMPARED

Gracchi, and endeavoured the most to disparage
them, never durst deny that, of all the Romans of
their time, nature had disposed them the most happi-
ly to virtue, or that this disposition was cuUivated by
the most excellent education.. But nature appears
to have done still more for Agis andClcomenes ; for
though they not only wanted the advantages of edu-
cation, but were trained to such manners and cus-
toms as had corrupted many before them, yet they
became examples of temperance and sobriety.

Besides, the Gracchi lived at a period when Rome-
was in her highest glory, a period distinguished by
virtuous emulation ; and of course they must have
had a natural reluctance to renounce the inheritance
of virtue, which they had received from their ances-
tors. Whereas Agis and Cleomenes had parents of
very different principles, and found their country in
a most imhappy and distempered state ; and yet these
things did not in the least abate their ardour in the
pursuits of honour.

Of the disinterested views of the Gracchi, and their
aversion from avarice, we have a strong proof in their
standing aloof from all iniquitous practices during
the whole course of their administration. But Agis
might even have resented it, if any one had com-
mended him for not having touched the property of
others ; since he distributed his whole substance
among the citizens of Sparta, which besideother con-
siderable articles consisted of six hundred talents in
money. What a crime then must unjust gain have
appeared to him, who thought it nothing less than
avarice to possess more than others, though by the
iairest title ?

If we consider them v*-ith respect to the hardiness
of their enterprises, and the new regulations which
they sought to establisli,we shall hnd the two Grecians
greatly superior. One of the Romans applied
himself principally to making roads, and colonising
towns. The boldest attempt of Tiberius was, the
distribution of the public lands j and Caius achieved

WITH TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 245

nothing more extraordinary, than joining an equal
number of the equestrian order in commission with
the three hundred patrician judges.

The alterations, which Agis and Clcomenes in-
troduced into the system of their commonwealth,
were of a different nature. They saw that a small
and partial amendment was no better, as Plato ex-
presses it, than "^ cutting off one of the Hydra's
heads ^^ ;' and therefore they adopted a change, cal-
'Culated to remove all the distempers of the constitu-
tion at once. Perhaps we shall express ourselves
with more propriety, if we say that, by removing the
changes which had caused all their misfortunes, they
brought Sparta back to it's first principles.

It may be right to add, that the measures pursued
by the Gracchi were offensive to the greatest men in
Rome '^'^ ; whereas all that Agis meditated, and Clco-
menes carried into effect, had the best and most re-
spectable authorities engaged in their support ; I
mean those regulations respecting frugality and
equality, which were sanctioned either by Lycurgus
or Apollo.

What is still more deserving of consideration, by
the political measures of the Gracchi Rome made
not the least acquisition of jiower or of territory ;
whereas, through those of Cieomenes, Greece saw
the Spartans in a little time become masters of Pelo-
ponnesus, and contending for superiority with the
most powerful princes of the age : and this with no
other view, than to deliver the Greeks from the in-
cursions of the Illyrians and the Gauls, and to place
them once more under the protection of the race of
Hercules.

■*' De Rep. iv,

4- Plutarch seems to censure the Agrarian law as an irrational
one, and as the invention of the Gracclii. But an Agrarian law, in
fact, existed in the code of Lycurgus ; and, even among the Romans,
the Gracchi were not it's first promoters : Spurius Cassius had pro-
posed a hill of the same kind above two hundred years before, which
proved equally fatal to it's author.

I

246 AGIS AKD CLEOMENES COMPARED

The different manner, also, of the deaths of these
illustrious men appears to me to point out a difference
in their characters. The Gracchi fouglit with their
fellow-citizens, and being defeated perished in their
flight. Agis, on the other hand, fell almost a volun-
tary sacrifice, that no Spartan might lose his life on
his account. Cleomenes, when insulted and op-
pressed, had recourse to vengeance ; and, as circum-
stances did not favour him, had courage "^^ enough to
give himself the fatal blow.

If we view them in another light, Agis never dis-
tinguished himself as a general, for he was killed be-
fore he had any opportunity of that kind ; and with
the many signal and glorious victories of Cleomenes
we may compare the memorable exploit of Tiberius,
in being the first to scale the walls of Carthage, and
liis saving twenty thousand Romans (who had no
other chance of escape) by the peace, which he hap-
pily concluded with the Numantians. As for Caius,
there were many instances of his military talents both
in the Numantian war, and in Sardinia. So that the
two brothers would probably one day have been
ranked with the greatest generals among the Ro-
mans, had they not come to an untimely death.

With regard to their political abilities, Agis seems
to have wanted firmness and despatch. He suffered
himself to be imposed upon by Agesilaus, and did not
perform his promise to the citizens of making a dis-
tribution of lands. He v^'as, indeed, extremely young;
and had on that account a timidity, wliich prevented
the completion of those schemes, by which he had
so much raised the public expectation. Cleomenes,
on the contrary, took too bold and violent a method
to effectuate his projected changes in the police of
Sparta. It was an act of injustice to put to deatli^

"3 Thi.«, it must be remembered, is tbc language of a lieatben
writer. The more accurate ctbics of Christianity do not denominate
tbat man courageous, who flies from difficulties and dangers by self-
destruction.

Hoc, rogo, 7ion Juror est, ne moriare, mori ?*

WITH TIBERIUS AND CAIIJS GRACCHUS. 247

the Ephori, wliom lie might either have brought over
to his party by force, because he was superior in
arms, or have sent into exile as he did many others.
For to have recourse to the knife, except in cases of
extreme necessity, indicates neither the good physi-
cian nor the able statesman, but unskilfulness in
both. Besides, in politics, that unskilfulness is al-
ways attended with injustice and cruelty. But nei-
ther of the Gracchi began the civil war, or dipped
his hands in the blood of his countrymen. Caius,
we are told, even when attacked, did not ve^
pel force with force ; and, though no one behaved
with more courage and vigour than he had done in
other wars, none was so siov/ to lift his arm against
a fellovz-citizen. He went out unarmed to a scene
of fury and sedition : when the tight began, he re-
tired ; and throughout the whole he appeared more
solicitous to avoid the doing of harm, than the re-
ceiving of it. The flight, therefore, of the Gracchi
must not be considered as an act of cowardice, but
of patriotic discretion. For I hey were under a neces-
sity either of flying, or of fighting in their own de-
fence, if they stayed.

The strongest charge against Tiberius is, that he
deposed his collegue, and sued for a second tribune-
ship. Caius was blamed for Antyllius' death, but
against all reason and justice ; for the fact was com-
mitted without his approbation, and was indeed by
him regarded as a most unhappy circumstance. On
the other hand, Cleomenes, not to mention any more
the assassination of the Ephori, took an unconstitu-
tional step in enfranchising all the slaves ; and in
reality reigned alone, though in order to save ap-
pearances he admitted as a partner in the throne his
brother Euclidas, who was not of the other family
claiming the privilege of giving one of the kings to
8parta. Archidamus, who was of that family, and
had as much right as himself to the throne, he perr
suaded to return from Messene. In consequence of
this, he was assassinated^ and, as Cleomenes made no

248 TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS.

inquiry into the murther, it is probable that he was
justly censured as the cause of it. Whereas Lycur-
gus, whom he pretended to adopt as his pattern,
freely surrendered to his nephew Charilaus the king-
dom committed to his charge, and that he might not
be blamed in case of his untimely death, went abroad
and wandered a long time in foreign countries; not
returning, till Charilaus had a son to succeed him in
the throne. It is true, Greece never produced any
other man, who can be compared with Lycurgus.

We have shown that Cleomenes, in the course of
his government, introduced greater innovations, and
committed grosser acts of injustice. And those, that
are inclined to censure the persons of whom we are
writing, represent him as from, the first of a tyranni-
cal disposition, and a lover of war"*^ The Gracchi
they accuse of imnioderate ambition, malignity itself
not being able to discover in them any other flaw.
At the same time thev acknowlcdo-e, that those tri-
bunes might possibly be carried beyond the dictates
of their native disposition by anger and the heat of
contention, which like so many hurricanes drove
them at last upon some extremes in their administra-
tion. What indeed could be more just or meritori-
ous than their first design, to v.hich they would have
adhered, had not the rich and the ])Owerful by their
violent methods of thwarting the bill involved them
both in tho:^e fatal quarrels; the one to defend him-
self, and the other to avenge his brother, w-ho had
been taken off without any form of law or justice ?

From these observations, you "*■' may easily perceive
the difference between them. But if you require me
to characterise each of them singly, I pronounce tliat
the palm of virtue belongs to Tibeiius, young Agis
had the fewest iaults, and Caius in point of coinage
and spirit of enterprise was little inferior to Cleo-
menes.

'»4 See Polyb. ii.

45 These Lives are addressed by Plutarch to Sossius Senecio-,
See the Life of Theseus iu the beginning.*

THE

LIFE

OF

DEMOSTHENES.

SUMMARY.

Virtue independent of the place of one's nativity. Plutarch little versed
in the Latin language^ which he did not begin to study till late in
life. His ohject in writing the Lives of Demostlienes and Cicero.
Extraction of Demosthenes. Origin of his ambition to speak in
public. He pleads against his guardians ; and addresses the peo'
pie, with little success : is dejected, but encouraged by one of his
friends. His extraordinary pains to improve himself in oratory.
He refuses to speak upon any subject unprepared j but occasionally
does so, and succeeds. Different opinions about him. His great
efforts to get the better of his personal defects; his repartees. He
enters upon public business. His treatment cf Miaias. Fidelity to
his party. Principle, upon which the chief part of his orations are
written. His superiority, in moral xwrth, to the contemporary
orators: His orations. He inveighs against Philip, even before
the tear breaks out. His zealin favour of Greece. He persuades
the Thehans to join the confederacy. Credit accruing to him from
that measure: he contemns the ill omens announced ; but in the bat-
tle throws away his arms, and Jlies. Marks of esteem shoim him
by the King of Persia. He is selected to ynake the general oration
over the bones of those, who fell at Chceronea. Death of Philip-
and Demosthenes' exultation upon that event : Justified against
JEschines' reproaches. New league of the Greeks, disconcerted by
Alexander's success. That prince deynands of the Athenians ten of
their orators : Demades obtains their pardon. Demosthenes regains
a little credit. The affair " Concerning the Croxvn.'' He accepts
a, bribe f and goes over to Harpalus' interest; is examined before

250 DEMOSTHENES.

the court of Areopagus, and sentenced to pay a fine offyhj talen^^*
and to he imprisoned till it is paid. He escape?, and gets out of the
city ; bears his exile very tcealclij; f? re-animated by the account of
Alexander's deaths and recalled ^ but soon aftervcard condemned to
death. He seeks refuge at Calauria, in the temple of Neptune,
ivhencc Archias endeavotirs to seduce him, but xvithout effect. He
takes poison, tvhich he constantly carried about him. Different tra-
dilions about his death. Honours paid by the Athenians to his
memory. Death of Demades,

"nnrryT*!

V V IIOEVER. it was, my Sossiiis, that wrote the en^
comium upon Alcibiades for his victory in the char
riot-race at the Olympic games \ whether Euripides
(which is the common opinion) or some other, he
pronounces it " The first requisite to happiness, that
a man be born in no mean city '.'* But as to real
happiness, whicli consists principally in the habit and
jLlispositionof the mind, I myself think it would make
jio difference though a man should be born in an in-
considerable town, or of a mother wlio had no advan-
tages either of size or beauty : for it is ridiculous to
suppose that Julis, a small town in Ceos (itself an in-
considerable island), and .^Egina, which an Athenian
" wished to have removed as an eye-sore to the
" Pirosus," should have given birth to good poets
and players^, and yet not be able to produce a man

» In these it was the highest of glories to be successful, and the
noblest of lyric poets tbuught thein fit subjects of their immortal
cues. The victors, as Horace informs us (Od. I. i.), were elevated
to the rank of 'Gods'. No wonder then, that kin!!:s were seen among
the competitors. Alcibiades sent seven chariots thitiier, and carried
ofi'the three first prizes. (See hh Life, II. 121.) *

- * I cannot reflect without pleasure on the bounty of nature,
vhich cast my birth in a free and civilised country, in an age of sci-
ence and philosophy,' &c. &c. ((Jibbou's ^Mem. i. 17. 4 to.) The
present Emperor of llu.ssia (Alex. I.) is said to have observed, that
the man possessing the most materials for happiness is an English
country gentleman. The maxim in the text is by Ammianus IVIar-
cellinus ascribed to Simonides.*

3 Sinionides the elegiac, and Bacchylides the lyric, poet were of
Ceos; and Polus the celebrated tragedian was of iCgina, as was

DEMOSTHENES. 251

capable of the virtues of justice, contentment, and
magnanimity. Those arts, indeed, wliich are to gain
the master considerable profit or lionour, may pro-
bably not flourish in mean and insignificant towns.
But virtue like a strong and hardy plant will take
root in any place, w here it can find an ingenuous na-
ture, and a mind that has no aversion from labour
and discipline. If our sentiments or our conduct
therefore fall short of the point, which they ought to
reach, we must impute it not to the obscurity of the
place where we were born, but to our little selves.

These reflexions however do not extend to an
author, who would write a history of events that
happened in a foreign country, and cannot be learn-
ed in his own. As he has his materials to collect
from a variety of volumes dispersed in different libra-
ries, his first care should be to take up his residence
in some respectable and populous town, which has an
ambition for literature. There, he will meet with
many curious and valuable books : and the particu-
lars,* that are wanting in writers, he may upon in-
quiry derive from those who have stored them in the
faithful repository of memory. This will prevent his
^vork from being defective in any material point.
As to myself, I live in a small town, and I clioose to
live there, lest it should become still smaller "\ When
I was in Rome and otiier parts of Italy, I had not
leisure to study the Latin tongue, on account of the
public commissions with which I was charged, and
the number of people who came to be instructed by
me in })hilosophy. It was not therefore till a late
period of life, that I began to read the Iloman

likewise (according to some writers) Aristophanes, the comic author.
This latter island, which Pindar has celebrated (Pyth. viii. 38.) as
♦ the nurse of heroes,' had in Plutarch's time become proverbially
degenerated. The Athenian, who wished it removed, was Pericles
(See his Life, II. H., and Aristot. Rhet. iii. 10.), referring more
probably to its maritime rivalry of Athens, than to it's physical
position.*

* Cheeronea, in Boeotia. See the Life of Plutarch, prefixed to
tiiis work.*

259 DEMOSTHENES.

authors. The process may seem strange, and yet
it is very true. I did not so much gain the know-
ledge of things by words, as words by the knowledge
which I had of things. I shall only add, that to at-
tain such a skill in the language, as to be master of
the beauty and fluency of it's expressions, with it's
figures, it's harmony, and all the other graces of it's
structure, would indeed be an elegant and agreeable
accomplishment. But the practice and pains, which
it demands, are more than I have time for, and I must
relinquish the ambition of excelling in that walk to
younger men.

In this book, which is the fifth of our parallels, we
intend to give the Lives of Demosthenes and Cicero,
and from their actions and political conduct we shall
collect and compare their manners and disposition ;
but, for the reason already assigned, we shall not
pretend to examine their orations, or to determine
which of them was the more agreeable speaker ',
For as Ion says,

Such is the dolphin's force when drafrn to land !

Caecilius^, a Avriter at all times much too presump-
tuous, paid little regard to that maxim of the poet's,
when he so boldly attempted a comparison between
Demosthenes and Cicero. But perhaps the precept,
*' Know thyself," would not be considered as di-
vine, if every man coLdd easily reduce it to practice.

s This, M. Ricard observes, as he might justly have assigned the
palm to Demosthenes, completcl}' exonerates him from the impu-
tation of partiality to his Grecian heroes. Longinus (sect. 12.) has
given a short sketch of their respective characters, as speakers.
Ion was a drunken poet and philosopher of Chios. See ^-Elian V,
II. ii. 4-1. , and Bentl. Ep. ad. Mill. He i^rote odos and tragedies.
Analogous to the proverb quoted from him is the Latin Ccnitlicriuin
injbssd, Liv, xxiii. 47., upon which Crevierhas a satisfactory note.*

^ A celebrated Jewij^h rhetorician of Calantis in Sicily, who lived
in the time of Augustus, and was the friend of Dion. Halic. He
wrote a Treatise on the Sublime, which is mentioned by Longinus ;
and was the first, aCeording to Suid;\s, who ' attempted the com-
parison' mentioned in the text.

DEMOSTHENES. 553

Demosthenes and Cicero appear to me to have been
orighially formed by nature in the same mould, so
great is the resemblance in their disposition. The
same ambition, the same love of liberty, pervades
their whole administration, and the same timidity
amidst wars and dangers. Neither did they less re-
semble each other in their fortunes. For I deem it
impossible to find two other orators, who raised
themselves from obscure beginnings to such autho-
rity and power, who both opposed kings and tyrants,
who both lost their daughters, were both banished
from their country and recalled with honour, both
forced to fly again, both taken by their enemies, and
at last both doomed to die along with the liberties
of their country. So that if nature and fortune, like
two artificers, were to descend upon the scene and.
dispute about their work, it would be difficult to de-
cide whether tiie former had produced a closer re-
semblance in their dispositions, or the latter in the
circumstances of their lives. We shall begin with
the more ancient.

Demosthenes, the father of Demosthenes, was one
of the principal citizens of Athens. Theopompus
informs us, he was called ' the Sword-cutler *,' be-
cause he employed a great number of slaves in that
business. As to what ^schines the orator relates
concerning his mother \ that she was tiie daughter
of one Gylon ^, who had been forced to fly for trea-
son against the commonwealth, and a barbarian wo-
man, we cannot take upon us to pronounce whether

* ' ■ •Pater ardentis- massce fuli<rine UppuSy
A carbone et Jbrcipibus, giadiosgue parante
liicude, et lutco V^dcano adrlietora misit. (Jav. Sat. x. ISO.)"
" In his Oration against Ctesiphon.

^ Gylon was accused of iiaving betrayed to the enemy a town in
Pontus, called Nymphssum ; upon which he fled into Scythia, where
he married a native of the country and had two daughters by hert
one of them married t© Philochares, and the other, named Cleobule,
to Demosthenes. Her fortune was fifty minae ; and from this mar-
riage sprang * the Orator.'

254. DEMOSTHENES.

it was dictated by truth, or by falsehood and malig-
nity. He had a large fortune left him by his father,
who died when lie was only seven years of age, the
whole beina^ estimated at little less than lifteen
talents. But he was greatly wronged by his guar-
dians, who con\'erted part of it to their own use, and
suffered part to lie neglected. Nay, they were vile
enough to defraud his tutors of their salaries. This
was the chief reason, that he had not those advan-
tages of education, to which by his ((uality he was en-
titled. His mother did not choose that he should be
put to hard and laborious exercises, on account of
the weakness and delicacy of his frame ; and his pre-
ceptors, being ill paid, did not press him to attend
them. From the first indeed he was of a slender
and sickly habit, insomuch that the boys are said to
have ffiven him the contemptuous name of Batalus^
■on account of his natural defects. Some affirm that
Batalus was an effeminate musician, whom Anti-
phanes ridiculed in one of his farces ; others, that he
was a poet, v-liose verses were of the most wanton
and licentious kind. The Athenians, likewise, of
that time seem to have ffiven the name of Batalus to
a part of the body which decency forbids us to name.
We are told, that Demosthenes had also the name of
Argas, either on account of the savage and morose
turn of his behaviour, for there is a kind of serpent
which some of the ])oets call Argas ^^ : or else from
the severity of his expressions, whicii often gave his

9 Hesychlus gives a ditlerent explanation of tlic word * KPttahis;'
but Plutarch must be allowed, mal^irrc M. Dacier, to have under-
stood the sense of the Greek word as well as Hesychius. (L.)
From Aul. Gel), i. 5. however, and .^sch. in Timarch. it appears,
that Demosthenes was notorious ibr the eifen^.iaaey of his dress.*

■° Hi}»pocrates also (dc Morb. Vulg. v ) nientiojis a serpent of
that name, which crept into a young man's mouth. Pahnerius
refers the appellation (which, it appears from ililscli. ^.^t riufx-rf.
was consequent on his action against his guardiauii) to the fable ot
the serpent, which stung the traveller after having been festered ii>
his bosom. The poet Argas is mentioned by Athcn. xiv. 9.*

DEMOSTHENES. 255

hearers pain ; the verses of the poet Argas being
pecuh'arly keen and satirical. But enough, as Plato
says, upon this head.

His ambition to speak in public is said to have
taken its rise on the following occasion : The orator
Callistratus was to plead in the cause, which the city
ofOropus" had then depending; and the expec-
tation of the public was much raised both by the
powers of the speaker, which were at that time in
the highest repute, and by the importance of the
trial. Demosthenes, hearing the governors and
tutors agree among themselves to attend the trial,
with much importunity prevailed upon his master to
take him to hear the pleadings. The master, having
some acquaintance with the officers who opened the
court, procured his young pupil a seat, where he
could hear the orators without being seen. Callis-
tratus had great success, and his abilities were ex-
tremely admired. Demosthenes was fired with a
spirit of emulation*. When he saw with what dis-

^' Oropus was a town on the banks of the Euripus, on the fron-
tiers of Attica. The Thebans, though they had been relieved in
their distress by Chabrias and the Athenians, forgot their former
services, and took Oropus from them. Thi» subjected Chabrias to
the suspicion of treachery, and Calhstratus was retained to plead
jigainst him. See Demosthenes' Oration against Midias. At the
time of the trial (01. ciii. 3.) he was about sixteen. For the different
masters of this disputed place, see Pausan. i, tvi. ; Thucyd. i. 28.;
Diod. Sic. xiv. 17. ; Xenoph. Ilellen. vii. ; andDera. s-fp; Zn^. xxix.
* Fro.ii the commentary usually, but improperly f, ascribed to
Ulpian v/e learn that Demosthenes upon being asked, 'Whether Cal-
listratus or himself were the better speaker ?' he replied, ' I to the
reader, Callistratus to the hearer.' This may perhaps be ascribed
to his modesty; or it may probably have been said at some early
period when he had not attained the excellence which he afterward
reached, and for which he is celebrated by the unanimous voice of
antiquity: for after all his labours in the choice of matter, in the
decorations of stile, and in the graces of delivery (recorded by Plu-
* tarch, by Cicero, and by Quintilian, who particularly records xi. 3.
the opinion of his illustrious adversary), we cannot admit it'$ truth
in his more advanced and ripened age. See Parr's Character of
Fox, II. 558.

This is quite reconcileable with the judgement expressed upon the
relative merits of Phocion and Demosthenes, V. 8.*

f See Chapman's Ohservationes in Comm. vulg. Ulpian. prefixed
ij Moimteney's Demosthenes.

^56 DEMOSTHENES.

tinction the advocate was conducted home and com-
plimented by the people, be uas struck still more
with the power of that commanding eloquence,
■which could carry all before it. From this time
therefore he bade adieu to the other studies and ex-
ercises in which boys are engaged, and applied him-
self with the utmost assiduity to declaiming, in hopes
of being one day numbered among the orators.
Isaeus was the man, whom he attended as his pre-
ceptor in eloquence, though Isocrates w^as then a
teacher : whether it was, that the loss of his father
incapacitated him from paying the surn often mina?'*,
which was that rhetorician's usual price ; or he pre-
ferred the keen and subtile manner of Isyeus, as more
fit for public purposes.

Hermippus says, he met with an account in certain
anonymous Memoirs, that Demosthenes likewise
studied under Plato '^, and received great assistance
from him in preparing to speak in public. Ctesibius

'^ This could not be the reason, if what is recorded in the Life of
Isaeus be true, that lie was retained as tutor to Demosthenes at the
price of a hundred niint-c. (L.) Isaeus, according to Dion. Halic,
was one of the best orators at Athens. Ten of his orations are still
extant.*

'3 This is confirmed by Cicero (Brut, xxxi.) Lectitavisse Plato-
nem stiidiose, audivisse etiam, Demosthenes dicitur : Idque npparet
in genere ct granditate verhorum. Dicit etiam in qiuulam Epistold
hoc ipse de sese. Again, in his Orat. iv. Quod idem de Demnsthene
exist imnri potest j cujus ex Epistolis inteUigi licet, quam frequens
J'lierit Flatonis auditor. It is possible that Cicero in both these
places alludes to that letter of Demosthenes addressed to Heracleo-
dorus, in which he thus speaks of Plato's philosophy: ' Since you
have espoused the doctrine of Plato, which is so distant from avarice,
from artifice, and violence — a doctrine, whose object is the perfec-
tion of goodness and justice ! Immortal gods ! Mhen once a man has
adopted this doctrine, is it possible that he should deviate from truth,
or entertain one selfish or ungenerous sentiment V (L.) (See also
his De Orat. i. 20., and the Preface to his Offices ; with Quint, xii. 2.,
and Aul. Gell. iii. 13.) ' Dion. Halic. in that part of his Ttyjn, whicB
treats Ui^i rui iv fi/'XiTxi^ ?r/>i:ujtA,iAiiu,i\.eov^ points out some instances in

Avhich Demostliencs cvyccya'y./^iTsti xcirx i:ty-K<ri' Try Ti?,</,Tme(;, So in-
tent was he upon giving the utmost perfection to his stile!' (Parr's
Character of Fox, II. 557.) The Plerraippus here mentioned was
an historian of Smyrna, and wrote the Lives of some eminent scho-
lars. (Voss. de liist. Grac.)*

DEMOSTHENES. 257

(he adds) used to affirm, that Demosthenes was pri-
vately supplied by Callias the Syracusan and some
others with the systems of rhetoric taught by Iso-,
crates and Alcidamas, and made his advantage of
them ^\

When his minority w^as expired, he called his guar-
dians to account at law, and wrote orations against
them. As they found many methods of chicane and
delay, he had great opportunity, according to Thu-
cydides, of exercising his talent for tlie bar ^*. It
w^as not without much exertion and some risk, that
he gained his cause ; and, at last, it was but a very
small part of his patrimony which he could recover.
By those means, however, he acquired a proper as-
surance and some experience 5 and having tasted the
honour and power tliat follow in the train of elo-
quence, he attempted to speak in the public debates,
and take a share in the administration. As it is
related of Laomedon the Orchomenian, that by the
advice of his physicians, in some disorder of the
spleen he applied himself to running, and continued
it constantly a great length of way, till he gained
such excellent health and breath, that he contended
for the crown at the puijlic games and distinguished-
himself in the Long Course ^'^ ; so it happened to De-
mosthenes, that he first appeared at the bar for the
recovery of his own fortune, which had been nearly
embezzled ; and having acquired in that cause a per-
suasive and powerful manner of speaking, he disput-

'-* Lucian, in his Encom., informs us that Demosthenes profited
by the tuition of CalHstratus, Alcidamas, Isocrates, Isseus, Eubulides,-
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Xenocrates, and Plato.

'^' He lost his father at the age of seven, and he was ten years im
tlie hands of guarcVians. He therefore began to pkad in his eigh-
teenth year, which as it was only in his own private affairs, was not
forbidden by the laws. (L.)

M, Ricard, following Barton (the editor of the Lives of Domost.
henes and Cicero) by a slight alteration in the text translates it,
* he had great opportunity of improving himself by the study of
Thucydides;' whom he is said by Lucian (Cpos A?rciJivro*) and
others, to have transcribed eight times.*

"^ See the Life of Phocion, V, 27., not. (22.)

VOL. V. • S

253 DEMOSTHENES.

cd the crown, for so I may call it, with the other
orators before the general assembly.

In his first address to the people, however, he was
laughed at, and interrupted by their clamours ; for
the violence of his manner threw him into a confu-
sion of periods, and a distortion of argument. Be-
sides, he had a weakness and stammering in his voice,
and a want of breath, which caused such a distrac-
tion in his discourse, that it was difficult for tlie
audience to understand him. At last, upon his
quitting the assembly Eunomus the Thriasian, a man
at that time far advanced in years, found him wan»
dering in a dejected condition in the Piraeus, and
undertook to set him riiijht: " You have a manner
" of speaking," said he, " very like that of Tericles j
" and yet you lose yourself, out of mere timidity
" and cowardice. You neither bear up against the
" tumults of a popular assembly, nor prepare your
" body by exercise for the labour of the Rostrum, but
*' suffer your parts to wither away in indolence and
" carelessness."

Another time (we are told) when his speeches
had been ill received, and he was returning home
with his head covered and in the utmost distress,
Satyrus the player, M'ho was an acquaintance of his,
followed and Ment in with him. Demostlicnes la-
mented to him, " That though he was the most
" laborious of all the orators, and had almost sacri-
" Heed his health to his application, he yet could
" gain no favour with the people; but drunken sea-
" men and other unlettered persons were heard, and
" kept the Rostrum, while he was entirely disie-
" garded '''." " Your observation is just," answered

'" This was the privilege of all democratic stat'js. Some think,
that bv seamen hi,' means Deniadcs, whose profession was that of a
mariner (Quint, ii. 17.), (L.) and whose character, according to
Pytheas, was that of extreme drunkenness. See Athen. ii. Of
Satyrus, Demosthenes (^ffi Daf ^rp. xviii.) recoids a veiy honour-
able trait, which he places in opposition to the licentiousness of
yEschincs.*

D^IOSTHENES* 25S

Satyrus ; " but I will soon provide a remedy, if
*' you will repeat to me some speech in Euri-
" pides or Sophocles." When Demosthenes had
finished, Satyrus pronounced the same speech ; and
he did it with such propriety of action, and so
much in character, that it appeared to the orator
quite a different passage. He now understood so
perfectly what grace and dignity action adds to the
best oration, that he thought it a small matter to pre-
meditate and compose, though with the utmost care,
if pronunciation and propriety of gesture were not
likewise attended to. Upon this, he built himself a
subterraneous study, which remained even to our
times '^. Thither he repaired every day, to form his
action and exercise his voice, and there he would
often stay for two or three months together ; shaving
one side of his head, that if he should accidentally
long to go abroad, the shame of appearing in that
condition might detain him within.

When he did go out upon a visit or receive one,
he would take something that passed in conversation,
some business or fact that was reported to him, for a
subject upon which to exercise himself. As soon as
he liad parted from his fnends, he retired to his
study, where he repeated the matter in order as it
passed, together with the arguments for and against
it. The substaace of the speeches which he heard
he committed to memory, and afterward reduced
them to regular sentences and periods ^^j meditating

'^ Barton, and after him M. Ricard, quotes a passage from
Wheler, upon the subject apparently of this celebrated study, called
^ Demosthenes' Lantern ;' but the place of which he there speaks,
is not subterraneous. It might possibly have been erected by the
Athenians, to preserve the memory of the other ; or it might have
succeeded to it's renown, like Marius' oak, mentioned by Cic. de
-Legg. i. 1. So, it. maybe trusted, the mulberry-trees ofShakspeare
and Milton, at Stratford and Christ's College, Cambridge, will
never want their representatives. There is even said to be still
remaining some kindred memorial of the tree, whence Nev/ton in-
ferred the stupendous theory of gravitation.*

'9 Cicero, as we find in his Epistles to Atticus, followed precisely

S 2 -

260 DEMOSTHENES.

a variety of corrections and new forms of expressiotlj
both for what others had said to him, and for his
own replies. Hence it was concluded, tliat he was
not a man of much genius, and that all his eloquence
was the effect of labour '^^. A strong proof of this
seemed to be, that he was seldom heard to speak
any thing extemporary ; and though the people
often called upon him by name, as he sat in the as-
sembly, to speak to the point debated, he would
never do it unless he came prepared. For this,
many of the orators ridiculed him ; and Pytheas in
particular told him, " That all his arguments smelled
" of the lamp*.'* Demosthenes retorted sharply
npon him, " Yes, indeed ; but your lamp and mine,
" my friend, are not conscious of the same labours.'*
To others he did not pretend to deny his previous
application, but told them, " He neither wrote the
" whole of his orations, nor spoke without having
" iirst committed a ])art of them to WTiting." He
farther affirmed, " That this proved him a good
" member of a democratic state, for the coming pre-
" pared to the Rostrum was a mark of respect for
'' the people ; whereas to be regardless of what they
" might think of a man's address, show^ed his incli-
" nation for oligarchy, and that he had rather gain
" his point by force than by persuasion." Another
proof adduced of his want of confidence upon any
sudden occasion is, that when he iiappened to be
thrcwn into disorder by the tumultuary behaviour
of the people, Demades often rose up to support
him in an address, whereas he never did the same for
Demades.

the same pEactice. These argumen ts he calls ©trn? politico:, and
gives us a list of them. (ix. 4.)

"° ET*,[;t-£Av;5 /y^a>iAev •<? £U(?v>;?. (Hermipp. ap. Suid. voc. Demosth.)
Ol" Pytheas and Demades, mentioned below, see some account iu
the Life of Phocion, V. 2. 25., &c.*

* No vroiwlcr that with such application, to improve such talents,
he should hava been held in the estimation o( Cicero, Quintilian,
and all the critics of antiquity as nearly a perfect orator. 'Parr's
i'haracter of Fox, II. 55~.

DEMOSTHENES. 2€i

Wherefore then, it may be asked, did -^schfnes
pronounce him an orator of the most admirable as-
surance : How could he stand up alone and refute
Python the Byzantian "^, whose eloquence poured
against the Athenians like a torrent ? and when La-
machus the Myrrhentean '^^ pronounced at the
Olympic games an encomium which he had written
upon Philip and Alexander, and in which he had
asserted many reproachful things against the The-
bans and Olynthians, how could Demosthenes rise
lip and prove by a ready induction of facts the many
benefits, for which Greece was indebted to the The-
bans and Chalcidians, and the many evils which the
flatterers of the Macedonians had brought upon
their country ? This likewise wrought such a change
in the minds of the audience, that the sophist his
antagonist, apprehending a tumult, stole out of the
assembly.

Upon the whole, it appears that Demosthenes did
not take Pericles entirely for his model. He only
adopted his action and delivery, and his prudent
resolution not to make a practice of speaking from
a sudden impulse, or upon every casual occasion ;
being persuaded, that to that conduct he owed his
greatness. Yet, while he declined frequently trust-

^' This was one of the most glorious circumstances in Demost-
henes' life. The fate of his countr}', in a great measure, depended
upon his eloquence. When Elatea was lost, and Philip threatened
to march against Athens, the Athenians applied for succours to the
Boeotians. The league being established and the troops assembled
at Chaeronea, Philip sent embassadors to the council of Bceotia, the
chief of whom was Python, one of the ablest oratoi-s of his time.
(^•Esch. Trif^i'Tiupa^p. xl.) After he had inveighed with all the powers
of eloquence against the Athenians and their cause, Demosthenes
replied to him, and carried the point in their favour. With this vic-
tory he was so elevated, that he mentions it in his Oration (^sp* Unp.
xliii.) in almost the same bold terms, which Plutarch has here used.
See Lucian in Encom., and Philostr. Life of Apoll. Tyan. vii. 3.

-^ If we suppose this Lamachus to have been of Attica, the text
should be altered from ' Myrrhenaean ' to ' Myrrhinusian ;' for
* Myrrhinus ' was a borough of Attica. But there was a town called
Myrrhine in JEoYia, and another in Lemnos, and probably Lama-
phus wa* one of these.

6

M2 DEMOSTHENES.

ing the success of his powers to fbrtiine, lie did not
absolutely neglect the reputation, which may be ac-
quired by speaking upon an emergency. And if we
believe Eratosthenes-^, Demetrius the Phalerean,
and the comic poets, there was a loftier spirit and
confidence in his unpremeditated orations, than in
those w^iich he had committed to writing. By Era-
tosthenes we are told, that in his extemporaneous
harangues he often spoke as from a supernatural
impulse ; and Demetrius informs us, that in an ad-
dress to the people, he once, like a man inspired,
uttered this oath in verse ;

By earth, by all her fountains, streams, and floods.

One of the comic writers calls him Rhopoperpcr-
ethras*^; and another, ridiculing his frequent use of
the antithesis, says,

* Retaking, as he took ' — a phrase, to please.
The ear fastidious of Demosthenes.

Unless indeed the author (Antiphanes) were play-
ing upon that passage in the Oration concerning the
isle of Halonesus, in which Demosthenes advises the
Athenians " not to take, but to retake it from
Philip -^^^

It was universally agreed, however, that Demades
excelled all the orators, when he trusted to nature

^■^ Of Cyrene, a pupil of Callimachus, and keeper of the Alex-
andrian library under Ptolemy Euergetes. He was surnained
Beta, for having said that ' he iiad rather be second in all the sci-
ences, than first in any one of them.'*

^^ * A haberdasher of small wares,' or something like it. (L.)
This usage of combining many words together was familiar to the
old comedians, who did not so much attend to the justice, as to the
ludicrousness of the compound.*

^^ i. e. ' Not to receive it as a favour, but to recover it as a
right.' Halonesus is a small island in the iEgean sea, over against
Thessaly. See iEsch. Kocrot, Kr)>5. xxx., and yElian, V. H. xii, 53.*
There is an expression something like what Plutarch has quoted,
about the beginning of that Oration. Libanius suspects the whole

DEMOSTHENES. 268

alone, and tliat his sudden effusions were superior to
the laboured speeches of Demostlienes. Aristo of
Chios gives us the following account of Theophras-
tus' opinion concerning tliese rival speakers : Being
asked, " What he thought of Demosthenes as an
" orator? " he said, " I think him worthy of Athens ;*'
" And what of Demades -^ ?" " I think him above it.'*
The same philosopher relates of Polyeuctus ^^ the
Sphettian, who was one of the principal persons at
that time in the Athenian administration, that he
called " Demosthenes the greatest orator, and Pho-
" cion the most powerful speaker ;'* because the lat-
ter comprised a great deal of sense in a few words.
To the same purpose we are told that Demosthenes
himself, whenever Phocion got up to oppose him,
used to say to his friends, " Here comes the prun-
" ing-hook of my periods *.'* It is uncertain indeed,
whether Demosthenes referred to Phocion's manner
of speaking, or to his life and character. The latter
might possibly be the case, because he knew that a
word or a nod from a man of superior character is
more regarded than the long discourses of others.

As for his personal defects, Demetrius the Phale-
rean informs us of the remedies, which he applied to
them ; and he says, that he had it from Demosthenes
himself in his old age. The hesitation and stam-
mering of his tongue, he corrected by practising to

of the composition to be spurious, and ascribes it to Hegesippus;
but this raillery of the poet on Demosthenes seems to prove the
contrary,

Demosthenes is censured by Demetrius tlie Phalerean for his ex.'
ccssive use of this figure. That the quotation from Antiphanes
is rightly rendei'ed, appears from Athen. vi. 1. quoted by Barton.*

''' To a character of public speaking, composed of emphasis, alle-
gory, and hyperbole, Demetrius Phalereus gives the denomination
of ' Demadean.'

This opinion of Theophrastus, however, must refer only ' to extem-
poraneous effusions, in which Demades, from the natural vigour of his
niind,andfrom habit, had confessedly the superiority. The unrivalled
excellence of the speeches ivrittai by Demosthenes is indisputable.'*

^7 This orator, though he defended Midias, in all public matters
most cordially co-operated with Demosthenes.

* See the Life of Phocion, V. 8.

2G4, de:\iosthenes.

speak with pebbles in his mouth ; and his voice he
strengthened by running or walking up hill, and
pronouncing some passage in an oration or a poem,
during the difficulty of breath which that exercise
created. He liad moreover a lookinsjr-irlass in his
house, before which he used to declaim, and adjust
all his motions*^.

It is said, that a man came to him one day, and
desired him to be his advocate against a person from
whom he had suffered by assault: " Not you in-
*' deed," said Demosthenes, " you have suffered no
*' such tiling-^." "What!" said the man, raising
his voice, " have I not received those blows ?"
" Ay, now," replied Demosthenes, " you speak like
^' a person that has been really injured." So much,
in his opinion, do the tone of voice and the action
contribute to gain the speaker credit in what he
affirms.

His action was extremely agreeable to the com-
monalty ; but people of taste (among whom was
Demetrius the Phalerean) thought there was some-
thing in it low, inelegant, and uiunanly. Hermip-
pus acquaints us, that -^sion being asked his opi-
nion of the ancient and modern orators, replied,
^' Whoever has heard the orators of former times,
" must admire the decorum and dignity with which
*' they spoke. Yet, when we read the orations of
" Demosthenes, we must allow that they have more
^' art in the composition and greater force." It is
needless to mention, that in his written orations
there was something extremely sarcastic and severe ;
but in his sudden repartees there was, also, somcr
thing of humour "^ When Demades said, " De-

*^ Upon this subject see Lucian in Encom., Cic. de Orat. i. 61.,
Quint, xi. 3., and Val. Max. viii. 7.*

^0 Cicero, in his defence of Q. Gallius, converts this to an argu-
ment: Tutsi uc, M. Galidi, nisijinjreres, sic agcres? (Brut. Jxxx.)*

^°Lon<:inus will not allow him the least excellence in matters of
* humour.' (xxviii.) Colyttus, mentioned below, was one of the Attic
boroufrhs.

DEjNIOSTHENES. S6a

*' mostlienes to me ! a sow to Minerva !" our orator
answered, " This Minerva was found the other day
" playing the whore in Colyttus." When a rascal
surnamed Chalcus^^, attempted to jest upon his late
studies and long watchings, he said, " I know my
*' lamp offends thee. But you need not wonder, my
" countrymen, that we have so many robberies, when
" we have thieves of brass and walls only of clay."
Though more of his sayings might be produced, we
shall pass them over, and proceed to view the rest
of his manners and character in his actions and his
political conduct.

He himself informs us, that he entered upon pub-^
lie business in the time of the Phocian war^-; and
the same may be collected from his Philippics. For
some of the last of them were delivered after that
war was finished, and the earlier relate to it*s im-
mediate transactions. It appears also that he was
two and thirty years old, when he was preparing his
Oration against Midias, and yet at that time he had
attained no name or power in the administration.
This, indeed, seems to have been the reason of his
stropping the prosecution for a sum of money. For,

■ no prayer, no moving art

E'er bent that tierce inexorable heart 3J.

He was, in truth, vindictive in his nature, and im-
placable in his resentments. It was a difficult thing,
he found, and out of the reach of his interest, to pull
down a man so well supported upon all sides as Midias
bv wealth and friends ; and he therefore listened to
the application in his behalf. Had he seen any
hopes or possibility of crushing his enemy, I cannot

3' That is, ' Brass.'

3- 01. cvi. ^.j B. C. 353. Demosthenes was then in his twenty-
ninth year, (L.) On the war here mentioned, which broke out OL
cv. 4. (Pausan. x. 2.), and lasted nearljr ten years, see a former note.
The passage here referred to iii Demosthenes, occurs in his srs^
'STi(p. vii.*

33 Pop^. Ilora. II. XX. 467.

-26e DEMOSTHENES.

think that three thousand drachmae could have dis-
armed his anger.

He had a glorious subject for his political ambition,
to defend the cause of Greece against Philip ; and
he defended it like a champion worthy of such a
charge, speedily gaining a high reputation both for
his eloquence and his courage. He was admired in
Greece, and courted by the king of Persia. Nay,
Phihp himself had a much better opinion of him than
of the other orators ; and his enemies acknowledged,
that they had to contend with a great man. For
^-Eschines and Plyperides, in their I'ery accusations,
give him this character.

I wonder therefore how Theopompus^* could state
that he was a man of no steadiness, seldom long
pleased either with the same persons or objects;
when on the contrary it appears, that he adhered to
the party and the measures which he first adopted,
and was so far from forsaking them during his life,
that he forfeited his life rather than forsake them.
Demades, to excuse the inconsistency of his own
public character, used to say ; " I may have assert-
" ed things contrary to my former sentiments, but
*' never any thing contrary to the true interest of
" the commonwealth." Melanopus^', who w^as of
the opposite party to Callistratus, often suffered him-
vsclf to be bougiit off, and then by way of apology to
the people observed ; " It is true, the man is my
*' enemy, but the public good should be our ruling
" motive.'* And Nicodemus the Messenian, who
hrst supported the interest of Cassander and sub-
sequently that of Demetrius, alleged that " he was
" guilty of no inconsistency, for it was the best
" policy to side with the strongest." But we have

54 Tills writer a native of Chios, beside his general turn for find-
ing tault, was particularly^iostile to Athens ; which may account for
Jiib severity toward Demosthenes. The orator, however, was ac-
cused also by others of unsteadiness and caprice. See ^Esch. m^i
Us^fsi/Tf, xvii., &c.*

^5 See Xenoph, Hellcn. vi., and Arigt. Rhet. i. 15.*

DEMOSTHENES. 267

notiiing of that kind to adduce against Demosthenes.
He was no time-server, either in his words or his ac-
tions. The key of poHtics, which he first touclied,
he ever afterward invariably preserved.

The greatest part of his Orations, according to
PantEtius"'^ the philosopher, are written upon this
principle, that virtue is to be chosen simply for her
own sake ; that (for instance) ' Concerning the
Crown,' that ' against Aristocrates,' that ' for the
Immunities,' and the ' Philippics.* In all these, he
exhorts his countrymen not to that which is most
agreeable, or easy, or advantageous ; but to regard
honour and propriety as the first objects, and to deem
the safety of the state a matter of secondary consi-
deration. So that if j beside the noble ambition which
animated his measures and the lofty turn of his ad-
dresses to the people, he had been blessed with mili-
tary courage, and had kept his hands pure from
bribes, he would not have been numbered with such
orators as Myrocles^'', Polyeuctus, and Hyperides ;
but would have deserved to be placed in a higher
sphere v/ith Cimon, Thucydides, and Pericles.

Among those who took the reins of government
after him, Phocion, though not of the party in most
esteem (I mean that, which seemed to favour the
Macedonians) on account of his probity and valour,
did not appear at all inferior to Ephialtes, Aristides,
and Cimon. But Demosthenes had neither the
courage, that could be trusted in the field, nor was

3^ Par.setius was an eminent Stoic philosopher of Rhodes, the
friend of Lfelius and Scipio : and this passage mcst probably occurs
in his Treatise on Duties, upon which Cicero founded his book,
De Officiis, and which had for it's basis, Solum honestum propter sc
expctendum esse."^

37 Of this usurious orator see an account in Demosth. !i-;|4
BcifccTi^. Ixxxii., and Ari.st. Rhet. iii. 10.

The Thucydides, mentioned below, must not be confounded with
the historian of that name. See the Life of Pericles, II. 19.; and
also for farther particulars of Cimon and Ephialtes, the latter of
whom was an intimate friend of that great statesman, and for his
rigid honesty is celebrated by A^liaa V. H. xi. 9.*

?6S DEMOSTHENES.

he (as Demetrius expresses himself) sufficiently for-,
tilled against the impressions of money. Though he
bore up under the assaults of corruption from Philip
and the Macedonians, he was overpowered by tlie
gold of Sii^-a and Ecbatana. So that he was much
better qualified to recommend, than to imitate, tlie
virtues of our ancestors. It must be acknowledsced
however, that he excelled all the orators of his time,
except Pliocion, in his life and conversation. And
w^e find in his Orations, that he told the people the
boldest truths, that he strenuously opposed their in-
clinations, and constantly rectified their mistakes.
Theopompus also informs us that, when the Athe-
nians wished to appoint him manager of a certain
impeachment, and insisted upon it in a tumultuary
manner, he rose up, and said, " My friends, I will be
^^ your counsellor, even if you don't wish it ; but a
*' false accuser I will not be, even if you do." His
behaviour, in the case of Antiplio, was of the aristor
cratic cast^^ This man the people had acquitted in
the general assembly, and yet Demosthenes carried
him before the Areopagus ; w^iere, without paying
any regard to the people's resentment, he proved
that he had promised Philip to burn the arsenal :
upon which he was condemned by the council, and
put to death. He likewise accused the priestess
Theoris of several misdemeanors, and among the rest,
of having taught the slaves many arts of imposition.
Such crimes, he insisted, Vv-ere capital ; and she was
delivered over to the executioner.

Demosthenes is said to have written the Oration
for Apoliodorus, by which he carried his cause
against the general Timotheus, in an action for debt
to the public treasury, as also those others against
Phormio and Stephanus ; which formed a just ex-
ception against his character. For he com})Osed
likewise the Oration, which Phormio had pronounce^
against Apoliodorus. This thercfoie was like fur-

38

See his Orat. Ui^i Srsf . xliL

DEMOSTHENES. 269

hisliing two enemies with weapons out of the same
shop '^^ to light one another. He wrote also some
public Orations for others, before he himself had any
concern in the administration, viz. those against
Androtion, Timocrates, and Aristocrates*. For it
appears, that he was only seven or eight-and-twenty
years old^°, when he published those Orations.
That ' against Aristogiton,' and that ' for the Immu-
nities,' he delivered himself, at the request (as he
informs us) of Ctesippus "*^ the son of Chabrias ;
though others tell us, it was because he paid his ad-
dresses to the young man's mother. He did not^
however, marry her ; for his wife, according to De-
metrius the Magnesian, in his Account of persons of
the same name '^'\ was a woman of Samos. It is un-
certain, whether that against ^Eschines, ' for having
betrayed his trust as Embassador '^'^/ was ever spoken ;
though Idomeneus affirms, that ^schines was ac-

39 This seems a dextrous allusion to his father's sword-cutlery.
The charge against him, which it implies, is somewhat differently
stated by .^schiues (rrsfit n«f«!rf. lii., andx«'k Krijer. Ivii.), but not less
to his dishonour.*

* The two first for Diodorus, and the last for Euthycles. For the
subjects see Taylor, I.

•♦° Aul. Gel. XV. 28., where it is observed that Dem.osthenes and
Cicero distinguished themselves by their eloquence at nearly an
equal age; the former by his orations against ; Androtion and
Timocrates, the later by his defer.ca of P. Quinctius and Sext*
Roscius.*

41 With respect to this stupid and dissolute young man see the
Life of Phocion, V. 9., and Athen. iv. 18. The passage, here
referred to, occurs in the Oration 55-^05 Ae.tI.*

-*- This writer, by Dion. Halic. called Polyhistor or ' the Enlight-
ened,' was contemporary with Cicero; and, beside the work here
mentionedy had addressed to A tticus a Treatise on Concord. See
Ep. ad Att. ix. il., and Yoss. de Hist. Grnec. i. 23.*

43 In this Oration, Demosthenes accused i'Eschines of many
capital crimes committed in the embassy, upon which he had been
sent to oblige Philip to swear to the articles of peace. It is still
extant, with ^Eschines' reply. (L.) That it was actually spoken
appears, not only fronl the testimony of Idomeneus, but also from
Photius (Biblioth.61.), Ulpian (see Tayl. II. 309.), and^Eschines'
own letter (xii.) to the Athenian people, in which he infers the
excellence of his administration from his having- been acquitted,
even though Demosthenes was his accuser.*

270 DEMOSTHENES.

quitted only by thirty votes. This seems not to be
true, at least so far as may be conjectured from both
their orations ' concerning- the Crown :' for neither
of them expressly mentions it as a cause, that ever
came to trial. But this is a point, which w'C shall
leave for others to decide.

Demosthenes, throughout the whole course of his
political conduct, left none of the actions of the king
of Macedon undisparaged. Even in time of peace,
he seized every opportunity of raising suspicions
against him among the Athenians, and of exciting
their resentment. Hence, Philip looked upon him
as a person of the utmost importance in Athens ; and
when he went with nine other deputies ** to the
court of that prince, after he had given them all au-
dience, he answered the speccli of Demosthenes with
greater care than the rest. As to other marks of
honour and respect, of these Demosthenes received
not an equal share ; they were bestowed principally
upon yEscliines and Philocrates. These envoys,
therefore, were loud on all occasions in Philip's
praise ; and insisted, in particular, upon his eloquence,
his beauty, and even his beirig able to drink an im-
mense quantity of liquor. Demosthenes, who could
not bear to hear him commended, turned these thinns
off as trifles: " The first,'* he said, " was the pro-
" perty of a sophist, the second of a woman, and the
" third of a sponge ; and not one of them could do
" any credit to a king."

It subsequently appeared, that nothing was to be
expected but war ; for on one hand Philip knew not
how to sit down in tranquillity, and on the other
Demosthenes was always inflaming the Athenians.
In this case, his first step was to induce them to de-

^'f Ctesiplion, Aristodemus, Patrocles, Cimon, Xauslcles, Der-
c^-lluy, Pliryno, P!ii!ocratcs, and iEscliines. These were sent first
to sound Philip's inclination toward peace, and af'ccrward to receive
his ratification. Plutarclii here, through hipse of memory, ascribes
to t)ernosthenes what /Eschines claims i'or himself (■:"£|« ^u^xTtf. xvi.)
See also,.l£i. V. II. viii. 12.*

DEMOSTHENES. 271

spatcli an armament to Eiiboea, which had been
brought by it's petty tyrants under PhiHp's yoke.
Accordingly he drew up an edict, in pursuance of
which they passed over to that peninsula, and ex-
pelled the Macedonians ^\ His second operation
was the procuring of succours for the Byzantines
and Perinthians, with whom Philip was then at war.
He persuaded the people to drop their resentment,
to forsret the faults which both those nations had
committed in the Confederate War, and to send a
body of troops to their assistance. They did so, and
saved them from ruin. After this he went embassa-
dor to the states of Greece ; and, by his animating
addresses, persnaded nearly the whole of them to
combine in the league against Philip. Beside the
troops of the several cities, they took into pay an
army of mercenaries, to the number of fifteen thou-
sand foot and two thousand horse, and readily con-
tributed to the charge. Theophrastus informs us-
that when the allies desired the quota of each might
be settled, Crobylus the orator replied, " War cannot
" be kept at a set diet '\'*

The eyes of all Greece were now upon these move-
ments, and every body was anxious about the event.
The cities of Euba?a, the Acha^ans, the Corinthians,
the Mcgarensians, the Leucadians, the Corcyraeans,

''5 B. C. 341. See the Life of Phocion, who commanded upon
that occasion, V. 15., and i^sch. ib. liii. The credit of this edict
Demosthenes claims for himself, ^sft ^Ti(p. xxiv.

Perinthus, mentioned below, was a strong city on the Propontis,
which Philip obstinately besieged, and the inhabitants as obstinately
defended. It was, at last, relieved by the Persians ; and the Byzan-
tines, who by sending it succours had drawn upon themselves that
prince's resentment, owed their deliverance to Phocion. Diod. Sic.
xvi. 74., &c., and Dem. ib. 21-., '21 *

46 This is before recorded, in the Life of Cleomenes, V, 183.i.
as having been said by Archidamus, at the beginning of the Pelo-
ponnesian war, Sec. The monthly allowance of slaves, here alluded
to, was called Demensum. See Ter. Phorm. i. 1., and Plaut. Stich.
ii. By Harpocration and Suidas Crobylus is named Hegesippus»
and for his political co-operation with Demosthenes was so much
hated by Pliilip, that he banished the poet Xenoclides for having
received him at his table. Dem ffff* Ui • ~^. xcii.*

2

5-72 DEMOSTHENES.

had each severally engaged for themselves against tli(^:
Macedonians. Yet the greatest work still remained
i'or Demosthenes to accomplish, uhich was to bring
over the Thebans to the league. Their country
bordered upon Attica; they had a large army on foot,
and they were reckoned the best soldiers at that time
in Greece. But they had incurred recent obligations
to Philip in the Phocian '\^'ar, and therefore it was
not easy to draw them from his party ; especially
vlien they considered the frequent quarrels and acts
of hostility, in which by their vicinity to Athens they
had been engaged.

In the mean time Philip, elevated with his success
at Amphissa"''', surprised Elatea, and possessed him-
self of Phocis. The Athenians were struck with
astonishment, and not one of them durst mount the
Rostrum : no one knew what advice to give, and a
melancholy silence reigned throughout the city. In
this distress, Demosthenes alone stood forth, and
proposed that application should be made to the
Thebans. Pie likev/ise animated the people in his
usual manner, and inspired them with fresh hopes ;
in consequence of which he was sent embassador to
Thebes, some others beingjoined in commission with
him. Philip likewise on his part, as Marsyas informs
ns, despatched Amyntus and Clearchus, two Mace-
donians, Daochus the Thessalian, and Thrasidirus
the Elean, to answer the Athenian deputies. The
Thebans were not ignorant which wav tiieir true in-
teiest pointed^ but each of them had the evils of war
before his eves : for their Phocian wounds were still
fresh upon tlicm. The powers of the orator however,

''7 The Locri O/.olse liad violated the Delphic territor)', and
assassinated the envoys sent by the Aniphictyonic coui.cil to make
a survey and report upon the subject. Upon this, Philip was ap-
pointed generalissimo against them, and soon settled the matter.
Dem. ^'f; Zrid*. xlvii , &c. Elatea was a city of Phocis, on the con-
fines of Hoeotia. It's seizure is sublimely described by Dem. ib. liii.

Marsyas, mentioned below, was a native of Pella, and brother of
Antigonus, who was one of Alexander's successors. He wrote tea
books on the A flairs of M;^cedon.*

DEMOSTHENES. 273

as we are told by Theopompus, rekindled their
courage and ambition so effectually, that all other
objects were disregarded. They lost sight of fear,
of caution, of every prior attachment, and through
the force of his eloquence fell with enthusiastic
transports into the path of honour.

So powerful indeed were his efforts, that Philip
immediately sent embassadors to Athens to apply
for peace : Greece recovered her spirits, while she
stood waiting for the event ; and not only the Athe-
nian generals, but the governors of Boeotia, were
ready to execute the commands of Demosthenes.
All the assemblies, as well those of Thebes as those
of Athens, were under his direction : he was equally
beloved, equally powerful in both places ; and, as
Theopompus proves, it was no more than his merit
deserved. But the superior power of fortune, which
seems to have been working a revolution, and draw-
ing the liberties of Greece at that time to their pe-
riod, opposed and baffled all his measures. The
deity discovered many tokens of the approaching
event. Among the rest, the priestess of Apollo de-
livered dreadful oracles, and an old prophecy from
the Sibylline books was then in every body's mouth j

Far from Thermodon's banks, when stain'd with blood
Boeotia trembles o'er the crimson flood.
On eagle-pinions let me pierce the sky.
And see the vanquish'd weep, the victor die !

This Thermodon''% they say, is a small river in
our country near Chseronea, which falls into the
Cephisus. At present we know no river of that
name, but we conjecture that the Hsemon which
runs by the temple of Hercules, v/here the Greeks
encamped, might then be so called ; and the battle
having filled it with blood and dead bodies, it might
on that account receive it's present appellation.
Duris indeed affirms, that Thermodon was not a river;

■'^ It is placed by Pausanias (x. 19.) near the city Glisas ia
Boeotia.*

VOL. V. T

27* DEMOSTHENES.

but that some of the soldiers, as they were pitching
their tents and opening the trenches, found a small
statue M'ith an inscription signif>'ing, that the person
represented was Thcrmodon holding a wounded
Amazon in his arms. There was another oracle, he
adds, at that time much noticed ;

Fell bird of prey,

\Vait thou tlic plenteous harvest, vvliith the sword
AVill give thee on Thermodon.

But it is difficult to pronounce, what truth there is in
these accounts.

As to Demosthenes, he is said to have had such
coniidence in the Grecian arms, and to have been so
much elated with the courage and spirit of so many
brave men calling for the enemy, that he would not
suffer them to regard any oracles or prophecies. He
told them, tliat he suspected the prophetess herself
of ' Philippising^'-^.' He reminded the Thebans of
Epaminondas, and the Athenians of Pericles ; how
they considered such thin2;s as mere pretexts of
cowardice, and pursued the plan which their reason
]iad dictated. Thus far, Demosthenes acquitted
Jiimselfiike a man of spirit and honour. But in the
battle, he performed nothing worthy of the glorious
things, which he had uttered. He quitted his post %
threw away his arms, and fled in the most infamous
manner ; not ashamed (as Pytheas observes) to bely
the inscription, which he had engraven upon his
shield in golden characters, " to good foiiti:xe."

Immediately after the victory, Philip in the pride
of his heart committed a thousand excesses ^'. He

49 j^L.-sch. in Ctesiph. xlil.* ■

•5° Tliis^ it we trust his great political rival (^•Esch. ^s^'j Tlufx-p.
Xivi.) \va3 not his first piece of cowardice. There is a ridiculous
story told by the author of tlie Lives of the Ten Orators, that in his
iiiglit a thorn caught hold of his cloke ; upon which he screamed
out, * Take me alive.' See also A. (iell. xvii. 21. The battle of
Chirronea was fought B. C. 338, and Philip was assassinated two
years afterward,*

'^ Upon this subject Justin, ix. 1. and iEIian. V. H. viii. 15. differ

DEMOSTHENES. 275

drank to intoxication, and danced over the dead,
making a kind of song ^^ of the first part of the decree
whicli Demosthenes had procured, and beating time
to it"; "Demosthenes the Peeanian, the son of
Demostlienes, has decreed." But when he came
to be sober again, and considered the dangers by
which he had kitely been surrounded, he trembled
to think of the prodigious force and power of that
orator, who liad obHged him to risk both empire and
life on the cast of a few hours of one single day ^\

The fame of Demosthenes had reached the Persian
court ; and the king wrote letters to his lieutenants,
commanding them to supply him with money, and
to pay more court to him than to any other man in
Greece ; because he best knew how to make a
diversion in his favour, by exciting fresh troubles,
and finding employment for the Macedonian arms
nearer home. This Alexander subsequently disco-
vered from Demosthenes' letters, which he found at
Sardis, and tlie papers of the Persian governors ex-
pressing the sums which had been advanced.

When the Greeks had lost this signal battle, those
of the contrary faction attacked Demosthenes, and
brought a variety of public accusations against him.

from Plutarch, and affirm that he behaved with great moderation ;
while Diod. Sic. xvi. 86, 87., and Sext. Empir. adv. Math. i. 13.,
agree with him. All however, not excepting Demosthenes himself,
concur in representing him as finally very kind in his treatment of
the Athenians.*

^^ Deprived of it's first syllable, it assumes a regular trochaic
form, the metre of joy and triumph :

Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,

Soon he sooth'd his soul to pleasures, &c. &c<

S3 The subjoined couplet will give a very imperfect idea of this
childish levity :

So Demosthenes decrees,
Son of old Demosthenes !*

^^ See Lucian in Encom. Demades likewise 'contributed to
bring him to the right use of his reason, when he told him with such
distinguished magnanimity, ' That fortune had placed him in the
character of Agamemnon, but he chose to play ths part uf
Thersites.*

T 2

2Vff DEMOSTHENES.

The peo])le lio\vcver not only acquitted him, but
treated him \vith the same respect as before, and
called him again to the helm as a person whom they
knew to be a well-wisher to his country: and, when
the bones of those who tell at Chaeronea were brought
home to be interred, they selected him to pronounce
the funeral oration". They were therefore so far
from bearing their misfortune in a mean and dastard-
ly manner, as Theopompus exaggcratingly states,
that by the great honour which they paid to the ad-
viser, they showed they did not repent of having
followed his advice.

Demosthenes accordingly made the oration. Yet,
after this, he did not prelix his own name to his
edicts, because he considered fortune as inauspicious
to him '"^ ; but sometimes that of one friend, some-
times that of another, till upon Philip's death he re-
covered his spirits. For that prince did not long
survive his victory at Chsronea; and his fate seem-
ed to have been presignified in the last of the verses
above quoted :

And see the vanquish'd weep, the victor die !

Deraostiienes had secret intelligence of his death,
and in order to prepossess the people with hopes of
srood success to come, he entered the assembly v.-ith
a gay countenance, pretending that he had seen a
vision which announced somethinf? cjreatfor Athens.
Soon afterward, messengers arrived with an account
of Philip's death. The Athenians immediately ofiev-
ed sacrifices of acknowledgement to the gods lor so
happy an event, and voted a crown to Pausanias [his
assassin]. Demosthenes on this occasion made his

55 See Dem. ^fp S-£<p. Ixxxviii., and ^xlsch, in Ctesiph. xlviii.
The Oration now extant under this character is regarded as suppo-
sititious by Don. Halic. ^jpi tjj? A-/;m/. Jjii-o]. xxii.'^

5^ And this is urged against him both by Dinarchus, <ind by
^sch. ib. xlix. The measure however here aficri!)ed to Demos-
thenes is by yEschines referred not to his modesty, but to a rcgula-'
tion made by the Athenians themselves.*

DEMOSTHENES. 277

appearance in magnificent attire, and with a garland
upon his head, though it was only the seventh day
atter his daughter's death, as we are tokl by
yEschines ^\ who on that account reproaches him as
an unnatural father. But he must liinisclf have been
of an ignoble and effeminate disposition, if lie con-
sidered tears and lamentations as marks of a kind and
affectionate parent, and condemned the man who
bore such a loss with moderation. At the same
time, I do not pretend to say that the Athenians
acted honourably in crowning themselves with flow-
ers, or in sacrificing upon the death of a prince, who
Jiad behaved to them with so much gentleness and
humanity in their misfortunes. For it was a mean-
ness below contempt, to honour him in his life, and
to admit him a citizen ; and yet, after he was fallen
by the hands of another, not to restrain their joy
within any bomids, but to insult the dead and sing
triumphal songs, as if they had themselves performed
some extraordinary feat of valour.

I commend Demosthenes indeed for having left
the tears and other instances of mourning, which liis
domestic misfortunes might claim, to the women ;
and engaged in such actions, as he deemed con-
ducive to the welfare of his country. For I think a
man of that firmness and other abilities, which a
statesman ought to possess, should always keep tlie
common concern in view, and look upon his private
accidents or business as considerations greatly infe-
rior to those of the public. In consequence of which,
he will be far more careful to maintain his dignity,
than actors who personate kings and tyrants ; and
yet these, w^e see, neither laugli nor weep according
to the dictates of their own passions, but as they are
directed by the subject of the drama. It is univer-
sally acknowledged, that we are not to abandon the

■■57 lb. xxix. in a most beautiiai passage. Sec a]so 1. and Ixxviii.
Plutarch refers to t!ic same stor)^ in his Consolatory Treatise to
Apollonius ; and Cicero likewise in his Tusc. iii. 26.*

278 DEMOSTHENES.

unhappy to their sorrows, but to endeavoiu' to con-
sole them hii^ rational discourse, or by diverting their
attention to more agreeable objects ; in the same
manner as we desire those, who have weak eyes, to
turn them from bright and dazzling colours to green,
or others of a softer kind. And what better conso-
lation can there be under domestic afflictions, than to
attemper and alleviate them with the public suc-
cess ^^, so that in such a mixture the bad may be
corrected by the good ^ These reflexions we thought
proper to make, because we have observed that this
discourse of i^schines has weakened the minds of
many persons, and encouraged them to indulge in
all the effeminacy of sorrow.

Demosthenes now a second time solicited the states
of Greece, and they entered once more into the
league. The ^^hebans, having been furnished by him
with arms, attacked the garrison in their citadel, and
killed great numbers; and the Athenians prepared to
join them in the war. Demosthenes mounted the
Rostrum almost every day ; and he wrote to the king
of Persia's lieutenants in Asia, to urge them to com-
mence hostilities from that quarter against Alexan-
der, whom he called a ' boy,' a ' second Margites^°.'

But when Alexander had settled tlie afllau-s of his
own country, and marched into Bccotia witli all his
forces, the pride of tlie Athenians was humbled, and
the spirit of DemosMienes died away. They deserted
the Thebans, and that unhappy people had to sup-
port the whole fury of the war by themselves ; in con-
sequence of which, they lost their city^\ The Athe-

59 This was a consolation, of which Cicero felt the want, upon the
death of his daughter. See Ep. Fam. iv. 6.*

*° Homer wrote a satire against this RIargites, who appears to have
been a very contemptible character, (L.) but only a few fragments
of it remain. For his scurrility, Demosthenes is severely reproved
by ^sch. ib. 1. See also the Life of Phocion, V. 20., and the Life
of Alexander, IV 25o.*

^^ B. C. 5.15. The news of this event so struck tlie Athenians,
that they even quitted the Great Mysteries, which they were theii
^■ek'bruting.*

DEMOSTHENES. 27^

iiians were in deep trouble and confusion ; and they
could devise no better measure, than the despatch-
ing of Demostiienes and some others as embassadors
to Alexander. But Demostlienes, dreading tlie an-
ger of that monarch, turned back at Mount Cithtiv
ron, and relinquished his commission *"-. Alexander
immediately sent deputies to Athens, to demand
(according to Idomeneus and Duris) that they would
deliver up ten of their orators. But the greatest
part, and those the most reputable of the historians
affirm, that he demanded only the eight following :
Demosthenes, Polyeuctus, Ephialtes, Lycurgus, My-
rocles, Demon, Callisthenes, and Charidemus^"^. Upon
this occasion, Demosthenes related to the people the
fable of the sheep, who were required to give up their
dogs to the wolves, before they would grant them
peace: by which he insinuated, that he and the
other orators were the guards of the people, as the
dogs were of the flock; and that Alexander of Mace-
don was the great wolf ''^ And again : " As we see
" merchants carrying about a small sample in a dish,
" by which they sell large quantities of wheat ; so
" you in us, though unconsciously, deliver up tlie
" whole body of citizens." These particulars we
have from Aristobulus of Cassandria.

^- According to Diod. Sic. xvii., and Justin, xi, 3, 4., there were
two embassies sent to Alexander; the first, of which Demosthenes
was a member, prior to the I'all of Thebes. *

<^j Of tl:iese, next to Demosthenes, Lycurgus was the most emi-
nent ; not only for his eloquence, but for his purity of character.
Demon was Den:!osthenes' sister's son. Charidemus tied to Darius,
and was by him for his republican plainness of speech put to death.
(Q. Curt. iii. 5.) Ephialtes went envoy to the Persian court, and fell
bravely fighting in a sally made against the Macedonians from Hali-
carnassus.*

<^4 Movo>i.viict, called by other writers MoiaTrii^Ki and Me-nct. They are
a peculiar kind of wolves, which prey separately, and (as Arist. Hist.
Anim. viii. 5. informs us) upon men. See Lucian in Ep. Saturn.
and in Timone, Boch. Hierozoic. iii. 10., &:c.

Aristobulus, mentioned below, accompanied Alexander into the
East, and wrote a History of his Expedition, to vvhich Arrian owns
his obligations. His hero, however, appears to have been less satis^
^od with his narrative; as he is said, upon reading the account of his
engagement with Torus, to have thrown the volume into the river.*

250 DEMOSTHENEa

The Athenians deUbcrated upon the point in full
assembly ; and Demades observing them in much
perplexity, offered to go alone to the king of Mace-
don, and intercede for th.e orators, on condition that
each of them should give him five talents ; whether
it was, that he depended upon the friendship of that
prince, or hoped tofmd him like a lion satiated with
blood. He succeeded, hovrever, in his application
for the orators, and reconciled him to the city.

When Alexander returned to Macedon, the repu-
tation of Demades and the other orators of his party
greatly increased, and that of Demosthenes gradually
declined. It is true, he raised liis head a little, when
Agis II. king of Sparta took the field, but it soon
drooped again ; for the Athenians refused to join
that prince, he himself fell in battle, and the Lace-
daemonians were entirely put to the rout^\

About this time*^*^, the affair ' concernino; the
Crov\n' came again under discussion. The informa-
tion was first laid in the archonship of Chgerondas a
little before the battle of Cha^ronea * ; and the cause
was not determined till ten years afterward*"", in that
of Aristophon. It was the most celebrated cause
that ever was pleaded, on account as well of the high

^5 This happened B. C. S30, in an action with Antipater, while
Alexander was in Asia. See Diod. Sic. xvii., Q. Curt, vi, 1.*

^^ Demosthenes rebuilt the walls of Athens at his own expense ;
for which the people, on the motion of Ctesiphon, decreed him a
Crown of gold. This excited /Eschines' jealousy, and induced him
te bring the celebrated impeachment (nominally against Ctesiphon,
but virtually against Demosthenes) which drew forth from the latter
the ininiitable Oration Tnpt ^ncp. in reply.

* Upon this subject, see a very elaborate discussion in Taylor's
Demosth. 11.600., &c. from which, chiefly upon the authority of Cor-
sini (Fast. Att.), it appears thatCha;rondas must have given name to
three successive years (01. ex. 1, 2, 3.) ; to the first two, as one of
the nine Archons representing, perhaps casually, the real Eponymi
Theophrastus and Lysimachides, and to the last as Eponymus him-
self. Some, however, have supposed, on the evidence of yEschines,
that for a ' little before' we should read ' a little after.' (lb. 602.)*

^7 Pluiarcli must be mistaken here. The interval appears not to
have b;. cu more than eight years, unless we adoj)t Cicero's the-
ory, in the preamble to his Version of these two celebrated Orations,
DeOpt Gtn.Oratorum, and Taylor's modest reasoning, II. 599., &c.
Ijut these are calculations of little moment.

DEMOSTHENES. ^81

reputation of tlie orators, as the generous behaviour
of the judges. For though Demosthenes' prosecu-
tors were then in high power, as being entirely in
the Macedonian interest, the judges would not give
their voices against him ; but on the contrary, ac-
quitted him so honourably, that ^-lischines had not
a fifth part of the suffrages ^\ ^schines immedi-
ately quitted Athens, and spent the rest of his days
in teaching; rhetoric at Rhodes and in Ionia.

It was not long after this, that Harpalus came from
Asia to Athens^'^. He had fled from the service of
Alexander, both because he was conscious of having
falsified his trust in order to minister to his pleasures,
and because he dreaded his master, who was now be-
come terrible even to his best friends. As he ap-
plied to the people of Athens for shelter, and desired
protection for his ships and treasures, most of the
orators had an eye u})on his wealth, and supported
his application with ail their interest. Demosthenes
at first advised them to send him immediately away,
and to be particularly careful not again to involve
the city in v/ar without any just or necessary cause.

Yet a few days after v/ard, when they were taking
an account of the treasure, as Harpalus perceived
that Demosthenes was much pleased with one of the
king's cups, and stood admiring the workmanship and
fashion, he desired him to take it in his hand, and
feel the weight of the gold. Demosthenes being

^'^ This was justly deemed, in all cases, a most ignominious circmii-
stance: and imposed upon the accuser a fine of a tiionsand drachmas.
(L.) it was at Rhodes, as we are told by Plin. Ep. ii. S., that
i^Lschines recited the two Orations here spoken of, and when tliatof
Demosthenes in particular drev/ forth tlie tumultuous acclamations
of his audience, cried, * But what, if you had heard the wild beast
himself bellowing out these tremendous expressions!'*

^9 B. C. 327. Harpalus had the charge of Alexander's treasure
in Babylon; where, flattering himself that lie would never return
from his Indian expedition, he had indulged himself in every species
of guilt and excess. At last, when lie found that Alexander was
really coming back, and that he took a severe account of such peo-
ple as himself, he fled with five thousand talents and six thousand
men into Attica. See Athen. xiii,, Diod. Sic. xvii. lOS., and the Life
of Fhocion, V. 25.

-zS2 DEMOSTHENES.

surprised at it's heaviness, and asking Harpakis how
much it might bring ; " It will bring you," said he
smiling, " twenty talents/* And as soon as it "vvas
night, he sent him the cup with that sum. For
Harpalus knew well enough how to distinguish a
man's passion for gold by his pleasure at the sight, and
the keen looks which he cast upon it. Demosthenes
could not resist the temptation ; it made all the im-
pression upon him, that was expected: he received
the money, like a garrison, into his house, and went
over to Harpalus' interest. Next day, he came into
the assembly with a quantity of wool and bandages
about his neck ; and, when the people called upon
him to get up and speak, he made signs that he had
lost his voice. Upon which some facetious bystand-
ers said, " It was no common hoarseness, that he had
" got in the night ; but a hoarseness brought on
''• by swallowing gold and silver '"." Afterward,
when all the people w^ere apprised of his having
taken the bribe, and he v/ished to speak in his own
defence, they would not suffer him, but raised a loud
clamour and expressed their indignation. At the
same time, somebody or other stood up and snecr-
ingly said, " Will you not listen to the man with the
"cup^'r" The Athenians then immediately sent
Harpalus off; and fearing they might be called to
account for the money v/ith which the orators had
been corrupted, they made a strict inquiry after it,
and searched all their habitations except that of Cal-
licles the son of Arrenides ; whom they spared (as
7'heopompus says) because he was newly married,
and his bride was then in his house "\

"'^ This is referred to a different occasion by Critolaus,A Gell. ii. 9. ;
and specifically by Ju. Poll. vii. St. to Demades, but improbably, as
he was hiuiriclf condemned for the same crime.*

7' Tliis alludes to a custom of the ancients at their feasts, in which
it was usual for the person who held the cup to sing a song, called
c-KoXtiv^ on account of the cup's passing obliquely from one guest to
another.

7^ Ulp. Pandect, ii. informs us, that a new-manied man "wag
not liable to be summoned into court.*

DEMOSTHENES. 283

At tlie same time Demosthenes, seemingly with a
design to prove his innocence, moved for an order
that the affair should be brought before the court of
Areopagus, and all persons punished who should be
found guilty of having received bribes. In conse-
quence of which, he appeared before that court, and
was one of the first convicted ^\ Being sentenced to
pay a fine of fifty talents, and to be imprisoned till it
was paid, the disgrace of his conviction and the
weakness of liis constitution, w'hich could not bear
close confinement, determined him to fly ; and this
he did, undiscovered by some, and assisted by others.
It is said that when he was not far from the city, he
perceived some of his late adversaries following, and
endeavoured to hide himself But they called to
him by name ^*, and when they came nearer, desired
him to accept some necessary supplies of money,
which they had brought with them tor that purpose.
They assured him, they had no other design in fol-
lowing him, and exhorted him to take courage. But
Demosthenes broke out into more violent expres-
sions of grief than ever, and said, " What comfort
*' can I have, when I leave behind me enemies in
" this city more generous, than it seems possible to
" find friends in any other ? His exile he bore in a
very weak and effeminate manner. For the most
part, he resided in JEgina, or Troezene ' ' ; and,
whenever he looked toward Attica, the tears fell
from his eyes. In his expressions, there was no-

73 Unjustly, according to Luc. in Encom. ; though it is difficult
to conceive that the whole court of Areopagus would combine
against him with Hyperides, his accuser. Pausanias, however
(ii. S3.), adduces some strong proofs of his innocence.*

7-tPhotius (with a change of names) relates that iEschlnes, when,
he left Athens, was followed and assisted by Demosthenes ; and
that, when he offered him consolation, he made the same answer.
This circumstance is likewise mentioned in ' the Lives of the Ten
Orators.' See also a^schines' second letter.

7-5 A city of Argolis, opposite Athens, beyond the Saronic gulf;
whither the Athenians seat their wives and children, on Xerxes' in-
vasion.*

284. DEMOSTHENES.

thing of a rational firmness ; nothing correspondent
to the bold things wliich he had said and done in his
administration. When he left Athens, we are told,
he lifted UD his hands toward the citadel, and ex-
claimed ; " O Minerva, goddess of those towers,
whence is it that thou deliohtest in three such
monsters as an owl, a dragon ''% and the people?"
The young men, who resorted to him for instruction,
he advised by no means to meddle with afiairs of
state. He told them, " That if two roads liad been
" shown him at first, the one leading to the Rostrum
" and the popular assemblies, and the other to cer-
" tain destruction ; and he could have foreseen the
evils, the fears, tlie envy, the calumny, and the
contention, which awaited him in the political
*' w^alk, he would have preferred that which led to
" immediate death."

During the exile of Demosthenes, Alexander
died'''. The Greek cities once more combining
upon that event, Leosthenes performed great things;
and among the rest, drew a line of circumvallation
round Antipater, whom he had sluit up in Lamia '^
Pythias the orator, w^ith Callimedon and Ca.rabus,
left Athens ; and going over to Antipater, accom-
panied his friends and embassadors in their applica-
tions to the Greeks, and in exhorting them not to
desert the Macedonian cause, or to listen to the
Athenians. On the other hand, Demostlienes joined
the Athenian deputies, and strenuously exerted
himself along with them in advising the states to fall
with united efforts upon the Macedonians, and drive
them out of Greece. Phylarchus'^ informs us that,

'^ The owl was even stamped on the coin of her favourite city,
and one or two dragons, called oi»«p?>i r,<psii, were constantly kept in
her temple in the citadel. The people is by Hor., Ep. I. i. 75.,
called Beilua midtorum capitum*

"7 B. C. .';24'. Demosthenes was then in his fifty-eighth year,

'^ Of this war, and of Callimedon, see an account in the Life of
Phocion, V. 27. 32. See also Died. Sic. xviii,, Justin, xi. 5., and
Pausan.*

79 This historian, who was contemporary with the Ptolemies Euer-

4

DEMOSTHENES. 285

in one of the cities of Arcadia, Pytheas and Demos-
thenes spoke with extreme acrimony ; the one in
pleading for the Macedonians, and the other for the
Greeks. Pytheas is reported to have said, " As
" some sickness is always supposed to be in the
" house, into which ass* milk is brought ; so the city,
** which an Athenian embassy ever enters, must ne-
*' cessarily be in a weak and decaying condition.'*
Demosthenes turned the comparison against him, by
saying, " As ass' milk never enters, but for curing
" the sick ; so the Athenians never appear, but for
**■ remedying some disorder." ,

The people of Athens were so much pleased with
this repartee, that they immediately voted his recal.
It was Damon the Psanian, cousin-german to Demos-
thenes, who drev/ up the decree. A galley was sent to
fetch him from ^gina; and when he came up from the
Piraeus to Athens, the whole body of citizens went
to meet and congratulate him upon his return, so
that there was neither a magistrate nor a priest left
in the town. Demetrius of Magnesia acquaints us,
that Demosthenes lifted up his hands to heaven in
thanks for that happy day : " Happier," said he, " is
" my return, than that of Alcibiades. It was through
" compulsion, that the Athenians restored him ; but
" me they have recalled from motives of kindness
*' and affection."

The fine, however, still remained due ; for they
could not extend their grace so fir as to repeal his
sentence. But they found out a method of evad-
ing the law, even while they seemed to comply with
it. It was the custom, in the sacrifices to Jupiter the
Preserver, to pay the persons who prepared and
adorned the altars. They, therefore, appointed
Demosthenes to this charge : and ordered that he
should have fifty talents, the sum to which his fine
amounted, in compensation for his trouble.

But he did not long enjoy his return to his coun-

getes and Philopator, composed a History of Events from Pyrrhus'
expedition into Peloponnesus to the death of the former of those
princes.*

^•S5 DEMOSTHENES.

try. The affairs of Greece soon went to ruin. They
lost the battle of Crano ^° in the month of Metagit-
nion, a Macedonian garrison entered Munychia in
Boedromion, and Demosthenes perished in Pyanep-
sion.

This last event happened in the following manner:
"When intelligence was brought, that Antipater and
Craterus were coming to Athens, Demosthenes and
those of his party hastened to escape"^' privately be-
fore their arrival. Upon this the people, on the
motion of Demades, condemned them to death.
As they fled different ways, Antipater sent a com-
pany of soldiers about the country to seize them.
Archias surnamed Phugadotheras, or ' the Exile-
hunter,' was their captain. He was a native of
Thurium, it is said, and had been some time a tra-
gedian ; and Polus of ^Egina (they add) who ex-
celled all the actors of his time, was his scholar.
Hermippus reckons Archias among the disciples of
Lacritus the rhetorician, and Demetrius states that
he spent some time at the school of Anaximenes.
This Archias however drew Hyperides the orator,
Aristonicus of Marathon, and Himera3us the brother
of Demetrius the Phalerean, out of the temple of
j3ilacus in iEgina, where they had taken refuge, and
sent them to Antipater at Cleonai. There they
were executed j and Hyperides is said to have first
had his tongue cut out^-.

, *'- To Antipater and Craterus. See Diod. Sic. xviii. Crano was
a city of Thcssaly, on the Peneus.*

**' Not from fear of Antipater, as it is generally supposed, for lie
had not yet required them to be given up, but of their own country-
men. Corn. Nepos says, they were only banished; and that, it
does not appear whether for their mal-administration, or their deser-
tion of the city in it's calamities. Upon this subject an oration of
Lycurgus is extant, which iEschines koctx K^iis-. xciii. seems to con-
demn for it's severitj'. Demades being incapable, from the infa-
mous frequency of his public convictioui:, of making any motion to
the people, was restored to accusatorial competency by a decree
made expressly for that purpose. Of Polus the celebrated actor,
mentioned below, an interesting story is told by A. Gell. vii. 5.*

*'By the author of the Lives of the Ten Orators, he is said to
have bit it oS*, lest he should be coottrained to divulge the secrets

DEMOSTHENES. 287

Archias, being informed that Demosthenes h.ad
taken sanctuary in the temple of Neptune at Calau-
ria, passed over to it with his Thracian soldiers in
row-boats. As soon as he had landed, he went to
the orator, and endeavoured to persuade him to quit
the temple, and to go v/ith him to Antipater ; assur-
ing him, that he had no hard treatment to expect.
But it happened, that Demosthenes had seen a
strange vision the night before. He thought 'hat he
was contending with Archias, which could beit play
the tragedian ; that he succeeded in his actior, had
the audience on his side, and would certainly have
obtained the prize, had not Archias outdone Hm in
the dresses and decorations of the theatre. Then
Archias therefore had addressed him with a ^reat
appearance of humanity, he fixed his eyes uponhim,
and said without rising from his seat ; " Your a«ting
" did not move me formerly, nor will your pronises
" move me now." Archias then besran to thraten
him : upon which he added, " Before, you acfed a

part ; now, you speak as from the Maccdoiian
' tripod ^^ Only w^ait a while till I have sent my

last orders to my family." So saying, he reti'ed
into the inner part of the temple, and taking stme
paper as if he meant to write, he put the pen inhis
mouth and bit it a considerable time, as he usee to
do when meditating his compositions, after whicl. he
covered his head, and held it in a reclining postire.
The soldiers who stood at the door, apprehendng
that he took these methods to defer the fatal str(ke,
laughed at him, and called him coward. Arciias .
then approaching him desired him to rise, and b^'an
to repeat his promises of making his peace with An-
tipater. Demosthenes, who by this time felt the
operation of the poison he had taken strong i^on
him, uncovered his face, and looking upon Arcliis ;

of the state : but Plutarch's account is the more probable, as hhad
been a most furious opponent to Antipater and the Macedonins.*
^3 Referring to that of Delphi, uponwliich the Pythoness redved
her inspiration.*

1

a

6i

288 DEMOSTHENES.

*' Now," said he, " you may act the part of Creon^'*
'' in the play as soon as you please, and cast out this
*' carcase of mine unburied. For my part, C) gra-
*' cious Neptune, I quit thy temple still breathing ;
" but Antipater and the Macedonians would not
" have scrupled to profane it with murther." By
this time he could scarcely stand, and therefore he
desired them to support him. But in attempting to
walk cut, he fell by the side of the altar ^^ and expir-
ed wifh a groan.

Ar^to says, lie sucked the poison (as we have re-
lated' from a pen. One Pappus, whose Memoirs
were recovered by Hermippus, reports that wlien he
fell ly the altar, there M-as found on his paper the
begiming of a letter, " Demosthenes to Antipater,"
and ootliing more. People being surprised, he adds,
that he died so quickly, the Thracians who stood at
the.loor assured them that he took the poison in his
hanl out of a piece of cloth, and put it to his mouth ;
anc that to them it had the appearance of gold.
Up)n inquiry made by Archias, a young maid who
ser ed Demosthenes said, he had long carried that
pice of cloth by v.'ay of amulet. Eratosthenes in-
foiTis us, that he kept the poison in tlic hollow cf a
bracelet button, which he wore upon his arm *'-',
Mny others have written upon the subject ; but it
is lot necessary to transcribe all their different ac-
comts. V/e shall only add, on the authority of
Dancchares one of his servants, that he did not
thhk his death ovv'ing to poison, but to the favour of

^Alluding to that passage in the Antigone of Soplioclcs (25., &c,)
•whrc Creon forbids the body of Polyuices to be buried.
I ' Hence perhaps the inscription F.7,-(?»/!*i«? on the marble found
son3 years ago among the ruins of Hadrian's villa, and sent over to
Dr.Mead. "Demosthenes died B. C. ;i2'2.*

^ Sec Plin. H, N. xxxiii. 1. The Democharis, mentioned below,
is sid by Cicero to have been Demosthenes' sister's son, and to
hav written an oratorical History of Athens during his own times.
(Bnt. Ixxxiii.) Both as a warrior and a statesman, he is com-
meHed by the author of the Lives of the Ten Orators. See Scnec.
d? la, iii. 23.*

DEMOSTHENES. 28.9

tlie gods and a happy providence, wlilch snatched
him fiom the cruelty of the Macedonians**" by a
speedy and easy death. He died on the sixteenth.
of Pyanepsion, which is the most mournful day in
the ceremonies of the Thesmophoria ''** ; the women
keeping it with fasting in the temple of Ceres.

It was not long before the people of Athens paid
him the honours that were due to him, by erecting
his statue in brass, and decreeing that the eldest of
his fkmily should be maintained in the Prytaneum
at the public charge. The following celebrated in-
scription was put upon the pedestal of his statue:

Had like thy eloquence thy valour shone,
Greece ne'er had served the Mars of Macedon.

For no regard is to be paid to those, who assert that
Demosthenes himself uttered these lines in Calauria,
just before he took the poison ^^.

A little before I visited Athens, the following ad-
venture is said to have happened. A soldier, being
summoned to appear before the commanding officer
upon some misdemeanor, put his little stock of gold
into the hands of the statue of Demos;thenes, which

*" Lueian in Encom. supposes, Vvith however but little probability,
that Antipater wished to have availed himself of his talents in pub-
lic business! *

^^ This was an annual festival in honour of Ceres Legifera.
(Virg. JEn. iv. 57.) It began upon the fourteenth of that month,
and ended the eighteenth. It's third day v/as a day of fasting and
mortification.

^9 This inscription (which he himself wrote, if we may trust Pho-
tius, Biblioth. Cod 265., a little before his death in a kind of
pocket-book), far from doing Demosthenes honour, is the greatest
disgrace that the Athenians could have fixed upon his memory.
It reproaches him with a weakness, which when the safety of his
country was at stake, implied such a deplorable want of virtue and
manhood, as no parts or talents could expiate. (L.) ' When I
look back to the long and eventful period during which Mr. Fox
was excluded from power, and to the unfortunate result of the mea-
sures pursued by other statesmen, I cannot help applying to him
this distich.' (Parr's Character of Fox, II. 573.) As L\lr. Fox
never served in the army, the reproadi which, according to L., it
implies, can have no application to his memory.*
VOL. V, U

290 DEMOSTHENES.

were in some measure clenched. A smdl plane-
tree grew near it; and many leaves, either acci-
dentally lodged there by the winds, or purposely so
placed by the soldier, covered the gold a considera-
ble time. When he returned and found his money
entire, the fame of this accident was spread abroad,
and many of the wits of Athens strove which could
write the best copy of verses, to vindicate Demos-
thenes from the charge of corruption.

As for Demades, he did not long enjoy the new
honours, v/hich he had acquired. The being who
took it in charge to revenge Demosthenes, led him
into Macedon^, where he justly perished by the
hands of those, whom he had basely flattered. They
had for some time hated him ; but at last they caught
him in a fact, which could neither be excused nor
pardoned. Letters of his v.ere intercepted, in which
he exhorted Perdiccas to seize Macedon and preserve
Greece, which (he said) " hung only by an old rot-
ten stalk," meaning Antipater. Dinarchus the Co-
rinthian^^ accusing him of this treason, Cassander
w^as so much provoked, that he stabbed his son in
his arms, and afterward gave orders for his execution.
Thus, by the most dreadful misfortunes, he learned
that traitors always first fell themselves ; a truth
which Demosthenes had often told him before %
though he w^ould never believe it. Such, my Sossius,
is the Life of Demosthenes, which we have compiled
in the best manner we could from books and from
tradition.

9° See the Life of Phocion, V, 37.

9' One of the Ten Orators, and by Demosth. Tspt Srs^. xci. pro-
nounced a traitor. He was a friend of Theophrastus, and Denietriu*
the Phalerean.*

^'^ In Orat. ib. xiv.

LIFE

OF

C I C ER

SUMMARY.

flis ts.h'aclion / siirndine, cjid hirth. Ue dhtin^idshcs himself
among his schonl-JcUoivs ; applies hiffiselfto the stiidif qfphilosophify
and serves tinder Sylla. Hisjirsf cause. He trWoelsinioGreecey
ttnd attaches hiinself to the Gpinions of the Neio Academy ; visits
the most cehhrated rhetoricians in Asia. Ilis caidion on returning
to Rome. His too frequent jests and repartees : Qua; si or ship in
Sicily : Passion for glory. He learns the names and places of
abode of the more eminent citizens. His disinterestedness. Affair
of Verres : Cicero procures his condemnation. His private lije^
and poptdarity at Rome. Causes during his prcetorship. Mani-
iius. He is elected consul. Faction at Rome. Conspiracy of
Catiline, ivhn txith Antony sues for the consulship. Cicero^ s diffi'
cidties at entering upon his office. He procures the rejection of
Rullus' Agrarian bill. His irresistible eloquence. Catiline calls
troops to Rome. Cicej-o lays before the senate his i) formations ;
a7id is invested with absolute power. Catiline in vain attempts to
get him assassinated. Lejdnlus places himself at the head of the
conspirators in Rome. Their plans. TJiey enter into a ncgocia-
tion tvith the embassadors of the Allobrooes. Lentulus, and the
other ringleaders, are arrested. Cicero's irresolution, tviih regard
to the mode of treating them. He is urged by his tvife to severity.
Coisat's opinion J counteracted by that of Cato. The criminal
are put to death. Marks of esteem shorvn to Cicero. Catiline
falls in battle. Intrigues against Cicero. He is dejiomlnated, ly
g public decree, * the Father of his Country;'' renders himself ci-

U 2

292 CICERO.

noxious by his continual self-praises. His liberal cornmendationt
of his contemporaries. His jests upon Crassus : and bons-mots,
Clodius, in the habit of a female musician^ gets privately into
Ccesar^s house, during the celebration of the mysteries of the Bona
Dea. Cicero gives evidence against him: but he is acquitted, and
affects to be reconciled to him. Ca:sar declares against Cicero :
and Clodius summonshim to trial. He goes abroad, and is banish-
ed. Efforts made by the senate for his restoration. He is recalled.
Exultation of the people. Acts of Clodius' tribuneship destroyed.
Affair of Milo. He goes proco7isul into Cilicia. His conduct
there. Upon his return, he finds Rome divided bctrveen Ccesar and
Pompcy : joins the latter, and is blamed for it by Cato, His
railleries in Pompey's camp. He sets out to meet Ccesar, xoho re-
ceives him tvith great honour. Ligarius. He tvithdraivs from
"public business, and gives himself up to study. Divorces his txsife
Terentia, and marries a younger, xchom he lilceivise puts atvay :
Death of his daughter Tidlia ; and of Ccesar. Antony excites the
people against Ccesar s murthcrers : Mutual dislike between hii-z
and Cicero. Singular dream of the latter. He unites mith Octa^
viuSf and di'atos over the senate to his party. Antoiiy procures
his proscription. He files ivith his brother, tvho is betrayed and
assassinated. His i^erplexilies. He is put to death. His head
and hands are exposed over the Rostra.

JL HE account which we have of Helvfa the mother
of Cicero is, that her family was noble ', and her
character excellent. Of his father there is nothing
said, but in extremes. For while some affirm that
he was the son of a fuller", and educated in the same
trade, others deduce his origin from Attius Tullus%
a prince who governed the Volsci with great repu-

^ Cinna was of this family.

' Dion (xlvi. 4.) informs us, that Q. Calenus was the autlior of
this calumny. Cicero (de Leg. ii. 1., and iii. 16.) has himself said
enough to prove, that both his lather and grandfather were persons
of property and of a liberal education. (L.) A similar account is
given yEn. xi. 340. of Drances, in whom Virgil is by some supposed
to have typified Cicero.*

3 The same prince, to whom Coriolanus retired nearly four
hundred years before. Cicero himself appears to have had no coa-

CICERO. 293

tation. Be that as it may, I think the first of the
family, who bore the name of Cicero, must have been
an extraordinary man ; and hence his posterity did
not reject the appellation, but rather adopted it with
pleasure, though it was a common subject of ridicule :
for the Latins call a vetch cicer, and he had a fiat ex-
crescence on the top of his nose in resemblance of a
vetch, from which he got that surname ^ As for the
Cicero of whom we are writing, his friends advised
him, upon his first application to business and solicit-
ing one of the high offices of state, to lay aside the
appellation or to change it. But he nobly replied,
*' That he would endeavour to make the name of
*' Cicero more glorious, than that of the Scauri and
" the Catuli." When qusestor in Sicily, he conse-
crated in one of the temples a vase or some other
offering in silver, upon which he inscribed his two
first names Marcus Tullius ; and, punning upon the
third, ordered the artificer to engrave a vetch. Such
is the account, which we have of his name.

He was born on the third of January ^, the day
upon which the magistrates now sacrifice and pay
their devotions for the health of the emperor ; and
his mother is said to have been delivered of him
without pain. It is also reported, that a spectre ap-
peared to his nurse ; and foretold that the child,
whom she had the happiness to attend, would one
day prove a signal benefit to the whole common-

sciousness of this royal lineage, but in a joke selects an ancestor
from an illustrious Roman family. (Brut. 16.)

Regia progenies, et Tullo sa?iguis ab alto. (Sil. Ital.)

Festus, voc. Tullius, derives the name from the ancient situation
©f the family at the confluence of the Fibrenus and the Liris.*

4 Pliny's account of the origin of this name is more probable.
He supposes that the person, who first bore it, was remarkable for
the cultivation of vetches. So Fabius, Lentulus, and Piso had their
names from beans, tares, and peas. (H. N. xviii. 3.) This opinion
is adopted by Middleton, in his Life of Cicero. Quintilian, how-
ever, i, 4., agrees with Plutarch.*

5 A. U. C. 647, B. C. 107. See Ep. ad, Att, vii. 5. xiii. 42.
Fompey was born in the same y*ar.

2.94^ CICERO.

wealth of Rome. These things might have passed
for idle dreams, had he not speedily demonstrated
the truth of the prediction. When he was of a pro-
per age to go to school, his genius broke out with
such surpassing lustre, and he gained so distinguish-
ed a reputation among the boys, that the fathers of
some of them repaired to the schools to see Cicero,
and to have specimens of his capacity for literature ;
but the less civilised were angry with their sons, wheq
they saw them take Cicero in the middle of them as
they walked, and always give him the place of honour^
He had that turn of genius and disposition, which
Plato ' requires a scholar and a philosopher to possess.
He had both capacity and inclination to learn all the
arts, neither was there any branch of science that he
despised: yet was he most inclined to poetry; and
there is still extant a poem, entitled ' Pontius Glau-
cus ^,' which was written by him when a boy, in
tetrameter verse. In process of time, when he had
studied this art with greater application, he was
looked upon as the best poet, as well as the greatest
orator in Rome. His reputation for oratory still re-
mains, notwithstanding the considerable changes that
have since been made in the language ; but as many
ingenious poets have appeared since his time, his
poetry has lost it's credit, and is now neglected".
When he had finished those studies through which

* Sail. Bell. Jug. 11. 7 De Rep. v,

* This Glauciis was a celebrated fisherman of Anthedon near the
PiUripus, who after eating a certain herb jumped into the sea, and
became one of the gods of that element. For more particulars of
him, see Atlien. vii. 12., and Pans. Bceot. xxii. ^'Eschylus wrote a
tragedy upon the same subject. Cicero's poem is lost.

9 Plutarch was a very indifferent judge of Latin poetry; and his
, spealcjng with so much favour of Cicero's, contrary to the opinion
of Juvenal ^nd niajiy others, is a strong proof of it. Cicero likewise
translated Aratus into verse at the age of seventeen, and wrote a
ppetical panegyric upon Marius, which Scaevola (de Legg. i. 1.)
pronounced would live through innumerable ages. But it has been
long dead : and the poem, w'lich he wrote in three books upon his
own Consulship, has shared the same fate.

CICERO. 2^5

boys commonly pass, he attended the lectures of
Philo the academician^", whom of all the scholars of
Clitomachus the Romans most admired for his elo-
quence, and loved for his conduct. At the same
time, he made great improvement in the knowledge
of the lav/ under Mucins Scsvola^^, an eminent law-
yer and president of the senate. He likewise ac-
quired a little military knowledge under Sylla, in the
Marsian war ^-. But afterward, finding the common-
wealth engaged in civil contests, which were likely
to end in nothing but absolute monarchy, he v.ith-
drew to a philosophic and contemplative life ; con-
versing with men of letters from Greece, and making
farther advances in science. This method of life he
pursued, till Sylla had gained the ascendency, and
there appeared to be some established government
again.

About this time, Sylla ordered to be sold by auc-
tion the estate of one of the citizens, who had fall-
en under the proscription ; when it was knocked
down to Chrysogonus, Sylla's freedman, at the small
sum of two thousand drachmae. Roscius, the son
and heir of the deceased, expressed his indignation,
and declared that the estate was worth two hundred
and fifty talents. Sylla, enraged at having his con-
duct thus publicly called in question, brought an ac-
tion against Roscius for the murther of his father,
and appointed Chrysogonus the manager : w hen
such was the dread of the dictator's cruelty, that no
man offered to appear in the young man's defence.
In this distress, he applied to Cicero, whose friends
urged him to come forward upon the occasion ;
thinking he could not have a nobler, or more glorious
opportunity of entering the lists of fame. Accord-
ingly he undertook his defence, succeeded, and gain-

'° Brut. Ixxxix., and Tusc. Quaest. ii. 3.*

" Augur, and Consul A. U. C. 658. He also studied law under
a pontiff' of that name. (De Amic. 1.)*

'^ In the 18th year of his age. (Pliilipp. xii. 3.) Tljis was also
called the Social war. See the Life of Sylla, HI.*

6

296 CICERO.

ed great applause ". But fearing Sylla's resentment'*,
he travelled into Greece, and gave out that the re-
covery of his health was the motive. He was in re-
ality of a lean and slender habit, and his stomach was
so weak, that he was obliged to be very sparing in
his diet, and not to eat till a late hour in the dav.
His voice however had a variety of inflexions, but
was at the same time harsh and unformed ; and as
in the vehemence and enthusiasm of speaking he
always rose into a loud key, there was reason to ap-
.prehend fhat it might injure hishealtli.

"When he came to Athens, he heard Antioclius the
Ascalonite, and was charmed with the smoothness
and the grace of his elocution, though he did not
approve his innovations in philosophy. Tor Antio-
cluis had left the New Academy (as it is called) and
the sect of Carneades, either from clear conviction
and from the strength of the evidence of sense '% or
from a spirit of opposition to the schools of Chtoma-
chus and Philo, and had adopted most of the doc^
trines of the Stoics '^ But Cicero loved the New
Academy, and leaned more and more to it's opinions;
having already resolved, if he failed in his design of
I'aising himself in the state, to retire from the I'orum
find all political intrigues to Athens, and spend liis
,days in the quiet bosom of philosophy.

But not long afterward, he received the news of
Sylia's death. |iis body had by tliis time acquired
strength from exercise, and was now brought to a
good habit. His voice was formed; and, at the
same time that it was full and sonorous, had gained
a sufllcient sweetness, and was brought to a key

13 B. C. 81, at the age of 26. This was his first public, or
criminal cause. (Brut. 434.) He had previously tried his strength
in some private causes, and anionjij others, that of" P. Quinctius.*

'•» This, Middltton affirms, was not the cause of his journey, as he
continued a whole year subsequently in Rome. (Brut. 90, 91.)*

'-' VVhich Arcesilas, the head of that Academy (a pupil oi Polcmo,
Xenocrates' successor in the school of Plato), considered as ^ist
putable.*

? See Acad. 4-., aod Brut. 91,

CICERO. 297

Avhlch his constitution could bear. Besides, his
friends at Rome solicited him by letters to return,
and Antiochus earnestly exhorted him to apply him-
self to public affairs. For which reasons he exercised
afresh his rhetorical powers, as the best engines for
business, and called forth his political talents. In
short, he suffered not a single day to pass without
either declaiming, or attending the most celebrated
orators. In the prosecution of this design, he sailed
to Asia and the island of Rhodes. Among the
rhetoricians of Asia, he availed himself of the in-
structions ofXenocles of Adramyttium,Dionysius of
Magnesia, and Menippus of Caria. At Rhodes he
studied under the rhetorician Apollonius the son of
Molo '^, and the philosopher Posidonius. It is said
that Apollonius, not understanding the Roman lan-
guage ^'', desired Cicero to declaim in Greek; with
which he readily complied, because he thought his
faults might thus the better be corrected. Vvlien he
had ended his declamation, the rest were astonished
at his performance, and strove wdiich should praise
him most: Apollonius alone showed no signs of plea-
sure while he was speaking, and when he had finish-
ed, sat for a long time thoughtful and silent. At
last, observing the uneasiness which it gave his pupil,
he said ; " As for you, Cicero, I praise and admire
*' you: but I am concerned for the fate of Greece.
" She had nothing left her, except the glory of elo-
quence and erudition, and that too you are bearing
away to Rome." Cicero now prepared to apply
himself to public affairs, with sanguine hopes of suc-
cess ; but his spirit received a check from the oracle
at Delphi. For upon his inquiring by what means

'^ Not < Apollonius the son of Molo,' but * Apollonius Molo.'
The same mistake is made by our author in the Life of Caesar, IV.
359., not. (7.) Of all his masters Cicero gives an account,
J>rut. 91.

•7 From Val. Max. ii. 2. it appears that, out of respect to his
abilities, he was the first foreigner, who was allowed to address the
§ciuite wiUiout un interpreter.^

298 CICERO.

he might acquire the highest renown, the priestess
bade him " follow nature, and not take the opinion
" of the multitude for the guide of his life." Hence
it was that, after his coming to Rome, he acted at
first with great caution. He was timorous and back-
ward in applying for public offices, and had the mor-
tification to find himself neglected, and called ' a
Greek '%' and ' a scholastic ;' terms, which artisans
and others of the vulgar are very liberal in applying.
But as he was naturally ambitious of honour, and
spurred on besides by his father and his friends, he
betook himself to the bar. Nor was it by slow and
insensible degrees, that he gained the palm of elo-
quence ; his fame shone forth at once, and he was
distinguished above all the orators of Rome. Yet it
is said, that his turn for action was naturally as de-»
fecti\ e as that of Demosthenes ; and that therefore
he profited as much as he could from the instructions
of Roscius, who excelled in comedy, and of -/Esopus
whose talents lay in tragedy '^ This iEsopus (we are
told) when he was one day playing Atreus, in the
passage where he considers how he should punish
Thyestes, being worked up by his passion to a degree
of insanity, struck with his sceptre a servant who
happened suddenly to pass by, and laid him dead at
his feet. In consequence of these helps, Cicero
jfbund his powers of persuasion not a little assisted by-
action and just pronunciation. But as for the bawl-
ing orators, he laughed at them, and said ; " Their
" weakness made them rise into clamour, as lame
" men get on horseback." His excellence at hitting

»8 This appellation, given him by Caler.us,p. 292., not. (2)., was a
mark of contempt among the Konmans, as implying an obsequious
and parasitical character. See Cic. in Pison. 28., and Juv. iii. 78.*

'9 Middleton, however, arguing from his De Orat. i. 59., iii. 5G.
S9>, Tusc. Disp. iv. 25., &c., thinks Cicero would have disdained such
tuition, however he might liave esteemed the tutors ; and deems
it more natural, that ' they who act in feigned life should take their
pattern from the true, as Roscius and iKsopus are said to have at-
tended all the trials in which Cicero pleaded, than that those who
represent the true should copy from that which is feigned,'*

CICERO, «9$

off a jest or repartee animated his pleadings, and
therefore seenied not foreign to the business of the
Forum ; but by bringing it mucli into life, he offend-
ed many, and got the character of a malevolent man.

He was. appointed qutestor at a period, when there,
was a scarcity of corn ; and having Sicily for his pro%
vince, he gave the people considerable trouble at
first, by compelling then^ to export their grain to
Home. But afterward, when they had had expe-f
rience of his diUgence, justice, and moderation,
they honoured him more than any qutestor they had
ever received from Rome. About that time a num-
ber of young Romans of noble families, who lay un-
der the chargo of having violated the rules of disci-
pline, and not behaved with sufficient courage in
actual service, were sent back to the praetor of
Sicily. Cicero undertook their defence, and acquit-
ted himself of it with great ability and success.
Upon his return to Rome, much elated with these
advantages, he had (as he himself infornis us ^") a
pleasant adventure. On the road through Campa-
nia, meeting a person of some eminence with whom
he was acquainted, he asked him, " What they said
*' and thougiit of his actions in Rome?" imagining,
that his name and the glory of his achievements had
filled the whole city. His acquaintance answeredj
*' Why, where have you been then, Cicero, all this
*' timer"

This answer extremely dispirited him ; for he found
that the accounts of his conduct had been lost in
Rome, as in an immense sea, and had made no re-
markable addition to his reputation. By mature re-
flexion upon this incident, he was brought to re-r
trench his ambition, because he saw that contention
for glory was an endless thing, and had no attaia-
able limit. Nevertheless, his immoderate love of
praise and his passion for glory always remained with
him, and often interrupted his best and wisest de-
isigns.

*" In tjis Oration for Plancius, 26.

300 CICERO.

When lie began to dedicate himself more earnestly
to public business, he thought that while mechanics
know the name, and place, and use of all their tools
and instruments (though those things are inanimate),
it would be absurd for a statesman, whose functions
cannot be performed but by means of men, to be
negligent in acquainting himself with the citizens.
He therefore made it his business to commit to me-
mory not only their names, but the places of abode
of the more eminent, what friends they most valued,
and what neii2:hbours were in their circle. So that
Avhatever road in Italy Cicero travelled, he could
easily point out the estates and houses of his friends.

Though his own estate was sufficient for his neces-
sities, yet as it was small, it seemed strange that he
would take neither fee nor present for his services at
the bar* This was most remarkable in the case of
Verres. Verres had been praetor in Sicily, and had
committed numberless acts of injustice and oppres-
sion. The Sicilians prosecuted him, and Cicero
gained the cause for them, not so much by pleading,
as by forbearing to plead. The magistrates, from
their partiality to Verres, put off the trial by several
adjournments to the last day'^^ ; and as Cicero knew
there was not time far the advocates to be heard and
the matter determined in the usual method, he rose
up and said, " There was no occasion for pleadings.'*
He therefore brought up the witnesses, and after their
depositions were taken, insisted that the judges should
im.mediately pronounce their verdict.

Yet we liave an account of several humorous
sayings of Cicero's in this cause. When an eman-
cipated slave (Casciliusby name) who was suspected

^' Not ' to the last da)'.' Cicero brought it on, a few days before
Verres' friends here alhided to (Q. Ilortensius and Q. IMetellus, the
consuls elect, and M. Metellus the new praetor) were to come into
office. [The word i;i^f(x, as Barton remarks, may perhaps be used
in this place indefinitely, or it may signify the legitimate duration of
a cause, as in 1 Cor. iv. 3.*] Of the seven Orations, which were
composed upon the occasion, the two first only were delivered,
B. C. 70., and dravc Verres into voluntary exile.

CICERO. 301

of being a Jew, would have set aside the Sicilians,
and taken the prosecution of Verres upon himself -%
Cicero said, " What has a Jew to do with swine's
*' flesh ?" For the Romans call a boar-pig xxirres.
And whenVerres reproached Cicero with effeminacy,
he answered, " Why do you not first reprove your
" own children ?" For Verres had a young son,
who was supposed to make an infamous use of his
advantages of person. Hortensius the orator did not
venture directly to plead the cause of Verres, but
he was prevailed upon to appear in his behalf at the
laying of the fine, and had received an ivory -^
sphinx from him as a kind of fee. In this case, Cicero
threw out several enigmatical hints against Horten-
sius ; and when he said, " He did not know how
" to solve riddles ;" Cicero retorted, " That is some-
*' what strange, when you have a sphinx in your
« house."

Verres being thus condemned, Cicero set his fine
at seven hundred and fifty thousand drachmae ; upon
which, it was reported by censorious people, that he
had been bribed to let him off so low ^\ The Sici-
lians however, in acknowledgement of his assistance,
brought him, when he was aedile, a number of arti-
cle* for his games and other very valuable presents ;
but he was so far from considering his private advan-
tage, that he made no other use of their generosity,
than to lower the price of provisions.

*^ Cicero knew that CaEcilius was secretly a friend to Verres, and
anxious to bring hiai off. Against him therefore was the first of the
Verrine orations, entitled Divinatio, directed ; and it repelled his
claim with success.*

^3 Of bronze, according to Quint, vi. 3. ; or of Corinthian brass,
according to PHn. H. N. xxxiv. 8.*

^4 This fine, indeed, was very inconsiderable. The legal fine for
extortion, in such cases as that of Verres, was twice the sum ex-
torted. The Sicilians laid a charge of ^.322,916 against Verres:
the fine must therefore have been a^.645,832 ; but 750,000 drachmae
were only equivalent to ^.24,218. Plutarch must therefore, most
probably, have been mistaken. (I>.)

From Cicero's own words, indeed, it appears that he laid his cli-
ent's damages at above ^. 800,000. Qv.o nojnine a te viillies sester'-
tium ex legs repeto*

S02 CICEHa

He had a handsome country seat at Arplniini, a
farnfi near Naples, and another at Pompeii^ but nei-
ther of them were very considerable. With his wife
Tcrentia he received a fortune of a hundred and
twenty thousand denarii, and he succeeded as heir
to something that amounted to ninety thousand
ittore. Upon this, he lived in a genteel and at the
same time a frugal manner, with men of letters, both
Greeks and Romans, about him. He rarely took
his meal before sun-set t not that business, or «tudy,
prevented his sitting down to table sooner ; but the
Weakness of his stomach, he thought, requircd such
a regimen. He was so exact indeed in all respect?
in the care of his health, that he had his stated hours
for rubbing, and for the exercise of walking. By
this management of his constitution, he gained a
sufficient stock of health and strength for the labours
and fatigues, which he afterward underv;ent.

He relinquished the family town-house to his bro-
ther, and took up his residence on the Palatine hill -'*,
that those who came to pay their court to him might
not have too far to go. For he had a levee every
day, not less than Crassus had for his wealth, or Pom-
pey for his interest in the army ; though they were
the most followed, and the greatest men in Rome.
Pompey himself showed him the utmost attention,
and found his political assistance very useful to him,
in respect both to power and to reputation.

When Cicero stood for the proetorship, he had
many competitors who were persons of distinction,
and yet he was returned first on the list. As a pre-
sident in the courts of justice, he acted with the ut-
most integrity and honour. Licinius Macer, who
had considerable interest of his own, and was sup-
ported besides by that of Crassus, was accused be-
fore him of some default with regard to money.
He had so much confidence however in his own in-

^* This house, for renting which he was contemptuously called by
Catiline * Inquilinm,^ he subsequently purcliased from Crassus.
(Ep. ad Fam. v. 6.)*

CICERO. 305

€uence and the activity of his friends, tliat when the
judges were going to decide the cause, it is said he
went home, cut his hair, and put on a white habit
as if he had gained the victory, and was about to re-
turn so equipped to the Forum. But Crassus met
him in his court-yard, and told him that all the
judges had given their verdict against him ; wliich
affected him in such a manner, that he turned back
again, took to his bed, and died ". Cicero gained
honour by this affair, for it appeared that he kept
strict watch against corruption in the court.

There was another person named Vatinius '% an
insolent orator, who paid very little respect to th^
judges in his pleadings. It happened, that he had
his neck full of scrophulous swellings. This man ap-
plied to Cicero about some business or other ; and
as that magistrate did not immediately comply with
his request, but sat some time deliberating, he said ;
*' I could easily swallow such a thing, if I were
" praetor :'* upon which Cicero turned round, and
replied, " But I have not so large a throat."

When only two or three days of his office remained
unexpired, an information was laid against Manilius
for having embezzled the public money. Manilius,
who was a favourite with the people, and prosecuted
in their opinion solely on Pompey's account (being
his particular friend), desired to have a day fixed foi^

*5 The story is differently related by Valerius Maximus (ix. 12.)
He says that Macer v/as in court waiting the issue, and perceiv-
ing that Cicero was proceeding to give sentence against him,
sent to inform him that he was dead, and immediately suffocated
himself with his handkerchief. Cicero therefore did not pronounce
sentence against him, by which means his estate was saved to his son
I^icinius Calvus. Notwithstanding this, Cicero himself, in one of
his Epistles to Atticus, affirms that he actually condemned him : and
in the very next speaks of the popular esteem, which he gained by
so doing (i. 3.) (L.) Macer was an advocate of merit, (Brut, 67.)
and had composed some historical works. See Censorin. de Die
Nat. 20.*

*^ Of this fellow, whose proverbial scrophula is again referred to
balow, Seneca has given an admirable portrait, De Const. Sap. 17.
A large throat was by the ancients accounted character is tical of im-
pudence.'*

SOi CICERO.

his trial ; and as d'ccro appointed the very next, the
people were much offended, because it had been
customary for the praetors to allow the accused ten
days at the least. The tribunes therefore cited Cicero
to appear before the commons, and give an account
of this proceeding. He desired to be heard in his
own defence, which was to the following eflfect: " As
" I have always behaved to persons impeached with
" all the moderation and humanity, which the lav/s
" will allow, I thought it wrong to lose the opportu-
" nity of showing Manilius the same candour. I was
" master only of one day more in my office of pra2-
" tor, and consequently must appoint that ; for to
*' have left the decision of the cause to another ma-
*' ffistrate was not the method for those, who were
" inclined to serve Manilius." This made a won-
derful change in the minds of the people ; they were
lavish in their praises, and desired him to undertake
the defence himself, with which he readily complied ;
his regard for Pompcy, who was absent, not being
his smallest inducement. In consequence of this, he
again presented himself before the commons ; and
giving an account of the whole aflfiiir, took the oppor-
tunity of making severe reflexions upon those who
favoured oligarchy, and envied Pompey's glory '-•.

Yet, for the sake of their country, the patricians
joined the plebeians in raising him to the consulship.
The occasion was as follows : The change, which
Sylla had introduced into the constitution, at first
appeared uneasy ; but by time and custom it came
to an establishment, which many thought not disa-
greeable. At present there were some who sought
to effect another change, merely in order to gratify
their own avarice, and without the least view to the
public good. Pompey was engaged with the kings
of Pontus and Armenia, and there was no force in
Rome sufficient to hold in check the autliors of this
projected innovation. They had for their chief a
man of a bold and enterprising spirit, and the most

*: This beautiful Oration is still txtant.

CICERO. S05

remarkable versatility of manners, called Lucius Ca-
tiline. Beside a variety of other crimes,*, hre- was
accused of having debauched his own daughter, and
killed his own brother. To screen himself from pro-
secution for the latter, he persuaded Sylla to put his".
brother among the proscribed, as if he had been still
alive. These profligates, with such a leader, among
other engagements of secrecy and fidelity sacrificed
a man, and ate of his flesh -^ CatiHne had corrupted
numbers of the Roman youth, by indulging their de-
sires in every form of pleasure, providing them wine
and women, and setting no bounds to their extrava-
gance for these purposes. All Tuscany, and the
greatest part of Cisalpine Gaul, were ripe for a re-
volt. The vast inequality of the citizens in point of
property prepared Rome, likewise, for a change.
Men of spirit among the nobility had impoverished
themselves by their enormous expenses on public
exhibitions and entertainments, on bribing for offices,
and on magnificent buildings, by which means the
riches of the city were fallen into the hands of low
people. In this tottering state of the commonwealth,
there needed no mighty force to overset it: it was in
the power of any bold adventurer to accomplish it's
ruin.

Catiline how^ever^ before he began his operations,
wanted a strong fort from which to make his sallies,
and with that view stood for the consulship. His
prospect seemed very promising, because he hoped
to have Caius Antonius for his collegue ; aman who
had no firm principles either good or bad, nor any
resolution of his own, but who would form a consi-
derable addition to the power of any guiding chief.
Many persons of virtue and honour, . perceiving this
danger, proposed Cicero for the consulship, and the
people accepted him with pleasure. Thus Catiline

^* Or, as Sallust (Bell. Cat. 23.) informs us, without however full
assurance, ' drank of his blood.' The character, here given of Ca-
tiline, is coni^rmed and expanded by that illustrious historian.*
VOL. v. X

$Ci6 ClCtM.

'^as baffied, and Cicero -' and Cafus An^dniiis were
Appointed consuls; though Cicero's father was oiily
ftf the equestrian order, and his Competitors weie of
patrician families.

Catiline's designs were not yet disclosed to the
people. Cicero however, at his entrance on hig
ofiicc, had great affairs upon his hands, the preludes
of what was to follow. On the one side, those who
had been incapacitated by the laws of Sylla from
bearing offices, a powerful and numerous body, be-
gan now to solicit them, and to make all possible
interest with the people. It is true, they alleged
many just and good arguments against the tyranny
of Sylla, but the period was unseasonable. On the
other side, the tribunes of thiC people proposed laws,
which had the same tendency to distress the govern-
ment ; for they wished to appoint Decemvirs, and
to invest them with unlimited authority. This was
to extend over the whole of Italy, Syria, and all
I^ompey's late conquests. They were to be com-
missioned to sell the public lands in these countries,
to judge or banish whom they pleased, to plant colo-
nies, to take money oat of the public treasury, and
to levy and keep on foot what troops they might
deem necessary. Many Romans of high distinction
were pleased with the bill, and in particular Cicero's
collegue, Antony, who hoped to be one of the ten»
It was thouglit, likewise, that he was no stranger to
Catiline's designs ; and that, on account of his im-
mense debt, he did not disrelish tliem. Tiiis was an
alarming circumstance to all, who had the good of
their countrv at heart; and a<:^aiust it Cicero first
made pi-ovision, by getting the province oi' Macedoii
decreed to Antony, and not taking that of Gaul al-
lotted to himself. With this favour Antony was so
much delighted, that he was ready, like a hired
player, to act a subordinate part under Cicero for

*9B. .C.63. Accorclinj^ to Asconiu?, there were six coinpetitnrs.*

CICERO. ^ SO?

the benefit of his country. Having thus managed
his collegue, Cicero began with greater courage 10
take his measures against the seditious party. He
adduced his objections against the bill in the senate,
and effectually silenced the proposers ^^. They seized
another opportunity however, and coming prepar-
ed, insisted that the consuls should appear before
the people. Cicero, not in the least intimidated,
commanded the senate to follow him, and addressed
the commons with such success, that they threw out
the bill. His victorious eloquence indeed had such
an effect upon the tribunes, that they abandoned
also some other projects, which they had in medi-
tation.

He was in fact the man, who most effectually
showed the Romans what charms eloquence can add
to truth, and that justice when properly supported
is invincible. He showed them also that a magis-
trate, who watches for the good of the community,
should always in his actions prefer right to popular
measures ; and in his speeches should know how to
make those right measures agreeable, by separating
from them whatever may give offence. Of the gracfe
and power, with which he spoke, we have a proof in
a theatrical regulation adopted during his consulship.
Previously, those of the equestrian order sat mixed
with the commonalty. Marcus Otho in his pr^etor-
ship was the first, who separated the knights from
the other citizens, and appointed them seats which
they still enjoy ^^ The people looked upon this as a
mark of dishonour, a,nd hissed and insulted Otho,
when he appeared in the theatre. The knights, oft
the other hand, received him with loud plaudits.

3° This was the first of his tlifee Orations de Lege Agrar'ii. (L.)
The other two M'ere addressed to the people. They are all extant,
but the last in a very mutilated conuiti(«i.*

3r About four years before, under the consulship of Piso and
Glabrio. But Otho, whose other names were Luc. Roscius, was
not then praetor ; he was tribune. (Li v. Epit. xcix., Dio xxxvL

X 2

308 CICERO.

The people repeated tlieir hissing, and the knights
their applause, till at last they came to mutual re-
proaches, and threw the v^hole theatre into the ut-
most disorder. Cicero being informed of the dis-
turbance, came and summoned the people to the
temple of Bellona ; where partly by his reproofs, and
partly by his lenity, he so corrected them, that they
returned to the theatre, loudly testified their appro-
bation of Otho's conduct, and strove witli the knights
which should do him the most honour.

Catiline's conspiracy, wliich at first had been in-
timidated and discouraged, was now beginning to
recover it's spirits. Tlie accomplices assembled,
and exhorted each other to commence their opera-
tions with vigour before the return of Pompey, who
was said to be already marching homeward with hi^
forces, i^jt Catiline's chief motive for action Avas
the dependence, which he placed on Sylla's veterans.
Though these were scattered all over Italy, the
greatest and most warlike part resided in the cities of
Etruria, and in idea were again plundering and shar-
ing among themselves the Vv'eaith of Italy. They
had iilanlius for their leader (a unan, who had served
with high distinction under Sylla), and entering at
this time into Catiline's views, tlicy came to Rome
to assist in the approaching election ; for he was
now a second time suing for the consulship, and
liad resolved to assassinate Cicero in the tumult of
that assembly.

The gods seemed to presignify the machinations
of.these incendiaries_ by earthquakes, and thunders,
and apparitions^". There were also intimations from
human authorities, true enough in themselves, but not
sufficient for the conviction of a person of Catiline's
quality and power. Cicero, therefore, adjourned the
day of election; and having summoned Catiline before
the senate, examined him upon the informations which

3^ Of these Cicero himself giv-es- a -long detail, Catil. iii. 8., and-De
Div:. i. 17. They are also referred to by Dio xxxvii. '■25., and by
.Jul, Obseq. de Prodigiis.*

CICERO: «F)^

he had received. Catiline, believing there were
many in the senate desirous of a change, and at the.
same time happy to show his resolution to his ac-i
complices who were then present, answered with a
calm firmness ;■ "A* there lire two bodies, one of
" them feeble and decayed yet with il head, the other.
*' strong and robust without one, vvhat harm am I
" doing, if I give a head to the body that wants it ?'*
By these enigmatical expressions, he meant the
senate and the people. Cicero, conseqaently, was
still more alarmed. On the day of election,' he put
on a coat of mail ; the -principal persons in Rome
conducted him from liis house, and great numbers
of the youth attended him to the Campus Martins.
There he threw back his robe, and displayed part of
the coat of mail, on purpose to point out his danger.
The people were incensed, and immediately gathered
about him ; the consequence of which was, that
Catihne was again rejected, and vSilanus and Murena
chosen consuls. - =

Not long after this, when the veterans were as-
sembling for Catihne in Etruria, and the day ap-
pointed for carrying the plot into execution ap-
proached, three of the first and most illustrious per.*
sonagGS in Rome, Marcus Crassus, Marcus Marcellus,
and Metellus Scipio, went and knocked at Cicero's
door about midniglit ; and having called the porter;
bade him awake his master, and tell him who at-
tended. Their business was as follows : Crassus' por-
ter had brought him in a packet of letters after sup-
per, which he had received from a person unknown.
They Vvcre directed to diilerent persons, and there
was an anonymous one for Crassus himself ^^. This
alone he read, and when he found that it conveyed in-

' 33 1*!ee the Life of Crassus, III. 165. It is rather surprising that
Sallust, who is anxious to acquit Crassus of all participation- in Xhe
conspiracy, makes no mention of this letter, and his consequent
communication ofit to Cicero. The English reader will be remind-
ed by it of a similar detection, in the case of the Gunpo\vder-plot»
effected by an anonymous letter sent to Lord Monteagle.* -

3l(T CICERO.

formation of a horrible massacre intended by Catiline,
and warned him to retire out of the city, without
©penincj tlie rest, he immediately hurried to wait
upon Cicero. For he was not only terrified at the
impending danger, but he had also to remove some
suspicion, which had arisen from his acquaintance
u'ith Catihne. Cicero, having consulted with them
what was proper to be done, at.sembled the senate at
"break of day, and delivered the letters according to
their directions, desiring at the same time that they
might be read in public. They all concurred in
giving the same account of the conspiracy.

Quintus Arrius likewise, a man of praetorian dig-
Tuity^ informed the senate of the levies which had
been made in Etruria, and assured them that Manlius
with a considerable force was hovering about those
parts, and only waiting for news of an insurrection
in Rome. Upon these informations the senate made
a decree, by which all affairs were committed to the
consuls, and they were empowered to act in the
manner which they should deem best for the preser-
vation of the commonwealth. This is an edict,
which the senate seldom issue, and never except in
some imminent danger ^'.

When Cicero was invested with this power, he
committed the care of things without the city to
Quintus Metellus, and took the direction of all with-
in upon himself lie made his appearance every
day attended and guarded by such a multitude of
people, that they filled great part of the Forum.
Catiline, unable to support any longer delay, deter-
mined to repair to Manlius and his army ; and or-
dered Marcius and Cethegus ^^ to take their swords
and go to Cicero's house early in the morning, where
under pretence of paying their compliments they
T^ere to attack and kill him. But Fulvia, a woman

34 Cecs. Bell. Civ. i. 5.

3i These names are not correct ; but Cicero, Sallust, and Appian
*re too much at variance with each other, to enable us to give them
with precision.

CICERO. $lt

of quality, went to Cicero in tbe night to inform him
of his danger, and charged him to be on bis guard,
particularly against Cethegus. As soon as it was
light, the assassins came ; and being denied entrance,
grew very insolent and clamorous, which li/pwever
only rendered them the more suspected.

Cicero went out afterward, and assembled the
senate in tlve temple of Jupiter Stator, which stands
at the entrance of the Via Sacra, on the way to the
Palatine hill. Among the rest Catiline appeared,
as with a desiirn to make his defence, but there was
not a senator who would sit near him : they all left
his bench, and when he began to speak, they inter-
rupted him in such a manner, that he could not be
heard.

At length Cicero rose up, and commanded him
to depart the city^^ "For," said he, "while I
*' employ only words, and you weapons, there should
" at least be walls between us." Catiline upon this
immediately marched out with three hundred men
well armed, and with the fasces and other ensigns of
authority, as if lie Iiad been a lawful magistrate. In
this manner he joined Manlius, and having assembled
sn army of twenty thousand men, went round to the
cities, in order to persuade them to revolt. Hosti-
lities being thus openly commenced, Antony, Ci-
cero's coUcgue, was sentagauist him.

Those whom Catiline had corrupted, and thought
proper to leave in Rome, were kept together and
encouraged by Cornelius Lentulus surnamed Sura,
a man of noble birth but profligate life. He had
been expelled from the senate for his debaucheries,
but w^as then a second time prsetor, for that was a
customary qualification, when ejected persons Vvcre
to be restored to their places in the senate^'. As to

3^ Not by exorcss ^vords, for tliat would have been invidious ; but
indirectly, by laying open the wliole plan of the conspiracy, and bit-
terly vep reaching him for his nefarious project. Something, most
Jike the passage here quoted, occurs Or^t. Catil. i. 5.*

3? When a Uonum senator was expelled, an apoointment to a

6

tl2 CICERO.

the surname of Sura, it is said to have been given
him on the following occasion : When he was qua^^-
tor in the time of %'lla, he had lavished away im-
mense sums of the public money. Sylla, incensed
at his behaviour, demanded an account of him in
full senate. Upon this, Lentulus came up in a most
negligent and disrespectful manner, and said, " I
*' have no account to give you, but I present you
"with the calf of my leg '^ ;" which was a common
expression among the boys, when they had missed
tlieir stroke at tennis. Hence he had the surname
of Sura [the Roman term for the calf of the leg].
At another time, being prosecuted for some great
offence, he corrupted the judges. Vv^hen they had
given their verdict, thougii he v;as acquitted by only
a miijority of two, he said ; " He had put himself to
*Va needless expense in bribing one of those j6dges,
" for it would have been sufficient to have had a ma-
" jority of one."

Such was the disposition of this man, who had not
only been solicited by Catiline, but was moreover in-
fatuated W'ith vain hopes, which prognosticators and
other impostors had inspired. They forged verses in
an oracular form, and brought them to him as from
the books of the Sybils. These lying prophecies sig-
nified the decree of fate, " That three of the Cornelii
" should be monarchs of Rome." JThey added,
" That two had already fulfilled their destiny, Cinna
*' and Sylla : that he was the third, to whom the
" gods now offered the monarchy ; and that he
" ought by all means to embrace his high fortune,
" and not ruin it by delays, as Catiline had done."

practorsliip was, among others, a sufficient qualification for him to
i"esunie his seat. (Dio xxxvii.)

3S V^iz. To be struck by the ball — So Turnebus explains it, Ad-
yers. vii. 4., and to this custom Persius probably alludes :

Ccedimiis.inque vicem prcebe^nus crura. (Sat. iv. 42.)

This derivation however, as referred to the conspirator Lentulus,
is obviously false ; the name being of considerable antiquity. See
Liv. xxii. 31.*

- . CICEnO* 313-

Nothing little or trivial novv' entered Into Lentulus*
schemes : he resolved to imirther the whole senate,
and as many of the other citizens as he possibly
could, to burn the city, and to spare none but the
sons of Pompey, wiiom he intended to seize and hold
as hostages for a peace with that general. For by
this time it was strongly reported, that he was on liis
return from his great expedition. The conspirators
had fixed upon a night during the feast of the Satur-
naiia^*^ ibr the execution of their enterprise, had
lodged arms and combustibles in the house of Ce-
thegus, and having divided Rome into a hundred
parts, had selected the same number of men, to each
of whom was allotted his quarter to be set on fire.
As this was to be done bv them all at the same mo-
ment, they hoped that the conflagration would be
general : others were to intercept the Vv'ater, and kill
all that went to seek it.

While these things were preparing there happened
to be at Rome two embassadors from the Ahobroijes,
a nation which had been much oppressed bv the
Romans,' and was very impatient under their yoke '*'^.
These Lentulus and his party judged proper persons
to raise commotions in Gaul, and bring over tliat
country to their interest, and therefore they made
them partners m the conspiracy. They likewise
charged them with letters to their magistrates, and
to Catiline. To the (lauls they promised liberty ;
and they desired Catiline to enfranchise the slaves^
and march immediately to Rome. Alo?;;^:^ with the
embassadors, they sent one Titus of Crotona, to
carry the letters to Catihne. But the measures of
these inconsiderate men, who generally consulted
upon their affairs over their wine and in company

'5 This festival is. celebrated about the end of Dccembex', when
the nights are of tlieir greatest length.

■ According to Salhist (Bell. Catil. 44'.) the city wns only divided
into a dozen parts. The same historian gives a full detail of the
subsequent transactions of the conspirators with the embassadors of
the Allobrogcs (Jiod. Dauphine, and nearly the whole of Savoy )^'

*° Noxnsque rebus injidelis Allobrox. (Hor» Epod. xvi. G.)*

31i CICERO.

with women, were soon detected by the indefatigable
diligence, sober address, and great capacity of
Cicero. He had his emissaries in every part of
the city, to trace all their steps ; and he had, be-
sides, a secret correspondence with many who pre-
tended to join in the conspiracy, by which nneans
he got intelligence of their treating with those
strangers.

In consequence of this, he laid an ambush for the
Crotonian in the night, and seized him and the let-
ters ; the embassadors themselves privately lending
him their assistance '''. Early in the morninj? he as-
scmblcd the senate in the temple of Concord, where
he read the letters, and took the depositions of the
witnesses. Junius Silanus deposed, that several per-
sons had heard Ccthegus say, " Three consuls and
" four praetors would very soon be killed." The
evidence of Piso, a man of consular dignity, con-
tained circumstances of a similar nature. And Caius
Sulpitius one of the praetors, who had been sent to
CethcgMs' house, discovered there a large quantity
of javelins, swords, poniards, and other arms, all
newly furbished. At last, the senate giving the
Crotonian a promise of indemnity, Lentulus beheld
himself entirely detected, and laying down his office
(for he was then prfetor), put off his purple robe in
the house, and took another more suitable to his pre-
sent distress. Upon which, both he and his accom-
plices were delivered to the praetors*- to be kept in
custody, but not in chairis.

It was now late, and as the people were waiting
without in great numbers for the event of the day,
Cicero went out and gave them an account of it.
After which they conducted him to the house of a
friend, who lived in his neighbourhood ; his own

<' These embassadors had been solicited by Umbrenus to join his
party; but upon mature deliberation they thought it safest to abide
bv the state, and accordingly discovered the plot to Fabius Sanga,
the patron of their nation.

4i Or other public characters, according to Sallust, Bell. CatiU*

CICERO. $1$

being occupied by the womenj who were then em-
ployed in the mysterious rites of the goddess, whom
the Romans call Bona (or ' the Cxood') and the
Creeks Gvnecea"^^. An annual sacrifice is offered
her in the consul's house by his wife and mother,
and the vestal vu-gins give their attendance. When
Cicero was retired to the apartments assigned him,
with only a few friends, he began to consider what
punishment he should inflict upon the criminals.
He was extremely loth to proceed to a capital one,
which the nature of their offence seemed to demand,
as well on account of the mildness of his disposition,
as from the apprehension of being censured for mak-
ing an extravagant and severe use of his power against
men, who were of the first families and had power-
ful connexions in Rome. On the other side, if he
gave them a more gentle chastisement, he thought he
should still have something to fear from them. He
knew that they would never rest with any thing less
than death, but would rather break out into the most
desperate villainies, when their former wickedness
should be sharpened by fresh resentment. Besides,
he might himself be branded with the mark of timi-
dity and weakness, and the rather because he was
generally supposed not to possess much courage.

Before he could come to a fixed resolution, the
women who were sacrificing observed an extraordi-
nary presage. When the fire on the altar seemed to
be extinguished, a strong and bright fiame suddenly
burst forth from the embers^*. The other women
were terrified at the prodigy ; but the vestal virgins
ordered Terentia, Cicero's wife, to go to him imme-
diately, and command him from them, " Boldly to

43 See the Life of Caesar, IV. 366., and Juv. vi. 315. These
mysteries might also be celebrated in the house of the pra?toi". (lb.)*

■i^ See Suet, in Tib. xiv., and Virg. Eel. viii. 105-, upon which
Servius refers to this very ckcumstance, as attested by Cicero in
his Poem upon his own Consulsliip ; though no allusion to it is now
to be found, even in his De Div. i. 17., vi^here the prodigies attend-
ing his consulship are enumerated,^

$16 CICERO.

*.' follow his best iud"'ment in the service of his coiln-
':' try : because the goddess, by the brightness of this
" flame, promised him not only safety but glory in
" his enterprise." Terentia was by no means of a
meek and timorous disposition, but had her ambi-
tion, and (as Cicero himself says) took a larger share
with him in politics, than slie permitted him to take
in domestic business in return. She now informed
him of the prodigy, and exasperated him against the
criminals. His brother Quintus, and Pubiius Nigi-
dius^^ one of his phik)sophical fiends, of whom he
made considerable use in the administration, strength-
ened him in the same purpose.

Next day, the senate met to deliberate upon the
punishment of the conspirators ; and Siianus being
lirst asked his opinion, moved for sending them to
prison, and punishing them in the severest manner
that was possible. The rest in- their order agreed
with him, till it came to Caius Cicsar, wlio was sub-
sequently dictator. Ctesar then a young man, and
jr.st in the dawn of power both in his measures and
his hopes, was taking that road which he pursued,
till he converted the Roman commonwealth into a
monarchy. This was not at that time indeed ob-
served by others, but Cicero had strong suspicions
of him ^^ He took care, however, not to give him
any handle against him. 8ome say, the consul had
almost obtained the necessary proofs, and that Cassar
had a very narrow escape. C)thcrs assert that Cicero
purposely neglected the informations which miglit
have been had against him, from a fear of his friends
and his great interest, l^or, had Cassar been brought
under the same predicament with the conspirators,

■«- P. Nij;i(ltiis.Figalus, the most learned of the Romans after
Varro (A. Gell. iv. 9.), was liighly Cbteemed by Cicero, as the sjmie
writer informs us, xi 11., on account of his talents and acquire*
nients, but still more for his co-operation in public measures. 'See
Ep. ad i"am. iv. l[^. He composed several works, -and amony;ihe
rest a Treatise upon Animals, and another on Grammar. He fol-
lowed the fortunes of Pompev, and died iu exile B. C. 45.*

^6 See the Life of Ca;-:ar, IV. 3G1.

CICERO, 817

it would rather have contributed to save than to de-
stroy them.

\Vhen it came to his turn to give judgement, he
rose and moved ;." Not for punishing them capi-
" tally, but for confiscating their estates, and lodg-
*^ ing them in any of the towns of Italy that Cicero
" should select, where they might be kept in chains
" till Catiline was conquered^'." To this opinion,
which was on the merciful side, and supported with
much eloquence by h.im who gave it, Cicero himself
added no small weight. For in his speech ^^ he gave
the arguments at large for both opinions, first for the
former, and subsequently for that of Caesar. And
all Cicero's friends, thinking it would be less invidi-
ous for him to avoid putting the criminals to death,
Vvcre for the latter sentence ; insomuch that even
Silanus changed sides, and excused himself by saying
that he did not mean capital punishment, as impri-
sonment was the most severe infliction which a Ro-
man senator could suffer.

The matter thus went on, till it came to Lutatius
Catulus, He declared for capital punishment, and
Cato * supported him, expressing in strong terms his
suspicions of Caesar ; which so roused the spirit and
indignation of the senate, that they passed a decree
for sending the conspirators to execution. Caesar
then opposed the confiscating of their estates ; for
he said it was unreasonable, when tliey rejected the
mild part of his sentence, to adopt the severe. As
the majority still insisted upon it;, he appealed to the
tribunes. The tribunes indeed did not pat in their

47 Plutarch seems here to intimate that, after the defeat of Ctiti-
line they might be put upon their trial ; but it appears from Sallust,
and Cic. in Cm. iv. 5., that Caisar liad no sueh intention.

"i* The fourth of tlie Catilinarian oration?, sect, 4. From this
very ingenious harangue, and from Ep. ad Att. xii. 21. (as well a.-^
from Suetonius, and Dio), it appears that Cffisar was the first, who
recommended a merciful punishment; though Sallust, Bell. Cat.-49.,
and Appian, Bell. Civ. ii., state that in this he svas preceded by Ti-
berius Nero.*

* See IV. 365., and V. 72.

lis ticEkO.

intercession, but Cicero himself gave up the point,
and agreed that their estates should not be forfeited.

After this, Cicero went at the head of the senate
to the criminals, who were not all lodged in one
house, but in those of the several praetors. First he
took Lentulus from the Palatine hill, and led him
down the Via Sacra, and through the middle of the
Forum. The principal persons in Rome attended
the consul on all sides, like a guard ; the people
stood silent at the horror of the scene ; and the
youth looked on with fear and astonishment, as if
they were that day initiated '^ in some awefid cere-
monies of aristocratic power. AVhen he had passed
the Forum, and was come to the prison, he delivered
Lentulus to the executioner. Afterward he brought
Cethegus, and all the rest in their order, and they
were put to death. On his return he saw others,
who were involved in the conspiracy, standing thick
in the Forum. As these did not know the fate of
their ringleaders, they were waiting for night in
order to go to their rescue, for they supposed them
yet alive. Cicero, therefore, called out to them
aloud, " They did live^^'." In this manner the Ro-
mans, who choose to avoid all inauspicious words,
express death.

It was now growing late, and as he passed through
the Forum to his own house, the people conducted
him, not in a silent and orderly manner, but hailing
him with loud acclamations and plaudits, and pro-
nouncinfT him ' the Saviour and second Founder of
Rome.' The streets v.-ere illuminated^^ with a

49 Tills metaphor refers to the Eleuslnian Mysteries, in which
those about to be initiated were tried by many dreadful prf!f:csscs,
alternations of light and darkness, shakings of the temple, horrible
apparitions, &c. previously to their final admission. Of these Clau-
dian, de Rapt. Proserp. i., has given a Gtriking account. See also
I'heniist. ap. IStob. Serm cxix., and Meurs. Eleus. xi.'-

5^ Of this mode of expression examples occur in Plant. Bacch. i.
5. Capt. iii. 3. Trueul. i. i'., Tibul. Eleg. iii. 5., Virg. 7Eu. ii. 325.,

■5' Illuminations are of high antiquity. They came originally".

CICERO. 3ld

multitude of lamps and torches, placed by the doors.
The women held out lights from the tops of the
houses, that they might behold and pay a proper com-
pliment to the man now followed in solemn procession
by a train of the most illustrious citizens in Rome,
most of whom had distinguished themselves by suc-
cessful wars, led up triumphs, and enlarged the em-
pire both by sea and land. All these, in their dis-
course with each other as they went along, acknow-
ledged that Rome was indebted to many generals
and heroes of that age for pecuniary acquisitions,
for rich spoils, and for power ; but for preservation
and safety, to Cicero alone, who had rescued her
from so imminent and dreadful a danger. Not that
his quashing the enterprise, and punishing the delin-
quents, appeared so extraordinary a thing : but the
wonder was that he should have suppressed the
greatest conspiracy that ever existed with so little
inconvenience to the state, v.'ithout the smallest sedi-
tion or tumult : for many, who had joined Catiline,
left him on receiving intelligence of the fate of Len-
tulus and Cethegus ; and that traitor, giving Antony
battle with the troops that remained, was destroyed
with his whole army.

Yet a few were displeased by this conduct and suc-
cess of Cicero, and inclined to do him all possible
injury. At their head were some of the magistrates
for the ensuing year ; C«esar who was to be praetor,
and Metellus and Bestia tribunes ^^. These last,
having entered upon their office a few days before
that of Cicero expired, would not suffer liim to ad-
dress the people. They placed their own benches
on the Rostra, and only gave him permission to take

from the nocturnal celebration ef religious mysteries; and upontliat
account involved the idea ot" veneration and respect.

5* Bestia went out of office on the eighth of December. Metel-
lus and Sextius were tribunes. (L ) To the former of these Cicer«
confines the charge of this injurious treatment. Ep ad Fam. v. 2.,
and iii Pison. 3.*

320 CICERO.

the oath upon laying down his office ^^ after \vhich he
■was immediately to descend. Accordingly when Cicero
went up, it was expected that he would take the cus^
tomary oath ; bnt, silence being uiade, instead of the
usual Ibrm, he adoj^ted one which was new and sin-
gular. The purport of it was, that " He had saved
his country, and preserved the empire ;" and all the
people joined in it.

This exasperated Ca?sar and the tribunes still more,
and they endeavoured to create him new troubles.
Among other things, they proposed a decree for
calling Pompey home with his army, to suppress the
despotic power of Cicero. Happily for him, and
for the whole commonwealth, Cato was then one of
the tribunes. He opposed them with an authority
equal to theirs, and a reputation much superior, and
consequently broke their measures with ease. He
made a set speech upon Cicero's consulship, and re-
presented it in so glorious a light, that the highest
honours were decreed him, and he was denominated
' the Father of his Country ;' a mark of distinction,
which none had ever obtained before. Cato be-
stowed that title upon him before the people, and
they confirmed iV'\

His authority in Rome at that tinie was, un-
doubtedly, great ; but he rendered himselt'obnoxious
to man}', not by any b-id action, but by continually
praising and magnifying himself. He never entered
the senate, the assembly of the people, or the court.s
of judicature, but Catiline and Lcntulus were the
burthen of his song. Not satisfied v.ith this, .his
writings were so interlarded with encomiums on him-

^3 The consuls took two oatli>5, one upon enterin}:^ into, their ofHce,
that ' they would act accorchng to the hiws ;' and the other upon
quitting it, that ' they had not acted contrary to the laws.'

■i^ Q. Catulus was the first, who f;avc him the title: .Cato, as tri-
bune, confirmed it before tlie people. (See Cic.in Pison.t>.)_

Roma Pair em Patrick Ciccronr.m libera dixit. (Juv. viii. 21 1.)

CICERO^ , S21

self, that tlioiigli his stile was elegant and delightful,
his discourses were disgusting and nauseous to the
reader ; for the blemish stuck to him, like an incur-
able disease. '^

But, with this insatiable avidity of honour, he was
never unwilling that others should have their share.
For he was entirely free from envy ; and it appears
by his works that he was most liberal in his praises,
not only of the ancients, but of his contemporaries.
Many of his remarkable sayings likewise, of this na-
ture, are preserved. Thus of Aristotle he observed,
" That he was a river of flowing gold ;" and of Pla-
to's dialogues, " That, if Jupiter were to speak, he
" would speak as he did." Theophrastus he used to
call his " particular favourite ;" and, being asked
which of Demosthenes' orations he thought the best,
he answered, " The longest." Some, who affect to be
zealous admirers of that orator, complain indeed of
Cicero's having said in one of his Epistles ^% " That
" Demosthenes occasionally nodded in his orations:"
but they forget the many great encomiums, which he
bestowed upon him in other parts of his works, and
do not consider that he gave the title of ' Philippics*
to his own Orations against Mark Antony, which
were his most elaborate compositions. There was
not one of his contemporaries celebrated either foi*
his eloquence or philosophy, whose fame he did not
promote, either by speaking or writing of him in a
favourable manner. He persuaded Caesar, when
dictator, to grant Cratippus the Peripatetic the free-
dom of Rome. He likewise prevailed upon the
council of Areopagus to make an order, desiring him
to remain at Athens to instruct the youth, and not
deprive their city of such an ornament. There are

■i^This is not now extant, but is mentioned by Quintilian x. 1. xii 1.
After all however, what is it but to pronounce him less than perfect?
^Vllat is it more, than what Horace has pronounced of Homer ?
What is it, in short, but the inevitable condition of humanity it-
self? In his Orator he observes, that though Demosthenes does not
realise his idea of perfection, he comes nearer to it than any other
person.*

VOL. V. Y

322 CICERO,

moreover extant letters of Cicero to Herodes ^\ and
others to his son, in which he directs them to study
pliilosophy under Cratippus. But he accuses Gor-
g'ias the rhetorician of having accustomed his son to
a life of pleasure and intemperance, and therefore
forbids the young man his society *^. Among his
Greek letters this, and another to Pclops the Byzan-
tine, are all that discover any thing of resentment.
His reprimand to Gorgias was certainly proper, if he
really were the worthless and dissolute man, which
he was said to be ; but he betrays an excessive mean-
ness in his expostulations with Pelops, for having ne-
glected to procure him certain honours from the city
of Byzantium.

These w^re the effects of his vanity. Superior
keenness of expression likewise, which he had at
command, led him into manv violations of decorum.
He pleaded for Munatius ^^ in a certain cause, and
his client was acquitted in consequence of his de-
fence. At a subsequent period Munatius prosecuted
Sabinus, one of Cicero's friends ; upon wliich, he was
so much transported with anger, as to say ; " Dost
" thou suppose it was the merit of thy cause that
" saved thee, and not rather the cloud ^'^ which I
" threw over thy crimes, and which kept them out
" of the sight of the court ?'* He had succeeded in
an' encomium upon Marcus Crassus from the Ros-
trum ; and a few days afterward as publicly re-
proached him. " What !" said Crassus, " did you
" not lately praise me, in the place where you now
" stand ?" " True,'* answered Cicero, " but I did

'>' To whom Cicero had entrusted his son, during his residence at
Athens, with a view of receiving iVom him occasional accounts of
his proticieiicy. See Ep. ad Att. xiv. 16. xv. 16.*

'^ See Ep. ad Fam. xvi. Hi., in which young Cicero informs Tiro
t)f his compliance with his father's prohihition.*

59 T. Munatius Plancus Bursa, who was tribune A. U. C, 701.,
and the enemy of Cicero and .Milo. See Ep. ad Fam. vii. 2. Phi-
h'pp. vi. 4-.*.

^ This, Cicero boasted he did in the cause of Cluentius, Quint,
ii. 17.*

CICERO. S23

** it by way of experiment, to see what I could make
*' of a bad subject." Crassus had once affirmed,
that none of his family ever lived above three-score
years ; but was subsequently desirous of contradict-
ing it, and said, " What could I be thinking of, when
*' I asserted such a thing?" " You knew," said,
Cicero, " that such an assertion would be highly
" agreeable .to the Roman people." Crassus hap-
pened one day to profess himself much pleased with
that maxim of the Stoics, ' The good man is always
rich :' " I believe," said Cicero, " there is another
more agreeable to you, ' All things belong to the
" prudent*'^*" For Crassus was notoriously covetous.
Crassus had two sons, one of whom resembled a man
named Axius so much, that his mother was suspected
of having had an intrigue with him. This young man
spoke in the senate with great applause ; and Cicero,
being asked what he thought of him, answered in
Greek, aiios Crassou ^''. When Crassus was about to
set out for Syria, he thought it better to leave Cicero
his friend than his enemy, and therefore addressed
him one day in an obliging manner, and told him he
would come and sup with him ^^. Cicero accepted
the offer with equal politeness. A few days after-
ward Vatinius likewise applied to him by his friends,
and desired a reconciliation. " What !" said Cicero,
" doesVatinius too want to sup with me ?" Such were
his jests upon Crassus.

Vatinius (as before observed) had scrophulous
tumours in his neck, and one day when he was plead-
ing, Cicero called him " a tumid orator." An ac-
count was once brought to him that Vatinius was
dead, which being subsequently contradicted, he

^' :Txvrc6 wen ns tro^pis. The Greek o-o4>(35 signifies • cunning, shrewd,
prudent,' as well as ' wise ;' and in any of the former acceptations
the Stoic maxim was applicable to Crassus. Thu^frujri, in Latin,
is used indifferently either for ' saving prudence,' or for ' sober wis-
dom.'

''- A scandalous pun, which might mean either that the young
man was worthy of Crassus, or that he was the son of Axius.

^i See Ep. ad. Fam. i, 9.*

y 2

524 CICERO.

said, " Perdition seize the tongue, that told the
"lie^*!" When Cfrsar proposed a decree for dis-
tributing the lands in Campania among the soldiers,
many of the senators v.cre displeased at it ; and
Lucius Crcllius "^ in particular, who was one of the
oldest of them, declared, " That shall never be so
" long as I live." " Let us wait awhile then," said
Cicero ; " for Gellius requires no very long credit."
There was one Octavius, to whom it had been ob-
jected, that ' he was an African.' One day when
Cicero was pleading, this man said he could not hear
him : " That is somewhat strange," observed Cicero ;
** for 3^ou are not without a hole in your ear ^'V —
When Mctelius Nepos told him, " That he had
*' ruined more as an evidence, than he had saved as
" an advocate :" " I grant it," said Cicero, " for
" I have more truth than eloquence." A young
man, wlio lay under the imputation of having given
his father a poisoned cake, talking in an insolent
manner, and threatening Cicero with the weight of
his reproaches, Cicero replied ; " I had much rather
" have them, than your cake." Publius Sestius had
taken Cicero, among others, for his advocate in a
cause of some importance, and yet he would suffer
no man to speak but himself. When it appeared
that he would be acquitted, and the judges were
giving their verdict, Cicero called to him and said ;
*' Sestius, make the best use of your time to-day, for

- 64 For more of this facetiousness on the same subject, see Quint.
vi. 8.*

^5 This man had always been correct in his poHtics, and frequent-
ly bore the most honourable testimony to botli Cicero and Cato.
fSee Cic. in Pison. 3. A pleasant story is related of his honhommic
by Atticus, De Legg. i. 20.*

''" A mark of slavery among some nations, derived perhaps origin-
ally from the Jewg. See Kxod. xxi. (j., Deut. xr. 17.; but the
Africans wore pendents in their ears, by way of ornament. (See
Macrob. Saturn, vii. 0.) Pttronius, likewise, and Dio mention
this as an African custom. It appears however from Xenoph.
Anab. iii., and Juv. i. 105., to have been practised likewise in Asia.
Cpon the obscure extraction ©f the person in question, there arc
some sneers, Ep. ad Vam, vii. 9. and 16.*

CICERO. SfS

** to-morrow you will be out of office ^'''." Publius
Cotta who affected to be thought an able Jawyer,
though he had neither learning nor capacity, being
summoned as a witness in a certain cause, declared,
" He knew nothing of the matter." " Perhaps,'*
said Cicero, " you think I am asking you some
" question in law." Metellus Nepos, in some differ-
ence with Cicero, often asking him, " Who is your
" father ?" he replied, " Your mother has made it
" much more difficult for you to answer that ques-
" tion :" for his mother had not the most unsullied
reputation. This Metellus was himself a man of a
light unbalanced mind. He suddenly quitted the
tribunitial office, and sailed to Pompey in Syria '^^j
and, when there, he returned in a manner still more
absurd. Upon the death of his preceptor Philagrus,
he buried him in a pompous manner, and placed
the figure of a crow in marble on his monument '^^.
" This," remarked Cicero, "• was one of the wisest
" things you ever did ; for your preceptor has taught
" you rather to fly than speak '"." Marcus Appius
having mentioned, in the introduction to one of his
pleadings, that his friend had desired him to try every
resource of care, eloquence, and fidelity in his cause,
Cicero said ; " What a hard-hearted man you are,
" not to do any one thing, that your friend has de-
" sired of you 1"

It seems not foreign to the business of an orator,
to use this cutting raillery against enemies or oppo-
nents ; but his employing it indiscriminately, merely

''7 Probably Sestius, not being a professed advocate, would not
be employed to speak for any body else ; and therefore Cicero
meant, that he should indulge his vanity in speaking for himself.
(L.) This Sestius is the one for whom Cicero pleaded, and of whom
he makes mention, Ep. ad Q. Fratr. ii. 3, 4., and ad Att. vii. 17.
, 6^ See the Life of Cato, V. 77.

^9 It was usual among the ancients to place emblematic figures
upon the monuments of the dead ; and these were either such in-
struments as represented the profession of the deceased, or sucli
animals as resembled them in disposition.

7' Alluding to the celerity of his expeditions.

526 CICERO.

with a view to raise a laugh, rendered him extremely
obnoxious. To give a few instances : he used to call
Marcus Aquilius, ' Adrastus,' because he had two
sons-in-law who were both in exile'^ Lucius Cotta,
a ii'reat lover of wine, was censor when Cicero soli-
cited the consulship. Cicero in the course of his
canvas, happening to be thirsty, asked for some
"water, and said to his friends who stood round him
as he drank ; " You do well to conceal me, for you
" are afraid that the censor will call me to account
" for drinking water." Meeting Voconius one day
with three daughters, who were very plain women,
he cried out.

On this conception Phcebue never smiled 7 i.

Marcus Gellius, who was supposed to be of servile
extraction, happening to read some letters in the
senate with a loud and strong voice, " Do not be
" surprised at it," said Cicero, " for there have been
"** public cryers in his family." Faustus^^ the son of
Sylla the dictator, who had proscribed great numbers
of Romans, having run deeply into debt and wasted
a considerable part of his estate, w\as obliged to put
up public bills for the sale of it. Upon which Cicero
said, " I like these bills much better than his father's."

Many hated him for these keen sarcasms, which
encouraged Clodius and his faction to form their
vSchemes against him. The occasion was as follows :
Clodius who was of a noble family, young and ad-
venturous, entertained a passion for Pompcia, the
wife of Caesar. This induced him to get privately
into CtEsar's house, which he did in the habit of a,

7' The Adrastus alluded to married his two daughters to Eteoclcs
and Polynices, who were both banished.

7^ A verse of Sophocles, speaking of Laius the father ofCrdipus.

73 Sylla, who had named himself Felix, called his twins Faustus
and Fausta. The young man, who had married Pompey's daughter,
was at length taken in Africa, and by CiEsar's order put to death.
See Dio, xli., and Ilirtius de Bell. Afric. 95. To Iiis debts au uUu-*
fion is made by Cicero, tip. ad Att. ix, 11.*'

CICERO. 827

female musician. The women were then offering
tliere that mysterious sacrifice, v/hich is kept from;
the sight and knowledge of men. But though no
man is suffered to assist in it, Clodius, who was very
young and had his face yet smooth, hoped to pass
through the women to Pompeia undiscovered. Hav-
ing entered a large house however in the night, he
w^as puzzled to find his way ; and one of the women
belonging to Aurelia, Ca3sar's mother, seeing him
wandering up and down, asked him his name. Be-
ing now forced to speak, he said he was seeking
Abra, one of Pompeia's maids. The woman, per-
ceiving it was not a female voice, shrieked out, and
called the matrons together. Upon which they im-
mediately made fast the doors, and searching the
whole house, found Clodius sculking in the apart-
ment of the maid, by whom he had been introduced.
As this affair made a great noise, CiEsar divorced
Pompeia, and prosecuted "'^ Clodius for his impiety.
Cicero was at that time his friend ; for during the
conspiracy of Catiline he had been ready to give him
all the assistance in his power, and even attended as
one of his guards. But as Clodius insisted in his de-
fence, that he was not then at Rome, but at a con-
siderable distance in the country ; Cicero deposed
that he came that very day to his house, and talked
■with him about some particular business. This was,
indeed, matter of fact ; yet probably it was not so
much the influence of truth, as the necessity of satis-
fying his wife Terentia, which induced him to de-
clare it. She hated Clodius, on account of his sister
Clodia ; who, she was persuaded, was anxious to get
Cicero for her husband, and managed the design by
one Tullus. As Tullus was an intimate friend of
Cicero, and likewise made frequent visits to Clodia,
who was his neighbour, this circumstance strengthen.

7'* He was prosecuted by a tribune, according to Plutarch's
former and more accurate account, in the Life of Ca?sar, IV. 358.
That Clodius had been at least not the enemy of Cicero, appears
from his Orat. De Prov. Cons. 9.*

32g CICERO.

ed lier suspicions. Beside^:, Terentia was a woman
of an imperious temper, and having the ascendency
over her husband, instigated him to give evidence
against Clodius. Many other persons of honour
alleged against him the crimes of perjury, of fraud,
of having bribed the people, and corrupted the
women. Nay, Lucullus brought his maid-servants
to prove that Clodius had a criminal commerce with
his own sister, who was that nobleman's wife. This
was the youngest of the sisters. And it was gene-
rally believed, that he had had connexions of the same
kind with his other sisters; one of whom, named
Tertia, was married to Martins Rex, and the other
(Clodia) to Metellus Celer. The latter was nick-
named ' Quadrantaria,' because one of her lovers had
palmed upon her a purse of small brass money, instead
of silver ; the smallest brass-coin being called a
Quadrans'^. It was upon this sister's account, that
Clodius was most censured. As the people set them-
selves both against the witnesses and the prosecutors,
the judges were so terrified, that they thought it
necessary to place a guard about the court ; and
most of them confounded the letters upon the
tablets '^ He seemed, however, to be acquitted by
the majority; but this was owing, it was reported, to
pecuniary applications. Hence Catulus, when he
met the judges, said, " You were right in desiring a
*' guard for your defence ; for you were afraid, that
" somebody would take the money from you.'* And
when Clodius told Cicero, that the judges did not
give credit to his disposition ; " Yes," said he, " five
" and twenty of them believed me, for so many con-

"''^ There was a smaller, called a sextula, as appears from Varro,
de L. L. V. 36. But the qnadrnns was the price for bathing ( llor.
Sat. I. iii. 137.), and to an intrigue of Cludia with a bathing-ma^
Cicero alludes. Pro M. Ca;l. 26.*

7^ See the parallel passage, in the Life of Caesar, IV. "69., not.
(16.) The briber}' is distinctly affirmed by C ic. Ep. ad Att. i. 10.,
where Catulus' observation, and Cicero's retort upon Clodius, are
both to be found.*

CICERO. S2S

*' demned you : nor did the other thirty believe you,
" for they did not acquit you till they had received
" your money.'* As to Cjiesar, when he was called
upon, he gave no testimony against Clodius ; neither
did he affirm, that he was certaiu of any injury done
to his bed. He only said, " He had divorced Pom-
" peia, because the wife of Caesar ought not only ta
" be clear from such a crime, but also from the very
" suspicion of it ^^"

After Clodius had escaped this danger, and was
elected tribune of the people, he immediately at-
tacked Cicero, and left neither circumstance nor
person untried to ruin him. He gained the people
by laws, which flattered their inclinations ^^, and the
consuls by decreeing them large and wealthy pro-
vinces ; for Piso was to have Macedon, and Gabinius,
Syria. He enrolled many mean and indigent per-
sons as citizens ; and armed a number of slaves for
his constant attendants. Of the great triumvirate,
Crassus was an avowed enemy to Cicero, Pompey
indifferently caressed both parties, and Csesar was
about to set off upon his expedition to Gaul. Though
the latter was not his friend, but rather since Cati-
line's affair suspected of enmity, it was to him that he
now applied. The favour which he solicited was,
that he would take him as his lieutenant ; and Caesar
granted it ''^. Clodius, perceiving that Cicero would

77 Hor. Sat. I. vi. 82. •

— ■ jmdicum.

Qui primus virtutis honos, scrvavit ab omni

Noii solum facto, veruyn opprobrio quoque, turpi.*

'^ Of these, four are mentioned by Asconius, in his notes on Cic.
Orat. in Pison. 6. ; tlie first ordaining that corn, which had been
previously sold at a low price, should be distributed gratis to the
multitude ; the second, that no observations of the heavens should
take place on the days of public business ; the third, that the old
guilds should be re-established, and new ones instituted ; and the
last, tliat the censors should not strike any one out of his class with-
out a formal accusation, and the full concurrence of the two col-
Jegues.*

79 Cicero himself says, that this lieutenancy was a voluntary ofter
of Caesar's. (L,) (Ep. ad Att. ii, 18. 29., and de Prov. Cons. 17.)

S30 CICERO.

thus get beyond the reach of his tribunitial power,
pretended to be incKned to a reconcihation. He
threw most of the blame of the late diflerence upon
Terenlia; and spoke always of Cicero in terms of
candour, not like an adversary vindictively inchned,
but as one friend might complain of another. This
removed Cicero's fears so entirely ^"'j that he gave up
the lieutenancy to which CjEsar had appointed hi.a
and began to attend to business as before.

Cagsar was so much piqued at this proceedings that
lie encouraged Clodius against him, and drew off
Pompey entirely from his interest. He declared
likewise before the people, that Cicero in his opinion
had been guilty of a flagrant violation of all justice
and law, in having without any form of trial put
Lentulus and Cethegus to death *^\ This was the
charge, which he was summoned to answer. Cicero
then put on mourning, let his hair grow, and with
every token of distress w^ent round to supplicate the
people. Clodius took care to meet him in every
street with his audacious and insolent crew, who in-
sulted him on his change of dress, and often disturb-
ed his applications by pelting him with dirt and
stones. Almost all the equestrian order, however,
went into mourning with him ; and no fewer than
twenty thousand young men of the best families at-
tended him with their hair dishevelled, and entreated
the people in his behalf. Afterward the senate met,
with an intent to decree that the people should change
their habits, as in times of public mourning. But as
the consuls opposed it, and Clodius beset the house
vith his armed band of ruffians, many of the senators

That both Caesar and Pompey were perfidious in their present atten-
tions to Cicero, appears from Dio xxxviii. 15.*

**° It is not clear, that Cicero v/as influenced by this conduct of
Clodius: he had always expressed a great indifference upon the
subject. (lb.)

"' Sec Veil. Paterc. ii. ■\n. This assembly u-as held without the
walls, in order that Ca?sar, who had already left the city as procon-
sul, might be able to attend. J^ee Dio, ib.-

CICERO. S31

ran out, rending their garments and exclaiming
against the outrage.

But this spectacle excited neither compassion, nor
shame ; and it appeared that Cicero must either go
into exile, or decide the dispute by the sword. In
this extremity, he applied to Pompey for assistance ;
but he had purposely absented himself, and remained
at his Alban villa. Cicero first sent his son-in-law
Piso to him, and subsequently went himself. When
Pompey was informed of his arrival, he could not
bear to look him in the face. He was confounded
at the thought of an interview witli his injured friend,
who had fought such great battles for him, and ren-
dered him so many services in the course of his ad-
ministration. But being now son-in-law to Cgesar,
he sacrificed his former obligations to that connexion,
and went out at a back-door in order to avoid his
presence ^".

Cicero, thus betrayed and deserted, had recourse
to the consuls. Gabinius always treated him rudely ;
but Piso beliaved with some civility. He advised
him to withdraw from the torrent of Clodius' rage,
to bear this change of the times wdth patience, and
to be once more the saviour of his country, which
for his sake was involved in all this trouble and com-
motion.

After this answer, Cicero consulted with his friends.
Lucullus advised him to stay, and assured him he
would be victorious. Others ^^ were of opinion, that
it was best to fly, because the people would soon long
for his return, when they were weary of Clodius*
madness and extravagance. The last advice he
adopted ; and taking a statue of Minerva, which he
had long kept in his house with great devotion, car-

** In this Dio seems to agree with Plutarch, and Cic. in Pison.
31. conveys the same idea ; but from Ep. ad Att. x. 4. it appears
that Cicero had an interview with Pompey, before he went into
qxile.*

''s Cato and Hortensius. See Dio. ib., and Ep. ad Att, iii, 15., ad
Q. Fratr. i. 3 *

332 CJCERO.

ricd it to the Capitol, and dedicated it there with this
inscription,

" To Minerva, the protectress of Rome."

About midnight, he privately quitted the city ;
and, with some friends who attended to escort him,
took his route on foot through Lucania, intending
thence to pass over into Sicily.

It was no sooner known that he was fled, than
Clodius procured a decree of banishment against
him, prohibiting him fire and water, and admission
into any house within fi\c hundred ^"^ miles of Italy.
But such was the veneration, which the people had
for Cicero, that in general there was no regard paid
to the decree. They showed him every kind of
civility, and conducted him on his way with the most
cordial attention. Only at Hipponium, a city of
Lucania (now called Vibo) one Vibius a native of
vSicily, who had particular obligations to him, and
among other things had held an appointment under
him when consul as surveyor of tlie works, now re-
fused to admit him into his house ; but at the same
time acquainted him, that he would appoint a place
in the country for his reception. And Caius Virgi-
nius, the praetor of Sicily, though indebted to Cicero
for signal services, wrote to forbid him entrance into
that island.

Discouraged by these instances of ingratitude, he
repaired to Brundusium, where he embarked for
Dyrrhachium. At first he had a favourable gale, but
the next dav the wind turned about, and drove him
back to port. He set sail again, however, as soon as
the wind was fair. It is reported, that when he was
about to land at Dyrrhachium, there happened to bean
earthquake, and the sea retired to a considerable dis-
tance from the shore. Hence the soothsayers in-
ferred, that his exile would be of no long continu-
ance, as these were tokens of a sudden change.
Numbers of people came to pay their respects to him,

*•* Four hundred. See Ep. ad Att. iii. 4.*

CICERO. 333

and the cities of Greece strove which should show
him the highest civilities ; yet he continued dejected
and disconsolate. Like a passionate lover, he often
cast a longing look toward Italy, and behaved with a
littleness of spirit not to have been anticipated in
one, who had enjoyed such opportunities of cultiva-
tion from letters and philosophy. Nay, he had often
desired his friends not to call him an orator, but a
philosopher ; because he had m.ade philosophy his
business, and rhetoric only the instrument of his poli-
tical operations. But opinion ^^ has great power to
dilute the tincture of philosopliy, and infuse the pas-
sions of the vulgar into the minds of statesmen, who
have a necessary connexion and commerce with the
multitude ; unless they take care so to engage in
every thing extrinsic as to attend exclusively to the
business, without imbibing the passions that are the
ordinary consequence of that business.

After Clodius had banished Cicero, he burned his
villas and his house in Rome, and on the place where
the latter had stood erected a temple to Liberty.
His goods he put up to auction, and the crier gave
notice of it every day, but no buyer appeared. By
these means, he became formidable to the patricians;
and having drawn the people with him into the most
audacious insolence and effrontery, he attacked Pom-
pey, and called in question some of his acts and or-
dinances in the wars. This exposing Pompey to
censure, he deeply blamed himself for having aban-
doned Cicero ; and, entirely altering his plan, adopt-
ed every method for effecting his return. As Clo-
dius constantly opposed them, the senate decreed
;that no public business of any kind should be de-
spatched by their body, till Cicero was recalled.

In the consulship of Lentulus '^, the sedition in-

85 Ac|a signifies not only ' opinion,' but ' fame,' and (by an easy
figure) ' a passion for fame,' The reader will choose which sense
he thinks best.

^^ This was in the fiftieth year of Cicero's age, B. C. 57. With
respect to his brother's danger, mentioned below, Plutarch appears

S34 CICERO.

creased : some of the tribunes were wounded in the
Porum ; and Quintus, the brother of Cicero, was
left for dead among the slain. The people began
now to change their opinion ; and Annius Milo, one
of the tribunes, was tlie first who ventured to sum-
mon Clodius to answer for his violation of the public
peace. Many of the people of Rome, and of the
neighbouring cities, joined Pompey ; wdth whose
assistance he drove Clodius out of the Forum, and
then assembled the citizens to vote. Nothing, it is
said, was ever carried among the commons with so
much unanimity ; and the senate, vying with them
in their proofs of attachment to Cicero, decreed their
thanks to the cities, which had treated him with
kindness and respect during his exile ; and that his
town and country-houses, Mhich Clodius had demo-
lished, should be rebuilt at the public charge '*'.

Sixteen months after his banishment, Cicero re-
turned ; and such joy was expressed by the cities,
and so much eagerness to meet him \vas displayed
by all ranks of people, that his own account of it falls
short of the truth, though he remarked ^^, " Italy
*' had brought him upon her shoulders to Rome."
Crassus, who was his enemy before his exile, now
readily went to meet him, and was reconciled. In
this, he said he was desirous to oblige his son Pul>-
lius, who was a great admirer of Cicero.

Not long after his return, Cicero taking his op-
portunity when Clodius was absent ^'', went up with
a large party to the Capitol, and destroyed the tri-
bunitial tables, in which were recorded all the acts

to have confounded Quintus Cicero with Sextius the tribune. See
C'ic. pro Scxt. 35 — 37.*

''^ The consuls decreed for rebuildinc; his house in Rome nearlv
11,0001., for his Tusculan villa nearly 30001., and for his Formian
villa about half that sum, which Cicero called ' a very scanty esti-
mate.' Ep. ad Att. iv. 2.

«^ Orat. post Red. ad Sen. 15.*

®9 Cicero had attempted this once before, when Clodius was pre-
sent ; but Caius, Clodius' brother, being pra-tor, he failed in his
undertaking.

CICERO. S35

of Clodlus* time. Clodius loudly complained of this
proceeding ; but Cicero answered, " That his ap-
" pointment as tribune was irregular, because he was
" of a patrician family % and consequently all his
** acts null and void.'* At this Cato was displeased,
and opposed Cicero in the assertion. Not that he
commended Clodius ; on the contrary, he was ex-
tremely offended at his administration : but he re-
presented, " That it would be a violent stretch of
" prerogative in the senate, to annul so many de-
" crees and acts, among which were his own com-
" mission and regulations at Cyprus and Byzan-
" tium ^'." The difference however, which this pro-
duced betw^een Cato and Cicero, did not proceed to
an absolute rupture ; it only lessened the warmth of
their friendship.

After this, Milo killed Clodius ; and, being ar-
raigned for the fact, he chose Cicero for his advo-
cate. The senate, fearing that the prosecution of a
man of Milo's spirit and reputation might produce
some tumult in the city, appointed Pompey to pre-
side at this and the other trials, and to provide for
the peace both of the city and of the courts of justice.
In consequence of which, he posted a body of soldiers
in the Forum before day, and secured every part of
it. This rendered Milo apprehensive, that Cicero
would be disconcerted at so unusual a sight, and less
able to plead. He therefore persuaded him to come
in a litter to the Forum, and to repose himself there
till the judges w^ere assembled and the court filled.
For he was not only timid in war, but he had also
his alarms when he spoke in public, and in many
causes scarcely ceased to tremble even in the very
height and vehemence of his eloquence'^-. When

9° To obviate this objection, he had caused himself to be adopted

into a plebeian family.*

9' See the Life of Cato, V. 88., and Veil. Paterc. ii.*

92^ This he himself confesses in his Orat. pro Cluent. 18., and

Divin. in Q. Caeci). 13. And this, M. Kicard informs us, was the

<'a£e with the great Bossuet.*

336 CICERO.

he undertook to assist in the defence of Licinms
Murena ^^ against the prosecution of Cato, he was
ambitious to outdo Hortcnsius, who had ahxady
spoken with much applause ; for which reason, he
sat up all night to prepare himself. But the watch-
ing and application hurt him so much, that he ap-
peared inferior to his rival '^\

When he came out of the litter to open Milo's
cause, and saw Pompey seated on high as in a camp,
and weapons glistering all round the Forum, he was
so confounded that he could scarcely open his ora-
tion. For he shook, and his tongue faultered, though
Milo attended the trial with great courage, and had
disdained to let his hair grow, or to put on mourning.
These circumstances contributed not a little to his
condemnation '^\ As for Cicero, his trembling was
imputed rather to his anxiety for his friend, than to
any particular timidity.

Cicero was appointed ^'^ one of the priests called
Augurs, in tlie place of young Crassus, who had been
killed in the Parthian war. The province of Cilicia
was, subsequently, allotted to him ; and he sailed
thitker with an army of twelve thousand foot, and
two thousand six hundred horse. He had it in charire
to compel Cappadocia to submit to king Ariobar-
zanes ; which he performed to the satisfaction of all
parties, without having recourse to arms. And find-
ing the Cilicians elated on the miscarriage of the
Romans in Parthia, and the commotions in Syria, he
brought them to order by the gentleness of his
gov ernment. The presents, which the neighbouring
princes offered him, he declined. He excused the
province from finding him a public table, and daily

93 Mnrasna had retained three advocates, Hortensius, ^larcus
Crassus, and Cicero.

94 * To himself,' as Xylander suggests, by a correction (etv-n)
to which Barton gives his approbation.*

95 Of the effects of this invidious fortitude Cicero was justly afraid.
See Pro Milon. 31.*

9^ In the fifty-fourth year of his age.*

CICERO. S37

entertained at his own charge persons of honour and
learning, not with magnificence indeed, but with
elegance and propriety. He had no porter at his
gate, neither did any man ever find him in bed ; for
he rose early in the morning, and kindly received
tiiose who came to pay their court to him, either
standing or walking before his door ^' . We are told,
that he never caused any man to be beaten with rods,
or to have his garments rent^^, never gave opprobri-
ous language in his anger, nor added insult to punish-
ment. He recovered the public money, which had
been embezzled, and enriched the cities with it.
At the same time, he was satisfied if those who had
been guilty of such frauds made restitution, and
fixed no mark of infamy upon them.

He had, also, a taste of war : for he routed the
bands of robbers that had possessed themselves of
Mount Amanus, and was thence saluted bv his army
' Imperator ^^.' Caecilius ^°^ the orator, having de-
sired him to send him some panthers from Cilicia for
his games at Rome, in his reply he could not forbear
boasting of his achievements. " There were no
" panthers (he said) left in Cilicia ; those animals, in
" their vexation to find that they were the only ob-

97 See Ep. ad Au. vi. 2., where also mention is made of his mild
treatment of such, as made restitution.*

98 This mark of ignominy was of the highest antiquity. * Where-
fore Hanim took David's servants, and shaved off one half of their
beards ; and cut off their garments to the middle, even to their
buttocks, and sent them away.' (2 Sam. x. 4.)

99 He not only received this mark of distinction, but public
thanksgivings, upon the motion of Cato, were ordered at Rome for
his success ; and the people had nearly decreed him a triumph. His
military services, therefore, must have been considerable, and Plu-
tarch seems to mention them too slightly. See Ep. ad Att. v. 21.,
ad Fam, xv. 4. Mount Amanus, Strabo informs us, was a part of
Mount Taurus, and extended to "the Euphrates.

^^° Not C<Tcilius, but Caeiius. He was then aedile, and wanted
the panthers for his public shows. See Ep. ad Fam. ii. 11, ; which
however, as M. Ricard judiciously remarks after Gronovius, appears
a piece of simple and elegant badinage^

YOh. v. Z

338 CICERO.

" jects of war, wliile every thing else was at peace,
" having fled into Caria."

On his return from his province he stopped at
Rhodes, and afterward made some stay at Athens ;
this he did witli great pleasure, in remembrance of
the conversations, which he had formerly enjoyed at
that place. He had now the company of all, who
were most famed for erudition, and visited his former
friends and acquaintance. After receiving due ho-
nours and marks of esteem from Greece, he passed
forward to Rome, where he found the fire of dissen-
sion kindled, and every thing tending to a civil
war '°\

AVhen the senate were for decreeing him a tri-
umph, he said, " He had rather follow Caesar's cha-
** riot-wheels in his triumph, if a reconciliation could
" be effected between him and Pompey." And in
private he tried every healing and conciliatory me-
thod, by writing to Caesar, and entreating Pompey.
After it came to an open rupture, and Caesar was on
his march to Rome, Pompey did not choose to wait
for him, but retired with numbers of the principal
citizens in his train. Cicero did not attend him in
his flight ; and therefore it was believed, that he
would join Cssar ^^\ It is certain, that he fluctuated
considerably in his opinion, and was in the utmost
anxiety : " For," says he in his Epistles, " AVliither
" shall I turn ? Pompey has the more honourable
*' cause ; but Caesar manages his affairs with the
*' greatest address, and is most able to save himself
" and his friends. In short, I know whom to avoid,

'°' Ep. ad Farti. xvL 11.

*°- From several of Cicero's letters to Atticus, in the ninth book
(10. 16. 18.), this appears to be incorrect; as he certainly left the
city soon after his return, and notwithstanding Caesar's entreaties
would not come back again. His inclination was certainly in favour
of Pompey (Ep. ad Att. vii. 1.), though he saw and lamented that
general's mistakes ; and all that Caesar appears to have hoped ibr.
wag his neutrality. The latter part of the subjoined extract is from
viii. 7.* '■ ' ■ ■

CICERO. 339

^' but not whom to seek.'* At last one Trebatius, a
friend of Caesar, signified to him by letter, that Csesar
thought he had reason to regard him as of his side,
and a partner of his hopes. But if his age would
not permit it, lie might retire into Greece, and live
tliere in tranquillity unconnected with either party.
Cicero w^as surprised that Csesar did not write him-
self'°", and angril}^ replied, " That he would dono-
" thing unworthy of his political character.'* Such
is the account, which we have of the matter in his
Epistles.

Upon Caesar's marching for Spain, however, he re-
crossed the sea, and repaired to Pompey. His ar-
rival was agreeable to the generality ; but Cato
blamed him in private for having taken this measure.
" As for me," said he, " it would have been wrong
" to leave that party, which I had embraced from the
" beginning; but you might have been much more
" serviceable to your country and your friends, if
" you had stayed at Rome, and accommodated your-
" self to events : whereas now, without any reason
" or necessity, you have declared yourself an ene-
" my to Cassar. and are come to share in frightful
*' dangers.'*

These arguments made Cicero change his opinion:
especially, when he found that Pompey did not em-
ploy him upon any considerable service. It is true,
no one was to be blamed for this but himself; for he
made no secret of his repenting ^°*. He disparaged
Pompey's preparations, he insinuated his dislike of
his councils, and never spared his jests upon his al-
lies. He was not, indeed, disposed to laugh him-
self; on the contrary, he walked about the camp
with a very solemn countenance ; but he often made

"^3 There is, however, a letter of his (ad, Fam. x. 8.) to Cicero
on this very subject.*

'°^ Ep, ad. Fam. vii. 3. Of his sadness in camp he gives an accomit,
Philipp. ii. 15, 16. See also Macrob, Sat. ii. 3. Plutarch elsewhere
records a bitter sarcasm of his upon one, who had come over from
Cxsar to Pompey, and said he had left his horse behind in his hurry :
* His horse is very much obliged to iiim.'*

Z 2

cc

340 CICERO.

others laugh, though they were Httle inchned to it.
It may not be amiss, perhaps, to give a few in-
stances. When Domitius advanced a man, who had
no turn for war, to the rank of captain, and assigned
as his reason that he was an honest and a prudent
man ; " Why then," said Cicero, " don't you keep
" him for governor to your children ?" When some
were commending Theophanes tlie Lesbian, who was
director of the board of works, for having consoled
the Rliodians on the loss of their fleet ; " See," said
Cicero, " what it is to have a Grecian ^^^ director 1"
When Cffisar was successful in almost every instance,
and held Pompey as it were besieged, Lentulus said,
" He was informed that Ccesar's friends looked very
sour." " You mean, I suppose," observed Cicero,
that they are out of humour with him." One
Martins newly arrived from Italy told them, a report
prevailed at Rome that Pompey was blocked up in
his camp: " You took a voyage then," said Cicero,
" on purpose to see it with your ovvn eyes." After
Pompey's defeat, Nonnius said, " There was still
" room for hooc, for there were seven easrles left in
" the camp." Cicero answered, " That v/ould be
" good encouragement, if we were to figlit with
" jack-daws." When Labienus, on the strength of
som.c oracles ^^^, insisted that Pompey must be con-
queror at last: " By this oracular generalship," re-
plied Cicero, " we have lost our camp."

After the battle of Pharsalia (in which he was not
present, on account of his ill health) and after the
flight of Pompey, Cato, who had considerable forces
and a great fleet at Dyrrhachium, desired Cicero to

1C5 Whose rhetoric cnn * console,' even after his folly has ruined.
Ills followers! Theophanes of JVlitylene had v/ritten the History of
Pompey's wars, p.nd was in great credit with him. (Caesar Ijell.
Civ. iii. 18., Ep, ad. Att. ii. 17- v. 11.) See, also, Cic. pro. Arch. 10.
Cicero, however, seems not to iiav.e rated him very highly, Ep. ad.
Att. ix. 1. He it was, who persuaded Pompey, after the battle of
Pharsalia, to take refuge in Egypt. See iV. 224.*

■'-■^ This, it appears from Lucan ix. S'kd., was Labienus' particu-
lar superstition.*

CICERO. 841

assume the command, because his consular dig-nity
gave him a legal title to it. Cicero however not only
declined it, but absolutely refused taking any farther
share in the war. Upon which young Pompey and
his friends called him ' traitor,' drew their swords,
and would certainly have despatched him, had not
Cato interposed, and conveyed him out of the camp.
He got safe to Brundusiuni, and waited there some
time in expectation of Caesar, who was detained by
his affairs in Asia and Egypt. A¥hen he heard that
the conqueror was arrived at Tarentum, and design-
ed to proceed thence by land to Brundusium, he set
out to meet him ; not without hope, nor yet without
some shame and reluctance, at the thought of trying
in the presence of so many witnesses how he stood
in the opinion of a victorious enemy. He had no
occasion, however, either to do or to say any thing
beneath his dignity. Cassar no sooner beheld him at
some considerable distance advancing before the rest,
than he dismounted and ran to embrace him ; after
Vv'hich, he went on discoursing v/itli him alone for
many furlongs. He continued, indeed, to treat him
with the utmost kindness and respect ; insomuch that
when he had written an encomium on Cato, which
bore the name of that illustrious man, Cassar, in his
answer (entitled ' Anti-Cato), praised both the elo-
quence ^^'^ and the conduct of Cicero, and said he
greatly resembled Pericles and Theramenes.

'°7 See Plin. H, N. vii. SO., and Cic. Brut. 72. Oi Theramenes
we have some account in Cic. de Orat. iii. 16., and also in theLife of
Kicias,III.205. Fronp. the moderation of his politics, he was considered
iis a trimmer. Upon the taking of Athens by Lysander, he resisted
the establishment of an oligarchy ; and as one of the Thirty Tyrants,
lie v.'ithstood the proscriptions and murthers authorised by his col-
legues, for which he was impeached by Critias, one of thiit bloody
directory, and died with true Socratic fortitude. See more of himiu
the Lifeof Ljsander, III. 399.,Diod. Sic.xiv.,andXenopIi.Hellen. ii.

Upon Cato many coMtroversial works appeared. Brutus composed
one underhisname, to which Augustus wrote a reply, (Suet. Aug. 85.)
He was panegyrised likewise by Fabius Gailus, a friend of Cicero's
(Ep. ad Fain, vii, 24-.), Munatius, and Thrasea. See the Life of
Cssar, IV. 420.*

342 CICERO.

When Quintus Ligarius was prosecuted for having
borne arms against Cassar, and Cicero had under-
taken to plead his cause, Caesar is reported to have
said ; " Why may we not give ourselves a pleasp.re,
" which we have now not enjoyed for so long a time,
" that of hearing Cicero speak : since I have already
" taken my resolution as to Ligarius, who is clearly
*' a bad man, as well as mv enemy ?" But he was
much moved, when Cicero began ; and his speech,
as it proceeded, had such a variety of pathos, so irre-
sistible a charm, that his colour often changed, and
his mind was evidently torn by conflicting passions.
At last, when the orator touched upon the battle of
Pharsalia '°^, he was so extremely affected, that his
whole frame trembled, and he let drop some papers
out of his hand. Thus subdued by the force of elo-
quence, he acquitted Ligarius.

The commonwealth being changed into a monar-
chy, Cicero withdrew from the scene of public busi-
ness, and bestowed his leisure upon the young
men '% who were desirous of being instructed in
philosophy. As these were of the best families, by
his interest with them he once more obtained n-reat
authority in Rome. He m^ade it his business to com-,
pose and translate philosophical dialogues, and to ex-
press the Greek terms of logic and natural philoso-
phy in the Roman language. For it is said that he
first, or at least principally, gave Latin terms for
these Greek words, phantasia [imagination], si/nca-
fathesis [assent], epoche [doubt], catalepsis [compre-
hension], atomos [atom], amercs [indivisible], kenon
[void], and many other such terms in science; con-
triving either by metaphorical expression, or strict
version, to render them intelligible and familinr to
the Romans, His ready turn for poetry afibrded hiui

""^ Fro LIgar. S. The vvhole oration is most honourable to the ge-
nius of the speaker, and it's success is perhaps the noblest triumph of
eloquence over prejudice and party-spirit on record.*

*°> These were chiefly Pansa, Hirtius, and Dolabella. See
Quint, viii. 3. xii. 11., Cic. Ep. adFam.ix. IG., Suet. deCl. Rhet. 1.,
and Senec. Centre v. 1.*

CICERO. 343

amusement ; for we are told, when he was intent
Jipon it, he could compose five hundred verses in a
single night. As in this period he spent most of his
time at his Tusculan villa, he wrote to his friends,
*' That he led tlie life of Laertes "";" either byway
of raillery, as his custom was, or from an ambitious
desire of public employment and discontent in his
present situation. Be that as it may, he rarely went
to Heme, and then only to pay his court to Cassar.
He was always one of the first to vote him additional
honours, and forward to sav somethincs: new of him
and his actions. Thus when Caesar ordered Pompey's
statues, which had been pulled down, to be re-erect-
ed, Cicero said ; " That, by this act of humanity in
" setting up Pompey's statues, he had established his
" own."

It is reported, that he had formed a design to write
the history of his own country, in which he would
have interwoven many of the Grecian affairs, and
inserted not only their speeches, but their fabulous
legends'". But he was prevented by many disa-
greeable circumstances, both public and private, into
most of which he brought himself by his own indis-
cretion. For, in the first place,he divorced his wife
Terentia. The reasons which he assigned were, that
she had neglected Inm during the war, and even sent
him out without necessaries. Besides^ after his re-
turn to Italy, she behaved to him with little regard,
and did not wait upon him during his long stay at
Brundusium. Nay, when his daughter, at that time
very young, took so long a journey to see him, she
allowed her only an indifferent equipage and very in-
sufficient supplies. According to his own account
indeed, his house was become naked and empty, in
consequence of the many debts, which she had con-
tracted. These were the most specious pretences for
the divorce. Terentia, however, denied all thesf

'°° See Horn. Od. xxiv. 205. 225.*
'" DeLegg. 12.*

3

344. CICERO.

charges; and Cicero himself made a full apology for
her, by marrying a younger woman ^^- not long after-
ward. Terentia said, he took her merely for her
beauty ; but his freedman Tyro affirms that lie mar-
ried her for her wealth, that it might enable him to
pay off his encumbrances. She was indeed very ricli,
and her fortune was in the hands of Cicero, who had
been left her guardian. As his debts were great, his
friends and relations persuaded him to marry the
young lady, notwithstanding the disparity of their
years, and to satisfy his creditors out of her fortune.

Antony, in his answer to the Philippics, censures
him for having divorced a wife, with whom he: was
grown old ; and rallies him on account of his per-
petually keeping at home, like a man unfit either for
business or for war. Not long after this match, his
daughter Tullia, who on the death of Piso had mar-
ried Lentulus''^, died in child-bed. The philo-
sophers came from all parts to comfort him, for his
loss affected him extremely ; and he even put away
his new bride, because she seemed to rejoice at Tul-
lia's death. In this posture stood Cicero's domestic
affairs.

As to those of the public, he had no share in the
conspiracy against Cassar, though he was one of Bru-
tus' particular friends ; and no man was more uneasy
under the new establishment, or more desirous of
having the commonwealth restored. Possibly they
feared his natural deficiency of courage, as well as
his time of life "% at which the boldest begin to
droop. After the deed was achieved by Brutus and
Cassias, the friends of Caesar assembled to revenge

' "* Publilia. Upon the censures, to which the disparity of their
years gavebirtii (for Cicero was now above sixty), Quintilian has pre-
served one of the orator's own jokes, vi. 3. See Ep. ad Fain. iv. 14-.*
"3 p. Corn. Lentulus Dolabella, her third husband. Plutarch has
forgotten to mention her second, Furius Crassipcs, Ep. ad Q.
Fratr. ii. 4, 5, 6. And from Lentulus she had been divorced, some
time before her death.*

''4 lie was now sixty-three years of age.*

1

CICERO. 54.5

Ills death ; and it was apprehended, that Home would
again be plunged into civil wars. Antony, who was
consul, convened a meeting of the senate, and made
a short speech on the necessity of union. But Cicero
expatiated in a manner suitable to the occasion ; and
persuaded the senate, in imitation of the Athenians,
to pass a general amnesty ^^^ as to all that had been
done against Caesar, and to decree provinces to Bru-
tus and Cassius.

None of these things, however, took effect, for
the people were inclined to pity on this event ; and
when they beheld the dead body of Caesar carried
into the Forum, where Antony showed them his
robe stained with blood ^^^, and pierced on all sides
with their swords, they broke out into a transport of
rage. They sought all over the Forum for the prin-
cipal actors in the tragedy, and ran with lighted
torches to burn their houses. This danger, by their
precaution, they escaped; but, as they saw others not
less considerable impending, they left the city.

Antony, elated with this advantage, became for-
midable to all the opposite party, who supposed that
he would aim at nothing less than absolute power ;
but Cicero had particular reason to deprecate his
ascendency. For being sensible that Cicero's weight
in the administration was re-estabhshed, and that he
was strongly attached to Brutus, Antony could
hardly endure his presence. Besides, there had long
been some jealousy and dislike between them, on ac-
<:ount of the dissimilarity of their lives. Cicero,
fearing the event, was solicitous to go with Dolabella
into Syria, as his lieutenant. But afterward Hirtius
and Pansa, who were to succeed Antony in the con-
sulship, persons of great merit and warm admirers
of Cicero, implored him not to leave them ; and en-

"5 As Thrasybukis had done at Athens, upon the expulsion of the
Thirty Tyrants. See Xenoph. Hellen. xi. noar the end, Corn. Ne-
pos. Vit. Thrasyb., and Val. Max. iv. 1."^'

"'' Upon the effect of this exhibition Quintilian has a remark,
vi. 1.*

346 CICERO.

gfiged, with his assistance, to desCroy Antony. Ci-
cero, without depending much upon their scheme,
gave up that of going with DolabclJa, and agreed
with the consuls elect to pass the summer in Athens,
and retmn when thev entered on their office.

Accordingly, he embarked for that place, without
taking any principal Roman along with him. But
his vovasre beinq; accidentally retarded, news arrived
from Rome (for he did not choose to be without
news) that there was a wonderful change in Antony;
that he took all his steps agreeably to the sense of the
senate ; and that nothing but the personal attend-
ance of himself was wantinir, to brins; matters to the
best establishment. Condemning therefore his own
excessive caution, he returned to Rome.

His first hopes were not disappointed. Such
crowds cam.e out to meet him, that almost a whole
day was spent at the gates, and on his way home, in
compliments and congratulations. Next day An-
tony convened the senate, and sent for Cicero ; but
he kept his bed, pretending that he was indisposed
by his journey. In reality, he seems to have been
afraid of assai-sination, in consequence of some hints
which he had received by the way. Antony was ex-
tremely incensed at these suggestions, and ordered
a party of soldiers either to bring him, or to burn
his house in case of refiisal. At the request however
of numbers who interposed, he revoked his order,
and bid them only bring a pledge "'" from his house.
After thif^, when they hap|>ened to meet, they
passed each other in silence, and lived in mutual
distrust. In tlie mean time vounof Ceesar, arriving:
from Apoilonia, put in his claim as heir to his uncle,
and sued Antony for tweuty-five million drachmas ^^^,
which he had detained of the estate.

"7 Upon tills custom sno a preceding note, in the Life of Cato,
V. 8G., not. (33.) The above threat is given in more moderate
terms, even by Cicero himself, who was never disposed to moderate
eit}»er his sufferings or services, Philipp. i. h.^

"* Sec also the Life of Antony. Flutaic]i is mistaken in the sun>.

CICERO. 3i7

Upon this, Philip wlio had married the mother,
and Marcellus who was husband to the sister of Oc-
tavius, brought him to Cicero. It was agreed be-
tween them, that Cicero should support Caesar with
his eloquence and interest, both in the senate and
among the people ; and that Caesar in return should
give Cicero all the protection, which his wealth and
military influence could afford. For the young man
had already collected a considerable number of vete-
rans, who had served under his uncle.

Cicero received the offer of his friendship with
pleasure. For, while Pompey and Cicero were
living, Cicero (it seems) had a dream ^'^, in which he
thought he called some boys, the sons of senators,
up to the Capitol, because Jupiter designed to make
one of them sovereign of Rome. The citizens ran
with all the eagerness of expectation, and placed
themselves about the temple ; and the boys in their
prretextas sat silent. The doors suddenly opening,
the boys rose up one by one, and in their order pass-
ed round the god, who reviewed them all, and sent
them away disappointed : but when Octavius ap-
proached, he stretched out his hand to him, and
said ; " Romans, this is the person who, when he
" comes to be your prince, will put an end to your
" civil wars." This vision, they tell us, made such
an impression upon Cicero, that he perfectly retain-
ed thQ figure and countenance of the boy, though he
did not then know him. Next day, he went down
to the Campus Martins, when the boys were just
returning fi'om their exercises ; and the first, who
struck his eye, was the lad in the very form that he

It sippcars from Veil. Paterc. ii. 60., and others (among the rest
Ciceio himself, Phil. ii. 37.), that it was seven times as much.
]3aiton however, and after him M. Ricard, contends that Plutarch
may be recoiiciicd nitli the rest, by interpreting, the larger sum of
the money which Csesar had amassekl for publrc uses, and the smaller
of !iis own private property.* i. < . ..

''<> Of this dream wc fuod ho •testimony, remaining, in any of Ci-
cero's works now extant; but a very similar one ofQ. Catulusis
preserved by Suet. Aug. Dk*

348 CICERO.

had seen in liis dream. Astonished at the discovery,
Cicero inquired vvho were his parents ; and he proved
to be the son of Octavius, a person not much dis-
tinguished in hfe '^'^5 and of Attia, Caesar's sister. As
he was so near a relation, and CjEsar had no children
of his own, he adopted him, and bequeathed him his
estate. Cicero after his dream, whenever he met
vounf]r Octavius, is said to have treated him with
particular regard ; and he received those marks of
his friendship with great satisfaction. Besides, he
happened to have been born in the year in which
Cicero was Consul.

These were the ostensible causes of their present
connexion. But the leading motive with Cicero
was, his hatred to Antony ; and the next his natural
avidity of glory. For he hoped to throw the weight
of Octavius into the scale of the commonwealth ;
and the latter behaved to him with such a puerile
deference, that he even called him ' Father.' Hence
Brutus, in his letters to Atticus, expressed his indig-
nation against Cicero, and said ; " That as through
" fear of Antony he paid his court to young Caesar,
" it was plain he took his measures not for the liber-
" ty of his country, but only to obtain a gentle mas-
" ter for himself." Nevertheless, Bnit.us finding-
Cicero's son at Athens, where he was studying under
the philosophers, gave him a command, and employed
him upon many services which proved successful.

Cicero's power, at this time, was at it's greatest
height. He carried every point that he desired, in-
somuch that he expelled Antony, and raised such a
spirit against him, that the consuls Hirtius and Pansa
were sent to give him battle ; and Cicero likewise

'?° Here Plutarch scEms to have truste/d too imph'citly to some of
Augustus' enemies ; as it appears t'rofn vSuetonius, tliat his lather
had filled sotne high pifices ot' state, ar.xl ii" he had lived, Cicero
(Philipp. iii. 6.) informs us he would have been consul. Fronn
the follouing Lives of Brutus, and of Antony, it is clear that Altia
wae niece (sister's daughter) to Caesar, petfivius was born B. C.
63.*

CICERO. 349

prevailed upon the senate to grant Caesar the fasces
with the dignity of prsetor, as one that was fighting
for his country.

Antony, indeed, was beaten ; but, both the con-
suls failing in the action, the troops ranged them-
selves under the banners of Csesar. The senate now
fearing the views of a young man, who was so much
favoured by fortune, endeavoured by honours and
gifts to seduce his forces from him, and to diminish
his power ^-\ They alleged that, as Antony was
put to flight, there was no need to keep such an army
on foot. Csesar, alarmed at these vigorous mea-
sures, privately sent some friends to entreat and per-
suade Cicero to procure the consulship for them
both ; promising at the same time, that he should
direct all affairs according to his own better judge-
ment, and And him perfectly tractable, as a young
man v/ho had no ambition for anv thins^ but the title
and the honour. Cassar himself acknovv'ledged after-
ward that, in his apprehensions of being entirely
ruined and deserted, he seasonably availed himself
of Cicero's ambition, persuaded him to stand for the
consulship, and undertook to support his application
with his whole interest.

In this case particularly Cicero, old as he was,
suffered himself to be duped by this young man,
solicited the people for him, and brought the senate
into his interest. His friends blamed him for it at
the time ; and it was not long before he vvas sensible
that he had ruined himself, and given up the liberties
of his country ^-^ For CaBsar was no sooner strength-
ened with the consular authority, than he gave up
Cicero ^-^; and reconciling himself to Antony and

i^i See Dio, xlvl. 4-0., and App. Ee!I. Civ. iii.*

'-^ All this, though supported by the concurrence of Dio and
Appian, is justly rejected by Middleton, as not mentioned by Pater-
cuius or Suetonius, and completely contradicted by Cicero himself,
Ep. ad Brut. 10. 15 *

"5 Instead of taking him for his collegue, he chose Quintus
Pedius.

350 CICERO.

Lepldus, united his power with theirs, and combined
in a partition of the empire, as if it had been a pri-
vate estate. At the same lime, they proscrijbed
above two hundred persons, whom they had selected
for sacrifices. The chief difficulty and dispute was
about the proscription of Cicero. For Antony would
come to no terms, till he was first taken off. Lepi-
dus agreed with Antony in this preliminary; but
Cssar opposed them both. They held a private
congress for iliese purposes, near the city of Bononia,
which lasted three days. The place where they met
was ovcr-again£t their camps, on a little island in the
river. 1 hroughout two of these days, Ccesar is said
to have contended strenuously for Cicero, but on
the third he gave him up. The sacrifices on each
i)art were these : Csesar was to abandon Cicero to
his fate ; Lepidus, his brother Paulus '-^ ; and An-
tony, Lucius Cgesar, his uncle by the mother's side.
Thus rage and rancour entirely stifled in them all
sentiments of humanity ; or, more i)roperly speak-
ing, they showed that no beast is more savage than'
man, when he is possessed of power equal to his
passions.

While his enemies were thus employed, Cicero
with his brother Quintus was at his Tusculan villa.
On receiving information of the proscription, they
determined to remove to Astyra ^-\ a country-house
of Cicero's near the sea ; where they intended to
take ship, and repair to Brutus in Macedon. For it
was reported, that he was already very powerful in
those parts. They were carried in their separate lit-
ters, oppressed with sorrow and despair ; and often
joining their litters on the road, they stopped to be-

'-•' Witli regard to Paulus, see Suet. Jul. 29., and Cic. Ep. ad
Fam. xi. 19. On the subject of L. Jul. Ciesar, who as well as Pau-
lus was a consular man, see Phil, ii. 6. viii. 1., Ep. ad Earn. x. '2b.,
Sec. Neither of them, however, fell by this proscription.*

'-^ A small island, at tlie mouth of a river of the same name, be-
tween Actium and Circaeum, whither he had before retired upon
the death of his daugliter. (Ep. ad. Att. xii. 40.)*

CICERO. 351

moan their mutual misfortunes. Quiiitus was the
more dejected, because he was in want of necessa-
ries ; for, as he said, lie had brought nothing from
home with him. Cicero, likewise, had but a slender
provision. They concluded, therefore, that it \vould
be best for Cicero to hasten his flight, and for Quin-
tus to return to liis house, and procure some sup-
plies. This resolution being fixed upon, they em-
braced each other with every expression of sorrow,
and then parted.

A few days afterward, Quintus and his son were
betrayed by his servants to the assassins who came
in quest of them, and lost their lives. As for Cicero,
he was carried to Astyra ; where finding a vessel,
he immediately went on board, and coasted along
to Circaeum with a favourable wind. The pilots
were preparing immediately to set sail again ; but
whether it was that he feared the sea, or had not yet
given irp all his hopes in CiEsar, he disembarked and
travelled a hundred furlongs on foot, as if liome had
been the place of his destination. Repenting how-
ever afterward, he quitted that road, and again re-
paired to the sea. The ensuing night he passed in
the most perplexing and horrid thoughts; insomuch,
that he was sometimes inclined to go privately into
Caesar's house, and stab himself upon the altar of his
domestic gods, in order to bring down the divine
vengeance upon his betrayer. But from this he was
deterred by tlie fear of torture. Other alternatives,
equally distressful, presented themselves. At last,
he put himself into the hands of his servants, and
ordered them to carry him by sea to Caieta *-^ where
he had a delightful retreat in the summer, when the
Etesian ^^^ v/inds set in. On that coast stood a tem-
ple of Apollo, from which a flight of crows came
with great noise toward Cicero's vessel, as it was

'^^ In the printed text it is Koi.7iru<;, but one MS. gives us xchxttccv.
According to Appian, Cicero was killed near Capua ; but Valerius
-Maximus says, the scene of that tragedy was at Caieta, (i. 4. 5.)

"7 The north-east winds.

352 CICERO.

liiaklng land ; and perched on both sides of the sail-
yard, where some sat croaking, and others pecking
the ends of the ropes. This every body considered
as an ill omen ; yet Cicero went on shore, and enter-
ing his house, lay down to repose himself. In the
mean time, a number of the crows settled in the
chamber- window, and croaked in the most doleful
manner. One of them even entered it, and alight-
ing on the bed attempted, with it's beak, to draw off
the clothes Vv'ith which he had covered his flxce. On
seeing this, the servants began to reproach them-
selves. " Shall we remain," said they, " to be
" spectators of our master's murther ? Shall we not
" protect him, innocent and heavily afflicted as he
*' is, when even the brute creatures give him marks
" of their care and attention?" Upon which, partly
by entreaty and partly by force, they got him into
his litter, and carried him toward the sea.

In the mean time the assassins came up. They
vere commanded by Herennius a centurion, and
Pompilius a tribune, whom Cicero had Jbrmerly de-
fended when under a prosecution for parricide '"^
The doors of the house being made fast, they broke
them open. Still Cicero did not appear ; and the
servants, who were left behind, declared they knew
nothing of him. But a young man named Pliilo-
logus, his brother Quintus' freedman, whom Cicero
had instructed in the liberal arts and sciences, in-
formed the tribune, that thev were carrvina: the lit-
ter through deep shades to the sea-side. Upon this
the tribune, taking a few soldiers with him, ran to
the end of the walk v/here he was to come out.
Cicero, now perceiving that Herennius was hasten-
ing after him, ordered the servants to set the litter
down; and putting his left hand to his chin, as it

*'8 This, it appears from Seneca (Controv. iii. 17.), is an exagge-
ration, lie had only defended liim in a private cause. But the in-
gratitude of Ponipilrus is still sufiicicntly dr.rk in it's complexion.
The young man, mentioned below, is called Philogonus, Ep. ad Q.-
Fratr. i. 3.*

CICERO. Si6d

was his custom to do, he looked steadfastly upon Iiis
murtherers. The appearance of misery in his coun-
tenance, overgrown with hair and wasted with
anxiety, so much affected Herennius* attendants,
that they covered their faces during the melan-
choly scene. That officer despatched him, while he
stretched his neck out of the litter to receive the
blow. Thus fell Cicero, in the sixty-fourth year of
his age. Herennius cut off his head, and likewise
by Antony's command his hands, with which he had
written the Philippics. This was the title, which he
gave his Orations against Antony, and they retain it
to the present day.

When these parts of Cicero's body were brought
to Rome, Antony happened to be holding an assem^
biy for the election of magistrates, but on beholding
them, he cried out, " Now Itt there be an end of all
" proscriptions.'* He then ordered the head and
hands to be exposed over the Rostra, a dreadful
spectacle to the Roman people, who thought they
did not so much see Cicero's face, as a picture of
Antony's soul. Yet he did one act of justice upon
this occasion, which was the delivering up of Philo-
Jogus to Pomponia, Quintus' wife. When she was
mistress of his fate, beside other horrid punishments,
she made him cut off his own flesh piece-meal, and
roast and eat it. This is the account, which some
historians give us ; but Tyro, Cicero's freed-man,
makes no mention of Philologus' treachery. I have
been told, that a long time afterward Csesar, going
to see one of his grandsons, found him with a book of
Cicero's in his hands. The boy, alarmed at the ac-
cident, endeavoured to hide it under his robe, which
Cassar perceived, and took it from him : and after
having run most of it over as he stood, he returned
it, and said, " This was an eloquent man, my dear
" child ; an eloquent man, and a lover of his
•' country."

Being consul at the time when he conquered
Antony, he took Cit^ero's son for his collegue j under

VOL. V. 2 A

S54 DEMOSTHENES AND

whose auspices the senate ordered the statues of
Antony to be thrown down, defaced all the monu-
ments of his honour, and decreed that for the future
none of his family should bear the name of Marcus.
Thus, the divine justice reserved the completion of
Antony's punishment for the house of Cicero.

DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO

COMPARED.

THESE are the most memorable circumstances in
the lives of Demosthenes and Cicero, that could be
collected from the historians which have come to our
knowledge. Though I shall not pretend to compare
their talents for speaking, yet this I think I ought to
observe, that Demosthenes by the exertion of all his
powers, both natural and acquired, upon that single
object, came to exceed in energy and strength the
most celebrated pleaders of his time *, in grandeur
and magnificence of stile, all that were eminent for
the sublime of declamation ; and in accuracy and
art, the most able professors of rhetoric ^'^* Cicero's

"9 In this triple division, Plutarch refers to the known distribu-
tion cf eloquence by Aristotle into the <^(x«nKei', jsruJ'tjxTixev, and
rvfji^QaXiUTiKov (Rhet. i. 3.), which QuintUian, iii. 7, 8, 9., translate*
judicialCf dcmomtrativum or laudativunty and deliberativum or
suasoriumr^

I cannot help subjoining a fine passage from Parr's Character of
C. J. Fox. • Critics must often have observed a peculiar resem-
blance between Mr. Fox and Demosthenes, in their disregard of
profuse and petty ornaments ; in their application of the sound, the
salutary, and sometimes homely maxims, which common life supplies
for the elucidation of politics ; in the devotion of all their mind, and
all their soul, and all their strength to a great subject ; and in tlieir
eagerness to fix upon some pertinent and striking topic, to recur to
it frequently -j-, suddenly, forcibly; and upon each recurrence to
hold it up in a new, light, and point it in a new direction. But
biographers will do well to record that, in conversing with a learned
friend, he professed to receive more delight from Cicero than from

f Like a Clitomachus, not a Charmidas, Cic. Oral. par. 150.

CICERO COMPARED. 356

Studies were more general ; and, in his treasures of
knowledge, he had a great variety. He has left us
a number of philosophical tracts, which he composed
upon the principles of the Academy. And we see
somewhat of an ostentation of learning in the very
Orations, which he wrote for the Forum and the bar.
Their different tempers are discernible in their
modes of writing. That of Demosthenes, without
any embellishments of wit and humour ^^'^^ is always
grave and serious. Neither does it " smell of the
" lamp," as Pytheas tauntingly said, but of the water-
drinker, of the man of thought, of one who was
characterised by the austerities of life. But Cicero,
who loved to indulge his vein of pleasantry, so much
affected the wit, that he sometimes sunk into the buf-
foon ; and, by affecting gayety upon the most seri-
ous occasions to serve his client, ofiended against the
rules of propriety and decorum. , Thus, in his Ora-
tion for Caslius, he asks, " Where is the absurdity,
" if a man with affluence at commanxli, indulge him-
" self in pleasure? It would be madness, not to
" enjoy what is in his power.; particularly, when
" some of the greatest philosophers place the sion-
" mum bonum in pleasure '^' ?"

Demosthenes f . Experience in this, as in other instances, puts to
flight the conclusions which theorists might be prone to dniw from
apparent likeness in the characteristic traits of stile. Similitude is
not always the effect of voluntary and conscious imitation, nor does
approbation always imply direct and general preference for the pur-
poses of composition. We have been told, that Euripides was the
I'avourite writer of Milton in his closet, but in Milton's poetry we
often meet with the bolder feature, and the more vivid colouring,
which enrapture and astonish us in the Tragedies of ^Eschylus.'
(1.184.) fa .

'3° Yet Cicero, de Clar. Orat. 26., is of a different opinion ; as is
also Hermogenes de iNIeth.v. 33. Quintiliaai however, Dion. Halic,
and Longinus 34. agree more nearly with Plutarch; and ^Eschines,
in one of his Epistles, says, ' he never raised a laugh on any c-heek
but Ctesiphon's.'*

'31 Plutarch has not quoted this passage ^vith accuracy. Cicero
apologises for the excesses of youth : but he does not defend, or
approve, the pursuit of pleasure. See Pro Gael. 17.

•f Hume veas of a different opinion. See his Essay on Eloquence.

J>i A. j^

356 DEMOSTHENES AND

When Cato impeached Murjena, Cicero, who was
then consul, undertook his defence ; and, in his
pleading, seized the opportunity of ridicuHng several
paradoxes of the Stoics, because Cato was of that
sect. In this he succeeded so far, as to raise a laugh
in the assembly ; and even among the judges. Upon
which Cato smiled, and said to those who sat near
him, " What a laughter-raising consul we have* !"
Cicero, indeed, was naturally facetious ; and he not
only loved his jest, but his countenance was gay and
smilino*. Whereas Demosthenes had a care and
thoughtfulness in his aspect, which he seldom or
never put off. Hence his enemies, as he confesses,
called him ' a morose ill-natured man.*

It appears also from their writings, that Demos-
thenes, when he touches upon his own praise, does
it with an inoffensive delicacy. He never in fact docs
it at all, but when he has some great point in view, and
upon all other occasions he is extremely modest.
But Cicero, in his Orations, speaks in such high
terms of himself!, that it is plain he had a most in-
temperate vanity. Thus he cries out :

Let arms revere the robe, the wreathed brow
Yield to the tongue '^-.

At length he came to commend not only his own
actions and operations in the commonwealth, but
likewise his speeches ^'^% as w^ell those which he had
only pronounced, as those which he had committed
to writing ; as if, in juvenile vanity, he were vying
with the rhetoricians Isocrates and Anaximenes, in-
stead of being inspired with the lofty ambition of
guiding the Roman people,

Herce ia the field and dreadful to the foe.

* See the Life of Cato, V. 70.*

'3^ In this he was represented by Pijo, as intending to claim a
superiority over all the military Illustrissimi of Rome, and particu-
larly Pompey ; but, in Orat., in Piscn. ^03., he warmly repels the
charge.*

133 For a more candid estimate of this part of his character, see
Quint, xi. 1^^

CICERO COMPARED. 357

It is necessary, indeed, for a statesman to have the
advantage of eloquence ; but it is mean and illiberal
to rely upon such a qualification, or to hunt after
praise in that quarter. In this respect Demosthenes
behaved with more dignity, and superior elevation
of soul. He said, " His ability to explain himself
" was a mere acquisition ; and not so perfect, but
" that it required great candour and indulgence on
" the part of the audience ^^"^.'^ He thought it must
be, as indeed it is, only a low and little mind, that
can value itself upon such attainments.

They had both undoubtedly political abilities, as
well as powers to persuade ; and those in such a de-
gree, that men who had armies at their devotion,
stood in need of their support. Thus Chares,
Diopithes, and Leosthenes availed themselves of
Demosthenes ; and Pompey and young Caesar of
Cicero ; as Csesar himself acknowledges, in his Com-
mentaries ^^^ addressed to Agrippa and Mgecenas.

It is an observation no less just than common,
that ' nothing makes so thorough a trial of a man's
disposition, as power and authority.' For they
awaken every passion, and discover every latent vice.
Demosthenes never had an opportunity for a trial of
this kind. He never obtained any eminent charge ;
neither did he lead against Philip those armies, which
his eloquence had raised. But Cicero went qusestor
into Sicily, and proconsul into Cilicia and Cappado-
cia : at a time too, when avarice reigned witiiout
control ; when the governors of provinces, thinking
it beneath them to take a clandestine advantage, fell
to open plunder ; when to seize another's property
was deemed no great crime, and he who pillaged
moderately passed for a man of character. Yet, at
such a time as this, Cicero gave many proofs of his
contempt of money, and many of his humanity and

'34 nip 'Zncp. 84'., and also JTspt n«f«7rp. 96.*

'35 These consisted of thirteen books, and came down to the de-
feat ot" the Cantabri, (Suet. Aug. 85.) The observation, whicii
follows, refers to a passage in Soph. Antig. 181— r 183,*

358 DEMOSTHENES AND

goodness. At Rome, with the title only of consul,
lie had an absolute and dictatorial power against
Catiline and his accomplices. Upon which occasion,
he verified the prediction of Plato, " That every state
*' would be delivered from it's calamities, w'henever
" power should fortunately unite with wisdom and
"justice in one person'""^."

It is mentioned, to the disgrace of Demosthenes,
that his eloquence was mercenary ; that he privately
composed orations both for PhormioandApollodorus,
though adversaries in the same cause ^^^. To which
we may add, that he was suspected of having received
money from the king of Persia, and condemned for
having taken bribes of Harpalns. Supposing some
of these charges the calumnies of those, who wrote
against him (and they are not a few), yet it is impossi-
ble to affirm, that he was proof against the presents
sent him by princes, as marks of honour and respect.
This was too much to be expected from a man, who
vested his money at interest upon ships '''^ Cicero
on the other hand had magnificent presents sent him
by the Sicihans, when he was sedile ; by the king of
Cappadocia, wdien proconsul ; and by his friends was
pressed to receive their benefactions, when in exile ;
yet, as we have already observed, he refused them all.

• The banishment of Demosthenes reflected infamy
upon him, for he was convicted of having taken
bribes : that of Cicero did him great honour, because
he suffered for having destroyed traitors, who had
vowed the ruin of their country. The former, there-
fore, departed without exciting pity or regret : for

'36 Camniit philosopJii regncrent, aut vcges j)hUosopharentur.*

»37 Gives forked counsel ; takes provoking gold

On either Iiund. (Jonson.)

Quintilian however, xii. 1., does not believe a// that has been said
to his discredit.*

'^-^ This, uhich (though so heavily censured) was sanctioned by
the Ir.vvs, is now called ' Bottomry,' and is rather considered as a
dangerous than a disgraceful mode of employing money. Plutarch
has before passed ji censure upon it ; see the Life of Cato the Ccn-f
sor, 11.523/* - . .

5

CICERO COMPARED. 359

the latter the senate changed their liabit, continued to
mourn his absence, and could not be persuaded to
pass any act till he was recalled. Cicero, indeed,
spent the time of exile in an inactive manner in Mace-
don ; but with Demosthenes it was a busy period in
his political character. Then it was (as we have
mentioned above) that he visited the several cities
of Greece, strengthened the common interest, and
defeated the designs of the Macedonian embassadors.
In which respect, he discovered a much higher re-
gard for his country, than Themistocles and Alcibi-
ades had done when under the same misfortune.
After his return, he pursued his former plan of govern-
ment, and continued the war with Antipaterand the
Macedonians. Whereas LaeHus reproached Cicero
in full senate with sitting silent, when Csesar, who
was not yet come to years of maturity, applied for
the consulship contrary to law '"^^. And Brutus, in
one of his letters, charged him with " having reared
*' a greater and more insupportable tyranny, than
" that which they had destroyed.**

As to the manner of their death, we cannot think
of Cicero's without a contemptuous kind of pity.
How deplorable to see an old man, for want of
proper resolution, suffering himself to be carried
about by his servants, endeavouring to hide himself
from death (a messenger, which nature would soon
have sent him), and overtaken notwithstanding, and
slaughtered by his enemies ! The other, though he
discovered some fear indeed by taking sanctuary, is
nevertheless to be admired for his having judiciously
provided poison, carefully preserved it, and nobly

'39 This was powerfully enforced by the centurion Cornelius, who
threw back his cloke, and showed the hilt of his sword, saying, Hie
Jaciei, si vos non Jeceritis. (Suet. Aug. 26.) And yet, notwith-
standing this menace, Cicero (according to Dio, xlvi. 4-3.) had the
courage to say, ' If Caesar canvasses with the sword, he must suc-
ceed.' Al' aVfc'J TtXaXKCiAnTif XiP^tTUi aVTajK.*

360 DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED.

wed it '*^ So that, when Neptune did not afford
him an asylum, he had recourse to a more inviolable
altar, rescued himself from the weapons of the guards,
and eluded Antipater's cruelty.

'*o This, it must again be remarked, is the observation of a heathen,
and iij direct opposition to the more Christian-like opinions of So-
crates arid Plato, vfha condetrin suicide as the most dastardly of
resource.*.

'VVIien all the blandishments of life are gone.
The coward sneaky to death, the brave live on.

(Dr. Scwel.*)

THfi

LIFE

oi-

DEMETRIUS.

SUMMARY.

£i-ror of those, xvho first thought the Arts might be compared lb the
senses. Examples of bad have their u$e. Birth and character of
Demetiius. His affection for his father : Dexterity in saving one
of his frie?ids. He is defeated by Ptolemy king of Egypt : sub-
dues the Kabathcean Arabs ; retakes Babylon ; and forms the pro-
ject of rescuing Greece from slavery. Arrives at Athens. The
j)eople send deputies to him. He re-instates them in their liberties :
takes Megara ; and declares it free : re-establishes the democracy
at Athens. Excessive honours decreed to him. Resentment of the
gods. Still jnore extravagant decree of Dromoclides. Dvmetrins
marries Eurydicc : is sent by his father to conquer Cyprus : gains
the battle qf Salamis in that island : his subsequent moderation.
Flattery of Aristodemus. Antigoyius and Demetrius receive the
title of ' Kings* Their wfortunate expedition against Ptolemy.
Si'ngnldr contrasts in Demetrius' manners. His magnificent culti*
vation of the arts : ext^-aordinary machine used by him at the siege
qf Rhodes. He takes that city, and shous great kindness to the
inhabitants : drives Cassander out qf Greece. His infaynous de-
baucheries. Heroism of Democles. Fresh servilities of the Athe-
nians. Sficcesses of Demetrius in Peloponnesus. His pride, and
contempt of other kings. He procures his admission irregularly
into the Greater Mysteries qf Ceres. The extravagance qf Lamia,
one of his mistresses. His long passion for her. League of several
princes against- Antigonus, Discouraging omens. Success qf the
confederacy : Antigonus is slain. The Athenians refuse to admit

562 DEMETRIUS.

Demetrius into their city: his indignation. He marries his
daughter to Selcucus. Unjustifeble behaviour of that prince.
Demetrius besieges, and takes Athens. His alternations of for'
time. He is called into Macedon hy Alexander, and constrained
through his jealousy to retire. He gets him assassinated, and
himself proclaimed king of Macedon. Passion of young Antiochus
for his step-mother Slratonice, discovered by his physician Erasis^
trains ; ivho contrives to obtain her for him from his father Seleu-
cus. Demetrius besieges and takes Thebes, and treats it udth the
tdmost clemency. He ravages Epirus. His pride and ostentation
offend his subjects. He makes a treaty tvith Pyrrhus. His vast
projects. Several princes combine against him: his soldiers go
over to Pyrrhus. Hejlies. Death of his ivife Phila. He collects
same fresh forces ; and lays siege to Athens, but raises it again.
Marches against Lysimachus. Distress to vihich he is reduced by
Arrathocles. Seleucus refuses to succour him. He nearly sticceeds
in surprising that prince : is obliged to yield himself prisoner at
. discretion. Seleucus* courtiers do him ill offices. He is sent to
■ ike Syrian Chersonese, tvhere he indulges in drinking, S^c, and
dies at the end of three years. His funeral.

Those, who first thought that the arts might be
compared to the senses in the perception of their re-
spective objects, appear to me to have well under-
stood the power, by which that perception was to be
formed ; the power, I mean, of distinguishing con-
trary qualities ; for this they have in common. But
in the mode of distinguishing, as well as in the end
of what is distinguished, they evidently differ. The
senses, for instance, have no connate power of per-
ceiving a white object more than a black one, what
is sweet more than what is bitter, or what is soft and
yielding more than what is hard and solid. Their
office is to receive impressions from such objects as
strike upon them, and to convey those impressions
to the mind. But the operation of the arts is more

DEMETRIUS. S65

rational. They are not, like the senses, passive in
their perceptions : they choose or reject what is pro-
per or improper : what is good, they attend to pri-
marily and intentionally ; and what is evil, only ac-
cidentally, in order to avoid it. Thus, the art of
medicine considers the nature of diseases, andmusie
that of discordant sounds, in order to produce their
contraries. And the most excellent of all arts, tem-
perance, justice, and prudence, teach us to judge
not only of what is honourable, just, and useful ; but
also of what is pernicious, disgraceful, and unjust.
These arts bestow no praise on that innocence, which
boasts an entire ignorance of vice ; in their estimate,
it is rather an absurd simplicity to be ignorant of
those things, which every one disposed to live vir-
tuously should make it his particular care to know.
Accordingly the ancient Spartans at their feasts used
to compel the Helots to drink an excessive quantity
of wine, and then bring them into the public halls
where they dined, with the view of showing the
young men what drunkenness was.

We do not indeed think it agreeable either to hu-
manity or good policy, to corrupt some of the spe-
cies, in order to correct others. Yet, perhaps, it
may not be amiss to insert among the rest of the
Lives a pair or two of examples of those, who have
abused their power to the purposes of licentiousness,
and whose elevation has only made their vices greater
and more conspicuous. Not that we adduce them
to give pleasure, or to adorn our paintings with the
graces of variety ; but we do it from the same mo-
tive with Ismenias the Theban musician, who pre-
sented his scholars with both good and bad per-
formers on the flute; and used to say, " Thus
" you must play, and thus you must not play."
And Antigenidas observed, " That young men
" would hear good performers with much higher
*' pleasure, after they had heard bad ones." In
like manner, in my opinion, we shall behold and
imitate the virtuous with deeper attention, if we be

36* DEMETRIUS.

not entirely unacquainted with the characters of the
vicious and the infamous.

In this book, therefore, we shall give the Lives of
Pemetrius surnamed Poliorcetes \ and of Antony
the triumvir ; men, who both most remarkably veri-
fied that observation of Plato, ' That great parts
produce great vices, as well as virtues.* They
were equally addicted to wine and Women ; both ex-
cellent soldiers, and persons of remarkable munifi-
cence ; but at the same time, both prodigal and in-
solent. The same resemblance characterised their
fortunes. For, in the course of their lives, they met
both with great successes, and great disappoint-
ments ; now extending their conquests with the ut-
most rapidity, and now losing all ; now falling be-
yond all expectation, and now recovering them-
selves when there was as little prospect of such a
change. This similarity there was in their lives, and
in the concluding scenes of them there was not much
difference ; for the one was taken bv his enemies and
died in captivity, and the other was very near shar-
ing the same fate.

Antigonus having two sons by Stratonice, the
daughter of Corrasus, called the one after his brother
Demetrius, and the other after his father Philip. So
most historians state. But some affirm, that Deme-
trius was not the son of Antigonus, but his nephew ;
and that his father dying and leaving him an infant,
and his mother soon afterward marrying Antigonus,
he was upon that account considered as his son.
Philip, who was not many years younger than De-
metriuls, died at an early period. 13cmetrius, though
tall, Was not equal in size to his father Antigonus.
But his bcautv and mien were so inimitable, that no
statuary or painter could hit off a likeness. His coun-
tenance had a mi:cturc of grace and dignity, and was
at once amiable and aweful ; and the unsubdued and
eager air of youth was blended with the majesty of

' Or, *T!)e taker of cities.'*

DEMETRIUS. ^85

the hero and the king. There was the same happy
mixture in his behaviour, which inspired at once
pleasure and reverence. In his hours of leisure a
most agreeable companion, in his table and every
species of entertainment, of all princes the most
delicate ; and yet, when business called, unequalled
in activity, diligence, and despatch. In which re-
spect, he imitated Bacchus^ most of all the gods ;
since he was not only terrible in war, but knew how
to terminate war with peace, and turn with the hap-
piest address to the joys and pleasures which that in-
spires.

• His affection for his father was remarkably great j
and in the respect, which he paid his mother, his
love for his other parent was easily discernible. His
duty was genuine, and not in tlie least influenced by
the considerations of high station or power. Hap^
pening to return from hunting, when his flither was
giving audience to some embassadors, he went up
and saluted him, and then sat down by him with liis
javelins in his hand. After they had received their
answer and were going away, Antigonus called out
to them, and said, " You may mention likewise the
" happy terms, upon which I live with my son.'*
By this he gave them to understand, that their mu-
tual harmony and coniidencc added strength to the
kingdom, and security to his power. 80 incapable
is regal authority of admitting a partner % so liable to
jealousy and liatred, that the greatest and oldest of
Alexander's successors rejoiced that he had no occa-
sion to fear his own son, but could freely let jiim
approach with his weapons in his hand. We may
venture indeed to say that this flmiily alone, in the
course of many successions, was free from these

* Of whom Horace says,

• ' — SecI idem

Pads eras mediusqiie belli. (Cd. II. xix, 2S.)*

2 Nec regna sociumjefre, nee tcsdce sciunt.*

365 DEMETRIUS.

evils. Of all the descendents of Aiitigonus, Philip
was the only prince who put his son to death ; whereas,
in the famihes of other kings, nothing is more com-
mon than the murthers of sons, and mothers, and
wives. As for the killing of brothers, like a postu-
late in geometry, it was considered as indisputably
necessary to the safety of the reigning prince.

That Demetrius was originally well disposed by
nature to the offices of humanity and friendship, the
following is a proof: Mithridatcs, the son of Ario-
barzanes, was of the same age, and his constant
companion. He was likewise one of the attendants
of Antigonus, and bore an unblemished cliaracter :
yet Antigonus conceived some suspicion of him from
a dream. He thought he entered a large and beau-
tiful field, and sowed it with filings of gold. This
produced a crop of the same precious metal ; but
coming a little afterward to visit it, he found it was
cut, and nothing left but the stalks. As he was in
great distress about his loss, he heard some people
say, that Mithridates had reaped the golden harvest,
and was gone with it toward the Euxine sea.

Disturbed at this dream, he communicated it to
his son, having first made him swear to keep it se-
cret ; and, at the same time, he informed him of his
absolute determination to destroy Mithridates. De-
metrius was exceedingly concerned at the affair ;
but though his friend waited upon him as usual, that
they might pursue their diversions together, he durst
not speak to him on the subject, because of his oath.
By degrees, however, he drew him aside from the
rest of his companions ; and, when they were alone,
he wrote on the ground with the point of his spear,
" Fly, Mithridates." The young man, understand-
ing his danger, fled that night into Cappadocia ; and
fate soon accomplished Antigonus' dream. For Mi-

4 See the Life of Taulus ^millus, II. 290. Of the death of tJie
young prince, Demetrius, an account is given by Li\ y,x 1. 21. ; and
upon it is founded Dr. Young's atlecting tragedy of ' The Brothers.'*

_ DEMETRIUS. 367

thridates conquered a rich and extensive country,
and founded the family of the Pontic kings, which
continued through eight successions, and was at last
destroyed by the Romans \ This is a sufficient evi-
dence, that Demetrius was naturally well inclined to
justice and humanity.

But as, according to Empedocles, love and hatred
are the sources of perpetual wars between the ele-
ments, particularly such as touch or approach each
other, so among the successors of Alexander there
were continual wars ; and the contentions were al-
ways the most violent, when inflamed by opposition
of interest, or vicinity of place. This was the case
of Antigonus and Ptolemy ^. Antigonus, while he
resided in Phrygia, received information that Ptole-
my was gone from Cyprus into Syria, where he was
ravaging the country, and reducing the cities either
by solicitation or force. Upon this, he sent against
him his son Demetrius, though he was then only
twenty-two years of age, and in this first command
had the greatest and most difficult affairs to manage.
But a young and unexperienced man was unequally-
matched with a general from the school of Alexan-
der, who had distinguished himself in many import-
ant combats under that prince. Accordingly, he
was defeated near Gaza ; with the loss of five thou-
sand of his men killed, and eight thousand taken pri-
soners. He lost also his tent, his military chest, and
his whole equipage. But Ptolemy sent them back
to him, together with his friends ; adding this gene-
rous and obliging message, " That they ought only
" to contend for glory and empire." When Deme-
trius received it, he begged of the gods, " That he
" might not long remain Ptolemy's debtor, but speed-
" ily have it in his power to return the favour."
Neither was he disconcerted, as most young men
would be, with such a miscarriage in his first essay.

5 In the person of Mithridates VIII., whom Galba caused to be
put to death.*

^ The founder of tlie kingdom of Egypt.*

36$ PEMETRIU$.

On the contrary, like a complete general accustomed
to the vicissitudes of fortune, he employed himself
in making new levies and pro\iding arms ; kept the
cities in their duty, and exercised the troops which
he had raised.

As soon as Antlgonus was apprised how the battle
had terminated, he said, " Ptolemy has indeed beat-
" en boys, but he shall soon have to do with men.-*
As he did not however choose to repress his son's
spirit, he gave him permission, upon his earnest re-
quest, to try his fortune again by himself. Not
long after this Cilles, Ptolemy's general, undertook
to drive Demetrius entirely out of Syria ; for which
purpose he brought with him a numerous army,
though he held him in contempt on account of his
late defeat. But Demetrius by a sudden attack
struck his adversaries with such a panic, that both
the camp and the general fell into his hands, toge-
ther with verv considerable treasures. Yet he did
not consider the gain, but the ability to give : nei-
tlier did he so much value the glory and the riches,
Avhich this advantage procured him, as it's enabling
him to requite the generosity of Ptolemy. He would
not proceed, however, upon his own judgement : he
consulted his fatlier ; and, on his free permission to
act as he thought proper, he loaded Cilles and his
friends with his favours, and sent them back to their
master. By this turn of affairs, Ptolemy lost his
footing in Syria ; and Antigonus marched down from
Celasn^ '', rejoicing in his son's success, and impa-
tient to embrace him.

Demetrius after this, being sent to subdue the Na-
l)ath8ean Arabs ^, found himself in great danger, by
fallina; into a desert countrv, which aflbrded no
Avater. But the barbarians, astonished at his uncom-
mon intrepidity, did not venture to molest him ;
and he retired with a considerable booty, among
which were seven hundred camels.

7 A cfty in Upper Phrygia.*

* Situated in the ea&tt:p port of Avabia Petra;a."*

DEMETRIUS. 569

Antlgonus had formerly taken Babylon from Se^
leuCiis^, but he had recovered it by his own arms,
and was now marching with his main army to reduce
the nations which bordered upon India, and the
provinces about Mount Caucasus. In the mean
time Demetrius, hoping to find Mesopotamia un-
guarded, suddenly passed the Euphrates, and at-
tacked Babylon. There were two strong castles in
that city; but by this manoeuvre in Seleucus' absence
he seized one of them, dislodged the garrison, and
placed there seven thousand of his own men. After
this, he ordered the rest of his soldiers to plunder
the country for their own benefit, and then return
to the sea-coast. By these proceedings, he left Se-*
leucus better established in his dominions than ever;
for his laying waste the country seemed to imply j
that he abandoned all farther claim to it*

In his return through Syria, he was informed that
Ptolemy was besieging Halicarnassus, upon which
he hastened to it's relief, and obliged him to retire*
As this ambition to succour the distressed gained
Antigonus and Demetrius great reputation, they con-
ceived a strong desire to rescue all Greece from the
slavery, in which it was held by Cassander and Pto^
lemy. No princes ever engaged in a more just and
honourable war. For they employed the wealth,
which they had gained by the conquest of the bar-
barians, for the advantage of the Greeks ; solely with
a view to the honour, which such an enterprise held
out.

When they had resolved to begin their operations
with Athens, one of his friends advised Antigonus^
if he took that city, to keep it as the key of Greece ;
but he would not listen to him. He said, " The
** best and securest of all keys was the friendship of
" the people ; and that Athens was the watch-tower
*' of the world, whence the torch of his glory would
" blaze over the earth."

' The founder of the kingdam of Syria.

Vol. v. 2 B '

S70 DEMETRIUS.

In consequence of these resolutions, Demetrius
failed to Athens with five thousand talents of silver,
and a fleet of two hundred and fifty ships. Deme-
trius the Phalerean governed the city for Cassander,
and had a good garrison in the fort of Munycliia.
His adversary, who managed tlie aflfair both with
prudence and good fortune, made his appearance be-
fore the Pirgeus on the twenty-fifth of Thargelion ^^
The inhabitants, unapprised of his approach, when
they saw his fleet coming in, concluded tliat it be-
longed to Ptolemy, and prepared to receive it as such.
At last however the officers who commanded in the
city, being undeceived, hastened to oppose it. All
the tumult and confusion ensued, which might natu-
rally be expected when an enemy had come unex-
pectedly, and was already landing. For Demetrius,
finding the mouth of the harbour open, ran in with
ease ; and the people could plainly distinguish him
on the deck of his ship, whence he made signs to
them to com.pose themselves and keep silence. With
this demand they complied, and a herald was ordered
to proclaim ; " That his father Antigonus (in a happy
" hour, he hoped, for Athens) had sent him to rein-
*' state them in their liberties by expelling the garri-
" son, and to restore their laws and ancient form of
*' government."

Upon this proclamation, the people threw down
their arms, and embracing the proposals with loud
acclamations, desired him to disembark, and hailed
him their benefactor and deliverer. Demetrius the
Phalerean, and his partisans, thought it necessary to
admit a man who came with such a superior force,
though he should not perform any of his promises,
and accordingly sent deputies to make their submis-
sion. Demetrius received them in an obliging man-
ner, and despatched back with them Aristodemus
the Milesian, a friend of his father's. Neither was
he unmindful of Demetrius the Phalerean, who in

»» B- C, 307.

DEMETRIUS. 371

this revolution was more afraid of the citizens than
of the enemy ; but, from regard to his character and
virtue, he sent Iiim with a strong convoy to Thebes^
agreeably to his request. He likewise assured the
Athenians, that however desirous he might be to see
their city, he would den}^ himself that pleasure, till
he had set it entirely free by expelling the garrison.
He therefore surrounded the fortiess of Munychia
with a ditch and rampart, to cut off it's communica-
tion with the rest of the city, and then sailed to
Megara, where Cassander had another garrison.

Upon his arrival, he was informed that Cratesipolis,
the wife of Alexander son of Polyperchon, a cele-
brated beauty, was at Patr^^', and was solicitous of
Jiaving an interview with him. In consequence of
v/hich he left his forces in th.e territory of Megara,
and with a few light horse took the road to Fatrag,
On approaching the place, he drew off from his men,
and pitched his tent apart, that Cratesipolis might
not be perceived when she came to pay her visit.
But a party of the enemy, getting intelligence of this,
fell suddenly upon him. In his alarm, he had only
time to huddle on a mean cloke ; and, in that dis-
guise, he saved himself by flight. So near an infa«
mous captivity had his intemperate love of beauty
brought him. His tent the enemy seized, with all
the riches which it contained.

After Megara was taken, the soldiers prepared to
plunder it; but the Athenians interceded strongly
for that people, and prevailed. Demetrius was satis*
fied with expelling the garrison, and declared the
city free. Amidst these transactions he bethought
liimself of Stilpo, a philosopher of great reputation,
who sought only the retirement and tranquillity of a
studious life ; and sending for him, enquired of him,
*' Whether they had taken any thing from him ?'*
" No,'* said Stilpo, " I found none, who wished to
steal any knowledge." The soldiers, however, had

" A city of Achaia, at the mouth of the gulf of Lepanto-*

2 B 2

i:2 DEMETRIUS.

clandestinely carried off all the slaves. When Deme-
trius therefore })aid his respects to him again, on
leaving the place, and said, " Stiipo, I leave you
'•' entirely free ;" " True," answered Stiipo, " ibr
" you have not left a slave among us."

Demetrius then returned to the siege of Munychia.
dislodged the garrison, and demolished the fortress.
After which, the Atlienians pressing him to enter the
city, he complied. He then assembled the people,
re-established the commonwealth in it's ancient
form, and moreover promised them, in the name of
his father, a hundred and fifty thousand medimni of
wheat, and timber enough to build a hundred galleys.
Thus they recovered the democracy, fifteen years
after it had been dissolved. During the interval sub-
sequent to the Lamian war and the battle of Cranon,
the government, though called an oligarchy, had in
fact been monarchical ; for the power of Demetrius
the Phalerean had met with no control.
. Their deliverer appeared glorious in his services to
Athens; but they rendered him obnoxious by the ex-
travagant honours, which they decreed him. For
they were the first to give him and his father Anti-
gonus the title of ' Kings,* which they had hitherto
religiously avoided ; and v/hich was indeed the only
thing left to the descendents of Philip and Alexan-
der, un-invaded by their generals. In the next
place, they alone'* honoured them with the appel-
lation of' the Gods-Protectors;' and, instead of
denominating the year as formerly from the Archon,
they abolished his office, created annually in his
room a priest of those gods-protectors, and pre-
fixed his name to all their public acts. They lihe-
"wise ordered, that their portraits should be wrought
in the holy veil with those of the other gods '^. They

" No other peopls More found capable of such vile adulation.
Their servility showed, how little they deserved the liberty, whicl*
liad been restored to thern.

'^ Every fifth year the Athenians celebrated the Panathcnasa, or
ftriitival of Minerva; and car/icd in procession the Feplucn, or ' holy

DEMETPxIUS. 373

consecrated the place, where their patron first ar-
rived from his chariot, and erected an altar to De-
metrius Catabates [ * the Dismounter.'] They added
two to the number of their tribes, and called them
Demetrias and Antigonis;- in consequence of which
the senate, before consisting- of five hundred mem-
bers, was to consist of six hundred, for each tribe
supplied fifty.

Stratocles, who invented all these refined and ex-
travagant compliments, devised a still higher stroke.
He procured a decree, that those who should be
sent upon public business from the commonwealth of
Athens to Antigonus and Demetrius, should be
called, not 'embassadors' but ' Theori ; * a title
which had been appropriated to such as, on the so-
lemn festiv'als, carried the customary sacrifices to
Delphi and Olympia, in the name of the Grecian
states. This Stratocles was, in all respects, a person
of the most daring effrontery and the most debauch-
ed life ; insomuch, that he seemed to imitate the an-
cient Cleon ^^ in his scurrilous and licentious beha-
viour to the people. He kept a mistress, called Phy-
lacium; and one day, when she brought from the
market some heads for supper, he said, " Why, how
*•' now ! you have provided us just such things to
*' eat, as v,-e statesmen use for tennis balls."

When the Athenians were defeated in the sea-fight
near Amorgos ^\ he arrived at Athens before any ac-
count of the misfortune had been received, and
passing through the Ceramicus with a'chaplet upon

veil' (a large robe without sleeves), in which the defeat of the Ti-
tans and the actions of INIinerva were inwrought. In this veil like-
wise they placed the figures of those commanders, who had distin-
guished themselves by their victories; and thence came the; expres-r '
fion, that * such a one was worthy of the Peplum;' meaning, that
he was a brave soldier. Tliis Peplum was drawn by land in a ma-
chine like a ship along the Ceramicus, as far as the temple of Ceres at
Eleusis, whence it was brought back and consecrated in the citadel.
'■* See the Life of Pericles, II. 51., and note (95.)*
'j One of the Sporades I. near Naxos, See Died. Sic. xviii,
15.*

37+ DEMETRIUS.

his bead, informed the people that they were vic^
torious. He then moved that sacrifices of thanks-
giving should be offered, and meat distributed among
the tribes for pubhc entertainment. Two days af-
terward, the poor remains of the fleet were brought
home ; and the people in great anger summoning
him to answer for the imposition, he made his ap-
pearance in the height of the tumult with the most
consummnie assurance, and said ; " Yvliat harm
" hai^e I done yoa, in making you merry for two
" days ?" Such v/as his impudence.
But there were other extravagances.

Hotter than fire itself,

as Aristophanes expresses it. One flatterer outdid
even Stratocles in servility, by procuring a decree
that Demetrius, whenever he visited Athens, should
be received with the same honours which were paid
to Ceres and Bacchus ; and that whoever exceeded
the rest in the splendour and magnificence of his re-
ception, should have money out of the treasury to
enable him to set up some pious memorial of his suc-
cess. Ihcie instances of adulation concluded v.ith
their changing the name of the mouth Munychiou
to ' Demietrion', with calling the last day of every
month ' Demetrias,' and the Dionysia (or feasts of
Bacchus) ' Deraetria.'

The gods soon showed, how much they were of-
fended at these things. For the veil, in which vi^ere
wrought the figures of Demetrius and Antigonus
alorig with those of Jupiter and Minerva, as they
carried it through tl^e Ceramicus, was rent asunder
by a sudden storm of wind. Hemlock, though a
plant seldom found in that country, sprung up in
gieat quantities round their altars. On the 'day,
when the Dionysia were to be celebrated, the priests
were compelled to put a stop to the procession by an
excessive and unseasonable cold ; and there fell so
strong a hoar-frost, that it blasted not only the vines

DEMETRIUS. S75

and figtrces, but also a considerable part of the corn
in the blade. Hence Phiiippides, who was an enemy
to Stratocles, thus attacked him in one of his come-
dies :

He for whose guilt our shrivell'd vines complain,
Throiigli whom our holy veil was rent in twtiin,
Who tir&t to man the rites of gods transferr'd-—
He, he — not comedy '^ perverts the herd.

This Phiiippides enjoyed the friendship of Lysima-
chus, and the Athenians received many favours from
that prince upon his account. Nay, whenever Lysi-
machus happened to meet or see this poet, he con-
sidered it as a good omen, and a happy time to enter
upon any great business or important expedition.
Iksides, he was a man of excellent character, and
never importunate or officious, like those who are
bred in a court. One day Lysimachus talked to him
in a most obliging manner, and said, " What is
" there of mine, that you would share in ?" " Any
" thing," said he, " but your secrets." I have
purposely contrasted these characters, that the dif-
ference may be obvious between the comic writer and
the demagogue.

What exceeded however all the rage of flattery
above-mentioned, was the decree proposed by Dro-
moclides the Sphettian ; injoining the people to con-
sult the oracle of Demetrius, as to the mode in which
they were to dedicate certain shields at Delphi. This
was expressed in the following terms : " In a fortu-
" nate hour be it decreed by the people, that a citi-
•' zen of Athens be appointed to go to the god-pro-
*' tector, and after due sacrifices demand of Deme-
" trius, the god-protector, what will be the most pious,
" honourable, and expeditious mode of consecrating
'' the intended offerings. And it is hereby enacted,

i<5 Stratocles most probably, and other persons of his character,
inveighed against the dramatic writers, on account of the liberties
which they took with their vices ; though this was after the time,
when the Middle Comedy prevailed at Athens. (L.) Phiiippides
composed a hundred and fifty-four pieces, of which however only a
few fragments ar€ now extant,*

S76 DEMETRIUS.

that the people of Athens shall follow the mode
dictated by his oracle." By this mockery of in*
cense to the vanity of one, who was scarcely be-
fore in his senses, they rendered him perfectly in-
sane.

During his stay at Athens he married Eurydice (a
descendent of the ancient Miltiades), who was the
widow of Opheltas king of Cyrene, and had re-
turned to Athens after his death. The Athenians
reckoned this a particular favour and honour to their
city ; though Demetrius made no kind of difficulty
in marrying, and had many wives at the same time.
Among the whole number, he paid the greatest re-
spect to Phila ; because she was the daughter of An-
tipater, and had been married to Craterus, who of
all the successors of Alexander was most regretted
by the Macedonians. Demetrius was very young,
when his father persuaded him to many her, though
she was advanced in life, and on that account unfit
for him. As he was disinclined to the match, Anti-.

fonus is said to have repeated to him that verse of
luripides, with a happy parody j

'Midst Fortune's stores, to marriage we submitj
Against the bent of nature.

Only putting ' marriage*, instead of * bondage.*
The respect however, which Demetrius paid to Phila
and his other wives, was not of such a nature, but
that he publicly entertained many mistresses, as well
slaves as free-born women, and was more infl\mous
for his excesses of that description than any other
prince of his age.

In the mean while, his father called him to take
the conduct of the war against Ptolemy, and he
found it necessary to obey him. But as it gave him
pain to leave the war, v/hich he had undertaken for
the liberties of Greece (a war so much more advan-
tageous in point of glory), he sent to Cleonides, who
commanded for Ptolemy in Sicyon and Corinth, and
oft'ered him a pecuniary consideration, on condition
^hat he would set those cities free. Cleonides no^'

DEMETRIUS. 377

accepting the proposal, Demetrius immediafely em-
barked his troops, and sailed to Cyprus. There he
had an engagement witli Menelaiis, brother to Pto-
lemy, and defeated him. Ptolemy himself soon af-
terward made his appearance, with a great number
of land-forces, and a considerable fleet. U}3on which
occasion, several menacing and haughty messages
passed between them. Ptolemy bade j^emctrius de-
part, before he collected all his forces and trod him
under foot ; and Demetrius said, he would let Pto-
lemy go, if he would promise to evacuate Sicyon and
Corinth.

The approaching battle awakened the attention
both of tile parties concerned, and of all other
princes ; for beside the uncertainty of the event, so
much depended upon it, that the conqueror would
be not master of Cyprus and Syria alone, but supe-
rior to all his rivals in power. Ptolemy ad\'anced
v/ith a hundred and fiftv shins ; aiid he had ordered
Menelaiis, with sixt}^ more, to come out of the har-
bour of Salamis ''' in the heat of the battle, and
throw the enemy into disorder by failino; on his rear.
Against these sixty ships Demetrius appointed a
^uard of ten, a number sufficient to block up the
mouth of the harbour. Ilis land-forces he ranged on
the adjoining promontories, and then bore down upon
his adversary with a hundred and eighty sliips. This
he did with so much impetuosity that Ptolemy could
not stand the shock, but v.-as defeated and tied with
eight ships, the whole that he was able to save ; for
seventy v/ere taken with their crews, and the rest
sunk in the engagement. His numerous train, his
servants, friend^., wives, arms, money, and ma-
chines, v.hich had been stationed near the fleet in
transports, all fell into Dem.etrius' hands, and were
carried by him to his camp.

Among these was the celebrated Lamia, who at
first acquired notice solely for lier performance on

'7 A sea port In Cypru*,*

378 DEMETRIUS.

the flute, and that was by no means contemptible,
but afterward became famous as a courtesan. By
this time, her beauty was in the wane: yet she cap-
tivated Demetrius, though not near her age, and so
effectually enslaved him by the peculiar power of her
address, that though other women had a passion for
him, he had no passion but for her.

After the sea-fight, Menelaiis made no farther re-
sistance, but surrendered Salamis with all the ships
and the laud-forces, which consisted of twelve hun-
dred horse and twelve thousand foot.

This victory, so great in itself, Demetrius rendered
still more glorious by his generosity and humanity, in
giving the enemy's dead an honourable interment,
and setting tlie p^risoners free. He selected twelve
hundred complete suits of armour from the spoils,
and bestowed them upon the Athenians. Aristode-
mus the IMilesian v.as the person, whom he sent to
his father vvith an account of the victorv. Of all the
courtiers, this man was the boldest flatterer •, and
upon the present occasion he designed to outdo him-
self. When he arrived on the coast of Syria from
Cyprus, he would not suifer the ship to make land ;
but ordering it to anchor at a distance, and all the
company to remain aboard, he took the boat, and
went on shore alone. He then advanced toward the
palace of Antigonus, who w^as expecting the event
of the battle with all the solicitude natural to a man
with so vast a concern at stake. Upon hearing that
the messenger was on his way, his anxiety increased
to such a degree, that he could scarcely keep within
his palace. He sent his officers and friends, one af-
ter another, to Aristodemus, to demand what intel-
ligence he brought. But, instead of giving any of
tliem an ansv,er, he v/alked on with tlie utmost silenc-e
and solemnity. The king by this time much alarmed,
and having no longer patience, went to the door to
meet him. A great crowd was gathered about Aris-
todemus, and people were running together from all
quarters to the palace to hear the news. When h(i

PEMETRIUS. 379

was near enough to be heard, he stretched out his
hand, and cried aloudj " Hail to king Antigonus!
" We have totaily beaten Ptolemy at sea, we are
*' masters of Cyprus, and have made sixteen thou-
" sand eight hundred prisoners." Antigonus an-
swered, " Hail to you too, my good friend ! but I
*' will punish you for toituring us so long ; you shall
^- wait long for the reward- of your good tidings.'*

The people now, for the first time, proclaimed
Antigonus and Demetrius ' Kings.' Antigonus had
the diadem immediately put on by his friends. He
sent another to Demetrius, and in the letter, which
accompanied it, addressed him under the stile of
* King.' The Egyptians, when they were apprised
of this circumstance, gave Ptolemy likewise the title
of ' king,' that they might not appear dispirited by
their late defeat. The other successors of Alexander
caught eagerly at the opportunity to aggrandise
themselves. Lysimachus took the diadem ; and Se-
leucus, in his transactions wath the Greeks, did the
same. He hi}d already done it for some time, when-
ever he gave orders to the barbarians ; Cassander
alone, while others wrote to him and saluted him as
' King,' prefixed his name to his letters exactly as he
had been accustomed to do.

This title proved not a mere addition to their name
and figure. It gave them higher notions. It intro-
duced pompousness into their manners, and self-im-
portance into their discourse. Just as tragedians,
when they take the habit of kings, change their gait,
voice, deportment, and manner of address. After
this too, they became more severe in their judicial
capacity ; for they laid aside that dissimulation, with
which they had hitherto concealed their povver, and
which had made them much milder and more favour-
able to their subjects. So much could one word of a
flatterer accomplish ! Such a change did it eflfect in
|he whole face of the world !

Antigonus, elated with his son's achievements

5

380 DEMETRIUS.

at Cyprus, immediately niarclied against Ptolemy;
commanding his land-forces in person, v.hile Deme-
trius with a powerfid fleet attended him along the
coast. One of Antigonius' friends, named Mcdius,
had the event of this expedition communicated to him
in a dream. lie thought, that Antigonus and his
whole army were running a race. At tirst he seemed
to advance with great swiftness and force, but after-
ward his strength gradually abated, and on turning
he became very weak, and drew his breath with
such pain, that he could scarcely recover himself.
Accordingly, Antigonus met with many difKculties
at land, and Demetrius encountered such a storm at
sea, that he was in danger of being driven upon an
impracticable shore. In this storm he lost many of
his ships, and returned without having effected any
thing.

Antigonus was now little short of eighty ; and hia
immense size and weight, still more than his age,
di;^qualified him for war. He therefore left the mili^
tary department to his son, who by his good fortune,
as well as ability, managed it in the happiest man--
ner. Neither was Antigonus hurt by his debauch-
eries, his expensive appearance, or his long carou-
sals. For these were what Demetrius pursued in the
time of peace with the utmost licentiousness, and
the most unbounded avidity. But in war no man,
however naturally temperate, exceeded him in so^
briety.

When the power that Lamia had over him w^as evi-
dent to every one, Demetrius came after some ex-
pedition or other to salute his father, and kissed hin\
so cordially, that he laughed and said ; " Surely, my
" son, you think you are kissing Lamia." Once xa hen
he had been spending many days with his friends
over the bottle, he excused himself on his return to
court, by saying, " That he liad been kept at home
" by adefluxion." " So I heard," said Antigonus j
" but whether was the defluxion from Thasos, or fron\

, DEMETRIUS. 581

*' Cliios^^? " At another time, having learnt that
he was indisposed, he went to see him ; and, at the
door, met one of his flivourites going out. He en-
tered however, and sitting down by iiim, took hold
of his hand. Demetrius said, " his fever had now
" left him. " I know it," said Antigonus, " for I
" met it this moment at the door ^'\'* With such
mildness he treated his son's faults, out of regard to
his achievements. It is the custom of the Scythians
in the midst of their carousals to strike the strings of
their bows, to recal as it were their courage, when
melting away in pleasure. But Demetrius one while
devoted himself to pleasure, and another while to
business exclusively; he never intermixed them. His
military talents, therefore, did not suffer by his at-
tentions of a gayer kind.

Nay, he seemed to display even higher abilities
in his preparations for war, than in his use of them.
He was not content, unless he had stores that
were more than sufficient. There was something
peculiarly great in the construction of his ships and
engines, and he took an unwearied pleasure in the
inventing of new ones. For he was ingenious in the
speculative part of mechanics; and he did not, like
other princes, apply his taste and knowledge of those
arts to the purposes of diversion, or to pursuits of no
utility, such as playing on the flute, painting, or turn-
ing, ^ropus, king of Macedon, spent his hours of
leisure in making little tables and lamps. Attains-'',
surnamed Philometor'-^, amused himself with plant-
ing poisonous herbs ; not only henbane, and helle-

'^ Islands in the iEgean, celebrated for their excellent wines.*

'^ A similar observation is ascribed to Sully, who told his royal mas-
ter ( Henry I V.) , " he had met his indisposition in green at the door."*

*° Plutarch does not give due honour to Attalus (III., king of Per-
gamus) when he mentions his employments, as unworthy o( a prince.
He made many experiments in natural philosophy, and wrote a
Treatise on Agriculture. Other kings, particularly Hiero and
Archelaus, did the same.

*■ This is a mistake in Plutarch. Philometor was another prince,
who made agriculture his amusement.

382 DEMETRIUS.

bore, but hemlock, aconite, and dorycnium ". Tlicse
he cultivated in the royal gardens, and beside gather-
ing them at their proper seasons, made it his busi-
ness to investigate the qualities of their juices and
fruit. And the kings of Parthia took a pride in forg-
ing and sharpening heads for arrows.

But the mechanics of Demetrius were of a prince-
ly kind ; there was always something great in the
fabric. Together witli a spirit of curiosity and the
love of arts, there appeared in all his works a gran-
deur of design, and a dignity of invention, so that
they were worthy not only of the genius and the
wealth, but also of the hand of a king. His friends
were astonished at their magnificence, and his very
enemies were pleased with tlieir beauty. Neither
is this description of him at all exaggerated. His
enemies used to stand on the shore, looking with
admiration upon his galleys of fifteen or sixteen banks
of oars, as they sailed along; and his engines called
' hclepoles ' [town-takers3 were a pleasing spectacle
to the very towns, which he besieged. This is
evident from facts. Lysimaehus, who of all the
princes of his time was his bitterest enemy, when he
came to compel him to raise the siege of Soli in Cili-
cia, requested that he would show him his engines of
war, and his manner of navigating the galleys : and
he was so struck with the sight, that he immediately
retired. And tlie Rhodians, after they had endured
a long siege and at last compromised the affair, en-
treated him to leave some of his engines, as monu•^
ments both of his power and of their valour.

His war with the Rhodians was occasioned by their
alliance with Ptolemy ; and, in the course of it, he
brought the largest of his helepoles up to their walls.
It's base was square, each of it's sides at the bottom
was forty-eight cubits wide, and it's height was sixty-
six cubits. The sides of the several divisions gradual-

'* * Dorvcnium' was a common poisonous plant, so called from the
points ofi-pcars being tingei with it's juices. (Plin. H. N. xxi. SI.)

DEMETRIUS. 383

]y lessened, so that the top was much narrower than
the bottom. The inside was divided into several
stories or rooms, one above another. The front,
which was turned toward the enemy, had a window
in each story, through which missile weapons of vari-
ous kinds were thrown ; for it was filled with men,
who practised every method of fighting. It neither
shook nor varied the least in it's motion, but rolled
on regularly in a steady upright position. And, as
it moved with a horrible noise, it at once pleased and
terrified the spectators'-^.

He had two coats of mail brought from Cyprus ^*,
for his use in this war, each of which weighed forty
minas. Zoi'lus the maker, to show the excellence of
their temper, ordered a dart to be shot at one of them
from an engine, at the distance of twenty-six paces ;
and it stood so firm, that there remained no mark
upon it, than what might be made with a stilus used
in writing. This he took for himself, and gave the
other to Alcimus the Epirot, a man of the greatest
bravery and strength of any in his army. The Epi-
rot's whole suit of armour weighed two talents,
whereas that of others did not exceed one. This
warrior fell in the siege of Rhodes, in an action near
the theatre.

As the Rhodians defended themselves with much
spirit, Demetrius was not able to efiTect any thing
considerable. There was one thing in their conduct,
which he particularly resented, and which indeed in-
duced him to persist in the siege. They had taken
the vessel in which were letters from his wife Phila,
together with some robes and pieces of tapestry, and
in that state they sent it to Ptolemy. In this they

*5 Diodorus Siculus (xx. 92.) says, this machine had nine stories ;
that it rolled on four large wheels, each of them sixteen feet high,
and was worked bv three thousand four hundred men.

*■* Pliny informs us, that the Cyprian adamant was impregnable.
Cyprus was famous for this metal, of which armour was made even
in the time of the Trojan war; and Agamemnon had a cuirass sent
him from Cinyras, king of Cypru.s. (Mora. I!, xi, 20., &c.)

3S4- DEI\IETRIUS.

were flir from Imitating the courtesy of the Athenian^,
who when they were at war Mitli Philip, happening
to take Ins courtiers, read all the other letters, but
sent him that of Olympias with the seal entire.

But Demetrius, incensed as he was, did not retali-
ate upon the Rhodians, though he presently had an
opportunity. Protogenes of Caunus was at that time
painting for them the history of lalysus -^, and had
ahnost iinished it, when Demetrius seized it in one
of the suburbs. The Rhodians sent a herald to en-
treat him to spare the work, and not suffer it to be
destroyed. Upon which he said, " He would rather

*5 We have not met witli the particular suhject of this celebrated
pninting. Jalysus was one oC the fabulous heroes,, the son of Oclii-
rnus and grandson of Apollo ; and tliere is a town in Rhodes called
lalysus, which probably from him had it's name. It was in this
picture (of which the first view produced such an effect upon
Apelles, ALL V. H. xii. 41.) that Protog:enes, wlien he liad long
5:^boured in vain to paint the foam of a dog, happily hit it off, by
throwing the brush in anger at the dog's mouth, .^iilian, as well as
I'lutarch, savS that he was ' seven years in finishing it.' Pliny in-*
forms us, that he gave it four coats of colours, in order that when
one was effaced by time, another might supply it's place f. He
adds, that while Protogenes was at work, he was visited by Deme-
trius; and when the latter asked him, how he could prosecute his
work with so much calmness amidst the rage of war, he replied, that
" 'i jiough Demetrius was at war with Rhodes, he did not suppose
" he was at war with the arts." (H. N. xxxv. 10.) He lived on
lupines during the time employed upon this painting, that his judge-
ment might not be clouded by luxurious dietij;. The picture wai
brought to Rome by Cassius, and placed in the Temple of Peace,
"vliere it remained till Comn.odus' time; when it was consumed,
together with the tem.ple, by fire.

. f Whether however there were four coats of colours, or four
separate pictures successively painted upon each other, is a subject
of controversy among modern critics ; M. le Comte de Caylus
aCHrming tlie first (Mem. de I'Acad. des Belles Lettrcs, xix. 262.),
and M. I'abbe Brotier the latter. (lb. xlvi. 4G3., S:c.) The learned
abbe expresses his surprise at the srory of the lupines ; but the great
Dominichino, in labouring at his celebrated picture of the Commu-
wion of St. Jerom, is said to have adopted the same regimen with
not inferior success.*

1^ * Abstinence sharpening my invention, I performed the finest
things, and of the most admirjible invention, that lever did in my
life.' (Life of Benvenuto Cellini by himself, translated by Nugent>
1.231.)

DEMETRIUS, SS5

*' burn his fatlier's pictures, than hurt so laborious
*' apiece of art." For Protogenes is stated to have
spent seven years in finishing it. Apclles, as he tells
us, when he first saw it, was so much astonished that
he could not speak ; and at last, upon recovering
himself, he exclaimed; '' A master-piece of labour [
" A wonderful performance! But it wants those
" graces, which raise the fame of my paintings to t!ic
" skies." This piece was afterward carried to Rome,
and beinn; added to the number of those there col-
iected, perished by nre.

The llhodians how beg:in to grow weary of the
Y/ar. Demetrius likewise only wished for a pretence
to put an end to it, and he found one. The Athe-
nians-^ interposed and reconciled them upon this
condition, that the llhodians should assist Antigonus
and Demetrius, as allies, in all their wars except
those with Ptolemy.

At the same time, the Athenians called him to their
succour against Cassander, who was besieging their
city. In consequence of which, he sailed thither
with a fleet of three hundred and thirty ships, and a
numerous body of land forces. Vv^ith these he not
•only drove Cassander out of Attica, but followed him
to Thermopykr, and entirely defeated him there.
Heraclea then voluntarily submitted, and he received
into his army six thousand Macedonians, who came
over to him. On his return, he restored liberty to
the Greeks within the straits of Thermopylss, admit-
ted the Boeotians into his alliance, and made himself
master of Cenchrea?. He likewise reduced Phyle
and Panactus, the bulwarks of Attica, which had been
garrisoned by Cassander, and replaced them in the
bands of the Athenians. The Athenians, thougli
they had before lavished honours upon him in the
most extravagant manner, yet contrived upon this
occasion to appear new in their flattery. They gave

^^ Or TEtolians. (Diotl. Sic. xx. 99.) *
VOL. V, 2 C

SSG ' DE?JETRIUS,

orders, that he should lodge in the back-part of the
Parthenon"' ; wliich accordingly he did, and ]\Iinerva
"was said to have received liim as her guest — a guest,
not very fit to come under her roof, or suitable to her
virgin purity.

In one of their expeditions, his brother Philip took
up his quarters in a house, where three young women
resided. His father Antigonus, without saying any
thing to Phihp, called the quarter-master, and said to
him in his presence, " AVhy do not you remove my
" son out of this lodging, where he is so much strait-
" ened for room ?" And Demetrius, who ought to
have reverenced Minerva, if on no other account, yet
as his eldest sister (for he so affected to call her),
behaved in such a manner to all persons of both sexes,
and so polluted the citadel with his debaucheries,
that it appeared comparatively kept sacred, when he
confined himself to the prostitutes Chrysis, Lamia,
Demo, and Anticyra.

Some thinc^s, out of rescard to the character of the
city of Athens, we choose to omit ; but the virtue
and chastity of Democles ought not to be left under
the veil of silence. Democles was very young ; and
his beauty was no secret to Demetrius. His surname
indeed unhappily declared it, for he was called De-
mocles ' the Plandsome.' Demetrius, through his
emissaries, left nothing unattempted to gain him by
great offers, or to intimidate him by threats ; but
neither could prevail. He left the wrestling-ring and
all public exercises, and made use only of a private
bath. Demetrius w^atchcd his opportunity, and sur-
prised him there alone. The boy seeing nobody
near to assist him, and perceiving the impossibility of
resisting wath any effect, took off the cover of the
cauldron, and jumped into the boiling water. It is
true, he came to an unworthy end ; but his sentiments
were worthy of his country, and of his personal beauty,

-7 The Temple of the Virgin Minerva.*

DEMETRIUS. S87

Very (HfFcrent were those of ClecTiietiis, the son of
Cleomedoii. That youth, liaviug procured for his
father the remission of a fine of fifty talents, brought
letters from Demetrius to the people, signifying his
pleasure in that respect ; by which he not only dis-
honoured himself, but caused great trouble to the
city. The people took ofl'the fine, but at the same
time decreed, that no citizen should for the future
bring any letter from Demetrius. Yet when they
found that Demetrius was disobliged at it, and ex-
pressed his resentment in strong terms, they not only
repealed the act, but piuiished the persons who pro-
posed and supported it, some with death and some
with banishment. They hkewise passed a new edict,
importing, " That the people of Athens had resolv-
" ed, whatsoever Dcnietrius might command should
" be accounted holy in respect of the gods, and just
" in respect of men." Some person of better prin-
ciple upon this occasion happening to say, that Stra-
tocles was mad in proposing such decrees. Demo-
chares the Leuconian'"'' answered, " He would be
" mad if he were not mad." Stratocies found his
advantage in his servility ; and for this saying De-
mocliares was prosecuted, and banished the city. To
such meannesses were the Athenians reduced, even
after the garrison seemed to l)e removed out of their
city, and they pretended to be a free people !

Demetrius subsequently passed into Peloponnesus,
where he met with no resititance, for all his enemies
fled before him, or surrendered their cities. He
therefore reduced with ease that part of the country
called Acte-^ and the whole of Arcadia, except
Mantinea. Argos, Sicyon, and Corinth he set fi-ee
from their garrisons, by giving the commanding
officers a hundred talents to evacuate them. About

^8 The nephew of Demosthenes. See his Life, p. 28S., uot. (86.)
The figure, here used, is similar to tlie celebrated Feriissem, ni
periissem."

^9 The eastern part of the coast of Peloponnesus. The name was
common to several maritime districts.*

2 C 2

5S3 DEMETRIUS.

tliat time the feasts of Juno took place at Argos, and
33cmetrius presided in the games and other exhibi-
tions. During these solemnities he married Deida-
mia,the daugliter of ..'I^^acides Icing of the Molossians,
and sister of rvrrlms. He told tlic Sicvonians, that
they lived out of their city ; and showing them a
more advantageous situation, persuaded them to
place it, where it now stands : and along with it's
situation he likewise clianged it's name, calling it
' Demetrias ' instead of Sicyon.

The states being assembled at the Isthmus, and a
prodigious number of people attending, he was pro-
claimed general of Greece, as Philip and Alexander
had been before ; and, in the elation of power and
success, he regarded himself as a much greater man.
Alexander had robbed no other prince of his title,
neither did he ever declare himself Kino; of Kins-s,'
though he raised many both to the stile and authority
of royalty. But Demetrius thought no man worthy
of that title, except his father and himself. He even
mocked and ridiculed tliose, who made use of it to
others ; and was delighted to hear the sycophants at
his table drinking king Demetrius, Seleucus com-
mander of the elephants, Ptolemy admiral, Lysima-
chus treasurer, and Agathocles (the Sicilian) gover-
nor of the islands'". The rest of them, however,
only laughed at such extravagant instances of vanity ;
but Lysimachus was angry, that Demetrius should
reckon him no better than an eunuch : for the princes
of the east had generally eunuchs for their treasurers.
Lysimachus, indeed, was his most violent enemy ;
and now taking an opportunity of disparaging him ou
account of his passion for Lamia, he said, " This was
*' the first tim.e, that he had seen a whore act in a
*' tragedy^'." Demetrius retorted, " My whore is
" an honester woman than his Penelope."

3° Thi^ passage is transcribed verhatim from Phylarclius, as pre-
served by Atheiiieus, vi. 17.*

3' The modern stage needs not to be put to the blush by this
assertion in favour of the aneient ; the reason of it was, that there

.DEMETRIUS. .SB9

When he was preparing to return to Athens, he
%vrote to the republic, that on his arrival he intended
to be initiated, and to be immediately admitted not
only to the Less Mysteries, but even to those called
Intuitive. This v,'as unlawful and unprecedented :
for the Less Mysteries were celebrated in Anthes-
terion, and the Greater in Boedromion ; and none
were admitted to the Intuitive, till a year at least
after they had attended the latter"'. When the let-
ters were read, Pythodorus the torch-bearer was the
only person, who ventured to oppose the demand ;
but his opposition was wholly ineffectual. Strato-
cles procured a decree, that the month of Munychion
should be called and reputed the month of Anthes-
terioU;, in order to give Demetrius an opportunity
for his first initiation, which was to be pei'formed in
the ward of Agra. After which, Munychion was
again changed into Boedromion. By these means
Demetrius was admitted to the Greater Mysteries,
and to immediate intuition. Hence those strokes
of satire upon Stratocles, from the poet Phiiippides;

He to one crowded montli contracts the year,

and, with respect to Demetrius' being lodged in the
Parthenon,

As a vile inn the temple he pollutes,

And with the Virgin blends his prostitutes.

Eut, among the many abuses and enormities com-'
mitted in their city, no one seems to have given the

were no women actors. Men, in female dresses, performed their
parts.

3- Plutarch in this place seems to make a difference between tl>e
Intuitive and the Greater Mysteries, though tliey are commonly
understood to be the same. Casaubon and Meursius think tiie
text corrupt ; but the manner, in which they would restore it, docs
not render it less perplexed. (L.) After the first initiation, tlve
candidates were called Mysta?, and were only admitted as far as the
vestibule ; after the secoad, they received the privilege of seeing
•(.n-ery thing, and were denominated Epoptce:* •

390 DEMKTRltJS.

Athenians greater uneasiness than the followmg :
lie ordered them to raise two hundred and fifty ta-
lents in a very sliort time, and tlie sum was exacted
Avith tlie utmost i-igo\u\ "When the money was pro-
duced, and lie saw it altogether, he directed it to
be given to Lamia and his other mistresses to buy
soap. Thus the disgrace hurt them more than the
loss, and the application more than the impost. JSome
writers, however affirm, that he behaved in this man-
ner, not to the Athenians, but to the people of
Thessaly. Beside this disagreeable tax, Lamia ex-
torted money from many persons on her own autho-
rity, to enable her to provide an entertainment for
the king. And the expense of that supper was so
remarkable, that Lynccus the Samian ^^ even gave a
description of it. For the same reason, a comic
poet of those times, with equal wit and truth, called
Lamia ' an Helcpolis.' And Demochares the Solian
called Demetrius ' Muthos * [Fable], because he
too had his Lamia ^*.

The great interest which Lamia had v/ith Deme-
trius, in consequence of his passion for her, excited
a spirit of envy and dislike to her, not only in the
breasts of his wives, but of his friends. Demetrius
having sent embassadors to Lysimachus upon some
occasion or other, that prince amused himself one
day with showing them the decj) wounds, which he
had received from a lion's claws in his arms and
thicfhs ; and £2;ave them an account of his havino; been
shut up with that wild beast by Alexander the Great,
and his battle with it ^\ Upon which they laughed,

5" A giammarian, pupil to Thcophi-astu», and contemporary
with Alexander.*

^■* Fable mentions a cjiiecn of I.ybia, v.ijo out of rage for tlio loss
of her own children, ordered those of other women to be brought
to her, and devoured them : whence she was called Lamia, from
the Phoenician word lahama, ' to devour.' Upon this account,
l>iodonis Siculus (xx. 41.) infonns us, ' Lamia' became a bugbear
to cliiWren.

^f Justin (xv. 3.) and Pausanias (i. 9.) mention this ; but Q.
I'urtius, and probably with reason, doubts the truth oi" the whole
atory (viii. L)

DEMETRIUS. syi

and said ; " The king our master, too, bears on his
" neck the marks of a dreadful wild beast, called a
" I.amia." It was strange, indeed, that he should
at first have objected so strongly to the disparity of
years between himself and Phila, and should after-
ward fall into such a lasting captivity to Lamia,
though she had passed her prime at their first ac-
quaintance. One evening when Laraia had been
]ilaying on the flute at supper, Demetrius asked
Demo, surnamed Mania "^ what she thought of her.
" I think her an old woman, sir," replied Demo.
At another time, when there was an extraordinary
dessert on the table, he said to her, " You see what
" fine things Lamia sends me :" " My mother will
" send you finer," answered Demo, " if you will
" but sleep with her."

We shall mention only one story more of Lamia,
which relates to her censure of the celebrated judge-
ment of Bocchoris. There Avas a younQ' man in
Egypt extremely desirous of the fiivours of a cour-
tesan, named Thonis, but she set too high a price'
npon them. He dreamed afterward, that he enjoyed
lier, and his desire was satisfied. Thonis, upon this,
commenced an action against him for the money ;
and Bocchoris having heard both partier?, ordered
the man to count the e:old which she demanded into
a bason, and shake it about before her, tliat she
might enjoy the sight of it. " For fancy," said he,
" is no more than the shadow of truth." Lamia did
not think this a just sentence ; " because the wo-
man's desire of the gold was not removed by the
sight of it, whereas her lover's passion had been
cured by his dream.

The change in the fortunes, and conduct, of the
subjects of our narrative now turns the comic scene
into tragedy. All the other kings having united
their forces aajainst Antigonus, Demetrius IqH Greece

._,.

2« Anglice, ' Miss Madcap,'

'392 DEMETRIUK.

in onier to join Iiiiu, iind was greatly animated to-
iind his father preparin,!;- lor war with a spirit above
liis vcars. Had Anti^'onus abated a little of his
pretensions, and restraining his ambition of govern-
ing the world, he might have retained the pre-emi-
nence among the successors of Alexander, not only
for himself, but for his son alter him. But being
naturally arrogant and imperious, and not less inso-
lent in his expressions than in his actions, he exaspe-
rated many young and ■j)0\verful princes. He even
boasted, that " he could break the present league,
*' and disperse the united armies, with as much ease
" as a boy does a flock of birds by throwing a stone,
" or making a shght noise."

His army amounted to more than seventy thousand
foot, ten thousand liorse, and seventy-five elephants.
The infantry of tiic enemy consisted of sixty -four
thousand men, and their cavalry often thousand five
hundred; tliey had four hundred elephants, and a
hundred and tv.cnty armed ciiariots. When the
two armies were in sight, a visii)le change took
place in Antigonus' mind, but ratlier vvith respect
to his hopes than his resolution. In other engage-
ments his spirits used to be high ; his port lofty,,
his voice loud, and his expressions vaunting ; inso-
nuTch, that he would sometimes in the heat of the
action let fall some jocular expression, to show his
unconcern and his contempt of the adversary. But,
at this time, he was observed for the most part
to be thoughtful and silent; and one day he pre-
sented hiis son to the army, and recommended him
as his successor. What appeared still more extra-
-Gi-dinar}'- was, that he took hirii aside into his tent,
and discoursed with him there ; for he had never
before been accustomed to communicate his inten-
tions to him in private, or to consult him in the least,
but to rely entirely upon his own judgement, and to
issue orders for the executicn of his purposes. It is
even reported tliat Demetrius, in his b.oyhood, once:

DEMETRIITS. 3'93

risked him when they should decamp ; and that lie
angrilv rcpHed, " Are you afraid, that you alone
" shall not hear the trumpet?"

Upon this occasion, it is true, their spirits were
depressed by ill omens. Demetrius dreamed, that
Alexander came to him in a magniiiceot suit of
armour, and inquired of him what was to be tlie
word in the ensuing battle. Demetrius answered,
' Jupiter and Victory ;' upon which Alexander said,
" 1 s'o then to vour adversaries, for they are ready
" to receive me.'* ^\^lien the army was arranged in
order of battle, Antigonus stumbled as he went out
of his tent, and tilling on his face received a consi-
derable huit. After he had recovered himself, he
stretched out his hands tov^ard iieavcn, and })rayed
tliat he miglit either conquer, or die before he wns
sensible that the day was lost.

V/hen the battle began, Demetrins at the head of
his best cavalry fell upon Antioch-us the son of
Seleucus, and fought with so much bravery that he
put the enemy to flight ; but, by a vain and unsea-
sonable ambition to press the pursuit, he lost the
victory. For he advanced so far that he could not
re-join h.is infantry, the enemy's elephants having
occupied the intermediate space. 8elencus now,
seeing his adversary's foot deprived of tlieir horse,
instead of attacking, rode round them, as if he were
every moment about to charge ; intending b}^ this
manoeuvre both to terrify them, and to give them an
opportunity of clianging sides. The event answered
his expectation. Great part separated from the
main body, and voluntarily came over to him ; the
rest were put to the rout. V/hen vast nnunbers
Were bearing dov/n upon Antigonus, one of those
tliat were about him said, " 'ihey are advancing
" against you, sir." He answered, " Vv'hat other
'^^ obiect can thev have ? But Demetrius vv^ill come

*■' • ■% - -

*' to mv assistance." In tliis hope he continued to
the last, still looking; about for his son till he ieli
''under a shov/er of darts. His servants, his very

391. DEMETRIUS.

friends, forsook lilm ; and only Thorax of Larissa
remained by the dead body.

The battle beinc; decided, the victorious kinc.s
dismembered tlie dominions of Antii^onus and De-
iiietrius like some great body, of which each took a
limb ; thus adding to their own dominions the pro-
vinces, which those two princes had previously pos-
sessed. Demetrius fled with five thousand foot, and
four thousand horse. And as he reached Ephesus
in a short time, and was in want of money, it was
expected that he would have pillaged the temple.
He not only spared it himself however, but fearing
that his soldiers might be tempted to violate it, he
immediately left the place, and embarked for Greece.
His principal dependence was upon the Athenians,
f )r with them he had left his sliips, his money, and
his v.'ife Deidamia ; and, in this distress, he thought
he could have no safer asylum than their affection.
He, therefore, pursued liis voyage with all possible
expedition ; but embassadors from Athens met him
near the Cyclades, and entreated him not to think
of going thither, because the people had declared
by an edict, that they would receive no king into
their city. As for Deidamia, they had conducted
Iier to i\Iegara with a proper retinue, and all the
respect due to her rank. This so enraged Deme-
trius, that he was no longer master of himself;
thou2:h he had hitherto borne his misfortunes with
sufiicicnt calmness, and betrayed no mean or unge-
nerous sentiment in the sad change of his aiTairs.
But to be thus unexpectedly deceived by the Athe-
nians, to find by facts that their affection, so strong
in appearance, v.as only false and counterfeit, cut
In'm to the heart. Excessive honours, indeed, are a
very indifferent proof of the regard of the people for
kings and princes. For all the value of tliose honours
rests in tlieir being freely given : and of that there
can be no certainty, because the givers may bo
under the influence of fear, and fear and love often
produce the same public declarations. For the same

DEMETRIUS. S9.j

reason wise princes will not regard statnes"^, pictiires,
or divine lionours : but rather consider their own
actions and behavionr, and thence infer either that
those liononrs are real, or the mere dictates of neces-
sity. Nothing more frequently happens, than that
the people hate their sovereign the most, at the
very time that he is receiving the most immoderate
honours, the tribute of unv.'ilhng minds.

Demetrius, tliongh he severely felt this ill-treat-
ment, was not in a condition to revenge it ; he there-
fore by his envoys moderately expostulated with the
Athenians, and only desired them to send him his
galleys, among which there was one of thirteen banks
of oars. 'With these he steered for th.e Isthmus,
but found his affairs there in a very bad situation.
The cities had expelled his garrisons, ar.d were all
revoltini^ to his enemies. Upon this, leaving; Pvrrhus
in Greece, he sailed to the I'hcrsonese, and by his
ravages there distressed Lysimachus, as well as en-
riched and secured the fidelity of his own forces,
vv-Jiich now began to gather strength and improve
into a respectable army. The other kings paid no
regard to Lysimachus ; who, at tiie same time that
he was much more formidable in his power than
Demetrius, was not in the least more moderate in
his conduct.

Soon after this, Seleucus sent proposals of mar-
riage to Stratonice, the daughter of Demetrius by
Phila. He had, indeed, already a son named An-
tioehus by Apama, a Persian lady ; but he thought
that his dominions were sufHcient for more heirs,
and that he stood in need of this new alliance, be-
cause he saw Lysimachus marrying one of Ptolemy's
daugliters himself, and taking the other for his sen
Aii-athocies.

A connexion witli Seleucus was a happy and an
unexpected turn of fortune for Demetrius. lie

?^ Witli regard to tlie uucoTtamty of the Inferences, founded
upon such doubtail marks of vcHeration, see Juv. x. 5b — iii-r

59G DE:METKirS.

took his daughter therefore, and sailed with his
"whole fleet to Svria. In the course of his vovasre he
Avas several times under a necessity of niakin;^ land,
and he touched in particular upon the coast of
Cihcia, which had been given to Plistarchus tiic
brother of Cassander as his share, after Anti2"onus*
defeat. Plistarchus, thinking himself injured by the
descent which Demetrius made upon his country,
viQnt immediately to Cassander to complain of
Seleucus, as having reconciled himself to the com-
mon enemy without the concurrence of the other
kings. Demetrius, being informed of his depar-
ture, left the sea, and marched up to Quinda '''' ;
where finding twelve hundred talents, the remains
of his tather's treasures, he carried them off, em-
barked again without interruption, and instantly
set sail, his wife Phila having joined him by the
way.

Seleucus met him at Orossus"^^. Th.eir intervievr
was conducted in a sincere and princely manner,
without any marks of design or suspicion. Seleucus
invited Demetrius iirst to his pavihon ; after which,
Demetrius entertained him in his ii^ajlev of thirteen
banks of oars. Thev conversed at their case, and
passed the time together without guards or arms ;
till Seleucus took Stratonice', and carried her with
great pomp to Antioch.

Demetrius seized the province of Cilicia, and sent
Phila to her brother Cassander, to ansvrer the accu-
sations brought against him by Plistarchus. In the
mean time, Deidamia joined him from Greece ; but
she had not been long with him, before she sickened
and died : and Demetrius havin^r throuGjli Seleucus*
mediation accommodated matters v\ith Ptolemy, it
was agreed that he should marry Ptolemai's, the
daughter of that prince.

Hitlierto Seleucus bad behaved with honour and

3' A city in Cilicia/^

^ Or K<>s5u.s according to Cellarlus and Lublni:^, a naritirae
city La "^vrii*., betn-een Issus end Seleucia."^

' DEMETRIUS. SOT

propriety ; but afterward he demanded, that Deme-
triiis should surrender Cilicia to him for a sum of
money, and upon his refusal angrily insisted on
leaving Tyre and Sidon. This behaviour appeared
unjustifiable and cniel. Already the lord of Asia
from the Indies to the Syrian sea, how sordid was it
in him to quarrel for two cities with a prince
who was his father-in-law, and who was labouring
under so painful a reverse of fortune I A strong
proof of the truth of Plato's maxim, that ' the man,
who v.ouid be truly happy, should study not to
enlarge his estate but to contract his desires 1*
For he, v.ho does not restrain his avarice, must ever
be poor.

Demetrius however, far from being intimidated,
said. '• Thoucrh I had lost a thousand battles as
'■ great as that of Ipsus, nothing should induce me
" to purchase the alliance of Seleucus;" and, upon
this principle he garrisoned these cities in the
strongest manner. About this time receiving intel-
ligence that Athens was split into factions, and
that Lachares taking advantage of these divisions
had seized the government, he thought he should
be able to g'tt possession of the city with ease, if he
appeared suddenly before it. Accordingly, he set
out with a considerable fleet, and crossed the sea
vrithout danger ; but on the coast of Attica he met
with a storm, in which he lost many ships and vast
numbers of his men. He escaped however himself,
and began hostihties against Athens, though \\-ith no
great vigour. As his operations answered no end,
he despatched his lieutenants to collect another
fleet, and in the mean time he passed into Pelopon-
nesus, and laid siege to Messene. In one of the
assaults, he incurred extreme danger; for a dart
from an engine pierced his jaw, and entered his
mouth. But he recovered, and reduced some cities
that had revolted. After this, he again invaded
Attica, took Eleusis and Rhamnus, and ravaged the
countrv. Happening to capture a ship loaded with

9

SiyS BEMETRIUS.

wheat, whicli was bound for Athens, he hanged both
the merchant and the pilot. This so ahirmcd other
merchants, that they forbore attempting any thing
of that kind, so that a famine ensued ; and, together
with the want of bread-corn, the people were in
want of every thing else. A medimnus of salt was
sold for forty drachmas, and a modiiis"'* oi^ wheat for
three hundred. A fleet of a hundred and fifty
vessels which Ptolemy sent to their rcliefj appeared
before JEgina ; but the encouragement it afforded
them was of short continuance. A jireat reinforce-
ment of ships came to Demetrius from Peloponnesus
and Cyprus, so that he had in all not fewer than
three hundred. Ptolemy's fleet, therefore, weighed
tinchor and steered off. The tyrant Lachares at the
same time private!}' made his escape, and abandoned
the city.

The Athenians, though they had passed a decree
that no man under pain of death should mention
peace or reconciliation with Demetrius, now opened
the gates nearest him, and sent embassadors to his
camp. Not that they expected any favour from
him, but tbiCy vrere compelled to this measure
by the extremity of famine. In the course of it
many dreadful events occurred, and among the rest
the following : A father and his son, it is said, were
sitting in the same room in the last state of despair ;
when, a dead mouse happening to fall from the
roof of the house, they both started up and fought
for it. Epicurus the philosopher, we are told, sup-
ported his friends and disciples at that time with
beans, wliich he shared v/ith them, and cpunted out
to them dailv.

In this miserable condition was the city, when
Demetrius entered it. He ordered all the Athe-
nians to assemble in the theatre, which he sur-
rounded with his troops ; and having planted his

ir See the Table of Weights and jNIeasures prefixed to the first
Volume.

DEMETRIUS. 399

guards on. each side the stage, he came down through
the passasce by which th.e actors make their en-
trance. The fears of the people increased, on his
appearance, but they were entirely dissipated when
he began to speak. For neither was the accent of
his voice loud, nor his language severe. He com-
plained of them in soft and easy terms, and taking
them again into favour, made them a present of
a hundred thousand mcdimni of vv-heat, and re-
established such an administration as they m.ost
approved.

The orator Dromoclides observed the variety of
acclamations among the people, and that in the joy
of their hearts they endeavoured to outdo the enco-
miums of those who spoke from the Ptostrum. He
therefore proposed a decree, that the Piraeus and
the fort of Munychia should be delivered up to king-
Demetrius. After this bill was passed, Demetrius
on his own authority placed a garrison in the
Musaeum '*- : lest, if there should be a second de-
fection among the people, it might detain him from
other enterprises.

The Athenians thus reduced, Demetrius imme-
diately formed a design against Lacedgemon. King
Archidamus met him at Mantinea, where Deme-
trius defeated Jiim in a pitched battle ; and, after
putting him to flight, entered Laconia. Another
action took place ahnost in sight of iSparta, in vdiich
he killed two hundred of the enemy, and made five
hundred prisoners : so that he seemed almost master
of a town, which had hitherto escaped the hands of
a conqueror. But surely fortune never displayed
such sudden and extraordinary vicissitudes, in the
life of any other prince : never in any other instance
did she so often change from low to high, from a
glorious to an abject condition, or again repair the
ruins which she had made. Hence he is said, in his

4^ This, according to Pausan. (i. 25.), was a lull, upon which
Musseus used to recite his cmnpositions, and where he was aftcr-
\vi.ii"d buried.*

mt DEMETIUUS.

greatest adversity, to have addressed her in the
"li'ords of yEschylus :

Thou gavest me life, and now thy parching hand
Consumes uie.

"When his affairs seemed to be in so promising a
train for power and empire, intclh'gencc was brought,
that Lysimachus in the first place had taken the
cities which he had in Asia, that Ptolemv had dis-
possessed him of the whole of Cypnis except the
city of Salamis, in which he had left his children and
his mother, and th^at this town was now actually in
n state of siege. I'ortune however, like the woman
ill Archilochus,

Whose right hand ofl'ered water, vi-hilc the Iclt
Bore hostile fire ■

thoucrh bv these alarminf; tidin2,'s she drew him from
Lacedtemon, speedily opened to him a new scene of
]lght and liopc. To this end she availed herself of
the foUowinG; circumstances :

After the death of Cassander, his eldest son Philip
had but a short reign over the Macedonians, for he
died soon ailer his father. The two remainino- bro-
thcrs were perpetually at variance. One of them
named Antipater, having killed his mother Thessa-
lonica, the other (Alexander) called in to his assist-
iince the Greek princes, Pyrrhns from Epirus and
Demetrius from Peloponnesus. Pyrrhus arrived first,
and seized a considerable part of Macedon, which
he kept for his revv^ard, and thus became a formidable
iiei.frhbour to Alexander. Demetrius no sooner
received the letters, than he marched his forces thi-
ther likewise, and excited still greater alarm in the
young prince by his great name and dignity. He
met him however at Dium ^^, and received him in

•i< A Macedonian city, below Pydna, on the coast of the Thcr-

Kiaic gulf.

DEMETRIUS. 401

the most rcspcctfal manner, but told him at the
Same tiiiie that his affairs did not now require his
presence. Hence mutual jealousies arose ; and
Demetrius, as he was going to sup with Alexander
upon his invitation, was informed that there was a
design against his life, which was to be carried into
execution in the midst of the entertainment. De-
metrius, not in the least disconcerted, only slackened
his pace, and gave orders to his generals to keep
the troops under arms : after which he took his
guards and the officers of his household, who were
much more numerous than those of Alexander, and
commanded them to enter the banqueting-room
with him, and to remain there till he rose from
table. Alexander's people, intimidated by this
train, durst not attack Demetrius ; and he on his
part, pretending that he was not disposed to drink
that evening, presently withdrew. Next day he
prepared to decamp, and alleging that he was
called off by some new emergency, desired Alex-
ander to excuse him if he left him soon this time;
assuring him, that at some ensuing opportunity he
would make a longer stay. Alexander, rejoicing
that he was going away voluntarily, and without any
hostile intentions, accompanied him as far as Thes-
saly. Upon reaching Larissa, they both renewed
their invitations, but both with treachery in their
hearts. In consequence of these polite manoeuvres,
Alexander fell into Demetrius' snare. He would
not go with a guard, lest he should teach the other
to do the same. He therefore suffered what he had
intended to inflict upon his enemy, and had only
deferred for the surer and more convenient execu-
tion. He went to sup with Demetrius ; and, as his
host rose up in the midst of the feast, Alexander was
terrified and rose up with him. Demetrius, when
he was at the door, said simply to his guards, " Kill
" the man that follows me ;" and went out; upon
which they cut Alexander in pieces, and his friends
who attempted to assist him. One of these is re-

VOL. V. 2 D

102 DEMETRIUS.

ported to have remarked, as he was dying, " DemC-
*' trius is but one day before-hand with us.'*

The night was, as might be expected, a night of
terror and confusion. In tlie morning, the Mace-
donians were greatly disturbed witli the apprehen-
sion, that Demetrius would fall upon them with all
his forces ; but when, instead of proceeding hostilely
against them, he sent a message desiring to speak
Avith them and vindicate what was done, they reco-
\'ered their spirits, and resolved to receive him with
civility. U})on his arrival, he found it unnecessary
to make long speeches. They hated Antipater for
the murther of his mother ; and as they had no better
prince at hand, they declared Demetrius king, and
<:onductcd him into i)iIaccdon. 'J'hc Macedonians,
who were at home, proved not disinclined to the
change. For thev still remembered with horror
■Cassander's base behaviour^' to Alexander the
Great ; and if they had any regard left for the mode-
ration of old Antipater, it turned wholly in favour
of Demetrius', who had married his daugliter Phila,
and had a son by her to succeed him in the throne ;
a youth already grown up, and at this very time
bearing' arms under his father.

Immediately after this glorious change of fortune,
Demetrius received intelh'jrencc that Ptolemv had
set his wife and children at liberty, and dismissed
them with presents and other tokens of honour. He
v»fas informed likewise tliat his daughter, who had
been married to Seleucus, was now wile to Antioclui.s
the son of that prince, and declared queen of the
barbarous nations in Upper Asia.

Antiochus was violently enamoured of the yonnff
Stratonice, though she had had a son by his father.
His situation was extremely unhappy. He had made
the strongest eiforts to con(|uer his passion, but they
were of no avail. At last, considering that his de-

4+ Sorno h'storlans suppose, tliat he even poisoned him ; but that
either he or his fatlier Antipater did, is refuted by Plutarch, in his
Life of Akxandcr, IV. 352.*

DEMETRIUS. 403

sires were of the most exti*avagant kir.d, that there
was no prospect of satisfying them, and that the
succour of reason entirely failed, he resolved in his
despair to rid himself of hfe, and bring it gradually
to a period, by neglecting all care of his person and
abstaining from food, lor this purpose he pretended
sickness. His physician Erasistratus easily discover-
ed, that his distemper was love ; but it was less easy
to conjecture who was the object. In order to dis-
cover this, he spent whole days in his chamber; and
whenever any beautiful person of either sex entered
it, watched with the utmost attention not only
his looks, but every part and motion of the body,
which most perfectly sympathises witli the passions
of the soul. On the entrance of all others, he re-
mained wholly unaffected ; but when Stratonice
came in, as she often did cither alone or with Se-
leucus, he exhibited all the symptoms described by
Sappho, the faultering voice, the burning blush, the
languid eye^', the sudden sweat, the tumultuous
pulse, and at length, the passion overcoming his
spirits, a deliquium and mortal paleness.

From these tokens, Erasistratus concluded that the
prince was in love with Stratonice, and perceived
that he intended to carry the secret with him to the
ffrave. He saw the difiicultv of breakinc: the matter
to Selcucus; yet depending upon the afrection which
the king had for his son, he ventured one day to tell
him, " That the young man's disorder was love, a^i
" impracticable, incurable love." The king, quite
astonished, said " How ! incurable love !" " Posi-
" tively so," answered Erasistratus, " for he is in
" love with my wife." " What ! Erasistratus," said
the king, " would you, who are my friend, refuse

"•J o-i/ion v^oS'iihn; is a Corruption. It oa<;ht to be read e-^iM¥
t/V9>{iiJ/;K, tlie ' faint, languid, or clouded e}'e.' (L.)

Tiie ode of Sappho, here referred to, is preserved by Lonsino'i,
sect. 10, is beautifully translated by Catnll. 49., and by our own
A. Phillips, and is imitated by Boijeau. See Spect. IV. 9/29., where
this story is quoted by Addison, as illustrative of the poem in
question.*

2 D 2

40i DEMETRIUS.

to give up your wife to my son, when you see us

in danger of losing our only hope ?'* " Nay,
" would you do such a thing," demanded the phy-
sician, " thougli you are his father, if he were in
*' love with Stratonice ?'* " O my friend,'* replied
vSeleucus, " how happy should I be, if either God or
" man could transfer his affections thither ! I would
*' give up my kingdom, so I could but keep Antio-
" chus." He pronounced these words with so much
emotion and such a profusion of tears, that Erasis-
tratus took him by the hand, and said, " Then there
" is no need of Erasistratus. You, Sir, who are a
" father, a husband, and a king, will be the best
" physician too for your family.'*

Upon this, Seleucus summoned the people to
meet in full assembly, and told them, " It was his
" will and pleasure that Antiochus should inter-
" marry with Stratonice, and that they sliould be
" declared king and queen of the Upper Provinces.
*' He believed," he said, " that Antiochus, who
" was the most obedient son, would not oppose his
" desire ; and if the princess should decline the
" marriage as an unprecedented thing, he hoped his
*' friends would persuade her to think, that what
" was agreeable to the king and advantageous to
" the kingdom was both just and honourable." Such
is said to have been the cause of the marriage be-
tween Antiochus and Stratonice.

Demetrius was now master of Macedon and
Thessaly ; and as he possessed great part of Pelo-
ponnesus likewise, and the cities of Megara and
Athens on the otlicr side of the Isthmus, he was de-
sirous of reducing the Boeotians, and threatened
them with hostiHties. At first, they proposed to
come to an accommodation with him on reasonable
conditions; but Cleonymus the Spartan having in
the mean time thrown himself into Thebes with his
army, they were so much elated, that on the insti-
gation of Pisis the Thespian, a leading man among
tiiem, they broke of^' the treaty. Demetrius then
]2

DEMETRIUS. 405

drew up his machines to the walls, and laid siege to
Thebes ; upon which Cleonymus, apprehending the
consequence, stole out ; and the Thebans were so
much intimidated, that they immediately surrender-
ed. Demetrius placed garrisons in their cities,
exacted large contributions, and left Hieronymus
the historian governor of Boeotia. He appeared,
however, to make a merciful use of his victory, par-
ticularly in the case of Pisis. For though he took
him prisoner, instead of offering him any injury, he
treated him with the utmost civihty and politeness,
and appointed him polemarch of Thespiee.

Not long after this, Lysimachus being taken pri-
soner by Dromichcetes, Demetrius marched toward
Thrace with all possible expedition, hoping to find
it defenceless. But when he was gone, the lioeotians
again revolted, and he had the mortification to hear
upon the road, thut Lysimachus was set at liberty.
He, therefore, immediately came back in anger ;
and finding, on his return, that the Boeotians were
already driven out of the field by his son Antigonus,
he laid siege the second time to Thebes. As Pyrrhus
however had over-run all Thessalv, and was advanced
to ThermopyljE, Demetrius left the conduct of the
siege to his son Antigonus, and marched against that
warrior.

Pyrrhus immediately retiring, Demetrius placed a
guard of ten thousand foot and a thousand horse in
Thessaly, and then returned to the siege. His first
operation was to bring up his ' helepolis :' but he
proceeded in it with great labour, and by slow de-
grees ; as, on account of it's size and weight, he"
could scarcely move it two furlongs in two months'^''.

The Boeotians however making a vigorous resist-
ance, and Demetrius frequently obliging his men to
renew the assault, rather out of a spirit of animosity
than with the hope of any advantage, young Anti^

4<5 A wonderful kind of motion this for a machine on wheels
About twelve inches in an hour !

40(J DEMETRIUS.

gonus was deeply concerned at seeing such numbers
tall ; and said, " Vvliy, Sir, do we sulier these brave
" men to lose their lives without any necessity ?"
Demetrius, offended at this liberty, replied, " Why
*'' do you trouble yourself about that? Have you
" any provisions to find for tlie dead ?" Yet to
prove that he v»as not prodigal of tiie lives of his
troops alone, he took liis own share in the danger,
and received a wound trom a lance which pierced
through his neck. This gave him excessive pain,
but he continued the siei^'e, till he had once more
made himself master of Thebes. Upon wliich he
entered the citv with such an air of resentment and
severity, that the inhabitants expected to sufter the
most dreadful punishments ; yet he contented him-
self with putting thirteen of them to death, and ba-
nishing a few more : all the rest he pardoned. Thus
Thebes was taken twice within ten years after it's
having been rebuilt.

The Pythian games now approached, and Deme-
trius on this occasion adopted a very extraordinary
measure. As the /Etolians were in possession of
the passes to Delphi "*', he ordered the games to be
solemnised at Athens ; alleging, that they could not
pay their homage to Apollo in a more proper place
than that, where the people considered him as their
patron and progenitor.

Thence he returned to Maccdon : but as he was
naturally indisposed to a life of quiet and inaction,
and observed besides that the Macedonians were atten-
tive and obedient to him in time of war, though
turbulent and seditious in peace, he undertook an
expedition against tlie .^Etolians. After he had ra-
vaged the country, he left Pantauchus there with a
respectable army, and with the rest of his forces
marched against Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus was coming to
seek him ; but as they happened to take different
roads and missed each other, iJemetrius laid waste

*" Where these games, instituted in honour of Apollo after his
victory over the serpent Pythoji, were ordinarily celebrated. *

a

DEMETRIUS. 407

Epirus, and Pyrrhus falling upon Pantauchus obliged
him to stand on his defence. The two generals met
in the action, and both gave and received wounds.
Pyrrhus however defeated his adversary, killed many_
of his men, and made five thousand prisoners.

This battle was the principal cause of Demetrius'
ruin. Tor Pyrrhus was less hated by the Macedo-
nians for the mischief, which he had done them,
than admired for his personal bravery. The late
battle, in particular, gained him great honour : in-
somuch, that many of the Macedonians said, " Of
" all the kings, it was in Pyrrhus alone that they
" saw a lively image of Alexander's valour; whereas

the other princes, especially Demetrius, imitated

him only like so many players, by assuming a

lofty port and a majestic air."
Demetrius, indeed, always appeared like a thea-
trical sovereign ; not only affecting a superfluity of
ornament in wearing a double diadem, and a robe
of purple interwoven witii gold ; but having his
shoes likewise made of cloth of gold, with soles of
fine purple. There was a robe a long time in weav-
ing for him, of the most sumptuous magnificence.
The figure of the world, and all the heavenly bodies,
were to be represented upon it ; but, on account of
his change of fortune, it was left unfinished. Nei-
ther did any of his successors ever presume to wear
it, though Macedon had subsequently many pom-
pons kings.

This ostentation of dress offended the people, who
were unaccustomed to such sights: but his luxurious
and dissolute manner of life was still more obnox-
ious ; and what displeased them most of all, was
Ins want of affability and his difficulty of access.
For he either refused to see those, who applied to
him, or behaved to them in a harsh and haughty
manner. Though he favoured the Athenians more
than the rest of the Greeks, their embassadors waited
two years at his court for an answer. The Lacedae-
monians happening to send only one embassador to
9

408 DEMETRIUS.

him, he considered it as an aflront, and asked in
great anger, " What! have the Lacedaemonians sent
" bnt one embassador ?" " But one/* laconically
replied the Spartan, " to one king."

One day, ^vhen he seemed to come out in a more
obliging temper, and to be something less inaccessi-
ble than usual, he was presented with several peti-
tions, all of which he received, and placed in the
skirt of his robe. The people, of course, followed
him with great joy : but no sooner was he come to
the bridge over the Axius, than he opened his robe,
and shook them all into the river. This stung the
Macedonians to the heart; when, looking for the
protection of a king, they found the insolence of a
tyrant. And it appeared still harder to such as had
seen, or heard from those who had seen, how kind
Philip's beliaviour used to be upon such occasions.
An old woman was one day very troublesome to
him in the street, and importunately begged to be
heard. He said, " He was not at leisure." " Then,"
cried the old woman, " you should not be a king."
These words struck him : and having considered
the thing a moment, he returned to his palace ;
where, postponing all other affairs, he gave audi-
ence for several days to every one that chose to
apply to him, beginning with the old woman. No-
thing, indeed, so much becomes a king as the dis-
tribution of justice. For " Mars is a tyrant," as
Timotheus expresses it ; but " Justice," according
to Pindar, " is the rightful sovereign of the world."
The things which, Homer informs us, kings receive
from Jove, are not machines for taking towns, or
tihips with brazen beaks, but law and justice''^;
these they are to guard, and to cultivate : and it is
not the most warlike, the most violent and sangui-
nary, but the most equitable of princes, whom he
calls " the disciple of Jupiter '■'." But Demetrius

*s II. i. 238.

49 Od. xix. 178., wliere the poet is speaking of Minos I., the Jon
of Jupiter and Europa, and ihe Chief Justice of the Shades.*

DEMETRIUS. 409

was pleased with an appellation quite opposite tor
that, which is bestowed upon the king of the Gods.
For Jupiter is called Polieus and Poliuchus, the
' patron and the guardian of cities ;* whereas De-
metrius is surnamed Poliorcetes, ' the taker of ci-
ties.* Thus, in consequence of the union of power
and folly, vice is substituted in the place of virtue,
and the ideas of glory and injustice are united too.

When Demetrius lay dangerously ill at Pella, he
was very near losing Macedon ; for Pyrrhus, by a
sudden inroad, penetrated as far as Edessa. But
upon his recovery, he repulsed him with ease, and
afterward came to terms with him : as he was not
disposed to be obstructed, by skirmishing for posts
with Pyrrhus, in the pursuit of more arduous enter-
prises. His project was, to recover all his father's
dominions; and his preparations were suitable to the
magnitude of the object. For he had raised an army
of ninety-eight thousand foot and near twelve thou-
sand horse J and he was building five liundred gal-
leys in the ports of Piraeus, Corintli, Chalcis, and
Pella. He went himself to all these places, to give
directions to the workmen and to assist in the con-
struction. Every one was surprised, not only at the
number, but at the greatness of his works. For no
man, before his time, ever saw a galley of fifteen or
sixteen banks of oars. Subsequently, indeed, Pto-
lemy Philopater built one of forty banks ; it's length
was two hundred and eighty cubits, and it's height
to the top of the prow forty-eight cubits. Four hun-
dred mariners belonged to it, exclusive of the
rowers, who were not fewer than four thousand ;
and the decks and the several interstices were capa-
ble of containing nearly three- thousand soldiers.
This, however, was a mere matter of curiosity ; for
it differed very little from an immoveable building,
and was calculated more for show than for use, as
it could not be stirred from it's place without great
difficulty and danger. But the ships of Demetrius
had their use, as well as their beauty : with ail their

41(> DEMETRIUS.

piagnificence of construction, they were equally fit
for righting ; and, though they were admirable' for
their sizc^"^, they were still more so for the swiftness
of their motion.

Demetrius having provided such an armament for
the invasion of Asia, as no man except Alexander
the Great, ever had before him, Seleucus, Ptolemy,
and Lysimachus united to op})ose him. They joined,
likewise in an application to Pyrrhus, desiring him
to tall upon Macedon, and not to consider himself
as bound by the treaty with Demetrius ; since that
prince had entered into it, not from any regard to
Pyrrhus' advantage, or in order to avoid future hos-
tilities, but merely for his own sake, that he miglit be
at liberty to turn his arms against whom he pleased.
Pyrrhus closing with this proposal, Demetrius, while
he was preparing for his voyage, found himself sur-
rounded with war at home, lor at the same instant
Ptolemy came with an immense fleet to draw off
Greece from it's present master, Lysimachus invaded
^lacedon from Thrace, and Pyrrhus entering it
from a nearer quarter joined in ravaging that coun-
try. Demetrius upon this occasion left his son in
Greece, and went himself to the relief of Macedon.
His first operations were directed against Lysima-
chus ; but as he was upon his march, he received an
account that Pvrrhus had taken Bera^a, and the
news soon s])reading among his Macedonians, he
could do nothing in an orderly maimer : the whole
army resounding with lamentations and tears, and
expressions of resentment and reproach against their
?;.ing. They were even ready to desert, under pre-
tence of attending to their domestic affairs, but in
fact to join Lysimachus.

In this case, Demetrius thought proper to remove

i° With regard to the asserted size of the ancient galleys, much
ecepticism exists among the moderns ; but we may perhaps safely
infer from the engines of Archimedes, that mechanics were in
those times carried to a higher degree of excellence in many re-
spects than at present ; and therefore such things might be.*

DEMETRIUS. -ill

as far as lie could from Lvsimaclms, and to turn his
arms against ryrrhus. Lysimachus was of their
own nation, and many of them had known him in
Alexander's service ; wliereas Pyrrhus was an entire
stranger, and therefore he thought the Macedonians
would never give him the preference : but he was
dreadfully mistaken in his conjecture, as he quickly
discovered upon encamping near Pyrrhus. The
Macedonians had always admired the distinguished
valour of that prince, and had of old been accustonj-
ed to think the best man in the field the most worthy
of a crown. Besides, they received daily accounts
of the clemency, with which he behaved to his pri-
soners. They were inclined, indeed, to desert either
to him or to any otlier, so they could but get aw^ay
from Demetrius. They, therefore, began to go olf
privately and in small parties at first, but afterward
every thing was disorder and mutiny in the camp.
At last, some of them had the assurance to go to
Demetrius, and bid him provide for himself by
flight ; for " the Macedonians,'* they told him
" were tired of fighting to maintain his luxury.
These expressions appeared modest, in comparison
with the rude behaviour of others. Upon which, he
entered his tent not like a real king, but a theatrical
one ; and having exchanged his royal robe for a
black one, privately withdrew\ As multitudes were
pillaging his tent, not only tearing it to pieces, but
fighting for the plunder, Pyrrhus made his appear-
ance ; upon which, the tumult instantly ceased, and
the whole army submitted to him. Lysimachus and
he then divided Macedon between them, which
Demetrius had held without disturbance for seven
years.

Demetrius, thus fallen from the pinnacle of power,
fled to Cassandria '^^ where his wife Phila was then
resident. Nothing could equal her sorrow upon

5' Anciently called Polida^a, a cit}' of Upper Macedon, on tlio
borders of Thrace.*

4li: DEMETRIL'S.

this occasion. She coiikl not bear to sec the unfor-
tunate Demetrii^s once more a private man, and an
exile ! In her despair tlierefbre, and detestation of
fortune, who had always been more constant to him
in her visits of adversity than prosperity, she took
poison.

Demetrius, however, resolved to gather up the
remains of his wreck; for which purpose he repaired
to Greece, and collected such of his friends and
officers as he found there. Menelaiis, in one of the
tragedies of Sophocles", gives this picture of his own
fortune :

I move on Fortune's rapid wheel ; my place
For ever changing, like the lunar phase,
AVhich each night varies. Hardly o'er the hills
Now rising, soon her horn she shows ; then fills
Her orb with light ; but in her loftiest reign
'Midst all her glory, she begins to wane,
Till lost she sinks in darkness.

But this picture is more applicable to Demetrius
in his increase and his wane, his splendour and his
obscurity. His glory seemed now entirely eclipsed
and extinguished, and yet it broke out again and
shone with new lustre. Fresh forces came in, and
gradually filled up the measure of his hopes. This
Avas the first occasion, upon which he addressed the
cities as a private man, and without any of the en-
signs of empire. Somebody, seeing him at Thebes
in this condition, not inappositely applied to him
those verses of Euripides j

To Dirce's fountain, and Ismenus' shore
In mortal form he moves, a God no more^^

When he had re-entered the high road of hope,
and had once more a respectable force and form of
royalty about him, he restored to the Thebans their

5* Now lost.*

" Bacch. i. 4. The river Ismenus washes the wall of Thebes, and
Dirce is a stream in the neighbourhood-.*

DEMETRIUS. 413

ancient government and laws. At the same time,
the Athenians abandoned liis interests ; and rasing
out of their registers the name of Diphilus, who was
then priest of the Gods-Protectors, ordered Archons
to be re-appointed, according to ancient custom ^\
They likewise sent for Pyrrhus from Macedon, be-
cause they saw Demetrius grown stronger than they
expected. Demetrius, greatly enraged, marched
immediately to attack them, and laid close siege to
the city. But Crates the philosopher, a man of high
reputation and autliority, being despatched to him
by the people, partly by his entreaties for the Athen-
ians, and partly by representing to him that his
interest lay another way, prevailed upon him to raise
tlie siege. After this he collected all his ships, em-
barked his army, which consisted of eleven thousand
foot beside cavalry, and sailed to Asia with the hope
of seducing Caria and Lydia from Lysimachus' party.
Eurydice, the sister of Phila, received him at Mile-
tus, having brought with her Ptolemai's, her daughter
by Ptolemy, who had formerly been engaged to him
through the mediation of Seleucus. Demetrius mar-
ried her, with the free consent of Eurydice, and soon
afterward attempted the cities in that quarter : many
of which opened their gates to him, and many others
he took by force. Among the latter, was Sardis.
Some of Lvsimachus* officers likewise deserted to
him, and brought sufficient appointments of money
and troops along with them. But as Agathocles the
son of Lysimachus advanced against him with a large
army, he marched to Phrygia, intending first to seize
. Armenia, and tlien to try Media and the Upper
Provinces, which might upon occasion afford hini
many places of retreat. Agathocles followed him
close, and as he found Demetrius superior in all
their skirmishes, he betook himself to cutting off his
convoys. This distressed him not a little ; a^id,

** See p, 372., where an account is given of their aboytion.*

-ill DKMETRIUS.

wliat \vas another (lisap:rccablc circumstance, liis
soldiers suspected that he designed to lead them
into Armenia and IMcdia.

The famine increased every day, and by mistaking
the fords of the river Lycus, he had a great number
of men swept away Avith tlie stream. Yet, amidst
all their distress, iiis troops were capable of jesting.
One of them wrote upon the door of his tent the
beginning of the tragedy of CEdipus, with a slight
alteration.

Offspring of blind old king Antigonus,
Say, whither dost thou lead us ^» i

Pestilence at last followed the flmiine, as it com-
monly happens, when people arc imder a necessity
of eating every thing, however unwholesome ; so
that, finding he had lost in all not less than eight
thousand men, he turned back with the rest. AVhen
he reached Tarsus, he was desirous of sparing the
country, because it belonged to Scleucus, and he did
not think proper to give him any pretence for de-
claring against him. But perceiving that it was
impossible for his troops to avoid seizing something,
when reduced to such extremities, and finding that
Agathocles had fortified the passes of Mount Taurus,
he wrote a letter to Seleucus containing a long and
moving detail of his condition, and concluding with
strong entreaties that he would take compassion
upon a prince who was allied to him, and whose
sufferings were such as would aflcct even an enemy.

Seleucus was touched with pity, and sent orders
to his lieutenants in those parts to supply Demetrius
with every thing suitable to the state of a king, and
his army with sufficient provisions. But Patrocles,

>5 The alteration was very small indeed, for it was only changing
AvTiyovi] into Avnyovif. In the tragedy it is,

The iloseness of the parody is what Plutarch calls ' the jest.'

(C

BEIMETHIUS. ' 41-3

Vviiowas a man of understanding and a faithful friend
to Seleucns, went to that prince and represented to
him ; " That the expense of furnishing Demetrius'
" troops with provisions was a trifle, com])ared with
" the risk of tolerating in the country Demetrius
" liimself, wlio had always been one of the most
violent and enterprising princes in the world, and
was now in such desperate circumstances as might '
stimulate even those of the mildest dispositions to
bold and unjust attempts."
Upon these representations, vSeleucus marched
into Cilicia with a great army. Demetrius, astonish-
ed and tcrritied at the sudden change in Seleucus,
withdrew to the strongest posts which he could find
on Mount Taurus ; and sent a message to him, im-
ploring, " That he might be permitted to make n
" conquest of some free nations of barbarians, and
" by settling among them as their king put a period
"-^ to his wanderings. If this could not I)e granted,
" he hoped Seleucus would at least allow him to
" winter in that country, and not expose him naked
" and in want of every thing to the mercy of his
" enemies.'*

As all these proposals had a suspicious appearance
to Seleucns, he-replied ; " That he might, if he pleas-
*' ed, spend two months of the winter in Cataonia^%
*' upon sending him his principal friends as hos-
^^ tages." But, at the same time, he secured the
passes into Syria. Demetrius, thus surrounded like
a wild beast in the toils, was under a necessity of
having recourse to violence. He therefore ravaged
the country, and had the advantage of Seleucns
whenever he attacked him. Seleucus once beset
him with his armed chariots, but he broke through
them, and put his enemy to the rout. After this,
he dislod":ed the corns that was to defend the l]ei£!:hts
.on the side of Svria, and made himself m^aster of the
passages.

^* A province of Cappadocia.*

41 G • BEMETRIUS.

Elevated with his success, and finding the courage
of his men restored, he prepared to fight a decisive
battle with Seleiicus. That prince was now in the
utmost perplexity. He had rejected the succours
offered him byLysimachus, from a want of confidence
in his honour, and from an apprehension of his de-
signs ; and he was loth to try his strength with De-
metrius, because he dreaded his desperate courage,
as well as his usual change of fortune, which had
often raised him from the depth of misery to the
summit of power. In the mean time Demetrius was
seized with a fit of sickness, which considerably im-
paired his personal vigour, and entirely ruined his
affairs : for part of his men went over to the enemy,
and part left their colours and dispersed. In forty
days he with difficulty recovered, and getting under
march with the remains of his army, made a feint of
moving toward Cilicia. But afterward in the niglit
he decamped without sound of trumpet, and taking
the contrary road crossed Mount Amanus, and ra-
vaged the country on the other side as far as Cyrr-
hestica^'.

Seleucus followed, and encamped very near him.
Demetrius then, with the hope of surprising him,
put his army in motion in the night. Seleucus was
retired to rest ; and in all probability his enemy
would have succeeded, had not some deserters in-
formed him of his danger. On this, he started up in
great consternation, and ordered the trumpets to
sound an alarm ; and as he put on his sandals, he
said to his friends, " What a terrible wild beast are
" we engaged with !" Demetrius, perceiving by
the tumult in the enemy's camp that his scheme was
discovered, retired as fast as possible.

At break of day Seleucus offered him battle, when
Demetrius, ordering one of his officers to take care
of one wing, placed himself at the head of the other,
and made some impression upon the enemy. In

J? A district of Syria*

DEMETRIUS. . 417

tlie mean time Seleucus quitting his horse, and lay-
ing aside his hehnet, presented himself to Deme-
trius' hired troops with only his buckler in his hand ;
exhorting them to come over to him, and to be con-
vinced at last that it was to spare them, not Deme-
trius, that he had been so long about the war. Upon
which, they all saluted him king, and ranged them-
selves under his banner.

Demetrius, though of all the changes which he
had experienced he thought the present the most
terrible, yet imagining that he might extricate him-
self from this distress as well as the rest, fled to the
passes of Mount Amanus ; and gaining a thick wood,
with a few friends and attendants who followed his
fortune, waited there for the night. His intention
was if possible to take the road to Caunus^'^, where
he hoped to find his fleet, and thence to make his
escape by sea ; but, knowing that he had not pro-
visions even for the current day, he meditated some
other expedient. Afterward one of his friends,
named Sosigenes, arrived with four hundred pieces
of gold in his purse ; by the assistance of which they
hoped to reach the shore. Accordingl}', Vv'hen night
came, they attempted to pass the heights : finding a
number of fires however lighted there by the enemy,
they despaired of succeeding that way, and returned
to their former retreat ; but neither with their whole
company, for some had gone off, nor with the same
spirits. One of them venturing to tell him, that he
thought it was best for him to surrender himself to
Seleucus, Demetrius drew his sword to kill himself:
but his friends interposed, and consoling him in the
best manner they could, persuaded him to follow
this advice ; in consequence of which, he sent to
Seleucus, and yielded himself prisoner at discretion.

Upon this intelligence, Seleucus said to those
about him, " It is not the good fortune of Deme-
*' trius, but mine which now saves him, and adds to-

^8 A city in Caria.
VOL. v. 2 E

41S DEMETRIUS.

" other favours this opportunity of testifying my
*' humanity.'* Then calHng the officers of his house-
hold, he ordered them to pitch a royal tent, and to
provide every tiling else for his reception and en-
tertainment in the most magnificent manner. And
as he happened to have in his service one Apolloni-
des, who was an old acquaintance of Demetrius, he
immediately despatched him to that prince, that he
mio'ht feel himself more at ease, and come with the
firmer confidence as to a son-in-law and a friend.

Upon the discovery of this favourable disposition
of Seleucus, at first a few and afterward a consider-
able number of the courtiers waited on Demetrius,
and strove which shpuld pay him the highest re-
spect ; for it was expected, that his interest with
Seleucus would soon be the best in the kingdom.
But these compliments turned the compassion which
liis distress had excited into jealousy, and gave occa-
sion to the envious and the malevolent to divert the
stream of the king*s humanity from him, by alarm-
ing him with apprehensions not of a slight change,
but of violent commotions in his army on the sight
of Demetrius.

ApoUonides was now come to Demetrius with
extreme satisfaction, and others who followed to pay
their court brought extraordinary accounts of Seleu-
cus' kindness ; insomuch that Demetrius, though in
the first shock of his unfortunate fall he had thought^
it a deep disgrace to surrender himselfj was now
displeased at his own reluctance (such confidence
had he in the hopes, which they held out to him !)
when Pausanias advancing with a party of horse and
.foot, to the number of a thousand, suddenly sur-
rounded him, and drove away such as he found in-
clined to favour his cause. After he had thus seized
his person, instead of conducting him to the pre-
sence of Seleucus, he carried him to the Syrian
Chersonese ^^. There he was kept indeed under a

i'i Or Apamea ; a city situated upon a hill, peninsulatcd by the

DEMETRIUS. 419

strong guard, but Seleucus sent him a sufficient
equipage, and supplied him with money and a table
suitable to his rank. He had also places of exercise
and walks, worthy of a king ; his parks were well
stored with game ; and such of his friends, as had
accompanied him in his flight, were permitted to
attend him. Seleucus had likewise the complaisance
frequently to despatch some of his people with kind
and encouraging messages, intimating that as soon
as Antiochus and Stratonice should arrive, terms of
accommodation would be arranged, and he should
be set at liberty.

Under this misfortune Demetrius wrote to his son,
and to his officers and friends in Athens and Co-
rinth, desiring them to trust neither his hand-writins:
nor his seal, but to act as if he were dead, and to
keep the cities and all his remaining estates for An-
tigonus. When that young prince was informed of
his father's confinement, he was extremely concern-
ed at it : he put on mourning, and wrote not only
to the other kings, but to Seleucus himself; offering,
on condition that his fatlier were released, to cede
all the remaining possessions, and to deliver himself
up as an hostage. Many cities and princes joined
in the request; but Lysimachus was not of the num-
ber. On the contrary, he tendered Seleucus a lar<xe
sum of money, to induce him to put Demetrius to
death. For this proposal Seleucus, wlio had before
looked upon him in an indifierent light, abhorred
him as a villain ; and he only waited tor the arrival
of Antiochus and Stratonice, to pay them the com-
pliment of restoring Demetrius to his liberty.

Demetrius, who at first supported his misfortune
with patience, by custom learned to submit to it
with a still better grace. For some time^, he took the
exercises of hunting and running; but he gradually
relin({uished them, and sunk into indolence and in-
activity. He afterward indulged in drinking and

Orontes and adjacent marshes, and thence denominated * The Cher-
sonese.'*

2 E 2

4?0 DEMETRIUS.

play, and spent most of liis time In that kind of dis-
sipation ; M'liether it was to elude tlie tlioughts of his
present condition, wliich lie could not bear in his
sober hours, aiKl to drown reflexion in the bowl ; or
that he was at Inst sensible this was the sort of life
which, though originally the object of his desires, he
had idly renounced to follow the dictates of an
nbsurd ambition. Perliaps he considered that he
had given himself and others infinite trouble^", by
seeking with fleets and armies that happiness which
he found (when he least expected it) in ease, indul-
gence, and repose. For what other end does the
wretched and silly vanity of kings propose to itself
in all their wars and dangers, but to quit the patlis
of virtue and honour for those of luxury and plea-
sure ; the sure consequence of their not knowing,
what real pleasure and true enjoyment are ?

Demetrius, after three years' confinement in the
(,'hersonese, fell into a distemper occasioned bv idle-
ness and excess, which carried him off at the age of
lifty-four'^\ Seleucus was severely censured, and
indeed was himself much concerned, for his unjust
suspicions of Demetrius : whereas he should lia\e
followed the e\am])le of DromiclKietes, who though
a Thracian and barbarian, liad treated lysimacliiis
(wlien his prisonei-) with all the generosity that be-
came a king.

I'here was something of a theatrical pomp, even
in Demetrius' funeral. For Antigonus, being in-
formed that they were bringing his father's ashes to
Greece, went to meet them with his wliole fleet ;
and finding them near the isles of the ^gean sea,
took the urn, which was of solid gold, on board rhe
admiral j^allev. The cities at wliicli thev touched
sent crowns to adorn the urn, and persons in mourn-
ing to assist at the funeral solemnity. When the
fleet approached Corinth, the urn was seen in a

^"^ Upon this subject, see Clncas' observations in the Life of
Pvrrlnis, III. 84-.
'*' Pi. C. 286".

DEMETRIUS. , 421.

conspicuous position upon the stern of the vessel,
adorned with a purple robe and a diadem, and at-
tended by a company of young men well armed,
Xenophantus, the most eminent performer on the
flute of that time, sat by the urn, and played a solemn
air. The oars kept time with the notes, and accom-
panied them with a melancholy sound, like that of
mourners in a funeral procession beating their breasts
in concert with the music. But it was the mournful
appearance and the tears of Antigonus, which ex-
cited the greatest compassion among the people as
they passed. After the Corintliians had bestowed
crowns and all due honours upon the remains, Anti-
gonus carried them to Demetrias, and deposited
them there. This was a city called after the de-
ceased, which he had peopled from the little towns
about lolcos^'-.

Demetrius left behind him several children : An-
tigonus and Stratonice, whom he had by his wife
Phila ; and two sons of the name of Demetrius, one
snrnamed ' the Slender,' by an Illyrian woman, and
the other by Ptolemai's, afterward king of Cyrene.
By Deidamia he had Alexander, who took up his
residence in Egypt, and by his last wife Eurydicc
he is said to have had a son named Corrhabus. His
posterity enjoyed the throne in continued succession
down to Perseus ^^ the last king of Macedon, in

^' Strabo, ix., has preserved the names of these constituent
townships. The city itself was in Magnesia, upon the Pelasgic gull'.^

^' About a hundred and sixteen years. 'I'he descendents of hjs
son Antigonus were as follows :

Antigonus 11. (Gonatas)
Demetrius II. Alcyoneus (natural child)

Philip Antigonus III. (Doson) Echecrates

, — ^ ,

Perseus, last king of Macedon Demetrius

Philip, meanly employed at Rome. Alexander, and a daughter.

The two latter died in prison. They were all three led in triumph

with their father. See the Life of Paulus iEmilius, II. 289., not. (29. )

12

422 DEMETRIUS.

whose time the Komaiis subdued that country.
Having thus gone through the Macedonian drama,
let us now bring the Ron) an upon the stage.

TH5

LIFE

OF

ANTONY.

SUMMARY.

Family of Antoni/. He is educated hy his mother. His licentious
youth. He is banished J^rom his ^father's house, and passes into
Greece : makes a campaign tinder Gabinius in Syria. His ex-
ploits in Egypt. His manliness of aspect ; excessive extravagance.
He is elected tribune of tlie people, and attaches himself to Ca'sar^s
party. Driven from the senate-house, he Jlics to Ccesar^s camp ;
and by his ill-conduct renders his authority odious : briyigs him
considerable reinforcements, and is appointed his general of the
horse : quarrels with Dolabclla, and disgusts all parties by his
licentiousness : marries Fidvia. Her character. He prevents
CcBsarfoom appointing Dolabella consul : offers a diadem to Ccesar
at the Lupercalia. His conduct after Ccesar's death ; at frst
favourable to the conspirators. He subseqttently excites the people
a<rainst them. Has an interview tvith Octavius at Rome ; is de-
feated by him, and obliged to fly : is joined by the troops of Le-
pidiis, and Munatius Plancus : comes to an accommodation xvith
Octavius. Proscriptions. Triumvirate of Ccesar, Antony, and
Lepidus. The tivo frst defeat Brutxis and Cassius. Antonyms
•voyage into Greece and Asia, and his voluptuous life. His dis-
graceful exhibitions in public. Artful freedom of his sycophants.
He orders Cleopatra, who ivas accused of having assisted Cassius,
to meet him in Cilicia. Her magnifceyit galley ; and interview
•with Antony. Their mode of life. Sumptuous presents made by
his son to Philotas the physician. Address of Cleopatra in capti-

42i ANTONY.

vaiing Antony. His inlelUQ;encefrom Italy ohliges kim to return
thither. He is reconciled to Cceaar, and marries his sister Octavia.
Their joint accommodation mth young Pompey. Successes of
Ventidius over the Pnrthians, Antonyms reputation among the
Barbarians. Octavia mediates betiveen her husband and brother.
Antony's love for Cleopatra revives. He marches against the
Parthians ; but his formidable armament is rendered useless by his
fatal passion. His Jirst check. His military engines seized. He
obtains a slight advantagCy and rvith difficulty regains his camp.
Stratagem of Phraatcs to surprise him. Antony marches from
Parthia. Advice of a Mardian. He is attacked on his retreat^
hut repulses the enemy : is attacked again, and through the rashness
ofGallus sustains a heavy loss : Gallns himself slain. Affection
of the soldiers for Antony. The Parthians make their appear-
ance, and are driven hack. Famine in the Roman army. New
stratagem of the enemy, qfxvhich Antony is apprised by one Mith-
ridates. He is pursued. His troops despond. Tumult in his
camp. He crosses a river, and the Parthians discontimie their
pursuit. His losses in this expedition : impatience to revisit Cleo-
patra, and neiv projects against the Parthians. Octavia sets off
to join her husband. Cleopatra's alarms, and arts upon the occa-
sion. He puts off his Median expedition. Casar wishes to make
Octavia quit his house. Antony becomes odious from his distri-
bution of provinces to his children by Cleopatra. Mutual crimina-
tions of Antony and CcEsar. Antony sails with Cleopatra to
tiamos, where they spend several days in festivals. Thence they
proceed to Athens, where Cleopatra receives public honours. Ccesar
completes his preparations. Complaints against Antony. He is
forsaken by many nf his friends. Geminius goes into Greece, and
endeavours to reconcile him ivith Octavia. Ccesar declares war
against Cleopatra. Prodigies unfavourable to Antony. Respect-
ive forces of Antony and Ccesar. The former, though much supe-
rior at land, to gratify Cleopatra, resolves to engage by sea : is
abandoned by some of his allies. Canidius' advice, frustrated by
Cleopatra. Antony is nearly seized by some of Ccesar's troops.
They draw uji their fleets, and harangue their followers. Antony
commences the attack. Cleopatra fies, and he follows her. Dan-
ger incurred in their flight. He sends orders to Canidius to march
tf^rough Macedon into Asia, Ccesar takes possession of the
greatest part of his feet, and sails for Athens. Antony fies to a
desert, and at last returns to Alexandria. He retires to a small
house near Pharos^ «2td ajffects like Timon to sequester himself

ANTONY. 425

J^royn manhind. Digression ttpon that misanthrope. Antony re-
turns to Alexandria, and resumes his usual festivity , Cleopatra
tries the effects of several poisonous drugs. They both despatch
embassadors to Ccvsar ; vJio absolutely rejects the petition of Aw
to)iy, and sends Thyreiis to Cleopatra. She removes her trea-
sures into some tombs of her own construction. Caesar marches
into Egypt. Presages of Antony's defeat, verified. Cleopatra
orders Antony to be informed, that she is dead. He stabs himself,
and directs his servants to carry him to the door of her monument.
Ccesar regrets his death, and sends Procideiiis to take Cleopatra
alive. He gets into the momiment, and prevents her from stabbing
herself. Ccesar makes his entry into Alexandria, and spares it for
the sake ofhisfriend Arius. He orders Antyllus, Antony's eldest
son by Fulvius, and Ca;sario, Jidiits Ccesar's son by Cleopatra, to
be execided. Cleopatra determines upon death. Ccssar pays her
a visit, consoles her, and falters himself that she is reconciled to
live. She ynakes her last oblations to Antony. Her death :
different traditions about it. Antony's children, and their coji'
7iexions by marriage.

X HE grcindfatlisr of Mark Antony was Antony the
orator, \v]io followed the faction of Sy]Ia, and was
put to death by Marius '. His father was Antony,
surnamed Creticiis, a man of no figure or conse-
quence in the political world", but distinguislicd for
his integrity, benevolence, and liberality; of which
the following little circumstance is a sufficient proof:
his fortune was not large ; and his wife, therefore,

' Valerius Maximus says, that Antony the orator was put to
death by the joint order oi Cinna and Marius. But Cicero men-
tions Cinna singly, as the immediate cause. (Phiiipp. I.) See the
Lite of Mariusrili- 177. He had been consul, and obtained the
honours of a triumph.

* Nevertheless, lie conducted the war in Crete, and thence Iiad
his surname. (L.) Metellus however, who subdued that island,
and treated the nations with great severity, had a much higher
military claim to the honour of bis eimilar denomination. (Hor,
jii. 7.)*

426 AXTONY.

very prudently laid some restraint upon his muni-
ficent disposition. An acquaintance of his, who was
under some pecuniary difficulties, applied to him for
assistance. Antony, having no money at command,
ordered his boy to bring him a silver bason full of
M'ater, under pretence of shaving, presented it to
his friend, and bade him make what use of it he
thought proper. The disappearance of the bason
occasioned no small commotion in the family ; upon
which Antony, finding his wife prepared to take a
severe account of the servants, begged her pardon,
and told her the truth.

His wife's name was Julia. She was of the family
of the Caesars, and a woman of distinguislied merit
and modesty. Under her auspices, Mark Antony
received his education ; when, after the death of his
father, she married Cornelius Lentulus, whom Cicero
put to death for having engaged in Catiline's con-
spiracy. This was the origin of the lasting enmity,
which took place between Cicero and Antony. The
latter affirmed, that his mother Julia was even ob-
liged to beg the body from Cicero's wife for inter-
ment. But this is not true ; for none of those, who
suffered on the same occasion under Cicero, were
refused this privilege.

Antony was most agreeable in his person, and
was so unfortvuiate as to fall into the good graces
and friendship of Curio, a man devoted to every
species of licentiousness ; who, to render his youth-
ful friend the more dependent upon him, led him
into all the excesses of indulging in wine and wo-
men, and all the exorbitant expenses which such
indulgences imply. Of course he was soon deeply
involved in debt, and owed at least two hundred and
fifty talents, while he was yet a very young man.
Curio was bound for the payment of this money j
and his father, being informed of it, banished An-
tony from his house. Thus dismissed, he attached
himself to Clodius, that pestilent and audacious tri-
bune, who threw the state into such dreadful dis-

9

ANTONY. > 427

order; till weary of his mad measures, and afraid of
his opponents, he passed into Greece, where he em-
ployed himself in military exercises and the study of
eloquence. The Asiatic stile ^ was then much in
vogue, and Antony fell naturally into it ; as it cor-
responded with his manners, which w^ere vain, pom-
pous, insolent, and assuming.

In Greece he received an invitation from Ga-
binius, the proconsul, to make a campaign with him
in Syria. This invitation he refused to accept as a
private man ; but, on receiving an appointment to
the command of the cavalry, he attended him. His
first operation was against Aristobulus, who had
excited the Jews to revolt. He was the foremost
who scaled the wall ; and this he did in the highest
part. He drove Aristobulus from all his forts ; and,
afterward, with a handful of men, defeated his nu-
merous army in a pitched battle. Most of the ene-
my were slain, and Aristobulus and his son were
taken prisoners. Upon the conclusion of this war,
Gabinius was solicited by Ptolemy'^ to carry his
arms into Egypt, and restore him to his king-dom.
The reward of this service was to be ten thousand
talents. The chief part of the officers disapproved
of the expedition ; and Gabinius himself did not
readily enter into it, though the money pleaded
strongly in it's behalf. Antony however, ambitious
of great enterprises and vain of gratifying a suppli-
ant king, used every means to draw Gabinius into
the service, and prevailed. It was the general opi-
nion, that the march to Pelusium was more danger-
ous, than the war that was to follow. For they were
to traverse a sandy and unwatered country, by the

2 Cicero {Brut. 95.) mentions two sorts of stile, called « the
Asiatic' Unimi sententlosum ct argutiim, sententiis nontam gravi-
bus et sevens, quam concinnis et venustis. — Aliud niitem. genus est,
von tam sententiis freqiicniatiiyn, quam verbis volucre atque incitatum;
quali nunc est Asia tota, necflumine solum orationis, sed etiam ex-
ornato etfaceto generi' verhornm.

-♦ Ptolemy Auletes. See Dio, xxxix.*

428 ANTONY.

filtliy bog of Serbonis % wliose stagnant ooze the
Egyptians call ' the exhalations ofTyphon ;' though
it is probably only the drainings of the Red-Sea,
which is there separated from the Mediterranean by
a mere neck of land.

Antony being ordered thither witli the cavalry,
not only seized the straits, but took the large city
of Pelusium, and made the garrison prisoners. By
this operation he at once opened a secure passage
for the army, and a fair prospect of victory for their
generah The same love of glory, which was so
serviceable to his own party, was upon this occasion
advantageous to the enemy. For when Ptolemy
entered Pelusium, in the rage of revenge he would
have put the citizens to death ; but Antony reso-
lutely opposed it, and prevented him from executing
his horrid purpose. In the several actions, in which
he was concerned, he gave distinguished proofs of
his conduct and valour ; but especially in that man-
oeuvre where, by wheeling about and attacking the
enemy in the rear, he enabled those who charged in
front to gain a complete victory. For this action,
he received suitable honours and rewards.

His humane care of the body of Archclaus, who
fell in the battle, was noticed even by the common
men. He had been his intimate friend, and con-
nected with him in the rights of hospitality; and
though he was obliged by his duty to oppose him in
the field, he no sooner heard that he was fallen, than
he ordered search to be made for his body, and in-
terred it with regal magnificence. This conduct
caused him to be respected in Alexandria, and ad-
mired by the Romans.

Antony had a noble disunity of countenance, a
graceful length of beard, a large forehead, an aqiii-

i Ijy this, Milton, P. L. ii., illustrates the region beyond Letlic ;

A gulf profound, as tliatScrboninn hog,
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old,
Where armies whole have sunk.*

ANTONY. 42D

line nose ; and, upon the whole, the same manly
aspect, that we see in the pictures and statues of
Hercules. There was indeed an ancient tradition,
that his family had descended from Hercules, by a
son of his called Anteon ; and it was no wonder that
Antony sought to confirm this opinion, by affecting
to resemble him in his air and dress. Thus, when
he appeared in public, he wore his vest girt on the
hips, a large sword, and over all a coarse mantle.
That kind of conduct, which would seem disagree-
able to others, rendered him the darling of the
army. He talked with the soldiers in their own
swaggering and ribald strain, ate and drank with
them in public, and would stand to take his victuals
at their mess-table. He was pleasant on the subject
of his amours, ready in assisting the intrigues of
others, and easy under the raillery to which he was
subjected by his own. His liberality to the soldiers,
and to his friends, was the first foundation of his ad-
vancement, and continued to support him in that
power, which he was otherwise v/eakening by ten
thousand irregularities. A single instance of his
liberality I must mention. He had ordered two
hundred and fifty thousand drachmas, which the Ro-
mans call decks^ to be e-iven to one of his friends.
His steward, startled at the extravagance of the
sum, laid the silver in a heap, that he might see it
as he passed. He saw it, and inquired it's destina-
tion. " It is the sum/' answered the steward, " that
" you ordered for a present." Antony perceiving
his envious design, to mortify him still more, coolly
observed, " I really thought the sum would have
" made a better figure : 'tis too little ; let it be
** doubled^." This, however, was in the latter part
of his life.

Home was divided into two parties : Pompey was

* The same story is told of Alexander. A similar stratagem
was practised upon some modern prince by his treasurer, with'
better success. The sight of the devoted guineas moved him from
his purpose, and he gravely said, * Half the sum will do.'*

430 ANTONY.

with the senate. The people were desh-ous of bring-
ing Caesar with his army out of Gaul. Curio, the
friend of xVntony, who had changed sides and joined
Caesar, carried Antony Hkewise over to his interest.
The influence which he liad obtained by his elo-
quence, and by the profusion of money supplied
from Caesar's funds, enabled him to make Antony-
tribune of the people, and subsequently augur.
Antony was no sooner in power, than Cassar found
the advantage of his services. In the first place, he
opposed the consul Marcellus, whose design it was
to bestow upon Pompey the command of the old
legions, and at the same time to empower him to
raise new ones. Upon this occasion he obtained a
decree, that the forces then on foot should be sent
into Syria, and join liibulus in carrying on the war
against the Parthians ; and that none should give in
their names to serve under Pompey. On another
occasion, when the senate would neither receive
Cassar's letters nor suffer them to be read, he read
them by virtue of his tribunitial authority ; and thus,
as the requests of Cassar appeared moderate and
reasonable, brouo'htover manv to his interest. Two
questions were at length proposed in the senate ;
one, ' Whether Pompey should dismiss his army?*
the other, ' Whether Caesar should dismiss his?'
For the former, there were but few votes, while a
large majority voted for the latter. Upon wliich
Antony stood up, and demanded, ' Wiiether both
Caesar and Pompey should dismiss their armies?*
This motion being received with great acclamations,
Antony was applauded, and desired to put it to the
vote. The consuls, however, opposing this measiuc,
the friends of CiBsar made other proposals, which
seemed by no means unreasonable : but they were
over-ruled by Cato '', and Antony was commanded

' Cicero asserts, that Antony was the immediate cause of tlie
civil war; but, if lie could iiave laid down his prejudice, he might.
have diiicovered a more iniinediiUe cause in the impolitic reseut-
luciit of Cato.

ANTONY. 431

\>y Lentiilus the consul to leave the house. He le^
it, with bitter execrations ; and disguising himself
like a servant, accompanied only by Quintus Cassius,
hired a carriage, and went immediately to Ccesar.
As soon as they arrived, they exclaimed that nothing
was conducted at Rome according to order or law,
that even the tribunes were refused the privilege of
speaking, and whoever would rise in defence of the
right, must be expelled and exposed to personal
danger.

Cassar, upon this, marched his army into Italy ;
and hence it was observed by Cicero, in his Philip-
pics, that Antony was not less the cause of the civil,
than Helen had been of the Trojan war ^. There
is, however, but little truth in this assertion. Caesar
was not so much a slave to the impulse of resent-
ment, as to have undertaken so desperate a measure,
if it had not been premeditated. Neither would he
have carried war into the bov/els of his country,
merely because he saw Antony and Cassius flying to
him in a mean dress and a hired carriage. At the
same time, these things might give some colour to
the commencem.ent of hostilities long predeter-
mined". Caesar's motive was the same, which had
before driven Alexander and Cyrus over the ruins
of human kind ; the insatiable lust of empire, the
frantic ambition of being the first man upon earth,
. which he knew he could not be while Pompey was
"yet alive.

As soon as he was arrived at Rome and had dri-

* Ut Helena Trojanisy sic istc h.uic reip. causa helli ; caiisu peslts
mtque exitiifuit. (Pliilipp. ii. 22.) (L.) M. Ricaid enters into
an elaborate defence of Cicero upon the occasion, and proves that
both Antony and Helen were the mere pretexts to Caesar and Aga-
memnon for their respective wars ; referring for his authorities, with
regard to Troy, to Herod, ii. 120. and Thucyd. L 9. ; and subjoin-
ing his suspicion that causa, as occasionally meaning • pretext,*
unght be misunderstood by the Chaironean biographer.*

' Caesar, as Cicero informs us, alleged in his defence; Quo J
intercessio Antonii ncglecla, jns tribunitium sublatmn, circumscrijjtus
a senatu essct Antonius ! *

4S2 AKToxr.

ven Pompey out of Italy, his first design was to
attpck his legions in Spain, and having a fleet in
readiness, to go afterward in pnrsnit of Pompcy him-
self; Avhiie, in the mean time, Rome was left to the
government of Lepidns the prastor, and Italy and
the army to the conmiand of Antony the tribune.
Antony, by the sociability of Iiis disposition, soon
rendered himself agreeable to the soldiers. For he
ate and drank witii them, and made them presents
to the utmost of his abilitv. To others, his beha-
viour was less acceptable. He was too indolent to
attend to the cause of the injured, too violent and
too impatient when he was applied to upon business,
and infamous for his adulteries. In short, though
there was nothinsf tvrannical in the government
Caisar, it was rendered odious bv the ill conduct of
his friends ; and, as Antony .had the largest share
of the power, so he bore the greatest part of the
blame. Caesar notwithstanding, upon his return
from Spain, connived at his irregularities ; and
Indeed, in the military appointment which he had
given him, he had judged not improperly ; for An-
tony was a brave, skilful, and active general.

Caesar embarked at Brundusium, crossed the
Ionian sea with a small number of troops, and sent
back the fleet, with orders that Antony and Gabinius
should put the army on board, and proceed as fast
as possible to Macedon. Gabinius was afraid of the
sea, as It was winter, and the passage was dangerous.
He, therefore, marched his forces a long way round
by land. Antony on the other hand, apprehensive
that Caesar mlo-ht be surrounded and oveixome bv
his enemies, beat off Libo, w'ho lay at anchor in the
mouth of the haven of Brundusium ; sending out
several small vessels, to encompass his galleys sepa-
rately, and thus obliged them to retire ^'*. He then
seized the opportunity of embarking about twenty

'° Of this action Caesar himself has given a more detailed ac-
count, Cell. Civ. iii. 23.*

ANTONY. 433

tliousand foot, and eight hundred horse ; and with
these he set sail. The enemy discovered, and made
up to him ; but he escaped, by favour of a strong
gale from the south, which rendered the sea .so rough
that tlie pursuers could not reach him. The same
wind, however, at first drove him upon a rocky
shore, on which the sea broke so roughly, that there
appeared no hope of escaping shipwreck ; but after
a little while it changed to the south-west, and blow-
ing off land to the main sea, Antony sailed in safety,
with the satisfaction of seeing the wrecks of the
enemv's fleet scattered alone; the coast. The storm
had driven their ships upon the rocks, and many of
them went to pieces. Antony profited by this dis-
aster ; for he took several prisoners, and a consi-
derable booty. He made himself master, likewise,
of the town of Lissus ^^ ; and, from the seasonable
arrival of his re-inforcement, gave a more promising
aspect to Caesar's affairs.

In every battle that was fouo^ht, Antony distin-
guished himself Twice he stopped the army in it's
flight, brought them back to the charge, and gained
the victory ; so that, in point of military reputation,
he was inferior only to Caesar. What opinion Caesar
had of his abilities, appeared in the last decisive
battle at Pharsalia. He led the right wing himself,
and gave the left to Antony, as to the ablest of his
officers. After this battle, Cffisar being appointed
dictator went in pursuit of Pompey, and despatched
Antony to Rome, as his general of the horse. This
officer is next in power to the dictator, and has
the sole command in his absence. For on the elec-
tion of a dictator, all the other magistrates, with
the exception of the tribunes, are divested of their
authority.

l>olabella, one of the tribunes, a young man fond
of innovations, proposed a law for the abolition of
tlebts 5 and solicited his friend Antony, who was

^* A city of Macedon, above Dyrrachiam.*
VOL. V. 2 F

45 1 AXTOXV.

ever ready to gralifv tlie people, to join him in tlm
•rne^siire. On the otlicr hand, Asinius and Trebel-
liys dissuaded him from it. Antony happened at
this time to suspect a criminal connexion between
Dolabella and his wile, whom upon that account
he dismissed, thoug-h she was his irrst-cousin, and-
dauglitcr to Caius Antonius, who had been colleguc
■^vitli Cicero. In consequence of this, he joined Asi-
nijis, and opposed l>olabella. The latter having
taken }3ossession of tiie Forum, with a design to
carry his law by force, Antony being ordered by the
senate to repel force with force, attacked him, killed
several of his men, and lost some of his own.

By this action, he forfeited the favour of the
people. But this was not the only thing, which
rendered him obnoxious ; for men of sense (as
Cicero observes) could not but condemn his noc-
turnal revels, his enormous extravagance, his scan-
dalous lewdness, his sleeping in the day, liis walks
to carry off the qualms of debauchery, and his enter-
tainments on the marriages of ])layers and buffoons.
It is said, that after drinking ail night at the wed-
ding of Hippias the player, he was summoned in tlie
morning upon business to the Forum ; wlum through
excessive repletion he was unfortunately, in the pre-
sence of the people, seized with a fit of vomiting,
and one of his friends received the contents of his
stoniach in his gown ^-. Sergius the player had the
oreatest intere^^t with him ; and Cvtheris '^, a lady
of the same profession, had the management of his
heart. She attended him in his excursions ; and her
equipage was in no respect inferior to that of his
mother. The people were offended at the ])omp of
his travclHng plate, which was more nt for the ojna-
ment of a triumph ; at his erecting tents on the road,
by sroves and rivers, for the most luxurious dinners ;

'- For a very spirited aij»d graphical description of this disgnst-
inw scH'ive, 5ee (.'ic. Pliilipp. ii. 25. In the preceding section sorns
acrount i<, likewise, tjiveii ot" Cvtheris.*

('ic. Kp. ad Alt. X. 10.

mt his cliariots drawn by lions, and at liis billetting
iiis ladies of pleasure and female musicians upoti
modest and sober people. This dissatisfaction at
Antony's coiYduct could not but be ilicreased by th6
t:'omparativt3 view of that of CiEsar. While the latter
^vas supportini^ the flitigues of a military life, the
former was indulging himself in all the dissipation of
luxiuy, and by means of his delegated power iusiilt-
inff the citizens.

This behaviour occasioned many disturbances in
K-ome, and gave the soldiers an opportunity of abus->
ing and plundering tive people. When C&sa'r thei'G-
fore returned to Rome, he pardoned Dolabella ; and
On his being created consul the third time, took
Lepidus, and not Antony, for his collegue. Antony^
who had purchased Pompey's house, when he was
required to make the payment, expressed himself iil
very angry terms ; and this, he informs us, was the
reason why he woidd not accompany Cffisar into
Africa. His former services he thought insuffi-
ciently repaid. Caesar however, by his disapprobation
of Antony's conduct, seenis to have thrown some
restraint upon his dissolute manner of life.

He now resolved to marry, and made choice of
Fulvia, the widow of the seditious Clodius, a woman
by no means adapted to domestic employments, nor
even contented with ruhng her husband as a private
Inan. Her ambition was to govern those who
governed, and to command the commanders of
Armies. It was to Fulvia therefore that Cleopatra
W-as Di)liged, for having tauglit Antony due submis-
sion to female authority. He had gone through such
a course of discipline, as iliade him perfectly tract-
able when he came into her hands.

He endeavoured, however, to amuse thfe violent
sjiirit of Fulvia by many whimsical and pleasant fol-
lies. When Cassar, after his success in Spain, wa^
on his return to Rome, Antony among others went
to meet him ; but a report having prevailed that
QlEsar was killed, and that the enemy was marching

2 F 2 '

43G AXTGNY.

into Italy, he returned immediately to Rome, and
entering his house by night in the disguise of a slave,
jM'ctendcd that he had letters from Antony to Fulvia,
Upon this, he was introduced to her with his head
muffled up : and before she received the letter, she
im])atiently inquired, if Antony were v/ell. He pre-
sented the letter to her in silence ; and while she
was opening it, he threw his arms round her neck,
and kissed her. We adduce this as one instance,
out of many, of his pleasantries.

When Caesar returned from Spain, most of the
principal citizens went some days' journey to meet
him ; but Antony had the most distinguished recep-
tion, and accompanied him in his cliariot through
Italv. After them came Brutus Albiinis, and Octa-
vius the son ot Caesar's niece, who was afterward,
under the name of Augustus Caisar, for many years
emperor of Home. Cajsar, being created consul
for the fifth time, chose Antony for his collegue ;
but, as he intended to resign the consulship in
iavour of Dolabclla, he acquainted the senate witii
his resolution. This measure Antony vehemently
opposed, and loaded Dolabella w-ith the most flagrant
reproaches. Dolabella did not fail to return tlie
abuse ; and Caisar, offended at their scurrilous beha-
viour, put off the affair till another time. When
it was again proposed, Antony insisted that the
omens from the flight of birds were against the
measure ' *. Thus Ciesar was obliged to give up
Dolabella, who was not a little mortified by hia
disappointment. It appears, however, that CjEsar
had as little regard for Dolabella, as he had for
Antony : for, when both were accused of designs
against him, he said contemptuously enough, " It is
" not those fat sleek fellows I am afraid of, but
*' the pale and the lean * :" By these he meant.
Brutus and Cassius, who subsequently put him to

^* This power he had by virtue of his office, as augur.
"^ See tlie Life of Ctcsar, Vol. IV. p. 430., and of Biutus, Vol.
VI. p. 63.

•ANTONY. 437

death. Antony, without intending it, gave them
a pretence for that undertaking. When the llomans
were celebrating the LupercaHa, Caesar in a tri-
umphal habit sat on tlie Rostrum to see the race.
Upon this occasion, many of the young nobihty and
the magistracy, anointed with oil and having white
thongs in their hands, run about and strike, as in
sport, every one whom they meet. Antony was of
the number : but regardless of the ceremonies of the
institution, he took a garland of laurel, and wreath-
ing it in a diadem, run to the Rostrum ; where being
lifted up by his companions, he would have placed
it on CiEsar's head, intimating thereby the convey-
ance of regal power. CcBsar, however, seemed to
decline the offer, and was on this account applauded
by the people. Antony persisted in his design ;
and for some time there was a contest betv/een
them, while he who offered the diadem had the
applause of his friends, and he who refused it the
acclamations of the multitude. Thus, what is sin-
gular enough, while the Romans endured every
thing that regal power could impose, they dreaded
the name of king as destructive of their liberty.
Ca2sar was much concerned at this transaction, and
uncovering his neck, offered his life to any one that
would take it. At length, the diadem was placed
upon one of his statues, but the tribunes pulled
it off ^-^ ; upon which, the people followed them
home with great acclamations. Afterward, how-
ever, Caisar showed that he resented this, by turn-
ing those tribunes out of office.

From these circumstances, the enterprise of Bru-
tus and Cassius derived strength and encouragement.
To the rest of their friends, v/hom they had selected
for the purpose, they wished to draw over Antony :

^•5 Cum Tribiini plebis, Epidius Maridlus, Cccsetlnxque Flavus,
coronce fa&ciam detrahiy homlnemque diici in vincula jtisdssent';
dolcns scic pariini prospere viotam regni menlionem, sive (ntfcrehat)
ereptam s'lbi glorlam recusandi, tribunos graviter increpitos potestats
privavii. (.Suet, Jul. 79.)

438 ANTONY.

Trebonius alone objected to him. He informed them
that, in their journey, to meet CeGsar, he had been
generally with liim : thai he liad sonndcd him upon
this business by hints, which though cautious were
intelligible ; and that he had always expressed his
disapprobation, tiiough he never betrayed the secret.
It was then proposed, that Antony should fall at the
same time with Cassar ; but this Brutus opposed.
An action, undertajvcn in support of justice and the
laws, he very properly thought, should have nothing
unjust connected with it. Of Antony however they
were afraid, both in respect of his personal valour,
and the influence of his office ; and it wiis agreed
that, when Caisar was in the house,, and they were
on the point of executing their purpose, Antony
should be amused without by some pretended dis-
course upon business.

When, in consequence of these measures, Cifisar
was slain, Antony absconded in the disguise of a
slave ; but after he found that the conspirators were
assembled in the Capitol, and had no farther designs
of massacre, he invited them to come down, and
sent his son to them as an hostage. That night
Cassius supped with him, and Brutus with Lepidus.
The day following he assembled the senate, when
he proposed that an act of amnesty should be passed,
and that provinces should be assigned to Brutus
and Cassius. This the senate confirmed, and at
the same time ratified the acts of Ctesar. Thus
Antony acquitted himself in this difficult affair with
the highest reputation ; and, by saving Rome from
a civil war, proved himself a most able and valuable
politician. But the intoxication of glory drew him
off from these wise and moderate councils ; and
from his influence M'ith the people he felt that, if
Brutus were borne down, he should be the first
man in Rome. With this view, when Caesar's body
was exposed in the Forum, he undertook the cus-
tomary funeral oration ; and as he foimd the people
affected and interested by his encomiums upon the

9

ANTONY. 43»

deceased, he endeavoured still more to excite their
compassion, by every thing that was pitiable oi'
aggravating in the massacre. For this purpose,
in the close of his oration, he plucked the robe from
the dead body, and held it up to them bloody as it
\^as, and pierced through with weapons ; not hesi-
tating, at the same time, to call the perpetrators of
tlie deed ' villains and murtherers.' This had such
An effect upon the people, that tliey immediately
fore up the benches and tables in the Forum, to
make a pile for the body. After they had duly
discharged the funeral rites, they snatched the burn-
ing braikls from the pile, and rushed to attack the
liouses of the conspirators.

Brutus and his party now left the city, and CiGsar's
friends joined Antony. Calphurnia, his widow, en-
trusted him with her treasure, which amounted to
four thousand talents. All Ciigsar's papers likewise,
which contained a particular account of his designs,
ivere delivered up to him. Of these Antony made
a very ingenious use, for by inserting in them what
iiames he thought proper, he created some of his
friends magistrates, and others senators ; some he
recalled from exile, and others he released from
prison, under pretence that all these things had been
ordered by Qesar. The people, thus favoured,
the Romans called ' Charonites ^^ ;' because, to
support their title, they had recourse to the regis-
ters of the dead. The power of Antony, in short,
was absolute. He was himself consul, his brother
Caius was priEtor, and his brother Lucius tribune'
of the people.

Such was the state of affairs when Octavius, who
was the son of Caesar's niece ^^ and appointed by
will his heir, arrived at Rome from Apollonia, where
he resided when his uncle was killed. He first

'^ The slaves, who were enfranchised by the last will of their
masters, were so denominated, as well as « Orcini.' (Suet. Aug.
35.)

'7 Sec the Life of Cicero, p. 346.

41^0 ANTOXV.

visited Antony as his uncle's friend ; and spoke to
bim concerning the money in his liands, and the
legacy of seventy-tive drachmas left to every Roman
citizen. Antony, however, paid little regard to
him ; tehing him, it would be madness for an un-
experienced and friendless young man to undertake
so important an office, as that of being executor to
Ca2sar.

But Octaviiis was not thus to be repulsed. He
still demanded th.e monev ; and Antony, on the
other hand, did every thing to mortity and affront
him. He opposed him in his application for the
tribuneship : and when he made use of the golden
chair, which had been granted by the senate to his
uncle '*^, lie threatened that unless he desisted from
soliciting the people, he would conmiit him to prison.
But when Octavius joined Cicero, and tlie rest of
Antony's enen)ics, and by their means obtained an
interest in the senate ; when he continued to pay his
court to the people, and drew the veteran soldiers
from their quarters, Antony alarmed for the conse-
quences gave him a nieeting in the Capitol.

Upon this an accommodation took place, but it
was soon destroyed ; for that very night Antony
dreanied that his right hand was struck by thunder,
and a few days afterward he was informed that Octa-
vius had a desio'n ai]^ainst his Yi^ic. The latter would
have justiiied himself, but he met with no credit; so
that, of course, the breach became as wide as ever.
They now immediately hurried over Ital}', and en-
deavoured to be before-hand with each other, in se-
curing by rewards and promises the old troops that
were in difierent quarters, and such legions as were
still on foot.

Cicero, who had at that time considerable influ-
ence in the city, incensed the i)eople against An-
tony, and prevailed upon the senate to declare him

'^ The senate had decreed to Coesar the privilege of using a
jvolden chair, adorned with a crown of gold and precious stone:?,
iu all the theatres. (Dion. xliv. 6.)

ANTONV. 441

a public enemy ; to send the rods and the rest of the
prtetorial ensigns to yonng Caisar, and to commis-
sion Hirtius and Pansa, the consuls, to drive his
opponent out of Italy. The two armies engaged
near Mutina '•', and Caesar was present at the battle:
both the consuls were slain, but Antony was defeat-
ed. In his flight he w^as reduced to great extremi-
ties, particularly by famine. Distress, however, was
to him a school of moral improvement; and Antony,
in adversity, was almost a man of virtue. It is
common indeed for men nnder misfortunes to have
a clear view of their duty, but a change of conduct
from bad to good is not always the consequence.
Upon such occasions, they too often relapse into
their former manners, through the inactivity of rea-
son and infirmity of mind. But Antony w^as even a
pattern for his soldiers. From all the varieties of
luxurious living, he readily acquiesced in drinking
foul water, and eating the wild fruits and roots of
the desert. Nay, it is said, that they devoured the
very bark of the trees ; and that in passing the Alps
they fed upon creatures, which had never before
been accounted human food.

Antony's design was to join Lepidus, who com-
manded the army on the other side of the Alps :
and he had a reasonable prospect of his friendship,
from the good offices which he had done him with
Julius Caisar. When he came within a small dis-
tance of him, he encamped ; but, receiving no en-
couragement, he resolved to hazard all upon a single
cast. His hair was uncombed; and his beard, which
he had not shaved since his defeat, was long. In
this forlorn figure, with a mourning mantle thrown
over him, he came to Lepidus' camp, and addressed
himself to the soldiers. While some were afiected
with his appearance, and others with his eloquence,
Lepidus afraid of the consequence ordered the trum-
pets to sound, that he might no longer be heard.

^^ Hod. Modena.

ii^ ANTONY.

This, however, contributed to heighten the com-
passion of the soldiers; so that ihcy sent Lfrh'us and
Clodins, in the dress of those ladies who hired out
their lavours to the arn>y, to assure Antony, that if
he had resolution enough to attack the trendies, he
would iind many, not only ready to receive him, b\it
(if he wished it) to assassinate Lepidus himself.
Antony would not suffer any violence to be offered"
to him ; but the day following, at the head of his'
troops, he crossed the river which lay between tlie
two camps, and had the satisfaction to see Lepfclus*
soldiers all the while stretehins: out their hands to
him, and making way through the entrenchments.

Having thus possessed himself of Lepidus* camp,
he treated him with the utmost courtesy. He saluted'
him by the naraeof ' Fath-er;' and, though in reality
every thing was in his own })OWer, he secured to him
the title and the honours of i>'eneral. This conduct
brought over Munatius Plancus, who was at the
head of a considerable force at no great distance.
Thus Antony was once more extremely powerful,
and returned into Italy with seventeen entire legions
of foot, and ten thousand horse. Beside these, he
left six legions as a garrison in Gaul under the com-
mand of Varius, one of his convivial companions,
whom they called ' Cotylon -°.'

Octavius, when he found that Cicero's object was
to restore the liberties of the commonwealth, soon
abandoned him, and came to an accom.modation
with Antony. They met, together with Lepidus,
in a small river-island"', w-here the conference lasted
three days. The empire of the world was divided
among them, like a paternal inheritance ; and this
they ibund no difficulty in settling. But whom they
sliould kill, and whom tliey should spare, it was less-
easy to adjust; while each wished to save his respect-
ive friends, and to destroy his enemies. At length,

-• Or Cotylos (Cic. Phil. v. 2.), from a half-pint bumper, a Greek
measure 6o denominated.

-- i>ee tlie Life of Cicero, p. 350,

ANTONY. 413

their resentment against the latter overcame their
kindness for the former. Octavius gave up Cicero
to Antony, and Antony sacrificed his uncle Lucius
Cagsar to Octavius ; while Lepidus had the privilege
of putting to death his own brother Paulus. Though
others say, that Lepidus gave up Paulus to them -%
on their peremptory requisition. I bchcve there
never was any thing so atrocious, or so execrably
savage, as this commerce of blood. For while a
friend was given up for an enemy received, the same
action murthered at once the friend and the enemy;
and the destruction of the former was still more hor-
rible, because it had not even resentment tor it*s.
apology.

When this confederacy had taken place, the arm3;?
desired it might be confirmed by some alliance;
and Cffisar therefiire was to marry Claudia tiie daugh-
ter of Fulvia, Antony's wife. As soon as this was
determined, they marked down those whom they
intended to put to death, amounting in number to
three hundred. AVhen Cicero was slain, Antony
ordered his head, and the hand with which he wrote
his Phihppics, to be cut off: and, w^hen they were
presented to him, he burst into frequent and loud
fits of laughter, and exulted at the sight. After he
was satiated with looking upon them, he ordered
them to be exposed on the Rostia, in the Forum.
But this insult on the dead, was in fact an abuse of
his own good fortune, and of the power, whicli it-
had placed in liis hands '^. His uncle Lucius CiEsar,
being pursued by his assassins, fled for refuge to his
sister : and when the pursuers had broken into the
house, and were forcing their way into his chamber,
she placed herself at the door, and stretching forth

** The former English translator ought not to have omitted this ;
because it somewhat softens the character of Lepidus, who was
certainly the least detestable of the three.

*^ Were there any circumstance in Antony's life, that could be
esteemed an instance of true magnanimity, the total want of that
virtue in the present instance would prove that such a circumstance
"^^as merely accideiatal.

4i4. ANTONY.

her hantls exclaimed ; " You shall not murther Lu-
" cius CiEsar, till you have iirst murthered me, the
" mother of your general." By tliese means, she
saved her brother.

This triumvirate was most odious to the Romans,
"but Antony bore the greatest part of the blame; for
he was not only older than Caesar, and more pov.er-
fid than Lepidus, but when he was no longer under
difficulties, he relapsed into his former irregulari-
ties. His abandoned and dissolute manners were
the more obnoxious to the people, in consequence of
his living in the house of Pompey the Great, a man
not less distinguished by his temperance and his mo-
desty, than by the honour of three triumphs. They
were mortified to see those doors shut with inso-
lence against magistrates, generals, and embassa-
dors ; while they were open to players, jugglers, and
sottish sycophants, in^)on wliom he spent the princi-
pal part of his trcasiu'cs amassed by cruelty and ra-
pine. The triumvirate, indeed, were by no means
scrupulous about the manner, in which they pro-
cured their wealth. They seized and sold the estates
of those, who had been jjroscribed, and by false
accusations defrauded their widows and orphans.
Thcyburthencdthe pco})le with insupportable imposi-
tions; and being inlbrmed that large sums of money,
the property both of strangers and citizens, were
deposited in the liands of the vestals, they took them
away by violence. When Ca33ar found that An-
tony's covetousness was as boundless as his prodi-
gality, he demanded a division of the treasure. The
army, likewise, was divided. Antony and Caesar
went into Macedon against Brutus and Cassius, and
the government of Rome was entrusted to Lepidus.

Having encamped in sight of the enemy, Antony
opposite to Cassius and Ca?sar to Brutus, Cassar
eiiectcd nothing extraordinary, but Antony's efforts
were still successful. In the hrst engagement, Caesar
was defeated by Brutus, his camp was taken, and
he himself narrowly escaped by flight; though in

ANTONY. 41S

liis Memoirs he informs us that, on account of a
dream M'hich happened to one of his friends '-^^ he
had \vithdrawn before the battle. • At the same time,
Cassius was defeated by Antony ; and yet some
writers affirm, that Antony was not present at the
battle, but only joined subsequently in the pursuit.
As Cassius knew nothing of Brutus' success, he was
killed on his own earnest entre^Uy by his freedman
Pindarus. Another battle was foufflit soon after-
ward, in which Brutus v.as defeated, and in conse-
quence slew himself. Cxesar happened at that time
to be sick, and the honour of this victory likewise,
of course, devolved in a great measure upon An-
tony. As he stood over the body of Brutus, he
slightly reproached him for the death of his brother
Caius, whom in revenge for the assassination of
Cicero Brutus had slain in Macedon. It appeared
however, that Antony did not impute Caius' death
so much to Brutus, as to Hortensius ; tor he or-
dered the latter to be slain upon his brother's tomb-
He threw his purple robe over Brutus' body, and
ordered one of his freedmen to do the honours of his
funeral : and upon learning, at a subsequent period,
that he had not burnt the robe aloni^ with tlie Iwdv,
and had retained part of the money which was to
have been expended on the ceremony, he com-
manded him to be executed. After this victory,
Cassar was conveyed to Home, wher42 it was expecV
ed that his distemper would have put an end to hi^
life. Antony, having traversed some of the pro-
vinces of Asia for the purpose of raising money,
passed with a large army into Greece. Contribu-
tions indeed were absolutely necessary, as a gra-
tuity of five thousand drachmas had been promised
to every private man.

Antony's behaviour v>-as, at first, very acceptable
to the Grecians. He attended the disputes of their,
logicians, their public diversions, and their religion-

^■* His physician. See the Life of Erutus.

415 ANTONY.

ceremonies. lie was mild in the administration of
justice, and affected to be called ' the Friend of
Greece,' but particularly ' the Friend of Athens,*
to which city he made considerable presents. The
Megarcnsia-ns, vying with the Athenians in the cx-
Inbition of something curious, invited him to see
their s<^natc-house ; and when thev asked him how
he liked it, lie tokl them, " It was little and rui-
" nons.'* He took, likewise, the dimensions of the
temple of the Pythian Ajiollo, as if he had intended
to repair it ; and indeed he promised the senate, that
he would.

But when, leaving Lucius Censorinus in Greece,
he once more jiassed into Asia ; and enriched him-
self with the wealth of the country; when his house
was the resort of obsequious kings, and queens con-
tended for his favour by their beauty and mvuu-
ficence ; then, while Ca?sar was harassed with sedi-
tions at Rome, Antony once more abandoned himself
to luxury, and relapsed into all the dissipations of
his former life. The Anaxenors and the Xuthi, tlie
harpers and pipers, Metrodorus the dancer, the
whole corps of the Asiatic drama, who far outdid in
bufl^bonery the poor wretches of Italy- — these were
the people of the court, the folks that carried all
before them. In short, every thing was riot and
disorder. And Asia in some measure resembled the
cily mentioned by Sophocles '^\ that v.'as filled at
once with the perfumes of sacrifices, with songs,
and with groans.

When Antony entered Fphesus, the women in the
dress of l^acchanals, and the men and bovs habited
like Pan and the satyrs, marched before him. No-
thing; was to be seen throusrhout the whole citv but
ivy-crowiis, and spears wreathed with ivy, harps,
flutes, and pipes, while Antony was hailed by the
name of Bacchus ;

— ■ ■liacclius ever kind, and free !

'^ Ocd. Tyr. i. -f, 5.

ANaOMY. 447

And such, Inaeed, he was to some; but to others,
he was ' Bacchus savage and severe^".* He deprived
many noble families of their fortunes, and bestowed
them upon sycophants and parasites. Many were
represented to be dead, who were still living; ami
commissions were granted to his minions for seizing
their estates. He gave his cook the estate of a
Magnesian citizen, for having dressed one supper to
his taste : but when he laid a double impost upon
Asia, Hybreas the agent for the people told him,
with a pleasantry agreeable to his humour, that " if
*' h.e doubled th€ taxes, he ougiit to double the sea-
'' sons too, and supply tlic people with two summ-ers
*' and two winters." He added at the same time
with a little more acrimony, that, " As Asia had
*' already raised two hundred thousand talents, if he
had not received it, he ought to demand it of
those who had: but," said he, " if you have re-
ceived it, and yet have it not, we are undone."
This sensibly touched him, for he was ignorant of
many things transacted under his authority ; not
that he was indolent, but unsuspecting. He had a
simplicity in his nature, without much penetration.
But, when he foiuid that fliults had been committed,
he cKpressed the greatest concern and acknowledge-
ment to the suiferers. He was prodigal in his re-
wards, and rigorous in his punishments ; but the
excess was rather in the former, than the latter. The
insulting raillery of his conversation carried it's re-
medy along with it ; lor he was perfectly liberal iu
allowing the retort, and gave and took with the same
good humour. This, however, had a bad effect
upon his affairs. He imagined that those, who
treated him freely in conversation, would not be in-
sincere in business: not perceiving tb.'it his syco-
piiants were artful in their freedom; using it as a
kiml of poignant sauce, to prevent tii£ satiety of
flattery ; and that, by taking these liberties with.

■f Qi>}?s.te:^ gnxl Apripniu.s '.ver$ sifiuimiies ot Bacch.us, as weU as
Qliaiiuotes and Milicliins.-

4-18 ANTOXY.

him at table, tliey M'ere -well convinced, ^vlicir.
they comphed with his opinions in business, that lie
would think if. arose not from complaisance, but from
a conviction of his superior judgement.

Such was the frail natuie of xlntony, when tlie
love of Cleopatra came in to complete his ruin. This
awakened every dormant vice, inflamed every guilty
passion, and totally extinguished the gleams of re-
maining^ honour and virtue. It becC'^n in the follow-
mg manner : When he first set out on his expedition
against the Parthians, he sent orders to Cleopatra
to meet him in Cilicia, that she might answer some
accusations which had been laid against her, of hav-
ing assisted Cassius in the war. Dellius, who went
upon this message, no sooner observed her beauty
and learned her art and address, than he concluded
that such a woman, instead of liaving any thing to
apprehend from Antony's resentment, would cer-
tainly acquire considerable influence over him. He
therefore paid his court to the amiable Egyptian,
and solicited her to go, as Homer says,

Trick'd in her best attire -?,

into Cilicia ; assuring her, that she had nothing to
fear from Antony, who was the kindest and most
gallant of generals. Induced by his invitation, and
confiding in that beauty, which had before touched
the hearts of Cffisar and young Pompey, she enter-
tained no doubt of achieving this third conquest.
When Caesar and Pompey had possessed her favours,
she was young and unexperienced ; but she was to
meet Antony at an age, when beauty in it's full
perfection had called in the maturity of the under-
standing to it's aid. Prepared therefore with such
treasures, ornaments, and presents, as were suitable
to the dignity and affluence of her kingdom, but

*7 Horn. 11. xiv. 162. It ^vas thuSp that Juno proposed to meet
Jupiter, uhen ^e had a particular design of inspiring him with
love.

ANTONY. 449

chiefly relying upon her personal charms, she set out
for Cilicia.

Though she had received many pressing letters of
invitation from Antony and his friends, she held him
in such contempt, that she by no means took the
most expeditious method of travelling. She sailed
down the river Cydnus in a most magnificent gal-
ley-^. The stern was covered with gold, the sails
were of purple, and the oars were silver. These in
their motion kept time to the music of flutes, pipes,
and harps. The queen, in the dress and character
of Venus, lay under a canopy embroidered with
gold of the most exquisite workmanship; w^hile boys,
like painted Cupids, stood fanning her on each side
of the sofa. Her maids were of the most distin-
guished beauty, and habited like Nereids and Graces
assisted in the steerage and management of the ves-
sel. The fragrance of burning incense was diffused

^* The Cydnus was a river in Cilicia, whose waters were ex-
tremely cold. See the Life of Alexander, IV. 267. For a beauti-
ful description of this luxurious voyage, see Antony's speech in the
third act of Dryden's All for Love:

Her galley down the silver Cydnus rowed.

The tachling silk, the streamers waved with gold.

The gentle winds were lodged in purple sails.

Her nymphs, like Nereids, round her couch were placed.

Where she, another sea-born Venus, lay —

She lay, and lean'd her cheek upon her hand.

And cast a look so languishinglj'^ sweet,

As if, secure of all beholders' hearts.

Neglecting she could take them. Boys, like Cupids,

Stood fannino- with their painted wings the winds,

That play'd about her face : but if she smiled,

A darting glory seem'd to blaze abroad,

That men's desiring eyes were never wearied.

But hung upon tlie object! To soft flutes

The silver oars kept time, and Avhile they play'd,

The hearing gave new pleasure to the sight,

And both to thought ! 'Twas heaven, or somewhat more ;

For she so charm'd all hearts, that gazing crowds

Stood panting on the shore, and wanted breath

To give their welcome voice.

For a quaint, but more literal copy from this original, see also
Shakspeare's Antony and Cleopatra, ii. 2.*
VOL. V. 2 G

450 ANTONY.

along the shores, wliich were covered with miiltltiidcs
of people. Some followed the procession, and such
luimbers w^nt down from the city to sec it, that
Antony was at last left alone on the tribunal. A
rumour was soon s])read, that Venus was come to
feast with Bacchus, for the benefit of Asia. Antony
sent to invite her to supper : but she thouglit it his
duty to wait upon her ; and to show his politeness
on her arrival, he complied. He was astonished at
the superiority of the preparations to all, that had
been reported of them ; but particularly at the
multitude of lights, which were raised or letdown
together, and disposed in such a variety of square
and circular figures, that they afforded one of the
most pleasing spectacles ever recorded in history.
The day following, Antony invited her to sup with
him, and was ambitious to outdo her in the elegance
and magnificence of the entertainment. But he was
soon coVivinced, that he fell short of her in both, and
M-as the first to ridicule tlic meanness and vulgarity
of his own banquet. As she found that Antony's
humour savoured more of the camp than of the court,
she adopted the same coarse system, and played
upon him without the least reserve. Such was the
variety of her powers in conversation. Her beauty,
it is said, was neither astonishing nor inimitable ; but
it derived a force from her wit, and the fascination
of her manner, which was absolutely irresistible.
Her voice was delightfully melodious, and had the^
same variety of niodula'tions as an instrument ol
many strings. She spoke most languages; and there
were but few of the foreign embassadors, whom she
answered by an interpreter. She gave audience her-
self to the Ethiopians, the Troglodytes, the Hebrews,
Arabs, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians. Neither
v/ere these all the languages, that she understood ;
though the kings of Kgypt, her predecessors, could
hardly ever attain the^Egyptian, and some of them
forgot even their origiiial Macedonian.

Antony was jso wholly engrossed by her charms.

ANTONY. ' 451

that while his wife Fulvia was maintaining his in-
terest at Rome against Csesar, and the Parthian
forces assembled under the conduct of Labienus in
Mesopotamia were ready to enter Syria, she led her
amorous captive in triumph to Alexandria. There
the veteran warrior fell into every idle excess of
puerile amusement, and offered at the shrine of
luxury, what Antipho pronounces " the greatest of
all sacrifices," the sacrifice of time. This mode of
life, they called ' the inimitable.' They visited each
other, alternately, every day ; and the profusion of
their entertainments is almost incredible. Philotas
a physician of Amphissa, who was at that time pur-
suing his studies in Alexandria, told my grandfather
Lamprias, that being acquainted with one of An-
tony's cooks, he was invited to see the preparations
for supper. When he came into the kitchen, beside
an infinite variety of other provisions, he observed
eight wild-boars roasting whole, and expressed his
surprise at the number of the company, for whom
this enormous provision was intended. The cook
laughed, and said, that the company did not exceed
twelve ; but tliat as every dish was to be roasted to
a single turn, and as Antony was uncertain with re-
gard to the precise time when he should sup, parti-
cularly if an extraordinary bottle or an extraordinary
vein of conversation was going round, it was neces-
sary to have a succession of suppers. Philotas
added, that being subsequently in the service of
Antony's eldest son by Fulvia, he was admitted to
sup with him, v/hen he did not sup with his father ;
and it once happened that, another physician at
table having tired the company with his noise and
impertinence, he silenced him with the following
sophism :

" I'here are some degrees of a fever^ in which
'• cold water is good for a man :

" Every man, wdio has a fever, lias it in som.e
" degree ;

2 G 2

cc
a
a
a
a
a

i5-2 ANTONY,

" Thcrclbre, cold uatcr is good lor every man in
*' a fever."

With this syllogism the man was struck dumb :
and Antony's son, Avho enjoyed his distress, to reward
Philotas ibr his good otlices, pointing to a n)agnifieent
side-board of plate, said ; " All that, Philotas, is
" yours!" Philotas acknowledged the kind offer,
but thought it too much for such a boy to bestow.
And afterward wlien a servant brought the plate to
Iiim in a chest, tliat he might put his seal upon it,
he refused, and was indeed afraid to accept it : upon
which the servant said, " What are you afraid of?
Don't you consider that this is a present from the
son of Antony, who could easily give you it's
weight in gold ? I would recommend it to you,
however, to take the value of it in money. In
this plate there may be some curious pieces of
ancient vvorknianship, whicli Antony might re-
gret"^." Such are the anecdotes, which my grand-
father told me he had from Philotas.

Cleopatra was not limited to Plato's four kinds of
flattery^". She had an infinite variety of it. Whe-
ther Antony were in the gay, or the serious humour,
she was always prepared with something for his
amusement. Slie was with him nidit and dav. She
gamed, she drank, she hunted, she rcview^ed with
him. In his night-rambles, when he was reconnoi-
tring the doors and windows of the citizens, and
throwing out his jests upon them, she attended him
in the habit of a servant, which he also upon such
occasions affected to wear. From these expeditions
he frequently returned a sufferer, both in person and
character. But though some of the Alexandrians
were displeased at this whimsical humour, others
enjoyed it, and observed, " That Antony presented

^9 To the expenses incHrred in collections of this kind frequent
allusions are made by the classic writers, as in Cic. Verr., Hor. Sat.
ii. 3., &c. Antony had an enormous quantity of such curiosities.*

3° See his Gorgias.

ANTONY. 453

" his comic parts in Alexandria, and reserved the
" tragic for Rome." To mention all his follies,
would be to trifle too much ; but his fishing story
must not be omitted. He was a-fishing one day with
Cleopatra, and had ill success, which in his mistress*
presence he considered as disgraceful ; he, therefore,
ordered one of the assistants to dive, and put upon
his hook such as had been taken before. This scheme
he practised three or four times, and Cleopatra de-
tected it. She affected however to be surprised at
his success, expressed her wonder to the people
about her, and the day following invited them to
come and see fresh proofs of it. Accordingly, the
vessel was crowded with people ; and, on Antony's
letting down his line, she ordered one of her divers
instantly to put a salt fish upon his hook. When
Antony found that he had caught his fish, he drew
up his line ; and this, as it may be supposed, occa-
sioned no small mirth among the spectators. " Go,
general !" said Cleopatra, " leave fishing to us
petty princes of Pharos and Canopus ; your game
is cities, kingdoms, and provinces^'."
In the midst of these scenes of festivity and dissi-
pation, Antony received tv;o unfavourable mes-
sages ; one from Rome, that his wife Fulvia and his
brother Lucius, after long dissensions between them-
selves, having joined to oppose Csesar, had been
overpowered and obliged to fly out of Italy : the
other, that Labienus and the Parthians had reduced
Asia, from Syria and the Euphrates to Lydia and
Ionia. It was with diflicnlty, that even this dispelled
his lethargy. Rou'^ing himself however at length,
and literally wakint, from a fit of intoxication, he set
out against the Parthians, and proceeded as far as

^^ Cleopatra's expression has somewhat of the same turn with
Virgil's

Excudent alii spirantia mollins cera 1 —

Tu regere imperio popidos, Romanes -memento.

[Mn. vi. 848. 852.)
N. B. Virgil was at this very time writing his ^Eneid.

A3i ANTONY.

Phoenicia. But, upon the receipt oi" some very
moving letters from Fulvia, he turned his course
with two hundred ships towards Italy. Such of his
friends, as had fled tlicnce, he received ; and from
them he learnt, that Fulvia had been the principal
cause of the disturbances in Rome. Her disposition
liad a natural tendency to violence and discord, and
upon this occasion it had been abetted by jealousy ;
for she expected, that the disorders of Italy would
call Antony from the arms (^f Cleopatra. That un-
happy woman died at Sicyon, on her way to meet
her husband.

This event furnished an opportunity for a recon-
ciliation with CcGsar. For when u})on Antony's
arrival in Italy, Caesar instead of expressing resent-
ment against him, threw the whole blame upon
Fulvia, their respective friends interfered, and
brought them to an accommodation. The east
within the boundaries of the Ionian sea was given to
Antony, the west to Caesar, and Lepidus had Africa.
Whenever they did not accept the consulship them-
selves, they were to dispose of it in their turns, as
they thought proper.

These matters settled, they concerted means of
securing this union, which fortune had set on foot.
Cfesar had a sister older than himself, named Octa-
via, but they were born of different mothers. Octa-
via's mother was Ancharia, and Cassar's Attia. For
this sister he had an uncommon affection, and she
was indeed a woman of extraordinary merit. She had
been already married to Caius Marcellus, but had
recently buried her husband ; and, as Antony had
lost his wife, there was an openinp; for a fresh union.
His connexion with Cleopatra he did not afiect to
deny, but he positively declared that he was not
married to her ; and in this circumstance, it must be
owned, his prudence prevailed over his love. His
marriage with Octavia Avas universally wished. It
w^as the general hope, that a woman of her beauty
and distinguished virtues would acquire such an

ANTONY. 4o5

influence over him, as might eventually preserve
and harmonise the state. Conditions being mutually
agreed upon, tliey proceeded to solemnise the nuptials
at Rome ; the law, which permits no widow to marry
till the expiration often months after her husband's
decease, being dispensed with by the senate.

Sextus the son of Pompey, who was then in pos-
session of Sicily, had not only made great ravages in
Italy, but had covered the sea with such a number
of piratical vessels, under the command of Menas
and Menecrates, that it was no longer safe for other
ships to pass. He had favoured Antony, however,
in giving his mother and his wife Fulvia a kind re-
ception, when they were obh'ged to fly from Rome.
It was judged proper, therefore, to accommodate mat-
ters with him ; and, for this purpose, a meeting was
held at the promontory of Misenum, by the mole
that runs into the sea. Pompey w^as attended by his
fleet, Antony and Caesar by an army of foot. At
this interview it was arranged, that Pompey should
keep Sicily and Sardinia, on condition of clearing
the sea from pirates, and sending a certain quantity
of corn to Rome. These things being agreed upon,
they mutually invited each other to supper ; when
it fell to Pompey's lot, to give the first entertain-
ment. On Antony asking him, where they should
sup ; " There," said he, pointing to the admiral-
galley of six oars, " that is the only mansion left to
^' Pompey :" implying a sarcasm upon Antony, who
was at that time in possession of his father's house.
He entertained them however very politely, after
conducting tliem over a bridge from the promontory
to the ship, that rode at anchor. During the ban-
quet, while the raillery ran briskly on Antony and
Cleopatra, Menas came to Pompey, and told hini
secretly, that if he would permit him to cut the
cable, he would make him master not only of Sicily
and Sardinia, but of the whole Roman empire. Pom-
pey, after a moment's deliberation, replied that he
should have done it without consulting him : " ^Yq

45(5 ANTONY.

" must now let it alone," said he, " for I cannot
" break my oath of treaty." The compHment of
the entertainment was returned by his guests, and
he then retired to Sicily.

Antony, after the accommodation, sent Ventidius
into Asia, to stop the progress of the Parthians. All
matters of public administration were conducted
with the happiest harmony between him and Octa-
vius : and, in compliment to the latter, he took
upon himself the office of high-priest to Cassar the
dictator ^-. But, alas ! in their contests at play,
Caesar was generally superior, and Antony was
mortified. Pie kept in his house a fortune-telling
Egyptian, who was skilled in the calculation of nati-
vities. This man, either to oblige Cleopatra or fol-
lowing the investigation of truth, told Antony that
the star of his fortune, however glorious in itself,
was eclipsed and obscured by Csesar's, and advised
him by all means to keep at the greatest distance
from that young man. " The genius of your life,"
said he, " is afraid of his^^: by itself, 'it's port is
" erect and fearless ; but, when his approaches, it is
" dejected and depressed." There were many cir-
cumstances, indeed, which seemed to justify the
conjuror's doctrine: for in every kind of play, whe-
ther they cast lots or dice, Antony was still the
loser. In their cock and quail-fights, it was still
CiEsar's cock, and Caasar's quail. These things,
co-operating with the Egyptian's observations, had
such an effect upon Antony, that he relinquished the
management of his domestic affairs to Caesar, and
left Italy. Octavia, who had by this time brought
him a daughter, he took with him into Greece. The
winter he spent in Athens ; and there lie learned,
that his affairs in Asia under Ventidius were success-
ful : that the Parthians had been routed, and that

'* See Dio, xliv. 6*

35 And under him (Bnnquo) my genius is rebuked,

As (it is said) Mark Antony's was by C'ajsar. (Macb. iii. 1.)'

ANTONY. 457

Labienus and Pharnapates, the ablest generals of
Orodes, bad fallen in the battle. In honour of this
victoiy, he gave an entertainment to the Greeks,
and treated the Athenians with an exhibition of the
gymnastic games, in which he himself took the pre-
sident's part. The robes and ensigns of the general
were laid aside ; the rods, the cloke, and the shppers
of the gymnasiarch were assumed ; and, when the
combatants had fought sufficiently, he parted them
himself.

When he went to the war, he carried with him a
crown of the sacred olive ^% and by the direction of
some oracle or other, a vessel of water filled out of
the Clepsydra^^ In the mean time Pacorus, son of
the king of Parthia, made an incursion into Syria, but
was routed by Ventidius in Cyrrhestica, and with the
chief part of his army fell in the battle. This cele-
brated victory made ample amends for the defeat of
Crassus. The Parthian s had now been thrice con-
quered, and were confined within the bounds of
Media and Mesopotamia. Ventidius would not
pursue them any farther, lest he should excite the
envy of Antony; he therefore turned his arms
against the revolters, and brought them back to their
duty. Among these was Antiochus, the king of
Commagenc, whom he besieged in the city of Samo-
sata. That prince at first offered to pay a tliousand
talents, and to submit himself to the Roman empi-.e :
upon which Ventidius told him, that he must send
his proposals to Antony, for he was then at no great
distance ; and he had forborne commissioning Ven-
tidius to make peace with Antiochus, that something

"■* This was carefully preserved in the citadel, and was supposed
to have sprung up, wheu Minerva disputed v/ith Neptune the lio-^
nour of giving a name to Athens.*

5* The Clepsydra was a fountain belonging to the citadel at
Athens; so called, because it was full of water when the Etesiaa;
winds began to blow, and empty when they ceased. (L.) There was.
a similar one at Delos. As an artificial instrument, the Clepsydra
v/as a graduated veisel filled with water, to measure time by it's,
efflux in courts of law, &c.*

12

4oS ANTONY.

at least might be done in his own name, and not
every thing by his lieutenant. But while the siege
was thus y)rolonged, and the people of Samosata
despaired of obtaining terms, that very despair pro-
duced a degree of courage, which defeated every
effort of the besiegers; and Antony was, at last,
reduced to the disgraceful necessity of accepting
three hundred talents.

After he had done some little toward settling the
affairs of Syria, he returned to Athens, and sent
Yentidius to Rome, to enjoy the reward of his merit
in a triumph. He was tlie only general, that ever
triumphed over the Parthians. Of humble extrac-
tion, by his connexion with Antony he was raised to
high appointments ; and by making the best use of
them, he confirmed what had been said both of An-
tony and Octavius Caesar, that they were more suc-
cessful bv their lieutenants, than when thev com-
manded.in person. This observation, with regard
to Antony in particular, might be justified by the
successes of Sossius and Canidius. The former had
achieved great things in Syria : and the latter, whom
he left in Armenia, after having reduced the whole
country; and defeated the kinsjs of Iberia and Al-
bania, had penetrated as far as Mount Caucasus, and
spread the terror of Antony's name and power
throughout those barbarous nations.

Soon after this, upon hearing some disagreeable
reports concerning the designs or the conduct of
Cffisar, he sailed for Italy with a fleet of three hun-
dred ships ; and, being refused admittance into the
harbour of Brundusium, he made for Tarentum.
There he Vv'as prevailed upon by his wife Octavia,
who accompanied him, and was then a third time
pregnant; to send her to her brother ; and she for-
tunately met him on her journey, attended by his
two friends Maecenas and Agrippa. In conference
with him, she entreated him to consider the pecu-
liarity of her situation, and not to make the haj)piest
v,oman in the world the most unfortunate : " The
9

ii

ANTONY. 459

*' eyes of all," said she, " are necessarily turned
'' upon me, wlio am the wife of Antony and the
sister of Caesar ; and should these chiefs of the
empire, misled by hasty counsels, involve the
whole in war, whatever may be the event, for me
it will be inost unhappy." By these entreaties
Csesar was softened, and proceeded w^ith peaceable
views to Tarentum. His arrival afforded a general
satisfaction to the people. They were delighted to
see such an army on the shore, and such a fleet in
the harbour, mutually disposed for peace, and no-
thing but compliments and expressions of kindness
passing between the generals. Antony first invited
Cassar to sup with him, and in compliment to Octa-
via he accepted the invitation. At length it was
agreed, that Caesar should give up to Antony two
legions for the Parthian service ; and that Antony,
in return, siiould leave a hundred armed galleys with
Cgesar. Octavia moreover engaged Antony to
resign twenty light ships to Ca?sar, and procured
from her brother a thousand foot for her husband.
Matters being thus accommodated, Caesar went to
war with Pompey for the recovery of Sicily ; and
Antony, entrusting to his protection his wife and
his children, both by his present and his former
marriage, sailed for Asia.

Upon his approach to Syria, the love of Cleopatra,
which had so long lain dormant in his heart, and
which better counsels seemed totally to have sup-
pressed, revived and took possession of his soul.
The unruly steed, to which Plato " compares cer-
tain passions, once more broke loose J and in spite
of honour, interest, and prudence, Antony des-
patched Fonteius Capito to conduct Cleopatra into
Syria.

3^ Plutarch here allades to that passage in Plato (Phaed.),
where he compares the soul to a winged chariot with two horses
and a charioteer. One of these horses is mischievous and unruly,
the other gentle and tractable. The charioteer is Reason : the
unruly horse denotes the Concupiscent, and the tractable one the
Irascible part.

^60 ANTONY.

Upon her arrival, he made her the most magnifi-
cent presents. He gave her tiie provinces of Phoe-
nicia, Ca?Iosyria, Cyprus, great part of Cihcia, that
district of Jadasa which produces the bahn '^\ and
the part of Arabia Nabathgea bordering upon the
ocean. These extravagant gifts displeased the Ro-
mans : for though he had often conferred on private
persons considerable governments and kingdoms,
deprived many princes of their dom^^ions, and be-
headed Antigonus of Judaea, the lirst king who ever
suffered in such a manner^-, yet notliing so much
disturbed the ixomans, as his enormous profusion in
fdvouY of that woman. Neither were they less
offended at his bestowing the surnames of the Sun
and the Moon upon the twins, Alexander and Cleo-
patra, whom he had by her.

But Antony knew well how to varnish the most
disreputable actions. The greatness of the Roman
empire, he said, appeared more in giving, than in
receiving kingdoms ; and that it^vas proper for per-
sons of hi^h birth and station to extend and secure
their nobility, by leaving children and successors
born of different princes ; that his ancestor Hercules
did not trust to the fertility of one woman, as if he
had feared the penalties annexed to the law of Solon,
but by various connexions with the sex became the
founder of many families.

After Orodes was slain by his son Phraates ^^, who
took possession of the kingdom, many of the Par-
thian chiefs fled to Antony ; and among the rest
Moneses, a man of great dignity and power. An-

37 Near the lake of Genesarcth, and bordering on the territory
of Damascus.*

'** Dion informs us (xliv. 22.) that Antigonus was first tied to
a stake, and whipped ; and that, afterward, his tliroat was cut.
ATfiircpx^i, and not T^iMxn^t, is the word he uses. Livy says, Delignti
ad palumy rirgisque cfcsi, et seeuri percussi. (L.) Antigonus, how-
tner, was not king of Judjea, but under tlic name of high-priest
had usurped the royal authority. This execution took place aboat
B. C. 87, or 38.*

-"5 The Phraates mentioned by Horace, Od. II. ii. 17.

liedditum Cijri solio Fliraatem.

ANTONY. 461

tony thinking that Moneses in his fortune resembled
Themistocles, and comparing his own wealth and
magnificence with that of the Persian kings, gave
him three cities, Larissa, Arethusa, and HierapoHs,
whicli was before called Bombyce. But, when
Phraates sent Moneses assurances of his safety, he
readily dismissed him. Upon this occasion, he
formed a scheme to deceive Phraates. He pre-
tended a disposition for peace, and required only
that the Roman standards and ensigns which had
been taken on Crassus' defeat, and such of the pri-
soners as still survived, might be restored. Cleo-
patra he sent into Egypt ; after which he marched
through Arabia and Armenia, where as soon as his
own troops were joined by the allies, he reviewed
his army. Of the various princes confederated with
him, the most powerftd was Artavasdes king of
Armenia, who furnished six thousand horse and
seven thousand foot. At this review there a|)peared
sixty thousand Roman foot, and ten thousand horse,
who though chiefly Gauls and Spaniards, were
reckoned as Romans. The number of the alJies,
including the light-armed and the cavalry, amounted
to thirty thousand.

This formidable armament, v;hich struck terror
into the Indians beyond Eactria, and alarmed all
Asia, his attachment to Cleopatra rendered perfectly
useless. His anxietv to spend the winter in her
arms made him take the field too early in the season,
and precipitated all his measures. As a man under
the power of enchantment can only act by the im-
pulse of the magic, his longing eye was continually
drawn toward Cleopatra, and to return to her was a
greater object than to conquer the world. He ought
certainly to have wintered in Armenia, that he might
give a proper respite and refreshment to his men,
after a march of a thousand miles. In the early
part of the spring, he should have made himself mas-
ter of Media, before the Parthian troops w^re drawn
out of garrison: but his impatience hurried him to

462 ANTONY.

the march, and passing by Armenia on the left he
traversed the province of Atropatenc, and laid waste
the country. In his haste, he left behind him the
battering engines, among which was a ram eighty feet
long, and these followed the camp on three hnn-
deed carriages. Had they met with any damage,
it would have been impossible to repair them in this
upper part of Asia, where there is no timber of
height or strength sufficient for the purpose. They
were brought after him, however, under the conduct
of Tatianus. He himself laid siege to the large city
of Phraata, the residence of the king of Media's
Avives and children. Plere he perceived his error in
having left the engines behind, as for want of them
he was obliged to throw up a mount against the wall,
v/hich required considerable time and labour.

In the mean time, Phraates advanced with a nu-
merous army ; and being informed tiiat Antony had
left beliind him his machines, he sent a large de-
tachment to intercept them. This party fell upon
Tatianus, who with ten thousand of his men were
slain upon the spot : many were taken prisoners,
among the rest king Polemo, and the machines were
seized by tlie enemy and destroyed.

This miscarriage greatly discouraged the array ;
and Artavasdes, though he had been the promoter
of the war, withdrew his forces in despair. The
Parthians on the other hand, elated by their success,
came up to the Romans while they were employed
in the siege, and treated them with the most insolent
menaces and contempt. Antony, who knew that
despair and timidity would be the consequence of
inaction, led out ten legions, three praitorian cohorts
heavy. armed, and the whole body of cavalry on the
business of foraging. He was persuaded, at the same
time, that this was the only method of drawing the
enemy after liini, and bringing them to a battle.
After one day's progress, he observed tlie enemy in
motion, and vratching an opportunity of falling upon
him in liis march. Upon this, he set up in his camp

ANTONY. 4G3

tha signal for battle, but at tlie same time struck his
tents, as if his intention had been not to light but to
retire. Accordingly, he passed the army of the bar-
barians, which was drawn up in form of a crescent ;
but he had previously directed the horse to charge
the enemy at full speed, as soon as their ranks were
within reach of the legionary troops. The Parthians
were astonished at the order of the Roman army, as
tliey observed them pass at regular intervals widiout
confusion, and brandish their pikes in siJence.

"When the signal was given tor battle, the horse
turned short, and fell witii loud shouts upon the
enemv. The Parthians received the attack vAik
firmness, though tliey were too near them ibr the
use of their bows. But when the infantry came to
the charge, tiieir shouts aiul the clashing of their
arms so frightened the enemy's horses, that tiiey
were «o longer manageable, and tlie Parthians fled
without once engaging. Antony pursued theoi
closely, in hopes that this action would in a great
measiu'e terminate the war. But when tlie infantry
had followed them fifty furlongs, and the cavalry at
least an hundred and fifty, he 'found that he had not
slaini above eighty of the enemy, and that only thirty
were taken prisoners. Thus the trifling advantage
of their victories, and the heavy loss of their defeats,
as in the recent instance of tlie carriages, was a fresh
discouragement to the Romans.

The day following, they rctui-ned with their bag-
gage to the trenches before Phraata. In their march
they met with some straggling troops of the enemy,
afterward with larger parties, and at last with tiis
whole body ; which having easily rallied, appeared
like a fresh army, and harassed them in such a man-
ner, that it was with dilticulty they reached their
camp.

The Median garrison, in the absence of Antony,
bad made a sally ; and those, who had been left to
defend the mount, had quitted their post and iied.
Antojiy, on his return^ punished the fugitives by

46* AXTONY.

decimation: that is, he divided them into tens; and
in each division put one, upon wliom tlie lot hap-
pened to fall, to death. Those, that escaped, re-
ceived their allowance in barley instead of wheat.

Both parties now found their present inconve-
niences in the war, and the future was still more
alarming. Antony had the dread of famine before
him, for he could not forage without a terrible loss
of men ; and Phraates knowing the temper of the
Parthians was apprehensive that, if the Romans per-
sisted in carrying on the siege, as soon as the au-
tumnal equinox was passed and the winter set in, he
should be deserted by his army, which would not at
that time endure the open field. In order to prevent
this, he had recourse to stratagem. He directed
his officers not to pursue the Romans too closely,
w^hen they were foraging, but to permit them to carry
off provisions ; commanding them at the same time
to compliment them on their valour, and to express
his high opinion of the Roman bravery. They were
instructed likewise, as opportunity might offer, to
blame Antony's obstinacy in exposing to the seve-
rities of famine and a winter-campaign so many
brave men, who must suffer of course, notwithstand-
ing all the Parthians could do for them.

Antony, upon hearing reports of this kind from
many quarters, began to conceive hopes j but he
would not offer any terms, before he was satisfied
whether or not they came originally from the king.
The enemy assured him, that such were the senti-
ments of Phraates ; and being induced to believe
them, he sent some of his friends to demand the
standards and prisoners, which had fallen into their
hands on Crassus' defeat; thinking, if he demanded
nothing, it might appear that he was pleased with
the privilege of retreating. The Parthian answered,
that the standards and prisoners could not be re-
stored ; but that Antony, if he would set off imme-
diately, was at liberty to retreat in safety.

After some few days spent in making up the bag-

ANTONY. 465

gage, lie began his march. Upon this occasion,
though he had the happiest eloquence in addressing
his soldiers, and reconciling thera to every situation
and event ; yet, whether it was through shame or
sorrow, or both, he left that office to Domitius
^nobarbus. Some of them were offended at this,
as an act of contempt : but the chief part under-
stood the cause, and pitying their general, paid him
still higher respect and attention.

Antony had determined to take his route through
a plain and 0])cn country; but a certain Mardian^%
who was well acquainted with the practices of
the Parthians, and had approved his faith to the
llomans at the battle wlien the machines were
lost, advised him to take the mountains on his i'ight»
and not expose his heavy-armed troops in an open
country to the attacks of the Parthian bowmen
and cavalry. Phraates, he said, amused him with
fair promises, merely to draw him oif from the
siege ; but, if he would accept him for his guide,
he would conduct him by a way that was nearer,
and better furnished with necessaries. Antony de-
liberated some time upon this. He would not ap-
pear to doubt the honour of the Partiiians, after
the truce which they had agreed to ; and yet he
could not but approve of a way, Vvhich was shorter,
and which lay through an inhabited country. At
last, he required the necessary pledges of the Mar-
dian's faith ; w^hich he gave, in suiiering himself to
be bound, till he should have conducted the army
into Armenia. In this condition, he led the Ro-
mans peaceably along for two days : but on the
third, when Antony, expecting nothing less than
the Parthians, was marching forward in disorderly
security, the Mardian observing the mounds of a
river broken down, and the waters let out into the
plain where they were to pass, concluded that the

*° The Marxians were a people of Mediri, on the confines of
Persia. (Strabo, xi.)*

VOL. V. 2 H

466 ANTONY.

Parthians had done this to retard their march, and-
advised Antony to be upon his guard ; as the ene-
my, he assured him, was at no great distance. While
Antony was drawing up his men, and preparing such
of them as were armed with darts and shnij;s to make
a sally against the enemy, they canie upon him, and
surroiuiding his army harassed it on every part.
The light-armed Romans indeed made an incursion
upon them, and galling them with their missive wea-
pons, obliged them to retreat; but they soon return-
ed to the charge, till a band of the Gaulish cavalry
attacked and dispersed them, so that they appeared
no more that day.

Antony, upon this, discovered what measures he
was to take ; and covering both wings and the rear
with such troops, as were armed with missive wea-
pons, marched his army in the form of a square.
The cavalry had orders to repel the attacks of the
enemy, but not to pursue them to any distance.
The i^arthians of course, when in four successive
days they could make no considerable impression,
and found themselves ecniallv annoved in their turn,
grew more remiss, and alleging the winter-season as
an excuse, began to meditate a retreat. Upon the
lifth day, Flavius Galiusj a general oihcer of great
courage and activity, requested Antony to indulge
him with a number of light-armed troops from the
rear, together with a few horse from the fi-ont ; and
with these he pro})osed to achieve some notable ex-,
ploit. These he obtained, and in repelling the at-
tacks of the Parthians, he did not (like the rest) re-
treat by degrees toward the body of the army, but
maintained his ground, and fought rather on the
offensive than on the defensive. The officers of the
rear observing that he w^as separated from ti.e rest,
sent to recall him, but he did not obey the summons.
It is said, however, that Titius the quaestor turned
back the standard, and inveighed against Gallus for
leading so many brave men to destruction. Gallus,
on the other hand, retorted his reproaches j aud

ANTONY. 467'

comiTiandlnpf those who were about him to stand,
Titius retreated alone. Gallus had no sooner made
an impression on the enemy's front, than he was sur-
rounded. In this distress,- he sent for assistance ;
and here the general officers, and Canidius the fa-
vourite of Antony among the rest, committed a
capital error. Instead of leading the v*'hole army
against the Parthians, as soon as one detachment
was overpowered, they sent another to it's support "^^ ;
and thus by degrees they would have sacrificed the
principal part of the troops, had not Antony come
hastily from tlie front with the heavy-armed, and
urging on the third legion through the midst of the
fugitives, stopped the enemy's pursuit.

In this action not fewer than three tliousand were
slain, and five thousand brought back v.'ounded to
the camp. Among the latter was Gallus, who had
four arrows shot through his body, and soon after-
ward died of liis wounds. Antony visited all, who
had suffered upon this imhappy occasion, and con-
soled them with tears of real grief and affection :
while the wounded soldiers, embracing the hand of
their general, entreated him not to attend to their
sufferings, but to his own health and quiet ; " While
" our general is safe, all (said they) is well." It is
certain, that there was not in those days braver men
or a finer army. The men were tall, stout, able^ and
willing to endure the severest toils. Their respect,
and ready obedience, to their general, were v/on-
derful. There was not a man in the army, from the
first officer to the meanest soldier, who would not
have preferred the favour of Antony to his own life
and safety. In all these regards, they were at least
equal to the armies of ancient Ronie. A variety of
causes, as v.e have observed, concurred to produce
this : Antony's noble birth, his eloquence, his can-
dour, his liberality and magnificence, and the fami-
liar pleasantry of his conversation. These were the

•♦' Dmn singuli p'ignant, imlversi lincuntur. (Tic. Agrlc. 12.}*

2 H 2

468 ANTONY.

general grounds of the affection, which he found m
his army ; and upon this particular occasion, his
sympathising with the wounded, and attending to
their wants, made thein totally forget their suf-
terings.

The Parthlans, who had before begun to languish
in their operations, were so much elevated by tliis
ad\antage, and held the Romans in such contempt,
that they even spent the night by their camp, in
hopes of seizing the baggage while they deserted
their tents. At break of day, numbers more came
up, to the amount (as it is said) of forty thousand
horse ; for the Parthian king had despatched even
his body-guard, so coniidcnt was he of absolute vic-
tory ; as for himself, he never was present at any
engagement.

Antony, being now to address his soldiers, called
for mourning-apparel, tliathis speech might be more
affecting; but, his friends not permitting him to
wear this, he appeared in his general's robe. Those
who had been victorious he praised, those who had
fled he reproached : the former encouraged him by
every testimony of their zcid ; the latter, offering
themselves either to decimation, or any other kind
of punishment which he might think proper to inflict
upon them, besought him to forego his sorrow and
concern. Upon this, he raised his hands to heaven,
and prayed to the gods ; " That if his haj)pier fbr-
•*■ tunc was to be followed by future evil, it might
** affect only himself, and that his army might be
" safe and victorious."

The day following, they marched out in better
and firmer order ; and the Parthians, who thought
they had nothing to do but to plunder, when they
saw their enemy in fresh spirits and in a capacity for
renewing the engagement, were extremely discon-
certed. They fell upon the Romans however fi-om
the adjacent declivities, and galled them with their
arrows, as they were marching slowly forward.
Against these attacks the light-armed troops Nvere

12

ANTONY. i69

covered by the legionaries, who placing one knee
\ipon the ground, received the arrows on their shields.
The rank, which was behind, covered that wliich was
before, in a regular gradation ; so that this curious
fortification, wliich effectually defended them from
the enemy's arrows, resembled the roof of a house.

The Parthians, who thought tliat the Romans
rested on their knees onl}^ through weariness and
fatigue, threw away their bows, and came to close
engagement with their spears^-. Upon this the
ilomans leaped up with a loud sliout, slew^ with their ^
pikes tliose who came first to tlie attack, and put all
the rest to flight. This method of attack and de-
fence being repeated every day, they made but little
progress in their march, and were besides distressed
lor want of provisions ; they could not forage with-
out fighting ; the corn wliich they could get was but
little, and even that they had not instruments to
grind. The greatest part of them had been left be-
hind ; for many of their beasts of burthen were dead,
and many employed in carrying the sick and wound-
ed. It is said, that an Attic choenix of wheat w\as
sold for fifty drachmas, and a barley-loaf for it's
weight in silver. Those, who sought for roots and
pot-herbs, found few that they had been accustomed
to ; and in tasting unknown herbs they met with
one, which brought on madness and death. Hie
cater immediately lost all memory and knowledge;
busyhig himself at the same time in turning and mov-
ing cTcry stone he met with, as if he were upon some
very important pursuit. The camp was full of un-
happy men stooping to the ground, and digging uj)
and removing stones, till at last they were carried off
by a bilious vomiting ; when wine'*"^, the only remedy,

** These consisted of a wooden shaft of five feet long, pointed
with iron of nearly half that length.

"•3 The ancients held wine to be a remedy against vomiting:
Prceterca vomitioncs sistit, (Plin. H. N. xxiii. 1.) It v/as, likewise,
esteemed good against many kinds of poison Mfnoii est contra
ijciitam^ acoiiita, ct omnia ciucv refrigerant, rcmedium. (lb.)

iro ANTONY.

was not to be had. Thus while numbers perished,
and the Parthians still continued to harass them,
Antony is said frequently to have exclaimed, " O the
" ten thousand!" alludin;:? to tlie armv which Xeno-

-I ^

phon led from Babylon both a longer way^"*, and
through more numerous conflicts, and yet led in
safety.

The Parthians, when tliey found that they could
not break tiuough tlic Ptoman ranks, nor throw tliem
into disorder, but v/ere frequently beaten in their
attacks, began once more to treat their foragers in a
peaceable manner. They showed them their bows
unstrung, and informed them that tliey had given
lip the pursuit, and were about to depart. Ps. few
Medes, they said, might continue to tbllow them a
day or two longer, but they would give the Romans
no trouble, as their only purpose was to protect
some of the remoter villages. These professions
w^ere accompanied with many kind salutations and
civilities, insomuch that the Romans conceived fresh
spirits ; and, because the v.'ay over the mountains
was represented as destitute of water, Antony was
once more desirous of taking his route throus^h the

-.-1 . ^

plains. When he w'as about to carry this scheme
into execution, one Mithridatcs, cousin to that Mo-
neses who had formerly sought his protection and
been presented by him with three cities, came from
the enemy's can:p, and desired permission to speak
with some one that understood the Sja'ian or the
Parthian language. Alexander of Antioch, a friend
of Antony's, went out to him; and after the Par-
thian had informed him who he was, and attributed
his coming to the kindness shown to Moneses, he
asked him., v/hether he did not see at an immense
distance before him a range of high hills ; " Under
" those hills," said he " the whole Parthian army
^' lies in ambuscade for you : for at the foot of the

■^^ When Plutarch says, that Xenophon led his ten thousand a
longer way, he must mean to terminate Antony's marcli with Ar-
menia,

ANTONY. 471

*^ mountains is a spacious plain ; and there wlicn,
" deluded by tlieir artitices, you have left the way
" across the heipjits, they expect to find you. In
" the mountain-roads, indeed, you have thirst and
" toil to contend with as usual ; but, should Antony
" take the plains, he must expect Crassus' fate."

After he had given this information, he departed ;
and Antony immediately assembled the council, and
among the rest his Mardian guide, who concurred
with the Parthian in his suggestions. The w\iy over
the plains, he. said, was hardly practicable, were there
no enemy to contend with. The windings were
long and tedious, and difficult to be made out. The
rugged road across the mountains, on the contrary,
3iad no otiier difficulty in it, than to endure thirst for
a single day. Antony therefore changed his mind,
and ordering eacii man to carry some water along
with him, took the mountain-road by night. As
there was not a sufficient number of vessels, some
<3onveyed their water in helmets, and others in blad-
ders.

The Parthians were informed of Antony's mo-
tions, and contrary to custom pursued him in the
-night. About sun-rise, they came up with the rear,
weary as it was with toil and v,atching ; for that
night they had travelled thirty miles. In this con-
dition they had to contend with an unexpected ene-
my, and being at once obliged to %ht and to con-
tinue their march, their thirst became still more in-
supportable. At last the front came up to a river,
the water of which was cool and clear^ but being
salt and acrimonious occasioned a pain in the sto-
mach and bowels, heated and inflamed with thirst.
The Mardian guide had, indeed, forewarned them
of this ; but the poor fellows, breaking from those
who would have prevented them, drank eagerly of
the stream. Antony, running among the ranks, en-
treated them to forbear but a little. He told them,
there was another river at no great distance, the
water of which might be drank v,ith safety, and that

9

'iT2 AXTONT.

the way was so extremely rocky and uneven, tliat it
Avas impossible for the enemy's cavalry to pursue.
At the same time he sonudcd a retreat, to call oif
such as were enijajred with the enemy, and gave the
sic^nal for pitchino- their tents, that they might at
least have the convenience of shade.

While their tents were fi^in<T, and the Parthians
as usnal retiring from tlie piirsuit, Mithridates came
again ; and Alexander being sent out to him, he
advised that the Romans after a little rest should
rise and make for the river, because the Parthians
did not propose to carry their pursuit beyond it.
Alexander reported this to Antony, and Mithridates
being presented with as many phials and cups of
gold as he could conceal in his garments, once more
left the camp. Antony while it Vv-as yet day, struck
his tents, and marciied unmolested by the enemy.
But so dreadlul and alarming a night as followed,
he had never passed. Those who were known to
be possessed of gold or silver were slain and plun-
dered, and the money conveyed in the baggage was
carried off. Last of all, his own baggage was seized,
and the richest bowls and tables were cut asunder and
divided among the pillagers. The greatest terror
and distraction per\aded the Vvhole armv, for it
was concluded that the inroads of the enemy had
occasioned this flight and confusion. Antonv sent
for one of his freedmen called Rhamnus', and
made him swear that he would stab him and cut
off his head, whenever he should command him ;
that he might neither fall alive into the hands of
the enemy, nor be known when dead. A\'hile his
friends were weeping around him, the Ivlardian
guide gave him some encouragement, by assuring
him that the river was at hand, as he could percei\ e
from the cool iieshjiess of the air issuing fi'om it, and
that of course the troubles of his journey would soon
be at an end, as the night nearly was. "^At the same
time, he was informed that aU these disorders had
been occasioned by the avarice of the soldiers j and

ANT0>;Y. 473

lie tliereforc made the signal for encamping, tliat he
might rectify his discomposed and scattered army'*^
It was now day-light, and as soon as the troops
w^ere brought to a little order, the Parthians once
more began to harass tlie rear. The signal was
therefore given to the light-troops to engage, and
the lieavy armed iTceived the arrows under a roof of
shields as before. The Parthians however durst not
come any more to close engagement, and when the
front had advanced a little farther, the river was in
sight. Antony first drew up the cavalry on the
bank opposite the enemy, and carried over his weak
and wounded. The combat was now at an end, and
the thirsty could enjoy their water in (juiet. At
sight of the river, the Parthians unstrung their bows,
and with the highest encomiums on their bravery,
bade their enemies cross it in peace. They did so,
and after the necessary refreshments, without much
confidence in the Parthian praises, proceeded on
their march. Within six days from the last battle
they arrived at the river Araxes, which divides Media
from Armenia. This river, on account of the depth
and strength of it's current, seemed difficult to pass ;
and a rumour moreover ran through the army, that
the enemy was there in ambuscade, to attack them
as they forded it. They crossed it however in safety,
and when they set foot in Armenia with the avidity
of mariners on first coming a-shore, they kissed the
ground in adoration, and embraced each other with
a pleasure that could only express itself in tears.

*' Plutarch does not, in this place, appear to have heen suffi-
ciently informed. The cause of this tumult in the army could not
be the avarice of the soldiers alone, since that might have operated
long before, and at a time when tliey were capable of enjoying
money. Their object now was the preservation of life; and it was
not wealth, but water, that they wanted. We must look lor the
cause of this disorder then in some other circumstance, and that
probably was the report of their general's despair, or possibly of his
death ; for, otherwise, they would hardly have plundered his bag-
gage. The fidelity and aifection, which they had shown him in all
thtiir distresses, a&rd asufficieut argument on this behalf.

471. ANTONY.

The ill consequences of their former extremities,
however, discovered themseh cs even here ; tor, as
they now passed through a country of plenty and
profusion, their too great indulgences threw them
into the droj)sy and the cholic. Antony, on re-
viewing his army, found that he had lost twenty
thousand foot and four thousand horse, more than
lialfof whom had died not in battle, but by sickness.
They had been twenty-seven days in their return
from Fhraata, and had beaten the Parthians in
eighteen engagements ; but these victories had been
by no means complete, '>ecausc they could not fol-
low up their advantages by pursuit.

Hence it is evident, that Artavasdcs deprived
Antony of the fruits of his Tarthian expedition : for
had he been assisted bv the sixteen"' thousand horse»
^vhich lie carried with jiim out of Media (armed as
tbev were like tlic Parthians, and accustomed to
light M'ith them) after the Romans had beaten them
in set battles, this cavalry might have taken up the
pursuit, and harassed them in such a manner, that
they could not so often have rallied and returned to
tiie charge. Every one, therefore, stimulated An-
tony to revenge himself on Artavasdes. But he
adopted better counsels, and in his present weak and
indigent condition chose neither to complain of his
treachery, nor to withhold the usual respect and
honours which he had paid him. But when he
came into Armenia upon another occasion, after
having drawn him to a meeting by fair promises and
invitations, he seized and carried him bound to
Alexandria, where he led him in triumphal proces-
sion. The Romans were offended at this triumph,
and at Antony himself, who had thus for Cleopatra's
gratification transferred the principal honours of
their country to Egypt. These things, however^
liappened in a later period of Antony's life.

TiiC severity of the winter, and the perpetual

*'^ Six thousand is tlie more probable number mentioned above.*

ANTONY. 475

snows, were so destructive to tlic troops, that in his
march he lost eight tlioiisand men. Accompanied
by a small party, he went down to the sea-coast ;
and in a fort between Berytus and Sidon, called
Leucecome, awaited Cleo])atra's arrival. To divert
his impatience on her delay, he had recourse to fes-
tivity and intoxication ; and he would frequently
over his cups start up from his seat, and run leaping
■and dancing to look out for her approach. At
length she came, and brought with her a large quan-
tity of money and clothing for the army. Some,
however, have asserted that she brought nothing but
.the clothes, and that Antony supplied the money,
diough lie gave her the credit of it.

There happened at this time a quarrel between
Phraates and the king of the Medes, occasioned
(it is said) by the division of the Roman spoils, and
the latter was apprehensive of losing his kingdom.
He, therefore, sent to Antony an offer of his assis-
tance against the Parthians. Antony, who con-
cluded that he had failed of conquering the Parthians
only through want of cavalry and bowmen, and
would here seem rather to confer than to receive a
favour, determined once more to return to Armenia,
and after joining the king of the Medes at the river
Araxes, to renew the war.

Octavia, who was still at Rome, now expressed a
desire of visiting Antony, and Cfiesar gave her his
permission ; not (according to the general opinion)
merely to oblige her, but that the ill treatment and
neglect, which he concluded she would meet with,
might furnish him with a pretence for a fresh quarrel.
When she arrived at Athens, she received letters
from Antony, commanding her to continue there,
and acquainting her with his new^ expedition. These
letters mortitied her, for she suspected the expedition
to be nothing more than a pretext : she wrote to
him, hov.ever, to inquire where she should leave the
presents, which she had brought. These presents

47<; ANTOXY.

consisted of clotliing for the army, beasts of burthen,
money, and gifts for his officers and friends. Beside
these, she had with her two thousand picked
men, fidly equipped and armed for the general's
cohort. Octavia sent this letter by Niger, a friend
of Antony's, who paid her many high and well-
merited compliments.

Cleopatra dreaded her rival. Slie was apprehen-
sive that if she came to Antony, the respectable
gravity of her manners, added to the authority
and interest of Ciiesar, would carry off her hus-
band. She therefore pretended to be dying for
the love of him, and to give a colour to this, ema-
ciated herself by a])stinence. At his approach she
taught her eye to express an agreeable surprise, and
^vhenever he left her, she put on the look of lan-
guishment and dejection. Frequently she would
endeavour to be. caught weeping ; and then, as if
she wished to hide the tear, she aaected to wipe
it oif unseen.

Antony was all this win'le preparing for his Me-
dian expedition, and Cleopatra's creatures did not
fail to reproacli his hard unfeeling heart for thus
suffering a woman, whose life was wrapped up in his,
to die for his sake. " Octavia's marriage," they
said, " was a mere political convenience, and it was
" enouixh for her, that she had tlic honour of beinir

called his wife ; poor Cleopatra, though queen of

a mighty nation, was called nothing more than
" his mistress. Yet even with this, for the sake of

his society, she could be content ; but, of that
' society whenever slie should be deprived, it would

deprive her of life." These insinuations so totally
nnmanncd him, tliat througli fear of Cleopatra's
pining to death, he returned to Egypt, and put olf
the king of tlic Mcdes till summer, thougli at that
lime the Parthian afliiirs were represented as being
in a very disorderly situation. At lencjth however
he went into Armenia, and after entering into alli-

en

cc

cc

ANTONY. 4r77

ancewith the Mede,aiKl bctrotliing one of Cleopatra's
sons to a daugiiter of his vv'ho was very young *'', he
returned to attend to the civil war.

When Octavia came back from Athens, CiEsar
looked upon the treatment she had met with as a mark
of the greatest contempt, and he therefore ordered,
her to retire and live alone. She refused, however,
to quit her husband's house, and moreover entreated
her brother by no means merely upon her account
to have recourse to arms. It would be infamous,
she said, for the two chiefs of the lloman em])ire to
involve the peo}>le in a civil war, one for the love of
a woman, and the other out of jealousy. IJy her
own conduct she added weight to her expostulations.
.She kept up the dignity of Antony's house ; and
took as nnicli care of his children, both those which
he had had by Fuivia and her own, as she could
possibly have taken, had he been present. Antony's
friends, who were sent to Rome to sohcit honours
or transact business, she kindly entertained, and
used her best offices with Ctesar to obtain what they
requested. Yet even by this conduct she was, con-
trary to her inclination, hurting Antony. His inju-
rious treatment of such a woman excited a c'enerai
indignation ; and the distribution, which he had
made to his children in Alexandria, carried with
it something so haughty and imperious, and so dis-
paraging to thiC Romans, tisat it not a little increased
that indignation. The manner of doing it was ex-
tremely obnoxious : He summoned the people to
the place of public exercise, and ordering two golden
chairs to be placed on a tribunal of silver, one for
himself, and the other for Cleopatra, beside lower
seats for the children, he announced her ' Queen of
Egypt, Cyprus, Africa, and Coelosyria,' and nomi-
nated Caesario (her son by Csesar tlie dictator) her
collegue. Her sons by himself he entitled ' Kings
of Kings' ; to Alexander giving Arm.enia and. Medi

'^^ See Dio, xlix. 4 k*

^" -^1,

478 ANTONY.

together with Parthia when it should be conquered ;
and to Ptolemy Pha-nicia, Syria, and Cilicia. At
the same time the children made their aj)pearance,
Alexander in a Median dress witli the turban and
tiara, and Ptolemy in the long clokc and slippers, with
a bonnet encircled by a diadem. The latter was
dressed like the successors of" Alexander, the former
like the JVIedian and Armenian kings. When the
children saluted their |3arents, one was attended by
Armenian, and the other by Macedonian guards.
Cleo])atra upon this, and other public occasions,
wore the sacred robe of Isis'*^, and affected to give
audience to the people in the character and name of
the ' New Isis.'

Caesar expatiated on these things in the senate,
and by frequent accusations incensed the peo])le
against Antony. And Antony, by his deputies, did
not fail to recriminate. In the first place, he charged
Cassar with having wrested Sicily ou.t of Pompey's
hands, and not divided it v/ith him : his next charge
was, that Caesar had never returned the ships, which
he had borrowed of him : his third, that after reduc-
ing his collegue Lepidus to the condition of a private
man, he had taken to himself his army, his province,
and his tributes ; and the last, that he had distri-
buted almost all the lands in Italy among his own
soldiers, and had left nothing for his. To these
Ca3sar replied, that Lepidus had been reduced, from
an incapacity of sustaining his government ; that
what he liad acquired by war he was ready to divide
with Antony, and at the same time he expected
to share Armenia with him in return ; but that his
soldiers had no rii^ht to lands in Italy, because
Media and Armenia, which by their bravery they
had added to the Roman empire, had been already
allotted to them.

*8 This robe was of all colours, to signify the univei-sality of
the goddess' intluence. (L.) The robe of Osiris was simply white,
and was onlv to be been upon one stated day in the vear, (See
Plut. Is. & O.-ir.)^-

ANTONY. iVJ

Antony, being informed of these tilings in Armc-
3iia, immediately sent Canidius to the sea-coast with
sixteen legions. In the mean time, he himself went
with Cleopatra to Ephesus. There he assembled
his fleet, consisting of eiglit hundred ships of bur-
then, of which Cleopatra furnished two hundred,
beside twenty thousand talents and provisions tor
the whole army. Antony, by the advice of Domi-
tius and some other friends, ordered Cleopatra to
return to Egypt, and there to wait tlie event of th«
war. But the queen, apprehensive that through
Octavia's mediation a reconciliation might take place,
bv means of iar^e bribes drew over Canidius to her
interest; and prevailed ri])on him to represent to
Antony, that it was unreasonable to refuse so power-
ful an auxiliary the privilege of being present at tlie
war; neither would it be judicious to discourai^c the
Egyptians, who composed so considerable a part of
his naval force; nor indeed was Cleopatra in point
of abilities inferior to any of the princes his allies,
since she had not only been a long time at the head
of a large kingdom, but by her intercourse with
him had learnt the administration of the 2:reatest
affairs. These remonstrances, as the fates had de-
creed every thinc^ for Ci^sar, produced the desired
effect, and they sailed together for Samos, where
they indulged in every species of luxury. For at
the same time that the kings, governors, states, and
provinces between Syria, the Mcrotis, Armenia,
ttnd Lauria"^'', v.-ere commanded to send tlieir con-
tributions to the war, the whole tribe of playcjs
and musicians were ordered to repair to Samos;'
and, while almost tlie v,hole world besides was
venting it's anguish in groans and tears, that island"
alone was piping and dancing. The several cities-

"" As a. mountain of DO note in Attica does net seem properly
mentioned uith great kingdoms and provinces, it is supposed ilmt
v.'e ougiit to read ' Illyiin,' instead of ' Lauriix.' IHyria is after-
ward incuticned as the boundary cf Antony's dominions oa that
side.

480 ANTONY.

sent oxen for sacrifice, and kings contended in tlie
magnificence of their presents and entertainments.
So that it was natural to say, " Wliat kind of figure
" will these people make in their triumph, wlien their
" very preparations for war are so splendid!"

When these things were over, he assigned Priene'°
for tiie residence of the players and musicians, and
saded for Athens, where he once more renewed tho
larce of public games and shows. The Athenians
had treated Octavia, when she was at Athens, Mith
the highest respect ; and Cleopatra, jealous of the
honours which she had received, endeavoured to
court the people by every mark of favour. TJic
})eople in return voted her public honours, and sent
a deputation to wait upon her with the decree. At
the head of this deputation was Antony himself, in
the character of an Athenian citizen, and he was
prolocutor on tlie occasion.

In the mean time, he despatched some of his people
to turn Octavia out of his house at Rome. When
slie left it, it is said she took with her all his children
(except the eldest by Tulvia, who attended him) and
deplored the severity of her fate with tears, under
the apprehension that she would be regarded as one
of the causes of the civil war. The Romans pitied
lier sufferings, but still more the folly of Antony,
particularly those who had seen Cleopatra ; for she
was by no means jireferable to Octavia, cither on
account of her youth, or her beauty.

When Cicsar was informed of the celerity and
magnificence of Antony's preparations, he was afraid
of being forced into the war that summer. This
would have been very inconvenient for him, as he
was in want of almost every thing, and the levies
of money occasioned a general dissatisfaction. The
whole body of the people were taxed one fourth of
their income, and the sons of freedmen one-eighth.
This occasioned the utmost clamour and confusion

^® A city of Ionia, in Asia Minor.*

ANTOKY, m

in Italy, and iflntony certainly committed a very
capital oversight in neglecting the advantage. By
his unaccountable delays he gave Caesar an opportu-
nity both of completing his preparations, and of ap-
peasing the minds of the people. Yv'hen the money
was demanded, they murmured and mutinied ; but,
after it was once paid, they thought of it no longer.

At thir, time Titius and Plancus, men of consular
dignity and Antony's principal friends, being ill-
used by Cleopatra on account of their having op-
posed lier stay in the army, abandoned him and
went over to Casar. As they knew the contents of
Antony's will, they presently made him acquainted
with them. This will was lode^ed in the hands of
the vestals, and when Csesar demanded it, they re-
fused to send it ; adding, that if he was determined
to have it, he must come and take it himself. Ac-
cordingly he went, and took it. First of all, he
perused it by himself, and remarked such passages as
were most liable to censure. He then read it in the
senate, and this gave general offence ^\ It seemed
to the greatest part an absurd and unprecedented
thing that a man should suffer in his life-time, for
what he had directed to be done after his death,
Cffisar dwelt particularly upon the orders, which he
had given concerning his funeral. For in the event
of his dvino; at Rome, he had commanded his bodv
to be carried in procession through the Forum, and
afterward conveyed to Alexandria to Cleopatra.
Calvisius, a retainer of Caesar's, accused him also of
having given to Cleopatra the Pergamenian library^
which consisted of two hundred thousand volumes^"^^

5' This was an net of most injurious Tiolence. Nollung could be
more sacred than a will deposited in the liands of the vestals. (L.)
Besides, Antony had the power of changing it, as long as he lived.*

^' This had been formed by the literary taste of the wealthy
Attali, kings of Pergamus. But we mu^st not confound the size of
tliCir 'volumes' with that of those, which are in one of oar pre-
sent libraries. That name was anciently given to a simple treatise,
a single book of a history, of odes, or of elegies, a tragedy, or a
pair of parallel livgs ; and the aggregate of the Pergameniaa coi*
VOL, v. 2 X

482 ANTONY,

and added that once, when they supped in public,
Antony rose and trode on Cleopatra's foot, by way
of signal Ibr some rendezvous. He asserted, more-
over, that he had suffered the Ephesians in his pre-
sence to call Cleopatra sovereign ; and that, when
he was presiding at the administration of public af-
fairs, attended by several tetrarchs and kings, he
received love-letters from her inclosed in onyx and
crystal, and perused them there. Besides, when
Furnius, a man of great dignity and one of the
ablest of the Roman orators, was speaking in public,
Cleopatra was carried through the Forum in a litter;
upon whicli Antony immediately started up, and no
longer giving his attention to the cause, accompa-
nied her, leaning on the litter as he walked.

The veracity of Calvisius in these accusations was,
nevertheless, suspected. Antony's friends solicited
the people in his behalf, and despatched Geminius,
one of their number, to put him on his guard against
the abrogation of his power, and his being declared
an enemy to the Roman people. Geminius sailed
into Greece, and on his arrival was suspected by
Cleopatra, as an agent of Octavia's. Upon this
account, he was contemptuously treated, and the
lowest seats were assigned him at the public sup-
pers. This however he bore for some time with
patience, in hopes of obtaining an interview with
Antony. Being at last called upon to state the
cause of his coming, he replied, " that one part of
the cause would require to be communicated at a
sober hour, but the other part could not be mis-
taken, whether a man were drunk or sober; for
" it was clear that all things would go well, if Cleo-
patra were sent back to Egypt." Antony was
extremely chagrined ; and Cleopatra said, " You
have done very well, Geminius, to confess with-
" out being put to the torture." Geminius soon af-

lectlon would not perhaps equal in bulk a similar number of modern
pamphlets. Till the invention indeed of typography, the accumu-
lation ofhooks was a most laborious and expensive undertaking.*

<(

iC

It

' ANTONY. 483

terward withdrew, and returned to Rome. Many
more of Antony's friends were driven off by the
creatures of Cleopatra, when they could no longer
endure their insolence and scurrility. Among the
rest were Marcus Silanus, and Delliusthe historian".
The latter informs us, that Cleopatra (as he was told
by Glaucus, the physician) had a design upon his
life, because he had once affronted her at supper by
saying, that while Sarmentus was drinking Falernian
at Rome, they w'ere obliged to take up with vine-
gar. ISarmentus ^* was a boy of Csesar*s, one of those
creatures whom the Romans call DelicicE.

When Caesar had made his preparations, it was
resolved that war should be declared against Cleo-
patra ; as Antony could not be said to possess that
power, which he had already resigned to a woman.
He was like a man, Ceesar observed, under enchant-
ment, who has no longer any power over himself. It
was not he, with whom they were going to war, but
Mardion the eunuch, and Pothinus, and Iras (Cleo-
patra's woman), and Charmion ; for these had the
principal direction of affairs. Several prodigies are
said to have happened previously to this war. Pisau-
rum, a colony of Antony's on the Adriatic, was swal-
lowed up by an earthquake. His statue in Alba was
for many days covered with sweat, which broke out
afresh, though frequently wiped off. While he was
at Patrag, the temple of Hercules was set on fire by
lightning ; and at Athens, the statue of Bacchus was
carried by a whirlwind from the Gigantomachia"
into the theatre. These things concerned Antony
the more nearly, as he affected to be a descendent
of Hercules, and an imitator of Bacchus, insomuch
that he was called ' Bacchus the younger :' The

55 Who accompanied Antony into Parthia, and wrote a history
of that expedition.*

^* Horace gives an account of a scolding match between this
youth and Messius Cicirrus, Sat. I. v. 52., &c. See also Juv.

V. .S.

55 A building, so called probably from containing some celebrated
picture of the ' Battle of the Gods and the Giants.'^

2 I 2

434 ANTONY.

same wind threw down the colossal statues of Eu-
menes and Attains, called the Antonii, while the
rest remained unmoved. And in Cleopatra's royal
galley, which was u.amed xlntonias, a terrible phe-
nomenon appeared. Some swallows having built
their nests in the stern^ others drove them away, and
destroyed their young.

Upon the commencement of the war, Antony had
no fewer than live hundred armed vessels, magnifi-
cently adorned and furnislicd with eight or ten banks
of oars. He had, moreover, a hundred thousand
foot and twelve thousand horse. The auxiliary kings,
who fought under his banners, were Bocchus of
Africa, Tarcondcmus of the Upper Cilicia, Arche-
laiis of Cappadocia, Philadelphus of Paphlagonia,
Mithridates of Commageue, and Adallas of Thrace.
Those, who did not attend in person but sent sup-
plies, were Polemo of Pontus, Malchus of Arabia,
Herod of Judrea, and Amyntas king of Lycaonia and
Galatia. Pcsidc these, lie received supplies also
from the king of the Medes. Cagsar had two hun-
dred and fifty men of war, eighty thousand foot, and
an equal number of horse with the enemy. Antony's
dominions extended from the Euphrates and Arme-
nia to the Ionian sea and Illyria : Caesar's from lily-
ria to the western ocean, and from that again to the
Tuscan and Sicilian sea. He possessed likewise all
that part of Africa which lies opposite to Italy, Gaul,
and Spain, as far as the pillars of Hercules. The
remainder, from Cyrene to Ethiopia, was in the hands
of Antony.

But such a slave was he to the will of a woman,
tliat though much superior at land, in order to gra-
tify her, he put his whole confidence in the navy ;
notwithstanding that the ships had not half their
complement of men, and the officers were obliged
to press in exhausted Greece vagrants, ass-drivers,
reapers, and boys. Neither could they make up
their numbers even with these, many of the ships
being still almost empty. Cicsar's vessels, which

ANTONY. 485

were not high-built or splendidly set off for show, but
tight good sailers well manned and equipped, con-
. tinned in the harbours of Tarentum and Brundu-
sium. Thence he sent to Antony desiring he would
meet him with his forces, that no time might be lost;
offering at the same time to leave the ports and har-
bours free for his landing, and to withdraw his army
a day's journey on horseback, that he might make
good his encampment. To this Antony returned a
haughty answer, challenging Csesar, though he was
the older man, to single combat ; or if he should de-
cline the duel, to meet him at Pharsalia, and decide
their quarrel where CiEsar and Pompey had previ-
ously determined theirs. This, however, CfEsar pre-
vented ; for while xVntony made for Actium '^ (which
is now called Nicopolis) he crossed the Ionian, and
seized on Toryne, a place in Epirus. His prompti-
tude annoyed Antony, who was without his infan-
try ; but Cleopatra made a jest of it, and asked him if
it* was so very dreadful a thing, that Ceesar had got
into ' the Ladle''.*

Antony, as soon as it was daydight, perceiving the
enemy making up to him, and fearing that his ill-
manned vessels would be unable to stand the attack,
armed his rowers, and placing them on the decks to
make a show, v/ith the oars suspended on each side
of the vessels, proceeded in this mock form of battle
toward Actium. GiEsar was deceived by the strata-
gem, and retired. The v/ater about Caesar's camp
was both scarce and bad, and Antony had the ad-
dress to cut off the little that they had.

It was about this time that, contrary to Cleopatra's
wish, he acted so generous a part by Domitius. The
latter, even when he had a fever upon him, took a

i^ A city and promontory of Acarnania, the first now called Azio,
and the latter Capo di Figalo. The name of Nicopolis was given to
another built near it by Augustus, in honour of his decisive victory.
Strab. vii.*

^y In Greek, Tortjne.

486 ANTONY.

small boat and went over to Cicsar: Antony, though
lie could not but resent this, despatclied after
him his baggage, his friends, and his servants ; and
Domitius, as if it had been through grief that his
treachery was discovered, died very soon afterward '**.
Aniyntas and Deiotarus likewise went over to Caesar.

Antony's fleet was so extremely unsuccessful, and
so unfit for service, that he was obliged at last to
think of his land-forces ; and Canidius, who had
been retained in Cleopatra's interest, now changing
his mind, thought it necessary that she should be
sent away, and that Antony should retire into Thrace
or Macedon to decide it in the field, as Dicomes,
king of the Getae, had ofiered to assist him with a
laige army. To give up the sea to Caesar, who in
his Sicihan wars had acquired so much experience
upon it, he said, would be no disgrace ; but to give
up the advantage which so able a general as himself
might make of his land-forces, and waste the strength
of so many legions in useless draughts for the sea-
service, would be infinitely absurd. Cleopatra, how-
ever, prevailed for the decision by sea ; though her
motive was, not the superior chance of victory, but
in the event of being vanquished, the better oppor-
tunity of escaping.

There was a neck of land between Antony's camp
and his fleet, along which he used frequently to pass
from one to the other. Caesar having learnt by a
domestic, how easy it would be to seize him in this
passage, sent a party to lie in wait for that purpose.
These were so near carrying their point, that they
seized the person who went before Antony; and had
they not been too hasty, he must himself have fallen

^8 Pjutarch seems to have been ill-informed about this matter.
It is moi^t probable that Doniitiut;, one of Uie firmest friends of An-
tony, wiis delirious when he went over to Caesar; and that Antony
icncw t!)is, when he t^ent his attendants after him. It is at tlie same
tiaie possible that, v\hen he returned to himself, the consciousness
of bib desertion might occasion his death.

((

ii
ii

ANTONY. 4^7

into their hands, as it was v»'ith the utmost difficulty
that he made his escape by flight.

After it was determined to decide the aflfair by sea,
they set fire to all the Egyptian vessels ^^ except six-
ty. The best and largest ships I'rom three ranks of
oars to ten were selected, and these had their proper
complement of men, being supplied with twenty
thousand foot and two thousand archers. Upon this
a veteran warrior, an experienced officer in the in-
fantry, who had often fought under Antony, and
whose body was covered with scars, exclaimed j
Why will you, general, distrust these honest
wounds, and rest your hopes on those villainous
wooden bottoms ? Let the Egyptians and the Phoe-
" nicians skirmish at sea, but give us at least the
land ; for there it is, that we have learned to con-
quer or die.'* Antony made no answer, but seemed
to encourage him by the motions of his hand and
head, though at the same time he had no great con-
fidence himself; for when the pilots would have left
the sails behind, he ordered them to take them all
on board, pretending indeed that it was with a view
to pursue the enemy's flight, not to facilitate his
own.

On that and the three following days, the sea ran
too high for an engagement: but on the fifth the wea-
ther was fine, and the sea calm. Antony and Popli*
cola led the right wing, Coelius the left, and Marcus
Octavius and Marcus Justeius commanded the cen-
tre. Caesar had given his left wing to Agrippa, and
led the right himself. Antony's land-forces were
commanded by Canidius, and Caesar's remained
quiet on the shore, under the command of Taurus.
As to the generals themselves, Antony was rowed
about in a light vessel ; ordering his men, on account
of the weight of their vessels, to keep their ground
and fight as steadily as if they were at land. His pi-

59 From liis tear of their cowardice. The sixty, which he spared,
were reserved as Cleopatra's guard.*

5

4SS ANTONY.

lots he directed to stand as firm as if they were at an-
chor, in that position to receive the attacks of the
enemy, and by all means to avoid the disadvantage
of the straits. Caesar, when he left his tent before
day to review his fleet, met a man who was driving an
ass. Upon asking his name, the man answered,
*' My name is Eutychus, and that of my ass is Ni-
*' con'^''^." The place where he met him was after-
ward adorned with trophies of the beaks of ships, and
there he placed the staiueofthe ass and his driver in
brass. After having reviewed the whole fieet> and
taken his post in the right wing, he attended to the
fleet of the enemy, which he was surprised to find
steady and motionless as if it lay at anchor. For
some time, he thought it was so ; and he therefore
Jcept back his fleet at the distance of eight furlongs.
About noon, there was a brisk gale from the sea ;
when Antony's forces impatient for the combat, and
trusting to the height and bulk of their vessels, which
they imagined v/ould render them invincible, put the
Jeft wing in motion. Csesar rejoiced at the sight of
this, and kept back his riglit wing, that he nnght the
more effectually draw them out to the open sea, where
his light galleys could easily surround the heavy half-
nianned vessels of the enemy.

The attack was not made with any violent shock
or impetuosity : for Antony's ships were too heavy
for that kind of rapid impression, which is absolutely
necessary for the breach of an enemy's vessel. On
the other hand, Caesar's ships durst neither encoun-
ter head to head v.ith those of Antony, on account of
the strength and roughness of their beaks ; nor
yet attack them on the sides, since by their mere
weiglit they would easily have broken their beaks,
which were made of large square pieces of timber
fastened to each other with iron cramps. The en-
gagement, therefore, v/as more like a land than a sea-
fight, or more properly like the storming of a town ;

'° < The Fortunate,' and ' the Conqueror.'

ANTONY. 48©

for there were firenerallv tliree or more of Caesar's
ships about one of Antony's, assaulting it with pikes,
javelins, and fire-brands, while Antony's men from
their wooden towers^' hurled weapons of various
kinds from engines. Agrippa opened his left wing
with a design to surround the enemy, and Poplicola
in his endeavour to prevent him was separated from
the main body, which threw it into disorder, while at
the same time it was attacked by Arruntius^' with
great vigour. While things were in this situation,
and nothing decisive was yet effected, Cleopatra's
sixty ships on a sudden hoisted their sails, and fairly
took to flight through the midst of the combatants ;
for they were placed in the rear of the large vessels,
and by breaking through them occasioned no small
confusion. The enemy saw them with astonishment
making their way with a fair wind for the Pelopon-
nesus. Antony, upon this occasion, forgot both the
general and the man ; and as some author ^^ has plea-
santly observed, that the soul of a lover lives in the
body of another, so as if he had been absolutely
incorporated with Cleopatra, he suffered her to carry
him aloncr with her. No sooner did he see her vessel
hoisting sail, than forgetting every other object, and
betraying and forsaking those brave friends who were
shedding their blood in his cause, he took a five-oared
galley, and accompanied only by Alexander the vSy-
rian, and Scellius, followed her who was the first
cause and now the accomplisher of his ruin. Her
own destruction was certain, and he voluntarily in-
volved himself in her fate.

As soon as she saw him coming, she hoisted a sig-
nal in her vessel, upon which he instantly went a-
board : neither of them however beino; able to look
each other in the face, Antony sat down at the head
of the ship, where he remained in melancholy silence.

^' His ships are so called, on account of their tallness
^" Arruntius must have commanded Cocsa
•curastance is not mentioned.
63 Cato the Cepsor. See his Life, 11. 505.

~ Arruntius must have commanded Cocsar's centre, though that

490 ANTONY.

holdiiiiT his head between his hands. In the mean
time Caesar's hght ships, which were in pursuit of
him, came in sight. Upon this, he ordered his pilot
to tack about and meet them ; but they all declined
the engagement and made off, except Eurycles the
Laccdtcuionian, who shook his lance at him in a me-
nacing manner on the deck. Antony, standing at
the head of his galley, demanded ; " Who art thou,
" that thus pursuest Antony?" He answered, " lam
" Eurycles the son of Lachares, and follow the for-
*' tunes of Cassar to rcvenQ:c mv father's death."
This Lachares Antony had beheaded for a robbery.
Eurycles, however, did not attack Antony's vessel,
but fell upon the other admiral-galley (for there
were two of that rank), and by the shock turned her
round. He subsequently captured her, with another
vessel containing Antony's most valuable plate and
furniture. Upon his departure, Antony returned to
tlie same pensive posture ; and continuing thus for
three days, during which either through shame or
resentment he refused to see Cleopatra, he arrived at
Tffinarus. There the women who attended them first
brought them to speak to each other, then to dine,
and not long afterward to sleep together. At last
several of his transports, and some of his friends who
had escaped from the defeat, came up with him, and
informed him that his fleet indeed was totally de-
stroyed, but that his land-forces were yet unhurt.
Upon this, he sent orders to Canidius to march his
army immediately through Macedon into Asia. As
for himself, he determined to sail from Ticnarus into
Africa; and, dividing a ship-load of treasure among
his friends, he desired them to provide for their own
Safety. But they refused the treasure, expressing their
sorrow at the same time by tears ; while Antony with
the kindest and most humane consolations entreated
them to accept it, and dismissed them witli letters
of recommendation to his agent at Corintli, whom
he ordered to give them secure refuge, till they could
be reconciled to Caesar. This agent was Theophilus

ANTONY. 491

the father of Hipparchiis, who had great interest
with Antony, but was the first of his freedmen that
went over to C^sar. He afterward settled at Co-
rinth.

In this posture were Antony's affairs. As for his
fleet, after it had long struggled with Caesar's, a hard
gale which blew right a-hcad of it obliged it to strike
about four in the afternoon. About five thousand
men were slain in the action, and Caesar according to
his own account took three hundred ships. Antony's
flight was observed by few, and to those who had
not seen it, it appeared at first incredible. They
could not possibly believe that a general, who had
nineteen legions and twelve thousand horse, a gene-
ral to whom vicissitude of fortune was nothing new%
would so basely desert them. His soldiers likewise
had an inexpressible desire to see him, and still ex-
pecting that he would appear in some part or other,
displayed the strongest testimonies of their courage
and fidelity. Nay, when they were even convinced
that he was irrevocably gone, they continued embo-
died for seven days, and would not listen to Caesar's
envoys. At last however, when Canidius who com-
manded them fled from the camp by night, and wheu
they were abandoned by their principal officers, they
surrendered to Caesar.

After this signal success, Caesar sailed for
Athens. The cities of Greece he found in extreme
poverty ; for they had been plundered of their cattle,
and every thing else, before the war. He there-
fore not only admitted them to favour, but made a
distribution among them of the remainder of the
corn, which had been provided for the war. My
o-reat-ffrandfather Nicarchus used to relate, that as
the inhabitants of Ch^ronea had no horses, they
were compelled to carry a certain quantity of corn
on their shoulders to the sea-coast as far as Anticyra,
and were driven by soldiers with stripes like so many
beasts of burthen. This, however, was done but
ojice ; for when the corn was measured a second

492 ANTONY.

time, and they were preparing to carry it, intcIH-
gence was brought of Antony's defeat, and this
saved the city from farther hardships ; as the com-
missaries and soldiers immediately took to flight,
and left the poor inhabitants to share the corn among
themselves.

When Antony arrived in Libya, he sent Cleopatra
from Paraetonium^* into Egypt, and retired to a me-
lancholy desert, where he wandered up and down
with only two attendants. One of these was Aris-
tocrates, the Greek rhetorician ; the other was the
Roman Lucilius, of whom it has been elsewhere re-
lated that, in order to favour the escape of Brutus
at Phihppi, he assumed his name and suffered him-
self to be taken^\ Antony saved his life, and in
grateful remembrance of the favour he attended him
to the last.

When Antony learned, that he who commanded his
troops in Libya was gone over to the enemy, he at-
tempted to lay violent hands upon himself: but he
was prevented by his friends, who conveyed him to
Alexandria, where he found Cleopatra engaged in a
very bold and astonishing enterprise.

Between the Red Sea and the Egyptian, there is an
isthmus which divides Asia from Africa, and which in
the narrowest part is about three hundred furlongs
in breadth. Cleopatra had formed a design of draw-
ing her galleys over this part into the Red Sea, and
purposed with all her wealth and forces to seek some
remote country, where she might neiiher be reduced
to slavery nor involved in v/ar. The first galleys
however that were carried over being burnt by the
Arabians of Petra '% and Antony not knowing that
his land-forces were dispersed, she abandoned her
project, and began to fortify the avenues of her
kingdom. Antony in the mean time forsook the

^■» A maritime city in Africa, on the confines of Cjrenaica.*
6-5 See the Life of Brutus, VI. 101.

^ Die telis us, that the vessels burnt were not those whicli had
been drawn ever the Isthmus, but some built upon that side, (ii, 7.)

ANTONY. • 493

city, and the society of his friends, and retired to a
small house which he had built for himself near Pha-
ros, on a mound he had cast up in the sea. In this
place, sequestered from all commerce with mankind,
he affected to live like Timon, because there was a
resemblance in their fortunes. He had been treated
injuriously and ungratefully by his friends, and this
made him distrust and hate his whole species.

This Timon was a citizen of Athens, and lived
about the time of the Peloponnesian war, as ap-
pears from the comediesof Aristophanes and Plato"',
in which he is exposed as a gloomy misanthrope.
Yet, though he hated mankind in general, he caress-
ed the bold and impudent boy Alcibiades ; and be-
ing asked the reason by Apemantus, who expressed
some surprise at it, he answered, " Because he fore-
" saw that he would plague th^people of Athens.'*
Apemantus was the only one, whom he admitted to
his society, and he was his friend, from sympathy of
feeling and manners. At the feast of sacrifices for
the dead^*^, these two dined by themselves, and when
Apemantus observed that the feast was excellent,
Timon replied, " It would be so, if you were not
" here." Once in an assembly of the people he
mounted the Rostrum, and the novelty of the thing
occasioning an universal silence and expectation, he
said ; " People of Athens, there is a %-tree in my
*^ yard, upon which many worthy citizens have
hanged themselves : and as I have determined to
build upon the spot, I thought it necessary to give
public notice, that such as choose to have recourse
" to this tree for the aforesaid purpose, may repair
" thither before it is cut down." He was buried at
Halse near the sea, and the water surrounded his

^7 The comic writer of that name.*

^^ This feast of z°'^i, which took place on the second or middle
day of the Anthesteria, is interpreted soniewhat differently by M.
ilicard in his long note upon the passage. For his authorities he re-
fers to Meursius, and M. I'abbe Bavthelemy (Mem. de I'Acad. de3
Belles Lettres, xxxix. p. 176.)*

1

a

it

494. ANTONY.

tomb in such a manner, that he w^s even tiien Inac-
cessible to mankind. Tlie following epitaph is in-
scribed on his monument :

At last, I've bid the knaves farewell ;
Ask not my name, but go — to hell.

This epitaph, it is said, he wrote himself. That,
which is commonly repeated, was written by Calli-
niachus :

My name is Timon : knaves, begone I
Curse me, but come not near my stone !

These are some of the many anecdotes, which we
have concerning Timon.

Canidius himself brought Antony intelligence ojf
the defection of his army. Soon afterward he heard,
that Herod of Judaea was gone over to Caesar with
some legions and cohorts, that several other powers
had deserted his interest, and in short that he had no
foreign assistance to depend upon. None of these
things, however, disturbed him : for at once aban-
doning his hopes and his cares, he left his Timonian
retreat, and returned to Alexandria ; where, in the
palace of Cleopatra, he once more entertained the
citizens with his usual festivity and munificence.
He gave the Toga Virilis to Antyllus, his son by
I^ulvia, and admitted Cleopatra's son by Caesar into
the order of Youns: Men'''-^. The entertainments
upon this occasion were infinitely pompous and mag-
nificent, and lasted several days.

Antony and Cleopatra had before established a
society called the ' Inimitable in Life,' of which
they were members : they now instituted another,
by no means inferior in splendour or luxury, called
' The Inseparable in Death.' Into this their friends
were admitted, and the time passed in mutual treats
and diversions. Cleopatra at the same time was

^9 See Dio, 51, G. These honours proved fatal, in the issue, to
their wearers.*

ANTONY. 495

malvlrig a collection of poisonous drugSj and wishing
to ascertain which was the least painful, she tried
them upon the capital convicts. Such poisons, as
were cjuick in their operation, she found to be at-
tended with violent pain and convulsions ; such as
M^ere milder, were slow in their effect : she therefore
undertook the examination of venomous creatures,
and caused different kinds of them to be applied to
different persons under her own inspection. These
experiments she repeated daily, and at length she
discovered that the bite of the asp ''^ was the most
eligible kind of death : as it brought on a gradual
kind of lethargy, in which the face was covered with
a gentle sweat, and the senses sunk easily into stupe-
faction : and those who were thus affected showed
the same uneasiness at being disturbed or awaked,
that people do in the most profound natural sleep.

They both despatched embassadors to Caesar in
Asia. Cleopatra requested Egypt for her children,
but Antony only jietitioned that he might be per-
mitted to live as a private man in Egypt, or if that
were too much, that he might retire to Athens. De-
serted as they were by almost all their friends, and
hardly knowing in whom to confide, they were ob-
liged to send Euphronius, their children's tutor, on
this embassy. Alexis of Laodicea, w ho by means of
Timogenes had become acquainted with Antony at
Rome, a man of great skill in the Greek learning,
and one of Cleopatra's chief agents in keeping Octa-
via from her husband, he had before despatched to
Juda?a to retain Herod in his interest. This man
gave up Antony, and relying on Herod's interest,
had the confidence to appear before Caesar. That
interest, however, did not save him ; for he was im-
mediately carried in chains into his own country, and
there put to death. Thus Antony had, at least, the
satisfaction of seeing him punished for his perfidy.

The petition of Antony Caesar absolutely rejected j

7" Aspis somniculosa.

405 ANTONY.

but he answered Cleopatra, that she might expect
every fiivour from him, provided she either took off
Antony, or banished him from her dominions. At
the same time he sent to her Thvreus"' one of his

ml

freedmen, whose address was not unhkcly to carry his
point ; particularly as he came from a yor.iig con-
queror to the court of an ambitious queen, still deep-
ly impressed with a notion of her personal charms^'.
As this embassador was indulged with audiences
longer and more frequent than u-ral, Antony grew
jealous ; and having first ordered him to be whipped,
he sent him back to Caasar with letters, in Mhich he
informed him, that he had been provoked by the in-
solence of his freedman, at a time ^vhen his misfor-
tunes made him but too prone to anfrer. " You have
'' a freedman of mine however," added he, " Hippar-
" chus, in your power, and if it will be any satisfac-
" tion to vou, use him in the same manner." Cleo-
patra, that she might make some amends for her in-
discretion, behaved to him afterward with the utmost
tendernessand respect. Her own birth-day she kept
in a manner suitable to their unhappy circumstances ;
but his v.-as celebrated with such splendour and mag-
nificence, that many of the guests who came poor
returned opulent.

After Antony's overthrow, Agrippa wrote several
letters to Csesar to inform him, that his presence was
necessary at Rome. This for some time put oft the
war; but as soon as the winter was over, Caesar

7^ Dion calls him ' Thyrsus.' Antony and Cleopatra had de-
spatched other embassadors to Ccesar with offers of considerable
treasures, and last of all Antony sent his son Antyllus with large
sums of gold. CjEsar u'ith his characteristic meanness took the
gold, but granted him none of his requests. Fearing, however,
that despair might reduce Antony to carry the war into Spain or
Gaul, or provoke him to burn the wealth which Cleopatra had been
amassing, he sent this Thyreus to Alexandria.

7^ Thyreus, as Dion informs us, was instructed to make use of the
softest address, and to insinuate that Caesar was captivated with her
beauty. The object of this n)easurc was to prevail upon her to take
off Antony, while she v,-as flattered with the prospect of obtaining
the conqueror.

ANTONY. 497

marched against Antony by the ronte of Syria, and
despatched his heutenants on the same business into
Africa. When Pclusium was taken, it was rumoured,
that Seleucus had deKvered up the place with the
connivance or consent of Cleopatra ; upon which the
queen, in order to justify herself, gave up the wife
and children of Seleucus into Antony's bands. Cleo-
patra had erected near the temple of Isis some monu-
ments of extraordinary size and grandeur. To these
she removed her treasure, her gold, silver, emeralds,
pearls, ebony, ivory, and cinnamon, together with a
large quantity of flax and a number of torches.
Cassar was under apprehensions about this immense
wealth, lest upon some sudden emergency she should
set fire to the whole. For this reason, he was con-
tinually sending messengers to her with assurances
of gentle and honourable treatment, and in the mean
time he hastened himself to the city with his army.

•Upon his arrival, he encamped near the Hippo-
drome ; upon which Antony made a brisk sally, rout-
ed the cavalry, drove them back into their trenches,
and returned to the city with the complacency of a
conqueron As he was going to the palace he met
Cleopatra, and armed as he was saluted her without
ceremony, at the same time recommending to her
favour a brave soldier, who had distinguished himself
in the engagement. In reward of his valour he re-
ceived from her a cuirass and helmet of gold, and the
same night went over to Caesar. After this, Antony
challenged tllgesar to fight him in single combat ; but
Caesar only answered, that " Antony might find out
" many other ways to end his life." Upon which,"* An-
tony concluding that he could not die more honour-
ably than in battle, determined to attack him at the
same time both by sea and land. The night preced-
ing the execution of this design, he ordered his ser-
vants at supper to render him their best services that
evening, and fill the wine round plentifully ; for the
day following they might belong to another master,
while he lay extended a corpse and a nothing on

VOL. V. 2 K

498 ANTONY.

the ground. His friends were affected, and wept to
hear liim talk thus ; which when he perceived, he
encouraged them by assurances, that his expectations
of a glorious victory were at least equal to those of
an honourable death. At the dead of night, when
universal silence reigned throughout the city, a
silence deepened by the awful thought of the ensuing
day, on a sudden was heard the sound of musical
instruments, and a noise which resembled the excla-
mations of Bacchanals. This tumultuous procession
seemed to pass through the whole city, and to go out
at the gate which led to the enemy's camp. Such
as reflected upon this prodigy concluded that Bac-
chus, the god whom Antony affected to imitate, had
then forsaken him.

As soon as it was light, he led his infantry out of
the city, and posted tliem on a rising ground, whence
he saw his fleet advance toward that of the encmv.
There he stood waiting for the event ; but as soon
as the two fleets met, they hailed eacli other with
their oars in a friendly manner, Antony's fleet mak-
ing the first advances, and sailed together peaceably
toward the city. This was no sooner done, than the
cavalry deserted him in the same manner, and sur-
rendered to Caesar. His infantry were routed ; and
as he retired to the city, he exclaimed that Cleopatra
had betrayed him to those, with whom he was fight-
ing only for her sake.

The wretched queen, dreading the effects of his
anger, fled to her monument, and having secured it
as much as possible with bars and bolts, gave orders
that Antony should be informed she was dead. Be-
lieving the information to be true, he cried, " An-
'* tony, why tarriest thou ? What is life to thee, when
*' it is taken from her, for whom alone thou couldcst
** wish to live ?" He then went to his chamber, and
opening his coat of mail, said ; " I am not distressed,
*' Cleopatra, that thou art gone before me, for I shall
" soon be with thee : but 1 grieve to think that I,
" who have been so distinguished a general, should

a
cc
a

ANTONY. 499

^* be Inferior in magnaniiinii,/ to a woman." He was
attended by a faithful servant, whose name was Eros-
This servant he had engaged to kill him, whenever
he should deem it necessary, and he now demanded
that service. Upon which, Eros drew his sword, as
if he designed to comply : but suddenly turning
about, he slew himself, and fell at his master's feet.
This, Eros," said Antony, " was greatly done ;
thy heart would not permit thee to kill thy master,
but thou hast taught him what to do by thy exam-
'^ pie." He then plunged his sword into his own
bowels, and threw himself upon a couch which stood
near. The w^ound however was not so deep, as to
cause immediate death ; and the blood stopping as
he lay on the couch, he came to himself, and en-
treated those that were present to put liim out of his
pain. But they all fled, and left him to his cries
and torments, till Cleopatra's secretary Diomedes
arrived with a request from her, that he would come
to her in the monument. When Antony found that
she was still living, it gave him fresh spirits, and he
ordered his servants to take him up. Accordingly,
they carried him in their arms to the door of the
monument. Cleopatra would not suffer the door to
be opened ; but a cord being let down from a win-
dow, Antony was fastened to it, and she with her
two women, all that had been admitted into the mo-
nument, endeavoured to draw him up. Nothing, as
they who stood by observed, could possibly be more
affecting than this sight. Antony, covered with
blood and in the agonies of death, hoisted up by the
rope and stretching out his hands to Cleopatra, while
he v/as suspended for a considerable time in the air !
For it was with the greatest difficulty that the wom.en
raised him, though Cleopatra herself exerted all her
strength, straining every nerve, and distorting every
feature with the violence of the effort; while those,
who stood below, endeavoured to animate her, and
seemed to partake in all her feelings. When she
had gotten him within and laid him on a bed, as she

2 K 2

500 ANTONY.

stood over him, slic rent licr clothes, beat and
"wouiuled her bieast, and wiping the blood from his
disfigured countenance, called him '" her lord, her
" emperor, her husband !'* Her whole soul was ab-
sorbed in his misibrtunes ; and she seemed totally to
have forgotten, that she had any miseries of her own.
Antony endeavoured to sooth her as well as he was
able, and called for wine ; either because he was
thirsty, or because he thought it might sooner put
him out of his pain. When he had drunk, he advised
her to consult her own affairs and her safety, as far
as might be consistent with honour, and to place her
confidence in Proculeius ^^ rather than in the other
friends of Caesar. " As to himself,'* he said, " she
" ought rather to rejoice in the recollection of his
" past happiness, than to bewail his present misfor-
" tunes ; since in his life he had been illustrious,
" and was not ins^lorious in his death. He had con-
" quered like a Roman, and it was only by a Roman
" that he had been overcome." A little before he
expired, Proculeius arrived from Caesar ; for after
Antony had stabbed himself, and w^as conveyed to
Cleopatra, Derceta^us, one of his guards, privately
carried off his bloody sword and showed it to Ca?sar.
When Ca?sar beheld this token of Antony's death,
he retired to the inner part of his tent, and shed
some tears in remembrance of a man who had been
his relation, his collcgue in government, and his as-
sociate in so many battles and important affairs. He
then called his friends togetlier, and read the letters
wdiich had passed between himself and Antony ;
from which it appeared that, though Csesar had still
written in a rational and equitable manner, Antony's
answers had been insolent and contemptuous. After
this, he despatched Proculeius witli orders, if possi-
ble, to take Cleopatra alive ; for he was extremely
solicitous to save the treasures in the monument,

"5 Of til is respectable Roman we liave a very favourable trait in
I lor. Od. II. ii. 5 — 8., where he is represented as a particularly
affectionate brother.*

ANTONY. 501

which would so greatly enhance the glory of his tri-
umph. She refused, however, to admit him into
the monument, and would only speak to him through
the bolted ffate. The substance of this conference
was, that Cleopatra made a requisition df the king-
dom tor her children, while Proculeius on the other
hand encouraged her to trust every thing to Caesar.

After he had reconnoitred the place, he sent an
account of it to Caesar : upon which, Gallus was
despatched to confer with Cleopatra. The thing
was thus concerted : Gallus went up to the gate of
the monument, and drew Cleopatra into conversa-
tion, while Proculeius applied a ladder to the win-
dow, through which the women had introduced
Antony ; and having entered with two servants,
immediately went up to the place where Cleopatra
was in conference with Gallus. One of her women
discovered him, and immediately screamed aloud,
" Wretched Cleopatra, you are taken alive!" Upon
which she turned about, and seeing Proculeius,
instantly attempted to stab herself; for, to this
intent, she always carried a dagger about with
her. Proculeius however prevented her, and ex-
postulating with her, as he held her in his arms,
entreated her not to be so injurious to herself or to
Caesar ; not to rob so humane a prince of the glory
of his clemency, or expose him by her distrust to
the imputation of treachery or of cruelty. At the
same time, he took the dagger from her, and shook
her clothes, lest she should have poison concealed
about her. Caesar also sent his freedman Epaphro-
ditus, ordering him to treat her with the greatest
politeness, but by all means to biing her alive.

Caesar marched into Alexandria, conversing with
Arius the philosopher ; and, to do liim honour before
the people, he led him by the hand. On entering
the Gymnasium, he ascended a tribunal that had
been erected for him, and gave assurances to the
citizens, who prostrated themselves before him, that

502 ANTONY.

the city should not be injured. For this, he told
them, he had different motives. First, it had been
built by Alexander : next, he admired it for it's beauty
and magnitude ; and lastly, he would spare it, were
it but for his friend Arius' sake. Such was the dis-
tinguished honour Cassar conferred upon him, extend-
ing pardon to many at his request. Among these
was Philostratus, one of the most acute and eloquent
sophists of his time. This man, without any riglit,
pretended to be a follower of the Academics ; and
Caesar, from a bad opinion of his morals, had rejected
his petition : on which the sophist followed Arius
up and down in a mourning cloke, with a long white
beard, crying constantly,

** The wise, if i-eally wise, will save the wise."

Caesar heard and forgave him, not so much out of
favour, as to rescue Arius from the impertinence
and envy which he might otherwise incur on his ac-
count.

Antyllus, Antony's eldest son by Fulvia, was be-
trayed by his tutor Theodorus, and put to deatli.
"While the soldiers were beheading him, the tutor
stole a jewel of considerable value, which he wore
about his neck, and concealed it in his girdle. "When
he was charged with it, he denied the fact ; but the
jewel being found upon him, he was crucified. Caasar
appointed a guard over Cleopatra's children and
their governors, and allowed them an honourable
support. Caesario, the reputed son of Caesar the
dictator, had been sent by his mother, with a con-
siderable sum of money, through Ethiopia into India.
But Rhodon, his governor, a man of the same prin-
ciples with Theodorus, persuading him that Caesar
would certainly make him king of Egypt, prevailed
upon him to turn back. While Cicsar was deliberat-
ing hov/ he should treat him, Arius is said to have
observed, that there ought not to be a plurality of

ANTONY. 50S

Caesars*^. Soon after the death of Cleopatra, there-
fore, he was slain.

Many considerable princes begged Antony's body,
that they might have the honour of giving it burial ;
but Caesar would not take it from Cleopatra, who in-
terred it with her own hands, and performed the fu-
neral rites with great magnificence ; for she was al-
lowed to expend as much as she thought proper upon
the occasion. The excess of her affliction, and the
inflammation of her breast, wounded as it was by the
blows which she had given it in her anguish, threw
her into a fever. She was delierhted to find an ex-
cuse in this for abstaining from food, and hoped thus
to be permitted to die without interruption. The
physician, in whom she placed her principal confi-
dence, was Olympus ; and, according to his short
account of these transactions, she made use of his
advice in the accomplishment of her design. Caesar,
however, suspected it, and that he might prevail
upon her to take the necessary food and physic,
threatened to treat her children with severity. This
had the desired effect, and her resolution was over-
borne ^^

A few days afterward, Caesar himself made her a
visit of condolence and consolation. Siie was then
in an undress, and lying negligently upon a couch ;
but when the conqueror entered the apartment,
though she was only wrapped in a single bed-gown,
she arose and threw herself at his feet. Her face was

77 Alluding to a verse in Homer (II. ii. 204.) which, deprecating

That worst of tj^rants, an usurping crowd,

asserts that ' there ought not to be a plurality of governors.' Be-
tween the original ^roAfx.eipcci'oj and the TreXuKccKrafitj^ of the text, is an
obvious onoraatopceia ; and in this consists the smartness of Arius'
observation.*

7* Cleopatra certainly possessed, in a very eminent degree, the
virtues of fidelity and natural attection. She had several opportu-
nities of betraying Antony, could she either by fear or by ambition
have been induced to it. Her tenderness for her children was
always superior to her self-love; and she had a greatness of soul,
v.hich Caesar never knew.

5

501. ANTONY.

out of figure, her hair in disorder, her voice trem-
bhng, her eyes sunk, and her bosom bore the marks
of the injuries ^v]uch she had inflicted upon it. In
short, her person gave the exact image of her nn'nd;
yet in this deplorable condition there were some re-
mains of that grace and vivacity, which had so pecu-
liarly animated her former charms, and still some
gleams of her native elegance might be seen to wan-
der over her melancholy countenance '"'■'.

When Caisar had replaced her on her couch, and
seated himself by her, she endeavoured to justify
the part which she had taken against him in the war,
alleging the necessity she was under, and her fear of
Antony. But when she found that these apologies
had no weight with him, she had recourse to prayers
and entreaties, as if she had been really desirous of
life ; at the same time putting into his hands an in-
ventory of her treasures. Seleucus one of her trea-
surers, who happened to be present, accused her of
having suppressed some articles in the account; upon
which she started up from her couch, cauglit him by
the hair, and gave him several blows on the face.
Csesar smiled at this spirited resentment, and endea-
voured to pacify her ; but " How is it to be endured,
" Csesar," she exclaimed, " if even while you are
" honouring me with a visit in my wretched situa-
" tion, I must be affronted by one of my own ser-
" vants? Supposing that I have reserved a few trin-
" kets, they were by no means intended as orna-
" ments for my own person in these miserable for-
" tunes, but as little presents for Octavia and Livia,
" through whose good offices I might hope to find
" favour with you." Caesar was not displeased to
hear this, because he flattered himself that she was

79 Dion (li. 12.) gives a more pompous account of her reception
of Ceesar. She received him (l)e informs us) in a magnificent apart-
ment, lying on a splendid bed, in a mourning habit which particu-
larly became her ; and hud several pictures of Julius Caesar placed
near her, and some of his letters in her bosom. The conversation
turned on the same subject, and her speech on the occasion is re-
corded,

I

ANTONY. 50.:;

desirous to live. He therefore assured her, that what-
ever she had reserved, she might dispose of at her
pleasure : and tliat she might, in every respect, de-
pend upon the most honourable treatment. After
this he took his leave, in full confidence that he had
deceived her to his purpose ; but he was himself
deceived.

There was in Caesar's train a young nobleman,
named Cornelius Dolabella. This youth smitten
with the charms of Cleopatra, and pledged to com-
municate to her every thing that passed, gave her
private notice that Caesar was about to return into
Syria, and that within three days she with her chil-
dren vyould be sent off. When she v;as informed of
this, she requested of Caesar permission to make her
last oblations to Antony. This being granted, she
was conveyed to the place where he was buried ; and
kneehng at his tomb, with her women, she thus ad-
dressed the manes of the dead : " It is not long, my
" Antony, since with these hands I buried thee.
" Alas ! they were then free ; but thy Cleopatra is
" now a prisoner, and attended by a guard, lest in
" the transports of her grief she should disfigure this
" captive body, which is reserved to adorn the tri-
" umph over thee. These are the last offerings, the
" last honours which she can pay thee, for she is now
" about to be conveyed to a distant country. No-
" thing could part us, while Ave lived ; but in death
" we are, it seems, to change places. Thou, though
*' a Roman, liest buried in Egypt ; and I, an Egyp-
" tian, must be interred in Italy, the only favour
" which I shall receive from thy country. Yet, if
*' the gods of Rome have power or mercy left (for
" surely those of Egypt have forsaken us^') let them

not sufier me to be led in living triumph to thy

fit

^° It was the opinion of the ancients, that the gods forsook the
vanquished.. Thus Virgil:

Excesstre omnes adijth arisqrie rdiclis

Di, qtiihus impcrium hoc stcterai. {lEn. ii. 356.)

And Tacitus ; AUeni jam imfcrli deos.

506 ANTONY.

" disgrace ! No ! hide me, bury me with thee in the
" grave ; for hfe, since thou hast left it, has been
*' misery to me."

Thus the unhappy queen bewailed her misfor-
tunes ; and after crov/ning the tomb with flowers,
and kissing it, she ordered her bath to be prepared.
When she had bathed, she sat down to a magnilicent
supper; soon after which, a peasant came to the
gate with a small basket. The guards inquired, what
it contained ; upon which the man who brought it,
removing the upperm.ost leaves, showed them a par-
cel of figs. As they admired their size and beauty,
he smiled, and bade them take some ; but thev re-
fused, and not suspecting that the basket contained
any thing else, suffered it to be carried in. After
supper Cleopatra sent a letter to Caesar, and order-
ing every body except her two women out of the
monument, fastened the door. When Caesar opened
the letter, tlie plaintive stile in which it was written,
and the strong request that she might be buried in
the same tomb with Antony, made him suspect her
design. At first he was for hastening to her himself,
but he changed his mind, and despatched others.
Her death however was so sudden, that though they
v.'ho were sent ran the whole way, alarmed the guards
with their apprehensions, and immediately broke
open the doors, they found her quite dead *'-, lying
on her golden bed and dressed in all her roval orna-
ments. Iras, one of her women, lay dead at her
feet ; and Charmion, hardly able to support herself,
was adjusting her mistress' diadem. Upon one of
Cassar's messengers angrily asking, " Charmion, was
" this well done ?" " Perfectly well," she replied,
" and worthy a descendent of the kings o^ Egypt.'*
She had no sooner said this, than she fell down dead.

It is related by some, tliat an asp was brought in
among the figs, and hidden under the leaves j and

*- Dion (ib. 14.) says, that Caesar ordered her to be sucked by
the Psylli, that the poison niiglit be drawn out; but it was too hUc.
For an account of these Psylli, see Lucan. ix. 925 — S>'''7.

ANTONY. ^07

tliat Cleopatra had ordered it so, that she might be
bitten without seeing it : that however, upon re-
moving the leaves, she perceived it, and said, "This
" is what I wanted." * Upon which, she instantly
held out her arm to it. Others state, that the asp
v.'as kept in a water-vessel, and that she vexed and
pricked it with a golden spindle, till it seized her
arm. But nothing of this could be ascertained: for
it was likewise reported, that she carried about with
her a certain poison in a hollow bodkin which she
wore in her hair ; yet no mark of poison could be
traced on her body, neither was there any serpent
found in tlie monument, though the track of a reptile
was said to Jiave been discovered on the sea-sands
opposite to the windov/s of her apartment. Others
again have athrmed, that she had two small punc-
tures on her arm, apparently occasioned by the asp's
sting, and to this Caesar obviously gave credit ; for
her effigy, which he carried in triumph, had an asp
on the arm ^^.

Such are the accounts, which we have of Cleopa-
tra's death ; and Cissar, though much disappointed
by it, admired her fortitude, and ordered her to be
buried with ail the magnificence due to her quality
in Antony's tomb. Her women, likev.ise, were by
his orders interred with great funeral pomp. Cleo-
patra died at the age of thirty-nine, after having
reigned twenty-two years, the last fourteen in con-
junction with Antony. Antony was fifty-tin-ee, some
say fifty-six, when he died. His statues were all

*3 This may be a matter of doubt. There v/ould of course be an
asp on the diadem of the effigy, because it was peculiar to the kings
of Egypt ; and this might give rise to the repoit of an asp being on
the arm. (L.) The passage in the text however is justified by Pro-
pertius (El. III. xi. 53.)

Brachia spectavi sacris admorsa coluhris.

Anc] Elorace's

■ — Fortls et asp<?ra.?
Tractare serpentes, id atruni
Corpore combiberet veneniun. (Od. I. xxxvii. 29.)

can only be warranted by supposing him to have adopted Csesar's
opinion on the subject.'*

50S ANTONY.

demolished, but Cleopatra's reinaincd untouched;
Archibius, a friend of hers, having given Ca3sar a
thousand talents for their redemption.

Antony left by his three wives seven children*", of
whom Antyllus alone, the eldest, was put to death.
Octavia took the rest, and educated them along with
lier own. Cleopatra, his daughter by Cleopatra, was
married to Juba, one of the politest princes of his
times and Octavia brought Antony (his other son
by Fulvia) into such favour with Cassar, that after
Agrippa and the sons of Livia, he was generally al-
lowed to hold the first place in his regard. Octavia
by her first husband Marcellus had two daughters,
and a son named Marcellus. One of these daughters
she gave in marriage to Agripj^a ; and the son mar-
ried a daughter of Cassar's. But as he died soon
afterward '^ and Octavia observed her brother at a
loss whom to adopt in his place, she prevailed upon
him to give his daughter Julia to Agrippa, though her
own daughter must necessarilybe divorced in order to
make way for her. Cgesar and Agrippa having agreed
on this point, she took back her daughter, and mar-
ried her to Antony. Of the two daughters, whom
Octavia had by Antony, one was married to Domi-
tius .^Enobarbus, and the other (Antonia Minor, so
much celebrated for her beauty and virtue) to Dru-
sus the son of Livia and son-in-law of Caesar. From
this line sprang Germanicus and Claudius. Claudius
was subsequently emperor; and so likewise was Caius
(the son of Germanicus) who, after a short but in-
famous reign, v;as put to death together with his
Avife and daughter. Agrippina, who had Lucius
Domitius by -^nobarbus, was subsequently married
to Claudius Caesar. He adopted Domitius, and
named him Nero Germanicus. This Nero, who was

"■* By Fiilvia, lie had Autyllus and Antony ; by Cleopatra, Cleo-
patra, Ptolemy, and Alexander; and by Octavia, Antonia Major
and Antonia ^ilinor.

*'i This was the Marcellus so much cherished and regretted by tlie
Romans, whom Virgil has inmiortBliscd by his allcctinir verse?,
.-En. vi.SGl— 887.*

DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 509

emperor in our times, put his own mother to death,
and by the madness of his conduct nearly ruined the
Roman empire. He was the fifth in descent from
Antony.

DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY

COMPARED.

AS Demetrius and Antony both experienced a
variety of fortune, we shall consider, in the first
place, their respective power and celebrity. These
were hereditary to Demetrius ; for Antigonus, the
most powerful of Alexander's successors, had re-
duced all Asia during his son's minority. On the
other hand, the father of Antony was indeed a man
of character, but not of military character. Yet
though he had no public influence or reputation to
bequeath to his son, that son ventured to aspire to
the empire of Csesar, and without any title either
from consanguinity or alliance, efiectually invested
himself with all that he had acquired : at least, by
bis own peculiar weight, after he had divided the
world into two parts, he took the better for liimseif.
By his lieutenants he conquered the Parthians, and
drove back the barbarous nations about Caucasus as
far as the Caspian sea. Even the less reputable parts
of his conduct are so many testimonies of his great-
ness. Demetrius' father thought it an honour to
marry him to Phila, the daughter of Antipater,
though there was a disparity in their years: whereas
Antony's union with Cleopatra w'as considered as a
degrading circumstance, though Cleopatra in wealth
and magnificence was superior, with the exception
of Arsaces, to all the princes of her tim.e. Thus
he had raised himself to such a pitch of grandeur,
that the world in general thought him entitled even
to more than he desired.

In Demetrius' acquisition of empire, there vvas

510 DEMETRIUS AND AXTOKY COMPARED.

notliing reprehensible ; he extended it only to na-
tions inured to subjugation, and fond of being go-
verned : but the arbitrary power of Antony grew
upon the execrable policy of a tyrant, who a second
time reduced to slavery a people that had shaken off
the yoke. Consequently tiie brightest of his actions,
liis conquest of Brutus and Cassius, is sullied by the
inglorious motive of wresting it's liberty from Rome.
Demetrius, during his better fortunes, consulted the
liberties of Greece, and removed the garrisons from
the cities ; while Antony made it his boast, that he
had destroyed the assertors of his country's freedom
In Maccdon.

Antony is praised for his liberality and munifi-
cence ^^ : in which however Demetrius is so far his
superior, tliat he gave more to his enemies, than the
ibrmer did to his friends. Antony was honoured,
for having allowed Brutus a magnificent funeral: but
Demetrius buried every enemy that he had slain, and
sent back his prisoners to Ptolemy, not only with their
own property, but with presents.

Both were insolent in prosperity, and both fell
with too nnich ease into luxury and induli;ence. But
we never find Demetrius nesjlectino; his affairs for his
pleasures. In his hours of leisure indeed he had his
Lamia, whose office it was, like the fairy in the fable,
to lull him to sleep, or to amuse him in his play.
When he went to war, his spear was not bound about
with ivy, his helmet did not smell of perfume, he
did not come in the foppery of dress out of the wo-
men's apartments : the riots of Bacchus and his
train were hushed, and he became, as Euripides
says,

The minister of horrid Mars.

In short, he never lost a battle through the indul-
gence of luxury. This could not be said of An-

^'j But this, as M. Ricard justly observes, is a very equivocal vir-
tsp. For one courtier enricht- d, how many subjects are iuipovcrislicd!
IJow much to be admired the saying of the good Louis XII. * Lts
c.urtisans vivent cic mes dons, et le 2:eu:ple de mes rcftisl'*

DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 511

tony : As in the pictures of Hercules we see Om-
phale stealing his club and his lion's skin, so Cleo-
patra frequently disarmed Antony, and while he
should have been prosecuting the most necessary
expeditions, led him to dancing and dalliance on the
shores of Canopus and Taphosiris ^'^. So likewise,
as Paris came from battle to the bosom of Helen, and
even from the loss of victory to her bed^'', Antony
threw victory itself out of his hands to follow Cleo-
patra.

Demetrius, being under no prohibition of the laws,
but following the examples of Philip and Alexander,
Lysimachus and Ptolemy, married several wives, and
treated them all with the highest respect. Antony^
though it was a thing unheard of among the Romans,
had two wives at once. Besides, he banished her
who was properly his wife and his countrywoman
from his house, to indulge a foreigner, with whom
he could have no legal connexion. From their mar-
riages, of course, one of them found no inconveni-
ence ; the other sustained the greatest of evils ^^.

In regard to their amours, Antony was compara-
tively pardonable and modest. Historians tell lis,
that the Athenians excluded dogs from the citadel,
because these animals in particular couple in public.
But Demetrius had his courtesans, and dishonoured
the matrons of Athens, even in the temple of Mi-
nerva. Nay, though cruelty seems inconsistent with
sensual gratifications, he scrupled not to drive the
most beautiful and virtuous youth in the city to the
extremity of death, to avoid his brutal desiq-ns. In
short, Antony by his amorous indulgences hurt only
himself; Demetrius injured others.

With respect to their behaviour toward their pa-
rents and relations, that of Demetrius is irreproach-

^^ Or, ' Tomb of Osiris.' Strabo (xvii.) mentions this as < a roman-
tic place near the sea, full of rocks, in the neigbom-hood of Alex-
andria, where the young people went to amuse themselves.'

*7 Horn. II. iii. 447.

^3 An ample testimony to the blessings connected with ' honoura-
ble marriage and the bed undenled;' and one among infinite proofs,
that ' whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.' (Hob. xiii, 4.) *

i

512 DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED.

able ; but Antony sacrificed liis uncle to the sword of ^
Csesar, that he might be empowered in his turn to
cut off Cicero — a crime horrible, abominable, and
almost unpardonable, had Antony even saved and
not sacrificed an uncle by the means ! They are both
accused of perfidy, in that one of them threw Arta-
bazus ''^ into prison, and the other killed Alexander.
Antony, however, has some apology in this case ;
for he had been abandoned and betrayed by Arta-
bazus in Media : whereas Demetrius was suspected
of having laid a false accusation against Alexander,
and punished not the offender, but the injured.

There is this difference, likewise, in their military
operations, that Demetrius gained every victory him-
self, while many of Antony's greenest laurels were
won by his lieutenants.

Both lost their empire by their own fault, but by
different means. The former was abandoned by his
people ; the latter deserted his, even while they were
fighting for him. The fault of Demetrius was, that
by his conduct he forfeited the affection of his army:
that of Antony, his neglect of that affection and at-
tachment.

In their death neither of them can be approved,
but Demetrius much less than Antony ; for he suf-
fered himself to fall into the hands of the enemy ;
and, with a spirit truly bestial, endured an impri-
sonment of three years, for nothing but the low in-
dulgences of appetite. There was a deplorable weak-
ness, and many disgraceful circumstances, attending
the death of Antonv ; but he effected it at last with-
out falling into the encmv's hands.

S5 Called Artavasdes above.

END OF VOL. V.

Priiiuciby C. Baldwin, New Briilj^i-Strect, Lundon.

DE

Plutarchus

7

Lives. 2d ed

P55

1813

V.5

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY