Plutarch's Lives, Vol. VI (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
===============================================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 6. Completes the 6-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

^B 

fc,'** 

H 

kfrmfa 'f/?r/'etjt#M, 

^kz^Af, 

. y'/r.s&wJed I'M 

/r s/u/ s/' > eA/cic&ria , tfo& stock) ctzustetz/Cy 

\§& PLUTARCH'S LIVES, 

TRANSLATED FROM 

THE ORIGINAL GREEK; 

WITH 

NOTES CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL, ' 

AND A 

LIFE OF PLUTARCH. 

BY JOHN LANGHORNE, D.D. 

AND 

WILLIAM LANGHORNE, A.M. 
IN SIX VOLUMES. 

THE SECOND EDITION, 

BY 

THE REV. FRANCIS WRANGHAM, M.A. F.R.& 

WITH CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 

VOL. VI. 

LONDON: 

Printed for J. Mawman ; F. C. and J. Rivington ; G. Wilkie and J. Robinson ; J. Walker; 
W. Clarke and Sons; CadeLl and Davies; F. Wingravb; C. Law; J. and A. Arch ; 

SCATCHERD AND LETTKRMAN ; B. AND R. CrOSDY ; WHITE, COCHRANE, AND Co. ; LONGMAN, 

Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown; J. Booker; J. Richardson; J. M. Richardson; Black, 
Parry, and Co.; J. Hatchard; J. Murray; R. ScnoLEY ; R. Baldwin; Cradock and 
Joy; T.Hamilton; J. Faulder ; Gale, Curtis, andFenner; and G. and S. Robinson; 
and Wilson and Sons, York. 

1813. 

*rt»icJ by C. Baldwin, New Bridge-street, London. 

CONTENTS 

OF THE 

SIXTH VOLUME, 

PAG* 

XLV. Dion 1 

XLVI. Brutus 55 

Dion and Brutus compared 108 

XL VII. Artaxerxes 115 

XLVIII. Aratus 151 

XLIX. Galba .... 210 

L. Otho ... 24S 

Inalje 265 

THE 

LIFE 

01? 

DION. 

SUMMARY. 

Service done by the Academy to the Greeks in rearing Dion, and to 
the Romans in assisting the education of Brutus. General simila- 
rity between these tivo great men. Dionysius the Elder seizes the 
government of Syracuse : his partiality to Dion. Character of 
Dion. Advantages derived by him from his intercourse with Plato. 
Dionysius, exasperated by tl\e bold truths of that philosopher •, 
orders him to be sold as a slave. Dion's freedom with Dionysius. 
Dionysius* death. Offers made by Dion to Ids son. He is calum- 
niate I by the courtiers. His austerity displeasing to young Diony- 
sius.' He exhorts that prince to the study of philosophy, and by 
repeated importunities induces him to send for Plato to Sicily. 
Dion's enemies set up Philistus in opposition to him. Change 
effected by Plato in Dionysius. The courtiers succeed in render- 
ing him suspicious of Dion, who is banished into Italy. Diony- 
sius' affection for Plato, and for philosophy. Plato returns into 
Greece, and endeavours to soften Dion's severity of manners. 
Honours paid to Dion in Greece. Dionysius presses Plato to 
return into Sicily. Plato revisits Syracuse ; is ill-used by Diony- 
sius, re-demanded by Archytas, and sent home again. The tyrant 
compels Dion's wife to marry Timocrates. Dion determines to 
make war against him ; and re-assures his forces, disheartened by 
the idea of being led into Sicily. Eclipse of the moon ; how inter- 
preted by the soothsayer Miltas. Violent storm during his voyage. 
He arrives in Sicily, and marches toward Syracuse, where he is 
joined by many bodies of troops. The principal Syracusans meet 

VOL. VI. B 

DION 

him at the gates : Timocraies Jtics. Dion makes his pubUc entry 
into the city, and is appointed praetor* Specious proposals of 
Dionysius to the Syracusans. He suddenly attacks the city, and 
is driven bach with great loss. Dionysius1 letter, tending to render 
Dion obnoxious to the citizens, and it's effect. The people appoint 
Heraclides his collcne, ivho enters into intrigues against Jinn. 
Sosis' calumnious accusation of Dion, Philistus is taken by the 
Syracusans in an engagement, and barbarously put to death. Ti- 
mceus censured for his reproaches, and Ephorusfor Lis encomiums 
upon Philistus. Dionysius' escape. Dion is deprived of the com- 
mand: leaves Syracuse, and is pursued by the citizens, whom lie 
twice repulses. He goes to Leontium. Nypsius, Dionysius1 ad- 
miral, takes Syracuse by surprise. They send for Dion : he sets 
off. The soldiers of Dionysius ravage the city. Dion reaches the 
gates, and conquers the enemy. His reply to his friends, zvho ad- 
vise him to destroy Heraclides and Theodotes. He pardons the 
former, who is continued admiral, and forms new plots against him. 
They are reconciled. The mediation of Gcesylus the Sparta, i. 
Dionysius* son delivers up the citadel, and Dion recovers his wife. 
His generosity and moderation. Heraclides recommences his 
schemes, and Dion consents to his assassination. CaUippus' con- 
spiracy. Apparition. Death of Dion's only Son. CaUippus gives 
Dion's ivife and sister the most solemn assurances of his fidelity. 
Dion is killed by the soldier.'; : his sisti r and wife imprisoned. 

As we learn from Simonides, my dear Senecio, 
that the Trojans were by no means offended at (lie 
Corinthians for having joined the confederates in the 
Grecian war, because the family of Glaucus, their 
own ally, was originally of Corinth \ so neither the 
Greeks nor the Roman.: have reason to complain of 
the Academy, which lias been equally favourable to 
both. This will appear from the Lives , of Brutus 

. ' Horn. II. vi. 152., o.c, whence it appears that Glaucus was 
descended, through BeMeW>j>hc*n, from Sisyphus, Who had fonaerlv 
reigned in Ephyra, subsequently called Goriatfh. Aristotle, Khet 
i. CJ., has preserved $iinonides' line upon the subject.* 

9 

DION. 3 

and Dion ; for as one was the scholar of Plato, and 
the other educated in his principles, they came like 
wrestlers from the same pakestra, to engage in the 
severest conflicts. Both by their conduct, in which 
there was a striking similarity, confirmed that obser- 
vation of their master, that " Power and fortune 
must concur with prudence and justice, to effect any 
thing great in a political capacity. " But as Hippo- 
machus the wrestler said, that he could distinguish 
his scholars at a distance, though they were only 
carrying meat from the market ? ; so the sentiments 
of those, that have had a polite education, must 
exercise an influence of the same kind upon their 
manners, and give a peculiar grace and propriety to 
their conduct. 

Accident however, rather than design, gave simi- 
larity to the lives of these two illustrious men; and 
both were cut off by an untimely death, before they 
could carry the purposes, which they had pursued 
with so much labour, into execution. The most 
singular circumstance attending their death was, 
that both had a divine warning of it, in the appear- 
ance of a frightful spectre. There are indeed who 
affirm, that no man in his senses ever saw a spectre3: 
that they are the delusive visions of women and 
children, or of men whose intellects are affected by 
some distemper of the mind or some infirmity of the 
body, and who refer their absurd and ridiculous 
notions to divine inspiration. But if Dion and 
Brutus, men of firm and philosophic minds, whose 
understandings were not easily to be deluded or 
discomposed by any sudden apprehension, could pay 
so much credit to the appearance of spectres as to 
give an account of them to tbeir friends, I see no 

1 A proof — and many such occur in Theophrastus, of the sim- 
plicity of ancient Greciau manners!* 

3 A very singular story, however, could be told upon this head 
by Generals S — and W — , both men of indisputable honour and 
spirit, and honourably distinguished by their exertions in tu#ir 
countrv's service.* 

B 2 

1 DION. 

reason why \vc should depart from the opinion of the 
ancients — that men had their evil genii, who dis- 
turbed them with fears and distressed their virtue, 
lest by a steady and uniform pursuit of it they should 
hereafter obtain a happier allotment than them- 
selves4. These things, however, 1 must refer to 
another opportunity ; and in this twelfth book of 
parallel Lives, of which Dion and Brutus are the 
subjects, I shall begin with the more ancient. 

After Dionysius the Elder had seized the govern- 
ment of Sicily *, he married the daughter of Her- 
mocrates, a Syracusan. As the monarchic power 
however was yet but ill established, she had the 
misfortune to be so dreadfully abused in her person 
by an outrageous faction, that she put an end to her 
life. When Dionysius was confirmed in his govern- 
ment, he married two wives at the same time. One 
was Doris, a native of Locris ; the other Aristo- 
nuiche, the daughter of Hipparinus, a principal per- 
son in Syracuse, who had been his collegue when he 
was first appointed general of the Sicilian forces. 
These wives, it is said, he married on the same day. 
It is not certain which he enjoyed first, but he was 
afterward most impartial in his attentions to them ; 
for both attended him at his table, and alternately 
partook of his bed. As Doris had the disadvantage 
of being a foreigner, the Syracusans sought every 
method of obtaining the preference for their coun- 
trywoman ; but it was more than equivalent to the 
disadvantage of the former, that she had the honour 
of giving Dionysius his eldest son. Aristomache 
on the contrary was for a long time barren, though 
the king Mas extremely desirous of having children 
by her, and even put Doris' mother to death, on a 
supposition that she had prevented her conception 
by potions. 

* This is perfectly agreeable to the Platonic doctrine of the dif- 
ferent orders and dispositions of the genii ; and both Dion and 
Brutus were great enthusiasts in Platonism. 

* U. (J. 405. 

DION. 5 

Dion, the brother of Aristomache, was well re- 
ceived at court ; not only upon his sister's account, 
but from the regard which Dionysius had for his 
merit and abilities: and that prince gave his trea- 
surer an order to supply him with as much money as 
he wanted, but at the same time to keep an account 
of what he received. 

But whatever the talents and virtues of Dion 
might originally have been, undoubtedly they re- 
ceived the happiest improvement under the auspices 
of Plato. Surely the gods, in mercy to mankind, 
sent that divine philosopher from Italy to Syracuse, 
that through the humane influence of his doctrine 
the spirit of liberty might once more revive, and 
the inhabitants of that country be rescued from 
tyranny 5. 

Dion soon became the most distinguished of his 
scholars. To the fertility of his genius, and the 
excellence of his disposition, Plato himself has borne 
testimony6, and he did the greatest honour to that 
testimony by his life. For though he had been 
educated in servile principles under a tyrant, though 
he had been familiarised to dependence on one hand, 
and to the indulgence of pomp and luxury as the 
supreme happiness on the other, yet he was no 
sooner acquainted with that philosophy which points 
out the road to virtue, than his whole soul caught 
the enthusiasm ; and with the simplicity of a young 
man, who judges of the dispositions of others by his 
own, he concluded that Plato's lectures would have 
the same effect upon Dionysius : for this reason he 
solicited, and at length persuaded, the tyrant to 
hear him. When Plato was admitted, the discourse 
turned on virtue in general. Afterward, they came 
to fortitude in particular ; and Plato made it appear, 
that tyrants have of all men the least pretence to 

5 Plato, in his seventh letter, says, ' When I explained the prin- 
ciples of philosophy and humanity to Dion, I little thought that I 
was insensibly opening a way to the subversion of tyranny.' 

6 Ibid. 

i; 

6 DION. 

that virtue. Justice was the next topic ; when, on 
Plato's asserting the happiness of the just, and the 
wretched condition of the unjust, the tyrant was 
stung, and unable to answer his arguments, exp- 
ressed his resentment against those, who seemed to 
isten to him with pleasure. At last he was ex- 
tremely exasperated, and demanded of the philo- 
sopher, what business he had in Sicily ? Plato an- 
swered, " That he came to seek an honest nun." 
It seems then/' replied the tyrant, " that you 
have lost your labour." Here, Dion hoped, his 
anger would have ended ; but while Plato was 
hastening to be gone, he conveyed him on board a 
galley, in which Pollis the Lacedaemonian was re- 
turning to Greece. Dionvsius urged Pollis either to 
put Plato to death in his passage, or at least to sell 
him as a slave : " For, according to his own maxim," 
said he, " this fellow cannot be miserable ; a just 
" man, he says, must be happy in a state of slavery, 
" as well as in a state of liberty." Pollis therefore 
carried him to ^Egina, and sold him there7. For 
the people of that place, being at war with the Athe- 
nians, had made a decree, that whatever Athenian 
was taken upon their coast should be sold. 

Dion notwithstanding retained his interest with 
Dionysius, had considerable employments, and was 
sent embassador to Carthage. Dionysius entertained 
a high esteem fcr him, and he therefore permitted 
him to speak his sentiments with freedom. An in- 
stance of this we have in the retort, which he made 
on the tyrant's ridiculing the government of Gelo s : 
Gelo," said Dionysius, " is (Gelos) the laughing- 
stock of Sicily." AVhile. others admired and ap- 

7 For twenty pounds. (L.) The silence of Plato however upon 
this subject, in his Letters, seems to acquit Dionysius of the charge 
of having participated in this piece of villainy.* 

8 Gelo usurped the kingdom of Syracuse, B. C. 491 ; eleven 
3'ears afterward heat at Himera the Carthaginians, who by attack- 
ing Sicily intended to make a diversion in favour of Xerxes; and 
dying B. C. 478, was succeeded by his brother Hiero, the friend 
of Pindar.* 

DION. 7 

plauded this -witticism, Dion answered, " You ob- 
*' tained the crown by being trusted on Gelo's 
" account, but no man will hereafter be trusted on 
" yours. " In fact, Gelo made monarchy seem the 
best of governments ; whereas under Dionysius it 
appeared to be the worst. Dionysius had three 
children by Doris, and four by Aristomache, of 
whom two were daughters, Sophrosyne and Arete. 
Of these, the former was married to his eldest son 
Dionysius, the latter to his brother Thearides ; and, 
after his death, to her uncle Dion. In Dionysius* 
last illness, Dion would have applied to him in 
behalf of the children of Aristomache, but the 
physicians were before-hand with him. They 
wished to ingratiate themselves with his successor; 
and when he asked for a sleeping dose, Timseus 
informs us, they gave him one so effectual, that he 
awoke no more9. 

When his son Dionysius came to the throne, in 
the first council that he held, Dion spoke with so 
much propriety upon the existing state of affairs, 
and the measures which ought to be taken, that the 
rest appeared to be mere children in understanding. 
By the freedom of his councils he strongly exposed 
the slavish principles of those who, through a timo- 
rous disingenuousness, recommended such measures 
as they thought would please their prince, rather 
than such as might advance his interest. But what 
alarmed them most was, the steps which he proposed 
to take in regard to the impending war with Car- 
thage : for he offered either to go in person to Car- 
thage, and negotiate an honourable peace with the 
Carthaginians; or, if the king were rather inclined 
for war, to fit out and maintain fifty galleys at his 
own expense. 

With this magnificence of spirit Dionysius was 
delighted ; but the courtiers feeling how little it 
made them appear, agreed that at all events Dion 

9 B. C. 368. 

8 DION. 

must be crushed, and in consequence spared no 
calumny that malice could suggest. They repre- 
sented to the king, that he certainly meant to make 
himself master by sea, and thus to obtain the king- 
dom for his sister's children. There was moreover 
another, and an obvious cause of their hatred to him, 
in the reserve of his manners, and the sobriety of 
his life. Thev themselves led the young and ill-edu- 

. JO 

cated king through every species of debauchery, 
the shameless pandars to his wrong-directed passions. 
Yet while folly rioted, the rage of tyranny was dis- 
solved in the ardour of youthful indulgences, as iron 
is softened in the fire ; and the kindness and lenity, 
which the Sicilians could not expect from the virtue 
of their prince, they found in his infirmities. Thus 
the reins of that monarchy, which the Elder Diony- 
sius had vainly called ' adamantine,' when he boasted 
that he had rivetted them on the state, gradually 
fell from the loose and dissolute hand that held 
them. This young prince, it is said, would continue 
the scene of intoxication for ninety days without 
intermission ; during which time no sober person 
or conversation was admitted at his court, where 
all was drunkenness, and ribaldry, and buffoonery, 
and riot. 

Their enmity to Dion, who had no taste for these 
empty enjoyments, was a thing of course : and, as 
he refused to partake with them in their vices, they 
resolved to strip him of his virtues. To these they 
gave the names of such vices, as arc supposed in 
some degree to resemble them. His gravity of man- 
ners they called pride ; his freedom of speech, inso- 
lence; his declining to join in their licentiousness, 
contempt lu. It is true, there was a natural haugh- 
tiness in his deportment, and an asperity of an un- 
sociable and almost inaccessible nature : hence it is 

JO At nos virtutes ipsas invertimus, atque 

Sincerum cupimus ws incrustare. Probvs qnis 

Nob'n^ivn rnvV ? Multum est demissus homo, &c. 

(llor. Sat. I. iii. 55., &c,}* 

DION. i> 

not to be wondered at, that lie found no ready ad- 
mission to the ears of a young king, already spoiled 
by flattery ; since many even of his own particular 
friends, who admired the integrity and generosity of 
his heart, could not but condemn those harsh for- 
bidding manners, which were so ill adapted to civil 
intercourse : and Plato himself, upon writing to him 
some time afterward, warned him as it were by the 
spirit of prophecy, " To guard against that auste- 
rity, which is the companion of solitude ":" The 
necessity of the times, however, and the feeble 
state of the monarchy rendered it necessary for the 
king, though contrary to his inclination, to retain 
him in the highest appointments ; and this Dion 
himself very well knewr. 

As he was willing to impute the irregularities of 
Dionysius to a bad education, he endeavoured to 
engage him in a course of liberal studies, and to 
give him a taste for those sciences, which have a 
tendency to moral improvement. By these means 
he hoped he should induce him to think of virtue 
without disgust, and at length to embrace it's pre- 
cepts with pleasure. The young Dionysius was not 
naturally the worst of princes ; but his father being 
apprehensive that, if his mind were improved by 
science and the conversation of virtuous men, he 
might at some time or other think of depriving him 
of his kingdom, kept him in close confinement ; 
where, through ignorance and want of other em- 
ployment, lie amused himself with making little cha- 
riots, candlesticks, wooden chairs, and tables. His 
father indeed was so suspicious of all mankind, and 
so wretchedly timorous, that he would not suffer a 
barber to approach his head with a rasor, but had 
his hair singed off with a live coal by one of his 
own attendants 12. Neither his brother nor his son 
were ever admitted into his chamber in their own 

» See Vol. II. p. 192., not. (24.) 

12 Cic. Tusc. Quoest. V. 20. says, this office was performed by his 
daughters.* 

10 DION". 

clothes, but were first stripped and examined by the 
yentraels, and after that, were obliged to put on 
such clothes as were provided for them. When his 
brother Leptines was once describing the situation 
of a place, he took a spear from one of the guards 
to trace the plan, upon which Dionvsius was ex- 
tremely offended, and caused the soldier who had 
given up the weapon to be put to death. He was 
afraid, he said, of the sense and sagacity of his 
friends; because he knew, they must think it more 
ible to govern, than to obey, lie slew Marsyas, 
whom he had advanced to a considerable military 
command, merely because Marsyas had dreamed 
that he killed him ; for lie inferred, that this dream 
bv night must have been occasioned by some similar 
suggestion;: or conception of the day*. Yet even 
this timorous and suspicious wretch was offended 
with Plato, because he would not allow him to be 
the most valiant man in the world ! 

When Dion, as we have before observed, consi- 
dered that the irregularities of voung Dionvsius were 
chiefly owing to his want of education, he exhorted 
him earnestly to apply himself to study ; and by all 
means to send for Plato, the prince of philosophers, 
into Sicily : " Upon his arrival," said he, " apply 
" to him without loss of time. Conformed by his 
precepts to that divine exemplar of beauty and 
perfection, which called the universe from confu- 
" sion into order, you will secure at once your own 
happiness, and that of your people. The obe- 
dience, which they now render you through fear, 
by your justice and moderation you will improve 
into a principle of filial duty ; and, from a ty- 
rant, you will become a king. Fear, and force, 
and fleets, and armies are not, as your father 
u called them, the ' adamantine' chains of govern- 

* lago. Nay, this was but his dream. 

Othello. But this denoted a foregone conclusion : 

*jis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. 

(Othello, III. 3.) 

cc 

cc 
cc 
cc 

cc 
cc 
tc 

a 

it 

K 

DION. 11 

P ment; but that attention, that affection, that re- 
" spect, which justice and goodness ever draw after 
" them. These are the milder, but at the same 
" time the stronger, bonds of empire. Besides, it 
" is surely a disgrace for a prince, who in ah the 
circumstances of figure and appearance is distin- 
guished from the people, not to rise above them 
likewise in the superiority of his conversation and 
" the cultivation of his mind, and to embellish the 
" palace of his soul with royal furniture/* 

As Dion frequently solicited the king upon this 
subject, and occasionally repeated some of Plato's 
arguments, Dionysius conceived at length a violent 
inclination to hear him discourse. He therefore sent 
several letters of invitation to him at Athens, which 
were seconded by Dion's entreaties. The Pythago- 
rean philosophers in Italy also concurred in desiring 
him to undertake the direction of this young prince, 
whose mind was misguided by power, and to reclaim 
him by his solid advice. Plato, as he himself owns13, 
ashamed to be a philosopher merely in theory, and 
not in practice, and flattering himself that if he could 
rectify the mind of this ruling portion of Sicily, he 
might by the same means remedy the disorders of 
the whole island, yielded to their request. 

The enemies of Dion, now fearing an alteration 
in Dionysius, advised him to recall from exile one 
Philistus (a man of deep learning14, and well skilled 
in every thing relative to despotism) with a view of 
setting him up in opposition to Plato, and his philo- 
sophy. Philistus, from the beginning, had been a 
principal instrument in supporting the established 
monarchy, and kept the citadel, of which he was 
governor, a long time for that party. It is said, 
that he had a private commerce with the mother of 
the elder Dionysius, and that the tyrant himself was 
not ignorant of it. Be that as it may, Leptines, 

J3 Lett. vii. 

M For an account of this historian see II. 250., not. (2i.) 

12 DION. 

who had two daughters by a married woman whom 
he had debauched, gave one of them to Philistus in 

marriage ; but this having been done without con- 
sulting Dionysius, he was offended, imprisoned 
Leptines' mistress, and banished Philistus. The lat- 
ter fled to his friends at Adria l5, where (it is proba- 
ble) he composed the greatest part of his history ; 
for he did not return to Sicily during that Dionysius' 
reign. After his death, as we have observed, Dion's 
enemies procured his recall. His arbitrary princi- 
ples were well suited to their purpose, and he began 
to exercise them immediately upon his return. 

At the same time, calumnies and impeachments 
against Dion were, as usual, brought to the king. 
He was accused of holding a private correspondence 
with Theodotes and Heraclides, for the subversion 
of the monarchy; and indeed it is probable that he 
conceived some hopes, from Plato's arrival, of les- 
sening the excessive power of Dionysius, or at least 
of making him moderate and equitable in the use of 
it. Besides, if he continued obstinate and irreclaim- 
able, he was determined to depose him, and restore 
the commonwealth to the Syracusans; for he pre- 
ferred even the popular form of government to an 
absolute monarchy, where a well-regulated aristo- 
cracy could not be procured. 

Such was the state of affairs, when Plato arrived 
in Sicily. At first, he was received with the greatest 
appearance of respect and kindness, and was con- 
veyed from the coast in one of the king's most 
splendid chariots. Even Dionysius himsalf sacri- 
ficed to the gods, in acknowledgement of the hap- 
piness conferred upon his kingdom. The people, 
likewise, entertained the greatest hopes of a speedy 
reformation. They observed an unusual decorum in 
the court-banquets, and a sobriety in the conduct 
of the courtiers ; while the king himself answered 
all, to whom he gave audience, with the utmost affa- 
ir In the Picenc, hod. The .March of Ancona.* 

DION. 13 

bility. The desire of learning, and the study of 
philosophy, became general ; and the royal palace, 
it is said, was filled with the dust, in which the stu- 
dents describe their mathematical figures. Not long 
after this, at a solemn sacrifice in the citadel, when 
the herald prayed as usual for the long continuance of 
the government, Dionysius is reported to have cried, 
" Plow long will you continue to curse me ?" This 
was an inexpressible mortification to Philistus and 
his party : " If Plato," said they, " lias already ef- 
" fected such a change in the king, his influence in 
" time will be irresistible." 

They now no longer made their attack, on Dion 
separately, or in private ; but united in exclaiming 
against him, as having fascinated the king by the 
delusions of eloquence and philosophy, with a view 
of inducing him voluntarily to resign the crown in 
favour of his sister's children. They represented it 
as a matter of the highest indignity, that after the 
whole force of the Athenians by sea and land had 
vainly invaded -Sicily, and were vanquished and de- 
stroyed without so much as having been able to take 
Syracuse, they should now by means of one sophist 
overturn Dionysius' empire, prevail upon him to part 
with his guard often thousand spearmen, to give up 
a navy of four hundred galleys, and to disband an 
army of ten thousand horse, and many times that 
number of foot ; in order to pursue an ideal happi- 
ness in the Academy, and amuse himself with theo- 
rems of geometry, while the substantial enjoyments 
of wealth and power were left to Dion and his ne- 
phews. 

Bv means of these suggestions, Dion first incurred 
the suspicion, and soon afterward the open displea- 
sure of Dionysius. A letter of his was likewise in- 
tercepted, and privately carried to the king. It was 
addressed to the Carthaginian agents, and directed 
them not to have their audience of the king con- 
cerning the conclusion of the peace, unless he him- 
self were present, and then every thing should be 

14 DION. 

settled as they wished. Timaeus informs us, that 
after Dionysius bad shown this letter to Philistus, 

and consulted him upon it, lie over-reached Dion 
by a pretence of reconciliation, and told him he was 
desirous their good understanding might be renewed. 
After this, as he was one day walking alone with 
him by the wall of the castle near the sea, he pro- 
duced the letter, and accused him of having con- 
spired with the Carthaginians against him. Upon 
his attempting to speak in his own defence, Dionysius 
refused to hear him ; and having forced him on board 
a vessel, which lay there for the purpose, he com- 
manded the sailors to set him ashore in Italy. 

When this was publicly known, it was everywhere 
condemned as tyrannical and cruel. The court was 
in distress for the ladies of Dion's family; but the 
citizens received fresh courage from the event, hop- 
ing that the odium, which it would raise against 
Dionysius, and the general discontent that his go- 
vernment occasioned, might contribute to bring- 
about a speedy revolution. Dionysius observed this 
with some anxiety, and thinking it necessary to pa- 
cify the women and the rest of Dion's Friends, he 
told them that he was not gone into exiie, but only 
sent out of the way for a time, lest his obstinacy 
should draw upon him a heavier punishment. He 
also allowed his friends two ships, that tl.':y might 
despatch to him in Peloponnesus as much of his 
treasure, and as many of his servants;, as they should 
think fit ; for Dion was a man of considerable pro- 
perty, and little inferior to the kiim- in wealth or 
magnificence. The most valuable part of his effects, 
together with presents from the ladies and others of 
his acquaintance, his friends conveyed to him ; and 
the splendour of his fortune gained him great respect 
among the Greeks. At the same time, they con- 
ceived a high idea of the power of the tyrant, when 
an exile from his kingdom could make such an ap- 
pearance. 

Dionysius now, under colour of kindness, removed 

DION. IS 

Plato into the citadel ; but in reality to set a guard 
upon him, lest he should follow Dion, and proclaim 
to the world how injuriously he had been treated. 

As wild beasts become tame and tractable by use, 
so the tyrant, by frequent conversation with the 
philosopher, began at last to entertain an affection 
for him : yet even that affection had something 
tyrannical in it ; for he required of Plato, in return, 
that he should confine his regard and admiration 
exclusively to himself. On condition that he would 
prefer his friendship to that of Dion, he was willing 
to resign the whole administration into his hands. 
This extravagant attachment gave Plato no small 
trouble ; for it was accompanied with petulance and 
jealousy, as the love which subsists between the 
different sexes has in a short period it's freouent 
quarrels and reconciliations. Pie expressed the 
strongest desire to become Plato's scholar, and to 
proceed in the study of philosophy ; but he ex- 
pressed it with reluctance in the presence of those* 
who sought to divert him from his purpose, and 
seemed as if he were in pursuit of something, of 
which he ought to be ashamed. 

As a war broke out about this time, he found it 
necessary to dismiss Plato ; but he promised him, 
before his departure, to recall Dion the ensuing sum- 
mer. He did not however keep his promise, under 
pretence of the war; but he remitted to him (lie 
produce of his estate. At the same time, he desired 
Plato to accept his apology, assuring him that he 
would instantly send for Dion on the conclusion of 
the peace ; and he entreated Dion himself in the 
mean while to remain quiet, and not say or do 
any thing, which might hurt his character among 
the Greeks. This Plato endeavoured to effect, 
by keeping Dion in the Academy in pursuit of 
philosophv. 

At Athens, Dion lived with an acquaintance, 
whose name was Callippus. But a piece of pleasure- 
ground, which he purchased, he gave up on his 

16 DION. 

departure to Speusippus, with whom he had most 
usually conversed. Speusippus (as Timon, in his 
poems called Sylli10, sarcastically informs us) was a 
facetious companion, and had an apt turn for raillery; 
and Plato was desirous, that Dion's severity of man- 
ners might be softened by the pleasantry of his 
conversation. When Plato exhibited a chorus of bovs 
at Athens17, Dion took upon himself the manage- 
ment, and defrayed the expense. Plato was solicitous, 
that this munificence might procure him popularity -, 
and, upon that account, he readily gave up the 
honour of conducting the affair himself. 

Dion likewise visited other cities, and conversed 
with the principal statesmen, by whom he was pub- 
licly entertained. In his manners there was now no 
longer any thing pompous or affected, nothing that 
savoured of the dissolute luxury of a tyrant's court. 
His behaviour was modest, discreet, and manly ; and 
his philosophical discourses were ingenious. This 
procured him popular favour, and public honours ; 
and the Lacedaemonians, without regard to Diony- 
sius' resentment, though at the very time they had 
received succours from him against the Thebans, 
presented him with the freedom of their city. We 
are told that Dion accepted an invitation from Ptaeo- 
dorus, the Megarensian, who was a man of consider- 
able power and fortune ; and when he found his door 
crowded with people on business, and that it was 
difficult to get access to him, he said to his friends, 
who were expressing their dissatisfaction on the 
occasion, " AVhv should this affront us? We did 
" the same ourselves at Syracuse." 

Dion's popularity in Greece soon excited the 
jealousy of Dionysius, who in consequence stopped 

'6 These (as Suidas, and Diog. Lacrt. ix. 3., tell us) were a 
species of burlesque satires, directed against the philosophers, par- 
ticularly those called the Dogmatists. Speusippus succeeded Pluto 
in the Academy, B. C. 348.* 

*.' This was a dramatic entertainment, exhibited with great mag- 
nificence on the feast of Bacchus. See the Life of Aristidcs, II, 445. 

12 

DION. If 

his remittances, and put his estate into the hands of 
his own stewards. That his reputation however 
might not suffer through Plato's means among the 
philosophers, he retained a number of learned men 
in his court ; and being desirous to outshine them, 
all in disputation, he was frequently under a neces- 
sity of introducing, without the smallest propriety, 
the arguments which he had learned from Plato. 
He now wished for that philosopher again, and re- 
pented that he had so ill availed himself of his 
instructions. Like a tyrant therefore, whose desires 
however extravagant are immediately to be complied 
with, he was violently bent on recalling him. To 
effect this, he meditated every expedient : and at 
length prevailed upon Archytas, and the rest of the 
Pythagorean philosophers, to pledge themselves for 
the performance of his promises, and to persuade him 
to return to Sicily ; for it was Plato, who had first 
introduced those philosophers to his acquaintance18. 
On their part, they despatched Archidemus to 
Plato, and Dionysius at the same time sent some 
galleys with several of his friends to join in their 
request. He wrote to him likewise himself, and told 
him in plain and positive terms, that his friend Dion 
must expect no favour from him, unless he accepted 
his invitation ; but, upon his arrival, he might de- 
pend on every thing he desired. Dion was also 
solicited by his sister and wife to persuade Plato to 
gratify the tyrant, that he might no longer have an 
apology for the severity of his treatment. Plato 
therefore, as he says himself, set sail the third time 
for Sicily : 

To brave Charybdis' dreadful gulf once more x9 ! 

His arrival was not only a satisfaction to Diony- 
sius, but to the whole of Sicily ; the inhabitants of 
which did not fail to implore the gods, that Plato 

18 See Plato, Epist. vii. 

19 Odys. xii. 428. The passage itself occurs in Plato, Epist vii.* 
VOL. VI. C 

18 DION. 

might overcome Philistus, and that the tyranny 
might expire under the influence of his philosophy. 
Plato was in high favour with the women in parti- 
cular, and with Dionysius he had such credit as no 
other person could boast, being allowed to approach 
him without being searched. When Aristippus the 
Cyrenean20 saw the king offering Plato money, and 
Plato as constantly declining it, lie said, " Dionysius 
" was liberal without danger of exhausting his trea- 
" sury ; for to those Mho wanted and would take 
" money, he was sparing in his offers, but profuse 
" where he knew it would be refused." 

After the first compliments were over, Plato seized 
an opportunity of mentioning Dion ; but the tyrant 
put him off, till at last expostulations and animosities 
took place. These, however, Dionysius was indus- 
trious to conceal, and endeavoured to bring over 
Plato from Dion's interest by repeated favours and 
studied civilities. The philosopher, on the other 
hand, did not immediately publish that prince's per- 
fidv, but dissembled his resentment. While things 
were thus circumstanced, Helicon of Cyzicum, one 
of Plato's followers, foretold an eclipse of the sun ; 
and, as it. happened according to his prediction, the 
king in admiration of his learning rewarded him with 
a talent of silver. Upon this Aristippus, jesting 
among the rest of the philosophers, told them, 
" That he likewise had something extraordinary 
" to prognosticate." Being entreated to make it 
known, " I foresee," said he, " that there will shortly 
" be a quarrel between Dionysius and Plato." Soon 
after this, Dionysius sold Dion's estate, and con- 
verted the money to his own use. Plato was re- 
moved from his apartment in the palace-gardens, and 

so This philosopher began with taking lessons from Socrates: but 
disliking the rigid ethics of that school, he established one of hi* 
own under the name of Cyrenaic, which was still more voluptuous 
and accommodating to human frailty than that of Epicurus. He was 
a great favourite with Horace, and is frequently mentioned in his 
works, particularly Ep. I. i. and xvii., in the latter of which he is 
very pleasantly contrasted with the cynic Diogenes.* 

it 

DION. 19 

placed within the purlieus of the soldiery ; who had 
long hated and even sought to kill him, on a suppo- 
sition that he had advised the tyrant to lay down his 
government, and disband his guards. 

Archytas, who had engaged for Plato's safety, 
when he understood his danger, sent a galley to 
demand him ; and the tyrant, in order to palliate 
his enmity, previously to his departure made pom- 
pous entertainments. At one of them, however, 
he could not forbear saying ; " I suppose, Plato* 
when you return to your companions in the Aca- 
demy, my faults will often be the subject of your 
censure." " I hope," answered Plato with a 
smile, " we shall never be so much at a loss for sub- 
" jects in the Academy, as to mention you at all." 
Such are the circumstances, which have been men- 
tioned concerning Plato's departure, but they are 
not perfectly consistent with his own account21. 

Dion being offended not only with these things* 
but with some intelligence, which he had before re- 
ceived concerning his wife (mysteriously alluded to 
in Plato's letter to Dionysius), openly declared him- 
self his enemy. The affair was as follows : Plato 
was desired by Dionysius privately to consult Dion, 
upon his return to Greece, whether or not he would 
dislike his wife's marrying another man : for there 
was a report, whether true or the invention of his 
enemies, that his matrimonial state was not agreeable 
to him, and that there was a coolness between him 
and Arete. After Plato had consulted Dion on the 
affair, he wrote to Dionysius ; and, though he spake 
in plain terms of other matters, he mentioned this in 
a manner which could be intelligible only to the 
king. He told him, that he had conversed with Dion 
on the business, and that he would certainly resent 
it, if any such attempt should be made22. 

So long as any prospect of an accommodation re^ 

ai Epist. vii., where he simply states that Dionysius, on Archytas' 
requisition, victualled a galley for him, and sent him home again.* 
22 Epist. xiii. 

SO DION. 

mained, Dionyslus took no farther steps in the affair ; 
but when that prospect disappeared, and Plato had 
once more left Sicily in displeasure, he compelled 
Arete to marry Timocrates : in this instance, falling 
short even of his father's lenity ; for when Philoxenus 
(who had married Theste, the sister of that prince) 
was declared his enemy, and fled through fear out of 
Sicily, Dionysius sent for his sister, and reproached 
her with having been privy to her husband's escape, 
without letting him know it. Theste, without fear 
or hesitation, replied ; " Do you then, Dionysius, 
" think me so bad a wife, or so weak a woman, that 
" if I had known of my husband's flight, I would 
" not have accomoanied him, and shared in the 
" worst of his fortunes ? Indeed, I was ignorant of 
" it. And I assure vou, that I should esteem it 
" a higher honour to be called the wife of Phi- 
" loxenus the exile, than the sister of Dionvsius the 
" tyrant." The king, it is said, admired her spirit- 
ed answer : and the Syracusans honoured her so 
much, that she retained her princely respect and 
retinue even after the dissolution of the tyranny ; 
and the citizens, by public decree, attended the 
solemnity of her funeral. This is a digression, but 
it may have it's use. 

Dion now thoughtTof nothing but war23. Plato, 
however, was against it ; partly on account of the 
hospitality, which he had received from Dionysius, 
and partly because of the advanced age of Dion24. 
Speusippus and the rest of his friends, on the other 
hand, encouraged him to rescue from slavery his 

*3 B. C. 537. 

24 Of Plato, now 71, say the modern editors of Amyot's French 
version, arguing from the best MSS. That it could not be Dion, 
appears as well from Plato's Epist. vii. where he observes, that on 
his first arrival at the younger Dionysius' court (eleven years only 
prior to this period) Dion had just attained manhood, as from Cor- 
nelius Nepos, who states that at his death (three years, at least, sub- 
sequent to his arrival in Sicily) he was only fifty-five. He might 
then now be pronounced, as in the next page, ;r«p>jic/*«x<v?, but hard- 
ly -perliaps yty,j** 

DION. %\ 

native Sicily, which stretched forth her hands toward 
him, and would certainly receive him with every 
expression of joy. Speusippus, when he attended 
Plato into Sicily, had mixed more with the people, 
and learned their sentiments with regard to the 
government. At first indeed they wrere reserved, 
and suspected him as an emissary of the tyrant's j 
but, by degrees, he obtained their confidence. In 
short, it was the voice and prayer of the people, that 
Dion would come though without either army or 
navy to their relief, and lend them only his name 
and his presence against the tyrant. These repre- 
sentations encouraged Dion, who the more effectually 
to conceal his intentions, raised what forces he was 
able by means of his friends. In this he was assisted 
by many statesmen and philosophers, among others 
by Eudemus the Cyprian (upon occasion of whose 
death, Aristotle wrote his Dialogue on the Soul23), 
and Timonides the Leucadian. These engaged in 
his interest Miltas the Thessalian, who was skilled 
in divination, and had been his fellow-Academician* 
But of all those whom the tyrant had banished, 
which were not fewer than a thousand, only twenty- 
five gave in their names for the service. The rest, 
through want of spirit, declined engaging in the 
cause. The general rendezvous was in the island 
of Zacynthus'26 ; and there, when the little army 
was assembled, it did not amount to eight hundred 
men27 : but they were men, who had signalised them- 
selves in many a hot engagement ; they were in 
perfect discipline, and inured to hardship ; in courage 
and conduct, they had no superiors in the army : in 
short, they were men likely to serve Dion's cause, 

°'3 Not now extant.* 

16 Hod. Zante, an island in the Ionian sea, to the west of the 
Morea* 

27 Diod. Sic. cxvi. 9, 10. enlarges, with great propriety, upon the 
extraordinary spirit of this enterprise, (L.) and the cause of it's 
success ; a success, which proved that power alone is not the ' ada- 
mantine' chain of empire, unless the links hare been forged by 
justice and benevolence.* 

22 DIOX. 

by rousing and animating by their example those, 
"who should flock to his standard in Sicily. 

Yet these men, when they understood that they 
were to be led against Dionysius, were disheartened, 
and condemned the rash resentment of Dion ; the 
consequence of which they looked upon as certain 
ruin. Neither were they less offended with their 
commanders, and those who had enlisted them, for 
having concealed the object of the service. But 
when Dion, in a public speech, after showing them 
the feeble state of Dionysius' government, told them 
that he considered them rather as so many officers, 
whom he carried to head the people of Sicily already 
prepared to revolt, than as private men ; and when 
Alcimenes, who in birth and reputation was the 
principal man in Achaia, confirmed this statement 
and joined in the expedition, they were fully satisfied. 

It was now about midsummer, the Etesian winds ~s 
prevailed at sea, and the moon was at the full, when 
I.)ion prepared a magnificent sacrifice to Apollo, and 
marched in procession to the temple with his men 
under arms. After the sacrifice, he gave them a 
feast in the race-ground of the Zacynthians. They 
were astonished at the quantity of gold and silver- 
plate exhibited upon this occasion, so far above the 
ordinary fortunes of a private man ; and naturally 
concluded, that a person of such opulence would not 
at a late period of life expose himself to dangers, 
without a fair prospect of success, and the certain 

i8 These winds blow regularly at a certain season of the year. 
Strabo sometimes calls them East, and sometimes North winds ; 
but to convey Dion from Zacynthus to Paehynus, they must have 
blown from the east. Pliny makes the Etesian the same as the 
North-East wind: Aquilo in cestate media mutat nomen, et Etesias 
vacatur. (II. N. xviii. 34.) He informs us, when these winds 
be'jin : Deeimo octavo Cat. Aug. JEgi/pto aquilo occidit matuti.io, 
Etesiarumque prodromijlatus incipiunt (28.) : and when they end ; 
Decimo sexto Cat, Oct. JEgypto Spica, quam tenet virgo, exoritur 
piatutino, Etesiceque desinunt (31). Thus, it seems, they last about 
two months (Pliny elsewhere says forty days, ii. 17.) ; and the re- 
Ijef of such gales in that season is plainly providential. Aristotle 
;h counts for them from the convexity of the earth. 

DION. 23 

and strong support of friends. After the usual pray- 
ers and libations, the moon was eclipsed. This was 
nothing- strange to Dion, who knew the variations 
of the ecliptic, and that the defection of the moon's 
light was caused by the interposition of the earth 
between her and the sun. Hut as the soldiers were 
troubled about it, Miltas the soothsayer undertook 
to give it a proper turn, assuring them that it por- 
tended the sudden obscurity of something, which 
was at present glorious ; and that this glorious ob- 
ject could be no other than Dionysius, whose lustre 
would be extinguished on their arrival in Sicilv. 
This interpretation he communicated in as public a 
manner as possible ; but from the prodigy of the 
bees '2<J, a swarm of which settled upon the stern of 
Dion's ship, he intimated to his friends his appre- 
hensions that the great affairs, which Dion was then 
prosecuting, after flourishing awhile, would come to 
nothing. Dionysius, it is likewise said, had many 
prodigies upon this occasion. An eagle snatched 
a javelin from one of his guards, and after flying 
aloft with it, dropped it into the sea. The waters 
of the sea at the foot of the citadel, as plainly ap- 
peared to every one who tasted them, were fresh 
for one entire day. He had pigs farrowed perfect 
in all their other parts, but without ears. This the 
soothsayers considered as an omen of rebellion and 
revolt : the people, they said, would no longer give 
ear to the mandates of the sovereign. The fresh- 
ness of the sea-water imported that the Syracusans, 
after their harsh and severe treatment, would enjoy 
milder and better times. The eagle was the mini- 
ster of Jove, and the javelin an ensign of power and 

*9 This superstition prevailed not less among the Romans, 
than among the Greeks. See the Life of Brutus. (L.) That the 
sudden appearance of a swarm of bees was considered as an inau- 
spicious omen, portentous of slavery, &c, we learn from Cic. Orat. 
de Harusp. Kesponsis. Was the speedy decay of prosperity, fore- 
told in the text (inquires the former English translator), inferred 
£*rom the food of bees, the beautiful but transitory flower ? * 

2* DiOK. 

government: thus the father of the gods had de- 
stined the overthrow and abolition of the tyranny. 
These tilings we have from Theopompus. 

Dion's soldiers were conveyed in two transports. 
These were accompanied by another smaller vessel, 
and two more of thirty oars. Beside the arms of those 
who attended him. he took with him two thousand 
shields, a large quantity of darts and javelins, and a 
considerable supply of provisions, that nothing might 
be wanting in the expedition ; for they put off to 
the main sea, because they did not think it safe to 
coast along, being informed that Philistus was sta- 
tioned off Japygja30 to watch their motions. Having 
sailed with a gentle wind about twelve days, on the 
thirteenth they arrived at Pachynus31, a promontory 
in Sicily- There the pilot advised Dion to land his 
men immediately; as if they once doubled the cape, 
they might continue at sea a long time, before they 
could have a gale from the south at that season of 
the year. But Dion, who was afraid of disembark- 
ing too near the enemy, and chose rather to make 
good his landing in some remoter part of the island, 
doubled the cape notwithstanding. They had not 
sailed far, before a strong gale from the north and a 
high sea carried them quite off Sicily. At the same 
time, there was a violent storm of thunder and light- 
ning, for it was about the rising of Arcturus ; and 
it was accompanied with such dreadful rains, and 
the weather was in every respect so tempestuous, 
that the affrighted sailors knew not where they were, 
till they found themselves driven by the violence of 
the storm to Cercina on the coast of Africa. Here, 
from the dangerous rocks which surrounded this 
craggy island, they narrowly escaped being dashed 
to pieces ; but by working hard with their poles 

3° This seems to have been Apulia, or Calabria; and hence arose 
the name of thvi 2\. W. wind Japyx, which was favourable to such as 
were sailing from Italy to Greece (See Hor. Od. 1. iii. 4., &c.) The 
Acra Japygia of Plin., H. N. iii. 11., is the modern C. cli Leuca.* 

51 Hod. Cane Pussaro. 

DION. 55 

they kept clear, with much difficulty, till the storm 
abated. They were then informed by a vessel, which 
accidentally came up with them, that they were at 
the head of what is called the Great Syrtis 3~. In 
this horrible situation, they were farther dishearten- 
ed by finding themselves becalmed ; but, after beat- 
ing about for some time, a gale sprung up suddenly 
from the south. On this unexpected change, as the 
wind increased upon them, they made all their sail, 
and imploring the assistance of the gods, once more 
put to sea in quest of Sicily. After an easy passage 
of five days, they arrived at Minoa, a small town in 
Sicily33, belonging to the Carthaginians. Synalus34, 
a friend of Dion's, was then governor of the place ; 
and, as he did not know that this little fleet belong- 
ed to Dion, he attempted to prevent the landing of 
his men. The soldiers leaped out of the vessels in 
arms, but killed none that opposed them ; for Dion, 
on account of his friendship with Synalus, had for- 
bidden them. They ran however in one body with 
the fugitives into the town, and thus made them- 
selves masters of it. When Dion and the governor 
met, mutual salutations passed between them, and 
the former restored to the latter his town unhurt. 
Synalus in return entertained his soldiers, and sup- 
plied him with necessaries. 

It happened that Dionysius, a little before this, 
had sailed with eighty ships for Italy, and his absence 
gave them no small encouragement : so that, when 
Dion invited his men to refresh themselves for some 
time after their fatigues at sea, they thought of no- 
thing but making a proper use of the present mo- 
ment, and with one voice called upon him to lead 
them to Syracuse. He, therefore, left his useless 

32 Not far from Tripoli. There was also a smaller Syrtis, and 
both were bays full of rocks and quicksands, occasioning a danger- 
ous inequality in the motion of the waters.* 

3i Called also Heraclea, on the southern coast between Agri- 
gentum, hod. Girgenti, and Lilybaeum, hod. Cape Boco, 

3* Diodorus calls him ' Pyralus.' 

26 DION. 

arms and baggage with Synalus, and having engaged 
him to transmit them to him at a proper opportunity, 
set off on his march for that place. Two hundred 
of the A >xri pontine cavalry, who inhabited the conn- 
try about Ecnomus, immediately revolted and joined 
him in his march, and these were followed by the in- 
habitants of Gela3i. 

The news of his arrival soon reaching Syracuse, 
Timocrates, who had married Dion's wife, and who 
was appointed regent in Dionysius' absence, imme- 
diately despatched letters to apprise the tyrant of the 
event. In the mean while, he applied himself to 
prevent all tumults in the city ; for the people were 
greatly animated by the report of Dion's arrival, 
though their uncertainty and alarm for a time kept 
them quiet. A singular accident happened to the 
courier, who had been sent with the letters for Diony- 
sius. Upon his landing in Italy, as he was passing 
through the territory of Ilhegium to Caulonia, where 
the tyrant then was, he met an acquaintance of his 
returning home with a newly-offered sacrifice, and 
havins; received from him a little of the flesh for his 
own use36, he made the best of his way. At night, 
however, he found it necessary to take a little rest, 
and retired to sleep in a wood by the road-side. A 
wolf, allured by the smell of the flesh, came up while 
he was asleep, and carried it off, together with the 
bag of letters to which it was fastened. When the 
courier awoke, he sought a long time to no purpose 
for his dispatches, and being afraid to face Dionysius 
without them, absconded. Thus it was a consider- 
able time afterward, and from other sources, that 
Dionysius was informed of Dion's arrival in Sicily. 

Dion, on his march, was joined by the Cama- 
rinaeans, and many revolters from the territory of 
Syracuse. The Leontines and Cainpanians, who 

35 Which was near Auricentum.* 

>'' To carry home part of the victim, and to give part of it to any 
person that the hearer met, were acts of religion. 

DION. 27 

with Timocrates guarded the Epipola*S7, being mis- 
led by a report (designedly propagated by Dion) that 
he intended to attack their cities first, quitted their 
present station, and set off to take care of their own 
concerns. Dion, being informed of this while he lay 
near Acne, decamped in the night, and came to the 
river Anapus, which is at the distance often furlongs 
from the city. There he halted, and sacrificed by 
the river, addressing his prayers to the rising sun. 
The soothsayers informed him that the gods gave a 
promise of victory, and as he had himself assumed a 
garland at the sacrifice, all who were present imme- 
diately did the same. He was now joined by about 
five thousand, who were ill-furnished indeed with arms, 
but their courage supplied that deficiency38. When 
he gave orders to march, the parole was 6 Liberty,' 
and they rushed forward with the loudest acclama- 
tions of joy. The most eminent and powerful citi- 
zens of Syracuse, dressed in white, met him at the 
gates. The populace, in the mean while, fell with 
great fury upon Dionysius' party ; but in particular 
they seized his spies, a set of wretches hated by gods 
and men, who went prying about the city to collect 
the sentiments and expressions of the inhabitants, 
in order to report them to the tyrant. These were 
the first that suffered, being knocked down wherever 
they were met. When Timocrates found that he 
could not join the garrison in the citadel, he fled on 
horseback out of the city, and spread a general terror 
and dismay wherever he passed ; magnifying all the 
while the forces of Dion, that it might not appear a 
dight effort, against which he was unable to defend 
the place. 

37 See the Life of Timoleon, II. 253., not. (31.) Camarina was a 
city on the southern, and Acrse (mentioned below) on the eastern 
coast of Sicily. Of the Cumpanians, not Catanians (as some would 
read), who were Italian settlers in Sicily, see a full account in Diod. 
Sic. xiv. 8- 15.58. xvi. 82.* 

38 Diodorus says, he was soon joined by 20,000, and that when, 
he reached Syracuse, he had not fewer than 50,000 men. 

25 DiOX. 

Dion now made his public entry into the town, 
dressed in a magnificent suit of armour, his brother 
Megacles marching on the right hand, and Callip- 
pus the Athenian on the left, with garlands upon 
their heads. He was followed by a hundred foreign 
soldiers, who wen his body-guard; and after these 
inarched the rest of the army in proper order, under 
the conduct of their respective officers. This pro- 
cession the Syracusans regarded as sacred. They 
considered it as the triumphal entry of Liberty, 
which would once more establish the popular govern- 
ment, after a suppression of forty- eight years. 

When Dion entered at the Menitidian gate, silence 
was commanded by sound of trumpet, and he order- 
ed freedom to be proclaimed to the Syracusans and 
the rest of the Sicilians, in the name of Dion and 
Megacles, who came to abolish tyranny. Being de- 
sirous to address the people in a speech, he marched 
up to the Achradina. As he passed through the 
streets, the people prepared their victims on tables 
placed before their doors, scattered flowers on his 
head, and offered up their prayers to him as their 
tutelar deity. At the foot of the citadel, under the 
Pentapvlse, stood a lofty sun-dial 3g, which had been 
placed there by Dionysius. From the top of this 
building he addressed the citizens, and exhorted 
them earnestly to assert their freedom. The people 
in their turn nominated Dion and his brother prae- 
tors of the city, and on their wish and request ap- 
pointed them twenty collegues, half of whom were 
selected from Dion's brother-exiles. 

At first it was considered by the soothsayers as a 
good omen that Dion, when he addressed the people, 
had under his feet the stately edifice which Diony- 
sius had erected ; but upon reflecting that this edi- 

3,) Pherecydes vns the first, who invented dials to mark the hour 
of the day, about three hundred years after Homer. But before 
his time the Phoenicians had contrived a dial in the isle of Scyrof, 
which described the solstices. 

DION. 23 

nee, on which he had been declared general, was a 
sun-dial, they became apprehensive that his present 
power would fall into speedy decline. 

Dion in the next place took the castle of Epipolse, 
released the prisoners who were confined there, and 
invested it with a strong wall. Seven days after this 
event, Dionysius arrived from Italy, and enter d 
the citadel from the sea. Dion at the same time 
received from Synalus the arms and ammunition, 
which he had left with him. These he distributed 
among the citizens, as far as they would go : the rest 
armed themselves, as well as they were able ; and 
all expressed the utmost alacrity for the service. 
Dionysius, at first, sent agents in a private manner 
to Dion, to try what terms might be made with him : 
but Dion refused to receive any overtures in private. 
The Syracusans, he told the envoys, were now a 
free people ; and what they had to offer, must be 
addressed to them in public. Upon this, they made 
specious proposals to the citizens, and promised 
them an abatement of their taxes, and an exemption 
from serving in the wars, even though those wars 
should be undertaken with their own approbation. 
These proposals the Syracusans held in derision ; and 
Dion answered, that it would be in vain for Diony- 
sius to propose terms, without resigning in the first 
place the regal government; if he took this measure, 
however, he added, he might depend upon all the 
good offices in his power, at least with regard to 
every thing reasonable, from the remembrance of 
their relationship. Dionysius seeming to consent 
to these terms, sent back his agents, to desire that a 
deputation of the Syracusans might attend him in 
the citadel, in order to settle articles by mutual con- 
cessions for the public tranquillity. Dion, therefore, 
selected a number of the citizens for this deputation ; 
and the general report from the citadel was, that 
Dionysius would voluntarily resign his authority. 

This, however, was only a crafty stratagem to 
amuse the Syracusans. The deputies no sooner 

12 

50 DION. 

arrived, than they were imprisoned ; and early the 
next morning, after he had plied the mercenaries 
with wine, he ordered them to sally out and attack 
the wall which had been built by Dion. This un- 
expected assault was carried on writh great vigour 
by the barbarians. They broke through the works, 
and tailing with extreme impetuosity and loud shouts 
upon the Syracusans, quickly put them to flight. 
Dion's foreign troops took the alarm, and hastened 
to their relief; but the cries and blunders of the 
citizens mixing and rushing forward with them dis- 
ordered their ranks, and rendered it difficult for them 
to hear orders, or give any effectual assistance. 
Dion, perceiving that in this tumult his orders could 
not be heard, instructed them by his example, and 
charged the thickest of the enemy. The battle, 
where he fought in person, was fierce and bloody. 
He was known to the enemy, as wrell as to his own 
party; and they rushed toward him with the utmost 
fury. His age, indeed, rendered him unfit for such 
an engagement ; but he maintained the fight with 
great vigour, and cut in pieces many of the enemy 
that attacked him. At length, he was wounded in 
the head with a lance ; his shield was pierced through 
in many places with the darts and spears, levelled 
against him ; and his armour no longer resisting 
the blows which he received in this close engage- 
ment, he fell to the ground. He was immediately 
carried off by his soldiers, and leaving the command 
to Timonides, rode about the city to rally the fugi- 
tives. Soon afterward he brought a detachment of 
foreign soldiers, which he had left to guard the 
Achradina,as a fresh reserve against the enemy. This, 
however, was unnecessary : they had placed their 
whole hopes of retaking the city in their first sally, 
and finding so powerful a resistance, fatigued with 
the action they retreated into the citadel. As soon 
as they began to fall back, the Greek soldiers bore 
hard upon them, and pursued them up to the wall. 
In this action Dion lost seventy-four men, and an 

DION. SI 

immense number of the enemy perished. The vic- 
tory was so important, that the Syracusans rewarded 
each of the foreign soldiers with a hundred minae, 
and Dion was presented by his army with a crown 
of gold. 

Soon after tins, messengers came from Dionysius, 
with letters to Dion from the women of his family. 
Beside these, there was one inscribed, ' liipparinus 
(this was the name of Dion's son) to his father Dion.' 
Timaeus says, indeed, that he was called Aretaeus 
from his mother Arete ; but I think credit is rather 
to be given to Timonides, who was his friend and 
fellow-soldier. The rest of the letters, which were 
read openly before the Syracusans, contained vari- 
ous solicitations and entreaties from the women. 
That, which appeared to come from liipparinus, the 
people out of respect to the father wished not to be 
opened in public ; but Dion insisted, that it should. 
It proved to be a letter from Dionysius himself, 
directed indeed to Dion, but in reality addressed to 
the people of Syracuse ; for, though it carried the 
air of request and apology, it had an obvious ten- 
dency to render Dion obnoxious to the citizens. He 
reminded him of the zeal, which he had formerly 
shown for his service ; he threatened him through 
his dearest connexions, his sister, his son, and his 
wife ; and his menaces were followed by the most 
passionate entreaties, and the most abject lamenta- 
tions. But the most trying part of his address was 
that, where he besought Dion not to destroy the 
government, and give that freedom to his inveterate 
enemies, by means of which they would prosecute 
him to death ; but to retain the regal power himself, 
for the protection of his family and friends. 

This letter did not produce those sentiments in 
the people, which it should naturally have done. 
Instead of exciting admiration of the noble firmness 
and magnanimity, which could prefer the public, 
utility to the tenderest private connexions, it occa- 
sioned jealousies and fears. The people saw, or 

9 

$2 DION. 

thought they saw, that Dion was under an absolute 
necessity of being favourable to Dionysius. They 
already began to wish for another general, and it 
was with peculiar satisfaction they heard of the ar- 
rival of Heraclides, This Heraclides, who had been 
banished by the tyrant, had once held a distinguish- 
ed command in the army, and was a man of consider- 
able military abilities ; but he was an irresolute cha- 
racter, and particularly unsteady when he had a 
eollcgue in command. He had, some time before, 
had a difference with Dion in Peloponnesus, and 
therefore resolved upon his own strength to make 
war against Dionysius. On reaching Syracuse, he 
found the tyrant closely besieged, and the Syracusans 
elated with their success. His first object, therefore, 
was to court the people, and for this purpose he had 
all the necessary talents ; an insinuating address, and 
that kind of flattery, which is so acceptable to the 
multitude. This business was the more easy. to. him, 
as the fbbidding gravity of Dion was thought too 
haughty for a popular state : besides, the Syracusans, 
already insolent with success, claimed the court 
usually paid to a free people, though they had not 
in reality recovered their freedom. Thus they con- 
vened themselves without any summons, and ap- 
pointed Heraclides their admiral. When Dion in- 
deed remonstrated against their procedure, and 
showed them that by thus constituting Heraclides 
admiral they had superseded the office of general, 
v ich they had previously conferred upon himself ', 
they with some reluctance annulled the commission. 
This affair settled, Dion invited Heraclides to his 
house, and gently expostulated with him on the im- 
propriety of insisting upon a punctilio of honour, at 
a time when the least inattention to the common 
cause might be the ruin of the whole. He then 
called an assembly, appointed Heraclides admiral, 
and prevailed upon the citizens to allow him such a 
guard, as they had before granted to himself. He- 
raclides treated Dion with the utmost appearance of 

DION, 33 

respect, acknowledged bis obligations to him, and 
seemed attentive to his commands ; but in private 
he corrupted the people, and encouraged a spirit of 
mutiny and dissatisfaction, so that Dion was involved 
in continual disturbances and disquiet. If he ire- 
commended, that Dionysius should be permitted to 
make his retreat in safety, he was censured, as de- 
signing to favour and protect him : And if in order 
to avoid those suspicions, he advised the continuance 
of the seige, he was accused of protracting the war, 
that he might the longer retain his command, and 
hold the citizens in subjection. 

There was in the city one Sosis, a fellow infamous 
for his insolence and villainy, who thought the per- 
fection of liberty was the licentiousness of speech. 
This wretch openly attacked Dion, and told the 
people at a public meeting, that they had only 
changed the inattention of a drunken and dissolute 
tyrant for the crafty vigilance of a sober master. 
Immediately after this he left the assembly, and was 
seen the next day running naked through tiie streets* 
as if from somebody that pursued him, with his head 
and face covered with blood. In this condition he 
burst into the market-place, and told the people 
that he had been assaulted bv Dion's foreign sol- 
diers ; at the same time showing them a wound in 
his head, which he said they had given him-. Dion 
upon this was generally condemned, and accused of 
silencing the people by sanguinary methods. He 
came however before this irregular and tumultuous 
assembly in his own vindication, and made it appear 
that this Sosis was brother to one of Dionysius' 
guards, and had been engaged by him to raise a 
tumult in the city; the only resource, which the 
tyrant had now left, being that of exciting factions 
and dissensions among the people. The surgeons 
also, who examined the wound, found that it was 
not occasioned by any violent blow. The wounds 
made by weapons are generally deepest in the 
middle ; whereas this was entirely superficial, and 

vol. vi. D 

Si DION. 

being discontinuous did not appear to have beeit 
the effect of one incision, but to have been made at 
different times as the pain gave him leave. At the 
same time others deposed, that seeing Sosis running 
naked and wounded, and hearing him exclaim that 
he was riving from the pursuit of Dion's foreign 
soldiers, who had just then wounded him, they 
hastened to take the pursuers : that however they 
could meet with no such persons, but found a rasor 
lying under a hollow stone near the place, whence 
they had observed him come. All these circum- 
stances pressed strongly against him : but when his 
own servants gave evidence, that he went out of his 
house alone before day-light with a rasor in his hand, 
Dion's accusers were silenced. The people unani- 
mously condemned Sosis to die, and were once more 
reconciled to Dion. 

Nevertheless, their jealousy of his soldiers re- 
mained. And as the war was now principally car- 
ried on by sea, Philistus being come to Dionysius* 
support with a considerable fleet from Japygia, they 
did not see the necessity of retaining in their service 
those Greeks who were no seamen, and who must 
depend for protection on the naval force. Their 
confidence in their own strength was likewise greatly 
increased by an advantage gained at sea against 
Philisfcus, whom they used in a very barbarous man- 
ner. Ephorus states that, after his ship was taken, 
lie slew himself. But Timonides, who attended 
Dion from the beginning of the war, writing to 
Speusippus the philosopher, relates the story as 
follows : Philistus' galley having run aground, he 
was taken prisoner alive ; and after being disarmed 
and stripped was exposed naked, though an old 
man, to every kind of insult. They then cut off his 
head, and ordered their children to drag his body 
through the Aehradina, and throw it into the quarry. 
Tima^us represents the indignity, offered to his re- 
mains, as having been still greater. The boys, he 
savs, tied a rope about his lame leg, and so dragged 
9 

• DION. 35 

him through the city ; the Syracusans in the mean 
while insulting over his carcase, when they saw fas- 
tened by the leg him, who had said ; " It would ill 
" become Dionysius to trust to his horses' heels for 
* his escape from a throne, which he ought never 
" to quit, till he was dragged from it by his own 40." 
Philistus however informs us, that this was not said 
to Dionysius by himself, but by another. It is plain 
at the same time, that Timaeus seizes every occasion, 
from Philistus' zealous adherence to arbitrary power, 
of loading him with the keenest reproaches. Those 
whom he injured are in some degree excusable, if 
in their resentment they treated him with indignities 
after death. But wherefore should his biographers, 
whom he never injured, and who have had the 
benefit of his works, exhibit him with all the ex- 
aggeration of scurrility in those scenes of distress, 
to which fortune sometimes reduces the best of 
men ? Ephorus, on the other hand, is no less ex- 
travagant in his encomiums on Philistus. He knows 
well how to throw into shades the foibles of the 
human character, and to give an air of plausibi- 
lity to the most indefensible conduct ; but, with all 
his eloquence and art, he cannot rescue Philistus 
from the imposition of having been the most strenu- 
ous assertor of despotism, and the fondest follower 
and admirer of the luxury, the power, the magnifi- 
cence, and the alliance of tyrants. Upon the whole, 
he who neither defends the principles of Philistus, 
nor insults over his misfortunes, will best discharge 
the duty of the historian. 

After the death of Philistus, Dionysius offered to 
surrender the citadel to Dion, together with the 
arms, provisions, and soldiers, and an advance of 
five months' pay, on condition that he might be per- 
mitted to retire into Italy, and there enjoy the reve- 
nues of Gyata, a fruitful tract of country in the 
territory of Syracuse, reaching from the sea to the 

«° Diod. Sic. xiv. 8. 
D 2 

S6 DION. 

middle of the country. Dion, still refusing to nego- 
tiate on his own account, referred the embassadors 
to the Syracusans ; and these, as they expected 
that Dionysius would shortly come alive into their 
hands, dismissed them without audience. Upon 
this the tyrant, leaving his eldest son Apollocratcs 
to defend the citadel, embarked with his most 
valuable treasures and a few select friends, and 
setting sail with a fair wind, eluded the admiral's 
observation. 

The tyrant's escape having greatly exasperated 
the people against Heraclides, in order to appease 
them, he proposed by Hippo, one of the orators, 
that there should be an equal division of lands ; 
alleging, that equality was the first foundation of 
civil liberty, and that poverty and slavery were syno- 
nymous terms. Thus, while he supported Hippo in 
the promotion of this scheme, he encouraged the 
faction against Dion, who opposed it. At length he 
prevailed with the people not only to pass this law, 
but also to direct the pay of the foreign soldiers to 
be stopped, and new commanders chosen, that they 
might no longer be subject to the severe discipline 
of Dion. Tims like the patient, who after a linger- 
ing sickness makes too rash a use of the first returns 
of health, and rejects the gradual and sober regimen 
of his physician, the citizens from their long slavery 
took too precipitate steps to freedom, and refused 
the salutary counsels of their deliverer. 

It was about the middle of summer, when the 
assembly was summoned for the election of new 
lMlieeis ; and for the space of fifteen days there were 
the most dreadful thunders, and the most alarming- 
prodigies. The religious fears, which these prodi- 
gies excited, made the people decline the choosing 
of officers. When the weather grew more serene, 
thv orators again exhorted them to proceed to the 
business; but no sooner had they begun than a 
draught-ox, which could not have been terrified by 
the crowds and noise to which he had been accus- 

DION. 37 

tomed, suddenly in a fit of irritation against his 
driver broke from his yoke, and running furiously 
into the assembly, scattered the people in great dis- 
order before him ; thence, throwing down all that 
stood in his way, he carried confusion throughout 
that part of the city, which afterward fell into the 
enemy's hands. The Syracusans however, regard- 
less of these things, elected five-and-twentv officers, 
among whom was Heraclides. At the same time, 
they privately endeavoured to draw oft Dion's men ; 
promising, if they would desert him, to make them 
citizens of Syracuse. But the soldiers were faithful 
to their general, and taking and placing him in the 
middle of a battalion, marched out of the city. 
They did not indeed, upon this occasion, offer any 
violence to the inhabitants ; but they severely re- 
proached them for their baseness and ingratitude. 
The comparative smallness of their number, and 
their declining to act offensively, induced the Syra- 
cusans to attempt cutting them off, before they 
escaped out of the city; and, with this design, they 
fell upon their rear. Dion was now in a great diffi- 
culty and dilemma ; finding himself under the neces- 
sity either of fighting against his countrymen, or of 
suffering himself and his faithful soldiers to be cut in 
pieces. He entreated the Syracusans, therefore, to 
desist ; stretching forth his hands to them, and 
pointing to the citadel full of soldiers, who were 
happy in being spectators of these dissensions among 
their enemies. But the torrent of the populace, 
impelled by the seditious breath of the; orators, was 
not to be stopped by persuasion. He therefore 
commanded his men to advance with shouts, and 
clashing of arms, but not to attack them. The 
Syracusans upon this fled immediately through the 
streets, though no one pursued them, for Dion 
retreated with his men into the territories of the 
Leontines. 

The very women ridiculed the new officers for 

3S DION. 

this cowardly flight ; and the latter, to recover theiF 
reputation, ordered the citizens to arms, pursued 
Dion, and came up with him as he was crossing a 
river. A skirmish began between the cavalry ; but 
when they found Dion no longer disposed to bear 
these indignities with his usual paternal patience, 
and observed him with all the eagerness of resent- 
ment, drawing up his forces for battle, they once 
more turned their backs, and with the loss of some 
few men fled to the city in a more cowardly manner 
than before. 

The Leontines received Dion most honourably, 
gave money to his soldiers, and made them free of 
their city. They also despatched messengers to 
Syracuse with requisitions, that his men might have 
justice done them, and receive their pay. The 
Syracusans, in return, despatched messengers with 
impeachments against Dion : but, when the matter 
was debated at Leontium in a full assembly of 
the allies, they evidently appeared. to be in fault. 
They refused, nevertheless, to stand to the award 
of this assembly ; for the recent recovery of their 
liberties had rendered them insolent, and the popu- 
lar power was without control, their very com- 
manders being no more than servile dependents 
upon the multitude. 

About this time, Dionysius sent a fleet under Nyp- 
sius the Neapolitan, with provisions and pay for the 
garrison in the citadel. The Syracusans overcame 
him, and took four of his ships ; but they made an 
ill use of their success. Destitute of all discipline, 
they celebrated the victory with the most riotous 
extravagance ; and, at the very time when they 
thought themselves secure of taking the citadel, they 
lost the city. Nypsius observing their disorder, their 
night-revels and debauches, in which their com- 
manders (either from inclination, or through fear of 
giving offence by issuing orders to a drunken rabble) 
were as deeply engaged as themselves, availed him- 

DION. 39 

self of the opportunity, broke through their walls, 
and subjected the city to the violence and depreda- 
tion of his soldiers. 

The Syracusans at once perceived their folly, and 
their misfortune : but the latter, in their present 
confusion, was not easy to be redressed. The sol- 
diers made dreadful havock in the city : they demo- 
lished the fortifications, put the men to the sword, 
and dragged the women and children shrieking to 
the citadel. The Syracusan officers being unable to 
separate the citizens from the enemy, or to draw 
them up in any order, gave up all for lost. So cir- 
cumstanced, while the Achradina itself was in danger 
of being taken, they naturally turned their thoughts 
upon Dion ; but none had the courage to mention 
a man, whom all had injured. In this emergency 
a voice was heard from the cavalry and the allies, 
crying, " Send for Dion and his Peloponnesians 
" from Leontium." His name wras no sooner once 
mentioned, than the people shouted for joy. With 
tears they implored, that he might once more be 
placed at their head : they remembered his promp- 
titude and intrepidity in the most trying dangers : 
the courage which he himself had always displayed, 
and the confidence which he inspired, whenever he 
led them against the enemy. Archonides and 
Telesides from the auxiliaries, and Hellanicus with 
four more from the cavalry, were immediately de- 
spatched to Leontium ; where, making the best of 
their way, they arrived in the close of the evening. 
There, instantly throwing themselves at Dion's feet, 
they related with tears the deplorable condition of 
the Syracusans. The Leontines and Peloponnesians 
soon gathered about them, conjecturing from their 
haste, and the manner of their address, that their 
business had something extraordinary in it. 

Dion immediately summoned an assembly, and the 
people being soon collected, Archonides and Hella- 
nicus briefly stated the distress of the Syracusans, 

40 DIOX. 

entreated the foreign soldiers to forget the injuries 
which they had offered them, and once more to assist 
that unfortunate people, already more heavily pu- 
nished for their ingratitude, than even they whom 
they had injured would have wished. When they 
had thus spoken, a profound silence ensued ; upon 
which Dion arose, and attempted to address them ; 
but he was prevented by his tears. His soldiers,- 
deeply affected by their general's sorrow, besought 
him to moderate his grief, and to proceed. After 
he had recovered himself a little, he spake to the 
following purpose : " Peloponnesians and confede- 
rates, I have called you together, that you may 
consult upon your respective affairs. My mea- 
sures are taken : I cannot hesitate what to do, 
when Syracuse is perishing. If I cannot save it, 
I will at least hasten thither, and bury myself 
beneath the ruins of my country. For you, if 
you can yet persuade yourselves to assist the most 
" unfortunate and inconsiderate of men, it may be 
" in your power to save from destruction a city, 
" which was the work of your own hands41. But, 
*'' if your pity for the Syracusans be sacrificed to 
" your resentment, may the gods reward your 
" fidelity and kindness to Dion ! And remember, 
■c that as he would not desert vou when vou were 
" injured, so neither could he abandon his falling 
" country.-' 

He had scarcely ended, when the soldiers signi- 
fied their readiness for the service by loud acclama- 
tions, and called upon him to march directly to the 
relief of Syracuse. The messengers embraced them, 
and entreated the gods to shower down their bless- 
ings upon Dion and the Peloponnesians. As soon 
as the tumult subsided, Dion gave orders that the 
men should repair to their quarters, and after taking 

41 Strabo says, that Syracuse was built 01. xi. 2. by Archias, one 
of the Hevaclida;, who came from Corinth to Syracuse. 

tf 

a 
t,t 
it 

<■<. 

cc 
a. 

DION. 41 

the necessarV refreshments assemble In the same 
place completely armed ; as lie intended to march 
that very night. 

Dionysius' soldiers, after having ravaged the city 
during the whole day, retired at night with the loss 
of a few men into the citadel. This small respite 
once more encouraged the demagogues of the city, 
who presuming that the enemy would not repeat 
their hostilities, dissuaded the people from admitting 
Dion and his foreign soldiers ; advising them not to 
resign the honour of saving the city to strangers, 
but to defend their liberty themselves. Upon this, 
the generals despatched fresh messengers to Dion, 
to countermand his march ; while on the other hand, 
the cavalry, and many of the principal citizens, sent 
to request that he would hasten it. Thus invited 
by one party and rejected by another, he advanced 
but slowly ; and, at night, the faction which op- 
posed him set a guard upon the gates, to prevent 
his entering. 

Nypsius now made a fresh sally from the citadel, 
with still more fury, and Q-reater numbers of merce- 
naries than before ; and after having totally demo- 
lished the remaining part of the fortifications, began 
to ravage the city. The slaughter was dreadful : 
men, women, and children fell indiscriminately by 
the sword ; for the object of the enemy was not 
so much plunder, as destruction. Dionysius de- 
spaired of regaining his lost empire, and in his mortal 
hatred of the Syracusans, determined to bury it in 
the ruins of their citv4". Jt was resolved therefore 
that, before Dion's succours could arrive, they should 
destroy it the quickest way, by laying it in ashes. 
Accordingly, they set fire to the nearer parts by 
brands and torches, and to those which were more 
remote, by shooting flaming arrows. The citizens, 
in the utmost consternation, tied every where before 

41 Such might have been hi? orders to Nypsius, but he was not 
now at Syracuse himself'.* 

19 DION. 

them. Those who, in order to avoid the fire, had 
deserted their houses, were put to the sword in the 
streets ; and they, who sought for refuge in their 
houses, were again driven out by the flames : many 
were burned to death, and many perished beneath 
the tailing habitations. 

This terrible distress by universal consent, opened 
the gates for Dion. After learning that the encmy 
had retreated into the citadel, he had made no great 
haste. But, early in the morning, some horsemen 
carried him the news of this fresh assault. These 
were followed by others, even of those who had 
recently opposed his coming, but who now implored 
him to rly to their relief. As the calamity in- 
creased, Heraclidcs despatched his brother, and 
after him his uncle Theodotes, to entreat Dion's 
assistance ; for they were now no longer in a 
capacity of opposing the enemy : he was himself 
wounded, and a considerable part of the city had 
been destroyed and laid in ashes. 

When Dion received this intelligence, he was 
about sixty furlongs from the city. After he had 
acquainted his soldiers with the dreadful exigency, 
and exhorted them to behave with resolution, they 
no longer marched, but ran ; and in their way they 
were met by numbers in succession, who besought 
them if possible to go still faster. By the eager and 
vigorous speed of the soldiers, Dion quickly arrived 
at the city ; and entering by the part called Heca- 
tompedon, he ordered his light troops immediately 
to charge the enemy, that the Syracusans might take 
courage at the sight of them. In the mean while he 
drew up his heavy-armed men, with such of the 
citizens as had joined him, and divided them into 
several small bodies of greater depth than breadth, 
that he might intimidate the enemy by attacking 
them in several quarters at once. He himself ad- 
vanced to the engagement at the head of his men, 
amidst a confused noise of shouts, plaudits, prayers, 
and vows, which the Syracusans offered up for their 

DION. 43 

deliverer, their tutelary deity; for so they now 
termed him, and his foreign soldiers they called 
4 their brethren and fellow-citizens.' At this time 
perhaps there was not a single wretch so selfishly 
fond of life, as not to hold Dion's safety dearer 
than his own, or than that of all his fellow-citizens ; 
while they saw him advancing first in the front of 
danger, through blood and fire, and over heaps of 
the slain. 

There was indeed something terrible in the ap- 
pearance of the enemy, who animated by rage and 
despair had posted themselves in the ruins of the 
ramparts, so that it was extremely dangerous and 
difficult to approach them. But the apprehensions 
of fire discouraged Dion's men the most, and dis- 
tressed them in their march. They were surrounded 
by flames, raging on every side ; and while they 
walked over burning fragments, through clouds of 
ashes and smoke, they were every moment in danger 
of being overwhelmed by the fall of half-consumed 
buildings. In all these difficulties, they took infinite 
pains to keep close together, and to maintain their 
ranks. When they came up to the enemy, a few 
only could engage at a time, on account of the nar- 
rowness and inequality of the ground. They fought 
however with the utmost bravery, and encouraged 
by the acclamations of the citizens, at length routed 
Nypsius, most of whose men escaped into the citadel 
near at hand. Such of them as were dispersed, and 
could not effect an entrance, were pursued and put 
to the sword. The present deplorable state of the 
city afforded neither time nor propriety for the joy- 
ful congratulations, which usually follow victory. 
All were busy in saving the remains of the confla- 
gration ; but, though they laboured hard throughout 
the whole night, it was with great difficulty that the 
fire was extinguished. 

Not one orator of the popular faction durst any 
longer remain in the city. By their flight they at 
once confessed their guilt, and avoided punishment. 

a 
a 

44 DION. 

Heraclides however, and Theodotes, surrendered 
themselves to Dion, acknowledging their error, and 
entreating that he would not imitate them in the 
cruel treatment, which they had shown him. They 
forsrot not to add, how much it would be for his 
honour, unequalled as he was in other virtues, to 
restrain his resentment ; and by forgiving the un- 
grateful, to testify that superiority of spirit, for 
which they had contended with him. His friends, 
however, advised him by no means to pardon these 
factious and invidious men, but to give them up to 
his soldiers, and to rid the commonwealth of the 
ambition of demagogues, an evil not Jess destruct- 
ive than that of tyrants. Dion, on the other hand, 
endeavoured to mitigate their resentment : " Other 
generals," said he, " employ themselves chiefly 
in military studies ; but, by being long conver- 
sant in the Academy, I have learned to subdue 
" my passions, and to restrain the impulses of all 
" envy, enmity, and anger. To prove that I have 
" really gained such a victory over myself, it is not 
" sufficient merely to be kind to men of virtue, but 
" to be indulgent and reconcileable to the injurious. 
" If I have excelled Heraclides in military and po- 
" litical abilities, I am resolved not to be inferior to 
" him in justice and clemency; since to have the 
" advantage in those, is the first degree of excel- 
" lence. The honours of conquest are never wholly 
" our own ; for, though the conqueror may stand 
" unrivalled, fortune will claim her share in his suc- 
" cess43. Heraclides may be treacherous, invi- 
ci dious, and malicious ; but must Dion, therefore, 
" sully his glories by the indulgence of resent- 
u ment41? The laws, indeed, allow the revenge of 
*' an injury to be more justifiable than the commis- 

^ This is nearly the language of Cicero to Crcsar (Orat. pro 
Marceli. '?..) : Maximum verb partem, quasi suo jure, fori una sibi 
<vi)idicat, &c* 

44 All this, though highly creditable to Dion and his illustrious 
tutor Plato, falls infinitely short of the comprehensive charity of the 

DION. 45 

**' sion of it ; but botli proceed originally from the 
" infirmity of human nature. Besides, there is hardly 
any malignity so inveterate, that it may not be 
overcome by kindness, and softened by repeated 
favours." Agreeably to these sentiments, Dion 
pardoned Heraclides, and dismissed him. 

His first object was to repair the wall, with which 
he had formerly enclosed the citadel ; and for this 
purpose, he ordered each of the citizens to furnish a 
palisado, and to bring it to the works. When they 
had done this, he sent them to their repose, and em- 
ployed his own men the whole night in drawing a 
line of circumvallation round the citadel, which 
both the enemy and the citizens were astonished to 
find completed the next morning. 

After the dead were buried, and the prisoners to 
tlie amount of two thousand ransomed, he sum- 
moned an assembly. Heraclides moved, that Dion 
should be declared commander-in-chief both at sea 
and land. This motion was approved by the nobi- 
lity, and the commons were desired to confirm it ; 
but the sailors and artificers tumultuously opposed 
it. They were unwilling, that Heraclides should 
lose his command at sea ; for though they had no 
high opinion of his principles, they knew that he 
would be more indulgent than Dion, and more ready 
to gratify their inclinations. Dion therefore gave up 
the point, and agreed that Heraclides should con- 
tinue admiral. But when the equal distribution of 
lands was moved for, he opposed it, and repealed 
all the decrees formerly passed with regard to that 
measure, by which he once more incurred the dis- 
pleasure of the people. Heraclides again made his 
advantage of this, and harangued the soldiers and 
sailors at Messana, accusing Dion of a design to 
make himself absolute. At the same time, he pri- 

Gospel : ' I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you,' &rc. (Matth. v. 44.) 

The conclusion of the speech will remind the Christian reader of 
Horn. xii. 19. (quoted from Prov. xxv. 22.) : upon which see Pol. 
Synops. Crit. V. 278., and Wolf. Cur. Phil, et Grit. III. 253 * 

AS DION. 

vately corresponded with Dionysius, by means of 
Pharax a Spartan. When the nobility received 
intelligence of this, there was a sedition in the 
army, and the city was greatly distressed by want 
of provisions. Dion was now at a loss what mea- 
sures to pursue ; and all his friends condemned 
him, for having strengthened the hands of so per- 
verse and invidious a wretch as Heraclides. 

Pharax was encamped at Neapolis, in the territory 
of Agrigentum ; and Dion led out the Syracusans, 
but not with a view of engaging him, till he found a 
convenient opportunity. This gave Heraclides and 
his seamen an occasion of exclaiming, that he de- 
layed fighting only to continue the longer in com- 
mand. Thus he was forced to action contrary to his 
inclinations, and was beaten. His loss indeed was 
small, and his defeat was owing rather to a misun- 
derstanding in his own army, than to the superior cou- 
rage of the enemy : he, therefore, resolved to renew 
the engagement, and after animating and encourag- 
ing his men to redeem their lost credit, drew them 
up in form of battle. In the evening however he 
was informed that Heraclides was sailing for Syracuse, 
with an intent to possess himself of the city, and to 
shut him out. Upon this he selected the bravest 
and most active of the cavalry, and rode with such 
expedition, that he reached the city by nine o'clock 
in the morn in sr, after a march of seven hundred fur- 
longs45. Heraclides, though he had made all the 
sail he could, was too late j and he therefore tacked 
about, and stood out to sea. While he was unde- 
termined what course to steer, he met Gaesylus the 
Spartan, who told him that he was sent to command 
in chief in Sicily, as Gylippus had done before. 
Heraclides immediately accepted him, and boasted 
to his allies, that he had found in this Spartan an 
antidote to Dion's power : at the same time, he de- 

45 Is this possible ? asks M. Ricard ; and leaves it to military 
men to determine the question,* 

DION. 47 

spatched a herald to Syracuse, ordering the citizens 
to receive Gaesylus for their general. Dion replied, 
that the Syracusans had already a sufficient number 
of generals; and that, if it were necessary tor them 
to have a Spartan, he was himself a citizen of 
Sparta. 

Gsesylus having now no hopes of the command, 
waited upon Dion, and by his mediation reconciled 
him to Heraclides. This reconciliation was con- 
firmed by the most solemn oaths, and Gaesylus him- 
self was guarantee of the treaty, and undertook to 
punish Heraclides, on the event of any future breach 
of faith. The Syracusans upon this discharged their 
navy, deriving no advantages from it equal to the 
expenses of keeping it on foot, and to those inconve- 
niences which it brought upon them, as a continual 
source of seditions among their chiefs. At the same 
time, they continued the siege of the citadel, and in- 
vested it with another wall. As the besieged were 
cut off from farther supplies, when provisions failed, 
the soldiers began to mutiny : so that Apollocrates 
was obliged to come to terms with Dion ; and of- 
fered to deliver up to him the citadel with all the 
arms and stores, on condition that he might have five 
galleys, and be permitted to retire in safety with his 
mother and sisters. Dion granted his request, and 
with these he sailed to Dionysius. 

He was no sooner under sail, than the whole city 
of Syracuse assembled to behold the joyful sight. 
Their hearts were so full of this interesting event, 
that they even expressed their anger against those 
who were absent, and could not be witnesses with 
what glory the sun that day rose upon Syracuse, de- 
livered at last from the chains of slavery. As this 
flight of Dionysius' connexions^ was one of the 
most memorable vicissitudes of fortune recorded in 
history, and as no tyranny had ever been more ef- 
fectually established than 'his, how great must their 

« B. C. C57< 

a 
ec 

ec 

cc 

is DION. 

joy and their s&Lf-complaceney have been, after they 
had destroyed it by such inconsiderable means ' 

When Apollocrates was gone, and Dion proceeded 
to take possession of the citadel, the women could 
not wait till lie entered, but ran to meet him at the 
gate. Aristomache came first, leading Dion's son ; 
and Arete followed her in tears, apprehensive of 
meeting and addressing her husband, after she had 
been so long in the possession of another. Dion first 
embraced his sister, then his son : after which, 
Aristomache presented Arete to hum, and said : 
" Your banishment, Dion, made us all equally 
*' miserable. Your return, and your success, have 
made us all happy; except her, whom I had the 
misfortune to see by cruel compulsion given to 
another, while you were yet alive. We are now 
entirely in your disposal. But how will you de- 
termine concerning this unhappy woman ? And 
how must she salute you ? as her uncle, or as her 
" husband?" Dion was affected by this tender inter- 
cession, and wept. lie embraced Arete with great 
affection, put his son into her hands, and desired her 
to retire to his own house, where lie purposed to 
reside ; for the city he immediately delivered up to 
the Syraeusans. 

All things had now succeeded to his wish ; but lie 
byno means sought to reap for himself the first ad- 
vantages of his good fortune. His foremost object 
was to gratify his friends, to reward his allies, and 
to give his fellow- citizens and his foreign soldiers 
proper marks of his favour, in which his munificence 
even exceeded his abilities. As to himself, he lived 
in a plain and frugal manner, which upon this occa- 
sion in particular was universally admired. Eor 
while the fame of his actions and the reputation of 
his valour was spread throughout Sicily and Greece, 
he seemed rather to live with Plato in the sparing 
simplicity of the Academic life, than among soldiers, 
who looked upon the daily indulgences of luxury as 
a compensation for the toils and dangers of war. 

12 

DION. 49 

Though Plato himself wrote to him 47, that the eyes 
of the whole world were upon him, he seems not to 
have carried his attentions beyond one particular 
part of one city, the Academy. His judges in that 
society, he knew, would not regard so much the 
greatness of his performances, his courage, or his 
victories, as the temper of mind with which he bore 
prosperity, and the moderation with which he sus- 
tained his happier fortunes. He did not, therefore, 
in the least relax in the severity of his manners ; but 
kept the same reserve toward the people, though 
condescension was at this time politically necessary, 
and though Plato (as we have already observed) had 
expostulated with him upon this account, and told 
him that austerity wras the companion of solitude48. 
He had, certainly, a natural antipathy to complais- 
ance ; and he had moreover a design, by his own 
example, to reform the manners of the Syracusans, 
which were become dissolute and immodest. 

HeracJides now once more began to oppose him. 
Dion sent for him to attend at the council ; but he 
replied, that he would not attend in any other capa- 
city, than as a private citizen at a public assem- 
bly49. Soon after this, he charged Dion with having 
declined to demolish the citadel, and prevented the 
people from opening Dionysius' tomb, and dragging 
out the body. He accused him likewise of having, 
in contempt of his fellow-citizens, sent for counsel- 
lors and ministers to Corinth. And it is true, that 
he had engaged some Corinthians to assist him in 
settling his plan of government. His intention was 
to restrain the unlimited power of the popular admi- 
nistration (which cannot indeed properly be called a 
government, but rather, as Plato terms it, ' a ware- 
house of governments 50'), and to establish the con- 
stitution on the Lacedaemonian and Cretan plan. 

- "7 Epist. iv. 48 See p. 9. 

49 Thus making his court to the people, by insinuating that the 
coHncil was too aiistocratical in it's nature.* 
5° De. Rep. viii. 

VOL. VI. E 

50 DION. 

This was a mixture of the regal and popular govern- 
ments, or rather an aristocracy. Dion knew, that 
the Corinthians were governed chiefly by the nobi- 
lity ; and that the influence of the people rarely in- 
terfered. He foresaw, however, that Heraclides 
would be no inconsiderable impediment to his 
scheme : he knew him to be factious, turbulent, and 
inconstant ; and he therefore gave him up to those, 
who advised to kill him, though he had before saved 
him out of their hands. Accordingly, they broke 
into his house, and murthered him. His death was, 
at first, deeply resented by the citizens ; but when 
Dion bestowed upon him a magnificent funeral, at- 
tended the dead body with his soldiers, and pro- 
nounced an oration to the people, their resentment 
went off. They were indeed sensible that, so long 
as the competition of Dion and Heraclides subsisted, 
the city would never be at peace. 

Dion had a friend named Callippus, an Athenian, 
with whom he had first become acquainted, not on 
account of his literary merit, but (according to 
Plato ") because he happened to be introduced by 
him to some religious Mysteries ; who had always 
attended him in the army, and stood high in has 
esteem. He was the first of his friends, who marched 
along with him into Syracuse with a garland upon 
his head, and he had subsequently much distin- 
guished himself in every action. This man, finding 
that Dion's chief friends had fallen in the war, that 
since the death of Heraclides the popular party was 
without a leader, and that he himself stood in great 
favour with the army, formed an execrable design 
against the life of his benefactor. His object was 
certainly the supreme command in Sicily, though 
some say he was bribed to it by twenty talents. For 
this purpose, he drew several of the soldiers into a 
conspiracy against Dion, and his plot was conducted 
in a most artful manner. He constantly informed 

5,1 Epist. vii. 

DION: 51 

Dion of what he heard, or pretended to have heard, 
alleged against him in the army. By these means 
he obtained such confidence, that he was allowed 
to converse privately with whomsoever he thought 
proper, and to speak with the utmost freedom against 
Dion, in order to discover his secret enemies. Thus 
in a short time he found out, and drew together, all 
the seditious and discontented citizens ; and, if any 
one of different principles informed Dion that his 
integrity had been tried, he gave himself no concern 
about it, as that point had already been settled with 
Callippus. 

While this conspiracy was on foot, Dion had a 
monstrous and dreadful apparition. As he was me- 
ditating one evening alone in the portico before his 
house, he heard a sudden noise, and turning about 
perceived (for it was not yet dark) a woman of gi- 
gantic size at the end of the portico, in the form of 
one of the Furies, as they are represented on the 
theatre, sweeping the floor with a broom. In his 
terror and amazement he sent for some of his friends, 
and informing them of this prodigy, desired they 
would stay with him during the night ; as his mind 
was in the utmost disorder, and he was apprehen- 
sive, if they left him, that the spectre would again 
make it's appearance : but he saw it no more. Soon 
after this his only son, who was now almost grown 
up to manhood, upon some childish displeasure or 
frivolous affront, threw himself from the top of the 
house, and was killed upon the spot 5'2. 

While Dion was in this distress, Callippus was for- 
warding the conspiracy ; and for this purpose he 
propagated a report in Syracuse that Dion, being 
now childless, had determined to adopt Dionysius' 
son Apollocrates, who was nephew to his wife and 

52 This, Plutarch would seem to insinuate, was connected with 
the story of the apparition, which was now beginning to ' sweep * 
off the inhabitants or his house. But Cornelius Nepos simply re- 
presents the dissipated young man, as having leaped out of the 
window to escape from his father's severity. 

E 2 

52 DION. 

grandson to his sister. The plot however was now 
suspected both by Dion, his wife, and his sister, 
and accounts of it were brought to him from all 
quarters. Dion, who had stained his honour and 
tarnished his crlories bv the murther of Hera- 
elides, had (as we may suppose) his distresses and 
anxieties on that account ; and frequently declared, 
that rather than live not only in fear of his enemies 
but in suspicion of his friends, he would die a thousand 
deaths, and freely open his bosom to the assassin. 

When Callippus found the women inquisitive and 
suspicious, he was afraid of the consequence, and as- 
serted with tears his own integrity, offering to give 
them any pledge of his fidelity they might desire. 
They required that he would take the Great Oath, 
the form of which is as follows : the person who 
takes it goes down into the temple of the Thesmo- 
phoii ", where after the performance of some reli- 
gious ceremonies, he puts on the purple robe of 
Proserpine, and holding a flaming torch in his hand, 
proceeds to the oath. All this Callippus did without 
hesitation, and to show in what contempt he held 
the goddess, he appointed the day of her festival for 
the execution of his conspiracy. He could hardly 
think indeed that even this would enhance his guilt, 
or render him more obnoxious to the goddess, when 
he was the very person, who had before initiated 
Dion in her sacred Mysteries. 

The conspiracy was now supported by numbers ; 
and as Dion was surrounded by his friends, in the 
apartment where he usually entertained them, the 
conspirators invested the house, some securing the 
doors and others the windows. The assassins, who 
were Zacynthians, entered in their ordinary dress 
unarmed. Those, who remained without, fastened 
the doors. The Zacynthians then seized Dion, and 
endeavoured to strangle him ; but, not succeeding 
in this, they called for a sword. No one however 

x Ceres and Proserpine.* 

DION. 53 

durst open the door, as Dion had many friends 
about him ; yet they had in effect nothing to fear 
from them, each of them concluding, that by giving 
up Dion lie should consult his own safety. When 
they had waited some time, Lycon, a Syracusan, 
put a short sword through the window into the 
hands of a Zacynthian ; who fell upon Dion, al- 
ready stunned and senseless, and cut his throat like 
a victim at the altar. His sister, and his wife who was 
pregnant, they imprisoned. In this unhappy situa- 
tion she fell in labour, and was delivered of a son, 
whom they ventured to preserve ; Callippus being 
too much embroiled by his own affairs to attend to 
them, and the keepers of the prison having been 
prevailed upon to connive at it. 

After Dion was cut off, and Callippus had the 
whole government of Syracuse in his hands, he had 
the presumption to write to the Athenians, whom 
next to the gods he ought of all others to have 
dreaded, polluted as he was with the murther of 
his benefactor. But it has been observed with great 
truth of that state, that it's good men are the best, 
and it's bad men the worst in the world ; as it's soil 
produces the finest honey 54, and the most fatal poi- 
sons. Callippus' success, however, did not long 
reproach the indulgence of the gods : he soon re- 
ceived the punishment, which he deserved. For, in 
attempting to take Catana, he lost Syracuse ; upon 
which occasion he said, that he had lost a city, and 
gained a cheese-grater55. Afterward, at the siege 
of Messana, most of his men were cut off, and 
among the rest Dion's murtherers. As he was re- 
fused admission by every city in Sicily, and univer- 
sally hated and despised, he passed into Italy, and 
made himself master of Rhegium ; where being no 
longer able to maintain his soldiers, he was slain by 

54 On mount Hymettus.* 

5J But the Greek word signifying ' a cheese- grater ' is not 
Crttane, but Patane, which might however be vulgarly pronounced 
like the other. 

54 DION. 

Leptines and Polyperchon, with the very sword with 
which Dion had been assassinated, for it was known 
by it's size (being short, like the Spartan swords), 
and by it's curious workmanship. Thus Callippus 
received the punishment due to his crimes. 

"When Aristomache and Arete were released out 
of prison, they were received by Icetes a Syracusan, 
a friend of Dion's, who for some time entertained 
them with hospitality and good faith. Afterward 
however, being prevailed upon by Dion's enemies, 
he put them on board a vessel, under pretence of 
sending them to Peloponnesus ; but giving private 
orders at the same time to the sailors to assassinate 
them in the passage, and throw their bodies over- 
board. Others say, that they and the infant were 
thrown alive into the sea. Phis wretch, likewise, 
paid the forfeit of his villainy : for he was put to 
death by Timoleon ; and the Syracusans, to revenge 
Dion, slew his two daughters, of which I have made 
more particular mention in the Life of Timoleon. 

THE 

LIFE 

OF 

BRUTUS. 

SUMMARY. 

Birth and education of Brutus. His family by the father's and mo- 
ther's side. He attaches himself to the Old Academy ; accompanies 
his uncle Cato to Cyprus ; and in the civil war sides xvith Pom- 
pey. Caesar orders his officers to spare him, and receives him 
courteously. He is appointed governor of Cisalpine Gaul, and 
prcetor of the city : is suspected by Ccesar. Engages in a conspi- 
racy against him ; animated by private intimations from several 
quarters, and determined by Cassius. They gain Ligarius, and 
other friends: Labeo and Albinus join their party. Brutus' wife, 
Porcia, proves her competency to the secret. The execution fxed 
for the Ides of March. Many alarming accidents. Brutus, in- 
formed that his wife is dead, remains in the senate-house. Lcena's 
conversation xvith Ccesar disconcerts the conspirators. Ccesar as- 
sassinated. Brutus opposes the murther of Antony, who atfrst 
takes their part; hit afterward, by reading Ccesar' s will to the 
people, rouses the public indignation against the assassins. Brutus 
leaves Rome, and orders the shows to be exhibited in his absence. 
Octavius arrives at Rome. Brutus retires into Lucania. Porcia's 
grief upon the occasion. He goes to Athens, and begins to levy 
troops, which daily gather strength. His illness from cold. He 
defeats Caius, the brother of Antony, and takes him prisoner, 
Octavius is reconciled to Antony. Second triumvirate, and pro- 
scription. Brutus in revenge puts Caius to death. Parallel of 
Brutus and Cassius. Eulogy on Brutus. His sense of honour. 
Cassius takes Rhodes. Brutus besieges Xanthus. The Lyciansg, 

06 BRUTUS. 

in despair, set /ire to their city. The moderation of Brutus gains 
him several other cities. He puis to death Theodotus, tvho had 
recommended the murther of Pompey in Egypt. Quarrels ivilli 
Cassius. Adventure of Favonius. Brutus' rigour in secins; the 
larvs fulfilled. He offends Cassius. Apparition, and Cassius' 
speech upon it. They march against Caesar and Antony, at Phi- 
lippi. Cassius, moved by some prodigies, tvishes to defer the en- 
gagement, hut Brutus refuses. Their conversation before the 
battle. The right wing, under Brutus, gains a considerable advan- 
tage ; but the left, under Cassius, is entirely defeated. A fatal 
mistake. Cassius surrounded : his troops disperse. He orders 
his freedman to kill him. Brutus' lamentation over his body. He 
collects his scattered forces ; but is distressed by the disposition of 
the soldiery : deviates, in one instance, from his accustomed jus- 
tice. Ccesar and Antony hazard a second battle. The spectre re- 
appears to Brutus ; tvho is defeated. Lucilius offers himself to 
the pursuers as Brutus, and ?s carried to Antony. Brutus sends 
Stalilius to visit his camp : kills himself. Honours paid by Antony 
io his remains. Death of Porciu. 

i HE great progenitor of Marcus Brutus was that 
Junius Brutus, to whom the ancient Ltomans erected 
a statue of brass, and placed it in the Capitol 
among their kings. He was represented with a 
drawn sword in his hand, to signify the spirit and 
firmness, with. which he vanquished the Tarquins: 
"but hard-tempered like the steel of which that sword 
was composed, and in no degree humanised by edu- 
cation, the same obdurate severity which impelled 
him against the tyrant, shut up his natural affection 
from his children, when he found them conspiring 
for the support of tyranny. On the contrary that 
Brutus, whose Life we are now writing, had all the 
advantages arising from the cultivation of philoso- 
phy. To his spirit, which was naturally sedate and 
mild, he gave activity by constant application. Upon 
the whole, he seems to have been happily formed to 
virtue. Even the partisans of Caesar ascribed to him 

BRUTUS. 57 

every thing, which had the appearance of honour or 
generosity in the conspiracy, whereas all that was 
of a contrary complexion was laid to the charge of' 
Cassius ; who was indeed the friend and relation of 
Brutus, but by no means resembled him in the pu- 
rity and simplicity of his manners. It is universally 
allowed, that his mother Servilia was descended from 
Servilius Ahala, who when Spurius Maelius sedi- 
tiously aspired to the monarchy, went up to him in 
the Forum under a pretence of business, and as 
Melius inclined his head to hear what he would sav, 
stabbed him with a dagger which he had concealed 
for that purpose '. But those, who were ill affected 
toward him on account of his participation in Cae- 
sar's murther, would not allow that he was descended 
from Junius Brutus, whose family they said was ex- 
tinct with his two sons2. Marcus Brutus (according 
to them) was a plebeian, descended from one Bru- 
tus, a steward of mean extraction ; and the family 
had but lately risen to any dignity in the state. On 
the contrary, Posidonius the philosopher agrees 
with those historians, who state that Junius Brutus 
had a third son, an infant when his brothers were 
put to death, and that from him Marcus Brutus was 
descended. He farther informs us, that there were 
several illustrious persons of that family in his time, 
with whom he was well acquainted, and who very 

1 Livy (iv. 14-.) and other historians relate this affair in a different 
manner. Some of them confidently assert, that Servilius, who was 
then genera! of the horse, put Maelius to death hy order of Cincin- 
nattis the dictator. 

1 Of this number is Dio, xl'tv. 14., and Dionysus of Halicar- 
nassus, v. :5. The latter adduces the pleheianship of ]VI. Brutus, 
here mentioned; as a satisfactory proof. But from Suet. (Aug. 2.) 
it appears that patrician families, e.g. the Octavian, sometimes 
became plebeian. The authority of Cicero is less valuable (Brut. 
Ik, and Philipp. i. 6.), as his reverence for Brutus nearly amount- 
ed to idolatry, and he would naturally assign him the most illus- 
trioa^ extraction he could. 

Tunc licet k) Pico rumors genus. (Juv. viii. 131.)* 

12 

58 BRUTUS. 

much resembled the statue of Junius Brutus'. But 
enough upon this subject. 

Cato the philosopher was brother to Scrvilia, the 
mother of Brutus, who greatly admired and imitated 
his uncle's virtues, and married his daughter Porcia. 

Brutus was acquainted with all the sects of the 
Greek philosophers, and understood their doctrines ; 
but the Platonists ranked highest in his esteem. He 
had no favourable opinion either of the New, or of 
the Middle Academy ; but applied himself wholly to 
the studies of the Old one4. Antiochus of Ascalon 
was therefore his favourite, and he entertained his 
brother Ariston in his own house ; a man who, 
though inferior to some of the philosophers in learn- 
ing, was equal to the first of them in modesty, 
prudence, and gentleness of manners. Empylus, 
who likewise lived with Brutus (as we find from his 
own Epistles, and in those of his friends), was an 
orator, and left a short but well-written narrative of 
the death of Caesar, entitled ( Brutus.' 

Brutus spoke with great ability in Latin, both in 
the field and at the bar. In Greek, he affected the 
sententious and laconic way : of this there are several 
instances in his Epistles. Thus, in the beginning of 
the war, he wrote to the Pergamenians ; " I hear 

you have given money to Dolabella. If you gave 

it willingly, you must own that you injured me \ 

it 

3 There were several distinguished persons of this family, A. U. C. 
558 ; some of whom opposed the abrogation of the Oppian law, 
and were besieged by the Roman women in their houses. (Liv. 
xxxiv. i., Val. Max. ix. 1. 3.) 

4 The Old Acadenvy, instituted properly by Socrates, was suc- 
cessively governed by Plato, his nephew Speusippus, Xenocrates, 
and Polemo. The Second, or Middle, owed it's origin to Arcesilas, 
who was succeeded by Lacydes, Evander, Hegesinus, and Car- 
neades. By this last was founded that called the New ; and he was 
followed by Clitomachus, Philo, and Antiochus of Ascalon. For 
some account of the latter, see the Life of Cicero, Vol. V. ; and for 
his brother, Cic. Acad. i. 3., Brut. 97. The three jointly reach 
from the time of Socrates down to that of Augustus, and compre- 
hend upward of three hundred years.* 

9 

BRUTUS. 53 

" if unwillingly, prove it by giving willingly to me." 
And again, upon another occasion, to the Samians ; 
'•' Your deliberations are tedious; your actions slow : 
" what, think yon, will be the consequence r" Of 
the Patareans5 thus ; " The Xanthians rejected my 
" kindness, and desperately made their country their 
" grave. The Patareans confided in me, and re- 
" tained their liberty. It is in your own choice to 
" imitate the prudence of the Patareans, or to suffer 
" the fate of the Xanthians." And such is the stile 
of his most remarkable letters. 

While he was yet very young, he accompanied 
Cato to Cyprus, in the expedition against Ptolemy6. 
After Ptolemy had killed himself, Cato, being de- 
tained by business in the isle of Rhodes, sent 
Caninius to secure the king's treasure ; but sus- 
pecting his fidelity, he wrote to Brutus to sail im- 
mediately to Cyprus from Pamphylia, where after a 
fit of sickness he was then staying for the re-esta- 
blishment of his health. This order he obeyed with 
reluctance, both out of respect to Caninius, who 
was thus superseded with disgrace, and because he 
thought the employment servile and illiberal, and 
by no means proper for a young man engaged in 
the pursuit of philosophy. Nevertheless, he executed 
the commission with such diligence, that he obtained 
Cato's approbation; and, having converted Ptolemy's 
effects into ready money, he brought the greatest 
part of it to Rome. 

When Rome was divided into two factions, and 
Pompey and Csesar were in arms against each other, 
it was generally believed that Brutus would join 

5 Patarea was a city of Lycia, on the northern coast of Asia 
Minor, and to the east of the mouth of the Xanthus. Ptolemy 
Philadelphia, by whom it was considerably augmented, called it 
* Arsinoe of Lycia,' after the name of his wife ; but the old deno- 
mination was soon restored. (Strabo, xiv.) Xanthus, the city 
mentioned below, stood higher up on the other side.* 

6 See the Life of Cato, V. 85. In that Life, Caninius is always 
palled Canidius.* 

60 BRUTUS. 

Caesar, because his father hud been put to death by 
Pompey7. Brutus however thought it his duty to 
sacrifice his resentments to the interest of his coun- 
try, and judging Pompey's to be the better cause, 
joined his party ; though before lie would not even 
salute that general when he met him, esteeming it a 
crime to hold any conversation with the murtherer 
of his father. But he now regarded him as the head 
of the commonwealth ; and therefore, listing under 
his banner, lie sailed for Sicily as lieutenant to Sestius, 
who was governor of the island. There, however, 
he found no opportunity of distinguishing himself; 
and being informed that Pompey and Caesar were 
encamped near each other, and preparing for the 
battle which was to decide the fate of the empire, he 
hastened into Macedon to take his share in the dan- 
ger. This measure, it is said, so much surprised and 
delighted Pompey, that he rose to embrace him in 
the presence of his guards, and treated him with as 
much respect as if he had been his superior. During 
the time that he was in camp, those hours which 
he did not spend with Pompey, he employed in 
reading and study ; and thus he passed the day be- 
fore the battle of Pharsalia. it was the middle of 
summer, the heats were intense, the marshy situation 
of the camp disagreeable, and his tent-bearers were 
Jong in coming. Nevertheless, though extremely 
harassed and fatigued, he did not anoint himself till 
noon ; and then taking a morsel of bread, while 
others were at rest, or musing on the event of the 
ensuing day, he employed himself till the evening in 
writing an epitome of Polybius. 

Caesar, it is recorded, had so high an esteem for 
him, that he ordered his officers by all means to spare 
him, if he chose to surrender himself; and, if he 
refused, to let him escape with his life. Some have 
placed this kindness to the account of his mother 

i See the Life of Pompey. IV. 143. 

BRUTUS. 61 

Servilia, with whom Caesar had had connexions of a 
tender nature in the early part of his life8. Besides, 
as this amour was at its acme about the time when 
Brutus was born, Cssar had some reason to believe 
that he might be his son. The intrigue was noto- 
rious. When the senate was debating upon the 
dangerous conspiracy of Catiline, Cato and Caesar, 
who took different sides of the question, happened 
to sit near each other. In the midst of the business, 
a note was brought to Caesar from without, which he 
read silently to himself: upon this, Cato loudly 
accused Caesar of receiving letters from the enemies 
of the commonwealth ; and Caesar, finding that it 
had occasioned a disturbance in the senate, delivered 
the note to Cato as he had received it. Cato, when 
he found it to be nothing but a lewd letter from his 
own sister Servilia, threw it back again to Caesar : 
ii Take it, you sot," said he, and went on with the 
public business. 

After the battle of Pharsalia, when Pompey had 
tied toward the sea and Caesar was storming the 
camp, Brutus escaped through one of the gates, and 
fled into a watery marsh, where he hid himself among 
the reeds. Thence he ventured out in the night, 
and got safe to Larissa3. From Larissa he wrote to 
Caesar, who expressed the greatest pleasure in hear- 
ing of his safety, sent for him, and entertained him 
among the first of his friends. When no one could 
give any account which way Pompey was fled, Caesar 
walked for some time alone with Brutus, to explore 
his opinion ; and finding that he supposed it was to 
Egypt, he disregarded the suggestions of the rest, 
and directed his march for that country. Pompey 

s These connexions were well known. Caesar ma<'e her a pre- 
sent, upon a certain occasion, of a pearl which cost him nearly 
50,0001. In the civil wars, he assigned to her a confiscated estate 
tor a mere trifle ; and when the people expressed their surprise at 
it's cheapness, Cicero said humorously, Quo melius emptqrn sciatis, 
tertia deducta est. Terlia was a daughter of Servilia's, and deducts, 
was a term in the procuring business. 

9 A city in ThessaJy.* 

62 BRUTUS. 

had indeed taken the route of Egypt, as Brutus con- 
jectured, but he had already met his fate. 

Brutus had so much influence with Caesar, that he 
reconciled him to his friend Cassius ; and when he 
spoke in behalf of the king of Africa, though there 
were many impeachments against him, he obtained 
for him a considerable part of his kingdom10. On 
opening his speecli upon this occasion, Caesar said ; 
" I know not what this young man intends, but 
" whatever it is, he intends it strongly." His mind 
was steady, and not easily moved by entreaties. His 
principles were reason and honour, and the ends to 
which these directed him he prosecuted with so much 
vigour, that he seldom failed of success. No flattery 
could induce him to attend to unjust petitions; and 
though that ductility of mind, which may be wrought 
upon by the impudence of importunity, is by some 
called good-nature, he considered it as (he greatest 
disgrace. lie used to say, that he suspected those, 
who could refuse no favours, iiad not very honestly 
employed the flower of their. youth. 

Caesar, previously to his expedition into Africa 
against Cato and Scipio, appointed Brutus to the 
government of Cisalpine Gaul : and this was very 
fortunate for that particular province. For, while 
the inhabitants of other provinces were oppressed 
and treated like slaves by the violence and rapacity 
of their governors, Brutus behaved with so much 
kindness to the people under his jurisdiction, that 
they were in some measure indemnified for their 
former sufferings. Yet he ascribed evervthin^ to the 
goodness or Caesar ; and it was no small gratification 
to the latter to find, upon his return through Italy, 
not onlv Brutus himself, but all the cities under his 
command, ready to attend his progress and industri- 
ous to do him honour. 

As there were several praetorships vacant, it was 

Ic Plutarch must here be mistaken. It was Deiotarus, king of 
Galatia, and not the king of Africa, for whom Brutus pleaded. See 
Cic. Ep. r.d At!, iv. 1. 

BRUTUS. 65 

the general opinion that the chief of them, the prae- 
torship of the city, would be conferred upon either 
Brutus or Cassius. Some say, that this competition 
heightened the variance, which had already taken 
place between them ; for such there was, though 
Cassius was allied to Brutus by having married his 
sister Junia. Others however affirm, that this com- 
petition was a political manoeuvre of Caesar's, who 
by privately favouring both their hopes, had en- 
couraged their mutual hostility. Be that as it may, 
Brutus had little more than the reputation of his 
virtue to set against the gallant actions, which had 
been achieved by Cassius in the Parthian war. Caesar 
weighed the merits of each ; and after consulting 
with his friends, " Cassius," said he, " has the better 
" title to the first praetorship ; but Brutus must have 
" it, notwithstanding." Another praetorship was 
therefore given to Cassius ; but he was less obliged 
by this, than offended by the loss of the first. 

Brutus had, or at least might have had, equal in- 
fluence with Caesar in every thing else : he might 
have stood the first in interest with him, if he had 
not been drawn off and turned aside by Cassius* 
party. Not that he was perfectly reconciled to 
Cassius, since their competition for the praetoriai ap- 
pointments ; but he listened to his friends, who were 
perpetually advising him, instead of being soothed 
or cajoled by Caesar, to reject the civilities of a 
tyrant, whose object was not to reward but to disarm 
his virtue. On the other hand, Caesar had his sus- 
picions, and Brutus his accusers ; yet the former 
thought he had less to fear from his spirit, his autho- 
rity, and his connexions, than he had to hope from 
his honesty. When he was told, that Antony and 
Dolabella had some dangerous conspiracy on foot ; 
" It is not," said he, " the sleek and fat men that I 
" fear, but the pale and the lean* ;" meaning Brutus 
and Cassius. Afterward, when he was advised to 

* See the Life of Antony, Vol. V,* 

6* BRUTUS. 

beware of Brutus, he laid his hand upon his brcasf, 
and said ; " Don't you think, then, that Brutus will 
" wait, till I have done with, this poor body ?" as if 
he thought Brutus the only proper person to succeed 
him in his immense power. It is extremely probable 
indeed that Brutus would have been the first man in 
Home, could he have had patience to remain awhile 
the second, and have stayed till time had wasted the 
power of Caesar, and dimmed the lustre of his great 
actions. But Cassius, a man of violent passions, and 
an enemy to Cassar rather from personal than political 
hatred, still urged him against the dictator. It was 
universally observed, that Brutus hated the imperial 
power, and Cassius the emperor. Cassius, indeed, 
pretended that Caesar had injured him : he com- 
plained, that the lions which he had procured when 
he was nominated cedile, and which he had sent to 
Megara, Caesar had converted to his own use, having 
found them in that city when it was taken bv Calanus. 
Those lions, it is stated, were very fatal to the in- 
habitants : for as soon as their city was taken, they 
opened their dens and unchained them in the streets, 
to stop the irruption of the foe ; instead of which, 
they fell upon the citizens, and tore them so dread- 
fully, that their very enemies were struck with pity. 
Some affirm, that this was the principal motive with 
Cassius for conspiring against Caesar -, but they are 
strangely mistaken. Cassius had a natural hatred of 
the whole race of tyrants, which he showed even 
when he was at school with Faustus the son of Sylla.- 
As Faustus was one day boasting among the boys of 
the unlimited power of his father, Cassius rose and 
struck him on the face. The friends and tutors of 
Faustus wou.id have taken upon themselves to punish 
the insult; but Pompey prevented it, and sending 
for the boys examined them himself. Upon which 
Cassius said, " Come along, Faustus ! and repeat, if 
*'■ you darCj before Pompey the expressions which* 
" provoked me, that I may again strike you on the 
" face." Such was the disposition of Cassius. 

BRUTUS. G£ 

But Brutus was animated to this undertaking by 
the persuasion of his friends, by private intimations, 
and by anonymous letters. Under the statue of his 
ancestor, who destroyed the Tarquins, was placed a 
paper with these words : " O that we had a Brutus 
now !" And " O that Brutus were now alive !" His 
own tribunal, upon which he sat as praetor, was 
continually filled with such inscriptions as these : 
" Brutus, thou sleepest ! thou art not a true Brutus !** 
Caesar's sycophants were the occasion of this ; for, 
among other invidious distinctions which they paid 
him, they crowned his statues by night, that the 
people might salute him king instead of dictator. 
This however, as I have shown more at large in the 
Life of Caesar, had a contrary effect. 

When Cassius solicited his friends to engage in 
the conspiracy, they all consented, on condition that 
Brutus would take the lead ; concluding, that it 
was not strength of hands or resolution which they 
wanted, but the countenance of a man of reputation 
like him to preside at this sacrifice, and by his very 
participation to justify the deed. They were sensi- 
ble, that without him they should neither proceed 
with spirit, nor escape suspicion when they had 
effected their purpose : as the world, they knew,, 
would infer that if the action had been honourable, 
Brutus would not have refused to be concerned in it. 
Cassius, having considered these things, determined 
to pay Brutus the first visit, after the quarrel that 
had been between them ; and when the compliments, 
of reconciliation were over, he asked him, whether 
he intended to be in the senate on the calends of 
March ; as " it was reported," he said, " that 
" Caesar's friends designed to move, that he should 
f be declared king." Brutus answered, he should 
not be there : upon which Cassius demanded, " But 
what, if they should send for us ?" " It would 
then," replied Brutus, " be my duty, not only to 
speak against it, but to sacrifice my life for* the 
liberties of Rome." Cassius, encouraged by this, 

VOL. VI. F 

« 

Li 

66 BftUTtfS. 

6< 

« 

Li 

proceeded ; " But what Roman will bear to sec you 
die ? Don't you know yourself, Brutus ? Think 
you that those inscriptions, which you found on 
your tribunal, were placed there by weavers and 
victuallers-, and not by the first and greatest men 
" in Rome? From other praetors they look for pre- 
" sents, and shows, and gladiators ; but from you 
they claim the abolition of tyranny, as a debt 
which your family has entailed upon you. They 
are ready to suffer every thing on your account, 
if you are really what you ought to be, and what 
they expect you to be." After this he embraced 
him, and being perfectly reconciled, they retired to 
their respective friends. 

In Pompey's party there was one Quintus Ligarius* 
whom Caesar had pardoned, though he had borne 
arms against him. This- man, less grateful for the 
pardon which he had received, than offended at the 
power which had made him stand in need of it, hated 
Ca?sarj but was the intimate friend of Brutus. The 
latter one day visited him, and finding him unwell, 
said, " O Ligarius I what a time is this to be sick ?" 
Upon which he raised himself on his elbow, and 
taking Brutus by the hand, answered ; " If Brutus 
" has any design worthy of himself, Ligarius is well."1 
They now sounded the inclinations of all whom they 
could trust, and took into the conspiracy not only 
their familiar friends, but such as they knew to be 
brave and above the fear of death. For this reason, 
though they had the highest regard for Cicero, and 
the utmost confidence in his principles as a re- 
publican, they concealed the conspiracy from him ; 
lest his natural timidity, increased by the wariness of 
age11, and estimating every individual step with a 
view to the greatest possible security, should retard 
those measures which required the most resolute 
despatch. 

Brutus likewise thought proper to leave his friends 

11 He was now* sixty-three yeara of sge, !). C. H-.* 

BRUTUS. G7 

Statilius and Favonius, the followers of Cato, out 
of the conspiracy. He had tried their sentiments 
under the colour of a philosophical dispute, in 
which Favonius observed, that the worst absolute 
government was preferable to a civil war ; and Sta- 
tilius added, that it did not become a wise or sensible 
man to expose himself to fear and danger, on account 
of the faults and follies of others. But Labeo, who 
was present, contradicted both : and Brutus, though 
lie was silent at that time, as if the dispute had been 
difficult to determine, communicated the design 
subsequently to Labeo, who readily concurred in it. 
It was then agreed to gain over the other Brutus, 
surnamed Albinus, who though not distinguished by 
his personal courage or activity, derived considerable 
importance from the number of gladiators whom he 
bred for the public shows, and the entire confidence 
that Caesar reposed in him. To the solicitations of 
Cassius and Labeo, however, he made no answer ; 
but when he came privately to Brutus, and found 
that he was at the head of the conspiracy, he made 
no scruple of joining them. The name of Brutus 
drew in many more of the most eminent persons of 
the state ; and though they had entered into no oath 
of secrecy, they kept the conspiracy so close, that 
notwithstanding the gods themselves denounced the 
event by visions and a variety of other prodigies, no 
one would give any credit to it. 

Brutus now felt his consequence lie heavy upon 
him. The safety of some of the principal men in. 
Home depended upon his conduct, and he could not 
think of the danger, which they were about to en- 
counter, without anxiety. In public, indeed, he 
suppressed his uneasiness ; but at home, and espe- 
cially by night, he was not the same man. Some- 
times, he would start from his sleep ; at others, he 
was totally immersed in thought. From these and 
similar circumstances it was obvious to his wife, as 
they slept together, that he was full of unusual cares,, 
arid was revolving in his mind some difficult and 

F 2 

68 SRtnm 

dangerous enterprise. Porcia, as we before observed, 
was the daughter of Cato. She had been married to 
her cousin Brttttis very young, though she was then 
a widow, and had a son named liibulus after his 
father. There is a small tract of his still extant, 
called £ Memoirs of Brutus.' Porcia to the affection 
of a wife added the prudence of a woman, who was 
not unacquainted with philosophy ; and she resolved 
to forbear inquiring into her husband's secrets, before 
she had made the following trial of her own firmness : 
She ordered all her attendants out of her apartment, 
and with a small knife gave herself a deep wound in 
the thigh. This occasioned a great effusion of blood, 
violent pain, and a fever in consequence. While 
Brutus, who was extremely afflicted for her, was 
attending her in the height of her suffering, she thus 
spoke to him : " When you married Cato's daughter, 
Brutus, you did not I presume consider her merely 
as a female companion, but as the partner of all 
your fortunes. You, indeed, have given me no 
reason to repent my marriage : but what proof, 
either of affection or fidelity, can you receive from 
" me, if I am to share neither in your secret griefs 
u nor in your private counsels ! I am sensible, that 
** secrecy is not the characteristic virtue of my sex : 
;' but surely our natural weakness may be strength- 
" ened by a virtuous education, and by honourable 
connexions ; and Porcia can boast that she is the 
daughter of Catd, and the wife of Brutus. Yet 
even in these distinctions I placed no absolute 
*f confidence, till I had made an experiment, and 
" found that I was proof against pain." When she 
had said this, she showed him her wound, and in- 
formed him other motives: upon which Brutus was 
so much surprised, that with lifted hands he entreated 
the gods to favour his enterprise, and enable him to 
approve himself worthy of Porcia. He then took 
every means to cure her wound, and to restore her 
to health. 

A meeting of the senate being appointed, at which 

a 

a 

BRUTUS. 69 

Caesar was expected to attend, that was thought a 
proper time for the execution of their design. For 
then they could not only appear together without 
suspicion, but as some of the most considerable 
persons in the commonwealth would be present, 
they flattered themselves that as soon as the deed 
was done, these would join in asserting the common 
liberty. The place too, where the senate was to 
meet, seemed providentially favourable for their 
purpose. It was a portico adjoining to the theatre, 
and in the midst of a saloon furnished with benches 
stood a statue of Pompey, which had been erected 
to him bv the commonwealth, when he adorned that 
part of the city with these buildings. Here the 
senate was convened on the ides of March ; and it 
seemed, as if some god was bringing Cassar to this 
place, in order to avenge upon him Pompey's death. 
When the day came, Brutus went out, and took 
with him a dagger, which last circumstance was 
known only to his wife. The rest met at Cassius' 
house, and conducted his son, who was that day to 
put on the Toga Virilis, to the Forum ; whence they 
proceeded to Pompey's portico, and waited for 
Ceesar. Any one, who had been privy to the design, 
of the conspirators, would now have been astonished 
at their tranquil and consistent firmness. Many of 
them were praetors, and obliged by their office to 
hear and determine causes. These they heard with 
so much calmness, and decided with so much ac- 
curacy, that no one could have supposed there had 
been any thing else upon their minds : and, when a 
certain person appealed with great clamour from the 
judgement of Brutus to Cassar, Brutus looking round 
upon the assembly said ; " Cassar neither does, nor 
" shall, hinder me from acting agreeably to the 
" laws." Nevertheless, they were disturbed by many 
accidents. Though the day was far spent, still Ceesar 
did not arrive, being detained by his wife and the 
-soothsayers on account of defects in the sacrifices. 
In the mean time a person came up to Casca, one of 

70 BRUTUS. 

the conspirators, and taking him by the hand, " Yoii 
" concealed the thing from me," said he, " but 
" Brutus has told me all." Casca expressed his 
surprise ; upon which the other said, laughing, 
" How came you to be so rich of a sudden, as to 
" stand for the asdileship r" So nearly was the great 
secret blown, by the ambiguity of this man's dis- 
course 1 At the same time Popilius Lama a senator, 
after saluting Brutus and Cassius in a very obliging 
manner, said in a whisper ; " My best wishes are 
" with you : but make no delay, for it is now no 
" secret." Upon which, he immediately went away, 
and left them in the utmost consternation, as they 
concluded that every thing was discovered. Soon 
after this, a messenger came running from Brutus' 
house, and told him that his wife was dying. Porcia 
had been under extreme anxiety, and in great 
agitation about the event. At every little noise or 
voice she started up and ran to the door, like one of 
the frantic priestesses of Bacchus, demanding of 
every one who came from the Forum, what Brutus 
was doing. She despatched messenger after messen- 
ger, to make the same inquiries ; and, unable any 
longer to support the agony of her mind, at length 
punk and fainted away. She had not time to retire 
to her chamber. As she sat in the middle of the 
house, her spirits failed, her colour changed, and she 
lost her senses and her speech. Her women shrieked, 
the neighbours ran to their assistance, and a report 
was soon spread through the city that Porcia was 
dead. By the care of those about her, however, in a 
short time she recovered. Brutus was naturally much 
distressed on the intelligence, but his private grief 
gave way to the public concern ; for it was now 
reported, that Caesar was coming on a litter. The 
ill omen of his sacrifices had deterred him from 
entering upon business of importance, and he pro- 
posed to defer it under a pretence of indisposition. 
As soon as he had left the litter, Popilius Loena, who 
a little before had wished Brutus success, went up 

9 

BRUTUS. 71 

and spoke to him for a considerable time, Caesar all 
the while standing and seeming very attentive. The 
conspirators (for so let them be stiled) not being able 
to hear what he said, suspected from what had pass- 
ed between him and Brutus* that he was now mak- 
ing a disclosure of their design. This disconcerted 
them extremely, and looking upon each other they 
agreed by the silent language of the countenance, 
that they would not stay to be taken, but despatch 
themselves. With this intent, Cassius and some 
Others were just about to draw their daggers from 
under their robes ; when Brutus having inferred 
from Laena's looks and gestures, that he was peti- 
tioning and not accusing, encouraged Cassius by the 
cheerfulness of his countenance. This was the only 
way, in which he could communicate his sentiments, 
being surrounded by many that were strangers to 
the conspiracy. Laena, after a little while, kissed 
Caesar's hand and left him ; and it plainly appeared, 
upon the whole, that he had been speaking about 
his own private affairs* 

The senate was already seated, and tire conspira- 
tors, under pretence of preferring a suit to him, had 
crowded round Caesar's chair. Cassius turned his 
ilice to Pompey's statue, and invoked it, as if it had 
been sensible of his prayers. Trebonius 12 detained 
Antony in conversation without the court. And 
now Caesar entered, and the whole senate rose to 
salute him- The conspirators clustered about him, 
and set Tullius Cimber, one of their number, to solicit 
the recal of his brother who had been banished. In 
this solicitation they all united, clasping Caesar's 
hand, and kissing his head and his breast. He re- 
jected their applications, however, and finding that 
they would not desist, at length rose from his seat 
in anger. Tullius upon this laid hold of his robe, 

11 This, though different from Plutarch's former account in the 
Life of Ceesar, IV. 434. (in which he informs us, that Antony was 
•detained by Brutus Albinus), is the more accurate statement. See 
jCic. Philipp. ii., and xiii.* 

V2 eritc.s. 

and pulled it from his shoulders. Casta, who stood 
behind, gave him the first (though but a slight) 
wound with his dagger, near the shoulder. Caesar 
caught the handle of the dagger, and said in Latin, 
" Villain! Casca ! What dost thou mean ?" Casea, 
in Greek, called his brother to his assistance. Caesar 
was wounded by numbers almost at the same instant, 
and looked round him for some way to escape ; but 
when he saw Brutus' dagger pointed against him, 
he let go Casca's hand, and covering his head with 
his robe, resigned himself to their swords. The con- 
spirators pressed so eagerly to stab him, that they 
even wounded each other. Brutus, in attempting to 
have his share in the sacrifice, received a cut in his 
hand, and all of them were covered with blood. 

Caesar thus slain, Brutus stepped forward into the 
middle of the senate-house, and proposing to make 
a speech, desired the senators to stay. They fled 
however with the utmost precipitation, though no 
one pursued, the conspirators having no design upon 
any life, but that of Caesar: that taken away, they 
invited the rest to liberty. AH but Brutus indeed 
were of opinion, that Antony ought to fall with 
Caesar ; as an insolent man, who in his principles 
favoured monarchy, and who had rendered himself 
popular in the army. Moreover, beside his natural 
disposition to despotism, he had at this time the con- 
sular power, and was Cesar's coliegue. Brutus, on 
the other hand, alleged the injustice of such a mea- 
sure, and suggested the possibility of Antony's 
change of principle. Ke thought it tar from impro- 
bable that, after the destruction of Caesar, a man so 
passionately fond of glory would be inspired by an 
emulation to join in restoring the commonwealth. 
Thus Antony was saved ; though, in the general 
consternation, he had fled in the disguise of a ple- 
beian. Brutus and his party betook themselves to 
the Capitol, and showing their bloody hands and 
•naked swords, proclaimed liberty to the people as 
they passed. At first all was lamentation, distrac- 

BRUTUS. 73 

tioiv and anarchy: but as no farther violence was 
committed, the senators and people recovered their 
apprehensions, and went in a body to the conspira- 
tors in the Capitol. Brutus made a popular speech 
adapted to the occasion ; and, this being well re- 
ceived, his party were encouraged to come down 
into the Forum. The rest were undistinguished ; 
but persons of the first quality attended Brutus, 
conducted him with great honour from the Capitol, 
and placed him in the Rostrum. At the sight of 
.Brutus the populace, though disposed to tumult, 
were struck with reverence ; and, when he began 
to speak, they attended with silence. It soon ap- 
peared however that it was not the action, but the 
man, that they respected ; for when Cinna spoke and 
accused Caesar, they loaded him with the most oppro- 
brious language, and became so outrageous, that 
the conspirators thought proper once more to retire 
into the Capitol. Brutus now expected to be be- 
sieged, and therefore dismissed the principal people 
that attended him ; as he thought it unreasonable 
that they, who had had no concern in the action, 

■\}d be exposed to the danger connected with it. 
Next day, the senate assembled in the temple of 
Tellus ; and Antony, Pktncus, and Cicero, in their 
respective speeches, persuaded and prevailed upon 
the people to consent to an amnesty. Accordingly, 
not only the conspirators were pardoned, but it was 
decreed that the consul should take into considera- 
tion what honours were proper to be conferred upon 
them. After this, the senate broke up ; and Antony 
having sent his son as a hostage to the Capitol, Bru- 
tus and his party came down, and mutual compli- 
ments passed between them. Cassius was invited 
to sup with Antony, and Brutus with Lepidus, and 
the rest were entertained by their respective friends. 

Early the following morning the senate re-assem- 
bled, and voted thanks to Antony for having pre- 
vented a civil war, as well as to Brutus and his party 
fojf their services to the commonwealth. The latter 

12 

ii BRUTUS 

had, also, provinces distributed among them. Crete 
Mas allotted to Brutus, Africa to Cassius, Asia to 
Trebonius, Bithynia to Cimber, and the other Bru- 
tus had that part of Gaul which borders on the Bo. 

Caesar's will, and his funeral, came next in ques- 
tion. Antony proposed, that the will should be 
read in public ; and that the funeral should not be 
private, or without proper magnificence, lest, such 
treatment should exasperate the people. This, Cas- 
sius strongly opposed ; but Brutus agreed to it, and 
here he tell into a second error. His preservation 
of so great and formidable an enemy to the con- 
spiracy as Antony was a gross mistake, but his giv- 
ing up the management of the funeral to him was 
irreparable. The publication of the will had an 
immediate tendency to inspire the people with a 
passionate regret for Csesar's death ; for he had left. 
to each Roman citizen seventy-five drachmas, beside 
the public use of his gardens beyond the Tiber, 
where now the temple of Fortune stands. When the 
body was brought into the Forum, and Antony spoke 
the usual funeral eulogium, as he perceived the 
people affected by his speech, he endeavoured still 
more to work upon their passions, by uniblding the 
bloody garment of Caesar ; showing them in how 
many places it had been pierced, ami pointing out 
the number of his wounds. This threw every thing 
into confusion. Some called aloud to kill the mur- 
therers ; others, as had formerly been done in the 
ease of the seditious demagogue Cloditis J3, snatched 
the benches and tables from the neighbouring shops, 
and erected a pile for the body in the midst of con- 
secrated places, and surrounding temples. As soon 
as the pile was in flames, the people crowding from 
all parts snatched the half-burnt brands, and ran 

13 Sec the Life of Cicero, Vol. V. To tltis Cicero alludes, iu his 
Orat. pro Milone, l.'i ; and a farther account of it is given by As 
.conius Pedianus, in his Argument to that speech. The whole of 
Antony's address is admirably amplified by our own tthakspeare, in. 
4hs Julius Caesar, iii. 2.* 

BRUTUS. 75 

round the city to set on fire the houses of the con- 
spirators : but they were on their guard against such 
an assault, and prevented the effects. 

There was a poet named China 14, who had had no 
concern in the conspiracy, but was rather a friend of 
Caesar's. This man dreamed, that Caesar invited 
him to supper ; and that on his declining the invita- 
tion, he took him by the hand, and constrained him 
to follow him into a dark and deep place, which he 
entered with the utmost horror. The agitation of 
his spirits threw him into a fever, which lasted the 
remaining part of the night. In the morning how- 
ever, when Caesar was to be interred, he was asham- 
ed of absenting himself from the solemnity : he there- 
fore mingled with the multitude, recently inflamed 
as it was by Antony's speech ; and being unfortu- 
nately mistaken for that Cinna, who had before in- 
veighed against Caesar, he was torn to pieces. This 
more than any thing, except Antony's change of 
conduct, alarmed Brutus and his party. They now 
thought it necessary to consult their safety, and re- 
tired to Antium 15. Here they sat down, with an 
intent to return as soon as the popular fury should 
have subsided ; and for this, considering the caprice 
and inconstancy of the multitude, they concluded 
that they should not have long to wait. The senate, 
moreover, was in their interest ; and though they 
did not punish Cinna's murtherers, they had caused 
strict inquiry to be made after those, who had at- 
tempted to burn the houses of the conspirators. An- 
tony, likewise, became obnoxious to the people ; 
for they suspected him of seeking to erect another 
kind of monarchy. The return of Brutus was, con- 
sequently, much desired ; and, as he was to exhibit 
shows and games in his capacity of praetor, it was 

14 Helvius Cirma? at that time tribune of the people (Dio, xliv. 
50.), and mistaken for Cornelius Cinna the praetor, who was an, 
accomplice in the plot.* 

15 A city near the sea, hod. Anzo Rovinato in the Campagna di 
Roma,* 

7b' BIUJTl'S. 

expected. Brutus, however, bad received intelli- 
gence that several of Caesar's old soldiers, to whom 
he had distributed lands and colonies, bad stolen by 
small parties into Rome, and there lay in wait for 
him : he, therefore, did not think proper to come 
himself Notwithstanding this, the shows exhibited 
on his account were extremelv magnificent ; for he 
had bought a considerable number of wild beasts, 
and ordered that they should all be reserved without 
exception for that purpose. He went himself as far 
as Naples, to collect a number of comedians ; and 
being informed of one Canutius, who was much ad- 
mired upon the stage, he requested his friends to 
use all their interest to bring him to Rome. Canu- 
tius was a Grecian, and Brutus therefore thought 
that no compulsion ought to be used. He wrote 
likewise to Cicero, and begged that he would by all 
means be present at the public shows. 

Such was the situation of his affairs, when upon 
Octavius' arrival at Rome things took a different 
turn. He was son to the sister10 of Caesar, who had 
adopted and appointed him his heir ; and was pur- 
suing his studies at Apollonia, with the expectation 
of meeting his uncle there on his intended expedi- 
tion against the Parthians, at the time of his death. 
Upon hearing of this event, he immediately came to 
Rome, and in order to ingratiate himself with the 
people, assumed the name of Caesar. By punctually 
distributing among the citizens the money, which 
had been bequeathed to them, he soon gained the 
ascendency over Antony ; and, by his liberality to 
the soldiers, he attracted to his party the greatest 
number of those, who had served under Caesar. 
Cicero likewise, who hated Antony, joined his in- 
terest : and this was so much resented by Brutus, 
that in his letters he reproached him in the severest 
terms. " He perceived," he said, " that Cicero 
was tame enough to bear a tyrant, and was only 

''' Rather ' the niece' {See the Life of Cicero, Vol. V. 
not. (120*)* 

BRUTUS. 77 

afraid of the tyrant who hated him ; and that his 
compliments to Octavius were meant to purchase an 
easy slavery : but our ancestors," said Brutus, 
" scorned to bear even a gentle master. As to the 
measure of peace or war," he added, " he himself 
was undetermined ; but upon one thing he had 
firmly resolved, which was, never to be a slave." 
He then expressed his surprise, " That Cicero should 
prefer an infamous accommodation even to the dan- 
gers of civil war; and that the only fruits, which he 
expected from destroying the tyranny of Antony, 
should be the establishment of a new tyrant in Oc- 
tavius 17." Such was the spirit of his first letters. 

The city was now divided into two factions : some 
joined Csesar, others remained with Antony, and the 
army was sold to the best bidder. Brutus, of course, 
despaired of any desirable event ; and resolving to 
leave Italy, went by land to Lucania, and came to the 
maritime town of Elea. Porcia, being to return thence 
to Rome, endeavoured as well as possible to conceal 
the sorrow that oppressed her ; but notwithstanding: 
her magnanimity, a picture which she found there be- 
trayed her distress. The subject was, the parting of 
Hector and Andromache. He was represented de- 
livering his son Astyanax into her arms, and the 
eyes of Andromache were fixed upon him. The re- 
semblance, which this picture bore to her own dis- 
tress, made her burst into tears the moment she be- 
held it ; and frequently every day she visited the 
melancholy emblem, to weep over it. Upon this 
occasion Acilius, one of Brutus' friends, repeated 
the passage in Homer, where Andromache says ; 

Yet "hile my Hector still survives, I see 
My father, mother, brethren, all in thee lS. 

To which Brutus replied with a smile, £C But I 

« See Cic. Ep. ad Brut. 16, 17.* 
18 Pope. Horn. II. vi. 429., &c* 

TS BRUTUS. 

" must not answer Porcia, as Hector did Andrcr. 
" macbe ; 

-Hasten to thy tasks at home, 

" There guide the spindle, and direct the loom I9. 

" She has not personal strength, indeed, to sustain 
■" the toils which we undergo ; but her spirit is not 
" less active in the cause of her country." This 
anecdote we have from Bibulus, Porcia's son. 

From Elea Brutus sailed for Athens, where he 
was received with high applause, and invested with 
public honours. There he took up his residence 
with a particular friend, and attended the lectures of 
Theomnestus the Academic, and Cratippus the Pe- 
ripatetic -°, devoting himself wholly to literary pur- 
suits. Yet, in this unsuspected state, he was private- 
ly preparing for war. He despatched Herostralus 
into Macedon, to gain the principal officers in that 
province ; and by his kindness he secured all the 
young Romans who were then students at Athens. 
Among these was the son of Cicero, upon whom he 
bestowed the highest encomiums ; declaring, that 
he could never cease admiring the spirit of that 
young man, who bore such a mortal hatred to 
tyrants. 

At length, he began to act more publicly ; and 
hearing that some of the Roman ships laden with 
money were returning from Asia, under the com- 
mand of a man of honour, a friend of his, lie met him 
at Carystus a city of Euboea. There he had a con- 
ference with him, and requested that he would sur- 
render to him the ships. It happened to be his own 
birth-day, upon which occasion he gave a splendid 
entertainment, and while they were drinking ' Vic- 
tory to Brutus and Liberty to Rome,' to encourage 

"> Tope. Hon). II. vi. 491.* 

20 For some account of this philosopher see Clc. Off. i. 1., Ep. 
ad Fain. xvi. 21., and Dc Div. i. 3,* 

BftUTCS. 79 

the cause he called for a larger bowl. As he held 
it in his hand, without any visible relation to the 
subject they were upon, he pronounced this verse : 

My full was dooni'd by Phojbiis and by Fate jr. 

Sonic historians affirm, that ' Apollo' was the 
parole issued to his soldiers in the last battle at Phi- 
lippi, and of course conclude, that this exclamation 
was a presage of his defeat. Antistius, the com- 
mander of the ships, gave him five hundred thousand 
drachmas of the money, which he was carrying to 
Italy. The remains of Pompey's army, that were 
scattered about Thessalv. readily joined his standard ; 
and beside these he took rive hundred horse, whom 
China was conducting to Dolabella in Asia. He then 
sailed to Demetrias", and seized a large quantity of 
arms, which Julius Caesar had provided for the Par- 
thian war, and which were now to be sent to Antony. 
Macedon was delivered up to him by Hortensius 
the praetor, and all the neighbouring princes readily 
offered their assistance. When information was 
brought that Caius, the brother of Antony, had tra- 
versed Italy to join the forces under Gabinius in 
Dy rrachium and Apolloriia, Brutus determined to seize 
them before he arrived, and made a forced march 
with such troops as were at hand. The road was 
rugged, and the snow deep ; but he moved with such 
expedition, that his suttlers were left a long wray be- 
hind. When he had almost reached Dyrracluum, 
he was seized with a disorder called ' Bulimia' (or 
violent hunger), occasioned by cold and fatigue. 
This disorder affects both men and cattle after fa- 
tigues in the snow ; whether it be that, perspiration 
being prevented by the extreme cold, the vital heat is 
confined, and more im mediate! v consumes the ali> 
.nient ; or that a keen and subtile vapour rising from 
the melted snow penetrates the body, and destroys 

sl A line r.poken by Patroclus to Hector, Horn. II. xvi. 349.* 
-: A town in Thecal}", at the head of the bay of PagHsae.* 

80 BRUITS'. 

the heat by expelling it through the pores: for the 
sweatings seem to arise from the heat contending 
with the cold, which being repelled by the latter, 
the vapoury steam is diffused over the surface of the 
bodv. But of this I have treated more largely in 
another place. Brutus growing very faint, and 
having no provisions, his servants were forced to go 
to the enemy's gates, and beg bread from the sen- 
tinels. These, on learning Brutus' distress, brought 
him meat and drink in their own hands ; and in re- 
turn for their humanity, when he had taken the city, 
he showed kindness both to them and to the rest of 
the inhabitants. 

When Caius arrived in ApoJJonia, he summoned 
the soldiers quartered near the city to join him ; but 
rinding that they were all with Bnitus, and siispe ! - 
ing that those in Apo! Ionia favoured the same party, 
he proceeded to Buthrotus ;. utu»j however, 

found means to destroy three of his cohorts in their 
march; Cains after this attempted to seize some 
posts near Byllis, but was routed in a set battle by 
young Cicero, to whom Brutug had given the com- 
mand of the army upon that occasion, an'd to whose 
generalship he was frequently indebted for success. 
Caius was soon afterward surprised in a marsh, 
whence he had no means to escape : and Brutus 
finding him iu his power, surrounded him with his 
cavalry, and gave orders that none of his men should 
be killed ; expecting, that they would quickly joitii 
him of their own accord. His expectation war, 
justified by the event. They surrendered both them- 
selves and their general ; so that Brutus had now a 
very respectable army. il2 treated Cains for a long 
time with all possible respect ; not divesting him of 
any of the ensigns of dignify which he bore, though 
he received letters (it is said) from several persons at 

-3 Buthrotus (hod. Butrfnto) was a city of Epirus, seated in a 
peninsula opposite Corfu, and held by a Roman colony. Byllis, 
mentioned below, was a maritime city in Illvria, founded by the 
Myrmidons under Neoptolemus. (Steph, de Orb.)* 

BRUTUS. 81 

Rome, and particularly from Cicero, advising him 
to put him to death. At length however, when he 
found that he was secretly intriguing with his officers 
and exciting seditions among the troops, he put him 
on board a ship, and kept him close prisoner. The 
soldiers whom he had corrupted retired into Apol- 
lonia, whence they sent to Brutus, that if he would 
visit them there, they would return to their duty, 
Brutus replied, " That this was not the custom of 
" the Romans ; but that those who had offended, 
" should come in person to their general, and solicit. 
" his forgiveness." They did so, and were par- 
doned. 

He was now preparing to pass over into Asia, 
when he was informed of a change in affairs at Rome. 
Young Caesar, abetted by the senate, had gained the 
ascendency over Antony and driven him out of 
Italy, but at the same time he began to be not less 
formidable himself; for he solicited the consulship 
contrary to law, and kept in pay an unnecessary 
army. The senate consequently, though they had 
at first supported, were now dissatisfied with his mea- 
sures : and as they began to cast their eyes on Bru- 
tus, and decreed or confirmed several provinces to 
him, Cassar was under some apprehensions. He 
therefore despatched messengers to Antony, and de- 
sired that a reconciliation might take place. After 
this he drew up his army round the city, and carried 
the consulship though but a boy, as he himself in- 
forms us in his Memoirs, in his twentieth year. He 
was no sooner consul, than he ordered a judicial 
process to issue against Brutus and his accomplices, 
for having without trial or condemnation murthered 
the first magistrate in Rome. Lucius Cornificius 
was appointed to accuse Brutus, and Marcus Agrip- 
pa, Cassius ; and as neither of them appeared, the 
judges were obliged to pass sentence against both. 
It is said that when the crier, as usual, cited Brutus 
to appear, the people could not suppress their sighs ; 
and persons of the first distinction heard it in silent 

VOL. vi. G 

S2 BKUTUS. 

Rejection. Publius -Silicius24 was observed to burst 
into tears ; and this was the cause, why he was after- 
ward proscribed. The triumvirs, Ca3sar, Antony, 
and Lepidus, being now reconciled, divided the pro- 
vinces among them ; and settled that list of assassi- 
nation, in which two hundred citizens, and Cicero 
among the rest, were proscribed. 

When the report of these proceedings was brought 
into Macedon, Brutus found himself under a neces- 
cessity of despatching orders to Hortensius to kill 
Caius, the brother of Antony, in revenge of the 
deaths of Cicero his friend,, aud Brutus Albinus his 
kinsman. This was the reason why Antony, when 
he had taken Hortensius at the battle of Philippi, 
slew him upon his brother's tomb. Brutus says, 
that he was more ashamed of the cause of Cicero's 
death,, than grieved at the event ; while he saw 
.Rome enslaved rather by her own fault, than by 
that of her tyrants, and continuing a tame spectator 
pf scenes, which ought not to have been heard of 
without horror. 

Brutus' army was now considerable, and he or- 
dered it's route into Asia, while a fleet was prepar- 
ing in Bithynia and at Cyzicum. As he marched by 
land, he settled the affairs of the cities, and gave 
audience to the princes of the countries through 
which he passed. He sent directions likewise to 
Cassius, who was in Syria, to abandon his intended 
journey into Egypt, and join him. Upon this occa- 
sion he tells him, that their collecting forces to de- 
stroy the tyrants was for the purpose, not of secur- 
an empire to themselves, but of delivering their 
fellow-citizens ; that they should therefore never 
forget this prime object of their undertaking, but, 
adhering to their first intentions, keep Italy in 
their eye, and hasten to rescue their country from 
oppression. 

Cassius accordingly set out to join him, and 

34 See Dion, xlvi. 49., who there calls him Silicius Coronas.* 

BRUTUS. 

Brutus at the same time making some progress to 
meet him, their interview took place at Smyrna. 
Till this meeting, they had not seen each other since 
they parted at the Pirseiis of Athens, when Cassius 
set out for Syria and Brutus for Macedon. The 
forces, which they had respectively assembled, gave 
them great joy, and made them confident of success. 
From Italy they had fled like solitary exiles, without 
money, without arms, without a ship, a soldier, or a 
town for shelter. Yet now, within so short a time, 
they found themselves supplied with shipping and 
money, with an army of horse and foot, and in a 
condition of contending for the empire of Rome. 
Cassius was no less respectful to Brutus, than Brutus 
was to him ; but the latter would generally wait 
upon the former, as Cassius was the older man, and 
of the feebler constitution. Cassius was esteemed 
an able soldier, but of a fiery disposition, and ambi- 
tious to command rather by fear than affection \ 
though at the same time with his familiar acquaint- 
ance he was easy in Ills manners, and fond of raillery 
to excess. Brutus on account of his virtue was 
respected by the people, beloved by his friends, ad- 
mired by men of principle, and not hated even by 
his enemies. He was mild in his temper, and had a 
loftiness of mind superior to anger, avarice, and the 
love of pleasure : in his opinions, he was firm and 
inflexible, and zealous in every pursuit where justice 
or honour were concerned. The people had the 
highest opinion of his integrity and sincerity iri 
every undertaking, and this naturally inspired them 
with confidence and affection. Even Pompey the 
Great scarcely ever had so much credit with them : 
for no one believed that, if he had conquered Cassar, 
he would have submitted to the laws, and would 
not have retained his power under the title of con- 
sul or dictator, or some more specious and popular 
name. Cassius on the contrary, a man of violent 
passions and rapacious avarice, was suspected of ex- 
posing himself to toil and danger, rather from i 

g 2 

84 BRUTUS. 

thirst of power, than an attachment to the liberties 
of Rome. The former disturbers of the common- 
wealth, China, and Marius, and Carbo, evidently set 
their country as a stake for the winner, and hardly 
scrupled to own that they fought for empire. But 
the very enemies of Brutus never charge him with 
this. Even Antony has been heard to say, that 
Brutus was the only one of the conspirators, who 
had the sense of honour and justice for his motive, 
and that the rest were wholly actuated by malice or 
envv. It is clear likewise, from what Brutus him- 
self remarks, that he finally and principally relied 
upon his own virtue. Thus he writes to Atticus, 
immediately before the engagement, " That his 
affairs were in the most desirable situation imagin- 
able ; as he should either conquer and restore liberty 
to Rome, or die and be free from slavery : that every 
thing else was reduced to certainty ; and that this 
only remained a question, Whether they should live 
or die freemen ?" He adds, that " Mark Antony was 
properly punished for his folly ; who, when he 
might have ranked with the Bruti, the Cassii, and 
the Catos, chose rather to be the underling of Octa- 
vius : and that, if he did not fall in the approach- 
ing battle, they would very soon be at variance 
with each other." In which he seems to have been 
a true prophet. 

While they were at Smyrna, Brutus desired Cas- 
sius to let him have part of the immense treasure 
which he had collected, because his own had been 
chiefly expended in equipping a fleet, to gain the 
superiority at sea. But from this the friends of 
Cassius dissuaded him, alleging that it would be ab- 
surd to give Brutus money saved with so much fru- 
gality, and acquired with so much envy, merely to 
enable him to increase his popularity, by distributing 
it among the soldiers. Cassius, however, gave him 
a third of what he had, and they then separated to 
their respective commands. Cassius behaved with 
great severity on the taking of Rhodes : though 

BRUTUS. 85 

when he first entered the city, and Was saluted with 
the title of king and master, he answered ; " That 
" he was neither their king nor their master, but 
" the chastiser and destroyer of him who would 
" have been both." Brutus demanded supplies of 
men and money from the Lycians ; but Naucrates, 
a demagogue, persuaded the cities to rebel, and 
some of the inhabitants posted themselves on the 
hills with an intention of opposing his passage. Bru- 
tus at first despatched a party of horse, which sur- 
prised them at dinner, and killed six hundred of 
them. But afterward when he had taken the adja- 
cent towns and villages, he gave up the prisoners 
without ransom, hoping to gain them to his party 
by clemency. Their former sufferings however made 
them reject his humanity, and those that still resisted, 
being driven into the city of Xanthus, were there 
besieged. As a river ran close by the town, several 
attempted to escape by swimming and diving ; but 
they were prevented by nets let down for that pur- 
pose, which had little bells at the top, to give notice 
when any one was taken. After this the Xanthians 
made a sally in the night and set fire to several of 
the battering-engines ; but they were perceived and 
repulsed by the Romans, and at the same time the 
violence of the winds drove the flames against the 
city, so that several houses near the battlements 
took fire. Brutus, apprehensive that the whole city 
would be destroyed, sent his own soldiers to assist 
the inhabitants in quenching the fire. But the Ly- 
cians were seized with an incredible despair, a kind 
of phrensy, which can no otherwise be described 
than bv calling it a longing; for death! Women and 
children, freemen and slaves, people of all ages and 
conditions, strove to drive back the soldiers as they 
came to their assistance from the walls. With their 
own hands they collected wood, and reeds, and all 
kinds of combustibles, in order to spread the fire 
throughout the city, and encouraged it's progress by 
jdl the means in their power. Thus assisted, the 

S6 BRTJTCS. 

flames flew over the whole with dreadful rapidity; 
while Brutus, extremely shocked at the disaster, rode 
round the walls, and stretching forth his hands to 
the inhabitants, implored them to spare themselves 
and their city : but, regardless of his entreaties, they 
strenuously persisted in putting an end to their lives. 
Men, women, and even children, with hideous cries 
leaped into the flames. Some threw themselves 
headlong from the walls, and others fell upon the 
swords of their parents, opening their breasts and 
begging to be slain. 

Yv'hen the city was nearly reduced to ashes a 
woman was found, who had hanged herself with 
her young child fastened to her neck, and the torch 
in her hand with which she had set fire to her house. 
This deplorable object so much affected Brutus, 
that he wept when he was told of it, and proclaimed 
a reward to any soldier who could save a Xanthian. 
It is said, however, that not more than a hundred 
and fifty were preserved, and those against their 
will. Thus the Xanthians, as if fate had appointed 
certain periods for their destruction, after a long 
course of years sunk into the same deplorable ruin, 
in which a similar impulse of rash despair had involved 
their ancestors in the Persian war ; for they also 
burned their city, and destroyed themselves. 

After this, when the Patareans likewise made 
resistance, Brutus was under great anxiety about 
bcsiea;ini; them : for he was afraid, thev should fol- 
low the desperate measures of the Xanthians. Hav- 
ing some of their women however, whom he had 
taken prisoners, he dismissed them without ransom ; 
and those returning to their husbands and parents, 
who happened to be people of the first distinction, 
•-o much extolled his justice and moderation, that 
they prevailed upon them to submit and surrender 
their city into his hands. The adjacent cities fol- 
lowed their example, and found that his humanity 
exceeded their hopes. Cassius had compelled every 
Ithodian to give up all the gold and silver in hi-- 

BRUTUS. 87 

possession, by which he amassed eight thousand 
talents, and yet he laid the public under a fine of 
five hundred talents more ; but Brutus took only 
a hundred and fifty talents from the Lycians, and 
without offering them any other injury, led his 
army into Ionia. 

Brutus, in the course of this expedition, did many 
acts of justice ; and was vigilant in the dispensation 
of rewards and punishments. An instance of this I 
shall relate, because both he himself, and every 
honest Roman, was particularly pleased with it : 
When Pompey the Great, after his overthrow at 
Pharsalia, fled into Egypt, and landed near Pelusium, 
the tutors and ministers of young Ptolemy consulted 
what measures they should take upon the occasion. 
But they differed in their opinions : some were for 
receiving him, others for shutting him out of Egypt. 
Theodotus, a Chian by birth and a teacher of rhe- 
toric by profession, who then attended the king in 
that capacity, was for want of abler ministers ad- 
mitted to the council. This man insisted, that 
they were all in the wrong ; both those who were 
for admitting, and those who were for excluding 
Pompey. The best measure which they could 
adopt, he said, would be to pnt him to death ; 
and he closed his speech ' with the proverb, c Dead 
men do not bite*.' To this the council agreed; 
and Pompey the Great, an example of the incre- 
dible mutability of fortune, fell a sacrifice to the 
eloquent arguments of a sophist, as that sophist 
lived subsequently to boast. Not long afterward, 
upon Caesar's arrival in Egypt, some of the mur- 
therers received their proper reward, and were put 
to death : but Theodotus made his escape. Yet, 
though for a while he gained from fortune the poor 
privilege of a wandering and despicable existence, 
he fell at last into the hands of Brutus, as he was 
passing through Asia j and, by paying the forfeit of 

* See the Life of Pompey, IV. 226,* 

«r Bnim;s. 

his baseness, became more memorable from his death, 
than from any thing in his life. 

About this time, Brutus sent for Cassius to Sardis, 
and went with his friends to meet him. The whole 
army, being drawn up, saluted both the leaders with 
the title of Imperator. But as it usually happens in 
important affairs, where many friends and many 
officers are engaged, mutual complaints and suspi- 
cions arose between the two chieftains. To settle 
these more properly, they retired into an apartment 
by themselves. Expostulations, debates, and accu- 
sations ensued ; and that to so high a degree, that 
they burst into tears. Their friends without were 
surprised at the loudness and asperity of the con- 
ference ; but though they were apprehensive of the 
consequence, they durst not interfere, because they 
had been expressly forbidden to enter. Favonius 
however, an imitator of Cato, but rather enthusiastic 
than rational in his philosophy, attempted to go in. 
The servants in waiting endeavoured to prevent 
him, but it was not easy to stop his impetuosity. 
He was headstrong and violent in his whole conduct, 
and valued himself less upon his dignity afs a senator, 
than upon a kind of cynical freedom in saying what- 
ever he pleased ; a character not unentertaining to 
those, who could bear with his impertinence. This 
man broke through the door, and rushed into the 
apartment, pronouncing in a theatrical tone what 
Nestor says in Homer, 

Young men, be ruled ; I'm older than you both {*. 

Cassius laughed : But Brutus thrust him out, telling 
him that he pretended to be a cynic, but was in 
reality a dog -\ This however terminated the dis- 
pute, and for that time they parted. Cassius gave 
an entertainment in the evening, to which Brutus 

«4 II. i. 259 * 

ss From Mm, * a dog,' is derived the appellation of that class of 
snarling plulosophists.* 

BRUTUS'. 89 

invited his friends. When they were seated, Favo- 
nius came in from bathing. Brutus called aloud to 
him, telling him he was not invited, and bade him 
go to the end of the table. Favonius notwithstand- 
ing thrust himself in, and sat down in the middle*. 
Upon that occasion, there was much learning and 
good humour in the conversation. 

The day following one Lucius Pella, who had 
been praetor and employed in offices of trust, being 
charged by the Sardians with having embezzled the 
public money, was disgraced and condemned by 
Brutus. This was extremely mortifying to Cassius, 
as a little while before he had acquitted two of his 
own friends accused of the same crime, and content- 
ing himself with giving them a private reproof, con- 
tinued them in office. Of course, he charged Brutus 
with too rigid and scrupulous an exertion of the laws, 
at a time when lenity was much more politic. Bru- 
tus on the other hand reminded him of the ides of 
March, the day when they had killed Caesar, who 
was not (personally speaking) the scourge of man- 
kind, but only abetted with his power" those that 
were so. He bade him consider, that if the neglect 
of justice were in any case to be connived at, it 
should have been done before ; and that they had 
better have borne with the oppressions of Caesar's 
friends, than suffer the mal-practices of their own to 
pass with impunity : " For then," continued he, 
" we could have been blamed only for cowardice ; 
" but now, after all we have undergone, we shall He 
" under the imputation of injustice." Such were 
the principles of Brutus. 

26 The Romans had three couches, holding three each, at the 
tahle, upon which the guests reclined. Of these the middle one 
was the most respectahle, and the middle place upon it the place 
of honour. The locus consularis, however, where the consul when 
present was placed, was the lowest on the middle couch, as he 
could there most conveniently receive any messages; and next ta 
him the host reclined, at the top of the lowest couch. The hoi 
cunvivcc lecti (Hor. Sat. II. viii. 40.) were often his parasites, aud. 
humble friends.* 

90 ])];i;ris. 

When they were about to leave Asia, Brutus (it is 
said) bad au extraordinary apparition. Naturally 
watchful, sparing in his diefc, and assiduous in busi- 
ness, he allowed himself but little time for sleep. In 
the day, he never slept at all ; nor in the night, till 
all business was over, and his friends had retired, 
and left him nobody to converse with. But at this 
time, involved as he was in the operations of war, 
and solicitous for the event, he only slumbered. 
a little after supper, and spent the rest of the 
night in ordering his most urgent affairs. When 
these were despatched, he employed himself in read- 
ing till the third watch27, at which time the tribunes 
and centurions came to him for orders. In this 
manner, a little before he left Asia, he was sitting 
alone in his tent, by a dim light and at a 'late hour. 
The whole army lay in dead silence, when the gene- 
ral, wrapped in deep meditation, thought he per- 
ceived something enter his tent ; and turning toward 
the door, saw a horrible and monstrous spectre 
standing stilly by his side. " Whdt art thou r" said 
he boldly; " Art thou god, or man? And what is 
" thy business with me ?" The spectre answered, 
" I am thy evil genius, Brutus! Thou wilt see me 
" at Philippi." To which he calmly replied, ■" I'll 
" meet thee there." As soon as the apparition was 
gone, he called his servants, who told him they had 
neither heard any noise, nor seen anv vision. That 
night he did not lie down to rest, but went early iri 
the morning to Cassius, and told him what had hap- 
pened. Cassius, who was of the school of Epicurus, 
and used frequently to dispute with Brutus upon- 
these subjects, answered him thus : " It is the opinion 
" of our sect, that not every thing which we see is 
" real; for matter is evasive, and sense deceitful. 
c; Besides, the visual impressions are by the quick 
" and subtile influence of imagination thrown into a 

27 Or midnight. There were four watches of three hours each, 
commencing at 6 P. M , in the Roman discipline,* 

cc 

CC 

cc 
cc 

CC 

cc 

cc 
cc 

cc 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 

BRUTUS. 91 

" variety of forms, many of whicli have no arche- 
" types "in nature ; and this the imagination effects, 
as easily as we make an impression on- wax. The 
mind of man, having in itself the plastic powers 
and the component parts, can fashion and vary it's 
objects at pleasure. This is clear from the sud- 
" den transition of dreams, in which the imagina- 
tion can educe from the slightest principles such 
an amazing variety of forms, and call into exer- 
cise all the passions of the soul. The mind is 
perpetually in motion, and that motion is imagi- 
nation or thought. But when the body, as in 
your case, is fatigued with labour* it naturally 
suspends or perverts the regular functions of the 
mind. Upon the whole, it is highly improbable, 
that there should be any such beings as daemons 
or spirits : or. that, if there were such, they should 
assume a human shape or voice, or have any power 
" to afreet us. At the same time, I own I could 
" wish there were such beings, that we might not 
" rely on fleets and armies, but find the concurrence 
" of the gods in this our sacred and glorious enter- 
" prise." Such .were the arguments, which he used 
to tranquillise Brutus. 

When the army began to march, two eagles 
perched upon. the two first standards, and accompa- 
nied them as far as Philippi, being constantly fed by 
thc soldiers; but, the day before the battle, they 
flew away. Brutus had already reduced most of the 
nations in these parts; nevertheless, he traversed 
the sea-coast opposite to Thasus, that if any hostile 
power remained, he might bring it into subjection. 
Norbanus, who was encamped in the straits near 
Symbolum :b, they surrounded in such a manner, 
that they obliged him to quit the place. He nar- 
rowly escaped losing his whole army indeed, whicli 
would certainly have been the case, had not Antony 
come to his relief with such astonishing expedition, 

2S See Dion, xlvii. 35.* 

32 BRUTUS. 

that Brutus could not believe it possible. Caesar, 
who had been detained by sickness, joined his army 
about ten days afterward. Brutus was encamped 
over-against him, and Cassius was opposite to 
Antony. The space between the two armies, the 
Romans called ' the plains of Philippi.' Two armies 
of Romans, equal in numbers to these, had never 
before met to engage each other. Caesar's was some- 
what superior in numbers, but in the splendour of 
arms and equipage it was far exceeded by that of 
Brutus ; for most of their arms were of gold and sil- 
ver, which their general had liberally bestowed upon 
them. In other things, Brutus had accustomed his 
officers to frugality ; but the riches which his soldiers 
carried about with them would at once, he thought, 
add to the spirit of the ambitious, and stimulate the 
covetous to the defence of their arms, the principal 
part of their wealth29. 

Caesar made a lustration of his army within the 
cangp, and gave each private man a little corn and 
five drachmas only for the sacrifice. But Brutus, 
in order to show his contempt of the poverty or the 
avarice of Caesar, made a public lustration of his 
army in the field ; and not only distributed cattle to 
each cohort for the sacrifice, but gave fifty drachmas 
upon the occasion to each private man. Of course 
he was more beloved by his soldiers, and they were 
more ready to fight for him. It is reported that, 
during the lustration, an unlucky omen happened 
to Cassius. The garland, which he was to wear at 
the sacrifice, was presented to him the wrong side 
outward. At a solemn procession likewise some 

29 This was likewise J. Caesar's notion (see Suet. Jul. lxvii.) ; 
and Sertorius, as we learn from his Life, acted upon tiie same 
principle. It was not however the universal creed, as appears both 
from what is related of Mithridates, in the Life of Lucullus, 111. 
298., and from a fine passage in Livy, ix. 40. That Agricola. 
indeed was of Brutus' opinion, may be inferred from Galgacusv 
speech to his Britons (Tac. Vit. Agr. xxxii.) But the epic writers, 
Homer and Virgil, seem to deride all gaudiness of arms, and repre- 
sent it as often fetal to it's wearers. II. ii. 872., /En. xi. 768., &c* 

9 

BRUTUS. ©s 

time before, the person who bore the golden image 
of Victory before Cassius, it was said, happened 
to stumble30, and the image fell to the ground. 
Several birds of prey hovered daily about the camp, 
and swarms of bees M were seen within the trenches. 
Upon which, the soothsayers ordered the part 
where they appeared to be shut up ; for Cassius, 
with all his Epicurean philosophy, began to be 
superstitious, and the soldiers were extremely dis- 
heartened. 

For this reason Cassius was inclined to protract 
the war, and unwilling to hazard the whole of the 
event upon the ensuing engagement. What farther 
recommended this measure was, that they were 
stronger in money and provisions, but inferior in 
numbers. Brutus, on the other hand, was as usual 
for an instant decision ; that he might either give 
liberty to his country, or rescue his fellow-citizens 
from the toils and expenses and dangers of war. He 
was encouraged likewise by the success, which his 
cavalry had met with in several skirmishes, and some 
instances of desertion and mutiny in the camp 
brought over many of Cassius' friends to his opinion. 
There was one Atellius however, a friend of his, 
who still opposed his project, and advised to put it 
off till the next winter. When Brutus asked him, 
what advantages he expected thence, he replied ; 
" If I gain nothing else, I shall at least live so much 
" the longer." Both Cassius and the rest of the 
officers were displeased with this answer, and it was 
determined to give battle the day following. 

Brutus, that night, expressed great confidence and 
cheerfulness ; and having passed the hour of supper 
in philosophical conversation, retired to rest. Mes- 
sala says, that Cassius supped in private with some 
of his most intimate friends j and that, contrary to 

3° Dion (xlvii. 40.) simply mentions the fact, without stating 
either that the image was of gold, or borne before Cassius.* 
31 See the Life of Dion, p. 23., not. 29.# 

r< 

cc 

$4 BKUTUS. 

his usual manner, he was pensive and silent. After 
supper, he adds, he took him by the hand, and press- 
ing- it close, said courteously in Greek (the language, 
•which lie used upon such occasions), " Bear witness, 
T.iessala, that I am reduced to the same necessity 
with Pompey the Great, of hazarding the liberty 
of my country upon one battle. Yet I have con- 
" fide nee in our good-fortune, upon which we ought 
** still to rely, though our measures be indiscreet." 
These, Messala informs us, were the last words that 
(Ja-si'is sn:;ke, before he bade him farewell ; and the 
following day, being Ins birth-day ", he invited Cas- 
sius to sup with him. 

Next morning as soon as it was light, the scarlet 
robe, which was the signal for battle, was hung out 
in the tents of Brutus and Cassius ; and they them- 
selves met on the plain between the two armies. 
Upon this occasion, Cassius thus addressed himself 
to Brutus; " M&J the gods, Brutus, make this day 
successful, that we may pass the rest of our days 
together in prosperity ! But as the most irti- 
portant of human events are the most uncertain, 
and as we may never see each other more, if 
we are unfortunate upon tin's occasion, tell me 
Mhat is your resolution concerning flight and 
" death?" 

To this Brutus replied, " In the younger and 
" less experienced part of my life I was led, upon 
" philosophical principles, to condemn the conduct 
" of Cato in killing himself 1 thought it at oncfe 
" impious and unmanly to sink beneath the stroke 
" of fortune, and to refuse the lot that had befallen 
" us. In my present situation, however, I am of a 

32 Mcssala's, as M. Ricard rightly supposes : if indeed it had 
been Culms' (according to our .Shakspcare, Jul. Cas. v. I., influ- 
enced undoubtedly by North's translation from the French of 
Amyot), he would have supplied an additional instance of a great 
man's dying, like Poinpey and Attains and Shakspeare himself, on 
his birtn-day ', and, as such, would hardly have hecn omitted in 
Plutarch's list: see the Life 6f Camillus, I. US6, 

12 

u 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 

BRUTUS. -9r> 

«' different opinion. 80 that if heaven should now 
'vbe unfavourable to our wishes, I will no longer 
" solicit my hopes or my fortune, but die contented 
" with it, such as it is. On the ides of March, I 
" devoted my life to my country ; arid since that 
<f time, I have lived in liberty and iriorv." At these 
words Cassius smiled, and embracing Brutus said, 
" Let us march then against the enemy : for with 
" these resolutions, though we should not conquer, 
" we have nothing to fear." Thev then consulted 
with their friends concerning the order of battle. 
Brutus desired, that he might command the right 
wing, though that post was thought more proper for 
i 'assius on account of lus experience : Cassius how- 
ever gave it up to him, and placed M-essala, with 
the best of his legions, in the same wing. Brutus 
immediately drew out his cavalry, which were equip- 
ped with great magnificence, and the foot followed 
close behind. 

Antony's troops were at this time employed in 
making a trench from the marsh, where they were 
encamped, in order to cut oil' Cassius' communica- 
tion with the sea. Caesar, confined by sickness, lay 
still in his tent. His soldiers were far from expect- 
ing, that the enemy would hasard a pitched battle. 
They supposed, that they were only making, excur- 
sions, to harass the trench-diggers with their light 
arms ; and, not perceiving that they were pouring 
in upon them, they were astonished at the tumul- 
tuous and loud outcry which they heard from the 
trenches. Brutus in the mean time sent tickets to 
the several, officers with the word of battle, and rode 
through the ranks to encourage his men. But there 
were few, who had patience to wait for the word. 
The chief part, before it could reach them, fell with 
loud shouts upon the enemy. This precipitate onset 
threw the army into confusion, and separated the 
legions. Messala's legion first turned the left wing 
of Cae<?ar, and was followed by those who were sta- 
tioned near him. In their way, they disordered 

96 BRUTUS. 

some of the outmost ranks, and killed a few of the 
enemy: but their chief object was to fall upon Caesar's 
camp ; and they pushed directly up to it. Caesar 
himself, as he informs us in his Memoirs, had but 
just before been conveyed out of his tent ; in conse- 
quence of a vision of his friend Artorius, which 
commanded that he should be carried out of the 
camp. This gave currency to a report, that he was 
slain ; for the soldiers had pierced his empty litter 
in many places with darts. Those that were taken in 
the camp were put to the sword, among whom were 
two thousand Lacedaemonian 3i) auxiliaries. The rest 
of the forces, who attacked Caesar's legions in front, 
easily put them to the rout, and cut three legions in 
pieces. After this, borne forward with the impetu- 
osity of victory, they rushed into the camp along 
with the fugitives, and Brutus was in the midst of 
them. The flank of Brutus' army was now left un- 
guarded, by the separation of the right wing, which 
had advanced too far in the pursuit; and the enemy, 
perceiving this, endeavoured to take advantage of 
it. They accordingly attacked it with great fury, 
hut could make no impression upon the main body, 
which received them with the utmost firmness. The 
left wTing, however [under the command of Cassius] 
was soon routed ; for the men were in disorder, and 
knew nothing of what had passed in the right. The 
enemy pursued them into the camp, which they 
plundered and destroyed, though neither of their 
generals were present. Antony, it is said, to avoid 
the fury of the first onset, had retired into the ad- 
joining marsh ; and Caesar, who had been carried 
sick out of the camp, was no where to be found. 
Nay, some of the soldiers would have persuaded 
Brutus that they had killed Caesar, describing hi* 

73 For ' Lacedaemonian,' M. Dacier plausibly suggests * Mace- 
donian' auxiliaries. The latter were certainly nearer the scene of 
action tlian the former, and Iiad likewise more connexion with 
Home. The ' Lacedicmon' also, mentioned below, is a doubtful 
word, upon the same account.* 

BRUTUS. 9Y 

age and person, and showing him their bloody 
swords. 

The main body of Brutus' army had now made 
prodigious havock of the enemy; and Brutus in his 
quarter was no less absolutely conqueror, than Cas- 
sius was conquered. The want of knowing this 
was the ruin of their affairs. Brutus neglected to 
relieve Cassius, thinking that he as well as himself 
was victorious ; and Cassius did not expect relief 
from Brutus, thinking that he as well as himself was 
overcome. 

When Brutus had destroyed Cassar's camp, and 
was returning from the pursuit, he was surprised 
that he could neither perceive Cassius' tent as usual 
above the rest, nor anv of those that were about 
it ; for they had been demolished by the enemy, on 
their first entering the camp. Some, that were of 
quicker sight than the rest, told him they could per- 
ceive a motion of shining helmets and silver targets 
in Cassius* camp ; and supposed, from their num- 
bers and their armour, that they could not be those, 
who had been left to guard the camp: though at the 
same time there was a less appearance of dead bo- 
dies, than there must have been after the defeat of 
so many legions. This gave Brutus the first suspi- 
cion of Cassius' misfortune ; and leaving a sufficient 
guard in the enemy's camp, he called off the re- 
mainder from the pursuit, and led them to his friend's 
relief. 

The case of Cassius was as follows : Chagrined at 
first by the irregular conduct of Brutus' soldiers, 
who had begun the attack without waiting for their 
general's orders, and afterward by their alacrity to 
plunder, rather than to surround and cut off the 
enemy; he trifled, instead of showing vigour and 
alacrity, with his command, and through want of 
vigilance suffered himself to be hemmed in by the 
enemy's right wing ; upon which his cavalry quitted 
their post, and fled toward the sea. The foot, like- 
wise, began to give way ; and though he exerted 

VOL. vi. H 

98 BRUTUS. 

himself to the utmost to stop their flight, and snatch- 
ing an ensign from the hand of one of the fugitives 
fixed it at his feet, he was scarcely able to keep even 
his own praetorian band together : so that he was at 
length obliged to retire, with a very small number, 
to a hill which overlooked the plai:;. Yet here he 
could discover nothing ; for he was short-sighted, 
and it was with some difficulty that he could perceive 
his own camp plundered. His companions however 
saw a large detachment of horse, which Brutus had 
sent to their relief, making up to them. These 
Cassius concluded to be the enemy, that were in 
pursuit of him ; notwithstanding which, he detached 
Titinius to reconnoitre them. When Brutus' cavalry 
saw this faithful friend of Cassius approach, they 
shouted for joy. His acquaintances leaped from 
their horses to embrace him, and the rest rode round 
him with clashing of arms, and all the clamorous ex- 
pressions of immoderate gladness. This circumstance 
had a fatal effect. Cassius took it for granted, that 
Titinius was seized by the enemy; and regretted 
that through a weak desire of life, he had suffered 
his friend to fall into their hands. When he had ex- 
pressed himself to this purport, he retired into an 
empty tent, accompanied only by his freedman Pin- 
darus, whom ever since Crassus' defeat he had re- 
tained for a particular object. In that defeat, he 
had escaped out of the hands of the Parthians ; but 
now wrapping his robe about his face, he laid bare 
his neck, and commanded Pindarus to cut off his 
head. This was done ; for his head was found se- 
vered from his body : but whether Pindarus did it 
by his master's command or not, has been suspected, 
because he never afterward appeared. It was quickly 
discovered who the cavalry were ; and Titinius, 
crowned with garlands, came to the place where he 
had left Cassius. The lamentations of his friends 
informing him of his general's unhappy fate, he se- 
verely reproached himself for the tardiness which 
had occasioned it, and fell upon his sword. 

BRUTUS. 99 

Brutus, as soon as he was assured of Cassius' de- 
feat, made all possible haste to his relief; but he 
knew nothing of his death, till he came up to his 
camp. There he wept over his body, and called him 
c the last of Romans ;' intimating, that Rome would 
never produce another man of equal spirit. His fu- 
neral he ordered to be celebrated at Thasus, that it 
might not occasion any disorder in the camp. His 
dispersed and dejected soldiers he collected, and 
encouraged ; and as they had been stripped of every 
thing by the enemy, he promised them two thou- 
sand drachmas a man. This munificence at once 
encouraged, and surprised them : they attended him 
at his departure with loud acclamations, and com- 
plimented him as the only general of the .four, who 
had not been beaten. Brutus was confident of vic- 
tory, and the event justified his hopes ; for with a 
few legions he overcame all that opposed him, and 
if most of his soldiers had not passed the enemy in 
pursuit of plunder, the battle must have been deci- 
sive in his favour. He lost ei-i'ht thousand men, 
including the servants, whom he called ' Briges.' 
The enemy, Messala says he supposes, lost more 
than twice that number. They were, consequently, 
more discouraged than Brutus ; till Demetrius, a 
servant of Cassius, went over to Antony in the even- 
ing, and carried him his master's robe and sword, 
which he had taken from the dead bodv. This so 
effectually encouraged them, that they were drawn 
up in form of battle by break of day. Both camps 
in the occupation of Brutus involved him in difficul- 
ties. His own, full of prisoners, required a strong 
guard. At the same time, many of Cassius' soldiers 
murmured at their change of master, and the van- 
quished were naturally envious and jealous of the 
victors. He therefore thought proper to draw up 
his army, but not to fight. 

All the slaves, whom he had taken prisoners, 
being found practising with his soldiers, were put to 
the sword, but most of the freemen and citizens he 

h 2 

<C 
(( 

100 BRUTUS. 

dismissed ; telling them at the same time, that 
They were more truly prisoners in the hands of the 
enemy, than in his : with them," he said, " they 
were slaves indeed, but with him freemen and ci- 
" tizens of Rome." He was obliged, however, to 
dismiss them privately ; for they had implacable 
enemies among his own friends and officers. Among 
the prisoners were Volumnius a mimic, and Saculio 
a buffoon; of whom Brutus took no notice, till they 
were brought before him. and accused of continuing;, 
even in their captivity, their scurrilous language and 
abusive jests. Yet still, engaged in more important 
concerns, he paid no regard to the accusation : 
Messala Corvinus however was of opinion, that they 
ought to be publicly whipped and sent naked to the 
enemy, as proper associates and comrades for such 
generals. Some were entertained by the idea, and 
laughed ; but Publius Casca, the first who wounded 
Osesar, observed that it was indecent to celebrate 
the obsequies of Cassius with jesting and laughter: 
" As for you, Brutus," said he, " it will be seen 
" what esteem you have for the memory of that 
" general, when you shall have either punished or 
" pardoned those, who ridicule and revile him." 
Brutus, resenting this expostulation, replied; " Why 
" do you apply to me, Casca, instead of acting upon 
" your own ideas?" This answer was considered as 
an assent to their death ; so the poor wretches were 
led away, and executed. 

lie now distributed the promised rewards to his 
soldiers ; and, after gently rebuking them for hav- 
ing begun the assault without waiting for the word 
of battle, promised that if they acquitted themselves 
to his satisfaction in the next engagement, he would 
give them up the cities of Laeedaemon and Thessa- 
lonica to plunder. This is the only circumstance in 
his lite, which baffles all apology. Yov though An- 
tony and Caesar subsequently acted with more un- 
bounded cruelty in rewarding their soldiers, having 
driven most of the ancient inhabitants of Italy from 

BRUTUS. 101 

their lands, and bestowed them upon those who had 
no title to them ; yet they acted consistently with 
their first object, which was the acquisition of em- 
pire and arbitrary power. But Brutus maintained 
such a reputation for virtue, that he was neither 
allowed to conquer, nor even to save himself, ex- 
cept upon the strictest principles of honour and 
justice: more particularly, since the death of Cas- 
sius, who was generally supposed to have influenced 
Brutus in any unusual act of violence. As sailors 
however, when their rudder is broken in a storm, 
substitute some other piece of wood in it's place, 
and though they are not able to steer so well as be- 
fore, do the best they can in their necessity ; so 
Brutus, at the head of such an immense army and 
such important affairs, unassisted by any officer 
equal to the charge, was obliged to make use of such 
advisers as he had : and he generally followed the 
counsel of those, who proposed anything that might 
bring Caserns' soldiers to order. For these were now 
become extremely untractable ; insolent in the camp 
from their want of a commander, though cowardly 
in the field from the remembrance of their defeat. 

The affairs of Cassar and Antony were not in a 
much better condition. Provisions were scarce, and 
the marshy situation of their camp made them dread 
a toilsome winter. The autumnal rains indeed had 
fallen heavy after the battle, and filled their tents 
with mire and water, which from the coldness of the 
weather immediately froze. In this situation they 
received intelligence of their loss at sea. Their fleet, 
on it's way from Italy with a large supply of soldiers, 
had been met by that of Brutus, and so totally de- 
feated, that the few wrho escaped were reduced by 
famine to eat the sails and tackle of the ships. It 
was now determined, upon Caesar's side, that they 
should come to battle before Brutus was apprised of 
his success. The fights, it appears, by sea and land 
had taken place on the same day ; but by some acci- 
dent, rather than the fault of the officers, Brutus 

9 

102 BRUTUS. 

heard nothing of his victory (ill twenty days after- 
ward. Had lie been informed of it, he would cer- 
tainly never have hasardcd a second battle ; as he 
had provisions sufficient for a considerable length of 
time, and his army was so advantageously posted, 
that it Was safe both from the injuries of the weather 
and the incursions of the enemy. Besides, knowing 
that he was wholly master at sea and partly victo- 
rious by land, he would have had every thing ima- 
ginable to encourage him, and could not have been 
urged to any dangerous measures by despair. 

But the republican form of government, it seems, 
was no longer to subsist in Rome : it necessarily re- 
quired a monarchy ; and Providence in order to re- 
move the only man, who could oppose it's destined 
master, kept from him the knowledge of his victory 
till it was too late. And yet, how nearly had he 
received the intelligence ! The very evening before 
the engagement a deserter named Clodius came over 
from the enemy to tell him, that Caesar had learnt 
the loss of his fleet, and that this was the reason of 
his hastening the battle. The deserter, however, 
was considered either as designing or ill-informed : 
his communication was disregarded, and he was not 
even admitted into Brutus' presence. 

That night, they say, the spectre re-appeared to 
Brutus, and assumed it's former figure, but vanished 
without speaking. Yet Publius Volumnius a philo- 
sophical man, who had borne arms with Brutus 
throughout the whole war, makes no mention of this 
prodigy; though he says, that the first standard was 
covered with a swarm of bees*, and that the arm of 
one of the officers incessantly perspired oil of roses, 
though often wiped and rubbed off. He adds like- 
wise, that immediately before the battle, two eagles 
fought in the space between the two armies ; and 
that an incredible silence and attention prevailed in 
the field, till that on the side of Brutus was beaten 

* See above, p. 23., not. (29.) 

BRUTUS. 103 

and flew away. The story of the Ethiopian is well 
known, who meeting the standard-bearer opening 
the gate of the camp, was cut in pieces by the sol- 
diers ; for that they interpreted as an ill omen. 

When Brutus had drawn up his army in form of 
battle, he paused some time before he gave the 
word. While he was visiting the ranks, he had sus- 
picions of some, and heard accusations of others. 
The cavalry he found had no ardour for the attack, 
but seemed waiting to see what the foot would do. 
Besides, Camulatus a soldier in the highest estima- 
tion for valour rode close by Brutus, and went over 
to the enemy in his sight. This hurt him inexpres- 
sibly ; and partly from anger, partly from fear of 
farther desertion and treachery, he led his forces 
against the enemy about three in the afternoon. 
Where he himself fought in person, he was still suc- 
cessful. He charged the enemy's left wing, and the 
cavalry following the impression which the foot had 
made, it was put to the rout. But when his other 
wing was ordered to advance, the inferiority of their 
numbers made them apprehensive that they should 
be surrounded. For this reason they extended their 
ranks, in order to cover more ground ; by which 
means the centre of the wing was so much weak- 
ened 34, that it could not sustain the shock of the 
enemy, but fled at the first onset. After their dis- 
persion the enemy surrounded Brutus, wlio did 
every thing that the bravest and most expert general 
could do in his situation, and whose conduct at 
least entitled him to victory. But what seemed 
an advantage in the first engagement, proved a dis- 
advantage in the second. In the former battle, the 
conquered wing of the enemy was totally cut off, 
while most of the men in the conquered wing of 
Cassius were saved3". This, at the time, might ap- 

34 This appears to have determined the issue of the fatal day of 
Austerlitz.* 

iS There is no defect in the original, as the former translator 
imagines. He supposed the defeat of Cassius' soldiers to be in the 

104 BRUTUS. 

pear a benefit, but it proved detrimental. The re- 
membrance of their former defeat filled them with 
terror and confusion, which they spread through the 
principal part of the army. 

Marcus, the son of Cato, was slain righting amidst 
the bravest of the vounq; nobility. He scorned alike 
either to fly, or to yield ; and avowing who he was, 
and assuming his father's name, still used his sword, 
till he fell upon the heaps of the slaughtered enemy. 
Many other brave men, who exposed themselves for 
Brutus' preservation, perished at the same time. 

Lucilius, a man of great worth and his intimate 
friend, observed some barbarian horse riding full 
speed against Brutus in particular, and was deter- 
mined to stop them, though at the hazard of his own 
life. He therefore told them, that he was Brutus ; 
and they believed him, because he pretended to be 
afraid of Caasar, and desired to be taken to Antony*. 
Exulting in their capture, and thinking themselves 
peculiarly fortunate, they carried him along with 
them by night ; having previously sent an account 
of their success to Antony, who was infinitely pleased 
with it, and came out to meet them. Many others 
likewise, when they heard that Brutus was brought 
alive, assembled to see him ; some pitying his mis- 
fortunes, while others accused him of an inglorious 
meanness, in having thus suffered the love of life to 
betray him into the hands of barbarians. On his 
approach, when Antony was deliberating in what 
manner he should receive him, Lucilius first ad- 
dressed him, and with the utmost intrepidity said ; 
Be assured, Antony, that Brutus neither is, nor 
will be, taken by an enemy. Forbid it, heaven, 
that fortune should have such a triumph over vir- 
tue ! Whether he he found alive or dead, he will 
" be found in a state becoming Brutus. I have 

present, and not in the former battle. This led him into the diffi- 
culty, which he increased by translating nxw irx', ' victory,' in- 
tead of' advantage.' 
* See the Life of Antony, Vol. V.* 

cc 

cc 
cc 

cc 

BRUTUS. 105 

" imposed upon your soldiers, and am prepared to 
" suffer the worst which you can inflict.'* Thus 
spoke Lucilius, to the astonishment of those that 
were present. When Antony, addressing himself 
to those who brought him, said ; " I perceive, 
" fellow-soldiers, that you are angry at this imposi- 
" tion of Lucilius : but you have really gotten a 
" better booty, than you intended. You sought an 
" enemy, but you have secured me a friend. I know 
" not how I should have treated Brutus, had you 
" brought him alive ; but I am sure, that it is better 
" to have such a man as Lucilius for a friend, than 
," for an enemy." Upon this, he embraced Lucilius, 
recommending him to the care of one of his compa- 
nions : and he ever afterward found him faithful to 
his interests. 

Brutus, attended by a few of his officers and friends, 
having passed a brook overhung with cliffs and 
shaded with trees, and being overtaken by night, 
stopped in a cavity under a large rock. There cast- 
ing his eyes upon the heavens, which were covered 
with stars, he repeated two verses, one of which 
(Volumnius informs us) was this ; 

Forgive not, Jove, the cause of this distress36. 

The other, he says, had escaped his memory. Upon 
enumerating the several friends, slain before his eyes 
in the battle, he sighed deeply at the mention of 
Flavius and Labeo ; the latter of whom was his lieu- 
tenant, and the former the master of his band of 
artificers. In the mean while one of his attendants 
being thirsty, and observing Brutus in the same con- 
dition, took his helmet, and went to the brook for 
water. At the same time a noise was heard on the 
opposite bank, and Volumnius and Dardanus the 
armour-bearer went to see what it was. In a short 
time they returned, and asked for the water : " It is 

36 Eurip. Med. 333. The one forgotten was to the purport of 
Non in re, sed in verbo tantum, esse virtutem. (Flor. iv. 7-) See 
Dion, xlvii., and Hor. Ep. I. xvii. 4d.* 

106 BRUTUS. 

a 

all drunk up," said BrUtus with a smile, " but 
" another helmet-full shall be fetched." The man, 
who had brought the first, was therefore sent again ; 
hut he was wounded by the enemy, and with diffi- 
culty made his escape. 

As Brutus si ose 1, that he had not lost many 
men in the battle. >tatilius undertook to pass through 
the enemy (for there wras no other way) and see in 
what condition their camp was. If things were safe 
there, he was to hold up a torch as a signal, and re- 
turn. He got safe to the camp, for the torch was 
held up; but a long time elapsed, and he did not 
return. " If'St;. 'ius were alive," said Brutus, " he 
" would be here/" On his return, it appears, he 
fell into the enemy ; tnds, and was slain. 

The night was nj .. far spent ; when Brutus, 
leaning his head toward his servant Clitus, whispered 
something in his ear. Qlitjtts made no answer, but 
burst into tears. After that he took his armour- 
hearer Dardanus aside, and said something to hitfl in 
private. At/ last addressing himself to Volumnius in 
Greek, he entreated him, in memory of their com- 
mon studies and exercises, to put his hand to his 
sword, and help him to give the thrust. Volumnius, 
as well as several other:;, refused ; and one of them 
observing, that they must necessarily fly, " We must 
" fly, indeed," said Brutus rising hastily, " not 
" however with our feet, but with our hands." He 
then took each of them by the hand, and spoke with 
great appearance of cheerfulness to the following 
purpose : " It is an infinite satisfaction to me, that 
" all my friends have been faithful. If I am angry 
" with Fortune, it is for the sake of my country. 
" Myself I esteem more happy than the conquerors, 
" not only in respect of my past, but also my pre- 
" sent situation. I shall leave behind me that 
" reputation for virtue, which they with all their 
" wealth and power will never acquire. For pos- 
" ferity will not scruple to believe, that they were 
" an abandoned and worthless set of men, who 
" destroyed the good and the virtuous, for the sake 

BRUTUS. 107 

" of unjust empire." After this, be implored them 
severally to provide for their own safety, and with- 
drew with only two or three of his most intimate 
friends. One' of these was Strato, with whom he 
had first become acquainted, when they studied rhe- 
toric. This friend he placed next to himself ; and 
laying hold of the hilt of his sword with both his 
hands, he fell upon the point, and died. Some say 
that Strato, at Brutus' earnest request, turned aside 
his head, and held the sword ; upon which he threw 
himself with such violence, that entering at his 
breast it passed quite through his body, and he im- 
mediately expired. 

Messala the friend of Brutus, after he was recon- 
ciled to Csesar, took occasion to recommend Strato 
to his favour : " This," said he with tears, " is the 
" man, who did the last kind office for my dear 
" Brutus." Caesar received him with kindness; 
and he was one of those brave Greeks, who after- 
ward attended him at the battle of Actium. In that 
engagement, Caesaf observing, that he had been not 
less zealous in his service, than he had been against 
-him at Phiiippi, he is said to have replied, " I have 
" always taken the best and justest side." When 
Antony found the body of Brutus, he ordered it to 
be covered with the richest robe he had ; and, that 
being stolen, he put the thief to death*. His ashes 
he sent to his mother Servilia. 

With regard to Porcia his wife, Nicolaus37 the 
philosopher and Valerius Maximus3H inform us, that 

* See the Life of Antony, Vol. V. 

37 Damascenus, a friend of Augustus, and a leader of the Peripa- 
tetic school. It was he, who used to send the emperor those 
Celebrated dates, mentioned by Piin. H. N. xiii. 4., and Theophr. 
Hist. Plant, ii. 8. Ke was the author of an Universal History in 
one hundred and forty books, beside tragedies, comedies, &c. ; and 
had attempted, as Suidas informs us, almost every species of com- 
position. See Fabr. BibUGraee;* 

33 Tuos quoque castissimos ignes, Porcia, M. Caianis fdia, cuncia 
seeula debita admiraiiane prpsequeotu* ; quce cum apud PhiUppos 
viciurn ei iriteremptum virum tuum Brutur.i cog?iosceres, quiajerrum 
hon dabaiur, ardeutes ore carboncs haurire non dubiiasti, niidiebri 

108 BRUTUS'. 

being preserved by the constant vigilance of her 
friends from (lie death she courted, she snatched 
some burning* coals from the fire, and shut them close 
in her mouth till she was suffocated. There is a 
letter however from Brutus to his friends still ex- 
tant39, in which he laments the loss of Porcia, and 
complains that their neglect of her must have made 
her prefer death to the continuance of her illness. 
So that Nicoialis appears to have been mistaken, in 
the time at least, if this epistle be authentic ; for it 
describes Porcia's distemper, her conjugal affection, 
and the manner of her decease. 

DION AND BRUTUS 

COMPARED. 

WHAT is principally to be admired in the lives 
of Dion and Brutus, is their having risen to such 
importance from inconsiderable beginnings. But 
here Dion has the advantage : for, in the career of 
glory, he had no co-adjutor ; whereas Cassius went 
hand in hand with Brutus, and though in the repu- 
tation of virtue and honour by no means his equal, 
in military experience, resolution, and activity, he 
was not his inferior. Some have ascribed to him the 
origin of the whole enterprise, and have asserted, 
that Brutus would never otherwise have engaged in 
it. But Dion, at the same time that he made the 
whole military preparations himself, engaged also 
the friends and associates of his design. He did 
not, like Brutus, derive power and riches from the 
war ; but he employed that wealth, upon which he 
was to subsist as an exile in a foreign country, in 
restoring the liberties of his own. When Brutus and 
Cassius tied from Rome, and found no asylum from 

spiritu virilem patris exitum imitata. Sednescioan hoc fortius, qiu»' 
tile usitato, tu, novo genere mortis absionpta es ! (Val. Max. iv. (j.) 

V) Net at present.* 

DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED. 109 

the pursuit of their enemies, their only resource was 
war ; and they took up arms as much in their own 
defence, as in that of the common liberty. Dion, 
on the contrary, was happier in his banishment, than 
the tyrant that had banished him ; and yet he volun- 
tarily exposed himself to danger for the freedom of 
Sicily. Besides, to deliver the Romans from Cassar, 
and the Syracusans from Dionysius, were enterprises 
of a very different kind. Dionysius was an avowed 
tyrant ; and Sicily, with reason, groaned beneath his 
yoke. But with respect to Cassar, though while his 
imperial power was in it's infancy, he treated his 
opponents with severity, yet as soon as that power 
was confirmed by victory, the tyranny was rather a 
nominal and imaginary, than a real thing ; for no 
cruel or tyrannical action could be laid to his charge. 
Nay, such was the condition of Rome, that it evi- 
dently required a master ; and Cassar appeared like 
some tender physician, appointed by Providence 
itself. Of course the people lamented his death, and 
were implacably enraged against his assassins. Dion, 
on the other hand, was reproached by the Syracusans 
for having suffered Dionysius to escape, and not 
having dug up their former tyrant's grave. 

With regard to their military conduct, Dion, as a 
general, was without a fault ; he not only made the 
most of his own instructions, but where others failed, 
he happily repaired the error. But it was wrong in 
Brutus to hasard a second battle, when all was at 
stake1. And after that battle was lost, he had neither 
sagacity enough to devise new resources, nor spirit 
(like Pompey) to contend with fortune, though he 
had still reason to rely upon his troops, and was ab- 
solute master at sea. 

But what is chiefly blamed in Brutus, is his ingra- 
titude to Caesar. To his favour he owed his own 
life, as well as those of the prisoners, for whom he 

1 This censure seems very unjust. The wavering disposition of 
Cassius' troops obliged him to come to a second engagement. 

lltf DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED. 

had intercede;!. He had been treated as his friend, 
and distinguished by particular marks of honour; 
and yet he embrued his hands in his blood. Dion 
stands clear of any charge like this. As a relation 
of Dionysius, he assisted and was useful to him in the 
administration, so that his services were equal to his 
honours : and when he was driven into exile, and 
deprived of his wife and fortune, he had every just 
and legitimate motive to take up arms against him. 

Yet, if this circumstance be considered in another 
light, Brutus will have the advantage. The greatest 
glory of both consists in their abhorrence of tyrants, 
and tyrannical measures. This, in Brutus, was un- 
blended with any other motive. He had no quarrel 
with Caesar, but exposed his life for the liberty of 
his country. But Dion, had he not been injured, 
would never have fought. This is obvious from 
Plato's Epistles'- ; where it appears, that he was 
banished from Dionysius' court, and in consequence 
of that banishment made war upon him. For the 
good of the community Brutus, though an enemy to 
Pompey, became his friend; and, though a friend to 
Csesar, became his enemy. His enmity and his 
friendship in both instances arose from the same 
principle, justice. But Dion, while in favour, em- 
ployed his services for Dionysius ; and it was not till 
he was disgraced, that he armed against him. His 
friends, of course, were not quite satisfied with his 
enterprise. They were apprehensive that, when he 
had destroyed the tyrant, he might seize the govern- 
ment himself, and amuse the 'people with some softer 
title than that of tyranny. On the other hand, the 
very enemies of Brutus acknowledge that he was the 
'-mly conspirator, who had no other view than that of 
restoring the ancient, form of government. 

Besides, the enterprise against Dionysius cannot be 
placed incompetition with that against Ca^ar. The 
former had rendered himself contemptible by his 

: See Epist. vii. 

DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED. Ill 

low manners, his drunkenness, and his debauchery. 
But to meditate the subversion of Caesar without 
trembling at his dignity, fortune, or power, or 
shrinking at that name which disturbed the slumbers 
of Parthian and Indian kings ; this evinced a supe- 
riority of soul, upon which fear could have no in- 
fluence. Dion was no sooner seen in Sicily, than he 
was joined by thousands : whereas the authority of 
Caesar was so formidable in Rome, that it supported 
his friends even after his death ; and a simple boy 
rose to the highest eminence merely by adopting his 
name, which served as a charm against the envy and 
the power of Antony. Should it be objected, that 
Dion had the sharpest conflicts in expelling the 
tyrant, but that Caesar fell naked and unguarded 
beneath the sword of Brutus ; it will argue at least 
a consummate management and prudence, to have 
been able to come at a man of his power naked and 
unguarded. Particularly, when it is considered that 
the blow was not sudden, nor the work of one or of 
a few ; but meditated, and communicated to many, 
not one of whom deceived their leader: for either 
he had the power of distinguishing honest men at 
the first view, or such as he chose he made hor st 
by the confidence which he reposed in them. But, 
Dion confided in men of bad principles ; so that he 
must either have been injudicious in his choice, or 
if his people grew worse after their appointments, 
unskilful in lus conduct. Neither of these can be 
consistent with the character of a wise ma:; ; and 
Plato accordingly blames him in his letters, for 
having made choice of such friends, as in the end 
proved his ruin. 

Dion found no one to avenge his death, whereas 
Brutus received an honourable interment even from 
his enemy Antony ; and Caesar, as it appears from 
the following circumstance, tolerated the public re- 
spect which was paid to his memory. A statue of 
brass had been erected to him at Milan, in Cisalpine 
Gaul, which was a fine performance and a striking 
12 

112 DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED. 

likeness. Caesar, as he passed through the town, 
took notice of it; and after a short halt, summoning 
the magistrates, told them in the presence of his 
attendants, that they had broken the league by hav- 
ing harboured one of his enemies. The magistrates, 
as it may well be supposed, denied it ; and stared at 
each other, profoundly ignorant what enemy he 
could mean. He then turned toward the statue, 
and knitting his brows said, " Is not this my enemy, 
" that stands here ?" The poor Milanese were struck 
dumb with astonishment ; but Caesar added with a 
smile, that he was pleased to find them faithful to 
their friends in adversity, and ordered that the statue 
should continue where they had placed it. 

THE 

LIFE 

OF 

Al 

"I? 

%■ i ^V^LlliiVuiVlliO. 

SUMMARY. 

H/s foVfA a?2£? character. He is declared Darius1 successor. His 

coronation. His brother Cyrus projects a revolt. Artaxerxes' 

liberality. Cyrus demands assistance of the Lacedemonians ; and 

begins his march against the kins- Artaxerxes marches to meet 

Mm. Surprise of the rebels on his appearance. Clearchus the 

cause of Cyrus' defeat. Cyrus kills Artagerses. Account of 

Cyrus' death given by Dinon and Ctesias. His right hand and 

his head cut off. Differences betiveen the story of Xeuophon, and 

those of Dinon and Ctesias. Artaxerxes' presents to those, who 

had slain or "wounded Cyrus. Folly of the Carian^ who had 

wounded him ; avenged by Parysatis. Mithridates, who boasted 

that Cyrus had fallen by his hand, condemned to the punishment of 

* the boat.' Parysatis circumvents Artaxerxes, and gets Presabates 

flayed alive. Death of Clear elms, and some other Grecian officers. 

Parysatis poisons Siatira, and is exiled to Babylon. Agesilaus 

invades Asia : Artaxerxes, by bribing several of the Grecian states, 

procures- his recall. Peace of Anialcidas. Ismehias and Pelopidas 

visit his court. Magnificent presents made by that prince to Tima-' 

goras. He is reconciled to Parysatis, and marries Atossa : makes 

war upon the Egyptians and Cadusians ; and is extricated from a 

perilous situation by the address of Tiribazus : Shows himself proof 

against luxury, but becomes suspicious and cruel : Declares his 

eldest so?i Darius his successor. Darius demands Aspasia of his 

■ father, ivho necessarily complies, but soon takes her away, and 

makes her a priestess of Diana of Ecbatana. Darius., offended by 
vol, VI. I 

Ill ARTAXKRXES. 

this measure, is still farther exasperated against Artaxerxes by 
Tirtbazus, who had suffered an injury of nearly the same hind. 
They enter into a conspiracy against him, "which is detected. Tiri* 
bazus Jails ; Darius is beheaded. Death of Ariaspes ; and of 
Arsames. Death of Artaxerxes. 

JL HE first Artaxerxes1, who of all the Persian kings 
was most distinguished for his moderation and 
greatness of mind, was surnamed c Longimanus,' 
because his right hand was longer than his left2. 
He was the son of Xerxes. The second, surnamed 
' Mncmon 3,' whose Life we are now going to write, 
was son to the daughter of the first. For Darius, 
by his wife Pary satis, had four sons ; Artaxerxes the 
eldest, Cyrus the second, and Ostanes and Oxathres 
the two younger. Cyrus was denominated after the 
ancient king of that name, as he is said to have been 
after the sun ; for the Persians call the sun 4 Cyrus4.' 
Artaxerxes at first was named Arsicas5, though 
Dinon asserts that his original name was Oartes6. 

1 M. Ricard gives a useful table of the succession of Persian 
kings from Cyrus downward, which I subjoin, inserting (after Blair) 
Artabanus, and making on the same authority a slight correction or 
two in the chronology. 

Cyrus, li. C. 5.59. Xerxes II. (a month), 425. 

Cambyses, 529. Sogdiahus (7 months), 421. 

Smerdis, one of the Magi, 522. Darius II. (Nothus), 423. 

Darius, son of Hystaspes, 52J. Artaxerxes II. (Mnemon), 404. 

Xerxes the Great, 485. — — III. (Ochus), 358. 

Artabanus (7 months), 461. Arses, ;>S7. 

Artaxerxes Longimanus, 161. Darius III. (Codomannus), '335.* 

2 Strabo, xv., refers this surname to the length of his arms, which 
(he says) when he stood upright, reached down to his knees* 

3 On account of his extraordinary memory. 

4 This is Hesychius' opinion. And from Cyrus, M. Dacier thinks 
the Greeks, who borrowed many of their terms from the oriental 
languages, derived their word Kvpto$* 

5 Or Arsaces, a more familiar name in the East. (Epit. Ctes.xix.) 
* Or Oarses Dinon, the father of Clitarchus the historian and 

ARTAXERXES. 115 

But though Ctesias has filled his books with a number 
of incredible and extravagant fables, it is not pro- 
bable that he should be ignorant of the name of a 
king, at whose court he lived in quality of physician 
to him, his wife, his mother, and his children. 

Cyrus, from his infancy, was of a violent and 
impetuous temper ; but Artaxerxes had a native 
mildness, an innate gentleness in his whole disposi- 
tion. The latter married a beautiful and virtuous lady, 
by order of his parents, and kept her even when they 
commanded him to send her away. For the king, 
having put her brother to death7, designed that she 
should share his fate. But Arsicas applied to his 

contemporary with Alexander, composed a History of Persia, to 
which frequent reference is made by both Greek and Latin writers. 
(See Voss. de Hist. Gr. iv. 8.) For an account of Ctesias see Fabr. 
Bibl. Gr., who gives a list of his works. As a writer, he is decried 
also by Strabo ; but Demetrius Phalereus, n*p< 1>(U,^., speaks well of 
him, as does also Dion. Halic. trip. 2XU;. bmf*. The fragments of 
him, still extant (Persica et Indica) are usually printed at the end 
of the editions of Herodotus.- 

7 Teriteuchmes, son of the satrnp Ilydarnes and brother of Sta- 
tira, had been guilty of the complicated crimes of adultery, incest, 
andmurther; which raised great disturbances in the royal family, 
and ended in the ruin of all who were concerned in them. Arta- 
xerxes, then called Arsaces, was charmed with Statira's beauty, 
and married her. At the same time Teriteuchmes married Hames- 
tris, one of the daughters of Darius and sister of Arsaces ; and had 
thence interest enough, upon his father's demise, to get himself 
appointed to his government. But in the mean time he conceived 
a passion for his own sister Roxana, who was in no respect inferior 
in beauty to Statira; and that he might enjoy her without con- 
straint, resolved to despatch his wife Hamestris, and light up the 
flames of rebellion in the kingdom. Darius, apprised of his design, 
engaged Adriastes, an intimate friend of Teriteuchmes, to kill him, 
and was rewarded by the king with the government of his province. 
Upon this, some commotions were raised by the son of Teriteuchmes: 
but, the king's forces having the superiority, all the family of Hy- 
darnes were apprehended and delivered to Parysatis, that she might 
execute her revenge upon them for the injury done or intended to 
her daughter. That cruel princess put them all to death, except 
Statira, whom at the earnest entreaties of Arsaces, and contrary to 
the opinion of Darius, she spared. But Arsaces was no sooner 
settled upon the throne, than Statira prevailed upon him to leave 
Adriastes to her correction, and she put him to a death too cruel to 
be described. Parysatis, in return, poisoned the son of Teriteuch- 
mes, and not long afterward Statira herself. (Ctes. in Pers.) 

I 2 

116 ARTAXERXES. 

mother with many tears and entreaties, and at last 
with much difficulty prevailed upon her, not only 
to spare her life, but to excuse him from divorcing 
her. Yet his mother had the greater affection for 
Cyrus, and was desirous of raising him to the throne : 
so that when he was called from his residence on the 
coast, in his father's iast sickness, he returned to 
court full of hopes that the queen's interest had 
established him successor. Parysatis had indeed a 
specious pretence, of which the ancient Xerxes, on 
the suggestion of Demaratus, had availed himself, 
viz. that she had brought Darius his son Arsicas 
when he was in a private station, but Cyrus after he 
was king. She could not, however, prevail. Darius 
appointed his eldest son 8 his successor, upon which 
occasion his name was changed to Artaxerxes. Cy- 
rus had the government of Lydia, and was to be 
commander-in-chief on the coast. 

Soon after Darius' death the new sovereign went 
to Pasargadae 9, in order to be consecrated (according 
to custom) by the priests of Persia. In that city 
stands the temple of a goddess, who has the affairs 
of war under her patronage, and may therefore be 
supposed to be Minerva. This temple the prince to 
be consecrated must enter, and putting off' his own 
robe, take that which was worn by Cyrus the Great 
before he was king. He must eat a cake of figs, 
chew some turpentine, and drink a cup of acidulated 
milk. Whether there are anv other ceremonies is 
unknown, except to the persons concerned. As 
Artaxerxes was on the point of going to be conse- 
crated, Tisaphernes brought him a priest, who had 
been chief inspector of Cyrus' education in his in- 
fancy, and had instructed him i-n the learning of the 

8 By his second wife : hut. for an account of his whole family and 
of this transaction, see Herod, vii. 2.* 

9 Pasargadae was a city of Persia, which had been built by Cyrus 
the Great, on the spot where he had defeated Astyages, and endow- 
ed with several valuable privileges, and here he was subsequently 
interred. (Strab. xv.) Hod. Darabegerd.* 

ARTAXERXES. 117 

Magi ; and might, therefore, be deemed as much 
concerned as any man in Persia, that his pupil had 
not been appointed king. Hence, his accusation 
against Cvrus could not but sain credit. He ac- 
cused him of a design to lie in wait for the king in 
the temple, and after he had put off his garment;, to 
attack and kill him. Some affirm, that Cyrus on this 
information was immediately arrested : others, that 
he slipped into the temple and concealed himself 
there, but was pointed out by the priest, in conse- 
quence of which he was doomed to death ; but that 
his mother at that moment clasped him in her arms, 
bound the tresses of her hair about him, held his neck 
to her own, and by her tears and entreaties got him 
pardoned and remanded to the sea-coast. Never- 
theless, he was far from being satisfied with his 
government. Instead of regarding his brother's 
favour with gratitude, he remembered only the in- 
dignity of his chains ; and, in his resentment, aspired 
more than ever after the sovereignty. 

Some indeed state, that he thought the allowance 
for his table insufficient, and therefore revolted from 
his king. But this is a foolish pretext. For if he 
had had no other resource, his mother from her own 
revenues would have readily supplied him with what- 
ever he wanted. Besides, his riches are abundantly 
evinced by the number of foreign troops in his 
service, which were entertained for him, as we are 
informed by Xenophon lti, in various parts by his 
friends and retainers. For the better to conceal his 
preparations, he did not keep his forces in a body, 
but had his emissaries in different places, who en- 
listed foreigners on various pretences. In the mean 
while his mother, who lived at court, made it her 
business to remove the king's suspicions : and Cyrus 
himself alwavs wrote in a lenient stile ; sometimes 
entreating a candid interpretation, and sometimes 
recriminating upon Tisaphernes, as if his contention 

JO Anab. i.* 

lis ARTAXERXES. 

had been solely with that grandee. Add to this, 
that the king had naturally a dilatory turn of mind, 
which many took for moderation. At first indeed 
he seemed entirely to imitate the mildness of the first 
Artaxerxes, whose name he bore, by behaving with 
great affability to all that addressed him, and distri- 
buting honours and rewards to persons of merit with 
a lavish hand. lie took care, that punishment should 
never be embittered with insult. If he received 
presents, he appeared as well pleased as those who 
offered them, or rather as those who received pre- 
sents from him; and, in conferring favours, he always 
maintained a countenance of benignity and pleasure. 
There was not anv thine;, however trifling* sent him 
as a gift, which he did not receive with the utmost 
graciousness. Even when one Omisus brought him 
a pomegranate of uncommon size, he exclaimed ; 
'* By the light of Mithra, this man, if he were made 
" governor of a small city, would soon make it a large 
" one11." When he was once upon a journey, and 
people presented him with a variety of things by the 
way, a labouring man having nothing else to bestow 
ran to the river, and brought him some water in his 
hands. With this Artaxerxes was so much delighted, 
that he sent the man a golden cup, and a thousand 
Darics. Euclidas the Lacedremonian having said 
many insolent things to him, he contented himself 
with ordering the captain of his guard to give him this 
answer ; " You may say what you please to the king, 
" but the king can both say and do." One day, as 
he was hunting, Tiribazus showed him a rent in his 
royal robe ; upon which the king said, " What shall 
" I do with it?" " Take another, and give that to 
" me," said Tiribazus. " It shall be so," said the 
king : " I u;ive it thee ; but I charge thee not to 
" wear it." Tiribazus, who though not a bad man 

" Though there is no necessary union between the management 
of a garden and a government, yet Aristotle (in the first book of 
hi-- Politics) has represented excellence in domestic ceconomv ,>s'hc 
basis of good statesmanship.* 

artaxerxes. 119 

was giddy and vain, disregarding the restriction soon 
put on the robe, and at the same time tricked him- 
self out with some golden ornaments, fit only for 
queens. At this the court expressed great indigna- 
tion, because it was a thing contrary to their laws 
and customs ; but the king only laughed, and said 
to him, " I allow thee to wear the trinkets as a 
" woman, and the robe as a madman." 

No one had been admitted in former reigns to the 
king of Persia's table, except his mother and his wife ; 
the former sitting above, and the latter below him : 
Artaxerxes, nevertheless, extended that honour to 
Ostanes and Oxathres, his vounsrer brothers. But 
what afforded the Persians the most pleasing spec- 
tacle, was the queen Statira always riding in her 
chariot with the curtains open, and admitting the 
women of the country to approach and salute her. 
These things made his administration popular. Some 
turbulent and factious men however still contended 
that the affairs of Persia required a king of the mag- 
nificent spirit, military talents, and generous soci- 
ability of Cyrus ; and that the dignity of so great an 
empire could not be supported without a prince of 
high thoughts and noble ambition. It was not there- 
fore without a confidence in some of the Persians, 
as well as in the maritime provinces, that Cyrus un- 
dertook the war. 

He wrote also to the Lacedaemonians for assist- 
ance, promising that to the foot, he would give 
horses, and to the horsemen chariots ; that upon 
those who had farms he would bestow villages, and 
upon those who had villages cities. As for their 
pay, he assured them it should not be counted, but 
measured out to them. At the same time he 
spoke in very high terms of himself, assuring them 
that he had a loftier and more princely heart than 
his brother; that he was the better philosopher, 
having been instructed in the doctrines of the Magi, 
and that he could drink and bear more wine than 
his brother. Artaxerxes, he said, was so timorous 

120 ARTAXERXES. 

find effeminate a man, that he could not sit a horse 
in hunting", nor a chariot in battle. The Lacedae- 
monians therefore sent the Scvtale to Clearcluis, 
with directions to obey Cyrus' orders1". 

Cyrns began his march against the king, with a 
numerous army of barbarians M, and almost thirteen 
thousand Greek mercenaries14. He found one pre- 
tence after another, tor having such an armament 
on foot; but his real designs did not remain long 
undiscovered. For Tisaphernes went in person to 
give information about them to the king. 

This communication threw the court into great 
disorder. Parysatis was censured as the principal 
cause of the war, and her friends were suspected of 
a private intelligence with Cyrus. Statira, in her 
distress about the war, occasioned her the most 
trouble : " Where is now," she cried, " that faith, 
which you pledged ? Where are your intercessions, 
by which you saved the man, that was conspiring 
against his brother? Have they not brought war, 
and all its calamities upon us ?" These expostula- 
tions fixed in the heart of Parysatis, who was naturally 
vindictive and barbarous in her resentment, such a 
hatred of Statira, that she contrived to take her off. 
Dinon writes, trait this cruel purpose was carried 
into execution during the war ; but Ctesias assures 
us, it was afterward. And it is not probable that 

12 They took care not to mention Artaxerxes, pretending not to 
he privy to the design?, which were carrying on against him. This 
precaution they used, that in case Artaxerxes should get the better 
of his brother, they might justify themselves to him in what they 
had done. But see Xenoph. ib. 

13 A hundred thousand. 

14 Clearchus, the Lacedaemonian, commanded all the Pelopon- 
nesian troops except the Achaeans, who were led by Socrates of 
Achaia. The Boeotians were under Proxenus, a Theban, and the 
Thessalians under Mcnon. The other nations were commanded by 
Persian generals, of whom Ariaeus was the chief". The fleet con- 
sisted of thirty-five ships under Pythagoras a Lacedemonian, and 
twenty-five commanded by Tamos an Egyptian, who was admiral 
of the whole. Upon this occasion, Proxenus presented Xcnophon 
to Cyrus, who gave him a commission among the Greek merce- 
naries. 

a 

ARTAXERXES. 121 

he, who was an eye-witness of the transactions of 
that court, could either be ignorant of the time 
when the assassination took place, or have any rea- 
son to misrepresent the date of it : though he often 
deviates into fictitious tales, and loves to give us in- 
vention instead of truth. We shall therefore leave 
this story to the order of time, in which he lias 
placed it. 

While Cyrus was upon his march, he had accounts 
brought him, that the king did not design to try the 
fortune of the field by giving battle immediately, 
but intended to wait in Persia till his forces were 
assembled thither from all parts of his kingdom. 
And though he had drawn a trench across the plain 
ten fathom wide, as many deep M, and four hundred 
furlongs in length, yet he suffered Cyrus to pass him, 
and to march almost to Babylon lh. Tiribazus, we 
are told, was the first who ventured to remonstrate 
to the king, that he ought not any longer to avoid 
an action, or to abandon Media, Babylon, and even 
Susa to the enemy, and hide himself in Persia ; since 
he had an army infinitely greater than theirs, and 
ten thousand satraps and other officers, all of them 
superior to those of Cyrus both in courage and 
conduct. 

Upon this, he took a resolution to come to action 
as soon as possible. His sudden appearance with an 
army of nine hundred thousand men 17, well prepared 
and accoutred, extremely surprised the rebels ; who, 
through their confidence in themselves and contempt 
of their enemy, were marching in great confusion, 

15 Xenophon says, this trench was only five fathom wide, and 
three deep. It must be observed that the word ofvw« sometimes 
signifies a pace only, and if it be so understood here, it will bring 
Plutarch's account more within the bounds of probability. 

16 There was a passage twenty feet wide left between the trench 
and the Euphrates, and Artaxerxes neglected to defend it. 

J" He had four armies of three hundred thousand men each, 
under Tisaphernes, Gobryas, Arbaces, and Abrocomas; but the 
last did not arrive till five days after the battle. He had also six 
thousand chosen cavalry about his person, and two hundred armed 
chariots.* 

122 ARTAXEltXES". 

and even without their arms. Ilonee it was with 
the utmost difficulty, that Cyrus reduced them to 
anv order, and he could not at last effect it without 
much noise and tumult. As the king advanced in 
silence and at a slow pace, the good discipline of his 
troops afforded an astonishing* spectacle to the 
Greeks, who expected among such a multitude no- 
thing but irregular shouts and motions, and every 
other instance of distraction and disorder. He dis- 
played his judgement, likewise, in placing the 
strongest of his armed chariots before that part of his 
phalanx, which was opposite to the Greeks ; that 
by the impetuosity of their motion, they might break 
the enemy's ranks before they came to close combat. 

Many historians have described this battle : but 
XenophOn has done it with such life and energy38, 
that we do not read an account of it; we sec it. and 
feel all the danger. It would be the height of ab- 
surdity* therefore to attempt any thing after him, ex- 
cept the mentioning of some material circumstances, 
which he has omitted. 

The place where the battle was fought is called 
Cunaxa, and is five hundred furlongs from Babylon. 
A little before the action, Clearchus advised Cyrus 
to post himself behind the Macedonians19, and not 
risk his person ; upon which he is reported to have 
said, " What advice is this, Clearchus ? Would you 
41 have me, at the very time when I am aiming at a 
" crown, show myself unworthy of one ?" Cyrus, 
indeed, committed an error, in rushing incautiously 
into the midst of difficulty and danger ; but Clearchus 
was guilty of another as great, if not greater, in re- 
fusing to place his Greeks opposite to the king, and 
in getting the river upon his right in order to pre- 
vent his being surrounded. For if safety was his 

18 In the first book of his most interesting work, ' The Retreat 
of the Ten Thousand.'* 

[9 This is undoubtedly the error of some transcriber; and i'or 
' Macedonians' we should read 'Lacedaemonians.' The converse 
of this error is suggested as probable, p. 96., not. (33.)* 

12 

AKTAXEKXE& 123 

principal object, and he was by all means to avoid 
Joss, he ought to have staved at home ao. But volun- 
tarily to carry his arms ten thousand furlongs from 
the sea, solely with a view of placing Cyrus upon 
the throne of Persia ; and then to secure, not a post 
where he might best defend the prince whose pay he 
received, but one in which he might act most at ease 
and with the least hazard, was to behave like a man, 
who at the sight of present danger abandons the 
whole enterprise, and forgets the entire purpose of 
his expedition. For from the course of the action 
it appears, that if the Greeks had charged those who 
were posted about the king's person, they would 
not have stood the shock ; and, after Artaxerxes had 
been slain or put to flight, the conqueror must have 
gained the crown without farther interruption. The 
overthrow, therefore, of Cyrus* affairs and his death 
i.s much rather to be ascribed to the caution of 
Clearchus, than to his own rashness. For had the 
king himself assigned a post for the Greeks, where 
they might do him the least prejudice, he could not 
have selected a better than that, which was most 
remote from himself and the troops about him. At 
the distance at which he was placed from Clearchus, 
he knew nothing of the defeat of that part of his 
armv near the river ; and Cyrus was cut off, before 
he could avail himself of the advantages gained by 
the Greeks. Cyrus, indeed, was sensible what dis- 
position would have been of most service to him, 
and for that reason ordered Clearchus to charge in 
the centre ; but Clearchus, notwithstanding his 
assurances of doing every thing for the best, ruined 
all. For the Greeks beat the barbarians with ease, 
and pursued them a considerable way. 

In the mean time, Cyrus bein<? mounted on Pasa- 
cas, a horse of great spirit but at the .-same time 
headstrong and unruly, tell in (as Ctesias informs us) 

' Xenophon, who was not less illustrious in t!ie capacity of ge- 
neral than in that of historian, seems to commend Clearchus' pru- 
dence upon this occasion.* 

(.i 

12* ARTAXERXES, 

with Artagerses, general o£ the Cadusians "l9 who 
met -him Upon the gallop, and called oat to him in 
these terms: " Most unjust and stupid of men, who 
disgracest the name of Cyrus, the most august of 
all names among the Persians; thou leadcst those 
brave '" Greeks a vile way to plunder thy country, 
and to destroy thy brother and thy king, who has 
" many millions of servants better men than thou. 
" Try if he has not, and here thou shalt lose thy head, 
" before thou can'st see the face of the king." So 
saying, he threw Ills javelin at him with all his force ; 
but his cuirass was of such excellent temper, that he 
was not wounded, though the violence of the blow 
shook him in his seat. After which, as Artagerses 
was turning his horse, Cyrus aimed a stroke at him 
with his spear, and the point of it entering at his 
collar-bone, pierced through his neck. That Arta- 
gerses fell by the hand of Cyrus, almost all historians 
agree. With regard to the death of Cyrus himself, 
since Xenophon has given a very short account of 
it, as he was not on the spot when it happened, per- 
haps it may not be amiss to relate the manner of it 
(on the authority of Dinon and Ctesias) in greater 
detail. 

Dillon informs us, that Cvrus, after he had slain 
Artagerses, charged the vanguard of Artaxerxes 
with extreme fury, wounded the king's horse, and 
dismounted him. Tiribazus immediately mounted 
him on another horse, and said, " Sir, remember 
" this day ; for it deserves not to be forgotten." 
At the second attack, Cyrus spurred his horse 
against the king, and gave him a wound J3 ; at the 
third, Artaxerxes in the utmost indignation said to 
those that were by, " It is better to die, than to 

31 A people nenr the Caspian sea.* 

2i Kca*£, the epithet here given to the Greeks, has probably been 
a mistake of the transcribers for xcot»<. Then it will be, ' Thou 
leadest those vile Greeks a vile way,' &c. 

-; Or, ' with the violence of the encounter beat the king from 
his Fiorse.' In the original it is, tvirtitrui ra ixza K«.Tn,a.\t tov An-ctjipg*!, 

9 

ARTAXE11XES. 123 

" suffer all this." At the same time he pushed for- 
ward against Cyrus, who was rashly advancing amidst 
a shower of darts. The king wounded him with his 
javelin, and others did the same. Thus fell Gyrus, 
as some say, by the blow which the king gave him ; 
but according to others by the hand of a Carian 
soldier, who afterward, as an acknowledgement of 
his exploit, had the honour of carrying a golden 
cock at the head of the army on the point of his 
spear. For the Persians called the Carians ' cocks,' 
on account of the crests, with which they adorned 
their helmets '2\ 

Ctesias' story is very long, but the purport of it 
is as follows : When Cyrus had slain Artagerses, he 
spurred his horse up toward the king, and the king 
advanced against him, both in silence. Ariesus, one 
of Cyrus' friends, first aimed a blow at the king, 
but without effect. The king then threw his javelin 
-at Cyrus, but missed him ; the weapon however 
struck and killed Tisaphernes 25, a man of approved 
valour, and a faithful servant to Cyrus. It was now 
Cyrus* turn to try his javelin ; which pierced the 
king's cuirass, and going two fingers deep into his 
breast, brought him from his horse. This occasion- 
ed such disorder in his troops, that they fled. But 
the king recovering himself retired with a few of his 
men, among whom was Ctesias, to an eminence not 
far off, and there reposed himself. In the mean 
time Cyrus' horse, grown more furious by the action, 
carried him deep among the enemy ; and as night 
was coming on, they did not know him, and his own 
men sought for him in vain. Elated however with 
victory, and naturally daring and impetuous, he con- 

24 This was one of the three inventions ascribed to them by 
Herod, i. 171. And of this Alcseus (Strab. xiv.) speaks, AcQe* n 
cum Kapwe*. Hence, likewise, is the Egyptian oracle explained, 
Herod, ii. 152.* 

25 Tisaphernes is, probably, an erroneous reading-. We know 
of no Tisaphernes, but the grandee of that name, who was « a 
faithful servant' to Artaxerxes. The St. Germain MS. gives us 
* Satiphernes.' 

1'26 AHTAXKRXES. 

tinned advancing^ crying out in the Persian Iarigiragfe 
as he went; " Slaves, njake way." Upon this they 
humbled themselves, and opened their ranks ; but 
his tiara happened to fall from his head, and a young 
Persian, named Mithridates, in passing wounded 
him with his lance in the temple near his eye, with- 
out knowing who he was. From this wound such a 
quantity of blood issued, that he was seized with a 
giddiness, and fell senseless from his horse. The 
horse having lost his rider, wandered about the field; 
the housing likewise Ml off, and the servant of 
Mithridates, who had given him the wound, took it 
up all stained with blood. 

At last Cyrus, with much difficulty, began to re- 
cover from his swoon ; and a few eunuchs, who at- 
tended him, endeavoured to mount him upon an- 
other horse, and thus carry him out of danger. But 
as he was too weak to sit on horseback, he thought 
it better to walk, and the eunuchs supported him as 
he went. His head was still heavy, and he tottered 
at every step ; yet he continued to believe himself 
victorious, because he heard the fugitives calling 
Cyrus ' king,' and imploring mercy. 

At that instant some Cauniansa0 of mean condi- 
tion, who performed the most servile offices for the 
royal army, happened to mix with the company of 
Cyrus as friends. They perceived however, though 
not without difficulty, that the clothing of his people 
was red, whereas that given by the king their master 
was white. One of these then ventured to give 
Cyrus a stroke with his spear behind, but without 
knowing him to be the prince. The weapon hit his 
ham, and cut the sinew ; upon which he fell, and in 
falling dashed his wounded temple against a stone, 
and died upon the spot. Such is Ctcsias' story of 
the death of Cyrus, which like a blunt weapon hacks 
and hews him a long time, and can hardly kill him 
at last. 

2r' Caunus was a city of Curia.* 

ARTAXERXES. 127 

Soon after Cyrus expired, an officer, who was call- 
ed ' the King's Eye 2V passed that way. Artasyras 
(tor that was his real name) knowing the eunuchs, 
who were mourning over the corpse, addressed the 
one that appeared most faithful to his master, and 
said ; " Pariscas, whom art thou lamenting so 
" much ?" " O Artasyras !" answered the eunuch, 
" don't you see prince Cyrus dead r"' Artasyras 
was astonished at the event : he desired the eunuch 
however to compose himself, and take care of the 
corpse ; and instantly rode at full speed to Ar- 
taxerxes, who had given up all for lost, and was 
ready to faint, both witli thirst and wTith the anguish 
of his wound, when the officer joyfully hailed him in 
these words, " I have seen Cyrus dead." The king, 
at first, was impatient to view the dead body himself, 
and commanded Artasyras immediately to conduct 
him to it. But finding the whole field full of terror 
from a report that the Greeks, victorious in their 
quarter, were pursuing the fugitives and putting all 
to the sword, he thought proper to send out a greater 
number to reconnoitre the place. Accordingly, thirty 
men went with flambeaux in their hands. Still the 
king was almost dying with thirst, and the eunuch 
Satibarzanes sought every place for water ; as the 
field itself afforded none, and they were at a con- 
siderable distance from the camp. After much 
search, he found that one of those poor Caunians 
had about two quarts of bad water in a mean bottle, 
and took and carried it to the king. After the king 
had drank it all up, the eunuch asked him, " If he 
" did not find it a disagreeable beverage r" Upon 
which he swore by the gods, " That he had never 
" drank the most delicious wine, nor the lightest and 

J" Of these there were many in Persia, as well as of another 
class called ' the King's Ears,' from their respective employments 
in denouncing traitors. See Aristotle De Rep. iii. 1G. They were 
originally established, in great numbers, by Cyrus the Great 
(Xenopli. K. n. viii.) They did not, however, escape the wicked 
wits of those days, Aristoph. Acharn. i. '2, .'3.* 

128 ARTAXERXES. 

a 

clearest water, with so much pleasure. I wish 
only," continued he, " that I could find the man 
who gave it thee, that 1 might bestow upon him 
" a reeompence. In the mean time, I entreat the 
" gods to make him happy and rich." 

While he was speaking, the thirty men, whom lie 
had sent out, returned in great exultation, and con- 
firmed the news of his unexpected good fortune. 
Now likewise numbers of his troops again repaired 
to him, and dismissing his fears he descended from 
the eminence, with many torches carried before him. 
When he came to the dead body, according to the 
law of the Persians, the right hand and the head were 
cut off; and having ordered the head to be brought 
to him, he took it by the hair which was long and 
thick, and showed it to the fugitives, and to such as 
were still doubtful of the fortune of the day. The 
sight astonished them, and they prostrated them- 
selves before him. Seventy thousand men quickly 
gathered round him, and with them he returned to 
his camp. Ctesias informs us, he had led four hun- 
dred thousand men that day into the field ; but 
Dinon and Xenophon make the number much 
larger. As to the number of the slain, Ctesias says, 
an account of onlv nine thousand was brought to 
Artaxerxes ; whereas there appeared to himself to 
have been not fewer than twenty thousand 2fJ. That 
article, therefore, must be left dubious. But nothing 
can be a more palpable falsity than what Ctesias 
subjoins, that he was sent embassador to the Greeks 
in conjunction with PhayllusafJ the Zacynthian, and 
some others. For Xenophon knew, that Ctesias 
was at the Persian court ; he mentions him in his 
works, and it is plain that he had met with his books. 

28 Diod. Sic. xiv. 34. estimates the king's loss at fifteen, and that 
of Cyrus at only three thousand. Of the Greeks, he says not a 
single man was slain, and only very few wounded.* 

19 He is named by Xenophon (Ar.iib.ii.) Phalinus ; and by 
Diod. Sic. ib. Phallenus, Zacynthus is the island now called 
Zante.* 

ARTAXERXES. V29 

If he had been joined in commission therefore to 
settle such important affairs, he would not have 
passed him by unnoticed, but would have mentioned 
him with Phayllus. Ctesias indeed was a man of 
unbounded vanity, as well as strong attachment to 
Clearchus ; and for that reason always leaves a place 
in the story for himself, when he is celebrating the 
praises of Clearchus and the Lacedaemonians. 

After the battle, the king sent great and valuable 
presents to the son of Artagerses, who had been slain 
by Cyrus. He rewarded also Ctesias, and others, in 
a distinguished manner ; and having found the 
Caunian who gave him the bottle of water, he raised 
him from indigence and obscurity to riches and ho- 
nours. There was something likewise of an appro- 
priateness in his punishments. One Arbaces, a 
Mede, deserted during the battle to Cvrus, and after 
that prince's death returned to his colours. As he 
perceived that the man had done it rather from 
weakness and cowardice than with any treasonable 
design, he only sentenced him to carry about a 
naked courtesan upon his shoulders a whole day in 
the market-place. Another, beside deserting, had 
bragged that he had killed two of the enemy ; and, 
for his punishment, he ordered his tongue to be 
pierced through with three needles. 

He himself supposed, and he was desirous of hav- 
ing it believed by the world, that Cyrus fell by his 
hand. This induced him to send rich presents to 
Mithridates, who gave him the first wound, and to 
instruct the messengers to say; " The king does you 
" this honour, because you found the housing of 
" Cyrus' horse, and brought it to him." And 
when the Carian, who gave Cyrus the stroke in his 
ham, applied for his reward, he ordered those who 
gave it to him to state : " The king bestows this 
upon you, because you were the second person 
that announced to him good tidings. For Arta- 
syras was the first, and you the next who brought 
him an account of Cyrus' death." Mithridates 
vol. vl K 

a. 

it 
a 
(c 

130 ARTAXERXES. 

went awav in silence, though not without concern : 
but the unhappy Carian could not surmount the 
common disease of vanity. Elated with what he 
thought his good fortune, and aspiring to things 
above his station, he would not receive his reward 
for tidings : but angrily insisted, and called the 
gods to witness, that he and no other had killed 
Cyrus, and that it was unjust to rob him of the glory. 
At this the king was so much incensed, that he 
ordered the man's head to be struck oft'. But his 
mother Parysatis being present, exclaimed, " Let 
" not this villainous Carian get off so easily : leave 
" him to me, and he shall have the reward, which 
".his audacious tongue deserves." Accordingly, 
the king gave him up to her ; and she delivered him 
to the executioners with orders to torture him for 
ten days, and then to tear out his eyes, and pour 
molten brass into his ears till he expired. 

Mithridates also soon afterward, through his own 
folly, came to a miserable end. Being invited one 
evening to supper, where both the king's eunuchs 
and those of his mother were present, he went in a 
robe embroidered with gold, which he had received 
from the king. During the entertainment, Pary- 
satis' principal eunuch took occasion to say ; " What 
" a beautiful garment is that, Mithridates, which 
sC the king has given you ! How handsome are those 
" bracelets, and that chain ! Plow valuable your 
" cimitar! He has certainly made you not only a 
" great, but a happy man." Mithridates, by this 
time flushed with wine, replied, " What are these 
" things, Sparamixes ? I deserve much higher marks 
" of honour than these for the services, which I 
" rendered the king on that day." Upon which 
Sparamixes, with a smile, observed, " I speak not 
in the least out of envy; but since (according to 
the Greek proverb) ' there is truth in wine,' let 
me ask you what great matter it is to find a horse's 
" housing fallen off, and bring it to the king?" 
This he said, not that he was ignorant of the real 

9 

AllTAXEIlXES. 131 

state of the case ; but wishing to lay him open, and 
observing that the wine had made him talkative and 
thrown him off his guard, he studied to pique his 
vanity. Mithridates, no longer master of himself, 
said, " You may talk of what housing and trifles you 
" please : but I teli you plainly, it was by this hand 
" that Cyrus was slain. I did not, like Artagerses, 
" throw my javelin in vain, but I pierced his temple 
" near the eye, and brought him from his horse ; 
" and of that wound he died." The rest of the 
company saw the dreadful fate that would befal 
Mithridates, and cast their eyes upon the ground ; 
but he who gave the entertainment said, " Conic, 
" come, let us mind our eating and drinking; and 
" adoring the fortune 30 of the king, forego such 
<; subjects as are too high for us." 

Immediately after the company broke up, the 
eunuch told Farysatis what had been said, and she 
informed the king. Artaxerxes, like one who had 
been detected, or lost a victory out of his hands, 
was enraged at the discovery. For he was desirous 
of making all the barbarians and Greeks believe, 
that in the several encounters he had both given and 
received blows ; and that, though he was wounded 
himself, he had killed his adversary. He, therefore, 
condemned Mithridates to the punishment of ' the 
boat.' The manner of this is as follows: they take two 
boats, which are made to fit each other, and extend 
the criminal in one of them in a supine posture. 
They then invert the second upon it, so that the poor 
wretch's body is covered, the head and hands only 
being left out at one end, and the feet at the other. 
He is supplied daily with victuals, and if he refuses 
to eat, they compel him by pricking him in the 
eyes. After he has eaten, they make him drink a 
mixture of honey and milk, which they pour into 
his mouth. They spread the same likewise over his 

30 Or, as an English host would have equivalent!)' proposed 
(perhaps with three times three), ' drinking a bumper to his ma- 
jesty's health.'* 

K 2 

182 ARTAXERXES. 

face, and always turn him so as to have the sun full 
in his eves ; the consequence of which is, that his 
face is covered with swarms of flies. As all the ne- 
cessary evacuations of a man who eats and drinks 
are within the boat, the filthiness and corruption en- 
gender a quantity of worms, which consume his 
flesh, and penetrate to his entrails. Y\'hen they rind 
that he is dead, they take off the upper boat, and 
enjoy the spectacle of a carcase whose flesh is eaten 
away, and of numberless vermin clinging to and 
gnawing the bowels. Mithridates with much diffi- 
culty found death, after he had thus gradually wasted 
for seventeen days. 

There was now no remaining object for the venge- 
ance of Parysatis but Mesabates, one of the king's 
eunuchs, who had cut oil Cyrus' head and hand. 
As he took care, however, to give her no handle 
against him, she laid the following scheme for his 
destruction : she was a woman of keen parts in all 
respects, and in particular played well at dice. The 
king often played with her before the war, and being 
reconciled to her after it [resumed the same diver- 
sion. She was even the confidante of his pleasures, 
and scrupled not to assist him in his gallantries. 
Statira, indeed, was the object of her hatred, and 
she let her have a very small share of the kino's 
company ; for she was determined to possess the 
principal interest with him herself31.] One day 
finding Artaxerxes in want of amusement, she chal- 
lenged him to play for a thousand Darics, and pur- 
posely managed her dice so ill that she lost. She 
immediately paid the money, but with much appa- 
rent chagrin, and challenged him to play again for 
an eunuch. This proposal he accepted, and they 
agreed each of them to except five of their most 
faithful eunuchs ; the winner to have his choice out 
of all the rest. On these conditions they played. 
The queen, who had the affair at heart, exerted all 

1 Thi< passage is supplied from the St. Germain MS.* 

ARTAXERXES. I ; 

her skill, and being favoured besides by the dice, 
won the eunuch, and pitched upon Mesabates, who 
was not of the number excepted. He was of course 
delivered to her, and before the king suspected any 
tiling of her intentions, she put him into the hands of 
the executioners, with orders to iiay him alive, to fix 
his body upon three stakes, and to stretch out his 
skin by itself Artaxerxes, highly incensed, ex- 
pressed his resentment in strong terms: but she only 
said in a laughing ironical way, " This is pleasant 
ef indeed, that you must be so angry about an old 
" useless eunuch, while I say not one word of my 
" loss of a thousand Darics." The king, though 
much concerned at the trick, held his peace. But 
Statira, who upon other occasions openly censured 
the queen-mother, complained now of her injustice 
and cruelty in sacrificing to Cyrus the eunuchs and 
other faithfUl servants of the king. 

After Tisaphernes3- had gained possession of 
Clearchus and the other Grecian officers by trea- 
chery, and contrary to the treaty and his oaths put 
them in chains, Ctesias informs us, that Clearchus 
made interest with himself for the obtaining of a 
comb : with the use of which it seems he was so 
much pleased, that he took his ring from his finger, 
and gave it him as an evidence of his regard to be 
shown to his friends and relations in Lacedsemon. 
The device was a dance of the Caryatides33. He 

32 Tisaphernes, by promises which he did not intend to keep, 
drew Clearchus to an interview in his tent. He went with four 
principal officers, Proxenus the Boeotian, Menon the Thessalian, 
Agias the Arcadian, and Socrates the Achaean, twenty captains, 
and about two hundred soldiers, to wait on the Persian ; who put 
Clearchus and the four officers under arrest, and ordered the 
captains to be cut in pieces. Some time afterward the king com- 
manded Clearchus, and all the four officers except Menon, to be 
beheaded. (L.) Him he reserved for a whole year of tortures, at 
the end of which he likewise was put to death. (Xenoph. Anab. ii. 
ad tin.)* 

3.3 Carya was a town in Laconia, where there was a temple of 
Diana. The whole town, indeed, was dedicated to Diana and her 
nyrophs. In the court before the temple stood a statue of Diana 

12 

134 ARTAXF.RXES. 

jadds, that whenever provisions were sent to Clearchus, 
Lis fellow-prisoners seized most of them for them- 
selves, and left him only a very small share ; but that 
he corrected this abuse, by procuring a larger quan- 
tity to be furnished to Clearchus, and separating the 
allowances. All this (according to our author) was 
.done with the concurrence, and by the favour, of 
Parysatis. As he sent every day a gammon of bacon 
among the provisions, Clearchus suggested to him, 
that he might easily conceal a small dagger in the 
fleshy part ; and earnesly implored him to doit, that 
his fate might not be left to the cruel disposition of 
Artaxerxes : but, through fear of the king's displea- 
sure, he refused. The king however, at the request 
of his mother, promised upon oath not to put Clear- 
chus to death ; though he was afterward persuaded 
by Statira to destroy all the prisoners, except Me- 
non. On this account (he adds) Parysatis plotted 
against Statira, and resolved to take her off by poi- 
son. It is perfectly absurd in Ctesias, to assign so 
disproportionate a cause. Would Parysatis, for the 
Sake of Clearchus, undertake so horrid and danger- 
ous an enterprise, as that of poisoning the king's 
lawfnl wife, by whom he had children and an heir 
to his crown ? He obviously relates this fabulous 
tale, to do honour to Clearchus' memory. For the 
carcases of the other officers, by his account, were 
torn in pieces by dogs and birds ; but a storm of 
wind brought a great heap of sand, and provided a 
tomb for Clearchus. Around this heap there sprang 
up a number of palm-trees, which soon grew into 
an admirable grove, and spread their protecting 
shade over the place ; so that the king deeply re? 
pen ted of what he had done, believing that he had 
destroyed a man beloved by the gods. 

It was therefore only from the hatred and jealousy, 

Caryatis, and the Spartan virgins kept a yearly festival, upon which 
they danced round it. (L.) (Pausan. iii. 10.) The peculiar 
dance, we learn from Lucian, was established by Castor and 
Pollux* 

ARTAXERXES. 135 

which Parysatis had from the first entertained of 
Statifa, that she embarked in so cruel a design. She 
perceived, that her own power with the king de- 
pended only upon his reverence for her, as his mo- 
ther; whereas that of Statira was founded on love, and 
confirmed by the highest confidence in her fidelity. 
The point which she had to carry was great, and 
she resolved to make a desperate effort for it. She 
had a faithful and favourite female attendant, named 
Gigis, who (as Dinon informs us) assisted in the 
affair of the poison ; but, according to Ctesias, she 
was only privy to it, and that against her will. The 
former calls the person who provided the poison, 
Melantas ; the latter, Belitaras 3\ 

These two princesses had apparently forgotten 
their old suspicions and animosities, and began to 
visit and eat at each other's table. But they did it 
with so much caution and distrust, as to make it a 
rule to eat at the same dish, and even of the same 
slices. There is a small bird in Persia which has no 
excrements, the intestines being completely filled 
with fat, whence it is supposed to live upon air and 
dew ; the name of it is Rhyntaces. One of these" 
birds, according to Ctesias, Parysatis divided with a 
small knife poisoned upon one side ; and, taking the 
wholesomer part herself, gave the other to Statira. 
Dinon however affirms, that it was not Parysatis, 
but Melantas, who cut the bird in two, and pre- 
sented the poisoned part to Statira. Be that as it 
may, she died in dreadful agonies and convulsions ; 
and was not only herself sensible of the cause, but 
intimated her suspicions to the king, who knew too 
well his mother's savage and implacable temper, and 
therefore immediately made an inquiry into the 
affair. Her officers and servants who attended at 
her table were arrested, and put to the torture. But 
Gigis she kept in her own apartment; and, when 
the king demanded her, refused to give her up. At 

34 Both these names Huet, Ju bis De;n Evang., identifies with 
Baltasar.* 

ISfi ARTAXERXES. 

last, Gigis entreated the queen-mother to let her go 
in the night to her own house ; and the king, being 
informed of it, ordered some of his guards to inter- 
cept her. Accordingly she was seized, and con- 
demned to die. The laws of Persia have ordered 
the following punishment for poisoners : their heads 
are placed on a broad stone, and then bruised and 
crushed with another, till nothing of the figure re- 
mains. Thus was Gigis executed. As for Parysatis, 
the king did not reproach her with her crime, nor 
punish her any farther than by sending her to Baby- 
lon (which was the place she petitioned to retire to), 
and declaring that he would never visit that city so 
long as she lived. Such was the state of his domestic 
affairs. 

He was not less solicitous to get into his hands 
the Greeks, who had followed Cyrus into Asia, than 
he had been to conquer Cyrus himself, and to retain 
possession of the crown : but in this he could not suc- 
ceed 3\ For though they had lost Cyrus their gene- 
ral and their own officers, they yet forced their way 
as it were out of the very palace of Artaxerxes, and 
proved to the whole world, that the Persians and 
their king had nothing to value themselves upon 
but wealth, luxury, and women ; and that all the 
Test, was- mere parade, and ostentation. This gave 
fresh spirits to the Greeks, and taught them to de- 
spise the barbarians. The Lacedemonians in partir 
cular thought it would be a great dishonour, if they 

•'* The Greeks were at a great distance from their own country, 
in the very heart of the Persian empire, surrounded by a numerous 
army flushed with victory; and had no way of returning into 
Greece, but by forcing their retreat through an immense tract of 
the enemy's country. But their valour and resolution surmounted 
all these difficulties; and in spite of a powerful army which pursued 
and harassed them all the way, they made a retreat of 2,32.5 miles 
through the provinces belonging to the Persians, and arrived at the 
Greek, cities on the Euxine sea. Clearchus had the conduct of this 
march at first, but he being cut off by the treachery of Tisa-. 
phernes, Xenoplu n was chosen in his room ; and to his valour and 
visdom it was chiefly owing, that at length they reached Greece ir* 
safety. 

ARTAXERXES. 137 

did not now deliver the Asiatic Greeks from servi- 
tude and put an end to the insults of the Persians. 
Their first attempt was under Thimbro, and their 
next under Dercyllidas30; but, as those generals 
effected nothing of' importance, the conduct of the 
war was given to their king, Agesilaus. That prince 
immediately passed into Asia with his fleet, and 
speedily distinguished himself by his vigorous opera- 
tions ; for he defeated Tisaphernes in a pitched 
battle, and brought over several cities. 

By these losses Artaxerxes understood, what 
would be his best method of making war. He there- 
fore sent Hermocrates, the Ilhodian, into Greece 
with a large quantity of gold, instructing him to 
corrupt with it the principal men among the states, 
and to stir up a Grecian war again Lacedeemon. In 
this commission Hermocrates acquitted himself with 
so much success, that the most considerable cities 
leagued against Sparta, and such commotions were 
excited in Peloponnesus, that the magistrates were 
forced to recall Agesilaus from Asia. Upon his de- 
parture, he is reported to have said to his friends, 
" The king drives me out of Asia with thirty thou- 
" sand archers." The Persian money, it must be 
recollected, bore the impression of an archer. 

Artaxerxes deprived the Lacedaemonians of the 
dominion of the sea, by means of Conon the Athe- 
nian, who acted in conjunction with Pliarnabazus. 
For Conon, after lie had lost the sea-fight at ^Egos- 
Potamos;'7, fixed his abode in Cyprus; not merely 
with a view of providing for his own safety, but 
waiting for a change of affairs, as mariners wait for 
the turn of the tide : and finding that his own plan 
required a respectable power to carry it into execiir 
tion, and the Persian power a person of ability to 
conduct it, he transmitted to the king an account of 
the measures, which he had concerted. This letter 

16 See Xenoph. Hellen. iiif 

37 See the Life of Agesilaus, IV. 88,, the Life of Alcibiades, IL 
189., and the Life of Lysandcr, III. 199.* 

I3S ARTAXERXES. 

the messenger was ordered to get delivered into his 
hands by Zeno the Cretan, who danced in the revels, 
or by Polycritus the Mendaean, wlio was his physi- 
cian, or (in the event of their absence) by Ctesias 
another physician. It was given, we are told, to 
Ctesias, who added to it this paragraph ; " I desire 
" you, Sir, to send me Ctesias. for he will be very 
" serviceable in the business of the navy." Ctesias 
however affirms, that the king without any kind of 
solicitation employed him upon that service. 

After Artaxerxes, through Conon and Pharna- 
bazus, had gained the battle off Cnidus, which 
stripped the Lacedaemonians of the empire of the 
sea, he drew almost the whole of Greece into his 
interest; insomuch that the celebrated peace, called 
'the* Peace of Antalcidas08/ was entirely of his 
modelling. Antalcidas was a Spartan, the son of 
Leon, and so strongly attached to the ting, that 
he persuaded the Lacedaemonians to give up to 
him all the Greek cities in Asia, and the islands 
which are reckoned among it's dependencies, to 
be held as his tributaries in virtue of the peace ; 
if indeed we can call that a peace, by which Greece 
was dishonoured and betrayed, and which was 
indeed so vile a bargain, that the most unsuccess- 
ful war could not have terminated in any thing more 
inglorious. 

Hence it was that Artaxerxes, though (according 
to Dinon's account) he always detested the other 
Spartans as the most impudent of men, expressed a 
great regard for Antalcidas, when he came to his 
court. One evening he took a chaplet of flowers 
from his head, dipped it in the richest essences, 
and sent it him from his own table. The whole 
court was astonished at such a mark of favour. 
But there seems to have been a propriety in mak- 
ing him this ridiculous compliment'9 ; such a crown, 

3« B. C. 387. See the Life of Agesilaus, IV. 99., and note.* 
39 It was a compliment entirely out of character to a Spartan, 
who, as such, was supposed to value himself upon the simplicity of 
his manners, and to avoid all approaches to luxury : but Antalcidas 

ARTAXERXES. 1% 

in fact, suited the brows of him, who could mimic 
Leonidas and Callicratides in a dance before the 
Persians. Somebody happening to say in Agesi- 
laus' hearing, " Alas for Greece ! when the Lace- 
" dsemonians are turning Persians;'* he corrected 
him, and said, "No; the Medes are rather turning 
" Lacedemonians""'." But the wit of the expres- 
sion did not remove the disgrace of the thing;. 
They lost their superiority in Greece by the ill- 
fought battle of Leuctra M, as they had previously 
lost their honour by the vile conditions of this 
peace. 

So long as Sparta maintained her superiority, 
the king admitted Antalcidas to the privileges of 
hospitality, and called him his friend. But when, 
upon their defeat at Leuctra, the Spartans sent 
Agesilaus into Egypt to procure a supply of money, 
and Antalcidas went upon the same errand to the 
Persian court, Artaxerxes treated him with so much 
neglect and contempt, that between the ridicule 
which he suffered from his enemies, and his fear 
of the resentment of the Ephori, he resolved on his 
return to starve himself to death. Ismenias the 
Theban, and Pelopidas who had lately won the 
battle of Leuctra, went also to the court of Arta- 
xerxes. Pelopidas submitted to nothing unworthy 
of his country, or his character ; but Ismenias, 
being commanded to adore the king, purposely 
let his ring fall from his finger, that by stooping 
to take it up he might appear in a posture of 
adoration. 

Timagoras the Athenian having given the king 
some secret intelligence, in a letter which lie de- 
spatched by a secretary named Beluris, he was so 

had shown, hy his servile cc-pdescension, how little he was allied in 
feeling to Sparta. 

4° See note (38.) 

41 B. C 371.; where the Thebans, led by Epaminondas and 
Pelopidas, defeated the Lacedaemonians under their king Cleom- 
brotus, who fell in the action.* 

WO AilTAXERXKS. 

much pleased that lie made him a present of ten 
thousand Darics. The same Timagoras wanted a 
supply of cow's milk on account of a languishing 

disorder ; upon which Artaxerxes ordered eighty 
cows lor his use to follow him wherever he went. 
He likewise sent him a bed with the necessary cover- 
lets, and Persian servants to make it, because he 
thought the Greeks not skilled in that art 42 ; and he 
ordered him, on account of his indisposition, to be 
carried to the sea-side in a litter. To this we may 
add the allowance for his table while he was at court, 
which was so magnificent, that Ostanes the king's 
brother one day said to him ; im Timagoras, remem- 
" her this table, for it is not so sumptuously main- 
" tained for nothing." This was rather reproach- 
ing him for his treason, than calling for his acknow- 
ledgements. And indeed Timagoras, upon his re- 
turn, was capitally condemned by the Athenians for 
having received bribes. 

Artaxerxes in some measure atoned for the causes 
of sorrow, which he had given the Greeks, by doing 
one thing that afforded them great pleasure : he put 
Tisaphernes, their most implacable enemy, to death. 
This he did partly at the instigation of Parysatis, 
who added other charges to those alleged against 
him. For he had not long retained his anger, but 
was reconciled to his mother and sent for her to 
/ court ; because he saw that she had understanding 
and spirit enough to assist in governing the kingdom, 
and there now remained no farther cause of suspi- 
cion between them. From this time she made it a 
rule to please the king in all her measures, and not 

** Hence, says a former annotator, Agamemnon threatens to 
doom his \siatic slave Chryseis, when advanced in years, 

To deck the bed she once enjoy'd! (Horn. II. i. 31.) 

The distance from the Persian capital to the sea-side, alluded to 
above, was so considerable, that the chairmen for their discharge 
t>C this piece of royal courtesy (as Plutarch himself informs us, in 
his Life of Pelopidas, II. 379.) received from the king a compensa- 
tion of four talents.* 

ARTAXERXES. Ill 

to oppose any of his inclinations, by which she 
gained an absolute ascendency over him. He had a 
strong passion, she perceived, for one of his own 
daughters, named Atossa. He endeavoured, indeed, 
to conceal it on his mother's account, and restrained 
it in public ; though, according to some authors, he 
had already a private commerce with the princess. 
Parysatis no sooner suspected the intrigue, than she 
caressed her grand-daughter more than ever ; and 
was continually praising to Artaxerxes both her 
beauty and behaviour, in which she assured him 
there was something great and worthy of a crown. 
At last, she persuaded him to make her his wife, 
without regarding the laws and opinions of the 
Greeks: "God," said she, "has made you a law 
" to the Persians, and a rule of right and wrong." 
Some historians (among whom is Heraclides of 
Cumae43) affirm, that Artaxerxes married not only 
Atossa, but another of his daughters named Ames- 
tris, of whom we shall speak by and by. His affec- 
tion for Atossa was so strong, that though she had 
a leprosy which spread itself over her whole body, 
he was not disgusted by it, but daily implored Juno 
for her, and grasped the dust of her temple ; for he 
paid his homage to no other goddess. At the same 
time by his direction his state-officers sent so many 
offerings to her shrine, that the whole space between 
the palace and the temple, which was sixteen fur- 
longs, was filled with gold, silver, purple, and fine 
horses'14. 

Pharnabazus and Iphicrates45 he despatched to 
make war upon the ^Egyptians ; but the expedition 

45 Who wrote a History of Persia in five books.* 
44 As ' horses ' seem a strange present to Juno, and are as 
strangely mixed with ' gold, silver,* and purple,' Dacier proposes, 
instead of *»»»*, 'horses,' to read /*;>&>, 'precious stones.' (L.) 
And yet Juno was very partial to Argos, which the Greek poets 
call i.-'oloTcc, foz/jMToi, Izkkc, &c. ; and Horace (Od. I. vii. [).) 
aptum equis-* 

41 An Athenian general of high reputation, contemporary with 
Phacion. His Life was written by Cornelius Nepos.* 

U2 ARTAXERXES. 

miscarried through a quarrel, which took place be- 
tween the generals employed. After this he marched 
in person against the Cadusians, with three hundred 
thousand foot and ten thousand horse. Their coun- 
try is rough and uneven, and covered with perpetual 
fogs. As it produces no corn or fruits by cultiva- 
tion, the inhabitants, a fierce and warlike race of 
men, live upon wild pears, apples, and other things 
of that kind. He was, therefore, insensibly involved 
in great danger and distress ; for his troops could 
find no provisions there, neither could they be sup- 
plied from any other place. They were conse- 
quently forced to Vdl their beasts of burthen, and 
eat them ; and even those became so scarce, that 
an ass' head was sold for sixty drachma-.. The! 
king's table itself was ill supplied ; and there re- 
mained only a few horses, all the rest having been 
used for food. 

In this extremity Tiribazus, who was often in 
high favour on account of his courage, and often 
degraded for his levity, and who at this very time 
was in the deepest disgrace, saved the king and his 
whole army by the following stratagem : The Cadu- 
sians having two kings, each had his separate camp. 
Upon this Tiribazus founded his scheme ; and after 
he had communicated it to Artaxerxes, went himself 
to one of those princes, and sent his son to the 
other. Each imposed upon the king to whom he 
applied, by pretending that the other was about to 
despatch a private embassy to Artaxerxes, with the 
view of negotiating a separate alliance. " But if 
tc you are wise," said they, " vou will be before- 
" hand with your rival, and we will assist you in the 
*' whole affair." This argument had it's effect ; 
and each, persuaded that the other was undermining 
him out ot' envy, sent his embassadors, the one with 
Tiribazus, and the other with his son. As some 
time elapsed before they returned, Artaxerxes began 
to entertain suspicions, and there were not. wanting 
people who suggested that Tiribazus had some trai- 

ARTAXERXES. 145 

torous design. Upon this, the king was extremely 
dejected, and repenting of the confidence which he 
had reposed in him, gave ear to all the calumnies of 
his enemies. But at last Tiribazus arrived, as did 
also his son, with the Cadusian embassadors, and 
peace was made with both parties ; in consequence 
of which, Tiribazus stood higher in esteem and au- 
thority with the king than ever. During this expe- 
dition, Artaxerxes showed that weakness and 
cowardice ought not to be ascribed, as they gene- 
rally are, to the pomp and luxuries of liie"s\ but to 
a native meanness and depravity of judgement. For 
neither ihc. gold, nor the purple, or the jewels, which 
the king always wore, and which were worth not 
less UlV.u twelve thousand talents, prevented him 
from encountering the same fatigues and hardships 
with the meanest soldier in his army, lie took his 
quiver on his back, and his buckler upon his arm, 
and quilting his horse would frequently march fore- 
most up the most craggy and difficult places ; so 
that others found their task much lighter, when they 
observed the strength and alacrity with which he 
proceeded ; for he marched above two hundred 
furlongs a day. 

At last he reached one of his own palaces, where 
there were gardens and parks of great extent and 
beauty, though the surrounding country was naked 
and barren. As the weather was exceedingly cold, 
he permitted his men to cut wood out of the parks, 
without sparing either pine or cypress : and, when 
he observed them loth to touch trees of such size 
and beauty, he took an ax in his own hand, and 
applied it to the largest and finest tree among them. 
After which they cut them down without scruple, 
and having made a number of fires, passed the night 
in comfort. 

He found however, upon his arrival at his capital, 

4f' Yet the instance in question ought rather perhaps to be con- 
sidered as an exception, than an example.* 

14* ARTAXERXES. 

that he had lost many brave men, and almost all his 
horses ; and imagining that he was despised for his 
disasters, and the ill success of the expedition, he 
became suspicious of his grandees. Many of them 
he put to death in anger, and more out of apprehen- 
sion. For fear is the most sanguinary principle* 
tipon which a tyrant can act ; whereas courage, on 
the contrary, is mild and unsuspicious. Thus the 
shyest and most timorous animals are the most diffi- 
cult to be approached, or tamed ; whereas the more 
generous, having less suspicion because they have 
less fear, do not shun the caresses of man. 

Artaxerxes, being now far advanced in years, 
observed his sons making parties for the crown, 
among his friends and the rest of the nobility. The 
more equitable were for his leaving it to his eldest 
son Darius, as he had himself received it from his 
father in right of primogeniture. 13ut his younger 
son Ochus, who was a man of an active and violent 
spirit, had also a considerable interest among the 
grandees. Besides, he hoped to gain his lather 
through Atossa ; to whom lie assiduously paid his 
court, promising to make her the partner of his 
throne upon the death of Artaxerxes. Nay, it was 
even said, that he had already had private familiari- 
ties with her. Artaxerxes, thousrh he was ignorant 
of this circumstance, resolved to cut off Ochus' hopes 
at once ; lest, following the daring steps of his uncle 
Cyrus, he should again involve the kingdom in civil 
■wars. He therefore declared Darius his successor, 
who was now twenty-five !7 years old, and permitted 
him to wear the point of his turban 48 erect as a 
mark of royalty. 

As it is customary in Persia for the heir to ask a 
favour of him that has declared him such, which if 
possible is always granted, Darius demanded Aspasia, 

47 In the printed text it is « fifty;' but one of the MSS. gives 
us TTiyjTtTav xa nxer-rov instead of TrsvTKKoo-Tov. Besides, Plutarch 
sails him ' a young man' a little below. 

"8 K<7^<5. 

ARTAXERXE& 115 

who bad been his uncle Cyrus' favourite mistress, 
and was now one of the king's concubines. This 
woman was a native of Phocea in Ionia, and her 
parents, who were above the condition of slaves, had 
given her a good education. One evening, she was 
introduced to Cyrus at supper with the other women. 
While they all approached him without scruple, and 
received his jokes and caresses with pleasure, Aspasia 
stood by in silence; and, upon Cyrus' calling her 
to him, she refused to go. Perceiving that the 
chamberlains were about to compel her, she said, 
" Whoever lays hands upon me, shall repent it." 
Upon which, the company considered her as an un- 
polished rustic ; but Cyrus was delighted, and said 
with a smile to the person who brought them, " Do 
" not you see that of all these, whom you have 
" provided, this young woman alone has generous 
" and virtuous sentiments?" From that moment 
he attached himself to her, loved her most of all 
his concubines, and called her Aspasia ' the Wise.' 
When Cyrus fell in battle, she was taken among the 
plunder of his camp. 

Artaxerxes was much concerned at his son's re- 
quest. For the barbarians are so extremely jealous 
of their women, that capital punishment is inflicted, 
not only upon the man who speaks to or touches 
one of the king's concubines, but upon him also who 
approaches, or passes their chariots on the road. 
And though, in compliance with the dictates of his 
passion, he had made Atossa his wife contrary to 
law, he kept three hundred and sixty concubines, 
all of them women of the greatest beauty. When 
Darius however demanded Aspasia, he declared her 
free, and said ; " She might go with him, if she 
" pleased : but he would not compel her against 
" her inclination." Accordingly Aspasia was sent 
for, and contrary to the king's expectation made 
choice of Darius. He gave her up to him, indeed, 
because he was obliged to it by the law ; but he 
soon took her away from him, and made her a 

VOL. vi. L 

U6 ARTAXERXES. 

priestess of Diana of Ecbatana, whom they call 
' Anitis'Y that she might pass the remainder of 
her lire in chastity. This he thought no severe re- 
venge upon his son, but a pleasant way of chastis- 
ing Ins presumption. Djariu.s, however, highly re- 
sented the affront ; whether it was, that the charms 
of Aspasia had made a deep impression upon him, 
or he thought himself insulted and ridiculed by the 
proceeding. 

Tiribazus, seeing how much he was offended, 
endeavoured to exasperate him still farther. This 
he did from a fellow-feeling ; for he had suffered 
an injury of nearly the same kind. The king, hav- 
ing several daughters, promised to give Apama to 
Pharnabazus, Rhodogune to Orontes 50, and Ames- 
tris to Tiribazus. With the two first he kept his 
word, but he deceived Tiribazus : for, instead of 
giving Amestris to him, he married her himself; 
promising at the same time, that he should have his 
youngest daughter Atossa. But of her likewise he 
afterward became enamoured, and married her too, 
as we have already mentioned. This treatment ex- 
tremely incensed Tiribazus, who had indeed nothing 
steady in his disposition, but was wild and irregular. 
One while upon a level with the greatest men in the 
court, another while unacceptable to the king and 
sinking into disgrace, he bore no change of fortune 
with propriety. If he was in favour, his vanity 
was insupportable ; if out of it, instead of being 
humble and quiet, he had recourse to violence 
and ferocity. 

His conversing with the young prince was, there- 
fore, adding fire to fire : " What avails it," said he, 
" to have the point of your turban advanced, if 
" you do not seek to advance your authority ? 
" Nothing can be more absurd than your thinking 

<9 Pausanias (iii. 16.) says, there was a temple of Diana Anaitis 
in Lydia. But Justin (x. i.) informs us, that Artaxerxes made 
Aspasia one of the priestesses of the Sun. 

s° Who subsequent!)' fell into disgrace. Sec Diod. Sic. xv. 8.* 

ARTAXERXE& U7 

" yourself secure of the succession, while your 
" brother is privately forwarding his interest by 
" means of the women, and your father is so very 
" foolish and unsteady. He, who could break one 
" of the most sacred laws of the Persians, for the 
sake of an insignificant Greek woman, is certainly 
not to be depended upon in more important en- 
: gagements. Besides, the case is quite different 
between you and Ochus, as to the event of the 
competition : if Ochus fails to obtain the crown, 
no body will hinder him from living happily in a 
private station ; but you, who have been declared 
king, must either reign or die." Upon this occa- 
sion was verified the observation of Sophocles, 

Swift in it's march 

a 

tc 
cc 
u 

Is evil counsel. 

The road which leads us to what we desire is 
indeed smooth, and of an easy descent ; and the 
desires of most men are vicious, because they have 
never known or tried the enjoyments of virtue. 
The lustre of the imperial crown, and Darius' fear 
of his brother, furnished Tiribazus with other argu- 
ments ; but the goddess of beauty contributed her 
share toward persuading him, by putting him in 
mind of the loss of Aspasia. ; 

He, therefore, entirely resigned himself to Tiri- 
bazus, and many others soon engaged in the con- 
spiracy. But before it could be carried into execu- 
tion, an eunuch gave the king information of it, and 
of all the measures that were to be taken; for he 
had procured perfect intelligence, that they designed 
to enter his chamber in the night, and to murther him 
in his bed. 

Artaxerxes thought it would be great imprudence 
either to slight the information, and expose himself 
to such danger, or to credit it without farther proof. 
The method, which he adopted, was as follows : he 
ordered the eunuch to join Darius and his adherents, 
and assist at all their councils ; and in the mean 

l 2 

1*8 ARTAXERXE& 

time he broke a door through the wall behind his 
bed, which he concealed with the tapestry. When 
the moment which the eunuch had mentioned arrived, 
he placed himself upon his bed, and remained there 
till he had a sight of the faces of the conspirators, and 
could perfectly distinguish each of them. But as soon 
as he saw them draw their swords and advance to- 
ward him, he suddenly raised the tapestry, retreated 
into the inner room, and after he had bolted the 
door, alarmed the palace. The assassins, finding 
themselves discovered and their designs disap- 
pointed, immediately took to flight, and desired 
Tiribazus to do the same, because he must cer- 
tainly have been observed. While he lingered, the 
guards came and laid hold on him ; but he killed 
many of them, and it was with difficulty that he 
was despatched at last, by a javelin thrown from 
a distance. 

Darius was arrested, together with his children, 
and brought to answer for his crime before judges 
appointed by the king. The king, thinking it im- 
proper to assist at the trial in person, directed others 
to prefer the charge against his son, and his notaries 
to bring him separately the opinion of each judge. 
As they all gave it unanimously for death, the officers 
took Darius, and led him into an adjacent prison, 
But when the executioner came, with the instrument 
in his hand which is used for beheading capital con- 
victs, he was struck with horror at the sight of 
Darius, and drew back toward the door, as having 
neither ability nor courage to lay violent hands upon 
his prince. But the judges who stood at the door 
urging him to do his office, with menaces of instant 
punishment if he did not comply, he returned, and 
seizing Darius by the hair threw him on the ground, 
and cut offihis head. Some say, the cause was tried 
in the king's presence ; and that Darius, after he 
was convicted by indubitable proofs, fell on his face 
and begged for mercy : but Artaxcrxes, rising in 
great anger, drew his cimitar, and pursued his stroke 

9 

ARTAXERXES. HO 

till he laid him dead at bis feet. After this, they 
add, he returned to his palace, and having paid his 
devotions to the sun, said to those who assisted at 
the ceremony ; " My Persians, you may now re- 
" turn in triumph, and tell your fellow subjects, that 
" the great OromazesM has taken vengeance upon 
" those, who had formed the most impious and exe- 
" crable designs against their sovereign." Such was 
the end of the conspiracy. 

Ochus now entertained very agreeable hopes, and 
was farther encouraged by Atossa. But he had still 
some fear of his remaining legitimate brother Ari- 
aspes, and of his natural brother Arsames. Not that 
Ochus had so much to apprehend from Ariaspes, 
merely because he was older ; but the Persians were 
desirous of having him succeed to the throne on ac- 
count of his mild, sincere, and humane disposition. 
As for Arsames, he had the (character of a wise 
prince, and was the particular favourite of his father. 
This was no secret to Ochus. He, therefore, plan- 
ned the destruction of them both ; and being of an 
artful as well as a sanguinary turn, he employed his 
cruelty against Arsames, and his craft against Ari- 
aspes. To the latter he privately sent some of the 
king's eunuchs and friends, with frequent accounts 
of severe and menacing expressions of his father's, 
as if he had resolved to put him to a cruel and igno- 
minious death. As these persons came daily to tell 
him in confidence, that some of these threats were 
upon the point of being carried into execution, and 
the others would not long be delayed ; he was so 
terrified, and fell into such a melancholy and despond- 
ing way, that he prepared a poisonous draught, and 
drank it off to deliver himself from the burthen of life. 

The king being informed of the manner of his 
death sincerely lamented him, and had some suspi- 
cion of the cause, but could not thoroughly examine 
into it, on account of his advanced age. Arsames 

5\ The Persians worshipped Ororaazes as the author of Good, 
and Arimanius as the author of Evil. 

150 ARTAXERXES. 

however now became dearer to him than ever, and 
it was easy to see that the king placed an entire 
confidence in him, and communicated to him his 
most secret thoughts. Ochus therefore would not 
any longer defer his enterprise, but employed Har- 
pates, the son of Tiribazus, to take him off. Arta- 
xerxes, whom time had brought to the very verge of 
life, when he received this additional stroke in the 
fate of Arsames, could make little more struggle ; 
but was soon brought down by grief and despondence 
to the grave. He lived ninety-four years, and 
reigned sixty-two". He had the character of a 
prince who governed with lenity, and loved his 
people. But, perhaps, the behaviour of his suc- 
cessor might contribute not a little to his reputa- 
tion ; for Ochus was the most cruel and sanguinary 
of princes. 

s2 According to Blair, forty-six. Diod. Sic. xv. 93. says that he 
feigned only forty-three, and places his death, B. C. 362. His 
successor assumed his name, from deference to the Persians, with 
whom he had been a great favourite,* 

THE 

LIFE 

Of 

A R A T U S. 

SUMMARY. 

Why Plutarch addresses this Life to Polycrates. Aratus in his child- 
hood escapes from the hands of Abantidas. Employments of his 
youth. Nicocles usurps the government of Sicyon. Aratus'' plan 
to destroy the tyrant. He determines to scale the 'wall. His pre- 
parations. He deceives Nicocles' spies ; Sets off: Is disturbed 
by the dogs, and the sentinels ; Gets possession of Sicyon. Nicocles 
jlies. He persuades that city to enter into the Achcean league. 
His character : Moderation and generosity. His voyage to Egypt. 
History of the portrait of Aristratus. He establishes peace and 
friendship among his countrymen. Anligonus attempts to render 
him obnoxious to Ptolemy. Aratus undertakes to recover the citadel 
of Corinth. Importance of that place : Hoiv gained by Antigonus. 
Erginus promises to give it up to Aratus for sixty talents. Aratus 
pledges his plate, jewels, fyc.for the money. The enterprise nearly 
fails. Aratus enters Corinth : attacks the citadel, -and takes it : 
Persuades the Corinthians to join the league. Other exploits. He 
has great influence in the confederacy : Undertakes to deliver 
Argosfrom the tyrant Aristomachus. The latter is slain, and 
succeeded by Arisiippus. His miserable life. Aratus vainly en- 
deavours to surprise Argos : Receives a check by his own mis- 
management : Defeats and destroys the tyrant, which re-establishes 
his character. Lysiades, tyrant of Megalopolis, lay's down his 
usurped authority, and unites that city to the Achcean league, 
Aratus defeats the JEtolians at Pellene. Singular occurrence in 
the tempk of Diana. Aratus endeavours to surprise the Piratts'.' 

152 ARATUS. 

Cannes it to be given up to the Athenians : Procures Aristomachus1 
admission into the league : Is defeated by Cleomenes, and takes 
Mantinea. Death of Lysiades, and discredit thence attached to 
Aralus. Reflexions on his conduct. He prevents the reception of 
Cleomenes into the confederacy. Result of that affair. The Co- 
rinthians endeavour to seize him, but he escapes. Refuses Cleo- 
menes' offers, and summons Antigcnus to the aid of the Achceans. 
. He is treated honourably by that prince, and recovers Argosfrom 
Cleomenes. His conduct, toith regard to Mantinea, inexcusable. 
He is beaten by the Mtolians at Caphye. His reputation with 
Philip begins to decline. He persuades that prince to restore 
It home to the Messcnians : Withdraws from his court : Is poison- 
ed by that prince. Funeral honours paid to him at Sicyon. Venge- 
ance of heaven upon Philip. 

JL HE philosopher Chrysippus, my dear Polycrates, 
seems to have thought the ancient proverb not quite 
justifiable ; and he therefore delivered it, not as it 
really is, but as he thought it ought to be : 

— Who but happy sons will praise their sires ? 

Dionysodorus the Troezenian however corrects him, 
and gives it right : 

Who but unhappy sons will praise their sires ? 

The proverb (he says) was made to silence those 
who, having no merit of their own, dress themselves 
up in the virtues of their ancestors, and are lavish in 
their praises. And those in whom, to make use of 
Pindar's expression, 

the virtues of their sires 

Shine with congenial beauty. 

who like you form their conduct after the brightest 
patterns in their families, may think it a great hap- 

ARATUS. 15* 

piness to remember the most excellent of their an- 
cestors, and often to hear or speak of them. For 
they assume not the honour of other men's virtues 
through want of merit in themselves, but uniting 
their own exploits with those of their progenitors, 
they praise them as the authors of their descent and 
the models of their lives. For which reason, when 
I have written the Life of Aratus, your countryman 
and one of your ancestors, I shall send it to you, as 
reflecting no dishonour upon him either in point of 
reputation or power. Not that I doubt your having 
studied his actions, from the first, with all possible 
care and exactness ; but I do it, in order that your 
sons, Polycrates and Pythocles, may form themselves 
upon the noble exemplars in their own family, some- 
times hearing and sometimes reading what it be- 
comes them well to imitate. For it is the admirer 
of self, not the admirer of virtue, who thinks himself 
superior to others. 

After the harmony of the pure Doric1 (I mean, 
the aristocracy) was broken in Sicyon, and seditions 
through the ambition of the demagogues took place, 
the city long continued in a distempered state. It 
only exchanged one tyrant for another, till Cleon 
was slain, and the administration devolved upon 
Timoclidas and Clinias, persons of the highest re- 
putation and authority amongst the citizens. The 
commonwealth seemed in some degree re-established, 
when Timoclidas died. Abantidas, the son of Pa- 
seas, taking that opportunity to set himself up tyrant, 
killed Clinias, and either banished or put to death 
his friends and relations. He sought also for his 
son Aratus, who was only seven years old, with the 
design of despatching him. But, in the confusion 
that filled the house after his father's assassination, 
the boy escaped among those who fled, and wander- 
ed about the city trembling and unprotected, till he 
happened to enter unobserved the house of a woman 

1 There was great gravity, but at the same time great perfection, 
in the Dorian music. Sicyon was a city of Dorian extraction. 

154 ARATUS. 

named So^o, who was W8fcftr to Abantidas, and had 
been married to Pro} ihe brother of CJinias. 

As she was a person of generous sentiments, and was 
likewise persuaded that the child had taken refuge 
with her by the direction of some deity, she conceal- 
ed him in one of her apartments till night, and then 
sent him privately to Argos. 

Aratus, having thus escaped so imminent a dan- 
ger, immediately conceived a violent and implacable 
hatred ioi tyrants, which increased as he grew up. 
He was educated by the friends of his family at 
Argos, in a liberal manner ; and as he was vigorous 
and robust, he gave himself up to gymnastic exercises, 
and succeeded so well as to gain the prize in five 
several sorts'2. In his statues, indeed, there is an 
athletic look ; and, amidst the strong sense and ma- 
jesty expressed in ids countenance, we discover 
something inconsistent with the voracity3 and the 
mattock of wrestlers. Hence perhaps it was, that 
he cultivated his powers of eloquence less than be- 
came a statesman. He might, indeed, be a better 
speaker than some suppose ; and there are those 
who infer from his Commentaries, that he certainly 
was so, though they were hastily written, and at- 
tempted nothing beyond common language. 

Some time after the escape of Aratus, Dinias and 
Aristotle the logician formed a design against the 

2 The five exercises of the Pentathlum (as we have already ob- 
served, in a former note) were running, leaping, throwing the dart, 
boxing, and wrestling. See M. Burette, Mem. de l'Acad. des 
Belles Lettres, iii. 318. 

3 This in solids, as we learn from the story of Milo of Crotona, 
was not limited by any regimen. Their vaunted training had refe- 
rence chiefly to abstinence from wine, the vicissitudes of the wea- 
ther, &C. &c. 

Qui studet optatam cursu contingent metam, 
JSfulta lulityjecitque piter ; sudaxii et a/sit, 
Abstinuit vencre et vino. (ITor. A. P. 412.) 

In particul ir they used to break up the ground with the mattock, 
by way of exercise, to improve their strength. See Fest. voc. Ru- 
trum ; and Mem. de l'Acad. des Belles Lettres, i. 221. 241. 

K'&>%tT to/wti VKXircAa* t», y.xi tixxn rfcrrfih hakA*. 

(Theoc. Bifc I'. 10.) 

AKATUS. 155 

life of Abantidas ; and they easily found an oppor- 
tunity of carrying it into effect, as he attended and 
occasionally took a part in their disputations in the 
public halls, to which they had insensibly led him 
for that very purpose. Upon this Paleas, the father 
of Abantidas, seized the supreme power; but he was 
assassinated by Nicocles, who took his place, and 
was the next tyrant. There was a perfect likeness, 
it is said, between this Nicocles and Periander, the 
son ofCypselus; as Orontes the Persian resembled 
Aicmaeon the son of Amphiaraus and a Lacedae- 
monian youth the great Hector. This young man, 
Myrsilus informs us, was crushed to death by the 
multitude who came to see him, as soon as the re- 
semblance became public. 

Nicocles reigned four months, during which time 
he offered a thousand injuries to the people, and 
nearly lost the city to the iEtolians, who had formed, 
a scheme to surprise it. Aratus was by this time 
approaching to manhood, and much attention was 
paid to him on account of his high birth and 
spirit, in which there was nothing little or inactive, 
although it was under the correction of a gravity 
and solidity of judgement far beyond his years. The 
exiles, therefore, considered him as their principal 
resource ; and Nicocles was not inattentive to his 
motions, but by his private agents observed all his 
measures. Not that he expected him personally to 
embark in so bold and dangerous an enterprise as he 
did, but he apprehended his applications to the 
princes, who had been connected with his father by 
the ties of friendship and hospitality. Aratus, in- 
deed, began in that channel ; but when he found 
that Antigonus, notwithstanding his promises, con- 
tinually put him off, and that his hopes from Egypt 
and Ptolemy were too remote, he resolved to destroy 
the tyrant without any foreign assistance. 

The first persons, to whom he imparted his inten- 
tions, were Aristomachus and Ecdelus ; both of them 
exiles, Aristomachus from Sicyon, and Ecdelus from 

12 

156 ARATUS. 

Megalopolis. The latter was a philosopher, who in 
speculation never lost sight of practice, for he had 
studied at Athens under Arcesilai'is the Academi- 
cian4. As these readily accepted his proposal, he 
applied to the other exiles, a few of whom joined 
him, because they were ashamed of renouncing their 
hopes ; but the greater part believed it was only 
Aratus' inexperience s, which made him project such 
a bold attempt, and endeavoured to prevent his 
proceeding. 

While he was considering how to seize some post 
in the territories of Sicyon, whence he might pro- 
secute hostilities against the tyrant, a man of Sicyon 
who had escaped out of prison arrived at Argos. 
He was the brother of Xenocles, one of the exiles ; 
and being introduced by him to Aratus informed 
him, that the part of the wall over which he had 
scrambled was almost level with the ground on the 
inside, as it was contiguous to v. high rocky part of 
the city, and that on the outside, it was not so lofty 
but that it might be scaled. On this intelligence 
Aratus sent two of his servants, Sceuthas and Tech- 
non, along with Xenocles to reconnoitre the wall : 
for he was resolved, if he could do it secretly, to 
hazard all upon one mighty effort, rather than pro- 
tract the war, and publicly with his private resources 
assail the tyrant. 

Xenocles and his companions, after they had taken 
the height of the wall, reported on their return that 
it was neither impracticable nor difficult, but that it 
was dangerous to attempt it, on account of some 
dogs kept by a gardener, which were small indeed, 
but extremely fierce and furious. Aratus, however, 
immediately set about the work. It was easy to pro- 
vide arms without exciting alarm ; for almost every 
body went armed, on account of the frequent rob- 
beries and incursions of one people into the terri- 

« Arcesilaiis was the disciple of Crantor, and had established the 
Middle Academy. 

J He was not yet twenty years old. 

ARATUS. 137 

tories of another. And as to the scaling-ladders, 
Euphranor, who was one of the exiles and a carpen- 
ter by trade, made them publicly ; his business 
screening him from suspicion. Each of his friends 
in Argos, who had no great number of men that he 
could command, furnished him with ten ; he himself 
armed thirty of his own servants, and hired some few 
soldiers of Xenopliilus, who was captain of a band 
of robbers. To the latter it was announced, that 
the design of their march to Sicyon was to carry off 
the king's stud ; and several of them were despatch- 
ed by different ways to the tower of Polygnotus °, 
with orders to wait for him there. Caphesias was 
likewise sent off, with four others, in a travelling 
dress. These were to go in the evening to the 
gardener's cottage, and under the pretence of being 
travellers to procure a lodging there, after which they 
were to confine both him and his dogs ; for that part 
of the wall was not accessible by any other wav. 
The ladders being made to take in pieces, were 
packed up in corn-chests, and sent before in wag- 
gons prepared for the purpose. 

In the mean time, some of the tyrant's spies ar- 
rived at Argos, and it was reported that they were 
sculking about to watch Aratus' motions. Next 
morning therefore, Aratus appeared early with his 
friends in the market-place, and conversed with them 
for some time. He then went to the Gymnasium, 
and after he had anointed himself, took with him 
some young men from the wrestling-ring, who used 
to be of his parties of pleasure, and returned home. 
In a little while his servants were seen in the market- 
place, some carrying chaplets of flowrers, some buying 
flambeaux, and some in discourse with the women 
who used to sing and play at entertainments. These 
manoeuvres completely deceived the spies. They 
laughed, and said to each other ; " Assuredly, no- 
" tiling can be more dastardly than a tyrant ; since 

5 Between Argos and Nemea, a city on the road from the former 
place to Sicyon.* 

153 ARATUS. 

" Nicocles, master of so strong a city and armed 
" with so much power, lives in dread of a young 
man, who squanders the pittance he has to support 
him in exile, upon drinking and revelling even in 
the day-time." Under these false views of the 
matter, they retired. 

Aratus, immediately after he had finished his meal, 
set out for the tower of Polygnotus ; and, on joining 
the soldiers there, proceeded to Nemea, where he 
disclosed his real intentions to his whole company. 
Having exhorted them to behave like brave men, 
and promised them great rewards, he gave ' Propi- 
tious Apollo* for the word; and then led them on 
toward Sicyon, governing his march according to 
the motions of the moon, sometimes quickening and 
sometimes slackening his pace, so as to have the 
benefit of her light by the way, and to reach the 
garden near the wall just after she was set. There 
Caphesias met him, and informed him that the dogs 
had been let out before he arrived, but that he had 
secured the gardener. This account dispirited most 
of the party, and they entreated Aratus to renounce 
his enterprise ; but he encouraged them by promising 
to desist, if the dogs should prove very troublesome. 
He then ordered those who carried the ladders to 
march before, under the conduct of Ecdelus and 
Mnasitheus, and he himself softly followed. The 
dogs flow began to run about, and bark violently at 
Ecdelus and his men ; nevertheless, they approached 
the wall, and planted their ladders safe. But as the 
foremost of them were mounting, the officer who was 
to be relieved by the morning-guard passed that way, 
at the sound of a bell, with many torches and much 
noise. Upon this, the men clapped themselves close 
to their ladders, and escaped the notice of this watch 
without much difficulty : but when the other which 
was to relieve it came up, they were in the utmost 
danger. That too passed, however, without having 
observed them ; after which Mnasitheus and Ecdelus 
mounted the wall first, and having secured the way 

ARATUS.' 159 

both to the right and left, despatched Technon to 
Aratus to desire him to advance as fast as possible. 

It was no great distance from the garden to the 
wall, and to a tower in which was placed a large 
hunting-dog to alarm the guard. But whether he 
was naturally drowsy, or had wearied himself the 
day before, he did not perceive their entrance. The 
gardener's dogs, however, awaking him by barking 
below, he began to growl ; and when Aratus' men 
passed by the tower, he barked so loud, that the 
whole place resounded with the noise. Upon this 
the sentinel, who kept watch opposite to the tower, 
called aloud to the huntsman, and asked him ; 
" Whom the dog barked at so angrily, or whether 
" any thing new had occurred ?" The huntsman, 
from the tower answered, " No ; he was only dis- 
" turbed by the torches of the guards, and the noise 
" of the bell." This, more than any thing else, 
encouraged Aratus' soldiers ; for they imagined that 
the huntsman concealed the truth, as having a secret 
understanding with their leader, and that there were 
many others in the town who would promote the 
design. But, when the rest of their companions 
came to scale the wail, the danger increased. It 
appeared to be a tedious business, because the lad- 
ders shook and swung extremely, if thev did not 
mount them softly and one by one; and the time 
pressed, for the cocks began to crow. The country- 
people likewise, who kept the market, were expected 
to arrive every moment. Aratus therefore hastened 
up himself, when only forty of his company had 
gained the wall ; and after a few more had joined 
him from below, putting himself at the head of his 
men, he marched immediately to the tyrant's palace 
where the main-guard was kept, and where the mer- 
cenaries passed the night under arms. Coming sud- 
denly upon them, he took them prisoners without 
killing a single man ; and then sent to his friends 
in the town, to invite them to come and join him. 
They immediately hastened to him from all quarters. 

160 ARATUS. 

and day now appearing, the theatre was filled with 
a crowd of people who stood in suspense: for they 
had only heard a rumour, and had no certainty of 
what was doing, till a herald came and proclaimed 
aloud ; " Aratus, the son of Clinias, calls the citizens 
4C to liberty." 

Upon this, persuaded that the long-expected day 
was at last arrived, they rushed in multitudes to the 
palace of the tyrant, and set lire to it. The flame 
was so strong, that it was seen as far as Corinth ; 
and the Corinthians, wondering what might be the 
cause, were upon the point of going to their assist- 
ance. Nicoclcs himself crept away, and escaped 
out of the city by some subterranean conduits ; and 
the soldiers, having helped the Sicyonians to extin- 
guish the fire, plundered his palace. Neither did 
Aratus prevent them from taking this booty ; but 
the rest of the wealth, which the several tyrants had 
amassed, he bestowed upon the citizens. 

There was not so much as one man killed or 
wounded in this action, either of Aratus' party or of 
the enemy ; fortune so conducting the enterprise, 
as not to sully it with the blood of a single citizen. 
Aratus recalled eighty persons, who had been banish- 
ed by Nicocles, and of those that had been expelled 
by the former tyrants not less than five hundred. 
The latter had long been forced to wander from place 
to place, some of them full fifty years : most of them, 
of course, returned in a destitute condition. They 
were now, indeed, restored to their ancient posses- 
sions ; but their going into houses and lands, which 
had found new masters, laid Aratus under consider- 
able difficulties. Without, he saw Antigonus7 envying 
the liberty which the city had recovered, and laying 
schemes to enslave it again ; and within, he found 
nothing but faction and disorder. He therefore 
judged it best, in this critical situation, to unite it 
to the Achaean league8. As the people of Sifcyon 

7 Surnamed Gonatus, the father of Demetrius. 8 B. C. 251.* 

ARATUS. 161 

were Dorians0, they had no objection to being called 
a part of the Achaean community, or to their form of 
government10. It must be acknowledged, indeed, 
that the Achaeans at that time were no very great 
or powerful people. Their towns were generally 
small, their territory neither extensive nor fertile, 
and they had no harbours on their coasts, the sea for 
the most part entering the land in rocky and imprac- 
ticable creeks. Yet none gave a better proof than 
this people, that the power of Greece is invincible, 
so long as good order and harmony prevail among 
her members, and she has an able general to lead 
her armies. In fact these very Achaeans, though 
next to nothing when compared with the Greeks in 
their flourishing times, or (to speak more properly) 
not equalling in their whole community the strength 

y See Pausan. ii. 6.* 

10 The Dutch republic, before Holland was revolutionised by it's 
unfortunate contiguity to France, much resembled it. The Achaeans 
indeed at first had two Praetors, whose office it was both to preside 
in the diet, and to command the army ; but it was soon thought 
advisable to reduce them to one. There was this difference, like- 
wise, between the Dutch Stadtholder and the Achaean Praetor, that 
the latter did not continue t'.vo years successively in his employ- 
ment. But, in other respects, the similarity between the states of 
Holland and those of the Achaean league was striking ; and, if the 
Achaeans could have become a maritime power like the Dutch, 
their dominion would probably have been much more extensive and 
more lastimr. 

All the cities subject to the Achaean league were governed by the 
great council or general assembly of the whole nation, which was 
assembled twice a-year, in spring and in autumn. To this assem- 
bly, or diet, each of the confederate cities had a right to send a 
number of deputies, who were elected in their respective cities, by 
a plurality of voices. In these meetings they enacted laws, dis- 
posed of the vacant employments, declared war, made peace, con- 
cluded alliances, and in short provided for all the principal occasions 
of the commonwealth. 

Beside the Praetor, they had ten great officers called Demiurgi, 
chosen by the general assembly out of the most eminent and ex- 
perienced persons among the states. It was tlieir office to assist 
the Praetor with their advice. He was to propose nothing to the 
general assembly, but what had been previously approved by their 
body; and upon them, in his absence, devolved the whole manage- 
ment of civil affairs. 

VOL. VI. M 

m ARATUS. 

of one respectable city at that period, yet by good 
counsels and unanimity, and by hearkening to any 
man of superior virtue instead of envying his merit, 
not only kept themselves free amidst so many mighty 
states and tyrants, but saved a large part of Greece, 
or rescued it from chains. 

As to his character, Aratus had something vcrv 
popular in his behaviour ; he had a native loftiness 
of mind, and was more attentive to the public interest 
than to his own. He was an implacable enemy to 
tyrants; but, with respect to others, he made the 
good of his country the sole rule of his friendship or 
opposition. So that he seems rather to have been a 
mild and moderate enemy, than a zealous friend, hi- 
regards or dislikes to individuals varying as the oc- 
casions of the commonwealth dictated. In short, 
nations and great communities with one voice re- 
echoed the declaration of the assemblies and theatres, 
that, c Aratus loved none but the good.' With 
regard to open wars and pitched battles, he was 
indeed diffident and timorous ; but in gaining a point 
by stratagem, in surprising cities and tyrants, there 
could not be an abler man. 

To this cause we must ascribe it, that after he had 
exerted eminent courage, and succeeded in under- 
takings considered as desperate, through too much 
fear and caution he gave up others, that were more 
practicable and not of less importance. For as among 
animals there are some which can see very clearly in 
the night, and yet are almost blind in the day-time, 
the dryness of the eye and the subtil ty of it's 
humours not suffering them to bear the light ; so 
there is in man a kind of courage and understanding, 
which is easily disconcerted in open dangers and 
encounters, and yet resumes a happy boldness in 
secret enterprises. The reason of this inequality in 
men, of parts otherwise excellent, is their wanting 
the advantages of philosophy. Virtue is in them the 
product of nature unassisted by science, like the 
fruits of the forest, which come without the least 

ARATUS. 163 

cultivation1'. Of this, there are many examples to 
be found. 

After Aratus had engaged himself and his city 
in the Achaean league, he served in the cavalry, 
and the generals highly esteemed him for his ready 
obedience. For though he had contributed so much 
to the common cause by his name and by the forces 
of Sicyon, yet the Achaean commander, whether of 
Dyna or Tritta or some still more inconsiderable 
town, always found him as tractable as the meanest 
soldier. 

When the king of Egypt13 made him a present of 
twenty-five talents, he received it indeed, but he 
expended the whole upon his fellow-citizens; reliev- 
ing the necessitous with part of it, and ransoming 
such as were prisoners with the rest. 

But the exiles, whom Aratus had recalled, would 
not be satisfied with any thing less than the restitu- 
tion of their estates, and gave the present possessors 
so much trouble, that the city was in danger of 
being ruined by sedition. In this extremity, he saw 
no resource, except in the generosity of Ptolemy ; 
and he therefore determined to take a voyage to 
Egypt, and apply to him for as much money as 
would reconcile all parties. Accordingly, he set 
sail from Methone^ above the promontory of Malea, 
in hopes of taking the shortest passage. But a con- 
trary wind arose ; and the seas ran so high that the 
pilot, unable to bear up against them, changed his 
course, and with much difficulty got into Adria15, a 

11 This character of the inconsistencies of Aratus is perfectly 
agreeable to what Potyrjius has recorded of him in his fourth book. 
Two great masters, though their manner must be different, will 
draw with equal excellence. 

13 Ptolemy Philadelphia, who was succeeded by Euergetes, 
B. C. 2 If).* ' 

14 In Messenia, anciently called Pedasus, and one of the seven 
cities promised by Agamemnon to Achilles. (II. ix. 2H-) See 
Strabo viii. Malea was a promontory of Laconia, Strab. i )., Odyss. 
ix. 80.* 

15 Palmerius conjectures that we should read ' Andria,' which 
be supposes to have been a town in the island of Andros ; as Ara- 

M 2 

1CA A R ATI'S. 

town belonging to the encinv ; for Antigonus had a. 
garrison there. To avoid tliis imminent danger, he 
landed ; and with only one friend named Tiraanthes, 

making his way as tar as possible from the sea, 
sought shelter in a plaee well covered with wood, in 
which he and his companion spent a very disagree- 
able night. Soon after he had left the ship, the 
governor of the fort came and inquired for him ; 
but he was deceived by Aratus' servants, who were 
instructed to say, he had instantly sailed in another 
vessel for Eubcea. The ship and servants he detained, 
however, as lawful prize. Aratus spent some days 
in this distressful situation, where one while he 
looked out to reconnoitre the coast, and another 
while kept himself concealed ; but at last, by good 
fortune, a Roman ship happened to put in, near the 
place of his retreat. It was bound for Syria, and 
Aratus prevailed upon the master to land him in 
(aria, ikit he had as great dangers to combat at 
sea in this, as in his former passage. And when he 
was in Caria, he had a voyage to take to Egypt, 
which he found a very long one. Upon his arrival, 
however, he was immediately admitted to an audience 
by the king, who had long been inclined to serve 
him, on account of the paintings with which he used 
to compliment him from Greece. Aratus, it ap- 
pears, who had a taste for these things, was always 
collecting for him the pieces of the best masters, 
particularly those of Pamphilus and Melanthus ir>. 
For Sicyon was famed for the cultivation of the arts, 
particularly that of painting ; and it was believed, 
that there only the ancient elegance was preserved 

tus is said to have passed thence to Eubeea, which is opposite to 
that island. 

16 Two of the most celebrated painters of antiquity. Pamphilus 
had been brought up under Kupompus,and was the muster of Apelles 
and Melanthus. His chef-d'oeuvre* were, a Brotherhood, a Battle, 
the Victory of the Athenians, and Ulysses in his vessel taking le;i\r 
of Calypso: and Pliny informs us, that the whole wealth of a cit \ 
could scarcely purchase one of the pieces of Melanthus. (II. N. 

XXXV. 7. 12.) 

ARATUS. 165 

without the least corruption. Hence it was that the 
great Apelles, at a time when he was much admired, 
went to Sicyon and save the painters a talent, not 
so much for any improvement which lie expected, 
as for the reputation of having been of their school. 
In consequence of which Aratus, when he restored 
Sicyon to liberty, and destroyed the portraits of the 
tyrants, hesitated a long time on coming to that of 
Aristratus, who had been contemporary with Philip: 
for it was the united work of the disciples of Melan- 
thus, who had represented him standing in a chariot 
with the Goddess of Victory ; and the pencil of 
Apelles himself) we are informed by Polemo17 the 
geographer, had contributed to the performance. 

This piece was so admirable, that Aratus could 
not avoid feeling the art which was displayed in it ; 
but his hatred of tyrants soon over-ruled that feeling, 
and he ordered it to be defaced. Nealces the 
painter1", who was honoured with his friendship, 
is said to have implored him with tears to spare it : 
and when he found him inflexible, he cried out ; 
" Continue your war, Aratus, with tyrants, but not 
" with every thing that belongs to them. Spare at 
" least the chariot and the Victory, and I will soon 
" make Aristratus vanish." Upon this Aratus gave 
his consent, and Nealces defaced the figure of Aris- 
tratus, but did not venture to put any thing in it's 
place except a palm-tree. AVe are told, however, 
that there still remained a dim appearance of the 
feet of Aristratus at the bottom of the chariot. 

This taste for painting had already recommended 
Aratus to Ptolemy, and his conversation gained so 
much farther upon him, that he made him a present 

17 This writer had composed several works upon painters and 
painting. See Fabric. Bibl. Graec* 

18 Nealces was a painter of great reputation. The subject of one 
of his pieces was, the Naval Fight between the Egyptians and the 
Persians. As this action took place upon the Nile, whose colour 
resembles that of the sea, he distinguished it by a symbol : he drew 
an ass drinking on the shore, and a crocodile in the act of springing) 
upon him. (Plin. ib. 11.) 

165 ARATUS. 

of a hundred and fifty talents for the city ; forty of 
which he sent back with him on his return to Pelopon- 
nesus, and remitted the rest in the several portions, 
and at the times that he had appointed. It was an 
honourable circumstance to apply such a sum of 
money to the use of his fellow-citizens, at a time 
when it was common to see generals and dema- 
gogues, for much smaller sums which they had 
received of kings, oppressing, enslaving, and betray- 
ing to them their native cities. But it was still more 
honourable, by this money to reconcile the poor to 
the rich, to secure the commonwealth, and to intro- 
duce comfort among all ranks of people. 

His moderation in the exercise of the great power, 
with which he was vested, was trulv admirable. 
For, being appointed sole arbitrator of the claims ot 
the exiles, he refused to act alone, and joined with 
himself fifteen of the citizens in the commission ; 
with whose assistance, after much labour and atten- 
tion, he established peace and friendship among his 
countrymen. Beside the honours, which the whole 
community conferred upon him for these services, 
the exiles in particular erected his statue in brass, 
and put upon it the following inscription : 

Far as the pillars which Alcides rear'd, 

Thy toils, thy counsels, and thy might are heard. 

But we, Aratus, to our homes restored 

p.y thy just arms, thy justice to record, 

'Mid guardian gods thy guardian statue place ; 

For thou, like them, givest harmony and peace. 

Aratus, after such important services, was placed 
above envy among his people. But king Antigonus, 
uneasy at his popularity, was determined either to 
gain him over to his party, or to render him obnoxi- 
ous to Ptolemy. He therefore showed him extra- 
ordinary marks of his regard, though he desired no 
such advances. Among others, the following was 
one : upon occasion of a sacrifice, which he offered 
at Corinth, he sent portions of it to Aratus at 

a 
it 

<i 

ARATUS. 167 

Sicyon : and at the feast which ensued he said, in 
full" assembly, " I at first considered this young 
" Sicyonian only as a man of a liberal and patriotic 
" spirit, but now I find that he is also a good judge 
" of the characters and affairs of princes. At first* 
" he overlooked us for the sake of foreign hopes, 
" and the admiration which he had conceived from 
hearsay of the wealth, and elephants, and fleets, 
and splendid court of Egypt ; but since he has 
been upon the spot, and seen that all this pomp 
is merely theatrical, he has entirely come over to 
<( us. I have received him to my bosom, and am 
" determined to employ him in all my affairs. I 
" desire, therefore, that you will all regard him as 
" a friend." From this speech, the envious and 
malevolent took occasion to allege heavy charges 
against Aratus, in their letters to Ptolemy ; inso- 
much, that the king sent one of his agents to tax. 
him with his infidelity. Thus, like passionate lovers, 
the candidates for the first favours of kings dispute 
them with the utmost envy and malignity. 

After Aratus was first chosen general of the 
Achaean league, he ravaged Locris, which lies on the 
other side of the gulf of Corinth, and committed the 
same spoil in the territories of Calydon. It was his 
intention to have assisted the Boeotians with ten 
thousand men, but he came too late ; they had been 
already defeated by the iEtolians in an action near 
Chaeronea19, in which Aba:ocritus their general, and 
a thousand of their men, were slain. 

The year following'0, Aratus being re-elected 
general undertook the celebrated enterprise of re- 
covering the citadel of Corinth, in which he con- 

19 We must take eare to distinguish this battle of Chaeronea, from 
that great action in which Philip of Macedon heat the united forces 
of the Thebans and Athenians, and which took place B. C. 338., 
above sixty years before Aratus was born. 

20 Polybius, who wrote from Aratus' Commentaries, informs us 
there were eight years between his first prcetorship and his second 
in which he took the citadel of Corinth. 

168 ARATUS. 

suited not only the benefit of Sicyon and Achaia, but 
of Greece in general ; for such would the expulsion 
of the Macedonian garrison prove, which was nothing 
better than a tyrant's yoke. As Chares, the Athe- 
nian general, upon a battle which he won from the 
king of Persia's lieutenants, wrote to the people that 
he had gained a victory sister to that of Marathon ; 
so we may justly pronounce this exploit of Aratus 
sister to those of Pelopidas the Theban, and Thrasy- 
bulus the Athenian, when they slew the tyrants"1. 
There is indeed this difference, that Aratus* enter- 
prise was not against Greeks, but against a foreign 
power, a difference much to his honour. For the 
isthmus of Corinth, which separates the two seas, 
unites our continent to that of Peloponnesus ; and 
when there is a good garrison in the citadel of 
Corinth, which stands on a high hill in the middle 
at an equal distance from the two continents, it cuts 
off all communication with those within the isthmus, 
so that there can be no passage for troops, nor any 
kind of commerce either by sea or land. In short, 
he who is possessed of it, is master of the whole of 
Greece. The younger Philip of Macedon therefore 
was not jesting, but spoke a serious truth, when he 
called the city of Corinth c the Fetters of Greece/ 
Hence the place, particularly among kings and 
princes, was a constant subject of dispute. 

Antigonus' passion for it was not less than that of 
love, in it's greatest extravagance ; and it was the 
phief object of his anxiety to find a method of taking 
it by surprise, after his hope of succeeding by open 
force had failed. When Alexander, who was master 
of the citadel, died of poison (said to have been ad- 
ministered at the instigation of Antigonus) his wife 
Nicaea, into whose hands it then fell, guarded it. 
with great care. But Antigonus, hoping to gain it 
by means of his son Demetrius, sent him to make 

" See the Life of Pelopidas, II. 356., &c, ; and Xenopli. (Hcllen. 
ii.) 

ARATUS. 169 

her an offer of his hand. It was a flattering prospect, 
to a woman somewhat advanced in years, to have 
such a young prince for her husband. Accordingly, 
Antigonus caught her by this bait. She did not how- 
ever give up the citadel, but guarded it with the 
same attention as before. Antigonus pretending 
to take no notice, celebrated the marriage with sa- 
crifices and shows, and spent whole days in feasting 
the people, as if his mind had been entirely occu- 
pied with mirth and pleasure. One day when 
Amoebaeus was to sing in the theatre, he conducted 
Niceea in person, on her way to the entertainment, 
in a litter decked with royal ornaments. She was 
elated with the honour, and had not the least appre- 
hension of what was to ensue. But when they came 
to the road turning off toward the citadel, he or- 
dered the men who bore the Yittcv to proceed to the 
theatre ; and bidding farewell to Amoebaeus and the 
wedding, walked up to the fort, much faster than 
could have been expected from a man of his years. 
Finding the gate barred, he knocked with his staff, 
and commanded the guard to open it. Surprised at 
the sight of him, they complied, and thus he be- 
came master of the place- Upon this occasion, he 
was not able to contain his joy : he drank and re- 
velled in the open streets, and in the market-place, 
attended by female musicians and crowned with 
flowers. When we see a man of his age, who had 
experienced such changes of fortune, in the indul- 
gence of his transports embracing and saluting every 
one he meets, we must acknowledge that unexpected 
joy raises greater tumults in an unbalanced mind, and 
oversets it sooner, than either fear or sorrow. 

Antigonus, having thus gained possession of the 
citadel, garrisoned it with men in whom he placed 
the utmost confidence, and made the philosopher 
Persaeus 22 governor. While Alexander was living, 

12 Who had been his tutor, Ml. Var, Hist. iii. 17. lie was a 
stoic, originally the slave arid subsequently the pupil of Zeno, the 
foundeB of that sect. See Athen. xiii. 8.* 

170 ARATUS. 

Aratus had cast his eye upon it, as an excellent ac- 
quisition for his country ; but, the Aclueans admit- 
ting that prince into the league, he did not prosecute 
his design. Afterward, however, a new occasion 
presented itself. There were in Corinth four bro- 
thers, natives of Syria ; one of whom, named Diodes, 
served as a soldier in the garrison. The other three 
having stolen some of the king's money retired to 
Sicyon, where they applied to one JEgjas a banker, 
whom Aratus used to employ. Part of this gold 
they immediately disposed of to him ; and Erginus, 
one of the three, at several visits privately changed 
the rest. Thus an acquaintance was formed between 
him and iEgias, who one day drew him into dis- 
course about the garrison. Erginus told him, that 
as he often went up to visit his brother, he had ob- 
served on the steepest side a small winding path cut 
in the rock, and leading to a part of the wall much 
lower than the rest. Upon this, JEgias said with an 
air of raillery ; " Why will you, my good friend, 
purloin the king's treasures for so inconsiderable 
a sum, when you might raise yourself to opulence 
by a single hour's service ? Don't you know that 
if you are apprehended, you will as certainly be 
put to death for this trifling theft, as if you had be- 
trayed the citadel." Erginus laughed at the 
hint, and promised to sound his brother Diocles 
upon the subject ; for he could not, he said, place 
much confidence in the other two. 

A few davs after this he returned, and had an in- 
terview with Aratus ; at which it wits agreed, that 
he should conduct him to a part of the wall not 
above fifteen feet high, and that both he and his 
brother Diocles should assist him in the sequel of 
the enterprise. Aratus, on his part, promised to 
give them sixty talents, if he succeeded ; and if 
they failed, and yet returned all safe to Sicyon, he 
engaged that each of them should have a house and 
one talent. As it was necessary, for the satisfaction 
of Erginus, that the sixty talents should be deposited 

it. 
n. 
U 
tl 

a 
a 

ARATUS. 171 

in JEgias' hands, and Aratus neither had such a sum 
nor chose to borrow it, lest he should create some 
suspicion of his intentions, he took the greatest part 
of his plate and his wife's jewels, and pledged them 
with yEgias for the money. Such was the loftiness 
of his soul, and such his passion for noble achieve- 
ments, that knowing Phocion and Epaminondas had 
been accounted the justcst and most excellent of all 
the Greeks for refusing considerable presents, and 
not sacrificing virtue to money, he ascended a step 
higher. He privately gave money, and embarked 
his estate in an enterprise, where he alone was to 
expose himself for the many, who were not even 
apprised of his intentions in their favour. Who, 
then, can sufficiently admire his magnanimity ? 
Who* even in our days, is not fired with ambition 
to imitate the man that purchased so much danger 
at such an immense price, and pledged the most 
valuable of his goods for the sake of being introduced 
by night among enemies, where he was to fight for 
his life, without any other equivalent than the hope 
of performing an heroic action ? 

This undertaking, in itself sufficiently dangerous, 
became still more so by a mistake which they com- 
mitted in the beginning. Technon, one of Aratus' 
servants, of whom we have already spoken, was 
sent before to Diodes, that they might reconnoitre 
the wall together. He had never seen Diodes, but 
lie thought he should easily know him by the marks 
which Erginus had given, viz. his curled hair, 
swarthy complexion, and total want of beard. He 
went therefore to the place appointed, and sat down 
before the city at a point called Ornis, to wait for 
Erginus and his brother Diodes. In the mean time 
Dionysius their eldest brother, who knew nothing of 
the affair, happened to come up. As he greatly re- 
sembled Diodes, Technon, struck with his appear- 
ance, which exactly answered the description, in- 
quired if he had any connexion with Erginus. On his 
replying, that he was his brother, Technon, thoroughly 
9 

172 ARATUS. 

persuaded that he was speaking to Diocles, without 
demanding his name or waiting for any token, gave 
him his hand, mentioned to him the circumstances 
of the appointment with Erginus, and asked him 
many questions about it. Dionvsius availed himself 
very artfully of the mistake, agreed to every point, 
and returning towards the city held him in discourse, 
without giving him the least cause of suspicion. 
They wrere now near the town, and he was on the 
point of seizing Technon; when fortunately Erginus 
met them, and perceiving how much his friend was 
imposed upon, and the extreme danger he was in, 
beckoned to him to make his escape. Accordingly, 
they both fled, and got safe to Aratus. Aratus 
however did not renounce his hopes, but immedi- 
ate! v sent Erginus to Dionvsius, to offer him money 
and entreat him to be silent: in which he succeeded 
so well, that he brought Dionvsius back with him. 
When they had him in their hands, they thought it 
not judicious to part with him ; but bound and 
guarded him in a small apartment, and then pre- 
pared for their principal design. 

When every thing was ready, Aratus ordered his 
troops to pass the night under arms; and taking 
with him four hundred picked men, who knew no- 
thing of what they were setting about, he led them 
to the gates of the city near the temple of Juno. It 
was then about the middle of summer, the moon at 
the full, and the night without the least cloud. As 
their arms glittered by the moon-light, they were 
afraid that circumstance would betray them to the 
Match. The foremost of them were now near the 
walls, when clouds arose from the sea, and covered 
the city and it's environs. The men sat down, and 
took off their shoes, that they might make the less 
noise, and mount the ladders without danger of 
slipping. Erginus, in the mean while, with seven 
young men in the habit of travellers, reached the gate 
unobserved, killed the keeper and the guard who 
were with him. At the same time the ladders were 
12 

ARATUS. 173 

applied to the walls, and Aratus with a hundred men 
instantly mounted. The rest he commanded to fol- 
low, in the best manner they could ; and having 
immediately drawn up his ladders, he marched at 
the head of his party through the town toward the 
citadel, confident of success, because he had not 
been discovered. 

As they advanced, they met four of the watch 
with a light, which gave Aratus a full view of them, 
while he and his company remained unseen, be- 
cause the moon was still overclouded. He, there- 
fore, retired under some ruined walls, and lay in 
ambush for them. Three out of the four were killed ; 
but the other, after he had received a cut upon his 
head, made his escape crying, " That the enemy 
" was in the city." In a little time the trumpets 
sounded, and the whole town was in motion on the 
alarm. The streets were filled with people running 
up and down ; and so many lights were brought out, 
both in the lower town and in the citadel, that the 
whole was illuminated, and a confused noise was 
heard from every quarter. Aratus went forward 
notwithstanding, and attempted the way up the rock. 
.Slowly and difficultly he proceeded at first, because 
he had lost the path which lay deep beneath it's 
craggiest parts, and led to the wall by a variety of 
windings and turnings. But at that very moment 
the moon, as it were by miracle 23, is said to have 
dispersed the clouds, and thrown a light upon the 
obscurest portion of the path, which continued till 
he reached the wall at the place he sought. The 
clouds then gathered afresh, and she again hid her 
face. 

In the mean while, the three hundred men, whom 
Aratus had left by the temple of Juno, had entered 
the city, which they found all in alarm and full of 
lights. As they could not discover the path which 

23 The extreme courtesy of the moon, during the whole of this 
adventure, gives too great an air of romance for the narrative of 
sober history.* 

374 ARATUS. 

Aratus had taken, nor trace him in the least, they 
screened themselves under the shady side of a high 
rock, and waited there in great perplexity and dis- 
tress, liv this time he was engaged with the enemy 
on the ramparts of the citadel, and they could dis- 
tinguish the cries of combatants : but, as the noise 
was echoed by the neighbouring mountains, it was 
Uncertain whence it originally proceeded. While 
tktey were in doubt what way to turn, Archelaiis, 
who commanded the king's forces, took a consi- 
derable corps, and ascending the hill with loud 
shouts and trumpets sounding, in order to attack 
Aratus' rear, passed the party of the three hundred 
without perceiving them ; but he was no sooner 
gone by, than they rose up as from an ambuscade, 
fell upott him . a 1 killing the. first so terrified the rest, 

ft. / o * 

including Arc ' sails himself, that they turned their 
backs, and were pursued till they entirely dispersed. 
When the party was thus victorious, Erginus came 
down from their friends above, to inform them that 
Aratus was engaged with the enemy, who made a 
vigorous defence, that the wall itself was disputed, 
and that their general wanted immediate assistance. 
They bade him lead them to the place that moment; 
and, as they ascended, they announced themselves 
bv their shouts. Thus their friends were encouraged, 
and the reflexion of the full moon upon their arms 
caused them to appear more numerous to their ene- 
mies, on account of the length of the path. By the 
echoes of the night, likewise, the shouts seemed to 
come from a much larger party. At last they joined 
Aratus, and with an united effort beat off the enemy, 
and took post upon the wall. At break of day the 
citadel was their own, and the first rays of the sun 
dawned upon their success. At the same time, the 
rest .of Aratus' forces arrived from Sieyon : the 
Corinthians readily opened their gates to them, and 
assisted in taking the king's soldiers prisoners-4. 

>* E. C. 213.* 

ARATUS. 175 

When he thought his victory complete, he went 
down from the citadel to the theatre; an innumer- 
able multitude crowding to see him, and to hear the 
speech, which he was about to make to the Corin- 
thians. After he had ranged the Acheeans on each 
side of the avenues to the theatre, he came from be- 
hind the scenes, and made his appearance in his ar- 
mour. But he was so much changed by labour and 
watching, that the joy and elevation, which his suc- 
cess might have inspired, was weighed down by the 
extreme fatigue of his spirits. On his appearance, 
the people immediately began to express their high. 
sense of his services ; upon which he took his spear 
in his right hand, and leaning his body and one knee 
a little against it, remained a long time in that pos- 
ture silent, to receive their plaudits and acclamations, 
their praises of his virtue, and compliments on his 
good fortune. 

After their first transports were over, and he per- 
ceived that he could be heard, he summoned all the 
strength that he had left, and made a speech in the 
name of the Achaeatts suitable to the great event, 
persuaded the Corinthians to join the league, and 
delivered to them the keys of their city, of which 
they had never been masters since the times of Phi- 
lip. As to the generals of Antigonus, he set Arche- 
laus, who was his prisoner, free ; but Theophrastus 
he put to death, because he refused to leave Corinth. 
Persaeus, on the taking of the citadel, made his es- 
cape to Cenchrea? -3. A while afterward, when he 
was amusing himself with disputations in philosophy, 
and some person advanced the position that, * None 
but the wise man was fit to be a general ;' " As- 
" suredly," said he, " this maxim of Zeno's once 
" pleased me more than all the rest ; but I have 
'* changed my opinion, since I was better taught 

by the young Sicyonian." This circumstance 
concerning Persams we have from many historians. 

*•» Pausanias, ii. 8., says Aratus put him to death.* 

a 

176 ARATOS. 

Aratus immediately seized the Ilencuin (or tem- 
ple- of Juno) and the harbour of Leciucum, in which 
he took twenty-five of the king's ships. He took 
also five hundred horses, and four hundred Syrians 
whom he sold. The Achaeans placed a garrison of 
four hundred men in the citadel of Corinth, which 
was strengthened with fifty dogs, and as many men 
to take care of them. 

The Romans were great admirers of Philopoemcn, 
and called him ' the last of the Greeks ; ' not allow- 
ing, that there was any great man among that peo- 
ple after him. But, in my opinion, this exploit of 
Aratus is the last, which the Greeks have to boast. 
Whether we consider indeed the boldness of the 
enterprise, or the good fortune which attended it, 
it equals the most illustrious upon record. This 
appears, likewise, from it's immediate consequences: 
the Megarensians revolted from Antigonus, and 
joined Aratus; the Trcezenians and Epidaurians, also, 
ranged themselves on the side of the Achaeans. 

In his first expedition beyond the bounds of Pelo- 
ponnesus, Aratus over-ran Attica, and passing into 
Salamis, ravaged that island ; so that the Achaean 
forces thought themselves escaped as it were out of 
prison, andlbllowed him wherever he pleased. Upon 
this occasion he set the Athenian prisoners free 
.without ransom, by which he sowed among them 
the first seeds of defection from the Macedonians. 
He brought Ptolemy""', likewise, into the Achaean 
league, by procuring him the direction of the war 
both by sea and land. Such was his influence over 
the Achaeans that, as the laws did not allow him to 
be general for two successive years, they appointed 
him every other year ; and in action, as well as in 
council, he had always in effect the chief command. 
For they saw it was" not wealth, or glory, or the 
friendship of kings, or the advantage of his own 
country, or any thing else, that he preferred to the 

-'' Euergetes I.* 

' ARATUS. IT? 

promotion of the Achaean power. He thought that 
cities in their single capacity were weak, and that 
they could not provide for their defence without, as 
it were, binding themselves together for the com- 
mon good. As the members of the body cannot be 
nourished or live, except by their connexion with 
each other, and when separated, pine and decay; so 
cities perish, when they break off from the com- 
munity to which they belong, and on the contrary 
gather strength and power, by becoming parts of 
some great body, and enjoying the fruits of the 
wisdom of the whole27. 

Observing therefore that all the bravest people 
in his neighbourhood lived according to their own 
laws, it gave him pain to see the Argives in slavery, 
and he took measures for destroying their tyrant 
Aristomachus28. Besides, he was ambitious to 
restore Argos to it's libertv, as a reward for the edit- 
cation which it had afforded him, and to unite it to 
the Achaean league. Without much difficulty he 
found some of them hardy enough to undertake the 
enterprise, with /Eschylus and Charimenes the 
soothsayer at their head : but they had no swords ; 
for they had been forbidden to keep arms, and the 
tyrant had laid heavy penalties on such as should be 

-"! We shall here give the reader an account of some laws, by 
which the Achaean states were governed: 

1. An extraordinary assembly was not to be summoned at the 
request of foreign embassadors, unless they first notified in writing, 
to the Praetor and Derpiurgj, the subject of their embassy; 

2. No city, subject to the league, was to send any embassy to a 
foreign prince or state, without, the consent and approbation of a 
general diet ; 

3. No member of the assembly was to accept presents from 
foreign princes, under any pretence whatsoever; 

4. No prince, state, or city was to be admitted into the league, 
without the consent of the whole alliance; 

5. The general assembly was not to sit above three days. 

28 This Aristomachus must not be confounded with him, who 
was thrown into the sea at Cenchreae. Between them reigned 
Aristippus (of whom, however, Polybius has made no mention j, 
and surpassed all his brother tyrants in cruelty. 

yot. vi. N 

r?a ARATUS. 

found to have any in their possession. To supply 
this defect, Aratus provided several daggers for them 
at Corinth, and having sewed them up in the pack- 
saddles of horses that were to cany some ordinary 
wares, they were thus conveyed to Argos. In the 
mean time Charimenes, having admitted another of 
his friends as an accomplice, iEschylus and his asso- 
ciates were so much provoked, that they east him 
off", and determined to effect the business by them- 
selves. But Charimenes perceiving their intention, 
in resentment of the slight, informed the tyrant of 
their purpose, when they were set out to carry it into 
execution. Upon which they lied with precipitation, 
and most of them escaped to Corinth. 

It was not long, however, before Aristomachus 
was slain by one of his own servants ; but, before 
any measures could be adopted to guard against 
tyranny, Aristippus seized the reins, and proved a 
worse tyrant than the former. Aratus, indeed, 
inarched immediately to Argos29 with all the 
Achseans able to bear arms, in order to support 
the citizens, whom he doubted not to find ready 
to assert their liberty. But they had been long 
accustomed to the yoke, and were willing to be 
slaves; insomuch that not one of them joined him, 
and he returned with the disadvantage of having 
subjected the Achaeans to the imputation of com- 
mitting acts of hostility in time of full peace. For 
this injustice they were summoned to answer before 
the Mantineans. 

Aratus did not make his appearance at the trial, 
and Aristippus being the prosecutor got a fine of 
thirty mina? laid upon the Achaeans. As that tyrant 
both hated and feared Aratus, he meditated his death, 
and Antigonus entered into the scheme. They had 
their emissaries in almost every quarter, watching 
their opportunity. But the surest guard for a prince, 

29 Po]yT}iu3 (ii. ) places this attempt for the relief of Argos under 
the second Aristoniachus. 

ARATUS. 179 

or other chief, is the sincere affection of his people. 
For when the commons and the nobility, instead of 
fearing their chief magistrate, fear for him, he sees 
with many eyes and hears with many ears, and 
has a prescience of whatever is going forward. 
And here I cannot but leave a little the thread of 
my story, to describe the manner of life which 
Aristippus was under a necessity of leading, in order 
to retain in his hands that despotism, that state of 
an arbitrary sovereign, winch is commonly so much 
envied and admired as the highest pitch of hap- 
piness. 

This tyrant, who had Antigonus for his ally, who 
kept so large a body-guard, and had not left one of 
his enemies alive in the city, would not suffer his 
guards to do duty in the palace, but only in the 
vestibule and porticoes about it. When supper was 
finished, he sent away all his servants, barred the 
door of the hall himself, and with his mistress 
mounted through a trap-door into a small chamber 
above. Upon that door he placed his bed, and 
slept there as a person, in his anxious state of mind, 
may be supposed to sleep. The ladder by which 
he ascended, his mistress* mother took away and 
secured in another room till morning, when she 
brought it back and called up this wonderful prince, 
who crept like a reptile out of his hole. Whereas 
Aratus, who acquired a lasting command not by 
force of arms, but by virtue and in a way agreeable 
to the laws, who made his appearance without fear 
in a plain vest and cloke, and always showed him- 
self an enemy to tyrants, left an illustrious posterity 
among the Greeks which flourishes at this day bu. 
But of those who have seized castles, who have 
maintained guards, who have fenced themselves 
with arms and gates and barricadoes, how few can 

30 A compliment to Polycrates, whom Plutarch characterises, in 
the beginning of this Life, as one of his hero's descendants. The 
interval between Aratus and Plutarch was not less than three hun- 
dred and fifty years.* 

N 2 

ISO ARATUS. 

we enumerate, that have not like timorous hares 
died a violent death11 ; and not one of them has 
left a house, a family, or even a monument, to pre- 
serve his memory with honour. 

Arattis made many attempts, both private and 
public, to pull down Aristippus and rescue Argos 
out of his hands, but he always miscarried. Once 
he had applied his scaling-ladders, and ascended the 
wall with a small party, in spite of the extreme dan- 
ger which threatened him. He had even succeeded 
so far as to kill the guards, who came to oppose him : 
but when day appeared, and the tyrant attacked him 
on all sides, the people of Argos (as if he had not 
been fighting for their liberty, and they were only 
presiding at the Nemean games) sat cool and im- 
partial spectators of the action, without making the 
least motion to assist him. Aratus defended himself 
with the utmost courage, and though he had his 
thigh run through with a spear, maintained his post 
all day against the superior numbers of the enemy. 
Would his strength have permitted him to continue' 
the combat in the night too, he must have carried 
his point: for the tyrant was meditating his escape, 
and had already sent most of his treasure on board 
his ships. As no one, however, gave Aratus intelli- 
gence of this circumstance, his water failing, and his 
wound disqualifying him from any farther personal 
efforts, he called off his men and retired. 

He now despaired of succeeding by way of sur- 
prise, and therefore openly entered the territories of 
Arabs with, his army, and committed great devasta- 
tions. He fought a pitched battle with Aristippus 
near the river Chares, and upon that occasion in- 
curred the imputation of having deserted the action, 
and let the victory slip out of his hands, lor one 
part of his army had clearly the advantage, and was 
advancing fast in the pursuit ; when he, without 

3» Ad gene nun Cererjs sine ceede et sanguine panel 

Descendant reges, ct sicca morte tyranni. (Juv, x. 112.)* 

AEATUS. 181 

being overpowered where he acted in person, merely 
out of fear and diffidence, retired in disorder to his 
camp. His men, on their return from the pursuit, 
expressed their indignation at being prevented from 
erecting the trophy, after they had put the enemy 
to night, and killed many more men than they had 
lost. Aratus, wounded by these reproaches, deter- 
mined to risk a second battle for the trophy. Accord- 
ingly, after his men had rested one day, he drew 
them out the next. But finding, that the enemy's 
numbers had increased, and that their troops were in 
much higher spirits than before, he durst not hasard 
an action, but retreated, after having obtained a 
truce to carry oft' the dead. By his engaging man- 
ners, however, and his abilities in the administration, 
he obviated the consequences of this error, and 
added the city of Cleome3- to the Achaean league. 
In Clconae he caused the Nemean games to be cele- 
brated, for he thought that city had the best and 
most natural claim to them. The people of Argos, 
likewise, exhibited them ; and upon this occasion the 
freedom and security, which had been the privilege 
of the champions, were first violated. The Achaeans 
considered as enemies all who had repaired to the 
games at Argos, and having seized them as they 
passed through their territories, sold them for slaves. 
So violent and implacable was their general's hatred 
of tyrants. 

Not long afterward, Aratus received intelligence 
that Aristippus had a design against Cleome, but 
that he was afraid of him, because he then resided 
at Corinth : upon which he assembled his forces by 
proclamation, and having ordered them to take pro- 
visions for several days, marched to Cenchrese. By 
this manoeuvre he hoped to bring Aristippus against 
Cleonae, as supposing him at a distance : and it had 
it's effect. The tyrant immediately set out from 
Argos with his army. But it was no sooner dark, 

22 A city in Argolis, between Corinth and Argos.* 

162 ARATUS. 

than Aratus returned from Cenchreae to Corinth ; 
and having placed guards in all the roads, led on the 
Achaeans, who followed him in such good order and 
with so much celerity and pleasure, that they not 
onlv made their inarch, but entered Cleonae that 
night, and marshalled themselves in order of battle: 
neither did Aristippus gain the least knowledge of 
this movement. 

Next morning at break of day the gates were 
opened, the trumpet sounded, and Aratus advanc- 
ing at full speed and with all the alarm of war tell 
upon the enemy, and soon routed them. He then 
went upon the pursuit, particularly that way which 
he imagined Aristippus would take ; for the country 
had several outlets. The pursuit was continued as 
far as Mycense, and the tyrant (as Dinias informs us) 
was overtaken and killed by a Cretan, named Tra- 
giscus ; and of his army there were above fifteen 
hundred slain. Aratus, though he had gained this 
important victory without the loss of a single man, 
could not make himself master of Argos, or deliver 
it from slavery : for Agias and young Aristomachus 
entered it with the king of Macedon's troops, and 
continued to hold it in subjection. 

This action silenced in a great measure the ca- 
lumny of the enemy, and put a stop to the insolent 
scoffs of those, who to flatter the tyrants had not 
scrupled to say, that whenever the Achaean general 
prepared for battle, his bowels lost their retentive 
faculty ; that when the trumpet sounded, his eyes 
grew dim, and his head giddy ; and that when he 
had given the word, he used to ask his lieutenants 
and other officers, ' what farther need there could be 
of him, since the die was cast, and whether he might 
not retire, and wait the event of the day at some 
distance.' These reports had prevailed so much, 
that the philosophers in their inquiries in the schools, 
1 Whether the palpitation of the heart and change of 
colour on the appearance of danger were arguments 
of cowardice, or only of some natural defect, some 

ARATUS. 183 

coldness in the constitution ?' used always to quote 
Aratus as an excellent general, who yet was con- 
stantly subject to these emotions on occasion of a 
battle. 

After he had destroyed Aristippus, he sought 
means to depose Lysiades the Megalopolitan, who 
had assumed the supreme power in his native city. 
This man had something generous in his nature, and 
was not insensible to true honour. He had not, 
like most other tyrants, committed this injustice 
out of a love of licentious pleasure, or from a motive 
of avarice: but incited, when very young, by a pasr 
sion for glory, and unadvisedly believing, in his high- 
minded view of things, the false and vain accounts 
of the wondrous happiness of arbitrary power, he 
had made it his business to usurp it. He soon, how*- 
ever, felt it a heavy burthen : and being at once de- 
sirous to gain the happiness which Aratus enjoyed, 
and to deliver himself from the fear of his intriguing 
spirit, he formed the noblest resolution imaginable ; 
first to get rid of the hatred, the fears, and the guards 
which encompassed him, and then to bestow the 
greatest blessing on his country. In consequence of 
this, he sent for Aratus, laid down the authority 
which he had assumed, and united the city to the 
Achaean leagne. The Achasans, charmed with his 
lofty spirit, thought it not too high a compliment 
to elect hiur general. He was no sooner appointed, 
than he discovered an ambition to raise his name 
above that of Aratus, and was by this project led to 
several unnecessary attempts, particularly to declare 
war against the Lacedcemonians. This, Aratus en- 
deavoured to prevent, but his opposition was thought 
to proceed from envy. Lysiades was chosen general 
a second time, though Aratus exerted all his interest 
to procure that appointment for another ; for, as we 
have alreadv observed, he had the command himself 
only every other year. Lysiades was fortunate 
enough to gain that commission a third time, enjoy- 
ing it alternately with Aratus. But at last avowing 

m A RAT US. 

himself his enemy, and often accusing him to the 
Acha?ans in full 'council, that people cast him off. 
lor he appeared, with only an assumed character, to 
contend against real and sincere virtue. iEscip tells 
us, " that the cuckoo one day asked the little birds, 
" ' why they avoided her;' and they answered, ' it 
" was because they feared, she would at last prove 
" a hawk33.' " In like manner it happened to Ly- 
siades. It -was suspected that, as he had been onee 
a tyrant, his laying down his power was not quite a 
voluntary thing, and that he would be glad to seize 
the iirst opportunity of resuming it. 

Aratus acquired new glory in the war with the 
iEtolians. The Achaeans pressed him to engage 
them on the confines of Megara, and Agis king of 
the Lacedaemonians, who attended with an army, 
joined his instances to theirs ; but he would not 
consent. They reproached him with want of spirit, 
with cowardice ; they tried what scoffing, what ridi- 
cule could do : but he bore all their\ittacks with 
patience, and would not sacrifice the real good of the 
community to the fear of seeming disgrace. Upon 
this principle, he suffered the ifttolians to pass 
mount Gerania 34, and to enter Peloponnesus with- 
out the least resistance. But when he found that 
in their march they had seized Pcllene, he was no 
longer the same man. Without the least delav, 
without waiting till all his forces were assembled, he 
advanced with those he had at hand against the ene- 
my, now much weakened by their late acquisition, 
which had occasioned the utmost disorder and mis- 
rule. For they had no sooner entered the city, than 
the private men dispersed themselves in the houses, 
and began to scramble and fight for the booty ; while 
the generals and other officers seized the wives and 

3i No such fable of /Esop's is now extant ; but there is one of 
' the Hawk and other Birds,' to which this passage alludes.* 

34 A mountain in Attica, so called by Megarus, who under the 
guidance of some cranes saved himself upon it's summit from Deu- 
calion's ilood.* 

ARATUS. 183 

daughters of the inhabitants, and each placed his 
helmet upon the head of his prize, as a mark to 
v, horn she belonged, and to prevent her falling into 
the hands of another. 

While they were thus employed, intelligence ar- 
rived that Aratus was on the point of attacking 
them. The consternation was such, as might be 
expected among men in extreme disorder. Before 
they were all apprised of their danger, those who 
were about the gates and in the suburbs had skir- 
mished a few moments with the Achaeans, and were 
put to flight, with a precipitation, excessively alarm- 
ing to those who had assembled to support them. 
During this confusion one of the captives, daughter 
to Epigethes a person of considerable eminence in 
Pellene, who was remarkable for her beauty and 
majestic mien, was seated in the temple of Diana, 
where her captor had placed her, after having put 
his helmet adorned with three plumes of feathers on 
her head. This lady, hearing the noise and tumult, 
ran out suddenly to see what was the cause. As 
she stood at the door of the temple, and looked 
down upon the combatants with the helmet still upon 
her head, she appeared to the citizens a figure more 
than human, and the enemy took her for a deity ; 
which struck the latter with such terror and astonish- 
ment, that they were no longer able to use their 
arms. 

The Pellenians inform us, that the statue of the 
goddess stands commonly untouched, and that when 
the priestess moves it out of the temple in order to 
carry it in procession, none dare look it in the face, 
but on the contrary all turn away their eyes with the 
utmost care ; for it is not only a terrible and dan- 
gerous sight to mankind, but it's look renders the 
trees barren, and blasts the fruits where it passes. 
The priestess, they add, carried it out upon this 
occasion, and always turning the face directly to- 
ward the iEtolians 'rilled them with horror, and de- 
prived them of their senses. But Aratus, in his 

186 ARATUS. 

Commentaries, makes no mention of any such cir- 
cumstance: he only says, that he put the ./Etolians 
to flight, and entering the town with the fugitives-, 
dislodged them by dint of sword, and killed seven 
hundred. This action was one of the most celebra- 
ted in history, and Timanthes3' the painter gave a 
very lively and excellent representation of it. 

As many powerful states however were combining 
against the Achaeans, Aratus hastened to make peace 
-with the vl/.olians, which he not only effected by 
the assistance of Pantaleon, one of the most powerful 
men ainonsj them, but likewise entered into an alii- 
ance offensive and defensive. He had a great de- 
sire to restore Athens to it's liberty, and exposed 
himself to the severest censures of the Aclurans by 
attempting to surprise the Piraeus, while there was 
a truce subsisting between them and the Macedo- 
nians. Aratus indeed, in his Commentaries, denies 
the fact, and lays the blame upon Erginus, in con- 
cert with whom he had taken the citadel of Corinth. 
It was the exclusive scheme of Erginus, he informs 
us, to attempt that port : his ladder however break- 
ing, he miscarried, and was pursued ; and in order 
to save himself, he often called upon Aratus, as if 
present, by which artifice he deceived the enemy and 
escaped; But this defence of his wants probability 
to support it. It is not likely that Erginus a private 
man, a Syrian, would have formed a design of such 
consequence without having Aratus at the head of 
it, to supply him with troops, and to point out the 
opportunity for the attack. Nay, Aratus proved 
the same against himself, by making not only two or 
three, but many more attempts upon the Piraeus, 

35 Of Timanthes Pliny gives us a character, II. N. xsxv. 10 ; 
where however, in his enumeration of his works, he makes no men- 
tion of this particular piece. One of his most celehrated works was 
' the Sacrifice of Iphigenia/ in which he threw a veil over the face 
of Agamemnon ; and another a Cyclops, of whose size (as he was 
limited to a small picture) he conveyed a strong idea, by represent- 
ing some young satyrs measuring his thumb with a thyrsus.* 

ARATUS. 187 

Like a person violently in love, his miscarriages did 
not induce him to desist ; for as his hopes were dis- 
appointed only by the failure of perhaps a single 
circumstance, and he was always within a little of 
succeeding, he still encouraged himself to proceed. 
In one repulse, as he fled over the fields of Thri- 
asium36, he broke his leg, and the cure could not be 
effected without several incisions ; so that for some 
time afterward, whenever he was called to action, he 
was carried into the field in a litter. 

After the death of Antigonus, and Demetrius' 
accession to the throne, Aratus was more intent than 
ever upon delivering Athens from the yoke, and 
conceived an utter contempt for the Macedonians. 
He was, however, defeated in a battle near Phylacia 
by Bithys the new king's general ; and a strong re- 
port being spread on one side that he was taken pri- 
soner, and on another that he wras dead, Diogenes 
who commanded in the Piraeus wrote a letter to Co- 
rinth, insisting, " That the Achceans should evacuate 
the place, since Aratus was no more." Aratus hap- 
pened to be at Corinth, when the letter arrived ; 
and the messengers, finding that their business occa- 
sioned much laughter and satirical discourse, retired 
in great confusion. The king of Macedon himself 
likewise sent a ship with orders, " That Aratus 
should be brought to him in chains." 

The Athenians, outdoing themselves in flattery 
to the Macedonians, wore chaplets of flowers upon 
the first rumour of Aratus' death. Incensed at this 
treatment, he immediately marched out against them, 
and proceeded as far as the Academy : but they 
implored him to spare them, and he returned with- 
out having done them the least injury. The Athe- 
nians now became sensible of his virtue, and as upon 
the death of Demetrius they were determined to 
make an attempt for liberty, they called him in to 
their assistance. Though he was not general of the 

36 In Attica.* 

158 ARATUS. 

A cl weans that year, and was beside so much indis- 
posed by long siekness as to be forced to keep his bed- 
he yet caused himself to be curried in a litter, to ren- 
der them his best services. Ac cou'dingiybe prevailed 
upon Diogenes, who commanded the garrison, to 
give up, the Piraeus, Munychia, Sakunis, and Snnium 
to the Athenians, for the consideration of a hundred 
and fifty talents, twenty of which were advanced by 
Aratus himself. Upon this, the .Egineta* and Her- 
mionians joined the Aclwans, and a considerable 
part of Arcadia paid contributions to the league. 
The Macedonians now found enmlovment enough 
for their arms nearer home ; and the Achsrans. num- 
bering the iEtolians among their allies, acquired a 
great addition to their power. 

Aratus still proceeded upon his old principles, 
and concerned to see tyranny established in a city 
so near him as that of Argos, despatched his agents 
to Aristomachus, to persuade him ' to restore that 
city to liberty, and unite it to the Achaean league : 
in noble emulation of the example of Lysiades, who 
chose to command so illustrious a people with repu- 
tation and honour as the general of their choice, ra- 
ther than a single city as a tyrant exposed to per- 
petual danger and hatred.' Aristomachus listened 
to their suggestions, and desired Aratus to send him 
fifty talents to pay off his troops. The money was 
granted agreeably to his request ; but Lysiades 
whose commission as general was not expired, and 
who was ambitious to have this negotiation pass 
with the Ach.ieans for his work, took an opportunity, 
while the sum was providing, of accusing Aratus to 
Aristomachus as a person implacably hostile to 
tyrants, and advised him rather to put the business 
into his hands. To these suggestions Aristomachus 
gave ear, and Lysiades had the honour of introduc- 
ing him to the league. But, upon this occasion more 
especially, the Achaean council showed their affec- 
tion and fidelity to Aratus ; for, upon his speaking 
against Aristomachus, they rejected him with the 
9 

ARATUS. IS9 

utmost resentment. Afterward, when Aratus was 
prevailed upon to undertake the management of the 
affair, they readily and cheerfully accepted him, and 
made a decree by which the Argives and Phliusians 
were admitted into the league. The year following, 
likewise, Aristomachus was appointed general. 

Aristomachus, finding himself esteemed by the 
Achaeans, was desirous of carrying his arms into La- 
conia, for which purpose he sent for Aratus from 
Athens. Aratus replied, that he utterly disapproved 

l * hi ft A 

the expedition, not choosing that the Achaeans 
should engage with Cleomencs37, whose spirit and 
power increased with his difficulties. Aristomachus 
however, was bent upon the enterprise ; and Aratus, 
yielding to his solicitations, returned to assist him in 
the war. Cleomenes offered him battle at Palan- 
tium, but Aratus prevented hum from accepting the 
challenge. V\)i>\\ this, Lysiades accused Aratus to 
the Achreans, and the year following declared him- 
self his competitor for the command: but Aratus 
had the majority of votes, and was for the twelfth 
time declared general. 

This year, he was defeated by Cleomenes at 
mount Lyeselim ; and, in his flight being forced to 
wander about in the night, he was supposed to have 
been killed. This was the second time, that a re- 
port of his death had spread over Greece. He saved 
himself, however, and having collected the scattered 
remains of his forces, was not satisfied with retiring 
unmolested; but availing himself in the best man- 
ner of his opportunity, when no one expected or 
even thought of such a manoeuvre, fell suddenly 
upon the Mantineans who were allies to Cleomenes, 
took their city, secured it with a garrison, and de- 

37 Some authors write that Cleomtenes, at the instigation of the 
.fl&tolians, had built a fortress in the territory of the Megalopolitans. 
caljed Athenaeum, which the Achaeans considering as an open 
rupture, declared in a general assembly; that the Lacedssraonian^ 
should be considered as enemies, 

190 ARATUS. 

clared all the strangers lie found there free of the 
city. In short, he obtained that for the Achaeans 
when beaten, which they could not easily have gain- 
ed if victorious. 

The Lacedaemonians having again entered the ter- 
ritorics of Megalopolis, he marched to relieve that 
city. Cleomenes endeavoured to bring him to an 
action, but he declined it, though the Megalopoli, 
tans strongly pressed him to leave the matter to the 
decision of the sword. For, beside that he was 
never very tit for disputes in the open field, he was 
now inferior in numbers ; and at a time of life when 
his spirits began to fail, and his ambition was sub- 
dued, he would have had to engage with a young 
man of the most adventurous courage. He thought 
likewise that, if Cleomenes by his boldness sought to 
acquire glory, it became him by his caution to keep 
that, which lie had acquired. 

One day the light infantry skirmished with the 
Spartans, and having driven them to their camp, 
entered it along with them and began to plunder. 
Aratus even then would not lead on the main body, 
but kept his men on the other side of a defile that 
lay between, and would not suffer them to pass. 
Lysiades, incensed at thi^ order and reproaching 
him with cowardice, called upon the cavalry to sup- 
port the party in pursuit of the enemy, and not to 
betray the victory, nor to desert one who was about 
to hazard all for his country. On this, many of the 
best men in the army followed him to the charge, 
which was so vigorous, that he put the right wing of 
the Lacedaemonians to flight. But in the ardour of 
his courage and his ambition lor honour, he advanced 
inconsiderately upon the pursuit, till he fell into an 
intricate way, obstructed with trees and intersected 
with large ditches. In this ground Cleomenes at- 
tacked and slew him, after he had maintained the 
most glorious of all combats, the combat for his 
people, almost at their own doors. The rest of the 

ARATUS. 191 

cavalry fled, and turning back upon the main body 
threw the infantry into disorder, so that the rout 
became general. 

This loss was principally imputed to Aratus, for 
he was thought to have abandoned Lysiades to his 
fate. The Achaeans, therefore, retired in great anger, 
and obliged him to follow them to iEsjium. There 
it was decreed in full council, that he should not be 
supplied with any more money, or have any merce- 
naries ; and that, if he was determined to go to war, 
he must find resources for it himself. Thus igno- 
miniously treated, he was inclined to deliver up the 
seal, and immediately resign his command; but, upon 
more mature consideration, he thought it better to 
bear the affront with patience. Soon after this, he led 
the Achaeans to Orchomenus, where he gave battle to 
Megistonoiis the father-in-law of Cleomenes, killed 
three hundred of his men, and took him prisoner. 

It had been customary with him to take the com- 
mand every other year ; but when his turn came, 
and he was called upon to resume it, he absolutely 
refused, and Timoxenus was appointed general. The 
reason commonly assigned for his rejecting the com- 
mission was his resentment against the people for 
the late dishonour, which they had done him ; but 
the real cause was, the bad posture of the Acha?aii 
affairs. Cleomenes no longer advanced by insensible 
steps : he had no measures now to keep with the 
magistrates at home, nor any tiling to fear from their 
opposition ; for he had put the Ephori to death, 
distributed the lands in equal portions, and admitted 
many strangers citizens of Sparta. After he had 
thus made himself absolute master at home, he 
marched into Achaia, and insisted upon being ap- 
pointed general of the league. Aratus therefore is 
highly blamed, when affairs were in such a tempes- 
tuous state, for having given up the helm to another 
pilot 3% when he ought rather to have taken it by 
force to save the community from sinking. Or, if 

5* See the Life of Cleomenes, V. 1G9., not. (*) 

VJ2 ARATUS. 

he thought the Achaean power gone beyond the 
possibility of retrieval, he should have yielded to 
Cleomenes, and not have reduced Peloponnesus into 
a state of fresh barbarism by Macedonian garrisons, 
or filled the citadel of Corinth with Illvrian and 
Gaulish 9 arms. For this was making those men, to 
whom he had shown himself superior both in his 
military and political capacity, and whom he had' 
vilified so much in his Commentaries, lords of his 
cities, under the softer but false name of allies. It 
may be said, perhaps, that Cleomenes was unjust 
and tyrannical. Let us grant it for a moment : yet 
he was a dcscendent of the Hefa'clidfie, and his coun- 
try was Sparta, the meanest citizen of which should 
have been preferred as general of the league to the 
first of the Macedonians, at least by those who set 
any value upon the dignity of Greece. Besides, 
Cleomenes solicited the command among the Acha> 
ans'°, only with a view of making their cities happy 
in his services, in return for the honour of the title : 
whereas Antigonus, though declared commander-in- 
chief both by sea and land, would not accept the 
commission till he was paid with the citadel of 
Corinth, in which he perfectly resembled /Esop's 
hunter41 ; for he would not ride the Achseans, though 
they offered their backs, and though by embassies 
and decrees thev courted him to do it, till he had 
first bridled them by his garrison, and by the hostages 
which they were obliged to deliver to him. 

'■° This appears so unaccountable a circumstance, that M. du 
Soul for 'Gaulish,' would read VEtolian' arms.* 

40 Aratus was, perhaps, apprehensive that Cleomenes would en- 
deavour to render himself absolute among the Achaeans, as he was 
already in Lacedaemon, There was a possibility however of his 
behaving with honour, as general oi" the Achseans, whereas from 
Anfigmius nothing could be expected but chains. Tins Antigonus 
was surnamed Doson. 

■i1 Horace gives us this fable of iEsop's, Ep. I. x. 

Cervus cquum, pitgnd mriior, communibus herbis 

Pellebat, &c. — — 
but, before TEsop, the poet Stesichorus is said to have applied it to 
the Ilimerians, when they were going to raise a guard for Phalaris. 

ARATUS. 193 

Aratus, it is true, labours to justify himself by the 
necessity of affairs. But Polybius assures us that, 
long before that necessity existed, he had been afraid 
of the daring spirit of Cleomencs, and had not only 
treated with Antigonus in private, but induced the 
Megalopolitans to propose to the general assembly 
of the Achaeans, that Antigonus should be invited to 
their assistance. For, whenever Cleomenes renewed 
his depredations, the Megalopolitans were the first 
that suffered by them. Phylarchus42 gives the same 
account, but we should not have afforded him much 
credit, if he had not been supported by the testi- 
mony of Polybius : for such is his fondness for Cleo- 
menes, that he cannot speak of him without enthu- 
siasm ; and, as if he was pleading a cause rather than 
writing a history, he perpetually disparages the one, 
and vindicates the other. 

The Achaeans having lost Mantinea, which Cleo- 
menes now took a second time, and being moreover 
defeated in a great battle at Hecatomboeum, were 
so terrified that they immediately invited Cleomenes 
to Argos, with a promise of making him general. 
But Aratus no sooner perceived that he was on his 
march, and had brought his army as far as Lerma, 
than his fears gained the ascendency, and he sent 
embassadors to desire him to come to the Achseans 
as to friends and allies, with only three hundred men. 
They were to add that, if he had any distrust of the 
Achasans, they would give him hostages. Cleo- 
menes told them, they did but insult and mock him 
with such a message, and returning immediately 
wrote a letter to the Achaean council, full of com- 
plaints and invectives against Aratus. Aratus wrote 
another against Cleomencs in the same stile, and 
they proceeded to such gross abuse, as not to spare 
the characters even of their wives and families. 
Upon this, Cleomenes sent a herald to declare 

42 For an account of this historian, see a former note. In his 
partiality for Cleomenes, mentioned below, he was followed to seme 
extent by Plutarch.* 

VOL. VI. O 

Wi A RAT Ufa'. 

war against the Achaeans ; and, in the mean time, 
the city of Sicyon narrowly escaped being betrayed 
to him. Disappointed of his expectation there, he 
turned against Pellene, dislodged the Achaean gar- 
rison, and secured the town for himself. A little 
while afterward, he took Fheneum and Penteleum ; 
and it was not long before the people of Argos 
adopted his interest, and the Phliasians received his 
garrison. So that scarcely any thing remained firm 
to the Achaeans, of the dominions which they had 
acquired ; Aratus saw nothing but confusion about 
him ; all Peloponnesus was in a tottering condition, 
and the cities were every where excited by innova- 
tors to revolt. None, indeed, were quiet, or satisfied 
with their present circumstances. Even among the 
Sicyonians and Corinthians many were found to 
entertain a correspondence with Cleomenes, having 
been long disaffected to the administration and the 
public utility, because they wished to get the power 
into their own hands. Aratus was invested with full 
authority to punish the delinquents. The corrupt 
members of Sicyon he cut off; but by seeking for 
such in Corinth, in order to put them to death, he 
exasperated the people, already sick of the same dis- 
temper and weary of the Achaean government43. 
Upon this occasion they assembled in the temple of 
Apollo, and sent for Aratus, being determined either 
to kill him or take him prisoner, before they pro- 
ceeded to an open .revolt. Pie came leading his 
horse, as if he had not the least mistrust or suspi- 
cion. When they saw him at the gate, a number of 
them rose up, and loaded him with reproaches. 
But he with a composed countenance and mild 
address bade them sit down again, and not by stand- 
ing in the way, and making such a disorderly noise, 
prevent other citizens who were at the door from 
entering. At the same time that he said this, he drew 

•*J What wonder, when they saw Aratus unfaithful to his first 
principles, aad about to reduce them afresh under the Macedonian 
yoke ? 

ARATUS. 195 

back step by step, as if he were seeking somebody 
to take his horse. Thus he got out of the crowd, 
and continued to talk without the least appearance 
of confusion to such of the Corinthians as he met, 
desiring them to go to the temple, till he insensibly 
approached the citadel. He then vaulted upon his 
horse, and having ordered Cleopater the governor to 
keep a strict guard upon it, rode off to Sicyon, fol- 
lowed by only thirty soldiers, for the rest had left 
him and dispersed. 

The Corinthians, quickly apprised of his flight, 
went in pursuit of him ; but failing in their design, 
they sent for Cleomenes, and put the city into his 
hands. He did not, however, think this advantage 
equal to his loss in their having suffered A rat us to 
escape. As soon as the inhabitans of [that district 
on the coast called] Acte had surrendered their 
towns, he shut up the citadel with a wall of circum- 
vallation, and a palisadoed entrenchment. 

In the mean time many of the Achseans repaired 
to Aratus at Sicyon, and a general assembly was 
held, in which he was chosen commander-in-chief 
with an unlimited commission. He now first took 
a guard, and it was composed of his fellow-citizens. 
He had conducted the Achasan administration three 
and thirty years, and had been the greatest man in 
Greece, both in power and reputation : but he found 
himself at this time abandoned, indigent, and perse- 
cuted ; without any thing but a single plank to trust 
to, in the perilous storm that had shipwrecked his 
country. For the iEtolians had refused him the as- 
sistance, which he requested ; and the city of Athens, 
though well inclined to serve him, was prevented by 
Euclides and Micion. 

Aratus had a house and valuable effects at Corinth. 
Cleomenes would not touch any thing that belonged 
to him, but sent for his friends and agents, and 
charged them to take the utmost care of his pro- 
perty, as remembering that they must give an ac- 
count to it's owner. To Aratus himself he privately 

o 2 

196 ARATUS. 

sent Tripylus, and afterward his father-in-law Megis- 
tonous, with high offers, and among the rest a pen- 
sion of twelve talents, which was double the yearly 
allowance he had from Ptolemy. In return for this, 
he desired to be appointed general of the Achaeans, 
and to be associated with him in the care of the 
citadel of Corinth. Aratus answered, " That he did 
" not now govern affairs, but they governed him." 
As there appeared an insincerity in this answer, 
Cleomenes entered the territories of Sicyon, and 
committed dreadful devastations. He likewise block- 
ed up the city for three months together, during all 
which time Aratus was debating within himself, 
whether or not he should surrender the citadel to 
Antigonus : for he would not send him succours 
upon any other condition. 

Before he could form his resolution, the Achaeans 
met in council at jiEgium'14, and summoned him to 
attend it. As the town was invested by Cleomenes, 
it was dangerous to pass. The citizens entreated 
him not to go, and declared that they would not 
suffer him to expose himself to an enemy, who was 
watching for his prey. The matrons and their chil- 
dren likewise hung upon him, and wept for him as 
for a common parent and protector. He consoled 
them however as well as he could, and rode down to 
the sea-side, taking with him ten of his friends and 
his son, who was now approaching to manhood. 
Finding some vessels at anchor, he went on board, 
and arrived safe at ^Egium. There he held an 
assembly, in which it was decreed that Antigonus 
should be called in, and the citadel surrendered to 
him. Aratus sent his own son among the other 
hostages ; which the Corinthians so much resented, 
that they plundered his goods, and made a present of 
his house to Cleomenes. 

As Antigonus was now approaching with his army 
... . . f 

** A maritime city of Achaia, not far from the mouth of the gulf 
of Corinth. PegSfi, mentioned below, is situated at the north-eastern 
extremity of til? iRUtf gulf-* 

ARATUS. 19? 

•(which consisted of twenty thousand foot, all Mace- 
donians, and of fourteen hundred horse), Aratus went 
with the Demiurgi45 by sea, and without being dis- 
covered by the enemy met him at Pega?, though 
he placed not much confidence in Antigonus, and 
distrusted the Macedonians. For he knew that his 
greatness had been owing to the mischiefs which he 
had done them, and that he had first risen to the 
direction of affairs in consequence of his hatred to 
old Antigonus. But seeing an indispensable ne- 
cessity before him, such an occasion as those who 
seemed to command are forced to obey, he faced the 
danger. When Antigonus was told that Aratus was 
come in person, he gave the rest a common welcome, 
but received him in the most honourable manner, 
and finding him upon trial to be a man of probity 
and prudence, admitted him into his most intimate 
friendship. He was both serviceable to the king 
indeed in his affairs of importance, and in his hours 
of leisure his most agreeable companion. Antigonus 
therefore though young, perceiving in him such a 
temper and such other qualities as fitted him for a 
prince's friendship, preferred him not only to the 
rest of the Achagans, but even to the Macedonians 
that were about him, and continued to employ him 
in every affair of consequence. Thus what the gods 
had announced, by the entrails of one of the victims, 
was accomplished. For it is said, that when Aratus 
was sacrificing not long before, there appeared in 
the liver two gall-bladders enclosed in the same caul ; 
upon which, the soothsayer declared that two ene- 
mies, then apparently the most irreconcileable, would 
soon be united in the strictest friendship. Aratus 
at that time took little notice of the saying, for he 
never put much faith in victims, nor indeed in pre- 
dictions from any thing else, but used to depend 
upon his reason. Some time afterward however, 

45 The Achaean magistrates. See an account of ,thera before* 
ar.d Hesych. in voc. 

198 ARATUS. 

when the war went on successfully, Antigonus gave 
an entertainment at Corinth ; at which, though 
there was a numerous company, he placed Aratus 
next above him/ They had not sat long, before 
Antigonus called for a cloke. At the same time he 
asked Aratus, " Whether he did not think it very 
u cold ?" and upon his replying that " He quite 
" shivered," he desired him to sit nearer, so that the 
servants who brought the cloke put it over the 
shoulders of both. This reminding Aratus of the 
victim, lie laughingly informed the king both of the 
sign and the prediction. But all this occurred long 
after the time, that we are now writing about. 

"While they were at Pegae, they took oaths of 
mutual fidelity, and then marched against the enemy. 
Several actions ensued under the walls of Corinth, 
in which Cleomenes had strongly fortified himseifj 
and the Corinthians defended the place with great 
vigour. 

In the mean time Aristotle, a citizen of Argos and 
a friend of Aratus, despatched an agent to him in 
private, with an offer of inducing that city to declare 
lor him, if he would go thither in person with a few 
troops. Aratus having apprised Antigonus of this 
scheme, embarked fifteen hundred men, and im- 
mediately sailed with them from the Isthmus to 
Epidaurus. But the people of Argos, without wait- 
ing for his arrival, had attacked the troops of Cleo- 
menes, and shut them up in the citadel. Cleomenes 
having nonce of this, and fearing that the enemy, 
if they were in possession of Argos, might intercept 
his retreat to Lacedsemon, left his post before the 
citadel of Corinth the same night, and marched to 
their succour. He reached Argos before Aratus, 
and gained some advantage over the enemy ; but 
Aratus arriving soon afterward, and the king appear- 
ing with his army, Cleomenes retired to Aiantinea. 

Upon this, all the cities again joined the Acha?ans. 
Antigonus made himself master of the citadel of 
Corinth, and the Argives having appointed Aratus 

ARATUS. 199 

their general, he persuaded them to bestow upon 
Antigonus the estates of the late tyrants and of all 
the traitors. That people put Aristomachus to the 
torture at Cenchreae'16, and afterward drowned him 
in the sea. Aratus was much censured upon this 
occasion, for having permitted a man to suffer un- 
justly, who was not of a bad character, with whom 
he had formerly been connected, and who at his 
persuasion had abdicated the supreme power, and 
brought Argos to unite itself to the Achaean league. 
There were other charges against Aratus, viz. that 
at his instigation the Achseans had surrendered the 
city of Corinth to Antigonus, as if it had been no 
more than an ordinary village ; that they had suf- 
fered him to pillage Grchomenus, and place in it a 
Macedonian garrison ; that they had decreed their 
community should not send a letter or an embassy 
to any other king, without the consent of Anti- 
gonus ; that they were forced to maintain, and pay, 
the Macedonians ; and that they had instituted sa- 
crifices, libations, and games in honour of that 
prince : the fellow-citizens of Aratus having set the 
example, and received him into their city, upon 
which occasion Aratus entertained him in his own 
house. For all these things they blamed Aratus, 
not considering that when he had once put the reins 
into that prince's hands, he was necessarily carried 
along with the career of regal power ; no longer 
master of any thing but his tongue, and finding it 
dangerous to use even that with freedom. For he 
was visibly hurt by many circumstances of the king's 
conduct, particularly with respect to the statues. 
Antigonus erected anew those of the tyrants, which 
Aratus had pulled down, and demolished those 
which he had set up in memory of the brave men, 

46 Plutarch seems here to have followed Phylarchus. But Poly- 
bius (ii.) says, that Aristomachus deserved greater punishments 
than he suffered, not only tor his extreme cruelty when tyrant of 
Argos, but also for his having forsaken the Achrcans in their dis- 
tress, and declared for their enemies. 

*tm ARATUS. 

that surprised the citadel of Corinth. That of Aratus 
alone was spared, notwithstanding his intercession 
for the rest. In the affair of Mantinea4.7, likewise, 
the behaviour of the Achaaans was not suitable to 
the Grecian humanity ; for having conquered it by 
means of Antigonus, they put the principal and most 
illustrious inhabitants to the sword, some of the rest 
they sold or sent in fetters to Macedon, and of the 
women and children they made slaves. Of the 
money thus raised they divided a third part among 
themselves, and gave the rest to the Macedonians, 
But this had it's excuse in the law of reprisals. For, 
however shocking it may appear that men should 
sacrifice to their anger those of their own nation and 
kindred, yet in necessity (as Simonides observes) it 
seems rather a proper alleviation, than a hardship, 
to give relief to a mind inflamed and aching with 
resentment48. But, as to what Aratus did afterward 
with respect to Mantinea, it is impossible to justify 
him upon a plea either of propriety or necessity. 
For Antigonus having made a present of that city 
to the Argives, they resolved to repeople it, and 
appointed Aratus to see it done ; by virtue of which 
commission, as well as that of general, he decreed 
that it should no more be called Mantinea but AntU 
gonea, the name it still bears. Thus by his means 
Mantinea (" the lovely Mantinea," as Homer49 
propounces it) was no more ; and, in it's place, we 

47 The Mantineans had applied to the Achrcans for a garrison, 
to defend them against the Lacedaemonians. In compliance with 
their request, the Achaeans sent them three hundred of their own 
citizens, and two hundred mercenaries. But the Mantineans, soon 
afterward changing their minds, in the most perfidious manner 
massacred the garrison. They merited, therefore, all that they 
are here said to have suffered; Polybius (ii.), however, makes no. 
mention of the principal inhabitants having been put to death; he 
only says, their goods were plundered, and some of the people sold 
for slaves ; though, for their treacherous conduct, they had de- 
served a much less moderate treatment. 

43 This is a sentiment, surely, unworthy of the mild and gentle 
Plutarch. How differently would a Christian apoBtle have com» 
roented upon such an occasion!* 
' 4» II. ii. 607.* 

ARATUS. 20£ 

have a city named from the man who destroyed and 
ruined it's inhabitants. 

Some time after this, Cleomenes being over- 
thrown in a great battle near Sellasia50 quitted Sparta, 
and sailed to Egypt. As for Antigonus, after the 
kindest and most honourable behaviour to Aratus, 
he returned to Macedon. In his sickness there, 
which happened soon after his arrival, he sent Philip 
(at that time very young, but already declared his 
successor) into Peloponnesus ; having first instruct- 
ed him above all things to pay the utmost attention 
to Aratus, and through him to treat with the cities, 
and make himself known to the Aclutans. Aratus 
received him with great honour, and managed him 
so well, that he returned to Macedon full of senti- 
ments of respect for his friend, and in the most fa- 
vourable and zealous disposition for the interests of 
Greece. 

After the death of Antigonus, the iEtolians de- 
spised the inactivity of the Achaeans; for accustomed 
to the protection of foreign arms, and sheltering 
themselves under the Macedonian power, they sunk 
into a state of idleness and disorder M. This gave 
the iEtolians room to attempt a footing in Pelopon- 

s° Cleomenes had entrenched himself so strongly near Sellasia, 
in a narrow pass between the mountains Eva and Olympus, that 
Antigonus did not think proper to attack him there. It is not easy 
to comprehend, what, could induce Cleomenes to come out of these 
entrenchments, and risk a pitched battle. His troops were not so 
numerous as the enemy's by one-third, and he was supplied with 
all kinds of provisions from Sparta : What then could make him 
hasard an action, the event of which was to decide the fate of La- 
cedaemon ? Polybius, indeed, seems to insinuate the cause of this 
proceeding. According to him, Ptolemy king of Egypt, who had 
promised to assist him in this war, had sent him word that he was 
not in a condition to make good his engagements. And as Cleo- 
menes did not choose to try the other part of the alternative, that 
of suing to Antigonus for a peace, he ventured all upon the issue 
of that day. 

51 See Polyb. iv. Patrae, mentioned below, was a considerable 
city in the north-west, and Dyme in the west of Achaia, whence 
indeed (as Strabo, viii., informs us) it had it's appellation; though 
Pausanias, vii. 17., derives it from a man or a woman of a similar 
name.* 

302 ARATUS. 

BCSU3. By the way they made some booty in the 
country about Pat! a? and Dyine, and then proceeded 
to Messene, and laid waste it's territories. Aratus 
was incensed at this insolence ; but he perceived 
that Timoxenus, who was then general, took slow 
and dilatory measures, because his year was almost 
expired 52. As he was to succeed therefore to the 
command, he anticipated his commission by five 
days, for the sake of assisting the Messeniansl He 
assembled the Achseans, but they hxl now neither 
exercise nor courap-e to enable them to maintain the 
combat, and consequently he was beaten in a battle 
which he fought at Caphyae. Being accused of hav- 
ing ventured too much upon this occasion i3, he be- 
came afterward so cold, and so far abandoned his 
hopes for the public, as to neglect the opportunities 
which the vEtolians gave him, and suffer them to 
roam about Peloponnesus in a kind of bacchanalian 
manner, committing all the excesses that insolence 
could suggest. 

The Achasans were, in consequence, again obliged 
to stretch out their hands toward Macedon, and 
brought Philip to interfere in the aflairs of Greece. 

5* See Polyb. iv.* 

53 Aratus was accused in the assembly, first, of having taken the 
command upon him before his time; next, of having dismissed the 
Achrcan troops, while the iEtolians were still in the heart of Pelo- 
ponnesus; thirdly, of having risked an action with so few troops, 
when lie might easily have made a safe retreat to the neighbouring 
towns and there reinforced his army. But the last and heaviest 
charge against him was, that after he had resolved to give the 
enemy battle, he did not in the whole action take a single step 
worthy of an experienced general. For he sent the cavalry and 
light-armed foot to attack the enemy's rear, after their front had 
gained the advantage ; whereas he ought to have encountered the 
front at first with the advantage of having them on the declivity, 
in which case his heavy-armed infantry would have done him great 
service. He endeavoured, however, to prove that the loss of the 
battle was not his fault ; adding, that if he had been wanting in any 
of the duties of an able general, he asked pardon, and hoped in 
regard of his past services they would not censure him with rigour. 
This submission of his changed the minds of the whole assembly, 
and the people began to vent their rage upon his accusers. (Polvh. 
ib.) 

ARATUS. 203 

They knew the regard which he had for Aratus, 
and the confidence he placed in him, and trusted 
upon that account to find him tractable and easy in 
all their affairs. But the king now first began to 
listen to Apelles, Megalaeus, and other courtiers, 
who endeavoured to darken the character of Aratus, 
and prevailed upon him to support the contrary 
party, by which means Eperatus was elected general 
of the Achagans. Eperatus, however, soon fell into 
the greatest contempt among them ; and, as Aratus 
would not give any attention to their concerns, no- 
thing went on well. Philip, finding that he had 
committed a capital error, turned again to Aratus, 
and surrendered himself entirely to his direction. 
As his affairs now prospered, and his power and re- 
putation grew under the culture of that chieftain, 
he depended entirely upon him for the farther in- 
crease of both. It was evident, indeed, to all the 
world that Aratus had excellent talents, not only 
for guiding a commonwealth, but a kingdom too. 
For there appeared a tincture of his principles and 
manners in the whole conduct of this young prince. 
Thus the moderation with which he treated the 
Spartans5' after they had offended him, his engaging 
behaviour to the Cretans by which he conciliated 
the whole island in a few days, and the glorious 
success of his expedition against the zEtolians, 
gained Philip the honour of knowing how to follow 
good counsel, and Aratus that of being able to 
give it. 

Upon this account, the courtiers envied liim still 

5-* The Spartans had killed Adimas, one of the Ephcri, and others 
of their citizens who were in the interest of Philip, and some of his 
counsellors advised him to revenge the affront with rigour. But he 
said that, as the Spartans now belonged to the Achaean league, 
they were accountable to it ; and that it ill became him to treat 
with severity his allies, when his predecessor had extended his. 
clemency to them, though enemies. (L.) See Polyb. ii. This 
historian, though he says nothing of his behaviour to the Cretans 
here alluded to, gives the particulars of his expedition against the 
ijS.tolians in detail, in his fourth and fifth books.* 

S04 ARATUS. 

more ; and as they found that their private engines 
of calumny availed nothing, they began to try open 
battery, reviling and insulting him at table with the 
utmost effrontery, and the lowest abuse. Nay, once 
they threw stones at him, as he was retiring from 
supper to his tent. Philip, incensed at this outrage, 
fined them twenty talents, and upon their proceed- 
ing to disturb and embroil his affairs, put them to 
death. 

But afterward he was carried so high by the flow 
of prosperity, as to discover many disorderly pas- 
sions. The native badness of his disposition broke 
through the veil, which he had thrown over it, and 
by degrees his real character appeared. In the first 
place, he deeply injured young Aratus by corrupt- 
ing his wife ; and this commerce was a long time 
kept secret, because he lived beneath his roof, where 
he had been received under the sanction of hospita- 
lity ". He next discovered a strong dislike to com- 
monwealths, and to the cities that were under that 
form of government. It was easy to be seen, like- 
wise, that he sought to shake off Aratus. The first 
suspicion of his intentions arose from his beha- 
viour with respect to the Messenians. There were 
two factions among them, which had raised a sedi- 
tion in the city. Aratus went to reconcile them; 
but Philip, getting to the place a day before him, 
added stings to their mutual hostility. On the one 
hand, he assembled the magistrates in private, and 
asked them, " Whether they had not laws to restrain 
" the rabble ?" and on the other, he asked the de- 
magogues, " Whether they had not hands to defend 
" them against tyrants ?" The magistrates, thus 
encouraged, attacked the popular leaders; and they 
in their turn availing themselves of the advantage of 
superior numbers, murthered the magistrates, with 
nearly two hundred more of their party. 

After Philip had engaged in these detestable 

5J For the particulars of this transaction, and Philip's general 
€>.nnge of conduct, see Livy, xxvii. 31., and Polyb. iv.» 

ARATUS. 205 

practices, which exasperated the Messenians still 
more against each other, Aratus upon his arrival 
made no secret of his resentment, neither did he 
check his son in the severe and disparaging things 
which he said to Philip. The young man had 
once had a particular attachment to Philip, which 
in those days they distinguished by the name of 
love ; but upon this occasion he scrupled not to 
tell him, " That after such a base action, instead 
" of appearing agreeable, he was the ugliest of 
" mankind." 

Philip made no answer, though anger was evi- 
dently working in his bosom, and he often muttered 
to himself while the other was speaking. He pre- 
tended, however, to bear it with the utmost calm- 
ness, and affecting to appear the man of subdued 
temper and refined manners gave the elder Aratus 
his hand, and took him from the theatre to the cas- 
tle of Ithome *, under pretence of sacrificing to 
Jupiter and visiting the place. This fort (which is 
as strong as the citadel of Corinth), were it garri- 
soned, would extremely annoy the neighbouring 
country, and be almost impregnable. After Philip 
had offered his sacrifice there, and the soothsayer 
had brought him the entrails of the ox, he took them 
in both hands, and showed them to Aratus and De- 
metrius of Phariae, turning them sometimes to one 
and sometimes to the other, and asking them, 
<<r What they saw in the entrails of the victim ; whe- 
" ther thev warned him to retain this citadel, or to 
" restore it to the Messenians?" Demetrius smiled 
and said, " If you have the soul of a soothsayer, you 
" will restore it57; but, if that of a king, you will 

-'6 In the printed text it is ' Ithomata,' which agrees with the 
appellation given to this tort by Polybius ; but one of the MSS. 
has ' Ithome,' which is it's name in Strabo. It was a city in 
Messenia. For an account of the subjoined conversation, see 
Polyb. vii, 

J7 Meaning perhaps, * he determined, whether to restore it or 
not, by the principles of divination.'* 

a 

20S AH ATI'S. 

" hold the bull by both his horns." By which hfe 

hinted, that he would keep Peloponnesus in entire 

subjection, if he added Ithome to the citadel of 

Corinth. Aratus remained for a long time silent ; 

but upon Philip's pressing him to declare his opinion, 

he said, " There are many mountains of great 

strength in Crete, many castles in lofty situations 

in Bceotia and Phocis, and many impregnable 

places in Acarnania, both on the coast and within 

" land. You have seized none of these, and yet 

" they all pay you a voluntary obedience. Robbers, 

" indeed, cling to rocks and precipices for security ; 

" but for a king, there is no such fortress as honour 

" and humanity. These are the things which have 

opened to you the Cretan sea, these have unbarred 

to you the gates of Peloponnesus. By these, in 

short, it is that at so early a period in life you 

" are become general of the one, and sovereign of 

" the other." While he was yet speaking, Philip 

returned the entrails to the soothsayer ; and taking 

Aratus by the hand drew him along and said, " Come 

" on then, let us go as we came:" intimating that 

he had over-ruled him, and deprived him of such an 

acquisition as that city would have proved. 

After this Aratus began to withdraw from court, 
and gradually to give up all correspondence with 
Philip. He refused also to accompany him in his 
expedition into Epirus, though applied to for that 
purpose ; choosing to stay at home, lest he should 
share in the disrepute of his actions. But when 
Philip had lost his fleet with the utmost disgrace 
in the Roman war, and nothing succeeded to his 
wish, he returned to Peloponnesus, and tried once 
more what art could effect to impose upon the 
Messenians. Finding however that his designs were 
discovered, he had recourse to open hostilities, and 
ravaged their country. Aratus then saw all his 
meanness, and broke with him entirely. By this 
time, likewise, he had learned that he had disho- 
noured his son's bed ; but though the injury lay 
12 

AllATUS. 807 

heavy on hira, he concealed it from his son, because 
he could only inform him that he had been ill-used, 
without being able to help him to the means of 
revenge. There seemed to be a great and unna- 
tural change in Philip, who from a mild and sober 
young Prince had become a libidinous and cruel 
tyrant: but in fact, it was not a change of disposi- 
tion ; it was only discovering in a time of full secu- 
rity the vices, which his fears had long concealed. 
That his regard for Aratus had originally a consider- 
able mixture of fear and reverence, appeared even 
from the method, which he took to destroy him. 
For though he was very desirous of effecting that 
cruel purpose, because he neither looked upon him- 
self as an absolute prince, or a king, or even a free- 
man, so long as Aratus lived ; yet he would not 
attempt any thing against him in the way of open 
force, but desired Taurion, one of his friends and 
generals, to take him off in a private manner in his 
absence. At the same time, lie recommended 
poison. That officer accordingly, having formed an 
acquaintance with him, gave him a dose not of a 
sharp or violent kind, but such a one as causes lin- 
gering heats and a deep cough, and gradually brings 
the body to decav. Aratus was not ignorant of the 
cause of his disorder ; but, knowing that it availed 
nothing to discover it to the world, he bore it quietly 
and in silence, as if it had been an ordinary disten per. 
When one of his friends, indeed, came to visit him 
in his chamber, and expressed his surprise at seeing 
him spit blood, he said ; " Such, Cephalon, are the 
" fruits of royal friendship SV 

Thus died Aratus at iEgium 59, after he had been- 
seventeen times general of the Achseans. That 
people were desirous of having him buried there, 

58 Juvenal knew the iniscrcc magnceque pallor amicitite, iv. 75. 
And David appears to have formed nearly a similar estimate of the 
stability of princely regard. Ps. cxlvi. 2.* 

Si> B. C. 213, and, according to Blair, JEt. 62.; but Ricard 
says, only 58.* 

208 ARATUS. 

and would have deemed it an honour to give him a 
magnificent funeral, and a monument worthy of his 
life and character. But the Sicyonians considered 
it as a misfortune to have him interred any where 
hut among themselves, and therefore persuaded the 
Achaeans to indulge them with the disposal of the 
body. As there was an ancient law that had been 
observed with religious care, against burying any 
person within their walls, and they were afraid to 
transgress it upon this occasion, they sent to Delphi 
to inquire of the priestess of Apollo, and received 
from her this answer ; 

What holy rites for liberty restored 
Sicyon shall pay to her departed lord, 
She asks ; who grudges him n resting-place, 
Of earth, and skies, and seas is the disgrace. 

This oracle gave great joy to all the Achaeans, par- 
ticularly to the people of Sicyon. They changed 
the dav of mourning into a festival, and adorning 
themselves with garlands and white robes, brought 
the corpse with songs and dances from yEgium to 
Sicyon. There they selected the most conspicuous 
ground, and interred him as the founder and deli- 
verer of their city. The place is still called Aratium, 
and there they offer two yearly sacrifices ; one on 
the fifth of the month Da?sius (which the Athenians 
called Anthesterion), the day upon which he deli- 
vered the citv from the voke of tyrants, whence thev 
denominate the festival Soteria, and the other on his 
birth-dav. The first sacrifice was offered by the 
priest of Jupiter the Preserver, and the second by 
the son of Aratus, who upon that occasion wore a 
girdle00, not entirely white, but with a stripe of 
purple in the midst. The music was sung to the 
harp by the choir, belonging to the theatre. The 
procession was led up by the master of the Gymna- 
sium, at the head of the bovs and young' men : the 

bo v 

Zr;cd>icv signifies also ' a fillet.' 

AilAim 2oi< 

senate followed crowned with flowers, and such other 
of the citizens as chose to attend. Some small 
marks of the ceremonies observed upon those days 
still remain, but the chief part is worn out by time 
and other circumstances. 

Such was the life and character, that history has 
given us of the elder Aratus. And as to the 
younger, Philip, who was naturally wicked and 
delighted to add insolence to cruelty, gave him 
potions, not of the deadly kind, but such as deprived 
him of reason ; insomuch that he was led to feel 
inclinations shocking and monstrous, and to delight 
in things which not only dishonoured but destroyed 
him. Death therefore, which took him off in the 
flower of his age, was considered, not as a misfortune, 
but a deliverance. The vengeance however of 
Jupiter, the patron of hospitality and friendship, 
visited Philip for his breach of both, and pursued 
him throughout life. For he was beaten by the 
Romans, and forced to yield himself to their dis- 
cretion. In consequence of which he was stripped 
of all his acquisitions, surrendered the whole of his 
ships except five, obliged himself to pay a thousand 
talents, and delivered his son as a hostage. He even 
held Macedon, and it's dependencies, at the mercy 
of the conquerors. Amidst all the>e misfortunes he 
possessed only one blessing, a son of superior virtue, 
and him he put to death, from his envy and jealousy 
of the honours which the Romans paid him. His 
crown he left to his other son Perseus, who was 
believed not to be his, but a supposititious child 
born of a sempstress named Gnathsenium. It was 
over him, that Paulus iEmilius triumphed, and in 
him ended the royal race of Antigonus 61 ; whereas 
the posterity of Aratus remained to our days, and 
still continues in Sicyon and Pellene. 

61 ®&e the Life of Demetrius, V note (67-)* 

VOL. VI, 

thi: 

LIFE 

OF 

G A L B A. 

SUMMARY 

Danger of undisciplined troops. Changes among the Romans after 
the death of Nero. Birth and outset of G alba ; his behaxiour t.- 
the government of Spain. He places himself at the head of 77 
dex's revolted troops : how Nero receives the news. Gclba repents, 
of the measure : learns that the people and senate, have declared 
him emperor. Great influence of Nymphidius Sabimts at Rqme* 
He aspires secretly to the supreme power. Virginius Rufus ac- 
knowledges Galba, who receives an embassy from the senate. Cha- 
racter of Titus Vinius. Nymphidius jealous of his interest with 
Galba ; attempts to supplant tlie nctv emperor. Anionics Honn- 
ratus secures the prcelorian cohort to Galba. Nymphidms is slain. 
Tyrannical acts of Galba. Insolence of the legion of seamen : 
Galba orders the cavalry to fall upon them ; compels the stage- 

' players, fyc. to refund Nero's bounties. Vinius leads him into 
this sordid conduct. General, hatred of Galba. He resolves to 
adopt a successor. Olho. How he insinuates himself into Gal ha' s 
good graces. Vinius recommends his adoption. The' Genre: 
army proclaim Vitellius emperor. Galba goes to the camp to de- 
clare Piso his successor. Otho intrigues with the army at Romet 
and is proclaimed emperor. A report of his death. Galba is slain, 
Otho declared emperor by the senate. Character of Galba. 

GALBx\. 211 

IPHICRATES, the Athenian general, thought 
that a soldier of fortune should have an attachment 
both to money J and pleasure, that his passions might 
induce him to fight with more boldness for a supply* 
But most others are of opinion that the main body 
of an army, like the healthy natural body, should 
have no motion of it's own, but be entirely guided 
by the head. Hence Paulus yEmilius, when he 
found his army in Macedon talkative, busy, and 
ready to direct their general, is said to have issued 
orders ; " That each should keep his hand fit for 
" action, and his sword sharp, and leave the rest to 
" him." And Plato perceiving that the best gene- 
ral cannot undertake any thing with success, unless 
his troops be sober and perfectly united to support 
him, concluded that to know how to obey required 
as generous a disposition, and as rational an educa- 
tion, as to know how to command : as these advan- 
tages would correct the violence and impetuosity of 
the soldier by the mildness and humanity of the 
philosopher. Among other fatal examples, what 
happened among the Romans after the death of Nero 
is sufficient to prove, that nothing is more dreadful 
than an undisciplined army actuated only by the 
impulse of their own ferocity. Demades, observing 
the wild and violent motions of the Macedonian army 
after the death of Alexander, compared it to the Cy- 
clops -, after his eye was put out. But the Roman 
empire more resembled the extravagant passions 
and ravings of the Titans, as related by the poets, 
when it was torn in pieces by rebellion, and turned 
it's arms against itself; not so much through the 
ambition of the emperors, as the avarice and licen- 
tiousness of the soldiers, who drove out emperors 
like nails one by another. 

1 This is illustrated by Lucullus* soldier, ia Horace? 

ibit eo, qui zonam perdidit, inquit. (Ep. II. ii. 40*) ' 

1 Polyphemus. 

P 2 

212 GALEA. 

Dionysius the Sicilian speaking of a tyrant of 
Pherae, who reigned in Thessaly only ten months, 
and was then slain, in derision of the sudden change 
called him a c theatrical tyrant/ But the palace of 
the Caesars received four emperors in a less space of 
time, one entering and another making his exit, as 
if they had only been acting a part upon a stage. 
The Romans indeed had one consolation amidst 
their misfortunes, that they needed no other revenue 
upon the authors of them, than to see them destroy 
each other : and with the greatest justice those fell 
the first, who had corrupted the army, and taught 
them to expect so much upon the change of em- 
peror ; thus dishonouring a glorious action by mer- 
cenary considerations, and turning the revolt from 
Nero into treason. For Nymphidius Sabinus (who, 
as we observed before ', was joined in commission 
with Tigellinus, as captain of the praetorian cohorts) 
after Nero's affairs had become desperate, and it was 
plain that he intended to retire into Egypt, per- 
suaded the army, as if Nero had already abdicated, 
to declare Galba emperor ; promising every soldier 
of the praetorian cohorts seven thousand five hundred 
drachmas, and the troops quartered in the provinces 
twelve hundred and fifty drachmas a man ; a sum. 
which it was impossible to collect, without doing 
infinitely more mischief to the empire than Nero had 
done in his whole reign. 

This proved the immediate ruin of Nero, and 
soon afterward destroyed Galba himself. The sol- 
diers deserted Nero in hopes of receiving the money, 
and despatched Galba because they did not receive 
it. They subsequently sought for another, who 
might pay them that sum ; but they ruined them- 
selves by their rebellions and treasons, without gain? 
ing what they had been taught to expect. To give 
a complete and exact account of the aflairs of those 

3 In the Life of Nero, which is lost. It is supposed, that Plu- 
'arch had written the Lives of the Twelve Calais.* 

GALBA. 2U 

times, belongs to the professed historian. It falls, 
however, within my province to lay before the 
reader the most remarkable circumstances in the 
lives of the Caesars. 

It is an acknowledged truth, that Sulpitius Galba 
was the richest private man, who ever rose to the 
imperial dignity. But though his extraction was of 
the noblest, from the family of the JServii, he yet 
thought it a greater honour to be related 4 to Quin- 
tus Catulus Capitolinus, who was the first man in 
his time for virtue and reputation, though he volun- 
tarily ceded to others the pre-eminence in power. 
He was also related to Livia 5 the wife of Augustus, 
and by her interest had been raised from the office 
which he held in the palace, to the dignity of consul. 
It is said, that he acquitted himself of his commission 
in Germany with honour ; and that he gained more 
credit than most commanders, during his procon- 
sulate in Africa b. But his simple parsimonious way 
of living passed for avarice in an emperor ; and the 
pride, which he then took in economy and strict tem- 
perance, was afterward out of character. 

He was sent governor into Spain by Nero, before 
that emperor had learned to fear such of the citizens, 
as had great authority in Rome. Besides, the mild- 
ness of his temper and his advanced time of life 
promised a cautious and prudent conduct. The 
emperor's receivers-general 7, an abandoned set of 
men, harassed the provinces in the most cruel man- 
ner. Galba could not assist them against their per- 
secutors j but his concern for their misfortunes, 

« See Suet. Galb. 2.* 

5 In consequence of his attention to her, she bequeathed hinj 
an immense legacy, which however Tiberius very considerably 
reduced, and, so reduced, never paid. (Id. ib. 5.)* 

6 This lasted two years, and that amidst domestic and foreign 
tumults, which he happily composed. (Id. ib. 7.)* 

7 Ez-irfozroi, procuralores ; These men had full powers to collect 
the revenues, and stuck at no acts of oppression in the course of 
their proceedings. They were originally appointed by Augustus. 
(Dion. Cass. bii. 15 ) 

214 GALBA. 

which appeared not less than if he had been a suf- 
ferer himself, afforded them some consolation, even 
while they were condemned and sold for slaves. 
Many songs were made upon Nero, and sung every- 
where ; and as Galba did not endeavour to suppress 
them, or join the receivers-general in their resent- 
ment, this circumstance endeared him still more to 
the natives. For he had now contracted a friend- 
ship with them, having long been their governor. 
He had borne that commission eight years, when 
Junius Vindex, who commanded in Gaul, revolted 
against Nero. Galba, it is said, before this rebellion 
broke out, had intimations of it in letters from Vin- 
dex ; hut he neither countenanced nor discovered 
it, as the governors of other provinces did, who sent 
the letters they had received to Nero, and thus did 
all they could to ruin the project. Yet those same 
governors, by subsequently joining in the conspiracy 
against their prince, evinced that they could betray, 
not onlv Vindex but themselves. 

After Vindex however had openly commenced 
hostilities, he wrote to Galba, desiring him " To 
accept the imperial dignity, and give a head to 
the strong Gallic body which so much wanted 
one ; which had not fewer than a hundred thousand 
men in arms, and was able to raise a still greater 
number." 

Galba then called a council of his friends. Some 
of them advised him to wait, and observe what mo- 
tions, or inclinations for a change, there might be in 
Rome. But Titus Vinius, captain of one of the 
praetorian cohorts, said ; " What room is there, 
" Galba, for deliberation ? To inquire^ whether we 
" shall continue faithful to Nero, is to have already 
<£ revoked ?, There is no medium, We must either 
" accept the friendship of Vindex, as if Nero was 
<c our declared enemy ; or accuse and fight Vindex, 
" because he desires that the Ilomans should have 

8 Qui dehberant, desciverunt. (Tac. Hist. ii. 77-)* 

GALBA. 215 

* Galba for their emperor, rather than Nero for 
*£ their tyrant.'' Upon this Galba, by an edict, fixed 
a day for enfranchising all that should present them- 
selves. The report of this quickly drew together a 
multitude of people, who were desirous of a change; 
and he had no sooner mounted the tribunal, than 
with one voice they declared him emperor. Without 
immediately accepting the title, he accused Nero of 
great crimes, and lamented the fate of many Romans 
of distinction whom he had barbarously slain : after 
which he declared, " That he would serve his 
" country with his best abilities, not as Csesar or 
" emperor, but as lieutenant to the senate and peo- 
" pie of Rome V 

That it was a just and rational scheme, which 
Yindex adopted in calling Galba to the empire, 
requires no better proof than Nero himself. For 
though he pretended to look upon the commotions 
in Gaul as nothing, yet when he received the news 
of Galba's revolt, which he happened to do just 
after he had bathed and sat down to supper, in his 
madness he overturned the table. When the senate, 
however, had declared Galba an enemy to his coun- 
try, he affected to despise the danger, and attempt- 
ing to be merry upon it said to his friends ; " I have 
" long wanted a pretence to raise money, and this 
" will furnish me with an excellent one. The Gauls, 

when I have conquered them, will be a fine booty, 

and in the mean time I will take possession of 
" Galba's estate, since he is a declared enemy, and 
<' dispose of it as I think fit." Accordingly, he 
issued directions that it should be sold ; which 
Galba no sooner heard, than he exposed to sale 
all that belonged to Nero in Spain, and more readily 
found purchasers; 

The revolt from Nero soon became general, and 

9 Dion Cassius informs us, that this declaration was made nine 
months and thirteen days before Galba's death, and consequently 
on the third of April, A. D. 68 : for he was assassinated on the 
fifteenth of January in the following year. 

u 

it. 

216 GALBA. 

the governors of provinces declared for Galba; only 
Clodius Macer in Africa, and Virginius Rufus in 
Germany, stood out and acted for themselves, but 
upon different motives. Clodius being conscious to 
himself of much rapine and many murthers, to which 
his avarice and cruelty had prompted him, was in a 
fluctuating state, and could not resolve either to 
assume or reject the purple : and Virginius, who 
commanded some of the best legions in the empire, 
and had been often urged by them to take the title 
of emperor, declared ; " That he would neither take 
" it himself, nor suffer it to be taken by any other, 
" but the person whom the senate should name." 

At this Galba was, at first, not a little alarmed. 
But after the forces of Virginius and Vindex had 
overpowered their generals, like charioteers no 
longer able to guide the reins, and forced them to 
fight, Vindex lost twenty thousand Gauls in the 
"battle, and despatched himself A report was then 
current that the victorious army, in consequence of 
so signal an advantage, would insist upon Virginius' 
acceptance of the imperial dignity, and that if he 
refused it, they would turn again to Nero. This 
threw Galba into great consternation, and he wrote 
letters to Virginius, exhorting him to act In concert 
with him for preserving the empire and liberty of 
the Romans. After which he retired with his friends 
to Colouia10, a city in Spain, and there spent some 
time; rather in repenting of what he had done, and 
wishing for the life of ease and leisure to which he 
had so long been accustomed, than taking any of 
the necessary steps for his success. 

It was now the beginning of summer, when one 
evening a little before night one of Gal ba?s freed* 
men, a native of Sicily11, arrived in seven days from 
Rome. Being told that Galba was retired "to rest, 

IO Some read Clunia, a city of Hispam'a Tarraconensis. See 
Flin. H. N. iii. S.* 

^ " Instead of 2**s/!flc, should be read IkiXcc, Icelus, after Suet 
Ner. 49. and Galb. 14,, as well as from it's recurrence belpw.*. 

GALEA. 911 

he ran up to his chamber, and having opened it in 
spite of the resistance of the chamberlains, informed 
him ; " That as Nero did not appear, though he was 
" at that time living, the army first and subsequently 
tc the people and senate of Rome had declared Galba 
i( emperor, and that intelligence was quickly brought 
" of Nero's death." To this he added, "That not 
" satisfied with the report, lie went and saw the 
" dead body of the tyrant, before he set out." Galba, 
highly elevated by this intelligence, encouraged the 
multitudes who quickly gathered round the door by 
communicating it to them, though the expedition 
with which it had been conveyed appeared incredi- 
ble. But two days afterward Titus Vinius, with 
many others, arrived from the camp, and brought 
a confirmation of the account. Vinius12 was pro- 
moted to an honourable employment ; while the 
freedman had his name changed from Icelusto Mar- 
tianus, was honoured with the privilege of wearing 
the gold ring, and had more attention paid to him 
than anv of the rest of the freedmen. 

In the mean time, at Home Nymphidius Sabinus 
got the administration into his hands, not by slow 
and insensible steps, but with the utmost celerity. 
He knew that Galba from his advanced age, being 
now seventy-three, was scarcely able to support the 
journey thither, though carried in a litter. Besides, 
the forces there had long been inclined to serve him; 
and now they depended upon him alone, considering 
him as their benefactor on account of the large 
gratuity which he had promised them, and Galba as 
their debtor. He, therefore, immediately command- 
ed his collegue Tigellinus13 to surrender his sword; 
and gave great entertainments, at which he received 

12 Vinius was of a praetorian family, and had behaved with honour 
as coventor of Gallia Narbonensis; but when he became the fa- 
vourite and first minister of the emperor of Heme, he soon made 
his master obnoxious to the people, and ruined himself. The truth 

e„ lie was naturally of a bad disposition, and a man of no principles. 
Uefell soon after 'his master. (Tac. Hist. i. 28. 31.) 

13 For an account of the ignominious death of this infamous fel- 
" 'v, see Tac. (Hist. i. 72.)- 

2i» GALBA. 

persons of consular dignity, and such as had com- 
manded armies and provinces, issuing his invitations 
however in the name of Galba. He likewise in- 
structed many of the soldiers to suggest it to the 
praetorian cohorts, that they should send a message 
to Galba, demanding that Nymphiditis should con- 
tinue their captain and without a collegue. The 
readiness, which the senate displayed to add to his 
honour and authority by calling him their ' bene- 
factor,' by going daily to pav their respects at his 
gate, and desiring that he would take upon him to 
propose and Confirm every decree, raised him to a 
much higher pitch of insolence ; so that in a little 
time he became not only obnoxious, but formidable, 
to the very persons who paid their court to him. 
When the consuls had charged the public messengers 
with the decrees to be carried to the emperor, and 
had sealed the instruments with their seal, in order 
that the magistrates of the towns through which they 
were to pass, seeing their authority, might furnish 
them at each stage with carriages for the greater 
expedition, he was offended that they had not made 
use of his seal, and employed his men to carry the 
despatches. He even had it under consideration, it 
is said, whether he should not punish the consuls ; 
but, upon their apologising and begging pardon for 
the affront, he wras appeased. To ingratiate himself 
with the people, he did not prevent them from des- 
patching by torture such of Nero's creatures as fell 
into their hands. A gladiator, named Spicillus, was 
put under the statues of Nero, and dragged about 
with them in the Forum till he died. Aponius, one 
of the informers, was extended upon the ground, 
and waggons loaded with stones were driven over 
him : many others they tore in pieces, and among 
these some that were entirely innocent. So that 
Mauriscus, who not only had the character of one 
of the best men in Rome, but really deserved it, 
said one day to the senate, " He was afraid they 
" would soon regret the loss of Nero." 

Nymphiditis, thus advancing in his hopes, was not 

0 

GALBA. 219 

at all displeased at being called the son of Cains 
Caesar u, who reigned after Tiberius. That prince 
in his youth, it seems, had had some commerce with 
his mother, who was tiie daughter of Calistus one of 
Caesar's freedmen by a sempstress, and who was not 
deficient in personal charms. The connexion, how- 
ever, which Caius had with her, was undoubtedly 
after the birth of Nymphidius ;' and it was believed 
that he was the son of Martianus the gladiator, 
whom Nymphidia fell in love with on account of his 
professional reputation : besides, his resemblance to 
the gladiator gave a sanction to that opinion. Be 
that as it may, he acknowledged himself the son of 
Nymphidia, and yet insisted that he was the only 
person who deposed Nero. Not content with the 
honours and emoluments which he enjoyed upon 
that account, and with Sporus, whom he took from 
the funeral pile while Nero's corpse was still burn- 
ing, and called £ Poppasa15 ;' he aspired to the im- 
perial seat, and had his engines privately at work in 
Home, in which he employed his friends, with some 
intriguing women and some men of consular rank. 
He sent also Gellianus, one of his friends, into 
Spain, to act as a spy upon Galba. 

After the death of Nero, all things went for Galba 
according to his wish ; the uncertainty alone, as to 
what part VirginiusRufus would act, gave him a little 
uneasiness. Virginius commanded a powerful army, 
which had already conquered Vindex, and he held 
in subjection a very considerable part of the Roman 
empire ; for he was master not only of Germany, 
but of Gaul, which was in great agitation and ripe 
for a revolt. Galba, therefore, was apprehensive 
that he would listen to those who offered him the 
imperial purple. There was not indeed an officer of 
higher name or reputation than Virginius, nor one 
who had more weight in the affairs of those times ; 

14 Caligula, who succeeded Tiberius, B. C. 37, and was slain 
B.C. 41.* 

J> See Suet. Nero, 28., and Dion. Cass. lxii. 27, 28.* 

220 GALEA. 

for he had delivered the empire botli from tyranny, 
and from a Gallic war. He remained true, however, 
to his first resolution, and reserved the appointment 
of emperor for the senate. After Nero's death was 
certainly know;}, the troops again pressed hard upon 
Yirginius, and one of the tribunes drew his sword in 
the pavilion, and bade him receive either sovereign 
power or the steel ; but the menace produced no 
effect- At last after Fabius Yalens, who commanded 
one legion, had taken the oath of fidelity to Galba, 
and letters arrived from Rome with an account of 
the senate's decree, he persuaded his army, though 
with extreme difficulty, to acknowledge him. The 
new emperor having sent Flaccus Hordeonius as his 
successor, he admitted him in that quality, and deli- 
vered up to him his forces. lie then went to meet 
Galba, who was on his journey to Rome, and at- 
tended him thither, without receiving any marks 
either of his kindness or of his resentment. The 
reason of this was that Galba, on the one hand, re- 
garded him in too respectable a light to offer him 
any injury ; and, on the other, the emperor's friends 
(particularly Titus Vinius) were jealous of the pro- 
gress, which he might make in his favour. But that 
officer was not aware that, while he was thus pre- 
venting his promotion, he was co-operating with his 
good genius, in withdrawing him from the wars and 
calamities in which other generals were engaged, 
and procuring him a life of tranquillity full of days 
and peace. 

The embassadors, whom the senate sent to Galba, 
met him at Narbon, a city of Gaul. There they 
paid the|f compliments, and advised him to show 
himself as soon as possible to the people of Rome, 
who were very desirous to see him. He gave them 
a kind reception, and entertained them in an agree- 
able manner. But though Nymphidius had sent him 
rich vessels, and other furniture suitable to a great 
prince, which he had taken out of Nero's palace, he 
made iiq use of any part of it ; every thing was served 

GALBA. &t 

lip in dislies of his own. This was a circumstance, 
which did him considerable honour, as it proved him 
to be a man of superior sentiments, and entirely 
above vanity. Titus Yinius, however, soon endea- 
voured to convince him that these loftv sentiments, 
this modesty and simplicity of manners, betrayed an 
ambition for popular applause, which real greatness 
of mind disdains10. By this argument he prevailed 
upon him to use Nero's riches, and display all the 
imperial magnificence at his entertainments ; and 
thus the old man allowed it to appear, that in time 
lie would be entirely governed by Vinius. 

No one had a stronger passion for money than 
Vinius, neither was any man more addicted to 
women. While he was yet xcry young, and mak- 
ing his first campaign under Calvisius Sabinus, he 
brought his general's wife (an abandoned prostitute) 
one night into the camp in a soldier's habit, and lay 
with her in that part of it which the Romans call the 
Principia lT. For this, Caius Caesar put him in prison ; 
but, upon that prince's death, he was released. 
Afterward, happening to sup with Claudius Cassar, 
he stole a silver cup. The emperor, being informed 
of it, invited him the following evening, but ordered 
the attendants to serve him with only earthen ves- 
sels. This moderation of the emperor seemed to 
show that the theft was deserving of ridicule, rather 
than of serious resentment : but his subsequent 
conduct, when he had Galba and his revenues at 
command, served partly as the cause, and partly as 
the pretence for many events of the most tragical 
kind. 

16 In the text »*» KSjKrtJ'srijra umyocXr,', axoZfturoii etvrn*. As it is 
difficult to make sense of this, Du Soul ingeniously proposes to read 
xmi AK-OM-^OTHTA METAAGN gura^narxn olvtw, ' and a rusticity, which 
thinks itself unworthy of any tiling great.' The text, throughout 
this Life, is extremely corrupt. 

" A consecrated place, where the principal standards were fixed, 
the altars of the gods and the images of the emperors stood, and all 
military husicess was transacted. Tacitus, in relating this story 
(Mist. i. 48.), does not mention Vinius' name.* 

M2 GALBA. 

Nymphidias on the return of Gelliarms, whom lie 
had sent as a spy upon Galba, was informed that 
Cornelius Laco was appointed to the command of 
the guards and of the palace, and that the whole 
power would be placed in Vinius' hands. This dis- 
tressed him exceedingly, as he had no opportunity of 
attending the emperor, or of speaking to him in 
private ; for his intentions were suspected, and all 
were upon their guard. In this perplexity he as- 
sembled the oliicers of the praetorian cohorts, and 
told them that, " Galba was indeed an old man of 
mild and moderate sentiments ; but that, instead 
of using his own judgement, he was directed en- 
tirely by Vinius and Laco, who made a bad use 
of their influence. It is our business therefore," 
continued he, " before they insensibly establish 
*' themselves, and become sole masters asTigellinus 
" was, to send embassadors to the emperor in the 
" name of all the troops, and represent to him, that 
" if he removes those two counsellors from his per- 
" son, he will find a much more agreeable reception 
" among the Romans." Perceiving hoviever that 
his officers did not relish the proposal, but thought 
it absurd and preposterous to dictate the choice of 
friends to an emperor of his age, as they might have 
done to a boy on his first accession to power, he 
adopted another scheme. With the hope of intimi- 
dating Galba, he pretended sometimes in his letters, 
that there were discontents and dangers of an insur- 
rection in Rome, sometimes that Clodius Macer had 
laid an embargo in Africa upon the corn-ships. At 
one moment he said, the German legions were in 
motion ; and at another, that the same rebellious 
disposition existed among those in Syria and Judaea. 
But as Galba did not give much attention or credit 
to his advices, he resolved to usurp the imperial title- 
himself, before he arrived : though Clodius Celsus 
the Antiochian, a sensible man and one of his best 
friends, did all be could to dissuade him from it ; and 
told him plainly, he did not believe there was a 

cc 

6c 

GALBA. 225 

single family in Rome, which would honour him 
with the title of Caasar. Many others, however, 
ridiculed Galba : and Mithridates of Pontus in par- 
ticular, making merry with his bald head and wrink- 
led face, said; " The Romans think him something 
<s extraordinary, while lm is at a distance : but, as 
" soon as he arrives, they will consider it a disgrace 
" to the times to have ever called him * Caesar.' ' 

It was resolved therefore, that Nymphidius should 
be conducted to the camp at midnight, and pro- 
claimed emperor. But Autonius Honoratus, the 
first tribune, assembled in the evening the troops 
under his command ; and after blaming both himself 
and them, for having changed so often in so short a 
time, not in pursuance of the dictates of reason or 
the exercise of a better choice, but because some 
daemon pushed them on from one treason to another, 
continued ; " The crimes of Nero indeed may jus- 
tify our first measures. But has Galba murthered 
his mother, or his wife ? Or has he made you 
ashamed of your emperor, by appearing as a fiddler 
" or an actor upon a stage ? Yet not even these 
things induced us to abandon Nero; but Nym- 
phidius first persuaded us, that he had abandoned 
us and fled into Egypt. Shall we then sacrifice 
Galba after Nero, and when we have destroyed 
the relation of Livia, as well as the son of Agrip- 
pina, place the son of Nymphidia upon the im- 
perial throne r Or rather, after having taken 
<c vengeance on a detestable tyrant in Nero, shall 
" we not show ourselves good and faithful guards to 
" Galba?" 

Upon this speech of the tribune, all his men ac- 
ceded to the proposal. They applied also to their 
fellow-soldiers, and prevailed upon most of them to 
return to their allegiance. At the same time, aloud 
shout was heard in the camp ; and Nymphidius, 
either believing (as some writers state) that the 
troops, were calling him in order to proclaim him. 

(C 

it 

it 
a 

(C 

u 
« 

i"Ji GALBA. 

emperor, or else hastening to appease the insurrec- 
tion and fix such as lie found wavering, ran with 
lights to the camp; having in his hand "a speech 
composed for him by Cingonius Varro, which he 
had committed to memory, in order to pronounce it 
to the army. But seeing the gates shut, and a 
number of men in arms upon the wall, his confidence 
abated. Advancing nearer, however, he asked 
them ; " What they intended to do, and by whose 
" command thev were under arms?" Thev answered 
unanimously, " That thev acknowledged no other 
ct emperor but Galba." Upon which, pretending 
to adopt their opinion, he applauded their fidelity, 
and ordered his attendants to follow his example. 
The guard opening the gate, and suffering him to 
enter with a i'cw of his people, a javelin was thrown 
at him, which Septi'rriius, who went before, received 
upon his shield. But others drawing their swords 
be fled, and was pursued into a soldier's hut, where 
they, despatched him. His body was dragged into 
the middle of the camp, where they enclosed it with 
pales, and exposed it to public view the next day. 

Nyinphidius being thus cut off, Galba was no 
sooner informed of it, than he ordered such of his 
accomplices, as had not already despatched them- 
selves, to be put to death. Among these was Cin- 
gonius, who composed the oration, and Mithridates 
of Pont us. In this, the emperor did not proceed 
according to the laws and customs of the Romans ; 
neither was it indeed a popular measure, to inflict 
capital punishment upon persons of eminence with- 
out any form of trial, though they had deserved 
death. For the Romans, deceived (as is usually the 
case) by first reports, now expected another kind of 
government. But what afflicted them most was, 
the order which he sent for the execution of Petro- 
nius Turpilianus, a man of consular dignity, merely 
because he had been faithful to Nero. For taking 
off Macer in Africa by Trebonianus, and Fonteius in 
12 

GALBA. 225 

Germany by Valens there was some pretence, be- 
cause they were in arms, and had forces which he 
might justly fear. But there was no reason why 
Turpilianus, a defenceless old man, should not have 
had a hearing, at least under a prince who ought to 
have preserved in his actions the moderation he so 
much affected. Such were the complaints against 
Galba upon this subject. 

When he was about five-and-twenty furlongs 
from the city, he found the way obstructed by a 
disorderly crew of seamen, who gathered about him 
on all sides. These had been formed by Nero into 
a legion, that they might act as soldiers ; and they 
now met Galba on the road to have their establish- 
ment confirmed, and pressed upon him so much* 
that he could neither be seen nor heard by those 
who came to wait upon him, clamorously insisting 
on having legionary colours and quarters assigned 
them. Galba would have put them off to another 
time ; but this they considered as a denial, and some 
of them even drew their swords; on which, he or- 
dered the cavalry to fall upon them. They made no 
resistance, but fled with the utmost precipitation, 
and many of them were killed in their flight18. It 
was considered as an inauspicious circumstance for 
Galba, to have entered the city amidst so much 
blood and slaughter. And those, who before de* 
spised him as weak and inactive through age, now 
looked upon him as an object of fear and horror. 

Besides, while he endeavoured to reform the ex- 
travagance and profusion, with which money had 
been squandered by Nero, he fell short of the mark 
of propriety. When Canus, a celebrated performer 
on the flute, played to him one evening at court, 
after expressing the highest satisfaction at the ex- 
cellence of his music, he ordered his purse to be 

18 Dio Cassius informs us (lxiv.) that seven thousand of the 
disarmed multitude were cut to pieces upon the spot, and others 
committed to prison, where they lay till Galba's death. Many, 
.however, were still left. See Suet. Galb. 12., and Tac. Hist. i. 6. 
VOL. VI. Q 

2'26 GALEA. 

brought; and taking out a few pieces of goM19, h'fc 
gave them to him, telling him at the same time, that 
* this was a gratuity out of his own, not the public 
money.' As for the money, which Nero had lavished 
upon persons who pleased him on the stage or in the 
pahestra, he rigorously insisted that it should all, 
with the exception of a tenth part, be returned. 
And as persons of such dissolute lives, who make 
only a provision for the day, could produce very 
little, he caused inquiry to be made for all that had 
bought any thing of them, or received presents, and 
obliged them to refund. This affair extending to 
great numbers of people, and seeming to have no 
end, involved the emperor in disgrace, and brought 
the public envy and hatred on Vinius ; as exhibiting 
his master sordid and mean to others, while he him- 
self pillaged the treasury in the most insatiable man- 
ner, and seized and sold whatever he thought proper. 
In short, as Hesiod says, 

Spare not the full cask, nor though lessen 'd frosr 
Declare the hottoni near, your hand withdraw20. 

80 Vinius seeing Galba old and infirm drank freely 
of the favours of fortune, as only beginning, and yet 
at the same time drawing toward an end.21. 

But the aged emperor was deeply injured by 
Vinius, not only through his neglect or misapplica- 

19 Suetonius (ih.) says, Galba pave him five denarii. But at that 
time, as some authors contend, there were denarii of gold. This 
however Gronovius, in his Treatise on the Money of the Ancients, 
denies. That writer adds (ibO, that, when his table upon any ex- 
traordinary occasion was more splendidly served than usual, he 
could not forbear sighing, and expressing his dissatisfaction in a. 
manner inconsistent with common decency. 

10 Ejsy. xttt ttfMp. 3GH. 

11 Thus, in the court of GaJba, were to be found all the extor- 
tions oi' Nero's reign. They were equally grievous, says Tacitus 
(Hist. 1. 7i), but not equally excused, in a prince of Galba's years 
and experience. He had the greatest integrity of heart; but,:'.*; 
the rapacity and other excesses of his ministers were imputed to 
him( he was not less hated, than if he had committed them himseLL 

GALBA. 227 

tion of things committed to his trust, but by his 
condemning or defeating the most salutary intentions 
of his master. This was the case, with respect to 
the punishing of Nero's ministers. Some bad ones, 
it is true, were put to death, among whom were 
Elius, Polycletus, Petinus, and Patrobius. When 
these were led through the Forum to the place of 
execution, the people expressed their joy by loud 
plaudits, and called it ' a glorious and holy proces- 
sion' : but both gods and men, they said, demanded 
the punishment of Tigellinus, who had suggested 
the very worst measures, and taught Nero all his 
tyranny. That worthy gentleman, however, had 
secured himself by great presents to Vinius, which 
were only earnests of still greater. Turpilianus* 
though obnoxious only because he had not betrayed 
or hated his master on account of his bad qualities, 
and though guilty of no remarkable crime, was not- 
withstanding put to death ; while the man who had 
made Nero unfit to live, and after he had made him 
such, deserted and betrayed him,lived and flourished: 
a proof, that there was nothing which Vinius would 
not sell, and that no monied man had reason to 
despair. For there was no sight, which the people 
of Rome so passionately coveted, as that of Tigel- 
linus carried to execution ; and in the theatre, and 
the circus, they continually demanded it ; till at last 
the emperor checked them by an edict, importing 
that Tigellinus was in a deep consumption, which 
would destroy him ere long, and that their sovereign 
entreated them not to convert his government into 
a tyranny by needless acts of severity. 

At this the people were highly displeased, but the 
miscreants only laughed at them. Tigellinus offered 
sacrifice in acknowledgement to the s*ods for his 
recovery, and provided a grand entertainment ; and 
Vinius rose from the emperor's table to go and 
carouse with him, accompanied by his daughter, 
who was a widow. Tigellinus drank to her, and 
said, " I will make this cup worth two hundred and 

Q2 

•228 (iALBA. 

" fifty thousand drachmas to you ;" at the same 
time ordering his chief mistress to take off her own 
necklace, and give it to her. This was said to be 
worth a hundred and fifty thousand more. 

From this period, the most moderate of Galba's 
proceedings were misrepresented"2. For instance, 
his lenity toward the Gauls, who had been concern- 
ed in Vindex's conspiracy, did not escape censure. 
It was believed, indeed, that they had gained a re- 
mission of tribute and the freedom of Rome, not 
from the emperor's indulgence, but from Vimus' 
venality. Hence, the people had a general dislike 
to Galba's administration. As for the soldiers, 
though they did not receive what had been promised 
them, they let it pass ; hoping that, if they had not 
that gratuity, they should certainly have as much as 
Nero had given them. But when they began to 
murmur, and their complaints were brought to 
Galba, he said (as well became a great prince) 
" That it was his custom to choose, not to buy, his 
" soldiers -J." This saying however, being report- 
ed to the troops, kindled in them the most deadly 
and irreconcileablc hatred. For it seemed to them, 
that he sought not only to deprive them of the gra- 
tuity himself, but to set a precedent for future em- 
perors. 

This disaffection which prevailed in Rome was as 
yet in some measure kept secret, partly because 
some remaining reverence for the emperor's pre- 
sence prevented the rlame of sedition from breaking 
out, and partly from want of an open occasion to 
attempt a change. But the troops which had served 
under Virginius, and were now commanded by Flac- 

11 Though the rest of Galba's conduct was not blameless, yet 
(according- to Suetonius, ib., and Zouaras) he kept the soldiers to 
their duty ; punished with the utmost severity those who, by their 
false accusations, had occasioned the death of innocent persons: 
delivered up to the vengeance of the laws such slaves, as had borne 
witness against their masters ; and recalled those who, under pre- 
tence of treason, had been exiled by his predecessor. 

*> See Suet, ib., and Tac. Hist. i. 6.* 

GALEA. 929 

cus in Germany, thinking that they had deserved 
great rewards for the battle which they had fought 
with Vindex, and finding that they received nothing, 
began to behave in an extremely refractory manner, 
and could not be appeased by their officers. Their 
general himself they utterly despised, on account as 
well of his inactivity (for he had the gout in a violent 
manner), as of his want of experience in military 
affairs. One day at some public games, when the 
tribunes and centurions according to custom made 
vows for the happiness of the emperor, the common 
soldiers murmured ; and when the officers repeated 
their good wishes, they answered, " If he is worthy." 
The legions under Tigellinus' command behaved 
with equal insolence, of which Galba's agents wrote 
him an account. He was now apprehensive that it 
was not only hitf age, but his want of children 24, 
which brought him into contempt ; and he therefore 
resolved to adopt some young man of nobic birth, 
and declare him his successor. 

Marcus Otho was of a family by no means ob- 
scure; but,,at the same time, he had been from his 
infancy more notorious for luxury and love of plea- 
sure, than most of the Roman youth. And, as Ho- 
mer often calls Paris c the husband of the beauteous 
Helen,* because he had nothing else to distinguish 
him, so Otho was noted in Rome as ' the husband of 
Poppsea/ This was the lady, whom Nero fell in 
love with, while she was wire to Crispinus 25 ; but 
retaining1 as yet some respect for his own wife, and 
some reverence for his mother, he privately employ- 
ed Otho to solicit her. For Otho's debauchery had 
recommended him to Nero as a friend and com- 
panion, and he had an agreeable way of rallying 
him upon what he called, his ' avarice and sordid 
manner of living.' 

** Suet. ib. 17.* 

15 This Roman knight was at first banished by Nero, on account 
of his wife, and subsequently put to death. (Tac. Ann. xv. 71., 
xvi. 17.)* 

tm (jAlba. 

We arc told, that one day when Nero was per- 
fuming himself with a very rich essence, lie sprinkled 
a little of it upon Otho. Otho invited the emperor 
the day following, when suddenly gold and silver 
pipes opened on all sides of the apartment, and 
poured out essences for them as plentifully as if it 
had been water. He applied to Pbppaea^ accord- 
ing to Nero's desire, and first seduced her for him 
by the flattering idea of having an emperor for her 
lover; after which, he persuaded her to leave her 
husband. But when he took her home as his own 
wife, he was less happy in possessing her, than miser- 
able in the thought of sharing her with another. 
And Poppaea is said not to have been displeased with 
this jealousy ; for it seems, she refused to admit Nero 
when Otho was absent : whether it was that she 
studied to keep Nero's appetite from cloying, or 
(according to some) did not choose to receive the 
emperor as a husband, but in her wanton way took 
more pleasure in seeing him approach her as a gal- 
lant. Otho's life, therefore, was in great danger on 
account of that marriage ; and it is* astonishing that 
the man, who could sacrifice his wife and sister for 
the sake of Poppaea, should have afterward spared 
Otho, 

But Otho had a friend in Seneca ; and it was he, 
who persuaded Nero to send him out governor of 
Lusitania, upon the borders of the ocean. Here 
Otho rendered himself agreeable to the inhabitants 
"by his lenity ; for he knew that this comnVand was 
given him only as a more honourable exile a;. Upon 
Galba's revolt, he was the first governor of a pro- 
vince who came over to him ; and he carried with 

16 Tacitus says (Ann. xiii. 45, 46.) that he wooed and won her 
for himself, and afterward by his imprudent or artful praises of her 
excited his royal master's passion.* 

27 And perhaps to prevent the publicity of Nero's intrigue with 
his wife, which would have been caused by his death. Upon this 
occasion, the following distich was made ; 

Cur Otho mentito sit, quceritis, exul honore ; 

Uxoris mcechus cceperat esse suce. (Suet. Oth. 3.) 

GALBA. 231 

liim all his gold and silver vessels to be melted down 
and coined for his use. lie likewise presented him 
with such of his servants, as knew best how to wait 
upon an emperor. He behaved to him, indeed, in 
every respect with the utmost fidelity : and it ap- 
peared, from the specimen which he gave, that there 
was no department in the government for which he 
had not talents. He accompanied him through his 
whole journey, and was many days in the same car- 
riage with him ; during all which time he lost no 
opportunity of paying his court to Yinius, either by 
assiduities or presents : and, as he always took care 
t© leave him the first place, he was secure by his 
means of having the second. Beside that there was 
nothing invidious in this station, he recommended 
himself by granting his favours and services without 
reward, and by his general politeness and affability. 
He took most pleasure in serving the officers of the 
army, and obtained governments for many of them, 
by application partly to the emperor, and partly to 
Yinius and his freedmen Lcelus and Asiaticus, who 
laad the chief influence at court. 

Whenever Galba visited him, he complimented 
the company of guards upon duty with a piece of 
gold for each man ; thus practising upon and gaining 
the soldiers, while he seemed only to be doing ho- 
nour to their master. When Galba was. deliberating 
upon the choice of a successor, Yinius proposed 
Otho. This was not a disinterested overture, for 
Otho had promised to marry Yinius' daughter, after 
Galba had adopted him, and appointed him his suc- 
cessor. But Galba always showed, that he preferred 
the good of the public to any private consideration; 
and in this case he sought, not one who might be 
most agreeable to himself, but one who promised to 
be the greatest blessing to the Romans. It can 
scarcely indeed be supposed, that he would have 
appointed Otho heir even to his private patrimony, 
when he knew how expensive and profuse he was, 
and that he was loaded with a debt of five millions 
9 

2:3* GALBA. 

of drachmas. He therefore gave Vinius a patient 
hearing, without returning him any answer, and put 
off the affair to another time. As he declared him- 
self consul however, and chose Vinius for his col- 
legue, it was supposed that he would appoint a suc- 
cessor at the beginning of the next year, and the 
«oldiers wished that Otho might be the man. 

But while Galba delayed the appointment, and 
continued deliberating, the army mutinied in Ger- 
many ab. All the troops throughout the empire 
hated Galba, because they had not received the pro- 
mised donations, but those in Germany had a par- 
ticular apology for their aversion. They alleged, 
" That Virginias llufus, their general, had been re- 
" moved with ignominy ; and that the Gauls, who 
" had fought against them, were the only people 
" rewarded : while all, who had not joined Vindex, 
" were punished ; and Galba, as if he had owed to 
" him alone the imperial diadem, honoured his me- 
" mory with sacrifices and public libations." 

Such speeches as this were common in the camp, 
when the calends of January were at hand, and 
Flaccus assembled the soldiers, to take the custom- 
ary oath of fealty to the emperor. But instead of 
that, they overturned and broke to pieces Galba's 
statues, and having taken an oath of allegiance to 
the senate and people of Home, retired to their 
tents. Their officers were now as apprehensive of 
anarchy as of rebellion, and the following speech is 
said to have been made to them upon the occasion : 
What are we doing, my fellow-soldiers ? We nei- 
ther appoint another emperor, nor keep our alle- 
giance to the present, as if we had renounced not 
" only Galba, but every other sovereign, and all 
" kinds of obedience. Hordeonius Flaccus, it is 
•' true, is no more than the shadow of Galba. Let 
" us, then, quit him. At the distance of a single 
" day's march, Vitellius commands in the lower 

2» Suet. Galb. 16. 

4i 
44 

GALBA. 233 

«« 

« 

11 

Germany, whose father was censor, and thrice 
" consul, and as it were collegue to the emperor 
Claudius : and though his poverty be a circum- 
stance, for which some people may despise him, 
it is a strong proof botli of his probity and his 
" magnanimity. Let us go and declare him em- 
peror ; and show the world that we know how to 
choose a person for that high dignity, better than 
the Spaniards and Lusitanians.,, 
Some approving, and others rejecting this motion, 
one of the standard-bearers marched off privately, 
and carried the news to Vitellius that night. He 
found him at table, giving an entertainment to his 
officers. The intelligence quickly spread through- 
out the army; and Fabius Valens, who commanded 
one of the legions, went next day at the head of a 
considerable party of horse, and saluted Vitellius 
emperor. For some days before, he had seemed to 
dread the weight of sovereign power, and totally to 
decline it ; but now being fortified with the indul- 
gences of the table ~9, to which he had sat down at 
mid-day, he went out and accepted the title of 
* Germanicus,' which the army conferred upon him, 
though he refused that of4 Caesar.' Soon afterward, 
Flaccus' troops forgot the republican oaths, which 
they had taken to the senate and people, and swore 
allegiance to Vitellius. Thus Vitellius was pro- 
claimed emperor in Germany. 

As soon as Galba was informed of the insurrection 
there, he resolved without farther delay to proceed 
to the adoption. Some of his friends, he knew, were 
for Dolabella, and a still larger number for Otho ; 
but without being guided by the judgement of either 
party, or making the least mention of his design, he 
sent suddenly for Piso, the son of Crassus and Scri- 
bonia who had been put to death by Nero, a young 

29 For instances of the various indulgences of this imperial gour- 
mand, see Suet. Vitell. 13., Tac. Hist. ii. 62.* 

334 Ci.YLBA. 

man formed by nature for every virtue, ami distin- 
guished by his modesty and sobriety of manners. 
In pursuance of his intentions, he went down with 
him to the camp, to bestow upon him the title of 
4 Caesar,' and declare him his successor. But he had 
no sooner left Ills palace, than very inauspicious pre- 
sages appeared : and in the camp, while he was de- 
livering a speech to the army, reading some parts 
and pronouncing others from memory, the many 
claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, a violent 
rain, and the darkness which covered both the camp 
and the city, plainly announced that the gods did 
not approve the adoption, and that the issue would 
be unfortunate. The countenances of the soldiers* 
likewise, were black and lowering, because even 
upon this ceremony39 there was no donation. 

As for Piso, all who were present could not but 
wonder that, so far as they could conjecture from 
his voice and look, he was in no respect disconcerted 
by so great an honour, though he did not receive it 
without sensibility IL« On the contrary, in Otho's 
countenance there appeared strong marks of resent- 
ment, and of the impatience with which he bore his 
disappointment. For his not obtaining the honour, 
to which he had been thought worthy of aspiring, 
and which he lately believed himself very near pos- 
sessing, seemed a proof of Galba's hatred and dis- 
pleasure. He was not, therefore, without appre- 
hension of what might befal him afterward ; and 
dreading Galba, execrating Piso, and full of indie:- 
nation against Vinius, he retired with this confusion 
of passions in his heart. But the Chaldeans and 
other soothsayers, whom he had always about him, 
would not suffer him entirely to relinquish his hopes, 

30 Tacitus informs us, that a little exertion of liberality would 
have gained the army, and that Galba suffered by an unseasonable 
attention to the purity of ancient times. (Hist. i. 18.) 

31 See an excellent speech, which Tacitus ascribes to Galba 
upon this occasion, (lb. 15, lb'.) 

GALBA. 23.5 

or abandon his design. In particular he relied upon 
Ptolemy3-, because he had foftnerly predicted, that 
he should not fall by the hand of Nero, but survive 
him and live to ascend the imperial throne. For,, 
as the former part of the prophecy had proved true, 
he thought he had no reason to despair of the latter. 
None however exasperated him more against Galba, 
than those who condoled with him in private, and 
pretended that he had been treated with great in- 
gratitude. Besides, there were many people that 
had flourished under Tigellinus and Nymphidius, 
and now lived in poverty and disgrace, who in order 
to recommend themselves to Otho, expressed the 
utmost indignation at his treatment, and urged him 
to revenge it. Among these were Veturius, who 
was Optio or centurion's deputy, and Barbius who 
was Tesserarius, or one of those that carry the word 
from the tribunes to the centurions 33. Onomastus 
one of Otho's freedmen joined them, and went from, 
troop to troop, corrupting some with money and 
others with promises. They were, indeed, corrupt 
enough already, and wanted only an opportunity of 
putting their designs in execution. If they had not 
been extremely disaffected, they could not have been 
prepared for a revolt in so short a space of time as 

3* See Tac. Hist i. 22. Called by Suetonius (Oth.4.) < Seleucus.'* 

33 The way of setting the nightly guard was by a tessera (or 
tally) with a particular inscription, given from one centurion to 
another throughout the army, till it came round to the tribune, by 
whom it had first been delivered. 

The text, in this place, is corrupt. Lipsius rightly observes 
that, instead of <^i' ajyysA^ and Jj'e^-Tirpw, we should read hc/s/yttev 
and Jtos-7^sjv. It will then run thus: ovt,v yap x.a.tevToc.1 d hayyO^i 
xat ^iOTrrrfim v7:y,p<<no(.c, Titevric,. But, even then, Plutarc t will not 
have given a description of the principal ofT.ces of the Optio and the 
Tesserarius. Messengers, it is true, they were ; but spies only oc- 
casionally. It is necessary however to translate the text thus 
amended, at least in a note; ' So they are called, who perform the 
offices of messengers and spies.' (L.) 

The two soldiers in question were introduced by Onomastus to 
Otho, whence Tacitus (ib. 25.) observes, Suscepereduomanipulares 
impcrium popidi Romani t ransfaendum, el traHstidenmt.* 

fS6 GALBA. 

that of four days, which was the whole interval he- 
tween the adoption and the assassination ; for Piso 
and Galba were both slain on the sixth day follow- 
ing, which was the. fifteenth of January. Early in 
the morning Galba, in the presence of his friends, 
sacrificed in the palace. Umbricius the soothsayer 
do sooner took the entrails in his hands, than he 
declared, not in enigmatical expressions but plainly, 
that there were signs of considerable troubles, and 
of treason threatening immediate danger to the em- 
perordl. Thus Otho was delivered up to Galba 
almost, as it were, by the hand of the gods ; for he 
stood behind the emperor, listening with the utmost 
attention to Umbricius' observations. These threw 
him into great confusion, and his fears were evinced 
by his change of colour ; when his freed man Ono- 
mastus came, and told him that the architects were 
arrived, and waited for him at his house. This was 
the signal for Otho's meeting the soldiers. He pre- 
tended therefore that he had bought an old house, 
which these architects were to examine, and passing 
by what is called ' Tiberius' palace ' proceeded to 
that part of the Forum, where stands the gilded pillar 
terminating all the great roads in Italy 35. 

The soldiers who received him, and saluted him 
emperor, are said to have been not more than twenty* 
three. So that, though he had nothing of the das- 
tardly spirit which the delicacy of his constitution 
and the effeminacv of his life seemed to declare, but 

* *■' ' 

on the contrary was firm and resolute in time of 
danger, yet upon this occasion he was intimidated 
and wished to retire ; but they would not suffer it. 

'4 Adding, according to Suet. (Galb. 19), Nan lotige percussorcs 
abexse, ' That his murtherers were at no great distance.'* 

35 This pillar was set up by Augustus, when lie took the high- 
ways under his inspection, and had the distances of places from 
Rome marked upon it. (L.) See I'lin. H. N. iii. 5., and Dion. Cass, 
liv. S. See also Brotier in Tae. Hist. i. 21. Caius Gracchus, about 
a hundred years before, had erected mile-stones. See his Life, V. 
230.* 

GALBA. 237 

They surrounded the chair30 with drawn swords, 
and insisted on it's proceeding to the camp. In the 
meanwhile Otho desired the bearers to make haste, 
often declaring that he was a lost man. There were 
some, who overheard him ; and they rather won- 
dered at the hardiness of the attempt with so small 
a party, than disturbed themselves about the conse- 
quences. As he was carried through the Forum, 
nbout the same number as the first joined him, and 
others subsequently by three or four at a time. The 
whole party then saluted him ' Caesar,' and con- 
ducted him to the camp, flourishing their swords 
before him. Martialis, the tribune who kept guard 
that day, knowing nothing (as we are told) of the 
conspiracy, was surprised and terrified at so unex- 
pected a sight, and suffered them to enter. When 
Otho was within the camp, he met with no resist- 
ance, for the conspirators gathered about such as 
were strangers to the design, and made .it their bu- 
siness to explain it to them ; upon which, first from 
fear, and afterward out of choice, they joined them 
by one or two at a time. 

The intelligence was immediately carried to Galba, 
while the soothsaver was vet in attendance, and had 
the entrails in his hands ; so that they, who had 
previously been most incredulous in matters of divi- 
nation, and even held them in contempt, were 
astonished at the divine interposition in the accom- 
plishment of this presage. People of all sorts now 
crowding from the Forum to the palace, ^Vinius and 
Laco, with some of the emperor's freedmen, stood 
before him with drawn swords to defend him. Piso 
went out to speak to the life-guards ; and Marius 
Celsus, a man of great courage and honour, was sent 
to secure the Illyrian legion, which by in Vipsa- 
nius' portico. 

Galba wishing to go out to the people, Vinius 

■ s6 Suetonius says, he got into a woman's sedan, which was of a 
closer kind, in order to be the better concealed, (Oth. 6.) 
12 

233 GALBA. 

endeavoured to dissuade him from it ; but Celsiis 
and Laco encouraged him to go, and expressed 
themselves with some sharpness against Vinius. In 
the mean time, a strong report prevailed, that Otho 
had been slain in the camp ; soon after which Julius 
Atticus, a soldier of some note among the guards, 
came up, and crying " He was the man that had 
" killed Cassar's enemy," made his way through 
the crowd, and displayed his bloody sword to Galba. 
The emperor fixing his eye upon him, and asking, 
" Who gave you orders ?" he replied, " My alJe- 
" giance, and the oath which I had taken •/* upon 
which the people expressed their approbation in loud 
plaudits. Galba then went out in a sedan-chair, 
with a design to sacrifice to Jupiter, and show him- 
self to the people. But he had no sooner reached 
the Forum, than the rumour changed like the wind, 
and news met him that Otho was master of the 
camp. Upon this occasion, as it was natural among 
a multitude of people, some called out to him to 
advance and some to retire, some to take courage 
and some to be cautious. His chair was tossed 
backward and forward, as in a tempest, and ready to 
be overset ; when there appeared first a party of 
horse, and then another of foot, issuing from the 
Basilica of Paulus and crying out, " Away with this 
*' private man !" Numbers were at this time running 
about, not to separate by flight, but to possess 
themselves of the porticos and eminences about the 
Forum, as it were to enjoy some public spectacle. 
Atilius Vergilio beat down one of Galba's statues, 
which served as a signal for hostilities, and they at- 
tacked the chair on all sides with javelins. As those 
did not despatch him, they advanced sword in hand. 
In this time of trial none rose up in his defence but 
one man, who indeed, among so many millions, was 
the only one that did honour to the Roman empire. 
This was Sempronius Densus37 a centurion, who 

*7 In the Greek text, it is ' Ihdistrus :' but that text (as nc ob- 
served before), in the Life of Galba, is extremely corrupt. We 

GALBA. 23?; 

without any particular obligations to Galba, and 
only from a regard to honour and the law, stood 
forth to defend the chair. First of all, he lifted up 
the vine-branch, with which the centurions chastise 
such as deserve stripes ; and then calling out to the 
soldiers who were pressing forward, commanded 
them to spare the emperor. They fell upon him 
notwithstanding, Upon which he drew his sword and 
fought a lon«; time, till he received a stroke in the 
ham, which brought him to the ground. 

The chair was overturned at what is called the 
' Curtian lake,' and Galba tumbling out of it, they 
ran to kill him. At the same time, he presented his 
throat, and said ; " Strike, if it be for the good of 
" iiome3s." He received many strokes upon the 
arms and legs, for he had a coat of mail upon his 
bodv. According to most accounts it was Camurius, 
a soldier of the fifteenth legion, who despatched 
him ; though some say it was Terentius, some Ar- 
cadius39, and others Fabius Fabnlus. They add, 
that when Fabius had cut off his head, he wrapped 
it up in the skirt of his garment, because it was so 
bald that he could take no hold of it. His associates 
however would not suffer him to conceal it, but in- 
sisted that he should let the world see, what an ex,- 
ploit he had performed ; he fixed it therefore upon 
the point of his spear, and swinging about the head 
of a venerable old man and a mild prince, who was 
both Pontifex Maximus and consul, he ran on (like 
the Bacchanals with that of Peritheus) brandishing 
his spear, dyed with the blood trickling from it. 

When the head was presented to Ocho, he cried 
out, " This is nothing, my fellow-soldiers ; show 
" me the head of Piso." This was brought not long 
afterward ; for that young prince being wounded., 

have therefore given ' Densus ' from Tacitus ; as ' Vergilio' instead 
of ' Sercello,' above. 

3s Suet. Galb. 20., Tac. Hist. i. 11.* 

39 In Tacitus, ' Lecanius.' That historian makes no mention of 
Fabius. 

210 GALBA. 

and pursued by one Murcus, was killed by him at 
the gates of the temple of Vesta. Vinius also was 
put to the sword, though he declared himself an 
accomplice in the conspiracy, and protested that he 
suffered against Otho's orders. They cut off his 
head however, and that of Laco, and carrying them 
to Otho demanded their reward ; For, as Archilo- 
chus says, 

We bring seven warriors only to your tent, 
Yet thousands of us kill'd them. 

So in this case many, who had no share in the ac- 
tion, bathed their hands and swords in the blood, 
and exhibiting them to Otho claimed their recom- 
pencc. It appeared afterward, from the petitions 
given in, that the number of them was a hundred 
and twenty: all of whom Vitellius subsequently 
sought out, and put to death. Marius Celsus also 
coming to the camp, many accused him of having 
exhorted the soldiers to stand by Galba, and the bulk 
of the army insisted that he should suffer. But Otho 
anxious to save him, and yet afraid of contradicting 
them, told them ; " He did not choose to have him 
" executed so soon, because he had several import- 
" ant questions to put to him." He ordered him 
therefore to be kept in chains, and delivered him to 
persons, in whom he could best place his confi- 
dence40. 

The senate was immediately assembled ; and as if 
they were become different men, or had other gods 
to swear by, they took the oath to Otho, which he 
had before taken to Galba, and violated ; and gave 
him the titles of c Ca?sar' and ' Augustus,' while the 
bodies of those that had been beheaded lay in their 
consular robes in the Forum. As for the heads, the 

40 He had been most faithful to Galba ; and Otho judiciously, as 
it appeared in the issue, hoped he would prove as faithful to him- 
self. (Tac. Hist. i. 71.) His integrity indeed gained the admira- 
tion, and his preservation the applause, even of those who had 
urged his execution.* 

GALEA. 241 

soldiers, when they had no farther use for them, sold 
that of Vinius to his daughter for two thousand five 
hundred drachmas. Piso's was given to his wife 
Verania, at her request51 ; and Galba' 3 to the ser- 
vants of Patrobius and Vitellius4', who after they 
had treated it with the utmost insolence and outrage, 
threw it into a place called Sestertium43, where the 
bodies of those are cast, that are put to death by the 
emperors. His body was carried away, with Otho's 
permission, by Helvidius Priscus, and buried in the 
night by his freed man Argius. 

Such is the history of Galba ; a man who, in the 
points of family and fortune distinctly considered, 
was exceeded by few of the Romans, and who in the 
union of both was superior to all : he had lived like- 
wise in great honour, and with the best reputation, 
under five emperors ; and it was rather by his cha- 
racter, than by force of arms, that he deposed Nero. 
As to the rest who conspired against the tyrant, 
some of them were thought unworthy of the impe- 
rial diadem by the people, and others by themselves: 
but Galba was invited to accept it, and only followed 
the sense of those, who called him to that high dig- 
nity. Nay, when he gave the sanction of his name 
to Vindex, that which before was termed rebellion 
was considered only as a civil war, because a man 
of princely talents was then at the head of it. So 
that he did not so much want the empire, as the 
empire wanted him : and with these principles he 
attempted to govern a people corrupted by Tigellinus 
and Nymphidius, as Scipio, Fabricius, and Camillus 
governed the Romans of their times. Notwithstand- 

41 Tacitus (Hist. i. 47.) says, she purchased it. 

41 Galba had put Patrobius to death, but we know not why the 
servants of Vitellius should have desired to treat his remains with 
indignity. 

43 Lipsius says, it was so called qu. semiteriium, as being two 
miles and a half from the city ; (L.) but if appears from Tacitus, 
that Galba's head was only carried to Patrobius' tomb. Of Helvi- 
dius Priscus, neither Tacitus (ib. 49.) nor Suetonius (ib.20.) make 
any mention, upon this occasion.* 
VOL, VI. R 

243 GALBA. 

ing Jiis advanced age, throughout th-e military 
department he showed himself a chief worthy of 
ancient Rome. But in the civil administration he 
delivered himself up to Vinius, to Laco, and to his 
enfranchised slaves who sold every thing, in the same 
manner as Nero had left all to his insatiable vermin. 
The consequence of this was, that no man regretted 
him as an emperor, though almost every one was 
moved with pity at his miserable fate. 

TEE 

LIFE 

OF 

O T H 

SUMMARY. 

Oilw takes possession of his new dignity* and enters upon the dis* 
charge of it's duties ; puts Tigellinus to death ; and suffers the 
populace to give him the name of * Nero.1 "Turbulent behaviour 
of the seventeenth praetorian cohort ; appeased by Otho. He writes 
to Vitellius : the answer. Various omens. He marches to meet 
Vitellius! lieutenants. Insolence of Vitellius' troops. Otho's 
forces gain some advantage over them. Otho, in opposition to the 
counsels of his officers, determines to give battle. Skirmishes be- 
tiveen the parties. Otho orders his officers to proceed to the at- 
tack ; and is beaten : Causes of his defeat. His army send 
deputies, and take the oath to Vitellius. Horrible carnage in the 
battle. Attachment of Otho's attendant soldiers to their general : 
he addresses them; sends away such of his friends and senators, as 
are present ; and kills himself. His troops give his body a magni- 
f cent interment ; and take the oath to Vitellius. 

JL HE new emperor went early in the morning to 
the Capitol, and sacrificed ; after which he ordered 
Marius Ceisus to be brought before him, received 
him with great marks of his regard, and desired him 

r 1 

21* OTHO. 

rather to forget the cause of his confinement, than 
to remember his release. Celsus neither showed any 
meanness in his acknowledgements, nor any want of 
gratitude. He said, " The very charge brought 
" against him bore witness to his character ; since 
" he was accused only of having been faithful to 
" Galba, from whom he had never received any per- 
" sonal obligations/' All who were present at the 
audience admired both the emperor and Celsus, and 
the soldiers in particular testified their approbation1. 

Otho made a mild and gracious speech to the se- 
nate. The remaining part of his consulship he di- 
vided wTith Vifginius ftufus, leaving those, who had 
been appointed to that dignity by Nero and Galba, 
to enjoy it in their course. The respectable for age 
and character, he promoted to the priesthood ; and 
to such senators, as had been banished by Nero and 
recalled by Galba, he restored all their goods and 
estates which he found unsold. So that the first and 
best of the citizens, who had before not considered 
him as a man, but dreaded him as a fury or destroy- 
ing daemon that had suddenly seized the seat of go- 
vernment, now entertained more agreeable expec- 
tations from so hopeful a beginning. 

But nothing gave the people in general so high a 
pleasure2, or contributed so much to gain him their 
affections, as his punishing Tigellinus. This man, 
it is true, had long suffered under the fear of pu- 
nishment, which the Romans demanded as a public- 
debt, and under a complication of incurable dis- 
tempers. These, and his infamous connexions with 
the worst of prostitutes, into which his passions 
drew him (though almost in the arms of death) were 

1 See p. 24-0., not. (40.) Otho exempted the soldiers from the 
fees, which they had paid the centurions for furloughs and other 
immunities ; and at the same time promised to satisfy those officers, 
upon nil reasonable occasions, out of his own revenue. In Conse- 
quence of these furloughs, the fourth part of a legion was often ab- 
sent, and the troops became daily more and more corrupted. 

2 In the close of the day, upon which he was- inaugurated, be put 
Laco and Icelus to death. 

OTHO. 245 

considered by the thinking part of mankind as the 
greatest of punishments, and worse than many 
deaths. Yet it was a pain to the common people, 
that he should see the light of the sun, after so many 
excellent men through his means had been deprived 
of it. He was then at his country-house near Sinu- 
essa3, and had vessels at anchor, ready to carry him 
on occasion to some distant country. Otho sent to 
him there ; upon which, lie first attempted to bribe 
the messenger with large sums to suffer him to 
escape. Finding that this had no effect, he gave 
him the money notwithstanding ; and desiring only 
to be indulged with a few moments till he had 
shaved himself, he took the rasor and cut his own 
throat. 

Beside this just satisfaction which Otho gave the 
people, it was a most agreeable circumstance that 
he remembered none of his private quarrels. To 
gratify the populace, he suffered them also at first to 
bestow upon him in the theatres the name of' Nero,* 
and he made no opposition to those who erected 
publicly the statues of that emperor. Nay, Clau- 
dius4 Rufus informs us that, in the letters with 
which the couriers were despatched to Spain, he 
joined the name of Nero to that of Otho. But, 
perceiving that the nobility were offended, he dis- 
continued the use of it. 

After his government was thus established, the 
praetorian cohorts gave him no small trouble, by ex- 
horting him to beware of many persons of rank, and 
to forbid them the court ; whether their affection 
made them really apprehensive for him, or it was 
only a colour for raising commotions and wars. One 
day the emperor himself had sent Crispinus orders 

3 A maritime city in Campania near the mouth of the Lin's, and 
celebrated for it's warm springs. See PHfr. H. N. iii. 5., xxi. 2.* 

4 This writer, who was a man of consular dignity and succeeded 
Galba in the government of Spain, was called not ' Claudius,' but 
* Cluvius' Rufus. (L.) Otho's assumption of the name of4 Nero * 
is confirmed by Suetonius. (Oth. 7. See Tac. Hist. i. 8.)* 

216 OTIIO. 

to bring the seventeenth cohort from Ostia °, and in 
order to do it without interruption, that officer began 
to prepare for it as soon as it grew dark, and to 
pack up the arms in waggons. Upon which some of 
the most turbulent cried out, that Crispinus was 
come with no good intention, that the senate had 
some design against the government, and that the 
arms he was going to carry were to be made use of 
against Caesar, not in his service. This notion soon 
spread, and exasperated numbers; some laid hold 
on the waggons, while others killed two centurions 
who endeavoured to quell the mutiny, and with 
them Crispinus himself. The whole party then 
armed then selves, and exhorting each other to go 
to the emperor's assistance, marched straight to 
Rome. Being informed there that eighty senators 
were s ipping with him that evening, they hastened 
to the palace, exclaiming, " Now is the time to 
" crush all Caesar's enemies at once." The city was 
greatly alarmed, expecting to be immediately plun- 
dered. The palace likewise was thrown into the 
utmost confusion, and Otho himself was in unspeak- 
able distress: for he was under fear and concern for 
the senators, while they were afraid of him, and he 
saw they kept their eyes fixed upon him in silence 
and extreme consternation ; some of them having 
even brought their wives with them to supper. He 
therefore ordered the principal officers of the guards 
to go and speak to the soldiers, and endeavour to 
appease them, and at the same time sent out his 
guests at another door. They had scarcely made 
their escape, when the soldiers rushed into the 
room, and demanded, " What was become of the 
" enemies of Caesar?" The emperor then, rising from 
his couch, used many arguments to satisfy them, 
and by entreaties and tears at last prevailed upon 
them with much difficulty to desist. 

* This we learn likewise from Tacitus (Hist. i. SO.) Ostia, at the1 
mouth ofithe Tiber; was a military station, established by the cm« 
peror Claudius. (Suet. Claud, xxv.)* 

t. 
te 
«c 
<c 

OTHO. 247 

Next day, having presented the soldiers with 
twelve hundred and fifty drachmas a man, he entered 
the camp. Upon this occasion he commended the 
troops as in general well-affected to his government, 
"but at the same time told them, " There were some 
designing men among them, who by their cabals 
brought his moderation and their fidelity both into 
question : these (he said) deserved their resent- 
ment, and he hoped they would assist him in 
punishing them." They applauded his speech, 
and desired him to chastise whatever persons he 
thought proper; but he pitched upon two only for 
capital punishment, whom no man could possibly 
regret, and then returned to his palace. 

Those, who had conceived an affection for Gtho., 
,and placed confidence in him, admired this change 
in his conduct. But others thought it was only a 
piece of policy, which the times necessarily required, 
and that he affected a popular behaviour on account 
of the impending war. For now he had undoubted 
intelligence that Vitellius had assumed the title of 
emperor and all the ensigns of supreme power, and 
couriers daily arrived with news of continual addi- 
tions to his party. Other messengers also brought 
information, that the forces in Pannonia, Dalmatia, 
and Mysia with their generals had declared for Otho. 
And a few days afterward, he received obliging 
letters from Mucianus and Vespasian, wrho both 
commanded numerous armies, the first in Syria and 
the other in Judaea. 

Elated by this intelligence, he wrote to Vitellius, 
advising him not to aspire to things above his rank ; 
and promising, if he desisted, to supply him liberally 
with money, and give him a city where he might 
spend his days in pleasure and repose. Vitellius at 
first returned an answer, in which ridicule was tem- 
pered with civility. But afterward, being both 
thoroughly exasperated, they addressed each other 
in a stile of the bitterest invective. Not that their 
mutual reproaches were groundless, but it was ab- 

243 OTHO. 

surd for the one to impute to the other what might 
■with equal justice be objected against both. For 
their charges consisted of prodigality, effeminacy, 
incapacity for war, their former poverty, and their 
immense debts ; articles in which it is difficult to 
decide, whether of them had the advantage. 

As to the stories of prodigies and apparitions at 
that time, many of them were founded upon vague 
reports, which could not be traced to their author. 
But in the Capitol there was a Victory mounted 
upon a chariot, and numbers of people saw her let 
the reins drop out of her hands, as if she had lost 
the power of holding them. And in the island of 
the Tiber, the statue of Julius Caesar turned round 
from west to east, without either earthquake or 
whirlwind to move it: a circumstance, which is said 
likewise to have happened, when Vespasian openly 
took upon him the direction of affairs. The inun- 
dation of the Tiber was, also, considered by the 
populace as a bad omen. It was at a time, indeed, 
when rivers usually overflow their banks ; but the 
flood never rose so high before, nor was it ever 
so ruinous in it's effects ; for it now laid great 
part of the city under water, particularly the corn- 
market, and caused a famine which continued for 
several days. 

About this time information was brought thai 
Cecina and Valens, who acted for Vitellius, had 
seized the passes of the Alps. And in Rome Dola- 
bella, who was of an illustrious family, was suspected 
by the guards of some disloyal design. Otho either 
fearing him, or some other whom he could influence, 
sent him to Aquinum0 with assurances of friendly 
ireatment : and when he proceeded to select the 
officers who were to attend him upon his march, he 
appointed Lucius the brother of Vitellius to be of 
the number, without either promoting or lowering 
him in point of rank. He took also particular care 

* A city on the left, or Campanian, siJc of the Litis.* 

OTHO. 249 

of the mother and wife of Vitellius, and endeavoured 
to place them in a situation, where they had nothing 
to fear. The government of Rome he bestowed 
upon Vespasian's brother Flavins Sabinus, either 
with an intention of doing honour to Nero, who had 
formerly given him that appointment (as Galba had 
deprived him of it) or else of showing his regard for 
Vespasian by promoting his brother. 

Otho himself stopped at Brixellum 7, a town in 
Italy near the Po, and ordered the army to march 
forward under the conduct of his lieutenants Marius 
Celsus, Suetonius Paulinus, Gallus, and Spurina, 
officers of great reputation. But they could not 
pursue their concerted plan of operations, on ac- 
count of the obstinacy and disorderly behaviour of 
the soldiers, who declared that they had made the 
emperor, and would be commanded by him alone. 
The enemy's troops were not under much better 
discipline : they too were refractory and disobedient 
to their officers, and on the same account. But 
they had seen service, and were accustomed to 
fatigue ; whereas Otho's men had been used to idle- 
ness, and their mode of life was quite different from 
that in the field. They had spent most of their 
time indeed at public spectacles and the entertain- 
ments of the theatre, and had reached such a degree 
of insolence, that they did not pretend to be unable 
to perform their appointed services, but affected to 
be above them. Spurina, who attempted to use 
compulsion, incurred the danger of assassination. 
They spared no kind of abuse, calling him traitor, 
and telling him that it was he who had ruined Caesar's 
affairs, and purposely missed the most favourable 
opportunities. Some of them came in the night 
intoxicated with liquor to his tent, and demanded 
their discharge ; " For they had to go," they said, 
" to Caesar, to accuse him." 

The cause however, and Spurina with it, received 

'' Hod, Perseljo, 0P the southern bank of the Po. 

aao OTMO. 

some benefit from the insult which these troops en- 
•countered at Placentia8. Those of Vitellius came 
up to the walls, and ridiculed Otho's men who were 
appointed to defend them, calling them ' players and 
dancers, fit only to attend the Pythian and Olympic 
games ; fellows who knew nothing of war, who had 
never made a single campaign, who were puffed up 
with pride, merely because they had cut off the head 
of a poor unarmed old man (meaning Galba) ; 
wretches, that durst not look men in the face, or 
stand any thing like a fair and open battle.* With 
these reproaches they were so -mortified, and so 
desirous of revenge, that they threw themselves 
at Spurina's feet, and implored him to command 
and employ them on whatever service he thought 
proper, assuring him that there was no danger or 
labour, which they would decline. After this, 
the enemy made a vigorous attack upon the town, 
and plied their battering engines with their whole 
force ; but Spurina's men repulsed them with great 
slaughter, and thus kept possession of one of the 
richest and most respectable towns in Italy. 

Of Otho's officers in general, it must be ob- 
served, that they were more obliging in their beha- 
viour, both to cities and private persons, than 
those of Vitellius. Cecina, one of the latter, had 
nothing popular either in his address, or in his 
figure. He was of a gigantic size, and most un- 
couth appearance ; for he wore breeches and long 
sleeves in the manner of the Gauls, even while his 
standard was Roman, and he gave his instructions 
to Roman officers. His wife followed him on 
horseback, in a rich dress, and was atended by a 
select party of cavalry. Fabius Valens, the other 
general, had such a passion for money, as was 
not to be satisfied either by plunder from the 
enemy, or by exactions and contributions from 

R Not far from Brixcllum. Cremona, mentioned helper, wn^ 
almost opposite to it, on the other side of the Po.* 

OTHO. 251 

the allies ; insomuch, that he was believed to pro- 
ceed more slowly for the sake of collecting gold as 
he advanced, and was therefore not up at the first 
action. Some indeed accuse Cecina of having has- 
tened to give battle before the arrival of Valens, in 
order that the victory might be all his own, and 
(beside some smaller faults) charge him not only 
with having attacked at an unseasonable time, but 
also with not having maintained the combat so gal- 
lantly as he ought to have done : all which errors 
nearly ruined the affairs of his party. 

Cecina, after his repulse at Placentia, marched 
against Cremona, another rich and great city. In 
the mean time Annius Gallus, who Mas going to 
join Spurina at Placentia, received intelligence by 
the way that he had been victorious, and that the 
siege was raised : but being informed at the same 
time that Cremona was in danger, he led his forces 
thither, and encamped very near the enemy. Sub- 
sequently, other officers brought in reinforcements. 
Cecina posted a strong body of infantry under cover 
of some trees and thickets, after which he order- 
ed his cavalry to advance, and if the enemy at- 
tacked them, gradually to give way and retire, till 
they had drawn them into the ambuscade. But 
Celsus, being informed of his intention by some 
deserters, advanced with his best cavalry against 
Cecina's troops, and upon their retreating pur- 
sued them with so much caution, that he sur- 
rounded the corps, which lay in ambush. Having 
thus thrown them into confusion, he called the 
legions from the camp ; and it appears, that if 
they had come up in time to support the horse, 
Cecina's whole army would have been cut in pieces. 
But, as Paulinus advanced very slowly9, he was 

9 Tacitus (ii. 25, 26.) informs us, that Paulinus was naturally 
slow and irresolute. On this occasion, he charges him with two 
errors: the first, that instead of advancing immediately to the 
charge, and supporting his cavalry, he had trifled away the time 
in filling up the trenches ; the other, that he did not avail himself 
of the disorder of the enemy, hut sounded much too early a retreat; 

952 OTHO. 

censured for having used more precaution than 
became a general of his character. Nay, the sol- 
diers accused him of treachery, and endeavoured 
to incense Otho against him ; insisting that the 
victory had been in their hands, and that if it was 
incomplete, it was owing entirely to the misma- 
nagement of their generals. Otho did not so much 
believe these representations, as he was willing to 
appear not to disbelieve them. He therefore sent 
Ins brother Titianus to the army, with Proculus 
the captain of his guard ; Titianus to command in 
appearance, and Proculus in reality. Celsus and 
Paulinus had the title of friends and counsellors, but 
jiotthe least authority in the direction of affairs. 

The enemy too, particularly the forces of Valens, 
were not without their dissatisfaction and disorder : 
for when they learned what had happened at the 
ambuscade, they expressed their indignation that 
their general had not put it in their power to be 
there, that they might have used their endeavours to 
rescue the brave men, who perished in that action. 
They were even inclined to despatch him ; but, 
having pacified them with much difficulty, he de- 
camped and joined Cecina. 

In the mean time Otho came to the camp at 
Bedriacum, a small town near Cremona, and there 
held a council of war. Proculus and Titianus were 
of opinion, " That he ought to give battle, while 
" the army retained those high spirits, with which 
" the late victory had inspired them ; and not suffer 
" their ardour to cool, or wait till Vitellius arrived 
*' in person from Gaul." But this was opposed by 
Paulinus : " The enemv," said he, " have received 
" all their troops, and have no farther preparations 
" to make for the combat ; whereas Otho will have 
*' from Mysia and Pannonia forces as numerous as 
*f those which he has already, if he will wait his 

own opportunity, instead of giving one to the 

enemy. And certainly the army he now has, if 
" with their small numbers they have so much 
*c ardour, will not fight with less but greater spirit, 

OTITO. 2oS 

*• when they see their numbers so mucli increased. 
" Besides, the gaining of time is in our favour, be- 
** cause we have every thing in abundance ; whereas 
*c delays must greatly distress Cecina and his col- 
•f legue for necessaries, because they lie in an 
66 enemy's Gauntry." 

This opinion was supported by Marius Celsus. 
Annius Gallus could not attend, because he had 
received some hurt by a fall from his horse, and was 
under cure. Otho therefore wrote to him, and 
Gallus advised him not to precipitate matters, but 
to wait for the army from Mysia, which was already 
on it's way. Otho however would not be guided by 
these counsels, and the opinion of those who were 
for immediately hazarding a battle prevailed. Dif- 
ferent reasons are, indeed, alleged for this resolution. 
The most probable is, that the praetorian cohorts 
(which composed the emperor's guards) now coming 
to taste what real war was, longed to be once more 
at a distance from it, and to return to the ease, the 
company, and the public diversions of Rome ; and 
therefore they could not be restrained in their eager- 
ncss for a battle, for they imagined that they could 
overpower the enemy at the first charge. Besides, 
Otho seems to have been no longer able to support 
himself in a state of suspense ; such a horror of the 
thoughts of danger had his dissipation and effeminacy 
created! Overburthened then bv his cares, he has- 
tened to free himself from their weight : he covered 
his eyes, and leaped down the precipice : he com- 
mitted all at once to fortune. Such is the account 
given of the matter by the orator Secundus, who 
was his secretary. 

Others say, that the two parties were much in- 
clined to lay down their arms, and unite in choosing 
an emperor out of the best generals they had ; or, 
if they could not agree in their choice, to leave the 
election to the senate. Neither is it improbable, as 
the two who were called emperors were neither of 
them men of reputation, that the experienced and 

12 

254 OTHO. 

prudent part of the soldiers should form such a de- 
sign. For they could not but reflect, how unhappy 
and dreadful a thing it would be to plunge them- 
selves afresh into those calamities, which the Romans 
could not bring upon each other without aching 
hearts in the quarrels of Sylla and Marius, of Caesar 
and Pompey : and for what — but to provide an 
empire to minister to the insatiable appetite and 
drunkenness of Vitellius, or to the luxury and 
debaucheries of Otho 10 ! These considerations are 
supposed to have induced Celsus to endeavour to 
gain time, in the hope that matters might be com- 
promised without the sword ; while Otho, from his 
fears of such an agreement, hastened the battle. 

In the mean time he returned to Brixellum n, 
which was certainly an additional error ; as by that 
step he deprived the combatants of the reverence 
and emulation, which his presence might have in- 
spired, and took a considerable limb from the body 
of the army (I mean some of the best and most 
active men, both horse and foot) for his body-guard. 
There happened about that time a rencontre upon 
the Fo, Cecina's troops endeavouring to lay 'abridge 
across that river, and those of Otho to prevent it. 
The latter, finding their other efforts ineffectual, 
placed a quantity of torches well covered with brim- 
stone and pitch in some boats, which were carried 
by the wind and current against the enemy's work. 
First smoke, and afterward a bright flame, arose ; 
upon which Cecina's men were so terrified that they 
leaped into the river, overset their boats, and were 
completely exposed to their enemies, who laughed at 
their awkward distress. 

The German troops, however, beat Otho's gla- 

10 Upon the improbability of this being a general reflexion, see 
Tac. Hist. ii. 37.* 

11 It was debated in council, whether the emperor should be pre- 
sent in the action, or not Marius Celsus and Paulinus durst not 
vote for it, 'est they should seem inclined to expose his person lie 
therefore retired to Brixellum, a circumstance which contributed 
net a little to his rum. ( Tac. ib. 31-) 

OTHO; 253 

diators in a little island of the Po, and killed a con- 
siderable number of them. Otho's army in Bedria- 
cum, resenting this affront, insisted on being led out 
to battle. Accordingly Proculus marched, and 
pitched his camp at the distance of fifty furlongs 
from Bedriacum. But he chose his ground in a 
most unskilful manner. For though it was in the 
spring-season, and the country afforded many foun- 
tains and rivulets, his army was distressed for water. 
Next day, Proculus wished to march against the 
enemy, who lay not less than a hundred furlongs off; 
but Paulinus would not agree to it. He said thev 
ought to keep the post which they had taken, rather 
than after incurring much fatigue immediately en- 
gage an enemy, who could arm and array themselves 
at their leisure, while they were making such a 
inarch with all the incumbrance of baggage and ser- 
vants. The generals disputed the point, till a Nu- 
midian horseman came with letters from Otho, or- 
dering them to make no longer delay, but proceed 
to the attack without losing a moment's time !*2. 
Upon this they decamped of course, and went to 
seek the enemy. The news of their approach threw 
Cecina into great confusion j and immediately quit- 
ting his works and his post upon the river, he re- 
paired to the camp, where lie found most of the 
soldiers armed, and the word already given by 
Valens. 

During the time that the infantry were forming, 
the best of the cavalry were directed to skirmish. 
At that moment a report was spread, from what 
cause we cannot tell, among Otho's van, that Vitel- 
lius' officers were coming over to their party. As 
soon therefore as they approached, they saluted them 
in a friendly manner, calling them ' Fellow-soldiers ;* 
but, instead of receiving the appellation, they answer- 
ed with a furious and hostile shout. The conse- 
quence was, that the authors of the compliment were 

» See Tac. ib. 40.* 

255 (Vnio. 

dispirited, and the rest suspected them of treason. 
This was the first tiling, which disconcerted Otho's 
troops, for by this time the enemy had charged. 
Besides, they could preserve no order ; the inter- 
mixture of the baggage, and the nature of the ground, 
preventing any regular movement. For the ground 
was so full of ditches and other inequalities, that 
they were forced to break their ranks, and wheel 
about to avoid them, and could only fight in small 
parties. There were but two legions, one of Vitel- 
lius' called ' theDevourer,' and one of Otho's call- 
ed the ' Succourer,' which could disentangle them- 
selves from the defiles, and gain the open plain. 
These engaged in a regular battle, and fought a long 
time. Otho's men were vigorous and brave, but 
they had not previously seen so much as a single 
action : on the other hand, those of Vitellius had 
much experience in the field ; but they were old, 
and their strength decaying. 

Otho's legion coming on with great fury mowed 
down the first ranks, and took the eagle. The ene- 
my filled with shame and resentment advanced to 
chastise them, slew Orphidius their commander, and 
took several standards. Against the gladiators1', who 
had the reputation of being brave fellows and excel- 
lent at close fighting, Alphenus Varus brought up 
the Batavians, who come from an island formed by 
the Rhine, and arc the best cavalry in Germany. 
Against these a few of the gladiators made head, 
but the chief part fled to the river, and falling in 
with some of the enemy's infantry which was posted 
there, were all cut in pieces. None, however, be- 
haved so ill that day as the praetorian bands. They 
did not even wait to receive the enemy's charge, 
but in their flight broke through the troops which as 

15 Gladiators, as it appears from a dialogue of Plato's, who con- 
siders the circumstance as perfectly providential, were seldom in 
high estimation for military prowess. Those that fought under 
Spartacus, however, must be admitted to form a splendid exception 
to this remark.^ 

OTHO. 257 

yet stood their ground, and threw them into dis- 
order. Nevertheless, many of Otho's men were ir- 
resistible in the quarter where they fought, and 
opened a way through the victorious enemy to their 
camp. But Proculus and Paulinus took another di- 
rection ; for they dreaded the soldiers, who already 
blamed their generals for the loss of the day. 

Annius Gallus received into the city all the scat- 
tered parties, and endeavoured to encourage them 
by assurances that the advantage upon the whole 
was equal, and that their troops had the superiority 
in many parts of the field. But Marius Celsus as- 
sembled the principal officers, and desired them to 
consider of measures to save their country : " After 
' such an expense of Roman blood,'* said he, " Otho 
' himself, if he has any patriotism, will not tempt 
6 fortune any more ; since Cato and Scipio, in re- 
1 fusing to submit to Caesar after the battle of Phar- 
6 salia, are accused of having unnecessarily sacri- 
{ ficed the lives of many brave men in Africa, not- 
6 withstanding that they fought for the liberties of 
6 their country. Fortune indeed is capricious, and 
' all men are liable to suffer her inconstancy : yet 
8 good men have one advantage, of which she can 
' never deprive them, and that is, in every contin- 
6 gency to avail themselves of their reason." These 
arguments prevailed upon the officers, and on sound- 
ing the private men, they found them desirous of 
peace. Titianus himself was of opinion, that they 
ought to send embassadors to treat for a coalition. 
In pursuance of which, Celsus and Gallus were 
charged with a commission to Cecina and Valens. 
As they were upon the road, they met some centu- 
rions, who informed them that Vitellius' army was 
advancing to Bedriacum, and that they were de- 
spatched before by their generals with proposals for 
an accommodation. Celsus and Gallus commended 
their design, and desired them to go back with them 
to meet Cecina. 

When they approached that general's army, Cel- 
YOL. vi. S 

■25 $ OTHO. 

sus was in great danger. For the cavalry, which 
had been beaten in the affair of the ambuscade, hap- 
pening to be in the van, no sooner saw him, than 
they advanced with loud shouts against him. The 
centurions however threw themselves before him, 
and the other officers called out to them to do him 
no violence. Cecina himself, when informed of the 
tumult, rode up and quelled it, and after he had 
made his compliments to Celsus in a very obliging 
manner, accompanied him to Bedriacum. 

In the mean time Titianus, repenting that he had 
sent the embassadors, placed the most resolute of the 
soldiers again upon the walls, and exhorted the rest 
to assist. But when Cecina rode up and offered his 
hand, not a man of them would oppose him. Some 
saluted his men from the walls, and others opened 
the gates ; after which they went out, and mixed 
with the troops that were coming up. Instead of 
acts of hostility, there was nothing but mutual 
caresses and other demonstrations of friendship ; in 
consequence of which they all took the oath to Vitel- 
iius, and ranged themselves under his banner. 

This is the account, which most of those that 
were in the battle give of it : at the same time how- 
ever they confess that they did not know all the par- 
ticulars, because of the confused manner in which 
they fought, and the inequality of the ground. Long 
afterward, when I was passing over the field of battle, 
JVlestrius Florus a person of consular dignity pointed 
out to me an old man, who in his youth had served 
under Otho with others his coevals, not from in- 
clination but by constraint u. He told me also, 

".4 From this passage Dacier would infer, that the Life of Otho 
was not written by Plutarch. A person, he contends, who had 
served as a young man under Otho, could not be old at the time, 
when Plutarch can be supposed to have visited the field of battle. 
His argument is this. That battle was fought A, D. 69. Plutarch 
returned from Italy to Chaeronea about the end of Domitian's reign, 
A. D. 93 or 94, and never again left his native city. As this re- 
treat of Plutarch's was only four or hve-and-twenty years after the 
battle of Bedriacum, he concludes that a person who fought in that 

OTHO. 258 

that on visiting the field after the battle, he saw a 
huge pile of dead bodies as high as the head of a 
man ; and upon inquiring the reason, he could nei- 
ther discover it himself, nor gain any information 
about it. It was no wonder that there was a great 
carnage in the event of a general rout, because in a 
civil war they make no prisoners, as such captives 
would be no advantage to the conquerors ; but it is 
difficult to assign a reason, why the carcasses should 
be piled up in that manner. 

An uncertain rumour (as it commonly happens) 
was first brought to Otho, and afterward some of 
the wounded came and assured him, that the battle 
was lost. That his friends upon this occasion strove 
to encourage him, and keep him from desponding, 
was nothing extraordinary ; but the attachment of 
the soldiers to him exceeds all belief. None of them 
left him, or went over to the enemy, or consulted 
his own safety, even when their chief despaired of 
his. On the contrary they thronged his gates ; they 
called him emperor ; they left no form of applica- 
tion untried ; they kissed his hands ; they fell at his 
feet, and with groans and tears they entreated him 
not to forsake them or give them up to their ene- 
mies, but to employ their hearts and hands to the 
last moment of their lives. In this request they all 
concurred ; and one of the private men drawing his 

battle as a young man could not possibly be old, when Plutarch 
made the tour of Italy ; and therefore conjectures that this, as well 
as the life of Galba, must have been written by a son of Plutarch. 
But we think no argument, in a matter of such importance, ought 
to be adduced from a passage manifestly corrupt. Besides, Lam- 
prias in the catalogue ascribes these two Lives to his father. Nei- 
ther do we discover such a dissimilarity to Plutarch's other writings, 
either in the stile or manner, as warrants us to conclude that they 
are not from his hand. Henri L'Etienne did not, indeed, admit 
them into his edition, because he found them among the Opuscula ; 
some of which being supposed to be spurious, he too hastily con- 
cluded that these were of the number. The loss of Plutarch's 
Lives of the other Emperors, we regard as a real loss to the world ; 
and we should have been glad if they had come down to us, even in 
the same imperfect condition of text as those of Galba, and Otho. 

S 2 

269 OTHO. 

sword, thus addressed him : " Learn, Caesar, what 
" your soldiers are ready to do for you," and imme- 
diately plunged the steel into his heart. 

Unmoved at this affecting scene, and with a cheer- 
ful and steady countenance looking round upon the 
company, Otho harangued them as follows : " This 
" day, my fellow- soldiers, I consider as a more 
".. happy one than that upon which you made me 
emperor, when I see you thus disposed, and stand 
so high in your opinion. But deprive me not of 
a still greater happiness, that of laying down my 
life with honour for so many generous Romans. 
If I am worthy of the Roman empire, I ought to 
shed my blood for my country. I know the victory, 
which my adversary has gained, is by no means 
decisive. I have intelligence, that my army from 
Mysia is at the distance of but a few days' march j 
M Asia, Syria, and Egypt are pouring their legions 
" upon the Adriatic ; the forces in Judaea declare 
" for us ; the senate is with us ; and the very wives 
" and children of our enemies are so many pledges 
" in our hands. But we are not fighting for Italy 
" with Annibal, or Pyrrhus, or the Cimbri : our dis- 
" pute is with the Romans ; and whatever party 
prevails,'whether we conquer or are conquered, our 
country must suffer. Under the victor's joy she 
bleeds. Believe me then, my friends, that I can 
die with greater glory, than reign. For I know 
no benefit which Rome can reap from my victory, 
equal to what I shall confer upon her by sacri- 
ficing myself for peace and unanimity, and thus 
preventing Italy from beholding such another day 
" as this 15!" 

After he had made this speech, and showed him- 
self immoveable to those who attempted to alter his 
resolution, he desired his friends, and such senators 
as were present, to leave him and provide for their 

,s Compare with this the different speech pat into Otho's mouth 
by Tacitus, Hist. ii. 47. In his subsequent address to Coceeius, 
they more nearly agree, (ib. 18.)* 

<c 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
<c 

ic 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
<c 
cc 

(( 
*c 
cc 
u 
<( 
ce 
a 
« 

OTHO. 261 

own safety. To those who were absent he sent the 
same commands, and signified his pleasure to the 
cities by letters, that they should receive them ho-, 
nourably, and supply them with good convoys. 

He then called his nephew Cocceius16, who was 
yet very young, and bade him compose himself, and 
not fear Vitellius : " I have taken the same care," 
said he, " of his mother, his wife, and his children, 
as if they had been my own. And for the same 
reason, I mean for your sake, I deferred the adop- 
tion which I intended you. For I thought proper 
to wait the issue of this war, that you might reign 
with me if I conquered, and not fall with me if I 
was overcome. The last thing, my son, which I 
have to recommend to you is, neither entirely to 
forget, nor yet to remember too well, that you 
had an emperor for your uncle. " 
A moment afterward, he heard a loud noise and 
tumult at his gate. The soldiers, seeing the senators 
retiring, threatened to kill them if they moved a step 
farther, or abandoned the emperor. Otho in the 
utmost concern for them, again showed himself at 
the door, but no longer with a mild and supplicating 
air ; on the contrary, he cast such a stern and angry 
look upon the most turbulent of them, that they 
withdrew in great fear and confusion. 

In the evening he was thirsty, and drank a little 
water. He then had two swords brought to him, 
and having examined the points of both along time, 
he sent one away, and put the other under his arm. 
After this, he called his servants, and with many 
expressions of kindness gave them money : not that 
he chose to be lavish of what would soon be ano- 
ther's, for he gave to some more, and to others less, 
proportioning his bounty to their merit, and paying 
a strict regard to propriety. 

On dismissing them, he dedicated the remainder 

16 Tacitus and Suetonius call him * Cocceianu*.* 

*<# OTIIO. 

of the night to repose, and slept so soundly, that his 
chamberlains heard him at the door. Early in the 
morning he called his freedman, who assisted him in 
the care of the senators, and ordered him to make 
the proper inquiries about them. The answer which 
he brought was, that they were departed, and had 
been provided with every thing they desired. Upon 
which he said, " Go you then, and show yourself to 
" the soldiers, that they may not imagine you have 
" assisted me in despatching myself, and put you to 
" some cruel death for it." 

As soon as the freedman was gone out, he fixed 
the hilt of his sword upon the ground, and holding 
it with both hands fell upon it with so much force, 
that he expired with only a single groan. The ser- 
vants in waiting without heard the groan, and burst 
into a loud lamentation, which was echoed through- 
out the camp and the city. The soldiers ran to the 
gates with the most pitiable wailings and the most 
unfeigned grief, reproaching themselves for not hav- 
ing guarded their emperor, and prevented his dying 
for them. Not one of them would leave him, in 
order to provide for himself, though the enemy was 
at hand. They attired the body in a magnificent 
manner, and prepared a funeral-pile ; after which 
they attended the procession in their armour, and 
happy was the man, that could come to support his 
bier. Some kneeled and kissed his wound, some 
gyasped his hand, and others prostrated themselves 
upon the ground, and adored him at a distance. 
Nay, there were some who threw their torches upon 
the pile, and then slew themselves : not that they 
had received any extraordinary favours from the 
deceased, or were afraid of suffering under the hands 
a' the conqueror; but no king or tyrant, it appears, 
was ever so passionately fond of governing, as they 
were of being governed by Otlio. Neither did their 
affection cease with his death : it survived the grave> 
and terminated in the hatred and destruction < 

OTHO. 263 

Vitellius. Of that we shall give an account in it's 
proper place17. 

After they had interred the remains of Otho, they 
erected a monument over them, which neither by 
it's size nor by any pomp of epitaph could excite the 
smallest degree of envy. I have seen it at Brixel- 
lum : it was extremely modest, and the inscription 
only this j 

TO THE MEMORY OF 

MARCUS OTHO. 

Otho died at the age of thirty-seven, having reign- 
ed but three months. Those, who find fault with his 
life, are not more respectable for either their numbers 
or their rank, than those who applaud his death. 
For, though his life was not much more correct than 
that of Nero, his death was certainly much more 
honourable. 

The soldiers were extremely incensed against 
Pollio18, one of the principal officers of the guards, 
for persuading them to take the oath immediately to 
Vitellius ; and being informed that there were still 
some senators upon the spot, they let the others 
pass, but solicited Verginius Rufus in a troublesome 
manner. They even went in arms to his house, and 
insisted that he should accept the imperial title, or 
at least be their mediator with the conqueror. But 
he, who had refused to receive that title from them 
when they were victorious, thought it would be the 
height of madness to do so after they had been beat- 
en : and he was afraid of applying to the Germans 

'? Viz. in the Life of that Emperor, which is now lost. See 
p. 258., not. H * 

18 Of this officer neither Suetonius nor Tacitus make any men- 
tion ; unless indeed, as Lipsius conjectures, he be the same with 
Plotius Firmus the prsefect, spoken of by the latter writer. Hist. 
ji. 46.* 

26i OTHO. 

in their behalf, because he had obliged that people 
to do many things contrary to their inclinations. 
He, therefore, went out privately at another door. 
When the soldiers found that he had left them, 
they took the oath to Vitellius, and having ob- 
tained their pardon, were enrolled among the troops 
of Cecina. 

END OF THE LIVES OF PLUTARCH. 

GENERAL INDEX. 

The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume, the Figures to the 
page, and the letter n. to the notes. 
Whatever relates to Geography, is marked with f. 

A. 

JlBANTES, Inhabitants of Euboea, their tonsure, and mannet 
of fighting, i. 6. 

Abantidas kills Clinias, and sets himself up tyrant in Sieyon, vi. 
153. 

■\-Abas, river, iv. 170. 

Abillius, otherwise Aollius, son of Romulus and Hersilia, i. 71. 

AbcBocritus, vi. 167. 

■fAbolus, river, ii. 270. 

Abra or Aura, iv. 368. v. 327. 

Abrotonon, the mother of Themistocles, i. 31 1 • 

Abidites imprisoned by Alexander, iv. 342. 

jAbydos, ii. 154. 

Academus discovers to Castor and Pollux, that Helen was kept pri- 
vately at Aphidnae, i. 41. 

Academy, so called from Academus, and spared for his sake, i. 41. 
Adorned by Cimon, hi. 313. The opinions of the Old and New 
Academy, iii. 388. Middle Academy, vi. 156, n. New Aca- 
demy, v. 296. Academy equally favourable to the Greeks and 
Romans, vi. 2. The groves of the Academy at Athens cut down 
by Sylla, iii. 247. 

Acamantis, tribe of, ii. 5. 

■fAcanlhians, iii. 188. 

Acarnania, ii. 32. iii. 72. 

•\Acarnanians defeated by Agesilaus, iv. 98. 

Acarnanian year, i. 200. 

Acastus, the son of Pelias, dies of the Lousy Disease, iii. 282. 

Acca Larentia, wife of Faustulus, and nurse of Romulus and Re- 
mus, i. 54. 

f Acerrce, ii. 395. 

\Achceans, Philopcemen changes their arms, iii. 11. Erect a 
statue of brass at Delphi, to Philopcemen, 14. Break their 

?SG INDEX. 

league with Philip, and join with the Romans, 36, 37. Redeem 
the Roman captives, 48. Demand succoui-3 of Sparta against the 
Jitolians, v. 146. Choose Aratus for their general, vi. 167. 
Their form of government, 161, n. Their laws, 177, a. Call in 
Antigohus, 196. 

■fAcharnee, an Athenian borough, ii. 50. 

"fAchetoiiSf river, ii. 32. 

Achilla*, one of the officers of Ptolemy, undertakes to assassinate 
Pompey, iv. '225. Put to death by Ccesar, 229. His plot 
against Caesar, 414. 

AcJ'illcs, divine honours are paid him in Epirus, iii. 66. Slain in 
the gates of Troy, by Paris, 289. Religious homage paid him 
by Alexander, and that prince's saying of him, iv. 260, 261. 

Acilin.s, Caius, his account of the feast of Lupercalia, i. 87. 

Acilius Glabrio, ii. 508. iii. 23, 50. 

■ , one of Caesar's soldiers, his valour, iv. 375. 

, a friend of Brutus, vi. 77. 

•fAcontiwn, Mount, iii. 255. 

Aconite given to Orodes, by hi* son Phraates, with a design to 
poison him, but cures his dropsy, iii. 493. 

Acorn-eat cr$, who so called, ii. 177. 

■fAchradina, a part of Syracuse, ii. 254, 417, n. 

\Acr<r, vi. 27. 

\Acrillce, ii. 415. 

Acroamatics, a part of philosophy, not communicated to every 
common soldier, iv. 249. 

f Acrocorinthus, described, vi. 163. Taken by Antigonua, 169. 
Taken by Aratus, 174. Surrendered by him to Antigonus Gona- 
tus, 198. 

Acron, king of the Cseninenses, makes war upon Romulus, i. 74. 
Is defeated and killed by him, ibid. 

j Acropolis the citadel of Athens, i. 28, 29, n. 

f Acrorium, Mount, v. 40- 

Acrotatus, son of Areus king of Sparta, his connexion with Chcli- 
donis, iii. 105 His gallant behaviour, 108. 

f Acte, the s,v. - oast of Achaia so called, v. 387. 

Action, two of that name, iv. 2. 

Action, in speaking, the use and force of it, v. 259. Abused b\ 
Cleon, 201. Extremely vehement in Caius Gracchus, 200. 

fActium, battle of, v. 483, 4S9. 

Acuphis, what he said to Alexander, iv. 328. 

Ada, Queen of Caria, iv. 273. 

Adeem, iv. 85. 

Adallus, king of Thrace, in Antony's army, v. 1'84. 

■J- Adiabeni, iii. 364. 

Adimaitiks, an Athenian general, ii. 16S. 

AdmrtHs, the favourite of Apollo, i. 171. 

, king of the Molossians, an enemy to Thcmistocles, en- 
tertains him when he fled from the Athenians, i. ") 6. 

Adonis, the ceremonies of his feasts, ii. 137, 138. The Athenian 
embarkation for Sicilv at the time of those fea*ts, deemed omi- 
nous, 137- iii. 420. 

INDEX. 26? 

Adoption, required for a stranger, previous to the ceremonies of 
initiation, i. 42, n. 

f Adranum, and the god, ii. 214, 21-5. 

Adranus, ii. 24-5. It's inhabitants join Timoleon, 246. 

\Adrastia, Mount, iii. 338. 

Adrastus assisted by Theseus in recovering the bodies of those that 
were slain at the siege of Thebes, i. 37. 

rAdria, a Tuscan city, whence the Adriatic sea took its name, 
i. 380. 

Adrian, one of Lucullus' lieutenants, iii. 349. 

i Adrymetum, v. 110. 

Adversity, iii. 328. iv. 50. v. 3. 

Adultery not known in Sparta, i. 136. Solon's law concerning 
adultery, 251. 

Macides, king of the Molossians, deposed, iii. 66. 

ALacida, the Grecian confederates sacrifice to them, i. 335. 

AEacus, son-in-law of Sciron, i. 11. Alexander descended from 
him by the mother's side, iv. 329. His temple in vagina, v. 286- 

jAZdepsus, iii. 267. 

JEdiles, two orders of them, iii. 124. 

ALdui. See Hedui. 

fAigce, i.348. iii. 104. 

•ALgean Sea, iii. 304. 

A-'geis, an Athenian tribe, ii. 142. 

+ Aigesteans, iii. 417. 

Mgeus, the father of Theseus, i. 5. Discovers his son, 13, His 
death, 24. 

\Mgialia, island of, v. 187. 

rAigians, retained in their duty by Cato, ii. 509. 

ALgias, a banker at Sicyon, the service he did Aratus, vi. 170, 171 - 

iJEgicores, an Athenian tribe, i. 253. 

■\ Angina, the eye-sore of tho* Piraeus, ii. 14. v. 250. 

Mginetce, signalise themselves in the battle of Salamis, i. 337. Joic 
the Achaean league, vi. 188. 

^Sgis, or .shield of Minerva, ii. 25, n. 

\A.gium, v. 172. vi. 196. 

JEgle, Theseus leaves Ariadne for her, i. 22, 37. 

fJEoos-Potamos, ii. 168. iii. 197. 

\ALgypt, it's soil, iii. 440. Subdued by Alexander, iv. 279. 

'Egyptians, Lycurgus supposed to have taken from them his distinc- 
tion between soldiers and mechanics, i. 115. Their opinion 
concerning the gods, 171. Their wheels, and mystical meaning 
of them, 193. Laugh at the mean appearance of Agesiiaus,. 
iv. 118. 

ALlia, one cf the wives of Sylla, iii. 240. 

jEliiy the poverty and content in which they lived, ii, 286, 321 . 

Ailius Tid'ero, ii. 286. 

Scwtus, consul with Flaininius, iii. 32. 

Mmathion, i. 50. 

JEmilia?i family, whence they sprung, i. 180, ii. 23K 

/Emilia^ the wife of Scipio Africanus, ii. 282- 

268 INDEX. 

JEmilia, daughter of Scaurus and Metella, and daughter-in-law to 
Sylla, married to Pompey, iv. 134. She dies in child-bed, 135. 
in. 279. 

■ , daughter of /Eneas and Lavinia, by some said to be the 

mother of Romulus, i. 51. 
JEmilius Marcus, i. 418. 
j-jEnaria, isle of, iii. 168. 
JEneas, founder of Lavinium, ii. 210. 
JEnobarbus, whence the name, ii. 314. 
■\JFmus, a city of Thrace, v. 58. 
■\JEolian islands, i. 373. 
fJEyui invade the Roman territories, i. 403. 
Mropus, Pyrrhus' great concern for his death, iii. 75. 
. , king of Macedon, amused himself with making lamps and 

tables, v. 381. 

JEsckines losing his cause against Demosthenes, retires to Rhodes. 

v.281. ' 

JEschylus, brother-in-law to Timophanes, endeavouring in vain to 

dissuade him from inslaving Corinth, joins Timoieon in killing 

him, ii. 236. 
, the tragic poet, contends with Sophocles, iii. 305. 

Loses the prize, retires to Sicily, and dies of discontent, ib. His 

tragedies, i. 38. ii. 449. iv. 1 26. 
of Argos, vi. 177. 

JEscidapius, said to have been entertained by Sophocles, i. 172, 

His temple at Epidaurus, iv. 153. 
TEsicn, his judgement of orators, v. 264. 
•J* ZEson river, ii. 302. 
JSsop, the fabulist, his advice to Solon, i. 262. A saying of his, ii 

384,385. 
JEsopus the tragedian, v. 298. 
■fJEsopia, district of, i. 228. 
JEsqiiiline Mount, iii. 244. 
•fsEsuvian Meadow, i. 282. 
Mhra, daughter of Pittheus, and mother of Theseus, i. 5. Carried 

prisoner to Lacedaemon, and thence to Troy, 43. 
f JEtolians, iii. 10. Carry oft" fifty thousand Helots, v. 173. Their 

war with the Achaeans, iii. 10. vi. 184, 185, 201. In Quintius* 

army, ascribe to themselves the victory over the Macedonians, 

iii. 41. 
Afranius Lucius, has a command under Pompey in Spain against 

Sertorius, iv. 26. Pompey leaves Armenia in his custody, 168. 

Defeats Phraates king of Parthia, 171. Defeats the Arabians 

near mount Amanus, 174. His insulting speech to Pompey, 210. 

He and Varro defeated in Spain by Caesar, 400. 
f Africa, iv. 416,420. 
Agamemnon, why pleased with the disputes between Ulysses and 

Achilles, iv. 75. Sacrifices his own daughter, 76. The terms, 

on which he exempts a rich coward from service, 80. 
Agariste, wife of Xanthippus, niece of Clisthenes, and mother of 

Pericles, ii. 5. 

INDEX. 269 

Agatharckus, a painter, valaes himself upon the expedition with 
which he works, ii. 22. The answer of Zeuxis upon it, ib. Kept 
prisoner by Alcibiades, till he had finished the painting of his 
house, 134. 
Agathoclea, the mistress of Ptolemy Philopater, v. 189. 

Agathocles, the Syracusan, marries his daughter to Pyrrhus, iii. 76. 
Agave, iii. 497. 

Agesilaus, the brother of Agis, iv. 70. His person, education, 
and character, 71. Some would have set him aside on account 
of his lameness, but he reigns notwithstanding, 72, 73. Commands 
in the war between the Greeks and Persians, 75. Humbles 
Lysander, 78. Defeats Tisaphernes, 81. Indulgent to his 
friends, 85, 86. Intends to penetrate into the heart of Persia. 
but is recalled from Asia by the Ephori, 87. Passes through 
Macedon, 89. Defeats the Pharsalians, 90. Fights the confe- 
derates at Cronea, 91, 92. Ravages the territories of Corinth, 
96, 98. Defeats the Acarnanians, 98. Obliges the Greeks to a 
peace with the king of Persia, 99. Justifies Phoebidas in his 
seizing the Cadmea, ib. Goes to war with the Thebans, 100. 
Teaches them the art of war, 104. His implacable hatred to the 
Thebans proves at last almost the ruin of Sparta, ib. Taken ill 
at Megara, ib. 105. The Spartans defeated by Epaminondas at 
Leuctra, 105, n. Agesilaus marches against the Mantineans, 
100. Quells a sedition in Lacedaemon, 112. Agesilaus goes 
into Egypt, 117. Deserts Tachos, and enters into the service of 
Nectanabis, 120. Sets out on his return to Sparta, 122. Is 
driven by a storm to the haven of Menelaus in Africa, and there 
dies, ib. His corpse embalmed and brought to Lacedaemon, 123. 
The crown remains in his family to Agis III. in the fifth gene- 
ration, ib. 

Agesilaus, one of the Ephori, v. 145. 

Agesipolis, king of Sparta, his character, iv. 95. and death, 100, 101. 

Agesistrata, the mother of Agis, v. 136, 139. Murthered by Am- 
phares, 153. 

Agidce, iii. 219. v. 135. 

Agias and young Aristomachus enter Argos with the king of Mace- 
don's troops, vi. 182. 

Agiatis, the widow of Agis, marries Cleomenes, v. 154. Her 
death, 177. 

Agis killed in battle, v. 280. 

, son of Archidamus, king of Sparta, i. 128. iv. 70. His answer 

to an Athenian, i. 142. Another saying of his, 143. Money 
first found it's way into Sparta in his reign, 159. His hatred of 
Alcibiades for debauching his wife, iii. 216. iv. 72. 

Agis, son of Eudamidas, v. 135. His character, 136, 137. At- 
tempts to restore the ancient laws and discipline of Sparta, 138. 
Offers to distribute his patrimony, and retain only what Lycurgus 
had originally appointed, 142. Deceived by Agesilaus, one of 
the Ephori, 146. Goes to assist the Achaeans against the i£to- 
lians, ib. Finds the people mutinying at his return, because 

'J70 INDEX. 

the lands were not divided, 14-8. Flies to the temple of Minerva 
for protection, 149. Put to death by order of the Ephori, 153. 
Agnon, or Ancon, the Athenian, iii. 205. 

-, the Teian, wore silver nails in his shoes, iv. 303. 

AgnonideSy the orator, accuses Phocion, v. 39. Is put to death by 

the Athenians, 44. 
Agnothemis declares he heard Antigonus say, that Alexander was 

poisoned, iv. 352. 
Agnus, one of the tribes of Athens, i. 14. 
Agra, Smaller Mysteries of Ceres celebrated at, i. 39. n. 
Agrarian law amongst the Romans, v. 206, 245, n. That of Ly- 

curgus, i. 122. The ill consequence of it's being evaded, v. 207. 
Agrmdos, her consecrated grove at Athens, ii. 132. The oath 

taken there by the Athenian youth, ib. 
Agriculture favourable to peace, i. 196. Favourable to oligarchy, 341. 
-fAgrigentum, repeopled, ii. 271. 
Agrigentines, assist Dion, vi. 26. 
Agrippa, Menenius, ii. 181. 
— , the friend of Augustus, impeaches- Cassius, vi. 81. Wins 

the battle of Actium, v. 489. Marries Julia, 508. 
Agrippina, married to ^Enobarbus, by whom she has Nero, and 

afterward married to Claudius Caesar, v. 508. Murthered by 

Nero, 509. 
Aiantis, one of the Athenian tribes, ii. 476. 
Ajaxy his mother Peribcea, i. 37. His son Eurysaces, ii. 112. 
Aidoneus king of the Molossians, i. 40. Destroys Pirithdus the 

friend of Theseus by his dog Cerberus, ib. Releases Theseus at 

the request of Hercules, 43. 
\Aipia, i. 259. 

Aius LoquutiuSy a temple erected to him by Camillus, i. 399. 
\Alace, fishermen belonging to that place present Sylla with 

some fish, iii. 268. 
Alalcomeniusy one of the Baeotian months, ii. 480. 
\Alba, i. 51,52, 57. 
■fAlban lake overflows it's banks, i. 365. 
f Albanians, a people near mount Caucasus, iv. 168. Defeated by 

Pompey, 169, who grants them peace, ib. Revolt, and are again 

defeated by Pompey, ib. 170. 
Albinus, a Roman officer, reflected on by Marius, iii. 129. Sylla's 

lieutenant, killed by the soldiers, 239. 

. , Lucius, his piety, i. 388. 

AlcceiiSy his epigram on Philip, iii. 41. 

, the Sardian, poisoned by Mithridates, for beating him in a 

horse-race, iv. 172. 
Alcander, his behaviour to Lycurgus, and how punished for it, 

i. 127. 
AlcetaSy son of Tharrytas, iii. 66. Father of Arybas, ib. 
■ refuses to obey the orders of Perdiccas, iv. 43. Disputes 

the command with Eumenes, 49. 
Alcibiades, his statue set up by the Romans, i. 181. Descended 

9 

INDEX. 271 

from Aiax by the father's side, and by his mother, Dinomaehe, 
from Alcnneon, ii. 112. His father Clinias gains honour in the 
sea-fight of Artemisjum, and falls in the battle of Coronea, ib. 
The attachment of Socrates to him contributes to his fame, 113. 
His beauty long retains it's charm, ib. He has a lisping which 
is graceful, 114. Particulars of his childhood, ib. His reasons for 
not learning to play upon the flute, 115. In spite of the blandish- 
ments of fortune and pleasure, he cleaves to Socrates, 116. Fro- 
lics, in one of which he serves a poor man, 117 — 119. His 
behaviour to two school-masters with respect to Homer, 120. 
What he said of Pericles, as to giving in his accounts, ib. So- 
crates saves him in the battle of Potidasa, and he returns the 
favour in that of Delium, 121. Gives Hipponicus, a man 
respectable both for his birth and fortune, a box on the ear, ib. 
Humbles himself for his rude frolic, and afterward marries his 
daughter Hipparete, who brings him a portion of ten talents, ib. 
122. Demands of his brother-in-law Callias ten talents more on 
the birth of his first child, ib. Callias declares the people his 
heir in case of his dying without children, ib. Hipparete, offended 
at his dissolute life, leaves him : but being obliged to present in 
public court a bill of divorce, he seizes and carries her off in his 
arms, ib. She dies, while Alcibiades is on his voyage to Ephesus, 
ib. The affair of his dog, 123, and of his quail, ib. A popular act 
of his, ib. Chooses to recommend himself principally by his 
eloquence, 121. Famed for his horses and chariots, ib. 
His victories at the Olympic games, ib. Several cities 
contribute to his expenses, 125. He imposes upon one 
Diomedes with regard to a chariot, ib. Phaeax and Nicias his 
chief competitors for the public favour, 126. He joins with them, 
to turn the ban of Ostracism upon Hyperbolus, 127. Out of 
envy to Nicias, contrives to break the peace which that general 
had made with the Lacedaemonians, 129. Engages the Manti- 
neans and Eleans, as well as the Argives in alliance with Athens, 
131. After the battle of Mantinea, an attempt is made toward 
aristocracy in Argos ; but Alcibiades supports the popular party, 
ib. He persuades the people of Argos, and those of Patrae too, 
to join their cities by long walls to the sea, 132. His luxury, 
profusion, and effeminacy of dress tarnish his great qualities, ib. 
His device upon his shield, 133. Sallies of his, which the Athe- 
nians called good-natured, 134. He makes a dreadful slaughter 
among the Melians, ib. What Timon the Misanthropist said to 
him, 135. He puts the Athenians upon the Sicilian expedition, 
and encourages the young men to hope for the conquest of 
Carthage itself, 135, 136. The Sicilian war disapproved by 
Socrates and Meton, 136. Nicias, Alcibiades, and Lamachus 
appointed generals, ib. 137. They are invested with discre- 
tionary powers, 137. Bad omens intervene, ib. 138. Alcibiades 
is accused of defacing the statues, and of a mock celebration of 
the Mysteries of Ceres, 133. His enemies get his trial put off, 
till after his departure to Sicily, 139. The forces he went out 
•with, 141. He takes Catana ; after which he is soon recalled to 

272 INDEX. 

take his trial, ib. The Salaminian galley is sent for ^him, 143; 
but he embarks in a vessel of his own, ib. n. His departure pre- 
vents the taking of Messena, 143. He arrives at Thurii, and 
escapes the search that was made after him, 144. His answer 
to one who asked him, ' whether he would not trust his country,' 
ib. He is condemned in his absence, and the priests commanded 
to denounce execrations against him, 145. Retires to Sparta, ib. 
Persuades the Spartans to send Gylippus to Sicily, to declare 
war against the AtheHians, and to fortify Decelea, ib. Conforms 
himself perfectly to the Spartan manners, 156. His surprising 
versatility in adopting the customs of all the countries to which 
he came, ib. He corrupts Timaea the wife of Agis, and she has a 
son by him,namedLeotychidas,147. The islands join the Lacedae- 
monians, and Alcibiades brings great part of Ionia to revolt, 148. 
The Spartans are jealous of his glory, and he retires to the court 
of Tisaphernes, ib. In what manner he was caressed there, ib. 
He advises that grandee to ' keep the balance even between the 
Lacedaemonians and Athenians,' 149. Makes private proposals 
to such of the Athenian nobility as were with the army in Samos, 
156. Phrynichus and Alcibiades endeavour to counteract each 
other, ib. Agreeably to the artful proposal of Alcibiades, an 
oligarchy is introduced at Athens, 151, 152. The army in Samos, 
in resentment of the usurpations of the Four Hundred at home, 
choose Alcibiades general, 152. His prudent behaviour saves 
the commonwealth, ib. The Four Hundred are quashed at 
Athens, 153. Near Abydos, he defeats the Lacedaemonian fleet 
commanded by Mindarus, 154. Alcibiades goes to wait upon 
Tisaphernes, and is put under arrest, 155. Finds means to make 
his escape, and joins the Athenians again, ib. Defeats Pharna- 
bazus, kills Mindarus, and takes Cyzicum, 156. Intercepts the 
letter to the Ephori, written on occasion of their loss, ib. En- 
courages Thrasyllus, who had been beaten befora Ephesus, and 
supports him against Pharnabazus, 157. Plunders the province 
of Pharnabazus, ib. Lays siege to Chalcedon, ib. Repulses 
Pharnabazus, who came to it's relief, 158. Makes himself 
master of Selybria, ib. The Chalcedonians return to their alle- 
giance to Athens, 159. Recovers Byzantium, 160. Returns 
with great triumph to his native country, and is received by the 
Athenians with tears of joy, 161, 162. He addresses the people 
in full assembly, who give him absolute command of their forces 
by sea and land, 163. The Eumolpidae take oft' the execrations, 
ib. His arrival falling in with the feast of the Plynteria, sup- 
posed inauspicious, ib. He conducts with an armed force the 
procession to Eleusis in the feast of Ceres, 164. The Athenians 
apprehensive of his setting himself up tyrant, soon send him to 
sea again, 165. He defeats the people of Andros, and a party 
of Lacedaemonians in that island, but does not take the city, ib. 
The Athenians are displeased, that he does not do every thing, 
166. He goes into Caria to raise money, and leaves the fleet in 
charge with Antiochus, ib. Antiochus fights contrary to his 
orders, and is beaten by Lysander, ib. 167. Alcibiades after- 

12 

INDEX. 273 

Vard offers Lysander battle, but be declines it, ib. Thrasybulus 
goes to Athens, to accuse Aleibiades, 167. The Athenians ap- 
point new commanders, ib. Aleibiades retires into Thrace, where 
he had previously built a castle nearBisanthe,/£. He collects some 
foreign troops, makes war upon some provinces of Thrace, and 
defends the Grecian frontier, 168. Finds the new Athenian 
generals ill-stationed at ./Egos-Potamos, and unmindful of dis- 
cipline, ib. Gees to inform them of their danger, and is treated 
ill, ib. Lysander destroys the Athenian fleet, takes Athens itself, 
and sets up the Thirty Tyrants, 169. Aleibiades retires into 
Bithynia, and thence to the court of Pharnabazus, of whom he 
desires a safe conduct to Artaxerxes, 170. The Athenians la- 
ment their ill treatment of Aleibiades, ib. Critias, cue of the 
Thirty Tyrants, exhorts Lysander to procure the death of Alei- 
biades, 171. Lysander desires Pharnabazus to take him off, ib. 
His dream preceding his death, ib. The manner of his death, ib. 
His mistress Timandra gives him a decent interment, ib. 172. 

Alcidamus, v. 257- 

Alcimenes, the Acha?an, his friendship to Dion, vi. 22. 

Alcimus the Epirot, a brave officer in Demetrius' army, v. 383. 
Killed in the siege of Rhodes, ib. 

Alcman, a celebrated lyric poet, i. 156. 

Alcmccon, father of Megacles, i. 263. 

. — -, general of the Athenians against the Cirrhseans, i. 231, 

— , son of Amphiaraiis, vi. 155. 

— , the last of the Archons for life, at Athens, i. 45. n. 

Alcmena, i. 9. Her body disappears as they are carrying it to the 
grave, 98. Married to Rhadamanthus after the death of Am- 
phytrion, iii. 224. 

Ala/oneus, carries Pyrrhus' head to his father Antigonus, and is 
reproved for it, iii. 117. Behaves with some propriety to He- 
lenus the son of Pyrrhus, 118. 

Alea, the sepulchre of Rhadamanthus, iii. 224. 

f Alesia, iv. 390. 

Alexander VI. Pope, saying of his, i. 26, n. 

Alexander, or Paris, i. 43. 

— , son of Amynta?, killed by his brother Ptolemy, in 

373, n. 

, the son of Pyrrhus, by Lanassa, iii. 76. 

the son of Cassander, expelled by his brother Antipater, 

iii. 72. Calls in Pyrrhus and Demetrius, ib. Is killed, 73. 

of Antioch, v. 489. 

of Myndos, iii. 140. 

the philosopher, entertained by Crassus, and ill supplied 

with necessaries, iii. 450. 

the tyrant of Phera?, beaten by Pelopidas, ii. 372. 

Seizes Pelopidas and Tsuienias, 374. Defeated by the Thebans. 
and Thessalians, 382. Killed by the contrivance of his wife, 
386, 387. 
Alexander the Great, orders the Macedonian troops to shave 
their beard^ and why, i. 7. A descendent of Hercules by Ca* 
vol. vi. T 

%1i INDEX. 

ranus, and of ifcaeus by Neoptolemu?, iv. 239. Son of Philip 
and Olympian, ib. Presignified by a dream of his father's, to 
be possessed of a bold and lion-like courage, 240. Some account 
of his pretended divine extraction, 24-1. Born the same day that 
the temple of Diana was burnt at Ephesus, 24-2. Philip takes 
the city of Potidsea, has an account of a victory won for him, 
another at the Olympic games, and of the birth of his son, 24>8. 
Lysippus, the only statuary, whom Alexander allowed to represent 
him, ib. His person described, ib. 244. He is continent, and 
sublime in his ambition, ib. A remarkable saying of his, 215. 
Gives no encouragement to the Athletac, ib. His father hap- 
pening to be absent, he receives when very young the Persian 
embassadors, ib. They are astonished at his lofty and enter- 
prising genius, ib. On each new victory of Philip's, says, ' his 
father will leave him nothing to conquer,' 246. Leonidas, a re- 
lation of the queen's, is his governor, and Lysimachus, the Acar- 
nanian, his preceptor, ib. Bucephalus is offered in sale to Philip, 
and Alexander manages him, when none of the grooms were 
able to do it, ib. 247. Philip sends for Aristotle to instruct his 
son in philosophy, 248. Alexander's letter to Aristotle, on his 
publishing treatises upon the profounder parts of science, 249. 
That philosopher's answer, ib. Alexander has a practical know- 
ledge of physic, ib. Loves polite literature, 250. His great 
esteem for the Iliad, ib. What books Harpalus sent to him in 
Asia, ib. His saying concerning Aristotle, ib. Philip, upon 
his expedition to Byzantium, leaves him regent, 251. He re- 
duces the Medari, a barbarous nation that rebelled during his 
regency, ib. Fights against the Greeks in the battle of Cha> 
ronea, and is the first who breaks the Sacred Band, ib. Philip's 
marriage with Cleopatra brings on a quarrel between himself and 
Alexander, 2.52. Alexander places Olympias in Epirus, and 
retires himself into Illyricum, ib. Demaratus, the Corinthian, 
procures a reconciliation between Philip and Alexander, ib. 253. 
Alexander imagines that his father designs the crown for Arrhi- 
dseus, and therefore endeavours to supplant his natural brother 
in a match negotiating for him, 253. Philip banishes his son's 
counsellors, 254. Pausanias being abused by order of Attalus 
and Cleopatra, applies to Philip for justice, is denied it, and kills 
him, ib. Olympias and Alexander, supposed accomplices in his 
murther, ib. He endeavours to wipe off that aspersion, ib. The 
.state of Macedon, and it:s dependencies, at the death of Philip, 
255. Alexander's council advise him to give up Greece, and to 
treat the revolting barbarians with mildness, ib. But, though 
only twenty years old, he resolves to proceed with vigour, ib. 
Marches to the banks of the Danube, and defeats Syrmus king 
of the Tribal! i, ib. Marches to chastise the Thebans and Athe- 
nians, ib. Makes equitable proposals to the Thebans at first; 
and, these being rejected, he begins the war with great fury, 
25(3. Takes Thebes, and levels it with the ground, ib. Sells the 
inhabitants for slaves, a few excepted, ib. 257. The injuries 
- done to Timoclea, her revenge and intrepid behaviour, 257. H& 

12 

INDEX. 275 

Forgives the Athenians, ib. Long remembers, with regret, his 
cruelty to the Thebans, 2.58. Is elected captain-general of 
Greece against the Persians, ib. What passed between him and 
Diogenes, ib. 259. He consults the oracle at Delphi, 2.59. 
Omen of his success, ib. The number of troops with which he 
passes into Asia, ib. The trifling sum he had provided for their 
pay, 260. He gives away almost all the revenues of Macedon, 
ib. Visits Ilium, sacrifices to Minerva, and does homage at the 
tomb of Achilles, ib. Fights the battle with the Persians on the 
banks of the Granicus, 261. Is in great danger of being slain, 
262. Saved by Clitus, 263. Erects statues to his friends who 
fell in the battle, 264. Sends presents to the Greeks, ib. Sardis, 
and other cities, make their submission, ib. He takes Halicar- 
nassus and Miletus by storm, ib. A brass plate, with a prophecy 
inscribed, is thrown up by a spring in Lycia, ib. He hastens to 
reduce all the coast, 265. Marches by Climax along the shore 
of the Pamphylian sea, ib. He unties the Gordian knot, 266. 
Darius advances from Susa, with six hundred thousand men, 
267. Darius dream, ib. He is encouraged by Alexander's long 
stay in Cilicia, ib. That stay owing to sickness, contracted by 
his bathing in the river Cydnus, .ib None but Philip the Acar- 
nanian ventures to attempt his cure, 268. Parmen.io accuses 
Philip of a design to poison him, ib. The striking scene 
while Alexander takes Philip's medicine, ib. He recovers in 
three days, 269, n. Darius neglects the advice of Amyntas, 
and enters -the straits of Cilicia, 269. Inconveniences of this 
situation, ib. Alexander is wounded, but kills a hundred 
and ten thousand of the enemy, 270. The mother and wife of 
Darius, and his two daughters, are among the prisoners, 271. 
Alexander behaves to them with great honour and humanity, ib. 
Knows no woman before marriage, except Barsine the widow of 
Memnon, 272. Severely reproves Philoxenus for an infamous 
proposal, ib c273. Gives orders for the punishment of two Mace- 
donians, who had corrupted the wives of some of the mercenaries, 
273. Is temperate in eating and drinking, ib. Restores' Ada to 
the throne of Caria, ib. How he spent his days of leisure, 274. 
In what manner his entertainments were conducted, 275. Vain, 
and very capable of being flattered, ib. Seizes the Persian 
money and equipages at Damascus, ib. The kings of Cyprus and 
Phoenicia make their submission ; only Tyre holds out, 276. 
He besieges that city seven months, ib. Presages of his success, 
ib. Makes an excursion against the Arabians of Antilibanus, 
and is brought into great danger through the indiscretion of his 
preceptor Lysimachus, 277. Tyre taken, 278. Gaza taken, ib. 
He sends part of the spoils to Olympius and Cleopatra, ib. 
Sends five hundred talents weight of frankincense to his late 
governor Leonidas, ib. Puts Homer's Iliad in a valuable casket, 
which had belonged to Darius, 279. Fixes upon the happy 
situation of Alexandria, in consequence of an intimation from 
Homer in a dream, ib. 280. It's figure 280. Omen of it's being 
a commercial place, ib. He visits the temple of Jupiter Ammon, 

x 2 

27S INDEX. 

ib. 281. The dangers attending that journey, overcome by 
Alexander's superior good fortune, '281. A flock of crows con- 
ducts him on his way, 282. Amnion salutes him as his son ; 
informs him, that ' the death of Philip is sufficiently avenged;' 
.md promises him the conquest of the world, ib. Goes to hear 
Psammo, an Egyptian. Philosopher, 2SI5. His pretensions to 
divinity, how conducted, ib. At his return from Egypt to Phoe- 
nicia, he celebrates games in honour of the gods, 2S4-. Darius 
proposes conditions of peace to Alexander; but Alexander insists 
on hit) absolute submission, 28a. The wife of Darius dies ; and 
Uexander, though on his march, returns and buries her with 
great magnificence, 286. Tireus, one of Darius' eunuch's, flies 
to his master with the news, ib. The important and affecting 
discourse, that passed between them, ib. 287. Darius prays, that 
'If the period of the Persian glory was arrived, none but Alex- 
ander might sit on the throne of Cyrus,' 288. Alexander having 
Subdued all on this side the Euphrates begins his march against 
Darius, who had talcen the field with a million of men, ib. The 
servants of Alexander's army make parties, and choose two chiefs, 
one of whom they called Alexander, and the other Darius, ib. 
Alexander orders the two chiefs to fight in single combat; and 
the issue is considered as an omen of the event of the war, ib, 
Sacrifices to Peak before the battle of Arbela, 289. Parmenio 
and others advise Alexander to attack the Persians in the night, 
290. Ilis answer, ib. Sleeps long the morning of the battle, ib. 
The battle described, 291 — 293. Darius flies, and Parmenio's 
demand of assistance prevents Alexander from going on the 
pursuit, 294. Alexander is acknowledged king of all Asia, 295. 
Declares against all tyrannies in Greece, ib. Gives orders for 
rebuilding the city of Plata;a, and why, ib. Sends presents to 
the Crotonians in Italy, ib. Pinds immense treasures in Susa, 
298. Water from the Nile and the Danube, found in the repo- 
sitories of the kings of Persia, ib. He enters Persia, through a 
country difficult of access, and well guarded, and makes great 
slaughter at first in terrorem, ib. 299. Finds as much treasure 
there as at Susa, 299. Enters Persepolis, ib. Considers whe- 
ther lie .shall rear again a statue of Xerxes, which was thrown 
down, ib. What Demaratus said, when he saw him first seated 
on the Persian throne, 300. He burns the palace of Xerxes ar. 
the instigation of a courtesan, 301. His munificence increases 
with his acquisitions, ib. Instances of that munificence, ib. 302. 
ilis mother Olympias endeavours to lessen it, but in vain, 302. 
Her attempts to direct the government during his absence, 
prove fruitless, g03. His great officers give into luxury and 
effeminacy;, and he reproves them with all the temper of a philo- 
sopher, ib. 301. Sits them an example of love oLC toil, in the 
exercise of hunting, 301. His officers begin to speak ill of him, 
ib. Ilis -noble saving thereupon, 305. His attention to hi* 
friends, and the obliging letters Ire wrote to them, ib. He paid 
the strictest regard to justice in the first years of his reign, and 
jcuted it with great moderation; but afterward becomes ii> 

INDEX. 

1 1 

flexibly severe, and listens too much to informers, 306, 307. On 
intelligence that Bessus had seized the person of Darius, he 
dismisses the Thessalians with rich presents, 307". Makes an 
expeditious march, to get that prince into his hands, ib. Dis- 
tressed with thirst, but refuses to drink, while so many others 
wanted water, ib. Darius is found extended on his chariot, and 
pierced with many darts, 30S. A Macedonian gives him some 
water, to quench his thirst, 309. That noble-minded, but un- 
fortunate, prince's last words, ib. Alexander covers the body 
with his own robe, ib. Puts the traitor Bessus to a dreadful death, 
ib. Orders the body of Darius all the honours of a royal funeral, 
ib. Sends it embalmed to his mother, ib. Takes his brother 
Oxathres, into the number of his friends, ib. Marches into 
Hyrcania, and takes a view of the Caspian Sea, ib. His horse 
Bucephalus is taken by the Barbarians, but soon brought to him 
again, 310. In Parthia he first puts on the robe of the eastern 
kings, ib. Passes the Orexartes, and defeats the Scythians, 311. 
There, said by some historians, to have been visited by the queen 
of the Amazons, ib. His speech to the army on entering Hyr- 
cania, 312. He endeavours to unite the Asiatics to the Mace- 
donians by a mixture of fashions, ib. Selects thirty thousand 
boys, to be educated in the Grecian literature, and trained to 
arms in the Macedonian manner, ib. Marries Roxana, 313. 
His two favourites, Hephaestion and Craterus, quarrel, ib. They 
are effectually reconciled by him, ib' Philotas, the son of Par- 
menio, has great authority among the Macedonians, ib. 314. 
But takes too much state upon him for a subject, 314. Par- 
menio says to him, ' My son, be less,' ib. By way of recom- 
mending himself to his mistress, ascribes all the great actions of the 
war to himself and his father, ib. This opens the way to his ruin, 
ib. He refuses to introduce persons to the king who came to 
inform him of a conspiracy, 315. The conspirator is slain; and 
Alexander wanting farther pi'oofs against Philotas, has him put 
to the torture, 316. Not only Philotas, but his father Parmenio, 
the king's oldest and best counsellor and general, is put to death, 
ib. This makes Alexander terrible to his friends, ib. The sad 
story of Clytus, 317 — 319. Alexander's inexpressible grief for 
his loss, 320. The efforts of Aristander, Callisthenes, and Anax- 
archus, to console him, ib. Circumstances, which brought on 
the ruin of Callisthenes, 321 — 323. His severity; his refusing 
to worship Alexander, 323. Unjustly accused of being con- 
cerned in Hermolaus' plot, 321. Various accounts of Callis- 
thenes' death, 324. Alexander, previously to his Indian expedi- 
tion, burns the baggage, 325. Alarmed by a prodigy, and soon 
refreshed by a better omen, 326. On breaking the ground by 
the river Oxus, he finds a spring of oily liquor, ib. Dislodges 
Sisimethres from a rock apparently impregnable, 327. Besieges 
Nysa, 323. Acuphis comes with proposals of peace, from the 
citizens, and is appointed governor of the place, ib. Taxiles, 
a powerful Indian king, meets him in a friendly manner, ib. 329. 
Alexander makes him a present of a thousand talents, 329. 
After the capitulation of a certain city, he destroys a body of 

f>- 

78 INDEX. 

Indian mercenaries, ib. Hangs many Indian philosophers, ib. 

330. His war with Porus, who takes post on the eastern bank 
of the Hydaspes, 330. Passes the river with great danger, ib. 
His saying thereupon, ib. The battle with Porus described, 

331. The uncommon size of Porus, and the care hir, elephant 
took of him when wounded, ib. 332. Alexander asks Porus, now 
his prisoner, how he desires to be treated ; and he says, 'Like 
a king,' 332. The conqueror restores him his kingdom, which 
he was to govern as his lieutenant, and adds a large country to it, 
ib. Appoints Philip, one of his own friends, to the government 
of another large country, ib. Pmcephalus dies, ib. Alexander 
builds a city in memory of him, ib. Resolves to pass the Ganges, 
but his troops absolutely refuse to do it, 333. His grief there- 
upon, ib. He builds great altars, and leaves arms and mangers 
much bigger than those in use, 334. Forms a design to visit the 
ocean, and falls down the rivers for that purpose, ib. Makes 
several descents, and attacks cities by the way, ib. Is in extreme 
danger from the Malli, ib. Takes ten Gymnosophists, who had 
stirred up Sabbas and others to revolt, 336. Puts abstruse ques- 
tions to them, and commands them, on pain of death, to give 
right solutions, 336, 337. What passed between him and the 
philosopher Calanus, 339. Arrives at the ocean, and sails to the 
isle of Scilloustis, ib. Considers the nature of the sea and the 
coast, ib. Orders his admiral Nearchus to sail round, keeping 
India on the right, ib. Marches himself through the country of 
the Orites, ib. Loses in his Indian expedition one fourth part 
of his numerous army, ib. Reaches Gedrosia, which is a fertile 
country, 340. Marches through Carmania in a Bacchanalian 
procession, ib. The procession described, ib. Is delighted with 
the account of Nearchus' expedition, and meditates himself a 
great expedition by sea, 341. On the report of that design, his 
new subjects revolt, and other great disorders arise, ib. Olym- 
pias and Cleopatra league against Antipater, and drive him out 
of Macedon, ib. He chastises his own lieutenants, 342. Kills 
Oxyartes with his own hand, ib. Gives every woman in Persia 
a piece of gold, ib. Finds the tomb of Cyrus broken open, and 
puts the culprit to death, ib. The inscription on the tomb, ib. 
Calanus burns himself, 343. His prophecy previous to that 
action, ib. Several of Alexander's friends killed by drinking in 
a great carousal, ib. 344. He takes Statira, the daughter of 
Darius, to wife, and marries his friends to Persian ladies, 344. 
Pays oft' the debts of all, who had married Persian women, ib. 
Antigonus, though not in debt, puts himself upon the list ; but is 
detected and punished, ib. Alexander finds the thirty thousand 
Persian boys perfect in their Grecian exercises, and is greatly 
delighted, 345. Put it is matter of uneasiness to the Macedo- 
nians, ib. He takes Persians for his guards, and rejects the 
Macedonians lor their mutinous behaviour, ib. They humble 
themselves, and are pardoned, ib. 346. 1 1 is generous behaviour 
to the invalids, who return to Macedon, ib. lie celebrates games 
at Kehatana, ib. Hephacstion sickens, and dies there, ib. His 
master's grief on that occasion, ib* The mourning and monu- 

INDEX. 279 

ftient for him, ib. 347. Alexander sacrifices the Cussocans to the 
manes of Hephacstion, 347. Procures orders from Ammon to re- 
vere him as a demi-god, 346,347. Nearchus returns from a second 
expedition, 347, The Chaldaeans warn Alexander not to enter 
Babylon, ib. 348. Omens of his approaching end, 348. He 
orders a madman to be executed for putting on his robe and 
diadem, ib. 349. Is jealous of the designs of Antipater and his 
sons, 349. Falls into a fever, in consequence of continued hard 
drinking, 350. An account of the progress of that fever, from 
his own journals, 351, 352. Dies, 352. No suspicion of poison 
till some years after his death, ib. Roxana, now pregnant by 
Alexander, gets Statira into her power, and puts her to death, 
353. Perdiccas is her accomplice, and uses Arrhidacus only as a 
screen, ib. 

Alexander, the son of Demetrius, by Deidamia, v. 421. 

• and Cleopatra, twins of Cleopatra by Antony, surnamed 

the Sun and the Moon, v. 460. 

■ of Corinth, vi. 168. 

— , the son of Perseus, ii. 332. 

the son of Polyperchon, v. 39, 371. 

•j- Alexandria founded by Alexander, iv. 279. Token of it's be- 
ing a commercial place, 280. It's figure, ib. The great library 
burnt, 414. 

Alexandrian war, iv. 414. 

Alexandrides the historian, iii. 209. 

Alexis of Laodicea, punished for his infidelity to Antony, v. 495- 

f Alexia, hod. Alise, besieged by Caesar, iv. 390. Surrenders, 391. 

Alexicrates, chief cup-bearer to Pyrrhus, iii. 71. 

Alexippus, the physician, Alexander's letter to him, iv. 305. 

Alimus, one of the wards of Athens, iii. 279. Thucydides belonged 
to it, ib. 

\Allia, river, i. 383- Battle of, in which the Gauls overthrow 
the Romans, ib. 

iAllobroges, their embassadors concerned in Catiline's conspiracy ,, 
v. 313, 314. 

Alopece, one of the wards of Athens, Aristides belonging to it, ii. 
444, and Thucydides, ib. 

f Alopecus, or Fox-hill, iii. 227- 

j Alps, mountains of, iii. 148. 

fAlscea, v. 161. 

Altar, ballots taken from it, ii. 49 and n. 

Alycus, son of Sciron, slain by Theseus in the cause of Helcn> 
i. 42. 

\Alycus, a place near Megara, i. 41. 

■\Amanus, mount, iv. 174. v. 337, 416. 

Amarsya$c i. 18. 

■\ Amathusian, Paeon, the, i. 22. 

^Amazons, their history and wars, i. 32. Their history as con' 
nected with Hercules allegorical, 32, n. Sacrifice offered to 
them at Athens, 35. Their sepulchres at Megara and Scotusscea, 
36. Said to assist the Albanians against Pompey, iv. 170. The 

280 INDEX. 

country they inhabited, ib. Their wars represented by Phidias, 
ii. 48. Their queen's visit to Alexander a iiction, iv. 811. 
Amazonium, i. 34, 35. 

Ambiorix, king of the Gauls, beats Cotta and Titurius, but is de- 
feated by Caesar, iv. 887, 888. 
Ambition censured, iii. 284. iv. 79. v. 340. 
Ambuscade, at Sparta, what, i. 155. 
"}" Ambracia, iii. 72. 
TAmbrones, march against Marius, iii. 143. Defeated by Ma- 

rius, 144. 
Ambuslus. See Fabius. 
f Ameridt iii* 141. 

Amestr'iSy married to her father Artaxerxes, vi. 141. 
Aminias, the Decelean, i. 334. 
Aminius, the Phocean, one of Antigonus' officers, marches to the 

relief of Sparta against Pyrrhus, iii. 100. 
Amintius, a friend of Caesar's, iy. 415. 

\ Amisus, an Athenian colony, iii. 358- Besieged by Lucullus, 
352. Defended by Calhmachus, ib. At length taken, and 
burnt, ib. 
Ammon, the son of Pasiphae, iv. 142. 

, — , Jupiter, his oracle consulted by Lysander, iii. 214. By 

Cimon, 321. By the Athenians, 418. By Alexander, iv. 281. 
Ammonius, the philosopher, Plutarch's master, I. xxix. xxx. 
Amnceus the senator, his saying, v. 68. 
Amcebceus, the musician, vi. 169. 
A.mompharetus, the Spartan, i. 230. ii. 471. 
iAtnorgos, v. 373. 

Arnphares betrays and murthers Agis, v. 151, 152. 
Amphiaraus, his oracle, ii. 475. 
Amphicrates, an Athenian orator, dies at the court of Tigranes, 

iii. 358. 
AwpJiictyones, or general assembly of the states of Greece, iii. 245. 
246. Undertake the war against the Cirrhseans, i. 231. The 
remonstrance made to them by Themistocles, i. 342. Their de- 
cree against the people of Scyros, iii. 304. 
+ Amphilochia, iii. 72. 

■fAmphipolis, an Athenian colony, iii. 303. 
■\Amphissa, v. 272. 
Amphitheus, iii. 222. 
Amphitryon, iii'. 224. 
Amulet, ii. 58. 

Amulius dispossessed his brother Numitor, i. 52. Orders Ilomuluk 
and Remus to be destroyed, 53. Is killed by these two princss, 60. 
Arnycla, the nurse of Alcibiades, i.. 137. ii. 113. 
Amyntas, his advice to Darius, iv. 269. 

■■ , king. of Lycaonia, sends forces to Antony, v. 484. Goes 

over to Augustus, 486. 
Amyntus, sent by Philip to Thebes, v. 272. 

Anacharsis, the Scythian, his conversation and friendship with 
Solon, i. 224. 

INDEX. 281 

AnaJces, Castor and Pollux why so called, i. 42, 191. 

Annalius, Lucius, a senator, struck by Crassus, iii. 500. 

^Anapus, river, ii. 257. vi. 27. 

Anarchy, dreadful to a state, iv. 194, 195. 

Auaxagoras of Clazomena?, said to have taught Themistocles, i. 
313. Pericles indebted to him for most of his philosophy, ii. 8. 
Denies the world to be the eifect of chance, ib. llesolves to 
starve himself, 29. His explication of the lunar eclipses, iii. 
435. A prosecution intended against him at Athens, and why, 
ii. 49. Pericles conducts him out of Athens, ib. 

Anaxarchus of Abdera, iv. 320. His impious advice to Alexan- 
der, ib. 

Anaxidamus, iii. 256. 

Anaxilaiis, governor of Byzantium, treats privately with Alcibiades, 
ii. 159. Accused for it at Sparta, and is acquitted, 160, 161. 

Anaximenes, an orator, v. 286. 

Anaxo, the Trcezonian, the rape of her by Theseus, i. 37. 

Ancharia, mother to Octavja, v. 454. 

Anchariux, despatched by Mantis' guards, iii. 176. 

Ancilia, i. 190. 

Ancus Marcius, son of Marcius and Pompilia, and grandson of 
Numa, i. 182. 

Andocides, the Athenian orator, imprisoned, ii. 142. Hermes of, 
ib. iii. 419. 

Andria, public repasts among the Cretans, copied by Lycurgus, 
i. 127. 

Androcles, the orator, ii. 138, 139. 

Androcleon, one of those that saved Pyrrhus in his infancy, iii. 66. 

Androclides the historian, iii. 196. 

opposes the Spartan interest in Thebes, ii. 346. Is as- 
sassinated at Athens, 347. 

, a faithful servant to Pyrrhus, iii. 66. 

accused of being corrupted by the king of Persia, iii. 

222. 
Androcottus, king of India, presents Seleucus with five hundred 

elephants, iv. 333. Sees Alexander in India, 334. 
Androcydes, a painter who worked at Thebes, ii. 371. 
Androgens, murthered on the confines of Attica, i. 15. On which 

account the Athenians pay tribute, ib. Games instituted in ho- 
nour of him by Minos, 16. 
Andromache, picture of her parting with Hector, vi. 78. 
Andromachus, father of TimtEus the historian, governs Taurome- 

nium with great equity, ii. 243. 

betrays Crassus, iii. 491. 

Andron of Halicarnassus, his account of the Ishmian games, i. 32. 
Andrnnicus, the Rhodian, makes tables to the writings of Aristotle 

and Theophrastus, iii. 267. 
\Andros, ii. 342. The answer of it's inhabitants to Themistocles, 

i. 843. Colonized by Pericles, ii. 19. 
Androtion, i. 238. v. 269. 
Angel u*, one of Pyrrhus' servants, iii. 66. 

2*2 INDEX. 

Ankhts, LuciUS, the praetor, seizes Gentius, king of Illvria, ii.2$7. 

Animals, how mercifully they ought to he used, ii. 499. The most 
fearful, the hardest to be tamed, vi. 144. Why some see clearly 
in the night, and are almost blind in the day-time, 162. 

■fAnio, river, i. 301. 

A nit es. See Diana. 

f Anius or Aoii?, river, iv. 402. 

Annibal enters Italy, gains the great battle of Trebia, and over' 
runs all Etruria, ii. 65. Beats Flaminius the consul near the 
Thrasymenian lake, 67. Sensible of Fabius' prudence in avoid- 
ing a battle, while others condemned that> conduct, 71,72. Led 
by his guides to Casalinum, instead of Casinum, 73. Sur- 
rounded, and the rear of his army attacked by Fabius, 74-. His 
stratagem to extricate himself from that difficulty, ib.75. Orders 
the lands of Fabius to be spared, while the rest of the country 
is ravaged, 76. Defeats Minucius, 81. Says of Fabius, that 
« the cloud which had long hovered upon the mountains was 
come down in a storm at last,' 82. The good effects of a jest of 
bis upon Gisco, 87. Chooses his ground, and draws up his army 
in a most excellent manner at Cannae, ib. Says oi' the Roman 
cavalry, when he saw them dismount, that * they were delivered 
to him bound,' 88. Kills fifty thousand, and takes fourteen 
thousand prisoners, 89. Flis error in not pursuing his victory, 
90. Attempts in vain to ensnare Fabius, 94-. Fights Mar- 
cellus, 427, 429. His observations upon Marcellus' returning 
to the charge next day, ib. 430. He ravages Italy, 431. Draws 
Marcellus into a snare, 93, 435. His generous behaviour to 
Marcellus' remains, 436. He acknowledges, that the divine 
counsels are irresistible, ib. Plutarch's observation on his never 
being wounded in battle, 440. Goes to the court of Antiochus, 
iii. 42. Thence to that of Prusias, king of Bithynia, 57. His 
death and speech immediately preceding it, 58. Whom he 
judged the greatest generals, 59. iii. 75. His advice to the king 
of Armenia to build the city of Artaxata, 372. 

Annius murthers Mark Antony the orator, iii. 178. 

, Caius, sent by Sylla against Sertorius, iv. 10. 

, Gallus, one of Otho's generals, vi. 251. Marches to the 

relief of Cremona, ib. His advice to Otho, 253. 

, Titus, his question which puzzles Tiberius Gracchus, v. 

215. 

A-ntcEus killed in wrestling, by Hercules, i. 12. His incredible 
size, iv. 12. Where said to be buried, ib. 

Antagoras of Chios, his behaviour to Pausanias, ii. 483. 

Antalcidas, his saying to Agesilaus, i. 131. iv. 103, 104. Another 
saying of his, 111. Sent by the Lacedaemonians to negotiate a 
peace, 98. By the peace which bears his name, the Asiatic 
Greeks are betrayed, ib. 99. In great favour with Artaxerxes, 
vi. 138. His death, 139. 

^Antcmnce, i. 76. iii. 275. 

fAntemnates defeated by Romulus, i. 76. 

Anterior, i. 180. 

INDEX. 283 

■\Anthedon, iii. 26S. 

Anthemion, ii. 191. 

Anihcmocritus, the Athenian herald, sent to Lacedaemon and the 
Megarensians, ii. 46. The Megarensians suspected to be guilty 
of his death, ib. 

Anthesterion, month of, iii. 251. v. 389. 

Antho, the daughter of Amulius, i. 53. 

Antias and Vatinius made praetors through Pompey's interest, 
iv. 191. 

^Antiates, and other Volscians, defeated by Cominius, ii. 184, 185. 
Their other wars with the Romans, 197. 

Anti-Cato, Caesar's answer to Cicero's Cato, iv. 420. v. 341. 

Anticrates, the Spartan, kills Epaminondas in battle, iv. 116. Pie 
and his posterity exempted from taxes, ib. . 

Anticyra, one of Demetrius' mistresses, v. 386. 

f ,vi.93. 

Autigenes, one of the principal officers of the Argyraspides, iv. 61. 
Conspires against Eumenes, ib. Is put to death by Antigonus, 
iv. 66, n. 

> , banished from court by Alexander, and why, iv. 34*. 

Pardoned, 345. 

Antigenidas, v. 363. 

Antigone, daughter of Berenice, married to Pyrrhus, iii. 70. 

— : , of Pydna, mistress to Philotas, betrays him, iv. 314. 

■f Antigonia. See Mantinea. 

Autigonis, a new tribe added by the Athenians., v. 373. 

Antigonus, the most, powerful of Alexander's successor?, v. 365. 
A* saying of his before the sea-fight near Andros, ii. 342. Said, 
' Pyrrhus would be the greatest general in the world, if he lived 
to be old,' iii. 75. Refuses to establish Eumenes in Cappadocia, 
iv. 41. Commissioned by the Macedonians, along with Anti- 
pater, to manage the war against Eumenes, 48 Disperses pa- 
pers in the camp of Eumenes, setting a price upon his head, 49. 
ilis saying on Eumenes' forbearing to seize his baggage, 51. 
Besieges that general in the castle of Nora, 52. Oilers him 
peace, 54. Defeated by Eumenes near the Pasitigris, 57. His 
saying on Eumenes' being carried in a litter through the ranks, 
59. Is deceived by a stratagem of Eumenes, 60, <6\. Takes the 
baggage of the Argyraspides, who acted under Eumeiaes, 62. 
Offers to restore it, if they will deliver him up, 63. Puts Eu- 
menes to death, 65. Punishes the Argyraspides for their trea- 
chery, 66- Desires certain embassadors to tell their masters 
how happily he and his son Demetrius lived together, v. 365. 
Suspects Mitbridates one of his own courtiers on account of 

- a dream, 366. His wars with Ptolemy, 367. His raillery upon 
his son, 379. Reproves his son for enquiring into his councils, 
392, 393. Killed in the battle of Ipsus, 393. What a peasant of 
Phrygia said with regard to him, 34, 35. 

* Gonatas, son of Demetrius, reigns in Macedon, iii. 103. 

Defeated by Pyrrhus, ib. Called to Argos by Aristippus, 110. 
The answer he sent Pyrrhus upon his challenge, 112. Reproves 

284 INDEX. 

his son Alcyoheus for bringing Pyrrhus' head to him, 117. 
Burns the body of Pyrrhus honourably, 118. His obliging be- 
haviour to Helenus the son of Pyrrhus, and to his officers, ib. 
Offers to surrender himself to Seleucus, on condition that he 
would set his father at liberty, v. 4-19. Endeavours to gain 
Aratus, or make Ptolemy suspect him, vi. 166. His passion for 
making himself master of Acroeorintluis, 168. His suceess and 
joy thereupon, 169. His death, 187. 

Antigenic III. surnamed ' Doson,' ii. 289,290. Invited by the 
Achacans to be general of the league, iv. 175. vi. 192. but insists 
first on having Acrororinthus put into his hands, ib. The respect 
he showed Aratus, 197. The honours paid him by the Achaean.;, 
199, 200. Returns into Macedon, where he declares his kinsman 
Philip his successor, 201. Dies immediately after a battle, 
iv. 187. 

■ , king of Judea, beheaded by Antony, is the first king 

who suffered in that manner, v. 460. 

f Anli-libanusi mount, iv. 227. 

Antilochus writes a panegyric on Lysander, iii. 210. 

Ant: niacin's, i. 66. ii 229. Writes in praise of Lysander, iii. 210. 

f Antiock, of Daphne, iii. 355. 

f , in Mygdonia, the Nysibis of the barbarians, iii, 374. 

Antiochis, tribe of, ii. 445. 

Antiockus, an Athenian pilot, recommends himself to Alcibiades 
by a trifling service, ii. 123. Is entrusted with the fleet in his 
absence, ib. n. iii. 192. Fights contrary to orders, and is beaten 
by Lysander, ib. 

■ of Ascalon, first teaches the doctrines of the Old Aca- 
demy, iii. 388. Quits them for the New, v. 296. Leaves that, 
and adopts the doctrines of the Stoics, ib. Brutus a great ad- 
mirer of him, vi. 58. Cicero one of his hearers, v. 296. 

■ the Great at war with the Romans, iii. 23. Defeated by 

the Romans, ib. Marries a young girl at Chalcis, ib. Aims at 
universal monarchy, 42. Annibal at his court, ib. Is defeated 
at Thermopylae, and returns to Asia, 50. 

< son of Seleucus by Apama, v. 395. Falls in love with 

Stratonicehis father's wife,402. Seleucus gives her up to him, 404. 
-, king of Commagene, besieged by Ventidius, v. 457. 

» i_ f^j <j •/ 

Antiope the Amazon, given to Theseus, i. 32. 

Antiorus the son of Lycurgus, i. 162. 

Antipater defeated by the Greeks in Thcssaly, v. 30. Imposes 
hard conditions on the Athenians, 32. His answer to Phocion, 
ib. His testimony of Phocion, 36. His character and death, 
35, 37. Demosthenes, and others, put to death by his order, 
v. 236, 288. 

, son of Cassandcr, kills his mother Thessalonica, and 

expels his brother Alexander, iii. 72. 

of Tarsus, iii. 180. His lectures in philosophy, to whom 

dedicated, v. 207. 

of Tyre teaches Cato the Younger the Stoic philosophy. 

v. 52. 

INDEX. 28', 

Anliphanes, v. 262. 

Antiphates, i. 338. 

Antiphilus, an Athenian general, v. 28, 30. 

A/itip/io, the Rhamnusian, iii. 405. Accused by Demosthenes, 
and condemned, v. 268. 

■ , his invective against Alcibiades, ii. 115. 

Antiquity, fabulous, i. 2. 

Anti-scnatorian band, an abandoned set of men, a kind of guards 
to Sulpitius, iii. 164. 

Antisthenes, a saying of his concerning the Thebans, i. 161. Ano- 
ther concerning Ismenias, ii. 3. 

Antistia, married to Pompey, iv. 130. Divorced, 1S4-, 

, wife of Appius Claudius, and mother of Claudia, v. 203. 

.Intistius, the praetor, iv. 129. Gives his daughter to Pompey, ISO. 
Loses his life in espousing his interest, 135. 

. Vetus, pra?tor in Spain, iv. 362. 

. , an officer of the navy, his services to Brutus, vi. 79- 

Antonia, daughter of Mark Antony by Octavia, married to Drusus, 
v. 508. 

Antonias, Cleopatra's roved galley so called, v. 58i. 

Antoxius, Lucius, rebels against Domitian, ii. 814. 

. , Caius, consul with Cicero, v. 305. Marches ngainst Ca- 
tiline, 811. Defeats and kills him, 319. Father of Mark An- 
tony's first wife, 434. 

— , Publius, Caesar accuses him, iv. 360. 

-, Caius, brother of Mark Antony, defeated by Cicero's 

son, vi. 81. Surrendered to Brutus, and kept close prisoner, 
ib. Put to death after the proscription of Cicero and Brutus 
Albinus, 82. 

. • Creiicus, father to Mark Antony, his character, v. 425. 

. ; Honoratus, vi. 223. 

lntojiy, Mark, the orator, discovered by the simplicity of a ser- 
vant, iii. 177. Marius sends a party to despatch him, 178. His 
eloquence disarms the soldiers, ib. Killed by Annius, ib. 

Antony, Mark, grandson of Mark Antony the orator, and son of 
Antonius Creticus, v. 425. His mother Julia has Cornelius 
Lentulus for her second husband, and Antony his education 
under her auspices, 426. He conceives a strong resentment 
against Cicero, for his putting Lentulus to death, ib. Engaging 
in his person, but unfortunate in his connexions, ib. Forms a 
friendship first with Curio, and subsequently with Clodius, per- 
sons of the most profligate character, ib. Puns deeply in debt, ib. 
During the troubles which Clodius had brought upon the state, 
retires into Greece, 427'. Employs himself there in military 
cxercises and the study of eloquence, in. Adopts the Asiatic 
stile, ib. Goes with Gabinius into Syria, with a command of 
cavalry, ib. In besieging Aristobulus, he is the first to scale the 
wall, ib. Takes Aristobulus, and his son prisoners, ib. Gabinius 
and he restore Ptolemy to his kingdom, ib. Antony prevents 
Prolemy i'nvM putting the citizen- of Pelusium lo death, 4$8, 
His human? e:u'c of the body of ..^:h,itus, ib. His person cie- 

SS6 INDEX. 

scribed, ib. 429. His free manner engaging to the soldiers, 429. 
His great liberality, ib. Through Curio's means is elected tri- 
bune of the people, and is very serviceable to Caesar against 
Pojnpey, 430. Alter some equitable proposals in behalf of Caesar 
to the senate, he is commanded by Lentulus the consul to leave 
the house, ib. 431 . Disguises himself like a servant, and goes 
immediately to Caesar, 431. Upon this, Caesar enters Italy, ib. 
Leaves the command of the army of Italy to Antony, during his 
expedition to Spain, and on his return connives at his irregula- 
rities, 432. Antony beats off Libo, and carries a considerable re- 
inforcement to Caesar, ib. 433. Distinguishes himself in every 
engagement, 433. Has the command of Caesar's left wing in the 
battle of Pharsalia, ib. Caesar going in pursuit of Pompey, sends 
Antony to Rome in character of general of the horse, ib. Dola- 
bella, one of the tribunes, proposes a decree for abolishing debts, 
ib. Antony, who suspects him of a, criminal commerce with his 
wife, opposes him, 434. He dismisses his wife, who was the 
daughter of Caius Antonius, ib. All sober people are offended 
at his excessive irregularities, ib. Caesar, to show his dislike of 
these proceedings, takes Lepidus, and not Antony, for his col- 
legue in the consulship, 435. Caesar orders him to pay for Pom- 
pey's house, which he had, ib. He marries Fulvia, the widow of 
Clodius, a woman of a most ambitious spirit, ib. Caesar on his re- 
turn from Spain, takes Antony for his collegue, 436. Antony, 
in the feast oi' the Lupercalia, attempts to put a diadem on the 
head of Caesar, 437. Some of the conspirators against Caesar 
propose, that Antony should be taken off with him, but Brutus 
objects, 438. Antony is amused without, while Caesar is de- 
spatched in the senate house, ib. He absconds in the habit of a 
slave, ib. Sends his son to the conspirators in the Capitol, as a 
hostage, ib. Proposes an act of amnesty to the senate, ib. Am- 
bition draws him from these moderate councils, ib. In making 
Caesar's funeral oration, he exasperates the people against the 
conspirators, ib. 439. Brutus and his party leave the city, and 
Caesar's friends join Antony, 439. Calpurnia, Caesar's relict, 
entrusts him with her treasure, ib. The advantage Antony makes 
of Caesar's papers, ib. Octavius, the relation and heir of Ca\sar, 
arrives at Rome from Apollonia, ib. As Caesar's executor he 
applies to Antony for the effects, and is refused, 440. An ac- 
commodation between Octavius and Antony takes place, but is 
soon destroyed, ib. They both prepare for war, ib. Cicero 
persuades the senate to declare Antony a public enemy, and to 
commission Hirtius and Pansa to drive him out of Italy, ib. 441. 
The consuls are slain near Mutina, but Antony is defeated, 441. 
Antonv and his troops are distressed by famine, ib. He is a 
pattern of fortitude, ib. Passes the Alps, and draws over the 
troops of Lepidus, but attempts nothing against his life or honour, 
ib.A 42. Munatius Plancus joins him, 442. He leaves a suffi- 
cient force in Gaul, and returns to Italy with a great army, ib. 
Octavius, finding Cicero resolved to restore the commonwealth, 
comes to an accommodation with Antony, ib. They and Lepidus 

INDEX. 287 

meet in a little river-island, and divide the empire of the world 
among them, ib. They proscribe no fewer than three hundred 
Romans, 44-3. Octavius agrees to marry Claudia, the daughter 
of Fulvia, ib. Antony orders Cicero's head, and the hand with 
which he had written the Philippics, to be placed on the Rostra, 
ib. The mother of Antony saves Lucius Caesar, ib. 444. The 
triumvirate is extremely oppressive, 444. Antony disgraces 
Pompey's house with the vilest excesses, ib. Octavius insists on 
a division of the treasure and the army, ib. They go against 
Brutus and Cassius, and leave Lepidus governor of Rome, ib. 
Cassius is defeated by Antony, ami puts an end to his life, 445. 
Brutus is beaten in a second battle, and slays himself, ib. The 
honour of this victory, too, falls to Antony, ib. Antony slays 
Hortensius on the tomb of his brother Caius, ib. Throws his 
purple robe over the body of Brutus, and orders him an honour- 
able funeral, ib* Caesar is conveyed to Rome sick, ib. Antony 
raises contributions in Asia, having promised five thousand 
drachmas to each private man, ib. Returns to Greece, where 
his behaviour at first, is very acceptable, ib. Passes again into 
Asia, where he lives in the most luxurious manner, 446. Is cele- 
brated at Ephesus in the character of Bacchus, ib. Disgraces 
his jollity and freedom with the most savage cruelty and extor- 
tion, 447. His real character more developed, ib. Cleopatra 
comes into Cicilia, to answer a charge laid against her, and 
Antony falls into her snares, 448. She sails along the Cydnus 
in the character of Venus, 449. Their mutual invitations, 450, 
Her address and versatility, ib. She sings admirably, and speaks 
most languages, ib. While Fulvia is supporting the interests of 
Antony at Rome, he is revelling with Cleopatra at Alexandria, 
451. Antony's son makes a magnificent present to Philotas the 
physician, 452. Cleopatra attends him in his night-rambles in 
the habit of a slave, ib. His fishing-story, 453. He receives 
disagreeable news from different quarters, ib. He awakes from 
his intoxication, marches to Phoenicia, and thence sails to Italy, ib. 
454. Fulvia dies at Sicyon, ib. This event opens a way for recon- 
ciliation between him and Caesar, ib. The triumvirate settle their 
respective claims and powers, ib. Caesar gives his sister Oetavia 
to Antony in marriage, ib. Sextus the son of Pompey, having 
gained a considerable maritime power, is allowed to keep Sicily 
and Sardinia, 455. Sextus has an opportunity to destroy Antony 
and Caesar at an entertainment on board his galley, but forbears 
it, ib. 456. Antony sends Yentidius into Asia against the Par- 
thiar.s, 456. Takes upon himself the office of high priest to 
Caesar the dictator, ib. The star of Octavius' fortune superior 
to that of Antony, ib. Antony leaves Italy, and takes Oetavia 
with him into Greece, ib. Celebrates Gymnastic games at 
Athens, on news that Vantidius was successful against the 
Parthians, 457. Ventidius engages Pacorus, son of the king of 
Parthia, in Syria, and kills him, ib. He brings Antiochus, the 
son of Commagene, to terms, 45S. Antony, as well as Octavius, 
more successful by their lieutenants, than where they acted in 

2SS INDEX. 

person, ib. Upon some disagreeable news concerning Ca?rar'<; 
designs, Antony sails with three hundred ships for Italy, ib. 
Octavia interpose: and reconciles them, ib. 459. Caesar goes to 
war with Pompey for the recovery nf Sicily ; and Antony, leaving 
his wife aad children in the care of Carsar, sets out for Asia, 4-59. 
On his arrival there, he sends for Cleopatra, ib. He presents 
her with several considerable province*, 460. Gives the sur- 
names of the Sun and Moon to the v.vins he had by her, ib. 
Phraates slays his father Orodes ; upon which many of the Par- 
thian chiefs fly to Antony, ib. He gives Moneses three cities, 
461. Reviews his army in Armenia, which consists of a hundred 
thousand nun, ib. His attachment to Cleopatra precipitates his 
measures, ib. He lays siege to Phraata without his battering 
engines, 462. Phraates falls upon Tatianus, who was conducting 
the engines, kills ten thousand of his men, and destroys the en- 
gines, ib. Ar':avasde6, king of Armenia, withdraws in despair, ib. 
Antony attempts to bring the Parthians to a pitched battle, but 
does not succeed, 463. The Parthians gall the Romans in their 
return to their camp, ib. Antony finds that his troops had lied 
in his absence from before Phraata, and punishes them with deci- 
mation, ib. 4-64. Phraates pretends to come to terms with An- 
ton*/, but intends all the time to harass him in his retreat, 464-, 
465. Antony designs to take his rout through an open country, 
but is advised, by a certain Mardian, to take the safer road of 
the mountains, 465. The Parthians make their appearance the 
third day, and attack the Romans, 466. Antony, after tin's, 
marches in so judicious a form, that the enemy can make little 
impression, and think of retiring, ib. Flavins Galius proposes to 
perform some considerable exploit with a select party ; but draw- 
ing too far from the main body, is surrounded, ib. 467. Antony 
himself, at last, beats the enemy off, 467. The great affection of 
the troops for him, ib. His address to the army on that occasion, 
468. The Romans, when attacked again, assume the form of a 
pent-house, 169. Famine prevails among them, ib. They eat 
an herb, which brings on madness and death, ib. Antony often 
cries out, ' () the ten thousand!' 470. Mithridates, cousin to 
Moneses, comes in the night, and warns Antony not to descend 
into the plain, ib. 471. The Parthians, contrary to custom, 
pursue him in the night, 471. The Romans have to contend 
wit!: thirst, and with the Parthians, at the same time, ib. They 
come up to a river, whose water is sharp, and drink of it too 
freely, ib. The Mardian acquaints them, that there is another 
at n.o great distance, sweeter and more salubrious, ib. Mithri- 
dates comes again, and advir.es the Romans to hasten to that 
river ; because it would terminate the pursuit, 472. Antony, 
accordingly, moves on ; hut a strange disorder happens in his 
army, and his tent is plundered, ib. The Romans pass the last- 
mentioned river in peace, 473. Six days after this, they reach 
the Araxes, and when they have passed it, kiss the ground in 
Armenia with great avidity,//'. The new plenty throws them 
into' the dropsy and she cholic, 474. Antony does not chastise 

.INDEX. -289 

Artavasdes, who had deserted him, at present, but seizes him 
afterward, and leads him in triumph into Alexandria, ib. An* 
tony, who had lost twenty four thousand men already in his 
retreat, loses eight thousand more through the severity of the 
weather, ib. 475. Waits for Cleopatra at a fort between Berytus 
and Sidon, 475. The Partitions and the Medes quarrel about 
the Roman spoils, and the Mede offers his assistance to Antony, 
475. Octavia expre ses her desire to visit Antony, and Caesar 
gives her leave, in hopes that some event would lead to a quarrel, 
ib* Commanded by Antony to stop at Athens, she sends Niger 
to him, with an account of the many valuable presents she had 
brought him, ib. 4-76. Cleopatra affects to be dying for the love 
of Antony, 476. He returns to Egypt, and puts off the Mede 
till summer, ib. Betroths one of Cleopatra's sons to a daughter 
of the Mede, 477. Chesar appears to be, and indeed the Randans 
• in general are, offended at his neglect of Octavia, and his dis- 
posing of kingdoms in favour of the children of Cleopatra, . 
Caesar accuses him in the senate, 478. Antony recriminates, ib. 
Cesar replies, /Zi. Antony sends Canidius to the sea-coast with 
fcixteen legions, 479. Goes to Ephesus, attended by Clcbpatra, 
ib. Assembles a fleet of eight hundred ships, two hundred of 
which were supplied by Cleopatra, ib. Cleopatra, jealous cf the 
mediation of Octavia, bribes Canidius to persuade Antony to 
permit her to attend him in the war, ib. They spend their time 
in all kinds of revelry at Samos, ib. Visits Athens, where Cleo- 
patra endeavours to surpass Octavia in her favours to the people, 
480. He sends some of his people to turn Octavia out of 'his 
house at Rome, ib. Antony, instead of attacking Caesar imme- 
diately, gives him time to prepare himself, 481. Titius and 
Plancus are ill used by Cleopatra, for opposing her stay in the 
army, and they go over to Csosar, ib. Caesar takes Antony's 
will from the Vestals, and reads it to the senate, ib. Antony's 
friends, and Geminius in particular, point out to him his true 
interest, but they are driven away by the creatures of Cleopatra, 
482, 483. Caesar declares war against Cleopatra, 48J. Pro^ 
digies announcing the event of the war, ib. 484. An account of 
their respective forces, 484. Antony, notwithstanding his 
strength at land, is persuaded by Cleopatra to decide the dis- 
pute at sea, ib. Circumstances previous to the battle of 
Actiiim, 485. Domitius, AmyntaSj and De'iotarus, go over 
to Caesar, ib. 48G. Canidius gives Antony salutary counsel; 
but the fascinations of Cleopatra prevent his listening to its 
486. An old soldier remonstrates against a sea-fight, 487. 
Caesar has omens of victory 488. The battle described, ib. 

489. Cleopatra dies, 'before the "battle is lost, and Antony is 
infatuated enough to follow her, 4S9. He enters Cleopai'ra's 
galley, and sits three days in sombrous silence, ib. 490. Has 
intelligence that his army is safe in Macedon, but instead of 
going to it, sends orders to Canidius to conduct it into Ask. 

490. Divides a ship-load of treasure among his friend? 
and dismisses them, ib. The gallant reliance, winch, his fiett 

vol. vi. U 

"90 INDEX. 

made after he had forsaken it, 4-91. His land-forces remain em- 
bodied seven days and do not surrender to Caesar, till their officers 
desert them, ib. Caesar relieves the cities of Greece, which had 
been much oppressed, ib. Antony lands in Libya, and sends 
Cleopatra into Egypt, 492. Retires into a desert, with only two 
attendants, ib. The commander of his troops in Libya revolts ; 
he attempts to kill himself, ib. Is prevented by his friends, and 
conveyed to Alexandria, ib. Finds Cleopatra engaged in an 
attempt to draw her ships over the isthmus into the Red-sea, and 
with all her wealth and forces to see-k some remote country, ib. 
But the first galleys that are carried over are burnt by the Ara- 
bians of Petra, ib. Antony betakes himself to a kind of Timonian 
retirement near Pharos, 4-93. After he is informed that his army 
and all his allies had deserted him, he abandons his hopes and 
his cares together, and returns to Alexandria, 494. Cleopatra 
and he form the society of' the Companions in Death,' as they 
had before instituted that of « the Inimitable in Life,' ib. They 
pass their time in mutual treats and diversions, ib. Cleopatra 
makes experiment of several poisons, and gives the preference 
to the asp, 495. They send Euphronius, their children's tutor, 
on an embassy to Caesar, ib. Caesar encourages Cleopatra to 
hope every thing, provided that she gave up Antony, and amuses 
her with a pretence of love, 496. Antony causes Thyreus, 
Caesar's freedman, to be whipped, ib. Cleopatra redoubles her 
attentions to Antony, ib. Caesar renews the war, takes Pelusium, 
and advances to Alexandria, 497. Antony makes a brisk sally, 
and repulses the enemy, ib. Sends a challenge to Caesar, which 
is as much disregarded as one that he had sent formerly, ib. A 
noise of departing Bacchanals presage the fate of Antony, 49^. 
Antony designs to attack Ca:sar both by sea and land; but the 
fleet and cavalry desert him, ib. His infantry are routed, and 
he exclaims, that Cleopatra has betrayed him, ib. The queen 
retires to her monument, and orders that Antony should he in- 
formed she is dead, ib. lie commands his servant Eros to 
despatch him, but Eros despatches himself, 499. Plunges his 
sword into his bowels, hut the stroke does not prove mortal, ib. 
Cleopatra sends for him, and she and her women draw him up 
into the monument, ib. Their affecting meeting, ib. Antony 
dies, 500. Antyllus, son of Antony by Eulvia, is put to death, 
502. Theodorus, who betrayed him, is crucified for theft, ib. 
Cleopatra is permitted to bury Antony, which she does in a mag- 
nificent manner, 503. Her last oblations and speech at Antony's 

. tomb, 505. Antony's children, 508. His descendents come to 
be emperors, ib. Anton) and Demetrius compared, 509. 

\A.ntdninst Lucius, brother of Antony, created tribune, v. 4S9. 

~ •, son of Antony by Fulvia., v. 508. 

— , the first who lays violent hands on Sertorius, iv. 35- 

.1, if ■■■Uiits, the lietor killed in the Capitol, v. '237. 

Antyllus, son of Anton) by Fulvia, v. 494. Is put to death, 502. 

AnutitSy son of Anthemion, Alcibiades' frolic at his house, ii. 118. 
The first who bribed the judges at llh-ns. 191. 

INDEX. 201 

JLoltius. See Abillius. 

Apama, daughter of" Artaxerxes, married to Piiarnabazus, vi. 146. 

■ , wife of Seleucus, v. 395. 

Apellcs, draws Alexander's picture, iv. 244. Does not succeed as 

to his complexion, ib. Surprised at Protogenes' painting, v. 385. 

Enters himself of the school of Sicyon, vi. J 65. 

, in the court of the younger Philip of Macedon, vi. 203. 

Apellicon, the Teian, his library carried by Sylla to Rome, iii. 267. 

Apemantus, what he said to Timon, and Timon's answer, v. 4-93. 

•}■ Aperantians, iii. 50. 

Apfiepsidn, Archon at Athens, iii. 305. 

\Aphidn<z\) a city near Athens. Theseus sends Helen thither, 

i. 40. Taken by Castor and Pollux, 41. 
Aphidnus, a friend of Theseus, i. 40. 
■f Apkygceans, a people of Thrace, iii. 214. 
4pis, the ox worshipped by the /Egyptians, v. 190. 
Apolia, daughter of Agesilaus, by Cleora, iv. 94. 
Apollo Delphinius, Theseus consecrates his hair to him, i. 6. Sa- 
crifices the Marathonian bull to him, 15. Makes an offering t» 

him on his departure for Crete, 19. The Laurelled, 335. Is- 

menius, iii. 226. Lyceus, 113. Pythius, 256. - Tegyraeus, ii. 

360. Thurius, iii. 256. His temples plundered by pirates, iv. 

153. 
Apollo, the name of one of Lucullus' dining-rooms, iii. 387. 
Apollocrates, the eldest son of Dionvsius, vi. 36. Surrenders the 

castle of Syracuse to Dion, and goes off to his father, 47. 
Apollodorus, the historian, i. 110. 

, governor of Babylon, iv. 348. 

, the Phalerian, an extravagant admirer of Socrates, 

v. 95. 

. , the Sicilian, carries Cleopatra to Caesar, iy. 414. 

i — , the Athenian, has orations written for him by De- 
mosthenes, v. 268. 
f Apollonia, ii. 260. iii. 268. vi. 76, 79. 
ApollonideY, sent by Seleucus to Demetrius, v. 418. 

, the stoic, is with Cato at Utica, v. 116. 

Apollonius Molo, teaches rhetoric at Rhodes, v. 297. Csesar and 

Cicero his scholars, iv. 359. v. 297. His speech to Cicero, v. 

297. 
Apollophanes of Cyzicum procures a conference between Pharna- 

bazus and Agesilaus, iv. 84. 
+Apollothemis, the historian, i. 162. 
Aponius, a noted informer, how put to death, vi. 218. 
Apophthegms. See Sayings. 
Apotlietce, a deep pit into which they threw children at Sparta 

whom they deemed not fit to be reared, i. 136, and n. 
Apparition seen by Brutus, vi. 90, 102. — Seen by Dion, vi. 3, 51. — 

Of The6eus at the battle of Marathon, i. 45. 
Apparitions at Cha?ronea, in consequence of a murther, iii. 294. — ■ 

Opinion of the Epicureans concerning them, vi. 90, 91, 

Applause, it's different effects, ii. 178. 

i- o 

INDEX, 

Appian Road. Sec Ways. 

Appius, competitor for the censorship with Scipio Africanus, ii. 
832. 

persuades Ponipey that Caesar's army would revolt to him, 

iv. 199. 

Marcus, v. 325. 

Claudius, praetor of Sicily, ii. 404, and n. 

Claud/ us, his remonstrance to the senate in the case of Co- 

riolanus, it 198. His speech against making peace with Pyr- 
rhus, iii. 91. 

Claudius betroths his daughter Claudia to Tiberius Grac- 

chus, v. 202. 

Claudius, killed by Telesinus, iii. 273. 

Clausus, a Sabine, migrates with rive thousand families t© 

Rome, and is made a senator, i. 300, 301. 

Clodius, sent by Lucullus to Tigranes, iii. 355. 

Varus, left governor in Africa by Ponipey, v. 105. 

y.lpsus, river, iii. 34. 

f Aptera, a city of Crete, iii. 11 ] . 

Apuleius, Lucius, his accusation against Camillas, i. 376. 

f Apulia, ii. 427. 

f Aqiue Sextue, iii. ! 1<2. 

\Aquilii conspire in behalf of Tarquin against the commonwealth, 
i. 275. Their fate, 279. 

Aquilius, Marcus, v. 86. A sharp saying of Cicero's about him, 326. 

, Manius, iii. 137. 

■ •, one of Metellus' lieutenants, beaten by Sertorius, iv. 

18, 19. 

■fAquinuvi, vi. 248. 

Arabs, draw Demetrius into the deserts, v. 368. He defeats them, 
and carries off seven hundred camels, ib. Alexander's expedi- 
tion against them, iv, 277. Bum Cleopatra's gallies, v. 492. 

\ Arabia Petrcea, iv. J 76. 

\ Arabians, Nabathasan, v. 368. Sccnite, iii. 356. 

Aracus, titular admiral of the Lacedaemonian fleet, iii. 195. 

•f AraciLOsia, iv. 66. 

-r Arar, river, iv. 189. 

r Aratrrion, i. 44. 

■fAratium, vi. 208. 

Akatus, the son of CHnias, in danger of being slain, when Aban- 
tidas set himself up tyrant in Sicyon, vi. 153. Preserved by Soso, 
the sistei-'of Abantidas, till she can send him to Argos, 154. H# 
is educated at Argos in a liberal manner, but distinguishes him- 
•f most in the 1 tra, ib. He undertakes the deliverance of 

Sievon, 155. Though he is not yet quite twenty years old, Ni- 
cocles, the reigning tyrant, is afraid of him, ib. Aristomachus 
arid Eedelus join in the enterprise, ib. 156. Aratus gets intel- 
ligence of a part of the wall that may be scaled, ib. Xenocles 
and others reconnoitre the wall, and confErni the intelligence, ib. 
manner in which he provided men, anus, and scaling-ladders,. 
ib. 157. Deceive.; the spies whom Nicotics sent to Argosr ib. 
9 

INDEX. 293 

Finds some dogs kept near the wall let loose, but plants his lad- 
ders notwithstanding, 158. His company is much alarmed at the 
watch, which pass by, ib. But not discovered either by these, 
or by the person who kept guard in the tower, ib. He comes 
suddenly, with a small party, upon the tyrant's guards at the 
palace, and takes them all prisoners, 3 59. Calls together his 
friends in the town, lb. A herald, by his order proclaims liberty 
to the citizens, 160. They set fire to the tyrant's palace, ib. 
Not a man lost on either side, ib. The tyrant escapes by a sub- 
terranean passage, ib. Aratus recalls all, who had been banish- 
ed by the tyrants, ib. Is laid under difficulties, on account oi* 
ethers being possessed of the property of the exiles, ib. Unites 
Sic}ron to the Achaean league, ib. In what manner the Achaean 
league became so respectable and important, 162. The character 
of Aratus, ib. He serves in the Achaean cavalry, and distinguishes 
himself by ready obedience to his general, whoever he might hap- 
pen to be, 163. Ptolemy, king of Egypt makes him a present oi' 
twenty-five talents, and he lays out the whole for the advantage of 
his fellow-citizens, ib. The exiles being clamorous for their pro- 
perty,he takes a voyageto /Egypt to getmoneytosatisfyall parties, 
ib. Encounters with great dangers in his passage, ib. 16<k Is well 
received by Ptolemy, on account of his supplying him with paint- 
ings, for which Sicyon was celebrated, 164. Aratus hated ty- 
rants to such a degree, that he could not be persuaded to spare 
the picture of one, 165. Ptolemy gives him a hundred and fifty 
talents, payable at several times, 166. By this money he re- 
conciles the poor to the rich, and secures the commonwealth, ib. 
The exiles erect his statue in brass, ib. The inscription upon 
it, ib. Antigonus endeavours to gain Aratus, or make Ptolemy 
suspect him, ib. Aratus is chosen general of the league, and 
ravages the territories of Locris and Calydcn, 167. Marches to 
the assistance of the Beeotiansj against the TEtolians, but comes 
too late, ib. Is general again, and undertakes to recover the 
eitadel of Corinth from the Macedonians, ib. For this purpose 
he forms a connexion with certain Syrians, who had a brother a 
soldier in the garrison, and having purloined the king of Mace- 
don's treasures, thereupon retired to Sicyon, 170. Erginus, one 
of the brothers, undertakes to conduct him to a part of the wall 
not above fifteen feet high, ib. The plot near being discovered, 
171, 172. Aratus gets into Corinth by night, and advances to- 
ward the citadel, 173. The town is alarmed, and he proceeds 
up the rock notwithstanding, ib. Archelaus, who commanded 
for Antigonus in the town, marches to attack Aratus' rear ; but 
the three hundred, whom Aratus had left behind, fall upon 
Archelaus, and put him to flight, 17 k Erginus comes to the 
three hundred, and conducts them up the rock, ib. The citadel 
is gained by Aratus, ib. The rest of Aratus' forces arrive from 
Sicyon, and the Corinthians open their gates to them, ib. He 
persuades the Corinthians to join the league, and delivers to them 
the keys of their city, 175. How he disposes of the prisoners, 
ib. He seizes the Hcraaim, and the harbour of Lechaium, 176. 
Over-run-; Attica, and ravages the isle of Salamis, ib. Sets the 

294 INDEX. 

Athenian prisoners free without ransom, and thereby sows the 
seeds of a defection from the Macedonians, ib. Brings Ptolemy 
into the Achaean league, by declaring him its protector, ib. Is 
chosen general every other year, ib. Attempts to rescue Argos 
from the yoke of tyranny ; but one of his associates discovers the 
design to the tyrant Aristomachus, 177, 178. Aristomachus is 
despatched soon after by one of his own servants, 178. Aristip- 
pus succeeds to the tyranny, and gets a fine laid upon the 
Achaeans for the late breach' of the peace, ib. The miserable 
life of a tyrant described in that of Aristippus, 179. Aratus 
makes several fruitless attempts upon Argos, 180. The Argives, 
for whose liberties he fights, give him no assistance, ib. He 
fights a pitched battle with Aristippus, and lets the victory slip 
out of his hands, ib. Adds Clecnae to the Achaean league, 181. 
Celebrates the Nemean games at Cleonae, ib. Takes those who 
were going to Argos for the same purpose, and sells them for 
slaves, ib. Draws Aristippus against Cleonae by a stratagem, 
puts him to the rout, and kills him in the pursuit, ib. 182. This in 
good measure removes the imputation of cowardice, which some 
endeavoured to fasten upon him, 182. Agias and young Aristo- 
machus enter Argos with the king of Macedon's troops, ib. 
Aratus endeavours to depose Lysiades, tyrant of Megalopolis, 
183. Suffers the JEtolians to enter Peloponnesus, but falls upon 
them while they are plundering Pellene, dislodges them, and 
kills a considerable number, 184, 185. Makes peace with 
them, 1S6. Makes several attempts upon the Piraeus, and in one 
of them breaks his leg, ib. 187. Is defeated by Bithys, Deme- 
trius' general, 187. On the death of Demetrius, the Athenians 
call in Aratus to their assistance, and he prevails upon Diogenes, 
the Macedonian governor, to deliver up to them the Piraeus, 
Munychia, Salamis, and Sunium, for a hundred and fifty talents, of 
-which he furnishes twenty, ib. 188. The Achaean league receives 
several very considerable states into it's community, 188. Among 
these is Argos; Aratus having persuaded it's tyrant Aristomachus 
to quit the sovereignty and join the Achaeans, ib. Aristomachus 
is chosen general of the league, and proposes to carry his arms 
into Laconia, 189. Aratus opposes a war with Cleomenes a> 
impolitic, but at last consents, ib. Cleomenes offers battle at 
Palantium, but Aratus prevents the offer from being accepted, ib. 
Lysiades accuses Aratus to the Achaeans, ib. He is chosen 
praetor the next year notwithstanding, ib. Beaten by Cleo- 
menes, ib. Collects his army, and surprises Mantinea, ib. Ly- 
siades, in another action, puts the right wing of the Lacedaemo- 
nians to flight; but going too far upon the pursuit, is cntangh d 
in an intricate piece of ground, and slain by Cleomenes, 1 
The loss of that brave man, and the defeat of the army, is im- 
puted to Aratus' neglecting to support him, 191. Aratus is 
sometime considered in a disgraceful light by the Achaeans, ib. 
He redeems his credit a littie, by beating Megistonoiis, fatty 
in-law to Cleomenes, and taking him prisoner, ib. When it 
comes to his turn again, he declines the command, on account 
of the growing power of Cleomenes, ib. The h::d policy of 

INDEX. 295 

Aratus, in calling in the Macedonians, instead of suffering 
Cleomenes to be appointed general of the league, 192. Cleo- 
nienes is exasperated by fruitless negotiations, and makes a still 
greater progress with his arms, 193, 194. Aratus attempts to 
cut off the innovators in Corinth ; and with difficulty escapes with 
his own life, ib. 195. The Corinthians put their city into the 
hands of Cleomenes, and he shuts up the citadel with a wall of 
circumvallation, 195. Aratus applies to the JEtolians and Athe- 
nians for assistance, but without effect, ib. Cleomenes offers 
him a yearly pension of twelve talents, on certain conditions, 
196. Aratus' insincere answer, ib. Cleomenes blocks up Si- 
cyon, ib. Aratus escapes with much difficulty, to j^Egium, and 
by a decree of council calls in Antigonus, and surrenders to him 
Acrocorinthus, ib. Goes with the Achaean magistrates to meet 
Antigonus, 197. Antigonus' friendship for him, ib. Several 
actions under the walls of Corinth, 198. Argos revolts to the 
Macedonians, and Cleomenes retires to Mantinea, ib. Aratus 
submits to many mortifying things, after Antigonus was become 
master of Acrocorinthus, 199. Has the meanness to call 
Mantinea (after it was retaken) ' Antigonia,' 200. After the 
death of Antigonus, the .'Etolians attack Aratus, and defeat him, 
201, 202. He calls Philip to his assistance, '202. The incon- 
sistency of Philip's behaviour to him, 203. Aratus advises. 
Philip not to seize the castle of Ithome, 206. Philip orders a 
dose of slow poison to be given him, 207. Aratus dies at 
iEgium, ib. Is buried at Sicyon, 208. The testimony which 
the oracle of Delphi paid to his virtue, ib. Divine honours paid 
him, ib. 

Aratus the Younger, his bed dishonoured by Philip, vi. 204. Has 
a poison given him by Philip, which deprives him of his intellects, 
207. 

\AraxeSy river, iv. 167. v. 473. 

Arbaces, how punished by Artaxerxes for desertion, vi. 129. 

Arbelct, battle of, iv. 288, 2S9. 

fArbelitis, district, iv. 289. 

■\ Arcadians, called acorn-eaters, ii. 177. Come into Italy with 
Evander, i. 86. Defeated by Archidanius, without the loss. of 
one Spartan, iv. 1 14. 

Arcadian year, i. 200. 

Arcadius, said to be the person that killed Galba, vi. 239. 

Arcesilaiis, and Amphares betray Agis, v. 151. 

, the Academician, iii. 2. vi. 156. 

Archcdamus, the /Etolian, ii. 311. 

Arclielaiis, king of Sparta, i. 118. 

, one of Mithridates' generals, iii. 246, 252, 265. Af- 
terward in the service of the Romans, 265. 

, a merchant of Delium, iii. 263. 

, a physician, iii. 299. 

, the poet, iii. 297. 

■ , an officer of Antigonus, vi. 174. 

.. } Antony's care of his dead body, v. 4.28. 

!29t5 INDEX. 

Archeptoiis, one of the sons of Themistocles, i. 357. 
Archestmtus, at what time this poet lived, ii. 446, and n. His 
saying concfetfning Alcibiades, iii. 212. 

, proposes a decree against Phocion, v. 10. 

hias, one of the Theban tyrants, ii. 34*7. His saving, 352,! 

is killed, 354. 

, the Athenian high-priest, ii. 853. 

-, the Athenian captain, surnamed ' Pbugadotheras,' v. 286. 

Archibiades, an Athenian, affects the Spartan gravity, v. 13. Re- 
proved for inconsistency by Phocion, ib. 

ArcHbhiSy his generous behaviour with respect to Cleopatra, after 
her death, v 508. 

Archidaviia, what she said to the Lacedaemonian senate, iii. 106. 

■ , the grandmother of Agis, v. 136. Gives up her 

estate to the public, 142. Is murthered by order of Amphares, 
153. 

Archidamida», sayings of his, i. 11-3, 144. 

Archidamus, king of Sparta, son of Zeuxidamus, and father of 
Agis and . ius, iv. 70. Fined. for marrying a little woman, 

72. Endeavours to rec to each other, ii. 45. 

Marches into the territories of the Athenians, 50. Other parti- 
culars, iii. 316, 317. 

• — , son of Agesilaus, iv. 102. Cleonymus is his favour- 
ite, ib. Intercedes for Sphodrias, ib. Defeats the Arcadians, 
114. His valour, 115. Slain by the Messapians, v. 135. 

r , — ? son of Eudamidas, v. 135. 

_ 1 brother or" Agis, saves himself from Leonidas by a 

timely retreat, v. 154. Is recalled by Cleomenes and murthered, 
159, '150. 

Arckidemus, sent to persuade Plato to return to Sicily, vi. 17. 

Archilochvs, a Greek poet, the gods do honour to his memory, i. 
172. Verses of his, i. 7. 

Archimedes, ii. 403. Invents several military machines at the re- 
quest of Hiero, 409. The power of his machines, ib. 410. De- 
feats Marcellus, who calls him ' a Briareue,' 413. Commits no 
account of his machines to writing, ib. So intent upon his 
studies, that he hears not the tumult when the town is taken, 
413. How killed, ib. Regretted by Marcellus, 419. The de- 
vice on his tomb-stone, 414. 

Arckippe, wife of Themistocles, i. 357. 

Archippus, the poet, ii. 114. 

Arckons, the chief magistrates in Athens, i. 45, n. An account of 
their oflicc, i. '244, n. ii. 444. 

Arckonides, sent by the Syracusans to Dion, vi. 39. 

ArcJiytas, one of the first inventors of mechanics, ii. 408. 

„ • , the Pythagorean, security for Plato's safely in Sicily, vi. 

17- Demands him of Dionysius, li). 

Arcissus^ a Spartan officer, executed for surrendering the Cadmea} 
ii. 355. 

Arcturus, his rising attended with tempestuous weather, vi. 24, 

jlrdellus, a place at Athens, i. 35. 

INDEX, 297 

Arcopagifes, i. 2 15. 

Areopagus, court of, established by Solon, on a better footing, i. 

24$, n. Examines whether every man has a visible livelihood, 
251. It's power lessened, ii. 12, 16. 
AretcEus, vi. 31. 
Arete, daughter of Dionysiusthe Elder, by Aristomache, and wife 

of Dion, vi. 7. Compelled to marry Timocrates, 20. 
■\Arethusa, i. 162. v. 461. 
Arens, king of Sparta, iii. 105. Arrives seasonably from Crete to 

the relief of Sparta against Pyrrhus, 110. Cuts oft' a number 

of Pyrrhus' men in their march to Argos, 111. Assists the Ar- 

gives, 113. 
Argas, the name of a poet, and of a species of serpents, v. 254. 

Demosthenes so called, ib. 
Argileonis, mother of Brasidas, a saying of hers, i. 151. 
■\Arginusa-, iii. 194. 
Argives, their kings, i. 122. Invited by Alcibiades to join the 

Athenians, ii. 128, 131. Celebrate the Nemean games, vi. 181. 
Argius, Galba's freedman, buries his master, vi. 241. 
Argo, the name of Jason's ship, i. 21. 
\ Argos, and Messene ; the cause of their ruin, i. 122. 
- — , Aratus delivers it from it's tyrants, vi. 188. Cleomenes 

makes himself master of it, v. 173. Loses it again, 176, 177. 

Pyrrhus makes an attempt upon it, iii. 112, 113. 
Argyraspides, or silver shields, commanded by Antigenes and Teu- 

tamus, iv. 61. Never defeated, 62. Their treachery to Eumenes, 

63. Punished by Antigonus, 66. 
Ariadne falls in love with Theseus, and gives him a clue to the 

Labyrinth, i. 20. Government of Crete devolves on her, 21. 

Different accounts of her, ib. Has two sons by Theseus, 22. Is 

cast upon the isle of Cyprus, ib. Divine honours paid her there, 

23. Two Ariadnes, ib. 
Ariceus, a friend of Cyrus, vi. 125. 
Ariamenes, Xerxes' brother and admiral, a very brave man, i. 334. 

Killed in the battle of Salamis, ib. 
Ariamnes, an Arabian, sent by the Parthians to mislead Crassus, 

iii. 476. Cassius reproaches him with perfidy, 478. 
Ariarathes, king of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, iv. 41. Taken 

prisoner by Perdiecas, 42. 
, one of the sons of Mithridates, iii. 246. Poisoned by 

his father, iv. 172. 
Ariaspes, one of the sons of Artaxerxes, his mildness and timidity, 

vi. 149. Poisons himself, ib. 
Arimauius, a Persian deity, i. 352. Supposed the author of evil, 

ib. n. vi. 149, n. 
f Ariminvm, taken by Caesar, iv. 202. 
Arimnestus, general of the Platreans, his dream, ii. 4-64. 

, a Spartan, kills Mardonius, ii. 475. 

Ariobarzanes, king of Cappadocia, expelled by Mithridates, re-es- 

tabiished by Sylla, iii. 264. Sylla reconciles those two princes, 

•266. 

98 TXDEX. 

ArioSarzanes, re-established by Cicero, v. 336. 

. son bfGobryas, a Persian generalj iii. '210. 

Ariovistus, Icing of the Germans, Caesar's war with him, iv. 370. 
limn, guardian ro Alcibiades, ii. I 1 2. 

yfr;', , general of the Acheans, iii. 3 7,23. 

At 'Orcts, of Cv/.icum, his dream, iii. 340. 

Aristander, of Telmesus, interprets Philip's dream, iv. 240. His 
observation to Alexander concerning the sweating of Orpheus'" 
statue, 2.59. Foretells the taking of Tyre, 277, 278. Sacrifices 
to Fear, 289. What he does to encourage Alexander's men, 
292. Forewarns Alexander of an impending evil, 317. En- 
deavours to comfort him after he had killed Clitus, 320. 

Aruteas, the Proconnesian, the story of his vanishing, i. 97. 

. , a citizen of Argos, invites Pyrrhus thither, iii. 111. 

Opens one of the gates for him, 113. 

Aristides, son of Lysimachus, of the tribe of Antiochis, and the 
ward of Alopece, ii. 444. Different accounts of his estate, ib. 
445, On what account appointed Archon, 4i7. A favourer 
of aristocracy, ib. For that, and other reasons, always opposed 
by Themistocles, ib. Their different dispositions, and characters, 
ib. The integrity, patriotism, and steadiness, of Aristides, 448. 
I lis speech to the Athenians with respect to their wanting to be 
flattered in their degeneracy, 4.51. Datis arrives with Darius' 
fleet at Marathon, and ravages the neighbouring country, ib. 
Of the generals appointed to act against him, Miltiades was first 
in dignity, and Aristides next to him, ib. The latter gives up 
his turn in the command, and greatly strengthens the hands of 
the former, 4.52. The battle of Marathon described, i b. While 
the Greeks march to defend Athens, Aristides is left at Marathon 
to guard the prisoners and spoils, ib. 453. He acquits himself of 
that charge in the most upright manner, 453. But Callias and 
others enrich themselves unknown to him, ib. Chosen Archon, 
rmd sumamed ' the Just,' 454. Banished by the Ostracism, 455. 
Extraordinary instance of his moderation, 45G, 457. His prayer 
for the Athenians in going into exile, 457. Recalled, ib. For 
the good of the public, scruples not to join his enemy Themisto- 
cles, ib. Takes the nephews of Xerxes prisoners, 459. Opposes 
the proposal of Themistocles, 460. What he commanded the 
Spartan embassadors to tell their masters, 461. His orders to 
the priests, 462. Has the chief command of the Athenians in 
the war with Mardonius, 463. Marches to Plataea?, ib. Consults 
the oracle of Apollo, and receives a perplexing answer, which 
is at last unriddled, ib. 464. Puts an end to the dispute between 
the Tegeata; and the Athenians, about their post in the battle, 
referring it to the allies, 465. His prudent behaviour on 
discovering a conspiracy in the Athenian camp, 166. The Me- 
;iiensians being distressed by the Persian cavalry, Aristides 
nds a parly of Athenians to their assistance, 467. Alexander, 
king of Mac( don, comes in the night, and informs Aristides of 
the design of Mardonius to attack the Greeks the next day, 469. 
immedi tely acquaints Pausanias, the commander-dn* 

INDEX. 29.9 

chief, with his intelligence, ib. Reproves the Athenians for find- 
ing fault with their being removed to the right wing, facing the 
Persians, 470. Mardonius alters his disposition to avoid fighting, 
with the Athenians, 471. The day passes without a battle, ib. 
The Greeks make a movement, to gain a camp more advanta- 
geous for water, ib. Dangers from the separation of the troops, 
and from waiting long for auspicious tokens in the sacrifices; 
471 — 474. The Lacedaemonians make great havock among the 
Persians, who behave with great gallantry, 474. Aristides hastens 
to join the former, but is attacked by the way by the Thebarcs 
and other Greeks, allies to the Persians, ib. He defeats them; 
475. The Persian camp is taken, and prodigious slaughter 
made, 476. What the loss on both sides was, ib. The Greeks 
rear an ahar to Liberty, 477. The Athenians and Lacedaemo- 
nians dispute about the chief honour of the day, but compromise 
the matter by adjudging it to the Platacans, 478. The decree, 
which Aristides proposed in their favour to the general assembly 
of the Greeks, 480. Their annual procession in memory of those, 
who died for liberty, ib. Aristides permits Archons to be chosen 
out of the whole body of citizens, 4S1. The high testimony 
which the Athenians gave to his virtue, in ordering Themistocles 
to communicate a certain project to him only, ib. 482. Joined 
in commission with Cimon in an expedition at sea, 482. The 
justice and candour of these two generals draw the chief com- 
mand of the allies from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians, ib. 
The Lacedaemonians desire, that Aristides may regulate the 
quotas of all the states of Greece, for the war with the barbarians, 
484. He executes that commission with his usual integrity and 
ability, ib. What he said to Themistocles on the qualifications' of 
a general, 485. Makes a difference between private and political 
justice, which has no foundation in fact, ib. 4S6. Allows it to 
be unjust to bring the public treasure o'i Greece from Delos to 
Athens, but at the same time says it. was expedient, 486. 
Though he made the public rich, himself continues poor, ib. 
Reckoned by Plato the greatest and most illustrious man of his 
time, 1-87. His candid behaviour to Themistocles, ib. Various 
accounts of his death, ib. 488. His monument at Phaleriunj, 
erected at the public charge, 488. His son and daughters pro- 
vided for by the public, ib, 

Aristides the Locrian, ii. 238. 

, son of Xenophilns, ii. 227. 

. , author of the Milesiacs, hi. 495. 

Aristion, tyrant of Athens, compels the city to oppose Sylla, hi. 
247. His vile character, 249. Surrenders the citadel for want 
of water, 251. Poisoned by Sylla's order, 264. 

Aristippus of Argos set himself up tyrant there, vi 178. The mi- 
serable life of a tyrant, 179, 180. Killed in his flight, 182. 

.- the Cyrenian, what he said of Dionysius, vi. Jg, A 

jocular prediction of his, ib. 

Aristo the Chian, v. 263. 

Aristobule. See Diana, 

600 INDEX. 

Aristobulus of Cassandiia, v. '279. 

. king of Judea, taken prisoner by Pompey, iv. 171. 

Makes head against Gabinius and Antony, and is again among 

the captives, v. -1-27. 
Aristoclitus, the father of Lysander, iii. 189. 
Aristocrat es the historian, i. 116. 168. iii. 22. 
the rhetorician, attends Mark Antony in his Timonean 

retirement, v. 492. 
Arisiocritus sent to Philip of Macedon by Pexodorus, iv. 253. 
Arid demits ^ tyrant of Megalopolis, iii. 2. 
- , son of Hercules, founder of the royal family at 

Sparta, iv. 93, and ??. 

the Milesian, sent by Demetrius to the governor of 

Athens, v. 370, and to Antigonus with the news of a victory, 
3 1 8. 
Arzstodtcus the Tanagrean assassinates Ephialtes, ii. 18. 
Aristogiton, the public informer, v. 13, 11-. 

, Demosthenes makes an oration against him, v. 269. 

His grand-daughter married at the public charge of the Athe- 
nians, ii. 490. 
Arist ... daughter of Hipparinus, married to Dionysius the 

Elder, vi. 4. Her speech to Dion on restoring to him his wife 
Arete, 48. Put to death by order of Icetes, 54. 
Aristomachus, an exile from Sicyon, joins Aratus in his enterprise 
for the deliverance of that city, vi. 155. 

, , tyrant or" Argos, vi. 177- Slain by his servants, 178. 

the Younger reigns some time at Argos, vi. 182. 

Quits the tyranny, joins the Achaean league, and is elected 
general, 188. Is put to death, 199. 
Aristomenes offers a hecatomb three several times for having ae 

often killed a hundred Lacedaemonians, i. 92. 
Arision assists Pisistratus in forming his tyranny at Athens, i. 265. 

the philosopher, vi. 58. 

■ ■ the Corinthian, his stratagem, iii. 430, 431, n. 

< the Paeon ian, iv. 301. 

, natural son of Eumenes, excites troubles in Asia, iii. 
59. His affairs ruined, v. 221. 

. , Mithridates' admiral, delivered up to Lucullus by his 

own people-, iii. 342. 

, of Marathon, v. 286. 

the musician, iii. 211. 
itopkanes the comic poet, his saying of the Samians, ii. 40. 

. , one of Alexander's life-guards-, iv. 319. 

ion the painter, his drawing of Neniasa, ii. 134. 

. the orator, v. 10. When Archon, v. 280. 

e the Stagyrite, i. 5, 1(5, 30. His engaging manner, ii. 

His writings but little known in the time of Sylla, iii. 

267. Philip sends for him to take the tuition of Alexander, iv. 

His acroamatics and epoptics, 249. His metaphysics, ib. 

AJ xander talks of his sophisms, 349. What Cicero said of his 

•■lings, v. 321. 

INDEX. 303 

Aristotle of Argos persuades the Argives to quit Cleomenes* 
interest, v. 176. 

■ — the logician assists in killing the tyrant of Sicyon, vi. 155. 

Aristoxenus the musician, his question to Dionysius concerning 
Plato, ii. 24-9. 

, his commentaries, iv. 244. 

Aristratus, tyrant of Sicyon, his picture excellently drawn bj 
Melanthes, vi. 165. A rat us desired to spare it on that ac- 
count, ib. 

Arithwiadcs assists Lvcurmis in forming the Lacedaemonian corn- 
mon wealth, i. 117. 

Arius the philosopher honoured by Qctavius Caesar, v. 501, 502. 

fArmenf&f v. 473. 

Armenians, their cavalry, v. 47 k 

Armi.lHstrium, i. 89. 

Arnaccs-y a Persian, sent by Themistocles to Xerxes, 5. 336, 037. 

fArpininn, and it's district, iii. 122* 

Arrenid.es, v. 282. 

Arrhidcens, natural son of Philip of Macedon, iv, 253. By Pln- 
linna a courtesan, 353. Promising in his childhood, but hurt 
both in health and understanding by Olympias' potions, w. 
His commission to Eumenes, 55. 

Arrins, Qitmlus, informs the senate of some particulars of Catiline'* 
conspiracy, v. 310. 

&rron. See Aruns, 

Amentias commands the main bodv of Augustus' fleet at Actium, 
v. 4bU 

Arsaces, a common name of the kings of Parthia, iii. 473, n. 

Orodes, the first who sends an embassy to the Romans, iii. 

235, 472. Understands the Greek language, 496. Mates 
peace with Artavasdes, king of Armenia, and marries his son 69 
that prince's sister, ih. His second son Phraates gives him 
aconite, and afterward strangles him, 498. 

Harpates, son of Tiribazus, mufthers Arsames, vi. 150. 

Arsames, natural son of Artaxerxes, his character, vi. 149. Slain. 

150. 
f Arsanias, river, iii. 373. 
Arsenal of Athens, iii. 251. 

fArsian grove, where the Tuscan army was brought up, L 282- 
Arsicas, at first the name of Artaxerxes Maenaos, vi. 114. 
f Arsis, river, iv. 133. 
Artabazus, a Persian officer, ii. 476. 

— , father of Barsine, iv. 39, 272. 

Artagerses, general of the Ckdusians, vi. 124. Slain by Cyrus, ih, 
Arfasi/ras, called * the King Eye/ brings Artaxerxes an account 

of Cyrus' death, vi. 127. 
Artavasdes, king of Armenia, poes with six thousand horse in rid 

to Crassus, iii. 474. His excellent advice to Crassus in person, 

ib. Makes peace with Orodes, 496. Writes tragedies and other 

pieces in Greek, ib. 

so2 i:\iu: £ 

Arfavusd(.<, an ally to A ntcm)-, v. 461. Why he- withdrew from' tft* 
(toman camp, 462. 

Arta&ds king of Armenia, iii. !;72. 

-f Artaxata, built bj the advice of Annibal, iii. 372, 373. 

Artaxerxes, son of Xerxes, surnamed ' Longimanus,' vi. 1 14-. His 
character, 1 15. 

Akt.wkkxks II. surnamed ' Mnemon,' vi. 111. Son of Darius 
and Parysatis the daughter of Artaxerxes Longimanus, ib. Has 
three brothers, Cyrus, Ostanes, and Oxathres, ib. Of a mild 
disposition, the very reverse of his brother Cyrus, 115. Marries 
Statira, and with much difficulty keeps her, when the king had 
put her brother to death, and designed that she should share his 
fate, ib. His mother has the greater affection for Cyrus, and is 
desirous of raising him to the throne, 116. The pretence she 
makes use of for that purpose, ib. Darius appoints his eldest 
son his successor notwithstanding, and changes his name from 
Arsaces to Artaxerxes, ib. Cyrus resolves to assassinate Arta- 
xerxes, when that prince goes to Pasargadae, to be consecrated 
king, ib. 117. The ceremonies of the consecration, 116- The 
conspiracy is discovered to the king by Tisaphernes ; but Cyrus 
escapes with impunity, through the intercession of the queen- 
mother, and continues to aspire to the sovereignty, 117. Cyrus 
enlists foreign troops under various pretences, 117. Parysatis 
always endeavours to exculpate him, ib. Artaxerxes of a dila- 
tory turn of mind, 118. Other particulars of his character, ib. 
Some of his Sayings, ib. 119. He admits his brothers Ostanes 
and Oxathres to his table, contrary to the custom of Persia, 119. 
The queen Statira behaves in a popular manner, ib. Cyrus 
marches against the king his brother, with a hundred thousand 
barbarians, and nearly thirteen thousand Greeks, 120. Tisa- 
phernes informs the king of the real designs of Cyrus, ib. Statira 
reproaches- Parysatis with patronizing a rebel ; and Parysatis 
resolves to destroy Statira, ib. Artaxerxes draws a vast, trench 
along the plains, but Cyrus is suffered to pass it, and to march 
almost to Babylon, 121. Tiribazus rouses the king to action, ib. 
The king brings nine hundred thousand men into the field and 
draws them up judiciously, ib. 122. The battle of Cunaxa, ib. 
Engagement of Cyrus with Artaxerxes, 124, 125. The beha- 
viour of Artaxerxes on the death of Cyrus, 127, 128. He drinks 
some bad water with avidity, 127. The right-hand and the head 
of Cyrus are cut off, 12S. The king collects a considerable body 
of men, and returns to his camp, ib. Something of an analogy 
between the punishments winch the king inflicted, and the crime, 
' 129. He is ambitious of having it believed, that Cyrus fell by 
his hand, ib. The poor Carian and Mithridates the Persian, 
who are his competitors for that honour, come to a miserable 
end, 130. Parysatis indulges her vengeance upon them, and on 
the eunuch who cut off Cyrus' head and right-hand, ib. Mithri- 
dates suffers the cruel punishment of * the boat,' 181. Arta* 
xerxes, contrary to his promise, puts Clearqhus, and the other 

INDEX. 303 

Grecian officers to death, 13k Parysatis poisons the queen 
Statira, 135. Artaxerxea punishes Gigis, who was an accessary 
to the murther, after the manner that prisoners were punished 
in Persia; but only confines his mother to the city of Babylon, 
136. The Ten Thousand Greeks make good their retreat out of 
the heart of the enemy's country, ib. The Lacedaemonians 
attempt to dehver the Asiatic Greeks from servitude, and fail in. 
the two first expeditions; but succeed under Agesilaus, ib. 137. 
Artaxerxes, by his money, stirs up a Grecian war against Lace- 
daemon, 137. Agesilaus is called to the defence of his own 
country, ib. Artaxerxes gains the sea-fight near Cnidus, by 
Conon'and Pharnabazus, 138. The peace of Antalcidas' follows, 
which makes the Asiatic Greeks, and the islands reckoned among 
their dependencies, tributary to the Persian, ib. The king pays 
great attention to Antalcidas; but after the Spartans had lost the 
battle of Leuctra, treats him with contempt, ib. 139. Pelopidas 
keeps up his dignity at the Persian court, while Ismenias dis- 
honours his commission, 139. The king makes rich presents to 
Timagoras the Athenian, who is afterward capitally condemned 
by his countrymen for having received them, 140. Parysatis is 
recalled by the king, ib. At her instigation he puts Tisaphernes 
to death, ib*. She cherishes his passion for his own daughter 
Atossa, 141. He marries Atossa, and also another of his own 
daughters named Amestris, ib. Sends Pharnabazus and Iphf 
crates against the Egyptians ; but the expedition miscarries by 
the difference between the generals, ib. 142. Marches in person 
■against the Cadusians, 142. His numerous army is greatly 
distressed for want of provisions, ib. Tiribazus extricates them 
from the difficulty by a stratagem, ib. Artaxerxes shows himself 
verypatient of fatigue, 143. On his arrival an Ins own dominions, 
he permits his troops to fell the trees of his parks for fuel, ib. 
Thinks himself despised by his grandees for his ill success in the 
expedition, and becomes cruel and sanguinary, 144. His sons 
make parties for the crown, ib. The equitable part o^ his subjects 
favour Darius, the eldest sen; but Ochus hopes to gain the 
crown, through the interest of Atossa, ib. Artaxerxes declares 
-Darius his successor, ib. The heir apparent, according to cus^- 
torn, being to be granted his first request, he asks for Aspasia, 
late the concubine of Cyrus, ib. 145. The king gives her, but 
soon afterward takes her away, and consecrates her to Diana 
Anitis, ib. 146. Darius is highly offended at the affront, 146. 
Tiribazus, whom the king had disappointed of one of the prim- 
cesses, excites Darius to conspire agahist his father, ib. 147. 
Artaxerxes receives intelligence, that the conspirators design to 
enter his chamber in the night, and kill him in his bed, li-7- 
The prudent method which he adopted to be convinced of the 
truth, and for his own safety, ib. 143. Tiribazus falls, fighting 
in his own defence, 148. Darius is tried for the conspiracy, 
condemned, and put to death, ib. Artaxerxes dies, at the age 
of ninety-four, having reigned sixty years, 150. 
Artemidorus, a Greek, his services to Lueullus, hi, 31'", 

12 

304- INDEX. 

Artemidorus, the Cnidian, gives Caesar an account in writing of llic 

conspiracy against him, iv. 433. 
Artemisia, queen of Haliearnassus, takes up the body of Ariamenes 

brother of Xerxes, i. 331. 

i -Arlciiii. -Jinn, sea-fight of, ii. 112. 

Artemisius, mouth of, iv. 26 i. 

Arlcmius, of Colophon, Alexander's speech to hiin, iv. 318. 

Artemon, engineer to Pericles, why called ' Periphoretus,' ii. 4!. 

Artkniius, the Zclite, declared infamous for attempting to corri.pl 
the Greeks with Persian gold, i. 320. 

Artorius in a vision advises Octavianus to quit the camp, vi. 96. 

Arts, compared to the senses, v. 362. 

fAryerni, a people of Gaul, iv. 389. Defeated by Caesar, 390. 

Aruns, son oi' Tarquin, fights Brutus, and both fall in the combat, 
i. 282. 

, son of Porsenna, i. 297. 

, a Tuscan, persuades the Gauls to invade Italy, i. 379. 

Arijbas, son of Alcetas, and father of /Eacides, hi. 66. 

Arymbas, brother of Olympias, iv. 219. 

An, a small coin, i. 377. 

Asbolpmeni, who, iii. 295. 

Ascalis, king of Mauritania, expelled, iv. 12. Assisted by the 
Cilician pirates, id. 

Ascanius, son of iEneas, i. 50. 

Asclepiades, brings the first account of Alexander's death to 
Athens, v. 26. 

Asdrubal, and Hamilcar, Carthaginian generals, sent into Sicily, 
ii. 261. 

AcryawJijc, Istanda, a Persian word, iv. 267, n. 

■[Asia, oppressed by Sylla, iii. 266. Mithridates' massacre of 
Romans there, ib. 

Asia, youngest daughter of Themistocles, i. 358. 

Asiaticus, one of Galba's freedmen, vi. 231. 

Asiatic style, v. 427. 

Asinaria, a feast of the Syracusans, iii. 442. 

fAsinarus, river, iii. 411. 

Asinius Pull in, his account of the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 219. At- 
tends Caesar in Africa, 418. A friend of Caesar's, v. 102. 

■ , a friend of Antony, v. 434. 

Asqpus, father of Sinope, iii. 360. 

Asp, it's bite occasions an easy death, v. 495. 

Aspasia, Pericles accused of making war on the Samians at her 
instigation, ii. 36. A native of Miletus, ib. Skilled in rhe- 
toric, ib. Socrates one of her visitors, 37. Pericles marries 
her, and has a sen by her, ib. She is accused of impiety, and 
of being procuress to Pericles, and with difficulty saved by that 
great man, 4S, 49. 
■ , of Phocaea, concubine to Cyrus, ii. 38. Her name ori- 
ginally Milto, ib. Made priestess to Diana Anitis, vi. 145, 146 

A los, Achilles so called in Epirus, iii. 66. 

Asphalius. See Neptune. 

INDEX. 305 

Aspis, the eftadel of Argos, v. ITS. Why so called, iii. 113, n.. 

Ass, kicks a lion to death, iv. 348. 

j- Ass us, river, iii. 251. 

Asttria, of Salamis, one of Cimon's mistresses, iii. 299. 

Asteropus, the first that raised the power of* the Ephori, v. 164. 

Astyauax, vi. 77. 

Astyochus, the double part he acts between Phrynichus and Alci- 
biades, ii. 150. 

Astyphilas, the Posidonian, interprets Cimon's dream, iii. 320. 

Assyrians, iii. 363. 

Asylceus, his temple made a place of refuge by Romulus and 
Remus, i. 61. 

Atargatas, a Syrian goddess, treasures of her temple, iii. 472, n. 

Ateius, his imprecations, as tribune, against Crassus, iii. 470. 

f Alhamanians, iii. 50. iv. 210. 

Atheist, Theodorus called one, v. 44. 

AUicncca, least so called, enlarged by Theseus, and made common 
to all Attica, i. 29, n. See Panathencea. 

Atheiueum, a temple of Minerva near Belbina, v. 158. 

f Athenians, pay tribute to Minos, i. 15. Apply themselves at a 
late period to navigation, 19, n. Celebrate the Oschophoria in 
Plutarch's time, 25. Divided into three classes by Theseus, 30. 
War between them and the Amazons, i. 32. Rebel against 
Theseus, 41 . Commanded by the oracle to bring his bones to 
Athens, 45. Pay divine honours to Theseus after his death, 
46. Make a law against mentioning the recovery of Salamis, 
227. Solon gets that law repealed by stratagem, ib. Allow 
Pisistratus a guard, 265. Their victory at Salamis, 334, 335. 
They reject a very advantageous proposal (the burning of the 
fleet of the allies) because it is unjust, 341. Six hundred of 
them colonise Sinope, ii. 33. Under Pericles they beat the La- 
cedajinonians, 34. Their war with Samos, 39. Some of them 
branded in the forehead by the Samians, 40. Forbid the Mega- 
rensians their territories, 46. Their small number after the 
plague, 57. Beaten by Lysandcr, iii. 199. Under Thirty Ty- 
rants, 206. Delivered from their yoke, 214. Recover the Cad- 
mea for the Thebans, iv. 99, 100. The care they took of their 
poor, ii. 489. Their humanity, 490. The three things they 
taught men the use of, iii. 307. Jealous of men of parts, 405. 
Their eagerness for the Sicilian expedition, and great designs 
in consequence of it, ii. 136. Their armies and generals ruined" 
in Sicily, iii. 438, 441. Some of their men saved for repeating a 
few verses from Euripides, 444. They declare war against Phi- 
lip of Macedon, v. 19. Receive a Macedonian garrison into 
Munychia, 33. Their servility to Antigonus and Demetrius, 
372. Their ingratitude to Demetrius, 394, 413. 

f Athens, rebuilt by Themistocles, after it was burnt by Xerxes, 
i. 340. Beautified by Pericles, ii. 22. The plague there, 53. 
The famine, iii. 249. v. 398. Besieged and taken by Sylla, iii. 
247, 250. It's good men the best, and it's bad men the worst in 
the world, vi. 53. 

vol. vi. *s X 

8.06 INDEX. 

Athenian commonwealth, acraofits establishment, i. 2, n. 
Ai'.cnodorus the actor, iv. 2S5. Victorious in Alexander's exhibi' 

tion, fined for being absent on the festival of Bacchus, ib. 
' the Imbrian, released by Alexander, at the request of 

Fhocion, v. 23. 

— the stoic philosopher, brought by Cato to Rome, v. 57, 

58. 

Atlienophanes, one of Alexander's servants, iv. 296. 

f Athesis, river, iii. 148. 

Aihleicea, their discipline inconsistent with that of soldiers, iii. 4. 
Their five exercises and voracious appetite, vi. 154, n. 

Athletic exercises, not admired by lhilopcemen, iii. 5. Nor by 
Alexander the Great, iv. 245. 

Atlantic Island, a work of Solon's left unfinished, i. 258. Plato 
attempts the same, but does not finish it, 268. 

f ■ islands, iv. 11. 

f ocean, iv. 11. 

Atossa, daughter, and wife to Artaxerxes, vi. 141. Favours 
Ochus, 144. 

Atreus, v. 298. 

t Attalia, iv. 223. 

Attains, king, assists Flaminius in his operations in Greece, iii. 38. 
Dies, ib. 

« , uncle to Cleopatra, wife of Philip of Macedon, iv. 252. 

■ Philometor, leaves his kingdom to the people of Rome, 

v. 213, 214, and n. Amuses himself with planting poisonous 
herbs, 381. 

Attia, mother of Augustus, v. 348. 

Attic boroughs, incorporation of, a?ra of, i. 2, n. 

Attica, the people of it collected into one city by Theseus, i. 28. 
Oil the principal commodity, 254. 

AttcIIius, advises Brutus not to give battle to Augustus, vi. 93. 

Attilia, daughter of Soranus and wife of Cato the Younger, v. 55. 
Is divorced, 73. 

Attilius Vrrgilio, gives the signal for killing Galba, vi. 238. 

Attis, two of that name, iv. 2. 

Attius Tulhis, v. 292. 

Atys, i. 170. 

Avarice, it's effects, v. 146. 

t Aventine, Mount, i. 62, 84. v. 238. 

Aujidius, a flatterer of Sylla, iii. 277- 

, conspires against Sertorius, iv. 34. 

AugurSj their ceremonies, i. 176. Their power, ii. 283, n. 

Auguries. See Omens. 

Augustus Cccsar, Antony at first despises his youth, v. 440. He 
collects Caesar's veterans, 347. Associates with Cicero, 440. 
vi. 77. Forms the triumvirate with Antony and Lepidus, v. 442. 
vi. 82. Agrees to a list of two hundred proscriptions, v. 443. 
vi. 82. Marries Claudia, the daughter of Fulvia, v. 443. De- 
feated by Brutus at Philippi, 411. The western provinces as- 
signed him, 454. His answer to Antony's complaints, 478. 

INDEX, 307 

Declares war against Cleopatra, 483. Commands the right 
squadron against Antony at Actium, 487. In consequence of 
an omen, erects the statues of a man and his ass, 488. Enters 
Alexandria, 501. Endeavours to save Cleopatra for his triumph, 
503. But is at last obliged to carry only her effigy, 507- Buries 
her magnificently with Antony, ib. His arrival at Rome upon 
the death of* Julius Csesar, vi. 76. Is chosen consul at the age 
of twenty, 81. Prosecutes Brutus and Cassius for the murdei 
of Caesar, ib. Musters his army, 92. Is conveyed out of the 
camp, 96. His fleet beaten by that of Brutus, 101. 

August, month of, so called from Augustus Caesar, i. 201. 

f Aulisy iv. 76. 

Aulas Gabinius, a friend of Pompey's, v. 83. 

■ Pompeius, the tribune, his sudden death, iii. 141. 

Aura, or Abra, servant maid to Pompeia Caesar's wife, iv. 368. 
v. 327. 

Aurelia, Caesar's mother, iv. 364, 366. 

Aurclius, Caius, a Roman Knight, reconciles Pompey and Crassus, 
iv. 151. 

, Quintus, proscribed by Sylla for the sake of his Alban 

villa, iii. 277. 

Autarctus, brother-in-law to Xerxes, his three children sacrificed 
in a barbarous and superstitious manner by the Greeks, i. 332, 
333. 

Aiitocthones, why the first inhabitants of Attica called themselves 
so, i. 4, n. 

Autoleon, king of Pseonia, gives his daughter to Pyrrhus, iii. 76. 

Autolijcus the wrestler, affronts Callibus, iii. 206. For which the 
Thirty Tyrants destroyed him, 207. 

• , founder of Sinope, iii. 359. 

f Auximum, iv. 132. 

Axiochus, father of Aspasia, ii. 36. 

Axius, or rather Accius, supposed to have had a criminal commerce 
with the wife of Crassus, v. 323. 

f , river, v. 408. 

Axones, tables on which Solon wrote his laws, i. 255. 

B. 

t BABYCE, i. 120. ii. 362. 

f Babylon, the soil about it bituminous and hot, the climate also 

very hot, iv. 297. 
■f Babylonian sea, iii. 364. 
Bacchiadcc, who had long governed in Corinth, when they retired 

to Lacedaemon seemed despicable to the Spartans on account of 

their being shaved, iii. 188 
Bacchides the eunuch, employed by Mithridates to kill his wive* 

and sisters, iii. 351. 
Bacchus, washed when an infant in the fountain of Cissusa, or Til- 

phusa, iii. 224. Marries Ariadne, i, 23. Sur named Omestes, 

x 2 

/ 

SOS INDEX. 

or ' the Devourer,' i. 332. Statue of Bacchus carried in proces- 
sion to Eleusis, ii. 161'. Called Evius and Thriambus, 424. 

Avenger of Thebes, the place of his nativity, iv. 258, and n. 

Son ofthe Bona Dea, 366, '567. Antony imitates him, v. 446, 

117. Nieias manumits a slave for personating him, iii. 401. 
Bacchi/lides, i. 172. Verses of his on peace, 203. 
Bachelors, law against them, i. 133. Perfectly ridiculous beings 

in Sparta, ib. 
Bactriaa cavalry, iv. 291. 
Bccbius, Marcus, i. 207. 
f Bcetis, river, ii. 506. 
Bagoas, his house given to Parmenio, iv. 303. 

■ wins the prize in a public exhibition, iv. 341. 

Balbus Cornelius. See Cornelius. 

Balinus, iv. 215. 

f Balissus, river, iii. 480. 

Ballot, the Spartans chose members into their societies of repast 

by it, i. 129. 
Ballots on some occasions taken from the altar, ii. 49, n. 
Baltc, the nymph, said to be mother of Epimenides, i. 233. 
Band, sacred band of the Thebans, ii. 359, 362, iv. 251. 
Bandius, Lucius, ii. 400, 401. 
f Bantia, city of, ii. 433. 
Barathrum, ii. 449. 
Barber, Caesar's, discovers a plot against him at Alexandria, iv. 

414. 
Barber's shop at Athens, the first news of the defeat in Sicily told 

there, and near being fatal to the poor barber, iii. 145. 
Barea the Carthaginian, tells Annibal ' he knew not how to use a 

victory,' ii. 90. 
Bureau, Ham dear so sumamed, ii. 503. 
Bardicvans, a band of ruffians kept by Marius as his guards, iii. 

178. By whom destroyed, ib. 
Bardyllis, king of Illyria, iii. 76. 
Barley, given to the Roman soldiers who misbehaved, instead of 

wheat, ii. 430. 
Barrels, in which the vestal virgins kept their most sacred utensils, 

i. 388. 
Barsine, daughter of Artabazas, widow of Memnon, and mistress 

to Alexander, has a son by Alexander, named Hercules, iv. 

39, 272. 
Bat-sine, sister to the former, given to Eumcnes. iv. 39. 
Basilica l'urcia, or the Porcian hall, built by Cato the elder, ii. 

518. 
Basilica built by Pauius near the Forum, iv. 393. vi. 238. 
Basillus, Lucius, an officer of Syila's, iii. 214. 
Bastards, not obliged to maintain their lathers, i. 251. They, and 

persons of the half blood, could not perform their exercises in 

the Gymnasium at Athens with the true-born Athenians, i. 311. 

Law against them at Athens, ii. 57. 
Bastard son of Pericles registered by his father's name as legiti- 

INDEX. 309 

mate, because he had lost his other children, ii. 57. That son 
afterwards condemned to die, ib. 

f Bastarnce, a warlike nation, auxiliaries to Perseus, ii. 292. 
Every horseman had a foot soldier by him, 295. Perseus, by 
his avarice, loses their assistance, ib. 

Balabaces, priest of Cybele, what he foretells the Romans, iii. 141. 

Batalus, Demosthenes so called, v. 254. 

, a poet and musician of that name, v. 254. 

| Batavians, their cavalry the best in Germany, vi. 256. 

Bathing, how practised among the Romans. See Decency. 

Bathycles, a sculptor, i. 223. 

Bato of Sinope, v. 147- 

Battle, of the Romans and Sabines, i. 76, 79, 80. Of the Ama- 
zons and Athenians, 34. Of Marathon, ii. 452. Of Leuctra, 
368, 369. iv. 105. Of Plataese, ii. 473—478. Of Mantinea, iii. 
13, 14. iv. 116. Of Ipsns, iii. 69. v. 393. Of Salami's, i. 333, 
et seq. Of Allia, i. 383. Of Chaeronea, iii. 256. iv. 91. v. 273. 
Of Coronea, ii. 32. Of Pharsalin, iv. 214—219. OfGranicus, 
261—263. Oflssus, 270. Of Arbela, 293, 294. Of Alexan- 
der with Porus, 330, 331. Of Philippi, vi. 95— 9S. Of Ac- 
tium, v. 488, 489. Of Bedriacum, vi. 255. Of Crimesus, ii. 
263—265. Of Cunaxa, vi. 122. Of Cannse, ii. 86—88. Of 
Artemisium, 113. Of Orchomenus, iii. 261. Of Sucro, iv. 
26, 146. Of Selasia, iii. 7, 8. v. 184. Of Trebia, ii. 65. Of 
Tegyra?, 361. Of Thrasymenus, 67. Of Tanagra, iii, 318. Of 
Timoleon with the Carthaginians, see Crimesus. Of Pyrrhus 
with the Romans, iii. 88, 95, 102. — With the Carthaginians, 98. 
— Mamertines, 99, 101. — Pantauchus, 74. In Argos, 115. Of 
Philopcemen with Machanidas, iii. 13, 14. — With Dinocrates, 
25. — With Nabis, 19. Of Archidamus with the Arcadians, 
commonly called ' the tearless battle,' iv. 114. Of Porsenna 
with the Romans, i. 295. Of Quintius with the Macedonians, 
near the Apsus, iii.. 35, 36. Of the Romans with Philip at 
Cynosccphalae, 39, 40. Of Sertorius with Memmius, Pompey's 
lieutenant, iv. 28. Of Sylla with Telesinus and Lamponius, iii. 
273. — With Marius the younger, 272. Of Marius with the 
Ambrones, 144. — With the Teutones, 146. — With the Cimbri, 
152. Of Crassus with the Parthians, 481 — 484. Of Antony 
with the Parthians, v. 463 — 473. Of Lucullus with Tigranes, 
iii. 367. Of Nicias with the Syracusans, iii. 437. 

Beards, why Alexander ordered those of the Macedonians to be 
shaved, i. 7. 

Beasts, three most mischievous ones, v. 284. 

Beckmann, i. 18,??. 

Bedriacwn, vi. 252, 255. 

Bees, Stocks of them, by Solon's law at what distance to be placed 
by the Athenians from their neighbours', i. 254. Bred from 
dead oxen, v. 197. Omens from swarms of bees. See Omens 
and Prodigies. 

Beetles bred from dead asses, iv. 197 

Brians provides a ship for Marius in his distress, iii. 171 - 

$Belbina,v. 158. 

310 INDEX. 

f Belgcc conquered by Caesar, iv. 381 . 

Bclitaras, said to have provided the poison for Statira, wife of 
Artaxerxes, vi. 135. 

Bellinus, the praetor seized by pirates, iv. 1.51. 

Bellona, iii. 243, 270. 

Beluris, secretary to Artaxerxes Mnemon, vi. 139. 

Belus, his temple, iv. 267. 

Berenice, wife of Ptolemy, gives Antigone, her daughter by a for- 
mer husband, to Pyrrhus, iii. 70. 

one of the wives of Mi thri dates, iii. 351. Takes poison, 

but not enough to despatch her, and is strangled, 352. 

f Berenicis, a city built by Pyrrhus, iii. 72. 

f Bertca, iv. 206. 

f Berytus, v. 475. 

Bessus, his treason against Darius, iv. 307, and punishment, 309. 

Bestia, an officer of good family, but without capacity for war, 
iii. 129. 

■ , the tribune, v. 317. 

Bias, the wise man, i. 223. 

Bibulus, Calpurnius, Caesar's collegue in the consulship, iv. 
184, 185, 372, 373. 

, Cato's son-in-law, v. 73, 74. 

■ , son of Bibulus and Porcia, vi. 68. 

Bion, i. 33. 

Billius, Caius, v. 220. 

Bii zenna, daughter of Bardyllis, king of Illyria, and wife of Pyrrhus, 
iii. 76. 

f Bisaltce in Thrace, colonised by the Athenians, ii. 19. 

f Bisanthe, ii. 16/. 

f Bitkynia, i. 33. ii. 157. iii. 246. vi. 74. 

Bithys, Demetrius' general, beats Aratus, vi. 187. 

Biton and Cleobis, preferred in point of happiness, by Solon, to 
Croesus, i. 261. 

Blond, that of a bull accounted poisonous, i. 357- 

Blossins, the philosopher, v. 207, 218. Resolutely declares to the 
patricians, that he would have done whatever Tiberius Gracchus 
ordered him, 221. Kills himself, ib. 

Boat, a dreadful kind of punishment among the Persians, vi. 131. 

Bocchoris, his verdict called in question by Lamia, v. 391. 

Bocchus, king of Upper Numidia, or Mauritania, Jugurtha's father- 
in-law, betrays him to Sylla, iii. 130, 131, 233. Presents Sylla 
with magnificent figures, representing that piece of history, 161, 
233. Revives the quarrel between Marius and Sylla, 161, 233. 

. , king of Lybia, in Antony's army, v. 484. 

Boedromia, an Athenian feast, i. 34. 

Boedromion, month of, i. 34. v. 33. 

Bceotarches, or annual governors of Bceotia, ii. 368. 

-f Bceotia, Lysander's expedition against it, iii. 223. Epaminondas 
calls its fields the orchestra of Mars, ii. 421, 422. 

Boeotians have the sole right of sacrificing at Aulis, and therefore 
insult Agesilaus for attempting it, iv. 

BoioriXf king of the Cimbri, iii. 151. 

77 

INDEX. fill 

f Bola, ii. 20.9. 

f Bombyce, v. 461. 

Bona Dea, the goddess so called, iv. 366. 

f Bononia, v. 350. 

f Bosporus, Cimmerian, i. 34. iii. 246. 

f Botticcans, a people of Thrace, i. 16. 

Bottomry, ii. 523. 

Boucation, one of the Theban months, ii. 370. 

Brachyllelis, a Theban, friend to Philip of Macedon, iii. 38. 

Brasidas opposed the peace of Greece for the sake of displaying 
his own bravery, iii. 410. Slain in the battle near Amphipolis, ib. 

f Brauron, a borough of Attica, i. 230. 

Brasen shield falls from heaven into the hands of Numa, i. 189. 

Brennus, king of the Gauls, his bold answer to the Roman em- 
bassadors, i. 380. He marches to Rome, 381. Defeats the 
Romans, 383. This event little known in Greece, 389. He 
besieges the Capitol, 390. Agrees to march oft' for a stipulated 
sum, but adds his sword to the weights, 397. He withdraws 
his troops on the approach of Camillus, 398. 

Briareus, Archimedes compared to him, ii. 413. 

Bribery, at Rome, ii. 190, 191. iv. ISO, 194, n. When it began at 
Athens, ii. 191. 

Bridge over the Rhine built by Caesar in ten days, iv. 385. 

Sublician, or wooden bridge at Rome esteemed saci'ed, i. 

182. When built, ib. 

Bribes, servants and sutlers to Brutus' army, vi. 99. 

t Britain, Caesar's two expeditions into it, iv. 386. It's existence 
doubted amongst the Romans, ib. 

f Brixelhnn, vi. 219. 

Broth, black, of the Lacedaemonians, i. 129. What gave it it's 
chief relish, ib. 

Brothers, union, a rare thing among them, ii. 286. 

f Brundusium, iv. 206. 

f Bruttii, ii. 96, 251. 

Brut ius Sura, deputy governor of Macedon, drives Archelaus out 
of Greece, iii. 246. 

Brutus, Lucius Junius, puts on the appearance of an idiot, i. 272, n. 
Expels the Tarquins, vi. 56. Condemns his own sons, and 
attends the execution, i. 278. How represented in his statue, 
vi. 56. 

-, Junius, the first tribune of the people, ii. 181. 

, the praetor, sent by the senate to Sylla, iii. 243. 

, one of Carbo's generals, iv. 132. 

, the father of Marcus Brutus, defends Mutina against 

Pompey, iv. 143. Surrenders it, and Pompey, by a breach of 
faith, puts him to death, ib. 

-, Albinus, in the conspiracy against Caesar, iv. 432. Laughs 

at augury, and draws Caesar out on the ides of March, ib. 433. 
Is put to death, vi. 82. 
Brutus, Marcus, his great ancestor was Junius Brutus, who ex- 
pelled the Tarquins, vi. 56. Happily formed to virtue by nature, 

12 

!12 INDEX. 

and has all the advantages of cultivation, ib. His mother Set*- 
vilia, 57. He marries Porcia the daughter of Cato, 58. Ac- 
quainted with the doctrines of all the philosophers; hut the 
Platonists and the Old Academy stood highest in his esteem, ib. 
Speaks with great ability both in the field, and at the bar, ib. 
In Greek, affects the laconic stile, ib. Accompanies Cato to 
Cyprus, in his expedition against Ptolemy, 59. Disposes of that 
prince's effects, and carries the treasure to Rome, ib. Out of 
principle, joins Pompey against Caesar, though Pompey had put 
his father to death, 60. Acts some time as lieutenant to Sestius, 
in Sicily, but goes volunteer to Macedon, before the battle of 
Pharsalia, ib. Employs the hours that he could spare from the 
duties of the camp, in study, ib. Caesar had a high esteem for 
him, having some reason to believe that he was his son, ib. 61. 
After the battle of Pharsalia, Brutus escapes to Larissa, and 
thence writes to Caesar, who sends for him, and entertains him 
amongst his friends, 61 . He reconciles Caesar to his friend Cassius, 
6C2. Some account of the character of Brutus, ib. Caesar ap- 
points him governor of Cisalpine Gaul, ib. Dissension between 
Brutus and Cassius, though Cassius had married his sister Junia, 
63. Brutus gains a more honourable praetorship than Cassius, ib. 
Cassius is offended, and represents Caesar to Brutus as a tyrant, 
ib. Caesar has his suspicions, yet trusts to the honour of Brutus, 
ib. Sayings of Caesar concerning him, ib. 64. Brutus hated the 
imperial power, and Cassius hated the emperor, 64-. Brutus is 
animated to take off Caesar, by private intimations and anony- 
mous letters, 65. Cassius informs Brutus, that the friends of 
Caesar intended to move that he should be declared king, ib. 
What Brutus said upon it, ib. He visits Q. Ligarius, who offers 
to join in the design against Caesar, 66. They take in others of 
their friends, but except Cicero, on account of his timidity, ib. 
The great secrecy, with which the design was conducted, 67. 
Brutus becomes pensive and full of anxiety, ib. The greatness 
of Porcia's conduct upon that occasion, 68. Her address to 
Brutus, ib. The senate assemble on the ides of March in Pom- 
pey's basilica, the day that Brutus and his associates had pitched 
upon for the execution of their purpose, ib. 69. He takes a 
dagger with hirn ; a circumstance known only to his wife, ib. 
The great firmness of the conspirators on that occasion, ib. 
Caesar delays his coming, ib. Ambiguous expressions to some 
of the friends of liberty, which make them think their secret is 
discovered, 70. The agonies of Porcia, ib. Popilius Laena 
addresses Caesar, and the conspirators are afraid that he is open- 
ing their design, ib. 71. The conspirators get close about Caesar's 
chair, under pretence of presenting a suit to him, 71. The pro- 
cess of their great undertaking, ?7;. Csesar is slain, 72. Brutus, 
in attempting to have his share in the sacrifice, is wounded in the 
hand, ib. Proposes to make a speech, but the senators fly, ib. 
Prevents the taking off Mark Antony, contrary to the opinion of 
his associates, ib. He and his party betake themselves to the 
Capitol, ib. They proclaim liberty to the people as they pass, ib. 

INDEX. 313 

After the first alarm Is over, the senators and the people go 
in a body to the conspirators in the Capitol, 73. Brutus' 
speech is well received, and he and his party come down into the 
Forum, ib. Brutus is heard there with reverence ; but Cinna, 
attempting to accuse Caesar, is loaded with the most opprobrious 
language, ib. The conspirators retire once more into the Ca- 
pitol, ib. The senate assemble the day following, and an am- 
nesty is decreed, ib. Antony sends his son to the Capitol as a 
hostage, ib. Brutus and his associates come down, and there is 
an appearance of a general reconciliation, ib. Antony has the 
thanks of the senate for preventing a civil war, and the principal 
of the conspirators have provinces assigned them, ib. 74. Brutus 
commits a second and greater error, in permitting Antony to 
publish Caesar's will, and to give him a public funeral, 74. The 
people snatch brands from the pile, and run to tire the houses of 
tiie conspirators, ib. 75. Cinna the poet is mistaken for Cinna 
the conspirator, and torn in pieces by the mob, 75. Brutus and 
his party retire to Antium ; but the shows with which he was to 
entertain the people, as praetor, are exhibited with great magni- 
ficence, ib. 76. Octavius comes to Rome, assumes the name of 
Caesar, and greatly ingratiates himself with the people, 76. Ci- 
cero joins him, ib. Brutus' spirited letters to Cicero on that 
junction, ib. 77. Brutus resolves to leave Italy, 77. The affect- 
ing circumstances of Porcia's parting with him at Elea, ib. 78. 
He sails from Elea to Athens, 78. He attends the lectures of 
the philosophers there ; but privately prepares for war, ib. Sends 
Herostratus into Macedon, while he secures the young Romans 
that were in Athens, and among the rest the son of Cicero, ib. 
Goes to Carystus, a city of Euboea, where a friend of his was 
arrived from Asia with some ships laden with money, ib. Lets 
fall an ominous expression at an entertainment on his birth-day, 
ib. 79. Antistius gives him five hundred thousand drachmas of 
the money he was carrying to Italy, 79. He collects forces, ib. 
At Demetrias, seizes the arms which Julius Caesar intended for 
the Parthian war, ib. Macedon is delivered up to him by Hor- 
tensius the Praetor, ib. He makes a forced march to Dvrra- 
chium, in order to reach it before Caius, the brother of Mark 
Antony, and is seized with the disorder called ' Bulimia,' ib. 
Makes himself master of Dyrrachium, Apollonia, and Buthrotus, 
and the troops that held those cities, 80. Takes Caius, the bro- 
ther of Antony, prisoner, 81. Young Cocsar finding the senate 
inclined to favour Brutus, reconciles himself to Antony, and ob- 
tains the consulship by force, ib. He is no sooner consul than he 
orders a process against Brutus and his accomplices for having 
murthered the first magistrate of Rome, ib. The triumvirate di- 
vide the provinces amongst them, and settle a list of two hundred 
proscriptions, 82. Brutus and Cassius meet at Smyrna, ib. 83. 
Their forces very respectable, 83. Their different depositions 
and views, ib. Brutus desires Cassius to let him have part 
of his treasure, and obtains a third, 84*. Cassius behaves with 

3Ii INDEX. 

great severity on the taking of Rhodes, ib. The Lvcians oppose 
Brutus, and he lays siege to the city of Xanthus, 85. His ope- 
rations against the Xanthians, and the passionate desire that 
people had of death, ib. Brutus weeps at the affecting circum- 
stances, in which a Xanthian woman was found, 86. Proclaims 
a reward to any soldier, who could wive a Xanthian, ib. Brings 
the Patareans and others to surrender, by dismissing some 
women without ransom, and other instances of justice and mode- 
ration, ib. Raises only a hundred and fifty talents in Lycia, 
while Cassius amasses eight thousand at Rhodes, 87. Theodotus, 
who advised the murther of Pompey the Great, falls into the 
hands of Brutus, and is put to death, ib. 88. Brutus and Cassius 
meet at Sardis, and fall into debates and mutual accusations, 88. 
Favonius puts an end to those disputes by an act of cynical 
freedom, ib. Cassius blames Brutus for disgracing Lucius 
Pella, on account of his embezzling the public money, and 
Brutus puts him in mind of ' the ides of March,' 89. A little 
before they left Asia, Brutus has an extraordinary apparition, 90. 
Cassius, who was an Epicurean, disputes the reality of apparitions, 
ib. 91. Omen oi' their defeat at Philippi, 91. Brutus comes 
upon Norbanes near Symbolum, and must have destroyed his 
whole army had not Antony with incredible celerity marched to 
his relief, ib. Circumstances previous to the battle of Philippi, 
92. Cassius inclined to protract the war, but over-ruled by 
Brutus, 98. Cassius asks Brutus, what his resolution is concern- 
ing flight and death, 9k Brutus' answer, ib. The battle 
described, 95, 96. Brutus is victorious in the right wing, and 
Cassius defeated in the left, 96. The want of their knowing in 
time the circumstances of each other proves the ruin of both, 97. 
Cassius, in consequence of an unfortunate mistake, orders his 
freedman Pindarus to despatch him, 98. Brutus laments over 
Cassius, and calls him the last of the Romans, 99. Encourages 
Cassius' troops, ib. The enemy's loss greatly exceeds his, ib. 
Demetrius, a servant of Cassius, goes over to Antony, with his 
master's robe and sword, ib. The reason why Brutus resolves to 
avoid another battle, ib. A blemish in the character of Brutus, 
that he promises his troops, in case of victory, the plunder of the. 
cities of Lacedaemon and Thessalonica, 100. The affairs of Caesar 
and Antony in an indifferent posture, 101. An unfortunate 
circumstance to Brutus, that he does not get intelligence of the 
victory gained by his fleet, 102. The spectre appears to him 
again, ib. Omens announce his fall, ib. 108. Brutus routs the 
enemy's left wing; but his own left wing, at the same time, is 
defeated and he is surrounded, 103. The valour and glorious 
death of Marcus the son of Cato, 104. Lucilius passes himself 
for Brutus, and is taken prisoner, ib. Brutus, attended by a few 
of his officers and his friends, stops under the cavity of a large 
rock, 105. Appeals to Heaven, ib. Sighs deeply at the mention 
of Flavius and Labeo, i£. Statilius undertakes to make his way 
through the enemy, to see whether the camp of Brutus was safe, 

INDEX. S15 

106. Holds up a torch, being the signal he had promised, but 
was slain in his return, ib. Brutus desires several "of his friends 
to assist in despatching him, and is refused, ib. His last address 
to his friends, ib. He falls upon his sword, 107. His friends 
behave with great honour, ib. His wife Porcia, being prevented 
from any other kind of death, puts burning coals into her mouth, 
and dies, ib. 108. He receives an honourable interment from 
his enemy Antony, 111. What passed between Octavius and 
the Milanese, with regard to the statue of Brutus, ib. 112. 
Bubulci, numbered by Plutarch among the Roman surnames, i. 

287. 

f Bucephalia, iv. 332. 

Bucephalus, Alexander's celebrated horse, how managed by him 

and obtained, iv. 24-6, 247. His age, 332. 
Bulimia, a distemper in which persons are extremely hungry, 

vi. 79. 
Bull, of Marathon, overcome by Theseus, and sacrificed to Apollo 

Delphinius, i. 14, 15. 
Bull and wolf in brass at Argos, emblematical, iii. 114. Of brass, 

upon which the Cimbri laid their hands in the solemnity of an 

oath, 149. 

sacrificed to the Euphrates, by Lucullus, iii. 361. 

Bulla, a Roman ornament for children, i. 83. 
Burials, in what manner regulated by Lycurgus, i. 1 53. 
Buried alive, two Greeks and two Gauls, by the Romans, in com- 
pliance with the Sibylline prophecies, ii. 392. 
Busiris, king of /Egypt, sacrificed by Hercules, i. 12. 
Buskin, Theramenes so called for his versatility, iii. 399. 
Butas, Cato's freedman, v. 120. 

, the poet, i. 86. 

Butes, general of the Persians, being besieged by Cimon, burns 

himself, iii. 302. 
f Butltrotus, vi. 80. 
f Byzantium, recovered by Alcibiades, ii. 160. Saved by Pho- 

cion, v. 18. 

C. 

CABIRI, country of the Cabiii, iii. 345, 346. 

Cabiri, the dii magni, or Samothracian gods, iii. 343, n. 345, n. ii. 

316, n. Their temple plundered by pirates, iv. 153. 
Caddos, what, i. 129. 
f Cadmea, the citadel of Thebes so called, iv. 99. Most unjustly 

surprised by Phoobidas the Lacedaemonian, ib. 
Cadmia, sister of Neoptolemus, iii. 71- 
Cadmus, iii. 256. 

Caduceus, Mercury's rod, carried by a herald, v. 239. n. 
f Cadusians, vi. 124, 142. 
Ccccias, the wind so called, iv. 23. 
C'ceci/ia, mother of Lucullus, iii. 325. 

316 INDEX. 

Ca-cilia Metella, daughter of Metellus the chief pontiff, wife of 

SylJa, iii. 239, and mother to yF/milia by Scaurus her former 

husband, 279. iv. 134. Dies, iii. 279. 
Ctvciliits Metellus^ son of Metellus Numidicus, iii. 123. Dedicates 

the picture of Flora in the lemple of Castor and Pollux, iv. 128. 

Desired by the army to take the command in Rome against 

Marius and Cinna, but refuses, iii. 175. 
Cczcilius, the rhetorician, v. 252. 

— - — , an emancipated slave, v. 300. 

. — ■, or rather Ccelius, the iEdile, applies to Cicero, when 

governor of Cilicia, for panthers, v. 337. Cicero's answer, ib. 
Ccelici. See Ccelia, 
f Canon, iv. 172. 
Crephisias, a musician, iii. 75. 

Crepio, defeated by the Teutones and Cimbri, iv. 4. iii. S86. 
, marries Pompey's daughter, who had been contracted to 

Faustus the son of Sylla, iv. 184'. 

-, half brother to Cato the younger, much beloved by him, 

v. 51, 52. His death, 58. 
C^bsar, Caius Julius, Sylla endeavours to bring him to repudiate 
Cornelia, the daughter of Cinna, and being unable to effect it, 
confiscates her dowry, iv. 356, 357. Marius, by marrying Julia, 
Caesar's aunt, had a family- connexion with him, 357. Ca?sar 
loses the priesthood through Sylla's means, ib. Sylla says, ' that 
in Coesar were many Mariuses,' ib. Casar conceals himself, ib. 
Sylla's blood-hounds fall in with him, ib. He bribes one Corne- 
lius to let him go, ib. 358. Repairs to Nicomecles in Bithynia, 
ib. Re-embarks, and is taken by pirates, ib. In what manner 
he lived, while among the pirates, ib. Pays his ransom, mans 
some vessels, takes those pirates, and crucifies them, ib. 359. 
Studies under Apollonius Molo at Rhodes, 359. Has great 
powers as an orator, ib. Accuses Dolabella and Publius Anto- 
nius, 360. Gains a considerable interest by defending persons 
impeached, and a still greater by his condescension, and the 
generous manner in which he lives, ib. Persons in power dis- 
regard him ot first, imagining he must soon exhaust his estate, ib. 
Cicero seems to have been the first, who discovered in him deep 
and dangerous designs, ib. 361. He obtains a tribunesbip in the 
army before his competitor Popilius, 361. Pronounces the 
funeral oration of his aunt Julia, ib., and has the hardiness to 
bring forth the images of Marius, ib. Pronounces a funeral pane- 
gyric for his own wife, which (as she was a young woman) was 
contrary to custom, 362. Goes out quaBStor to Spain with Antig- 
tius Veter, ib. Takes Pompeia to his third wife, ib. A thousand 
three hundred talents in debt before he got any public employ- 
ment, ib. Exhibits three hundred and twenty pair of gladiators, 
when sedile, ib. Revives the faction of Marius, and restores hi? 
images, 363. Catulus impeaches him for this, ib. The senate 
quit him, ib. Metellus, the chief-pontiff, dies, and Caesar stands 
for that high office against Isauricus and Catulus, 864. Catulus 
: rs him large sums, on condition that he will drop his pre- 

INDEX. 317 

tensions, but he rejects them, ib. His saying to his mother on 
that occasion, ib. Piso and Catulus blame Cicero for sparing 
Caesar in the time of Catiline's conspiracy, ib. The speech, which 
Caesar made in the senate at that ti.ne, for a lighter punishment 
than death, 365. In danger of be.ng killed on that occasion, as 
he goes out of the senate-house, ib. Daring his praetorship, 
while the women are celebrating the mysteries of the Bona Dca 
in his house, Clotlius concert : an intrigue with Fompeia, S66> 307. 
Claudius is detected, 368. Caesar divorces Pompeia, ib. His 
celebrated saying thereupon, ib. Caesar has the government of 
the Farther Spain after his praetorship, 369. Crassus engages 
for him for debts of eight hundred and thirty talents, before he 
can leave Rome, ib. Another saying of his, on passing through 
a village on the Alps, 370. His concern on reading the history 
of Alexander the Great, ib. He reduces some of the nations of 
Spain, and penetrates to the ocean, ib. His civil government 
satisfactory to the Spaniards, though he fills his own coffers, ib. 
At his return he drops his triumph, because his application for 
that and the consulate at the same time was not consistent, 371. 
Reconciles Pompey and Crassus, ib. Cato alone foresees the 
bad consequence of* that union, ib. Caesar is appointed consul 
with Calpurnius Bibulus, 372. Procures decrees for a division 
of lands and distribution oi corn, ib. Gives his daughter Julia to 
Pompey, ib. Marries Calpurnia the daughter of Piso, and pro- 
cures the consulship for Piso for the year ensuing, ib. Ribulus, 
finding his opposition fruitless and his life often in danger, 
attends the public assemblies no more, 373. Pompey fills the 
Forum with armed men, and Caesar has the government of Gaul 
decreed him for five years, ib. Caesar sends Cato toward prison, 
but does not commit him, ib. His question to Considius, and 
that senator's answer, ib. He gets Clodius elected tribune of the 
people, 37i. Is the greatest general and conqueror the Romans 
ever had, ib. Instances of the valour of his soldiers, 375, 376. 
The great example he set them in that respect, 376. Has the 
falling sickness first at Corduba, ib. His indefatigable powers, 
ib. 377. An excellent horseman, 377. Not difficult in his diet, 
ib. Defeats the Helvetii and Tigurini, who burned their own 
towns, and designed to penetrate into Italy, 37S. Obliges 
them to settle again in the countries they had quitted, 379. His 
war in defence of the YEdui, against Ariovistus king of the Ger- 
mans, ib. He puts his array in winter quarters in the coun- 
try of the Sequani, and repairs to Gaul on this side the Po, 
381. Great numbers come to him from Rome, and lie car- 
ries on a variety of state-intrigues, ib. The Belgae revolt, 
and he soon reduces them, ib. ?tlarches against the Nervii, who 
attack him suddenly, and at first gain considerable advantage, 
38'2. His own valour, and that of the tenth legion, restore the 
action, and he destroys almost all their troops, ib. 383. The 
senate order a thanksgiving for fifteen days, on account of this 
victory, 383. He crosses the Alps again, and strengthens his 
interest by bribery, ib. Pompey and Crassus, with a multitude 

sis INDEX. 

of other senators, wait on him at Lucca, ib. It is agreed thai 
they shall be consuls the year ensuing, and to get Caesar's go- 
vernment prolonged for five years more, ib. The Usipetes and 
the Tenehteri, two German nations, renew the war, 384. Caesar 
kills four hundred thousand of them, 385. The Sicamhri har- 
bour the few who escaped, and this affords him a pretence to 
enter Germany, ib. He throws a bridge over the Rhine, ib. 
The Suevi and the Sicambri retire into their forests, ib. Caesar 
after having laid waste the country with fire, returns to Gaul, ib. 
386. His two expeditions into Britain, 386. He receives news 
of Julia's death, ib. The people bury her in the Campus Mar- 
tins', 387 He separates his legions for the convenience of 
wiflter-tfuarters, ib. The Gauls, under the conduct of Ambiorix, 
fall upon them, and cut off some of his lieutenants, ib. He gets 
intelligence of this, on the road to Italy, and hastens back to the 
relief of Quintus Cicero, ib. The Gauls march against him, and 
he defeats them by stratagem, ib. 388. Pompey lends him two 
legions, in the room of those he had lost, 388. The Gauls re- 
volt again, and, under the conduct of Vercingetorix, begin hosti- 
lities, in the midst of a severe winter, ib. 389. He defeats 
them with his usual good fortune, 390. The remainder of their 
army retires into Alesia, ib. He besieges them there, ib. A 
prodigious army comes to raise the siege, but he puts it to the 
rout, 390. The besieged surrender, and Vercingetorix puts 
himself in the hands of the conqueror, 391. The death of 
Crassus opens the way to the civil war between Caesar and Pom- 
pey, ib. The corrupt state of Rome at that time, makes it unfit 
to subsist any longer as a commonwealth, 392. Pompey is de- 
clared sole consul, and has his governments of Spain and Africa 
continued to him, ib. Caesar applies for another consulship, and 
for the continuation of his commission in Gaul, ib. The consuls 
behave to his agents with rancour, and even disfranchise the 
colony of Novocomum which he had lately planted, 393. After 
the consulship of Marcellus, Caesar gains the new consul Paulus, 
and the tribune Curio, by money, ib. Sends back the two It - 
gions, which Pompey had lent him, ib. These troops give it 
out, that Caesar's whole army was ready to come over to Pom- 
pey, ib. Pompey opposes his enemy only with speeches and 
decrees, 391. Caesar's requisitions have a great appearance of 
justice: but Scipio and Lentulus carry it against him in the se- 
nate, ib. 395. Cicero almost brings matters to a compromise; 
395. But Lentulus, in the rage of party, drives out the tri- 
bunes Antony and Curio, and they fly to Cresar in the habit of 
slaves, ib. Caesar is perplexed in his deliberations on the banks 
of the Rubicon, 396. He passes it, 397. Takes Ariminum, 
ib. Rome, and the rest of Italy, are in a great consternation, 
ib. Favonius bids Pompey ' stamp with his foot, and bring his 
legions out of the earth,' ib. Pompey leaves Rome, and orders 
the senate, and every friend to liberty to follow him, 398. La- 
bienus goes over to Pompc)', ib. Caesar takes Domitius in 
Corfinium, who, though pardoned by his captor, soon revolts 

INDEX. 319 

again to Pompey, ib. 399. Pompey retires to Brundusium, and 
thence to Dyrrachium, 399. Caesar, having reduced all Italy 
in sixty days, repairs to Rome, ib. Takes money out of the public 
treasury, notwithstanding the opposition from . Metellus, 4-00. 
Marches into Spain, reduces Pompey's army there, and incor- 
porates it with his own, ib. Returns to Rome, and is declared 
dictator by the senate there, ib. His acts while he holds that 
office, which is only for eleven days, ib. 401. Declares himself 
consul with Servilius Isauricus, 401. Marches to Brundusium, 
ib. Crosses the Ionian Sea with part of his troops, ib. Takes 
Oricum and Apollonia, ib. Sends back his ships, to bring over 
the rest of his forces, but those ships are taken by the enemy, ib. 
Resolves to cross the sea in a twelve-oared boat, to fetch the rest 
of his forces, but the winter storms prevent it, 402, 403. An- 
tony arrives from Brundusium with the troops, 403. Caesar is 
distressed for provisions, ib. Has the advantage in several 
skirmishes ; but in one is driven back to his camp, and in danger 
of having it taken, 404. Caesar's saying on that occasion, 405. 
He marches against Scipio, who lay in Macedon, ib. Pom- 
pey for good reasons is for waiting the advantages of time, but 
not a man, except Cato, is of his opinion, ib. 406. Caesar takes 
Gomphi in Thcssaly, ib. Asks his troops whether they chose 
immediately to risque an action, or to wait for reinforcements, 
407. Omens of victory to Caesar, 408. Circumstances pre- 
vious to the battle of Pharsalia, ib. 409. The battle, 409, 410. 
Pompey flies, 411. What Caesar said, on viewing the enemy's 
camp, ib. He incorporates with his own troops most of the pri- 
soners, and pardons many persons of distinction : Brutus among 
the rest, ib. Caesar bestows liberty on the whole country of 
Thessaly, 412. Grants the same privilege to the Cnidians, at 
the request of Theopompus, ib. Discharges the inhabitants of 
Asia from a third part of their imposts, ib. His behaviour, 
when Theodotus presented to him the head of Pompey, ib. He 
has the satisfaction of saving every day one or other of his fel- 
low-citizens, 413. Is ill treated by Photinus, and sends for 
Cleopatra, ib. Demands the sums due to him from Ptolemy, 
ib. The stratagem by which Cleopatra was conveyed into his 
palace, 414. He insists that she shall reign along with her bro- 
ther, ib. Achillas and Photinus plot against Ceesar's life, ib. 
Caesar kills Photinus ; but Achillas escapes to the army, and 
involves Caesar in a very dangerous war, ib. The Egyptians 
stop up the aqueducts, that supplied his quarter, ib. He is 
forced to burn his ships in harbour, ib. The flames destroy the 
great Alexandrian library, ib. Caesar's extreme danger in the 
naval fight near Pharos, 415. Ptolemy is never heard of after it, 
ib. Cleopatra brings Caesar a son, who is named Caesario, ib. 
On intelligence that Pharnaces, son of Mithridates, had defeated 
his lieutenant Domitius, he marches against him, and defeats 
him near Zela, ib. His laconic account of that action, 4 id. 
Returns to Rome near the end of the year of his second dicta- 
torship, ib. Is declared consul for the year ensuing, ib. Does 

SfiO INDEX. 

not sufficiently punish cither his lieutenants or his soldiers for 
their misdemeanors, ib. Begins the waf in Africa against Cato, 
Scipio, and Juba, 117. Gives one Scipio Sallution the nominal 
command, on account of an oracle which declared ' the Scipios 
would be always victorious in Africa/ ib. Is much annoyed by 
the Numidian cavalry, 418. Falls upon Scipio, as he is forti- 
fying the camp of Thapsus, and gives him an entire defeat, ib. 
Takes the camp of Afranius, and destroys that of Juba, with 
the same tide of success, ib. Hastens to Utica, in hopes of 
taking Cato alive, 4-19. His saying on finding that he had de- 
spatched himself, ib. He writes the ' Anti-Cato,' 420. Leads 
up his triumphs, ib. Entertains the people at twenty-two 
thousand tables, ib. Exibits games in honour of his daughter 
Julia, ib. Marches into Spain, and fights the battle of Munda, 
in which he defeats the sons of Pompey with great difficulty, 

421, 422. The elder of the sons is taken, and put to death, 

422. His triumph for this victory displeases the Romans, ib. 
He is created perpetual dictator, 423. Other extravagant ho- 
nours are conferred upon him, ib. A temple is built to Cle- 
mency, ib. He rears again the statues of Pompey, which had 
been thrown down, ib. Cicero's Saying on that occasion, ib. 
Refuses to have a guard, and why, ib. Colonizes Carthage and 
Corinth, ib. Studious to gain all ranks of people, 424'. De- 
signs to conquer Parthia, and from thence to march northward, 
extending the Roman empire to the ocean on every side, 425. 
Attempts to dig through the Isthmus of Corinth, and meditates 
other great things, ib. Corrects the calendar, 426. His passion 
for the title of king proves his ruin, 427. He does not rise to 
the senate, when they wait on him in a body, ;b. Antony oilers 
him a diadem, at the festival of the Lupercalia, 428. He finds 
the people against his receiving it, 429. Two of the tribunes 
take the persons into custody, who first saluted him Ling, and teai 
the diadems from his statues, ib. He deposes the tribunes, ib. 
Brutus is desired to take off the tyrant, ib. He hesitates on ac- 
count of the obligations he had to Caesar, ib. Caesar has some 
intimation of the conspiracy, and suspects Cassius, but will be- 
lieve nothing ill of Brutus, 430. Presages of Caesar's death, 
431. He prefers a sudden death to an}- other, ib. Calpurnia's 
dream, 432. He sends Antony to adjourn the senate, ib. Brutus 
Albinus laughs him out of his fears, and conducts him to the 
senate house, ib. 433. Artemidorus puts a paper into his hand, 
containing an account of the conspiracy ; but he has not oppor- 
tunity to read it, 433. Cassius addresses the statue of Pompey, 
434. Antony is held in discourse without the house, ib. The 
conspirators approach him under pretence of petitioning for the 
brother of Cimber, ib. Casca gives him the first blow, ib. 
Ca;sar makes some resistance, but on perceiving the sword of 
Brutus, yields to his fate, 435. He dyes the pedestal of Pom- 
pey's statue with his blood, ib. The body of Caesar is burnt in 
the Forum, 43G. He died at the age of fifty-six, and survived 
Pompey only four years, 437. Those who dipt their hands in 

INDEX. 521 

his blood, come to an untimely end, ib. A comet appears after 

his death, 438. Reflexions on Plutarch's .Life of him, 439, n. 
Ccesa?; Octavianus. See Augustus. 
- , Lucius, sent by the council of Utica to intercede with 

Caesar, iv. 116. Given up by Antony in the proscription, though 

his uncle, v. 443. 

-, Sextus Julius, iii. 235, n. 

Casario, son of Julius Caesar, by Cleopatra, iv. 415. v. 494. 
Murdered by Octavianus, v. 503. 

Caius, foster-brother to Mithridates, steals his diadem after his 
death, and gives it to Faustus the son of Sylla, iv. 178. 

Cornelias, of Padua, foretells Caesar's victory, iv. 412. Se« 

the other Caii under their family names. 

Calanus, the Indian philosopher, iv. 338, 339. His symbol of the 
ox's hide, 339. Burns himself, 343. 

f Calauria, ii. 268. iv. 153. v. 34, 287. 

Calcnus, iv. 407. 

CaUcecians, iv. 370. 

Callceschrus, ii. 162. 

Callippus, an acquaintance of Dion's, with whom he lodged at 
Athens, vi. 15. Goes with Dion to Syracuse, 50. Murthers 
him, 52. Killed, 53. 

Calliades, an Athenian officer, defeated in Thrace, iii. 406. 

Callias the Athenian, makes a declaration in form that if he died 
without children, the people should be his heirs, ii. 122. Takes 
the Persian gold, and kills the person that directed him to it, 
453. First cousin to Aristides, and accused of suffering him to 
want necessaries, 486. Vindicates himself against that charge, 
487. Marries Elpinice, iii. 299. Negotiates a good treaty with 
the king of Persia, 312. 

, the Syracusan, v. 257. 

Callibius appointed governor of the citadel of Athens by Lysan 
der, iii. 206. 

Collides the usurer, v. 11. 

■ ■-, the son of Arrenides, v. 282. 

Callicratcs, a Spartan officer, wounded at the approach of the 
battle of Platass, ii. 473. What he said, just before he ex- 
pired, ib. 

, the Syracusan general, challenges Lamachus, and they 

die by each other's hand, iii. 426. 

and Ictinus, the architects, rebuild the Parthenon, 

ii. 23. 
Callicratidas, the Spartan general, succeeds Lysander, iii. 193. 

Not a popular or courtly man, but brave and virtuous, ib* Fails 

in his application to Cyrus for money, 194. Defeated and slain 

at the battle of Arginusae, ib. 
Callidrotnus, Mount, ii. 510. 
CallimaehuSf the poet, i. 26, n. 
■■- ■ , an excellent engineer in the service of Mithridates, 

iii. 352. Sets fire to the city of Amisus, when he can no longer 
VOL vi. Y 

3T2 INDEX. 

defend it, ib. Taken prisoner by Lucullus at Nisibis, and kept 

in chains, 375. 
CaUimedon, surnarned Carabus, v. 32, 284. Flies from Athens, 

v. 39. Sentence of death passed against him, 42, 43. 
CaWp/ion, an Athenian exile, intercedes with Sylla for Athens, 

iii. 251. 
CallipedeSf the Tragedian, iv. 96. His vanity, ib. 97. 
Callisthcnes one of Lucullus' freedmen, gives him a potion which 

affects his brain, iii. 390. 
■, the philosopher, endeavours to console Alexander, 

when be had killed Clitus, iv. 320. His sarcasm on Anax- 

archus, 321. His character, ib. His oration in praise of the 

Macedonians, 322, and another in their dispraise, ib. Aristotle's 

observation on him, 320, n. 323. Nephew to Aristotle, 321. 

Refuses to worship Alexander, 323. What he was accused of 

saying to Hermolaiis, 324. His death, 325. 

-, one of the orators, whom Alexander demanded of the 

Athenians, v. 279. 

-, the historian, iv. 115. 

Callistratus, secretary to Mithridates, iii. 350. 

_? the orator, v. 255, 266. 

Callistus, the father of Nymphidius, vi. 219. 

Calpurnii, from Calpus, the son of Numa, i. 204. 

Catpimiia, daughter of Piso, and wife of Caesar, iv. 372. Her 
dream, 431, 432. Puts herself under the protection of Antony, 
v. 439. 

Calqnirnius Bibulus. See Bibulus. 

Lenarius, assassinates Julius Salinator, iv. 10. 

Piso. See Piso. 

i 'alpus, said to be the son of Numa, i. 204. 

Calvinus, Domitius, iv. 214. 

('alviiiusy a retainer of Augustus, accuses Antony, v. 481 . 

. Sabinus, a Roman general, vi. 221. 

j- Calydon, vi. 167. 

Calydonian boar, killed by Meleager with the assistance of The- 
seus, i. 37. 

| Camarina>ans, vi. 26. 

Cambyses, fifty thousand of his men buried in the sands of Africa, 
iv. 281. 

Camels, when first said to be seen by the Romans, iii. 341. 

| Cameria, taken by Romulus, i. 91. 

Camcrians admitted citizens of Rome by Marius, contrary to law, 
iii. 155. 

Camillus, or Casmilkts, a name given to the youth who serves in 
the temple of Jupiter, i. 177. 

Camillus never consul, because in his time military tribunes were 
appointed instead of consuls, i. 361. The first who raised the 
family of the Furii to distinction, 362. A great action of his 
in the wars with the /Equi and Volsei, ib. 363. Raised to the 
censorship, 363. Obliges the men who lived single to marry the 

INDEX. 323 

widows of those who fell in the wars, ib. Makes orphans, a9 
well as others, contribute to the supplies, ib. A second time 
military tribune, 864. Defeats the Falisci and Capenates, while 
his collegues carry on the siege of Veii, ib. In the tenth year 
of the siege appointed dictator, 367- He takes Cornelius Scipio 
for his general of horse, ib. His vows, ib. He takes Veii by 
mining, 368. Weeps over the miseries of that great city, ib. 
His generous prayer, 369. Falls in turning after his prayer, ib. 
Removes the statue of Juno to Rome, ib. Leads up his tri- 
umph in a chariot, drawn by four white horses, which sort of 
carriage had been appropriated to the service of the gods, 370, 
371. Opposes the removing of half the people of Rome to Veii, 
371. His vow of the tenth of the spoils to Apollo, and absurd 
proceeding thereupon, ib. In these three last articles he highly 
offended the people, 372. The matrons contribute their golden 
ornaments, and a large vase is sent to Delphi, ib. Chosen a 
military tribune a third time, 373. Besieges Falerii, ib. The 
treachery of the school-master, and his chastisement, 374, 375. 
The Falerians, struck with the generous behaviour of Camillus, 
surrender their city, 375. He loses his son, 376. Is accused 
of fraud with respect to the Tuscan spoils, ib. Quits Rome, a 
voluntary exile, 377. Imprecates vengeance on the Romans, ib. 
Is fined fifteen thousand ases, ib. Tokens of the approaching 
calamities, ib. 378. Irruption of the Gauls into Italy, 380. 
Camillus, who had taken up his residence near Ardea, cuts in 
pieces a considerable corps of them near that place, 391, 392. 
The Romans in Veii desire Camillus to take the command of 
them, which he refuses till commissioned by the senate, 392. 
Declared dictator the second time, 393. Finds twenty thousand 
men in arms at Veii, and adds them to his army, 394. The 
Gauls climb the rock by the way, which one of the Romans had 
ascended, but are discovered by some geese kept near Juno's 
temple, and repulsed by Manlius, ib. 395. Provisions grow 
scarce in the Gaulish camp, and sickness prevails in it, 396, 
The besieged treat with Brennus, and offer him a thousand 
pounds weight of gold, 397. While that is weighing, Camillus 
comes to Home, ib. His discourse with Brennus, ib. 398. They 
come to blows among the ruins, 398. Brennus marches in the 
night, and encamps on the road to Gabii, ib. Camillus attacks 
and defeats him, and makes himself master of his camp, ib. En- 
ters Rome in triumph, 399. Restores the temples, and builds 
one to a new deity, Aius Loquutius, or ' the Speaker,' ib. Pre- 
pares to rebuild the city, but the people hanker after Veii, ib. 
The city is rebuilt in the compass of a year, but in an irregular 
manner, 402. The Lituus, or ' augural staff' of Romulus, is 
found under the rubbish, ib. The Romans are attacked by seve- 
ral of the neighbouring states — the military tribunes surrounded 
on mount Marcius by the Latins, 403. The senate appoints 
him dictator the third time, Camillus burns the enemy's works, 
and gives them an entire defeat, 405. Finds the city of Sutrium 
taken, and retakes it the same day, 406. Triumphs for these 

y 2" 

324 INDEX* 

great actions, 407. Envied by Manlius Capitolinus, who court- 
ing the populace, endeavours to raise himself to absolute power, 
ib. Manlius is condemned and executed, 408. Camillus with 
difficulty prevailed upon to accept the military tribuneship the 
sixth time, 409. Marches against the Pramestines and the Vol- 
scians, ib. Succours his collegues, who had rashly ventured 
upon an action, and routs the enemy the day followiug, 410. 
Retakes Satricum, a Roman colony, and puts the Tuscans he 
found there to the sword, ib. How he dealt with the people of 
Tusculum, 411, 412. A sedition prevails in Rome; the people 
insisting that one of the consuls should be a plebeian, 412. Is 
appointed dictator the fourth time, but soon resigns that office 
under pretence of sickness, 413. Another dictator, and an 
Agrarian law, 414. The Gauls march again toward Rome, and 
Camillus being appointed dictator the fifth time, defeats them 
near the river Anio, though now very old, ib. 415, 416. Re- 
conciles the senate and people, by allowing one of the consuls 
to be chosen out of the plebeians, 417. Builds a temple t<# 
Concord, 418. Dies of the plague, extremely regretted, ib. 

f Campania, v. 82. 

CampanianSy vi. 27. 

Campus Martins had been most of it the property of the Tarquins, 
i. 280. 

Camulatus, a soldier, goes over from Brutus to Augustus, vi. 

103. 
Caynurius, vi. 239. 

Canathrum, a Lacedaemonian chariot, described, iv. 94. 
Candidates, loosely clad, that they might more easily show the 

wounds they had received, ii. 190. An agreement made amongst 

them to prevent bribery, ib. 
Canes, javelins made of Cretan canes, iii. 224. 
Canethus, Sciron his son by Henioche the daughter of Pittheus, 

i. 32. 

Canidhts, tribune of the people, proposes to send Pompey embas- 
sador to Ptolemy, iv. 188. 

, or Caninius, employed in Cyprus, v. 85, 86. vi. 59. 

. ., Antony's lieutenant, bribed by Cleopatra to persuade 

Antony to a thing that proves his ruin, v. 479. Advises Antony 
to fi<dit at the head of his land-forces, and not of the fleet, 486. 
Quits his camp after Antony's flight, 491. Brings Antony 
word that his army is dispersed, 494. 

Caninius Rebiliusy consul for part oi' a day, iv. 424. 

f Campus, v. 193, 453. 

f CanncEy ii. 86. 

CanniciuSy (Cains) and Castus revolt from Spartacus, iii. 462. 

Cantharusy v. 34. 

Canideicy a vestal virgin, consecrated by Numa, i. 184. 

Canusy a musician, Galba's present to him, vi. 225, 226- 

\ Canuskmiy ii. 399,429. 

Canutius, a celebrated uttor, vi. 76. 

CapaneuSy ii. 343. 

INDEX. Qi$ 

t Capenates, conquered by Camillus, i. 364, 368. 
Caphesias, a friend of Aratus', vi. 158. 

Caphis, sent by Sylla to seize the treasures of Delphi, iii. 247. 
Conducts Hortensius with his reinforcement, 252. 

| Caphyce, vi. 202. 

Capita. See Fonteius. 

Capitol, taken by the Sabines, i. 76. Besieged by the Gauls, 390. 
Manlius' judges could not condemn him while they had that in 
sight, 408. 

Capitolinus, Q. Catulus, vi. 213. 

, T. Quintius, i. 407. 

f Cappadocia, iii. 246. iv. 41, 266. 

f Cappadocians, their goddess, iii. 243. 

Caprarii, i. 287. 

Captives, sacrificed to Bacchus Omestes. See Bacchus. 

t Capua surrenders to Annibal, ii. 90. 

Carahus. See Callimedon. 

Caranus, Alexander descended from him, iv. 239. 

Carbo defeated by the Teutones and Ambrones, iii. 139. 

— — flies into Africa, iii. 272. On the death of Cinna he usurps 
the government, and commits great outrages, iv. 131. Put to 
death by Pompey, 135. 

f Cardia, iv. 38. 

t Caria, i. 10. ii. 166. iv. 79. 

Carian soldier kills Cyrus ; but, as Artaxerxes claimed that 
honour to himself, the soldier suffers for his unadvised ambition, 
vi. 126, 130. 

f Carians, by the Persians called ' Cocks,' vi. 125. 

Carinna, one of Carbo's officers, iv. 132. 

f Carmania, iv. 340. 

Carmenta, the goddess, i. 85. 

Carmcntalia, feast of, i. 85. 

Carmental Gate, i. 393. 

Cameades, founder of the New Academy, ih'. 388. v. 296. Sent 
embassador by the Athenians to Rome, ii. 524. Much admired 
there for his eloquence, id. 

Carneus, a Syracusan month, called by the Athenians 'Metagitnion,' 
iii. 442. 

j Carnutes, a warlike people among the Gauls, iv. 389. Vcrcinge- 
torix their general, defeated by Caesar, 391. 

t Carres, iii. 490. 

f Carthage colonized by Coesar, iv. 423. Called Junonia by Caius 
Gracchus, when he rebuilt it, v. 234. 

|— — — — , New, iv. 10. 

Carthaginians appear before Sicily with a numerous fleet, ii. 233. 
Join Icetes against Timoleon, 239. Send twenty gallies to Rhe- 
gium to oppose Timoleon's passage to Sicily, 241. He dis- 
appoints them by his superior policy, 243. They send a great 
army into Sicily under Asdrubal and Hamilcar, 261. Pass the 
river Crimesus, 2G'3. Defeated bv Timoleon, 265. Enter into 

326 INDEX. 

league with Mamercus and Ieetes, 266. Send Gisco with another 
army into Sicily, in which, for the first time, they employ Greek 
mercenaries, ib. Make peace with Timoleon, 270. 

Carvilius, Spurius, the first Roman, who divorced his wife, i. 107, 214. 

Caryatides, their dance, vi. 133. 

f Carystus, a city of Euhcea, vi. 78. 

Casca, Puhlius, the first who gave Caesar a blow in the senate-house, 
iv. 434'. vi. 100. 

f Casilinum, ii. 73. 

f Casinum, in 73. 

f Caspian sea, it's water sweet, iv. 309. 

Cassandra, daughter of Priam, v. 1 4-2. 

Cassander takes care of the education of Phdopoemen, iii. 2. 

, the enemy of /Eacides, demands Pyrrhus, when an infant, 

from Glsueias, iii. 68. 

-, son of Antipater, laughs at the barbarians who adore 

Alexander, iv. 349. Causes Demades to be put, to death for 
calling his father Antipater ' an old rotten stalk,' and despatches 
his son at the same time, v. 290. His army defeated by Deme-> 
trius, 385. 

f Cassandria, v. 411. 

Cassivs Sabaco, a friend to Marios, expelled the senate, iii. 124. 

• , defeated by Spartacus, iii. 459. 

• , quaestor to Crassus, advises his general to keep to the 

heights beyond the Euphrates, iii. 475. Expostulates with the 
traitor Ariamnes, 478. Marries Junia, the sister o^ Brutus, vi. 
63. His enmity to Caesar, ib. His conversation with Brutus, 65, 
66. Addresses the statue of Pompey (though of Epicurean 
principles) before he gave Caesar the blow, 71. Africa allotted 
as his province, 74. Delivers a third part of Ins treasure to 
Brutus, 84. Behaves cruelly at Rhodes, ib. Discourses with 
Brutus upon apparitions, 90. An unlucky omen happens to him, 
92. Gives his opinion against a battle, 93. His discourse with 
Messala, 94. And with Brutus, ib. The wing which he com- 
manded routed, and his camp plundered, (;6. A mistake in 
reconnoitering makes him resolve upon death, 98. The manner 
of his death, ib. iv. 438. 

— Scava, his valour, iv. 375. 

, Quintus, v. 431. 

Castqr and Pollux make war upon Athens for their sister Helen, 
whom Theseus had carried off, i. 39, 40, 41. Received into 
Athens, and adopted by Aphidnus, in order to their being ini- 
tiated in the Mysteries of Ceres, 42. Appear in the battle by the 
lake Regillus, and immediately after tire seen at Rome giving 
notice of the victory, ii. 177, 314. Their temple in Samothracia, 
312. At Rome, iii. 242. iv. 128. Thought to assist lasander, 
in a sea-fight, iii. 200. Stars of gold dedicated to them by L)> 
sander, 209. Their different pursuits, v. 200. 

•f- Castido, a city of the Celtiberians, iv. 5. 

Castus, one of the officers of Spartucus, iii, 462. 

INDEX. 32 

<>~i 

Catabates, Demetrius so entitled by the Athenians in one of their 
acts of worship, v. 3713. 

f Catana, a city in Sicily, ii. 140, 246. vi. 53. 

Catiline, Lucius, murthers his own brother, and persuades Sylla to 
put him among the proscribed, v. 305. hi. 278. Attempts to 
subvert the government, and is near executing it, v. 71. Ac- 
count of his conspiracy, ib. His accomplices, ib. His character, 
205. Stands for the consulship, and loses it, ib. His resolution 
to kill Cicero, 308. His insolent saying in the senate, 309. 
Fails in his application for the consulship again, ib. Is com- 
manded to quit Home, and assembles an army, 311. Debates in 
the senate concerning the manner in which his accomplices 
should be punished, 71, 72, 316, 317. He and his army 
destroyed by Caius Antonius, 319. 

Cato, the Censor, said to be born at Tusculum, ii. 492. Lives in 
his youth on a paternal estate near the country of the Sabines, 
ib. His third name originally Priscus, ib. Why changed to 
Cato, ib. His hair red, and eyes grey, 493. Healthy and 
.strong, as he was inured to labour and temperance, ib. His 
esteem of eloquence, ib. Pleads causes in the villages and 
boroughs, without fee or reward, ib. Military glory still a 
greater object with him, ib. Makes his first campaign at the age 
of seventeen, when Annjbal was at the height of his prosperity 
in Italy, ib. His behaviour in battle, ib. Marches on foot, and 
carries his own arms, ib. 494. Never angry with his servant 
for the manner of dressing his victuals, 494. Water his com- 
mon drink, ib. In this respect he followed the example of 
Manius Curius, ib. Serves under Fabius Maximus at the siege 
of Tarentum, and forms a connexion there with Nearchus the 
Pythagorean, 495. Learns Greek at a late period, ib. Valerius 
Flaccus, who had a country-house in his neighbourhood, takes 
him into his protection, and advises him to go to Rome, ib. 
496. His pleadings, and the interest of Valerius, procure him 
friends there, 496. He is appointed a legionary tribune, and 
afterward quaestor, ib. The collegue of Valerius both in the 
consulate and censorship, ib. Takes Fabius Maximus for his 
model, ib. When quaestor to Scipio in the African expedition, 
comes home to accuse him of lavishing the public money, ib. 497. 
Called ' the Roman Demosthenes,' 497. The Romans compa- 
ratively corrupt in his time, 498. His extreme temperance and 
frugality, 499. Plutarch's reflex ions on his selling his old 
slaves, 499. When governor of Sardinia, he puts the people of 
that country to no manner of charge, 500, 501. Inexorable in 
whatever relates to public justice, 501. The nature of his stile, 
ib. His remarkable sayings, 502 — 505. Sent into the Hither 
Spain, 505, Hires troops of the Celtiberians, 506. Gains a 
great battle, 506. Gets the walls of four hundred towns rased 
in one day, ib. Gives every soldier a pound weight of silver, 
over and above his booty, ib. Keeps not only himself, but all 
his dependents, from extortion, 507. Scipio gets himself ap= 

32S INDEX. 

pointed his successor, near the conclusion of the war ; a measure 
which reflects dishonour on himself rather than on Cato, 507, 508. 
Cato is honoured with a triumph, 508. He is equally industrious 
in the public service afterward, ib. Goes a volunteer with Tibe- 
rius Sempronius into Thrace, and with Acilius Glabrio into 
Greece, ib. Several Grecian cities revolt, but Cato retains 
Corinth, Patrae, and /Egium, in their duty, 509. The purport 
of his speech to the Athenians, ib. Antiochus thinks himself 
secure in defending the pass of Thermopylae, but Cato takes a 
circuit, and falls upon his rear, ib. 510. Cato carries the first 
news of the victory to Rome, 512. Considers it us a great 
political duty to prosecute offenders, ib. Impeaches Scipio 
Africanus and his brother Lucius, ib. 513. Often impeached 
himself, and once when he was very old, 513. What he said 
thereupon, ib. Is candidate for the censorship, 51 4-. Chosen, 
notwithstanding his declarations that he will be a severe censor, 
515. Valerius Flaccus is appointed his collegue, at his request, 
ib. He enrols Valerius Flaccus chief of the senate, ib. Expels 
Lucius Quintius, ib. and Manilius, 517. Degrades Lucius the 
brother of Scipio, ib. What he did with respect to articles of 
hixury, ib. He demolishes the buildings that jutted out into 
the street, 518. Is fined two talents, ib. Censured for building 
the Porcian hall at the public charge, ib. The people erect his 
statue in the temple of Health, ib. The inscription on that 
statue, 519. What he had said before concerning statues, ib. Of 
all men the most forward to commend himself, ib. Chooses a wife 
rather for family than fortune, 520. Prefers the character of a 
good husband to that of a great senator, ib. Takes upon himself 
the education of his son, ib. His son's constitution and qua- 
lities, 521. That son marries Tertia, the daughter of Paulus 
/Emilius, 522. Cato's management of his slaves, ib. et seq. 
Turns his thoughts from agriculture to more certain dependencies, 
523. Practises usurj' upon ships in the most blameable manner, 
ib. Lends money to his slaves, ib. In what manner repaid, ib. 
The extravagant praise he gave to economy, ib. Displeased at 
the influence, which the eloquence of Carneades had on the 
Roman youth, 524, et seq. His unjust reflexion on Socrates, 
525. His prediction, ib. 526. An enemy to the Grecian phy- 
sicians, 526. A quack himself, ib. Marries a young wife in 
his old age, 527. Has a son by that wife, to whom he gives 
the surname of Salonius, 528. Bears the death of his son with 
the moderation of a philosopher, ib. Writes histories and books 
on country affairs, 529. Keeps a better table in the country 
than in town, ib. His conversation, what, ib. Goes embassador 
to Carthage, 529, 530. Causes the third Punic War, 531. Dies 
in the beginning of it, ib. A verse of Homer's, which he applied 
to Scipio,, afterward the second Africanus, 532, 
Cato, Marcus, son of Cato the Censor, loses his sword in battle, ii. 
809, 521 . What he does to recover it, ib. Marries the daugh* 
$cr of Paulus jEmiliuE, 522, 

INDEX. 329 

Calo, the grandfather of Cato the Censor, had fire horses killed 
under him in battle, ii. 492. 

. Salonius, ii. 528, 532. 

Cato of Utica, great grandson of Cato the Censor, v. 48. Left 
an orphan, together with his brother Cccpio and his sister Por- 
cia, ib. Brought up in the house of Livius Drusus, his mother's 
brother, ib. Had great firmness and solidity when a child, ib. 
Extraordinary instances of his intrepidity, and love of justice, 
in that period, 50. He asks his preceptor for a sword to kill 
Sylla, 51. His answer to those who asked him, ' whom he 
loved most,' 52. His affection for his brother Caepio very 
great, ib. He takes upon him the priesthood of Apollo, ib. 
Forms a connexion with Antipater of Tyre, for the sake of stu- 
dying the Stoic philosophy, ib. Cultivates the eloquence, which 
was tit for popular assemblies, ib. 53. The first occasion of his 
speaking in public, 53. The nature of his eloquence described, 
ib. He strengthens his constitution by exercise, ib. Travels 
always on foot, ib. Is remarkably patient and abstemious in 
sickness, 54. Drinks, at first, only one glass after his meals, 
but in time loves to sit over a bottle, for the sake of philosophi- 
cal conversation, ib. Very inattentive to his dress, even when 
he appeared in public, ib. Lends his money to his friends with- 
out interest, 55. Knows no woman before his marriage, ib. Pays 
his first addresses to Lepida, and is disappointed, ib. Writes 
iambics against his rival, whose proceedings were unfair, ib. 
Marries Attilia, the daughter of Soranus, ib. Serves as a volun- 
teer under Gellius, in the war with Spartacus, ib. A law being 
made against the use of nomenclators, he commits the names of 
the citizens to memory, 56. Goes with a tribune's commission 
under Rubrius into Macedonia, ib. Rubrius gives him the com- 
mand of a legion, which he forms in the most excellent manner 
to military virtue, 51. He goes to Pergamus, and prevails upon 
Athenodorus the stoic, to return with him, 58. His brother 
Caepio dies at iEnus in Thrace, ib. On this occasion he shows 
rather the sensibility of a brother, than the fortitude of a philo- 
sopher, ib. Is left coheir with Cacpio's daughter, 59. Caesar's 
calumny against him, ib. Great expressions of affection from his 
troops at his departure, ib. He visits Asia, and Deiotarus in- 
vites him to his court, ib. His manner of travelling, and care 
not to be troublesome, 60. Meets with a pleasant adventure, on 
entering Antioch, ib. Pompey gives him an honourable recep- 
tion atEphesus, 61. What Curio said to Cato, with respect to 
his travelling, 62. Deiotarus strongly importunes him to receive 
his presents, and he makes a very short stay at his court, on ac- 
count of that importunity, ib. He sails from Brundusium to 
Rome in the ship that carried Caspio's remains, and has a bail 
passage, 63. When quaestor, he makes a great reformation in 
that department, ib. Calls the assassins, employed by Sylla, to 
account, 65. Prevents his collegue Marcellus from making an 
unjust grant, 66. Always attends the meetings of the senate, 67- 
Watches over the conduct of Pompey, ib. Opposes the perni- 

330 INDEX. 

cious practices of Cloclius, ib. His veracity becomes proverbial, 
68. Not inclined to offer himself for tribune of the people, but 
puts a force upon himself, when he finds that Metellus Nepos 
stands for that office, ib. 69. Being appointed tribune, he gives 
the people a severe charge with respect to corruption in the con- 
sular elections, 69. Prosecutes Muraena for offending in that 
way, 70. Muraena, notwithstanding, consults him during his 
consulship, 71. Cato support;; the supreme magistrate by many 
excellent measures during the turbulent times of Catiline, ib. 
He prevails with the senate to decree that the conspirators 
should be capitally punished, 72. A billet is brought to Caesar 
in the senate-house, and Cato insists on having it read publicly, 
ib. 73. The billet is from Cato's sister Servilia, 73. Unfortu- 
nate among the women, ib. The conduct of his own wife Attilia 
not unexceptionable, ib. He divorces her, ib. Marries Martia, 
the daughter of Philip, ib. Hortensius desires to have her, and 
Cato gives her up to him, 74. He persuades the senate to grant 
the people a free gift of corn, in order to counterwork the popu- 
larity of Caesar, ib. The ill policy of that proceeding, 75, n. 
Metellus proposes an edict to call Pompey and his troops into 
Italy, intending to give up the state into his hands, 75. Cato 
opposes him at the hazard of his life, and succeeds, ib. — 78. 
Prevents the senate from voting Metellus ' infamous,' 78. Pro- 
cures Lucullus his triumph, which Memmius had attempted to 
deprive him of, ib. Prevents the senate from granting Pompey's 
requisition to defer the election of consuls till his arrival, ib. 
Pompey demands two of Cato's nieces in marriage, the elder for 
himself, and the younger for his son; and Cato refutes him, 79. 
Pompey is soon afterward guilty of open bribery, ib. What 
Cato said to the women upon it, ib. Cato's bad policy, in reject- 
ing the alliance of Pompey, throws him into the arms of Caesar, 
ih. Cato supports Lucullus against Pompey, 80. Opposes the 
Agrarian law proposed by Pompey and Caesar, ib. 81. They 
carry it against him by violence, 81. The senate i.: coMtawanded 
to swear to the observance of the law, ib. Cato is prevailed upon 
by Cicero to take the oath, ib. He opposes Caesar with respect 
to the distribution of lands in Campania, and Caesar leads him to 
prison, 82. Caesar perceives the bad policy of that measure, and 
engages one of the tribunes to rescue him, ib. The people vote 
Caesar the provinces of Illyricum and the Gauls, for five years; 
upon which Cato tells them, ' they were voting a tyrant into 
the citadel of Rome,' ib. Cato is sent to Cyprus, that Clod ins 
might be able to banish Cicero, 83. Cato, before his departure, 
exhorts Cicero to yield to the necessity of the times, ib. Brings 
Ptolemy, king of Cyprus, to submit by negotiation, 8k Ptoleim 
king of Egypt, who was on his way to Rome to solicit his re-es- 
tablishtnent in that kingdom, waits on Cato at Rhodes, ib. The 
good advice which Cato gave him, ib. 85. Ptolemy of Cyprus 
poisons himself, 85. Cato restores the Byzantine exiles, and 
reconciles them to their fellow-citizens, ib. Offends Munatius 
by his minute attention to the sale of Ptolemy's goods, ib. Mu- 
12 

INDEX. SSI 

natius is reconciled to him through the mediation of Marcia, 87. 
Cato brings near seven thousand talents of silver to Rome, ib. 
His honourable reception there ; and great privileges decreed 
him, which he declines, ib. 88. Cicero, on his return from ba- 
nishment, pulls down the tribunitial acts of Clodius, 88. Cato 
defends them, ib. 89. This occasions a coldness between Cicero 
and Cato, but they are subsequently reconciled, 89. Caesar, 
Pompey, and Crassus, erect themselves into a triumvirate, and 
as it were, divide the empire among them ; upon which Cato ad- 
's ises his brother-in-law- Lucius Domitms to oppose them with 
respect to the consulship, ib. Pompey and Crassus drive Do- 
mitius oun of the Campus Martins by violence, and they are 
elected consuls, 90. Cato is wounded in the fray, ib. Cato 
stands for the proetorship, but Pompey defeats him by very unfair 
means, ib. 91. Cato, in a speech to the people, predicts all the 
evils which afterward betel the commonwealth, 91. He prevents 
the people from pulling down Pompey's statues, 92. Tells 
Pompey, that he was raising Caesar to the ruin of himself and the 
commonwealth too, ib. Is elected praetor, but disgraces that 
office by the meanness of his dress, ib. Moves for a law, that 
every candidate should declare upon oath that he had not been 
guilty of bribery, 93. Clodius accuses Cato of embezzling a 
quantity of the Cyprian treasure, 94. Marcus Favonius, a friend 
of Cato's, elected aedile through his assistance, 95. Cato con- 
ducts the public entertainments for Favonius with remarkable 
parsimony, ib.96. Scipio, Hypsreus, and Milo, being candidates 
for the consulate, and nothing but violence and anarchy prevail- 
ing, Cato supports Bibulus' motion, that Pompey should be de- 
clared sole consul, ib. 97. Reproves Pompey tor some partial 
proceedings, 97. Cato, jealous of the progress which Cajsar 
was making toward supreme power, stands lor the consulship, 98. 
Loses his election by his zeal against, bribery, 99. Opposes a 
thanksgiving for Caesar's victories in Germany, ib. A proposal 
being made in the senate to appoint a successor to Ciesar, and 
Caesar's friends opposing it, except on certain conditions, Cato 
declares that Caesar had now thrown off the mask, 100. On 
Caesar's taking Ariminum, Cato advises the senate to put every 
thing into the hands of Pompey, ib. 101. Sends his younger 
son to Munatius in the country of the Brutii, 101. Takes 
Marcia again, on the death of Hortensius, ib. Follows Pompey, 
102. Is appointed to the government of Sicily, but finds the 
island already seized by the adverse paity, ib. Goes to Pompey 
at Dyrrachium, ib., Advises to procrastinate the v. ar, and that 
310 Roman should be killed, except in the field of battle, JC'2. 
Passes into Asia, for the purpose o^ raising men and ships, ib. 
Pompey, jealous of Cato's love of liberty, gives the command 
of the fleet to Bibulus, 103. Pompey's address to the army 
little regarded in comparison of that of Cato, ib. Pompey, after 
his success at Dyrrachium, leaves his magazines there, together 
?rith fifteen cohorts, under the command oi Cato, J01. After 

332 INDEX. 

the overthrow at Pharsalia, Cato proceeds to C'orcyra, and takes 
the command of the Meet, ib. J 05. Pompcy the Younger would 
have killed Cicero, hut Cato saves him, 104. He is informed, 
on the African coast, of the death of Pompey, 105. His march 
through the deserts of Libya, to join Scipio, ib. 106. Corrects 
the pride of Juba, 106, 107. Refuses to take the command of 
the army upon him, 107. But repents of it afterward, 108. 
Saves the Uticans from being put to the sword, 107. Fortifies 
Utica, and fills it with provisions, ib. Advises Scipio to proceed 
slowly in the war, but is not attended to, 108. Scipio is de- 
feated, and ruined in the battle of Thapsus, ib. 109. Cato's 
speech to the three hundred, 109, 110. They give up the 
thoughts of standing a siege, 112. What passed between Cato 
and a body of cavalry, ib. 113. Circumstances previous to the 
death of Cato, 116. Circumstances of his death, 1 19 — 121. 

Cato, Marcus, son of Cato of Utica, v. 122. His intrigue with the 
wife of a Cappadocian prince, ib. Falls gloriously in battle, 
467, ib. 

Cattle, the wealth of the primitive times, i. 287. 

Catulus, Lutatius, consul with Marius, iii. 137. Guards the coun- 
try of the Norici, 138. Quits the passes of the Alps, 148. Puts 
himself at the head of his flying forces, that they might seem to 
be only retreating, 149. Fights a battle in conjunction with 
Marius, and the victory is chiefly owing to Catulus, 152, 153. 
Vows a temple to « the Fortune of that Day,' 152. His name 
cut on the weapons of his men, 154. Gives Sylla occasion to 
distingush himself to the great vexation of Marius, 23 h Ca- 
tulus, censor with Crassus, 165. Opposes Crassus' attempt to 
make Egypt tributary, ib. Accuses Caesar to the senate for 
having set up Marius' images in the Capitol, iv. 363. Is Caesar's 
competitor for the pontificate, and otters him money to decline, 
364. His excellent character, v. 64. Catulus consul with Le- 
pidus, iv. 142. His address to the people concerning Pompey, 
156. Endeavours to save an obnoxious secretary in the quaestor's 
office, v. 64. Blames Cicero for suffering Caesar to escape in 
Catiline's conspiracy, iv. 364. Suffocated himself by the steam 
of a coal fire, iii. 178. 

f Caucasus, Mount, iv. 170. 

t Caulouia, ii. 97. v. 382. 

f Caunians, v. 492. 

fCaunus, iii. 444. v. 384, 417. 

Cebalinus offers to discover a conspiracy to Alexander, iv. 305. n. 

Cecina, one of Vitellius' generals, vi. 248. His gigantic size, and 
foreign dress, 250. 

Cecrops, first sovereign of Athens, built the Citadel, i. 29, n. 

Ceditius, Marcus, informed by a supernatural voice of the ap- 
proach of the Gauls, i. 378. 

Ccler, one of the friends of Romulus, said to be the person that 
killed Remus, i. 63. 

. , Metellus, why so called, i. 64. 

INDEX. 333 

•fCehrnir, in upper Phrygia, iv. 49. v. 368. 

Celeres, light troops which Piomulus used as a life-guard, i. 93. 

Dismissed by Numa, 176. 
Celibacy, argument against it, i. 225, 226. 
Ctlsus, Marius, a friend of Galba's, vi. 237. Saved by Otho, 2i0. 

Their first interview after Otho's accession, 243. 
f Celtce, made themselves masters of the best part of Italy, ill _ 132. 

The limits of their country, ib. 13.3. 
■\Celtiberians, iii. 122. iv. 5. Demand two hundred talents of Cato 

for their assistance in his wars, and he agrees to the demand, 

ii. 506. 
\Celto-Hcythce, the nations which bore that name, iii. 133. 
f Celtonians and Senones, i. 378. 
f Cenchrece, v. 385. 

f Cenin ensians, beaten by Romulus, i. 74. 

Censor, office of, i. 363, ». ii. 514, one dying in his office, an in- 
auspicious circumstance, i. 378, n. None to bear that office 

twice, ii. 174. The respect the censors paid to Pompey, iv. 151. 
Ccnsorinus of the family of the March, ii. 174. Accuses Sylla of 

extortion in Cappadocia, but does not bring him to his trial, iii. 

236. 
« , a companion of young Crassus, iii. 483 Orders his 

armour-bearer to kill him, 485. 
Centaurs, their battle with the Lapithse, i. 37, 38. Their original, 

v. 132. 
Centuries, in Rome, ii. 199, n. 
\Ceos, i. 318. ii. 271. 
Cephalus, sent from Corinth to assist Timoleon in compiling a body 

of laws for the Syracusans, ii. 260. 
Ccphalon, a friend of Aratus', vi. 207. 
Cephisodorus, one of Pelopidas' assistants in delivering Thebes, 

falls in the attack upon Leontidas, ii. 354. 
Cephisodotus, the statuary, Phocion marries his sister, v. 23. 
fCep/iisus, river, i. 12. iv. 251. Sylla turns it's course, iii. 254. 
Ceramicus, part of Athens so called, iii. 250. v. 41. The signifi- 
cation of the word, iii. 207, n. 
Ceratonian altar. See Keraton. 
t Ceraunian mountains, v. 35. 
Cerdunus. See Ptolemy. 

Cerberus, the name of Aidoneus', or Pluto's dog, i. 40. iii. 393. 
\Cercina, isle of, iii. 173. vi. 24. 
Cercyon, the Arcadian, killed by Theseus in wrestling, i. 12, and 

the first who used art in that exercise, ib. n. Ravishes his 

daughter, 37. 
Ceres, i. 88. The Spartans sacrificed to her on their leaving off 

mourning, 153. Her mysteries celebrated at Eleusis, ii. 163, 

16k Her temple at Hermiona plundered by the pirates, iv. 153. 

Hercules initiated in her Mysteries, i. 39. 
Cethegus flies with young Marius, iii. 172. 
■ the tribune, his flagitious life, 333- An enemy to Lu- 

331. INDEX. 

cullus, ib. An accomplice in Catiline's conspiracy, v. 7.1, 310, 
313. Put to death by order of the senate, [J J 8. 
■f Cermanum, i. 53. 

Chabrias the Athenian, goes to Egypt, and Taclios makes him his 
admiral, iv. 1 IS. When general of the Athenians, Phocion 
serves under him, v. 8. Mis character, ib. 9. His great regard 
for Phocion, 9. Loses his life by his heat in attempting to land 
in the isle of Chios, 8. 

-, founder of Chteronea, iii. 25(5. 

Clucrondas, archon at Athens, v. 280. 

fCheeronea, i. 36. The place of Plutarch's nativity, iii. 293, n. 
History of its inhabitants, ib. v 491. Rattles near it, in. 2-1-6, 
257. iv. 91, 92. 

t Vhalaslrdy iv. 316. 

Chalcaspides, h. 305. iii. 251. 

f Chalcedon, besieged by Alcibiadcs, ii. 158. Bv Mithridates, iii. 
336. 

fChdlcidian, foretells the greatness of Sylla, iii. 236. 

Chalcicecos, the temple of .Minerva at Spftfta, i. 117, 118. v. 145. 

fCkalcis, i. 35. iii. 23, 13,51. v. 409. 

Chalcodon, i. 34, 11. 

t Chaldceans, iv. 347. 

Chaldcean scheme, Octavius is killed with one in his bosom, iii. 
1 75. 

Chameleon never changes to white, ii. 146. 

4 Chaonians, iii. 107. 

f Characitani, a people beyond the Tagus, subdued by a stratagem 
of Sertorius, iv. 22. 

Chares, the Athenian general, Timotheus' observation on his 
showing his wounds, ii. 342. Sent to the assistance of the By- 
zantmes, but does not maintain his character there, v. 17. De- 
feats the king of Persia's lieutenants, vi. 168. 

■ -, the historian, iv. 270. 

, the orator, reflects on Phocion, v. 7. Phocion's an- 
swer, ib. 

4 , river, vi. 180. 

Ckaricles, Phocion's son-in-law, executes his scandalous commis- 
sion for Harpalus, v. 26. Is summoned to answer for it, and 
Phocion refuses to defend him, ib. 

Charicloy wife of Sciron, i. 1 la. 

Charidemus, takes Troy, iv. 2. 

• , the orator, "v. 19, 279. 

Ckarilaus, king of Sparta, i. 113. Suspects Lycurgus of conspir- 
ing against him, and takes refuge in the Clialcioecos, 117. 

Charimciic.s the diviner, a friend of Aratus', vi. 177, 178. 

Chariots, when first used in triumphs, i. 76. Drawn bv four white 
horses, appropriated to Jupiter, i. S70, 371. Camillus only 
presumes to ride in such a one, 370. Armed with scythes, 
iii. 257. 

Charm. See Amulet. 

INDEX. 335 

Charmion, one of Cleopatra's women, v. 483. The defence she 

makes for her mistress, 506. 
Charon lends his house to Pelopidas and the exiles, on their under- 
taking to deliver Thebes from it's tyrants, ii. 347, 348. On 
suspicion of a conspiracy, is cited to appear before Archias, 
351. Behaves with such firmness that the tyrant dismisses his 
fears, 352. 
Charonites, who so called, v. 439. 

Charops, son of Machatas, prince of Epirus, a friend to the Ro- 
mans, iii. 35. 
r Chclidonian islands, iii. 310, 312. 

Chelidonis, daughter of Leotychidas, and wife of Cleonymus, iii. 
105. A criminal commerce between her and Acrotatus the 
son of Areus, in which the Spartans encouraged them, ib. 107. 
Chelonis, daughter of Leonidas, and wife of Cleombrotus, a pat- 
tern of love and duty to her father and her husband, v. 149. 
\ Chersonese of Epirus, iii. 72. Of Thrace, colonised by Pericles, 
ii. 19, 32. Totally subdued by Cimon, iii. 313. Of Syria, v. 
418. 
Chickens, used by the Romans in augury, v. 217. 
Child, born with an elephant's head. See Prodigies. 
Children, the weakly destroyed at Sparta, i. 136. The rest how 

educated there, 137, et seq. 
Chileus, the Arcadian, assists Themistocles in adjusting the dif- 
ferences between the Greeks during the Persian war, i. 320. 
Chilo, one of Cato's slaves, a Grammarian, ii. 520. 
f Chios, a city in the island of that name, furnishes Alcibiades 
with provender for his horses, ii. 127. Lucullus expels Mith- 
sidates' forces from Chios, iii. 329. 
Chlidon, a messenger intended to be sent to Hipposthenidas to 

Pelopidas, but fortunately does not go, ii. 350. 
Cliceac% an Egyptian month, i. 66. 

Chcerilus, a varnishing poet, retained by Lysander, iii. 210. 
Cholargia, Pericles of that ward, ii. 5. 
Chorus of music, sent annually to Delos by the Athenians, iii. 

401, n. 
Chrcocopidce, white-washed men at Athens, i. 239. 
f Chrysa, i. 34. 

Chrysantes, an officer in the army of Cyrus, ii. 440. 
Chrysermus, his son Ptolemy killed by Cleomenes' party in Alex- 
andria, v. 194. 
Chrysippus, vi. 152. 

Chrysis, a courtesan, one of Demetrius' mistresses, v. 386. 
Chrysogonus, the musician, ii. 161. 

— , one of Sylla's freedmen, v. 295. 

Cicero, Marcus Tullius, his mother Helvia of a noble family and 
excellent character, v. 292. Various accounts of the family of 
his father, ib. Whence the name of Cicero, 293. What he 
said on his friends advising him to change his name, ib. Instead 
of his third name, engraves a vetch upon a vase which he dedi- 
cated when quaestor in Sicily, ib. Of distinguished reputation 

33S INDEX. 

among Tils schoolfellows, 29 1«. Hia poetry, ib. Attends the 
lectures of Philo the Academician, and studies law under JMucius 
tScfrvola, 295. (lets a taste of military knowledge under Sylla 
in the Marsian war, ib. Withdraws to a philosophic life, on 
account of the disorders of the state, ib. Defends Roscius when 
accused, by Sylla's order, of the murther of his father, ib. In fear 
of Sylla's resentment, retires to Greece, under pretence of doing 
it for his health, 296. His habit of body slender, and his voice 
harsh, ib. Attends the lectures of Antiochus at Athens, and ad- 
mires his elocution, ib. Loves the New Academy, ib. Receives tho 
news of Sylla's death, ib. Hishealthandmanner of speaking greatly 
improved, ib. His friends at Home solicit his return ; but he first 
sails to Asia, and attends the philosophers and rhetoricians there, 
297. How Apollonius Molo was affected at Rhodes, on Cicero's 
declaiming in Greek, ib. Cicero consults the oracle at Delphi, 
which bids him ' follow nature, and not the opinion of the mul- 
titude,' ib. 298. This makes him cautious of any attempts to- 
ward popularity, ib. At last he betakes himself to the bar, and 
is immediately distinguished above all the orators in Rome, ib. 
Finds advantage, in point of action, from the instructions of 
Roscius and vEsop, ib. What he said of bawling orators, ib. 
His free use of his talent at repartee gets him the character of 
a malevolent man, 299. When quaestor in Sicily, supplies Rome 
with corn, ib. Notwithstanding this burthen, his justice and 
moderation recommend him to the Sicilians, ib. From an ad- 
venture on his return perceives the slow progress of fame, ib. 
Acquaints himself with the names and connexions of the Ro- 
mans, '300. Will take no fee or reward for his services at the 
bar, ib. In what manner he gained the Sicilians their cause 
against Verres, ib. His answer to Hortensius, when he said, 
* he could not solve riddles,' 301 . The presents the Sicilians made 
him, when JEdile, ib. His country-seats, 302. The fortune 
his wife Terentia brought him, ib. Has a number of men of 
letters about him, ib. Very abstemious in his diet, and attentive 
to exercise, ib. Gives up his town-house to his brother, and 
takes up his residence on the Palatine hill, ib. Has a levee as 
great as Crassus or Pompey, ib. Returned first, when candidate 
for the prsetorship, ib. Condemns Licinius Macer, ib. His 
behaviour to Vatinius, 203. And to Manilius, ib. 804?. Out of 
fear of Catiline and his associates, the patricians join the ple- 
beians, in raising Cicero to the consulship, 30.5. The detestable 
character and designs of Catiline, 306. Catiline solicits the 
consulship, and loses it ; Cicero and Cains Antonius being ap- 
pointed to that office, ib. The tribunes of the people propose 
to set up a decemvirate, but Cicero quashes the bill, ib. 307. 
Instance of the force of his eloquence, in bringing the people to 
relish a theatrical regulation in favour of the equestrian order, 
307, 308. Catiline hastens his enterprise before the return of 
Pompey, 808. Privately engages Sylla's veterans, at the head 
of whom was Maniius, ib. Cicero brings a charge against him 
is the senate, but has not sufficient proofs, ib. Catiline offers- 

INDEX. 337 

himself again for the consulship, but loses it through the vigi- 
lance and interest of Cicero, 309. Crassus, Mar cell us, and Me- 
tellus Scipio, come to Cicero's house at midnight, and bring a 
packet of letters which give light into the intended massacre, 
ib. 310. Cicero assembles the senate, and produces the packet, 
310. Q. Arrius informs the senate of the designs of Sylla's 
veterans, ib. The consuls are impowered to act in the manner 
they think best for the preservation of the commonwealth, ib. 
Cicero takes the care of the city upon himself, ib. Catiline sends 
Marcius and Cethegus to assassinate him ; but he is apprised of 
his danger by Fulvia, ib. 311. Cicero assembles the senate, and 
Catiline appears, and attempts to speak, but is prevented, 31 1. 
Cicero commands him to quit Rome; and he marches out with 
ensigns of authority, and soon assembles an army of twenty 
thousand men, ib. Antony, Cicero's collegue, is sent against 
him, ib. Lentulus heads the conspirators in Rome, ib. The 
conspirators takes the embassadors of the Allobroges into the 
plot, and charge them with letters to their nation and to Cati- 
line, 313. They send one Titus of Crotona with the embas- 
sadors, ib. Cicero, by his great vigilance and address, dis- 
covers this affair, ib. 314. Lays an ambush for the Crotonian, 
and seizes him; the embassadors privately assisting the state, 
314. Cicero assembles the senate, and lays the letters before 
it, ib. Other informations, ib. Lentulus puts off his praetorian 
robe in the house, and with his accomplices is taken into custody, 
ib. Cicero gives the people an account of the proceedings of 
the day, ib. Spends the night following in considering, what 
punishment he should inflict on the criminals, 315. Opinions 
of different senators thereupon, 316, 317. The senate decree 
for capital punishment, 317. Cicero leads the convicts severally 
though the Forum to prison, where they are executed, 318. 
The people call him the preserver and second Founder of Rome, 
ib. Catiline gives Caius Antonius battle, and is destroyed with 
his whole army, 319. Caesar, now praetor, and two of the tri- 
bunes, prevent Cicero from addressing the people, and allow him 
only to take the oath on laying down his office, ib. 320. He 
takes it in a form of his own, 320. The attempts against him 
defeated by Cato, ib. He gains the glorious title of ' Father of 
his Country,' ib. His vanity disgusting ; yet not unwilling that 
others should have their share of honour, 321. His testimonies 
to the merit of Aristotle, Plato, and Demosthenes, ib. Favours 
he did Cratippus, ib. His son studies under that philosopher, 
322. Gorgias accused of accustoming young Cicero to a life 
of pleasure and intemperance, ib. Cicero's superior keenness 
of expression leads him into violations of decorum, ib. Instances 
of that keenness, ib. 323 Clodius becomes Cicero's enemy for 
giving evidence against his plea of an alibi, at the time when he 
entered Caesar's house in disguise, 326, 327. Clodius is elected 
tribune of the people, and attacks Cicero, 329. How the tri- 
umvirate then stood affected toward Cicero, ib. Cicero applies 
to Caesar for a lieutenancy under him in Gaul, but relinquishes 
VOL. vi. Z 

038 I\DEX. 

it after it was granted, ib. 330. This offends Caesar, 330. do- 
dius summons him to answer for nuttinjj Lentulus and Cethejjus 
to death, ib. Cicero puts on mourning, and twenty thousand 
young men of the hest families supplicate the people with him, 
ib. He applies to Pompey, who ungratefully deserts him, 331. 
Dedicates a statue of Minerva in the Capitol, ib. 332. Flies 
from Rome at midnight, 332. Is treated in general with great 
kindness, notwithstanding his banishment and interdiction from 
fire and water by Clodius, ib. What happened on his sailing 
from Brundusium to Dyrrachium, ib. He bears his exile in a 
manner unbecoming a philosopher, 333. Clodius burns hi-- 
villas ; and on the place where his house stood in Rome, erects a 
temple to Liberty, ib. And affronts Pompey, who now repents 
of his having suffered Cicero to be banished, ib. The senate re- 
solves to despatch no public business, till Cicero is recalled, ib. 
A great tumult ensues, in which Quintus, the brother of Cicero, 
is left for dead, ib. 334'. Milo summons Clodius to answer for his 
violation of the public peace, 334. Pompey drives Clodius out 
of the Forum, and the people vote for Cicero's return with great 
unanimity, ib. The senate vies with the commons in zeal for 
Cicero, ib. The cities, through which he passes, do the same, 
ib. He returns sixteen months after his banishment, ib. Erases 
Clodius' acts from the tribunitial tables, and endeavours to annul 
them, but is prevented by Cato, ib. 335. Milo kills Clodius; 
and being arraigned for the fact, chooses Cicero for his advocate, 
335. Cicero, though so able an orator, had a timidity in speak- 
ing, ib. Milo loses his cause, 336. Cicero is appointed one of 
the augurs, ib. Is sent proconsul into Cilicia, where he be- 
haves with great integrity, prudence, and moderation, ib. 337. 
Brings the Cappadocians to submit to Ariobarzanes without 
bloodshed, 336. Routs the robbers who had possessed them- 
selves of mount Amanus, and is saluted ' Imperator ' by the 
army, 337. His answer to the a:dile Ccelius, who applied to 
him for panthers, ib. Visits Rhodes and Athens in his return,. 
'.VIS. Finds the flame of civil war ready to break out at Rome, 
ib. His saying on the senate's decreeing him a triumph, ib. 
In great doubt and perplexity, as to the party he should take, ib. 
Caesar would have been satisfied with his standing neuter, but at 
hist he joins Pompey, 339. Cato blames him for not remaining ai 
Rome, ib. He repents of the step he had taken, ib. Disparages 
Pompey's preparations, counsels, and allies, ib. Some strokes of 
wit and repartee, in whieh he indulged himself in the camp, 340. 
After the battle of Pharsalia was lost, Cato desires Cicero, as a 
person of consular dignity, to take the command of the fleet; 
and on his refusal, young Pompey threatens to kill him, ib. 341. 
He waits at Brundusium for Caesar's return from Egypt, 311. 
Ts treated by the conqueror with great humanity and regard, ib. 
The compliment Csesar paid him in his ' Anti-Cato,' ib. His 
eloquence prevails upon Caesar to acquit Ligarius, contrary to 
his resolution, 342. He spends his time in philosophic retire- 
ment, and in forming the young nobility, ib. Invents Latin 

INDEX. 8S9 

terms in logic and natural philosophy, answerable to the Greek, 
ib. Rarely goes to Rome, and then only to vote Caesar new 
honours, 31-3. What he said of Caesar's setting up Pompey's 
statues, ib. Forms a design to write the history of his own 
country, but is prevented, ib. Divorces Terentia, and marries 
a young lady cf great fortune, to whom he was guardian, ib. 344-. 
Loses his daughter Tullia, 344, Puts away his new wile, because 
she seemed to rejoice at the death of Tullia, ib. After the death of 
Caesar, Cicero recommends a general amnesty, and that provinces 
should he decreed to Brutus and Cassius, ib. 345. Cicero sets 
out for Athens, but the news of Antony's reformation invites him 
to return to Rome, 343. Lives there in fear of assassination, ib. 
Octavius comes to Rome to demand Caesar's inheritance, and 
forms a connexion with Cicero, ib. 347. The dream which 
Cicero had some years before, concerning Octavius, 347. The 
reflexion, which Brutus made upon that new connexion of Cicero's, 
348. Cicero expels Antony, ib. Hirtius and Pansa are sent to 
give Antony battle, ib. The rank of praetor and the fasces are 
granted to Octavius through Cicero's means, 349. The consuls 
fall in the action, and their troops incorporated with Caesar's, ib. 
Antony being beaten, the senate endeavours to draw young 
Caesar's troops from him, ib. Caesar persuades Cicero to give 
him his interest for the consulship, and afterwards casts him oft' 
and takes another collegue, ib. The triumvirate is formed 
between Antony, Lepidus, and Octavius, 350. They proscribe 
two hundred persons, ib. Caesar contends for Cicero a while; 
but upon Antony giving up his uncle L. Caesar, and Lepidus 
agreeing to put his brother Paulus in the list, Cicero is sacri- 
ficed, ib. The distressful movements of Cicero and his brother 
Quintus, under the terrors of proscription, ib. They part, 351. 
Quintus and his son are betrayed by his servants to the assassins, 
ib. Cicero is carried to his country-house at Astyra, where he 
goes on board a vessel, and coasts along to Circaeum, ib. Though 
he has a favourable wind he puts to shore, and after various per- 
plexing movements, seeks the sea again, ib. Omens of his death, 
252. The assassins come up, amongst whom was Pompilius, whom 
he had defended, when under prosecution for parricide, ib. He 
stretches his neck out of the litter, and Hercnnius gives him the 
fatal blow, 253. Dies in the sixty-fourth year of his age, ib. 
His head and hands are fastened up over the Rostra by Antony, 
ib. What Augustus said of Cicero, to one of his own grandsons, 
ib. Augustus takes the son of Cicero for his collegue, in the 
comsulslrip, and under his auspices public dishonour is done to 
the memory of Antony, ib. 254. 
Cicero, Quintus, v. 316, 334, 351. Besieged by Ambiorix, iv. 387. 
Caesar relieves him, ib. 

the son, v. 322, 353. vi. 78, 80. 

Cichreus, i. 228. 

fCilicia, Cicero's behaviour there, as proconsul, v. 336, 337. 
Cilician pirates, their strength and audacity, iv. 152 — 155. Re- 
duced by Pompey, 157. 

z 2 

310 INDEX. 

Cillcs, Ptolemy's general, defeated and taken prisoner by Denie- 
metrius, v. ."68. 

Cimber, Metillius, or M. Tullius Cimber lays hold on Caesar's robe, 
which is a signal for all the rest to strike, iv. 43+. 

Cimbri and Teutones invade Italy with an arm}' of three hundred 
thousand men, iii. 132. 

Cimbri, whence their name, iii. 133. Invade the country of the 
Norici, 138. Defeat Ca-pio, iv. 4. Their order of battle, iii. 
J51, 152. Their first ranks fastened to each other with cords, 
153. The desperate behaviour of their women upon defeat, 
ib. 151'. 

f Cimmerian Bosporus, passed by the Amazons, i 34. 

■f Cimmerians, pass from the borders of the northern ocean by the 
Palus Maeotis, into Asia Minor, iii. 133. Their original coun- 
try so dark and dismal, that Homer thence took the image of 
hell, ib. 

Cimon, discovers the grave of Theseus in Scvros, i. 46, and removes 
his body to Athens, ib. 

Cimon, the son of Miltiades and Hegcsipyla, daughter to king 
Olorus, iii. 297. In his youth not unlike his grandfather, who 
got the title of ' Coalemos' for his stupidity and indiscretion, ib. 
Yet has something generous and sincere in his behaviour, ib. 
Accused of a criminal commerce with his sister Elpinice, 298. 
Cimon has his mistresses, Aristeria and Mnestra, 299. Marries 
Isodice, the daughter of Euryptolemus, ib. His great attach- 
ment to her while she lives, and sorrow for her death, ib. Equal 
in courage to Miltiades, and in prudence to Themistoclts ; and 
an honester man than either of them, ib. One of the first to 
try the fortune of Athens at sea upon the invasion of Xerxes, ib. 
Distinguishes himself in the battle of Salamis, 300. The people 
begin to be weary of Themistocles, and with pleasure receive 
Cimon into the administration, ib. Commands at sea for the 
Athenians, and draws the allies from Pausanias, not by force, 
but by his obliging manners, ib. 301. Defeats the Persians, in 
Thrace, and reduces their general Butes to such extremity, that 
be burns the city of Eion, and perishes in the flames, 302. 
Plants there a colony of Athenians, and erects three marble 
Hernia?, in memory of his victory, ib. The inscriptions upon 
those Herma?, ib. 303. Colonises Amphipolis, ; Takes 

Scyros, and clears the .Egean sea of pirates, 304. Discovers the 
remains of Theseus in Scyros, and carries them with great 
solemnity to Athens, ib. Games instituted at Athens on that 
occasion, 305. Cimon's talent for singing, ib. Ilis division of 
the booty taken at Sestos and Byzantium, ib. 306. His hospi- 
tality and bounty to the poor citizens of Athens, ib. 307. Re- 
vives tHe memory of the golden age, 308. Though so kind to 
the people, is yet of aristocratic principles, ib. Opposes Ephi- 
altcs in his attempt to abolish the court of Areopagus, ib. His 
noble answer to Rhoesaces the Persian, who offered him money, 
ib. He takes money and ships unmanned of the allies, instead 
of obliging them to serve in person, 309. This naturally gives 

9 

INDEX. 341 

the Athenians the superiority, ib. He reduces the king of Persia 
so effectually, that from Ionia to Pamphylia there was not a 
Persian standard to he seen, ib. Pieduces the Phaselites, 310. 
Defeats the Persian fleet in the Eurymedon, and takes two hun- 
dred ships, 311. Beats the Persian land-forces the same day, /'/•. 
Meets the Phoenician reinforcement, and takes all their ships, 
312. Obliges the king of Persia, by treaty, not to come within 
the Chelidonian islands with his ships, nor within a day's journey 
of the Grecian sea with his land-forces, ib. With the treasure 
he brings home, builds the wall on the south side of the citadel, 
and pei forms other public works, 313. Reduces all the Thracian 
Chersonese, ib. Defeats the Thracians, and secures the gold- 
mines to the Athenians, ib. Is accused for not invading Mace- 
don, when he had so fair an opportunity, ib. 314. Acquitted, 
314. During the absence of Cimon, the jurisdiction of the 
Areopagites is narrowed, ib. Cimon, on his return, attempts to 
restore that jurisdiction, but in vain, 315. The friendship which 
subsisted between Cimon and the Lacedaemonians, ib. The names 
he gave his sons, ib. The Lacedaemonians, after the earthquake, 
apply to the Athenians for succours against the Helots and 
Messenians, 316, 317. Cimon marches to their relief, 317. 
His adventure on his return, at Corinth, ib. 318. The Lacedae- 
monians call in the Athenians a second time, and afterward 
dismiss their troops without employing them, 318. The Athe- 
nians banish Cimon, and declare war against the Lacedaemonians, 
318. Cimon's friends distinguish themselves in the battle of 
Tanagra, and he is recalled, ib. 319. He makes peace between 
the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, 319. Fits out a fleet of two 
hundred sail, to carry the war a second time into Egypt and 
Cyprus, ib. Presages of his death, 320. Defeats the Persian 
fleet on the Asiatic coast, 321. Conceives a design to overrun 
that whole empire, ib. Casts anchor before Cyprus, ib. Sends 
persons to consult the oracle of Jupiter Amnion, ib. The god 
declares that Cimon is already with him, ib. He dies during the 
siege of Citium, 322. Had given orders, that the officers should 
sail home with the fleet, and in the mean time conceal his death, 
ib. The last of the Grecian generals that did any thing consi- 
derable against the barbarians, ib. His monument, where, 323. 

Cimonia, what, iii. 323. 

Cineas, his conversation with Pyrrhus concerning happiness, iii. 
83, 84. Sent by Pyrrhus to Rome with proposals of peace, 
which are rejected, 90, 92. Calls the senate of Rome • an 
assembly of kings,' 93. Gives Fabricius an account of the 
Epicurean philosophy, ib. Sent with other offers to Rome, 95. 
Sent into Sicily, 98. 

Cineas, father of Thallus, v. 16. 

Cingonins Varro, a friend of Nymphidius, vi. 224. Put to death by 
Galba, ib. 

China, Lucius, though of the opposite party, named consul by Sylla, 
upon a promise of being true to his interest, iii. 245. Forfeits 

242 INDEX. 

his oatli, 216. Driven out of* Rome by Octavius, 173. Hires 

a person to assassinate Pornpey, and his father, iv. 128. Killed 

b}r one of his own officers, 130, 131. 
Cinna, one of the conspirators against Caesar, iv. 437. vi. 73. 
, Helvius, a poet and friend of Caesar's, dreams that Caesar 

after his death, invites him to supper, vi. 75, n. Goes to attend 

his obsequies, and being taken by the rabble for the other Cinna, 

is torn in pieces, ib. 
■\Cios, v. 23. 

•fCirctEum, iii. 166. v. 351. 
Circe, i. 50. 

fCirceii, ii. 209. iv. 425. 
Circeii-inii Games, i. 70. 
Circus Flaminius, iii. 381. Maximus, i. 70. 
•\Cirrcetium, a village in the territory of Arpinum, where Marius 

originally lived, iii. 122. 
fCirrha, i' 171, £31. 

Cissus, and Ephialtes, imprisoned by Alexander, iv. 306. 
Cissusa, a fountain whose water was like wine ; Baechus said to 

have been washed in it immediately after his birth, iii. 224. 
■\Cithceron, Mount, v. 279. 
•f Citium, iii. 322. 

Civic Croxvn, the Roman reward for saving the life of a citizen, ii. 177. 
Clcelia swims the Tiber on horseback, i. 297. An equestrian statue 

of her in the Via Sacra, 298. 
f Clarius river, i. 259. 

^Claros, temple there plundered by the pirates, iv. 153. 
■fCla;4idium, ii. 395. 
Claudia, daughter of Appius Claudius, betrothed to Tiberius 

Gracchus, v. 203. 
Cloudily account of that family, i. 301. 
Claudius, the emperor, sets earthen vessels before Vinius after he 

had stolen one of plate, vi. 221 . 

- . See Appius. 

Clausus, See Appius, 

•fClazomence, iii. 419. 

Cleaenetus, son of Cleomedon, v. 387. 

Cleandrides, Pericles bribes him to withdraw the Lacedaemonian 

forces, ii, 35. Is sentenced to death, and flies from Lacedaemon, 

ib. Father of Gylippus, ib. 
Cleanthes, his observation upon Socrates and Alcibiades, ii. 119. 

« , frecdman and physician of Cato the Younger, v. 120. 

Clearchus sent embassador by Philip to Thebes, v. 272. 

-the Lacedaemonian general, ordered to obey Cyrus, vi. 

120. His over-cautious advice to Cyrus, 122. Ruins the whole 

affair by a bad disposition of the Greeks, 123. 
Clemency, a temple dedicated to that virtue, in honour of Caesar, 

iv. 423, 
Cleobis, and Biton, preferred in point of happiness, by Solon, to 

Croesus, i. 261. 

INDEX. S4S 

Vleocritus compromises the dispute between the Athenians and 
Spartans, as to erecting a trophy, ii. 4-78. 

Cleodes, son of Hyllus, iii. 66. 

Cleomanies the Spartan, one of Alexander's diviners, iv. 317. 

Cleombrotus succeeds Agesipolis, and is sent with an army into 
Beeotia, ii. 356, 364-. iv. 100, 101. Killed in the battle of Leuc- 
tra, iv. 107. v. 154. 

, king of Sparta, in the room of his father-in-law Leo- 

nidas, who is deposed, v. 145. Takes refuge in the temple of 
Neptune, 149. His wife Chelonis, who had before attended her 
father in Ins banishment, now goes into exile with him, 149. 

C'leomcdes the Astypalensian, account of his gigantic strength, i. 
97. Of his body's vanishing after his death, 98. The priestess 
of Apollo calls him the last of the heroes, ib. 

Cleomedon, fined by the Athenians, v. 387. 

Cleomenes, the Athenian, iii. 205. 

, the Spartan, one of the arbitrators between the Athe- 
nians and Megarensians, i. 230. 

Cleomenes, son of Leonidas, marries Agiatis the widow of 
Agis, v. 154. His character, 155. Dissatisfied at the prevailing- 
manners of Sparta, ib. Instructed in the Stoic philosophy by 
Sprnerus, 15G. Sounds Xenares about bringing back the Spartan 
constitution to its first principles, 157. Thinks war would fur- 
nish the best opportunity for the execution of his designs, ib. 
Seizes Athenaeum, 158. Watches the motions of Aratus, ib. 
He is recalled from Arcadia by the Ephori, ib. Sent out again, 
ib. Takes Methydrium in the territories of Argos, ib. The 
Achaeans march against him with an army greatly superior to 
his, under the command of Aristomachus, ib. Yet Aratus 
prevents their fighting, ib. Cleomenes goes to the assistance of 
the Eleans against the Achaeans, and defeats the latter at La- 
caeum, ib. Aratus makes a sudden movement to Mantinea, and 
takes it, ib. Cleomenes recalls Archidamus from exile, who is 
soon afterward treacherously slain, 159, 160. Bribes the Ephori 
to permit him to renew the war, 160. Defeats the Achaeans 
near Leuctra, and kills Lysiades, 161 . Persuades his lather-in- 
4aw, Megistonous, to join him in endeavouring to break the 
yoke of the Ephori, and to procure an equal division of lands, 
ib. Remarkable dream of one of the Ephori in the temple of 
Pasiphaa, ib. Cleomenes takes Heraea and Alsaea, two cities 
belonging to the Achaean league, ii. Returns suddenly with a 
small party, and kills all the Ephori, except one, 162. Agesi- 
■laus, who was the surviving one, makes his appearance the next 
day, and is spared, ib. Cleomenes banishes eight)' of the most 
obnoxious citizens, 164. His speech to the people in justifica- 
tion of his proceedings, ib. 165. He surrenders his own estate 
•into the public stock, 165. Divides the lands, 166. Fills up 
the number of citizens, ib. Forms the youth according to the 
discipline of Lycurgus, ib. Takes his brother Euclidas for his 
partner in the throne, ib. Ravages the territories of Megalo- 
polis, without any opposition from the Achaeans, 166. Is a 

344 INDEX. 

pattern of sobriety, 167. What kind of table he kept for 
strangers, 16S. The Man t means put themselves under his 
protection, ib. He defeats the Achaeans at Dimeae, 169. In- 
sists on being appointed, to the command of the league, ib. His 

sickness breaks his measures, 170. Aratus out of envy to Cleo- 
menes, invites Antigonus into Peloponnesus, ib. Cleomenes 
declares war against the Achaeans, 172. Takes Pellene, Phe- 
neum, and Penteleum, ib. 173. Comes upon Argos at the time 
of the Nemean games, and takes it, 173 Makes himself mas- 
ter of Cleonae and Phlius, 17 k The Corinthians invite him into 
their city, ib. He invests the citadel, which was in the hands 
of the Achaeans, ib. Fortifies the Onean mountains, 17.3- An- 
tigonus, after several vain attempts, gets into i'eloponnesus, by 
means of a defection of the Argives, 176, 177. Cleomenes re- 
tires to defend Laconia, 177. His wife Agiatis dies, ib. Ptolemy 
promises him succours, 178. His mother and children are sent 
hostages into Egypt, ib. He enfranchises a number of the 
Helots, 179. Makes a diversion against the progress of the 
Macedonian arms, by surprising Megalopolis, 180. Makes two 
excursions into the territories of Argos, 181, 182. Is forced to 
action for want of money, 183. Defeated and ruined in the bat- 
tle of Sellasia, 184. Takes ship at Gythiuan, 186. Antigonus 
behaves to the Spartans with great humanity, ib. Therycion 
exhorts Cleomenes to kill himself, and soon after sets the exam- 
ple, 187. Cleomenes' answer, 188. He sails to Egypt, where 
Ptolemy Euergetes treats him with some degree of generosity, 
ib. Ptolemy's successor, being a weak prince, soon begins to 
look upon him with an evil eye, 190. He desires only a ship to 
carry him to Peleponnesus, and is refused it, ib. The great in- 
jury done him by Nicagoras the Messenian, 191, 192. He is 
confined to his apartment, 192. He gets out of confinement by 
a stratagem, 193. After great exertions of valour in the streets, 
he finds it impossible to escape and therefore kills himself, 194, 
His friends despatch themselves with him, ib. Ptolemy puts his 
mother and children to death, 196. 

Cleon, the Athenian, accuses Pericles, ii. 51. His extravagant 
action in speaking, iii. 410. v. 201. His character, iii. 408, 
409. Reflects on Nicias, and having the command given 
him, return*; victorious, 409. Troublesome in the administra- 
tion, 4-10. Is killed in battle, ib. 

of Halicarnassus, composes an oration for Lysander; con- 
taining arguments for making the king of Sparta elective, iii. 220. 

, the Byzantine, his esteem for Phocion, v. 18. 

, one of the tyrants of Sicyon, vi. 153. 

^Cleonee, ii. 235. iii. 332. v. 34, 174. vi. 181. 

Cleonice, of Byzantium, comes with great reluctance towards the 
bed of Pausanias king of Sparta, and is inadvertently killed by 
him, iii. 301. He seeks means of expiation, and invokes her 
ghost, ib. The answer she made him, ib. 

ClcGuymus, of Sparta, stirs up the Thebans against Demetrius, 
but on that prince's approach withdraws, v. 404, 405. His 

INDEX. Sio 

-, 

wife unfaithful to him, iii. 10.5. Calls in Pyrrhus, and advises 
him to attack Sparta immediately ; but that advice is not listened 
to, and Pyrrhus fails, 105 — 110. 

Cleonymits, son of Spiiodrias favourite of Archidamus, son of 
Agesilaus, iv. 102. His valour and death, 107. 

— , father of Leonidas, v. 135. 

Cleopater commands for Aratus in Acrocorinthus, vi. 195. 

Cleopatra, daughter of Mithridates, and wife of Tigranes, iii. 358. 

. , Caesar undertakes the ./Egyptian war for her sake, iv. 

413. Caesar sends for her, and she contrives to be conveyed to 
him in a carpet, ib. 414. Caesar reconciles her to her bro- 
ther, 414. Her brother is lost in an action upon the Nile, 415. 
Caesar declares her queen of Egypt, and has a son by her named 
Caesario, ib. Commanded to appear before Antony, v. 448. Her 
magnificent spirit, and the charms of her conversation, 449, 
450. On a party of fishing, puts a salt -fish on Antony's hook, 
and tells him that « kings, not fish, were his game,' 453. 
Dresses in the habit of the goddess Isis, 478. Supplies Anto- 
ny with ships, money, and provisions, 475, 479. Jealous of 
the honours paid Octavia at Athens, 480, 482. Antony loses 
many friends on her account, 481. Persuades Antony to fight 
Octavius by sea, 486. lluins Antony by her flight, for she 
draws him after her, 489. Forms a scheme to retire into the 
farthest part of the east, 492. Makes an experiment of several 
poisonous drugs, 495, and venomous animals, ib. Builds seve- 
ral monuments, as repositories of her wealth, 497. Draws up 
Antony, half-dead, into one of them, 499. Seized by Procu- 
leius, 501. Her intentions to starve herself to death, 503. 
Augustus visits her, ib. Her address to the gods at Antony's 
tomb, 505. Writes a letter to Augustus, 506. Dies, ib. 

and Alexander, twins of Antony by Cleopatra, v. 460. 

— — / ^ t/ 

Cleopatra marries prince Juba the historian, 508. 

, wife of Philip, iv. 252. 

-, sister to Alexander the Great, iv. 42, 48. 

, „.„,.«. ..„ ..„, — ~ — , -.. — , — . 

Cleophanes, the Athenian, distinguishes himself by his bravery, 
v. 17. 

Cleophantus, one of the sons of Themistocles, i. 357. 

Cleophyfas, Homer's poems preserved by his posterity, i. 115. 

Cleoptolemus, Antiochus marries his daughter in Euboea, iii. 51. 

Cleora, wife of Agesilaus, iv. 94. 

Clepsydra, a fountain in the citadel of Athens, v. 457, and n. 

Clidemus the historian, i. 21, 34. 

Clients, the people distinguished into patrons and clients by Ro- 
mulus, i. 68. 

I Climax, cliffs of, under which Alexander marches by the Pam- 
phylian sea, iv. 265. 

Cliaias, a friend of Solon, i. 239. 

, father of Alcibiades, gains honour in the sea-fight near 

Artemisium, ii. 112. Falls in the battle of Coronea, ib. 

father of Aratus, one of the two chief magistrates of Si- 

cyon, vi. 153. Killed by Abantidas, ib. 

S46 INDEX. 

Clisthenes, son of A'.cmaeon, expels tlie Pisistratjdae, and esta- 
blishes the democracy at Athens, ii. 5. 

Clitomachus, v. 295. 

+ Clitorians, hov/ Sous acquits himself of his promise to them, 
i. 111. 

Clitus saves the life of Alexander, iv. 263. Ill omen, while he 
is sacrificing, 317. Behaves rudely to Alexander, and is killed 
by him, 81 M, 319. The king inconsolable for his death, 320. 

carries Ph'ocion and his friends as prisoners to Athens, v. 41. 

— — , servant to Brutus, vi 106. 

Clodia, sister of Clodius, and wife of Lucullus, divorced for injur- 
ing her husband's bed, iii. 382. 

« , called ' Quadrantaria,' and why, v. 328. 

Clodius, Publius, raises a mutiny in the army against Lucullus, iii. 
376, 377. II is infamous character, v. 328. Insults Pompey, 
iv. 186. Intrigues with Pompeia, Caesar's wife, or attempts at 
least to do it, v. 326, 327. iv, 366. Accused of impiety and 
incest, but acquitted, v. 828 Elected tribune of the people, 
32(J. Causes great disturbance in Rome, v. 80, 82, 8;). For 
the sake of being made tribune, descends from a patrician into 
a plebeian family, 82, 89. Sends Cato to Cyprus, 83. Prose- 
cutes and banishes Cicero, v. 332. Burns Cicero's houses, 333. 
Killed by Mil©, 33.5. 

Clodius Glaber, the praetor, sent against Spartacus, iii. 458. 

, the husband of Fulvia, who was subsequently married to 

Antony, v. 435. 

• goes in disguise from Lepidus' camp to Antony, v. 412. 

Celsus, the Antiochian, his advice to Nymphidius, vi. 222. 

Macer commands in Africa, vi. 222. Slain by Treboni- 

anus, 224. 

Clodones, a name of the Bacchanals, iv. 240, 

Cloelva. See Chelia. 

Ciokes and hats of purple, the most honourable marks of the 
prince's regard among the Macedonians, iv. 50. 

j Clusians, besieged by the Gauls, i. 380. The Roman embas- 
sador, on that occasion, unjustly commits hostilities against the 
Gauls, 381. 

t Cnacion, a river in Sparta, near which the senate used to meet, 
called also Oenus, i. 120. 

Cneius- See ail the Cneii under their family-names. 

^Cnidus, ii. 154. iii. 310. 

fCnidians, iv. 412. 

Coalemos, a name given to Cimon the grandfather of Cimon the 
Athenian general, iii. 297. 

Cocceius, Otho's brother's son, vi. 261. 

Coccus It iris, i. 18, n. See Kermes. 

Cock, en what occasion the Lacedaemonians offered one in sacri- 
fice, iv. 114. A golden cock carried on the point of a spear, vi. 
1 25. 

Cedes. See Horatius. 

( ddrus, i. 31, n. 45, n. Solon descended from him, 218. 

INDEX. 347 

f Calosyria, given by Antony to Cleopatra, v. 460. 

Ccelia, wife of Sylla, divorced because she was barren, iii. 240. 

Cceliiis, one of Carbo's officers, iv. 132. 

the orator, v. 337, n. 

Coffins, two of stone made for Numa, one for his body, and the 
other for his books, i. 206. 

Cohorts. See Prcetnrian. 

Coin, that of Persia stamped with the figure of an archer ; hence 
Agesilaas says, ' he was driven out of Asia by ten thousand 
archers,' iv. 89. 

fColchos, i. 37. iv. 167. 

■j- Codas, i. 228. 

Collatinus, Tarquinius, the husband of Lucretia, chosen consul, 
i. 272, 273. Accused of favouring Tarquin, 279. Lays down 
the consulate, and retires from Rome, 280. 

Colline Gate, iii. 273. 

Colonies, the advantage of those sent out by Pericles, ii. 19. 

iColonis, a town so called, iii. 24*. Probably should be written 
' Coronis,' ib. n. 

f Colophonians, restored to liberty by Lucullus, iii. 330. 

Colossus of Hercules, ii. 99. 

Colt, sacrificed by the Thebans, ii. 367. 

Colyttus, one of the Attic boroughs, v. 265. 

Cornagene, iv 167, n. 

Comedy, the ancient, iii. 383, n. v. 375. 

Comet, a large one appeared for seven nights after the death of 
Caesar, iv. 438. 

Comias, archonwhen Pisistratus erected his tyranny, i. 269. 

Cominius, the consul, besieges Corioli, ii. 182. Beats the Vol- 
scians, 184, 185. Speaks in praise of Caius Marcius, 185, 186. 
Gives him the surname of Coriolanus, 186. 

Comitium, a place in Home where elections were held, and other 
public business transacted, i. 64. Why so called, 82. 

Community of goods in Saturn's time ; Cimon's liberality resem- 
bled it, iii. 308. 

Companies, the people of Rome distributed into companies by 
Numa, according to their trades, i. 197. 

Comparisons and Similies ; Of the forming of a commonwealth to 
the stopping and uniting of small bodies in the water, iii. 10. 
The spirit of contention in states compared to the force of dis- 
tempers in the human body, 21. Of Pyrrhus to a gamester, iii. 
103. Of ambitious men to Ixion, v. 132. Subjects to be cho- 
sen for the mind as colours are for the eye, ii. 3. The opera- 
tiens of a statesman compared to those of a physician, 27. The 
passions of the soul to the strings of a musical instrument, 27, 
28. The rage of tyranny dissolved in the ardour of youthful 
indulgences, as iron is softened in the fire, vi. 8. The precipi- 
tate steps of returning freedom, compared to the rash use of re- 
turning health, 36. The severe, though necessary, measures 
of administration, compared to the bandages of surgeons, iii. 
J394. Alcibiades compared to the land of Egypt, 410. Of bio- 

343 INDEX. 

grapby to portrait-painting, iv. 239. Of the Macedonian army, 
after the death of Alexander, to Polyphemus after his eye was 
put out, vi. 211. The great councils of a state compared to an- 
chors, i. 215. The constituent purts of an army to those of the 
human body, ii. 341. vi. 211. Over cautious generals to timo- 
rous physicians, ii. 427. The Spartan Phalanx, to a fierce ani- 
mal erecting his bristles, 474. 

Concave mirrors, the vestal virgins recovered fire by them when 
theirs happened to be extinguished, i. 183. 

Conception and delivery supposed to be assisted by being struck 
with thongs in the feast of the Lupercalia; see Luperculia and 
Lupcrci. 

Concord, a temple built to her, i. 418. v. 241. 

Connidas, tutor to Theseus, i. 6. The Athenians sacrificed to 
him, ib. 

Conon takes an unfair advantage, with respect to the public, of 
Solon's friendship for him, i. 239. 

, the Athenian general, defeated by Lysander, at /Egos 

Potamos, iii. 199- Defeats the Spartans near Cnidus, vi. 138. 
Kills their admiral Pisander, iv. 91. Rebuilds the long walls of 
Athens with the Persian money, 98. 

Conopion burns the body of Phocion, v. 44. 

Conscience, terrors of conscience, upon Marius, iii. 179. On Pau- 
sanias, 301. 

Considius tells Caesar he is ' secure in the armour of old age,' iv. 
373. 

Conspiracy against Caesar, vi. 66, 67. Of Catiline, iv. 364. v. 71, 
308, 309. 

Consudlia, a feast among the Romans, i. 73. 

Consuls, when one of thein was first chosen out of the plebeians, 
i. 286, n. 

Consus, the god of counsel, whose altar Romulus pretended to 
find under ground, i. 69. Kept covered, except during the 
equestrian games, 70. 

f Coos, ii. 154. 

Copillus, chief of the Tectosagas, taken prisoner by Sylla, iii. 233. 

Coponius, governor for the Romans in Carrae, iii. 489. Receives 
Crassus into the town after his defeat, ib. 

Corcyne, Ariadne's nurse, i. 23. 

\Corcyra, an island of considerable strength, ii. 43 Pyrrhus 
gains it by marriage, iii. 76. The dispute between it's inhabi- 
tants and the city of Corinth, determined by Themistocles, i. 
346. 

-j- Corduba, iv. 376. 

Cordylio, v. 57. 

Core, daughter of A'idoneus king of the Molossians, i. 40. 

f Corfinium, iv. 398. 

f Corinth, it's regard for liberty, ii. 233, 259. Why called the 
4 Fetters of Greece,' iii. 43. vi. 168. Colonised by Caesar, iv. 
423. 

Corinthians, allow the Athenians to hold the place of honour at 

INDEX. 349 

the Ishmian games, i. 31. Colonise Syracuse, ii. 233, n. Assist 
the Syracusans, 234. For which purpose they choose Timo- 
leon general, and send supplies after him, ib. Their war with 
the Corcyreans, ii. 43, 44. 
Coriolanus, Caius Marcius, of an illustrious family, ii. 174. 
Brought up by his mother in her widowhood, ib. His excellent 
genius not sufficiently cultivated, 175. His heroic strength im- 
proved by exercise, 176. Makes his first campaign, when 
Tarquin was endeavouring to re-establish himself, ib. Gains a 
civic crown in the decisive battle, 177. His a fleet ion ate atten- 
tion to his mother Volumnia, 179. He lives in the same house 
with her after he is married, ib. The commons apply to the 
senate for relief against the usurers, ib. Relief is promised them 
before the Sabine war, but denied after it, ib. 180. Coriola- 
nus, in particular, is severe against them, 180. The people se- 
cede to tlie Sacred Mount, ib. The senate send to them the 
most venerable men of their body, and at the head of them 
Menenius Agrippa who addresses them with a fable that brings 
them to temper, ib. 181 . Before they are reconciled to the senate, 
they obtain tribunes to defend their rights, 181. The plebeians 
now readily give in their names for the war, 182. Corioli is 
taken chiefly by the valour of Marcius, 183. He hastens to assist 
the consul Cominius in the battle with the Volscians, 184, 185. 
The Volscians are entirely defeated, 185. Cominius offers 
Marcius the tenth of the spoils, ib. Marcius refuses the offer, 
and only desires to have a Volscian released, to whom he was 
bound by the ties of hospitality, ib. 186. Cominius gives him 
the surname of * Coriolanus,' 186. Some observations upon 
the Grecian and Roman names, 187, 188. Provisions are ex- 
tremely scarce in Rome, and the tribunes Jay hold of that op- 
portunity to incense the people against the senate, 188. Tin- 
people of Velitrre having suffered by a pestilential disorder, 
desire a colony from Rome ; and the tribunes inveigh against 
the nobility for sending one, ib. 189. Coriolanus makes an 
inroad into the territories of Antium, with a body of volun- 
teers, and brings off plenty of provisions, 190. Stands for the 
consulship, and the people, on the sight of his scars, are in- 
clined to serve him ; but the great appearance of senators in 
his interest awakes their jealousy, ib. 191. His resentment 
thereupon, 192. A great quantity of bread-corn is brought 
to Rome, and Coriolanus proposes holding u\i it's price, and 
advises the senate not to distribute that gratis, which was a 
present from Gelon, 193. His speech upon that occasion, ib. 

194. The tribunes stir up the people, and summon Coriolanus 
to answer for the advice he had given, I'M. A tumult ensues, 

195. The consuls and senate endeavour to appease the people, 
ib. The tribunes insist, that Coriolanus shall answer to certain 
articles, ib. Instead of the submissive language which the peo- 
ple expected, he makes a haughty speech, 196. Sicinius pro- 
nounces sentence of death against Coriolanus, ib. The patri- 
cians prevent the execution of that sentence, ib. The patri- 

S30 INDEX. 

cians demand a legal trial for Coriolanus before the people, and 
Sicinius agrees to it, 197. The expedition against the Antiates 
intervenes, ib. Appius Claudius opposes the senate's allowing 
the people a right of suffrage against them, 198. Nevertheless, 
Coriolanus appears to take his trial, ib. The tribunes break 
their word, and bring new charges against him, 199. They also 
make the people vote by tribes, and not by centuries, ib. He is 
condemned to exile by a majority of three tribes, 200. Remains 
unhumblcd, ib. Meditates revenge, and for that purpose ap- 
plies to the Volscians, 201. His address to Tullus Auhdius, the 
principal man among them, and hitherto his greatest enemy, 202, 
203. He meets with the kindest reception, 203. A remarkable 
prodigy happens at Rome, ib. The Romans order all the Vol- 
scians to quit their city, on occasion of some public shows, 206. 
The Volscians demand restitution of the lands and cities they had 
lost, and are answered with a defiance, 207. Coriolanus is 
joined in commission with Tullus, ib. He makes an inroad into 
the Roman territories, but spares the lands of the patricians, ib. 
208. The Volscians repair to the standard in great numbers, 
208. Tullus takes part of them to garrison the towns, and Co- 
riolanus with the other part marches into Latium, ib. 209. Co- 
riolanus takes several towns, subject to, or in alliance with, the 
Romans, 209. Upon Ids march against Lavinium, the plebeian - 
propose to recall him; but from an ill-timed resentment, or spirit 
of opposition, the patricians refuse their consent, 210. He 
marches immediately toward Rome, and encamps only five miles 
from it, 211. Both senate and people send a deputation, de- 
siring him to be reconciled, and to return to his native country, 
ib. He receives them with great pomp, and insists on condi- 
tions very favourable to the Volscians, ib. 212. Gives the Ro- 
mans thirty days to consider of them, and retreats, 212. Tullus 
and other Volscians, who envied his renown, cabal against him, 
ib. Coriolanus spends the interval in harassing the allies of 
Rome, 213. The Romans send a second embassy, to demand 
mere favourable conditions, and a third consisting of the minis- 
ters of religion ; but Coriolanus bids them either accept the 
former propositions, or prepare for war, 213. The divine as- 
sistance explained by Plutarch to be a moral influence, ?A5. 
An expedient is suggested to Valeria, as she was praying in the 
temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, 216. She goes with a number of 
matrons to Volumnia, the mother of Coriolanus, and intreats her 
and Ids wife Vergilia, to apply to him in behalf of their falling 
country, ib. The affecting meeting between Coriolanus and his 
family, 218. Volumnia's speech to him, ib. 219. He stands a 
long time silent, 219. Volumnia throws herself at his feet, and 
prevails, 'J20. The effect his departure from before Rome had 
upon the Romans, 221. A temple is built to the Fortune of 
Women, ib. Tullu i m( ''.rates the death of Coriolanus, 223. He 
is summoned to give an account of his conduct before the people 
of Antium ; but his enemies, not permitting him to be heard, 
fall upon him, and despatch bim on the spot, ib. 22+. The 

INDEX. 351 

Volscians give him an honourable burial, ib. The Roman wo- 
men are permitted to go into mourning for him, 225. 

\Corioli besieged and taken by tbe Romans, ii. 182, 184. 

Cornel-tree, one considered as holy, being supposed to grow from 
the staff of Romulus' javelin, i. 84. 

Cornelia, daughter of Metellus Scipio, and widow of Publius 
Crassus, married to Pompey, iv. 195, 196. Her great accom- 
plishments, 196. Her sad meeting with Pompey at Mitylene, 
221. Charges Pompey's defeat on his connexions with her ill 
fortune, ib. 222. Is an eye-witness of his tragical death, 227. 

. , daughter of Cinna, and Caesar's first wife, iv. 357. 

. — t daughter of Scipio Africanus, and mother of the Gracchi, 

v. 119. Her character, 200. Has opportunity to marry a king, 
and declines it, ib. Her care in the education of her sons Tibe- 
rius and Caius, whom their father left very young, ib. Reproaches 
them with her being called ' the mother-in-law of Scipio,' rather 
than « the mother of the Gracchi,' 207. Statue erected to her, 
and it's inscription, 228. The magnanimity of her behaviour on 
the untimely death of her sons, 24-2. The honours paid her in 
her old age, ib. 

Cornelius, one of Sylla's officers, bribed by Caesar, during the 
proscriptions, to let him escape, iv. 357, ^58. 

, Cneius, chosen by Marcellus, for his collegue, ii. 291. 

< — Cetkegus, degraded from the priest's office, for deficiency 

in point of ceremony, ii. 394-. 

Cossus, commands as a military tribune, at a time when 

there were not consuls, and has the honour of offering up the 
spoils called ' Opima,' i. 75. Appointed dictator, 407. 
-, Publius, i. 207. 

Balbus, hinders Caesar from rising up to the senate, iv. 

428. 

-, Caius, a diviner at Padua, announces there the begin 

ning and issue of the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 412. 

, Dolabella, an admirer of Cleopatra, acquaints her with 

, ~ , — — _- 1 7 — j 

Augustus' design to remove her from the monument, v. 505. 

Scipio, appointed general of horse by Camillus, when 

dictator, i. 367. 

Lentulus, his generous offer to Paulus /Emilius, ii. 88 

~~""'"""> O — ------ — — -j -;- 

Merala, made consul by Octavius in the room of Cinna, 

Hi. 173. 

Sylla. See Sylla. 

■ Nepos, iii. 390. 

Laco, appointed captain of the praetorian bands, vi. 222. 

T • 1114 .* 1 1^» - 

Cornificius, Lucius, employed by Augustus to impeach Brutus, 

vi/81. 

. ■ , one of Caesar's lieutenants, iv. 407, 416. 

Cornutns, saved in the time of the proscriptions by the fidelity of 

his slaves, iii. 177. 
Corcebus the architect, ii. 23. 
fCoronea, ii. 32. iii. 226. 
Corrceus, father of Stratonice, the wife of Antigonus, v. 364- 

S52 INDEX. 

Corrhabus, son of Demetrius by Eurydice, v. 421. 

Corvinns, Valerius, six times consul, iii. 15(>. 

Corynetes, or ' the club-bearer,' i. 9. 

fCos, isle of, iii. 329. 

Cosconius, a man of pnetorian dignity, killed by Caesar's soldiers 

in a mutiny, iv. 416. 
Costs, general of the Albanians, killed by Pompey, iv. 170. 
fCossa and Narnia, colonised by the Romans, iii. 32. 
Cossznius, collegue of Varinus, his camp {breed by Spartacus, and 

himself slain, iii. 458. 
Cossus, Licinius, sent to consult the oracle at Delphi, i. 3GS. 
Cothon, what, i. 125. 

Cotta, Marcus Aurelius, opposes Marius' law with respect to voting, 
but in vain, iii. 123. Is consul with Lucullus, 332. Sent by the 
senate to guard the Propontis and Bithynia, 334. His ambition 
to fight Mithridates, end* in being defeated both by sea and land, 
336. Defeated in a sea-fight by Sertorius, iv. 16. 

and Titurius, cut off by Ambiprix in their quarters, iv. 387. 

, Publius, what Cicero said to him, v. 324. 

, Lucius, v. 326. 

Cotylon, a name given to Varius, v. 442. 

Cotys, king of Paphlagonia, joins Agesilaus against the Persians, 

iv. 82. Marries the daughter of Spithridates, 83. 
Courage, a mild and unsuspicious quality, vi. 144. 
Cow with calf, a barbarous sacrifice necessary for the widow, who 

married before her time of mourning was expired, i. 187. 
Cowardice, how punished at Sparta, iv. 109. 
Crane, the name of a dance instituted by Theseus, i. 24. 
Cranium, a suburb of Corinth, iv. 258. 
j-Crano, city of, v. 286, 372. 
Crassus, the father of Piso, vi. 233. 

Ckassus, Marcus, his father had been honoured witli the censor- 
ship and a triumph, iii. 447. He is brought up in a small house 
with two brothers, ib. Takes care of a sister-in-law and he- 
children, ib. Temperate and chaste, yet accused of a criminal 
commerce with a vestal virgin, ib. That accusation a false one, 
448. His principal vice covetousness, ib. He improves an es- 
tate of three hundred talents to seven thousand one hundred; ib. 
Makes great advantage of Sylla's proscriptions, and of the fires 
likewise which happened in Pome, ib. Keeps a number of slaves 
who were builders, but builds only one house for himself, ib. 449. 
Breeds up slaves for every service in life, in order for sale, 4-9. 
These bring him a greater revenue than his lands ami silver 
mines, ib. His house is open to strangers, ib. 450. He lends 
money to his friends, without interest, but is strict in demanding 
it at the day, 450. His invitations were chiefly to the common 
people, ib. He cultivates the eloquence of the bar, defends 
every citizen that applies to him, and in all cases comes prepared, 
ib. Returns the salutation of every Roman by name, ib. His 
knowledge of history extensive, and he is not without a taste of 
Aristotle's philosophy ; yet keeps the philosopher, who is his 

INDEX. S3S 

guide and companion, in a condition just above starving, ib* 
Cinna and Marius put the father and brother of Crassus to death, 
451. Crassus flies into Spain, and takes refuge in a cave by the 
sea-side, in the lands of Vibius Pacianus, ib. Vibius supports him 
there for a considerable time, ib. On the death of Cinna, he raises 
forces in Spain, 453. Passes thence into Africa, to Metellus Pius, 
and afterward into Italy, where he serves under Sylla, ib. Sent by 
Sylla to levy troops amongst the Marsi, ib. What Sylla said to him, 
on his asking for a guard, ib. He executes that, and other com- 
missions, in an able manner, ib. The rise of his competition with 
Pompey, 454. Supposed to have converted much of the plunder 
of Tuder to his own use, ib. Very serviceable to Sylla in the de- 
cisive battle fought near Rome, ib. Makes the most unjust and 
rapacious use of Sylla's proscriptions, ib. Sylla gives him up, ib. 
A flatterer, and very capable of being flattered ; covetous, and 
hates covetous men, ib. 455. Envies Pompey's rapid progress 
in glory, 455. By the pains he takes in the administration and 
good oifices to his fellow-citizens, acquires an interest not inferior 
to that of Pompey, ib. Becomes security for Caesar in the sum 
of eight hundred and thirty talents, 456. Sacrifices both his 
attachments and resentments to his interest, ib. The gladiators* 
war breaks out, 457- Spartacus has the chief conduct of it, ib. 
Crassus is sent against him by the senate, 459. His lieutenant 
Mummius fights, contrary to orders, and is beaten by Spartacus, 
460. He punishes that corps with decimation, ib. Spartacus 
retires through Lucania to the sea, ib. Hires some Cilician 
pirates to transport him and his troops into Sicily ; but they take 
his money, and deceive him, ib. Entrenches himself in the 
peninsula of Rhegium, ib. Crassus builds a wall across the 
Isthmus, 461. Spartacus gets over it in a snowy tempestuous 
night, ib. Crassus repents of his having written to the senate 
for farther assistance, ib. Comes to an action with the enemy, 
in which he kills twelve thousand of them, 462. Sends two of 
his officers against Spartacus, who had retired towTard the moun- 
tains of Petelia, ib. Those officers are put to flight, ib. This 
advantage proves the ruin of Spartacus ; for his troops insist 
upon coming to a decisive battle, ib. Crassus, being informed 
that Pompey was approaching, hastens to meet the enemy, ib. 
463. A buttle ensues, in which Spartacus after great exertions 
of valour is slain, 463. Pompey meets a number of the enemy 
who had escaped, out of the field, and puts them to the sword; 
after which he takes to himself the honour of finishing the war, 
ib. Crassus has an ovation granted him, 461. Crassus solicits 
Pompey's interest in his application for the consulship, and 
obtains it, ib. They are appointed consuls together, ib. They 
disagree in every thing, ib. Nothing of note is performed, 
except Crassus' consecrating the tenths of his estate to Her- 
cules, and his entertaining the people at ten thousand tables, ib. 
They are reconciled by Aurelius, a Roman knight, who alleges a 
command for it from Jupiter, ib. Crassus makes the first 
advances, 465. In his censorship attempts to make Egypt tribal 
vox., vi. 2 A 

$5l> INDEX. 

tary to the Romans, but is prevented by his collcgue Catulus, In. 
Suspected of having some concern in the conspiracy of Catiline, 
ib. That suspicion, probably, groundless, ib. n. Crassus is at 
enmity with Cicero, but at length reconciled to him through 
the mediation of his son Publius, who was a great admirer of 
that eloquent man, 466. Caasar comes to Rome to solicit the 
consulship, and forms the famous triumvirate, ib. In order to 
the prolonging Caesar's government of Gaul, Pompey and Crassus 
were to be consuls again, ib. -167. They are interrogated in full 
senate as to their intentions, and Crassus answers with more 
moderation than Pompey, ib. 468. Uomitius is encouraged by 
Cato to oppose them in the election ; but they carry it by vio- 
lence, 468. Drive the opposite party out of the Forum, while 
Caesar is continued five years more in his government, and the 
Spains and Syria are decreed to Pompey and Crassus, ib. 469. 
Crassus indulges a sanguine and vain ambition of conquest, 469. 
The tribune Ateius threatens to oppose him in his designs against 
the Parthians, ib. He prevails with Pompey to conduct him 
out of Home, ib. Ateius meets him at the gate, by virtue of 
his office commands him to stop and utters the most horrid 
execrations against him, 470. Crassus, taking his voyage in the 
winter, loses a number of ships, ib. Pays his respects to De'io- 
tarus in Galatia, ib. Throws a bridge over the Euphrates with 
case, 471. Reduces Zenodocia and all Mesopotamia, ib. Sutlers 
himself to be saluted ' Imperator,' for the taking of a town, ib. 
Garrisons the towns, and returns into Syria, to winter, ib. His 
son arrives with a thousand horse sent by Caesar, ib. His error 
in not strengthening himself by the acquisition of Babylon a 
Seleueia, ib. Behaves in Syria more like a trader than a 
general, ib. Calculates the revenues of the cilies, and weigh- 
the treasures in the temple of Atargatis at Hierapolis, 472. 
Omen of his ruin, ib. What passed between him and the em- 
bassadors of Orodes king of Parthia, ib. 478. Alarming accounts 
are brought of the Parthian maimer of fighting, and Cassias 
and others desire Crassus to deliberate, 478. Artavasdes, king 
o'f Armenia, arrives at the Roman camp, offers him large suc- 
cours, and advises him to march into Parthia by the way of 
Crassus rejects his advice, and the Armenian 
parts, ib. Other ill omens, ib. 475. The forces, with which' 
I issed the Euphrates, 475. Cassius advises him to secure 
his troops in some fortified town, till he had an account of the 
enemy which might be depended upon; or else to march along 
the river till he reached Seleueia, ib. 476. Arianmes, an artful 
•Arabian, draws Crassus into an immense plain, 476. Surena 
marches against him, while Orodes lays waste Armenia, 477. 
Surena's opulence and great authority, ib. Arianmes leads 
Crassus into a vast, sea of sand, 478. Artavasdes, by his envoys, 
desires Crassus to go and drive Orodes out of Armenia iirst ; 
or at least to keep to the hills, where he might not be exposed 
to the Parthian cavalry, ib. The infatuated Roman gives an 
answer full of resentment, ib. Cassius reproaches Arianmes, in 

INDEX. 355 

private, with his perfidy, ib. The Arabian answers him in an 
artful manner, and soon after withdraws, with the consent of 
Crassus, 479. Crassus has intelligence of the approach of the 
Parthians, and is greatly disconcerted, ib. 480. The disposition 
of his forces, 480. Comes to the river Balissus, and is desired 
by many of his officers to pass the night there; but he marches 
forward with precipitation, ib. Surena conceals his main force, 
behind the advanced guard, ib. The horrid noise, by which the 
Parthians excite their men to action, and inspire the enemy with 
terror, 481. They attack the Romans on all sides, and with 
their arrows drive the cavalry and light armed back upon the 
legions, ib. The arrows do great execution on the legions, 
which were drawn up in a close square, 482. Crassus orders 
his son, with a select party, to get up with the enemy, ib. They 
fly, and young Crassus pursues with great ardour, 483. They 
face about, and make dreadful havock of the Romans, ib. 484. 
Young Crassus fails in his attempt upon the heavy-armed Par- 
thian horse, with his light-armed Gauls, ib. Has an opportunity 
to retire, but scorns to leave so many brave men dying for his 
sake, 485. Desires his armour-bearer to despatch him, ib. The 
principal officers follow his example, ib. The Parthians bring 
nis head, and show it in an insulting manner to his father, 486. 
The Romans are struck with astonishment at the sight, ib. Cras- 
sus behaves with uncommon magnanimity, ib. His speech on 
that occasion, 487. The Parthians make a great slaughter amongst 
the remaining troops, ib. Crassus gives himself up to despair, 

488. The Romans decamp in tin? night, under the conduct of 
Octavius and Cassius, ib. Ignatius calls at Carrse, and then 
makes the best of his way to Zeugma, with three hundred horse, 

489. Coponius Governor of Carrae, goes to meet Crassus, and 
conducts his army into the town, ib. The Parthians in the 
morning despatch the wounded Romans and the stragglers, ib. 
Surena sends persons to Came with insidious proposals of a peace, 

490. but soon advances to besiege the place, ib. The Romans 
resolve upon flight, and Crassus takes Andromachus, another 
traitor, for his guide, ib. 491. Crassus discovers the treachery 
of Andromachus, returns to Carrre, and thence escapes into 
Syria, 491. At day-light Crassus regains the road, and gets 
possession of a hill connected with the mountains of Sinnaca, ib. 
492. Surena has recourse to art, and the Romans force Crassus 
to treat, 492, 493. He protests against that violence, 493. 
Surena tells him, ' he must sign the treaty on the banks of the 
Euphrates,' 494. Crassus is mounted upon a Parthian horse, 
and the grooms drive him on, ib. The Romans make resistance, 
and Crassus is slain in the scuffle, by a Parthian named Pornaxge- 
thres, ib. The number of Romans killed in this war is twentv 
thousand, and ten thousand are made prisoners, 495. Surena 
sends the head and hand of Crassus to Orodes in Armenia, it. 
He pretends, notwithstanding, to bring Crassus alive into Seleucia, 
ib. His farcical processions, ib. His observations, before the 
Senate of Seleucia, on the obscene books found in the baggage 

O A O 

356 INDEX. 

of the Romans, ib. Orodes and Artavasdes are reconciled, 496. 
The Bacchne of Euripides acted before them, ib. A comical 
incident on the presenting of Crassus' head, 497. 

Crassus, Pubhus, son of Marcus Crassus, goes into mourning on 
Cicero's banishment, iii. 4-66. Reconciles Cicero and his father, 
ib. His spirit and valour in the Parthian war, 484-. His beha- 
viour when surrounded, 185. Commands his armour-bearer to 
kill him, ib. The Parthians cut off his head, put it on the point 
of a spear, and insultingly ask Crassus, ' who could be the father 
of so gallant a young man,' ib. 486. 

. , Publius Licinius, father to the wife of Caius Gracchus, 

v. 221, 222. 

— , the application of Fabius Maximus to him, ii. 102, 103 

Crdstiniis, or Crassinus, Caius saluted by Caesar in the morning of 
the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 216, 217. Begins the action, 217. 
Falls, after prodigious efforts of valour, ib. 

Craterus, his collection of Athenian decrees, iii. 312. 

, and Antipater, two of Alexander's successors, after 

having reduced Greece, pass into Asia, iv. 43. He is greatly 
beloved by the Macedonians, ib. He and Neoptolcmus march 
against Eumenes, 45. Both killed in the ensuing action, 47- 
Disputes which had happened long before between Craterus 
and Hephsestion, 313. Account of his going from Asia into 
Greece, v. 30. 

Crates, the philosopher, persuades Demetrius to raise the siege of 
Athens, v. 413. 

Cratesidea, mother of Cleomenes, v. 160. Goes into Egypt, in 
hopes of serving her country, 178. Her sorrow for her son'; 
death, 196. Her intrepid behaviour and death, ib. 

Cratesipolis, wife of Alexander the son of Polyperchon, her amour 
with Demetrius, v. 371. 

Craiinus, verses of his, ii. 6. iii. 307. 

Cratippus, the philosopher, does not exert himself in defence of pro- 
vidence against Pompey after his fall, iv. 223. A Peripatetic, v. 
321. The favours Cicero did him, ib. 

Crausis, the father of Philopcemen, iii. 2. 

■\Cremona, vi. 251. 

Creon, Demosthenes bids « Archias act the part of Creon in the 
tragedy,' v. 288. 

\ ('retails, send a number of their first-born to Delphi, i. 16. Their 
simple and temperate way of living, 128. From them Lycurgus 
drew his model, ib.. Their deceit, iii. 213. Their archers, iv: 
160. 

( Crete, the tribute the ancient Athenians paid to it, i. 16. 

Creticus, the surname of Mark Antony's father, v. 425. 

■\Crimesus, river, ii. 261. 

Crispinus, collegue of Marcellus, ii. 435. Wounded by a party of 
Kumidians, ib. Dies of his wounds, ib. 

— , husband of Poppaea, vi. 229. 

— — — — , an officer in Otho's army, vi. 245, 216. 

Critias, son of Callseschrus, instrumental in recalling Alcihiades. 

INDEX. 357 

from exile, ii. 162. Afterward one of the Thirty Tyrants, and 
advises Lysander to procure the death of Alcibiacles, lb. n. 171. 
Slain by Thrasybulus, 162, n. 

Critola'idas, one of the Spartan arbitrators, between the Athenians 
and Megarensians, i. 230. 

Crohjlas the orator, says, ' war cannot be kept to any set diet,' 
v. 271. 

Croesus, his conversation with Solon, i. 261, 262. 

■}■ Crommyon, a wild sow killed there by Theseus, i. 10. 

Cronius, the same with the month ' Hecatombeon,' i. 13. 

f Crotonians, part of the spoils taken at Arbela, sent them by 
Alexander, iv. 295. 

Crow stunned and struck down by the exclamations of the people, 
iii. 44. iv. 156. 

+ Crustumerium, i. 76. 

Cryptia, or ambuscade of the Spartans, a cruel manner of destroy- 
ing the Helots when thought too numerous, i. 154, 155. 

Ctesius, physician to Artaxerxes Mnemon, a fabulous writer, vi. 
115, 128,129. 

Ctesibius, v. 256. 

Ctesippus, the son of Chabrias, v. 9, 269. 

•f- Ctesium, iii. 304. 

Culleo advises Pompey to divorce Julia, and exchange Caesar's 
friendship for that of the senate, iv. 187. 

•f Cuma in Asia Minor, i. 348. 

•j- Cumceans, iv. 4-29, and n. 

\ Cunaxa, battle of. See Battle. 

Cup, Laconian, the fashion of it. See Cothon. 

f Cures, the capital of the Sabines, i. 82. Thence the Romans 
called Quirites, 81, 82. 

Curetes, i. 233. 

Curice, or wards, ten in each tribe at Rome, i. 67, n. 83. 

Curio, one of the officers in Sylla's army, takes the citadel of 
Athens, to which the tyrant Aristion had retired, iii. 251. 

-, the tribune, gained by Caesar who pays his immense debts, 
iv. 199, 200. Demands that either Pompey should dismiss his 
forces, or Caesar be suffered to keep his, 200. Makes equitable 
pi'oposals in Caesar's name, ib. 201. Screens and saves Caesar 
when in danger of being killed going from the senate-house after 
the debates about Catiline, 365. The advice he gives Cato, v. 
62. His exhibitions when aedile, 96. The ruin of Antony, 426. 

Curius, Manius, Cato admires his frugal manner of living, ii. 494. 
Pyrrhus defeated by him, iii. 102, 103. 

Curses. See Imprecations. 

Curtian Lake, i. 79. 

Curtius, an illustrious Sabine, i. 78, 79. 

\Cuss(eans, almost the whole nation sacrificed to the manes of 
Hephaestion, iv. 347- 

Cutlass, used by the Heroes of the early ages to carve with, i. 
13, n. 

35$ INDEX. 

■fCi/anean, or Chaledonian islands, iii. 312. 

Cylele the mother of the gods, warns Themistocles of an attempt 
against his life, i. 355. On which account he dedicates a tem- 
ple to her, ib. 

Cij'urnesia, or festival of pilots, i. 19. 

Cybistkus, adopted son of Thales, i. 226. 

Cychreus, of Salamis, worshipped by the Athenians, i. 11. Father- 
in-law of Sciron, ib. 

fCyclade.;, iii. 24-6. 

Cycnus, killed in single combat by Hercules, i. 12. 

■fCydnus, it's water extremely coid ; Alexander's sickness the 
consequence of bathing in it, iv. 267. v. 419. 

Cylarabis, a place of exercise near the gates of Argos, iii. 113. 
v. 172. 

Cylinder, within a sphere, ordered by Archimedes to be put upon 
his monument, ii. 414. 

Cylon, the history of him and his accomplices, i. 231, 232. 

Cyncegirus, ii. 534. 

Cynisca, sister to Agesilaus, he persuades her to contend for the 
prize of the chariot-race at the Olympic games, to show the 
Greeks how trifling all ambition of that kind was, iv. 94. 

Cijnosarges, the place of exercise without the city of Athens, i. 
'311. 

f Cyhoscephalts, i. 36. iii. 39. 

f Cyprus, submits to Alexander, iv. 276. The money Cato raised 
there, v. 87. 

Cypselus, vi. 155. 

Cyrbes, the tables on which Solon wrote his laws, i. 255. 

■fCyrenians, iii. 2. v. 105, 187. 

■\Cyrrhestica, v. 4-16. 

■} Cyrnus, river, iv. 168. 

Cyrus, whence the name, vi. 114. 

i , the Great, why he releases Croesus, i. 262, 263. His epi- 
taph, iv. 342, 343. 

-, son of Darius, and brother of Artaxerxes Mnemon, vi. 1 1 1. 
His attention to his concubine Aspasia, 145. Supplies Lysander 
with money, iii. 191. Conspires against the king his brother, 
vi. 116, 117. His vaunting offers to the Lacedaemonians, 119. 
Levies war against Artaxerxes, 120 Entertains Clearchus and 
other Greeks in his .-ervice, ib. Is k'lled in battle, 125. 

■fCythera, isle of, iii. 406. iv. Ill v. 187. 

Cytheris, an actress, Antony's mistress, v. 434. 

■fCyzicvm, besieged by Mithridates, iii. 338. Taken by Alcibi- 
ades, ii. 156. 

D. 

DACTYL! Tdcei, or of mount Ida, i. 196. 
Dadulus, his flight, i. 21. 

INDEX. 359 

Dcsdalus of Sicyon, a great sculptor, i. 23, n. 

Daemon, or Genius of Socrates, gives him instructions and warn- 
ings, ii. 136. iii. 419. 
Dremons, beings of a middle nature, between the divine and the 

human, i. 9:\ 
Dasius, or Dtesius, one of the Macedonian months, iv. 261. 
Damachus, what he said of a phenomenon in the air, iii. 201, 202. 
■f Damascus, surrendered to Alexander, iv. 275. 
Damastes, otherwise called Procrustes, the cruelties he exercised, 

i. 12. Killed by Theseus, ib. 
Damoclides, assists Pelopidas in restoring liberty to Thebes, ii. 349. 
Damon, remarkable for his skill in music and politics, ii. 7. Sup- 
posed to advise Pericles in the administration, ib. Banished 

on that account, ib. iii. 40.5. 

, surnamed Peripoltas, iii. 293. 

, the Paeanean, v. 285. 

Damoteles, corrupted by Antigonus, contributes to the defeat of 

Cleomenes, v. 185. 
Damyrias, river, ii. 268. 
Danaiis, iii. 114. 
Dance of the Caryatides, why so called, vi. 133, and n. Was the 

impression of Clearchus' ring, 133. Of the Delians in imitation 

of the mazes of the Labyrinth, i. 23, 24. Still exists in Greece. 

24, n. 
Dances, part of Numa's religious ceremonies, i. 178. 
Dandamis, the Indian philosopher, what he said of the Grecian 

philosophers, iv. 338. 
■\ Danube, ii. 292. Water brought thence to the repositories of 

the king of Persia, to show the extent of his dominions, iv. 298. 
Daoc/ius, v. 272. 

Daphne, daughter of Amyclas, transformed into a laurel, v. 142. 

■\Dardanians, ii 292. 

Dardanus, carries the Samothracian gods to Troy, i. 386. 

■, armour-bearer to Brutus, vi. 105, 106. 

f , in Troas, iii. 265. 

f Dardarians, iii. 348. 

Darius, Codomannus, marches from Susa against Alexander, iv. 
267. The number of his forces, and his dream on that occasion, 
ib. The office which he bore under the former king, ib. Ne- 
glects the salutary advice of Amyntas, and perceives his error 
when it is too late, 269. Is defeated by Alexander in Cilicia, 
270. The magnificence of his tent, ib. The letter he wrote to 
Alexander, 285. His affliction on the news of his wife's death, 
286. Tyreus assures him, that Alexander had behaved to her 
with great honour, 287. Darius' prayer to the gods thereupon, 
ib. 288. Defeated near Arbela, 293. His flight, 294. Taken 
by Bessus, 307. Found wounded with many darts, 308. What 
he said to Polystratus, who gave him some water in his last mo- 
ments, 309. 

Nothus, his children by Parysatis, vi. 114. Was inclined 

to destroy Statira with her brother, 115. 

360 INDEX. 

Darius, the elder son of Artaxerxes, vi. 144. Declared successor 
to the throne, and permitted to wear the point of his turban up- 
right, ib. According to the custom of the Persians, his first 
request, to be granted, and he asks Aspasia, ib. His father gives 
her to him, but afterward consecrates her to Diana Anytis, 145, 
146. He conspires against his father at the instigation of Tiri- 
bazus, 146, 147. Is taken and capitally punished, 14.8. 

■\Dasey!;ns, lake of, iii. 339. 

j Dassa retii, their country, iii. 34. 

Datis, the king of Persia's general, arrives at Marathon, and ra- 
vages the country, ii. 45!. 

Day, a white daj', why so called, ii. 41. 

Days, auspicious and inauspicious, i. 385. iii. 366. 

Dead, a law against speaking ill of them, i. 248. 

Death, iEsop thought it most unfortunate in time of prosperity, 
but Plutarch is of a different opinion, ii. 384, 385. A sudden 
death preferred to any other by Caesar, iv. 481. A cowardly 
thing to run into the arms of it, v. 188. 

Debts, public, a security to the prince, iv. 57. 

Decas, a place of execution in the prison at Sparta, v. 152. 

■\-Decelea, ii. 145, iii. 197, 222. 

Decency, ii. 521. 

Decimation, an ancient military punishment revived by Crassus, iii. 
460. Put in practice by Antony, v. 463, 464. 

Decius Brutus, leads Caesar to the senate the day he was de- 
spatches iv. 432, 433. 

Deidamia, married to Pirithoiis, i. 38. 

, sister of Pyrrhus, iii. 66. Married to Demetrius the son 

of Antigonus, 69. v. 388. Her death, iii, 73. v. 396. 

Deimachus, father of Autolycus, iii. 359. 

Deioneus, i. 10. Marries Perigune, the daughter of Sinnis, ib. 

Deiotarus, king of Galatia, his answer to Crassus, who told him 
he began to build late in the day, iii. 470, 471. Taken in Pe- 
ticius'^ship after the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 220. Cato's visit 
to him, v. 62. He goes over from Antony to Augustus, v. 486. 

Deipnophorce, i. 27. 

fDelium, ii. 121. iii. 226, 406. 

Dettius, the historian, v. 483. Quits Antony, ib. Sent by Antony 
to Cleopatra, v. 448. 

■\Delos, i. 23. ii. 20. iii. 401. 

■\ Delphi, i. 16, et passim. 

Delphic, tables, v. 201. 

Delphinium, i„ 14. 

Deluge, ceremonies performed by the Athenians after that of 

Demades, the Athenian orator, v. 2. Puins his country by es- 
pousing the Mace-Ionian interest, ib. Blames Phocion for send- 
ing his sorK.t,, Sparta, 25. His observation on the news of 
Alexander's death, 26. Proposes to treat with Antipater, 30. 
Gets his money ill, and spends it profusely, 36. His saying tp 
his son, ib. His letter to Antigonus, in which he tells him that 

INDEX. $61 

* Macedon hung only on an old rotten stalk,' 37. That letter 
intercepted causes his and his son's death, id. 290. He used to 
assist Demosthenes in his pleadings; as he spoke better extem- 
pore than that orator, 260. Goes embassador to Alexander the 
Great, 280. The divine vengeance hunts him down for the 
death of Demosthenes, 290. Cassander, the son of Antipater, 
kills him, id. To what he compared the army after Alexander's 
death, vi. 211. 

Demcenetus, ii. 274. 

Deraagoras, master of a Rhodian galley, iii. 331. 

Dcmaratus of Corinth, a saying of his, and Plutarch's reflexion 
upon it, iv. 88, 299, 300. Reconciles. Philip and Alexander, 
253. Sees Alexander seated on the throne of Persia; his beha- 
viour thereupon, 299, 300. His death and magnificent funeral, 
325. 

of Rhodes, released by Alexander at the intercession of 

Phocion, v. 23. 

— the Spartan, incenses the king of Persia, but that 

prince is reconciled to him at the request of Themistocles, i. 

ooo. 
Demareius, a Corinthian officer under Timoleon, ii. 257, 261, 262. 
Demariste, the mother of Timoleon, ii. 235. Detests him for 

killing his brother, 237. 
Demeas, son of Demades, killed in his father's presence, v. 37, 

290. 
t Demetrius, iii. 43. v. 318, 421. vi. 216. 
Demetrius, son of Philip of Macedon, sent as an hostage to Rome, 

iii. 42. His brother Perseus unjustly accuses him of treason, 

and he is put to death, ii. 291. 

, the Magnesian, v. 268. 

, Pompey's freedman, the preparations made for his 

reception at Antioch, v. 60, 61. His house and gardens, iv. 176. 

His insolence, 175. v. 61. 

, a servant of Cassius, vi. 100. 

, son of Demetrius, surnamed 'the Slender,' v. 421. 

, son of Demetrius, prince of Cyrene, v. 421. 

Pheidon accuses Callisthenes to Alexander, iv. 323. 

• , the Peripatetic, a friend of Cato's, v. 116. 

Phalereus, governor of Athens for Cassander, v. 370. 

Statues erected to his honour, i. 26, n. Generously treated by 
Demetrius Poliorcetes, v. 370, 371. The character he gave of 
Demosthenes' orations, 262. 

of Pharia?, his advice to Philip, vi. 205, 206. 

son of Antigonus Gonatas, ii. 289. 

Demetrius Poliorcetes, son of Antigonus and Stratonice, v. 364. 
Inimitably beautiful in his person, and a most agreeable compa- 
nion, id. 365. Attentive to his pleasures and yet very -diligent 
and expeditious when business called, 365. Remarkably affec- 
tionate to his father, id. Instance of the happy terms on which 
they lived, id. Antigonus intending to destroy one of his cour- 
tiers named Mithridates, on account of a dream, Demetrius ad- 

862 INDEX. 

vertices liim of that intention, 366. Antigonus, while he re- 
sides in Phrygia, is informed of Ptolemy's invasion of Syria, and 
sends his son Demetrius against him, though only twenty-two 
years of age, 367. Demetrius is defeated near Gaza; hut Pto- 
lemy sends him hack his military chest and equipage, ib. Be- 
haves wirli spirit under his loss, 368. Defeats Crlles, Ptolemy's 
general, and requites the generosity of Ptolemy, hy returning 
the spoils, ib. Demetrius is sent against the Nabathacan Arabs, 
and though he does not subdue them, brings off considerable 
booty, ib. Passes the Euphrates, while Seieucus is upon his In- 
dian expedition, takes one of the castles of Babylon, and lays 
waste the country, 369. Obliges Ptolemy to retire from the 
siege of Halicarnassus, ib. Antigonus and Demetrius form the 
design of setting Athens free from the yoke of Cassander and 
Ptolemy, ib. Demetrius sails thither with five thousand talents 
of silver, and two hundred and fifty ships, and, upon proclaim- 
ing liberty, is received with joy, 370. He gives Demetrius the 
Phalerean, who commanded there for Cassander, a safe conduct 
to Thebes, ib. 371. Surrounds the fort of Munychia with a 
ditch and rampart, and sails to Megara, where Cassander had 
another garrison, 371. His adventure with Cratesipolis near 
Patrse, ib. He dislodges the garrison of Megara, and declares 
the city free, ib. His attention to Stilpo the philosopher, ib. 372. 
Returns to the siege of Munychia, takes and demolishes it, 372. 
Enters Athens at the request of the citizens, re-establishes the 
commonwealth, promises them a large supply of wheat, and 
timber enough to build a hundred gallies, ib. Their extreme 
servility and adulation to Demetrius and Antigonus, ib. Stra- 
tegies the principal instrument of that profane adulation. 373. 
The gods announce their displeasure at this profaneness, 374. 
Dromoclides finishes all by a decree that the Athenians should 
consult the oracle of Demetrius, 375. Demetrius marries Eury- 
dice, a descendent of the ancient Miltiades, 376. An account 
of his marrying Phila, the daughter of Antipater, ib. Has more 
wives and mistresses than any Grecian prince of his time, ib. 
Defeats Menelaus, the brother of Ptolemy, at Cyprus, 377. 
Fights a great battle at sea with Ptolemy himself, and beats him, 
ib. Ptolemy flies with eight ships only, ib. On this occasion 
the celebrated Lamia falls into the hands of Demetrius, ib. The 
city of Salamis, and the land-forces of Ptolemy, are surrendered 
to him, 378. He sets the prisoners free, ib. Sends twelve 
hundred suits of armour to the Athenians, ib. Sends Aristode- 
mus to his father, with the news of his victory, ib. Aristodemus 
trifles vilely with Antigonus' impatience ; but being the first to 
salute him king, the people accept the title, ib. 379. Antigonus 
sends the diadem also to Demetrius, 379. Antigonus miscarries 
in an expedition against Ptolemy, 380. Being now little short 
of eighty, leaves the military department to his son, ib. Takes 
no oifence at his son's debaucheries, ib. Demetrius has a fertile 
invention in mechanics, and there is something peculiarly great 
both in the construction of his ships and engines, 381. Goes to 

INDEX. 363 

war with the Rhodians, on account of their alliance with Pto- 
lemy, 382. In the course of it, brings the largest of his helepoles 
up to the walls, ib. The ' helepoles* described, ib. 333. The 
Athenians negotiate a peace between him and the Rhodians, 8.85. 
Call him to the defence of Athens against Cassander, ib. He 
drives Cassander out of Attica, and defeats him at Thermopylae, 
ib. Heraclea voluntarily submits, and be receives into his army 
six thousand Macedonians, who revolt from Cassander, ib. Pro- 
claims liberty to the Greeks within the straits of Thermopylae, and 
receives the Boeotians into bis alliance, ib. Makes himself master 
of Cenchreoe, Phvle, and Panactps, ib. Puts the two latter into 
the bands of the Athenians again, ib. . The Athenians, very 
improperly, lodge him in the Parthenon, 386. His debaucheries 
there, ib. One instance of virtue is found in Athens, ib. He 
reduces that part of the country called Acte in Peloponnesus, 
and all Arcadia, except Mantinea, 387. Sets Argos, Sicyon, 
and Corinth, free, ib. Marries Deidamia, the sister of Pyrrhus, 

388. Is proclaimed general of all Greec , ib. Assumes the title 
of King of Kings, ib. Demetrius insists on being admitted im- 
mediately, at his return, both to the Less and the Greater Mys- 
teries ; and the Athenians, contrary to all the rules, comply, 

389. He commands them to raise two hundred and fifty taleots, 
and then giy.es his money to his mistresses to buy soap, 890. 
The extravagant expenses of Lamia, ib. She is called one of 
his ' helepoles,' ib. Demo, another of his mistresses, is called 
' Mania,' 391. Demetrius is called home to the assistance of his 
father, against whom the other successors of Alexander had 
united, ib. 392. The grciit preparations of their enemies, 392. 
Antigonus recommends Demetrius to the army, as his successor, 
ib. Omens of their defeat, 393. Demetrius puts Antiochus, 
the son of Seleucus, to flight ; but by going unseasonably upon 
the pursuit, loses the victory, ib. Antigonus' troops desert to 
Seleucus, and Antigonus is slain, ib. Demetrius flies to Ephe- 
sus, and, although in want of money, spares the temple of 
Diana, 394. Embarks for Greece, where his principal depen- 
dence is upon the Athenians, ib. Their embassadors meet him 
near the Cyclades, and tell him, ' they will receive no king into 
their city,' ib. This ingratitude of theirs cuts him to the heart, 
ib. Gets his gallies from their ports, and steers for the isthmus, 
where he finds the cities of Greece all inclined to revolt, 395. 
Sails to the Chersonese, whence he ravages the dominions of Lysi- 
machus, ib. Seleucus makes proposals of marriage to Stratonice 
the daughter of Demetrius, ib. Demetrius sails with his daughter, 
and by the way makes a descent on Cilicia, 396. Brings off twelve 
hundred talents from Quinda, which had been the property of his 
father, ib. Meets Seleucus at Orossus, and they entertain each 
other in a princely manner, ib. Demetrius seizes the province of 
Cilicia, ib. Is contracted to Ptolemais, the daughter of Pto- 
lemy. Seleucus demands Cilicia of him ; and on his refusing 
that, insists on having the cities of Tyre and Sidon, ib. 397. 
Demetrius puts stronger garrisons into those cities, ib. His 

364 INDEX. 

operations before Athens, which was now in the possession of 
the tyrant Lachares, ib. 398. He reduces it by famine, 398. 
Pardons the Athenians, and gives them a large supply of bread- 
corn, 399. In the joy of their hearts, they deliver up to iiim the 
Piraeus and Munychia, ib. He puts a garrison, likewise, into 
the Museum, ib. Forms a design upon Laeedcemon, and de- 
feats Archidamus; but is called from that scheme by news of 
the loss of his cities in Asia, and of all Cyprus except Salamis, 
ib. 400. The troubles in Macedon call him thither, 400. Fo 
establishes himself in that country, after having killed Alexander, 
the son of Cassander, 401. Ptolemy releases the wife and chil- 
dren of Demetrius, 402. Erasistratus, physician to Seleucus, dis- 
covers that Antiochus is desperately in love with Stratonice, and 
Seleucus give her up to him, and declares them king and queen 
of the Upper Provinces, 403, 404. Demetrius, whose dominions 
were now very extensive, takes Thebes, and reduces the rest of 
Bceotia, 404, 405. Makes a moderate use of his victory, 40,3. 
During an expedition of his into Thrace, the Boeotians revolt 
again, ib. He leaves his son Antigonus to besiege Thebes, and 
marches against Pyrrhus, who had over-run all Thessaly, ib. 
Pyrrh us retires, ib. Demetrius returns to the siege of Thebes, 
ib. He takes it, and puts only thirteen of the citizens to death, 
406. The iEtolians, being in possession of the passes to Delphi, 
he celebrates the Pythian games at Athens, ib. Marches against 
the /Etolians, ib. Leaves Pantauchus in TEtolia, and moves 
against Pyrrhus, ib. Pyrrhus falls upon Pantauchus, and de- 
feats him, 407. The Macedonians admire the valour of Pyrrhus, 
and despise Demetrius for his vanity of dress, ib. Extraordinary 
instance of that vanity, ib. They are offended also at his dis- 
solute life, and difficulty of access, ib. He throws the petitions 
of the people into the river, 408. During his sickness at Pella, 
Pyrrhus enters Macedon, and advances as far as Edessa, 409. 
He comes to terms with Pyrrhus, ib. Makes great preparations 
for recovering all his father's dominions, ib. The vast size of 
his gallies, ib. The kings attack him in several quarters, 410. 
Pyrrhus takes Bercea, and the Macedonians revolt to him, ib. 
411. Demetrius quits his royal robe, and flies, after having held 
Macedonia seven years, 411. Goes first to Cassandria, where 
his wife Phila, in her despair, takes poison, 411, 412. Repairs 
to Greece, and collects an army, 412. The Athenians revolt 
from him again, 413. He lays siege to Athens, but is persuaded 
by Crates the philosopher to raise it, ib. Sails to Asia with his 
forces, ib. Eurydice brings him Ptolema'i's, who had been con- 
tracted to him some time, ib. He takes Sardis, and other places 
in Ionia, ib. Agathocles, the son of Lysimachus, comes against 
him, and he moves into Phrygia, ib. Demetrius has the better 
in skirmishes, but Agathocles cuts off his convoys, ib. He de- 
signs to march toward Armenia, but is prevented by famine and 
pestilence amongst his troops, 414. Marches down to Tarsus, 
and applies to his son-in-law Seleucus for relief, ib. Seleucus at 
first relieves him, but soon afterward commences hostilities 

INDEX. $65 

against him, ib. 415. Demetrius ravages the country, and gains 
several advantages over Seleucus, 415. Long sickness proves 
a great hindrance to his affairs, 416. He passes mount Amanus, 
and Seleucus follows, ib. Is near taking Seleucus by surprise, 
ib. Seleucus offers him battle, and his troops revolt to that 
prince, ib. 417. He hides himself a while in a wood upon 
Mount Amanus, in hopes of making his way to Caunus, 417. 
Finds that impracticable, and surrenders to Seleucus, ib. Se- 
leucus at first is very favourably inclined to him, but fearing his 
practices upon the army, keeps him a prisoner at large in the 
Syrian Chersonese, 418. Allows him, however, a princely table, 
and other comforts in his confinement, 419. Demetrius orders 
his friends in Greece not to trust his letters, or his seal, ib. His 
son Antigonus makes Seleucus an offer of all his estates, and 
promises to deliver up himself an hostage, to procure his father's 
liberty, ib. Demetrius attends for a time to the exercises of 
hunting and running, but leaves them by degrees, and sinks into 
indolence and inactivity, ib. Drinking and play succeed, ib. 
420. After three years' confinement, he dies at the age of fifty- 
four, 420. Antigonus receives his remains at sea, and conducts 
them with great funeral pomp to Corinth, ib. Thence they are 
carried to Demetrias, and deposited in that city, 421. An ac- 
count of the issue he left, ib. His posterity fill the throne of 
Macedon down to Perseus, who was conquered by the Ro- 
mans, ib. 

Demo, one of Demetrius' mistresses, v. 386. Surnamed Mania, 
391. 

Demochares, the Leuconian, his reflexion upon a decree of Stra- 
tocles, v. 387. Banished for that reflexion, ib, 

- , of Soli, the name he gave Demetrius, v. 390. 

, the Lacedaemonian, a pretended friend to Agis, be- 
trays him, v. 151. 

Democharis, his account of the death of Demosthenes, v. 288, 289. 

Democles, his virtue and death, v. 3S6. 

Democrates, the Athenian, ii. 116. 

, the Spartan exile, v. 158. 

Democritus, one of the principles of his philosophy, ii. 2S1. 

Demtenetus, an enemy to Timoleon, ii. 274. 

Demoleon, iii. 359. 

Demon, the historian, i. 20, 28. 

Demonax, sent by Archelaus to inform the people of Cyzicum of 
the arrival of Lucullus, iii. 339. 

Demonides, of Ios, his advice to Pericles, ii. 16. 

Demophancs, one of the tutors of Philopcemen, iii. 2. Delivers 
his country from slavery, by employing persons to kill Aristo- 
demus, tyrant of Megalopolis, ib. Assists Aratus in expelling 
Kicocles, tyrant of Sicyon, ib. 

Demophaiitus, commander of the Elean horse, iii. 10, 

Hemophilus, v. 44. 

Demophoon, i. 43, 259, 

JDemopolis, i. 358. 

" 

365 INDEX, 

Demosthenes, the Athenian general, repulsed in /Etolia, iii. 406. 
Fortifies himself in Pylos, 107. Sent with a numerous fleet to 
assist Nicias in Sicily, -1-150. The magnificence of his arrival, 
431. Determined to attack the Syfacusans immediately, ib. 
Assaults Epipolae, 432. Is surrounded in the final retreat of 
the Athenians, and stabs himself, 410. Different accounts of 
his death, 443. 

— , father of the orator, was called ' the Sword-cutler,' 

v. '253. 

Demosthenes, the orator, the great resemblance between him 
and Cicero, v. 253. His father Demosthenes, kept many slaves 
at work on the business of a sword-cutler, ib. His mother was 
Cleobule, the daughter of Gylon, ib. At the age of seven he 
loses his father, who leaves him a considerable fortune, 254. 
Greatly wronged by Ii is guardians, ib. Of a sickly habit, and 
gets the contemptuous name of Batalus,' amongst the boys, ib. 
Has also the name of ' Argas,' ib. His ambition to speak in 
public from the success of CalHstratus, and the admiration in 
which that orator was holden, 255. Takes Isaeus for his pre- 
ceptor in eloquence, in preference to Isocrates, 25G. Studies, 
also, under Plato, ib. Goes to law with his guardians, and plead* 
his own cause, 257. Attempts to speak in the public debates; 
but fails through the violence of his manner, and the weakness 
and stammering of his voice, 25S. Encouraged by an old man, 
named Eunomus, ib. Instructed in pronunciation and action by 
Satyrus the player, 259. Builds himself a subterraneous study, 
and shaves one side of his head that he may not quit his study till 
his hair is grown, ib. Pytheas tells him, ' his arguments smell 
of the lamp,' 260. Demosthenes' answer, ib. He seldom speaks 
extempore, ib. Yet without premeditation answers Python the 
Byzantian, and Lamaehus the Myrrhenean, on two very signal 
occasions, 261. In what respect he took Pericles for his model, 
ib. He is called by the comic writers ' Rhopoperperethras,' 
262. Theophrastus' judgement, concerning Demosthenes and 
Demades, 263. What Demosthenes said of Phocion, ib. Cor- 
rects his stammering by speaking with pebbles in his mouth, and 
strengthens his voice by speaking as he ran up hill, ib. 264. His 
repartees, 264. Embarks in the administration in the time of 
Phocion, 265. Implacable in his resentments ; yet drops his 
prosecution against Midias, ib. Has a glorious subject for his 
political ambition, the defence of Greece against Philip, 266. 
Most of his orations written upon the principle of honour and 
virtue being preferable to all other considerations, 267. Nei- 
ther has courage to be trusted in the field, nor is sufficiently for- 
tified against the impressions of money, ib. 268. Yet excels all 
the orators of his time, except Phocion, in his life and .conver- 
sation, 268. Has the spirit to accuse Antipho before the Areo- 
pagus, after he had been acquitted by the people, ib. Prepares 
orations for two adversaries on each side of the question, ib. Ac- 
count of some other orations of his, 269.' Goes with nine other 
deputies to the court of Philip, and that prince answers the 

INDEX. 367 

speech of Demosthenes with the greatest care, 270. His reply 
to his collegues, who praised Philip, ib. He persuades the 
Athenians to drive the Macedonians out of Euhcea, and to send 
succours to the Byzantines and Perinthians, 271. Goes embas- 
sador to the states of Greece, and persuades most of them to join 
in the league against Philip, ib. Philip surprises Elatea, and 
possesses himself of Phocis, 272. Notwithstanding these advan- 
tages, Demosthenes, by his eloquence, brings the Thebans to 
declare against him, ib. 273. Philip sends embassadors to Athens 
to apply for peace, but by some fatality he is not listened to, ib. 
Oracles announce the downfall of Greece, ib. Demosthenes has 
great confidence in the Grecian arms, 27 -i ; yet, in the battle of 
Chccronea, throws away his arms, and flies, ib. Philip commits 
many excesses, in contempt of Demosthenes, ib. 1~o. Demos- 
thenes received large remittances from the king of Persia, 275. 
Many accusations are lodged against him at Athens, but the 
people continue him at the helm notwithstanding, ib. 276. He 
pronounces the funeral oration of those who fell in the late battle, 
ib. Philip dies soon afterward, and the Athenians vote a crown 
for Paasanias his assassin, ib. Demosthenes appears with a gar- 
land on his head, though it was only the seventh day after his 
daughter's death, ib. 277. The confederates unite again, and the 
Thebans attack the Macedonian garrison in their citadel, 278. 
Demosthenes represents Alexander as a mere boy, ib. Alexander 
takes the city of Thebes, ib. He commands the Athenians to 
deliver up their orators, 279. Demosthenes tells the people the 
fable of the sheep delivering up their dogs to the wolves, ib. 
Demades procures a pardon for the orators and the city, 280. 
The walls of Athens rebuilt by Demosthenes at his own expense, 
ib. n. The great cause concerning ' the Crown' is determined 
in favour of Demosthenes, 280, 281. iEschines retires to Rhodes, 
281. Harpalus carries off Alexander's treasures from Babylon, 
and brings them to Athers, ib. Demosthenes advises the people 
not to receive him ; but afterwards suffers himself to be bribed 
by Harpalus, ib. 282. Sentenced by the court of Areopagus, to 
imprisonment and a fine of fifty talents, for taking the bribe, 283. 
Fiies from Athens, ib. The generosity of some of his adver- 
saries on his quitting the city, ib. Bears his exile in a very effe- 
minate manner, ib. Resides, for the most part, in iEgina or 
Trcezene, ib. Advises the young men, who resorted to him for 
instruction, not to meddle with affairs of state, 284. Alexander 
dies, ib. The Greek cities once more combine, and Antipater 
is besieged by Leosthenes in Lamia, ib. Demosthenes joins the 
Athenian deputies in their applications to the Greeks to renew 
the war, ib. He is recalled, and a galley sent to fetch him from 
JEgina, 285. All the citizens go to meet him in the Piraeus, ib. 
His saying upon it, ib. They find means for his evading his fine,^. 
He has but short enjoyment of his return, ib. Antipater and 
Craterus approaching Athens, Demosthenes and his party fly, 
and a capital sentence is passed upon them, at the motion of 
Demades, ib. 286. Archias < the exile-hunter' is sent out after 

3GS INDEX. 

them by Antipatcr, ib. He finds Demosthenes in the temple of 
Neptune in Calauria, and endeavours to persuade him to quit it, 
287. Demosthenes takes poison, which he carried in a pen, ib. 
Dies on the most mournful day of the Thesmophoria, 2H9. The 
Athenians erect his statue in brass, ib. The inscription upon it, 
ib. The divine vengeance pursues Demades for the death of 
Demosthenes, 290. What Cicero said of his orations, 321. 

Demoslratus, the Phaeacian, a saying of his-, iv. 88. 

• ■ •, an Athenian orator, proposes that the generals should 

have absolute power in the Sicilian expedition, ii 137. in. 418. 

Dercetceus, one of Antony's guards carries the first news of his 
death to Augustus, v. 500. 

Derci/Uidas, an old bachelor, what was said to him by a young 
Spartan, i. 133. 

. , one of the Spartan generals, employed against the 

Persians, vi. 137. 

De regit us, undertakes to sieze Nicanor in the Pimeus, v. 38. 

Deucalion, the son and successor of Minos, i. 21, killed by The- 
seus, ib. 

< , and Pyrrha build a temple at Dodona, and settle among 

the Molossians, iii. 65. 

Dexithea, a daughter of Phorbas ; some suppose Romulus to have 
been her son by iEneas, i. 50. 

Dexoiis, kills Megacles, taking him for Pyrrhus by reason of his 
disguise, iii. 89. 

Diacrii, mountaineers so called in Attica, their political inclina- 
tions, i. 263, u. 

Diagoras, and his sons and grandsons, are all victorious in the 
Olympic games, ii. 385. What a Spartan said to him upon 
it, ib. 

Diampercs, the name of one of the gates of Argos, iii. 113. 

Diana, her feast at Syracuse, ii. <±\5. Sertorius pretended he 
had his white hind from her, iv. 15. Her temple at Sparta, 112. 
Her temple at Ephesus burnt the day that Alexander was 
born, 2*2. 

■ Anaitis, worshipped at Eebatana, vi. 146. 

Aristobule, a temple built to her by Themistocles, i. 34-4. 

Eucleia, ii. 479. 

. Orthia, i. 39, 140. On the altar of this temple the Spar- 
tans used to whip their children, ib. n. 

Orthobule, the prudent, i. 420. 

— Persica, heifers consecrated to her, iii. 361. 

of Priapus, supposed to have raised a storm against Mithri- 

dates' fleet for a sacrilegious offence, iii. 344. 

of Pellenc, the effects of carrying her image in procession, 

vi. 185. 

Dianassa, wife of Eunomus, and mother of Lycurgus, i. 111. 
Dica'archus the historian, i. 24. Mis history recited to the youth of 

Sparta, ib. iv. 94. 
Dice, Parysatis plays at with Ai taxerxes, and wins the eunuck 

Mesabatcs, whom she puts to a cruel death, vi. 132, 133. 

9 

INDEX. S69 

Dicomea, king of the Getae, v. 486. 

Dictator, fought always on foot, and why, ii. 69. The absolute 
power of the dictator, 7S. Two dictators at the same time, ib. 
The dictator hy whom named, 428. Whence the title, ib. 

Dictators, Caesar, iv. 423. Camillas, i. 367, 393. Cornelius 
Cossus, i. 407. Fabius Maxim us, ii. 68. Fabius Buteo, 78. 
Marcus Junius, 79. Minucius, 78. Q. Fulvius, 488. Sylla, 
iii. 278. 

Didius i Sertorius serving in the capacity of tribune under him 
in Spain, rescues the city of Castillo, and takes that of the 
Gyrisaenians, iv. 5. 

, brings to Caesar the head of Pompey's eldest son, iv. 422. 

Dimnus, plots against Alexander the Great. See Limnus. 

Dinarchus, a Corinthian officer under Timoleon, ii. 257, 260. 

, accuses Demades, v. 290. Flies from Athens, 40. If5 

tortured and put to death by order of Polyperchon, ib. 

Dindtpnene, a name of Cybele, i. 355. 

Dinius, and Aristotle the logician, despatch Abantidas the tyrant, 
vi. 155. 

Dinocrates, of Messene, an enemy to Philopoemen, draws Messene 
oft* from the Achaean league, iii. 24. Philopoemen fights and 
defeats him; but, some fresh troops coming on, he is taken 
prisoner, 25. Dinocrates compels him to drink poison, 27. 
The Achaeans take up arms to revenge the death of Philo- 
poemen, and Dinocrates, to escape their vengeance, despatches 
himself, ib. 

Dinomache, daughter of Megacles, and mother of Alcibiades, ii. 

112. 
Dinon, vi. 120. 
Diodes the Peparethian, i. 52. 

, chief magistrate of Eleusis, expelled by Theseus who takes 

the place by stratagem, i. 12. 

-, son of Themistocles, adopted by his grandfather Lysander, 

i. 357, 358. 
, one of Antigonus' soldiers, assists Aratus in taking Acro- 

corinth, vi. 170. 
Dioclides one of the accusers of Alcibiades, ii. 141. 
Diodorus the geographer, i. 46. 

, son of Sophax, subdues a great part of Africa, iv. 13. 

Diogenes, of Sinope, a saying of his, ii. 79. His conversation with 

Dionysius at Corinth, 250. Alexander's visit to him, iv. 258. 
, the Stoic, embassador from the Athenians to the Ro- 
mans, ii. 524. 
■ , son-in-law to ^rchelaiis, iii. 362. Falls honourably in the 

battle of Orchomenus, ib. 
• , governor of the Piraeus, what he wrote to the Acheans 

vi. 187. Gives up that, and other forts, for a sum of money, 

188. 
Diogiton and Malcites, Theban generals, sent into Thessaly to 

revenge the death of Pelopidas, ii. 385. 
Diomedes, i. 50. 

vol. vi. 2 B 

376 INDEX. 

Diomedes, the Athenian, employ? Aleibiades to buy a chariot fbf 
him of the people of Argos, to be used at the Olympic games; 
but Aleibiades buys it for himself, ii. 19.5. 

• , secretary to Cleopatra, v. 499. 

Dion and Brutus, both educated in the principles of Plato, vi. 2, 
8. One of Plato's maxims verified in them, 3. The simi- 
larity of their lives and death, ib. Dion the brother of Aristo- 
mache, one of the wives of Dionysius the Elder, 5. Esteemed 
by that prince, not only on account of his alliance, but his merit, 
ib. The improvement he gained under the auspices of Plato, 
who providentially came to Sicily at that time, ib. This prepares 
the way for the subversion of tyranny, in Syracuse, ib. He per- 
suades the tyrant to hear Plato, ib. Dionysius is stung with 
his discourse againt tyranny, and on the happiness which attends 
fortitude and justice ; and prevails with Pollis the Lacedaemo- 
nian to take him aboard his galley, and sell him for a slave, 6. 
Dion retains his interest with Dionysius, and is sent embassador 
to Carthage, ib. His noble answer to Dionysius, when he 
attempted to ridicule Gelo, 7. Marries his niece Arete, ib. His 
free and spirited advice to Dionysius, ib. He offers either to go 
in person to Carthage to negociate a peace, or to fit out and 
maintain fifty galleys at his own expense, ib. His adversaries 
represent that he wants to make himself master by sea, 8. They 
lead the ill-educated king through every species of debauchery, 
ib. With all Dion's virtues, his manners were forbidding, ib. 
He endeavours to engage Dionysius in a course of liberal studies, 
and for that purpose to send for Plato, 9, 10. Dion's enemies 
persuade Dionysius to recall Philistus, a friend to tyranny, that 
he might counteract the intentions of Plato, 11. Dion is accused 
to Dionysius of an intention to subvert the monarchy, 12. His 
real intentions in that respect, ib. By an intercepted letter, and 
other means, Philistus and his party prevail upon Dionysius to 
entrap Dion, and send him off, 13. Yet he allows his friends 
two vessels, to carry his effects to him in Peloponnesus, 14. Dion 
lives with great splendour in Greece, ii. Dionysius promises to 
recall Dion the ensuing summer, 15. He does not keep his word, 
but remits to him the produce of his estate, ib. Meantime Plato 
keeps Dion in the Academy, ib. Dion's connexions with Speu- 
sippus polish his manners not a little, 16. He lodges in the 
house of Ca.llipp.us, 15. Plato exhibits a chorus of boys at Athens, 
and Dion defrays the expense, and takes upon him the manage- 
ment of it, [6. The Lacedaemonians make him free of their 
city, ib. I lis observation on the difficulty of access to Ptoeo- 
i'orus the Mcgarensian, ib. Dionysius is jealous of Dion's 
popularity in (i recce, and stops his remittances, ib. 17- The 
tyrant confiscates Dion's estate, 18. Dionysius compels Arete, 
the wife of Dion, to marry Timocrates, 20. Dion resolves 
upon war, ib. Is assisted in his purpose by the philosophers, 
21. Musters no more than eight hundred men in the isle of 
Zacynthus, ib. Sacrifices to Apollo, 22. Prodigies, which 
happened to Dion and Dionysius, 23. Dion takes a large 

INDEX. 371 

quantity of arms with him, 24?. Approaches Paohynus ; but 
not choosing to land there, is blown off to Cercina, ib. In 
dar.ger of perishing on the great Syrtis, 25. Arrives at Minoa 
in Sicily, lands there, and is supplied with necessaries by Syna- 
lus, governor of the place, ib. Encouraged by the absence of 
Dionysius, who is upon an expedition to Italy, he marches for 
Syracuse, id. 26. Two hundred of the Agrigentine cavalry 
join him, 26. The inhabitants of Gela do the same, ib. Timo- 
crates, who was left regent, sends despatches to Dionysius, 
which are lost by a very extraordinary accident, ib. Dion is 
joined by the Camarinaeans and many revolters from Syracuse, 
ib. He draws the Leontines and Campanians out of Epipolse, 
by a stratagem, ib. 27- He marches to Syracuse, and the citi- 
zens open the gates to him, 27- Timocrates, finding himself 
unable to gain the citadel, flies, ib. The Syracusans consider 
the entry of Dion as a new epoch of liberty, 28. They nominate 
Dion and his brother Megacles praetors, ib. He takes the castle 
of Epipolse, and invests it with a strong wall, 29. Dionysius 
arrives from Italy, and enters the citadel, ib. He desires to 
treat, but Dion refuses to hear his embassadors unless in public, 
or without the preliminary of his resigning the crown, ib. Di- 
onysius' perfidy to the Syracusan deputies, 30. His mercenaries 
break through Dion's wall, and put the Syracusans to flight ; 
but Dion's valour regains the day, ib. He is presented by his 
army with a crown of gold, 31. Dionysius has art enough to 
convey a letter to Dion, and to get it publicly read; by which 
the confidence of the Syracusans in Dion is diminished, ib. They 
cast their eyes upon Heraclides, 32. The character of Hera- 
clides, ib. He is appointed admiral, and is a private enemy to 
Dion, ib. 33. Sosis, an agent of Dionysius, comes into the 
assembly naked and wounded, 33. Pretends to have received 
his wound from Dion's foreign soldiers, but his artifice is de- 
tected, ib. 34. The Syracusans, however, remain jealous of 
Dion's foreign soldiers, 34. They defeat Philistus, who was 
coming with a fleet to the assistance of Dionysius, and treat 
the dead body of PhilistuS with great indignity, ib. The tyrant 
leaves his eldest son Apollocrates to defend the citadel, puts his 
treasures on board ship, and sailing with a favourable wind, es- 
capes Heraclides the admiral, 36. Heraclides, to appease the 
people, proposes an equal division of lands, and to stop the pay 
of the foreign soldiers, ib. He carries these points against 
Dion, ib. The Syracusans, in spite of alarming prodigies, elect 
new officers, among whom is Heraclides, ib. 37. Dion's mer- 
cenaries place him in the middle of a battalion, and march out 
of the city, 37. The Syracusans attack their rear, ib. Dion 
orders the troops to advance with shouts and clashing of arms, 
and the Syracusans fly, ib. He retires into the territories of the 
Leontines, ib. They pursue him, and once more are put to 
flight, 38. The Leontines receive him in an honourable manner, 
and make his soldiers free of their city, ib. Their requisitions to 
the Syracusans prove fruitless, ib. Dionysius sends Nypsius the 

2 b 2 

372 IXDE.\ 

Neapolitan &ih provisions and money Tor the citadel, ib. He is 
defeated, and the Syracusans give into the most disorderly re- 
joicings, ib. Nypsius takes that opportunity to enter the city, 
and fills it with all the violence of war, ib. 39. The citizens ap- 
ply to Dion for assistance, 39. His speech on that occasion, at 
Leontium, 40. He marches to the relief of Syracuse, 41. The 
demagogues prevent his entrance, ib. Nypsius makes a fresh 
sally from the citadel, and destroys the city with fire and sword, 
ib. The gates are open for Dion, and Heraclides, his worst 
enemy, entreats him to enter, 42. He advances against the 
enemy through hlood and fire, 43. Nypsius is routed, and the 
flames are extinguighed, ib. The orators of the popular faction 
leave the city ; but Heraclides and Theodotes put themselves into 
the hands of Dion, ib. 44. His friends advise him to put them 
to death, 44. His observations on that occasion, ib. He par- 
dons Heraclides, 45. Repairs the wall which he had erected 
about the citadel, ib. Dion is declared commander-in-chief, and 
Heraclides, through his indulgence, is continued admiral, ib. 
Dion still opposes the equal distribution of lands, ib. Heraclides 
renews his practices against Dion, and privately corresponds 
with Dionysius, ib. 46. Dion fights Pharax, the enemy's gene- 
ral, and has the disadvantage, 46. On intelligence that Hera- 
clides was going once more to seize Syracuse, he hastens to the 
city, ib. Garsylus the Spartan reconciles Dion and Heraclides, 
47. Apollocrates surrenders the citadel to Dion, and sails to 
Dionysius with five gallies, ib. The joy of the Syracusans on 
that event, ib. The affecting meeting of Dion and his wife 
Arete, 48. Dion puts the citadel in the hands of the Syracu- 
sans, ib. The simplicity of his life after his great success, ib. 
His manners austere and unpopular, 49. Strongly inclines to 
the aristocratic form of government, ib. Heraclides accuses 
him of refusing to demolish the citadeL, and to break open the 
tomb of Dionysius, ib. Dion permits the enemies of Hera- 
clides to kill him, 50. Callippus, who was bound to Dion by 
the strongest ties of friendship and hospitality, conspires against 
him, ib. Conducts the plot with great art, ib. A dreadful 
spectre appears to Dion, 51 His only son throws himself from 
the top of the house, and is killed, ib. The conspiracy ripens, 
and Callippus is suspected, ib. 52. lie takes the Great Oath with- 
out hesitation, 52. The form of that oath, ib. Dion is assassi- 
nated in his own house, 53. Dion's wife is delivered of a son 
in prison, ib. At the siege of Messana, most of the murderers 
of Dion are cut off, ib. Callippus is slain with the same sword, 
with which Dion had been assassinated, 54. Aristomache and 
Arete are released out of prison, and received by Icetes, a friend 
of Dion's, who, after he had entertained them some time, pre- 
tends to send them to Peloponnesus; but orders them and the 
infant to be despatched by the way, 54. Icetes put to death 
by Timoleon, ib. 
Dionysia, the feasts of Bacchus, their name changed by the flat- 
tering Athenians to * Dcmetria,' v. 374. 

INDEX, 373 

Dionysodorus, vi. 152. 

Dionysius the Elder, tyrant of Sicily, when his mother desired to 
be married to a young Syracusan, what he said upon it, i. 247, 
248. He asks the daughter of Aristides, the Sicilian, in mar- 
riage, and is refused, ii. 238. His cruel behaviour on that re- 
fusal, ib. Sets himself up as tyrant of Sicily, vi. 4. Marries 
the daughter of Hermocrates, ib. She kills herself, ib. Mar- 
ries Doris and Aristomache, ib. Puts the mother of Doris to 
death, on suspicion of her having injured his other wife by po- 
tions, ib. The high value he set on Dion, 5. His behaviour to 
Plato, G. His restless fears and anxieties, 10, 11. His death, 
12. 

. — the Younger, Dion endeavours to inspire him with vir- 
tuous sentiments, vi. 10. His education neglected by his fa- 
ther, 9. His debauchery, 10. He invites Plato to Syracuse, 
11. His proficiency under him, 12, 13. The duplicity of his 
behaviour to Dion, 29. He finds out a plausible pretence to re- 
move Plato to the castle, 18, 19. Envies Dion, seizes his reve- 
nues, and converts Dion's estate into money for his own use, 
18. What he said to Plato on his departure, 19. Is expelled 
by Dion, 75. After ten years recovers Syracuse from Nysaecus, 
it's then master, ii. 232. Defeated by Icetes, 241. Surrenders 
to Timoleon, 246. The mean and dissolute life he led at Co- 
rinth, 247—250. 

, of Colophon, the painter, ii. 272. 

■ Chalcns, father of Hiero, built the city of Thurii, iii. 404. 

the Messenian, a madman, puts on Alexander's robe 

and diadem, iv. 348. Alexander, by direction of his diviners, 
condemns the poor wretch to death, 349. 

— of Magnesia, the rhetorician, v. 297. 

-, brother of Diodes and Erginus, assists Aratus in taking 

Acrocorinthus, vi. 171, 172. 
DiophaneSy general of the Achaeans, joins Flaminius against 

Sparta, iii. 22. 
, the rhetorician, a friend to Tiberius Gracchus, v. 207. 

Killed on account of that connexion, 220. 
DiopJmntus, Craterus' fabulous account that Aristides, upon his 

accusation, was fined fifty minae for bribery, ii. 488. 
Diopit'ies cites an oracle against Agesilaus' advancement to the 

crown of Sparta, from the objection of his lameness, iv. 72. iii. 

216. 

, his decree against Anaxagoras and Pericles, ii. 48, 49. 

Dioscorides, the historian, i. 127. 

Diphilus, priest of the Gods-Protectors at Athens, v. 413. 

Diphridasy one of the Ephori, meets Agesilaus in his return from 

Asia, and orders him to make an inroad in Boeotia, iv. 90. 
Dipylus, iii. 251. Anthemecritus buried near that gate, ii. 46. 
DiradeSy ward of, ii. 150. 
Dissensions, in a state, their good effect, iv. 74, 75. Their ill 

effect, when violent, 75. Between Ulysses and Achilles, ib. 
JJivination, i. 88. vi. 237. 

37* INDEX. 

Divorce, ii. 122, 285. 

Divorces, Romulus' law concerning them, i. 88. The first in- 
stance of one among the Romans, i. 107. 

Docimus, disputes the command with Eumenes, iv. 49. Eumenes' 
saying upon it, ib. 

■j- Dodona, the antiquity of it's temple, iii. 65. Oracles from it, 
i. 351. v. 33. 

Dog sacrificed in the feast of Lupercalia, i. 86. That hites a man, 
to be delivered up, according to Solon's laws, chained to a log 
of timber four cubits long, i. 2.54. Of Xanthippus swims over 
to the isle of Salamis, ii. 500. His grave, ib. Of Alci- 
biades, ii. 123. Statue of, at Duncombe-park in Yorkshire, ib. 
Of Alexander the Great, named ' Peritas,' Alexander builds a 
city in memorial of him. See Peritas. 

Dogs, why not suffered to enter the citadel of Athens, v. 511. 

Dolabella, accused by Caesar of misdemeanors in his government 
in Greece, iv. 360. But acquitted, ib. His profuseness, 416. 
Said to be in the conspiracy against Caesar, 430. Caesar's opi- 
nion of him, ib. When tribune of the people, attempts the 
cancelling of debts, v. 533. Cicero inclined to go with him into 
Syria, 345. Entertains a passion for Cleopatra, and informs her 
of the design of Octavianus to remove her, 505. 

— , suspected by Otho of designs against his government, 

and sent to Aquinum, vi. 248. 

f Doliola, i. 388. 

f Dotmnans, iii. 50. Settle in the isle of Scyros, and exercise pi- 
racy', 303, 304. 

Domit'mv, the profusion of ornament in his palace, i. 292. Lucius 
Antonius rebels against him, ii. 314. 

Dcmitius stands for the consulship in opposition to Crasr-sus and 
Pompey, iv. 190. Their party drive him out of the Forum by 
violence, 191. Beaten by Sertorius' lieutenant, iv. 16. Heads 
a party in Africa, 137. Is defeated by Pompey, and killed in 
battle, 138. 

_ Lucius, why called ' JEnobarbus,' ii. 314. By the force 

of ridicule, brings Pompey to fight the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 
211,212. Employed by Antony to harangue the army on his 
return from the Parthian expedition, v. 465. Advises him to 
send Cleopatra back to Egypt, 479. Goes over to Augustus, 486, 
487. Antony sends his money and goods after him, and the 
thought of his desertion breaks his heart, 486. 

besieged by Caesar in Corfinium, takes poison, iv. 398, 

399. 

and others in Pompey's army, dispute, before the battle 

of Pharsalia, who should succeed Caesar in the pontificate, iv. 
212. 

— commands the left wing of Pompey's army, at Pharsalia, 

iv. 214. 

Calvus commands the centre of Caesar's army at Phar- 

salia, iv. 214, and n. Appointed governor of Asia Minor by 
Caesar, and defeated by Pharnaces, 415. 

INDEX. S75 

Domitius Nero, or Nero Germanicus, v. 508. 

Doors of houses in Greece open outward, i. 299. 

Dorians, i 31, n. How long they had possessed the country of 

Laconia, iv. 100. The Heraclidae mix with them, iii. 219. 
Dorilaiis, general for Mithridates, suspects his collegue Archelaiis 

of treachery, iii. 260. Killed for the sake of his purple robe, 

350. 
Doris, wife of Dionysius the Elder, vi. 4. 
Dorycnion, a plant, v. 382. 
Doson, Antigonus so called. See Antigonus. 
Dowries, Solon, to promote population, ordered that they should 

not be given, i. 24-7. 
Drachma, what, iii. 208. 
Draco's laws extremely severe, and therefore repealed by Solon, i. 

24? 1. Said to be written with blood, 242. What Draco said in 

defence of them, ib. 
Dracontides, his decree against Pericles, ii. 49. 
Dragon of Minerva, v. 284. That lay by Olympias. See Olyn* 

pias. 
Dramatic exhibitions, the effects which Solon supposed they might 

have upon the principles of the people. See Theatrical Enter- 

tainrnents. 
Dreams. Sylla advises Lucullus to attend to them, iii. 238. 
Dromedary* 's house, a place so called, iv. 289. 
Dromichcetes the Thracian, takes Lysimachus prisoner, but soon 

releases him, v. 505. 
Dromoclides the Sphettian, in the rage of flattery, proposes that 

Demetrius should be consulted as an oracle, v. 376. 
Drusus. See Livius. 

Ditris, of Samos, the historian, his character, ii. 42, 161. 
\Dymcece, v. 169. 
f Dyna, vi. 163. 
f Dyrrachium, v. 102, 332. vi. 79. 
Dysaoridas, ii. 356. 

E. 

EAGLE, Pyrrhus so called by the Epirots, iii. 76. 

Eagles have but two young ones at a time, iii. 167. Yet Marius 

is said to have seen an aerie of seven, which presaged his seven 

consulships, ib. 
Earth. Pythagoras and Plato did not think it the centre of the 

world, i. 186. 
Earthquake in Laconia, i. 156. iii. 316. At Athens, 414. On 

Cicero's passing from Brundusium, v. 332. During the battle 

near the Thrasymenian lake, not perceived by the combatants, 

ii. 67. At Pisaurum, v. 483. 
f Ecbatana, iv. 87, 346. Gulf of fire in, iv. 295. 
Ecdelus, a friend of Aratus, vi. 155. 

376 INDEX. 

Ecdemus and Demophanes, the tutors of Philopocmen, destroy Aris'- 
todemus, tyrant of Megalopolis, and assist Aratus in expelling 
Nicocles from Sicyon, iii. 2. 

Echecratides the sophist, released by Alexander at the request of 
Phocion, v. 23. 

Echcdemas, the Academy at Athens, said to be named after him, 
i. 4-1. 

Echccrates, priest of Apollo Tegyraeus, ii. 360. 

Eclipse of the sun, one happened the day that Romulus laid the 
foundation of Rome, i. 65, 66. Another at the time of his death, 
96, n. Another, while Pericles was embarking to go against the 
Peloponnesians, ii. 54-. The Thebans greatly discouraged by an 
eclipse of the sun, 380. 

Eclipses of the sun understood in the time of Nicias, but not those 
of the moon, iii. 434. 

Eclip*p of the moon, it's different effects on the army of Paulus 
iEmilius and that of Perseus, ii. 303, 301?. That which happened 
before Dion's expedition, vi. 23. Supposed a forerunner of 
calamities, iii. 434, 435. Explained as a fortunate omen to those 
who are flying, 436. What was done by way of relief to the 
eclipsed luminaries in times of the greatest ignorance and super- 
stition, ii. 304. 

f Ecnomus, vi. 26. 

Ecprcpes, one of the Ephori, reduced the instruments of Phrynis 
two strings, v. 143. 

f Edessa, iii. 77. 81. v. 409. 

Edonian women, their ceremonies in the feasts of Bacchus, iv. 241. 

Education, its force, ii. 95, 176. v. 200. vi. 3. 

•f Edylium, Mount, iii. 254. 

Egeria, a nymph, with whom Numa pretended to hold communi- 
cation in his retirements, i. 170. 

Eight, some observations on that number, i. 46. 

■f Eion, city of, iii. 302. Colonised by the Athenians, ib. 

Eiresione, what, and why carried in a festival procession, i. 25. 

f Elcea, one of the cities offered to Phocion by Alexander, v. 23. 

Elaphebolion, the month so called, i. 65. 

■fElata, iii. 253. v. 40. 

Elatus, the first of the Ephori at Sparta, i. 121. 

f Elea, a maritime town in Italy, vi. 77. 

-j- Eleai/s, or people of Elis, iii. 10, 414. v. 169. 

Elephants, description of the one rode by Porus, iv. 331, 332. The 
disorder they caused in Annibal's army, ii. 430, 431. 

Elephenor, son of Chalcedon, took care of Theseus' children, i. 44. 
Carried them with him to the siege of Troy, 45. 

Eleus, one of the sons of Ciraon, iii. 315. 

f , city of, iii. 197. 

f Eleusis, taken by Theseus, i. 12, 38. The Greater Mysteries at, 
39, n. The temple, ii. 23. iv. 102. 

( i. 12. 

t Eleuthera, a city of Attica, i, 37, 38. 

INDEX. 

• •i t 

f Elimia, ii. 292. 

Elius, one of the vile ministers of Nero, put to death by Galba, 
vi. 227. 

Eloquence, the power of it, iii. 83. Does not thrive under an arbi- 
trary government, i. 271, n. 

Elpinice, sister of Cimon, applies to Pericles in behalf of her brother, 
ii. 18. Suspected of an intrigue with her brother, and with, 
Polygnotus the painter, iii. 298. Married to Callias, 299. 

f Elymaans, iv. 171. 

Ely dan fields, where placed, iv. 12. 

Embalming, iv. 123. 

Embassadors, Koman, violate the laws of nations at Clusium, i. 3S1. 
Condemned by the Fecialcs, 382. Screened by the people, 
ib. 

Empedocles, his doctrine of the elements, v. 367. 

Empylus the orator, a friend of Brutus, vi. 58. 

Enarsjihorus, son of Hippocoon, i. 39. 

Ende'is, daughter of Sciron and mother of Peleus and Telamon, 
i. 11. 

Endemics the Cyprian, vi. 21. 

Endymion, the favourite of Diana, i. 170, n, 

f Eng uiiim, a town in Sicily, ii. 419. 

f Enna, ii. 419. 

Envy, i. 344. ii. 370. 

Epaminondas, his poverty and content, ii. 343. More attentive to 
the improvements of the mind than those of the body, 344. Res- 
cues his friend Pelopidas in the battle of the Arcadians near 
Mantinea, 345. Sent into Thessaly to recover Pelopidas from 
the tyrant of Pheras, 377. Succeeds in that service, ib. 378. 
Reckons it the greatest happiness of his life that his father and 
mother lived to see him victorious at Leuctra, ii. 179. Sent 
embassador to Sparta, iv. 105. His behaviour on that occasion, 
ib. His debate with Agesilaus in a full council of the Greeks, 
in consequence of which Agesilaus declares war against the The- 
bans, ib. 106. He gains the battle of Leuctra, ii. 36S. iv. 105. 
Invades Laconia and ravages the country, 110. Marches to 
Sparta, 111. Is killed in the battle of the Lacedaemonians near 
Mantinea, 116. Buried by the Thebans at the public charge, 
on account of his poverty, ii. 105. 

Epaphroditus, a name assumed by Sylla, iii. 280. 

■ , an enfranchised slave of Caesar Octavianus, sent to 

be a spy upon Cleopatra, v. 501. 

Eperatus, general of the Achaeans, vi. 203. 

f Epkesus, called the arsenal of war, ii. 422. Lysander's services 
to that city, iii. 190. The temple burnt on the day Alexander 
was born, iv. 242. 

EphetcB, judges in criminal causes at Athens, i. 245. 

Ephialtes, breaks the power of the court of Areopagus at Athenss 
ii. 12. He is assassinated, 18. 

■ and Cissus, imprisoned by Alexander, iv. 306. 

Ephori, when established, i. 121. Intended to restrain the power 

378 INDEX. 

of the Spartan senate, 120, 121. The first act, after tlieir inau- 
guration, was to declare war against the poor Helots, 1.56. What 
they did with respect to the importation of gold and silver, iii. 
208. Fine Agesilaus as a monopoliser, on account of his popu- 
larity, iv. 74-. Recall him from his wars in Asia, 87. Give 
Isadas a garland for his bravery, but fine him a thousand 
drachma; for going oat to battle unarmed, 116. Engross all the 
power, and leave the Spartan kings only the name, i. 121, n. 
Singular customs observed by them, v. 144. Deposed by 
the joint consent of both the kings of Sparta, 145. Surprised 
by Cleomenes and kiiled, 162. 

Ephorus, the historian, censured by Plutarch, vi. 35. 

Epicharmus, sophism of his invention, i. 26, n. 180. 

Epicrates, the Acarnanian, conveys Themistocles' wife and chil- 
dren out of Athens, and is put to death for it by Cinion, i. S47. 

, the Athenian, proposes that, instead of choosing nine 

archons every year, twelve poor citizens should be sent embas- 
sadors to Persia in order to their returning rich, ii. 380. 

Epicurean philosophy, some account of it, iii. 93, 94. 

Epicurus, gives his disciples a daily supply of beans during the 
famine, v. 398. 

, , punished by Phocus for being instrumental in the death 

of his father Phoeion, v. 44. 

Epicydes, the orator, a man unfit for conducting an army. The- 
mistocles bribes him to drop his pretensions to it, i. 319. 

Epicydidas, iv. 90. 

f Epidaurus, ii. 54. iii. 247. iv. 153. vi. 198. 

f Epidauria, a district of Peloponnesus, i. 9. vi. 176. 

Epigethes, of Pellene, his daughter remarkably beautiful and ma- 
jestic, vi. 185. 

Epigonus, tyrant of Colophon, seized by Lucullus, iii. 330. 

Epi/ycus, ii. 55. 

Epimenides, the Phaestian, one of the Seven Wise Men, i. 233 
Skilled in expiations, ib. Supposed to be of more than mortal 
extraction, ib. A prophecy of his, 234. Refuses the presents 
offered him by the city of Athens for expiating the city, ib. 

Ep/polce, a fortress in Syracuse, iii. 432. Taken by Timoleon, ii. 
257. Taken by Dion, vi. 29. 

f Epirus, i. 40. The origin of that kingdom, iii. 65. 

Epitadeus, one of the Ephori, what he did with respect to the 
Agrarian laws, v. 137. 

Epitaph, of Sylla, iii. 284. 

Epitaphs. Only men who died in war, and women who had been 
employed in sacred offices, allowed to have them at Sparta, i. 
153. .. 

Epitimius, ii. 55. 

Epitragia, a name of Venus, i. 20. 

Epixi/ss, the governor of Upper Phrygia, forms a design to kill 
Themistocles, i. 354. 

•j- Epizepkyrians, ii. 434. 

Epoptic mysteries, ii. 114, n. 

INDEX. 379 

Epoptics, and acroamatics, a part of philosophy not communicated 

to common scholars, iv. 249. 
Erasistratus, the Athenian, father to Phaeax, ii. 126. 

. , physician to Seleucus, discovers the distemper of 

prince Antiochus to be love, v. 403. 
Eratosthenes the historian, v 288. i. 110, 351. 

, the character he gave Demosthenes' orations, v. 262, 

Erectheus, Theseus descended from him, i. 3, 30, n. 

Erecthidcc, i. 14', 40. 

Eretrian, i. 329. 

Ergades, who so called, i. 253. 

Erginus assists Aratus in taking Acrocorinthus, vi. 170. Attempts 

to seize the Piraeus, 186. 
Ergoteles lies in wait for Themistocles, for the sake of the reward 

promised for taking him, i. 348. 
Erianthus, the Theban, advises the Spartans to rase the city of 

Athens, iii. 206. 
Ericius, iii. 255. 
f Ero'ine, i. 12, n. 

Eros, servant to Antony, kills himself instead of his master, v. 499. 
Ersilia, the only married woman taken from the Sabines by the 
Romans, i. 70, 71. Said to have been afterward the wife of Ro- 
mulus, 71. 
f En/x, town of, iii. 98. 
Eryxias, the last decennial Archon at Athens, i. 45, n. And the 

last descendent of Codrus, ib. 
Eteocles, the Spartan, i. 37, u. A saying of his concerning Ly- 

sander, iii. 212. 
Etesian winds, v. 351. vi. 22. 
Etymodes, a friend of Agesilaus, iv. 103. 
Evagoras, king of Cyprus, iii. 199. 

Evalcus, a Spartan officer, killed in battle by Pyrrhus, iii. 112. 
Evan, a triumphal expression, which the Greeks supposed equiva- 
lent to the Roman ovation, ii. 423, 424. 
Evander, i. 68, 85. 

, the Cretan, remains with Perseus, after his defeat, ii. 

311. 
Evangelus, master of Pericles' household, ii. 29. 

. , his treatise on tactics, iii. 6. 

t Eubcea, i. 7, 44. ii. 35. v. 271. 
Eubulus, the orator, v. 10. 

Euchidas, the Platsean, the expedition with which he fetched fire 
from Delphi, ii. 479. Drops down dead as soon as he has de- 
livered it, and has the honour of being buried in the temple of 
Diana, ib. 
Eucleia, a name of Diana, ii. 479. 

Euclidas, made by his brother Cleomenes partner of the throne, 
v. 166. Commands one wing of the Spartan army against An- 
tigonus, iii. 8. Defeated and killed in the battle of Sellasia, 
v. 185. 

J3S0 INDEX. 

Euclidas, the Lacedaemonian, Artaxerxes' answer to his insolence, 
vi. 118. 

Euclides, the Athenian, oppores Aratus, vi. 195. 

, one of the Corinthian officers sent by Timoleon, to take 

possession of die castle of Syracuse, ii. 246. 

Euctits, one of Perseus' treasurers, stabbed by him for remonstrating 
against his conduct, ii. 311. 

Eudcaus, one of Perseus' treasurers, stabbed with Euctus, ii. 311. 

Eudamidas, king of Sparta, father of Agis, v. 135. 

Ettdamus, master of the elephants, informs Eumenes of a conspiracy 
against his life, because he was in his debt, iv. 61. 

Eudemus, the Pergamenian, brings Attalus' will to Rome, v. 213. 

Eudoxus, the first who applied geometry to mechanical purposes, 
ii. 408. 

Euergetes. See Ptolemy Euergetes. 

Evius, one of the names of Bacchus, ii. 424. 

the musician, iv. 39. 

Eumenes, king of Pergamus, honours paid him at Rome by all but 
Cato the Censor, ii. 503. 

Eumenes, a native of Cardia in the Thracian Chersonese, said 
by some to be the son of a poor waggoner ; but more probably 
the son of a person with whom Philip, king of Macedon, had 
connexions of hospitality, iv. 38. Philip is pleased with his per- 
formances in the public exercises, and takes him into his train, 
ib. Secretary to Alexander the Great, ib. Upon the death of 
Hephosstion, and the promotion of Perdiccas, succeeds Perdic- 
cas in his command of cavalry, ib. Alexander honours him with 
his alliance, by giving him Barsine, 39. Hephecstion takes his 
quarters from him, and gives them to a musician, ib. Eumenes 
reports it to Alexander, but only does himself harm by com- 
plaining of a favourite, ib. Alexander wanting to fit out a fleet, 
asks Eumenes for three hundred talents : Eumenes excuses him- 
self, and Alexander burns his tent ; upon which great treasures 
are found melted down, ib. 40. He continues Eumenes as his 
secretary notwithstanding, 40. Another dispute between Eu- 
menes and Hephaestion, ib. Hephacstion dies, and Eumenes 
exerts all his art to celebrate his memory, ib. Upon the death 
of Alexander, a dispute arises between 'the late king's friends 
and the phalanx, ib. Eumenes pretends to stand neuter, but 
privately takes part with the phalanx, ib. 41 . On the division of 
Alexander's dominions, Cappadocia and Paphlagonia are as- 
signed to Eumenes, 41. Leonatus and Antigonus are appointed 
to put him in possession, ib. Antigonus despises the commis- 
sion, ib. Eumenes gets Leonatus' secret from him as to his 
designs on Macedon, and flies with it to Perdiccas, ib. 42. 
Perdiccas establishes him in Cappadocia, ib. Perdiccas is de- 
sirous that Eumenes should secure the adjoining province of 
Armenia against the practices of Neoptolemus, ib. 43. Eumenes 
raises, and trains, a body of cavalry to be a counterpoise against 
the Macedonian infantrv, i'3. Craterus and Antipater pass ifltft 

INDEX. 381 

Asia, to humble Perdiccas, ib. Their first design is upon Eu- 
menes and Cappadocia, ib. Meantime Neoptolemus tails upon 
him with the Macedonian phalanx, bat is defeated, ib. 44. Cra- 
terus and Neoptolemus advance against Eumenes, 45. Eumenes 
fights them, and yet finds means to conceal from his troops that 
they had to act against Craterus, ib. His dream previous to the 
battle, ib. He kills both Craterus and Neoptolemus, the latter 
with his own hand, 47, 48. Weeps over Craterus, 48. The 
Macedonians, upon the death of Craterus, who was their parti- 
cular favourite, resolve upon the death of Eumenes, and desire 
Antigonus and Antipater to take the direction of the war, ib. 
Eumenes takes some of the king's horses from Mount Ida, and 
gives a receipt for them, ib. Intends to make Lydia the seat of 
war, but at the request of Cleopatra, winters in the Upper 
Phrygia, ib. 49. Alcetas and others contend with him for the 
command, 49. His saying upon it, ib. Not having money to 
pay his troops, he appoints the officers castles and lands, out of 
which they were to pay their men, ib. By this he gains the 
hearts of the Macedonians, so that they discourage all treason- 
able attempts against him, and appoint him a strong guard, ib. 
He distributes among them the badges of honour, which they 
used to receive from their kings, 50. Loses a battle to Antigo- 
nus, by the treachery of one of his officers ; but hangs the 
traitor, and by an artful movement returns to the field of battle, 
ib. Passes by an opportunity to take Antigonus' baggage, ib. 51. 
Retires to the castle of Nora, with only five hundred horse and 
two hundred foot, 52. His answer to Antigonus, who proposes 
a conference, ib. The castle affords only corn, water, and salt ; 
yet Eumenes furnishes out an agreeable entertainment to his 
friends, 53. His person and manners described, ib. His in- 
vention for exercising the horses as well as men, ib. 54. Anti- 
gonus proposes terms of peace to Eumenes on condition of his 
taking an oath he proposed, 54. Eumenes makes an alteration 
in the oath, but obtains his liberty, by the siege of Nora being 
raised, ib. Olympias invites him into Macedon, in order to 
his taking the tuition of Alexander's son, 55. Philip Arrhidaeus, 
and Polyperchon, impower him to take what sums he pleased out 
of the royal treasures at Quinda, to enable him to carry on 
the war against Antigonus, ib. They, likewise, order Anti- 
genes and Teutamus to support him with the Argyraspides, ib. 
These officers being unwilling to submit to Eumenes, he pre- 
tends that Alexander had appeared to him in a dream, and 
ordered them to erect a royal pavilion, and place in it a throne 
of gold which was to be honoured with their obedience, ib. 56. 
He is joined by Peucestas and other governors of provinces, 56. 
The inconveniences he experiences from those governors, ib. 
He borrows money of the heads of the army, to prevent their 
conspiring against his life, 57. On the approach of an ene- 
my, all the grandees and officers give him the first place, ib. He 
defeats Antigonus, on his attempt to pass the Pasitigris, ib. 
Peucestas feasts the army, and hopes to be indulged with the 

m INDEX. 

command ; but on the appearance of Antlgonus and his troops 
they call for Eumenes, though he was sick and carried in a 
litter, 58. Antigonus no sooner spies the litter moving from 
rank to rank, than he sounds a retreat, ib. 59. The Ma- 
cedonians again grow mutinous, and spread themselves all 
over the province of Gabene, i(>. 60. Antigonus marches 
against them ; but the cold is so intense, that he is forced 
to light many fires, which discover his motions, 60. Eume- 
nes undertakes to retard his march, till the troops could be 
assembled, and effects it by a stratagem, ib. 61. The chiefs of 
the Argyraspides agree with other officers to make use of Eu- 
menes in the ensuing battle, and afterward to assassinate him, 
61. This plot is discovered to him by persons to whom he 
owed money, ib. He makes his will, and destroys his other 
papers, 62. The veterans beat Antigonus' infantry ; but his 
cavalry in the mean time take their baggage, ib. Antigonus 
offers to restore the Argyraspides their baggage, on condition 
that they would put Eumenes in his hands, 63. His speech to 
the Macedonians before he is delivered up, ib. 64, His con- 
versation with his keeper during his imprisonment, 65. His 
death, ib. 

Eu?nenides. See Furies. 

Eumolpidce, had the direction of the mysteries of Ceres, ii. 144, 
and n. Ordered to absolve Alcibiades, 163. 

Eiuieosy one of Theseus' companions in his expedition against the 
Amazons, i. 33. 

Eunomus, the father of Lycurgus, i. 111. Killed by a kitchen- 
knife, 112. 

■* , the Thriasian, advises Demosthenes not to be discour- 
aged by his ill success in his first attempts to speak in public, 
v. 258. 

Eunus, a fugitive slave, stirs up the servile war in Sicily, iii. 283. 
Dies of the Lousy Disease, ib. 

Enphorion, said by seme writers to be the father of Solon, i. 218. 

Eupkranor, prepares the scaling-ladders for Aratus, vi. 157. 

EuphrantzdeSf the diviner, advises the sacrificing of the three 
children of Xerxes' sister Sandacc, to Bacchus Omestes, i 

f Euphrates river, iii. 361. 

Euphronins, tutor to Antony's children by Cleopatra, sent em- 
bassador to Augustus, v. 495. 

Eupolemus, son of the tyrant Icetcs, taken and put to death, ii 
269. 

Evpol/a, second wife of Archidamus, and mother of A^esilau^ 
iv. 70. 

Eupolis, iii. 315, 403, n. 

Euripides, i. 5, 26, n. 37. His ode in praise of Alcibiades, ii. 124, 
125. His epitaph on the Athenians, iii. 426. One of his verses 
saves Athens from being destroyed by Lysander and the con- 
federate Greeks, 206. His verses save the lives of many Athe- 
nians in Sicily, 4-11. Mariners of Caunus admitted into port in 

0 

INDEX. 8S3 

Sicily, because they could repeat some of his verses, ib. His 
tomb struck by lightning, and by that supposed to be rendered 
sacred, i. 162. 
\Eurotas river, i. 129. iv. 93, 115. 

Eurybiades, admiral of the confederate fleet against the Persians* 
charged with want of courage, i. 328. Otters to strike The- 
mistocles, 329. 
Eurycles, the Syracusan orator, proposes to send the Athenians 
to the quarries, and to put their two generals to death, iii. 442, 
443. 

■ , the Lacedaemonian, commands a ship for Augustus against 

Antony, v. 490. What he said to Antony, ib. 
Euryclidas, sent by Cleomenes to the Ep'iori, v. 162. 
Eurydice, descended from Miltiades, v. 376. Married to Deme- 
trius, ib. Has a son by him named Corrhaebeus, 421. 

, sister of Phila, and wife of Ptolemy, v. 413. 

Eiirylochus the iEgean, Alexander assists him in his passion for 

Telesippa, iv. 306. 
Eurymeclcn the Athenian general, sent to Sicily with reinforce- 
ments for Nicias, iii. 429. Killed in battle, 436. 

f river, iii. 310. 

Euryptolemus, son of Pericles' sister, ii. 12. 

, son of Megacies, Cimon marries his daughter Iso- 

dice, iii. 299. 
Eurysac.es, son of Ajax, ii. 112. i. 230. 

Eurycion, son of Sous king of Sparta, i. 111. From him the Eury- 
tionidse, ib. iii. 219. Slackens the reins of government, and finds 
the ill consequences of it, i. 112. 
Eurytus, i. 10. 
Euterpe, according to some writers, the name of Themistocles* 

mother, i- 311. 
Euthippus, the Anaphlyslian, exerts himself greatly to recover the 
reputation of Cimon, and is killed in battle, together with Ci- 
mon's other friends, iii. 318, 319. 
Euthydcmus, an officer who served under Nicias, joined in com- 
mission with him, iii. 430. Ambitious to fight, ib. Defeated in 
an action at sea, ib. 
Eidhymus, the Leucadian, an ambush laid for him at Ilieras in 
Sicily, by which his men are cut off, ii. 267. 

, general of horse for Icetes, brought in chains to Timo- 

leon and put to death, ii. 269. 
Euthynus, the Thespian, iv. 115. 
Eutychidas, i. 111. 
Eutychus, v. 488. 
Euxinc sea, i. 32. 

Example, the force of it, i. 203. ii. 4. 
Execestides, father of Solon, i. 218. 

Execrable, Athenian magistrates so called, who violated the pri- 
vilege of sanctuary, i.232. 
Execrations. See Imprecations. 
Exile. Lycurgus a voluntary one from Sparta. See I ycurgus,. 

384 INDEX. 

Exiles from Thebes assist in restoring that city to liberty, ii. 3 1 8, 

et seq. 
— — --ofAchaia, disputes about them in the senate of Rome, ii. 

504. 
Exodium, among the Greeks, means the conclusion of a tragedy ; 

among the Romans, a farce, iii. 497, n. 

FABER, Rev. G. S. on the mysteries of the Cabin, iii. 343, n. 
Fabia, a vestal virgin, sister to Terentia, Cicero's wife, v. 67. 
Fabii, whence the name, ii. 62. Their descent from Hercules, 

ib. Three hundred of them cut off by the Tuscans, i. 383. 
Fabius Ambustus, Quintus, takes up arms for the Clusians, i. 189. 

Sent to Delphi, 366. Sent embassador to the Gauls before 

Clusium, and violates the law of nations, 381. 
— — , chief Pontiff when Brennus, king of the Gauls, took Rome, 

i. 388. 

--, Lucullus' lieutenant, defeated by Mithri dates, iii. 377. 
— , propraetor of Spain, his government renders the Romans 

obnoxious to the provinces, v. 229. 

Buteo, chosen dictator at Rome, for the purpose of creat- 
ing new senators only, while Marcus Junius was dictator with 
the army, ii. 79. 

Fabulus, said to be the person who despatched Galba, vi. 

239. 

Gurgcs, defeated by the Samnites, ii. 101, n. 

Fabius Maximus, the origin of his family from Hercules, ii. 62. 
He was the fourth in descent from Fabius Rullus, who first ac- 
quired the surname of Maximus, 63. Has the surnames of 
* Verrucosus' and « Ovicula,' ib. Appears slow of apprehension, 
and stupid when a boy ; but his powers unfold themselves by 
degrees, ib. 61. He prepares his body by exercise for the ser- 
vice of the state, and his mind by improving his powers of per- 
suasion, 64. An oration, which he pronounced at the funeral of 
his son, extant in Plutarch's time, ib. Five times consul, 65. 
Honoured with a triumph for his victory over the Ligurians, ib. 
After Annibal had gained the battle of Trebia, Fabius advised 
the Romans to stand upon the defensive in their walled towns, 
66, 67. Is chosen dictator, 69. Appoints Minucius his general 
of the horse, ib. Is preceded by twenty-four lictors, ib. I3egins 
his office with acts of religion, 70. Amongst other things, vows 
a ver sacrum, ib. Takes slow and cautious measures against 
Annibal, 71. None but Annibal sensible of his prudence in that 
respect, 72. His general of the cavalry gives him much trouble, 
and brings the soldiers to consider him in a contemptible light, 
ib. He keeps to his first scheme notwithstanding, 73. Anni- 
bal, by a mistake of his guides, being led into the defiles of Casa- 
linum, instead of the plains of Casinum, Fabius surrounds him, 
ib. 74. Discovers Annibal's stratagem to disengage himself, 75. 
12 

INDEX. 3S3 

Has the disadvantage in some subsequent skirmishes, ib. The tri- 
bune Metilius incenses the people against him, and the senate is 
displeased with the terms he had settled for the ransom of pri- 
soners, 76. He sells his lands to pay the ransom of the Ro- 
mans whom he had received from Annibal, 77- Fabius being 
called to Rome on account of some religious solemnities, Miriu- 
cius fights contrary to orders, and defeats part of the enemy's 
forces, ib. Though this success makes a great noise in Rome, 
Fabius declares he will hasten back to chastise his general of 
horse, 78. Metilius stirs up the people, and they appoint Mini]-' 
cius collegue to Fabius in the dictatorship, ib. Fabius does 
not consent to his collegue's requisition to have the command of 
all the forces every other day, but, instead of that, divided theVa 
equally with him, 80. Annibal's stratagem to draw Minucius to 
an engagement succeeds, and that general is entirely defeated, 
ib. 81. Fabius marches to his relief, and Annibal retires into his 
camp, 82. The gratitude of Minucius, 83. His address to his 
troops, and to Fabius, ib. Fabius lays down the dictatorship, 
and the consuls that succeed for some time, follow his plan of 
action, 81-. Fabius exhorts Paulus /Emilius, the collegue of 
Varro, to guard against his temerity, 85. The greatness of 
Fabius' behaviour on the terrors occasioned in Rome by the 
successes of Annibal, 91. His relation, Fabius Pictor, is sent 
to consult the Oracle of Delphi, 92. Fabius appointed general 
with Claudius Marcel! us, 93. Their opposite character, and 
operations,//). Each of them was five times consul, ib. Anni- 
bal forges a letter, as from the inhabitants of Metapontum, to 
Fabius, who is nearly caught in the snare, 94. In what manner 
Fabius brought back one of the allies to his duty, ib. 95, and cured 
a Lucanian of stealing out of camp, 95, 9G. He recovers Taren- 
tum by means of a love-affair, 96, 97. Has art enough to amuse 
Annibal in the mean time, 97. Behaves to the Bruttians with 
a cruelty not to be expected in his character, 98. Bids hi* 
men ' leave to the Tarentines their angry gods,' ib. Is honoured 
with a second triumph, 99, and his son with the consulship, 
K)0. A Roman scene between the father and the son, ib. Ha 
loses his son, and bears that loss with great moderation, 1 01 - 
Publishes the funeral oration, which he had delivered himself, 
ib. Opposes the plans of Scipio, 102, 103. Does not live to 
see the reduction oi' the Carthaginians, 105. The citizens of 
Rome express their regard to him by defraying the expences of 
his funeral, ib. 
Fabius MiiximuS) son of Paulus /Emilius, adopted into the family 
of the Fabii, ii. 300. 

-_ Pictor, i. 52. Sent to consult the oracle at Delphi, ii. 92. 

Ridlus, or Rutilianus Qiriiiius, acquired the name of Max- 

imus, iv. 140. ii. 63. He was great-grandfather of Fabius Maximus 
the dictator, 63, 101. 

_ Valens% commander of a legion, the first officer who takes 

the oath of allegiance to Gallia, vi. 2 20 Salutes Vitvl'iaa em-' 
vet. vi« ■ 2 C 

2bQ INDEX. 

peror, 233. Employed us one of his generals, 248. His ex- 
treme avarice, 250. 

Fable of Picus and Faunus, i. 101. Of Minerva and Neptune 
contending for the patronage of Athens, 340. Of the members 
and the hclly, ii. 181. Of the feast-day and the day after the 
feast, i. 339. Of the serpent, whose tail rehellcd against the 
head, v. 133. Of the cuckoo and little birds, vi. 184. Of the 
wallet, iii. 4-96. Of the huntsman and horse, vi. 192. Of the 
sheep delivering up their dogs to the wolves, v. 279. 

Pabricius, Caius, said the Romans were not overcome by the 
Fpirots, but Laevinius by Pyrrhus, iii. 90. Sent to treat with 
Pyrrhus about the prisoners, 93. Refuses to accept Pyrrhus* 
presents, and says, ' The Romans had rather command those 
who are masters of gold, than have it themselves,' ib. Cineas 
gives him an account of the Epicurean philosophy, and he wishes 
that the enemies of Home may embrace it, ib. 94. Informs 
Pyrrhus of his physicians offer to poison him, 95. 

Factions and parties how serviceable to a commonwealth. See 
Distensions. 

Faith, a temple erected to her by Numa, i. 195. The oath by 
her, the most solemn among the Romans, ib. 196. Much 
knowledge of things divine lost for want of faith, ii. 222. 

■\ Falcrii, besieged by the Romans, i. 373. The schoolmaster's 
treachery, and how he was punished by Camillus, 374, 375. 

t Falisci, i* 364, 373. v. 227. 

Fame. See Glory. 

Famine at Athens, under the tyrant Aristion, iii. 249. In the 
army of Mithridates, iii. 337, 310. Another famine in Athens, 
v. 398. Famine in the army of Antony, 469. An herb eaten 
which brings on madness and death, ib. Famine in the camp of 
Artaxerxes, v. 142. 

Fannia, screens Marius in her house, iii. 169, 170. Her history, ib. 

FaiiniuSf one of the friends of Tiberius Gracchus, v. 203. 

— , Caius, attains the consulate through the interest of Caius 

Gracchus, v. 231. Opposes Caius Gracchus, ib. 

Fathers, the law which empowered them to sell their children, 
corrected in some respect by Numa, i. 198. 

Father of his country, Cicero the first that was honoured with that 
title, v. 320. 

Faunas, i 87. 

-_ , the demi-god, fable of his being taken, together with 

PicuB, by Numa, and of Numa's learning charms and other 
secrets of them, i. 191. Supposed to have married the Bona 
Pea, iv. 366, 367. 

FavQJiius,. Marcus, his witticisms on Pompey, iv. 211. Flies with 
Pompcv, and treats him with great respect, 220, 221. Is a 
friend and zealous imitator of Cato, v. 95. Is chosen redile, ib. 
Brutus sounds him as to the conspiracy against Ccesar. vi. 67, 
1 lis adventure with Brutus and Cassius, 89. 

FauJa, daughter of Metella, iii: 280 

INDEX. 53? 

Faustulus, the foster-father of Romulus rmd Remus, i. 53. 

Faust us, son of Sylla, iii. 280. Gets Mithridates' crown into his 

hands, iv. 178. Cassius strikes him when a hoy, and why, vi. 

65. Puts his estate up to sale, 326. What Cicero said of the 

hills he put up, ib. 
Fear. Theseus sacrifices to it as a god, i. 34-. Alexander dors 

the same, iv. 289. The temple of Fear, and it's worship, 162, 

163. A sanguinary passion in tyrants, vi. 144. 
Feast, in honour of the two Ariadnes, i. 23. 

■ of boughs at Athens called Oschophoria. See Oschophoria. 

— of slaves among the Romans, called Saturnalia. See Satur- 
nalia. 

of the Latins, u 366. 

> of Proserpine celebrated near Cyzicum. See Proserpine, 

— — of the Nonae Caprotina?, celebrated by the women in the 

Goats'-March, i. 100, 101. 

of Ceres, ii. 91. See also Thesmophoria. 

of Adonis, accounted ominous to the Athenians, on account 

>/. 

of it's happening at their embarkation for Sicily, ii. 13*5 

of Palilia, i. 65, n. Of the Lupercalia, i. 86. Of the Pa- 

nathenaea. See Pqnatkenaa. Of the Metoecia. See Metcecia* 

Of Boedromia. See Boedromia. 
Februaia, the feast of Lupercalia anciently so called, i. 86. 
Feciales, an order oi" priests instituted by Numa, i. 188, 382, Their 

office to act as heralds, to declare war and peace, ib. 
f Ferentum, iii. 89. 

Ferritins, Jupiter, whence the term, ii. 398. 
r Fidence, i. 76. In what manner taken by Romulus, 90. 
Figs forbidden to be exported out of Attica, i. 2o4>. Of Africa, 

ii. 531. Of Tusculum, iv. 211. 
Fimbria, besieges Mithridates in Pitana, iii. 330. Invites LuculluS 

to his assistance, ib. Assassinates Flaccus, 265. His men 

desert him, and he kills himself, 266. 
F/mbrians, the untraceable bands which mutinied against Fimbria, 

iii. 334, 
Fire. The sacred fire, attended by the Vestals at Rome, i. 87- 

The holy fire at Athens and Delphi, guarded by widows, 183. 

To be lighted by the sun-beams at Rome, in case of it's happen* 

ing to be extinguished, ib. Called ' Vesta.' and « Unity' by the 

Pythagoreans, 186. Worshipped as the first principle of all 

things, 387. An emblem of purity, 182. 
Fire -hearth, sacred to the domestic gods, iv. 323. 
f Firmians, a company of brave men who attended Cato the Censwr 

in his operations against Antiochus, ii. 511. 
Flaccus, Valerius. See Valerius. 

the consul marches against Sylla, iii. 260. Assassinated bf 

Fimbria, 265,33 

O.4. 

Hordeonius, sent by Galba to succeed Virginius, vi. 

The army refuse to take the oath of allegiance to GaJba, tvhich. 
Flaccus proposes, 232. 
Flamen, whence so called, i 176, 177. 

2 c 2 

58* INDEX. 

Flamrn Qjurinalis instituted by Numa, i. 176. 

Flaminius, Cains Quinfius, during his consulate defeats the Gauls, 
ii. 66, 392. Named general of horse to Minucius the dictator, 
and disqualified because a rat was heard to cry while he was 
naming him, 39k Rashly fights Annibal, and is killed, 67. 

Flaminius, Titus Quintius, or Quinctius, jealous of the glory of 
Philopcemen, III- '20. Quick both to resent an injury, and to do 
a service, 31, A legionary tribune under Marcellus in the war 
with Annibal, 32. Appointed governor of Tarentnm, and chief 
director of the colonies sent to Narnia and Cossa, id. Offers 
himself a candidate for the consulship without ascending by the 
previous steps, and is elected though not yet thirty years old, ib. 
Macedon and the war with Philip falls to his lot, 33. Finds that 
his predecessors had entered Macedonia too late in the season, 
and remedies that defect, ib. On his arrival in Epirus, finds 
Publius Villius encamped over against Philip, who had long been 
defending the fords of the Apsus, 34. As a passage there 
seemed impracticable, he is advised to go through Dassaretis 
along the Lycus, ib. But he does not choose to remove too far 
from the sea, lest he should be in want of provisions, ib. Re- 
solves to force his way up the mountains, 35. Some shepherds 
discovering to him a winding way neglected by the enemy, lie 
sends a tribune with four thousand men up that way, ib. At- 
tacks the Macedonians, when he believed the tribune'had gained 
the top, ib. Traverses Epirus with good order and discipline, 
36. As soon as he enters Thessaly, it declares for him, ib. He 
and Philip come to an interview, in which he insists that Philip 
should withdraw his garrisons from the Grecian cities, 37. The 
magistrates of Thebes come to meet him, and he enters the 
city with them, ib. 38. He sends agents to Rome to procure the 
continuation of his commission, 38. Meets Philip near Scotusa, . 
and defeats him entirely in a pitched battle at Cynoscephalre, 
39, 40. Hurt at the /Etolians claiming the honour of the vic- 
tory, and at the verses of Alcacus, suitable to their pretensions, 
41. Philip goes in person, and makes his submission to Flami- 
nius and the Romans, 42. The conditions on which peace is 
granted him by Flaminius^ ib. The prudence of Flaminius, in 
making that peace before Antiochus declared himself, ib. The 
ten commissioners sent by the senate to assist Flaminius, advise. 
him to keep garrisons in three of the principal cities of Greece; 
but he prevails with them to set Greece entirely free, 43. He 
proclaims liberty to the Greeks at the Isthmian games, and the 
shouts of joy and applause bring down the crows from the air, 44. 
Despatches Lentulus to the Bargyllians in Asia, Stcrtinius into 
Thrace, P. Villius to Antiochus, and goes himself to Chalcis and 
Magnesia, for the purpose of extending liberty, 45, 46. -Appoint- 
ed director of the Nemean games, 46. Recommends social 
virtues to the Greeks, ib. Dedicates shields to Castor and Pol- 
lux, and a crown .of gold to;. Apollo, at Delphi, ib. 47. Com- 
mences hostilities against 'Nabis, the tyrant of Laced;emon, but 
soon compromises the matter with him, 47 Honours decreed 

INDEX. 389 

to him by the Aehaeans, 48. Account of his triumph, 49. 
Antiochus invading Greece, the Romans appoint Flaminius 
the consul's lieutenant, ib. 50. Flaminius secures the Greeks io 
the Roman interest, and Antiochus is defeated at Thermopylae, 
50. Prevails vvith Manius the consul to spare the iEtolians and 
Chalcideans, 51. The Chalcideans pay divine honours to him, 
ib. Part of a hymn in Ins praise, 52. Some strong features of 
his soul describe.', ib. Sayings of his, ib. 53. Is created censor, 
53. His acts while he bore that oifice, 54. His resentment 
against Cato for expelling his brother Lucius from the senate, 55. 
He goes embassador to the court of Prusias, and demands that 
Annibal should be put to death, 57. He dies in his bed, QQf 
Flaminius and Philopcemen compared, ib. — 63. 

Flaminius, Lucius, brother of Titus, expelled the senate, iii. 55. 
Admiral under his brother, iii. 34. 

Flavins, a tribune, wounds one of Annibal's elephants with the 
point of an ensign staff* ii. 430, 431. 

and Marullus, tribunes of the people, deposed by Ccesar, 

iv. 429. 

— Gallus, rashlv undertakes an exploit against the Parthians, 

v. 466. 

or Fulvius Flaccus, informs Tiberius Gracchus of the 

senate's design against him, v. 218, and n. 

■■ Sabinus, brother of Vespasian, left governor of Rome by 

Otho, vi. 219. 

Flora, the celebrated courtesan, her amour with Pompe)r, iv. 127. 
So great a beauty that Csecilius Metellus, when he adorned the 
temple of Castor and Pollux vvith paintings, put her picture 
among the re^t, 128. 

Flute, an instrument sacred to peace, ji. 424. 

Fonteius Capita sent by Mark Antony to conduct Cleopatra into 
Syria, v. 459. 

— , killed by Vnlens, vi. 224, 225. 

Fortunate islands. See Atlantic. 

Fortune, how distinguished from chance, ii. 273, 274, n. Pier 
images said to have spoken to the Roman matrons, ii. 22L 
Loves to make affairs turn upon a minute circumstance, v. 184, 
Her inconsistency, ii. 318, 329, 330. Her greatest favours un- 
able to fill the capacities of the human mind, iv. 193. Unable 
to conquer virtue, v. 3. 

Fountains, whence their origin, ii. 398, 399. 

- — — ■ of fire near Apollonia, iii. 263. 

Fox, stolen by a Spartan boy, and he suffers it to eat out his bowels 
rather than be discovered, i. 140. 

fFrege/he, v. 226. 

t Freeellanians. ii. 435. 

Friends/tip, instances of it, ii. 345. vi. 338. 

Fugitives, those who fly in battle, their punishment, iii. 348. 

Fiikiuia, mother of Marius, iii. 122. 

.^Mlvia, widow of Clodius, marries Antony, v. 435. Maintains his 

590 INDEX. 

quarrels in Rome against Augustus, 451. But causes the war, 
453, 454. Her death, 454- . 

Fulvia informs Cicero of Catiline's design to kill him, v. 810, 811. 

Fulvius, Cncius, the proconsul, slain by Aimibal, ii. 427. 

„ f Quietus, appointed dictator, ii. 428. 

, , a friend of Caius Gracchus, v. 238. Sends his son to the 

consul Opimius, 289. He and his eldest son killed, 240. His 
body thrown into the river, and his widow forbidden to put her- 
self into mourning, 241. His younger son also put to death, ib: 

Funeral orations, their origin, i. 283, 284. Allowed to women for 
contributing their golden ornaments to make up an ottering to 
Apollo, i. 372. Not made for young women till Caesar's time, iv, 
361,362. 

Furcifer, the original of that name of reproach, ii. 205. 

Furies, the temple of, i. 35. A grove sacred to them, v. 211. 

Fitrii, Camillus first raises that family to distinction, i. 862. 

Farias, Lucius, collogue to Camillus, when military tribunes were 
appointed instead of consuls, i. 409. Sent by Camillus against 
the Tuscans, 41 J. 

— , collegue to Flaminius, ii. 392. 

-r, lieutenant to Publius Varjnus, defeated by Spartacus, iii 

45S. 
Fundus, an able orator, v. 482. 

G. 

GABEXK. Eumenes' troops spread themselves over that country 
for winter quarters, iv. GO. 

f Gabii, Romulus and Remus sent thither for education, i. 56. 

Gabinius, Aulus, a tribune, marches to the relief of Chaeronea, 
iii. 254. Proposes a law for investing Pompey with the com- 
mand at sea, and at land for four hundred furlongs from the sea, 
iv. 155. Is elected consul, v. 8.".. Has the province of Syria, 
329. His rudeness to Cicero, 381. 

- — , Antony's lieutenant, vi. 79. 

■\Gades, iv. II. 

iiluSy a Spartan, reconciles Dion and Heraclides, vi. 47. 

Gaittdcfius', a name of Neptune. See Scpnine. 

•fGcdale, Mount, y. 40. 

f Galaiia, iii. 160. v. 62, 

Galba, Sulpitius, the richest private man who ever rose to the 
imperial dignity, vi. 218. Of the noble family of the Servii, yet 
thinks it a greater honour to be related to Q, Catulus Capito- 
Juius, one of the most virtuous men of his time, id. Related 
also to Livia, the wife of Augustus, lb. Rises by her interest, 
to the dignity of consul, ib. Behaves with honour in Germany, 
and during his proconsulate in Africa, ib. His simple parsimo- 
nious way of living, out of character for an emperor, ib. Sent 
governor into Spain by Nero, ib. Unable t3 relieve the pro- 

INDEX. LSI 

vinces under the oppressions of the procurators, but gives them 
the consolation of his pity, ib. 214'. Does not endeavour to sup- 
press the songs made upon Nero, 214. Or inform him of Yin- 
dex's motions towards a revolt in Gaul, ib. Is oTered by Vindex. 
the imperial dignity, ib. His deliberation, and the speech of 
Titus Vinius to him on that occasion, ib. He enfranchises all 
that present themselves, 215. Is declared emperor, but chooses 
to act with the title of lieutenant to the senate and people of 
.Rome, ib. The senate declare him an enemy to his country, 
and confiscate his estate, ib. Upon the revolt from Nero, all 
acknowledge Galba, except Clodius Mater in Africa, and Vir- 
ginius Rufus in Germany, ib. 21G. Galba is much afraid of Vir- 
ginius; particularly after he had defeated Vindex, 216. Wishes 
for his former life of ease and leisure, ib. Receives intelligence 
from Rome of Nero's death, and that the praetorian guards and 
the senate and people of Rome had declared him emperor, 217. 
Conduct of Nymphidins Sabinus toward him, ib. 218. Gelli- 
anus sent into Spain to act as a spy upon him, 219. Is appre- 
hensive of the power and designs of Yirginius Rufus, ib. But 
Virginius persuades his army to acknowledge Galba, 220. Gal- 
ba's behaviour to Virginius, ib. His reception of the embassa- 
dors sent to invite him to Rome, ib. Is betrayed into the prac- 
tice of ostentation by Vinius, 221. Is made a jest of by Mithri- 
dates and others, 223. Orders Cingonius Varro and Mithridates, 
two of Nymphidius' accomplices, to be put to death without any 
form of trial, 224. Sends an order for the execution of Petro- 
nius Turpilianus, a man of consular dignity, ib. Causes Macer 
to be taken off in Africa, and Fonteius in Germany, ib. Falls 
upon a body of marines at no great distance from Rome, who 
came to solicit the continuance of their establishment, and kills 
great numbers, 225. Miserably parsimonious himself, but suffers 
his minister to plunder the treasury in the most insatiable man- 
ner, 226. Punishes some of Nero's evil ministers, but. spares 
Tigellinus, the greatest delinquent who had bribed Vinius to 
spare him, 227. All Galba's proceedings are now misrepre- 
sented, 228. His great error in not giving a gratuity to the 
army, ib. Yet he expresses himself nobly upon it, ib. The 
troops in Germany are almost ready to mutiny against him, ib. 229. 
He supposes, that not only his great age (for he was seventy- 
three when he came to the empire) but his want of children ex- 
poses him to contempt ; and therefore determines to adopt some 
young nobleman, and declare him his successor, 229. Vinius 
proposes Otho, and the soldiers wish that he may be the man, 
231j 232. Galba gives no answer to Vinius' application, 232. 
Has the public good really at heart }n his intended appointment, 
231. The army in Germany mutinies against him, and appoints 
Vitellius emperor, 232, 233. Galba proceeds to the adoption, 
and declares Piso, Caesar, 233, 234. lie gives no donation even 
onthis occasion, and the countenances of the soldiers are black 
anil lowering, 234. Galba sacrifices, and the diviner announces 
to him immediate danger from treason, 236. Otho, being sa» 

^32 INDEX 

luted emperor by a very small party of soldiers-, and carried to 
the praetorian camp, a uiob of people crowd to Galba's palace o?i 
the news,. ih. 237. Sonic of his friends stand up in his defence, 
237. Galba goes nut into the Forum, to speak to the people, 
238: A body of horse and foot appears, and declares Galba a 
private man, ib. He is attacked in his sedan chair, ib. Sem- 
pronius Densus, a centurion, is the only man faithful to him 
on this occasion, ib. He is tumbled out of his chair, at what 
was called the Curtian lake, 239. Says to the conspirators, 
* Strike, if it be for the good of Rome,' ib. Is despatched with 
many strokes, and his head carried to Otho, ib. His corpse 
carried away, with Otho's permission, and buried by his freed- 
man, 241 . Character of Galba, ib. 242. 

Galba, Servius, accuses Paulus iEmilius, ii. 322. 

— , a man of praetorian dignity, killed by Caesar s soldiers at 

Rome, iv. 416. 

Galley. A small one of gold and ivory presented by Cyrus to 
Lysander, iii. 209. 

f Gallia Narbonensis, iv. 16. 

Gallits, Sylla's lieutenant, iii. 256. 

■ , one of Otho's generals, vi. 253, 257. 

■ , Flavius, one of Antony's officers, dies of his wounds, v. 

466, 467. 

sent by Augustus to Cleopatra, v. 501. 

(James instituted by Theseus in Delos, i. 24. Isthmian, by Theseus, 
in honour of Neptune, i. 29, n. 31. ii. 262. The most honour. 
able place at the Isthmian reserved for the Athenians, i. 32. 
iv. 96. Olympic, in honour of Jupiter, i. 31, 109, and n. 148. 
Pythian, iy. 93. v. 406. tfemean, ii. 262. iii. 14. vi. 180. A ge- 
neral armistice in Greece during the celebration of the great 
games, i. 109, n. Circensian names, i. 367. In honour of liberty 
at Platave, ii 478, 480. 

| Uaridaritee and Prcesii, their kings make preparations against 
Alexander, iv. 333. 

Ganges. The breadth and depth of that river, iv. 303. Alexan- 
der's troops refuse to pa :,s it, ib. 

Gardens of Tisaphernes, ii. 149. OfLucuIlus, iii. 381. Of Ar- 
taxerxes, v. 143. 

f Gargettns, i. 44-. 

Gates, of Rome not accounted sacred as the wall was, i. 65. 

['Gaugamch or * Camel's house,' a place near Arbela, where the 
great battle between Alexander and Darius was fought, iv. 289. 

1 Gauls, their origin, i. 378. Their first inducement to enter 
Italy, 379,380. They besiege Clusium, 380. An infringement 
of the law of nations, by a Roman embassador, draws them to- 
ward Rome, 381. Defeat the Romans in the battle of Allia, 
383. Enter Rome and kill the senators in tiie Forum, 390, 
Fay siege to the Capitol, ib. Propositions for peace, 397. The 
fraud and insolence of the Gauls, ib. Defeated by Camillas, on 
the road to Gabii, as one division of them had been before, near 
Ardea, 39S. Their manner of fighting, 414,416. Observe an 

.INDEX. 39 

exact neutrality -during the Punic, war, ii.391. Defend Milan with 
great resolution, 897. Defeated by Marcellus, ib. Beaten by 
Flaminius, 392. Caesar's wars with them, iv. 378, et seq< Their 
avarice and rapacity, .hi. 104. Break open the tombs of the 
kings at Mgae, ib. The Gaulish cavalry the chief dependence 
of young Crassus, iii. 484. Their valour, ib. Two buried alive 
by the Romans, ii. 392. 

■\ Gaza besieged, iv. 278. 

f Gcdrosia, country of, iv. 340. 

Geese consecrated to Juno, and kept in the Capitol. By their 
cackling disepver the approach of the Gauls, i. 395. 

Gegania, one of the two festivals consecrated by Numa, i. 184. 

■ , her daughter-in-law, Thalaea, the first female known in 

Rome that quarrelled, i. 214. 

Gcla, ii. 271. vi. 26. 

t Gelcv, iv. 170. 

Gelanor, king of Argos, deposed by a faction, iii. 114. 

Gellianus sent into Spain by Nymphidius, to be a spy upon Galba, 
. vi. 219. 

Gellius, Lucius, what Cicero said of him, v. 324. 

-* the consul defeats a straggling party of Germans that be- 
longed to Spartacus, but Spartacus soon recovers that loss, iii. 
4-59, 460. 

, Lucius, v. 324. 

. , one of the censors, to whom Pompey, as a Roman knight, 

gives an account of his having served the campaigns required by 
law, iv. 150, 151. 

Gdoiiy sovereign of Syracuse, makes the Romans a present of corn, 
ii. 193. His statue preserved by the Syracusans, when they de- 
stroy those of the tyrants, 260. His just and mild government, 
vi. 7. 

■ , a friend to Neoptolemus, forms a design to poison Pyrrhus, 

iii. 71. 

one of the governors of Bceotia, iv. 101. 

Genwiius, an enemy to Marius, iii. 166. Seizes Marius, and car- 
ries him to Minturnae, 169. 

— , a friend of Pompey's ; Pompey gives his mistress, 

Flora, up to him, iv. 127. He kills Brutus Creticus by Pompey's 
order, 143. 

sent to acquaint Antony with the state of his affairs in 

.Rome, v. 482. Suspected by Cleopatra as a friend to Octavia, 
ib. 

Genealogy. Some great families in Rome tracing up their pedi- 
gree to Numa, a suspicious business, i. 164. 

Genethlion, near Traezene, the place of Theseus' birth, i. 5, n. 

Genii, i. 99. vi. 3. 

Gr-iitius, king of Illyria, joins Perseus against the Romans, but 
is deceived by him, and withdraws,- ii. 297. Defeated by Lu- 
cius Anicius, ib. 

Geuucius, v. 227. 

39* INDEX. 

Geographers and Historians, similar terms among the ancient.", 

i. 2, n. 
Geometry, ii. 4 OS. 

Gcradas, the Spartan, a saying of his, i. 135. 
f Gerrastus, iv. 76. 
Gcrandas, killed with forty more Spartans by Charon the Tbeban, 

Meneclidas compares that action with those of Pelopidas and 

Epaminondas, ii. 371. 
f Gerania, v. 175. vi. 184. 
f Gergtfhus, v. 23. 

Germard, Indian philosophers. See Gymnos&phists. 
Germanicus, the son of Drusus, v. 508. 
f Germans, iv. 37!), 380. 
\Gesatce, ii. 391,897. 
fGetce, v. 486. 
Gigisy one of Parysatis' women, privy to the poisoning of Statira, 

vi. 135. Her punishment, 136. 
Gisco the Carthaginian, Annibal turns his observations on the 

enemy's numbers into ridicule, ii. 86, 87. Sent by the Cartha- 
ginians into Sicily, '266. 
Glabrio, the command in Bithyaia taken from him, and given to 

Pompey, iv. 161. 
Gladiators, their war with the Romans. See Spariacus. 
Glaucias, a king of Illyria, preserves Pyrrhus when an infant, iii. 

67, 68. Restores him at an early period to the throne of 

Epirus, 68. 
. , a seditious tribune, employed by Marius, iii. 156. Is cut 

to pieces, 160. 
Glaucippus, v. 7. 

Glaucus, physician to Hcphrestion, iv. 346. 
-, son of Polymcdcs, his valour, v. 16. 

-, ally to the Trojans, vi. 2. 
-, physician to Cleopatra, v. 483. 

Glory. That which is derived from virtue, more excellent than 
that from power, i. 174. It's slow progress, v. 299. A disre- 
gard for it the mark of a worthless or insensate mind, ii. 127. 

— — , of one's ancestors. The worthless more ready to enlarge 
upon it than men of merit, vi. 152, 153. Follows in the train of 
virtue, i. 201. Great desire of it dangerous to those who are at 
the head of an administration, v. 299. 

Gnathcenirt, Perseus believed to be her child, and only suppositi- 
tious to Philip, ii. 291. vi. 209. 

\ Gnossus, in Crete, i. 21. 

Goats' -^Shirah, the place where Romulus disappeared, i. 95. 

Horns, the crest of the king of Macedon, iii. 79. 

Gobryas, iii. 810. 

Gon. No representation to be made of him by images, i. 179. To 
be worshipped with the mind, ib. Moves the will, but does not 
over-rule it, ii. 205. Psammo's sentiments concerning his pro- 
vidence, iv. 2S3. Who beloved by him, i. 171, 172. Extract 

INDEX. 395 

dinary instance of the divine interposition, ii. 251, 252.' The 
author of good and not of evil, ii. 329, n. 

Gods, of the earth, i. 88. 

Goddess of the women, by the Greeks called Gynaecea, by the 
Romans Bona Dea. Manner of worshipping her, v. 315. Her 
history, iv. 366, 367. 

Gold and silver prohibited in Sparta, i. 124. The great corrupter 
of mankind, ib. 

Golden pillar, at which terminated all the great roads in Italy, and 
on which they were inscribed, vi. 236, and n. 

f Gomphi, a city of Thessaly taken by Caesar, iv. 406. 

Gonalas, one of the Antigoni. See Antigonus. 

Gongybis the Corinthian, comes to the Syracusans, iii. 427. 

Good goddess. See Goddess of the women. 

Gordian knot, iv. 266. 

f Gordium, iv. 266. 

Gofdiug driven out of Cappadocia by Sylla, iii. 235. 

f G or dyne, iii. 356. 

Gorgias the Leontine, the character which he gave of Cimon, iii. 307. 

, one of Eumenes' officers, iv. 47. 

Gorgidas, assists Pelopidas in restoring liberty to Thebes, ii. 355. 
Embroils the Spartans with the Athenians, by drawing in Spho- 
drias to attempt the Piraeus, 357. Said to have first formed the 
Sacred Band, 362. 

Gorgo, wife of king Leonidas, her answer to a lady who told her 
none but the Spartan women bore rule over the men, i. 132, 133. 

Gqrgolcon, a Spartan general, killed in the battle of Tegyrae, ii. 361. 

Gorgus re-peoples the city of Gela, ii. 271. 

GqrpiceiiSi the month so called, i. 24. 

f GortynianSf iii. 18. 

Gourds, iii. 374, 375. 

Government, Spartan balance of it like the British, i. 119. 

Gracchus, Tiberius, the father of Tiberius and Cains, v. 199. 
Marries Cornelia, the daughter of that Scipio who conquered 
Annibal, ib. A prodigy of serpents, which happened in his fa- 
mily, ib. Leaves at his death twelve children, 200. 

Gkacchus, Tiberius and Caius, the difference in their dispositions, 
oratory, and behaviour, v. 200. Alike in valour, justice, and 
self-government, 202. Tiberius Gracchus, nine years older 
than his brother, ib. Admitted at an early period into the col- 
lege of Augurs, ib. His character so excellent, that Appius 
Claudius offers him his daughter, ib. Serves in Africa under the 
younger Scipio, 203. Is the first to scale the wall in the siege 
of one of the enemy's towns, ib. Appointed quaestor, ib. Serves 
under the consul Mancinus in the Numantian War, ib. Through 
his interest with the Numantians, procures a peace, and saves the 
lives of twenty thousand Romans, 204. The peace is annulled 
at Rome, and Scipio sent against the Numantians, 205. Tibe- 
rius resolves to procure a new Agrarian law, 207. Consults 
some of the principal Romans upon it, 203. Opposed by the 
rich, ib. The irresistible eloquence with which he pleaded for 

596 INDEX. 

that law, ib. Specimen of his eloquence, Ib. 200. His adversa- 
ries engage M. Octavilis, one of the tribunes, to oppose him, 200. 
Tiberius orders all the courts to be shut up till tin- law should 
be passed, 210. Put his own >e%l upon .the treasury, ib: The 

people assemble to give their suffrages, but the balloting vessels 
are carried off, ib. Manlius and Fulyius prevail upon Tiberius 
to refer the matter to tl i hale, ib. 211. The application to 
the senate ends jn nothing, 211. To get his law rjassed, he de- 
poses his fellow-tribune Octayius, by a decree of the people, 212. 
The Agrarian law is confirmed, and three commissioners ap- 
pointed to see the lands properly distributed, ib. The vacant 
tribune's seat given to one of Tiberius' clients, 213. Nasica's 
enmity to Tiberius;, ib. lie is treated with great malignity, by the 
Senate, ib. A friend of his supposed to be poisoned, ib. He 
puts himself in mourning, and recommends his wife and children 
to the protection of the people, 213. Attalus, king oi' Pergamus, 
dying and leaving the Roman people his heir;*, Tiberius proposes 
that the people, and not the senate, should have the disposal of that 
inheritance/^. 21 h A senator of the name of Pompey, accuses 
him of a design to make himself king of Rome, 21k Amiins 
opposes him by an unexpected question, ib. 215. His arguments 
in defence of his deposing Octavius, ib. 216. He proposes other 
popular laws in hopes of gaining the tribuneship the year fol- 
lowing, 216. Doubts his majority in the assembly of the people, 
and has recourse to intreaties, 217. Meets with several ill 
omens, ib. 218. Is received with joy by the people, now assem- 
bled in the Capitol, 218. Fulyius Flaecus informs him, that the 
landed interest designed to assassinate him, ib. 219. Tiberius 
touches his head, signifying the danger he was in ; and his ene- 
mies interpret that motion, as the requisition of a crown, 219. 
Nasica excites a party against him, ib. Manner of his death, 
'220. His dead body treated in an inhuman manner, ib. His 

friends experience the same treatment, ib. Caius, after the 

death of his brother, lives for some time retired ; but, during his 
retreat, improves his power of oratory, v. 225. The people 
delighted, and the patricians alarmed by the specimen of his 
eloquence in the defence of Vettius, ib. He goes quaestor to 
the consul Orestes in Sardinia, 224. His dream, ib. Distin- 
guishes himself greatly in Sardinia, ib. Prevails with the Sardi- 
nians to grant, the Romans a supply of clothing, 225. The senate 
puts an affront, upon Micipsa's embassadors, in order to mortify 
Caius, ib. They endeavour to keep him in Sardinia, ib. lie 
returns in spite of them, and is impeached, ib. Defends himself, 
and is acquitted, ib. Clears himself of all concern in the con- 
spiracy of Fregella?, 226. Is elected tribune of the people, 
notwithstanding the opposition of the patricians, ib. His speech 
previous to passing tWo laws, 227. What those laws were, ib. 
Other popular laws passed by him, 228. Returns money to the 
Spanish stater, for the corn which I'abius had extorted from 
them, 239: Procures decrees for sending out colonies, making 
r ... ; building public granaries, ib. The method he took 

2 

INDEX. 397 

with the public roads, 230. He makes Fanning, consul, and is 
himself appointed tribune the second time, 231. He colonises 
Tarentum, and Capua, ib. The nobility incite his collegue 
Livius Drusus to outdo him in popular acts, ib. He goes" to 
plant a colony in Carthage, 233. Meantime Drusus lays an 
information against Fulvius, who was a friend of Caius, ib. Scipio 
dies, and it is suspected that he was poisoned by Fulvius, with 
the connivance of Caius ; at least it was so given out, ib. Caius 
gives Carthage the name of Junonia, 23-k Meets with ill omens, 
ib. Returns to Rome, and proposes other laws, 234<, 235. 
Fannius ordering all that were not Romans by birth to depart 
from the city, Caius promises to support the allies, but does not 
perform his promise,. 235. He pulls down certain scaffold* 
erected by his collegues, ib. Miscarries in his application for 
a third tribuneship, 236. The consul Opimius prepares to repeal 
his laws, and annul his acts, ib. And Caius to defend them, ib. 
The two parties meet in the Capitol, and one of the consul's 
lictors, using scurrilous language, is killed, ib. 237. The senate, 
ordering the consul to provide for the safety of the common- 
wealth, Fulvius/ a partisan of Caius', prepares to repel force 
with force, and marches out to seize the Aventine hill, 238. 
Caius goes in his usual habit, with no other weapon but a dagger,'- 
ib. Licinia's speech to him, ib. 239. Fulvius, by the advice of,- 
Caius, sends his younger sons to the consul with proposals of 
peace, 239. An affray taking place, Caius retires to the temple 
of Diana, 24.-0. His prayer to the goddess, ib. Is prevented by 
his friends from killing himself and takes to flight, z£». Finishe's 
his days in the Grove offhe Iv.ries, 24h His body is thrown into 
the river, ib. His goods confiscated, and his wife forbidden to 
go into mourning, ib. 

Graces. Plato desired Xenocrates the philosopher, who was morose 
and unpolite, to sacrifice to the Graces, iii. 122. 

t Granicus, river, iii. 342. iv. 261, 26?. 

Granius, son to Marius' wife by a former husband, iii. 165. During 
Marius' flight, gets' to the isle of /Enaria, 171. Passes with 
Marius into Africa, ib. 

, the qugestor. Syl!?., one day only before he died, ordered 

him to be strangled, iii. 283. 

Petronius, Caesar's qu?estor, taken by Scipio, iv. 376. Has 

his life given hira but kills himself, ib. 

Gratitude, ii. 220. 

f Greece, the magnificence of her public buildir.gr,, ii. 20. The 
most glorious theatre for the display of great actions, iii. 39. 
Liberty proclaimed to all Greece by order of Fiaminius at the 
Isthmian games, 4-2. 

Greeks. The wisdom of their attention to liberty, to popular govern- 
ment, and to the vicissitudes of fortune, i. 261. When first listed 
in the Carthaginian service, ii. 253. Invincible when united, vi, 
161. Philopcemen called the last of them, iii. 3. 

Gums, brother to .Tigrunes, surrenders himself to Lucu'.--. See 
Gouras: 

SOS INDEX. 

Gylippus, son of Cicandridas, extremely avaricious, ii. 35. En- 
trusted by Lysander to carry money for the public use to Sparta* 
lie rips the bottom of the bags, and takes out part of it, iii. 207- 
Is detected, and withdraws from Sparta, 208. Goes to the assist- 
ance of the Syracusans, 427. Arrives at the very instant when 
they were going to capitulate, ib. 428. Defeats Nicias, 429. 
Takes Plemmyrium by storm, 430. Refuses the Athenians a 
truce, 440. Touched with pity for the misfortunes of Nicias, 
ib. Demands him of the Syracusans as his prisoner, and is 
refused, 443. Obnoxious to the Syracusans for his moroseness 
and avarice, ib. 

Gt/lippus, the father of Agiatis, iv. 155. 

Gylon, from whom Demosthenes descended, v. 253. 

Gymnasium at Athens, the place where Theseus was interred, i. 46. 
Becomes in consequence the refuge of the oppressed, ib. 

Gymnosophists, Indian philosophers, Lycurgus supposed to have 
consulted them, i. 116. Why so called, ib. n. iv. 336, n. Alex- 
ander's conversation with them, 337, 338. 

Gyncccea, said to have been the mother of Midas and Bacchus, 
and the wife of Fuunus, iv. 336, 337. See Goddess of the 
women. 

f Gyrisoviians, iv. 5. 

f Gyihiumt iii. 19. v. 186. 

H. 

HADRIAN, erects a monument between old and new Athens, 
i. 31, n. 

Hair, why worn long by the Spartans, i. 147. hi. 188, 189. First 
fruits of it sacrificed to Apollo, i. 6. The Abantes used to 
shave the fore-part of the head, ib. The directions which Alex- 
ander gave his soldiers with respect to it, 7. Shaving it (accord- 
ing to Herodotus) a mark of sorrow, iii. 188, n. Alexander 
ordered the very horses and mules to be shorn in the mourning 
for Hephajstion, ii. 384. 

t Ilcemon, a small river, anciently called Thermodon, i. 36. 

f Hccmus, Mount, iv. 241. 

■\ Haliartus attacked by Lysander, iii. 221 

t HalicarnassHs, iv. 26k v. 369. 

f Halnnesus, v. 262. 

£ Jamil car, ii. 261. 

Hanno, his trifling artifices before Syracuse, ii. 254, 255- 

Happiness, i. 161', 261, 262. v. 150. 

Harmastes, iii. 203. 

Harpalus, governor of Babylon, deserts the service of Alexander, 
and carries off" his treasures, iv. 306. v. 25, 281, 282. 

Harpates, son of Tiribazus, employed by Ochus, to kill Arsame=, 
vi. 149, 150. 

Hats, purple ones, royal marks of favour, iv. 50. 

Head, a bloody one found in laying the foundation of the Cap'tcl, 
i. 401. 

INDEX. S99 

Hearing. A shock upon that disturbs the mind more than any 

other of the senses does, iii. 481. 
Jlecale, an ancient woman entertains Theseus, i. 15. His gratitude 

to her, 15. 
Hecalesium, a sacrifice offered by Theseus to Jupiter Hecalus, 

i. 15. 
Hecatceus the rhetorician, i. 143. 

■ , tyrant of the Cardians, iv. 41. 

Hecatombceon, the month so called, i. 13, 29,46. iv. 242. 

f HecatombcBum, the Argives defeated there by Cleomenes, v. 169. 

Hecatompedon, the temple of Minerva at Athens so called, ii. 23, 

». 499. 
Hectemorii, the Athenian poor why so called, i. 235. 
Hector, vi. 77, 78, 155. 
t Hedai, or Mdui, a people of Gaul, revolt from the Romans, iv. 

389. 
Hegemon, the Athenian, appeals to Polyperchon, v. 41. Is con- 
demned to die, 42. 
Hcgesias the Magnesian, iv. 242. 
Hegesipylciy daughter of Olorus king of Thrace, wife of Miltiades, 

and mother of Cimon, iii. 297- 
Hegistralus, Archon the year in which Solon died, i. 269. 
Helen, stolen by Theseus, i. 37. Rape of, 39. The reputed 

daughter of Jupiter by Leda the wife of Tyndarus, i. 39, 40, ft. 

carried to Troy, 43. 
Helenas son of Pyrrhus, by Bircenna, iii. 76. 
Helepoles, Demetrius' machines for taking cities, v. 382. 
Ilelicca, court of, v. i9. 
Helicon the Cyzicenian, vi. 18. 

, the artisan, iv. 292. 

f , Mount, iii. 227. 

Hettanicus, the historian, i. 18, 32, 34, 39. 

• , the Syracusan, vi. 39. 

t Hellespont. Phocion dislodges Philip from the places upon if, 

v. 18. 
Helots, account of them, i. Ill, 156. iii. 317. 
f Helvetians come suddenly upon Cassar, but are defeated, and 

forced to return to their own barren hills, iv. 378. 
Helvia, mother of Cicero, v. 292. 
Helvidius Priscus conveys away Galba's body, vi. 241. 
Hephcesiion, the favourite of Alexander, iv. 38. His quarrel with 

Eumenes, 39. With Crateras, 313. His death, 346". Among 

other extravagant expressions of grief, Alexander pulls down 

the battlements of the cities, ib. His funeral, 347. 
Hcnioche, daughter of Pittheus, and mother of Sciron, i. 32. 
Heptachalcos, iii. 250. 
Heraclea, places in Atiiens consecrated to Hercules, i. 44. 

f in Pontus, iii. 341. 

f in Greece, taken by Demetrius from Cassander, v, 

3S5. 
| _ in Italy, iii. 87. 

400 INDEX. 

-tUerarfeum, ii, 300. 

Ilcracliche demolish the pillar set up by Theseus, i. 31, n. Settle 

in Peloponnesus, iik 219. The kings of Sparta of that family, 

i. 110. 
Heraclidcs of Pontus, the historian, i. 268, 389. ii. 55. 
, a Syracusan youth, brings on the battle in which Ni- 

cias is defeated, iii. 436. 

-, the Syracusan admiral, vi. 12, Hia behaviour to Dion, 

32, 33. His death, 50. 
Heraclitus, his opinion concerning the soul, i. 98. 

t Hercca, a city of Arcadia, iii. 216. 

•ffferaum, or temple of Juno, a place of some strength near Co- 
rinth, iv. 97. vi. 172, 170. 

Hercules, destroys robbers, i. 8. Kills Iphitus, ib. Is treated by 
Omphale as a slave, .ib. Inflicts the same punishments upon 
those he conquers which they had done upon others, 12. Sails 
with Theseus into the Euxine sea, 32. The first who grants the 
bodies of the slain to the enemy, 37. Initiated in the Great 
Mysteries by means of Theseus, 39. Intercedes with Aidoneus 
for the.rerease of Theseus, 43. The first of the Fabii descended 
from him by a nymph of Italy, ii. 62. As a god, accepts not a 
coward's offering, 306. A verse of Euripides descriptive of 
him, iii. 298. He never was the aggressor, and Theseus imi- 
tated him in that respect,- i. 9. iii. 437. His temples, i. 44. iii. 
437. v. 483. He takes Troy, iv. 2. Kills Antaeus, and has a 
son by his widow, named Sophax, 13. Sylla dedicates the tenth 
of his substance to him, iii. 281. Crassus does the same, iii. 
448. 

« ■, son of Alexander by Barsine, iv. 39. 

Hereas, the Megarensian, i. 22, 42, 230. 

Hcrennius, Caius, cited as an evidence against Marius, but ex- 
cuses himself as being patron to the family of Marius, iii. 125. 

■ , one of Sertorius' officers defeated by Pompey, iv. 145. 

■ , the centurion, despatches Oiccro, v. 353. 

Herippiaas, the Spartan, by too severe an inquiry after the plun- 
der, disobliges Spithridates, iv. 83. 

Hemue, or statues- of Mercury, mutilated at Athens, ii. 138. iii 
418. 

Henncsus, the priest, trodden to death, when Mithridates fled from 
Lucullus, iii. 350. 

Ilermiiiius joins Horatius Codes in defending the bridge against 
Porsenna, i. 291. 

■f Hermioue, i.12, and ?i. iv. 153. 

-f f purple of, iv. 298. 

Hermippidas the Spartan officer put (o death for surrendering the 
Cadmea, ii. H'iG. 

Hermippus, v. 2.76. Accuses Aspasia of impiety, ii. 48. 

- — ' the historian, i. 117, 148. v. 286. 

Hermncratcs, general of the Syracusans, a saying of his, iii. 42i 
His stratagem against Nicias, 438, 439. Inclined to treat the 
Athenians with mercy, but was over-ruled, 1 13. 

INDEX. 401 

Ilermocrales, father-in-law to Dionysius the Elder, vi. 4. 

■ of Rhodes employed by Artaxerxes to corrupt the 

states of Greece, vi. 137. 

Hermolaiis, his plot against Alexander, iv. 324. 

Hermon stabs Phrynichus for his design to betray the Athenian 
fleet, ii. 151. 

f Hermits, v. 26. 

Hermottnuis, the father of Milto, Cyrus' concubine, ii. 38. 

Hermus, left governor by Theseus of the city of Pythopolis, which 
he built in the country of .';e Amazons, i. 33. 

Hero, niece of Aristotle, and mother of" Callisthenes, iv. 324. 

Herodes, v. 322. 

Herod of Judaea sends forces to Anton}r, v. 484. Revolts to Octa* 
vius Caesar, 494. 

Herodotus, i. 32, 37, 38, 62. 

Herodotus the historian, i. 389, n. ii. 477. 

• of Bithynia beloved by the gods, i. 170. 

Heroes: serpents, why consecrated to them, v. 197- One link in 
the chain between divine and human nature, i. 99. 

Herophytus, the Samian, advises the allies to take the spoils for 
their share, and leave the slaves to the Athenians, iii. 306. 

Herostratus, one of the friends of Brutus, sent by him into Mace- 
donia, vi. 78. 

Hesiod, honoured after his death by one of the gods, for the sake 
of his poetry, i. 172. 

Hesi/chia, the priestess of Minerva, removed from Clazomenae to 
Athens, iii. 419. 

Hetruria, i. 64. 

Hexapylum, ii. 416. 

Hiempsal, king of Numicha, endeavours to detain young Marius 
and Cethegus, who had taken refuge at his court, iii. 172. 

, Pompey gives him the kingdom of Sarbas, iv. 138. 

f Hiercc, city of, ii. ^67. 

f Hierapolis, given by Antony to Moneses, v. 461. The goddess 
worshipped there, iii. 472. 

Hiero, king of Syracuse, ii. 407. Desires Archimedes to apply his 
mathematical knowledge to practice, 409. 

, the pretended son of Dionysius Chalcus, represents to the 

;. Athenians the cares and toils of his master Nicias for their be- 
nefit, iii. 404. 

Hieram/rnus, a descendant cf Hiero, assassinated by his own sub- 
jects at Leontium, ii. 406, ?i. 

■ , a Greek, settled at Carroe, desires young Crassus, in 

time of extremity, to retire to Ichna?, iii. 485. 

-, the historian, commissioned by Antigonus to offer 

Eumenes terms of peace, iv. 54. Appointed by Demetrius 
governor of Beeotia, v. 405. 

-, the philosopher, iv. 86. 

-\Hhnera, ii. 260. iv. 136. 
■f Himerccans, iv. 136. 

Hlmcrccus, brother of Demetrius Phalereus, v, 28(j. 
vol. vi 2 D 

#02 fNDEX. 

Hind, awhile one presented to Sertorius, i\. 14-, 15. He prr> 
tends that it was a present from Diana, and that it presignified 
his future events, IS. 

Hipparchns, Antony's f'reedraan, v. 496. 

of the ward of Cholarga, the first person banished by 

the Ostracism, iii. 116. 

-, father of Asclepiades, v. '26. 

Hipparete, daughter of Hipporiicus, and wife of Alcibiades, ii. 
122. Offended at his dissolute life, she leaves him and sues foF 
a divorce, but he carries her out of court in his arms, ib. 

Hipparhms, father of Aristomache, the wife of Dkmysius the 
Elder, vi. 4. 

, son of Dion, vi. 31. 

Hippias, the sophist, i. 148, 166. 

, a faithful servant to Pyrrhus, carries him in his infancv 

- to a place of refuge, iii. 66, 67. 

the comedian, one of the favourites of Antony, v. 434. 

Hippo, tyrant of Messana, besieged by Timoleon, endeavours to 
make his escape ; but the inhabitants seize him, and put him to 
an ignominious death, ii. 271. 

the Syracusan orator, vi. 36. 

H/ppodns, father of Pelopidas, ii. 343. 

Hippocoon, i. 39. 

Hippocrates, commanding officer in Chalcedon, killed by Alcibi- 
ades, ii. 158. 

, the Syracusan general, defeated by Marcellus, ii, 

415. 

-, the Athenian general, defeated at Delium in Bceotia, 

iii. 406. 

the physician, ii. 526. 

the mathematician, availed himself of mercantile ad- 

vantages, i. 221. 
llippoda-telountes, i. 212. 
Hippodamia, wife of Pelops, and mother of Pittheus and Lysidice, 

i. 9, 38, 7i. 
Jlippodrome, or Circus Maximus, i. 5~). iii. 257. 
J IippoiLumius, the month, i. 384. 
Ilippolijtc, the Amazon, i. 32, u. Peace concluded by her means 

between the Amazons and Athenians, 3.1. A pillar erected to 

her honour, i. ib. and n. 
llippolijtiis, said by Euripides to have been educated by Pittheus, 

j. 5. 
1 the son of Theseus, the great misfortunes which befel 

him, i. 36. 

the Sicyonian, 'the favourite of Apollo, i. 171. 

Hippomachus, the wrestler, vi. 3. 

Hippomedon, son of Agesilaus, one of the Ephori, and cousin to 
Agis king of the Spartans, v. 138. Saves his father on a critical- 
occasion, 1 19. 

Hipponicus makes an unfair advantage of Solon's information with. 
respect to the abolishing of debts> i. 239 

INDEX. 403 

Hipponicus, father of Callias, ii. 121. Alcibiades behaves with 

wanton rudeness to him, yet afterward marries his daughter, 

ib. 122. 
f Hipponium a city of Lucania, subsequently called ' Yibo,' v. 332. 
Hipposthenidas joins Pelopidas in his enterprise in delivering Thebes, 

but afterward draws off out of fear, ii. 3-5 9, 350. 
Hippotas, one of Cleomenes' friends, lame, but a man of great 

courage, v. 191. 
Hirthis and Pansa defeat Antony near Mutina, but are both killed 

in battle, v. 34-8, 349. 
Historian, the duty of a good one, vi. 35. Proper for him to b« 

situated in a great city, v. 251. 
History, the very ancient, fabulous, or pt the best uncertain, i. 2, 

Truth hard to be discovered from it, ii. 2b". 
, and Biography, their use, ii. 280. The difference between 

history and lives, iv. 239. 
Hobby-horse, Agesilaus rides on one among his children, iv. 103. 
Holy Cornel-tree. See Cornel-tree. 

Fire, how to be lighted. See Fire. 

Island in the Tiber, how first formed, i. 280, 281. 

Homer, says that Minos converses with Jove, i. 17, 30. His works, 

by whom preserved, 115. Collected into one body by Lycurgus, 
ib. His opinion of the divine influence oh the mind of man, 
explained and supported, ii. 214, 215. His verses have this 
peculiar excellence, that they seem to be produced with ease, 
273. A passage of his explained to mean, that the person, who 
loves not labour, will be inclined to support himself by violence 
and rapine, 536. Said to have been born at Ids, and to have 
died at Smyrna, iv. 3. His Elysian fields situated in the Atlantic 

* . '.Islands s 12. The high value which Alexander set upon his 
poems, 250. Alexander's copy of the Iliad corrected by Aris* 
totle, and called the 'copy of the Casket,' ib. and 279. 

Homoloichus, and Anaxidamas, inhabitants of Chaeronea, their valour 
and services to Sylla, iii. 256. 

Honour, the temple of, ii. 432. 

■ --, only the image of virtue, v. 132. Whether honours 

change men's manners, iii. 276, 277. 

Honoratus, Antonius, his speech to the praetorian bands, vi. 223. 

Hoplitce, one division of the people of Athens, i. 253. 

f Hoplites, the river near which Lysander was slain, iii. 225. 
226. 

Horace, iii. 385. ' 

Horatius, Marcus, dedicates the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, i.' 
291. 

— Codes, why so called, i. 294. Defends the bridge while 

the Romans break it down behind, ib. 

Horcomosium, a place near the temple of Theseus so called, and 
why, i. 3!~>. 

Horses, the flesh of dead ones breed wasps, v. 197. 

Hoftensius marches with a reinforcement for Sylla from Thessaly 
into Bceotia, iii. 252. Acts as one of Sylla's lieutenant-. 256. 

2 d 2 

401 INDEX. 

Hortensiua, the orator, ili. Si I 

, Quintus, desires Cato to give up his wife to Iiim, v. 74. 

, the praetor, delivers up Macedon to Brutus, vi. 79. 

, slain hy Antony on his brother's tomb, v. 4 45. vi. 82. 

Hospitality. Jupiter avenges the breach of it, vi. 20.9. 

Hostilius, marries Ersilia the Sabine, i. 71. Killed in the battle 

between Romulus and Tatius 79. 

the consul defeated by Perseus, ii. 292. 

Human sacrifices sometimes offered before a battle, ii. SGO. In- 
stances of them, ib. Not acceptable to the gods, 367. 
Husbandry. Slee tyrpicultx 

, the favourite of Apollo, i. 171. 

lybla besieged by Nicias, iii. 423. 
Hybrias, employed by the cities of Asia on a commission to Antony, 

v. 447. Behaves with great boldness, ib. 
\ Hyccara, rased by Nicias, iii. :'_:.!•. 
r Hydiispes. Alexander, passes that river, iv. 330. 
Hydrieus, the Carian, iv. 86. 
Hyllus, father of Cleodes, iii. 6G. 
Hymena us, i. 71. 

vales, a friend to Leonidas' part)- in Thebes, ii. 35 r. Killed 

by Pelopidas, ib. 
TIi/j- bolus. The Ostracism disgraced by his banishment, ii. 126, 

He the last whom it Fell upon, iii. II.", 4-16. 
f Hyperboreans. Some account, of them, i. 389, n. 

, the orator, v. 10. 266. Put to death at Cleona?, v. 

■34, 286. 
psceus, iv. 197,. v. 96. 
HypsechidaSf i. 230. 
Hypsicratia, Mithridates' mistress, her courage and attention tf> 

that prince in his distress, iv. 166. 
f Hyrcania, iv, 169, 309. 
■f Hyrcanean sea, iv. 170. 
Hyrodes. See Orodes. 

I. 

: I 'CI S, or BaccJais, his image carried in procession, v. 33. 

[Jalysus, an ancient city of Rhodes, v. 384, n. 

, his history painted by Protogenes, v. 384. 

Janiailnm, i. 206. 

is, why represented with one face before and another behind, 
i. 20_'. His temple when to be shut and when open, ib. How 
often shut at Rome, ib. 20 >. 

\Tdpygia, a country of Italy, i. 16. 

, cape of, iii. 85. 

larbas or Hiarbas, taken prisoner by Pompey, who gave his king- 
dom to Hiempsal, iv. 

m, and his ;;o, i. 21. Appointed to clear the sea ol 

pirates, /'i. 37. His expedition to Colchos, iii. 296. 

INDEX. 405 

Jason the tragedian, iii. 197. Appositely introduces the head of 

Crassus, ib. 
Javelin. iYIarius contrives a new form for it, iii. 150. 
f Iberia, the king of Iberia presents Pompey with a bedstead, table, 

and chair of state, all of gold, iv. 172. 
f Iberians. A warlike people seated about mount Caucasus, defeated 

by Pompey, iv. 108, 169. 
■\ Iberian mountains, iv. 108. 
J be.) us, river, iv. 21. 
Ibyrtius, governor of Arachosia, Antigonus put's the Argyraspideb 

in his hands, to be harassed and destroyed, iv. 66. 
Icelus, vi. 217. 

Icetes,- prince of the Leontines, chosen general by the Syracusans 
against Dionysius, ii. 233. Designs to seize Syracuse for him- 
self, 234. His letters to the Corinthians excite their indignation, 
239. He defeats Dionysius, 241. His proposals to Timbleon at 
Rhegium, ib. Is defeated by Thnoleon, 245. Sends two assassins 
to Adranum to destroy Timoleon, 251. Is reduced to a private 
station, 260. Leagues again with the Carthaginians, 268. Is 
defeated and put to death, 269. His wife and children also 
suffer death, for the cruellies of the family to that of Dion, 
ii. 270. 
Ichneumon, an /Egyptian animal, it's history, iv. 305, //. 
Icttnus and Calibrates build the Parthenon at Athens, ii. 23. 
j Ida, Mount, iv. 48. See Dactijli Idai. 

Idas. Helen said to be carried off by Idas and Lynceus, i. 39. 
Idleness punished at Athens, by a law of Solon, i. 251. 
Idomcneus the historian; his calumnies against Pericles, ii. 18. 
Jealousy, in what manner provided against by Lycurgus, i. 134, 135. 

The Persians extremely guilty of that passion, 349. 
f Jerusalem taken by Pompey the Great, iv. 174, n. 
Ignatius, one of Crassus' officers, escapes with three hundred men 
"'to Carraj, informs the governor of the battle that had been fought, 

and then hastens to the bridge over the Euphrates, iii. 489. 
Ilia, Rhea, or Sylvia, daughter of Numitor, and mother of Romulus 
and Remus, i. 52. 

, one of the wives of Sylla, iii. 239. 

Ilicium, according to Plutarch, a place so called from Jupiter's 

showing himself propitious there, i. 195. 
{ Ilium, iv. 260. 
Hljrid, iii. 67. v. 184. 
lifijricuhi, v. 82. 

linages forbidden in divine worship by Pythagoras and Numa, i. 
179. No images permitted in the temples at Rome for 170 years 
after it was built, ib. 
. or forms of visible objects, according to Demdcritus, float- 
ing in the air, ii. 281. 
Immortality of the soul strongly asserted, i. 9S, 99. 
Imprecations. The opinion the ancients had of their force and 
eifect, i. -77. iii. 470. An Athenian priestess said, ' she thought 
her office was for blessing, not for curbing,' ii. 145. 

406 INDEX. 

Imprecations against Crassusat his departure from Rome, iii. 170. 
\ Indians, some of them acted as mercenaries for their neighbours, 
iv. 329. Alexander's Indian war, ib. 

Indian philosophers, iv. 329. Alexander hangs some of them as 
seditious persons, who were only advocates for liberty, ib. 330. 
They persuaded Sabbas to revolt, 336. Their philosophers, why 
called Gymnosophists, 336, n. Their conversation with Alex- 
ander, 337, 338. One of them, named Calanus, burns himself, 
343. Another burned himself long after at Athens, ib. 

Ingratitude punished by the gods, i. 377, 378. 

Inimitable in TJj'e, a society so denominated by Antony and Cleo- 
patra, v. 194. 

Ino. Her sufferings from the jealousy of Juno represented in the 
process of a sacrifice by the Romans, i. 367. 

-]- Inora, castle of, iv. 166. 

■f Insubrians, part of the Gauls so called, ii. 390. 

Intercalary month, i. 199. 

Interregnum amongst the Romans after the death of Romulus, how 
settled, i. 168. 

Iblaiis, son of Antipatcr, chief cup-bearer to Alexander, iv. 349. 

flolcos, v. 421. 

Iun of Chios, the tragic poet, some account of him, i. 22. ii. 9. iii. 
305. v. 252. 

. , the favourite of Perseus. Perseus puts his children in his 

hands, and he betrays them, ii. 316. 

f Ionia, what in ancient times, i. 31. 

in Asia, v. 281. 

f Ionian sea, iii. 85. 

lonians, i. 31, n. 

lope, daughter of Iphicies, and wife of Theseus, i. 37. 

Ibpkon, son of Pisistratus by Timonassa, ii. 528. 

Ins, a city where Homer was said to be buried, ii. 26, n. It sig- 
nifies, also, a violet, iv. 3. 

Toxides, a colony in Baria, founded by Ib'xus, i. 10. 

Ibxus, son of Melanippus, and grandson of Theseus, carries a co- 
lony into Caria, i. 10. A custom observed by the I oxides his 
descendents, in memory of an incident in Theseus' life, ib. 

Iphicies, i. 37. 

Jphicraies the Athenian general, to what he compares the consti- 
tuent parts of an army, ii. 341. vi. 211. Defeats a party of 
.Lacedemonians, iv. 97. 

. ■ , lieutenant to Artaxcrxes against the /Egyptians, vi. 141. 

Iphigenia, iv. 76. 

Iphitus slain by Hercules, i. 8. 

. , contemporary with Lycurgus, i. 109. Ljcurgus assists 

him in' ordering the ceremonies of the Olympic games, ib, 
148. 

Iphtha, king of Mauritania, and father of Ascalis, iv. 12. 

f Ipsus, iii. 69. Battle of, v. 395. 

Iras, one of Cleopatra's women, v. 183. Pound dead at her feet, 
406. 

INDEX. 407 

Xrens and Mellirens at Sparta, what they were ir. the classes of 
young men and boys, and what their offices, L 139, 1 10. 

Iron Money. No other current in Sparta, i. 124s Prepared so as 
not to be malleable, lb. 

Isadus, son of Pheebidas, goes out naked from the bath to battle, 
iv. 115, 1,16. Mis valour, and the effect his appearance had on 
the enemy, 116. How rewarded, and why fined, ib. 

Isccus, instructs Demosthenes in eloquence, v. 256. Ills charac- 
ter, ib. 

Isandcr. His family alliance with Pericles, ii. 55. 

Isauricus, Servilius, Caesar's competitor for the pontificate, iv. 
364. He speaks against sending deputies from Caesar to Pompey 
with proposals of peace, 400. Ca?sar declares him his collegue 
in the consulate, 4-01. 

f Ischncc, iii. 485. 

Ischomachc, i. 38, n. 

his. Cleopatra dressed in the habit of that goddess, and affected 
to be called ' a second Isis,' v. 4-78. 

Island. A part of Syracuse so called, ii. 24-1. 

., Atlantic, Solon begins a work under that title. See Atlan- 
tic Island. 

in the Tiber, how formed, i. 280, 281. Called the < Holy 

Island,' or the island between the two bridges, 281. 
Islands, Fortunate, Homer places his Elysium .there. See Atlantic. 
fsmenian Apollo. See Apollo. 
Ismcnias, a friend to popular government in Thebes, carried to 

Sparta after the taking of the Cadmea, aud put to death, ii. 34-6. 
, a Theban officer, taken prisoner by Alexander of 

Pherae, ii. 37k Released by Epaminondas, 378. 

the musician, made his scholars hear bad practitioners 

as well as good, v. 363. 

the Theban embassador, lets his ring fall before Arta- 

xerxes, that in taking it up he might seem to adore him, vi. 139- 
Isocrates, i. 37, n. ii. 120". v. 257- 

Isodice, daughter of Euryptolemus, and wife of Cimon, iii. 299. 
■\ Isomantus, river, hi. 226. Formerly called Hoplias, ib. 
Isorium, a place of strength in Sparta, iv. 112. 
f Issus, battle of, iv. 270. 
Isler the historian, i. i j. 

f- . Sec Danube. 

Isthmian games. See Games. 

f Isthmus of Corinth, iv. 258. vi. 168. Between the lied sea and 

the Mediterranean, v. 41)2. 
Italia, one of the daughters of Themistocles, married to Pan- 

thides of the isle of Chios, i. 358. 
Italics, i. 50. 
Italy, i. 16. 
Itkagenes, ii. 4-0. 
I- Ithome, ii. 369. iii. 318. 
t Ithomata, or Ithome, a fortress belonging to the Messenians, said 

.to be as strong a3 Aerocorinthus, vi. 205, n. 206. 

408 INDEX. 

Itonis, an appellation of Minerva. See Minerva. 

Juba, king of Mauritania, his pride, v. 106. Corrected by Cuto of 
Utica, ib. 107. 

■ the historian, son of the king of Mauritania) i. 70. iv. 420. 

Led captive to Rome, which turns to his benefit, ib. He be- 
comes a learned and elegant writer, ib. Marries Cleopatra, 
Antony's daughter, v. 508. 

+ Judcca subdued by Fonipey, iv. 174. 

Judges, when chosen out of the equestrian order, v. 223. 

Jugurtha delivered up to Sylla by Bocclius, iii. 150, 131. His 
character, 135. Thrown into a dungeon at Rome, and his say- 
ing upon it, ib. His history d'etiheated by twenty golden stptues 
presented to Sylla by Bocchus, and erected in the Capitol, 161, 
236. 

Julia, aunt to Julius Caesar, and wife of Marius, iii. 126. Caesar 
pronounces her funeral oration, iv. 362. 

• , daughter of Caesar, and wife of Pompey, her great affection 

for her husband, iv. 192. Removes the jealousies between those 
two great men for a time, 216. But she dies in childbed, and 
they break out again, iv. 192, 193. Is buried in the Campus 
Martius, 192. 

, Antony's mother, married to Cornelius Lentulus, v. 426. 

, daughter of Augustus, ii. 437, and wife of Agrippa, v. 508. 

jjiilis, a town in the island of Ceos, v. 250. 

Julius the Censor, i. 378. 

Proculus, by his declaration that Romulus was received 

amongst the gods, appeases the tumults at Rome, i. 96, 97. 

Saliva tor, iv. 10. 

— — Atticus, a soldier in the guards, falsely asserts that he had 
killed Otho, vi. 238. 

Marlialus, the officer upon command, admits Otho into the 

praetorian camp, vi. 237. 

Junia, wife of Cassius, vi. 63. 

Junius Brutus deposes Tarquin. See Brutus. 

. Brutus, one of the first tribunes of the people, ii. 181. 

, Marcus, dictator with the army, while another is dictator 

at Rome, ii. 79. 

. , praetor in Asia, his avarice and extortion, iv. 359. 

Vindex, governor of Gaul, revolts against Nero, vi. 214. 

Kills himself, 216. 
Juno (in. iritis, why so called, i. 100. Her statue sent from Veii to 

Rome by Camillus, 369. 
• , her temples at Samos, Argos, and Lacinium, plundered by 

the pirates, iv. 153, 1 .5 4. Her statue at Argos, ii. 4. 

■ , Aspasia why so called, ii. 37, 38. 

•fjunonia, the name given to Carthage, when rebuilt by Caius 

Gracchus, v. 234. 
Jupiter, Capitolinus, ii. 216. iv. 174, n. Feretrius, i. 75. Heca- 

lus, i. 15. Inferus, i. 18.7,, »• Ileos, i. 195. Liberator, ii. 479. 

Martius, iii. 70. Olympius, iii. 260. Servator, v. 285. Stator, 

i. 80. Syllanius, i. 119. Of Pisa, ii. 4. Policus and Poliuchus, 

INDEX. 409 

v. -109. Terppie of Jupiter Capitol inus, i. 288 — 290. Sthenius, 

i. 8, n. 
Justeius, M;/.rcus, v. 487. 
Justice, iv. i\9. v. 94. 
Justin, i. 32, ». 
Ixion. Ambitious men well reproved by his story, v. 132. 

K. 

KALENDAR reformed by Numa, i. 198. More perfectly by 
Caesar, iv. 426. 

Kerata, i. 332. 

Kcraion, an altar so called, i. 24. Ascribed to the workmanship 
of Apollo, ib. n. 

Kernies, a scarlet dye procured from them, i. 18, n. History of, ib. 

King. The duty of a king, i. 104. Wherein distinguished from a 
tyrant, ib. The affection of his people his best guard, vi. 178, 
179. r 

. The title when assumed by the successors of Alexander, v. 

379. The effect that title had upon their behaviour, ib. Cato's 
opinion of a king, ii. 503. 

Kiiigs of Athens, a maxim of theirs, i. 340. Of Rome expelled 
and a commonwealth set up, i. 272. How ready they should be 
to receive petitions, and redress grievances, v. 408. Of Sparta, 
descendants of Hercules, iv. 73. Their power limited by the 
institution of a senate, and still more by that of the Ephori. See 
Senate and Ephori. Of Persia. Customary for them to give 
every woman a piece of gold when they visited Persia, iv. 342. 
Therefore few of them made that visit, ib. 

King's Eye, an officer belonging to the king of Persia, vi. 127. 

King of Kings, a title assumed by Demetrius Poliorcetes, v. 388. 

Knights, or equestrian order, v. 307. 

Knot. Gordian knot cut by Alexander. See Gordian. 

Knoiv thyself, v. 252. 

LABEO joins in the conspiracy against Caesar, vi. 67. Lieutenant 
to Brutus, 105. 

fLabici, ii. 209. 

Labienus, while Caesar's lieutenant defeats the Tigurini, iv. 378. 
He goes over from Caesar to Pompey, 207. Eager for a battle, 
212. Takes a voluntary oath not to quit the field till he shall 
have routed the enemy, ib. 

Labyrinth of Crete, i. 16. Theseus confined in it, 20. 

Lac, i. 18, n. 

Laccopluti, a name given to Callias' family, ii. 454. 

f Lacedtzmon, the Athenians accused there, ii. 44. Attacked by 
Pyrrhus, iii. 106, 107. Epaminondas goes thither as embassador, 
iv. 105. A conspiracy there suppressed with great art by Age- 
9 

410 INDEX. 

silaus, 112. Debts remitted, v. 145. Cleoraenes attempts to 

bring the constitution hack to it's iirst principles, and effects it 
in a good degree, 156, 164. See Sparta. 
Lacedcemonians invite Lycurgus to return, i. 116. He new-models 
their government, ib. They are of a musical, as well as martial 
turn, 144. Their sharp and pithy savings, 111 — 141. Their 
method of education, 131. The only people to whom war was a 
remission of laborious exercises, 147. Their form of government, 
!19. Before a battle the king sacrificed a goat, and the music 
played the hymn to Castor, 117. The king had an Olympic 
champion to light by his side, ib. A Lacedaemonian says, ' the 
Athenians punish a man for being a gentleman,' 149. They 
maintain the first rank among the states of Greece for five hun- 
dred years, 1.5S. The Sabines a colony of them, and some of 
their laws introduced by Numa, 165, 166. Propose to exclude 
from the general council of Greece, such cities as had not joined 
in the war against Xerxes, 342, This would have given the 
Lacedaemonians too much weight in the scale, ib. Traverse the 
designs of Pericles, ii. 31. They fine Plistonax their king for 
withdrawing out of Attica, and pass sentence of death on Cle- 
i.ndrides for taking money to advise him to it, 35. Invade At- 
tica again under the conduct of king Archidamus, and advance 
as tar as Acharnae, 50. Make peace with the Boeotians, and 
deliver up Panactus to the Athenians, but dismantled. 128. 
Their embassadors imposed upon by Alcibiades, and their pro- 
posals rejected, 130. Esteem any thing just and honourable, 
which is advantageous to their country, iv. 99, 120. Deprive 
Phccbidas of his command, and fine him for seizing the citadel 
of Thebes, but at the same time keep possession of the citadel, 
ii. 346, 317. The great error of the Lacedaemonian officers in 
the Cadmea in not supporting the party of the tyrants the night 
the}- were attacked, 356. Those officers surrender the Cadmea, 
and are punished for it, ib. Their wars with the Persians under 
Agesilaus, iv. S7- The Lacedaemonians enter Bceotia with a 
powerful army, 103. Are defeated by Pelopidas in the battle of 
Tegyrae; which is the first time they weve beaten by an inferior 
or an equal number, ii. 359. Defeated by Epaminondas and 
Pelopidas at Leuctra, iv. 105, and //. Their magnanimity on 
that defeat, ib. Not expert in sieges, ii. 476. Their decree 
against the Athenians, and in favour of the Thirty Tyrants, iii. 
205. Their regard for Cimon, the Athenian general, 315. De- 
sire succours of the Athenians against the Helots and Messe- 
nians, but send their forces back without employing them, iii. 
318. Their scruple about the oracle concerning a lame king, 
iv. 7'2 No enemy had been seen in their country for the space 
of six hundred years, 1 10. They lose the moderation usual to 
them in time of success, upon an advantage gained by Archi- 
damus, son of Agesilaus, 111. Their answer to the embassadors 
of Tachos and Nectanabis, and private instructions to Agesilaus, 
] 19, 120. Whence the corruptions that led to their ruin, v. 
137. Their great deference to their wives, 140. Philopoemcn's 
behaviour to the Lacedaemonians, iii. 'J'2} 24. £ec Spartans, 

INDEX. 411 

hacc.dcemonian women, i. 131. iii. 107- 

Laccdtvmmzius, one ol'the sons of Ciraon, iii. 315. 

f Lacetanians defeated by Cato the Elder, ii. 507. 

Lachnres, usurps the sovereignty of Athens, v. 397. He quits the 
place, 398. 

■ •, lathe: of Eurycles, v. 490. 

Lachartus, blames Cimon for entering the territories of the Co- 
rinthians without their leave, iii. 317. 

Lacias, ward of, ii. 1 14. 

f Laci niim, promontory of, iv. 151. 

Laco, a friend and minister of Galba's, vi. 237, 238. Despatched 
by the conspirators against that prince, 240. 

■f Laconia divided by Lyeurgus into thirty thousand lots, i. 123. 

Laconian cup. See Cotkon. 

Laconic manner of speaking. See Sayings. 

Lacratidas advises Agesilaus to let Lysander's papers rest with 
him in the grave, iii. 227. 

Lacratides. According to some accounts, it was upon his accusa- 
tion that Pericles was fined, ii. 54, 55. 

Lacritus, the orator, v. 286. 

J,<eliu>;, happy in having no connexion with more than one wo-* 
man, v. 55. 

, Cains, whence his appellation of the * Wise,' v. 207. 

. goes in disguise from Lepidus' camp to advise Antony to 

attack it, v. 442. 

Lcena, Popilius, the conspirators alarmed at his talking with 
Caesar, vi. 70, 71. 

Laertes. Cicero says, ' he lived his life,' v. 343. 

Lavinus, the consul, answers Pyrrhus, that the Romans neither 
accepted him as an arbitrator, nor feared him as an enemy, iii. 
87. Is defeated by Pyrrhus, 89, 90. 

Lais, the Corinthian courtesan, said to be the daughter of Ti- 
mandria, Alcibiades' mistress, ii. 172. Taken, when very young, 
by Nicias, at Hyccara, and sold among the other captives, ib. 

Lake Alban. See Alban. Curtian. See Curtian. Lucanian, 
It's waters sometimes sweet and sometimes salt, iii. 461. Thrasy- 
menian, the battle fought near it, ii. 67. 

Lamachus joined in commission with Nicias and Alcibiades for the 
Sicilian war, ii. 137. Brought into disrepute by his poverty, 
143. A more spirited general than Nicias, ib. iii. 418, v. 
Takes the opportunity of Nicias' sickness to engage the Syracu- 
sans, 426. lie and Callicrates, the Syracusan general, engage 
in combat, and fall by each other's hand, ib, 

— — of Myrrhene, the sophist, his panegyric upon Philip and 

Alexander, v. 261. 
Lamb, yeaned with the figure of a tiara upon it's head, and in 
another respect a monster, iv. 326. Considered as a bad omen 
by Alexander, ib. 
Lamia, the courtesan, becomes the favourite mistress of Dcme- 
metrius, though much older than he, v. 377, 378. An enter- 
tainment of her providing, 390. Called • Demetrius' Helepolis,3 

412 INDEX. 

ib. Objects to the sentence of Bocchoris in an affair in her own 
way, 39i. 

\ Lamia, the war thence called ' Lariiian,' iii. C6, u. iv. 11. v. 27, 

372. 
Lamp. The sacred lamp at Athens extinguished in tlie time of 

the tyrant Aristion, i. 183* Lighted again by fire gained froin 

the sun-beams, ih. 
Lampito, wife of Archidamus, and niotber of Agis, iv. 70. 
Lampo, the diviner, predicts from the horn of a ram, that Pericles' 

party would soon be greatly superior to the opposite one, ii. 10. 
Lamponius the Lucanian, lieutenant to Telesinus, iii. 273. 
Lampra, an Athenian borough, v. 39. 
LafflpHas, grandfather to Plutarch, v. 4.31. 
\ Lampsacus taken by Lysander, iii. 197. A city given to The- 

mistocles by the king of Persia, to supply him with wine, i. 

354. 
ham »r ' the Buffoon,' a surname of one of the Ptolemies, ii. 

187. 
Lanassa, daughter of Clebdes, and wife of the elder Pyrrhus, iii. 

66. 
, daughter of Agathocles, married to Pyrrhus, iii. 76. 

Leaves him, and marries Demetrius, 78. 
fLangb, v. lu'9. 
-j* Lailgdbritce, iv. IS. 

Language, the Latin, anciently much mixed with Greek, i. 177- 
Laodice of Troy, said to have had Clymene, by Demophoon, i. 43. 

On painting her story in the portico called Pcecile, Polygnotus 

puts the figure of Elplnic'e jri her room, iii. 298. 
Laomerfon refuses Hercules the horses be had promised him, and 

Hercules takes Troy the first time, iv. 2. 

■ the Orchomeniarij his cure for the spleen, v. 257- 

. _- the Athenian, iii. 305. 

Laphystius the orator, accuse*! Tirrioleon, ii. 274. 

t Lapitlue. Theseus assists them against the Centaurs, i. 37, 38. 

L'aras or Lara, a common name of the Tuscan kings, i. 293. 

Larentia. The Story of Larentia and Hercules, i. 54-. 

Larentialia, a festival kept in honour of Acca Larentia, i. 54. 

-j- La Issa, city of, iv. 89, 220. 

fLc i ■- -:;-, river, iii. 10. 

Lartius. See Spufius Ldrtiiis, and Titus Lartius. 

fLarymnd, a city of Ikeotia, iii. 208. 

•\Latin& demand a number of free-born virgins of the Romans, i. 

10v). Invade the ltoman territories, 403. Are defeated by 

Camillus, 404. ' 
Latin feasts. See Feasts. 
Latinus, son of Telemachus, i. 51. 

• Titus, his vision, ii. 204. 

Lai na frighted by a wild-boar near mount Ptoiim, ii. 360. 
Latamyo/s and the Tiussalians defeated at Geraestus, i. 384. 
Laughter, a little statue dedicated to the God of Laughter by Ly- 

curgus, in the public hall where they used to eat, i. 150. 

INDEX. 41 

a 

I.avinia, 1. 51. 

f Lavininm, i. 89. 

\ Laurent urn, i. 89. 

Laurentia. See Larcniia. 

f Lai[ri?w, a silver mine belonging to, tlie Athenians, i. 315, nnd 
w. Themistocles proposes that it's revenues, which used to be 
divided among the people, should be applied to the building of 
ships, ib. 316'. 

■\Lauron, a city in Spain, taken by Sertorius in sight of Pompcv, 
iv. 24; 

Law of Romulus relating to husband and wife, i. 88. Of Perieles 
against bastards. See Bastards. Of the Spartans never to make 
one man twice admiral, iii. 195. Easily evaded, ib. Agrarian, 
against bribery, &c. See Agrarian, Bribery, Szc. 

Lawgivers, i. 172. 

Latvs of Lycurgus not reduced to writing, because the practice of 
what they enjoined was to be interwoven with the whole course 
of the Spartan education, i. 130. For the particular laws of Ly- 
curgus, see Lycurgus. Of Draco, Gracchus, Solon, &-c., see 
Draco, &c\ 

. To men of few words few Jaws sufficient, i. 143. Com- 
pared to spiders' webs, 224. Should be so contrived, that the 
observance may be more advantageous than the breach of them. 
Purposely left ambiguous, to increase the power of the popular 
judges, 243. 

Lawsuits ceased in Sparta, on the prohibition of gold and silver, 
i. 149. 

.League, Achaean. See Achcvans. 

f Lebadia, iii. 253. Sylla's victory foretold by prophecies thence, 
255. Taken by Lysander, 223.' 

f Lechceum, v. 175. vf. 176, 

\ Ledum, a promontory in the country of Troas, iii. 331. 

f Lieges, iv. 170. 

Legion, formed by Romulus, i. 67. Doubled, 82. How many men 
it contained at different periods of the commonwealth, S2, ii. 

JjCiitiles offered on the tombs of the dead, iii. 475. 

I^entulus Baiiatus, trains up gladiators in Capua, who break from 
him and raise war, iii. 457. 

. ,_. Spiuthcr, iv. 436. 

sent into Asia by Flaminius, iii. 45. 

, the consul, marches against Spartacus, and is defeated, 

iii. 459. 

the censor, iv. 150. 

-, the consul, averse to a reconciliation between Pompey 

and Caesar, refuses to assemble the senate, iv. 201, 202. Opposes 
Caesar's demands, v. 431. Calls Caesar a robber, and says there 
was need of arms, not voices, against him, iv. 395. Drives An- 
ton}'and Curio out of the senate-house, ib. v. 430, 431. 

— , Lucius, coming to iEgjmt, and wandering about ig- 

norant of Pompey's fate, is put to death, iv. 229. 

U* INDEX. 

Leniulus, Cornelius, his character, v. 311. Whence his name of 

Sura, 312. Joins in Catiline's conspiracy, v. 71, 511. Is ex- 
pelled the senate, hut afterwards restored, 311, and;/. A sav- 
ing of Ins, 31 'J. Infatuated by vain predictions, ib. Draws the 
embassadors of the Allobroges into the conspiracy, 313. Is 
convicted in full senate, and taken into close custody, 314. And 
executed, 318. 

hen of Byzantium, a saying of Ills, iii. 434. 

the Corinthian, sallies from the citadel of Syracuse, and dis- 
lodges the enemy from Achradina, ii. '253. 

LeodoteSj the Athenian, accuses Pausanias of a treasonable design* 
against Greece, i. 345. 

hcochnrcs the statuary, iv. 301. 

Leocraies, an Athenian of considerable note, ii. 478. 

Leonatus the Macedonian, warns Pyrrhus of the design which 
an Italian had upon him in battle, iii. 88. 

— , one of Alexander's generals, directed, after the death of 

that prince, by Perdiccas, to establish Eumenes in the govern- 
ment of Cappadocia, iv. 41. Conceives a project to seize tin 
kingdom of Macedon, which he mentions in confidence to Eu- 
menes, 42. Sent by Alexander to the ladies of Darius' family, 
271. Employs a number of camels, to bring him earth out of 
Egypt, to be used only in wrestling, 303. Joins Antipater, v. 
SO. Is killed in battle, ib. 

Leonidas, uncle to Charilaus, king of Sparta, i. 113. 

■ . king of Sparta, tells one who talked well, but at an un- 
seasonable time, that ' he should not talk so much to the pur- 
pose, of what it was not to the purpose to talk about,' i. 143. 

, slain at Thermopylae, i. 324. 

— , Alexander's tutor, iv. 246. Bids him ' be sparing of 

frankincense, till he had conquered the several countries where 
it grew,' 278, 279. 

-, king of Sparta, son of Cleonymus, v. 136. His cha- 

racter, 1 tO. He opposes Agis in his reformations, ib. Ad- 
heres to the party of the rich, who were against the remission 
of debts and division of lands, ib. Is accused by Lysander, 
and flies to the temple of Minerva, for refuge, 111-, I 1-5. Is 
deposed, 115. Is restored, and Cleombrotus, who had been set 
Tip in his stead, is banished, 148, 119. The great virtue of his 
daughter, who was wife to Cleombrotus, ib. 150. He compels 
the widow of Agis to marry his son Cleomenes, 155. 

Lcontidas espouses the Spartan interest at Thebes, and becomes 
one of the tyrants there, ii. 347. Sends assassins against the 
Theban exiles at Athens, who kill Androclides, ib. Is killed by 
f'elopidas, 354. 

\ Leontines, ii. 260. iii. 97, 117. vi. 26, 37. 

Leonlis, tribe of, i. 311. ii. 152. 

f Leontocepkalus, i. 354. 

Leos the herald, discovers to Theseus the conspiracy of the Pal- 
lantidae, i. ! I 

INDEX. 41 

- 

Leosllienes, the Athenian general, author of the Laotian war, iii. 
66. v. 27. What passes between him and Phocion, ii. 238. iv. 
27. His victories, 28. His death, ib. 

Leoti/chidas, one of the ancient kings of Sparta, asks his friends 
at Corinth, ' whether trees grew square there,' i. 130, 131. 

, born in marriage to Agis by Timaca, but believed to 

be the son of Alcibiades, ii. 147. iv. 72. Acknowledged as his 
son by Agis upon his death-bed, ib. Set aside as spurious, 
through the management of Lysander, ib. See also iii. 216, 217. 

Lepida, contracted to Cato, marries Scipio, v. 55. 

Lcpidus, Marcus /Emilius, chief of the senate, ii. 333. 

, Marcus, against the inclination of Sylla, chosen consul 

through the interest of Pompey, iv. 142. Attempts after the 
death of Sylla to make himself absolute sovereign ol' Rome, ib. 
1 t3. Flies into Sardinia, and dies of grief for his wife's infi- 
delity, 144. 

< . Caesar chooses him for his collegne in the consulship, 

v. 435. Forms the triumvirate with Antony and Octavianus, 31'*, 
350. Has Africa for his share, 454-. 

Leptines and Polyperchon kill Callippus, vi. 53, 54. 

, tyrant of Apolionia, surrenders it to Timoleon, and is 

sent to Corinth, ii. 260. 

brother of Dionysius the Elder, vi. 10. 

f Lesbos, ii. 12.3, 148. 

Lesche, a place at Sparta where the old men meet for conversa- 
tion, to which the new-born children were carried to be exa- 
mined, i. 136. 

Letters, Laconic, i. 142. ii. 156. iv. 86. 

f Leucadians, v. 271. 

Leucaria. Roma supposed by some writers her daughter by Italus, 
i. 50. 

fLeucas, a Corinthian colony, ii. 248. Apollo's temple there, 
iv. 153. 

Leucothea, the goddess, i. 367. 

t Leuctra, battle of, ii. 367, 363. iv. 105, and n. Another battle, 
v. 160. 

heuGtridcei daughters of Scedasus, their rape, and the sacrifice i« 
be made to their manes, ii. 365, 366. 

Leuctrum, ii. 365. 

f Leucus, river, ii. 302, S09. 

Liber Pater. See Bacchus. 

Liberalia, iv. 422. 

Liberty of man not inconsistent with the co-operation of Cod, 
ii. 215. 

, games of, observed at Platsese in honour of the brave 

Greeks who fell in battle there, ii. 47S, 480. 

proclaimed to all Greece by Flaminius, at the Isthmian 

games. Sec Games. 

— , an altar reared to her by the Greek-, ii. 177. 
f Libethra, iv. 259. 
Libitina, the goddess of funerals, i. 1S7 

416 INDEX. 

Libo had the commnnd for Pompe)' of the fleet that watched the 

mouth of tlic harbour of Brundusium, v. 4312. 
Library. That of Alexandria burnt, iv. 4 14. That of Pergamus 

given by Antony to Cleopatra, v. 481. That of Luculhis open to 

all the Grecian literati, hi. 387. 
■\ Libya, ii. 136. hi. 84. 
Libys, v. 138. 

-f- Libyssa, in Bithynin, iii. 57. 
Lice. See Lousy Disease. 

Lichas, the Lacedaemonian, celebrated for his hospitality, iii. 307. 
Licinia, daughter of Licinius Crassus, and wife of Cuius Gracchus, 

v. 222, Her discourse to her husband, 238, 239. Deprived of 

her dowry after his death, 241. 
« — , the vestal virgin, M. Crassus pays his court to her, in 

order to buy her estate, iii. 447. 
Licinius Stolo raises a great commotion in Home, by insisting that 

one of the consuls should be chosen out of the Plebeians, i. 412. 

Appointed general of horse, 414. Procures a law that no one 

should possess above five hundred acres of land, and is the first 

that breaks it, ib. 

— Crassus. See Crassus. 

, servant to Cains Gracchus, v. 201. Killed in attempting 

to defend his master, 240. 

, Publius, defeated by Perseus, king of Macedon, ii. 291. 

— Maccr, when accused by Cicero, goes home and dresses 

himself in a white gown, as secure of being acquitted ; but 
finding that he was cast, kills himself, v. 302, 303. 
Cossus, i. 366. 

Licfors, persons who attended on the great officers of state among 
the Romans, why so called, i. 94. 

Licymnius, his monument, Pyrrhus falls there, iii. 116. 

Life. A general should not be prodigal of his life, ii. 34.1, 342. 

Ligarius, Quintus, defended with great eloquence by Cicero before 
Caesar, v. 342. Is acquitted, ib. Yet afterward in the con- 
spiracy against Caesar, vi. 66. 

Light. A great one appeared over Caesar's camp the night pre- 
ceding the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 213, 408. 

Lightning, a ridiculous story of a charm for it, i. 195. Places 
struck with lightning accounted sacred, i. 162. 

Ligurians. The expedition of Paulus ./Emilius against them, ii. 
287. And of Fabius Maximus, 65. Exercise piracy as far as 
the Pillars of Hercules, 287. Form a barrier against the Gauls, 
ib. Under Marius engage witli me A mb rones, iii. 144. 

f Lilybcram, promontory of, ii. 261. 

Limntpus, killed in defending Alexander in a city of the Malli, 
iv. 235. 

Lnnnus, a Macedonian, conspire: insl Alexander, and is killed 
in the resistance he made to those who were sent to apprehend 
him, iv. 3! 5. 

f Lindas, ii. 437. 

\ Lingones, a people of Gaul, iv. : 

INDEX. 41 1 

Lions let loose in the city of Mcgara, vi. 64. 

J- Lipareans, attack the Roman ships, charged with an offering for 

Delphi, i. 373. 
\ Liris, river, iii. 168. 
Lisping. That defect graceful in Alcibiades, ii. Il4. 

• of the gout, pain in the feet so called by Strabo, iii. 267. 

Lituus, the crooked staff of Romulus used by the augurs, i. 88. 

Lost when the Gauls burnt Rome, and recovered by miracle, ib> 
Livia, the wife of Augustus, v. 508. vi. 213. 
Livius Drusus* uncle to Cato the Younger by the mother's side^ 

v. 48. 
■ Drusus, tribune with Cains Gracchus, v. 231. The senate 

put him upon opposing that popular man, by acts of greater 

popularity, ib. 

Posthumius, general of the Latins, i. 100. 

-» o — — ' 

■ Marcus, what he said concerning Tarentum, ii. 99. 

f Locri Epizephyrii, ii. 434. 
f Loois, ii. 359. vi. 4, 167. 
f Lollius, Marcus, Cato's collegue in the qusestorship, v. 61. 

• , Lucius, iv; 16. 

Longimanus, a surname of Artaxerxes, vi. 114. 

Love, how defined by the philosophers* i. 103. What tlie love of 

the gods toward men, 171. 
Loiis, the month so called, iv. 242. 
Lousy Disease, Sylla and others die of it, iii. 282, 283. 
f Lucca , iii. 467- 
f Lucauian lake, iii. 461. 
f Lucanians, iii. 83. 

Luccrenses, one of the Roman tribes so called, i. 83. 
Lucilius the tribune proposes the choosing of Pompey dictator, 

but is opposed by Cato, and nearly turned out of office, iv. 194.. 
sutlers himself to he taken, to save Brutus, vi. 104. His 

speech to Antony, ib. He attends Antony in his retirement into 

tlie desert, v. 492. 
Lucius, son of Camillus, i. 406. 
■ Antonias, his rebellion against Domitian in Germany, ii. 

314. The news of his being cut to pieces with his whole army 

suddenly spread in Rome* and the author not to be found ; yet 

confirmed afterward, ib. 315. See all the other Lucii under 

their family-names. 
Lucretia, the wife of Numa, i. 205. 
, her rape the cause of the abolition of kingly government 

in Rome, i. 271, 272. 
Lucretius, the father of Lucretia, elected consul, i. 288. Dies, ib. 
Ofella besieges young Marius in Pra^neste, iii. 275. He 

applies for the consulship against the inclinations of Sylla, and is 

killed by his order, 279. 

-, Lucius, chief senator, i. 401. 

Lucullian coin, iii. 327. Games, iii. 258. 
Lucullus, Lucius, his grandfather a man of consular dignity, iii, 
825. Metellus Numidicus was his uncle, ib. His father found 
vol vi. 2 E 

•US INDEX, 

guilty of embezzling the public money, and his mother a woman 
01 indifferent reputation, ib. Detects Servilius ins father's 
accuser, in some misdemeanor, and prosecutes him for it, 326. 
Has great command both of the Greek and Latin tongues, ib. 
Sylla dedicates Ins Commentaries to him, ib. Versed in the 
liberal sciences, ib. Writes a short history of the Marsi in Greek 
verse, 5'27- His great affection lor his brother .Marcus, ib. They 
.ire created anliies together, ib. Distinguishes himself in the 
Marsian war, though then very young, ib. His constancy and 
mildness recommend him to Sylla, who makes use of his services 
from first to last, ib. Sylla gives him the direction oi' the mint, 
ib. Sylla sends him out during the siege of Athens, with a few 
ships in search o\l provisions, ib. He brings Crete over to that 
•reneral's interest, 828. Puts an end to the civil wars in Cyrene, 
ib. Sails to Egypt, and finds a magnificent reception there, ib. 
Ptolemy refuses to enter into alliance with Sylla, but offers 
Lucullus presents to the value of eighty talents, 229. Lucullus 
touches at Cyprus, ib. The stratagem he made use of to escape 
the enemy's ships, ib. Gets a fresh supply v\' ships at Rhodes, 
md reduces several islands in the 2Egean sea, ib. Is desired by 
Fimbria to shut up Mithridates in Pitana by sea, while he attacks 
him by land, 330. lie rejects the proposal, and suffers Mithri- 
dates to escape, ib. Defeats the king's fleet twice, ib. 331. 
Conveys Sylla and his army from the Chersonese to the Asiatic 
coast, 331. Being commissioned to levy the fine, laid by Sylla 
upon Asia, and to coin the money, he performs the odious part 
of it in as lenient a manner as possible, ib. Punishes the Mity- 
leans for having joined Marias' party, ib. 332, Has no hand in 
t he troubles of Italy, 332. Is constituted by Sylla guardian to 
his son, ib. This the foundation of the jealousies between 
Porapey and Lucullus, ib. After the death of Sylla, Lucullus 
is chosen consul A\ith M. Cotta, ib. A new war with Mithridates 
. ing proposed, Lucullus readily supplies Pompey with money in 
Spain, lest he should come home, and be appointed to the com- 

nd against Mithridates, . Prevents L. Quintius the 

tribune from rescinding the acts o-' Sylla, 333. The method he 
takes to get the government of Cilicia, ."31. Gains the command 
in the Mithridatic war, ib. His collegue Cotta is sent with a 
fleet to guard the Propontis and Bithynia, ib. Lucullus passes 

o Asia, with a legion raised in Italy on this occasion, ib. Finds 
■' e Roman troops in Asia, particularly those called ' Fimbrians,' 
intractable and entirely corrupted, but brings them under dis- 
cipline, ib. 335. Mithridates new-models his army, and brings it 
from show to use, 335. The people ol' Asia extremely oppressed 
bvthe Roman tax-gatherers and usurers: Lucullus redresses their 
grievances, ib. Cotta tights Mithridates, and being defeated and 
-!iut up in Chalcedon, Lucullus marches to his relief, 886. Noble 
sayings of Lucullus, ib. He goes to meet Marius, whom Serto- 
rius had sent to Mithridates, but the two armies are parted by a 
prodigy, :■■ 7. Resolves to reduce Mithridates by famine, 
Mithridates decamps in the night, and lays siege to Cyzicum, 338. 

INDEX. 419 

Lucullus follous, and takes measures for cutting off his convoy?, 
ib. Mithridates' men have the art to persuade the Cyzicenians, 
that the Romans who lay upon the heights, were Armenians, 
339. But Lucullus finds means to send Demonax into the town 
to acquaint them with his arrival, ib. Lucullus comes up with 
part of the forces of Mithridatcs at the river Rhyndacus, destroys 
great numbers, and makes many prisoners, 341. Lucullus strikes 
another great blow near the Granicus, 342. (jives chase to a 
squadron of the enemy's ships, takes them and kills their admiral 
Isidorus, !;12. Destroys more of the king's ships near Lemnos, 
and takes Marios, the general sent by Sertorius, prisoner, ib. 313. 
The senate offer Lucullus three thousand talents, to enable him 
to fit out a fleet : but he tells them he shall drive Mithridates out 
of the sea with the ships which the allies would give him, 344. 
He resolves to penetrate into Pontus, by way of Bithynia and 
Galatia, ib. Finds provisions very scarce at first, but afterward 
meets with them in extreme plenty, ib. His troops complain of 
his taking the enemy's towns by capitulation, instead of storm, 
345. His answer to those who complained of his proceeding 
slowly, ib. He leaves the sief^e of Amisus to Murffina, and 
inarches against Mithridates, who waits for him on the plains 
of the Cabiri, 346. In the first engagement the Roman cavalry 
are put to the rout, ib. Artemidorus conducts Lucullus to a 
stjrong post which commands the plains of the Cabiri, 34-7. A 
second rencounter between the two armies, ib. A Dardarian 
grandee pretends to desert to Lucullus, with a view to assassi- 
nate him; but is providentially disappointed, 318. Lucullus 
takes Cabiri, and many other places, where he finds much trea- 
sure and releases many prisoners; amongst the rest, one of the 
king's sisters, named Nyssa, 3,S1« Subdues Tibarene and Ar- 
menia the Less, 352. Demands .Mithridates of Tigranes, ib. 
Returns to the siege of Amisus, and takes it, ib. Weeps for the 
fate of that citv, which is burnt and plundered, 353. Rebuilds 
and peoples it, id. The miserable state of Asia Minor, relieved 
by his regulations, 354. The farmers of the revenues raise a 
clamour against him in Rome, but he is adored in Asia, 355. 
The Grecian cities in Asia institute a feast in honour of him, 358. 
He lays siege to Sinope and takes it, 359. Destroys the Cilicians 
who had thrown themselves into the town, ib. Endeavours to 
save the town on account of a dream concerning the hero Auto- 
lycus, ib. Machares, son of Mithridates, sends him a crown of 
gold, and desires to be admitted among the friends and allies of 
Rome, 360. Lucullus leaves Sornatius, with six thousand men 
in Pontus, and with little more than double that number marches 
against Tigranes and Mithridates, ib. His troops murmur, and 
the popular orators at Rome declaim against him, ib. 361. He 
passes the Euphrates without difficulty, and has presages of 
success, ib. Passes through Sophene, and pushes his march to 
mount Taurus, ib. 362. Enters Armenia, ib. Mithrobarzanes 
is sent with a body of men to take the Roman general alive, 362. 
Lucullus sends Sextilius against him, ib. Tigranes leaves 'Tiara* 

2 e 2 

120 INDEX. 

nocerta, and retires to mount Taurus, intending td assemble all 
his forces there; but Lucullus cuts off the parties as they come 
up, 3()3. Lucullus invests Tigranoccrta, ib. lie leaves Mursena 
to continue the siege, and goes with a small party against 
Tigranes, 365* Tigranes' saying on the diminutive appearance 
of Lucullus' armyj ib. He imagines Lucullus is flying, on his 
making a motion to pass the river, liGii. Somebody observes, 'that 
day had been a black one to the Romans,' and Lucullus says, ' he 
will make it a white one,' ib. He gains the advantage of the sum- 
mit of a hill, and bears down upon the enemy, who fly without. 
Striking a stroke, 367. He takes Tigranocerta, 8(39. Finds im- 
mense treasures there, and makes a proper use of them, ib. Re- 
commends himself to the eastern nations by his justice and huma- 
nity, 370. Does; great honour to the remains of Zarbienus, king 
of Gordyene, who had been put to death by Tigranes, ib. Receives 
embassadors from Parthia, 371. Finds the Parthians insincere, 
and meditates an expedition against them, ib. His troops prove re- 
fractory and mutinous, ib. He ascends mount Taurus, and marches 
against Artaxata, the capital of Tigranes, 372. Defeats Tigranes 
in another battle, 373. His army refuses to follow him to Artaxata, 
374. He crosses mount Taurus again, goes against Nisibis, and 
takes it, ib. 375. His good fortune forsakes him, partly through 
his own fault, 875. Murmurings against him at Rome, and 
practices for appointing another general, 376. His brother-in- 
law Clodius excites the Fimbriate against him, ib. 377. His troops 
refuse to march for some time, but on news that Fabius was 
beaten by Mithridates, they put themselves in motion, 377, 37^» 
Triarius hastens to fight before the arrival of Lucullus, and is de- 
feated, 378. Lucullus proposes once more to march against Ti- 
granes, but his mutinous troops show their empty purses, ib. 
All tnat they will agree to, is, to keep the field, and to fight it 
they should happen to be attacked, ib. Pompey succeeds him 
in the command, 379. Their common friends bring them to an 
interview, ib. They meet upon polite terms at first, but part 
greater enemies than ever, 880. The circumstance of the lau- 
rels which the lictors of Lucullus gave to those of Pompey, ib. 
Pompey allows Lucullus to take no more than sixteen hundred 
men home with him to attend his triumph, ib. With difficulty 
be obtains his triumph, through the interest of the patricians, 
381. The triumph described, ib. 382. He divorces Clodia for 
her infamous life, and is not more fortunate in marrying Ser- 
vilia, Cato's sister, 382. Soon quits the affairs of state, and re- 
tires to luxurious indulgences, ib. 383. His villas, gardens, fish- 
ponds, purple robes, furniture for his house, and provisions for 
his table, ib. 384, 385. He entertains the Grecian literati in his 
house, 386. Cicero and Pompey sup with him, and only allow 
him to say to his servants, ' We sup in the Apollo,' 387. He 
collects books at an immense expense, and his libraries are open 
to all the world, ib. The Greeks in particular have his counte- 
nance, and he often confers with them on matters of learning, ib. 
388. He gives the preference to the Old Academy, ib. Occa- 

INDEX. 421 

sionaily attends both the senate and the Fornm, only quitting his 
pretensions to the lead, ib, Pompcy's party suborn a person to 
accuse Lucullus of a design against Pompey's life, 389. Lucul- 
lus' intellects fail, and his brother has the care of his estate dur- 
ing the last years of his life, 390. The people insist on burying 
him in the Campus Marti us, but his brother begs leave to have 
it done in the Tusculan estate, ib. 
Lucidlus, Marcus, his brother Lucius' particular attention to him, 
hi. 327. Appointed sedile along with his brother, ib. Acts as 
one of Sylla's lieutenants, and gains a considerable victory, iii. 
270. Accused by Memmius for some of his acts when quaestor, 
but acquitted, 381. 

-, Marcus, praetor of Macedonia, iv. 360. 

Lucumo, his intrigue with Arron's or Arun's wife, i. 379. Rather 

a title than a name, ib. n. 
Lupercalia, a feast of purification, i. 86. A dog then sacrificed, ib. 
Luperci run about naked, and beat the women with thongs to cure 

them of barrenness, i. 86. iv. 428. 
f Lusitania, iv. 370. vi. 230. 
f Lusitanians, send embassadors to Sertorius, iv. 13. Defeated by 

Caesar, 370. 
Lustration, vi. 92. 
Lutatius Catulus. See Catnlus. 
Luxury flies from Sparta on the introduction of iron money, i. 121. 

Increases amazingly at Rome in a short period, iii. 163. 
TLyhiSy the father of Lysander, v. 138. 
f Lycaonia, v. 484. 
Lyceum, i. 35. iii. 247, 

f Lycia, the actions of Brutus in that country, vi. 85, 86. 
Lycimnius, his tomb in Argos, iii. 116. 

Lycomedes the Athenian, the first who takes a Persian ship in the 
battle of Salamis, i. 335. 

-, king of Scyros, receives Theseus when banished from 

Athens, i. 44, But afterward pushes him from a rock and kills 
him, ib. iii. 304. 
Lycon the player, inserts a verse in his part, by which he begs ten 
talents of Alexander, and that prince gives them, iv. 285. 

of Syracuse, an accomplice in the murther of Dion, vi. 53. 

Lycophron, brother of Thebe, assists her in killing her husband, 
Alexander, the tyrant of Pherae, ii. 386, 387. 

the Corinthian general, killed in battle by Nicias, iii. 

406. 
Lyc-ortas, the father of Polybius, chosen general by the Achaeans, 

revenges the death of Philopcemen, iii. 27. 
Lycurgidcc, days observed in memory of Lycurgus, i. 163, 
Lycurgus, the Spartan lawgiver, the times in which he flourished, 
i. 109, 110. His genealogy, 110. He succeeds his brother 
Polydectes in the Spartan throne, but relinquishes it, when it 
appears that his brother's widow is pregnant, 112. Preserves 
the child, and keeps the administration only as his guardian, ib. 
To get clear of unjust suspicions, travels into foreign countries, 
12 

422 INDEX. 

till his nephew Charilaus should be grown up, 1 13- Visits Crete, 
and treasures up some of the Cretan laws, ib. \ 14. Persuades 
Thales, the lyric poet, to go and settle at Sparta, 114. Procures 
a copy of Homer's poems in Ionia, 115. Selects one of the 
usages of Egypt, ib. Said by one historian to have visited the 
Gymnosophists, 116. Returns to Sparta, at the request of his 
countrymen, and resolves to alter the whole frame of the- consti- 
tution, ib. Gains the sanction of the Delphic oracle, 117. Pre- 
pares the principal citizens, and enters the market-place with 
thirty persons well-armed, ib. Institutes a senate, consisting of 
twenty^eight persons, who were to preserve a just equilibrium 
between the kings and the people, 119. Makes an equal division 
of lands, 123. Banishes gold and silver, and introduces heavy 
iron-money, 124. Obliges all the citizens to eat at public tables, 
125. Has one of his eyes struck out by Alcander, in an insurrec- 
tion, on account of this institution, 127. A description of these 
public repasts, 127 — 129. Chooses not to commit the principles of 
his polity to writing, but to interweave them with the education 
of youth, 130. Commands the Spartans to have plain and simple 
dwellings, ib. Not to fight often with the same enemy, 131. 
His regulations concerning the virgins, 132. He fixes a mark of 
infamy upon old bachelors, 133. The Spartan marriages, how 
conducted, ib. 134. All jealousy removed, and adulteries pre- 
vented, by the husband's occasionally consenting to the commu- 
nication of his wife's favours, ib. No weakly children reared at 
Sparta, 136. The nurses excellent, ib. The education of the 
boys undertaken by the public, when they reached the age of 
seven years, 137. The whole an exercise of obedience, ib. 
Their attention to literature very small, ib. They are principally 
taught to be valiant and hardy, 138. Encouraged in carrying 
things or? by surprise, but punished, if discovered, 139. Their 
spare diet contributes to make them tall, ib. They are accus- 
tomed from their childhood to think, 111. If a favourite boy 
offends, the person who had taken him into his protection is pu- 
nished, ib. They are taught to be concise in their language, and 
to excel in sharp repartee, ib. Instances of that kind, 14-2, 143, 
144. Their reverence for old age, 133, 144. The Spartan poe- 
try and music, 144. The king sacrifices to the Muses before a 
battle, 146. Their discipline less severe in war than in peace, 
ib. 147. A saying of Lycurgus concerning a large head of hair, 
147. Other regulations when they had taken the field, ib. Ly- 
curgus assists Iphitus, in regulating the Olympic games, and or- 
ders a general armistice during those games, 14S. The discipline 
of the Lacedaemonians continues after they arrive at years of ma- 
turity ; and the whole city, in point of good order, is like one 
great camp, 149. Their citizens exercise no mechanic arts; 
and the Heiots till the ground for them, ib. Law-suits are ba- 
nished with money, ib. Lycurgus encourages facetiousness, as a 
seasoning of their hard exercise and diet, 150. Instructs them 
to live not for themselves, but for their country, ib. The me- 
thod of choosing a new senator, in case of a vacancy, 152. His 

INDEX. 423 

regulations with respect to burials arid mourning, 153. He per- 
mits only some particular persons among the Spartans to travel ; 
and suffers few strangers to visit Sparta, ib. 154. He provides 
for the perpetuity of his laws, by making the people swear to ob- 
serve them till his return from Delphi, 157- With the same view 
he voluntarily puts a period to his life, 158. His establishment 
and the glory of Sparta continue for the space of five hundred 
3'ears, ib. His laws broken through by the introduction of gold 
and silver, 159. Eulogium of Lycurgus, 161, 162. Leaves a 
son named Antiorus, who dies without issue, 162. A feast called 
Lycurgidae, is observed in memory of him at Sparta, ib. 163. 

Lycurgus, head of the Fediaei, i. 263, n. 

■ , the orator, v. 10. What he said to Phocion, 13. 

. The conditions upon which he proposes to deliver up 

Byzantium to Alcibiades, ii. 159. 

f Lyons, river, ii. 270. iii. 34. 346. v. 414. 

fLydia, i. 850. iv. 48. vi. 116. 

Lydian March, one of the Spartan festivals concludes with it, ii. 
473. 

Lygdamis, iii. 133. 

Lynceus. See Idas. 

wrote a description of the entertainment which Lamia 

provided for Demetrius, v. 390. 

Lyra, iv. 426. 

Lysander, of Alopece, i. 357, 358. 

Lysander, his statue, or that of Brasidas, in the oratory of the 
Acanthians at Delphi, iii. 188. His father not of the royal 
line, but descended from the Heraclidae by another family, 189. 
His education and character, ib. Does not love money, yet 
fills Sparta with it, and with the love of it too, ib. 190. Is pitched 
upon to act against the Lacedaemonians, ib. He proves a great 
benefactor to the city of Ephesus, ib. 191. Goes to Sardis to ac- 
quaint Cyrus with the treachery of Tisaphernes, who, contrary to 
the king's orders, favoured Alcibiades and the Athenians, 191. 
Ingratiates himself greatly with Cyrus, who gives him ten thou- 
sand pieces of gold, ib. Increases the seamen's pay, and, by that 
means, almost empties the enemy's ships, ib. Afraid to engage 
with Alcibiades, ib. Beats Antiochus, to whom Alcibiades had 
imprudently left the command of the fleet during his absence, 
192. Lays the foundation of aristocratical government in the 
cities of Asia, ib. Greatly lamented by the principal persons in 
those parts when he leaves them, 193. Distresses his sus- 
cessor Callicratidas, ib. The command is restored to him, 
195. He and Callicratidas compared, ib. An instance of 
his duplicity and cruelty too, with respect to the inhabitants of 
Miletus, ib. Large sums given him by Cyrus, 196. Pillages 
TEgina and Salamis, 197. Visits the coast of Attica, where 
Agis was with his land-forces, ib. Takes Lampsacus, ib. De- 
ceives the Athenian fleet by his artful manoeuvres, 198. Falls 
upon it when the men were gone ashore to divert themselves, and 
takes or destroys the whole except the sacred galley called ' Para- 

424 INDEX. 

lus,' and eight ships, with which Conon escapes to Evagoras, 
king of Cyprus, 199, 200. Visits the maritime towns of Asia, 
and every where sets up an oligarchy, composed of his own 
friends and creatures, 203. Expels the Samians and Sestians, 
204. Kestores the iEginetce, Telians, and Scionajans, to their 
possessions, ib. Obliges Athens, distressed by famine, to sur- 
render at discretion,^. Conditions on which he agrees to make 
peace with the Athenians, 205. Finds a pretence to change 
their form of government, ib. Burns all their ships but twelve, 
and pulls down their walls, with every instance of festivity, 206. 
Sets up the Thirty Tyrants, ib. Puts a garrison in the citadel, 
ib. Sends the treasures he had taken to Lacedamion, by Gylip- 
pus, who opens the bottom of the bags, and takes out large 
sums, 207. Sciraphidas proposes to exclude all gold and silver 
money from Sparta, but Lysander has interest enough to get it 
retained as the public treasure, 208. He erects his own statue, 
and those of his officers in brass at Delphi, and dedicates two 
golden stars to Castor and Pollux, 209, He, likewise, places 
there the galley made of gold and ivory, which Cyrus had pre- 
sented him with, ib. Has altars erected to him, and hymns 
sung, 210. His favours to the poets who flattered him, ib. 21L 
Flattery makes him extremely arrogant and cruel, ib. Instance 
of his cruelty, ib. On the complaint of Pharnabazus against 
him, the Ephori send the Scytale, and recall him, 212. Pharna- 
bazus outwits him, and makes him his own accuser, 213. Ly- 
sander pretends an obligation to visit the temple of Jupiter Am- 
nion, ib. Returns, upon hearing that the oligarchies were going 
to be dissolved, 214. Is appointed general, ib. Is prevented 
from taking Athens again, by the jealousy of Pausanias, 215. 
The Athenians soon revolt; and that circumstance redeems the 
reputation of Lysander, ib. Several sayings of his, ib. On the 
demise of Agis he finds means to get Agesilaus appointed king, 
notwithstanding the pretensions of Leotychidas, and the lame- 
ness of Agesilaus, 216. Advises Agesilaus to carry the war 
into Asia, and goes with him as one of his counsellors, 217. The 
king, finding that Lysander is treated with superior distinction, 
humbles him more than he ought to have done such a friend, ib. 
218. Lysander comes to an explanation with Agesilaus, and 
has the lieutenancy of the Hellespont given him, ib. 219. Draws 
off Spithridates from the Persian interest, 219. Returns to 
Sparta, and forms a design to open a way to the throne to all the 
citizens of Sparta, or, at least, to all the Heraclidse, ib, Hopes, 
if he can effect, this, to have the best pretensions himself, 220. 
Gets Cleonof Ilalicarnassus to compose him an oration suitable 
to the occasion, ib. Endeavours to support his scheme with 
divine sanctions, ib. The priests of Amnion accuse him, but 
the Spartans regard them not, ib. Avails himself o'i a pretended 
son of Apollo, 221. Gives it out that there were certain oracles 
at Delphi, which none but a son of Apollo was to open, ib. 
Has the misfortune to see his scheme miscarry through the 
cowardice of one of the agents, ib, Charged with engaging his 

INDEX. 425 

country in the Boeotian war, 222. Sent against the Thebans 
with one army, and Pausanias with another, 223, Takes Oreho- 
menus and Lebadia, ib. Sends letters to Pausanias, that he will 
meet him at Haliartus, which the Thebans intercept, ib. Is at- 
tacked by surprise and killed, 224*. Pausanias recovers his body 
by treaty, 2-25. It is buried in the territories of the Panopaeans, 
ib. An ancient oracle fulfilled by Lysander's being killed near 
the river Hoplites, 226. His poverty, which was discovered 
after his death, proves an advantage to his character, 227. 
Among his papers is found that political one, which discovered 
his design to make the crown elective, ib. Agesijaus is inclined 
to publish it, but is restrained by Lacratidas, ib. The Spartans 
fine the persons, who desert their engagements with his daughters, 
228. 

Lysander, son of Lybis, v. 138, Chosen one of the Ephori through 
the interest of Agis, 140. Proposes a decree for cancelling 
of debts, ib. Accuses king Leonidas, 144. Is prosecuted by 
the Ephori for his decree relating to debts, 145. Deceived by 
the artful Agesilaus, 146. 

Lysandridas, the Megalopolitan, his advice to Cleomenes, v. 180. 

Lysiades of Megalopolis, sets himself up tyrant there, in hopes of 
finding superior happiness in power, vi. 183. Quits the sove- 
reignty, ib. Joins the city to the Achaean league, ib. Is chosen 
general of that league, and declares war against the Spartans, 
ib. Quarrels with Aratus, and loses his interest, 184. Forms a 
scheme to have all the honour of bringing Aristomachus, tyrant 
of Argos, into the league, but is disappointed, 188. Aratus ne- 
glects to support him with the infantry, and he is killed by Cleo- 
menes, v. 160. 

Lysias, i. 37, n. 

Lysides, a man in a low sphere of life, by the instructions of 
Aspasia becomes one of the principal and most polite men in 
Athens, ii. 37. 

Lysidice, daughter of Pelops and mother of Alcmsna, i. 9. 

Lysimachust father of Aristides, ii. 444. 

, grandson of Aristides, experiences the bounty of 

the Athenians, ii. 489. Turns interpreter of dreams for his 
bread, ib, 

-, king, forges a letter to Pyrrhus, as from Ptolemy, 

iii. 72. Ravages Upper Macedon, 78. Divides the kingdom 
of Macedon with Pyrrhus, 80. -Marches against him as far as 
Edessa, upon which Pyrrhus retires, and loses his share of Ma- 
cedon, 81. Says to Onesicritus the historian, who read to him 
an account of the Amazon's visit to Alexander, ' \Vhere was I at 
that time V iv. 312. Suspected by his allies on account of his 
great power, v. 395. Taken prisoner by Dromicluttcs, 405. 

the Acarnanian, preceptor to Alexander, iv. 246. 

Desires to go with his master against the Arabians on Anti- 
libanus, by which Alexander runs no small risk of his life, 277. 

Lysippus, the Achrean general, iii. 16. 

. Alexander suffers no other artist to make his statue, 

♦26 INDEX. 

iv. 243. Represents, in figures of brass, Alexander killing a 
lion, 301. 

M. 

MAC ARIA, daughter of Hercules, ii. 366. 

fMacedon subdued bv the Romans in the time of Perseus, ii. 

319, 320. 
Macedonian troops, ordered by Alexander to shave their beards, 

i. 7. 
Macedonians, great lovers of their kings, ii. 312. 
Macedonians, a name given to Metellus, iii. 120. 
Machanidas, the Lacedaemonian tyrant, killed in battle by Phi- 

lopoemen, iii. 14. 
Machares, son of Mithridates, sends Lucullus a crown of gold, 

and desires to be admitted into the friendship and alliance of 

the Romans, iii. 360. 
Machevriones, the posterity of Anticrates so called, iv. 116. 
Mcccenas, v. 357. 
Malius, Spurius, stabbed by Servilius Ahala for aspiring to the 

monarchy, vi. 57. 
+ Ma-otis, Palus, iii. 133, 246. 
Magcpus, brother to Pharnabazus. undertakes to destroy A!ci- 

biades, ii. 171. 
Mao;as, brother to Ptolemy king of Egypt, his life saved by Cleo- 

menes, v. 189. 
Magi, the Persian, iv. 243. vi. 117. 
f Magnesia, a city given to Themistocles by the king of Persia, to 

supply him with bread, i. 354. 
Magnesian citizen. Antony gives the estate of one to a cook for 

dressing a supper, v. 417. 
fMagnesians, iii. 43,50. 
Mago, the Carthaginian admiral, joins Icetes in his attempt upon 

Syracuse, ii. 252. Miscarries, and returns to Africa, 256". 
Mala, i. 201. 
Ma'uvacterion, ii. 480. 
Malchu<, king of Arabia, sends forces to the assistance of Antony, 

v. 484. 
Malcites apd Diogiton, sent by the Thebans into Thessaly to re- 
venge the death of Pelopidas, ii. 385. 
fMalea, promontory of, v. 140. vi. 163. 
Maliac Bay, ii. 31. 

f Malli. Alexander's danger in the attack of their city, iv. 334. 
Mallius, or Manlius, Lucius, an assistant to Cato the Elder, in 

attempting the heights near Thermopylae, ii. 510. 
Mamercii, pretend to be descendents of Mamercus, the son of 

Numa, i. 204. 
Mamercus, the son of Numa, i. 180. 

, the son of Pythagoras, ii. 282. 

■-, tyrant of CaUuia, forms an alliance with Tmioleon, it. 

INDEX. 427 

246. Envies his achievements, and enters into a league with 
the Carthaginians, 266. Is beaten by Timoleon, and flies to 
Hippo, tyrant of Messana, 270, 271. Surrenders to Timoleon, 
and is sent to Syracuse, where, upon his trial for breach of faith, 
and other crimes, he attempts to kill himself, but is prevented 
and put to a severer death, 271. 

t Mamertines, a warlike people, inhabitants of Messina, iii. 99. 

Mamurius Veturius. See Vefurius. 

Mancinus, Caius, the consul, is beaten by the Numantines, and 
makes peace ; for which he is disgraced and imprisoned, and 
the peace annulled, v. 203 — 205. 

\ Mandonium, v. 135. 

Manclrkidas, the Spartan, tells Pyrrhus, * if he is a god, he will do 
them no injustice ; if a man, there will be found as good a one 
as he,' iii. 106. 

Mandroclidas, the son of Ecphanes, assists Agis in his schemes 
for restoring the Spartan constitution to it's original purity, v, 
138. Called to account for it by the Ephori, 145. 

Manilius expelled the senate by Cato, ii. 517- 

. the tribune, his law in favour of Pompey, iv. 161. Ac- 
cused of having robbed the public, and defended by Cicero, v. 
303, 30*. 

^iaiiipuli, what so called, i. 60. 

Manipulares$ i. 60. 

Manias Acilius Glabrio, sent against Antiochus, whom he defeats at 
Thermopylae, iii. 23, 50. 

— Aquilius, iii. 137. 

Curius Deniatus triumphs thrice, ii. 494. Cato the Elder 

often visits his little farm, ib. He defeats Pyrrhus, ib. His 
answer to the Samnite embassadors who offered him gold, ib. 
495. 
Manlius, Titus, the temple of Janus shut in his consulship, i. 203. 

, with Sylla's veterans, engaged in Catiline's conspiracy, 

v. 308. 

-, Torquatus, causes his own son to be beheaded for fighting 

without orders, though he gained the victory, ii. 78 

-, who saved the Capitol, put to death for aspiring to the 

supreme power in Koine, i. 408. 

— , the tribune, opposes Flaminius in his solicitation for the 

consulship, iii. 32. 

defeated by the Arnbrones, iii. 143. 

, Lucius, defeated by Sertorius' lieutenant, iv. 16. 

, Lucius. See Mallius. 

conspires against Sertorius, iv. 34. 

--, his application to Tiberius Gracchus, v. 210, 211. 

f Mantinea, iii. 2, 13. Besieged by Cleomenes, v. 161. Taken by 
Aratus, v. 161. vi. 190. Its name changed to Antigonia, vi. 200. 
Battle of Mantinea, ii. 131. 

+ Marathon, a city of Tetrapolis, i. 15, n. Battle of, ii. 452. 

MarathoniiVi bull, conquered by Theseus, i 14, 15, and n. 

428 INDEX. 

Marathus, to fultil an oracle, offers himself up at the head of the 

army, i. 41. 
MurcelUmts and Domitius, demand of Pompey, whether he will 

stand for the consulship or not, iii. 467. iv. 190. 
Mcuxellus, brother-in-law to Ca?sar Octavianus, v. 347. 
, Marcus, goes with Crassus to Cicero's house at midnight, 

with letters relating to Catiline's conspiracy, v. 309. 

, the tribune, son of the conqueror of Syracuse, ii. 435. 

, son of Caius, his mother Octavia dedicates a library, and 

Augustus a theatre, to his memory, ii. 437. 

the consul, calls Caesar a public robber, iv. 200. Com 

mands Pompey to prepare for the defence of his country, 201 . 
the quaestor, v. 66. Collegue with Cato, ib. 

Marcellus, Marcus Claudius, consecrates the Spolia Opima to 
Jupiter Feretrius, i. 76. The original of his family, ii. 389. 
Whence the surname of Marcellus, ib. His great skill in war, 
particularly in single combat, 390. He rescues his brother Ota- 
cilius, ib. ' Appointed aedile and augur, ib. Appointed consul, 
and takes Cneius Cornelius for his collegue, 394. Viridomarus, 
king of the Gesata?, laying waste the country about the Po, Mar- 
cellus defeats and kills him, 395, 396. Consecrates the Spolia 
Opima to Jupiter Feretrius, 396. Is honoured with a triumph, 
397. Is sent with a fleet to Sicily to oppose Annibal, 399. After 
the great blow at Cannae, sends fifteen hundred men to assist in 
the defence of Rome, ib. Is ordered to head the remainder of 
the Roman army, which had retired to Canusium, ib. What 
Annibal said of him, 400. Marches to the relief of Naples and 
Noia, ib. Recovers Bandius to the Roman interest, 401. Defeats 
Annibal, ib. 402. Is called to the consulate, but lays it down, 
upon the omens being declared inauspicious, 402. Attacks An- 
nibal when he had sent out large detachments for plunder, and 
defeats him again, 403. Three hundred of Annibal's cavalry 
come over to him, ib. On the death of Hieronymus, the Car- 
thaginians assert their claim to Sicily again, and Marcellus, now 
consul the third time, is sent into that island, 404. With much 
difficulty he procures leave from the senate to employ the fugi- 
tives from Cannae, 405. Takes Leontium, ib. Attacks Syracuse 
both by sea and land, 406. Prepares a prodigious machine upon 
eight gallies fastened together, ib. This machine called ' Sam- 
buca,' broken in pieces by Archimedes, 410 — 412. Turns into 
a blockade the siege of Syracuse, 413. Takes Megara in Sicily, 
414. Attacks Hippocrates at Acrillae, and kills eight thousand 
of his men, //;. In the conferences held with the Syracusaus 
about the ransom of Uamippus, he takes notice of a tower which 
might be gained, ib. In the night of Diana's festival he gets 
into the city, and forcibly enters the Hexapylum, 415, 416. His 
officers compliment him on his taking the city, but he weeps at 
the thought of what it was to suffer, 416. He is much afflicted 
at the unhappy fate of Archimedes, 41S. His mercy to the 
people of Enguium, 421. He is called home to carry on tly-' 

INDEX. 429 

war against Annibal, ib. Carries with him the most valuable of 
the statues and paintings from Syracuse, ib. Is satisfied with an 
Ovation, 423. Accused by the Syracusans before the senate, 
but honourably acquitted, 4-24 — 426. Continues his protection 
to them notwithstanding ; and their liberty and laws by his means 
are confirmed to them, 426. Marches againts Annibal, and acts 
with more vigour than the officers before him, ib. Recovers the 
best towns of the Samnites, and makes three thousand of Anni- 
bal's men prisoners, 427. Cneius Fulvius, the proconsul, with 
eleven tribunes, and great part of his army being slain in Apulia, 
Marcellus revenges his death, ib. Annibal lays many snares for 
him, but he escapes them, 428. Confirms Quintus Fulvius dic- 
tator, his collegue having refused to nominate him, 428, 429. 
Watches the motions of Annibal, while Fabius Maximus besieges 
Tarentum, 429. Is beaten at Canusium, 429. Renews the 
charge the next day, and amply redeems the Roman honour, 
430, 431. Retires to Sinuessa, for the refreshment of his 
wounded soldiers, 431. Is accused by Bibulus of neglect of 
duty, ib. Is honourably acquitted and chosen consul a fifth 
time, 432. Allays a dangerous commotion in Tuscany, ib. Does 
not succeed in his desire to dedicate his temple to Honour and 
Virtue, ib. Is extremely desirous to fight a decisive battle with 
Annibal, 433. Fixes his camp between Bantia and Venusia, 
433. Going with a few horse to reconnoitre a hill in order to 
encamp upon it, is killed by a stratagem of Annibal's, 435. An- 
nibal, after having taken Marcellus' signet, gives the body a 
magnificent funeral, and sends the ashes in a silver urn to his 
son, 436. Marcellus' public donations, 437. The inscription 
on the pedestal of his statue in the temple of Minerva at Lindus, 
ib. His posterity continues in great splendour down to Mar- 
cellus, nephew and son-in-law of Augustus, ib. 

Marcia, daughter of Philip, and wife to Cato the philosopher, v. 73. 
She is married to Hortensius, with the consent of Cato, and when 
a rich widow Cato takes her again, 74, 101. 

Marcius, or Martins, Numa's kinsman, persuades him to accept 
the crown which the Romans offered him, i. 174. Starves him- 
self to death, 205. 

— , son of Marcius, marries Pompilia, the daughter of Numa, 

i. 205. Is the father of Ancus Marcius, ib. Publius and Quintus 
Marcius supply Rome with water, ii. 174. 

, Caius Marcius. See Coriolanus. 

Philippics, ii. 333. 

employed by Catiline to kill Cicero, v. 310. 

f , Mount, i. 403. 

Marcus Crassus. See Crassus. 

JEmilius Lepidus, declared chief of the senate by Paul us 

iDmilius, ii. 333. See all the other Marci under their family- 
names. 

Mardian, conducts the Romans out of Parthia, v. 465, et scq. 

Mardion, the eunuch, v. 483. 

Mardoniusy Xerxes' general, ii. 460. Pausanias acts as corn- 

4:30 INDEX. 

mknder in chief against him, 470. And Aristides at. the head 
of tiie Athenians, 469. lie is killed in the battle of Plataeae, 

475. 

Marcs, the graves of those of Cimon near his own, ii. 499, 500. 

Margian steel, iii. 4*81. 

Margites, why Demosthenes called Alexander by that name, v. 
278, and n. 

Marica, a comedy of Eupolis so called, iii. 403. 

M&rician grove, dedicated to the nymph of Marica, iii. 171. 

Marius, Cains, had no third name, iii. 120. His statue at Ravenna, 
121. Stern in his countenance, and intractable in his disposi- 
tion, ib. The disadvantage of his having no knowledge of the 
(ireek literature, 122. His parents obscure aud indigent people, 
ib. His father's name the same with his, and his mother's Ful- 
cinia, ib. Born at a village in the territory of Arpinum, ib. 
Makes his first campaign under Scipio at the siege of Numantia, 
ib. Scipio forerels that he would one day be a great general, 
123. When tribune of the people, he proposes a law which 
lessened the authority of the patricians in matters of judicature, 
and carries it against the consul, ib. Opposes the plebeians with 
respect to a distribution of corn, 124. Applies for the office ol 
-a-diie, and loses it, ib. Is accused of bribery in his application 
for the proctorship, and gains the office with great difficulty, ib. 
(iocs propraetor to the Farther Spain, and clears it of robbers, 
125. Marries Julia, of the family of the Caesars, 126. Instance 
of his fortitude in bearing an operation in surgery, ib. Metellus 
takes him as one of his lieutenants in the war against Jugurtha, 
ib. He practises against Metellus, and takes every method to 
recommend himself to the common soldiers, ib. 127. Prevails 
upon Metellus to pass sentence of death on his friend Turpilius, 
•who had lost the town of Vacca, and then insults him for it, 128. 
Applies to Metellus for leave to go and stand for the consulship, 
which he gains only twelve days before the election, 1'29. On 
his arrival at Rome, by false charges against Metellus, and 
great promises to the people, he prevails on them to elect him, 
ib. His insolent speeches against the nobility, 130. Sylla, 
Marius' qua?stor, endeavours to rob Marius of the honour of his 
exploits in Africa, as Marius had done Metellus, ib. Marius 
is elected consul again, though absent, in order to his going 
general against the Teutones and Cimbri, who were marching 
toward Italy with an army of three hundred thousand men, 132, 
134. He triumphs for the conquest oi Jugurtha, who is led 
captive, 135. He enters the senate in his triumphal robe, ib. 
He trains his soldiers to labour, and disciplines them in an 
excellent manner, ib. He obtains a third and fourth con- 
sulship, because the Romans did not choose to meet the bar- 
barians under any other general, 136, 137- He encamps 
by the river Rhone, and makes a cut in the mouth of 
that river, in order to the 'supplying of his camp the better 
with provisions, 137. The Teutones and Ambrones challenge 
him to battle. L38. He accustoms his men to the uncouth and 

INDEX. 431 

terrible looks of the enemy, ib. The troops complain of his 
restraining them from action, 139. He makes great use of the 
pretended prophecies of a Syrian woman named Martha, ib. 140. 
The Teutones attempt his entrenchments, and lose a number of 
men, 141. They march by, and ask the Romans, whether they 
have any commands to Rome, 142. Marius follows, and pre- 
pares for battle near Aquae Sextiae, ib. Pitches upon a camp 
that afforded little water, ib. Defeats the Ambrones, 145. De- 
spatches Claudius Marcellus, to lie in ambush behind the enemy 
w ith three thousand men, ib. Defeats them in another battle, 
ib. 146. The troops vote Marius such of the tents as were not 
plundered, 146. As he is preparing to set fire to piles of the 
enemy's arms, news is brought him of his being elected consul a 
fifth time, 147. His joy damped by the defeat of Catullus, by 
the Cimbri, 148. He goes to Rome, but refuses the triumph 
that was offered him, 119. Joins Catullus, 150. What passed 
between Marius and the embassadors of the Cimbri, ib. He 
contrives a new form for the javelin, ib. His answer to Boiorix, 
king of the Cimbri, who challenges him to battle, 151. The 
battle described, 151, 15'2. The desperate behaviour of the 
Cimbri and their women, on the defeat, 153,154. Marius gams 
the honour of the day, though Catullus did the most service, 154. 
He is called the third founder of Rome, ib. He courts the 
people for a sixth consulship, 155. Timid in popular assem- 
blies, ib. Obtains the consulship by the assistance of Glaucius 
and Saturninus, throws out Metellus, and gets Valerius Flaccus 
elected his collegue, 156. Abets Saturninus in his Agrarian 
law; in the murthcr of Nonius ; and in a clause obliging the se- 
nate to confirm whatever the people should enact, 157. Bv 
means of the snare which lurked in that clause, and Marius' pre- 
varication, Metellus is banished, 158, 159. Marius acts a double 
part' between the nobility and the seditious tribunes, 159. Sa- 
turninus and the rest of the cabal fly into the Capitol, but are 
forced to submit for want of water, 160. Marius tries to save 
them, but they are despatched by the people, on their coming 
down into the Forum, ib. He declines offering himself for the 
censorship, through fear of a repulse, ib. On the recall of Me- 
tellus, he takes a voyage into Asia, and endeavours to stir up 
Mithridates to war, in hopes of being appointed general against 
him, ib. 161. Bocchus, king of Numiclia, erects in the Capitol 
a set of figures, comprising the history of his delivering up Ju- 
gurtha to Sylla, which inflames the jealousy of Marius, ib. A 
civil war is prevented, for the present, by the breaking our oi 
the Marsian war, or the war of the allies, 162. Marius does not 
distinguish himself in that war, like Sylla, ib. Yet he kills six 
thousand of the enemy in one battle, and surfers not Pompedius 
Silo, one of their best generals, to take any advantage of him, ib. 
He lays down his command under pretence of inability, 163. 
Yet he solicits the chief command against Mithridates, through 
the tribune Sulpitius, ib. Takes his exercises in the Campus 
Martius, like a young man, ib. Sulpitius having killed the son 

43'J INDEX. 

of one of the consuls, and put the other consul to flight, dccrdeS 
the command to Marius, 164-, 16.5. Marius sends two officers to 
Sylla, with orders that he should deliver up the army, 16.}. 
Sylla puts those officers to death, and marches immediately to- 
ward Rome, ib. Marius, alter some cruelties* and a vain at- 
tempt to raise forces, flies, ib. His friends desert him, ib. He 
retires to Salonium, a little villa of his ; and from thence to 
Ostia, where he embarks, attended only by Granius, ib. Young 
Marius is in danger, but is saved by a bailiff of his father-in- 
law Mutius, and carried toward Rome in a cart-load of beans, ib. 
Young Marius sails for Africa, 166. The elder Marius coasts 
Italy, ib. Distressed by fear of his old enemies, his infirmities, 
and bad weather, he goes on shore at Circaeum, ib. In great 
want of provisions, and hunted by Sylla's soldiers; yet encou- 
rages his little company by a prophecy, that he should gain a 
seventh consulship, ib. 167. He espies a troop of horse making 
toward him, and with much difficulty gets on board a vessel, ib. 
168. The mariners, after having refused to surrender him to the 
horsemen, set him ashore near the mouth of the river Liris, and 
there desert him, 168. He applies to a cottager to hide him, ib. 
On the noise of persons sent by Geminius to search for him, 
he leaves the cave where he was lurking, and plunges into 
one of the marshes, 169. He is discovered, and carried to 
MinturnaBj ib. The magistrates place him at the house of Fan- 
nia, who had an inveterate aversion to him, ib. She forgets her 
resentment, and entertains Marius in the best manner, 170. He 
is encouraged by an omen, ib* The magistrates of Minturnse 
pass sentence of death upon him, ib. The executioner, who 
was either a Gaul or a Cimbrian, trembles at his voice, and at a 
light which darted from his eyes, ib. The soldier reports this to 
the people, and they resolve to conduct him wherever he pleased, 
171. They lead him even through the Marcian grove, ib. He 
goes on board a vessel provided by one Bekcus, ib. Finds his 
son-in-law, Granius, in the isle of ./Enaria, ib. Touches at Si- 
cily, from whence he escapes with difficulty, ib. Is informed in 
the island of Meninx, that his son Marius had escaped to Africa, 
and was gnnc to implore succour of Hiempsal, 172. Lands in 
Africa, and receives a message from the praetor Sextilius, com- 
manding him to depart, ib. His noble answer, ib. The king of 
Kumidia detains young Marius at his court ; but a love adven- 
ture sets him free, and he returns to his father, ib. 173. The 
omen of two scorpions fighting, puts Marius upon escaping to a 
neighbouring island, and soon after he sees a party of Numidian 
horse in pursuit of him, 173. Being informed of the quarrel 
between the consuls Cinna and Octavius, he sails to join China 
with only one thousand men, 173. He arrives at Telamon, a 
port of Tuscany, and proclaims liberty to the slaves, ib. Col- 
lects a considerable force, and fills forty ships, ib. 17i. Makes 
Cinna an offer of his assistance, which is accepted, ib. Cinna 
declares him proconsul, and sends him the fasces, which he re- 
jects, ib. He cuts off the enemy's convoys at sea, and makes 

INDEX. 43S 

himself master of the maritime towns, ib. Ostia is betrayed to 
him, ib. He enters Rome, after having demurred, under pre- 
tence of being an exile, 176. He selects a guard from the 
slaves, and calls them his Bardiseans, ib. These put all to 
death, whose salutation Marius does not return, ib. Account of 
the dreadful massacres, ib. 177, 178. Marius is elected consul 
the seventh time, and the very day he enters on his office, 
orders Sextus Licinus to be thrown down the Tarpeian rock, ib. 
179. Finds his faculties fail, ib. Has recourse to the bottle, ib. 
Becomes delirious, 180. Dies at the age of seventy, with the 
chagrin of an unfortunate wretch, who had not obtained what he 
wanted, ib. His death productive of the greatest joy in Rome, 
181. His son treads in the steps- of his cruelty, and comes to 
an untimely end, ib. 

Marius, son of Caius Marius, iii. 165. Goes to beg succours of 
Hiempsal, king of Numidia, 172. Is detained at his court, but 
makes his escape by the assistance of a young woman that fell 
in love with him, ib. 173. Is beaten by Sylla, 270. Flies to 
Prameste, 272. Kills himself, 278. 

Celsus. See Celsus. 

, Marcus, proscribed by Svlla, and killed by Catiline, iii. 

278. 

-, Marcus, a Roman officer, sent by Sertorius to act as ge- 

neral for Mithridates, iii. 337, 313. iv. 32. 
-' mules, who so called, iii. 136. 

Marphadates, a Cappadocian prince, husband to Psyche, with 

whom young Cato had an intrigue, v. 122. 
Marriage. Customs and ceremonies relating to it at Rome, i. 71 
Romulus' laws concerning it, 88. Regulations of Lycurgus, 
133, 131. And of Solon, about it, 24-7, 248. 
f Marrucinians, ii. 307. 

Mars, given out as father of Romulus and Remus, i. 51. 
f Marsi. Sylla persuades them to declare for the Romans, iii. 233. 
Marsi/as, put to death by Dionysius the Elder, for a dream, vi. 10. 
Martha, a Syrian prophetess, dressed up by Marius with great 

pomp. She attends him in his expeditions, and he makes great 

use of her predictions, iii. 139, 14-0. 
Mrtrtia\ See Marcia. 
Martial, epigram of, iii. 235, n. 
Martialis, a tribune, vi. 237. 
Martianus, a gladiator, vi. 217. 
Marlins Rex, marries Tertia, sister of Clodius, v. 328. 

, v. 310. 

MaruUus, a tribune of the people deposed by Caesar, iv. 429. 
Masinissa, king of Numidia, his wars with the Carthaginians, ii. 

529. A steady friend to the Romans, 530. 
JMasistius, a Persian officer, behaves with great courage, ii. 467. 

Is killed in battle by the Athenians, 468. 
f Massilia, or Marseilles, city of, founded by Protus, a merchant; 

i. 221, and n. 

voi. vi. 2 F 

- 

434 INDEX. 

Massilians inclose their vineyards with the bones of those who fell 
in the battle between the Romans and the Teutones, iii. 146. 

Matronalia, a feast in honour of the Roman matrons, for their 
having put an end to the war between the Sabines and the Ro- 
mans, i. 85, 

Matuta, Matery the temple of a goddess so called by the Romans, 
i. 367. 

Mauriscus, what he said to the senate of Rome, vi. CIS. 

f Mauritania, iv. 12. 

Mazceus, upon the impression made on Parmenio by the Bactrian 
horse, sends a party round to full on those who guarded Alex- 
ander's baggage, iv. 291,. Alexander's munificence to the son 
of Mazaeus, 303. 

Meal. No sacrifice to be made without it, i. 192. 

Mecenas, v. 458. 

Mechanics first cultivated as a branch of philosophy by Eudoxus 
and Archytas, ii. 408. 

Medea, wife of iEgeus, i. 13. Supposed to have anointed with 
naphtha the crown and veil which she gave Creon's daughter, 
iv. 297. 

f Medes, their habits, iv. 310. 

f Medica, ii. 295. 

Medimnus. A sheep and a medimnus of corn, each valued at a 
drachma in Solon's time, i. 252. Of wheat, sold for a thousand 
drachmas in time of famine, iii. 219. 

f Mediolanum. See Milan. 

Medius, a friend of Antigonus, his dream, v. 380. 

Medon, son of Codrus, the first Archon at Athens, i. 45, n. 

Megabacekus, famed for his strength and courage, a friend of young 
Crassus, iii. 483. Kills himself, 485. 

Megabates, son of Spithridates, a favourite of Agesilaus, iv. 83. 

Megabi/zus, Alexander's letter to him, iv. 306. 
^legacies, Archon of Athens, involves the city in the guilt of sacri- 
lege, in the affair of Cylon, i. 232. 

, father of Dinomaehe, and grandfather of Alcibiades, 

ii, 112. 

son of Alcmacon, heads a party of the Athenians, on 

their breaking into factions after the departure of Solon, i. 263. 
Pisistratus obtains a guard, and Megacles flies, 266. 

friend to Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus tells him, that ' the order 

of the Roman army has nothing of the barbarian in it,' iii. 87. 
Pyrrhus changes his dress with him ; upon which he is attacked 
and killed, 89. 

-, brother to Dion, joined in commission with Dion by the 

Syracusans, vi. 28. 
Megaleeus belonged to the court of Philip, the son of Demetrius, 

vi.203. 
Megalopolis, taken by Cleomenes, iii. 6. It's inhabitants saved 

and restored by Philopoeinen, ib. Hard pressed by Nabis, tyrant 

of Lacedacmon, 17. 

INDEX. 435 

I -Megara in Macedonia, i. 11, 31, 36. iii. 66. 

f in Sicily, ii. 415. 

t restored to liberty by Demetrius, v. 371. 

Megarensians take Nisaea, and recover Salamis from the Athenians, 
i. 232. Their manner of sepulture, 230. The Athenians forbid 
them to set foot on their territories, ii. 44. They are united to 
the Athenians by Phocion, v. 18. 

Megellm migrates from Elea to Agrigentum, which had been 
ruined by the Carthaginians during the Athenian war, ii. 271. 

Megistonoiis marries the mother of Cleomenes, v. 160. Taken 
prisoner by Aratus, vi. 191. 

Melancholy. Aristotle observes that persons of genius have some- 
thing of it, iii. 189. 

Melanippus, son of Theseus by Perigune, i. 10. Has a son named 
loxus, ib. 

Metanopus the orator, v. 266. 

Melantas, vi. 135. 

Melanthius the elegiac poet, iii. 297- 

■ , what he said in praise of Phocion's wife to a player, 

v. 23, 24. 

Melanthus of Sicyon, the celebrated painter, vi. 164. 

■f" Mclas, river, navigable from it's source, iii. 261. Swells about 
the summer solstice like the Nile, and produces the same plants, 
ib. 

Meleager, Theseus assists him in killing the boar, i. 37. 

Melians, inhabitants of Melos, one of the Cyciades, Alcibiades the 
chief cause of the slaughter among them ; yet he thinks he does - 
the island great honour by cohabiting with one of its women, ii. 
134. Lysander re-establishes them, iii. 204. 

■\ Melibcea, a city in Magnesia, ii. 377. 

Melicertes. Ceremonies in the worship of him, i. 31. 

Melisippidas, iv. 70. 

Melissus, the philosopher, Themistocles studies under him, i. 313. 

— , admiral of Samos, beats the Athenians, ii. 40. But is af- 
terward defeated by Pericles, ib. 

:(- Melite, an Athenian borough, i. 230. v. 24. 

■f Melitea, city of, iii. 260. 

Mel it 'us, a torch-bearer, iv. 191. 

f Mellaria, iv. 16. 

Mellirens. See Irens. 

Melville, Lord Viscount, i. 414, n. 

Melon, one of the associates of Pelopidas in delivering Thebes, 
ii. 349. 

Memmius, Caius, accuses the two Luculli, iii. 381. v. 78. 

■ , Pompey's sister's husband. Pompey, after he had re- 
duced Sicily for Sylla, left him governor there, iv. 137. 

Pompey's lieutenant, killed in battle by Sertorius, 

iv. 28. ' 

Memnon, the most able of Darius' generals, iv. 266. His death, 

ib. He was husband of Barsine, 272. 
t Memphis, one of the wonders of Egvpt, iii. 329. 

2 ¥ 2 

*36 INDEX. 

Menander, one of tho Athenian generals, defeated by Lysandcr 

at TEgos Potamos, ii. 16K, 169. 
. , an officer sent by Mithridates to intercept one of Lucul- 

lus' convoys, iii. 349. 

-, joined in commission with Nicias, iii. 429. His fatal 

ambition to fight, 430. 

, had the care of Antigonus' baggage, iv. 51. 

-, put to death by Alexander, for deserting a fortress of 

which he had the command, iv. 326. 

-, the poet, alludes to Alexander's passing through the 

Pamphylian sea, iv. 265 
Moms, a sea-officer under Sextus Pompeius, proposes to him a 

method to make the whole Roman empire his own, v. 455. 
\ Mende, castle of, iii. 504. 
} Mendes in Egypt, the prince of it solicits the favour of Agcsi- 

laus, iv. 121. 
Meneclidns, from a principle of envy, endeavours to set up another 

against Epaminondas and Pelopidas, ii. 371. Is fined by the 

Thebans, 372. _ 
Mcnccratcs, the historian, i. 33. 

1 , an officer in the navy of Sextus Pompeius, v. 155. 

, the physician, iv. 97. 

Menedemus, an officer of the bed-chamber to Lucullus, saves his 

master from an attempt of Olthacus upon his life, iii. 319. 
f Menelaiis1 haven in Africa, Agesilaus dies there, iv. 122. 
Menelaiis, brother to Ptolemy king of Egypt, is defeated, and 
" surrenders to Demetrius, v. 377. 
Mcnemacfats and Myron, sent by Mithridates to intercept a Roman 

convoy ; but their troops are almost totally cut offby Adrian, iii. 349. 
Menenius Agrippa, appeases a sedition, by reciting a fable to the 

people, ii. 181. 
Mencs. See Menas. 

Menesthes, one of the young men sent with Theseus by way of tri- 
bute to Crete, i. 19. 
Mcncstheus, stirs up the Athenians against Theseus, and takes the 

reins of government, i. 40, 41. The first, who undertook to be 

a demagogue, 40. Quietly possesses the kingdom of Athens, 

45. His death, ib. 

. • the orator, v. 10. 

Meninx, an island, at which Marius touches in his flight to Africa, 

iii. 172. 
Mciiippus, has a principal command under Pericles, ii. 25. 

, the Carian, a rhetorician, visited by Cicero, v. 297. 

Menezseus, son of Creon, devotes himself to death for his country, 

ii 366, n. 
Menou, Phidias' scholar, accuse* him, and Phidias dies in prison, 

ii. 47, 48. 
— , commands the Thessalonian horse in the Persian expedi- 
tion, v. 30. vi. 120, n. 131. The father of I'hthia, iii. 66. 
Mentor, brother of Menmon, goes with Eumenes to Alexander, 

when he has a certain complaint to make, iv. 39. 

INDEX. 437 

Menyllus commands the garrison which Antipater put in Athens, 

v. 33. Offers Phocion a sum of money, which he refuses, 35, 36. 
Mercedinus, or Mercedonius, the Roman intercalary month so 

called, i. 199. iv. 426. 
Merchant, the profession of, honourable, i. 221. Solon follows it 

some time, 220. 
Mercury, i. 33. His statues, ii. 138. iii. 302, n. Many of thera 

defaced in one night at Athens, ii. 138. iii. 418. 

of TEgeus' gate, i. 14. 

Mcrope, daughter of Erectheus, and mother of Drcdalus, i. 21 . 

Merula. See Cornelius. 

Mesabates, the eunuch, won of Artaxcrxes at dice, by Parysatis, 

and ordered to be flayed alive, for having cut oft the head and 

hand of Cyrus, v. 133. 
Mesolabes, mathematical instruments, ii. 408. 
f Mesopotamia. See the Life of Crassus. 
Messala, father of Valeria, the wife of Svlla, iii. 281. 

Corvinus, a friend of Cassius and Brutus, fights in the right 
wing of their army at Philippi, vi. 95. His generous answer to 
Augustus, 107. 

consul with Domitius, iv. 194. 

f Mcssana, or Messena, in Sicily, ii. 255. iii. 99. v. 102. vi. 53. 

f Messapians, iii. 83. v. 135. 

f Messene in Peloponnesus, the fertilitj' of the lands about it, i. 122, 
n. Re-established by Epaminondas, iv. 114. Freed from the 
tyrant Nabis by Philopoemen, iii. 16. 

Messengers, of Harpalus find a disagreeable reception from Pho- 
cion, v. 25. 

Metagenes, continues building the Parthenon, which was begun 
by Coroebus, ii. 23. 

Metageitnion, the month so called, i. 290. v. 286. 

f Metaponfitm, ii. 94. 

McteUa. See Ciccilia Melella. 

Mctellus, Quintus, his invidious observation upon Tiberius Grac- 
chus, v. 214. 

, Quintus, why called ' Celer,' i. 64. Married a sister 

of Clodius, v. 328. 

the chief pontiff, marries his daughter to Sylla, iii. 239. 

His death, iv. 364. 

, Caius, calls upon Sylla to declare whom he will save, 

and whom destroj', iii. 276. 

, or, as Plutarch calls him, Metilius Cimber, gives the 

signal for the attack upon Caesar in the senate-house, iv. 434-. 

Quintus Ca^cilius, called ' Kumidicus,' is general in the 

war against Jugurtha, iii. 126. Takes Marius for his lieutenant, 
by whom he is supplanted, ib. 127. His firmness and dignity of 
mind, 155. A saying of his, 158. Banished, 159. Recalled, 
160. 

, son of the former, iii. 175. 

Pius, invites Pompey to his assistance, iv. 134. Refuses 

the challenge of Sertorius, iv. 18. Lays siege to the city of 

438 INDEX. 

LangobritaE-, but is forced to raise it, ib. Is wounded near Sa- 
guntum, iv. 28. Promises a hundred talents and twenty thou- 
sand acres of land to the man that should kill Sertorius, 29. His 
vanity upon an advantage gained of Sertorius, ib. Grows lux- 
urious as he advances in years, iv. 17- 

Metellus Creticus, a relation of the former, iv. 160. Besieges the 
pirates in one of the towns of Crete, ib. Pompey commands 
him to desist, and he refuses, ib. 161. 

. Nepos, tribune of the people, v. 69. Opposes Caesar's 

opening the treasury at Rome, 399, 400. A decree he proposed, 
and the means he used to get it passed, v. 75 — 77. Disappoint- 
ed by Cato, 76, 77. His behaviour to Cicero, v. 319, 320. 

Scipio, v. 309. Father-in-law to Pompey, iv. 196. See 

Scipio. 
Meteor olesclicc, iii. 435. 
f Methbne, vi. 163. 
f Mcthydrium, v. 158. 
Mctilius, the tribune, kinsman to Minutius, ii. 76. Sets up Minu- 

tius against Fabius Maximus, 78. 
Metcvcia, a festival instituted by Theseus, in remembrance of the 

people of Attica removing to Athens, i. 29. 
Meton, the astrologer, to prevent his son's going upon the Sici- 
lian expedition, burns his own house, ii. 136. iii. 419. 
■ , the Tarentine, feigns himself drunk, to excite the atten- 
tion of the Tarentines, when he wanted to dissuade them from 
calling in Pyrrhus, iii. 82. 
Metrobius, a player, and favourite of Sylla, iii. 282. 

, the Athenian, iii. 307. 

Metrodorus, counsellor to Mithridates, and honoured with the title 
of his father, iii. 357. Put to death by him for want of fidelity 
in an embassy to Tigranes, 358. 
Metron, iv. 315. 

Micion commands a party of Macedonians, v. 29. Is defeated and 
killed by Phocion, 30. 

, the Athenian, opposes Aratus, vi. 195. 

Micipsa, sends the Romans a supply of corn, byway of compli- 
ment to Caius Gracchus, and his embassadors are turned out of 
the senate, v. 225. 
Midas, iv. 266, 366. 
Midias, an Athenian exile, begs Sylla to spare the city, iii. 251. 

• . Demosthenes drops his accusation against him for a sum 

of money, v. 265. 
fMieza, a lawn. Aristotle erects a school of Philosophy there 

for the people of Stagira, iv. 218. 
f Milan taken by the Romans, ii. 397. What passed between the 

people and Augustus Ceesar, vi. 112. 
MMesiat ?, obscene compositions of Aristides, iii. 495. 
•f Miletus, iii. 211. iv. 264, 358. The people at war with those of 

Sanios, ii. 38. 
Military tribunes, elected for a time by the Romans instead 
consuls, i. 361. Their number, ib. 

INDEX. 43$ 

MilOi detached by Perseus to oppose Scipio Nasica in his attempt- 
ing an entrance by the mountains, ii. 301. 

» , a candidate for the consulship, v. 96. 

• , Annius, the tribune, seizes and kills Clodius, v. 334. De- 
fended by Cicero, ib. 335. 
Miltas of Thessaly, a diviner and friend of Dion, vi. 21. 

Miltiades, the first in dignity and authority of the ten Athenian . 
generals at Marathon, ii. 451. The olive crown denied him 
after his victory, iii. 303. The father of Cimon, 299. His 
trophy excites the emulation of Themistocles, i, 9. Is fined and 
dies in prison, iii. 297. 
Mi/to, the favourite concubine of Cyrus the Younger. See As~ 
pasia . 

Mimallones, the Bacchanals so called, iv. 240, 241. 

Mina, the value of it increased by Solon, i. 238. 

Mindar?is, the Spartan admiral, ii. 154. Defeated by Alcibiades, 
and slain, 156. 

Minds. Great minds productive of great vices as well as great 
virtues, ii. 175. 

Minerva the Syllanian, i. 119. Optiletis, i. 127. The Itonian, 
iv. 92. She communicates to Pericles a remedy in a dream, 
ii. 24. Her peplum or veil, v. 372, and n. The golden statue 
of her made by Phidias, ii. 25. Her image brought from Troy, 
i. 387. Her temple at Athens called * Parthenon,' ii. 23. Her 
temple at Sparta called ' Chalcicecus,' v. 145. 

Mines. Gold-mines belonging to the Thasians, iii. 313. Silver 
mines at Laurium. See Laurium. 

•\Minoa, island of, iii. 406. vi. 25. 

Minos, demands tribute of the Athenians on account of his son 
Androgens having been killed in Attica, i. 15. Institutes games 
in honour of Androgeus, 16. Pursues Daedalus, is shipwrecked 
on the coast of Sicily and dies, 21. Two of that name kings of 
Crete, 23. Why abused by the dramatic poets at Athens, 17. 

Minotaur, the Cretan monster, slain by Theseus, i. 20. 

\Minturnce, Marius lurks in the marshes near it, but is taken and 
brought before the magistrates of that place, iii. 169. 

Miuucius, or Minutius, chosen dictator, but obliged to quit his 
office for the cr-ying of a rat, ii. 394. 

, Marcus, one of the first quaestors, i. 288. 

, Thermus, tribune of the people, v. 76. 

. , Cuius, i. 274. 

, Lucius, appointed by Fabius Maximus his general of 

horse, ii. 69. His vanity and presumption, 72. Gains some 
advantage of Annibal in the absence of Fabius, 77. Persuades 
the people to give him equal authority with the dictator, 78. Is 
worsted by Annibal, and seasonably relieved by Fabius, 81,82. 
His submission and speech to Fabius, 83, 84. 

Miracles. Plutarch's opinion of them, i. 370. See Prodigies. 

Mirrors, concave ones, bv which the fire of ? esta was to be re- 
kindled, i. 183. 

\Misenum. Marius' villa there, iii. 163. 

i 40 INDEX. 

Misfortunes, in what cases atrial, ii. 90, 91. 

Mlthra, it's Mysteries, iv. 154. 

Mithras, or Mithra, the sun worshipped under that name by the 
Persians, iv. 287. vi. 118. 

Mithridates, king of Pontus, gathers strength after his defeat, and 
becomes a formidable enemy to the Romans, ii. 59, 60. Marius 
endeavours to provoke him to declare war, hi. 161. A war 
ensues, and Sylla is appointed to the command of it, 246. His 
interview and peace with Sylla, 265, 266. Before this he had 
caused a hundred and fifty thousand Romans to be massacred in 
Asia in one day, 266. He leaves Pergamus, and shuts himself 
up in Pitane, 350. Taught by experience rather to prepare his 
troops by exercise, than to furnish them with splendid arms, 835. 
Marches to surprise Cyzicum, 338. Account of his operations 
there till provisions are extremely scarce in his own camp, and 
he is obliged to relinquish it, 340, 341. Takes the opportunity 
of a storm to make his escape, 341. Would have been taken by 
Lucullus, had not the avarice of the Roman soldiers prevented 
it, 350. Orders his wives and sisters to be put to death, 351. 
Flies to his son-in-law Tigranes, 352. Encouraged that prince 
after his defeat, 369. Offers to supply Sertorius with money 
and ships, which that general, though an exile, will not accept 
but upon certain conditions, iv. 31, 32. His saying upon it, 32. 
Shut up in his camp by Pompey, 165. His dream, ib. Is de- 
feated, and flies with only three friends, 166. The fidelity and 
services of his concubine Hypsicratia, ib. Delivers poison to 
each of his friends, ib. 167. His memoirs and letters between 
him and Monime, 172. His death, 177. 

■ , the son of Ariobarzanes, what passed between him 

and Demetrius, v. 366. 

, the Parthian, his advice to Antony, v. 470, 471. 

-, rewarded by Artaxerxes for wounding Cyrus, vi. 

129. Put to death for claiming the honour of what he had 
done, 131. 

-, a native of Pontus, laughs at. Galba's withered face 

and bald head, vi. 223. Is put to death by Galba, 224. 
-, king of Commagene, v. 484. 

Mithrobarzanes sent by Tigranes against Lucullus, iii. 362. Is 
killed in battle, 363. 

Mithropaustes, nephew to Xerxes, his saying to Demaratus, upon 
his ambition to wear a diadem, and to be carried in pomp 
though Sarclis, i. 353. 

■\Mihjlene, i. 237, n. iv. 221. 

f Miiyleneans, punished by Lucullus for having joined Marius' 
partv, iii. 331, 332. Set up Pittacus as prince, i. 256. 

Mnaaiihcus, a friend of Aratus, vi. 158. 

Mnemon. See Artaxerxes: 

Mncsicles, the Athenian architect, five years in finishing the por- 
tico of the citadel, ii. 24. 

Mnesipltilus, Themistocles' preceptor in political knowledge, i. 
313, 

INDEX. 441 

Mnesiptolcnut, Themistocles' daughter, devoted to Cybclc by the 
direction of that goddess, i. 355. 

Mnestheus, the notice taken of him by Homer, iii. 303. 

Mnestra, one of Cimon's mistresses, iii. 299. 

Modesty, the ornament of the fair sex, i. 212. 

Molo, Apollonius, Cicero and Caesar attend his lectures at Rhodes. 
See Apollonius. 

-j Molossians, i. 40. iii. 65, et^seq. 

Molus, river, iii. 259. 

Molpadia, an Amazon, i. 35. 

Molossus, an Athenian general, v. 17. 

Monarchy, Solon's dislike and refusal of that authority, i. 235, 
237. An enemy to eloquence, which is befriended by demo- 
cracy, 271, n. Cast off, and detested by the Romans, iv. 392. 

Moneses, a Parthian nobleman, revolts to Antony, but soon de- 

. serfs him, v. 460, 461. 

Moneta, her temple, i. 84, 40S. 

Money, of the ancient Romans, had the impression of an ox, 
sheep, &c. i. 287- 

■ . See Lucullian. Athenian, why stamped with the figure 

of an ox, i. 30, 287. 

Gold and silver mone}^ prohibited by Lycurgus, and 

heavy iron money introduced, i. 124. Gold and silver, when 
brought in again, proves the ruin of Sparta, 159. The scarcity 
of it at Athens in the time of Solon, 252. See Bribery. 

Monimc, refuses all the offers of Mithridates, except that of mar- 
riage, iii. 351. Lives unhappy, ib. Attempts to hang herself 
in her diadem, and it breaks, 351. 

Month, intercalary. See Mercidinus. 

Months, the Roman, whence named, i. 199. Do not answer to 
the Grecian months, 65. Numa adds two to the calendar, 200. 
The irregularity of the Grecian, ii. 262, n. 

Monuments, the custom of pouring oil upon them very ancient, 
iv. 260, 261. 

Moon. See Eclipse. 

, considered as a goddess, iii. 243. 

Moons, three seen at Ariminum at one time, before the defeat of 
the Gauls By Flaminius, ii. 392. 

■\Morius, river, iii. 256. 

Mother Earth. See Vesta. 

Mothers, what goddesses so called, ii. 420, n. 

Mountains, what the height of the highest, ii. 301. 

Mourning, the time allowed for it at Rome, i. 187. And at Sparta, 
153. 

Mucianus, general of the arm)' in Syria when Galba is declared 
emperor, vi. 247. 

Mrdbemj, Sylla's face compared to one strewed over with meal, 
iii. 231. 

Mules. See Marius* mules. 

Mummius, Lucius, who destroyed Corinth, prevents the defacing 

442 INDEX. 

of Philopcemen's monument, iii. 29. Gains the surname of 

Achaius, 120. 
Mummius, the lieutenant of Crassus, defeated by Spartacus, iii, 

460. 

— , Caius, iii. 244. 

Munatius Piancusy goes over to Antony, v. 433. 

. , Cato's friend, v. 56, 79. The difference between him 

and Cato, 85. They are reconciled, 87. 
f Munda, a city of Spain, iv. 421. 
Mundus, the name of the ditch drawn about the place where Rome 

was erected, i. 64. 
•f Munyckia, Ep'menides foretells that fort would one day contri- 
bute to the miseries of Athens, i. 234. v. 52, 371 
Munychion, the month so called, i. 19. iii. 205. v. 43, 389. 
Mirny chus, i. 43. 
Murcena, commands the left wing of Sylla's army in the battle with 

Archelaus near Chaeronea, iii. 256. 
, Lucullus' lieutenant, blocks up the city of Amisus, iii. 

346. Pursues and defeats Tigranes, 363. 

--, Lucius, chosen consul with Silanus, v. 309. Accused of 

bribery by Cato, v. 70. Is acquitted, 71. Behaves in a very 
respectful manner to Cato, 70, 71, 77. 
Marcus, vi. 240. 
Musceus, the poet, buried in, and gives name to, the Museum at 

Athens, i. 34, n. 
Muse, of silence, called Tacita, i. 179. 
Muses, their temple, iii. 256.- 
Museum, at Athens, i. 34. 

Music allied to war, i. 145, 146. The Lacedaemonian music, 146. 
Muthos. See Mythos. 
Mutia, wife of Pompey, false to his bed while he is upon his Asiatic 

expedition, iv. 179. He divorces her, ib. 
\Mutina, or Modena, Antony beaten there, v. 441. 
Mutius, or Mucins, why called ' Scaevola,' i. 295, 296. Attempts 

to kill Porsena, 295. Mistakes and burns off his right-hand, 

ib. 296. 
, father-in-law of Marius, iii. 165. His bailiff saves young 

Marius by sending him off in a load of beans, ib. 
— , a retainer to Tiberius GraceliHS, made tribune through his 

interest, v. 213. 

Sccevola the lawyer, iii. 282. v. 208, 295. 

f Mycale, Mount, ii. 5, n. Battle of, ii. 311. 

f Mycenceans, colony in Africa, settled by Hercules, iv. 13. 

f Mygdonia, iii. 374. 

f Mytassa, v. 23. 

Myro and Menemachus. See Menemachus* 

Myrocles the orator, v. 267. 

Myron, the person who managed the charge against the persons 

called ' execrable,' in the case of Cylofij i. 232. 
Myronides, the Athenian orator and statesman, ii. 478. 

INDEX. US 

f Myrrhimis a borough of Attica, v. 261, n. 

Myrtilus, cup-bearer to Pyrrhus. Gelon attempts to bring him 

into a plot to poison his master, but he discovers the plot to 

Pyrrhus, iii. 71. 
Myrsilus the historian, vi. 155. 
Myrtle sacred to Venus, ii. 424. 
Myrto, grand-daughter of Aristides, ii. 489. Socrates is said to 

have married her out of charity, ib. 
t Mysia; vi. 247. 
Mysteries of Cores, v. 33. Mimicked by Alcibiades, ii. 138. i. 

39, n. Demetrius admitted to them, contrary to all the rules, 

v.. 389. 
Mythos, or Mathos, a name given to Demetrius, because he had 

his Lamia, v. 390. 
f Mytilene, declared by Pompey a free city, iv. 178. 
f Myus, a city given to Themistocles, to supply him with meat, 

i. 354. 

N. 

NABATHEAN Arabs. Demetrius marches against them, and 

brings off considerable booty, v. 368. 
Nabis, tyrant of Lacedasmon, surprises Messene, iii. 16. But flies 

on the approach of Philopeemen, ib. At war with the Romans 

and Achajans, 18. Slain by the x-Etolians, 20. 
Nails, Agnon the Teian wears silver ones in his shoes, iv. 303. 
Xames of distinction among the Greeks, iii. 121. Roman, iii. 120, 

Grecian and Roman, ii. 187. 
Naphtha, a kind of bitumen found in the provinces of Babylon, iv. 

296. Easily catches fire, ib. See Medea. 
f Naples, ii. 400. 
+ Narnia, iii. 32. 
Nasica, Publius, why an enemy to Tiberius Gracchus, v. 213. 

Insists that the consul shall proceed against him as a tyrant, 219. 

Leads a party to the Capitol, which kills him, 220. The senate, 

after this, send him embassador into Asia, because he is become 

extremely obnoxious to the people, ib. He dies near Pergamus, 

ib. See Scipio Nasica. 
NaucrateSf the orator, persuades the cities of Lycia to oppose 

Brutus, vi. 85. 
-j- Nauplia, iii. 1 12. 
Nausitheus, Theseus' pilot, i. 18. 
f Naxos, i. 22, 23. The victory of Chabrias and Phocion there, v. 

9. Colonised by Pericles, ii. 19. 
Nealces the painter, vi. 165. Endeavours to dissuade Aratus from 

destroying a capital painting of a tyrant, ib. 
Neander, a young man who assisted in carrying of? Pyrrhus in his 

infancy, iii. 66. 
Neapolis, part of Syracuse, ii. 416. 
Nearchus, the Pythagorean, ii. 495. 

■ 4H INDEX. 

Nearchus, the Cretan, uses his interest with Antigonus to save 

Eumenes, but Tails in the attempt, iv. 65. 
• , banished Macedon by Philip, but subsequent.]}' recalled 

by Alexander, iv. 254. Alexander's admiral, iv. 39. Gives 

Alexander an account of his voyage, iv. 351. 
Necromancy, hi. 301. 
Nectanabis, revolts from Tachos, iv. 119. Agcsilaus deserts Tachos, 

and serves Nectanabis, 120. 
Neleus, the Scepsian. Theophrastus bequeaths to him his writings, 

iii. 267. 
Nemea, the courtesan, ii. 134. 

t ,".32. 

Nemean games. See Games. 

Neoekorus of Haliartus, kills Lysander, iii. 226. 

Neocles, father of Themistocles, i. 311. 

-, son of Themistocles, i. 357. 

Neon, the Boeotian, ii. 311. 

A'eoptolem us, son of Achilles, settles in Epirus, and leaves a long 
succession of kings, iii. 65. 

■ , raised to the throne by the Molossians, when they 

revolted from Pyrrlms, iii. 69. Pyrrhus returns, and associates 
him in the government, 70. He agrees, or it is pretended that 
he agrees, to the poisoning of Pyrrhus, 71. Is killed by Pyr- 
rhus, ib. 

-, one of Mithridates' officers, beaten by Lucullus at 

sea, iii. 331. 

-, captain of Alexander's life-guard, after the death of 

that prince, endeavours to lessen the reputation of Eumenes, iv. 
38, 39. Is defeated and killed by Eumenes, 47. 
-, father of Olympias, iv. 239, n. 

Neptune, worshipped by the Troezenians as their tutelar deity, i. 7. 

His temple in Calauria, v. 287. His titles of ' Asphalius,' i. 47. 

* Gaieochus' ib. * The Equestrian,' 70. His temple at Sparta, 

v. 149- Theseus reputed to be his son, i. 7. 
Nero. In him Antony's offspring gain the imperial power, for he 

was the fifth in descent from Antony, v. 508. Proclaims liberty 

to Greece at Corinth, iii. 47. His great enormities, vi. 223. He 

kills his mother, and almost ruins the Roman empire, ib. His 

rage upon being informed that Galba was declared emperor, 215. 

His death, 217. 
f Nereii, the most warlike of the Belgnc, defeated by Caesar, iv. 

382, 383. 
Neuters, in time of sedition, infamous by Solon's law, i. 246. 
NJccea, widow of Alexander of Corinth, is married to Demetrius, 

and Antigonus gets the citadel of Corinth from her, vi. 168, 169.' 
Nicagoras of Trcezene, makes a decree very favourable to the 

wives and children of the Athenians, who retired thither upon 

the invasion of Xerxes, i. 326, 327. 

the Messenian, a secret enemy to Cleomenes, v. 191. 

Xiennor, sent to receive Eumenes, who was delivered up by the 

Argyraspidcs, iv. 63. 

INDEX. 445 

Ntcanor, the commission of Menyllus in Munychia given him by 
Cassander, v. 37. His firm dependence on Phocion, 38. He 
makes an attempt upon the Piraeus, 39. 

Xicarcfnis, great-grandfather to Plutarch, v. 491. 

f Nice in Bithynia, it's history by Menecrates, i. 33. 

Nicerdtus, father of Nicias, iii. 399. 

, the poet, the contest between him and Antimachus, 

which should write the best poem in praise of Lysander, iii. 
210,211. 

Nicias of Enguium, ii. 420. 

Nicias, son of Nieeratus, iii. 399. Younger than Pericles, yet 
often his collegue in the wars, ib. The nobility hope he will 
prove a barrier against the insolence of Cleon, 400. lie is 
equally favoured by the people, ib. Naturally timid and cold- 
hearted, ib. Applies his wealth to the purposes of popularity, 
particularly in public exhibitions, ib. Enfranchises a slave, 
who had appeared with ' applause in the character of Bacchus, 
101. His regulations with respect to the chorus that vva* 
sent to the isle of Delos in honour of Apollo, ib. He conse- 
crates a palm-tree of brass, and a piece of ground to Apollo, 402. 
Is pious to a degree of superstition, ib. Has silver-mines 
in the borough of Laurium. ib. 403. Gives money, not only to 
those who deserved his bounty, but to such as might be able to 
do him harm, 403. Goes seldom into company, mid pretends to 
be for ever intent upon the business of the state, 401. His re- 
tainer Iliero holds out these pretences to the people, ib. \\\>. 
life is, in fact, a life of great fear and care, 405. When he 
takes the command, he makes it his business to proceed upon a 
sure plan, ib. Takes Cythera, 406. Recovers many places in 
Thrace, ib. Makes himself master of the isle of Mio.oa, and 
the port of Nisaea, ib. Defeats the Megarensians and Corin- 
thians, ib. Chooses to loose his trophy, rather than leave two of 
his men unburied, ib. 407. Takes the fortress of Thynea, 407. 
His enemy Cleon, who had prevented a peace with the Lace- 
daemonians, now raises a clamour against hiui about the siege of 
Pylos, 408. Nicias gives up to him the command, ib. lie is no 
sooner clear of Cleon, than Alcibiades begins to oppose him in 
the administration, 410. Nevertheless, he effectuates a peace 
with the Lacedemonians, 411. Alcibiades endeavours to em- 
broil the two powers again, and draws the Lacedaunonian em- 
bassadors from Nicias by false promises, 413. Nicias desires to 
be sent to Sparta, to adjust the matters in dispute, but does not 
succeed in that commission, 414. The quarrel rises so high 
between Nicias and Alcibiades, that the people propose to ba- 
nish one of them by the Ostracism, 415. Nicias and Alcibiades 
join interests, and turn the Ostracism upon Hyperbolus, 416. 
The /Egesteans and Leontines desiring the Athenians to under- 
take the Sicilian expedition, Nicias opposes it, but is over-ruled 
by the arts of Alcibiades, 417- Though appointed general 
along with Alcibiades and Larnachus, he still protests against 
-the war, iB. 420. His timid proceedings in the conduct of it. 

41 G INDEX. 

4 20. ALcibiades being called bomc, to take his trial for defacing 
the Hermac and profaning the Mysteries, Nicias has the chief 
authority, 421. lie lays siege to the little town of Ilybla, and 
does not take it, 423. Rases Hyccara, ib. Draws the Syra- 
cusan forces to Catana by stratagem, and in the mean time 
seizes the ports of Syracuse, and eneamps in an advantageous 
situation, ib. 421. Attacks, with some success, the Syracusans 
on their return, 424. Prevents his troops from taking the 
temple of Jupiter Oh mpius, ib. Winters in Naxos, a city be- 
tween Syracuse and Catana, ib. The Syracusans make another 
excursion as far as Catana, 425. Nicias, who is as vigorous in 
executing as he is slow in resolving, returns to Syracuse, gains 
the peninsula of Thapsos, and gets possession of Epipolae, ib. 
Beats not only the Syraeusan infantry, but their cavalry, ib. 
Encloses Syracuse almost entirely with a wall, ib. Is taken ill, 
and during his illness Lamachus is defeated by the Syracusans, 
426, Saves his camp by setting fire to the machines before the 
entrenchments, ib. The cities declare for him, and supply him 
with provisions in great abundance, 427. Treats Gylippus with 
contempt, who comes to Syracuse with a large army, and often, 
him a safe conduct, provided he will quit Sicily, 428. Defeats 
that general in the first engagement, ib. Is beaten in the se- 
cond, 429. Falls into his old despondence, and applies to the Athe- 
nians, either for another army, or else to be recalled, ib. They 
send him a reinforcement and money by Eurymedon, ib. He 
gains some advantage by sea, ib. Loses the fort of Plemmy- 
rium, in which were lodged the Athenian stores and money, 
430. Is forced by his collegues, Menander and Euthyderaus, to 
give battle at sea, and is beaten, ib. Demosthenes arrives with 
a formidable fleet, 431. He, too, is ambitious to come imme- 
diately to a decisive action, ib. Nicias represents to him the 
Syracusans' want of money, and their being tired of Gylippus, 
but cannot prevail upon him to wait, ib. 432. Demosthenes at- 
tacks Epipolce in the night, and has some advantage at first, but 
proceeds too far, and is entirely defeated,^. 433. Demosthenes 
gives his opinion for returning to Athens ; but Nicias, afraid of 
impeachments there, opposes it, 433, 434. Fresh forces coming 
in to the Syracusans, and sickness prevailing in the Athenian 
camp, Nicias agrees to return, 434. Loses his opportunity by 
his superstitious fears of an eclipse of the moon, ib. Intent 
upon his sacrifices, till he is surrounded both by sea and land, 
43b'. His fleet is defeated, and Eurymedon slain, ib. The 
Athenians insist on his leading them off* by land, but he re- 
solves to risque another naval action, 437- Abandons his great 
camp and his. walls, ib. The sea-fight described,^. After the 
defeat of Nicias, Hermocrates by a stratagem prevents him 
from retiring in the night, when he might have done it safely, 
438. The Athenians beginning their march, with every circum- 
stance of misery before them, Nicias behaves with spirit and 
propriety, 439. Through a march of eight days, keeps his own 
division tolerably entire, 440. In vain offers conditions of 
12 

INDEX. 447 

peace, ib. Marches on to the river Asinarus, where a bloody- 
scene takes place, 441. Throws himself at the feet of Gylippus, 

and implores his humanity to the Athenians, ib. Nicias and 

Demosthenes suffer death, 443. 
Nicon, a slave belonging to Craterus, iv. 306. 
■ , or Nico, the name of an ass which Octavius met, and which 

he considers as a favourable omen, v. 488. The name of an 

elephant; his fidelity to Pyrrhus, iii. 115. 
Nicodes, kills Paleas, and sets himself up tyrant of Sicyon, vi. 155. 

Expelled by Aratus, iii. 2. vi. 160. 

, a friend of Phocion, v. 21. Is condemned to die, 42. 

Nicocreon, king of Salamis in Cyprus, one of the presidents in 

the theatrical entertainments of Alexander the Great, iv. 284. 
Nicodemus, a Theban, both blind and lame ; Epaminondas' obser- 
vation upon him, ii. 344. 

, the Messenian, his excuse for changing sides, v. 266. 

Nicogenes, entertains Themistoeles at JEgas in iEoli, i. 348. Gets 

him conveyed to the Persian court in a woman's carriage, 349. 
Nkolails, the philosopher, vi. 107, 108. 
Nicomache, daughter of Themistoeles, i. 358. 
Nicomachus, his paintings, though excellent, appeared to be 

wrought off with ease, ii. 273. 
■ , a Greek settled at Carrae, attends young Crassus in 

his Parthian expedition, iii. 485. 
« , informs his brother Cebalinus of a conspiracy against 

Alexander, iv. 315. 
Nicomedes, the Athenian, i. 358. 
, king of Bithynia, reconciled to Mithridates by Sylla, 

iii. 264, 266. Visited by Caesar, iv. 358. 
f Nicomedia, iii. 343. 
Niconides, the Thessalian, an engineer in the service of Mitferi- 

dates, iii. 340. 
f Nicopolis, city of, formerly Actium, v. 485. 

, the courtesan, leaves Sylla her heir, iii. 232. 

Nicostrata, the same with Carmen'ta. See Carmenta. 

Niger, a friend of Antony's, sent to him by Octavia, v. 476. 

Nigidius, Publius, a friend of Cicero, v. 316. 

f Nile. Water of the Nile, as well as of the Danube, kept among 

the treasures of the kings of Persia, iv. 298. 
f Niscea, iii. 78, n. v. 18. 
fNisibis, a city in Mygdonia, by the Greeks called Antioch, taken 

by Lucullus, iii. 374. 
t Nolo, ii. 400. iii. 243. 
f Nomades, Thracians so called, iii. 457. 

f Nomentum, marshes about it Caesar intended to drain, iv. 425. 
Nones of the Goats, Nonce Caprotince, a feast kept by the Romans, 

in memory of Philotis and the other servant-maids, who imposed 

upon the Latins, i. 100, 166. 
f Nonacris, rocks of, iv. 352. 
Nonius, killed by Saturninus, his competitor for the tribuneship, 

iii. 157. 

4 IS INDEX. 

Nonius, nephew to Sylla, rejected in his application for the consu- 
late, iii. 245. 
j Nora, castle of, iv. 52. 
Norbanus, the consul, defeated hy Sylla, iii. 270. 

, escapes with difficulty from Brutus, vi. 91. 

f Noricum, iii. 138. 
t Novocomum, iv. 393. 

Numa Pompilius, several Roman families trace their pedigree up 
to him, but not with sufficient certainty, i. 164. Rather con- 
temporary with Pythagoras the Spartan, than with Pythagoras 
the Samian, 165. On the demise of Romulus, various debates 
ensuing about the choice of a king, Numa is the person pitched 
upon, 168. He was a citizen of Cures, the son of Pomponius, 
and had married Tatia, the daughter of Tatius, Romulus' col- 
legue, 169. His character, ib. Believed to converse with the 
goddess Egeria, 170. In his fortieth year, when invited to the 
throne, 173. His answer to the embassadors on that occasion, 
77;. His father and his friend Marcius prevail with him to accept 
the crown, 174. Vettius the interrex receives him in the Forum, 
and his election is confirmed, 175, 176. He has happy presages 
in the flight of birds, 176. Immediately dismisses the guards^ 
which had been kept on foot by Romulus, ib. To the priests 
adds one for Romulus, ib. Moulds the people to a softer 
temper, by the force of superstition, 178. His just conception* 
of the first cause of all things, 179. Allows no images, nor 
bloody sacrifices, ib. 180. Said to have a son named Mamercus, 
to whom he gives the surname of JEmilius, 180. Institutes the 
* order of priests called Pontiflces, and is himself Pontifex Max* 
iinus, 181. Consecrates the vestals, 184. Builds the temple of 
Vesta in an orbicular form, 186. Teaches the Romans to look 
upon the touching of a dead body as no pollution, 187. Teaches 
them to venerate the goddess Libitina, ib. Fixes the time of 
mourning, ib. His regulations concerning widows, ib. He in- 
stitutes the sacred orders of the Salii and Feciales, 188. Builds 
a palace near the temple of Vesta, and spends most of his 
time in religious exercises, 191. Makes the people reverent 
and attentive, 191. Many of his precepts resemble those of 
Pythagoras, 192. He brings the people to believe the most im- 
probable tales concerning his eonnexion with the gods, 193 — 
195. The ridiculous charm said to be communicated to him for 
thunder and lightning, 194, 195. He builds temples to Fides, 
or Faith, and to Terminus, 195. Draws the people to agricul- 
ture, as another great means of peace, 196. Distributes the 
citizens into companies, according to their arts and trades, 197. 
Corrects the severity of the law, which empowered fathers to 
sell their children, 198. Attempts the reformation of the ca- 
lendar, ib. — 202. The temple of .Janus shut for the space of 
forty-three years in his reign, 203. The happy influence of his 
example, ib. Various accounts ol his wives and children ; no- 
thing certain, but that he had a wife name 'Pat ia, and a daughter 
vailed Pompilia. 204. Wastes awaj bv a gentle decline, 205. 

9 

INDEX. 449 

Buried with great honour, and sincerely lamented hy his sub- 
jects, ib. His books buried with him, arid found some ages 
afterward ; but the senate thinks proper to burn them, 206, 207. 
The misfortunes of the succeeding kings add lustre to his cha- 
racter, 208. 

t Numantia. Scipio's expedition against it, iii. 122. 

f JtiiimantineSy beat the consul Muncinus, seize his camp, and take 
the Romans prisoners, v. 203, 201. Out of respect to Tiberius 
Gracchus, they grant the consul terms of peace, and let the Ro- 
mans go, 204. This peace annulled at Rome, 205. 

Number Eight, why sacred to Neptune, i. 46. Twenty-eight, i. 
119. Three, the perfection of it, ii. 71. 

Numbers^ the doctrine of, a great favourite with Plutarch, i. 47, n. 

Numerius, a friend of Marius, provides him a ship for his escape to 
Africa, iii. 165. 

» , a partisan of Pompey's taken prisoner by Caesar, and 

sent to Pompey with offers of peace, iv. 206. 

Numidian cavalry, iv. 418. 

f Numistro, ii. 427. 

Numitor, ejected from the throne of Alba by his brother Amulius, 
i. 52. His equity and prudence, 59. Restored by Romulus 
and Remus, 61. 

NundincE, the Roman market-days, why so called, ii. 197. 

Nurses, Spartan, in great esteem, i. 136. Their method with chil- 
dren, 137. 

f Nursia, a city of the Sabines, iv. 4. 

f Nymphcea, iii. 72. 

f Nymphceum, a place near Apollonia, where are constant springs 
of fire. iii. 268. 

Nymphs Sphragitides. See Sphragitides. 

Nymphidia, natural daughter of Callistus, Caesar's freedman, vi, 
219. 

Nymphidius Sabinus, promises the soldiers of the praetorian co- 
horts, and those quartered in the provinces, much larger sums 
than could ever be paid, For declaring Galba emperor, vi. 212. 
Attempts to set up for himself, 217. The measures he pursues, 
ib. 218. His death, 224. 

Nyp.sius, the Neapolitan, gets provisions and money to pay the 
troops in the castle of Syracuse for Dionysius, vi. 38. He is 
defeated by the Syracusans, but they make an ill use of their 
victory, ib. Sallies out, and sets fire to the city, 41. Driven 
back by Dion, 43. 

f Nysa, a city in India, besieged by Alexander, iv. 328. 

Nyssa, sister to Mithridates, released by Luculius, iii. 351. 

O. 

OAK, every Roman who saved the life of a fellow-citizen, was 
presented with an oaken crown, ii. 177. Sacred to Jupiter, ib. 
vol. vi, 2 G 

450 INDEX. 

Oak, under which Alexander pitched his tent before the battle of 
Chaeronea, shown in Plutarch's time, iv. '_'.31. 

OarteSy said to have been the original name of Artaxcrxes Mne- 
mon, vi. 1 14. 

Oath, the method of taking the Great Oath among the Syracusans, 
vi. 52. The oath taken by the young Athenians in the temple of 
Agraulos, ii. 132. Red-hot iron, by uav of symbol, thrown into 
the sea by Aristides, upon taking an oath, 485. Between the 
kings of Epirus and their subjects, iii. 70. Taken with respect 
to the judges at public exhibitions, iii. '.'AX'). By the consuls, 
v. 320. 

Obelisci, iii. 208. 

<)bo/i, iii. 208. 

Oclni^, Darius would not visit the kingdom of Persia, though bfs 
native country, for fear of the expense in giving every woman a 
piece of money, iv. '.'> 12. 

« , one of the sons of Artaxerxes Mnemon, finds means to g r 

two of his brothers destroyed, succeeds to the crown, and out- 
does all his predecessors in cruelty, vi. I <:), 150. 

Oiiarin, half-sister of Augustus, and widow of Caius Marcellus, 
is married to Antony, v. 454. Reconciles her brother and 
husband, 459. Goes to Athens, and carries Antony consider- 
able supplies, 475, 476. Returns to Rome, 477. Is com- 
manded by Antony to quit his house, which she does with great 
reluctance, 480. Laments that she should be numbered amongst 
the causes of the civil war, ib. Takes the rest of Antony'? 
children after his death, 508. 

Octavius, Cneius, permits Perseus to enjoy the protection of the 
temple in Samothrace, but guards against his escaping by sea, 
ii. 345. Perseus surrenders himself to him, :U6. 

-, the consul, drives Cinna out of Rome, iii. 173. Is a 
man of great probity, but adheres too scrupulously to the laws 
in time of civil war, and superstition has too much hold ol 
him, ib. 17i. Declares he will not make slaves free of that city . 
from which, in maintenance of the laws, he excludes Marios, 
175. Seized and put to death by order of Marius and Cinna, ib. 
--, governor of Cilicia, dies, and Lucullus applies for thai 

province, iii. 333. 

--, lieutenant to Grassus, in vain endeavours to console him 

aftev his defeat in Parthia, iii. IS8, Insists on accompanying 
Cra^sus to Surena, 4-93. Is killed in endeavouring to prevent the 
Parthians from carrying Crassus off, 494. 

— , Lucius, sent by rornpey to supersede Me tell us in Crete, 

iv. 1G0. Is treated by him with contempt, 161. 

— , Marcus, his message to C'ato about the command at 

Utica, v. 115. 

Caius, assumes the merit of being in the conspiracy 

against Caesar, when he was not, and suffers for his vanity, iv.436. 
Marcos, tribune with Tiberius Gracchus, v, 209; Ti- 

berius deposes him, 211, 2J 2. 

INDEX. 4,-i 

G-:tcaiust Marcus, commands the centre of Antony's force? 

against Augustus, v. 407. 
See Augustus. 
Odeum, or Music Theatre, built by Pericles, in imitation of the 

king of Persia's pavilion, ii. '23, 24. 
Odours, sweet ones, how produced, iv. 244. 
(Economics, a constituent part of politic?, iii. 449. 
(Edipus, his tragical legacy to his son, iii. 76. 
(Enanthes, an infamous minister to young Ptolemy's pleasures, is 

also a minister of state, v. \b9. 
f (J'Jneadce, their territories ravaged by Pericles, ii. 32. Forced 

to take refuge within their walls, ib. ■ 
(Etieis, tribe of, iii. 306, n. 318. 
t (Eniades. Alexander undertakes to revenge their cause against 

the /Etolians, iv. 317. 
(Enopion, son of Theseus by Ariadne, i. 22. The founder of Chios, ib. 
(Enus. See Cnacion. 
(Eta, Mount, i. 39, n. 
Ofella, Lucretius. See Lucretius Ofella. 
Oil, the opinion of the ancient physicians, that it is salutary when 

applied outwardly, and pernicious if taken inwardly, ii. 536. 
Oily springs, found on the banks of the Oxus, and the water of 

that river itself oily, iv. 326. 
f Olbians, iv. 13. 
Olbius, tutor to Nicogenes' children, breaks out into a prophetic 

verse, i. 348. 
Old age, much honoured at Sparta, i. 133, 144. 
Oligarchy, at Samos, abolished by Pericles, ii. 38. Alcibiades 

makes a feint of proposing one at Athens, ii. 151, 152. 
Olive, one sacred at Athens, i. 231. Bough of it bound with 

wool, and offered to Apollo. See Eircsione. 

■ -, a spring called sn, ii, 360. 

f Olizon, i. 323. 

f Olocrus, Mount, ii. 308. 

| Ologuntus, v. 183, 

Oithacus, prince of the Dardarians, pretends to desert from Mi- 

thridatcs to Lucullus, iii. 348. Attempts to kill Luculius, buC 

miscarries, 349. 
j Oiympia, oracle of, v. 144. 
Olympian Games. See Games. Proved by Strabo to have been 

unknown in the time of Homer, i. 31, n. Several Olympic 

games before the common sera of Olympiads, i. 109, n. 

• Earth, Temple of, i. 35. 

Oli/mpias, the fidelity of Eumenes to that princess, iv. 54. She 

invites him into Macedon, 55. Early initiated in the Mvsteries 

of Orpheus and Bacchus, and greatly addicted to enthusiasm 

and superstition, iv. 239, 240. Her dreams the night before the 

consummation of her marriage with Philip, 240. A saying of 

her's upon Alexander's pretending to be the son of Jupiter, 241. 

Jealous and implacable in her temper, 252. Her inhumanity to 

Cleopatra, Philip's other wife, 254. She advises Alexander 

2 c 2 

452 INDEX. 

not to be so profuse to the objects of his bounty, 302. She and 
iit_r daughter Cleopatra raise a party agajhst Antipater, and di- 
vide the government during Alexander's absence, 341. 

t OlyrnpuSf the height of the mountain so called, ii. 301. 

t , a city in Pamphylia, ceremonies of Mithra and other 

mysteries performed there, iv. 154. 

, physician to Cleopatra, v. 503. 

f Olynthiam, v. 261. 

Omens, that happened to Romulus and Remus, i. 62. To The- 
mistocles, 331. To Antigonus, v. 392. To Camillus, i. 370, 
To Agesilaus, iv. 76. To Alcibiades, ii. 137, 163. To Timo- 
leon, 239, 246, 262. To Paulus /Kmilius, 293. To Mareellus, 
4-32, 133. To Pyrrhus, iii. 108, 109. To Marius, 107* 170. 
To Sylla, 238, 269. To Mitlrridates, iv. 165. To the Romans, 
i. 373. ii. 65. iii. 210, 211. To Cimon, 320. To the Athe- 
nians, i.335. ii. 137. iii. 119. v. 371. To Crassus, iii. 172, 474, 
175. To Alexander, iv. 259, 276, 279, 280, 292, 326, 318. 
To Caesar, 108, 131. To Galba, vi. 231. To Tiberius Grac- 
chus, v. 217. To Caius Gracchus, v. 231. To Dion and Diony- 
sius, vi. 23, 21. To Mark Antony, v. 183, 181, 193. To 
Pornpey, iv. 163, 212, 213. To Octavius, v. 488. To Qtfto, 
vi. 248. To Cicero, v. 315, 332, 317. To Cassius, vi. 92. To 
Brutus, vi. 79, 90, 102. To Aratus, vi. 198. See Prodigies. 

Omestes. See Bacchus Omestes. 

Omisus; presents Artaxerxes with a large pomegranate, vi. 118. 

Ompkale. See Hercules. 

Onarus, a priest of Bacchus, said to have married Ariadne, after 
she was deserted by Theseus, i. 22. 

Onatius A'ureUus, relates his vision, in consequence of which 
Pornpey and Crassus arc reconciled. See Caius Aurcliu.-:. 

Onesieritu's, attends Alexander in his eastern- expedition', iv. 330, 
332. Sent by Alexander to the Indian philosophers, 338. Pilot 
to the fleet, of which Nearchus was admiral, in the voyage 
round the southern point of India, 339. 

f Oaean mountains, v. 175. 

Ouomarchus, commits sacrilege at Delphi, and falls in the Sicilian 
wars, ii. L'ft«f. 

'— ' — ■ — , who had the custody of Eurnenes for Antigonus, his 

conversation with Eurnenes concerning the fear of death, iv. 65. 

Onomastus, one of Otho's freedmen, vi. 235. 

Oii/icllas, the king of that name, and such as he could influence, 

* ' conducted by Peripoltas the diviner from Thessaly into i>ceotiar 
iii. 293. 

, king of Cyrene, v. 376. 

Oftima Spjolia, what, and by whom won, i. 75. ii. 3?>S. 

bjpiniius, Lucius, of the patrician party, loses his election for con- 
sul through the opposition of Caius Gracchus, v. 234. Is after- 
ward chosen, and endeavours to annul the acts of Caius, 236. 
Upon the ruin and death of that tribune, builds a temple to 
Concord, 211. Uses a dictatorial power in his consulate, in con- 
demning so many citizens of Rome unheard, 212. Is convicted 
of taking bribes of Jugurtha, and. grows old in dishonour, ib. 

INDEX. 453 

Oplacus the Italian, fixes his aim on Pyrrhus in particular, in an 

engagement, iii. S8, 89. 
Oppiu-s Caius, a friend of Csesar, some account of his writings, iv. 

136. 

Optildis. See M/acrra Opiiletis. 

Optio, a centurion's deputy, so called, vi. 235. 

Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, i. 29. v. 297. Of Apollo Tegyncus, 
ii. 360. Of Trophonius, ii. 4-75. iii. 255. Of Amphiaraus, ii. 
475. Of Jupiter Amnion, iii. 331-i Of Dodona, i. 351. Of 
Pasiphaa, v. HI. 161. By Necromancy, iii. 301. Of Tethys 
or Themis, i. 51. 

Oracles, and prophecies, concerning iEgeus, i. 5. Concerning 
the future greatness of the Romans, 97. Concerning the waters 
of the A! ban lake, 366". The coming of the Gauls into Italy, ii. 
392. The death of Canon, iii. 320. To Marius, that he should 
be a seventh time consul, 167. Concerning a lame king of 
Sparta, iv. 72, 73. Concerning the succession of the Spartan 
kings, to be opened only by a son of Apollo, iii. 221. The 
death of Lysander, 226. To Alexander the Great, iv. 259, 261, 
266, 231—283, 299. Concerning Ca?sar in the battle of Phar- 
salia, 4-12 To Cicero, v. 298. Concerning the battle of Cha?- 
ronea, iii. 255. v. 273. Three Cornelii to reign at Home, v. 312. 
Concerning the untying of the Gordian Knot, iv. 266. That the 
Scipios should always be victorious in Africa, 417. Concerning 
the burial of Aratus, vi. 208. To Otho, vi. 234. 

Orantf.es, a Cretan, deceives Perseus, ii. 316. 

Orations, Funeral. See Funeral Orations. Orations and Speeches 
of Alexander, iv. 304, 312. Of Afranius to Pompey, 210. Of Anni- 
bal before his death, iii. 58. Of Appius Claudius to the senate, 
iii. 91, 92. Of Aratus to Philip, vi. 206. Of Brennus, i. 380. 
Of Cleopatra at the tomb of Antony, v. 505. Of Cato to the 
Three Hundred, v. 109, 110. Of Chelonis the daughter of Le- 
onidas, v. 14-9, 150. Of Cornelia to Pompey, iv. 221, 212. 
Of Cleomenes concerning the institution of the Ephori, v. 164, 
\65. 01* the same concerning death, 188. Of Coriolanus to 
Tullus, ii. 202. Of the same against the insolence of the people, 
193. Of Crassus to the army after the death of his son, iii. 4-87. 
Of the same, in going to meet his own death, 497. Of Dion, 
vi. 7, 10, 11, 40, 44, 45. Of Eumenes to the Argyraspides, 
iv. 63. Of Fab i us Maximus to his army, ii. 82. To Paulus 
.Emilias, 85. Of Caius Gracchus, v. 227. Of Tiberius 
Gracchus, 208, 209, 215. Of Ersilia, and the Sabine women, 
i. 80. Of Licinia, the wife of Caius Gracchus, v. 238, 239. Of 
Lucullusto the army, iii. 315. Of Marius Gelsus, vi. 2o7. Of 
Minueius to his troops, ii. 83. Of Numa refusing the offered 
crown, i. 173. Of the father of Xuma, in answer, 174, 175. 
Of Otho to his troops, vi. 260. Of Paulus /Emilius to Perseus, 
ii. 317. Of tlte same, to the young officers, on the taking of 
Perseus, 318. Of the same, to the people of Rome, 330. Of 
Perpenna against Sertorius, iv. 33. Of Pompey to Cornelia, iv. 
222. Of Remus to Numitor, i. 5S. Of Sertori :s, on the force of 

454 INDEX. 

perseverance, iv. 22. Of Syllato liis men, iii. 26] . Of Therycion 
to Cleomenes, on the contempt of death, v. 187. Of Tiribazus 
to Darius, vi. 1 -1-6, 147. Of Valerius, sister to Publicola, to 
Volumoia the mother of Coriolanus, ii. 216. Of Volumnia to 

the Roman matrons, 217. Of the same to her son, 218 — 220. 
Of Vinius to Galba, vi. 214. 

Orator, prevails more from the goodness of his heart than the elo- 
quence oi' his tongue, v. 7. 

Oratory, the conciseness of that of Phoeion, v. 7, 8. 

-J- brc/ildidn hills, iii. 227. 

f Orchomenus, ii. 359. iii. 223, 261. v. 161. 

Orcynians, in Cappadoc-ia, iv. 50. 

Orestes, the consul of that name, v. 224. 

t Oram, ii. 292. 

f Ore.rartes, river, iv. SI 1. 

f Oricuni, ii. 322. iv. 208. 

-\-Orites, Alexander marches through then country, iv. 339, 341. 

Orneus, of the family of Ereehtheus, i. 40. 

\0rnytus, plants a colony in Caria, i. 10. 

Orohazus, comes from Arsaces to wait on Sylla, the first embassa- 
dor the Parthians sent to the Romans, iii. 235. Put to death by 
Arsaces for suffering Sylla to take the place oi' honour, 236. 

Grades, or Hijrodes, king of Parthia, sends an embassy to Crassus, 
iii. 473, and n. Restored to his throne by Surena, 477. Con- 
quers Crassus, 494. Is murdered by his son Phraates, 498. 

Croesus, the Cretan, kills Ptolemy the son of Pyrrhus, iii. 11]. 

Oromnsdes, or Or'amqzes, the God who is the author of good, so 
called by the Persians, iv. 286. vi. 149. 

Ornntes, the Persian, vi. 146, 155. 

-j- OropianSf their cause, ii. 524, v. 255. 

-j- Qrbpus, v. 255. 

■j- OrosSus, v. 396. 

Orphans, and widows, excused from taxes by the Romans, at the 
first appointment o\ qu;rstors, i. 286, arid n. 

Orpheus, iv. 240. His statue of cypress at Libethra, 259. 

Orphidhts, vi. 256 

Orthngords, the diviner, a friend of Timoleon's, ii. 236. 

Orthia. See Diana Orthia, 

Orthopagus, iii. 256. 

4 Osca, iv. 19. 

Oschophorin., pr * the Feast of Boughs,' instituted by Theseus, i. 
25j 27. Description of this feast, 27, n. 

Osodqtes, iv. 326. ' 

Oitqnes, brother to Artajcerxes Mnembn, vi. Hi). His saying to 
Timngoras, 140. 

f Ostiq, iii. 165, 174. 

Ostius, Ductus, the first parricide in Rome, i. Si). 

Ostracism, ngainsj whom "employed, i. 319, 344. ii. 127. On what 
account abolished, iii. 416. 

Otacilins, brother to Marcellus, ii. 390. 

Qtho, the : .. tor, his law in favour of the equestrian order, v. 807. 

INDEX. 45* 

Orno, Marcus, his luxury and love of pleasure, vi. 229. His con- 
nexions with Nero, 229. Nero is inclined to put him to death, 
in order to have Popjasea entirely to himself, 230. But through 
the intercession of Seneca, he is sent out governor of Lusitania, 
ib. One of the first who declares for G alba, ib. Pays his court 
in an agreeable manner both to Galba and his minister Vilnius, 231 . 
Takes measures for being appointed successor to Galba, ib. 
Contracts immense debts, ib. Bribes the prsetorian cohorts, ib. 
Rebels against Galba upon being disappointed of the adoption, 
23k Is the means of Galba's death, 238, 239. Goes to the 
Capitol, as emperor, and sacrifices, 243. Pardons Marius Cel- 
sus, ib. Makes a gracious ?peech to the senate, 244. Divides 
the remaining part of his consulship with Verginius Rufus, ib. 
Begins his administration with several prudent and popular acts, 
ib. Resolves to punish Tigellinus, and that wretch cuts his own 
throat, 244, 245. Remembers none of his private quarrels, 245. 
Assumes the name of Nero, to gratify the populace, ib. The 
praetorian cohorts, in their concern, or pretence of concern, for 
the emperor's safety, behave in a very turbulent manner, and go 
near to despatch a great number of senators, ib. 246. He 
punishes two soldiers by way of example, 24-7. Has intelligence 
that Vitellius had taken the title of emperor upon him, ib. 
Receives accounts from other countries, favourable to himself, ib. 
Letters pass between him and Vitellius, which end in mutual 
reproaches, ib. Does not deprive Lucius, the brother of Vitel- 
line, of his command in the army, but orders him to attend him 
on his march, 248. Takes particular care of the mother and 
wife of Vitellius, ib. 249. Appoints Flavius Savinus, brother to 
Vespasian, governor of Rome, 249. Stops at Brixellum, and 
orders his army to march on under his lieutenants, which thev 
refuse, ib. Character of his officers, ib. Sends his brother Titia- 
nus to take the command of the army, and gives him Proculus 
for his assistant, 252. Holds a council of war, in which his mo^t 
experienced generals advise him to wait for his troops from Mysia 
and Pannonia, ib. But impatient to have the affair decided, he 
gives orders for a general action, 254. Retires to Brixellum, ib. 
ilis great error in that step, ib. Some skirmishes upon the Po 
make his troops at Bedriacum insist on being led out, ib. 2r>5. 
Bravery of his legion called * the Succourer,' 256. When intel- 
ligence is brought to him that the battle was lost, the troops 
about him give every possible assurance of their fidelity, 259. 
His speech, in which he assures them, that though ho knows the 
late battle to be by no means decisive, he will lay down his life 
to procure them peace, 260. Takes leave of the senators, 
and others of his friends, ib. Appeases his soldiers, who 
thought the senators were forsaking him, 261. Sleeps sound 
the night following, 262. Palls upon his sword, and expires with 
one groan, ib. The army lament his death in the sincerest 
manner, and give him the most honourable burial, ib. A plain 
monument is put upon his grave at Brixellum, 263. lie died at 
the age of thirty-seven, having reigned only three months, ib. 

*56 INDEX. 

By his death, in some measure, he compensated for the disorders 

of his life, ib. 
f Otn/ce, iii. 337. 
Ovation, the smaller triumph, ii. 423. Not the same with the 

Greek Evan, 424. But derived from the Latin word, Ovis, ib. 
Ovicula, a name given to Fabius Maxiinus in his youth on account 

of his seeming lameness and stupidity, ii. 63. 
C*u/, Athenian money impressed with the figure of one, iii. 208. 
Ox, said to have spoken. See Prodigies. 
— , valued at five drachmae at Athens, i. 252. At a hundred oholi 

in the time of Publicola, 286. 
Oxat/ires, the brother of Darins, Alexander takes him into his 

friendship, iv. 309. 

. , brother to Artaxerxes Mnemon, vi. 119. 

+ Oxii', river, iv. 526. 

O.vj/arte-, asked by Alexander ' whether Sisimethres, who had 

taken post on an inaccessible rock, was a man of courage,' iv. 

S27. 

, son of Abulytes, stabbed by Alexander, iv. 34-2. 

Qxydracm. See Malli 

PACCIANUS, defeated and killed by Sertorius, iv. 12. 

Paches, who had taken Lesbos, being called to account by the 

Athenians for some misdemeanour, kills himself in open court, 

iii. 4-05. 
f Pac/u/nus, promontory of, vi. 24. 
Pacianus, Caius, a Roman who resembled Crassus, obliged by the 

Parthians to personate him, iii. 4-95. 
. , Vibius, Crassus takes refuge with him in Spain from the 

cruelty of Marius, iii. 451. 
Pacorus, prince of Parthia, marries the king of Armenia's sister, 

iii. 496. Killed in battle by the Romans, 498. v. 457. 
Pceanea, Demosthenes of that ward, v. 275. 
Ptfdarefus the Spartan, a saying of his, i. 150. 
Pceon, the historian, i. 22. 
Pcconia, iii. 76. iv. 177- 
Painters, excellent ones at Sicyon, vi. 164. 
Paintings, Aratus collects them for Ptolemy, vi. 165. 
Palatine hill, i. 50, 79. 
•j- Palccscepsis, a city given to Themistocles by the king of Persia, 

i. 354. 
Palilia, a pastoral feast, i. 65, 85. 
Palladium, i. 35. Image of Pallas, 387. 
Pallantiilce, the sons of Pallas, and next heirs to ^Egeus, if Theseus 

had not been acknowledged his son, have recourse to arms, but 

are defeated, i. 5, 14. 
f Pallantium, vi. ]K9. 

Pallas, brother of -I'.geus, and father of the Pallantidae, i. 5, «, 
. . See Miugria, 

INDEX. 457 

Pallene, an Athenian tribe, do not intermarry with that of Agnus, 

i. U. 
Palm, a spring so called, ii. 360. 
Palm-tree shooting up near the statue of Ca?sar in a temple at 

Tralles, considered as prefigurative of his victory at Pharsalia. 
. See Prodigies. 
Pammenes, Philip, king of Macedon, brought up in his house ai 

Thebes, ii. 373. 
Pamphilus, of Sicyon, a celebrated painter, vi. 16i. 
f Pamphijlia, iv. 223. 
Pan, i. 172. 

t Panactus, ii. 128. v. 3S5. 
Pancctius commands a galley of Tenos in the service of Xerxes, and 

revolts from him, i. 331. 

, the philosopher, what he said of Demosthenes, v. 267. 

Panathcncea, the festival of the united Athenians, instituted by- 
Theseus, i. 29. v. 24. 
Pancratium, what, iv. 24:5, and n. 
f Pandosia, iii. 87. 
Pandion, i. 14. 
Panemus, the month of Metageitnion so called by the Boeotians, i. 

385. 
Panic fears, iv. 213. 
f Pannonia, vi. 247. 
f Panopceans, iii. 225, 253. 
Pauopeus, i. 37. 

Pansa and Hirtius, consuls, ii. 332. See Hirtius. 
Pantaleon, a man of great power and interest among the iEtolians, 

vi. 186. 
Pantauchus, challenges Pyrrhus to single combat, and is overcome, 

iii. 74. v. 406. 
Panteus, sent by Cleomenes to seize on Megalopolis, v. 179. 

Kills himself in Egypt on the body of Cleomenes, 195. His 

wife a woman of great beauty, courage, and dignity of sentiment, 

196. 
Panthers, v. 337. 
Pantho'ides, the Spartan general, Pelopidas kills him in the battle 

of Tanagra, ii. 359. 
Panthides, marries Italia, the daughter of Themistocles, i. 358. 
Paphian Venus. See Venus. 
t Paphlagonia, iii. 264. iv. 41, 82, 266. 
Papiria, wife of Paul us iEmilius, divorced by him, ii. 285. 
Papirius Maso, ii. 285. 
Carbo, the consul, defeated by Sylla's lieutenants, makes 

his escape in the night, and gets into Lybia, iii. 272. 
Pappus, v. 2S8. 
■f Parceto>iium, v. 492. 
Purali, one division of the people of Attica so called; they lived 

on the sea-coast, i. 263, n. 
Paralus, one of the sons of Pericles, his father's affliction for his 

death, ii. 56. 

458 INDEX. 

Paralks, a ship ro called, iii. 200. 

1- Parapotamians, iii. 254. 

Paris' harp preserved at Troy, Alexander refuses to see it, iv. 261. 

jJariscas, an eunuch belonging to the younger Cyrus, vi. 127. 

^.■Pjarmal embassadors from that place, iii. 1.54. 

Parmenio, father of Philotas, wains Alexander of a supposed de- 

j sign of poison from his physician, iv. 268. Tells him, ha 
would accept the offers of Darius, if he was Alexander, 2S5.. 
Advises hirn. to attack the enemy in the night, to which Alex- 
ander replies, ' I will not steal a victory,' 289, 2- 0. His party, 
in the great battle of Arbela, disordered by the Bactrian horse, 
291. Sends to Alexander for succours, 294. Censured for it, 
ib. Alexander gives him Bagoas' house, 303. Parmenio says to 
Philotas, ' My son, be less,' 314. He is put to death by order of 
Alexander, 316. 

-J- Parnassus, iii. 252. 

Parrhasius, a celebrated painter at Athens, i. 6. Honoured by 
the Athenians for his pictures of Theseus, ib. 

Parricide. See Ostitis. 

Parsley, used in adorning the sepulchres of the dead, ii. 262. 
Crowns of it bestowed on the victors in the Isthmian and Ne- 
mean games, ib. 

Parthenon, the temple of Minerva, at Athens, ii. 23. v. 3!:6. 

Parlhiaus, defeat Crassus, iii. 483, 484. Their manner of right- 
ing, ib. 482. Their habits, 481. Defeated by Antony, v. 463. 
Attack him in his return, and harass him extremely, 466, et seq. 

Part-:. Great parts produce great vices, as well as virtues, v. 364! 

Par;/s,:!is^ wife of Darius, and mother of Artaxerxes Mnemon, 
vi. 114. Her attachment to her younger son Cyrus, 116. En- 
courages his ambitious designs, am) contributes greatly to the 
war between the two brothers, 120. Her character, ib. Her 
extreme cruelty to all who were concerned in the death of 
Cyrus, or in cutting off his head and hand, 131, 135. She 
poisons Siatira, the wife of Artaxerxes, 135. Is confined for 
some time to the city of Babylon, 136. Artaxerxes is recon- 
ciled to her, 140. 

Pawicas, Cyrus' horse, vi. 123. 

-j- Pasargadce, vi. 116. 

Paseas, the father of Abantidas, vi. 153. Killed by Nicocles, 155. 

Pastorates, king of Soli in Cyprus, iv. 284. 

Pasipkae, the wife of Minosj supposed to have had a criminal con - 
merce with his general Taurus, i. 20. 

Pasiphaa, her oracle, iv. 141, 142,161. 

Paiiphon, an author, iii. 402. 

Pasitigris", river, iv. 57. 

■\Passaron, in the country of the Molossians, iii. 70. 

Passions', diseases, and tempests, considered by the heathens as 
divinities, i. 34, n. 

Patfccus, i. 225. 

j Pafara, yi. 86. 

j Patareans, Brutus' letter concerning them, vi 59, 

INDEX. 459 

■[ Patrcc, ii. 132. v. 371, 483. 

Patricians, whence the term, i. (57. A hundred of the most emi- 
nent Romans selected hy Romulus for a council or senate, ib. 
Their manner increased, 82. He leaves them only the name 
of a senate without the power, 91. They conspire against 
him, 95. 

Patriotism, i. 148. It's emblem, iv. 74, n. 

Pat robins, one of Nero's servants, put to death by Galha, vi. 227. 

Patroclcs, father of Soils, i. 110. 

Patron, i. 68. 

Patrons and clients among the Romans, an account of their rela- 
tion, i. 68. iii. 125. 

t Patronis, iii. 252. 

Paulus JEmilius, Lucius, consul with Terentius Varro, ii. S5. 
Fabius Maximus advises him to avoid an engagement with An- 
nibal, ib. His answer, 86. Killed in the battle of Carina;, 
89, 282. 

Paulus iE.MiLius, his family supposed to be descendents of a son 
of Numa, ii. 281. Is the son of Lucius Paulus JEmilius, who 
fell at Cannae, 282. Sets out in a different track from the rest 
of the young nobility, ib. Carries the office of axlile against 
twelve competitors, 283. When taken into the college of augurs, 
studies their rules and ceremonies with great attention, ib. 
Strict in military discipline, 284. Is sent praetor into Spain, with 
double the usual number of lictors, and reduces the barbarians 
who had revolted, ib. Returns to Rome not a drachma the 
richer, 285. Divorces his first wife Papiria, after he had lived 
long with her, and she had brought him fine children, ib. Mar- 
ries a second wife, bv whom he has two sons, 286. His sons by 
the first wife are adopted, the one by Fabius Maximus, the other 
by the son of Seipro Afrieanus, ib. One of his daughters is 
married to the son of Cato, and the other to iElius Tubero, ib. 
In his first consulship reduces the Ligurians, and takes from 
them the ships which they had employed in piracy, 287". Is 
candidate again for the consulship, and loses it, ib. 288. In- 
spects the education of his children, and procures them not only 
Roman, but Grecian masters, 288. Perseus defeats several 
Roman generals, ib. Paulus Emiiius is called to the consulship, 
292. Omens of success to him, 293. His speech to the people, 
on being appointed to the command in Macedon, 29 k After a 
safe and speedy passage, he finds Perseus strongly fortified by 
the sea-side at the foot of mount Olympus, 297. Discovers 
water for his troops, by digging at the foot of the mountains, 298. 
Finds out a way of coming at the enemy, through Perrhaebia, 
300. Is astonished at the numbers and good order of the enemy, 
303. Has the art to encamp without being disturbed by the 
Macedonians, ib. Takes advantage of an eclipse of the moon, 
and announces victory to the Romans, provided they stood upon 
the defensive, 303, 804. Makes use of an artifice to make the 
Macedonians begin to attack, 305. His conduct in the battle, 
30'j. Marcus, his son-in-law, loses his sword, and finds it again 

-ICO INDEX. 

with much difficulty under a heap of the slain, 309. Scipio, his 
younger son, is missing, but returns to the camp late in the night, 
31-0,311. JEmilius in two days' time becomes master of all 
MacedoD, 313. His rebuke to the vanquished Perseus, when he 
is brought before him, 317. His speech to the officers of his 
army on the instability of fortune, 318. Visits Greece, reforms 
abuses, and gives specimens of his bounty, 319. Erects his own 
statue at Delphi, on a pedestal designed for that oi' Perseus, ib 
With ten commissioners from Rome, settles the government of 
Macedon, ib. 320. Exhibits games, 320. Has a happy talent 
for making entertainments, ib. Takes nothing of Perseus' trea- 
sures for himself, ib. Sacks seventy cities of Epirus, and yet 
the soldiers to whom the plunder was given, have no more than 
eleven drachma1 a man, 322. Returns to Italy, and sails in great 
pomp up the Tiber, ib. The soldiers endeavour to prevent his 
triumph, 323. Servilius' speech on that occasion, ib. 324. The 
triumph described, 32.3 — 323. yEmilius loses his two younger 
sons, who were not adopted into other families, 329. The mag- 
nanimity discovered in his speech on that occasion, 330. He 
brings so much money into the treasury, that the people have no 
occasion to pay any taxes till the times of Hirtius and Pansa, 
332. Is acceptable to the people, though in the interest of the 
nobility, ib. Is elected censor with Marcius Philippus, 333, and 
n. His moderation in that office, 333. Sickens during his 
censorship, ib. The cordial regard expressed for him at his 
funeral, not only by the Romans, but persons of the countries 
he had conquered, 334-, 335. Leaves a very small estate behind 
him, ib. 

Paulas, the consul, bribed by Caesar, Sv. 199, 393. 

, — , given up to the proscription by his brother Lepidus, v 

350, 443. 
Pan san /as, commander in chief of the Greeks, at the battle of 

Plataeae, ii. 467, et sea. 

, king ox Sparta, inarches into Attica, under pretence of 

supporting tbje Thirty Tyrants, but realty with another view, iii. 
215. Obtains a truce, and carries off the dead body of Lysander 
from before the walls of Haliartus, 225. Retires to Tegea, 227. 
Deserted by the allies, who put themselves under the command 
of Cimon, 301. Unfortunately kills Cleonice at Byzantium, /£. 
His unhappy end, i. 302, n. 344, 315, n. 

-, kills Philip of Macedon for denying him redress under 

an insupportable injury, iv. 251. 

-'-, the physician, Alexander's letter to him on the use of 

hellebore, iv. 305. 

--, sent by Seleucus to seize Demetrius, v. 118. 

Peace, of Nicias, ;ii. 112. Between the Athenians and the king of 
Persia, 312. Of Antalcidas, iv. 98. vi. 138. Between Sylla and 
Mithridatcs, iii. 265, 233. 

, an altar erected to her. iii. 312. Verses descriptive of her, 

i. 208. 

Pecunia, i. 30, n, 

INDEX. 461 

j pcdalion, a rock so called, iii. 359. 

Pedicei, an Athenian class, i. '263, n. 

t Pedum, city of, ii. 209. 

|- Pegee, ii. 32. vi. 198. 

f Pdasgi, i. 19. The oldest inhabitants of Greece, ib. ??. 

Pel ass; us, iii. 65. 

Pcleus, the grandson of Sciron, i. 11. 

\ Pel ionium, ii. 307. 

i Pella, ii. 311. v. 409. 

. , Lutius, disgraced by Brutus, vi. S9. 

f Pellene, recovered from the /Etolians by Aratus, vi. 181. Taken 
by Cleomenes, v. 172. 

Pki'opjedas, the son of Hippoclus, nobly descended, ii. 34-3. Makes 
a generous use of his wealth, ib. Cannot prevail on his friend 
Epanhnondas to partake of his riches, and therefore partakes of 
his poverty, ib. Marries into a noble family, yet afterward by 
his munificence lessens his fortune, 344. Delights in the exer- 
cises of the Palaestra and the field, ib. The happy consequences 
to the public from the perpetual friendship and harmony subsist- 
ing between him and Epaminondas, ib. Rescued in battle by 
Epaminondas, 345. Is sentenced to banishment, 346. Prevails 
upon the exiles to attempt the deliverance of their country, 34S. 
Is one of the twelve exiles, who having left the rest of their 
party at Thriasium, set out in disguise with dogs and hunting 
poles, 349. He and his company enter the city in different quar- 
ters, under favour of their disguise and the snowy weather, and 
get safe to Charon's house, 350. He goes against Leontidas, who 
was at home in his own chamber, and despatches him with much 
difficulty) 353, 354. Kills, also, Hypates, 354. Is elected 
by the people one of the governors of Bceotia, 355. Takes the 
ladmea a little before succours arrived from Sparta, 356. This 
a-'fion of Pclopidas justly called sister to that of Thrasybulus, ib. 
The Athenians, alarmed at the arrival of a Spartan army on the 
borders of Bceotia, draw off from the Theban league, but Pelo- 
pidas finds means to embroil them again with the Spartans, 357. 
His agents persuade Sphodrias, the Spartan, to make an attempt 
upon the Piraeus, ib. He defeats the Spartans in several ren- 
counters, 358, 359. His concern in the battle of Tegyra*, 359. 
The Sacred Band, first formed by Gorgides, improved by Pelo- 
pidas, 362, 364. His answer to his wife, who desires him to take 
care of his person, 365. Marches with Epaminondas against 
Cleombrotus, 367. His dream before the battle of Leuctra, 365, 
366. As captain only of the Sacred Band, has a considerable 
share in the honour of the victory, 368. He and Epaminondas 
are appointed joint-governors of Bceotia, and make very consi- 
derable progress in Peloponnesus, ib. 369. 1 hey venture to 
keep their commission beyond the expiration of their year, 
though the penalty was capital, 369. Lay waste Laconia with 
an army of seventy thousand men, ib. Drive the Spartans out 
of Messenia, and re-establish the ancient inhabitants, ih. In 
their return defeat the Athenians, ib. 370. Are capitally tried 

4G2 INDEX. 

for keeping the command beyond the time allowed by law, 370. 
Acquitted, ib. Meneclides forms a party against them, ib. 371. 
Endeavours to put Charon upon a footing with them, 371. A 

heavy line is laid upon that envious man, 372. Tlir Thossalians 
applying to the Thebans for assistance against Alexander the 
tyrant of Pherae, Pelopidas takes the command of the succours, 
and recovers Larissa, 372. Attempts to humanise the tyrant, 
but in vain, ib. The tyrant escapes out of his hands, ib Pelo- 
pidas goes into Macedon, as arbitrator between Alexander and 
Ptolemy, 373. Brings Philip and thirty other hostages to 
Thebes, ib. Ptolemy having killed the king of Macedon, and 
assumed the sovereignty, Pelopidas permits him to keep it oh 
certain conditions, for the performance of which he gives his son 
Philoxenus, as an hostage, 374. Besieges Pharsalus, ib. Alex- 
ander, the tyrant of Pherae, approaches it with his army, and 
Pelopidas is imprudent enough to go to him without guards, ib. 
The tyrant seizes him and Ismenias, and makes himself master of 
Pharsalus, ib. Thebe, the tyrant's wife, visits Pelopidas in the 
prison, 375. Epaminondas recovers him and Ismenias out of the 
tyrant's hands, 378. Pelopidas goes embassador to the Persian 
court, and is highly honoured by Artaxerxes, ib. Obtains all he 
desires, 379. Accepts none of the king's presents, ib. The 
tyrant of Pherae extends his conquests and oppressions, 380. 
An eclipse of the sun happens, when Pelopidas is marching ou! 
against him, ib. He has the advantage in the battle, notwith- 
standing his inferior numbers; but falls a sacrifice to his resent- 
ment against the tyrant, 382. The sorrow of the allies, as well 
as Thebans, for his death, ib. 383. His funeral solemnised by 
the Thessalians, 384-. The Thebans send an army to revenge 
his death upon Alexander, 385. The tyrant is slain by his wife 
and her three brothers, 386, 387. 

Peloponnesian war, ii. 43. Pasts twenty -seven years, iii. 402, n. 

-f- Peloponnesus, i. 31, 40. v. 170. 

Pelops, after he was settled in Peloponnesus, formed alliances in 
his family with the neighbouring princes, and became the most 
powerful king in those parts, i. i-, n. Father of Pittheus and 
Lysidicj&, ib. 

— , of Byzantium, Cicero expostulates with him by letter for 

not procuring for him certain honours thence, v. 322. 

•f- P-elusium, v. 427, 497- vi. 87- 

-j- Peneus, river, iii. 34. 

Pentacosiomcdimni, an order of men in Athens according to the 
constitution of Solon, i. 212. ii. 445. 

pentaiftluni, what, vi. 151', n. 

-j Pentele, a borough of Attica, famed for it's marble, i. 292. 

i Pentejeum, v. 173. 

Pentfieu&i iii. 406, 497. vi. 239. 

Peparalhus, one of the Cyclades, i. 52, n. 

Prp/uvi, or sacred veil of Minerva, i. 29, n. v. 372, n. 

■\ Prrc.tr, a city given to Themistocles by the king of Persia,. tft 
Supply his wardrobe, i. 354. 

INDEX. 463 

Perdjccas, on the death of Hephsestion supplies his place, iv. 3S. 
He establishes Eumenes in Cappadocia, 42. Marches against 
Ptolemy, 43. Is killed in a mutiny in /Egypt, 48. Had assisted 
Roxana in taking off Statira and her sister, iv. 353. 

f Pergamus, iii. 246. The library there, v. 481. 

Pergamenians, Brutus' letter to them, vi. 58, 5'J. 

Periander, entertains the seven Wise Mer-r, i. 222, 223. 

, the son of Cypselus, vi. 15.3. 

Perib/ra, the mother of Ajax, married to Theseus, i. 37. 

Pkrki.es, of the tribe of Acamantis, and the ward of Cholargfa, 
ii. 5. Son of Xanthippus and Agariste, both illustrious person- 
ages, ib. His person described, 6. Rallied by the comic poets, 
on the largeness of his head, ib. Damon, under pretence of 
teaching him music, instructs him in politics, 7. He attends the 
lectures of Zeno the Eleanj ib. Most indebted for his sublime 
oratory and great knowledge of nature, to Anaxagoras, 8. Cured 
by him of superstition, 9. Patient under injuries, yet taxed 
with pride, ib. The rain with one horn found in his grounds, 
3 0. Resembles Pisistratus in his person and manner, 11. En- 
gages in the administration, and takes the popular party, be- 
cause Cimon was at the head of the nobility, ib. Lives extreme- 
ly retired, for the sake of preserving his dignity, 12. Over- 
throws the power of the Areopagus, by means of Ephialtes, 12, 
13. Improves his eloquence by his philosophy, and from the 
force of it gains the surname of Olympias, 13. Compared to 
thunder and lightning as bespoke, 13, 14. Thucydides' obser- 
vation on his eloquence, 14, 15. Several sayings of Pericles, ib. 
He first endeavours to bring himself to some sort of equality with 
Cimon, and for that purpose corrupts the people with the public 
money, ib. 16. Causes Cimon to be banished by the Ostracism, 
16. Cimon is recalled, and Pericles and he take different de- 
partments in the state, 17. Pericles is unjustly charged with i. 
assassination of Ephiaites, 18. Upon the death of Cimon, the 
nobility set up Thucydides against Pericles, ib. 19. Pericles in- 
dulges the people more and more, 19. He employs sixty gaik. > 
for eight months every year, ib. His policy in sending out 
colonies, ib. He removes the public treasures of Greece from 
Delos, and takes them into his own custody, 20. Constructs 
noble edifices at Athens, 21, 22. Rebuilds the Parthenon, '. 
Builds the Odeum, or music-theatre, ib. Begins the long wails, 
ib. A good workman falls from the vestibule of the citadel, and 
his life being despaired of, a remedy for him is communicated to 
Pericles in a dream, 24. Pericles is accused of a variety of in- 
trigues, 25. Pie offers the people to be at the whole charge of 
the public buildings himself, if they would suffer them to be in- 
scribed with his name, instead of theirs, 26. Procures the 
banishment of Thucydides, and becomes sole master of Athens, 
ib. 27. Treats the people with less ceremony, but is strictly just, 
and does not add one drachma to his paternal estate, 27, 28. 
Holds the reins for fifteen years after the banishment of Thucy- 
dides, and for forty years in all, 28. Attentive to las own 

4G* INDEX. 

finances, ib. A servant, named Evangelas, is very useful to 
him in his private (economy , 29. Is informed that Anaxagoras 
intends to starve himself, and hastens to dissuade him, ib. 30. 
Mends deputies to all the states of Greece, to summon them to 
Athens, to consult about rebuilding the Grecian temples, and 
the best measures lor preserving the peace of Greece, 30. The 
safety of his measures in war, 31. A saying of his thereupon, 
ib. Endeavours to dissuade Tolmides from his expedition into 
Roeotia, ib. Pericles' expedition to the Chersonese, 32. That 
by sea around Peloponnesus, ib. He sails with a strong fleet, 
and secures the Grecian cities in the neighborhood of the 
Euxine sea, 33. Sends a colony of six hundred Athenians to 
Sinope, ib. Restrains the wild desires of the Athenians, who 
were possessed with a passion for conquering Sicily and other 
countries, ib. Opposes the Lacedaemonians in the Sacred War, 
and puts the temple of Delphi in the hands of the Phocians 
again, 34. Inscribes the Athenian privilege of consulting the 
oracle first, on the side of the brasen wolf, ib. The Lacedae- 
monians under their king Plistonax invading Attica, Pericles 
bribes Cleandrides, the guardian of Plistonax, to retire, ib. 35. 
Puts down ten talents for necessary use, and the Athenians 
allow it without examining the purpose, 35. Chastises the Eu- 
booahs, ib. Agrees upon a truce for thirty years with the Lace- 
daemonians, 36. Makes war upon the Samians, at the instiga- 
tion of Aspasia, ib. Though Pericles had two sons by his wife, 
named Xanthippus and Paralus, they part by consent, and he 
marries Aspasia, 37. Has a son by her, 38. His operations 
against the Samians, who are at last entirely reduced, ib. — 4-2. 
He celebrates the obsequies of his countrymen who had fallen 
in the Samian war, and pronounces their funeral oration at 
Athens, 12. Upon a rupture between the Corinthians and Cor- 
cyreans, he sends Lacedaemonius, the son of Cimon, with ten 
ships only, to the assistance of the latter, 43, 44. Afterward 
he sends a larger fleet, 44. Is the sole author of the Pelopon- 
nesian war, 45. Phidias is condemned for putting his own 
figure, and thai; of Pericles, on the aegis of Minerva, 47, 48. 
Aspasia is prosecuted for impiety, and a charge of peculation is 
brought against Pericles, ib. 49. He begs Aspasia off, and con- 
ducts Anaxagoras *oait of Athens, 49. He hastens on the war, 
ib. The Lacedaemonians desire the Athenians to banish all 
execrable persons, hoping that Pericles would be included in 
the number, 50. This attaches the Athenians to Pericles still 
more, ib. He warns the Athenians of the enemy's design to 
spare his lands, when they ravaged the rest, ib. Archidamus 
invades Attica, and: proceeds as far as Acharnae; but Pericles 
keeps the Athenians close in the city, ib. 51. He divides the 
kinds in /Egina among the poor citizens of Athens, 52. Ra- 
vages the Peloponnesian coasts with his fleets, and lays waste 
the territories of Megara, ib. The plague breaking out at 
Alliens, he mans a hundred and fifty ships, 53. An eclipse of 
the sun happens, when he is about to set sail, ib. 54. He ex- 

INDEX. 46.5 

plains that phenomenon, so as to remove the superstitious fears 
of his men, 54. Lays siege to Epidaurus ; but the sickness 
among his troops breaks his measures, ib. The Athenians de- 
prive him of the command, and lay a tine upon him, ib. His 
elder son Xanthippus behaves in a very un dutiful manner, 55. 
He loses that son, and several other persons of his family in the 
plague, 56. Retains his dignity of sentiment till the death of 
his last legitimate son Paralus, ib. The Athenians, disappointed 
in their other statesmen, call him again to the administration, 
ib. He repeals the law which he had made against bastards, 
having now himself only natural children left, ib. Is permitted 
to enrol a natural son by his own name, 51. That son is put to 
death by the Athenians, after the sea-fight at Arginusse, ib. 
Pericles takes the plague, but has it in a lingering manner, 58. 
His friends, when they think him insensible, and at the point of 
death, discourse about his bed, ib. The remarkable observation 
which he made upon that occasion, ib. His character, ib. 59. 
Much wanted in the administration, and regretted by the Athe- 
nians, 59, 60. 

Periclidas, sent by the Spartans to Athens to request succours 
against the Helots, iii. 317. 

Perigune, daughter of Sinnis, her history, i. 10. 

f Perinthians, iv. 344. v. 17, 271. 

f Pcriphemus, a hero to whom the oracle directs Solon to sacrifice 
in Salamis, i. 228. 

Periphetes, surnamed Cori/netes, or the Club-bearer, slain by The- 
seus in the territories of Epidaurus, i. 9. 

Perip/toretus, Artemon, why so called, ii. 41. 

Peripoltas, the diviner, conducts king Ophelias into Boeotia, iii. 

293. 

Periskulalnsmoi, ceremonies, i. 87. 

Peritas, Alexander's dog. That prince builds a city of the same 
name in memory of him, iv. 332. 

Perithois, one of the wards of Athens, ii. 126. iii. 415. 

Perpcnna, joins Sertorius, iv. 21. Jealous of the glory of that 
general, and conspires against him, 34. Kills Sertorius, in spite 
of the sanction of hospitality, 35. Is taken prisoner, and put to 
death by Pompey, ib. 147, 148. 

■fPerrhcebians, ii. 300. iii. 43. 

Persams, the philosopher, commands in Acrocorinth for Antigo- 
nus, vi. 169. Aratus takes that citadel from him, 174. A say- 
ing of his, 175. 

■\Persepolis. Alexander enters that city, iv. 299. Burns the 
palace of Xerxes there, 300, 301. 

Perseverance, the effects of it, iv. 22. 

Perseus, of the heroic times, iii. 296. 

, king of Macedon, the son of Philip, goes to war with the 

Romans, ii. 291. Said to be a supposititious child, and really the 
son of a sempstress, ib. Defeats some of the Roman generals, 
ib. 292. Makes great preparations- for future hostilities, 292. 
vol. vi. 2 H 

46s index: 

His sordid avarice, 295, 296. And timidity, 806. He is eiv 
couraged by his officers to venture upon a decisive action, 302. 
Said by some to have withdrawn to Pydna as soon as the battle- 
began, 306. Defeated by the Romans, 309. His Jubsequent 
behaviour, 311. Octavius spares the sanctuary of the Cabiri 
in which he had taken refuge, 315. Surrenders himself to Oc- 
tavius, 316. Behaves meanly on being introduced to Paulus 
iEmilius, 317. Led in triumph, 328. Put to a cruel death, 
331, 332. Is the last of the kings of Macedon, v. 421. 
\ Persians, their wars with the Greeks under Darius, ii. 451. Un- 
der Xerxes, i. 321, ct scq. With the Lacedaemonians in the 
time of Agesilaus, vi. 137. With Alexander the Great, iv. 
cj!66y et passim. The entrance into their country difficult, 298. 
Their jealousy of their women, i. 349. 
■fPessimtSf iii. 141. v. 62. 

Pestilence at Rome, i. 90, 418. Throughout Italy, 189. At Athens, 
ii. 53. In the army of Demetrius, the consequence of unwhole- 
some diet, v. 414. 
[Pctelia, ii. 434. 
f Pelelian hills, iii. 462. 
Peieus, i. 40. 
Peticius, a Roman, receives Pompey into his ship, in consequence 

of a dream he had upon his voyage, iv. 220. 
Petilius, the praetor, advises the senate to burn the books of Numa, 
which were found about four hundred years after his death, 
i. 207. 
Petinus, one of the evil ministers of Nero, put to death by Galba, 

vi. 227. 
f Petra, in Arabia, iv. 177. 

|-' , near Mount Olympus, ii. 300. 

t Petrocus, iii. 256. 

Petronius, one of Cra?sus' officers in the Parthian expedition, his 
great fidelity to his general, iii. 494. 

Turpilianusy a person of consular dignity, put to death 

by Galba, vi. 224. 
PeucestaSy joins Kumenes, iv. 56. Endeavours to gain the prin- 
cipal authority in the army, 53, 59. Is surprised at the news of 
Antigonus' approach, 60. The cavalry defeated, and the bag- 
gage taken through his cowardice, 62. Alexander's letter to 
him, on his being bitten by a bear, iv. 305. 
PexodoruS) governor of Caria, treats of marriage between his 

daughter and Arrhidams, the son of Philip, iv. 253. 
Phcea, the wild sow of Crommyon, killed by Theseus, i. 10. Said 

to be, not a sow, but a female robber, 11. 
Phccax, tire name of one of the mariners who sailed with Theseus 
to Crete, i. 18. 

. , and Nicias, the only persons able to make bead against 

Alcibiades in the administration, ii. 126. 
PlicedimuSy informs Eumenes of a conspiracy against him, because 
Eumenes had borrowed money of biro, iv. 61, 

INDEX. 467 

Phcedon, archon of Athens, when the oracle directed the Athe- 
nians to carry the bones of Theseus from Scyros to Athens, i. 45. 
Plueilra, Theseus marries her, i. 36. The calamities said to en- 
sue upon her unlawful passion for Hippolytus, supposed not to 
be fictitious, ib. 
Phccranete, the wife of Samos, discovers Neoptolemus' conspiracy' 

against Pyrrhus, iii. 71. 
Pha'eco??, some writers reckon him the first king of the Molossians, 

after the deluge, iii. 65. 
Phalanx, the Macedonian, described, ii. 306. iii. 40. iv. 41, 42. 
Phalcrum, the monuments of Nausitheus and Phaeax erected there, 

by Theseus, i. 19. Temple of Sciron, ib. 
Pharax, a Lacedaemonian officer, under pretence of introducing 

liberty into Sicily, wanted to set himself up tyrant, vi. 46. 
t Pharice, vi. 205. 
+ Pkarmacusa, iv. 359. 
Pharmutki, i. 67. 

Pharnahazus, endeavours to cover the Lacedaemonian ships with 
his land forces, ii. 155. Is defeated by Alcibiades three several 
times, 156, 157, 158. Complains to the Spartans of Lysander's 
having plundered his province, iii. 212. Lysander desires him to 
send a letter by him, retracting what he had asserted, which he 
promises to do, but palms a different letter upon him, 213. 
Much respected by the Lacedaemonians for the services he had 
done them, ib. Is defeated by Spithridates and Herippidas, 
iv. 83. His conference with Agesilaus, 84, S5. Sent by Ar- 
taxerxes, as his general, against the Egyptians, vi. 141. 

■ ■ , son of Artabazus, commands a corps of horse under 

Eumenes, iv. 46. 
Phamaces, son of Mithridates, revolts from him to the Romans, 
upon which Mithridates kills himself, iv. 177. Sends presents 
to Pompey, ib. Defeats Domitius Calvinus, Caesar's lieutenant, 
415. Defeated by Caesar, ib. 
-} - Pharnacia, iii. 351. 
Pkarnapates, the most experienced general that Orodes had, killed 

in battle by Ventidius, v. 457. 
t Pharos, the isle so called, it's situation, iv. 279. 
t Pharsalia, battle of, described, iv. 216 — 219. 
f Phantrres, v. 40. 
t Phaselis, iii. 310. iv. 265- 
-|- Phasis, river, iii. 376. iv. 169. 

Phayllus, the Crotonian, fits out a vessel at his own charge, and 
joins the Greeks at Salamis, iv. 295. In memory of his zeal 
for the cause of Greece, Alexander sends part of the spoils of 
Asia to the Crotonians, ib. 

, the Zacynthian, vi. 128. 

f- Pheneum, v. 172. 

f Phcrce, in Achaia, v. 168. 

t , in Thessaly, ii. 372, 375. 

Pherebcea, one of Theseus' wives, i. 37. 
Pheredes, sent to corrupt the oracle of Dodona, iii. 220. 

2 n 2 

•1G8 INDEX. 

Phrrcclus, the son of Amarsyas, i. 18. » 

Phcrecydex, the historian, i. 20, 82. 

■ , the philosopher, his skin preserved by direction of an 

oracle, ii. 366. 

— , the diviner, dies of the Lousy Disease, iii. 282. 

Phetend&tcs, commands the Persian land-forces, and is defeated by 
Cimon, iii. 282. 

Phercmcus, ii. 3*6, 34-8. 

Pheristust ii. 271. 

Phidias, the statuary, his Jupiter, ii. 48, n. His Minerva, 25. 
Surveyor of the public buildings for Pericles, 23. Unjustly 
accused by Menon of embezzling the gold, 47, 48. Imprisoned 
for putting his own figure and that of Pericles upon Minerva's 
shield, 48. Dies in prison, ib. 

Pliiditia, the public repasts at Sparta, i. 127. 

Pkidius, defeated by Sertorius, iv. 16. 

Pliila, daughter of Antipater, and widow of Craterus, married to 
Demetrius, v. 376. Poisons herself upon the loss of the king- 
dom of Macedon, 412. 

Philadelphus, king of Paphlagonia, takes part with Anton}', v. 4S1 

■ . See Ptolemy. 

Phihcus, one of the sons of Ajax, i. 230. 

Pliilagrus, preceptor to Metellus Nepos, pompously buried by him, 
v. 82.5. 

Phila'ide, an Athenian tribe, i. 230. 

Pkilargyrus, Cato's freedman, v. 87. 

Philemon, the poet, ii. iv. 

Philidas, a friend of Pelopidas, appointed secretarj' to Archias 
and Philip in Thebes, ii. 348. Invites the tyrants to his house, 
and promises to provide them some fine women, 350. 

Phi/ides, the affair between hira and Themistocles, i. 317. 

Philinna, a courtesan ; Philip has his son Arrhida;us by her, iv. 353 

Philip, king of Macedon, pretends to wonder how the elder Dio- 
nysius could find time for his poetical performances, ii. 24-9, 250. 
A maxim of his, 296. Brought up at Thebes, and imitates 
Epaminondas in his military conduct, 373. Sends persons to 
Argos to assassinate Philopcemen, iii. 16. Initiated in the Mys- 
teries of the Cabiri, iv. 239. Dreams that his wife's womb was 
sealed up with a seal, the impression of which was a lion, 240. 
Commanded by the oracle of Delphi to sacrifice to Jupiter 
Amnion, 241. Receives three important, pieces of news in one 
day, 243. Affects to show his eloquence like a sophist, 2] !, 
245. His saying to his son, upon his managing Bucephalus, 
248. Sends for Aristotle to instruct his son in philosophy, ib. 
Causes great disorder in his family, by marrying Cleopatra, 
while Olympias was living, 252. Orders the Corinthians to send 
him Thessalus, one of Alexander's confidants, in chains, and 
banishes four others, 254. Assassinated by Pausanias, for re- 
fusing him justice, under a great injury he had received, ib. The 
state of Macedon at his death, 255. An account of the success 
of his arms, ib. His extravagant joy upon the victory of Ch»- 

INDEX. 469 

ronea, v. 274, 275. He reflects, with great emotion, after that 
battle, on the danger which he had incurred, through the oppo- 
sition of Demosthenes, ib. 

Philip, the son of Demetrius II., goes to war with the Romans, iii. 
33. Sulpitius, and another Roman general, only trifle with 
him, ib. He comes to an interview with Flaminius, who is ap- 
pointed to act against him, 37. Addresses his army from an 
eminence that happens to be a burying ground, 39. Beaten by 
Flaminius, at Cynoscephahc, 40. Submits to the discretion of 
the Romans, 42. Prepares again in the interior parts of his 
kingdom for war, ii. 290. Puts his son Demetrius to death, vi. 
209. Came to the crown of Macedon on the demise of his kins- 
man Antigonus Doson, ii. 290. vi. 201. Aratus, and the other 
Achaeans, call him in to their assistance, 202. He gains the 
Cretans by his moderation, and prospers by following the coun- 
sels of Aratus, 203. Puts some of his courtiers to death for 
insulting Aratus, ib. His vices, which were only masked, make 
their appearance, 204. He corrupts the wife of Aratus' son, ib. 
Takes Aratus up into Ithome, and asks his opinion as to seizing 
that strong hold, 20.;. Is defeated at sea by the Romans, 206. 
Causes Aratus and the son of Aratus to be poisoned, 207, 209. 
Is obliged to receive hard conditions of peace from the Romans, 
209. Suffers in his own peace, in the manner that his crimes 
deserved, ib. 

. , Archias, and Leontidas, incite Phccbidas, the Lacedae- 
monian, to seize the Cadmeae, and become tyrants in Thebes, 
ii. 346. 

■ ■ Arrhidceus. See Arrhidceus. 

-, Pompey's freedman, buries his master with the assistance 

of an old Roman, who had long lived in Egypt, iv. 228. 
— , Alexander gives him a government in India, iv. 332. 
-, Alexander's physician, accused of an intention to poison 

him, clears himself of the imputation with great honour, iv. 
268, 269. 

-, the father of Marcia, v. 73. 

PMUppus, Marcius, his moderation in the office of censor, ii. 333. 

• , Lucius, father-in-law to Augustus, a saying of his con- 
cerning his affection for Pompey* iv. 127, v. 347. Proposes to 
send Pompey into Spain, against Sertorius, iv. 144. 

f Philippi, battle of, vi. 95 — 98. 

Philippic, a gold coin, iii. 49. 

Philippides, the comic poet, an enemy to Stratocles, v. 375. A 
favourite of Lysimachus, ib. Desires to be excused from hear- 
ing the secrets of princes, ib. 

Philistus, the Syracusan, commended as an historian, iii. 397. 
Marries one of the daughters of Leptines, vi. 11, 12. Comes 
with a fleet from Apulia, to assist Dionysius the Younger in 
Sicily, 34. Is beaten by the Syracusans, ib. His saying to 
Dionysius, 35. His accusations against Dion, vi. 12. The 
barbarous treatment he suffered, 34. His death, ib. Cha- 
racter, 35, 

470 INDEX. 

Philo, the Academician, scholar to Clitomachus, v. 295. Tutor to 
Cicero, ib. 

. , built the arsenal in the Piraeus, which was burnt by Svlla, 

iii. 251, 252. 

• , %valks in the steps of Carneades, and defends the New 

Academy, iii. 388. 

■f- Philobceolus, a hill so called, iii. 253. 

Philochorus, an Athenian historian, i. 15, 18, 20, 32, 37. 

Philocles, one of the Athenian commanders, defeated by Lysander 
at iEgos-Potamos, iii. 197. Advised the Athenians to cut off the 
right thumbs of all their prisoners of war, ib. Lysander's ques- 
tion to him thereupon, and his answer, 202. His intrepidity and 
death, 203. 

Philocrates, the servant of Caius Gracchus, v. 240. 

, the orator, v. 270. 

Philocyprus, one of the princes of Cyprus, Solon advises him to 
remove his city from a barren hill to a fruitful plain below it, i. 
259. In gratitude he calls his city ' Soli,' ib. 

Philodemus, or rather Philomclus, of Phocis, robs the temple of 
Apollo at Delphi, ii. 267. Punished by the Gods for his sacri- 
lege, ib. 268. 

Philologus, the freedman of Cicero's brother Quintus, betrays 
Cicero to Antony's ruffians, v. 352. In what manner, and by 
whom put to death, 353. 

Philombrotus, Solon chosen archon next after him, i. 236. 

Philomedes, of Lampra, v. 39. 

Philonicus, the Thessalian, offers the celebrated horse Bucephalus 
in sale to Philip, iv. 246. 

Philopcemen, the son of Crausis, of Megalopolis, iii. 2. Edu- 
cated by Cassander in his younger years, ib. Afterwards under 
the tuition of Ecdemus and Demophanes, who deliver their 
country from tyranny, ib. Excellently formed to virtue, ib. 
Called the last of the Greeks, 3. His visage not very homely, 
ib. Simple in his manner and dress, ib. The story of his hostess 
at Megara, ib. What Titus Flaminms said of him, 4. Eprt- 
minondas taken by him as his pattern, ib. Despises the exercise 
of wrestling, 5. Makes incursions into Laconia, ib. Spends 
his leisure either in the chase or agriculture, ib. Reads chiefly 
books relative to war, 6. Considers military excellence as the 
highest of human improvements, ib. Thirty years old when 
Cleomenes surprised Megalopolis, ib. Stands upon his defence 
till the inhabitants had made their escape, 7. Persuades them 
not to return till Cleomenes had left the place, ib. Distinguishes 
himself, under Antigonus, in a battle with Cleomenes, 8. A 
saying of Antigonus concerning him, 9. Antigonus is desirous 
of retaining him in his service ; but conscious that he cannot 
bear a superior, he goes into Crete, where he gains a thorough 
knowledge of the stratagems of war, ib. At his return, he 
makes a great reform in the Achaean cavalry, ib. Defeats the 
iEtolians and Eleans near the river Larissus, and kills Demo- 
phantus, commander of the Elean horse, 10. The Achceans. 

INDEX. 471 

called in foreign princes in the time of Aratus, but stand upon 
their own bottom in that of Philopccmen, 11. He corrects the 
errors of the Achaeans, in drawing up their forces, and in the 
make of their arms, 11. Turns their passion for show, from 
dress, and household furniture, to arms, 12. Takes the field 
against Machanidas, the tyrant of Lacedaemon, 13. And kills 
him in the battle of Mantinea, 14. The Achaeans, on that ac- 
count, erect a statue to him at Delphi, ib. Passes his phalanx in 
review at the Nemean games, and is received with great applause 
in the theatre, 15. Philip of Macedon sends some persons to 
Argos, to assassinate him, 16. He goes to rescue the Messe- 
nians from Nabis, the tyrant of Lacedaemon, and succeeds, ib. 
Is blamed for passing a second time into Crete, when his fellow- 
citizens were distressed by Nabis, ib. His saying concerning 
Ptolemy, 17. The Megalopolitans inclined to pass an outlawry 
against him, ib. While in Crete he outdoes the Cretans them- 
selves in art and stratagem, 18. At his return, he finds Philip 
beaten by Flaminius, and Nabis engaged in war both with the 
Romans and Achaeans, ib. He is chosen general of the Achaeans, 
ib. Ventures to act at sea, and is shamefully beaten, ib. Puts 
to sea again to relieve Gythium, and succeeds, 19. Nabis comes 
upon him, as he was marching through a difficult pass, ib. He 
puts Nabis and the Lacedaemonians to the rout, and kills many as 
they endeavour to regain their city in the night, ib. 20. Seizes 
Sparta, and joins it to the Achaean league, 20. The Lacedae- 
monians sell the house and goods of Nabis, and by a public order 
give the money to Philopcemen, ib. Philopcemen refuses the 
money, 21. What he said upon that occasion, ib. Philopcemen 
enters Sparta, and shuts its gates upon Diophanes and Flami- 
nius, 22. On a fresh complaint against the Spartans, he puts 
eighty of their citizens to death, demolishes their walls, and add6 
great part of their territory to that of Megalopolis, ib. Compels 
them to give their children an Achaean education, ib. Laments 
that he had not the command of the Achaeans, when Antiochus 
and the Syrians behaved with so little regard to discipline in 
Greece, 23. Contends with the Romans, after they had esta- 
blished themselves in Greece, ib. A saying of his on that occa- 
sion, ib. Elected general of the Achaeans tlie eighth time, when 
seventy years of age, 24. Says, ' there was no great account 
to be made of a man, who suffered himself to be taken alive,' 
ib. Though sick, marches against Dinocrates with a small corps 
of Megalopolitan volunteers, ib. 25. Repulses Dinocrates; but 
some fresh troops coming up, he is pushed upon the rocks, and 
his horse throws him, ib. Is taken alive, carried off in an igno- 
minious manner, and put in prison, ib. 26. The Messenians 
themselves lament his fall, 26. The Achaeans demand him, ib. 
Dinocrates opens the dungeon in the night, and sends in his 
servant with a dose of poison, ib. 27. Philopcemen inquires, 
whether the Megalopolitan cavalry had escaped, 27. Being an- 
swered in the affirmative, he drinks off the poison with great 
satisfaction, ib. His death fills all Achaia with grief and lamen- 

472 INDEX. 

tation, ib. The Achacans march against the Messenians, to re- 
venge it, ib. The procession of the Achaeans to Megalopolis 
with his remains, 28. A Roman endeavours long afterward to 
get his statues pulled down, but Mummius forbids it, ib. 29. 

Philosophers, the honour done them by Pompey, iv. 179. The dif- 
ference between a speculative and a practical philosopher, ii. 29. 

Pkilostephanus, i. 148. 

Philostratus, the philosopher. Cato pays him great respect, v. 106. 
Octavius dislikes him, and why, v. 502. hi what manner he 
obtains his pardon, ib. 

Philota&f the son of Parmenio, provokes Alexander by his pride 
and arrogance, iv. 314. Has hunting-nets, that reach an hundred 
furlongs in length, 303. Suppresses an information of treason 
against the king, 315. Is seized and put to death, 316. 

. , ,of Amphissa, the physician, v. 451. Silences an imper- 
tinent fellow by a sophism, ib. Rewarded for it, by the son of 
Antony, with a whole service of plate, 452. 

Philotis, or Tutola, a servant-maid in Rome, her stratagem to 
preserve the honour of the Roman virgins, and to massacre the 
Latins in their camp, i. 100, 403. 

Philoxenus, Alexander's lieutenant on the sea-coast severely re- 
proved by him for an infamous proposal, iv. 272. 

« , son of Ptolemy, sent by Pelopidas from Macedon as a 

hostage, ii. 374. 

• , the poet, his dithyrambics, iv. 250. 

-, marries Theste the sister of Dionysius the Elder, vi. 20, 

f Pldiarus, river, iii. 226. 

f Ph/iaaians, iv. 101. vi. 189. 

f Phlius, v. 174 

| Phoccea, iii. 192. 

Phocion, came to the administration when the commonwealth of 
Athens was no more than a wreck, v. 2. Probably not the son 
of a turner, 6. Educated by Plato and Xenocrates in the aca- 
demic philosophy, 7. Particularities in his character, ib. His 
saying, upon Chares' reflecting on his countenance, ib. His 
speeches concise, but weighty and persuasive, ib. He serves 
under Chabrias in his youth, and helps to correct the impe- 
tuosity of that general, 8. His gallant behaviour in the sea- 
fight off the isle of Naxos, 9. Goes to the islands with a single 
ship, and prevails with them to send their quotas of ships and 
money, ib. Endeavours to excel, both in the civil and military 
department, which was not the custom in his time, 10. Elected 
general five-and-forty times, ib. Popular, though he opposed 
the inclinations of the citizens, 11. Several sayings of 
his, ib. 12 — 14. He had a deal of goodness and humanity 
notwithstanding the severity of his expressions, 14. He marches 
against Philip of Macedon's forces, which were endeavouring to 
establish themselves in Eubcea, and defeats them, 15 — 17. 
Drives Plutarch out of Eretria, 17. Makes himself master of 
the fort ofZaretra, ib. Saves Byzantium From Philip, 18. Takes 
several of h|s ships, and recovers cities which he had garrisoned, 

INDEX. 473 

ib. Is wounded, and returns to Athens, ib. Upon an applica- 
tion from the people of Megara, he fortifies their town, ib. De- 
mosthenes carries it against him for war with Philip, but advised 
it's being conducted at the greatest distance from Attica, 19. 
His saying upon it, ib. The people are with much difficulty 
prevailed on by the court of Areopagus, to put their concerns in 
his hands, ib. He gives his opinion for a peace ; but for a 
peace, the conditions of which should be previously known, 20. 
The error of the Athenians in not abiding by his counsel, ib. 
He will not permit any rejoicings at Athens on the death of 
Philip, ib. Reproves Demosthenes for his invectives against 
Alexander, ib. 21. Advises the giving up of the orators, which 
Alexander demanded, 21. Is in great esteem with that prince* 
who will not receive the submission of the Athenians from any 
other hands, ib. Refuses Alexander's present, 22. But applies 
for the liberty of his friends, ib. 23. Alexander offers him his 
choice of four cities in Asia, but he rejects the offer, ib. His 
house shown in the time of Plutarch, ib. The excellent charac- 
ter of his wives, ib. 2k His son Phocus wins the prize in a foot- 
race in the Panathenaea, 24. Phocus being of a disorderly turn, 
and addicted to drinking, his father carries him to Laceda?mon, 
to try what effect the discipline of Lycurgus would have upon 
him, ib. 25. Alexander applies to the Athenians for ships, and 
the orators advise them to refuse him, 25. Phocion's saying 
upon it, ib. Harpalus attempts to corrupt him, but without 
effect, ib. Charicles, being called to account by the people for the 
money which he had taken of Harpalus, desires in vain the pro- 
tection of Phocion, 26. Phocion's advice to the people upon the 
death of Alexander, 27. He opposes the Lamian war, ib. Still 
disapproves it, notwithstanding the success of Leosthenes, 28. 
At the age of fourscore, takes the command, beats the Macedo- 
nians, and kills their general Micion, 29, SO. Is sent to treat 
with Antipater of peace, 31. An account of the conditions, ib. 
The Athenians are forced to receive a Macedonian garrison into 
Munychia, 33. Menyllus, a friend of Phocion, who commands 
the garrison, offers Phocion money, 35. What Phocion said 
upon it, ib. 36. The confidence which Nicanor placed in Pho- 
cion, 38. Nicanor makes an attempt upon the Pirams, and 
Phocion, who relied too much upon his honour, does not guard 
against him in due time, 39. Agnonides accuses Phocion of trea- 
son, ib. Phocion retires to Polyperchon, 40. Deputies are sent 
to the camp of that general to accuse Phocion, ib. Phocion 
attempts to make his defence before Philip Arrhidaius ; but being 
often interrupted by Polyperchon, holds his peace, ib. He and 
others are declared guilty of treason, and sent back to Athens to 
have sentence passed upon them by the people, 41. An assem- 
bly of slaves, foreigners, infamous persons, and citizens, decree 
the death of Phocion, ib. He labours to save his friends, but is 
not able, 42. The dignity of his behaviour in the last scene of 
his life, 43. What he said to Thud ippus, on his bewailing him- 
self, ib. Other excellent sayings of his on that occasion, ib. A 

^2 

474 INDEX. 

decree passed, that his body should not remain within the bounds 
of Attica; and that no Athenian should furnish fire for the fune- 
ral pile, 44. The last offices are performed in the territory of 
Megara, ib. The Athenians soon repenting of what they had 
done erect the statue of Phocion in brass, bury his remains at 
the public expense, and put to death his principal accuser, ib. 
His son Phocus destroys two more of his accusers, ib. The 
proceedings against him put the Greeks in mind of those against 
Socrates, 45. 

Phocian war, ii. 34. iii. 222,223, 318. 

■f Phocis, taken by Philip of Macedon, v. 272. 

Phoeus, a friend of Solon's, i. 237. 

r , son of Phocion, is victorious in the foot-race, v. 24-. Other 

particulars concerning him, 44. 

Phccbidas, the Lacedaemonian, incited by Archias, Leontidas, and 
Philip, to seize the citadel of Thebes, ii. 346. iv. 99. In return, 
he assists them against the democratic party in Thebes, and they 
become tyrants, ii. 34-7. Deprived of his command by the Lace- 
daemonians, for seizing the Cadmea, yet they keep the fort, 346, 
347. Killed at Thespue, 359. 

-f- Phoenicia, given by Antony to Cleopatra, v. 460. 

-f Phoenicians, their fleet beaten by Cimon, iii. 312. 

Phauiix, preceptor to Achilles, iii. 2. 

, of Tenedos, one of Eumenes' lieutenants, iv. 46. 

• , the Theban, Alexander insists on his being given up t© 

him, with Prothytes, iv. 256. 

Phorbas, favourite of Apollo, i. 171. 

Phorbus, father of Dexithea, i. 50. 

Phormio, Demosthenes composes an oration for him against Apol- 
lodorus, and another for Apollodorus against Phormio, v. 268. 

Photinus, the eunuch, minister to Ptolemy king of Egypt, advises 
him to put Pompey to death, iv. 225. Forms a scheme against 
Caesar and Cleopatra, 414. Js capitally punished by Caesar, 229. 

f Phraata besieged by Antony, v. 4-62, 

Phraates, gives his father Orodes poison, and, that proving ineffec-. 
tual, despatches him another way, iii. 498. His message, as king 
of Parthia, to Pompey, and Pompey's answer, iv. 168. Beaten 
bv Afranius, Pompey's lieutenant, 171. Forms a stratagem 
against Antony, v. 464. 

Phrasicles, nephew to Themistocles, marries his daughter Nicorna- 
cha, i. 358. 

Phrearians, the people of Phrear, one of the wards at Athens, i. 
311. 

PiirixHS, a Spartan, iv. 113. 

f Phrygia, iv. 49, 84, 266. 

Phrygius, one of Alexander's companions, expelled from Mace- 
don by Philip, iv. 254. 

Phnpnchus, an Athenian general opposes the counsels of Alcibiadee 
at Samos, and discovers them to the enemy, ii. 151. Is stabbed 
by one of Mention's men, and subsequently declared a traitor te 
his country, ii. 

INDEX. 475 

Phrynichits, the comic poet, i. 318. ii. 141. 

Phrynis, a musician, v. 143. 

Phryxus. See Phrixus. 

Pkt/iia, wife of Admetus, king of the Molossians, i. 347. 

, the mother of Pyrrhus, iii. 66. 

f Phtkiotce, ii. 385. iii. 43. 

Phugadotheras, or * Exile-hunter,' who so called, v. 21-6. 

Phyensians, the people of one of the wards of Athens, i. 232. 

Pkygea, one of the wards of Athens, ii. 144. 

Phylcicium, the concubine of Stratocles, v. 373. 

Phylarchus, the historian, iii. 107. 

f Pkyle, castle of, iii. 214. v. 385. 

Phyllius, fights gallantly in defence of Sparta, iii. 108. 

Phytalidce. Theseus meets with the first instance of hospitality 
from them in Attica, i. 12. Were the descendents of Phytalus, 
ib. n. Phytalus, entrusted by Ceres with the secret of cultivat- 
ing the fig-tree, ib. 

-j- Picenum, or the Picene, ii. 392. iv. 131. 

f Picince, or rather PictcE, iii. 244. 

Picus and Faunus, two demi-gods, the story of their being taken 
by Numa, and obliged to instruct him in certain charms and 
expiations, i. 194. 

Pier io, a poet, iv. 318, 

Pigris, iv. 45. 

Pillar, set up in the Isthmus of Corinth by Theseus, i. 31. 

Pilots, feast of. See Cybernesia. 

Pinarii, said to be descended from Pinus, the son of Numa, i. 20i. 

Pinarius, i. 214. 

Pindar, verses of his, i. 146. The favourite of Pan, 172. Alex- 
ander spares his family in Thebes, iv. 256, 257. Pindar and 
Epaminondas redeem the credit of Bceotia, I. xxviii. 

Pindarus, despatches Cassius at his request, vi. 9S. 

Piraica, one of the gates of Athens, i. 34. 

Piracies, the Athenian harbour, Sphodrias makes an attempt upon 
it, iv. 101. Erginus, a friend of Aratus, and Aratus himself, do 
the same, vi. 186. Sylla takes it, iii. 251. 

Pirates, those of Cilicia masters of the seas, iv. 152, 153. Their 
extreme insolence, 153. Conquered by Pompev, 157. 

Pirithom. His friendship with Theseus, i. 38. He marries Dei- 
damia, ib. Assists Theseus in the rape of Helen, 40. Attempts 
to carry oft* Cory, the daughter of Ai'doneus and is torn to pieces 
by his dogs, ib. 

Pisander, sent from Samos to Athens, to change the government 
from a democracy to an aristocratical form, ii. 151. 

, brother-in-law to Agesilaus, appointed by him admiral, 

iv. 82. Is defeated and slain, 91. 

f Pisaunim, v. 433. 

Pisianuction, or Plcsianaction, iii. 298. 

t Pisidians, iv. 266. 

Pisis, the Thespian, his authority in Thebes, v. 404. Demetrius 

476 INDEX. 

takes him prisoner, but afterward makes him governor of 
Thespife, ib. 

Pisistratidte, i. 214, n. 

Pisistratidas, i. 151. 

Pisistratides, sent ambassador from Sparta to the Persian Satrapae, 
asayingof his to them, i. 151. 

Pisistratus, strikes a line out of Hesiod to gratify the .Athenians, 
j. 22. The kinsman of Solon, 218. His character, ib. n. 263. 
Causes himself to be wounded in several places, and pretends to 
have received those wounds from the nobility, 265. Obtains a 
guard from the people, and by means oi* that guard sets himself 
up tyrant, ib. 266. Is accused of murder, and though possessed 
of supreme power, submits to a trial before the court of Areopa- 
gus, 267. Makes a law in favour oi such as were maimed in the 
wars, ib. 

Piso, Calpurnius, v. 83. Cassar marries his daughter, and make* 
him the consul the next year, ib. 

, Caius, the historian, iii. 179. 

, Cicero's son-in-law, v. 331. 

, the consul, Clodius assigns him the province of Macedon, 

v. 329. 

. , adopted by Galba, vi. 233, 23 1. His excellent qualities, 234. 

He is killed by Otho's party, near the temple of Vesta, 240. 

Pissnthnes, the son of Hystaspes, a friend to the people of Samos, 
ii. 39, 

\ Pit ana, Mithridates shuts himself up in that city, iii. 330. 

Pittacits, one of the seven wise men, the Mityleneans choose him 
for their sovereign, i. 236. 

Pittheus, grandfather of Theseus by the mother's side, founds the 
city of Treezene, i. 4. Teaches rhetoric there, ib. n. Moral 
sentence ascribed to him, ib. Theseus brought up by him, 6. 

•f Pityusa, isle of, iv. 10. 

•j- Placentia, vi. 2.50. 

Plague. See Pestilence. 

Plancus, accused and cast, though Pompey appeared in his behalf, 
iv. 197. Goes over from Antony to Augustus, v. 481. 

Planting, Solon's law concerning it, i. 253. 

-J- Plattccr, battle of, ii. 471 — 17(i. 

Platceans, Alexander's compliment to them upon it long after, iv, 
295. They build a temple to Minerva, ii. 478. The Greeks 
yield them the prime honour of the day, in the battle against the 
Persians, 478. Games of liberty celebrated amongst them, 478, 
480,481. 

Plato, i 40, n. a passage in hiswritings concerning the happy effects of 
royal authority, and a philosophical mind united, 204. v. 364. Pro- 
vides for theexpenses of his voyage into Egypt, by the merchandise 
of oil, i. 22 1 . Finds fault with Eudoxus and Archytas, for applying 
the mathematics to mechanic purposes, ii.408. Three blessings, for 
which he thanked his good genius, iii. ISO. Admires the 
poetry of Anthnachus and contorts him wheu the preference 

INDEX. 477 

was given by Lysander to Niceratus, 211. What Cicero said 
of him, v. 321. The Cyrenians apply to hirrt for a body of laws, 
and he tells them, it is hard to give laws to wealthy people, iii. 
328. His doctrines derive their authority from his exemplary 
life, and from his asserting a divine principle superior to neces- 
sity and fate, 435. A maxim of his, v. 997. Another, vi 8. 
Directed by the gods into Sicily, 5< Sent away by Dionysius 
the Elder, and sold at Mgina, for a slave, 6. Dion, his disciple, 
5. Returns to Sicily, 10. The great effect which his instruc- 
tions had at first upon Dionysius the Younger, 12, 13. Enter- 
tains the Athenians with games, at Dion's expense, 16. Re- 
turns a third time to Sicily, 17. Archytas demands him of Diony- 
sius the Younger, in the name of the philosophers, 19. De- 
mosthenes, his disciple, v. 256. 

Plato, the comic poet, ii. 7, 127. 

Plebeian consul. When first created, Plebeians gain the privilege 
of having tribunes to protect their rights, i. 286, n. 

f Plemmyrum, iii. 430. 

Pliny, i. 18, n. 

Pfi'jarchits, the brother of Cassander, v. 396. 

Plistinus, brother to Faust ul us, killed in the dispute between Ro- 
mulus and Remus, i. 64. 

Plistonax, king of the Lacedemonians retires from Attica, by 
the advice of Cleandrides, and is fined for it so high, that he is 
obliged to quit his country, ii. 35. His answer to an Athenian, 
who said that the Lacedaemonians were not learned, i. 143. 

Plutarch, author of these Lives, confirms the reputation which 
Boeotia had recovered, I. xxviii. Chacronea, the place of his 
birth, ib. He acknowledges the stupidity of the Boeotians in 
general, but imputes it rather to their diet, than their air, ib. 
The year, in whith he was born, not easy to be ascertained, ib. 
He studied philosophy under Ammonius, at Delphi, when Nero 
made his. progress into Greece, xxix. Plutarch, when he learn- 
ed the Roman language, which vras not till he was some- 
what advanced in life, got the knowledge of words from his 
knowledge of things, xxxi. An instance of his early skill in 
criticism, in his dissertation on the word u, engraved on the 
temple of Apollo, ib. The works of their poets were almost 
universally committed to memory by the Greeks, xxxiii. The 
advantage Plutarch made of that mode of education, xxxiv. 
Yet sometimes he made mistakes by trusting too much to If s 
memory, ib. He was probably of the Latter Academy, but 
borrowed notwithstanding what he found excellent in every 
' sect, ib. xxxv. His benevolent regards to the animal creation, 
xxxvi. He pays great attention to dreams, xxxix. His read- 
ing prodigiously extensive, xl. His family not without wealth, 
ib. He had the happiness to know his great grandfather Nicai- 
chus, ib. His grandfather Lamprias, a man of great eloquenei , 
and an excellent companion, ib. His father, a learned and vir- 
tuous man, but his name not delivered down to us, ib. An in- 
stance of his father's discretion, xli. Plutarch's affection to his 

473 INDEX. 

two brothers, Tinion and Lamprias, ib. He is said to have 
passed into Egypt, ib. Undoubtedly visited Italy, and pro- 
bably on some business of the Chaeroneans, xlii. Probably 
wrote his Morals at Rome, and his Lives at Cliaeronea, xliii. 
Constantly kept a common-place book, xliv. Was at Rome and 
other parts of Italy, almost forty years, ib. Collected many 
materials from conversation, ib. He made no great progress in 
the Latin tongue, xlv. Tells us himself that he wrote the Lives 
of Demosthenes and Cicero at Clueronea, xlvi. Did not retire 
to Cha:ronea till after the death of Trajan, ib. The book of 
Apophthegms, supposed to be written by another hand, ib. Pre- 
ceptor to Trajan, by whom he was raised to the consular dignity, 
and appointed governor of Illyria, ib. His letter to Trajan, and 
the genuineness of it defended, ib. xlvii. n. The attention paid 
by the Roman nobility to his lectures, xlvii. An instance of it 
in Arulenus Rusticus, ib. His friendship with Sossius Senecio, 
xlviii. His being preceptor to Trajan defended, xlix. Errors 
as to the time of the establishment of his reputation in Rome, 
refuted, and the real time asserted, 1. The Roman writers, who 
were his contemporaries, probably jealous of his fame, ib. Tes- 
timonies of otber writers to his merit, li. lii. He retires in the 
decline of life to Chaeronea, and there writes his Lives, liii. 
Critique upon those Lives, ib. liv. Plutarch's sentiments of the 
duty of a biographer, Iv. He was constitutionally religion.-, 
and therefore too indulgent to superstition, lvi. Yet, upon the 
whole, had honourable notions of the Supreme Being, ib. His 
opinion of Genii or Daemons, ib. lvii. He is consecrated priest 
of Apollo, lvii. Elected archon of Chaeronea, lviii. Justly 
asserts, that the most dangerous public factions are often at first 
kindled by private misunderstandings, lix. He asserts also the 
necessity of obedience and deference to magistrates, though 
they happen to be our inferiors, lx. A republican at heart, and 
a friend to liberty, ib. His domestic connexions, Ixi. The 
name of his wife Timoxena, Ixii. Her character ib. He had 
at least five children by her, four sons, and a daughter, ib. Two 
of his sons and his daughter die young, ib. lxiii. He left two 
sons, Plutarch and Lamprias : The latter has given us a cata- 
logue of his father's writings, ib. lxiv. A list of those which 
are lost, lxiv. lxv. His nephew Sextus teaches the Greek lan- 
guage and learning to Marcus Antoninus, lxv. The character 
given by that emperor, of Sextus, applicable to Plutarch, id. 
Our author enjoyed that reward of philosophy, long life ; but of 
the time of his death we have no satisfactory account, ib. 

Plutarch of Eretria, asks assistance of the Athenians, v. 15. He 
is defeated by the Macedonians, 1G. Driven out of Eretria by 
Phocion, 17. 

PliduSy the god of riches, not only blind, but without sense and 
motion at Sparta, i. 126. 

Phjnteria, the time during which the ornaments of the Palladium, 
or image of Minerva, are purified, and the image itself is covered 
up, ii. 163. 

12 

INDEX. 479 

Pm/i, »• 3*- TKe Rostrum from which the Athenian orators spoke 
there, turned toward the sea by Themistocles, i. 341. 

\Po, river, iii. 150. vi. 254, 255. 

Pcecile, iii. 298. 

Poisoners. Their heads crushed flat between two broad stones 
in Persia, vi. 136. 

Polemarchs, among the Spartans, i. 128. The annual governors of 
Bceotia, so called, ii. 348. Who so called amongst the Athe- 
nians, i. 244, n. 

Polemon, Alc^tas and Docimus dispute the command with Eu- 
menes, iv. 49. 

Polemo the geographer, vi. 165. 

, king of Pontus, Antony's ally taken prisoner by the Par- 
tisans, v. 462. 

Politics, ii. 192. v. 4, 133, 246, 277, 300, 305, 357. 

Pollichus, the Syracusan, uncle to Heraclides, goes with ten gallies 
against Nicias, to assist his nephew who was in danger of being 
taken, iii. 436. 

Pollio, the troops of Otho find fault with him, vi. 263. 

Pollis the Spartan, takes Plato on board his ship by desire of 
Dionysius the Elder, and sells him for a slave, vi. 6. 

Pollux. See Castor and Pollux. 

Polus, of iEgina, a celebrated actor, v. 286. 

Polycenus, a friend of Philopoemen, iii. 14. 

Polyarces, the Lacedaemonian embassador, ii. 46. His saying to 
Pericles, ib. 

Polybius, son of Lycortas, carries Philopcemen's urn, which is 
attended with a mixture of triumphal and funeral pomp, iii. 28. 
Solicits Cato in favour of the Acheean exiles, ii. 404. 

Pohjdetus, one of Nero's ministers, put to death by Galba, vi. 

227. 

■ ■ the statuary, ii. 4. 

Po/ycrates the Sicyonian, a descendent of Aratus, vi. 153. Plu- 
tarch addresses the life of Aratus to him, 152. 

tyrant of Samos, ii. 40. Lysander follows his example, 

iii. 196. 

Polycrite, daughter of Lysimachus the son of Aristides, ii. 489. 
The Athenians assign her a public allowance, out of regard to 
her grandfather, ib. 

Polycritus the Mendaean, physician to Artaxerxes, vi. 138. 

Polydectes, son of Eunomus, and half-brother to Lycurgus, i. 
111. 

Polydorus and Theopompus, kings of Sparta, insert a clause in 
the Rhetra, i. 120. 

Polyeuctes, one of the sons of Themistocles, i. 357. 

Polyeuctus the Sphettian, exhorts the Athenians to war, and it 
proves a laborious piece of work to him to speak about it, v. 
12, 13. Phocion's observation thereupon, 13. He calls De- 
mosthenes the greatest orator, but Phocion the best speaker, 
v. 7, 8, 263. 

480 INDEX. 

Poh/gnotus the painter, supposed to have had an intrigue with El- 
pinice, iii. 298. 

+ , tower of, vi. 158. 

Polymachus, a Macedonian, put to death by Alexander for pre- 
suming to rifle the tomb of Cyrus, iv. 31-2. 

Polymedes, father of Glaucus, v. 16. 

Polijperchan, or Puli/spcrchon, declared general of the army by 
Antipatcr a little before his death, v. 37. 

and Leptines kill Callippus, vi. 53, 54. 

Puli/pliron killed by his nephew Alexander, tyrant of Phera?, who 
consecrates the spear with which he despatched him, ii. 377. 

Poli/tion, joins Alcibiades in prophaning the sacred mysteries, ii. 
138. 

■\Polyzelium, iii. 410. 

Pu/jjzelus, the Rhodian, i. 239. 

PoiiutxcHhres the Parthian kills Crassus, iii. 494. Obtains the 
customary reward, 497. 

Pottierium, what, and why so called, i. 65. 

Pompeia, the third wife of Caesar, suspected of an intrigue with 
Clodius, v. 326, 327. Caesar divorces her, 329. 

f Pompeii, v. 302. 

Povipeius, a senator, accuses Tiberius Gracchus of aspiring to the 
sovereignty, v. 21 1. 

— , Aulus. Sec Auhis Pnmpc//'<. 

■ Unfits, consul with Sylla, iii. 164, n. 239. His son 

is killed by the tribune Sulpitius, iii. 164. 

Pompey, son of Strabo, as much beloved by the Romans as his 
lather was hated, iv. 126. His excellent qualities, id. The 
beauty and dignity of his person, 127- Like Alexander the 
Great, id. Flora's passion for him, id. Simple in his diet, 128. 
His saying upon his physician's ordering him a thrush, ib. Serves 
under his father against Cinna, ib. Saves himself and his father 
from being assassinated, and prevents the troops from deserting, 

129. Defends himself, and his deceased father, at the bar, with 
applause, ib. The praetor Antistius gives him his daughter, ib. 

130. lie repairs to China's camp, but soon after disappears for 
some time, 130. Raises forces in the Picene, 131. Marches to 
join Sylla, 132. On the way defeats three generals of the 
opposite party, ib. Scipio the consul advances against him, and 
his men desert to Pompey, ib. Pompey defeats Carbo's cavalry. 
1,38. Sylla marches to Pompey, and salutes him Imperator, ib. 
Pomney goes, at the request of Metellus, to his assistance in 
Gaul, ib. 134. He is persuaded to divorce Antistia, and to 
marry /Emilia, daughter-in-law to Sylla, 134. He expels Per- 
penna from Sicily, and recovers that island, 135. Puts Carbo to 
death, ib. Spares the Himereans for a bold saying of their 
countrymen Sthenis, 136- Sails to Africa with a powerful fleet 
and army, 137. Seven thousand of the enemy revolt to him, ib. 
His soldiers, with a spirit of infatuation, dig for treasure about 
the ruins of Carthage, ib. He defeats and kills Domitius, 138. 

INDEX. 45 i 

Takes Iiirbas prisoner, and gives his crown to Hiempsal, ib. 
Reduces Africa in forty days, ib. 139. Sylla sends him an humi- 
liating order, with regard to the disposition of his troops, at 
which the army express their indignation, 139. At his return 
to Rome, Sylla gives him the surname of Magnus, ib. He 
demands a triumph, and gains it after some opposition from Sylla, 
140, 14-1. Refuses to flatter the army, 141. Gets Lepidus 
returned consul, against the will of Sylla, 142. Sylla's prediction 
thereupon soon verified, ib. Sylla takes no notice of him in his 
will, yet he procures Sylla interment in the Campus Martius, 
though opposed by Lepidus, ib. Lepidus collects the remains 
of the Marian faction, and sets up for dictator, z'Z>. Fompey is 
sent against him by Catullus the other consul, 'and soon defeats 
Lepidus and all his partisans, 143. Behaves dishonourably to 
Brutus, who had surrendered Mutina, ib. Has interest enough 
to be sent in aid to Metellus Pius against Sertorius in Spain, 144. 
Sertorius expresses his contempt of him, 145. He is afflicted at 
the loss of Lauron, which Sertorius burns in his presence, ib. 
Defeats Herennius and Perpenna, ib. Fights the battle of Sucro, 
from which he escapes by quitting his horse with gold trappings, 
146. Behaves with great, respect, to Metellus, ib. Applies to 
the senate for money to pay his troops, and Lucullus, who was 
jealous of him as a competitor for the command against Mithri- 
dates, takes care to see the money sent, 147. By a stratagem 
draws Perpenna into the field, defeats him, and puts him to death, 
ib. 148. Very prudently destroys the papers of Sertorius, 148,. 
Returns to Italy, when Crassus had almost finished the war with 
the gladiators, and happening to kill five thousand of those 
slaves, acquaints the senate that he had cut. up the war by the 
roots, ib. It is apprehended, tiiat he will retain his troops that 
they may raise him to the dictatorship, but he dismisses them 
immediately after his triumph, 119. He restores the tribunes 
of the people their authority, ib. A second triumph is decreed 
him, together with the consulship, ib. 150. Crassus is appointed 
his collegue, 150. They disagree in every thing, ib. Pompey 
permits judges to be appointed out of the equestrian order, ib. 
When consul, he appears before the censors to give an account 
of his having served the campaigns required by law, ib. 151. 
Crassus and he are reconciled by a command announced as from 
Jupiter, 151. Pompey leaves the bar, seldom appears in public, 
and never but amidst a large company of friends and retainers, 
152. Gabinius proposes an edict for sending him against the 
Cilician pirates, and investing him with a most extensive com- 
mand both at sea and land, 155. The people, and Csesar, for his 
own views, approve the edict ; but it displeases the senate, and 
one of the consuls ventures to say, ' If Pompey imitates Romulus, 
he will not escape his fate,' ib. 156. After this bill is passed, 
Pompey procures an enlargement of his powers, ib. 157. He 
divides the Mediterranean into thirteen parts, and appoints a 
lieutenant for each, 157. He clears the sea of all the piratical 
adventurers, in forty days' time, ib. The consul Piso inveigh? 

VOL. VI. 2 1 

482 INDEX. 

against hi m at Rome, ib. He returns to Rome, ib. Gabihiufl 
prepares a decree for deposing Piso, but Pompey will not sutler 
him to propose it, 158. Pompey re-embarks and touches at 
Athens, ib. The honour paid him by the Athenians, ib. He 
defeats the pirates on the Cilician coast, and compels them to 
surrender all their castles, ib. 159. Places the pirates in inland 
towns, 159. Guilty of an invidious action in attempting to strip 
Metellas of his command in Crete, ICO. The tribune Manihus 
procures a decree, which gives him the direction of the war 
against Mitbridatcs and Tigranes, and makes him, in fact, 
sovereign of the Roman empire, 161. The artificial behaviour of 
Pompey, when he receives the news, 162. He takes all oppor- 
tunities to annul the acts of Lucullus, 161, 162. The two 
generals have an interview, which only makes the breach the 
wider, 163, 164. He seduces all Lucullus' soldiers, except, 
sixteen hundred, 164. Marches in quest of Mithridates, ib. 
His operations against him, 165. He routs him entirely near 
the Euphrates, 166. Enters Armenia, on the invitation of 
young Tigranes, who had revolted from his father, 167. Tigranes 
the Elder receives a Roman garrison into his capital, and makes 
his personal submission to Pompey, ib. Pompey continues to 
Tigranes the dominions which he has in his hands, and offers to 
make his son king of Sophene, ib. 168. The father is very happy 
in these conditions; but the son murmurs, and is reserved in 
chains for Pompey's triumph, 168. Pompey marches in search 
of Mithridates, ib. The Albanians attack him, and are defeated, 
ib. 169. He grants them peace, 169. Defeats the Iberians, vtfho 
were never conquered till this time, ib. Enters Colchis, in 
order to pursue Mithridates, who concealed himself about the 
Bosporus and the Palus Mceotis, ib. Is called back by the 
revolt of the Albanians, ib. Defeats them again, and kills Cosis, 
the king's brother, with his own hand, 170. Designs to visit 
Hyrcania, but is prevented by the great number of serpents he 
finds on the way, ib. Takes his route to Armenia the Less, 171 . 
dives audience there to the embassadors of the Elymaeans and 
the Medes, ib. Sends Afranius against the Parthians, who were 
laying waste Gordyene, ib. Pompey's polite behaviour to Stra- 
touice, favourite concubine to Mithridates, ib. The king of 
Iberia sends him rich presents, and he delivers them to the 
quaestors, to be applied to the public revenue, 172. Finds in the 
castle of Cajnon Mithridates' private papers, by which he dis- 
covers him, in his real character, to be cruel and libidinous, ib. 
Goes to Amisus, where he distributes governments before the 
war. is finished, though he had blamed that measure in Lucullus, 
17j. Twelve kings appear before him there, ib. He is desirous 
to recover. Syria, and push his conquests as far as the Red Sea; 
and in the mean time he takes measures for reducing Mithridates 
by famine, ib. 174. Inters the bodies of those Romans, who fell 
under Triarius three days before, 174. Subdues the Arabians 
about mount Auunus, ib. Converts Syria into a Roman pro- 
vince, ib. Reduces Judaea, and takes its king, Aristobulus, 

INDEX. 483 

prisoner, ib. Administers justice, and decides disputes between 
cities and princes, particularly between the Armenians and 
Parthians, ib. 175. Too indulgent to his own ministers, 175. 
The insolent use that his freedman Demetrius made of ins favour, 
ib. Pompey's theatre beautiful and grand, but his house not 
ostentatiously great, 176. He marches against Petra, in Arabia, 
ib. Near that place he receives the news or' the death of Mithri- 
dates, 177. Marches to Amisus, where he finds presents from 
Pharnaces, together with the body of Mithridates, ib. Moves 
with great pomp towards Italy, 173. His bounty to philosophers 
and other learned men at Rhodes and at Athens, ib. 179. At 
his return to Italy, has the mortification to find that his wife 
Mucia had dishonoured his bed, 179. Divorces her, ib. Apprehen- 
sions in Home that he will keep his army on foot, and make him- 
self absolute master, ib. Removed, by his disbanding it imme- 
diately, ib. The cities pour out their inhabitants to welcome 
and conduct him to Rome, 180. Finding Cato the 'only person 
who ventured to oppose him in the administration, he endeavours: 
to gain him by proposing a family alliance, but his offer is 
rejected, ib. Bribes publicly for one of his friends, ib. His 
triumph remarkable in being over the third quarter of the world, 
after his former triumphs had been over the other two, 181. He 
advances the Roman revenues from fifty to eighty-five millions 
of drachma;, and brings to tire value of twenty thousand talents 
into the treasury; ib. Ruined by the weight of his own power, 
182. Lucullus gets his acts confirmed, which Pompey had 
annulled, ib. Pompey having lost his majority in the senate, has 
recourse to the tribunes of the people, ib. Clodius insists on his 
sacrificing Cicero, and he complies, 183. Caesar, on his return 
from Spain, reconciles Pompey and Crassus, ib. Caesar, in con- 
sequence of that union, is appointed consul, and proposes several 
Jaws agreeable to the people, but not to the senate, 184. Pompey 
declares he will defend those laws with the sword, ib. Marries 
Julia, Caesar's daughter, who had been promised to Caepio, ib. 
Gives his own daughter to Caepio, who had been promised to 
Faustus, ib. The consul Bibulus and others are driven out of the 
Forum, by violence, and the law for the division of lands is car- 
ried, 185. The acts of Pompey are confirmed, and the two Gauls 
with Illyria are given to Caesar for five years, ib. Cato foretells 
the calamities which would fail upon the commonwealth, and on 
Pompey himself, ib. Pompey becomes extremely uxorious, 186. 
Clodius behaves to him with extreme insolence, lb. Culieo 
advises him to repudiate Julia, others to recall Cicero, 187. 
Fie embraces the counsel of the latter, ib. Cicero on his 
return reconciles the senate to Pompey, and procures for him 
the important charge of supplying Rome with corn, ib. Ke 
executes it with sreat ability, 188, 189. During the wars in 
Gaul, Caesar is privately making preparations at Rome for his 
future sovereignty, 189. Pompey and Crassus give him the 
meeting at. Lucca, where it is agreed that they two shall have 
the consulship the ensuing year, and Ca?sar his command con- 

2 x 2 

484 INDEX. 

tinucd tor five years more, ib. 190. Marcellinus attempts to 
bring this mattter to an eclaircissemcnt, 190. The answer 
which Pompey and Crassus gave hirn, ib. Pompey prevents Cato 
from being elected praetor, by pretence of having seen an inaus- 
picious flight of birds, 191. The greatest part of the Roman 
empire being divided among the triumvirate, Pompey is to have 
Africa, and both the Spain*, for his share, ib. He exhibits 
games on the dedication of his theatre, ib. Julia's great affection 
for him, 192. He affects to despise Csesar, 194. Suffers 
anarchy to prevail, in order that he himself may be appointed 
dictator, ib. Is prevented by Cato for a time, ib. Suffers con- 
fusion to take place again, 195. Bibulus makes a motion that 
Pompey should be declared sole consul, and Cato approves it, 
ib. Pompey marries Cornelia, the daughter of Metellus Scipio, 
ib. 196. He makes laws against bribery, and against enco- 
miums upon persons accused, but is extremely partial in the 
execution of them, 196, 197. Takes his father-in-law for his 
collegue, the last five months of his time, 197. His govern- 
ments are continued to him four years more, and he lias a thou- 
sand talents a-ycar allowed for the subsistence and pay of hi^ 
troops, ib. Caesar's friends demand that he should cither have 
another consulship, or the term of his governments prolonged, 
and Pompey favours that requisition ; but Cato's ill-timed seve- 
rity prevents any accommodation, ib. 198. Pompey redemands 
the two legions which he had lent Caesar, and Caesar sends thera 
home liberally rewarded, 198. Great rejoicings are made in 
Italy for Pompey's recovery from sickness, 198. He is lulled 
asleep with the pride of power, and makes no preparations for 
war, 199. Marcellus, at the head of the senate, marches out of 
the city to him, 201. Pompey has no success in the new levies, 
ib. Cicero endeavours to bring about a reconciliation, but with- 
out effect, between Pompey and Caesar, 202. Caesar, having 
seized Ariminum, marches with a small body of men, and passes 
the Rubicon, ib. Tullus asks Pompey what forces he has ready 
for the war, and receives an unsatisfactory answer, ib. 20". Pom- 
pey is invested with discretionary powers, 203. He declares he 
will consider those who remain in Rome as the partisans of 
Caesar, 201. Caesar hastens to drive him out of Italy, before his 
forces could arrive from Spain, ib. Pompey sails from Brun- 
dusium to Dyrrachium, having first filled the principal streets of 
Brundusium with sharp stakes, and covered them with earth, ib. 
205. Caesar having made himself master of all Italy in sixty 
days, marches into Spain with an intent to gain Pompey's forces 
there, 206. Pompey exercises his new-raised troops with great 
diligence and activity, ib. Many kings and princes repair to his 
camp, and he has a complete senate about him, 207. Even La- 
bienus and Brutus repair to his standard, ib. Cicero, though he 
had advised otherwise, and Tidius Sextius, though extremely old, 
do the same, ib. The humane decree made at the motion of 
Cato, 200. Caesar, having made himself master of Pompey'S 
forces in Spain, marches back through Italy, sails to Oricum, 

INDEX. 48* 

and sends Vibullius Rufus to Pompey with proposals of peace, 
ib. Pompey, instead of accepting the proposals, secures the 
ports and strong holds, ib. Csesar often attacks Pompey's en- 
trenchments, and in one of those assaults incurs the danger of 
losing his whole army, 209. Pompey does not pursue his ad- 
vantage, ib. Csesar, for want of provisions, is forced to de- 
camp, and takes his way to Thessaly, 210. Upon this, Pompey's 
troops are too much elated, and impatient for a decisive action, 
ib. Afranius advises Pompey to regain Italy, ib. His reasons 
for refusing that advice, ib. He pursues Caesar, and comes up 
with him on the plains of Pharsalia, 211, 212. Is teased into a 
battle, against his better judgment, 212. His dream, ib. 213. 
Another presage of his defeat, 213. Pompey orders his army 
to wait for the enemy's charge, 215. Pompey quits his ranks, 
and retires to his camp ; but finding that not secure, he changes 
his habit and flies, 218. The eacmy finds Pompey's camp 
full of preparations for festivity, 219. Pompey, not being 
pursued, quits his horse, passes by Larissa, and comes to 
Tempe, ib. Goes down to the sea-coast, and passes the re- 
mainder of the night in a fisherman's cahin. 220. Coasts along 
in a small river-boat, ib. Is taken up by Peticius, a Roman ci- 
tizen, into a ship of burthen, ib. The persons with him, ib. 
Steers for Mitylene to receive Cornelia and his son, 221. Their 
distressful meeting, ib. The advice he gave to the people of 
Mitylene, 223. He complains to Cratippus of Providence, ib. 
Sets sail with his wife and friends, ib. Touches at Attalia, where 
he is joined by some Cilician gallies, ib. Finds in a little time 
sixty senators about him, ib. Is informed that his fleet is entire, 
and that Cato is gone with it to Africa, ib. Laments his great 
error in giving Caesar battle at a distance from his fleet, ib. 
Raises men and money, 22k Deliberates about the country he 
shall retire to, and fixes at last upon Egypt, ib. 225. Notifies 
his arrival to Ptolemy, 225. The young king demands of his 
council in what manner he ought to treat him, and concludes to 
put him to death, 225, 226. A boat is sent to receive him, 226. 
Cornelia divines his fate, 227. His last words to her, ib. Pto- 
lemy's people sit sullen in the boat, and assassinate Pompey as he 
is getting out, ib. Slain the day alter his birth-day, at the age 
of fifty-nine, ib. His body is thrown out naked, 228. Buried 
by his freedman Philip, and an old Roman soldier, who was a 
sojourner in Egypt, ib. Caesar arrives in Egypt, and executes 
vengeance on the murtherers of Pompey, . 2v. 

Pompey, the Younger, or Sextus, seizes Sicily, and infests the 
Italian coast, v. 455. His answer to Mark Antony, ib. Menas. 
proposes to make him master of the whole Roman empire, id. 
His answer to Menas, ib. 456. 

Pompilia, daughter of Numa, i. 205. 

Pompon, son of Numa, i. 204. 

Pomponia, the wife of Quintus Cicero, v. 353. 

Pomponius, the father of Numa, persuades his son to accept the 
Roman crown, i. 169. 

4-So INDEX. 

Pomp&nitcs, the praetor, gives a concise but plain account of the loss 

of the battle at the Thrasvnienian lake, ii. 68. 
— , wounded and taken prisoner by Mithridates, iii. '.' I •'. 

He answers with a dignity becoming a Roman, to Mithridates' 

proposals, 347. 

killed in defence pf Cains Gracchus, v. 210. 

Potttifices, instituted by Numa, i. 181. 

PoniiJVx yia.rimiis, his office, i. i '. 

Pontius Cominius, ascends the Capitol to inform the senate of Ca- 

millus' victory over the Gauls, i. 393. 
. , a servant of a Roman of that name, meets Sylla in a 

prophetic rap u re, and tells him he brings him success from 

Beliona, iii. 2.0. 

GMncus, the title of one of Ciciro's poems, v. 294.-. 

f Pont us, iii. 24-6. 

Popedius Silo, attempts to intimidate Cato when a child, v. 49, 50. 

Popilkis, the praetor, banishes the friends of Tiberius GraGchus, 
v. 227- Obliged to quit Italy himself, ib. 

• , the tribune, murthers Cicero, though he had been de- 
fended by him under an accusation of parricide, v. S52. 

■ Cains, iv. 361. 

- Lama, his address to Brutus and Cassius, vi. 70. His 

discourse with Caesar, ib. 71. 

Poplicola. See Publiccla. 

■ , one of Antony's lieutenants, v. 4*87. 

Poppcca, the wife of Crispinus, her connexions with Otho and 
Nero, vi. 230. 

Populace, whether most insolent to good men when government 
prospers, or in the contrary circumstances, v. 3. 

Popularity, iv. 133, 134. 

Porcia, sister to Cato the Younger, v. 48. 

, the daughter of Cato, married first to Bibulus, and after 

his death to Brutus, v. 73, vi. 58. Her excellent character, v. 
68. Gives herself a private wound by way of trial of what she 
could bear, ib. Her disc . to Brutus, ib. Her great anxiety 
on his account, 70. How affected at the sight of a picture at 
Elea, 77. Said by some to have swallowed hot ashes, by others 
to have died in another manner, 108. 

Basilica, or Pcrciun hall, built by Cato the Censor, ii. 518. 

v. 53. 

Porcii, whence that family name, i. 287. 

Porci>> . >n to Cato ofUtiea, gives into debauchery, v. 122. Atones 
xor it by the valour he ^xerted in the battle in which he fell, ib. 

Porscna, adopts the cause of Tarquin, and declares war against 
the Romans, who retire before him, i. 293. He besieges Rome, 
295. The bold attempt of IVJucius Scaivola, ib. Rorsena's ge- 
nerous behaviour to him, and to the Romans in general, 296. 
They <jrect his statue in brass, 299. 

Poms, one of the principal kings in India, his prodigious stature, 
iv. 331. Taken prisoner by Alexander, 332. When asked how- 
he desired to be treated, answers, ' Like a king,' ib, 

e 

INDEX. 487 

Poseideon, one of the Athenian months, iv. 101. 

Posidonius, the philosopher, iii. 179. Cicero his discip'e, v. 297. 

Posidonii, two, iv. 178, n. 

PostJnnnn, Sylla's daughter by Valeria, iii. 283. 

PosthumhiSi the soothsayer, requires to be bound and imprisoned 

till Sylla had conquered Marius, iii. 243. 
■ Albinus, rallied by Gate for writing a history in Greek, 

and asking pardon for improprieties of language, ii. 509. 

- Tubertus, created consul, i. 299. Appointed dictator, 

to act against the JEqul and Vo'sci, 362 

■ , Spurius, rivals Tiberius Gracchus, v. 207. 

Poiamo, the Lesbian, iv. 33? 

)0. 

f Potamos, a place in Attica, where the Athenians assign the 

daughter of Aristides a farm for her dowry, ii. 490. 
Pothinus, v. 483. 
f Potidcea, ii. 120. iv. 243. 
Poverty, ii. 536, 537. 
Poxver, what it's effect, iii. 276. Arbitrary power a burthen to 

the possessor, as well as to the people, ii. 219. vi. 183. 
Prcecia, a courtesan, her influence in Rome, iii. 333, 334. 
\Prcenestines, iii. 278. 

Prcetexta, a Roman garment edged with purple, i. 83, n. 
Prcetorian cohorts, vi. 245. 
Pranichus, the poet, iv. 317. 
Prayer, i. 193. Of Camillus, 369. 
Praxiergidcc, the persons who performed certain ceremonies about 

the image of Minerva, ii. 163. 
i'Prkne, I 223. ii. 38. v. 480. 

Prima, said to be the daughter of Romulus by Ersilia, i. 71. 
Principle!, the general's quarters in the Roman camp, esteemed 
sacred., on account of the images of the gods being placed there, 
vi. 221, n. 
Priscus. See Helvidius Priscus. 
Priapus, i. 51 . 

f Probalinthus, a city of Tetrapoiis, i. 14, n. 
Procrustes. See Damasies. 
Prociileius, employed by Augustus to get Cleopatra alive into his 

hands, v. 500. 
Procidus, Julius, makes oath that Romulus had appeared to him 
in a form more than mortal, i. 96. Sent to offer Nutria the 
crown, 173. 

. , captain of the guards to Otho, vi. 252. 

Prodici, the guardians of kings who were minors, so called by the 

Lacedaemonians, i. 112. 
Prodigies. The sweating of the image of the god Adranus, and 
the brandishing of his spear, ii. 246. The preternatural over- 
flowing of the Alban lake, i. 365, 366. The vanishing of the 
body of Alcmena, 98. What happened in marking out the 
foundations of Alexandria, iv. 279. Stone said to fall from 
heaven, iii. 200. What happened to a person, who leaped upon 
*he altar of the twelve gods, 419, One of Antony's statues at 

488 INDEX. 

Alba sweats for many days, v. 483. An altar oruils a bright 
flame when the lire seemed to be extinguished, SIS. At Argos 

the priestess of the Lycean Apollo runs into the streets, and cries 
out that * she sees the city covered with blood and gore,' iii. 113. 
The vanishing of Aristeas the Proconncsian, i. 97- Incidents 
relating to bees interpreted as prodigies, vi. 23, 93, 10^. The 
raining of blood, i. 90. Ceres and Proserpine attiring themselves 
for a journey, ii. 239. The vanishing of Clcomenes the Asty- 
palcnsian, i. 97, 98. The entwining of a snake about the face 
of Clcomenes on the cross, v. 195. A child born with an ele- 
phant's head, ii. 433. Crows conduct Alexander through the 
Lybian deserts to the temple of Ammon, iv. 282. Eagles, and 
standards so called, prodigies relating to them, iii. 167,475. v. 
234. vi. 23, 93, 102. Entrails slip out of the hands of Crassus, 
iii. 475. A fish seizes the hinder parts of a hog intended for 
sacrifice, v. 34. A flame issues from the standard, iii. 210. A 
globe of fire falls between two armies, 337. A double gall 
belonging to one victim, and enclosed in one caul, vi. 197. The 
Hermoe defaced in Athens in one night, ii. 138. iii. 488. Liver 
without a head, iii. Ill, 321. iv. 348. Lightning, prodigies 
relating to it, ii. 313, 433. iii. 474. v. 483. vi. 36. Moons. 
Three seen at one time, ii. 392. Orpheus' statue of cypress- 
wood sweats profusely, iv. 259. Oxen, prodigies relating to 
them, ii. 433. iii. 114. v. 36, 37. Palm-tree grows up by the 
base of Caesar's statue, iv. 412. Ram with one horn, ii. 10. 
River in the Picene appears to flow with blood, ii. 392. Ravens 
devour their young in the city of Rome, iii. 240. Serpents creep 
into a helmet, and lay their eggs there, v. 217. Shields and 
spears, and persons fighting, seen in the sky, iii. 141. Sound of 
a trumpet in a mournful tone heard in the air, 210, 241. Crown 
of victory falls upon the head of Timolcon in the temple at 
Delphi, ii. 240. Tumbles down at Pergaraus, iii. 246 Voice 
from heaven announces the coming of the Gauls, i. 378. See 
Omens. 

Prblyta, daughter of Agesilaus, iv. 94. 

Promachus, victorious in a drinking-match, dies in three days, iv. 
343, 344. 

Promathion, the historian, i. 52. 

Prometheus, iv. 126. 

Promontories, of Diana, v. 33. 

Proper this, i 38, n. 

Prcphantus, brother to Clinias, his wife saves Aratus, vi. 154. 

■fProporitis, iii. 334. 

Proserpine, the wife of Aidoneus, king of the Molossians, i. 40. 

, the ceremonies of, her feast, iii. 339, 310. Her robe 

worn by the person who took the Great Oath, vi. 52. 

P, ■■/;, iii. 328. iv 50. 

Protagoras, the philosopher, ii. 55. Banished Athens for ascribing 
extraordinary phenomena to natural causes, iii. 435. 

Pfotsas, desires of Alexander a proof of his being reconciled to 
hinij and he gives him five talents, iv. 302. 

INDEX. 489 

Prolheus, the Spartan, endeavours to prevent the war with the 
Thebans, iv. 106. 

Prothytes, demanded by Alexander of the Thebans, iv. 256. 

Protogenes, the Caunian, a celebrated painter, v. S84. 

Profit, a merchant, founder of Massilia or Marseilles, i. 221 . 

Proverbs. 'Nothing without Theseus,' i. 37. ' Business to-mor- 
row,' ii. 353. ' A platter would not hold a dolphin,' iii. 358. 
< He plays the Cretan with a Cretan,' 213. ' He carries hay,' or 
' wears wisps ' on his horns, 456. ' Dead men do not bite,' iv. 
226. vi. 87. * Such a one has need of nothing but parsley,' ii. 
262. 'The die is cast,' i't. 202. vi. 182. 'In wine there is 
truth,' vi. 130. 'Woe to the conquered,' i. 397. 

Providence, particular, ii. 252. 

Proxemis, the Macedonian, discovers a spring of an oily nature on 
the banks of the river Oxus, iv. 326. 

Prusias, king of Bithynia. Annibal flies to his court, and is 
demanded of him by the Romans, iii. 57. 

Prytanes, members of the Athenian senate, i. 19, n. 

Prytaneum, i. 19. 

Prytanis, the grandfather of Lycurgus, i. 100, 101. 

Psammo, the philosopher, asserts the divine power and providence, 
iv. 283. 

Psenophis, priest of Heliopolis, i. 258. 

Psyche, the wife of Marphadates the Cappadocian, corrupted by 
the son of Cato of Utica, v. 122. 

Psylli, Africans who cured persons bitten by serpents by sucking 
the parts affected, v. 105, 106. 

Ptccodorus, of Megara, vindicated by Dion, vi. 16. 

Ptolemais, the daughter of Ptolemy, given in marriage to Deme- 
trius, v. 396, 413. 

Ptolemy, restored to his kingdom by Gabinius and Mark Antony, 
v. 427. 

, natural son of Amyntas II., makes war upon his brother 

Alexander king of Macedon, ii. 373. Is the father of Philox- 
enus, 374*. 

— , son of Pyrrhus and Antigone, iii. 72. Killed in the 

battle with the Lacedaemonians on the way to Argos, 111. 

Ceraiinus, king of Macedon, killed in the battle by the 

Gauls, iii. 97 

Lathyrus, king of Egypt, appoints Lucullus a table in 

the palace, and offers him presents to the value of eighty talents; 
but he refuses them, and takes nothing but ships, which he was 
sent by Sylla to procure, iii. 328, 329. 

— , nephew to Antigonus, sent as an hostage for Eumenc? 

come and treat, iv. 52. 

-- Dioui/nns, king of Egypt, deliberates on the measures 

he should take with respect to Pompcy, iv. 225. An account oi 
his vile ministers, who persuade him to destroy that great .. 
ib. Defeated in battle by Caesar, and never heard of aftervv; 
229, 4-15. 

490 INDEX. 

Ptoliniy Lagus, subsequently king of Egypt, one of Alexander's 
principal officers, marries Apama, iv. 39. 

■ , king of Egypt, Cato's advice to hint), v. 84, 85. 

, king of Cyprus, the proposals Cato made him, v. S4>. 

He poisons himself, 85. 

— P/iilonicfor, makes proposals of marriage to Cornelia, 

mother of the Gracchi, v. 200. 

— , the son of Chrysermus, visits Cleomenes in prison, v 

192. He is killed, 194." 

- Euergetes, his friendship to Aratus, and favours to the 

Sicyomans on his account; vi. 163, 164, 166. Declared head of 
the Achaean league, 176. Demands of Cleomenes his mother 
and children as hostages, v. 178. Behaves with some degree 
of generosity to that prince, and promises to send him back to 
Greece, 188,189. His death, 189. 

— Philopaior, son of Eucrgetes, his effeminate life, and ill 

treatment of Cleomenes, v. 189. Orders the body of Cfeomenes 
to be fastened to a cross, 195. A serpent entwines about the 
head of Cleomenes, 197. The superstitious fears of Philopator 
on that occasion, ib. 

, governor of Alexandria, killed by Cleomenes, v. 191- 

the diviner, his prediction to Otho, vi. 235. 

5 

Pto'um, ii. 360. 

PtTBLicoLA, Valerius, descended from the ancient Valerius, who 
was the chief author of the union between the Romans and the 
Sabines, i. 271. Distinguished under the kings by his eloquence 
and riches, ib. Employs both with great propriety, ib. Assists 
Brutus in expelling Tarquin and his family, 272. Stands for the 
consulship with Brutus, and loses his election, ib. Is the first 
who takes the oath proposed by Brutus, to support the Roman 
liberty ; though before he had retired from public business in dis- 
content, 273. Tarquin, by his embassadors, proposes to treat, 
but Valerius will not suffer them to be heard, 274. The embassa- 
dors during their stay corrupt the nephews of Collatinus, and the 
sons of Brutus, and a plot is formed to kill the consuls, which a 
slave, named Vindicius, discovers, and informs Valerius of it, 275 
— 277. He and his brother secure the conspirators, and seize the 
letters which were to be sent to Tarquin, 275. The consul Col- 
latinus, being accused of favouring his relations who had con- 
spired against the commonwealth, is degraded, and Valerius sub- 
stituted in his place, 279, 280. The armies of Tarquin and the 
Romans, after great slaughter, being separated by a storm, Vale- 
rius avails himself of a stratagem to encourage the Romans, 282, 
283. Valerius triumphs, and is the first consul who enters Rome 
in a chariot and four, 283. Pronounces the eulogium of Brutus, 
ib. Is envied tor his governing without a coliegue, and for his 
lofty house, 284. Gains the name of Publicola, 2S6. Fills up 
the senate, ib. Passes an act for liberty of appeal from the 
consuls to. the people, ib. Exempts artificers, and others, 
from taxes, ib. Makes it lawful, without form of trial, tt» 

INDEX. 49i 

kill any man who should attempt to sot himself up for king, 
28.7. Places the public treasure in the temple of Saturn, and 
permits the people to choose qunestors for the management of 
it, ib. Takes Lucretius, and afterward Marcus Horatius, for 
his collegue, 288. Ts des rnus to have the dedicating of the 
temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, which was bui)t by Tarquin, 
but the senate assigns that honour to Horatius, 290. Is again 
chosen consul, 25 3. Builds the town or' Sigliuria, ib. En- 
gages Porsena, and is defeated, and earned off wounded, ib. Is 
chosen consul the third time, ib. 2* i. Stands chiefly upon the 
defensive, but defeats a fh ipg | arty that was ravaging the coun- 
try, 295. Refers the dispute between the Romans and Tarquin 
to Porsena, 297. Tarquin refuses to abide by his arbitration, 
but Porsena makes peace with the Romans, ib. The ten virgins 
given as hostages by the Romans, swim across a stream to Pub- 
licola : his behaviour on that occasion, ib. Is chosen consul the 
fourth time, 299. Consults the Sibyl's books upon certain na- 
tural appearances of an alarming kind, 300. His reception of 
Appius Claudius, founder of the Claudian family, who migrates 
with a very considerable number of Sabines, to Rome, 301. 
The Sabines, renewing the war, form an ambuscade for the 
Romans ; but Publicola, by a counter-stratagem, defeats them 
with great slaughter, 302. He is honoured with a triumph, 303. 
Dies soon afterward, and is buried at the public charge, id. The 
women continue the mourning for him a whole year, ib. 

Publicus, steals the scabbard of Mithridates' sword, and sells it 
to Ariarathes, iv. 178. See all the Publii under their family- 
names. 

Punishment, corporal, the practice of it in our public schools one 
of the worst remains of barbarism, I. xxx. 

Purple, that of Hermione much esteemed, iv. 298. Preserves it's 
colour, a hundred and ninety years, ib. In what manner pre- 
pared, ib. 

f Put col i, iii. 283. 

Pi/anepsion, the month so called, i. 25, 46. 

\Pydna, ii. 302. iv. 314. 

Pyludes, the musician, iii. 15. 

Pylius, king of Thespiae in Bceotia, adopts Hercules, previous to 
initiation, i. 42. 

■\Pylos, iii. 407. 

■\ Pyramid, iii. 114. 

\ Pyrenees, i. 378. iv. 10. 

Pyrilampes, a person connected with Pericles, ii. 25. 

Pyronides, ii. 38. 

Pyrrha, iii. 65. 

Pyrrhidtz, the successors of Neoptolemus so called, iii. 65. 

Pyrrhus, the son of iEacides and Phthia, iii. 66. His saying 
concerning the Romans, 37. Some account of the peopling and 
polishing of his country, 65, 66. Has two sisters named De'i'da- 
mia and Troias, 66. His father is deposed, and the sons of Neop- 
tolemus brought in, 66. Pyrrhus is carried off, when an infant. 

i l INDEX. 

by two faithful servants, named Androclides and Angelas, to the 
court of Glaucias king of Ulyria, and laid as a suppliant at his 
feet, 66, 67, 6'S. Glaucias, after some hesitation, takes the 
infant into his protection, 68. Cassander, king of Macedon, 
demands him of Glaucias, who refuses to deliver him up, ib. 
Glaucias conducts him, at an early period, into Epirus, and 
places him on the throne, ib. His person described, ib. Be- 
lieved to cure the swelling of the spleen, by touching the part 
affected with his toe, ib. About five years afterward, he goes 
out of his own territories, to attend the nuptials of one of 
Glaucias' sons, 69. The Molossians take that opportunity to 
revolt to Neoptolemus again, ib. Pyrrhus applies for protection 
to Demetrius, who had married his sister De'idamia, ib. Ac- 
companies Demetrius at Ipsus, and distinguishes himself in that 
battle, ib. Keeps for Demetrius the cities of Greece, ib. Goes 
a hostage into Egypt, where he gains the favour of Ptolemy 
and Berenice, ib. 70. Marries Antigone, the daughter of Be- 
renice, by Philip her former husband, 70. Antigone procures 
him men and money, which enable him to recover the kingdom 
of Epirus, ib. He associates Neoptolemus in the kingdom, ib. 
The kings of Epirus took an oath in the manner of the kings of 
England, ib. Neoptolemus attempts, or it is pretended that he 
attempts, to poison Pyrrhus, 71. Pyrrhus despatches Neopto- 
lemus, 72. Has a son by Antigone, whom he names Ptolemy, 

72. Builds the city of Berenicis, ib. Alexander, the son of 
Cassander, applies to him for assistance against his brother An- 
tipater who had driven him out of Macedon, ib. He demands 
the maritime part of Macedon for his reward, ib. Lysimachus, 
who was inclined to assist Antipater, forges letters as from 
Ptolemy king of Egypt, to retard the progress of Pyrrhus, ib. 

73. Pyrrhus detects the fraud, 73. Demetrius, who had like- 
wise been applied to, arrives, kills Alexander, and gets himself 
proclaimed king of Macedon, ib. Demetrius is jealous of the- 
growing power of Pyrrhus, and goes to seek him in the field, ib. 

74. They inadvertently pass each other, 74. Pyrrhus finds 
Pantauchus, Demetrius' lieutenant, and gives him a great over- 
throw, 71. The Macedonians conceive a high opinion of his 
valour, and discover in him a strong resemblance of Alexander 
the Great, ib. Antigonus' saying concerning him, 75. • Not 
easily provoked, quick to repay a kindness, ib. Saying of his, 
ib. 76. After the death of Antigone, he marries several wive , 
for the purpose of interest and power, 76. Beside his son 
Ptolemy, already mentioned, he has Alexander by Lauassa, the: 
daughter of Agathocles, and Helenus by Bircenna, the daugh- 
ter of Bardyllis, ib. Says he will leave his kingdom to the 
son who has the sharpest sword, ib. The Epirots give him 
the name of Eagle, ib. Has intelligence that Demetrius is 
pick, enters Macedon, and penetrates as far as Edessa, 77. 
Demetrius inarches against him, and he retires, ib. Deme- 
trius meditates an expedition for the recovery o£ his paternal 
kingdom, ib. The other kings desire Pyrrhus to exert him 8 

12 

INDEX. 493 

on this occasion, 77- Pyrrhus loses his wife Lanassa, and the 
isle of Corcyra, both which are gained by Demetrius, 78: He 
marches against Beroea, ib. His dream concerning Alexander 
the Great, ih Takes Bercea, 79. Demetrius, apprehending 
that his army might revolt to Lysimachus, if he continued his 
march against him, turns against Pyrrhus, ib. The Macedonians 
revolt to Pyrrhus, and he is proclaimed king of Macedon, ib. 80. 
Lysimachus makes his appearance soon afterward, and pretending 
that he had contributed equally to the flight of Demetrius, 
demands his share of the kingdom, which Pyrrhus agrees to, 80. 
Pyrrhus enters the citadel of Athens, ib. Advises the Athenians 
never to admit another king within their walls, 81. Takes the 
Grecian cities from Demetrius, notwithstanding the peace he had 
made with him, ib. Demetrius' affairs being entirely ruined, 
Lysimachus marches against Pyrrhus, debauches his army, and 
dispossesses him of his share of Macedon, ib. Pyrrhus' impa- 
tience of inaction is relieved by an application from the Taren- 
tines, for assistance against the Romans, 82. Meton, the Taren- 
tine, endeavours to dissuade his countrymen from calling in Pyr- 
rhus, and to excite their attention, feigns himself intoxicated, 
ib. Cineas first minister to Pyrrhus draws him into a conversa- 
tion, in which he shows him the vanity of ambition, but does not 
cure him of that disease, 83, 84, 85. He meets with a dreadful 
storm in his passage to Italy, 85. Makes the land with great 
difficulty, and marches with the scattered remains of his forces to 
Tarentum, ib. 86. Corrects the luxury of the Tarentines, and 
introduces strict discipline, ib. 87. Has intelligence that Lsevi- 
nus the Roman consul, is coming against him, 87- Goes to the 
river Siris to reconnoitre the enemy's army, ib. What he said 
on the occasion, ib. His proposal of acting as a mediator^ is 
rejected, ib. The action on the banks of the Siris, in which 
Pyrrhus proves victorious, chiefly by means of his elephants, 88, 
89. Notwithstanding his victory, he despatches Cineas to Rome, 
with propositions of peace, which are rejected, 90, 91. Fabricius 
sent as embassador to Pyrrhus, to treat about the ransom and 
exchange of prisoners, 93. Pyrrhus offers him ^oney, which 
he refuses, though his circumstances were very mean, ib. Pyr- 
rhus' physician makes Fabricius an offer of poisoning him, which 
Fabricius discovers to Pyrrhus, 94, 94. Pyrrhus defeats the 
Romans again at Asculum, 95, 96. Says to those who compli- 
mented him upon it, «-■ Such another victory, and we are undone,' 
96. Receives invitations from the Macedonians on one hand, and 
from the Sicilians on the other, 97. Leaves a garrison in Taren- 
tum, contrary to the inclinations of the people, and passes into 
Sicily, 98. Finds the most agreeable reception there, ib. Ra- 
vages the Carthaginian province, takes Eryx by storm, and cele- 
brates the games which he had vowed to Hercules, ib. Defeats 
the Mamertines, a numerous and warlike people, about Messane, 
99. The Carthaginians court his friendship ; but he insists upon 
their evacuating Sicily, which they refuse, ib. His next object 
is Africa ; and wanting mariners, he compels the Sicilians to 
supply him, ib. Degenerates from a popular prince into a tyrant, 

■m INDEX. 

100. Ungrateful to Thocnon and Sostratus, the persons who 
first introduced bim into Syracuse, ib. Loses liis influence in 
Sicily, ib, What he said on leaving it, ib. The Mamertines 
attack him, after his return to Italy, 101. He cleaves down one 
of their soldiers, who challenged him to single combat, ib. 
Marches against Manias Curios, who lay at Beneventam, and 
is defeated, 102. Returns to Epirus, ei ters Macedon, defeats 
Antigonus, and is once more raised to the throne of .Macedon, 
103, 10k Marches to Sparta, at the request of Cleonymus, 105. 
His operations before Sparta, 106, 107. He is repulsed, 108. 
On the invitation of Aristea?, marches to Argos, Hi. His son 
Ptolemy is killed by the wav, ib. He sends a challenge to Anti- 
gonus, 112. enters Argos, 113. His actions there, 114. His 
orders are mistaken, 115. He takes the piurne from his helmet, 
ib. Struck down by a poor old woman with a tile, IKS. De- 
spatched by Zopyrus, who cuts oft' his head, 117. A magnificent 
funeral pile provided to: him by Antigonus, who gives his ashes 
to his son Helen us, IIS. 

Pythagoras, a Spartan, remarkable in the gymnastic exercises, 
visits Italy, i. 1 '". 

, the phi! opher, went into Italy about five ages after 

Nunja, i. IG.3. A fit 2ts to be thought something superior to the 
rest of the human race, 178. Uses a tame eagle to serve that 
purpose, and . ; 5 high, ib. Believes the Supreme- 

Being to be incori , impassive, invisible, and an object only 

of the- mind, 179. Sacrifices nothing to him that has life, 1H0. 
His precepts, 192. A statue erected to him at Rome, as the 
wisest of the Greeks, 181. Eulogium of him, xxxvi. — xxxix. 
-, the diviner, iv. 34-8. 

Putkeas, the orator, severely reproved by Phocion, for his impu- 
dence in speaking to the people, v. 25. Tells Demosthenes that 
' his orations smell of the lamp,' 260. Joins Antipater, 284. 
Speaks to the Arcadians against the Athenians, 285. Is answer- 
ed by Demosthenes, ib. 

Pythian . [polio. See Apollo Pi/tkim. Games. See Games. 

Pyi:iio>>L(-', the mistress ox Harpalus, v. 2d. He erects a magni- 
ficent monument to her memory, ib. 

•fPythium, ii. 300. 

Pythocles, son of Polycrates, a descendent of Aratus, vi. 153. 
Plutarch writes the Life of Aratus for the benefit of him and bis 
brother, ib. 

■ , one of those who suffered death with Phocion, v. 4-2. 

Pytfwclides, said to teach Pericles music, ii. 7. 

Pythadoriis, lies, in wait for Themistocles, i 318. 

Pyth lau&, brother to Tiiebe, the wife of Alexander of Pherap, 
assists her in despatching him, ii. 383. 

Python^ one of Alexander's officers, iv. 352. 

, the musician, iii. 75. 

, the Byzantine orator, refuted by Demosthenes,, v. 261 

, the serpent killed by Apollo, ii. 360. 

jr Pythopolis, a city built by Theseus, i. 33. 

INDEX, 49S 

<2. 

QUADRANS, a small piece of brass coin, v. 328. Which each 
Roman citizen contributed toward Publicola's funeral, 1. 303. 

Quadraniaria, or Quadrantula, a name given to an infamous sister 
of Clodlus, v. 328. 

Qucesior, the office what, i. 28*7. By whom first instituted, ib. 

Quails, ii. 128. 

Quarrels. See Dissensions. 

f Quinda, iv. 55. v. 396'. 

Quintilis, the month now called July, i. 95. 

Quintio, one of Cato the Censor's freedmen, ii. 528. 

Quintius, Titus, and Lucius, brothers. See Flaminius. 

--, Lucius, the tribune, attempts to rescind the acts of Sylla, 

but is opposed by Luculius, iii. 338. Obtains a decree for recall- 
ing Lucullus, 376. 

— . See Capitolinus. 

Quintus Cassius, goes with Antony to Ca?sar, v. 430. 

. , one of Crassus lieutenants, flies from Spartacus, iii. 462. 

See all the other Quiuti, under their family names. 
Quirinal, mount, in Rome, i. 100, 193. 
Qiiirinalis, Flamen, i. 176. 

Quirinus, Romulus so called, i. 97, 99, 100, 167. 
Ihiiris, the meaning of the term, i. 82, n. 100. 
Quirilc:;, the Romans why so called, i. 82, 99, 
Quirilis. See Juno Quiritius. 

R. 

BAIN, an attempt to account for its falling in great quantities after 
a battle, iii. 146, 147. 

Ram with one horn, found in the grounds of Pericles, ii. 10. 
Explained in the way of omen, ib. Accounted for philosophi- 
cally, ib. 

Rape, of the Sabine virgins, i. 70. Occasions a war, 74. Pro- 
ductive of better consequences, 81. Rape of Helen, by The- 
seus. See Helen. 

, how punished, by Solon's laws, i. 252. 

Rat, heard to cry, when Minucius named his general of horse, ii. 
394. 

Ratumena, one of the gates of Rome, near the Capitol, i. 289. 

f Ravenna, iii. 121. 

Regia, a royal palace, i. 80, 191. 

Registers, the Syracusan, 'taken by the Athenians, iii. 421. 

Religion, its exercises to be performed with great reverence and 
attention, i. 191. How defined, ii. 283. The regard the Romans 
paid to it for a long time, 393, 394. 

Remonium, a strong situation on mount Aventine, where Remus 
proposed to build the city, i. 62. 

496 INDEX. 

Remus, twin-brother of Romulus, i. 50. Seized and carried before 
Numitor, 57. His speech, 58. Faustulus carries to court the 
trough or cradle, in which Romulus and he were taken up, and he 
is acknowledged by Numitor, 39. What occasioned his death, 
63. He is buried in Remonium, 64. 

Resignation, v. 277. 

Retreat, of * the Ten Thousand ' Greeks under Xenophon. See 
Xenopkom 

Rhadamanthiis, a judge under Minos, i. 17. Said to have mar- 
ried Alcmena, after the death of Amphitryon, iii. 224. The 
Haliartians show his tomb at Alea, ib. 

■f Rhamnus, v. 29. 

■ -, one of Antony's freedmen, v. 472. 

Rhamnenses, the name of one of the tribes of Rome, i. 83. 

Rhea, Ilia, or Sylvia, daughter of Numitor, and mother of Romuluc 
and Remus, i. 52. 

, the mother of Sertorius, iv. 1. 

-j- Rhegians, ii. 243. 

■f Rhegium, ii. 97. vi. 26, 53. 

■f Rhenia, a little island near Delos, iii. 401. 

Rhetoric, the art of ruling the minds of men, ii. 27. 

Rketrce, the fundamental statutes of Lycurgus, i. 119. 

-j- Rhine, Caesar lays a bridge over it, iv. 385. 

•f Rhodes, taken by Cassius, vi. 84. 

-j- Rhodians, their brave defence against Demetrius, v. 383. They 
desire him to leave one of his engines, as a monument of the 
siege they had undergone, 3S2. 

Rkodon, a traitor, v. 502. 

Rhodogune, daughter of Artaxerxes, married to Orontes, vi. 146. 

Rhocsaces, revolts from his master, the king of Persia, and retires 
to Athens, iii. 308. Is much harassed there by the public- 
informers, ib. Applies to Cimon for protection, and offers him 
money, ib. Cimon's generous answer to him, ib. 

, attacks Alexander on his passing the Granicus, iv. 262. 

Alexander kills him, 263. 

■f Rhcetium, v. 179. 

Rhone, river, iii. 137. iv. 4. 

Rhopopcrperethras, a name given to Demosthenes, v. 262. 

Rhus, i. 36. 

Rhipnitalces, the Thracian, i. 77. 

•J- Rhyndacus, river, iii. 341. 

Rhyntac.es, a Persian bird so called, vi. 135. 

Riches, and eloquence, the means by which the Romans gained a 
place in the administration, iii. 125. 

— — — , not to desire them, more glorious than to use them well, 
ii. 186. A competency preferable to them, i. 220. The true 
use of them, ii. 343. 

Rignarium, i. 62. 

-J- Riphccan mountains, i. 378. 

Roads, the attention of C. Gracchus to the repairing of them, V 
230. 

INDEX. 497 

Roma, one of the Trojan matrons, who came with iEneas into 
Italy, i. 49. Advises her female companion* to burn the ships, 
ib. Rome said to be called after her, or after Roma, the 
daughter of Italus and Leucaria, 50. 

Romans, rise to the height of empire by means of temperance and 
fortitude, i. 97- Admit no use of images in the worship of the 
gods, for a hundred and seventy years after the building of Rome, 
179. Retire into the Capitol on the coming of the Gauls, 386. 
Distressed by famine, 396. Delivered by Camillus, 397- De- 
feated by Annibal in the great battle of Cannae, ii. 88. Behave 
with dignity on that occasion, 91. Their attention to religious 
ceremonies, 205. Offer human sacrifices on the invasion of the 
Gauls, after the first Punic war, 391. For some ages unpolished, 
and skilled only in agriculture and war, 422. Marcellus first 
gives them a taste for paintings, and other curiosities of art, for 
which he is blamed by the graver citizens, ib. Lose both their 
consuls by one of Annibal's stratagems, 436. Degenerated in 
the time of Cato the Censor, 497, 498. He compares them to 
sheep, 502. They reject the presents of Pyrrhus, and all pro- 
positions of peace, while he remains in Italy, iii. 91, 93. Pro- 
claim liberty to the Greeks, iii. 43. 

Romanics, son of Ulysses and Circe, i. 50. 

Rome, uncertainty of the history of its foundation, i. 49. Built by 
Romulus, i. 61. The time of its foundation, 65. Its tribes and 
wards originally, what, 83. Its ferocious and uncivilized state 
at the accession of'Numa, corrected b}' the influence of religion, 
177,178. Burnt by the Gauls, 390. Rebuilt by Camillus,L399. 
And adorned by Marcellus, ii. 422. 

Romulus, various accounts of his origin, as well as that of Rome, 
i. 49, 51. The son of Ilia, Rhea, or Sylvia, the daughter of 
Numitor, 52, 53. Amulius, the brother of Numitor, orders 
Romulus, and his brother Remus, to be destroyed, but the 
servant only exposes them by the river, 53. There they were 
suckled some time by a she-wolf, ib. Taken up by Faustulus, 
and nursed by his wife Acca Larentia, 54. Sent to Gabii for 
education, 56. Their powers of body and mind, generous incli- 
nations and actions, ib. They distinguish themselves in an affray 
between the herdsmen of Numitor and Amulius, 57- While 
Romulus is employed in divination, Remus is taken prisoner and 
brought to answer for the late violence, ib. The reigning prince 
leaves the correction of him to Numitor, who feels an instinctive 
kindness for him, ib. His speech to Numitor, 58. Who con- 
ceives hopes of his hems' his grandson, 59. Faustulus desires 
Romulus to assist his brother, and informs him of the particulars 
cf his birth, ib. Faustulus hastens with the cradle to Numi- 
tor, but is questioned by Aiimiius' guards, who inform that 
prince of their suspicions, ib. Romulus arrives, brings a con- 
siderable force with him, and many of the citizens join with 
him, 60. The two brothers resolve to build a city in the 
place where they had their first nourishment, 61. Open 
a place of refuge for fugitives, ib. A dispute arises 
vol. vi. 2 K 

m INDEX. 

between them about the situation of their intended city, which 
is referred to the decision of augury, and carried in favour 
of Romulus, 62. Remus ridicules, and leaps over the ditch 
which Romulus opened, 63. Remus slain, probably by the 
hand of Romulus, ib. Ceremonies observed in founding Rome, 
under the direction of proper persons from Hetruria, 64-, 65. 
The twenty-first of April celebrated as the first day of Rome, 65. 
Romulus forms the most warlike of the people into legions, 67. 
Constitutes a senate, ib. Appoints the connexion between the 
patricians and plebeians, as patrons and clients, 68. Exhibits 
games, at which the intended rape of the Sabine women is put in 
execution, 69. Marries Ersilia, and has by her Aollius and 
Prima, 71. Kills Acron, king of the Ceninensians, with his own 
hand, and dedicates the Spolia Opima to Jupiter Feretrius, 74-. 
A battle takes place between the Sabines and the Romans, in 
which he receives a blow on the head with a stone, and the 
Romans give ground, 79. Romulus prays to Jupiter, and the 
Romans return to the combat, 80. A peace is concluded, and 
the Sabines are incorporated with the Roman soldiers, 81. Story 
of the cornel-tree propagated from the shaft of Romulus' spear, 
84. The Sabines receive the Roman months, and Romulus 
adopts the use of their shields, ib. The feasts agreed on to be 
instituted, 85. Romulus introduces the sacred fire at Rome, and 
appoints the Vestal virgins, 87. Is skilled in divination, and 
bears the Lituus, 88. His law concerning divorces, ib. Appoints 
no punishment for actual parricide, but calls all murther parri- 
cide, ib. 89. Tatius is killed at Lavinium, and Romulus gives his 
body an honourable interment, but does not punish his assas- 
sins, 89, 90. Thought accessary to his death, 90. The Latins 
send embassadors to him, ib. Takes Fidense, and makes it a 
Roman colony, ib. The Camerians attacking the Romans, 
Romul us defeats them, and takes and colonises their city, 91. 
The Veientes declare war against the Romans, ib. Extravagant 
account of the valour of liomuius, who defeats them, 92. Ro- 
mulus triumphs for his victory, 93. After he has reduced the 
neighbouring countries, assumes the monarch to an odious degree, 
93. Gives offence by his dress, guards, and lictors, ib. 94s On 
the death of his grandfather Numitor, he leaves the administra- 
tion of Alba in the hands of the inhabitants, 94. He allows the 
Sabines in Rome also magistrates of their own, ib. He dictates 
to the senate, and the patricians go into the house only to learn 
the news of the day, ib. Other arbitrary acts of his, ib. He 
disappears unaccountably, 95. Various stories concerning his 
death, ib. All agree in this, that the senators despatched him, 
ib. 96. The sen atovs tell the people that he was caught up to 
heaven, 96. Julius Proculus confirms it on the strength of a 
pretended apparition, ib. Flis age, 102. Compared with The- 
seus, ib. 

KpmfiSp son of JEmathion, i. 50. 

, king of the Latins, i. 50. 

Roscius, the actor, iii. 282. v. 298. 

INDEX. 499 

Roscius, defended by Cicero against Sylla's prosecution, v. 295. 

Rorana, sister to Mithridates, iii. 351. Dies untimely, execrating 
her brother, 352. 

•, pregnant by Alexander, iv. 353. Is jealous of Statira, and 

procures the death both of that princess and her sister, ib. 

Roxancs, a Persian officer, addresses Themistocles in reproachful 
terms, as he passes him in the court, i. 352. 

+ Rubicon, Caesar passes it, but first deliberates, iv. 202, 396. 

Rubrius, praetor in Macedon, v. 56. 

Riifinus, one of the ancestors of Sylla, expelled the senate for being 
possessed of more than ten pounds weight of plate, iii. 230. 

Rufus, Lucius, boasts of being concerned in killing Gaius Grac- 
chus, v. 220. 

■ — , Gluvius, vi. 245, n. 

Rumiiia, the tutelar goddess of children at the breast, i. 53. 

Riimincdis, what so called, and why, i. 53. 

Rumours, extraordinary ones, ii. 313, 314. 

Rustius, or Roscius, iii. 495, n. 

Rutilius, lieutenant to Metellus, iii. 130. 

-, Rufus, the historian, iii. 156. iv. 173. 

S. 

SAB ACQ, Cassius. See Cassius Sabaco. 

Sabbas, one of the kings of India, his revolt from Alexander, iv.. 
336. 

Sabine women, carried off by the Romans, i. 69. Run in between 
the Romans and the Sabines, 80. Their eloquent remonstrance 
on that occasion, which conciliates a peace, ib. 81. The honours 
paid them by the Romans, 81. 

f Sabines, a colony of Lacedaemonians, i. 73, 165, 166. Attack the 
Romans, on account of the rape, 73, 74. Invade the Roman 
territories, and are defeated by Marcus Valerius, brother to 
Publicola, losing thirteen thousand of their men, i. 299. Again 
defeated by Publicola, 302. 

Sabinus, v. 322. 

Sacred band of Thebans. See Band. Fire, i. 87. Mount, ii. 180. 
War, ii. 34, 267, n. 

Saculio, a buffoon, vi. 100. 

Sadalcs. See Adallus. 

f Sagra, river, ii. 314. 

-J* Salamis, i. 18. Said to be first given up to the Athenians by 
Philaeus and Eurysaces, the sons of Ajax, i. 230. The Athe- 
nians lose it, and, after many vain trials, make a law that there 
shall be no more attempts for recovering it, 227. Recovered bv 
Solon, 228. The Grecian and Persian fleets engage in the strait* 
of Salamis, 333 — 335. Surrendered to Demetrius, v. 378. 

Saliminian galley, ii. 12, 143. 

Salii, priests instituted by Numa, to take charge of the brasen 

2 k 2 

500 INDEX. 

shield that fell from heaven, i. 188, 189. An account of their 

procession, 100. 
Salinator, Julius. See Julius Salinator. 
Sal/us, commander of the Pelignians, throws his standard among 

the enemy, ii. 307. 
, a person of Samothrace or Mantinea, said to have taught 

the dance in armour, i. 190. 
Salonium, iii. 165. 
Salonius, steward to Cato. Cato the Censor, in his old age, marries 

his daughter, fi. 527, 528. 

■ , Cato. See Cato Salonius. 

^//-springs, or Salt-works, i. 92. 

Sallust, the historian, mistaken in saying that camels were first 

seen by the Romans in the battle fought by Lucullus near the 

river lihyndacus, iii. 341. 
Salvius, a Roman who had served under Pompey, takes part in his 

assassination, iv. 226. 
Sanuena, a kind of ship so called, ii. 40. 
Sambuca, a machine invented by Marcellus in the siege of Syracuse, 

ii. 410. It is destroyed by Archimedes, 412. 
t Samians, beat the Athenian fleet after Pericles was gone, and 

brand the prisoners in the forehead with the figure of an owl, 

ii. 40. The Athenians had branded them with a Samaena, and 

thence they were called by Aristophanes a lettered people, ib. 

They are entirely reduced by Pericles, 41. Their flattery to 

Lysander, iii. 210. 
t Satnnites, iii. 83. v. 205. 
Samon, chief herdsman to Neoptolemus, iii. 71. 
t Samos, Pericles beats down the walls of it's capital, ii. 41. 
-f Samosata, v. -157. 

f Samothrace, or Samothracia, iii. 243. iv. 153. 
Samothracian gods. See Cabiri. 
Sartiothracians at Sparta, v. 162. 
Sandacc, sister to Xerxes, her three sons sacrificed by the Greeks 

to Bacchus Omestes, i. 332. 
■j- Sapha, iii. 358. 
f Sappho, v. 403. 
Sardians to be sold, why proclaimed by the cryer at Pome before 

every sacrifice for victory, i. 93. 
Sardinia conquered, i. 93, n. 
jSardis, iii. 196. iv. 48, 264. v. 413. 
Sardonic laughx v. 236. 
Sarmentus, v. 483. 

Sarpcdon, preceptor to Cato the Younger, v. 51. 
Satibarzanes, an eunuch belonging to Artaxerxes, vi. 127. 
|- Satricum taken by the Tuscans, i. 410. Retaken by Camillu?, 

411. 

Saturcius, Publius, the tribune, gives Tiberius Gracchus the first 

wound, v. 220. 
Saturnalia, fe&st of, i. 209- iii. 258. v. 313. 

INDEX. 501 

Satarninm, Lucius, a furious tribune, iii. 137. Supports Marius 
in all his measures, ib. and 156. Proposes an Agrarian law, 157. 
Banishes Metellus, 159. Retires into the Capitol, 160. Is 
promised indemnity on surrendering himself, ib. Killed notwith- 
standing, as soon as he enters the Forum, ib. 

Satyr, brought to Sylla, iii. 268. 

Satyrus, the diviner (or, as he is called by others, Orthagoras), asskt; 
in killing Timophanes, the brother of Timoleon, ii. 236. 

, the actor, forms the pronunciation and delivery of Demos- 
thenes, v. 258, 259. 

Sayings and apophthegms of Acuphis, iv. 328. TEmilius, ii. 320. 
vi. 211. iEsop, i. 262. Afranius, iv. 406. Agesilaus, iv. 81, 
88, 89, 90, 97, 99, 100. Agis, v. 139, 140, 143, 152. 153. Alci- 
biades, ii. 120, 123, 130, 1 14. Alexander the Great, iv. 88, 245, 
24-9, 255, 256, 259, 272, 273, 282, 283, 284, 290, 301, 302, 303, 
304, 306, 307, 328, 329. Anaeharsis, i. 224. Anaxilaiis, ii. 
J60. Annibal, ii. 82, 87, 88. iii. 59. Antalcidas, i. 131. iv. 103, 
104,111. Antigonus, i. 77. ii. 340. iii. 9, 75. iv. 56. v. 369. 
Antipater, iv. 48. v. 2. Antisthenes, i. 161. Anytus, ii. 118. 
Archelaus, i. 113. Archestratus, ii. 135. Archidamidas, i. 
144. Archidamus, v. 183. Argileonis, i. 151. Aristides, 
ii. 448, 449, 459, 460. Augustus, v. 353. Artaxerxes, vi. 
118, 119. Barca, ii. 90. Brutus, vi. 69, 89, 90. Ca?sar, 
Julius, i. 77. ii. 2. iv. 213, 360, 368, 370, 403, 405, 411, 416, 
419, 421, 422. v. 122. Camillus, i. 397, 398. Callicratidas, 
ii. 342. Cassius, vi. 94. Cato the Censor, ii. 340, 502—505, 
et passim. Cato the Younger, v. 68, 76, 79. Charilaus, i. 
143. Cicero, iv. 361. v. 298, 300, 301, 320, 321, 322, 32rf, 325, 
340. CimoH, iii. 308. Cleomenes, v. 159. Cleopatra, v. 453. 
Crassus, iii. 449. Cratesiclea, v. 178. Curius Dentatus, ii. 494, 
495. Crobylus, v. 271. Deiotarus, iii. 470. Demadcs, i. 242. 
v. 183,266. Demaratus, i. 143. iv. 88, 253. Demetrius Po- 
liorcetes, v. 384. Demetrius the Pharian, vi. 205, 206. De- 
mocrates, v. 158. Demosthenes, v. 8, 258, 260, 263, 264, 270, 
283, 284, 285, 287- Diogenes, ii. 79. iv. 259. Dionysius, ii. 
249, 250. Draco, i. 242. Epaminondas, i. 130. Epimenides, 
i. 233, 234. Eumenes, iv. 49, 52. Fabius Maximus, ii. 73, 
80, 9S, 100. Favonius, iv. 406. Flaminius, iii. 52, 53. Caius 
Gracchus, v. 225. Galba, vi. 228. Gorgo, i, 132, 133. Iphi- 
crates, ii. 341. Laconic sayings, instances of them, i. 142 — 144. 
v. 408. Leox)f Byzantium, iii. 437. Leonidas, i. 143. Lucul- 
ius, iii. 336, 353. Lycurgus, i. 123, 142, 147. iii. 188, 189. 
Lycurgus the Orator, iii. 499. Lysander, iii. 193, 194, 196, 
215. Marius, iii. 150,151,155, 163, 172,449. Metellus, iii. 
158, 159. Nicias, iii. 433. Paedaretus, i. T,~0. Parmenio, iv. 
301'. Pelopidas, ii. 344, 361, ?S5, 375. Pericles, ii. 14, 15, 31, 
32, 58. Persaeus, vi. 175. Philip, ii. 3. iv.248. Philistus, vi. 35. 
Philopoemen, iii. 17, 21, 22, 23. Phocion, v. 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 
19, 20, et passim. Pittheus, i. 4. Plato, ii. 27, 117, 192. iii. 
32*. v. 364. vi. 19. Plistonax, i. 143. Pisistratidus, i. 151, 

502 INDEX. 

Pompey, iv. 128, 14-1, 185, 189, 233, 231. rv.upeius Sextus, 
v. 455, 456. Pomponius, iii. 346, 34-7. Ptolemy, v. 367. 
Pyrrhus, iii. 76, 100. Pytheas, v. 260, 266. T. Quintius Fla- 
minius, iii. 53. Romulus, i. 90. Scopas, ii. 518. Seleucus, v. 
416, 417. Sertorius, iv. 7, 8, 9, 25, 27, 32. Solon, i. 224, 237, 
238, 243, 260, 261, 265. Sophocles, iii. 422. Sth'enis, iv. 
136. Stilpo, v. 371, 372. Stratocles, v. 393. Stratonicus, i. 
161. Sylla, iii. 245, 247, 248, 250. iv. 357. Theano, ii. 145. 
Themistocles, i. 338, 339, 352, 353. Teleclides, ii. 239. Theo- 
dorus, ii. 163. Theopompus, i. 121, 143, 160. Thespis, i. 265. 
Theste, vi. 20. Tigranes, iii. 366. Timoclea, iv. 257. Timon, 
ii. 135. Timotheus, ii. 342. 

Sccevola. See Mutius. 

Scambonis, a ward in Athens, ii. 144. 

Scapte Hyle, what, iii. 297, n. 

Scaurus, his daughter iEmilia is Pompey's second wife, iv. 134. 

Scedasus, the story of his daughters, ii. 365. 

Scellius, a friend of Antony's, attends him in his flight at the battle 
of Actium, v. 489. 

Scenes, a slave of Pompey's, iv. 227. 

Scenical Entertainments. See Theatrical. 

Scenthas, servant to Aratus, vi. 156. 

Schinocephalus, a name given to Pericles, ii. 6. 

f Scilloustis, isle of, iv. 339. 

-j- Scionceans, re-established by Lysander, iii. 204. 

Scipio, Publius Cornelius, surnamed Africanus, appointed pre- 
sident of the senate by Flaminius, iii. 54. Undertakes to remove 
the Carthaginian war from Italy into Africa, ii. 102. His great 
actions there, 104. He defeats Annibal, 105. Has an inter- 
view with Annibal at Ephesus, iii. 59. They debate who was 
the greatest general in the world, ib. 

, Nasica, son-in-law to Africanus, offers to conduct a party 

round for /Emilius, in order to take Perseus on the more acces- 
sible side, ii. 300. Executes the service with great ability, ib. 
301. An enemy to Tiberius Gracchus, and why, v. 212. Puts- 
Tiberius to death, 219, 220. 

i. , iEmilianus, or the second Africanus, happily formed for 

virtue, valiant, and ambitious of glory, ii. 310, 311. The army 
afraid that he was lost in the action with Perseus, 310. Favours 
the people in his administration, 333. In that respect different 
from his father, ib. Foretells the future greatness of Marius, 
iii. 123. Disobliges the people by opposing the Agrarian law, 
v. 222. Different accounts of his death, i. 95. v. 233. 

- , Metellus, father-in-law to Pompey, iv. 195, 196. Pompey 

assigns him the command in Maccdon, 405. The altercations 
between him and other friends of Pompey about succeeding 
Caesar in the pontificate, 212. He commands the main body in 
the battle of'Pharsalia, 214. He and Cato retire into Africa, 
416, 417. Is received by Juba, king of Mauritania, 417. v. 
106. Is defeated by Caesar at Thapsus, 108. 

INDEX. 503 

Scipio Sallution, a mean person in Caesar's army, Caesar gives him 
the titular command, in order to turn an ancient prophecy on 
his side, iv. 417. 

f Sciradium, promontory of, i. 229. 

Sciras, provides Theseus with a Salaminian pilot, i. 18. 

Sciron, temple of, i. 19. 

, slain by Theseus, i. 11, 31, 32. 

Scirop/iorion, iv. 107. 

Scopas, the Thessalian, a saying of his, ii. 518. 

Scorpions, a military instrument, ii. 412. 

9 seen fighting by Marius on the African coast ; it is 

deemed ominous, iii. 173. 

fScotusa, iii. 39. iv. 213. 

fScottisscea, i. 36. 

Scropha, quaestor to Crnssus, iii. 462. 

f Scyros, isle of, Theseus retires thither, i. 44. Taken by Cimon, 
iii. 303. 

Scytale, what, iii. 212. 

Scytalce, serpents so called, iii. 496. 

Sci/tha, one of the Lacedeemonians sent to Larissa by Agesilaus, 
'iv. 90. 

f Scythians, iii. 481. v. 381. 

Sea. See Caspian and Mediterranean. 

Secession, of the Roman people to the sacred mount, ii. 181. 

Secundus, secretary to Otho, vi. 253. 

Sedition. See Neuters. 

Scisacthia, what, i. 241. 

\Seleucia, upon the Tigris, iii. 358, 472, 478. 

Sdcucus I. surnamed Nicanor, recovers Babylon from Antigonus, 
v. 269. He marries Stratonice the daughter of Demetrius, 395. 
Quarrels with Demetrius, 397. Discovers by means of his 
physician, that his son Antiochus is desperately in love with 
Stratonice, 403. Gives her up to his son, and assigns him a 
considerable territory, 404. Enters into alliance with Ptolemy 
and Lysimachus against Demetrius, 410. Gains over the army 
of Demetrius, and keeps him a prisoner at large, 417, 418. A 
saying of his, 416, 417. 

fSeiiUsia, battle of, iii. 7, 8. 

■fSelybria, taken by Alcibiades, ii. 158. 

f Sempronitis, Tiberius, conssl, ii. 393. Much beloved by the 
people of Rome, ib. Permitted to nominate his own successors, 
ib. 

Iudittrus (or rather Densus),a centurion, without any 

particular obligation to Galba, stands up in his defence, and is 
killed in the attempt, vi. 238, 239. 
S&nater of SpaTta, of what number it consisted, i. 119. The me- 
thod of choosing it's members, 151. Is the principal support of 
the Spartan state, 119. Of Athens, i. 244. v. 373. Of Rome, 
oppose Caius Gracchus with his own weapons, v. 231. 
Senators, Roman, called ' Fathers,' and ' Conscript Fathers,* L 
GS. A hundred members from the Sabines added to their num- 

504 INDEX. 

ber, 82. Judges of all causes, till the Gracchi added an equal 
number of the equestrian order to the bench, v. 228. 

Seneca, in his friendship for Otho, persuades Nero to send him 
into Lusitania, vi. 230. 

Senecio. See Sossius. 

f Senones, i. 378. 

Sentivs, the Roman governor of Macedon, iii. 246. 

Stptempagium, i. 92. 

Sept i mi us, who had served under Pompey, assists in the murther of 
that great man, iv. 227. 

Septimideius, connected with the consul Opimius, v. 241. 

Sequani, iii. ISO. iv. 381. 

Scrnpion, a young man who played with Alexander at tennis, what 
he said to that prince, iv. 381. 

Serapis, iv. 348, 352. His temple and oracle at Babylon, ib. 

Serbonis, an Egyptian marsh, v. 428. 

Sergius, the player, retainer to Antony, v. 434. 

■fSeriphus, i. 338, 339. 

Serpent, the fable of it's tail quarrelling with it's head, iv. 133. 

Serpents, said to be produced from the human marrow, v. 197. 

Sertokius, Quintus, of a respectable family in the town of Nersia, 
and country of the Sabines, iv. 4. Lost his father when a child, 
ib. Had a liberal education given him by his mother Rhea, ib. 
Makes his first campaign under Caepio, against the Cimbri and 
Teutones, ib. Swims the river Rhone in his armour, ib. Acts 
against the same enemy under Marius, and goes amongst them 
as a spy, ib. Goes hi capacity of tribune under Didius into 
Spain, and takes up his winter-quarters in Castulo, 5. The bar- 
barians attack the Romans there, and kill many of them, ib. 
Sertorius gets out of the town, collects some scattered soldiers, 
enters it again, and put the inhabitants to the sword, ib. Dis- 
guises his party in the clothes and arms of the barbarians, 
inarches against the Gyiiscenians, and cuts them off, ib. 6. He 
is appointed qiurstor in the Cisalpine Gaul, where he is very 
active in the cause of Marius, 6. Stands for the office of tri- 
bune of the people, and loses it through the opposition of Sylla's 
faction, ib. Joins Cinna against Octavius, 7. Cinna is beaten 
in the Forum, and forced to quit Rome, ib. He and Sertorius 
collect fresh forces in Italy, ib. Marius returns to Italy, and 
offers to join Cinna, ib. Sertorius opposes it, till he is informed 
that Marius came upon the invitation of Cinna, ib. Remon- 
strates to Mai ins and Cinna against his savage proceedings after 
victory, 8. Destroys Marius' Bardiaeans, ib. After the death 
of the elder Marius, finds the war against Sylla in Italy badly 
carried on, and retires into Spain, ib. 9. Pays toll to the bar- 
barians for his passage over the Pyrenees, 9. His saying upon 
it, ib Finding the Spaniards averse to the Roman government, 
he lowers the taxes, and excuses them from providing quarters 
for the soldiers, ib. Sends Julius Salinator to block up the 
passages of the Pyrenees, 10. Sails for Africa, but the Moors 
refuse to receive him, and he returns to the Spanish coast, ib. 

INDEX. 505 

Lands in the isle of Pityusa, ib. Prepares with some piratical 
vessels to fight Annius, but is prevented by a storm, ib. 11. 
Passes the streights of Gades, and lands in Brctica, 11. 
There meets with some mariners, who give him an account of 
the Atlantic or Fortunate islands, 11. He is desirous to go, and 
live there, 12. The Cilician pirates leave him, and go to re- 
store Ascalis to the throne of Mauritania, ib. He supports 
the Moors against Ascalis, ib. Defeats and kills Paccia- 
nus, ib. Takes the city of Tingis, ib. The Lusitanians invite 
him to take the command among them, 13. The character of 
Sertorius, ib. 14. A little changed, in the later period of his 
life, by his misfortunes, 14. As general of the Lusitanians, 
reduces the native provinces, and numbers come over to hima 
ib. The great use he made of a white hind, which he pretends 
to be a gift from Diana, ib. 15. With a small force carries on 
the war against four Roman generals, 15, 16. Beats Cotta at 
sea, 16. Defeats Phidius in Baetica; Domitius and Lucius Man-? 
litis in the hither Spain; and kills Thoranius, who was sent 
against him by Metellus, 16. Reduces Metellus to such extre- 
mities, that he is forced to call in Lollius to his assistance from 
Gallia Narbonensis ; and Pompey the Great is sent with another 
army from Rome, ib. Metellus marches against the Langobrita?, 
who having but one well in their city, Sertorius sends them two 
thousand skins filled with water, 18. Metellus despatches AqmV 
lius to collect provisions; but Sertorius lays an ambush for him, 
and cuts off the convoy, 18. Sertorius arms and trains the 
Spaniards in the Roman manner, 19. Collects the children of 
the nobility from the several nations of Spain into the city of 
Osca, and gives them masters to instruct them in the Grecian 
and Roman literature, 19. Multitudes lay themselves under 
engagements, if Sertorius should fall in battle, to die with him, 
20. Perpenna arrives in Spain, and his troops insist upon his 
joining Sertorius, ib. Sertorius applies to the senses of the 
Spaniards, by a symbol, recommending to them unanimity, 
perseverance, and obedience to their general, 21, 22. The 
means he took to subdue the Characitani, who dwelt in caves 
upon a mountain in all appearance impregnable, 22, 24. Takes 
the city of Lauron, though Pompey was come to its relief, and 
lay close by him, 24, '25. Beats Pompey in the battle of Sucro, 
26. Loses his hind, but is happy enough to find her again, 27. 
Gives Metellus and Pompey battle on the plains of Saguntum, 
and is defeated, 28. Retires into a fortress, while his officers 
assemble fresh forces, ib. He cuts off the Roman convoys both 
by sea and land, 29. Metellus offers a great reward to any 
Roman who should take him, ib. His vanity upon an advantage 
gained of that general, ib. Forms a senate out of the patricians, 
who had taken refuge with him, 30. His passion to be restored 
to his country, ib. His extreme grief upon the news of the 
death of his mother, ib. 31. The greatness of his behaviour, 
and regard to the dignity of his country, in his treaty with 
Mithridates, 31. Sends him a general, named Marcus Marius, 

506 INDEX. 

32. Perpenna and others cabal against Sertorius, and eafute 
some of the cities of Spain to revolt, ib. 33. Sertorius, 
exasperated at this, puts some of the children of the 
.Spanish nobility to death, and sells others for slaves, 34-. 
Perpenna draws Sertorius, by false pretences, to an entertain- 
ment in his tent, ib. The conspirators take that opportunity to 
despatch him, 35. 

Servile war, iii. 457, 460. v. 55. 

Servilia, sister to Cato of Utica, v. 4-8. Married to Lucullus, and 
divorced for infidelity to his bed, 73. Attends Cato in his expe- 
ditions, 102. Is left with her child at Rhodes, 103. 

, another sister of Cato of Utica, married to Silanus, v. 48> 

7i. 70. 

-, the mother of Brutus, debauched by Caesar, vi. 61. Sends 

Caesar a billet, which is delivered to him in the senate-house, ib. 
Cato insists that the billet is from the conspirators against the 
commonwealth, upon which Caesar shows it him, ib. 

Servilius, the augur, prosecuted by Lucullus for undue proceedings 
in his office, iii. 326. Acquitted, ib. 

■ Ccepio. See Ccepio. 

< Isauricas. See Isauricits. 

, the praetor, sent by the senate to forbid Sylla's ap- 
proaching Rome in arms, is treated by the soldiers with great 
indignity, iii. 243. 

--, upon Pompey's refusing to flatter his soldiers, declares 

him truly great, and worthy of a triumph, iv. 141. 

-, employed by Pompey to guard the Pontic sea, meets 

him at Colchis, iv. 169. 

Marcus, his speech in behalf of Paulus iEmilius, and in 

reply to Servius Galba, ii. 324, 325. 

-- Galba, Cato, at the ageof ninety, accuses him, ii. 513, 514. 

Servius Galba, opposes the granting Paulus iEmilius a triumph, 

ii. 322. 
-■' , a friend of Sylla, is candidate for the consulship, and the 

people reject him, in order to show their disapprobation of Sylla, 

iii. 245. 
Sestius, Publius, what Cicero said to him, v. 324, 325. 
f Sestos, taken from the Athenians by Lysander, iii. 204. 
f Sctia, iv. 425. 
Seven wise men, i. 223. 
Sextilis, month of, iii. 153. 
Sextilius, praetor in Africa, sends a message to Marias, to forbid 

his entrance, iii. 172. 
■ , the praetor, carried off" by pirates, with all the ensigns of 

his dignity, iv. 154. 

--, Lucullus' lieutenant, his exploits, iii. 362, 363. 

Sextius, Lucius, the first consul chosen out of the plebeians, i. 418. 
Sex t us JElius. See JElius. 

Lucinus, thrown, by order of Marius, from the Tarpeian 

ruck, iii. 178, 179. 

« Pompeii!?--. See Pompey the Younger, 

12 

INDEX. 507 

Sextus, nephew to Pompoy, v. 51. 

Sheep, the price of one at Athens in the time of Solon, i. 252. 

Shield that fell from heaven. See Ancyli.i. 

Skip in which Theseus returned from Crete preserved by the Athe- 
nians, i. 26. Affords an example to the philosophers concerning 
the identity of things, ib. Annually sent to Delos, 32, n. 

Sibyls, their books consulted on great emergencies, ii. 70. The 
persons employed to consult them were under the obligation of 
secrecy, ib. The prediction concerning the battle of Chaeronea, 
v. 273. 

f Sicambri, iv. 385. 

f Sicily, i. 21. 

Sicimns Vellutus, one of the first tribunes of the people, ii. 182. 
Opposes the sending a colony to Velitrsc, but is over-ruled by 
C. Marcius Coriolanus, 189. Pronounces sentence of death 
against Marcius, 196. Agrees that Marcius shall have a farther 
trial before the people, upon which Marcius is adjudged tQ 
banishment, 197. 

Sicinius, what he said of Marcus Crassus, iii. 1-56. 

Sicinus, tutor to Themistocles' children, i. 330. Sent privately by 
Themistocles to Xerxes, ib. 

+ S>cyon, i. 171. Rescued by Aratus from tyranqy, iii. 2. vi. 160. 
Joins the Achaean league, ib. 161. Famed for its painters, 164. 

■\ Sidon, v. 4w5. 

-j- Sigluiria, i. 293. 

Silanion, a celebrated statuary, i. 6. Honoured by the Athenians 
for his statue of Theseus, ib. 

Silanns, Junius, elected consul, v. 70, 309. Declares for the 
highest punishment upon the accomplices of Catiline, 71. Qua- 
lifies that declaration, ib. Marries Serviiia, the sister of Caco, 
70. In what respect blamed by Cato, 72. 
■ , Marcus, quits Antony, v. 483. 

Silenus, said to be the son of Apollo, sent to Delphi to demand 
certain oracles, by which Lysander designed to change the Spar- 
tan constitution, iii. 221. 

Silicius, Publius, why proscribed, vi. 82. 

Sillaces, one of the Parthian generals, iii. 4-76. 

Silo, Popedius. See Popcdius Silo. 

f Silvium, iii. 270. 

Similies. See Comparisons. 

Sitnmias, a friend of Philopccmen, iii. 14. 

, the Athenian, ii. 55. 

Simonides, the poet, i. 18, 110. 

Sinudus, the poet, i. 77. 

f Sinnaca, mountains of, iii. 491. 

Sinnis, ' the pine-bender,' slain by Theseus, i. 10, 32. Plis daugh- 
ter Perigune has a child by Theseus, 10. And marries De'io- 
neus, ib. 

■'- Sinopc, delivered from the tyranny of Timesilaiis bv Pericles, who 
sends thither six hundred Athenian colonists, ii. 33. Taken by 
Lucullus, iii. 359. 

.508 INDEX. 

Sinope, the daughter of Asopus, iii. 360. 

f Shut ess a, ii. 431. vi. 245. 

SippiuSy a noted epicure, v. 52. 

Sipylxs, mines of, enrich Pelops, i. 4, n. 

Sims, river, iii. 87. 

Sisenna, the historian, iii. 327. 

Sisimethres, besieged by Alexander upon a rock deemed imprcg* 
nable, iv. 327. 

Sismulia, the monument of those who were killed by an earthquake 
at Sparta, iii. 316. 

Sitting at table, a posture of mourning among the Romans, v. 106. 

Slaves, Spartan. See Helots. 

• , Roman, their liberty during the Saturnalia. See Satur- 
nalia. 

Smyrna, Homer said to have died there, iv. 3. 

Sochares, the Decelean, what he said to Miltiades, iii. 303. 

Socrates, opposes the Sicilian expedition, in consequence of admo- 
nitions from his Good Genius, ii. 136. iii. 419. The purity of 
his love for Alcibiades, ii. 117. Yields to Alcibiadcs the prize 
of valour, 121. Is saved by Alcibiades in the battle of Delium, 
ib. The qualities of his mind, different from what his person 
promised, 501. Admired by Cato the Censor for his behaviour 
in his family, 520. Condemned to die for his philosophy, iii. 
435. His fate like that of Phocion, v. 45. 

-f- Soli, a city of Cyprus, i. 259. iv. 284. 

, a city of Cilicia, iv. 159. 

Solon, the son of Execestides, a deseendent of Codrus, i. 218. 
Connected with Pisistratus, not only by friendship, but by blood, 
ib. His father hurts his fortune, which originally was not 
great, 219. He endeavours to retrieve it by merchandise, 220. 
But has no attachment to riches, farther than they are useful, 
ib. This expressed in some agreeable verses of his, ib. The 
use he made of his poetical talents, 221, 222. Cultivates that 
part of mo;;.! philosophy, which treats of civil obligations, 222. 
Has little knowledge of natural philosophy, ib. Takes Ana- 
eharsis into his friendship, 221. Their conversation concerning 
laws, ib. He is entertained by Thales at Miletus, and asks him 
why he does not marry, ib. 225. The contrivance of Thales 
thereupon, 225. The Megarensians having taken Salamis, a 
decree is passed at Athens, that no attempt should be made -for 
the recovery of it, 227. Solon feigns himself insane, and gets the 
decree repealed, 227. Different accounts of the manner of his 
retaking the island, 228, 229. Solon procures a decree from the 
Amphictyons for chastising the Cirrhasans, who had sacrilegiously 
laid siege to Delphi, 230, 231. Brings the long disputes about 
the affair of Cylori to a conclusion, 231, 232. Prodigies appear, 
and Athens labours under superstitious fears, 233. To rectify 
the disorders, Solon is appointed archon and lawgiver, 236 
Many exhort him to assume regal power, but he declines it, 
236, 237. He cancels debts, and makes an order that for tin- 
future no man should take the bodv of his debtor for security^ 

2 

INDEX.- 509 

2-38. Enlarges measures, and the -value of maney, ib. Unhap- 
pily discovers his design of cancelling debts, to some of his 
friends, who makes a villainous advantage of it, 2:59. Sets the 
first example of the remission of debts, ib. The rich are dis- 
pleased at the cancelling of debts, and the poor at his not making 
an equal division of lands, 240. They are reconciled to him, and 
invest him with full powers of legislation, 241. He repeals the 
laws of Draco, except those concerning murther, ib. Appoints 
four orders of citizens, according to their property, 242. Per- 
sons of superior property to bear offices, ib. He establishes the 
court of Areopagus upon a better footing, 243. Appoints a se- 
nate of four hundred, 244. One of his laws declares the person 
infamous, who stands neuter in time of sedition, 246. His laws 
concerning heiresses, ib. Concerning marriage, 247. Against 
speaking ill of the dead, 248. Against reviling the living on 
certain public occasions, ib. Concerning wills, 249. He regu- 
lates the journevs, mournings, and sacrifices of the women, 249, 
250. Concerning fathers and children, 251. Concerning the 
idle, ib. Some absurdity in his laws concerning women, 252. 
Laws relative to wolves, ib. To welis, planting of trees, and 
raising stocks of bees, 253, 254. To the naturalising of fo- 
reigners, 254. To the going to public entertainments, 255. 
These laws of his were to continue in force for a hundred years, 
ib. He amends the calendar, 256. On his laws taking place, he 
withdraws from the captious importunity of the citizens, and tra- 
vels for ten years, 258. He visits Egypt, and gets an account 
from the priests of the Atlantic island, which he attempts to de- 
scribe in verse, ib. 259. Sails to Cyprus, and is very serviceable 
to one of the kings in building a new city, which is called Soli, 
259. His interview and conversation with Croesus upon happi- 
ness, 260, 261. What iEsop, the fabulist, said to him, 262. 
When Crcesus is on the point of suffering death before Cyrus the 
Great, he calls on the name of Solon, and relates the conversa- 
tion ; which saves his life, ib. 263. The three parties in Attica 
quarrel with each other during Solon's absence. 263. The cha- 
racter of Pisistratus, who was at the head of one of these par- 
ties, ib. 264. He wounds himself, in order to procure a guard, 
265. Solon, who was now returned, opposes it, but in vain, ib. 
Thespi? exhibits in tragedy, ib. Solon's opinion of such exhibi- 
tions, ib. Pisistratus seizes the citadel, and with it absolute 
power, 266. Solon exhorts the Athenians to recover their li- 
berty, but without effect, ib. His answers to those who asked 
him, how he durst speak so freely, 297. Pisistratus observes 
the greatest part of Solon's laws ; upon which, Solon gives him 
some countenance, ib. Solon lives cheerful to thelast, 268. Hii 
ashes said to have been scattered about the isle of Salamis, 269. 
Solon, of Platan, v. 40. 

Soloon, one of the companions of Theseus, in his expedition against 
the Amazons, i. 33. Drowns himself in consequence of his 
hopeless passion for Antiope, ib. The river called by his name, ib. 

510 INDEX 

Sonchis, the Saite, the most learned of the Egyptian priests, gives 
Solon an account of the Atlantic islands, i. 258. 

f Sbphene, country of, iii. 361, 370. 

Stlpkax, son of Hercules by Tinga the widow of Antaeus, builds a 
city which he calls Tingis, after the name of his mother, iv. 13. 

Sophocles; intimate with /Esculapius, i. 172. Carries the prize 
of tragedy from TEschylus, iii. 305. One of his sentiments 
censured, v. 2. A saying of Ins, iii. 422. 

Sordnus, father to Atilia, Cato's first wife, v. 55. 

Sores:, the mimic, one of the people whom Sylla amused himself 
with, iii. 282. 

Sornatius, an officer under Lucullus, defeats a party sent by Mith- 
ridates, that attacked a convoy, iii. 349. Left in Pontus by 
Lucullus, 360. 

Sorpiceus, the month so called, i. 23. 

Sosibhis, minister to Ptolemy Philopator, forms a scheme against 
Cleomenes, v. 190, 192. 

Sosicles, thrust Ariamenes, Xerxes' brave admiral, with his pike 
into the sea, i. 334. 

Sosigenes, a friend of Demetrius Poliorcet.es, v. 417. 

Sosis, the Syracusan, his infamous character, vi. 33. Plots against 
Dion, ib. Condemned by the Syracusans, and capitally pu- 
nished, 34. 

Soso, though sister to Abantidas, the reigning tyrant of Sicyon, 
saves Aratus when a child, vi. 154. 

Sossius, Senecio, a Roman of consular dignity, Plutarch dedi- 
cates his Lives to him, i. 2, n. vi. 2. 

■ , Mark Antony's lieutenant, v. 458. 

Sostratus, a person of great authority in Syracuse, invites Pyrrhus 
into Sicily, iii. 100. Pyrrhus grows jealous of him, and he is 
forced to fly, ib. 

Soteria, a feast in honour of Aratus the deliverer of his country, 
vi. 208. 

Soul, it's immortality, i. 99. Possessed of a self-directing power, ii. 3. 

Soils, king of Sparta, one of the ancestors of Lycurgus, i. 111. 
Under his conduct the Spartans subdue the Helots, ib. lit 
over-reaches the Clitorians, ib. 

Smv, the wild one of Crommyon, i. 10. 

+ Spcnriards, disciplined in the Roman manner, and a number of 
their children educated by order of Sertorius, iv. 18, 19. They 
devoted their lives for their generals, 20. 

Spanus, makes Sertorius a present of a white hind, iv. 14, 15. 

Sparimixes, the eunuch, employed by Parysatis to ruin Mithridates 
the Persian, vi. 130. 

■\ Sparta, the only city where riches had no influence, Plutus being 
there lame as well as blind, i. 126. The whole city, in the re- 
gularity which the inhabitants were obliged to observe, resembled 
one great camp, 149. Or the discipline under which some se- 
vere philosophers lay themselves, 159. Fortitude cultivated 
there more than justice, 154. Luxury enters it along with 

INDEX. 511 

money, v. 137. Oppressed by tyrants, ili. 13. United by Phi- 
lopcemen to the Achaean league, iii. 20. 
Spartacus, the gladiator, originally a Thracian shepherd, but a 
man of great spirit and understanding, iii. 457. The prodigy of 
a snake twining about his face, explained by his wife, ib. He 
escapes by stratagem from a mountain where he was besieged, 
puts the Romans "to flight, and takes their camp, 458. Defeats 
Fui-ius, the lieutenant of Varinus, and Cossonius, Varinus* 
collegue, ib. Makes his way in spite of Lentulus and Cas- 
sius, 459. Beats Mummius, lieutenant to Crassus, 460. Finds 
a method of getting over the wall which Crassus built across the 
peninsula of Rhegium, 461. His subsequent success makes his 
troops refractory, and he is forced to try a general action, ib. 
462. Previous to this he kills his horse, 463. He makes great 
havock of the enemy, kills two centurions with Jus own hands, 
and falls overpowered by numbers, ib. 
f Spartans, the privacy of their commerce with their brides, i. 134. 
The education of their children, 137. The chief end of their 
discipline, what, 138. Their beds, ib. Their thefts, 139. 
Whipped for want of dexterity, if discovered in their thefts, ib. 
The resolution of a young Spartan in suffering a fox which he 
had stolen to gnaw out his bowels, rather than he would be de- 
tected, 140. Their short sayings and sharp repartees, 141, 143. 
Their poetry and music, 144. Sacrifice to the Muses before a 
battle, 146. Nourish their hair and dress it elegantly, 147. 
Their diet better, and discipline less severe in time of war, ib. 
The method of electing their senators, 151, 152. The burials, 
and time of mourning, 153. Their ambuscade, a cruel way of 
lessening the number of the Helots, 154, 155. Applied to by 
the people of other countries for generals, 160. Their youth * 
seasoned with an early desire of glory and dread of disgrace, 
iii. 189. See Lasedcemonians. 
Sparton, the Boeotian general, defeats the Athenians, iv. 93. 
Spectator, paper in, on the story of Isadas, iv. 116, n. 
Spectres. See Apparitions. 
Spendon, a Lacedaemonian poet, i. 156. 
f Sperchins, river, i. 43. 

Speusippus, the philosopher, intimately acquainted with Dion at 
Athens, vi. 16. Dion gave him a piece of pleasure-ground 
when he went to Sicily, 15, 16. 
f Sphacteria, isle of, ii. 129. iii. 407. 

Spluerus, the historian, his account of the number of Lycurgus' 
associates, i. 119. 

— , the Borysthenite, instructs Cleomenes in philosophy, 

v. 156. Assists him in forming the Spartan youth, 166. 
f Spkettus, a borough of Attica, i. 14. 
Sphines, the true name of Calanus, iv. 338. 
Sphinx, an ivory one, given by way of gratuit}r to Hortensius in a 

certain cause, v. 301. Cicero rallies him upon it, ib. 
Sphodrias, the Spartan, of a violent temper, and very capable of 
being flattered, iv. 101. Attempts the Piraeus, ib. 

512 INDEX. 

Sphragiiides, nymphs so called, ii. 476. 

Spicillus, the gladiator, vi. 218. 

Spinther the consul, why he favoured Pompey's appointment to the 
sovereign command for supplying Koine with corn, iv. 188. 

. ■, Domitius, and Scipio, contend for Caesar's pontificate be- 
fore the battle of Pharsalia, iv. 212, 407. 

Spiral form of drawing up an army, iii. 11. 

Spithridates, a Persian officer, killed by Clitus, in the instant that, 
he was aiming a blow at Alexander, iv. 263. 

, the father of Megabates, iv. 78. Brought over to 

the Grecian interest by Lysander, ib. Returns to Sardis, 83. 

Spo/ia Opima, i. 75. ii. 398. 

Springs. See Fountains. 

Spurina, one of Otho's generals, vi. 249. 

Spurius LartiuSy assists in defending the bridge against Porsena, L 
394. See the other Spurii under their family-names. 

-j- Stagirdy the birth-place of Aristotle, iv. 248. Rebuilt at his 
request, ib. 

Staph //us, son of Theseus by Ariadne, i. 22, 23. 

Stars, the opinion of Anaxagoras and other philosophers concern- 
ing them, iii. 200, 201. 

Stasicralcs, an architect, makes a proposal to Alexander to cut 
mount Athos into a statue, iv. 347. 

Statesman, what course he should steer, v. 4, 133. 

Statianus, or Tatianus, one of Antony's officers, killed by the Par- 
tisans, v. 462. 

\ Statilii's. See Statyllius. 

Statira, sister to Mithridates, the fortitude with which she dies, 

111. 3!) 

52. 

— , wife of Darius, treated with great respect by Alexander, 

iv. 271. Her death, 286. 
, daughter of Darius, and wife of Alexander, iv. 344. Mur- 

thered by Itoxana, 353. 

-, wife of Artaxerxes Mnemon, vi. 119. Poisoned by Pary- 

satis the queen-mother, 135. 
Statins Murcus, kills Piso, vi. 240. 
Stator. See Jupiter Stator. 
Slatjjliius, affects to imitate Cato of Utica, v. 116. Would have 

killed himself as Cato did, had he not been prevented, 123. 

A friend of Brutus, ib. vi. 67. His hardy enterprise and death, 

v. 123. vi. 106. 
St. Croix, ' Mysteres du Paganisme,' iii. 343, n. 
Stephen, an experiment of the power of naphtha, made in the pre- 
sence of Alexander, upon his body, iv. 296. 
Stephanas, v. 268. 
Sleshnbrotus, the historian, censured for inconsistency, ii. 26, 39. 

His account of Cimon, iii. 297. 
Sthenis, an orator of Himera, iv. 136. For a frank and bold saying 

of his, he and his fellow-citizens are spared by Pompey, ib. 

, a statuary, iii. 359. 

Slilbides, the diviner, attends Xicias into Sicily, iii. 436. 

INDEX. 515 

Stilpo, the philosopher, tells Demetrius, * he found none that 

wanted to steal any knowledge.,! v. 371. 
Stira, ward of, ii. 153. 
■f Stiris, in Phocis, iii. 295. 
Stoic philosophy, v. 156. 
Stolo. See Licinius. 
Stone, story of a great one falling from heaven, ii. 65, and n. iii. 

200. Of one which fell in Yorkshire, ib. n. 
Strabo the philosopher, iii. 368. 
•, the father of Pompey, hated hy the people as much as his 

son was beloved, iv. 126. 
Straits, of Thermopylae^ v. 385. Of Corinth, ii. 369. Of Salamis, 

i. 330. Of Symbolum, vi. 91. Of Cilicia, iv. 269. 
Stratagems, of Alcibiades, ii. 155, 159. Of Annibal, ii. 74, 80, 

94,95,434. Of Aratus, vi. 157, 181, 182, 189. Of Caesar, iv. 

388. Of Camillus, i. 415. Of Cimon, iii. 321. Of Dion, vi. 

27. Of Eumenes, iv. 47, 50, 60, 61. Of Lucullus, iii. 334, 347.- 

Of Mithridates, 348. Of Nicias, 423. Of the Parthians, v. 

466, 470. Of Sertorius, iv. 22, 25. Of Solon, i. 227. Of 

Spartacus, iii. 458. Of Themistocles, i. 330. Of Tiribazus, vi. 

142, 143. Of Timoleon, ii. 242, 243. 
Strato, the friend of Brutus, said to have assisted him in despatch- 
ing himself, vi. 107. 
Stratocles, the Athenian orator, his impudence and servility, v. 373. 

The extravagant decrees he procured in favour of Antigonus 

and Demetrius, ib. 
Stratonice, favourite concubine to Mithridates, iv. 171. 
, daughter of Demetrius by Phila, v. 395. Married to 

Seleucus, 396. By whom she has a son, 402. Given up by 

Seleucus to his son Antiochus, who was discovered to be de- 
. sperately in love with her, 404. 

-, daughter of Corraeus, and wife of Antigonus, v. 364. 

Straionicus, i. 161. 

Stroibus, a reader to Callisthenes, iv. 322. 

Stn/mon, river, iii. 302. 

Sublician. See Bridge. 

•J- Sucro, river, iv. 146. 

Suetonius Paidinus, one of Otho's generals, vi. 249. 

-|- Sueviy iv. 385. 

Suicide, condemned, v. 188. 

Suilli, why a Roman name, i. 287. 

Sulpitius, or Sulpicius, elected consul, v. 98. 

, a bold and insolent tribune of the people, brings Marius 

into the Forum, and declares him proconsul and general of the 
Mithridatic war, iii. 163, 241, 242, 243. Takes a guard of six 
hundred horse, whom he calls * his anti-senators,' 161. Kills 
the son of Pompeius Rufus, the consul, 164. Condemned 
by the senate, 245. Betrayed by one of his slaves, ib. And 
executed, ib. 

--, Caius, v. 314. 
-, the Interrex, declares Pompey sole consul, iv. 195. 

vol. vi. 2 L 

514 INDEX. 

Sulpitius, who commanded in Macedon, iii. 33. 

•- , Quint us, degraded from the priesthood for an ominous 

accident, ii. 391. 
Sun, eclipses of it, iv. 91. The opinion of astronomers concerning 

it's motion, v. :;i, 4. 
j Sunium, vi. 188. 

Superstition, the great evil of it, iv. 350. 
Sura. See Lent ul us. 

Surena, the Parthian general, iii. 476. His character, 477. The 
privilege of his family to crown the king of Parthia, ib. He 
hides his main force behind the first ranks, 4S0. Defeats Cras- 
sus with great slaughter, 481, 483. Sends proposals of a con- 
ference in order to be informed whether Crassus was retired into 
Carr;e or not, 490. By his artful measures gets Crassus into 
his hands, 493, 494. Sends the head of Crassus to Orodes, 
191. Burlesques the Roman triumph, 495. Produces to the 
senate of Seleucia the books found in the baggage of Roscius, 
which puts the senators in mind of yKsop's wallet, 496. His army 
compared to the serpents called ' Scytake,' id. He is put to 
death by Orodes, 49S. 
Surnames. See Names. 

f Susa, iv. 87. The wealth found there by Alexander, 298. 
Susamilhres, uncle to Pharnahazus, undertakes to despatch Alei- 

biades, ii. 171. 
f Suirium, i. 403. Taken and retaken the same day, 407. 
Svoordmen. See Machcvrionc<. 
Sybaris, one of the daughters of Themistoeles, i. 385. 

t , a city in Lucania, colonised by Pericles, and called Thurii, 

ii. 20. 
Sybarite says, ' It was no wonder that the Spartans freely risked 
their lives, because they had nothing worth living for,' ii. 340, 
341 . 
Sybil, prophecy of, i. 29. 

Sycophant, the original meaning of the word, i. 254. 
Sylla, Lucius Cornelius, the consul Rufinus was one of his ances- 
tors, iii. 230. Born to a scanty fortune, ib. His figure, 231. 
Whence his name of Sylla, ib. Fond of players and jesters, and 
joins in every drollery in company, though grave and austere, 
when he had business to transact, il>. 232. Addicted to 
debauchery through life, 232. Nicopolis, the courtesan, leaves 
him her estate, ib. His mother-in-law does the same, ib. He 
goes quaestor with Marius into Africa, ib. Gains great honour 
in the military department, ib. Makes a friend of Bocchus, king 
of Upper Numidia, ib. Bocchus delivers up Jugurtha to him, 
233. Marius is jealous of his fame, ib. That jealousy is in- 
creased by the signet which Sylla makes use of, ib. Yet Marius 
continues to employ him in his wars, ib. Sylla takes Copillus, 
r' ief of the Tectora^.e, prisoner', ib. Persuades the Marsi to 
declare for the Romans, ib. Acts under Catulus, the collegue 
of .Marius, 2">4. Procures provisions for the camps both of 
■ :;ulus and Marius,?'//. Anniies for the praetorahip, and loses 

INDEX. 515 

it, id. Gains it the next year, 235. Casar tells him, he bought 
it, ib. Re-establishes Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia, and restrains 
Mithridates in his progress of power, ib. Is the first Roman, 
who received an embassador from Parthia, ib. A person in the 
train of that mbassador foretells his future greatness, 236. Cen- 
sorinus prepares to accuse him of extortion, but does not proceed, 
ib. The quarrel between Sylla and Marius breaks out afresh, 
on occasion of Bocchus' erecting certain statues in the Capitol, 
ib. Sylla performs great things in the confederate war, ib. His 
enemies represent him, rather as a fortunate than a great general, 
2^7. He glories in being the favourite of fortune, ib. Advises 
Lucullus to attend to the visions of the night, 238. Has many 
inconsistencies in his character, ib. Overlooks the crime of his 
soldiers in killing Albinus, one of his lieutenants, 239. Elected 
consul with Quintius Pompeius, when he was fifty years of age, 
ib. Marries Caecilia, the daughter of Metellus, the chief pon- 
tiff, ib The names of others of his wives, ib. 240. Ambitious 
of the conduct of the Mithridatic war, ib. Finds a rival for that 
post in Marius, ib. Pompeius Rufus and Sylla order a cessa- 
tion of all public business, 242. Sylla is compelled by Sulpi- 
tius to revoke it, ib. The son of Pompeius is killed, and Sylla 
saves his life by escaping into the house of Marius, ib. Sylla 
gets to the camp before Marius' officers, and they are stoned, 
ib. 24*3. Marius plunders, and puts to death the friends of Sylla 
in Rome, 243. Sylla marches to Rome, ib. Attacks it with fire 
and sword, 244. Assembles the senate, and gets Marius and 
Sulpitius condemned to death, 245. Sets a price upon the head 
of Marius, ib. The people reject his nephew Nonius, in his 
application for the consulship, ib. His saying upon it, ib. 
He proposes Cinna, who was of the opposite faction, for the 
consulship ; but first makes him swear to do nothing against, 
him, ib. Cinna is no sooner elected, than he impeaches Sylla, 
246. Sylla leaves the impeachment behind him, and sets for- 
ward against Mithridates, ib. On the arrival of Sylla in Greece, 
all the cities, except Athens, submit to him, 247. He besieges 
Athens, which was held by the tyrant Aristion for Mithridates, 
ib. Cuts down the groves of the Academy and the Lyceum, •/£. 
Violates the treasures of Greece, and spares not even the tem- 
ples, ib. His saying upon Caphis' scrupling to touch those of 
Delphi, 248. Aristion insults him and Metellus from the 
walls, 249. Sylla scales the walls near the Heptachalcos, 250, 
He pulls down part of the wall, and enters the town at midnight. 
ib. A dreadful slaughter ensues, which Sylla at last stops, ib. 

251. What he said on that occasion, 251. Sylla likewise takes 
the Piraeus, and lays most oY it in ashes, 'ib. Taxiles, the 
enemy's general, moves down from Thrace with a great army, 

252. Sylla marches into Rceotia, for the sake of provisions, ib. 
Hortensius joins him with a reinforcement from Thessaly, ib. 
His army but a handful in comparison of the enemy, 253." He 
keeps close in his entrenchments, and the enemy straggle off, ib, 
He tries whether labour would not make his troops more willing 

2 l 2 

516 INDEX. 

to face danger, and it has it's effect, 254. Orders them to seize 
a difficult post sword In hand, ib. Archelaus moves against Chae- 
ronea, and Sylla sends it succours, ib. Out of prodigious num- 
bers of the enemy, only ten thousand reach Chalets, while Sylla 
misses only fourteen men, 259. He inscribes his trophies to 
* Mars, Victory, and Venus,' ib. Celebrates games at Thebes, 
260. Takes from the Thebans their territories, ib. Marches to 
oppose Flaccus, but returns upon intelligence that Dorylaus had 
entered Beeotia, with Mithridates' best troops, ib. That general 
accuses Archelaus of treachery ; but after some slight skirmishes 
with Sylla, agrees with Archelaus that the war ought to be pro- 
tracted, ib. 261. Metella comes from Rome with an account 
that China and Carbo, beside other outrages, had burnt Sylla's 
houses, 262. Archelaus proposes a peace, 263. The conditions on 
which Sylla grants it, ib. 264-. Mithridates demurs, and desires 
to be excused as to certain articles, 264. The rather, because 
Fimbria, who had killed the consul Flaccus, was marching against 
him, 265. But Sylla, who has an interview with him at Darda- 
nus, obliges him to ratify the whole, 266. He reconciles Ario- 
barzanes and Nicomedes to him, ib. Mithridates delivers up to 
him seventy of his ships and five hundred archers, ib. Sylla 
inarches against Fimbria, who was encamped at Thyatira, ib. 
Fimbria's troops go over to Sylla, and Fimbria kills himself, ib. 
Sylla lays a fine upon Asia of twenty thousand talents, and com- 
pels the people to quarter his soldiers at a vast expense, ib. He 
sails to Athens, where he is initiated in the Mysteries of Ceres, 
267. Carries thence the library of Apellicon, in which 
were the works of Aristotle and Theophrastus, ib. Having 
something of the gout, he goes to the warm bath at TEdepsus, 
267. Encourages the Alaeans to rebuild their city, 268. Goes 
to Apollonia, where a satyr is brought to him from a place called 
Nymphreum, ib. Is afraid that his troops will disperse as soon as 
they reach Italy ; but they voluntarily come, and take an oath to 
stand by him to the last, 269. Has to cope with fifteen generals 
In Italy, who have under them twenty-five legions, ib. Several 
presages of his being victorious, ib. He defeats young Marius, 
and Norbanus the consul, 270. Other predictions and presages, 
ib. Marcus Lucullus, one of Sylla's lieutenants, defeats the 
enemy with a very inferior force, ib. Sylla corrupts Scipio's 
soldiers, under pretence of treating of peace, 271. Beats Ma- 
rius, now consul, and kills ten thousand men, with the loss only 
of twenty-three, 272. His lieutenants are everywhere victorious, 
ib. Sylla's last conflict is with Telesinus the Samnite, whom he 
overcomes with difficulty^ ib. 273, 274. Sylla wears in all his 
battles a golden image of Apollo, 274. His address to it on 
this occasion, ib. The remains of the broken faction send depu- 
ties to him at Antenma, and he promises them impunity on cer- 
tain conditions ; but, after they had performed the conditions, 
destroys them in cold blood in the Circus at Rome, 275. The 
senate, which he is haranguing, listens with terror to their encs, 
ib. What be said upon it, ib. He fills the city with massacre.', 

9 

INDEX. 517 

276. C. Metellus ventures to ask him, when there would he an 
end of them, ib. His proscriptions and confiscations, 277. His 
cruelty to the people of Procneste, 278. The noble behaviour of 
one of Sylla's friends in that city, ib. Catiline having killed his 
own brother, Sylla, at his request, puts him among the proscribed, 
ib. Sylla declares himself dictator, ib. Makes Pompey divorce 
his wife Antistia, and marry his daughter-in-law ^Emilia, 279. 
Lucretius Osella, who had acted as his lieutenant against Praeneste, 
aspires to the consulship without his consent, and is killed by his 
order, ib. Sylla leads up his triumph, in which the restored 
exiles make the most agreeable appearance, ib. Takes the addi- 
tional name of Felix, 280. Gives the name of Faustus and 
Fausta to the twins he had by Metella, ib. Lays down the 
dictatorship, ib. Dedicates the tenth of his substance to Her- 
cules, 281. Metella dies, and he marries Valeria, ib. 282. Falls 
into the Lousy Disease, 282. Circumstances preceding his 
death, 283. His burial and epitaph, 284. 

Sylla, Sextius, the Carthaginian, i. 71. 

Syllanian Jupiter. See Jupiter. 

Syllis, a poem so called, vi. 16. 

Sylvia, Ilia, or Rhea, daughter of Numitor, and mother of Romu- 
lus and Remus, i. .52. 

-}- Symbol 'urn, vi. 91. 

Syualus, governor of Minoa, vi. 25. A friend of Dion, ib. 

Syucecia. See Metcecia. 

Syphax. See Sophax. 

f Syracusans, their war with the Athenians, iii. 423. Decoyed to 
Catana by Nicias, ib. Instead of fifteen generals, elect three, 
whom they invest with a discretionary power, 424. Draw a cross 
wall from the city to hinder the Athenians from finishing theirs, 
426. Ready to capitulate when Gylippus arrives, 427. Give 
the Athenians a total defeat under the conduct of Gylippus, 437, 
438. Keep a festival in memory of his taking Nicias prisoner, 
442. Delivered by Dion from the tyranny of Dionysius, vi. 36. 
Their ingratitude to Dion, 37. Recall that deliverer, 42 Their 
miserable state after his death, ii. 232. Their affairs retrieved by 
Timoleon, 260, et seq. 

■j- Syracuse, a Corinthian colony, ii. 233. vi. 40, n. Besieged by 
the Romans. See Marcettus. 

f Syrians, said to be descended from Syrus the son of Apollo, and 
the nymph Sinope, iii. 360. 

Syrmus, king of the Triballi, Alexander defeats him soon after his 
accession, iv. 255. 

Syrtis, vi. 25. 

Syrus, son of Apollo, iii. 360. 

T. 

TABLE, Cato the Censor thought it the properest place for the 
forming of friendships, ii. 529. Cato's agreeable behaviour at 

SIS INDEX. 

bis own table, ib. He would suffer no evil to be spoken at it by 

any man whatever, ib. 
Table-talk, excellence of that of the ancients, and meanness of 

that of tbe moderns, I. xliv. 
Tables of silver, of which Caius Gracchus was possessed, v. 

201. 
Taclios, tbe Egyptian, entertains Agesilaus in his service, iv. 117. 

Leaves A gesilaus only tbe command of tbe mercenaries, 118. 

Agesilaus goes over from him to Nectanabis, 119. Tachos, 

thus deserted, takes to flight, 120. 
Tacita, the muse to whom Numa pays his homage, i. 179. 
Tactics, iii. 6. 

| TcRuarus, iv. 153. v. 35, 490. 
f Togas, river, iv. 22. 
Talasius, a young Roman of note at the time of the rape of the 

Sabine virgins, i. 71. 
Talasio, tbe nuptial acclamation supposed to be first used on his 

account, i. 71. 
f Talaura, iii. 352. 
f Tanagra, ii. 17, 359. iii. 3 IS. 
f Tamils, river, iv. 311. 
f Taphnsiris, v. 511. 
Tarcheiius, king of Alba, i. 51. 

Tar condemns, king of Upper Cilicia, is in Antony's army, v. 484. 
\ Tarentines, call in Pyrrhus to their assistance against the Romans, 

iii. 82. One of their citizens warns them of the restraint under. 

which they would be laid, ib. Their archers, v. 160. 
f Tarentnm, recovered from Annibal by Fabius Maximus, by means 

of a woman, ii. 96, 97. Fabius said, ' he would leave that city 

it's angry gods,' 98. 
Tarpeia, betrays the Capitol to the Sabines, who promise her what 

they wore upon their left arms, i. 76, 77. She dies overwhelmed 

by their shields, 77. 
i ■ , a Vestal virgin, admitted at Numa's second consecration, 

i. 184. 
Tarpcian rock, whence so called, j. 78. Subsequently tbe Capitol, 

176. 
farpeius entrusted by Romulus with the defence of the Capitol 

against Tatius, i. 76. According to Juba the historian, guilty 

of betraying it, ib. 
Tarquhiia, the Vestal virgin, said by some to have given a field to 

the public, which was afterward called the Campus Martius, i. 

281. How honoured with the gift, ib. 
Tarquinius, son of Demaratus, according to some authors, the 

first who triumphed in a chariot, i. 76. 
* Super/jus, either son or grandson of Tarquinius the son 

of Demaratus, i. 290. Attains the Roman crown in an iniquitous 

manner, and governs like a tyrant, 271. Expelled on his son's 

committing a rape upon Lucretia, 272. Sends to Rome, to 

demand his goods, 274. Finds shelter with the Tuscans, who 

send him back with a numerous army, 282. Is defeated, and 

INDEX. 519 

Ms son Aruns slain, 282. Retires to L-arus Porsena at Clusium, 
293. Refuses to refer his cause to Porsena, 293. 

t Tarracina, iii. 166, 169. 

Tarrutius, marries Acca Larehtia, i. 55. 

t Tarsus, v. 414. 

Tarutius calculates the day and hour of Romulus' nativity, from 
the circumstances and actions of his life, i. 65. 

Tatia, daughter of Tatius and wife of Numa, i. 169. 

Talienses, the name of one of the tribes at Rome, i. 83. 

Tatius, general for the Sabines against the Romans, i. 76. Gives 
the Romans battle, upon which the matrons interpose, 80. 
Reigns in conjunction with Romulus, 82. Killed, as he was 
sacrificing with Romulus at Lavinius, 89* Buried in an ho- 
nourable manner on mount Aventine, ib. 90. 

Taureas, ii. 134. 

Taurion, or Faurion, vi! 207. 

\ Tauromenium, ii. 245. 

Taurus, general and prime minister in Crete, i. 16. His connex- 
ion with Pasiphae, 20. Vanquished by Theseus, in the games 
which Minos exhibited, ib 

| Taurus, mount, iii. 362. v. 414, 415. 

, commands Augustus' land-forces, v. 487. 

Tax, paid by the Greeks for carrying on the Persian war, ii. 483. 

Taxes, in Greece trebled in sixty years' time, ii. 484. 

Taxiles, MithriJates' general, comes down from Thrace and Mace- 
don, to join Archelaus, iii. 252. Defeated by Muracna, Sylla's 
lieutenant, 259. . Sent by Mithridates to Tigranes, to advise 
him to avoid a general action with the Romans, 364. His 
answer to Tigranes, who observed to him, that the Romans were 
flying, 366. ' 

, one of the king* of India, the extent of his dominions, 

iv. 328. His sensible address to Alexander, and that prince's 
answer, ib. 329. Gives and receives presents, 329. 

fTaggetus, mount, i. 135. v. 110. 

Teckuoii, a servant of Aratus, vi. 171, 172. 

Tectosagce. Sylla, when lieutenant to Mari-us, takes Copillus, 
chief of the Tectosagae, prisoner, iii, 233. 

■\ Tegea, i. 40. v. 146, 177.. 

Tegeatce, ii. 476. 

f Tegyrce, battle of, described, ii. 361. , This battle a prelude to 
that of Leuctra, 359. 

Tcius, Marcus, or rather Ateius, iii. 250, 

Telamon, grandson of Sciron, i. 11. 

J- , a port of Etruria, iii. 173. 

Teleclides, his verses, in which he describes the power of Peri- 
cles among the Athenians, ii. 28. His saying of Nicias, iii» 
403. 

Telemachus, father of Latinus, j. 51. 

, the Corinthian, ii. 246. 

Tehontes, an Athenian tribe, i. 253, 

Telcphus, the son of Hercules, i. 50. 

520 INDEX. 

Telesides, one of the auxiliaries whom the Syracusans commission- 
ed to go to Dion, vi. 39. 
Telesinus, the Samnite, his operations against Sylla, iii. 272, 273. 

He decamps in the night, and marches to Rome, 273. 
Telesippa, a courtesan above the condition of a slave, Alexander 

assists a private soldier in his application to her, iv. 306. 
Telestus, the poet, iv. 250. 

Teleutias, half-brother to Agesilaus, appointed admiral, iv. 95. 
Tellus, the Athenian, preferred by Solon in point of happiness to 

Croesus, i. 261. 

, her temple, vi. 73. 

f Tclmesus, iv. 2 10. 

•J- Tempe, the charms of that vale described, iii. 34. Pompey 

passes through it after the battle of Fhar*alia, iv. 220. 
f Tenchteri, iv. 384. Defeated by Caesar, ib. 
-j Tencdos, iii. 331. 
■f Teos, i. 311?. 
Ter alius, i. 51. 
Terentia, the wife of Cicero, meddles with politics, v. 316. Proud 

and uneasy in her temper, 328. Hates Clodius, 327. Neglects 

Cicero in his banishment, 343. Divorced, ib. 
Terentius Varro. See Varro. 
• — Culeo, the tribune, persuades the people to give orders 

for the admission of many persons to the right of citizens, iii. 54. 
Lucius, conspires against Pompeius Strabo and his son, 

iv. 128.' 

-, said to be the person who killed Galba, vi. 239. 

Termerian Mischief, a proverbial expression, i. 12. 

Termerus, slain by Hercules, i. 12. 

f Termia, the last day of life so called, i. 12, n. 

Terminus, the god of boundaries, a temple built to him by Numa, 

i. 195. His sacrifices, what, 196. 
f Termione, i. 12, n. 
Terpander the poet, i. 145, 156. v. 143. 
Tertia, the little daughter of Paulus iEmilius ; her saying, \ Perseus 

is dead,' considered as a lucky omen, ii. 293. 

: — , sister to Clodius, v. 328. 

Tesserarius, the person who carried the Word in the Roman army, 

vi. 235. 
Testaments, or Wills, i. 249. 
Tethys, her oracle. See Oracle. 
■\ Te'trapolis, a district of Attica, i. 14. 
Teucer, one of the accusers of Alcibiades, ii. 141. 
Teuta^us, one of the principal officers of the Argyraspides, iv. 61. 

Conspires against Eumenes, ib. 
■\Teutones and Cimbri invade Italy, iii. 132. Defeated by Marius, 

145, 146. See Cimbri and Marius. 
Theenon, one of the principal persons in Syracuse, ungratefully put 

to death by Pyrrhus, iii. 100. 
Thais, the courtesan, Ptolemy's mistress, persuades Alexander to 

burn Persepolis, iv. 300. 

INDEX. 521 

Thakea, the first Roman wife who had any quarrel with her mo- 
ther-in-law, i. 214. 

■fThalamice, v. 141. • 

Thales, one of the Seven Wise men, i. 223. Goes upon mercantile 
business into Asia, 222. The first who extended his inquiries 
beyond matter necessary for practice, ib. 

— , the lyric poet, i. 114. 

Thnllus, the son of Cineas, his valour, v. 16. 

Thanksgivings and festivities by the Romans, iv. 383. 

f Thapsacus, iv. 341. 

■\Thapsus, iii. 425. iv. 418. v. 108. 

Thargelia, ii. 36. 

Thargelion, month of, ii. 163. v. 370. 

Tharrytas, king of the Molossians, iii. 66. 

f Thasians, beaten in a sea-fight, iii. 313. 

Thasian marble, v. 58. 

f Thasos, ii. 26. vi. 91. 

Theagenes, commander of the Thebans against Philip in the battle 
of Chaeronea, iv. 257. Falls in that battle, ib. The noble be- 
haviour of his sister, ib. 

Theano says, * She is a priestess for prayer, but not for execration,' 
ii. 145. 

Thearidas, the Megalopolitan, v. 180. 

Theatrical Entertainments, i. 264, 265. iv. 284. v. 23, 95, 96, 166, 
167. 

f Thebans, suspected by the Lacedaemonians, after they had dis- 
tinguished themselves as auxiliaries to that people in the first 
battle of Mantinea, ii. 345, 346. Their decree in favour of the 
Athenians, who were oppressed by the Thirty Tyrants, iii. 222, 
223. Their gallant behaviour in the battle of Chaeronea, and 
retreat after it, iv. 92. Invade Laconia, 110. Pass the Euro- 
tas, 111. Lay siege to Sparta, ib. Revolt from Alexander, 
255. The terrible revenge taken by Alexander, 256. The best 
soldiers in Greece, v. 272. 

Thebe, daughter of Jason, and wife of Alexander the tyrant of 
Pherae, ii. 375. Compassionates the sufferings of Pelopidas, and 
visits him in prison, ib. Conspires against her husband, and 
assists in killing him, 386, 387. 

f Thebes, it's citadel, the Cadmea, seized by Phoebidas the Lace- 
daemonian, iv. 99. Twice taken by Demetrius Poliorcetes with- 
in a short period, v. 405, 406. 

Themis, oracle of, i. 51, n. iv. 320. 

\ Themiscyrce, iii. 345. 

Themistocles, the son of Neocles an inferior citizen of Athens, 
i. 311. His mother a foreigner, ib. Consequently deemed ille- 
gitimate by the laws of Athens, ib. Declares that * the trophies 
of Miltiades would not suffer him to sleep,' 9, 315. Persuades 
several of the nobility to take their exercise among the illegitimate 
at Cynosarges, 312. Related to the Lycomedians, ib. His 
natural qualities, ib. What his tutor said of him, ib. Not 
acute in learning the politer arts, ib. The names of his masters, 

522 INDEX. 

313. The irregularities of his youth, 311. The emblem, by 
which his father endeavoured to deter him from aiming at a share 
in the administration, ib. His great ambition, ib. His diffe- 
rence with Aristides, ib. Foresees the Persian war, 315. Ma- 
nages the publie treasury with prudence, ib. 316. Persuades 
the Athenians to build ships, 316. Why he heaps up riches, 
317. Draws much company to his house, by entertaining an 
excellent lyrist, ib. Keeps a magnificent equipage, 318. Ex- 
hibits a tragedy at his own expense,//;. Beloved by the com- 
mon people, ib. What passed between him and Simonides the 
poet, ib. 319. Gives Epieydes money, to engage him not to 
apply for the command, 319. Puts the interpreter of the Per- 
sian embassadors to death, 320. Gets Art h mi us degraded, ib. 
liaised to the command by the Athenians, ib. Persuades them 
to quit the city, and embark on board their ships, ib. Gives 
up the chief command of the confederates to Eurybiades, and 
thereby saves Greece, 321. Prevents Architelts from quitting 
the fleet, 322. The action at Artemisium, 323. His stratagem 
with regard to the Ionians, 324. The artifice, by which he drew 
the Athenians to the ships, 325, 326. His interpretation of the 
nracle concerning Salamis, 326. The means which he made use 
of to get money for the embarkation, 327. He procures a de- 
cree for recalling Aristides, 32S. His answer to Eurybiades, ib. 
329. Retort upon an insolent officer, and on a certain Eretrian, 
329. His stratagem to prevent the confederates from separating, 
S30. Xerxes, in consequence of a private message from The- 
mistocles, gives orders that the Greeks should be surrounded in 
the straits of Salamis, ib. 331. What passed between Aristides 
and Themistocles upon that occasion, 331. Themistocles sacri- 
fices three Persian captives to Bacchus Oinestes, 332. Happy 
in the choice of time, as well as place, for engaging, 333. The 
battle of Salamis, ib. et seq. Themistocles sounds Aristides, 
about breaking down the bridge over the Hellespont, 336. 
Aristides' answer, ib. Themistocles, under pretence of friend- 
ship, advises Xerxes to fly, before his bridge over the Hellespont 
is broken down, 337. Among the cities, .Egina bears away the 
palm, and among the commanders, Themistocles, ib. How 
honoured at Sparta, and at the Olympic games, ib. 338. His 
sayings, 338, ct &cq. He amuses the Spartans, while the Athe- 
nians rebuild their walls, 340. Fortifies the Piraeus, ib. En- 
courages trade and navigation, which greatly advance the de- 
mocratic party, ib. 341. Places the Rostrum in Pnyx, so as to 
face the sea, 341. Forms a design to increase the naval strength of 
Athens, ib. Is ordered to communicate it to Aristides, ib. The 
Athenians reject it, because it is an unjust one, ib. Ilis advice pre- 
ponderates against a proposal of the Lacedaemonians, in the as- 
sembly of the Amphictyons, 342. Incurs their hatred on that ac- 
count,and that of the other alliesby hisexactions, ib. What he said 
to the people of Androsand their answer, ib. 343. Envied by the 
Athenians, and obliged frequently to recount his own services, 34 k 
Offends them farther by building the temple of Diana Aristobcle, 

INDEX. 523 

l!>. From his statue in this temple, it appeared that his aspect was 
as heroic as his soul, ib'. He is banished by the Ostracism, ib. 
Refuses to join the plot of Pausanias, but does not discover it, 
345. Accused of being an accomplice in it, ib. His defence 
by letter, ib. The Athenians send persons to seize him, but 
he escapes to Corcyra, ib. 346. Flies thence to the court of 
Admetus, king of the Molossians, who lied long been his 
enemy, ib. Embarks at Pydna for Asia, 347. His danger 
near Naxos, whither he was driven by a storm, ib. Part of 
his treasures conveyed to him by his friends, and the rest con- 
fiscated, 348. He arrives at Cuma, where he finds a proclama- 
tion of the king of Persia's, offering a reward of two hundred 
talents for apprehending him, ib. Flies thence to ./Egre, where 
he is concealed by his friend Nicogenes, ib. His dream, in 
consequence of which he flies to the Persian court, ib. 
349. The manner of his conveyance, 349. His address to 
Artabanus, 3.50. His speech to the king, 351. He re- 
lates to the king his vision, and an oracle he had from Do- 
dona, ib. The joy his arrival gave the king, 352. The cour- 
tiers treat him with rancour, ib. But at his second audience, 
the king speaks to him graciously, tells him he owed him two 
hundred talents, promises him many other favours, and asks him 
what he had to propose concerning Greece, ib. He desires a 
year to learn the Persian language, 353. The great honours 
conferred upon him by the king, and his free intercourse with 
him, ib. He is instructed in the learning of the magi, ib. The 
king is reconciled to Demaratus the Lacedaemonian, at the re- 
quest of Themistocles, ib. Gives the latter three cities for his 
maintenance, 354. What Themistocles said to his children, ib. 
Epixyes governor of the Upper Phrygia, employs persons to 
assassinate him, ib. He is informed of it in a dream, in conse- 
quence of which he builds a temple to Cybele Dindymene, and 

• consecrates his daughter Mnesiptolema to her service, 355. Asks 
the governor of Lydia's permission to transmit to Athens a sta- 
tue of brass which he found in Sardis, ib. 356. The governor 
threatens to inform the king of it, 356. After this he behaves 
with more prudence, and lives long in great security in Mag- 
nesia, ib. On the revolt of /Egypt, and the great advantages gained 
by Cimon at sea, the king calls upon Themistocles to take the 
direction of an expedition, ib. His reasons for declining that 
command, ib. 357. He puts a period to his life by drinking bull's 
lood, 357. His age, and children, by his two wives, ib. 358. 
"H Magnesians erect a monument to his memory, and continue 
the ^hnours and privileges granted his posterity, down to Plu- 
tarch Stjme> 358. Verses in the nature of an epitaph, 359. 

Thenses, tijj chariots in which the images of the gods were carried 
in process!^ jj, ^06. 

Tkeodectes, ot "iaseliS) the honours paid by Alexander to his sta- 
tue, iv. 265- 

Tkeodorus, accused >c joining Alcibades in his burlesque on tha 
Mysteries, ii. 139, % & x 

521. INDEX. 

Theodorus, the Athenian high-priest, ii. 163. 

, the Tarentine, disgraeed by Alexander for his infamous 

traffic, iv. 272, 27:). 

, the atheist, v. 44. 

-, tutor to Antyilus the son of Antony, his villainy, and 

punishment, v. .502. 

Thcodotcs, vi. 12. 

T/ifodoliis, of Chios, his advice to Ptolemy to take away the life of 
Pompey the Great, iv. 225. Flies, and lives a wretched vaga- 
bond, 229. Put to death at last by Brutus, ib. 

TheomnestuSy the Academic, vi. 78. 

Theophanes, the Lesbian, supposed to have censured Rutilius the 
historian unjustly, iv. 172, 173. His opinion, that it was best 
for Pompey to retire into Egypt, 224. A saying of Cicero's 
concerning him, v. 340. 

TheopMks.i the father of Hipparchus, v. 490, 491. 

, made Alexander's helmet, iv. 291. 

Tfaeaplwustus, i. IS, n. His observation concerning Demosthenes 
and Demacks, as orators, v. 263. Leaves his works to Neleus, 
iii. 267. 

_ - , refusing to quit Corinth, is put to death by Aratus, 

vi. 175. 

Thcopcrrrpas, king of Sparta, inserts a clause in the Rhetra, to pre- 
vent the people from altering or corrupting any law, i. 120. A 
saying of ins, 121. 

i , the T heban, joins Pelopidas in his enterprise for the 

recovery of liberty, ii. 349. 

the Spartan general, killed in the battle of Tegyra?, 

ii. 361. 

of Cnidos, the fabulist, iv. 412. Caesar enfranchises 

the Cnidians at his request, ib. 

-, unjust in accusing Demosthenes of unsettled princi- 

ples with respect to the commonwealth, v. 266. 
Theori, a sacred title, v. 373. 
7'heoria, what, iii. 401. 
Theoris, the priestess, Demosthenes accuses her of teaching the 

slaves to cheat their masters, v. 268. She is put to death for 

that and other enormities, ib. 

, ii. 114. 

Theramenes, the son of Agnon ; the Athenians, by his advice, sub- 
mit to the Spartan injunction to pull down their Long Walls, iii. 

205. Why surnamed < the Buskm,' 399. v. 341. 
Thericion, v. 162. 

f Thermodon, a river of Pontus, iii. 345. 
f , a small river near Chacronea, anciently so cdled, but 

afterward Hamion, i. 36. v. 273. 
Thermopylee. See Straits. 
T her sip pus, i. 267. 
Therycion, advises Cleomenes to retire from th storm which beat 

upon him, into the harbour of death, *r« 187. Despatches 

himself, 188. 

INDEX, 52S 

f Thesea, i. 6, 44. 

Thcscan feasts, i. 6. 

Thcse'is, a kind of tonsure, i. 7. 

Theseus, sera in which he flourished not well ascertained, i. 2, n. 
Answers to Romulus in many particulars, 3. Descended hy the 
father's side from Erechtheus, and by his mother, from Pelops, 
3, 4. Pittheus, founder of Troczene, was his grandfather by 
the mother's side, 4. iEgeus, afterward the father of Theseus, 
receives an oracle at Delphi, and applies to Pittheus for the in- 
terpretation of it, 5. Theseus, why so named, 6. Brought up 
by Pittheus, ib. His tutor Connidas honoured with sacrifices by 
the Athenians in the Thesean feasts, ib. He cfftrs the first-fruits 
of his hair to Apollo at Delphi, but shaves only the fore-part of 
his head, 6. Reported to be the son of Neptune, 7- Takes up 
the tokens of his origin, ib Chooses to go to Athens by land, 
though the roads were infested by ruffians, ib. 8. Emulates the 
actions of Hercules, to whom he was nearly related, 9. Deter- 
mines to injure no one, but to take vengeance of such as should 
offer him violence, ib. Attacked by Periphetes, surnamed Co- 
rynet.es or ' the Club-bearer,' whom he slays, and then takes the 
club for his weapon, ib. Destroys Sinnis the pine-bender, 10. 
Has a son named Melanippus, by Perigune the daughter of 
Sinnis, ib. Kills a wild sow named Pha?a, ib. Destroys Sciron, 
a famous robber, 11. Engages in wrestling with Cercyon, and 
kills him on the spot, 12. Despatches Damastes, surnamed 
Procrustes, in the same manner as he had despatched others, ib. 
Meets with the first instance of hospitality from the descendents 
of Phytalus, and is purified by them, ib. 13. Einds Athens and 
the family of iEgeus in great distraction, 13. Medea per- 
suades iEgeus to poison him at an entertainment ; but Theseus 
preparing to carve with his sword, JEgeus knows him to be his 
son, ib. TEgeus acknowledges him before the people, ib. The 
Pallantida? commence hostilities, but are defeated through the 
treachery of a herald named Leos, 14. Theseus goes against 
the Marathonian bull, brings him alive to Athens, and sacrifices 
him to the Delphinian Apollo, ib. 15. Is entertained by Hecale, 15. 
The tribute is demanded by the Cretans the third time, on ac- 
count of Androgeus having been slain in Attica, ib. The tribute 
consisted of seven young men and as many virgins, 16. The 
Minotaur and Cretan labyrinth, what, ib. The Athenians ex- 
pressing their resentment that ^getts, who was the cause of 
their misfortunes, took no share in them, Theseus offers himself 
as one of the seven, 17. The ship is sent out with a black sail, 
18. fibt a white one is also given the pilot, to be hoisted, if he 
brought Theseus safe back, ib. Theseus said to have a pilot 
from Salamis, because the Athenians had not as yet applied 
themselves much to navigation, ib. 19. Makes an offering for 
himself and his companions to the Delphinian Apollo, 19. 
Commanded bv the oracle to take Venus for his guide', ib. On 
his arrival in Creto, Ariadne falls in love with him, and gives 
him a clue of thread, by which he might pass and repass through 

£26 INDEX. 

the labyrinth, 20. He kills the Minotaur, and carries off Arf- 
adneand the young Athenians, ib. Other accounts of Theseus' 
expedition to Crete, ib. — 23. He puts in at Delos, and sacrifices 
to Apollo, 23. Whence the annual deputation of" the Athenians 
to Delos, ib. n. On his approach to Attica, forgets to hoist the 
white sail, 2k /Egeus throws himself from the rock, and is 
dashed to pieces, ib. Theseus sends a herald to Athens with an 
account of his safe return, ib. Enters the city with sorrow, but 
is received with great rejoicings, 15. The Oschophoria cele- 
brated, in memory of that event, ib. The vessel, in which 
Theseus sailed, preserved to the time of Demetrius Phalerens, 
26. A temple erected and sacrifices offered to Theseus, the 
care of which he commits to the Phytalidae, 28. He settles all 
the inhabitants of Attica in Athens, ib. Erects a democracy, 
ib. Connects the citadel with the city.. Institutes the Pan- 
athentca and Metcecia, 29. Invites all strangers to equal privi- 
leges in Athens, 30. Distinguishes the people into noblemen, 
husbandmen, and mechanics, ib. Is the first, who inclined to 
a popular government, ib. Gives the impression of an ox to 
the Athenian money, ib. Adds Megara to the territory of 
Athens, 31. Sets up a pillar in the Isthmus, as a mark of distinc- 
tion between Peloponnesus and Ionia, ib. Institutes the Isthmian 
games in honour of Neptune, ib. Makes war upon the Amazons, 
and receives Antiope as the reward of his valour, 32. One of his 
companions, named Soloiin, falls in love with Antiope, and 
drowns himself in consequence of his hopeless passion, 33. 
Theseus calls the river after his name, and builds a city, 
which he names Pythopolis, ib. The Amazons cross the Cim- 
merian Bosporus upon the ice, and march to Athens, 34*. 
Theseus sacrifices to Fear, before he engages them, ib. Has 
by the Amazon a son named Hippolytus, or according to Pin- 
dar, Demophobn, 36. Marries Phaedra after the death of An- 
tiope, ib. His other marriages and amours, ib. 37. He assists 
the Lapithae against the Centaurs, 37. And Adrastus, in re- 
covering the bodies of those that fell before Thebes, ib. The 
friendship between him and Pirithous, 38. On occasion of his 
friend's marriage, he goes with him into the country of the 
Lapithas, and joins them against the Centaurs, ib. Procures Her- 
cules' admission to the Mysteries of Ceres, 39. Carries off 
Helen, when he was fifty years old, 39. He, and his friend 
Pirithous, are pursued as far as Tegea, 40. He places Helen 
at Aphidnae, under the inspection of his mother, ib. Goes 
with Pirithous into Epirus, to fetch off the daughter of Aido- 
neus, ib. Pirithous is destroyed by Ai'doneus' dog Cerberus, 
and Theseus is imprisoned, ib. Meantime, Meneslheus excites 
a sedition in Athens, ib. 41. Academus informs them, where 
Helen was concealed, ib. The Academy always spared by the 
Lacedaemonians for his sake, ib. The Tyndaridae beat their 
adversaries in a set battle, and demolish Aphidna?, ib. TEthra, 
the mother of Theseus, is carried to Lacedaemon, and thence 
with Helen to Troy, 43. Theseus is released by Ai'doneus, at 

INDEX. 527 

the intercession of Hercules, ib. Returns to Athens, and at- 
tempts to reduce the Athenians by force, but is overpowered, ib. 
44. Sends his children into Euboea, and retires to the isle of 
Scyrcs, where he is treacherously destroyed by Lyeomedes, ib. 
Menestheus dying in the expedition to Troy, the sons of Theseus 
recover the kingdom, 45. After the Median war, the Athe- 
nians are commanded by the oracle to bring the bones of The- 
seus to Athens, ib. This is carried into execution by Cimon, 
who places the remains near the Gymnasium; and Theseus' Ora- 
tory is made a place oi' refuge, 46. Sacrifices to Theseus, ib. 
His sons attend Elphenor to the Trojan war, -15. Theseus com- 
pared with Romulus, 102. 

Thesmophuria, the feast of Ceres, ii. 346. v. 239. 

l^liesmophori, vi. 52. 

Thesmothetce, i. 244, n. 

f Thespice, ii. S5S. hi. 225. iv. 102. v. 404. 

Thespis, begins to exhibit tragedies, i. 264. The opinion of Solon, 
as to the exhibition of fictions, 265. 

f Tf>esprotians, iii. 65- 

t Thessaly, traversed by the Amazons, i. 36, 43, 50. iv. 412. v. 
401. 

f Thessalouico, v. 58. 

, widow of Cassander, murthered bv her son Anti- 
pater, iii. 72. v. 400. 

Thessalus, one of the sons of Cimon, iii. 315. Lodges an infor- 
mation against Alcibiades for his burlesque on the Mysteries of 
Ceres, ii. 144. The form of that information, ib. 

Thessalus, the player, sent by Alexander on a commission to 
Pexodorus, governor of Caria, iv. 253. Alexander's concei n on 
his losing the prize in tragedy, 2S5. 

, the son of Pisistratus, ii. 528. 

T/ieste, sister to Dionysius the Elder, and wife of Philoxenus, vi. 
20. Her dignity of behaviour, ib. The regard the Syracusans 
had for her, ib. 

Thetes, the lowest order of the Athenians so called, i. 235, 242. 

Thetys, or rather Themis, her oracle, i. 51. 

Thimbro, commands the Lacedaemonian forces in their first attempt 
to deliver the Asiatic Greeks, but without success, vi. 137. 

Thoas, one of Theseus' companions against the Amazons, i. 53. 

Thonis, the Egyptian courtesan, v. 391. 

Thor, in the Phoenician language, ' a heifer,' iii. 256. 

Thoranius, lieutenant to Metellus, sent against Sertorius, and 
killed by that general, iv. 16. 

Thorax, commands the Spartan land-forces at the siege of Lamp- 
sacus, and gives his soldiers the plunder after the town was 
stormed, iii. 197. Put to death by the Ephori, because there 
was silver found in his possession, 212. 

■ of Larissa, tin1 only person who paid any attention to the 

dead body of Antigonog, v. 394 

Tholh, the Egyptian month so called, i, 66. 

\Thrace, i. 17. ii. 19. iii. 297, 313 

S2S INDEX. 

f lliracia, village of, iii. 338. 

Thracian officer, pushed into a well by Timoclea. See Timoclea* 

Thrascas, v. 73. 

T/iro-y/bidus, the son of Thrason, goes from Samos to Athens, on 
purpose to accuse Alcibiades, ii. 167. Marches from Thebes, 
and recovers the castle of Fhyle, in the neighbourhood of Athens, 
iii. 295* 

Thrasydtvus, one of Philip's embassadors to Thebes, v. 272. 

ThrasuUus, an Athenian general, his troops despised bj' those of 
Alcibiades, for the defeat which Pharnabazus had given them 
near Ephesus, ii. 157. Afterward victorious in conjunction with 
Alcibiades, ib. 

\ Tktasymenus. See Thrasymeninn lake. 

Thriambus, one of the titles of Bacchus, ii. 424-. 

f Thriasia, i. 334. iv. 101. 

Thriasium, ii. 348. 

Thucydides, the son of Milesias, his answer to Archidamus, who 
asked whether he or Pericles was the best wrestler, ii. 14. En- 
couraged by the Athenian nobility to oppose Pericles, 18, 19. 
Banished, 27. His character as a statesman, 19. 

— , the historian, descended from king Olorus, and a 

relation to Cimon, iii. 297. His death and sepulchre, ib. 

Thudippiis, condemned to die with Phocion, v. 42. 

j- Thurii, a city in Italy, built by Dionysius Chalcus, iii. 404. Co- 
lonised by Pericles, ii. 20. 

Thurian Apollo. See Apollo Thurins. 

■\Thurium, ii. 251. iii. 256. v. 286. 

Tlmro, mother of Chaeron, the founder of Chaeronea, iii. 256. 

f Thyalira, iii. 266. 

\ Thymcctadcc, i. 21 . 

■f Thyrcatis, iii. 114. 

■f Thrycea, iii. 407. 

Thyreus, sent by Augustus to Cleopatra, v. 496^ Chastised by 
Antony, ib. 

Tiara, a lamb yeaned with the figure of one upon it's head, deemed 
ominous by Alexander, iv. 326. 

f Tibarene, iii. 345. 

f Tiber, river, i. 49. ii. 322. 

Tiberius Gracchus. See Gracchus. 

■ Scmpro?iius. See Sempronius. 

Tidius Sextius, though old and lame, joins Pompey in Macedon, 
iv. 207. 

Tigellinus, captain of the prxtorian band in Nero's time, vi. 212. 
The people insist upon his being capitally punished, 227. He 
bribes Vinius, chief minister to Galba, ib. Pretends to be sick, 
but soon makes the most insolent rejoicings for his recovery, 
ib. Makes magnificent presents to Vinius' daughter, ib. 228. 
Otho sends for him, 245. He cuts his own throat, ib. 

Tigranes, son-in-law to Mithridates, iii. 345, 346. His conquests, 
355, 356. His pride, 356. Refuses to deliver up Mithridates, and 
tells Appius the Pomair embassador, that he is able to repel 

INDEX. 529 

force with force, 357. Changes his behaviour to Mithridates, 
ib. His imprudence in not joining that prince, while his forces 
were entire, 360. He beheads the first person, who gave him. 
notice of the approach of Lucullus, 362. Sends Mithrobarzanes, 
who was so hardy as to tell him the truth, with orders to bring 
Lucullus alive, ib. Quits Tigranocerta, and retires to mount 
Taurus, 363. Attacked by Muraena in a defile, and put to flight, 
ib. Resumes his foolish confidence, on being joined by the 
neighbouring kings, 364. Defeated in a general action by 
Lucullus, 367, 368. His crown carried to Lucullus, 368. 
Refuses to receive Mithridates when defeated by Pompey, and 
sets a price upon his head, iv. 167. Admits a Roman garrison 
into his capital, ib. Makes a mean submission to Pompey, ib. 
Pompey restores him his kingdom on conditions, 168. 

Tigranes, the Younger, revolts from his father to Pompey, iv. 
167- Not satisfied with the kingdom of Sophene, which Pom- 
pey allotted him, 168. Imprisoned by Pompey, and reserved 
for his triumph, ib. 

f Tigranocerta, iii. 363, 365, 369. 

f Tigris, river, iii. 362. 

f Tigurini, iv. 378. 

f TUphosium, iii. 261. 

Timesa, wife of Agis king of Sparta, has a son by Alcibiades, iv.- 
72. Proud of that connexion, ib. Her son excluded the 
succession, as a bastard, though acknowledged by Agis on hig 
death-bed, ib. 

Timceus, persuades Andocides to acknowledge himself and some 
others guilty of having defaced the Hermae, ii. 142. 

— , the historian, i. 110. For what censured by Plutarch, 

iii. 397. vi. 35. For what commended by Cicero, iii. 397, n. 

Timagenes, iv. 188. 

Timagoras, the Athenian embassador to the court of Persia, v. 139. 
Suffers death on his return, for having received presents while he 
acted in that capacity, 140. 

Timandra, the mistress of Alcibiades, faithful and affectionate to 
him in the last offices, ii. 171, 172. 

Timanthes, the painter, a history-piece of his representing Aratus' 
actions at Pellene, vi. 186. 

Time, the best counsellor, ii. 32. The greatest of all sacrifices.. 
v. 451. 

Timesileos, the tyrant of Sinope, expelled by the Athenians, who 
send thither six hundred colonists, ii. 33. 

Timesitheus, governor of Lipara, persuades his people to spare a 
Roman vessel charged with offerings to Apollo at Delphi, i. 373. 

Timoclea, sister to Theagenes, the injury she suffered in the sack of 
Thebes, iv. 257 Her revenge, ib. The dignity with which 
she behaved, when brought before Alexander, ib. 

Timoclidas, elected governor of Sicyon, vi. 153. 

Timocrates, marries Arete, who was separated from her husbnnd 
Dion by the tyranny of Dionysius, vi. 20, Commands in the 
absence of Dionvsius, 26. 

vol. vi. 2 M 

530 INDEX. 

Tbtiocreon, his severe verses against Themistocles, i. 34-3. 

Tinwdcmus, the father of Timoleon, ii. 234. 

Timolaus, his eonnexions of hospitality with Philepcemen, iii. 21. 
Sent to him by the Spartans with a present of an hundred and 
twenty talents, ib. Loth to declare his commission, ib. Phi- 
lopcemen's answer to it, when declared, ib. 

Ti.moleov, the distracted state of the Syracusan affairs before he 
was sent into Sicily, ii. 232. The most considerable of the Syra- 
cusans fly to Icetes, prince of Leontium ; and subsequently, on 
appearance of a Carthaginian fleet, apply to the Corinthians for 
assistance, 233. Icetes acts a double part upon that occasion, 
234. The Corinthians grant the succours, and give the com- 
mand of them to Timoleon, the son of Timodemus and Dema- 
riste, ib. His character, 235. He saves the life of his brother 
Timophanes, in one of his expeditions, ib. 23G. Endeavours to 
dissuade his brother from setting himself up tvrant in Corinth, 
2:46. Finds him obstinate, and is instrumental in his death, ib. 
Is much afflicted on account of his mother's aversion to him, and 
gives himself up a prey to melancholy, 237. Twenty years after- 
ward, he is appointed to the command in Sicily, 238. What 
Teleclides said to him on that appointment, 239. Omens of 
success to Timoleon, 240. He arrives at Rhegium with ten 
galleys. Icetes, having beaten Dionysius in a set battle, sends 
the Carthaginians with artful propositions to Timoleon, but 
secretly charges them to prevent his landing in Sicilv, 2tl. 
Timoleon outwits them, and lands at Tauromenium, 243. An- 
dromachus, the prince of that city, permits him to make it a 
place of arms, ib. The Sicilians having been often deceived by 
pretended deliverers, no other city, except Adranum, is inclined 
to receive Timoleon, 244. A battle is fought between Icetes 
and Timoleon near Adranum, in which the former is defeated, 
245. Several cities join in alliance with Timoleon, particularly 
i. atana, and it's prince Mamercus, 246. Dionysius offers to de- 
liver up to him both himself and the citadel of Syracuse, ib. 
Timoleon sends four hundred men, by a {e\v at a time, into the 
citadel, who take possession of the arms, stores, and all that be- 
longed to the tyrant except his money, with which he gets-on 
board a ship, and escapes to the camp of Timoleon, 246. The 
Corinthians send Timoleon a reinforcement, which stops at Thu- 
vium, because the sea was beset with the Carthaginian Meet, 2.31. 
Icetes dispatches two men to Adranum, to assassinate Timoleon, 
ib. Timoleon's providential deliverance, ib. The citadel is 
much distressed, but Timoleon finds means to send provisions 
into it, 253. Timoleon takes Messana, 255. Marches to Syracuse, 
,ib. Attacks the city in several quarters at once, and carries it 
without the loss of one Corinthian, 257. He calls the citizens 
together to destroy the citadel, which had been the seat of ty- 
ranny, ib. Erects upon the place a common hall, 258. Syra- 
cuse being in want of inhabitants, he applies to the Corinthians 
for a supply, ib. The Corinthians collect the Syracusan exiles, 
and with some new colonists, make up a supply of ten thousand. 

INDEX. 531 

259. Timoleon collects a much greater number, ib. Divides 
the lands among them gratis, but sells the houses for a thousand 
talents, which becomes a supply for the public treasury, exhaust- 
ed by the war, ib. Delivers the other cities from the tyrants, 

260. Reduces Icetes to a private station, ib. Leptines, prince 
of Apollonia, is also deposed, and sent to Corinth, ib. Timoleon, 
assisted by commissioners from Corinth, gives the Syracusans a 
body of laws, ib. Sends his lieutenants to ravage the Cartha- 
ginian province, ib. 261. Asdrubal and Hamilcar march in 
great fury against the Corinthians, 261. Timoleon meets them 
near the banks of the Crimesus, with a handful of men, ib. Dex- 
terously turns an imagined ill omen into a sign of victory, 262. 
Another good presage, ib. He and his troops have a distinct 
view of the enemy, before they are seen themselves, 263. He 
attacks them, as they are passing the river, ib. A thunder- 
storm befriends the Greeks, 264. Timoleon, with the news of 
the victory, transmits the handsomest of the Carthaginian arms 
to Corinth, 266. At his return to Syracuse, he banishes the 
thousand mercenaries who had deserted him before the battle, 
ib. Mamereus and Icetes revolt, and call the Carthaginians in 
again, who send another army under Gisco, ib. The confede- 
rates gain some advantages against Timoleon; but he loses only 
the mercenaries, 267. While he is besieging Calauria, Icetes 
makes an inroad into the Syracusan territories, and in his re- 
turn insults Timoleon himself, 268. The latter lets him pass, 
but pursues and defeats him, on the banks of the river Damyrias 
or Lamyrias, ib. 269. Takes him alive at Leontium, and "puts 
him to death, together with his son Eupolemus, and Euthymus, 
his general of horse, ib. Suffers the Syracusans to destroy the 
women of Icetes' family, 270. Mamereus of Catana, and Hippo 
of Messena, are also reduced, and capitally punished, 271. The 
Carthiginians conclude a peace with \\\m,ib. Agrigentum and Gela 
are now repeopled, ib. He is happy in the affections of the Sici- 
lians ; in the ease and elegance which attend all his actions ; and 
in the perpetual favour of fortune, 272, 273. Spends the remainder 
of his life among the Syracusans, and enjoys the blessings he had 
procured, 274. His answers on his being attacked by two de- 
magogues, ib. In his old age he loses his sight, 275. Is con- 
sulted, notwithstanding, on all important points, and in ev,. i-y 
respect treated with great honour by the Syracusans, 276. His 
easy death and magnificent funeral, ib. 277. His memory cele- 
brated with annual games, 277. A palsestra is erected around 
his monument, ib. The Syracusans happy in his laws for a long 
course of years, 278. 

Timon, the poet, vi. 16. 

-■■ ■ --> the man-hater, passes others by without notice, but ad- 
dresses Alcibiades with great kindness, because he thought he 
would do much mischief, ii. 135. v. 4-93. His answer to 
Apemantus, ib. His address to the people of Athens, i'u. His 
epitaph, 494. 

, the Phliasian, i. 178. ii. 8. 

2 M 2 

532 INDEX. 

Timonassa, of Argos, ii. 528. 

Timonides, vi. 21, 30, 31. 

Timophanes, Timoleon's elder brother, ii. 235. Of a sanguine and 
ambitious disposition, ib. Commands the Corinthian cavalry in 
a battle with the Argives, ib. In great danger, but rescued by 
his brother, ib. 236. The Corinthians, for the security of their 
city, entertain four hundred mercenaries in their service, and 
give him the command, 236. By the assistance of these mer- 
cenaries he enslaves his country, ib. Timoleon and his friends 
entreat him to relinquish 'the tyranny, ib. Timophanes, abso- 
lutely rejecting their advice, is poniarded, ib. 

Timotheus, the Athenian general, ii. 342. His observation that 
a commander-in-chief ought to be ashamed of needlessly hazard- 
ing his person, ib. Will attribute nothing to fortune, hi. 237. 
Is banished, ib. 

. , the poet, iii. 15. And musician, v. 143, and n. 

Timoxenus, elected general of the Achaean league, vi. 191, 202. 

Tinga, widow of Antaeus, has a son called Sophax, by Hercules 
who had killed her husband, iv. 13. 

Tingis, a city of Africa, built by Sophax, and so named from his 
mother Tingi, iv. 13. Story of Antaeus, who was buried there, 
12, 13. 

Tinnius, the husband of Fannia, iii. 169. The quarrel between 
him and his wife, ib. Their cause comes before Marius, ib. 
How decided, ib. 170. 

Tireus, an eunuch of Darius' bed-chamber, iv. 286. 

Tiribazus, iv. 98. What Artaxerxes said to him, on his putting 
on the king's robe, vi. 118. When he mounts Artaxerxes on a 
fresh horse, after he had been dismounted in battle with Cyrus, 
desires him to remember that day, 124. The many changes in 
his fortune, 142. Delivers Artaxerxes and his whole army, in 
the expedition against the Cadusians, ib. 143. Artaxerxes pro- 
mises him his daughter, and disappoints him, 146. In revenge, 
he stirs up Darius against his father, 147. His character, 146. 
His speech to Darius, ib. 147. His designs being discovered, 
he is surprised by the guards, and dies fighting in his own de- 
fence, 148. 

Tisapherues, an officer in the army of Cyrus, killed in battle by 
Artaxerxes, vi. 125. 

_ f discovers Cyrus' conspiracy against his brother Arta- 
xerxes Mnemon, and communicates it to the king, vi. 116, 117. 
-, the king of Persia's lieutenant, though a great enemy 

to the Greeks, is charmed with the behaviour of Alcibiades, 
ii. 148, 149. After the great naval victory which Alcibiades 
gained of the Lacedaemonians, afraid of the resentment of his 
master the king of Persia, seizes that general, and sends him to 
Sardis, 155. Agrees upon a truce with Agesilaus, promising 
to set free the Asiatic Greeks, but soon breaks it, iv. 79. De- 
feated by Agesilaus, 81. Put to death by the king of Persia, id. 

Tisias, ii. 126. 

Tisiphonits, ii. 3S6. 

INDEX. 533 

Titans, i. 194-. 
1 Tithora, iii. 252. 

Tithranstes, successor to Tisaphernes, puts him to death by order 

of the king of Persia, iv. 81. Proposes terms of peace to Age- 

silaus, and promises him large sums of money, ib. Defeated by 

Cimon, iii. 310,311. 

Titianus, the brother of Otho, vi. 252. 

Titillius, sent by Flaminius into Thrace, to expel the garrisons of 

Philip, iii. 45. 
Titinius, the friend of Cassius, vi. 98. Kills himself, ib. 
Tit ius, Quintus, foretells a victory to Sylla, iii. 255. 

, quaestor to Antonv, v. 466. Goes over to Octavianus, 

481. 
Titurius, officer in Caesar's army cut off by Ambiorix, iv. 387. 
Titus Lartius, left by Cominius to command at the siege of Co- 
rioli, while he went to fight the Volsci, ii. 182. 

> , the Crotonian, sets out with letters to Catiline from the 

conspirators in Rome, v. 313. Seized by order of Cicero, 314. 
Upon a promise of impunity, discovers all he knew of the plot, 
ib. 

, one of the sons of Junius Brutus, put to death for conspiring 

with the Tarquins against the commonwealth, by order of his 
father, and in his sight, i. 278. See the other Titi, under their 
family-names. 
Tityus, ii. 360. 
Toe, of Pyrrhus, which was believed to have a healing virtue in it, 

untouched by the fire when his body was burnt, iii. 69. 
Toga Virilis, i. 83, n. vi. 69. 
f Tolerium, ii. 209. 
Tolmceus, ii. 31. 

Tolmides, son of Tolmaeus, Pericles endeavours to dissuade him 
from an unnecessary expedition into Boeotia, ii. 31. Killed in 
battle, 32. iv. 93. 
Tolumnius, the Tuscan general, killed by Cornelius Cossus, who 

thereupon is entitled to the ' Spolia Opima,' i. 75. 
Torquatus, Sylla's officer advises that chieftain to delay his engage- 
ment with the Lucanians and Samnites, before the gates of Rome, 
iii. 273. 

, Manlius. See Manlius, 

f Torync, taken by Caesar, v. 485. 

f Trachin, i. 39. 

Trades, mechanic ones, thought beneath the citizens of Sparta, 

i. 211. 
Tragiscus, vi. 182. 

Tragedy, ii. 9, n. See Theatrical Entertainments. 
f Tralles, iv. 412. 

j- TralUans, a people of Thrace, demand a consideration of Age- 
silaus for his passage through their country, iv, 89. Defeated 
by him, ib. 
\Trapezusr iv. 41. 

534. INDEX. 

Travelling, not allowed aTl persons by Lycurgus, lest they should 
bring foreign manners and customs into Sparta, i. 154. 

Trebatius, a friend of Caesar's, v. 339. 

TrebelHus. one of the friends of Antony, v. 434. 

f Trebia, battle of, ii. 65. 

Trcbonins, Caius, tribune of the people, proposes a decree by which 
provinces were to be continued, or given, to Caesar, Crassus, and 
Pompey, iv. 191. v. 91. Holds Antony in conversation without 
the court, while Caesar is killed in the senate-house, iv. 4rS3, n. 

Triarius, Lucullus' lieutenant, defeated by Mithridates, iv. 174, rt. 

Tribulli, iv. 255. 

Tribes, the people of Rome originally divided into Three, i. 67, 
n. 83. 

. •, of Athens, i. 24-4, n. 253. 

Tribunes, military, elected for a time instead of consuls, i. 361. Of 
the people, when first obtained, ii. 181, and n. Their power 
consisted principally in putting a negative on the proceedings 
which they disliked, v. 69, 209. Could not affect any thing as 
a bony, if one were dissentient, ib. The only officers retaining 
their authority when a dictator was appointed, ii. 78. Justly com- 
pared to a violent medicine, v. 68. 

•j- Triccacans, v. 171. 

\ Triopium, iii. 310. 

Tripod, sent by the Seven Wise men from one to another, i. 223. 

Tripylus, by order of Cleomenes, offers Aratus a yearly pension of 
twelve talents, on condition that Cleomenes should be declared 
general of the Achaean league, vi. 196. 

f Tritta, vi. 163. 

Triumph, of Paulus iEmilius, described at large, ii. 325 — 328, 

Troades, ii. 377. 

f Troas, iii. 265,331. 

f Trcezene, i. 4, 46, 71. vi. 176. 

f Trojans, i. 49. 

Trojan women, i. 49. 

. — ; course, a game, v. 51. 

Troias, wife of Arybas, and mother of iEacides, iii. 66. 

«- , daughter of v^acjdes and Phthia, and sister to Pyrrhus, 

iii. 66. 
Trophonius, his cave and oracle, ii. 475, n. iii. 255. 
f Troy, how often taken, iv. 2. 

. . See Trojan Course. 

Trycorithus, a city of Tetrapolis, i. 14, ». 

Tubero, ./Elius, son-in-law to Paulus iEmilius. See JElias. 

. , the Stoic, calls Lucullus * Xerxes in a gown,' iii. 384. 

Tubertus See Posthumins. 

f Tudertia, by PJiny called Tuder, iii. 454. 

f Tudrrtuiv, iii. 141 

Tallin, daughter of Cicero, goes to meet him at Brundusium on his 

return from exile, v. 343. Dies in child-bed, 344. 
Tul'dus. See Cicero. 

INDEX. 53 

a 

Tullius, Appius or Attius, king of the Volsci, v. 292. 

Tullus Hostilius, succeeds Numa, i. 205, 208. His superstition, 208. 
His death, ib. 

« , Amphidius or Aufidius, his great authority among the 

Volscians, ii. 201. His personal enmity to Coriolanus, 203. The 
application and speech of Coriolanus to him, 202, 203. His 

. reception of that great man, 203. Joined in command with him, 
207. Resolves to destroy him, upon his withdrawing from before 
Rome, 223. He and his party fall upon Coriolanus, as he is pre- 
paring to make his defence, and accomplish their purpose, 224-. 
He is killed in a battle with the Romans, 225. 

asks Pompey what forces he had to oppose Caesar, and 

finding him ill prepared, advises him to treat of peace, iv. 202, 
203. 

-, a friend of Cicero, v. 327. 

Turpilius, master of the artificers in the army of Metellus, iii. 128, 

His fate, ib. 
f Tuscans, skilled in religious rites, i. 64-, and n. Originally a 

colony of the Sardians, 93. Take and lose Sutrium the same 

day, 407. Take Satricuin, 410. Are defeated by Camillus, 411. 
Tuscan diviners, iii. 24-1. 
Tuscany, i. 49. 
f Tusculum, people of, revolt from the Romans, i. 411. On hearing 

that Camillus was advancing against them, put on an appearance 

of peace, ib. Figs of Tusculum, iv. 211. 
Tutola. See Philotis. 
Tuttia, battle of, iv. 26. 
Tijche, part of Syracuse, ii. 416. 
Tychon, ii. 377. 
Tydeus, his insolence to Alcibiades, who came to make some neces« 

sary remonstrances to the Athenians on the situation of their 

affairs, iii. 198. 
Tyridaridts. See Castor and Pollux. 
Tyndarus, the father of Helen, i. 39. 

Tynnondas, the Eubceans choose him for their king, i. 236. 
Typhon, v. 428. 
Tyrannio, the grammarian, corrects the copies of Aristotle's and 

Theophrastus' works, which he found in the library of Apel- 

licon the Teian, iii. 267. The injustice done him by Murena, 

354. 
Tyranny. Solon's saying concerning it, i. 237. 
Tyrants, live in continual fear, vi. 179. The miserable life of the 

tyrant Aristippus described, ib. Few die a natural death, or 

leave any posterity, 179, 180. 
f Tyre, besieged and taken by Alexander, iv. 276, 278. 
Tyrian purple, superseded by the dye of Kermes, i, 1.8, n, 
Tyro, Cicero's freedman, v. 353, 
Tyrtaus the poet, i. 120. 

636 INDEX, 

v. u. 

VACCA, city of, iii. 128. 

f Vacceians, iv. 29. 

Vavjses, the Parthian embassador, his commission to Crassu?, iii 

$72. His reply, when Crassus said he would deliver his answer 

at Seleucia, 473. 
Valens, Fahius. See Fabius Valens. 
| Valentia, iv. 145. 
Valeria, the daughter of Publicola, one of the hostages given to 

Porsenna, i. 297. 
-. , the sister of Publicola, as she is at her devotion in the 

temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, is induced by a sudden impulse 

to go to the ladies of Coriolanus' family, ii. 216. Her speech 

to them, ib. 

the daughter of Messala, and sister to Hortensius, makes 

advances to Sylla, and Sylla marries her, iii. 281, 282. 

Valeria, all the branches of that family for six hundred years, ac- 
knowledge Publicola as the fountain of their honour, i. 305. 
Have a particular burying-place assigned them, 304. 

Valerius. See Publicola. 

• , or rather Tiberius, one of the sons of Junius Brutus, put 

to death by his father for treason against the commonwealth, 
i. 278. 

--, Marcus, brother to Publicola, beats the Sabines in two 

battles, i. 299. Honoured with a triumph, and a house built on 
the Palatine hill at the publics charge, ib. 

— Potitus, charged with a commission to consult the oracle 

at Delphi, i. 366. 

Flaccus, his character, ii. 495. The generous encourage- 

ment which he gave his country-neighbour Cato, 496. Cato 
chosen consul with him, and censor, ib. 514. Appointed chief 
of the senate, 515. 

— Flaccus, chosen consul with Marius, iii. 156. 

Corviuits, the only person, beside Marius, who had been 

six times consul, iii. 156. 

Antias, i. 70, 207. 

Maximm, brother to Publicola, iv. 140, and n. 

Maximus, the historian, vi. 107. 

-, Quintus, a man of great learning, put to death by Pompey, 

iv. 136. 

1 ariiuis, Publius, defeated by Spartacus, iii. 459. 
Varius, has a command under Antony, v. 442. Surnamed * Coty- 

lon,' ib. 
Varro, tho philosopher, desires Tarutius to calculate the day and 

hour of Romulus' nativity, from the circumstances and events 

of his life, i. 66. 

, Terentius, the consul, a man of obscure birth, ii. 84. 

ises himself, by declaiming against the slow operations of 

Fabius, 85. His army greater than any which the Romans had 

2 

INDEX. 537 

sent against Annibal, 85. Totally defeated in the battle of Canna?, 
88. The senate, at liis return, thank him for not having despaired 
of the commonwealth, 92. 

Varro, Pompey's lieutenant in Spain, iv. 400. Caesar makes him- 
self master of his camp and troops, ib. 

Varus, his disputes with Scipio, v. 106. 

, Alphenus, general of the Batavi, vi. 256. 

Vatinius, appointed praetor in preference to Cato, through the 
influence, or rather violence, of Pompey's party, v. 91. Cicero's 
puns upon Vatinius, v. 303, 323. 

Veclius, suborned to accuse Lucullus, iii. 389. 

f Veientes, beaten by Romulus, i. 91, 92. 

+ Veii, the capital of Tuscany, i. 91, n. Taken by Camillus, after 
it had stood a ten-years' siege, 368. 

t Vela brum, i. 55. 

Velesus, i. 173. 

f Velia, i. 304. ii. 334. 

f Velitrce, taken by the Romans, i. 416. A colony sent thither 
in the room of those who had been swept away by the pestilence, 
ii. 189, 190. 

Vellutus. See Sicinius. 

Vengeance, divine, ii. 268. 

VentkUi, two brothers of Carbo's faction, banished from Auximum 
by Pompey, who then acted for Sylla, iv. 132. 

Ventidius, sent by Antony against the Parthians, v. 456. Defeats 
Pacorus son of Orodes, 457. Besieges Antiochus in Samosata, 
ib. The only Roman honoured with a triumph over the Parthians, 
458. 

Venus Epitragia, i. 20. Figure of, in Montfaucon, ib. n. 

- — -- Ariadne, i. 23. The Paphian, v. 84, and n. The Victo- 
rious, iv. 213. Lucullus' dream in the temple of Venus, iii. 
342. 

, a cast on the dice so called, whence the proverb, * Venus 

forbids, v. 54. Statue of, carved by Daedalus, given by Ariadne 
to Theseus, i. 23. 

f Venusia, ii. 88, 433. 

Ver Sacrum, what, ii. 70, and n. 

Verania, one of the Vestal Virgins consecrated by Numa, i. 1 84. 

-7 , the wife of Piso, vi. 241. 

f Vercellcc, iii. 151. 

Vercingctorix, general of the Arverni and Carnutes, iv. 389. De- 
feated by Cassar, 391. 

Vergilia, the wife of Coriolanus, ii. 216. 

Vermiculum, vermeil, or vermilion, i.'18, n. 

Verres, accused by Cicero, v. 300. Fined, 301. 

Verrucosus, ii. 63. 

Vespasian, general of the army in Judea, acknowledges Otho, vi. 
247. 

Vesta, i. 51, 80, Numa builds a temple to that goddess, 186, 

Marius driven into her temple, iii. 224, 225. 
Vestal virgins, established at Rome, i, 87, 182. Guardians of 

*3* INDEX. 

til* Sacred Fire, ih. Their number, 1 84-. Their prerogatives, 

385. The punishments inflicted upon them, when they broke 
their vow, io. 
Veilh, in Latin Cicer, hence Cicero's family had their surname. 

v. 293. 
Peter, Antistius, the praetor, iv. 362. 
Vettius, Spurius, Interrex till the election of Numa, i. 175. 

. -, a friend of Caius Gracchus, v. 223. 

Velkurius, Caius, v. 227. 

Veturius, corrupts the praetorian cohorts, vi. 235. 

■ Mamurius, makes the brasen shields for Numa, i. 190. 

, , Pubiius, one of the first quaestors, i. 287. 

Via Sacra, v. 311. 

Vibius Pacianus. See Pacianus;. 

■ , the Sicilian, his ingratitude to Cicero, v. 332. 

f Vibo, a city of Lucania, anciently called Hipponium. See Hip- 

ponium. 
Vibutiids Rufus, a friend of Pompey, taken by Caesar in Spain, and 

sent to him to treat of an accommodation, iv. 208. 
Victory, considered as a goddess, iii. 259. 
Villius, Pubiius, sent to treat with Antiochus, iii. 45. 
Vindex, Junius. See Junius Vindex. 
Vindicius, a slave, discovers the plot of the Aquilii and Vitellii in 

favour of Tarquin, i. 276. Made a citizen of Rome, 280. 
Vindicta, the act of manumission, why so called, i. 208. 
Vindius, killed by the Picentines for calling Pompey a ' school -boy,* 

iv. 131. 
Vinius, Titus, one of the commanders of the praetorian cohorts 
and first minister to Galba, vi. 214. Libidinous and avaricious, 
221 . Proposes Otho as a proper person to be adopted by Galba, 
231. Appointed consul, 232. Killed, 240. 
Vipsamus* Portico, vi. 237. 

Virginius, Caius, praetor in Sicily, refuses Cicero entrance into that 
island, notwithstanding his obligations to him, v. 332. 

. , one of the tribunes of the people, prevailed upon by 

Cinna to commence a criminal process against Sylla, iii. 246. 

-, or rather Verginius Rufus, general in Germany, vi. 216. 

Refuses to take the imperial title, and declares himself an enemy 
to all who shall assume it without the appointment of the senate, 
ib. Defeats Vindex, ih. His merit, and declarations alarming 
to Galba, ib. Delivers up the command to Flaccus Hordeonius, 
who was sent by Galba to succeed him, 220. Treated with 
coldness by Galba, ib. Otho takes him partner in the consul- 
ship, 244. Again pressed to accept the empire, but abides by 
his first resolutions, 263. 

Viridonmrus, king of the Gauls, killed by Claudius Marcellus, who 
thereupon is entitled to the ' Spolia Opima,' i. 73. ii. 397, 398. 

Virtue, her woiks attract our imitation, ii. 4. Like a hardy plant, 
will take root in any place, v. 149. Her divinity to be acknow- 
ledged, i. 98. Impossible for Fortune to conquer her, v. 197. 
The honour which she enjoys, all her own, iii. 28(J, 

INDEX. 539 

Virtues of the same name, different in different characters, v. 6. 

Vitellii, conspire with Tarquin against the commonwealth, i. 275. 

Vitellius, his descent and qualities, vi. 232, 233. Saluted emperoi 
by the troops in Germany, 233. Puts to death all those, who had 
claimed rewards for destroying the friends of Galba, 240. The 
soldiers in Rome take the oath to him, 263. 

. , Lucius the brother of the emperor, vi. 248. 

Uliades, the Samian, attacks the galley of Pausanias, by way of 
proof that the confederates would no longer submit to his- com- 
mand, ii. 483. 

Ulysses, i. 50. 

Umbricius, the diviner, announces to Galba the impending danger, 
vi. 236. 

Unanimity, between generals of the same nation, ii. 344. 

Union, of states and cities, it's happy effects, vi. 177. 

Unity, fire so called by the Pythagoreans, i. 186. 

Voconius, one of Lucullus' officers, gives Mithridates an opportu- 
nity to escape out of Bithynia, iii. 343. Cicero's inhuman say- 
ing upon him and his daughters, v. 326. 

f Volscians, invade the Roman territories, i. 403. Reduced by 
Camillus, 406. Take up arms again, and together with the 
Praenestines, ravage the countries of those who were in alliance 
with Rome, 409. Again defeated by Camillus, 410. Collect 
all their force to relieve the city of Corioli, ii. 182. Give shelter 
to Coriolanus, who heads their armies, 203, 208. Despatch that 
general, and then regret his death, 224, 225. Entirely subdued 
by the Romans, 225. 

Vohimnia, the mother of Coriolanus, ii. 216. Her answer to the 
speech of Valeria, 217. Her speech to Coriolanus, pressing hira 
to draw off his forces from before Rome, 218, 219. 

Volumnius, a mimic of, put to death by Brutus, vi. 100. 

, Publius, a friend of Brutus, vi. 105, 106. 

Vopiscus, ii. 187. 

Usipetes, people of Germany, break into Gaul, iv. 384. Defeated 
by Caesar, ib. 

f Uiica, v. 107. 

Vulcan, his temple, i. 91, 95. 

f Vidturnus, river, by the Greeks called ' Lothronus,* ii. 74. 

Vultures, Romulus sees twelve and Remus only six, i. 62. Two 
with brasen collars appear before Marius' victories, iii. 140. 

W. 

WALLS, Long, which fortified Athens down to the sea, ii. 23. 
iv. 98. 

War, cannot be brought to any set diet, v. 183, 271. The error 
of repeated wars with the same enemy, i. 131. Lycurgus endea- 
voured to guard against that error, id. 

Wards. See Cur ice. 

Wasps} breed from dead horses, v. 197. 

-5*0 INDEX. 

Waleri with which springs are supplied, supposed by ?ome to be 
immediately formed by the condensation of vapours. See Foun- 
tain. 

• -, of a fuuntain, in which Bacchus was washed immediately 

after his birth, said to taste like wine. See Cissusa. 

of the Nile and Danube, preserved among the treasures 

of the kings of Persia, to show the extent of their dominions, 
See Danube. 

Way, the Appian, Caesar expends a great deal of his own money 
upon it, iv. '362. 

Wells, at Athens, if public ones, all that were within the distance 
of four furlongs had the privilege of them, i. 253. Other regu- 
lations of Solon concerning wells, ib. 

Wheat, a medimnus of it sold for a thousand drachmas, iii. 249. 

Wheels, Egyptian, an emblem of the instability of fortune, i. 193. 

White Day, ii. 41. 

Wife, Archidamus, king of Sparta, fined for marrying a little one, 
iv. 71, 72. 

Wine, a remedy against vomiting, and some kinds of poisons, v. 
469, and n. 

■ , according to Numa's institutions, not to be offered in sacri- 
fice, except from a vine that was pruned, i. 192. 
-, mingled with spices, used in washing of feet, v. 24. 

Wise men, no one of the Seven will allow himself to be the wisest, 
i. 223. 

Wolf, a she-one suckles Romulus and Remus, i. 53. 

> , of brass at Delphi, ii. 34. Priority of privilege in consulting 

the oracle engraved upon it, ib. And bull in brass, in act to 
fight, at Argos, iii. 114. The occasion of their being so repre-r 
sented, ib. Pyrrhus, why disheartened at the sight, ib. Car- 
ries off despatches designed for Dionysius, vi. 26. 

Women, of Sparta, i. 214. Plutarch thinks Aristotle's reflections 
on them ill founded, 131. Their courage, iii. 109. Their influ- 
ence over their husbands, i. 131. v. 140. The share which they 
had in their honours, i. 132. 

■ , of Athens, Solon's laws concerning their journies, mourn- 
ings, and sacrifices, i. 252. Of Rome, i. 212. Contribute their 
golden ornaments to a Delphic offering, 372. Temple erected to 
the Portune of Womrn by the Romans,when Coriolanus was pre- 
vailed upon by his wife and mother to retire from before Home, ii. 
221. Of Macedon, much exercised in the ceremonies of Orpheus 
and Bacchus, iv. 210. Of Germany, great pretenders to prophecy, 
iv. 380. In their divination observe the flowing and noise of 
streams, ib. Belonging to the Ambrones, iii. 141. And Cim« 
bri, 153. 

Wood pecker, sacred to Mars, i. 53, 51. 

Wrestlers* Sec Athletes. 

index. sn 

X. 

t XANTHlANS, iv. 264-. vi. 59. The passionate desire which 
that people had of death, 85. 

Xanthippus, the father of Pericles, defeats the king of Persia'* 
general at Mycale, ii. 5. Marries Agariste, the niece of Clis- 

. thenes, who expelled the race of Pisistratus, ib. 

— — — — , the son of Pericles, profuse in his expenses, and dis- 
respectful in his behaviour to his father, ii. 55. 

Xenagoras, the son of Eumelus, his account of the height of mount 
Olympus, ii. SOI. 

Xenarchus, an insipid and frivolous writer, iii. 398. 

Xe?iaresy an intimate friend of Cleomenes, gives him, at his request, 
an account of Agis' designs for the reformation of the common- 
wealth, iv. 157. Finds him much inclined to the same system, 
and withdraws from the connexion, ib. 

Xenochs, of the ward of Cholargus, builds the dome of the temple 
at Eleusis, ii. 23. 

■ , an exile from Sicyon and friend of Aratus, vi. 156. 

> , the Spartan, sent by Agesilaus to Larissa, iv. 89, 90. 

, the Adramyttian, Cicero's visit to him, v. 297. 

Xcnocrates, the philosopher, the vanity of his saying to the chil- 
dren of Lycurgus the orator, who had delivered him from a 
prosecution for the Metcecia, iii. 46. Plato advises him to 
* sacrifice to the Graces,' iii. 122. Alexander offers to make 
him a present of fifty talents, but he accepts only a small sum, 
iv. 251, and n. In great esteem with the Athenians, v. 31. What 
he said of Antipater, and the terms which he offered, ib. lie- 
fuses the freedom of Athens, 35. 

Xenodochus, the Cardian, Alexander's question to him, iv. SIS. 

Xenophalns, captain of a band of robbers, Aratus hires some troops 
of him, vi. 157. 

Xenopkon, fights as a volunteer under Agesilaus in. the battle of 
Chajronea, iv. 91. Sends his children to Sparta for the benefit 
of education, 94. Conducts the ten thousand Greeks in their 
retreat out of Asia, v. 470. vi. 136, n. 

Xerxes, endeavours to join the isle of Salamis to the continent, 
i. 335. Loses the battle of Salamis, ib. Flies, in consequence 
of a stratagem of Themistocles, 337. Alexander debates with 
himself, whether he should rear the statue of Xerxes that was 
fallen down, iv. 299. Alexander burns the palace of Xerxes, at 
the instigation of a courtesan, 300, 301. 

Xeuxidamus, iv. 70. 

Xuthi, v. 446. 

Xuthus, son-in-law of Erechtheus, i. 14, n. 

Xypete, one of the wards of Athens, ii. 23. 

Y. 

YEAR, the Roman. See Kalendar. In which Rome was built, 
i. 6i, and n. The Great Year, iii. 241. 

542 INDEX. 

Z. 

^ZACYNTHUSy isle of, iii/52, 4-35. vi. 21. 

Zaleucus, i. 172. 

Zarbienus, king of Gordyene, brought over to the Roman interest 
by Clodius, Lucullus' lieutenant and brother-in-law, hi. 356. Put 
to death with his wife and children by Tigranes, before the Ro- 
mans entered Armenia, 370. His obsequies celebrated in a 
magnificent manner by Lucullus, ib. 

■fZarcti-a, a castle in Eubcea, taken by Phocion, v. 17. 

■fZela, city of, iv. 415 

Zenoy of Elea, in natural philosophy a follower of Parmenides, 
and a subtile disputant, ii. 7. Pericles his disciple, ib. See also, 
v. 156. 

, the Citiean, v. 156. 

, the Cretan, vi. 138. 

f Zenodotia, iii. 471. 

Zcuodotus, ofTrcezene, i. 71. 

Zenof, a city of Tetrapolis, i. 14, n. 

Zeugitce, the third class of men among the Athenians, why so 
called, i. 242. 

Zeuxidamus, king of Sparta, father of Archidamus, iii. 316. iv. 70. 

Zeuxis, tells Agatharchus, who boasted of his despatch in painting, 
that if he boasted, it should be that he painted very slow, ii. 22. 

Zoilus, an artificer in steel, v. 383. 

Zopi/rus, though a slave, appointed by Pericles school-master to 
Alcibiades, i. 137. ii. 113. 

>, an officer in the army of Antigonus, cuts off Pyrrhus' head, 

iii. 117. 

Zoroaster, king of the Bactrians and lawgiver, supposed to be 
inspired, i. 172. 

Zosima, the wife of king Tigranes, led captive in Pompey's triumph, 
though he restored the kingdom of Armenia to Tigranes, iv. 181, 

THE END. 

Printed by C Baldwin, New BriJj;e-*treet,Londw. 

BOOKS, 
PUBLISHED BY J. JMAWMAN, 

And the other Proprietors. 

THE TRAVELS of ANACH ARSIS the Younger, in Greece, 
during the middle of the Fourth Century, before the Christian Mra, 
Translated from the French of the late Abbe Barthelemy. To 
which are prefixed, Memoirs of the Life of J. J. BARTHELEMY .- 
written by himself, in 1792 and 1793: with a Portrait of the 
Author, 7 Vols. 8vo. and an Eighth in Quarto, containing Maps, 
Plans, Views, &c. 41. 4s. boards, and on Royal Paper, 61. 6s. boards. 

*#* This Edition has been carefully revised and corrected by the 
late Paris Edition, published from a Copy, in which the late Abbe 
Barthelemy had made numerous Corrections and Additions with 
his own hand. 

T. LIVII PATAVINI HISTORIARUM, ab Urbe Condita, 
Libri qui supersunt xxxv. Recensuit, et notis ad usum Seholarum 
accommodatis illustravit J. B. L. CREVIER, Emeritus Rheto- 
rical Professor in Collesrio Dorraano-Bellovaco, Universitatis Pari- 
siensis. Neatly printed in Six Volumes, Octavo, 21. 2s. in Boards ; 
and on large paper, 31. 39. in Boards. 

*** The universally admitted superiority of Crevier's notes to 
Livy, and the Neatness, Cheapness, and Correctness of this Edition, 
will, it is hoped, give it a claim to the attention of Scholars. 

CICERONIS OPERA OMNIA, ex recensions JO. AUG. 
ERNESTI, cum ejusdem Notis et Clave Ciceroniana, upon good 
Paper, and accurately printed from the best Edition, executed at 
Halle in Saxony, with the Index improved, 8 VoJs. 8vo. 61. Boards. 
Oxon. 1810. 

RICARDI PORSONI ADVERSARIA.— Notce et Emenda- 
tiones in Poetas Graecos, quas ex Schedis Manuscriptis Porsoni 
apud Collegium SS. TrinitatisCantabrigise adservatis, deprompserunt 
et ordinarunt, necnon Indicibus instruxerunt JACOBUS HENRI- 
CUS MONK, A. M. CAROLUS JACOBUS BLOMFIELD, 
A.M. Cantabrigine : Sumptibus Collegii SS. Trinitatis. Excudit 
Joannes Smith, Academise typographus. Elegantly printed in One 
Volume, demy 8vo. ornamented with a fine Portrait of the Author, 
engraved by Fittler, from a bust taken immediately after his Death, 
11. 5s. Boards. 

yV* A few Copies, beautifully printed on imperial Paper, and 
hot-pressed, with proof impressions of the Head, 31. 3s. Boards. 

Books published by J. Mawnan, end the other Proprietors, 

A TOUR through ITALY, exhibiting a View of its Scenery, 
its numerous Antiquities, and its Monuments ; particularly as they 
are Objects of CLASSICAL INTEREST and Elucidation; with 
an Account of the present State of its Cities and Towns ; and 
occasional Observations on the recent Spoliations of the French. 
By the Rev. JOHN CHETWODE EUSTACE. 

Ha?c est Italia diis sacra, hae gentes ejus, 
Ha_'c oppida populorum. 

Plin. Nat. Hist. hi. 20. 

*.„* This Work is the result of much Research and Observation, 
It exhibits a comprehensive View of Modern Italy, with its varied 
Beauties of Natural Scenery, and its numerous Works of Art, 
The gratification of the Scholar and the Man of Taste is consulted 
by a constant Reference to the Writers of Antiquity ; and it is 
confidently presumed, that some new Light will be thrown upon 
the Language, Literature, Politics, and Character of the Italians. 
Elegantly printed in Two large Volumes, 4to. illustrated with 
Eight engraved Plans of Churches, Five Guineas in Boards. 

: ESSAYS on the PICTURESQUE, as compared with the Sub- 
lime and the Beautiful ; and on the Use of studying Pictures, for 
the purpose of improving Real Landscape. By UVEDALE 
PRICE, Esq. Neatly printed, a New Edition, with considerable 
Additions and Improvements ; in Three Volumes, Octavo. 11. 7s. 
Boards. 

THE PRESENT STATE of TURKEY ; or, a Description of 
the Political, Civil, and Religious Constitution, Government, and 
Laws of the Ottoman Empire. By THOMAS THORNTON, 
Esq. Two Volumes, Octavo, Second Edition, 21s. Boards. 

*%* To render this Work more complete, a most accurate Map is 
inserted of the Turkish Empire, as well as a Plan of Constanti- 
nople, both beautifully engraved, and carefully composed from the 
most authentic materials. 

AN HISTORICAL VIEW of the ENGLISH GOVERN. 
MENT, from the Settlement of the Saxons in Britain to the 
present Time, with some Dissertations connected with the History 
of the Government. By JOHN MILLAR, Professor of Law in 
the University of Glasgow. A new Edition, in four Volumes, 
Octavo, ll, 16s. Boards. 

DE Plutarchus 

7 Lives. 2d ed. 

P55 

1813 

v.6 

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SUPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 

a