Plutarch's Lives, Vol. IV (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
===============================================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 4. Completes the 6-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

HANDBOUND 
AT THE 

■Jfa. 

UNIVERSITY OF 
TORONTO PRESS 

GSJ 

** ±S - A^S 0C £*/?-**-& S P*v 

a 

<rt *e^t 

0L^C* 

C4^~J. 

c 

gg[ PLUTARCH'S LIVES, 

TRANSLATED 

jFroro t^e ©rifiinal <£mft; 

WITH 

NOTES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL; 

ANJ) 

A LIFE OF PLUTARCH. 

BY 

JOHN LANGHORNE, M. D. 

AND 

WILLIAM LANGHORNE, M. A. 

CAREFULLY CORRECTED, AND PRINTED FROM THE LAS' 

LONDON EDITION. 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. IV. 

NEW-YORK: 

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, 

NO. 82 CLIFF STREET, 
AND SOLD BY THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATU. 

184 6. 

0 

; ^*i 

«, 

■ 

CONTENTS 

OF 

THE FOURTH VOLUME. 

PACK 

Cleomenes 5 

Tiberius Graccus 35 

Caius Graccus 52 

Agis and Cleomenes, and T. and C. Graccus com- 
pared 66 

Demosthenes 70 

Cicero 95 

Demosthenes and Cicero compared 134 

Demetrius ..138 

Antony 179 

Demetrius and Antony compared 236 

Dion 240 

Brutus 276 

Dion and Brutus compared 311 

Artaxerxes 314 

Aratus 339 

Galba 379 

Olho 401 

Tables of Weights, Measures, and Money . . 415 

Chronological Table 417 

Index 425 

PLUTARCH'S LIVES. 

THE 

LIFE OF CLEOMENES. 

After Agis was put to death, Leonidas intended the same 
fate for his brother Archidamus; but that prince saved himself 
by a timely retreat. However, his wife Agiatis, who was newly 
brought to bed, was forced by the tyrant from her own house, 
and given to his son Cleomenes. Cleomenes was not quite 
come to years of maturity, but his father was not willing that 
any other man should have the lady; for she was daughter 
to Gylippus, and heiress to his great estate; and, in beauty, as 
well as happiness of temper and conduct, superior to all the 
women of Greece. She left nothing unattempted to prevent 
her being forced into this match, but found all her efforts inef- 
fectual. Therefore, when she was married to Cleomenes, she 
made him a good and affectionate wife, though she hated his 
father. Cleomenes was passionately fond of her from the first; 
and his attachment to his wife made him sympathize with her 
on the mournful remembrance of Agis. He would often ask 
her for the history of that unfortunate prince, and listen with 
great attention to her account of his sentiments and designs. 

Cleomenes was ambitious of glory, and had a native great- 
ness of mind. Nature had, moreover, disposed him to temper- 
ance and simplicity of manners as much as Agis, but he had 
not his calmness and moderation. His spirit had an ardour in 
it; and there was an impetuosity in his pursuits of honour, or 
whatever appeared to him under that character. He thought 
it most glorious to reign over a willing people ; but at the same 
time, he thought it not inglorious to subdue their reluctances, 
and bring them against their inclinations into what was good 
and salutary. 

He was not satisfied with the prevailing manners and cus- 
toms of Sparta. He saw that ease and pleasure were the great 
objects with the people : that the king paid but little regard to 

A2 

g CLEOMENES. 

public concerns, and, if nobody gave him any disturbance, chose 
to spend his time in the enjoyments of affluence and luxury; 
that individuals, entirely actuated by self-interest, paid no at- 
tention to the business of the state, any farther than they could 
turn it to their own emolument. And what rendered the pros*- 
pect still more melancholy, it appeared dangerous to make any 
mention of training the youth to strong exercises and strict 
temperance, to preserving fortitude and universal equality, 
since the proposing of these things cost Agis his life. 

It is said, too, that Cleomenes was instructed in philosophy, 
at a very early period of life, by Sphaerus the Borysthenite,* 
who came to Lacedaemon, and taught the youth with great di- 
ligence and success. Sphaerus was one of the principal disci- 
ples of Zeno the Citiean ;t and it seems that he admired the 
strength of genius he found in Cleomenes, and added fresh in- 
centives to his love of glory. We are informed, that when 
Leonidas of old was asked, — " What he thought of the poetry 
of Tyrtaeus?" he said, — " I think it well calculated to excite 
the courage of our youth; for the enthusiasm with which it in- 
spires them makes them fear no danger in battle." So the 
Stoic philosophy^ may put persons of great and fiery spirits 
upon enterprises that are too desperate; but in those of a grave 
and a mild disposition, it will produce all the good effects for 
which it was designed. 

When Leonidas died, and Cleomenes came to the crown, he 
observed that all ranks of men were utterly corrupted. The 
rich had an eye only to private profit and pleasure, and utterly 
neglected the public interest. The common people, on ac- 
count of the meanness of their circumstances, had no spirit for 
war, or ambition to instruct their children in the Spartan ex- 
ercises. Cleomenes himself had only the name of king, while 
the power was in the hands of the ephori. He, therefore, soon 
began to think of changing the present posture of affairs. He 
had a friend called Xenares, united to him by such an affection 
as the Spartans called inspiration. Him he first sounded; in- 
quiring of him what kind of prince Agis was; by what steps, 
and with what associates, he came into the way he took. Xe- 
nares at first consented readily enough to satisfy his curiosity, 
and gave him an exact narrative of all the proceedings. But 

* This Sphaerus was born towards the end of the reign of Ptolemy Phila- 
delphia, and flourished under that of Euergetes. Diogenes Laertius has 
given us a catalogue of his works, which were considerable. He was the 
scholar of Zeno, and afterwards of Cleanthes. 

t He was so called to distinguish him from Zeno of Elea, a city of Laco- 
nia, who flourished about two hundred years after the death of Zeno the Ci- 
tiean. Citium, of which the elder Zeno was a native, was a town in Cyprus. 

t From its tendency to inspire a contempt of death, and a belief m the 
agency of Providence. 

CLEOMENES. 7 

when he found that Cleomenes interested himself deeply in 
the affair, and took such an enthusiastic pleasure in the new 
schemes of Agis, as to desire to hear them again and again, he 
reproved his distempered inclinations, and at last entirely left 
his company. However, he did not acquaint any one with 
the cause of their misunderstanding, but only said, — " Cleo- 
menes knew very well." As Xenares so strongly opposed 
the king's project, he thought others might be as little disposed 
to come into it; and, therefore, he concerted the whole matter 
by himself. In the persuasion that he could more easily effect 
his intended change in time of war than in peace, he embroiled 
his country with the Achaeans, who had indeed given sufficient 
occasion of complaint. For Aratus, who was the leading man 
among them, had laid it down as a principle, from the begin- 
ning of his administration, to reduce all Peloponnesus to one 
body. This was the end he had in view in his numerous ex- 
peditions, and in all the proceedings of government, during 
the many years that he held the reins in Achaia. And indeed 
he was of opinion that this was the only way to secure Pelo- 
ponnesus against his enemies without. He had succeeded with 
most of the states of that peninsula: the Lacedaemonians and 
Eleans, and such of the Arcadians as were in the Lacedaemo- 
nian interest, were all that stood out. Upon the death of Leo- 
nidas, he commenced hostilities against the Arcadians, parti- 
cularly those who bordered upon the Achaeans; by this means 
designing to try how the Lacedaemonians stood inclined. As 
for Cleomenes, he despised him as a young man without ex- 
perience. 

The ephorl, however, sent Cleomenes to seize Athenaeum,* 
near Belbina. This place is one of the keys of Laconia, and 
was then in dispute between the Spartans and Megalopolitans. 
Cleomenes accordingly took it, and fortified it. < Aratus made 
no remonstrance, but marched by night to surprise Tegea and 
Orchomenus. However, the persons who had promised to be- 
tray those places to him found their hearts fail them when they 
came to the point, and he retired undiscovered, as he thought. 
Upon this Cleomenes wrote to him, in a familiar way, desiring 
to know, — « Whither he marched the night before?" Aratus 
answered, — " That understanding his design to fortify Bel- 
bina, the intent of his last motion was to prevent that mea- 
sure." Cleomenes humorously replied, — " I am satisfied with 
the account of your march, but should be glad to know where 
those torches and ladders were marching." 

Aratus could not help laughing- at the jest; and he asked 
what kind of a man this young prince was? Democrates, a 

* A temple of Minerva. 

g CLEOMENES. 

Lacedaemonian exile, answered, — " If you design to do any 
thing against the Spartans, you must do it quickly, before the 
spurs of this cockerel be grown." 

Cleomenes, with a few horse, and three hundred foot, was 
now posted in Arcadia. The ephori, apprehensive of a war, 
commanded him home, and he obeyed; but finding that, in 
consequence of this retreat, Aratus had taken Caphyae, they 
ordered him to take the field again. Cleomenes made himself 
master of Methydrium, and ravaged the territories of Argos. 
Whereupon the Achaeans marched against him with twenty 
thousand foot and a thousand horse, under the command of 
Aristomachus. Cleomenes met him at Palantium, and offered 
him battle; but Aratus, intimidated by this instance of the 
young prince's spirit, dissuaded the general from engaging, 
and retreated. This retreat exposed Aratus to reproach 
among the Achaeans, and to scorn and contempt among the 
Spartans, whose army consisted not of more than five thou- 
sand men. Cleomenes, elevated with this success, began to 
talk in a higher tone among the people, and bade them remem- 
ber an expression of one of their ancient kings, who said, — 
" The Lacedaemonians seldom inquired the number of their 
enemies, but the place where they could be found." 

After this he went to the assistance of the Eleans, against 
whom the Achaeans had now turned their arms. He attacked 
the latter at Lycaeum as they were upon the retreat, and put 
them entirely to the rout; not only spreading terror through 
their whole army, but killing great numbers, and making 
many prisoners. It was even reported among the Greeks that 
Aratus was of the number of the slain. Aratus, availing him- 
self in the best manner of the opportunity, with the troops that 
attended him in his flight, marched immediately to Mantinea, 
and coming upon it by surprise, took it, and secured it for the 
Achaeans. 

The Lacedaemonians, greatly dispirited at this loss, opposed 
Cleomenes in his inclination for war. He therefore bethought 
himself of calling Archidamus, the brother of Agis, from Mes- 
sene, to whom, in the other family, the crown belonged ; for he 
imagined that the power of the ephori would not be so formi- 
dable when the kingly government, according to the Spartan 
constitution, was complete, and had its proper weight in the 
scale. The party that had put Agis to death, perceiving this, 
and dreading vengeance from Archidamus, if be should be esta- 
blished on the throne, took this method to prevent it: — They 
joined in inviting him to come privately to Sparta, and even 
assisted him in his return; but they assassinated him immedi- 
ately after. Whether it was against the consent of Cleomenes, 
as Phylarchus thinks, or whether his friends persuaded him to 

CLEOMENES. Q 

abandon that unhappy prince, we cannot take upon us to say 
The greatest part of the blame, however, fell upon those friends, 
who, if he gave his consent, were supposed to have teased him 
into it. 

By this time he was resolved to carry his intended changes 
into immediate execution; and, therefore, he bribed the ephori 
to permit him to renew the war. He gained also many others 
by the assistance of his mother Cratesiclea, who liberally sup- 
plied him with money, and joined in his schemes of glory. 
Nay? it is said, that though disinclined to marry again, for hei 
son's sake she accepted a man who had great interest and au- 
thority among the people. 

One of his first operations was the going to seize Leuctra, 
which is a place within the dependencies of Megalopolis. The 
Achaeans hastened to its reliei under the command of Aratus; 
and a battle was fought under the walls, in which part of the 
Lacedaemonian army was beaten. But Aratus stopping the 
pursuit at a defile which was in the way, Lysiadas* the Me- 
galopolitan, offended at the order, encouraged the cavalry un- 
der nis command to pursue the advantages they had gained ; 
by which means he entangled them among vineyards, ditches, 
and other enclosures, where they were forced to break their 
ranks, and fell into great disorder. Cleomenes seeing his op- 
portunity, commanded the Tarentines and Cretans to fall upon 
them; and Lysiadas, after great exertions of valour, was de- 
feated and slain. The Lacedaemonians, thus encouraged, re- 
turned to the action with shouts of joy, and routed the whole 
Achaean army. After a considerable carnage, a truce was 
granted the survivors, and they were permitted to bury their 
dead; but Cleomenes ordered the body of Lysiadas to be 
brought to him. He clothed it in robes of purple, and put a 
crown upon its head; and in this attire he sent it to the gates 
of Megalopolis. This was that Lysiadas who restored liberty 
to the city in which he was an absolute prince, and united it 
to the Achaean league. 

Cleomenes, greatly elated with this victory, thought, if mat- 
ters were once entirely at his disposal in Sparta, the Achaeans 
would no longer be able to stand before him. For this reason, 
he endeavoured to convince his father-in-law, Megistonoiis, 
that the yoke of the ephori ought to be broken, and an equal 
division of property to be made; by means of which equality 
Sparta would resume her ancient valour, and once more rise 
to the empire of Greece. Megistonoiis complied, and the king 
then took two or three other friends into the scheme. 

About that time one of the ephori had a surprising dream 

* In the text it is Lydiadas ; but Polybius calls him Lysiadas ; so does 
Plutarch in another place. 
Vol. IV. B 

j 0 CLEOMENES. 

as he slept in the temple of Pasiphaa. He thought that, In 
the court where the ephori used to sit for the despatch of bu- 
siness, four chairs were taken away, and only one left. And 
as he was wondering at the change, he heard a voice from the 
sanctuary, which said, — " This is best for Sparta." The ma- 
gistrate related this vision of his to Cleomenes, who at tirst 
was greatly disconcerted, thinking that some suspicion had led 
him to sound his intentions. But when he found that there 
was no fiction in the case, he was the more confirmed in his 
ourpose; and taking with him such of the citizens as he thought 
most likely to oppose it, he marched against Heraea and Alsaea, 
two cities belonging to the Achaean league, and took them. 
After this, he laid in store of provisions at Orchomenus, and 
then besieged Mantinea. At last he so harassed the Lacedae- 
monians, by a variety of long marches, that most of them de- 
sired to be left in Arcadia, and he returned to Sparta with the 
mercenaries only. By the way he communicated his design 
to such of them as he believed most attached to his inte\ jst, 
and advanced slowly, that he might come upon the ephori as 
they were at supper. 

When he approached the town, he sent Euryclidas before 
him to the hall where those magistrates used to sup, upon pre- 
tence of his being charged with some message relative to the 
army. He was accompanied by Thericion and Phoebis, and 
two other young men who had been educated with Cleomenes, 
and whom the Spartans call Samothracians.* These were at 
the head of a small party. While Euryclidas was holding the 
ephori in discourse, the others ran upon them with their drawn 
swords. They were all slain but Agesilaus, and he was then 
thought to have shared the same fate, for he was the first man 
that fell; but in a little time he conveyed himself silently out 
of the room, and crept into a little building which was the 
temple of Fear. This temple was generally shut up, but then 
happened to be open. When he was got in, he immediately 
barred the door. The other four were despatched outright; 
and so were above ten more who came to their assistance. 
Those whp remained quiet, received no harm; nor were any 
hindered from departing the city. Nay, Agesilaus himseli 
was spared, when he came the next day out of the temple. 

The Lacedaemonians have not only temples dedicated to 

* All the commentators agree that Eano9?axar is a corruption. Palmerius 
proposes to read ITu^ist, Pythians. So at Sparta they called two persons 
whom the king sent to consult the oracle of Apollo, and who used to eat at 
the king's table. But ITuSisi is very distant in sound from EauoS-jaxat. The 
editor of the former English translation proposes, by no means unhappily, to 
read ijiofytmat, which is synonymous to o-uvrjotpst. Proper regard ought to 
he paid, too, to the conjecture of Bryan and Du Soul, who offer us Sa^cmo? at. 
This signifies persons who give the signal of battle, prcefects, generals. 

CLEOMENES. j j 

Fear, hut also to Death, to Laughter, and many of the 
passions. Nor do they pay homage to Fear, as one of the 
noxious and destroying demons, but they consider it as the 
best, cement of society. Hence it was, that the ephori, (as 
Aristotle tells us,) when they entered upon their office, caused 
proclamation to be made, that the people should shave their 
upper lip, and be obedient to the laws, that they might not be 
under the necessity of having recourse to severity. As for 
the shaving of the upper lip, in my opinion, all the design of 
that injunction is, to teach the youth obedience in the smallest 
matters. And it seems to me, that the ancients did not think 
that valour consists in the exemption from fear; but, on the 
contrary, in the fear of reproach, and the dread of infamy. 
For those who stand most in fear of the law, act with the 
greatest intrepidity against the enemy; and tbey who are 
most tender of their reputation, look with the least concern 
upon other dangers. Therefore, one of the poets said well, — 

Ingenuous shame resides with fear. 

Hence Homer makes Helen say to her father-in-law, Pria- 
mus, — 

Before thy presence, father, I appear 

With conscious shame and reverential fear. — Pope. 

And, in another place, he says, the Grecian troops 

With fear and silence on their chiefs attend. 

For reverence, in vulgar minds, is generally the concomitant 
of fear. And, therefore, the Lacedaemonians placed the tem- 
ple of Fear near the hall where the ephori used to eat, to 
show that their authority was nearly equal to the regal. 

Next day Cleomenes proscribed eighty of the citizens, whom 
he thought it necessary to expel ; and he removed all the seats 
of the ephori except one, in which he designed to sit himself, 
to hear causes, and despatch other business. Then he assem- 
bled the people, in order to explain and defend what he had 
done. His speech was to this effect: — " The administration 
was put by Lycurgus in the hands of the kings and the senate; 
and Sparta was governed by them a long time, without any 
occasion for other magistrates. But, as the Messenian Avar 
was drawn out to a great length, and the kings, having the 
armies to command, had not leisure to attend to the decision 
of causes at home, they pitched upon some of their friends to 
be left as their deputies for that purpose, under the title of 
ephori, or inspectors. At first they behaved as substitutes and 
servants to the kings; but, by little and little, they got the 
power into their own hands, and insensibly erected their office 

CLEOMENES. 

into an independent magistracy.* A proof of this is a custom 
which has obtained till this time, that when the ephori sent for 
the kins;, he refused to hearken to the first and second message, 
and did not attend them till they sent a third. Asteropus 
was the first of the ephori who raised their office to that height 
of authority, many ages after their creation. While they kept 
within the bounds of moderation, it was better to endure than 
to remove them; but when, by their usurpations, they de- 
stroyed the ancient form of government, when they deposed 
some kings, put others to death without any form of trial, and 
threatened those princes who desire to see the divine constitu- 
tion of their country in its original lustre, they became abso- 
lutely insupportable. Had it been possible, without the shed- 
ding of blood, to have exterminated those pests which they 
had introduced into Lacedsemon; such as luxury, superfluous 
expense, debts, usury, and those more ancient evils, poverty 
and riches, I should then have thought myself the happiest of 
kings. In curing the distempers of my country, I should have 
been considered as the physician whose lenient hand heals 
without giving pain. But for what necessity has obliged me 
to do, I have the authority of Lycurgus, who, though neither 
king nor magistrate, but only a private man, took upon him to 
act as a king,t and appeared publicly in arms. The conse- 
quence of which was, that Charilaus, the reigning prince, in 
great consternation, fled to the altar. But being a mild and 
patriotic king, he soon entered into the designs of Lycurgus, 
and accepted his new form of government. Therefore, the 
proceedings of Lycurgus are an evidence that it is next to im- 
possible to new-model a constitution, without the terror of an 
armed force. For my own part, I have applied that remedy 
with great moderation; only ridding myself of such as op- 
posed the true interest of Lacedsemon. Among the rest, I 
shall make a distribution of all the lands, and clear the people 
of their debts. Among the strangers, I shall select some of 
the best and ablest, that they may be admitted citizens of 
Sparta, and protect her with their arms; and that we may no 
longer see Laconia a prey to the iEtolians and Illyrians for 
want of a sufficient number of inhabitants concerned for its 
defence." 

When he had finished his speech, he was the first to surren- 
der his own estate into the public stock. His father-in-law, 

* When the authority of the kings was grown too enormous, Theopompus 
found it necessary to curb it, by the institution of the ephori. But they were 
not, as Cleomenes says they were, in their first establishment, ministers to tiie 
kings. 

t Lycurgus never assumed or aspired to regal authority : and Cleomenes 
mentions this only to take off the odium from himself. 

CLEOMENES. j 3 

Megistonoiis, and his other friends, followed his example. 
The rest of the citizens did the same; and then the land was 
divided. He even assigned lots for each of the persons whom 
he had driven into exile; and declared that they should all be 
recalled when tranquillity had once more taken place. Having 
filled up the number of citizens out of the best of the inhabi- 
tants 01 the neighbouring countries, he raised a body of four 
thousand foot, whom he taught to use the two-handed pike in- 
stead of the javelin, and to hold their shields by a handle, and 
not by a ring, as before. Then he applied himself to the edu- 
cation of the youth, and formed them with all the strictness of 
Lacedaemonian discipline ; in the course of which he was much 
assisted by Sphserus. Their schools of exercise, and their re- 
fectories, were soon brought into that good order which they 
had of old; some being reduced to it by compulsion, but the 
greatest part coming voluntarily into that noble training pecu- 
liar to Sparta. However, to prevent any offence that might 
be taken at the name of monarchy, he made his brother Eucli- 
das his partner to the throne; and this was the only time that 
the Spartans had two kings of the same family. 

He observed that the Achseans, and Aratus, the principal 
man among them, were persuaded that the late change had 
brought the Spartan affairs into a doubtful and unsettled state; 
and that he would not quit the city while it was in such a fer- 
ment. He, therefore, thought it would have both its honour 
and utility, to show the enemy how readily his troops would 
obey him. In consequence of which he entered the Megalo- 
politan territories, where he spread desolation, and made a 
very considerable booty. In one of his last marches he seized 
a company of comedians who were on the road from Messene; 
upon which he built a stage in the enemy's country; proposed 
a prize of forty minae to the best performer, and spent one day 
in seeing them. Not that he set any great value on such di- 
versions, but he did it by way of insult upon the enemy, to 
show his superiority by this mark of contempt: for, among 
the Grecians and royal armies, his was the only one which had 
not a train of players, jugglers, singers, and dancers, of both 
sexes. No intemperance or buffoonery, no public shows or 
feasts, except on the late occasion, were ever seen in his camp. 
The young men passed the greatest part of their time in the 
exercises, and the old men in teaching them. The hours of 
leisure were amused with cheerful discourse, which had all the 
smartness of laconic repartee. This kind of amusement had 
those advantages which we have mentioned in the life of Ly- 
curgus. 

The king himself was the best teacher. Plain and simple 

Vol. IV. 2 

1 4 CLEOMENES. 

in his equipage and diet, assuming no manner of pomp above 
a common citizen, he set a glorious example of sobriety. 
This was no small advantage to his affairs in Greece. When 
the Greeks addressed themselves to other kings, they did not 
so much admire their wealth and magnificence, as execrate 
their pride and spirit of ostentation, their difficulty of access, 
and harshness of behaviour to all who had business at their 
courts. But when they applied to Cleomenes, who not only 
bore the title, but had all the great qualities of a king, they saw 
no purple or robes of state, no rich carriages, no gauntlets ol 
pages or door-keepers to be run. Nor had they their answer, 
after great difficulties, from the mouth of secretaries;* but they 
found him in an ordinary habit, ready to meet them, and offer 
them his hand. He received them with a cheerful counte- 
nance, and entered into their business with the utmost ease and 
freedom. This engaging manner gained their hearts; and they 
declared he was the only worthy descendant of Hercules. 

His common supper was short and truly laconic. There 
were only couches for three people; but when he entertained 
ambassadors or strangers, two more couches were added, and 
the table was a little better furnished by the servants: not that 
any curious desert was added; only the dishes were larger, 
and the wine more generous: for he blamed one of his friends 
for setting nothing before strangers but the coarse cake and 
black broth, which they eat in their common refectories: — 
" When we have strangers to entertain," he said, " we need 
not be such very exact Lacedaemonians." After supper, a 
three-legged standt was brought in, upon which were placed a 
brassy bowl full of wine, two silver pots that held about a pint§ 
and a half a-piece, and a few cups of the same metal. Such of 
the guests as were inclined to drink, made use of these vessels, 
for the cup was not pressed upon any man against his will. 
There was no music, or other extrinsic amusement; nor was 
any such thing wanted. He entertained his company very 
agreeably with his own conversation; sometimes asking ques- 
tions, and sometimes telling stories. His serious discourse 
was perfectly free from moroseness, and his mirth from petu- 
lance and rusticity. The arts which other princes used of 
drawing men to their purpose, by bribery and corruption, he 
looked upon as both iniquitous and impolitic : but to engage 
and fix people in his interest by the charms of conversation, 
without fraud or guile, appeared to him an honourable method. 

Id the text it is ypa^nanov, by billets ; but probably it should be read 
■ypanficmov, secretaries, there being no instances in antiquity that have come 
to our knowledge, of answers in writing to a personal application. 

t Tpwas. \ KpaTT,p. { AixetuVjs. 

CLEOMENES. ] 5 

and worthy of a king. For he thought this the true difference 
between a hireling and a friend, that the one is gained by mo- 
ney, and the other by an obliging behaviour. 

The Mantineans were the first who applied for his assist- 
ance. They admitted him into their city in the night; and 
having, with his help, expelled the Achaean garrison, put 
themselves under his protection. He re-established their laws 
and ancient form of government, and retired the same clay to 
Tegea. From thence he fetched a compass through Arcadia, 
and marched down to Pheras in Achaia; intending by this 
movement either to bring the Achaeans to a battle, or make 
them look upon Aratus in a mean light for giving up the 
country, as it were, to his destroying sword. 

Hyperbatas was indeed general at that time, but Aratus had 
all the authority. The Achaeans assembled their forces, and 
encamped at Dymaeae* near Hecatombaeum ; upon which Cleo- 
menes marched up to them, though it was thought a rash step 
for him to take post between Dymaeae, which belonged to the 
enemy, and the Achaean camp. However, he boldly chal- 
lenged the Achaeans, and indeed forced them to battle, in 
which he entirely defeated them, killed great numbers upon 
the spot, and took many prisoners. Lango was his next ob- 
ject, from which he expelled an Achaean garrison, and then 
put the town into the hands of the Eleans. 

When the Achaean affairs were in this ruinous state, Ara- 
tus, who used to be general every other year,t refused the 
command, though they pressed him strongly to accept it. But 
certainly it was wrong, when such a storm was raging, to quit 
the helm, and leave the direction to another. The first de- 
mands of Cleomenes appeared to the deputies J of the Achae- 
ans moderate enough ; afterwards he insisted on having the 
command himself In other matters, he said, he should not 
differ with them, for he would restore them both the prisoners 
and their lanas. The Achaeans agreed to a pacification on 
these conditions, and invited Cleomenes to Lerna, where a ge 
neral assembly of their state was to be held. But Cleomenes 

* Polybius calls it Dymse. 

tEvoJkoj rap' EviauTov a£i rpamyfiv.}: The former English translator renders 
(his, who used to continue general two years together; and Dacier to the same 
sense, qui avoit accoutume d'etre capitaine-general tous les deux ans. But 
they are both under a great mistake ; Trap' cviauTov does certainly signify every 
other year. So in Polybius, Trapa revapirw 'n^pav, every fourth day ; and in 
Aristotle, ?rapa prnva TpiTov, every third month. 

\ The two French translators, and the English one employed by Tonson, 
change nfTpiahere into s^ETpia, without any necessity, or pretence of autho- 
rity for it. We do not see why Cleomenes might not, in the first conditions 
he proposed, possibly demand something less of the Achaean than their allow 
ing him to be commander-in-chief and governor of all Greece. 

j g CLEOMENES. 

hastening his march too much, heated himself, and then very 
imprudently drank cold water; the consequence of which was, 
that he threw up a great quantity of blood, and lost the use of 
his speech. He, therefore, sent the Achaeans the most respect- 
able of the prisoners, and putting off the meeting, retired to 
Lacedaemon. 

This ruined the affairs of Greece. Had it not been for this, 
she might have recovered out of her present distress, and have 
maintained herself against the insolence and rapaciousness oi 
the Macedonians. Aratus either feared or distrusted Cleome- 
nes, or envied his unexpected success. He thought it intoler- 
able that a young man, newly sprung up, should rob him at 
once of the honour and power which he had been in posses- 
sion of for three-and-thirty years, and come into a govern- 
ment which had been growing so long under his auspices. Foi 
this reason, he first tried what his interest and powers of per- 
suasion would do to keep the Achaeans from closing with 
Cleomenes; but they were prevented from attending to him 
by their admiration of the great spirit of Cleomenes, and 
their opinion that the demands of the Spartans were not un- 
reasonable, who only desired to bring Peloponnesus back to 
jts ancient model. Aratus then undertook a thing which 
would not have become any man in Greece, but in him was 
particularly dishonourable, and unworthy of all his former 
conduct, both in the cabinet and the field : — He called Anti- 
gonus into Greece, and filled Peloponnesus with Macedonians, 
though in his youth he had expelled them, and rescued the 
citadel of Corinth out of their hands. He was even an enemy 
to all kings, and was equally hated by them. Antigonus, in 
particular, he loaded with a thousand reproaches, as appears 
from the writings he had left behind him.* He boasts that 
he had encountered and overcome innumerable difficulties, in 
order to deliver Athens from a Macedonian garrison; and yet 
he brought those very Macedonians, armed as they were, into 
his own country, into his own house, and even into the wo- 
men's apartment. At the same time, he could not bear that a 
Spartan king, a descendant of Hercules, who wanted only to 
restore the ancient policy of his country, to correct its broken 
harmony, and bring it back to the sober Doric tone which Ly- 
curgus had given it;t he could not bear that such a prince 
should be declared general of the Sicyonians and Triccaeans.}, 

* Aratus wrote a history of the Achaeans, and of his own conduct. 

t The music, like the architecture of the Dorians, was remarkable for its 
simplicity. 

| This probably should be Tritaeans. Tritasa was a city of Phocis, and 
comprehended in the league; but Tricca, which was in Thessaly, conic) 
hardly be so. 

CLEOMENES. \ J 

While he avoided the coarse cake and the short cloak, and 
what he thought the greatest grievance in the whole system 
of Cleomenes^the abolishing of riches, and the making poverty 
a more supportable thing, he made Achaia truckle to the dia- 
dem and purple of Macedonians, and of Asiatic grandees. To 
shun the appearance of submission to Cleomenes, he offered 
sacrifices to the divinity of Antigonus, and, with a garland on 
his head, sungjpse&ns in honour of a rotten Macedonian. These 
things we say not in accusation of Aratus, (for in many re- 
spects he was a great man, and worthy of Greece;) we mean 
only to point out, with compassion, the weakness of human 
nature, which, in dispositions the best formed to virtue, can 
produce no excellence without some taint of imperfection. 

When the Achaeans assembled again at Argos, and Cleo- 
menes came down from Tegea to meet them, the Greeks enter- 
tained great hopes of peace. But Aratus, who had already 
settled the principal points with Antigonus, fearing that Cleo- 
menes, either by his obliging manner of treating, or by force, 
would gain all he wanted'of the people, proposed, — " That he 
should take three hundred hostages for the security of his per- 
son, and enter the town alone ; or, if he did not approve of 
that proposal, should come to the place of exercise without the 
walls, called Cyllarabium* and treat there at the head of his 
army." Cleomenes remonstrated that these proceedings were 
very unjust. He said, — " They should have made him these 
proposals at first, and not now, when he was come to their 
gates, distrust and shut him out." He, therefore, wrote to the 
Achaeans a letter on this subject, almost filled with complaints 
of Aratus; and the applications of Aratus to the people were 
little more than invectives against the king of Sparta. The 
consequence of this was, that the latter quickly retired, and 
sent a herald to declare war against the Achaeans. This he- 
rald, according to Aratus, was sent not to Argos, but to iEgi- 
um,t in order that the Achaeans might be entirely unprepared. 
There were at this time great commotions among the mem- 
bers of the Achaean league, and many towns were ready to fall 
off: for the common people hoped for an equal distribution of 
lands, and to have their debts cancelled; while the better sort, 
in general, were displeased at Aratus, and some of them highly 
provoked at his bringing the Macedonians into Peloponnesus. 

Encouraged by these misunderstandings, Cleomenes entered 
Achaia; where he first took Pellene by surprise, and dislodged 
the Achaean garrison. Afterwards he made himself master of 

* From Cyllarbus, the son of Sthenelus. 

t This was a maritime town of Achaia on the Corinthian bay.— The inten- 
tion of Cleomenes was to take it by surprise, before the inhabitants could 
have intelligence of the war. 

Vol. IV. C 2* 

j g CLEOMENES. 

Phcneum and Penteleum. As the Achseans were apprehensive 
of a revolt at Corinth and Sicyon, they sent a body of cavalry 
and some mercenaries from Argos, to guard against any mea- 
sures tending that way, and went themselves to celebrate the 
Nemean games at Argos. Upon this, Cleomenes hoping, what 
really proved the case, that, if he could come suddenly upon 
the city, while it was filled with multitudes assembled to par- 
take of the diversions, he should throw all into the greatest 
confusion, marched up to the walls by night, and seized the 
quarter called Jispis, which lay above the theatre, notwith- 
standing its difficulty of access. This struck them with such 
terror, that not a man thought of making any resistance: they 
agreed to receive a garrison, and gave twenty of the citizens as 
hostages for their acting as allies to Sparta, and following the 
standard of Cleomenes as their general. 

This action added greatly to the fame and authority of that 
prince : for the ancient kings of Sparta, with all their endea- 
vours, could never fix Argos in their interest; and Pyrrhus, 
one of the ablest generals in the world, though he forced his 
way into the town, could not hold it, but lost his life in the at 
tempt, and had great part of his army cut in pieces. Hence 
the despatch and keenness of Cleomenes were the more ad 
mired ; and they who before had laughed at him for declaring 
he would tread in the steps of Solon and Lycurgus in the can- 
celling of debts, and in an equal division of property, were 
now fully persuaded that he was the sole cause of all the 
change in the spirit and success of the Spartans. In both re- 
spects they were so contemptible before, and so little able to 
help themselves, that the ^Etonians made an inroad into La- 
conia, and carried off fifty thousand slaves. On which occa- 
sion, one of the old Spartans said, " The enemy had done them 
a kindness in taking such a heavy charge off their hands." 
Yet they had no sooner returned to their primitive customs 
and discipline, than, as if Lycurgus himself had restored his 
polity, and invigorated it with his presence, they had given 
the most extraordinary instances of valour and obedience to 
their magistrates, in raising Sparta to its ancient superiority 
in Greece, and recovering Peloponnesus. 

Cleonae and Phlius* came in the same tide of success with 
Argos. Aratus was then making an inquisition at Corinth in- 
to the conduct of such as were reported to be in the Lacedae- 
monian interest; but when the news of their late losses reached 
him, and he found that the city was falling off to Cleomenes, 
and wanted to get rid of the Achseans,t he was not a little 

* Towns between Argos and Corinth. 

i In the prated text it is Ax«iwv airaUa7rivai (JsXojtfvov, and the Latin and 

CLEOMENES. j Cj 

alarmed. In this confusion he could find no hetter expedient 
than that of calling the citizens to council, and in the mean 
time, he stole away to the gate. A horse heing ready for him 
there, he mounted and fled to Sicyon. The Corinthians were 
in such haste to pay their compliments to Cleomenes, that, 
Aratus tells us, they killed or spoiled all their horses. He ac- 
quaints us also, that Cleomenes highly blamed the people of 
Corinth for suffering him to escape. Nevertheless, he adds, 
that Megistonoiis came to him on the part of that prince, and 
offered to give him large sums if he would deliver up the cita- 
del of Corinth, where Tie had an Achaean garrison. He an- 
swered,— " That affairs did not then depend upon him, but he 
must be governed by their circumstances." So Aratus him- 
self writes. 

Cleomenes, in his march from Argos, added the Troezenians, 
the Epidaurians, and Hermionians, to the number of his friends 
and allies, and then went to Corinth, and drew a line of cir- 
cumvallation about the citadel, which the Achasans refused to 
surrender. However, he sent for the friends and stewards of 
Aratus, and ordered them to take care of his house and effects 
in that city. He likewise sent again to that general by Trity- 
malus the Messenian, and proposed that the citadel should be 
garrisoned half with Achasans and half with Lacedaemonians ; 
offering, at the same time, to double the pension he had from 
Ptolemy king of Egypt. As Aratus, instead of accepting 
these conditions, sent his son and other hostages to Antigonus, 
and persuaded the Achaeans to give orders that the citadel of 
Corinth should be put in the hands of that prince, Cleomenes 
immediately ravaged the territories of Sicyon, and, in pursu- 
ance of a decree of the Corinthians, seized on the whole estate 
of Aratus. After Antigonus had passed Gerania,* with a 
great army, Cleomenes thought it more advisable to fortify the 
Onaean mountains,! than the Isthmus, and by the advantage of 
his post to tire out the Macedonians, rather than hazard a 
pitched battle with a veteran phalanx. Antigonus was greatly 
perplexed at this plan of operations; for he had neither laid in 
a sufficient quantity of provisions, nor could he easily force the 
pass by which Cleomenes had sat down. He attempted one 

French translators have followed it, rendering it to this sense, and the Achce- 
ans were hastening home : but two manuscripts give us (3a\ou£VTiv, which is to 
be referred to woXiv, before; and with the former English translator, we 
choose to follow that reading. 

* A mountain between Megara and Corinth. 

t This range of mountains extends from the Scironian rocks, on the road 
to Attica, as far as mount Cithoeron. — Strab. 1. vii. They were called 
opt)' ovcia, the Mountains of AsseB. 

20 CLEOMENES. 

night, indeed, to get into Peloponnesus by the port of Lechae- 
um,* but was repulsed with loss. 

Cleomenes was much encouraged with this success, and his 
troops went to their evening's refreshment with pleasure. An- 
tigonus, on the other hand; was extremely dispirited; for he 
saw himself in so troublesome a situation, that it was scarcely 
possible to find any resources which were not extremely diffi- 
cult. At last he determined to move to the promontory of 
Heraeum, and from thence to transport his troops in boats to 
Sicyon ; but that required a great deal of time, and very consi- 
derable preparations. However, the evening after, some of 
the friends of Aratus arrived from Argos by sea, being sent to 
acquaint him that the Argives were revolting from Cleomenes, 
and purposed to invite him to that city. Aristotle was the au- 
thor of the defection ; and he had found no great difficulty in 
persuading the people into it, because Cleomenes had not can- 
celled their debts, as he had given them room to hope. Upon 
this, Aratus, with fifteen hundred men, whom he had from 
Antigonus, sailed to Epidaurus. But Aristotle, not waiting 
for him, assembled the townsmen, and, with the assistance 01 
Timoxenus and a party of Achaeans from Sicyon, attacked 
the citadel. 

Cleomenes getting intelligence of this about the second 
watch of the night, sent for Megistonoiis, and in an angry tone, 
ordered him to the relief of Argos : for he it was who had 

Erincipally undertaken for the obedience of the Argives, and, 
y that means, prevented the expulsion of such as were sus- 
pected. Having despatched Megistonoiis upon this business, 
the Spartan prince watched the motions of Antigonus, and en- 
deavoured to dispel the fears of the Corinthians, assuring them 
it was no great thing that had happened at Argos, but only an 
inconsiderable tumult. Megistonoiis got into Argos, and was 
slain in a skirmish there; the garrison were hard pressed, and 
messenger after messenger sent to Cleomenes. Upon this he 
was afraid that the enemy, after they had made themselves 
masters of Argos, would block up the passages against him, 
and then go and ravage Laconia at their pleasure, and besiege 
Sparta itself, which was left without defence. He therefore 
decamped from Corinth; the consequence of which was the 
loss of the town; for Antigonus immediately entered it, and 
placed a garrison there. In the mean time, Cleomenes having 
collected his forces, which were scattered in their march, at- 
tempted to scale the walls of Argos; but failing in that enter- 
prise, he broke open the vaults under the quarter called Aspis^ 
gained an entrance that way, and joined his garrison, which 

* One of the harbours of Corinth. 

CLEOMENES. 21 

still helcl out against the Achseans. After this he took some 
other quarters of the city by assault, and ordering the Cretan 
archers to ply their bows, cleared the streets ot the enemy. 
But when he saw Antigonus descending with his infantry from 
the heights into the plain, and his cavalry already pouring in- 
to the city, he thought it impossible to maintain his post. He 
had now no other resource but to collect all his men, and re- 
tire along the walls, which he accordingly did without loss. 
Thus, after achieving the greatest things in a short space of 
time, and making himself master of almost all Peloponnesus 
in one campaign, he lost all in less time than he gained it; 
some cities immediately withdrawing from his alliance, and 
others surrendering themselves not long after to Antigonus. 

Such was the ill success of this expedition. And what was 
no less a misfortune, as he was marching home, messengers 
from Lacedsemon met him in the evening near Tegea, and in- 
formed him of the death of his wife. His affection and esteem 
for Agiatis was so great, that, amidst the current of his hap- 
piest success, he could not stay from her a whole campaign, 
but often repaired to Sparta. No wonder, then, thai: a young 
man, deprived of so beautiful and virtuous a wife, was ex- 
tremely affected with the loss. Yet his sorrow did not debase 
the dignity of his mind. He spoke in the same accent; he 
preserved the same dress and look; he gave his orders to his 
officers, and provided for the security of Tegea. 

Next morning he entered Lacedsemon ; and, after paying a 
proper tribute to grief at home with his mother and his chil- 
dren, he applied himself to the concerns of state. Ptolemy, 
king of Egypt, agreed to furnish him with succours; but it 
was on condition that he sent him his mother and children as 
hostages. This circumstance he knew not how to communi- 
cate to his mother; and he often attempted to mention it to 
her, but could not go forward. She began to suspect that 
there 'was something which he was afraid to open to her; and 
she asked his friends what it might be. At last he ventured 
to tell her; upon which she laughed very pleasantly, and 
said, — " Was this the thing which you have so long hesitated 
to express? Why do not you immediately put us on board a 
ship, and send this carcass of mine where you think it may be 
of most use to Sparta, before age renders it good for nothing, 
and sinks it into the grave?" 

When every thing was prepared for the voyage, they went 
by land to Tsenarus; the army conducting them to that port. 
Cratesiclea being on the point of taking ship, took Cleomenes 
alone into the temple of Neptune, where, seeing him in great 
emotion and concern, she threw her arms about him, and 
said, — " King of Sparta, take care that when we go out, no 

22 

CLEOMENES. 

one perceive us weeping or doing any thing unworthy that 
glorious place. This alone is in our power; the event is in the 
hands of God." After she had given him this advice, and 
composed her countenance, she went on hoard, with her little 
grandson in her arms, and ordered the pilot to put to sea as 
soon as possible. 

Upon her arrival in Egypt, she understood that Ptolemy 
had received ambassadors from Antigonus, and seemed to lis- 
ten to his proposals; and, on the other hand, she was informed 
that Cleomenes, though invited by the Achaeans to a pacifica- 
tion, was afraid, on her account, to put an end to the war, 
without Ptolemy's consent. In this difficulty she wrote to 
her son, to desire him " to do what he thought most advanta- 
geous and honourable for Sparta, and not, for the sake of an 
old woman and a child, to live always in fear of Ptolemy." 
So great was the behaviour of Cratesiclea under adverse for- 
tune. 

After Antigonus had taken Tegea, and plundered Orcho 
menus and Mantinea, Cleomenes, now shut up within the 
bounds of Laconia, enfranchised such of the helots as could pay 
five Attic minsc for their liberty. By this expedient he raised 
fifty talents; and having, moreover, armed and trained in the 
Macedonian manner two thousand of those helots, whom he 
designed to oppose to the Leucaspides of Antigonus, he en- 
gaged in a great and unexpected enterprise. Megalopolis was 
at that time as great and powerful a city as Sparta. It was 
supported, besides, by the Achaeans and Antigonus, whose 
troops lay on each side of it. Indeed, the Megalopolitans were 
the foremost and most eager of all the Achaeans in their appli- 
cation to Antigonus. This city, however, Cleomenes resolved 
to surprise ; for which purpose he ordered his men to take five 
days' provisions, and led them to Sellasia, as if he designed an 
inroad into the territories of Argos. But he turned short, and 
entered those of Megalopolis; and, after having refreshed his 
troops at Rhoetium, he marched, by Helicon,* directly to the 
object he had in view. When he was near it, he sent Panteus 
before with two companies of Lacedaemonians, to seize that 
part of the wall which was between the two towers, and which 
he understood to be the least guarded. He followed with the 
rest of his army at the common pace. Panteus finding not 
only that quarter, but great part of the wall without defence, 
pulled it down in some places, undermined it in others, and 
put all the sentinels to the sword. While he was thus em- 
ployed, Cleomenes came up, and entered the city with his 
forces, before the Megalopolitans knew of his approach. 

* Lubinus thinks it ought to be read Helisson, there being no such place as 
Helicon in Arcadia. 

CLEOMENES. 23 

They were no sooner apprised of the misfortune which had 
befallen them, than the greatest part left the city, taking their 
money and most valuable effects with them. The rest made a 
stand, and though they could not dislodge the enemy, yet their 
resistance gave their fellow-citizens opportunity to escape. 
There remained not above a thousand men in the town, all the 
rest having retired to Messene, with their wives and children, 
before there was any possibility of pursuing them. A consi- 
derable part even of those who had armed and fought in de- 
fence of the city got off, and very few were taken prisoners. 
Of this number were Lysandridas and Thearidas, two persons 
of great name and authority in Megalopolis. As they were 
such respectable men, the soldiers carried them before Cleo- 
menes. Lysandridas no sooner saw Cleomenes than he thus 
addressed him: — " Now," said he, in a loud voice, because it 
was at a distance, " now, king of Sparta, you have an opportu- 
nity to do an action much more glorious and princely than the 
late one, and to acquire immortal honour." Cleomenes, guess- 
ing at his aim, made answer, — " You would not have me re- 
store you the town?" " That is the very thing," said Lysan- 
dridas, " I would propose. I advise you, by all means, not to 
destroy so fine a city, but to fill it with firm friends and faith- 
ful allies, by restoring the Megalopolitans to their country, and 
becoming the saviour of so considerable a people." Cleome- 
nes paused a while, and then replied, — " This is hard to be- 
lieve; but be it as it will, let glory with us have always greater 
weight than interest." In consequence of this determination, 
he sent the two men to Messene, with a herald in his own 
name, to make the Megalopolitans an offer of their town, on 
condition that they would renounce the Achseans, and declare 
themselves his friends and allies. 

Though Cleomenes made so gracious and humane a proposal, 
Philopoemen would not suffer the Megalopolitans to accept it, 
or to quit the Achaean league;* but assuring them that the king 
of Sparta, instead of inclining to restore them their city, want- 
ed to get the citizens too into his power, he forced Thearidas 
and Lysandridas to leave Messene. This is that Philopoemen 
who afterwards was the leading man among the Achaeans, and 
(as we have related in his Life) one of the most illustrious 
personages among the Greeks. 

Upon this news, Cleomenes, who hitherto had kept the 
houses and goods of the Megalopolitans with such care, that 
not the least thing was embezzled, was enraged to such a de- 
gree that he plundered the whole, sent the statues and pictures 

* Polybius bestows great and just encomiums on this conduct of the Me 
galopolitans, 1. xi. 

04 CLEOMENES. 

to Sparta, and levelled the greatest and best parts of the city 
with the ground. After this he marched home again, being 
under some apprehensions that Antigonus and the Achseans 
would come upon him. They, however, made no motion to- 
wards it, for they were then holding a council at iEgium. 
Aratus mounted the rostrum on that occasion, where he wept 
a long time with his robe before his face. They were all 
greatly surprised, and desired him to speak. At last he said, — ■ 
" Megalopolis is destroyed by Cleomenes." The Achaeans 
were astonished at so great and sudden a stroke, and the coun- 
cil immediately broke up. Antigonus made great efforts to 
go to the relief of the place ; but as his troops assembled slowly 
from their winter-quarters, he ordered them to remain where 
they were, and marched to Argos with the forces he had with 
him. 

This made the second enterprise of Cleomenes appear rash 
and desperate: but Polybius,* on the contrary, informs us, 
that it was conducted with great prudence and foresight; for 
knowing (as he tells us) that the Macedonians were dispersed 
in winter-quarters, and that Antigonus lay in Argos with only 
his friends and a few mercenaries about him, he entered the 
territories of that city, in the persuasion, that either the shame 
of suffering such an inroad would provoke Antigonus to bat- 
tle, and expose him to a defeat; or that, if he declined the com- 
bat, it would bring him into disrepute with the Argives. The 
event justified his expectation. When the people of Argos 
saw their country laid waste, every thing that was valuable 
destroyed or carried off, they ran in great displeasure to the 
king's gates, and besieged them with clamour, bidding him 
either go out and fight, or else give place to his superiors. 
Antigonus, however, like a wise and able general, thought the 
censures of strangers no disgrace in comparison of his quitting 
a place of security, and rashly hazarding a battle, and, there- 
fore, he abode by his first resolutions. Cleomenes, in the 
mean time, marched up to the very walls, insulted his ene- 
mies, and, before he retired, spread desolation at his pleasure. 

Soon after his return, he was informed that Antigonus was 
come to Tegea, with a design to enter Laconia on that side. 
Upon this emergency, he put his troops under march another 
way, and appeared again before Argos by break of day, ravag- 
ing all the adjacent fields. He did not now cut down the corn 
with scythes and sickles, as people usually do, but beat it down 
with wooden instruments in the form of scimitars, as if this 
destruction was only an amusement to his soldiers in their 
march. Yet, when they would have set fire to Cyllarabis, the 

* Polybius, lib. xi. 

CLEOMENES. 05 

school of exercise, he prevented it; reflecting that the ruin of 
Megalopolis was dictated rather by passion than by reason. 

Antigonus immediately returned to Argos, having taken 
care to place guards in all the passes of the mountains. But 
Cleomenes, as if he held him and his operations in the utmost 
contempt, sent heralds to demand the keys of Juno's temple, 
that he might sacrifice to the goddess. After he had pleased 
himself with this insult on his enemy, and offered his sacrifice 
under the walls of the temple, which was fast shut up, he led 
his troops off to Phlius. In his march from thence he dislodged 
the garrison of Ologuntum, and then proceeded by Orchome- 
nus; by which means he not only inspired this people with 
fresh courage, but came to be considered by the enemy as a 
most able general, and a man capable of the greatest underta- 
kings: for, with the strength of the single city, to oppose the 
whole power of the Macedonians and Peloponnesians, and all 
the treasures of the king; and not only to keep Laconia un- 
touched, but to carry devastation into the enemy's country, 
were indications of no common genius and spirit. 

He who first called money the sinews of business, seems 
principally to have had respect to that of war. And Demades, 
when the Athenians called upon him to equip their navy and 
get it out, though their treasury was very low, told them, — 
" They must think of baking bread before they thought of an 
embarkation." It is also said, that the old Archidamus, at the 
beginning of the Peloponnesian war, when the allies desired 
that the quota of each should be determined, made answer, 
that " war cannot be kept at a set diet." And in this case we 
may justly say, that as wrestlers, strengthened by long exer- 
cise, do at last tire out those who have equal skill and agility, 
but not the exercise; so Antigonus, coming to the war with 
vast funds, in process of time tired out and overcame Cleome- 
nes, who could but in a very slender manner pay his merce- 
naries, and give his Spartans bread. 

In all other respects the times favoured Cleomenes, Antigo- 
nus being drawn home by the bad posture of his affairs: for in 
his absence the barbarians invaded and ravaged all Macedonia. 
The Illyrians, in particular, descending with a great army from 
the north, harassed the Macedonians so much, that they were 
forced to send for Antigonus. Had the letters been brought a 
little before the battle, that general would have immediately 
departed, and bidden the Achseans a long farewell. But fortune, 
who loves to make the greatest affairs turn upon some minute 
circumstance, showed on this occasion of what consequence a 
moment of time may be.* As soon as the battle of Sellasiat 

* Plutarch had this reflection from Polybius. 

+ Polybius has given a particular account of this battle. Antigonus had 

Vol. IV. D 3 

26 

CLEOMENES. 

was fought, and Cleomenes had lost his army and his city, 
messengers came to call Antigonus home. This was a great 
aggravation of the Spartan king's misfortunes. Had he held 
off and avoided an action only a day or two longer, he would 
have been under no necessity of fighting; and after the Mace- 
donians were gone, he might have made peace with the Achae- 
ans on what conditions he pleased. But such, as we said, was 
his want of money, that he had no resource but the sword ; and, 
therefore, as Polybius informs us, with twenty thousand men, 
was forced to challenge thirty thousand. 

He showed himself an excellent general in the whole course 
of the action; his Spartans behaved with great spirit, and his 
mercenaries fought not ill. His defeat was owing to the su- 
perior advantage the Macedonians had in their armour, and to 
the weight and impetuosity of their phalanx. 

Phylarchus, indeed, assures us, it was the treachery of one 
of his officers that ruined the affairs of Cleomenes. Antigonus 
had ordered the Illyrians and Acarnanians secretly to fetch a 
compass, and surround that wing which was commanded by 
Euclidas, the brother of Cleomenes, while he was marshalling 
the rest of his army. Cleomenes taking a view from an emi- 
nence of his adversary's disposition, could not perceive where 
the Illyrians and Acarnanians were posted, and began to feai 
they were designed for some such manoeuvre. He, therefore, 
called Damoteles, whose business it was to guard against any 
surprise, and ordered him to reconnoitre the enemy's rear with 
particular care, and form the best conjecture he could of the 
movements they intended. Damoteles, who is said to be 
bribed by Antigonus, assured him that " he had nothing to fear 
from that quarter, for all was safe in the rear; nor was there any 
thing more to be done but to bear down upon the front." Cleo 
menes, satisfied with this report, attacked Antigonus. The 
Spartans charged with so much vigour, that they made the 
Macedonian phalanx give ground, and eagerly pursued their 
advantage for about five furlongs. The king then seeing Eu- 
clidas in the other wing quite surrounded, stopped, and cried out, 
— " Thou art lost, my dear brother ! thou art lost, in spite of all 
thy valour! but great is thy example to our Spartan youth, and 
the songs of our matrons shall for ever record thee !"* 

twenty-eight thousand foot, and twelve hundred horse. The army of Cleo 
menes consisted only of twenty thousand ; hut it was advantageously posted. 
He was encamped on two mountains, which were almost inaccessible, and 
separated only by a narrow defile. These he had fortified with strong ram- 
parts and a deep fosse; so that Antigonus, after reconnoitring his situation, 
did not think proper to attack him, but encamped at a small distance on the 
plain. At length, for want of money and provisions, Cleomenes was forced to 
come to action, and was beaten. — Polyb. lib. xi. 
* He acted like a brave soldier, but not like a skilful officer. Instead of 

CLEOMENES. QJ 

Euclidas, and the wing he commanded, thus heing slain, the 
victors fell upon Cleomenes, who seeing his men in great con- 
fusion, and unable to maintain the fight, provided as well as he 
could for his own safety. It is said that great numbers of the 
mercenaries were killed; and that of six thousand Lacedaemo- 
nians no more than two hundred were saved. 

When he reached Sparta, he advised the citizens to receive 
Antigonus: — " For my part," said he, " I am willing either to 
live or to die, as the one or the other may be most for the in- 
terest of my country." Seeing the women run to meet the few 
brave men who had escaped with him, help to take off their 
armour, and present them with wine, he retired into his own 
house. After the death of his wife, he had taken into his house 
a young woman, who was a native of Megalopolis, and free- 
born, but fell into his hands at the sack of the place. She ap- 
proached him, according to custom, with a tender of her ser- 
vices on his return from the field. But though both thirsty 
and weary, he would neither drink nor sit down ; he only lean- 
ed his elbow against a pillar, and his head upon it, armed as he 
was; and having rested a few moments, while he considered 
what course to take, he repaired to Gythium with his friends. 
There they went on board vessels provided for that purpose, 
and immediately put out to sea. 

Upon the arrival of Antigonus, Sparta surrendered. His 
behaviour to the inhabitants was mild and humane, and not un- 
suitable to the dignity of their republic; for he offered them 
no kind of insult, but restored to them their laws and polity; 
and after having sacrificed to the gods, retired the third day. 
He was informed, indeed, that Macedonia was involved in a 
dangerous war; and that the barbarians were ravaging: the 
country. Besides, he was in a deep consumption, and had a 
continual defluxion upon the lungs. However, he bore up un- 
der his affliction, and wrestled with domestic wars, until a 
great victory over, and carnage of the barbarians, made him 
die more glorious. Phylarchus tells us, (and it is not at all 
improbable,) that he burst a vessel in his lungs with shouting 
in the battle: though it passed in the schools, that, in express- 
ing his joy after the victory, and crying out, — " 0 glorious 
day !" he brought up a quantity of blood, and fell into a fever, 
of which he died. Thus much concerning Antigonus. 

From the isle of Cythera, where Cleomenes first touched, he 
sailed to another island called ^Egialia. There he had formed 
a design to pass over to Cyrene, when one of his friends, named 
Therycion, a man of high and intrepid spirit on all occasions, 

pouring upon the enemy from the heights, and retiring as he found it conve- 
nient, he stood still, and suffered the Macedonians tc cut off his retreat. 

28 CLEOMENES. 

and one who always indulged himself in a lofty and haughty 
turn of expression, came privately to Cleomenes, and thus ad- 
dressed him: — " We have lost, my prince, the most glorious 
death, which we might have found in the battle; though the 
world had heard us boast that Antigonus should never conquer 
the king of Sparta till he had slain him. Yet there is another 
exit still offered us by glory and virtue. Whither, then, are 
we so absurdly sailing; flying a death that is near, and seeking 
one that is remote? If it is not dishonourable for the descen- 
dants of Hercules to serve the successors of Philip and Alex- 
ander, why do not we save ourselves a long voyage, by making 
our submission to Antigonus, who, in all probability, as much 
excels Ptolemy, as the Macedonians do the Egyptians? But if 
we do not choose to be governed by a man wrbo beat us in the 
field, why do we take one who never conquered us for our 
master? Is it that we may show our inferiority to two instead 
of one, by flying before Antigonus, and then going to flatter 
Ptolemy? Shall we say that you go into Egypt for the sake 
of your mother? It will be a glorious and happy thing truly 
for her, to show Ptolemy's wives her son from a king become 
a captive and an exile. No ! while we are yet masters of our 
swords, and are yet in sight of Laconia, let us deliver our- 
selves from this miserable fortune, and make our excuse for 
our past behaviour to those brave men who fell for Sparta at 
Sellasia. Or shall we rather sit down in Egypt, and inquire 
whom Antigonus has left governor of Lacedasmon?" 

Thus Therycion spoke, and Cleomenes made this answer: — 
" Dost thou think, then, wretch that thou art! dost thou think, 
by running into the arms of death, than which nothing is more 
easy to find, to show thy courage and fortitude? And dost thou 
not consider that this flight is more dastardly than the former? 
Better men than we have given way to their enemies, being 
either overset by fortune, or oppressed by numbers. But he 
who gives out either for fear of labour and pain, or of the opi- 
nions and tongues of men, falls a victim to his own cowardice 
A voluntary death ought to be an action, not a retreat from ac 
tion: for it is an ungenerous thing either to live or to die to 
ourselves. All that thy expedient could possibly do, would 
be only the extricating us from our present misfortunes, with 
out answering any purpose either of honour or utility. But I 
think neither thou nor I ought to give up all hopes for our 
country. If those hopes should desert us, death, when we 
seek for him, will not be hard to find." Therycion made no 
reply; but the first opportunity he had to leave Cleomenes, he 
walked down to the shore, and stabbed himself. 

Cleomenes left iEgialia, and sailed to Africa, where he was 
received by the king's officers, and conducted to Alexandria. 

CLEOMENES. 09 

When he was first introduced to Ptolemy,* that prince behaved 
to him with sufficient kindness and humanity; but when, upon 
farther trial of him, he found what strength of understanding 
he had, and that his laconic and simple way of conversing 
was mixed with a vein of wit and pleasantry; when he saw 
that he did not, in any instance whatever, dishonour his royal 
birth, or crouch to fortune, he began to take more pleasure in 
his discourse than in the mean sacrifices of complaisance and 
flattery. He greatly repented, too, and blushed at the thought 
of having neglected such a man, and given him up to Anti- 
gonus, who, by conquering him, had acquired so mi-'ch power 
and glory. He, therefore, encouraged him now with every 
mark of attention and respect, and promised to send him back 
to Greece with a fleet and supply of money, to re-establish him 
in his kingdom. His present appointments amounted to four 
and twenty talents by the year. Out of this he maintained 
himself and his friends in a sober and frugal manner, and be- 
stowed the rest in offices of humanity to such Greeks as had 
left their country, and retired into Egypt. 

But old Ptolemy died before he could put his intentions in 
favour of Cleomenes into execution; and the court soon be- 
coming a scene of debauchery, where women had the sway, 
the business of Cleomenes was neglected: for the kingt was 
so much corrupted with wine and women, that in his more 
sober and serious hours he would attend to nothing but the 
celebration of mysteries, and the beating a drum with his royal 
hands about the palace; while the great affairs of state were 
left to his mistress Agathoclea and her mother, and Oenanthes 
the infamous minister to his pleasures. It appears, however, 
that at first some use was made of Cleomenes; for Ptolemy be- 
ing afraid of his brother Magas, who, through his mother's in- 
terest, stood well with the army, admitted Cleomenes to a 
consultation in his cabinet: the subject of which was, whether 
he should destroy his brother. All the rest voted for it, but 
Cleomenes opposed it strongly. He said, — " The king, if it 
were possible, should have more brothers, for the greater se- 
curity of the crown, and the better management of affairs.''' 
And when Sosibius, the king's principal favourite, replied, — 
" That the mercenaries could not be depended on, while Magas 
was alive," Cleomenes desired them to give themselves no pain 
about that: " for," said he, " above three thousand of the mer- 
cenaries are Peloponnesians, who, upon a nod from me, will be 
ready with their arms. Hence Ptolemy, for the present, looked 
upon Cleomenes not only as a fast friend, but a man of power; 
but his weakness afterwards increasing his timidity, as is com- 

* Ptolemy Euergetes. t Ptolemy Philopater. 

30 CLEOMENES. 

mon with people of little understanding, he began to place his 
security in jealousy and suspicion. His ministers were of the 
same stamp, and they considered Cleomenes as an object of 
fear, on account of his interest with the mercenaries; inso- 
much that many were heard to say, — " That he was a lion 
among a flock of sheep." Such indeed, he seemed to be in 
court, where, with a silent severity of aspect, he observed all 
that passed. 

In these circumstances, he made no more applications for 
ships or troops: but being informed that Antigonus was dead; 
that the Achseans were engaged in war with the ^Etolians; and 
that affairs called strongly for his presence, in the troubles and 
distractions that then reigned in Peloponnesus, he desired only 
a conveyance thither for himself and his friends. Yet no man 
listened to him. The king, who spent his time in all kinds of 
Bacchanalian revels with women, could not possibly hear him. 
Sosibius, the prime minister, thought Cleomenes must prove a 
formidable and dangerous man, if he were kept in Egypt against 
his will; and that it was not safe to dismiss him, because of his 
bold and enterprising spirit; and because he had been an eye- 
witness to the distempered state of the kingdom: for it was 
not in the power of money to mollify him. As the ox Apis, 
though revelling, to all appearance, in every delight that he 
can desire, yet longs after the liberty which nature gave him, 
wants to bound over the fields and pastures at his pleasure, 
and discovers a manifest uneasiness under the hands of the 
priest who feeds him; so Cleomenes could not be satisfied 
with a soft and effeminate life; but, like Achilles, 

Consuming cares lay heavy on his mind : 

In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll, 

And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul. Pope. 

While his affairs were in this posture, Nicagoras the Messe 
nian, a man who concealed the most rancorous hatred of Cleo 
menes, under the pretence of friendship, came to Alexandria. 
It seems he had formerly sold him a handsome piece of ground, 
and the king, either through want of money, or his continual 
engagement in war, had neglected to pay him for it. Cleo- 
menes, who happened to be walking upon the quay, saw this 
Nicagoras just landing from a merchantman, and saluting him 
with great kindness, asked, — " What business had brought 
him to Egypt?" Nicagoras returned the compliment with 
equal appearance of friendship, and answered, — " I am bring- 
ing some fine war-horses for the king." Cleomenes laughed, 
and said, — " I could rather have wished that you had brought 
him some female musicians and pathics; for those are the cattle 
that the king at present likes best." Nicagoras, at that time, 

CLEOMENES. 3 J 

only smiled; but a few days after he put Cleomenes in mind 
of the field he had sold him, and desired he might now be 
paid; pretending, — "that he would not have given him any 
trouble about it, if he had not found considerable loss in the 
disposal of his merchandise." Cleomenes assured him, — 
" that he had nothing left of what the kings of Egypt had 
given him;" upon which, Nicagoras, in his disappointment, 
acquainted Sosibius with the joke upon the king. Sosibius re- 
ceived the information with pleasure; but being desirous to 
have something against Cleomenes that would exasperate Pto- 
lemy still more, he persuaded Nicagoras to leave a letter, as- 
serting that " if the Spartan prince had received a supply of 
ships and men from the king of Egypt's bounty, he would have 
made use of them in seizing Cyrene for himself." Nicagoras, 
accordingly, left the letter and set sail. Four days after, Sosi- 
bius carried it to Ptolemy, as if just come to his hands; and 
having worked up the young prince to revenge, it was resolved 
that Cleomenes should have a large apartment assigned him, 
and be served there as formerly, but not suffered to go out. 

This was a great affliction to Cleomenes; and the following 
accident made his prospects still more miserable: — Ptolemy, 
the son of Chrysermus, who was an intimate friend of the 
king's, had all along behaved to Cleomenes with great civility: 
they seemed to like each other's company, and were upon 
some terms of confidence. Cleomenes, in this distress, desired 
the son of Chrysermus to come and speak to him. lie came 
and talked to him plausibly enough, endeavouring to dispel 
his suspicions, and to apologize for the king; but as he was 
going out of the apartment, without observing that Cleomenes 
followed him to the door, he gave the keepers a severe repri- 
mand, " for looking so carelessly after a wild beast, who, if he 
escaped, in all probability could be taken no more." Cleo- 
menes having heard this, retired before Ptolemy perceived 
him, and acquainted his friends with it. Upon this they all 
dismissed their former hopes, and taking the measures which 
anger dictated, they resolved to revenge themselves of Ptole- 
my's injurious and insolent behaviour, and then die as became 
Spartans, instead of waiting long for their doom in confine- 
ment, like victims fatted for the altar; for they thought it an 
insufferable thing that Cleomenes, after he had disdained to 
come to terms with Antigonus, a brave warrior, and a man of 
action, should sit expecting his fate from a prince who assumed 
the character of a priest of Cybele ; and who, after he had laid 
aside his drum, and was tired of his dance, would find another 
kind of sport in putting him to death. 

After they had taken their resolution, Ptolemy happening 
to go to Canopus, they propagated a report, that by the king's 

32 

CLEOMENES. 

order Cleomenes was to be released; and, as it was the cus 
torn of the kings of Egypt to send those to whom they de- 
signed to extend such grace a supper, and other tokens of 
friendship, the friends of Cleomenes made ample provision 
for the purpose, and sent it to the gate. By this stratagem the 
keepers were deceived; for they imagined that the whole was 
sent by the king. Cleomenes then offered sacrifice with a 
chaplet of flowers on his head, and afterwards sat down with 
his friends to the banquet, taking care that the keepers should 
have large portions to regale them. It is said that he set about 
his enterprise sooner than he intended, because he found that 
one of the servants who was in the secret had been out all 
night with his mistress. Fearing, therefore, that a discovery 
might be made about mid-day, while the intoxication of the 
preceding night still kept the guards fast asleep, he put on his 
military tunic, having first opened the seam ot the left shoul- 
der, and rushed out sword in hand, accompanied by his friends, 
who were thirteen in number, and accoutred in the same man- 

1 ? 
ner. 

One of them, named Hippotas, though lame, at first was 
enabled, by the spirit of the enterprise, to keep pace with them ; 
but afterwards perceiving that they went slower on his account, 
he desired them to kill him, and not ruin the whole scheme by 
waiting for a man who could do them no service. By good 
fortune they found an Alexandrian leading a horse in the 
street; they took it, and set Hippotas upon it, and then moved 
swiftly through the streets, all the way inviting the people to 
liberty. They had just spirit enough left to praise and admire 
the bold attempt of Cleomenes, but not a man of them ven- 
tured to follow or assist him. 

Ptolemy, the son of Chrysermus, happening to come out oi 
the palace, three of them fell upon him, and despatched him. 
Another Ptolemy, who was governor of the city, advanced to 
meet them in his chariot: they attacked and dispersed his offi- 
cers and guards, and, dragging him out of the chariot, put him 
to the sword; then they marched to the citadel, with a design 
to break open the prison, and join the prisoners, who were no 
small number, to their party. But the keepers had prevented 
them by strongly barricading the gates. Cleomenes, thus dis- 
appointed again, roamed up and down the city; and he found 
that not a single man would join him, but that all avoided him 
as they would avoid infection. 

He therefore stopped, and said to his friends, — " It is no 
wonder that women govern a people who fly from liberty;" 
adding, " that he hoped they would all die in a manner that 
would reflect no dishonour upon him or on their own achieve- 
ments." Hippotas desired one of the younger men to des- 

CLEOMENES. 

33 

patch him, and was the first that fell. Afterwards each ol them, 
without fear or delay, fell upon his own sword, except Pan- 
teus, who was the first man that scaled the walls of Megalo- 

Kolis when it was taken by surprise. He was in the flower of 
is age, remarkable for his beauty, and of a happier turn than 
the rest of the youth for the Spartan discipline; which per 
fections had given him a great share in the king's regard; and 
he now gave him orders not to despatch himself till he saw his 
prince and all the rest breathless on the ground. Panteus 
tried one after another with his dagger as they lay, lest some 
one should happen to be left with'life in him. On pricking 
Cleomenes in the foot he perceived a contortion in his face. 
He therefore kissed him, and sat down by him till the breath 
was out of his body, and, then embracing the corpse, slew 
himself upon it. 

Thus fell Cleomenes, after he had been sixteen years king 
of Sparta, and showed himself in all respects the great man. 
When the report of his death had spread over the city, Cra- 
tesiclea, though a woman of superior fortitude, sunk under the 
weight of the calamity; she embraced the children of Cleo- 
menes, and wept over them. The eldest of them, disengaging 
himself from her arms, got unsuspected to the top of the house, 
and threw himself down headlong. The child was not killed, 
but much hurt ; and when they took him up, he loudly ex- 
pressed his grief and indignation that they would not suffer him 
to destroy himself. 

Ptolemy was no sooner informed of these things, than he or- 
dered the body of Cleomenes to be flayed, and nailed to a cross, 
and his children to be put to death, together with his mother, 
and the women her companions. Amongst these was the wife 
of Panteus, a woman of great beauty, and a most majestic pre- 
sence. They had been but lately married, and their misfor- 
tunes overtook them amidst the first transports of love. When 
her husband went with Cleomenes from Sparta, she was de- 
sirous of accompanying him, but was prevented by her parents, 
who kept her in close custody. But soon after she provided 
herself a horse and a little money, and making her escape by 
night, rode at full speed to Tsenarus, and there embarked on 
board a ship bound for Egypt. She was brought safe to Pan- 
teus, and she cheerfully shared with him in all the incon- 
veniences they found in a foreign country. When the soldiers 
came to take out Cratesiclea to execution, she led her by the 
hand, assisting in bearing her robe, and desired her to exert 
all the courage she was mistress of; though she was far from 
being afraid of death, and desired no other favour than that she 
might die before her children. But when they came to the 
place of execution, the children suffered before her eyes, and 
Vol. IV. E 

34 CLEOMENES. 

then Cratesiclea was despatched, who, in this extreme distress, 
uttered only these words, — " 0 ! 1113^ children ! whither are 
you gone!" 

The wife of Panteus, who was tall and strong, girt her robe 
about her, and, in a silent and composed manner, paid the last 
offices to each woman that lay dead, winding up the bodies as 
well as her present circumstances would admit. Last of all, 
she prepared herself for the poniard, by letting down her robe 
about her, and adjusting it in such a manner as to need no as- 
sistance after death; then calling the executioner to do his of- 
fice, and permitting no other person to approach her, she fell 
like a heroine. In death she retained all the decorum she had 
preserved in life; and the decency which had been so sacred 
with this excellent woman still remained about her. Thus, in 
this bloody tragedy, wherein the women contended to the Inst 
for the prize of courage with the men, Lacedaemon showed that 
it is impossible for fortune to conquer virtue. 

A few days after, the soldiers who watched the body of 
Cleomenes on the cross,* saw a great snake winding about his 
head, and covering all his face, so that no bird of prey durst 
touch it. This struck the king with superstitious terrors, and 
made way for the women to try a variety of expiations; for 
Ptolemy was now persuaded that he had caused the death of a 
person who was a favourite of heaven, and something more 
than mortal. The Alexandrians crowded to the place, and 
called Cleomenes a hero, a son of the gods, till the philoso- 
phers put a stop to their devotions, by assuring them, that as 
dead oxen breed bees,t horses wasps,J and beetles rise out of 
the putrefaction of asses; so human carcasses, when some of 
the moisture of the marrow is evaporated, and it comes to a 
thicker consistence, produce serpents. || The ancients knowing 
this doctrine, appropriated the serpent, rather than any other 
animal, to heroes. 

* That the friends of the deceased might not take it away by night. Thus 
we find in Petronius' Ephesian Matron, — Miles qui cruces asservahat, neqiris 
ad sepulturam corpora detraheret. And thus we find in an authority we 
shall not mention at the same time with Petronius. 

t This was the received opinion of antiquity, as we find in Varro, &c. &c. 

I Pressus humo bellator equus crabronis origo. Ovid. 

|] Sunt qui, cum clauso putrefacta est spina sepulchro, 
Mutari credant humanas angue medullas. Ovid. 

The above verses seem to be taken from some Greek lines of Archelaiis, 
addressed to Ptolemy on the subject of serpents being generated from the 
corruption of the human body. 

THE 

LIFE OF TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

Having thus presented you with the history of Agis and 
Cleomenes, we have two Romans to compare with them ; and 
no less dreadful a scene of calamities to open in the Lives of 
Tiberius and Caius Gracchus. They were the sons of Tibe- 
rius Gracchus; who, though he was once honoured with the 
censorship, twice with the consulate, and led up two triumphs, 
yet derived still greater dignity from his virtues.* Hence, 
after the death of that Scipio, who conquered Hannibal, he 
was thought worthy to marry Cornelia, the daughter of that 
great man, though he had not been upon any terms of friend- 
ship with hi:*i, but rather always at variance. It is said, that 
he once caught a pair of serpents upon his bed ; and that the 
soothsayers, after they had considered the prodigy, advised 
him neither to kill them both nor let them both go. If he 
killed the male serpent, they told him his death would be the 
consequence; if the female, that of Cornelia. Tiberius, who 
loved his wife, and thought it more suitable for him to die 
first, who was much older than his wife, killed the male, and 
set the female at liberty. Not long after this, he died, leaving 
Cornelia with no fewer than twelve children. t 

The care of the house and the children now entirely devolv- 
ed upon Cornelia; and she behaved with such sobriety, so 
much parental affection and greatness of mind, that Tiberius 
seemed not to have judged ill in choosing to die for so valu- 
able a woman : for though Ptolemy, king of Egypt, paid his 
addresses to her, and offered her a share in his throne, she re- 
fused him. During her widowhood, she lost all her children 
except three, one daughter, who was married to Scipio the— 
younger, and two sons, Tiberius and Caius, whose lives we 
are now writing. Cornelia brought them up with so much 
care, that though they were without dispute of the noblest fa- 
mily, and had the happiest genius and disposition of all the 
Roman youth, yet education was allowed to have contributed* 
more to their perfections than nature. 

* Cicero in his first book de Divinafione, passes the highest encomiums on 
his virtue and wisdom. He was grandson to Publius Sempronius. 

t Cicero relates this story in his first book de Divinatione, from the Me 
moirs of Caius Gracchus, the son of Tiberius. 

36 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

As in the statues and pictures of Castor and Pollux, though 
there is a resemblance between the brothers, yet there is also f 
a difference in the make of him who delighted in the cestus, 
and in the other whose province was horsemanship; so while 
these young men strongly resembled each other, in point of 
valour, of temperance, of liberality, of eloquence, of greatness 
of mind, there appeared in their actions and politicalconduct 
no small dissimilarity. It may not be amiss to explain the dif- 
ference, before we proceed farther. 

In the first place, Tiberius had a mildness in his look, and a 
composure in his whole behaviour; Caius as much vehemence 
and fire: so that when they spoke in public, Tiberius had a 
great modesty of action, and shifted not his place; whereas, 
Caius was the first of the Romans that, in addressing the people, 
moved from one end of the rostra to the other, and threw his 
gown off his shoulder.* So it is related of Cleon of Athens, 
that he was the first orator who threw back his robe, and smote 
upon his thigh. The oratory of Caius was strongly impassion- 
ed, and calculated to excite terror; that of Tiberius was of a 
more gentle kind, and pity was the emotion that it raised. 

The language of Tiberius was chaste and elaborate; that of 
Caius splendid and persuasive. So, in their manner of living, 
Tiberius was plain and frugal; Caius, when compared to other 
young Romans, temperate and sober, but, in comparison with 
his brother, a friend to luxury. Hence Drusus objected to 
him, that he had bought Delphic tables,t of silver only, but 
very exquisite workmanship, at the rate of twelve hundred 
and fifty drachmas a pound. 

Their tempers were no less different than their language. 
Tiberius was mild and gentle; Caius high-spirited and uncon- 
trolled; insomuch that in speaking he would often be carried 
away by the violence of his passion, exalt his voice above the 
regular pitch, give into abusive expressions, and disorder the 
whole frame of his oration. To guard against these excesses, 
he ordered his servant, Licinius, who was a sensible man, to 
stand with a pitchpipej behind him when he spoke in public, 
and whenever he found him straining his voice, or breaking 

* Cicero, in his third book de Oralore, quotes a passage from one of Caius' 
orations on the death of Tiberius, which strongly marks the nervous pathos of 
his eloquence :— " Quo me miser conferam ? In Capitoliumne ? at fratris 
sanguine redundat. An domum ? Matremne ut miseram, lamentantemque 
videam, et abjectam." Cicero observes, that his action was no less animated 
than his eloquence : — Que sic ab illo acta esse constabat oculis, voce, gestu, 
inimici ut lachrymas tenere non possent. 

t These, we suppose, were a kind of tripods. 

t Cicero, in his third book de Oratore, calls this email ivory pipe, Ebur 
neola fistula. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 3-7 

out into anger, to give him a softer key ; upon which his vio- 
lence both of tone and passion immediately abated, and he was 
easily recalled to a propriety of address. 

Such was the difference between the two brothers. But in 
the valour they exerted against their enemies, in the justice 
they did their fellow-citizens, in attention to their duty as ma- 
gistrates, and in self-government with respect to pleasure, they 
were perfectly alike. Tiberius was nine years older than his 
brother; consequently their political operations took place in 
different periods. This was a great disadvantage, and indeed 
the principal thing that prevented their success. Had they 
flourished together, and acted in concert, such an union would 
have added greatly to their force, and perhaps might have ren 
dered it irresistible. We must, therefore, speak of each sepa- 
rately; and we shall begin with the eldest. 

Tiberius, as he grew towards manhood, gained so extraor- 
dinary a reputation, that he was admitted into the college of au- 
gurs, rather on account of his high virtue than his high birth. 
Of the excellence of his character the following is also a 
proof: — Appius Claudius, who had been honoured both with 
the consulate and the censorship, whose merit had raised him 
to the rank of president of the senate, and who in sense and 
spirit was superior to all the Romans of his time, supping one 
evening with the augurs at a public entertainment, addressed 
himself to Tiberius with great kindness, and offered him his 
daughter in marriage. Tiberius accepted the proposal with 
pleasure; and the contract being agreed upon, Appius, when 
he went home, had no sooner entered the house, than he called 
out aloud to his wife, and said, — " Antistia, I have contracted 
our daughter Claudia." Antistia, much surprised, answered, — 
" Why so suddenly? What need of such haste, unless Tiberius 
Gracchus be the man you have pitched upon?" I am not ig- 
norant that some* tell the same story of Tiberius, the father 
of the Gracchi and Scipio Africanus : but most historians give 
it in the manner we have mentioned; and Polybius, in particu- 
lar, tells us, that after the death of Africanus, Cornelia's rela- 
tions gave her to Tiberius, in preference to all competitors ; 
which is a proof that her father left her unengaged. 

The Tiberius of whom we are writing served in Africa un- 
der the younger Scipio, who had married his sister; and, as he 
lived in the same tent with the general, he became immedi- 
ately attentive to his genius and powers, which were daily 
productive of such actions as might animate a young man to 
virtue, and attract his imitation. With these advantages, Ti- 
berius soon excelled all of his age, both in point ol discipline 

* Amongst these was Livy, lib. xxxviii. cap. 37. 
Vol. IV. 4 

38 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

and valour. At a siege of one of the enemy's towns, he was 
the first that scaled the walls, as Fannius relates,* who, ac- 
cording to his own account, mounted it with him, and had a 
share in the honour. In short, Tiberius, while he staid with 
the army, was greatly beloved, and as much regretted when he 
left it. 

After this expedition he was appointed quaestor; and it fell 
to his lot to attend the consul Cams Mancinus in the Numan- 
tian war.t Mancinus did not want courage, but he. was one ol 
the most unfortunate generals the Romans ever had. Yet 
amidst a train of severe accidents and desperate circum- 
stances, Tiberius distinguished himself the more, not only by 
his courage and capacity, but what did him greater honour, 
by his respectful behaviour to his general, whose misfortunes 
had made him forget even the authority that he bore : for, after 
having lost several important battles, he attempted to decamp 
in the night: the Numantians perceiving this movement, 
seized the camp, and falling upon the fugitives, made great 
havoc of the rear. Not satisfied with this, they surrounded 
the whole army, and drove the Romans upon impracticable 
ground, where there was no possibility of escape. Mancinus 
now despairing of making his way sword in hand, sent a he- 
rald to beg a truce and conditions of peace. The Numantians, 
however, would trust no man hut Tiberius, and they insisted 
on his being sent to treat. This they did, not only out of re- 
gard to the young man who had so great a character in the 
army, but to the memory of his father, who had formerly 
made war in Spain, and, after having subdued several nations, 
granted the Numantians a peace, which, through his interest, 
Avas confirmed at Rome, and observed with good faith. Tibe- 
rius was, accordingly, sent; and, in his negotiation, he thought 
proper to comply with some articles, by which means he gain- 
ed others, and made a peace that undoubtedly saved twenty 
thousand Roman citizens, besides slaves and other retainers 
to the army. 

But whatever was left in the camp, the Numantians took as 
legal plunder. Among the rest they carried off the books and 
papers which contained the accounts of Tiberius' quasstorship. 
As it was a matter of importance to him to recover them, 
though the Roman army was already under march, he return- 
ed with a few friends to Numantia. Having called out the 
magistrates of the place, he desired them to restore him his 
uooks, that his enemies might not have an opportunity to ac 

* This Fannius was author of a history, and certain annals, which were 
abridged by Brutus. 

i lie was consul with iEmilius Lepidus in the year of Rome 616. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 39 

cuse him, when they saw he had lost the means of defending 
himself. The Numantians were much pleased that the acci- 
dent had given them an opportunity to oblige him, and they 
invited him to enter their city. As he was deliberating on thfs 
circumstance, they drew nearer, and taking him by the hand, 
earnestly entreated him no longer to look upon them as ene- 
mies, but to rank them among his friends, and place a con- 
fidence in them as such. Tiberius thought it best to comply, 
both for the sake of his books, and for fear of offending them 
by the appearance of distrust. Accordingly, he went into the 
town with them, where the first thing they did, was to provide 
a little collation, and to beg he would partake it. Afterwards 
they returned him his books, and desired he would take what- 
ever else he chose among the spoils. He accepted, however, 
of nothing but some frankincense, to be used in the public sa 
crifices, and at his departure he embraced them with great cor- 
diality. 

On his return to Rome, he found that the whole business of 
the peace was considered in an obnoxious and dishonourable 
light. In this danger the relations and friends of the soldiers 
he had brought off, who made a very considerable part of the 
people, joined to support Tiberius ; imputing all the disgrace 
of what was done to the general, and insisting that the quaestor 
had saved so many citizens. The generality of the citizens, 
however, could not suffer the peace to stand, and they de- 
manded that, in this case, the example of their ancestors should 
be followed : for when their generals thought themselves hap- 
py in getting out of the hands of the Samnites, by agreeing to 
such a league, they delivered them naked to the enemy.* The 
quasstors, too, and the tribunes, and all that had a share in con- 
cluding the peace, they sent back in the same condition, and 
turned entirely upon them the breach of the treaty, and of the 
oath that should have confirmed it. 

On this occasion the people showed their affection for Tibe- 
rius in a remarkable manner: for they decreed that the consul 
be delivered up to the Numantians, naked, and in chains; but 
that all the rest should be spared for the sake of Tiberius. 
Scipio, who had then great authority and interest in Rome 
seems to have contributed to the procuring of this decree. He 
was blamed, notwithstanding, for not saving Mancinus, nor 
using his best endeavours to "get the peace with the Numan- 
tians ratified, which would not have oeen granted at all, had 
it not been on account of his friend and relation Tiberius. 
Great part of these complaints, indeed, seems to have arisen 

* This was about 182 years before. The generals sent back, were the con 
suls Veturius Calvmus and Posthumius Albinus. 

40 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

from the ambition and excessive zeal of Tiberius' friends, ann 
the sophists he had about him ; and the difference between hirr 
and Scipio was far from terminating in irreconcileable enmity 
Nay, I am persuaded that Tiberius would never have falle;. 
into those misfortunes that ruined him, had Scipio been at 
home to assist him in his political conduct. He was engaged 
in war with Numantia, when Tiberius ventured to propose 
his new laws. It was on this occasion: — 

When the Romans in their wars made any acquisitions of 
lands from their neighbours, they used formerly to sell part, to 
add part to the public demesnes, and to distribute the rest 
among the necessitous citizens; only reserving a small rent to 
be paid into the treasury. But when the rich began to carry 
it with a high hand over the poor, and to exclude them en- 
tirely, if they did not pay exorbitant rents, a law was made 
that no man should be possessed of more than five hundred 
acres of land. This statute for a while restrained the avarice 
of the rich and helped the poor, who, by virtue of it, remained 
upon their lands at the old rents. But afterwards their wealthy 
neighbours took their farms from them, and held them in other 
names; though, in time, they scrupled not to claim them in 
their own. The poor, thus expelled, neither gave in their 
names readily to the levies, nor attended to the education of 
their children. The consequence was, a want of freemen si! 
over Italy; for it was filled with slaves and barbarians, who. 
after the poor Roman citizens were dispossessed, cultivates 
the ground for the rich. Caius Laelius, the friend of Scipio, 
attempted to correct this disorder; but finding a formidable op- 
position from persons in power, and fearing the matter could 
not be decided without the sword, he gave it up. This gained 
him the name of Laslius the wise..* But Tiberius was no 
sooner appointed tribune of the people, than he embarked in 
the same enterprise. He was put upon it, according to most 
authors, by Diophanes the rhetorician, and Blossius the philo- 
sopher; the former of whom was a Metylenean exile, the latter 
a native of Cumse in Italy, and a particular friend of Antipater 
of Tarsus, with whom he became acquainted at Rome, and 
who did him the honour to address some of his philosophical 
writings to him. 

Some blame his mother Cornelia, who used to reproach her 
sons, that she was still called the mother-in-law of Scipio, not 
the mother of the Gracchi. Others say, Tiberius took this 
rash step from a jealousy of Spurius Posthumius, who was of 

* Plutarch seems here to have followed some mistaken authority. Tt was 
not this circumstance, but the abstemiousness of his life, that gave Laelius the 
name of wise. Lcelius eo dictus est sapiens, quad non intelligerct quid suavissi- 
mum essel. — Cic. de Fin. Bon. et ]\fal. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 4| 

the same age with him, and his rival in oratory. It seems, 
when he returned from the wars, he found Posthumius so 
much before him in point of reputation and interest with the 
people, t*)at, to recover his ground, he undertook this hazardous 
affair, which so effectually drew the popular attention upon him. 
But his brother Caius writes, that as Tiberius was passing 
through Tuscany on his way to Numantia, and found the 
country almost depopulated, there being scarce any husband- 
men or shepherds, except slaves from foreign and barbarous 
nations, he then first formed the project which plunged them 
in so many misfortunes. It is certain, however, that the people 
inflamed his spirit of enterprise and ambition, by putting up 
writings on the porticoes, walls, and monuments, in which 
they begged of him to restore their share of the public lands 
to the poor. 

Yet he did not frame the law without consulting some of the 
Romans that were most distinguished for their virtue and au- 
thority. Among these were Crassus the chief pontiff, Mutius 
Scsevola the lawyer, who at that time was .also consul, and 
Appius Claudius, father-in-law to Tiberius. \There never was 
a milder law made against so much injustice and oppression; 
for they who deserved to have been punished for their infringe- 
ment on the rights of the community, and fined for holding 
the lands contrary to law, were to have a consideration for 
giving up their groundless claims, and restoring the estates to 
such of the citizens as were to be relieved. But though the 
reformation was conducted with so much tenderness, the people 
were satisfied : they were willing to overlook what was past, on 
condition that they might guard against future usurpations. 

On the other hand, persons of great property opposed the 
law out of avarice, and the lawgiver out of a spirit of resent- 
ment and malignity; endeavouring to prejudice the people 
against the design, as if Tiberius intended by the Agrarian 
law to throw all into disorder, and subvert the constitution. 
But their attempts were vain : for, in this just and glorious 
cause, Tiberius exerted an eloquence which might have adorn- 
ed a worse subject, and which nothing could resist. How great 
was he, when the people were gathered about the rostrum, and 
he pleaded for the poor in such language as this : — " The wild 
beasts of Italy have their caves to retire to, but the brave men 
who spill their blood in her cause, have nothing left but air 
and light. Without houses, without any settled habitations, 
they wander from place to place with their wives and children ; 
and their generals do but mock them, when, at the head of 
their armies, they exhort their men to fight for their sepulchres 
and domestic gods: for among such numbers, perhaps there is 
not a Roman who has an altar that belonged to his ancestors, 

Vol. IV. F 4* 

42 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

or a sepulchre in which their ashes rest. The private soldiers 
fight and die, to advance the wealth and luxury of the great; 
and they are called masters of the world, while they have not 
a foot of ground in their possession." 

Such speeches as this, delivered by a man of such spirit, and 
flowing from a heart really interested in the cause, filled the 
people with an enthusiastic fury, and none of his adversaries* 
durst pretend to answer him. Forbearing, therefore, the war 
of words, they addressed themselves to Marcus Octavius, one 
of the tribunes, a grave and modest young man, and an inti- 
mate acquaintance of Tiberius. Out of reverence for his 
friend, he declined the task at first; but upon a number of op- 
plications from men of the first rank, he was prevailed upon 
to oppose Tiberius, and prevent the passing of the law : for 
the tribune's power chiefly lies in the negative voice, and if 
one of them stands out, the rest can effect nothing. 

Incensed by this behaviour, Tiberius dropped his moderate 
bill, and proposed another more agreeable to the commonalty, 
and more severe against the usurpers; for by this they were 
commanded immediately to quit the lands which they held 
contrary to former laws. On this subject there were daily 
disputes between him and Octavius on the rostra; yet not one 
abusive or disparaging word is said to have escaped either of 
them in all the heat of speaking. Indeed, an ingenuous disposi- 
tion and liberal education, will prevent or restrain the sallies 
of passion, not only during the free enjoyment of the bottle, but 
in the ardour of contention about points of a superior nature. 

Tiberius observing that Octavius was liable to suffer by the 
bill, as having more land than the laws could warrant, desired 
him to give up his opposition, and offered, at the same time, to 
indemnify him out of his own fortune, though that was not 
great. As this proposal was not accepted, Tiberius forbade all 
other magistrates to exercise their functions, till the Agrarian 
law was passed. He likewise put his own seal upon the doors 
of the temple of Saturn, that the quaestors might neither bring 
any thing into the treasury, nor take any thing out. And he 
threatened to fine such of the praetors as should attempt to dis- 
obey his commands. This struck such a terror, that all de- 
partments of government were at a stand. Persons of great 
property put themselves into mourning, and appeared in public 
with all the circumstances that they thought might excite com- 
passion. Not satisfied with this, they conspired the death of 
Tiberius, and suborned assassins to destroy him. For which 
reason he appeared with a tuck, such as is used by robbers, 
which the Romans call a dolon* 

* We find this word used by Virgil : — 

Pjla many, sienirosque gerunt in bella dolones. — JEn. vii. v. 664. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 43 

When the day appointed came, and Tiberius was summon ■ 
ing the people to give their suffrages, a party of the people of 
property carried off the balloting vessels,* which occasioned 
great confusion. Tiberius, however, seemed strong enough to 
carry his point by force, and his partisans were preparing to 
have recourse to it, when Manlius and Fulvius, men of con- 
sular dignity, fell at Tiberius' feet, bathed his hands with tears, 
and conjured him not to put his purpose in execution. He 
now perceived how dreadful the consequences of his attempt 
might be, and his reverence for those two great men had its 
effect upon him : he therefore asked them what they would 
have him do? They said, they were not capable of advising 
him in so important an affair, and earnestly entreated him to 
refer it to the senate. The senate assembled to deliberate upon 
it, but the influence of the people of fortune on that body was 
such, that their debates ended in nothing. 

Tiberius then adopted a measure that was neither just nor 
moderate. He resolved to remove Octavius from the tribune- 
ship, because there was no other means to get his law passed. 
He*addressed him, indeed, in public first, in a mild and friendly 
manner, and taking him by the hand, conjured him to gratify 
the people, who asked nothing that was unjust, and would only 
receive a small recompense for the great labours and dangers 
they had experienced. But Octavius absolutely refused to 
comply. Tiberius then declared, — " That it was not possible 
for two magistrates of equal authority, when they differed in 
such capital points, to go through the remainder of their office 
without coming to hostilities: he saw no other remedy but the 
deposing of them." He, therefore, desired Octavius to take 
the sense of the people first with respect to him; assuring him, 
that he would immediately return to a private station, if the 
suffrages of his fellow-citizens should order it so. As Octa- 
vius rejected this proposal too, Tiberius told him plainly, that 
he would put the question to the people concerning him, if, 
upon farther consideration, he did not alter his mind. 

Upon this, he dismissed the assembly. Next day he con- 
voked it again ; and when he had mounted the rostra, he made 
another trial to bring Octavius to compliance. But finding 
him inflexible, he proposed a decree for depriving him of the 

The dolon was a staff that had a poniard concealed within it, and had its 
name from dolus, deceit. 

* The original 'ufyia signifies an urn. The Romans had two sorts of vessels 
which they used in balloting. The first were open vessels called cistce, or 
cistellm, which contained the ballots before they were distributed to the peo- 
ple; the others, with narrow necks, were called sitellce, and into these the 
people cast their ballots. The latter were the vessels which are here said to 
have been carried off. 

44 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

tribuneship, and immediately put it to the vote. When, of the 
five and thirty tribes, seventeen had given their voices for it, 
and there wanted only one more to make Octavius a private 
man, Tiberius ordered them to stop, and once more applied to 
his colleague. He embraced him with great tenderness in the 
sight of the people, and, with the most pressing instances, 
besought him, neither to bring such a mark of infamy upon 
himself, nor expose him to the disreputation of being pro- 
moter of such severe and violent measures. It was not with- 
out emotion that Octavius is said to have listened to these en- 
treaties. His eyes were filled with tears, and he stood a long 
time silent. But when he looked towards the persons of pro- 
perty, wno were assembled in a body, shame and fear of losing 
himself in their opinion, brought him back to his resolution to 
run all risks, and with a noble firmness he bade Tiberius do 
his pleasure. The bill, therefore, was passed; and Tiberius 
ordered one of his freedmen to pull down Octavius from the 
tribunal; for he employed his own freedmen as lictors. This 
ignominious manner of expulsion made the case of Octavius 
more pitiable. The people, notwithstanding, fell upon him; 
but by the assistance of those of the landed interest, who came 
to his defence, and kept off the mob, he escaped with his life. 
However, a faithful servant of his, who stood before him to 
ward off the danger, had his eyes torn out. This violence was 
much against the will of Tiberius, who no sooner saw the tu- 
mult rising, than he hastened down to appease it. 

The Agrarian law then was confirmed, and three commis- 
sioners appointed to take a survey of the lands, and see them 
properly distributed. Tiberius was one of the three, his fa- 
ther-in-law Appius Claudius another, and his brother Caius 
Gracchus the third. The latter was then making the campaign 
under Scipio at Numantia. Tiberius, having carried these 
points without opposition, next filled up the vacant tribune's 
seat; into which he did not put a man oi any note, but Mutius, 
one of his own clients. These proceedings exasperated the 
patricians extremely, and, as they dreaded the increase of his 
power, they took every opportunity to insult him in the se- 
nate. When he desired, for instance, what was nothing more 
than customary, a tent at the public charge, for his use in di- 
viding the lands, they refused him one, though such things 
had been often granted on much less important occasions. 
And at the motion of Publius Nasica, he had only nine oboli a 
day allowed for his expenses. Nasica, indeed, was become his 
avowed enemy; for he had a great estate in the public lands, 
and was, of course, unwilling to be stripped of it. 

At the same time, the people were more and more enraged. 
One of Tiberius' friends happening to die suddenly, and ma- 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 45 

Iignant spots appearing upon the body, they loudly declared 
that the man was poisoned. They assembled at his funeral, 
took the bier upon their shoulders, and carried it to the pile. 
There they were confirmed in their suspicions: for the corpse 
burst, and emitted such a quantity of corrupted humours, that 
it put out the fire. Though more fire was brought, still the 
wood would not burn till it was removed to another place; 
and it was with much difficulty at last that the body was con- 
sumed. Hence Tiberius took occasion to incense the common- 
alty still more against the other party. He put himself in 
mourning; he led his children into the forum, and recom- 
mended them and their mother to the protection of the people; 
as giving up his own life for lost. 

About this time died Attalus* Philopator; and Eudemus of 
Pergamus brought his will to Rome, by which it appeared, 
that he had left the Roman people his heirs. Tiberius endea- 
vouring to avail himself of this incident, immediately proposed 
a law, — " That all the ready money the king had left, should 
be distributed among the citizens, to enable them to provide 
working tools, and proceed in the cultivation of their new as- 
signed lands. As to the cities, too, in the territories of Atta- 
lus, the senate, he said, had not a right to dispose of them, but 
the people, and he would refer the husiness entirely to their 
judgment." 

This embroiled him still more with the senate; and one of 
their body, of the name of Pompey, stood up, and said, — " He 
was next neighbour to Tiberius, and by that means had oppor- 
tunity to know that Eudemus the Pergamenian, had brought 
him a royal diadem and purple robe for his use when he was 
king of Rome." Quintus Metellus said another severe thing 
against him: — " During the censorship of your father, when- 
ever he returned home after supper,t the citizens put out their 
lights, that they might not appear to indulge themselves at un- 
seasonable hours; but you, at a late hour, have some of the 
meanest and most audacious of the people about you with 
torches in their hands. "% And Titus Annius, a man of no 
character in point of morals, but an acute disputant, and re- 
markable for the subtilty both of his questions and answers, 
one day challenged Tiberius, and offered to prove him guilty 
of a great offence in deposing one of his colleagues, whose 

* This was Attalus TIL the son of Eumenes II. and Stratonice, and the last 
king of Pergamus. He was not, however, surnamed Philopator, but Philo- 
metor, and so it stands in the manuscript of St. Germain. 

i Probably from the public hall where he supped with his colleague. 

t 'On tb U£i< iraTpof outs nfi-rmuovros. oaaxis 'avaXuoi lura Seittvov o'xoci5e. t<x (pwrcoxaTEt 
Psvvucrav oi 7roXiTai (pdfi&itfvoi im jroppwTtpa ts iiErpw 5ojtouiv lv <ruv8<7ias eIvi xai jtotoii. 
Other translators have paraphrased this passage, and given it a different sense 
from what the Greek seems to bear. 

46 TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

person by the laws was sacred and inviolable. This propo- 
sition raised a tumult in the audience, and Tiberius immedi- 
ately went out and called an assembly of the people, designing 
to accuse Annius of the indignity he had offered him. An- 
nius appeared; and knowing himself greatly inferior, both in 
eloquence and reputation, he had recourse to his old art, and 
begged leave only to ask him a question before the business 
came on. Tiberius consented, and silence being made, An- 
nius said, — " Would you fix a mark of disgrace and infamy 
upon me, if I should appeal to one of your colleagues? And 
if he came to my assistance, would you in your anger deprive 
him of his office ?" It is said, that this question so puzzled 
Tiberius, that, with all his readiness of speech, and propriety 
of assurance, he made no manner of answer. 

He, therefore, dismissed the assembly for the present. He 
perceived, however, that the step he had taken in deposing a 
tribune, had offended not only the patricians but the people 
too ; for, by such a precedent, he appeared to have robbed that 
high office of its dignity, which, till then, had been preserved 
in great security and honour. In consequence of this reflec- 
tion, he called the commons together again, and made a speech 
to them, from which it may not be amiss to give an extract, by 
way of specimen of the power and strength of his eloquence: 
— " The person of a tribune, I acknowledge, is sacred and in- 
violable, because he is consecrated to the people, and takes 
their interests under his protection. But when he deserts 
those interests, and becomes an oppressor of the people ; when 
he retrenches their privileges, and takes away their liberty of 
voting; by those acts he deprives himself, for he no longer 
keeps to the intention of his employment. Otherwise, if a 
tribune should demolish the Capitol, and burn the docks ans. 
naval stores, his person could not be touched. A man who 
should do such things as those, might still be a tribune, though 
a vile one; bu1[he who diminishes the privileges of the peo- 
ple, ceases to be a tribune of the people. 1 Does it not shock 
you to think, that a tribune should be able to imprison a con- 
sul, and the people not have it in their power to deprive a tri- 
bune of his authority, when he uses it against those who gave 
it? For the tribunes, as well as the consuls, are elected by the 
people. Kingly government seems to comprehend all au- 
thority in itself, and kings are consecrated with the most aw- 
ful ceremonies: yet the citizens expelled Tarquin, when his 
administration became iniquitous: and, for the offence of one 
man, the ancient government, under whose auspices Rome 
was erected, was entirely abolished. What is there in Rome so 
sacred and venerable as the vestal virgins who keep the per- 
petual fire? yet if any of them transgress the rules of her or 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 47 

der, she is buried alive. For they who are guilty of impietv 
against the gods, lose that sacred character, which they had 
only for the sake of the gods. So a tribune who injures the 
people, can be no longer sacred and inviolable on the people's 
account. _ He destroys that power in which alone his strength 
lay. If it is just for him to be invested with the tribunitial 
authority by a majority of tribes, is it not more just for him to 
be deposed by the suffrages of them all ? What is more sacred 
and inviolable than the offerings in the temples of the gods? 
yet no one pretends to hinder the people from making use of 
them, or removing them wherever they please. And/indeed, 
that the tribune's office is not inviolable or unremoveable, ap- 
pears from hence, that several have voluntarily laid it down, 
or been discharged at their own request." These were the 
heads of Tiberius' defence. 

His friends, however, being sensible of the menaces of his 
enemies, and the combination to destroy him, were of opinion 
thatjie ought to make interest to get the tribuneship continued 
to him another year. For this purpose, he thought of other 
laws, to secure the commonalty on his side ; that for shorten 
ing the time of military service, and that for granting an ap- 
peal from the judges to the people. The bench of judges, at 
that time, consisted of senators only, but he ordered an equal 
number of knights and senators ; though it must be confessed, 
that his taking every possible method to reduce the power of 
the patricians, savoured more of obstinacy and resentment than 
of a regard for justice and the public good. 

When the day came for it to be put to the vote, whether these 
Jaws should be ratified, Tiberius and his party, perceiving that 
their adversaries were the strongest, (for all the people did not 
attend,) spun out the time in altercations with the other tri- 
bunes; and, at last, he adjourned the assembly to the day fol- 
lowing. In the mean time, he entered the forum with all the 
ensigns of distress, and, with tears in his eyes, humbly applied 
tothe citizens, assuring them, — " He was afraid that his ene- 
mies would demolish his house, and take his life before the 
next morning." This affected them so much, that numbers 
erected tents before his door, and guarded him all night. 

At day-break, the person who had the care of the chickens 
which they use in augury, brought them, and set meat before 
them ; but they would none of them come out of their pen, 
except one, though the man shook it very much ; and that one 
would not eat;* It only raised up its left wing, and stretched 
out its leg, and then went in again. This put Tiberius in mind 
of a former ill omen He had a helmet that he wore in battle, 

* When the chickens eat greedily, they thought it a sign of good fortune. 

48 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

finely ornamented, and remarkably magnificent: two serpents 
that had crept into it privately, laid their eggs, and hatched in 
it. Such a bad presage made him more afraid of the late one. 
Yet he set out for the Capitol, as soon as he understood that 
the people were assembled there. But, in going out of his 
house, he stumbled upon the threshold, and struck it with so 
much violence, that the nail of his great toe was broken, and 
the blood flowed from the wound. When he had got a little on 
his way, he saw on his left hand two ravens fighting on the 
top of a house, and though he was attended, on account of his 
dignity, by great numbers of people, a stone which one of the 
ravens threw down, fell close by his foot. This startled the 
boldest of his partisans. But Blossius* of Cumae, one of his 
train, said, — " It would be an insupportable disgrace, if Tibe- 
rius, the son of Gracchus, grandson of Scipio Africanus, and 
protector of the people of Rome, should, lor fear of a raven, 
disappoint that people when they called him to their assist- 
ance. His enemies, he assured him, would not be satisfied 
with laughing at this false step ; they would represent him to 
the commons as already taking all the insolence of a tyrant 
upon him. 

At the same time several messengers from his friends in the 
Capitol, came and desired him to make haste, for (they told 
him) every thing went there according to his wish. 

At first, indeed, there was a most promising appearance. 
When the assembly saw him at a distance, they expressed 
their joy in the loudest acclamations: on his approach they 
received him with the utmost cordiality, and formed a circle 
about him, to keep all strangers off. Mutius then began to call 
over the tribes, in order to business; but nothing could be 
done in the usual form, by reason of the disturbance made by 
-the populace, v/ho were still pressing forward. Meantime, 
Fulviust Flaccus, a senator, got upon an eminence, and know- 
ing he could not be heard, made a sign with his hand, that he 
had something to say to Tiberius in private. Tiberius having 
ordered the people to make way, Flaccus, with much difficulty, 
got to him, and informed him, — " That those of the landed in- 
terest had applied to the consul, while the senate was sitting, 
and as they could not bring that magistrate into their views, 
they had resolved to despatch Tiberius themselves, and for 
that purpose, had armed a number of their friends and slaves." 

Tiberius no sooner communicated this intelligence to those 
about him, than they tucked up their gowns, seized their hal- 

* In the printed text it is Blastus ; but one of the manuscripts gives us 
Blossius, and all the translators have followed it. 

+ Not Flavins, as it is in the printed text. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 49 

berts with which the Serjeants kept off the crowd, broke them, 
and took the pieces, to ward against any assault that might 
be made. Such as were at a distance, much surprised at this 
incident, asked what the reason might be? and Tiberius, find-,-, 
ing they could not hear him, touched his head with his hand, 
to signify the danger he was in. His adversaries seeing this, 
ran to the senate, and informed them that Tiberius demanded 
the diadem; alleging that gesture as a proof of it. 

This raised a great commotion. Nasica called upon the 
consul to defend the commonwealth, and destroy the tyrant. - 
The consul mildly answered, — " That he would not begin to 
use violence, nor would he put any citizen to death who was 
not legally condemned; but if Tiberius should either persuade 
or force the people to decree any thing contrary to the con- 
stitution, he would take care to annul it." Upon which Na- 
sica started up and said, — " Since the consul gives up his 
country, let all who choose to support the laws follow me." 
So saying, he covered his head with the skirt of his robe, and 
then advanced to the Capitol. Those who followed him, 
wrapped each his gown about his hand, and made their way 
through the crowd. Indeed, on account of their superior- 
quality, they met with no resistance: on the contrary, the 
people trampled on one another to get out of their way. Their 
attendants had brought clubs and bludgeons with them from 
home, and the patricians themselves seized the feet of the 
benches which the populace had broken in their flight. Thus , 
armed, they made towards Tiberius; knocking down such as 
stood before him. These being killed or dispersed, Tiberius 
likewise fled. One of his enemies laid hold on his gown ; but 
he let it go, and continued his flight in his under-garment. He 
happened, however, to stumble and fall upon some of the 
killed. As he was recovering himself, Publius Satureius, one 
of his colleagues, came up openly, and struck him on the head 
with the foot of a stool. The second blow was given him by 
Lucius Rufus, who afterwards valued himself upon it as a 
glorious exploit. Above three hundred more lost their lives" 
by clubs and stones, but not a man by the sword. 

This is said to have been the first sedition in Rome, since the 
expulsion of the kings, in which the blood of any citizen was 
shed. All the rest, though neither small in themselves, nor 
about matters of little consequence, were appeased by mutual 
concessions; the senate giving up something, on one side, for 
fear of the people, and the people, on the other, out of respect 
for the senate. Had Tiberius been moderately dealt with, it 
is probable that he would have compromised matters in a 
much easier way; and certainly he might have been reduced, 
without their depriving him of his life; for he had not above 

Vol. IV. G 5 

5() TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

three hundred men ahout him. But, it seems, the conspiracy 
was formed against him, rather to satisfy the resentment and 
malignity of the rich, than for the reasons the}^ held out to 
the public. A strong proof of this we have in their cruel and 
abominable treatment of his dead body: for, notwithstanding 
the entreaties of his brother, they would not permit him to 
take away the corpse, and bury it in the night, but threw it in- 
to the river with the other carcasses. Nor was this all: they 
banished some of his friends without form of trial, and took 
others and put them to death. Among the latter was Dio- 
phanes the rhetorician. One Caius Billius they shut up in a 
cask with vipers and other serpents, and left him to perish in 
that cruel manner. As for Blossius of Cumos, he was carried 
before the consuls, and, being interrogated about the late pro- 
ceedings, he declared that he had never failed to execute what- 
ever Tiberius commanded.'* " What then," said Nasica, " if 
Tiberius had ordered thee to burn the Capitol, wouldst thou 
have done it?" At first he turned it off, and said, " Tiberius 
would never have given him such an order." But when a 
number repeated the same question several times, he said,— 
" In that case I should have thought it extremely right, for 
Tiberius would never have laid such a command upon me, if 
it had not been for the advantage of the people of Rome." 
He escaped, however, with his life, and afterwards repaired to 
Aristonicus,t in Asia; but finding that prince's affairs entirely 
ruined, he laid violent hands on himself. 

The senate now, desirous to reconcile the people to these 
acts of theirs, no longer opposed the Agrarian law; and they 
permitted them to eject another commissioner in the room of 
Tiberius, for dividing the lands. In consequence of which, 
they chose Publius Crassus, a relation of the Gracchi; for 
Caius Gracchus had married his daughter Licinia. Cornelius 
Nepos, indeed, says it was not the daughter of Crassus, but 

* Lnm'us, in the treatise written by Cicero under that name, gives a different 
account of the matter: — "Blossius," he says, " after the murder of Tiberius, 
came to him while he was in conference with the consuls Popilius Lamas and 
Publius Rupilius, and earnestly begged for a pardon, alleging, in his defence, 
that such was his veneration for Tiberius, he could not refuse to do any thing 
he desired." " If then," said Laslius, " he had ordered you to set fire to the 
Capitol, would you have done it ?" " That," replied Blossius, " he would 
never have ordered me to do; but if he had, I s^uld have obeyed him." 
Blossius does not, upon this occasion, appear to have been under a judicial 
examination, as Plutarch represents him. 

t Aristonicus was a bastard brother of Attalus ; and being highly offended 
at him for bequeathing his kingdom to the Romans, he attempted to get pos- 
session of it by arms, and made himself master of several towns. The Romans 
sent Crassus the consul against him, the second year after the death of Tibe- 
rius. Crassus was defeated and taken by Aristonicus. The year following, 
Aris*"«icus was defeated in his turn, and taken prisoner by Perpenca. 

TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. 

51 

of that Brutus, who was honoured with a triumph for his 
conquests in Lusitania: but most historians give it for the 
former. 

Nevertheless, the people were still much concerned at the 
loss of Tiberius, and it was plain that they only waited for an 
opportunity of revenge. Nasica was now threatened with 
an impeachment. The senate, therefore, dreading the conse- 
quence, sent him into Asia, though there was no need of him 
there: for the people, whenever they met him, did not repress 
their resentment in the least: on the contrary, with all the 
violence that hatred could suggest, they called him an exe-, 
crable wretch, a tyrant who had defiled the holiest and most 
awful temple in Rome with the blood of a magistrate, whose 
person ought to have been sacred and inviolable. 

For this reason Nasica privately quitted Italy, though by his 
office he was obliged to attend the principal sacrifices; for he 
was chief pontiff. Thus he wandered from place to place in a 
foreign country, and alter a while died at Pergamus. Nor is 
it to be wondered that the people had so unconquerable an 
aversion to Nasica, since Scipio Africanus himself, who seems 
to have been one of the greatest favourites of the Romans, as 
well as to have had great right to their affection, was near for- 
feiting all the kind regards of the people, because, when the 
news of Tiberius' death was brought to Numantia, he express- 
ed himself in that verse of Homer, — 

So perish all that in such crimes engage.* 

Afterwards Caius and Fulvius asked him in an assembly of 
the people, what he thought of the death of Tiberius, and by 
his answer he gave them to understand that he was far from 
approving of his proceedings. Ever after this, the commons 
interrupted him when he spoke in public, though they had of- 
fered him no such affront before; and, on the other hand, he 
scrupled not to treat them with very severe language. But 
these things we have related at large in the Life of Scipio. 

* In Minerva's speech to Jupiter. — Odys. lib. i. 

THE 

LIFE OF CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

Whether it was that Caius Gracchus was afraid of his ene- 
mies, or wanted to make them more obnoxious to the people, 
at first he left the forum, and kept close in his own house ; like! 
one who was either sensible how much his family was reduced,! 
or who intended to make public business no more his object:! 
insomuch that some scrupled not to affirm that he disapproved 
and even detested his brother's administration. He was, in- 
deed, as yet very young, not being so old as Tiberius by ninei 
years; and Tiberius at his death was not quite thirty. _ How-| 
ever, in a short time .t appeared, that he had an aversion, not! 
only to idleness and effeminacy, but to intemperance and ava-l 
rice: and he improved his powers of oratory, as if he consider-} 
ed them as the wings on which he must rise to the great offices 
of state. These circumstances showed that he would not long 
continue inactive. 

In the defence of one of his friends named Vettius, he ex- 
erted so much eloquence, that the people were charmed be- 
yond expression, and borne away with all the transports of en- 
thusiasm. On this occasion he showed that other orators 
were no more than children in comparison. The nobility had 
all their former apprehensions renewed, and they began to 
take measures among themselves to prevent the advancement 
of Caius to the tribunitial power. 

It happened to fall to his lot to attend Orestes* the consul in I 
Sardinia in capacity of quaestor. This gave his enemies great , 

Eleasure. Caius, however, was not uneasy on the event: for1 
e was of a military turn, and had as good talents for the camp 
as for the bar. Besides, he was under some apprehension, 
about taking a share in the administration, or of appearing on 
the rostra, and at the same time he knew that he could not re- 
sist the importunities of the people or his friends. For these i 
reasons he thought himself happy in the opportunity of going 
abroad. 

* Lucius Aurelius Orestes was consul with iEmilius Lepidus the year of 
Borne 627. So that Caius went quaestor into Sardinia at the age of twenty ■ 
seven. 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. 53 

It is a common opinion that of his own accord he hecame a 
violent demagogue, and that he was much mere studious than 
Tiberius to make himself popular. But that is not the truth. 
On the contrary, it seems to have been rather necessity than 
choice, thai brought him upon the public stage: for Cicero the 
orator relates, that when Caius avoided all offices in the state, 
and had taken a resolution to live perfectly quiet, his brother 
appeared to him in a dream, and thus addressed him : — " Why 
lingerest thou, Caius? There is no alternative. The Fates 
have decreed us both the same pursuit of life, and the same 
death, in vindicating the rights of the people." 

In Sardinia, Caius gave a noble specimen of every virtue, 
distinguishing himself greatly among the other young Romans, 
not only in his operations against the enemy, and in acts of 
justice to such as submitted, but in his respectful and obliging 
behaviour to the general. In temperance, in simplicity of diet, 
and love of labour, he excelled even the veterans. 

There followed a severe and sickly winter in Sardinia, and 
the general demanded of the cities clothing for his men. But 
they sent a deputation to Rome to solicit an exemption from 
this burden. The senate listened to their requests, and or- 
dered the general to take some other method. As he could 
not think of withdrawing his demands, and the soldiers suf- 
fered much in the mean time, Caius applied to the towns in 
person, and prevailed with them to send the Romans a volun- 
tary supply of clothing. News of this being brought to Rome, 
and the whole looking like a prelude to future attempts at 
popularity, the senate were greatly disturbed at it. Another 
instance they gave of their jealousy, was in the ill reception 
which the ambassadors of Micipsa found, who came to ac- 
quaint them that the king their master, out of regard to Caius 
Gracchus, had sent their general in Sardinia a large quantity of 
corn. The ambassadors were turned out of the house ; and the 
senate proceeded to make a decree, that the private men in 
Sardinia should be relieved, but that Orestes should remain, in 
order that he might keep his quaestor with him. An account 
of this being brought to Caius, his anger overcame him so far, 
that he embarked; and as he made his appearance in Rome 
when none expected him, he was not only censured by his ene- 
mies, but the people in general thought it singular that the 
quaestor should return before his general. An information 
was laid against him before the censors, and he obtained per- 
mission to speak for himself: which he did so effectually, that 
the whole court changed their opinions, and were persuaded 
that he was very much injured. For he told them, — " He had 
served twelve campaigns, whereas he was not obliged to serve 
more than ten; and that in capacity of quaestor, he had at- 

5* 

/j 4 CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

tended his general three years,* though the laws did not re 
quire him to do it more than one." He added, — " That he was 
the only man who went out with a full purse, and returned 
with an empty one; while others, after having drunk the wine 
they carried out, brought back the vessels filled with gold and 
silver." 

After this, they brought other charges against him. They 
accused him of promoting disaffection amongst the allies, and 
of being concerned in the conspiracy of Fregellse,t which was 
detected about that time. He cleared himself, however, of all 
suspicion ; and having fully proved his innocence, offered him- 
self to the people as a candidate for the tribuneship. The 
patricians united their forces to oppose him; but such a num- 
ber of people came in from all parts of Italy to support his 
election, that many of them could not get lodging, and the 
Campus Martius not being large enough to contain them, gave 
their voices from the tops of houses. 

All that the nobility could gain of the people, and all the 
mortification that Caius had, was this: — Instead of being re- 
turned first, as he had flattered himself he should be, he was 
returned the fourth. But when he had entered upon his office, 
he soon became the leading tribune, partly by means of his 
eloquence, in which he was greatly superior to the rest, and 
partly on account of the misfortunes of his family, which gave 
him opportunity to bewail the cruel fate of his brother. For 
whatever subject he begun upon, before he had done, he led the 
people back to that idea, and at the same time put them in 
mind of the different behaviour of their ancestors: — "Your 
forefathers," said he, " declared war against the Felisci, in or- 
der to revenge the cause of Genucius, one of their tribunes, to 
whom that people had given scurrilous language; and they 
thought capital punishment little enough for Caius Veturius, 
because he alone did not break way for a tribune, who was 
passing through the forum. But you suffered Tiberius to be 
despatched with bludgeons before your eyes, and his dead body 
to be dragged from the Capitol through the middle of the city, 
in order to be thrown into the river. Such of his friends, too, 
as fell into their hands, were put to death without form of trial. 
Yet, by the custom of our country, if any person under a prose- 
cution for a capital crime did not appear, an officer was sent to 
his door in the morning, to summon him by sound of trumpet, 
and the judges would never pass sentence, before so public a 

* Great part of this speech is preserved by Aulus Gellhis ; but there Cains 
says he had been quaestor only two years. Biennium enimfui in provincia. — 
Aul. Gell. 1. xii. c. 15. 

t This place was destroyed by Lucius Opimius the praetor, in the year of 
Rome 629. 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. 55 

citation. So tender were our ancestors in any matter where 
the life of a citizen was concerned." 

Having prepared the people by such speeches as this, (for 
his voice was strong enough to be heard by so great a multi- 
tude,) he proposed two laws. One was, — " That if the people 
deposed any magistrate, he should from that time be incapable 
of bearing any public office." The other, — "That if any ma- 
gistrate should banish a citizen without a legal trial, the peo- 
ple should be authorized to take cognizance of that offence." 
The first of these laws plainly referred to Marcus Octavius, 
whom Tiberius had deprived of the tribuneship; and the se- 
cond to Popilius, who, in his prsetorship, had banished the 
friends of Tiberius. In consequence of the latter, Popilius, 
afraid to stand a trial, fled out of Italy. The other bill Caius 
dropped, to oblige, as he said, his mother Cornelia, who in- 
terposed in behalf of Octavius. The people were perfectly sa- 
tisfied; for they honoured Cornelia, not only on account of 
her children, but of her father. They afterwards erected a 
statue to her, with this inscription : — 

Cornelia, the Mother of the Gracchi. 

There are several extraordinary expressions of Caius Grac- 
chus handed down to us concerning his mother. To one of 
her enemies he said, — " Darest thou pretend to reflect on Cor- 
nelia, the mother of Tiberius?" And as that person had spent 
his youth in an infamous manner, he said, — " With what front 
canst thou put thyself upon a footing with Cornelia? Hast thou 
brought children as she has done? Yet all Rome knows that 
she has lived longer than thou hast without any commerce with 
men." Such was the keenness of his language; and many ex- 
pressions equally severe might be collected out of his writings. 

Among the laws which he procured to increase the authority 
of the people, and lessen that of the senate, one related to colo- 
nizing and dividing the public lands among the poor. Ano- 
ther was in favour of the army, who were now to be clothed 
at the public charge, without diminution of their pay, and none 
were to serve till they were full seventeen years old. A third 
was for the benefit of the Italian allies, who were to have the 
same right of voting at elections as the citizens of Rome. By 
a fourth the markets were regulated, and the poor enabled to 
buy bread-corn at a cheaper rate. A fifth related to the courts 
of judicature, and, indeed, contributed more than any thing 
to retrench the power of the senate: for, before this, senators 
only, were judges in all causes, and on that account their body 
was formidable both to the equestrian order and the people. 
But now he added three hundred knights to the three hundred 
senators, and decreed that a judicial authority should be equally 

£>> CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

invested in the six hundred.* In offering this bill, he exerted 
himself greatly in all respects, but there was one thing very 
remarkable; whereas the orators before him, in all addresses 
to the people, stood with their faces towards the senate-house 
and the comitium, he then, for the first time, turned the other 
way, that is to say, towards the forum, and continued to speak 
in that position ever after. Thus, by a small alteration in the 
posture of his body, he indicated something very great, and, 
as it were, turned the government from an aristocracy into a 
democratic form: for, by this action, he intimated mat all 
orators ought to address themselves to the people, and not to 
the senate. 

As the people not only ratified this law, but empowered him 
to select the three hundred out of the equestrian order, for 
judges, he found himself in a manner possessed of sovereign 
power. Even the senate, in their deliberations, were willing 
to listen to his advice ; and he never gave them any that was 
not suitable to their dignity. That wise and moderate decree, 
for instance, was of his suggesting, concerning the corn which 
Fabius, when propraetor in Spain, sent from that country. 
Caius persuaded the senate to sell the corn, and send the mo- 
ney to the Spanish states; and at the same time to censure 
Fabius for rendering the Roman government odious and in- 
supportable to the people of that country. This gained him 
great respect and favour in the provinces. 

He procured other decrees for sending out colonies, for 
making roads, and for building public granaries. In all these 
matters he was appointed supreme director, and yet was far 
from thinking so much business a fatigue. On the contrary, he 
applied to the whole with as much activity, and despatched it 
with as much ease, as if there had been only one thing for him 
to attend to: insomuch that they Avho both hated and feared 
the man, were struck with his amazing industry, and the ce- 
lerity of his operations. The people were charmed to see him 
followed by such numbers of architects, artificers, ambassa- 
dors, magistrates, military men, and men of letters. These 
were all kindly received : yet, amidst his civilities, he pre- 
served a dignity, addressing each according to his capacity and 
station: by which he showed how unjust the censures of those 
people were, who represented him as a violent and overbear- 
ing man : for he had even a more popular manner in conver- 
sation, and in business, than in his addresses from the rostrum. 

* The authorities of all antiquity are against Plutarch in this article. Caius 
did not associate the knights and the senators in the judicial power; but 
vested that power in the knights only, and they enjoyed it till the consulship 
of Servilius Csepio, for the space of sixteen or seventeen years. Velleius, 
Asconius, Appian, Livy, and Cicero himself, sufficiently prove this 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. 57 

The work that he took most pains with, was that of the 
public roads; in which he paid a regard to beauty as well as 
use. They were drawn in a straight line through the country, 
and either paved with hewn stone, or made of a binding sand, 
brought thither for that purpose. When he met with dells or 
other deep holes made by land-floods, he either filled them up 
with rubbish, or laid bridges over them ; so that being levelled, 
and brought to a perfect parallel on both sides, they afforded a 
regular and elegant prospect through the whole. "Besides, he 
divided all the roads into miles, of near eight furlongs each, 
and set up pillars of stone to mark the divisions. He likewise 
erected other stones at proper distances, on each side of the 
way, to assist travellers, who rode without servants, to mount 
their horses. 

The people extolled his performances, and there was no in 
stance of their affection that he might not have expected. In 
one of his speeches he told them, — " There was one thing in 
particular, which he should esteem as a greater favour than all 
the rest, if they indulged him in it, and if they denied it, he 
would not complain." By this it was imagined that he meant 
the consulship; and the commons expected that he would de 
sire to be consul and tribune at the same time. When the day 
of election of consuls came, and all were waiting with anxiety 
to see what declaration he would make, he conducted Caius 
Fannius into the Campus Martins, and joined with his friends 
in the canvass. This greatly inclined the scale on Fannius' 
side, and he was immediately created consul. Caius, too, with- 
out the least application, or even declaring himself a candidate, 
merely through the zeal and affection of the people, was ap- 
pointed tribune the second time. 

Finding, however, that the senate avowed their aversion to 
him, and that the regards of Fannius grew cold, he thought of 
new laws which might secure the people in his interest. Such 
were those for sending colonies to Tarentum and Capua, and 
for granting the Latins all the rights and privileges of citizens 
of Rome. The senate, now apprebending that his power would 
soon become entirely uncontrollable, took a new and unheard- 
of method to draw the people from him, by gratifying them in 
every thing, however contrary to the true interests of the state. 

Among the colleagues of Caius Gracchus, there was one 
named Livius Drusus; a man who in birth and education was 
not behind any of the Romans, and who in point of eloquence 
and wealth might vie with the greatest and most powerful men 
of his time. To him the nobility applied; exhorting him to 
set himself up against Caius, and join them in opposing him; 
not in the way of force, or in any thing that might offend the 
commons, but in directing all his measures to please them, and 

Vol. IV. H 

£g CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

granting them things which it would have hcen an honour to 
refuse at the hazard of their utmost resentment. 

Drusus agreed to list in the service of the senate, and to 
apply all the power of his office to their views. He, therefore, 
proposed laws, which had nothing in them either honourable 
or advantageous to the community. His sole view was to 
outdo Caius in flattering and pleasing the multitude, and for 
this purpose he contended with him, like a comedian upon a 
stage. Thus the senate plainly discovered, that it was not so 
much the measures of Caius, as the man they were offended 
with, and that they were resolved to take every method to 
humble or destroy him: for when he procured a decree for 
sending out two colonies only, which were to consist of some 
of the most deserving citizens, they accused him of ingratiat- 
ing himself by undue methods with the plebeians. But when 
Drusus sent out twelve, and selected three hundred of the 
meanest of the people for each, they patronized the whole 
scheme. When Caius divided the public lands among the poor 
citizens, on condition that they should pay a small rent into 
the treasury, they inveighed against him as a flatterer of the 

ftopulace; but Drusus had their praise for discharging the 
ands even of that acknowledgment. Caius procured the La- 
tins the privilege of voting as citizens of Rome, and the patri- 
cians were offended: Drusus, on the contrary, was supported 
by them in a law for exempting the Latin soldiers from being 
flogged, though upon service, for any misdemeanour. Mean 
time Drusus asserted, in all his speeches, that the senate, in 
their great regard for the commons, put him upon proposing 
such advantageous decrees. This was the only good thing in 
his manoeuvres; for by these arts the people became better af- 
fected to the senate. Before, they had suspected and hated the 
leaders of that body; but Drusus appeased their resentment, 
and removed their aversion, by assuring them, that the patri- 
cians were the first movers of all these popular laws. 

What contributed most to satisfy the people as to the since- 
rity of his regard, and the purity of his intentions, was, that 
Drusus, in all his edicts, appeared not to have the least view 
to his own interest: for he employed others as commissioners 
for planting the new colonies: and if there was an affair of 
money, he would have no concern with it himself; whereas 
Caius chose to preside in the greatest and most important 
matters of that kind. Rubrius, one of his colleagues, having 
procured an order for rebuilding and colonizing Carthage, 
which had been destroyed by Scipio, it fell to the lot of Caius 
to execute that commission, and in pursuance thereof he sail- 
ed to Africa. Drusus took advantage of his absence to gain 
more ground upon him, and to establish himself in the favour 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. 59 

of the people. To lay an information against Fulvius he 
thought would be very conducive to this end. 

Fulvius was a particular friend of Caius, and his assistant in 
the distribution of the lands: at the same time he was a fac- 
tious man, and known to be upon ill terms with the senate. 
Others, beside the patricians, suspected him of raising commo- 
tions among the allies, and of privately exciting the Italians to 
a revolt. These things, indeed, were said without evidence or 
proof; but Fulvius himself gave strength to the report b}' his 
unpeaceable and unsalutary conduct. Caius, as his acquaint- 
ance, came in for his share of the dislike, and this was one of 
the principal things that brought on his ruin. 

Besides, when Scipio Africanus died without any previous 
sickness, and (as we have observed in his Life) there appeared 
marks of violence upon his body, most people laid it to the 
charge of Fulvius, who was his avowed enemy, and had that 
very day abused him from the rostrum. Nor was Caius him- 
self unsuspected. Yet so execrable a crime as this, committed 
against the first and greatest man in Rome, escaped with im- 
punity; nay, it was not even inquired into. For the people 
prevented any cognizance of it from being taken, out of fear 
for Caius, lest, upon a strict inquisition, he should be found 
accessory to the murder. But this happened some time before. 

While Caius was employed in Africa in the re-establishment 
of Carthage, the name of which he changed to Junonia* he 
was interrupted by several inauspicious omens. The staff of 
the first standard was broken between the violent efforts of the 
wind to tear it away, and those of the ensign to hold it. Ano- 
ther storm of wind blew the sacrifices from the altars, and 
bore them beyond the bounds marked out for the city; and the 
wolves came and seized the marks themselves, and carried 
them to a great distance. Caius, however, brought every thing 
under good regulations in the space of seventy days, and then 
returned to Rome, where he understood that Fulvius was hard 
pressed by Drusus, and affairs demanded his presence. For 
Lucius Opimius,t who was of the patrician party, and very 
powerful in the senate, had lately been unsuccessful in his ap- 
plication for the consulship, through the opposition of Caius, 
and his support of Fannius; but now his interest was greatly 

* Quam Juno fertua terris magis omnibus unam 
Posthabita coluisse Samo. Virgil. 

tin tbe printed text it is Hostilius, but it sbould be Opimius; for he was 
consul the year following with Q. Fabius Maximus, which was the year of 
Rome 631. Plutarch himself calls him Opimius a little after. Hoslilim, 
therefore, must be a false reading ; and, indeed, one of the manuscripts gives 
us Opimius here. 

60 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

strengthened, and it was thought he would be chosen the fol- 
lowing year. It was expected, too, that the consulship would 
enable him to ruin Caius, whose interest was already upon the 
decline. Indeed, by this time the people were cloyed with 
indulgence: because there were many beside Caius, who flat- 
tered them in all the measures of administration, and the se- 
nate saw them do it with pleasure. 

At his return, he removed his lodgings from the Palatine 
Mount to the neighbourhood of the forum; in which he had 
a view to popularity; for many of the meanest and. most in- 
digent of the commonalty dwelt there. After this, he propos- 
ed the rest of his laws, in order to their being ratified by the 
suffrages of the people. As the populace came to him from 
all quarters, the senate persuaded the consul Fannius to com- 
mand all persons to depart the city who were not Romans by 
birth. Upon this strange and unusual proclamation, that none 
of the allies or friends of the republic should remain in Rome, 
or, though citizens, be permitted to vote, Caius, in his turn, 
published articles of impeachment against the consul, and at the 
same time declared, he would protect the allies, if they would 
stay. He did not, however, perform his promise. On the 
contrary, he suffered the consul's Victors to take away a person 
before his eyes, who was connected with him by the ties of 
hospitality, without giving him the least assistance : whether 
it was that he feared to show how much his strength was di- 
minished, or whether (as he alleged) he did not choose to give 
his enemies occasion to have recourse to the sword, who only 
sought a pretence for it. 

He happened, moreover, to be at variance with his col- 
leagues. The reason was this : — There was a show of gladia- 
tors to be exhibited to the people in the forum, and most of 
the magistrates had caused scaffolds to be erected around the 
place, in order to let them out for hire. Caius insisted that 
they should be taken down, that the poor might see the exhi- 
bition without paying for it. As none of the proprietors re- 
garded his orders, he waited till the night preceding the show, 
and then went with his own workmen, and demolished the 
scaffolds. Next day the populace saw the place quite clear of 
them, and, of course, they admired him as a man of superior 
spirit. But his colleagues were greatly offended at his violent 
temper and measures. This seems to have been the cause of 
his miscarriage in his application for a third tribuneship; for, it 
seems he had a majority of voices, but his colleagues are said to 
have procured a fraudulent and unjust return. Be that as it may, 
(for it was a matter of some doubt,) it is certain that he did 
not bear his disappointment with patience ; but when he saw 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. gj 

his adversaries laugh, he told them, with too much insolence, — 
" Their laugh was of the Sardonic* kind, for they did not per- 
ceive how much their actions were eclipsed hy his." 

After Opimius was elected consul, he prepared to repeal 
many of Caius' laws, and to annul his establishment at Car- 
thage, on purpose to provoke him to some act of violence, and 
to gain an opportunity to destroy him. He bore this treat 
ment for some time; but afterwards, at the instigation of his 
friends, and of Fulvius in particular, he began to raise an op- 
position once more against the consul. Some say, his mother, 
on this occasion, entered into the intrigues of the party, and 
having privately taken some strangers into pay, sent them into 
Rome in the disguise of reapers; and they assert that these 
things are enigmatically hinted at in her letters to her son. 
But others say Cornelia was much displeased at these measures. 

When the day came on which Opimius was to get those 
laws repealed, both parties early in the morning posted them- 
selves in the Capitol ; and after the consul had sacrificed, Quin- 
tus Antyllius, one of his lictors, who was cany ing out the en- 
trails of the victims, said to Fulvius and his friends, — " Stand 
off, ye factious citizens, and make way for honest men." Some 
add, that, along with this scurrilous language, he stretched his 
naked arm towards them in a form that expressed the utmost 
contempt. They immediately killed Antyllius with long 
styles, said to have been made for such a purpose. 

The people were much chagrined at this act of violence. As 
for the two chiefs, they made very different reflections upon 
the event. Caius was concerned at it, and reproached his par- 
tisans with having given their enemies the handle they long 
had wanted. Opimius rejoiced at the opportunity, and excited 
the people to revenge. But for the present they were parted 
by a heavy rain. 

At an early hour next day, the consul assembled the senate, 
and while he was addressing them within, others exposed the 
corpse of Antyllius naked on a bier without, and, as it had 
been previously concerted, carried it through the forum to the 
senate-house, making loud acclamations all the way. Opimius 
knew the whole farce, but pretended to be much surprised. 
The senate went out, and planting themselves about the corpse, 

* It was not easy to seethe propriety of this expression as it is used here. 
The Sardonic laugh was an involuntary distention of the muscles of the 
mouth, occasioned by a poisonous plant; and persons that died of this poison 
had asmile on their countenances. Hence it came to signify forced or affected 
laughter; but why the laughter of Gracchus' opponent should be called 
forced or Sardonic, because they did not perceive his superiority, it does not 
appear. It might more properly have been called affected, if they did per- 
ceive it. Indeed, if every species o£ unreasonable laughing may be called 
Sardonic, it will do still. 

F 

g£ CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

cxpiessed their grief and indignation, as if some dreadful mis- 
fortune had befallen them. This scene, however, excited only 
hatred and detestation in the breasts of the people, who could 
not but remember that the nobility had killed Tiberius Grac- 
chus in the Capitol, though a tribune, and thrown his body into 
the river; and yet now, when Antyllius, a vile serjeant, who 
possibly did not deserve quite so severe a punishment, but by 
his impertinence had brought it upon himself, — when such a 
hireling lay exposed in the forum, the senate of Rome stood 
weeping about him, and then attended the wretch to his fune- 
ral, with no other view than to procure the death of the only 
remaining protector of the people. 

On their return to the house, they charged Opimius the con- 
sul, by a formal decree, to take every possible method for the 
preservation of the commonwealth, and the destruction of the 
tyrants. He therefore ordered the patricians to arms, and each 
of the knights to attend with two servants well armed the next 
morning. Fulvius, on the other hand, prepared himself, and 
drew together a crowd of people. 

Caius,1 as he returned from the forum, stood a long time 
looking upon his father's statue, and, after having given vent 
to his sorrow in some sighs and tears, retired without uttering 
a word. Many of the plebeians, who saw this, were moved 
with compassion ; and declaring they should be the most das- 
tardly of beings, if they abandoned such a man to his enemies, 
repaired ti his~house to guard him, and passed the night before 
his door. This they did in a very different manner from the 
people who attended Fulvius on the same occasion. These 
passed their time in noise and riot, in carousing and empty 
threats; Fulvius himself being the first man that was intoxi- 
cated, and giving into many expressions and actions unsuita- 
ble to his years. But those about Caius were silent, as in a 
time of public calamity ; and, with a thoughtful regard to what 
was yet to come, they kept watch and took rest by turns. 

Fulvius slept so sound after his wine, that it was with diffi 
culty they awoke him at break of day. Then he and his com- 

Cany armed themselves with the Gallic spoils which he had 
rought off in his consulship, upon his conquering that people ; 
and thus accoutred, they sallied out, with loud menaces, to 
seize the Aventine hill. As for Caius, he would not arm, but 
went out in his gown., as if he had been going upon business 
into the forum ; only he had a small dagger under it. 

At the gate, his wife threw herself at his feet, and taking 
hold of him with one hand, and of her son with the other, she 
thus expressed herself: — " You do not now leave me, my dear 
Caius, as formerly, to go to the rostra in capacity of tribune 
or lawgiver; nor do I send you^)ut to a glorious war, where. 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. gg 

if the common lot fell to your share, my distress might at least 
have the consolation of honour. You expose yourself to the 
murderers of Tiberius, unarmed indeed, as a man should go, 
who had rather suffer than commit any violence; but it is 
throwing away your life without any advantage to the com- 
munity. Faction reigns; outrage and the sword are the only 
measures of justice. Had your brother fallen before Numan- 
t:a, the truce would have restored us his body; but now, per- 
haps, I shall have to go a suppliant to some river or the sea, 
to be shown where your remains may be found: for what con- 
fidence can we have either in the laws, or in the gods, after the 
assassination of Tiberius*?" 

When Licinia had poured out these lamentations, Caius dis- 
engaged himself as quietly as he could from her arms, and 
walked on with his friends in deep silence. She catched at 
his gown, but in the attempt fell to the ground, and lay a long 
time speechless. At last her servants, seeing her in that con- 
dition, took her up, and cai'ried her to her brother Crassus. 

Fulvius, when all the party was assembled, listened to the 
advice of Caius, and sent his younger son into the forum, 
equipped like a herald.* He was a youth of most engaging 
appearance, and he approached with great modesty ana tears 
in his eyes, to propose terms of accommodation to the consul 
and the senate. Many were disposed to hearken to the pro- 

Eosal; but Opimius said, — " The criminals ought not to treat 
y heralds, but come in person to make their submission to 
the senate, and surrender themselves to justice, before they 
interceded for mercy." At the same time, he bade the young 
man return with an account that these conditions were com- 
plied with, or not return at all. 

Caius was of opinion that they should go and endeavour to 
reconcile themselves to the senate. But as none of the rest 
acceded to that opinion, Fulvius sent his son again writh propo- 
sitions much the same. Opimius, who was in haste to begin 
hostilities, immediately took the young man into custody, and 
marched against Fulvius with a numerous body of infantry, 
and a company of Cretan archers. The latter galled their ad- 
versaries much, and put them in such confusion that they took 
to flight. Fulvius hid himself in an old neglected bath, where 
he was soon found and put to the sword, together with his 
eldest son. Caius was not seen to lift his hand in the fray. 
On the contrary, he expressed the greatest uneasiness at their 
coming to such extremities, and retired into the temple of 
Diana. There he would have despatched himself, but was 
hindered by Pomponius and Licinius, the most faithful of his 

* Literally, with a caduccus, or herald's wand in his hand. 

g4 CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

friends, who took away his poniard, and persuaded him to try 
the alternative of flight. On this occasion he is said to have 
kneeled down, and with uplifted hands to have prayed to the 
deity of that temple, — " That the people of Rome, for their 
ingratitude and base desertion of him, might be slaves for 
ever." Indeed, most of them, on promise of impunity by 
proclamation, openly went over to the other party. 

The enemy pursued Caius with great eagerness, and came 
up with him at the wooden bridge. His two friends, bidding 
him go forward, planted themselves before it, and suffered no 
man to pass till they were overpowered and slain. One of his 
servants, named Philocrates, accompanied Caius in his flight. 
All encouraged him to make the best of his way as they do a 
runner in the lists, but not one assisted him, or offered him a 
horse, though he desired it, for they saw the enemy now al- 
most upon him.* He got, however, a little before them into a 
grove sacred to the Furies,X and there closed the scene; Phi- 
lecrates first despatched him, and afterwards himself. Some, 
indeed, say, that they both came alive into the enemy's hands; 
and that the slave clung so close to his master, that they could 
not come to the one, till they had cut the other in pieces. We 
are told also, that after a person, whose name is not mentioned, 
had cut off the head of Caius, and was bearing away his prize, 
Septimuleius, one of Opimius'J friends, took it from him: for, 
at the beginning of the action, the weight in gold had been 
offered by proclamation either for his head, or for that of Ful- 
vius. Septimuleius carried it to Opimius upon the point of a 
pike; and when put in the scales, it was found to weigh seven- 
teen pounds eight ounces: For Septimuleius had added fraud 
to his other villanies ; he had taken out the brain, and filled 
the cavity with molten lead. Those who brought in the head 
of Fulvius, being persons of no note, had no reward at all. 

The bodies of Caius and Fulvius, and the rest of the slain, 
who were no fewer than three thousand, were thrown into the 
river. Their goods were confiscated and sold, and their wives 
forbidden to go into mourning. Licinia was, moreover, de- 
prived of her dowry. The most savage cruelty was exercised 
upon the younger son of Fulvius, who had never borne arms 
against them, nor appeared among the combatants, but was 

* Aurelius Victor mentions two of Caius' friends who stopped the pursu it of 
the enemy; Pomponius at the Porta Trigeminal, and Lsetorius at the Pons 
Sublicius. 

t This grove was called Lucus Furince, and was near the Pons Sublicius. 
The goddess had a high priest called Flamen Furinalis, and annual sacrifices. 
— Varro de Ling. 1. v. 

X Pliny and Valerius Maximus say, he was an intimate acquaintance of 
O racchus. 

CAIUS GRACCHUS. (J 5 

imprisoned when he came with proposals of peace, and put 
to death after the battle. But neither this, nor any other in- 
stance of despotism, so sensibly touched the people, as Opi- 
mius' building a temple to Concord: for by that he appeared 
to claim honour for what he had done, and in some sort to 
triumph in the destruction of so many citizens. Somebody, 
therefore, in the night, wrote this line under the inscription on 
the temple : — 

Madness and discord rear the fane of Concord. 

Opimius was the first consul who usurped the power of a 
dictator, and condemned three thousand citizens without any 
form of justice, beside Caius Gracchus and Fulvius Flaccus ; 
though one of them nad been honoured with the consulship 
and a triumph, and the other, both in virtue and reputation, 
was superior to all the men of his time. 

Opimius was vile enough to suffer himself to be corrupted 
with money. Going afterwards ambassador to Jugurtha the 
Numidian, he took a bribe : and being called to account for it 
at his return, in a judicial way, he had the mortification to 
grow old with that infamy upon him. At the same time, he 
was hated and execrated by the commons, who through his 
means had been reduced to an abject condition. In a little 
time those commons showed how deeply they regretted the 
Gracchi. They erected their statues in one of the most public 
parts of the city ; they consecrated the places where they were 
killed, and offered to them all first fruits according to the sea- 
son of the year. Nay, many offered daily sacrifices, and paid 
their devotions there, as in the temples of the gods. 

Cornelia is reported to have borne all these misfortunes with 
a noble magnanimity, and to have said of the consecrated 
places in particular, where her sons lost their lives, — " That 
they were monuments worthy of them." She took up her re- 
sidence at Misenum, and made no alteration in her manner of 
living. As she had many friends, her table was always open 
for the purposes of hospitality. Greeks and other men of let- 
ters she had always with her; and all the kings in alliance 
with Rome expressed their regard, by sending her presents, 
and receiving the like civilities in return. She made herself 
very agreeable to her guests by acquainting them with many 
particulars of her father Africanus, and of his manner of liv- 
ing. But what they most admired in her was, that she could 
speak of her sons without a sigh or a tear, and recount their 
actions and sufferings, as if she had been giving a narrative of 
some ancient heroes. Some, therefore, imagined, that age and 
the greatness of her misfortunes had deprived her of her un- 
derstanding and sensibility. But those who were of that opi 

Vol. IV. 1 6* 

gg AGIS AND CLEOMENES 

nion seem rather to have wanted understanding themselves, 
since they knew not how much a noble mind may, by a liberal 
education, be enabled to support itself against distress; and 
that though, in the pursuit of rectitude, fortune may often de- 
feat the purposes of Virtue, yet Virtue in bearing affliction can 
never lose her prerogative.* 

AGIS AND CLEOMENES 

COMPARED WITH 

TIBERIUS AND CAIUS GRACCHUS. 

Thus we have given the history of these great men seve- 
rally, and it remains that we take a view of them in compa- 
rison with each other. Those who hated the Gracchi, and 
endeavoured the most to disparage them, never durst deny, 
that of all the Romans of their time, nature had disposed them 
most happily to virtue, or that this disposition was cultivated 
by the most excellent education. But nature appears to have 
done still more for Agis and Cleomenes; for though they not 
only wanted the advantages of education, but were trained to 
such manners and customs as had corrupted many before them, 
yet they became examples of temperance and sobriety. 

Besides, the Gracchi lived at a time when Rome was in her 
greatest glory ; a time that was distinguished by a virtuous 
emulation ; and, of course, they must have had a natural aver 
sion to give up the inheritance of virtue which they had re- 
ceived from their ancestors: whereas Agis and Cleomenes had 
parents of very different principles, and found their country in 
a very diseased and unhappy state; and yet these things did not 
in the least abate their ardour in the pursuits of honour. 

We have a strong proof of the disinterested views of the 
Gracchi, and their aversion to avarice, in their keeping them- 
selves clear of all iniquitous practices in the whole course of 
their administration. But Agis might even have resented it, 

* Kai 'on ms afETTis 'ti tuX'O <puA.ctTTOj^£vois fisv Ta xa\a TroWa^is ttejieS'iv, £v 5t 
ru irraio-ai to (psosiv tuKoyiTOJ 87rayaiT£iTai. The learned Du Soul here pro- 
poses to read ipu\aTTOfi£VTis, instead of <pu\aTTon£voii, and xaxa for xa\a. There 
are, indeed, some manuscript authorities for those reading's., and the passage 
is capable of a good sense if we accept them, viz. — And that though Virtue, 
tn striving to avoid affliction, may be often overborne by Fortune, &c. But 
we think the contrast sufficiently preserved without altering the printed text. 
The learned annotator will have tpiAa-r-nnai here to signify into; — and that is 
certainly often the signification. But sometimes it signifies obscrvo, as ap« 
pears from the following passage in Hesiod : — H^ata 6' tx Aio^ev iKipiAaynrvoi 

COMPARED WITH THE GRACCHI. 

67 

*f any one had commended him for not touching the property 
of others, since he distributed his whole substance among the 
citizens of Sparta, which, beside other considerable articles, 
consisted of six hundred talents in money. What a crime, 
then, must unjust gain have appeared to him, who thought it 
nothing less than avarice to possess more than others, though 
by the fairest title ? 

If we consider them with respect to the hardiness of their 
enterprises, and the new regulations they wanted to establish, 
we shall find the two Grecians greatly superior. One of the 
two Romans applied himself principally to making roads and 
•-olonizing towns. The boldest attempt of Tiberius was the 
distribution of the public lands ; and Caius did nothing more 
extraordinary than the joining an equal number of the eques- 
trian order in commission with the three hundred patrician 
judges. 

The alterations whicl\A.gis and Cleomenes brought into the 
system of their commonwealth, were of a different nature. 
The)'- saw that a small and partial amendment was no better, 
as Plato expresses it, than the cutting off one of the Hydra's 
heads;* and, therefore, they introduced a change that might 
remove all the distempers of the constitution at once. Per- 
haps we may express ourselves with more propriety, if we say, 
that, by removing the changes that r.ad caused all their mis- 
fortunes, they brought Sparta back to its first principles. 

Possibly it may not be amiss to add, that the measures the 
Gracchi adopted, were offensive to the greatest men in Rome ;t 
whereas, all that Agis meditated, and Cleomenes brought to 
bear, had the best and most respectable authorities to support 
it ; I mean the sanction either of Lycurgus or Apollo. 

What is sti*ll more considerable, by the political measures 
of the Gracchi, Rome made not the least acquisition of power 
or territory, whereas, through those of Cleomenes, Greece 
saw the Spartans in a little time become masters of Pelopon- 
nesus, and contending for superiority with the most powerful 
princes of that age; and this without any other view than to 
deliver Greece from the incursions of the Illyrians and Gauls, 
and put her once more under the protection of the race of 
Hercules. 

The different manner of the deaths of these great men ap- 
pears also to me to point out a difference in their characters. 

* In the fourth book of the Commonwealth. 

t Plutarch seems to censure the Agrarian law as an irrational one, and as 
ftie invention of the Gracchi. But, in fact, there was an Agrarian law among 
the institutions of Lycurgus ; and the Gracchi were not the first promoters of 
such a law among the Romans. Spurius Cassius offered a bill of the same 
kind above two hundred years before, which proved equally fatal to him. 

gg AGIS AND CLEOMENES 

The Gracchi fought with their fellow-citizens, and being de- 
feated, perished in their flight. Agis, on the other hand, fell 
almost a voluntary sacrifice, rather than that any Spartan 
should lose his life on his account. Cleomenes, when insulted 
and oppressed, had recourse to vengeance; and, as circum- 
stances did not favour him, had courage enough to give him 
self the fatal blow. 

If we view them in another light, Agis never distinguished 
himself as a general; for he was "killed before he had any op- 
portunity of that kind : and with the many great and glorious 
victories of Cleomenes, we may compare the memorable ex- 
ploit of Tiberius in being the first to scale the walls of Car- 
thage, and his saving twenty thousand Romans, who had no 
other hope of life, by the peace which he happily concluded 
with the Numantians. As for Caius, there were many in- 
stances of his military talents, both in the Numantian war and 
in Sardinia. So that the two brothers would probably one 
day have been ranked with the greatest generals among the 
Romans, had they not come to an untimely death. 

As to their political abilities, Agis seems to have wanted 
firmness and despatch. He suffered himself to be imposed 
upon by Agesilaus, and performed rot his promise to the citi- 
zens of making a distribution of la^ls. He was, indeed, ex- 
tremely young; and, on that account, had a timidity which 
prevented the completion of those scbemes that had so much 
raised the expectation of the public. Cleomenes, on the con- 
trary, took too bold and too violent a method to effectuate the 
changes he had resolved on in the police of Sparta. It was an 
act of injustice to put the pphori to death, whom he might 
either have brought over to his party by force, because he was 
superior in arms, or else have banished, as he did many others: 
for to have recourse to the knife, except in case of extreme 
necessity, indicates neither the good physician, nor the able 
statesman, but unskilfulness in both. Besides, in politics, that 
ignorance is always attended with injustice and cruelty. But 
neither of the Gracchi began the civil war, or dipped his hands 
in tne blood ol his countrymen. Caius, we are told, even when 
attacked, did not repel force with force; and though none be- 
haved with greater courage and vigour than he in other wars, 
none was so slow to lift up his hand against a fellow-citizen. 
He went out unarmed to a scene of fury and sedition : when 
the fight began, he retired; and, through the whole, appeared 
more solicitous to avoid the doing of harm, than the receiving 
it. The flight, therefore, of the Gracchi must not be consi- 
dered as an act of cowardice, but patriotic discretion : for they 
were under a necessity either of taking the method they did, 
or of fighting in their own defence, if they staid. 

COMPARED WITH THE GRACCHI. gy 

The strongest charge against Tiberius is, that he deposed 
his colleague, and sued for a second tribuneship. Caius was 
blamed for the death of Antyllius, but against all reason and 
justice; for the fact was committed without his approbation, 
and he looked upon it as a most unhappy circumstance. On 
the other hand, Cleomenes, not to mention any more his de- 
stroying the ephori, took an unconstitutional step in enfran- 
chising all the slaves; and, in reality, he reigned alone, though, 
to save appearances, he took in his brother Euclidas as partner 
in the throne, who was not of the other family that claimed a 
right to give one of the kings to Sparta. Archidamus, who 
was of that family, and had as much right to the throne, he 
persuaded to return from Messene. In consequence of this 
he was assassinated ; and, as Cleomenes made no inquiry into 
the murder, it is probable that he was justly censured as the 
cause of it. Whereas, Lycurgus, whom he pretended to take 
as his pattern, freely surrendered to his nephew Charilaus the 
kingdom committed to his charge; and that he might not be 
blamed in case of his untimely death, he went abroad, and 
wandered a long time in foreign countries; nor did he return 
till Charilaus had a son to succeed him in the throne. It is 
true, Greece had not produced any other man who can be com- 
pared to Lycurgus. 

We have shown that Cleomenes, in the course of his govern- 
ment, brought in greater innovations, and committed more 
violent acts of injustice. And those that are inclined to cen- 
sure the persons of whom we are writing, represent Cleomenes 
as, from the first, of a tyrannical disposition, and a lover of 
war. The Gracchi they accuse of immoderate ambition, ma- 
lignity itself not being able to find any other flaw in them. At 
the same time they acknowledge, that those tribunes might 
possibly be carried beyond the dictates of their native disposi- 
tion by anger, and the heat of contention, which, like so many 
hurricanes, drove them at last upon some extremes in their 
administration. What could be more just or meritorious than 
their first design, to which they would have adhered, had not 
the rich and great, by the violent methods they took to abro- 
gate their law, involved them both in those fatal quarrels; the 
one to defend himself, and the other to revenge his brother, 
who was taken off without any form of law or justice? 

From these observations, you may easily perceive the dif- 
ference between them; and if you required me to charac- 
terize each of them singly, I should say that the palm of virtue 
belongs to Tiberius; young Agis had the fewest faults; and 
Caius, in point of courage and spirit of enterprise, was little 
inferior to Cleomenes. 

THE 

LIFE OF DEMOSTHENES. 

Whoever it was, my Sossius, that wrote the encomium upon 
Alcibiades, for his victory in the chariot-race at the Olympic 
games; whether Euripides, (which is the common opinion,) 
or some other, he asserts, that " The first requisite to happi- 
ness, is that a man be born in a famous city." But as to real 
happiness, which consists principally in the disposition and 
habit of the mind, for my part, I think it would make no dif- 
ference though a man should be born in an inconsiderable 
town, or of a mother who had no advantages either of size or 
beauty: for it is ridiculous to suppose that Julis, a small town 
in the isle of Ceos, which is itself not great, and iEgina, which 
an Athenian " wanted to have taken away, as an eye-sore to 
the Piraeus," should give birth to good poets and players,* and 
not be able to produce a man who might attain the virtues of 
justice, of contentment, and of magnanimity. Indeed, those 
arts, which are to gain the master of them considerable profit 
or honour, may probably not flourish in mean and insignificant 
towns. But virtue, like a strong and hardy plant, will take 
root in any place, where it can find an ingenuous nature, and 
a mind that has no aversion to labour and discipline. There- 
fore, if our sentiments or conduct fall short of the point they 
ought to reach, we must not impute it to the obscurity of the 
place where we were born, but to our little selves. 

These reflections, however, extend not to an author, who 
would write a history of events which happened in a foreign 
country, and cannot be come at in his own. As he has his 
materials to collect from a variety of books dispersed in dif- 
ferent libraries, his first care should be to take up his residence 
in some populous town which has an ambition for literature. 
There he will meet with many curious and valuable books ; 
and the particulars that are wanting in writers, he may, upon 
inquiry, be supplied with by those who have laid them up in 
the faithful repository of memory. This will prevent his work 
from being defective in any material point. As to myself, 1 
live in a little town, and I choose to live there, lest it should 
become still less. When I was in Rome, and other parts of 

* The poet Simonides was of Ceos, and Polus the actor was of iEgina. 

DEMOSTHENES. 7 j 

Italy, I had not leisure to study the Latin tongue, on account 
of the public commissions with which I was charged, and the 
number of people that came to be instructed by me in philo- 
sophy. It was not, therefore, till a late period in life, that I 
began to read the Roman authors. The process may seem 
strange; and yet it is very true. I did not so much gain the 
knowledge of things by the words, as words by the knowledge 
I had of things. I shall only add, that, to attain such a skill 
in the language, as to be master of the beauty and fluency of 
its expressions, with its figures, its harmony, and all the other 

f races of its structure, would, indeed, be an elegant and agreea- 
le accomplishment. But the practice and pains it requires, 
are more than I have time for, and I must leave the ambition 
to excel in that walk to younger men. 

In this book, which is the fifth of our parallels, we intend to 
give the Lives of Demosthenes and Cicero, and, from their 
actions and political conduct, we shall collect and compare 
their manners and disposition; but, for the reason already as- 
signed, we shall not pretend to examine their orations, or to 
determine which of them was the more agreeable speaker. 
For, as Ion says, 

What's the gay dolphin when he quits the waves, 
And bounds upon the shore ? 

Caecilius,* a writer at all times much too presumptuous, paid 
little regard to that maxim of the poet's, when he so boldly 
attempted a comparison between Demosthenes and Cicero. 
But perhaps the precept, Know thyself, would not be consi- 
dered as divine, if every man could easily reduce it to practice. 
It seems to me that Demosthenes and Cicero were originally 
formed by nature in the same mould, so great is the resem- 
blance in their disposition. The same ambition, the same love 
of liberty, appears in their whole administration, and the same 
timidity amidst wars and dangers. Nor did they less resem- 
ble each other in their fortunes. For I think it is impossible 
to find two other orators, who raised themselves from obscure 
beginnings to such authority and power; who both opposed 
kings and tyrants; who both lost their daughters; were ba- 
nished their country, and returned with honour; were forced 
to fly again; were taken by their enemies, and at last expired 
the same hour with the liberties of their country. So that, if 
nature and fortune, like two artificers, were to descend upon 
the scene, and dispute about their work, it would be difficult 
to decide whether the former had produced a greater resem- 

* Csecilius was a celebrated rhetorician, who lived in the time of Augustus. 
He wrote a Treatise on the Sublime, which is mentioned by Longinus. 

72 DEMOSTHENES. 

blance in their dispositions, or the latter in the circumstances 
uf their lives. We shall begin with the more ancient 

Demosthenes, the father of Demosthenes, was one of the 
principal citizens of Athens. Theopompus tells us, he was 
called the sword- cutler, because he employed a great number 
of slaves in that business. As to what iEschines the orator 
relates concerning his mother,* that she was the daughter of 
one Gylon,t who was forced to fly for treason against the com- 
monwealth, and of a barbarian woman, we cannot take upon 
us to say whether it was dictated by truth, or by falsehood and 
malignity. He had a large fortune left him by his father, who 
died when he was only seven years of age; the whole being 
estimated at little less than fifteen talents. But he was greatly 
wronged by his guardians, who converted part to their own 
use, and suffered part to lie neglected. Nay, they were vile 
enough to defraud his tutors 01 their salaries. This was the 
chief reason that he had not those advantages of education to 
which his quality entitled him. His mother did not choose 
that he should be put to hard and laborious exercises, on ac- 
count of the weakness and delicacy of his frame; and his pre 
ceptors, being ill paid, did not press him to attend them. Indeed, 
from the first he was of a slender and sickly habit, insomuch 
that the boys are said to have given him the contemptuous 
name of Batalus,% for his natural defects. Some say, Batalus 
was an effeminate musician, whom Antiphanes ridiculed in one 
of his farces ; others, that he was a poet, whose verses were of 
the most wanton and licentious kind. The Athenians, too, at 
that time, seem to have called a part of the body batalus, 
which decency forbids us to name. We are told, that De- 
mosthenes had likewise the name of Jlrgas, either on account 
of the savage and morose turn of his behaviour; for there is a 
kind of serpent which some of the poets call argas ;§ or else 
for the severity of his expressions, which often gave his hearers 
pain; for there was a poet named Jirgas, whose verses were 
very keen and satirical. But enough of this article. 

His ambition to speak in public is said to have taken its 
rise on this occasion: — The orator Callistratus was to plead 

* In his oration against Ctesiphon. 

t Gylon was accused of betraying to the enemy a town in Pontus called 
Nymphaeum ; upon which he fled into Scythia, where he married a native of 
the country, and had two daughters by her; one of whom was married to 
Philochares, aud the other, named Cleobule, to Demosthenes. Her fortune 
was forty mince; and of this marriage came Demosthenes the orator. 

I l[esy< hius gives a different explanation of the word Batalus; but Plu- 
tarch must be allowed, though Dacier will not here allow him, to understand 
the sense of the Greek word as well as Hesychius. 

i Hippocrates too mentions a serpent of the name. 

DEMOSTHENES. 73 

in the cause which the city of Oropus* had depending; and 
the expectation of the public was greatly raised, both by the 
powers of the orator, which were then in the highest repute, 
and by the importance of the trial. Demosthenes hearing the 
governors and tutors agree among themselves to attend the 
trial, with much importunity prevailed on his master to take 
him to hear the pleadings. The master having some acquaint- 
ance with the officers who opened the court, got his young 
pupil a seat where he could hear the orators without being 
seen. Callistratus had great success, and his abilities were 
extremely admired. Demosthenes was fired with a spirit of 
emulation. When he saw with what distinction the orator was 
conducted home, and complimented by the people, he was 
struck still more with the power of that commanding elo- 
quence, which could carry all before it. From this time, 
therefore, he bade adieu to the other studies and exercises in 
which boys are engaged, and applied himself with great assi- 
duity to declaiming, in hopes of being one day numbered 
among the orators. Isseus was the man he made use of as his 
preceptor in eloquence, though Isocrates then taught it; whe- 
ther it was that the loss of his father incapacitated him to pay 
the sum of ten minaej which was that rhetorician's usual price, 
or whether he preferred the keen and subtle manner of Isoeus, 
as more fit for public use. 

Hermippus says he met with an account in certain anony- 
mous memoirs, that Demosthenes likewise studied under Pla- 
to,:}: and received great assistance from him in preparing to 
speak in public. Tie adds, that Ctesibius used to say, that 
Demosthenes was privately supplied by Callias the Syracusan, 

* Oropus was a town on the banks of the Euripus, on the frontiers of At- 
tica. The Thebans, though they had been relieved in their distress by Cha- 
brias and the Athenians, forgot their former services, and took Oropus from 
them. Chabrias was suspected of treachery, and Callistratus, the orator, was 
retained to plead against him. Demosthenes mentions this in his oration 
against Phidias. At the time of this trial, he was about sixteen. 

tThis could not be the reason, if what is recorded in the life of Isceus be 
true, that he was retained as tutor to Demosthenes at the price of a hundred 
mince.. 

\ This is confirmed by Cicero in his Brutus : — Lectilavisse Platonem stu 
diose, audivisse etiam, Demosthenes deciiur: Idque apparet in gencre et 
granditate verborum. Again, in his book de Oratore : — Quod idem de De- 
mosthene existimari -potest, cvjus ex epistolis intelligi licet, quctm frequens 
fuerit Platonis auditor. It is possible that Cicero in this place alludes to the 
letter of Demosthenes addressed to Heracleodorus, in which he thus speaks 
of Plato's philosophy: — "Since you have espoused the doctrine of Plato, 
which is so distant from avarice, from artifice, and violence, — a doctrine 
whose object is the perfection of goodness and justice! Immortal gods ! when 
once a man lias adopted this doctrine, is it possible he should deviate from 
truth, or entertain one selfish or ungenerous sentiment?" 

Vol. IV. K 

74 DEMOSTHENES. 

and some others, with the systems of rhetoric taught by Iso- 
crates and Alcidamus, and made his advantageof them. 

When his minority was expired, he called his guardians to 
account at law, and wrote orations against them. As they 
found many methods of chicane and delay, he had great op- 
portunity, as Thucydides says, to exercise his talent for the 
bar.* It was not without much pains and some risk that he 
gained his cause; and, at last, it was but a very small part of 
his patrimony that he could recover. By this means, however, 
he acquired a proper assurance, and some experience; and, 
having tasted the honour and power that go in the train of elo- 
quence, he attempted to speak in the public debates, and take 
a share in the administration. As it is said of Laomedon the 
Orchomenian, that, by the advice of his physicians, in some 
disorder of the spleen, he applied himself to running, and con- 
tinued it constantly a great length of way, till he had gained 
such excellent health and breath, that he tried for the crown at 
the public games, and distinguished himself in the long course: 
so it happened to Demosthenes, that he first appeared at the bar 
for the recovery of his own fortune, which had been so much 
embezzled ; and having acquired in that cause a persuasive and 
powerful manner of speaking, he contested the crown, as I may 
call it, with the other orators before the general assembly. 

However, in his first address to the people, he was laughed 
at, and interrupted by their clamours; for the violence of his 
manner threw him into a confusion of periods, and a distortion 
of his argument. Besides, he had a weakness and stammering 
in his voice, and a want of breath, which caused such a distrac- 
tion in his discourse, that it was difficult for the audience to 
understand him. At last, upon his quitting the assembly, Eu- 
nomus the Thriasian, a man now extremely old, found him 
wandering in a dejected condition in the Piraeus, and took 
upon him to set him right: — " You," said he, " have a man- 
ner of speaking very like that of Pericles; and yet you lose 
yourself out of mere timidity and cowardice. You neither 
bear up against the tumults of a popular assembly, nor pre- 
pare your body by exercise for the labour of the rostrum, 
but suffer your parts to wither away in negligence and indo- 
lence." 

Another time, we are told, when his speeches had been ill 
received, and he was going home with his head covered, and 
in the greatest distress, Satyrus the player, who was an ac- 
quaintance of his, followed, and went in with him. Demos- 
thenes lamented to him, — " That though he was the most la 

* He lost his father at the age of seven ; and he was ten years in the hand3 
of guardians. He, therefore, began to plead in his eighteenth year, which, 
as it was only in his own private affairs, was not forbidden by the laws. 

DEMOSTHENES 75 

honous of all the orators, and had almost sacrificed his health 
to that application, yet he could gain no favour with the peo- 
ple; but drunken seamen, and other unlettered persons, were 
heard, and kept the rostrum, while he was entirely disregard- 
ed."* " You say true," answered Satyrus; "but I will soon 
provide a remedy, if you will repeat to me some speech in 
Euripides or Sophocles." When Demosthenes had done, Sa- 
tyrus pronounced the same speech; and he did it with such 
propriety of action, and so much in character, that it appeared 
to the orator quite a different passage. He now understood so 
well how much grace and dignity action adds to the best ora- 
tion, that he thought it a small matter to premeditate and com- 
pose, though with the utmost care, if the pronunciation and 
propriety of gesture were not attended to. Upon this, he built 
himself a subterraneous study, which remained to our times. 
Thither he repaired every day, to form his action, and exercise 
his voice; and he would often stay there for two or three 
months together; shaving one side of his head, that, if he 
should happen to be ever so desirous of going abroad, the 
shame of appearing in that condition might keep him in. 

When he did go out upon a visit, or received one, he would 
take something that passed in conversation, some business or 
fact that was reported to him, for a subject to exercise him- 
self upon. As soon as he had parted from his friends, he 
went to his study, where he repeated the matter in order as it 
passed, together with the arguments for and against it. The 
substance of the speeches which he heard, he committed to 
memory, and afterwards reduced them to regular sentences 
and periods,t meditating a variety of corrections and new 
forms of expressions, both for what others had said to him, and 
he had addressed to them. Hence it was concluded that he 
was not a man of much genius; and that all his eloquence was 
the effect of labour. A strong proof of this seemed to be, that 
he was seldom heard to speak any thing extempore, and though 
the people often called upon him by name, as he sat in the as 
sembly, to speak to the point debated, he would not do it un 
less he came prepared. For this many of the orators ridiculed 
him ; and Pytheas in particular told him, — " That all his ar- 
guments smelled of the lamp." Demosthenes retorted sharply 
upon him, — " Yes, indeed; but your lamp and mine, my friend, 
are not conscious to the same labours." To others he did not 
pretend to deny his previous application, but told them, — " He 
neither wrote the whole of his orations, nor spoke without first 

* This was the privilege of all democratic states. Some think that by sea- 
men, he means Demades, whose profession was that of a mariner. 

t Cicero did the same, as we find in his epistles to AtUcus. These argu- 
ments he calls Theses Polilicce. 

70 DEMOSTHENES. 

committing; part to writing." He farther affirmed, — " That 
this showed him a good member of the democratic state; for 
the coming prepared to the rostrum, was a mark of respect 
for the people; whereas, to be regardless of what the people 
might think of a man's address,' showed his inclination for 
oligarchy; and that he had rather gain his point by force than 
by persuasion. Another proof they give us of his want of 
confidence on any sudden occasion, is, that when he happened 
to be put in disorder by the tumultuary behaviour of the peo- 
ple, Demades often rose up to support him in an extempore 
address; but he never did the some for Demades. 

Wherefore, then, it may be said, did iEschines call him an 
orator of the most admirable assurance? How could he stand 
up alone and refute Python the Byzantian,* whose eloquence 
poured against the Athenians like a torrent? And when La- 
machus the Myrrheneant pronounced at the Olympic games 
an encomium which he had written upon Philip and Alex- 
ander, and in which he had asserted many severe and reproach- 
ful things against the Thebans and Olynthians, how could De- 
mosthenes rise up and prove, by a ready deduction of facts, 
the many benefits for which Greece was indebted to the The- 
bans and Chalcidians, and the many evils that the flatterers of 
the Macedonians had brought upon their country? This, too, 
wrought such a change in the minds of the great audience, 
that the sophist, his antagonist, apprehending a tumult, stole 
out of the assembly. 

Upon the whole, it appears that Demosthenes did not take 
Pericles entirely for his model. He only adopted his action 
and delivery, and his prudent resolution not to make a prac- 
tice of speaking from a sudden impulse, or on any occasion 
that might present itself: being persuaded, that it was to that 
conduct he owed his greatness. Yet, while he chose not often 
to trust the success of his powers to fortune, he did not abso- 
lutely neglect the reputation which may be acquired by speak- 

* This was one of the most glorious circumstances in the life of Demos- 
thenes. The fate of his country, in a great measure, depended on his elo- 
quence. After Plataea was lost, and Philip threatened to march against 
Athens, the Athenians applied for succours to the Boeotians. When the 
league was established, and the troops assembled at Chseronea, Philip sent 
ambassadors to the council of Bceotia, the chief of whom was Python, one 
of the ablest orators of his time. When he had inveighed with all the powers 
of eloquence against the Athenians and their cause, Demosthenes answered 
him, and carried the point in their favour. He was so elevated with this 
victory, that he mentions it in one of his orations in almost the same terms 
that Plutarch has used here. 

t If we suppose this Lamachns to have been of Attica, the text should be 
altered from Myrrhence.an to JSIyrrhinusian ; for Myrrhinus was a borough 
of Attica. But there was a town called Myrrhine in iEolia, and another in 
Lemnos, and probably Lamachus was of one of these. 

DEMOSTHENES. 77 

tng on a sudden occasion. And if we believe Eratosthenes, 
Demetrius the Phalerean, and the comic poets, there was a 
greater spirit and boldness in his unpremeditated orations, 
than in those he had committed to writing. Eratosthenes says, 
that, in his extemporaneous harangues, he often spoke as from 
a supernatural impulse; and Demetrius tells us that in an ad- 
dress to the people, like a man inspired, he once uttered this 
oath in verse, — 

By earth, by all her fountains, streams, and floods. 

One of the comic writers calls him Rhopoperperethras* and 
another, ridiculing his frequent use of the antithesis, says, — ■ 
" As he took, so he retook:" for Demosthenes affected to use 
that expression. Possibly, Antiphanes played upon that pas- 
sage in the oration concerning the isle of Halonesus, in which 
Demosthenes advised the Athenians " not to take, but to re- 
take it from Philip." 1" 

It was agreed, however, on all hands, that Demades excelled 
all the orators, when he trusted to nature only; and that his 
sudden effusions were superior to the laboured speeches of 
Demosthenes. Aristo of Chios gives us the following account 
of the opinion of Theophrastus concerning these orators: — 
Being asked in what light he looked upon Demosthenes as an 
orator?" he said, — " I think him worthy of Athens:" what of 
Demades? "I think him above it." The same philosopher 
relates of Polyeuctus the Sphettian, who was one of the prin- 
cipal persons in the Athenian administration at that, time, that 
he called " Demosthenes the greatest orator, and Phocion the 
most powerful speaker:" because the latter comprised a great 
deal of sense in a few words. To the same purpose, we arc 
told, that Demosthenes himself, whenever Phocion got up to 
oppose him, used to say to his friends, — " Here comes the pru- 
ning-hook of my periods." It is uncertain, indeed, whether 
Demosthenes referred to Phocion's manner of speaking, or to 
his life and character. The latter might be the case, because 
he knew that a word or nod from a man of superior character, 
is more regarded than the long discourses of another. 

As for his personal defects, Demetrius the Phalerian gives 
us an account of the remedies he applied to them; and he says 
he had it from Demosthenes in his old age. The hesitation 
and stammering of his tongue, he corrected by practising to 
speak with pebbles in his mouth; and he strengthened his 

* A haberdasher of small wares, or something like it. 

t There is an expression something like what Plutarch has quoted, about 
the beginning of that oration. Libanius suspects the whole of that oration to 
be spurious; but this raillery of the poet on Demosthenes, seems to prove 
that it was of his hand. 

7* 

78 DEMOSTHENES. 

voice by running or walking up hill, and pronouncing some 
passage in an oration or a poem, during the difficulty of breath 
which that caused. He had moreover, a looking-glass in his 
house, before which he used to declaim, and adjust all his mo- 
tions. 

It is said, that a man came to him one day, and desired him 
to be his advocate against a person Irom whom he had suf- 
fered by assault. " Not you, indeed," said Demosthenes, 
" you have suffered no such thing." " What!" said the man, 
raising his voice, " have I not received those blows?" " Ay, 
now," replied Demosthenes, " you do speak like a person that 
has been injured." So much, in his opinion, do the tone of 
voice and the action contribute to gain the speaker credit in 
what he affirms. 

His action pleased the commonalty much: but people of 
taste (among whom was Demetrius the Phalerian) thought 
there was something in it low, inelegant, and unmanly. Her- 
rnippus acquaints us, that -ZEsion, being asked his opinion of 
the ancient orators, and those of that time, said, — " Whoever 
has heard the orators of former times, must admire the deco- 
rum and dignity with which they spoke. Yet when we read 
the orations of Demosthenes, we must allow they have more 
art in composition, and greater force." It is needless to men- 
tion, that, in his written orations, there was something ex- 
tremely cutting and severe; but, in his sudden repartees, there 
was also something of humour.* When Demades said, — 
" Demosthenes to me! a sow to Minerva;" our orator made 
answer, — " This Minerva was found the other day playing the 
whore in Colyttus." When a rascal, surnamed Chalehus,t at- 
tempted to jest upon his late studies and long watchings, he 
said, — " I know my lamp offends thee. But you need not 
wonder, my countrymen, that we have so many robberies, 
when we have thieves of brass, and walls only of clay." 
Though more of his sayings might be produced, we shall pass 
them over, and go on to seek the rest of his manners and cha- 
racter in his actions and political conduct. 

He tells us himself, that he entered upon public business in 
the time of the Phocian war; J and the same may be collected 
from his Philippics: for some of the last of them were deliver- 
ed after that war was finished, and the former relate to the im- 
mediate transactions of it. It appears, also, that he was two- 

* Longinus will not allow him the least excellence in matters of humour or 
pleasantry. — Cap. xxviii. 

t That is, B7'iss. 

J In the one hundred and sixth Olympiad, five hundred and thirty-three 
years before the Christian era. Demosthenes was then in nis twentv-seventb 
year. 

DEMOSTHENES. 

79 

and-thirty years old when he was preparing his oration 
against Midias : and yet, at that time, he had attained no 
name or power in the administration. This, indeed, seems to 
be the reason of his dropping the prosecution for a sum of 
monev : for, 

no prayer, no moving art 

E'er bent that fierce, inexorable heart. Pope. 

He was vindictive in his nature, and implacable in his re- 
sentments. He saw it a difficult thing, and out of the reach 
of his interest, to pull down a man so well supported on all 
sides as Midias by wealth and friends ; and, therefore, he lis- 
tened to the application in his behalf. Had he seen any hopes 
or possibility of crushing his enemy, I cannot think that three 
thousand drachmas would have disarmed his anger. 

He had a glorious subject for his political ambition, to de- 
fend the cause of Greece against Philip. He defended it like 
a champion worthy of such a charge, and soon gained great 
reputation, both for eloquence and for the bold truths which 
he spoke. He was admired in Greece, and courted by the 
king of Persia. Nay, Philip himself had a much higher opi- 
nion of him than the other orators ; and his enemies acknow- 
ledge that they had to contend with a great man: for iEschines 
and Hyperides, in their very accusations, gave him such a 
character. 

I wonder, therefore, how Theopompus could say that he 
was a man of no steadiness, who was never long pleased 
either with the same persons or things: for, on the contrary, 
it appears, that he abode by the party and the measures which 
he first adopted; and was so far from quitting them during his 
life, that he forfeited his life, rather than he would forsake 
them. Demades, to excuse the inconsistency of his public 
character, used to say, — " I may have asserted things contra- 
ry to my former sentiments, but not any thing contrary to the 
true interest of the commonwealth." Melanopus, who was 
of the opposite party to Callistratus, often suffered himself to 
be bought off, and then said, by way of apology, to the peo- 
ple,— " It is true, the man is my enemy, but the public good 
is an overruling consideration." And Nicodemus the Mes 
senian, who first appeared strong in the interest of Cassander, 
and afterwards in that of Demetrius, said, — " He did not con- 
tradict himself, for it was always the best way to listen to the 
strongest." But we have nothing of that kind to allege 
against Demosthenes. He never was a time-server either in 
his words or actions. The key of politics, which he first 
touched, he kept to without variation. 

Panaetius the philosopher asserts, that most of his orations 

gQ DEMOSTHENES. 

are written on this principle, that virtue is to be chosen for hei 
own sake only; that, for instance, of the Crown, that againsl 
Jiristocr -cites, that/or the Immunities, and the Philippics. In 
all these orations, he does not exhort his countrymen to that 
which is most agreeable, or easy, or advantageous; but points 
out honour and propriety as the first objects, and leaves the 
safety of the state as a matter of inferior consideration. So 
that, if, beside that noble ambition which animated his mea- 
sures, and the generous turn of his addresses to the people, he 
had been blest with the courage that war demands, and had 
kept his hands clean of bribes, he would not have been num- 
bered with such orators as Mirocles, Polyeuctus, and Hy- 
perides, but have deserved to be placed in a higher sphere 
with Cimon, Thucydides, and Pericles. 

Among those who took the reins of government after him,1* 
Phocion, though not of the party in most esteem, I mean that 
which seemed to favour the Macedonians; )ret, on account of 
his probity and valour, did not appear at all inferior to Ephi- 
altes, Aristides, and Cimon. But Demosthenes had neither 
the courage that could be trusted in the field, nor was he (as 
Demetrius expresses it) sufficiently fortified against the im- 
pressions of money. Though he bore up against the assaults 
of corruption from Philip and the Macedonians, yet he was 
taken by the gold of Susa and Ecbatana: so that he was much 
better qualified to recommend, than to imitate, the virtues of 
our ancestors. It must be acknowledged, however, that he 
excelled all the orators of his time, except Phocion, in his life 
and conversation. And we find in his orations, that he told 
the people the boldest truths, that he opposed their inclina- 
tions, and corrected their errors with the greatest spirit and 
freedom. Theopompus also acquaints us, that when the Athe- 
nians were for having him manager of a certain impeachment, 
and insisted upon it in a tumultuary manner, he would not 
comply, but rose up and said, — " My friends, I will be your 
counsellor whether you will or no; but a false accuser I will 
not be, how much soever you may wish it." His behaviour 
in the case of Antipho was of the aristocratic cast.t The peo- 
ple had acquitted him in the general assembly ; and yet he car- 
ried him before the Areopagus, where, without regarding the 

* Tuv ■ysv het' outov, seems as it would do, with the little paraphrase we 
have given it; for Phocion did certainly hold the reins of government when 
Demosthenes was no more. At the same time, we must observe, that some 
insist that the emendation of Wolfius, tuv 78V xa-r' amov, should take place, be- 
cause Phocion was contemporary to Demosthenes ; and because Plutarch 
says afterwards, tsi ye xo^' outov jnTojas, £(u 6t X078, Ti3-oiiai (paxiuva, xai tco Pk* 
irafTiKaS-s. 

+ See his oration de CoronA. 

DEMOSTHENES. § J 

offence it might give the people, he proved that he had pro- 
mised Philip to burn the arsenal ; upon which he was con- 
demned by the council, and put to death. He likewise ac- 
cused the priestess Theoris of several misdemeanors; and, 
among the rest, of her teaching the slaves many arts of impo- 
sition. Such crimes, he insisted, were capital ; and she was 
delivered over to the executioner. 

Demosthenes is said to have written the oration for Apollo- 
dorus, by which he carried his cause against the general Timo- 
theus, in anaction of debt to the public treasury ; as also those 
others against Phormio and Stephanus;* which was a just 
exception against his character : for he composed the oration 
which Phormio had pronounced against Apollodorus. This, 
therefore, was like furnishing two enemies with weapons out 
of the same shop to fight one another. He wrote some public 
orations for others, before he had any concern in the adminis- 
tration himself, namely, those against Androtion, Timocrates, 
and Aristocrates: for it appears that he was only twenty-seven 
or twenty-eight years of age when he published those orations. 
That against' Aristogiton, and that for the immunities, he de- 
livered himself, at the request, as he says, of Ctesippus, the son 
of Chabrias ; though others tell us, it was because he paid his 
addresses to the young man's mother. He did not, however, 
marry her; for his wife was a woman of Samos, as Demetrius 
the Magnesian informs us, in his account of persons of the 
same name. It is uncertain whether that against iEschines, 
for il betraying his trust as ambassador,"! was ever spoken ; 
though Idomeneus affirms thatiEschines was acquitted only by 
thirty votes. This seems not to be true, at least so far as may 
be conjectured from both their orations concerning the crown : 
for neither of them expressly mentions it as a cause that ever 
came to trial. But this is a point which we shall leave for 
others to decide. 

Demosthenes, through the whole course of his political con- 
duct, left none of the actions of the king of Macedon undis- 
paraged. Even in time of peace, he laid hold on every oppor 
tunity to raise suspicions against him among the Athenians, 
and to excite their resentment. Hence, Philip looked upon 
him as a person of the greatest importance in Athens ; and 
when he went with nine other deputies to the court of that 

* Dacier gives a quite contrary sense. Instead of, against Phormio, he 
says for Phormio, pour Phormion ; though the Greek is sj ttjoj Gojuiuva. 
Probably he had a copy with a different reading, but he does not mention it. 

+ In this oration, Demosthenes accused jEsclunes of many capital crimes 
committed in the embassy on which he was sent to oblige Philip to swear to 
the articles of peace. Both that oration, and the answer of ^schines, are 
still extant. 

Vol. IV. L 

g2 DEMOSTHENES. 

prince, after having given them all audience, he answered the 
speech of Demosthenes with greater care than the rest. As 
to other marks of honour and respect, Demosthenes had not 
an equal share in them ; they were hestowed principally upon 
^Eschines and Philocrates. They, therefore, were large in the 

firaise of Philip on all occasions ; and they insisted, in particu- 
ar, on his eloquence, his beauty, and even his being able to 
drink a great quantity of liquor. Demosthenes, who could not 
bear to hear him praised, turned these things off as trifles : — ■ 
"The first," he said, "was the property of the sophist, the 
second of a woman, and the third of a sponge; and not one of 
them could do any credit to a king." 

Afterwards it appeared that nothing was to be expected but 
war; for, on one hand, Philip knew not how to sit clown in 
tranquillity; and, on the other, Demosthenes inflamed the Athe- 
nians. In this case, the first step the orator took, was to put 
the people upon sending an armament .to Eubcea, which was 
brought under the yoke of Philip by his petty tyrants. Ac- 
cordingly, he drew up an edict, in pursuance of which they 
passed over to that peninsula, and drove out the Macedo- 
nians. His second operation was the sending succours to the 
Byzantians and Perinthians, with whom Philip was at war. 
He persuaded the people to drop their resentment, to forget 
the faults which both those nations had committed in the con- 
federate war, and to send a body of troops to their assistance. 
They did so, and it saved them from ruin. After this he went 
ambassador to the states of Greece ; and, by his animating 
address, brought them almost all to join in the league against 
Philip. Besides the troops of the several cities, they took an 
army of mercenaries, to the number of fifteen thousand foot, 
and two thousand horse, into pay, and readily contributed to 
the charge. Theophrastus tells us, that, when the allies de- 
sired their contributions might be settled, Crobylus the orator 
answered, — " That war could not be brought to any set diet." 
The eyes of all Greece were now upon these movements ; 
and all were solicitous for the event. The cities of Eubcea, 
the Achaeans, the Corinthians, the Megarensians, the Leuca- 
dians, the Cocyraeans, had each severally engaged for them- 
selves against the Macedonians. Yet the greatest work re- 
mained for Demosthenes to do ; which was to bring the The- 
bans over to the league. Their country bordered upon Attica ; 
they had a great army on foot, and were then reckoned the best 
soldiers in Greece. But they had recent obligations to Philip 
in the Phocian war; and, therefore, it was not easy to draw 
them from him; especially when they considered the fre- 
quent quarrels and acts of hostility, in which their vicinity to 
Athens engaged them. 

DEMOSTHENES. 

S3 

Mean time Philip, elated with his success at Amphissa, sur 
prised Elatea, and possessed himself of Phocis. The Athe- 
nians were struck with astonishment, and not one of them 
durst mount the rostrum: no one knew what advice to give; 
but a melancholy silence reigned in the city. In this distress 
Demosthenes alone stood forth, and proposed that application 
should be made to the Thebans. He likewise animated the 
people in his usual manner, and inspired them with fresh hopes; 
in consequence of which, he was sent ambassador to Thebes, 
some others being joined in commission with him. Philip, 
too, on his part, as Marsyas informs us, sent Amyntus and 
Clearchus, two Macedonians, Daochus the Thessalian, and 
Thrasidaeus the Elean,* to answer the Athenian deputies. 
The Thebans were not ignorant what way their true interest 
pointed; but each of them had the evils of war before his 
eyes; for their Phocian wounds were still fresh upon them. 
However, the powers of the orator, as Theopompus tells us, 
rekindled their courage and ambition so effectually, that all 
other objects were disregarded. They lost sight of fear, of 
caution, of every prior attachment, and, through the force of 
his eloquence, fell with enthusiastic transports into the path of 
honour. 

So powerful, indeed, were the efforts of the orator, that 
Philip immediately sent ambassadors to Athens to apply for 
peace. Greece recovered her spirits, whilst she stood waiting 
for the event; and not only the Athenian generals, but the 
governors of Boeotia, were ready to execute the commands of 
Demosthenes. All the assemblies, as well those of Thebes as 
those of Athens, were under his direction: he was equally be- 
loved, equally powerful in both places ; and, as Theopompus 
shows, it was no more than his merit claimed. But the supe- 
rior power of fortune, which seems to have been working a 
revolution, and drawing the liberties of Greece 'o a period at 
that time, opposed and l}amed all the measures that could be 
taken. The deity discovered many tokens of the approaching 
event. Among the rest, the priestess of Apollo delivered 
dreadful oracles; and an old prophecy from the Sibylline books 
was then much repeated : — 

Far from Thermodon's banks, when, stain'd with blood, 
Boeotia trembles o'er the crimson flood, 
On eagle-pinions let me pierce the sky, 
And see the vanquish'd weep, the victor die ! 

* As the country of Amyntus and Clearchus is mentioned, so in all proba- 
bility was that of the other ambassadors who were to act with tliem. The 
text, as it now stands, is AjiuvTav \iiv xai Kkeapx^v MaxsSovas, Apax°v <5e xa 
©£cr<raXov xai ©jacruSaiov. The xai before ©EcraaXsv should probably be taken 
away. As to Thrasidaeus, we find in Plutarch's Morals, that he was an Elean , 

g4 DEMOSTHENES. 

This Thermodon, they say, is a small river in our country, 
near Chseronea, which falls into the Cephisus. At present we 
know no river of that name; but we conjecture that the Hse- 
mon, which runs by the temple of Hercules, where the Greeks 
encamped, might then be called Thermodon; and the battle 
having filled it with blood and the bodies of the slain, it might, 
on that account, change its appellation. Duris, indeed, says, 
that Thermodon was not a river; but that some of the soldiers, 
as they were pitching their tents, and opening the trenches, 
found a small statue, with an inscription, which signified, that 
the person represented was Thermodon, holding a wounded 
Amazon in his arms. He adds, that there was another oracle 
on the subject, much taken notice of at that time: — 

-Fell bird of prey, 

Wait thou the plenteous harvest, which the sword 
Will give thee on Thermodon. 

But it is hard to say what truth there is in these accounts. 

As to Demosthenes, he is said to have had such confidence 
in the Grecian arms, and to have been so much elated with the 
courage and spirit of so many brave men calling for the enemy, 
that he would not suffer them to regard any oracles or pro- 
phecies. He told them that he suspected the prophetess her- 
self of Philippizing. He put the Thebans in mind of Epa- 
minondas, and the Athenians of Pericles, how they reckoned 
such things as mere pretexts of cowardice, and pursued the 
plan which their reason had dictated. Thus far Demosthenes 
acquitted himself like a man of spirit and honour. But in the 
battle, he performed nothing worthy of the glorious things he 
had spoken. He quitted his post; he threw away his arms; 
he fled in the most infamous manner; and was not ashamed, as 
Pytheas says, to belie the inscription which he had put upon 
his shield in golden characters, — to good fortune. 

Immediately after the victory, Philip, in the elation of his 
heart, committed a thousand excesses. He drank to intoxica- 
tion, and danced over the dead, making a kind of song of the 
first part of the decree which Demosthenes had procured, and 
beating time to it: — Demosthenes the Pseanian, son of De- 
mosthenes, has decreed. But when he came to be sober again, 
and considered the dangers with which he had lately been sur- 
rounded, he trembled to think of the prodigious force and 
power of that orator, who had obliged him to put both empire 
and life on the cast of a day, on a few hours of that day.* 

Demades the orator contributed to bring him to the right use of his rea 
son, when he told him with such distinguished magnanimity, — " That fortune 
had placed him in the character of Agamemnon, but that he chose to play 
the part of Thersites." 

DEMOSTHENES. 35 

The fame of Demosthenes reached the Persian court ; and 
the king wrote letters to his lieutenants, commanding them to 
s.upply him with money, and to attend to him more than to any 
other man in Greece; because he best knew how to make a 
diversion in his favour, by raising fresh troubles, and finding 
employment for the Macedonian arms nearer home. This 
Alexander afterwards discovered by the letters of Demos 
thenes which he found at Sardis, and the papers of the Persian 
governors, expressing the sums which had been given him. 

When the Greeks had lost this great battle, those of the 
contrary faction attacked Demosthenes, and brought a variety 
of public accusations against him. The people, however, not 
only acquitted him, but treated him with the same respect as 
before, and called him to the helm again, as a person whom 
they knew to be a well-wisher to his country : so that when 
the bones of those who fell at Chseronea were brought home 
to be interred, they pitched upon Demosthenes to make the 
funeral oration. They were, therefore, so far from bearing 
their misfortune in a mean and ungenerous manner, as Theo- 
pompus, in a tragical strain, represents it, that, by the great 
honour they did the counsellor, they showed they did not re- 
pent of having followed his advice. 

Demosthenes, accordingly, made the oration. But, after 
this, he did not prefix his own name to his edicts, because he 
considered fortune as inauspicious to him; but sometimes that 
of one friend, sometimes that of another, till he recovered his 
spirits upon the death of Philip: for that prince did not long 
survive his victory at Chseronea; and his fate seemed to be 
presignified in the last of the verses above quoted : — 

And see the vanquished weep, the victor die ! 

Demosthenes had secret intelligence of the death of Philip; 
and, in order to prepossess the people with hopes of some 
good success to come, he entered the assembly with a gay 
countenance, pretending he had seen a vision which announced 
something great for Athens. Soon after messengers came with 
an account of Philip's death. The Athenians immediately of- 
fered sacrifices of acknowledgment to the gods for so happy 
an event, and voted a crown for Pausanias, who killed him. 
Demosthenes, on this occasion, made his appearance in mag- 
nificent attire, and with a garland on his head, though it was 
only the seventh day after his daughter's death, as iEschines 
tells us, who, on that account, reproaches him as an unnatural 
father. But he must himself have been of an ungenerous and 
effeminate disposition, if he considered tears and lamentations 
as marks of a kind and affectionate parent, and condemned the 
man who bore such a loss with moderation. 

Vol. IV. 8 

86 DEMOSTHENES. 

At the same time, I do not pretend to say the Athenians 
were right in crowning themselves with flowers, or in sacri- 
ficing, upon the death of a prince who had behaved to them 
with so much gentleness and humanity in their misfortunes: 
for it was a meanness, below contempt, to honour him in his life, 
and admit him a citizen; and yet, after he was fallen by the 
hands of another, not to keep their joy within any bounds, bul 
to insult the dead, and sing triumphal songs, as if they had per 
formed some extraordinary act of valour. 

I commend Demosthenes, indeed, for leaving the tears, and 
other instances of mourning, which his domestic misfortunes 
might claim, to the women, and going about such actions as he 
thought conducive to the welfare of nis country: for I think 
a man of such firmness and other abilities as a statesman ought 
to have, should always have the common concern in view, and 
look upon his private accidents or business as considerations 
much inferior to the public: in consequence of which, he will 
be much more careful to maintain his dignity, than actors who 
personate kings and tyrants; and yet these, we see, neither 
augh nor weep according to the dictates of their own passions, 
Dut as they are directed by the subject of the drama. It is 
universally acknowledged, that we are not to abandon the un- 
happy to their sorrows, but to endeavour to console them by 
rational discourse, or by turning their attention to more agree- 
able objects; in the same manner as we desire those who have 
weak eyes, to turn them from bright and dazzling colours, to 
green, or others of a softer kind. And what better consola- 
tion can there be under domestic afflictions, than to attemper 
and alleviate them with the public success;* so that, by such 
a mixture, the bad may be corrected by the good. These re- 
flections we thought proper to make, because we have observed 
that this discourse of .ZEschines has weakened the minds of 
many persons, and put them upon indulging all the effeminacy 
of sorrow. 

Demosthenes now solicited the states of Greece again, and 
they entered once more into the league. The Thebans, being 
furnished with arms by Demosthenes, attacked the garrison in 
their citadel, and killed great numbers; and the Athenians 
prepared to join them in the war. Demosthenes mounted the 
rostrum almost every day; and he wrote to the king of Per- 

* In the printed text, it is iraT?i5or anxovaes, but the Vulcob. and another 
manuscript give us eutuxouo-tis. Some question whether xaivuv ?ra3-uv can mean 
public joy, though lraS-n does certainly sometimes mean the affections or pas- 
sions in general. It would, indeed, be good sense to say, We ought to lose 
our private sorrows in the public : Dost thou mourn for thyself, when thy 
country is perishing? But that interpretation would not agree with what fol- 
lows, toij (3tA.noc-iv <x(pavi£ag-av Ta x*l$u< that the bad may be corrected by the good. 

DEMOSTHENES. g~ 

sia's lieutenants in Asia, to invite them to commence hostili- 
ties from that quarter against Alexander, whom he called a 
buy, a second Margites* 

But when Alexander had settled the affairs of his own coun- 
try, and marched into Boeotia with all his forces, the pride of 
the Athenians was humbled, and the spirit of Demosthenes 
died away. They deserted the Thebans ; and that unhappy 
people had to stand the whole fury of the war by themselves ; 
in consequence of which they lost their city. The Athenians 
were in great trouble and confusion ; and they could think of 
no better measure than the sending Demosthenes and some 
others ambassadors to Alexander. But Demosthenes, dread- 
ing the anger of that monarch, turned back at Mount Cithaeron, 
and relinquished his commission. Alexander immediately sent 
deputies to Athens, who (according to Idomeneus and Duris) 
demanded that they would deliver up ten of their orators. .But 
the greatest part, and those the most reputable of the histo- 
rians, say, that he demanded only these eight: Demosthenes, 
Polyeuctus, Ephialtes, Lycurgus, Myrocles, Damon, Callis- 
thenes, and Charidemus. On this occasion, Demosthenes ad- 
dressed the people in the fable of the sheep who were to give 
up their dogs to the wolves, before they would grant them 
peace : by which he insinuated, that he and the other orators 
were the guards of the people, as the dogs were of the flock ; 
and that Alexander was the great wolf they had to treat with. 
And again,—" As we see merchants carrying about a small 
sample in a dish, by which they sell large quantities of wheat ; 
so you, in us, without knowing it, deliver up the whole body 
of citizens." These particulars we have from Aristobulus of 
Cassandria. 

The Athenians deliberated upon the point in full assembly •, 
and Demades seeing them in great perplexity, offered to go 
alone to the king of Macedon, and intercede for the orators, 
on condition that each of them would give him five talents: 
whether it was that he depended upon the friendship that 
prince had for him, or whether he hoped to find him, like a 
lion, satiated with blood : he succeeded, however, in his appli- 
cation for the orators, and reconciled Alexander to the city.. 

When Alexander returned to Macedon, the reputation of 
Demades, and the other orators of his party, greatly increased ; 
and that of Demosthenes gradually declined. It is true, he 
raised his head a little, when Agis, king of Sparta, took the 
field : — but it soon fell again ; for the Athenians refused to 

* Homer wrote a satire against this Margites, who appears to have been a 
very contemptible character. 

gg DEMOSTHENES 

join him, Agis was killed in battle, and the Lacedaemonians 
entirely routed. 

About this time,* the affair concerning the crown came 
again upon the carpet. The information was first laid under 
the archonship of Chserondas ; and the cause was not deter- 
mined till ten years after,t under Aristophon. It was the 
most celebrated cause that ever was pleaded, as well on ac- 
count of the reputation of the orators, as the generous be- 
haviour of the judges : for though the prosecutors of Demos- 
thenes were then in great power, as being entirely in the Ma- 
cedonian interest, the judges would not give their voices 
against him ; but on the contrary, acquitted him so honour- 
ably, that iEschines had not a fifth part of the suffrages. % 
.ZEschines immediately quitted Athens, and spent the rest of 
his days in teaching rhetoric at Rhodes and in Ionia. 

It was not long after this, that Harpalus came from Asia to 
Athens. § He had fled from the service of Alexander, both 
because he was conscious to himself of having falsified his 
trust, to minister to his pleasure, and because he dreaded his 
master, who now was become terrible to his best friends. As 
ne applied to the people of Athens for shelter, and desired 
protection for his ships and treasures, most of the orators had 
an eye upon the gold, and supported his application with all 
their interest. Demosthenes at first advised them to order 
Harpalus off immediately, and to be particularly careful not to 
involve the city in war again, without any just or necessary 
cause. 

Yet a few days after, when they were taking an account of 
the treasure, Harpalus perceiving that Demosthenes was much 
pleased with one of the king's cups, and stood admiring the 
workmanship and fashion, desired him to take it in his hand, 
and feel the weight of the gold. Demosthenes being surprised 

* Demosthenes rebuilt the walls of Athens at his own expense ; for which 
the people, at the motion of Ctesiphon, decreed him a crown of gold. This 
excited the envy and jealousy of iEschines, who thereupon brought that fa- 
mous impeachment against Demosthenes which occasioned his inimitable 
oration de Corona. 

t Plutarch must be mistaken here. It does not appear, upon the exactest 
calculation, to have been more than eight years. 

\ This was a very ignominious circumstance ; for if the accuser had not a 
fifth part of the suffrages, he was fined a thousand drachmas. 

$ Harpalus had the charge of Alexander's treasure in Babylon, and, flatter- 
ing himself that he would never return from his Indian expedition, he gave 
in to all manner of crimes and excesses. At last, when he found that Alexan- 
der was really returning, and that he took a severe account of such people as 
himself, he thought proper to march off with 5,000 talents, and 6,000 men, 
into Attica. 

DEMOSTHENES. 

89 

at the weight, and asking Harpalus how much it might bring, 
he smiled, and said, — " It will bring you twenty talents." And 
as soon as it was night, he sent him the cup with that sum: for 
Harpalus knew well enough how to distinguish a man's passion 
for gold, by his pleasure at the sight, and the keen looks he 
cast upon it. Demosthenes could not resist the temptation ; 
it made all the impression upon him that was expected; he 
received the money, like a garrison, into his house, and went 
over to the interest of Harpalus. Next day, he came into the 
assembly with a quantity of wool and bandages about his 
neck ; and when the people called upon him to get up and 
speak, he made signs that he had lost his voice: upon which, 
some that were by, said, — " It was no common hoarseness 
that he had got in the night: it was a hoarseness occasioned 
by swallowing gold and silver." Afterwards, when all the 
people were apprised of his taking the bribe, and he wanted to 
speak in his own defence, they would not suffer him, but raised 
a clamour, and expressed their indignation. At the same 
time, somebody or other stood up, and said, sneeringly, — ■ 
"Will you not listen to the man with the cup ?"* The Athe- 
nians then immediately sent Harpalus off; and fearing they 
might be called to account for the money with which the ora- 
tors had been corrupted, they made a strict inquiry after it, 
and searched all their houses, except that of Callicles, the son 
of Arrenides, whom they spared, as Theopompus says, be- 
cause he was newly married, and his bride was in his house. 

At the same time, Demosthenes, seemingly with a design 
to prove his innocence, moved for an order, that the affair 
should be brought before the court of Areopagus, and all per- 
sons punished who should be found guilty of taking bribes. 
In consequence of which, he appeared before that court, and 
was one of the first that were convicted. Being sentenced to 
pay a fine of fifty talents, and to be imprisoned till it was paid, 
the disgrace of his conviction, and the weakness of his consti- 
tution, which could not bear close confinement, determined 
him to fly; and this he did, undiscovered by some, and assist- 
ed by others. It is said that when he was not far from the 
city, he perceived some of his late adversaries following,! and 
endeavoured to hide himself. But they called to him by name ; 

* This alludes to a custom of the ancients at their feasts, wherein it was 
usual for the cup to pass from hand to hand; and the person who held it sung 
a song, to which the rest gave attention. 

t It is recorded by Phocius, that iEschines, when he left Athens, was fol- 
/owed in like manner, and assisted by Demosthenes ; and that when he offer- 
ed him consolations, he made the same answer. Plutarch likewise mentions 
this circumstance in the Lives of the ten orators. 

Vol. IV. M 8* 

90 DEMOSTHENES. 

and when they came nearer, desired him to take some neces- 
sary supplies of money, which they had brought with them 
for that purpose. They assured him, they had no other design 
in following, and exhorted him to take courage. But Demos- 
thenes gave into more violent expressions of grief than ever, 
and said, — " What comfort can I have, when I leave enemies 
in this city more generous than it seems possible to find friends 
in any other?" He bore his exile in a very weak and effemi- 
nate manner : for the most part, he resided in iEgina or Trce- 
zene ; where, whenever he looked towards Attica, the tears 
fell from his eyes. In his expressions, there was nothing of a 
rational firmness ; nothing answerable to the bold things he 
had said and done in his administration. When he left Athens, 
we are told, he lifted up his hands towards the citadel, and 
said, — " 0 Minerva, goddess of those towers, whence is it 
that thou delightest in three such monsters as an owl, a dra- 
gon, and the people?" The young men who resorted to him 
for instruction, he advised, by no means, to meddle with af- 
fairs of state. He told them, — " That if two roads had been 
shown him at first, the one leading to the rostrum and the bu- 
siness of the assembly, and the other to certain destruction, 
and he could have foreseen the evils that awaited him in the 
political walk, the fears, the envy, the calumny, and conten- 
tion, he would have chosen that road which led to immediate 
death." 

During the exile of Demosthenes, Alexander died.* The 
Greek cities once more combining upon that event, Demos- 
thenes performed great things ; and, among the rest, drew a 
line of circumvallation around Antipater, whom he had shut 
up in Lamia. Pytheas the orator, with Callimedon and Ca- 
rabus, left Athens, and, going over to Antipater, accompanied 
his friends and ambassadors in their applications to the Greeks, 
and in persuading them not to desert the Macedonian cause, 
nor listen to the Athenians. On the other hand, Demosthenes 
joined the Athenian deputies, and exerted himself greatly with 
them in exhorting the states to fall with united efforts upon 
the Macedonians, and drive them out of Greece. Phylarchus 
tells us, that, in one of the cities of Arcadia, Pytheas and De- 
mosthenes spoke with great acrimony; the one in pleading for 
the Macedonians, and the other for the Greeks. Pytheas is 
reported to have said, — " As some sickness is always supposed 
to be in the house into which ass's milk is brought; so the 
city which an Athenian embassy ever enters, must necessa- 
rily be in a sick and decaying condition." Demosthenes turn- 

* Olymp. cxiv. Demosthenes was then in his fifty-eighth year. 

DEMOSTHENES. 

91 

ed the comparison against him, by saying, — " As ass's milk 
never enters but for curing the sick; so the Athenians never 
appear but for remedying some disorder." 

The people of Athens were so much pleased with this re- 
partee, that they immediately voted for the recall of Demos- 
thenes. It was Damon the Paeanian, cousin-german to Demos- 
thenes, who drew up the decree. A galley was sent to fetch 
him from iEgina; and when he came up from the Piraeus to 
Athens, the whole body of citizens went to meet and to con- 
gratulate him on his return; insomuch that there was neither 
a magistrate nor priest left in the town. Demetrius of Mag- 
nesia acquaints us, that Demosthenes lifted up his hands to- 
wards heaven in thanks for that happy day: — " Happier," said 
he, " is my return than that of Alcibiades. It was through 
compulsion that the Athenians restored him, but me they have 
recalled from a motive of kindness." 

The fine, however, still remained due; for they could not 
extend their grace so far as to repeal his sentence: but they 
found out a method to evade the law, while they seemed to 
comply with it. It was the custom, in the sacrifices to Jupiter 
the Preserver, to pay the persons who prepared and adorned 
the altars. They, therefore, appointed Demosthenes to this 
charge; and ordered that he should have fifty talents for his 
trouble, which was the sum his fine amounted to. 

But he did not long enjoy his return to his country. The 
affairs of Greece soon went to ruin. They lost the battle of 
Crano in the month of August,* a Macedonian garrison en- 
tered Munychia in September,t and Demosthenes lost his life 
in October.^ 

It happened in the following manner: — When news was 
brought that Antipater and Craterus were coming to Athens, 
Demosthenes and those of his party hastened to get out pri- 
vately before their arrival. Hereupon, the people, at the mo- 
tion of Demades, condemned them to death. As they fled 
different ways, Antipater sent a company of soldiers about the 
country to seize them. Archias, surnamed Phugadotheras, or 
the exile-hunter, was their captain. It is said he was a native 
of Thurium, and had been some time a tragedian ; they add, 
that Polus of iEgina, who excelled all the actors of his* time, 
was his scholar. Hermippus reckons Archias among the dis- 
ciples of Lacritus the rhetorician; and Demetrius" says he 
spent some time at the school of Anaximenes. This Archias, 
however, drew Hyperides the orator, Aristonicus of Mara- 
thon, and Hymeraeus, the brother of Demetrius the Phalerean, 
out of the temple of JEacus in iEgina, where they had taken 

* Metagitnion. i Boedromion. J Pvanepsion. 

9-2 DEMOSTHENES. 

refuge, and sent them to Antipater at Cleonae. There tney 
were executed ; and Hyperides is said to have first had his 
tongue cut out. 

Archias being informed that Demosthenes had taken sane 
tuary in the temple of Neptune at Calauria, he and his Thra- 
cian soldiers passed over into it in row-boats. As soon as he 
Was landed, he went to the orator, and endeavoured to per- 
suade him to quit the temple, and go with him to Antipater, 
assuring him that he had no hard measure to expect. But, i1 
happened that Demosthenes had seen a strange vision the night 
before. He thought that he was contending with Archias 
which could play the tragedian the best; that he succeeded in 
his action, had the audience on his side, and would certainly 
have obtained the prize, had not Archias outdone him in the 
dresses and decorations of the theatre. Therefore, when Ar- 
chias had addressed him with a great appearance of humanity, 
he fixed his eyes on him, and said, without rising from his 
seat, — " Neither your action moved me formerly, nor do your 
promises move me now." Archias then began to threaten 
him; upon which he said, — "Before, you acted a part; now 
you speak as from the Macedonian tripod. Only wait a while, 
till I have sent my last orders to my family." So saying, he 
retired into the inner part of the temple; and taking some 
paper, as if he meant to write, he put the pen in his mouth, 
and bit it a considerable time, as he used to do when thought- 
ful about his composition: after which, he covered his head, 
and put it in a reclining posture. The soldiers who stood at 
the door, apprehending that he took these methods to put off 
the fatal stroke, laughed at him, and called him a coward. Ar- 
chias then approaching him, desired him to rise, and began to 
repeat the promises of making his peace with Antipater. De- 
mosthenes, who by this time felt the operation of the poison 
he had taken strong upon him, uncovered his face, and look- 
ing upon Archias, — "Now," said he, " you may act the part 
of Creon,* in the play, as soon as you please, and cast out this 
carcass of mine unburied. For my part, 0 gracious Neptune! 
I quit thy temple with my breath within me; but Antipater 
and the Macedonians would not have scrupled to profane it 
with murder." By this time he could scarcely stand, and, 
therefore, desired them to support him. But in attempting to 
walk out, he fell by the altar, and expired with a groan. 

Aristo says, he sucked the poison from a pen, as we have 
related it. One Pappus, whose memoirs were recovered by 
Hermippus, reports, that, when he fell by the altar, there was 

* Alluding to that passage in the Antigone of Sophocles, where Creon for 
bids the body of Polynices to be buried. 

DEMOSTHENES. 93 

found on his paper the beginning of a letter: — " Demosthenes 
to Antipater," and nothing more. He adds, that people being 
surprised that he died so quickly, the Thracians who stood at 
the door, assured them that he took the poison in his hand out 
of a piece of cloth, and put it to his mouth. To them it had 
the appearance of gold. Upon inquiry made by Archias, a 
young maid who served Demosthenes, said, he had long wore 
that piece of cloth by way of amulet. Eratosthenes tells us, 
that he kept the poison in the hollow of a bracelet button 
which he wore upon his arm. Many others have written upon 
the subject; but it is not necessary to give all their different 
accounts. We shall only add, that Democharis, a servant of 
Demosthenes, asserts, that he did not think his death owing to 
poison, but to "the favour of the gods, and a happy providence, 
which snatched him from the cruelty of the Macedonians, by 
a speedy and easy death. He died on the sixteenth of Octo- 
ber, which is the most mournful day in the ceremonies of 
the Thesmophoria.* The women keep it with fasting in the 
temple of Ceres. 

It was not long before the temple of Athens paid him the 
honours that were due to him, by erecting his statue in brass, 
and decreeing that the eldest of his family should be maintain- 
ed in the Prytaneum, at the public charge. This celebrated 
inscription was put upon the pedestal of his statue: — 

Divine in speech, in judgment, too, divine, 
Had valour's wreath, Demosthenes, been thine, 
Fair Greece had still her freedom's ensign borne, 
And held the scourge of Macedon in scorn ! 

For no regard is to be paid to those who say that Demosthenes 
himself uttered these lines in Calauria just before he took the 
poison, t 

A little before I visited Athens, the following adventure is 
said to have happened: — A soldier, being summoned to appear 
before the commanding officer upon some misdemeanor, put 
the little gold he had into the hands of the statue of Demos- 
thenes, which were in some measure clenched. A small plane- 
tree grew by it, and many leaves, either accidentally lodged 
there by the winds, or purposely so placed by the soldier, co- 
vered the gold a considerable time. When he returned and 

*This was an annual festival in honour of Ceres. It began the fourteenth 
of October, and ended the eighteenth. The third day of the festival was a 
day of fasting and mortification ; and this is the day that Plutarch speaks of. 

t This inscription, so far from doing Demosthenes honour, is the greatest 
disgrace that the Athenians could have fastened on his memory. It reproaches 
him with a weakness which, when the safety of his country was at stake, was 
such a deplorable want of virtue and manhood, as no parts or talents could 
atone for. 

94 DEMOSTHENES. 

found his money entire, the fame of this accident was spread 
abroad, and many of the wits of Athens strove which could 
write the best copy of verses, to vindicate Demosthenes from 
the charge of corruption. 

As for Demades, he did not long enjoy the new honours he 
had acquired. The being who took it in charge to revenge 
Demosthenes, led him into Macedonia, where he justly perish- 
ed by the hands of those whom he had basely flattered. They 
had hated him for some time; but at last they caught him in a 
fact which could neither be excused nor pardoned. Letters 
of his were intercepted, in which he exhorted Perdiccas to 
seize Macedonia, and deliver Greece, — " which," he said, 
" hung only by an old rotten stalk," meaning Antipater. Di- 
narchus the Corinthian, accusing him of this treason, Cassan- 
der was so much provoked that he stabbed his son in his arms, 
and afterwards gave orders for his execution. Thus, by the 
most dreadful misfortunes, he learned that traitors always first 
fell themselves; a truth which Demosthenes had often told 
him before, but he would never believe it. Such, my Sossius, 
is the life of Demosthenes, which we have compiled, in the 
oest manner we could, from books and from tradition. 

THE 

LIFE OF CICERO. 

The account we have of Helvia, the mother of Cicero, is, 
that her family was noble,* and her character excellent. Of 
his father there is nothing said but in extremes: for some af- 
firm that he was the son of a fuller,t and educated in that trade, 
while others deduce his origin from Attius Tullius,} a prince 
who governed the Volsci' with great reputation. Be that as it 
may, I think the first of the family who bore the name of Ci- 
cero, must have been an extraordinary man; and for that rea- 
son his posterity did not reject the appellation, but rather took 
to it with pleasure, though it was a common subject of ridicule; 
for the Latins call a vetch cicer, and he had a flat excrescence 
on the top of his nose in resemblance of a vetch, from which 
he got that surname. § As for the Cicero of whom we are 
writing, his friends advised him, on his first application to bu- 
siness, and soliciting one of the great offices of state, to lay 
aside or change that name. But he answered with great spirit, 
— " That he would endeavour to make the name of Cicero 
more glorious than that of the Scauri and the Catuli." When 
quaestor in Sicily, he consecrated in one of the temples, a vase, 
or some other offering, in silver, upon which he inscribed his 
two first names Marcus Tullius, and, punning upon the third, 
ordered the artificer to engrave a vetch. Sucn is the account 
we have of his name. 

He was born on the third of January,|| the day on which 
the magistrates now sacrifice and pay their devotions for the 
health of the emperor; and it is said that his mother was de- 
livered of him without pain. It is also reported, that a spectre 
appeared to his nurse, and foretold, that the child she had the 

* Cinna was of this family. 

t Dion tells us that Q. Calenus was the author of this calumny. Cicero, 
in his books de Legibus, has said enough to show that both his father and 
grandfather were persons of property and of a liberal education. 

I The same prince to whom Coriolanus retired four hundred years before. 

§ Pliny's account of the origin of this name is more probable. He sup- 
poses that the person who first bore it was remarkable for the cultivation of 
vetches. So Fabius, Lentulus, and Piso, had their names from beans, tares, 
and peas. 

|| In the six hundred and forty-seventh year of Rome; a hundred and four 
years before the Christian era. Pompey was born the same year. 

96 CICERO. 

happiness to attend, would one day prove a great benefit to the 
whole commonwealth of Rome. These things might have 
passed for idle dreams, had he not soon demonstrated the truth 
of the prediction. When he was of a proper age to go to 
school, his genius broke out with so much lustre, and he gained 
so distinguished a reputation among the boys, that the fathers 
of some of them repaired to the schools to see Cicero, and to 
have specimens of his capacity for literature; but the less ci- 
vilized were angry with their sons, when they saw them take 
Cicero in the middle of them as they walked, and always give 
him the place of honour. He had that turn of genius and dis- 
position which Plato* would have a scholar and philosopher 
to possess. He had both capacity and inclination to learn all 
the arts, nor was there any branch of science that he despised, 
yet he was most inclined to poetry; and there is still extant a 
poem, entitled Pontius GlaacusJ which was written by him 
when a boy, in tetrameter verse. In process of time, when 
he had studied this art with greater application, he was looked 
upon as the best poet, as well as the greatest orator in Rome. 
His reputation for oratory still remains, notwithstanding the 
considerable changes that have since been made in the lan- 
guage; but, as many ingenious poets have appeared since his 
time, his poetry has lost its credit, and is now neglected, t 

When he had finished those studies through "which boys 
commonly pass, he attended the lectures of Philo the acade- 
mician, whom, of all the scholars of Clitomachus, the Romans 
most admired for his eloquence, and loved for his conduct. At 
the same time he made great improvement in the knowledge 
of the law, under Mucius Scaevola, an eminent lawyer, and 
president of the senate. He likewise got a taste of military 
knowledge under Sylla, in the Marsian war.§ But afterwards, 
finding the commonwealth engaged in civil wars, which were 
likely to end in nothing but absolute monarchy, he withdrew 
to a philosophic and contemplative life; conversing with men 
of letters from Greece, and making further advances in sci- 
ence. This method of life he pursued till Sylla had made 

* Plato's Commonwealth, lib. v. 

t This Glaucus was a famous fisherman, who, after eating of a certain herb, 
jumped into the sea, and became one of the gods of that element. iEschylus 
wrote a tragedy on the subject. Cicero's poem is lost. 

t Plutarch was a very indifferent judge of the Latin poetry, and his speak- 
ing with so much favour of Cicero's, contrary to the opinion of Juvenal and 
many others, is a strong proof of it. He translated Aratus into verse at the 
age of seventeen, and wrote a poem in praise of the actions of Marius, which, 
Scaevola said, would live through innumerable ages. But he was out in his 
prophecy. It has long been dead. And the poem which he wrote in three 
books on his own consulship, has shared the same fate. 

t In the eighteenth year of his age. 

CICERO. gy 

himself master, and there appeared to be some established 
government again. 

About this time Sylla ordered the estate of one of the citi 
zens to be sold by auction, in consequence of his being killed 
as a person proscribed ; when it was struck off to Chryso- 
gonus, Sylla's freedman, at the small sum of two thousand 
drachmas. Roscius, the son and heir of the deceased, express- 
ed his indignation, and declared that the estate was worth two 
hundred and fifty talents. Sylla, enraged at having his con- 
duct thus publicly called in question, brought an action against 
Roscius for the murder of his father, and appointed Chryso- 
gonus to be the manager. Such was the dread of Sylla's 
cruelty, that no man offered to appear in defence of Roscius, 
and nothing seemed left for him but to fall a sacrifice. In this 
distress he applied to Cicero, and the friends of the young 
orator desired him to undertake the cause ; thinking he could 
not have a more glorious opportunity to enter the lists of fame. 
Accordingly, he undertook his defence, succeeded, and gained 
great applause.* But fearing Sylla's resentment, he travelled 
into Greece, and gave out that the recovery of his health was 
the motive. Indeed, he was of a lean and slender habit, and 
his stomach was so weak, that he was obliged to be very 
sparing in his diet, and not to eat till a late hour in the day. 
His voice, however, had a variety of inflections, but was at 
the same time harsh and unformed ; and as, in the vehemence 
and enthusiasm of speaking, he always rose into a loud key, 
there was reason to apprehend that it might injure his health. 

When he came to Athens, he heard Antiochus the Ascalo- 
nite, and was charmed with the smoothness and grace of his 
elocution, though he did not approve his new doctrines in phi- 
losophy: for Antiochus had left the neiv Jlcademy, as it is 
called, and the sect of Carneades, either from clear conviction, 
and from the strength of the evidence of sense, or else from 
a spirit of opposition to the schools of Clitomachus and Philo, 
and had adopted most of the doctrines of the Stoics. But 
Cicero loved the new Academy, and entered more and more 
into its opinions ; having already taken his resolution, if he 
failed in his design of rising in the state, to retire from the 
forum and all political intrigues, to Athens, and spend his 
days in peace in the bosom of philosophy. 

But not long after, he received the news of Sylla's death. 
His body by this time was strengthened by exercise, and 
brought to a good habit. His voice was formed, and, at the 
same time that it was full and sonorous, had gained a sufficient 
sweetness, and was brought to a key which his constitution 

* In his twenty-seventh year. 
Vol. IV. N 9 

gg CICERO. 

could bear. Besides, his friends at Rome solicited him by- 
letters to return, and Antiochus exhorted him much to apply 
himself to public affairs. For which reasons, he exercised his 
rhetorical powers afresh, as the best engines for business and 
calling forth his political talents. In short, he suffered not a 
day to pass without either declaiming, or attending the most 
celebrated orators. In the prosecution of this design, he sailed 
to Asia and the island of Rhodes. Amongst the rhetoricians 
of Asia, he availed himself of the instructions of Xenocles of 
Adramyttium, Dionysius of Magnesia, and Menippus of Caria. 
At Rhodes he studied under the rhetorician Apollonius the 
son of Molo,* and the philosopher Posidonius. It is said, that 
Apollonius, not understanding the Roman language, desired 
Cicero to declaim in Greek ; and he readily complied, because 
he thought by that means his faults might the better be cor- 
rected. When he had ended his declamation, the rest were 
astonished at his performance, and strove which should praise 
him most; but Apollonius showed no signs of pleasure while 
he was speaking; and when he had done, he sat a long time 
thoughtful and silent. At last, observing the uneasiness it 
gave his pupil, he said, — " As for you, Cicero, I praise and 
admire you, but I am concerned for the fate of Greece. She 
had nothing left her but the glory of eloquence and erudition, 
and you are carrying that too to Rome." 

Cicero now prepared to apply himself to public affairs with 
great hopes of success : but his spirit received a check from 
the oracle at Delphi : for, upon his inquiring by what means 
he might rise to the greatest glory, the priestess bade him 
" follow nature, and not take the opinion of the multitude for 
the guide of his life." Hence it was, that, after his coming to 
Rome, he acted at first with great caution. He was timorous 
and backward in applying for public offices, and had the mor- 
tification to find himself neglected, and called a Greek, a scho- 
lastic; terms which the artisans, and others the meanest of the 
Romans, are very liberal in applying. But as he was natu- 
rally ambitious of honour, and spurred on besides by his fa- 
ther and his friends, he betook himself to the bar. Nor was 
it by slow and insensible degrees that he gained the palm of 
eloquence; his fame shot forth at once, and he was distin- 
guished above all the orators of Rome. Yet it is said that Ids 
turn for action was naturally as defective as that of Demos- 
thenes, and, therefore, he took all the advantage he could from 
the instruction of Roscius, who excelled in comedy, and of 
iEsop, whose talents lay in tragedy. This iEsop, we are told, 

* Not Appollonius the son of J\IoIa, but Appollonius Molo. The same mis 
take is made by our author in the Life of Csesar. 

CICERO. gg 

when he was one day acting Atreus, in the part where he con- 
siders in what manner he should punish Thyestes, being work- 
ed up by his passion to a degree of insanity, with his sceptre 
struck a servant who happened suddenly to pass by, and laid 
him dead at his feet. In consequence of these helps, Cicero 
found his powers of persuasion not a little assisted by action 
and just pronunciation. But as for those orators who gave 
into a bawling manner, he laughed at them, and said, — f* Their 
weakness made them get up into clamour, as lame men get on 
horseback." His excellence at hitting off a jest or repartee, 
animated his pleadings, and, therefore, seemed not foreign to 
the business of the Jorum; but by bringing it much into life, 
he offended numbers of people, and got thecharacter of a ma- 
levolent man. 

He was appointed quaestor at a time when there was a great 
scarcity of corn ; and having Sicily for his province, he gave 
the people a great deal of trouble at first, by compelling them 
to send their corn to Rome. But afterwards, when they cair.6 
to experience his diligence, his justice and moderation, they 
honoured him more than any quaestor that Rome had ever sent 
them. About that time, a numoer of young Romans, of noble 
families, who lay under the charge of having violated the rules 
of discipline, and not behaved with sufficient courage in time 
of service, were sent back to the praetor of Sicily. Cicero un- 
dertook their defence, and acquitted himself of it with great 
ability and success. As he returned to Rome, much elated 
with these advantages, he tells us,* he met with a pleasant 
adventure. As he was on the road through Campania, meet- 
ing with a person of some eminence, with whom he was ac- 
quainted, he asked him, — " What they said and thought of his 
actions in Rome?" imagining that his name and the glorv of 
his achievements had filled the whole city. His acquaintance 
answered, — " Why, where have you been then, Cicero, all this 
time ?" 

This answer dispirited him extremely: for he found that the 
accounts of his conduct had been lost in Rome, as in an im- 
mense sea, and had made no remarkable addition to his repu- 
tation. By mature reflection upon this incident, he was brought 
to retrench his ambition, because he saw that contention for 
glory was an endless thing, and had neither measures nor bounds 
to terminate it. Nevertheless, his immoderate love of praise, 
and his passion for glory, always remained with him, and often 
interrupted his best and wisest designs. 

When he began to dedicate himself more earnestly to public 
business, he thought that, while mechanics know the name, 

* In his oration for Plancus. 

100 CICERO. 

the place, the use of every tool and instrument they take in 
their hands, though those things are inanimate, it would be 
absurd for a statesman, whose functions cannot be performs 
but by means of men, to be negligent in acquainting himscv 
with the citizens. He, therefore, made it his business to com- 
mit to memory not only their names, but the place of abode 
of those of greater note, what friends they made use of, and 
what neighbours were in their circle : so that whatever road in 
Italy Cicero travelled, he could easily point out the estates 
and houses of his friends. 

Though his own estate was sufficient for his necessities,_yet, 
as it was small, it seemed strange that he would take neither 
fee nor present for his services at the bar. This was most re- 
markable in the case of Verres. Verres had been prsetor in 
Sicily, and committed numberless acts of injustice and oppres- 
sion. The Sicilians prosecuted him, and Cicero gained the 
cause for them, not so much by pleading as by forbearing to 
plead. The magistrates, in their partiality to Verres, put off 
the trial by several adjournments to the last day;* and as Ci- 
cero knew there was no time for the advocates to be heard, 
and the matter determined in the usual method, he rose up, 
and said, — " There was no occasion for pleadings." He, 
therefore, brought up the witnesses, and after their deposi- 
tions were taken, insisted that the judges should give thei* 
verdict immediately. 

Yet we have an account of several humorous sayings of 
Cicero's in this cause. When an emancipated slave, Csecilius 
by name, who was suspected of being a Jew, would have set 
aside the Sicilians, and taken the prosecution of Verres upon 
himself,! Cicero said, — " What has a Jew to do with swine's 
flesh?" For the Romans call a boar-pig verres. And when 
Verres reproached Cicero with effeminacy, he answered, — 
' Why do you not first reprove your own children ?" For 
Verres had a young son who was supposed to make an infa- 
mous use of his advantages of person. Hortensius the orator 
did not venture directly to plead the cause of Verres, but he 
was prevailed on to appear for him at the laying of the fine, 
and had received an ivory sphinx from him by way of consi- 
deration. In this case, Cicero threw out several enigmatical 
hints against Hortensius; and when he said, — " He knew not 
how to solve riddles," Cicero retorted, — "That is somewhat 
strange, when you have a sphinx in your house." 

* Not till the last day. Cicero brought it on a few days before Verres' 
friends were to come into office; but of the seven orations which were com- 
posed on the occasion, the two first only were delivered. A. U. 683. 

t Cicero knew that Caecilius was secretly a friend to Verres, and wanted 
by this means to bring him off. 

CICERO. 2Q| 

Verres being thus condemned, Cicero set his fine at seven 
hundred and fifty thousand drachmae: upon which it was said 
by censorious people, that he had been bribed to let him off 
so low.* The Sicilians, however, in acknowledgment of his 
assistance, brought him when he was aedile a number of things 
for his games, and other very valuable presents; but he was 
so far from considering his private advantage, that he made 
no other use of their generosity, than to lower the price of 
provisions. 

He had a handsome country-seat at Arphinum, a farm near 
Naples, and another at Pompeii, but neither of them were 
very considerable. His wife Terentia brought him a fortune 
of a hundred and twenty thousand denarii, and he fell heir to 
something that amounted to ninety thousand more. Upon 
this he lived in a genteel, and at the same time, a frugal man- 
ner, with men of letters, both Greeks and Romans, about him. 
He rarely took his meal before sunset; not that business 01 
study prevented his sitting down to table sooner, but the 
weakness of his stomach, he thought, required that regimen. 
Indeed, he was so exact in all respects in the care of his health, 
that he had his stated hours for rubbing and for the exercise 
of walking. By this management of his constitution, he gained 
a sufficient stock of health and strength for the great labours 
and fatigues he afterwards underwent. 

lie gave up the town house which belonged to his family to 
his brother, and took up his residence on the Palatine hill, 
that those who came to pay their court to him might not have 
too far to go : for he had a levee every day, not less than Cras- 
sus had for his great wealth, or Pompey for his power and in- 
terest in the army; though they were the most followed, and 
the greatest men in Rome. Pompey himself paid all due re- 
spect to Cicero, and fojnd his political assistance very useful 
to him, both in respect to power and reputation. 

When Cicero stood for the prsetorship, he had many com- 
petitors who were persons of distinction, and yet he was re- 
turned first. As a president in the courts of justice, he acted 
with great integrity and honour. Licinius Macer, who had 
great interest of his own, and was supported, besides, with 
that of Crassus, was accused before him of some default with 
respect to money. He had so much confidence in his own in- 
fluence and the activity of his friends, that when the judges 
were going to decide the cause, it is said he went home, cut 

* This fine, indeed, was very inconsiderable. The legal fine for extortion, 
in such cases as that of Verres, was twice the sum extorted. The Sicilians 
laid a charge of 322,916/. against Verres : the fine must, therefore, have been, 
645,832/. ; but 750,000 drachma? were no more than 24,21 St. Plutarch must, 
therefore, most probably have been mistaken. 

9* 

102 CICERO. 

his hair, and put on a white habit, as if he had gained the 
victory, and was about to return so equipped to tbe forum. 
But Crassus met him in his court-yard, and told him, that all 
the judges had given verdict against him; which affected him 
in such a manner, that he turned in again, took to his bed, and 
died.* Cicero gained honour by this affair, for it appeared 
that he kept strict watch against corruption in the court. 

There was another person, named Vatinius, an insolent 
orator, who paid very little respect to the judges in his plead- 
ings. It happened that he had his neck full of scrophulous 
swellings. This man applied to Cicero about some business 
or other; and as that magistrate did not immediately comply 
with his request, but sat some time deliberating, he said, — 
" I could easily swallow such a thing, if I was praetor;" upon 
which Cicero turned towards him, and made answer, — " But 
I have not so large a neck." 

When there were only two or three days of his office unex- 
pired, an information was laid against Manilius for embez- 
zling the public money. This Manilius was a favourite of the 
people, and they thought he was only prosecuted on Pompey's 
account, being his particular friend. He desired to have a day 
fixed for his trial; and as Cicero appointed the next day, the 
people were much offended, because it had been customary for 
the praetors to allow the accused ten days at the least. The 
tribunes, therefore, cited Cicero to appear before the commons, 
and give an account of this proceeding. He desired to be 
heard in his own defence, which was to this effect: — "As I 
have always behaved to persons impeached with all the mo- 
deration and humanity that the laws will allow, I thought it 
wrong to lose the opportunity of treating Manilius with the 
same candour. I was master only of one day more in my 
office of praetor, and consequently, must appoint that; for to 
leave the decision of the cause to another magistrate, was not 
the method for those who were inclined to serve Manilius." 
This made a wonderful change in the minds of the people; 
they were lavish in their praises, and desired him to under- 
take the defence himself. This he readily complied with; his 
regard for Pompey, who was absent, not being his least in- 
ducement In consequence hereof, he presented himself be- 

* The story is related differently by Valerius Maximus. He says that 
Macer was in court waiting the issue, and perceiving that Cicero was pro- 
ceeding to give sentence against him, he sent to inform him that he was dead, 
and at the same time suffocated himself with his handkerchief. Cicero, 
therefore, did not pronounce sentence against him, by which means his estate 
was saved to his son Licinius Calvus. Notwithstanding this, Cicero himself, 
in one of his epistles to Atticus, says, that he actually condemned him : and 
in another of his epistles, he speaks of the popular esteem this affair pro- 
cured him.— Cic. Ep. ad. Alt. 1. i. c. 3, 4. 

CICERO. 103 

fore the commons again, and giving an account of the whole 
aflair, took opportunity to make severe reflections on those 
who favoured oligarchy, and envied the glory of Pompey. 

Yet for the sake of their country, the patricians joined the 
plebeians in raising him to the consulship. The occasion was 
this: — The change which Sylla introduced into the constitu- 
tion, at first seemed harsh and uneasy, but by time and custom 
it came to an establishment which many thought not a bad one. 
At present there were some who wanted to bring in another 
change, merely to gratify their own avarice, and without the 
least view to the public good. Pompey was engaged with the 
kings of Pontus and Armenia, and there was no force in Rome 
sufficient to suppress the authors of this intended innovation. 
They had a chief of a bold and enterprising spirit, and the 
most remarkable versatility of manners ; his name Lucius Ca- 
tiline. Beside a variety of other crimes, he was accused of 
debauching his own daughter, and killing his own brother. 
To screen himself from prosecution for the latter, he persuaded 
Sylla to put his brother among the proscribed, as if he had 
been still alive. These profligates, with such a leader, among 
other engagements of secrecy and fidelity, sacrificed a man. 
and ate of his flesh. Catiline had corrupted great part of the 
Roman youth, by indulging their desires in every form of 
pleasure, providing them wine and women, and setting no 
bounds to his expenses for these purposes. All Tuscany was 
prepared for a revolt, and most of Cisalpine Gaul. The vast 
inequality of the citizens in point of property, prepared Rome, 
too, for a change. Men of spirit amongst the nobility had 
impoverished themselves by their great expenses on public 
exhibitions and entertainments, on bribing for offices, and 
erecting magnificent buildings; by which means the riches of 
the city were fallen into the hands of mean people: in this 
tottering state of the commonwealth, there needed no great 
force to overset it, and it was in the power of any bold ad- 
venturer to accomplish its ruin. 

Catiline, however, before he began his operations, wanted 
a strong fort to sally out from, and with that view stood for 
the consulship. His prospect seemed very promising, because 
he hoped to have Caius Antonius for his colleague ; a man 
who had no firm principles, either good or bad, nor any reso- 
lution of his own, but would make a considerable addition to 
the power of him that led him. Many persons of virtue and 
honour perceiving this danger, put up Cicero for the consul- 
ship, and the people accepted him with pleasure. Thus, Ca- 
tiline was baffled, and Cicero* and Caius Antonius appointed 

* In his forty-third year. 

jq4 CICERO. 

consuls; though Cicero's father was only of the equestrian 
order, and his competitors of patrician families. 

Catiline's designs were not yet discovered to the people. 
Cicero, however, at his entrance upon his office, had great 
affairs on his hands, the preludes of what was to follow. On 
the one hand, those who had been incapacitated by the laws 
of Sylla to bear offices, being neither inconsiderable in power 
nor in number, began now to solicit them, and make all possible 
interest with the people. It is true, they alleged many just and 
good arguments against the tyranny of Sylla, but it was an 
unseasonable time to give the administration so much trouble. 
On the other hand, the tribunes of the people proposed laws 
which had the same tendency to distress the government; for 
they wanted to appoint decemvirs, and invest them with an 
unlimited power. This was to extend over all Italy, over 
Syria, and all the late conquests of Pompey. They were to be 
commissioned to sell the public lands in these countries ; to 
judge or banish whom they pleased ; to plant colonies ; to take 
money out of the public treasury ; to levy and keep on foot 
what troops they thought necessary. Many Romans of high 
distinction were pleased with the bill, and in particular, An- 
tony, Cicero's colleague, for he hoped to be one of the ten. 
It was thought, too, that he was no stranger to Catiline^s 
designs, and that he did not disrelish them on account of his 
great debts. This was an alarming circumstance to all who 
had the good of their country at heart. 

This danger, too, was the first that Cicero guarded against; 
which he did by getting the province of Macedonia decreed to 
Antony, and not taking that of Gaul, which was allotted to 
himself. Antony was so much affected with this favour, that 
he was ready, like a hired player, to act a subordinate part 
under Cicero for the benefit of his country. Cicero having 
thus managed his colleague, began with greater courage to 
take his measures against the seditious party. He alleged 
his objections against the law in the senate, and effectually 
silenced the proposers.* They took another opportunity, 
however, and coming prepared, insisted that the consuls 
should appear before the people. Cicero, not in the least in- 
timidated, commanded the senate to follow him. He address- 
ed the commons with such success, that they threw out the 
bill ; and his victorious eloquence had such an effect upon the 
tribunes, that* they gave up other things which they had been 

meditating, 

He was, indeed, the man who most effectually showed the 
Romans what charms eloquence can add to truth, and that 

* This was the first of his three orations, de Lege Agraria. 

CICERO. 1Q5 

justice is invincible when properly supported. He showed 
also, that a magistrate who watches for the good of the com- 
munity, should in his actions always prefer right to popular 
measures, and in his speeches know how to make those right 
measures agreeable, by separating from them whatever may 
offend. Of the grace and power with which he spoke, we 
have a proof in a theatrical regulation that took place in his 
consulship. Before, those of the equestrian order sat mixed 
with the commonalty. Marcus Otho in his praetorship was 
the first who separated the knights from the other citizens, and 
appointed them seats which they still enjoy.* The people 
looked upon this as a mark of dishonour, and hissed and in- 
sulted Otho when he appeared at the theatre. The knights, 
on the other hand, received him with loud plaudits. The peo- 
ple repeated their hissing, and the knights their applause; till 
at last they came to mutual reproaches, and threw the whole 
theatre into the utmost disorder. Cicero being informed of 
the disturbance, came and called the people to the temple of 
Bellona, where, partly by reproof, partly by lenient applica- 
tions, he so corrected them, that they returned to the theatre, 
loudly testified their approbation of Otho's conduct, and 
strove with the knights which should do him the most honour. 

Catiline's conspiracy, which at first had been intimidated and 
discouraged, began to recover its spirits. The accomplices 
assembled, and exhorted each other to begin their operations 
with vigour, before the return of Pompey, Avho was said to be 
already marching homewards with his forces. But Catiline's 
chief motive for action, was the dependence he had on Sylla's 
veterans. Though these were scattered all over Italy, the 
greatest and most warlike part resided in the cities of Etru- 
ria, and in idea were plundering and sharing the wealth of 
Italy again. They had Manlius for their leader, a man who 
had served with great distinction under Sylla ; and now en- 
tering into Catiline's views, they came to Rome to assist in 
the approaching election; for he solicited the consulship again, 
and had resolved to kill Cicero in the tumult of that assembly. 

The gods seemed to presignify the machinations of these 
incendiaries by earthquakes, thunders and apparitions. There 
were also intimations from men, true enough in themselves, but 
not sufficient for the conviction of a person of Catiline's qua- 
lity and power. Cicero, therefore, adjourned the day of elec 
tion; and having summoned Catiline before the senate, exa- 
mined him upon the informations he had received. Catiline 
believing there were many in the senate who wanted a change, 

* About four years before, under the consulship of Piso and Glabrio. But 
Otho was not then praetor; he was tribune. 
Vol. IV, 0 

X06 CICERO. 

and at the same time being desirous to show his resolution to 
his accomplices who were present, answered with a calm firm- 
ness,— " As there are two bodies, one of which is feeble and 
decayed, but has a head; the other strong and robust, but 
is without a head ; what harm am I doing, if I give a head to 
the body that wants it?" By these enigmatical expressions 
he meant the senate and the people ; consequently Cicero was 
still more alarmed. On the day of election, he put on a coat 
of mail ; the principal persons in Rome conducted hint from 
his house, and great numbers of the youth attended him to 
the Campus Martius. There he threw back his robe, and 
showed part of the coat of mail, on purpose to point out his 
danger. The people were incensed, and immediately gather- 
ed about him; the consequence of which was, that Catiline 
was thrown out again, and Silanus and Murena chosen con- 
suls. 

Not long after this, when the veterans were assembling for 
Catiline in Etruria, and the day appointed for carrying the 
plot into execution approached, three of the first and greatest 
personages in Rome, Marcus Crassus, Marcus Marcellus, and 
Metellus Scipio, went and knocked at Cicero's door about 
midnight; and having called the porter, bade him awake his 
master, and tell him who attended. Their business was this : — 
Crassus' porter brought him in a packet of letters after supper, 
which he had received from a person unknown. They were 
directed to different persons, and there was one for Crassus 
himself, but without a name. This only Crassus read ; and 
when he found that it informed him of a great massacre in- 
tended by Catiline, and warned him to retire out of the city, 
he did not open the rest, but immediately went to wait on 
Cicero: for he was not only terrified at the impending danger, 
but he had some suspicions to remove, which had arisen from 
his acquaintance with Catiline. Cicero, having consulted with 
them what was proper to be done, assembled the senate at break 
of day, and delivered the letters according to the directions, 
desiring, at the same time, that they might be read in public 
They all gave the same account of the conspiracy. 

Quintus Arrius, a man of praetorian dignity, moreover, in- 
formed the senate of the levies that had been made in Etru- 
ria, and assured them that Manlius, with a considerable force, 
was hovering about those parts, and only waiting for news of 
an insurrection in Rome. On these informations, the senate 
made a decree, by which all affairs were committed to the 
consuls, and they were empowered to act in the manner they 
should think best for the preservation of the commonwealth. 
This is an edict which the senate seldom issue, and never but 
in some great and imminent danger. 

CICERO. 107 

When Cicero was invested with this power, he commit- 
ted the care of things without the city to Quintus Metellus, 
and took the direction of all within to himself. He made his 
appearance every day, attended and guarded by such a multi- 
tude of people, that they filled great part of the forum. Cati- 
line, unable to bear any longer delay, determined to repair to 
Manlius and his army; and ordered Marcius and Cethegus to 
take their swords, and go to Cicero's house early in the morn- 
ing, where, under pretence of paying their compliments, they 
were to fall upon him, and kill him. But Fulvia, a woman of 
quality, went to Cicero in the night, to inform him of his dan- 
ger, and charged him to be on his guard, in particular against 
Cethegus. As soon as it was light, the assassins came, and be- 
ing denied entrance, they grew very insolent and clamorous, 
which made them the more suspected. 

Cicero went out afterwards, and assembled the senate in the 
temple of Jupiter Stator, which stands at the entrance of the 
Via Sacra, in the way to the Palatine hill. Catiline came 
among the rest, as with a design to make his defence; but 
there was not a senator who would sit by him; they all left 
the bench he had taken ; and when he began to speak, they in- 
terrupted him in such a manner, that he could not be heard. 

At length, Cicero rose up, and commanded him to depart 
the city: — "For," said he, " while I employ only words, and 
you weapons, there should at least be walls between us." Cati- 
line, upon this, immediately marched out with three hundred 
men, well armed, and with the fasces and other ensigns of au- 
thority, as if he bad been a lawful magistrate. In this form 
he went to Manlius, and having assembled an army of twenty 
thousand men, he marched to the cities, in order to persuade 
them to revolt. Hostilities being thus openly commenced, 
Antony, Cicero's colleague, was sent against Catiline. 

Such as Catiline had corrupted, and thought proper to leave 
in Rome, were kept together, and encouraged by Cornelius 
Lentulus, surnamed Sura, a man of noble birth, but bad life. 
He had been expelled the senate for his debaucheries, but was 
then praetor the second time; for that was a customary quali- 
fication, when ejected persons were to be restored to their 
E laces in the senate.* As to the surname of Sura, it is said to 
ave been given on this occasion: — When he was quasstor in 
the time of Sylla, he had lavished away vast sums of the public 
money. Sylla, incensed at his behaviour, demanded an ac- 
count of him in full senate. Lentulus came up in a very care- 
less and disrespectful manner, and said, — " I have no account 

* When a Roman senator was expelled, an appointment to prastorial office 
was a sufficient qualification for him to resume his seat. — Dion. 1. xxxvii 

208 CICERO. 

to give, but I present you with the calf of my leg;" which war 
a common expression among the boys, when they missed their 
stroke at tennis. Hence he had the surname of Sura, which 
is the Roman word for the calf of the leg. Another time, be- 
ing prosecuted for some great offence, he corrupted the judges. 
When they had given their verdict, though he was acquitted 
only by a majority of two, he said, — " He had put himself to 
a needless expense in bribing one of those judges; for it would 
have been sufficient to have had a majority of one." 

Such was the disposition of this man, who had not only 
been solicited by Catiline, but was moreover infatuated with 
vain hopes, which prognosticators and other impostors held 
up to him. They forged verses in an oracular form, and 
brought him them, as from the books of the Sybils. These 
lying prophecies signified the decree of fate, — " That three of 
the Cornelii would be monarchs of Rome." They added, — 
" That two had already fulfilled their destiny, Cinnaand Sylla; 
that he was the third Cornelius whom the gods now offered 
the monarchy; and that he ought, by all means, to embrace his 
hig;h fortune, and not ruin it by delays, as Catiline had done." 

Nothing little or trivial now entered into the schemes of 
Lentulus. He resolved to kill the whole senate, and as many 
of the other citizens as he possibly could; to burn the city; 
and to spare none but the sons of Pompey, whom he intended 
to seize and keep as pledges of his peace with that general: 
for by this time it was strongly reported that he was on his 
return from his great expedition. The conspirators had fixed 
on a night during the feast of the Saturnalia, for the execu- 
tion of their enterprise. They had lodged arms and combusti- 
ble matter in the house of Cethegus. They had divided Rome 
into a hundred parts, and pitched upon the same number of 
men, each of which was allotted his quarter to set fire to. As 
this was to be done by them all at the same moment, they 
hoped that the conflagration would be general; others were to 
intercept the water, and kill all that went to seek it. 

While these things were preparing, there happened to be at 
Rome two ambassadors from the Allobroges, a nation that 
had been much oppressed by the Romans, and was very impa- 
tient under their yoke. Lentulus and his party thought these 
ambassadors proper persons to raise commotions in Gaul, and 
bring that country to their interest, and therefore, made them 

f>artners in the conspiracy. They likewise charged them with 
etters to their magistrates, and to Catiline. To the Gauls 
they promised liberty, and they desired Catiline to enfranchise 
the slaves, and march immediately to Rome. Along with the 
ambassadors, they sent one Titus of Crotona, to carry the let- 
ters to Catiline. But the measures of these inconsiderate men, 

CICERO. 

109 

who geneially consulted upon their affairs over their wine, 
and in company with women, were soon discovered by the in- 
defatigable diligence, the sober address, and great capacity of 
Cicero. He had his emissaries in all parts of the city, to trace 
every step they took; and he had, besides, a secret correspon- 
dence with many who pretended to join in the conspiracy; by 
which means he got intelligence of their treating with those 
strangers. 

In consequence hereof, he laid an ambush for the Croto- 
nian in the night, and seized him and the letters; the ambas- 
sadors themselves privately lending him their assistance.* 
Early in the morning he assembled the senate in the temple 
of Concord, where he read the letters, and took the deposi- 
tions of the witnesses. Junius Silanus deposed, that several 
persons had heard Cethegus say, that three consuls and four 
praetors would very soon be killed. The evidence of Piso, a 
man of consular dignity, contained circumstances of the like 
nature. And Caius Sulpitius, one of the praetors, who was sent 
to Cethegus' house, found there a great quantity of javelins, 
swords, poniards, and other arms, all new furbished. At last, 
the senate giving the Crotonian a promise of indemnity, Len- 
tulus saw himself entirely detected, and laid down his office 
(for he was then praetor:) he put off his purple robe in the 
house, and took another more suitable to his present distress. 
Upon which, both he and his accomplices were delivered to 
the praetors, to be kept in custody, but not in chains. 

By this time it grew late, and as the people were waiting 
without in great numhers for the event of the day, Cicero 
went out and gave them an account of it. After which, they 
conducted him to the house of a friend who lived in his neigh- 
bourhood, his own being taken up with the women, who were 
then employed in the mysterious rites of the goddess, whom 
the Romans call Bona, or the Good, and the Greeks Gynecca. 
An annual sacrifice is offered her in the consul's house, by his 
wife and mother, and the vestal virgins give their attendance. 
When Cicero was retired to the apartments assigned him, with 
only a few friends, he began to consider what punishment he 
should inflict upon the criminals. He was extremely loth to 
proceed to a capital one, which the nature of their offence 
seemed to demand, as well by reason of the mildness of his 
disposition, as for fear of incurring the censure of making an 
extravagant and severe use of his power against men who 
were of the first families, and had powerful connections in 
Rome. On the other side, if he gave them a more gentle chas- 

* These ambassadors had been solicited by Umbrenus to join his party. 
Upon mature deliberation, they thought it safest to abide by the state, and 
discovered Ihe plot to Fabius Sanga, the patron of their nation 

Vol. IV. 10 

1 1 0 CICERO. 

tisement, he thought he should still have something to fear 
from them. He knew that they would never rest with any- 
thing less than death, but would rather break out into the most 
desperate villanies, when their former wickedness was sharp- 
ened with anger and resentment. Besides, he might himself 
be branded with the mark of timidity and weakness, and the 
rather because he was generally supposed not to have much 

courage. 

Before Cicero could come to a resolution, the women who 
were sacrificing observed an extraordinary presage. When 
the lire on the altar seemed to be extinguished, a strong and 
bright flame suddenly broke out of the embers. The other 
women were terrified at the prodigy, but the vestal virgins or- 
dered Terentia, Cicero's wife, to go to him immediately, and 
command him from them, — " Boldly to follow his best judg- 
ment in the service of his country; because the goddess, by 
the brightness of this flame, promised him not only safety but 
glory in his enterprise." Terentia was by no means of a meek 
and timorous disposition, but had her ambition, and (as Cicero 
himself says) took a greater share with him in politics, than 
she permitted him to have in domestic business. She now in- 
formed him of the prodigy, and exasperated him against the 
criminals. His brother Quintus, and Publius Nigidius, one of 
his philosophical friends, whom he made great use of in the 
administration, strengthened him in the same purpose. 

Next day, the senate met to deliberate on the punishment 
of the conspirators, and Silanus, being first asked his opinion, 
gave it for sending them to prison, aifd punishing them in the 
severest manner that was possible. The rest in their order 
agreed with him, till it came to Caius Caesar, who was after- 
wards dictator. Caesar, then a young man, and just in the 
dawn of power, both in his measures and his hopes, was taking 
that road which he continued in, till lie turned the Roman 
commonwealth into a monarchy. This was not observed by 
others, but Cicero had strong suspicions of him. He took 
care, however, not to give him a sufficient handle against him 
Some say the consul had almost got the necessary proofs, and 
that Caesar had a narrow escape. Others assert, that Cicero 
purposely neglected the informations that might have been 
had against him, for fear of his friends and his great interest: 
for, had Caesar been brought under the same predicament with 
the conspirators, it would rather have contributed to save than 
to destroy them. 

When it came to his turn to give judgment, he rose and de- 
clared,— " Not for punishing them capitally, but for confis- 
cating their estates, and lodging them in any of the towns of 
Italy that Cicero should pitch upon, where they might be kept 

CICERO. 

Ill 

in chains till Catiline was conquered."* To this opinion, 
which was on the merciful side, and supported with great elo- 
quence by him who gave it, Cicero himself added no small 
weight: for in his speech he gave the arguments at large for 
both opinions, first for the former, and afterwards for that of 
Caesar. And all Cicero's friends, thinking it would be less 
invidious for him to avoid putting the criminals to death, were 
for the latter sentence ; insomuch that even Silanus changed 
sides, and excused himself by saying that he did not mean 
capital punishment, for that imprisonment was the severest 
which a Roman senator could suffer. 

The matter thus went on, till it came to Lutatius Catulus. 
He declared for capital punishment ; and Cato supported him, 
expressing in strong terms his suspicions of Caesar; which so 
roused the spirit and indignation of the senate, that they made 
a decree for sending the conspirators to execution. Caesar 
then opposed the confiscating their goods; for he said it was 
unreasonable, when they rejected the mild part of his sentence, 
to adopt the severe. As the majority still insisted upon it, he 
appealed to the tribunes. The tribunes, indeed, did not put 
in their prohibition, but Cicero himself gave up the point, and 
agreed that the goods should not be forfeited. 

After this Cicero went at the head of the senate to the cri 
minals, who were not all lodged in one house, but in those of 
the several praetors. First he took Lentulus from the Palatine 
hill, and led him down the Via Sacra, and through the middle 
of the forum. The principal persons in Rome attended the 
consul on all sides, like a guard; the people stood silent at the 
horror of the scene; and the youth looked on with fear and 
astonishment, as if they were initiated that day in some awful 
ceremonies of aristocratic power. When he had passed the 
forum, and was come to the prison, he delivered Lentulus to 
the executioner. Afterwards he brought Cethegus, and all 
the rest in their order, and they were put to death. In his 
return he saw others who were in the conspiracy standing 
thick in the forum. As these knew not the fate of their ring- 
leaders, they were waiting for night, in order to go to their 
rescue, for they supposed them yet alive. Cicero, therefore, 
called out to them aloud, They did live. The Romans, who 
choose to avoid all inauspicious words, in this manner express 
death. 

By this time it grew late, and as he passed through the forum 
to go to his own house, the people now did not conduct him in a 

* Plutarch seems here to intimate, that after the defeat of Catiline they 
might be put upon their trial; but it appears from Sallust, that Csesar had no 
such intention. 

2 22 CICERO. 

silent and orderly manner, but crowded to hail him with loud 
acclamations and plaudits, calling him the saviour and second 
founder of Rome. The streets were illuminated* with a mul- 
titude of lamps and torches placed by the doors. The women 
held out lights from the tops of the houses, that they might 
behold, and pay a proper compliment to the man who was fol- 
lowed with solemnity by a train of the greatest men in Rome, 
most of whom had distinguished themselves by successful 
wars, led up triumphs, and enlarged the empire both by sea 
and land. All these, in their discourse with each other as they 
went along, acknowledged that Rome was indebted to many 
generals and great men of that age for pecuniary acquisitions, 
for rich spoils, for power, but for preservation and safety to 
Cicero alone, who had rescued her from so great and dreadful 
a danger. Not that his quashing the enterprise, and punish- 
ing the delinquents, appeared so extraordinary a thing; but 
the wonder was, that he could suppress the greatest conspiracy 
that ever existed, with so little inconvenience to the state 
without the least sedition or tumult: for many who had joined 
Catiline, left him on receiving intelligence of the fate of Len- 
tulus and Cethegus ; and that traitor giving Antony battle 
with the troops that remained, was destroyed with his whole 
army. 

Yet some were displeased with this conduct and success of 
Cicero, and inclined to do him all possible injury. At the 
head of this faction were some of the magistrates for the en~ 
suing year; Csesar, who was to be praetor, and Metellus and 
Bestia tribunes.! These last entering upon their office a few 
days before that of Cicero's expired, would not suffer him to 
address the people. They placed their own benches on the 
rostra, and only gave him permission to take the oath upon 
laying down his office,:]: after which he was to descend imme- 
diately. Accordingly, when Cicero went up, it was expected 
that he would take the customary oath ; but silence being 
made, instead of the usual form, he adopted one that was new 
and singular. The purport of it was, that " He had saved his 
country, and preserved the empire ;" and all the people joined 
in it. 

This exasperated Csesar, and the tribunes still more, and 

* Illuminations are of high antiquity. They came originally from the noc- 
turnal celebration of religious mysteries, and on that account carried the idea 
of veneration and respect with them. 

t Bestia went out of office oi. ihe eighth of December. Metellus and Sex- 
tius were tribunes. 

| The consuls took two oaths; one, on entering into their office, that they 
would act according to the laws; and the other, on quitting it, that they had 
not acted contrary to the laws 

CICERO. jjg 

they endeavoured to create him new troubles. Among other 
things, they proposed a decree for calling Pompey home with 
his army, to suppress the despotic power of Cicero. It was 
happy for him, and for the whole commonwealth, that Cato 
was then one of the tribunes; for he opposed them with an 
authority equal to theirs, and a reputation that was much 
greater, ana, consequently, broke their measures with ease. 
He made a set speech upon Cicero's consulship, and represent- 
ed it in so glorious a light, that the highest honours were de- 
creed him, and he was called the father of his country ; a 
mark of distinction which none ever gained before. Cato be- 
stowed that title on him before the people, and they confirmed 
it* 

His authority in Rome at that time was undoubtedly great; 
but he rendered himself obnoxious and burdensome to many, 
not by any ill action, but by continually praising and magni- 
fying himself. He never entered the senate, the assembly of 
the people, or the courts of judicature, but Catiline and Len- 
tulus were the burden of his song. Not satisfied with this, his 
writings were so interlarded with encomiums on himself, that, 
though his style was elegant and delightful, his discourses 
were disgusting and nauseous to the reader; for the blemish 
stuck to him like an incurable disease. 

But though he had such an insatiable avidity of honour, he 
was never unwilling that others should have their share : for he 
was entirely free from envy; and it appears from his works 
that he was most liberal in his praises, not only of the ancients, 
but of those of his own time. Many of his remarkable say- 
ings, too, of this nature, are preserved. Thus, of Aristotle 
he said, — "That he was a river of flowing gold;" and of 
Plato's dialogues, — " That if Jupiter were to speak, he would 
speak as he did." Theophrastus he used to call his " particu- 
lar favourite;" and being asked which of Demosthenes' ora- 
tions he thought the best, he answered, — "The longest.'* 
Some who affect to be zealous admirers of that orator, com- 
plain, indeed, of Cicero's saying in one of his epistles, — 
"That Demosthenes sometimes nodded in his orations:" but 
they forgot the many great encomiums he bestowed on him in 
the other parts of his works; and do not consider that he gave 
the title of Philippics to his orations against Mark Antony, 
which were the most elaborate he ever wrote. There was not 
one of his cotemporaries, celebrated either for his eloquence 
or philosophy, whose fame he did not promote, either by- 
speaking or writing of him in an advantageous manner. He 

* Q. Catulus was the first who gave him the title. Cato, as tribune, con- 
firmed it before the people. 

Vol. IV. P 10* 

j j 4 CICERO. 

persuaded Caesar, when dictator, to grant Cratippus, the Peri- 
patetic, the freedom of Rome. He likewise prevailed upon 
the council of Areopagus to make out an order for desiring 
him to remain at Athens, to instruct the youth, and not de- 
prive their city of such an ornament. There are, moreover, 
letters of Cicero's to Herodes, and others to his son, in which 
he directs them to study philosophy under Cratippus. But he 
accuses Gorgias the rhetorician of accustoming his son to a 
life of pleasure and intemperai.ee, and, therefore, forbids the 
young man his society. Amongst his Greek letters this, and 
another to Pelops the Byzantine, are all that discover any 
thing of resentment. His reprimand to Gorgias certainly was 
right and proper, if he was the dissolute man that he passed 
for; but he betrays an excessive meanness in his expostula- 
tions with Pelops, for neglecting to procure him certain ho- 
nours from the city of Byzantium. 

These were the effects of his vanity. Superior keenness of 
expression, too, which he had at command, led him into many 
violations of decorum. He pleaded for Munatius in a certain 
cause, and his client was acquitted in consequence of his de- 
fence. Afterwards Munatius prosecuted Sabinus, one of Cice- 
ro's friends; upon which he was so much transported with 
anger, as to say, — " Thinkest thou it was the merit of thy 
cause that saved thee, and not rather the cloud which I threw 
over thy crimes, and which kept them from the sight of the 
court?" He had succeeded in an encomium on Marcus Cras- 
sus from the rostrum; and a few days after as publicly re- 
proached him. "What!" said Crassus, "did you not lately 
praise me in the place where you now stand?" " True;" an- 
swered Cicero, w but I did it by way of experiment, to see 
what I could make of a bad subject." Crassus had once af- 
firmed, that none of his family ever lived above threescore 
years; but afterwards wanted to contradict it, and said, — 
" What could I be thinking of when I asserted such a thing?" 
" You knew," said Cicero, " that such an assertion would be 
very agreeable to the people of Rome." Crassus happened one 
day to profess himself much pleased with that maxim of the 
Stoics, — " The good man is always rich."* " I imagine," 
said Cicero, " there is another more agreeable to you, All 
things belong to the prudent :" for Crassus was notoriously 
covetous. Crassus had two sons, one of which resembled a man 
called Accius so much, that his mother was suspected of an 
intrigue with him. This young man spoke in the senate with 

* riavTa Eivai ts o-otpn. The Greek o-cipos signifies cunning, shrewd, prudent, 
as well as wise; and in any of the former acceptations the Stoic maxim was 
applicable to Crassus. This frugi, in Latin, is used indifferently, either for 
saving prudence, or sober wisdom. * 

i; 

CICERO. i j 5 

great applause; and Cicero being asked what lie thought of 
him, answered in Greek, Jixious Crassou* When Crassus 
was going to set out for Syria, he thought it better to leave 
Cicero his friend than his enemy, and, therefore, addressed 
him one day in an obliging manner, and told him he would 
come and sup with him. Cicero accepted the offer with equal 
oliteness. A few days after, Vatinius likewise applied to 
im by his friends, and desired a reconciliation. "What!" 
said Cicero, " does Vatinius too want to sup with me?" Such 
were his jests upon Crassus. Vatinius had scrophulous tu- 
mours in his neck; and one day when he was pleading Cicero 
called him a " tumid orator." An account was once brought 
Cicero that Vatinius was dead, which being afterwards con- 
tradicted, he said, — " May vengeance seize the tongue that 
told the lie ?" When Caesar proposed a decree for distributing 
the lands in Campania among the soldiers, many of the sena- 
tors were displeased at it; and Lucius Gellius, in particular, 
who was one of the oldest of them, said, — "That shall never 
be while I live." "Let us wait a while then," said Cicero, 
" for Gellius requires no very long credit." There was one 
Octavius, who had it objected to him, that he was an African. 
One day, when Cicero was pleading, this man said he could 
not hear him. " That is somewhat strange," said Cicero, "lor 
you are not without a hole in your ear."t When Metellus 
Nepos told him, — " That he had ruined more as an evidence 
than he had saved as an advocate:" "I grant it," said Cicero, 
" for I have more truth than eloquence." A young man, who 
lay under the imputation of having given his father a poisoned 
cake, talking in an insolent manner, and threatening that Ci- 
cero should feel the weight of his reproaches, Cicero answer- 
ed,— " I had much rather have them than your cake." Pub- 
lius Sestius had taken Cicero, among others, for his advocate, 
in a cause of some importance; and yet he would suffer no 
man to speak but himself. When it appeared that he would 
be acquitted, and the judges were giving their verdict, Cicero 
called to him, and said, — " Sestius, make the best use of your 
tune to-day, for to-morrow you will be out of office.":}: Pub- 
lius Cotta, who affected to be thought an able lawyer, though 
he had neither learning nor capacity, being called as a witness 
in a certain cause, declared, — " He knew nothing of the mat- 

* An ill-mannered pun, which signifies either that the young man was 
worthy of Crassus, or that he was the son of Accius. 

+ A mark of slavery amongst some nations ; but the Africans wore pen- 
dants in their ears by way of ornaments. 

% Probably Sestius, not being a professed advocate, would not be employed 
to speak for any body else ; and, therefore, Cicero meant that he should in- 
dulge his vanity in speaking for himself. 

|1 g CICERO. 

ter." " Perhaps," said Cicero, "yon think I am asking yoa 
some question in law." Metellus Nepos, in some difference 
with Cicero, often asking him, — "Who is your father?" he 
replied, "Your mother has made it much more difficult for 
you to answer that question:" for his mother had not the 
most unsullied reputation. This Metellus was himself a man 
of a light unbalanced mind. He suddenly quitted the tribu- 
nitial office, and sailed to Pompey in Syria; and when he wa3 
there, he returned in a manner still more absurd. When his 
preceptor Philagrus died, he buried him in a pompous manner, 
and placed the figure of a crow in marble on his monument.* 
" This," said Cicero, " was one of the wisest things you ever 
did ; for your preceptor has taught you rather to fly than to 
speak."t Marcus Appius having mentioned, in the introduc- 
tion to one of his pleadings, that his friend had desired him 
to try every resource of care, eloquence, and fidelity in his 
cause, Cicero said, — " What a hard-hearted man you are, not 
to do any one thing that your friend has desired of you!" 

It seems not foreign to the business of an orator, to use 
this cutting raillery against enemies or opponents : but his 
employing it indiscriminately, merely to raise a laugh, ren- 
dered him extremely obnoxious. To give a few instances, — ■ 
He used to call Marcus Aquilius, Jldrastus, because he had 
two sons-in-law who were both in exile. J Lucius Cotta, a 
great lover of wine, was censor when Cicero solicited the 
consulship. Cicero, in the course of his canvass, happening 
to be thirsty, called for water, and said to his friends who 
stood round him as he drank, — " You do well to conceal me, 
for you are afraid that the censor will call me to account for 
drinking water." Meeting Voconius one day with three 
daughters, who were very plain women, he cried out, — 

On this conception Phcebus never smil'd.5 

Marcus Gellius, who was supposed to be of servile extrac- 
tion, happening to read some letters in the senate with a loud 
and strong voice, — " Do not be surprised at it," said Cicero, 
" for there have been public criers in his family." Faustus, 
the son of Sylla the dictator, who had proscribed great num- 
bers of Romans, having run deep in debt, and wasted great 
part of his estate, was obliged to put up public bills for the 

* It was usual among the ancients to place emblematic figures on the monu- 
ments of the dead; and these were either such instruments as represented the 
profession of the deceased, or such animals as resembled them in disposition. 

t Alluding to the celerity of his expeditions. 

| Because Adrastus had married his daughters to Eteocles and Polynices, 
who were exiled. 
& A verse of Sophocles, speaking of Laius the father of iEdipus. 

CICERO. 217 

sale of it. Upon which Cicero said, — " I like these bills much 
better than his father's.'*' 

Many hated him for these keen sarcasms; which encouraged 
Clodius and his faction to form their schemes against him. 
The occasion was this: — Clodius, who was of a noble family, 
3Toung and adventurous, entertained a passion for Pompeia the 
wife of Caesar. This induced him to get privately into the 
house, which he did in the habit of a female musician. The 
women were offering in Csesar's house that mysterious sacri- 
fice which is kept from the sight and knowledge of man. But 
though no man is suffered to assist in it, Clodius, who was very 
young, and had his face yet smooth, hoped to pass through 
the women to Pompeia undiscovered. As he entered a great 
house in the night, he was puzzled to find his way; and one 
of the women belonging to Aurelia, Caesar's mother, seeing 
him wandering up and down, asked him his name. Being now 
forced to speak, he said he was seeking Abra, one of Pom- 
peia's maids. The woman, perceiving it was not a female 
voice, shrieked out, and called the matrons together. They 
immediately made fast the doors, and, searching the whole 
house, found Clodius skulking in the apartment of the maid 
who introduced him. 

As the affair made a great noise, Caesar divorced Pompeia, 
and prosecuted Clodius for that act of impiety. Cicero was 
at that time his friend; for during the conspiracy of Catiline, 
he had been ready to give him all the assistance in his power, 
and even attended as one of his guards. Clodius insisted in 
his defence, that he was not then at Rome, but at a consider- 
able distance in the country. But Cicero attested that he came 
that very day to his house, and talked with him about some 
particular business. This was, indeed, matter of fact; yet 
probably it was not so much the influence of truth, as the ne- 
cessity of satisfying his wife Tarentia that induced him to de- 
clare it. She hated Clodius on account of his sister Clodia; 
for she was persuaded, that that lady wanted to get Cicero for 
her husband; and that she managed the design by one Tullus. 
As Tullus was an intimate friend of Cicero's, and likewise 
constantly paid his court to Clodia, who was his neighbour, 
that circumstance strengthened her suspicions. Besides, Ta- 
rentia was a woman of an imperious temper, and, having an 
ascendant over her husband, she put him upon giving evidence 
against Clodius. Many other persons of honour alleged against 
him the crimes of perjury, of fraud, of bribing the people, and 
corrupting the women. Nay, Lucullus brought his maid- 
servants to prove that Clodius had a criminal commerce with 
his own sister, who was the wife of that nobleman. This was 
the youngest of the sisters; and it was generally believed ho 

Hg CICERO. 

had connections of the same kind with his other sisters; one 
of which, named Tertia, was married to Martius Rex; and 
the other, Clodia, to Metellus Celer. The latter was called 
Quadrant aria, because one of her lovers palmed upon her a 
purse of small brass money, instead of silver; the smallest brass 
coin being called a Quadrans. It was on this sister's account 
that Clodius was most censured. As the people set themselves 
both against the witnesses and the prosecutors, the judges were 
so terrified, that they thought it necessary to place a guard 
about the court; and most of them confounded the letters 
upon the tablets.* He seemed, however, to be acquitted by 
the majority; but it was said to be through pecuniary applica- 
tions. Hence, Catulus, when he met the judges, said — " You 
were right in desiring a guard for your defence; for you were 
afraid that somebody would take the money from you." And 
when Clodius told Cicero, that the judges did not give credit 
to his deposition, — " Yes," said he, " five-and-twenty of them 
believed me, for so many condemned you; nor did the other 
thirty believe you, for they did not acquit you till they had 
received your money." As to Caesar, when he was called 
upon he gave no testimony against Clodius; nor did he affirm 
that he was certain of any injury done his bed. He only 
said, — " He had divorced Pompeia, because the wife of Caesar 
ought not only to be clear of such a crime, but of the very 
suspicion of it." 

After Clodius had escaped this danger, and was elected tri- 
bune of the people, he immediately attacked Cicero, and left 
neither circumstance nor person untried to ruin him. He 
gained the people by laws that flattered their inclinations, and 
the consuls by decreeing them large and wealthy provinces ; 
for Piso was to have Macedonia, and Gabinius Syria. He re- 
gistered many mean and indigent persons as citizens; and 
armed a number of slaves for his constant attendants. Of the 
great triumvirate, Crassus was an avowed enemy to Cicero. 
Pompey indifferently caressed both parties, and Caesar was 
going to set out upon his expedition to Gaul. Though the lat- 
ter was not his friend, but rather suspected of enmity since the 
affair of Catiline, it was to him that he applied. The favour 
he asked of him was, that he would take him as his lieutenant; 
and Caesar granted it.t Clodius, perceiving that Cicero would 
by this means get out of the reach of his tribunitial power, 
pretended to be inclined to a reconciliation. He threw most 
of the blame of the late difference on Terentia; and spoke al 

* See the note on the parallel passage in the Life of Caesar. 
+ Cicero says that this lieutenancy was a voluntary offer of Cassar's. — Ep. 
ad Att 

CICERO. j j q 

ways of Cicero in terms of candour, not like an adversary vin- 
dictively inclined, but as one friend might complain of ano 
ther. This removed Cicero's fears so entirely,* that he gave 
up the lieutenancy which Caesar had indulged him with," and 
began to attend to business as before. 

Caesar was so much piqued at this proceeding, that he en- 
couraged Clodius against him, and drew off Pompey entirely 
from his interest. He declared, too, before the people, that 
Cicero, in his opinion, had been guilty of a flagrant violation 
of all justice and law, in putting Lentulus and Cethegus to 
death without any form of trial. This was the charge which 
he was summoned to answer. Cicero then putting on mourn- 
ing, let his hair grow, and, with every token of distress, went 
about to supplicate the people. Clodius took care to meet 
him every where in the streets, with his audacious and inso- 
lent crew, who insulted him on his change of dress, and often 
disturbed his applications by pelting him with dirt and stones. 
However, almost all the equestrian order went into mourning 
with him ; and no fewer than twenty thousand young men, 
of the best families, attended him with their hair dishevelled, 
and entreated the people for him. Afterwards the senate met, 
with an intent to decree that the people should change their 
habits, as in time of public mourning. But as the consuls 
opposed it, and Clodius beset the house with his armed band 
of ruffians, many of the senators ran out, rending their gar- 
ments, and exclaiming against the outrage. 

But this spectacle excited neither compassion nor shame ; 
and it appeared that Cicero must either go to exile, or decide 
the dispute with the sword. In this extremity he applied to 
Pompey for assistance ; but he had purposely absented him- 
self, and remained at his Alban villa. Cicero first sent his 
son-in-law Piso to him, and afterwards went himself. When 
Pompey was informed of his arrival, he could not bear to look 
him in the face. He was confounded at the thought of an in- 
terview with his injured friend, who had fought such battles 
for him, and rendered him so many services in the course oi 
his administration. But being now son-in-law to Caesar, he 
sacrificed his former obligations to that connection, and went, 
out at a back door, to avoid his presence. 

Cicero, thus betrayed and deserted, had recourse to the 
consuls. _ Gabinius always treated him rudely; but Piso be- 
haved with some civility. He advised him to withdraw from 
the torrent of Clodius' rage, to bear this change of the times 

* It does not appear that Cicero was influenced by this conduct of Clodius: 
he had always expressed an indifference to the lieutenancy that was offered 
to him by Caesar. — Ep. ad Att. 1. ii. c. 18. 

1 20 CICERO. 

with patience, and to be once more the saviour of his country 
which for his sake was in all this trouble and commotion. 

After this answer, Cicero consulted with his friends. Lu- 
cullus advised him to stay, and assured him he would be vic- 
torious. Others were of opinion, that it was best to fly, be- 
cause the people would soon be desirous of his return, when 
they were weary of the extravagance and madness of Clodius. 
He approved of this last advice ; and taking a statue of Mi- 
nerva, which he had long kept in his house with great devo- 
tion, he carried it to the Capitol, and dedicated it there, with 
this inscription : — to minerva, the protectress of rome. 
About midnight he privately quitted the city; and, with some 
friends who attended to conduct him, took his route on foot 
though Lucania, intending to pass from thence to Sicily. 

It was no sooner known that he was fled, than Clodius pro- 
cured a decree of banishment against him, which prohibited 
him fire and water, and admission into any house within five 
hundred miles of Italy. But such was the veneration the peo- 
ple had for Cicero, that in general there was no regard paid 
to the decree. They showed him every sort of civility, and 
conducted him on his way with the most cordial attention. 
Only at Hipponium, a city of Lucania, now called Vibo, one 
Vibius, a native of Sicily, who had particular obligations to 
him, and, among other things, had an appointment under him 
when consul, as surveyor of the works, now refused to admit 
him into his house ; but, at the same time, acquainted him that 
he would appoint a place in the country for his reception. And 
Caius Virginius,* the prsetor of Sicily, though indebted to 
Cicero for considerable services, wrote to forbid him entrance 
into that island. 

Discouraged at these instances of ingratitude, he repaired 
to Brundusium, where he embarked for Dyrrhachium. At 
first he had a favourable gale, but the next day the wind turn- 
ed about and drove him back to port. He set sail, however, 
again, as soon as the wind was fair. It is reported, that when 
he was going to land at Dyrrhachium, there happened to be an 
earthquake, and the sea retired to a great distance from the 
shore. The diviners inferred that his exile would be of no 
long continuance, for these were tokens of a sudden change. 
Great numbers of people came to pay their respects to him; 
and the cities of Greece strove which should show him the 
greatest civilities; yet he continued dejected and disconso- 
late. Like a passionate lover, he often cast a longing look 
towards Italy, and behaved with a littleness of spirit which 
could not have been expected from a man that had enjoyed 

* Some copies have it Virgilius. 

CICERO. |21 

such opportunities of cultivation from letters and philosophy. 
Nay, he had often desired his friends not to call him an ora- 
tor, but a philosopher, because he had made philosophy his 
business, and rhetoric only the instrument of his political 
operations. But opinion* has great power to efface the tinc- 
tures of philosophy, and infuse the passions of the vulgar into 
the minds of statesmen, who have a necessary connection and 
commerce with the multitude; unless they take care so to en- 
gage in every thing extrinsic, so as to attend to the business 
only, without imbibing the passions that are the common con- 
sequence of that business. 

After Clodius had banished Cicero, he burnt his villas, and 
his house in Rome; and on the place where the latter stood, 
erected a temple to Liberty. His goods he put up to auction, 
and the crier gave notice of it every day, but no buyer appear- 
ed. By these means he became formidable to the patricians; 
and having drawn the people with him into the most audacious 
insolence and effrontery, he attacked Pompey, and called in 
question some of his acts and ordinances in the wars. As this 
exposed Pompey to some reflections, he blamed himself great- 
ly for abandoning Cicero, and, entirely changing his plan, took 
every means for effecting his return. As Clodius constantly 
opposed them, the senate decreed that no public business of 
any kind should be despatched by their body, till Cicero was 
recalled. 

In the consulship of Lentulus, the sedition increased; some 
of the tribunes were wounded in the forum ; and Quintus, 
the brother of Cicero, was left for dead among the slain. The 
people began now to change their opinion; and Annius Milo, 
one of the tribunes, was the first who ventured to call Clodius 
to answer for his violation of the public peace. Many of the 
people of Rome, and of the neighbouring cities, joined Pom- 
pey; with whose assistance he drove Clodius out of the fo- 
rum, and then he summoned the citizens to vote. It is said 
that nothing was ever carried among the commons with so 
great unanimity; and the senate, endeavouring to give still 
higher proofs of their attachment to Cicero, decreed that their 
thanks should be given the cities which had treated him with 
kindness and respect during his exile; and that his town and 
country houses, which Clodius had demolished, should be re- 
built at the public charge.t 

Cicero returned sixteen months after his banishment; and 

* AoSfa signify not only opinion, but glory, fame, and, by an easy figure, a 
passion for fame. The reader will choose which sense he thinks best. 

t The consuls decreed for rebuilding his house in Eome near 11,000/.; for 
his Tuscan villa near 3,000/. ; and for his Formian villa about half that sum, 
which Cicero called a very scanty estimate. 

Vol. IV. Q 11 

2 22 cicero. 

such joy was expressed by the cities, so much eagerness to 
meet him by all ranks of people, that his own account of it is 
less than the truth, though he said, — " That Italy had brought 
him on her shoulders to Rome." Crassus, who was his enemy 
before his exile, now readily went to meet him, and was re- 
conciled. In this, he said, he was willing to oblige his son, 
Publius, who was a great admirer of Cicero. 

Not long after his return, Cicero taking his opportunity 
when Clodius was absent,* went up with a great company to 
the Capitol, and destroyed the tribunitial tables, in which were 
recorded all the acts in Clodius' time. Clodius loudly com- 
plained of this proceeding; but Cicero answered: — " That his 
appointment as tribune was irregular, because he was of a pa- 
trician family, and, consequently, all his acts were invalid. " 
Cato was displeased and opposed Cicero in this assertion: not 
that he praised Clodius; on the contrary, he was extremely 
offended at his administration; but he represented, — "That it 
would be a violent stretch of prerogative, for the senate to 
annul so many decrees and acts, among which were his own 
commission, and his regulations at Cyprus and Byzantium." 
The difference which this produced between Cato and Cicero, 
did not come to an absolute rupture; it only lessened the 
warmth of their friendship. 

After this, Milo killed Clodius; and being arraigned for the 
fact, he chose Cicero for his advocate. The senate fearing 
that the prosecution of a man of Milo's spirit and reputation, 
might produce some tumult in the city, appointed Pompey to 
preside at this and the other trials, and to provide both for the 
peace of the city, and the courts of justice. In consequence 
of which, he posted a body of soldiers in the forum before 
day, and secured every part of it. This made Milo appre- 
hensive that Cicero would be disconcerted at so unusual a 
sight, and less able to plead. He, therefore, persuaded him to 
come in a litter to the forum, and to repose himself there till 
the judges were assembled, and the court filled: for he was not 
only timid in war, but he had his fear when he spoke in public; 
and in many causes he scarce left trembling even in the height 
and vehemence of his eloquence. When he undertook to as- 
sist in the defence of Lucinius Murena,t against the prosecu- 
tion of Cato, he was ambitious to outdo Hortensius, who had 
already s'poken with great applause; for which reason he 
sat up all night to prepare himself: but that watching and 

* Cicero had attempted this once before, when Clodius was present ; but 
Caius, the brother of Clodius, being praetor, by his means they were rescued 
out of the hands of Cicero. 

t Murena had retained three advocates, Hortensius, Marcus Crassus, and 
Cicero. 

CICERO. | Qn 

application hurt him so much, that he appeared inferior to his 
rival. 

When he came out of the litter to open the cause of Milo, 
and saw Pompey seated on high, as in a camp, and weapons 
glittering all around the forum, he was so confounded that he 
could scarce begin his oration : for he shook, and his tongue 
falteied; though Milo attended the trial with great courage, 
and had disdained to let his hair grow, or to put on mourning. 
These circumstances contributed not a little to his condemna- 
tion. As for Cicero, his trembling was imputed rather to his 
anxiety for his friend, than to any particular timidity. 

Cicero was appointed one of the priests called Augurs, in 
the room of young Crassus, who was killed in the Parthian 
war. Afterwards the province of Cilicia was allotted to him ; 
and he sailed thither with an army of twelve thousand foot, 
and two thousand six hundred horse. He had it in charge to 
bring Cappadocia to submit to king Ariobarzanes ; which he 
performed to the satisfaction of all parties, without having re- 
course to arms. And finding the Cilicians elated on the mis- 
carriage of the Romans in Parthia, and the commotions in 
Syria, he brought them to order by the gentleness of his go- 
vernment. He refused the presents which the neighbouring 
princes offered him. He excused the province from finding 
him a public table, and daily entertained at his own charge 
persons of honour and learning, not with magnificence indeed, 
but with elegance and propriety. He had no porter at his gate, 
nor did any man ever find him in bed; for he rose early in 
the morning, and kindly received those who came to pay their 
court to him, either standing or walking before his door. We 
are told that he never caused any man to be beaten with rods, 
or to have his garments rent;* never gave opprobrious lan- 
guage in his anger, nor added insult to punishment. He re- 
covered the public money which had been embezzled, and en- 
riched the cities with it. At the same time, he was satisfied, 
if those who had been guilty of such frauds, made restitution, 
and fixed no mark of infamy upon them. 

He had also a taste of war; for he routed the bands of rob- 
bers that had possessed themselves of Mount Amanus, and 
was saluted by his army Imperator on that account! Cseci- 

* This mark of ignominy was of great antiquity: — "Wherefore Hanun 
took David's servants, and shaved off one-half of their beards, and cut off 
their garments to the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away." — 
2 Sam. x. 4. 

t He not only received this mark of distinction, but public thanksgivings 
were ordered at Rome for his success ; and the people went near to decree 
him a triumph. His services, therefore, must have been considerable, and 
Plutarch seems to mention them too slightly. 

1 24 CICERO. 

lius* the orator, having desired him to send him some panthers 
from Cilicia for his games at Rome, in his answer he could not 
forbear boasting of his achievements. He said, — " There 
were no panthers left in Cilicia. Those animals, in their vexa- 
tion to find that they were the only objects of war, while every 
thing else was at peace, were fled into Caria." 

In his return from his province, he stopped at Rhodes, and 
afterwards made some stay at Athens; which he did with 
great pleasure, in remembrance of the conversations he had 
formerly had there. He had now the company of all that 
were most famed for erudition; and visited his former friends 
and acquaintance. After he had received all due honours and 
marks of esteem from Greece, he passed on to Rome, where 
he found the fire of dissension kindled, and every thing tend- 
ing to a civil war. 

When the senate decreed him a triumph, he said, — "He 
had rather follow Caesar's chariot-wheels in his triumph, if a 
reconciliation could be effected between him and Pompey." 
And in private he tried every healing and conciliating me- 
thod, by writing to Caesar, and entreating Pompey. After it 
came to an open rupture, and Caesar was on his march to 
Rome, Pompey did not choose to wait for him, but retired, 
with numbers of the principal citizens in his train. Cicero 
did not attend him in his flight; and, therefore, it was believed 
that he would join Caesar. It is certain that he fluctuated 
greatly in his opinion, and was in the utmost anxiety : for he 
says, in his epistles, — "Whither shall I turn? — Pompey has 
the more honourable cause ; but Caesar manages his affairs 
with the greatest address, and is most able to save himself and 
his friends. In short, I know whom to avoid, but not whom 
to seek." At last, one Trebatius, a friend of Caesar's, signi- 
fied to him by letter, that Caesar thought he had reason to 
reckon him of his side, and to consider him as partner of his 
hopes. But if his age would not permit it, he might retire into 
Greece, and live there in tranquillity, without any connection 
with either party. Cicero was surprised that Caesar did not 
write himself, and answered angrily, — " That he would do 
nothing unworthy of his political character." Such is the 
account we have of the matter in his epistles. 

However, upon Caesar's marching for Spain, he crossed the 
sea, and repaired to Pompey. His arrival was agreeable to 
the generality ; but Cato blamed him privately for taking this 
measure: — " As forme," said he, " it would have been wrong 
to leave that party which I embraced from the beginning ; but 

* Not Caxiilius, but Cselius. He was then sedile, and wanted the panthers 
for his public shows. 

cicero. 225 

you might have been much more serviceable to your country 
and your friends, if you had staid at Rome, and accommo- 
dated yourself to events. Whereas now, without any reason 
or necessity, you have declared yourself an enemy to Caesar, 
and are come to share in the danger with which you had no- 
thing to do." 

These arguments made Cicero change his opinion, especially 
when he found that Pompey did not employ him upon any 
considerable service. It is true, no one was to be blamed for 
this but himself; for he made no secret of his repenting. He 
disparaged Pompey 's preparations; he insinuated his dislike 
of his counsels, and never spared his jests upon his allies. He 
was not, indeed, inclined to laugh himself; on the contrary, 
he walked about the camp with a very solemn countenance; 
but he often made others laugh, though they were little in- 
clined to it. Perhaps it may not be amiss to give a few in- 
stances:— When Domitius advanced a man who had no turn 
for war, to the rank of captain, and assigned for his reason, 
that he was an honest and prudent man, — " Why then," said 
Cicero, " do you not keep him for governor to your children?" 
When some were commending Theophanes the Lesbian, who 
was director of the board of works, for consoling the Rho- 
dians on the loss of their fleet, — " See," said Cicero, "what 
it is to have a Grecian director!" When Caesar was success- 
ful in almost every instance, and held Pompey as it were be- 
sieged, Lentulus said, — " He was informed that Caesar's friends 
looked very sour." " You mean, I suppose," said Cicero, 
" that they are out of humour with him." One Martins, newly 
arrived from Italy, told them a report prevailed at Rome, that 
Pompey was blocked up in his camp: "Then," said Cicero, 
" you took a voyage on purpose to see it." After Pompey's 
defeat, Nonnius said, there was room yet for hope, for there 
were seven eagles left in the camp. Cicero answered, — " That 
would be good encouragement, if we were to fight with jack- 
daws." When Labienus, on the strength of some oracles, in- 
sisted that Pompey must be conqueror at last: " By this ora- 
cular generalship," said Cicero, " we have lost our camp." 

After the battle of Pharsalia, (in which he was not present 
on account of his ill health,) and after the flight of Pompey, 
Cato, who had considerable forces, and a great fleet at Dyrrha- 
chium, desired Cicero to take the command, because his con- 
sular dignity gave him a legal title to it. Cicero, however, 
not only declined it, but absolutely refused taking any farther 
share in the war. Upon which young Pompey and his friends 
called him traitor, drew their swords, and would certainly 
have despatched him, had not Cato interposed, and coiveyed 
him out of the camp. 

11* 

126 CICERO. 

He got safe to Brundusium, and staid there some time in 
expectation of Caesar, who was detained by bis affairs in Asia 
and Egypt. When he heard that the conqueror was arrived 
at Tarentum, and designed to proceed from thence by land to 
Brundusium, he set out to meet him; not without hope, nor 
yet without some shame and reluctance, at the thought of try- 
ing how he stood in the opinion of a victorious enemy, before 
so many witnesses. He had no occasion, however, either to 
do or to say any thing beneath his dignity. Caesar no sooner 
beheld him at some considerable distance, advancing before 
the rest, than he dismounted, and ran to embrace him; after 
which, he went on discoursing with him alone for many fur- 
longs. He continued to treat him with great kindness and 
respect; insomuch that when he had written an encomium on 
Cato, which bore the name of that great man, Caesar in his 
answer, entitled Jlnti-Cato, praised both the eloquence and 
conduct of Cicero, and said he greatly resembled Pericles and 
Theramenes. 

When Quintus Ligarius was prosecuted for bearing arms 
against Caesar, and Cicero had undertaken to plead his cause, 
Caesar is reported to have said, — " Why may we not give our- 
selves a pleasure, which we have not enjoyed so long, that of 
hearing Cicero speak; since I have already taken my resolu- 
tion as to Ligarius, who is clearly a bad man, as well as my 
enemy?" But he was greatly moved when Cicero began; and 
his speech, as it proceeded, had such a variety of pathos, so 
irresistible a charm, that his colour changed; and it was evi- 
dent that his mind was torn with conflicting passions. At last, 
when the orator touched on the battle of Pharsalia, he was so 
extremely affected, that his whole frame trembled, and he let 
drop some papers out of his hand. Thus conquered by the 
force of eloquence, he acquitted Ligarius. 

The commonwealth being changed into a monarchy, Cicero 
withdrew from the scene of public business, and bestowed his 
leisure on the young men who were desirous to be instructed 
in philosophy. As these were of the best families, by his in- 
terest with ihem he once more obtained great authority in 
Rome. He made it his business to compose and translate 
philosophical dialogues, and to render the Greek terms of logic 
and natural philosophy in the Roman language: for it is said, 
that he first, or principally, at least, gave Latin terms for these 
Greek words, plant asia, imagination; syncatathesis, accent, 
epoche, doubt; catalepsis, comprehension; atomos, atom; 
ameres, indivisible; kenon, void; and many other such terms 
in science; contriving either by metaphorical expression, or 
strict translation, to make them intelligible and familiar to the 
Romans. His ready turn for poetry afforded him amusement; 

CICERO. 

127 

for, we are told, when he was intent upon it, he could make 
five hundred verses in one night. As in this period he spent 
most of his time at his Tusculan villa, he wrote to his friends, 
— " That he led the life of Laertes;" either bv way of raillery, 
as his custom was, or from an ambitious desire of public em- 
ployment, and discontent in his present situation. Be that as 
it may, he rarely went to Rome, and then only to pay his court 
to Caesar. He was always one of the first to vote him addi- 
tional honours, and forward to say something new of him and 
his actions. Thus, when Csesar ordered Pompey's statues, 
which had been pulled dov/n, to be erected again, Cicero said, 
— " That by this act of humanity in setting up Pompey's sta- 
tues, he had established his own." 

It is reported that he had formed a design to write the his- 
tory of his own country, in which he would have interwoven 
many of the Grecian affairs, and inserted not only their speeches, 
but fables. But he was prevented by many disagreeable cir- 
cumstances, both public and private, into most of which he 
brought himself by his own indiscretion : for, in the first place, 
he divorced his wife Terentia. The reasons he assigned were, 
that she had neglected him during the war, and even sent him 
out without necessaries. Besides, after his return to Italy, she 
behaved to him with little regard, and did not wait on him 
during his long stay at Brundusium. Nay, when his daughter, 
at that time very young, took so long a journey to see him, 
she allowed her but an indifferent equipage, and insufficient 
supplies. Indeed, according to his account, his house was 
become naked and empty through the many debts which she 
had contracted. These were the most specious pretences for 
the divorce. Terentia, however, denied all these charges; 
and Cicero himself made a full apology for her by marrying a 
younger woman not long after. Terentia said, he took her 
merely for her beauty ; but his freed-man Tyro affirms, that 
he married her for her wealth, that it might enable him to pay 
his debts. She was, indeed, very rich, and her fortune was in 
the hands of Cicero, who was left her guardian. As his debts 
were great, his friends and relations persuaded him to marr 
the young lady, notwithstanding the disparity of years, an 
satisfy his creditors out of her fortune. 

Antony, in his answer to the Philippics, taxes him with 
" repudiating a wife with whom he was grown old ;"* and ral- 
lies him on account of his perpetually keeping at home, like a 
man either unfit for business or war. Not long after this 
match, his daughter Tullia, who, after the death of Piso, had 
married Lentulus, died in childbed. The philosophers came 

* Cicero was then sixty-two. 

128 CICERO. 

from all parts to comfort him : for his loss affected him ex- 
tremely ; and he even put away his new bride, because she 
seemed to rejoice at the death of Tullia. In this posture were 
Cicero's domestic affairs. 

As to those of the public, he had no share in the conspiracy 
against Caesar, though he was one of Brutus' particular friends; 
and no man was more uneasy under the new establishment, or 
more desirous of having the commonwealth restored. Possi- 
bly they feared his natural deficiency of courage, as well as 
his time of life, at which the boldest begin to droop. After 
the work was done by Brutus and Cassius, the friends of Caesar 
assembled to revenge his death; and it was apprehended that 
Rome would again be plunged in civil wars. Antony, who 
was consul, ordered a meeting of the senate, and made a short 
speech on the necessity of union. But Cicero expatiated in a 
manner suitable to the occasion, and persuaded the senate, in 
imitation of the Athenians, to pass a general amnesty as to all 
that had been done against Caesar, and to decree provinces to 
Brutus and Cassius. 

None of these things, however, took effect: for the people 
were inclined to pity on this event; and when they beheld the 
dead body of Caesar carried into the forum, where Antony 
showed them his robe stained with blood, and pierced on all 
sides with swords, they broke out into a transport of rage. 
They sought all over the forum for the actors in that tragedy, 
and ran with lighted torches to burn their houses. By their 
precaution they escaped this danger ; but as they saw others 
no less considerable impending, they left the city. 

Antony, elated with this advantage, became formidable to 
all the opposite party, who supposed that he would aim at no- 
thing less than absolute power; but Cicero had particular rea- 
son to dread him ; for, being sensible that Cicero's weight in 
the administration was established again, and of his strong at- 
tachment to Brutus, Antony could hardly bear his presence. 
Besides, there had long been some jealousy and dislike be- 
tween them on account of the dissimilarity of their lives. Ci- 
cero, fearing the event, was inclined to go with Dolabella into 
Syria, as his lieutenant. But afterwards Hirtius and Pansa, 
who were to be consuls after Antony, persons of great merit, 
and good friends to Cicero, desired him not to leave them; 
and promised, with his assistance, to destroy Antony. Cicero, 
without depending much on their scheme, gave up that of go- 
ing with Dolabella, and agreed with the consuls elect to pass 
the summer in Athens, and return when they entered upon 
their office. 

Accordingly, he embarked for that place without taking any 
principal Roman along with him. But his voyage being acci- 

CICERO. jog 

dentally retarded, news was brought from Rome, (for he did 
not choose to be without news,) that there was a wonderful 
change in Antony; that he took all his steps agreeably to the 
sense of the senate; and that nothing but his presence was 
wanting to bring matters to the best establishment. He, there- 
fore, condemned his excessive caution, and returned to Rome. 

His first hopes were not disappointed. Such crowds came 
out to meet him, that almost a whole day was spent at the 
gates, and on his way home, in compliments and congratula- 
tions. Next day Antony convened the senate, and sent for 
Cicero ; but he kept his bed, pretending that he was indisposed 
with his journey. In reality, he seems to have been afraid of 
assassination, in consequence of some hints he received bv the 
way. Antony was extremely incensed at these suggestions, 
and ordered a party of soldiers either to bring him, or to burn 
his house in case of refusal. However, at the request of num- 
bers who interposed, he revoked that order, and bade them 
only bring a pledge from his house. 

After this, when they happened to meet, they passed each 
other in silence, and lived in mutual distrust. Mean time, 
young Caesar, arriving from Apollonia, put in his claim as 
heir to his uncle, and sued Antony for twenty-five million 
drachmas* which he detained of the estate. 

Hereupon, Philip, who had married the mother, and Mar- 
cellus, who was husband to the sister of Octavius, brought 
him to Cicero. It was agreed between them that Cicero should 
assist Caesar with his eloquence and interest, both with the 
senate and the people ; and that Caesar should °;ive Cicero all 
the protection that his wealth and military influence could 
afford: for the young man had already collected a considera- 
ble number of the veterans, who had served under his uncle. 

Cicero received the offer of his friendship with pleasure: 
for while Pompey and Caesar were living, Cicero, it seems, 
had a dream, in which he thought he called some bovs, the 
sons of senators, up to the Capitol, because Jupiter designed 
to pitch upon one of them for sovereign of Rome. The citi- 
zens ran with all the eagerness of expectation, and placed 
themselves about the temple; and the boys in their prxtexta 
sat silent. The doors suddenly opening, the boys rose up one 
by one, and, in their order, passed round the god. who review- 
ed them all, and sent them away disappointed: but when Oc- 
tavius approached, he stretched out his hand to him, and said: 
— " Romans, this is the person, who, when he comes to be your 
prince, will put an end to your civil wars." This vision, they 

* Plutarch is mistaken in the sura. It appears from Paterculus and others 
that it was seven times as much. 

Vol. IV. R 

|30 CICERO. 

tell us, made such an impression upon Cicero, that he perfectly 
retained the figure and countenance of the boy, though he did 
not yet know him. Next day, he went down to the Campus 
Martius, when the boys were just returning from their exer- 
cises; and the first who struck his eye, was the lad in the very 
form that he had seen in his dream. Astonished at the dis- 
covery, Cicero asked him who were his parents; and he proved 
to be the son of Octavius, a person not much distinguished in 
life, and of Attia, sister to Caesar. As he was so near a rela- 
tion, and Caesar bad no children of his own, he adopted him, 
and, by will, left him his estate. Cicero, after his dream, 
whenever he met young Octavius, is said to have treated him 
with particular regard; and he received those marks of his 
friendship with great satisfaction. Besides, he happened to be 
born the year that Cicero was consul. 

These were pretended to be the causes of their present con- 
nection. But the leading motive with Cicero was his hatred 
of Antony, and the next his natural avidity of glory: for he 
hoped to throw the weight of Octavius into the scale of the 
commonwealth; and the latter behaved to him with such a 
puerile deference,* that he even called him father. Hence 
Brutus, in his letters to Atticus, expressed his indignation 
against Cicero, and said, — " That, as through fear of Antony 
he paid his court to young Caesar, it was plain that he took not 
his measures for the liberty of his country, but only to obtain 
a gentle master for himself." Nevertheless, Brutus finding 
the son of Cicero at Athens, where he was studying under 
the philosophers, gave him a command, and employed him 
upon many services, which proved successful. 

Cicero's power at this time was at ifs greatest height; he 
carried every point that he desired ; insomuch that he expelled 
Antony, and raised such a spirit against him, that the consuls 
Hirtius and Pansa were sent to give him battle; and Cicero 
likewise prevailed upon the senate to grant Cassar the fasces, 
with the dignity of praetor, as one that was fighting for his 
country. 

Antony, indeed, was beaten ; but both the consuls falling in 
the action, the troops ranged themselves under the banners of 
Caesar. The senate now fearing the views of a young man, 
who was so much favoured by fortune, endeavoured by ho- 
nours and gifts to draw his forces from him, and to diminish 
his power. They alleged, that as Antony was put to flight, 
there was no need to keep such an army on foot. Caesar, 

* The Greek is irqos to fisiyaxiov, which is used adverbially for pueriliter. 
Thus Sophocles uses irjos xaijov adverbially for tempestive, and ttjos aipOoviav 
for abunde. The commentators not adverting to this, have declared the text 
corrupt, and puzzled themselves needlessly to restore it. 

CICERO. j g j 

alarmed at these vigorous measures, privately sent some friends 
to entreat and persuade Cicero to procure the consulship for 
them both ; promising, at the same time, that he should direct 
all affairs according to his better judgment, and find him per- 
fectly tractable, who was but a youth, and had no ambition for 
any thing but the title and the honour. Caesar himself ac- 
knowledged afterwards, that, in his apprehensions of being 
entirely ruined and deserted, he seasonably availed himself of 
Cicero's ambition, persuaded him to stand for the consulsbip, 
and undertook to support his application with his whole in- 
terest. 

In this case particularly, Cicero, old as he was, suffered him- 
self to be imposed upon by this young man, solicited the peo- 
ple for him, and brought the senate into his interest. His 
friends blamed him for it at the time; and it was not long be- 
fore he was sensible that he had ruined himself, and given up 
the liberties of his country: for Cassar was no sooner strength- 
ened with the consular authority, than he gave up Cicero,* 
and, reconciling himself to Antony and Lepidus, he united 
his power with theirs, and divided the empire among them, as 
if it had been a private estate. At the same time they pro- 
scribed above two hundred persons whom they had pitched 
upon for a sacrifice. The greatest difficulty and dispute was 
about the proscription of Cicero: for Antony would come to 
no terms, till he was first taken off. Lepidus agreed with An- 
tony in this preliminary, but Caesar opposed them both. They 
had a private congress for these purposes near the city of 
Bononia, which lasted three days. The place where they met 
was over against their camps, on a little island in the river. 
Caesar is said to have contended for Cicero the two first days ; 
but the third he gave him up. The sacrifices on each part were 
these: — Caesar was to abandon Cicero to his fate; Lepidus, 
his brother Palus; and Antony, Lucius Caesar, his uncle by 
the mother's side. Thus, rage and rancour entirely stifled 
in them all sentiments of humanity; or, more properly speak- 
ing, they showed that no beast is more savage than man, when 
he is possessed of power equal to his passion. 

While his enemies were thus employed, Cicero was at his 
Tusculan villa, and his brother Quintus with him. When 
they were informed of the proscription, they determined to 
remove to Astyra, a country-house of Cicero's near the sea, 
where they intended to take a ship, and repair to Brutus in 
Macedonia: for it was reported, that he was already very 

fiowerful in those parts. They were carried in their separate 
itters, oppressed with sorrow and despair; and often joining 

* Instead of taking him for his colleague, he chofcie Quintus Petlius.. 

132 CICERO. 

their litters on the road, they stopped to bemoan their mutual 
misfortunes. Quintus was the more dejected, because he was 
in want of necessaries*, for, as he said, he had brought nothing 
from home with him. Cicero, too, had but a slender provi- 
sion. They concluded, therefore, that it would be best for 
Cicero to hasten his flight, and for Quintus to return to his 
house, and get some supplies. This resolution being fixed 
upon, they embraced each other with every expression of sor 
row, and then parted. 

A few days after, Quintus and his son were betrayed by his 
servants to the assassins who came in quest of them, and lost 
their lives. As for Cicero, he was carried to Astyra; where 
finding a vessel, he immediately went on board, and coasted 
along to Circseum, with a favourable wind. The pilots were 
preparing immediately to sail from thence ; but whether it was 
that he feared the sea, or had not yet given up all his hopes in 
Caesar, he disembarked, and travelled a hundred furlongs on 
foot, as if Rome had been the place of his destination. Re- 
penting, however, afterwards, he left that road, and made again 
for the sea. He passed the night in the most perplexing and 
horrid thoughts; insomuch, that he was sometimes inclined to 
go privately into Csesar's house, and stab himself upon the altar 
of his domestic gods, to bring the divine vengeance upon his 
betrayer. But lie was deterred from this by the fear of tor- 
ture. Other alternatives, equally distressful, presented them- 
selves. At last, he put himself in the hands of his servants, 
and ordered them to carry him by sea to Cajeta,* where he 
had a delightful retreat in the summer, when the Etesian 
winds set in.t There was a temple of Apollo on that coast, 
from which a flight of crows came with great noise, towards 
Cicero's vessel, as it was making land. They perched on both 
sides of the sail-yard, where some sat croaking, and others 
pecking the ends of the ropes. All looked upon this as an ill 
omen; yet Cicero went on shore, and, entering his house, lay 
down to repose himself. In the mean time, a number of the 
crows settled in the chamber window, and croaked in the most 
doleful manner. One of them even entered it, and alighting 
on the bed, attempted, with its beak, to draw off the clothes 
with which he had covered his face. On the sight of this, 
the servants began to reproach themselves: — " Shall we," said 
they, " remain to be spectators of our master's murder? Shall 
we not protect him, so innocent and so great a sufferer as he 

* Tn the printed text it is xajriTar ; but a manuscript gives us Kaiarrav. Ac- 
cording to Appian, Cicero was killed near Capua; but Valerius Maximus 
says the scene of that tragedy was at Cajeta. 

t The north-east winds. 

cicero. 233 

is, when the brute creatures give him marks of their care and 
attention ?" Then partly by entreaty, partly by force, they got 
him into his litter, and carried him towards the sea. 

Mean time the assassins came up. They were commanded 
by Herennius a centurion, and Pompilius a tribune, whom 
Cicero had formerly defended when under a prosecution for 
parricide. The doors of the house being made fast, they 
broke them open. Still Cicero did not appear, and the ser- 
vants, who were left behind, said they knew nothing of him. 
But a young man, named Philologus, his brother Quintus' 
freed-man, whom Cicero had instructed in the liberal arts and 
sciences, informed the tribune, that they were carrying the 
litter through deep shades to the sea side. The tribune, taking 
a few soldiers with him, ran to the end of the walk where he 
was to come out. But Cicero perceiving that Herennius was 
hastening after him, ordered his servants to set the litter 
down; and, putting his left hand to his chin, as it was his 
custom to do, he looked stedfastly upon his murderers. Such 
an appearance of misery in his face, overgrown with hair, and 
wasted with anxiety, so much affected the attendants of He- 
rennius, that they covered their faces during the melancholy 
scene. That officer despatched him, while he stretched his 
neck out of the litter to receive the blow. Thus fell Cicero, in 
the sixty-fourth year of his age. Herennius cut off his head, 
and, by Antony's command, his hands too, with which he had 
written the Philippics. Such was the title he gave his orations 
against Antony, and they retain it to this day. 

When these parts of Cicero's body were brought to Rome, 
A.ntony happened to be holding an assembly for the election 
of magistrates. He no sooner beheld them than he cried out, — 
" Now let there be an end of all proscriptions." He ordered 
the head and hands to be fastened up over the rostra, a dread- 
ful spectacle to the Roman people, who thought they did not 
so much see the face of Cicero, as a picture of Antony's soul. 
Yet he did one act of justice on this occasion, which was the 
delivering of Philologus to Pomponia, the wife of Quintus. 
When she was mistress of his fate, beside other horrid pun- 
ishments, she made him cut off his own flesh by piecemeal, 
and roast and eat it. This is the account some historians give 
us; but Tyro, Cicero's freed-man, makes no mention of the 
treachery of Philologus. 

I am informed that a long time after, Caesar, going to see 
one of his grandsons, found him with a book of Cicero's in 
his hands. The boy, alarmed at the accident, endeavoured to 
hide the book under his robe ; which Cjesar perceived, and 
took it from him; and after having: run most of it over as he 

Vol. IV. 12 

134 DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED. 

stood, he returned it, and said, — "My dear child, this was an 
eloquent man, and a lover of his country." 

Being consul at the time when he conquered Antony, he 
took the son of Cicero for his colleague ; under whose au- 
spices the senate took down the statues of Antony, defaced 
all the monuments of his honour, and decreed, that, for the 
future, none of his family should bear the name of Marcus. 
Thus the divine justice reserved the completion of Antony's 
punishment for the house of Cicero. 

DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO 

COMPARED. 

These are the most memorable circumstances in the lives of 
Demosthenes and Cicero, that could be collected from the his 
torians which have come to our knowledge. Though I shall 
not pretend to compare their talents for speaking, yet this, I 
think, I ought to observe, that Demosthenes, by the exertion 
of all his powers, both natural and acquired, upon that object 
only, came to exceed, in energy and strength, the most cele- 
brated pleaders of his time; in grandeur and magnificence of 
style, all that were eminent for the sublime of declamation ; 
and in accuracy and art, the most able professors of rhetoric. 
Cicero's studies were more general, and, in his treasures of 
knowledge, he had a great variety. He has left us a number 
of philosophical tracts which he composed upon the principles 
of the Academy. And we see something of ostentation of 
learning in the very orations which he wrote for the forum 
and the bar. 

Their different tempers are discernible in their way of writ- 
ing. That of Demosthenes, without any embellishments of 
wit and humour, is always grave and serious : nor does it 
smell of the lamp, as Patheas tauntingly said, but of the wa- 
ter-drinker, of the man of thought, of one who was charac- 
terised by the austerities of life. But Cicero, who loved to 
indulge his vein of pleasantry, so much affected the wit, that 
he sometimes sunk into the buffoon; and, by affecting gaiety in 
the most serious things, to serve his client, he has offended 
against the rules of propriety and decorum. Thus, in the ora- 
tion of Caelius, he says, — "Where is the absurdity, if a man, 
with an affluent fortune at command, shall indulge himself 

DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED. 135 

with pleasure? It would be madness not to enjoy what is in 
his power, particularly when some of the greatest philosophers 
place man's chief good in pleasure?"* 

When Cato impeached Murena, Cbero, who was then con- 
sul, undertook his defer ce, and, in his pleading, took occasion 
to ridicule several paradoxes of the Stoics, because Cato was 
of that sect. He succeeded so far as to raise a laugh in the 
assembly, and even among the judges. Upon which Cato 
smiled, and said to those who sat by him, — " What a pleasant 
consul we have!" Cicero, indeed, was naturally facetious; 
and he not only loved his jests, but his countenance was gay 
and smiling : whereas Demosthenes had a care and thought- 
fulness in his aspect, which he seldom or never put off. 
Hence his enemies, as he confesses, called him a morose ill- 
natured man. 

It appears also from their writings, that Demosthenes, when 
he touches upon his own praise, does it with an inoffensive 
delicacy. Indeed, he never gives into it at all, but when he 
has some great point in view; and on all other occasions is 
extremely modest. But Cicero, in his orations, speaks in such 
high terms of himself, that it is plain he had a most intempe- 
rate vanity. Thus, he cries out, — 

Let arms revere the robe, the warrior's laurel 
Yield to the palm of eloquence. 

At length he came to commend not only his own actions 
and operations in the commonwealth, but his orations too, as 
well those which he had only pronounced, as those which he 
had committed to writing, as if, with a juvenile vanity, he 
were vying with the rhetoricians Isocrates and Anaximenes, 
instead of being inspired with the great ambition of guiding 
the Roman people, — 

Fierce in the f eld, and dreadful to the foe. 

It is necessary, indeed, for a statesman to have the advan- 
tage of eloquence; but it is mean and illiberal to rest on such 
a qualification, or to hunt after praise in that quarter. In this 
respect Demosthenes behaved with more dignity, with a su- 
perior elevation of soul. He said: — "His ability to explain 
himself was a mere acquisition: and not so perfect, but that 
it required great candour and indulgence in the audience." 
He thought it must be, as indeed it is, only a low and little 
mind, that can value itself upon such attainments. 

* Plutarch has not quoted this passage with accuracy. Cicero apologizes 
for the excesses of youth, but does not defend or approve the pursuit of 
pleasure. 

136 DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED. 

They both, undoubtedly, had political abilities, as well as 
powers to persuade. They had them in such a decree, that 
men who had armies at their devotion, stood in need of their 
support. Thus, Chares, Diopithes, and Leosthenes, availed 
themselves of Demosthenes; Pompey and young Caesar of 
Cicero; as Csesar himself acknowledges, in his Commentaries 
addressed to Agrippa and Maecenas. 

It is an observation no less just than common, that nothing 
makes so thorough a trial of a man's disposition, as power and 
authority ; for they awake every passion, and discover every 
latent vice. Demosthenes never had an opportunity for a trial 
of this kind. He never obtained any eminent charge; nor 
did he lead those armies against Philip, which his eloquence 
had raised. But Cicero went quaestor into Sicily, and pro- 
consul into Cilicia and Cappadocia; at a time, too, when ava- 
rice reigned without control ; when the governors of provinces, 
thinking it beneath them to take a clandestine advantage, fell 
to open plunder; when, to take another's property, was thought 
no great crime, and he who took moderately passed for a man 
of character. Yet at such a time as this, Cicero gave many 
proofs of his contempt of money; many of his humanity and 
goodness. At Rome, with the title only of consul, he had an 
absolute and dictatorial power against Catiline and his accom- 
plices: on which occasion he verified the prediction of Plato, 
— "That every state will be delivered from its calamities, 
when, by the favour of fortune, great power unites with wis- 
dom and justice in one person." 

It is mentioned to the disgrace of Demosthenes, that his 
eloquence was mercenary; that he privately composed ora- 
tions both for Phormio and Apollodorus, though adversaries 
in the same cause. To which we may add, that he was sus- 
pected of receiving money from the king of Persia, and con- 
demned for taking bribes of Harpalus. Supposing some of 
these the calumnies of those who wrote against him, (and 
they are not a few,) yet it is impossible to affirm that he was 
proof against the presents which were sent him by princes, as 
marks of honour and respect. This was too much to be ex- 
pected from a man who vested his money at interest upon 
ships. Cicero, on the other hand, had magnificent presents 
sent him by the Sicilians, when he was asdile; by the king of 
Cappadocia, when proconsul; and his friends pressed him to 
receive their benefactions, when in exile; yet, as we have al- 
ready observed, he refused them all. 

The banishment of Demosthenes reflected infamy upon him; 
for he was convicted of taking bribes: that of Cicero, great 
honour ; because he suffered for destroying traitors, who had 
vowed the ruin of their country. The former, therefore 

DEMOSTHENES AND CICERO COMPARED. 137 

departed without exciting pity or regret: for the latter, the 
senate changed their habit, continued in mourning, and could 
not be persuaded to pass any act, till the people had recalled 
him. Cicero, indeed, spent the time of exile in an inactive 
manner in Macedonia; but with Demosthenes it was a busy 
period in his political character. Then it was (as we have 
mentioned above) that he went to the several cities of Greece, 
strengthened the common interest, and defeated the designs of 
the Macedonian ambassadors. In which respect he discovered 
a much greater regard for his country than Themistocles and 
Alcibiades, when under the same misfortune. After his re- 
turn, he pursued his former plan of government, and continued 
the war with Antipater and the Macedonians: whereas Laelius 
reproached Cicero in full senate, with sitting silent, when 
Caesar, who was not yet come to years of maturity, applied for 
the consulship contrary to law. And Brutus, in one of his let- 
ters, charged him with " having reared a greater and more un- 
supportable tyranny, than that which they had destroyed." 

As to the manner of their death, we cannot think of Cicero's 
without a contemptuous kind of pity. How deplorable to see 
,an old man, for want of proper resolution, suffering himself 
to be carried about by his servants, endeavouring to nide him- 
self from death, which was a messenger that nature would soon 
have sent him, and overtaken notwithstanding, and slaughtered 
by his enemies! The other, though he did discover some fear, 
by taking sanctuary, is, nevertheless, to be admired for the 
provision he had made of poison, for the care with which he had 
preserved it, and his noble manner of using it: so that, when 
Neptune did not afford him an asylum, he had recourse to a 
more inviolable altar, rescued himself from the weapons of the 
guards, and eluded the cruelty of Antipater. 

Vol. IV. S 12* 

THE 

LIFE OF DEMETRIUS. 

Thosf who first thought that the arts might be compared to 
the senses, in the perception of their respective objects, appear 
to me to have well understood the power by which that per- 
ception was to be formed, the power of distinguishing con- 
trary qualities; for this they have in common. But in the 
mode of distinguishing, as well as in the end of what is dis- 
tinguished, they evidently differ. The senses, for instance, 
have no connate power of perceiving a white object more than 
a black one; what is sweet, more than what, is bitter; or what 
is soft and yielding, more than what is hard and solid. Their 
office is to receive impressions from such objects as strike 
upon them, and to convey those impressions to the mind. 
But the operation of the arts is more rational. They are not 
like the senses, passive in their perceptions. They choose or 
reject what is proper or improper. What is good, they attend 
to primarily and intentionally; and what is evil, only acciden- 
tally, in order to avoid it. Thus, the art of medicine considers 
the nature of diseases, and music that of discordant sounds, in 
order to produce their contraries. And the most excellent of 
all arts, temperance, justice, and prudence, teach us to judge 
not only of what is honourable, just and useful, but also of 
what is pernicious, disgraceful, and unjust. These arts be- 
stow no praise on that innocence which boasts of an entire ig- 
norance of vice; in their reckoning, it is rather an absurd sim- 
plicity to be ignorant of those things, which every man that is 
disposed to live virtuously, should make it his particular care 
to know. Accordingly, the ancient Spartans, at their feasts, 
used to compel the Helots to drink an excessive quantity of 
wine, and then bring them into the public halls where they 
dined, to show the young men what drunkenness was. 

We do not, indeed, think it agreeable, either to humanity or 
good policy, to corrupt some of the species, in order not to 
corrupt others. Yet, perhaps, it may not be amiss to insert 
among the rest of the lives, a few examples of those who have 
abused their power to the purposes of licentiousness, and 
whose elevation has only made their vices greater and more 
conspicuous: not that we adduce them to give pleasure, or to 
adorn our paintings with the graces of variety; but we do it 
from the same motive with Ismenias the Theban musician. 

DEMETRIUS. jgg 

vho presented his scholars both with good and bad performers 
on the flute; and used to say, — "Thus you must play;" and 
"Thus you must not play." And Antigenidas observed, — 
"That young men would hear able performers with much 
greater pleasure after they had heard bad ones." In like man- 
ner, according to my opinion, we shall behold and imitate the 
virtuous with greater attention, if we be not entirely unac- 
quainted with the characters of the vicious and infamous. 

In this book, therefore, we shall give the Lives of Deme- 
trius, surnamed Poliorcetes, and of Antony the triumvir, men 
who have most remarkably verified that observation of Plato, 
— " That great parts produce great vices, as well as virtues." 
They were equally addicted to wine and women; both excel- 
lent soldiers, and persons of great munificence, but, at the 
same time, prodigal and insolent. There was the same re- 
semblance in their fortune: for, in the course of their lives, 
they met both with great success, and great disappointments; 
now extending their conquests with the utmost rapidity, and 
now losing all; now falling beyond all expectation; and now 
recovering themselves when there was as little prospect of 
such a change. This similarity there was in their lives; and 
in the concluding scene there was not much difference; for 
the one was taken by his enemies, and died in captivity, and 
the other was near sharing the same fate. 

Antigonus having two sons by Stratonice, the daughter of 
Corraeus, called the one after his brother, Demetrius, and the 
other after his father Philip. So most historians say. But 
some affirm that Demetrius was not the son of Antigonus, but 
his nephew; and that his father dying and leaving him an in- 
fant, and his mother soon after marrying Antigonus, he was 
on that account considered as his son. Philip, who was not 
many years younger than Demetrius, died at an early period. 
Demetrius, though tall, was not equal in size to his father 
Antigonus. But his beauty and his mien were so inimitable, 
that no statuary or painter could hit off' a likeness. His coun- 
tenance had a mixture of grace and dignity, and was at once 
amiable and awful; and the unsubdued and eager air of youth 
was blended with the majesty of the hero and the king. There 
was the same happy mixture in his behaviour, which inspired, 
at the same time, both pleasure and awe. In his hours of lei- 
sure a most agreeable companion; in his table and every spe- 
cies of entertainment, of all princes the most delicate: and yet, 
when business called, nothing could equal his activity, his di- 
ligence and despatch: in which respect he imitated Bacchus 
most of all the gods, since he was not only terrible in war, 
but knew how to terminate war with peace, and turn with the 
nappiest address to Ihe joys and pleasures which that inspires. 

1 40 DEMETRIUS. 

His affection for his father was remarkably great; and in 
the respec he paid his mother, his love for his other parent 
was very discernible. His duty was genuine, and not in the 
least influenced by the considerations of high station or power. 
Demetrius happening to come from hunting, when his father 
was giving audience to some ambassadors, went up and saluted 
him, and then sat down by him with his javelins in his hand. 
After they had received their answer, and were going away, 
Antigonus called out to them and said, — " You may mention, 
too, the happy terms upon which I am with my son." By 
which he gave them to understand, that the harmony and con- 
fidence in which they lived, added strength to the kingdom, 
and security to his power. So incapable is regal authority of 
admitting a partner, so liable to jealousy and hatred, that the 
greatest and oldest of Alexander's successors rejoiced that he 
had no occasion to fear his own son, but could freely let him 
approach him with his weapons in his hands. Indeed, we may 
venture to say, that his family alone, in the course of many 
successions, was free from these evils. Of all the descend- 
ants of Antigonus, Philip was the only prince who put his 
son to death; whereas, in the families of other kings, nothing 
is more common than the murders of sons, mothers, and wives. 
As for the killing of brothers, like a postulatum in geometry, 
it was considered as indisputably necessary to the safety of the 
reigning prince. 

That Demetrius was originally well disposed by nature to 
the offices of humanity and friendship, the following is a proof: 
— Mithridates the son of Ariobarzanes, was of the same age, 
and his constant companion. He was likewise one of the at 
tendants of Antigonus, and bore an unblemished charactei. 
Yet Antigonus conceived some suspicion of him from a dream. 
He thought he entered a large and beautiful field, and sowed 
it with filings of gold. This produced a crop of the same 
precious metal; but coming a little after to visit it, he found 
it was cut, and nothing left but the stalks. As he was in 
great distress about his loss, he heard some people say, that 
Mithridates had reaped the golden harvest, and was gone with 
it towards the Euxine sea. 

Disturbed at the dream, he communicated it to his son, 
having first made him swear to keep it secret, and at the same 
time, informed him of his absolute determination to destroy 
Mithridates. Demetrius was exceedingly concerned at the 
affair ; but though his friend waited on him as usual, that they 
might pursue their diversions together, he durst not speak to 
him on the subject, because of his oath. By degrees, however, 
he drew him aside from the rest of his companions, and when 
they were alone, he wrote on the ground, with the bottom oi 

DEMETRIUS. 

141 

his spear, — " Fly, Mithridates." The youn°; man, under- 
standing his danger, fled that night into Cappadocia; and fate 
soon accomplished the dream of Antigonus: for Mithridates 
conquered a rich and extensive country, and founded the family 
of the Pontic kings, which continued through eight succes- 
sions, and was at last destroyed by the Romans. This was a 
sufficient evidence that Demetrius was naturally well inclined 
to justice and humanity. 

But as, according to Empedocles, love and hatred are the 
sources of perpetual wars between the elements, particularly 
such as touch or approach each other; so among the succes- 
sors of Alexander there were continual wars ; and the conten- 
tions were always the most violent when inflamed by the op- 
position of interest, or vicinity of place. This was the case 
of Antigonus and Ptolemy. Antigonus, while he resided in 
Phrygia, received information that Ptolemy was gone from 
Cyprus into Syria, where he was ravaging the country, and 
reducing the cities either by solicitation or force. Upon this 
he sent his son Demetrius against him, though he was only 
twenty-two years of age; and in this first command had the 
greatest and most difficult affairs to manage. But a young 
and unexperienced man was unequally matched with a general 
from the school of Alexander, who had distinguished himself 
in many important combats under that prince. Accordingly, 
he was defeated near Gaza; five thousand of his men were 
killed, and eight thousand taken prisoners. He lost also his 
tents, his military chest, and his whole equipage. But Ptole- 
my sent them back to him, together with his friends; adding 
this generous and obliging message, — " That they ought only 
to contend for glory and empire." When Demetrius received 
it, he begged of the gods, — " That he might not long be Ptole- 
my's debtor, but soon have it in his power to return the fa 
vour." Nor was he disconcerted, as most young men would 
be, with such a miscarriage in his first essay. On the contra- 
ry, like a complete general, accustomed to the vicissitudes ol 
fortune, he employed himself in making new levies and pro- 
viding arms; he kept the cities to their duty, and exercised 
the troops he had raised. 

As soon as Antigonus was apprised how the battle went, he 
said, — " Ptolemy has, indeed, beaten boys, but he shall soon 
have to do with men." However, as he did not choose to re- 
press the spirit of his son, on his request, he gave him per- 
mission to try his fortune again by himself. Not long after 
this, Cillcs, Ptolemy's general, undertook to drive Demetrius 
entirely out of Syria ; for which purpose he brought with him 
a numerous army, though he held him in contempt, on account 
of his late defeat. But Demetrius, by a sudden attack, struck 

1 42 DEMETRIUS. 

his adversaries with such a panic, that both the camp and the 
general fell into his hands, together with very considerable 
treasures. Yet he did not consider the gain, but the ability to 
give : nor so much valued the glory and riches which this ad- 
vantage brought him, as its enabling him to requite the gene- 
rosity of Ptolemy. He was not, however, for proceeding upon 
his own judgment; he consulted his father; and, on his free 
permission to act as he thought proper, loaded Cilles and his 
friends with his favours, and sent them back to their master. 
By this turn of affairs, Ptolemy lost his footing in Syria; and 
Antigonus marched down from Celaense, rejoicing in his son's 
success, and impatient to embrace him. 

Demetrius, after this, being sent to subdue the Nabathasan 
Arabs, found himself in great danger, by falling into a desert 
country, which afforded no water. But the barbarians, asto- 
nished at his uncommon intrepidity, did not venture to attack 
him; and he retired with a considerable booty, amongst which 
were seven hundred camels. 

Antigonus had formerly taken Babylon from Seleucus; but 
he had recovered it by his own arms, and was now marching 
with his main army, to reduce the nations which bordered 
upon India, and the provinces about Mount Caucasus. Mean 
time Demetrius, hoping to find Mesopotamia unguarded, sud- 
denly passed the Euphrates, and fell upon Babylon. There 
were two strong castles in that city; but by this manoeuvre, in 
the absence of Seleucus, he seized one of them, dislodged the 
garrison, and placed there seven thousand of his own men. 
After this he ordered the rest of the soldiers to plunder the 
country for their own use, and then returned to the sea-coast. 
By these proceedings he left Seleucus better established in his 
dominions than ever ; for his laying waste the country seemed 
as if he had no farther claim to it. 

In his return through Syria, he was informed that Ptolemy 
was besieging Halicarnassus ; upon which he hastened to its 
relief, and obliged him to retire. As this ambition to succour 
the distressed, gained Antigonus and Demetrius great repu- 
tation, they conceived a strong desire to rescue all Greece 
from the slavery it was held in by Cassander and Ptolemy. 
No prince ever engaged in a more just and honourable war; for 
they employed the wealth which they had gained by the con- 
quests of the barbarians, for the advantage of the Greeks ; solely 
with a view to the honour that such an enterprise promised. 

When they had resolved to begin their operations with 
Athens, one of his friends advised Antigonus, if he took the 
city, to keep it as the key of Greece; but that prince would 
not listen to him: He said, — "The best and securest of all 
keys was the friendship of the people ; and that ^Athens was 

DEMETRIUS. j ^n 

the watch-tower of the world, from whence the torch of his 
glory would blaze over the earth." 

In consequence of these resolutions, Demetrius sailed to 
Athens with five thousand talents of silver, and a fleet of two 
hundred and fifty ships. Demetrius the Phalerean governed 
the city for Cassander, and had a good garrison in the fort of 
Munychia. His adversary, who managed the affair both with 
prudence and good fortune, made his appearance before the 
Piraeus on the twenty-fifth of May.* The town had no in- 
formation of his approach; and when they saw his fleet coming 
in, they concluded that it belonged to Ptolemy, and prepared 
to receive it as such. But at last, the officers who commanded 
in the city, being undeceived, ran to oppose it. All the tu- 
mult and confusion followed, which was natural when an ene- 
my came unexpected, and was already landing: for Demetrius, 
finding the mouth of the harbour open, ran in with ease; and 
the people could plainly distinguish him on the deck of the 
ship, whence he made signs to them to compose themselves, 
and keep silence. They complied with his demand ; and a 
herald was ordered to proclaim, — " That his father, Antigo- 
nus, in a happy hour, he hoped, for Athens, had sent him to 
reinstate them in their liberties, by expelling the garrison, and 
to restore their laws and ancient form of government." 

Upon this proclamation, the people threw down their arms, 
and receiving the proposal with loud acclamations, desired 
Demetrius to land, and called him their benefactor and de- 
liverer. Demetrius the Phalerean, and his partisans, thought 
it necessary to receive a man who came with such a superior 
force, though he should perform none of his promises, and, 
accordingly, sent deputies to make their submission. Deme- 
trius received them in an obliging manner, and sent back with 
them Aristodemus the Milesian, a friend of his father's. At 
the same time, he was not unmindful of Demetrius the Phale- 
rean, who, in this revolution, was more afraid of the citizens 
than of the enemy; but, out of regard to his character and 
virtue, sent him with a strong convoy to Thebes, agreeably 
to his request. He likewise assured the Athenians, that, how- 
ever desirous he might be to see their city, he would deny 
himself that pleasure till he had set it entirely free, by expel- 
ling the garrison. He, therefore, surrounded the fortress of 
Munychia with a ditch and rampart, to cut off its communi- 
cation with the rest of the city, and then sailed to Megara, 
where Cassander had another garrison. 

On his arrival, he was informed, that Cratesipolis, the wife 
of Alexander the son of Polyperchon, a celebrated beauty, 

* Thargelion. 

144 DEMETRIUS. 

was at Patrae, and had a desire to see him : in consequer 1 ot 
which, he left his forces in the territory of Megara, andv »vith 
a few light horse, took the road to Patrae. When he was near 
the place, he drew off from his men, and pitched his tent apart, 
that Cratesipolis might not be perceived when she came to pay 
her visit. But a party of the enemy getting intelligence of 
this, fell suddenly upon him. In his alarm, he had only time 
to throw over him a mean cloak, and, in that disguise, saved 
himself by flight. So near an infamous captivity had his in- 
temperate love of beauty brought him. As for his tent, the 
enemy took it, with all the riches it contained. 

After Megara was taken, the soldiers prepared to plunder 
it; but the Athenians interceded strongly for that people, and 
prevailed. Demetrius was satisfied with expelling the garri- 
son, and declared the city free. Amidst these transactions, 
he bethought himself of Stilpo, a philosopher of great reputa- 
tion, who sought only the retirement and tranquillity of a 
studious life. He sent for him, and asked him : — " Whether 
they had taken any thing from him?" " No," said Stilpo, " I 
found none that wanted to steal any knowledge." The sol- 
diers, however, had clandestinely carried off almost all the 
slaves. Therefore, when Demetrius paid his respects to him 
again, on leaving the place, he said, — " Stilpo, I leave you en- 
tirely free." " True," answered Stilpo, " for you have not 
left a slave among us." 

Demetrius then returned to the siege of Munychia, dislodg- 
ed the garrison, and demolished the fortress. After which 
the Athenians pressed him to enter the city, and he complied 
Having assembled the people, he re-established the common- 
wealth in its ancient form; and, moreover, promised them, in 
the name of his father, a hundred and fifty thousand measures* 
of wheat, and timber enough to build a hundred galleys. 
Thus they recovered the democracy fifteen years after it was 
dissolved. During the interval, after the Lamian war, and 
the battle of Cranon, the government was called an oligarchy, 
but, in fact, was monarchical ; for the power of Demetrius the 
Phalerean met with no control. 

Their deliverer appeared glorious in his services to Athens ; 
but they rendered him obnoxious by the extravagant honours 
they decreed him: for they were the first who gave him and 
his father Antigonus the title of kings, which they had hitherto 
religiously avoided, and which was, indeed, the only thing left 
the descendants of Philip and Alexander, uninvaded by their 
generals. In the next place, they alonet honoured them with 

* Medimni. 

-f No other people were found capable of such vile adulation. Their ser 
vility showed how little they deserved the liberty that was restored them. 

DEMETRIUS. 

145 

the appellation of the gods-protectors ; and, instt-ad of deno- 
minating the year as formerly, from the archon, they abolish- 
ed his office, created annually in his room a priest of those 
gods-protectors, and prefixed his name to all their public acts. 
They likewise ordered that their portraits should be wrought 
in the holy veil with those of the other gods.* They conse 
crated the place where their patron first alighted from his 
chariot, and erected an altar there to Demetrius Catabatea. 
They added two to the number of their tribes, and called them 
Demetrias and Antigonis; in consequence of which, the se- 
nate, which before consisted of five hundred members, was to 
consist of six hundred; for each tribe supplied fifty. 

Stratocles, of whose inventions these wise compliments 
were, thought of a stroke still higher: he procured a decree, 
that those who should be sent upon public business from the 
commonwealth of Athens to Antigonus and Demetrius, should 
not be called ambassadors, but the.ari, a title which had been 
appropriated to those who, on the solemn festivals, carried 
the customary sacrifices to Delphi and Olympia, in the name 
of the Grecian states. This Stratocles was, in all respects, a 
person of the most daring effrontery, and the most debauched 
life, insomuch that he seemed to imitate the ancient Cleon in 
his scurrilous and licentious behaviour to the people. He kept 
a mistress called Phylacium, and one day, when she brought 
from the market some heads for supper, he said : — " Why, 
how now ! you have provided us just such things to eat, as we 
statesmen use for tennis-balls." 

When the Athenians were defeated in the sea-fight near 
Amorgos, he arrived at Athens before any account of the mis- 
fortune had been received, and passing through the Ceramicus 
with a chaplet on his head, told the people that they were vic- 
torious. He then moved that sacrifices of thanksgiving should 
be offered, and meat distributed among the tribes for a pub- 
lic entertainment. Two days after, the poor remains of the 
fleet were brought home; and the people, in great anger, call- 
ing him to answer for the imposition ; he made his appearance 
in the height of the tumult, with the most consummate assur- 
ance, and said, — "What harm have I done you, in making 

* Every fifth year the Athenians celebrated the Panathenaea, or festival of 
Minerva, and carried in procession the Peplum, or holy veil, in which the de- 
feat of the Titans, and the actions of Minerva, were inwrought. In this veil, 
too, they placed the figures of those commanders who had distinguished 
themselves by their victories; and from thence came the expression, that 
such a one was worthy of the Peplum ; meaning, that he was a brave soldier. 
As to the form of the Peplum, it was a large robe without sleeves. It was 
drawn by land in a machine kke a ship along the Ceramicus, as far as the 
temple of Ceres at Eleusis ; from whence it was brought back, and conse- 
crated in the citadel. 

Vol. IV. T 13 

j 46 DEMETRIUS. 

you merry for two days ?" Such was the impudence of Stra- 
tocles. 

But there were other extravagances, hotter than fire itself, 
as Aristophanes expresses it. One flatterer outdid even Stra- 
tocles in servility, by procuring a decree that Demetrius, 
whenever he visited Athens, should be received with the same 
honours that were paid to Ceres and Bacchus; and that who 
ever exceeded the rest in the splendour and magnificence ol 
the reception he gave that prince, should have money out ol 
the treasury to enable him to set up some pious memorial of 
his success. These instances of adulation concluded with 
their changing the name of the month Munychion to Deme- 
trion ; with calling the last day of every month Demetrias; 
and the Dionysia, or feasts of Bacchus, Demetria. 

The gods soon showed how much they were offended at 
these things: for the veil in which were wrought the figures 
of Demetrius and Antigonus, along with those of Jupiter and 
Minerva, as they carried it through the Ceramicus, was rent 
asunder by a sudden storm of wind. Hemlock grew up in 
great quantities round the altars of those princes, though it is 
a plant seldom found in that country. On the day when the 
Dionysia were to be celebrated, they were forced to put a stop 
to the procession by the excessive cold, which came entirely 
out of season ; and there fell so strong a hoar-frost, that it 
blasted not only the vines and fig-trees, but great part of the 
corn in the blade. Hence, Philippides, who was an enemy to 
Stratocles, thus attacked him in one of his comedies: — "Who 
was the wicked cause of our vines being hlasted by the frost, 
and of the sacred veil's being rent asunder? He who trans- 
ferred the honours of the gods to men: it is he, not comedy,* 
that is the ruin of the people." This Philippides enjoyed the 
friendship of Lysimachus, and the Athenians received many 
favours from that prince on his account. Nay, whenever Ly- 
simachus was waited on by this poet, or happened to meet him, 
he considered it as a good omen, and a happy time to enter 
upon any great business or important expedition. Besides, he 
was a man of excellent character, never importunate, intriguing, 
or over-officious, like those who are bred in a court. One day 
Lysimachus talked to him in the most obliging manner, and 
said, — " What is there of mine that you would share in ?" 
"Any thing," said he, " but your secrets." I have purposely 
contrasted these characters, that the difference may be obvious 
between the comic writer and the demagogue. 

* It is probable that Stratocles, and other persons of his character, inveigh- 
ed against the dramatic writers, on account of the liberties they took with 
their vices ; though this was after the time that the Middle Comedy prevailed 
at Athens. 

DEMETRIUS. j 47 

What exceeded all the rage of flattery we have mentioned 
was the decree proposed by Dromoclides the Sphettian; ac- 
cording to which, they were to consult the oracle of Deme- 
trius, as to the manner in which they were to dedicate certain 
shields at Delphi. It was conceived in these terms: — "In a 
fortunate hour, be it decreed by the people, that a citizen of 
Athens be appointed to go to the god-protector, and, after due 
sacrifices offered, demand of Demetrius, the god-protector, 
what will be the most pious, the most honourable, and expedi- 
tious method of consecrating the intended offerings. And it is 
hereby enacted, that the people of Athens will follow the me- 
thod dictated by his oracle." By this mockery of incense to 
his vanity, who was scarcely in his senses before, they render- 
ed him perfectly insane. 

During his stay at Athens, he married Eurydice, a descend- 
ant of the ancient Miltiades, who was the widow of Opheltas 
king of Cyrene, and had returned to Athens after his death. 
The Athenians reckoned this a particular favour and honour 
to their city; though Demetrius made no sort of difficulty ot 
marrying, and had many wives at the same time. Of all his 
wives, he paid most respect to Phila, because she was the 
daughter of Antipater, and had been married to Craterus, 
who, of all the successors of Alexander, was most regretteel 
by the Macedonians. Demetrius was very young when his 
father persuaded him to marry her, though she was advanced 
in life, and, on that account, unfit for him. As he was disin- 
clined to the match, Antigonus is said to have repeated to him 
that verse of Euripides, with a happy parody, — 

When fortune spreads her stores, we yield to marriage 
Against the bent of nature. 

Only putting marriage instead of bondage. However, the 
respect which Demetrius paid Phila and his other wives, was 
not of such a nature, but that he publicly entertained many 
mistresses, as well slaves as free-born women, and was more 
infamous for his excesses of that sort, than any other prince 
of his time. 

Mean time his father called him to take the conduct of the 
war against Ptolemy; and he found it necessary to obey him. 
But as it gave him pain to leave the war he had undertaken 
for the liberties of Greece, which was so much more advan 
tageous in point of glory, he sent to Cleonides, who com- 
manded for Ptolemy in Sicyon and Corinth, and offered him v 
pecuniary consideration, on condition that he would set those 
cities free. Cleonides, not accepting the proposal, Demetrius 
immediately embarked his troops, and sailed to Cyprus. There 
he had an engagement with Menelaiis, brother to Ptolemy, and 

1 48 DEMETRIUS. 

defeated him. Ptolemy himself soon after made his appear 
ance with a great number of land-forces, and a considerable 
fleet. On which occasion, several menacing and haughty 
messages passed between them. Ptolemy bade Demetrius 
depart, before he collected all his forces, and trod him under 
foot; and Demetrius said, he would let Ptolemy go, if he 
would promise to evacuate Sicyon and Corinth. 

The approaching battle awakened the attention not only of 
the parties concerned, but of all other princes; for, beside the 
uncertainty of the event, so much depended upon it, that the 
conqueror would not be master of Cyprus and Syria alone, 
but superior to all his rivals in power. Ptolemy advanced 
with a hundred and fifty ships, and he had ordered Menelaiis, 
with sixty more, to come out of the harbour of Salamis, in the 
heat of the battle, and put the enemy in disorder by falling on 
his rear. Against these sixty ships, Demetrius appointed a 
guard of ten, for that number was sufficient to block up the 
mouth of the harbour. His land-forces he ranged on the ad- 
joining promontories, and then bore down upon his adversary 
with a hundred and eighty ships. This he did with so much 
impetuosity, that Ptolemy could not stand the shock, but was 
defeated, and fled with eight ships only, which were all that 
he saved; for seventy were taken, with their crews, and the 
rest were sunk in the engagement. His numerous train, his 
servants, friends, wives, arms, money, and machines, that were 
stationed near the fleet, in transports, all fell into the hands of 
Demetrius, and he carried them to his camp. 

Among these was the celebrated Lamia, who at first was 
only taken notice of for her performing on the flute, which 
was by no means contemptible, but afterwards became famous 
as a courtesan. By this time her beauty was in the wane, yet 
she captivated Demetrius, though not near her age, and so ef- 
fectually enslaved him by the peculiar power of her address, 
that, though other women had a passion for him, he could only 
think of her. 

After the sea-fight, Menelaiis made no further resistance, but 
surrendered Salamis with all the ships, and the land-forces, 
which consisted of twelve hundred horse, and twelve thousand 
foot. 

This victory, so great in itself, Demetrius rendered still 
more glorious, by generosity and humanity, in giving the 
enemy's dead an honourable interment, and setting the pri- 
soners free. He selected twelve hundred complete suits of 
armour from the spoils, and bestowed them on the Athenians. 
Aristodemus the Milesian, was the person he sent to his father, 
with an account of the victory. Of all the courtiers, this man 
was the boldest flatterer, and, on the present occasion, he de- 

DEMETRIUS. j^g 

signed to outdo himself. When fte arrived on the coast of 
Syria, from Cyprus, he would not suffer the ship to make land ; 
but ordering it to anchor at a distance, and all the company to 
remain in it, he took the boat, and went on shore alone. He 
advanced towards the palace of Antigonus, who was watching 
for the event of this battle, with all the solicitude that is 
natural to a man who has so great a concern at stake. As soon 
as he was informed that the messenger was coming, his anxiety 
increased to such a degree, that he could scarce keep within 
his palace. He sent his officers and friends, one after another, 
to Aristodemus, to demand what intelligence he brought. But 
instead of giving any of them an answer, he walked on with 
great silence and solemnity. The king, by this time much 
alarmed, and having no longer patience, went to the door to 
meet him. A great crowd was gathered about Aristodemus, 
and people were running from all quarters to the palace to hear 
the news. When he was near enough to be heard, he stretched 
out his hand, and cried aloud, — "Hail to king Antigonus! 
We have totally beaten Ptolemy at sea; we are masters of 
Cyprus, and have made sixteen thousand eight hundred pri- 
soners." Antigonus answered, — " Hail to you too, my good 
friend! but I will punish you for torturing us so long; you 
shall wait long for your reward." 

The people now, for the first time, proclaimed Antigonus 
and Demetrius kings. Antigonus had the diadem immediately 
put on by his friends. He sent one to Demetrius; and in the 
letter that accompanied it, addressed him under the style of 
king. The Egyptians, when they were apprised of this cir- 
cumstance, gave Ptolemy likewise the title of king, that they 
might not appear to be dispirited with their late defeat. The 
other successors of Alexander caught eagerly at the opportu- 
nity to aggrandise themselves. Lysimachus took the diadem; 
and Seleucus did the same in his transactions with the Greeks. 
The latter had worn it some time, when he gave audience to 
the barbarians. Cassander alone, while others wrote to him, 
and saluted him as king, prefixed his name to his letters in the 
same manner as formerly. 

This title proved not a mere addition to their name and 
figure. It gave them higher notions. It introduced a pom- 
pousness into their manners, and self-importance into their 
discourse. Just as tragedians, when they take the habit of 
kings, change their gait, their voice, their whole deportment, 
and manner of address. After this they became more severe 
in their judicial capacity; for they laid aside that dissimulation 
with which they had concealed their power, and which had 
made them much milder and more favourable to their subjects. 

13* 

j 50 DEMETRIUS. 

So much could one word of a flatterer do! Such a change did 
it effect in the whole face of the worldly 

Antigonus, elated with his son's achievements at Cyprus, 
immediately marched against Ptolemy, commanding his land- 
forces in person, while Demetrius, with a powerful fleet, at- 
tended him along the coast. One of Antigonus' friends, named 
Medius, had the event of this expedition communicated to him 
in a dream. He thought that Antigonus and his whole army 
were running a race. At first he seemed to run with great 
swiftness and force; but afterwards his strength gradually 
abated; and, on turning, he became very weak, and drew his 
breath with such pain that he could scarce recover himself. 
Accordingly, Antigonus met with many difficulties at land, 
and Demetrius encountered such a storm at sea, that he was in 
danger of being driven upon an impracticable shore. In this 
storm he lost many of his ships, and returned without effect- 
ing any thing. 

Antigonus was now little short of eighty; and his great size 
and weight disqualified him for war still more than his age. 
He, therefore, left the military department to his son, who, by 
his good fortune, as well as ability, managed it in the happiest 
manner. Nor was Antigonus hurt by his son's debaucheries, 
his expensive appearance, or his long carousals : for these were 
the things in which Demetrius employed himself in time of 
peace with the utmost licentiousness and most unbounded 
avidity. But in war, no man, however naturally temperate, 
exceeded him in sobriety. 

When the power that Lamia had over him was evident to 
all the world, Demetrius came, after some expedition or other, 
to salute his father, and kissed him so cordially, that he laugh- 
ed, and said, — " Surely my son, you think you are kissing La- 
mia." Once when he had been spending many days with bis 
friends over the bottle, he excused himself at his return to 
court, by saying, — " That he had been hindered by a de- 
fluxion." " So I heard," said Antigonus, " but whether was 
the defluxion from Thasos or from Chios?" Another time, be 
ing informed that he was indisposed, he went to see him; and 
when he came to the door, he met one of his favourites going 
out. He went in, however, and sitting down by him, took 
hold of his hand. Demetrius said, his fever had now left him. 
" I know it," said Antigonus, " for I met it this moment at the 
door." With such mildness he treated his son's faults, out of 
regard to his excellent performances. It is the custom of the 
Scythians in the midst of their carousals to strike the strings 
of their bows, to recal, as it were, their courage, which is 
melting away in pleasure. But Demetrius one while gave 

DEMETRIUS. ^ 5 j 

himself up entirely to pleasure, and another while to business; 
he did not intermix them. His military talents, therefore, 
did not suffer by his attentions of a gayer kind. 

Nay, he seemed to show greater abilities in his preparations 
for war, than in the use of them. He was not content unless 
he had stores that were more than sufficient. There was some- 
thing peculiarly great in the construction of his ships and en- 
gines, and he took an unwearied pleasure in the inventing of 
new ones : for he was ingenious in the speculative part of 
mechanics; and he did not, like other princes, apply his taste 
and knowledge of those arts to the purposes of diversion, 01 
to pursuits of no utility, such as playing on the flute, painting, 
or turning. 

iEropus king of Macedon, spent his hours of leisure in 
making little tables and lamps. Attalus,* surnamed Philo- 
metor,T amused himself with planting poisonous herbs, not 
only henbane and hellebore, but hemlock, aconite, and doryc- 
nium.J These he cultivated in the royal gardens, and, beside 
gathering them at their proper seasons, made it his business to 
know the qualities of their juices and fruit. And the kings 
of Parthia took a pride in forging and sharpening heads for 
arrows. But the mechanics of Demetrius were of a princely 
kind; there was always something great in the fabric. Toge- 
ther with a spirit of curiosity and love of the arts, there ap- 
peared in all his works a grandeur of design, and dignity of 
invention, so that they were not only worthy of the genius 
and wealth, but of the hand of a king. His friends were as- 
tonished at their greatness, and his very enemies were pleased 
with their beauty. Nor is this description of him at all ex- 
aggerated. His enemies used to sta-nd upon the shore looking 
with admiration upon his galleys of fifteen or sixteen banks 
of oars, as they sailed along; and his engines called helepoles, 
were a pleasing spectacle to the very towns which he besieged. 
This is evident from facts. Lysimachus, who, of all the prin- 
ces of his time, was the bitterest enemy to Demetrius, when 
he came to compel him to raise the siege of Soli in Cilicia, 
desired he would show him his engines of war, and his man- 
ner of navigating the galleys; and he was so struck with the 
sight, that he immediately retired. And the Rhodians, after 
they had stood a long siege, and at last compromised the affair, 

* Plutarch does not do that honour to Attalus which he deserves, when he 
mentions his employments as unworthy of a prince. He made many experi- 
ments in natural philosophy, and wrote a treatise on agriculture. Other 
kings, particularly Hiero and Archelaus, did the same. 

t This is a mistake in Plutarch. Philometor was another prince, who made 
agriculture his amusement. 

t Dori/cnium was a common poisonous plant, which was so called from tha 
points of spears being tinged with its juices. 

X52 DEMETRIUS. 

requested him to leave some of his engines, as monuments 
both of his power, and of their valour. 

His war with the Rhodians was occasioned by their alliance 
with Ptolemy ; and in the course of it he brought the largest 
of his helepoles up to their walls. Its base was square ; each 
of its sides at the bottom forty-eight cubits wide; and it was 
sixty-six cubits high. The sides of the several divisions gra- 
dually lessened, so that the top was much narrower than the 
bottom. The inside was divided into several stories or rooms, 
one above another. The front, which was turned towards the 
enemy, had a window in each story, through which missive 
weapons of various kinds were thrown ; for it was filled with 
men who practised every method of fighting. It neither 
shook nor veered the least in its motion, but rolled on in a 
steady upright position; and, as it moved with a horrible 
noise, it at once pleased and terrified the spectators.* 

He had two coats of mail brought from Cyprust for his use 
in this war, each of which weighed forty minsc. Zoilus, the 
maker, to show the excellence of their temper, ordered a dart 
to be shot at one of them from an engine at the distance of 
twenty-six paces; and it stood so firm, that there was no more 
mark upon it than what might be made with such a style as is 
used in writing. This he took for himself, and gave the other 
to Alcimus the Epirot, a man of the greatest bravery and 
strength of any in his army. The Epirot's whole suit of ar- 
mour weighed two talents, whereas that of others weighed no 
more than one. He fell, in the siege of Rhodes, in an action 
near the theatre. 

As the Rhodians defended themselves with great spirit, 
Demetrius was not able to do any thing considerable. There 
was one thing in their conduct which he particularly resented ; 
and, for that reason, he persisted in the siege. They had 
taken the vessel in which were letters from his wife Phila, to- 
gether with some robes and pieces of tapestry, and they sent 
it, as it was, to Ptolemy; in which they were far from imitat- 
ing the politeness of the Athenians, who, when they were at 
war with Philip, happening to take his couriers, read all the 
other letters, but sent him that of Olympia with the seal 
entire. 

But Demetrius, though much incensed, did not retaliate 
upon the Rhodians, though he soon had an opportunity. Pro- 

* Diodorus Siculus says, this machine had nine stories ; and that it rolled 
on four large wheels, each of which was sixteen feet high. 

+ Pliny says that the Cyprian armour was impregnable. Cyprus was fa- 
mous for the metal of which armour was made even in the time of the Trojan 
war, and Agamemnon had a cuirass sent him from Cyniras king of Cyprus. — - 
Horn. II. xi. 

DEMETRIUS. ^53 

togenes of Caunus was at that time painting for them the his- 
tory of Ialysus,* and had almost finished it, when Demetrius 
seized it in one of the suburbs. The Rhodians sent a herald 
to entreat him to spare the work, and not suffer it to be de- 
stroyed. Upon which he said, — " He would rather burn the 
pictures of his father, than hurt so laborious a piece of art; 
for Protogenes is said to have been seven years in finishing 
it. Apelles tells us, that when he first saw it, he was so much 
astonished that he could not speak; and, at last, when he re- 
covered himself he said, — " A master-piece of labour ! a won- 
derful performance! But it wants those graces which raise the 
fame of my paintings to the skies." This piece was after- 
wards carried to Rome, and, being added to the number of 
those collected there, was destroyed by fire. The Rhodians 
now began to grow weary of the war. Demetrius, too, want- 
ed only a pretence to put an end to it, and he found one. The 
Athenians came and reconciled them on this condition, that 
the Rhodians should assist Antigonus and Demetrius as allies, 
in all their wars, except those with Ptolemy. 

At the same time the Athenians called him to their succour 
against Cassander, who was besieging the city. In conse- 
quence of which, he sailed thither with a fleet of three hundred 
and thirty ships, and a numerous body of land forces. With 
these he not only drove Cassander out of Attica, but followed 
him to Thermopylae, and entirely defeated him there. Hera- 
clea then voluntarily submitted, and he received into his army 
six thousand Macedonians, who came over to him. In his 
return he restored liberty to the Greeks within the straits of 
Thermopylae, took the Boeotians into his alliance, and mode 
himself master of Cenchreae. He likewise redwced Phyle a id 
Panactus, the bulwarks of Attica, which had been garrisoned 
by Cassander, and put them in the hands of the Athenians 

* We have not met with the particular suhject of this famous painting. 
Mysus was one of the fabulous heroes, the son of Ochimus, and grandson of 
Apollo ; and there is a town in Rhodes called Ialysus, which probably had ,is 
name from him. It was in this picture tliat Protogenes, when he had long 
laboured in vain to paint the foam of a dog, happily hit it off, by throwing the 
brush, in anger, at the dog's mouth. jElian, as well as Plutarch, says, that 
he was seven years in finishing it. Pliny tells us, that he gave it four coats of 
colours, that when one was effaced by time, another might supply its place. 
He tells us, too, that while Protogenes was at work, he was visited by Deme- 
trius, and when the latter asked him how he could prosecute his work with 
so much calmness under the rage of war? he answered, — " That though De- 
metrius was at war with Rhodes, he did not suppose he was at war with the 
arts." He is said to have lived on lupines during the time he was employed 
on this painting, that his judgment might not be clouded by luxurious diet. 
The picture was brought to Rome by Cassius, and jplaced in the Temple of 
Peace, where it remained till the time of Commodus, when, together with Uift 
temple, it was consumed by fire. 

Vol. IV. U 

j 54 DEMETRIUS. 

again. The Athenians, though they had lavished honours 
upon him before in the most extravagant manner, yet con- 
trived on this occasion to appear new in their flattery. They 
gave orders that he should lodge in the back part of the Par- 
thenon; which, accordingly, he did, and Minerva was said to 
have received him as her guest; a guest not very fit to come 
under her roof, or suitable to her virgin purity. 

In one of their expeditions, his brother Philip took up his 
quarters in a house where there were three young women. His 
father, Antigonus, said nothing to Philip; but called the quar- 
ter-master, and said to him in his presence, — " Why do you 
not remove my son out of this lodging, where he is so much 
straitened for room?" And Demetrius, who ought to have re- 
verenced Minerva, if, on no other account, yet as his eldest 
sister, (for so he affected to call her,) behaved in such a man- 
ner to persons of both sexes, who were above the condition of 
slaves, and the citadel was so polluted with his debaucheries, 
that it appeared to be kept sacred in some degree, when he in- 
dulged himself only with such prostitutes as Chrysis, Lamia, 
Demo, and Anticyra. 

Some things we choose to pass over out of regard to the 
character of the city of Athens; but the virtue and chastity of 
Democles ought not to be left under the veil of silence. De- 
mocles was very young, and his beauty was no secret to De- 
metrius. Indeed, his surname unhappily declared it, for he 
was called Democles the Handsome. Demetrius, through his 
emissaries, left nothing unattempted to gain him by great of- 
fers, or to intimidate him by threats; but neither could prevail. 
He left the wrestling-ring and all public exercises, and made 
use only of a private bath. Demetrius watched his opportu- 
nity, and surprised him there alone. The boy seeing nobody 
near to assist him, and the impossibility of resisting with any 
effect, took off the cover of the cauldron, and jumped into the 
boiling water. It is true, he came to an unworthy end, but 
his sentiments were worthy of his country and of his personal 
merit. 

Very different were those of Cleaenetus the son of Cleome- 
don. That youth, having procured his father the remission of 
a fine of fifty talents, brought letters from Demetrius to the 
people, signifying his pleasure in that respect; by which he not 
only dishonoured himself, but brought great trouble upon the 
city. The people took off the fine, but at the same time they 
made a decree, that no citizen should, for the future, bring any 
letter from Demetrius. Yet when they found that Demetrius 
was disobliged at it, and expressed his resentment in strong 
terms, they not only repealed the act, but punished the per- 
sons who proposed ana supported it, some with death, and 

DEMETRIUS. jr« 

some with banishment. They likewise passed a new edict 
importing, — " That the people of Athens had resolved that 
whatsoever thing Demetrius might command, should be ac- 
counted holy in respect of the gods, and just in respect of 
men." Some person of better principle, on this occasion, hap- 
pening to say, that Stratocles was mad in proposing such de- 
crees, Demochares the Leuconian* answered, — " He would be 
mad if he were not mad." Stratocles found his advantage in 
his servility; and for this saying, Demochares was prosecuted 
and banished the city. To such meannesses were the Athe- 
nians brought, when the garrison seemed to be removed out of 
their city, and they pretended to be a free people ! 

Demetrius afterwards passed into Peloponnesus, where he 
found no resistance: for all his enemies fled before him, or 
surrendered their cities. He, therefore, reduced with ease that 
part of the country called Acte, and all Arcadia, except Man- 
tinea. Argos, Sicyon, and Corinth, he set free from their 
garrisons by giving the commanding officers a hundred talents 
to evacuate them. About that time the feasts of Juno came 
bt\ at Argos, and Demetrius presided in the games and other 
exhibitions. During these solemnities he married Deidamia, 
the daughter of iEacides king of the Molossians, and sister of 
Pyrrhus. He told the Sicyonians that they lived out of their 
city, and showing them a more advantageous situation, per- 
suaded them to build one where the town now stands. Along 
with the situation he likewise changed the name, calling the 
town Demetrius, instead of Sicyon. 

The states being assembled at the Isthmus, and a prodigious 
number of people attending, he was proclaimed general of all 
Greece, as Philip and Alexander had been before; and in the 
elation of power and success, he thought himself a much 
greater man. Alexander robbed no other prince of his title, 
nor did he ever declare himself king of kings, though he raised 
many both to the style and authority of kings. But Deme- 
trius thought no man worthy of that title except his father and 
himself. He even ridiculed those who made use of it, and it 
was with pleasure he heard the sycophants at his table drink- 
ng King Demetrius, Seleucus commander of the elephants, 
Ptolemy admiral, Lysimachus treasurer, and Agathocles the 
Sicilian governor of the islands. The rest of them only laugh- 
ed at such extravagant instances of vanity. Lysimachus alone 
,vas angry, because Demetrius seemed to think him no better 
than an eunuch: for the princes of the east had generally 
eunuchs for their treasurers. Lysimachus, indeed, was the 

* The nephew of Demosthenes. The Greek text that calls him Acuuvev*, 
is erroneous. It should be Aevxovou. 

j 56 DEMETRIUS. 

most violent enemy that he had; and now taking an opportu- 
nity to disparage him on account of his passion for Lamia, he 
said, — " This was the first time he had seen a whore act in a 
tragedy." * Demetrius said in answer, — " My whore is an 
honester woman than his Penelope." 

When he was preparing to return to Athens, he wrote to 
the republic, that, on his arrival, he intended to be initiated, 
and to be immediately admitted, not only to the less myste- 
ries, but even to those called intuitive. This was unlawful 
and unprecedented; for the less mysteries were celebrated in 
February ,t and the greater in September ;J and none were 
admitted to the intuitive till a year at least after they had at- 
tended the greater mysteries. § When the letters were read, 
Pythodorus the torch-bearer was the only person who ventur- 
ed to oppose the demand ; and his opposition was entirely in- 
effectual. Stratocles procured a decree that the month of 
Munychion should be called and reputed the month of Jin- 
thesterion, to give Demetrius an opportunity for his first ini- 
tiation, which was to be performed in the ward of Agra; 
after which, Munychion was changed again into Boedromion. 
By these means, Demetrius was admitted to the greater mys- 
teries, and to immediate inspection. Hence those strokes of 
satire upon Stratocles, from the poetPhilippides : — "The man 
who can contract the whole year into one month." And, 
with respect to Demetrius' being lodged in the Parthenon: 
— -" The man who turns the temples into inns, and brings pros- 
titutes into the company of the virgin goddess." 

But amongst the many abuses and enormities committed in 
their city, no one seems to have given the Athenians greater 
uneasiness than this; — he ordered them to raise two hundred 
and fifty talents in a very short time, and the sum was exact- 
ed with the greatest rigour. When the money was brought in, 
and he saw it all together, he ordered it to be given to Lamia 
and his other mistresses, to buy soap. Thus, the disgrace 
hurt them more than the loss, and the application more than 
the impost. Some, however, say, that it was not to the Athe- 
nians he behaved in this manner, but to the people of Thes- 
saly. Besides this disagreeable tax, Lamia extorted money 
from many persons on her own authority, to enable her to 

* The modern stage needs not be put to the blush by this assertion in favour 
of the ancient : the reason of it was, that there were no women actors. Men, 
in female dresses, performed their parts. 

t Anthesterion. \ Boedromion. 

& Plutarch, in this place, seems to make a difference between the intuitive 
and the greater mysteries, though they are commonly understood to be the 
same. Casaubon and Meursius thinks the text corrupt ; but the manner in 
which they would restore it, does not render it less perplexed. 

DEMETRIUS. I57 

provide an entertainment for the king. And the expense of 
that supper was so remarkable, that Lynceus the Samian took 
pains to give a description of it. For the same reason, a comic 
poet of those times, with equal wit and truth, called Lamia an 
Helepolis; and Demochares the Solian, called Demetrius Mu- 
thos, that is, Fable, because he too had his Lamia.* 

The great interest that Lamia had with Demetrius, in con- 
sequence of his passion for her, excited a spirit of envy and 
aversion to her, not only in the breasts of his wives, but of his 
friends. Demetrius having sent ambassadors to Lysimachus, 
on some occasion or other, that prince amused himself one 
day with showing them the deep wounds he had received 
from a lion's claws in his arms and thighs, and gave them an 
account of his being shut up with that wild beast by Alexan- 
der the Great, and of the battle he had with it.t Upon which 
they laughed, and said: — "The king, our master, too, bears 
on his neck the marks of a dreadful wild beast, called a La- 
mia." Indeed, it was strange that he should at first have so 
great an objection against the disparity of years between him 
and Phila, and afterwards fall into such a lasting captivity to 
Lamia, though she had passed her prime at their first ac- 
quaintance. One evening, when Lamia had been playing on 
the flute at supper, Demetrius asked Demo, surnamed Mania,;}: 
what she thought of her? " I think her an old woman, Sir," 
said Demo. Another time, when there was an extraordinary 
dessert on the table, he said to her: — "You see what fine 
things Lamia sends me." "My mother will send you finer," 
answered Demo, " if you will but lie with her." 

We shall mention only one story more of Lamia, which re- 
lates to her censure of the celebrated judgment of Bocchoris. 
In Egypt there was a young man extremely desirous of the 
favours of a courtesan named Thonis, but she set too high a 
price upon them. Afterwards he fancied that he enjoyed her 
in a dream, and his desire was satisfied. Thonis, upon this, 
commenced an action against him for the money; and Boc- 
choris having heard both parties, ordered the man to tell the 
gold that she demanded into a basin, and shake it about before 
her, that she might enjoy the sight of it: — " For fancy," said 
he, " is no more than the shadow of truth." Lamia did not 

* Fabulous history mentions a queen of Libya, who, out of rage for the loss 
of her own children, ordered those of other women to be brought to her, and 
devoured them. From whence she was called Lamia, from the Phoenician 
word Labama, to devour. Upon this account, Diodorus tells us, that Lamia 
became a bugbear to children. And this satisfies M. Dacier with regard to 
the explanation of this passage in Plutarch. 

t Justin and Pausanias mention this; but Q. Curtius doubts the truth of 
it; and he probably is in the right. 

t In English, Miss Madcap. 

Vol. IV. 14 

158 DEMETRIUS. 

think this a just sentence; "because the woman's desire ot 
the gold was not removed by the appearance of it; whereas 
the dream cured the passion of her lover." 

The change in the fortunes and actions of the subject of our 
narrative now turns the comic scene into tragedy: all the 
other kings having united their forces against Antigonus, De- 
metrius left Greece in order to join him, and was greatly 
animated to find his father preparing for war with a spirit 
above his years. Had Antigonus abated a little of his pre- 
tensions, and restrained his ambition to govern the world, he 
might have kept the pre-eminence among the successors of 
Alexander, not only for himself, but for his son after him. 
But being naturally arrogant, imperious, and no less insolent 
in his expressions than in his actions, he exasperated many 
young and powerful princes against him. He boasted, that 
" he could break the present league, and disperse the united 
armies, with as much ease as a boy does a flock of birds, by 
throwing a stone, or making a slight noise." 

He had an army of more than seventy thousand foot, ten 
thousand horse, and seventy-five elephants. The enemy's in- 
fantry consisted of sixty-four thousand men, their cavalry of 
ten thousand five hundred; they had four hundred elephants, 
and a hundred and twenty armed chariots. When the two 
armies were in sight, there was a visible change in the mind 
of Antigonus, but rather with respect to his hopes than his 
resolution. In other engagements his spirits used to be high, 
his port lofty, his voice loud, and his expressions vaunting; 
insomuch that he would sometimes, in the heat of the action, 
let fall some jocular expression, to show his unconcern, and 
his contempt of his adversary. But, at this time, he was ob- 
served for the most part to be thoughtful and silent; and one 
day he presented his son to the army, and recommended him 
as his successor. What appeared still more extraordinary was, 
that he took him aside into his tent, and discoursed with him 
there: for he never used to communicate his intentions to him 
in private, or to consult him in the least, but to rely entirely 
on his own judgment, and to give orders for the execution of 
what he had resolved on by himself. It is reported that De- 
metrius, when very young, once asked him when they should 
decamp, and that he answered angrily, — " Are you afraid that 
you only shall not hear the trumpet?" 

On this occasion, it is true, their spirits were depressed oy 
ill omens. Demetrius dreamed that Alexander came to him 
in a magnificent suit of armour, and asked him what was to 
be the word in the ensuing battle? Demetrius answered, Ju- 
piter and Victory ; upon which Alexander said, — " I go then 
to your adversaries, for they are ready to receive me." When 

DEMETRIUS. j 5 9 

the army was put in order of battle, Antigonus stumbled as 
he went out of his tent, and, falling on his face, received a con- 
siderable hurt. After he had recovered himself, he stretched 
out his hands towards heaven, and prayed either for victory, 
or that he might die before he was sensible that the day was 
lost. 

When the battle was begun, Demetrius, at the head of his 
best cavalry, fell upon Antiochus the son of Seleucus, and 
fought with so much bravery that he put the enemy to flight; 
but by a vain and unseasonable ambition to go upon the pur- 
suit, he lost the victory: for he went so far that he could not 
get back to join his infantry, the enemy's elephants having 
taken up the intermediate space. Seleucus now seeing his 
adversary's foot deprived of their horse, did not attack them, 
but rode about them, as if he was going every moment to 
charge; intending by this manoeuvre both to terrify them, and 
to give them an opportunity to change sides. The event an- 
swered his expectation. Great part separated from the main 
body, and voluntarily came over to him; the rest were put to 
the rout. When great numbers were bearing down upon An- 
tigonus, one of those that were about him said, — " They are 
coming against you, Sir." He answered, — " What other ob- 
ject can they have? But Demetrius will come to my assist- 
ance." In this hope he continued to the last, still looking 
about for his son, till he fell under a shower of darts. His 
servants and his very friends forsook him; only Theorax of 
Larissa remained by the dead body. 

The battle being thus decided, the kings who were victori- 
ous, dismembered the kingdom of Antigonus and Demetrius, 
like some great body, and each took a limb; thus adding to 
their own dominions the provinces which those two princes 
were possessed of before. Demetrius fled with five thousand 
foot and four thousand horse: and as he reached Ephesus in 
a short time, and was in want of money, it was expected that 
he would not spare the temple. However, he not only spared 
it himself,* but fearing that his soldiers might be tempted to 
violate it, he immediately left the place and embarked for 
Greece. His principal dependence was upon the Athenians; 
for with them he had left his ships, his money, and his wife 
Deidamia; and in this distress he thought he could have no 
safer asylum than their affection. He therefore, pursued his 
voyage with all possible expedition ; but ambassadors from 
Athens met him near the Cyclades, and entreated him not to 
think of going thither, because the people had declared by an 
edict that they would receive no king into their city. As for 

* A striking proof that adversity is the parent of virtue ! 

160 DEMETRIUS. 

Deidamia, they had conducted her to Megara with a propel 
retinue, and all the respect due to her rank. This so enraged 
Demetrius, that he was no longer master of himself; though 
he had hitherto borne his misfortune with sufficient calmness, 
and discovered no mean or ungenerous sentiment in the great 
change of his affairs: but to be deceived, beyond all his ex- 
pectation, by the Athenians ; to find by facts that their affec- 
tion, so great in appearance, was only false and counterfeit, 
was a thing that cut him to the heart. Indeed, excessive ho- 
nours are a very indifferent proof of the regard of the peo- 
ple for kings and princes: for all the value of those honours 
rests in their being freely given; and there can be no cer- 
tainty of that, because the givers may be under the influence 
of fear: and fear and love often produce the same public de- 
clarations. For the same reason, wise princes will not look 
upon statues, pictures, or divine honours, but rather consider 
their own actions and behaviour, and, in consequence thereof, 
either believe those honours real, or disregard them as the 
dictates of necessity. Nothing more frequently happens, than 
that the people hate their sovereign the most, at the time that 
he is receiving the most immoderate honours, the tribute ot 
unwilling minds. 

Demetrius, though he severely felt this ill treatment, was 
not in a condition to revenge it: he, therefore, by his envoys, 
expostulated with the Athenians in moderate terms, and only 
desired them to send him his galleys, among which there was 
one of thirteen banks of oars. As soon as he had received 
them he steered for the Isthmus, but found his affairs there in 
a very bad situation. The cities expelled his garrisons, and 
were all revolting to his enemies. Leaving Pyrrhus in Greece, 
he then sailed to the Chersonesus, and by the ravages he com- 
mitted in the country, distressed Lysimachus, as well as en- 
riched and secured the fidelity of his own forces, which now 
began to gather strength, and improve into a respectable army. 
The other kings paid no regard to Lysimachus, who, at the 
same time that he was much more formidable in his power 
than Demetrius, was not in the least more moderate in his 
conduct. 

Soon after this, Seleucus sent proposals of marriage to Stra- 
tonice, the daughter of Demetrius by Phila. He had, indeed, 
already a son named Antiochus, by Apama, a Persian lady; 
but he thought that his dominions were sufficient for more 
heirs, and that he stood in need of this new alliance, because 
he saw Lysimachus marrying one of Ptolemy's daughters him- 
self, and taking the other for his son Agathocles. A connec- 
tion with Seleucus was a happy and unexpected turn of for- 
tune for Demetrius. 

DEMETRIUS. 1 g j 

He took his daughter, and sailed with his whole fleet to 
Syria. In the course of the voyage he was several times under 
a necessity of making land, and he touched in particular upon 
the coast of Cilicia, which had been given to Plistarchus the 
brother of Cassander, as his share, after the defeat of Anti- 
gonus. Plistarchus thinking himself injured by the descent 
which Demetrius made upon his country, went immediately to 
Cassander, to complain of Seleucus for having reconciled him- 
self to the common enemy, without the concurrence of the 
other kings. Demetrius being informed of his departure, left 
the sea, and marched up to Quinda; where, finding twelve 
hundred talents, the remains of his father's treasures, he car- 
ried them off, embarked again without interruption, and set 
sail with the utmost expedition, his wife Phila having joined 
him by the way. 

Seleucus met him at Orossus. Their interview was con- 
ducted in a sincere and princely manner, without any marks of 
design or suspicion. Seleucus invited Demetrius first to his 
pavilion; and then Demetrius entertained him in his galley of 
thirteen banks of oars. They conversed at their ease, and 
passed the time together without guards or arms: till Seleucus 
took Stratonice, and carried her with great pomp to Antioch. 

Demetrius seized the province of Cilicia, and sent Phila to 
her brother Cassander, to answer the accusations brought 
against him by Plistarchus. Mean time Deidamia came to 
him from Greece, but she had not spent any long time with 
him before she sickened and died ; and Demetrius having ac- 
commodated matters with Ptolemy through Seleucus, it was 
agreed that he should marry Ptolemais, the daughter of that 
prince. 

Hitherto Seleucus had behaved with honour and propriety; 
hut afterwards he demanded that Demetrius should surrender 
Cilicia to him for a sum of money, and on his refusal to do 
that, angrily insisted on having Tyre and Sidon. This beha- 
viour appeared unjustifiable and cruel. When he already com- 
manded Asia from the Indies to the Syrian sea, how sordid 
was it to quarrel for two cities with a prince who was his 
father-in-law, and who laboured under so painful a reverse of 
fortune. A strong proof how true the maxim of Plato is, — 
" That the man who would be truly happy, should not study 
to enlarge his estate, but to contract his desires." For he 
who does not restrain his avarice, must for ever be poor. 

However, Demetrius, far from being intimidated, said, — 
" Though I had lost a thousand battles as great as that of 
Ipsus, nothing should bring me to buy the alliance of Seleu- 
cus;" and, upon this principle, he garrisoned these cities in 
the strongest manner. About this time, having intelligence 

Vol. IV. X 14* 

162 

DEMETRIUS. 

that Athens was divided into factions, and that Lachares, 
taking advantage of these, had seized the government, he ex- 
pected to take the city with ease, if he appeared suddenly be- 
fore it. Accordingly, he set out with a considerable fleet, and 
crossed the sea without clanger; but on the coast of Attica, he 
met with a storm, in which he lost many ships and great num- 
bers of his men. He escaped, however, himself, and began 
hostilities against Athens, though with no great vigour. As 
his operations answered no end, he sent his lieutenants to col- 
lect another fleet, and in the mean time entered Peloponnesus, 
and laid siege to Messene. In one of the assaults he was in 
great danger; for a dart which came from an engine, pierced 
through his jaw, and entered his mouth. But he recovered, 
and reduced some cities that had revolted. After this, he in- 
vaded Attica again, took Eleusis and Rhamnus, and ravaged 
the country. Happening to take a ship loaded with wheat, 
which was bound for Athens, he hanged both the merchant 
and the pilot. This alarmed other merchants so much that they 
forebore attempting any thing of that kind, so that a famine 
ensued; and, together with the want of bread-corn, the people 
were in want of every thing else. A bushel* of salt was sold 
for forty drachmas, and a peckt of wheat for three hundred. 
A fleet of a hundred and fifty ships, which Ptolemy sent to 
their relief, appeared before JEgina; but the encouragement it 
afforded them was of short continuance. A great reinforce- 
ment of his ships came to Demetrius from Peloponnesus and 
Cyprus, so that he had not in all fewer than three hundred. 
Ptolemy's fleet, therefore, weighed anchor, and steered off. 
The tyrant Lachares at the same time made his escape pri- 
vately, and abandoned the city. 

The Athenians, though they had made a decree, that no man, 
under pain of death, should mention peace or reconciliation 
with Demetrius, now opened the gates nearest him, and sent 
ambassadors to his camp. Not that they expected any favour 
from him, but they were forced to take that step by the ex- 
tremity of famine. In the course of it many dreadful things 
happened, and this is related among the rest: — A father and 
his son were sitting in the same room, in the last despair 
when a dead mouse happening to fall from the roof of the 
house, they both started up and fought for it. Epicurus the 
philosopher is said at that time to have supported his friends 
and disciples with beans, which he shared with them, and 
counted out to them daily. 

In such a miserable condition was the city, when Demetrius 

* Med i rim us, 

+ Modius. These measures were something more, but we give only the 
round quantity.— See the table. 

DEMETRIUS. j qcj 

entered it. He ordered all the Athenians to assemble in the 
theatre, which he surrounded with his troops; and having 
planted his guards on each side the stage, he came down through 
the passage by which the tragedians enter. The fears of the 
people on his appearance increased; but they were entirely 
dissipated when he began to speak; for neither the accent of 
his voice was loud, nor his expressions severe. He complained 
of them in soft and easy terms, and taking them again into 
favour, made them a present of a hundred thousand measures 
of wheat,* and re-established such an administration as was 
most agreeable to them. 

The orator Dromoclides. observed the variety of acclama- 
tions among the people, and that, in the joy of their hearts, 
they endeavoured to outdo the encomiums of those that spoke 
from the rostrum. He, therefore, proposed a decree that the 
Piraeus and the fort of Munychia should be delivered up to 
king Demetrius. After this bill was passed, Demetrius, on 
his own authority, put a garrison in the Museum ; lest, if there 
should be another defection amongst the people, it might keep 
them from other enterprises. 

The Athenians thus reduced, Demetrius immediately formed 
a design upon Lacedosmon. King Archidamus met him at 
Mantinea, where Demetrius defeated him in a pitched battle; 
and, after he had put him to flight, he entered Laconia. There 
was another action almost in sight of Sparta, in which he killed 
two hundred of the enemy, and made five hundred prisoners: 
so that he seemed almost master of a town which, hitherto, 
had never been taken. But surely fortune never displayed 
such sudden and extraordinary vicissitudes in the life of any 
other prince; in no other scene of things did she so often 
change from low to high, from a glorious to an abject condi- 
tion, or again repair the ruins she had made. Hence he is 
said, in his greatest adversity, to have addressed her in the 
words of iEschylus : — 

Thou gav'st me life and honour, and thy hand 
Now strikes me to the heart. 

When his affairs seemed to be in so promising a train for 
Dower and empire, news was brought that Lysimachus, in the 
first place, had taken the cities he had in Asia; that Ptolemy 
had dispossessed him of all Cyprus, except the city of Sala- 
mis, in which he had left his children and his mother; and 
that this town was now actually besieged. Fortune, however, 
like the woman in Archilochus, 

Whose right hand offer'd water, while the left 
Bore hostile fire, 

* Medimni. 

Ig4 DEMETRIUS. 

though she drew him from Lacedaemon by these alarming 
tidings, yet soon raised him a new scene of light and hope. 
She availed herself of these circumstances: — 

After the death of Cassander, his eldest son Philip had but 
a short reign over the Macedonians, for he died soon after his 
father. The two remaining brothers were perpetually at va- 
riance. One of them, named Antipater, having killed his mo- 
ther Thessalonica, Alexander, the other brother, called in the 
Greek princes to his assistance, Pyrrhus from Epirus, and 
Demetrius from Peloponnesus. Pyrrhus arrived first, and 
seized a considerable part of Macedonia, which he kept for 
his reward, and by that means, became a formidable neighbour 
to Alexander. Demetrius no sooner received the letters, than 
he marched his forces thither likewise, and the young prince 
was still more afraid of him, on account of his great name and 
dignity. He met him, however, at Dium, and received him 
in the most respectful manner, but told him at the same time 
that his affairs did not now require his presence. Hence mu- 
tual jealousies arose, and Demetrius, as he was going to sup 
with Alexander, upon his invitation, was informed that there 
was a design against his life, which was to be put in execution 
in the midst of the entertainment. Demetrius was not in the 
least disconcerted; he only slackened his pace, and gave or- 
ders to his generals to keep the troops under arms: after which 
he took his guards and the officers of his household, who were 
much more numerous than those of Alexander, and command- 
ed them to enter the banqueting-room with him, and to remain 
there till he rose from the table. Alexander's people, intimi- 
dated by his train, durst not attack Demetrius: and he, for his 
part, pretending that he was not disposed to drink that even- 
ing, soon withdrew. Next day, he prepared to decamp; and 
alleging that he was called off by some new emergency, de- 
sired Alexander to excuse him if he left him soon this time; 
and assured him, that at some other opportunity, he would 
make a longer stay. Alexander rejoiced that he was going 
away voluntarily, and without any hostile intentions, and ac- 
companied him as far as Thessaly. When they came to La- 
rissa, they renewed their invitations, but both with malignity 
in their hearts. In consequence of these polite manoeuvres, 
Alexander fell into the snare of Demetrius. He would not 
go with a guard, lest he should teach the other to do the same. 
He, therefore, suffered that which he was preparing for his 
enemy, and which he only deferred for the surer and more 
convenient execution. He went to sup with Demetrius; and 
as his host rose up in the midst of the feast, Alexander was 
terrified and rose up with him. Demetrius, when he was at 
the door, said no more to his guards than this: — "Kill tli*» 

DEMETRIUS. jg£j 

man that follows me;" and then went out. Upon which they 
cut Alexander in pieces, and his friends who attempted to as- 
sist him. One of these is reported to have said, as he was 
dying, — "Demetrius is but one day beforehand with us." 

The night was, as might be expected, full of terror and con- 
fusion. In the morning the Macedonians were greatly dis- 
turbed with the apprehension that Demetrius would fall upon 
them with all his forces; but when, instead of an appearance 
of hostilities, he sent a message desiring to speak with them, 
and vindicate what was done, they recovered their spirits, and 
resolved to receive him with civility. When he came he found 
it unnecessary to make long speeches. They hated Antipater 
for the murder of his mother, and, as they had no better prince 
at hand, they declared Demetrius king, and conducted him 
into Macedonia. The Macedonians who were at home, proved 
not averse to the change: for they always remembered with 
horror Cassander's base behaviour to Alexander the Great; 
and if they had any regard left for the moderation of old An- 
tipater, it turned all in favour of Demetrius, who had married 
his daughter Phila, and had a son by her to succeed him in the 
throne; a youth who was already grown up, and at this very 
time bore arms under his father. 

Immediately after this glorious turn of fortune, Demetrius 
received news that Ptolemy had set his wife and children at 
liberty, and dismissed them with presents and other tokens of 
honour. He was informed, too, that his daughter, who had 
been married to Seleucus, was now wife to Antiochus, the son 
of that prince, and declared queen of the barbarous nations in 
Upper Asia. Antiochus was violently enamoured of the 
young Stratonice, though she had a son by his father. His 
condition was extremely unhappy. He made the greatest ef- 
forts to conquer his passion, but they were of no avail. At 
last, considering that his desires were of the most extravagant 
kind, that there was no prospect of satisfaction for them, and 
that the succours of reason entirely failed, he resolved in his 
despair to rid himself of life, and bring it gradually to a period, 
by neglecting all care of his person, and abstaining from food. 
For this purpose he made sickness his pretence. His physi- 
cian, Erasistratus, easily discovered that his distemper was 
love, but it was difficult to conjecture who was the object. In 
order to find it out, he spent whole days in his chamber; and 
whenever any beautiful person of either sex entered it, he ob- 
served with great attention, not only his looks, but every part 
and motion of the body which corresponds the most with the 
passions of the soul. When others entered he was entirely 
unaffected, but when Stratonice came in, as she often did, 
either alone or with Seleucus, he showed all the symptoms 

I fig DEMETRIUS. 

described by Sappbo, tbe faltering voice, the burning blush, 
the languid eye,* the sudden sweat, the tumultuous pulse, and 
at length, the passion overcoming his spirits, a deliquium, and 
mortal paleness. 

Erasistratus concluded from these tokens that the prince 
was in love with Stratonioe, and perceived that he intended to 
carry the secret with him to the grave. He saw the difficulty 
of breaking the matter to Seleucus; yet depending upon the 
affection which the king had for his son, he ventured one day 
to tell him, — " That the young man's disorder was love, but 
love for which there was no remedy." The king, quite asto- 
nished, said, " How' love for which there is no remedy !" " It 
is certainly so," answered Erasistratus, " for he is in love with 
my wife." "What! Erasistratus!" said the king, "would 
you, who are my friend, refuse to give up your wife to my 
son, when you see us in clanger of losing our only hope?" 
" Nay, would you do such a thing," answered the physician, 
"though you are his father, if he were in love with Strato- 
nice?" "Oh! my friend," replied Seleucus, "how happy 
should I be, if either God or man could remove his affections 
thither! I would give up my kingdom, so I could but keep 
Antiochus." He pronounced these words with so much emo- 
tion, and such a profusion of tears, that Erasistratus took him 
by the hand, and said, — " Then there is no need of Erasistra- 
tus. You, Sir, who are a father, a husband, and a king, will 
be the best physician too for your family." 

Upon this, Seleucus summoned the people to meet in full 
assembly, and told them, — " It was his will and pleasure that 
Antiochus should intermarry with Stratonice, and that they 
should be declared king and queen of the Upper Provinces. 
He believed," he said, " that Antiochus, who was such an 
obedient son, would not oppose his desire; and if the princess 
should oppose the marriage, as an unprecedented thing, he 
hoped his friends would persuade her to think, that what was 
agreeable to the king, and advantageous to the kingdom, was 
both just and honourable." Such is said to have been the 
cause of the marriage between Antiochus and Stratonice. 

Demetrius was now master of Macedonia and Thessaly; 
and as he had great part of Peloponnesus too, and the cities of 
Megara and Athens on the other side of the Isthmus, he want- 
ed to reduce the Boeotians, and threatened them with hostili 
ties. At first they proposed to come to an accommodation 
with him on reasonable conditions; but Cleonymus the Spar- 
tan having thrown himself, in the mean time, into Thebes with 

* OnI/euv WoJ£i?eu is a corruption. It ought to be read o^iuv iwo\£i-J/ji«, t'vo 
faint, languid, or clouded eye. 

DEMETRIUS. 2 67 

his army, the Boeotians were so much elated, that, at the insti- 
gation of Pisis the Thespian, who was a leading man among 
them, they broke off the treaty. Demetrius then drew up his 
machines to the walls, and laid siege to Thebes; upon which 
Cleonymus, apprehending the consequences, stole out, and the 
Thebans were so much intimidated, that they immediately 
surrendered. Demetrius placed garrisons in their cities, ex- 
acted large contributions, and left Hieronymus the historian, 
governor of Boeotia. He appeared, however, to make a mer 
ciful use of his victory, particularly in the case of Pisis: for 
though he took him prisoner, he did not offer him any injury: 
on the contrary, he treated him with great civility and polite- 
ness, and appointed him polemarch of Thespiae. 

Not long after this, Lysimachus being taken prisoner by 
Dromichaetes, Demetrius marched towards Thrace with all 
possible expedition, hoping to find it in a defenceless state. 
But while he was gone, the Boeotians revolted again, and he 
had the mortification to hear on the road that Lysimachus was 
set at liberty. He, therefore, immediately turned back in 
great anger; and, finding on his return, that the Boeotians were 
already driven out of the field by his son Antigonus, he laid 
siege again to Thebes. However, as Pyrrhus had overrun all 
Thessaly, and was advanced as far as Thermopylae, Demetrius 
left the conduct of the siege to his son Antigonus, and marched 
against that warrior. 

Pyrrhus immediately retiring, Demetrius placed a guard of 
ten thousand foot and a thousand horse in Thessaly, and then 
returned to the siege. His first operation was to bring up his 
machine, called helepoles ; but he proceeded in it with great 
labour and by slow degrees, by reason of its size and weight: 
he could scarce move it two furlongs in two months.* As 
the Boeotians made a vigorous resistance, and Demetrius often 
obliged his men to renew the assault rather out of a spirit of 
animosity, than the hope of an advantage, young Antigonus 
was greatly concerned at seeing such numbers fall, and said, — 
"• Why, sir, do we let these brave fellows lose their lives with- 
out any necessity?" Demetrius, offended at the liberty he 
took, made answer, — " Why do you trouble yourself about 
it? Have you any provisions to find for the dead?" To show, 
however, that he was not prodigal of the lives of his troops 
only, he took his share in the danger, and received a wound 
from a lance that pierced through his neck. This gave him 
excessive pain, yet he continued the siege till he once more 
made himself master of Thebes. He entered the city with 

* A wonderful kind of motion this for a machine that ran upon wheels! 
ahout twelve inches in an hour! 

J68 DEMETRIUS. 

such an air of resentment and severity, that the inhabitants 
expected to suffer the most dreadful punishments ; yet he con- 
tented himself with putting thirteen of them to death, and 
banishing a few more. All the rest he pardoned. Thus 
Thebes was taken twice within ten years after its being rebuilt. 

The Pythian games now approached, and Demetrius on this 
occasion took a very extraordinary step. As the iEtolians 
were in possession of the passes to Delphi, he ordered the 
games to be solemnized at Athens; alleging, that they could 
not pay their homage to Apollo in a more proper place than 
that where the people considered him as their patron and pro- 
genitor. 

From thence he returned to Macedonia: but as he was na- 
turally indisposed for a life of quiet and inaction, and observ- 
ed besides that the Macedonians were attentive and obedient 
to him in time of war, though turbulent and seditious in peace, 
he undertook an expedition against the iEtolians. After he 
had ravaged the country, he left Pantauchus there with a re- 
spectable army, and with the rest of his forces marched against 
Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus was coming to seek him; but as they hap- 
pened to take different roads, and missed each other, Deme- 
trius laid waste Epirus, and Pyrrhus falling upon Pantauchus, 
obliged him to stand on his defence. The two generals met 
in the action, and both gave and received wounds. Pyrrhus, 
however, defeated his adversary, killed great numbers of his 
men, and made five thousand prisoners. 

This battle was the principal cause of Demetrius' ruin: for 
Pyrrhus was not so much hated by the Macedonians for the 
mischief he had done them, as admired for his personal brave- 
ry; and the late battle in particular gained him great honour; 
insomuch, that many of the Macedonians said, — "That of all 
the kings, it was in Pyrrhus only that they saw a lively image 
of Alexander's valour; whereas the other princes, especially 
Demetrius, imitated him only in a theatrical manner, by af- 
fecting a lofty port and majestic air." 

Indeed, Demetrius did always appear like a theatrical king : 
for he not only affected a superfluity of ornament in wearing 
a double diadem, and a robe of purple interwoven with gold, 
but he had his shoes made of cloth of gold, with soles of fine 
purple. There was a robe a long time in weaving for him, of 
most sumptuous magnificence. T'he figure of the world and 
all the heavenly bodies were to be represented upon it ; but it 
was left unfinished, on account of his change of fortune. Nor 
did any of his successors ever presume to wear it, though 
Macedon had many pompous kings after him. 

This ostentation of dress offended a people who were unac- 
customed to such sights: but his luxurious and dissolute man- 

DEMETRIUS. ■, n q 

ner of life was a more obnoxious circumstance : and what dis- 
obliged them most of all, was his difficulty of access; for he 
either refused to see those who applied to him, or behaved to 
them in a harsh and haughty manner. Though he favoured 
the Athenians more than the rest of the Greeks, their ambas- 
sadors waited two years at his court for an answer. The La- 
cedaemonians happening to send only one ambassador to him, 
he considered it as an affront, and said in great anger, — 
" What! have the Lacedaemonians sent no more than one am- 
bassador?" "No," said the Spartan, acutely in his laconic way, 
" one ambassador to one king." 

One day, when he seemed to come out in a more obliging 
temper, and to be something less inaccessible, he was present- 
ed with several petitions, all which he received, and put them 
in the skirt of his robe. The people of course followed him 
with great joy; but no sooner was he come to the bridge over 
the Axius, than he opened his robe, and shook them all into 
the river. This stung the Macedonians to the heart; when, 
looking for the protection of a king, they found the insolence 
of a tyrant. And this treatment appeared the harder to such 
as had seen, or heard from those who had seen, how kind the 
behaviour of Philip was on such occasions. An old woman 
was one day very troublesome to him in the street, and begged 
with great importunity to be heard. He said, — " He was not 
at leisure." " Then," cried the old woman, " you should not 
be a king." The king was struck with these words; and hav- 
ing considered the thing a moment, he returned to his palace ; 
where, postponing all other affairs, he gave audience for seve- 
ral days to all who chose to apply to him, beginning with the 
old woman. Indeed, nothing becomes a king so much as the 
distribution of justice: for " Mars is a tyrant," as Timotheus 
expresses it; but Justice, according to Pindar, "is the right- 
ful sovereign of the world." The things which, Homer tells 
us. kings receive from Jove, are not machines for taking towns, 
or ships with brazen beaks, but law and justice :* these they 
are to guard and to cultivate. And it is not the most warlike, 
the most violent and sanguinary, but the justest of princes, 
whom he calls the disciple of Jupiter, t But Demetrius was 
pleased with an appellation quite opposite to that which is 
given the king of the gods : for Jupiter is called Policus and 
Poliuchus, the patron and guardian of cities; Demetrius is 
surnamed Poliorcetes, the destroyer of cities. Thus, in con- 
sequence of the union of power and folly, vice is substituted 
in the place of virtue, and the ideas of glory and injustice are 
united too. 

* II. 1. i. 231. t Od. xix. 178. 

Vol. IV. Y 15 

1 7Q DEMETRIUS. 

When Demetrius lay dangerously ill at Pella, he was very 
near losing Macedonia; for Pyrrhus, by a sudden inroad, 
penetrated as far as Edessa. But as soon as he recovered, he 
repulsed him with ease, and afterwards he came to terms with 
him : for he was not willing to be hindered, by skirmishing for 
posts with Pyrrhus, from the pursuit of greater and more ar- 
duous enterprises. His scheme was to recover all his father's 
dominions; and his preparations were suitable to the great- 
ness of the object: for he had raised an army of ninety-eight 
thousand foot, and near twelve thousand horse; and he was 
building five hundred galleys in the ports of Piraeus, Corinth, 
Chalcis, and Pella. He went himself to all these places, to 
give directions to the workmen, and assist in the construction. 
All the world was surprised, not only at the number, but at the 
greatness of his works: for no man, before his time, ever saw 
a galley of fifteen or sixteen banks of oars. Afterwards, in- 
deed, Ptolemy Philopater built one of forty banks; its length 
was two hundred and eighty cubits, and i.ts height to the top 
of the prow* forty-eight cubits. Four hundred mariners be- 
longed to it, exclusive of the rowers, who were no fewer than 
four thousand; and the decks and the several interstices were 
capable of containing near three thousand soldiers. This, 
however, was mere matter of curiosity, for it differed very 
little from an immoveable building, and was calculated more 
for show than for use, as it could not be put in motion without 
great difficulty and danger. But the ships of Demetrius had 
their use as well as beauty; with all their magnificence of con- 
struction, they were equally fit for fighting; and though they 
were admirable for their size, they were still more so for the 
swiftness of their motion. 

Demetrius having provided such an armament for the invar 
sion of Asia as no man ever had before him, except Alexan- 
der the Great, Seleucus, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus united 
against him. They likewise joined in an application to Pyr- 
rhus, desiring him to fall upon Macedonia, and not to look 
upon himself as bound by the treaty with Demetrius, since 
that prince had entered into it, not with any regard to the ad- 
vantage of Pyrrhus, or in order to avoid future hostilities, but 
merely for his own sake, that he might at present be at liberty 
to turn his arms against whom he pleased. As Pyrrhus ac- 
cepted the proposal, Demetrius, while he was preparing for 
his voyage, found himself surrounded with war at home: for, 
at one instant of time, Ptolemy came with a great fleet to draw 
Greece off from its present master, Lysimachus invaded Mace- 
donia from Thrace, and Pyrrhus entering it from a nosier 

* AxfoS'oA.joy. 

DEMETRIUS. j^j 

quarter, joined in ravaging that country. Demetrius, on this 
occasion, left his son in Greece, and went himself to the relief 
of Macedonia. His first operations were intended against 
Lysimachus, but as he was upon his march he received an ac- 
count that Pyrrhus had taken Beroea; and the news soon 
spreading among his Macedonians, he could do nothing in an 
orderly manner: for nothing was to be found in the whole 
army but lamentations, tears, and expressions of resentment 
and reproach against their king. They were even ready to 
march off", under pretence of attending to their domestic affairs, 
but in fact to join Lysimachus. 

In this case Demetrius thought proper to get at the greatest 
distance he could from Lysimachus, and turn his arms against 
Pyrrhus. Lysimachus was of their own nation, and many of 
them knew him in the service of Alexander; whereas Pyr- 
rhus was an entire stranger, and, therefore, he thought the 
Macedonians would never give him the preference. But he 
was sadly mistaken in his conjecture; and he soon found it 
upon encamping near Pyrrhus. The Macedonians always ad- 
mired his distinguished valour, and had of old been accus- 
tomed to think the best man in the field the most worthy of a 
crown. Besides, they received daily accounts of the clemency 
with which he behaved to his prisoners. Indeed, they were 
inclined to desert to him or any other, so they could but get 
rid of Demetrius. They, therefore, began to go off privately, 
and in small parties at first, but afterwards there was nothing 
but open disorder and mutiny in the camp. At last some of 
them had the assurance to go to Demetrius, and bade him 
provide for himself by flight, for, "the Macedonians (they 
told him) were tired of fighting to maintain his luxury." 
These expressions appeared modest in comparison of the rude 
behaviour of others. He, therefore, entered his tent not like 
a real king, but a theatrical one, and having quitted his royal 
robe for a "black one, privately withdrew. As multitudes were 
pillaging his tent, who not only tore it to pieces, but fought 
for the plunder, Pyrrhus made his appearance; upon which 
the tumult instantly ceased, and the whole army submitted to 
him. Lysimachus and he then divided Macedonia between 
them, which Demetrius had held without disturbance for seven 
years. 

Demetrius, thus fallen from the pinnacle of power, fled to 
Cassandria, where his wife Phila was. Nothing could equal 
her sorrow on this occasion. She could not bear to see the 
unfortunate Demetrius once more a private man and an exile! 
In her despair, therefore, and detestation of fortune, who was 
always more constant to him in her visits of adversity than 
prosperity, she took poison. 

172 DEMETRIUS. 

Demetrius, however, resolved to gather up the remains of 
his wreck; for which purpose he repaired to Greece, and col- 
lected such of his friends and officers as he found there. Me- 
nelaiis, in one of the tragedies of Sophocles, gives this picture 
of his own fortune : — 

I move on Fortune's rapid wheel: my lot 
For ever changing, like the changeful moon, 
That each night varies; hardly now perceiv'd, 
And now she shows her bright horn ; by degrees 
She fills her orb with light: but when she reigns 
In all her pride, she then begins once more 
To waste her glories, till dissolv'd and lost, 
She sinks agaiu to darkness. 

But this picture is more applicable to Demetrius, in his in- 
crease and wane, his splendour and obscurity. His glory 
seemed now entirely eclipsed and extinguished, and yet it 
broke out again, and shone with new splendour. Fresh forces 
came in, and gradually filled up the measure of his hopes. 
This was the first time he addressed the cities as a private 
man, and without any of the ensigns of royalty. Somebody 
seeing him at Thebes in this condition, applied to him, with 
propriety enough, those verses of Euripides, — 

To Dirce's fountain, and Ismenus' shore, 
In mortal form he moves, a God no more. 

When he got into the high road of hope again, and had once 
more a respectable force and form of royalty about him, he 
restored the Thebans their ancient government and laws. At 
the same time the Athenians abandoned his interest, and, 
rasing out of their registers the name of Diphilus, who was 
then priest of the gods-protectors, ordered archons to be ap- 
pointed again, according to ancient custom. They likewise 
sent Pyrrhus from Macedonia, because they saw Demetrius 
grown stronger than they expected. Demetrius, greatly en- 
raged, marched immediately to attack them, and lay strong 
siege to the city. But Crates the philosopher, a man of great 
reputation and authority, being sent out to him by the people, 
partly by his entreaties for the Athenians, and partly by re- 
presenting to him that his interest lay another way, prevailed 
on Demetrius to raise the siege. After this, he collected all 
his ships, embnrked his army, which consisted of eleven thou 
sand foot, beside cavalry, and sailed to Asia, in hopes of draw- 
ing Garia and Lydia over from Lysimachus. Eurydice, the 
sister of Phila, received him at Miletus, having brought with 
her Ptolemais, a daughter she had by Ptolemy, who had for- 
merly been promised him upon the application of Seleucus. 
Demetrius married her with the free consent of Eurydice, and 

DEMETRIUS. j 73 

soon after attempted the cities in that quarter; many of them 
opened their gates to him, and many others he took by force. 
Among the latter was Sardis. Some of the officers of Lysi- 
machus likewise deserted to him, and brought sufficient ap- 
pointments of money and troops with them. But as Agatho- 
cles, the son of Lysimachus, came against him with a great 
army, he marched to Phrygia, with an intention to seize Ar- 
menia, and then to try Media, and the Upper Provinces, which 
might afford him many places of retreat upon occasion. Aga- 
thocles followed him close, and as he found Demetrius supe- 
rior in all the skirmishes that he ventured upon, he betook 
himself to cutting off his convoys. This distressed him not a 
little; and, what was another disagreeable circumstance, his 
soldiers suspected that he designed to lead them into Armenia 
and Media. 

The famine increased everyday; and, by mistaking the fords 
of the river Lycus, he had a great number of men swept away 
with the stream. Yet, amidst all their distress, his troops were 
capable of jesting. One of them wrote upon the door of his 
tent the beginning of the tragedy of (Edipus, with a small 
alteration, — 

Thou offspring of the blind old king Antigonus, 
Where dost thou lead us ?* 

Pestilence at last followed the famine, as it commonly hap- 

ijens when people are under a necessity of eating any thing, 
lowever unwholesome; so that, finding he had lost in all not 
less than eight thousand men, he turned back with the rest. 
When he came down to Tarsus, he was desirous of sparing 
the country, because it belonged to Seleucus, and he did not 
think proper to give him any pretence to declare against him. 
But perceiving that it was impossible for his troops to avoid 
taking something, when they were reduced to such extremi- 
ties, and that Agathocles had fortified the passes of Mount 
Taurus, he wrote a letter to Seleucus, containing a long and 
moving detail of his misfortune, and concluded with strong 
entreaties that he would take compassion on a prince who was 
allied to him, and whose sufferings were such as even an enemy 
might be affected with. 

Seleucus was touched with pity, and sent orders to his lieu- 
tenants in those parts to supply Demetrius with every thing 

* The alteration was very small indeed, for it is only changing AvTiyovn into 
AvTiyovs. In the tragedy it is 

Tekvjv rv(p\s 7£povT0f, Avriyovn, tiv<xi 
Xcojsj otpiyixtOa ; ■ 

The closeness of the parody is what Plutarch calls the jest. 

15* 

174 DEMETRIUS. 

suitable to the state of a king, and his army with sufficient 
provisions. But Patrocles, who was a man of understanding, 
and a faithful friend to Seleucus, went to that prince, and re- 
presented to him, — " That the expense of furnishing the troops 
of Demetrius with provisions, was a thing of small importance, 
in comparison of suffering Demetrius himself to remain in the 
country, who was always one of the most violent and enter- 
prising princes in the world, and now was in such desperate 
circumstances as might put even those of the mildest disposi- 
tions on bold and unjust attempts." 

Upon these representations Seleucus marched into Cilicia 
with a great army. Demetrius, astonished and terrified at the 
sudden change in Seleucus, withdrew to the strongest posts he 
could find upon Mount Taurus, and sent a message to him, 
begging, — " That he might be suffered to make a conquest of 
some free nations of barbarians, and, by settling amongst them 
as their king, put a period to his wanderings. If this could 
not be granted, he hoped Seleucus would at least permit him 
to winter in that country, and not, by driving him out naked, 
and in want of every thing, expose him in that condition to 
his enemies." 

As all these proposals had a suspicious appearance to Seleu- 
cus, he made answer, — "That he might, if he pleased, spend 
two months of the winter in Cataonia, if he sent him his prin- 
cipal friends as hostages." But, at the same time, he secured 
the passes into Syria. Demetrius, thus surrounded like a wild 
beast in the toils, was under a necessity of having recourse to 
violence. He, therefore, ravaged the country, and had the 
advantage of Seleucus whenever he attacked him. Seleucus 
once beset him with his armed chariots, and yet he broke 
through them, and put his enemy to the rout. After this he 
dislodged the corps that was to defend the heights on the side 
of Syria, and made himself master of the passages. 

Elevated with this success, and finding the courage of his 
men restored, he prepared to fight a decisive battle with Se- 
leucus. That prince was now in great perplexity. He had re- 
jected the succours offered him by Lysimachus, for want of 
confidence in his honour, and from an apprehension of his de- 
signs; and he was loth to try his strength with Demetrius, be- 
cause he dreaded his desperate courage, as well as his usual 
change of fortune, which often raised him from great misery 
to the summit of power. In the mean time, Demetrius was 
seized with a fit of sickness, which greatly impaired his per- 
sonal vigour, and entirely ruined his affairs: for part of his 
men went over to the enemy, and part left their colours and 
dispersed. In forty days he recovered with difficulty, and get- 
ting under march with the remains of his army, made a feint 

DEMETRIUS. I75 

of moving towards Cilicia: but afterwards in the night he de- 
camped without sound of trumpet, and taking the contrary- 
way, crossed Mount Amanus, and ravaged the country on the 
other side, as far as Cyrrhestica. 

Seleucus followed, and encamped very near him. Deme- 
trius then put his army in motion in the night, in hopes of 
su-rprising him. Seleucus was retired to rest; and in all proba- 
bility his enemy would have succeeded, had not some desert- 
ers informed him of his danger, just time enough for him to 
put himself in a posture of defence. Upon this he started up 
in great consternation, and ordered the trumpets to sound an 
alarm; and as he put on his sandals, he said to his friends, — 
" What a terrible wild beast are we engaged with!" Deme- 
trius perceiving, by the tumult in the enemy's camp, that his 
scheme was discovered, retired as fast as possible. 

At break of day, Seleucus offered him battle, when Deme- 
trius, ordering one of his officers to take care of one wing, put 
himself at the head of the other, and made some impression 
upon the enemy. Mean time Seleucus quitting his horse, and 
laying aside his helmet, presented himself to Demetrius' hired 
troops with only his buckler in his hand; exhorting them to 
come over to him, and to be convinced at last that it was to 
spare them, not Demetrius, that he had been so long about the 
war. Upon which they all saluted him king, and ranged them- 
selves under his banner. 

Demetrius, though of all the changes he had experienced he 
thought this the most terrible, yet imagining that he might ex- 
tricate himself from this distress as well as the rest, fled to the 
passes of Mount Amanus; and gaining a thick wood, waited 
there for the night, with a few friends and attendants who fol- 
lowed his fortune. His intention was, if possible, to take the 
way to Caunus, where he hoped to find his fleet, and from 
thence to make his escape by sea; but knowing he had not 
provisions even for that day, he sought for some other expe- 
dient. Afterwards one of his friends, named Sosigenes, ar- 
rived with four hundred pieces of gold in his purse ; with the 
assistance of which money they hoped to reach the sea. Ac- 
cordingly, when night came, they attempted to pass the heights; 
but finding a number of fires lighted there by the enemy, they 
despaired of succeeding; that way, and returned to their former 
retreat, but neither with their whole company, (for some had 
gone off,) nor with the same spirits. One of them venturing to 
tell him, that he thought it was best for him to surrender himself 
to Seleucus, Demetrius drew his sword to kill himself; but his 
friends interposed, and, consoling him in the best manner they 
could, persuaded him to follow his advice: in consequence of 
which he sent to Seleucus, and yielded himself to his discretion 

J 76 DEMETRIUS. 

Upon this news, Seleucus said to those about him, — " It is 
not the good fortune of Demetrius, but mine, that now saves 
him; and that adds to other favours this opportunity of testi- 
fying my humanity." Then calling the officers of his house- 
hold, he ordered them to pitch a royal tent, and to provide 
every thing else for his reception and entertainment in the 
most magnificent manner. As there happened to be in the 
service of Seleucus one Apollonides, who was an old ac- 
quaintance of Demetrius, he immediately sent that person to 
him, that he might be more at ease, and come with the greater 
confidence, as to a son-in-law and a friend. 

On the discovery of this favourable disposition of Seleucus 
towards him, at first a few, and afterwards a great number of 
the courtiers waited on Demetrius, and strove which should 
pay him the most respect; for it was expected that his inte- 
rest with Seleucus would soon be the best in the kingdom. 
But these compliments turned the compassion which his dis- 
tress had excited into jealousy, and gave occasion to the en- 
vious and malevolent to divert the stream of the king's hu- 
manity from him, by alarming him with apprehensions of no 
insensible change, but of the greatest commotions in his army 
on the sight of Demetrius. 

Apollonides was now come to Demetrius with great satis- 
faction; and others who followed to pay their court brought 
extraordinary accounts of the kindness of Seleucus; insomuch 
that Demetrius, though in the first shock of his misfortune 
he had thought it a great disgrace to surrender himself, was 
now displeased at his aversion to that step. Such confidence 
had he in the hopes they held out to him; when Pausanias 
coming with a party of horse and foot, to the number of a 
thousand, suddenly surrounded him, and drove away such as 
he found inclined to favour his cause. After he had thus 
seized his person, instead of conducting him to the presence of 
Seleucus, he carried him to the Syrian Chersonesus. There 
he was kept, indeed, under a strong guard, but Seleucus sent 
him a sufficient equipage, and supplied him with money and a 
table suitable to his rank. He had also places of exercise and 
walks worthy of a king; his parks were well stored with game; 
and such of his friends as had accompanied him in his flight, 
were permitted to attend him. Seleucus, too, had the com- 
plaisance often to send some of his people, with kind and 
encouraging messages, intimating, that as soon as Antiochus 
and Stratonice should arrive, terms of accommodation would 
be hit upon, and he would obtain his liberty. 

Under this misfortune Demetrius wrote to his son, and to 
his officers and friends in Athens and Corinth, desiring them 
to trust neither his hand-writing nor his seal, but to act as if he 

DEMETRIUS. 177 

were dead, and to keep the cities and all his remaining estates 
for Antigonus. When the young prince was informed of his 
father's confinement, he was extremely concerned atit: he put 
on mourning, and wrote not only to the other kings, but to 
Seleucus himself; offering, on condition that his father were 
set free, to cede all the possessions they had left, and deliver 
himself up as an hostage. Many cities and princes joined in 
the request; but Lysimachus was not of the number. On the 
contrary, he offered Seleucus a large sum of money to induce 
him to put Demetrius to death. Seleucus, who looked upon 
him in an indifferent light before, abhorred him as a villain for 
this proposal; and only waited for the arrival of Antiochus 
and Stratonice, to make them the compliment of restoring De- 
metrius to his liberty. 

Demetrius, who at first supported his misfortunes with pa- 
tience, by custom learned to submit to it with a still better 
grace. For some time he took the exercises of hunting and 
running ; but he left them by degrees, and sunk into indolence 
and inactivity. Afterwards, he took to drinking and play, and 
spent most of his time in that kind of dissipation: whether it 
was to put off the thoughts of his present condition, which he 
could not bear in his sober hours, and to drown reflection in 
the bowl ; or whether he was sensible at last that this was the 
sort of life which, though originally the object of his desires, 
he had idly wandered from, to follow the dictates of an ab- 
surd ambition. Perhaps he considered that he had given 
himself and others infinite trouble, by seeking with fleets and 
armies that happiness which he found, when he least expected 
it, in ease, indulgence, and repose: for what other end does 
the wretched vanity of kings propose to itself, in all their wars 
and dangers, but to quit the paths of virtue and honour for 
those of luxury and pleasure : the sure consequence of their 
not knowing what real pleasure and true enjoyment are. 

Demetrius, after three years confinement in the Chersonesus, 
fell into a distemper, occasioned by idleness and excess, which 
carried him off at the age of fifty-four. Seleucus was severely 
censured, and, indeed, was much concerned himself, for his 
unjust suspicions of Demetrius; whereas he should have fol- 
lowed the example of Dromichsetes, who, though a Thracian 
and barbarian, had treated Lysimachus, when his prisoner, 
with all the generosity that became a king. 

There was something of a theatrical pomp even in the fu- 
neral of Demetrius: For Antigonus being informed that they 
were bringing his father's ashes to Greece, went to meet them 
with his whole fleet; and finding them near the isles of the 
iEgean sea, he took the urn, which was of solid gold, on board 
the admiral's galley. The cities at which they touched sent 

Vol. IV.— Z 

178 

DEMETRIUS. 

crowns to adorn the urn, and persons in mourning to assist at 
the funeral solemnity. 

When the fleet approached Corinth, the urn was seen in a 
conspicuous position upon the stern of the vessel, adorned 
with a purple robe and a diadem, and attended by a company 
of young men well armed. Xenophantus, a most celebrated 
performer on the flute, sat by the urn, and played a solemn 
air. The oars kept time with the notes, and accompanied them 
with a melancholy sound, like that of mourners in a funeral 
procession, beating their breasts in concert with the music. 
But it was the mournful appearance, and the tears of Antigo- 
nus, that excited the greatest compassion among the people as 
they passed. After the Corinthians had bestowed crowns and 
all due honours upon the remains, Antigonus carried them to 
Demetrias, and deposited them there. This was a city called 
after the deceased, which he had peopled from the little towns 
about Iolcos. 

Demetrius left behind him several children; Antigonus and 
Stratonice, whom he had by his wife Phila; two sons of the 
name of Demetrius; one surnamed the slender, by an Illyrian 
woman; the other was by Ptolemais, and came to be king of 
Cyrene. By Deidamia he had Alexander, who took up his re- 
sidence in Egypt; and by his last wife Eurydice he is said to 
have had a son named Corrhasbus. His posterity enjoyed the 
throne in continued succession down to Perseus,* the last 
king of Macedon, in whose time the Romans subdued that 
country. Thus having gone through the Macedonian drama. 
it is time that we bring the Roman upon the stage. 

* About one hundred and sixteen yeanu 

THE 

LIFE OF ANTONY. 

The grandfather of Mark Antony was Antony the orator, 
who followed the faction of Sylla, and was put to death by 
Marius.* His father was Antony, surnamed the Cretan, a man 
of no figure or consequence in the political world,t but dis- 
tinguished for his integrity, benevolence, and liberality; of 
which the following little circumstance is a sufficient proof: — ■ 
His fortune was not large; and his wife, therefore, very pru- 
dently laid some restraint on his munificent disposition. An 
acquaintance of his, who was under some pecuniary difficul- 
ties, applied to him for assistance. Antony, having no money 
at command, ordered his boy to bring him a silver basin full 
of water, under a pretence of shaving. After the boy was 
dismissed, he gave the basin to his friend, and bade him make 
what use of it he thought proper. The disappearance of the 
basin occasioned no small commotion in the family; and An- 
tony finding his wife prepared to take a severe account of his 
servants, begged her pardon, and told her the truth. 

His wife's name was Julia. She was of the family of the 
Caesars, and a woman of distinguished merit and modesty. 
Under her auspices, Mark Antony received his education; 
when, after the death of his father, she married Cornelius 
Lentulus, whom Cicero put to death for engaging in the con 
spiracy of Catiline. This was the origin of that lasting en 
mity which subsisted between Cicero and Antony. The lat- 
ter affirmed, that his mother Julia was even obliged to beg the 
body of Cicero's wife for interment. But this is not true; for 
none of those who suffered on the same occasion, under Cicero, 
were refused this privilege. Antony was engaging in his per- 
son, and was unfortunate enough to fall into the good graces 
and friendship of Curio, a man who was devoted to every spe- 
cies of licentiousness, and who, to render Antony the more 
dependent on him, led him into all the excesses of indulging in 
wine and women, and all the expenses that such indulgences 
are attended with. Of course, he was soon deeply involved in 

* Valerius Maximus says, that Antony the orator was put to death by the 
joint order of Cinna and Marius. But Cicero mentions Cinna as the imme- 
diate cause. — Cic. Philip. I. 

t Nevertheless, he conducted the war in Crete, and from hence was called 
Cretensis. 

I gQ ANTONY. 

debt, and owed, at least, two hundred and fifty talents, while 
he was a very young man. Curio was bound for the payment 
of this money; and his father being informed of it, banished 
Antony from his house. Thus dismissed, he attached himself 
to Clodius, that pestilent and audacious tribune, who threw 
the state into such dreadful disorder; till weary of his mac 
measures, and fearful of his opponents, he passed into Greece, 
where he employed himself in military exercises and the study 
of eloquence. The Asiatic style* was then much in vogue, 
and Antony fell naturally into it; for it was correspondent 
with his manners, which were vain, pompous, insolent, and 
assuming. 

In Greece, he received an invitation from Gabinius the pro- 
consul, to make a campaign with him in Syria. t This invita- 
tion he refused to accept, as a private man; but being appoint- 
ed to the command of the cavalry, he attended him. His first 
operation was against Aristobulus, who had excited the Jews 
to revolt. He was the first who scaled the wall; and this he 
did in the highest part. He drove Aristobulus from all his 
forts; and, afterwards, with a handful of men, defeated his nu- 
merous army in a pitched battle. Most of the enemy were 
slain, and Aristobulus and his son were taken prisoners. Upon 
the conclusion of this war, Gabinius was solicited by Ptolemy 
to carry his arms into Egypt, and restore him to his kingdom, j 
The reward of this service was to be ten thousand talents 
Most of the officers disapproved of the expedition; and Gabi 
nius himself did not readily enter into it, though the money 
pleaded strongly in its behalf. Antony, however, ambitious 
of great enterprises, and vain of gratifying a suppliant king, 
used every means to draw Gabinius into the service, and pre- 
vailed. It was the general opinion, that the march to Pelusium 
was more dangerous than the war that was to follow: for they 
were to pass over a sandy and unwatered country, by the filthy 
marsh of Serbonis, whose stagnant ooze the Egyptians call the 
exhalations of Typhon; though it is probably no more than 
the drainings of the Red Sea, which is there separated from 
the Mediterranean only by a small neck of land. 

Antony being ordered thither with the cavalry, not only 
seized the straits, but took the large city of Pelusium, and 

* Cicero, in his Brutus, mentions two sorts of style called the Asiatic, 
" Unum sentcntiosum et argutum, sententiis non tam gravibus et severis, 
quam concinnis et venustis. Aliud autem genus est, non tam sententiis fre- 
quentatum, quam verbis volucre atque incitatum ; quali nunc est Asia tota, 
nee flumine solum orationis, sed etiam exornato et faceto genere verborum." 

t Aulus Gabinius was consul in the year of Rome 695; and the year fol- 
lowing he went into Syria. 
| Dion, 1. xxxix. 

ANTONY. 2 81 

made the garrison prisoners. By this operation he at once 
opened a secure passage for the army, and a fair prospect of 
victory for their general. The same love of glory which was 
so serviceable to his own party, was, on this occasion, advan- 
tageous to the enemy: for when Ptolemy entered Pelusium, in 
the rage of revenge, he would have put the citizens to death, 
but Antony resolutely opposed it, and prevented him from 
executing his horrid purpose. In the several actions where 
he was concerned, he gave distinguished proofs of his conduct 
and valour ; but especially in that manoeuvre where, by wheel- 
ing about and attacking the enemy in the real*, he enabled 
those who charged in front to gain a complete victory. For 
this action he received suitable honours and rewards.* 

His humane care of the body of Archelaus, who fell in the 
battle, was taken notice of even by the common men. He had 
been his intimate friend, and connected with him in the rights 
of hospitality; and though he was obliged, by his duty, to op- 
pose him in the field, he no sooner heard that he was fallen, 
than he ordered search to be made for his body, and interred 
it with regal magnificence. This conduct made him respected 
in Alexandria, and admired by the Romans. 

Antony had a noble dignity of countenance, a graceful 
length of beard, a large forehead, an aquiline nose; and, upon 
the whole, the same manly aspect which we see in the picture? 
and statues of Hercules. There was, indeed, an ancient tradi- 
tion that his family was descended from Hercules, by a son of 
his called Anteon; and it was no wonder if Antony sought to 
confirm this opinion, by affecting to resemble him in his air and 
dress. Thus, when he appeared in public, he wore his vest girt 
on the hips, a large sword, and over all a coarse mantle. That 
kind of conduct which would seem disagreeable to others, ren- 
dered him the darling of the army. He talked with the sol- 
diers in their own swaggering and ribald strain, ate and drank 
with them in public, and would stand to take his victuals at 
their common table. He was pleasant on the subject of his 
amours, ready in assisting the intrigues of others, and easy 
under the raillery to which he was subjected by his own. His 
liberality to the soldiers, and to his friends, was the first foun- 
dation of his advancement, and continued to support him in 
that power which he was otherwise weakening by a thousand 
irregularities. One instance of his liberality I must mention : — 
He had ordered two hundred and fifty thousand drachmas 
(which the Romans call decies) to be given to one of his 
friends. His steward, who was startled at the extravagance 
of the sum, laid the silver in a heap, that he might see it as he 
passed. He saw it, and inquired what it was for. " It is the 
sum," answered the steward, "that you ordered for a pre- 

Vol. IV. 16 

182 ANTONY. 

sent." Antony perceived his envious design, and to mortif f 
him still more, said, coolly, — " I really thought the sum would 
have made a better figure. It is too little : let it be doubled."* 
This, however, was in the latter part of his life. 

Rome was divided into two parties. Pompey was with the 
senate. The people were for bringing Caesar with his army 
out of Gaul. Curio, the friend of Antony, who had changed 
sides, and joined Caesar, brought Antony likewise over to his 
interest. The influence he had obtained by his eloquence, 
and by that profusion of money in which he was supported by 
Caesar, enabled him to make Antony tribune of the people, 
and afterwards augur. Antony was no sooner in power, than 
Caesar fofmd the advantage of his services. In the first place, 
he opposed the consul Marcellus, whose design was to give 
Pompey the command of the old legions, and, at the same 
time, to empower him to raise new ones. On this occasion 
he obtained a decree, that the forces then on foot should be 
sent into Syria, and join Bibulus in carrying on the war 
against the Parthians ; and that none should give in their 
names to serve under Pompey. On another occasion, when 
the senate would neither receive Caesar's letters, nor suffer 
them to be read, he read them by virtue of his tribunitial au- 
thority; and the requests of Caesar appearing moderate and 
reasonable, by this means he brought over many to his inte- 
rest. Two questions were at length put in the senate; one, — 
"Whether Pompey should dismiss his army?" the other, — 
"Whether Caesar should give up his?" There were but a 
few votes for the former; a large majority for the latter. Then 
Antony stood up, and put the question, — " Whether both 
Caesar and Pompey should not dismiss their armies?" This 
motion was received with great acclamations, ami Antony was 
applauded, and desired to put it to the vote. This being op- 
posed by the consuls, the friends of Caesar made other propo- 
sals, which seemed by no means unreasonable: but they were 
overruled by Cato;t and Antony was commanded by Lentu- 
lus the consul to leave the house. He left them with bitter 
execrations ; and disguising himself like a servant, accompa- 
nied only by Quintus Cassius, he hired a carriage, and went 
immediately to Caesar. As soon as they arrived, they exclaim- 
ed that nothing was conducted at Rome according to order 
or law; that even the tribunes were refused the privilege of 
speaking, and whoever would rise in defence of the right, 
must be expelled and exposed to personal danger. 

'* The same story is told of Alexander. 

+ Cicero asserts, that Antony was the immediate cause of the civil war; but 
if he could have laid down his prejudice, he might have discovered a more 
immediate cause in the impolitic resentment of Cato. 

ANTONY. ] gg 

Caesar, upon this, marched his army into Italy, and hence it 
was ohserved by Cicero, in his Philippics, that Antony was no 
less the cause ot the civil war in Rome, than Helen had been 
of the Trojan war.* There is, however, but little truth in this 
assertion. Caesar was not so much a slave to the impulse of re- 
sentment, as to enter on so desperate a measure, if it had not 
been premeditated. Nor would he have carried war into the 
bowels of his country, merely because he saw Antony and 
Cassius flying to him in a mean dress, and a hired carriage. At 
the same time, these things might give some colour to the com- 
mencement of these hostilities which had been long deter- 
mined. Caesar's motive was the same which had before driven 
Alexander and Cyrus over the ruins of human kind; the insa- 
tiable lust of empire, the frantic ambition of being the first 
man upon earth, which he knew he could not be while Pom- 
pey was yet alive. 

As soon as he was arrived at Rome, and had driven Pompey 
out of Italy, his first design was to attack his legions in Spain, 
and, having a fleet in readiness, to go afterwards in pursuit of 
Pompey himself, while, in the mean time, Rome was left to 
the government of Lepidus the praetor, and Italy and the army 
to the command of Antony the tribune. Antony, by the so- 
ciability of his disposition, soon made himself agreeable to the 
soldiers: for he ate and drank with them, and made them pre- 
sents to the utmost of his ability. To others his conduct was 
iess acceptable. He was too indolent to attend to the cause of 
the injured, too violent and too impatient when he was applied 
to on business, and infamous for his adulteries. In short, though 
there was nothing tyrannical in the government of Caesar, it 
was rendered odious by the ill conduct of his friends; and as 
Antony had the greatest share of the power, so he bore the 
greatest part of the blame. Caesar, notwithstanding,. on his 
return from Spain, connived at his irregularities; and, indeed, 
in the military appointment he had given him, he had not 
judged improperly ; for Antony was a brave, skilful, and active 
general. 

Caesar embarked at Brundusium, sailed over the Ionian sea 
with a small number of troops, and sent back the fleet, with 
oiders that Antony and Gabinius should put the army on board, 
and proceed as fast as possible to Macedonia. Gabinius was 
afraid of the sea, for it was winter, and the passage wras dan- 
gerous. He, therefore, marched his forces a long way round 
by land. Antony, on the other hand, being apprehensive that 
Caesar might be surrounded and overcome by his enemies, beat 

* In the second Philippic: — Ut Helena Trojanis, sic iste huic reipublicas 
causa belli; causa pestis atque exitiifuit. 

184 ANTONY. 

off Libo, who lay at anchor in the mouth of the haven of 
Brundusium. By sending out several small vessels, he en- 
compassed Libo's galleys separately, and obliged them to re- 
tire. By this means he found an opportunity to embark about 
twenty thousand foot and eight hundred horse; and with these 
he set sail. The enemy discovered and made up to him; but 
he escaped by favour of a strong gale from the south, which 
made the sea so rough that the pursuers could not reach him. 
The same wind, however, at first drove him upon a rocky 
shore, on which the sea bore so hard, that there appeared no 
hope of escaping shipwreck: but after a little it turned to the 
south-west, and, blowing from land to the main sea, Antony 
sailed in safety, with the satisfaction of seeing the wrecks of 
the enemy's fleet scattered along the coast. The storm had 
driven their ships upon the rocks, and many of them went to 
pieces. Antony made his advantage of this disaster; for he 
took several prisoners, and a considerable booty. He likewise 
made himself master of the town of Lissus; and, by the sea- 
sonable arrival of his reinforcement, tne affairs of Caesar wore 
a more promising aspect. 

Antony distinguished himself in every battle that was fought. 
Twice he stopped the army in its flight, brought them back to 
the charge, and gained the victory; so that, in point of military 
reputation, he was inferior only to Caesar. What opinion Caesar 
had of his abilities appeared in the last decisive battle at Phar- 
salia. He led the right wing himself, and gave the left to 
Antony, as to the ablest of his officers. After this battle, Caesar 
being appointed dictator, went in pursuit of Pompey, and sent 
Antony to Rome, in character of general of the horse. This 
officer is next in power to the dictator, and, in his absence, he 
commands alone; for, after the election of a dictator, all other 
magistrates, the tribunes only excepted, are divested of their 
authority. 

Dolabella, one of the tribunes, a young man who was fond of 
innovations, proposed a law for abolishing debts, and solicited 
his friend Antony, who was ever ready to gratify the people, 
to join him in this measure. On the other hand, Asinius and 
Trebellius dissuaded him from it. Antony happened, at this 
time, to suspect a criminal connection between Dolabella and 
his wife, whom, on that account, he dismissed, though she was 
his first cousin, and daughter to Caius Antonius, who had been 
colleague with Cicero. In consequence of this, he joined Asi- 
nius, and opposed Dolabella. The latter had taken possession 
of the forum, with a design to pass his law by force; and An- 
tony being ordered by the senate to repel force with force, at- 
tacked him, killed several of his men, and lost some of his own. 

By this action he forfeited the favour of the people: but 

ANTONY. |g5 

this was not the only thing that rendered him obnoxious; for 
men of sense and virtue, as Cicero observes, could not but 
condemn his nocturnal revels, his enormous extravagance, his 
scandalous lewdness, his sleeping in the day, his walks to carry 
off the qualms of debauchery, and his entertainments on tbe 
marriages of players and buffoons. It is said, that, after 
drinking all night at the wedding of Hippias the player, he was 
summoned in the morning upon business to the jorum, when, 
through a little too much repletion, he was unfortunate enough, 
in the presence of the people, to return part of his evening fare 
by the way it had entered; and one of his friends received it 
in his gown. Sergius the player had the greatest interest with 
him; and Cytheris,* a lady of the same profession, had the 
management of his heart. She attended him in his excursions; 
and her equipage was by no means inferior to his mother's. The 
people were offended at the pomp of his travelling plate, which 
was more fit for the ornament of a triumph ; at his erecting 
tents on the road, b}r groves and rivers, for the most luxurious 
dinners ; at his chariots drawn by lions ; and at his lodging 
ladies of pleasure, and family musicians, in the houses of mo- 
dest and sober people. This dissatisfaction at the conduct of 
Antony could not but be increased by the comparative view 
of Caesar. While the latter was supporting the fatigues of a 
military life, the former was indulging himself in all ihe dissi- 
pation of luxury; and, by means of his delegated power, in- 
sulting the citizens. 

This conduct occasioned a variety of disturbances in Rome, 
and gave the soldiers an opportunity to abuse and plunder the 
people. Therefore, when Csesar returned to Rome, he par- 
doned Dolabella; and, being created consul the third time, he 
took Lepidus, and not Antony, for his colleague. Antony 
purchased Pompey's house; but, when he was required to 
make the payment, he expressed himself in very angry terms; 
and this, he tells us, was the reason why he would not go with 
Cassar into Africa. His former services he thought insuffi- 
ciently repaid. Csesar, however, by his disapprobation of 
Antony's conduct, seems to have thrown some restraint on his 
dissolute manner of life. He now took it into his head to 
marry, and made choice of Fulvia, the widow of the seditious 
Clodius, a woman by no means adapted to domestic employ- 
ments, nor even contented with ruling her husband as a pri- 
vate man. Fulvia's ambition was to govern those that go- 
verned, and to command the leaders of armies. It was to 
Fulvia, therefore, that Cleopatra was obliged for teaching An- 
tony due submission to female authority. He had gone through 

* Cic. Ep. ad Att. 1. x, ep. 10. 
Vol. IV. 2 A 1G* 

185 ANTONY. 

such a course of discipline as made him perfectly tractable 
when he came into her hands. 

He endeavoured, however, to amuse the violent spirit of 
Fulvia by many whimsical and pleasant follies. When Caesar, 
after his success in Spain, was on his return to Rome, Antony, 
amongst others, went to meet him; but a report prevailing, 
that Caesar was killed, and that the enemy was marching into 
Italy, he returned immediately to Rome, and, in the disguise 
of a slave, went to his house by night, pretending that he had 
letters from Antony to Fulvia. He was introduced to her 
with his head muffled up; and, before she received the letter, 
she asked, with impatience, if Antony were well ? He present- 
ed the letter to her in silence; and while she was opening it, 
he threw his arms round her neck, and kissed her. We men- 
tion this as one instance, out of many, of his pleasantries. 

When Caesar returned from Spain, most of the principal 
citizens went some days' journey to meet him; but Antony 
met with the most distinguished reception, and had the ho- 
nour to ride with Caesar in the same chariot. After them 
came Brutus Albinus, and Octavius, the son of Caesar's niece, 
who was afterwards called Augustus Caesar, and for many 
years was emperor in Rome. Caesar being created consul for 
the fifth time, chose Antony for his colleague; but, as he in- 
tended to quit the consulship in favour of Dolabella, he ac- 
quainted the senate with his resolution. Antony, notwith- 
standing, opposed this measure, and loaded Dolabella with 
the most flagrant reproaches. Dolabella did not fail to return 
the abuse ; and Caesar, offended at their indecent behaviour, 
put off the affair till another time. When it was again pro- 
posed, Antony insisted that the omens from the flight of birds 
were against the measure.* Thus Caesar was obliged to give 
up Dolabella, who was not a little mortified by his disappoint- 
ment. It appears, however, that Caesar had as little regard 
for Dolabella as he had for Antony: for when both were ac- 
cused of designs against him, he said, contemptuously enough, 
— " It is not these fat sleek fellows I am afraid of, but the pale 
and the lean." By whom he meant Brutus and Cassius, who 
afterwards put him to death. Antony, without intending it, 
gave them a pretence for that undertaking. When the Ro- 
mans were celebrating the Lupercalia, Caesar, in a triumphal 
habit, sat on the rostrum to see the race. On this occasion, 
many of the young nobility, and the magistracy, anointed with 
oil, and having white thongs in their hands, run about and 
strike, as in sport, every one they meet. Antony was one of 
the number ; but regardless of the ceremonies of the institu 

* He had this power by virtue of his office as augur. 

ANTONY. 

187 

tion, he took a garland of laurel, and wreathing it in a diadem, 
ran to the rostrum, where, being lifted up by his companions, 
he would have placed it on the head of Caesar, intimating there- 
by the conveyance of regal power. Caesar, however, seemed 
to decline the offer, and was, therefore, applauded by the peo- 
ple. Antony persisted in his design ; and for some time there 
was a contest between them ; while he that offered the diadem 
had the applause of his friends, and he that refused it the ac- 
clamations of the multitude. Thus, what is singular enough, 
while the Romans endured eveiy thing that regal power could 
impose, they dreaded the name of king, as destructive of their 
liberty. Caesar was much concerned at this transaction; and, 
uncovering his neck, he offered his life to any one who would 
take it. At length the diadem was placed on one of his statues, 
but the tribunes took it off;* upon which the people followed 
them home with great acclamations. Afterwards, however, 
Caesar showed that he resented this, by turning those tribunes 
out of office. The enterprise of Brutus and Cassius derived 
strength and encouragement from these circumstances. To 
the rest of their friends, whom they had selected for the pur- 
pose, they wanted to draw over Antony. Trebonius only ob- 
jected to him. He informed them, that in their journey to 
meet Caesar, he had been generally with him; that he had 
sounded him on this business by hints, which, though cautious, 
were intelligible; and that he always expressed his disappro- 
bation, though he never betrayed the secret. Upon this it was 
proposed that Antony should fall at the same time with 
Caesar; but Brutus opposed it. An action, undertaken in sup- 
port of justice and the laws, he very properly thought, should 
have nothing unjust attending it. Of Antony, however, they 
were afraid, both in respect of his personal valour, and the in- 
fluence of his office ; and it was agreed that when Caesar was 
in the house, and they were on the point of executing their 
purpose, Antony should be amused without by some pretended 
discourse of business. 

When, in consequence of these measures, Caesar was slain, 
Antony absconded in the disguise of a slave; but after he 
found that the conspirators were assembled in the Capitol, and 
had no further designs of massacre, he invited them to come 
down, and sent his son to them as an hostage. That night 
Cassius supped with him, and Brutus with Lepidus. The day 
following he assembled the senate, when he proposed that an 
act of amnesty should be passed; and that provinces should 

* Tribuni plebis, Epidius Marcellus, Ctesetiusque Flavus coronse fasciam 
delrahi, hominemque duci in vincula jussissent, dolens seu parum prosper^ 
motam regni mcntionem, sive, ut ferebat, ereptam sibi gloriam recusandi, 
tribunos graviter increpitos potestate privavit. — Suet. 

jgg ANTONY. 

be assigned to Brutus and Cassius. The senate confirmed this, 
and, at the same time, ratified the acts of Caesar. Thus, An- 
tony acquitted himself in this difficult affair with the highest 
reputation; and, by saving Rome from a civil war, he proved 
himself a very able and valuable politician. But the intoxica- 
tion of glory drew him off from these wise and moderate coun- 
sels: and from his influence with the people, he felt that, if 
Brutus were borne down, he should be the first man in Rome. 
With this view, when Caesar's body was exposed in the forum, 
he undertook the customary funeral oration; and when he 
found the people affected with his encomiums on the deceased, 
he endeavoured still more to excite their compassion, by all 
that was pitiable or aggravating in the massacre. For this pur- 
pose, in the close of his oration, he took the robe from the dead 
body, and held it up to them, bloody as it was, and pierced 
through with weapons; nor did he hesitate, at the same time, 
to call the perpetrators of the deed villains and murderers. 
This had such an effect upon the people, that they immediately 
tore up the benches and the tables in the forum, to make a 
pile for the body. After they had duly discharged the funeral 
rights, they snatched the burning brands from the pile, and 
went to attack the houses of the conspirators. 

Brutus and his party now left the city, and Caesar's friends 
joined Antony. Calphurnia, the relict of Caesar, entrusted him 
with her treasure, which amounted to four thousand talents. 
All Caesar's papers, which contained a particular account of 
nis designs, were likewise delivered up to him. Of these he 
made a very ingenious use; for, by inserting in them what 
names he thought proper, he made some of his friends magis- 
trates, and others senators; some he recalled from exile, and 
others he dismissed from prison, on pretence that all these 
things were so ordered by Caesar. The people that were thus 
favoured the Romans called Charonites;* because, to support 
their title, they had recourse to the registers of the dead. The 
power of Antony, in short, was absolute. He was consul him- 
self; his brother Caius was praetor; and his brother Lucius 
tribune of the people. 

Such was the state of affairs, when Octavius, who was the 
son of Caesar's niece, and appointed his heir by will, arrived at 
Rome from Apollonia, where he resided when his uncle was 
killed. He first visited Antony as the friend of his uncle, and 
spoke to him concerning the money in his hands, and the le- 
gacy of seventy-five drachmas left to every Roman citizen. 
Antony paid little regard to him at first, and told him, it would 

* The slaves who were enfranchised by the last will of their masters, were 
likewise called Charonites. 

ANTONY. 189 

be madness for an inexperienced young man, without friends, 
to take upon him so important an office as that of being ex- 
ecutor to Caesar. 

Octavius, however, was not thus repulsed. He still insist- 
ed on the money; and Antony, on the other hand, did every 
thing to mortify and affront him. He opposed him in his ap- 
plication for the tribuneship; and when he made use of the 
golden chair, which had been granted by the senate to his un- 
cle,* he threatened that, unless he desisted to solicit the peo- 
ple, he would commit him to prison. But when Octavius joined 
Cicero, and the rest of Antony's enemies, and by their means 
obtained an interest in the senate; when he continued to pay 
his court to the people, and drew the veteran soldiers from 
their quarters, Antony thought it was time to accommodate; 
and, for this purpose, gave him a meeting in the Capitol. 

An accommodation took place, but it was soon destroyed; 
for that night Antony dreamed that his right hand was thun- 
derstruck; and, a few days after, he was informed that Octa- 
vius had a design on his life. The latter would have justified 
himself, but was not believed; so that, of course, the breach 
became as wide as ever. They now went immediately over 
Italy, and endeavoured to be before-hand with each other, in 
securing, by rewards and promises, the old troops that were in 
different quarters, and such legions as were still on foot. 

Cicero, who had then considerable influence in the city, in- 
censed the people against Antony, and prevailed on the senate 
to declare him a public enemy; to send the rods and the rest 
of the praetorial ensigns to young Caesar; and to commission 
Hirtius and Pansa, the consuls, to drive Antony out of Italy. 
The two armies engaged near Modena, and Caesar was present 
at the battle. Both the consuls were slain, but Antony was 
defeated. In his flight he was reduced to great extremities, 
particularly by famine. Distress, however, was to him a school 
of moral improvement ; and Antony, in adversity, was almost 
a man of virtue. Indeed, it is common for men, under misfor- 
tunes, to have a clear idea of their duty; but a change of con- 
duct is not always the consequence. On such occasions, they 
too often fall back into their former manners, through the in 
activity of reason, and infirmity of mind. But Antony was 
even a pattern for his soldiers. From all the varieties of luxu- 
rious living, he came with readiness to drink a little stinking 
*rater, and to feed on the wild fruits and roots of the desert. 
Nay, it is said, that they ate the very bark of the trees; and 

* The senate had decreed to Caesar the privilege of using- a golden chair, 
adorned with a crown of gold and precious stones, in all the theatres. — Dion., 
. xliv. 

190 ANTONY. 

that, in passing the Alps, they fed on creatures that had never 
been accounted human food. 

Antony's design was to join Lepidus, who commanded the 
army on the other side of the Alps; and he had a reasonable 
prospect of his friendship, from the good offices he had done 
him with Julius Caesar. When he came within a small distance 
of him, he encamped; but receiving no encouragement, he re- 
solved to hazard all upon a single cast. His hair was uncombed, 
and his beard, which he had not shaven since his defeat, was 
long. In this forlorn figure, with a mourning mantle thrown 
over him, he came to the camp of Lepidus, and addressed him- 
self to the soldiers. While some were affected with his appear- 
ance, and others with his eloquence, Lepidus, afraid of the 
consequence, ordered the trumpets to sound, that he might no 
longer be heard. This, however, contributed to heighten the 
compassion of the soldiers; so that they sent Lselius and Clo- 
dius, in the dress of those ladies who hired out their favours 
to the army, to assure Antony, that, if he had resolution enough 
to attack the camp of Lepidus, he would meet with many who 
were not only ready to receive him, but, if he should desire 
it, to kill Lepidus. Antony would not suffer any violence to 
be offered to Lepidus; but the day following, at the head of 
his troops, he crossed the river which lay between the two 
camps, and had the satisfaction to see Lepidus' soldiers all the 
while stretching out their hands to him, and making way 
through the entrenchments. 

When he had possessed himself of the camp of Lepidus, he 
treated him with great humanity. He saluted him by the 
name of Father; and though, in reality, every thing was in 
his own power, he secured to him the title and the honours of 
general. This conduct brought over Munatius Plancus, who 
was at the head of a considerable force at no great distance. 
Thus, Antony was once more very powerful, and returned into 
Italy with seventeen entire legions of foot, and ten thousand 
horse. Besides these, he left six legions as a garrison in Gaul, 
under the command of Varius, one of his convivial compa- 
nions, whom they called Cotylon.* 

Octavius, when he found that Cicero's object was to restore 
the liberties of the commonwealth, soon abandoned him, and 
came to an accommodation with Antony. They met, together 
with Lepidus, in a small river-island,t where the conference 
lasted three days. The empire of the world was divided 
amongst them like a paternal inheritance; and this they found 
no difficulty in settling. But whom they should kill, and 

* From a half-pint bumper ; a Greek measure so called, 
t In the Rhine, not far from Bologna. 

ANTONY. 

191 

whom they should spare, it Avas not so easy to adjust, while 
each was for saving his respective friends, and putting; to death 
his enemies. At length their resentment against the latter 
overcame their kindness for the former. Octavius gave up 
Cicero to Antony; and Antony sacrificed his uncle Lucius 
Caesar to Octavius; while Lepidus had the privilege of put- 
ting to death his own brother Paulus; though others say, that 
Lepidus gave up Paulus to them,* though they had required 
him to put him to death himself. I believe there never was 
any thing so atrocious, or so execrably savage, as this com- 
merce of murder: for while a friend was given up for an ene- 
my received, the same action murdered at once the friend and 
the enemy; and the destruction of the former was still more 
horrible, because it had not even resentments for its apology. 

When this confederacy had taken place, the army desired it 
might be confirmed by some alliance; and Caesar, therefore, 
was to marry Claudia the daughter of Fulvia, Antony's wife. 
As soon as this was determined, they marked down such as 
they intended to put to death, the number of which amounted 
to three hundred. When Cicero was slain, Antony ordered 
his head, and the hand with which he wrote his Philippics, to 
be cut off; and, when they were presented to him, he laughed, 
and exulted at the sight. After he was satiated with looking 
upon them, he ordered them to be placed on the rostra in the 
forum. But this insult on the dead was, in fact, an abuse of 
his own good fortune, and of the power it had placed in liis 
hands. t When his uncle Lucius Csesar was pursued by his 
murderers, he fled for refuge to his sister; and when the pur- 
suers had broken into the house, and were forcing their way 
into his chamber, she placed herself at the door, and stretch 
ing forth her hands, she cried, — " You shall not kill Lucius 
Csesar, till you have first killed me, the mother of your gene- 
ral." By this means she saved her brother. 

This triumvirate was very odious to the Romans; but An- 
tony bore the greater blame; for he was not only older than 
Csesar, and more powerful than Lepidus, but when he was no 
longer under difficulties, he fell back into the former irregu- 
larities of his life. His abandoned and dissolute manners were 
the more obnoxious to the people by his living in the house of 
Pompey the Great, a man no less distinguished by his tem- 
perance and modesty than by the honour of three triumphs. 

* The former English translator ought not to have omitted this, because it 
somewhat softens at least the character of Lepidus, who was certainly the 
least execrable villain of the three. 

t Were there any circumstance in Antony's life that could be esteemed aa 
instance of true magnanimity, the total want of that virtue in this case would 
prove that such a circumstance was merely accidental. 

192 ANTONY. 

They were mortified to see those doors shut with insolence 
against magistrates, generals, and ambassadors; while they 
were open to players, jugglers, and sottish sycophants, on. 
whom he spent the greatest part of those treasures he had 
amassed by rapine. Indeed, the triumvirate were by no means 
scrupulous about the manner in which they procured their 
wealth. They seized and sold the estates of those who had 
been proscribed, and, by false accusations, defrauded their 
widows and orphans. They burdened the people with insup- 
portable impositions; and, being informed that large sums of 
money, the property both of strangers and citizens, were de- 
posited in the hands of the Vestals, they took them away by 
violence. When Caesar found that Antony's covetousness was 
as boundless as his prodigality, he demanded a division of tha 
treasure. The. army too was divided. Antony and Caesar 
went into Macedonia against Brutus and Cassius, and the 
government of Rome was left to Lepidus. 

When they had encamped in sight of the enemy, Antony 
opposite to Cassius, and Caesar to Brutus, Caesar effected nothing 
extraordinary, but Antony's efforts were still successful. In 
the first engagement Caesar was defeated by Brutus; his camp 
was taken; and he narrowly escaped by flight; though, in his 
Commentaries, he tells us, that, on account of a dream which 
happened to one of his friends, he had withdrawn before the 
battle.* Cassius was defeated by Antony; and yet there are 
those, too, who say, that Antony was not present at the battle, 
but only joined in the pursuit afterwards. As Cassius knew 
nothing of the success of Brutus, he was killed at his own 
earnest entreaty, by his freedman Pindarus. Another battle 
was fought soon after, in which Brutus was defeated, and, in 
consequence of that, slew himself. Caesar happened, at that, 
time, to be sick, and the honour of this victory, likewise, of 
course, fell to Antony. As he stood over the body of Brutus, 
he slightly reproached him for the death of his brother Caius, 
whom, in revenge for the death of Cicero, Brutus had slain i"n 
Macedonia. It "appeared, however, that Antony did not im- 
pute the death of Caius so much to Brutus as to Hortensius; 
for he ordered the latter to be slain upon his brother's tomb. 
He threw the purple robe over the body of Brutus, and order- 
ed one of his freedmen to do the honours of his funeral. When 
he was afterwards informed, that he had not burned the robe 
with the body, and that he had retained part of the money 
which was to be expended on the ceremony, he commanded 
him to be slain. After this victory, Caesar was conveyed to 
Rome ; and it was expected that his distemper would put an 

* See the Life of Brutus. 

ANTONY. 2 03 

end to his life. Antony, having traversed some of the pro- 
vinces of Asia for the purpose of raising money, passed with 
a large army into Greece. Contributions, indeed, were abso- 
lutely necessary, when a gratuity of five thousand drachmas 
had been promised to every private man. 

Antony's behaviour was at first very acceptable to the Gre- 
cians. He attended the disputes of their logicians, their pub- 
lic diversions, and religious ceremonies. He was mild in the 
administration of justice, and affected to be called the friend 
of Greece, but particularly the friend of Athens, to which he 
made considerable presents. The Megarensians, vying with 
the Athenians in exhibiting something curious, invited him to 
see their senate-house; and when they asked him how he liked 
it, he told them, it was little and rubious. He took the dimen- 
sions of the temple of Apollo Pythius, as if he had intended 
to repair it; and, indeed, he promised as much to the senate. 

But when, leaving Lucius Censorinus in Greece, he once 
more passed into Asia ; when he had enriched himself with 
the wealth of the country; when his house was the resort of 
obsequious kings, and queens contended for his favour by 
their beauty and munificence; then, whilst Caesar was harass- 
ed with seditions at Rome, Antony once more gave up his 
soul to luxury, and fell into all the dissipations of his former 
life. The Anaxenors and the Zuthi, the harpers and pipers, 
Metrodorus the dancer, the whole corps of the Asiatic drama, 
who far outdid in buffoonery the poor wretches of Italy; these 
were the people of the court, the folks that carried all before 
them. In short, all was riot and disorder; and Asia, in some 
measure, resembled the city mentioned by Sophocles,* that 
was at once filled with the perfumes of sacrifices, songs, and 
groans. 

When Antony entered Ephesus, the women in the dress of 
Bacchanals, and men and boys habited like Pan and the Satyrs, 
marched before him. Nothing was to be seen through the 
whole city but ivy-crowns, and spears wreathed with ivy, 
harps, flutes, and pipes, while Antony was hailed by the name 
of Bacchus; — 

" Bacchus ! ever kind and free !" 

And such, indeed, he was to some ; but to others he was 
savage and severe. He deprived many noble families of their 
fortunes, and bestowed them on sycophants and parasites. 
Many were represented to be dead who were still living; and 
commissions were given to his knaves for seizing their estates. 
He gave his cook the estate of a Magnesian citizen, for dress- 

* Sophocles, CEd. Sc. I. 
Vol. IV. 2 B 17 

j 94 ANTONY. 

ing one supper to his taste: but when he laid a double im 
post on Asia, Hybrias the agent for the people, told him, with 
a pleasantry that was agreeable to his humour, that, " II he 
doubled the taxes, he ought to double the seasons too, and sup- 
ply the people with two summers and two winters." He added, 
at the same time, with a little more asperity, that, "As Asia 
had already raised two hundred thousand talents, if he had 
not received it, he should demand it of those who had; but," 
said he, "if you received it, and yet have it not, we are un- 
done." This touched him sensibly; for he was ignorant of 
many things that were transacted under his authority; not 
that he was indolent, but unsuspecting. He had a simplicity 
in his nature, without much penetration. But when he found 
that faults had been committed, he expressed the greatest con- 
cern and acknowledgment to the suflerers. He was prodigal 
in his rewards, and severe in his punishments; but the excess 
was rather in the former than in the latter. The insulting 
raillery of his conversation carried its remedy along with it; 
for he was perfectly liberal in allowing the retort, and gave 
and took with the same good humour. This, however, had 
a bad effect on his affairs. He imagined that those who 
treated him with freedom in conversation, would not be insin 
cere in business. He did not perceive that his sycophants 
were artful in their freedom; that they used it as a kind of 
poignant sauce, to prevent the satiety of flattery; and that, by 
taking these liberties with him at table, they knew well that, 
when they complied with his opinions in business, he would 
not think it the effect of complaisance, but a conviction of his 
superior judgment. 

Such was the frail, the flexible Antony, when the love of 
Cleopatra came in to the completion of his ruin. This awaken- 
ed every dormant vice, inflamed every guilty passion, and to- 
tally extinguished the gleams of remaining virtue. It began in 
this manner: — When he first set out on his expedition against 
the Parthians, he sent orders to Cleopatra to meet him in Ci- 
licia, that she might answer some accusations which had been 
laid against her of assisting Cassius in the war. Dellius, who 
went on this message, no sooner observed the beauty and ad- 
dress of Cleopatra, than he concluded that such a woman, far 
from having any thing to apprehend from the resentment of 
Antony, would certainly have great influence over him. He, 
therefore, paid his court to the amiable Egyptian, and solicited 
her to go, as Homer says, "in her best attire,"* into Cilicia; 
assuring her, that she had nothing to fear from Antony, who 

* Horn. II. xiv. 1. 162. It is thus that Juno proposes to meet Jupiter, when 
she has a paiticular design of inspiring him with love. 

ANTONY. 

195 

was the most courtly general in the world. Induced by his 
invitation, and in the confidence of that beauty which had be- 
fore touched the hearts of Caesar and young Pompey, she en- 
tertained no doubt of the conquest of Antony. When Caesar 
and Pompey had her favours, she was young and unexperi- 
enced; but she was to meet Antony at an age when beauty, in 
its full perfection, called in the maturity of the understanding 
to its aid. Prepared, therefore, with such treasures, orna- 
ments, and presents, as were suitable to the dignity and afflu- 
ence of her kingdom, but chiefly relying on her personal 
charms, she set off for Cilicia. 

Though she had received many pressing letters of invitation 
from Antony and his friends, she held him in such contempt, 
that she by no means took the most expeditious method of 
travelling. She sailed along the river Cydnus in a most mag- 
nificent galley. The stern was covered with gold, the sails 
were of purple, and the oars were silver. These, in their mo- 
tion, kept time to the music of flutes, and pipes, and harps. 
The queen, in the dress and character of Venus, lay under a 
canopy embroidered with gold of the most exquisite workman- 
ship; while boys, like painted Cupids, stood fanning her on 
each side of the sopha. Her maids were of the most distin- 
guished beauty, and, habited like the Nereids and the Graces, 
assisted in the steerage and conduct of the vessel. The fra- 
grance of burning incense was diffused along the shores, which 
were covered with multitudes of people. Some followed the 
procession, and such numbers went down from the city to see 
it, that Antony was at last left alone on the tribunal. " A ru- 
mour was soon spread, that Venus was come to feast with 
Bacchus, for the benefit of Asia. Antony sent to invite her 
to supper; but she thought it his duty to wait upon her, and, 
to show his politeness on her arrival, he complied. He was 
astonished at the magnificence of the preparations; but parti- 
cularly at that multitude of lights, which were raised or let 
down together, and disposed in such a variety of square and 
circular figures, that they afforded one of the most pleasing 
spectacles that has been recorded in history. The day follow- 
ing, Antony invited her to sup with him, and was ambitious to 
outdo her in the elegance and magnificence of the entertain- 
ment. But he was soon convinced that he came short of her 
in both, and was the first to ridicule the meanness and vul- 
garity of his treat. As she found that Antony's humour sa- 
voured more of the camp than of the court, she fell into the 
same coarse vein, and played upon him without the least re- 
serve. Such was the variety of her powers in conversation: 
her beauty, it is said, was neither astonishing nor inimitable; 
but it derived a force from her wit and her fascinating manner, 

|96 ANTON!. 

which was absolutely irresistible. Her voice was delightfully 
melodious, and had the same variety of modulation as an in- 
strument of many strings. She spoke most languages; and 
there were but few of the foreign ambassadors whom she an- 
swered by an interpreter. She gave audience herself to the 
Ethiopians, the Troglodytes, the Hebrews, Arabs, Syrians, 
jVIedes, and Parthians. Nor were these all the languages she 
understood, though the kings of Egypt, her predecessors, could 
hardly ever attain to the Egyptian; and some of them forgot 
even their original Macedonian. 

Anton v was so wholly engrossed with her charms, that while 
his wife Fulvia was maintaining his interest at Rome against 
Caesar, and the Parthian forces, assembled under the conduct 
of Labienus in Mesopotamia, were ready to enter Syria, she 
led her amorous captive in triumph to Alexandria. There the 
veteran warrior fell into every idle excess of puerile amuse- 
ment, and offered at the shrine of luxury, what Antipho calls 
the greatest of all sacrifices, — the sacrifice of time. This mode 
of life they called the inimitable. They visited each other 
alternately every day; and the profusion of their entertain- 
ments is almost incredible. Philotas, a physician of Amphissa, 
who was at that time pursuing his studies in Alexandria, told 
my grandfather Lamprias, that, being acquainted with one of 
Antony's cooks, he was invited to see the preparations for sup- 
per. When he came into the kitchen, beside an infinite variety 
of other provisions, he observed eight wild boars roasting 
whole; and expressed his surprise at the number of the com- 
pany for whom this enormous provision must have been made. 
The cook laughed, and said that the company did not exceed 
twelve; but that, as every dish was to be roasted to a single 
turn; and as Antony was uncertain as to the time when he 
would sup, particularly if an extraordinary bottle, or an extra- 
ordinary vein of conversation was going round, it was neces- 
sary to have a succession of suppers. Philotas added, that, be- 
ing afterwards in the service of Antony's eldest son by Fulvia, 
he was admitted to sup with him, when he did not sup with his 
father; and it once happened, tbat, when another physician at 
table had tired the company with his noise and impertinence, 
he silenced him with the following sophism: — "There are 
some degrees of a fever in which cold water is good for a man; 
every man who has a fever has it in some degree; and, there- 
fore, cold water is good for every man in a fever." The im- 
pertinent was struck dumb with this syllogism ; and Antony's 
son, who laughed at his distress, to reward Philotas for his 
good offices, pointing to a magnificent sideboard of plate, said, 
— "All that, Philotas, is yours?" Philotas acknowledged tho 
kind offer, but thought it too much for such a boy to give. 

ANTONY. 1Q7 

And afterwards, when a servant brought the plate to him in a 
chest, that he might put his seal upon it, he refused, and. in- 
deed, was afraid to accept it: upon which the servant said, — 
'What are you afraid of? Do not you consider that this is a 
present from the son of Antony, who could easily give you its 
weight in gold? However, I would recommend it to you to 
take the value of it in money. In this plate there may be 
some curious pieces of ancient workmanship that Antony may 
set a value on." Such are the anecdotes which my grandfa- 
ther told me he had from Philotas. 

Cleopatra was not limited to Plato's four kinds of flattery.* 
She had an infinite variety of it. Whether Antony were in 
the gay or the serious humour, still she had something ready 
for his amusement. She was with him night and day. She 
gamed, she drank, she hunted, she reviewed with him. In his 
night rambles, when he was reconnoitring the doors and win- 
dows of the citizens, and throwing out his jests upon them, 
she attended him in the habit of a servant, which he also, on 
such occasions, affected to wear. From these expeditions he 
frequently returned a sufferer both in person and character. 
But though some of the Alexandrians were displeased with 
this whimsical humour, others enjoyed it, and said, — " That 
Antony presented his comic parts in Alexandria, and reserved 
the tragic for Rome." To mention all his follies would be too 
trifling; but his fishing-story must not be omitted. He was 
a fishing one day with Cleopatra, and had ill success, which, 
in the presence of his mistress, he looked upon as a disgrace, 
he therefore ordered one of the assistants to dive, and put on 
his hook such as had been taken before. This scheme he put 
in practice three or four times, and Cleopatra perceived it. 
She affected, however, to be surprised at his success; express- 
ed her wonder to the people about her, and the day following 
invited them to see fresh proofs of it. When the day follow- 
ing came, the vessel was crowded with people; and as soon as 
Antony had let down his line, she ordered one of her divers 
immediately to put a salt fish on his hook. When Antony 
found he had caught his fish, he drew up his line; and this, as 
may be supposed, occasioned no small mirth amongst the spec- 
tators. " Go, general," said Cleopatra, " leave fishing to us 
petty princes of Pharos and Canopus; your game is cities, 
kingdoms, and provinces."! 

* Plato, Gorgias. 

+ This expression of Cleopatra's has something of the same turn with that 
passage in Virgil, — 

Excudent alii spirantia molliiis asra! 
Tu regere imperio populos, Romane, memento. 
17* 

j 98 ANTONY. 

In the midst of these scenes of festivity and dissipation, 
Antony received two unfavourable messages; one from Rome, 
that his wife Fulvia, and his brother Lucius, after long dis- 
sensions between themselves, had joined to oppose Caesar, 
but were overpowered, and obliged to fly out ot Italy. The 
other informed him, that Labienus and the Parthians had re- 
duced Asia, from Syria and the Euphrates to Lydia and Ionia. 
It was with difficulty that even this roused him from his le- 
thargy: but, rousing at length, and literally waking from a fit 
of intoxication, he set out against the Parthians, and proceed- 
ed as far as Phoenicia. However, upon the receipt of some 
very moving letters from Fulvia, he turned his course towards 
Italy, with two hundred ships. Such of his friends as had 
fled from thence, he received; and from these he learned, that 
Fulvia had been the principal cause of the disturbances in 
Rome. Her disposition had a natural tendency to violence 
and discord; and, on this occasion, it was abetted by jealousy; 
for she expected that the disorders of Italy would call Antony 
from the arms of Cleopatra. That unhappy woman died at 
Sicyon, in her progress to meet her husband. This event 
opened an opportunity for a reconciliation with Caesar: for 
when Antony came to Italy, and Caesar expressed no resent- 
ment against him, but threw the whole blame on Fulvia, their 
respective friends interfered, and brought them to an accom- 
modation. The east, within the boundaries of the Ionian sea, 
was given to Antony: the western provinces to Caesar; ana 
Lepidus had Africa. When they did not accept of the con- 
sulship themselves, they were to dispose of it as they thought 
proper, in their turns. 

After these matters were settled, they thought of means to 
secure this union which fortune had set on foot. Caesar had 
a sister older than himself, named Octavia, but they had dif- 
ferent mothers. The mother of Octavia was Ancharia. Caesar's 
mother was Attia. He had a great affection for this sister ; for 
she was a woman of extraordinary merit. She had been al- 
ready married to Caius Marcellus; but a little before this had 
buried her husband; and as Antony had lost his wife, there 
was an opening for a fresh union. His connection with Cleo- 
patra he did not affect to deny; but he absolutely denied that 
he was married to her; and in this circumstance, indeed, his 
prudence prevailed over his love. His marriage with Octavia 
was universally wished. It was the general hope, that a wo- 
man of her beauty and distinguished virtues would acquire 
such an influence over Antony, as might, in the end, be salu- 
tary to the state. Conditions being mutually agreed upon, 
they proceeded to solemnize the nuptials at Rome; and the 

ANTONY. 199 

law which permits no widow to marry till the expiration of 
ten months after the decease of her husband, was dispensed 
with by the senate. 

Sextus, the son of Pompey, who was then in possession of 
Sicily, had not only made great ravages in Italy, but had cover- 
ed the sea with such a number of piratical vessels, under the 
command of Menas and Menecrates, that it was no longer safe 
for other ships to pass. He had been favourable, notwith- 
standing, to Antony; for he had given a kind reception to his 
mother and his wife Fulvia, when they were obliged to fly from 
Rome. It was judged proper, therefore, to accommodate mat- 
ters with him; and, for this purpose, a meeting was held at 
the promontory of Misenum, by the mole that runs into the 
sea. Pompey was attended by his fleet; Antony and Caesar 
by an army of foot. At this interview it was settled, that 
Pompey should keep Sicily and Sardinia, on condition that he 
should clear the sea of pirates, and send a certain quantity of 
corn to Rome. When these things were determined, they 
mutually invited each other to supper; but it fell to the lot of 
Pompey to give the first entertainment. When Antony asked 
him where they should sup ? " There," said he, pointing to the 
admiral galley of six oars; " that is the only patrimonial man- 
sion-house that is left to Pompey;" and it implied, at the same 
time, a sarcasm on Antony, who was then in possession of his 
father's house. However, he entertained them very politely, 
after conducting them over a bridge from the promontory to 
the ship that rode at. anchor. During the entertainment, while 
the raillery ran briskly on Antony and Cleopatra, Menas came 
to Pompey, and told him secretly, that if he would permit him 
to cut the cable, he would not only make him master of Sicily 
and Sardinia, but of the whole Roman empire. Pompey, after 
a moment's deliberation, answered, that he should have done 
it without consulting him : — " We must now let it alone," said 
he, " for I cannot break my oath of treaty." The compliment 
of the entertainment was returned by his guests, and he then 
retired to Sicily. 

Antony, after the accommodation, sent Ventidius into Asia, 
to stop the progress of the Parthians. All matters of public 
administration were conducted with the greatest harmony be- 
tween him and Octavius; and, in compliment to the latter, he 
took upon himself the office of high-priest to Caesar the dic- 
tator. But, alas! in their contests ait play Caesar was generally 
superior, and Antony was mortified. He had in his house a 
fortune-telling gipsy, who was skilled in the calculation of na- 
tivities. This man, either to oblige Cleopatra, or following 
the investigation of truth, told Antony, that the star of his 
fortune, however glorious in itself, was eclipsed and obscured 

200 ANTONY. 

by Caesar's, and advised him, by all means, to keep at the 
greatest distance from that young man : — " The genius of your 
life," said he, " is afraid of his : when it is alone, its port is 
erect and fearless; when his approaches, it is dejected and de- 
prest." Indeed, there were many circumstances that seemed 
to justify the conjuror's doctrine : for in every kind of play, 
whether they cast lots, or cast the die, Antony was still the 
loser. In their cock-fights and quail-fights, it was still Caesar's 
cock and Caesar's quail. These things co-operating with the 
conjuror's observations, had such an effect on Antony, that he 
gave up the management of his domestic affairs to Caesar, and 
left Italy. Octavia, who had by this time brought him a 
daughter, he took with him into Greece. He wintered in 
Athens, and there he learnt that his affairs in Asia, under 
Ventidius, were successful; that the Parthians were routed; 
and that Labienus and Pharnapates, the ablest generals of 
Orodes, fell in the battle. In honour of this victory, he gave 
an entertainment to the Greeks, and treated the Athenians 
with an exhibition of the gymnastic games, in which he took 
the master's part himself. The robes and ensigns of the ge- 
neral were laid aside; the rods, the cloak, and the slippers of 
the gymnasiarch were assumed ; and when the combatants had 
fought sufficiently, he parted them himself. 

When he went to the war, he took with him a crown of the 
sacred olive, and, by the direction of some oracle or other, a 
vessel of water filled out of the Clepsydra.* In the mean time, 
Pacorus, son of the king of Parthia, made an incursion into 
Syria, but was routed by Ventidius in Cyrrhestica, and, with 
the greatest part of his army, fell in the battle. This, cele- 
brated victory made ample amends for the defeat of Crassus. 
The Parthians had now been thrice conquered, and were con- 
fined within the bounds of Media and Mesopotamia. Venti- 
dius would not pursue the Parthians any farther, for fear of 
exciting the envy of Antony: he, therefore, turned his arms 
against the revolters, and brought them back to their duty. 
Amongst these was Antiochus, the king of Commagene, whom 
he besieged in the city of Samosata. That prince, at first, offer- 
ed to pay a thousand talents, and to submit himself to the Ro- 
man empire ; upon which Ventidius told him that he must send 
proposals to Antony; for he was then at no great distance; 
and he had not commissioned Ventidius to make peace with 
Antiochus, that something at least might be done by himself. 
But while the siege was thus prolonged, and the people of Sa- 
mosata despaired of obtaining terms, that despair produced a 

* The Clepsydra was a fountain belonging to the citadel at Athens, so 
called; because it was sometimes full of water, and sometimes empty. 

ANTONY. 201 

decree of courage which defeated every effort of the besiegers 
and Antony was at last reduced to the disgraceful necessity of 
accepting three hundred talents. 

After he had done some little towards settling the affairs of 
Syria, he returned to Athens, and sent Ventidius to Rome, to 
enjoy the reward of his merit in a triumph. He was the only 
general that ever triumphed over the Parthians. His birth 
was obscure, but his connections with Antony brought him 
into great appointments; and, by making the best use of them, 
he confirmed what was said of Antony and Octavius Caesar, 
that they were more successful by their lieutenants, than when 
they commanded in person. This observation, with regard to 
Antony in particular, might be justified by the success of Sos- 
sius and Canidius: the former had done great things in Syria, 
and the latter, whom he left in Armenia, reduced the whole 
country, and, after defeating the kings of Iberia and Albania, 
penetrated as far as Mount Caucasus^ and spread the terror of 
Antony's name and power through those barbarous nations. 

Soon after this, upon hearing some disagreeable reports con- 
cerning the designs or the conduct of Caesar, he sailed for Italy 
with a fleet of three hundred ships; and, being refused the 
harbour of Brundusium, he made for Tarentum. There he 
was prevailed on by his wife Octavia, who accompanied him, 
and was then pregnant a third time, to send her to her brother; 
and she was fortunate enough to meet him on her journey, at- 
tended by his two friends, Mecaenas and Agrippa. In con- 
ference with him, she entreated him to consider the peculiarity 
of her situation, and not to make the happiest woman in the 
world the most unfortunate: — "The eyes of all," said she, 
" are necessarily turned on me, who am the wife of Antony, 
and the sister of Caesar; and should these chiefs of the em- 
pile, misled by hasty counsels, involve the whole in war, what- 
ever may be the event, it will be unhappy for me." Caesar was 
softened by the entreaties of his sister, and proceeded with 
peaceable views to Tarentum. His arrival afforded a general 
satisfaction to the people. They were pleased to see such an 
army on the shore, and such a fleet in the harbour, in the mu- 
tual disposition for peace; and nothing but compliments and 
expressions of kindness passing between the generals. An- 
tony first invited Caesar to sup with him, and, in compliment 
to Octavia, he accepted the invitation. At length it was agreed, 
that Caesar should give up to Antony two legions for the Par- 
thian service ; and that Antony, in return, should leave a hun- 
dred armed galleys with Caesar. Octavia, moreover, engaged 
Antony to give up twenty light ships to Caesar, and procured 
from her brother a thousand foot for her husband. Matters 
being thus accommodated, Caesar went to war with Pompey 

Vol. IV. 2 C 

202 ANTONY. 

for the recovery of Sicily; and Antony, leaving under his 
protection his wife and his children, both by the present and 
the former marriage, sailed for Asia. 

Upon his approach to Syria, the love of Cleopatra, which 
had so long been dormant in his heart, and which bettor coun- 
sels seemed totally to have suppressed, revived again, and took 
possession of his soul. The unruly steed, to which Plato* 
compares certain passions, once more broke loose, and in spite 
of honour, interest, and prudence, Antony sent Fonteius Ca- 
pito to conduct Cleopatra into Syria. 

Upon her arrival, he made her the most magnificent pre- 
sents. He gave her the provinces of Phoenicia, Cselosyria, 
Cyprus, great part of Cilicia, that district of Judea which pro- 
duces the balm, and that part of Arabia Nabathaea which lies 
upon the ocean. These extravagant gifts were disagreeable 
to the Romans: for, though he had often conferred on private 
persons considerable governments and kingdoms; though he 
had deprived many princes of their dominions, and beheaded 
Antigonus of Judea, the first king that ever suffered in such a 
manner ;t yet nothing so much disturbed the Romans as his 
enormous profusion in favour of that woman : nor were they 
less offended at his giving the surnames of the Sun and Moon 
to the twins he had by her. 

But Antony knew well how to give a fair appearance to the 
most disreputable actions. The greatness of the Roman em 
pire, he said, appeared more in giving, than in receiving king- 
doms: and that it was proper for persons of high birth and 
station to extend and secure their nobility, by leaving children 
and successors born of different princes: that his ancestor 
Hercules trusted not to the fertility of one woman, as if he had 
fe.ired the penalties annexed to the law of Solon, but, by va- 
rious connections with the sex, became the founder of many 
families. 

After Orodes was slain by his son Phraates,J who took pos- 
session of the kingdom, many of the Parthian chiefs fled to 
Antony; and, amongst the rest, Moneses, a man of great dig- 
nity and power. Antony, thinking that Moneses, in his for- 
tune, resembled Themistocles, and comparing his own wealth 

* Plutarch here alludes to that passage in Plato, where he compares the 
soul to a winged chariot with two horses and a charioteer. One of these horses 
is mischievous and unruly; the other gentle and tractable. The charioteer 
is Reason : the unruly horse denotes the concupiscent, and the tractable horse 
the irascible part. — Plain, Phced. 

t Dion tells us that Antigonus was first tied to a stake and whipped ; and 
that afterwards his throat was cut. Awo-ipa^E, and not 7i-£\£xi{£, is the word ho 
uses. Livy says, Delignii ad palum, virgisquc casi, et securi pcrcussi. 

\ The same Phraates that Horace mentions. Redditum Cyri solio Phraa 
tern. — Lib. iii. Ode 2. 

ANTONY. 

203 

and magnificence to that of the tings of Persia, gave him three 
cities, Larissa, Arethusa, and Hierapolis, which was before 
called Bombyce. But when Phraates sent Moneses assurance 
of his safety, he readily dismissed him. On this occasion he 
formed a scheme to deceive Phraates. He pretended a dis- 
position for peace, and required only that the Roman standards 
and ensigns which had been taken at the defeat of Crassus, 
and such of the prisoners as still survived, might be restored. 
He sent Cleopatra into Egypt; after which he marched through 
Arabia and Armenia, where, as soon as his own troops were 
joined by the allies, he reviewed his army. He had several 
princes in alliance with him. But Artavasdes, king of Arme- 
nia, was the most powerful, for he furnished six thousand horse 
and seven thousand foot. At this review there appeared sixty 
thousand Roman foot, and ten thousand horse, who, though 
chiefly Gauls and Spaniards, were reckoned as Romans. The 
number of the allies, including the light-armed and the cavalry, 
amounted to thirty thousand. 

This formidable armament, which struck terror into the In- 
dians beyond Bactria, and alarmed all Asia, his attachment to 
Cleopatra rendered perfectly useless. His impatience to re 
turn and spend the winter in her arms, made him take the field 
too early in the season, and precipitated all his measures. Aa 
a man who is under the power of enchantment can only act as 
the impulse of the magic directs him, his eye was continually 
drawn to Cleopatra, and to return to her was a greater object 
than to conquer the world. He ought certainly to have win- 
tered in Armenia, that he might give a proper respite and re- 
freshment to his men, after a march of a thousand miles. In 
the early part of the spring he should have made himself mas- 
ter of Media, before the Parthian troops were drawn out of 
garrison: but his impatience put him upon the march, and, 
leaving Armenia on the left, he passed through the province 
of Atropatene, and laid waste the country. In his haste, he 
left behind him the battering engines, amongst which was a 
ram eighty feet long; and these followed the camp on three 
hundred carriages. Had any damage happened to these, it 
would have been impossible to repair them in this upper part 
of Asia, where there is no timber of height or strength suffi- 
cient for the purpose. However, they were brought after him, 
under the conduct of Statianus; and, in the mean time, he laid 
siege to the large city of Phraata, the residence of the king of 
Media's wives and children. Here he perceived his error in 
leaving the engines behind ; for want of which he was obliged 
to throw up a mount against the wall; and that required con- 
siderable time and labour. 

In the mean time, Phraates came up with a numerous army; 

204 ANTONY. 

and being informed that Antony had left behind him his ma 
chines, he sent a large detachment to intercept them. This 
party fell upon Statianus, who, with ten thousand of his men, 
were slain upon the spot. Many were taken prisoners, among 
whom was king Polemo; and the machines were seized by 
the enemy and destroyed. 

This miscarriage greatly discouraged the army; and Arta- 
vasdes, though he had been the promoter of the war, with- 
drew his forces in despair. The Parthians, on the other hand, 
encouraged by their success, came up with the Romans while 
they were employed in the siege, and treated them with the 
most insolent menaces and contempt. Antony, who knew 
that despair and timidity would be the consequence of inac- 
tion, led out ten legions, three praetorian cohorts heavy-armed, 
and the whole body of cavalry, on the business of foraging. 
He was persuaded, at the same time, that this was the only 
method of drawing the enemy after him, and bringing them to 
a battle. After one day's progress, he observed the enemy in 
motion, and watching an opportunity to fall upon him in his 
march. Hereupon he put up in his camp the signal for battle ; 
but, at the same time, struck his tents, as if his intention was 
not to fight, but to retire. Accordingly, he passed the army of 
the barbarians, which was drawn up in form of a crescent; 
but he had previously given orders to the horse to charge the 
enemy, full speed, as soon as their ranks were within reach of 
the legionary troops. The Parthians were struck with asto- 
nishment at the order of the Roman army, when they. observ- 
ed them pass at regular intervals without confusion, and bran - 
dish their pikes in silence. 

When the signal was given for battle, the horse turned short, 
and fell with loud shouts on the enemy. The Parthians re- 
ceived the attack with firmness, though they were too close in 
with them for the use of their bows. But when the infantry 
came to the charge, their shouts, and the clashing of their arms, 
so frightened the enemy's horses, that they were no longer 
manageable; and the Parthians fled without once engaging. 
Antony pursued them closely, in hopes that this action would, 
in a great measure, terminate the war. But when the infantry 
had followed them fifty furlongs, and the cavalry at least a 
hundred and fifty, he found that he had not slain above eighty 
of the enemy, and that thirty only were taken prisoners. 
Thus, the little advantage of their victories, and the heavy 
loss of their defeats, as in the recent instance of the carriages, 
was a fresh discouragement to the Romans. 

The day following they returned with their baggage to the 
camp before Phraata. In their march they met with some 
straggling troops of the enemy, afterwards with greater par- 

i: 

ANTONY. OQ5 

ties, and at last with the whole body, which having easily ral- 
lied, appeared like a fresh army, and harassed them in such a 
manner, that it was with difficulty they reached their camp. 

The Median garrison, in the absence of Antony, had made 
a sally; and those who were left to defend the mount, had 
quitted their post and fled. Antony, at his return, punished 
the fugitives by decimation ; that is, he divided them into tens, 
and in each division put one to death, on whom the lot hap- 
ened to fall. Those that escaped had their allowance in bar- 
ey, instead of wheat. 

Both parties now found their difficulties in the war. An- 
tony had the dread of famine before him, for he could not 
forage without a terrible slaughter of his men; and Phraates, 
who knew the temper of the Parthians, was apprehensive, that 
if the Romans persisted in carrying on the siege, as soon as 
the autumnal equinox was past, and the winter set in, he should 
be deserted by his army, which would not at that time endure 
the open field. To prevent this he had recourse to stratagem. 
He ordered his officers not to pursue the Romans too close 
when they were foraging, but to permit them to carry off pro- 
visions. He commanded them, at the same time, to compli- 
ment them on their valour; and to express his high opinion of 
the Roman bravery. They were instructed likewise, as op- 
portunity might offer, to blame the obstinacy of Antony, 
which exposed so many brave men to the severities of famine 
and a winter campaign, who must suffer, of course, notwith- 
standing all the Parthians could do for them, while Phraates 
sought for nothing more than peace, though he was still de- 
feated in his benevolent intentions. 

Antony, on these reports, began to conceive hopes; but he 
would not offer any terms before he was satisfied whether they 
came originally from the king. The enemy assured him, that 
such were the sentiments of Phraates; and, being induced to 
believe them, he sent some of his friends to demand the stand- 
ards and prisoners that came into their hands on the defeat of 
Crassus; for he thought, if he demanded nothing, it might ap- 
pear that he was pleased with the privilege of retreating. The 
Parthian answered, that the standard and prisoners could not 
be restored; but that Antony, if he thought proper, was at 
liberty to retreat in safety. 

After some few days had been spent in making up the bag- 
gage, he began his march. On this occasion, though he had 
the happiest eloquence in addressing his soldiers, and recon- 
ciling them to every situation and event; yet, whether it was 
through shame, or sorrow, or both, he left that office to Do- 
mitius ^Enobarbus. Some of them were offended at this, as 

Vol. IV. 18 

Q06 ANTONY. 

an act of contempt. But the greater part understood the cause, 
and pitying their general, paid him still greater attention. 

Antony had determined to take his route through a plain and 
open country; but a certain Mardian, who was well acquaint- 
ed with the practices of the Parthians, and had approved his 
faith to the Romans at the battle when the machines were lost, 
advised him to take the mountains on his right, and not to ex- 
pose his heavy-armed troops in an open country to the attacks 
of the Parthian bowmen and cavalry. Phraates, he said, 
amused him with fair promises, merely to draw him off' from 
the siege; but if he would take him for his guide, he would 
conduct him by a way that was nearer, and better furnished 
with necessaries. Antony deliberated some time upon this. 
He would not appear to doubt the honour of the Parthians af- 
ter the truce they had agreed to; and yet he could not but ap- 
prove of a way which was nearer, and which lay through an 
inhabited country. At last, he required the necessary pledges 
of the Mardian's faith, which he gave in suffering himself to 
be bound till he should have conducted the army into Arme- 
nia. In this condition he led the Romans peaceably along for 
two days: but on the third, when Antony, expecting nothing 
less than the Parthians, was marching forward in disorderly 
security, the Mardian observing the mounds of a river broken 
down, and the waters let out into the plain where they were to 
pass, concluded that the Parthians had done this to retard their 
march, and advised Antony to be on his guard; for the enemy, 
he said, was at no great distance. Whilst Antony was draw- 
ing up his men, and preparing such of them as were armed 
with darts and slings to make a sally against the enemy, the 
Parthians came upon him, and, by surrounding his army, 
harassed it on every part. The light-armed Romans, indeed, 
made an incursion upon them, and, galling them with their 
missive weapons, obliged them to retreat; but they soon re- 
turned to the charge, till a band of the Gaulish cavalry attacked 
and dispersed them; so that they appeared no more that day. 

Antony, upon this, found what measures he was to take; 
and covering both wings and the rear with such troops as were 
armed with missive weapons, his army marched in the form of 
a square. The cavalry had orders to repel the attacks of the 
enemy, but not to pursue them to any great distance. The 
Parthians, of course, when in four successive days they could 
make no considerable impression, and found themselves equal- 
ly annoyed in their turn, grew more remiss, and, finding an 
excuse in the winter season, began to think of a retreat. On 
the fifth day, Flavius Gallus, a general officer of great courage 
and valour, requested Antony that he would indulge him with 

ANTONY. 207 

a nwmber of light-armed troops from the rear, together with 
a few horse from the front ; and with these he proposed to 
perform some considerable exploit. These he obtained, and, 
in repelling the attacks of the Parthians, he did not, like the 
rest, retreat by degrees towards the body of the army, but 
maintained his ground, and fought rather on the offensive than 
on the defensive. When the officers of the rear observed that 
he was Separated from the rest, they sent to recall him, but 
he did not obey the summons. It is said, however, that Titius 
the quaestor turned back the standard, and inveighed against 
Gallus for leading so many brave men to destruction. Gallus, 
on the other hand, returned his reproaches, and, commanding 
those who were about him to stand, Titius made his retreat 
alone. Gallus had no sooner made an impression on the ene- 
my's front, than he was surrounded. In this distress he sent 
for assistance ; and here the general officers, and Canidius, the 
favourite of Antony, amongst the rest, committed a most capi- 
tal error. Instead of leading the whole army against the Par- 
thians, as soon as one detachment was overpowered, they sent 
another to its support; and thus, by degrees, they would have 
sacrificed great part of the troops, had not Antony come has- 
tily from the front with the heavy-armed, and, urging on the 
third legion through the midst of the fugitives, stopped the 
enemy's pursuit. 

In this action no fewer than three thousand were slain, and 
five thousand brought back wounded to the camp. Amongst 
the last was Gallus, who had four arrows shot through his body, 
and soon after died of his wounds. Antony visited all that 
had suffered on this unhappy occasion, and consoled them with 
tears of real grief and affection; while the wounded soldiers, 
embracing the hand of their general, entreated him not to at- 
tend to their sufferings, but to his own health and quiet: — 
" While our general is safe, all," they said, " is well. It is 
certain that there was not in those days a braver or finer army. 
The men were tall, stout, able and willing to endure the great- 
est toils. Their respect and ready obedience to their general 
was wonderful. Not a man in the army, from the first officer 
to the meanest soldier, but would have preferred the favour of 
Antony to his own life and safety. In all these respects they 
were at least equal to the armies of ancient Rome. A variety 
of causes, as we have observed, concurred to produce this. 
Antony's noble birth, his eloquence, his candour, his liberality 
and magnificence, and the familiar pleasantry of his conversa- 
tion ; — these were the general causes of the affection he found 
in his army; and, on this particular occasion, his sympathizing 
with the wounded, and attending to their wants, made them to- 
tally forget their sufferings. 

208 ANTONY. 

The Parthians, who had before begun to languish in their 
operations, were so much elevated with this advantage, and 
held the Romans in such contempt, that they even spent the 
night by their camp, in hopes of seizing the baggage while they 
deserted their tents. At break of day, numbers more came up, 
to the amount, as it is said, of forty thousand horse; for the 
Parthian king had sent even his body-guard, so confident was 
he of absolute victory, as to himself, he never was pufesent at 
any engagement. 

Antony, being now to address his soldiers, called for mourn 
mg apparel, that his speech might be more affecting; but as 
his friends would not permit this, he appeared in his general's 
robe. Those that had been victorious he praised, those who 
had fled he reproached ; the former encouraged him by every 
testimony of their zeal; the latter, offering themseh'es either 
to decimation, or any other kind of punishment that he might 
think proper to inflict upon them, entreated him to forego his 
sorrow and concern. Upon this he raised his hands to hea- 
ven, and prayed to the gods, — " That if his happier fortune 
was to be followed by future evil, it might affect only himself, 
and that his army might be safe and victorious." 

The day following they marched out in better and firmer 
order, and the Parthians, who thought they had nothing to do 
but to plunder, when they saw their enemy in fresh spirits, and 
in a capacity for renewing the engagement, were extremely 
disconcerted. However, they fell upon the Romans, from the 
adjacent declivities, and galled them with their arrows as they 
were marching slowly forward. Against these attacks the 
light-armed troops were covered by the legionaries, who, 
placing one knee upon the ground, received the arrows on 
their shields. The rank that was behind covered that which 
was before in a regular gradation; so that this curious fortifi- 
cation, which defended them from the arrows of the enemy, 
resembled the roof of a house. 

The Parthians, who thought that the Romans rested on their 
knees only through weariness and fatigue, threw away their 
bows, and came to close engagement with their spears. Upon 
this the Romans leaped up with a loud shout, cut to pieces 
those who came first to the attack, and put all the rest to flight. 
This method of attack and defence being repeated every day, 
they made but little progress in their march, and were besides 
distressed for want of provisions: they could not forage with- 
out fighting; the corn they could get was but little, and even 
that they had not instruments to grind. The greatest part of 
them had been left behind ; for many of their beasts of bur- 
den were dead, and many were employed in carrying the sick 
and wounded. It is said that a bushel of wheat, Attic mea- 

ANTONY. 209 

sure, was sold for fifty drachmas, and a barley-loaf for its weight 
in silver. Those who sought for roots and pot-herbs found 
few that they had been accustomed to eat; and in tasting un- 
known herbs, they met with one that brought on madness and 
death. He that had eaten of it immediately lost all memory 
and knowledge; but, at the same time, would busy himself in 
turning and moving every stone he met with, as if he was upon 
some very important pursuit. The camp was full of unhappy 
men bending to the ground, and thus digging up and removing 
stones, till at last they were carried off by a bilious vomiting; 
when wine,* the only remedy ,t was not to be had. Thus, 
while numbers perished, and the Parthians still continued to 
harass them, Antony is said frequently to have cried out, — " 0 
the ten thousand!" alluding to the army that Xenophon led 
from Babylon, both a longer wa)-,f and through more nume- 
rous conflicts, and yet led in safety. 

The Parthians, when they found that they could not break 
through the Roman ranks, nor throw them into disorder, but 
were frequently beaten in their attacks, began once more to 
treat their foragers in a peaceable manner. They showed them 
their bows unstrung, and informed them that they had given up 
the pursuit, and were going to depart. A few Medes, they said, 
might continue the route a day or two longer, but they would 
give the Romans no trouble, as their only purpose was to pro- 
tect some of the remoter villages. These professions were 
accompanied with many kind salutations, insomuch that the 
Romans conceived fresh hopes and spirits; and, because the 
way over the mountains was said to be destitute of water, An- 
tony once more was desirous of taking his route through the 
plains. When he was going to put his scheme in execution, 
one Mithridates, cousin to that Moneses who had formerly 
sought his protection, and been presented by him with three 
cities, came from the enemy's camp, and desired he might be 
permitted to speak with some person that understood the Sy- 
rian or the Parthian language. Alexander of Antioch, a friend 
of Antony's, went out to him, and after the Parthian had in- 
formed him who he was, and attributed his coming to the kind- 
ness of Moneses, he asked him, whether he did not see, at a 
great distance before him, a range of high hills? — "Under 
those hills," said he, " the Avhole Parthian army lies in am- 
buscade for you : for, at the foot of the mountains, there is a 

* The ancients held wine to be a principal remedy against vomiting : — 
Prceterea vomitiones sistit. — Plin. JVat. Hist. 1. xxiii. c. 1 . 

t It was likewise esteemed good against many kinds of poison. Merum est 
contra cicutam, Aconita, et omnia quae refrigerant remedium. — Ibid. 

\ When Plutarch says that Xenophon led his ten thousand a longer way, lie 
must mean to terminate Antony's march with Armenia. 

Vol. IV. 2 D IS* 

OJO ANTONY. 

spacious plain, and, there, when deluded by their artifices, 
you have left the way over the heights, they expect to find you. 
In the mountain roads, indeed, you have thirst and toil to con- 
tend with, as usual; but should Antony take the plains, he 
must expect the fate of Crassus." 

After he had given this information, he departed ; and An- 
tony on the occasion assembled a council, and amongst the 
rest his Mardian guide, who concurred with the directions of 
the Parthian. The way over the plains, he said, was hardly 
practicable, were there no enemy to contend with. The wind- 
ings were long and tedious, and difficult to be made out. The 
rugged way over the mountains, on the contrary, had no other 
difficulty in it than to endure thirst for one day. Antony, there- 
fore, changed his mind, and ordering each man to take water 
along with him, took the mountain road by night. As there 
was not a sufficient number of vessels, some conveyed their 
water in helmets, and others in bladders. 

The Parthians were informed of Antony's motions, and, 
contrary to custom, pursued him in the night. About sun- 
rise they came up with the rear, weary as it was with toil and 
watching; for that night they had travelled thirty miles. In 
this condition they had to contend with an unexpected enemy, 
and being at once obliged to fight and continue their march, 
their thirst became still more insupportable. At last the front 
came up to a river, the water of which was cool and clear, 
but being salt and acrimonious, it occasioned a pain in the 
stomach and bowels that had been heated and inflamed with 
thirst. The Mardian guide had, indeed, forewarned them of 
this, but the poor fellows rejecting the information that was 
brought them, drank eagerly of the stream. Antony, run- 
ning amongst the ranks, entreated them to forbear but a little. 
He told them that there was another river at no great distance, 
the water of which might be drank with safety; and that the 
way was so extremely rocky and uneven, that it was impos- 
sible for the enemy's cavalry to pursue. At the same time he 
sounded a retreat, to call off such as were engaged with the 
enemy, and gave the signal for pitching their tents, that they 
miffht at least have the convenience of shade. 

While their tents were fixing, and the Parthians as usual 
retiring from the pursuit, Mithridates came again, and Alex- 
ander being sent out to him, he advised that the Romans, after 
a little rest, should rise and make for the river, because the 
Parthians did not propose to carry their pursuit beyond it. 
Alexander reported this to Antony, and Mithridates being 
presented with as many phials and cups of gold as he could 
conceal in his garments, once more left the camp. Antony 
while it was yet day, struck his tents, and maiched, unmo 

ANTONY. 211 

Jested by the enemy. But so dreadful a night as followed he 
had never passed. Those who were known to be possessed of 
gold or silver were slain and plundered, and the money that 
was conveyed in the baggage was made a prey of. Last of 
all, Antony's baggage was seized, and the richest bowls and 
tables were cut asunder and divided amongst the plunderers. 
The greatest terror and distraction ran through the whole 
army, for it was concluded that the inroads of the enemy had 
occasioned this flight of confusion. Antony sent for one of 
his freedmen, called Rhamnus, and made him swear that he 
would stab him, and cut off" his head, whenever he should 
command him, that he might neither fall alive into the hands 
of the enemy, nor be known when dead. While his friends 
were weeping around him, the Mardian guide gave him some 
encouragement, by telling him that the river was at hand, as 
he could perceive by the cool freshness of the air that issued 
from it, and that, of course the troubles of his journey would 
soon be at an end, as the night nearly was. At the same 
time he was informed that all these disorders had been occa- 
sioned by the avarice of his soldiers, and he, therefore, order- 
ed a signal for encamping, that he might rectify his disordered 
army.* 

It was now day-light, and as soon as the troops were brought 
to a little order, the Parthians once more began to harass the 
rear. The signal was, therefore, given to the light troops to 
engage, and the heavy-armed received the arrows under a roof 
of shields, as before. The Parthians, however, durst not come 
any more to close engagement, and when the front had ad- 
vanced a little farther, the river was in sight. Antony first 
drew up the cavalry on the banks to carry over the weak and 
wounded. The combat was now over, and the thirsty could 
enjoy their water in quiet. At sight of the river the Parthians 
unstrung their bows, and, with the highest encomiums on their 
bravery, bade the enemies pass over in peace. They did so, 
and, after the necessary refreshments, proceeded on their 
march, without much confidence in the Parthian praise or pro- 
fessions. Within six days from, the last battle, they arrived 
at the river Araxes, which divides Media from Armenia. This 

* Plutarch does not, in this place, appear to be sufficiently informed. The 
cause of this tumult in the army could not be the avarice of the soldiers only, 
since that might have operated long before, and at a time when they were 
capable of enjoying money. Their object now was the preservation of life; 
and it was not wealth, but water, that they wanted. We must look for the 
cause of this disorder, then, in some other circumstance; and that probably 
was the report of their general's despair, or possibly of his death ; for, other- 
wise, they would hardly have plundered his baggage. The fidelity and affec- 
tion they had shown him in all their distresses, afford a sufficient argument 
on this behalf. 

212 

ANTONY. 

river, on account of the depth and strength of its current, 
seemed difficult to pass, and the rumour, moreover, ran through 
the army that the enemy was there in ambuscade, to attack 
them as they forded it. However, they passed over m safety, 
and when they set foot in Armenia, with the avidity of mari- 
ners when they first come on shore, they kissed the ground in 
adoration, and embraced each other with a pleasure that could 
only express itself in tears. The ill consequences of their 
former extremities, however,discovered themselves even here; 
for, as they now passed through a country of plenty and pro- 
fusion, their too great indulgences threw them into "the dropsy 
and the cholic. Antony, on reviewing his army, found that he 
had lost twenty thousand foot and four thousand horse, more 
than half of which had not died in battle, but by sickness. 
They had been twenty-seven days in their return from Phraata, 
and had beaten the Parthians in eighteen engagements; but 
these victories were by no means complete, because they could 
not prosecute their advantages by pursuit. 

Hence it is evident, that Artavasdes deprived Antony of 
the fruits of his Parthian expedition: for, had he been assisted 
by the sixteen thousand horse which he took with him out of 
Media, (who were armed like the Parthians, and accustomed 
to fight with them,) after the Romans had beaten them in set 
battles, this cavalry might have taken up the pursuit, and 
harassed them in such a manner, that they could not so often 
have rallied, and returned to the charge. All, therefore, wTere 
exciting Antony to revenge himself on Artavasdes. But he 
followed better counsels, and, in his present weak and indigent 
condition, he did not think proper to withhold the usual re- 
spect and honours he had paid him. But when he came into 
Armenia on another occasion, after having drawn him to a 
meeting by fair promises and invitations, he seized and carried 
him bound to Alexandria, where he led him in triumphal pro- 
cession. The Romans were offended at this triumph and at 
Antony, who had thus transferred the principal honours of 
their country to Egypt, for the gratification of Cleopatra. 
These things, however, happened in a later period of Anto- 
ny's life. 

The severity of the winter, and perpetual snows, were so 
destructive to the troops, that, in his march, he lost eight 
thousand men. Accompanied by a small party, he went down 
to the sea-coast, and in a fort between Berytus and Sidon, 
called the White Hair,* he waited for Cleopatra. To divert 
his impatience on her delay, he had recourse to festivity and 
intoxication ; and he would frequently, over his cups, start up 

* Afuxri xoji-o. 

ANTONY. £13 

from his seat, and run leaping and dancing to look out for her 
approach. At length she came, and brought with her a large 
quantity of money and clothing for the army. Some, how- 
ever, have asserted that she brought nothing but the clothes, 
and that Antony supplied the money, though he gave her the 
credit of it. 

There happened at this time a quarrel between Phraates and 
the king of the Medes, occasioned, as it is said, by the divi- 
sion of the Roman spoils, and the latter was apprehensive of 
losing his kingdom. He, therefore, sent to Antony an offer of 
his assistance against the Parthians. Antony, who concluded 
that he had failed of conquering the Parthians only through 
want of cavalry and bowmen, and would here seem rather to 
confer than to receive a favour, determined once more to re- 
turn to Armenia, and, after joining the king of the Medes at 
the river Araxes, to renew the war. 

Octavia, who was still at Rome, now expressed a desire of 
visiting Antony, and Caesar gave her his permission, not, ac- 
cording to the general opinion, merely to oblige her, but that 
the ill treatment and neglect which he concluded she should 
meet with, might give him a pretence for renewing the war. 
When she arrived at Athens, she received letters from Anto- 
ny, commanding her to continue there, and acquainting her 
with his new expedition. These letters mortified her, for she 
suspected the expedition to be nothing more than a pretence: 
however, she wrote to him, and desired he would send his 
commands where she should leave the presents she had brought. 
These presents consisted of clothing for the army, beasts of 
burden, money, and gifts for his officers and friends. Beside 
these, she had brought two thousand picked men, fully equip- 

f>ed and armed for the general's cohort. Octavia sent this 
etter by Niger, a friend of Antony's, who did not fail to pay 
her the compliments she deserved, but represented her to An- 
tony in the most agreeable light. 

Cleopatra dreaded her rival. She was apprehensive that if 
she came to Antony, the respectable gravity of her manners, 
added to the authority and interest of Caesar, would carry off 
her husband. She, therefore, pretended to be dying for the 
love of Antony, and, to give a colour to her pretence, she 
emaciated herself by abstinence. At his approach she taught 
her eye to express an agreeable surprise, and when he left her, 
she put on the look of languishment and dejection. Some- 
times she would endeavour to weep, and then, as if she wish- 
ed to hide the tear from her tender Antony, she affected to 
wipe it off unseen. 

Antony was, all this while, preparing for his Median expedi- 
tion, and Cleopatra's creatures and dependents did not fail to 

214 

ANTONY. 

reproach his unfeeling heart, which could suffer the woman 
whose life was wrapped up in his, to die for his sake. Octavia's 
marriage, they said, was a mere political convenience, and it 
was enough for her that she had the honour of being called his 
wife. Poor Cleopatra, though queen of a mighty nation, was 
called nothing more than his mistress ; yet even with this, for 
the sake of his society, she could be content ; but of that so- 
ciety, whenever she should be deprived, it would deprive her 
of life. These insinuations so totally unmanned him, that, 
through fear of Cleopatra's putting an end to her life, he re- 
turned to Egypt, and put off the Mede till summer, though at 
that time the Parthian affairs were said to be in a seditious and 
disorderly situation. At length, however, he went into Ar- 
menia, and after entering into alliance with the Mede, and be- 
trothing one of Cleopatra's sons to a daughter of his who was 
very young, he returned, that he might attend to the civil war. 
When Octavia returned from Athens, Csesar looked upon 
the treatment she had met with as a mark of the greatest con- 
tempt; and he, therefore, ordered her to retire and live alone. 
However, she refused to quit her husband's house, and more- 
over entreated Csesar by no means to have recourse to arms 
merely on her account. It would be infamous, she said, for 
the two chiefs of the Roman empire to involve the people in 
a civil war — one for the love of a woman, and the other out of 
jealousy. By her own conduct she added weight to her ex- 
postulations. She kept up the dignity of Antony's house, and 
took the same care of his children, as well those that he had 
by Fulvia as her own, that she could possibly have taken, had 
he been present. Antony's friends, who were sent to Rome to 
solicit honours or transact business, she kindly entertained, 
and used her best offices with Caesar to obtain what they re- 
quested. Yet, even by this conduct, she was hurting Antony, 
contrary to her inclination. His injurious treatment of such 
a woman excited a general indignation; and the distribution 
he had made to his children in Alexandria carried with it 
something so imperious and so disparaging to the Romans, 
that it increased that indignation not a little. The manner of 
doing it was extremely obnoxious. He summoned the peo- 
ple to the place of public exercise, and ordering two golden 
chairs to be placed on a tribunal of silver; one for himself, 
and the other for Cleopatra, beside lower seats for the chil- 
dren : he announced her queen of Egypt, Cyprus, Africa, and 
Ccelosyria; and nominated Csesario, her son by Csesar the dic- 
tator, her colleague. The sons she had by him he entitled 
kings of kings ; and to Alexander he gave Armenia and Media, 
together with Parthia, when it should be conquered. To 
Ptolemy he gave Phoenicia, Syria, and Cilicia. At the samo 

ANTONY. 215 

time the children made their appearance, Alexander in a Me- 
dian dress, with the turban and tiara; and Ptolemy, in the 
long cloak and slippers, with a bonnet encircled by a diadem. 
The latter was dressed like the successors of Alexander; the 
former, like the Median and. Armenian kings. When the 
children saluted their parents, one was attended by Armenian, 
the other by Macedonian guards. Cleopatra on this, and on 
other public occasions, wore the sacred robe of Isis,* and 
affected to give audience to the people in the character and 
name of the New Isis. 

Caesar expatiated on these things in the senate, and, by fre- 
quent accusations, incensed the people against Antony. An 
tony did not fail to recriminate by his deputies. In the first 
place, he charged Caesar with wresting Sicily out of the hands 
of Pompey, and not dividing it with him. His next charge 
was, that Caesar had never returned the ships he had borrow- 
ed of him : a third, that, after reducing his colleague Lepidus 
to the condition of a private man, he had taken to himself his 
army, his province, and his tributes : lastly, that he had distri- 
buted almost all the lands in Italy among his own soldiers, and 
had left nothing for his. To these Caesar made answer, that 
Lepidus was reduced, from an incapacity of sustaining his 
government; that what he had acquired by war he was ready 
to divide with Antony, and at the same time he expected to 
share Armenia with him ; that his soldiers had no right to 
^nds in Italy, because Media and Armenia, which by their 
bravery they had added to the Roman empire, had been al- 
lotted to them. 

Antony being informed of these things in Armenia, immedi- 
ately sent Canidius to the sea-coast with sixteen legions. In 
the mean time he went to Ephesus, attended by Cleopatra. 
There he assembled his fleet, which consisted of eight hun- 
dred ships of burden, whereof Cleopatra furnished two hun- 
dred, beside twenty thousand talents, and provisions for the 
whole army. Antony, by the advice of Domitius and some 
other friends, ordered Cleopatra to return to Egypt, and there 
to wait the event of the war. But the queen, apprehensive 
that a reconciliation might take place, through the mediation 
of Octavia, by means of large bribes drew over Canidius to 
her interest. She prevailed on him to represent to Antony, 
that it was unreasonable to refuse so powerful an auxiliary 
the privilege of being present at the war; that her presence 
was even necessary to animate and encourage the Egyptians, 
who made so considerable a part of his naval force : nor was 

* This robe was of all colours, to signify the universality of the goddess' 
influence. The robe of Osiris was of one colour only. 

fHQ ANTONY. 

Cleopatra, in point of abilities, inferior to any of the princes, 
his allies ; since she had not only been a long time at the head 
of a considerable kingdom, but, by her intercourse with him, 
had learnt the administration of the greatest affairs. These 
remonstrances, as the fates had decreed every thing for Caesar, 
had the desired effect; and they sailed together for Samos, 
where they indulged in every species of luxury: for at the 
same time that the kings, governors, states, and provinces, be- 
tween Syria, the Moeotis, Armenia, and Lauria,* were com- 
manded to send their contributions to the war, the whole tribe 
of players and musicians were ordered to repair to Samos; 
and, while almost the whole world beside was venting its an- 
guish in groans and tears, that island alone was piping and 
dancing. The several cities sent oxen for sacrifice, and kings 
contended in the magnificence of their presents and entertain- 
ments. So that it was natural to say, — " What kind of figure 
will these people make in their triumph, when their very pre- 
parations for war are so splendid!" 

When these things were over, he gave Priene for the resi- 
dence of the players and musicians, and sailed for Athens, 
where he once more renewed the farce of public entertain- 
ments. The Athenians had treated Octavia, when she was at 
Athens, with the highest respect; and Cleopatra, jealous of the 
honours she had received, endeavoured to court the people by 
every mark of favour. The people in return decreed her 
public honours, and sent a deputation to wait on her with the 
decree. At the head of this deputation was Antony himself, 
in character of a citizen of Athens; and he was prolocutor on 
the occasion. 

In the mean time he sent some of his people to turn Octavia 
out of his house at Rome. When she left it, it is said she 
took with her all his children, (except the eldest by Fulvia, 
who attended him,) and deplored the severity of her fate with 
tears, under the apprehension that she would be looked upon 
as one of the causes of the civil war. The Romans pitied her 
sufferings, but still more the folly of Antony, particularly such 
as had seen Cleopatra; for she was by no means preferable to 
Octavia, either on account of her youth or beauty. 

When Caesar was informed of the celerity and magnificence 
of Antony's preparations, he was afraid of being forced into 
the war that summer. This would have been very inconve- 
nient for him, as he was in want of almost every thing, and 
the levies of money occasioned a general dissatisfaction. The 

* As a mountain of no note in Attica does not seem proper to be mention 
ed with great kingdoms and provinces, it is supposed that we ought to read 
Illyria instead of Lauria. Illyria is afterwards mentioned as the boundary 
of Antony's dominions on that side. 

ANTONY. 

217 

whole Lody of the people were taxed one-fourth of their in- 
come, and the sons of freedmen one-eighth. This occasioned 
the greatest clamour and confusion in Italy; and Antony cer 
tainly committed a very great oversight in neglecting the ad- 
vantage. By his unaccountable delays he gave Caesar an op- 
portunity both to complete his preparations, and appease the 
minds of the people. When the money was demanded, they 
murmured and mutinied; but after it was once paid, they 
thought of it no longer. 

Titius and Plancus, men of consular dignity, and Antony's 
principal friends, being ill-used by Cleopatra, on account of 
their opposing her stay in the army, abandoned him and went 
over to Caesar. As they knew the contents of Antony's will, 
they presently made him acquainted with them. This will 
was lodged in the hands of the vestals; and when Caesar de- 
manded it, they refused to send it; adding, that if he was de- 
termined to have it, he must come and take it himself. Ac- 
cordingly, he went and took it. First of all, he read it over to 
himself, and remarked such passages as were most liable to 
censure. Afterwards he read it to the senate, and this gave a 
general offence.* It seemed to the greatest part an absurd 
and unprecedented thing that a man should suffer in his life, 
for what he had ordered to be done after his death. Caesar 
dwelt particularly on the orders he had given concerning his 
funeral : for in case he died at Rome, he had directed his body 
to be carried in procession through the forum, and afterwards 
conveyed to Alexandria to Cleopatra. Calvisius, a retainer 
of Caesar's, also accused him of having given to Cleopatra 
the Pergamenian library, which consisted of two hundred 
thousand volumes; and added, that once, when they supped in 
public, Antony rose and trode on Cleopatra's foot,t by way 
of signal for some rendezvous. He asserted, moreover, that 
he suffered the Ephesians in his presence to call Cleopatra 
sovereign; and that when he was presiding at the administra- 
tion of public affairs, attended by several tetrarchs and kings, 
he received love-letters from her, enclosed in onyx and crys- 
tal, and there perused them. Besides, when Furnius, a man 
of great dignity? and one of the ablest of the Roman orators, 
was speaking in public, Cleopatra was carried through the 
forum in a litter; upon which Antony immediately started up, 
and no longer paying his attention to the cause, accompanied 
her, leaning on the litter as he walked. 

* This was an act of most injurious violence. Nothing could be more 
•acred than a will deposited in the hands of the vestals. 

+ Tfijkiv T8s irrfat. The former English translator says, that Antony look 
ho'd of her feet and handled them. Whatever idea he might have of Anto- 
ny's familiarity, he ought not, surely, to have been so familiar with Plutarch* 
*Vot.. 1V.—1 V 19 

218 ANTONY. 

The veracity of Calvisius, in these accusations, was, never 
theless, suspected. The friends of Antony solicited the peo- 
ple in his behalf, and despatched Geminius, one of their num- 
ber, to put him on his guard against the abrogation of his 
power, and his being declared an enemy to the Roman people. 
Geminius sailed into Greece, and, on his arrival, was suspect- 
ed by Cleopatra as an agent of Octavius. On this account, 
be was contemptuously treated, and the lowest seats were as- 
signed him at the public suppers. This, however, he bore for 
some time with patience, in hopes of obtaining an interview 
with Antony: but being publicly called upon to declare the 
cause of his coining, he answered, — " That one part of the 
cause would require to be communicated at a sober hour, but 
the other part could not be mistaken, whether a man were 
drunk or sober; for it was clear that all things would go well, 
if Cleopatra retired into Egypt." Antony was extremely 
chagrined; and Cleopatra said, — "You have done very well, 
Geminius, to confess without being put to the torture." Ge- 
minius soon after withdrew, and returned to Rome. Many 
more of Antony's friends were driven off by the creatures of 
Cleopatra, when they could no longer endure their insolence 
and scurrility. Among the rest were Marcus Silanus and Del- 
lius the historian. Tbe latter informs us, that Cleopatra had 
a design upon his life, as he was told by Glaucus the physi- 
cian; because he had once affronted her at supper, by saying, 
that while Sarmentus was drinking Falernian at Rome, they 
were obliged to take up with vinegar. Sarmentus was a boy 
of Caesar's, one of those creatures whom the Romans call 
* Deliciae.' 

When Caesar had made his preparations, it was decreed that 
war should be declared against Cleopatra; for that Antony 
could not be said to possess that power, which he had already 
given up to a woman. Caesar observed, that he was like a man 
under enchantment, who has no longer any power over himself. 
It was not he with whom they were going to war, but Mar- 
don the eunuch, and Pothinus; Iris, (Cleopatra's woman,) and 
Charmion; for these had the principal direction of affairs. 
Several prodigies are said to have happened previous to this 
war. Pisaurum, a colony of Antonyms on the Adriatic, was 
swallowed up by an earthquake. Antony's statue in Alba was 
covered with sweat for many days, which returned, though it 
was frequently wiped off. While he was at Patrae, the temple 
of Hercules was set on fire by lightning: and at Athens the 
statue of Bacchus was carried by a whirlwind from the Gi- 
gantomachia into the theatre. These things concerned An- 
tony the more nearly, as he affected to be a descendant of Her- 
cules, and an imitator of Bacchus, insomuch that he was call- 

ANTONY 

219 

ed the younger Bacchus. The same wind threw down the 
colossal statues of Eunienes and Attalus, called the Antonii, 
while the rest were unmoved. And in Cleopatra's royal gal- 
ley, which was called Jintonius, a terrible phenomenon ap- 
peared. Some swallows had built their nests in the stern, and 
others drove them away and destroyed their young. 

Upon the commencement of the war, Antony had no fewer 
than five hundred armed vessels, magnificently adorned, and 
furnished with eight or ten banks of oars. He had, more- 
over, a hundred thousand foot, and twelve thousand horse 
The auxiliary kings, who fought under his banners, were 
Bocchus of Africa, Tarcondemus of the Upper Cilicia, 
Archelaiis of Cappadocia, Philadelphus of Paphlagonia, Mi- 
thridates of Commagene, and Addallas of Thrace. Those 
who did not attend in person, but sent supplies, were Polemo 
of Pontus, Malchus of Arabia, Herod of Judaea, and Amyn- 
tas king of Lycaonia and Galatia. Beside these he had sup- 
plies also from the king of the Medes. Caesar had two hun- 
dred and fifty men of war, eighty thousand foot, and an equal 
number of horse with the enemy. Antony's dominions lay 
from the Euphrates and Armenia, to the Ionian sea and Illy- 
ria: Caesar's extended from Illyria to the western ocean, and 
from that again to the Tuscan and Sicilian sea. He had 
likewise all that part of Africa which lies opposite to Italy, 
Gaul, and Spain, as far as the pillars of Hercules. The rest 
of that country, from Cyrene to Ethiopia, was in the posses- 
sion of Antony. 

But such a slave was he to the will of a woman, that though 
much superior at land, to gratify her, he put his whole con- 
fidence in the navy; notwithstanding that the ships had not 
half their complement of men, and the officers were obliged 
to press and pick up in Greece vagrants, ass-drivers, reapers, 
and boys. Nor could they make up their numbers even with 
these, but many of the ships were still almost empty. Caesar's 
ships, which were not high-built, or splendidly set off for 
show, but tight good sailers, well manned and equipped, 
continued in the harbours of Tarentum and Brundusium. 
From thence he sent to Antony, desiring he would meet him 
with his forces, that no time might be lost; offering at the 
same time to leave the ports and harbours free for his landing, 
and to withdraw his army a day's journey on horseback, that 
he might make good his encampment. To this Antony re- 
turned a haughty answer, and though he was the older man, 
challenged Caesar to single combat; or if he should decline 
this, he might meet him at Pharsalia, and decide it where 
Caesar and Pompey had done before. Caesar prevented this, 
for while Antony made for Actium, which is now called ]Ni- 

220 ANTONY. 

copolis, he crossed the Ionian, and seized on Toryne, a place 
in Epirus. Antony was distressed on finding this, because 
he was without his infantry; but Cleopatra made a jest of it, 
and asked him if it was so very dreadful a thing that Caesar 
was got into the Ladle?* 

Antony, as soon as it was day-light, perceived the enemy 
making up to him; and fearing that his ill-manned vessels 
would be unable to stand the attack, he armed the rowers, and 
placed them on the decks to make a show: with the oars sus- 
pended on each side of the vessels, he proceeded in this mock 
form of battle towards Actium. Caesar was deceived by the 
stratagem, and retired. The water about Caesar's camp was 
both scarce and bad, and Antony had the address to cut off the 
little that they had. 

It was much about this time that, contrary to the inclination 
of Cleopatra, he acted so generous a part by Domitius. The 
latter, even when he had a fever upon him, took a small boat, 
and went over to Caesar: Antony, though he could not but re- 
sent this, sent after him his baggage, his friends, and servants, 
and Domitius, as if it had been for grief that his treachery was 
discovered, died very soon after.t Amyntas and Deiotarus 
likewise went over to Caesar. 

Antony's fleet was so very unsuccessful, and so unfit for 
service, that he was obliged at last to think of his land-forces; 
and Canidius, who had been retained in the interest of Cleo- 
patra, now changing his mind, thought it necessary that she 
should be sent away, and that Antony should retire into 
Thrace or Macedonia, to decide it in the field. These places 
were thought of the rather, because Dicomes, king of the 
Getae, had offered to assist Antony with a large army. To 
give up the sea to Caesar, who, in his Sicilian wars, had ac- 
quired so much experience upon it, he said would be no dis- 
grace; but to give up the advantage which so able a general as 
himself might make of his land-forces, and waste the strength 
of so many legions in useless draughts for the sea-service, 
would be infinitely absurd. Cleopatra, however, prevailed for 
the decision by sea; though her motive was not the superior 
chance of victory, but, in case of being vanquished, the better 
opportunity to escape. 

There was a neck of land that lay between Antony's cam]) 
and his fleet, along which he used to go frequently from one 

* In Greek, Toryne. 

+ Plutarch seems to be ill-informed about this matter. It is most probable 
that Domitius, one of the firmest friends of Antony, was delirious when he 
went over to Cassar, and that Antony was sensible of this when he sent his 
attendants after him. It is possible, at the same time, that, when he returned 
to himself, the sense of his desertion might occasion his death. 

ANTONY. 221 

to the other. Caesar was informed by a domestic how easy it 
might be to seize Antony in this passage, and he sent a party 
to tie in wait for that purpose. They were so near carrying 
their point, tbat they seized the person who went before An- 
tony; and had they not been too hasty, he must have fallen 
into their hands, for it was with the greatest difficulty that he 
made his escape by flight. 

After it was determined to decide the affair by sea, they set 
fire to all the Egyptian vessels except sixty. The best and 
largest ships, from three banks of oars to ten, were selected, 
and these had their proper complement of men, for they were 
supplied with twenty thousand foot, and two thousand archers. 
Upon this, a veteran warrior, an experienced officer in the in- 
fantry, who had often fought under Antony, and whose body 
was covered with scars, cried, pointing to those scars, — " Why 
will you, general, distrust these honest wounds, and rest your 
hopes on those villanous wooden bottoms? Let the Egyptians 
and the Phoenicians skirmish at sea; but give us at least the 
land; for there it is that we have learnt to conquer or to die." 
Antony made no answer, but seemed to encourage him by the 
motions of his hand and head; though, at the same time, he 
had no great confidence himself; for when the pilots would 
have left the sails behind, he ordered them to take them all on 
board, pretending, indeed, that it should be done to pursue the 
enemy's flight, not to facilitate his own. 

On that and the three following days the sea ran too high 
for an engagement: but on the fifth the weather was fine and 
the sea calm. Antony and Poplicola led the right wing, Oce- 
llus the left, and Marcus Octavius and Marcus Justeius com- 
manded the centre. Caesar had given his left wing to Agrippa, 
and led the right himself. Antony's land-forces were com- 
manded by Canidius, and Caesar's remained quiet on the shore, 
under the command of Taurus. As to the generals them- 
selves, Antony was rowed about in a light vessel, ordering his 
men, on account of the weight of their vessels, to keep their 
ground, and fight as steadily as if they were at land. He or- 
dered his pilots to stand as firm as if they were at anchor, in 
that position to receive the attacks of the enemy, and by all 
means to avoid the disadvantage of the straits. Caesar, when 
he left his tent before day, to review his fleet, met a man who 
was driving an ass. Upon asking his name, the man answer- 
ed, my name is Eutychus, and the name of my ass is Nicon.* 
The place where he met him was afterwards adorned with 
trophies of the beaks of ships, and there he placed the statue 
of the ass and his driver, in brass. After having reviewed the 

* Good Fortune, and Victory. 
19* 

222 ANTONY. 

whole fleet, and taken his post in the right wing, he attended 
to the fleet of the enemy, which he was surprised to find steady 
and motionless, as if it lay at anchor. For some time he was 
of opinion that it was so, and, for that reason, he kept back his 
fleet at the distance of eight furlongs. About noon there was 
a brisk gale from the sea, and Antony's forces being impatient 
for the combat, and trusting to the height and bulk of their 
vessels, which they thought would render them invincible, put 
the left wing in motion. Caesar rejoiced at the sight of this, 
and kept back his right wing, that he might the more effec- 
tually draw them out to the open sea, where his light galleys 
could easily surround the heavy half-manned vessels of the 
enemy. 

The attack was not made with any violence or impetuosit}r : 
for Antony's ships were too heavy for that kind of rapid im- 
pression, which, however, is very necessary for the breach of 
the enemy's vessel. On the other hand, Caesar's ships durst 
neither encounter head to head with Antony's, on account of 
the strength and roughness of their beaks, nor yet attack them 
on the sides, since, by means of their weight, they would 
easily have broken their beaks, which were made of large 
square pieces of timber fastened to each other with iron 
cramps. The engagement, therefore, was like a battle at land, 
rather than a sea-fight, or more properly, like the storming of a 
town: for there were generally three or more ships of Caesar's 
about one of Antony's, assaulting it with pikes, javelins, and 
fire-brands, while Antony's men, out of their wooden towers,* 
threw weapons of various kinds from engines. Agrippa open- 
ed his left wing with a design to surround the enemy, and 
Poplicola, in his endeavour to prevent him, was separated 
from the main body, which threw it into disorder, while, at 
the same time, it was attacked with great vigour by Arrun- 
tius.t When things were in this situation, and nothing deci- 
sive was yet effected, Cleopatra's sixty ships on a sudden 
hoisted their sails, and fairly took to flight through the midst 
of the combatants; for they were placed in the rear of the large 
vessels, and, by breaking their way through them, they occa- 
sioned no small confusion. The enemy saw them, with asto- 
nishment, making their way with a fair wind for the Pelopon- 
nesus. Antony, on this occasion, forgot both the general and 
the man; and, as some author has pleasantly observed, that a 
lover's soul lives in the body of his mistress; so, as if he had 
been absolutely incorporated with her, he suffered her to carry 
him, soul and body, away. No sooner did he see her vessel 

* His ships are so called, on account of their tallness. 
t Arruntius must have commanded Cassar's centre, though that circum- 
stance is not mentioned. 

ANTONY. i223 

noisting sail, than forgetting every other object — forgetting 
those brave friends that were shedding their blood in his cause 
— he took a five-oared galley, and, accompanied only by Alex- 
ander the Syrian, and Scellius, followed her, who was tbe first 
cause, and now the accomplisher, of his ruin. Her own de- 
struction was certain, and he voluntarily involved himself in 
her fate. 

When she saw him coming, she put up a signal in her vessel, 
on which he soon went aboard: neither of them coulc look 
each other in the face; and Antony sat down at the head of 
the ship, where he remained in sombre silence, holding his 
head between his hands. In the mean time, Caesar's light 
ships that were in pursuit of Antony, came in sight. Upon 
this he ordered his pilot to tack about and meet them ; but 
they all declined the engagement, and made off, except Eury- 
cles the Lacedaemonian, who shook his lance at him in a me- 
nacing manner on the deck. Antony, standing at the head of 
his galley, cried, — " Who art thou that thus pursuest Antony ?" 
He answered: — "I am Eurycles the son of" Lachares, and fol- 
low the fortunes of Cassar to revenge my father's death." This 
Lachares Antony had beheaded for a robbery. Eurycles, 
however, did not attack Antony's vessel; but fell upon the 
other admiral-galley, (for there were two of that rank,) and by 
the shock turned her round. He took that vessel, and another 
which contained Antony's most valuable plate and furniture. 
When Eurycles was gone, Antony returned to the same pen- 
sive posture; and continuing thus for three days, during which, 
either through shame or resentment, he refused to see Cleopa- 
tra, he arrived at Toenarus. There the women who attended 
them, first brought them to speak to each other, then to dine 
together, and not long after, as it may be supposed, to sleep 
together. At last, several of his transports, and some of his 
friends who had escaped from the defeat, came up with him, 
and informed him that his fleet was totally destroyed, but that 
his land forces were yet unhurt. Hereupon he sent orders to 
Canidius immediately to march his army through Macedonia 
into Asia. As for himself, he determined to sail from Tasna- 
rus into Africa, and dividing one ship-load of treasure among 
his friends, he desired them to provide for their own safety. 
They refused the treasure, and expressed their sorrow in tears ; 
while Antony, with the kindest and most humane consolations, 
entreated them to accept it, and dismissed them with letters 
of recommendation to his agent at Corinth, whom he ordered 
to give them refuge till they could be reconciled to Cassar. 
This agent was Theophilus, the father of Hipparchus, who 
nad great interest with Antony; but was the first of his freed- 

224 ANTONY. 

men that went over to Caesar. He afterwards settled at 
Corinth. 

In this posture were the affairs of Antony. After his fleet 
at Actium had long struggled with Caesar's, a hard gale, which 
blew right a-head of the ships, obliged them to give out about 
four in the afternoon. About five thousand men were slain 
in the action, and Caesar, according to his own account, took 
three hundred ships. Antony's flight was observed by few, 
and to those who had not seen it, it was at first incredible. 
They could not possibly believe that a general, who had nine- 
teen legions and twelve thousand horse, a general to whom 
vicissitude of fortune was nothing new, would so basely desert 
them. His soldiers had an inexpressible desire to see him, 
and still expecting that he would appear in some part or other, 
gave the strongest testimony of their courage and fidelity. 
Nay, when they were even convinced that he was irrecover- 
ably fled, they continued embodied for seven days, and would 
not listen to the ambassadors of Caesar. At last, however, 
when Canidius, who commanded them, fled from the camp by 
night, and when they were abandoned by their principal offi- 
cers, they surrendered to Caesar. 

After this great success, Caesar sailed for Athens. The cities 
of Greece he found in extreme poverty, for they had been 
plundered of their cattle and every thing else before the war. 
He, therefore, not only admitted them to favour, but made a 
distribution amongst them of the remainder of the corn which 
had been provided for the war. My great grandfather Nicar- 
chus used to relate, that as the inhabitants of Chaeronea had no 
horses, they were compelled to carry a certain quantity of 
corn on their shoulders to the sea-coast as far as Anticyra, and 
were driven by soldiers with stripes like so many beasts of 
burden. This, however, was done but once: for when the 
corn was measured a second time, and they were preparing to 
carry it, news came of Antony's defeat, and this saved the city 
from further hardships; for the commissaries and soldieis im- 
mediately took to flight, and left the poor inhabitants to share 
the corn amongst themselves. 

When Antony arrived in Libya, he sent Cleopatra from Pa- 
raetonium into Egypt, and retired to a melancholy desert, 
where he wandered up and down, with only two attendants. 
One of these was Aristocrates the Greek rhetorician : the 
other was Lucilius, concerning whom it has been mentioned 
in another place, that, to favour the escape of Brutus at the 
battle of Philippi, he assumed his name, and suffered himself 
to be taken. Antony saved him, and he was so grateful, that 
he attended him to the last. 

ANTONY. 225 

When Antony was informed that he who commanded his 
troops in Libya was gone over to the enemy, he attempted to 
lay violent hands on himself; but he was prevented by his 
friends, who conveyed him to Alexandria, where he found 
Cleopatra engaged in a very bold enterprise. 

Between the Red Sea and the Egyptian, there is an isth- 
mus which divides Asia from Africa; and which, in the nar- 
rowest part, is about three hundred furlongs in breadth. Cleo- 
patra had formed a design of drawing her galleys over this 
part into the Red Sea, and purposed, with all her wealth and 
forces, to seek some remote country, where she might neither 
be reduced to slavery, nor involved in war. However, the 
first galleys that were carried over, being burnt by the Ara- 
bians of Petra,* and Antony not knowing that his land-forces 
were dispersed, she gave up this enterprise, and began to for- 
tify the avenues of her kingdom. Antony, in the mean time, 
forsook the city and the society of his friends, and retired to 
a small house which he had built himself near Pharos, on a 
mound he had cast up in the sea. In this place, sequestered 
from all commerce with mankind, he affected to live like Ti- 
mon, because there was a resemblance in their fortunes. He 
had been deserted by his friends, and their ingratitude had put 
him out of humour with his own species. 

This Timon was a citizen of Athens, and lived about the 
time of the Peloponnesian war, as appears from the comedies 
of Aristophanes and Plato, in which he is exposed as the hater 
of mankind. Yet, though he hated mankind in general, he 
caressed the bold and impudent boy Alcibiades; and being 
asked the reason of this by Apemantus, who expressed some 
surprise at it, he answered, it was because he foresaw that he 
would plague the people of Athens. Apemantus was the only 
one he admitted to his society, and he was his friend in point 
of principle. At the feast of sacrifices for the dead, these two 
dined by themselves, and when Apemantus observed that the 
feast was excellent, Timon answered, — " It would be so if you 
were not here." Once, in an assembly of the people, he 
mounted the rostrum, and the novelty of the thing occasioned 
an universal silence and expectation; at length he said, — 
" People of Athens, there is a fig-tree in my yard, on wnich 
many worthy citizens have hanged themselves; and as I have 
determined to build upon the spot, I thought it necessary to 
give this public notice, that such as choose to have recourse 
to this tree, for the aforesaid purpose, may repair to it before 
it is cut down." He was buried at Halas, near the sea, and 

* Dion tells us, that the vessels which were burnt were not those that were 
drawn over the isthmus, but some that had been built on that side. — Lib. ii 

Vol. IV. 2 F 

226 ANTONY. 

the water surrounded his tomb in such a manner, that he 
was inaccessible to mankind. The following epitaph is in- 
scribed on his monument: — 

At last, I've bid the knaves farewell; 
Ask not my name — but go — to hell. 

It is said that he wrote this epitaph himself. That which is 
commonly repeated was written by Callimachus: — 

My name is Timon ; knaves, begone ! 
Curse me, but come not near my stone! 

These are some of the many anecdotes we have concerning 
Timon. 

Canidius himself brought Antony news of the defection of 
his army. Soon after, he heard that Herod of Judea was gone 
over to Caesar with some legions and cohorts; that several 
other powers had deserted his interest, and, in short, that he 
had no foreign assistance to depend upon. None of these 
things, however, disturbed him; for, at once abandoning his 
hopes and his cares, he left his Timonian retreat, and return- 
ed to Alexandria; where, in the palace of Cleopatra, he once 
more entertained the citizens with his usual festivity and mu- 
nificence. He gave the toga virilis to Antyllus, his son by 
Fulvia, and admitted Cleopatra's son by Caesar into the order 
of young men. The entertainments on this occasion were in- 
finitely pompous and magnificent, and lasted many days. 

Antony and Cleopatra had before established a society, 
called the Inimitable Livers, of which they were members; 
but they now instituted another, by no means inferior in 
splendour or luxury, called the Companions in Death. Their 
friends were admitted into this, and the time passed in mutual 
treats and diversions. Cleopatra, at the same time, was making 
a collection of poisonous drugs, and being desirous to know 
which was least painful in the operation, she tried them on the 
capital convicts. Such poisons as were quick in their opera- 
tions, she found to be attended with violent pain and convul- 
sions; such as were milder were slow in their effect; she, 
therefore, applied herself to the examination of venomous 
creatures, and caused different kinds of them to be applied to 
different persons, under her own inspection. These experi- 
ments she repeated daily, and, at length, she found that the 
bite of the asp was the most eligible kind of death; for it 
brought on a gradual kind of lethargy, in which the face was 
covered with a gentle sweat, and the senses sunk easily into 
stupefaction ; and those who were thus affected showed the 
same uneasiness at being disturbed or awaked, that people do 
in the profoundest natural sleep.* 

* Aspis somniculosa. — Sisen 

ANTONY. 227 

They both sent ambassadors to Csesar in Asia. Cleopatra 
requested Egypt for her children, and Antony only petitioned 
that he might be permitted to live as a private man in Egypt, 
or, if that were too much, that he might retire to Athens. 
Deserted as they were by almost all their friends, and hardly 
knowing in whom to confide, they were forced to send Eu- 
phronius, their children's tutor, on this embassy. Alexis of 
Laodicea, who, by means of Timogenes, became acquainted 
with Antony at Rome, a man of great skill in the Greek learn- 
ing, and one of Cleopatra's chief agents in keeping Antony 
from Octavia, he had before despatched to Judea to retain 
Herod in his interest. This man gave up Antony, and, re- 
lying on Herod's interest, had the confidence to appear before 
Cassar. The interest of Herod, however, did not save him; 
for he was immediately carried in chains into his own coun- 
try, and there put to death. Thus Antony had, at least, the 
satisfaction of seeing him punished for his perfidy. 

Caesar absolutely rejected Antony's petition; but he an- 
swered Cleopatra, that she might expect every favour from 
him, provided she either took off Antony, or banished him her 
dominions. At the same time he sent Thyreus* to her, who 
was one of his freedmen, and whose address was not unlikely 
to carry his point, particularly as he came from a young con- 
queror to the court of a vain and ambitious queen, who had 
still the highest opinion of her personal charms. t As this am- 
bassador was indulged with audiences longer and more fre- 
quent than usual, Antony grew jealous, and having first or- 
dered him to be whipped, he sent him back to Caesar with let- 
ters, wherein he informed him, that he had been provoked by 
the insolence of his freedman at a time when his misfortunes 
made him but too prone to anger: — "However," added he, 
"you have a freedman of mine, Hipparchus, in your power, 
and if it will be any satisfaction to you, use him in the same 
manner." Cleopatra, that she might make some amends for 
her indiscretion, behaved to him afterwards with great ten- 
derness and respect. She kept her birth-day in a manner 

* Dion calls him Thyrsus. Antony and Cleopatra sent other ambassadors 
to Caesar, with offers of considerable treasures, and, last of all, Antony sent 
his son Antyllus with large sums of gold. Caesar, with that meanness which 
made a part of his character, took the gold, but granted him none of his 
requests. Fearing, however, that despair might put Antony upon the re- 
solution of carrying the war into Spain or Gaul, or provoke him to burn the 
wealth that Cleopatra had been amassing, he sent this Thyreus to Alexan- 
dria. 

+ Dion says, that Thyreus was instructed to make use of the softest address, 
and to insinuate that Caesar was captivated with her beauty. The object of 
this measure was to prevail on her to take off Antony while she was flattered 
with the prospect of obtaining the conqueror. 

228 ANTONY. 

suitable to their unhappy circumstances; but his was cele- 
brated with such magnificence, that many of the guests, who 
came poor, returned wealthy. 

After Antony's overthrow, Agrippa wrote several letters to 
Caesar, to inform him that his presence was necessary at Rome. 
This put off the war for some time; but as soon as the winter 
was over, Caesar marched against Antony by the rout of Syria, 
and sent his lieutenants on the same business into Africa. 
When Pelusium was taken, it was rumoured that Seleucus had 
delivered up the place with the connivance or consent of Cleo- 
patra: whereupon the queen, in order to 'justify herself, gave 
up the wife and children of Seleucus into' the hands of Anto- 
ny. Cleopatra had erected near the temple of Isis some monu- 
ments of extraordinary size and magnificence. To these she 
removed her treasure, her gold, silver, emeralds, pearls, ebony, 
ivory, and cinnamon, together with a large quantity of flax, 
and a number of torches. Caesar was under some apprehen- 
sions about this immense wealth, lest, upon some sudden 
emergency, she should set fire to the whole. For this reason 
he was continually sending messengers to her with assurances 
of gentle and honourable treatment, while in the mean time he 
hastened to the city with his army. 

When he arrived, he encamped near the Hippodrome, upon 
which Antony made a brisk sally, routed the cavalry, drove 
them back into their trenches, and returned to the city with 
the complacency of a conqueror. As he was going to the palace 
he met Cleopatra, whom, armed as he was, he kissed without 
ceremony, and at the same time he recommended to her favour 
a brave soldier, who had distinguished himself in the engage- 
ment. She presented the soldier with a cuirass and helmet of 
gold, which he took, and the same night went to Caesar. Af- 
ter this, Antony challenged Caesar to fight him in single com- 
bat, but Caesar only answered, that Antony might think of 
many other ways to end his life. Antony, therefore, conclu- 
ding that he could not die more honourably than in battle, de- 
termined to attack Caesar at the same time both by sea and 
land. The night preceding the execution of this design, he 
ordered the servants at supper to render him their best services 
that evening, and fill the wine round plentifully; for the day 
following they might belong to another master, whilst he lay 
extended on the ground, no longer of consequence either to 
them or to himself. His friends were affected, and wept to hear 
him talk thus; which, when he perceived, he encouraged them 
by assurances, that his expectations of a glorious victory were 
at least equal to those of an honourable death. At the dead of 
night, when universal silence reigned through the city, a si- 
lence that was deepened by the awful thought of the ensuing 

ANTONY. 229 

day, on a sudden was heard the sound of musical instruments, 
and a noise which resembled the exclamations of Bacchanals. 
This tumultuous procession seemed to pass through the whole 
city, and to go out at the gate which led to the enemy's camp. 
Those who reflected on this prodigy, concluded that Bacchus, 
the god whom Antony affected to imitate, had then forsaken 
him. 

As soon as it was light, he led his infantry out of the city, 
and posted them on a rising ground, from whence he saw his 
fleet advance towards the enemy. There he stood waiting for 
the event; but as soon as the two fleets met, they hailed each 
other with their oars in a very friendly manner, (Antony's fleet 
making the first advances,) and sailed together peaceably to- 
wards the city. This was no sooner done, than the cavalry 
deserted him in the same manner, and surrendered to Caesar. 
His infantry were routed ; and as he retired to the city, he ex- 
claimed that Cleopatra had betrayed him to those with whom 
he was fighting only for her sake. 

The unhappy queen, dreading the effects of his anger, fled 
to her monument, and having secured it as much as possible 
with bars and bolts, she gave orders that Antony should be in- 
formed she was dead. Believing the information to be true, 
he cried, — " Antony, why dost thou delay? What is life to 
thee, when it is taken from her for whom alone thou couldst 
wish to live?" He then went to his chamber, and opening his 
coat of mail, he said, — "I am not distressed, Cleopatra, that 
thou art gone before me, for I shall soon be with thee; but I 
grieve to think that I, who have been so distinguished a gene- 
ral, should be inferior in magnanimity to a woman." He was 
then attended by a faithful servant, whose name was Eros. 
He had engaged this servant to kill him, whenever he should 
think it necessary, and he now demanded that service. Eros 
drew his sword, as if he designed to kill him; but, suddenly 
turning ahout, he slew himself, and fell at his master's feet. 
"This, Eros, was greatly done," said Antony ;" thy heart 
would not permit thee to kill thy master, but thou hast taught 
him what to do by thy example." He then plunged his sword 
into his bowels, and threw himself on a couch that^ stood by. 
The wound, however, was not so deep as to cause immediate 
death ; and the blood stopping as he lay on the couch, he came 
to himself, and entreated those who stood by to put him out of 
his pain. They all fled, nevertheless, and left him to his cries 
and torments, till Diomedes, secretary to Cleopatra, came with 
her request, that he would come to her in the monument. 
When Antony found that she was still living, it gave him fresh 
spirits, and he ordered his servants to take him up. Accord 
ingly, thev carried him in their arms to the door of the monu 
Vol. IV. 20 

«30 ANTONY. 

ment. Cleopatra would not suffer the door to be opened, but 
a cord being let down from a window, Antony was fastened to 
it. and she, with her two women, all that were admitted into the 
monument, drew him up. Nothing, as they who were present 
observed, could possibly be more affecting than that spectacle. 
Antony, covered with blood, and in the agonies of death, 
hoisted up by the rope, and stretching out his hands to Cleo- 
patra, while he was suspended for a considerable time in the 
air ! For it was with the greatest difficulty they drew him up, 
though Cleopatra herself exerted all her strength, straining 
every nerve, and distorting every feature with the violence of 
the eflort; while those who stood below endeavoured to animate 
and encourage her, and seemed to partake in all the toil, and 
all the emotions that she felt. When she had drawn him up, 
and laid him on a bed, as she stood over him she rent her 
clothes, beat and wounded her breast, and wiping the blood 
from his disfigured countenance, she called him her lord, her 
emperor, her husband ! Her whole soul was absorbed in his 
misfortunes; and she seemed totally to have forgot that she 
had any miseries of her own. Antony endeavoured to sooth 
her as well as he was able, and called for wine ; either because 
he was thirsty, or because he thought it might sooner put him 
out of his pain. When he had drunk, he advised her to con- 
sult her own affairs, and her safety, so far as might be consist- 
ent with honour, and to place her confidence in Proculeius 
rather than in the other friends of Csesar: — "As to himself," 
he said, "that she ought rather to rejoice in the remembrance 
of his past happiness, than to bewail his present misfortunes; 
since in his life he had been illustrious, and was not inglorious 
in his death. He had conquered like a Roman, and it was 
only by a Roman that he was conquered." A little before he 
expired, Proculeius arrived from Caesar; for after Antony had 
stabbed himself, and was conveyed to Cleopatra, Dercetoeus, 
one of his guards, privately carried off his bloody sword, and 
showed it to Csesar. When Caesar beheld this token of An- 
tony's death, he retired to the inner part of his tent, and shed 
some tears in remembrance of a man who had been his relation, 
his colleague in government, and his associate in so many bat- 
tles and important affairs.* He then called his friends to- 
gether, and read the letters which had passed between him and 
Antony, wherein it appeared, that, though Caesar had still 
written in a rational and equitable manner, the answers of 

* This retirement of Csesar was certainly an affectation of concern. The 
death of Antony had been an invariable object with him. He was too cow- 
ardly to think himself safe while he lived; and to expose his weakness by 
readina his letters the moment he was informed of his death, was certainly no 
proof that he felt even then any tenderness for his memory. 

ANTONY. 232 

Antony were insolen' and contemptuous. After .his, he des- 
patched Proculeius with orders to take Cleopatra alive, if it 
were possible; for hj was extremely solicitous to save the 
treasures in the monument, which would so greatly add to the 
glory of his triumph. However, she refused to admit him 
into the monument, and would only speak to him through the 
bolted gate. The substance of this conference was, that Cleo- 
patra made a requisition of the kingdom for her children; while 
Proculeius, on the other hand, encouraged her to trust every 
thing to Caesar. 

After he had reconnoitred the place, he sent an account of 
it to Caesar; upon which Gallus was despatched to confer with 
Cleopatra. The thing was thus concerted: — Gallus went up 
to the gate of the monument, and drew Cleopatra into conver- 
sation, while, in the mean time, Proculeius applied a ladder to 
the window, where the women had taken in Antony; and hav- 
ing got in with two servants, he immediately made for the 
place where Cleopatra was in conference with Gallus. One of 
her women discovered him, and immediately screamed aloud, 
— " Wretched Cleopatra, you are taken alive !" She turned 
about, and seeing Proculeius, the same instant attempted to 
stab herself; for to this intent she always carried a dagger 
about with her. Proculeius, however, prevented her, and, ex- 
postulating with her, as he held her in his arms, he entreated 
her not to be so injurious to herself or to Cassar; that she 
would not deprive so humane a prince of the glory of his cle- 
mency, or expose him, by her distrust, to the imputation of 
treachery or cruelty. At the same time, he took the dagger 
from her, and shook her clothes, lest she should have poison 
concealed about her. Caesar also sent his freedman Epaphro- 
ditus with orders to treat her with the greatest politeness, but, 
by all means, to bring her alive. 

Caesar entered Alexandria, conversing with Arius the philo- 
sopher; and, that he might do him honour before the people, 
he led him by the hand. When he entered the Gymnasium, 
he ascended a tribunal which had been erected for him, and 
gave assurances to the citizens, who prostrated themselves 
before him, that the city should not be hurt. He told them 
he had different motives for this. In the first place, it was 
built by Alexander; in the next place, he admired it for its 
beauty and magnitude; and lastly, he would spare it, were it 
but for the sake of his friend Arius, who was born there. 
Caesar gave him the high honour of this appellation, and par- 
doned many at his request. Amongst these was Philostratus, 
one of the most acute and eloquent sophists of his time. This 
man, without any right, pretended to be a follower of the Aca- 
demics; and Caesar, from a bad opinion of his morals, rejected 

232 ANTONY. 

his petition: upon which the sophist followed Arius up and 
down in a mourning cloak, with a long white beard, crying 
constantly, — 

" The wise, if really such, will save the wise." 
Caesar heard and pardoned him, not so much out of favour as 
to save Arius from the impertinence and envy he might incur 
on his account. 

Antyllus, the eldest son of Antony by Fulvia, was betrayed 
by his tutor Theodorus, and put to death. While the soldiers 
were beheading him, the tutor stole a jewel of considerable 
value, which he wore about his neck, and concealed it in his 
girdle. "When he was charged with it, he denied the fact; but 
the jewel was found upon him, and he was crucified. Caesar 
appointed a guard over Cleopatra's children and their gover- 
nors, and allowed them an honourable support. Caesano, the 
reputed son of Caesar the dictator, had been sent by his mo- 
ther, with a considerable sum of money, through ^Ethiopia 
into India. But Rhodon, his governor, a man of the same 
principles with Theodorus, persuading him that Caesar would 
certainly make him king of Egypt, prevailed on him to turn 
back. While Caesar was deliberating how he should dispose 
of him, Arius is said to have observed, that there ought not, 
by any means, to be too many Caesars. Therefore, soon after 
the death of Cleopatra, he was slain. 

Many considerable princes begged the body of Antony, that 
they might have the honour of giving it burial; but Caesar 
would not take it from Cleopatra, who interred it with her 
own hands, and performed the funeral rites with great magni- 
ficence; for she was allowed to expend what she thought pro- 
per on the occasion. The excess of her affliction, and the in- 
flammation of her breast, which was wounded by the blows 
she had given it in her anguish, threw her into a fever. She 
was pleased to find an excuse in this for abstaining from food, 
and hoped, by this means, to die without interruption. The> 
physician in whom she placed her principal confidence was 
Olympus; and, according to his short account of these trans- 
actions, she made use of his advice in the accomplishment oi 
her design. Caesar, however, suspected it; and that he might 
prevail on her to take the necessary food and physic, he threat 
ened to treat her children with severity. This had the desired 
effect, and her resolution was overborne.* 

A few days after, Caesar himself made her a visit of con- 

* Cleopatra certainly possessed the virtues of fidelity and natural affection 
in a very eminent degree. She had several opportunities of betraying Anto- 
ny, could she have been induced to it either by fear or ambition. Her ten- 
derness for her children is always superior to her self-love, and she had a 
greatness of soul which Caesar never knew. 

ANTONY. 

2U3 

dolencc and consolation. She was then in an undress, and 
lying negligently on a couch; but when the conqueror entered 
the apartment, though she had nothing on but a single bed- 
gown, she arose and threw herself at his feet. Her face was 
out of figure, her hair in disorder, her voice trembling, her 
eyes sunk, and her bosom bore the marks of the injuries she 
had done it. In short, her person gave you the image of her 
mind; yet, in this deplorable condition, there were some re 
mains of that grace, that spirit and vivacity, which had so pe 
culiarly animated her former charms, and still some gleams oi 
her native elegance might be seen to wander over her melan 
choly countenance.* 

When Caesar had replaced her on her couch, and seate i 
himself by her, she endeavoured to justify the part she took 
against him in the war, alleging the necessity she was under, 
and her fear of Antony. But when she found that these apo- 
logies had no weight with Caesar, she had recourse to prayers 
and entreaties, as if she had been really desirous of lit*- ; and, 
at the same time, she put into his hands an inventory of her 
treasure. Seleucus, one of her treasurers, who was present, 
accused her of suppressing some articles in the account; upon 
which she started up from her couch, caught him by the hair, 
and gave him several blows on the face. Caesar smiled at this 
spirited resentment, and endeavoured to pacify her: — "But 
how is it to be borne," said she, " Caesar, if, while even you 
honour me with a visit in my wretched situation, I must be 
affronted by one of my own servants? Supposing that I have 
reserved a few trinkets, they were by no means intended as 
ornaments for my own person in these miserable fortunes, but 
as little presents for Octavia and Livia, by whose good offices 
I might hope to find favour with you." Caesar was not dis- 
pleased to hear this, because he flattered himself that she was 
willing to live. He, therefore, assured her, that whatever she 
had reserved, she might dispose of at her pleasure; and that 
she might, in every respect, depend on the most honourable 
treatment. After this he took his leave, in confidence that he 
had brought her to his purpose; but she deceived him. 

There was in Caesar's train a young nobleman, whose name 
was Cornelius Dolabella. He was smitten with the charms of 
Cleopatra, and having engaged to communicate to her every 
thing that passed, he sent her private notice that Caesar was 

* Dion gives a more pompous account of her reception of Caesar. She re- 
ceived him, he tells us, in a magnificent apartment, lying on a splendid hed, 
in a mourning habit, which peculiarly became her; that she had several pic- 
tures of Julius Caesar placed near her; and some letters she had received 
from him in her bosom. The conversation turned on the same subject ; and 
her speech on the occasion is recorded. — Dion, 1. liv. 

Vol. IV. 2 G 20* 

234 ANTONY. 

about to return into Syria, and that, within three days, she 
would be sent away with her children. When she was in- 
formed of this, she requested of Caesar permission to make 
her last oblations to Antony. This being granted, she was 
conveyed to the place where he was buried ; and kneeling at 
his tomb, with her women, she thus addressed the manes ot 
the dead: — "It is not long, my Antony, since, with these 
hands, I buried thee. Alas! they were then free, but thy 
Cleopatra is now a prisoner, attended by a guard, lest, in the 
transports of her grief, she should disfigure this captive body, 
which is reserved to adorn the triumph over thee. These are 
the last offerings, the last honours she can pay thee; for she is 
now to be conveyed to a distant country. Nothing could part 
us while we lived, but in death we are to be divided. Thou, 
though a Roman, liest buried in Egypt; and I, an Egyptian, 
must be interred in Italy, the only favour I shall receive from 
thy country. Yet, if the gods of Rome have power or mercy 
left, (for surely those of Egypt have forsaken us,*) let them 
not suffer me to be led in living triumph to thy disgrace! No! 
hide me, hide me with thee in the grave; for life, since thou 
hast left it, has been misery to me." 

Thus the unhappy queen bewailed her misfortunes ; and 
after she had crowned the tomb with flowers, and kissed it, 
she ordered her bath to be prepared. When she had bathed, 
she sat down to a magnificent supper; soon after which a 
peasant came to the gate with a small basket. The guards in- 
quired what it contained; and the man who brought it, putting 
by the leaves which lay uppermost, showed them a parcel of 
figs. As they admired their size and beauty, he smiled, and 
bade them take some; but they refused, and, not suspecting 
that the basket contained any thing else, it was carried in. 
After supper, Cleopatra sent a letter to Caesar, and ordering 
every body out of the monument, except her two women, she 
made fast the door. When Caesar opened the letter, the plain- 
tive style in which it was written, and the strong request that 
she might be buried in the same tomb with Antony, made him 
suspect her design. At first, he was for hastening to her him- 
self, but he changed his mind, and despatched others. t Her 
death, however, was so sudden, that though they who were 

* It was the opinion of the ancients, that the gods forsook the vanquished 
Thus Virgil :— 

Excessere omnes, adytis arisque relictis, 

Dii, quibus imperium hoc steterat. JEn. ii. 351. 

And Tacitus: — 

Alieni jam imperii Deos. 

+ This is another instance of his personal cowardice. 

ANTONY. 235 

sent ran the whole way, alarmed the guards with their appre- 
hensions, and immediately broke open the doors, they found 
her quite dead,* lying on her golden bed, and dressed in all 
her royal ornaments. Iras, one of her women, lay dead at her 
feet, and Charmion, hardly able to support herself, was adjust- 
ing her mistress' diadem. One of Caesar's messengers said 
angrily, — " Charmion, was this well done?" " Perfectly well," 
said she, " and worthy a descendant of the kings of Egypt." 
Sh">, had no sooner said this, than she fell down dead. 

It is related by some, that an asp was brought in amongst 
the figs, and hid under the leaves; and that Cleopatra had or- 
dered it so that she might be bit without seeing it ; that, how- 
ever, upon removing the leaves, she perceived it, and said, — 
" That is what I wanted." Upon which she immediately held 
out her arm to it. Others say, that the asp was kept in a 
water-vessel, and that she vexed and pricked it with a golden 
spindle till it seized her arm. Nothing of this, however, could 
be ascertained ; for it was reported likewise that she carried 
about with her a certain poison, in a hollow bodkin that she 
wore in her hair; yet there was neither any mark of poison on 
her body, nor was there any serpent found in the monument, 
though the track of a reptile was said to have been discovered 
on the sea-sands, opposite to the windows of Cleopatra's 
apartment. Others, again, have affirmed, that she had two 
small punctures on her arm, apparently occasioned by the 
sting of the asp; and it is clear that Caesar gave credit to this; 
for her effigy, which he carried in triumph, had an asp on the 
arm.t 

Such are the accounts we have of the death of Cleopatra; 
and though Caesar was much disappointed by it, he admired 
her fortitude, and ordered her to be buried in the tomb of An- 
tony, with all the magnificence due to her quality. Her wo- 
men, too, were, by his orders, interred with great funeral 
pomp. Cleopatra died at the age of thirty-nine, after having 
reigned twenty-two years, the fourteen last in conjunction 
with Antony. Antony was fifty-three, some say fifty-six, 
when he died. His statues were all demolished, but Cleopa- 
tra's remained untouched ; for Archibius, a friend of hers, 
gave Caesar a thousand talents for their redemption. 

Antony left by his three wives seven children, J whereof 

* Dion says, that Caesar ordered her to be sucked by the Psylli, that the 
poison might be drawn out ; but it was too late. 

+ This may be a matter of doubt. There would, of course, be an asp on 
the diadem of the effigy, because it was peculiar to the kings of Egypt; and 
tliis might give rise to the report of an asp being on the arm. 

t By Fulvia, he had Antyllus and Antony; by Cleopatra, he had Cleopatra, 
Ptolemy, and Alexander; and by Octavia, Antonia Major, and Antonia Minor. 

i: 

036 DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 

Antyllus, the eldest, only was put to death. Octavia took the 
rest, and educated them with her own. Cleopatra, his daugh- 
ter by Cleopatra, was married to Juba, one of the politest 
princes of his time; and Octavia made Antony, his son by 
Fulvia, so considerable with Caesar, that, after Agrippa, and 
the sons of Livia, he was generally allowed to hold the first 
lace in his favour. Octavia, by her first husband Marcellus, 
lad two daughters, and a son named Marcellus. One of these 
daughters she married to Agrippa; and the son married a 
daughter of Caesar's. But as he died soon after, and Octavia 
observing that her brother was at a loss whom he should adopt 
in his place, she prevailed on him to give his daughter Julia to 
Agrippa, though her own daughter must necessarily be divorc- 
ed to make way for her. Caesar and Agrippa having agreed 
on this point, she took back her daughter, and married her to 
Antony. Of the two daughters that Octavia had by Antony, 
one was married to Domitius iEnobarbus, and the other, ( An- 
tonia, so much celebrated for her beauty and virtue,) married 
Drusus, the son of Livia, and son-in-law to Caesar. Of this 
line came Germanicus and Claudius. Claudius was afterwards 
emperor; and so likewise was Caius the son of Germanicus, 
who, after a short, but infamous reign, was put to death, to- 
gether with his wife and daughter. Agrippa, who had Lucius 
Domitius by iEnobarbus, was afterwards married to Claudius 
Caesar. He adopted Domitius, whom he named Nero Ger- 
manicus. This Nero, who was emperor in our times, put his 
own mother to death, and, by the madness of his conduct, 
went near to ruin the Roman empire. He was the fifth in de- 
scent from Antony. 

DEMETRIUS AND ANTON? 

COMPARED. 

As Demetrius and Antony both passed through a variety ol 
fortune, we shall consider, in the first place, their respective 
power and celebrity. These were hereditary to Demetrius; 
or Antigonus, the most powerful of Alexander's successors, 
had reduced all Asia during his son's minority. On the other 
hand, the father of Antony was indeed a man of character, but 
not of military character; yet, though he had no public influ- 
ence or reputation to bequeath to his son, that son did not hesi ■ 

DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 337 

tate to aspire to the empire of Caesar; and, without any title, 
either from consanguinity or alliance, he effectually invested 
himself with all that he had acquired: at least, by his own 
peculiar weight, after he had divided the world into two parts, 
he took the better for himself. By his lieutenants he conquer- 
ed the Parthians, and drove back the barbarous nations about 
Caucasus, as far as the Caspian sea. Even the less reputable 
parts of his conduct are so many testimonies of his greatness, 
f be father of Demetrius thought it an honour to marry him 
to Phila the daughter of Antipater, though there was a dis- 
parity in their years; while Antony's connection with Cleo- 
patra was considered as a degrading circumstance; though 
Cleopatra, in wealth and magnificence, was superior to all the 
princes of her time, Arsaces excepted. Thus he had raised 
himself to such a pitch of grandeur, that the world in general 
thought him entitled even to more than he wished. 

In Demetrius' acquisition of empire, there was nothing re- 
prehensible. He extended it only to nations inured to slavery, 
and desirous of being governed. But the arbitrary power of 
Antony grew on the execrable policy of a tyrant, who once 
more reduced to slavery a people that had shaken off the yoke. 
Consequently, the greatest of his actions, his conquest of 
Brutus and Cassius, is darkened with the inglorious motive of 
wresting its liberty from Rome. Demetrius, during his better 
fortunes, consulted the liberties of Greece, and removed the 
garrisons from the cities: while Antony made it his boast that 
he had destroyed the assertors of his country's freedom in 
Macedonia. 

Antony is praised for his liberality and munificence; in 
which, however, Demetrius is so far his superior, that he gave 
more to his enemies than the former did to his friends. An- 
tony was bonoured for allowing a magnificent funeral to Bru- 
tus; but Demetrius buried every enemy he had slain, and sent 
back his prisoners to Ptolemy, not only with their own pro- 
perty, but with presents. 

Both were insolent in prosperity, and fell with too much 
ease into luxury and indulgence. But we never find Deme- 
trius neglecting his affairs for his pleasures. In his hours of 
leisure, indeed, he had his Lamia, whose office it was, like the 
fairy in the fable, to lull him to sleep, or amuse him in his play. 
When he went to war, his spear was not bound about with 
ivy; his helmet did not smell of perfume; he did not come in 
the foppery of dress out of the chambers of the women; the 
riots of Bacchus and his train were hushed; and he became, as 
Euripides says, the minister of Mars. In short, he never lost 
a battle through the indulgence of luxury. This could not be 
^aid of Antony : as in the pictures of Hercules we see Omphale 

(^38 DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 

stealing his club and his lion's skin, so Cleopatra frequently 
disarmed Antony, and, while he should have been prosecuting 
the most necessary expeditions, led him to dancing and dal- 
liance on the shores 01 Canopus and Taphosiris.* So likewise, 
as Paris came from battle to the bosom of Helen, and even 
from the loss of victory to her bed, Antony threw victory 
itself out of his hands to follow Cleopatra. 

Demetrius, being under no prohibition of the laws, but fol- 
lowing the examples of Philip and Alexander, Lysimachus and 
Ptolemy, married several wives, and treated them all with the 
greatest honour. Antony, though it was a thing unheard of 
amongst the Romans, had two wives at the same time. Be- 
sides, he banished her who was properly his wife, and a citizen, 
from his house, to indulge a foreigner with whom he could 
have no legal connexion. From their marriages, of course, 
one of them found no inconvenience; the other suffered the 
greatest evils. 

la respect of their amours, Antony was comparatively par- 
donable and modest. Historians tell us, that the Athenians 
turned the dogs out of the citadel, because they had their pro- 
creative intercourse in public. But Demetrius had his cour- 
tesans, and dishonoured the matrons of Athens even in the 
temple of Minerva. Nay, though cruelty seems to be incon- 
sistent with sensual gratifications, he scrupled not to drive the 
most beautiful and virtuous youth in the city to the extremity 
of death, to avoid his brutal designs. In short, Antony, by 
his amorous indulgences, hurt only himself; Demetrius injured 
others. 

With regard to their behaviour to their parents and rela- 
tions, that of Demetrius is irreproachable; but Antony sacri- 
ficed his uncle to the sword of Csesar, that he might be em- 
powered in his turn to cut off Cicero; — a crime the latter was, 
which could never be made pardonable had Antony even 
saved, and not sacrificed an uncle by the means! They are 
both accused of perfidy, in that one of them threw Artabazus 
into prison; and the other killed Alexander. Antony, how- 
ever, had some apology in this case; for he had been aban- 
doned and betrayed by Artabazus in Media. But Demetrius 
was suspected of laying a false accusation against Alexander, 
and of punishing, not the offender, but the injured. 

There is this difference, too, in their military operations, 
that Demetrius gained every victory himself, and many oi 
Antony's laurels were won by his lieutenants. 

Both lost their empire by their own fault, but by different 

* Strabo mentions this as a romantic place near the sea, full of rocks, where 
the young people went to amuse themselves. — Lib. xvii. 

DEMETRIUS AND ANTONY COMPARED. 33 (j 

means. The former was abandoned by his people; the latter 
deserted his, even whilst they were fighting lor him. The fault 
of Demetrius was, that, by his conduct, he lost the affection 
of his army; the fault of Antony, his desertion and neglect 
of that affection. Neither of them can be approved in their 
death; but Demetrius much less than Antony; for he suffered 
himself to fall into the hands of the enemy, and, with a spirit 
that was truly bestial, endured an imprisonment of three years 
for nothing but the low indulgences of appetite. There was 
a deplorable weakness and many disgraceful circumstances 
attending the death of Antony; but he effected it at last with 
out falling into the enemy's hands. 

THE 

LIFE OF DION. 

As we learn from Simonides, my dear Senecio, that the Tro- 
jans were by no means offended at the Corinthians for joining 
the confederates in the Grecian war, because the family of 
Glaucus, their own ally, was originally of Corinth; so neither 
the Greeks nor the Romans have reason to complain of the 
Academy, which has been equally favourable to both. Thi? 
will appear from the Lives of Brutus and Dion; for, as one 
was the scholar of Plato, and the other educated in his prin 
ciples, they came like wrestlers from the same palaestra, to en 
gage in the greatest conflicts. Both by their conduct, in which 
there was a great similarity, confirmed that observation ot 
their master, that " Power and fortune must concur with pru- 
dence and justice, to effect any thing great in a political capa- 
city." But as Hippomachus the wrestler said, that he could 
distinguish his scholars at a distance, though they were only 
carrying meat from the market; so the sentiments of those 
who have had a polite education, must have a similar influence 
on their manners, and give a peculiar grace and propriety to 
their conduct. 

Accident, however, rather than design, gave a similarity to 
the lives of these two great men; and both were cut off by 
an untimely death, before they could carry the purposes which 
they had pursued with so much labour, into execution. The 
most singular circumstance attending their death was, that 
both had a divine warning of it, in the appearance of a frightful 
spectre. There are those, indeed, who say that no man in his 
senses ever saw a spectre; that these are the delusive visions 
of women and children; or of men whose intellects are affect- 
ed by some infirmity of the body; and who believe that their 
absurd imaginations are of divine inspiration. But if Dion 
and Brutus, men of firm and philosophic minds, whose under- 
standings were not affected by any constitutional infirmity; — 
if such men could pay so much credit to the appearance of 
spectres, as to give an account of them to their friends, I see 
no reason why we should depart from the opinion of the an- 
cients, that men had their evil genii, who disturbed them 
with fears, and distressed their virtue, lest, by a steady and 
uniform pursuit of it, they should hereafter obtain a happier 

DION. 

241 

allotment than themselves.* These things, however, I must 
refer to another occasion, and in this twelfth book of parallel 
lives, of which Dion and Brutus are the subjects, I shall be- 
gin with the more ancient. 

After Dionysius the elder had seized the government of 
Sicily, he married the daughter of Hermocrates, a Syracusan. 
But as the monarchic power was yet but little established, she 
had the misfortune to be so much abused in her person, by an 
outrageous faction, that she put an end to her life. When 
Dionysius was confirmed in his government, he married two 
wives at the same time. One was Doris, a native of Locris; 
the other Aristomache, the daughter of Hipparinus, who was 
a principal person in Syracuse, and colleague with Dionysius, 
when he was first appointed general of the Sicilian forces. It 
is said that he married these wives on the same day. It is not 
certain which he enjoyed first, but he was impartial in his 
kindness to them; for both attended him at his table, and al- 
ternately partook of his bed. As Doris had the disadvantage 
of being a foreigner, the Syracusans sought every means of 
obtaining the preference for their countrywoman; but it was 
more than equivalent to this disadvantage, that she had the 
honour of giving Dionysius his eldest son. Aristomache, on 
the contrary, was a long time barren, though the king was ex- 
tremely desirous of having children by her; and put to death 
the mother of Doris, upon a supposition that she had prevent- 
ed her conceptions by potions. 

Dion, the brother of Aristomache, was well received at 
court; not only on her account, but from the regard which 
Dionysius had for his merit and abilities; and that prince 
gave his treasurer an order to supply him with whatever mo- 
ney he wanted ; but, at the same time, to keep an account of 
what he received. 

But, whatever the talents and the virtues of Dion might be 
originally, it is certain that they received the happiest im- 
provement under the auspices of Plato. Surely the gods, in 
mercy to mankind, sent that divine philosopher from Italy to 
Syracuse, that, through the humane influence of his doctrine, 
the spirit of liberty might once more revive, and the inhabit- 
ants of that country he rescued from tyranny.t 

Dion soon became the most distinguished of his scholars. 

* This is perfectly agreeable to the Platonic doctrine of the different or- 
ders and dispositions of the genii. And as Dion and Brutus were both great 
enthusiasts in Platonism, the strength of their faith brought their spectres be- 
fore them. 

t Plato, in his seventh letter, says, — " When I explained the principles 
of philosophy and humanity to Dion, I little thought that I was insensibly 
opening a way to the subversion of tyranny !" 

Vol. IV. 2 H 21 

242 DI0N- 

To the fertility of his genius, and the excellence of his ohs 
position, Plato himself has given testimony,* and he did the 
greatest honour to that testimony in his life: for though he had 
heen educated in servile principles under a tyrant; though he 
had been familiarized to dependence, on the one hand, and to 
the indulgence of pomp and luxury, as the greatest happiness, 
on the other; 3-et he was no sooner acquainted with that phi- 
losophy which points out the road *o virtue, than his whole 
soul caught the enthusiasm ; and, with the simplicity of a young 
man, who judges of the dispositions of others by his own, he 
concluded that Plato's lectures would have the same effect on 
Dionysius : for this reason be solicited, and at length persuaded, 
the tyrant to hear him. When Plato was admitted, the dis- 
course turned on virtue in general. Afterwards, they came to 
fortitude in particular; and Plato made it appear that tyiants 
have of all men the least pretence to that virtue. Justice was 
the next topic; and when Plato asserted the happiness of the 
just, and the wretched condition of the unjust, the tyrant was 
stung; and, being unable to answer his arguments, he express- 
ed his resentment against those who seemed to listen to him 
with pleasure. At last he was extremely exasperated, and 
asked the philosopher what business he had in Sicily? Plato 
answered : — " That he came to seek an honest man." — " And 
so, then," replied the tyrant, "it seems you have lost your 
labour." Dion was in hopes that his anger would have ended 
here; but while Plato was hastening to be gone, he conveyed 
him aboard a galley, in which Pollis the Lacedaemonian was 
returning to Greece. Dionysius urged Pollis either to put 
Plato to death in his passage; or, at least, to sell him as a slave : 
— " For, according to his own maxim," said he, " this man 
cannot be unhappy: a just man, he says, must be happy in a 
state of slavery, as well as in a state of freedom." Pollis, 
therefore, carried him to iEgina, and sold him there :1" for the 
people of that place, being at war with the Athenians, had 
made a decree, that whatever Athenian was taken on their 
coast, he should be sold. Dion, notwithstanding, retained his 
interest with Dionysius, had considerable employments, and 
was sent ambassador to Carthage. Dionysius had a high 
esteem for him; and he, therefore, permitted him to speak his 
sentiments with freedom. An instance of this we have in the 
retort he made on the tyrant's ridiculing the government of 
Gelo: — " Gelo," said Dionysius, "is (Gelos) the laughing- 
stock of Sicily." While others admired and applauded this 
witticism, Dion answered, — " You obtained the crown by be- 
ing trusted on Gelo's account, who reigned with great humani- 

* Plato, ibid. t For twenty pounds. 

DION 243 

ty ; but you have reigned in such a manner, that, for your sake, 
no man will be trusted hereafter. Gelo made monarchy ap- 
pear the best of governments; but you have convinced us that 
it is the worst." Dionysius had three children by Doris, and 
four by Aristomache, whereof two were daughters, Sophrosyne 
and Arete. The former of these was married to his eldest son 
Dionysius; the latter to his brother Thearides, and, after his 
death, to her uncle Dion.' In the last illness of Dionysius, Dion 
would have applied to him in behalf of the children of Aristo- 
mache; but the physicians were beforehand with him. They 
wanted to ingratiate themselves with his successor; and, when 
he asked for a sleeping-dose, Timasus tells us, they gave him 
so effectual a one, that he awaked no more. 

When his son Dionysius came to the throne, in the first 
council that he held, Dion spoke with so much proprietv on 
the present state of affairs, and on the measures which ought 
to be taken, that the rest appeared to be mere children in 
understanding. By the freedom of his counsels he exposed, 
in a strong light, the slavish principles of those, who, through 
a timorous disingenuity, advised such measures as they 
thought would please their prince, rather than such as might 
advance his interest. But what alarmed them most was the 
steps he proposed to take with regard to the impending war 
with Carthage; for he offered either to go in person to Car- 
thage, and settle an honourable peace with the Carthaginians; 
or, if the king were rather inclined for war, to fit out and 
maintain fifty galleys at his own expense. 

Dionysius was pleased with the magnificence of his spirit; 
but the courtiers felt that it made them appear little. They 
agreed that, at all events, Dion was to be crushed, and they 
spared no calumny that malice could suggest. They repre- 
sented to the king, that he certainly meant to make himself 
master by sea, and, by that means, to obtain the kingdom for 
his sister's children. There was, moreover, another and an 
obvious cause of their hatred to him, in the reserve of his 
manners, and in the sobriety of his life. They led the young 
and ill-educated king through every species of debauchery, 
the shameless panders to his wrong-directed passions. Yet 
while folly rioted, tyranny slept; its rage was dissolved in the 
ardour of youthful indulgences as iron is softened in the fire; 
and that lenity which the Sicilians could not expect from the 
virtue of their prince, they found in his weakness. Thus, the 
reins of that monarchy, which Dionysius vainly called ada- 
mantine, fell gradually, from the loose and dissolute hand 
that held them. This young prince, it is said, would continue 
the scene of intoxication for ninety days without intermission 

244 dion. 

during which time no sober person was admitted to his court, 
where all was drunkenness and buffoonery, revelry and riot. 

Their enmity to Dion, who had no taste for these enjoy- 
ments, was a thing of course; and, as he refused to partake 
with them in their vices, they resolved to strip him of his vir- 
tues. To these they gave the names of such vices as are sup- 
posed, in some degree, to resemble them. His gravity of 
manners, they called pride; his freedom of speech, insolence; 
his declining to join in their licentiousness, contempt. It is 
true, there was a natural haughtiness in his deportment, and 
an asperity that was unsociable and difficult of access ; so that 
it is not to be wondered, if he found no ready admission to 
the ears of a young king, already spoiled by flattery. Many, 
even of his own particular friends, who admired the integritv 
and generosity of his heart, could not but condemn those for- 
bidding manners, which were so ill adapted to social and po- 
litical intercourse; and Plato himself, when he wrote to him 
some time after, warned him, as it were by the spirit of pro- 
phecy, to guard against that austerity which is the companion 
of solitude.* However, the necessity of the times and the 
feeble state of the monarchy, rendered it necessary for the 
king, though contrary to his inclinations, to retain him in the 
highest appointments; and this Dion himself very well knew. 

As he was willing to impute the irregularities of Dionysius 
to ignorance and a bad education, he endeavoured to engage 
him in a course of liberal studies, and to give him a taste for 
those sciences which have a tendency to moral improvement. 
By this means he hoped that he should induce him to think of 
virtue without disgust, and at length to embrace its precepts 
with pleasure. The young Dionysius was not naturally the 
worst of princes; but his father being apprehensive that if 
his mind were improved by science, and the conversation of 
wise and virtuous men, he might some time or other think of 
depriving him of his kingdom, kept him in close confinement; 
where, through ignorance and want of other employment, he 
amused himself with making little chariots, candlesticks, 
wooden chairs and tables. His father, indeed, was so suspi- 
cious of all mankind, and so wretchedly timorous, that lie 
would not suffer a barber to shave him, but had his hair 
singed off with a live coal by one of his own attendants. Nei- 
ther his brother nor his son were admitted into his chamber 
in their own clothes, but were first stripped and examined by 
the. sentinels, and after that were obliged to put on such clothes 

* 'H 5c auOaJeia t?r\iua ^woixor. Literally, — " Haughtiness lives under the 
same roof with solitude." This is towards the end of Plato's fourth letter. It 
is preceded by a fine political precept, viz. that the complaisance which pro- 
duces popularity is the source of the greatest operations in government. 

DION. 045 

as were provided for them. When his brother Leptines was 
once describing the situation of a place, he took a spear from 
one of the guards to trace the plan, upon which Dionysius 
was extremely offended, and caused the soldier who had given 
up the weapon to be put to death. He was afraid, he said, of 
the sense and sagacity of his friends; because he knew they 
must think it more eligible to govern than to obey. He slew 
Marsyas, whom he had advanced to a considerable military 
command, merely because Marsyas dreamed that he killed 
him; for he concluded, that this dream by night was occasion- 
ed by some similar suggestion of the day. Yet even this 
timorous and suspicious wretch was offended with Plato, be- 
cause he would not allow him to be the most valiant man in 
the world ! 

When Dion, as we have before observed, considered that 
the irregularities of young Dionysius were chiefly owing to 
his want of education, he exhorted him earnestly to apply 
himself to study; and by all means to send for Flato, the 
prince of philosophers, into Sicily: — " When he comes," said 
he, " apply to him without loss of time. Conformed by his 
precepts to that divine exemplar of beauty and perfection, 
which called the universe from confusion into order, you will 
at once secure your own happiness, and the happiness of your 
people. The obedience they now render you through fear, by 
your justice and moderation you will improve to a principle 
of filial duty; and of a tyrant you will become a king. Fear 
and force, and fleets and armies, are not, as your father called 
them, the adamantine chains of government; but that atten 
tion, that affection, that respect, which justice and goodness 
for ever draw after them. These are the milder, but the 
stronger bonds of empire. Besides, it is surely a disgrace for 
a prince, who, in all the circumstances of figure and appear- 
ance, is distinguished from the people, not to rise above them, 
at the same time, in the superiority of his conversation, and 
the cultivation of his mind." 

As Dion frequently solicited the king on this subject, and 
occasionally repeated some of Plato's arguments, he conceiv- 
ed at length a violent inclination to hear him discourse. He, 
therefore, sent several letters of invitation to him at Athens, 
which were seconded by the entreaties of Dion. The Pytha- 
gorean philosophers in Italy requested at the same time, that 
he would undertake the direction of this young prince, whose 
mind was misguided by power, and reclaim him by the solid 
counsels of philosophy. Plato, as he owns himself, was 
ashamed to be a philosopher in theory and not in practice; 
and flattering himself that if he could rectify the mind of the 

21* 

246 DI0N- 

prince, he might by the same means remedy the disorders of 
the kingdom, he yielded to their request. 

The enemies of Dion, now fearing an alteration in Diony 
sius, advised him to recall from exile one Philistus, who was, 
indeed, a man of learning,* but employed his talents in de- 
fence of the despotic policy; and this man they intended to 
set in opposition to Plato and his philosophy. Philistus, from 
the beginning, had been a principal instrument in promoting 
the monarchic government, and kept the citadel, of which he 
was governor, a long time for that party. It is said that he 
had a private commerce with the mother of the elder Diony- 
sius, and that the tyrant himself was not ignorant of it. Be 
this as it may, Leptines, who had two daughters by a married 
woman, whom he had debauched, gave one of them in mar- 
riage to Philistus: but this being done without consulting 
Dionysius, he was offended, imprisoned Leptines' mistress, 
and banished Philistus. The latter fled to his friends at Adria, 
where (it is probable) he composed the greatest part of his his- 
tory; for he did not return to Sicily during the reign of that 
Dionysius. After his death, as we have observed, Dion's ene- 
mies occasioned him to be recalled. His arbitrary principles 
were suitable for their purpose, and he began to exercise them 
immediately on his return. 

At the same time calumnies and impeachments against Dion 
were, as usual, brought to the king. He was accused of hold- 
ing a private correspondence with Thcodotes and Heraclides 
for the subversion of the monarchy; and, indeed, it is proba- 
ble that he entertained some hopes, from the arrival of Plato, 
of lessening the excessive power of Dionysius; or, at least, of 
making him moderate and equitable in the use of it. Besides, 
if he continued obstinate, and were not to be reclaimed, he was 
determined to depose him, and restore the commonwealth to 
the Syracusans; for he preferred even the popular form of 
government to an absolute monarchy, where a well-regulated 
aristocracy could not be procured. 

Such was the state of affairs when Plato came into Sicily. 
At first he was received with the greatest appearance of kind- 
ness, and he was conveyed from the coast in one of the king's 
most splendid chariots. Even Dionysius himself sacrificed to 
the gods, in acknowledgment of his safe arrival, and of the 
honour and happiness they had by that means conferred on his 
kingdom. The people had the greatest hopes of a speedy re- 
formation. They observed an unusual decorum in the enter- 
tainments at court, and a sobriety in the conduct of the cour- 

* He wrote the Histories of Egypt, Sicily, and the Reign of Dionysius. 
Cicero calls him the petty Thucydides, (Pusillus Thucydides.) 

DION. 247 

tiers; while the king answered all to whom he gave audience 
in a very obliging manner. The desire of learning, and the 
study of philosophy, were become general; and the several 
apartments of the royal palace were like so many schools of 
geometricians, full of the dust in which the students describe 
their mathematical figures. Not long after this, at a solemn 
sacrifice in the citadel, when the herald prayed, as usual, for 
the long continuance of the government, Dionysius is said to 
have cried, — "How long will you continue to curse me!" 
This was an inexpressible mortification to Philistus and his 
party. If Plato, said they, has already made such a change in 
the king, his influence in time will be irresistible. 

The)' now no longer made their attacks on Dion separately 
or in private. They united in exclaiming against him, that he 
had fascinated the king with the delusions of eloquence and 
philosophy, in order to obtain the kingdom for his sister's 
children. They represented it as a matter of the greatest in- 
dignity, that, after the whole force of the Athenians had vainly 
invaded Sicily, and were vanquished and destroyed, without 
so much as being able to take Syracuse, they should now, by 
means of one sophist, overturn the empire of Dionysius. It 
was with indignation they beheld the deluded monarch pre- 
vailed on by his insinuations to part with his guard of ten 
thousand spearmen: to give up a navy of four hundred gal- 
leys; to disband an army of ten thousand horse, and many 
times that number of foot, in order that he might pursue an 
ideal happiness in the Academy, and amuse himself with 
theorems of geometry; while the substantial enjoyments of 
wealth and power were left to Dion and the children of Aris- 
tomache. 

By means of these suggestions, Dion first incurred the sus- 

f)icion, and soon after the open displeasure, of Dionysius. A 
etter of his was likewise intercepted, and privately carried to 
the king. It was addressed to the Carthaginian agents, and 
directed them not to have their audience of the king concern- 
ing the conclusion of the peace, unless he were present, and 
then every thing should be settled as they wished. Timaeus 
informs us, that, after Dionysius had showed this letter to 
Philistus, and consulted him upon it, he over-reached Dion 
by a pretence of reconciliation, and told him, that he was de- 
sirous their good understanding might be renewed. After 
tli is, as he was one day walking alone with him by the wall of 
the castle, near the sea, he showed him the letter, and accused 
him of conspiring with the Carthaginians against him. When 
Dion attempted to speak in his own defence, Dionysius re- 
fused to hear him; and, having forced him aboard a vessel, 

£48 DI0N 

which lay there for the purpose, commanded the sailors to set 
him ashore in Italy. 

When this was publicly known, it was generally condemned 
as tyrannical and cruel. The court was in distress for the 
ladies of Dion's family; but the citizens received fresh cou- 
rage from the event: for they were in hopes that the odium 
which it would bring upon Dionysius, and the general discon- 
tent that his government occasioned, might contribute to bring 
about a revolution. Dionysius perceived this with some anxie- 
ty; and, thinking it necessary to pacify the women and the 
rest of Dion's friends, he told them that he was not gone into 
exile, but only sent out of the way for a time, that his obsti- 
nacy might not draw upon him a heavier punishment. He 
also allowed his friends two ships, that they might convey to 
him, in Peloponnesus, as much of his treasure, and as many 
of his servants, as they should think fit: for Dion was a man 
of considerable property, and little inferiorto the king in wealth 
or magnificence. The most valuable part of his effects, toge- 
ther with presents from the ladies, and others of his acquaint- 
ance, his friends conveyed to him; and the splendour of his 
fortune gained him great respect among the Greeks. At the 
same time, they conceived a high idea of the power of the 
tyrant, when an exile from his kingdom could make such an 
appearance. 

Dionysius now removed Plato into the citadel, under colour 
of kindness; but in reality to set a guard upon him, lest he 
should follow Dion, and proclaim to the world how injuriously 
he had been treated. 

As wild beasts become tame and tractable by use, so the 
tyrant, by frequent conversation with the philosopher, began 
at last to conceive an affection for him; yet even that affection 
had something of the tyrant in it; for he required of Plato, 
in return, that he should exclusively confine his regard and 
admiration to him. On condition that he would prefer his 
friendship to that of Dion, he was willing to give up the whole 
administration into his hands. This extravagant affection gave 
Plato no small trouble; for it was accompanied with petulance 
and jealousy, as the love which subsists between the different 
sexes has its quarrels and reconciliations. He expressed the 
strongest desire to become Plato's scholar, and to proceed in 
the study of philosophy; but he expressed it with reluctance 
in the presence of those who wanted to divert him from his 
purpose, and seemed as if he was in pursuit of something he 
ought to be ashamed of. 

As a war broke out about this time, he found it necessary 
to dismiss Plato; but he promised him, before his departure, 
to recall Dion the ensuing summer: however, he did not keep 

DION. 249 

his promise, but made the war he was engaged in his apology, 
and remitted to him the produce of his estate. At the same 
time, he desired Plato to acquiesce in his apology, assuring 
him that he would send for Dion on the commencement of the 
peace; and he entreated him, in the mean while, that Dion 
would be peaceable, and not say or do any thing that might 
hurt his character among the Greeks. This Plato endeavour- 
ed to effect by keeping Dion in the Academy in pursuit of 
philosophy. 

At Athens, Dion lived with an acquaintance, whose name 
was Callippus. But a piece of pleasure-ground which he pur- 
chased, he gave, on his departure, to Speusippus, with whom 
he had most usually conversed. Speusippus, as Timon, in his 
poems called Syllis, informs us, was a facetious companion, 
and had a turn for raillery; and Plato was desirous that Dion's 
severity of manners might be softened by the pleasantry of 
his conversation. When Plato exhibited a chorus of boys at 
Athens,* Dion took upon himself the management, and de- 
frayed the expense. Plato was desirous that this munificence 
might procure him popularity; and, on that account, he readily 
gave up the honour 01 conducting the affair himself. 

Dion likewise visited other cities, and conversed with the 
principal statesmen, by whom he was publicly entertained. In 
nis manners there was now no longer any thing pompous or 
affected; there was nothing that savoured of the dissolute 
luxury of a tyrant's court: his behaviour was modest, discreet, 
and manly; and his philosophical discourses were learned and 
ingenious. This procured him popular favour and public ho- 
nours; and the Lacedaemonians, without regard to the resent- 
ment of Dionysius, though at the very time they had received 
succours from him against the Thebans, made him free of their 
city. We are told that Dion accepted an invitation from 
Ptseodorus the Megarensian, who was a man of considerable 
power and fortune; and when he found his door crowded with 
people on business, and that it was difficult to have access to 
him, he said to his friends, who expressed their dissatisfaction 
on the occasion, — "Why should this affront us? We did this, 
and more than this, at Syracuse." 

Dion's popularity in Greece soon excited the jealousy of 
Dionysius; who, therefore, stopped his remittances, and put 
his estate in the hands of his own stewards. However, that 
his reputation might not suffer, througn Plato's means, amongst 
the philosophers, he retained a number of learned men in his 
court; and, being desirous to outshine them all in disputation, 

* This was a dramatic entertainment, exhibited with great expense and 
magnificence on the feast of Bacchus. 

Vol. IV. 2 I 

250 DION- 

he frequently was under a necessity of introducing, without tho 
least propriety, the arguments he had learnt from Plato. He 
now wished for that philosopher again, and repented that he 
had so ill availed himself of his instructions. Like a tyrant, 
therefore, whose desires, however extravagant, are immedi- 
ately to be complied with, he was violently bent on recalling 
him. To effect this he thought of every expedient; and at 
length prevailed on Archytas^and the rest of the Pythagorean 
philosophers, to pledge themselves for the performance of his 
promises, and to persuade him to return to Sicily; for it was 
Plato that first introduced those philosophers to Dionysius. 

On their part they sent Archidemus to Plato; and Diony- 
sius, at the same time, sent some galleys with several of his 
friends to join in their request. The tyrant likewise wrote to 
him, and told him in plain terms, that Dion must expect no 
favour from him, if Plato should not come into Sicily; but, 
upon his arrival, he might depend on every thing he desired. 
Dion was also solicited by his sister and wife to prevail with 
Plato to gratify the tyrant, that he might no longer have an 
apology for the severity of his treatment. Plato, therefore, as 
he says himself, set sail the third time for Sicily, — 
To brave Chary bdis' dreadful gulf once more!* 

His arrival was not only a satisfaction to Dionysius, but to 
all Sicily; the inhabitants of which did not fail to implore the 
gods, that Plato might overcome Philistus; and that the tyran- 
ny might expire under the influence of his philosophy. Plato 
was in high favour with the women in particular, and with 
Dionysius he had such credit as no other person could boast; 
for he was allowed to come to him without being searched. 
When Aristippus the Cyrenean, observed that the king fre- 
quently offered Plato money, and that Plato as constantly re- 
fused it, he said, — " That Dionysius was liberal without dan- 
ger of exhausting his treasury; for to those who wanted, and 
would take money, he was sparing in his offers, but profuse 
where he knew it would be refused." 

After the first civilities were over, Plato took an opportu- 
nity to mention Dion; but the tyrant put him off, till, at last, 
expostulations and animosities took place. These, however, 
Dionysius was industrious to conceal, and endeavoured to 
bring over Plato from the interest of Dion by repeated favours 
and studied civilities. The philosopher, on the other hand, did 
not immediately publish his perfidy, but dissembled his re- 
sentment. While things were thus circumstanced, Helicon of 
Cyzicus, one of Plato's followers, foretold an eclipse of the sun; 

* Odys. 1. xii 

DION. 

251 

and as it happened according to his prediction, the king, in ad 
miration of his learning, rewarded him with a talent of silver 
Upon this, Aristippus, jesting among the rest of the philoso 
phers, told them, he had something extraordinary likewise to 
prognosticate. Being entreated to make it known, — " I fore- 
see, said he, "that in a short time there will be a quarrel be- 
tween Dionysius and Plato." Soon after this, Dionysius sold 
Dion's estate, and converted the money to his own use. Plato 
was removed from his apartment in the palace-gardens, and 
placed within the purlieus of the guards, who had long hated, 
and even sought to kill him, on a supposition that he advised 
the tyrant to lay down his government, and disband his army. 

Archytas, who had engaged for Plato's safety, when he un- 
derstood his danger, sent a galley to demand him; and the ty- 
rant, to palliate his enmity, previous to his departure, made 
pompous entertainments. At one of them, however, he could 
not help saying, — "I suppose, Plato, when you return to your 
companions in the Academy, my faults will often be the sub- 
ject of your conversation." " I hope," answered Plato, " we 
shall never be so much at a loss for subjects in the Academy, 
as to talk of you." Such are the circumstances which have 
been mentioned concerning Plato's departure; but they are 
not perfectly consistent with Plato's own account. 

Dion being offended, not only with these things, but with 
some intelligence he had before received concerning his wife, 
which is alluded to in Plato's letter to Dionysius, openly de- 
clared himself his enemy. The affair was this : — Plato, on his 
return to Greece, was desired by Dionysius privately to con 
suit Dion, whether he would be averse to his wife's marrying 
another man ; for there was a report, whether true, or the in- 
vention of his enemies, that his matrimonial state was not 
agreeable to him, and that there was a coolness betwixt him 
and Arete. After Plato had consulted Dion on the affair, he 
wrote to Dionysius, and, though he spoke in plain terms of 
other matters, he mentioned this in a manner that could only 
be intelligible to the king. He told him, that he had talked 
with Dion on the business, and that he would certainly resent 
it if any such attempt were made. 

While any prospect of an accommodation remained, Diony- 
sius took no further steps in the affair; but when that prospect 
was gone, and Plato once more had left Sicily in displeasure, 
he compelled Arete to marry Timocrates; and, in this in- 
stance, he fell short even of the justice and lenity of his father. 
When Philoxenus, who had married his sister Theste, wras de- 
clared his enemy, and fled through fear out of Sicily, Dionysius 
sent for his sister, and reproached her with being privy to her 
husband's escape, without letting him know it. Theste an- 

252 DION. 

swered, without fear or hesitation, — " Do you think me, Dio- 
nysius, so bad a wife, or so weak a woman, that if I had known 
of my husband's flight, I would not have accompanied him, 
and shared in the worst of his fortunes? Indeed I was ignorant 
of it. And I assure you, that I should esteem it a higher 
honour to be called the wife of Philoxenus the exile, than the 
sister of Dionysius the tyrant." The king, it is said, admired 
her spirited answer: and the Syracusans honoured her so much, 
that she retained her princely retinue after the dissolution of 
the tyranny; and the citizens, by public decree, attended the 
solemnity of her funeral. This is a digression,, but it may 
have its use. 

Dion now thought of nothing but war. Plato, nowever, was 
against it; partly on account of the hospitable favours he had 
received from Dionysius, and partly because of the advanced 
age of Dion. Speusippus, and the rest of his friends, on the 
other hand, encouraged him to rescue from slavery his native 
Sicily, that stretched forth her hands towards him, and would 
certainly receive him with every expression of joy. Speusip- 
pus, when he attended Plato into Sicily, had mixed more with 
the people, and learned their sentiments with regard to the 
government. At first, indeed, they were reserved, and sus- 
pected him for an emissary of the tyrant's; but, by degrees, 
he obtained their confidence. In short, it was the voice, the 
prayer of the people, that Dion would come, though without 
either army or navy, to their relief, and lend them only his 
name and his presence against the tyrant. Dion was en- 
couraged by these representations; and the more effectually 
to conceal his intentions, he raised what forces he was able by 
means of his friends. He was assisted in this by many states- 
men and philosophers, amongst whom was Eudemus the Cy- 
f>rian, (on occasion of whose death, Aristotle wrote his Dia- 
ogue on the Soul,) and Timonides the Leucadian. These en 
gaged in his interest Miltas the Thessalian, who was skilled in 
divination, and had been his fellow-academician. But of all 
those whom the tyrant had banished, which were no fewer 
than a thousand, no more than twenty-five gave in their names 
for the service. The rest, for want of spirit, would not en- 
gage in the cause. The general rendezvous was in the island of 
Zacynthus; and here, when the little army was assembled, it 
did not amount to eight hundred men:* but they were men 
who had signalized themselves in the greatest engagements; 
they were in perfect discipline, and inured to hardship; in 
courage and conduct they had no superiors in the army; in 

* Diodorus enlarges, with great propriety, on the extraordinary spirit and 
success of this enterprise. — Lib. xvi. 

dion. 253 

short, they were such men as were likely to serve the cause of 
Dion, in animating, hy their example, those who came to his 
standard in Sicily. 

Yet these men, when they understood that they were to be 
led against Dionysius, were disheartened, and condemned the 
rash resentment of Dion; the consequence of which they 
looked upon as certain ruin. Nor were they less offended 
with their commanders, and those who had enlisted them, be- 
cause they had concealed the design of the service. But when 
Dion, in a public speech, after showing them the feeble state 
of Dionysius' government, told them, that he considered them 
rather as so many officers whom he carried to head the people 
of Sicily, already prepared to revolt, than as private men ; and 
when Alcimenes, who, in birth and reputation, was the princi- 
pal man in Achaia, had concurred in the address of Dion, and 
joined in the expedition, they then were satisfied. 

It was now about midsummer, the Etesian winds* prevailed 
at sea, and the moon was at the full, when Dion prepared a 
magnificent sacrifice to Apollo, and marched in procession to 
the temple, with his men under arms. After the sacrifice, he 
gave them a feast in the race-ground of the Zacynthians. They 
were astonished at the quantity of gold and silver plate that 
was exhibited on this occasion, so far above the ordinary for- 
tunes of a private man; and they concluded, that a person of 
such opulence would not, at a late period of life, expose him- 
self to dangers, without a fair prospect of success, and the cer- 
tain support of friends. After the usual prayers and libations, 
the moon was eclipsed. This was nothing strange to Dion, 
who knew the variations of the ecliptic, and that this defection 
of the moon's light was caused by the interposition of the 
earth between her and the sun. But as the soldiers were trou- 
bled about it, Miltas the diviner took upon him to give it a 
proper turn, and assured them, that it portended the sudden 
obscurity of something that was at present glorious: that this 
glorious object could be no other than Dionysius, whose lustre 

* These winds blew regularly at a certain season of the year. Strabo some- 
times calls them east, and sometimes north winds; but to convey Dion from 
Zacvnthus to Pachynus, they must have blown from the east. Pliny makes 
the Etesian winds the same as the north-east wind. Aquilo in (Estate media 
muted nomen, et Etesias vocattir. — Hist. Nat. lib. xviii. cap. 34. He tells us 
when the winds begin, xviii. Calend. Aus;usti, Egvplo aquilo occidit matu- 
tinb, Etesiarumque prodromi flatus incipient. — Ibid. lib. xviii. cap. 28. And 
when they end ; Decimo Sexto Calend. Octob. JEsypto Spica, quam ter.pt 
Virgo, exoritur matutino, Etesiceque desim/nt. — Ibid. lib. xviii. cap. 3*1. 
Thus, it seems, that they last about two months, (Pliny, in another place, 
says forty days, lib. ii. cap. 47,) and the relief of such gi'es in that season is 
plainly providential. Aristotle accounts for them from the convexity of the 
earth. 

Vol. IV. 22 

254 DI<>N- 

would be extinguished on their arrival in Sicily. This inter- 
pretation he communicated in as public a manner as possible: 
but from the prodigy of the bees,* a swarm of which settled on 
the stern of Dion's ship, he intimated to his friends his appre- 
hensions that the great affairs which Dion was then prosecut- 
ing, after flourishing a while, would come to nothing. Diony- 
sius, too, they said, had many prodigies on this occasion. An 
eagle snatched a javelin from one of his guards, and, after fly- 
ing aloft with it, dropt it in the sea. The waters of the sea, at 
the foot of the citadel, were fresh for one whole day, as plain- 
ly appeared to every one that tasted them. He had pigs far- 
rowed perfect in all their other parts, but without ears. The 
diviners interpreted this as an omen of rebellion and revolt; 
the people, they said, would no longer give ear to the man 
dates of the tyrant. The freshness of the sea-water imported, 
that the Syracusans, after their harsh and severe treatment, 
would enjoy milder and better times. The eagle was the minis- 
ter of Jove, and the javelin an ensign of power and govern- 
ment: thus the father of the gods had destined the overthrow 
and abolition of the tyranny. These things we have from 
Theopompus. 

Dion's soldiers were conveyed in two transports. These 
were accompanied by another smaller vessel, and two more of 
thirty oars. Beside the arms of those who attended him, he 
took with him two thousand shields, a large quantity of darts 
and javelins, and a considerable supply of provisions, that 
nothing might be wanting in the expedition; for they put off 
to the main sea, because they did not think it safe to coast it 
along, being informed that Philistus was stationed off Iapygia 
to watch their motions. Having sailed with a gentle wind 
about twelve days, on the thirteenth they arrived at Pachynus, 
a promontory in Sicily. There the pilot advised Dion to land 
his men immediately; for if they once doubled the cape, they 
might continue at sea a long time before they could have a 
gale from the south at that season of the year. But Dion, 
who was afraid of making a descent too near the enemy, and 
chose rather to make good his landing in some remoter part 
of the island, doubled the cape notwithstanding. They had 
not sailed far before a strong gale from the north and a high 
sea drove them quite off Sicily. At the same time, there was 
a violent storm of thunder and lightning; for it was about the 
rising of Arcturus; and it was accompanied with such dread- 
ful rains, and the weather was', in every respect, so tempestu- 
ous, that the affrighted sailors knew not where they were, till 

* This superstition prevailed no less amongst the Romans than amongst the 
Greeks. See the Life of Brutus. 

dion. 255 

they found themselves driven by the violence of the storm to 
Cercina on the coast of Africa. This craggy island was sur- 
rounded with such dangerous rocks, that they narrowly es- 
caped being dashed to pieces; but by working hard with their 
poles, they kept clear, with much difficulty, till the storm 
abated. They were then informed by a vessel, which accident- 
ally came up with them, that they were at the head of what is 
called the Great Syrtis.* In this horrible situation, they were 
further disheartened by finding themselves becalmed; but, after 
beating about for some time, a gale sprung up suddenly from 
the south. On this unexpected change, as" the wind increased 
upon them, they made all their sail, and imploring the assist- 
ance of the gods, once more put off to sea in quest of Sicily. 
After an easy passage of five days, they arrived at Minoa, a 
small town in Sicily,t belonging to the Carthaginians. Syna- 
lus,:); a friend of Dion's, was then governor of the place, and 
as he knew not that this little fleet belonged to Dion, he at- 
tempted to prevent the landing of his men. The soldiers 
leaped out of the vessels in arms, but killed none that opposed 
them; for Dion, on account of his friendship with Synalus, 
had forbidden them. However, they ran in one body with the 
fugitives into the town, and thus made themselves masters of 
it. When Dion and the governor met, mutual salutations 
passed between them, and the former restored him his town 
unhurt. Synalus, in return, entertained his soldiers, and sup- 
plied him with necessaries. 

It happened that Dionysius, a little before this, had sailed 
with eighty ships for Italy, and this absence of his gave them 
no small encouragement: insomuch that when Dion invited 
his men to refresh themselves for some time after their fatigues 
at sea, they thought of nothing but making a proper use of the 
present moment, and called upon him, with one voice, to lead 
them to Syracuse: he, therefore, left his useless arms and bag 
gage with Synalus, and having engaged him to transmit them 
to him at a proper opportunity, marched for Syracuse. Two 
hundred of the Agrigentine cavalry, who inhabited the country 
about Ecnomus, immediately revolted, and joined him in his 
march, and these were followed by the inhabitants of Gela. 

The news of his arrival soon reaching Syracuse, Timocrates, 
who had married Dion's wife, and was appointed regent in 
the absence of Dionysius, immediately despatched letters to 
acquaint him with the event. In the mean while he applied 
himself to prevent all tumults in the city, for the people were 
greatly animated on the report of Dion's arrival, though the 

* Not far from Tripoli. t On the south coast. 

t Diodorus calls him Pyrahis. 

'266 DI0N- 

uncertainty they were under as yet kept them quiet. A sin- 
gular accident happened to the courier who was despatched 
with letters for Dionysius. As he was passing through the 
territory of Rhegium to Caulonia, where the tyrant then was, 
he met an acquaintance of his returning home with a newly- 
offered sacrifice, and having taken a little of the flesh for his 
own use,* he made the best of his way. At night, however, 
he found it necessary to take a little rest, and retired to sleep 
in a wood by the side of the road. A wolf, allured by the 
smell of the flesh, came up while he was asleep, and carried it 
off, together with the bag of letters to which it was fastened. 
When the courier awaked, he sought a long time to no pur- 

Eose for his despatches, and being determined not to face 
lionysius without them, he absconded. Thus it was a consi- 
derable time after, and from other hands, that Dionysius was 
informed of Dion's arrival in Sicily. 

Dion, in his march, was joined by the Camarinaeans, and 
many revolters from the territory of Syracuse. The Leon- 
tines and Campanians, who, with Timocrates, guarded the 
Epipolse, being misled by a report designedly propagated by 
Dion, that he intended to attack their cities, first quitted their 

S resent station, and went to take care of their own concerns, 
ion being informed of this, while he lay near Acrae, decamped 
in the night, and came to the river Anapus, which is at the 
distance of ten furlongs from the city. There he halted, and 
sacrificed by the river, addressing his prayers to the rising 
sun. The diviners informed him that the gods gave a pro- 
mise of victory; and as he had himself assumed a garland at 
the sacrifice, all that were present immediately did" the same. 
He was now joined by about five thousand, who were, indeed, 
ill-furnished with arms; but their courage supplied that defi- 
ciency.! When he gave orders to march, Liberty was the 
word, and they rushed forward with the highest acclamations 
of joy. The most considerable citizens of Syracuse, dressed 
all in white, met him at the gates. The populace fell with 
great fury on Dionysius' party; but .in particular they seized 
his spies, a set of wretches hated by gods and men, who went 
about the city to collect the sentiments of the inhabitants, in 
order to communicate them to the tyrant. These were the 
first that suffered, being knocked down wherever they were 
met. When Timocrates found that he could not join the gar- 
rison in the citadel, he fled on horseback out of the city, and 
spread a general terror and dismay wherever he passed, mag- 

* To carry home part of the victim, and to give part of it to any person that 
the bearer met, were acts of religion. 

t Diodorus says he was soon joined liy 20,000; and that when he reached 
Syracuse, he had not fewer than 50,000 

DION. 25? 

nifying all the while the forces of Dion, that it might not ap- 
pear a slight effort, against which he was unable to defend the 
place. 

Dion now made his public entry into the town; he was 
dressed in a magnificent suit of armour, his brother Megacles 
marching on the right hand, and Callippus the Athenian on 
the left, with garlands on their heads. He was followed by a 
bundled foreign soldiers, who were his body-guard; and after 
these marched the rest of the army in proper order, under the 
conduct of their respective officers. The Syracusans looked 
upon this procession as sacred. They considered it as the 
triumphal entry of Liberty, which would once more establish 
the popular government, after a suppression of forty-eight 
years. 

When Dion entered at the Menitulian gate, silence was 
commanded by sound of trumpet, and he ordered freedom to 
be proclaimed to the Syracusans and the rest of the Sicilians, 
in the name of Dion and Megacles, who came to abolish ty- 
ranny. Being desirous to address the people in a speech, he 
marched up to the Achradina. As he passed through the 
streets, the people prepared their victims on tables placed be- 
fore their doors, scattered flowers on his head, and offered up 
their prayers to him as to their tutelar deity. At the foot oi 
the citadel, under the Pentapylas, there was a lofty sun-dial,* 
which had been placed there by Dionysius. From the emi- 
nence of this building he addressed the citizens, and exhorted 
them earnestly to assert their liberties. The people, in their 
turn, nominated Dion and his brother praetors of the city, and, 
at their request, appointed them twenty colleagues, half of 
whom were of those who returned with Dion from exile. 

At first it was considered by the soothsayers as a good omen, 
that Dion, when he addressed the people, had under his feet 
the stately edifice which Dionysius had erected; but upon re- 
flection that this edifice, on which he had been declared gene- 
ral, was a sun-dial, they were a-pprehensive that his present 
power and grandeur might be subject to decline. 

Dion, in the next place, took the castle of Epipolae, released 
the prisoners who were confined there, and invested it with a 
strong wall. Seven days after this event, Dionysius arrived 
from Italy, and entered the citadel from the sea. Dion, at the 
same time, received from Synalus the arms and ammunition 
he had left with him. These he distributed among the citi- 
zens, as far as they would go; the rest armed themselves as 

* Pherecydes was the first who invented dials to mark the hour of the day, 
about three hundred years after the time of Homer. But before his time the 
Phoenicians had contrived a dial in the isle of Scyros, which described the 
solstices. 

Vol. IV. 2 K 22* 

258 DION- 

well as they were able; and all expressed the utmost alacrity 
for the service. Dionysius at first sent agents in a private 
manner to Dion, to try what terms might be made with them. 
Dion refused to hear any overtures in private. The Syracu- 
sans, he told them, were now a free people; and what they 
had to offer must be addressed to them in public. Upon this 
they made specious proposals to the citizens, promised them 
an abatement of their taxes, and an exemption from serving 
in the wars, even though those wars should be undertaken by 
their own approbation. The Syracusans held these proposals 
in derision: and Dion answered, that it would be in vain for 
Dionysius to speak of terms without resigning, in the first place, 
the regal government; and that if he took this measure, he 
might depend on all the good offices so near a relation might 
be inclined to do him; at least in every thing that was just 
and reasonable. Dionysius seemed to consent to these terms; 
and again sent his agents to desire that a deputation of the 
Syracusans would attend him in the citadel, in order to settle 
articles for the public tranquillity. He assured them that he 
had such to offer them as they could not but accept; and that, 
on the other hand, he was equally willing to come into such 
as they had to offer him. Dion, therefore, selected a number 
of the citizens for this deputation; and the general report from 
the citadel was, that Dionysius would resign his authority in 
a voluntary manner. 

This, ho'wever, was no more than a stratagem to amuse the 
Syracusans. The deputies no sooner arrived than they were 
imprisoned; and early next morning, after he had plied the 
mercenaries with wine, he ordered them to sally out and at- 
tack the wall which had been built by Dion. This unexpect- 
ed assault was carried on with great vigour by the barbarians. 
They broke through the works, and falling with great impe- 
tuosity and loud shouts on the Syracusans, soon put them to 
flight. Dion's foreign troops took the alarm, and hastened to 
their relief; but the precipitate flight of the citizens disor- 
dered their ranks, and rendered it difficult for them to give 
any effectual assistance. Dion, perceiving that in this tumult 
his orders could not be heard, instructed them by his exam- 
ple, and charged the thickest of the enemy. The battle, where 
he fought in person, was fierce and bloody. He was known 
to the enemy as well as to his own party; and they rushed 
with the utmost violence to the quarter where he fought. His 
age, indeed, rendered him unfit for such an engagement; but 
he maintained the fight with great vigour, and cut in pieces 
many of the enemy that attacked him. At length he was 
wounded in the head with a lance; his shield was pierced 
through in many places with the darts and spears that were 

dion. 259 

levelled against him; and his armour no longer resisting the 
blows he received in this close engagement, he fell to the 
ground. He was immediately carried off by his soldiers, and 
leaving the command to Timonides, he rode about the city 
to rally the fugitives. Soon after, he brought a detachment 
of foreign soldiers, which he had left to guard the Achradina, 
as a fresh reserve against the enemy. This, however, was 
unnecessary. They had placed their whole hopes of retaking 
the city in their first sally, and finding so powerful a resist* 
ance, fatigued with the action, they retreated into the citadel. 
As soon as they began to fall back, the Greek soldiers bore 
hard upon them, and pursued them to the walls. Dion lost 
seventy-four men, and a very great number of the enemy fell 
in this action. The victory was so important, that the Syra- 
cusans rewarded each of the foreign soldiers with a hundred 
minae, and Dion was presented by his army with a crown of 
gold. 

Soon after this, messengers came from Dionysius with let- 
ters to Dion from the women of his family. Besides these, 
there was one inscribed — "Hipparinus to his father Dion:" for 
this was the name of Dion's son. Timaeus says, indeed, that 
he was called Aretseus, from his mother Arete; but I think 
credit is rather to be given to Timonides, who was his friend 
and fellow-soldier. The rest of the letters, which were read 
openly before the Syracusans, contained various solicitations 
and entreaties from the women. The letter which appeared 
to come from Hipparinus, the people, out of respect to the 
father, would not have suffered to be opened in public; but 
Dion insisted that it should be so. It proved to be a letter 
from Dionysius himself, directed indeed to Dion, but in 
reality addressed to the people of Syracuse; for though it 
carried the air of request and apology, it had an obvious ten- 
dency to render Dion obnoxious to the citizens. He remind- 
ed him of the zeal he had formerly shown for his service; he 
threatened him through his dearest connections, his sister, his 
son, and his wife; and his menaces were followed by the 
most passionate entreaties, and the most abject lamentations. 
But the most trying part of his address was that where he en- 
treated Dion not to destroy the government, and give that 
freedom to his inveterate enemies, by means of which they 
would prosecute him to death, but to retain the regal power 
himself, for the protection of his family and friends. 

This letter did not produce those sentiments in the people 
which it should naturally have done. Instead of exciting ad- 
miration of that noble firmness and magnanimity, which could 
prefer the public utility to the tenderest private connections, 
it occasioned jealousies and fears. The people saw, or thought 

260 DI0N- 

they saw, that Dion was under an absolute necessity of being 
favourable to Dionysius. They already began to wish for an- 
other general, and it was with peculiar satisfaction they beard 
of the arrival of Heraclides. This Heraclides, who had been 
banished by the tyrant, had once a distinguished command in 
the army, and was a man of considerable military abilities; 
but irresolute, inconstant, and particularly unsteady when he 
had a colleague in command. He had, some time before, had 
a difference with Dion in Peloponnesus; and, therefore, re- 
solved on his own strength to make war on Dionysius. When 
he arrived at Syracuse, he found the tyrant close besieged, 
and the Syracusans elated with their success. His first object, 
therefore, was to court the people; and, for this purpose, he 
had all the necessary talents — an insinuating address, and that 
kind of flattery which is so grateful to the multitude. This 
business was the more easy to him, as the forbidding gravity 
of Dion was thought too haughty for a popular state: besides, 
the Syracusans, already insolent with success, assumed the 
spirit of a free people, though they had not, in reality, their 
freedom. Thus they convened themselves without any sum 
mons, and appointed Heraclides their admiral: indeed, when 
Dion remonstrated against that proceeding, and showed them 
that, by thus constituting Heraclides admiral, they superseded 
the office of general, which they had before conferred on him, 
with some reluctance they deprived Heraclides of the com- 
mission they had given him. When this affair was settled, 
Dion invited Heraclides to his house, and gently expostulated 
with him on the impropriety of attending to a punctilio of 
honour, at a time when the least inattention to the common 
cause might be the ruin of the whole. He then called_ an as- 
sembly, appointed Heraclides admiral, and prevailed with the 
citizens to allow him such a guard as they had before granted 
to himself. Heraclides treated Dion with all the appearance 
of respect, acknowledged his obligations to him, and seemed 
attentive to his commands; but, in private, he corruptedthe 
people, and encouraged a spirit of mutiny and dissatisfaction; 
so that Dion was involved in continual disturbances and dis- 
quiet. If he advised that Dionysius should be permitted to 
make his retreat in safety, he was censured as designing to 
favour and protect him; if, to avoid those suspicions, he was 
for continuing the siege, he was accused of protracting the 
war, that he might the longer retain his command, and keep 
the citizens in subjection. 

There was in the city one Sosis, infamous for his insolence 
and villany, who thought the perfection of liberty was the 
licentiousness of speech. This fellow openly attacked Dion, 
and told the people in public assembly, that they had only 

DION. 261 

changed the inattention of a drunken and dissolute tyrant, for 
the crafty vigilance of a sober master. Immediately after this 
he left the assembly; and, next day, was seen running naked 
through the streets, as if from somebody that pursued him, 
with his head and face covered with blood. In this condition 
he ran into the market-place, and told the people that he had 
been assaulted by Dion's foreign soldiers; at the same time 
showing them a wound in his head, which, he said, they had 
given him. Dion, upon this, was generally condemned, and 
accused of silencing the people by sanguinary methods: he 
came, however, before this irregular and tumultuous assem- 
bly, in his own vindication, and made it appear, that this So- 
sis was brother to one of Dionysius' guards, and that he had 
been engaged by him to raise a tumult in the city — the only 
resource the tyrant had now left being that of exciting dis- 
sensions amongst the people. The surgeons also, who exa- 
mined the wound, found that is was not occasioned by any 
violent blow. The wounds made by weapons are generally 
deepest in the middle; but this was both superficial, and of 
an equal depth from one end to another: besides, being dis- 
continuous, it did not appear to be the effect of one incision, 
but to have been made at different times, probably as he was 
best able to endure the pain. At the same time there were 
some who deposed, that, having seen Sosis running naked and 
wounded, and being informed by him that he was flying from 
the pursuit of Dion's foreign soldiers, who had just then 
wounded him, they hastened to take the pursuers: that, how- 
ever, they could meet with no such persons, but found a ra- 
zor lying under a hollow stone near the place from whence 
they had observed him come. All these circumstances made 
strongly against him; but when his own servants gave evi- 
dence, that he went out of his house alone before day-light, 
with a razor in his hand, Dion's accusers withdrew. The peo- 
ple, by a general vote, condemned Sosis to die, and were once 
more reconciled to Dion. 

Nevertheless, their jealousy of his soldiers remained. And 
as the war was now principally carried on by sea, Philistus 
being come to the support of Dionysius, with a considerable 
fleet from Iapygia, they did not see the necessity of retaining 
in their service those Greeks who were no seamen, and must 
depend for protection on the naval force. Their confidence in 
their own strength was likewise greatly increased by an ad- 
vantage they had gained at sea against Philistus, whom they 
used in a very barbarous manner. Ephorus relates, that, after 
his ship was taken, he slew himself. But Timonides, who at- 
tended Dion from the beginning of the war, writing to Speu- 
sippus the philosopher, gives the story thus. — Philistus' galley 

0(32 DION. 

having run aground, he was taken prisoner alive; and, after 
being disarmed and stripped, was exposed naked, though an 
old man, to every kind of insult. They afterwards cut off his 
head, and ordered their children to drag his body through the 
Achradina, and throw it into the quarry. Timaeus represents 
the indignity offered his remains to be still greater. The boys, 
he says, tied a rope about his lame leg, and so dragged him 
through the city — the Syracusans, in the mean while, insulting 
over his carcase, when they saw him tied by the leg, who had 
said, — " It would ill become Dionysius to fly from his throne 
by the swiftness of his horse, which he ought never to quit till 
he was dragged from it by the heels." Philistus, however, 
tells us, that this was not said to Dionysius by himself, but 
by another. It is plain, at the same time, that Timaeus takes 
every occasion, from Philistus' known adherence to arbitrary 
power, to load him with the keenest reproaches. Those whom 
he injured are in some degree excusable, if, in their resent- 
ment, they treated him with indignities after death. But 
wherefore should his biographers, whom he never injured, and 
who have had the benefit of his works; — wherefore should 
they exhibit him, with all the exaggerations of scurrility, in 
those scenes of distress to which fortune sometimes reduces 
the best of men? On the other hand, Ephorus is no less ex- 
travagant in his encomiums on Philistus. He knows well how 
to throw into shades the foibles of the human character, and 
to give an air of plausibility to the most indefensible conduct; 
but, with all his eloquence, with all his art, he cannot rescue 
Philistus from the imputation of being the most strenuous as- 
sertor of arbitrary power — of being the fondest follower and 
admirer of the luxury, the magnificence, the alliance of tyrants. 
Upon the whole, he who neither defends the principles of 
Philistus, nor insults over his misfortunes, will best discharge 
the duty of the historian. 

After the death of Philistus, Dionysius offered to surrender 
the citadel to Dion, together with the arms, provisions, and 
soldiers, and an advance of five months' pay, on condition that 
he might be permitted to retire into Italy, and there enjoy the 
revenues of Gyata, a fruitful tract of country in the territorv 
of Syracuse, reaching from the sea to the middle of the coun- 
try. Dion refusing to negociate on his own account, referred 
the ambassadors to the Syracusans; and as they expected that 
Dionysius would shortly come alive into their hands, they 
were dismissed without audience. Upon this, the tyrant, leav- 
ing his eldest son Apollocrates to defend the citadel, embarked 
with his most valuable treasures and a few select friends, and, 
sailing with a fair wind, escaped Heraclides the admiral. 

The tyrant's escape greatly exasperated the people against 

DION. 

263 

Heraclides; and, in order to appease them, he proposed by 
Hippo, one of the orators, that there should be an equal divi- 
sion of lands; alleging, that equality was the first foundation 
of civil liberty; and that poverty and slavery were synonymous 
terms. At the same time that he supported Hippo in the pro- 
motion of this scheme, he encouraged the faction against Dion, 
who opposed it. At length he prevailed with the people not 
only to pass this law, but to make a decree, that the pay of the 
foreign soldiers should be stopped, and new commanders 
chosen, that they might no longer be subject to the severe dis 
cipline of Dion. Thus, like the patient, who, after a lingering 
sickness, makes too rash a use of the first returns of health, 
and rejects the sober and gradual regimen of his physician, 
the citizens, who had long laboured under the yoke of slavery, 
took too precipitate steps to freedom, and refused the salutary 
counsels and conduct of their deliverer. 

It was about the midst of summer, when the assembly was 
summoned for the election of new officers; and fpr the space 
of fifteen days there were the most dreadful thunders, and the 
most alarming prodigies. The religious fears that these pro- 
digies excited, made these people decline the choosing of 
officers. When the weather grew more serene, the orators 
again exhorted them to proceed to the business; but no sooner 
had they begun, than a draught-ox, which had neither received 
any provocation from the driver, nor could be terrified by the 
crowds and noise to which he had been accustomed, suddenly 
broke from his yoke, and running furiously into the assembly, 
drove the people in great disorder before him: from thence, 
throwing down all that stood in his way, he ran over that part 
of the city which afterwards fell into the enemy's hands. The 
Syracusans, however, regardless of these things, elected five 
and twenty officers, among whom was Heraclides. At the 
same time they privately endeavoured to draw off Dion's men ; 
promising, if they would desert him, to make them citizens of 
Syracuse. But the soldiers were faithful to their general, and 
placing him in the middle of a battalion, marched out of the 
city. They did not, on this occasion, offer any violence to 
the inhabitants, but they severely reproached them for their 
baseness and ingratitude. The smallness of their number, 
and their declining to act offensively, put the citizens on the 
view of cutting them off before they escaped out of the city; 
and with this design they fell upon their rear. Dion was here 
in a great dilemma: he was under the necessity either of fight- 
ing against his countrymen, or of suffering himself and' his 
faithful soldiers to be cut in pieces. He, therefore, entreated 
the Syracusans to desist: he stretched forth his hands to them, 
and pointed to the citadel full of soldiers, who were happy in 

264 DI0N- 

being spectators of these dissensions amongst their enemies. 
But the torrent of the populace, agitated and driven forwards 
by the seditious breath of the orators, was not to be stopped 
by persuasion. He, therefore, commanded his men to advance 
with shouts and clashing of arms, but not to attack them. The 
Syracusans, upon this, fled immediately through the streets, 
though no one pursued them; for Dion retreated with his men 
into the territories of the Leontines. 

The very women laughed at the new officers for this cow- 
ardly flight; and the latter, to recover their reputation, order- 
ed the citizens to arms, pursued Dion, and came up with him 
as he was passing a river. A skirmish began between the ca- 
valry; hut when they found Dion no longer disposed to bear 
these indignities with his usual paternal patience; when they 
observed him drawing up his men for battle, with all the eager- 
ness of strong resentment, they once more turned their backs, 
and, with the loss of some few men, fled to the city in a more 
disgraceful and more cowardly manner than before. 

The Leontines received Dion in a very honourable manner, 
gave money to his soldiers, and made them free of their city. 
They also sent messengers to Syracuse with requisitions, that 
his men might have justice done them, and receive their pay. 
The Syracusans, in return, sent other messengers, with im- 
peachments against Dion : but when the matter was debated 
at Leontium, in full assembly of the allies, they evidently ap- 
peared to be in fault. They refused, nevertheless, to stand to 
the award of this assembly ; for the recent recovery of their 
liberties had made them insolent, and the popular power was 
without control; their very commanders being no more than 
servile dependents on the multitude. 

About this time Dionysius sent a fleet under Nypsius the 
Neapolitan, with provisions and pay for the garrison in the 
citadel. The Syracusans overcame him, and took four of his 
ships; but they made an ill use of their success. Destitute 
of all discipline, they celebrated the victory with the most 
riotous extravagance; and at a time when they thought them- 
selves secure of taking the citadel, they lost the city. Nyp- 
sius, observing their disorder, their night-revels and debauches, 
in which their commanders, either from inclination, or through 
fear of offending them, were as deeply engaged as themselves, 
took advantage of this opportunity, broke through their walls, 
and exposed the city to the violence and depredation of his 
soldiers. 

The Syracusans at once perceived their folly and their mis- 
fortune: but the latter, in their present confusion, was not easy 
to be redressed. The soldiers made dreadful havock in the 
city: they demolished the fortifications, put the men to the 

DION. 265 

sword, and dragged the women and children shrieking to the 
citadel. The Syracusan officers being unable to separate the 
citizens from the enemy, or to draw them up in any order, 
gave up all for lost. In this situation, while the Achradina 
itself was in danger of being taken, they naturally turned their 
thoughts on Dion; but none had the courage to mention a man 
whom all had injured. In this emergency a voice was heard 
trom the cavalry of the allies, crying, — " Send for Dion and 
his Peloponnesians from Leontium." His name was no sooner 
mentioned than the people shouted for joy. With tears they 
implored that he might once more be at their head: they re- 
membered his intrepidity in the most trying dangers: they re- 
membered the courage that he showed himself, and the con- 
fidence with which he inspired them when he led them against 
the enemy. Archonides and Telesides from the auxiliaries, 
and Hellanicus, with four more from the cavalry, were imme- 
diately despatched to Leontium, where, making the best of 
their way, they arrived in the close of the evening. They in- 
stantly threw themselves at the feet of Dion, and related, with 
tears, the deplorable condition of the Syracusans. The Leon 
tines and Peloponnesians soon gathered about them, conjec- 
turing from their haste, and the manner of their address, tha. 
their business had something extraordinary in it. 

Dion immediately summoned an assembly, and the people 
being soon collected, Archonides and Hellanicus briefly rela- 
ted the distress of the Syracusans, entreated the foreign sol- 
diers to forget the injuries they had done them, and once more 
to assist that unfortunate people, who had already suffered 
more for their ingratitude than even they whom thej- had in- 
jured would have inflicted upon them. When they had thus 
spoken, a profound silence ensued; upon which Dion arose, 
and attempted to speak, but was prevented by his tears. His 
soldiers, who were greatly affected with their general's sorrow, 
entreated him to moderate his grief, and proceed. After he 
had recovered himself a little, he spoke to the following pur- 
pose:— "Peloponnesians and confederates, I have called vou 
together, that you may consult on your respective affairs. My 
measures are taken: I cannot hesitate what to do when Syra- 
cuse is perishing. If I cannot save it, I will, at least, hasten 
thither, and fall beneath the ruins of my country. For you, 
if you can yet persuade yourselves to assist the most unfortu- 
nate and inconsiderate of men, it may be in your power to 
save from destruction a city which was the work of your own 
hands.* But if your pity for the Syracusans be sacrificed to 

* Strabo says, that Syracuse was built in the second year of the eleventh 
Olympiad, by Archias, one of the Heraclidae, who came from Corinth tc 
Syracuse. 

Vol. IV. 2 L 23 

266 DION- 

vour resentment, may the gods reward your fidelity, your 
kindness to Dion! And remember, that as he would not de- 
sert you, when you were injured, so neither could he abandon 
his falling country!" 

He had hardly ended, when the soldiers signified their readi- 
ness for the service by loud acclamations, and called upon him 
to march directly to the relief of Syracuse. The messengers 
embraced them, and entreated the gods to shower their bless- 
ings on Dion and the Peloponnesians. When the noise sub- 
sided, Dion gave orders that the men should repair to their 
quarters, and, after the necessary refreshments, assemble in 
the same place completely armed, for he intended to march 
that very night. 

The soldiers of Dionysius, after ravaging the city during 
the whole day, retired at night, with the loss of a few men, 
into the citadel. This small respite once more encouraged the 
demagogues of the city, who, presuming that the enemy would 
not repeat their hostilities, dissuaded the people from admit- 
ting Dion and his foreign soldiers. They advised them not 
to give up the honour of saving the city to strangers, but to 
defend their liberty themselves. Upon this the generals sent 
other messengers to Dion to countermand his march; while, 
on the other hand, the cavalry, and many of the principal 
citizens, sent their requests that he would hasten it. Thus in- 
vited by one party, and rejected by another, he came forward 
but slowly: and at night the faction that opposed him set a 
guard upon the gates to prevent his entering. 

Nypsius now made a fresh sally from the citadel, with still 
greater numbers, and greater fury than before. After totally 
demolishing the remaining part of the fortification, he fell to 
ravaging the city. The slaughter was dreadful; men, women, 
and children, fell indiscriminately by the sword: for the ob- 
ject of the enemy was not so much plunder as destruction. 
Dionysius despaired of regaining his lost empire, and, in his 
mortal hatred of the Syracusans, he determined to bury it in 
the ruins of their city. It was resolved, therefore, that before 
Dion's succours could arrive, they should destroy it the quick- 
est way by laying it in ashes. Accordingly, they set fire to 
those parts that were at hand by brands and torches, and to 
the remoter parts by shooting flaming arrows. The citizens, 
in the utmost consternation, fled every where before them. 
Those who, to avoid the fire, had fled from their houses, were 
put to the sword in the streets; and they who sought for re- 
fuge in their houses were again driven out by the flames : many 
were burnt to death, and many perished beneath the ruins of 
the houses. 

This terrible distress, by universal consent, opened the gate* 

dion. 267 

for Dion. After being informed that the enemy had retreated 
into the citadel, he had made no great haste. But early in the 
morningsome horsemen carried him the news of a fresh as- 
sault. These were followed by some, even of those who had 
recently opposed his coming, but who now implored him to 
fly to their relief. As the conflagration and destruction in- 
creased, Heraclides despatched his brother, and after him his 
uncle Theodotes, to entreat the assistance of Dion; for they 
were now no longer in a capacity of opposing the enemy; he 
was wounded himself, and great part of the city was laid in 
ashes. 

When Dion received this news, he was about sixty furlongs 
from the city. After he had acquainted his soldiers with the 
dreadful exigency, and exhorted them to behave with resolu- 
tion, they no longer marched, but ran; and in their way they 
were met by numbers, who entreated them, if possible, to go 
still faster. By the eager and vigorous speed of the soldiers. 
Dion quickly arrived at the city; and entering by the part 
called Hecatompedon, he ordered his light troops immediately 
to charge the enemy, that the Syracusans might take courage 
at the sight of them. In the mean while he drew up his heavy- 
armed men, with such of the citizens as had joined him, and 
divided them into several small bodies, of greater depth than 
breadth, that he might intimidate the enemy, by attacking 
them in several quarters at once. He advanced to the engage- 
ment at the head of his men, amidst a confused noise of shouts, 

laudits, prayers, and vows, which the Syracusans offered up 
or their deliverer, their tutelary deity; for so they termed him 
now; and his foreign soldiers they called their brethren and 
fellow-citizens. At this time, perhaps, there was not one 
wretch so selfishly fond of life, that he did not hold Dion's 
safety dearer than his own, or that of his fellow-citizens, — 
while they saw him advancing first in the front of danger, 
through blood and fire, and over heaps of the slain. 

There was, indeed, something terrible in the appearance of 
the enemy, who, animated by rage and despair, had posted 
themselves in the ruins of the ramparts, so that it was ex- 
tremely dangerous and difficult to approach them. But the 
apprehension of fire discouraged Dion's men the most, and 
distressed them in their march. They were surrounded by 
flames that raged on every side; and while they walked over 
burning ruins, through clouds of ashes and smoke, they were 
every moment in danger of being buried beneath the fall of 
half-consumed buildings. In all these difficulties they took 
infinite pains to keep close together, and maintain their ranks. 
When they came up to the enemy, a few only could engage at 
a time, on account of the narrowness and inequality of the 

8 

268 DION- 

ground. They fought, however, with great bravery, and, en 
couraged hy the acclamations of the citizens, at length they 
routed Nypsius, and most of his men escaped into the citadel, 
which was^near at hand. Such of them as were dispersed, 
and could not get in, were pursued, and put to the sword. 
The present deplorable state of the city afforded neither time 
nor propriety for that joy, and those congratulations, which 
usually follow victory. All were busy in saving the remains 
of the conflagrations; and, though they laboured hard during 
the whole night, it was with great difficulty the fire was extin- 
guished. 

Not one orator of the popular faction durst any longer re- 
main in the city. By their flight they at once confessed their 
guilt, and avoided punishment. Heraclides, however, and 
Theodotes, surrendered themselves to Dion. They acknow- 
ledged their error, and entreated that he would not imitate 
them in the cruel treatment they had shown him. They for- 
got not to add how much it would be for his honour, who war 
unequalled in other virtues, to restrain his resentments, and, 
by forgiving the ungrateful, to testify that superiority of spirit 
for which they had contended with him. His friends, how- 
ever, advised him by no means to pardon these factious and 
invidious men, but to give them up to his soldiers, and to rid 
the commonwealth of the ambition of demagogues, no less 
destructive than that of tyrants. Dion, on the other hand, 
endeavoured to mitigate their resentments: — "Other gene- 
rals," said he, "employ themselves chiefly in military studies; 
but, by being long conversant in the Academy, I have learned 
to subdue my passions, and to restrain the impulses of en 
mity and anger. To prove that I have really gained such a 
victory over myself, it is not sufficient merely to be kind to 
men of virtue, but to be indulgent and reconcileable to the in- 
jurious. If I have excelled Heraclides in military and poli 
tical abilities, I am resolved not to be inferior to him in jus- 
tice and clemency; since, to have the advantage in those, is 
the first degree of excellence. The honours of conquest are 
never wholly our own; for though the conqueror may stand 
unrivalled, fortune will claim her share in his success. He- 
raclides may be treacherous, invidious, and malicious; but 
must Dion, therefore, sully his glories by the indulgence of 
resentment? The laws, indeed, allow the revenge of an injury 
to be more justifiable than the commission of it; but both 
proceed originally from the infirmity of human nature. Be- 
sides, there is hardly any malignity so inveterate, that it may 
not be overcome by kindness, and softened by repeated fa- 
vours." Agreeably to these sentiments, Dion pardoned He- 
raclides, and dismissed him. 

DION. 269 

His first object was to repair the wall, which he had for- 
merly erected around the citadel; and, for this purpose, he 
ordered each of the citizens to furnish a palisado, and bring it 
to the works. When they had done this, he sent them to their 
repose, and employed his own men the whole night in drawing 
a line of circumvallation around the citadel, which both the 
enemy and the citizens were astonished to find completed in 
the morning. 

After the dead were buried, and the prisoners, to the amount 
of two thousand, ransomed, he summoned an assembly. He- 
raclides moved, that Dion should be declared commander-in- 
chief, both at sea and land. This motion was approved by the 
nobility, and the commons were desired to confirm it; but the 
sailors and artificers opposed it in a most tumultuous manner. 
They were unwilling that Heraclides should lose his com- 
mand at sea; for though they had no good opinion of his 
principles, they knew that he would be more indulgent than 
Dion, and more ready to gratify their inclinations. Dion, 
therefore, gave up his point, and agreed that Heraclides should 
".ontinue admiral. But when the equal distribution of lands 
Was moved for, he opposed it, and repealed all the decrees 
which had formerly passed on that measure, by which means 
he once more incurred the displeasure of the people. Hera- 
clides again made his advantage of this, and harangued the 
soldiers and sailors at Messana, accusing Dion of a design to 
make himself absolute. At the same time, he privately cor- 
responded with Dionysius by means of Pharax, a Spartan. 
When the nobility got intelligence of this, there was a sedi- 
tion in the army, and the city was greatly distressed by want 
of provisions. Dion was now at a loss what measures to pur- 
sue; and all his friends condemned him for strengthening the 
hands of so perverse and invidious a wretch as Heraclides. 

Pharax was encamped at Neopolis, in the territory of Agri- 
gentum; and Dion drew out the Syracusans, but not with an 
intent to engage him till he found a convenient opportunity. 
This gave Heraclides and his seamen an occasion of exclaim- 
ing that he delayed fighting only that he might the longer con- 
tinue in command. He was forced to action, therefore, con- 
trary to his inclinations, and was beaten. His loss, indeed, 
was small, and his defeat was owing more to a misunderstand- 
ing in his own army, than to the superior courage of the ene- 
my: he, therefore, resolved to renew the engagement; and, 
after animating and encouraging his men to redeem their | st 
credit, he drew them up in form of battle. In the evening, 
however, he received intelligence that Heraclides was sailing 
for Syracuse, with an intent to possess himself of the city, 
and to shut him out. Upon this he made a draught of the- 

23* 

270 DI0N- 

bravest and most active of the cavalry, and rode with such ex 
pedition, that he reached the city by nine in the morning, after 
a march of seven hundred furlongs. Heraclides, though he 
made all the sail he could, was too late; and he, therefore, 
tacked about, and stood out to sea. While he was undeter- 
mined what course to steer, he met Gsesilus the Spartan, who 
informed him that he was sent to command in chief in Sicily, 
as Gylippus had done before. Heraclides immediately ac- 
cepted him, and boasted to his allies that he had found, in this 
Spartan, an antidote to the power of Dion. At the same time, 
he sent a herald to Syracuse, ordering the citizens to receive 
Gsesilus for their general. Dion answered, that the Syracusans 
had already a sufficient number of generals; and that, if it 
were necessary for them to have a Spartan, he was himself a 
citizen of Sparta. 

Gsesilus having now no hopes of the command, waited upon 
Dion, and, by his mediation, reconciled him to Heraclides. 
This reconciliation was confirmed by the most solemn oaths; 
and Gsesilus himself was guarantee of the treaty, and under- 
took to punish Heraclides in case of any future breach of faith. 
The Syracusans, upon this, discharged their navy, as they 
found no advantages from it equal to the expense of keep- 
ing it on foot, and to those inconveniences it brought upon 
them by being a continual source of seditions. At the same 
time, they continued the siege, and invested the city with an- 
other wall. As the besieged were cut off from further sup- 
plies, when provisions failed, the soldiers began to mutiny; 
so that Apollocrates found himself under a necessity of com- 
ing to terms with Dion, and offered to deliver up the citadel to 
him, with all the arms and stores, on condition that he might 
have five galleys, and be permitted to retire in safety with his 
mother and sisters. Dion granted his request; and with these 
he sailed to Dionysius. He was no sooner under sail, thai7 
the whole city of Syracuse assembled to behold the joyful 
sight. Their hearts were so full of this interesting event, that 
they even expressed their anger against those who were ab- 
sent, and could not be witnesses with what glory the sun that 
day rose upon Syracuse, delivered at last from the chains of 
slavery. As this flight of Dionysius was one of the most me- 
morable vicissitudes of fortune that is recorded in history, 
and as no tyranny was ever more effectually established than 
his, how great must their joy and their self-complacency have 
been, after they had destroyed it by such inconsiderable means! 

When Apollocrates was gone, and Dion went to take pos- 
session of the citadel, the women could not wait till he enter- 
ed, but ran to meet him at the gate. Aristomache came first, 
leading Dion's son ; and Arete followed her ir. tears, fearful 

DION. <27j 

and apprehensive of meeting her husband, after she had been 
so long in the possession of another. Dion first embraced his 
sister, then his son; after which Aristomache presented Arete 
to him, with this address: — "Your banishment, Dion, made us 
all equally miserable. Your return and your success have 
made us all happy, except her whom I had the misfortune to 
see, by cruel compulsion, given to another while you were yet 
alive. We are now entirely in your disposal; but how will 
you determine concerning this unhappy woman? And how 
must she salute you? — as her uncle, or as her husband?" Dion 
was affected by this tender intercession, and wept. He em- 
braced Arete with great affection, put his son into her hands, 
and desired her to retire to his own house, where he purposed 
to reside; for the city he immediately delivered up to the 
Syracusans. 

All things had now succeeded to his wish; but he by no 
means sought to reap the first advantages of his good fortune. 
His first object was to gratify his friends, to reward his allies, 
and to give his fellow-citizens and foreign soldiers proper 
marks of his favour, in which his munificence even exceeded 
his abilities. As to himself, he lived in a plain and frugal man- 
ner, which, on this occasion in particular, was universally ad- 
mired. For while the fame of his actions, and the reputation 
of his valour, was spread through Sicily and Greece, he seem- 
ed rather to live with Plato in the sparing simplicity of the 
Academic life, than among soldiers, who look upon every spe- 
cies of luxury as a compensation for the toils and dangers of 
war. Though Plato himself wrote to him, that the eyes of 
the whole world were upon him, he seems not to have carried 
his attentions beyond one particular part of one city, the Aca- 
demy. His judges in that society, he knew, would not so 
much regard the greatness of his performances, his courage, 
or his victories, as that temper of mind with which he bore 
prosperity, and that moderation with which he sustained his 
happier fortunes. He did not in the least relax the severity 
of his manners; he kept the same reserve to the people, 
though condescension was at this time politically necessary; 
and though Plato, as we have already observed, had expostu- 
lated with him on this account,and told him, that austerity was 
the companion of solitude. He had certainly a natural anti- 
pathy to complaisance; and he had moreover a design, by his 
own example, to reform the manners of the Syracusans, which 
were become vain, dissolute, and immodest. Heraclides once 
more began to oppose him. Dion sent for him to attend at 
the council; and he made answer, that he would not attend 
in any other capacity than as a private citizen at a public as- 
sembly. Soon after this he impeached Dion of declining to 

^72 DION- 

demolish the citadel, and of preventing the people from open- 
ing the tomb of Dionysius, and dragging out the body. He 
accused him likewise of sending for counsellors and ministers 
to Corinth, in contempt of his fellow-citizens: and it is true, 
that he had engaged some Corinthians to assist him in settling 
his plan of government. His intention was to restrain the 
unlimited power of the popular administration, (which can- 
not properly be called a government, but, as Plato terms it, a 
warehouse of governments,)* and to establish the constitu- 
tion on the Lacedaemonian and Cretan plan. This was a mix- 
ture of the regal and popular governments, or rather an aris- 
tocracy. Dion knew that the Corinthians were governed 
chiefly by the nobility, and that the influence of the people 
rather interfered. Pie foresaw that Heraclides would be no 
inconsiderable impediment to his scheme. He knew him to 
be factious, turbulent, and inconstant; and he, therefore, gave 
him up to those who advised to kill him, though he had before 
saved him out of their hands. Accordingly, they broke into 
his house, and murdered him. His death was, at first, re- 
sented by the citizens; but when Dion gave him a magnifi- 
cent funeral, attended the dead body with his soldiers, and 
pronounced an oration to the people, their resentment went 
off. Indeed, they were sensible that the city would never be 
at peace whilst the competitions of Dion and Heraclides sub- 
sisted. 

Dion had a friend named Callippus, an Athenian, with whom 
he first became acquainted, not on account of his literary merit, 
but, according to Plato, because he happened to be introduced 
by him to some religious mysteries. He had always attended 
him in the army, and was in great esteem. He was the first 
of his friends who marched along with him into Syracuse, 
with a garland on his head, and he had distinguished himself 
in every action. This man finding that Dion's chief friends 
had fallen in the war; that, since the death of Heraclides, the 
popular party was without a leader, and that he himself stood 
in great favour with the army, formed an execrable design 
against the life of his benefactor. His object was certainly the 
supreme command in Sicily, though some say he was bribed 
to it with twenty talents. For this purpose, he drew several 
of the soldiers into a conspiracy against Dion, and his plot was 
conducted in a most artful manner. He constantly informed 
Dion of what he heard, or pretended to hear, said against him 
in the army. By this means, he obtained such confidence, that 
he was allowed to converse privately with whom he thought 
proper, and to speak with the utmost freedom against Dion, 

* Repub. 1. viii. 

DION. 073 

that he might discover his secret enemies. Thus, in a short 
time, he drew about him all the seditious and discontented 
citizens; and if any one of different principles informed Dion 
that his integrity had been tried, he gave himself no concern 
about it, as that point had already been settled with Cal- 
lippus. 

While this conspiracy was on foot, Dion had a monstrous 
and dreadful apparition. As he was meditating one evening 
alone in the portico before his house, he heard a sudden noise, 
and, turning about, perceived (for it was not yet dark) a wo- 
man of gigantic size at the end of the portico, in the form of 
one of the Furies, as they are represented on the theatre, 
sweeping the floor with a broom. In his terror and amaze- 
ment, he sent for some of his friends, and, informing them of 
this prodigy, desired they would stay with him during the 
night. His mind was in the utmost disorder, and he was ap- 
prehensive that, if they left him, the spectre would appear 
again; but he saw it no more. Soon after this, his only son, 
who was now almost grown up to manhood, upon some child- 
ish displeasure, or frivolous affront, threw himself from the 
top of the house, and was killed upon the spot. 

While Dion was in this dislress, Callippus was ripening the 
conspiracy; and, for this purpose, he propagated a report in 
Syracuse, that Dion, being now childless, had determined to 
adopt Apollocrates, the son of Dionysius, who was nephew to 
his wife, and grandson to his sister. The plot, however, was 
now suspected, both by Dion, his wife, and sister. Dion, who 
had stained his honour and tarnished his glories by the mur- 
der of Heraclides, had, as we may suppose, his anxieties on 
that account; and he would frequently declare, that, rather 
than live, not only in fear of his enemies, but in suspicion of 
his friends, he would die a thousand deaths, and freely open 
his bosom to the assassin. 

When Callippus found the women inquisitive and suspi- 
cious, he was afraid of the consequence, and asserted, with 
tears, his own integrity, offering to give them any pledge of 
his fidelity they might desire. They required that he would 
take the great oath, the form of which is as follows: — The 
person who takes it, goes down into the temple of the Tlies- 
mophori, where, after the performance of some religious cere- 
monies, he puts on the purple robe of Proserpine, and holding 
a flaming torch in his hand, proceeds on the oath. All this 
Callippus did without hesitation; and, to show with what con- 
tempt he held the goddess, he appointed the execution of his 
conspiracy on the day of her festival. Indeed, he could hardly 
think that even this would enhance his guilt, or render him 

Vol. IV. 2 M 

274 DI0]N- 

more obnoxious to the goddess, when he was the very person 
who had before initiated Dion in her sacred mysteries. 

The conspiracy was now supported by numbers; and as 
Dion was surrounded by his friends, in the apartment where 
he usually entertained them, the conspirators invested the 
house, some securing the doors, and others the windows. The 
assassins, who were Zacynthians, came in unarmed, in their 
ordinary dress. Those who remained without made fast the 
doors. The Zacynthians then fell upon Dion, and endeavoured 
to strangle him; but not succeeding in this, they called for a 
sword. No one, however, durst open the door; for Dion had 
many friends about him: yet they had, in effect, nothing to 
fear from these; for each concluded, that, by giving up Dion, 
he should consult his own safety. When they had waited 
some time, Lycon, aSyracusan, put a short sword through the 
window into the hands of a Zacynthian, who fell upon Dion, 
already stunned and senseless, and cut his throat, like a victim 
at the altar. His sister, and his wife, who was pregnant, they 
imprisoned. In this unhappy situation she fell in labour, and 
was delivered of a son, whom they ventured to preserve; for 
Callippus was too much embroiled by his own affairs to attend 
to them, and the keepers of the prison were prevailed on to 
connive at it. 

After Dion was cut off, and Callippus had the whole govern- 
ment of Syracuse in his hands, he had the presumption to write 
to the Athenians, whom, after the gods, he ought of all others 
to have dreaded, polluted as he was with the murder of his 
benefactor. But it has been observed, with great truth, of that 
state, that its good men are the best, and its bad men the worst 
in the world; as the soil of Attica produces the finest honey, 
and the most fatal poisons. The success of Callippus did not 
long reproach the indulgence of the gods. He soon received 
the' punishment he deserved ; for in attempting to take Catana, 
he lost Syracuse; upon which occasion he said, that he had 
lost a city and got a cheese-grater.* Afterwards, at the siege 
of Messana, most of his men were cut off, and amongst the 
rest the murderers of Dion. As he was refused admission by 
every city in Sicily, and universally hated and despised, he 
passed into Italy, and made himself master of Rhegium; but 
being no longer able to maintain his soldiers, he was slain by 
Leptines and Polyperchon with the very same sword with 
which Dion had been assassinated; for it was known by the 
size (being short, like the Spartan swords,) and by the curious 

* But the word which signifies a cheese-grater in Greek is not Catane, 
but P atone. 

dion. 275 

workmanship. Thus Callippus received the punishment due 
to his crimes. 

When Aristomache and Arete were released out of prison, 
they were received by Icetes, a Syracusan, a friend of Dion's, 
who, for some time, entertained them with hospitality and good 
faith. Afterwards, however, being prevailed on by the ene- 
mies of Dion, he put them on board a vessel, under pretence of 
sending them to the Peloponnesus; but privately ordered the 
sailors to kill them in the passage, and throw the bodies over- 
board. Others say, that they and the infant were thrown alive 
into the sea. This wretch, too, paid the forfeit of his villany ; 
for he was put to death by Timoleon; and the Syracusans, to 
revenge Dion, slew his two daughters; of which I have made 
more particular mention in the Life of Timoleon. 

THE 

LIFE OF MARCUS BRUTUS 

The great ancestor of Marcus Brutus was that Junius Bru- 
tus, to whom the ancient Romans erected a statue of brass, 
and placed it in the Capitol among their kings. He was re- 
presented with a drawn sword in his hand, to signify the spirit 
and firmness with which he vanquished the Tarquins; but, 
hard-tempered like the steel of which that sword was com- 
posed, and in no degree humanized by education, the samp 
obdurate severity which impelled him against the tyrant, shut 
up his natural affection from his children, when he found those 
children conspiring for the support of tyranny. On the con- 
trary, that Brutus, whose life we are now writing, had all the 
advantages that arise from the cultivation of philosophy. To 
his spirit, which was naturally sedate and mild, he gave vigour 
and activity by constant application. Upon the whole, he was 
happily formed to virtue, both by nature and education. Even 
the partisans of Caesar ascribed to him every thing that had 
the appearance of honour or generosity in the conspiracy, and 
all that was of a contrary complexion they laid to the charge 
of Cassius; who was, indeed, the friend and relation of Bru- 
tus, but by no means resembled him in the simplicity of his 
manners. It is universally allowed, that his mother Servilia 
was descended from Servilius Ahala, who, when Spurius Mae- 
lius seditiously aspired to the monarchy, went up to him in 
the forum, under a pretence of business, and, as Maelius in- 
clined his head to hear what he would say, stabbed him with 
a dagger, which he had concealed for the purpose.* But the 
partisans of Caesar would not allow that he was descended 
from Junius* Brutus, whose family, they said, was extinct with 
his two sons.t Marcus Brutus, according to them, was a ple- 
beian, descended from one Brutus, a steward, of mean extrac- 
tion; and that the family had but lately risen to any dignity 
in the state. On the contrary, Posidonius, the philosopher, 
agrees with those historians who say, that Junius Brutus had 
a third son, who was an infant when his brothers were put to 
death, and that Marcus Brutus was descended from him. He 

* Livy, and other historians, relate this affair differently. Some of them say 
confidently, that Servilius, who was then general of the horse, put Maelius to 
death by order of Cincinnatus the dictator. 

f Of this number is Dionysius of Halicaruassus. 

BRUTUS. 277 

farther tells us, that there were several illustrious persons of 
that family in his time, with whom he was well acquainted, 
and who very much resembled the statue of Junius Brutus.* 

Cato the philosopher was brother to Servilia, the mother of 
Brutus, who greatly admired and imitated the virtues of his 
uncle, and married his daughter Porcia. 

Brutus was acquainted with all the sects of the Greek phi- 
losophers, and understood their doctrines; but the Platonists 
stood highest in his esteem. He had no a;reat opinion either 
of the new or of the middle Academy; but applied himself 
wholly to the studies of the ancient. Antiochus of Ascalon 
was, therefore, his favourite; and he entertained his brother 
Ariston in his own house — a man, who, though inferior to 
some of the philosophers in learning, was equal to the first of 
them in modesty, prudence, and gentleness of manners. Em 
pylus, who likewise lived with Brutus, as we find in his own 
epistles, and in those of his friends, was an orator, and left a 
short, but a well-written narrative of the death of Caesar, en- 
titled Brutus. 

Brutus spoke with great ability in Latin, both in the field 
and at the bar. In Greek he affected the sententious and la- 
conic way. There are several instances of this in his epistles. 
Thus, in the beginning of the war, he wrote to the Pergame- 
nians: — " I hear you have given money to Dolabella. If you 
gave it willingly, you must own you injured me; if unwilling- 
ly, show it by giving willingly to me. Thus, on another oc- 
casion, to the Samians: — "Your deliberations are tedious; 
your actions slow: what, think you, will be the consequence?" 
Of the Patareans thus: — "The Xanthians rejected my kind- 
ness, and desperately made their country their grave. The 
Patareans confided in me, and retained their liberty. It is in 
your own choice to imitate the prudence of the Patareans, or 
to suffer the fate of the Xanthians." And such is the style of 
his most remarkable letters. 

While he was yet very young, he accompanied Cato to Cy- 
prus, in the expedition against Ptolemy. After Ptolemy had 
killed himself, Cato being detained by business in the isle of 
Rhodes, sent Caninius to secure the king's treasure; but, 
suspecting his fidelity, he wrote to Brutus to sail immediately 
to Cyprus from Pamphylia; where, after a fit of sickness, he 
staid for the re-establishment of his health. He obeyed the 
order with reluctance, both out of respect to Caninius, who 
was superseded with disgrace, and because he thought the em- 

* There were several distinguished persons of this family in the year of 
Rome 558 : some of whom opposed the abrogation of the Oppian law, and 
were besieged by the Roman women in their houses. — Livy, 1. xxxiv. ; Vol 
Jilax. 1. ix. 

Vol. IV. 24 

278 BRUTUS. 

ployment illiberal, and by no means proper for a young man 
who was in pursuit of philosophy. Nevertheless, he executed 
the commission with such diligence, that he had the approba 
tion of Cato; and, having turned the effects of Ptolemy into 
ready money, he brought the greatest part of it to Rome. 

When Rome was divided into two factions, and Pompey and 
Caesar were in arms against each other, it was generally be- 
lieved that Brutus would join Caesar, because his father had 
been put to death by Pompey. However, he thought it his 
duty to sacrifice his resentments to the interest of his country; 
and, judging Pompey's to be the better cause, he joined his 
party; though before, he would not even salute Pompey when 
ne met him; esteeming it a crime to have any conversation 
with the murderer of his father. He now looked upon him 
as the head of the commonwealth; and, therefore, listing un- 
der his banner, he sailed for Sicily in quality of lieutenant to 
Sestius, who was governor of the island. There, however, he 
found no opportunity to distinguish himself; and, being in- 
formed that Pompey and Csesar were encamped near each 
other, and preparing for that battle on which the whole em- 
pire depended, he went voluntarily into Macedonia, to have 
his share in the danger. Pompey, it is said, was so much sur- 
prised and pleased with his coming, that he rose to embrace 
him in the presence of his guards, and treated him with as 
much respect as if he had been his superior. During the time 
that he was in camp, those hours that he did not spend with 
Pompey, he employed in reading and study; and thus he pass- 
ed the day before the battle of Pharsalia. It was the middle 
of summer; the heats were intense, the marshy situation of 
the camp disagreeable, and his tent-bearers were long in 
coming. Nevertheless, though extremely harassed and fa- 
tigued, he did not anoint himself till noon; and then, taking 
a morsel of bread, while others were at rest, or musing on the 
event of the ensuing day, he employed himself till the evening 
in writing an epitome of Polybius. 

Caesar, it is said, had so high an esteem for him, that he or- 
dered his officers by all means to save him if he would sur- 
render himself, and, if he refused, to let him escape with his 
life. Some have placed' this kindness to the account of Ser- 
vilia, the mother of Brutus, with whom Caesar had connec- 
tions of a tender nature in the early part of his life.* Be- 

* These connections were well known. Csesar made her a present, on a 
certain occasion, of a pearl which cost him near 50,000/. In the civil wars he 
assigned to her a confiscated estate for a mere trifle ; and when the people 
expressed their surprise at its cheapness, Cicero said humorously, Quo me- 
lius emptam sciatis, Tertia deducta est. Tertia was a daughter of Servilia's, 
rmd deducta was a term in the procuring business. 

BRUTUS. 079 

sides, as this amour was in full blow about the time when 
Brutus was born, Caesar had some reason to believe he might 
be his son. The intrigue was notorious. When the senate 
was debating on the dangerous conspiracy of Catiline, Cato 
and Caesar, who took different sides of the question, happened 
to sit near each other. In the midst of the business, a note 
was brought to Caesar from without, which he read silently to 
himself. Cato hereupon loudly accused Caesar of receiving 
letters from the enemies of the commonwealth; and Caesar, 
finding that it had occasioned a disturbance in the senate, de- 
livered the note to Cato as he had received it. Cato, when he 
found it to be nothing but a lewd letter from his own sister 
Servilia, threwr it back again to Caesar: — " Take it, you sot," 
said he, and went on with the public business. 

After the battle of Pharsalia, when Pompey was fled to- 
wards the sea, and Caesar was storming the camp, Brutus es- 
caped through one of the gates, and fled into a watery marsh, 
where he hid himself amongst the reeds. From thence he 
ventured out in the night, and got safe to Larissa. From La- 
rissa he wrote to Caesar, who expressed the greatest pleasure 
in hearing of his safety, sent for him, and entertained him 
amongst the first of his friends. When no one could give ac- 
count which way Pompey was fled, Caesar walked for some 
time alone with Brutus to consult his opinion; and finding 
that it was for Egypt, he rejected the opinion of the rest, and 
directed his nmrch for that country. Pompey had, indeed, 
taken the route of Egypt, as Brutus conjectured; but he had 
already met his fate. 

Brutus had so much influence with Caesar that he reconciled 
him to his friend Cassius; and when he spoke in behalf of the 
king of Africa, though there were many impeachments against 
him, he obtained for him a great part of his kingdom.* When 
he first began to speak on this occasion, Caesar said, — " I know 
not what this young man intends, but whatever it is, he in- 
tends it strongly." His mind was steady, and not easily 
moved by entreaties. His principles were reason, and honour, 
and virtue; and the ends to which these directed him he pro- 
secuted with so much vigour that he seldom failed of success. 
No flattery could induce him to attend to unjust petitions; 
and though that ductility of mind which may be wrought upon 
by the impudence of importunitj*, is by some called good- 
nature, he considered it as the greatest disgrace. He used to 
say, that he suspected those who could refuse no favours, had 
not very honestly employed the flower of their youth. 

* Plutarch must here he mistaken It was Deiotarus, and not the king of 
Africa, that Brutus pleaded for. 

280 BRUTUS. 

Caesar, previously to his expedition into Africa against Cato 
and Scipio, appointed Brutus to the government of Gallia 
Cisalpina; and this was very fortunate for that particular pro- 
vince: for while the inhabitants of other provinces were op- 
pressed and treated like slaves, by the violence and rapacity of 
their governors, Brutus behaved with so much kindness to the 
people under his jurisdiction, that they were in some measure 
indemnified for their former sufferings. Yet he ascribed every 
thing to the goodness of Caesar; and it was no small gratifica- 
tion to the latter to find, on his return through Italy, not only 
Brutus himself, but all the cities under his command, ready 
to attend his progress, and industrious to do him honour. 

As there were several praetorships vacant, it was the general 
opinion, that the chief of them, which is the praetorship of the 
city, would be conferred either on Brutus or on Cassius. Some 
say that this competition heightened the variance that had al- 
ready taken place between Brutus and Cassius; for there was 
a misunderstanding between them, though Cassius was allied 
to Brutus by marrying his sister Junia. Others say that this 
competition was a political manoeuvre of Caesar's, who had en- 
couraged it by favouring both their hopes in private. Be that 
as it may, Brutus had little more than the reputation of his 
virtue to set against the gallant actions performed by Cassius 
in the Parthian war. Caesar weighed the merits of each ; and, 
after consulting with his friends, — " Cassius," he said, " has 
the better title to it, notwithstanding Brutus must have the 
first praetorship." Another praetorship was, therefore, given 
to Cassius; but he was not so much obliged by this, as of- 
fended by the loss of the first. Brutus had, or at least might 
have had, equal influence with Caesar in every thing else; he 
might have stood the first in authority and interest, but he was 
drawn off by Cassius' party. Not that he was perfectly recon- 
ciled to Cassius since the competition for the praetorial ap- 
pointments; but he listened to his friends, who were perpetu- 
ally advising him not to be soothed or cajoled by Caesar, but 
to reject the civilities of a tyrant, whose object was not to re- 
ward, but to disarm his virtue. On the other hand, Caesar had 
his suspicions, and Brutus his accusers; yet the former thought 
he had less to fear from his spirit, his authority, and his con- 
nections, than he had to hope from his honesty. When he was 
told that Antony and Dolabella had some dangerous conspi- 
racy on foot, — " It is not," said he, " the sleek and fat men that 
I fear, but the pale and the lean ;" meaning Brutus and Cassius. 
Afterwards, when he was advised to beware of Brutus, he laid 
his hand upon his breast, and said, — " Do not you think, then, 
that Brutus will wait till I have done with this poor body?" 
as if he thought Brutus the only propter person to succeed him 

BRUTUS. 2gl 

in his immense power. Indeed, it is extremely probable that 
Brutus would have been the first man in Rome, could he have 
had patience awhile to be the second, and have waited till time 
had wasted th*" power of Caesar, and dimmed the lustre of his 
great actions. But Cassius, a man of violent passions, and an 
enemy to Caesar, rather from personal than political hatred, 
still urged him against the dictator. It was universally said, 
that Brutus hateu the imperial power, and that Cassius hated 
the emperor. Cassius, indeed, pretended that Caesar had in- 
jured him. He complained that the lions which he had pro- 
cured when he was nominated asdile, and which he had sent 
to Megara, Caesar had taken, and converted to his own use, 
having found them there when that city was taken by Calanus. 
Those lions, it is said, were very fatal to the inhabitants; for, 
as soon as their city was taken, they opened their dens and un- 
chained them in the streets, that they might stop the irruption 
of the enemy; but, instead of that, they fell upon the citizens, 
and tore them in such a manner that their very enemies were 
struck with horror. Some say that this was the principal mo- 
tive with Cassius for conspiring against Caesar; but they were 
strangely mistaken. Cassius had a natural aversion to the 
whole race of tyrants, which he showed, even when he was at 
school with Faustus the son of Sylla. When Faustus was 
boasting among the boys of the unlimited power of his father, 
Cassius rose and struck him on the face. The friends and tu- 
tors of Faustus would have taken upon themselves to punish 
the insult; but Pompey prevented it, and sending for the boys, 
examined them himself. Upon which Cassius said, — "Come 
along, Faustus! repeat, if you dare, before Pompey, the ex- 
pressions which provoked me, that I may punish you in the 
same manner." Such was the disposition of Cassius. 

But Brutus was animated to this undertaking by the per- 
suasions of his friends, by private intimations and anonymous 
letters. Under the statue of his ancestor, who destroyed the 
Tarquins, was placed a paper with these words: — O that we 
had a Brutus now! O that Brutus were noiv alive! His own 
tribunal, on which he sat as praetor, was continually filled with 
such inscriptions as these: — Brutus, thou steepest! thou art 
not a true Brutus! The sycophants of Caesar were the occa- 
sion of this; for, amongst other invidious distinctions which 
they paid him, tbey crowned his statues by night, that the peo- 
ple might salute him king, instead of dictator. However, it 
had a contrary effect, as I have shown more at large in the lifo 
of Caesar. 

When Cassius solicited his friends to engage in the conspi- 
racy, they all consented on condition that Brutus would take 
the lead. They concluded that it was not strength of hands or 

Vol. IV. 2 N 24* 

282 BRUTUS. 

resolution that they wanted, but the countenance of a man o' 
reputation, to preside at this sacrifice, and to justify the deed 
They were sensible that, without him, they should neither pro- 
ceed with spirit, nor escape suspicion when they had effected 
their purpose. The world, they knew, would conclude, that 
if the action had been honourable, Brutus would not have re- 
fused to engage in it. Cassius having considered these things, 
determined to pay Brutus the first visit after the quarrel that 
had been between them; and as soon as the compliments of 
reconciliation were over, he asked him, — "Whether he in- 
tended to be in the senate on the calends of March; for it was 
reported," he said, " that Caesar's friends designed to move 
that he should be declared king?" Brutus answered, — "He 
should not be there;" and Cassius replied, — "But what if 
they should send for us?" " It would then," said Brutus, 
" be my duty, not only to speak against it, but to sacrifice my 
life for the liberties of Rome." Cassius, encouraged by this 
proceeded, — " But what Roman will bear to see you die? Do 
not you know yourself, Brutus? Think you that those in- 
scriptions you found on your tribunal were placed there by 
weavers and victuallers, and not by the first men in Rome? 
From other praetors they look for presents, and shows, and 
gladiators ; but from you they expect the abolition of tyranny, 
as a debt which your family has entailed upon you. They 
are ready to suffer every thing on your account, if you are 
really what you ought, and what they expect you to be." Af- 
ter this he embraced Brutus, and, being perfectly reconciled, 
they retired to their respective friends. 

In Pompey's party there was one Quintus Ligarius, whom 
Caesar had pardoned, though he had borne arms against him. 
This man, less grateful for the pardon he had received, than 
offended with the power which made him stand in need of it, 
hated Caesar, but was the intimate friend of Brutus. The lat- 
ter one day visited him, and finding him not well, said, — " 0 
Ligarius! what a time is this to be sick?" Upon which he 
raised himself on his elbow, and, taking Brutus by the hand, 
answered, — " If Brutus has any design worthy of himself, Li- 
garius is well." They now tried the inclinations of all they 
could trust, and took into the conspiracy not only their fami- 
liar friends, but such as they knew to be brave, and above the 
fear of death. For this reason, though they had the greatest 
regard for Cicero, and the utmost confidence in his principles 
as a republican, they concealed the conspiracy from him, lest 
his natural timidity, and the weariness of age, should retard 
those measures which required the most resolute despatch. 

Brutus likewise thought proper to leave his friends, Stati 
lius and Favoniusj the followers of Cato, out of the conspiracy 

brutus. 283 

He had tried their sentiments, under the colour of a philoso- 
phical dispute; in which Favonius observed, that the worst 
absolute government was preferable to a civil war: and Stati- 
lius added, that it became no wise man to expose himself to 
fear and danger, on account of the faults and follies of others. 
But Labeo, who was present, contradicted both. And Brutus, 
though he was then silent, as if the dispute had been difficult 
to determine, afterwards communicated the design to Labeo, 
who readily concurred in it. It was then agreed to gain over 
the other Brutus, surnamed Albinus, who, though not distin- 
guished by his personal courage, was of consequence, on ac- 
count of the great number of gladiators he bred for the public 
shows, and the entire confidence that Csesar placed in him. To 
the solicitations of Cassius and Labeo he made no answer: but 
when he came privately to Brutus, and found that he was at 
the head of the conspiracy, he made no scruple of joining them. 
The name of Brutus drew in many more of the most consi- 
derable persons of the state; and though they had entered into 
no oath of secrecy, they kept the design so close, that, notwith- 
standing the gods themselves denounced the event by a va- 
riety of prodigies, no one would give credit to the conspiracy. 
Brutus now felt his consequence lie heavy upon him. The 
safety of some of the greatest men in Rome depended on his 
conduct, and he could not think of the danger they were to 
encounter without anxiety. In public, indeed, he suppressed 
his uneasiness; but at home, and especially by night, he was 
not the same man. Sometimes he would start from his sleep; 
at others he was totally immersed in thought. From which, 
and the like circumstances, it was obvious to his wife, that he 
was revolving in his mind some difficult and dangerous enter- 
prise. Porcia, as we before observed, was the daughter of 
Cato. She was married to her cousin Brutus very young, 
though she was a widow, and had a son named Bibulus after 
his father. There is a small tract of his still extant, called 
Memoirs of Brutus. Porcia added to the affection of a wife 
the prudence of a woman who was not unacquainted with 
philosophy; and she resolved not to inquire into her husband's 
secrets before she had made the following trial of her own 
firmness: — She ordered all her attendants out of her apart- 
ment, and with a small knife, gave herself a deep wound in 
the thigh. This occasioned a great effusion of blood, extreme 
pain, and a fever in consequence of that pain. Brutus was 
extremely afflicted for her, and as he attended her, in the 
height of her pain, she thus spoke to him: — "Brutus, when 
you married the daughter of Cato, you did not, I presume, 
consider her merely as a female companion, but as the partner 
of your fortunes. You, indeed, have given me no reason to 

284 BRUTUS. 

repent my marriage; but what proof, either of affection or 
fidelity, can you receive from me, if I may neither share in 
your secret griefs, nor in your secret councils? I am sensible 
that secrecy is not the characteristic virtue of my sex: but 
surely our natural weakness may be strengthened by a vir- 
tuous education, and by honourable connections; and Porcia 
can boast that she is the daughter of Cato, and the wife of 
Brutus. Yet even in these distinctions I placed no absolute 
confidence till I tried and found that I was proof against pain." 
When she had said this, she showed him her wound, and in- 
formed him of her motives; upon which Brutus was so struck 
with her magnanimity, that, with lifted hands, he entreated the 
gods to favour *iis enterprise, and enable him to approve him- 
self worthy of Porcia. He then took every means to cure her 
wound and restore her health. 

A meeting of the senate being appointed, at which Caesar 
was expected to attend, that was thought a proper time for the 
execution of their design. For then they could not only ap- 
pear together without suspicion; but, as some of the most 
considerable persons in the commonwealth would be present, 
they flattered themselves that, as soon as the deed was done, 
they would join in asserting the common liberty. The place, 
too, where the senate was to meet, seemed providentially fa- 
vourable for their purpose. It was a portico adjoining to the 
theatre; and in the midst of a saloon, furnished with benches, 
stood a statue of Pompey, which had been erected to him b} 
the commomvealth, when he adorned that part of the city with 
those buildings. Here the senate was convened on the ides 
of March; and it seemed as if some god should bring Caesar 
to this place to revenge upon him the death of Pompey. 

When the day came, Brutus went out, and took with him a 
dagger, which last circumstance was known only to his wife. 
The rest met at the house of Cassius, and conducted his son, 
who was that day to put on the toga virilis, to the forum ; from 
whence they proceeded to Pompey's portico, and waited foi 
Caesar. Any one that had been privy to the design of the con- 
spirators, would here have been astonished at their calm and 
consistent firmness. Many of them were praetors, and obliged 
by their office to hear and determine causes. These they heard 
with so much calmness, and decided with so much accuracy, 
that one could not have supposed there had been any thing 
else upon their minds; and when a certain person appealed 
from the judgment of Brutus to Caesar, Brutus looking round 
on the assembly said, — Caesar neither does, nor shall hinder 
me from acting agreeably to the laws. Nevertheless they 
were disturbed by many accidents. Though the day was far 
spent, still Caesar did not come, being detained by his wife 

BRUTUS. 285 

*nd the soothsayers, on account of defects in the sacrifices. 
In the mean time a person came up to Casca, one of the con- 
spirators, and taking him by the hand, — " You concealed 
the thing from me," said he, "but Brutus has told me all." 
Casca expressed his surprise; upon which the other said, 
laughing, — " How came you to be so rich of a sudden as to 
stand for the aedileship." So near was the great secret being 
blown by the ambiguity of this man's discourse! At the same 
time, Popilius Laena, a senator, after saluting Brutus and Cas- 
sius in a very obliging manner, said, in a whisper, — "My best 
wishes are with you; but make no delay; for it is now no se- 
cret." After saying this, he immediately went away, and left 
them in great consternation; for they concluded that every 
thing was discovered. Soon after this a messenger came run- 
ning from Brutus' house, and told him that his wife was dying. 
Porcia had been under extreme anxiety, and in great agita- 
tions about the event. At every little noise or voice she heard, 
she started up and ran to the door, like one of the frantic 
priestesses of Bacchus, inquiring of every one that came from 
the forum, what Brutus was doing. She sent messenger after 
messenger to make the same inquiries; and being unable any 
longer to support the agitations of her mind, she, at length, 
fainted away. She had not time to retire to her chamber. As 
she sat in the middle of the house, her spirits failed, her colour 
changed, and she lost her senses and her speech. Her women 
shrieked, the neighbours ran to their assistance, and a report 
was soon spread through the city, that Porcia was dead. 
However, by the care of those that were about her, she reco- 
vered in a little time. Brutus was greatly distressed with the 
news, and not without reason; but his private grief gave way 
to the public concern: for it was now reported that Caesar was 
coming on a litter. The ill omen of his sacrifices had deterred 
him from entering on business of importance, and he proposed 
to defer it under a pretence of indisposition. As soon as he 
came out of the litter, Popilius Laena, who, a little before, had 
wished Brutus success, went up, and spoke to him for a con- 
siderable time; Caesar all the while standing, and seeming very 
attentive. The conspirators not being able to hear what he 
said, suspected, from what passed between him and Brutus, 
that he was now making a discovery of their design. This 
disconcerted them extremely, and looking upon each other, 
they agreed, by the silent language of the countenance, that 
they should not stay to be taken, but despatch themselves. 
With this intent, Cassius and some others were just about to 
draw their daggers from under their robes, when Brutus, ob- 
serving from the looks and gestures of Laena, that he was pe- 
titioning, and not accusing, encouraged Cassius by the cheer- 

286 BRUTUS. 

fulness of his countenance. This was the only way by which 
he could communicate his sentiments, being surrounded by 
many who were strangers to the conspiracy. Laena, after a. 
little while, kissed Caesar's hand, and left him ; and it plainly 
appeared, upon the whole, that he had been speaking about 
his own affairs. 

The senate was already seated, and the conspirators got 
close about Caesar's chair, under pretence of preferring a suit 
to him. Cassius turned his face to Pompey's statue, and in- 
voked it, as if it had been sensible of his prayers. Trebonius 
kept Antony in conversation without the court. And now 
Caesar entered, and the whole senate rose to salute him. The 
conspirators crowded around him, and sent Tullius Cimber, 
one of their number, to solicit the recall of his brother, who 
was banished. They all united in the solicitation, took hold 
of Caesar's hand, and kissed his head and his breast. He re- 
jected their applications, and, finding that they would not de- 
sist, at length rose from his seat in anger. Tullius, upon this, 
laid hold of his robe, and pulled it from his shoulders. Casca, 
who stood behind, gave him the first, though but a slight 
wound, with his dagger, near the shoulder. Caesar caught the 
handle of the dagger, and said in Latin, — "Villain! Casca! 
What dost thou mean?" Casca, in Greek, called his brother 
to his assistance. Caesar was wounded by numbers almost at 
the same instant, and looked round him for some way to es- 
cape; but when he saw the dagger of Brutus pointed against 
him, he let go Casca's hand, and, covering his head with his 
robe, resigned himself to their swords. The conspirators 
pressed so eagerly to stab him, that they wounded each other. 
Brutus, in attempting to have his share in the sacrifice, re- 
ceived a wound in his hand, and all of them were covered 
with blood. 

Caesar thus slain, Brutus stepped forward into the middle of 
the senate-house, and, proposing to make a speech, desired the 
senators to stay. They fled, however, with the utmost preci- 
pitation, though no one pursued; for the conspirators had no 
design on any life but Caesar's; and, that taken away, they in- 
vited the rest to liberty. Indeed, all but Brutus were of opi- 
nion that Antony should fall with Caesar. They considered 
him as an insolent man, who, in his principles, favoured mo 
narchv, and who had made himself popular in the army. 
Moreover, beside his natural disposition to despotism, he had 
at this time the consular power, and was the colleague of Cae- 
sar. Brutus, on the other hand, alleged the injustice of such 
a measure, and suggested the possibility of Antony's change 
of principle. He thought it far from being improbable, that, 
after the destruction of Caesar, a man so passionately fond of 

bhutus. 237 

glory should be inspired, by an emulation, to join in restoring 
the commonwealth. Thus Antony was saved; though, in the 
general consternation, he fled in the disguise of a plebeian. 
Brutus and his party betook themselves to the Capitol; and, 
showing their bloody hands and naked swords, proclaimed 
liberty to the people as they passed. At first all was lamenta- 
tion, distraction, and tumult; but, as no further violence was 
committed, the senators and the people recovered their appre- 
hensions, and went in a body to the conspirators in the Capi 
tol. Brutus made a popular speech, adapted to the occasion; 
and, this being well received, the conspirators were encouraged 
to come down into the forum. The rest were undistinguished; 
but persons of the first quality attended Brutus, conducted 
him with great honour from the Capitol, and placed him in 
the rostrurn. At the sight of Brutus, the populace, though 
disposed to tumult, were struck with reverence; and, when he 
hegan to speak, they attended with silence. It soon appeared, 
however, that it was not the action, but the man, they respect- 
ed; for when Cinna spoke, and accused Caesar, they loaded 
him with the most opprobrious language, and became so out- 
rageous, that the conspirators thought proper once more to re- 
tire into the Capitol. Brutus now expected to be besieged ; 
and, therefore, dismissed the principal people that attended 
him; because he thought it unreasonable that they, who had 
no concern in the action, should be exposed to the danger that 
followed it. Next day the senate assembled in the temple of 
Tellus; and Antony, Plancus, and Cicero, in their respective 
speeches, persuaded and prevailed on the people to forget what 
was past. Accordingly, the conspirators were not only par- 
doned, but it was decreed that the consuls should take into 
consideration what honours and dignities were proper to be 
conferred upon them. After this the senate broke up; and 
Antony, having sent his son as a hostage to the Capitol, 
Brutus and his party came down, and mutual compliments 
passed between them. Cassius was invited to sup with An- 
tony, Brutus with Lepidus, and the rest were entertained by 
their respective friends. 

Early next morning, the senate assembled again, and voted 
thanks to Antony for preventing a civil war; as well as to 
Brutus and his party, for their services to the commonwealth. 
The latter had also provinces distributed amongst them. Crete 
was allotted to Brutus, Africa to Cassius, Asia to Trebonius, 
Bithynia to Cimber, and the other Brutus had that part of 
Gaul which lies upon the Po. 

Caesar's will and his funeral came next in question. An- 
tony proposed that the will should be read in public; and that 
the funeral should not be orivate, or without proper magnifi- 

£gg BRUTUS. 

cence, lest such treatment should exasperate the people. Cas- 
sius strongly opposed this; but Brutus agreed to it: and here 
he fell into a second error. His preservation of so formida- 
ble an enemy as Antony was a mistaken thing; but his giving 
up the management of Caesar's funeral to him was an irrepa- 
rable fault. The publication of the will had an immediate 
tendencv to inspire the people with a passionate regret for the 
death of Caesar; for he had left to each Roman citizen seven- 
ty-five drachmas, beside the public use of his gardens be- 
yond the Tiber, where now the temple of Fortune stands. 
When the body was brought into the forum, and Antony spoke 
the usual funeral eulogium, as he perceived the people affect- 
ed by his speech, heendeavoured still more to work upon 
their passions by unfolding the bloody garment of Caesar; 
showing them in how many places it was pierced, and point- 
ing out the number of his wounds. This threw every thing 
into confusion. Some called aloud to kill the murderers; 
others, as was formerly done in the case of that seditious de- 
magogue Clodius, snatched the benches and tables from the 
neighbouring shops, and erected a pile for the body of Caesar, 
in the midst of consecrated places and surrounding temples. 
As soon as the pile was in flames, the people, crowding trom 
all parts, snatched the half-burnt brands, and ran round the 
city to fire the houses of the conspirators; but they were on 
their guard against such an assault, and prevented the effects. 
There was a poet named China, who had no concern in the 
conspiracy, but was rather a friend of Caesar's. This man 
dreamed that Caesar invited him to supper, and that, when he 
declined the invitation, he took him by the hand, and con- 
strained him to follow him into a dark and deep place, which 
he entered with the utmost horror. The agitation of his spirits 
threw him into a fever, which lasted the remaining part of the 
night. In the morning, however, when Caesar was to be in- 
terred, he was ashamed of absenting himself from the solem- 
nity: he, therefore, mingled with the multitude that had just 
been enraged by the speech of Antony; and, being unfortu- 
nately mistaken for that Cinna, who had before inveighed 
against Caesar, he was torn to pieces. This, more than any 
thing, except Antony's change of conduct, alarmed Brutus and 
his party. They now thought it necessary to consult their 
safety, and retired to Antium. Here they sat down, with an 
intent to return as soon as the popular fury should subside; 
and for this, considering the inconstancy of the multitude, 
they concluded that they should not have long to wait. The 
senate, moreover, was in their interest; and, though they did 
not punish the murderers of Cinna, they caused strict inquiry 
to be made after those who attempted to burn the houses of the 

BRUTUS. 289 

eonspirators. Antony, too, became obnoxious to the people; 
for they suspected him of erecting another kind of monarchy. 
The return of Brufcus was consequently wished for; and as he 
was to exhibit shows and games in his capacity as praetor, it 
was expected. Brutus, however, had received intelligence 
that several of Caesar's old soldiers, to whom he had distri- 
buted lands and colonies, had stolen, by small parties, into 
Rome, and that they lay in wait for him : he, therefore, did 
not think proper to come himself. Notwithstanding which, 
the shows that were exhibited on his account were extremely 
magnificent; for he had bought a considerable number of wild 
beasts, and ordered that they should all be reserved for that 
purpose. He went himself as far as Naples to collect a num- 
ber of comedians; and, being informed of one Canutius, who 
was much admired upon the stage, he desired his friends to 
use all their interest to bring him to Rome. Canutius was a 
Grecian; and Brutus, therefore, thought that no compulsion 
should be used. He wrote likewise to Cicero, and begged 
that he would, by all means, be present at the public shows. 

Such was the situation of his affairs, when, on the arrival of 
Octavius at Rome, things took another turn. He was son to 
the sister of Caesar, who had adopted and appointed him his 
heir. He was pursuing his studies at Apollonia, and in ex- 
pectation of meeting Caesar there on his intended expedition 
against the Parthians, at the time when Caesar was slain. Upon 
hearing of this event, he immediately came to Rome, and, to 
ingratiate himself with the people, assumed the name of 
Caesar. By punctually distributing amongst the citizens the 
money that was left them by his uncle, he soon took the lead 
of Antony; and, by his liberality to the soldiers, he brought 
over to his party the greatest number of those who had serv- 
ed under Caesar. Cicero, likewise, who hated Antony, joined 
his interest. And this was so much resented by Brutus, that, 
in his letters, he reproached him in the severest terms: — " He 
perceived," he said, " that Cicero was tame enough to bear a 
tyrant, and was only afraid of the tyrant that hated him; that 
his compliments to Octavius were meant to purchase an easy 
slavery: but our ancestors," said Brutus, "scorned to bear 
even a gentle master." He added, that "as to the measures 
of peace or war, he was undetermined; but in one thing he 
was resolved, which was, never to be a slave/" He expressed 
his surprise, "that Cicero should prefer an infamous accom- 
modation even to the dangers of civil war; and that the only 
fruits he expected from destroying the tyranny of Antony, 
should be the establishment of a new tyrant in Octavius." 
Such was the spirit of his first letters. 

The city was now divided into two factions: some joined 

Vol. IV. 2 0 25 

0 90 BRUTUS. 

Caesar, others remained with Antony, and the army was sold 
to the best bidder. Brutus, of course, despaired of any de- 
sirable event; and, being resolved to leave Italy, he went by 
land to Lucania, and came to the maritime town of Elea. 
Porcia, being to return from thence to Rome, endeavoured, as 
well as possible, to conceal the sorrow that oppressed her; but, 
notwithstanding her magnanimity, a picture which shefound 
there betrayed her distress. The subject was the parting of 
Hector and Andromache. He was represented delivering his 
son Astyanax into her arms, and the eyes of Andromache were 
fixed upon him. The resemblance that this picture bore to 
her own distress, made her burst into tears the moment she 
beheld it; and several times she visited the melancholy em- 
blem, to gaze upon it, and weep before it. On this occasion, 
Acilius, one of Brutus' friends, repeated that passage in Ho- 
mer, where Andromache says, — 

Yet while my Hector still survives, I see, 
My father, mother, brethren, all in thee.* 

To which Brutus replied, with a smile, — " But I must not an- 
swer Porcia as Hector did Andromache: — 
-" Hasten to thy tasks at home, 

There guide the spindle, and direct the loom.t 

" She has not personal strength, indeed, to sustain the toils we 
undergo: but her spirit is not less active in the cause of her 
country." This anecdote we have from Bibulus the son of 
Porcia. 

From Elea Brutus sailed for Athens, where he was received 
with high applause, and invested with public honours. There 
he took up his residence with a particular friend, and attended 
the lectures of Theomnestus the Academic, and Cratippus the 
Peripatetic; devoting himself wholly to literary pursuits. Yet, 
in this unsuspected state, he was privately preparing for war. 
He despatched Herostratus into Macedonia to gain the prin- 
cipal officers in that province; and he secured, by his kind- 
ness, all the young Romans who were students then at Athens. 
Amongst these was the son of Cicero, on whom he bestowed 
the highest encomiums; and said, that he could never cease 
admiring the spirit of that young man, who bore such a mor- 
tal hatred to tyrants. 

At length he began to act more publicly; and being in- 
formed that some of the Roman ships, laden with money, were 
returning from Asia, under the command of a man of honour, 
a friend of his, he met him at Carystus, a city of Eubcea. 
There he had a conference with him, and requested that he 

* Pope. + Ibid. 

BRUTUS. 291 

would give up the ships. By the by, it happened to be Bru- 
tus' birth-day, on which occasion he gave a splendid entertain- 
ment, and while they were drinking Victory to Brutus and 
Liberty to Rome, to encourage the cause, he called for a larger 
bowl. While he held it in his hand, without any visible rela- 
tion to the subject they were upon, he pronounced this verse : — 

My fall was doomed by Phoebus and by Fate. 

Some historians say that Apollo was the word he gave his 
soldiers in the last battle at Philippi ; and, of course concluded 
that this exclamation was a presage of his defeat. Antistius, 
the commander of the ships, gave him five hundred thousand 
drachmas of the money he was carrying to Italy. The re- 
mains of Pompey's army that was scattered about Thessaly 
readily joined his standard; and besides these he took five 
hundred horse, whom Cinna was conducting to Dolabella in 
Asia. He then sailed to Demetrias, and seized a large quan- 
tity of arms, which Julius Csesar had provided for the Parthian 
war, and which were now to be sent to Antony. Macedonia 
was delivered up to him by Hortensius the praetor; and all the 
neighbouring princes readily offered their assistance. When 
news was received that Caius, the brother of Antony, had 
marched through Italy, to join the forces under Gabinius in 
Dyrrhachium and Apolloni'a, Brutus determined to seize them 
before he arrived, and made a forced march with such troops 
as were at hand. The way was rugged, and the snows were 
deep; but he moved with such expedition, that his suttlers 
were left a long way behind. When he had almost reached 
Dyrrhachium, he was seized with the disorder called Bulimia, 
or violent hunger, occasioned by cold and fatigue. This dis- 
order affects both men and cattle after fatigues in the snow. 
Whether it is that perspiration being prevented by the ex- 
treme cold, the vital heat is confined, and more immediately 
consumes the aliment; or that a keen and subtile vapour, rising 
from the melted snow, penetrates the body, and destroys the 
heat, by expelling it through the pores; for the sweatings seem 
to arise from the heat contending with the cold, which being 
repelled by the latter, the vapoury steam is diffused over the 
surface of the body. But of this I have treated more largely 
in another place. Brutus growing very faint, and no provi 
sions being at hand, his servants were forced to go to the gates 
of the enemy, and beg bread of the sentinels. When they 
were informed of the distress of Brutus, they brought him 
meat and drink in their own hands; and in return for their 
humanity, when he had taken the city, he showed kindness 
both to them and to the rest of the inhabitants. 

When Caius arrived in Apollonia, he summoned the sol 

29 SJ BRUTUS. 

diers that were quartered near the city to join him; but find- 
ing that they were all with Brutus, and suspecting that those 
in Apollonia favoured the same party, he went to Buthrotus. 
Brutus, however, found means to destroy three of his cohorts 
in their march. Caius, after this, attempted to seize some 
posts near Byllis, but was routed in a set battle by young Ci- 
cero, to whom Brutus had given the command of the army on 
that occasion, and whose conduct he made use of frequently, 
and with success. Caius was soon after surprised in a marsh, 
from whence he had no means to escape; and Brutus finding 
him in his power, surrounded him with his cavalry, and gave 
orders that none of his men should be killed ; for he expected 
that they would quickly join him of their own accord. As 
he expected, it came to pass. They surrendered both them- 
selves and their generals; so that Brutus had now a very re- 
spectable army. He treated Caius for a long time with all pos- 
sible respect; nor did he divest him of any ensigns of digni- 
ty that he bore, though it is said that he received letters from 
several persons at Rome, and particularly from Cicero, ad 
vising him to put him to death. At length, however, when 
he found that he was secretly practising with his officers, and 
exciting seditions among the soldiers, he put him on board 
a ship, and kept him close prisoner. The soldiers that he 
had corrupted retired into Apollonia, from whence they sent 
to Brutus, that if he would come to them there, they would 
return to their duty. Brutus answered, — " That this was not 
the custom of the Romans, but that those who had offended 
should come in person to their general, and solicit his forgive- 
ness." This they did, and were accordingly pardoned. 

He was now preparing to go into Asia, when he was in- 
formed of a change in affairs at Rome. Young Caesar, sup- 
ported by the senate, had got the better of Antony, and driven 
him out of Italy; but, at the same time, he began to be no less 
formidable himself; for he solicited the consulship contrary 
to law, and kept in pay an unnecessary army. Consequently, 
the senate, though they at first supported, were now dissatis- 
fied with his measures. And as they began to cast their 
eyes on Brutus, and decreed or confirmed several provinces 
to him, Caesar was under some apprehensions. He, therefore, 
despatched messengers to Antony, and desired that a recon- 
ciliation might take place. After this he drew up his army 
around the city, and carried the consulship, though but a boy, 
in his twentieth year, as he tells us in his Commentaries. He 
was no sooner consul than he ordered a judicial process to 
issue against Brutus and his accomplices, for murdering the 
first magistrate in Rome, without trial or condemnation. Lu- 
cius Cornificius was appointed to accuse Brutus, and Marcus 

BRUTUS. 293 

Agrippa accused Cassius; neither of whom appearing, the 
judges were obliged to pass sentence against both. It is said, 
that when the crier, as usual, cited Brutus to appear, the peo- 
ple could not suppress their sighs; and persons of the first 
distinction heard it in silent dejection. Publius Silicius was 
observed to burst into tears ; and this was the cause why he 
was afterwards proscribed. The triumviri, Caesar, Antony, 
and Lepidus, being now reconciled, divided the provinces 
amongst them, and settled that list of murder, in which two 
hundred citizens, and Cicero amongst the rest, were pro- 
scribed. 

When the report of these proceedings was brought into 
Macedonia, Brutus found himself under a necessity of send- 
ing orders to Hortensius to kill Caius, the brother of Antony, 
in revenge of the death of Cicero his friend, and Brutus Al- 
binus his kinsman, who were slain. This was the reason why 
Antony, when he had taken Hortensius at the battle of Phi- 
lippi, slew him upon his brother's tomb. Brutus says, that 
he was more ashamed of the cause of Cicero's death than 
grieved at the event; while he saw Rome enslaved more by 
her own fault, than by the fault of her tyrants, and continue a 
tame spectator of such scenes as ought not to have been heard 
of without horror. 

The army of Brutus was now considerable, and he ordered 
its route into Asia, while a fleet was preparing in Bithynia 
and at Cyzicus. As he marched by land, he settled the affairs 
of the cities, and gave audience to the princes of those coun- 
tries through which he passed. He sent orders to Cassius, 
who was in Syria, to give up his intended journey into Egypt, 
and join him. On this occasion he tells him, that their col- 
lecting forces to destroy the tyrants was not to secure an em- 
pire to themselves, but to deliver their fellow-citizens; that 
they should never forget this great object of their undertak- 
ing, but, adhering to their first intentions, keep Italy within 
their eye, and hasten to rescue their country from oppression. 

Cassius, accordingly, set out to join him; and Brutus, at 
the same time, making some progress to meet him, their in- 
terview was at Smyrna. Till this meeting they had not seen 
each other since they parted at the Piraeus of Athens, when 
Cassius set out for Syria, and Brutus for Macedonia. The 
forces they had respectively collected gave them great joy, 
and made them confident of success. From Italy they had 
fled, like solitary exiles, without money, without arms, with- 
out a ship, a soldier, or a town to fly to. Yet now, in so short 
a time, the}' found themselves supplied with shipping and mo- 
ney, with an army of horse and foot, and in a condition of con 
tending for the empire of Rome. Cassius was no less respectful 

294 BRUTUS. 

to Brutus than Brutus was to him; but the latter would gene- 
rally wait upon him, as he was the older man, and of a feebler 
constitution. Cassius was esteemed an able soldier, but of a 
fiery disposition, and ambitious to command rather by fear 
than affection; though, at the same time, with his familiar ac- 
quaintance, he was easy in his manners, and fond of raillery to 
excess. Brutus, on account of his virtue, was respected by the 
people, beloved by his friends, admired by men of principle, 
and not hated even by his enemies. He was mild in his temper, 
and had a greatness of mind that was superior to anger, ava- 
rice, and the love of pleasure. He was firm and inflexible in 
his opinions, and zealous in every pursuit where justice or ho- 
nour were concerned. Thepeople had the highest opinion of his 
integrity and sincerity in every undertaking, and this naturally 
inspired them with confidence and affection. Even Pompcy 
the Great had hardly ever so much credit with them; for who- 
ever imagined, that if he had conquered Caesar, he would have 
submitted to the laws, and would not have retained his power 
under the title of consul or dictator, or some more specious 
and popular name? Cassius, on the contrary, a man of violem 
passions and rapacious avarice, was suspected of exposing him- 
self to toil and danger, rather from a thirst of power, than an 
attachment to the liberties of his country. The former disturb- 
ers of the commonwealth, Cinna, and Marius, and Carbo, evi- 
dently set their country at a stake for the winner, and hardly 
scrupled to own that they fought for empire. But the very 
enemies of Brutus never charge him with this. Even Antony 
has been heard to say, that Brutus was the only conspirator 
who had the sense of honour and justice for his motive, and 
that the rest were wholly actuated by malice or envy. It is 
clear, too, from what Brutus himself savs, that he finally and 
principally relied on his own virtue. Thus, he writes to At- 
t.icus immediately before an engagement, — " That his affairs 
were in the most desirable situation imaginable; for that either 
he should conquer and restore liberty to Rome, or die and be 
free from slavery; that every thing else was reduced to cer- 
tainty: and that this only remained a question, Whether they 
should live or die free men?" He adds, " That Mark Antony 
was properly punished for his folly; who, when he might have 
ranked with the Bruti, the Cassii, and Catos, chose rather to 
be the underling of Octavius; and that if he did not fall in the 
approaching battle, they would very soon be at variance with 
each other." In which he seems to have been a true prophet. 
Whilst they were at Smyrna, Brutus desired Cassius to let 
him have part of the vast treasure he had collected, because 
his own was chiefly expended in equipping a fleet to gain the 
superiority at sea. But the friends of Cassius advised him 

BRUTUS. 295 

against this; alleging that it would be absurd to give .Brutus 
that money which he had saved with so much frugality, and 
acquired with so much envy, merely that Brutus might in- 
crease his popularity, by distributing it amongst the soldiers. 
Cassius, however, gave him a third of what he had, and then 
they parted for their respective commands. Cassius behaved 
with great severity on the taking of Rhodes; though, when he 
first entered the city, and was saluted with the title of king 
and master, he answered, — " That he was neither their king 
nor their master, but the destroyer of him who would have 
been both." Brutus demanded supplies of men and money 
from the Lycians; but Naucrates, an orator, persuaded the 
cities to rebel, and some of the inhabitants posted themselves 
on the hills, with an intent to oppose the passage of Brutus. 
Brutus, at first, despatched a party of horse, which surprised 
them at dinner, and killed six hundred of them. But after- 
wards, when he had taken the adjacent towns and villages, he 
gave up the prisoners without ransom, and hoped to gain them 
to his party by clemency. Their former sufferings, however, 
made them reject his humanity, and those that still resisted, 
being driven into the city of Xanthus, were there besieged. 
As a river ran close by the town, several attempted to escape 
by swimming and diving; but they were prevented by nets let 
down for that purpose, which had little bells at the top to give 
notice when any one was taken. The Xanthians afterwards 
made a sally in the night, and set fire to several of the batter- 
ing engines; but they were perceived and driven back by the 
Romans: at the same time, the violence of the winds drove 
the flames on the city, so that several houses near the battle- 
ments took fire. Brutus being apprehensive that the whole 
city would be destroyed, sent his own soldiers to assist the in- 
habitants in quenching the fire. But the Lycians were seized 
with incredible despair, a kind of phrensy, which can no other- 
wise be described than by calling it a passionate desire of 
death. Women and children, freemen and slaves, people ot 
all ages and conditions, strove to repulse the soldiers as they 
came to their assistance from the walls. With their own hands 
they collected wood and reeds, and all manner of combusti- 
bles, to spread the fire over the city, and encouraged its pro- 
gress by every means in their power. Thus assisted, the 
flames fiew over the whole with dreadful rapidity; while Bru- 
tus, extremely shocked at this calamity, rode round the walls, 
and, stretching forth his hands to the inhabitants, entreated 
them to spare themselves and the city. Regardless of his en- 
treaties, they sought by every means to put an end to their 
lives. Men, women, and even children, with hideous cries, 
leaped into the flames. Some threw themselves headlong from 

296 BRUTUS. 

the wulls, and others fell upon the swords of their parents, 
opening their breasts, and begging to be slain. 

When the city was in a great measure reduced to ashes, a 
woman was found who had hanged herself, with her young 
child fastened to her neck, and the torch in her hand with 
which she had fired her house. This deplorable object so 
much affected Brutus, that he wept when he was told of it, 
and proclaimed a reward to any soldier who could save a Xan- 
thian. It is said that no more that a hundred and fifty were 
preserved, and those against their will. Thus, the Xanthians, 
as if fate had appointed certain periods for their destruction, 
after a long course of years sunk into that deplorable ruin, in 
which the same rash despair had involved their ancestors in 
the Persian war: for they too burned their city, and destroyed 
themselves. 

After this, when the Patareans likewise made resistance, 
Brutus was under great anxiety whether he should besiege 
them; for he was afraid they should follow the desperate mea- 
sures of the Xanthians. However, having some of their wo- 
men whom he had taken prisoners, he dismissed them without 
ransom; and those returning to their husbands and parents, 
who happened to be people of the first distinction, so much 
extolled the justice and moderation of Brutus, that they pre- 
vailed on them to submit, and put their city into his hands. 
The adjacent cities followed their example, and found that his 
humanity exceeded their hopes. Cassius compelled every 
Rhodian to give up all the gold and silver in his possession, 
by which he amassed eight thousand talents; and yet he laid 
the public under a fine of five hundred talents more: but Bru- 
tus took only a hundred and fifty talents of the Lycians, and 
without doing them any other injury, led his army into Ionia. 

Brutus, in the course of this expedition, did many acts of 
justice, and was vigilant in the dispensation of rewards and 

Eunishments. An instance of this I shall relate, because both 
e himself, and every honest Roman, was particularly pleased 
with it: — When Pompey the Great, after his overthrow at 
Pharsalia, fled into Egypt, and landed near Pelusium, the 
tutors and ministers of young Ptolemy consulted what mea- 
sures they should take on the occasion. But they were of 
different opinions. Some were for receiving him, others for 
excluding him out of Egypt. Theodotus, a Chian by birth, 
and a teacher of rhetoric by profession, who then attended the 
king in that capacity, was, for want of abler ministers, admit- 
ted to the council. This man insisted that both were in the 
wrong; those who were for receiving, and those who were for 
expelling Pompey. The best measure they could take, he 
said, would be to put him to death ; and concluded his speech 

brutus. 297 

with the proverb, that dead men do not bite. The council 
entered into his opinion; and Pompey the Great, an example 
of the incredible mutability of fortune, fell a sacrifice to the 
arguments of a sophist, as that sophist lived afterwards to 
boast. Not long after, upon Caesar's arrival in Egypt, some 
of the murderers received their proper reward, and were put 
to death; but Theodotus made his escape. Yet, though for 
awhile he gained from fortune the poor privilege of a wander- 
ing and despicable life, he fell at last into the hands of Brutus 
as he was passing through Asia; and by paying the forfeit of 
his baseness, became more memorable from his death than 
from any thing in his life. 

About this time Brutus sent for Cassius to Sardis, and went 
with his friends to meet him. The whole army being drawn 
up, saluted both the leaders with the title of Tmperator. But, 
as it usually happens in great affairs, where many friends and 
many officers are engaged, mutual complaints and suspicions 
arose between Brutus and Cassius. To settle these more pro- 
perly, they retired into an apartment by themselves. Expos- 
tulations, debates, and accusations followed. And these were 
so violent that they burst into tears. Their friends without 
were surprised at the loudness and asperity of the conference; 
but though they were apprehensive of the consequences, they 
durst not interfere, because they had been expressly forbidden 
to enter. Favonius, however, an imitator 01 Cato, but rather 
an enthusiast than rational in his philosophy, attempted to 
enter. The servants in waiting endeavoured to prevent him, 
but it was not easy to stop the impetuous Favonius. He was 
violent in his whole conduct, and valued himself less on his 
dignity as a senator, than on a kind of cynical freedom in say- 
ing everything he pleased; nor was this unentertaining to 
those who could bear with his impertinence. However, he 
broke through the door, and entered the apartment, pronounc- 
ing, in a theatrical tone, what Nestor says in Homer, — 

Young men, be rul'd — I'm older than you both. 

Cassius laughed; but Brutus thrust him out, telling him that 
he pretended to be a cynic, but was in reality a dog. This, 
however, put an end to the dispute; and for that time they 
parted. Cassius gave an entertainment in the evening, to 
which Brutus invited his friends. When they were seated, 
Favonius came in from bathing. Brutus called aloud to him 
telling him he was not invited, and bade him go to the lower 
end of the table. Favonius, notwithstanding, thrust himself 
n, and sat down in the middle. On that occasion there was 
?iuch learning and good humour in the conversation. 
. The dav following, one Lucius Pella, who had been praetor, 
Vol. IV. 2 P 

$98 BRUTUS. 

and employed in offices of trust, being impeached by the Sar 
dians of embezzling the public money, was disgraced and con- 
demned by Brutus. This was very mortifying to Cassius; 
for, a little before, two of his own friends had been accused 
of the same crime; but he had absolved them in public, and, 
contenting himself with giving them a private reproof, con- 
tinued them in office. Of course, he charged Brutus with too 
rigid an exertion of the laws at a time when lenity was much 
more politic. Brutus, on the other hand, reminded him of the 
?des of March, the time when they had killed Caesar; who 
was not, personally speaking, the scourge of mankind, but 
only abetted and supported those that were with his power. 
tie bade him consider, that if the neglect of justice were in 
any case to be connived at, it should have been done before; 
and that they had better have born with the oppressions of 
Caesar's friends, than suffer the mal-practices of their own to 
pass with impunity: — " For then," continued he, " we could 
have been blamed only for cowardice; but now, after all we 
have undergone, we shall lie under the imputation of injus- 
tice." Such were the principles of Brutus. 

When they were about to leave Asia, Brutus, it is said, had 
an extraordinary apparition. Naturally watchful, sparing in 
his diet, and assiduous in business, he allowed himself but lit- 
tle time for sleep. In the day he never slept, nor in the night, 
till all business was over, and, the rest being retired, he had 
nobody to converse with. But at this time, involved as he 
was in the operations of war, and solicitous for the event, he 
only slumbered a little after supper, and spent the rest of the 
night in ordering his most urgent affairs. When these were 
despatched, he employed himself in reading till the third watch, 
when the tribunes and centurions came to him for orders. 
Thus, a little before he left Asia, he was sitting alone in his 
tent, by a dim light, and at a late hour. The whole army lay 
in sleep and silence, while the general, wrapt in meditation, 
thought he perceived something enter his tent: turning to 
wards the door, he saw a horrible and monstrous spectre stand- 
ing silently by his side: — " What art thou?" said he boldly? 
" Art thou god or man? And what is thy business with me?" 
The spectre answered, — " I am thy evil genius, Brutus! Thou 
wilt see me at Philippi." To which he calmly replied, — " I'll 
meet thee there." When the apparition was gone, he called 
his servants, who told him they had neither heard any noise, 
nor had seen any vision. That nia;ht he did not go to rest, 
but went early in the morning to Cassius, and told him what 
had happened. Cassius, who was of the school of Epicurus, 
and used frequently to dispute with Brutus on these subjects, 
answered him thus: — "It is the opinion of our sect, that not 

BRUTUS. 299 

every thing we see is real; for matter is evasive, and sense 
deceitful. Besides, the impressions it receives are, by the 
quick and subtile influence of imagination, thrown into a va- 
riety of forms, many of which have no archetypes in nature; 
and this the imagination effects as easily as we may make an 
impression on wax. The mind of man, having in itself the 
plastic powers, and the component parts, can fashion and Vary 
its objects at pleasure. This is clear from the sudden transi- 
tion of dreams, in which the imagination can educe from the 
slightest principles such an amazing variety of forms, and call 
into exercise all the passions of the soul. The mind is per- 
petually in motion, and that motion is imagination, or thought. 
But when the body, as in your case, is fatigued with labour, it 
naturally suspends or perverts the regular functions of the 
mind. Upon the whole, it is highly improbable that there 
should be any such beings as demons or spirits; or that if there 
were such, they should assume a human shape or voice, or 
have any power to affect us. At the same time, I own I could 
wish there were such beings, that we might not rely on fleets 
and armies, but find the concurrence of the gods in this our 
sacred and glorious enterprise." Such were the arguments he 
made use oif to satisfy Brutus. 

When the army began to march, two eagles perched on the 
two first standards, and accompanied them as far as Philippi, 
being constantly fed by the soldiers; but the day before the 
battle they flew away. Brutus had already reduced most of 
the nations in these parts ; nevertheless, he traversed the sea- 
coast over against Thasus, that, if any hostile power remained, 
he might bring it into subjection. Norbanus, who was en- 
camped in the straits near Symbolum, they surrounded in such 
a manner, that they obliged him to quit the place. Indeed, he 
narrowly escaped losing his whole army, which had certainly 
been the case, had not Antony come to his relief with such 
amazing expedition, that Brutus could not believe it to be 
possible. Cassar, who had been kept behind by sickness, join- 
ed his army about ten days after. Brutus was encamped over 
against him; Cassius was opposite to Antony. The space be- 
tween the two armies the Romans call the plains of Philippi. 
Two armies of Romans, equal in numbers to these, had never 
before met to engage each other. Caesar's was something su- 
perior in numbers; but, in the splendour of arms and equip- 
age, was far exceeded by that of Brutus; for most of their 
arms were of gold and silver, which their general had liberal- 
ly bestowed upon them. Brutus, in other things, had accus- 
tomed his officers to frugality ; but the riches which his sol- 
diers carried about with them would at once, he thought, add 

300 BRUTUS. 

to the spirit of the ambitious, and make the covetous valiant in 
the defence of those arms which were their principal wealth. 

Caesar made a lustration of his army within the camp, and 
gave each private man a little corn and five drachmas only for 
the sacrifice. But Brutus, to show his contempt of the poverty 
or the avarice of Caesar, made a public lustration of his army 
in the field; and not only distributed cattle to each cohort for 
the sacrifice, but gave fifty drachmas on the occasion to each 
private man. Of course, he was more beloved bv his soldiers, 
and they were more ready to fight for him. It is reported, 
that, during the lustration, an unlucky omen happened to Cas- 
sius. The garland he was to wear at the sacrifice was pre- 
sented to him the wrong side outwards. It is said, too, that 
at a solemn procession, some time before, the person who bore 
the golden image of Victory before Cassius happened to stum- 
ble, and the image fell to the ground. Several birds of prey 
hovered daily about the camp, and swarms of bees were seen 
within the trenches. Upon which the soothsayers ordered the 
part where they appeared to be shut up: for Cassius, with all 
his Epicurean philosophy, began to be superstitious, and the 
soldiers were extremely disheartened by these omens. 

For this reason Cassius was inclined to protract the war, 
and unwilling to hazard the whole of the event on a present 
engagement. What made for this measure, too, was, that 
they were stronger in money and provisions, but inferior in 
numbers. Brutus, on the other hand, was, as usual, for an imme- 
diate decision, that he might either give liberty to his country, 
or rescue his fellow-citizens from the toils and expenses of 
war. He was encouraged likewise by the success his cavalry 
met with in several skirmishes; and some instances of deser- 
tion and mutiny in the camp, brought over many of the friends 
of Cassius to his opinion. But there was one Atellius, who 
still opposed an immediate decision, and advised to put it otf 
till the next winter. When Brutus asked him what advan- 
tages he expected from that, he answered, — "If I gain nothing 
else, I shall at least live so much the longer." Both Cassius 
and the rest of the officers were displeased with this answer; 
and it was determined to give battle the day following. 

Brutus that night expressed great confidence and cheerful- 
ness ; and, having passed the time of supper in philosophical 
conversation, he went to rest. Messala says, that Cassius 
supped in private with some of his most intimate friends; and 
that, contrary to his usual manner, he was pensive and silent. 
He adds, that, after supper, he took him by the hand, and 
pressing it close, as he commonly did, in token of his friend- 
ship, he said in Greek, — "Bear witness, Messala, that I am 
reduced to the same necessity with Pompey the Great, of ha- 

BRUTUS. 3Q1 

zarding the liberty of my country on one battle. Yet I bave 
confidence in our good fortune, on which we ought still to 
rely, though the measures we have resolved upon are indis- 
creet." These, Messala tells us, were the last words that Cas- 
sius spoke before he bade him fareivell ; and that the next day, 
being his birth-day, he invited Cassius to sup with him. 

Next morning, as soon as it was light, the scarlet robe, 
which was the signal for battle, was hung out in the tents of 
Brutus and Cassius; and they themselves met on the plain 
between the two armies. On this occasion, Cassius thus ad- 
dressed himself to Brutus: — " May the gods, Brutus, make 
this day successful, that we may pass the rest of our days to- 
gether in prosperity. But as the most important of human 
events are the most uncertain, and as we may never see each 
other any more, if we are unfortunate on this occasion, tell 
me what is your resolution concerning flight and death?" 

Brutus answered: — "In the younger and less experienced 
part of my life, I was led, upon philosophical principles, to 
condemn the conduct of Cato in killing himself. I thought 
it at once impious and unmanly to sink beneath the stroke of 
fortune, and to refuse the lot that had befallen us. In my pre- 
sent situation, however, I am of a different opinion: so that, 
if heaven should now be unfavourable to our wishes, I will no 
longer solicit my hopes or my fortune, but die contented with 
it, such as it is. On the ides of March I devoted my life to 
my country; and since that time I have lived in liberty and 
glory." At these words Cassius smiled, and, embracing Bru- 
tus, said, — "Let us march, then, against the enemy; for, with 
these resolutions, though we should not conquer, we have no- 
thing to fear." They then consulted with their friends con- 
cerning the order of battle. Brutus desired that he might 
command the right wing, though the post was thought more 
proper for Cassius, on account of his experience. Cassius, 
however, gave it up to him, and placed Messala, with the best 
of his legions, in the same wing. Brutus immediately drew 
out his cavalry, which were equipped with great magnificence, 
and the foot followed close upon them. 

Antony's soldiers were at this time employed in making a 
trench from the marsh where they were encamped, to cut oft 
Cassius' communication with the sea. Caesar lay still in his 
tent, confined by sickness. His soldiers were far from ex- 
pecting that the enemy would come to a pitched battle. They 
supposed that they were only making excursions to harass the 
trench-diggers with their light arms; and not perceiving that 
they were pouring in close upon them, they were astonished at 
the outcry they heard from the trenches. Brutus, in the mean 
time, sent tickets to the several officers with the word of battle, 

Vol. IV. 26 

302 BRUITS. 

and rode through the ranks to encourage his men. There 
were few who had patience to wait for the word. The greatest 
part, before it could reach them, fell with loud shouts upon the 
enemy. This precipitate onset threw the army into confusion, 
and separated the legions. Messala's legion first got beyond 
the left wing of Caesar, and was followed by those that were 
stationed near him. In their way they did nothing more than 
throw some of the outmost ranks into disorder, and killed few 
of the enemy : their great object was to fall upon Caesar's 
camp, and they made directly up to it. Caesar himself, as he 
tells us in his Commentaries, had but just before been con- 
veyed out of his tent, in consequence of a vision of his friend 
Artorius, which commanded that he should be carried d\it of 
the camp. This made it believed that he was slain: for the 
soldiers had pierced his empty litter in many places with darts. 
Those who were taken in the camp were put to the sword, 
amongst whom were two thousand Lacedaemonian auxilia- 
ries. Those who attacked Caesar's legions in front easily put 
them to the rout, and cut three legions in pieces. After this, 
borne along with the impetuosity of victory, they rushed into 
the camp at the same time with the fugitives, and Brutus was 
in the midst of them. The flank of Brutus' army was now 
left unguarded, by the separation of the right wing, which was 
gone off too far in the pursuit; and the enemy perceiving this, 
endeavoured to take advantage of it. They, accordingly, at- 
tacked it with great fury, but could make no impression on the 
main body, which received them with firmness and unshaken 
resolution. The left wing, however, which was under the 
command of Cassius, was soon put to the rout; for the men 
were in great disorder, and knew nothing of what had passed 
in the right wing. The enemy pursued him into the camp, 
which they plundered and destroyed, though neither of their 
generals were present. Antony, it is said, to avoid the fury of 
the first onset, had retired into the adjoining marsh; and Caesar, 
who had been carried sick out of the camp, was nowhere to 
be found. Nay, some of the soldiers would have persuaded 
Brutus that they had killed Caesar, describing his age and per- 
son, and showing him their bloody swords. 

The main body of Brutus' army had now made prodigious 
havock of the enemy ; and Brutus, in his department, was no 
less absolutely conqueror, than Cassius was conquered. The 
want of knowing this was the ruin of their affairs. Brutus 
neglected to relieve Cassius, because he knew not that he want- 
ed relief. 

When Brutus had destroyed the camp of Caesar, and was 
returning from the pursuit, he was surprised that he could 
neither perceive the tent of Cassius above the rest, as usual, 

BRUTUS. 303 

nor any of those that were about it: for they had been de- 
molished by the enemy on their first entering the camp. Some, 
who were of quicker sight than the rest, told him, that they 
could perceive a motion of shining helmets and silver targets 
in the camp of Cassius, and supposed, from their numbers and 
their armour, that they could not be those who were left to 
guard the camp ; though at the same time there was not so 
great an appearance of dead bodies as there must have been 
after the defeat of so many legions. This gave Brutus the 
first suspicion of Cassius' misfortune; and leaving a sufficient 
guard in the enemy's camp, he called off the rest from the pur 
suit, and led them in order, to the relief of Cassius. 

The" case of that general was this: — He was chagrined at 
first by the irregular conduct of Brutus' soldiers, who began 
the attack without waiting for the command; and, afterwards, 
by their attention to plunder, whereby they neglected to sur- 
round and cut off the enemy. Thus dissatisfied, he trifled with 
his command, and, for want of vigilance, suffered himself to 
be surrounded by the enemy's right wing; upon which his 
cavalry quitted their post, and fled towards the sea. The foot, 
likewise, began to give way; and though he had laboured as 
much as possible to stop their flight, and snatching an ensign 
from the hand of one of the fugitives, fixed it at his feet, yet 
he was hardly able to keep his own praetorian band together: 
so that, at length, he was obliged to retire, with a very small 
number, to a hill that overlooked the plain. Yet here he could 
discover nothing, for he was short-sighted; and it was with 
some difficulty that he could perceive his own camp plunder- 
ed. His companions, however, saw a large detachment of 
horse which Brutus had sent to their relief, making up to 
them. These Cassius concluded to be the enemy that were in 
pursuit of him ; notwithstanding which, he despatched Titi- 
nius to reconnoitre them. When the cavalry of Brutus saw 
this faithful friend of Cassius approach, they shouted for joy. 
His acquaintance leaped from their horses to embrace him, 
and the rest rode round him with clashing of arms, and all the 
clamorous expressions of gladness. This circumstance had a 
fatal effect. Cassius took it for granted that Titinius was seized 
by the enemy, and regretted that, through a weak desire of 
life, he had suffered his friend to fall into their hands. When 
he had expressed himself to this effect, he retired into an 
empty tent, accompanied only by his freed-man Pindarus, 
whom, ever since the defeat of Crassus, he had retained for a 
particular purpose. In that defeat he escaped out of the hands 
of the Parthians: but now, wrapping his robe about his face, 
he laid bare his neck, and commanded Pindarus to cut off his 
head. This was done; for his head was found severed from 

304 BRUTUS. 

his body: but whether Pindarus did it by his master's com- 
mand, has been suspected; because he never afterwards ap- 
peared. It was soon discovered who the cavalry were, and 
Titinius, crowned with garlands, came to the place where he 
left Cassius. When the lamentations of his friends informed 
him of the unhappy fate of his general, he severely reproached 
himself for the tardiness which had occasioned it, and fell upon 
his sword. . 

Brutus, when he was assured of the defeat of Cassius, made 
all possible haste to his relief; but he knew nothing of his 
death, till he came up to his camp. There he lamented over 
his body, and called him the last of Romans ; intimating, that. 
Rome would never produce another man of equal spirit. He 
ordered his funeral to be celebrated at Thasus, that it might 
not occasion any disorder in the camp. His dispersed and de- 
lected soldiers he collected and encouraged ; and as they had 
been stripped of every thing by the enemy, he promised them 
two thousand drachmas a man. This munificence at once encou- 
raged and surprised them: they attended him at his departure 
with great acclamations, and complimented him as the only ge- 
neral of the four who had not been beaten. Brutus was confident 
of victory, and the event justified that confidence: for, with a 
few legions, he overcame all that opposed him; and if most of 
his soldiers had not passed the enemy, in pursuit of plunder, 
the battle must have been decisive in his favour. He lost eight 
thousand men, including the servants whom he calls Briges. 
Messala says, he supposes the enemy lost more than twice 
that number; and, of course, they were more discouraged than 
Brutus, till Demetrius, a servant of Cassius, went over to An- 
tony in the evening, and carried him his master's robe and 
sword, which he had taken from the dead body. This so ef- 
fectually encouraged the enemy, that they were drawn up in 
form of battle by break of day. Both camps, in the occupa- 
tion of Brutus, involved him in difficulties. His own, full of 
prisoners, required a strong guard. At the same time, many 
of the soldiers of Cassius murmured at their change of master, 
and the vanquished were naturally envious and jealous of the 
victors. He, therefore, thought proper to draw up his army, 
but not to fight. 

All the slaves he had taken prisoners, being found practising 
with his soldiers, were put to the sword : but most of the free- 
men and citizens were dismissed ; and he told them at the same 
time, that they were more truly prisoners in the hands of the 
enemy than in his: with them, he said, they were slaves indeed ; 
but with him freemen and citizens of Rome. He was obliged, 
however, to dismiss them privately; for they had implacable 
enemies amongst his own friends and officers. Amongst the 

BRUTUS. 305 

prisoners were Volumnius, a mimic, and Saculio, a buffoon, of 
whom, Brutus took no notice, till they were brought before 
him, and accused of continuing, even in their captivity, their 
scurrilous jest« and abusive language. Yet still taken up with 
more important concerns, he paid no regard to the accusation; 
but Massala Corvinus was of opinion that they should be pub- 
licly whipped, and sent naked to the enemy, as proper associ- 
ates and convivial companions for such generals. Some were 
entertained with the idea, and laughed; but Publius Casca, 
the first that wounded Caesar, observed, that it was indecent to 
celebrate the obsequies of Cassius with jesting and laughter: — 
" As for you, Brutus," said he, " it will be seen what esteem 
you have for the memory of that general, when you have 
either punished or pardoned those who ridicule and revile 
him.'**' Brutus resented this expostulation, and said, — "Why 
is this business thrown upon me, Casca? Why do not you do 
what you think proper? This answer was considered as an 
assent to their death; so the poor wretches were carried off 
and slain. 

He now gave the promised rewards to his soldiers; and 
after gently rebuking them for beginning the assault without 
waiting for the word of battle, he promised that if they ac- 
quitted themselves to his satisfaction in the next engagement, 
he would give them up the cities of Lacedaemon and Thessa- 
lonica to plunder. This is the only circumstance in his Life 
for which no apology can be made: for though Antony and 
Csesar afterwards acted with more unbounded cruelty in re- 
warding their soldiers; though they deprived most of the an- 
cient inhabitants of Italy of their lands, and gave them to 
those who had no title to them; yet they acted consistently 
with their first principle, which was the acquisition of empire 
and arbitrary power. But Brutus maintained such a reputa- 
tion for virtue, that he was neither allowed to conquer, nor 
even to save himself, except on the strictest principles of ho- 
nour and justice: more particularly, since the death of Cas- 
sius, to whom, if any act of violence were committed, it was 
generally imputed. However, as sailors, when their rudder 
is broken in a storm, substitute some other piece of wood in 
its place ; and though they cannot steer so well as before, do 
the best they can in their necessity; so Brutus, at the head of 
so vast an army, and such important affairs, unassisted by any 
officer that was equal to the charge, was obliged to make use 
of such advisers as he had; and he generally followed the 
counsel of those who proposed any thing that might bring 
Cassius' soldiers to order: for these were extremely untracta- 
ble ; insolent in the camp for want of their general, though 
cowardly in the field, from the remembrance of their defeat. 

Vol. IV. 2 Q 26* 

306 BRUTUS. 

The affairs of Caesar and Antony were not in a much better 
condition. Provisions were scarce, and the marshy situation 
of their camp made them dread the winter. They already be- 
gan to fear the inconveniences of it; for the autumnal rains 
had fallen heavy after the battle, and their tents were filled 
with mire and water; which, from the coldness of the weather, 
immediately froze. In this situation, they received intelli- 
gence of their loss at sea. Their fleet, which was coming from 
Italy with a large supply of soldiers, was met by that of Bru- 
tus, and so totally defeated, that the few who escaped were 
reduced by famine to eat the sails and tackle of the ships. It 
was now determined, on Caesar's side, that they should come 
to battle before Brutus was made acquainted with his success. 
It appears that the fight, both by sea and land, was on the 
same day; but by some accident, rather than the fault of their 
officers, Brutus knew nothing of his victory till twenty days 
after. Had he been informed of it, he would never certainly 
have hazarded a second battle : for he had provisions sufficient 
for a considerable length of time; and his army was so ad- 
vantageously posted, that it was safe both from the injuries of 
the weather, and the incursions of the enemy. Besides, know 
ing that he was wholly master at sea, and partly victorious hy 
land, he would have had every thing imaginable to encourage 
him, and could not have been urged to any dangerous mea- 
sures by despair. 

But it seems that the republican form of government was 
no longer to subsist in Rome; that it necessarily required a 
monarchy; and that Providence, to remove the only man who 
could oppose its destined master, kept the knowledge of that 
victory from him till it was too late. And yet how near was 
he to receiving the intelligence! The very evening before the 
engagement, a deserter, named Clodius, came over from the 
enemy to tell him, that Caesar was informed of the loss of his 
fleet, and that this was the reason of his hastening the battle. 
The deserter, however, was considered either as designing or 
ill-informed: his intelligence was disregarded, and he was not 
even admitted into the presence of Brutus. 

That night, they say, the spectre appeared again to Brutus, 
and assumed its former figure, but vanished without speaking. 
Yet Publius Volumnius, a philosophical man, who had borne 
arms with Brutus during the whole war, makes no mention of 
this prodigy; though, he says, that the first standard was cover- 
ed with a swarin of bees; and that the arm of one of the 
officers sweated oil of roses, which would not cease, though 
they often wiped it off. He says, too, that, immediately be- 
fore the battle, two eagles fought in the space between the two 
armies; and that there was an incredible silence and attention 

BRUTUS. 307 

in the field, till that on the side of Brutus was beaten and flew 
away. The story of the Ethiopian is well known, who, meet- 
ing the standard-bearer opening the gate of the camp, was cut 
in pieces by the soldiers; for that they interpreted as an ill 
omen. 

When Brutus had drawn up his army in form of battle, he 
paused some time before he gave the word. While he was 
visiting the ranks, he had suspicions of some, and heard accu- 
sations of others. The cavalry", he found, had no ardour foi 
the attack, but seemed waiting to see what the foot would do. 
Besides, Camulatus, a soldier in the highest estimation for 
valour, rode close by Brutus, and went over to the enemy in 
his sight. This hurt him inexpressibly; and, partly out of 
anger, partly from fear of further desertion and treachery, he 
led his forces against the enemy about three in the afternoon. 
Where he fought in person, he was still successful. He 
charged the enemy's left wing; and, the cavalry following the 
impression which the foot had made, it was put to the rout. 
But when the other wing of Brutus was ordered to advance, 
the inferiority of their numbers made them apprehensive that 
they should be surrounded by the enemy. For this reason 
they extended their ranks, in order to cover more ground; by 
which means the centre of the wing was so much weakened, 
that it could not sustain the shock of the enemy, but fled at 
the first onset. After their dispersion, the enemy surrounded 
Brutus, who did every thing that the bravest and most expert 
general could do in his situation, and whose conduct, at least, 
entitled him to victory. But what seemed an advantage in the 
first engagement, proved a disadvantage in the second. In the 
former battle, that wing of the enemy which was conquered 
was totally cut off; but most of the men in the conquered 
wing of Cassius were saved.* This, at the time, might ap- 
pear an advantage, but it proved a prejudice. The remem- 
brance of their former defeat filled them with terror and con- 
fusion, which they spread through the greatest part of the 
army. 

Marcus, the son of Cato, was slain fighting amidst the 
bravest of the young nobility. He scorned alike either to fly 
or to yield; but, avowing who he was, and assuming his 
father's name, still used his sword, till he fell upon the heaps 
of the slaughtered enemy. Many other brave men, who ex- 
posed themselves for the preservation of Brutus, fell at the 
same time. 

* There is no defect in the original, as the former translator imagines. He 
supposed the defeat of Cassius' soldiers to be in the present, and not in the 
former battle. This led him into the difficulty, which he increased by trans» 
Jating tt\sov iuxfj victory, instead of advantage. 

308 BRUTUS. 

Lucilius, a man of great worth, and his intimate friend, ob- 
served some barbarian horse riding full speed against Brutus 
in particular, and was determined to stop them, though at the 
hazard of his own life. He, therefore, told them that he was 
Brutus; and they believed him, because he pretended to be 
afraid of Caesar, and desired to be conveyed to Antony. 
Exulting in their capture, and thinking themselves peculiarly 
fortunate, they carried him along with them by night, having 
previously sent an account to Antony of their success, who 
was infinitely pleased with it, and came out to them. Many 
others, likewise, when they heard that Brutus was brought 
alive, assembled to see him: and some pitied his misfortunes, 
while others accused him of an inglorious meanness in suffer- 
ing the love of life to betray him into the hands of barbarians. 
When he approached, and Antony was deliberating in what 
manner he should receive Brutus, Lucilius first addressed 
him, and, with great intrepidity, said, — "Antony, be assured 
that Brutus neither is, nor will be, taken by an enemy. For- 
bid it, Heaven! that fortune should have such a triumph over 
virtue! Whether he shall be found alive or dead, he will be 
found in a state becoming Brutus. I imposed on your sol- 
diers, and am prepared to suffer the worst you can inflict upon 
me." Thus spoke Lucilius, to the no small astonishment of 
those that were present; when Antony, addressing himself to 
those that brought him, said, — "I perceive, fellow-soldiers, 
that you are angry at this imposition of Lucilius. But you 
have really got a better booty than you intended. You sought 
an enemy, but you have brought me a friend. I know not 
how I should have treated Brutus, had you brought him alive; 
but I am sure that it is better to have such a man as Lucilius 
for a friend than for an enemy." When he said this, he em- 
braced Lucilius, recommending him to the care of one of his 
friends; and he ever after found him faithful to his interest. 

Brutus, attended by a few of his officers and friends, having 
passed a brook that was overhung with cliffs, and shaded with 
trees, and being overtaken by night, stopped in a cavity under 
a large rock. There, casting his eyes on the heavens, which 
were covered with stars, he repeated two verses, one of which 
Volumnius tells us was this: — 

Forgive not, Jove, the cause of this distress.* 

The other, he says, had escaped his memory. Upon enume- 
rating the several friends that had fallen before his eyes in the 
battle, he sighed deeply at the mention of Flavius and Labeo; 
the latter of whom was his lieutenant, and the former master 

* Euripides, J\Iedr.a. 

BRUTUS. 309 

of the band of artificers. In the meanwhile, one of his at- 
tendants being thirsty, and observing Brutus in the same con- 
dition, took his helmet, and went to the brook for water. At 
the same time a noise was heard on the opposite bank, and Vo- 
lumnius and Dardanus the armour-bearer, went to see what it 
was. In a short time they returned, and asked for the water: 
— "It is drank up," said Brutus, with a smile; "but another 
helmet-full shall be fetched." The man who had brought the 
first water was, therefore, sent again; but he was wounded by 
the enemy, and made his escape with difficulty. 

As Brutus supposed that he had not lost many men in the 
battle, Statilius undertook to make his way through the ene- 
my, (for there was no other way,) and see in what condition 
their camp was. If things were safe there, he was to hold up 
a torch for a signal, and return. He got safe to the camp; 
for the torch was held up: but a long time elapsed, and he 
did not return. " If Statilius were alive," said Brutus, " he 
would be here." In his return he fell into the enemy's hands, 
and was slain. 

The night was now far spent; when Brutus, leaning his 
head towards his servant Clitus, whispered something in his 
ear. Clitus made no answer, but burst into tears. After that 
betook his armour-bearer Dardanus aside, and said something 
to him in private. At last, addressing himself to Volumnius 
in Greek, he entreated him, in memory of their common stu- 
dies and exercises, to put his hand to his sword, and help him 
to give the thrust. Volumnius, as well as several others, re- 
fused : and one of them observing that they must necessarily 
fly: " We must fly, indeed," said'Brutus, rising hastily, " but 
not with our feet/but with our hands." He then took each ot 
them by the hand, and spoke with great appearance of cheer- 
fulness to the following purpose: — "It is an infinite satisfac- 
tion to me, that all my friends have been faithful. If I am an- 
gry with Fortune, it "is for the sake of my country. Myself 1 
esteem more happy than the conquerors; not only in respect 
of the past, but in my present situation. I shall leave behind 
me that reputation for virtue, which they, with all their wealth 
and power, will never acquire. For posterity will not scruple 
to believe and declare, that they were an abandoned set of 
men, who destroyed the virtuous, for the sake of that empire, 
to which they had no right." After this he entreated them 
severally to provide for their own safety, and withdrew with 
only two or three of his most intimate friends. One of these 
was Strato, with whom he first became acquainted when they 
studied rhetoric. This friend he placed next to himself, and 
laying hold of the hilt of his sword with both his hands, he 
fell upon the point, and died. Some say that Strato, at the 

3 1 0 BRUTUS. 

earnest request of Brutus, turned aside his head, and held the 
sword ; upon which he threw himself with such violence, that, 
entering at his breast, it passed quite through his body, and he 
immediately expired. 

Messala, the friend of Brutus, after he was reconciled to 
Caesar, took occasion to recommend Strato to his favour: — 
"This," said he, with tears, "is the man who did the last 
kind office for my dear Brutus." Caesar received him with 
kindness; and he was one of those brave Greeks who after- 
wards attended him at the battle of Actium. Of Messala, it 
is said, that when Caesar observed he had been no less zealous 
in his service at Actium than he had been against him at Phi- 
lippi, he answered, — " I have always taken the best and justest 
side." When Antony found the body of Brutus, he ordered 
it to be covered with the richest robe he had-, and that being 
stolen, he put the thief to death. The ashes of Brutus he sent 
to his mother Servilia. 

With regard to Porcia, his wife, Nicolaiis the philosopher, 
and Valerius Maximus,* tell us, that being prevented from 
that death she wished for, by the constant vigilance of her 
friends, she snatched some burning coals from the fire, and 
shut them close in her mouth till she was suffocated. Not- 
withstanding, there is a letter from Brutus to his friends still 
extant, in which he laments the death of Porcia, and complains 
that their neglect of her must have made her prefer death to 
the continuance of her illness. So that Nicolaus appears to 
have been mistaken in the time, at least, if this epistle be au- 
thentic; for it describes Porcia's distemper, her conjugal af- 
fection, and the manner of her death. 

* Valerius Maximus speaks of her fortitude on this occasion in the highest 
terms. Tuos quoque castissimos ignes, Portia, M. Catonis Jilia, cuncla secu- 
la debild admiralione prosequentur : Quce cum apud Philippos victum et in- 
teremptum virum tuurn Brutum cognosceres, quia Jerrurn non dabatur, ar- 
dentes ore carbones haurire non clubitasti, muliebri spiritu virilem palri.i 
exilum imitata. Sed nescio an hoc fortius, quod Hit usitato, tu novo genere 
mortis absumpta es ! Val. Max. 1. ir. c. 6. 

DION AND BRUTUS 

COMPARED. 

What is principally to be admired in the Lives of Dion 
and Brutus, is their rising to such importance from inconsi- 
derable beginnings. But here Dion has the advantage; for in 
the progress of glory he had no coadjutor: whereas Gassius 
went hand in hand with Brutus; and though, in the reputation 
of virtue and honour, he was by no means his equal, in mili- 
tary experience, resolution, and activity, he was not inferior. 
Some have imputed to him the origin of the whole enterprise, 
and have asserted, that Brutus would never, otherwise, have 
engaged in it. But Dion, at the same time that he made the 
whole military preparations himself, engaged the friends and 
associates of his design. He did not, like Brutus, gain power 
and riches from the war: he employed that wealth on which 
he was to subsist as an exile in a foreign country in restoring 
the liberties of his own. When Brutus and Cassius fled from 
Rome, and found no asylum from the pursuit of their ene- 
mies, their only resource was war; and they took up arms as 
much in their own defence as in that of the common liberty. 
Dion, on the contrary, was happier in his banishment than the 
tyrant that banished him; and yet he voluntarily exposed him- 
self to danger for the freedom of Sicily. Besides, to deliver 
the Romans from Caesar, and the Syracusans from Dionysius, 
were enterprises of a very different kind. Dionysius was an 
avowed and established tyrant; and Sicily, with reason, groan- 
ed beneath his yoke. But with respect to Caesar, though, 
whilst his imperial power was in its infancy, he treated his op- 
ponents with severity; yet, as soon as that power was confirm- 
ed, the tyranny was rather a nominal than real thing; for no 
tyrannical action could be laid to his charge. Nay, such was 
the condition of Rome, that it evidently required a master; 
and Caesar was no more than a tender and skilful physician 
appointed by Providence to heal the distempers of the state. 
Of course, the people lamented his death, and were implaca- 
bly enraged against his assassins. Dion, on the contrary, was 
reproached by the Syracusans for suffering Dionysius to es- 
cape, and not digging up the former tyrant's grave. 

With regard to their military conduct, Dion, as a general, 
was without a fault: he not only made the most of his own 
instructions, but, where others failed, he happily repaired the 
error. But it was wrong in Brutus to hazard a second battle. 

312 DI0N AND BRUTUS COMPARED. 

where all was at stake.* And when that battle was lost, he 
had neither sagacity enough to think of new resources, nor 
spirit, like Pompey, to contend with fortune, though he had 
still reason to rely on his troops, and was absolute master at sea. 

But what Brutus is chiefly blamed for was his ingratitude to 
Caesar. He owed his life to his favour, as well as the lives of 
those prisoners for whom he interceded. He was treated as 
his friend, and distinguished with particular marks of honour; 
and yet he embrued his hands in the blood of his benefactor. 
Dion stands clear of any charge like this. As a relation of 
Dionysius, he assisted and was useful to him in the adminis- 
tration; in which case his services were equal to his honours 
When he was driven into exile, and deprived of his wife and 
his fortune, he had every motive that was just and honourable 
to take up arms against him. 

Yet if this circumstance be considered in another light, 
Brutus will have the advantage. The greatest glory of both 
consists in their abhorrence of tyrants and their criminal mea- 
sures. This, in Brutus, was not blended with any other mo- 
tive. He had no quarrel with Csesar, but exposed his life for 
the liberty of his country. Had not Dion been injured, he had 
not fought. This is clear from Plato's epistles, where it ap- 
pears that he was banished from the court of Dionysius, and, 
in consequence of that banishment, made war upon him. For 
the good of the community, Brutus, though an enemy to Pom- 
pey, became his friend : and though a friend to Caesar, he be- 
came his enemy. His enmity and his friendship arose from 
the same principle, which was justice. But Dion, whilst in 
favour, employed his services for Dionysius; and it was not 
till he was disgraced that he armed against him. Of course, 
his friends were not quite satisfied with his enterprise. They 
were apprehensive that when he had destroyed the tyrant, he 
might seize the government himself, and amuse the people 
with some softer title than that of tyranny. On the other 
hand, the very enemies of Brutus acknowledge that he was 
the only conspirator who had no other view than that of re- 
storing the ancient form of government. 

Besides, the enterprise against Dionysius cannot be placed 
in competition with that against Caesar. The former had ren- 
dered himself contemptible by his low manners, his drunken- 
ness, and debauchery. But to meditate the fall of Caesar, and 
not tremble at his dignity, his fortune, or his power, nor 
shrink at that name which shook the kings of India and Par- 
thia on their thrones, and disturbed their slumbers; this shovv- 

* This censure seems very unjust. The wavering disposition of Cassius' 
troops obliged him to come to a second engagement. 

DION AND BRUTUS COMPARED. 313 

ed a superiority of soul on which fear could have no influence. 
Dion was no sooner seen in Sicily than he was joined by thou- 
sands; but the authority of Caesar was so formidable in Rome, 
that it supported his friends even after he was dead ; and a 
simple boy rose to the first eminence of power by adopting his 
name; which served as a charm against the envy and the in- 
fluence of Antony. Should it be objected that Dion had the 
sharpest conflicts in expelling the tyrant, but that Caesar fell 
naked and unguarded beneath the sword of Brutus, it will argue 
at least a consummate management and prudence to be able to 
come at a man of his power naked and unguarded; particularly 
when it is considered, that the blow was not sudden, nor the 
work of one or of a few men, but meditated and communicated 
to many associates, of whom not one deceived the leader: for 
either he had the power of distinguishing honest men at their 
first view, or such as he chose he made honest, by the confi- 
dence he reposed in them. But Dion confided in men of bad 
principles; so that he must either have been injudicious in hi3 
choice, or, if his people grew worse after their appointments, 
unskilful in his management. Neither of these can be con- 
sistent with the talents and conduct of a wise man; and Plato, 
accordingly, blames him in his letters for making choice of 
such friends, as, in the end, were his ruin. 

Dion found no friend to revenge his death; but Brutus re- 
ceived an honourable interment even from his enemy Antony: 
and Caesar allowed of that public respect which was paid to his 
memory, as will appear from the following circumstance: — A 
statue of brass had been erected to him at Milan, in Gallia 
Cisalpina, which was a fine performance, and a striking like- 
ness. Caesar, as he passed through the town, took notice of it, 
and summoning the magistrates, in the presence of his attend- 
ants, he told them that they had broken the league, by harbour- 
ing one of his enemies. The magistrates, as may well be 
supposed, denied it, and stared at each other, profoundly igno- 
rant what enemy he could mean. He then turned towards the 
statue, and knitting his brows, said: — "Is not this my enemy 
that stands here?" The poor Milanese were struck dumb 
with astonishment; but Caesar told them, with a smile, that 
he was pleased to find them faithful to their friends in adversi- 
ty, and ordered that the statue should continue where it was. 

Vol. IV. 2 R 27 

THE 

LIFE OF ARTAXERXES. 

The first Artaxerxes, who of all the Persian kings was most 
distinguished for his moderation and greatness ot mind, was 
surnamed Longimanus, because his right hand was longer 
than his left. He was the son of Xerxes. The second Artax- 
erxes, surnamed Mnemon,* whose life we are going to write, 
was son to the daughter of the first. For Darius, by his wife 
Parysatis, had four sons; Artaxerxes the eldest, Cyrus the 
second, and Ostanes and Oxathres the two younger. Cyrus 
was called after the ancient king of that name, as he is said to 
have been after the sun; for the" Persians call the sun Cyrus. 
Artaxerxes at first was named Arsicas,t though Dion asserts 
that his original name was Oartes.J But though Ctesias has 
filled his books with a number of incredible and extravagant 
fables, it is not probable that he should be ignorant of the name 
of a king at whose court he lived in quality of physician to 
him, his wife, his mother, and his children. 

Cyrus, from his infancy, was of a violent and impetuous 
temper; but Artaxerxes had a native mildness, something 
gentle and moderate in his whole disposition. The latter mar- 
ried a beautiful and virtuous lady, by order of his parents, and 
he kept her when they wanted him to put her away. For the 
kino- having put her brother to death,§ designed that she should 

* So called on account of his extraordinary memory. 

t Or Arsaces. t °r Oarses. 

t> Teriteuchmes, the brother of Statira, had been guilty of the complicated 
crimes of adultery, incest, and murder, which raised great disturbances in the 
royal family, and ended in the ruin of all who were concerned in them. 
Statira was daughter to Hydarnes, governor of one of the chief provinces of 
the empire. Artaxerxes, then called Arsaces, was charmed with her beauty, 
and married her. At the same time, Teriteuchmes her brother married 
Hamestris, one of the daughters of Darius, and sister to Arsaces ; by reason 
of which marriage he had interest enough, on his father's demise, to get him- 
self appointed to his government. But, in the mean time, he conceived a 
passion for his own sister Roxana, nowise inferior in beauty to Statira; and 
that he might enjoy her without constraint, resolved to despatch his wife Ha- 
mestris, and light up the flames of rebellion in the kingdom. Darius being 
apprised of his design, engaged Udiastes, an intimate friend of Teriteuchmes, 
to kill him, and was rewarded by the king with the government of his pro- 
vince. Upon this some commotions were raised by the son of Teriteuchmes ; 
but the king's forces having the superiority, all the family of Hydarnes were 
apprehended, and delivered to Parysatis, that she might execute her revenge 
upon them for the injury done or intended to her daughter. That cruel 

ARTAXERXES. 3 J 5 

shs>re his fate. But Arsicas applied to his mother, with many 
tears and entreaties, and, with much difficulty, prevailed upon 
her not only to spare her life, but to excuse him from divorc- 
ing her. Yet his mother had the greater affection for Cyrus, 
and was desirous of raising him to the throne: therefore, 
when he was called from his residence on the coast in the sick- 
ness of Darius, he returned full of hopes that the queen's in- 
terest had established him successor. Parysatis had indeed a 
specious pretence, which the ancient Xerxes had made use of 
at the suggestion of Demaratus, that she had brought Darius 
his son Arsicas when he was in a private station, but Cyrus 
when he was a king. However, she could not prevail. Da- 
rius appointed his eldest son his successor; on which occasion 
his name was changed to Artaxerxes. Cyrus had the govern- 
ment of Lydia, and was to be commander-in-chief on the coast. 
Soon after the death of Darius, the king, his successor, went 
to Pasargadse, in order to be consecrated, according to custom, 
by the priests of Persia. In that city there is the temple of a 
goddess, who has the affairs of war under her patronage, and, 
therefore, may be supposed to be Minerva. The prince to be 
consecrated, must enter that temple, put off his own robe there, 
and take that which was worn by the great Cyrus before he 
was king. He must eat a cake of figs, chew some turpentine, 
and drink a cup of acidulated milk. Whether there are any 
other ceremonies is unknown, except to the persons concerned. 
As Artaxerxes was on the point of going to be consecrated, 
Tissaphernes brought to him a priest, who had been chief in- 
spector of Cyrus' education in his infancy, and had instructed 
him in the learning of the Magi; and, therefore, might be sup- 
posed to be as much concerned as any man in Persia at his 
pupil's not being appointed king. For that reason, his accusa- 
tion against Cyrus could not but gain credit. He accused him 
of a design to lie in wait for the king in the temple, and, after 
he had put off his garment, to fall upon him and destroy him. 
Some affirm that Cyrus was immediately seized upon this in- 
formation; others, that he got into the temple, and concealed 
himself there, but was pointed out by the priest, in conse- 
quence of which he was to be put to death ; but his mother, at 
that moment, took him in her arms, bound the tresses of her 
hair about him, held his neck to her own, and, by her tears 
and entreaties, prevailed to have him pardoned, and remanded 

princess put them all to death except Statira, whom she spared, at the ear- 
nest entreaties of her husband Arsaces, contrary to the opinion of Darius. 
But Arsaces was no sooner settled upon the throne than Statira prevailed 
upon him to leave Udiastes to her correction ; and she put him to a death too 
cruel to he described. Parysatis, in return, poisoned the son of Teriteuch- 
mes, and, not long after, Statira herself. — Ctes. in Pers. 

g Y q ARTAXERXES. 

to the sea-coast. Nevertheless, he was far from being satis- 
fied with his government. Instead of thinking of his brother's 
favour with gratitude, he remembered only the indignity of 
chains, and in his resentment aspired more than ever after the 
sovereignty. 

Some, indeed, say that he thought his allowance for his ta- 
ble insufficient, and, therefore, revolted from his king. But 
this is a foolish pretext: for if he had no other resource, his 
mother would have supplied him with whatever he wanted 
out of her revenues. Besides, there needs no greater proof of 
his riches than the number of foreign troops that he entertain- 
ed in his service, which were kept for him in various parts by 
his friends and retainers: for the better to conceal his prepara- 
tions, he did not keep his forces in a body, but had his emis- 
saries in different places, who enlisted foreigners on various 
pretences. Meanwhile his mother, who lived at court, made 
it her business to remove the king's suspicions: and Cyrus 
himself always wrote in a lenient style; sometimes begging a 
candid interpretation, and sometimes recriminating upon Tis- 
saphernes, as if his contention had been solely with that gran- 
dee. Add to this, that the king had a dilatory turn of mind, 
which was natural to him, and which many took for modera- 
tion. At first, indeed, he seemed entirely to imitate the mild- 
ness of the first Artaxerxes, whose name he bore, by behaving 
with great affability to all that addressed him, and distributing 
honours and rewards to persons of merit with a lavish hand. 
He took care that punishments should never be embittered 
with insult. If he received presents, he appeared as well 
pleased as those who offered them, or rather as those who re- 
ceived favours from him; and in conferring favours, he always 
kept a countenance of benignity and pleasure. There was not 
any thing, however trifling, brought him by way of present, 
which he did not receive kindly. Even when one Omisus 
brought him a pomegranate of uncommon size, he said, — 
"By the light of Mithra, this man, if he were made governor 
of a small city, would soon make it a great one." When he 
was once upon a journey, and people presented him with a 
variety of things by the way, a labouring man, having nothing 
else to give him, ran to the river and brought him some water 
in his hands. Artaxerxes was so much pleased that he sent 
the man a gold cup, and a thousand darics. When Euclidas 
the Lacedaemonian said many insolent things to him, he con- 
tented himself with ordering the captain of his guard to give 
him this answer: — "You may say what you please to the king; 
but the king would have you to know, that he can not only 
say, but do." One day, as he was hunting, Tiribazus showed 
him a rent in his robe: upon which the king said, — "What 

ARTAXERXES. 317 

shall I do with it?" "Put on another, and give that to me," 
said Tiribazus. "It shall be so," said the king; "I give it 
thee; but I charge thee not to wear it." Tiribazus, who, 
though not a bad man, was giddy and vain, disregarding the 
restriction, soon put on the robe, and, at the same time, tricked 
himself out with some golden ornaments fit only for queens. 
The court expressed great indignation; because it was a thing 
contrary to their laws and customs: but the king only laugh- 
ed, and said to him, — " I allow thee to wear the trinkets as a 
woman, and the robe as a madman." 

None had been admitted to the king of Persia's table but 
his mother and his wife; the former of which sat above him, 
and the latter below him: Artaxerxes, nevertheless, did that 
honour to Ostanes and Oxathres, two of his younger brothers. 
But what afforded the Persians the most pleasing spectacle, 
was the queen Statira always riding in her chariot with the 
curtains open, and admitting the women of the country to 
approach and salute her. These things made his administra- 
tion popular. Yet there were some turbulent and factious 
men, who represented that the affairs of Persia required a 
king of such a magnificent spirit, so able a warrior, and so 
generous a master as Cyrus was; and that the dignity of so 
great an empire could not be supported without a prince of 
high thoughts and noble ambition. It was not, therefore, 
without a confidence in some of the Persians, as well as in 
the maritime provinces, that Cyrus undertook the war. 

He wrote also to the Lacedemonians for assistance; pro- 
mising that to the foot he would give horses, and to the borse- 
men chariots; that on those who had farms he would bestow 
villages, and on those who had villages cities. As for their 
pay, he assured them it should not be counted, but measured 
out to them. At the same time he spoke in very high terms 
of himself, telling them he had a greater and more princely 
heart than his brother; that he was the better philosopher, be- 
ing instructed in the doctrines of the Magi; and that he could 
drink and bear more wine than his brother. Artaxerxes, he 
said, was so timorous and effeminate a man that he could not 
sit a horse in hunting, nor a chariot in time of war. The 
Lacedaemonians, therefore, sent the scytale to Clearchus, with 
orders to serve Cyrus in every thing he demanded.* 

Cyrus began his march against the king, with a numerous 

* They took care not to mention Artaxerxes, pretending not to be privy 
to the designs that were carrying on against him. This precaution they 
used, that, in case Artaxerxes should get the better of his brother, they 
might justify themselves to him in what tbtjy had done. — Xenoph. de Expe> 
dit. Curi. 1. i 

27* 

318 ARTAXERXES. 

army of barbarians,* and almost thirteen thousand Greek 
mercenaries. t He found one pretence after another for hav- 
ing; such an armament on foot; but his real designs did not re- 
main long undiscovered: for Tissaphernes went in person to 
inform the king of them. 

This news put the court in great disorder. Parysatis was 
censured as the principal cause of the war, and her friends 
were suspected of a private intelligence with Cyrus. Statira, 
in her distress about the war, gave Parysatis the most trouble: 
— " Where is now," she cried, " that faith which you pledged? 
Where your intercessions, by which you saved the man that 
was conspiring against his brother? Have they not brought 
war and all its calamities upon us?" These expostulations fixed 
in the hjeart of Parysatis, who was naturally vindictive and 
barbarous in her resentment and revenge, such a hatred of 
Statira, that she contrived to take her off. Dinon writes, that 
this cruel purpose was put in execution during the war: but 
Ctesias assures us it was after it. And it is not probable, that 
he, who was an eye-witness to the transactions of that court, 
could either be ignorant of the time when the assassination 
took place, or could have any reason to misrepresent the date 
of it; though he often deviates into fictitious talcs, and loves 
to give us invention instead of truth. We shall, therefore, 
leave this story to the order of time in which he has placed it. 

While Cyrus was upon his march, he had accounts brought 
him, that the king did not design to try the fortune of the field 
by giving battle immediately, but to wait in Persia till his 
forces were assembled there from all parts of his kingdom. 
And though he had drawn a trench across the plain ten 
fathoms wide, as many deep, X and four hundred furlongs in 
length, yet he suffered Cyrus to pass him, and to march almost 
to Babylon. § Tiribazus, we are told, was the first who ven- 
tured to remonstrate to the king, that he ought not any longer 
to avoid an action, nor to abandon Media, Babylon, and even 

* A hundred thousand barbarians. 

t Clearchus the Lacedaemonian commanded all the Peloponnesian troops, 
except the Achoeans, who were led by Socrates of Achaia. The Boeotians 
were under Proxenus, a Theban ; and the Thessalians under Menon. The 
other nations were commanded by Persian generals, of whom Ariacus was the 
chief. The fleet consisted of thirty-five ships, under Pythagoras, a Lacedae- 
monian; and twenty-five commanded by Tamos, an Egyptian, who was ad- 
miral of the whole fleet. On this occasion, Proxenus presented Xenophon 
to Cyrus, who gave him a commission amongst the Greek mercenaries. 

f Xenophon says, this trench was only five fathom wide, and three deep. 
It must be observed that the word op^uia sometimes signifies a pace only ; and 
if it be understood so here, it will bring Plutarch's account more within the 
bounds of probability. 

$ There was a passage twenty feet wide left between the trench and the 
Euphrates, and Artaxerxes neglected to defend it. 

ARTAXERXES. g j 9 

Susa to the enem)^, and hide himself in Persia; since he had 
an army infinitely greater than theirs, and ten thousand Sa- 
trapse and other officers, all of them superior to those of Cyrus 
both in courage and conduct. 

Upon this he took a resolution to come to action as soon as 
possible. His sudden appearance with an army of nine hun- 
dred thousand men, well prepared and accoutred, extremely 
surprised the rebels, who, through the confidence they had in 
themselves, and contempt of their enemy, were marching in 
great confusion, and even without their arms: so that it was 
with great difficulty that Cyrus reduced them to any order: 
and he could not do it at last without much noise and tumult. 
As the king advanced in silence, and at a slow pace, the good 
discipline of his troops afforded an astonishing spectacle to the 
Greeks, who expected amongst such a multitude nothing but 
disorderly shouts and motions, and every other instance of 
distraction and confusion. He showed his judgment, too, in 
placing the strongest of his armed chariots before that part of 
his phalanx which was opposite to the Greeks, that, by the 
impetuosity of their motion, they might break the enemy's 
ranks before they came to close combat. 

Many historians have described this battle; but Xenophon 
has done it with such life and energy, that we do not read an 
account of it; we see it, and feel all the danger. It would be 
very absurd, therefore, to attempt any thing after him, excep 
the mentioning some material circumstances which he has 
omitted. 

The place where the battle was fought is called Cunaxa, and 
is five hundred furlongs from Babylon. A little before the 
action, Clearchus advised Cyrus to post himself behind the 
Macedonians,* and not risk his person ; upon which he is re- 
ported to have said, — "What advice is this, Clearchus? 
Would you have me, at the very time I am aiming at a 
crown, to show myself unworthy of one?" Cyrus, indeed, 
committed an error in rushing into the midst of the greatest 
danger without care or caution: but Clearchus was guilty of 
another as great, if not greater, in not consenting to place his 
Greeks opposite to the king, and in getting the river on his 
right, to prevent his being surrounded : for if safety was his 
principal object, and he was by all means to avoid loss, he 
ought to have staid at home. But to carry his arms ten thou- 
sand furlongs from the sea, without necessity or constraint, 
and solely with a view to place Cyrus on the throne of Persia, 
and then not to be solicitous for a post where he might best 

* This is undoubtedly the erroi of some transcriber* and for Macedonians 
we should read Lacedaemonians. 

320 ARTAXERXES. 

defend the prince whose pay he received, but for one in which 
he might act most at ease, and in the greatest safety, was to 
behave like a man who, on the sight of present danger, aban- 
dons the whole enterprise, and forgets the purpose of his ex- 
pedition: for it appears from the course of the action, that if 
the Greeks had charged those that were posted about the 
king's person, they would not have stood the shock; and after 
Artaxerxes had been slain, or put to flight, the conqueror must 
have gained the crown without further interruption : therefore, 
the ruin of Cyrus' affairs and his death is much rather to be 
ascribed to the caution of Clearchus, than to his own rashness: 
for if the king himself had been to choose a post for the 
Greeks, where they might do him the least prejudice, he could 
not have pitched upon a better than that which was most re- 
mote from himself, and the troops about him. At the dis- 
tance he was from Clearchus, he knew not of the defeat of 
that part of his army which was near the river, and Cyrus 
was cut off before he could avail himself of the advantages 
gained by the Greeks. Cyrus, indeed, was sensible what dis- 
position would have been of most service to him, and for that 
reason ordered Clearchus to charge in the centre; but Clear- 
chus ruined all, notwithstanding his assurances of doing every 
thing for the best: for the Greeks beat the barbarians with 
ease, and pursued them a considerable way. 

In the mean time, Cyrus being mounted on Pasacas, a 
horse of great spirit, but at the same time headstrong and 
unruly, fell in, as Ctesias tells us, with Artagerses, gene- 
ral of the Cadusians, who met him upon the gallop, and 
called out to him in these terms: — "Most unjust and most 
stupid of men, who disgracSst the name of Cyrus, the most 
august of all names among the Persians; thou leadest these 
brave* Greeks a vile way to plunder thy country, and to de- 
stroy thy brother and thy king, who has many millions of ser- 
vants that are better men than thou. Try if he has not, and 
here thou shalt lose thy head, before thou canst see the face 
of the king." So saying, he threw his javelin at him with all 
his force ; but his cuirass was of such excellent temper, that 
he was not wounded, though the violence of the blow shook 
him in his seat. Then, as Artagerses was turning his horse, 
Cyrus aimed a stroke at him with his spear, and the point of" 
it entered at his collar-bone, and pierced through his neck. 
That Artagerses fell by the hand of Cyrus, almost all histo^ 
rians agree. As to the death of Cyrus himself, since Xeno- 

* Probably xaXss has been a mistake of the transcribers for xaxsi. Then it 
will be x<xxbs fiEv 'Eunvas fpxi xcunv 'o5ov oycov. Thou leadest these vile Greek* 
a vile way, fyc. 

ARTAXERXES. 

321 

phon has given a very short account of it, because he was not 
on the spot when it happened, perhaps it may not be amiss to 
give the manner of it in detail, as Dinon and Ctesias have re- 
presented it. 

Dinon tells us, that Cyrus, after he had slain Artagerses, 
charged the vanguard of Artaxerxes with great fury, wound- 
ed the king's horse, and dismounted him. Tiribazus imme- 
diately mounted him on another horse, and said, — " Sir, re- 
member this day, for it deserves not to be forgotten." At 
the second attack, Cyrus spurred his horse against the king, 
and gave him a wound;* at the third, Artaxerxes, in great 
indignation, said to those that were by, — "It is better to die 
than to suffer all this." At the same time he advanced against 
Cyrus, who was rashly advancing to meet a shower of darts. 
The king wounded him with his javelin, and others did the 
same. Thus fell Cyrus, as some say, by the blow which the 
king gave him; but according to others, it was a Carian sol- 
dier who despatched him, and who afterwards, for his ex- 
ploit, had the honour of carrying a golden cock, at the head 
of the army, on the point of his spear: for the Persians called 
the Carians cocks, on account of the crests with which they 
adorned their helmets. 

Ctesias' story is very long, but the purport of it is this: — 
When Cyrus had slain Artagerses, he pushed his horse up 
towards the king, and the king advanced against him, both 
in silence. Ariacus, one of the friends of Cyrus, first aimed 
a blow at the king, but did not wound him. Then the king 
threwhis javelin at Cyrus, but missed him; the weapon, how- 
ever, did execution upon Tissaphernes,t a man of approved 
valour, and a faithful servant to Cyrus. It was now Cyrus' 
turn to try his javelin; it pierced the king's cuirass, and going 
two fingers deep into his breast, brought him from his horse. 
This caused such disorder in his troops that they fled. But the 
king recovering, retired with a few of his men, among whom 
was Ctesias, to an eminence not far off, and there reposed him- 
self. In the mean time, Cyrus' horse, grown more furious by 
the action, carried him deep amongst the enemy; and as 
night was coming on, they did not know him, and his own 
men sought for him in vain. Elated, however, with vic- 
tory, and naturally daring and impetuous, he kept on, cry- 
ing out in the Persian language as he went, — "Make way, 
ye slaves, make way !" They humbled themselves, and opened 

* Or, with the violence of the encovnter, bent the king from his horse. In 
the original it is £v<TEio-aj ra hna xar£paA.£ jrav Apra^spfnv. 

+ Tissaphernes is probably an erroneous reading. We know of no Tis- 
Baphernes but the grandee of that name, who was a faithful servant to 
Artaxerxes. One of the manuscripts gives us Satiphernes. 

Vol. IV. 2 S 

322 ARTAXERXES. 

their ranks; but his tiara happened to fall from his head- 
and a young Persian, named Mithridates, in passing, wounded 
him with his lance in the temple near his eye, without know- 
ing who he was. Such a quantity of blood issued from the 
wound that he was seized with a giddiness, and fell senseless 
from his horse. The horse, having lost his rider, wandered 
about the field; the furniture, too, was fallen off*, and the ser- 
vant of Mithridates, who had given him the wound, took it 
up, all stained with blood. 

At last Cyrus, with much difficulty, began to recover from 
his swoon; and a few eunuchs, who attended him, endeavour- 
ed to mount him on another horse, and so to carry him out of 
danger. But as he was too weak to sit a horse, he thought it 
better to walk, and the eunuchs supported him as he went. 
His head was still heavy, and he tottered at every step; yet 
he imagined himself victorious, because he heard the fugitives 
calling Cyrus king, and imploring mercy. 

At that instant some Caunians of mean condition, who per- 
formed the most servile offices for the royal army, happened 
to mix with the company of Cyrus as friends. They perceiv- 
ed, however, though not without difficulty, that the clothing 
of his people was red, whereas that given by the king their 
master was white. One of these then ventured to give Cyrus 
a stroke with his spear behind, without knowing him to be 
the prince. The weapon hit his ham and cut the sinew; upon 
which he fell, and in falling dashed his wounded temple against 
a stone, and died upon the spot. Such is Ctesias' story of the 
death of Cyrus, which, like a blunt weapon, hacks and hews 
him a long time, and can hardly kill him at last. 

Soon after Cyrus expired, an officer, who was called the 
king's eye, passed that way. Artasyras (for that was his name) 
knowing the eunuchs, who were mourning over the corpse, 
addressed him who appeared to be most faithful to his master, 
and said, — " Pariscas, who is that whom thou art lamenting so 
much?" " 0 Artasyras!" answered the eunuch, " see you not 
prince Cyrus dead?" Artasyras was astonished at the event: 
however, he desired the eunuch to compose himself and take 
care of the corpse; and then rode at full speed to Artax- 
erxes, who had given up all for lost, and was ready to faint 
both with thirst and with the anguish of his wound. In these 
circumstances the officer found him, and with a joyful accent 
hailed him in these words, — " I have seen Cyrus dead." The 
king at first was impatient to see the dead body himself, and 
commanded Artasyras immediately to conduct him to it. But 
finding all the field full of terror and dismay, upon a report 
that the Greeks, victorious in their quarter, were pursuing the 
fugitives, and putting all to the sword, he thought proper to 

ARTAXERXES. 323 

send out a greater number to reconnoitre the place, which 
Artasyras had told him of. Accordingly, thirty men went 
with flambeaux in their hands. Still the king was almost dy- 
ing with thirst, and the eunuch Satibarzanes sought every 
place for water; for the field afforded none, and they were at 
a great distance from the camp. After much search, he found 
one of these poor Caunians had about two quarts of bad water in 
a mean bottle, and he took it and carried it to the king. Af- 
ter the king had drank it all up, the eunuch asked him,—" If 
he did not "find it a disagreeable beverage?" Upon which he 
swore by all the gods, — " That he had never drank the most de- 
licious wine, nor the lightest and clearest water, with so much 
pleasure. I wish, only," continued he, " that I could find the 
man who gave it thee, that I might make him a recompense. 
In the mean time, I entreat the gods to make him happy and 
rich." 

While he was speaking, the thirty men whom he had sent 
out, returned in great exultation, and confirmed the news of 
his unexpected good fortune. Now, likewise, numbers of his 
troops repaired to him again, and dismissing his fears, he de- 
scended from the eminence with many torches carried before 
him. When he came to the dead body., according to the law 
of the Persians, the right hand and the' head were cut off; and 
having ordered the head to be brought to him, he took it by 
the hair, which was long and thick, and showed it to the fugi- 
tives, and to such as were still doubtful of the fortune of the 
day. They were astonished at the sight, and prostrated them- 
selves before him. Seventy thousand men soon assembled 
about him, and with them he returned to his camp. Ctesias 
tells us, he had led four hundred thousand men that day into the 
field ; but Dion and Xenophon make that number much greater. 
As to the number of the killed, Ctesias says, an account only 
of nine thousand was brought to Artaxerxes; whereas there 
appeared to Ctesias himself to be no fewer than twenty thou- 
sand. That article, therefore, must be left dubious. But no- 
thing can be a more palpable falsity than what Ctesias adds, 
that he was sent ambassador to the Greeks in conjunction with 
Phayllus the Zacynthian, and some others: for Xenophon 
knew that Ctesias was at the Persian court; he mentions him 
in his works, and it is plain that he had met with his books. 
Therefore, if he had been joined in commission to settle such 
important affairs, he would not have passed him by unnoticed, 
but would have mentioned him with Phayllus. Ctesias, in- 
deed, was a man of unbounded vanity, as well as strong at- 
tachment to Clearchus; and, for that reason, always leaves a 
corner in the story for himself, when he is dressing out the 
praises of Clearchus and the Lacedaemonians. 

324 ARTAXERXES. 

After the battle, the king sent great and valuable presents 
to the son of Artagerses, who was slain by Cyrus. He re- 
warded also Ctesias and others in a distinguished manner; 
and having found the Caunian who gave him the bottle of wa- 
ter, he raised him from indigence and obscurity to riches and 
honours. There was something of an analogy between his 

Eunishments and the crime. One Arbaces, a Mede, in the 
attle deserted to Cyrus, and after that prince was killed, came 
back to his colours. As he perceived that the man had done 
it rather out of cowardice than any treasonable design, all the 
penalty he laid upon him, was to carry about a naked courte- 
san upon his shoulders a whole day in the market-place. An- 
other, beside deserting, had given it out, that he had killed 
two of the enemy; and, for his punishment, he only ordered 
his tongue to be pierced through with three needles. 

He supposed, and he was desirous of having it pass upon 
the world, that Cyrus fell by his hand. This induced him to 
send valuable presents to Mithridates, who gave him the first 
wound, and to instruct the messengers to say, — "The king 
does you this honour, because you found the furniture of Cy- 
rus' horse, and brought it to him." And when the Carian, 
who gave Cyrus the stroke in his ham that caused his death, 
asked for his reward, he ordered those who gave it him to 
say, — " The king bestows this upon you, because you were 
the second person that brought him good tidings: for Arta- 
syras was the first, and you the next that brought him an ac- 
count of the death of Cyrus." Mithridates went away in si- 
lence, though not without concern. But the unhappy Carian 
could not conquer the common disease of vanity. Elated 
with what he thought his good fortune, and aspiring to things 
above his walk in life, he would not receive his reward for 
tidings, but angrily insisted, and called the gods and men to 
witness, that he, and no other man, killed Cyrus; and that it 
was not just to rob him of the glory. 

The king was so much incensed at this, that he ordered the 
man's head to be cut off*. But his mother Parysatis being 
present, said, — " Let not this villanous Carian go off so: leave 
him to me, and he shall have the reward which his audacious 
tongue deserves." Accordingly, the king gave him up to her, 
and she delivered him to the executioners, with orders to tor- 
ture him for ten days, and then to tear out his eyes, and pour 
molten brass into his ears, till he expired. 

Mithridates also came to a miserable end soon after, through 
his own folly. Being invited one evening to supper, where 
both the eunuchs of the king, and those of his mother were 
present, he went in a robe embroidered with gold, which he 
had received from the king. During the entertainment, Pary- 

ARTAXERXES. 335 

satis' principal eunuch took occasion to say, — "What a beau- 
tiful garment is this, Mithridates, which the king has given 
you! How handsome are those bracelets and that chain! 
How valuable your cimitar! He has certainly made you not 
only a great, but a happy man." Mithridates, who by this 
time was flushed with wine, made answer, — " What are these 
things, Sparamixes? I deserve much greater marks of honour 
than these for the services I rendered the king that day." 
Then Sparamixes replied, with a smile, — " I speak not in the 
least out of envy; but since, according to the Greek proverb, 
there is truth in wine, let me tell you my mind freely, and ask 
you what great matter it is to find a horse's furniture fallen 
off, and bring it to the king?" This he said, not that he was 
ignorant of the real state of the case; but because he wanted 
to lay him open, and saw that the wine had made him talka- 
tive, and taken him off his guard, he studied to pique his va- 
nity. Mithridates, no longer master of himself, said: — " You 
may talk of what furniture and what trifles you please; but I 
tell you plainly, it was by this hand that Cyrus was slain: for 
I did not, like Artagerses, throw my javelin in vain, but 
pierced his temples near the eye, and brought him to the 
ground; and of that wound he died." The rest of the com- 

f>any saw the dreadful fate that would befall Mithridates, and 
ooked with dejected eyes upon the ground; but he who gave 
the entertainment said, — "Let us now attend to our eating 
and drinking; and, adoring the fortune of the king, let such 
matters alone as are too high for us." 

Immediately after the company broke up, the eunuch told 
Parysatis what had been said, and she informed the king. Ar- 
taxerxes, like a person detected, and one who had lost a vic- 
tory out of his hands, was enraged at this discovery: for he 
was desirous of making all the barbarians and Greeks believe, 
that in the several encounters he both gave and received blows; 
and that though he was wounded himself, he killed his adver- 
sary. He therefore condemned Mithridates to the punish- 
ment of the boat. The manner of it is this: — They take two 
boats, which are made to fit to each other, and extend the 
criminal in one of them in a supine posture. Then they turn 
the other upon it, so that the poor wretch's body is covered, 
and only the head and hands are out at one end, and the feet 
at the other. They give him victuals daily, and if he refuses 
to eat, they compel him by pricking him in the eyes. After 
he has eaten, they make him drink a mixture of honey and 
milk, which they pour into his mouth. They spread the same, 
too, over his face, and always turn him so as to have the sun 
full in his eyes; the consequence of which is, that his face is 
Vol. IV. 28 

326 ARTAXERXES. 

covered with swarms of flies. As all the necessary evacua- 
tions of a man who eats and drinks are within the boat, the 
filthiness and corruption engender a quantity of worms, which 
consume his flesh, and penetrate to his entrails. When they 
fir. d that the man is dead, they take off the upper boat, and 
have the spectacle of a carcass whose flesh is eaten away, and 
of numberless vermin clinging to and gnawing the bowels. 
Mithridates, with nr.uch difficulty, found death, after he had 
been consumed in this manner for seventeen days. 

There remained now no other mark for the vengeance of 
Parysatis but Mesabates, one of the king's eunuchs, who cut 
off Cyrus' head and hand. As he took care to give her no 
handle against him, she laid this scheme for his destruction : — 
She was a woman of keen parts in all respects, and in particu- 
lar she played well at dice. The king often played with her 
before the war, and being reconciled to her after it, took the 
same diversion with her. She was even the confidant of his 
pleasures, and scrupled not to assist him in any thing of gal- 
lantry. 

Statira indeed was the object of her hatred, and she let her 
have a very small share of the king's company; for she was 
determined to have the principal interest with him herself. 
One day, finding Artaxerxes wanted something to pass away 
the time, she challenged him to play for a thousand darics, 
and purposely managed her dice so ill that she lost. She paid 
the money immediately, but pretended to be much chagrined, 
and called on him to play again for an eunuch. He consented 
to the proposal, and they agreed each of them to except five of 
their most faithful eunuchs; the winner was to have his choice 
out of the rest. On these conditions they played. The queen, 
who had the affair at heart, exerted all her skill, and being 
favoured besides by the dice, won the eunuch, and pitched 
upon Mesabates, who was not of the number of the excepted. 
He was immediately delivered to her, and before the king sus- 
pected any thing of her intentions, she put him in the hands 
of the executioners, with orders to flay him alive, to fix his 
body on three stakes, and to stretch out his skin by itself. The 
king was highly incensed, and expressed his resentment in 
strong terms: but she only said, in a laughing ironical way: — 
"This is pleasant, indeed, that you must be so angry about 
an old useless eunuch, while I say not a word of my loss of a 
thousand darics.'''' The king, though much concerned at the 
imposition, held his peace. But Statira, who on other occa- 
sions openly censured the practice of the queen-mother, com- 
plained now of her injustice and cruelty in sacrificing to Cyrus 
the eunuchs and other faithful servants of the kins:/ 

ARTAXERXES. 327 

After Tissaphernes* had deceived Clearchus and the othei 
Grecian officers, and, contrary to the treaty and his oaths, put 
them in chains, Ctesias tells us, that Clearchus made interest 
with them for the recovery of a comb. When he had obtained 
it, it seems he was so much pleased with the use of it, that he 
took his ring from his finger, and gave it Ctesias, that it might 
appear as a token of his regard for him to his friends and re- 
lations in Lacedsemon. The device was a dance of the Carya- 
HdesA He adds, that whenever provisions were sent to Clear- 
chus, his fellow-prisoners took most of them for themselves, 
and left him a very small share; but that he corrected this 
abuse, by procuring a larger quantity to be sent to Clear 
chus, and separating the allowance of the others from his. 
All this (according to our author) was done with the consent, 
and by the favour of Parysatis. As he sent every day a gam- 
mon of bacon among the provisions, Clearchus suggested 
to him, that he might easily conceal a small dagger in the 
fleshy part, and begged earnestly that he would do it, that his 
fate might not be left to the cruel disposition of Artaxerxes; 
but through fear of the king's displeasure, he refused. The 
king, however, at the request of his mother, promised upon 
oath not to put Clearchus to death; but afterwards he was per- 
suaded by Statira, to destroy all the prisoners, except Menon. 
On this account he tells us, Parysatis plotted against Statira, 
and resolved to take her off by poison. But it is a great ab- 
surdity in Ctesias to assign so disproportionate a cause. 
Would Parysatis, for the sake of Clearchus, undertake so hor- 
rid and dangerous an enterprise, as that of poisoning the king's 
lawful wife, by whom he had children, and an heir to his 
crown ? It is clear enough that he tells this fabulous tale to 
do honour to the memory of Clearchus: for he adds, that the 
carcases of the other officers were torn in pieces by dogs and 
birds; but that a storm of wind brought a great heap of sand, 
and provided a tomb for Clearchus. Around this heap there 
sprung up a number of palm-trees, which soon grew into an 
admirable grove, and spread their protecting shade over the 
place; so that the king repented greatly of what he had done, 
believing that he had destroyed a man who was a favourite of 
the gods. 

* Tissaphernes, by promises which he did not intend to keep, drew Clear- 
chus to an interview in his tent. He went with four principal officers and 
twenty captains, to wait on the Persian, who put Clearchus and the four 
officers under arrest, and ordered the twenty captains to be cut in pieces. 
Some time after the king commanded Clearchus, and all the four officers, 
except Menon, to be beheaded. — Xenoph. de Exped. Cyri, 1. ii. 

t Carya was a town in Laconia, where there was a temple of Diana. In- 
deed, the whole town was dedicated to Diana and her nymphs. In the court 
before the temple stood a statue of Diana Caryalis, and the Spartan virgins 
kept a yearly festival on which they danced round it. 

gog ARTAXERXES. 

It was, therefore, only from the hatred and jealousy which 
Parysatis had entertained of Statira from the first, that she 
embarked in so cruel a design. She saw that her own power 
with the king depended only on his reverence for her as his 
mother; whereas that of Statira was founded in love, and 
confirmed by the greatest confidence in her fidelity. The point 
she had to carry was great, and she resolved to make one des- 
perate effort. She had a faithful and favourite attendant, 
named Gigis, who, as Dinon tells us, assisted in the affair of 
the poison; but, according to Ctesias, she was only conscious 
to it, and that against her will. The former calls the person 
who provided the poison Melantas; the latter Belitaras. 

These two princesses had, in appearance, forgot their old 
suspicions and animosities, and began to visit and eat at each 
other's table. But they did it with so much distrust and cau- 
tion, as to make it a rule to eat of the same dish, and even of 
the same slices. There is a small bird in Persia which has no 
excrements, the intestines being only filled with fat; on which 
account it is supposed to live upon air and dew: the name of 
it is Rhyntaces. Ctesias writes that Parysatis divided one of 
these birds with a small knife that was poisoned on one side, 
and, taking the wholesomer part herself, gave the other to Sta- 
tira. Dinon, however, affirms, that it was not Parysatis, but 
Melantas, who cut the bird in two, and presented the poisoned 
part to Statira. Be that as it may, she died in dreadful ago- 
nies and convulsions; and was not only sensible herself of the 
cause, but intimated her suspicions to the king, who knew too 
well the savage and implacable temper of his mother: he, 
therefore, immediately made an inquisition into the affair. He 
took her officers and servants that attended at her table, and 
put them to the torture. But she kept Gigis in her own apart- 
ment; and when the king demanded her, refused to give her 
up. At last, Gigis begged of the queen-mother to let her go 
in the night to her own bouse; and the king being informed of 
it, ordered some of his guards to intercept ber. Accordingly, 
she was seized, and condemned to die. The laws of Persia 
have provided this punishment for poisoners: — Their heads 
are placed on a broad stone, and then crushed with another, 
till nothing of the figure remains. In that manner was Gigis 
executed. As for Parysatis, the king did not reproach her 
with her crime, nor punish her any farther, than by sending 
her to Babylon, (which was the place she desired to retire to,) 
and declaring that he would never visit that city while she 
lived. Such was the state of his domestic affairs. 

He was no less solicitous to get the Greeks into his hands, 
who had followed Cyrus into Asia, than he had been to con- 
quer Cyrus himself, and to keep the crown. But he could not 

ARTAXERXES. 329 

succeed.* For though they had lost Cyrus their general, and 
their own officers, yet they forced their way, as it were, out of 
the very palace of Artaxerxes, and made it appear to all the 
world that the Persians and their king had nothing to value 
themselves upon but wealth, luxury, and women; and that 
the rest were mere parade and ostentation. This gave fresh 
spirits to the Greeks, and taught them to despise the barba- 
rians. The Lacedaemonians, in particular, thought it would 
be a great dishonour, if they did not now deliver the Asiatic 
Greeks from servitude, and put an end to the insults of the 
Persians. Their first attempt was under the direction ot 
Thimbro, and the next under that of Dercyllidas: but as those 
generals effected nothing of importance, the conduct of the 
war was given to Agesilaus. That prince immediately passed 
into Asia with his fleet, and soon distinguished himself by his 
vigorous operations; for he defeated Tissaphernes in a pitched 
battle, and brought over several cities. 

By these losses, Artaxerxes understood what was his best 
method of making war. He, therefore, sent Hermocrates the 
Rhodian into Greece with a great quantity of gold, having in- 
structed him to corrupt with it the leading men among the 
states, and to stir up a Grecian war against Lacedaemon. 

Hermocrates acquitted himself so well in his commission, 
that the most considerable cities leagued against Sparta, and 
there were such commotions in Peloponnesus, that the magis- 
trates were forced to recall Agesilaus from Asia. On leaving 
that country, he is reported tohave said to his friends, — " The 
king drives me out of Asia with thirty thousand archers." 
For the Persian money bore the impression of an archer. 

Artaxerxes deprived the Lacedaemonians of the dominion 
of the sea, by means of Conon the Athenian, who acted in 
conjunction with Pharnabazus. For Conon, after he had lost 
the sea-fight at iEgos Potamos, took up his abode in Cyprus; 
not merely to provide for his own safety, but to wait for a 
change of affairs, as mariners wait for the turn of the tide. 
As he saw that his own plan wanted a respectable power to 

* The Greeks were at a vast distance from their own country, in the very 
heart of the Persian empire, surrounded by a numerous army flushed with 
victory, and had no way to return again into Greece, but by forcing their re- 
treat through an immense tract of the enemy's country. But their valour 
and resolution mastered all these difficulties ; and, in spite of a powerful army 
which pursued and harassed them all the way, they made a retreat of two 
thousand three hundred and twenty-five miles, through the provinces belong- 
ing to the Persians, and got safe to the Greek cities on the Euxine sea. 
Clearchus had the conduct of this march at first; but he being cut off by the 
treachery of Tissaphernes, Xenophon was chosen in his room ; and to his 
valour and wisdom it was chiefly owing that at length they got safe into 
G reece. 

Vol. IV. 2 T 28* 

330 ARTAXERXES. 

carry it into execution, and that the Persian power required a 
person of ability to conduct it, he wrote the king an account 
of the measures he had concerted. The messenger was order- 
ed to get the letter delivered into his hands by Zeno tbe Cre- 
tan, who danced in the revels, or by Polycritus the Mendean, 
who was his physician; and in case of their absence, by Ctesias, 
another physician. The letter, we are told, was given to 
Ctesias, and he added to it this paragraph: — "I desire you, sir, 
to send Ctesias to me, for he will be very serviceable in the 
business of the navy." But Ctesias affirms that the king, with- 
out any kind of solicitation, put him upon this service. 

After Artaxerxes had gained, by Conon and Pharnabazus,the 
battle of Cnidus, which stripped the Lacedaemonians of the 
empire of the sea, he drew almost all Greece into his interest; 
insomuch that the celebrated peace, called the Peace of An- 
talcidas, was entirely of his modelling. Antalcidas was a 
Spartan, the son of Leon, and so strongly attached to the 
king, that he prevailed with the Lacedaemonians to give up to 
him all the Greek cities in Asia, and the islands which are 
reckoned amongst its dependencies, to be held as his tributa- 
ries, in virtue of the peace, if we can call that a peace, by 
which Greece was dishonoured and betrayed; which was in- 
deed so vile a bargain, that the most unsuccessful war could 
have terminated in nothing more inglorious. 

Hence it was that Artaxerxes, though, according to Dinon's 
account, he always detested the other Spartans as the most im- 
pudent of men, yet expressed a great regard for Antalcidas 
when he came to his court. One evening he took a chaplet 
of flowers from his head, dipped it in the richest essences, and 
sent it from his table to Antalcidas. All the court was as- 
tonished at such a mark of favour. But there seems to have 
been a propriety in making him so ridiculous a compliment;* 
and he was a fit man to wear such a crown, who could take off 
Leonidas and Callicratides in a dance before the Persians. 
Somebody happening to say in the hearing of Agesilaus, — 
"Alas for Greece! when the Lacedaemonians are turning Per- 
sians;" he corrected him, and said, — "No; the Medes are 
rather turning Lacedaemonians." But the wit of the expres- 
sion did not remove the disgrace of the thing. They lost their 
superiority in Greece by the ill-fought battle of Leuctra, as 
they had before lost their honour by the vile conditions of this 
peace. 

So long as Sparta kept the lead, the king admitted Antalcidas 

* It was a compliment entirely out of character to a Lacedaemonian, who, 
as such, was supposed to value himself upon the simplicity of his manners, 
and on avoiding' all approaches to luxury. 

ARTAXERXES. 33 \ 

to the privileges of hospitality, and called him his friend. But 
when, upon their defeat at Leuctra, the Spartans sent Agesi- 
laus into Egypt to get a supply of money, and Antalcidas went 
upon the same business to the Persian court, Artaxerxes treat- 
ed him with so much neglect and contempt, that between the 
ridicule he suffered from his enemies, and his fear of the re- 
sentment of the ephori, he resolved, on his return, to starve 
himself to death. Ismenias the Theban, and Pelopidas, who 
had lately won the battle of Leuctra, went also to the court of 
Artaxerxes. Pelopidas submitted to nothing unworthy of his 
country or character; but Ismenias being commanded to adore 
the king, purposely let his ring fall from his finger, and then, 
by stooping to take it up, appeared in a posture of adoration. 
Timagoras the Athenian, having given the king some secret 
intelligence in a letter which he sent by a secretary named 
Beluris, he was so much pleased, that he made him a present 
of ten thousand da?*ics. The same Timagoras wanted a sup- 
ply of cow's milk, on account of a languishing disorder, and 
Artaxerxes ordered eighty cows for his use, which were to fol- 
low him wherever he went. He likewise sent him a bed, with 
the necessary coverlets, and Persian servants to make it, be- 
cause he thought the Greeks not skilled in that art; and he or- 
dered him to be carried to the sea-side in a litter, on account 
of his indisposition. To this we may add the allowance for 
his table while he was at court, which was so magnificent, that 
Ostanes, the king's brother, one day said to him, "Timagoras, 
remember this table, for it is not so sumptuous for nothing." 
This was rather reproaching him with his treason, than calling 
for his acknowledgments. And, indeed, Timagoras, on his 
return, was capitally condemned by the Athenians for taking 
bribes. 

Artaxerxes, in some measure, atoned for the causes of sor- 
row he gave the Greeks, by doing one thing that afforded them 
great pleasure: he put Tissaphernes, their most implacable 
enemy, to death. This he did partly at the instigation of Pa- 
rysatis, who added other charges to those alleged against him: 
for he did not long retain his anger, but was reconciled to his 
mother, and sent for her to court; because he saw she had un- 
derstanding and spirit enough to assist in governing the king- 
dom, and there now remained no further cause of suspicions 
and uneasiness between them. From this time she made it a 
rule to please the king in all her measures, and not to oppose 
any of his inclinations, by which she gained an absolute as- 
cendant over him. She perceived that he had a strong passion 
for one of his own daughters, named Atossa. He endeavour- 
ed, indeed, to conceal it on his mother's account, and restrain- 
ed it in public; though, according to some authors, he had 

332 

ARTAXERXES. 

already a private commerce with the princess. Parysatis no 
sooner suspected the intrigue, than she caressed her grand- 
daughter more than ever, and was continually praising to Ar- 
taxerxes both her beauty and her behaviour, in which she 
assured him there was something great and worthy of a crown. 
At last she persuaded him to make her his wife, without re- 
garding the laws and opinions of the Greeks: — "God," said 
she, " has made you a law to the Persians, and a rule of right 
and wrong." Some historians, amongst whom is Heraclides 
of Cumae, affirm that Artaxerxes married not only Atossa, but 
another of his daughters, named Amestris, of whom we shall 
speak by and bye^ His affection for Atossa was so strong, 
that, though she' had a leprosy, which spread itself over her 
body, he was not disgusted at it; but he was daily imploring 
Juno for her, and grasping the dust of her temple; for he paid 
his homage to no other goddess. At the same time, by his 
order, his great officers sent so many offerings to her shrine, 
that the whole space between the palace and the temple, which 
was sixteen furlongs, was filled with gold, silver, purple, and 
fine horses.* 

He sent Pharnabazus and Iphicrates to make war upon the 
Egyptians; but the expedition miscarried, through the dif- 
ference which happened between the generals he employed. 
After this he went in person against the Cadusians, with three 
hundred thousand foot and ten thousand horse. Their coun- 
try is rough and uneven, and covered with perpetual fogs. 
As it produces no corn or fruits by cultivation, the inhabitants, 
a fierce and warlike race of men, live upon wild pears, apples, 
and other things of that kind. He, therefore, insensibly fell 
into great danger and distress; for his troops could find no 
provisions there, nor could thev be supplied from any other 
place. They were forced to kill their beasts of burden and 
eat them; and those became so scarce, that an ass's head was 
sold for sixty drachmas. The king's table itself was ill sup- 
plied; and there remained only a few horses, all the rest hav- 
ing been used for food. 

In this extremity, Tiribazus, who often was in high favour 
on account of his valour, and often degraded for his levity, 
and who, at this very time, was in the greatest disgrace, saved 
the king and his whole army by the following stratagem: — 
The Cadusians having two kings, each had his separate camp. 
Upon this Tiribazus formed his scheme; and after he had 
communicated it to Artaxerxes, went himself to one of those 
princes, and sent his son to the other. Each imposed upon 

* As horses seem a strange present to Jvtno, and are as strangely mixed 
with gold, silver, and purple, Dacier conjectures, that instead of iWov, horse*. 
we should read \i3-uv, precious stones. 

ARTAXERXES. 333 

the king he applied to, by pretending that the other was going 
to send a private embassy to Artaxerxes, to negociate a sepa- 
rate alliance: — " But if you are wise," said they, " you will be 
beforehand with your rival, and we will assist you in the whole 
affair." This argument had its effect; and each, persuaded that 
the other was undermining him out of envy, sent his ambassa- 
dors; the one with Tiribazus, and the other with his son. As 
some time passed before they returned, Artaxerxes began to 
suspect; and there were those who suggested that Tiribazus 
had some traitorous design. The king was extremely deject- 
ed, and, repenting of the confidence he had reposed in him, 
gave ear to all the calumnies of his enemies. But at last Ti- 
ribazus arrived, as did also his son, with the Cadusian ambas- 
sadors, and peace was made with both parties; in consequence 
of which Tiribazus returned with the king in greater esteem 
and authority than ever. During this expedition Artaxerxes 
showed that timidity and effeminacy ought not to be ascribed, 
as they generally are, to the pomp and luxuries of life, but to 
a native meanness and a depraved judgment: for neither the 
gold, the purple, nor the jewels, which the king always wore, 
and which were worth no less than twelve thousand talents, 
hindered him from bearing the same fatigues and hardships 
with the meanest soldier in his army. He took his quiver on 
his back, and his buckler upon his arm, and, quitting his horse, 
would often march foremost upon the most craggy and diffi- 
cult places; insomuch that others found their task much light- 
er, when they saw the strength and alacrity with which he pro- 
ceeded; for he marched above two hundred furlongs a-day. 

At last he arrived at one of his own palaces, where there 
were gardens and parks of great extent and beauty, though 
the country around it was naked and barren. As the weather 
was exceedingly cold, he permitted his men to cut wood out 
of his own parks, without sparing either pine or cypress: and 
when the soldiers were loth to touch trees of such size and 
beauty, he took an axe in his own hand, and laid it to the finest 
tree amongst them. After which they cut them down without 
scruple, and having made a number of fires, passed the night 
with great satisfaction. 

He found, however, on his arrival at his capital, that he had 
lost many brave men, and almost all his horses; and imagining 
that he was despised for his losses, and the ill success of the 
expedition, he became suspicious of his grandees. Many of 
them he put to death in anger, and more out of fear. For fear 
is the most sanguinary principle a tyrant can act from; 
courage, on the contrary, is merciful, mild, and unsuspicious. 
Thus, the most timorous animals are the hardest to be tamed; 

334 ARTAXERXES. 

but the more generous, having less suspicion, because they 
have less fear, fly not the caresses and society of men. 

Artaxerxes being now far advanced in years, observed his 
sons making parties for the crown amongst his friends and the 
rest of the nobility. The more equitable part were for his 
leaving it to his eldest son Darius, as he had received it from 
his father in the same right. But his younger son Ochus, 
who was an active man and of a violent spirit, had also a con- 
siderable interest among the grandees. Besides, he hoped to 
gain his father through Atossa; for he paid his court to her, 
and promised to make her the partner of his throne, upon the 
death of Artaxerxes. Nay, it was said that he had already 
private familiarities with her. Artaxerxes, though he was 
ignorant of this circumstance, resolved to cut off the hopes of 
Ochus at once, lest, following the daring steps of his uncle 
Cyrus, he should involve the kingdom again in civil wars. 
He, therefore, declared Darius his successor, who was now 
twenty-five* years old, and permitted him to wear the point 
of his turbant erect, as a mark of royalty. 

As it is customary in Persia for the heir to ask a favour of 
him that declared him such, which, if possible, is always grant- 
ed, Darius asked for Aspasia, who had been the favourite mis- 
tress of Cyrus, and was now one of the king's concubines. She 
was a native of Phocea in Ionia, and her parents, who were 
above the condition of slaves, had given her a good education. 
One evening she was introduced to Cyrus at supper with the 
other women. They approached him without scruple, and re- 
ceived his jokes and caresses with pleasure; but Aspasia stood 
by in silence; and when Cyrus called her, she refused to go. 
Perceiving that the chamberlains were about to compel her, 
she said, — " Whoever lays hands upon me shall repent it." 
Upon which the company looked upon her as an unpolished 
creature; but Cvrus was pleased, and said, with a smile, to 
the person who brought the women, — "Do you not see, that 
of all you have provided, this only has generous and virtuous 
sentiments!" From this moment he attached himself to her, 
loved her most of all his concubines, and called her Aspasia 
the ivise. When Cyrus fell in battle, she was taken amongst 
the plunder of his camp. 

Artaxerxes was much concerned at his son's request ; for 
the barbarians are so extremely jealous of their women, that 
capital punishment is inflicted, not only on the man who 
speaks to, or touches one of the king's concubines, but on him 

* In the printed text it is fifty; but one of the manuscripts gives us Ttiiunoi 
xai fixorov. instead of ttevttixojov. Besides, Plutarch calls him a young man a 
little below. 

t CUaris. 

ARTAXEE.XES. 335 

who approaches or passes their chariots on the road. And 
though, in compliance with the dictates of his passion, he had 
made Atossa his wife contrary to law, he kept three hundred 
and sixty concubines, all women of the greatest beauty. How- 
ever, when Darius demanded Aspasia, he declared her free, 
and said, — "She might go with him if she pleased ; but he 
would do no violence to her inclinations." Accordingly, As- 
pasia was sent for, and contrary to the king's expectation, 
made choice of Darius. He gave her up to him, indeed, be- 
cause he was obliged to it by the law; but he soon took her 
away and made her a priestess of Diana at Ecbatana, whom 
they call *driitis* that she might pass the remainder of her life 
in chastity. This he thought no severe revenge upon his son, 
but a pleasant way of chastising his presumption. But Darius 
highly resented the affront; whether it was the charms of As- 
pasia had made a deep impression upon him, or whether he 
thought himself insulted and ridiculed by this proceeding. 

Tiribazus seeing how much he was offended, endeavoured 
to exasperate him still more. This he did from a fellow-feel- 
ing; for he had suffered an injury much of the same kind. 
The king, having several daughters, promised to give Apama 
to Pharnabazus, Rhodogune to Orontes, and Amestris to Ti- 
ribazus. He kept his word with the two first, but deceived 
Tiribazus; for, instead of giving Amestris to him, he mar- 
ried her himself; promising at the same time that he should 
have his youngest daughter Atossa; but he became enamoured 
of her too, and married her, as we have already mentioned. 
This treatment extremely incensed Tiribazus, who had, in- 
deed, nothing steady in his disposition, but was wild and irre- 
gular. One while successful, and upon a footing with the 
greatest men in the court, another while unacceptable to the 
king, and sinking into disgrace, he bore no change of fortune 
with propriety. If he was in favour, his vanity was unsup- 
portable ; if in disgrace, instead of being humble and quiet, 
he had recourse to violence and ferocity. 

His conversing with the young prince was, therefore, adding 
flame to fire: — "What avails it," said he, " to have the point 
of your turban advanced, if you seek not to advance your au- 
thority? Nothing can be more absurd than your thinking your- 
self secure of the succession, while your brother is privately 
forwarding his interest by means of the women, and your 
father is so very foolish and unsteady. He who could break 
one of the most sacred laws of the Persians, for the sake of an 
insignificant Grecian woman, is certainly not to be depended 

* Pausanias says, there was a temple of Diana Anaitis in Lydia. But Justin 
tells us, that Artaxerxes made Aspasia one of the priestesses of the sun. 

336 ARTAXERXES. 

upon in more important engagements. The case is quite dif- 
ferent between you and Ochus, as to the event of the competi- 
tion : if Ochus does not obtain the crown, none will hinder him 
from living happily in a private station; but you, who have 
been declared king, must either reign or die." On this occa- 
sion was verified that observation of Sophocles, — 

Swift in its march 

Is evil counsel. 

The road which leads us to what we desire is, indeed, smooth, 
and of an easy descent: and the desires of most men are vi- 
cious, because they have never known or tried the enjoyments 
of virtue. The lustre of such an imperial crown, and Darius' 
fear of his brother, furnished Tiribazus with other arguments; 
but the goddess of beauty contributed her share towards per- 
suading him, by putting him in mind of the loss of Aspasia. 

He gave himself up, therefore, entirely to Tiribazus, and 
many others soon entered into the conspiracy. But before it 
could be carried into execution, an eunuch gave the king in- 
formation of it, and of all the measures that were taken; for 
he had got perfect intelligence that they designed to enter his 
chamber in the night, and kill him in his bed. 

Artaxerxes thought it would be great imprudence either to 
slight the information, and lay himself open to such danger, 
or to credit it without farther proof. The method he took was 
this : — He ordered the eunuch to join Darius and his adherents, 
and assist at all their councils; and in the mean time broke a 
door through the wall behind his bed, which he concealed with 
the tapestry. When the time came which the eunuch informed 
him of, he placed himself upon his bed, and remained there 
till he had a sight of the faces of the conspirators, and could 
perfectly distinguish each of them. But when he saw them 
draw their swords, and advance towards him, he pulled back 
the tapestry, retreated into the inner room, and after he had 
bolted the door, alarmed the palace. The assassins, seeing 
themselves discovered, and their designs disappointed, imme- 
diately took to flight, and desired Tiribazus to do the same, 
because he must certainly have been observed. While he 
lingered, the guards came and laid hold of him; but he killed 
many of them, and it was with difficulty that he was despatch- 
ed at last by a javelin thrown at a distance. 

Darius was taken, together with his children, and brought 
to answer for his crime before the judges which the king ap- 
pointed. The king did not think proper to assist at the trial 
in person, but directed others to lay the charge against his son, 
and his notaries were to take down separately the opinion of 
each judge. As they all gave it unanimously for death, the 

ARTAXERXES. 337 

officers took Darius, and led him into an adjacent prison. But 
when the executioner came, with the instrument in his hand 
which is used in beheading the capital convicts, he was seized 
with horror at the sight of Darius, and drew back towards the 
door, as having neither ability nor courage to lay violent hands 
upon his king. But the judges who stood at the door, urging 
him to do his office, with menaces of instant punishment if 
he did not comply, he returned, and, seizing Darius by the 
hair, threw him on the ground, and cut off his head. Some 
say the cause was tried in presence of the king; and that Da- 
rius, after he was convicted by indubitable proof, fell on his 
face and begged for mercy; but Artaxerxes, rising in great 
anger, drew his cimitar, and pursued his stroke till he laid 
him dead at his feet. They add, that after this, he returned to 
his palace, and having paid his devotions to the sun, said to 
those who assisted at the ceremony: — " My Persians, you 
may now return in triumph, and tell your fellow-subjects, that 
the great Oromazes* has taken vengeance on those who formed 
the most impious and execrable designs against their sove- 
reign." Such was the end of the conspiracy. 

Ochus now entertained very agreeable hopes, and was en- 
couraged besides by Atossa; but ne had still some fear of his 
remaining legitimate brother Ariaspes, and of his natural 
brother Arsames. Not that Ochus had so much to apprehend 
from Ariaspes, merely because he was older, but the Persians 
were desirous of having him succeed to the throne on account 
of his mildness, his sincerity, and his humane disposition. 
As for Arsames, he had the character of a wise prince, and 
was the particular favourite of his father. This was no secret 
to Ochus. However, he planned the destruction of both these 
brothers of his ; and being of an artful, as well as sanguinary 
turn, he employed his cruelty against Arsames, and his art 
against Ariaspes. To the latter he privately sent some of the 
king's eunuchs and friends with frequent accounts of severe 
and menacing expressions of his father's, as if he had resolved 
to put him to a cruel and ignominious death. As these per- 
sons came daily to tell him in confidence, that some of these 
threats were upon the point of being put in execution, and the 
others would not be long delayed, he was so terrified, and fell 
into such a melancholy and desponding way, that he prepared 
a poisonous draught, and drank it, to deliver himself from the 

burden of life. ,. >• j • 

The king being informed of the manner of his death, sin- 
cerely lamented him, and had some suspicion of the cause, 

* The Persians worshipped Oromazes as the author of Good, and Arima- 
-nius as the author of Evil. 

Vol. IV. 2 U 29 

ggg ARTAXERXES. 

but could not examine into it thoroughly, on account of hia 
great age. 

However, Arsames now became dearer to him than ever, 
and it was easy to see that the king placed an entire confidence 
in him, and communicated to him his most secret thoughts. 
Ochus, therefore, would not defer his enterprise longer, but 
employed Harpates, the son of Tiribazus, to kill Arsames. 
Artaxerxes, whom time had brought to the very verge of life, 
when he had this additional stroke in the fate of Arsames, 
could not make much more struggle; his sorrow and regret 
soon brought him to the grave. He lived ninety-four years, 
and reigned sixty-two.* He had the character of a prince 
who governed with lenity, and loved his people. But per- 
haps the behaviour of his successor might contribute not a 
little to his reputation; for Ochus was the most cruel and san- 
guinary of princes. 

* Diodorus Siculus says, that he reigned only forty-three years. 

THE 

LIFE OF ARATUS. 

The philosopher Chrysippus, my dear Polycrates, seems to 
have thought the ancient proverb not quite justifiable; and, 
therefore, he delivered it, not as it really is, but what he thought 
it should be: — 

Who but a happy son will praise his sire? 

Dionysidorus the Troezenian, however, corrects him, and gives 
it right: — 

Who but unhappy sons will praise their sires? 

He says, the proverb was made to silence those who, having 
no merit of their own, dress themselves up in the virtues of 
their ancestors, and are lavish in their praises. And those in 
tvhom the virtues of their sires shine in congenial beauty, 
to make use of Pindar's expression; who, like you, form their 
conduct after their brightest patterns in their families, may 
think it a great happiness to remember the most excellent of 
their ancestors, and often to hear or speak of them: for they 
assume not the honour of other men's virtues for want of merit 
in their own, but uniting their great actions to those of their 
progenitors, they praise them as the authors of their descent, 
and the models of their lives. For which reason, when I have 
written the Life of Aratus, your countryman, and one of your 
ancestors, I shall send it to you, who reflect no dishonour 
upon him either in point of reputation or power. Not that I 
doubt your having informed yourself of his actions from the 
first, with all possible care and exactness; but I do it, that 
your sons, Polycrates and Pythocles, may form themselves 
upon the great exemplars in their own family, sometimes hear- 
ing and sometimes reading what it becomes them well to imi- 
tate : for it is the self-admirer, not the admirer of virtue, thai 
thinks himself superior to others. 

After the harmony of the pure Doric,* I mean the aristo- 
cracy, was broken in Sicyon, and seditions took place through 
the ambition of the demagogues, the city continued a long time 
in a distempered state. It only changed one tyrant for ano- 
ther, till Cleon was slain, and the administration committed to 
Timoclidas and Clinias, persons of the greatest reputation and 

* There was a gravity, but at the same time great perfection, in the Do 
nan music. 

340 AliATUS. 

authority amongst the citizens. The commonwealth seemed 
to be in some degree re-established when Timoclidas died. 
A.bantidas, the son of Paseas, taking that opportunity to set 
himself up tyrant, killed Clinias, and either banished or put to 
death his friends and relations. He sought also for his son 
Aratus, who was only seven years old, with a design to des- 
patch him. But, in tbe confusion that was in his house when 
his father was slain, the boy escaped among those that fled, 
and wandered about the city, in fear and destitute of help, till 
he happened to enter, unobserved, the house of a woman 
named Soso, who was sister to Abantidas, and had been mar- 
ried to Prophantus, the brother of Clinias. As she was a per- 
son of generous sentiments, and persuaded, besides, that it 
was by the direction of some deity that the child had taken 
refuge with her, she concealed him in one of her apartments 
till night, and then sent him privately to Argos. 

Aratus having thus escaped so imminent a danger, immedi- 
ately conceived a violent and implacable hatred for tyrants, 
which increased as he grew up. He was educated by the 
friends of his family at Argos in a liberal manner; and as he 
was vigorous and robust, he took to gymnastic exercises, and 
succeeded so well as to gain the prize in the five several sorts.* 
Indeed, in his statues there is an athletic look ; and amidst 
the strong sense and majesty expressed in his countenance 
we may discover something inconsistent with the voracity and 
mattock of the wrestlers.! Hence perhaps it was that he cul- 
tivated his powers of eloquence less than became a statesman. 
He might indeed be a better speaker than some suppose; anil 
there are those who judge, from his Commentaries, that he 
certainly was so, though they were hastily written, and at- 
tempted nothing beyond common language. 

Some time after the escape of Aratus, Dinias and Aristotle 
the logician formed a design against Abantidas, and they easily 
found an opportunity to kill him, when he attended, and some- 
times joined in their disputations in the public halls, which 
they had insensibly drawn him into for that very purpose. 
Paseas, the father of Abantidas, then seized the supreme 
power; but he was assassinated by Nicocles, who took his 
place, and was the next tyrant. We are told that there was 
a perfect likeness between this Nicocles and Periander the son 
of Cypselus ; as Orontes the Persian resembled Alcmoeon the 

* The five exercises of the Penlathlum (as we have already observed) 
were running, leaping, throwing the dart, boxing, and wrestling. 

t They used to breakup the ground with the mattock, by way of exercise, 
to improve their strength. 

Kcoxet' fx10* cxciiravav T£, xai eihiti tsto3-i pia\a. 

Theocrit 

ARATUS. 341 

son of Amphiaraus, and a Lacedaemonian youth the grea 
Hector. Myrtilas informs us, that the young man was crush- 
ed to death by the multitudes who came to see him, when that 
resemblance was known. 

Nicocles reigned four months, during which time he did a 
thousand injuries to the people, and was near losing the city 
to the iEtolians, who formed a scheme to surprise it. Aratus 
was by this time approaching to manhood, and great attention 
was paid him on account of his high birth, and his spirit, in 
which there was nothing little or unenterprising, and yet it 
was under the correction of a gravity and solidity of judgment 
much beyond his years. The exiles, therefore, considered 
him as their principal resource; and Nicocles was not regard- 
less of his motions, but by his private agents observed the 
measures he was taking. Not that he expected he would em- 
bark in so bold and dangerous an enterprise as he did; but he 
suspected his applications to the princes who were the friends 
of his father. Indeed, Aratus began in that channel ; but when 
he found that Antigonus, notwithstanding his promises, put. 
him off from time to time, and that his hopes from Egypt and 
Ptolemy were too remote, he resolved to destroy the tyrant 
without any foreign assistance. 

The first persons to whom he communicated his intentions 
were Aristomachus and Ecdelus. Aristomachus was an exile 
from Sicyon, and Ecdelus an Arcadian banished from Mega- 
lopolis. The latter was a philosopher, who in speculation 
never lost sight of practice, for he had studied at Athens under 
Arcesilaiis the academician.* As these readily accepted his 
proposal, he applied to the other exiles; a few of whom joined 
him because they were ashamed to give up so promising a 
hope; but the greatest part believed it was only Aratus' inex- 
perience^ that made him think of so bold an attempt, and en- 
deavoured to prevent his proceeding. 

While he was considering how to seize some post in the 
territories of Sicyon, from whence he might prosecute hostili- 
ties against the tyrant, a man of Sicyon arrived at Argos, who 
had escaped out of prison. He was brother to Xenocles, one 
of the exiles; and being introduced by him to Aratus, he in- 
formed him, that the part of the wall which he had got over, 
was almost level with the ground on the inside, as it joined 
upon a high rocky part of the city; and that on the outside it 
was not so high but that it might be scaled. Upon this intel- 
ligence, Aratus sent two of his servants, Sceuthas and Technon, 

* Arcesilaiis was the disciple of Crantor, and had established the middle 
Academy. 
i He was not yet twenty years old. 

29* 

342 ARATUS. 

along; with Xenocles, to reconnoitre the wall; for he was re- 
solved, if he could do it secretly, to hazard all upon one great 
effort, rather than lengthen out the war, and publicly engage 
with a tyrant, when he had no resources but those of a private 
man. 

Xenocles and his companions, after they had taken the 
height of the wall, and reported at their return, that it was 
neither impracticable nor difficult, but that it was dangerous 
to attempt it on account of some dogs kept by a gardener, 
which were little indeed, but at the same time extremely fierce 
and furious. Aratus, however, immediately set about the work. 
It was easy to provide arms without suspicion ; for almost 
every body went armed, by reason of the frequent robberies 
and the incursions of one people into the territories of another. 
And as to the scaling ladders, Euphranor, who was one of the 
exiles, and a carpenter by trade, made them publicly ; his busi- 
ness screening him from suspicion. Each of his friends in 
Argos, who had no great number of men that he could com- 
mand, furnished him with ten : he armed thirty of his own ser- 
vants, and hired some few soldiers of Xenophilus, who was 
chief captain of a band of robbers. To the latter it was given 
out that the design of their march to Sicyon was to carry off 
the king's stud; and several of them were sent before by dif- 
ferent ways to the tower of Polygnotus, with orders to wait 
for him there. Caphesias was likewise sent with four others 
in a travelling dress. These were to go in the evening to the 
gardener's, and pretending to be travellers, get a lodging there: 
after which they were to confine both him and his dogs: for 
that part of the wall was not accessible any other way. The 
ladders being made to take in pieces, were packed up in corn- 
chests, and sent before in waggons prepared for that purpose. 

In the mean time, some of the tyrant's spies arrived at Ar- 
gos, and it was reported they were skulking about to watch the 
motions of Aratus. Next morning, therefore, Aratus appeared 
early with his friends in the market-place, and talked with them 
for some time. He then went to the Gymnasium, and after he 
had anointed himself, took with him some young men from 
the wrestling-ring, who used to be of his parties of pleasure, 
and returned home. In a little time his servants were seen in 
the market-place, some carrying chaplets of flowers, some buy- 
ing flambeaux, and some in discourse with the women who 
used to sing and play at entertainments. These manoeuvres 
deceived the spies. They laughed, and said to each other, — 
" Certainly nothing can be more dastardly than a tyrant, since 
Nicocles, who is master of so strong a city, and armed with so 
much power, lives in fear of a young man, who wastes the pit- 
tance he has to subsist on in exile, in drinking and revelling 

ARATUS. 343 

even in the day-time." After these false reasonings they re- 
tired. 

Aratus, immediately after he had made his meal, set out for 
the tower of Polygnotus, and when he had joined the soldiers 
there, proceeded to Nemea, where he disclosed his real inten- 
tions to his whole company. Having exhorted them to behave 
like brave men, and promised them great rewards, he gave 
'propitious JipolW for the word, and then led them forwards 
towards Sicyon, governing his march according to the motion 
of the moon, sometimes quickening and sometimes slackening 
his pace, so as to have the benefit of her light by the way, and 
to come to the garden by the wall just after she was set. There 
Caphesias met him, and informed him that the dogs were let 
out before he arrived, but that he had secured the gardener. 
Most of the company were greatly dispirited at this account, 
and desired Aratus to quit his enterprise; but he encouraged 
them by promising to desist, if the dogs should prove very 
troublesome. Then he ordered those who carried the ladders 
to march before, under the conduct of Ecdelus and Mnasi- 
theus, and himself followed softly. The dogs now began to 
run about and bark violently at Ecdelus and his men; never- 
theless, they approached the wall, and planted their ladders 
safe. But as the foremost of them were mounting, the officer 
who was to be relieved by the morning-guard passed that way 
at the sound of the bell, with many torches and much noise. 
Upon this the men laid themselves close to the ladders, and 
escaped the notice of this watch without much difficulty; but 
when the other which was to relieve it came up, they were in 
the utmost danger. However, that too passed by without ob- 
serving them; after which, Mnasitheus and Ecdelus mounted 
the wall first, and having secured the way both to the right and 
left, they sent Technon to Aratus, to desire him to advance as 
fast as possible. 

It was no great distance from the garden to the wall, and to 
a tower in which was placed a great hunting dog to alarm the 
guard. But whether he was naturally drowsy, or had wearied 
himself the day before, he did not perceive their entrance. 
But the gardener's dogs awakening him by barking below, he 
began to growl; and when Aratus' men passed, by the tower 
he barked out, so that the whole place resounded with the 
noise. Then the sentinel, who kept watch opposite to the 
tower, called aloud to the huntsman, and asked him, — "Whom 
the dog barked at so angrily, or whether any thing new had 
happened?" The huntsman answered from the tower, — "That 
there was nothing extraordinary; and that the dog was only 
disturbed at the torches of. the guards and the noise of the 
bell." This encouraged Aratus' soldiers more than any thing; 

344 ARATUS. 

for they imagined that the huntsman concealed the truth, he 
cause he had a secret understanding with their leader; ana 
that there were many others in the town who would promote 
the design. But when the rest of their companions came to 
scale the wall, the danger increased. It appeared to be a long 
affair, because the ladders shook and swung extremely if they 
did not mount them softly, and one by one; and the time press- 
ed, for the cocks began to crow. The country people, too, who 
kept the market, were expected to arrive every moment. Ara- 
tus, therefore, hastened up himself, when only forty of his 
company were upon the wall; and when a few more had join- 
ed him from below, he put himself at the head of his men, 
and marched immediately to the tyrant's palace, where the 
main guard was kept, and where the mercenaries passed the 
night under arms. Coming suddenly upon them, he took 
them prisoners without killing one man; and then sent to his 
friends in the town to invite them to come and join him. 
They ran to him from all quarters; and day now appearing, 
the theatre was filled with a crowd of people who stood in 
suspense; for they had only heard a rumour, and had no cer- 
tainty of what was doing, till a herald came and proclaimed 
it in these words: — "Aratus, the son of Clinias, calls the citi- 
zens to liberty." 

Then persuaded that the day they had long expected was 
come, they rushed in multitudes to the palace of the tyrant, 
and set fire to it. The flame was so strong that it was seen as 
far as Corinth, and the Corinthians, wondering what might be 
the cause, were upon the point of going to their assistance. 
Nicocles escaped out of the city by some subterranean con- 
duits; and the soldiers having helped the Sicyonians to extin- 
guish the fire, plundered his palace. Nor did Aratus hinder 
them from taking this booty; but the rest of the wealth, which 
the several tyrants had amassed, he bestowed upon the citi- 
zens. 

There was not so much as one man killed or wounded in 
this action, either of Aratus' party or of the enemy; fortune 
so conducting the enterprise as not to sully it with the blood 
of one citizen. Aratus recalled eighty persons who had been 
banished by Nicocles, and of those that had been expel 
led by the former tyrants not less than five hundred. The 
latter had long been forced to wander from place, to place, 
some of them full fifty years; consequently, most of them 
returned in a destitute condition. They were now, indeed, 
restored to their ancient possessions; but their going into 
houses and lands which had found new masters, laid Aratus 
under great difficulties. Without, he saw Antigonus envying 
the liberty which the city had recovered, and laying schemes 

ARATUS. 345 

to enslave it again, and within he found nothing hut faction 
and disorder. He, therefore, judged it best, in this critical 
situation, to join it to the Achaean league. As the people of 
Sicyon were Dorians, they had no objection to being called a 
party to the Achaean community, or to their form of govern- 
ment.* It must be acknowledged, indeed, that the Achaeans 
at that time were no very great or powerful people. Their 
towns were generally small, their lands neither extensive nor 
fertile; and they had no harbours on their coasts, the sea for 
the most part entering the land in rocky and impracticable 
creeks. Yet none gave a better proof than this people, that 
the power of Greece is invincible, while good order and har- 
mony prevail amongst her members, and she has an able ge- 
neral to lead her armies. In fact, these very Achaeans, though 
but inconsiderable in comparison of the Greeks, in their flou 
rishing times, or to speak more properly, not equalling in 
their whole community the strength of one respectable city in 
the period we are upon, yet, by good counsels and unanimity, 
and by hearkening to any man of superior virtue, instead of 
envying his merit, not only kept themselves free amidst so 
many powerful states and tyrants, but saved great part of 
Greece, or rescued it from chains. 

As to his character, Aratus had sometning very popular in 
his behaviour; he had a native greatness of mind, and was 
more attentive to the public interest than to his own. He was 
an implacable enemy to tyrants; but with respect to others, 
he made the good of his country the sole rule of his friendship 
or opposition: so that he seems ratlfcr to have been a mild 

* The Dutch republic much resembles it. The Achaeans, indeed, at first 
had two Prcetors, whose office it was both to preside in the diet, and to com- 
mand the army; but it was soon thought advisable to reduce them to one. 
There is this difference, too, between the Dutch Stadtholder and the Achaean 
Praetor, that the latter did not continue two years successively in his employ- 
ment. But in other respects there is a striking similarity between the states 
of Holland and those of the Achaean league; and if the Achaeans could have 
become a maritime power like the Dutch, their power would probably have 
been much more extensive and lasting than it was. 

All the cities subject to the Achaean league were governed by the great 
council, or general assembly of the whole nation, which was assembled twice 
a year, in the spring and autumn. To this assembly, or diet, each of the con- 
federate cities had a right to send a number of deputies, who were elected in 
their respective cities by a plurality of voices. In these meetings they enact- 
ed laws, disposed of the vacant employments, declared war, made peace, con- 
cluded alliances, and, in short, provided for all the principal occasions of the 
commonwealth. 

Beside the Prcclor, they had ten great officers called Demiurgi, chosen by 
the general assembly out of the most eminent and experienced persons 
amongst the states. It was their office to assist the praetor with their advice. 
He was to propose nothing to the general assembly but what had been pre- 
viously approved by their body, and in his absence the whole management 
of civil affairs devolved upon them. 

Vol. IV. 2 X 

3-16 ARATUS. 

and moderate enemy than a zealous friend ; his regards or 
aversions to particular men varying as the occasions of the 
commonwealth dictated. In short, nations and great commu- 
nities, with one voice, re-echoed the declaration of the assem- 
hlies and theatres, that Aratus loved none but good men.* 
With regard to open wars and pitched battles, he was indeed 
diffident and timorous; but in gaining a point by stratagem, 
in surprising cities and tyrants, there could not be an abler 
man. 

To this cause we must assign it, that after he had exerted 
great courage, and succeeded in enterprises that were looked 
upon as desperate; through too much fear and caution he gave 
up others that were more practicable, and not of less import- 
ance: for as amongst animals there are some that can see very 
clearly in the night, and yet are next to bliftJ in the day-time, 
the dryness of the eye, and the subtilty of its humours, not 
suffering them to bear the light; so there is in man a kind of 
courage and understanding, which is easily disconcerted in 
open clangers and encounters, and yet resumes a happy bold- 
ness i#n secret enterprises. The reason of this inequality in 
men of parts otherwise excellent, is their wanting the advan- 
tages of philosophy. Virtue is in them the product of nature, 
unassisted by science, like the fruits of the forest, which come 
without the least cultivation. "t Of this there are many exam- 
ples to be found. 

After Aratus had engaged himself and his city in the Achaean 
league, he served in the cavalry, and the generals highly es- 
teemed him for his rea^< obedience: for though he had con- 
tributed so much to the common cause by his name, and by 
the forces of Sicyon, yet the Achaean commander, whether of 
Dima or Tritta, or some more inconsiderable town, found 
him always as tractable as the meanest soldier. 

When the king of Egypt made him a present of twenty-five 
talents, he received it indeed, but laid out the whole upon his 

■* Ojxovoiat fS-vcov xai xoivcovias tto\iwv, xai cruv£i5pi(0 xa'i SsaTps |i£v afpavnv atpitvTos, 'en 
bJevoj au'l Si tuv xa\uv eyas™. The former translator has given as a good 
sentiment, but the original will not bear it : — " Of all those things which are 
esteemed most excellent, none gave him so great a delight as concord be- 
tween nations, associations of cities, and unanimity in public assemblies." 
He seems to have read aUs without the -A that follows. In that case, indeed, 
it would be capable of his construction ; but we have no authority for such 
an omission. We will not say, however, that his conjecture is wrong, or that 
ax\a has not been changed into au' n; for it certainly was Aratus' principal 
object to associate cities in one community, and promote harmony amongst 
the Greeks. 

t This character of Aratus is perfectly agreeable to what Polybius has 
given us in his fourth book. Two great masters will draw with equal excel- 
lence, though their manner must be different. 

t One of the, manuscripts gives us aUa \. 

ARATUS. 347 

fellow-citizens; relieving the necessitous with part of it, and 
ransoming such as were prisoners with the rest. 

But the exiles whom Aratus had recalled would not be sa 
tisfied with any thing less than the restitution of their estates, 
and gave the present possessors so much trouble, that the city 
was in danger of being ruined by sedition. In this extremity 
he saw no resource except in the generosity of Ptolemy, and 
therefore determined to take a voyage to Egypt, and apply to 
him for as much money as would reconcile all parties. Ac- 
cordingly, he set sail for Methone, above the promontory of 
Malea, in hopes of taking the shortest passage. — But a con 
trary wind sprung up, and the seas ran so high, that the pilot, 
unable to bear up against them, changed his course, and with 
much difficulty got into Adria,* a town which was in the 
enemy's hands, for Antigonus had a garrison there. To avoid 
this imminent danger he landed, and with only one friend, 
named Timanthes, making his way as far as possible from the 
sea, sought for shelter in a place well covered with wood, in 
which he and his companions spent a very disagreeable night. 
Soon after he had left the ship, the governor of the fort came 
and inquired for him; but he was deceived by Aratus' ser- 
vants, who were instructed to say he had made off in another 
vessel to Euboea. However, he detained the ship and servants 
as a lawful prize. Aratus spent some days in this distressful 
situation, where one while he looked out to reconnoitre the 
coast, and another while kept himself concealed; but at last, 
by good fortune, a Roman ship happened to put in near the 
place of his retreat. The ship was bound for Syria, and Aratus 
prevailed upon the master to land him in Caria. But he had 
equal dangers to combat at sea in this as in his former passages. 
And when he was in Caria he had a voyage to take to Egypt, 
which he found a very long one. Upon his arrival, however, 
he was immediately admitted to audience by the king, who 
had long been inclined to serve him, on account of the paint- 
ings which he used to compliment him with from Greece. 
For Aratus, who had a taste for these things, was always col- 
lecting for him the pieces of the best masters, particularly those 
of Pamphilus and Melanthus.t For Sicyon was famed for 

* Palmerius conjectures that we should read Andria, which he supposes to 
be a town in the island of Andros. He confirms it with this argument, that 
Aratus is said to have passed from hence to Euboea, which is opposite to that 
island. 

t Two of the most celebrated painters of all antiquity. Pamphilus had 
been brought up under Eupompus, and was the master of Apelles and Me- 
lanthus. The capital pieces of Pamphilus were, a Brotherhood, a Battle, 
the Victory of the Athenians, and Ulysses in his vessel taking leave of Ca- 
lypso. Pliny tells us, that the whole wealth of a city could scarce purchase 
one of the pieces of Melanthua. 

g48 ARATUS. 

the cultivation of the arts, particularly the art of painting, 
and it was believed that there only the ancient elegance was 
preserved without the least corruption. Hence it was that 
the great Apelles, at a time when he was much admired, went 
to Sicyon, and gave the painters a talent, not so much for any 
improvement, as for the reputation of having been of their 
school. In consequence of which, Aratus, when he restored 
Sicyon to liberty, and destroyed the portraits of the tyrants, 
hesitated a long time on coming to that of Aristratus; for it 
was the united work of the disciples of Melanthus, who had 
represented him standing in a chariot of victory, and the pen- 
cil of Apelles had contributed to the performance, as we are 
informed by Polemo the geographer. 

The piece was so admirable that Aratus could not avoid 
feeling the art that was displayed in it; but his hatred of ty- 
rants soon overruled that feeling, and he ordered it to be de- 
faced. Nealces the painter,* who was honoured with his 
friendship, is said to have implored him with tears to spare 
that piece: and when he found him inflexible, said, — " Aratus, 
continue your war with tyrants, but not with every thing that 
belongs to them. Spare at least the chariot and the victory, 
and I'shall soon make Aristratus vanish." Aratus gave his 
consent, and Nealces defaced the figure of Aristratus, but did 
not venture to put any thing in its place except a palm-tree. 
We are told, however, that there was still a dim appearance 
of the feet of Aristratus at the bottom of the chariot. 

This taste for painting had already recommended Aratus to 
Ptolemy, and his conversation gained so much farther upon 
him, that he made him a present of a hundred and fifty talents 
for the city; forty of which he sent with him on his return to 
Peloponnesus, and he remitted the rest in the several portions 
and at the times that he had fixed. It was a glorious thing to 
apply so much money to the use of his fellow-citizens, at a 
time when it was common to see generals and demagogues, 
for much smaller sums which they received of the kings, to 
oppress, enslave, and betray to them the cities where they were 
born. But it was still more glorious by this money to recon- 
cile the poor to the rich, to secure the commonwealth, and es- 
tablish harmony amongst all ranks of people. 

His moderation in the exercise of the great power he was 
vested with, was truly admirable: for, being appointed sole 
arbitrator of the claims of the exiles, he refused to act alone, 

* Nealces was a painter of great reputation. One of his pieces was the 
naval fight between the Egyptians and the Persians. As the action was upon 
the Nile, whose colour is like that of the sea, he distinguished it by a sym- 
bol : he drew an ass drinking on the shore, and a crocodile in the act to 
spring upon him. — Plin. 1. xxxv. c. ii. 

ARATUS. 349 

and joined fifteen of the citizens in the commission; with 
whose assistance, after much labour and attention, he establish- 
ed peace and friendship amongst the people. Beside the ho- 
nours which the whole community conferred on him for these 
services, the exiles in particular erected his statue in brass, and 
put upon it this inscription: — 

Far as the pillars which Alcides rear'd, 

Thy counsels and thy deeds in arms for Greece 

The tongue of Fame has told. But we, Aratus, 

We, wanderers whom thou hast restor'd to Sicyon, 

Will sing thy justice; place thy pleasing form, 

As a benignant power with gods that. save. 

For thou hast given that dear equality, 

And all the laws which favouring heaven might give. 

Aratus, after such important services, was placed above envy 
amongst his people. But king Antigonus, uneasy at the pro- 
gress he made, was determined either to gain him, or to make 
him obnoxious to Ptolemy. He, therefore, gave him extra 
ordinary marks of his regard, though he wanted no such ad 
vances. Amongst others this was one: — On occasion of a sa- 
crifice which he offered at Corinth, he sent portions of it to 
Aratus at Sicyon: and at the feast which ensued, he said in 
full assembly, — " I at first looked upon this young Sicyonian 
only as a man of a liberal and patriotic spirit, but now I find 
that he is also a good judge of the characters and affairs of 
princes. At. first he overlooked us for the sake of foreign 
hopes, and the admiration he had conceived from stories of 
the wealth, the elephants, fleets, and the splendid court of 
Egypt; but since he has been upon the spot, and seen titst al! 
this pomp is merely a theatrical thing, he is come over entire- 
ly to us. I have received him to my bosom, and am deter- 
mined to employ him in all my affairs. 1 desire, therefore, 
you will all consider him as a friend." The envious and ma- 
levolent took occasion from this speech to lay heavy charges 
against Aratus in their letters to Ptolemy, insomuch that the 
king sent one of his agents to tax him with his infidelity. 
Thus, like passionate lovers, the candidates for the first fa- 
vours of kings dispute them with the utmost envy and ma- 
lignity. 

After Aratus was first chosen general of the Achaean league, 
he ravaged Locris, which lies on the other side of the gulf of 
Corinth, and committed the same spoil in the territories o 
Calydon. It was his intention to assist the Boeotians with ten 
thousand men, but he came too late; they were already de- 
feated by the iEtolians in an action near Chaeronea,* in which 

* We must take care to distinguish this battle of Chasronea from that great 
action ;n which Philip of Macedon beat the Thebans and Athenians, and 
which happened sixty-six years before Aratus was born. 
Vol. TV. 30 

350 ARATUS. 

Abceocntus then general, and a thousand of their men, were 
slain. 

The 3Tear following,* Aratus being elected general again, 
undertook that celebrated enterprise, of recovering the citadel 
of Corinth; in which he consulted not only the benefit of 
Sicyon and Achaia, but of Greece in general; for such would 
be the expulsion of the Macedonian garrison, which was no- 
thing better than a tyrant's yoke. As Chares, the Athenian 
general, upon a battle which he won of the king of Persia's 
lieutenants, wrote to the people, that he had gained a victory 
which was sister to that of Marathon; so we may justly cail 
this exploit of Aratus sister to that of Pelopidas the Theban, 
and Thrasybulus the Athenian, when they killed the tyrants. 
There is, indeed, this difference, that Aratus' enterprise was 
not against Greeks, but against a foreign power, which is a 
difference much to his honour: for the isthmus of Corinth, 
which separates the two seas, joins our continent to that of 
Peloponnesus; and when there is a good garrison in the cita- 
del of Corinth, which stands on a high hill in the middle, at 
an equal distance from the two continents, it cuts off' the com- 
munication with those within the isthmus, so that there can be 
no passage for troops, nor any kind of commerce either by sea 
or land. In short, he that is possessed of it is master of all 
Greece. The younger Philip of Macedon, therefore, was not 
jesting, but spoke a serious truth, when he called the city of 
Corinth the Fetters of Greece. Hence the place was always 
much contended for, particularly by kings and princes. 

Antigonus' passion for it was not less than that of love in 
its greatest madness; and it was the chief object of his cares 
to find a method of taking it by surprise, when the hopes of 
succeeding by open force failed. When Alexander, who was 
master of the citadel, died of poison, that is said to have beep 
given him through Antigonus' means, his wife Nicaea, into 
whose hands it then fell, guarded it with great care. But An 
tigonus, hoping to gain it by means of his son Demetrius, sent 
him to make her an offer of his hand. It was a flattering 
prospect to a woman somewhat advanced in years, to have 
such a young prince for her husband. Accordingly Antigo- 
nus caught her by this bait. However, she did not give up 
the citadel, but guarded it with the same attention as before. 
Antigonus, pretending to take no notice, celebrated the mar- 
riage with sacrifices and shows, and spent whole days in feast- 
ing the people, as if his mind had been entirely taken up with 

* Polybius, who wrote from Aratus' Commentaries, tells us there were 
eipht years between Aratus' first preetorship, and his second, in which lie 
took Jlcrocorintk 

ARATUS. 35i 

mirth and pleasure. One day, when Amoebceus was to sing 
in the theatre, he conducted Nicoea in person on her way to 
the entertainment in a litter set out with royal ornaments. She 
was elated with the honour, and had not the least thought of 
what was to ensue. But when they came to the point which 
bore towards the citadel, he ordered the men that Dore the lit- 
ter to proceed to the theatre; and bidding farewell to Amcebab- 
usand the wedding, he walked up to the fort much faster tha'. 
could have been expected from a man of his years. Finding 
the gate barred, he knocked with his staff, and commanded the 
guard to open it. Surprised at the sight of him, they com- 
plied, and thus he became master of the place. He was not 
able to contain his joy on that occasion; he drank and revelled 
in the open streets, and in the market-place, attended with fe- 
male musicians, and crowned with flowers. When we see a 
man of his age, who had experienced such changes of fortune, 
carouse and indulge his transports, embracing and saluting 
every one he meets, we must acknowledge that unexpected 
joy raises greater tumults in an unbalanced mind, and oversets 
it sooner, than either fear or sorrow. 

Antigonus having in this manner made himself master of 
the citadel, garrisoned it with men in whom he placed the 
greatest confidence, and made the philosopher Persaeus gover- 
nor. Whilst Alexander was living, Aratus had cast his eye 
upon it, as an excellent acquisition for his country; but the 
Achaeans admitting Alexander into the league, he did not pro- 
secute his design. Afterwards, however, a new occasion pre- 
sented itself. There were in Corinth four brothers, natives of 
Syria, one of which, named Diodes, served as a soldier in the 
garrison. The other three having stolen some of the king's 
money, retired to Sicyon, where they applied to one iEgias a 
banker, whom Aratus used to employ. Part of this gold they 
immediately disposed of to him, and Erginus, one of the 
three, at several visits, privately changed the rest. Thus, an 
acquaintance was formed between him and .ZEgias, who one 
day drew him into discourse about the garrison. Erginus 
told him, that as he often went up to visit his brother, he had 
observed on the steepest side a small winding path cut in the 
rock, and leading to a part of the wall much lower than the 
rest. Upon this iEgias said, with an air of raillery, — " Why 
will you, my good friend, purloin the king's treasures for so 
inconsiderable a sum, when you might raise yourself to opu- 
lence by one hour's service? Do you not know, that if you are 
taken, you will as certainly be put to death for this trifling 
theft, as if you had betrayed the citadel?" Erginus laughed 
at the runt, and promised to sound his brother Diocles upon 

252 ARATUS. 

The subject; for he could not, he said, place much confidence 
m the other two. 

A few days after this he returned, and had an interview 
with Aratus, at which it was agreed that he should conduct 
him to a part of the wall that was not above fifteen feet high; 
and that both he and his brother Diodes should assist him in 
the rest of the enterprise. Aratus, on his part, promised to 
give them sixty talents, if he succeeded; and in case they 
failed, and yet returned all safe to Sicyon, he engaged that 
each of them should have a house and one talent. As it was 
necessary that the sixty talents should be deposited in the 
hands of .ZEgias, for the satisfaction of Erginus, and Aratus 
neither had such a sum, nor chose to borrow it, because that 
might create some suspicion of his intentions, he took most 
of his plate and his wife's jewels, and pledged them with 
ZEgias for the money. Such was the greatness of his soul, 
such his passion for high achievements, that, knowing that 
Phocion and Epaminondas were accounted the justest and 
most excellent of all the Greeks, for refusing great presents, 
and not sacrificing virtue to money, he ascended a step higher 
He privately gave money, he embarked his estate in an enter- 
prise, where he alone was to expose himself for the many who 
were not even apprised of his intentions in their favour. Who 
then can sufficiently admire his magnanimity? Who is there, 
even in our days, that is not fired with an ambition to imitate 
the man who purchased so much danger at so great an ex- 
pense, who pledged the most valuable of 1 's goods for the 
sake of being introduced by night amongst enemies, where he 
was to fight for his life, without any other equivalent than the 
hope of performing a great action? 

This undertaking, which was dangerous enough in itself, 
became more so by a mistake which they committed in the be- 
ginning. Technon, one of Arafns' servants, of whom we have 
already spoken, was sent befoie to Diocles, that they might 
reconnoitre the wall together. He had never seen Diocles, 
but he thought he should easily know him by the marks which 
Erginus had given, which were curled hair, a swarthy com- 
plexion, and want of beard. He went, therefore, to the place 
appointed, and sat down before the city at a point called Ornis, 
to wait for Erginus and his brother Diocles. In the mean 
time Dionysius, their eldest brother, who knew nothing; of the 
affair, happened to come up. He greatly resembled Diocles, 
mid Technon, struck with his appearance, which answered the 
description, asked him if he had any connection with Erginus 
He said he was his brother: upon which Technon, thoroughly 
persuaded that he was speaking to Diocles, without asking his 
name, or waiting for any token, gave him his hand, mentioned 

ARATUS. 353 

to him the circumstances of the appointment with Erginus, 
and asked him many questions ahout it. Dionysius availed 
himself very artfully of the mistake, agreed to every point, 
and, returning towards the city, held him in discourse without 
giving him tlie least cause of suspicion. They were now near 
the town, and he was on the point of seizing Technon, when 
h y good fortune Erginus met them, and perceiving how much 
his friend was imposed upon, and the great danger he was in, 
Leckoned to him to make his escape. Accordingly, they both 
lied, and got safe to Aratus. However, Aratus did not give 
up his hopes, but immediately sent Erginus to Dionysius, to 
offer him money, and entreat him to be silent; in which he 
succeeded so well, that he brought Dionysius along with him 
to Aratus. When they had him in their hands, they did not 
think it safe to part with him; they bound and set a guard on 
him in a small apartment, and then prepared for their princi- 
pal design. 

When every thing was ready, Aratus ordered his troops to 
pass the night under arms; and taking with him four hundred 
picked men, few of whom knew the business they were going 
ahout, he led them to the gates of the city, near the temple of 
Juno. It was then about the middle of summer, the moon at 
the full, and the night without the least cloud. As their arms 
glittered with the reflection of the moon, they were afraid that 
circumstance would discover them to the watch. The fore- 
most of them were now near the walls, when clouds arose 
from the sea, and covered the city and its environs. The men 
sat down and took off their shoes, that they might make the 
less noise, and mount the ladders without danger of slipping. 
But Erginus took with him seven young men, in the habit of 
travellers, and getting unobserved to the gate, killed the keeper 
and the guard that were with him. At the same time the lad- 
ders were applied to the walls, and Aratus, with a hundred 
men, got over with the utmost expedition. The rest he com- 
manded to follow in the best manner they could; and bavins; 
immediately drawn up his ladders, he marched at the head 01 
his party through the town towards the citadel, confident of 
success, because he was not discovered. 

As they advanced, they met four of the watch, with a light, 
which gave Aratus a full and timely view of them, while he 
and his company could not be seen by them, because the moon 
was still overclouded. He, therefore, retired under some 
ruined walls, and lay in ambush for them. Three out of the 
four were killed; but the other, after he had received a cut 
upon his head, ran off, crying, — " That the enemy w-as in the 
city." A little after the trumpets sounded, and the whole 
town was in motion on the alarm. The streets were filled 

Vol. IV 2 Y 30* 

354 ARATUS. 

with people running up and down, and so many lights were 
brought out, both in the lower town and in the citadel, that 
the whole was illuminated, and a confused noise was heard 
from every quarter. Aratus went on notwithstanding, and 
attempted the way up the rock. He proceeded in a slow and 
difficult manner at first, because he had lost the path which 
lay deep beneath the craggy parts of the rock, and led to the 
wall by a great variety of windings and turnings. But, at 
that moment, the moon, as it were by miracle, is said to have 
dispersed the clouds, and thrown a light on the most obscure 
part of the path, which continued till he reached the wall at 
the place he wanted. Then the clouds gathered afresh, and 
she hid her face again. 

In the mean time, the three hundred men whom Aratus had 
left by the temple of Juno, had entered the city, which they 
found all in an alarm, and full of lights. As they could not 
find the way Aratus had taken, nor trace him in the least, they 
screened themselves under the shady side of a high rock, and 
waited there in great perplexity and distress. By this time 
Aratus was engaged with the enemy on the ramparts of the 
citadel, and they could distinguish the cries of combatants: 
but as the noise was echoed by the neighbouring mountains, 
it was uncertain from whence it first came. Whilst they were 
in doubt what way to turn, Archelaus, who commanded the 
king's forces, took a considerable corps, and began to ascend 
the hill with loud shouts, and trumpets sounding, in order to 
attack Aratus' rear. He passed the party of the three hun- 
dred without perceiving them; but he was no sooner gone by, 
than they rose, as from an ambuscade, fell upon him, and kill- 
ing the first they attacked, so terrified the rest, and even 
Archelaus himself, that they turned their backs, and were 
pursued till they entirely dispersed. 

When the party was thus victorious, Erginus came to them 
from their friends above, to inform them that Aratus was en- 
gaged with the enemy, who defended themselves with great 
vigour; that the wall itself was disputed, and that their gene- 
ral wanted immediate assistance. They bade him lead them 
to the place that moment; and as they ascended, they disco- 
vered themselves by their shouts. Thus their friends were 
encouraged, and the reflection of the full moon upon their 
arms, made their numbers appear greater to their enemies, on 
account of the length of the path. In the echoes of the night, 
too, the shouts seemed to come from a much larger party. At 
last they joined Aratus, and, with an united effort, beat off the 
enemy, and took post upon the wall. At break of day the 
citadel was their own, and the first rays of the sun did honour 
to their victory. At the same time the rest of Aratus' forces 

ARATUS. 355 

arrived from Sicyon : the Corinthians readily ope; ed their 
gates to them, and assisted in taking the king's soldiers pri 
soners. 

When he thought his victory complete, he went down from 
the citadel to the theatre; an innumerable multitude crowding 
to see him, and to hear the speech that he would make to the 
Corinthians. After he had disposed the Achaeans on each 
side of the avenues to the theatre, he came from behind the 
scenes, and made his appearance in his armour. But he was 
so much changed by labour and watching, that the joy and 
elevation which his success might have inspired, was weighed 
down by the extreme fatigue of his spirits. On his appear- 
ance, the people immediately began to express their high sense 
of his services; upon which he took his spear in his right 
hand, and leaning his body on one knee a little against it, re- 
mained a long time in that posture silent, to receive their 
plaudits and acclamations, their praises of his virtue, and com- 
pliments on his good fortune. 

After their first transports were over, and he perceived that 
he could be heard, he summoned the strength he had left, and 
made a speech in the name of the Achaeans, suitable to the 
great event, persuaded the Corinthians to join the league, and 
delivered to them the keys of their city, which they had not 
been masters of since the times of Philip. As to the generals 
of Antigonus, he set Archelaus, who was his prisoner, free; 
but he put Theophrastus to death, because he refused to leave 
Corinth. Persaeus, on the taking of the citadel, made his es- 
cape to Cenchreae. Some time after, when he was amusing 
himself with disputations in philosophy, and some person ad- 
vanced this position, — "None but the wise man is fit to be a 
general:" — "It is true," said he, "and the gods know it, that 
this maxim of Zeno's once pleased me more than all the rest; 
but I have changed my opinion, since I was better taught by 
the young Sicyonian." This circumstance concerning Persaeus 
we have from many historians. 

Aratus immediately seized the Heramm, or temple of Juno, 
and the harbour of Lechaeum, in which he took twenty-five ot 
the king's ships. He took also five hundred horses, and four 
hundred Syrians, whom he sold. The Achaeans put a garri- 
son of four hundred men in the citadel of Corinth, which was 
strengthened with fifty dogs, and as many men to keep them. 

The Romans were great admirers of Philopoemen, and called 
him the last of the Greeks ; not allowing that there was any 
great man amongst that people after him. But, in my opinion, 
this exploit of Aratus is the last which the Greeks have to 
boast of. Indeed, whether we consider the boldness of the en- 
terprise, or the good fortune which attended it, it equals the 

356 ARATUS. 

greatest upon record. The same appears from its immediate 
consequences: the Megarensians revolted from Antigonus, 
and joined Aratus: the Troezenians and Epidaurians, too, 
ranged themselves on the side of the Achseans. 

In his first expedition beyond the bounds of Peloponnesus, 
Aratus overran Attica, and, passing into Salamis, ravaged that 
island; so that the Achaean forces thought themselves escaped, 
as it were, out of prison, and followed him wherever he pleased. 
On this occasion he set the Athenian prisoners free without 
ransom, by which he sowed amongst them the first seeds of 
defection from the Macedonians. He brought Ptolemy like- 
wise into the Achaean league, by procuring him the direction 
of the war both by sea and land. Such was his influence over 
the Achseans, that as the laws did not allow him to be general 
two years together, they appointed him every other year; and, 
in action, as well as counsel, he had always in effect the chief 
command : for they saw it was not wealth, or glory, or the 
friendship of kings, or the advantage of his own country, or 
any thing else, that he preferred to the promotion of the 
Achaean power. He thought that cities, in their single capacity, 
were weak; and that they could not provide for their defence 
without uniting and binding themselves together for the com- 
mon good. As the members of the body cannot be nourished 
or live but by their connection with each other, and, when 
separated, pine and decay; so cities perish when they break 
off from the community to which they belonged; and, on the 
contrary, gather strength and power by becoming parts of 
some great body, and enjoying the fruits of the wisdom of the 
whole.* 

Observing, therefore, that all the bravest people in his neigh- 
bourhood lived according to their own laws, it gave him pain 
to see the Argives in slavery, and he took measures for destroy- 
ing their tyrant Aristomachus.t Besides, he was ambitious for 
restoring Argos to its liberty, as a reward for the education it 
had afforded him, and to unite it to the Achaean league. With- 
out much difficulty he found them hardy enough to undertake 

* We shall here give the reader an account of some laws, by which the 
Achaean states were governed : — 1. An extraordinary assembly was not to be 
summoned at the request of foreign ambassadors, unless they first notified, in 
writing, to the Praetor and Deminrgi, the subject of their embassy. 2. No 
city, subject to the league, was to send any embassy to a foreign prince or 
state, without the consent and approbation of the general diet. 3. No mem- 
ber of the assembly was to accept of presents from foreign princes, under 
any pretence whatsoever. 4. No prince, state, or city, was to be admitted 
into the league, without the consent of the whole alliance. 5. The general 
assembly was not to sit above three days. 

tThis Arislomachus must not be confounded with him who was thrown 
into the sea at Cenchreae. Between them reigned Aristippus. 

ARATUS. 357 

the commission, at the head of whom was iEschylus and Cha- 
rimenes the diviner: but they had no swords; for they were 
forbidden to keep arms, and the tyrant had laid great penalties 
on such as should be found to have any in their possession. 
To supply this defect, Aratus provided several daggers for 
them at Corinth, and having sewed them up in the pack-sad- 
dles of horses that were to carry some ordinary wares, they 
were, hy that stratagem, conveyed to Argos.* In the mean 
time, Charimenes taking in another of his friends as a partner, 
iEschylus and his associates were so much provoked, that they 
cast him off, and determined to do the business by themselves. 
But Charimenes perceiving their intention, in resentment of 
the slight, informed the tyrant of their purpose, when they 
were set out to put it in execution. Upon which they fled 
with precipitation, and most of them escaped to Corinth. 

It was not long, however, before Aristomachus was des 
patched by one of his own servants; but before any measures 
could be taken to guard against tyranny, Aristippus took the 
reins, and proved a worse tyrant than the former. Aratus. 
indeed, marched immediately to Argos with all the Achaeaps 
that were able to bear arms, in order to support the citizens, 
whom he doubted not to find ready to assert their liberty. But 
they had been long accustomed to the yoke, and were willing 
to be slaves; insomuch that not one of them joined him, and 
he returned with the inconvenience of bringing a charge upon 
the Achaeans, that they had committed acts of hostility in time 
of full peace: for they were summoned to answer for this in- 
justice before the Mantineans. 

Aratus did not appear at the trial; and Aristippus being the 
prosecutor, got a fine of thirty minse laid upon the Achaeans. 
As that tyrant both hated and feared Aratus, he meditated his 
death, and Antigonus entered into the scheme. They had 
their emissaries in almost every quarter, watching their oppor- 
tunity. But the surest guard for a prince, or other chief, is 
the sincere affection of his people: for when the commons and 
the nobility, instead of fearing their chief magistrate, fear for 
him, he sees with many eyes, and hears with many ears. And 
here I cannot but leave a'little the thread of my story to de- 
scribe that manner of life which Aristippus was under the 
necessity of leading, if he chose to keep in his hands that des- 
potism, that state of an arbitrary sovereign, which is com- 
monly so much envied, and admired as the highest pitch of 
happiness. 

This tyrant, who had Antigonus for his ally, who kept so 

* Polybius places this attempt for the relief of Argos under the second 
Aristomachus. — Vid. Polyb. lib. ii. 

358 ARATUS. 

large a body-guard, and had not left one of his enemies alive 
in the city, would not suffer his guards to do duty in the pa- 
lace, but only in the vestibule and porticoes about it. When 
supper was over, he sent away all his servants, barred the door 
of the hall himself, and, with his mistress, crept through a 
trap-door into a small chamber above. Upon that door he 
placed his bed, and slept there as a person in his anxious state 
of mind may be supposed to sleep. The ladder by which he 
went up, his mistress' mother took away, and secured in an- 
other room till morning, when she brought it again, and called 
up this wonderful prince, who crept like a reptile out of his 
hole: whereas Aratus, who acquired a lasting command, not 
by force of arms, but by virtue, and in a way agreeable to this 
laws; who made his appearance without fear in a plain vest 
and cloak, and always showed himself an enemy to tyrants, 
left an illustrious posterity among the Greeks, which flourishe.5 
at this day. But of those who have seized castles, who have 
maintained guards, who have fenced themselves with arms, 
and gates, and barricadoes, how few can we reckon up that 
have not, like timorous hares, died a violent death; and not 
one of them has left a family, or even a monument to preserve 
his memory with honour. 

Aratus made many attempts, both private and open, to pull 
down Aristippus, and rescue Argos out of his hands; but he 
always miscarried. Once he applied his scaling ladders, and 
ascended the wall with a small party, in spite of the extreme 
danger that threatened him. He even succeeded so far as to 
kill the guards that came to oppose him: but when day ap 
peared, and the tyrant attacked him on all sides, the people of 
Argos, as if he had not been fighting for their liberty, and 
they were only presiding at the Nemean games, sat very im- 
partial spectators of the action, without making the least mo- 
tion to assist. Aratus defended himself with great courage, 
and, though he had his thigh run through with a spear, main- 
tained his post all day against such superior numbers. Would 
his strength have permitted him to continue the combat in the 
night too, he must have carried his point; for the tyrant now 
thought of nothing but making his escape, and had already 
sent most of his treasure on board his ships. However, as no 
one gave Aratus intelligence of this circumstance, as his water 
failed, and his wound disqualified him from any further efforts, 
he called off his men and retired. 

He now despaired of succeeding by way of surprise, and. 
therefore, openly entered the territories of Argos with his 
army, and committed great devastation. He fought a pitched 
battle with Aristippus near the river Chares, and on that oc- 
casion he was censured for deserting the action, and letting 

ARATUS. 359 

the victory slip out of his hands: for one part of his army had 
clearly the advantage, and was advancing fast in the pursuit, 
when he, without being overpowered where he acted in per- 
son, merely out of fear and diffidence, retired in great disor- 
der to his camp. His men, on their return from their pursuit, 
expiessed their indignation at being prevented from erecting 
the trophy, after they had put the enemy to flight, and killed 
many more men than they had lost. Aratus, wounded with 
these reproaches, determined to risk a second battle for the 
trophy. Accordingly, after his men had rested one day, he 
drew them out the next. But rinding that the enemy's num- 
bers were increased, and that their troops were in much higher 
spirits than before, he durst not venture upon an action, but 
retreated, after having obtained a truce to carry off the dead. 
However, by his engaging manners, and his abilities in the 
administration, he obviated the consequences of his error, and 
added the city of Cleonse to the Achaean league. In Cleonse 
he caused the Nemean games to be celebrated ; for he thought 
that city had the best and most ancient claim to them. The 
people of Argos likewise exhibited them, and, on this occa- 
sion, the freedom and security which had been the privilege of 
the champions, were first violated. The Achseans considered 
as enemies all that had repaired to the games at Argos, and 
having seized them as they passed through their territories, 
sold them for slaves. So violent and implacable was their 
general's hatred of tyrants. 

Not long after, Aratus had intelligence that Aristippus had 
a design upon Cleonse, but that he was afraid of him, because 
he then resided at Corinth, which was very near Cleonse. In 
this case he assembled his forces by proclamation, and having 
ordered them to take provisions for several days, marched to 
Cenchrese. By this manoeuvre, he hoped to bring Aristippus 
ngainst Cleonse, as supposing him at a distance; and it had its 
effect. The tyrant immediately set out from Argos with his 
army. But it was no sooner dark, than Aratus returned from 
Cenchrese to Corinth, and having placed guards in all the roads,, 
led on the Achseans, who followed him in such good order, 
and with so much celerity and pleasure, that they not only 
made their march, but entered Cleonse that night, and put 
themselves in order of battle ; nor did Aristippus gain the. 
least knowledge of this movement. 

Next morning, at break of day, the gates were opened, the 
trumpet sounded, and Aratus advancing at full speed, and with 
all the alarm of war, fell upon the enemy, and soon routed 
them. Then he went upon the pursuit, particularly that way 
which he imagined Aristippus might take; for the country had 
several outlets. The pursuit was'continued as far as Mycenae, 

360 ARATUS- 

and the tyrant, as Dinias tells us, was overtaken and killed by 
a Cretan named Tragiscus; and of his army there were abovo 
fifteen hundred slain. Aratus, though he had gained this im- 
portant victory without the loss of one man, could not make 
himself master of Argos, nor deliver it from slavery; for 
Agias and young Aristomachus entered it with the king ot 
Macedon's troops, and held it in subjection. 

This action silenced, in a great measure, the calumny of the 
enemy, and put a stop to the insolent scoffs of those who, to 
flatter the tyrants, had not scrupled to say, that whenever the 
Achaean general prepared for battle, his bowels lost their re- 
tentive faculty: that when the trumpet sounded, his eyes grew 
dim, and his head giddy; and that when he had given the 
word, he used to ask his lieutenants, and other officers, what 
further need there could be of him, since the die was cast, 
and whether he might not retire, and wait the event of the 
day at some distance. These reports had prevailed so much, 
that the philosophers, in their inquiries in the schools, Whe- 
ther the palpitation of the heart and change of colour on the 
appearance of danger, were arguments of cowardice, or only 
of some natural defect, some coldness in the constitution? 
used always to quote Aratus as an excellent general, who yet 
was always subject to those emotions on occasion of a battle. 

After he had destroyed Aristippus, he sought means to de- 
pose Lysiades the Megalopolitan, who had assumed the su- 
preme power in his native city. This man had something 
generous in his nature, and was not insensible to true honour 
He had not, like most other tyrants, committed this injustice 
out of a love of licentious pleasure, or from a motive of ava- 
rice; but incited, when very young, by a passion for glory, 
and unadvisedly believing the false and vain accounts of the 
wondrous happiness of arbitrary power, he had made it his 
business to usurp it. However, he soon felt it a heavy bur- 
den ; and being at once desirous to gain the happiness which 
Aratus enjoyed, and to deliver himself from the fear of his 
intriguing spirit, he formed the noblest resolution that can be 
conceived, which was first to deliver himself from the hatred, 
the fears, and the guards, that encompassed him, and then to 
bestow the greatest blessing on his country. In consequence 
hereof, he sent for Aratus, laid down the authority he had as- 
sumed, and joined the city to the Achaean league. The 
Achaeans, charmed with his noble spirit, thought it not too 
great a compliment to elect him general. He was no sooner 
appointed, than he discovered an ambition to raise his name 
above that of Aratus, and was by that means led to several 
unnecessary attempts, particularly to declare war against the 
Lacedaemonians. Aratus endeavoured to prevent it, but his 

ARATUS. ggj 

opposition was thought to proceed from envy. Lysiades \va3 
chosen general a second time, though Aratus exerted all his 
interest to get that appointment for another: for, as we have 
already observed, he had the command himself only every 
other year. Lysiades was fortunate enough to gain that com- 
mission a third time, enjoying it alternately with Aratus. But 
at last, avowing himself his enemy, and often accusing him to 
the Achseans in full council, that people cast him off. For he 
appeared with only an assumed character to contend against 
real and sincere virtue. iEsop tells us, — " That the cuckoo 
one day asked the little birds why they avoided her? and they 
answered, It was because they feared she would at last prove 
a hawk." In like manner it happened to Lysiades. It was 
suspected that, as he had been once a tyrant, his laying down 
his power was not quite a voluntary thing, and that he would 
be glad to take the first opportunity to resume it. 

Aratus acquired new glory in the war with the iEtolians. 
The Achseans pressed him to engage them on the confines of 
Megara; and Agis, ki«g of the Lacedaemonians, who attended 
with an army, joined his instances to theirs; but he would 
not consent. They reproached him with want of spirit, with 
cowardice; they tried what the weapons of ridicule could do; 
but he bore all their attacks with patience, and would not sa- 
crifice the real good of the community to the fear of seeming 
disgrace. Upon this principle he suffered the iEtolians to pass 
Mount Gerania, and to enter Peloponnesus without the least 
resistance. But when he found that in their march they had 
seized Pellene,he was no longer the same man. Without the 
least delay, without waiting till all his forces were assembled, 
he advanced with those he had at hand against the enemy, 
who were much weakened by their late acquisition, for it had 
occasioned the utmost disorder and misrule. They had no 
sooner entered the city, than the private men dispersed them- 
selves in the houses, and began to scramble and fight for the 
booty, while the generals and other officers seized the wives 
and daughters of the inhabitants, and each put his helmet on 
the head of his prize, as a mark to whom she belonged, and to 
prevent her coming into the hands of another. 

While they were thus employed, news was brought that 
Aratus was at hand, and ready to fall upon them. The con- 
sternation was such as might be expected amongst men in ex- 
treme disorder. Before they were all apprised of their dan- 
ger, those that were about the gates and in the suburbs, had 
skirmished a few moments with the Achaeans, and were put to 
flight; and the precipitation with which they fled, greatly dis- 
tressed those who had assembled to support them. During 
this confusion, one of the captives, daughter to Epig;ethe,s, a 

Vol. IV. 2 Z 31 

QQ2 ARATUS. 

person of great eminence in Pellene, who was remarkable for 
her beauty and majestic mien, was seated in the temple of 
Diana, where the officer, whose prize she was, had placed her, 
after having put his helmet, which was adorned with three 
plsmes of feathers, on her head. This lady, hearing the noise 
and tumult, ran out suddenly to see what was the cause. As 
she stood at the door of the temple, and looked down upon the 
combatants, with the helmet still upon her head, she appeared 
to the citizens a figure more than human, and the enemy took 
her for a deity; which struck the latter with such terror and 
astonishment, that they were no longer able to use their arms. 

The Pellenians tell us, that the statue of the goddess stands 
commonly untouched; and that when the priestess moves it 
out of the temple, in order to carry it in procession, none dare 
look it in the face, but, on the contrary, they turn away their 
eyes with great care; for it is not only a terrible and dangerous 
sight to mankind, but its look renders the trees barren, and 
blasts the fruits where it passes. They add, that the priestess 
carried it out on this occasion, and ahvays turning the face 
directly towards the iEtolians, filled them with horror, and 
deprived them of their senses. But Aratus, in his Com- 
mentaries, makes no mention of any such circumstance; he 
only says, that he put the iEtolians to flight, and, entering the 
town with the fugitives, dislodged them by dint of sword, and 
killed seven hundred. This action was one of the most cele- 
brated in history: Timanthes the painter gave a very lively 
and excellent representation of it. 

However, as many powerful states were combining against 
the Achseans, Aratus hastened to make peace with the iEto- 
lians, which he not only effected with the assistance of Panta- 
leon, one of the most powerful men amongst them, but like- 
wise entered into an alliance offensive and defensive. He had 
a strong desire to restore Athens to its liberty, and exposed 
himself to the severest censures of the Achseans, by attempt- 
ing to surprise the Piraeus, while there was a truce subsisting 
between them and the Macedonians. Aratus,, indeed, in his 
Commentaries, denies the fact, and lays the blame upon Ergi- 
nus, with whom he took the citadel of Corinth. He says, it 
was the peculiar scheme of Erginus to attempt that port; that 
his ladder breaking, he miscarried, and was pursued ; and that, 
to save himself, he often called upon Aratus, as if present; by 
which artifice he deceived the enemy, and escaped. But this 
defence of his wants probability to support it. It is not likely 
that Erginus, a private man, a Syrian, would have formed a 
design of such consequence, without having Aratus at the head 
of it, to supply him with troops, and to point out the oppor- 
tunity for the attack. Nay, Aratus proved the same against 

ARATUS. 363 

himself, by making not only two or three, but many more at- 
tempts upon the Piraeus. Like a person violently in love, his 
miscarriage did not prevail upon him to desist; for as his 
hopes were disappointed only by the failure, perhaps, of a sin 
gle circumstance, and he was always within a little of succeed- 
ing, he still encouraged himself to go on. In one repulse, as 
he fled over the fields of Thriasium, he broke his leg; and the 
cure could not be effected without several incisions, so that, for 
some time after, when he was called to action, he was carried 
into the field in a litter. 

After the death of Antigonus, and Demetrius' accession to 
the throne, Aratus was more intent than ever on delivering 
Athens from the yoke, and conceived an utter contempt for 
the Macedonians. He was, however, defeated in a battle near 
Phylacia by Bithys, the new king's general; and a strong re- 
port being spread on one side that he was taken prisoner, and 
on another, that he was dead, Diogenes, who commanded in 
the Piraeus, wrote a letter to Corinth, insisting, — " That the 
Achaeans should evacuate the place, since Aratus was no 
more." Aratus happened to be at Corinth when the letter 
arrived, and the messengers finding that their business occa- 
sioned much laughter and satirical discourse, retired in great 
confusion. The king of Macedon himself, too, sent a ship, 
with orders, — " That Aratus should be brought to him in 
chains." 

The Athenians exceeding themselves in flattery to the Ma- 
cedonians, wore chaplets of flowers upon the first report of 
Aratus' death. Incensed at this treatment, he immediately 
marched out against them, and proceeded as far as the Acade- 
my: but they implored him to spare them, and he returned 
without doing them the least injury. This made the Athe- 
nians sensible of his virtue; and as upon the death of Deme- 
trius they were determined to make an attempt for liberty, they 
called them in to their assistance. Though he was not general 
of the Achasans that year, and was so much indisposed besides, 
by Ions; sickness, as to be forced to keep his bed, yet he caused 
himself to be carried in a litter, to render them his best ser- 
vices. Accordingly, he prevailed upon Diogenes, who com- 
manded the garrison, to give up the Piraeus, Munychia, Sala- 
mis, and Sunium, to the "Athenians, for the consideration of a 
hundred and fifty talents, twenty of which Aratus himself fur- 
nished. Upon this, the iEginetae and Hermonians joined the 
Achaeans, and great part of Arcadia paid contributions to the 
league. The Macedonians now found employment enough 
for their arms nearer home, and the Achaeans, numbering the 
yEtolians amongst their allies, found a great addition to their 
power. 

364 ARATUS. 

Aratus still proceeded upon his old principles, and in his 
uneasiness to see tyranny established in a city so near him as 
that of Argos, sent his agents to Aristomachus, to represent, — 
" How advantageous a thing it would be for him to restore 
that city to ljberty, and join it to the Achaean league; how no- 
ble to follow the example of Lysiades, and command so great 
a people with reputation and honour, as the general of their 
choice, rather than one city as a tyrant, exposed to perpetual 
danger and hatred." Aristomachus listened to their susses- 
tions, and desired Aratus to send him fifty talents to pay ofl 
his troops. The money was granted agreeably to his request, 
but Lysiades, whose commission as general was not expired, 
and who was ambitious to have this negociation pass with the 
Achseans for his work, took an opportunity, while the money 
was providing, to accuse Aratus to Aristomachus, as a person 
that had an implacable aversion to tyrants, and to advise him 
rather to put the business into his hands. Aristomachus be- 
lieved these suggestions, and Lysiades had the honour of in- 
troducing him to the league. But on this occasion especially, 
the Achaean council showed their affection and fidelity to Ara- 
tus: for, upon his speaking against Aristomachus, they re- 
jected him with marks of resentment. Afterwards, when 
Aratus was prevailed upon to manage the affair, they readily 
accepted the proposal, and passed a decree, by which the Ar- 
gives and Phliasians were admitted into the league. The 
year following, too, Aristomachus was appointed general. 

Aristomachus, finding himself esteemed by the Achseans, 
was desirous of carrying his arms into Laconia, for which pur- 
pose he sent for Aratus from Athens. Aratus made answer, 
that he utterly disapproved the expedition, not choosing that 
the Achseans should engage with Cleomenes,* whose spirit 
and power kept growing in proportion to the dangers he had 
to encounter. Aristomachus, however, was bent upon the en- 
terprise^ and Aratus, yielding to his solicitations, returned to 
assist him in the war. Cleomenes offered him battle at Pa- 
lantium, but Aratus prevented him from accepting the chal- 
lenge. Hereupon Lysiades accused Aratus to the Achseans, 
and the year following declared himself his competitor for the 
command; but Aratus had the majority of votes, and was for 
the twelfth time declared general. 

This year he was defeated by Cleomenes at Mount Ly- 
cseum; and in his flight being forced to wander about in the 

* Some authors write, that Cleomenes, at the instigation of the iEtohans, 
had built a fortress in the territory of the Megalopolitans, called Athcencum : 
which the Achfeans considered as an open rupture, and, therefore, declared, 
in a general assembly, that the Lacedaemonians should be considered as 
enemies. 

ARATUS. 

365 

night, he was supposed to be killed. This was the second 
time that a report of his death spread over Greece. He saved 
himself, however; and having collected the scattered remains 
of his forces, was not satisfied with retiring unmolested: on 
the contrary, he availed himself in the best manner of his op- 
portunity; and when none expected, or even thought of such 
a manoeuvre, fell suddenly upon the Mantineans, who were 
allies to Cleomenes, took their city, secured it with a garrison, 
and declared all the strangers he found there free of the city. 
In short, he acquired that for the Achasans when beaten, which 
thev could not easily have gained when victorious. 

The Lacedaemonians again entering the territories of Mega- 
lopolis, he marched to relieve that city. Cleomenes endea- 
voured to bring him to an engagement, but he declined it, 
though the Megalopolitans pressed him much to leave the 
matter to the decision of the sword: for, besides that he was 
never very fit for disputes in the open field, he was now in- 
ferior in numbers; and at a time of life when his spirits began 
to fail, and his ambition was subdued, he would have had to 
do with a young man of the most adventurous courage. He 
thought, too, that if Cleomenes, by his boldness, sought to ac- 
quire glory, it became him, by his caution, to keep that which 
he had. 

One day the light infantry skirmished with the Spartans, 
and having driven them to their camp, entered it with them, 
and began to plunder. Aratus even then would not lead on 
the main body, but kept his men on the other side of a defile 
that lay between, and would not sufler them to pass. Lysi- 
ades, incensed at this order, and reproaching him with cow- 
ardice, called upon the cavalry to support the party which was 
in pursuit of the enemy, and not to betray the victory, nor to 
desert a man who was going to hazard all for his country. 
Many of the best men in the army followed him to the charge,, 
which was so vigorous, that he put the right wing of the La- 
cedaemonians to flight. But in the ardour of his courage, and 
his ambition for honour, he went inconsiderately upon the 
pursuit, till he fell into an intricate way, obstructed with trees, 
and intersected with large ditches. Cleomenes attacked him 
in this ground, and slew him, after he had maintained the most 
glorious of all combats, the combat for his people, almost at 
their own doors. The rest of the cavalry fled, and, turning 
back upon the main body, put the infantry in disorder, so that 
the rout became general. 

This loss was principally ascribed to Aratus, for he was 
thought to have abandoned Lysiades to his fate. The Achas- 
ans, therefore, retired in great anger, and obliged him to fol- 
low them to iEgium. There it was decreed in full council, 

31* 

366 ARATUS. 

that he should be supplied with no more money, nor have any 
mercenaries maintained; and that, if he would go to war, he 
must find resources for it himself. Thus ignominiously treat- 
ed, he was inclined to give up the seal, and resign his com- 
mand immediately; but, upon more mature consideration, he 
thought it better to bear the affront with patience. Soon after 
this he led the Achaeans to Orchomenus, where he gave battle 
to Megistonoiis, father-in-law to Cleomenes, killed three hun- 
dred of his men, and took him prisoner. 

It had been customary with him to take the command every 
other year; but when his turn came, and he was called upon 
to resume it, he absolutely refused, and Timoxenus was ap- 
pointed general. The reason commonly given for his reject- 
ing that commission, was his resentment against the people 
for the late dishonour they had done him; but the real cause 
was the bad posture of the Achaean affairs. Cleomenes no 
longer advanced by insensible steps; he had no measures now 
to keep with the magistrates at home, nor any thing to fear 
from their opposition; for he had put the ephori to death, 
distributed the lands in equal portions, and admitted many 
strangers citizens of Sparta. After he had made himself ab- 
solute master by these means at home, he marched into Achaia, 
and insisted upon being appointed general of the league. 
Aratus, therefore, is highly blamed, when affairs were in such 
a tempestuous state, for giving up the helm to another pilot, 
when he ought rather to have taken it by force to save the 
community from sinking. Or, if he thought the Achaean pow- 
er beyond the possibility of being retrieved, he should have 
yielded to Cleomenes, and not have brought Peloponnesus 
into a state of barbarism again with Macedonian garrisons, 
nor filled the citadel of Corinth with Illyrian and Gaulish 
arms: for this was making those men to whom he had shown 
himself superior, both in his military and political capacity, 
and whom he vilified so much in his Commentaries, masters of 
his cities, under the softer, but false name of allies. It may 
be said, perhaps, that Cleomenes wanted justice, and was ty- 
rannically inclined. Let us grant it for a moment: yet he was 
a descendant of the Heraclidae, and his country was Sparta, 
the meanest citizen of which should have been preferred as 
general of the league to the first of the Macedonians, at least 
by those who set any value on the dignity of Greece. Besides, 
Cleomenes asked for the command among the Achaeans,* only 

* Perhaps Aratus was apprehensive that Cleomenes would endeavour to 
make himself alsolute amongst the Achaeans, as he was already in Lacedse- 
mon. There was a possihility, however, of his behaving with honour as ge- 
neral of the Achaeans : whereas from Antigonus nothing could be expected 
but chains. 

ARATUS. 3(37 

to make their cities happy in his services, in return for the 
honour of the title; whereas Antigonus, though declared com- 
mander-in-chief hoth by sea and land, would not accept the 
commission till he was paid with the citadel of Corinth; in 
which he perfectly resembled iEsop's hunter;* for he would 
not ride the Achaeans, though they offered their backs, and 
though by embassies and decrees they courted him to do it, 
till he had first bridled them by his garrison, and by the host- 
ages which they were obliged to deliver to him. 

It is true, Aratus labours to justify himself by the necessity 
of affairs. But Polybius assures us, that, long before that 
necessity existed, he had been afraid of the daring spirit of 
Cleomenes, and had not only treated with Antigonus in pri- 
vate, but drawn in the Megalopolitans to propose it to the ge- 
neral assembly of the Achaeans, that Antigonus should be in- 
vited to their assistance. For, whenever Cleomenes renewed 
his depredations, the Megalopolitans were the first that suffer- 
ed by them. Phylarchus gives the same account; but we 
should not have afforded him much credit, if he had not been 
supported by the testimony of Polybius; for such is his fond- 
ness of Cleomenes, that he cannot speak of him but in an en- 
thusiastic manner; and, as if he was pleading a cause, rather 
than writing a history, he perpetually disparages the one and 
vindicates the other. 

The Achaeans having lost Mantinea, which Cleomenes now 
took a second time, and being, moreover, defeated in a great 
battle at Hecatomboeum, were struck with such terror, that 
they immediately invited Cleomenes to Argos, with a promise 
of making him general. But Aratus no sooner perceived that 
he was on his march, and had brought his army as far as Ler- 
ma, than his fears prevailed, and he sent ambassadors to de- 
sire him to come to the Achaeans as friends and allies, with 
three hundred men only. They were to add, that if he had 
any distrust of the Achaeans, they would give him hostages. 
Cleomenes told him, they did but insult and mock him with 
such a message, and returning immediately, wrote a letter to 
the Achaean council, full of complaints and invectives against 
Aratus. Aratus wrote another against Cleomenes in the same 
style; and they proceeded to such gross abuse, as not to spare 
even the characters of their wives and families. 

Upon this Cleomenes sent a herald to declare war against 
ihe Achaeans; and in the mean time the city of Sicyon was 
near being betrayed to him. Disappointed of his expectation 
there, he turned against Pellene, dislodged the Achaean garri- 

* Horace gives us this fable of jEsop's; but, before JEsop, the poet Stesi- 
chorus is said to have applied it to the Himerians, when they were going to 
raise a guard for Phalaris. 

368 ARATUS. 

son, and secured the town for himself. A little after this, he 
took Pheneum and Penteleum; and it was not long before the 
people of Argos adopted his interest, and the Phliasians re- 
ceived his garrison: so that scarce any thing remained firm to 
the Achseans of the dominions they had aquired : Aratus saw 
nothing but confusion about him; all Peloponnesus was in a 
tottering condition, and the cities every where excited by in- 
novators to revolt. Indeed, none were quiet or satisfied with 
their present circumstances. Even amongst the Sicyonians 
and Corinthians, many were found to have a correspondence 
with Cleomenes, having been long disaffected to the adminis- 
tration and the public utility, because they wanted to get the 
power into their own hands. Aratus was invested with full 
authority to punish the delinquents. The corrupt members of 
Sicyon he cut off; but by seeking for such in Corinth, in or- 
der to put them to death, he exasperated the people, already 
sick of the same distemper, and weary of the Achaean govern- 
ment.* On this occasion they assembled in the temple of 
Apollo, and sent for Aratus, being determined either to kill 
him or take him prisoner, before they proceeded to an open 
revolt. He came leading his horse, as if he had not the least 
mistrust or suspicion. When they saw him at the gate, a num- 
ber of them rose up and loaded him with reproaches. But he, 
with a composed countenance and mild address, bade them sit 
down again, and not be standing in the way, and by making 
such a disorderly noise, prevent other citizens who were at 
the door from entering. At the same time that he said this, he 
drew back step by step, as if he was seeking somebody to take 
his horse. Thus he got out of the crowd, and continued to 
talk, without the least appearance of confusion, to such of the 
Corinthians as he met, and desired them to go to the temple, 
till he insensibly approached the citadel. He then mounted 
his horse, and without stopping any longer at the fort, than to 
give his orders to Cleopater the governor to keep a strict 
guard upon it, he rode off* to Sicyon, followed by no more 
than thirty soldiers, for the rest had left him and dispersed. 

The Corinthians, soon apprised of his flight, went in pur- 
suit of him: but failing in their design, they sent for Cleo- 
menes, and put the city into his hands. He did not, however, 
think this advantage equal to his loss in their suffering Aratus 
to escape. As soon as the inhabitants of that district on the 
coast called Acte had surrendered their towns, he shut up the 
citadel with a wall of circumvallation, and a palisadoed en- 
trenchment.! 

* What wonder, when they saw Aratus unfaithful to his first principles^ 
and going to bring them again under the Macedonian yoke ? 

i Anttrravpa xai «r£f ieteixi{£- 

ARATUS. 369 

In the mean time, many of the Achasans repaired to Aratus 
at Sicyon, and a general assembly was held, in which he was 
chosen commander-in-chief, with an unlimited commission. 
He now first took a guard, and it was composed of his fel- 
low-citizens. He had conducted the Achaean administration 
three-and-thirty years; he had been first man in Greece, both 
in power and reputation; but he now found himself abandon- 
ed, indigent, persecuted, without any thing but one plank to 
trust to in the storm that had shipwrecked his country: for 
the Altolians refused him the assistance which he requested; 
and the city of Athens, though well inclined to serve him, was 
prevented by Euclides and Micion. 

Aratus had a house and valuable effects at Corinth. Cleo- 
menes would not touch any thing that belonged to him, but 
sent for his friends and agents, and charged them to take the 
utmost care of his affairs, as remembering that they must give 
an account to Aratus. To Aratus himself he privately sent 
Tripylis, and afterwards his father-in-law Megistonoiis, with 
great offers, and among the rest a pension of twelve talents, 
which was double the yearly allowance he had had from Pto- 
lemy. For this he desired to be appointed general of the 
Achaeans, and to be joined with him in the care of the citadel 
of Corinth. Aratus answered, — "That he did not now go- 
vern affairs, but they governed him." As there appeared an 
insincerity in this answer, Cleomenes entered the territories 
of Sicyon, and committed great devastations. He likewise 
blocked up the city for three months together; all which time 
Aratus was debating with himself whether he should surren- 
der the citadel to Antigonus, for he would not send him suc- 
cours on any other condition. 

Before he could take his resolution, the Achaeans met in 
council at iEgium, and called him to attend it. As the town 
was invested by Cleomenes, it was dangerous to pass. The 
citizens entreated him not to go, and declared they would not 
suffer him to expose himself to an enemy who was watching 
for his prey. The matrons, and their children, too, hung upon 
him, and wept for him as a common parent and protector. He 
consoled them, however, as well as he could, and rode down 
to the sea, taking with him ten of his friends, and his son, 
who was now approaching to manhood. Finding some vessels 
at anchor, he went on board, and arrived safe at iEgium. 
There he held an assembly, in which it was decreed that An- 
tigonus should be called in, and the citadel surrendered to him. 
Aratus sent his own son amongst the other hostages; which 
the Corinthians so much resented, that they plundered his 
goods, and made a present of his house to Cleomenes. 

As Antigonus was now approaching with his army, which 

Vol. IV. 3 A 

370 ARATUS. 

consisted of twenty thousand foot, all Macedonians, and of 
fourteen hundred horse, Aratus went with the Achaean magis 
trate by sea,* and without being discovered by the enemy, 
met bim at Pegae; though he placed no great confidence in 
Antigonus, and distrusted the Macedonians: for he knew that 
his greatness had been owing to the mischiefs he had done 
them; and that he had first risen to the direction of affairs in 
consequence of his hatred to old Antigonus. But seeing an 
indispensable necessity before him, such an occasion as those 
who seemed to command are forced to obey, he faced the dan- 
ger. When Antigonus was told that Aratus was come in per- 
son, he gave the rest a common welcome, but received him in 
the most honourable manner; and finding him, upon trial, to 
be a man of probity and prudence, took him into his most 
intimate friendship: for Aratus was not only serviceable to 
the king in great affairs, but in the hours of leisure his most 
agreeable companion. Antigonus, therefore, though young, 
perceiving in him such a temper, and such other qualities as 
fitted him for a prince's friendship, preferred him not only to 
the rest of the Achaeans, but even to the Macedonians that 
were about him, and continued to employ him in every affair 
of consequence. Thus the thing which the gods announced 
by the entrails of one of the victims was accomplished: for 
it is said that when Aratus was sacrificing not long before, 
there appeared in the liver two gall-bladders enclosed in the 
same caul; upon which the diviner declared, that two ene- 
mies, who appeared the most irreconcileable, would soon be 
united in the strictest friendship. Aratus then took little no- 
tice of the saying, for he never put much faith in victims, nor 
indeed in predictions from any thing else, but used to depend 
upon his reason. Some time after, however, when the war 
went on successfully, Antigonus made an entertainment at 
Corinth, at which, though there was a numerous company, he 
placed Aratus next above him. The)' had not sat long before 
Antigonus called for a cloak. At the same time he asked 
Aratus, — " Whether he did not think it very cold?" and he 
answered, — " It was extremely cold." The king then desired 
him to sit nearer, and the servants who brought the cloak put 
it over the shoulders of both. This putting Aratus in mind 
of the victim, he informed the king both of the sign and the 
prediction. But this happened long after the time that we are 
upon. 

WThile they were at Pegae, they took oaths of mutual fidelity, 
and then marched against the enemy. There were several 
actions under the walls of Corinth, in which Cleomenes had 

* The magistrates called Dcmiurgi. See an account of them before. 

ARATUS. 37 j 

fortified himself strongly, and the Corinthians defended the 
place with great vigour. 

In the mean time, Aristotle, a citizen of Argos and friend 
of Aratus, sent an agent to him privately, with an offer of 
bringing that city to declare for him, if he would go thither in 
person with some troops. Aratus having acquainted Antigo- 
nus with this scheme, embarked fifteen hundred men, and sail- 
ed immediately with them from the isthmus to Epidaurus. 
But the people of Argos, without waiting for his arrival, had 
attacked the troops of Cleomenes, and shut them up in the 
citadel. Cleomenes having notice of this, and fearing that the 
enemy, if they were in possession of Argos, might cut off his 
retreat to Lacedsemon, left his post before the citadel of Co- 
rinth the same night, and marched to the succour of his men. 
He reached it before Aratus, and gained some advantage over 
the enemy; but Aratus arriving soon after, and the king ap- 
pearing with his army, Cleomenes retired to Mantinea. 

Upon this all tne cities joined the Achaeans again. Antigo- 
nus made himself master of the citadel of Corinth; and the 
Argives having appointed Aratus their general, he persuaded 
them to give Antigonus the estates of the late tyrants and all 
the traitors. That people put Aristomachus to the torture at 
Cenchrese,* and afterwards drowned him in the sea. Aratus 
was much censured on this occasion, for permitting a maji to 
suffer unjustly, who was not of a bad character, with whom 
he formerly had connections, and who, at his persuasion, had 
abdicated the supreme power, and brought Argos to unite itself 
to the Achaean league. There were other charges against Ara- 
tus, namely, that, at his instigations, the Achaeans had given 
the city of Corinth to Antigonus, as if it had been no more 
than an ordinary village ; that they had suffered him to pillage 
Orchomenus, and place in it a Macedonian garrison; that 
they had made a decree that their community should not send 
a letter or an embassy to any other king, without the consent 
of Antigonus, that they were forced to maintain and pay the 
Macedonians; and that they had sacrifices, libations, and 
games, in honour of Antigonus, — the fellow-citizens of Ara- 
tus setting the example, and receiving Antigonus into their 
city, on which occasion Aratus entertained him in his house. 
For all these things they blamed Aratus, not considering that 
when he had once put the reins in the hands of that prince, 
he was necessarily carried along with the tide of regal power; 
no longer master of any thing but his tongue, and it was dan- 

* Plutarch seems here to have followed Phylarchus. Polybius tells us that 
Aristomachus deserved greater punishments than he suffered, not only for 
his extreme cruelty when tyrant of Argos, but also for his abandoning the 
Achceans in their distress, and declaring for their enemies. 

CJ72 ARATUS. 

gerous to use that with freedom: for he was visibly concern- 
ed at many circumstances of the king's conduct, particularly 
with respect to the statues. Antigonus erected anew those of 
the tyrants which Aratus had pulled down, and demolished 
those he had set up in memory of the brave men that surprised 
the citadel of Corinth. That of Aratus only was spared, not- 
withstanding his intercession for the rest. In the affair of 
Mantinea,* too, the behaviour of the Achseans was not suita- 
ble to the Grecian humanity: for having conquered it by 
means of Antigonus, they put the principal of the inhabitants 
to the sword ; some of the rest they sold, or sent in fetters to 
Macedonia; and they made slaves of the women and children. 
Of the money thus raised, they divided a third part amongs* 
themselves, and gave the rest to the Macedonians. But thi? 
had its excuse in the law of reprisals. For however shocking 
it may appear for men to sacrifice to their anger those of their 
own nation and kindred, yet in necessity, as Simonides says, 
it seems rather a popular alleviation than a hardship to give 
relief to a mind inflamed and aching with resentment. But as 
to what Aratus did afterwards with respect to Mantinea, it is 
impossible to justify him upon a plea either of propriety or 
necessity: for Antigonus having made a present of that city to 
the Argives, they resolved to repeople it, and appointed Ara- 
tus to see it done; in virtue of which commission, as well as 
that of general, he decreed that it should no more be called 
Mantinea, but Antigonea: which name it still bears. Thus, 
by his means, Mantinea, the amiable Mantinea, as Homer 
calls it, was no more; and, in the place of it, we have a city 
which took its name from the man who ruined its inhabitants. 
Some time after this, Cleomenes being overthrown in a 
great battle near Sellasia,t quitted Sparta, and sailed to Egypt. 

* The Mantineans had applied to the Achaeans for a garrisou to defend 
them against the Lacedaemonians. In compliance with their request, the 
Achaeans sent them three hundred of their own citizens, and two hundred 
mercenaries. But the Mantineans soon after changing their minds, in the 
most perfidious manner massacred that garrison. They deserved, therefore, 
all that they are here said to have suffered ; but Polybius makes no mention 
of the principal inhabitants being put to death; he only says, their goods were 
plundered, and some of the people sold for slaves. 

+ Cleomenes had entrenched himself so strongly near Sellasia, in a narrow 
pass between the mountains Eva and Olympus, that Antigonus did not think 
proper to attack him there. It is not easy to comprehend what could induco 
Cleomenes to come out of these entrenchments, and risk a pitched battle. 
His troops were not so numerous as the enemy's by one third; and he was 
supplied with all forts of provisions from Sparta: what then could make him 
hazard a battle, the event of which was to decide the fate of Lacedaemon ? 
Polybius, indeed, seems to insinuate the cause of this proceeding; for he tells 
us, that Ptolemy king of Egypt, who had promised to assist him in this war, 
acquainted him that he was not in a condition to make good his engagements 

ARATUS. 373 

As for Antigonus, after the kindest and most honourable be- 
haviour to Aratus, he returned to Macedonia. In his sickness 
there, which happened soon after his arrival, he sent Philip, 
then very young, but already declared his successor, into Pe- 
loponnesus, having first instructed him, above all things, to 
give attention to Aratus, and through him to treat with the 
cities, and make himself known to the Achaeans. Aratus re- 
ceived him with great honour, and managed him so well, that 
he returned to Macedonia full of sentiments of respect for his 
friend, and in the most favourable disposition for the interests 
of the Greeks. 

After the death of Antigonus, the iEtolians despised the in- 
activity of the Achaeans: for, accustomed to the protection of 
foreign arms, and sheltering themselves under the Macedo- 
nian power, they sunk into a state of idleness and disorder. 
This gave the iEtolians room to attempt a footing in Pelopon- 
nesus. By the way they made some booty in the country 
about Patrae and Dyme, and then proceeded to Messene, and 
laid waste its territories. Aratus was incensed at this inso- 
lence; but he perceived that Timoxenes, who was then gene- 
ral, took slow and dilatory measures, because his year was 
almost expired. Therefore, as he was to succeed to the com- 
mand, he anticipated his commission by five days, for the sake 
of assisting the Messenians. He assembled the Achaear.s, but 
they had now neither exercise nor courage to enable them to 
maintain the combat, and, consequent^7, he was beaten in a 
battle which he fought at Caphyae. Being accused of having 
ventured too much on this occasion,* he became afterwards so 
cold, and so far abandoned his hopes for the public, as to ne- 
glect the opportunities which the iEtolians gave him, and suf- 

And as Cleomenes did not choose to try the other alternative, that of suing 
to Antigonus for a peace, he risked all upon the event of that day. 

* Aratus was accused in the assembly, first, of having taken the command 
upon him before his time. In the next place, he was blamed for having dis- 
missed the Achaean troops, while the /Etolians were still in the heart of Pelo- 
ponnesus. The third article against him was, his venturing a battle with so 
few troops, when he might have made, with great ease, a safe retreat to the 
neighbouring towns, and there reinforced his army. The last and heaviest 
charge against him was, that after he had resolved to give the enemy battle, 
he did not, in the whole action, take one step that became a general of any 
experience: for he sent the cavalry and light-armed foot to attack the ene- 
my's rear, after their front had gained the advantage; whereas he ought to 
have encountered the front at first, with the advantage of having them on the 
declivity ; in which case his heavy-armed infantry would have done him great 
service. However, he endeavoured to prove that the loss of the battle was 
not his fault; adding, that if he had been wanting in any of the duties of an 
able general, he asked pardon ; and hoped that, in regard of his past ser- 
vices, they would not censure him with rigour. This submission of his 
changed the minds of the whole assembly, and the people began to vent their 
rage upon his accusers. 

Vol. IV. 32 

374 ARATUS. 

fered them to roam about Peloponnesus in a Bacchanalian 
manner, committing all the excesses that insolence could sug- 
gest. 

The Achaeans were now obliged to stretch out their hands 
again towards Macedonia, and brought Philip to interfere in 
the affairs of Greece. They knew the regard he had for 
Aratus, and the confidence he placed in him, and hoped, on 
that account, to find him tractable and easy in all their affairs. 
But the king now first began to listen to Apelles, Megalseus, 
and other courtiers, who endeavoured to darken the character 
of Aratus, and prevailed upon him to support the contrary 
party, by which means Eperatus was elected general of the 
Achaeans. Eperatus, however, soon fell into the greatest con- 
tempt amongst them; and as Aratus would not give any atten- 
tion to their concerns, nothing went well. Philip, finding that 
he had committed a capital error, turned again to Aratus, and 
gave himself up entirely to his direction. As his affairs now 
prospered, and his power and reputation grew under the cul- 
ture of Aratus, he depended entirely on him for the farther 
increase of both. Indeed, it was evident to all the world that 
Aratus had excellent talents, not only for guiding a common- 
wealth, but a kingdom too: for there appeared a tincture of 
his principles and manners in all the conduct of this young 
prince. Thus, the moderation with which he treated the Spar- 
tans,* after they had offended him, his engaging behaviour to 
the Cretans, by which he gained the whole island in a few 
days, and the glorious success of his expedition against the 
.ZEtolians, gained Philip the honour of knowing how to follow 
good counsel, and Aratus that of being able to give it. 

On this account, the courtiers envied him still more; and 
as they found that their private engines of calumny availed 
nothing, they began to try open battery, reviling and insulting 
him at table with the utmost effrontery and lowest abuse. Nay, 
once they threw stones at him, as he was retiring from supper 
to his tent. Philip, incensed at such outrage, fined them 
twenty talents, and, upon their proceeding to disturb and em- 
broil his affairs, put them to death. 

B.it, afterwards, he was carried so high by the flow of pros- 
perity, as to discover many disorderly passions. The native 
badness of his disposition broke through the veil he had put 
over it, and, by degrees, his real character appeared. In the 

* The Spartans had killed one of their ephori, and some others of their 
citizens who were in the interest of Philip; and some of his counsellors ad- 
vised him to revenge the affront with rigour. But he said that as the Spar 
tans now belonged to the Achaean league, they were accountable to il ; .and 
that it ill became him to treat them with severity, who were his allies, when 
his predecessor had extended his clemency to them, though enemies. 

ARATUS. 375 

hrst place, he greatly injured young Aratus by corrupting his 
wife; and the commerce was a long time secret, because he 
lived under his roof, where he had been received under tbe 
sanction of hospitality. In the next place, he discovered a 
strong aversion to commonwealths, and to the cities that were 
under that form of government. It was easy to be seen, too$ 
that he wanted to shake off' Aratus. The first suspicion of his 
intentions arose from his behaviour with respect to the Mes- 
senians. There were two factions amongst them which had 
raised a sedition in the city. Aratus went to reconcile tnem; 
but Philip getting to the place a day before him, added stings 
to their mutual resentments. On the one hand, he called the 
magistrates privately, and asked them whether they had not 
laws to restrain the rabble? and, on the other, he asked the 
demagogues whether they had not hands to defend tnem against 
tyrants? The magistrates, thus encouraged, attacked the chiefs 
of the people, and they, in their turn, came with superior num- 
bers, and killed the magistrates, with near two hundred more 
of their party. 

After Phili'p had engaged in these detestable practices, 
which exasperated the Messenians still more against each 
other, Aratus, when he arrived, made no secret of his resent- 
ment, nor did he restrain his son in the severe and disparaging 
things he said to Philip. The young man had once a particu- 
lar attachment to Philip, which, in those days, they distin- 
guished by the name of love; but on this occasion he scrupled 
not to tell him, — " That, after such a base action, instead of 
appearing agreeable, he was the most deformed of human 
kind." 

Philip made no answer, though anger evidently was work- 
ing in his bosom, and he often muttered to himself while the 
other was speaking. However, he pretended to bear it with 
great calmness, and, affecting to appear the man of subdued 
temper and refined manners, gave the elder Aratus his hand, 
and took him from the theatre to the castle of Ithome,* under 
pretence of sacrificing to Jupiter and visiting the place. This 
fort, which is as strong as the citadel of Corinth, were it gar- 
risoned, would greatly annoy the neighbouring country, and 
be almost impregnable. After Philip had offered his sacrifice 
there, and the diviner came to show him the entrails of the 
ox, he took them in both hands, and showed them to Aratus 
and Demetrius of Phariae, sometimes turning them to one, and 
sometimes to the other, and asking them, — " What they saw in 
the entrails of the victim; whether they warned him to keep 

* In the printed text it is Ithomata, which agrees with the name this fort 
has in Polybius; but one of the manuscripts gives us Ilhome, which is the 
name Strabo gives it 

376 ARATUS. 

this citadel, or to restore it to the Messenians?" Demetrius 
smiled, and said, — "If you have the soul of a diviner, you 
will restore it; but if that of a king;, you will hold the bull 
by both his horns." By which he hinted that he must have 
Peloponnesus entirely in subjection, if he added Ithome to the 
citadel of Corinth. Aratus was a long time silent; but upon 
Philip's pressing him to declare his opinion, he said, — " There 
are many mountains of great strength in Crete, many castles 
in Boeotia and Phocis in lofty situations, and many impregna- 
ble places in Acarnania, both on the coast and within land. You 
have seized none of these, and yet they all pay you a volun- 
tary obedience. Robbers, indeed, take to rocks and precipices 
for security; but for a king there is no such fortress as honour 
and humanity. These are the things that have opened to you 
the Cretan sea, these have unbarred the gates of Peloponnesus. 
In short, by these it is that, at so early a period in life, you are 
become general of the one, and sovereign of the other." 
Whilst he was yet speaking, Philip returned the entrails to 
the diviner, and taking Aratus by the hand, drew him along, 
and said, — " Come on then, let us go as we came;" intimating 
that he had overruled him, and deprived him of such an ac- 
quisition as the city would have been. 

From this time Aratus began to withdraw from court, and, 
by degrees, to give up all correspondence with Philip. He 
refused also to accompany him in his expedition into Epirus, 
though applied to for that purpose; choosing to stay at home, 
lest he should share in the disrepute of his actions. But after 
Philip had lost his fleet, with great disgrace, in the Roman 
war, and nothing succeeded to his wish, he returned to Pelo- 
ponnesus, and tried once more what art could do to impose 
upon the Messenians. When he found that his designs were 
discovered, he had recourse to open hostilities, and ravaged 
their country. Aratus then saw all his meanness, and broke 
with him entirely. By this time, too, he perceived that he had 
dishonoured his son's bed: but, though the injury lay heavy 
on him, he concealed it from his son, because he could only 
inform him that he was abused, without being able to help him 
to the means of revenge. There seemed to be a great and 
unnatural change in Philip, who, of a mild and sober young 
prince, became a libidinous and cruel tyrant; but, in fact, it 
was not a change of disposition; it was only discovering, in a 
time of full security, the vices which his fears had long con- 
cealed. That his regard for Aratus had originally a great 
mixture of fear and reverence, appeared even in the method 
he took to destroy him : for though he was very desirous of 
effecting that cruel purpose, because he neither looked upon 
himself as an absolute prince, or a king, or even a freeman. 

ARATUS. 377 

while Aratus lived, yet he would not attempt any thing agains* 
him in the way of open force, but desired Thaurion, one oi 
his friends and generals, to take him off in a private manner 
in his absence. At the same time he recommended poison. 
That officer, accordingly, having formed an acquaintance with 
him, gave him a dose, not of a sharp or violent kind, but such 
a one as causes lingering heats, and a slight cough, and gra- 
dually brings the body to decay. Aratus was not ignorant of 
the cause of his disorder, but knowing that it availed nothing 
to discover it to the world, he bore it quietly and in silence, as 
if it had been an ordinary distemper. Indeed, when one of 
his friends came to visit him in his chamber, and expressed 
his surprise at seeing him spit blood, he said, — " Such, Cepha- 
lon, are the fruits of royal friendship." 

Thus died Aratus at iEgium, after he had been seventeen 
times general of the Achaeans. That people were desirous of 
having him buried there, and would have thought it an honour 
to give him a magnificent funeral, and a monument worthy of 
his life and character. But the Sicyonians considered it as a 
misfortune to have him interred any where but amongst them, 
and, therefore, persuaded the Achaeans to leave the disposal of 
the body entirely to them. As there was an ancient law that 
had been observed with religious care, against burying any 
person within their walls, and they were afraid to transgress it 
on this occasion, they sent to inquire of the priestess of Apollo 
at Delphi, and she returned this answer: — 

Seek yon what funeral honours you shall pay 

To your departed prince, the small reward 

For liberty restor'd, and glory won? 

Bid Sicyon, fearless, rear the sacred tomb. 

For the vile tongue that dares with impious breath 

OfTend Aratus, blasts the face of Nature, 

Pours horror on the earth, and seas, and skies. 

This oracle gave great joy to all the Achaeans, particularly he 
people of Sicyon. They changed the day of mourning mJ > a 
festival, and adorning themselves with garlands and white 
robes, brought the corpse with songs and dances from iEgium 
to Sicyon. There they selected the most conspicuous ground, 
and interred him as the founder and deliverer of their city. 
The place is still called Jlratium ; and there they offer two 
yearly sacrifices; the one on the fifth of the month Daesius, 
(the Athenians call it Anthesterion,*) which was the day he 
delivered the city from the yoke of tyrants, and on which ac- 
count they called the festival Soteria; the other on his birth- 
day. The first sacrifice was offered by the priest of Jupiter 
the Preserver, and the second by the son of Aratus, who, on 

* February. 
Vol. IV. 3 B 32* " 

378 ARATUS. 

that occasion, wore a girdle,* not entirely white, but half pur- 
ple. The music was sung; to the harp by the choir that be- 
longed to the theatre. The procession was led up by the 
master of the Gymnasium, at the head of the boys and young 
men; the senate followed, crowned with flowers, and such of 
the other citizens as chose to attend. Some small marks of 
the ceremonies observed on those days still remain, but tbe 
greatest part is worn out by time and other circumstances. 

Such was the life and character that bistory has given us of 
the elder Aratus. As to the younger, Philip, who was natu- 
rally wicked, and delighted to add insolence to cruelty, gave 
him potions, not of the deadly kind, but such as deprived him 
of his reason; insomuch that he took up inclinations that were 
shocking and monstrous, and delighted in things that not only 
dishonoured, but destroyed him. Death, therefore, which 
took him in the flower of his age, was considered, not as a 
misfortune, but a deliverance. The vengeance, however, of 
Jupiter, the patron of hospitality and friendship, visited Philip 
for his breach of both, and pursued him through life: for he 
was beaten by the Romans, and forced to yield himself to their 
discretion. In consequence of which he was stripped of all 
the provinces he had conquered, gave up all his ships, except 
five, obliged himself to pay a thousand talents, and deliver his 
son as a hostage. He even held Macedonia and its depen- 
dencies only at the mercy of the conquerors. Amidst all 
these misfortunes, he was possessed only of one blessing, a 
son of superior virtue, and him he put to death, in his envy 
and jealousy of the honours the Romans paid him. He left 
his crown to his other son Perseus, who was believed not to 
be his, but a supposititious child, born of a sempstress named 
Gnathaenium. It was over him that Paulus iEmilius triumph- 
ed, and in him ended the royal race of Antigonus; whereas 
the posterity of Aratus remained to our days, and still con- 
tinues in Sicyon and Pellene. 

* Zrpoipioi signifies also a fillet. 

THE 

LIFE OF GALBA. 

Iphicrates the Athenian general, thought that a soldier of 
fortune should have an attachment both to money and plea- 
sure, that his passions might put him upon fighting with more 
boldness for a supply. But most others are of opinion, that 
the main body of an army, like the healthy natural body, 
should have no motion of its own, but be entirely guided by 
the head. Hence, Paulus ^Emilius, when he found his army 
in Macedonia talkative, busy, and ready to direct their gene- 
ral, is said to have given orders, — " That each should keep his 
hand fit for action, and his sword sharp, and leave the rest to 
him." And Plato perceiving that the best general cannot un- 
dertake any thing with success, unless his troops are sober, 
and perfectly united to support him, concluded, that to know 
how to obey, required as generous a disposition, and as ra- 
tional an education, as to know how to command; for these 
advantages would correct the violence and impetuosity of the 
soldier with the mildness and humanity of the philosopher. 
Amongst other fatal examples, what happened amongst the 
Romans after the death of Nero, is sufficient to show that no- 
thing is more dreadful than an undisciplined army actuated 
only by the impulse of their own ferocity. Demades, seeing 
the wild and violent motions of the Macedonian army after 
the death of Alexander, compared it to the Cyclops,* after 
his eye was put out. But the Roman empire more resembled 
the extravagant passions and ravings of the Titans, which the 
poets tell us of, when it was torn in pieces by rebellion, and 
turned its arms against itself; not so much through the am- 
bition of the emperors, as the avarice and licentiousness of the 
soldiers, who drove out one emperor by another.t 

Dionysius the Sicilian, speaking of Alexander of Pherse, 
who reigned in Thessaly only ten months, and then was slain, 
called him, in derision of the sudden change, a theatrical 
tyrant. But the palace of the Caesars received four emperors 
in a less space of time, one entering, and another making his 
exit, as if they had only been acting a part upon a stage. The 
Romans, indeed, had one consolation amidst their misfortunes, 

* Polyphemus. 

t In the original it is, as one nail is driven out by another. 

380 GALBA. 

that they needed no other revenge upon the authors of them 
than to see them destroy each other; and with the greatest 
justice of all, fell the first, who corrupted the army, and taught 
them to expect so much upon the change of emperor; thus 
dishonouring a glorious action by mercenary considerations, 
and turning the revolt from Nero into treason. ForNymphi- 
dius Sabinus, who, as we observed before,* was joined in com- 
mission with Tigellinus, as captain of the praetorian cohorts, 
after Nero's affairs were in a desperate state, and it was plain 
that he intended to retire into Egypt, persuaded the army, as 
if Nero had already abdicated, to declare Galba emperor, pro- 
mising every soldier of the praetorian cohorts seven thousand 
five hundred drachmas, and the troops that were quartered in 
the provinces twelve hundred and fifty drachmas a man: a 
sum which it was impossible to collect without doing infinitely 
more mischief to the empire than Nero had done in his whole 
reign. 

This proved the immediate ruin of Nero, and soon after 
destroyed Galba himself. They deserted Nero in hopes ot 
receiving the money, and despatched Galba because they did 
not receive it. Afterwards they sought for another who might 
pay them that sum, but they ruined themselves by their rebel- 
lions and treasons, without gaining what they had been made 
to expect. To give a complete and exact account of the affairs 
of those times, belongs to the professed historian. It is, how- 
ever, in my province to lay before the reader the most remark- 
able circumstances in the lives of the Caesars. 

It is an acknowledged truth, that Sulpitius Galba was the 
richest private man that ever rose to the imperial dignity. 
But though his extraction was of the noblest, from the family 
of the Servii, yet he thought it a greater honour to be related 
to Quintus Catulus Capitolinus, who was the first man in his 
time for virtue and reputation, though he voluntarily left to 
others the pre-eminence in power. He was also related to Li- 
via, the wife of Augustus, and it was by her interest that he 
was raised from the office he had in the palace to the dignity 
of consul. It is said that he acquitted him of his commission 
m Germany with honour; and that he gained more reputation 
than most commanders during his proconsulate in Africa. 
But his simple parsimonious way of living passed for avarice 
in an emperor; and the pride he took in economy and strict 
temperance was out of character. 

He was sent governor into Spain by Nero, before that em- 
peror had learned to fear such of the citizens as had great au- 
thority in Rome. Besides, the mildness of his temper and 

* In the Life of Nero, which is lost. 

GALBA. 38 1 

his advanced time of life, promised a cautious and prudent 
conduct. The emperor's receivers,* a most abandoned set of 
men, harassed the provinces in the most cruel manner. Galba 
could not assist them against their persecutors; but his con- 
cern for their misfortunes, which appeared not less than if he 
had been a sufferer himself, afforded them some consolation, 
even while they were condemned and sold for slaves. Many 
songs were made upon Nero, and sung every where; and as 
Galba did not endeavour to suppress them, or join the re- 
ceivers of the revenues in their resentment, that was a circum- 
stance which endeared him still more to the natives: for by 
this time he had contracted a friendship with them, having 
long been their governor. He had borne that commission 
eight years, when Junius Vindex, who commanded in Gaul, 
revolted against Nero. It is said, that before this rebellion 
broke out, Galba had intimations of it in letters from Vindex; 
but he neither countenanced nor discovered it, as the gover- 
nors of other provinces did, who sent the letters they bad re- 
ceived to Nero, and by that means ruined the project, as far 
as was in their power. Yet those same governors afterwards 
joining in the conspiracy against their prince, showed that 
thev could betray not only Vindex, but themselves. 

But after Vindex had openly commenced hostilities, he wrote 
to Galba, desiring him, — "To accept the imperial dignity, and 
give a head to the strong Gallic body, which so much wanted 
one; which had no less than a hundred thousand men in arms, 
and was able to raise a much greater number." 

Galba then called a council of his friends. Some of them 
advised him to wait and see what motions there might be in 
Rome, or inclinations for a ehange. But Titus Vinius, cap- 
tain of one of the praetorian cohorts, said, — "What room is 
there, Galba, for deliberation? To inquire whether we shall 
continue faithful to Nero, is to have revolted already. There 
is no medium. We must either accept the friendship of Vin- 
dex, as if Nero was our declared enemy, or accuse and fight 
Vindex, because he desires that the Romans should have Galba 
for their emperor, rather than Nero for their tyrant." Upon 
this, Galba, by an edict, fixed a day for enfranchising all who 
should present themselves. The report of this soon drew to- 
gether a multitude of people who were desirous of a change ; 
and he had no sooner mounted the tribunal, than with one 
voice they declared h.m emperor. He did not immediately 
accept the title, but accused Nero of great crimes, and lament- 
ed the fate of many Romans of great distinction whom he had 

* ETriTpoiria, procuralores ; they had full powers to collect the revenues, and 
scrupled no acts of oppression in the course of their proceedings. 

382 GALBA. 

barbarously slain : after wbich he declared, — "That he would 
serve his country with his best abilities, not as Caesar or em- 
peror, but as lieutenant to the senate and people of Rome."* 

That it was a just and rational scheme, which Vindex adopt- 
ed in calling Galba to the empire, there needs no better proof 
than Nero himself; for though he pretended to look upon the 
commotions in Gaul as nothing, yet when he received the news 
of Galba's revolt, which he happened to do just after he had 
bathed, and was sat down to supper, in his madness he over- 
turned the table. However, when the senate had declared. 
Galba an enemy to his country, he affected to despise the dan- 
ger, and, attempting to be merry upon it, said to his friends, — 
" I have long wanted a pretence to raise money, and this will 
furnish me with an excellent one. The Gauls, when I have 
conquered them, will be a fine booty, and, in the mean time, 
I will seize the estate of Galba, since he is a declared enemy, 
and dispose of it as I think fit." Accordingly, he gave direc- 
tions that Galba's estate should be sold; which Galba no 
sooner heard, than he exposed to sale all that belonged to 
Nero in Spain, and more readily found purchasers. 

The revolt from Nero soon became general; and the gover- 
nors of provinces declared for Galba: only Clodius Macer in 
Africa, and Virginius Rufus in Germany, stood out, and acted 
for themselves, but upon different motives. Clodius being 
conscious to himself of much rapine, and many murders, to 
which his avarice and cruelty had prompted him, was in a 
fluctuating state, and could not take his resolution either to 
assume or reject the imperial title. And Virginius, who com- 
manded some of the best legions in the empire, and had been 
often pressed by them to take the title of emperor, declared, — 
"That he would neither take it himself, nor suffer it to be 
given to any other but the person whom the senate should 
name." 

Galba was not a little alarmed at this at first. But after the 
forces of Virginius and Vindex had overpowered them, like 
charioteers no longer able to guide the reins, and forced them 
to fight, Vindex lost twenty thousand Gauls in the battle, and 
then despatched himself. A report was then current, that the 
victorious army, in consequence of so great an advantage, 
would insist that Virginius should accept the imperial dignity; 
and that, if he refused it, they would turn again to Nero. 
This put Galba in a great consternation, and he wrote letters to 
Virginius, exhorting him to act in concert with him, for pre- 
serving the empire and liberty of the Romans. After which 

* Dio Cassius informs us, that this declaration was made nine months and 
thirteen days before Galba's death, and, consequently, on the third of April; 
for he was assassinated on the fifteenth of January, in the following year. 

GALBA. 383 

he retired with his friends to Colonia, a city in Spain, and 
there spent some time, rather in repenting of what he had 
done, and wishing for the life of ease and leisure, to which he 
had so long heen accustomed, than taking any of the neces- 
sary steps for his promotion. 

It was now the beginning of summer, when one evening, a 
little before night, one of Galba's freed-men, a native of Sicily, 
arrived in seven clays from Rome. Being told that Galba was 
retired to rest, he ran up to his chamber, and having opened 
it, in spite of the resistance of the chamberlains, informed him, 
— " That as Nero did not appear, though he was living at that 
time, the army first, and then the people and senate of Rome, 
had declared Galba emperor; and not long after news was 
brought that Nero was dead." He added, " That he was not 
satisfied with the report, but went and saw the dead body of 
the tyrant before he would set out." Galba was greatly ele- 
vated by this intelligence; and he encouraged the multitudes 
that soon attended at the door by communicating it to them, 
though the expedition with which it was brought appeared 
incredible. But two days after, Titus Vinius, with many 
others, arrived from the camp, and brought an account of all 
the proceedings of the senate. Vinius* was promoted to an 
honourable employment: while the freed-man had his name 
changed from Icelus to Martianus, was honoured with the 
rivilege of wearing the gold ring, and had more attention paid 
im than any of the other freed-men. 
Meantime, at Rome, Nymphidius Sabinus got the adminis- 
tration into his hands, not by slow and insensible steps, but 
with the greatest celerity. He knew that Galba, on account of 
his great age, being now seventy-three, was scarce able to 
make the journey to Rome, though carried in a litter. Besides, 
Lhe forces there had long been inclined to serve him, and now 
they depended upon him only, considering him as their bene- 
factor, on account of the large gratuity he had promised, and 
Galba as their debtor. He, therefore, immediately command- 
ed his colleague Tigellinus to give up his sword. He made 
great entertainments, at which he received persons of consu- 
lar dignity, and such as had commanded armies and provinces; 
yet he gave the invitation in the name of Galba. He like- 
wise instructed many of the soldiers to suggest it to the prae- 
torian cohorts, that they should send a message to Galba, de- 
manding that Nymphidius should be always their captain, and 

* Vinius was of a praetorian family, and had behaved with honour as gover- 
nor of Gallia Narbonensis; but when he became the favourite and first minis- 
ter of the emperor of Rome, he soon made his master obnoxious to the peo- 
ple, and ruined himself. The truth is, he was naturally of a bad disposition, 
and a man of no principles. 

i: 

3Q4 GALBA. 

without a colleague. The readiness the senate expressed to 
add to his honour and authority, in calling him their benefac- 
tor, in going daily to pay their respects at his gate, and de- 
siring that he would take upon him to propose and confirm 
every decree, brought him to a much higher pitch of insolence; 
insomuch, that in a little time, he became not only obnoxious, 
but formidable to the very persons that paid their court to him. 
When the consuls had charged the public messengers with the 
decrees to be carried to the emperor, and had sealed the in- 
struments with their seal, in order that the magistrates of the 
towns through which they were to pass, seeing their authority, 
might furnish them with carriages at every different stage for 
the greater expedition, he resented it, that they had not made 
use of his seal, and employed his men to carry the despatches. 
It is said that he even had it under consideration whether he 
should not punish the consuls: but upon their apologizing, and 
begging pardon for the affront, he was appeased. To ingra- 
tiate himself with the people, he did not hinder them from 
despatching, by torture, such of Nero's creatures as fell into 
their hands. A gladiator, named Spicellus, was put under the 
statues of Nero, and dragged about with them in the forum 
till he died: Aponius, one of the informers, was extended on 
the ground, and waggons loaded with stones driven over him: 
they tore many others in pieces, and some who were entirely 
innocent: so that Mauriscus, who had not only the character 
of one of the best men in Rome, but really deserved it, said 
one day to the senate, — " He was afraid they should soon re- 
gret the loss of Nero." 

Nymphidius, thus advancing in his hopes, was not at all 
displeased at being called the son of Caius Caesar, who reigned 
after Tiberius. It seems that prince, in his youth, had some 
commerce with his mother, who was daughter of Calistus, one 
of Caesar's freed-men, by a sempstress, and who was not want- 
ing in personal charms. But it is evident that the connection 
Caius had with her was after the birth of Nymphidius; and it 
is believed that he was the son of Martianus the gladiator, 
whom Nymphidia fell in love with on account of his reputa- 
tion in his way ; besides, his resemblance to the gladiator gave a 
sanction to that opinion. Be that as it may, he acknowledged 
himself the son of Nymphidia, and yet insisted that he was the 
only person who deposed Nero. Not content with the honours 

and emoluments he enjoyed on that account, * * 

******** 

he aspired to the imperial seat, and had his engines privately 
at work in Rome, in which be employed his friends, with 
some intriguing women, and some men of consular rank. He 

GALBA. g g £ 

sent also Gellianus, one of his friends, into Spain, to act as a 
spy upon Galba. 

After the death of Nero, all things went for Galba accord- 
ing to his wish; only the uncertainty what part Virginius Ru- 
fus would act, gave him some uneasiness. Virginius command- 
ed a powerful army, which had already conquered Vindex; 
and he held in subjection a very considerable part of the Ro 
man empire; for he was master not only of Germany, but 
Gaul, which was in great agitation, and ripe for a revolt. 
Galba, therefore, was apprehensive that he would listen to 
those who offered him the imperial purple. Indeed, there was 
not an officer of greater name or reputation than Virginius, 
nor one who had more weight in the affairs of those times; 
for he had delivered the empire both from tyranny and from 
a Gallic war. He abode, however, by his first resolution, and 
reserved the appointment of emperor for the senate. After 
Nero's death was certainly known, the troops again pressed 
hard upon Virginius, and one of the tribunes drew his sword 
in the pavilion, and bade him receive either sovereign power 
or the steel ; but the menace had no effect. At last, after Fa- 
bius Valens, who commanded one legion, had taken the oath 
of fidelity to Galba, and letters arrived from Rome with an ac- 
count of the senate's decree, he persuaded his army, though 
with great difficulty, to acknowledge Galba. The new em- 
peror having sent Flaccus Hordeonius as his successor, he re- 
ceived him in that quality, and delivered up his forces to him. 
He then went to meet Galba, who was on his journey to Rome, 
and attended him thither, without finding any marks either of 
his favour or resentment. The reason of this was, that Galba, 
on the one hand, considered him in too respectable a light to 
offer him any injury; and, on the other hand, the emperor's 
friends, particularly Titus Vinius, were jealous of the progress 
he might make in his favour. But that officer was not aware, 
that while he was preventing his promotion, he was co-opera- 
ting with his good genius in withdrawing him from the wars 
and calamities in which other generals were engaged, and 
bringing him to a life of tranquillity full of days and peace. 

The ambassadors which the senate sent to Galba met him 
at Narbon, a city of Gaul. There they made their compli- 
ments, and advised him to show himself as soon as possible 
to the people of Rome, who were very desirous to see him. 
He gave them a kind reception, and entertained them in an 
agreeable manner. But though Nymphidius had sent him 
rich vessels, and other furniture suitable to a great prince, 
which he had taken out of Nero's palace, he made use of none 
of it; every thing was served up in dishes of his own. This 
was a circumstance that did him honour, for it showed him a 

Vot.. TV. 3 C 33 

388 GALBA 

man of superior sentiments, and entirely above vanity. Titus 
Vinius, however, soon endeavoured to convince him, that these 
superior sentiments, this modesty and simplicity of manners, 
hetrayed an ambition for popular applause, which real great- 
ness of mind disdains;* by which argument he prevailed with 
him to use Nero's riches, and show all the imperial magnifi- 
cence at his entertainments. Thus, the old man made it ap- 
pear that, in time, he would be entirely governed bv Vinius. 

No man had a greater passion for money than Vinius; nor 
was any man more addicted to women. While he was )Tet 
very young, and making his first campaign under Calvisius 
Sabinus, he brought the wife of his general, (an abandoned 
prostitute,) one night into the camp, in a soldier's habit, and 
lay with her in that part of it which the Romans call the Prin- 
cipia. For this Caius Caesar put him in prison; but he was 
released upon the death of that prince. Afterwards, happening 
to sup with Claudius Caesar, he stole a silver cup. The em- 
peror being informed of it, invited him the following evening, 
but ordered the attendants to serve him with nothing but 
earthen vessels. This moderation of the emperor seemed to 
show that the theft was deserving only of ridicule, and not 
serious resentment; but what he did afterwards, when he had 
Galba and his revenues at command, served partly as the 
cause, and partly as the pretence, for many events of the most 
tragical kind. 

Nymphidius, upon the return of Gellianus, whom he hai 
sent as a spy upon Galba, was informed that Cornelius Laco 
was appointed to the command of the guards and of the palace, 
and that all the power would be in the hands of Vinius. This 
distressed him exceedingly, as he had no opportunity to attend 
the emperor, or speak to bim in private; for his intentions 
were suspected, and all were on their guard. In this per- 
plexity, he assembled the officers of the praetorian cohorts, and 
told them, that "Galba was, indeed, an old man of mild and 
moderate sentiments; but that, instead of using his own judg- 
ment, he was entirely directed by Vinius and Laco, who made 
a bad use of their power. It is our business, therefore," con- 
tinued he, "before they insensibly establish themselves, and 
become sole masters, as Tigellinus was, to send ambassadors 
to the emperor in the name of all the troops, and represent to 
him, that if he removes those two counsellors from his person, 

* In the text it is, xai xoia^oTriTa (nvyaXTiv arra^iaa-av, aumv. — As it is difficult 
to make sense of this, Du Soul ingeniously proposes to read, xcu AKOM-POTH- 
TA MErAAQN aira^iBo-av aumv, which would be in English, and a rusticity 
which, thinks itself unworthy of any thing great. We may be willing to 
make several conjectures of this kind, for the text in this Life is extremely 
corrupt. 

GALBA. 

38' 

he will find a much more agreeable reception amongst the Ro- 
mans." Nymphidius perceiving that his officers did not ap 
prove the proposal, but thought it absurd and preposterous to 
dictate the choice of friends to an emperor of his age, as they 
might have done to a boy who now first tasted power, he 
adopted another scheme. In hopes of intimidating Galba, he 
pretended sometimes in his letters, that there were discontents, 
and dangers of an insurrection in Rome; sometimes, that Clo- 
dius Macer had laid an embargo in Africa on the corn-ships. 
One while he said the German legions were in motion, and 
another while, that there was the same rebellious disposition 
amongst those in Syria and Judea. But as Galba did not give 
much attention or credit to his advices, he resolved to usurp 
the imperial title himself before he arrived ; though Clodius 
Celsus the Antiochian, a sensible man, and one of his best 
friends, did all in his power to dissuade him, and told him 
plainly, he did not believe there was one family in Rome that 
would give him the title of Caesar. Many others, however, 
made a jest of Galba; and Mithridates of Pontus, in par- 
ticular, making merry with his bald head and wrinkled face, 
said, — "The Romans think him something extraordinary 
while he is at a distance, but as soon as he arrives they will 
consider it a disgrace to the times to have ever called him 
Caesar." 

It was resolved, therefore, that Nymphidius should be con- 
ducted to the camp at midnight, and proclaimed emperor. But 
Antonius Honoratus, the first tribune, assembled in the even- 
ing the troops under his command, and blamed both himself 
and them for changing so often in so short a time, not in pur- 
suance of the dictates of reason, or for making a better choice, 
but because some demon pushed them on from one treason to 
another: — "The crimes of Nero, indeed," said he, " may jus- 
tify our first measures. But has Galba murdered his own mo- 
ther, or his wife? Or has he made you ashamed of your em- 
peror by appearing as a fiddler or an actor on a stage? Yet 
not even these things brought us to abandon Nero ; but Nym- 
phidius first persuaded us that he had abandoned us, and was 
fled into Egypt. Shall we then sacrifice Galba after Nero ; 
and when we have destroyed the relation of Li via, as well as 
the son of Agrippina, set the son of Nymphidia on the imperial 
throne? Or rather, after having taken vengeance on a detesta- 
ble tyrant in Nero, shall we not show ourselves good and 
faithful guards to Galba?" 

Upon this speech of the tribune, all his men acceded to the 
proposal. They applied also to their fellow soldiers, and pre- 
vailed upon most of them to return to their allegiance. At 
the same time a loud shout was heard in the camp; and Nym- 

388 GALBA. 

phidius either believing (which is the account that some give 
us) that the troops were calling him in order to proclaim him 
emperor, or else hastening to appease the insurrection, and fix 
such as he found wavering, went with lights to the camp; 
having in his hand a speech composed for him by Cingonius 
Varro, which he had committed to memory in order to pro- 
nounce it to the army. But seeing the gates shut, and a num- 
ber of men in arms upon the wall, his confidence ahated. 
However, advancing nearer, he asked them, — " What they 
intended to do, and by whose command they were under 
arms?" They answered, one and all, — "That they acknow- 
ledged no other emperor but Galba." Then pretending to 
enter into their opinion, he applauded their fidelity, and order- 
ed those that accompanied him to follow his example. The 
guard opening the gate, and suffering him to enter with a few 
of his people, a javelin was thrown at him, which Septimius, 
who went before, received upon his shield. But others draw- 
ing their swords, he fled, and was pursued into a soldier's hut, 
where they despatched him. His body was dragged to the 
middle of the camp, where they enclosed it with pales, and 
exposed it to puhlic view the next day. 

Nymphidius being thus taken off, Galba was no sooner in- 
formed of it, than he ordered such of his accomplices as had not 
already despatched themselves, to be put to death. Amongst 
these was Cingonius who composed the oration, and Mithri- 
dates of Pontus. In this the emperor did not proceed accord- 
ing to the laws and customs of the Romans ; nor was it, indeed, 
a popular measure to inflict capital punishment upon person? 
01 eminence, without any form of trial, though they might de- 
serve death: for the Romans, deceived, as it usuaily happens 
by the first reports, now expected another kind of government. 
But what afflicted them most was, the order he sent for the 
execution of Petronius Turpjlianus, a man of consular dignity, 
merely because he had been faithful to Nero. There was 
some pretence for taking off Macer in Africa, by means of 
Trebonianus, and Fonteius in Germany by Valens, because 
they were in arms, and had forces that he might be afraid of. 
But there was no reason why Turpilianus, a defenceless old 
man, should not have a hearing, at least under a prince who 
should have preserved in his actions the moderation he so 
much affected. Such complaints there were against Galba on 
this subject. 

When he was about five-and-twenty furlongs from the city, 
he found the way stopped by a disorderly crew of seamen, 
who gathered about him on all sides.* These were persons 

Dio Cassius tells us, (lib. lxiv.) that seven thousand of the disarmed mul- 

GALBA. ggg 

whom Nero had formed into a legion, that they might act as 
soldiers. They now met him on the road to have their esta- 
blishment confirmed, and crowded the emperor so much, that 
he could neither he seen nor heard by those who came to wait 
on him; for they insisted in a clamorous manner, on having 
legionary colours and quarters assigned them. Galba put 
them off to another time; but they considered that as a de- 
nial: and some of them even drew their swords: upon which 
he ordered the cavalry to fall upon them. They made no re- 
sistance, but fled with the utmost precipitation, and many of 
them were killed in their flight. It was considered as an in 
auspicious circumstance for Galba to enter the city amidst so 
much blood and slaughter. And those who despised him be- 
fore as weak and inactive through age, now looked upon him 
as an object of fear and horror. 

Besides, while he endeavoured to reform the extravagance 
and profusion with which money used to be given awa)7 by 
Nero, he missed the mark of propriety. When Canus, a ce- 
lebrated performer on the flute, played to him one evening at 
court, after expressing the highest satisfaction at the excel- 
lence of his music, he ordered his purse to be brought, and 
taking out a few pieces of gold,* gave them to Canus, telling 
him at the same time, that this was a gratuity out of his own, 
not the public money. As for the money which Nero had 
given to persons that pleased him on the stage, or in the pa- 
laestra, he insisted with great rigour that it should all be re- 
turned, except a tenth part. And as persons of such dissolute 
lives, who mind nothing but a provision for the day, could 
produce very little, he caused inquiry to be made for all who 
had bought any thing of them, or received presents, and obliged 
them to refund. This affair extending to great numbers of 
people, and seeming to have no end, it reflected disgrace upon 
the emperor, and brought the public envy and hatred on Vini- 
us, because be made the emperor sordid and mean to others, 
while he pillaged the treasury himself in the most insatiable 
manner, and took and sold whatever he thought proper. 

In short, as Hesiod says, — 

Spare not the full cask, nor, when shallow streams 
Declare the bottom near, withdraw your hand. 

So Vinius, seeing Galba old and infirm, drank freely of the 

titude were cut to pieces on the spot ; and others were committed to prison, 
where they lay till the death of Galba. 

* Suetonius says, Galba gave five denarii. But at that time there were de- 
narii of gold. That writer adds, that when his table, upon any extraordinary 
occasion, was more splendidly served than usual, he could not forhear sigh- 
ing, and expressing his dissatisfaction in a manner inconsistent with common 
decency. 

33* 

390 

GALBA. 

favours of fortune, as only beginning, and yet, at the same 
time, drawing to an end.* 

But the aged emperor was greatly injured by Vinius, not 
only through his neglect or misapplication of things commit- 
tedto his trust, but by his condemning or defeating the most 
salutary intentions of his master. This was the case with 
respect to punishing Nero's ministers. Some bad ones, it is 
true, were put to death, amongst whom were Elius, Polycle- 
tus, Petinus, and Patrobius. The people expressed their joy 
by loud plaudits when these were led through the forum to 
the place of execution, and called it a glorious and holy pro- 
cession. But both gods and men, they said, demanded the 
punishment of Tj.gelTinus, who suggested the very worst mea- 
sures, and taught Nero all his tyranny. That worthy minister, 
however, had secured himself by great presents to Vinius, 
which were only earnests of still greater. Turpilianus, 
though obnoxious only because he had not betrayed or hated 
his master on account of his bad qualities, and though guilty 
of no remarkable crime, was, notwithstanding, put to death'; 
while the man who had made Nero unfit to live, and, after he 
had made him such, deserted and betrayed him, lived and 
flourished: a proof that there was nothing which Vinius 
would not sell, and that no man had reason to despair who 
had money: for there was no sight which the people of Rome 
so passionately longed for, as that of Tigellinus carried to ex- 
ecution; and in the theatre and the circus they continually de- 
manded it, till at last the emperor checked them by an edict, 
importing that Tigellinus was in a deep consumption, which 
wou.nl destroy him ere long; and that their sovereign entreat- 
ed them not to turn his government into a tyranny by needless 
acts of severity. 

The people were highly displeased; but the miscreants only 
laughed at them. Tigellinus offered sacrifice in acknowledg- 
ment to the gods for his recovery, and provided a great enter- 
tainment; and Vinius rose from the emperor's table, to go 
and carouse with Tigellinus, accompanied by his daughter, 
who was a widow. Tigellinus drank to her, and said, — "I 
will make this cup worth two hundred and fifty thousand 
drachmas to you." At the same time, he ordered his chief 
mistress to take off her own necklace, and gave it her. This 
was said to be worth a hundred and fifty thousand more. 

From this time the most moderate of Galba's proceedings 

* Thus, in the court of Galba, appeared all the extortions of Nero's reign. 
They were equally grievous, (says Tacitus,) but not equally excused, in a 
prince of Galba's years and experience. He had himself the greatest inte- 
grity of heart; but as the rapacity and other excesses of bis ministers were 
imputed to him, he was no less hated than if he had committed them himself. 

GALBA. 39J 

were misrepresented.* For instance, his lenity to the Gauls, 
who had conspired with Vindex, did not escape censure: for 
it was believed that they had not gained a remission of tribute 
and the freedom of Rome from the emperor's indulgence, but 
that they purchased them of Vinius. Hence the people had 
a general aversion to Galba's administration. As for the sol- 
diers, though they did not receive what had been promised 
them, they let it pass, hoping that, if they had not that gratuity, 
they should certainly have as much as Nero had given them. 
But when they began to murmur, and their complaints were 
brought to Galba, he said, what well became a great prince, — 
" That it was his custom to choose, not to buy his soldiers." 
This saying, however, being reported to the troops, filled them 
with the most deadly and irreconcileable hatred to Galba: for 
it seemed to them that he not only wanted to deprive them of 
the gratuity himself, but to set a precedent for future emperors. 

The disaffection to the government that prevailed in Rome 
was, as yet, kept secret in some measure, partly because some 
remaining reverence for the presence of the emperor prevent- 
ed the flame of sedition from breaking out, and partly for want 
of an open occasion to attempt a change. But the troops 
which had served under Virginius, and were now commanded 
by Flaccus in Germany, thinking they deserved great things 
for the battle which they fought with Vindex, and finding that 
they obtained nothing, began to behave in a very refractory 
manner, and could not be appeased by their officers. Their 
general himself they utterly despised, as well on account of 
his inactivity (for he had the gout in a violent manner,) as his 
want of experience in military affairs. One day, at some pub- 
lic games, when the tribunes and centurions, according to cus- 
tom, made vows for the happiness of the emperor, the com- 
mon soldiers murmured; and when the officers repeated their 
good wishes, they answered, — " If he is worthy." 

The legions that were under the command of Tigellinus 
behaved with equal insolence; of which Galba's agents wrote 
him an account. He was now apprehensive that it was not 
only his age, but his want of children, that brought him into 
contempt;" and, therefore, he formed a design to adopt some 
voung man of noble birth, and declare him his successor 
Marcus Otho was of a family by no means obscure; but, at 
the same time, he was more remarkable from his infancy for 

* Though the rest of Galha's conduct was not blameless, yet (according to 
Suetonius'and Zonaras) he kept the soldiers to their duty; he punished with 
the utmost severity those who, by their false accusations, had occasioned the 
death of innocent persons; he delivered up to punishment such slaves as had 
borne witness against their masters; and he recalled those who had been 
banished by Nero under pretence of treason. 

3 92 GALBA. 

luxury and love of pleasure than most of the Roman youth 
And as Homer often calls Paris the husband of the beauteous 
Helen, because he had nothing else to distinguish him, so Otho 
was noted in Rome as the husband of Poppaea. This was the 
lady whom Nero fell in love with while she was wife to Cris- 
pinus; but retaining as yet some respect for his own wife, and 
some reverence for his mother, he privately employed Otho to 
solicit her; for Otho's debauchery had recommended him to 
Nero as a friend and companion, and he had an agreeable way 
of rallying him upon what he called his avarice and sordid 
manner of living. 

We are told, that one day when Nero was perfuming him- 
self with a very rich essence, besprinkled a little of it upon 
Otho. Otho invited the emperor the day following, when 
suddenly gold and silver pipes opened on all sides of the 
apartment, and poured out essences for them in as much plen- 
ty as if it had been water. He applied to Poppsea, according to 
Nero's desire, and first seduced her for him, with the flatter- 
ing idea of having an emperor for her lover; after which he 
persuaded her to leave her husband. But when he took hei 
home as his own wife, he was not so happy in having her, as 
miserable in the thought of sharing her with another. And 
Poppaea is said not to have been displeased with this jealousy : 
for, it seems, she refused to admit Nero when Otho was ab- 
sent; whether it was that she studied to keep Nero's appetite 
from cloying, or whether (as some say) she did not choose to 
receive the emperor as a husband, but, in her wanton way, took 
more pleasure in having him approach her as a gallant. Otho's 
life, therefore, was in great danger on account of that mar- 
riage; and it is astonishing, that the man who could sacrifice 
his wife and sister for the sake of Poppsca, should afterwards 
spare Otho. 

But Otho had a friend in Seneca; and it was he who per- 
suaded Nero to send him out governor of Lusitania, upon 
the borders of the ocean. Otho made himself agreeable to 
the inhabitants by his lenity; for he knew that this command 
was given him only as a more honourable exile.* Upon 
Galba's revolt he was the first governor of a province that 
came over to him, and he carried with him all the gold and 
silver vessels he had, to be melted down and coined for his 
use. He likewise presented him with such of his servants as 
knew best how to wait upon an emperor. He behaved to him, 
indeed, in all respects, with great fidelity; and it appeared 

* On this occasion the following distich was made : 

Cur Otho mentito sit, quaeritis, exul honore; 
Uxoris mcechus cceperat esse suae 

GALBA. 3 93 

from the specimen he gave, that there was no department in 
the government for which he had not talents. He accompa- 
nied him in his whole journey, and was many days in the 
same carriage with him; during all which time he lost no op- 
portunity to pay his court to Vinius, either hy assiduities or 
presents: and as he always took care to leave him the first 
place, he was secure by this means of having the second. Be- 
sides that there was nothing invidious in this station, he recom- 
mended himself by granting his favours and services without 
reward, and by his general aiTahility and politeness. He took 
most pleasure in serving the officers of the army, and ohtained 
governments for many of them, partly by applications to the 
emperor, and partly to Vinius and his freed-men Icelus and 
Asiaticus; for these had the chief influence at court. 

Whenever Galba visited him, he complimented the com- 
pany of guards that was upon duty with a piece of gold for 
each man ; thus practising upon and gaining the soldiers, while 
he seemed only to be doing honour to their master. When 
Galba was deliberating on the choice of a successor, Vinius 
proposed Otho. Nor was this a disinterested overture; for 
Otho had promised to marry Vinius' daughter, after Galba had 
adopted him, and appointed him his successor. But Galba al- 
ways showed that he preferred the good of the public to any 
private considerations; and in this case he sought not for the 
man who might be most agreeable to himself, but one who 
promised to be the greatest blessing to the Romans. Indeed, 
it can hardly be supposed that he would have appointed Otho 
heir even to his private patrimony, when he knew how ex- 
pensive and profuse he was, and that he was loaded with a 
debt of five millions of drachmas. He, therefore, gave Vinius 
a patient hearing, without returning him any answer, and put 
off the affair to another time. However, as he declared him 
self consul, and chose Vinius for his colleague, it was supposed 
that he would appoint a successor at the beginning of the next 
year, and the soldiers wished that Otho might be the man. 

But while Galba delayed the appointment, and continued 
deliberating, the army mutinied in Germany. All the troops 
throughout the empire hated Galba, because they had not re- 
ceived the promised donations; but those in Germany had a 
particular apology for their aversion. They alleged, — " That 
Virginius Rufus, their general, had been removed with igno- 
miny; and that the Gauls, who had fought against them, were 
the only people that were rewarded ; whilst all who had not 
joined Vindex were punished, and Galba, as if he had obliga- 
tions to none but him for the imperial diadem, honoured his 
memory with sacrifices and public libations." 

Such speeches as these were common in the camp, when the 

Vol. IV. 3D 

394 GALBA. 

calends of January were at hand, and Flaccus assemhled the 
soldiers, that they might take the customary oath of fealty to 
the emperor. But, instead of that they overturned and broke 
to pieces the statues of Galba; and having taken an oath of 
allegiance to the senate and people of Rome, they retired to 
their tents. Their officers were now as apprehensive of anar- 
chy as rebellion, and the following speech is said to have been 
made on the occasion: — "What are we doing, my fellow-sol- 
diers? We neither appoint another emperor, nor keep our 
allegiance to the present, as if we had renounced not only 
Galba, but every other sovereign, and all manner of obedience. 
It is true, Hordeonius Flaccus is no more than the shadow of 
Galba. Let us quit him. But at the distance of one day's 
march only, there is Vitellius, who commands in the lower 
Germany, whose father was censor, and thrice consul, and, in 
a manner, colleague to the emperor Claudius. And though 
his poverty be a circumstance for which some people may de- 
spise him, it is a strong proof of his probity and greatness of 
mind. Let us go and declare him emperor, and show the 
world that we know how to choose a person for that high dig- 
nity better than the Spaniards and Lusitanians." 

Some approved, and others rejected this motion. One of 
the standard-bearers, however, marched off privately, and car- 
ried the news to Vitellius that night. He found him at table, 
for he was giving a great entertainment to his officers. The 
news soon spread through the army, and Fabius Valens, who 
commanded one of the legions, went next day at the head of a 
considerable party of horse, and saluted V itellius emperor. 
For some days before, he seemed to dread the weight of sove- 
reign power, and totally to decline it; but now, being forti- 
fied with the indulgences of the table, to which he liad sat 
down at mid-day, he went out and accepted the title of Ger- 
manicus, which the army conferred upon him, though he re- 
fused that of Caesar. Soon after, Flaccus' troops forgot the 
republican oaths they had taken to the senate and people, and 
swore allegiance to Vitellius. Thus Vitellius was proclaimed 
emperor in Germany. 

As soon as Galba was informed of the insurrection there, he 
resolved, without farther delay, to proceed to the adoption. 
He knew some of his friends were for Dolabella, and a still 
greater number for Otho; but without being guided by the 
judgment of either party, or making the least mention of his 
design, he sent suddenly for Piso, the son of Crassus and Scri- 
bonia, who were put to death by Nero; a young man formed 
by nature for every virtue, and distinguished for his modesty 
and sobriety of manners. In pursuance of his intentions, he 
went down with him to the camp, to give him the title of 

GALBA. 2Q5 

Caesar, and declared him his successor But he was no sooner 
out of his palace than very inauspicious presages appeared : 
and in the camp, when he delivered a speech to the army, 
reading some parts and pronouncing others from memory, the 
many claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, the violent 
rain that fell, and the darkness that covered both the camp 
and the city, plainly announced that the gods did not admit of 
the adoption, and that the issue would be unfortunate. The 
countenances of the soldiers, too, were black and lowering, 
because there was no donation even on that occasion.* 

As to Piso, all that were present could not but wonder, that, 
so far as they could conjecture from his voice and look, he 
was not disconcerted with so great an honour, though he did 
not receive it without sensibility. t On the contrary ,"in Otho's 
countenance there appeared strong marks of resentment, and 
of the impatience with which he bore the disappointment of 
his hopes: for his failing of that honour, which he had been 
thought worthy to aspire to, and which he lately believed him- 
self very near attaining, seemed a proof of Galba' s hatred and 
ill intentions to him. He was not, therefore, without appre- 
hensions of what might befall him afterwards; and dreading 
Galba, execrating Piso, and full of indignation against Vinius, 
he retired with this confusion of passion in his heart. But 
the Chaldseans and other diviners, whom he had always about 
him, would not suffer him entirely to give up his hopes or 
abandon his design. In particular, he relied on Ptolemy, be- 
cause he had formerly predicted, that he should not fall by the 
hand of Nero, but survive him, and live to ascend the imperial 
throne for as the former part of the prophecy proved true, 
he thought he had no reason to despair of the latter. None, 
however, exasperated him more against Galba than those who 
condoled with him in private, and pretended that he had been 
treated with great ingratitude. Besides, there was a number 
of people that had flourished under Tigellinus and Nymphidius, 
and now lived in poverty and disgrace, who, to recommend 
themselves to Otho, expressed great indignation at the slight 
he had suffered, and urged him to revenge it. Amongst these 
were Veturius, who was optio, or centurion's deputy, and Bar- 
bius, who was tesserarius, or one of those that carry the 
word from the tribunes to the centurions.}: Onomastus, one of 

* Tacitus tells us, that a little exertion of liberality would have gained the. 
army ; and that Galba suffered by an unseasonable attention to the purity of 
ancient times. 

t See an excellent speech which Tacitus ascribes to Galba on this occa- 
sion. 

\ The way of setting the nightly guard was by a tessera, or tally with a 

c)qg 6 ALBA. 

Otho's freed-men, joined them, and went from troop to troop, 
corrupting some with money, and others with promises. In- 
deed, they were corrupt enough already, and wanted only an 
opportunity to put their designs in execution. If they had not 
been extremely disaffected, they could not have been prepared 
for a revolt in so short a space of time as that of four days, 
which was all that passed between the adoption and the assas- 
sination ; for Piso and Galba were both slain the sixth day after, 
which was the fifteenth of January. Early in the morning 
Galba sacrificed in the palace in presence of his friends. Um- 
bricius the diviner no sooner took the entrails in his hands, 
than he declared, not in enigmatical expressions, but plainly, 
that there were signs of great troubles and of treason that 
threatened immediate danger to the emperor. Thus Otho 
was almost delivered up to Galba by the hand of the gods; for 
he stood behind the emperor, listening with great attention to 
the observations made by Umbricius. These put him in great 
confusion, and his fears were discovered by his change of co- 
lour, when his freed-man Onomastus came and told him that 
the architects were come, and waited for him at his house. 
This was the signal for Otho's meeting the soldiers. He pre- 
tended, therefore, that he had bought an old house which 
these architects were to examine, and going down by what is 
called Tiberius' palace, went to that part of the forum where 
stands the gilded pillar which terminates all the great roads in 
Italy.* 

The soldiers who received him and saluted him emperor, 
are said not to have been more than twenty-three: so that, 
though he had nothing of that dastardly spirit which the deli- 
cacy of his constitution, and the effeminacy of his life seemed 
to declare, but, on the contrary, was firm and resolute in time 
of danger; yet, on this occasion, he was intimidated, and 
wanted to retire. But the soldiers would not suffer it. They 
surrounded the chairt with drawn swords, and insisted on its 

particular inscription, given from one centurion to another quite through the 
army, till it came again to the tribune who first delivered it. 

The text in this place is corrupt. Lipsius rightly observes, that, instead 
of <5i ayyt\wv and 5i oTrmpuv, we should read diayyt\uv and (Jion-rnpcov. Then it 
will read thus: — Outco yap xa^svrai 01 5iayyt\uv »ai SiOTrmpcov 'vir-npeaias rilnvrts. 
But even then Plutarch will not have given a description of the principal of- 
fices of the optio and the tesserarius. Messengers, it is true, they were ; but 
spies only occasionally. It is necessary, however, to translate the text thus 
amended, at least in a note: — So they are called who perform the office of 
messengers and spies. 

* This pillar was set up by Augustus when he took the highways under his 
inspection, and had the distances of places from Rome marked upon it. 

+ Suetonius says, he got into a woman's sedan, in order to be the better 
concealed. 

GALBA. gg7 

proceeding to the camp. Mean time Otho desired the bearers 
to make haste, often declaring that he was a lost man. There 
were some who overheard him, and they rather wondered at 
the hardiness of the attempt with so small a party, than dis- 
turhed themselves about the consequences. As he was car- 
ried through the forum, about the same number as the first 
joined him, and others afterwards, by three or four at a time. 
The whole party then saluted him Caesar, and conducted him 
to the camp, flourishing their swords before him. Martialis, 
the tribune who kept guard that day, knowing nothing (as they 
tell us) of the conspiracy, was surprised and terrified at so un- 
expected a sight, and suffered them to enter. When Otho was 
within the camp, he met with no resistance, for the conspira- 
tors gathered about such as were strangers to the design, and 
made it their business to explain it to them; upon which they 
joined them by one or two at a time, at first out of fear, and 
afterwards out of choice. 

The news was immediately carried to Galba, while the di- 
viners 3'et attended, and had the entrails in his hands; so that 
they who had been most incredulous in matters of divination, 
and even held it in contempt before, were astonished at the 
divine interposition in the accomplishment of this presage. 
People of all sorts now crowding from the forum to the pa- 
lace, Vinius and Laco, with some of the emperor's freed-men, 
stood before him with drawn swords to defend him. Piso 
went out to speak to the life-guards, and Marius Celsus, a man 
of great courage and honour, was sent to secure the Illyrian 
legion, which lay in Vipsanius' portico. 

Galba was inclined to go out to the people. Vinius endea- 
voured to dissuade him from it; but Celsus and Laco encou- 
raged him to go, and expressed themselves with some sharp- 
ness against Vinius. Mean time a strong report prevailed 
that Otho was slain in the camp; soon after which, Julius 
Atticus, a soldier of some note amongst the guards, came up, 
and crying he was the man that had killed Caesar's enemy, 
made his "way through the crowd, and showed his bloody 
sword to Galba. The emperor fixing his eye upon him, said, 
— " Who gave you orders?" He answered, — " My allegiance, 
and the oath 1 had taken;" and the people expressed their ap- 
probation in loud plaudits. Galba then went out in a sedan 
chair, with a design to sacrifice to Jupiter, and show himselt 
to the people. But he had no sooner entered the forum than 
ihe rumour changed like the wind, and news met him that 
Otho was master of the camp. On this occasion, as it was 
natural amongst a multitude of people, some called out to him 
to advance, and some to retire; some to take courage, and some 
to be cautious. His chair was tossed backward and forward, 

Vol. IV. 34 

398 GALBA. 

as in a tempest., and ready to be overset, when there appeared 
first a party of horse, and then another of foot, issuing from 
the Basilica of Paulus, and crying out, — "Away with this 
private man!" Numbers were then running about, not to se- 
parate by flight, but to possess themselves ot the porticoes and 
eminences about the forum, as it were to enjoy some public 
spectacle. Atilius Virgilio beat down one of Galba's statues, 
which served as a signal for hostilities, and they attacked the 
chair on all sides with javelins. As those did not despatch 
him, they advanced sword in hand. In this time of trial none 
stood up in his defence but one man, who, indeed, amongst so 
many millions, was the only one that did honour to the Ro- 
man empire. This was Sempronius Densus,* a centurion, 
who, without any particular obligations to Galba, and only 
from a regard to honour and the law, stood forth to defend 
the chair. First of all he lifted up the vine-branch with which 
the centurions chastise such as deserve stripes, and then called 
out to the soldiers who were pressing on, and commanded 
them to spare the emperor. They fell upon him notwith- 
standing, and he drew his sword and fought a long time, till 
he received a stroke in the ham, which brought him to the 
ground. 

The chair was overturned at what is called the Curtian 
Lake, and Galba tumbling out of it, they ran to despatch him. 
At the same time he presented his throat, and said, — "Strike, 
if it be for the good of Rome." He received many strokes 
upon his arms and legs, for he had a coat of mail upon his 
body. According to most accounts, it was Camurius, a sol- 
dier of the fifteenth legion, that despatched him; though some 
say it was Terentius, some Arcadius,t and others Fabius Fa- 
bulus. They add, that when Fabius had cut off his head, he 
wrapt it up in the skirt of his garment, because it was so bald 
that he could take no hold of it. His associates, however, 
would not suffer him to conceal it, but insisted that he should 
let the world see what an exploit he had performed: he, there- 
fore, fixed it upon the point of his spear, and swinging about 
the head of a venerable old man, and a mild prince, who was 
both Pontifex Maximxis and consul, he ran on (like the Bac- 
chanals with the head of Pentheus,) brandishing his spear that 
was dyed with the blood that trickled from it. 

When the head was presented to Otho, he cried out, — "This 
is nothing, my fellow-soldiers; show me the head of Piso." 
It was brought not long after; for that young prince being 

* Tn the Greek text it is Indistrus; but that text (as we observed before I in 
the Life of Galba, is extremely corrupt. We have, therefore, given Den*js 
from Tacitus; as Virgilio instead of Sercelto, above. 

+ In Tacitus, Lecanius. That historian makes no mention of Fabius. 

GALBA. 399 

wounded, and pursued by one Marcus, was killed by him at 
the gates of the temple of Vesta. Vinius also was put to the 
sword, though he declared himself an accomplice in the con- 
spiracy, and protested that it was against Otho's orders that he 
suffered. However, they cut off his head, and that of Laco, 
and carrying them to Otho, demanded their reward : for, as 
Archilochus says, — 

We bring seven warriors only to your tent, 
Yet thousands of us killed tliein. 

So, in this case many, who had no share in the action, bathed 
their hands and swords in the blood, and showing them to 
Otho, petitioned for their reward. It appeared afterwards, 
from the petitions given in, that the number of them was a 
hundred and twenty; and Vitellius, having searched them out, 
put them all to death. Marius Celsus also coming to the 
camp, many accused him of having exhorted the soldiers to 
stand by Galba, and the bulk of the army insisted that he 
should suffer. But Otho being desirous to save him, and yet 
afraid of contradicting them, told them, — " He did not choose 
to have him executed so soon, because he had several impor- 
tant questions to put to him." He ordered him, therefore, to 
be kept in chains, and delivered him to persons in whom he 
could best confide. 

The senate was immediately assembled ; and, as if they were 
become different men, or had other gods to swear by, they took 
the oath to Otho, which he had before taken to Galba, but had 
not kept; and they gave him the titles of Caesar and Augustus, 
while the bodies of those that had been beheaded lay in their 
consular robes in the forum. As for the heads, the soldiers, 
after they had no farther use for them, sold that of Vinius to 
his daughter for two thousand five hundred drachmas. Piso's 
was given to his wife Verania, at her request;* and Galba's to 
the servants of Patrobius and Vitellius,T who, after they had 
treated it with the utmost insolence and outrage, threw it into 
a place called Sestertium,% where the bodies of those are cast 
that are put to death by the emperors. Galba's corpse was 
carried away by Helvidius Priscus, with Otho's permission, 
and buried in the night by his freed-man Argius. 

Such is the history of Galba; a man who, in the points of 
family and fortune, distinctly considered, was exceeded by few 
of the Romans, and who, in the union of both, was superior 

* Tacitus (lib. i.) says she purchased it. 

t Galba had put Patrobius to death ; but we know not why the servants of 
Vitellius should desire to treat Galba's remains with any indignity. 

\ Lipsius says, it was so called, quasi semilertium, as being two miles and 
a half from the city. 

400 GALBA. 

to all. He had lived, too, in great honour, and with the best 
reputation, under five emperors; and it was rather by his cha- 
racter, than by force of arms, that he deposed Nero. As to 
the rest who conspired against the tyrant, some of them were 
thought unworthy of the imperial diadem by the people, and 
others thought themselves unworthy. But Galba was invited 
to accept it, and only followed the sense of those who called 
him to that high dignity. Nay, when he gave the sanction of 
his name to Vindex, that which before was called rebellion, 
was considered only as a civil war, because a man of princely 
talents was then at the head of it. So that he did not so much 
want the empire, as the empire wanted him: and with these 
principles he attempted to govern a people corrupted by Ti- 
gellinus and Nymphidius, as Scipio, Fabricius, and Carnillus 
governed the Romans of their times. Notwithstanding his 
great age, he showed himself a chief worthy of ancient Rome 
through all the military department. But in the civil admi- 
nistration, he delivered himself up to Vinius, to Laco, and to 
his enfranchised slaves, who sold every thing, in the same 
manner as Nero had left all to his insatiaoie vermin. The 
consequence of this was, that no man regretted him as an em- 

Eeror, though almost all were moved v»lth pity at his misera- 
le fate. 

THE 

LIFE OF OTHO. 

The new emperor went early in the morning to the Capitol 
and sacrificed; after which he ordered Marius Celsus to be 
brought before him. He received that officer with great marks 
of his regard, and desired him rather to forget the cause of 
his confinement, than to remember his release. Celsus neither 
showed any meanness in his acknowledgments, nor any want 
of gratitude. He said, — " The very charge brought against 
him bore witness to hi's character; since he was accused only 
of having been faithful to Galba, from whom he had never re- 
ceived any personal obligations." All who were present at 
the audience, admired both the emperor and Celsus, and the 
soldiers in particular '.estified their approbation.* Otho made 
a mild and gracious speech to the senate. The remaining time 
of his consulship he divided with Virginius Rufus, and he 
left those who had been appointed to that dignity by Nerc 
and Galba to enjoy it in their course. Such as were respecta 
b)e for their age and character he promoted to the priesthood , 
and to those senators who had been banished by Nero, and 
recalled by Galba, he restored all their goods and estates that 
he found unsold. So that the first and best of the citizens, 
who had before not considered him as a man, but dreaded him 
as a fury, or destroying demon, that had suddenly seized the 
seat of government, now entertained more pleasing hopes from 
so promising a beginning. 

But nothing gave the people in general so high a pleasure,! 
or contributed so much to gain him their affections, as his pun- 
ishing Tigellinus. It is true, he had long suffered under the 
fear of punishment, which the Romans demanded as a public 
debt, and under a complication of incurable distempers. These, 
together with his infamous connections with the worst of pros- 
titutes, into which his passions drew him, though almost in 
the arms of death, were considered by the thinking part of 

* Otho exempted the soldiers from the fees which they had paid the cen- 
turions for furloughs and other immunities ; but at the same time promised to 
satisfy the centurions, on all reasonable occasions, out of his own revenue. 
In consequence of these furloughs, the fourth part of a legion was often ab- 
sent, and the troops became daily more and more corrupted. 

t In the close of the day on which he was inaugurated, he put Laco and 
Icelus to death. 

Vol. IV. 3 E 34* 

402 OTHO. 

mankind as the greatest of punishments, and worse than many 
deaths. Yet it was a pain to the common people that he should 
see the light of the sun, after so many excellent men had been 
deprived of it through his means. He was then at his coun- 
try-house near Sinuessa, and had vessels at anchor ready to 
carry him on occasion to some distant country. Otho sent to 
him there; and he first attempted to bribe the messenger with 
large sums to suffer him to escape. When he found that did 
not take effect, he gave him the money notwithstanding; and 
desiring only to be indulged a few moments till he had shaved 
himself, he took the razor, and cut his own throat. 

Eesides this just satisfaction that Otho gave the people, it 
was a most agreeable circumstance that he remembered none 
of his private quarrels. To gratify the populace, he suffered 
them also at first to give him in the theatres the name of Nero, 
and he made no opposition to those who erected publicly the 
statues of that emperor. Nay, Claudius* Rufus tells us, that 
in the letters with which the couriers were sent to Spain, he 
joined the name of Nero to that of Otho. But, perceiving 
that the nobility were offended, he made use of it no more. 

After his government was thus established, the praetorian 
cohorts gave him no small trouble by exhorting him to beware 
of many persons of rank, and to forbid them the court; whe- 
ther it was that their affection made them really apprehensive 
for him, or whether it was only a colour for raising commo- 
tions and wars. One day the emperor himself had sent Cris- 
pinus orders to bring the seventeenth cohort from Ostia; and, 
in order to do it without interruption, that officer began to pre- 
pare for it as soon as it grew dark, and to pack up the arms in 
waggons; upon which, some of the most turbulent cried out, 
that Crispinus was come with no good intention; that the se- 
nate had some design against the government; and that the 
arms he was going to carry were to be made use of against 
Caesar, not for him. This notion soon spread, and exasperat- 
ed numbers; some laid hold on the waggons, while others 
killed two centurions who endeavoured to quell the mutiny, 
and Crispinus himself. Then the whole party armed, and ex- 
horting each other to go to the emperor's assistance, they 
marched straight to Rome. Being informed there that eighty 
senators supped with him that evening, they hastened to the 
palace, saying, then was the time to crush all Caesar's enemies 
at once. The city was greatly alarmed, expecting to be plun- 
dered immediately. The palace, too, was in the utmost con- 
fusion, and Otho himself in unspeakable distress: for he was 

* This writer, who was a man of consular dignity, and succeeded Galba in 
the government of Spain, was not called Claudius, but Cluviui Rufus. 

otho. 403 

under fear and concern for the senators, while they were afraid 
of him; and he saw they kept their eyes fixed noon him in 
silence and extreme consternation; some having even brought 
their wives with them to supper. He, therefore, ordered the 
principal officers of the guards to go and speak to the soldiers, 
and endeavour to appease them, and at the same time sent out 
his guests at another door. They had scarce made their es- 
cape when the soldiers rushed into the room, and asked what 
was become of the enemies of Caesar. The emperor then 
rising from his couch, used many arguments to satisfy them, 
and, by entreaties and tears, at last prevailed upon them, with 
much difficulty, to desist. 

Next day, having presented the soldiers with twelve hun- 
dred and fifty drachmas a man, he entered the camp. On this 
occasion he commended the troops as m general well affected 
to his government, but at the same time he told them there 
were some designing men amongst them, who, by their cabals, 
brought his moderation and their fidelity both into question: 
these, he said, deserved their resentment, and he hoped they 
would assist, him in punishing them. They applauded his 
speech, and desired him to chastise whatever persons he 
thought proper; but he pitched upon two only for capital pun- 
ishment, whom no man could possibly regret, and then return- 
ed to his palace. 

Those who had conceived an affection for Otho, and placed 
a confidence in him, admired this change in his conduct; but 
others thought it was no more than a piece of policy which 
the times necessarily required, and that he assumed a popular 
behaviour on account of the impending war: for now he had 
undoubted intelligence that Vitellius had taken the title of em- 
peror and all the ensigns of supreme power, and couriers daily 
arrived with news of continual additions to his party. Other 
messengers also arrived with accounts that the forces in Pan- 
nonia, Dalmatia, and Mysia, with their generals, had declared 
for Otho. And a few days after he received obliging letters 
from Mucianus and Vespasian, who both commanded nume- 
rous armies, the one in Syria, and the other in Judea. 

Elated with this intelligence, he wrote to Vitellius, advising 
him not to aspire to things above his rank, and promised, in 
case he desisted, to supply him liberally with money, and give 
him a city in which he might spend his days in pleasure and 
repose. Vitellius at first gave him an answer, in which ridi- 
cule was tempered with civility. But afterwards, being both 
thoroughly exasperated, they wrote to each other in a style ot 
the bitterest invective: not that their mutual reproaches were 
groundless, but it was absurd for the one to insult the other 
with what might with equal justice be objected to both: for 

404 OTHO. 

their charges consisted of prodigality, effeminacy, incapacity 
for war, their former poverty, and immense debts; such arti- 
cles that it is hard to say which of them had the advantage. 

As to the stories of prodigies and apparitions at that time, 
many of them were founded upon vague reports that could 
not be traced to their author. But in the Capitol there was a 
victory mounted upon a chariot, and numbers of people saw 
her let the reins fall out of her hands, as if she had lost the 
power to hold them. And in the island of the Tiber the statue 
of Julius Caesar turned from wrest to east, without either earth- 
quake or whirlwind to move it; a circumstance which is said 
likewise to have happened when Vespasian openly took upon 
him the direction of affairs. The inundation of the Tiber, 
too, was considered by the populace as a bad omen. It was at 
a time, indeed, when rivers usually overflow their banks; bul 
the flood never rose so high before, nor was so ruinous in its 
effects; for now it laid great part of the city under water, par- 
ticularly the corn-market, and caused a famine which conti- 
nued for some days. 

About this time news was brought that Cecina and Valens, 
who acted for Vitellius, had seized the passes of the Alps. 
And in Rome Dolabella, who was of an illustrious family, 
was suspected by the guards of some disloyal design. Otho 
either fearing him, or some other whom he could influence, 
sent him to Aquinum, with assurances of friendly treatment. 
When the emperor came to select the officers that were to at- 
tend him on his march, he appointed Lucius, the brother of 
Yritellius, to be of the number, without either promoting or 
lowering him in point of rank. He took also particular care 
of the mother and wife of Vitellius, and endeavoured to put 
them in a situation where they had nothing to fear. The go- 
vernment of Rome he gave to Flavius Sabinus, the brother of 
Vespasian; either with an intention to do honour to Nero, 
(for he had formerly given him that appointment, and Galba 
had deprived him of it,) or else to show his affection to Ves- 
pasian by promoting his brother. 

Otho himself stopped at Brixellum, a town in Italy near the 
Po, and ordered the army to march on, under the conduct of 
his lieutenants, Marius Celsus, Seutonius Paulinus, Gallus, 
and Spurina, officers of great reputation. But they could not 
pursue the plan of operations they had formed, by reason of 
the obstinacy and disorderly behaviour of the soldiers, who 
declared that they had made the emperor, and they would be 
commanded by him only. The enemy's troops were not un- 
der much better discipline: they, too, were refractory and diso- 
bedient to their officers, and on the same account. Yet they 
had seen service, and were accustomed to fatigue ; whereas 

otho. 405 

Otho's men had been used to idleness, and their manner of 
living; was quite different from that in the field. Indeed they 
had spent most of their time in public, spectacles and the en- 
tertainments of the theatre, and were come to that degree of 
insolence, that they did not pretend to be unable to perform 
the services they were ordered upon, but affected to be above 
them. Spurina, who attempted to use compulsion, was in 
danger of being; killed by them. They spared no manner of 
abuse, calling; him traitor, and telling him that it was he who 
ruined the affairs of Caesar, and purposely missed the fairest 
opportunities. Some of them came in the night intoxicated 
with liquor to his tent, and demanded their discharge ; — "For 
they had to go," they said, "to Csesar to accuse him." 

The cause, however, and Spurina with it, received some 
benefit from the insult which these troops met with at Placen- 
tia. Those of Vitellius came up to the walls, and ridiculed 
Otho's men who were appointed to defend them; calling them 
players and dancers, fit only to attend the Pythian and Olym- 
pic games; fellows who knew nothing of war, who had not 
even made one campaign, who were swoln up with pride, 
merely because they had cut off the head of a poor unarmed 
old man (meaning Galba;) wretches that durst not look men 
in the face, or stand any thing like a fair and open battle. 
They were so cut with these reproaches, and so desirous of 
revenge, that they threw themselves at Spurina's feet, and 
begged of him to command and employ them on whatever 
service he thought proper, assuring him that there was neither 
danger nor labour which they would decline. After this the 
enemy made a vigorous attack upon the town, and plied their 
battering engines'with all their force; but Spurina's men re- 
pulsed them with great slaughter, and by that means kept pos- 
session of one of the most respectable and most flourishing 
towns in Italy. 

It must be observed of Otho's officers in general, that they 
were more obliging in their behaviour, both to cities and pri- 
vate persons, than those of Vitellius. Cecina, one of the lat- 
ter, had nothing popular either in his address or his figure. 
He was of a gigantic size, and most uncouth appearance; for 
he wore breeches and long sleeves in the manner of the Gauls, 
even while his standard was Roman, and whilst he gave his 
instructions to Roman officers. His wife followed him on 
horseback, in a rich dress, and was attended by a select party 
of cavalry. Fabius Valens, the other general, had a passion 
for money, which was not to be satisfied by any plunder from 
the enemv, or exactions and contributions from the allies: in- 
somuch that he was believed to proceed more slowly for the 
sake of collecting gold as he went, and, therefore, was not up 

406 OTHO- 

at the first action. Some, indeed, accuse Cecina of hastening 
to give battle before the arrival of Valens, in order that the 
victory might be all his own; and, beside other less faults, 
they charged him not only with attacking at an unseasonable 
time, but with not maintaining the combat so gallantly as he 
ought to have done; all which errors nearly ruined the affairs 
of his party. 

Cecina, after his repulse at Placentia, marched against Cre- 
mona, another rich and great city. In the mean time, Annius 
Gallus, who was going to join Spurina at Placentia, had intel- 
ligence by the way that he was victorious, and that the siege 
was raised. But being informed, at the same time, that Cre- 
mona was in danger, he led his forces thither, and encamped 
very near the enemy. Afterwards other officers brought in 
reinforcements.* Cecina posted a strong body of infantry 
under cover of some trees and thickets; after which he order- 
ed his cavalry to advance, and if the enemy attacked them, to 
give way by degrees, and retire, till they had drawn them into 
the ambuscade. But Celsus, being informed of his intention 
by some deserters, advanced with his best cavalry against Ce- 
cina's troops; and, upon their retreating, he pursued with so 
much caution, that he surrounded the corps that lay in am- 
bush. Having thus put them in confusion, he called the le- 
gions from the camp; and it appears, that if they had come 
up in time to support the horse, Cecina's whole army would 
have been cut in pieces. But as Paulinus advanced very slow- 
ly,! he was censured for having used more precaution than 
became a general of his character. Nay, the soldiers accused 
him of treachery, and endeavoured to incense Otho against 
him, insisting that the victory was in their hands; and that if 
it was not complete, it was owing entirely to the mismanage- 
ment of their generals. Otho did not so much believe these 
representations, as he was willing to appear not to misbelieve 
them. He, therefore, sent his brother Titianus to the army, 
with Proculus the captain of his guard: Titianus had the 
command in appearance, and Proculus in reality. Celsus and 
Paulinus had the title of friends and counsellors, but not the 
least authority in the direction of affairs. 

The enemy, too, were not without their dissatisfactions and 

*Err£iTa xai tuv aMuv txarot £|3ot)9ei tu r?aTT)J.w. Dacier takes uo notice of tin's 
passage, though a material one, both in the place where it stands, and with 
regard to the connection too. 

t Tacitus tells us, that Paulinus was naturally slow and irresolute. On this 
occasion he charges him with two errors. The first was, that, instead of 
advancing immediately to the charge, and supporting his cavalry, he trifled 
away the time in filling up the trenches; the second, that he did not avail 
himself of the disorder of the enemy, but sounded much too early a retreat 

OTHO. 4(,7 

disorder, particularly among the forces of Valens: for when 
they were informed of what happened at the ambuscade, they 
expressed their indignation that their general did not put it in 
their power to be there, that they might have used their en- 
deavours to save so many brave men who perished in that ac- 
tion. They were even inclined to despatch him; but having 
pacified them with much difficulty, he decamped and joined 
Oecina. 

In the mean time, Otho came to the camp at Bedriacum, a 
small town near Cremona, and there held a council of war. 
Proculus and Titianus were of opinion, — "That he ought to 
give battle, while the army retained those high spirits with 
which the late victory had inspired them, and not to suffer that 
ardour to cool, nor wait till Vitellius came in person from 
Gaul." But Paulinus was against it. " The enemy," said he, 
" have received all their troops, and have no farther prepara- 
tions to make for the combat; whereas Otho will have from 
Mysia and Pannonia forces as numerous as those he has al- 
ready, if he will wait his own opportunity, instead of giving 
one to the enemy. And certainly the army he now has, if 
with their small numbers they have so much ardour, will not 
fight with less but greater spirit when they see their numbers 
so much increased. Besides, the gaining of time makes for 
us, because we have every thing in abundance; but delays 
must greatly distress Cecina and his colleague for necessaries, 
because they lie in an enemy's country." 

Marius Celsus supported the opinion of Paulinus: Annius 
Gallus could not attend, because he had received some hurt by 
a fall from his horse, and was under cure. Otho, therefore, 
wrote to him, and Gallus advised him not to precipitate mat- 
ters, but to wait for the army from Mysia, which was already 
on the way. Otho, however, would not be guided by these 
counsels, and the opinion of those prevailed who were for 
hazarding a battle immediately. Different reasons are, indeed, 
alleged for this resolution. The most probable is, that the 
praetorian cohorts, which composed the emperor's guards, now 
coming to taste what real war was, longed to be once more at 
a distance from it, to return to the ease, the company, and 
public diversions of Rome; and, therefore, they could not be 
restrained in their eagerness for a battle, for they imagined that 
they could overpower the enemy at the first charge. Besides, 
Otho seems to have been no longer able to support himself in 
a state of suspense; such an aversion to the thoughts of dan- 
ger had his dissipation and effeminacy given him! Overbur- 
dened, then, by his cares, he hastened to free himself from 
th"eir weight; he covered his eyes, and leaped down the preci- 
pice; he committed all at once to fortune. Such is the ac- 

408 OTHO- 

count given of the matter by the orator Secundus, who was 
Otho's secretary. 

Others say, that the two parties were much inclined to lay 
down their arms, and unite in choosing an emperor out of the 
best generals they had; or, if they could not agree upon it, to 
leave the election to the senate. Nor is it improbable, as the 
two who were called emperors were neither of them men of 
reputation, that the experienced and prudent part of the sol- 
diers should form such a design : for they could not but re- 
flect how unhappy and dreadful a thing it would be to plunge 
themselves into the same calamities which the Romans could 
not bring upon each other without aching hearts in the quar- 
rels of Sylla and Marius, of Caesar and Pompey: and for what? 
— but to provide an empire to minister to the insatiable appe- 
tite and the drunkenness of Vitellius, or to the luxury and de- 
baucheries of Otho. These considerations are supposed to 
have induced Celsus to endeavour to gain time, in hopes that 
matters might be compromised without the sword ; while Olho, 
out of fear of such an agreement, hastened the battle. 

In the mean time, he returned to Brixellum,* which certainly 
was an additional error: for b}T that step he deprived the com- 
batants of the reverence and emulation which his presence 
might have inspired, and took a considerable limb from the 
body of the army, I mean some of the best and most active 
men, both horse and foot, for his body-guard. There happened 
about that time a rencontre upon the Po, while Cecina's troops 
endeavoured to lay a bridge over that river, and Otho's to 
prevent it. The latter, finding their other efforts ineffectual, 
put a quantity of torches well covered with brimstone and 
pitch into some boats, which were carried by the wind and cur- 
rent upon the enemy's work. First smoke, and afterwards a 
bright flame arose; upon which Cecina's men were so terrified, 
that they leaped into the river, overset their boats, and were 
entirely exposed to their enemies, who laughed at their awk- 
ward distress. 

The German troops, however, beat Otho's gladiators in a 
little island of the Po, and killed a considerable number of 
them. Otho's army that was in Bedriacum, resenting this af- 
front, insisted on being led out to battle. Accordingly, Pro- 
culus marched, and pitched his camp at the distance of fifty 
furlongs from Bedriacum: but he chose his ground in a very 
unskilful manner: for, though it was in the spring season, and 
the country afforded many springs and rivulets, his army was 

* It was debated in council, whether the emperor should be present in the 
action or not. Marius Celsus and Paulinus durst not vote for it, lest they 
should seem inclined to expose his person. He, therefore, retired to Brixel 
mm, which was a circumstance that contributed not a little to his ruin. 

otiio. 409 

distressed for water. Next day, Proculus was for marching 
against the enemy, who lay not less than a hundred furlongs 
off. But Paulinus would not agree to it. He said, they ought 
to keep the post they had taken, rather than fatigue themselves 
first, and then immediately engage an enemy, who could arm 
and put themselves in order of battle at their leisure, while 
they were making such a march with all the incumbrance of 
baggage and servants. The generals disputed the point, till a 
Numidian horseman came with letters from Otho, ordering 
them to make no longer delay, but to proceed to the attack 
without losing a moment's time. They then decamped of 
course, and went to seek the enemy. The news of their ap- 
proach threw Cecina into great confusion; and immediately 
quitting his works and post upon the river, he repaired to the 
camp, where he found most of the soldiers armed, and the word 
already given by Valens. 

During the time that the infantry were forming, the best of 
the cavalry were directed to skirmish. At that moment a report 
was spread, from what cause we cannot tell, amongst Otho's 
van, that Vitellius' officers were coming over to their party. 
As soon, therefore, as they approached, they saluted them in 
a friendly manner, calling them fellow-soldiers; but, instead of 
receiving the appellation, they answered with a furious and 
hostile shout. The consequence was, that the persons who 
made the compliment were dispirited, and the rest suspected 
them of treason. This was the first thing that disconcerted 
Otho's troops; for, by this time, the enemy had charged. Be- 
sides, they could preserve no order; the intermixture of the 
baggage, and the nature of the ground, preventing any regu- 
lar movement. For the ground was so full of ditches and 
other inequalities, that they were forced to break their ranks, 
and wheel about to avoid them, and could only fight in small 
parties. There were but two legions, one of Vitellius' called 
the devourer, and one of Otho's called the succourer, which 
could disentangle themselves from the defiles and gain the open 
plain. These engaged in a regular battle, and fought a long 
time. Otho's men were vigorous and brave, but they had not 
seen so much as one action before this; on the other hand, 
those of Vitellius had much experience in the field, but they 
were old, and their strength decaying. 

Otho's legion coming on with great fury, mowed down the 
first ranks and took the eagle. The enemy, filled with shame 
and resentment, advanced to chastise them, slew Orphidius, 
who commanded the legion, and took several standards. 
Against the gladiators, who had the reputation of being brave 
fellows, and excellent at close fighting, Alphenus Varus 
brought up the Batavians, who came from an island formed by 

Vol. IV. 3 F 35 

410 OTHO- 

the Rhine, ano are the hest cavalry in Germany. A few of 
the gladiators made head against them, hut the greatest part 
fled to the river, and falling in with some of the enemy's in- 
fantry that was posted there, were all cut. in pieces. But none 
behaved so ill that day as the praetorian bands. They did not 
even wait to receive the enemy's charge, and in their flight 
they broke through the troops that as yet stood their ground, 
and put them in disorder. Nevertheless, many of Otho's men 
were irresistible in the quarter where they fought, and opened a 
way through the victorious enemy to their camp. But Procu- 
lus and Paulinus took another way; for they dreaded the sol- 
diers, who already blamed their generals for the loss of the day. 

Annius Gallus received into the city all the scattered par- 
ties, and endeavoured to encourage them by assurances that the 
advantage upon the whole was equal, and that their troops had 
the superiority in many parts of the field. But Marius Celsus 
assembled the principal officers, and desired them to consider 
of measures that might save their country: — "After such an 
expense of Roman blood," said he, " Otho himself, if he has a 
patriotic principle, would not tempt Fortune any more; since 
Cato and Scipio, in refusing to submit to Caesar after the bat- 
tle of Pharsalia, are accused of having unnecessarily sacrificed 
the lives of so many brave men in Africa, notwithstanding 
that they fought for the liberties of their country. Fortune, 
indeed, is capricious, and all men are liable to suffer by her 
inconstancy: yet good men have one advantage which she 
cannot deprive them of, and that is, to avail themselves of 
their reason in whatever may befall them." These arguments 
prevailed with the officers, and, on sounding the private men, 
they found them desirous of peace. Titianus himself was of 
opinion that they ought to send ambassadors to treat for a coali- 
tion ; — in pursuance of which, Celsus and Gallus were charged 
with a commission to Cecina and Valens. As they were upon 
the road, they met some centurions, who informed them that 
Vitellius' army was advancing to Bedriacum, and that they 
were sent before by their generals with proposals for an ac- 
commodation. Celsus and Gallus commended their design, 
and desired them to go back with them to meet Cecina. 

When they approached that general's army, Celsus was in 
great danger: for the cavalry that were beaten in the affair of 
the ambuscade, happened to be in the van; and they no sooner 
saw Celsus, than they advanced with loud shouts against him. 
The centurions, however, put themselves before him, and the 
other officers called out to them to do him no violence. Ce- 
cina himself, when he was informed of the tumult, rode up and 
quelled it, and after he had made his compliments to Celsus in 
a very obliging manner, accompanied him to Bedriacum. 

OTHO. 411 

In the mean time, Titianus repenting that he had sent the am- 
bassadors, placed the most resolute of the soldiers again upon 
the walls, and exhorted the rest to be assisting. But when 
Cecina rode up and offered his hand, not a man of them could 
resist him. Some saluted his men from the walls, and others 
opened the gates; after which they went out and mixed with 
the troops that were coming up. Instead of acts of hostility, 
there was nothing but mutual caresses and other demonstra- 
tions of friendship; in consequence of which they all took the 
oath to Vitellius, and ranged themselves under his banner. 

This is the account which most of those that were in the bat- 
tle give of it; but, at the same time, they confess that they did 
not know all the particulars, because of the confused manner in 
which they fought, and the inequality of the ground. Long af- 
ter, when I was passing over the field of battle, Mestrius Flo- 
rus, a person of consular dignity, showed me an old man, who, 
in his youth, had served under Otho with others of the same 
age with himself, not from inclination, but by constraint.* He 
told me also, that, on visiting the field after the battle, he saw a 
large pile of dead bodies, as high as the head of a man; and 
upon inquiring into the reason, he could neither discover it him- 
self, nor get any information about it. It was no wonder that 
there was a great carnage in case of a general rout, because, in 
a civil war, they make no prisoners; for such captives would be 
of no advantage to the conquerors; but it is difficult to assign a 
reason why the carcases should be piled up in that manner. 

An uncertain rumour (as it commonly happens) was first 

* From this passage Dacier would infer, that the life of Otho was not 
written by Plutarch. He says, a person who served a young man under 
Otho, could not be old at the time when Plutarch can be supposed to have 
visited that field of battle. His argument is this: — That battle was fought in 
the year of Christ sixty-nine: Plutarch returned from Italy to Chaeronea 
about the end of Domitian's reign, in the year of Christ ninety-three or 
ninety-four, and never left his native city any more. As this retreat of Plu- 
tarch's was only twenty-four or twenty-five years after the battle of Bedria- 
cum, he concludes that a person who fought in that battle a young man, could 
not possibly be old when Plutarch made the tour of Italy; and, therefore, 
conjectures that this, as well as the Life of Galba, must have been written 
by a son of Plutarch. 

But we think no argument, in a matter of such importance, ought to be 
adduced from a passage manifestly corrupt : for, instead of ovt<x ircaaiov, we 
must either read iva ona waXaiov, or vuv 5t wa\aiov ?va, to make either Greek 
or sense of it. 

Lamprias, in the Catalogue, ascribes these two Lives to his father. Nor 
do we see such a dissimilarity to Plutarch's other writings, either in the style 
or manner, as warrants us to conclude that they are not of his hand. 

Henry Stevens did not, indeed, take them into his edition, because he 
found them amongst the opmcula; and as some of the npuscvla were sup- 
posed to be spurious, he believed too hastily that these were of the number. 

We think the loss of Plutarch's other Lives of the Emperors a real loss to 
the world, and should have been glad if they had come down to us, even in 
the same imperfect condition, as to the text, as those of Galba and Otho. 

412 OTHO- 

brought to Otho, and afterwards some of the wounded came 
and assured him that the battle was lost. On this occasion, 
it was nothing extraordinary that his friends strove to encou- 
rage him, and kept him from desponding; but the attachment 
of the soldiers to him exceeds all belief. None of them left 
him, or went over to the enemy, or consulted bis own safety, 
even when their chief despaired of his. On the contrary, they 
crowded his gates ; they called him emperor; they left no form 
of application untried ;* they kissed his hands, they fell at 
his feet, and, with groans and tears, entreated him not to for- 
sake them, nor give them up to their enemies, but to employ 
their hearts and hands to the last moment of their lives. They 
all joined in this request; and one of the private men drawing 
his sword, thus addressed himself to Otho, — "Know, Caesar, 
what your soldiers are ready to do for you;" and immediately 
plunged the steel into his heart. 

Otho was not moved at this affecting scene, but, with a 
cheerful and steady countenance, looking round upon the com- 
pany, he spoke as follows: — "This day, my fellow-soldiers, I 
consider as a more happy one than that on which you made 
me emperor, when I see you thus disposed, and am so great 
in your opinion. But deprive me not of a still greater happi- 
ness, that of laying down my life with honour for so many 
generous Romans. If I am worthy of the Roman empire, 1 
ought to shed my blood for my country. I know the victory 
my adversaries have gained is by no means decisive. I hart 
intelligence that my army from Mysia is at the distance of but 
a few days' march; Asia, Syria, and Egypt, are pouring their 
legions upon the Adriatic; the forces in Judea declare for us; 
the senate is with us; and the very wives and children of our 
enemies are so many pledges in our hands. But we are not 
fighting for Italy with Hannibal, or Pyrrhus, or theCimbrians; 
our dispute is with the Romans; and whatever party prevails, 
whether we conquer or are conquered, our country must bleed : 
under the victor's joy she bleeds. Believe me, then, my 
friends, that I can die with greater glory than reign: for I 
know no benefit that Rome can reap from my victory, equal to 
what I shall confer upon her by sacrificing myself for peace 
and unanimity, and to prevent Italy from beholding such an 
other day as this!" 

After he had made this speech, and showed himself immove 
able to those who attempted to alter his resolution, he desired 
nis friends, and such senators as were present, to leave him, 
and provide for their own safety. To those who were absent, 

* Instead of ejivovto Tpojraia, which has nothing to do here, one of the com- 
mentators proposes to read tyivovio jravToio, which is a common phrase with 
Plutarch. 

otho. 413 

he sent the same commands, and signified his pleasure to the 
cities by letters, that they should receive them honourably, and 
supply them with good convoys. 

He then called his nephew Cocceius,* who was yet very 
young, and bade him compose himself, and not fear Vitellius: 
— "I have taken the same care," said he, "of his mother, his 
wife, and children, as if they had been my own: and, for the 
«itme reason, I mean for your sake, I deferred the adoption 
which I intended you: for I thought proper to wait the issue of 
this war, that you might reign with me if I conquered, and not 
fall with me if I was overcome. The last thing, my son, I have 
to recommend to you, is, neither entirely to forget, nor yet to 
remember too well, that you had an emperor for your uncle." 

A moment after, he heard a great noise and tumult at his gate. 
The soldiers seeing the senators retiring, threatened to kill 
them if they moved a step farther, or abandoned the emperor. 
Otho, in great concern for them, showed himself again at the 
door, but no longerwitha mild and supplicatingair; on the con- 
trary, he cast such a stern and angry look upon the most turbu- 
lent partof them, that they withdrew in greatfear and confusion. 

In the evening he was thirsty, and drank a little water. 
Then he had two swords brought him, and having examined 
the points of both a long time, he sent away the one, and put 
the other under his arm. After this, he called his servants, 
and, with many expressions of kindness, gave them money: 
not that he chose to be lavish of what would soon be another's; 
for he gave to some more, and to some less, proportioning his 
bounty to their merit, and paying a strict regard to propriety. 

When he had dismissed them, he dedicated the remainder 
of the night to repose, and slept so sound, that his chamber- 
lains heard him at the door. Early in the morning he called 
his freed-man, who assisted him in the care of the senators, 
and ordered him to make the proper inquiries about them. 
The answer he brought was, that they were gone, and had 
been provided with every thing they desired. Upon which he 
said, — "Go you, then, and show yourself to the soldiers, that 
they may not imagine you have assisted me in despatching 
myself, and put you to some cruel death for it." 

As soon as the freed-man was gone out, he fixed the hilt of 
his sword upon the ground, and holding it with both hands, 
fell upon it with so much force, that he expired with one groan. 
The servants, who waited without, heard the groan, and burst 
into a loud lamentation, which was echoed through the camp 
and the city. The soldiers ran to the gates with the most 
pitiable waitings and most unfeigned grief, reproaching them 

* Tacitus and Seutonius call him Coccianus. 

35* 

414 OTHO- 

selves for not guarding their emperor, and preventing his 
dying for them. Not one of them would leave him to provide 
for himself, though the enemy was approaching. They attired 
the body in a magnificent manner, and prepared a funeral pile; 
after which, they attended the procession in their armour, and 
happy was the man that could come to support his bier. Some 
kneeled and kissed his wound, some grasped his hand, and 
others prostrated themselves on the ground, and adored him 
at a distance. Nay, there were some who threw their torches 
upon the pile, and then slew themselves. Not that they bad 
received any extraordinary favours from the deceased, or were 
afraid of suffering under the hands of the conqueror: but it 
seems that no king or tyrant was ever so passionately fond of 
governing, as they were of being governed by Otho. Nor 
did their affection cease with his death; it survived the grave, 
and terminated in the hatred and destruction of Vitellius. Of 
that we shall give an account in its proper place. 

After they had interred the remains of Otho, they erected a 
monument over them, which, neither by its size, nor any pomp 
of epitaph, could excite the least envy. I have seen it at Brix- 
ellum; it was very modest, and the inscription only thus: — 

TO THE MEMORY OF 

MARCUS OTHO. 

Otho died at the age of thirtv-seven, having reigned only 
three months. Those who find fault with his life, are not more 
respectable either for their numbers or for their rank, than 
those who applaud his death: for though his life was not much 
better than that of Nero, yet his death was nobler. 

The soldiers were extremely incensed against Pollio, one of 
the principal officers of the guards, for persuading them to 
take the oath immediately to Vitellius; and being informed 
that there were still some senators on the spot, they let the 
others pass, but solicited Virginius Rufus in a very trouble- 
some manner. They went in arms to his house, and insisted 
that he should take the imperial title, or at least be their me- 
diator with the conqueror. But he who had refused to accept 
that title from them when they were victorious, thought it 
would be the greatest madness to embrace it after they were 
beaten. And he was afraid of applying to the Germans in 
their behalf, because he had obliged that people to do many 
things contrary to their inclinations. He, therefore, went out 
privately at another door. When the soldiers found that he 
had left them, they took the oath to Vitellius, and having ob- 
tained their pardon, were enrolled among the troops of Cec-ina 

END OF THE LIVEri. 

AN ACCOUNT 

OF 

Weights, Measures, and Denominations of Money, 
mentioned by Plutarch. 

(FROM THE TABLES OF DR. ARBUTHNOT.) 

WEIGHTS. 

lb. oz. dwt. gr. 
The Roman libra, or pound 00 10 18 13-f 

The Attic mina, or pound 00 11 07 16f 

The Attic talent, equal to sixty minae . . 56 11 07 17-f 

DRY MEASURES OF CAPACITY. 

peck. gal. pints. 

The Roman modius 1 0 Of 

The Attic choenix, one pint, 15,705f solid inches, 

nearly 0 0 1| 

The Attic medimnus 4 0 6T'7 

LIQUID MEASURES OF CAPACITY. 

pints, solid inches. 

Thecotyle h 2,14U 

The cyathus U 0,356-^ 

The chus 6 25,69S 

MEASURES OF LENGTH. 

Eng. paces, ft. in. 
The Roman foot 0 0 11$ 

The Roman cubit 0 1 5f 

The Roman pace 0 4 10 

The Roman furlong 120 4 4 

The Roman mile 967 0 0 

The Grecian cubit 0 1 6£ 

The Grecian furlong 100 4 4| 

The Grecian mile 805 5 0 

N. B. In this computation, the English pace is five feel. 

416 WEIGHTS, MEASURES, ke> 

MONEY. 

£ s. 

The quadrans about 0 0 

The as 0 0 

The sestertius 0 0 

The sestertium, equal to 1000 sestertii . . 8 1 

The denarius 0 0 

The Attic obolus 0 0 

The drachma 0 0 

The mina, equal to 100 drachmae .... 34 

The talent, equal to 60 minae 193 15 

The stater-aureus of the Greeks, weighing 

two Attic drachmae 0 16 

The stater-daricus 1 12 

The Roman aureus was of different value at 
different periods. According to the pro- 
portion mentioned by Tacitus, when it 
exchanged for twenty-five denarii, it 
was of the same value as the Grecian 
stater 0 16 1 8 

d. 
0 

9- 

0* 

0 
1 

31 

5 

2 

7 

3 

1 

7 

o 
O 

7 

0 

0 

0 

1 

3 

3 

0 

CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE, 

FROM DACIER, AND OTHER WRITERS. 

A.M. 

2437 
2547 
2693 

2720 
2768 
2847 
2S80 

2804 
2908 
3045 

3171 

3198 
3201 
3235 

3236 
3279 

3350 
3350 
3354 

V. V fc 

.V *■» » 

I 

737 
627 
486 

454 

406 
327 
294 

288 
266 
129 

Olympiads 

vii. 1. 

vii. 4. 

xvi. 1. 

xvi. 3. 
xxvii. 2. 

xlv. 1. 

xlvi. 1. 

Deucalion's deluge 

Minos I. son of Jupiter and Europa . 
Minos II. grandson of the first . . . 

THESEUS. 

The expedition of the Argonauts . . 

Theseus attended Jason in it 

Troy taken. Demophon the son of The- 
seus was at the siege 

The return of the Heraclidae to Pelo- 
ponnesus 

The first war of the Athenians against 
Sparta . . 

Codrus devotes himself 

The Helots subdued by Agis . . . 

The Ionic migration 

Lycurgus flourishes 

THE FIRST OLYMPIAD. 

ROMULUS. 

Years before 
builtTg Rome. 

43 

■s-z 

so 

B C 

761 

1511 

651 

1401 

500 

1250 

473 

1228 

430 

1180 

351 

1101 

318 

1068 

304 

1055 

290 

1040 

153 

904 

Rome built 

The rape of the Sabine virgins 
The death of Romulus . . 

NUMA. 

Numa elected king 
Numa dies . . 

Vol. IV. 

SOLON. 

Solon flourishes 

Cylon's conspiracy • • 

Epimenides goes to Athens, and expiates 
the city. He dies soon after, at the age 
of one hundred and fifty-four. The se- 
ven wise men ; jEsop and Anacharsis 
flourish 

25 

A. U. C. 

4 

33 

39 

82 

153 

1G7 

774 

750 
747 
713 

712 
669 

598 

594 

-3G 

418 

A.M. 

Olympiad. 

3356 

xlvi. 3. 

3370 

1.1. 

3391 
3401 

Iv.2. 
lvii. 4. 

3442 

lxviii. 1. 

3443 

Ixviii. 3. 

3448 

lxix. 3. 

3459 

lxxii. 1. 

3461 
3462 
3463 

Ixxii. 2. 
lxxiii. 1. 
lxxiii. 2. 

3467 

lxxiv. 2. 

3470 
3471 
3474 
3479 

Ixxv. 1. 

Ixxv. 2. 
Ixxvi. 1. 
Ixxvii. 2. 

3480 
3481 
3500 

Ixxvii. 3. 
Ixxvii. 4. 
lxxxii. 3. 

3519 

lxxxvii. 2. 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLC. 

Solon archon 

Croesus king of Lydia 

Pythagoras goes into Italy .... 

Pisistratus sets up his tyranny 

Cyrus, king of Persia 

Croesus taken 

PUBLICOLA 

Is chosen consul in the room of Collatinus 

Brutus fights Aruns, the eldest son of 
Tarquin. Both are killed 

Publicola consul the third time. His 
colleague, Horalius Pulvillus, dedi- 
cates the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus 

Horatius Codes defends the Sublician 
bridge against the Tuscans 

Publicola dies 

Zeno Eleates flourished 

The battle of Marathon 

CORIOLANUS 

Ts banished, and retires to the Volsci 

Herodotus is born 

Coriolanus besieges Rome; but being 
prevailed upon by his mother to retire, 
is stoned to death by the Volsci . . 

ARISTIDES 

Is banished for ten years, but recalled at 
the expiration of three 

THEMISTOCLES. 

The battle of Salamis 

The battle of Plataea 

Thticydides is born 

Themistocles is banished by the ostracism 

CIMON 

Beats the Persians, both at sea and land 
Socrates is born. He lived 71 years 
Cimon dies. Alcibiades born the same 
year. Herodotus and Thucydides flou- 
rish ; the latter is twelve or thirteen 
years younger than the former . . 
Pindar dies, eighty years old . . . 

PERICLES 

Stirs up the Peloponnesian, war which 
lasts twenty-seven years. He was very 
young when the Romans sent the De- 
cemviri to Athens for Solou's laws 

A. U. C. 

159 

173 

194 
204 

245 

247 

251 

B. C 

592 

578 

557 
547 

t)06 

504 

500 
499 
262 489 

263 
265 

266 

270 

273 

274 

277 
282 

283 

284 

303 

488 
486 

485 

481 

478 
477 
474 
469 

468 
467 

443 
440 

322 

429 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. M. Olympiad. 

3521 
3522 

3545 

3546 

3549 

3550 

xciv. 1. 

35G1 

3562 
3566 
3569 
3574 
3579 

3580 

xcv. 4. 
xcvi. 1. 
xcvi. 2. 

xcvii. 4. 

xcviii. 1. 

xcix. 1. 

xcix. 4. 

ci. 2. 

cii. 2. 

cii. 3. 

Pericles dies 

Plato born 

Xerxes killed by Artabazus 

NICIAS. 

The Athenians undertake the Sicilian war 
Nicias beaten and put to death in Sicily 

ALCIBIADES 

Takes refuge at Sparta, and afterwards 

amongst the Persians 
Dionysius the elder, now tyrant of Sicily 
Sophocles dies, aged ninety-one . . 
Euripides dies, aged seventy-five . . 

LYSANDER 

Puts an end to the Peloponnesian war, and 
establishes the thirty tyrants at Athens 

Thrasybulus expels them .... 

Alcibiades put to death by order of Phar- 
nabazus 

ARTAXERXES MNEMON 

Overthrows his brother Cyrus in a great 
battle. The retreat of the ten thousand 
Greeks, conducted by Xenophon 

Socrates dies 

AGESILAUS 

Ascends the Spartan throne .... 
Lysander sent to the Hellespont . . 
Agesilaus defeats the Persian cavalry. 

Lysander dies 
The Romans lose the battle of Allia . 

CAMILLUS 

Retires to Ardea 

Aristotle born 

Demosthenes born ....... 

Chabrias defeats the Lacedaemonians 
Peace between the Athenians and Lace- 
daemonians 

The important battle of Leuctra 

PELOPIDAS, 

General of theThebans. He headed the 
sacred band the year before at Leuc- 
tra, where Epaminondas commanded 
in chief 

Dionysius the elder, tyrant of Sicily, 
dies, and is succeeded by his son 

Isocrates flourishes ........ 

419 

A.U.C. 

b. a 

324 

427 

325 

426 

338 

413 

340 

411 

342 

409 

_ 

407 

1 " 

406 

348 

403 

— 

401 

349 

402 

352 
353 

356 
357 

364 

365 
369 
372 
377 

382 

383 

385 

387 

399 
398 

395 
394 

387 

386 
382 
379 
374 

36 

368 

366 
364 

420 

A. M. 

3598 

3602 
3605 
3607 

3609 
3612 

3613 

3614 

Olympiad. 

3585 

ciii. 4. 

3586 

civ. 1. 

3587 

civ. 2. 

3588 
35S9 

civ. 3. 
civ. 4. 

3593 
3594 
3596 

cv. 4. 
cvi. 1-. 
cvi. 3 

3632 

5634 

3636 

cvii. 1. 

cviii. 1. 
cviii. 4. 

cix. 2. 

cix. 4. 

ex. 3. 

ex. 4. 

cxi. 1. 

3G16 

cxi. 3. 

3619 

cxii. 2. 

3623 

cxiii. 2. 

3627 

cxiv. 1. 

cxv. 3. 

cxvi. 1. 

cxvi. 4. 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

TIMOLEON 

Kills his brother Timophanes, who was 
setting himself up tyrant in Corinth 

Pelopidas defeats Alexander, the tyrant 
of Pherse, but falls in the battle 

The famous battle of Man tinea, in which 
Epaminondas, though victorious, is 
killed by the son of Xenophon . . 

Camillus dies 

Artaxerxes dies. So does Agesilaus 

DION 

' Expels Dionysius the younger . . . 
Alexander the Great born .... 
Dion is killed by Callippus .... 

DEMOSTHENES 

Begins to thunder against Philip . . 
Xenophon dies, aged ninety 
Plato dies, aged eighty, or eighty-one 
Timoleon sent to assist the Syracusans 
Dionysius the younger sent off to Corinth 

Epicurus born 

The battle of Chseronea, in which Philip 

beats the Athenians and Thebans . 
Timoleon dies 

ALEXANDER THE GREAT 

Is declared general of all Greece, against 
the Persians, upon the death of his 
father Philip 

The battle of the Granicus .... 

The battle of Arbela 

Porus beaten 

Alexander dies, aged thirty-three . . 

Diogenes dies, aged ninety 

Aristotle dies, aged sixty-three . . . 

PHOCION 

Retires to Polyperchon, but is delivered 
up by him to the Athenians, who put 
him to death 

EUMENES, 

Who had attained to a considerable rank 
amongst the successors of Alexander 
the Great, is betrayed to Antigonus, 
and put to death 

DEMETRIUS, 

Surnamed Poliorcetes, permitted by his 
father Antigonus to command the ar- 

A. U. C. 

B. C. 

388 

363 

390 
391 
392 

361 
360 
359 

396 
397 
399 

355 
354 
352 

401 

350 

405 
408 
410 
412 

346 
143 
141 
139 

415 
416 

336 
335 

417 
419 
422 
426 
430 

134 
333 
325 
325 
321 

— 

319 

435 

316 

437 

314 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

421 

A.M. 

3643 

3670 
3685 
3636 

3699 
3723 

Olympiad. 

cxvin. 

cxxv. 1. 

cxxviii. 4. 
cxxxi. 3. 

cxxxii. 1. 
cxxxviii. 2, 

3727 

3731 
3733 
3734 

3736 
3738 
3741 
3747 
3749 

3752 

cxxxix. 2. 

cxl. 4. 

cxl. 2. 

cxl. 1. 

cxli. 3. 

cxlii. 1. 

cxlii. 4. 

cxliv. 2. 

cxliv. 4. 

cxlv. 3. 

A.U.C. 

Vol. IV. 

my in Syria, when only twenty-two 
years of age •_ • • 

He restores the Athenians to their liber- 
ty, but they choose to remain in the 
worst of chains, those of servility and 
meanness 

Dionysius, the tyrant, dies at Heraclea, 
aged fifty-five 

In the year before Christ 288, died Theo- 
phrastus, aged eighty-five 

And in the year before Christ 285, The- 
ocritus flourished 

PYRRHUS, 

King of Epirus, passes over into Italy, 
where he is defeated by LaBvinus . 

The first Punic war, which lasted twen- 
ty-four years 

Philopoemen born 

ARATUS, 

Of Sicyon, delivered his native city from 
the tyranny of Nicocles .... 

AGIS AND CLEOMENES, 

Contemporaries with Aratus; for Aratus 
being beaten by Cleomenes, calls in 
Antigonus from Macedonia, which 
proves the ruin of Greece .... 

PHILOPCEMEN 

Thirty years old when Cleomenes took 
Megalopolis. About this time lived 
Hannibal, Marcellus, Fubius Maxi- 
mus, and Scipio Africanus . . . 

The second Punic war, which lasted 
eighteen years 

Hannibal beats the consul Flaminius at 
the Thrasymenean lake .... 

And the consuls Varro and iEmilius at 
Cannae «•","' 

He is beaten by Marcellus at Nola . 

Marcellus takes Syracuse .... 

Fabius Maximus seizes Tarentum 

Fabius Maximus dies . . . • • • 

Scipio triumphs for his conquests in Africa 

TITUS QUINCTIUS FLAMINIUS 

Elected consul at the age of thirty . 

CATO THE CENSOR 

Was twenty-one or twenty-two years 
1 36 

439 

446 

B.C. 

473 

488 
499 

502 

526 

530 
534 
536 

555 

312 

305 

272 

263 
252 

249 

225 

221 
217 
215 

537 

214 

539 

212 

541 

210 

544 

207 

550 

201 

552 

199 

196 

422 

Olympiad. 

cxlvi. 1. 

cxlvi. 2. 
cxlix. 1. 
cxlix. 2. 

cliii. 1. 

civ. 

clvi. 

clvii. 

1. 
1. 
4. 

clviii. 

3. 

clxiv. 

2. 

clxvii. 

2. 

clxviii. 
clxix 

3. 
1. 

clxxi. 

1. 

clxxi. 2. 

clxxiii 
clxxiii. 

1. 

2. 

clxxiv 
clxxiv. 

2. 
3! 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

old when Fabius Maximus took Ta- 
rentum. See the preceding page. 

All Greece restored to her liberty by 
T. Q. Flaminius ....... 

Flaminius triumphs ; Demetrius, the son 
of Philip, and Nabis, tyrant of Lace- 
daemon, follow his chariot. 

Cato triumphs for his conquests in Spain 

Scipio Africanus dies 

Philopcemen dies 

The same year that Philopoemen dies, 

paulus j:milius, 

Then first consul, was beaten by Hanni- 
bal at Cannae. 

When consul the second time, he con- 
quered Perseus, and brought him in 
cliains to Rome 

Now Terence flourished. 

Paulus vEmilius dies 

Marius born 

The third Punic war, which continued 
four years 

Cato the Censor dies. 

Scipio jEmilianus destroys Carthage; 
and Mummius sacks and burns Corinth 

Carneades dies, aged eighty-five . . 

Polybius dies, aged eighty-one . . . 

TIBERIUS and CAIUS GRACCHUS 

The laws of Caius Gracchus . . . 
MARIUS 

Marches against Jugurtha .... 

Cicero born. 

Pompey born 

Marius, now consul the second time, 
marches against the Cimbri . . . 

Julius Caesar is born, in the sixth con- 
sulship of Marius 

Lucretius born 

SYLLA, 

After his praetorship, sent into Cappa- 

docia 

Makes himself master of Rome . . 

Takes Athens 

Marius dies the same year. 

SERTORIUS 

Sent into Spain 

The younger Marius beaten by Sylla; 
yet soon after he defeats Pontius Tele- 

A. U. C. 

557 

558 
569 
570 

585 

593 
597 

C04 
607 

630 

B. C. 

658 
665 
666 

670 

194 

193 
162 
181 

166 

158 
154 

147 

144 
129 
123 

121 

646 

105 

647 

104 

649 

102 

653 

98 
94 

93 

86 

85 

81 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A. M. Olympiad. 

3669 

3870 

3871 

clxxiv. 4. 

clxxv. 1. 

clxxv. 2. 

3874 

3877 

3879 

3881 
3887 

3891 

3897 
3902 

clxxvi. 1. 

clxxvi. 4. 

clxxvii. 2. 

clxxvii. 4. 
clxxix. 2. 

clxxx. 2. 

clxxxi. 4. 
olxxxiii. 1. 

a. u. a 

sinus, at the gates of Rome. Sylla en- 
ters the city, and being created dicta- 
tor, exercises all manner of cruelties 

CRASSUS 

Enriches himself with buying the estates 
of persons proscribed. 

POMPEY, 

At the age of twenty-five, is sent into 
Africa, against Domitius, and beats him 

CATO OF UTICA 

Was younger than Pompey; for he was 
but fourteen years old when Sylla's 
proscriptions were in their utmost 
rage. 

CICERO 

Defends Roscius against the practices 
of Sylla. This was his first public 
pleading. After this he retires to 
Athens, to finish his studies . . . 

Sylla, after having destroyed above one 
hundred thousand Roman citizens, 
proscribed ninety senators, and two 
thousand six hundred knights, resigns 
his dictatorship, and dies the year fol- 
lowing • • : 

Pompey manages the war in Spain 
against Sertorius 

LUCULLUS, 

After his consulship, is sent against Mi- 
thridates ......... 

Sertorius assassinated in Spain . . . 

Crassus consul with Pompey. 

Tigranes conquered by Lucullus . . 

Mithridates dies. Pompey forces the 
temple of Jerusalem 

Augustus Caesar born. 

JULIUS CjESAR 

Appointed consul with Bibulus, obtains 
Illyria, and the two Gauls, with four 
legions. He marries his daughter J u- 
lia to Pompey 

Crassus is taken by the Parthians, and 
slain 

Caesar defeats Pompey at Pharsalia . 

Pompey flies into Egypt, and is assassi- 
nated there. 

671 

423 

B. C. 
80 

672 

79 

673 

674 
677 

680 
682 

684 

690 

690 

700 
705 

78 

77 
74 

71 
69 

67 

61 

57 

51 

46 

424 

A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE. 

A.M. 
3903 

3904 
3905 

Olympiad. 

clxxxiii. 2. 

elxxxiii. 3. 
clxxxiii. 4. 

3906 clxxxiv. 1. 

3907 clxxxiv. 2. 

3907 

3908 

3909 
3910 

3918 
3919 

3920 

clxxxiv. 2. 

clxxxiv. 3. 

clxxxiv. 4. 
clxxxv. 4. 

clxxxvii. 1. 
clxxxvii. 3, 

clxxxvii. 3. 

3947 
3981 

3982 
4018 

4019 

cxciv. 2. 

ccii. 4. 

cciii. 1. 

ccxi. 4. 

ccxii. 1. 

Caesar makes himself master of Alexan- 
dria, and subdues Egypt : after which, 
he marches into Syria, and soon re- 
duces Pharnaces 

He conquers Juba, Scipio.and Petreius, 
in Africa, and leads up four triumphs. 
Previous to which, Cato kills himself 

Caesar defeats the sons of Pompey, at 
Munda. Cneius falls in the action, 
and Sextus flies into Sicily. Caesar 
triumphs the fifth time 

BRUTUS. 

Caesar is killed by Brutus and Cassius 
Brutus passes into Macedonia . . . 

MARK ANTONY 

Beaten the same year, by Augustus, at 
Modena. He retires to Lepidus. The 
triumvirate of Augustus, Lepidus, 
and Antony, who divide the empire 
among them 

The battle of Philippi, in which Brutus 
and Cassius, being overthrown by Au- 
gustus and Antony, lay violent hands 
on themselves 

Antony leagues with Sextus, the son of 
Pompey, against Augustus . . . 

Augustus and A ntony renew their friend- 
ship after the death of Fulvia, and An- 
tony marries Octavia 

Augustus and Antony again embroiled 

The battle of Actium Antony is beaten, 
and flies into Egypt, with Cleopatra 

Augustus makes himself master of Alex- 
andria. Antony and Cleopatra de- 
stroy themselves 

GALBA 

Born. 

Otho born 

Galba appointed consul 

The revolt of Vindex 

Nero killed, and Galba declared emperor 

OTHO 

Revolts, and persuades the soldiers to 
despatch Galba ; upon which he is pro- 
claimed emperor; and, three months 
after, being defeated by Vitellius, des- 
patches himself 

A. U. C. 

706 
707 

708 

709 
710 

710 

711 

712 

713 
721 

722 

B. C. 

45 
44 

43 

42 
41 

41 

40 
39 

38 
30 

29 

723 

28 

Era 

of tha 

Incar 

nation. 

750 

— 

784 

34 

785 

35 

820 

70 

821 

INDEX. 

ACHEAJVS, their noble method of 
testifying their gratitude to the Ro 
mans, ii. 237. 

Adonis, feast of, i. 379. 

Adultery unknown at Sparta, i. 113. 

JEdiles, office of, its nature, ii. 288. 

JEmilian Family, its antiquity, ii. 38 

AZmilius Paulus is made aedile, ii 
39; his discipline, 39; subdues 
Spain, 40; and the Ligurians, 42; 
is appointed to conduct the war 
against Perseus, 45; whom he de- 
feats, 56; his disinterestedness, 63; 
his death, and public funeral, 72. 

JEsop meets Solon at the court of 
Croesus, i. 195. 

Agesilaus declared king of Sparta, by 
the influence of Lysander, iii. 126; 
appointed to command the Lacede- 
monian expedition into Asia, 129 
from which he is recalled, 137; to 
conduct the expedition against the 
Thebans, whom he defeats, 148; 
but is subsequently defeated by 
them, 151; they attack Lacedemon 
itself, but retire without taking it, 
154; his treachery towards Tachos, 
king of Egypt, 159; his death, 161. 

Agis, his general character, iii. 459 ; 
his efforts to reform his country, 
460; commands the Spartan army, 
466; is seized byLeonidas, and im- 
prisoned, 469; murdered, together 
with his mother and grandmother, 
270, 271 

Agriculture, advantages of, i. 152. 

Alban Lake, prophecy respecting, i. 
261. 

Albinns, piety of, i. 275. 

Alcander assaults Lycurgus, i. 108; is 
won upon by the kindness of Lycur- 
gus, ib. 

A'cibiades contracts a friendship with 
Socrates, i. 366; his kindness to a 
stranger, i. 367; gains the prizes at 
the Olympic games, 371 ; stratagem 
of, 374; his dissoluteness and extra- 
vagance, 376; is accused of impiety, 
Vol. IV. 3 H 

381 ; returns to Athens, where he 
is joyfully received, 395 ; his death, 
402. 

Alexander the Great receives the 
Persian ambassadors, when a youth, 
in the absence of his father, iii. 244; 
his courage, 246 ; quarrels with his 
father, 249; whom he soon suc- 
ceeds, 250; he takes Thebes, 251; 
his noble conduct to Timoclea, 252; 
defeats the Persians, 255; his ill- 
ness, 258 ; defeats Darius, 260 ; his 
honourable conduct to the mother, 
wife, and daughter, of Darius, 261 ; 
his temperance, 262; defeats Darius 
a second time, 277; orders funeral 
honours to be paid to the body of 
Darius, 286; marries Roxana, 288; 
puts his old counsellor, Parmenio, 
to death, 292; kills Clitus, 293; 
conquers Porus, 300 ; curious con- 
ference with the Gymnosophists, 
304; marries Statira, the daughter 
of Darius, 309; his death, 314; and 
character, ib. 

Ammonius, preceptor to Plutarch, 
anecdote of, i. 2. 

Amulius dispossesses Numitor of the 
the kingdom of Alba, i. 59 ; orders 
the destruction of his nephews, ib. 

Anarchy, the precursor of tyranny, 
iii. 210. 

Anaxagoras, his praise, i. 299 ; is ac- 
cused, and flies from Athens, i. 326; 
first taught the Athenians how the 
moon becomes eclipsed, iii. 30. 

Ancilia, bucklers, why so called, i. 
148. 

Andromachus betrays Crassus, iii. 68. 

Antigonus,\\. 140; his death, 159. 

Antiochus marries St ra ton ice, iv. 166. 

Antony, his generosity, iv. 181; his 
humane conduct to Archelaus, ib.; 
connects himself with the fortunes 
of Caesai, 186; to whom he carries 
assistance, 187 ; his vicious conduct, 
ib.; pronounces the funeral oration 
over Caesar's body, 188; unites wita 

36* 

426 

INDEX. 

Octavius Caesar and Lepidus, 190; 
his brutal exultation over Cicero, 
191; defeats Cassius, 192; his luxu- 
ry, 196; connects himself with Cleo- 
patra, ib. ; is defeated by the Par- 
tisans, 211; and after severe losses 
withdraws from their country, 212; 
treats his wife Octavia with great 
neglect, 213; his difference with 
Caesar, 214; gives himself up en- 
tirely to Cleopatra, 215; his forces, 
219; engages with Caesar's fleet, 
221; and is defeated, 223; his army 
goes over to Caesar, 224 ; he returns 
to Cleopatra, 225; they both offer to 
submit to Cassar, who rejects their 
proposal, 227; he stabs himself, 229: 
is buried by Cleopatra, 232. 

Aquilii conspire with the Vitellii to 
reinstate Tarquin, i. 203; and are 
discovered and punished, 204. 

Aralus raises the Acheans to dignity 
and power, iv. 345; takes Corinth 
by stratagem, 354; is deserted by 
the Acheans, 366; his various for- 
tune, 369; his death, 377. 

Archidamia, heroic conduct of, ii. 276. 

Archimedes, his skill in mechanics, ii. 
119; he defends Syracuse, 120; is 
killed, 125. 

Archon, office of, i. 184, n. 

Areopagus, council of, instituted, i. 
185. 

Ariadne instructs Theseus to pass 
through the Labvrinth, i. 40. 

Ariamnes, an artful Arabian chief, 
deceives Crassus, iii. 58. 

Aristides opposes Themistocles, i. 228; 
is banished, ii. 150; recalled, ib. ; 
his sense of justice, 167; why called 
"the just," 148; his voluntary 
poverty, 170; death, 171. 

Aristion, his vices and profligacies, ii. 
367. 

Aristotle the philosopher, preceptor 
to Alexander, iii. 246. 

Artnxerxes succeeds his father, iv. 
315; becomes popular, 316; his bro- 
ther Cyrus revolts, 317; whom he 
engages, 319; and defeats, ib.; loses 
his wife Statira, by poison, adminis- 
tered by Parysatis, whom he ba- 
nishes to Babylon, 328; his weak- 
ness and vice, ib.; his cruelties, 324; 
conspiracy of his eldest son and se- 
veral nobles, 336. 

Aruns, the son of Tarquin, killed bv 
Brutus, i. 207. 

As, Roman coin, value of, i. 268. 

Aspasia, her talents, i. 317; captivates 
Pericles, 318; accused and acquit- 
ted through the influence of Peri- 
cles, 326. 

Ateius opposes the departure of Cras- 
sus from Borne, iii. 54. 

Athens, settlement of, by Theseus, i. 
44; rebuilt by Themistocles, i. 244; 
adorned by Pericles, 309 ; taken by 
Lysander, ii. 337; and by Sylla, af- 
ter suffering famine and distress, 
400. 

Bandius, his bravery, ii. 115; espouses 
the cause of Hannibal, ib. ; from 
which he is detached by the kind- 
ness of Marcellus, ib. 

Barathrum, a place of punishment, 
ii. 145. 

Barley, the substitution of for wheat, 
a punishment, ii. 133. 

Bastards excused by the laws of So- 
lon from relieving their fathers, i. 
188; who were deemed such at 
Athens, i. 226; laws of Pericles 
concerning, 331. 

Bastarnce,z people of Gaul, ii. 45. 

Bessus seizes the person of Darius, iii. 
285; his punishment by Alexander 
for his perfidy, 286. 

Boat, punishment of the, its dreadful 
nature, iv. 325. 

Bona Dea, ceremonies observed at 
her festival, iii. 322. 

Brennus, king of the Gauls, i. 270; 
defeats the Romans, 272; takes 
Rome, 274. 

Broth, a favourite dish among the La- 
cedemonians, i. 109. 

Brutus, the first Boman consul, i. 200; 
condemns his own sons to death, iv. 
276; engages Aruns, and is killed, 
i. 207. 

, Marcus, accompanies Cato 

to Cyprus, iv. 277; joins Pompey's 
party against Caesar, 278 ; is recon- 
ciled to Cassar, 279; but, offended at 
Caesar's usurpation, he joins Cassius 
in conspiring his death. 282 ; assas- 
sinates Caesar, 286 ; kills Theodotns, 
the author of Pompey's death, iii. 
235; his dream, iv. 298; is defeated 
at Philippi, 307; his death, ib. 

Bucephalus, the horse, its value and 
properties, iii. 245; its death, 301. 

Bull, Marathonian, taken by The 
seus, i. 37. 

Burials, regulations concerning, by 
Lycurgus, i. 125, 

INDEX. 

Cabiri. mysteries of, ii. 430. 

Cazsar leaves Rome through fear of 
Sylla, and is taken by the pirates, 
iii. 317; from whom he obtains his 
freedom by ransom, ib. ; his elo- 
quence, 318; the tendency of his 
conduct to tyranny foretold by 
Cicero, 319; is elected pontiff, 
321 ; suspected of supporting Cati- 
line's conspiracy, ib. ; occasion of 
his divorcing Pompeia, 323 ; recon- 
ciles Pompey and Crassus, 32G; 
with whom he unites, ib.; and by 
their interest is appointed consul, 
ib. ; his success as a general, 328; 
affection of his soldiers, ib. ; va- 
rious traits of his character, 329; 
defeats the Germans, 332; and the 
Nervii, 333; his expedition into 
Britain, 335 ; defeats the Gauls, 337 ; 
beginning of his dissensions with 
Pompey, 339 ; passes the Rubicon 
on his way to Rome, 343; which he 
enters, 346; his heroic conduct dur- 
ing a storm at sea, 347; defeats 
Pompey at the battle of Pharsalia, 
353; puts Achillas and Photinus, 
the assassins of Pompey, to death, 
355; his connexion with Cleopatra, 
356; bis sententious mode of an- 
nouncing a victory, ib. ; defeats 
Juba king of Numidia, 358; is 
elected consul a fourth time, 359; 
and assumes absolute power at 
Rome, 360; corrects the errors of 
the calendar, in. 363; is assassi- 
nated in the senate house, 369; 
his character, 371. 

Calendar reformed by Numa, i. 153. 

Callias, his treachery, ii. 148. 

Callislhenes becomes disagreeable to 
the court of Alexander, iii. 294 ; his 
death, 297. 

Camillus, fortitude of, i. 259; various 
regulations of, ib.; takes the city of 
Veii, 262; honourable conduct of, 
towards the city of Falerii. 267; ex- 
iles himself from Rome, 268; deli- 
vers Rome from Brennus, 278; 
made military tribune a sixth time, 
289; defeats the Volsci, 290; ap- 
pointed dictator the fifth time, 293; 
defeats the Gauls a second time, 
294. 

Candidates to appear ungirt and in 
loose garments, i. 413. 

Cannce, battle of, i. 348. 

Capitol, how saved from Brennus, i. 
277. 

427 

Cassander, Alexander's treatment of 
him, iii. 212. 

Cassius joins Brutus in assassinating 
Caesar, iv. 282; unites in opposing 
Antony and Octavius, iv. 192; is 
killed at the battle of Philippi, 203. 

Catiline's conspiracy, iii. 420; his 
punishment and overthrow, iv. 106. 

Cato the Censor, his manner of life, 
ii. 174; his ungenerous sentiments 
as to the bonds between man and 
man, 177; his temperance, 179; 
conducts the war in Spain prosper- 
ously, 183; is honoured with a tri- 
umph, 184; his vain-glory, 186; se- 
verity against luxury, 189; domestic 
management, 191 ; his enmity to 
philosophy and physicians, 195; 
marries a young woman, 197; his 
opposition to Carthage, 199; his 
death, 200. 

Cato the Younger, his general cha- 
racter, iii. 404 ; his early promise of 
future honour, 405; his affection for 
his brother, 406; first attempt at 
oratory, 407; his mode of life, 408; 
his influence on the army, 410; his 
manner of travelling, 412; is great- 
ly honoured by Pompey, 413; as 
quaestor he reforms many abuses, 
ib. ; likewise as tribune also, 420; 
his family trials, 421 ; opposes Me- 
tellus, 422; refuses the alliance of 
Pompey, 425; opposes Caesar and 
Pompey, 427; his scrupulous and 
just conduct in reference to the 
treasures taken at Cyprus, 436; 
remonstrates with Pompey, 438; 
whom he afterwards supports, 441 ; 
is refused the consulship, 439 ; joins 
the forces of Pompey, 442 ; at whose 
death he goes into Africa, 444 ; his 
conduct at Utica, 451 ; his heroic 
death by suicide, 454, 455; is deep- 
ly lamented at Utica, ib. 

Celeres, etymology of, i. 85. 

Celibacy, deemed disgraceful at Spar- 
ta, i. 172. 

Censors, authority of, i. 259, n. ; their 
duties, i. 403. " 

Ceremonies, religious, why so called, 
i. 148. 

Cethegus detected by Cicero, as one 
of the accomplices of Catiline, iii. 
420. 

Chabrias initiates Phocion in the art 
of war, iii. 377. 

Chance and fortune, difference of, ii. 
33. 

428 INDEX. 

Chariot with fine white horses, sacred 
to the Gods, i. 264. 

Charon the Theban unites with Pelo- 
pidas to deliver his country from 
tyranny, ii. 80; his intrepidity, 82. 

Chelonis, daughter of Leonidas, iii. 
268; her virtuous attachment to 
her husband in his misfortunes, ib. 

Cheronea, a town of Bceotia, the birth 
place of Plutarch, i. 1 ; character 
of its inhabitants, 2. 

Children, deformed and weakly ones 
put to death at Sparta, i. 114. 

Cicero, his early promise of future 
greatness, iv. 95; undertakes the 
defence of Roscius against Sylla, 
97 ; receives the commendation of 
Apolionius for his oratory, 98; pro- 
secutes Verres, 100; his integrity as 
a judge, 101 ; detects Catiline's con- 
spiracy, 105; and is invested with 
absolute power, 107; punishes the 
conspirators, 111; he first perceives 
Caesar's aim at arbitrary power. 
112; but refuses to take any part 
in the war between him and Pom- 
pey, 124; divorces his wife Teren- 
tia, 127; takes part with Octavius 
Caesar, 130; by whom he is aban- 
doned, 131; his assassination, 133; 
his commendation by Octavius Cae- 
sar, ib. 

Cimbri, whence they came, ii. 293; 
their character, 294; defeat Catu- 
lus, the Roman consul, iii. 81 ; are 
defeated by Marius, ii. 306. 

Cimon is accused and banished by Pe- 
ricles, ii. 4 1 3 ; his general character, 
415 ; liberality, ib. ; defeats the Per- 
sians by land and sea in one day, 
ib. ; his death, ib. 

Cineas, his prudent advice and use- 
less remonstrance with Pyrrhus, ii. 
261. 

Cinna seeks Pompey's life, and is put 
to death, iii. 165. 

Cissusa, the fountain of, the bathing 
place of Bacchus, ii. 350. 

Claudius, Appius, his patriotic and 
noble advice to the Romans, ii. 266. 

Cleomenes marries Agiatis, widow of 
Agis, iv. 5 ; kills all the Ephori, 10 ; 
excuses himself, ib. ; his general 
conduct, 13; defeats the Acheans, 
15; but becomes unsuccessful in 
turn, 16; death of his wife, 21; is 
defeated by the Acheans at the bat- 
tle of Sellasia, 26; seeks protection 
from Ptolemy, king of Egypt, 29 ; 

is betrayed, and makes his escape, 
31; is pursued, and kills himself, 33. 

C/enn, the rival of Nicias, iii. 9. 

Cleopatra, her blandishments, iii. 354, 
&c. ; her wit and learning, 355; her 
influence over Antony, iv. 97 ; their 
total ruin, 229 ; her interview with 
Caesar, 233; her death, 235; and 
burial, ib. 

Clitus, the friend of Alexander, put 
to death by the king, when intoxi- 
cated, iii. 393. 

Clodius, his infamous character, iv. 
117; is killed by Milo, 122. 

Clodius, Publius, exhorts the troops 
of Lucullus to mutiny, ii. 452. 

Clmlia, anecdote of, i. 217. 

Codes, Horatius, saves Rome by his 
valour, i. 215. 

Collalinus, one of the first consuls, i. 
201 ; is suspected and banished from 
Home, 205. 

Comparison of Romulus with The- 
seus, i. 91 ; Numa with LvcnriMis, 
161; Solon with Publicola, 222; 
Pericles with Fabius Maxim us, 
361 ; Alcibiades wilh Coriolanns, 
436; Timoleon with iEmilius, ii. 
73; Pelopidas with Marcellus, 138; 
Aristides with Cato, 200; Flami- 
nius wilh Philopoemen, 245; Ly- 
sander with Sylla, 391 ; Cimon with 
Lucullus, 462; Nicias with Cras- 
sus, iii. 74; Sertorius withEumenes, 
123; Agesilaus with Pompey, 236; 
Agis and Cleomenes wilh Tiberius 
and Caius Gracchus, iv. 66; De- 
mosthenes and Cicero, 134; Deme 
trius and Antony, 236; Dion with 
Brutus, 311. 

Concord, temple of, occasion of its be- 
ing built, i. 294. 

Conscience, no distinction between a 
private and a political one, ii. 324. 

Consuls, Brutus and Collatinus the 
first, i. 201 ; Lucius Sextus the first 
plebeian consul, 209. 

Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi, 
her magnanimity, iv. 40. 

Crassus, his general character, iii. 38; 
becomes the possessor of great part 
of Rome, 39; leaves Rome in con- 
sequence of Marius's cruelties, 41 , 
is protected by Vibius, ib. ; unites 
with Pompey and Caesar, 45 ; his 
ambition, 52; is grievously defeated 
by Surena, 62; betrayed by An 
dromachus, 69 ; and treacherouslf 
slain, 71. 

INDEX. 

429 

Vratesirlea, her heroic and patriotic 

conduct, iv. 33 ; death, 34. 
Cr&ato, Solon's interview with, i. ]94. 
Curio, iii. 211. 

Curtinn Lake, why so called, i. 76. 
Cyrus, tomb of, iii. 308 ; inscription 

on, ib. 
Cyrus, brother of Artaxerxes, revolts 

against him, and is slain in battle, 

iv. 315. 

Damon, banishment of, i. 299. 

D ince, sacred, i. 141. 

Darius, defeated by Alexander, iii. 
260; his death, 286. 

Day", distinction of, into lucky and 
unlucky, considered, i. 273. 

Dead, speaking ill of, forbidden, i. 
187. _ 

Delphi, i. 39. et passim. 

Demades the orator, his character, iii. 
373. 

Demagogue, Menestheusthe first, i.52. 

Demetrius, his ostentation, iv. 139; 
his general character, ib. ; sails to 
Athens, and liberates the citizens, 
143; their adulation, ib. ; his vices, 
147; defeats Ptolemy, 148; his hu- 
manity, 149; his pride, ib. ; is griev- 
ously defeated, 159; forsaken by 
the Athenians, 160; marries his 
daughter to Seleucus, 161; retakes 
Athens, 162; and treacherously 
slays Alexander, 165; takes The- 
bes, 167; his pomp, 168; is forsaken 
by the Macedonians, 171 ; and his 
other troops, ib. ; surrenders him- 
self to Seleucus, 176; his death and 
funeral, 177. 

Democles, his virtue and chastity, iv. 
154. 

Demosthenes is left an orphan at seven 
years of age, iv. 72 ; is fired by the 
example of Callistratus to become 
an orator, 73 ; calls his guardians to 
account, ib. ; studies oratory, 74; 
overcomes, by diligence, the disad- 
vantages of nature, 75; opposes 
Philip, 79 ; but fails to act honoura- 
bly in battle, 80 ; death of Philip, 
85; his contest with ^Eschines con- 
cerning the crown, 88 ; is corrupted 
bv Harpalus, 89; is punished for his 
misconduct, 90; and becomes an 
exile, ib. ; is recalled, 91; poisons 
himself, 92; inscription on his pe- 
destal, 93. 

Dictator, by whom named, ii. 1 32 ; 
etymology of the title, ib. 

Diogenes the philosopher, his reply to 
Alexander, iii. 252. 

Dion, the disciple of Plato, iv. 240; is 
calumniated to the king, 242; and 
falls under his displeasure, 247; is 
banished, and retires to Athens, 248; 
undertakes the liberation of Sicily, 
252; and succeeds, 256; meets with 
a great want of confidence in the 
Syracusans, 259; who drive him to 
Leontium, 264; the return of Dio- 
nysius and his severe slaughter of 
the Syracusans induce them to soli- 
cit Dion's return, ib. ; he defeats the 
troops of Dionysius, 267; his mag- 
nanimity, 268 ; is opposed by Hera- 
clides and his party, 269 ; a conspi- 
racy being formed against him by 
one Callippus, he is murdered, 272. 

Dionysius the tyrant, after ten years' 
exile, returns to Syracuse, and re- 
stores his affairs, ii. 5 ; is conquered 
byTimoleon, 11; retires to Corinth, 
15; where, through poverty, he 
opens a school, ib. ; his education, 
ib. ; his conduct to Plato, 16. 

Divorce, law of, i. 81. 

Dolopes, or pirates, expelled by Cimon 
from Scyros, ii. 403. 

Draco, severity of the laws of, i. 182 ; 
repealed by Solon, ib. 

Earthquake at Athens, iii. 16. 

Eclipse of the moon, variously regard- 
ed as a good or bad omen, iii. 31. 

Elysian fields, where situated, iii. 8^. 

Envy, malicious stratagems of, i. 247. 

Epaminondas, his friendship for Pe- 
lopidas, ii. 78 ; commands the The- 
ban army, which defeats Cleombro- 
tus, king of Sparta, 10; attacks La- 
cedaamon, iii. 153; his death, 157. 

Ephesus prospers under Lysander, ii. 
328. 

Ephori, their office, i. 104. 

Epimenides contracts friendship with 
Solon, i. 177; instructs the Atheni- 
ans, ib. 

Eumenes, his birth, i. 103; is made 
secretary to Alexander, ib. ; kills 
Neoptolemus in single combat, 110 ; 
is besieged by Antigonus in Nora, 
113; receives succours from the 
Macedonians, 115; is betrayed by 
his own troops to Antigonus, 121 ; 
by whose order he is murdered, 122 

Fahii, family of the, why so called, i 
334. 

430 INDEX- 

Fabius Maximas, created dictator, i. 
337; his prudent manner of con- 
ducting the war, 339; the last hope 
of the Romans after their dreadful 
defeat at Cannae, ib. ; his mild con- 
duct towards one who had endea- 
voured to seduce his army, 340 ; re- 
covers Tarentum by stratagem, 
354; his death, 360. 

Fable of the body and its members, i. 
406. 

Fabricius, his probity and magnani- 
mity, ii. 267; and honour, ib. 

Faith, swearing by, the greatest of 
oaths, i. 152. 

Falerii, city of, taken by Camillus, i. 
267 ; anecdote of a schoolmaster of, 
ib. 

Fame, how far to be regarded, i. 138. 

Famine in the army of Mithridates, 
ii. 427. 

Fear, worshipped as a deity, iv. 11. 

Feciales, duty of, i. 147. 

Feretrius, a surname of Jupiter, 
whence derived, ii. 113. 

Fire, sacred, introduced by Romulus, 
i. 81; ever-living, ib. ; an emblem 
of purity, 145. 

F/arninius, the consul, his rashness 
and death, i. 336. 

, Lucius, his cruelty, ii. 241. 

■ , Titus Quinctius, his gene- 
ral character, ii. 225 ; defeats Phi- 
lip, 228; with whom he concludes 
a peace, 230 ; restores liberty to 
Greece, 234; is appointed censor, 
241 ; improperly interferes on be- 
half of his brother, 242. 

Flute, playing on, objected to by Al- 
cibiades, i. 128. 

Fortunate Isles, now the Canaries, 
supposed to be the Elysian fields, 
iii. 85. 

Fortune and Chance, difference of, ii. 
33; mutability of, ib. 

Fortune of Women, temple of, occa- 
sion of its erection, i. 433. 

Friendship of Theseus and Pirithous, 
origin of, i. 52; of Epaminondas 
and Pelopidas, ii. 78. 

Fttlvius, the friend of Caius Grac- 
chus, iv. 59. 

Galba, the richest private man that 
ever rose to the imperial dignity, 
iv. 380; is solicited to take the com- 
mand of the Gauls, 381 ; is nomi- 
nated by the senate and the army, 
383; is influenced by the counsels 

of Vinius, ib. ; his avarice, 386, 
gives himself up to be governed by 
corrupt ministers, 389 ; adopts Piso 
as his son, 395; but the soldiers re- 
volting, they are both slain, 396; 
his character, 399. 

Gauls, origin of the, i. 269; take 
Rome, 276. 

Genii, existence of, believed by Plu- 
tarch, i. 89 ; their offices, iv. 240. 

Gordian knot, account of, iii. 257. 

Gracchus, Tiberius, his character, 
and that of his brother, compared, 
iv. 36; his good fame, 37; con- 
cludes a peace with the Numan- 
tians, 38; as tribune he proposes 
the Agrarian law, 40 ; which, after 
much opposition, is passed, 44; and 
followed by great commotions, 45; 
during a violent tumult Gracchus 
is slain, 49; he is greatly lamented 
by the people, 51. 

, Caius, his early eloquence, 

iv. 52 ; goes out as qucrstor to Sar- 
dinia, ib. ; his popularity and the 
consequent jealousy of the senate, 
53; several laws proposed by him, 
55; is opposed by the senate and 
nobles, ib. ; and ultimately killed, 
64. 

Gratitude, instance of, i. 433; in the 
Acheans towards Flaminius, ii. 337. 

Gi/lippus, embezzles the money sent 
by Lysander to Lacedcmcn, ii. 339. 

Gymnosophists, or, Indian Philoso 
pliers, their conference with Alex- 
ander, iii. 304. 

Hair, offering of, to Apollo, i. 32; 
cutting it off a token of mourning, 
ii. 326. 

Hannibal defeats Minucius, i. 345; 
and the consuls jEmilius and Varro 
at Cannae, 350; endeavours to en- 
trap Fabius, 353; kills himself in 
Bithynia, ii. 243. 

Helen, rape of, i. 49. 

Heloles, cruel treatment of, at Sparta, 
i. 126. 

Hephccstion, is attached to Alexander, 
iii. 104; his death, 310; is lamented 
by Alexander, ib. 

Hind, the favourite one of Sertorius. 
iii. 88. 

H>ppnrete, wife of Alcibiades, i. 26&. 

Hipponicvs, conduct of Alcibiades 
towards, i. 269. 

Homer, his writings made generally 
known to Lycurgus, i. 100. 

Janus, temple of, shut in peace, open 
in war, i. 156. 

Iceles, is opposed by Timoleon, seized 
and condemned, ii. 30 ; his wile 
.md daughter are executed, 31. 

Ichneumon, description of the, iii.284. 

Idleness punished by the laws of Solon, 
l. 188. 

Jealousy of the Persians, i. 250. 

Iliad, Homer's, valued by Aristotle, 
iii. 266. 

Images of the gods, worn in the bo- 
som, i. 141. 

Interreges, Roman magistrates, their 
duty, i. 134. 

Iren, office and duties of, i. 116, 117. 

Iron Money, introduced by Lycurgus 
into Sparta, i. 106. 

Jugurlha betrayed by his father-in- 
law into the hands of Sylla, ii. 292; 
is led in triumph by Marius, 295 ; 
his wretched end, ib. 

Juno, statue of, converses with Camil- 
lus, i. 963. 

Lamia the courtesan, iv. 148. 

Lamprias, grandfather of Plutarch, 
character of, iv. 196. 

Laurentia, the nurse of Romulus, i. 
60. 

Lav<nium, the depository of the gods, 
besieged, i. 82. 

Laws of Lycurgus, not to be written, 
l. 110. 

Lawsuits unknown at Lacedsemon, i. 
123. 

Leucothea, rites of the goddess, i. 262. 

Lenclra, battle of, fatal to the Lace- 
dnemonian supremacy in Greece, ii. 
93. 

Licinia, wife of Caius Gracchus, begs 
him to avoid the public dissension, 
iv. 62. 

Life, not to be needlessly exposed by 
the general, ii. 76. 

Lucanian Sake, its peculiar nature, 
iii. 48. 

Lwullus, his general character, ii. 
417; is entertained by Ptolemy, 
king of Egypt, 419: permits Mith- 
ridates to escape, 420; whom he af- 
terwards most signally defeats, 429 ; 
providentially escapes assassination, 
433; cains an important victory 
over Tigranes, 450; his troops mu- 
tiny, ib. ; for want of attachment to 
his person, 451 ; he obtains the ho- 
nour of a triumph, 455 ; his domes- 
tic trials, 456; his luxury, pomp, 

INDEX. 43 1 

and magnificence, 457 ; his patron- 
age of literature, 460 ; his death, 
461. 

Lvpercalia, feast of, i. 80. 

Luxury, laws of Lycurgus against it, 
i. 107. 

Lycurgus, uncertainty of the history 
of, i. 96; saves the life of his ne- 
phew, 98; collects the writings of 
Homer, 100; consults the Delphia.4 
Oracle about altering the laws of 
Sparta, 101 ; his new laws, 104, &c. 
&zc. fee. ; exacts an oath for their 
observance, 128; starves himself at 
Delphi, ib. ; and is deified at Spar- 
ta, 130. 

Lysander makes Ephesus a naval 
depot, ii. 328 ; defeats the Athenians 
at sea 333; his subtlety, 341; is 
killed by the Thebans, at the siege 
of Haliactus, 350; his poverty, 352; 
and general depravity, ib. 

Macedonia conquered by the Romans, 
ii. 62. 

Mamercus defeated by Timoleon, n. 
31 ; endeavours to destroy himself, 
32 ; but failing so to do, is taken 
and punished as a thief and robber, 
ib. 

Manipuli, origin of the term, i. 64. 

Man'ius, why surnamed Capitolinus, 
i. 280; is condemned to death, 289. 

Mnrcellus, his general character, ii. 
107; defeats Viridomarus, king of 
the Gesata;, whom he slays in bat- 
tle, 112; his triumph, ib. &c. ; at- 
tacks and takes Syracuse, 118; is 
accused of cruelty and oppression 
by the Syracusans, and honourably 
acquitted by the senate, 130; is 
killed in reconnoitring Hannibal's 
camp, 137. 

Marcias Coriolanus, his early love 
for every kind of combat, i. 404 ; 
takes Corioli, 408; his disinterested- 
ness, 410; obtains the name of Co- 
riolanus, 411 ; is refused the consul- 
ship, 414: accused by the tribunes, 
416; condemned by them to death, 
and rescued by the patricians, 417; 
is banished, 419; and goes over to 
the Volscians, 421 ; ravages the Po- 
man territory, 425; rejects repeat- 
ed entreaties and embassies, 427; 
but is, at last, won upon by the 
prayers of his mother and wife, 433; 
is murdered by the Volscians, 435, 
and mourned for by the Romans, 436 

432 INDEX. 

Mardonius, the Persian general, sends 
ambassadors to Athens, to detach 
them from the cause of Greece, by 
promises of future peace and power, 
ii. 154. 

J\Iarius, his obscure birth, ii. 286; is 
appointed consul, 291 ; and after- 
wards a second, third, and fourtl 
time, 293; defeats the Cimbri, 297; 
quarrels with Sylla, 314; by whom 
he is driven from Rome, 315; he is 
taken, but set at liberty, 317; joins 
Cinna, and marches to Rome, 321; 
massacres the citizens, 322; terrified 
at the approach of Sylla, he becomes 
sick, and dies, 324. 

Marriage, regulations of, at Sparta 
i. 113; laws of Solon concerning, 
188. 

Martha, a prophetess, attends Mari- 
us, ii. 298. 

Matronalia, feast of, i. 80. 

Mencstheus, the first demagogue, i. 
52. 

Merchandise, honourableness of, i. 
168. 

Meton, the Tarentine, dissuades his- 
countrymen from war with the Ro- 
mans, and alliance with Pyrrhus, 
ii. 260. 

Me tell us refuses to take an oath re- 
quired by the Agrarian law, and 
leaves Rome, ii. 210; is recalled, 
211. 

Minotaur killed by Theseus, i. 37. 

Minucius upbraids Fabius, i. 340 ; 
his rash conduct, ib. ; is invested 
with power equal to that of Fabius, 
342; engaging with Hannibal, is 
rescued by Fabius from defeat and 
disgrace, 345 ; noble conduct of, 
towards Fabius, 347. 

Misfortunes, effect of, on the minds 
of men, i. 350. 

Mithridates, defeated by Sylla, ii. 
365; who grants him peace, 378; 
routed by Lucullus, 433; sends 
Bacchides to see his wives and sis- 
ters put to death, 434 ; his death, 
iii. 198. 

Modesty, the praise of, i. 164. 

Money, of gold and silver, first intro- 
duced at Sparta, byLysander, i.129. 

M>on, eclipses of, unknown to the 
Athenians, iii. 31. 

Mountains, their greatest height, as 
known to the Romans, ii. 51. 

Mourning;, regulations of Numa con- 
cerning, i. 146. 

Mvcianus, heroic conduct of, ir 
403. 

Muses, the sacrifices offered to, be- 
fore battle, ii. 372. 

Music cultivated at Sparta, i. 119; 
united with valour, ib. ; used before 
battle, 120. 

Names, the three in use among the 
Romans, ii. 285. 

Nearchus, the philosopher, his doc- 
trines, ii. 175. 

Neutrality, in limes of danger, infa- 
mous, i. 185. 

Nicagoras, duplicity and treacherv 
of, iv. 30. 

Nicias opposes Alcibiades, iii. 17; his 
regulations respecting Delos, 8; his 
veneration for the gods, ib. ; op- 
poses the proposed expedition to 
Sicily, of which he is appointed 
commander, 20; his timidity, 30; is 
defeated by the Syracusans, 34 ; 
by whom he is taken prisoner, ib. ; 
and stoned to death, 3b. 

Nichomachus, the painter, anecdote 
of, ii. 33. 

Numa, character of, i. 132; is solicit- 
ed to become king of Home, 137; 
affects a veneration for religion, 
139; reforms the calendar, 153; 
dies, 158; and is honoured by the 
neighbouring nations, as well as his 
own people, ib. ; is compared with 
LycurgiiB, 161. 

Numitor dispossessed of his kingdom 
by his brother Amulius, i. 59; re- 
cognises his grand-children, Romu- 
lus and Remus, 63. 

Nurses, Spartan preferred, i. 114. 

Nymphceum, account of, ii. 380. 

Oath, the great, its nature, iv. 273. 
Olthacus fails in his attempt to assas- 
sinate Lucullus, ii. 433. 
Omens regarded by Alexander, iii. 

253 et passim. 
Opima, spoils, why so called, ii. 113. 
Opimius, the consul, opposes Caiug 

Gracchus, iv. 59; his corruption 

and disgrace, 65. 
Opfacus, his valour, ii. 264. 
Orehomenus, plain of, both large and 

beautiful, ii. 88. 
Orodes sends ambassadors to Crassu?, 

iii. 55. 
Oromasdes, the author of all good, iii. 

271. 
Oschophoria, feast of, i. 43. 

IJNDEX. 

Ostracism, its nature, i. 373 ; object, 
374. 

Ctho commences his reign with mild- 
ness, and in a manner calculated to 
conciliate the affections of his new 
subjects, iv. 401 ; is opposed by Vi- 
telhus, 403 ; by whom he is defeated, 
405; and kills himself, 413; is la- 
mented by his troops, 414. 

Ovation, the lesser triumph, the na- 
ture of it, ii. 128. 

Panathenma, feast of, i. 45. 

Panteus, interesting account of the 
death of his wife, iv. 33. 

Parmenio, the friend and counsellor of 
Alexander, iii. 259 ; put to death,291 . 

Parsley, wreaths of considered sacred, 
ii. 25. 

Parthenon, built by Pericles, i. 309. 

Parthians, their mode of commencing 
an action, iii. 65. 

Parysalis, mother of Artaxerxes, her 
cruelties, iv. 324; is banished to 
Babylon, 328 ; is recalled, 331. 

Patricians, etymology of the word, i. 
68. 

Patrons and clients, i. 69. 

Pausanias kills Cleonice, ii. 401 ; his 
haughty conduct, iii. 250. 

Pelopidas, his birth and early virtues, 
ii. 77 ; his friendship for Epaminon- 
das, 78; encourages the exiled The- 
bans to regain their liberties, 80; 
defeats the Spartans, 88 ; seized by 
the tyrant Alexander, 98; and re- 
covered by Epaminondas, 99 ; un- 
dertakes a successful embassy to 
the king of Persia, 101 ; killed in a 
battle against Alexander the tyrant, 
103; is honoured and lamented by 
the Thessalians, ib. 

Pericles, his parentage, i. 298; con- 
duct, 299 ; eloquence, 301 ; banishes 
Cimon, 305 ; his prudence, 306; mi- 
litary conduct, 314; falls into dis- 
grace, 328; is recalled, 330; his 
praise, 332. 

Perpenna conspires against Serto- 
rius, whom he murders, iii. 100 ; 
and is himself taken and put to 
death by Pompey, 102. 

Perseus, king of Macedonia, defeats 
the Romans, ii. 44 ; his avarice, and 
its ill effects, ib. ; deceives Gentius, 
48; defeated by iEmilius, 54; sur- 
renders himself to the Romans, 61 ; 
and is led in triumph by iEmilius, 
67 ; his death, 70. 
Vol. IV. 3 I 

433 

Pharnabazus, duplicity of, towards 
Ly sander, ii. 342. 

Phidias, the statuary, i. 325. 

Philip, the Acarnanian, his regard 
for Alexander, iii. 258. 

Philip, king of Macedon, assassinated 
by Pausanias, for refusing him jus- 
tice under a great injury he had re- 
ceived, iii. 250. 

Philopcemen, his general character, 
ii. 207; is invested with the com- 
mand of the Acheans, and defeats 
Machanidas, 214; is defeated in a 
naval battle, 217; his contempt of 
money, 219; is taken prisoner and 
put to death, 222, 223 ; is worthily 
lamented by the Acheans, 224. 

Phocion, his general character, iii. 
375; Ins obligations and gratitude 
to Chabrias, 378; differs in opinion 
with Demosthenes, ib. ; successfully 
pleads with Alexander on behalf of 
the Athenians, 386 ; whose gifts he 
refuses to accept, 387; the excel- 
lent character of his wife, ib. ; re- 
fuses to be corrupted by Harpalus, 
389 ; defeats the Macedonian forces, 
392; his integrity, 395; and justice, 
396; is unjustly accused and put to 
death, 400; but is honoured after 
death, 402. 

Pirates, their depredations and auda- 
city, iii. 181 ; subdued by Pompev, 
183. 

Pirithous and Theseus, friendship of, 
i. 50. 

Pisistratus, ostentatious conduct of, i. 
197. 

Plague, at Athens, i. 328. 

Plal&a, battle of, most fatal to the 
Parian arms, ii. 162. 

Plato, seized by Dionysius, and sold 
as a slave, iv. 242; is invited by 
Dion to Sicily, 245 ; his return, 246. 

Plynteria, ceremonies of, i. 396. 

Pomaxalhres kills Crassus by trea- 
chery, iii. 71. 

Pompey, his general character, iii. 
165; is honoured by Sylla, 167; his 
domestic misconduct, 169; his in- 
humanity, .70; subdues Africa, '72; 
conducts the war in Spain against 
Sertorius, 176 ; and obtains a second 
triumph, 179; appointed with unli- 
mited power to subdue the pirates, 
183; his success, 185; quarrels 
with Lucullus, 187; conquers nu- 
merous nations and armies, 192; his 
splendid triumphs, 201 ; is appoint 

37 

434 

..NDEX. 

ed sole consul, 211 ; leaves Rome to 
oppose Csesar, 219; by whom he is 
conquered, 227; his death, 234; and 
funeral, ib. 

Porsenna, his greatness of mind, i. 
217. 

Portia, wife of Brutus, her heroic 
conduct, iv. 284. 

Poms, defeated and taken prisoner 
by Alexander, iii. 301. 

Prcecia, her character and influence, 
h. 422. 

Procrustes, slain by Theseus, i. 35. 

Psylli, a people who obviate the bite 
of serpents, iii. 444. 

Ptolemy, son of Pyrrhus, his death, ii. 
279. 

Publicola assists Brutus in expelling 
Tarquin, i. 201 ; is made consul, 
206; defeats the Tuscans, and tri- 
umphs, 208; his magnanimity, 209; 
makes many salutary Jaws, ib. ; 
death and character of, 220 ; com- 
pared with Solon, 221. 

Pyrrhus, is rescued from the Molos- 
sians, ii. 249; and protected by 
Glaucias, by whose aid he regains 
his kingdom, 250; kills Neoptole- 
mus, who conspires against him, 
252; his great military skill, 254 ; is 
declared king of Macedon, 258; 
defeats the Roman army, 263; of- 
fers peace, which the senate refuse, 
265 ; invades Sicily, 270 ; is defeat- 
ed by the Romans, 282; is killed by 
an old woman, 283. 

Quirinus, a surname of Romulus,i. 87. 
Qiunles, an appellation of the Ro- 
mans, wheuce derived, i. 78. 

Rats, squeaking of, an unlucky omen, 
ii. 100. 

Remus, brother of Romulus, i. 61 ; 
discovered by Numitor, 62; death 
of, 66. 

Rhea Sylvia, mother of Romulus and 
Remus, i. 59. 

Riches, true use of, ii. 77. 

Rome, origin of, uncertain, i. 58; 
taken by the Gauls, 276 ; retaken 
by Camillus, 278. 

Romulus, brother of Remus, and 
grandson of Numitor, i. 57 ; builds 
Rome, 64 ; steals the Sabine women, 
69 ; kills Acron, king of the Ceci- 
nentians 73; makes peace with 
Tatius, 77 ; becomes arrogant, 84 ; 
dies suddenly, 86. 

Sabine women, rape of, i 71 ; mediate 
between their countrymen and the 
Romans, 77. 

Sacred battalion, apart of the Theban 
army, ii. 90. 

Salaminian galley, uses of, i. 202. 

Salamis, i. 173. 

Salii, an order of priesthood, esta- 
blishment of, i. 148. 

Samian war, carried on am! termi- 
nated by Pericles, i. 321. 

Sardonic laugh, what so called, iv. 61 . 

Satur7iinus proposes an Agrarian law, 
ii. 208. 

Scipio, Africanus, his humane con 
duct to Hannibal, ii. 360. 

Scytale, its nature and uses, ii. 342. 

Senate, Roman, institution of, i. 68 
increased by Romulus, 78. 

, Spartan, introduced by Ly 

curgus, i. 102; mode of filling up 
vacancies in, 124. 

Sertorius, his general character, iii. 
80; serves under Marius, and is 
wounded, 81; loses an eye, 82 ; vi- 
sits the Canary Isles, 86; harasses 
the Roman armies, 87; subdues the 
Characitani by stratagem, 9^ ; re- 
jects the offers of Mithridates, 100, 
is murdered by Perpenna, one of 
his penerals, 101. 

Servilius, Marcus, his speech in de- 
fence of Paulus iEmihus, ii. 65. 

Sicinius, one of the Roman tribunes, 
accuses Marcius Coriolanus, i. 417. 

Sicinus, a spy, employed by Themis 
tocles, i. 238. 

Silenus, the pretended son of Apollo, 
ii. 348. 

Sitting, a posture of mourning, iii. 
445. 

Solon converses with Anacharsis and 
Thales, i. 170; writes a poem to 
persuade the Athenians to rescind 
a foolish law, 173; takes Salamis, 
174; settles disputes between the 
rich and the poor, 181 ; repeals the 
laws of Draco, 182 ; various regu- 
lations, 186; sails to Egypt, Cyprus, 
and Sardis; has an interview with 
Croesus, 192. 

Sophocles gains the prize as a tragic 
writer, at Athens, ii. 404. 

Sparta becomes corrupted by the in- 
troduction of money, iii. 458. 

Spartacus, war of, its origin and suc- 
cess, iii. 45; and termination, 49. 

Stars, opinion of the Peloponnesians 
concerning them, ii. 334. 

Stasicrates, the architect, employed 
by Alexander, iii. 311. 

Stratocles, his impudence and effron- 
tery, iv. 145. 

Sucro, battle of, iii. 177. 

SulpUius, his great depravity, ii. 314; 
and death, 364. 

Surena, his dignity and honour, iii. 
59; defeats Crassus, 71. 

Sylla receives Jugurtha as a prisoner 
from Bocchus, king of Numidia, ii. 
356; etymology of his name, 355; 
his character, 355; enters Rome, 
and indiscriminately massacres the 
innocent and the guilty, 363 ; de- 
feats the army of Archelaus, 365 ; 
his cruelties, 367; depravity, 389; 
and death, 390. 

Syracuse, the nature of the town of, 
ii. 7; is attacked and taken, see 
JSIarcellus. 

Tarentines, their character and con- 
dition, ii. 259. 

Tarentum taken by Fabius, by stra- 
tagem, see Fabius. 

Tarpeia, treachery and punishment 
of, i. 74. 

Thais persuades Alexander to destroy 
the palaces of the Macedonian king, 
iii. 280. 

Thebe, wife of the tyrant Alexander, 
conspires against her husband, ii. 
105. 

Themistocles is opposed by Aristides, 
i. 228; his ambition, ib. ; defeats 
Xerxes, 235; is greatly honoured, 
243; is banished, 247; seeks pro- 
tection from Admetus, king of the 
Molossians, 249 ; throws himself on 
the generosity of Xerxes, 251 ; es- 
capes assassination, 254 ; his death, 
256. 

Theseus, life of, i. 29 ; and Romulus 
compared, 92. 

Thucydides opposes Pericles, i. 306. 

Tigranes, his pride, ii. 438 ; is com- 
pletely defeated by Lucullus, 445. 

Timceua the historian, character of, 
iii. 5 

INDEX. 435 

Timoleon, his parentage and charac- 
ter, ii. 7 ; prefers his country to his 
family, and saves his brother, ib. ; 
conquers Dionysius, 14; is attempt- 
ed to be assassinated, 18 ; defeats 
the Carthaginians, and sends im- 
mense spoils to Corinth, 22; extir- 
pates tyranny, 32; his death and 
magnificent burial, 35. 

Timon the misanthropist, iv. 225. 

Tolmides, imprudence of, i. 314. 

Tribes, etymology of the word, i. 78. 

Tribunes of the people, occasion of 
their election, i. 406. 

Troy, the name of a Roman game, iii. 
406. 

Tullus Aufidius receives Coriolanus, 
i. 421. 

Turpilius is put to death falsely, ii. 
290. 

Tusculans, artful conduct of, i. 291. 

Tulula, her prudent counsel, i. 90. 

Valeria intercedes with the mother 
and wife of Coriolanus on behalf of 
their country, i. 430. 

Varro, is completely defeated at Can- 
nae, by Hannibal, i. 349. 

Veintes, defeated by Romulus, i. 84. 

Venus, Paphian, high honour of her 
priesthood, iii. 429. 

Vindicius discovers the conspiracy of 
the Aquilii and Vitellii to Valerius, 
i. 203 ; and is made free, 206. 

Vinius, Titus, urges Galba to accept 
the imperial purple, iv. 381; his 
character, 388. 

Vitellii conspire with the Aquilii in 
favour of Tarquin, i. 203 ; are dis- 
covered and punished, 204. 

War, not to be often made against 
the same enemy, i. 110. 

Water, springs of, how formed, ii. 
49. 

Women, various laws of Solon's con- 
cerning, i. 187. 

Xerxes is defeated by Themistocles. 
i. 235. 

THE END. 

!l 

BOOKS OF STERLING VALUE 

RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY 

HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW-YORK. 

i. 
ENCYCLOPEDIA OF DOMESTIC ECONOMY. 

A complete Repertory of all Matters connected with the Economy of Housekeeping. 
By T Webster, Esq. Edited, with Additions, &c, by an American Physician. Co- 
piously Illustrated. $3 50. 

Thia is decidedly a book for the million: it contains all that precise kind of information adapted to 
the use of families, and which* one may seek for in vain elsewhere. — New-York Evening Gazette. 

By far the most comprehensive and perfect^/amiVt/ Encyclopaedia ever presented to the public. 
Each household Buould have a copy of this sterling publication. — Courier and Enquirer. 

II. 

DICTIONARY OF PRACTICAL MEDICINE: 

Including General Pathology, the Nature and Treatment of Diseases, Morbid 
Structures, &c. By James Copland, M.D. Edited, with Additions, by Charles A. 
Lee, M.D., <fec. Publishing in Numbers, price 50 cents each, about 25 to complete 
the work. 

Thedesign and execution of this popular production evince the most consummate skiB and research ; 
every person who dei ' 
Broadway Journal. 

III. 

every person who desires a thorough digest of medical science must appreciate its high value. - 
Sfoaawi 

TRAVELS OF MARCO POLO, 

From valuable early Manuscripts recently published by the French Geographical 
Society : with copious Notes by Hugh Murray. 1 vol. 18mo. 50 cents. 

This well-known production has long been regarded as unique in geographical science. Marco Polo 
has justly been styled the " Herodotus of the Middle Ages." — Evening Pott, 

IV. 

MISS BEECUER'S DOMESTIC ECONOMY. 

A Treatise on Domestic Economy, for the Use of young Ladies at Home and a. 
School. By Catherine E. Beecher. Revised Edition, with many Engravings. 12mo. 
75 cents. 

A volume of especial value to the domestic circle, comprising a large amount of important instruc 
tion respecting the duties of domestic life and the educational training of females. — Couritr. 

V. 

THE DUTY OF AMERICAN WOMEN TO THEIR 

COUNTRY. 

1 vol. 18mo. 37J cents. 

This appeal might well be in the hands of every female in the land ; its design is to aid in the co\ 
rection of abuses in several departments of popular education. We therefore commend the vol- 
ume to the especial notice of our readers. — Commercial Advertiser. 

The work is earnestly, vigorously, and lucidly written; we recommend it to all readerr — BroacL 
\cay Journal. ~ 

HARPER & BROTHERS' RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

VI. 

MISS BEECHER'S RECEIPT BOOK. 

The American Housekeeper's Receipt Book. By Catherine E. Beecher. 1 vol 
I2mo. 

VII. 

GENERAL GREEN'S TEXIAN EXPEDITION. 

Journal of the Texian Expedition against Mier ; subsequent Imprisonment of the 
Author, his Satferings, and final Escape from the Castle of Perote, &c. With Re- 
flections upon the present political and probable future Relations of Texas, Mexico, 
and the United States. By General Thomas J. Green. With numerous Engravings. 
1 vol. 8vo. $2 00. 

VIII. 

DR. GARDNER'S FARMER'S DICTIONARY. 

The Farmer's Dictionary ; being a Compendious Account of every Crop raised or 
suited to our Climate, with full Information on Breeding of Stock, Horses, Pigs, and 
Poultry ; the Management of Manures, Fanning Implements, and all other Practical 
Matters, as well as an Explanation of all Technical Terms recently introduced into 
Agriculture from the Sciences. Abundantly illustrated by Engravings. [Iu Press.] 

IX. 

DR. ABERCROMBIE'S NEW ESSAYS. 

Miscellaneous Essays. By John Abercrombie, M.D., Author of " Inquiries into the 
Intellectual Powers," <fcc. 1 vol. 18mo. 50 cents. 
These essays will be read with pleasure and profit by all who uiUl read them. — Anglo American. 

X. 

HUMBOLDT'S COSMOS. 

Cosmos: a Survey of the general Physical History of the Universe. By Alexander 
Von Humboldt. (Publishing in Numbers.) 
A renowned production, by the greatest of scientific writers. — Courier. 

XI. 

MACKENZIE'S LIFE OF PAUL JONES. 

A Life of Paul Jones. By Alexander Slidell Mackenzie. 2 vols. 12mo. $1 00. 

XII. 

PROF. WIIEWELL'S MORALITY AND POLITY. 

Elements of Morality, including Polity. By William Whewell, D.D. 2 vols. 12rno 
$1 00. 

XIII. 

DR. KITCHINER'S COOK'S ORACLE. 

The Cook's Oracle and Housekeeper's Manual. Containing Receipts for Cookery 
and Directions for Carving. With a complete System of Cookery for Catholic Fam- 
ilies. By William Kitchiuer, M. D. 12mo. S8 cents. 

HARPER & BROTHERS' RECENT PUBLICATIONS. 

XIV. 

REV. JOSEPH WOLF'S JOURNAL. 

Narrative of a Mission to Bokhara in the Years 1843-45, &c. By Rev. Joseph 
Wolf, D.D , LL.D With numerous Illustrations. (Now Ready.) 

XV. 

MRS. PARKES'S DOMESTIC DUTIES. 

Domestic Duties ; or, Instructions to Young Married Ladies on the Management 
of their Households, and the Regulations of their Conduct in the various Relation* 
and Duties of Married Life. By Mrs. W. Parkes. 12mo. Half Roan. 75 cents. 

„ XVI. 

AMERICAN HUSBANDRY. 

American Husbandry ; being a Series of Essays, <fcc, designed for its Improvement. 
Edited by Willis Gaylord and Luther Tucker. 2 vols. 18mo. Half Sheep. $1 00. 

XVII. 

BUEL'S FARMER'S INSTRUCTER. 

The Farmer's Instructer , consisting of Essays, Practical Directions, and Hints for 
(he Management of the Farm and Garden. By Jesse Buel. 2 vo's. 18mo. Hal* 
Sheep. $1 00. 

XVIII. 

THE AMERICAN POULTRY BOOK. 

Being a Practical Treatise on the Management of Domestic Poultry. By Micajah 
R. Cock. ]8mo. Engravings. 35 cents. 

XIX. 

AGRICULTURAL CHEMISTRY. 

Chemistry applied to Agriculture. By M. le Compte Chaptal. With valuable 
Selections from Sir Humphrey Davy, M. Puvis, and others Translated and edited 
by Rev. William P. Page. 18mo. Half Sheep. 50 cents. 

XX. 

ARMSTRONG'S AGRICULTURE. 

A Treatise on Agriculture ; comprising a Concise History of its Origin and Prog- 
ress ; the present Condition of the Art Abroad and at Home, and the Theory and 
Practice of Husbandry. By Gen. John Armstrong. With Notes, by Jesse Buel. 
l8mo. Half Sheep. 50 cents. 

XXI. 

A PILGRIMAGE TO TREVES, 

Through the Valley of the Meuse, and the Forest of Ardennes. By C Edward 
Anthon, Esq. 1 vol. 75 cents. 
A very pleasing and more than ordinarily UBeful book of travels. — Evangelist. 
The volume ib replete with antiquarian lore relating to the city of Charlemagne, and the renowned 

city of Treves. It is evidently the work of a scholar, and cannot fail to enliat a profound inter 

est— Otwcgo J.lvcriiur. 

a 

BINDING £>LC7. AUG 4 1966 

DE Piute rchus 

7 Lives. Carefully corr., 

P55 . and printed from the last Lon- 

1844 don ed. 

v.4 

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY