Plutarch's Lives, Vol. I (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
======================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 1 (Wrangham 2nd ed., 1813): Life of Plutarch, Theseus, Romulus, Lycurgus, Numa, Solon, Publicola, Themistocles, Camillus. Completes the 6-volume set — Vol. 1 was the missing volume. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/livestranslatedf01plutuoft).

mi


i:


r|»Ha|*j«jj-


i


wm


4^-)


V


W.SuU^  jailp.


V  1,  r'l'A  R  C.hl,


TiihluJud  h-.LiHiwmim.  ;k)  luil<jiit£  Sireet.  and  the  odw  Proprieturv  ,3o'!^June',i6i&.


^^   PLUTARCH'S  LIVES,


^S^


TRANSLATED    FROM

THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK;


WITH


NOTES  CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL,


AND    A


LIFE   OF  PLUTARCH,


BY  JOHN  LANGHORNE,  D.D.


AND


WILLIAM  LANGHORNE.^k.M.


IN  SIX  VC^Rl3y^S.  ";.  Y^

THE  SECOND  EDITXXJj4

BY

THE  REV.  FRANCIS  WRANGHAM,  M.A.  F.R.S.

WITH  CORRECTIONS  AND  ADDITIONS,


VOL.    L


LONDON:

Printed  for  J.  Mawman;  F.  C.  and  J.  Rivington;  G.  Whkie  and  J,  Robinson;  J.  Waiker  ;
W.  Clarke  and  Sons;  Cadeu.  and  Da  vies;  F.  Winghave;  C.  Law;  J.  and  A.  Arch;
Scatcherd  and  Letterman;  B.  and  R.  Crosby;  White,  Cochrane,  and  Co.;  Longman,
Hurst,  Rbes,  Oraie,  and  Brown;  J.  Booker;  J.  Richardson;  J.  M.  Richardson;  Black,
Parry,  and  Co.;  J.  Hatchard;  J,  Murray;  R.  Scholey;  R.  Baldwin;  Craoock  and
Joy;  T.  Hasiilton;  J.  Faulder;  Gale,  Curtis,  and  Fenner  ;  and  G.  and  S.  Robinson;
AND  Wilson  and  Sons,  York.


1813.


VI


PrinteabyC.  Ba!c:\v:n,  Nc.r  Bridge-street,  Lniulotu


TO    THE    RIGHT    HONOURABLE


VISCOUNT  MILTON,


ONE   OF   THE    REPRESENTATIVES    IN    PARLIAMENT   OF   THE
COUNTY   OF   YORK,    &C.   &C.


My  dear  Lord,

When  under  the  sanction  of  your
Lordship's  name  I  offer  to  the  Public  an  edition  of
Plutarch's  Lives  of  Illustrious  Men,  I  am  sensible
that  I  place  before  them  'a  melancholy  series  of  in-
stances, in  which  3^irtue  was  referred  for  her  sole
recompense  to  the  recollection  of  her  achievements,
or  to  the  consciousness  of  her  purposes.  To  the
eye  of  the  multitude,  this  may  appear  to  throw  over
her  an  unnatural  and  a  discouraging  gloom.  But
you,  my  Lord,  inherit  the  talent  of  appreciating
her  value  by  better  tests,  than  that  of  her  worldly
brilliance.  Allied  by  descent  and  substituted  by  de-
legation to  men,  for  whose  integrity,  public  and
private,  future  Plutarchs  may  be  at  a  loss  to  dis-
cover parallels,  you  have  early  been  led  into  studies
and  reflexions  which,  thougli  they  have  given  poig-


DEDICATION.

nancy  to  your  regret,  have  mitigated  your  surprise,
at  the  sad  and  frequent  spectacle  of  proscribed  pa-
triotism. You  have  followed  Aristides  in  his  exile
from  Athens,  and  Cato  in  his  retreat  to  Utica — but
why  do  I  draw  exclusively  from  antiquity  examples
of  national  ingratitude  ? — You  have  wept  over  the
uncommemorated  martyrdom  of  a  De  Witt,  and
have  witnessed  the  calamitous  abandonment,  even
by  the  people  whom  he  loved  and  whom  he  served,
of  a  Fox.

Undeterred  by  their  fates,  my  Lord,  may  you
ever  continue  emulous  of  their  virtues!  For  yourself,
politically  characterised,  I  cannot  utter  a  more  com-
prehensive or  a  loftier  prayer.  If  I  venture  to  ex-
press a  farther  wish,  that  the  principles  of  liberty,
toleration,  and  economy,  of  which  you  have  already
shown  (and  will,  I  doubt  not,  always  show)  your-
self the  able,  undaunted,  and  incorruptible  assertor,
may  become  more  popular  than  they  have  lately
been,  it  is  for  my  country.

I  remain,  my  dear  Lord,

with  sentiments  of  tlie  utmost  regard  and  respect,
your  Lordship's  very  faithful  friend  and  servant,

FRS.  WRANGHAM.

Hunmanbiiy  Dec.  1,  1808.


CONTENTS


OF  THE


SIX    VOLUMES.


VOL.  I.

Preface  by  the  Langhornes *,.... Page  i

Editor xiii

Life  of  Plutarch   xxvii

Tablesof  Time,  Coins,  Weights,  Measures,  &c.  ..  Ixvii

Chronological   Table Ixxiv

I.  Theseus ,.  1

IL  Romulus 48

Theseus  and  Romulus  compared 102

III.  Lycurgus 108

IV.  Numa 164

Lycurgus  and  Numa  compared 208

V.  Solon   217

VI.  Publicola 270

Solon  and  Publicola  compared 304;

Vn.  Themistocles 310

VIIL  Camillus 360

Themistocles  and  Camillus  comparedf    ..,,....  418

VOL.   IL

IX.  Pericles    1

X.  Fabius  Maximus 61

Pericles  and  Fabius  Maximus  compared 106

XL  Alcibiades  Ill

XII.  Caius  Marcius  Coriolanus 173

Alcibiades  and  Caius  Mar.  Coriolanus  compared  225

XIII.  Timoleon    231

XIV.  Paulus  iEmilius 279

Timoleon  and  Paulus  .^niilius  compared 335

XV.  Pelopidas     539

XVL  Marcellus    388

Pelopidas  and  Marcellus  compared 433

XVII.  Aristides 443

XVIII.  Cato  the   Censor 491

Aristides  and  Cato  the  Censor  compared 532

VOL.    IIL

XIX.  Philopcemen   1

XX.  Titus  Quinctius  Flaminius 30

Philopcemen  and  Titus  Q.  Flaminius  compared  , ,  60


GENERAL  CONTENTS.

XXr.  rvrrhus , Page  64

XXII.  Caius  Marius 119

Pyrrhus  and  Caius  Marius  comparedf 181

XXIII.  Lysander 187

XXIV.  Sylla     229

Lysander  and  Sylla  compared 2S^

XXV.  Cinion 292

XXVI.  Lucullus 324

Cimon  and  Lucullus  compared 390

XXVII.  Nicias 396

XXMII.  Marcus  Crass-.-.s 446

Kicias  aad  Marcus  Crassus  compared 498

VOL.  IV.

XXIX.  Sertorius 1

XXX.  Eumenes 37

Sertorius  and  Eumenes  compared 66

XXXI.  Agesilaus     69

XXXII.  Pompey   124

Agesilaus  and  Pompey  compared 230

XXXIII.  Alexander    . . . , 237

XXXIV.  Julius  Csesar    355

Alexander  and  Julius  Caesar  comparedf 440

VOL.  V.

XXXV.  Phocion  1

XXXVI.  Cato  the  Younger 46

Phocion  and  Cato  the  Younger  comparedf 123

VYVVITT  (  ^S^^  ^^^^  Cleomenes 131

'  Vt  '  '   I  Tiberius  and  Caius  Gracchus 198

Agis  and  Cleomenes    and  T.   and    C.  Gracchus

compared 243

XLI,  Demosthenes   249

XLII.  Cicero 291

Demosthenes  and  Cicero  compared 354

XLIII.  Demetrius    361

XLIV.  Antony     423

Demetrius  and  Antony  compared 509

VOL.  VI.

XLV.  Dion 1

XLVl.  Rrutus 55

Dion  and  Brutus  compared    108

XLVII.  Artuxcrxes 113

XLVIII.  Aratus 151

XLIX.  Galba 210

L.  Otho   243

Index , 265

9


CONTENTS


OF   THE


FIRST    VOLUME.


PAGE

Preface  by  the  Langhornes i

Editor xiii

Life  of  Plutarch   xxvii

Tables  of  Time,  Coins,  Weights,  Plea-
sures, c^^c Ixvii

Chronological  Table Ixxiv

I.  Theseus 1

II.  Romulus   48

Theseus  and  Romulus  compared 102

III.  Lycurgus   , , .    108

IV.  Numa 164.

Lycurgus  and  Numa  compared 208

V.  Solon 217

VI.  Publicola 270

Solon  and  Publicola  compared 304f

VII.  Themistocles 310

VIII.   Camillus .  .  360

Themistocles  and  Camillus  compared^  ...  418


PREFACE,


BY  THE  LANGHORNES.


-If  the  merit  of  a  work  may  be  estimated  from  the
universality  of  it's  reception,  Plutarch's  Lives  have  a
claim  to  the  first  honours  of  literature.  No  book
has  been  more  generally  sought  after,  or  read  with
greater  avidity.  It  was  one  of  the  first,  which  were
brought  out  of  the  retreats  of  the  learned,  and  trans-
lated into  the  modern  languages.  Amyot,  abbe  of
Bellozane,  published  a  French  translation  of  it  in
the  reign  of  Henry  the  Second  *  ;  and  from  that

*  This  translation,  M.  Ricard  informs  us,  was  preceded  by  one
in  Italian  from  the  pen  of  Sansoveno  ;  and  was  '  drily  re-translated'
(as  Boileau  severely  remarks)  in  the  following  century  by  the  abbS
Tallemant.  The  version  of  Amyot,  from  it's  deservedly-high  cha-
racter, has  been  frequently  reprinted.  Of  the  two  editions  of  it
recently  given  to  the  public,  one  had  the  honour  of  being  super-
intended by  MM.  Brotier  and  Vauvilliers,  of  whose  notes  some
use  is  made  in  the  present  work ;  and  is  farther  recommended —
shall  I  say,  or  encumbered — by  all  the  grandeur  of  modern  typo-
graphy.

This  version  however,  though,  as  M.  Ricard  observes,  it  has  in
it's  stile  something  of  natural  and  simple  elegance,  has  likewise
(as  might  reasonably  be  expected  from  it's  date,  and  the  dearth

VOL  I.  b  \


U  PREFA'CE.

work  it  was  translated  into  English  *,  in  the  time  of
qneen  Elizabeth.

It  is  said  by  those,  who  arc  not  willing  to  allow
Shakspeare  much  learning,  that  he  availed  himself
of  the  last-mentioned  translation  t ;  but  they  seem
to  forget  that,  in  order  to  support  their  arguments  of
this  kind,  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  prove  that  Plato
too  was  translated  into  English  at  the  same  time ;
for  the  celebrated  soliloquy,  "  To  be,  or  not  to  bet,'*

at  that  time  of  critical  and  philological  works)  phrases  frequently
antique,  and  interpretations  frequently  erroneous.  Such  is  the
judgenieat  of  Meziriac,  and  with  him  Wyttenbach  (in  his  correct
and  copious  preface  to  the  IMorals,  ed.  Ox.  179i,  &c.  xvii.  xcvii.)
fully  agrees.  Neither  is  Dacier  his  successor,  notwithstanding  his
great  advantages,  to  be  regarded  as  unexceptionable.  The  mono-
tony of  his  diction,  it  must  be  owned,  is  ill-adapted  to  represent  it
^x'riter,  tv*hose  various  page  with  admirable  appropriateness  accom-
modates itself  to  it's  subject :  and  he  is  too  uniformly  trisie  in  his
expressions,  as  if  he  feared  to  venture  upon  those  happy  hazards,
those  adventurous  splendours,  which  characterise  his  author.  He
is,  besides,  needlessly  diffuse.  From  this  charge,  indeed,  Plutarch
himself  is  not  everywhere  exempt:  and  hence  the  translation  be-
comes revoltingly  tedious.  Those,  who  labour  to  be  brief,  become
sometimes  obscure ;  but  clearness  is  not  a  necessary  consequence
of  prolixity.  E.

*  By  Thomas  North,  A.  D.  1579.  E.

f  See  Farmer's  Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakspeare,  cd.  1st.
p.  y — 11. J  where  two  instances  are  adduced  from  Antony  and  Cleo-
patra, and  a  third  from  Julius  Ccesar,  in  strong  support  of  the
assertion.  E.

J  Whether  this  be  copied  from  the  Ilistorie  of  Hamblet  in  black
letter,  or  not  (see  Farmer  ib.,  p.  20.),  the  editor  is  unable  to  state.
But  thence,  it  appears,  and  not  from  the  untranslated  Saxo  Gram-
maticus,  Shakspeare  had  the  general  plot  of  this  justly-celebrated
tragedy.  E.  '


PREFACE.  m

is  taken,  almost  ^verbatim,  from  tliat  philosopher ;
yet  we  have  never  found,  that  Plato  was  translated
in  those  times.

Amyot  was  a  man  of  great  industry,  and  consider-
able learning.  He  sought  diligently  in  the  libraries
of  Rome  and  Venice  for  those  Lives  of  Plutarch,
which  are  lost ;  and,  though  his  search  was  unsuc-
cessful, it  had  this  good  effect,  that  by  meeting  with
a  variety  of  manuscripts,  and  comparing  them  with
the  printed  copies,  he  was  enabled  in  many  places
to  rectify  the  text.  This  was  a  very  essential  cir-
cumstance: for  few  ancient  writers  had  suffered
more  than  Plutarch,  from  the  carelessness  of  printers
and  transcribers  ;  and,  with  all  his  merit,  it  was  his
fate  for  a  long  time  to  find  no  able  restorer.  The
schoolmen  despised  his  Greek,  because  it  had  not
the  purity  of  Xenophon,  nor  the  Attic  terseness  of
Aristophanes ;  and,  on  that  account,  very  unrea-
sonably bestowed  their  labours  on  those  who  wanted
them  less.  Amyot's  translation  was  published  in
the  year  1558;  but  no  reputable  edition  of  the
Greek  tQ:^  of  Plutarch  appeared,  till  that  of  Paris
in  1624.  The  above-mentioned  translation  how-
ever, though  drawn  from  an  imperfect  text,  was
still  read,  till  Dacici',  under  better  auspices  and  in
better  times,  attempted  a  new  one  ;  which  he  exe-
cuted with  great  elegance,  and  tolerable  accuracy.
The  text  be  followed  was  not  so  correct,  as  might
have  been  wished ;  for  the  London  edition  of  Plu-
tarch was  not  then  published.  The  French  lan-
guage however  being  at  that  time  in  high  perfection,
and  current  through  almost  every  court  in  Europe,

b  2


iv  PREFACE.

Dacier's  translation  came  not  only  into  the  libraries,
but  into  the  hands  of  men.     Plutarch  was  univer-
sally studied,  and  no  book  in  those  times  had  a  more     d
extensive  sale,  or  went  through  a  greater  number  of
impressions.     The  translator  had,  indeed,  acquitted
himself  in   one  respect   with  considerable  felicity.
His  book  was  not  found  to  be  French   Greek.     He
had  carefully  followed  that  rule,  of  which  no  trans-
lator ought  ever  to  lose  sight,  the  grand  rule — of
humouring  the  genius,  and  maintaining  the  struc-
ture, of  his  own  language.     For  this   purpose,  he
frequently  broke  the  long  and  embarrassed  periods
of  the  Greek  ;    and,  by   dividing    and    shortening
them  in  his  translation,  gave  them  greater  perspi-
cuity and  a  more  easy  movement.     Yet  still  he  was
faithful  to  his  original ;  and  where  he  did  not  mis-
take him,  which  indeed  he  seldom  did,  conveyed
his  ideas  with  clearness,  though  not  without  verbo-
sity.    His  translation  had  another  distinguished  ad-
vantage.    He  enriched  it  with  a  variety  of  explana-    |
tory  notes.     There  are  so  many  readers,  who  have
no   competent   acquaintance   with   the   customs    of   i
antiquity,  the  laws  of  the  ancient  states,  the  cere-
monies of  their  religion,  and  the  remoter  and  more
minute  parts  of  their  history  and  genealogy  ;  that  to
have  an  account  of  tliese  matters  ever  before  the
eye,  and  to  travel  with  a  guide  who  is  ready  to
describe   to  us  every  object  we  are  unacquainted
with,  is  a  privilege  equally  convenient  and  agree-
;^ble.     But  here  the  annotator  ought  to  have  stopped.
-Satisfied  with  removing  the  difficulties  usually  aris-
ing in  the  circumstances  above-mentioned,  he  should

12


PREFACE.  v

not  have  swelled  his  pages  with  idle  declamations  on
trite  morals  and  obvious  sentiments.     Amyot's  mar-
gins,  indeed,  are  everywhere  crowded   with  such.
In  those  times  they  followed  the  method  of  the  old
divines,  which  was,  to  make  practical  improvements
of  every   matter ;  but   it  is  somewhat  strange  that
Dacier,  who  wrote  in  a  more  enlightened  age,  should
fall  into  that  beaten  track  of  insipid  moralising,  and
be  at  pains  to   say  what  every  one  must  know  *,
Perhaps,  as  the  commentator  of  Plutarch,  he  consi-
dered himself  as  a  kind  of  travelling  companion  to
the  reader  ;  and,  agreeably  to  the  manners  of  his
country,  he  meant  to  show  his  politeness  by  never
holding  his  tongue.     The  apology,  which  he  makes
for  deducing  and  detailing  these  fiat  precepts,  is  the
view  of  instructing  younger  minds.      He  had  not
philosophy  enough  to  consider,  that  to  anticipate  -
the  conclusions  of  such  minds,  in  their  pursuit  of
history  and  characters,  is  to  prevent  their  proper
effect.     When  examples  are  placed  before  them,  they
will  not  fail  to  make  right  inferences ;  but,  if  those
are  made  for  them,  the  didactic  air  of  information
destroys  their  influence.

After   the   old   English  translation  of   Plutarch,

*  These  remarks  apply  likewise,  in  a  limited  degree,  to  Plu-
tarch's last  French  translator,  the  abbe  Ricard,  whose  version  of  the
Lives  in  thirteen  volumes  12mo.  appeared  1798 — 1803.  He  had
previously  favoured  his  countrymen  with  a  translation  of  the  Morals.
This  respectable  man,  to  whom  the  editor  can  hardly  state  how
great  are  his  obligations,  died  at  Paris  of  the  grippe,  Jan.  28,  1803,
aged  sixty-two.  A  short  memoir  and  cloge  of  hira  are  attached
to  his  last  work.  E.


^i  PREFACE.

which  was  professedly  taken  from  Amyot's  French,
no  other  appeared  till  the  time  of  Dryden.  That
great  man,  who  is  never  to  be  mentioned  without
pity  and  admiration,  was  prevailed  upon  by  his
necessities  to  head  a  company  of  translators  ;  and  to
lend  the  sanction  of  his  glorious  name  to  a  trans-
lation of  Plutarch,  written  (as  he  himself  acknow-
ledges) by  almost  as  many  hands,  as  there  were
Lives.  That  this  motley  work  was  full  of  errors,
inequalities,  and  inconsistencies,  is  not  in  the  least
to  be  wondered  at.  Of  such  a  variety  of  translators,
it  would  have  been  very  singular,  if  some  had  not
failed  in  learning,  and  some  in  language.  The  truth
is,  that  the  greatest  part  of  them  were  deficient  in
both.  Their  task,  indeed,  was  not  easy.  To  trans-
late Plutarch,  under  any  circumstances,  would  re-
quire no  ordinary  skill  ia  the  language  and  antiqui-
ties of  Greece  :  but  to  attempt  it,  while  the  text
was  in  a  depraved  state,  unsettled,  and  nnrectified,
abounding  with  misnomers  and  transpositions,  this
required  much  greater  abilities,  than  fell  to  the  lot
of  that  body  of  translators  in  general.  It  appears
however,  from  the  execution  of  their  undertaking,
that  they  gave  themselves  no  great  concern  about
the  difficulties,  that  attended  it.  Some  few  blun-
dered at  the  Greek  ;  some  drew  from  the  scholiast's
Latin  ;  and  others,  more  humble,  trod  scrupulously
in  the  paces  of  Amyot.  Thus  copying  the  idioms
of  different  languages,  they  proceeded  like  the  work-
men at  Babel,  and  fell  into  a  confusion  of  tongues,
while  they  attempted  to  speak  the  same.  But  the
diversities  of  stile  were  not  the  greatest  fault  of  this


PREFACE.  Vii

strange  translation.  It  was  full  of  the  grossest  errors.
Ignorance  on  the  one  hand,  and  hastiness  or  negli-
gence on  the  other,  had  filled  it  with  absurdities  in
every  Life,  and  inaccuracies  in  almost  every  page.
The  language  in  general  was  insupportably  tame,
tedious,  and  embarrassed.  The  periods  had  no
harmony ;  the  phraseology  had  no  elegance,  no
spirit,  no  precision.

Yet  this  is  the  last  translation  of  Plutarch's  Lives,
that  has  appeared  in  the  English  language,  and  the
only  one  that  is  now  read.

It  must  be  owned  that,  when  Dacier's  translation
came  abroad,  the  proprietor  of  Dryden*s  copy  en-
deavoured to  repair  it.     But  how  was  this  done  ?•
Not  by  the  application  of  learned  men,  who  might
have  rectified  the  mistakes  by  con^sulting  the  ori-
ginal, but  bv  a  mean  recourse  to  the  labours  of  Da-
cier.    Where  the  French  translator  had  difiTered  from
the  English,  the  opinions  of  tiie  latter  were  religious-
ly given  up  ;  and  sometimes  a  period,  and  some-
times a  page,  were  translated  anew  from  Dacier :
while,  in  due  compliment  to  him,  the  idiom  of  his
language   and    every   tour   (V e.vpression   were   most
scrupulously  preserved.      Nay,  the  editors  of  that
edition,  which  was  published   in    1727,  did  more.
They  not  only  paid  Dacier  the  compliment  of  mix-
ing his  French  with  their  English  ;  but  while  they
borrowed  his  notes,  they  adopted  even  the  most  fri--
volous  and  superfluous  comments  that  escaped  his
pen.

Thus  the  English  Plutarch's  Lives,  at  first  so  he-


via  PREFACE.

terogeneous  and  absurd,  received  but  little  benefit
from  this  whimsical  reparation.  Dacier's  best  notes
were,  indeed,  of  some  value  ;  but  the  patch-work
alterations  drawn  by  the  editors  from  his  translation,
made  their  book  appear  still  more  like  Otway's  Old
W  Oman,  whose  gown  of  many  colours  spoke


■  variety  of  wretchedness.


Tills  translation  continued  in  the  same  form  up.
ward  of  thirty  years.  But  in  the  year  1758  the  pro-
prietor engaged  a  gentleman  of  abilities,  very  diffe-
rent from  those  who  had  formerly  been  employed,
to  give  it  a  second  purgation.  He  succeeded  as
well,  as  it  was  possible  for  any  man  of  the  best  judge-
ment and  learning  to  succeed  in  an  attempt  of  that
nature :  that  is  to  say,  he  rectified  a  multitude  of
errors,  and  in  many  places  endeavoured  to  mend  the
miserable  language.  Two  of  the  Lives  he  trans-
lated anew  ;  and  this  he  executed  in  such  a  manner
that,  had  he  done  the  whole,  the  present  translators
"would  never  have  thought  of  the  undertaking.  But
two  Lives  out  of  fifty  made  a  very  small  part  of  this
great  work  j  and  though  he  rectified  many  mistakes
in  the  old  translation,  yet  where  almost  every  thing
was  mistake,  it  is  no  wonder  if  many  escaped  him.
This  was,  indeed,  the  case.  In  the  course  of  our
notes,  we  had  remarked  a  great  number  ;  but,  appre-
hensive that  such  a  continual  attention  to  the  faults
of  a  former  translation  might  appear  invidious,  we
expunged  the  chief  part  of  the  remarks,  and  suffered


PREFACE.  BC

such  only  to  remain,  as  might  testify  the  propriety
of  our  present  undertaking*.  Besides,  though  the
ingenious  reviser  of  the  edition  of  1 758  might  re-
pair the  language,  where  it  was  most  palpably  de-
ficient, it  was  impossible  for  him  to  alter  the  cast  and
complexion  of  the  whole.  It  w-ould  still  retain  it's
inequahties,  it's  tameness,  and  it's  heavy  march  ;  it's
mixture  of  idioms,  and  the  irksome  train  of  far-
connected  periods.  These  it  still  retains  ;  and,  after
all  the  operations  it  has  gone  through,  remains

Like  some  patcli'd  dog-hole,  eked  with  ends  of  wall !

In  this  view  of  things,  the  necessity  of  a  new
translation  is  obvious ;  and  the  hazard  does  not  ap-
pear to  be  great.  With  such  competitors  for  the
public  favour,  the  contest  has  neither  glory  nor  dan-
ger attending  it.  But  the  labour  and  attention  ne-
cessary, as  well  to  secure  as  to  obtain  that  favour,
neither  are  nor  ought  to  be  less  :  and,  with  what-
ever success  the  present  translators  may  be  thought
to  have  executed  their  undertaking,  they  will  alwa}^
at  least  have  the  merit  of  a  diligent  desire  to  dis-
charge this  public  duty  faithfully.

Where  the  text  of  Plutarch  appeared  to  them
erroneous,  they  have  spared  no  pains,  and  neglected
no  means  in  their  power  to  rectify  it.

Sensible  that  the  principal  art  of  a  translator  is  to
prevent  the  peculiarities  of  his  author's  language
from  stealing  into  his  own,  they  have  been  particu-

*  Many  of  those  likewise,  as  no  longer  necessary,  are  in  this
edition  omitted.  E.


*  PREFACE.

larly  attentive  to  this  point,  and  have  generally  en-
deavoured  to    keep   their    English    unmixed  with
Greek.      At  the  same  tim.e  it  must   be  observed,
that   there  is  frequently  a  great   similarity  in    the
structure  of  the   two   languages :    yet   tiiat  resem-
blance  in  some  instances  makes  it  the  more  neces-
sary to  guard  against  it  on  the  whole.     This  care  is
of  the  greater  consequence,  because  Plutarch's  Lives
generally  pass  through  the  hands  of  young  people,
who  ought  to  read  their  own  language  in  it's  native
purity,  unmixed  and  untainted  with  the  idioms  of
different  tongues.     For  their  sakcs  too,  as  well  as  for
the  sake  of  readers  of  a  different  class,  we  have  omit-
ted some  passages  in  the  text,  and  have  only  signi-
fied the  omission    by  asterisms*.     Some,   perhaps,
may  censure  us  for  having  taken  too  great  a  liberty
with  our  author  in  this  circumstance  :  however,  we
must  beg  leave  in  that  instance  to  abide  by  our  own
opinion  ;  and  we  are  sure,  that  we  should  have  cen-
sined  no  translator  for  the  same.    Could  every  thing
of  that  kind  have  been  omitted,  we  should  have  been
still  less  dissatisfied  :  but  sometimes  the  chain  of  the
narrative  would  not  admit  of  it,  and  the  disagree-
able parts  were  to  be  gotten  over  with  as  much  de-
cency as  possible.

In  the  descriptions  of  battles,  camps,  and  sieges,
it  is  more  than  probable  that  we  may  sometimes  have
been  mistaken  in  the  military  terms.     We  have  en-

*  Some  of  these  have  been  re-inserted  by  the  present  editor  ;  in
one  instance  particularly  of  a  story  twice  told,  which  the  Langhornes,
by  an  oversight  abundantly  venial  in  so  long  a  work,  had  admitted
in  one  of  the  passages,  and  excluded  in  the  other.  E.


PREFACE.  xi

deavoured,  however,  to  be  as  accurate  in  this  re-
spect as  possible,  and  to  acquaint  ourselves  with
this  kind  of  knowledge  as  well  as  our  situations
would  permit ;  but  we  will  not  promise  the  reader,
that  we  have  always  succeeded.  Vv^here  something
seemed  to  have  fallen  out  of  the  text,  or  where  the
ellipsis  was  too  violent  for  the  forms  of  our  language,
we  have  not  scrupled  to  maintain  the  tenor  of  the
narrative,  or  the  chain  of  reasoning,  by  such  little
insertions  as  appeared  necessary  for  the  purpose.
These  short  insertions  we  at  first  put  between  hooks ;
but  as  that  deformed  the  page,  without  answering
any  material  purpose,  we  soon  rejected  it  *.

Such  are  the  liberties,  which  we  have  taken  with
Plutarch  ;  and  the  learned,  we  flatter  ourselves,  will
not  think  them  too  great.  Yet  there  is  one  more
which,  if  we  could  have  presumed  upon  it,  w^ould
have  made  his  book  infinitely  more  uniform  and
agreeable.  We  often  wished  to  throw  out  of  the
text  into  the  notes  those  tedious  and  digressive  com-
ments, which  spoil  the  beauty  and  order  of  his  nar-
rative, mortify  the  expectation  (frequently  when  it
is  most  essentially  interested)  and  destroy  the  natu-
ral influence  of  his  story  by  turning  the  attention  into
a  different  channel.  What,  for  instance,  can  be
more  irksome  and  impertinent, than  alongdissertation
on  a  point  of  natural  philosophy  starting  up  at  the
very  crisis  of  some  important  action  ?  Every  reader

*  These  have,  in  many  cases,  been  replaced ;  in  order  to  give
the  English  reader,  not  only  as  nearly  as  practicable  with  propriety
*  the  whole  truth,'  but  also  in  as  few  instances  as  possible  *  any
thing  but  the  truth.'  R.


xli  PREFACE.

of  Plutarch  must  have  telt  the  pain  of  these  unsea-
sonable digressions ;  but  we  could  not,  upon  our
own  pleasure  or  authority,  remove  them.

In  the  Notes,  we  have  prosecuted  these  several
intentions.  We  have  endeavoured  to  bring  the  Eng-
lish reader  acquainted  with  the  Greek  and  Roman
antiquities  ;  where  Plutarch  had  omitted  any  thing
remarkable  in  the  Lives,  to  supply  it  from  other  au-
thors, and  to  make  his  book  in  some  measure  a  ge-
neral history  of  the  periods  under  his  pen.

This  part  of  our  work  is  neither  wholly  borrowed,
nor  altogether    original.      Where  Dacier  or  other
annotators  offered  us  any  thing  to  the  purpose,  we
have  not  scrupled  to  make  use  of  it;  and,  to  avoid
the  endless  trouble  of  citations,  we  make  this  ac-
knowledgement once  for  all.     The  number  of  ori-
ginal notes  the  learned  reader  will  find  to  be  very
considerable  :  but  there  are  not  so  many  notes  of
any  kind  in  the  latter  part  of  the  work ;  because  the
manners   and   customs,    the    religious   ceremonies,
laws,  state-offices,  and  forms  of  government  among  •
the  ancients  having  been  explained  in  the  iirst  Lives,
much   did  not  remain  for  the  business    of  infor-
mation.


PREFACE,


BY  THE  EDITOR.


*  History,*  says  Clcero,  *  is  the  evidence  of  ages,
the  light  of  truth,  the  life  of  memory,  and  the  school
of  life/  Reason,  slow  and  doubtful  in  her  progress,
requires  an  intelligent  guide  to  accelerate  and  re-
gulate her  march.  History  takes  her  by  the  hand
in  infancy,  accompanies  her  up  to  maturity,  and  col-
lects the  testimony  of  universal  experience  for  her
instruction.  The  successes  of  caution  and  wisdom,
and  the  disasters  of  negligence  and  folly,  are  pressed
upon  her  view  ;  and  she  turns  with  disgust  from  the
wild  illusions  of  those  ignorant  or  perlidious  philo-
sophists,  who  fascinated  by  the  idea  of  unattainable
perfection,  or  goaded  by  the  fatal  lust  of  celebrity,
have  speculated  with  rapture  upon  the  blessings  of
revolution.

From  this  class  of  politicians  has  originated  the
modern  notion,  that  states  like  individuals  are  sub-
ject to  a  necessary  succession  of  growth  and  declen-
sion ;  and  that,  after  having  reached  the  summit
of  their  grandeur,  they  gradually  sink  into  sterility
and  decrepitude,  unless  recalled  as  it  were  by  a  total


mV  preface.

renewal  of  constitution  to  a  fresh  career  of  glory  and
of  happiness.  The  analogy  however,  upon  which
this  opinion  professes  to  be  founded,  is  merely  irna-
s:inary.  The  individual  from  his  birth  sustains  the
incessant,  though  imperceptible,  assaults  of  a  princi-
ple of  destruction,  which  sooner  or  later  infallibly
conducts  him  to  the  tomb  :.

The  young  disease,  that  must  subdue  at  length.

Grows  with  his  growth,  and  strengthens  with  his  strength.

But  States  rest  upon  moral-relations,  to  which  decline
and  death  are  by  no  means  essential.  It  cannot
indeed  be  denied,  that  empires  from  their  "  higli
"  and  pahny  "  vigour  have  fallen  into  decay :  but
thisj,  though  an  ordinary  result  of  their  connexion
witli  human  passions  imdcr  the  irritations  of  pros-
perity, is  at  the  same  time  so  far  from  being  inevita-
ble, tliat  sl-iilful  legislators  have  frequently  prevented
it's  taking  place.  In  the  very  bosom  of  corruption
Lycurgus  regenerated  Sparta,  and  gave  her  a  degree
of  sti-en^th  and  stabiHty,  by  which  for  a  series  of
years  she  was  enabled  to  wield  the  sceptre  of  Greece.
"  It  is  often  impossible,'*  says  Mr.  Burke,  "  in
these  political  inquiries  to  iind  any  proportion
between  the  apparent  force  of  any  moral  causes  we
may  assign,  and  their  known  operation.  AVe  are
therefore  obliged  to  deliver  up  that  operation  to
mere  chance,  or  more  piously  (perhaps,  more  ration-
ally) to  the  occasianal  interposition  and  irresistible
hand  of  the  Great  Disposer."

In   a  small  republic  indeed,  fi^om  it's  contracted
extent,  reform  is  undoubtedly  more  practicable,  tlian


PREFACE.  XV

in  a  wide  and  wealthy  nation,  corrupted  by  the  luxury
of  it's  members  and  enfeebled  by  the  folly  of  it's
chiefs.  But,  even  then,  all  is  not  lost.  If  she  can-
not be  exalted  afresh  to  her  former  height,  she  may
be  replaced  upon  her  original  foundation,  and  her
existence  may  be  protracted  for  indefinite  ages  :
not  however  by  a  bold  introduction  of  new  princi-
ples, a  kind  of  moral  transfusion  of  vitality,  but  by
remedies  analogous  to  her  primitive  constitution,
and  administered  with  a  most  delicate  and  trembling
hand.

History  informs  us  that  states,  in  proportion  to
their  ignorance,  are  usually  accessible  to  seduction.
It  is  the  trick  of  innovators  to  decry  her  authority.
Incensed  by  the  stubborn  opposition  of  her  records,
they  assert  that '  Man  has  no  need  of  precedent  for
his  instruction.  Has  he  not  reason  for  his  tutress?
Yielding  then  to  her  native  impulses,  let  him  opea
to  future  generations  new  sources  of  grandeur  and
felicity.'  From  the  representations  of  these  arrogant
revolutionists  it  would  appear,  that  the  torch  of  truth
was  never  lighted  before  :  that  the  track  of  govern-
ment has  hitherto  been  nothing  but  a  miserable  bye-
path,  in  which  the  blind  have  been  leaders  of  the
-blind  ;  and  that  nations  have  been  studiously  crip-
pled into  tameness  and  irabecillity  i

Alas !  into  how  many  ruinous  m.istakes  have  W'C
been  betrayed,  by  the  guidance  of  this  boasted  rea-
son !  How  often,  under  her  influence  when  swayed
(as  she  too  frequently  is)  by  the  passions,  have  v/e
closed  our  eyes,  or  lifted  our  hand  against  the  di-
vinity of  truth  t  And  to  these  errors  statesmen  ia


xvi  PREFACE.

particular,  from  the  blandishments  of  flattery,  the
thirst  of  domination,  and  the  habits  of  unresisted
sway,  are  eminently  exposed.  The  man  of  genius
himself,  accustomed  from  his  lofty  position  to  an
extensive  range  of  prospect,  requires  a  pilot  to  direct
him  across  the  trackless  ocean  of  political  specula-
tion. History  supplies  him  with  the  chart  and  the
compass,  and  conducts  him  to  the  desired  port.

Rashly  then  has  it  been  imputed  as  a  crime  to  the
enlightened  legislators  of  antiquity,  that  they  servilely
trod  in  the  steps  of  their  predecessors,  and  like  them
held  their  respective  states  in  darkness  and  in  chains.
They  should  rather  be  applauded  for  having  opposed
law  to  passion,  and  limited  the  exercise  of  liberty
with  the  view  of  ensuring  it's  duration.

Universal  history,  however,  is  a  field  too  wide  for
the  human  foot;  and  even  those  portions  of  it,
which  trace  the  progress  and  achievements  of  an
entire  people,  to  be  read  with  advantage,  demand
degrees  of  intellect  and  of  application  seldom  found
united.  But  the  species  adopted  by  Plutarch,  and
of  which  this  most  instructive  and  entertaining  writer
may  almost  be  pronounced  the  inventor  (for  the
comparatively-barren  pages  of  Cornelius  Nepos
scarcely  require  to  be  mentioned)  is  easier  of  com-
prehension, and  upon  that  account  more  generally
interesting.  The  former,  like  a  well-composed  pic-
ture distinguished  by  the  variety,  harmony,  and
arrangement  of  it's  parts,  can  only  be  appreciated
and  enjoyed  by  an  able  connoisseur :  the  latter,  like
a  gallery  of  portraits  of  well-known  personages,
offers  subjects  of  comparison  and  verification  to  the


PREFACE.  xvii

ordinary  spectator.  And  this  interest  is  judiciously
heightened  by  the  Parallels,  that  distinctive  accom-
paniment of  Plutarch's  biographies,  which  exhibits
the  striking  features  of  each  character  in  a  stronger
light,  and  assists  the  judgement  as  much  as  it  gratifies
the  eye.

From  these  sources  he  undoubtedly  derived  that
celebrity,  which  extending  beyond  the  limits  of  his
native  Boeotia,  procured  for  him  the  citizenship  of
Athens,  and  at  last  introduced  him  into  the  senate
and  the  palace  of  imperial  Rome.  Posterity  has
ratified  the  verdict  of  his  contemporaries.  His
Lives,  interspersed  with  sketches  of  ancient  manners,
which  give  a  sort  of  dramatic  bustle  to  the  moving
scene,  are  the  delight  of  every  condition  and  of
every  age.

Notliing  bears  a  more  decisive  testimony  in  favour
of  the  author's  character,  than  his  choice  of  subjects
— Heroes,  not  more  admirable  for  their  courage,
than  for  their  application  of  it ;  modest  and  gener-
ous in  success,  and  in  the  midst  of  victory  letting
fall  the  arm  of  conquest  to  extend  the  hand  of  con-
solation :  Legislators,  who  diffused  happiness  by  their
wise  institutions:  Statesmen,  whose  counsels  were
directed  to  the  welfare  of  their  country ;  and  Orators
displaying  by  their  political  sagacity  and  their  elo-
quence in  the  Ptostra  that  ardour  for  liberty,  which
their  compatriots  exhibited  as  warriors  in  the  field.
The  history  of  such  men  is  a  continuous  lesson  of
practical  morality,  a  series  of  models  of  valour,
moderation,  prudence,  justice,  temperance,  forti-
tude,  and   in   short  of  every  personal  and    social

VOL,  I.  c


xviii  PREFACE.

virtue.  If  opposite  characters  are  occasionally  in-
troduced, it  is  for  the  purpose  (as  Plutarch  himself
lias  remarked)  of  setting  off  the  others  with  all  the
advantage  of  contrast.  '  Instances  of  bad/  says  Pas-
cal, '  occur  the  most  frequently  ;  and  we  should
therefore  strenuously  labour  to  render  them  subser-
vient to  our  instruction.'

One  of  Plutarch's  chief  merits  in  this  work  is,  that
he  appears  everywhere  less  studious  to  detail  illustri-
ous exploits  (the  efforts  generally  of  strong  passion,
and  the  employment  of  but  a  few  brilliant  moments)
than  those  more  delicate  particulars  of  private  con-
duct, which   though    neglected   by  -other   authors,
give  the  clearest  view  of  manners  and  natural  dispo-
sition.    A  casual  trait  or  expression  often  supplies  a
better  knowledge  of  the  heart,  than  volumes  of  state-
papers  and  gazettes.     The  tyrant*,  W'ho  through  an
involuntary   emotion   sprung  from   his  seat   in   the
midst  of  an  affecting  tragedy,  and  rushed  out  of  tlie
theatre  indignantly  exclaiming,  "AVhatl  am  I  sus-
"  ceptible  of  pity !"  exhibits  more  completely  by
that  single  sentence  the  atrocity  of  his  temper,  than
by  all  the  murthcrs  which  then  crowded  upon  hii^
remembrance.

Among  the  few  ccnsurersof  this  species  of  history
(for  it  too,  like  every  thing  else,  has  been  ccnsurev!)

*  Alexander  of  Phenc.  Of  tlii?  usurper  the  reatler  will  find  some
iicoount  in  the  Life  of  Pelopidas.

It  is  one  of  the  finest  couplets,  in  Pope's  fine  prologue  to  Addi-
son's Cato,  where  he  represents  the  sudden  operation  of  this  feeling
excited  by  the  tragic  muse :

Tyrants  no  more  their  savage  nature  kept,
And  foes  to  virtue  wonder'd  why  they  wept.


PREFACE.  xLt

the  abbe  Sallicr,  member  of  the  French  Academy  of
Inscriptions  and  Belles  Lettres,  is  one  of  the  most
considerable.  In  his  critique  upon  three  of  Plu-
tarch's Treatises — on  '  The  Fortune  of  the  Romans/
and  '  on  The  Fortune,  and  the  Virtue  of  Alexander
the  Great ' — he  has  strongly  arraigned  his  scheme  of
biographical  composition.  He  particularly  condemns
the  national  partiality,  which  led  him  by  strange
approximation  to  compare  together  men,  not  more
distant  from  each  other  in  time  and  place,  than  in
pursuits  and  passions  and  achievements.  '  Antici-
pating in  his  Parallels  the  judgement  of  posterity,
he  places  his  favourite  Greeks  on  a  level  with  the
most  renowned  sages  and  warriors  of  Rome,  exag-
gerates their  slightest  labours,  and  not  unfrequently
assigns  them  the  palm  of  superiority.'

This  is  a  serious  charge,  but  it  is  an  incorrect  one*
It  was  no  part  of  Plutarch's  character,  to  flatter  his
heroes.  If  they  are  intemperate  in  victory  ;  if  they
abuse  their  power  to  purposes  of  ambition,  and
subjugate,  while  they  pretend  to  protect  5  if  in  the
administration  of  public  aifairs  they  evince  not  that
disinterestedness,  which  does  good  for  it's  own  sake,
and  marches  invariably  to  glory  by  the  path  of  jus-
tice, he  then  condemns  them  v/ithout  scruple.  Peri-
cles is  perhaps  the  solitary  personage,  upon  whom
he  has  bestowed  excessive  praise ;  blinded,  as  it
would  seem,  by  his  talents  and  his  successes  to  his
important  errors.  Sometimes,  likev/ise,  he  has  been
misled  by  his  authorities.  But  of  this,  examples
seldom  occur.

In  his  Parallels,  the  subjects  are  often  placed  in

c  2


XX  PREFACE.

exact  equlllbriuin  ;  and,  wliere  tlicy  arc  of  unequal
weight,  the  preponderance  is  almost  as  often  seen
in  the  Roman  as  in  the  Grecian  scale*.  What  better
evidence  indeed  of  his  integrity  can  be  suggested,
than  what  is  to  be  found  in  his  comparison  of  De-
mosthenes and  Cicero !  On  the  score  of  eloquence,
what  a  field  for  the  indulgence  of  his  supposed
'  partiality!  !'  But  he  declines  that  part  of  the  pa-
rallel, as  beyond  his  power.

*  See  tlie  comparisons  of  Solon  and  Publicola,  of  Pelopitlas  and
Marcellus,  of  Philopccmen  and  Flaminius,  of  Demetrius  and  An-
tony, &c.  &c.  May  we  not  the  rather  be  disposed  to  prefer  or  to
admit  this  charge  of  partiality  against  Plutarch,  from  being  accus-
tomed to  form  our  opinions,  both  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  lilustris-
simi,  under  the  representations  principally  of  Roman  writers  ?  The
man  would  not  be  seen  subduing  the  lion,  if  lions  were  sculptors.

From  some  cause  or  other,  however,  it  has  been  the  fashion,
ver}'^  generally,  to  complain  of  his  nationality.  In  her  *  Hists
toward  forming  the  Character  of  a  yoang  Princess,'  Mrs.  More
observes,  "  Plutarch  teaches  two  things  excellently,  antiquity  and
human  nature.  He  would  deserve  admiration,,  were  it  only  for  that
magazine  of  wisdom,  condensed  in  the  excellent  sayingsof  so  many
gi-eat  men,  which  he  has  recorded.  Perhaps,  all  the  historians  to-
gether have  not  transmitted  to  us  so  many  of  the  sage  axioms  and
hon  mots  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome.  Yet  in  his  Parallels — if
that  can  be  called  '  a  Parallel,'  which  brings  together  two  men
who  have  commonly  little  or  no  resemblance — even  tlie  upright
Plutarch  exhibits  something  too  much  of  '  partiality  :'  the  scale,
wlienever  he  weighs  one  of  his  own  countrymen  against  a  Roman,
almost  invariably  inclining  to  the  Greek  side,"  &c.

As  a  relater  of  battles,  likewise,  his  accuracy  is  impeached  by
Andreossi,  in  his  *  Retrospective  View  of  the  ^Military  Descriptions
of  Ilistoi'iaas ;'  who  imputes  part  of  his  mistakes,  indeed,  to  hi*
having  too  closely  followed  Liv}'.

■\  Quintilian  stands  up  for  his  brother-Roman  (x.  1.),  but  Fcnelon
idjudges  the  victory  to  the  Grecian  orator.     The  French  critics^


PREFACE.  xxi

With  regard  to  '  the  strange  approximation  of
men  distant  from  each  other  in  time  and  place,'
imputed  to  him  by  M.  Sallier — this  is  surely  an  ex-
cellence, to  have  been  able  to  select  individuals  so
similar  from  stations  and  periods  so  remote,  and  to
have  portrayed  with  accuracy  the  features,  in  which
they  particularly  agreed  or  differed.  And  to  censure
him  for  having  '  anticipated  the  judgement  of  pos-
terity,' is  to  criminate  along  with  him  the  most  emi-
nent writers  of  history,  who  seldom  dismiss  a  great
man  without  pronouncing  some  opinion  upon  his
merits.  The  Parallels  in  fact,  thus  severely  treated,
have  usually  been  considered  as  the  most  interesting*
part  of  his  work  ;  always  sensible  and  sagacious,  and
in  a  great  plurality  at  least  of  instances  impartial
and  just.  Four  of  them  *,  and  those  (it  may  be
surmised)  not  the  most  inconsiderable  in  value,  are
supposed  to  have  perished.

Of  his  Lives,  likewise,  several  are  unfortunately
lost :  but  two,  more  especially,  demand  our  regret;
those  of  Aristomenes  the  Messenian,  and  of  Epa-
minondas  the  Tiieban  general— the  latter,  in  parti-

howcver,  in  general  (Rapin,  &c.)  ai-range  themselves  on  the  side
of  Cicero.

*  Those  of  Tliemistocles  and  Camilius,  of  Pyrrhus  and  Marius,
of  Alexander  and  Cfssar,  and  of  Phocion  and  Cato  the  Younger.
They  have  been  successively  supplied  by  Duhaillon,  Dacier,  and
Ricard ;  and  from  the  last  of  those  writers  they  are,  in  a  consider-
ably compressed  form,  introduced,  on  the  strong  recommendation
of  the  Monthly  Review,  Jan.  1771,  into  the  present  edition.  (They
are  distinguished  from  the  other  parallels  by  a  f.)  To  the  same
source,  al§o,  must  be  referred  the  greater  part  of  the  Editor's  pre-
face.


xxu  PREFACE.

ciilar,  a  hero  great  by  his  actions,  but  still  greater
by  his  virtues ;  by  Cicero  pronounced  '  the  first  of
tlie  Greeks/  and  by  his  tutor  Spintharus  '  the  man
who  knew  the  most,  and  spoke  the  least  ;*  the  pure
philosophy  of  whose  principles  was  excelled  by  that
of  his  conduct,  and  who  refused  to  exchange  his
cherished  poverty  even  for  honourable  riches !  What
a  theme  for  his  fellow-countryman's  biography !  How
must  his  '  national  partiality'  have  made  him  almost
surpass  himself,  upon  a  subject  so  magnificent !  If
his  attachment  to  Bcxotia  once  rendered  him  unjust
to  an  invaluable  historian*,  how  must  it  have  in-
spired him,  when  engaged  in  the  delightful  employ-
ment of  celebrating  the  '  child  and  champion'  of
her  glory !

The  stile  of  Plutarch  is  his  least  perfect  part.
Deficient  in  softness,  in  harmony,  and  in  grace,  his
periods  are  long  and  dragging,  and  occasionally  ob-
scure ;  w  ithout  the  purity  so  captivating  in  Demos-
thenes, iEschines,  Plato,  Xenophon,  and  the  other
luminaries  of  that  splendid  aera,  v/hich  though  long
anterior  to  his  own,  was  vividly  impressed  upon  his
remembrance.  This,  indeed,  we  may  safely  infer
from  the  numerous  quotations  scattered  over  every
part  of  his  works.  But  he  was  not  a  native  of
Athens ;  and  when  he  visited   that  place,  he   had

*  Hcrpdotus  had  represented  the  inhabitants  of  Plataiae,  after
their  alliance  with  Xerxes,  as  not  less  strenuous  in  their  exertions
against  the  other  Greeks  than  the  barbarians  themselves.  Plutarch,
instead  of  refuting  the  particular  fact,  in  his  Treatise  on  •  The
Malignity  of  Herodotus,'  has  endeavoured  to  destroy  his  general
credibility  by  vague  charges  of  partiality,  misrepresentation,  anj
falsehood.


PREFACE.  xxm

breathed  Theban  air  too  long,  to  attain  that  deli-
cacy of  taste,  that  exquisite  sensibility,  and  that
peculiar  simplicity,  which  charm  us  in  the  indigenous
productions  of  Attica.  Still,  however,  his  diction
is  far  above  the  feeble  and  the  mean.  Full  of  ani-
mation and  energy,  it  generally  sets  off  his  ideas
with  rich  images  and  simiHes,  borrowed  from  physi-
cal objects  and  effects,  or  from  such  qualities  of  the
human  frame,  as  it  falls  within  the  compass  of  every
intellect  easily  to  apprehend.  To  the  poets  it  is,
frequently,  indebted  for  high  poetical  illustrations ;
and  the  occasional  transfer  of  entire  passages,  in  a
dislocated  order,  from  their  labours  to  his  own,
gives  to  his  sentences  a  character  of  boldness  not
usually  to  be  found  in  prose  compositions.


To  this  slight  disquisition  upon  history,  biography,
and  Plutarch,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  subjoin  a
brief  statement  of  what  has  been  attempted  in  the
present  work.

The  translation  of  Plutarch's  Lives  by  the  Lang-
homes  is  almost  the  only  one  ever  opened  by  the
English  reader :  and  liad  it  not  been  m.arked  by
some  slight  incorrectnesses  of  version,  especially  in
the  poetical  quotations  (where  the  author  of  '  The
Flowers  of  Fancy,'  with  a  licence  pardonable  per-
haps in  a  poet,  seems  occasionally  to  have  commuted
accuracy  for  elegance),  some  few  trivialities  of  dic-
tion, some  capricious  omissions  of  paragraphs —
which  are  now,  without  any  Violation,  it  is  hoped,
of  delicacy,  inserted — and  some  considerable  defici-


xxlv  PREFACE.

encies  in  the  notes  *,  the  present  Editor  Vv'ould  have
shrunk  from  touching  a  work,  executed  upon  tlie
whole  in  so  very  creditable  a  manner.  A  due  at-
tention to  these  however,  with  tlie  introduction  of
Summaries  prefixed  to  each  life,  and  the  four  defi-
cient Parallels  will,  he  trusts,  in  some  degree  excuse
his  boldness.  He  had  proposed  likewise  to  draw  up
a  new  Life  of  Plutarch,  incorporating  all  that  was
important  in  the  distinct  biographies  of  Langhorne,
Ricard,  and  Wyttenbach  ;  but  the  latter  has  not  yet
made  it*s  appearance  from  the  Clarendon  press,  and
the  first  singly  gives  much  of  what  can  be  collected
on  the  subject,  in  a  strain  of  great  candour  and  li-
berality. With  some  inconsiderable  alterations
therefore,  like  those  adopted  in  the  preface  from  the
same  pen,  it  is  here  retained.  The  intended  Dis-
sertation, on  '  the  Incertitude  of  the  first  five  Cen-
turies of  the  Roman  History,'  is  in  a  great  measure
superseded  by  a  brief  and  accurate  statement  to  the

*  The  references  to  authorities  in  particular,  which  were  often
incorrect,  have  in  most  instances  been  verified  or  rectified,  with  no
Email  trouble.  A  few  allusions  to  modern  events  were  forced  upon
the  editor  by  their  striking  parallelism  to  ancient  ones:  but,  when
it  is  considered  how  easily  he  might  have  swelled  their  number,  he
will  perhaps  gain  a  little  credit  for  what  he  has  '  discreetly  blotted  *
out.  To  have,  collated  still  more  extensively  the  other  historians  of
Greece  and  Rome,  for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  strong  co-inci-
dences, or  detecting  petty  discrepancies  of  narrative,  would  in-
deed have  been  *  strenuous  idleness.'  The  notes,  however,  will  be
found  to  contain  farther  explanations  of  antiquities,  customs,  man-
ners, and  laws;  with  short  notices  of  authors  quoted,  and  places
wientioned,  in  the  text.  The  additions  arc,  usually,  designated  by
an  asterism.


PREFACE.  XXV

same  purport,  prefixed  to  the  last  edition  of  Fer-
guson's Roman  Republic,  dated  1805.

In  the  remains  of  ancient  history,  Chronology  is
often  a   matter  of  almost  inextricable   perplexity.
Plutarch  himself  complains  of  the  negligence,  with
which  tables  on  that  subject  had  been  constructed.
And   yet   the   dates  of  events,  especially  of  great
events,  are  indispensable.  Upon  this  head,  however,
there  have  been  too  many  theories,  and  the  differ-
ence of  a  year  or  two  in  an  epoch*,  though  it  de-
ranges the  entire  set  of  dates  referred  to  it,  when
compared  with  some  more  general  a2ra,  is  in  itself  so
seldom  material,  that  the  Editor  has  judged  it  most
advisable  to  adopt  almost  implicitly,  in  his  enlarged
and  improved  Table,  the  system  of  Blair.  The  dates
of  the  principal  facts,  recorded  in  the  ensuing  vo-
lumes, will  satisfy  the  general  reader;  and  of  those,
that  are  less  certain  or  less  important,  the  learned
will  arrange  the  chronology  for  themselves.     One
cause  of  the  embarrassment  here  complained  of  is,
the  difference  in  the  commencement  of  the  Greek
and  Roman  months,  as  compared  with  each  other,  •
and   with  our's.     The  variation   between   the  two
former  Plutarch  has  himself  assigned,  as  a  source  of
the  uncertainty  prevailing  with  respect  to  the  epoch
of  the  Foundation  of  Rome  t.     The  very  order  of
the  months  is  not  free  from  doubt.

*  E.  g.  Whether  Rome  was  built  B.  C.  752,  or  753 ;  for  New-
ton's 'perturbing'  computations,  which  place  it  B.C.  627,  it  is
impossible  to  adopt,  without  regenerating  the  whole  of  the  esta-
blished Roman  chronology.

t  See  the  Life  of  Romulus,  I.  65.,  &c.


xxvi  PREFACE.

Enlarged  Tables  of  Time,  of  the  Values,  kc.  of
ancient  Coins,  of  Weights,  and  of  Measures  of
Length  and  Capacity  (for  things  Liquid,  and  Dry)
are  also  subjoined ;  and  in  the  translation  it  has
been  judged  more  correct  uniformly  to  retain  the
original  names,  for  an  account  of  which  these  tables
may  at  any  time  be  consulted,  than  to  substitute
for  them  modern  appellations  not  strictly  equivalent
in  value.

If  with  these  additions  the  Editor  may  presume  to
hope,  that  he  has  a  little  improved  the  valuable  au-
thor entrusted  to  his  revision,  he  will  not  regret  the
hours  employed  upon  the  undertaking.  IMore  than
slight  approbation  he  ventures  not,  even  in  his  san-
guine moments,  to  anticipate  ;  when  he  reflects,
how  much  in  a  work  of  this  kind  is  necessarily  due
to  others,  and  how  inconsiderable  has  usually  been
the  applause  bestowed  upon  the  still  more  laborious
task  of  primary  translation.  It  would  indeed  be  un-
reasonable to  expect,  that  industry  should  receive
the  rccompcnce  of  genius.


THE


LIFE


oe


P  L  U  T  A  R  C


As,  In  the  progress  of  life,  we  first  pass  through
scenes  of  innocence,  peace,  and  fancy,  and  after-
ward encounter  the  vices  and  disorders  of  society;
so  we  shall  here  amuse  ourselves  awhile  in  the  peace-
ful solitude  of  the  philosopher,  before  we  proceed
to  those  more  animated,  but  less  pleasing,  objects
which  he  describes.

Neither  will  the  view  of  a  philosopher's  life  be
less  instructive  than  his  labours.  If  the  latter  teach
us  how  great  vices,  accompanied  with  great  abilities,
may  tend  to  the  ruin  of  a  state  ,;  if  they  inform  us
how  ambition  attended  with  magnanimity,  how
avarice  directed  by  political  sagacity,  how  envy  and
revenge  armed  with  personal  valour  and  popular
support,  v/ill  destroy  the  most  sacred  establishments,
and  break  through  every  barrier  of  human  repose
and  safety ;  the  former  v/ill  convince  us  that  equa-
nimity is  more  desirable  than  the  highest  privileges
of  mind,  and  that  the  most  distinguished  situations
in  Life  are  less  to  be  envied  than  those  quiet  allot-
jnentSj  where  science  is  the  companion  of  virtue.


xxviii  LIFE  OF  PLUTAIICH.

Pindar  raid  Epaminondas  had,  long  before  Plu-
tarch's time,  redeemed  in  some  measure  the  credit
of  Breotia,  and  rescued  the  inluibitants  of  that  coun-
try from  the  proverbial  imputation  of  stupidity  *.
"When  Plutarch  ajipcared,  he  confirmed  the  repu-
tation, which  it  had  recovered.  He  showed  that
genius  is  not  the  growth  of  any  particular  soil,  and
that  it's  cultivation  requires  no  pecuhar  qualities  of
climate.

Chosronea,  a  town  in  Breotia  between  Phocis  and
Attica,  had  the  honour  of  giving  him  birth.  Tliis
place  was  remarkable  for  notiiing  but  the  tameness
and  servility  of  it's  inhabitants,  whom  Antony's
soldiers  obliged,  as  beasts  of  burthen  t,  to  carry
their  corn  upon  their  shoulders  to  the  coast.  As  it
jay  betv/een  two  seas,  and  was  partly  shut  up  by
mountains,  the  air  of  course  was  heavy.  But  situa-
tions, as  little  favoured  by  nature  as  Cha?ronea,  have
given  birth  to  the  greatest  men  ;  of  which  the  cele-
brated Locke  t,  and  many  others,  are  instances.

Plutarch  himself  acknowledges  the  general  stu-
pidity of  the  Ba^otians  ;  but  he  imputes  it  rather  to
their  diet  §,  than  to  their  air:  for  in  his  Treatise
on  Animal  Food,  he  intimates  that  a  gross  indul-
gence in  that  article,  which  was  usual  with  his
countrymen,  contributes  greatly  to  obscure  the  in-
tellectual facidties.

It  is  not  easy  to  ascertain,  in  what  year  he  was
born.  Ruauld  places  it  about  the  middle  of  the
reign  of  Claudius  ;  others,  toward  it's  end.     The

*  Bceotiim  in  crnsso  jurnrcs  acre  iinlum,

says  Horace  (Ep.  II.  i.  244.)  speaking  of  Alexander's  little  taste  for
poetrj'.  E.

f   See  the  Life  of  Antony,  V.

%  Locke  was  born  at  Wrington  near  Axbridge,  in  Somersetshire,
not  far  from  the  margin  of  the  Bristol  Channel.

j  Find.  Ol.  vi.  15'2.  had  ascribed  it  to  a  similar  cause,  their  vora-
city, in  his  HoiwTixv  o-j.  Sec  alsoJuv.  Sat.  x.  50.  Plutarch  however,  in
his  Treatise  on  the  Demon  of  Socrates,  states  that  from  the  time
of  that  philf)sopher  this  disgraceful  character  had  been  gradually
on  the  decline.  E.


1


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xxix

following  circumstance  is  the  only  foundation,  which
they  have  for  their  conjectures  :  Plutarch  says,  that
he  studied  philosophy  under  Ammonius  at  Delphi,
when  Nero  made  his  progress  into  Greece.  This,
we  know,  was  in  the  tweltth  year  of  that  emperor's
reign,  in  the  consulship  of  Paulinus  Suetonius  and
Pontius  Telesinus,  A.  D.  66.  Dacier  observes,  that
Plutarch  must  have  been  at  least  seventeen  or  eisfh-
teen  years  old,  when  he  was  engaged  in  the  abstruse
studies  of  philosophy ;  and  accordingly  fixes  his
birth  about  five  or  six  years  before  the  death  of
Claudius.  This,  however,  is  bare  suppositiori ;  and
that,  in  our  opinion,  not  of  the  most  })robable  kind.
The  youth  of  Greece  studied  very  early  under  the
philosophers  ;  whose  works,  with  those  of  the  poets
and  rhetoricians,  formed  their  chief  course  of  dis-
cipline.

But  to  determine  whether  he  was  born  under  the
reign  of  Claudius,  or  in  the  early  part  of  Nero's
reign  (which  we  the  rather  believe,  as  he  says  him-
self that  he  was  very  young,  when  Nero  entered
Greece)  ;  to  make  it  clearly  understood,  whether  he
studied  at  Delphi  at  ten  or  at  eighteen  years  of  age,
is  of  much  less  consequence,  tlian  it  is  to  know  bv
what  means  and  under  what  auspices  he  acquired
that  humane  and  rational  philosophy,  which  is  dis-
tinguishable in  his  works.

Ammonius  was  his  preceptor  ;  but  of  him  we  know
little  more,  than  what  his  scholar  has  accidentally
let  fall  concerning  him  *.  He  mentions  a  sinp^ular
instance  of  his  manner  of  correcting  his  pupils  :
"  Our  master,"  says  he,  "  having  one  day  observed
that  we  had  indulged  ourselves  too  luxuriously  at
dinner,  at  his  afternoon-lecture  ordered  his  freed-
man  to  give  his  own  son  the  discipline  of  the  wliip,
in  our  presence  ;  signifying,  at  the  same  time,  that
he  suffered  this  punishment,  because  he  could  not

*  From   the  Symposiacs,  ix.   1.  it  appears,   that   he  filled  th?
office  of  prstor  at  Athens,  E.


XXX  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

eat  his  victuals  without  sauce.  The  philosopher  all
the  while  had  his  eye  upon  us,  and  we  knew  well
for  whom  this  example  of  punishment  was  intended."
This  circ|nii stance  shows,  at  least,  that  Ammonius
was  not  of  the  school  of  Epicurus.  The  severity
of  his  discipline,  indeed,  seems  rather  to  have
been  of  the  Stoic  cast :  but  it  is  most  probable,
tliat  he  belonged  to  the  Academicians,  for  their
schools,  at  that  time,  had  the  highest  reputation
in  Greece.

It  was  a  happy  circumstance,  in  the  discipline  of
those  schools,  that  the  parent  alone  had  the  power
of  corporal  ])unishment.  The  ferula  Vvas  snatched
from  the  hand  of  the  petty  tyrant ;  his  sole  office
was  to  inform  the  mind ;  he  had  no  authority  to
dastardise  the  spirit ;  he  had  no  power  to  extinguish
the  generous  flame  of  freedom,  or  to  break  down  the
noble  independence  of  soul,  by  the  slavish  and
degrading  a})plication  of  the  rod.  This  mode  of
pnnishment  in  our  public  schools  is  one  of  the  worst
remains  of  barbarism,  that  prevails  among  us.  Sen-
sible minds,  however  volatile  and  inattentive  in
early  ycavs,  may  be  drawn  to  their  duty  b}^  many
means,  which  shame,  and  fears  of  a  more  liberal
nature  than  those  of  corporal  punishment,  will  su})ply.
Where  there  is  but  little  sensibility,  the  effect  which
that  mode  of  punishment  produces  is  not  more
liappy.  It  destroys  tliat  little  ;  though  it  should
be  the  first  care  and  labour  of  the  preceptor,  to
increase  it.  To  beat  the  body  is  to  debase  tiie  mind.
Nothinij  so  soon,  or  so  totallv,  abolishes  the  sense  of
shame  ;  and  yet  that  sense  is  at  once  the  best  pre-
servative of  virtue,  and  the  greatest  incentive  to
every  species  of  excellence.

Another  principal  advantage,  which  the  ancient
mode  of  the  Greek  education  gave  it's  pupils,  was
their  early  access  to  every  branch  of  philosophical
learning.  They  did  not,  likens,  employ  then*  youth
in  the  acquisition  of  woixls :  they  were  engaged  in
pursuits  of  a  loftier  nature,  in  acquiring  the  know-


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xxxi

ledge  of  things.  They  did  not,  like  us,  spend  seven
or  ten  years  of  scholastic  labour,  in  making  a  general
acquaintance  with  two  dead  languages.  Those
years  were  employed  in  the  study  of  nature,  and
in  gaining  the  elements  of  philosophical  knowledge
from  her  original  economy  and  law^s.  Hence  all
that  Dacier  has  observed,  concerning  the  proba-
bility of  Plutarch's  being  seventeen  or  eighteen
years  of  age  w^hen  he  studied  under  Ammonius,  is
without  the  least  weight.

The  way  to  mathematical  and  philosophical  know-
ledge was,  indeed,  much  more  easy  among  the  an-
cient Greeks,  than  it  can  ever  be  with  us.  Those
and  every  other  science  are  bound  up  in  terms,
whicli  we  can  never  understand  precisely,  till  w^e
become  acquainted  with  the  languages  whence  they
are  derived.  Plutarch,  when  he  learned  the  Ro-
man language,  which  was  not  till  he  was  some-
what advanced  in  life,  observed  that  '  he  got  the
knowledge  of  words  from  his  knowledge  of  things/
But  we  lie  under  the  necessity  of  reversing  his
method;  and,  before  we  can  arrive  at  the  know-
ledge of  things,  we  must  first  labour  to  obtain  the
knowledge  of  words.

Though  the  Greeks  however  had  access  to  science
without  the  acquisition  of  other  languages,  tliey  were
nevertheless  sufficiently  attentive  to  the  cultivation
of  their  own.  Philology,  after  the  mathematics
and  philosophy,  was  one  of  their  principal  studies  ;
and  they  applied  themselves  considerably  to   critical


uivestigation


A  proof  of  this  we  find  in  that  Dissertation,  which
Plutarch  has  given  us  on  the  word  ?;,  engraved  on
the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  In  this  tract  he
introduces  the  scholastic  disputes,  in  which  he
makes  a  principal  figure.  After  giving  us  the  vari-
ous signiiications,  assigned  by  others  "to  tliis  word,
he  adds  his  own  idea  of  it ;  and  that  is  of  some  con-
sequence to  us,  because  it  shows  us  that  he  was  not
a  polytheist.  "  E.,"  says  he,  "  Thou  art;  as  if  it
12


xxxli  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

were  n  £v,  Tlwu  art  one.  I  mean  not  in  the  ao'S're-
gate  sense,  as  we  say,  one  army,  or  one  body  of  men
composed  of  many  individuals  ;  but  that,  which  exists
distinctly,  must  necessarily  be  one :  and  the  very
idea  of  being  implies  individuality.  One  is  that,
which  is  a  simple  being,  free  from  mixture  and  com-
position. To  be  one  therefore,  in  this  sense,  is  con-
sistent only  with  a  nature  entire  in  it's  first  principle,
and  incapable  of  alteration  or  decay/'

So  far  we  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  Plutarch's
creed,  but  not  with  his  criticism.  To  suppose  that
the  word  n  should  signify  the  existence  of  one  God
only,  is  to  hazard  too  much  npon  conjecture  ;  and  the
whole  tenor  of  the  heathen  theology  makes  against  it.

Neither  can  we  be  better  pleased  with  the  other
interpretations  of  this  celebrated  word.  We  can
never  suppose,  that  it  barely  signified  ^  if;'  inti-
mating, that  the  business  of  those  who  visited  the
temple  was  inquiry,  and  that  they  came  to  ask  the
Deity,  '  if  such  events  should  come  to  pass.  This
construction  is  too  much  forced  ;  and  it  would  do
as  well  or  even  better,  were  the  a  interpreted  '  if*
you  make  large  presents  to  the  God,  '  if'  you  pay
the  priest.

Were  not  this  inscription  an  object  of  attention
among  the  learned,  we  should  not  at  tins  distant
period  of  time  have  thought  it  worth  mentioning,
otherwise  than  as  it  ogives  us  an  idea  of  one  branch
of  Plutarch's  education.  But  as  a  single  word,  in-
scribed on  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  must
be  a  matter  of  curiosity  with  those  who  carry  their
inquiries  into  remote  antiquity,  we  shall  not  scru-
ple to  add  one  more  to  tlie  other  conjectures
concerning  it.

W^e  will  suppose  then  that  the  word  n  was  here
used,  in  the  Ionic  dialect,  for  nOc,  '  1  wish.'  This
perfectly  expressed  the  state  of  mind  of  all,  that
entered  the  temple  on  the  business  of  consultation ;
and  it  might  be  no  less  emphatical  in  the  Greek,
than  Viigil's  Quoiujuam  O !  was  in  the  Latin.  If  we
9


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xxxiii

carry  this  conjecture  farther,  and  think  it  probable
that  this  word  might,  as  the  initial  word  of  a  cele-
brated line  in  the  third  book  of  the  Odyssey,  stand
there  to  signify  the  whole  line,  v/e  shall  reach  a
degree  of  probability  almost  bordering  on  certainty.
The  verse  we  allude  to  is  tliis :

El   yxp  SMI   Tc<r(n;ici   S'so*  cvjy.yjiv   ■^ccfa.B'Hiv  I

O  may  the  Gods  empower  me  to  succeed !

Wliat  prayer  more  proper  on  entering  the  temples
of  the  Gods,  particularly  with  the  view  of  consulting
them  upon  the  events  of  life  !

If  it  should  be  thought,  that  the  initial  word  is
insufficient  to  represent  a  whole  verse,  we  answer
that  it  was  agreeable  to  the  custom  of  the  ancients.
They  not  only  conveyed  the  sense  of  particular
verses  by  their  initial  words,  but  frequently  of  large
passages  by  the  .quotation  of  a  single  line,  or  even
of  half  a  line  ;  some  instances  of  which  occur  in  the
followini]^  Lives.  The  reason  of  this  is  obvious :
the  works  of  their  best  poets  were  almost  univer-
sally committed  to  memory  and  the  smallest  quo^
tation  was  sufficient  to  convey  the  sense  of  a  whole
passage*.

These  observations  are  matters  of  mere  curiosity,
but  they  have  had  their  use ;  for  they  have  naturally
pointed  out  to  us  anotiicr  instance  of  the  excellence
of  that  education,  which  formed  our  young  philoso-
pher. This  v.'as  the  improvement  of  the  memory,
bv  means  of  exercise.

Mr.  Locke  has  justly,  though  obviously  enough,
observed  that  nothing  so  much  strengthens  this
faculty,  as  the  employment  of  it.  The  Greek  mode
of  education  must  here  have  had  a  wonderful  eifect.
The  continual  exercise  of  the  memory,  in  laying  up
the  treasures  of  their  poets,  the  precepts  of  their

*  A  sitnilai*  mode  indeed  is  adopted  in  the  Christian  Psalter,  for
the  sake  of  more  biietly  referring-  to  the  psalais,  by  prefixing  to
each  two  or  three  of  the  initial  words  from  the  Latin  version.  E,
VOL.    I.  d


xxxii  I^IFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

were  n  £v,  Thou  art  one.  I  mean  not  in  the  aiTgre-
gate  sense,  as  we  say,  one  army,  or  one  body  of  men
composed  of  many  individuals  ;  but  that,  which  exists
distinctly,  must  necessarily  be  one  :  and  the  very
idea  of  being  implies  individuality.  One  is  that,
which  is  a  simple  being,  free  from  mixture  and  com-
position. To  be  one  therefore,  in  this  sense,  is  con-
sistent only  with  a  nature  entire  in  it's  first  principle,
and  incapable  of  alteration  or  decay."

So  far  we  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  Plutarch's
creed,  but  not  with  his  criticism.  To  suppose  that
the  word  £i  should  signify  the  existence  of  one  God
only,  is  to  hazard  too  much  upon  conjecture  ;  and  the
whole  tenor  of  the  heathen  theology  makes  against  it.

Neither  can  we  be  better  pleased  with  the  other
interpretations  of  this  celebrated  word.  We  can
never  suppose,  that  it  barely  signified  '  if;'  inti-
mating, that  the  business  of  those  who  visited  the
temple  was  inquiry,  and  that  they  came  to  ask  the
Deity,  '  if  such  events  should  come  to  pass.  This
construction  is  too  much  forced  ;  and  it  would  do
as  well  or  even  better,  were  the  fi  interpreted  '  if*
you  make  large  presents  to  the  God,  '  if'  you  pay
the  priest.

Were  not  this  inscription  an  object  of  attention
among  the  learned,  we  should  not  at  this  distant
period  of  time  have  thought  it  worth  mentioning,
otherwise  than  as  it  chives  us  an  idea  of  one  branch
of  Plutarch's  education.  But  as  a  single  word,  in-
scribed on  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi,  must
be  a  matter  of  curiosity  with  those  who  carry  their
inquiries  into  remote  antiquity,  we  shall  not  scru-
ple to  add  one  more  to  tlie  other  conjectures
concerning  it.

We  will  suppose  then  that  the  word  n  was  here
used,  in  the  Ionic  dialect,  for  51O;,  '  1  wish.'  This
perfectly  expressed  the  state  of  mind  of  all,  that
entered  the  temple  on  the  business  of  consultation ;
and  it  might  be  no  less  emphatical  in  the  Greek,
than  Viigil's  (-iuaiirjuam  O !  was  in  the  Latin.  If  we
9


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  Kxxiii

carry  this  conjecture  farther,  and  think  it  probable
that  this  word  might,  as  the  initial  word  of  a  cele-
brated line  in  the  third  book  of  the  Odvssey,  stand
there  to  signify  the  Avhole  line,  we  shall  reach  a
degree  of  probability  almost  bordering  on  certainty.
The  verse  we  allude  to  is  this  :

O  may  the  Gods  empower  me  to  succeed !

What  prayer  more  proper  on  entering  the  temples
of  the  Gods,  particularly  with  the  view  of  consulting
them  upon  the  events  of  life  !

If  it  should  be  thought,  that  the  initial  word  is
insufficient  to  represent  a  whole  verse,  we  answer
that  it  was  agreeable  to  tlie  custom  of  the  ancients.
They  not  only  conveyed  the  sense  of  particular
verses  by  their  initial  words,  but  frequently  of  large
passages  by  the  .quotation  of  a  single  line,  or  even
of  half  a  line  ;  some  instances  of  which  occur  in  the
followiuix  Lives.  The  reason  of  this  is  obvious :
the  works  of  their  best  poets  were  almoU  univer-
sally committed  to  memory  and  the  smallest  quo-
tation was  sufficient  to  convey  the  sense  of  a  whole
passage*.

These  observations  are  matters  of  mere  curiositj',
but  they  have  had  their  use ;  for  they  have  naturally
pointed  out  to  us  anotlicr  instance  of  the  excellence
of  that  education,  which  formed  our  young  philoso-
pher. This  v/as  the  improvem.ent  of  the  memory,
bv  means  of  exercise.

Mr.  Locke  has  justly,  though  obviously  enough,
observed  that  nothing  so  much  strengthens  this
faculty,  as  the  employment  of  it.  The  Greek  mode
of  education  must  here  have  had  a  wonderful  effect.
The  continual  exercise  of  the  memory,  in  laying  up
the  treasures  of  their  poets,  the  precepts  of  their

*  A  similar  mode  indeed  is  adopted  in  the  Christian  Psalter,  for
the  sake  of  more  biiefly  reteriing  to  the  psalms,  by  prefixing  to
each  two  ur  three  oi'the  initial  words  from  the  Latin  version.  E.
VOL.    I.  d


^xW  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

philosophers,  and  the  problems  of  their  mathema*
ticians,  must  have  given  it  that  mechanical  power  of
retention,  which  nothing  could  easily  escape.  Thus
Pliny  *  tells  us  of  a  Greek  called  Charmidas,  who
could  repeat  from  memory  the  contents  of  the  largest
hbrary.  The  advantages,  which  Plutarch  derived  from
this  exercise,  appear  in  every  part  of  his  w^orks.  As
the  writings  of  poets  lived  in  his  memory,  they  were
ready  for  use  on  every  apposite  occasion.  They
were  alwavs  at  hand,  either  to  confirm  the  senti-
ments  and  jnstify  the  principles  of  his  heroes,  to
support  his  own,  or  to  illustrate  both.  By  the  aid  of
a  cultivated  memory  too,  he  was  enabled  to  write  a
number  of  contemporary  Lives,  and  to  assign  to
each  such  a  portion  of  business  in  the  general
transactions  of  the  times,  as  might  be  sufMcient  to
delineate  the  character,  without  repeated  details  of
the  same  actions  and  negociations.  This  made  a
very  difficult  part  of  his  work  ;  and  here  he  acquit-
ted himself  with  great  management  and  address.
Sometimes,  indeed,  he  has  repeated  the  same  circum-
stances in  contemporary  Lives  ;  but  it  was  hardly
avoidable.  The  chief  wonder  is,  that  he  has  done
it  so  seldom.

But  though  an  improved  memory  might  in  this
respect  be  of  service  to  him,  as  undoubtedly  it  was,
there  were  others  in  which  it  was  rather  a  disadvan-
tage. By  trusting  too  much  to  it,  he  has  fallen  into
inaccuracies  and  inconsistencies,  where  he  was  pro-
fessedly drawing  from  preceding  writers  ;  and  w'e
have  often  been  obliged  to  rectify  his  mistakes,  by
consulting  those  authors,  because  he  would  not  be  at
the  pains  to  consult  tlicm  himself

If  Plutarch  might  be  properly  said  to  belong  to
any  sect  of  philosophers,  his  education,  the  rationa-
lity of  his  principles,  and  the  modesty  of  his  doctrines
would  incline  us  to  place  him  with  the  Latter  Aca-
demy.    At  least,  when  he  left  his  master  Amnionius

*  H.  N.  vii.  24.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCFI.  xxxv

and  came  into  society,  it  is  more  than  probable,  that
fee  ranked  particularly  with  that  sect.  His  writings,
however,  furnish  us  with  many  reasons  for  thinking,
that  he  subsequently  became  a  citizen  of  the  philo-
sophical world.  He  appears  to  have  examined  every
sect  with  a  calm  and  unprejudiced  attention,  to
have  selected  what  he  found  of  use  for  the  pur-
poses of  virtue  and  happiness,  and  to  have  left  the
rest  for  the  portion  of  those,  whose  narrowness  of
mind  could  think  either  science  or  felicity  confined
to  any  denomination  of  men.

From  the  Academicians  he  took  their  modesty  of
opinion,  and  left  them  their  original  scepticism  :  he
borrowed  their  rational  theology,  and  gave  up  to
them  in  a  great  measure  their  metaphysical  refine-
ments, together  with  their  vain  though  seductive
enthusiasm.  With  the  Peripatetics  he  '  walked'  in
search  of  natural  science,  and  of  logic  ;  but,  satis-
fied with  whatever  practical  knowledge  might  be
acquired,  he  left  them  to  dream  over  the  hypothe-
tical part  of  the  former,  and  to  chase  the  shadows  of
reason  through  the  mazes  of  the  latter.  To  the
Stoics  he  was  indebted  for  the  belief  of  a  particular
Providence  ;  but  he  could  not  enter  into  their  idea
of  future  rewards  and  punishments.  He  knew  not
how  to  reconcile  the  present  agency  of  the  Supreme
Being  with  his  judicial  character  hereafter ;  though
Theodoret  informs  us,  that  he  had  heard  of  the
Christian  religion,  and  inserted  several  of  it's  myste-
ries in  his  works*.  From  the  Stoics,  too,  he  bor-
rowed the  doctrine  of  fortitude  :  but  he  rejected  the
unnatural  foundation,  upon  which  they  erected  that
virtue.  For  a  better,  he  went  to  Socrates.  With
the  Epicureans  he  does  not  seem  to  have  had  much
intercourse,  though- the  accommodating  philosophy
of  Aristippus  entered  frequently  into  his  politics,  and
sometimes  into  the  general  economy  of  his  life.     In

*  Nothing  however  of  Plutarch's  is  now  extant,  from  which  we
«an  infer  that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  Christian  religion.

d  2


xxxvi  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

the  little  states  of  Greece,  that  philosopliy  had  not
much  to  do ;  but,  had  it  been  adopted  in  tlie  more
violent  measures  of  the  Roman  administration,  our
celebrated  bio(!;rap]ier  would  Jiot  have  had  such
scenes  of  blood  and  ruin  to  describe;  for  prejudice
and  opjiosition,  u])on  whatever  principles  tliey  might
plead  their  apology,  first  struck  out  the  fire  that  laid
the  conimonwealth  in  ashes.  If  Plutarch  borrowed
anv  thing  more  from  Epicurus,  it  was  his  rational
idea  of  enjoyment.  That  such  was  his  idea,  it  is
more  than  probable ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  believe
the  tales,  whicii  the  heathen  bigots  have  told  of  him,
or  to  su})pose  tliat  the  cultivated  mind  of  a  philo-
sopher should  piu'sue  it's  happiness  out  of  the  tem-
perate order  of  nature.  His  irreligious  opinions  he
left  to  him,  as  he  had  left  to  the  other  sects  their
vanities  and  absurdities.

But,  when  we  bring  him  to  the  school  of  Pytha-
goras, what  idea  siiall  v.e  entertain  of  him  ?  Shall  we
consider  him  any  longer  as  an  Academician,  or  as
a  citizen  of  the  pliilosophical  world  ?  Constitutionally
benevolent  and  humane  *,  he  there  finds  a  svstem  of
di\inity  and  pliiloso])hy  perfectly  adapted  to  his
natural  sentiments.  The  whole  animal  creation  he
iiad  originally  looked  upon  with  an  instinctive  ten-
derness :  but  when  the  amiable  Pythagoras,  the  priest
of  Nature,  in  defence  of  the  common  ])rivilcges  of
lier  creatures,  had  called  religion  into  their  cause ;
when  he  sought  to  soften  the  crueltv,  which  man
had  exercised  against  them,  by  the  honest  art  of
insiiniating  the  doctrine  of  transmigration,  how
could  Plutarch  reliisc  to  serve  under  him  ?  It  was
im})Ossible.  lie  adopted  the  doctrine  of  the  Me-
tempsychosis. He  entered  into  the  merciful  scheme
of  Pythagoras  ;  and  like  him   diverted  the  cruelty

*  *  He  is  remarkable  for  being  one  of  the  most  humane  writers
of  all  antiquity  ;  less  dazzled  than  many  of  tliem  are  with  the  ex-
ploits of  valour  and  ambition,  and  fond  of  displaying  his  great  men
to  us  in  the  more  gentle  lights  of  retirement  and  private  life.',
(Blair's  Lcct.  xxxvi. _)      E.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xxx^^i-

of  the  human  species,  by  appealing  to  the  seliisli
quahties  of  their  nature,  by  subduing  their  pride  and
exciting  their  sympathy,  while  he  showed  them  that
their  future  existence  might  be  the  condition  of  a
reptile.

This  spirit  and  disposition  break  strongly  from  him,
in  his  observations  on  the  elder  Cato.  And,  as  no-
thing can  exhibit  a  more  lively  picture  of  him  than
these  paintings  of  his  own,  we  shall  not  scruple  to  in-
troduce them  here:  "  For  my  ])art,  I  cannot  but
chariie  his  usins;  his  servants  like  so  many  beasts  of
burthen,  and  turning  them  off  or  selling  them  when
grown  old,  to  the  account  of  a  mean  and  ungene-
rous spirit,  which  thinks  that  the  sole  tie  between
man  and  man  is  interest  or  necessity.  But  goodness
moves  in  a  larger  sj)here  than  justice  :  the  obligations
of  law  and  equity  reach  only  to  mankind,  but  mercy
and  beneficence  should  be  extended  to  creatures  of
every  species  ;  and  these  still  flow  from  the  breast
of  a  weil-natured  man,  as  streams  that  issue  from  a
copious  fountain.  A  good  man  will  take  care  of  his
horses  and  dogs,  not  only  while  they  are  young,  but
when  old  and  past  service.  Thus  the  people  of
Athens,  when  they  had  finished  the  temple  called  He-
catompedon,  set  at  liberty  the  beasts  of  burthen
which  had  been  chiefly  employed  in  the  work,  suffer-
hig  them  to  pastiu'e  at  large,  free  from  any  farther
service.  It  is  said,  that  one  of  these  subsequently
came  of  its  own  accord  to  work,  iind  placing  itself
at  the  head  of  tlie  labouring  cattle,  marched  before
them  to  the  citadel.  Tiiis  pleased  the  people,  and
they  made  a  decree,  that  it  should  be  kept  at  the
public  charge  so  long  as  it  lived.  The  graves  of
Cimon's  mares,  with  which  he  thrice  conquered  at
the  Olympic  games,  are  still  to  be  seen  near  his  ovv'n
tomb.  Many  have  shown  ])articular  m.arks  of  re-
gard in  burying  the  dogs,  which  they  have  brought
up  and  cherished  ;  and  among  the  rest  Xanthippus
of  old,  whose  dog  swam  by  the  side  of  his  galley  to
JSalamis,  wlien  the  Athenians  were  forced  to  abau-


xxxviif  LIFE  OF  rLUTARCII.

don  their  city,  and  was  siibscqnently  interred  by  his
master  upon  a  promontory  to  this  day  called  the
'  Doer's  Grave.'  We  certainly  oiuijht  not  to  treat
living  creatures  like  shoes  or  household  goods,  which
when  worn  out  with  use  we  throw  away ;  and,  were
it  only  to  teach  benevolence  toward  human  kind,
we  should  be  tender  and  merciful  to  other  creatures.
For  my  own  part,  I  would  not  sell  even  an  old  ox,
M'hich  had  laboured  for  me ;  much  less  would  I
banish,  as  it  were,  for  the  sake  of  a  little  money,  a
man  grown  old  in  my  service,  from  his  usual  place
and  accustomed  diet ;  since  he  could  be  of  no  more
use  to  the  buyer,  than  he  v»-as  to  the  seller.  But
Cato,  as  if  he  took  a  pride  in  these  things,  informs
us  that,  when  consul,  he  left  his  war-horse  in  Spain,
to  save  the  public  the  charge  of  his  freight.  Whe-
ther such  things  as  these  are  instances  of  greatness
or  littleness  of  soul,  let  the  reader  judge  for  him-
self* 1"

What  an  amiable  idea  this  extract  gives  us  of  our
benevolent  philosopher  !  How  worthy  the  instruc-
tions of  the  Sage  of  Samos !  How  honourable  to  that
master  of  truth  and  universal  science,  whose  senti-
ments were  decisive  in  every  doubtful  matter,  and
whose  maxims  were  received  with  silent  convic-
tion t !

Wherefore  should  we  wonder  to  find  Plutarch
more  particularly  attached  to  the  opinions  of  this
illustrious  man  !  Whether  we  consider  the  immensity
of  his  erudition,  or  the  benevolence  of  his  system,
the  motives  for  that  attachment  were  equally  power-
ful. Pythagoras  had  collected  all  the  stores  of  hu-
man learning,  and  had  reduced  them  into  one  ra-
tional and  useful  body  of  science.  Like  our  own
Bacon,  he  led  philosophy  forth  from  the  jargon  of
schools,  and  the  fopperies  of  sects.  He  made  her
"wliat  she  was  originally  designed  to  be,  the  hand-
maid of  Nature  ;  friendly  to  her  creatures,  and  faith-

*  Vol.  II.  499.  t  Val.  Max.  VIII.  xv.  13.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xxxbc

fill  to  her  laws.  Whatever  knowledge  could  be
gained  by  human  industry,  by  tlie  most  extensive
inquiry  and  observation,  he  had  every  opportunity
to  obtain.  The  priests  of  Egypt  unfolded  to  him
their  mysteries,  and  their  learning  :  they  led  him
through  the  records  of  the  remotest  antiquity,  and
opened  all  those  stores  of  science,  that  had  been
amassing  through  a  multitude  of  ages.  With  the
priests  of  Egypt,  the  Magi  of  Persia  co-operated  in
his  instruction.  They  taught  him  those  higher  parts
of  science,  by  which  they  were  themselves  so  much
distinguished,  astronomy  and  the  system  of  the  uni-
verse. The  laws  of  moral  life,  and  the  institutions
of  civil  societies,  with  their  several  excellences  and
defects,  he  learned  from  the  various  states  and  esta-
blishments of  Greece.  Thus  accomplished,  when
he  came  to  dispute  in  the  Olympic  contests,  he  was
considered  as  a  prodigy  of  wisdom  and  learning ;  but
when  the  choice  of  his  title  was  left  to  him,  he  mo-
destly declined  the  appellation  of  '  a  wise  man,*
and  was  contented  only  to  be  called  '  a  lover  of
wisdom  *.'

Shall  not  Plutarch  then  meet  with  all  imasjinable
indulgence,  if  in  his  veneration  for  this  celebrated
character  he  not  only  adopted  the  nobler  parts  of  his
philosophy,  but  (what  he  had  avoided  with  regard
to  the  other  sects)  followed  him  likewise  in  his
errors  ?  Such,  in  particular,  was  his  doctrine  of
dreams  ;  to  which  our  biographer,  we  must  confess,
has  paid  too  mucli  attention.  Yet  absolutely  to  con-
demn him  for  this  wouki,  perhaps,  be  hazarding  as
much  as  totally  to  defend  him.  We  must  acknow-
ledge with  the  elder  Pliny,  Si  e.vempUs  agatur,  pro-
fectd  paria Jiant  t ;  or,  in  the  language  of  honest  Sir
Roger  de  Coverley,  "  Much  may  be  said  on  both
sides  t.'*  If  Pliny  however,  v/hose  complaisance  foi*
the  credit  of  the  marvellous  in  particular  was  very
great,  could  be  doubtful  about  this  matter,  we  "  of

*  Val.  Max.  VIII.  vii.  9.  t  H.  N.  x.  7.5.

%  Spect.  N°.  122.


xl  LITE  OF  PLUTARCH.

little  faith"  may  be  allowed  to  be  more  so.  Yet
Plutarch,  in  his  Treatise  on  Oracles,  has  maintained
his  doctrine  by  such  powerful  testimonies,  that  if  any
regard  is  to  be  paid  to  his  veracity,  some  attention
should  be  given  to  his  opinion.  We  shall,  therefore,
leave  the  point  in  suspense.

When  Zeno  consulted  the  oracle,  in  what  manner
he  should  live,  the  answer  was,  that  "  He  should  in-
quire of  the  dead."  Assiduous  and  indefatigable
application  to  reading  made  a  considerable  part  of
the  Greek  education  ;  and  in  this  our  biographer
seems  to  have  exerted  the  utmost  industry.  The
number  of  books  to  which  he  has  referred,  and  from
which  he  has  transcribed,  seems  almost  incredible  ;
■when  it  is  considered,  that  the  art  of  printing  was
not  known  in  his  time,  and  that  the  purchase  of
manuscripts  was  difficult  and  dear.

His  family,  indeed,  was  not  without  wealth.  In
his  Symposiacs  he  tell  us,  that  it  was  ancient  in
Chjeronea  ;  and  that  his  progenitors  had  been  invest-
ed with  the  most  considerable  offices  in  the  masfis-
tracy.  He  mentions  in  particular  his  great-grand-
father Nicarchus,  whom  he  had  the  happiness  of
knowing  ;  and  relates  from  his  authority,  the  mis-
fortunes of  his  fellow-citizens  under  the  severe  dis-
cipline of  Antony's  soldiers.

His  grandfather  LampriaS;,  he  tells  us,  w-as  a  man
of  considerable  eloquence,  and  of  a  brilliant  imagi-
nation. He  was  distinguished  by  his  merit  as  a
convivial  companion  ;  and  w^as  one  of  those  haj)py
mortals  who,  when  they  sacrifice  to  Bacchus,  are
favoured  by  Mercury.  His  good-humour  and  plea-
santry increased  with  his  cups  ;  and  he  used  to  say
that  wine  had  the  same  effi^ct  upon  him  that  iire  has
upon  incense,  which  causes  the  finest  and  richest
essences  to  evaporate.

Plutarch  has  mentioned  his  father  likewise  ;  but
he  has  not  given  us  his  name  in  any  of  those  writ-
ings, that  are  come  down  to  us.  He  has  borne  ho-
z^ourabie  testimony,  however,  to  his  memory  j  for


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCtt;  xli

he  tells  us,  that  he  was  a  learned  and  a  vlrtnous  man,
well  acquainted  with  the  philosophy  and  theology  of
his  time,  and  conversant  with  the  works  of  the  poets.
Plutarch,  in  his  Political  Precepts,  mentions  an  in-
stance of  his  father's  discretion,  which  does  him
great  honour  :  "  I  remember,'*  says  he,  "  that  I
was  sent,  when  a  very  young  man,  along  with  an-
other citizen  of  Chaeronea  upon  an  embassy  to  the
proconsul.  My  collegue  being  by  some  accident
obliged  to  stop  in  the  way,  I  proceeded  without  him,
and  executed  our  commission.  Upon  my  return  to
Clia^ronea,  when  I  was  to  give  an  account  hi  public
of  my  negociation,  my  father  took  me  aside,  and
said  ;  "  My  son,  take  care  that,  in  the  account  which
you  are  about  to  give,  you  do  not  mention  yourself
distinctly,  but  jointly  with  your  collegue.  8ay  not,
'  I  went,'  '  I  spoke,'  '  I  executed  ;'  but '  we  went,*
'  we  spoke,'  '  we  executed.'  Thus,  though  your
collegue  was  incapable  of  attending  you,  he  will
share  in  the  honour  of  your  success,  as  w^ell  as  in
that  of  your  appointment ;  and  you  will  avoid  that
envy,  which  necessarily  follows  all  arrogated  merit."

Plutarch  had  two  brothers,  whose  names  were
Timon  and  Lamprias.  These  were  his  associates
in  study,  and  in  amusement,  and  he  always  speaks
of  them  with  pleasure  and  affection.  Of  Timon  in
particular  he  says,  "  Though  Fortune  has  upon
many  occasions  been  favourable  to  me,  yet  I  have
no  obligations  to  her  so  strong,  as  the  enjoyment
of  my  brother  Timon's  invariable  friendship  and
kindness."  Lamprias  too  he  mentions,  as  inherit-
ing  the  lively  disposition  and  good-humour  of  his
grandfather,  who  bore  the  same  name.

Some  writers  have  asserted,  that  Plutarcli  passed
into  Egypt*.  Others  t  allege,  that  there  is  no  au-
thority for  that  assertion  :  and  it  is  true,   that  we

*  Does  it  not  appear  from  his  Syniposiacs,  v.  5.,   that  he  diil?

'Ecojj-o^  S,-.fci;  iw/^i;  ■/.x.oruc,    ft.To    TKi  AMtii-'-'S'^u^.c,  x.  r.  >..       The  titne  ilOW-

ever  of  his  voyage  thilher  must  he  athnitted  to  be  uncerUiin.  E,
t  Dacier,  in  the  Life  of  Plutarch.


xH  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

have  no  written  record  concernins:  it.  We  incline
nevertheless  to  believe,  that  he  did  travel  into  that
country ;  because  this  tour  was  a  part  of  liberal
education  among  the  Greeks,  and  Plutarch  being
descended  from  a  family  of  distinction  was,  there-
fore, likely  to  enjoy  such  a  privilege.  His  Treatise
on  Isis  and  Osiris  likewise  shows,  that  he  had  a  more
than  common  knowledge  of  the  religious  mysteries
of  the  Egyptians ;  whence  it  is  highly  probable,  that
he  had  obtained  this  knowledge  by  being  con-
versant among  them.  To  have  written  a  treatise  on
so  abstruse  a  subject,  without  some  more  eminent
advantages  than  other  writers  might  afford  him,
could  not  have  been  agreeable  to  the  genius,  or
consistent  with  the  modesty,  of  Plutarch.

Supposing  it  doubtful  however,  whether  or  not  he
passed  into  Egypt,  there  is  no  doubt  at  all  that  he
travelled  into  Italy.  Upon  what  occasion  he  visited
that  country,  it  is  not  quite  so  certain ;  but  he  pro-
bably went  to  Rome,  in  a  public  capacity,  on  the
business  of  the  Ch^roneans.  For  in  the  Life  of
Demosthenes  he  informs  us,  that  he  had  no  leisure
in  his  journey  to  Italy  to  learn  the  Latin  language,
on  account  of  public  business.

As  the  passage  here  referred  to  affords  us  farther
matter  of  speculation  for  the  Life  of  Plutarch,  we
shall  give  it  as  we  find  it.  "  An  author  who  would
write  a  history  of  events  that  happened  in  a  foreign
country,  and  cannot  be  learned  in  his  own,  as  he
has  his  materials  to  collect  from  a  variety  of  volumes
dispersed  in  different  libraries,  should  make  it  his
first  care  to  take  up  his  residence  in  some  respect-
able or  populous  town,  which  has  an  ambition  for
literature.  There  he  will  meet  witli  manv  curious
and  \  ahiable  books  ;  and  the  particulars,  that  are
wanting  in  writers,  he  may  upon  inquiry  derive  from
those,  who  have  stored  them  in  the  faithful  reposi-
tory of  memory.  This  will  prevent  his  work  from
being  defective  in  any  material  point.  As  to  my-
self, 1  live  in  a  small  town  j  and  I  choose   to  live

9


LIFE  OF  PLUTAllCH.  xliii

tliere,  lest  it  should  become  still  smaller.  When  I
was  in  Rom.e  and  other  parts  of  Italy,  I  had  not
leisure  to  study  the  Latin  tongue,  on  account  of
the  public  commissions  with  which  I  was  charged,
and  the  number  of  people  that  came  to  be  instruct-
ed by  me  in  philosoph)^  It  was  not  therefore  till
a  late  period  in  liie,  that  I  began  to  read  the  Ro-
man authors  *.'*

From  this  short  account  it  appears,  that,  while
he  was  resident  in  Rome,  public  business  and  lec-
tures in  philosophy  t  left  him  no  time  for  learning
the  Latin  language ;  and  yet  a  little  before  he  had
observed  that  those,  who  writ-e  a  history  of  foreign
characters  and  events,  ought  to  be  conversant  with
the  historians  of  that  country,  where  the  characters
existed  and  the  scene  is  hiid  ;  but  he  acknowledges,
that  he  did  not  learn  the  Latin  language  till  he  was
far  advanced  in  life,  because  when  at  Rome  he  had
not  time  for  that  purpose.

We  may  therefore  conclude,  that  he  wrote  his
Morals  at  Rome,  and  his  Lives  at  Chseroneal:.  For
the  composition  of  the  former,  the  knowledge  of
the  Roman  language  was  not  necessary  :  the  Greek
tongue  was  then  generally  understood  in  Rome  ;
and  he  had  no  occasion  to  use  any  other,  when  he
delivered  his  lectures  of  philosophy  to  the  people.
Those  lectures,  it  is  more  than  probable,  made  up
that  collection  of  Morals,  which  is  come  dov/n  to  us.

Though  he  could  not  however  avail  himself  of  the
Roman  historians,  in  the  great  purpose  of  composing
his  Lives,  for  want  of  a  competent  acquaintance  with
the  language  in  which  they  wrote  ;  yet,  by  convers-
ing with  the  principal  citizens  in  the  Greek  tongue,
he  must  have  collected  many  essential  circumstances
and  anecdotes  of  characters  and  events,  that  pro-

*  V.  251.

f  The  Lectures  were  probably  the  bases  of  many  of  his  Moral
Treatises.

X  That  he  wrote  the  Lives  of  Demosthenes  and  Cicero  there,  is
clear  from  his  own  account.    lb.


xliv  LIFE  OF  PLUTAFvCH.

motcd  his  design  and  enriched  the  plan  of  his  work.
These  treasures  lie  secured  by  means  of  a  common-
place  book,  which  lie  constantly  carried  about  with
him  :  and  as  it  appears  that  he  was  at  Rome,  and  in
other  parts  of  Italy,  from  the  beginning  of  Vespa-
sian's to  the  end  of  Trajan's  reign,  he  must  have  had
suthcient  time  and  means  to  procure  materials  of
every  kind  ;  for  this  was  a  period  of  almost  forty
years.     (A.  D.  81  — 118.)

We  shall  the  more  readily  enter  into  the  belief,
that  Plutarch  collected  his  materials  chiefly  from
conversation,  when  we  consider  in  what  manner  and
upon  what  subjects  the  ancients  used  to  converse.
The  discourse  of  people  of  education  and  distinction,
in  those  days,  was  somewhat  different  from  that  of
cur's.  It  was  not  on  the  powers,  or  the  pedigree,
of  a  horse;  it  was  not  on  a  match  of  travelling  be-
tween geese  and  turkies ;  it  was  not  on  a  race  of
maggots,  started  against  each  other  on  the  table,
when  they  first  came  to  day-light  from  the  shell  of  a
filbert ;  it  was  not,  by  what  part  you  may  susj)end  a
spaniel  the  longest  without  making  him  whine ;  it
was  not  on  the  exquisite  finesse,  and  the  highest
manoeuvres,  of  play.  The  old  Romans  had  no  am-
bition for  attainments  of  this  nature.  They  had  no
such  masters  in  science,  as  Heber  and  Hoyle  :  the
taste  of  their  times  did  not  run  that  way.  Tlie  powers
of  poetry  and  philosophy,  the  economy  of  human
life  and  manners,  the  cultivation  of  the  intellectual
iaculties,  the  enlargement  of  the  mind,  historical
and  political  discussions  on  the  events  of  their  coun-
try— these,  and  such  subjects  as  these,  made  the
principal  part  of  their  conversation.  Of  this  Plu-
tarch has  given  us  at  once  a  proof  and  a  s])ecimen,
in  what  he  calls  his  Symposiacs,  or  as  our  Sclden
denominates  it.  Table- Talk.  From  conversations
like  these,  then,  we  cannot  wonder  that  he  v/as  able
to  collect  such  treanures,  as  were  necessary  for  the
maintenance  of  his  biographical  undertaking.

In  the  sequel  of  the  last-quoted  passage,  wc  find


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xlf

another  argument  (above  referred  to),  which  con-
firms us  in  the  opinion,  that  Plutarch's  knowledge
of  the  Roman  history  was  chiefly  of  colloquial  ac-
quisition. "  My  method  of  learning  the  Roman
language,"  says  he,  "  may  seem  strange  ;  and  yet
it  is  very  true.  I  did  not  so  much  gain  the  know-
ledge of  things  by  words,  as  words  by  the  knowledge
whi^ch  I  had  of  things  *."  Tiiis  plainly  implies,  that
he  was  previously  acquainted  with  the  events  de-
scribed in  the  language,  which  he  was  learning.

It  must  be  owned  that  the  Roman  History  had
been  already  written  in  Greek  by  Polybius;  and
that,  indeed,  somewhat  invalidates  the  last-mentioned
argument.  Nevertheless,  it  has  still  sufficient  evi-
dence for  it's  support.  There  are  a  thousand  cir-
cumstances in  Plutarch's  Lives,  which  could  not  be
collected  from  Polybius  ;  and  it  is  clear  to  us,  that
he  did  not  make  much  use  of  his  Latin  reading.

He  acknowledges,  that  he  did  not  apply  himself
to  the  acquisition  of  that  language,  till  he  was  flir
advanced  in  life  :  possibly  it  might  be  about  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  reign  of  Trajan,  whose  kind  disposi-
tion toward  his  country  rendered  the  weight  of  public
and  political  business  easy  to  him.

But,  whenever  he  might  begin  the  study,  it  is
certain  that  he  made  no  considerable  progress  in  it.
This  appears,  as  well  from  the  little  comments  which
he  has  occasionallv  ixiven  us  on  certain  Latin  w^ords,
as  from  some  passages  in  his  Lives  ;  where  he  has
professedly  followed  the  Latin  historians,  and  yet
followed  them  in  an  uncertain  and  erroneous  man-
ner.

A  circumstance  arises  here,  which  confirms  to  us
an  opinion  we,  have  long  entertained,  that  the  Book
of  Apophthegms,  said  to  have  been  written  by  Plu-
tarch, is  really  not  his  work.  This  book  is  dedicated
to  Trajan  ;  and  the  dedicator,  assuming  the  name
and  character  of  Plutarch,  affirms  that  he  had  before


♦  lb.


5c!vJ  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

this  written  the  Lives  of  Illustrious  Men:  but  Plu-
tarch, as  we  have  concluded  above,  wrote  those
Lives  at  ChfEronea  ;  and  he  did  not  retire  to  Chae-
ronea,  till  after  Trajan's  death.

1  here  are  other  proofs,  if  others  were  necessary,
to  sliow  tliat  this  work  was  supposititious.  For  in  this
dedication  to  Trajan  not  the  least  mention  is  made
of  Pkitarch's  having  been  his  preceptor,  of  his  hav-
ing been  raised  by  him  to  the  consuhn-  dignity,  or
of  his  having  been  apj)ointed  governor  of  IJlyria.
Dacier,  observing  this,  has  drawn  a  wrong  conclu-
sion from  it ;  and,  contrary  to  the  assertion  of
Suidas,  will  have  it  that  Plutarch  was  neither  pre-
ceptor to  Triijan,  nor  honoured  with  any  appoint-
ments under  him.  Had  it  occurred  to  him,  that  the
Book  of  Apophthegms  could  not  be  Plutarch's
book,  but  that  it  was  merclv  an  extract  made  from
his  real  works  by  some  industrious  grammarian,  he
■would  not  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  hazard-
ing so  much  against  the  received  opinion  of  his  con-
nexions with  Trajan  ;  neitl^er  would  he  have  found
it  necessary  to  ailov/  so  little  credit  to  his  letter  ad-
dressed  to  that  emperor,  which  we  have  upon
record  *.

*  The  letter  is  as  follows :

Plutarch  to  Trajax.

*  I  AM  sensible,  that  you  sought  not  the  empire.  Your  uatural
modesty  would  not  suffer  you  to  apply  for  a  distinction,  to  which
you  were  always  entitled  by  the  excellence  of  your  manners.  That
modt  .;ty,  however,  makes  j'ou  still  morewortliy  of  those  honours,
•which  you  had  no  ambition  to  solicit.  Should  your  future  govern-
ment prove  in  any  degree  answerable  to  your  former  merit,  I  shall
liavc  reason  to  congratulate  both  your  virtue  and  my  own  good-
fortune  on  this  great  event.  But,  if  otherwise,  you  have  exposed
yourscif  to  danger,  and  me  to  obloquv  :  for  Rome  will  never  en-
dure an  empei(;.-  unworthy  of  her ;  and  the  foults  of  the  scholar
vill  be  imputed  to  the  master.  Seneca  is  rejiroached,  and  his  fame
still  suffers,  for  tlip  vices  of  Nero:  the  reputation  of  Quintilian  is
hurt  by  the  ill  conduct  of  his  scholars  ;  and  even  Socrates  is  ac-
cused of  negligence  in  the  education  of  Alcibiades.  Of3'ou,  how-
ever, I  have  better  hopes,  and  flatter  myself  that  your  administra-
tion will  do  honour  to  your  virtues.  Only  continue  to  be,  what
you  are.     Let  your  government  commence  in  your  own  breast;


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH,  xlvIJ

Neither  shall  we  find  it  any  very  difficult  matter
to  account  for  his  connexion  with  Trajan,  if  we  con-
sider the  manner  in  which  he  lived,  and  the  recep-
tion which  he  met  with,  in  Rome.  During  his  resi-
dence in  that  city,  his  house  was  the  resort  of  the
principal  citizens.  All  that  were  distinguished  by
their  rank,  taste,  learning,  or  politeness,  sought
his  conversation,  and  attended  his  lectures.  The
study  of  the  Greek  language  and  philosophy  was,  at
that  time,  the  greatest  pursuit  of  the  .Roman  nobi-
lity, and  even  the  emperors  honoured  the  most  ce-
lebrated professors  with  their  presence  and  support.
Plutarch  in  his  Treatise  on  Curiosity  has  introduced
a  circumstance,  which  places  the  attention  paid  to
his  lectures  in  a  very  strong  light :  "  It  once  hap-
pened,'* says  he,  "  that  when  I  was  speaking  in
public  at  Rome,  Arulenus  Rusticus,  the  same  whom
Domitian  through  envy  of  his  growing  reputation
subsequently  put  to  death,  was  one  of  my  hearers.
While  I  was  in  the  middle  of  my  discourse,  a  sol-
dier came  in,  and  brought  him  a  letter  from  the
emperor.  Upon  this,  there  was  a  general  silence
throughout  the  audience,  and  I  stopped  to  give  him
time  to  peruse  it :  but  he  would  not  suffer  it ;  nei-
ther did  he  open  the  letter,  till  I  had  finished  my
lecture,  and  the  assembly  was  dispersed."

To  understand  the  importance  of  this  compliment,
it  v/ill  be  necessary  to  consider  the  quality  and  cha-

and  lay  the  foundation  of  it  in  the  command  of  your  passions.  If
you  snake  virtue  the  rule  of  your  conduct,  and  the  end  of  your  ac-
tions, every  thing  will  proceed  in  harmony  and  order.  I  have  ex-
plained to  you  the  spirit  of  those  laws  and  constitutions,  which  wera
established  by  your  predecessors  ;  and  you  have  nothing  to  do,  but
to  carry  them  into  execution.  If  this  should  be  the  case,  I  shall
have  the  glory  of  having  formed  an  emperor  to  virtue ;  but,  if
otherwise,  let  this  letter  remain  a  testimony  with  succeeding  ages,
that  you  did  not  ruin  the  Roman  empire  under  the  shelter  of  the
counsels  or  the  authority  of  Plutarch.'

Why  Dacier  should  think  that  this  letter  is  neither  worthy  of  the
pen,  nor  written  in  the  manner  of  Plutarch,  it  is  not  easy  to  con-
ceive ;  for  it  has  all  the  spirit,  the  manly  freedom,  and  the  senti-
mental turn  of  that  philosopher.


klviii  LIFE  OF  rLUTARCir.

racter  of  the  person,  who  paid  it.     Arulenus  was  one
of  the  chief  men  in  Rome,  distinguished  as  well  bj
the  lustre  of  his  familv,  as  bv  an  honoural)]c  anibi-
tion  and  thirst  of  glory.     He  was  tribune  of  the
people,  when  Xero  caused  Pjrtus  and  Soranus  to  be
ca})itally    condemned    by    a   decree  of  the   senate.
While  Soranus  was   deliberating  with    his    friends,
whether  he  should  attempt  or  give  up  his  defence,
Arulenus  in  his  capacity  of  tribune  had  the  spirit  to
propose  an  opposition  to  the  decree  of  the  senate  ;
and  he  would  iiave  carried  it  into  execution,   had  he
not  been  over-ruled  by   Partus,  who  remonstrated
that  by  such  a  measure  he  would  destroy  himself,
without  the  satisfaction  of  havinsj  served  his  friend.
lie  was  afterward  praetor  under  Vitellius,  whose  in-
terest he  ibllowed  with  tiie  utmost  fidelity,     l^ut  his
spirit  and  magnanimity  do  him  the  highest  honour,
in  that  eulogy  which  he  wrote  upon  PjEtus  and  Mcl-
vidius  Priscus.     His  whole  conduct  was  regulated
by   the  precepts   of  pliilosophy  ;    and   the  respect,
■which  he   showed  to  Plutarch   upon   this  occasion,
was  a  proof  of  his  attachment  to  it.     vSuch  was  the
man,  who  to  the  lecture  of" a  philosopher  postponed
the  letter  of  a  prince.

But  Plutarch  was  not  onlv  treated  with'  general
marks  of  distinction  by  the  superior  people  in  Kome:
he  had  particular,  and  very  respectable  fi-iendships.
iSossius  Scnccio,  Avho  was  four  times  consul  (once
under  ^serva,  and  thrice  under  Trajan),  was  his  most
intimate  friend.  To  him  he  addresses  his  Lives,  ex-
cej)t  that  of  Aratus,  which  is  inscribed  to  Polycrates
of  .Sicyon,  the  grandson  of  Aratus.  With  Senecio
he  not  only  lived  in  the  strictest  friendship  while  he
was  in  Kome,  but  corresponded  with  him  after  he
had  retired  to  Greece.  And  is  it  not  easy  to  believe
that,  through  the  interest  of  this  zealous  and  powerful
friend,  he  might  not  only  be  appointed  tutor  to  Trajan,
but  be  advanced  likewise  to  the  consular  dignity  *  ?

*  Most  probably  of  the  honoravy  kind,  then  in  use.     E.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  xlix

"When  we  consider  Plutarch's  eminendie  in  Rome,  as
a  teacher  of  pliilosophy,  nothing  can  be  more  proba-
ble than  the  former  :  and,  when  we  remember  the
consular  interest  of  Senecio  under  Trajan,  nothing
can  be  more  likely  than  the  latter.

The  honour  of  having  been  preceptor  to  such  a
virtuous  prince  as  Trajan  is  so  important  a  point  in
the  life  of  Plutarch,  that  it  must  not  hastily  be  given
up  *.  Suidas  has  asserted  it :  the  letter  above-quoted,
if  it  be  (as  we  have  no  doubt  of  it's  being)  the  ge-
nuine composition  of  Plutarch,  has  confirmed  it.
Petrarch  has  maintained  it.  Dacier  alone  has  doubt-
ed, or  rather  denied  it.  But  upon  what  evidence
has  he  grounded  his  opinion  ?  Plutarch,  he  says,
was  but  three  or  four  years  older  than  Trajan,  and
therefore  w^as  unfit  to  be  his  preceptor  in  philoso-
phy. Now,  let  us  inquire  into  the  force  of  this  ar-
gument. Trajan  spent  the  early  part  of  his  life  in
arms  ;  Plutarch  in  the  study  of  the  sciences.  When
that  prince  applied  himself  to  literary  pursuits,  he
was  somewhat  advanced  in  life :  Plutarch  must  have
been  more  so.  And  why  a  man  of  science  should
be  an  unfit  preceptor  in  philosophy  to  a  military
man,  though  only  four  years  older,  it  will  surely  be
somewhat  difficult  to  discover.

Dacier,  moreover,  is  reduced  to  a  petilio principJi,
wlien  he  says  that  Plutarch  v^as  only  four  yeai's
older  than  Trajan  :  for  we  have  seen,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  ascertain  the  time  of  Plutarch's  birth  ;
and^  the  date,  which  Dacier  assigns  to  it,  is  purely
conjectural.  We  will  therefore  conclude,  with  those
learned  men  who  have  formerly  allovv-ed  Plutarch
the  honour  of  being  preceptor  to  Trajan,  that  he
certainly  was  so.  There  is  little  doubt,  that  they
grounded  their  assertions   upon  proper  authority ;

*  M.  Ricard  supposes,  as  he  has  scrupulously  detailed  his  ChiEro-
nean  honours,  and  probably  therefore  would  not  have  failed  to
speak  of  such  as  he  had  received  at  Rome,  that  he  might  during  his
abode  in  the  latter  city  have  given  private  lessons  to  Trajan,  either
before  or  after  -his  mounting  the  throne  of  the  world.  E.
VOL.  I.  e


1  LIl  E  OF  PLUTARCH.

and  indeed  the  internal  evidence  arising  from  the
nature  and  effect  of  that  education,  wliich  did  equal
honour  to  the  scholar  and  to  the  master,  comes  in
aid  of  the  argument.

Some  clu'onologcrs  liave  taken  upon  tliem  to  as-
certain the  precipe  time,  when  Plutarch's  fame  was
established  in  Home.  Peter  of  AlexaiKlriu  fixes  it
in  the  thirtccntli  year  of  the  reign  of  Nero,  in  the
consulate  of  Capito  and  Rufus  :  "  Lucian,"  says
he,  "  was  at  this  time  in  higli  reputation  among  the
Romans ;  and  iVIusonius  and  Plutarch  were  well
known."  Eusebius  brings  it  one  year  lower,  and
tells  us  that,  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Nero's  reign,
Musonius  and  Plutarch  were  in  great  vogue.  Rut
these  writers  are  palpably  mistaken.  We  have  seen
that  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Nero,  Plutarch  was  yet
at  school  under  Annnonius  ;  and  it  is  not  very  pro-
bable, that  a  school-boy  should  be  celebrated  as  a
philosopher  in  Rome,  within  a  year  or  two  after*
ward.  Eusebius,  indeed,  contradicts  himself;  for,
on  another  occasion,  he  places  him  in  the  reign  of
Hadrian,  A.  D.  120.  "  In  this  year,"  says  he,
*'  the  pliilosophcrs  Plutarch  of  Chaeronca,  Sextus,
and  Aii'atliobulus  flourished."  Here  he  carries  him
as  much  too  low,  as  he  had  before  placed  him  too
high.  It  is  certain,  that  he  first  attained  celebrity
imdcr  the  reign  of  Vespasian,  and  that  his  philoso-
phicral  fame  was  establisiied  in  the  time  of  Trajan.

It  seems,  that  the  Greek  and  Latin  writers  of  those
times  were  either  little  acquainted  with  each  other's
works,  or  that  there  were  some  literary  jealousies
and  animosities  between  them.  When  Plutarch
flourished,  there  wcic  several  contemporary  writers
of  distinguished  abilities;  Persius,  Lncan,  Silius  Ita-
licus,  Valeiius  Flaccus,  the  younger  Pliny,  Solinus,
Martial,  Quintilian,  and  many  more.  Yet  none  of
those  have  made  the  least  mention  of  him.  Was
this  envy ;  or  was  it  Roman  pride  ?  Possibly,  they
could  not  bear  that  a  Greek  sophist,  a  native  of^such
a  contemptible  town  as  Chasronea,  should  enjoy  the


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH;  H

palm  "of  literary  praise  in  Rome.  It  must  be  ob-
served, at  the  same  time,  that  the  principal  Roman
writers  had  conceived  a  jealousy  of  tlie  Greek  phi-
losophers, v.liich  was  very  prevalent  in  that  age.  Of
this,  we  find  a  strong  testimony  in  the  elder  Fliny  ;
where  speaking  of  Cato  the  Censor's  disapproving
and  dismissing  the  Grecian  orators,  and  of  the
younger  Cato's  bringing  in  triin.'iph  a  sophist  from
Greece,  lie  exclaims  in  terms  that  signified  contempt.
Quanta  morum  commutatio  !

To  be  undistinguished,  however,  by  the  enco-
miums of  contemporary  writers,  was  by  no  means  a
thing  peculiar  to  Plutarch.  It  has  been,  and  still  is,
the  liite  of  superior  genius,  to  be  beheld  either  with
silent  or  abusive  envy.  It  makes  it's  way  like  the
sun,  which  we  look  upon  with  pain,  unless  some-
thing passes  over  him  that  obscures  his  glory.  We
then  view  Vvith  eagerness  the  shadow,  the  cloud,  or
the  spot ;  and  are  pleased  with  what  eclipses  the
brightness,  which  we  otherwise  cannot  bear.

Yet  if  Plutarch,  like  other  great  men,  found
"  Envy  never  conquered  i)ut  by  death,"  his  manes
have  been  appeased  by  the  amplest  atonements.
Among  the  many  *,  that  have  done  honour  to  his
memory,  the  following  eulogiums  deserve  io  be  re-
corded :

Aulus  Gcilius  compliments  him  with  the  highest
distinction  in  science t ;  Taurus  quoted  b}^  Gellius,
calls  him  '  a  man  of  the  most  consummate  learning
and  wisdomt;'  Eusebius  })laces  him  at  the  head  of
the  Greek  philosophers ||  ;  Sardianus,  in  his  Preface
to  the  Lives  of  the  Philosophers,  calls  him  '  the
most  divine  Plutarch,  the  beauty  and  harmony  of

*  Of  these  see  a  very  complete  catalogue  in  Wyttenbach's  Pre-
face above-quoted,  iii.  sect.  1.  Index  scr'tptorum  veteris  ct  medii  csviy
Sec.  I. — XV.  In  this  list,  it  has  been  well  observed,  the  professor
*  gives  a  perfect  specimen  of  the  mode  of  exhibiting  that  kind  of
historical  science,  on  which  we  must  ground  our  belief  of  the
genuineness:  and  authenticity  of  the  ancient  authors.'  (Edinb.  Rev.
ii.  220.)     E.

i   iv.  7.  t  i.  26.  11  J'rsep.  iii.  init.

e  2


Ill"  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

pliilosophy  ;'  and  Petrarch,  in  his  moral  writin2^«!,
frequently  distinguishes  hiin  by  the  title  of  '  the
great  Plutarch.'

Honour  has  been  done  to  liim  likewise  bv  Orii^en,
Himerius  the  Sophist,  Cyrillus,  Tlieodoret,  Suid:i=^,
Photius,  Xiphilinus,  Joannes  Sarisberiensis,  \'\c-
torius,  Lipsius,  and  Agathias,  in  the  e[)igram  wh.ich
may  be  thus  translated  :

This  gmtoful  statue,  Chfcronean  sage,
Dread  Home  erects,  a  tribute  to  thy  page  ;
I^eeause  both  Greece  and  she  it's  toils  have  shared.
Their  chiefs  recorded,  and  their  Hves  coninared.
]jut  thou  thyself  could'st  never  write  thine  own  :
Their  lives  have  parallels,  hut  thine  has  none.

But  this  is  perfectly  extravagant.  AVe  are  miicli
better  pleased  with  the  Greek  verses  of  the  honest
metropolitan,  under  Constantine  Mononiachus.
They  deserve  to  be  translated  :

Lord  of  that  light,  that  living  power  to  save,
\\  hich  her  lost  sons  no  Heathen  Science  nave.
If  aught  of  tliese  thy  mere  y  means  to  spare.
Yield  Plato,  Lord,  yield  Pjlutakcu  to  my  prayer.
Led  by  no  grace,  no  new  conversion  wrought,
They  felt  thine  own  divinity  of  thought.
That  grace  exerted,  spare  the  partial  rod  :
The  last  best  witness,  that  thou  art  their  God  I

Theodore  Gaza,  who  was  a  man  of  considerable
learning,  and  an  em.inent  reviver  of  letters,  had  a
particular  attachment  to  our  biographer.  "When  he
was  asked,  in  case  of  a  general  destruction  of  books,
"  V»' hat  author  he  would  wish  to  save  from  the  ruin  ?'*
Jle  answered,  "  Plutarch."  He  considered  his
historical  and  philosophical  writings,  as  the  most
beneficial  to  society  ;  and,  of  course,  the.  best  sub-
stitute for  all  other  books.

Were  it  necessary  to  produce  farther  suffrages  for
the  merit  of  Plutarch,  it  would  be  sufficient  to  sav,
that  he  has  been  praised  by   Montaigne  *,  by  St.

*  Sec  Essay  xxv.  &c.     To  these  may  be  addud  Ilausseau,  Con-
fess, i.j  and  U-Jver.  du  Prom.  Solit.  iv.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  Jii


111


Evrem Olid,  and  by  Montesquieu,  the  best  critics  and
the  ablest  writers  of  their  time.

After  havinsjT  received  the  most  distinguished
honours  that  a  phik)sopher  could  enjoy,  after  the
god-hke  office  of  teaching  wisdom  and  goodness  to
tlie  metropolis  of  the  world,  after  having  formed  an
emperor  to  virtue,  and  after  beholding  the  effects  of
his  precepts  in  the  happiness  of  human  kind,  Plutarch
retired  to  his  native  country.  The  death  of  his
illustrious  prince  and  pupil,  to  a  man  of  his  sensi-
bility, must  have  rendered  Rome  even  painful :  for,
whatever  influence  philosophy  may  have  on  the  cul-
tivation of  the  mind,  we  find  that  it  has  very  little
power  over  the  interests  of  the  heart.

It  must  have  been  in  the  decline  of  life,  that
Plutarch  returned  to  Chaeronea*.  But,  though  he
withdrew  from  the  busier  scenes  of  the  world,  he
fled  not  to  an  unprofitable  or  inactive  solitude.  In
that  retirement  he  formed  the  great  work,  for  which
he  had  so  long  been  pre]}aring  materials,  his  Lives
of  Illustrious  Men;  a  work  which,  as  Scaliger  says,
noii  soliunfuit  in  manibus  liominum,  at  etiam  humani
generis  mcmoriam  occupavit.

To  recommend  by  enconn'ums  what  has  been
received  with  universal  approbation,  w^ould  be  su-
perfluous. But  to  observe,  where  the  biographer
has  excelled,  and  in  what  he  has  failed  ;  to  make  a

"*  Ruauld  thinks  he  must  have  passed  40 years  (SO — 70)  at  Rome,
to  enable  liiiu  to  acquire  the  Roman  information  displayed  more
fuliv  in  his  Live?,  and  occasionally  in  his  Moral  Works,  his  Roman
Questions,  Szq.  But  this  surely  is  not  very  probable  from  what  he  says
in  the  Life  of  Demosthenes  (see  p.  xlii.)  about  his  wanting  '  leisure
to  learn  the  Latin  language,'  which  under  the  most  urgent  circum-
stances such  a  long  period  must  have  afforded ;  and  as  the  study
of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  Romans,  from  their  connexion
with  Grecian  history,  must  have  formed  part  of  his  education,  ?J.
Dacier  (in  Ricard's  opinion,  much  more  reasonably)  concludes  he
did  not  spend  at  Rome  more  than  two  or  three  and  twenty  years,
and  that  broken  by  occasional  visits  to  Chgeronea.  If  indeed  he  had
returned  till  he  was  70,  as  he  must  then  have  feit  his  hie  drawing  to
a  close,  how  could  he  affect  to  choose  to  live  in  a  small  town  ;  or  liow
flunounce  himself,  in  his  E;  ^pitrSvTspv  TroMrnino',  as  still  abundantly
equal  to  the  fatigues  of  his  active  priesthood  I    E.


liv  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

due  estimate  as  v/ell  of  the  defects,  as  of  the  merits
of  his  work,  may  have  it's  use.

Lipsius  has  observed,  that  he  does  not  write  his-
tory, but  scraps  of  history  ;  non  h'tstoriam,  sed  parti-
culas  historic.  This  is  said  of  his  Lives,  and  in  one
sense  it  is  true.  No  single  Life,  that  he  has  written,
will  afford  a  sufficient  history  of  it's  proper  period  ;
neither  was  it  possible,  that  it  should  do  so.  As  his
plan  comprised  a  number  of  contemporary  Lives,
most  of  v^hich  were  in  public  characters,  the  business
of  their  period  was  to  be  divided  among  them.  The
general  history  of  the  time  was  to  be  tlu'ovvn  into
separate  portions ;  and  those  portions  were  to  be
allotted  to  such  characters,  as  had  the  principal  in-
terest in  the  several  events.

Yet  these  scraps  of  history  thus  divided  and  dis-
persed, when  seen  in  a  collective  form,  make  no  very
imperfect  narrative  of  tiic  times  witliin  their  view.
The  biographer's  attention  to  the  minuter  circum-
stances of  character,  his  disquisitions  on  principles
and  manners,  and  his  political  and  philosophical  dis-
cussions, lead  us  in  an  easy  and  intelligent  manner
to  the  events  which  he  describes.

It  is  not  to  be  denied,  that  his  narratives  are
sometimes  disorderly,  and  too  often  encumbered
with  impertinent  digressions.  By  pursuing  with  too
much  indulgence  the  train  of  ideas,  he  has  frequently
flestroyed  the  order  of  facts,  brought  together  events
that  lay  at  a  distance  from  each  otlier,  called  for-
ward circumstances  to  which  he  should  have  made  a
regular  progress,  and  made  no  other  apology  for
those  idle  excursions,  but  by  telling  us  that  he  is  out
of  the  order  of  time.

Notes,  in  the  time  of  Plutarch,  were  not  in  use.
Had  he  known  the  convenience  of  marginal  writing,
h«  would  certainly  have  thrown  the  greatest  part  of
his  digressions  into  that  form.  They  are,  undoubt-
edly, tedious  and  disgustful;  and  all  we  can  do  to
reconcile  ourselves  to  them  is  to  remember  that,  in
the  first  place,   marginal  writing  was  a  thing  un^


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  Iv

knoAvn  :  and  that  the  benevolent  desire  of  conveying
instruction  was  hi.s  chief  motive  for  introducing
them.  This  appears  from  their  very  nature ;  for
tliey  are,  principally,  disquisitions  in  natural  history
and  philosophy.

In  painting  the  manners  of  men,  Plutarch  is  truly
excellent.  Nothing  can  be  more  clear  than  his
moral  distinctions,  nothing  finer  than  his  delineations
of  the  miiul.

The  spirit  of  philosophical  observation  and  inquiry,
which  when  properly  directed  is  the  great  ornament
and  excellence  of  historical  composition,  Plul^ardi
possessed  in  an  eminent  degree.  His  biographical
writings  teach  philosophy,  at  once,  by  precept  and
by  example.  His  morals  and  his  characters  mutualb
explain  and  give  force  to  each  other.

His  sentiments  of  the  duty  of  a  biographer  wee
peculiarly  just  and  delicate.     This  Mill  appear  frcn
his  strictures  upon   those  historians,   who  wrot/of /
Pliihstus  :  "  It  is  plain,"  he  observes,  "  that  Tini-us
seizes  every  occasion,  from  Philistus'   zejh)us  a^''


herence  to  aibitrary  power,  of  loading  him  with  tl/-

Those  whom  he  irjurecl  a')^^/!
some  degree  excusable,  if  in  their  rescntincM  p,^


keenest  reproaches.


treated  him  with  indignities  after  deatii.  ]iul'\y/A-
ibre  should  his  biographers,  v»'hom  he/na\'cr  i.^y^^.
and  who  have  had  the  benefit  of  his'nrorKs,4:i"ui»  J
him  with  all  the  exaggerations  of  scurrility  in  those
scenes  of  distress,  to  which  Fortune  sometimes  re-
duces the  best  of  men  ?  Ephorus,  on  the  other  hand,
is  no  less  extrava<j:ant  in  his  encomiums  on  Philistus.
He  knows  well  how  to  throw  into  shades  the  foibles
of  the  human  character,  and  to  give  an  air  of  plausi-
bility to  the  most  indefensible  conduct :  but,  with
all  his  eloquence  and  art,  he  cannot  rescue  Philistus
from  the  imputation  of  having  been  the  most  strenu-
ous assertor  of  despotism,  and  the  fondest  follower
and  admirer  of  the  luxury,  tlie  power,  the  magnifi-
cence, and  the  alliance  of  tyrants.  Upon  the  whole,
he  who  neither  defends  the  principles  of  F^hilistus,  nor
12


Ivi


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH,


\


insults  over  his  misfortunes,  will   best  discluirgc  the
duty  of  the  historian*."

There  is  such  a  thing  as  constitutional  religion.
There  is  a  certain  temper  and  frame  of  mind,  na-
turally productive  of  devotion.  There  are  men,
Avho  are  born  with  the  original  principles  of  piety  ;
and  in  this  class  we  need  not  hesitate  to  place
Plutarch.  If  this  disposition  has  sometimes  made
him  too  indulgent  to  superstition,  and  too  attentive
to  the  less  rational  circumstances  of  the  heathen
theology,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  But,  upon
the  whole,  he  had  consistent  and  honourable  notions
pf  the  Supreme  Being.

That  he  believed  the  unity  of  the  Divine  Nature,
,'e  have  already  seen  in  his  observations  on  the
prd  f!  icngraved  on  Apollo's  temple.  The  same
inioDj  too,  is  to  be  found  in  his  Treatise  on  the
^•ssation  of  Oracles  ;  where,  in  the  character  of  a
Pl\|:.onisL  he  argues  against  the  Stoics,  who  denied
hAnlumlitv  of  worlds  :  "  If  there  are  manv  worlds
Liil^\h0i Stoics)  why  then  is  there  only  one  Fate,
le  Providence  to  guide  them;  for  the  Pla-
alloW,  that  there  is  but  one  ?  Why  should
\-{\\ny  Jupiters,  or  gods,  be  necessary  for  the
g^^^Qierntl  of  jiiany  worlds  ?'*  To  this  Plutarch
'•^."^^'JV^here  is  the  necessity  of  supposing
r.idVjy  Jupiters  for  this  plurality  of  worlds  ?  Is  not
one  Excellent  Being,  endued  with  reason  and  in-
telligence, such  as  lie  whom  we  acknowledge  to  be
the  Father  and  Lord  of  all  things,  sufficient  to  direct
and  rule  these  worlds  ?  If  there  were  more  supreme
agents,  their  decrees  might  be  vain,  and  contradic-
tory to  each  other."

But,  though  Plutarch  acknowledged  the  individu-
ality of  the  Supreme  Being,  he  believed  nevertheless
in  the  existence  of  intermediate  beings  of  an  inferior
order,  between  the  divine  and  the  human  nature.
These   beings   he  calls  Genii,    or  Daemons.     It  is


•  Life  of  Dion,  VI.  35.     E.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  M

impossible,  he  thinks,  from  the  general  order  and
principles  of  creation,  that  there  should  be  no  mean
between  the  two  extremes  of  a  mortal  and  immortal
being  ;  that  there  cannot  be  in  nature  so  great  a
vacuum,  without  some  intermediate  species  of  life,
which  miglit  in  some  measure  partake  of  both.  And,
as  we  find  the  connexion  between  soul  and  body  to
be  made  by  means  of  the  animal  spirits,  so  these
daemons  are  intelHgences  between  divinity  and  hu-
manity. Their  nature,  however,  is  beheved  to  be
progressive.  At  iirst  they  are  supposed  to  have
been  virtuous  men,  whose  souls  being  refined  from
the  gross  parts  of  their  former  existence  are  admit-
ted into  the  higher  order  of  Genii ;  and  are  thence
either  raised  to  a  more  exalted  mode  of  ethereal
being,  or  degraded  to  mortal  forms,  according  to
their  merit  or  their  degeneracy.  One  order  of  these
Genii,  he  supposes,  presided  over  oracles;  others
administered  under  the  Supreme  Being  the  affairs
and  the  fortunes  of  men,  supporting  tiie  virtuous,
punishing  the  bad,  and  sometimes  even  communi-
cating with  the  best  and  purest  natures.  Thus  the
Genius  of  Socrates  still  warned  him  of  approaching
danger,  and  taught  him  to  avoid  it.

It  is  this  order  of  beings,  which  tl\e  late  Mr.
Thomson,  who  in  enthusiasm  was  a  Platonist  and
in  benevolence  a  Pythagorean,  has  so  beautifully
described  in  his  Seasons :  and,  as  if  the  good  bard
liad  believed  the  doctrine,  he  pathetically  invokes  a
favourite  spirit,  which  had  lately  forsaken  it's  former
inansion :

And  art  thou,  Stanley,  of  that  sacred  band?
Alas  !  for  us  too  soon !

Such  were  Plutarch's  religious  principles  ;  and  as
a  proof  that  he  thought  them  of  consequence,  he
entered  after  his  retirement  into  a  sacred  character,
and  was  consecrated  priest  of  Apollo.

This  was  not  his  sole  appointment,  when  he  re-
turned to  Cha^ronea.     He  united  the  sacerdotal  with


iviii  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

the  magistratial  cliaracter*,  and  devoted  himself  at
once  to  the  service  of  the  ^ods,  and  to  the  duties  of
society.  He  did  not  think  that  philosophy,  or  the
pursuit  of  letters,  ought  to  exempt  any  man  from
personal  service  in  the  community,  to  which  he  be>
longed  ;  and,  though  his  literary  labours  were  of  the
utmost  importance  to  the  world,  he  sought  no  excuse
in  those,  from  discharging  offices  of  public  trust  in
his  little  city  of  ChtEronea.

It  appears  that  he  passed  through  several  of  these
offices,  and  that  he  was  at  last  appointed  Archon,
or  chief  magistrate  of  the  citv.  Whether  or  not  he
retained  his  superintendency  of  IJlyria  after  the
death  of  Trajan,  we  do  not  certainh-  know  :  but  in
this  humble  spliere,  it  will  be  worth  our  while  to
inquire  in  what  manner  a  philosopher  would  ad-
minister justice.

With  regard  to  the  inferior  offices  that  he  bore,
he  looked  upon  them  in  the  same  light  as  Epami-
nondas  had  done  ;  who,  when  he  was  appointed  to
a  commission  beneath  his  rank,  observed,  "  That  no
*'  office  could  give  dignity  to  him  that  held  it ;  but
*'  that  he,  who  held  it,  might  give  dignity  to  any
"  oPiice."  It  is  not  unentertaining  to  hear  our
philosopher  apologise  for  his  employment,  when  he
discharges  the  office  of  commissioner  of  sewers  and
public  buildings :  "  I  make  no  doubt,"  sa}s  he,
"  that  the  citizens  of  ChaL'ronea  often  smile,  when
they  see  me  employed  in  such  offices  as  these.  Upon
such  occasions,  I  generally  call  to  mind  what  is  said
of  Antisthcnes.  When  he  was  bringing  home  in  his
own  hands  a  dirty  fish  from  the  market,  some  ob-
servers expressed  tlieir  surprise  ;  '  It  is  for  myself
(said  Antisthcnes)  that  I  carry  this  fish.'  On  the
contrary,  when  I  am  rallied  for  measuring  tiles,  or
ior  calculating  a  quantity  of  stones  or  mortar,  I  an-

*  lie  was  elected  Archon,  t>!v  s-wvu.i//9»  u^^v  y.fZ''',  Sympos.  ii.  10.
Of  his  integrity  and  ability  in  disc'narging  his  ofticial  duties  some
judgement  may  be  tbrmtd  from  the  rules  which  lie  lays  down  in  his
n(i?.t,rid.:i  n«f*'.v,-/pxrs  for  the  conduct  of  other  public  fuctionaries.  E.


LIFE  OF  PLUTAllCH.  llx

swer,  tliat  it  is  not  for  inyself  I  do  these  things,  but
for  my  country.  For,  in  all  things  of  this  nature,
^the  public  utility  takes  off  the  disgrace  ;  and,  the
meaner  the  office  you  sustain,  the  greater  is  the
compliment  which  you  pay  to  the  community/*

Plutarch,  in  his  capacity  of  magistrate,  was  inde-
fatigable  in    recommending  unanimity  to  the  citi-
zens.    To  carry  tliis  point  more  effectually,  he  lays
it  down  as  a  first  principle,  that  a  magistrate  should
be  affible  and  easy  of  access  ;  that  his  house  should
be  always  open,  as  a  place  of  refuge  for  those  who
sought  for  justice  ;  and  that  he  should  not  satisfy
himself  merely  with  allotting  certain   hours  of  the
day  to  sit  for  the  despatch  of  business,  but  that  he
sliould  employ  a  part  of  his  time  in  private  negocia-
tions,  in  making  up  domestic  quarrels,  and  reconcil-
ing divided  friends.     This  employment  he  regarded
as  one  of  the  principal  parts  of  his  office,  and  indeed
he  might  properly  consider  it  in  a  political  light ;
for  it  too  frequently  happens,  that  the  most  danger-
ous public  factions  are   at  first  kindled  by  private
misunderstandings.     Thus,  in  one  partof  his  works,
lie  ialls  into  tlie  same  sentiment :  "  As  public  con-
flagrations," he  remarks,  "  do  not  uniformly  begin
in  public  edifices,  but  are  caused  more  frequently  by
some  lamp  neglected  in  a  private  house ;  so,  in  the
administration  of  states,  it  does  not  always  happen
that  the  flame  of  sedition  arises  from  political  dif-
ferences, but  from  private  dis.sensions,  which  running
throuirh  a  lona:  chain  of  connexions  at  length  affect
the  whole  body  of  tlie  people.     For  this  reason,  it  is
one  of  the  principvil  duties  of  a  minister  cif  state,  or
mafiistrate,  to  heal  these  private  animosities,  and  to
prevent  them  from  growing  into  public  divisions."
After  these  observations,  he  mentions  several  states
and   cities,  which  had  owed  their  ruin  to  the  same
little  causes  ;  and  then  adds,  that  we  ought  not  by
any  means  to  be  inattentive  to  the  misunderstandings
of  private  men,  but  apply  to   them  the  most  timely
reme-dies ;  for  by  proper  care,    as   C'ato   observes.


hi  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

Aviiat  is  great  becomes  little,  and  wliat  is  little  is
reduced  to  nothing.  Of  the  truth  of  these  observa-
tions the  annals  of  our  own  country,  we  wish  we  had
no  reason  to  say  of  our  own  times,  have  presented
us  with  many  melancholy  instances.

As  Plutarch  observed  that  it  was  a  fashionable
fault  among  men  of  fortune,  to  refuse  a  proper  re-
spect to  magistrates  of  inferior  rank,  he  endeavoured
to  remove  this  impolitic  evil  as  well  by  precept  as
by  example  :  '*  To  learn  obedience  and  deference
to  the  magistrate,"  says  he,  "  is  one  of  the  first  and
best  principles  of  discipHne  ;  neither  ought  these  in
any  instance  to  be  dispensed  with,  tliongh  that
mafijistrate  should  be  interior  to  us  in  fioure  or  in
fortune.  For  how  absurd  is  it,  if  in  theatrical  ex-
hibitions the  meanest  actor,  that  w-ears  a  momentary
diadem,  shall  receive  liis  due  respect  from  superior
players  ;  and  yet,  in  civil  life,  men  of  higher  power
or  wealth  sliall  withhold  the  deference  due  to  the
magistrate  !  In  this  case  however  they  should  remem-
ber that,  while  they  consult  their  own  importance,
they  detract  from  the  honour  of  the  state.  Private
dignity  ought  always  to  give  place  to  public  autho-
rity ;  as,  in  Sparta,  it  was  usual  for  the  kings  to  rise
in  compliment  to  the  ephori."

With  regard  to  Pliitarch's  political  principles,  it  is
clear  that  he  was,  even  while  at  Rome,  a  repul)lican
in  heart  and  a  friend  to  liberty :  but  this  does  him
no  pecuh"ar  honour.  .Such  privileges  are  the  birth-
right of  mankind  ;  and  they  are  never  parted  with,
but  through  fear  or  favour.  At  Rome,  he  acted
like  a  philosopher  of  the  world.  Qitando  noi  siamo
in  Roma,  no'i  jac'iamo  come  cgl'uio  fauno  in  Roma.
Lie  fotmd  a  constitution,  which  he  had  not  power  to
niter  ;  yet,  though  he  could  not  make  mankind  free,
he  made  them  comparatively  happy,  by  teaching
clemency  to  their  temj)orary  ruler.

At  Chajronea,  we  lind  him  more  openly  avowing
the  principles  of  liberty.     Durifig  his  residence  at
Rome,  he  had  remarked  an  essential  error  in  the
9


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  Ixt

police.  In  all  complaints  and  processes,  however
trifling,  the  people  had  recourse  to  the  first  officers
of  state.  By  such  means,  they  supposed,  their  in-
terest would  be  promoted  ;  but  it  had  a  certain  ten-
dency to  enslave  them  still  more,  and  to  render
tliem  the  tools  and  dependents  of  court-power.  Of
these  measures  the  archon  of  Chaeronea  thus  ex-
presses his  disapprobation :  "  At  the  same  time,"
he  observes,  "  that  we  endeavour  to  render  a  city
obedient  to  it's  magistrates,  we  must  beware  of  re-
ducing it  to  a  condition  too  humiliating.  Those,
who  carry  every  trifle  to  the  cognisance  of  the  su-
preme magistrate,  are  contributing  all  they  can  to
the  servitude  of  their  country."  And  it  is  undoubt-
edlv  true,  that  the  habitual  and  universal  exertion
of  authority  has  a  natural  tendency  to  arbitrary  do-
minion.

We  have  nov/  considered  Plutarch  in  the  light  of
a  philosopher,  a  biographer,  and  a  magistrate  ;'  we
have  entered  into  his  moral,  religious,  and  political
character,  as  well  as  the  information  which  we  could
obtain  would  enable  us.  It  only  remains,  that  we
view  him  in  the  domestic  sphere  of  life ;  that  littla
but  trying  sphere,  where  we  act  wholly  from  our-
selves,' and  assume  no  character,  but  that  which
nature  and  education  have  given  us.

Dacier,  in  entering  upon  this  part  of  Plutarch's
history,  has  made  a  whimsical  observation  :  "  There
are  two  cardinal  points,"  says  he,  "  in  a  man's  life,
which  determine  his  happiness  or  his  misery.  These
are  his  birth,  and  his  marriage.  It  is  in  vain  for  a
man  to  be  born  fortunate,  if  he  be  unfortunate  in
his  marriage."  Hov/  Dacier  could  reconcile  the
astrologers  to  this  new  doctrine,  it  is  not  easy  to
say ;  for  upon  this  principle  a  man  must  at  least
have  two  good  stars,  one  for  his  birth  day,  the  other
for  his  wedding-day  ;  as  it  seems  that  the  influence
of  the  natal  star  could  not  extend  beyond  the  bridal
morn,  but  that  a  man  then  falls  under  a  diflerent^
dominion.


Uii  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.

At  what  time  Plutarcli  entered  into  this  state,  vre
are  not  cjuitc  certain  ;  but  as  it  is  not  probable  tliat
a  man  ot  his  wisdom  would  marrv  at  an  advanced
time  of  life,  and  as  his  wife  was  a  native  of  Cha^-
ronea,  we  may  conclude  that  he  married  before  he
went  to  Rome.  However  that  might  be,  it  appears
that  he  was  fortunate  in  his  choice  ;  for  his  wife  was
not  only  well-born  and  well-bred,  but  a  woman  of
distinguished  sense  and  virtue.  Her  name  was
Timoxena.

Phitarch  appears  to  have  had  at  least  five  children
"by  her,  four  sons  and  a  daughter,  whom,  outofre-
g«,rd  for  her  mother,  he  called  Timoxena.  He  has
given  us  a  proof,  that  he  had  all  the  tenderness  of
an  affectionate  father  for  these  children,  by  record-
ing a  little  instance  of  his  daughter's  natural  beiie-
volcnce  :  "  When  she  was  very  youns:  "  he  intbrms
us,  "  she  would  frequently  beg  of  her  nurse  to  give
the  breast  not  only  to  the  other  children,  but  to  her
babies  nnd  dolls,  which  she  considered  as  her  de-
pendents and  under  her  protection."  Vvlio  does  not
see,  in  this  simple  circumstance,  at  once  the  tbnd-
ness  of  the  parent  and  tlie  benevolence  of  the  ma)i .?

But  the  philosopher  soon  lost  his  little  blossom  of
humanity.  His  Timoxena  died  in  her  infancy  ;  and
if  we  may  judge  from  the  consolatory  letter,  which
he  wrote  to  her  mother  upon  the  occasion,  he  bore
the  loss  as  became  a  pliilosojjher :  "  Consider,"  said
he,  "  that  death  has  deprived  your  Timoxena  only
of  small  enjoyments.  The  things,  which  she  knew,
were  but  of  little  consequence,  and  she  could  be  de-
lighted only  with  trifles."  in  this  letter  we  find  a
portrait  of  his  wife  *,  which  does  her  the  greatest
honour.  Trom  the  testimony  given  by  her  iiusband
it  appears,  that  she  was  far  above  the  general  weak-
ness and  affectation  of  her  sex.  She  had  no  passion
for  the    expensivencss    of  dress,   or   the    parade  of

*  Ifi'a.sr^r.  Dacier  supposes)  the  sketch  given  in  hk  rxfj'.ty.cc  he
taken  from  his  (h)nio!-tic  experience,  hou  hap]iy  he  must  have
been !    h.


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  bdil

public  appearances.  She  thought  every  kmd  of
excess  blameable ;  and  her  ambition  -went  not  be-
yond the  decencies  and  proprieties  of  life.

PUitarch  had  before  this  buried  two  of  his  sons,
his  eldest,  and  a  younger  named  Charon ;  and  it
appears  from  the  above-mentioned  letter  that  the
conduct  of  Timoxena,  on  both  these  events,  was
worthy  the  wife  of  a  philosopher.  She  did  not  dis-
figure herself  by  change  of  apparel,  or  give  way  to
the  extravagance  of  grief,  as  women  in  general  do
upon  such  occasions ;  but  supported  the  dispensa-
tions of  Providence  with  a  solemn  and  rational  sub-
mission, even  when  they  seemed  to  be  most  severe.
She  had  taken  unwearied  pains,  and  undergone  the
severest  sufferings,  to  nurse  her  son  Charon  at  her
own  breast,  at  a  time  when  an  abscess  formed  near
the  part  had  obliged  her  to  undergo  an  incision.
Yet  when  the  child,  reared  with  so  much  tender
pain  and  difficulty,  died,  those  w'ho  went  to  visit  her
on  the  melancholy  occasion  found  her  house  in  no
more  disorder,  than  if  nothing  distressful  had  hap-
pened. She  received  her  friends,  as  Hercules  was
received  by  Admetus ;  who,  the  same  day  that  he
buried  Alceste,  betrayed  not  the  least  confusion  be-
fore his  heroic  guest.

With  a  woman  of  so  much  dignity  of  mind,  and
excellence  of  disposition,  a  man  of  Plutarch's  wis-
dom and  humanity  must  have  been  infinitely  happy :
and  it  appears  indeed  from  those  precepts  of  conju-
gal happiness  and  afiection,  which  he  has  left  us,  that
he  has  drawn  his  observations  from  experience,  and
that  the  rules  which  he  recommended  had  been  pre-
viously exemplified  in  his  own  family.

It  is  said,  that  Plutarch  had  some  misunderstand-
ing with  his  wife's  relations  ;  upon  which  Timoxena,
fearing  that  it  might  afiect  their  union,  had  duty
and  religion  enough  to  go  as  far  as  Mount  Helicon
and  sacrifice  to  Love,  who  had  a  celebrated  temple
there.

He  left  two  sons,  Flutavch  and  Lamprias.     The


hd^


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.


latter  appears  to  have  been  a  philosopher,  and  to
him  we  arc  indebted  tor  a  catalogue  cf  his  father's
writings ;  which  however  one  cannot  look  upon  (as
Mr.  Dryden  says)  without  the  same  emotions,  that
a  merchant  must  teel  in  perusing  a  bill  of  freight,
after  he  has  lost  his  vessel,
extant  are  tliese :


The  writings  no  longer


The  Lives  of<


Herc'dcs,

Hesiod,

Pindar,

Crates  and  Daiphantus,  with  a  Pa-
rallel,

Leunidas,

Aristomenes,

Scipio  Africanus  II.  and  Metellus,

Augustus,

Tiberius,

Caligula,

Claudius,

Nero,

Vitellius,

Epamuiondas  and  Scipio  Africanus  L,
with  a  Parallel.


Four  Books  of  Commentaries  on  Homer.

Four  Books  of  Com.mentaries  on  Hesiod.

Five  Books  to  Empedocles,  on  the  Quintessence.

Five  Books  of  Essays.

Three  Books  of  Fables.

Three  Books  of  Rhetoric.

Three  Books  on  the  Introduction  of  the  Soul.

Two  Books  of  Extracts  from  the  Philosophers.

Three  Books  on  Sense.

Three  Books  on  the  great  Actions  of  Cities.

Two  Books  on  Politics.

An  Essay  on  Opportunity,  to  Theophrastus.

Four  Books  on  the  Obsolete  Farts  of  History.

Two  Books  of  Proverbs.

Eight  Books  on  the  Topics  of  Aristotle,


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.  kv

Three  Books  on  Justice,  to  -Chrysippus,

An  Essay  on  Poetry.

A  Dissertation  on  the  Difference  between   the  Pyr-

rhonists  and  the  Academicians.
A  Treatise  to  prove,  that  there  was  but  one  xlcade-

my  of  Plato,

Aulas  Gellius  has  taken  a  long  story  from  Taurus,
about  Plutarch's  method  of  correcting  a  slave,  in
which  there  is  nothing  more  than  this,  that  he
punished  him  like  a  philosopher,  and  gave  him  .  his
discipline  without  beino;  out  of  temper.

Plutarch  had  a  nephew  named  Sextus,  w^ho  bore
a  considerable  reputation  in  the  world  of  letters,
and  taught  the  Greek  language  and  learning  to
Marcus  Antoninus.  The  character  w'hich  that  phi-
losopher has  given  him,  in  his  First  Book  of  Re-
flexions, may  with  great  propriety  be  applied  to  his
uncle  :  "  Sextus,  by  his  example,  taught  me  mild-
ness and  humanity ;  to  govern  my  house,  like  a
good  father  of  a  family ;  to  fall  into  an  easy  and
unaffected  gravity  of  manners  ;  to  live  agreeably
to  nature  ;  to  lind  out  the  art  of  discovering,  and
preventing,  the  wants  of  my  friends  ;  to  connive  at
the  noisy  follies  of  the  ignorant  and  impertinent;
and  to  comply  with  the  understandings  and  the
humours  of  men."

One  of  the  rewards  of  philosophy  is  long  life,
and  this  it  is  clear  that  Plutarch  enjoyed ;  but  of  the
time,  or  the  circumstances,  of  his  death  we  have  no
satisfactorv  account.


VOL.    I,


TABLES


OF


TIME,  COINS,  WEIGHTS,  MEASURES,  &e.


The  Grecian  Months,
With  their  Engh'sh  Equivalents,  from  Potter's  Archaeol.  Gr.  II.  xxvi.

N.  B.     M.  Petau,  in  his  Doctrina  Temporum,  1.  9.  places  them
nearly  three  months  farther  downward.

It  should  be  noted,  that  they  consisted  of  30  and  29  days  alter-
nately.

Hecatombseon  ■=.  the  latter  half  of  June,  and  the  first  half  of  July.

Metageitnion July, Aug.

Boedromion August,      Sep.

Ma^macterion    September,    Oct.

Pyanepsion    October,    Nov.

Anthesterion* November,     Dec.

Poseideon December,     Jan.

Gamelion January, Feb.

Elaphebolion February, March.

Munychion    March, April.

Thargelion April,     May.

Scirrophorion    May,      June.


*  This  month  is  placed  after  Gamelion  by  Petau  and  Scaliger.

For  the  modes  of  computing  the  da^a  of  each  month,  see  Potter,  ib.


f  2


ixviii

The  Roman  Calendar.
(Sec  Adam's  Rom.  Antiq.  pp.  330,  331.)


Oa\s
of  the
Month

April,  June,
Sept.  Nov.

Jan.  Au!»"st,
Decemljcr.

March,  Mav,
July,  October.

February,

1

Kalendac.

Kalendac,

Kalenda:.

Kalenda;.

2

;__•     t  iionai)

iv.

vi.

iv.

3

iii.

iii.

V.

iii.

4

Pridie  Xon.

Pridie  Non.

iv.

Pridie  Non.

5

Nonaj.

Non£E.

iii.

Nona?.

6

Trill       V  («c  rfic  ante

viii.

Pridie  Non.

viii.

7

vii.

vii.

Nona;.

vii.

8

vi.

vi.

viii.

vi.

9

V.

v.

vii.

V.

10

iv.

iv.

vi.

iv.

11

iii.

iii.

V.

iii.

12

Pridie  Id.

Pridie  Id.

iv.

Pridie  Id,

13

Idus.

Idus.

iii.

Idus.

14.

...      C      (sc-  die

t  mens.seq)

xix.

Pridie  Id.

xvi.

15

xvii.

xviii.

Idus.

XV.

16

xvi.

xvii.

xvii.

xiv.

17

XV.

xvi.

xvi.

xiii.

18

xiv.

XV.

XV.

xii.

19

xiri.

xiv.

xiv.

xi.

20

xii.

xiii.

xiii.

X.

21

xi.

xii.

xii.

ix.

22

X.

xi.

xi.

viii.

23

ix.

X.

X.

vii.

24.

viii.

ix.

ix.

vi.*

25

vii.

viii.

viii.

v.

2G

vi.

vii.

vii.

iv.

27

V.

vi.

vi.

iii.

28

iv.

V.

V.

Pridie  Kal.

29

iii.

iv.

iv.

SO

Pridie  Kal.  mens*  scq.

iii.

iii.

31

Pridie  Kal.

Pridie  Kal.

*  Tliis  was  rcdui)1icated  in  ."v  leap-voar,  both  the  '2l!h  and  2")th  days  of
February  being  dcnonninaled  se.ito  Kakndas  Marlias,  wlirnce  the  name
*  Bissextile.'


Ixis


The  Values  and  Proportions  of  Grecian  Coins.


Lep(on


7

Chalcus

14

2

28

4

36

8

336

48

33,600

4,800

'2,016,000

'288,000

I.
0

0

0  0  -JaT

0

0

0  0  li

0

0

oi  -^V

Dichalcus

Hcmiobolus      0  0  0

Obolus*    0  0  1

Drachma    0  0  7

3  4  7


24


2,S00


12


144,000


1,200


600


72,000  36,600


100


Mina.


*    r


6,000160  Talentum  193    13      0


*  The  values  of  the  ff(0&o?«s,  ietrobolns,  didfacJimon  (which,  as  well  as  the
drachma,  was  generally  of  silver),  telradrndimon,  &c.  are  easily  ascertained
fro:n  their  etymology.  See  Harwood's  Grecian  Antiquities,  pp.  439 — 461  ;
and  for  the  Roman  modes  of  computation  of  money,  and  of  interest  (as  ajiso  of
weights,  and  measures),  see  Adam's  Roman  Antiquities,  pp.  493  —  500,  where-
are  given  many  curious  particulars  of  individual  opulence  j  and  also  the  accu-
rate Tables  annexed  to  Ainsworth's  Latin   Dictionary.


The  Values  and  Proportions  of  Roman  Coins.

h    s.    d.  q.


0     0     0  0     7  7  V


n    n    (\  X    5  5


Teruncius,  or  Quadrans  f

2       Sembella         ,

Libclla,  orAs        0     0    Q  %  t\

Sestertius,  LLS.+    0    0     1   3    |


10


20


40


1,000


10


20


10


300


10,000    5,000


250


2,500


Quinarius,  or  Victoriatus  ..    0     0     3  |    ^


100


1,000


50


500


0     0     7  I


Denarius

Stater  0  16     la


25


230


10    Sestertium


8     1     5^


T  The  smallest  of  the  brass  coins  after  the  reduction  of  the  ns,  as  the  sester-
tius was  of  the  silver  ones.  The  as,  at  tirst  libralis{or  a  pound  weight),  after  it's
successive  reductions  to  2  oz.,  1  oz.,  and  |  oz.,  was  still  called  libclla.  It  was
applied  to  any  thing  divided  into  twelve  parts ;  an  inheritance,  an  acre,  li-
quid measure,  interest  of  money,  &c.  Hence,  probably,  our  word  'aee'or
unit.  The  quinarius  was  called  victoriatus,  from  the  image  of  Victory  some-
limes  impressed  upon  it.

I  Meaning  libclla,  libella,  et  semis,  and  often  marked  IIS.

II  The  comparative  values  of  gold  and  silver  have  in  all  states  occasionally
varied.  As  the  stater,  of  gold,  weighed  generally  double  tiie  denarius,  they  are
here  stated  (below  the  present  proportion)  gold  :  silver  ::  25  :  2.  The  staler
Mureus  of  the  Greeks  is  estimated  at  the  same  value.  The  stater  Saricus  and
the  stater  Crcesi  were  double.


]xx


Grecian  and  Roman  Weights  reduced  to  English  Troy  Weight.


Lentcs


12


72


144


57  G


6,9  J  2


Siliquae


lObolus


18


3fi


12


Drachma

-?       Sicilicus


144


48


1,728


376


96


0  0  0  0  ^8,*j-

0  0  0  3  i' s

0  0  0  9  -^^

0  0  2  6  tV

0  0  4  13  ^


4     Uncia     0     0  18     5      i


48


12


Libra*     0  10  18  13     -^


*  Originally  an  as.  The  mina  Attica  communis  exceeds  this,
according  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot,  only  by -2-V»  ^Dfl  weighs  ... .         Oil     7   16  y

The  Takntum  Jllintvi  commune,    -  60  M'ww, 56   1 1      0   17    '

Alexandria: 104     0  1'.)   14

Ainswortli,  indeed,  states  the  JItic  weights  as  i  heavier  than  the  corre-
sponding Roman  ones.

N.  B.  Hftween  the  obolus  and  the  drachma  -nas  interposed  the  scrip tulum  zz
double  the  former  ;  between  the  drachma  and  the  siciUcus  the  sexlula  =  i  scrij}-
tiila;  and  beUveen  the  siciUcus  and  the  uncia  the  duclla  iz:  one  third  of  the  lat-
ter. There  were  also  other  subdivisions  of  Hei<;hts,  the  scmuncia,  /lonisescla,
i,  e.  semisextula,  &c.   But  they  are  omitted  in  the  Table,  for  the  sake  of  brevity.

The  weights  of  the  Grecian  coins  are  computed,

The  Drachma  at  0  0     2     6  ^  j

The  Mina  (lOO^r) 1  1     0

The  Talent  (63m.) 6a  0  12


4      1  4

5    '^


Ixxi


Grecian  Measures  of  Length.


Dactyl  us


4

Doron

12

3

16

4

24

6

96

24

9,600

2,400

76,800

19,200

Spithame
Pes


IJ


800


6,400


H


600


4,800


Cubitus,  OTTrnxyi*  ....
Passus,  or  opytca
Stadium  . .


400


;^,'200


100


800


yds.  ft.  inch:    dec.
0    0    0     .7554  ' '

I  6

0  0  3  .0218    ^

0  0  9  .0656     i

0  10  .0875

0  1  6  .13125

2  0  0  .525

201  1  4  .5

Milion    1611  2  0


*  Between  the  doronzwiS.  the  spHhmne  was  interposed  the  Uchas  =  ten,  and
the  ocMoJorojj  =  eleven  dactyli.  Between  the  pes  likewise  and  the  ttkx'j-,  ***"
larger  cubit,  occurred  the  Truyi^ri  =  threc-fourtlis,  and  tlie7ry_f-a)v;n  five-sixths  of
the  TTnyuc.

The  Greeks  and  Persians  called  thirty  itadia  aparasunga,  and  two parasang^
a  scha;nos.


Roman  Measures  of  Length.


Digitus  transvcrsus

Uncia,  or  Pollcx

Paluuis  minor


1^


16


24


80


10,000


80,000


3


12


18


60


Pes


li


20


7,500


00,000


2,500


20,000


625


5,000


Cubitus


3k


4I65


3,333i


Passus


125


1,OUO


Stadium


yds.  ft.
0     0

inch.
0

dec.
.725  -4

0     0

0

.907

0     0

2

.901

0     0

11

.601

0     1

5

.406

I    ]

10

.02

201     I

4

.5

8  Milliare    1611     2


Ixxii


Grecian  Measures  of  Capacity  for  things   Liquid,   reduced  to

English  Wine-Measure.


n


10


60


120


720


8,640


-1


48


12


24


288


144


3,456     1,7  28


6


12


72


12


864


144


6


72


12


gall,  pints-  111.  inch.
0      '      0.0336

[  iff


Cochlearion

Mvsfion*     0  TV     O.OSOJ,!

C'oiiche

(^yathiis

Cot-sle

Xestes

ChoLS


0.356  {  ^


Meli'efcs


0  ^'.f     0.178  l]-

0   ,'

0     ^      2.141  ^
0     1      4.283

0     6  25.698

10    2  iy.63fi


*  Between  llio  csclilearion  and  (he  vi;i<itron  was  interposed  the  cJienie,  equal
to  two  cocldearia:  and  between  the  cyathus  and  coh/le  (the  former  of  whicii  Dr.
Langhnrue,  by  mistake,  represents  as  nearly  triple,  instead  of  onc-si.xlh  of  the
latter)  the  oxyhnpltoii,  vvliich  was  equal  to  fonr  cofijltr.  Ur.  L.  likewise,  in
his  mingled  Table  of  Greek  and  Roman  measures  of  lengtii,  has  stated  tiic
English  pace  there  used  at  five  feet ;  M'hcreas,  in  what  relates  to  tlie  Grecian
part,  it  must  be  estimated  at  six.

Roman  Measures  of  Capacity  for  things  Liquid,  reduced  ta  English

Wine-Measure.


Ligula


24


48


Cyathus*

Hemina


12


288


72


1,152     288


2,304      576


48,080  11,520


12


48


96


1 ,920


Sextarius      ....

Concius


6


24


48


960


Urna


160      40


Amphora,  ov>
yiiadr:intal    ■>


20    Culeus


£ii!l.  pints  sol.  ivch.

0      J_      0.117    TT

0    r-^    0.469  f


0


i      2.818


0  1      5.636

0-  7      4.942

3  4i      5.33

7  1      10.66

143  3  11.095


*  Between  the  cyalhus  and  the  hemina  were  interposed  the  acetabulum  rz  oue-
fourth,  and  {he  quart arius  ~  one  half  the  latter :  so  called,  because  ^  se.ria-
rius  ;  as  sextarius,  because  ±  coiigius.  Cailus,  coiigiarius,  and  dolium  denote  uo
certain  measure.  The  Romans  divided  i\ic  sextarius,  as  well  as  the  libra,  into
twelve  equvil  parts,  called  cyatha.  Hence  their  caliccs  were  denominated
texlantes,  quadrantes,  or  trientcs,  according  to  the  number  of  ci/atfii  which  they
contained.


Ixxiii


Grecian  Measures  of  Capacity  for  things  Dry,  reduced  to  English

Corn- Measure.


Cochlearion

pcis,  gal.  pts.  sol.  inch.
.000    0.276  J

s

10

Cyathu

,000    2763    i

15

H

Oxvbaphon

.000     4.144     1

60

6

4

Cotjle

.     0    0    0  16  579

ISO

12

8

2

Xestes

.     0    0     0  S3  15S

ISO

18

12

3

H

Chcenix

..001   15.705     1

8,640

864

5T6

144

12

48

Mediuiniis .

.406    3.501

Roman  Measures  of  Capacity  for  things  Dry,  reduced  to  English

Corn-Measure.


pcki,  gal.  pts.  sol.  inth.


Ligula

0
0
0
0
0
0

1

0
0
0
0
0

I

0

1
45-

1

1

0
0

O.OI

4

Cyathu

s

0.04

6

I^

Acetabulum

0  06

I

24

6

4

Heminj

0  24

48

12

8

2

Sextari

us  1  ........ ...

0  48

384

96

64

16

8

Semimodius. ...

3.84

768

192

128

32

16

2        Modius..

7.68

The  Grecian  square  measures  were  the  pkthron,  of  doubtful  value  ;  and  it's
half,  called  the  aroura.

sq.Jeet.
*^*  The  Jugerum,  or  acre,   of  the  Romans  contained  240  feet  in

length,  and  140  in  breadth  ;    in  all      .,..         28.800

The  actus  quadratus,  called  also  actus  major  or  semis,  con-
tained an  area  of  120  feet  square,  or     14.400

The  actus  minimus,  called  also  sextans        4.800

The  tifwifl,  called  also  5«scimcia     S.&OO


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE.


before   Year  of  the
Ciinst.   worUl.
(B.C.)    (A.  M.)

23i8


1656


224-7  1757
218SJ1816

2089!  191 5

20591  ig-l-o


>  The  creation  of  the   world,  according  to    the    Hebrew
te.xt  *.
The   universal  deluge;  4-27  years   after  which,  Abram

was  called.
The  tower  of  Babel  built.

The  kingdom  of  Egypt  founded  by  Mizraim,  which  lasts
till  Cainbyscs,  B.  €.  n'lo.

SiCYON      founded,     which      lasts     till


B.C.  10S9.


1921:2083


r


1856
1764-


21 4S
2240


Assyria    founded,    which     lasts     till

Sardanapalus'  death,  B.  C.  820.

N.  B.     Seiniramis  dies,  B.  C.  1965.
Abram  called,  a?t.  75.     Here  commences  the  *  430  years

of  sojourning  f .'
The  kingdom  of  Argos  founded  by  Inachus.
The  deluge  of  Ogyges,  which  desolates  Attica  for  20S

years,  till  Cecrops'  arrival.


•  By  the  LXX.  it  is  placed  5872,  and  by  the  Samaritan  version  4700  year*
B.C.

+  fial.  ill  17.,  Exod.  xii.  AO.,  liebr.  A'oio  the  sojourning  of  the  children  of
Israel,  uiho  dwill  in  Egypt,  teas  4.'30  ijears.  In  the  latttr  ))a-sa!;e,  however,  arr
found  some  diflicultics  :  bfcau-e  not  only  the  children  of  Israel  did  not  sojourn
'  ill  liicypt  '  430jears;  bur,  to  complete  that  interval,  it  is  necessary  to  in-
clude tlie  previous  sojournins;  in  Canaan  of  Israel's  children,  of  I-.rael  himself,
of  Isaac  his  father,  and  in  part  of  Abraham  his  £;randtather.  The  LXX.  clears
up  the  matter,  by  reading  (in  addition  to  the  Hebrew  text)  cai  iv  yr\  Vavaav  aijioi
x:ii  0.  7.-alt|£c  at^'ajv ;  and  though  the  last  five  words  do  not  occur  in  cardinal
Carafa's  edition  1j87,  they  exist  in  the  l*olygIotts  of  C'omplntum  and  An-
twerp, ktc.  as  well  ;is  in  a  great  inimber  of  versions  and  jMSS.,  and  are  sub-tan-
tiaiej  by  all  the  Samaritan  rea(lin;^s.  The  sujonrning  in  l"/?>pt  in  fact,  dated
from  the  time  of  Israel's  arrival  in  that  country,  was  only  '-'15  years  :  but  their
f;itlieis  had  previously  siijourned  for  the  same  uumber  of  \carb  in  Canaan  after
the  cr.llins;  of  Abram.


CHRONOLOGICAL    TABLE.


3xxv


tb.  c.  a.  m.
1582  2422

1556


244-8


1531  2473
1506  2498


1503
1495
1493


1491
1485


2501
2509
2511


2513
2519


1451  2553
1406i2


1383


1356


2621


2648


The  Arundel  marbles  date  from  this  period,  and  place

here  the  coining  of  Cecrops  *.
Cecrops  I.  arrives  in   Attica  from  Sai's  in  Egypt,  and

reigns  50  years.
Moses  flies  into  Midian,  aet.  40.
Cranausf  succeeds  Cecrops.    In  his  reign  the  Areopagus

is  first  mentioned.
The  deluge  of  Deucalion,  in  Thessaly.
The  Panathenaea  first  celebrated  at  Athens.
Cadmus  introduces  the  Phoenician  letters  into  Greece,

and    builds   the     Cadmea,   afterward    the   citadel   of

Thebes.
The  children  of  Israel  leave  Egypt.
Danavis  is  driven  from  Egypt  by  his  brother  .i^igyptus

(called  also   Rameses,  and   Sesostris  the  Great)  and

arrives   in    Greece   in  his   jTsur/jKovre^e?,  or   fifty-oared

vessel.     Ten  years  afterward,  he  seizes  the  kingdom

of  Argos.
Moses  dies,  ast.  120,  and  is  succeeded  by  Joshua.
Minos  I.  gives  laws  to  the  Cretans,  and  acquires  a  great

maritime  power :[:.
Ceres  visits  Attica,  teaches  the  Athenians  to  sow  corn,

and   sends   her   son   Triptolemus  to    Eleusis  and  the

rest  of  Greece.
The  Eleusinian  Mysteries  instituted  by  Eumolpus,  son

of  Musseus.


*  The  dates  of  tlsese  marl)le:s   uniformly  precede  those  adojstcd  by   arcU-
bish<ip  Usher  by  about  26  years.

+   Between  Craiiaiib  and  Theseus,  the  kings  of  Aitica  were
B.C.

Araphictyon,  son   of  Deucalion,   wlio    married   Cranaiis'  daii<;!iter,  de-
throned iiis  father  in-law,  on  Deucalion's  death  (15.  t".  1J96),  reigned
at  Thermopylae,  and  e«tal)lished  the  Amphietyonie  council.
r.richthonius,   who  dispossessed  Amphictyon  of  the  crown.
Pandion  1.
Krechtheiis.
C'l'crops  I  i.
Pandion  ( J.,  and
/Enpus,  the  father  of  Theseus.
X  After  him  the  powers,  successively  masters  of  the  Mediterranean,  were
B.  C.

)  179     Tiie  Lvdians,
1058     The  Pelasaians,
1000     The  Tiiracians,
916     The  Rhodians,
893     The  Phrygians,
8fi8     The  Cypriots,
826     The  P'hccnicians,
787     The  .Egyptians,
753     The  IMnesians,
734     The  Carians,  and
676    The  Lesbians.


1497


1-187
M37
1397
13-J7
1307
1283


Ixxvi


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


9.C.    A.  M.

1326


A.   M.

'2678lThe  Isthmian  frames    instituted    by  Sisyplii
Corinth  ••     About  this  time  Pelops,  son  o


1263


274-1


ihu?!,   king    of


12S1

1231'
1225
1222


- ps,  son  of  Tantalus,

comes  into  Peloponnesus,  and  Orpheus  and  Linus  are
supposed  to  hiivc  flourished.
The   Argonautic    expedition   under  Jason,   to   Colchis :
TiiKsEUs  one  of  the  ])arty.     The  Pythian  games  tirst
celebrated  by  Adrastus,  king  of  Argos.

I.  THESEUS

relieves  the  Athenians  from  the  tribute  imposed  upon
tliem  by  Minos  II.,  king  of    Crete,   and   patron   of
Dccdalus,  for  the  mnrther  of  his  son  Antbogeus.
2770; collects  the  inhabitants  of  the  twelve  villages  of


2753


I     Attica  into  one  city,
2779  The  war  of  the  Seven  Captains  against  Thebes.


The


Ncmeari  games  instituted.


27S2  The  OJj/mpic  games,  which  are  said  to  have  been  insti-
!     tuted  by  the  Idyci  Dactyli  in  Elis  13.  C.  1-153,  revived
I     by  Hercules.
1213  2791  jThe  rape  of  Helen  by  Theseus.

1205'2799Mne.stheus  dethrones  Theseus,   and  drives  him  out  of
{     Attica,  which  is  recovered  however  23  years  afterward
I     by  his  son  Demophon.
lIS8i28I6i/<7'/'/''«  j^'dges  Israel.      Sanchoninthoy  the  Phceniciaii

[         I     historian,  flourishes  about  this  time,
l!84-2S2()lTroy  is  taken.
1124'2S80The  .^ohan  colonies  migrate,  SO  years  before  those  of

j  Ionia.

111612888  Samuel  jud<:es  Israel.
1104- 2900  Tiie  Heraclidte  return  into  Peloponnesus.
107o'2934  Codrus,  the  last  king  of  Athens,  devotes  himself  for  liis
i         I     country.     Here  begin  the  Archons  f .

»  TliPsP  };ainos  were  snliseqiiently  HMiewed  by  Thcseus,  B.  C.  12.'>4,.ind
!if:er  a  second  ii»tormib>i<)n,  B.  C.  b62,  upon  every  secoud  ye.ir.  The  Pythian
fames  were  restored  Jit  Ueiphi  every  fourlli  year,  by  llie  Aiiipliictyons,  li,  C.
5i91.  Ttie  Tsemian  jrames  were  revived,  eveiy  second  year,  IJ.  C.  3GvS  :  and
tlie  O'^mp^iV  games  Vieie  re-appoinled  ev>Ty  fourlli  vear  b\  Ji)!iiliiv,  Lvcurfjus.
atid  L'leostlienes,  15.  C.  SSJ,  Ihougli  llio  epoch  of  tlie  Olympiads  took  place  108
years  ai'terward.

T   After  Co(lru>,  perpetnal  .irchon-;   (of  wliotn  his  sod  ?.leiIoa  was  llie  first)
filled  Athens  for  316  years;  then
E.  C.
T  j4     Decennial  archons,  for  70  years ;  and,  finally,

'Tiie  first  called  '  the  Archon'  xaT  6?«;<;>i',  or  Etti-
luKcr,  giving  his  name  to  the  year  :
The  second rj.e-.^ior,  or  king,  presiding

-„,     X--  1         I         ;'       over  the  sacred  riles:

C8l     Aine   annual  archon:- <  r,,,      ,,  .    ,

j  i  tie  tiiirtl ncAE_M.aj;^:c,  or  secretary  at

I       v\ar,  and

1  Tiie  olhersix  0£<r,uc&eTa(,  regulators  of  the  public

I     decrees.     See  p.  244.,  not.  (39.)


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE.


B.  C.

1055

1004

975

971

944


926

907


A.  \t

2919
3000

3029

3033

3060


3078
3097


896  3108


884
869


820


3120
3135


3184


Saul  slain,  and  David  reigns  at  Hebron,  sel.  30.

The  temple,  after  eight  years  spent  in  it''s  bidlding^  dedi^

anted  hij  Solomon.
Israel  (or  the   Ten   Tribes)  separate  from  Judah  (and

Beiijamin.)
Sesac,  king  of  Egypt,  tales  Jerusalem,  and  plunders  tlie

temple,  lie.
Hesiod  flourishes,  according  to  tlie  Marbles,

III.  LYCURGUS
is  born.

Homer  flourishes,  according  to  the  Marbles.

Elijah,  or  Ellas,  taken  up  i>ito  lieaven.

Lycurgus  establishes  his  code  of  laws  at  Lacedfcmo^u

Dido  builds,  or  enlarges  Carthage:  and  Phidon  seizes
the  government  of  Argos,  invents  weights  and  mea-
sures, and  first  coins  silver  mone)'  at  j^gina.

Nineveli  taken  by  Arbaces  and  Belesis  (or  Baladan),  who
divide   the    Assyrian  empire,    the    former    receivia^g

,     Media,  and  the  latter  Babylon  "'.


*
lie


Tlic  subrlivision  of  tire  old  Assyrian  empire  was


Media
Arbaces,  &c.


Jiab'jlun
Belesis


Assyria  II.


<7     ...    Pul,  or  Niniis


Tiglath  Pileser


i'47 Nabonassar     (whose

aE>ra  is  used  by
Ptolemy),  &c.  &e.
till  Babylon  is
taten  bv  Esarhad-
doii  B.  C.  6S0.

"  tilfi^  S;imn*piS
U.  C.  7il,  lei.,t>
Isntl    with    T<j^

.  bit    captive,   anfl

707 Salinancser  J  coi.mjses   Sum.-

"" '^   ria      with       Ctr-

thites,  to    v,h«»m
Uraelitish  prk-srs
S've      only      tt>e
_  ,        .,      •Pentateuch.

712 Sennacherib

709     4 Esarhaddon    yjJ-f'.WoretgT.s^at

&c.  &c.  to

COG Nebuchadnez.  J  "'"'""'  '"*


Persia
Cyrus.

becomes  king  of  Mrdia.

■ takes  fivdia,  and

Bnbylon.

— -~ —  reisrs  over  all  A^ia,  and


Media

559

Iv.  2.

550

Ivii.  3.

548

Iviii.  I.

5.S8

Ix.  3.

5.96

Ixi.  1.

5'29

Ixii.  4.

5vl

Ixiv.  4.

485

Ixxiii.  4.

444:

lAXiA,   1.

iSS!(e.?  an  edict  for  tlie  mlHtn


of  the  Jews,  and  the  re-iuihiing  of  the  tem^k.
Carribyses.

Dai  ins  L  the  son  of  Ilj'staspes.
Xerxes  \.  (the  Great.)
^Vrtaxerxe-i  L  (Longimanns.)


Ixxviif


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE,


B.  C.    A.  M.

Sll'!3190The  kingdom  of  jMacedon  founded  by  Caranus,  which
lasts  till  the  battle  of  Pydna  B.  C.  168.
Jonah  tlic  prophet*.


800  320-1


797i3207  The  kingdom  of  Lydia  founded,  which  lasts  till  B.  C.


I


;ks.


779'3^25  Kings    superseded    at   Corinth   by    annual   magistrates,.
j         I     called  Prytanes.


B.C.

77fi|

760V.  1.


753

750


Olymp.    Year  of  Rome.
A.  U.C.

' The  epoch  of  the  Olympiads.

Theoponipus,    king  of  Lacedaimon,  introduces
five  ephori  into  the  government.

II.  ROMULUS

vi.  4.  1        builds  Rome,  according  to  V^arro,  according

to  Cato,  B.  C.  752  f.

vii.  3.  4    The  'Rape  of  the   Sabines,'  three  years  after

which  (at  the  epoch  of  Nabonassar)  Tatius,

their  prince,  is  associated  with  Romulus  in

the  united  empire.

7431  i  X  2.  11    The  first  Messenian  War  |,  which  lasts  nineteen

years,  ends  by  the  Lacedaemonians  taking
ithome.  About  this  time  (B.  C.  732.)  Sy-
racuse, and  (B.  C.  703.)  Corcyra  founded  by

Peraitt
Xerxes  IT.
Darius  II.  (Nothiis.)
Artaxerxos  II.  (Mnemon.)

III.  (Ochu=.)

Ar=cs

D.ariiis  III.  (Codomannus.)

■ . —  conquered  by  Alexander  the  Great.

*  The  dates  of  the  other  prophets  are
B.C.
790     Amoe.

Hosea,  died  about  721.

Nalmtn.

Jiaiiih,  sawn  asunder  by  order  of  Manasseh  abont  B,  C.  fi96,

Micah.

llabakkuk.

Jeremiah,  died  abont  B.  C.  577,  and  Joel  (Calmct)  ?

/cphaiiiaii.

Kzckie.l,  and  Obadiah  ?

Daniel.


B.C.

Media

It'y

Ixxxviii.  4

42.}

Ixxxix,  2.

401

xciv.  1.

.•?38

cv.  3.

3:i7

ex.  4.

3.1.5

cxi.  2.

331

<xii.  2.

T85
7.)S
7.57
754
731
6'il
626
593
558
328
527
436
+


Haggai.


Zechariah.
Rlalachi.

Sir  Isaac  Newton's  theory,  which  places  the  foundation  of  Rome  B.  C.
627,  would  completely  unhino;e  the  established  clironolocry.  Beside.s,  after  the
instances  of  Louis  XIV.  and  W.,  whose  two  reigns  cover  an  interval  of  132
ye.irs,  how  can  any  oneari^ue  securely  upon  averages  of  successions  ?

\  Ari>todeinu»  «as  the  .Mc.^senian  general.  Tiicir  second  war  under  Aristo-
inene^,  with  the  Lacedremonians  umlcr  TyrtiEus,  began  B.  C.  685,  and  ended
in  the  fourteenth  year  by  tiie  Lacedaemonians  taking  Ira,  and  expelling  their
enemies  from  Peloponnesus.     The  third  began  B.  C.  465,  and  lasted  ten  years.

12


CHRONOLOGICiL   TABLE.


ixxix


P.C.     Olymp.       A.U.C.


716

715
680


672
659


623
600


594-


xvi.  1.

xxiii.  3.


xxvii.  1.
XXX.  2.


xxxix.  2.

xlv.  1,


xtvi.  3.


S621iv.  3.
560  Iv,  1.

539  Ix.  2.

535.1xi.  2.


38

39
68


82
95


131
154


160!


Corinthian  colonies  ,-  and  (B.  C.  707.)  Taren-
tum  by  the  Paitlienians  from  Lacedasmon,

*

Romulus  dies,  and  after  an
year  is  succeeded  by


interregnum  of  a


192
191

215

219


IV.  NUMA*.

About  this  time  Archilochus  and  Alcmaa
flourish ;  and  Tei-pander  gives  to  tlie  lyre
seven  strings  instead  of  four.

NuMA  dies.

Cypselus  usurps  the  government  of  Corinth  for
thirt)^  years,  when  he  is  succeeded  by  Perian-
der,  who  holds  it  forty-four  years  more.

Byzantium  founded  B.  C.  658,  and  Cyrene  by
Battus  B.  C.  630.

Draco  promulgates  his  bloody  laws  at  Atliens.

Cylon,  &c.  slain  for  having  aspired  to  the  go-
vernment of  Athens.

V.  SOLON.

gives  laws  to  x\thens,  and  dies  B.  C.  558,
aBt.  80.

About  this  time  Epimenides  the  Phsestian  lus-
trates  Athens,  polluted  by  themurther  of  the
Cylonites  at  the  temple  of  the  Furies;  and
the  seven  wise  men  f ,  with  Alcccus,  Sajjpho,
Anacharslsy  Msop,  Stesichorus,  Anaximander^
Phalan's,  and  Anaximenes  of  Miletus  flourish-

Siisarion  and Dolon  introduce  comedy  at  Atheas.

Pisistratus  first  usurps  the  Athenian  govern-
ment.

The  Phocaeans,  driven  from  Rome,  colonise
Marseilles.

Thespis  introduces  tragedy  at  Athens,


*  The  successors  of  Numa  were
A.U.C.
82  .  Tiillus  Hostilius.
114    Ancus  Maitius.

138    Tarquiuius,  afterward  called  Priscus.
176     Servius  Tull ills,  and
220    Tarquinius  Superbus.

244    The  consular  government  introduced,  and  continued  with  fevr  interrup-
tions 462  years,  till  Julius  Ccesar's  victory  at  Pharsalia.
These  were


+
B.C.

629     Periander,  tyrant  of  Corinth.

Pittacus  of  Mitylene.

Chilo  of  Lacedsemon^
cqj   (  Solon  of  Athens.
^Thales  of  Miletus.

Bias  of  Piiene.

Cleobulus,  tyrant  of  Lindas  In  Rhode:.


612

597


565
S64


Ixxx


CimOXOLOGICAL   TABLE.


3.  C.      Olymp.        A.  U,  C


513lxvi.  4.
SlOlxvii.  3.


509lxvii.  4-.


508lxviii.  1.
503lxix.  2.
493lxxi.  4.


491  Ixii.  2.


490 3.

4S8lxxiii.  1.

4S5, 4.


4S4lxxiv.  1.


480lxxv.  1.


241

244


245


246
2j1

261


2G3


2G4
266

269
270


274


About  this  time  Theognis,  Pi/thagoras,  XcnO"
phanes  of  Colophon,  Anacreon,  Confucius^  and
Hcraclitus  flourish.

Hipparchus,  son  of  Pisistratus,  assassinated  by
Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  ;  and  Ilippias,
his  remaining  son,  expelled  from  Athens —
dies  B.  C.  490.

Tarquin  and  his  family  at  the  same  time  ex-
pelled from  Rome,  and  Consuls*  established.

VI.  VALERIUS  PUBLICOLA

is  chosen  consul  in  the  room  of  Collatinus.

Brutus  fights  A  runs,  the  eldest  son  of  Colla-
tinus, and  both  fall.

Horatius  Pulvillus,  collegue  of  Publicola,
dedicates  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus.

Horatius  Codes  defends  the  Subliciaa  bridge.

Publicola  dies.

The  people  of  Rome  secede  to  the  Mons  Sacevy
and  are  brought  back  by  Mencnius  Agrippa.

XII.  C.  MARCIUS  CORIOLANUS

is  banished  from  Rome,  and  retires  to  the
Volsci.

Gelo  usurps  the  government  of  Syracuse,  eleven
years  afteru-ard  beats  the  Carthaginians  at
Ilimera,  and  is  succeeded  B.  C.  478  by  his
brother  Iliero.

Miltiades  gains  the  battle  of  ^larathon  over
Darius'  army,  and  dies  the  following  year.

Coriolanus  besieges  Rome,  but  on  his  mo-
ther's intercession  withdraws  the  Volscian
army,  and  is  put  to  death  by  that  people.

Xerxes  succeeds  his  father  Darius  on  the  throne
of  Persia.

XVII.    ARISTIDES

is  banished  by  the  Ostracism  for  ten  years,
but  recalled  at  the  end  of  three ;  dies  B.  C.
467.

VII.     THEMISTOCLES

defeats    Xerxes'  fleet  at  Salamis,  about  i'ixv


*  The  commencement  of  several  of  (he  other  Koman  magistracies  were,
Of  (he  Qurestors  almost  coiitcnipnrnneously  «ith  the  city  itself.

Dictators  (L;irtiusthe  first),  A.  U.  C.  256.

—  Trihtines  (if  the  people  (and   the  plebeian  aciHles,  as  their  assist-
ants), 261.
■        ■ —  Censors,  31 1.

Ciirule  aediles,  387.

Praetors,  389.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


Ixxxi


E.  C.     Olymp.       A.U.C

479|lxxv.  2.    275


471


470

460

458


454
451


448
44-7


Ixxvii.  2.


3.


Ixxxi.  3.
Ixxxii.  2.

Ixxxiii.  ]


440;Ixxxiv.  4.

439  Ixxxv.  2.
4311xxxvii.2.


429


283


284

'i94
296


300
)03


J06


307


313

315
323


325


weeks  after  Leonldas  had  fallen  at  Ther-
mopylae.

The  Persians  under  Mardonius  defeated  at  Pla-
taeae  by  Pausanias  on  the  same  day,  upon  which
they  lost  the  battle  of  Mycale  in  Ionia.

About  this  time  Theron  of  Agrigentum  ;  and  not
long  afterward  Herodotus,  Thucydldes,  Hella-
nicus,  Democritiis,  JEschylus,  Pindar,  Anaxa-
goras  of  Clazomenae  (Ng?),  and  Sophocles
flourish.

The.mistocles  is  banished  by  the  Ostracism,
and  retires  to  the  court  of  Xerxes ;  dies  B.  C.
449,  a^t.  G5.

XXV.     CIMON,

son  of  Miltiades,  defeats  the  Persian  fleet  off
Cyprus,  and  their  army  near  the  river  Eury-
medon  in  Pamphylia.

—  is  banished  by  the  Ostracism,  recalled  in
iive  years,  and  dies  B.  C.  449,  act.  51.

Ezra  is  sent  hij  Ariaxerxes  Longimanus  from
Bahtjlon  to  Jerusalem  tcith  the  captive  Jcivs,  &c.'
490  1/ears  (i.  e.  70  prophetical  iveeksj  before
the  crucifixion.

The  Romans  send  to  Athens  for  Solon's  laws.

The  Decemvirs  created,  and  the  hiws  of  the  XII.
tables  compiled.  The  consulship  restored
B.  C.  449.

The  first  Sacred  War*  about  the  temple  of  Del-
phi, in  which  the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemo-
nians were  auxiliaries,  but  on  opposite  sides.

Tolmides  the  Athenian  general  killed,  and  his
forces  defeated  by  the  Boeotians  at  Chaeronea.

About  this  time  Zaleucus,  Charondas,  Empedo'
cles,  Euripides,  Phidias,  Cratinus,  Eupolts,
Aristophanes,  Melon,  Socrates,  Go7-gias,  Hip-
pocrates, Protagoras,  Parrhasius,  Lysias,  Cebesi
and  Euclid  of  Megara  flourish.

IX.     PERICLES

subdues  Samos,  which  had  revolted  from  the
Athenians.
War  of  Corinth  and  Corcyra  begins.

stirs  up  the  Peloponnesian  War,  which  with


the  interposition  of  some  truces  lasts  27  years.

About   this  time  the    Old     Testament    history
Jinishes.
dies,     eet.   70,    after     having     governed


*  The  second,  upon  the  (emple  of  Delphi's  being  plundered  by  the  Phocean?,
began  IJ.  C.  357,  and  lasted  nine  Ve.irs,    (Philoiuclus  fell  B.  C.  354.)
VOL.  I,  g


Ixxxii


CHRONOLOGICAL   TAELE.


B.C.      Olymp.       A.U.C.

Athens  25  years  in  concert  with  others,  and

Ij  alone.

4.24'lx\-xix.  1.  330^ The  Thebans  defeat  the  Athenians  at  Deliuni.
i22 3. 332  The  battle  of  Amphijjolis.


4^15  xci.  2.


407


xciii.  2.


404'Xciv.  1.


401


■4..


S9Tlxcv.  4.
.*>96  xcvi.  1 .


393


339


XXVII.     NICIAS

is  sent  by  the  Atiienians  to  Sicily  with  a  con-
siderable force,  and  falls  in  battle  t-.vo  years
afterward.


353


390  xcvii.  3.


337ixcviii.  2.


XL     ALCIBIADES,
who    had  been  sent  uS    NiciAs'   collegue,   is
recalled  and  retires  to  Sparta.

347 —  returns  to  Athens,  and  rejoins  the  army.

350 — dies  (:^et.  46),  as  also  Theramenes.  Athens,
afte.-  tlie  action  of  /Egos-Fotamos,  B.  C  4r05,
is  taken  by  the  Lacedaemonian  general

XXIIL    LYSANDER;

who  establishes  the  Thirty  'i'yrants  in  that  city,

and  foils  B.  C.  394  at  Haliartus.
The    Tliiity    Tyraiits  expelled  by   Thrasybulus,

who  dies  B.  C.  £90.
Cyrus  killed  in  his  expedition  against  his  brother,

XLVTI.     ARTAXERXES  II.    (Mnemon,  who

dies  B.  C.  358.)
The  *  Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand.'
About   this    time    Xenophon,    Plato,    Isocrntcsy
Ctesuts,    Zeuxis,    Antisthenes,    Archj/tas,    Phi-
loxeniiSf  Philiitus,  Isceus,   Diogenes,  and  Eu-
doxiis  flourish.

XXXL    AGESILAUS

357      ascends  the  throne  of  Sparta.

35S  —  defi;ats  the  Persian  cavalry.

361  —  defeats  the  allies  (Athenians,  Thebar.s,  Co-
rintliiuns,  and  Argivcs)  in  the  Corinthian  War
at  Chacronea,  a  \'ev;  days  after  Conon  had  de-
leatcd  the  Lacedaemonians  under  Pisander  in  a
sea-fight  at  Cnidus.
—  leads  an  army  into  Egypt,  to  assist  Tachos
against  the  Persians,  B.  C.  362,  and  dies  the
following  year.
The  Romans  defeated  at  A  Ilia  by  the  Gauls,  and


361


367


I


VIIL    CAMILLUS

made  dictator :  dies  B.  C.  S65.
The  'Peace  of  Antalcidas'  (tiie  Spartan  general,
who  died  B.  C.  370)  between  the  Persians  and


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


Ixxxiii


£.  C.        Olymp.  A.U.  C


377


371


368
363


360


c.  4.


cii.  2.


iii.  I.
civ.  2.


cv.  1.


.'57


35-1.


M^3


4.


cvi  y.


cix.  2.


340


338


ex.  1.


ex.  S.


336  cxi.  1.

n.i  I  ' O

O^-r. — ■     -<•

33];cxii.  2.


377


383


386
391


394


397


400


1-1 J


tl4

416


418
420

423


Lacedaemonians,  by  which  the  Greek  cities  ini

Asia  are  subjected  to  the  dominion  of  Persia.
Chabrias,  at  the  head  of  the  Athenians,  defeats

the   LacedEcraonians    under   PoHis  by  sea   at

Naxus.
The    Thebans   under    Epaminondas  defeat   the

Lacedaemonians  at  Leuctra,  where

XV.     PELOPIDAS

headed  the  Sacred  Band.     He  died  B.  C.  364,

in  a  successful  batth;  with  Alexander  tyrant  of

Pheraj,  who  survived  him  seven  years.
Dionysius  the  Elder,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  dies.
The  battle  of   Mantinea;    where    Epaminondas,

though  victorious,  is  killed  by  the  son  of  Xeno-

phon.
Philip  of  Macedon  begins  his  reign,   and  gains

a  battle    at    Methone  over   Argaeus  and  the

Athenians.

XLV.    DION

expels  Dionysius  the  Younger  from  Syracuse
(hut  he  recovers  possession  of  it  after  ten  years
of  banishment,  and  holds  it  for  four  more),
is  put  to  death  by  the  Zacynthian  mercenaries.
About  this  time  Theopompus  of  Chios,  Ephoi-us
of  Cuma?,  and  Speusippus,  Aristotle,  Profngenes
of  Rhodes,  Xenocrates,  StiJpo  of  Megara,
Apelles  of  Cos,  Callippns,  Lysippus,  Praxiteles,
and  Thcophrdstiis  flourish.

Xin.    TLMOLEON,

wlio  had  previously  put  to  death  his  brother
Timophanes  tor  affecting  the  Corinthian  govern-
ment,

Restores  liberty  to  Syracuse,  and  re-expels  Diony-
sius the  Younger,  who  takes  refuge  at  Corinth.

The  Samnite  War  begins,  and  lasts  71  years  ;
during  the  last  10,  the  Sumnites  confederate
with  the  Tarentines.

riMOLF.oN  defeats  the  Carthaginians  near  Agii-
geatum,  and  dies  B.  C,  337.

Philip  of  Macedon  defeats  the  Athenians  and  The-
bans  at   Ciioeronea;  is  assassinated  two  years  '
afterward  by  Pausanias,  and  succeeded  by

XXXIIL    ALEXANDER,

who,  after  having  destroyed  Thebes  B.  C.  SSf",
defeated  Darius'  armies  on  the  Granicus  B,  C.
334,  at  Issus  33S,  and  at  Arbela  S31,  taken
o-  2


lxxxi\


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


B.C.        Olyn-.p.

327  cxiii.  2.


A.U  C.

427


possession  of  Egypt,  and  marched  Into  India

against  Porus   327,  dies  323,  act.  32,  on   the

same  day  with  Diogenes,  act.  90.
His   empire  divided  into  four  kingdoms  *  after

his  death.
The  Samian  war  of  two  years  takes  place  between

the  Athenians  and  Antipater.


B.C.  A  u.c.


322
321
320

318
317

315
312

308

307


432
4-33
1-34

436
437

439
442
446

447


XLI.  DEMOSTHENE.S,

who  had  been  banished,  is  recalled  after  a  two  years'

exile,  and  (with  Hyperides  and  Demades)  put  to  death

the  following  year  by  Antipater,  a-t.  60.
The  Romans  passed  under  the  yoke  by  the  Samnitcs  at  the

Furcae  Caudinae.
Polysperchon  publishes  a  general  liberty  to  all  the  Greek

cities,  and  dies  about  B.  C.  309.

XXXV.   PHOCION

is  delii'ered  up  by  that  general  to  the  Athenians,  who

unjustly  put  him  to  death.
Syracuse,  &c.,  usurped  by  Agathocles,  who  dies  B.  C.  289.
Demetrius  Phalereus  governs  Athens  for  ten  years.

XXX.  EUMENES,

who  had  attained  considerable  rank  among  Alexander's
successors,  is  betrayed  to  Antigonus,  and  put  to  death,

Seleucus  Nicator  takes  Babylen,  whence  the  *  ^ra  of  the
Seleucidc-e,'  and  dies  B.  C.  280.

Q.  Fabius  defeats  the  Samnites,  Marsi,  and  Peligni.

XLIII.  DEMETRIUS  (Poliorcetes)

restores  the  Athenian  democracy,  banishing  their  oli-
garchs, Demetrius  Phalereus,  Dlnarchus,  &c.
About  this  time   Menander,   Polemon,   Zeno   of    Citium,


•  F,2;ypt,  Syria  and  Babjlon,  Asia,  and  !\Iaredon,      The  succession  of  the
Ptolemits,  princes  of  the  first  of  these,  is  subjoined  :
B.C.
323
284
246
221
204
180
14.1
116
106


Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Lagus,  surnamed  Sotei*.
•   Piiiladolphus.

Euergetes  I.

Pliilopator.

Epipianes.

. Philornetor.

Eueriieles  II.,  or  Physcon.

. Lathy  JUS  Sott-r,  with  iiis  mother  Cleopatra.

Alexander  king  of  Cyprus,  with   Cleopatra  tor  eighteen  years,    when

Lathyrus  was  restored  for  seven  more.
81    Cleopatra  II.   with  Alexander  II.
80  Ptolemy  Alexander   III.

6.1 Dioiiys'us   Aidetes,

61   Uionysins  II.   with  Cleopatra  III.'Then  Julius  Caesar,  43 — 4^,

the  II.  triumvirate,  and  B.  C.  al.  Augustus.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


Ixxx^


S.C.  A.U.C.


301


296


453


458


294:460

287  467


284


281
280


470

473
474


278
272
268

264
260


476
482
486


Grantor,    Philemon,    Megasthenes    the    historian,    and
Pi/rrho  flourish.

The  battle  of  Ipsus  in  Phrygia,  where  Antigonus  is  de-
feated (and  killed)  by  Ptolemy,  Seleucus,  Lysiniachus,
and  Cassander.

Demetrius  takes  Athens  after  a  year's  siege.

ascends  the  throne  of  Macedon.

is    deserted    by    his    army,     whom    Pyrrhus


corrupts,  and  by  the  Athenians,  and  dies  the  following
year.

XXI.  PYRRHUS

takes  possession  of  Macedon,  but  is  expelled  the  next  year

by  Lysimachus,  who  five  years  afterward  falls  in  Phrygia

in  an  action  with  Seleucus.
The  LXX.  translation  supposed  to  have  heen  made  about  this

time.
The  Achaean  league  begins.
Pyrrhus  passes  into  Italy,  and  continues  there  and  in

Sicily   till  his  defeat  by  Curius  at  Maleyentum,  B.  C.

274.
The  Gauls,  under  Brennus,  cut  to  pieces  near  Delphi.
Pyrrhus  dies.


Athens  taken  and  kept  12  years  by  Antigonus  (Gonatas)
king  of  Macedon,  after  which  he  restores  it  to  liberty.
490 The  I.  Punic  War*  begins,  and  lasts  23  years.
494  The  Carthaginians  defeated  at  sea  by  the  Romans  under
Duilius,  who  has  the  first  naval  triumph.
256  498  Regulus  defeated,  and  taken  prisoner  ;  dies  about  B.  C.  251.
In  this  half  century  Euclid  of  Alexandria,  Epicurus,   Ar-
cesilaus,  Zenodotus  of  Ephesiis,  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,
Theocritus,   Aratus   of  Tarsus,  Lycophron,  Berosus  the
Chaldean   historian,    Cleanthes,    Tima:ns,   May^ctho  the
i^gyptian  historian,  Callimachus,  Zoilus,  and  Dnris  of
Saraos  the  historian  flourish.


251

243


235


503
511


XL VII I.  ARATUS,

of  Sicyon,  prevails  upon  his   countrymen  to  join  tlie


Achaean  league.


takes  the  citadel  of  Corinth,  and  dies  B.  C.  213,  jet.  62,

XXXVII.  AGIS,

king  of  Sparta,  for  having  attempted  to  settle  an  A  gra-
rian  law,  put  to  death.
5l9|The  temple  of  Janus  shut  for  the  first  time  after  Xuma's


reign.


*  The  IT.,  in  which  Annibal  flourishes,  begins  B,  C.  218,  and  lasts  till  the
battle  of  Zama,  B.  C.  202.

III.  begins  B,  C.    149,   and  ends  B.  C.   146  with    the  destruction  of

Carthage.  12


Ixxx


VI


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


B.C.  A.U.C,


231


227


523


527


225  529

222532'


220

219
217


531


535


537
216538


212  51-2


208


The  iNIegalopoIitans  under  Lysiades,  at  the  persuasion  of

AuATUs,  join  the  Achaean  Icaguij.
The  first  divorce  at  Home,  by  Sp.  Carvilius.

XXXVIII.  CLEOMENES

begins  a  war  of  five  years  with  Aratus.
— kills  the  l'^phori,and  restores  the  Agrarian  laws  of  Sparta.
Loses  the  battle  of  Sellasia  to  Antigonus  (Doson)  king  of

Maccdon,  whom  Aratus  had  called  in  to  his  assistance,

and  retires  into  Egypt.
Tlie  Social  War  between  tlie  ^^tolians  and  Acha;ans  be-
gins, and  continues  three  years,  in  which  Philip  king  of

Macedon  joins  the  Achseans.
vSaguntum  taken  and  destroyed  by  Annibal,  which  causes

the  II.  Punic  war.
Annibal,   having  previously  gained  the  battles  of  Ticinum

and  Trebia,   defeats  the  consul  Flaminius   at  the  lake

Thrasymene ;  and
the   consuls    \'^arro  and    iEiiiilius    at    Cannae  in

Apulia.

XVI.  MARCELLUS

beats  Annibal  at  Nola.

takes  Syracuse,  after  a  siege  of  three  years.


51G — dies.


XIX.     PHILOrCE:\IEN,


'  the  last  of  the  Greeks,'  defeats  Macbanidas,  tyrant  of
Laceda:mon,  at  Mantinea.
(B.C.  191,  unites  Laceda?mon  to  the  Achscan  league.

188,    abrogates   the  la'.vs  of  Lycurgas,  which    are

soon  restored  however  by  the  R-omans,  and

183,  dies  a:t.  70.)


X.     FABIUS  MAXIMUS  (Cunctator).

207547  Asdrubal,  on  his  way  to  reinforce   Annibal,  is  defeated

I       I     and  slain  by  Claudius  Nero.
202552  Annibal  defeated  at  Zaraa  in  .Africa by  Scipio  (Africanus  I.
,     or  the  Great)  who  dies  B.  C.  181-.

( .dies  B.C.  183,  set.  64^.)

In  this  half-century  Jesus  the  Son  of  Sirach,  Canon  the
astronomer,  E rnto.it It cne$,  ApoUonios  of  Pcrga,  Livius
Andronicus,  Chri/sipmis,  Evphorinriy  Archimedes,  Nitvins,
ApnUonins  Rhodius',  Aristo,  Fahius  Pictor,  P/it/larchus
the  historian,  Plaidnx,  Emiim,  and  Sotion  flourish.
2O0  554The  I.  Macedonian  war*  begins,  and  lasts  nearly  four
years-


*  The  IT.  besi::?  T..  C.  171,  and  ends  with  the  total  defeat  of  Perseus.


CHROXOLOGICAX   TABLE.


IxxxvH


B.C.  A.U.C.


197
196


557
558


XX.     T.  Q.  FLAMINIUS

defeats  Philip,   king  of  Macedon,  at  Cynoscephalie  in
Thessaly  ;
-  procluiuis  liberty  to  Greecej  and  dies  after  B.  C.  182.


XVIII.     CATO  THE  CENSOR

tiiump]:s  for  his  conquests  in  Spain  ;  and  dies  B.  C.  148,
set.  85.
192  562;  War  of  the  Romans  with  Antiochus  the  Great,  king  of

Syria,  begins.


190


168
163

160
l55


146
135


564  Antiochus  is  totally  defeated  by  L.  C.  Scipio  (Asiaticus)
at  Magnesia  in  Lydia,  the  leader  of  the  first  Rouiaa
army  that  liad  entered  Asia.

XIV.  P.  JE?dILIlJS
586      totally  defeats  Perseus,  king  of  Macedon,  at  Pydna.
591  The  government  of  Judea  by  the  Asmon{Ecm  J'amily,  or  the

I     Maccabees,  begins  and  continues  126  yean.
591  P.  ^ATiLius  dies,  cet.  68.

599  Carn-  ades,  in  an  embassj^  from  Athens,  charms  the  Reman
senate  by  his  eloquence.
In  this  half-century   Ccecilius,   Terence,  Polybius,  PacU"
vins,  Hipparchns,  and  Aristarchns  flourish.
608  Cartilage  destroyed  by  P.  Scipio  ( Africanus  II.,  M^ho  died

B.  C.  129,  act.  56),  and  Corinth  by  L.  Muramius.
619  The  history  of  the  Apocrypha  ends.

The  Servile  war  of  three  years  begins  in  Sicily.

XXXIX.     TIBERIUS  GRACCHUS
621      is  put  to  death  for  having  attempted  to  introduce  an
xigrarian  law.
Numantia  is  destroyed  by  Scipio.

The    kingdom  of  Pergamus  is  annexed   to   the   Roman
empire.
G31  Carthage  is  rebuilt,  by  order  of  the  Roman  senate,  under
the  superintendence  of

XL.     CAIUS  GRACCHUS
633      killed,  aet.  23.

XXII.     CAIUS  MARIUS,

635      as  tribune,  imprisons  the  consul  Metellus  for  opposing  a

law  which  he  wished  to  carry.
643  The  Jugurthine  War  of  five  years  begins,
645  The  incursions  of  the   Teutoncs  and  Cimbri,  which  last

eight  years,  begin.
648  Marius  receives  Jugurtha  from  king  Bocchus.
102652 defeats  the  Teutones  and  Ambiones  in  two  battlss


133


12^


121


119

111
109

106


at  Aquaj  Sextife,  hod.  Aix  in  Provence.


ixxxviii


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLB.


91


89


86


663


h  c.  A.n  c.

101  653  Marius  with   Catulus  defeats  the  Cimbri,  when  endea-
vowring  to  enter  Italy  througli  Noricjm,  hod.  the  Tirol.
In  this  iialt-century  SrJ^rus,  Accms,  Paiuetius,  Xicander,
Ctesibius,  L.    Ccrlius  Antipater  the  Roman   historian,
LucdiuSy  and  ApoUodoriis  flourish.
The  Social  or  Marsic  War  of  three  years  begins,  and  is
I     terminated  by  Sylla,
6G5|The  Mithridaiic  War  of  26  j'ears  begins.
88  666  The  Civil  War  between  the  parties  of  Marius  and  Sylla
begins,  and  lasts  till  the  defeat  of  Carbo  and  young
Marius  at  Praeneste  B.  C.  82.
Marius  dies,  aet,  70.


668


73
69


680

681
G86


687


XXIV.     SYLLA,

who  had  previously  been  sent  into  Cappadocia,  takes
Athens,  and  cuts  to  pieces  the  army  of  Archelaus.

84  670  —  makes  peace  with  Mithridates.

82  672 —  is  created  dictator,  and  continues  for  three  years.
967.5  —  resigns  his  oihce,  and  dies  the  following  year,  a:t.  60.

XXIX.    L.  SERTORIUS
revolts  in  Spain,  and  is  assassinated  B.  C.  73.

XXVL    LUCULLUS

renews  the  war  against  IMithridates,  who  had  occupied
Bithynia,  and  made  a  league  with  Sehtorfus.

The  Servile  War  begins  under  Spartacus,  who  dies  B.  C.  71.

LucuLLus  defeats  Mithridates  and  Tigranes  in  .'\rmenia,
and  takes  Tigranoceita.

XXXII.     POMPEY

begins  and  completes  the  Piratical  War,  aet.  40.

^5|(j88| —  succeeds  Lucullus,    and  conquers   Armenia,  Syria,

&c.  which  latter  kingdom  he  reduces  the  following  year

to  a  Roman  province,  putting  an  end  to  the   reign  of

the  Seleucidae.

,L.  Cacc.  Metellus,  after  a  war  of  two  years,  subdues  Crete.

6069iPo.MPKY  unites  in  the  I.  triumvirate^'  with  C/iOsar  and
Crassus,  engages  in  the  Civil  War  with  the  former,
B.  C.  50;  is  besieged  by  him  in  Brundusium,  and  B.  C
48  loses  the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  and  dies.

XLIL  M.  T.  CICERO,
who  had  pleaded  (for  P.  Quinctius,  ffit.  26.)  B.  C.  81,
and  eleven  years  afterward  delivered  the  first  two
orations  against  Verrcs,  is  elected  consul,  and  opposes
Rullus'  Agrarian  law,  detects  the  conspiracy  of  Ca-
tiline, <ic.

The  II.  bct«eca  ,\ugiutu:.  Antony,  and  Lcpidus,  is  formed  B.  C.  43.


CHRONOLOGICAL   TABLE.


Ixxxix


a.C.  A.u.c.
64|690|OctavIus,  afterward  surnamed  Augustus,  is  born.
59  695  Cicero  submits  to  a  voluntary  exile,  whence  he  returns

triumphantly  the   following  year,  and  dies   B.   C.  41-,

set.  64.


58
55


696
699


53701


46


42


34
32

31
30

AD.

68


708


712


720
722

723
724


69


XXXIV.    C.  JUL.  C^SAR

begins  to  attack  the  Helvetii.
—  Crosses  the  Rhine,  defeats  the  Germans,  and  first  passes
into  Britain,  enters  Rome  B.  C.  49,  two  years  after-
ward re-takes  Alexandria,  B.  C.  45,  defeats  the  Pom-
peians  at  Munda  in  Spain,  and  is  assassinated  the  fol-
lowing year.

XXVIir.    MARCUS  CRASSUS

falls,  with  his  whole  army,  in  an  expedition  against  the
Parthians .

In  this  half-century  ApelUcon,  L.  Val,  Antias  the  Roman
historian,  Hortensius,  Posidonius,  M.  Ter.  Varro,  Lucre"
UiiSy  Catullus^  and  Sallust  flourish.

XXXVI.     CATO  the  Younger,
after  the  defeat  of  Juba,  kills  himself  at  Utica,  at.  48.

XLVI.    MARCUS  BRUTUS,
and  Cassius,  fall  by  their  own  hands  at  Philippi.

XLIV.    M.  ANTONY

takes  Artabazus,  king  of  Armenia,  prisoner.

—  After  a  long  misunderstanding  with  Octavius,  openlv
prepares  for  war.

— ■  Loses  the  battle  of  Actium.

—  Kills  himself.     Egypt  is  reduced  to  a  Roman  province.

XLIX.    GALBA

is  declared  emperor,  reigns  seven  months,  and  is  suc-
ceeded by

L.    OTHO,

who  after  a  reign  of  three  months,  being  defeated  b}
Vitellius,  kills  himself.


TOT,.  I


THE


L  I  F  E


ot


THESEUS^


SUMMARY.


D'tdinction  of  the fabidons  and  the  historic  ages.  Points  bf  ressm*
blance  belii^een  Theseus  and  Romidus.  Extraction  and  birth  of
Theseus.  His  education,  and  journei/  to  Delphi.  His  mother
reveals  to  him  the  secret  of'  his  parentage*  He  emulates  the  ex->
ploits  of  Hercules-  :  and  hills  Periphetes,  and  Sinnis  ;  the  wild
sow  of  Crommtjon  ;  Sciron,  and  other  public  robbers.  He  ar-
rives at  Athens ;  defeats  the  Pallantidce ;  engages,  and  subdues
the  Marathonian  bull.  The  Cretan  tribute.  He  offers  himself  as
one  of  the  victims  ;  embarks  ;  and  tvith  the  assistance  of  Ariadne
destroys  the  Minotaur.  Different  traditions  about  Ariadnc'S
death.  Upon  his  return,  Theseus  lands  at  Delos  :  origin  of  the
dance  of  the  Crane.  He  arrives  at  Athens :  death  of  his  father
JEgeus.  He  incorporates  the  boroughs  of  Attica  into  one  city  ;
institution  of  the  Panathencca.  He  divides  the  Athenians  into
classes :  esfablishes  the  Isthmian  games  :  sails  to  the  Euxiiie  ;  and
has  a  son  ( HippolijtusJ  by  Antiope,  the  Amazon.  The  Amazonian
■war.  He  marries  Phcedra.  Various  opinions  about  the  number
of  his  achievements.  His  friendship  with  Pirithbus.  The  battle
of  the  Cc'uiuiirs  and  the  Lapithu\  He  carries  off  Helen,  and  is
imprisoned  in  Epirus.  Intrigues  f  Menestheus  against  hint.
Castor  and  Pollux  invade  Athens,  to  recover  their  sifter.  Oricrin
nf  the  Academy.  They  arc  admitted  into  the  city,  by  the  advice
ff  Menes-hcus.  Theseus,  on  his  return,  finds  Athens  in  a  state  of
revolt  :  retires  to  Scyros ;  and  is  treacherously  destroyed  by  Ly'
comedes.  His  bones  long  cfterixard  brought  to  Athens.  Saeri-
fees  instituted  io  his  honour.

VOL.  I.  B


THESEUS.


As  geooraphers "  crowd  into  the  extremities  of
their  maps  tlio'se  countries  that  are  unknown  to
them,  remarking  at  the  same  time  that  all  beyond
is  hills  of  sand  and  liaunts  of  wild  beasts,  or  inac-
cessible marshes,  Scythian  snows,  and  fiozen  oceans  ;
so,  my  Senecio^^  in  comparing  the  lives  of  illustri-
ous men,  when  I  have  passed  through  those  periods
of  time  which  may  be  described  with  probability,
and  where  history  finds  firm  footing  in  facts,  1  may
pronounce  of  the  remoter  ages,  that  all  beyond
is  full  of  prodigy  and  fiction,  the  regions  of  poets
and  fabulists,  wrapped  in  clouds  and  unworthy  of
beliefs  Yet,  since  I  had  given  an  account  of  Ly-
curgus  and  Numa,  I  thought  I  might  without  im-


*  With  regard  to  the  time,  in  which  Theseus  flourislied,  clirono-
logists  differ.  The  Oxford  Marbles  (xx.)  fix  the  incorporation
of  the  Attic  boroughs,  the  estabhshmcnt  of  the  Athenian  com-
KiDnjvealth,  and  the  institution  of  tlie  Isthmian  games,  to  B.  C.
1259:  And  Dufresnoy  allows  him  a  subsequent  authority  of  thirty
years.  Blair  refers  these  events  to  B.  C.  123-1',  seventeen  years
after  his  Cretan  expedition.*

*  The  term  'historians'  is  adopted  in  the  original,  with  re-
ference not  only  to  the  use  of  geography  in  history,  but  to  the  cha-
racter of  the  old  geographers;  who,  beside  the  sites  and  distances
of  places,  gave  an  account  of  the  manners,  customs,  government,  &.c.
of  the  inliabitants  ;  as  Strabo,  Pausanias,  &c.*

*  Sossius  Senecio,  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  who  flourished
under  Nerva  and  Trajan;  to  whom  Plutarch  has  inscribed  many  of
his  Moral  Treatises,  and  Pliny  addressed  some  of  his  Epistles:  not
the  Senecio,  put  to  death  by  Doraitian  for  having  written  the  life  of
Helvidius  Priscus.  ( Tac.  Agric.  2,  ^5.)

*  The  wild  fictions  of  the  fabulous  ages  may  partly  be  accounted
for  from  the  genius  of  the  writers,  who  (as  Plutarch  observes)
were  chiefly  poets;  and  partly  from  an  affectation  of  something  ex-
traordinary or  preternatural  in  antiquity,  which  has  generally  pre-
vailed both  in  nations  and  families.   (L.)

A  similar  incertitude  Thucydides  (i.  1.),  more  than  five  hundred
years  before  Plutarch,  ascribes  to  the  times  anterior  to  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  war  (which  commenced  B.  C.  4-31.)  where  he  speaks  of
t!ie  Trojan  and  Median  conflicts,  the  latter  not  a  century  earlier
than  himself.  What  then  must  we  think  of  an  a:ra  nearly  eight
hundred  years  prior  to  the  ^Median  warl*


Ti-IESEUS.  5

propriety  ascend  to  Romulus,  as  I  had  approached
Ills  times.     But  considering

Who,  for  tliG  palm,  in  contest  higli  shall  join?
Or  who  in  equal  rank  shall  stand  ?

(as  ^scliylus  expresses  it^)  it  appeared  to  me  that
he,  who  peopled  ^  the  beautiiul  and  celebrated  city
of  Athens,  mio-ht  be  best  contrasted  and  compared
with  the  father  of  tlie  magnificent  and  invincible
Rome.  Permit  us  tlien  to  take  from  Fable  her  ex-
travagance, and  make  her  obediently  accept  the
form  of  History :  but  where  she  obstinately  de-
spises  probability,  and  refuses  to  mix  with  what  is
credible,  v.-e  must  implore  the  candour  of  our  read-
ers, and  their  kind  allowance  for  the  tales  of  an-
tiquity.

Theseus,  then,  appeared  to  answer  to  Romulus
in  many  particulars.  Both  were  of  uncertain  pa-
rentage, born  out  of  Mcdlock ;  and  both  had  the
repute  of  being  sprung  from  the  gods.  Both,  we
all  know,  were  warriors ' ;  and  both,  with  great
strength  of  body,  had  great  powers  of  mind.  One
was  the  founder  of  Rome,  and  one  peopled  Athens,
the  most  illustrious  cities  in  the  world.  Both  car-
ried off  women  by  violence.  Both  were  involved  in
domestic  miseries,  and  exposed  to  family-resent-
ment ;  and  both,  toward  the  end  of  their  lives,"  are
said  to  have  oflended  their  respective  citizens,  if  we
may  believe  what  seems  to  be  deiiv^ered  with  the
least  mixture  of  poetical  fiction.

The  lineage  of  Theseus,  by  his  father's  side,  ex-
tends upwards  to  Erectheus  and  the  first  inhabitants


S    'F.^T.  STJ  ©>;?.  437.  *

*  The  city,  according  to  the  INIarbles,  wasjbunded  by  Cecrops,
R.  C.  1532. ;  but  by  Blair's  computation,  B.  C.  1556.  See  ChroQoi,
Table.  *

'  Horn.  II.  vii.  281.*

B    2


4.  'JIIESEUS.

of  his  coiiiitiy'';  by  his  mother's  side  to  Pclops*,
who  was  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  PeI()})oniiesiaa
kings,  not  only  on  aecount  of  liis  great  oj)iilcnce,
but  the  nnmber  of  his  ehildren  ;  for  he  married  iiis
daughters  to  persons  of  tiie  first  dignity,  and  Ibund
means  to  place  his  sons  at  the  head  of  the  chief
states.  One  of  them  named  rittheiis,  the  grand-
father of  Theseus,  foimdcd  the  small  city  of  Tro--
zene'°,  and  was  esteemed  the  wisest  and  tlie  most
learned  man  of  his  age.  The  essence  of  the  wisdom
of  those  days  consisted  in  such  moral  sentences,  as
Hesiod'^  is  commended  for  in  his  Book  of  Works*
One  of  these  is  ascribed  to  Pittheus:

Blast  not  the  hope,  whicli  friendship  has  conceived.
But  fill  it's  measure  hitzh.


8  Theseus  was  the  sixth  in  descent  from  Ercchthcus  or  Erich-
thonius,  said  to  be  the  son  of  Vulcan  and  Minerva,  or  Cranae
grand-daughter  of  Craniius  the  second  king  of  Athens ;  so  thai
Plutarch  justly  states  him  to  have  descended  from  the  Autoch-
thones, or  first  inhabitants  of  Attica,  so  called  because  they  pre-
tended to  be  born  of  the  soil  of  that  very  country.  They  were,  in-
deed, a  more  ancient  people  than  those  of  many  other  districts  of
Greece;  which  from  their  fertility,  more  frequently  changed  their
masters,  v.-hile  few  were  ambitious  of  settling  in  a  barren  coun-
try. (L.)  This  we  learn  both  from  Herod,  vii.,  and  Thucyd.  i.  2. 6'.
The  '  golden  grasshopj)ers,'  nientioned  in  t!ie  latter  section,  the
Scholiiist  refers  (among  other  sources)  to  this  assmned  tgrrene
extraction.

'  Pelops  was  the  son  of  Tantalus,  and  of  Phrygian  extraction.
He  carried  with  him  immense  riches  into  Peloponnesus,  which  he
had  dug  out  of  the  mines  of  mount  Sijjylus.  hy  means  of  this
wealth,  he  obtained  the  govenuncnt  of  the  nm.st  considerable
towns  for  his  sons,  of  whom  he  had  eleven,  and  married  his  two
daughters  to  princes  (L.):  Eysidice  to  Alectryon  or  Nestor,  son  of
Perseus  king  of  Tirynthus;  and  Astvdaniia  to  Sthenelus,  king  of
jMyccnoe.*

'°  A  city  of  Argolis,  in  Peloponnesus.  Pausanias  gives  nearly
the  same  account  of  Pittheus,  and  savs  that  he  taught  rhetoric  at
Trcezene.  *  I  have  read  myself  (he  adds)  '  a  book  of  his  com-
position, which  was  given  to  me  by  a  man  of  Epidaurus.'  (ii.
UO.  31.)*

"  liesiod  flourished  about  five  hundred  years  after  Pittheus,
This  passage  occurs  F/-'/.  rxi  "u_^.  3(38.


THESEUS.  5

This  is  confirmed  by  Aristotle  :  and  Euripides,
in  saying  that  Hippolytus  was  taught  by  "  the  vene-
rable Pittlieus,"  bears  very  honourable  testimony  to
his  character.

iEgcus,  wishing  to  have  children,  is  said  to  have
received  from  the  oracle  at  Delphi  that  celebrated
answer,  which  commanded  him  not  to  approach  any
woman  before  he  returned  to  Athens.  But,  as  the
oracle  seemed  not  to  give  him  clear  instruction,  he
came  to  Troezene,  and  communicated  it  to  Pittheus
in  the  following  terms :

Tlie  mystic  vessel  shall  untouch'd  remain,
Till  in  thy  Attic  realm —

It  is  uncertain,  what  Pittheus  saw  in  this  oracle.
Either  by  persuasion  however,  or  by  deceit,  he
drew  ^'Egeus  into  intercourse  with  his  daughter
JEthrn.  3]geus  afterward  learning  that  she  with
whom  he  had  lain  was  Pittheus'  daughter,  and  sus-
pecting her  to  be  with  child,  hid  a  sword  and  a  pair
of  sandals  under  a  large  stone,  which  had  a  cavity
for  the  purpose.  Before  his  departure,  he  disclosed
the  secret  to  the  princess  only ;  and  gave  orders
that  if  she  brought  forth  a  son,  who  when  he  came
to  manhood  should  be  able  to  remove  the  stone,  and
take  away  the  things  left  under  it,  she  should  send
him  with  those  tokens  to  him  in  all  imaginable  pri-
vacy ;  for  he  vras  extremely  afraid,  that  some  plot
would  be  formed  against  him  by  the  Pallantidse,  who
despised  him  for  his  want  of  children.  These  were
fifty  brothers,  the  sons  of  Pallas^-.

jEthra  was  delivered  of  a  son^'^  j  and  some  say  he

'*  Pallas  was  brother  to  iEgeus ;  and,  as  iEgeus  was  supposed
to  have  no  children,  the  Pallantidae  considered  the  kingdom  of
Athens  as  their  undoubted  inheritance.

'^  According  to  Pausanias,  he  was  born  in  a  place,  thence  for  a
long  time  called  Genethlion,  near  the  harbour  of  Troezene ;  v.hither
Pittheus  had  purposely  sent  his  daughter,  in  order  to  filiate  the
phild  to  Neptune  with  a  better  grace.^


6  THESEUS.

ivss  immediate! V  named  Theseus'*,  because  of  the
laying  up  of  the  tokeur, ;  others,  that  lie  received  liis
name  afterward  at  Athens,  when  yEgcus  adopted
him  for  his  son  He  was  brought  U}3  by  Pittheus,
and  had  a  tutor  named  Connidas,  to  whom  the  Athe-
nians even  in  our  times  sacrifice  a  ram''',  on  the  day
preceding  the  Thcsean  Feasts ;  paying  tliis  honour
to  his  memory  upon  a  much  juster  account  than  that
which  they  pay  to  Silanion  and  Parrhasius'%  who
only  made  statr.es  and  pictures  of  Theseus.

As  it  Avas  then  the  custom  for  those,  wlio  had
attained  the  age  of  manhood,  to  go  to  Delphi  to  ofl'er
the  first-fruits  of  their  hair  to  Apollo,  Theseus  went
thither  ;  and  the  place,  where  this  ceremony  is  per-
formed, is  said  from  him  to  be  still  called  Thesea.
He  shaved  however  only  the  fore-part  of  Ins  head,  as
Homer  informs  us  the  Abantes  did'" ;  and  this  kind

^'*  The  Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Hebrews,  gave  names  both  to  per-
sons and  things  from  some  event  or  circumstance  attendine  tliat,
which  they  vi-ere  to  designate.  The  Greek  word  S-so-c,  signifies
*  laying  up '  (the  sword,  &c.),  and  B-t£!cnhiov,  'to  adopt  a  son.'
^geus  did  both  ;  the  ceremony  of  adoption  being  necei^sary  to  en-
able Theseus,  who  was  not  a  legitimate  son,  to  inherit  tlic  crown.

^^  Hence  the  proverb  K^if;  rpecpitcc  u^ina-iv,  implying  that  the
greatest  reverence  alouc  can  discharge  the  debt  incurred  to  a  tutor
-ibr  his  services.*

'<5  A  portrait  of  Theseus  by  Parrhasius,  representing  his  combat
with  the  Minotaur,  was  extant  in  the  Capitol  so  late  as  the  time  of
the  elder  Pliny  (IJ.  N.  xxxv.  10.)  This  illustrious  painter  flou-
rished about  four  centuries  before  Christ.

Silanion,  an  eminent  statuary  in  bronze,  was  nearly  contempo-
rary with  Alexander  the  Great.*

f!  The  Abantes  were  the  inhabitants  of  Eubcca,  but  originally  of
AboE,  a  town  in  Thrace.  (L.)  Prom  this  passage  it  appears,  that
Plutarch  refers  the  custom  to  a  period  more  remote  than  the  age  of
Theseus ;  but  Eustathius  expressly  derives  it's  origin  from  this
prince,  and  says  that  the  offering  was  made  not  at  Delphi,  but  at
Delos.  And  that  it  prevailed  only  among  the  Trcezenians,  and
after  the  a:ra  of  Theseus,  is  clear  from  Lucian,  whoso;.  •;  it  was  in-
stituted in  honour  of  Ilippolytus,  and  invariably  practised  by  the
young  of  both  sexes,  as  a  necessary  quahfication  for  marriage.  At
the  period  of  manhood  the  hair,  till  then  uninolu.sted,  was  cut  iu
the  temple,  deposited  in  a  gold  or  silver  vase  inscribed  with  the
^vt-n'jr's  name,  and  consecrated  to  Apollo.*


THESEUS.  7

of  tonsure,  on  liis  account,  was  called  Tlieseis.  The
Ahantes  first  cut  their  hair  in  this  manner,  not  in
imitation  of  the  Arabians  (as  some  imagine)  or  of
the  Mysians  ;  but  because  they  were  a  warlike  peo-
})le,  who  loved  close  figliting,.  and  were  more  ex-
j)ert  in  it  than  any  other  nation.  Thus  Archilo-
chus''* :

These  twang  not  bows,  nor  sling  the  hissing  stone,
When  Mars  exult;;,  and  fields  with  armies  groan  :
Far  nobler  skill  EubcEa's  sons  display,
And  with  the  thundering  sword  decide  the  fray.

That  they  might  not  therefore  give  advantage  to
their  enemies  by  their  hair,  they  took  care  to  cut  it
off.  And  we  are  told  that  Alexander  of  Macedon,
having  made  the  same  observation,  ordered  his  Ma-
cedonian troops  to  shave  their  beards,  these  being  a
ready  handle  in  battle.

For  some  time  vEthra  concealed  the  name  of
Theseus'  real  father,  but  the  report  propagated  by
Pittheus  v>'as,  that  lie  was  the  son  of  Neptune  ;  for
the  Troi'zenians  principally  worship  that  God  :  he  is
the  patron  of  their  city ;  to  him  they  ofler  their
first-frnits  ;  and  their  money  bears  the  impression  of
a  trident.  Theseus,  in  his  youth,  discovering  not
only  great  strength  of  body  but  firmness  and- soHdity
of  mind,  together  with  a  large  share  of  understand-
ing and  prudence,  yEthra  led  him  to  the  stone  ;
and,  having  told  him  the  truth  concerning  his  ori-
gin, ordered  him  to  take  up  his  father's  tokens,  and
sail  to  Athens.  The  stone  ^'■'  he  easily  removed  j
but  he  refused  to  go  by  sea,  though  he  might  have

'•^  Archilochus  was  a  Greek  poet,  who  lived  about  the  time  of
Romulus.  Homer  had  given  the  same  account  of  the  Abantes,
above  three  hundred  year?  before.  The  Abantes,  he  informs  us
(ii.  54 i,  5i-2.),  pierced  the  breast-plates  of  their  enemies  with  ex-
tended spears  or  pikes;   that  is  to  sa}',  they  fought  hand  to  hand.

^^  Thenceforward,  it  u-as  called  *  Theseus'  Stone.'  It  had  pre-
viously been  denominated,  the  '  Altar  of  Jupiter  Sthenius.'  A
beautiful  cornelian,  i-eprcscnting  this  first  effort  of  the  hero,  xvas
J9  thp  Orleans  cabinet  !*


$  THESEUS.

done  it  with  the  utmost  safety,  and  was  strongly
entreated  to  it  by  his  grandfather  and  his  niotlier,
as  it  was  hazardous  at  that  time  to  travel  by  land
to  Athens,  on  account  of  tlie  general  prevalence  of
ruffians  and  robbers.  Those  times,  indeed,  pror
duced  men  of  great  and  indcfiitigable  powers  of
body,  of  extraordinary  swiftness  and  agihty ;  but
they  applied  their  powers  to  notliing  just  or  useful.
On  the  contrary  their  genius,  their  disposition,  and
their  pleasiu^es  tended  only  to  insolence,  to  violence,
and  to  rapine.  Modesty,  justice,  equity,  and  huma-
nity, they  regarded  as  qualities,  in  which  the  strong
had  no  kind  of  concern  ;  virtues,  praised  by  those
only  who  were  afraid  of  being  injured,  and  who  on
the  same  principle  of  fear,  abstained  from  injuring
others.  Some  of  these  ridlians  were  cut  otf  by
Hercules  in  his  peregrinations,  wliile  others  escaped
to  their  lurking-holes,  and  were  spared  by  the  hero
in  contempt  of  [heir  cowaidice.  Dut  when  Hercules
had  unfortunately  killed  I[)liitus,  he  retired  to  l>y-
dia,  wlierc  for  a  long  time  he  was  a  slave  to  Om-
phale'",  a  punishment  which  he  imposed  upon  himself
for  the  murther.  The  Lydians,  during  that  period,
enjoyed  great  quiet  and  security  ;  but  in  Greece  the
same  kind  of  enormities  broke  out  anew,  there  being
no  one  to  restrain  or  quell  them.  It  was,  therefore,
extremely  dangerous  to  go  by  land  from  Pclopon-
iicsus  to  Athens  j  and  Pittheus,  acquainting  Theseus

^<^  Those  who  had  been  guilty  of  murther  became  voluntary  ex-
jlcp,  and  imposed  upon  themselves  a  certain  penance,  which  they
continued  till  they  thought  their  crime  expiated.  (L.)  Hercules
had  rashly  thrown  Iphitus  headlong  from  the  walls  of  Tirynthus,  in
resentment  of  a  breach  of  faith  by  his  father  P^arytus,  who  had
promised  to  iiim  his  daughter  lole  upon  certain  conditions,  and  af-
terward refused  to  fulfil  his  engagement.  In  consequence  of  this
event,  he  applied  first  to  Neleus  at  Pylus,  who  denied  him  the  ne-
cessary lustration ;  and  next,  with  somewhat  better  success,  to
Deiohobus  at  Amycla,'.  But,  being  still  arllicted  with  a  severe  illv
jiess,  he  consulted  the  Delphic  oracle;  and  was  answered,  that  he
must  spend  three  years  in  servitude,  in  order  to  obtain  an  effectual
cure.  Upon  which,  INIercury  sold  him  to  Omphale,  queen  of  Ly-
Uia.  (ApoUod.  II.)*


THESEUS.  9

with  the  number  of  these  ruffians  and  with  their  cruel
treatment  of  strangers,  advised  him  to  g'o  thither  by
sea.  But  he  had  long  been  secretly  tired  with  the
glory  of  Hercides,  whom  he  held  in  the  highest
esteem  ;  listening  with  the  utmost  attention  to  slicIi
as  related  his  achievements,  particularly  to  those
who  had  seen  him,  conversed  with  him,  and  been
witnesses  of  his  various  prowess.  He  was  affected
in  the  same  manner  as  Themistocles  afterward  was,
when  he  declared  that  the  trophies  of  Miltiades
would  not  suffer  him  to  sleep.*  The  virtues  of  Her-
cules were  his  dream  by  night,  and  by  day  emulation
led  him  out,  and  spurred  him  on  to  perform  some
exploits  of  a  similar  nature.  Besides,  they  were
nearly  related,  being  born  of  cousin-germans ;  for
^thra  was  the  daughter  of  Pittheus  and  Alcmena
of  Lysidice,  and  Pittheus  and  Lysidice  were  brother
and  sister  by  Pelops  and  Hippodamia.  lie  consi-
dered it  therefore  as  an  insupportable  dishonour,
that  Hercules  should  traverse  both  sea  and  laud  to
rid  them  of  those  banditti,  while  he  himself  declined
such  adventures  as  occurred  unsought ;  disgracing
his  reputed  father,  if  he  took  his  voyage  or  rather
flight  by  sea,  and  carrying  to  his  real  father  a  pair
of  sandals  and  a  sword  unstained  with  blood,  instead
of  the  ornament  of  great  and  good  actions,  to  add
lustre  to  his  noble  birth.  With  such  thoughts  and
resolutions  as  these  he  set  forward,  determined  to
injure  no  one,  but  to  take  vengeance  of  such  as
should  offer  him  any  violence.

lie  was  first  attacked  by  Periphetes  in  Epidauria*',
whose  weapon  w^as  a  club,  and  who  upon  that  ac-
count was  called  Corynetes,  or  '  the  Club-bearer.'
He  engaged  \yith  him  and  slew  him.  Delighted
with  the  club,  he  took  it  for  his  weapon,  and  bore
it  as  Hercules  did  the  lion's  skin.  The  skin  was  a
proof  of  the  vast  size  of  the  wild  beast,  which  that

*  See  the  Life  of  Themistocles.*
'^  A  district  of  Peloponnesus.*


10  THESEUS.

hero  liad  slnin;  and  Theseus  carried  about  witli  bini
this  chib,  vvhosc  stroke  he  iiuleed  had  been  able  to
parry,  but  wiiich  in  !us  hand  was  irresistible.  In  the
Isthmus  he  slew  Sinnis  '  the  Pine-bender",'  in  the
same  manner  as  he  had  destroyed  many  others:  and
this  he  did,  not  as  having  learned  or  practised  the
bending  or  those  trees,  but  to  prove  that  natural
strength  is  above  all  art.  Sinnis  had  a  daughter  re-
markable for  her  beauty  and  stature,  named  Peri-
gune,  who  concealed  herself  when  her  father  was
killed.  Theseus  however  made  diligent  search  for
her,  and  found  her  at  last  in  a  place  overgrown  with
shrubs,  and  rushes,  and  wild  asparagus.  In  her
childish  simplicity  she  addressed  her  prayers  anci
vows  io  these  plants  and  bushes,  as  if  they  had  a
sense  of  her  misfortune  ;  promising,  if  they  would
save  and  hide  her,  that  she  would  never  burn  or  de-
stroy them.  But  Theseus  pledging  himself  to  treat
her  honourably,  she  came  to  him,  and  in  due  time
brought  hini  a  son  named  Melanippus.  Afterward,
^vitll  his  permission,  she  married  Deioncus,  the  son
of  Eurytus  the  QLchalian.  Melanippus  had  a  son
named  loxus,  who  joined  with  Ornytus  in  planting
a  cofony  in  Caria  ;  and  hence  sprung  the  loxides,
with  whom  it  is  an  inviolable  rule,  not  to  burn  either
rushes  or  wild  asparagus,  but  to  honour  and  worship
them.

About  this  time  Crommyon  was  infested  by  a  wild
sow  named  Phieii"^,  a  fierce  and  formidable  crea-
ture.    This  savage  he  attacked  and  killed",  going

--  So  called  from  his  bending  the  heads  of  two  puics,  and  tying
passengers  between  the  opposite  branches,  which  by  their  siuhlea
return  tore  them  to  pieces.    (L.)

IVaisanias,  who  (as  well  as  Ovid,  Met.  vii.  40.)  calls  him  Sinis,
5.avs  that  one  of  these  pines   remained  till  die  time   of  Hadrian.

(ii.  1.)'-

^3  f^er-pc,    '  dun'  or  '  dark-coloured."       This   sow,  according  to
8trabo,  produced  the  Cal)"donian  boar,  kil'cd  by  Meleager.
C'roniniyou  was  on  the  border  dividing  Corinth  from  Megara.*
••  In  tills  instance  our  hero  deviated  from  the  principle,  upon
which  he  set  out,  never  to  be  the  aggressor  in  any  engagement.
12


THESEUS.  11

«iit  of  his  way  to  engage  her,  and  thus  displaying
an  act  of  voluntary  valour:  for  he  believed  it  equally
became  a  brave  man  to  stand  upon  his  defence
against  al)andoned  ruffians,  and  to  seek  out  and  begin
tiie  combat  with  strong  and  savage  animals.  i>ut
some  say,  tliat  Fhaea  was  an  abandoned  female  rob-
ber who  dwelt  in  Crommyon,  received  the  name  of
*  Sow '  on  account  of  her  life  and  manners,  and
w^as  afterward  slain  by  Theseus.

On  the  borders  of  Megara  he  destroyed  Sciron,  by
casting  him  headlong  from  a  precipice  :  a  robber,
as  the  story  is  generally  related ;  but  as  others  affirm,
one  who  in  wanton  villainy  used  to  make  strangers
wash  his  feet,  and  to  take  those  opportunities  to
kick  and  push  them  into  the  sea.  The  writers  of
Megara  however,  in  contradiction  to  this  report,
and  (as  Simonides  expresses  it)  "  fighting  with  all
antiquity,"  assert  tliat  Sciron  was  neither  a  robber
nor  a  ruffian,  but  on  the  contrary  a  destroyei-  of
robbers,  and  a  man  whose  heart  and  house  were
ever  open  to  the  good  and  the  honest.  For  .32acus
(say  they)  was  looked  upon  as  the  justest  man  in
Greece,  Cychreus  of  Salamis  had  divine  honours
paid  him'  at  Athens,  and  the  virtue  of  Peleus  and
Telamon  also  vras  universally  known.  Now  Sciron
was  the  son-in-law  cf  Cychreus,  the  father-in-law  of
^acus,  and  the  grandfather  of  Peleus  and  Telamon,
who  were  both  of  them  sons  of  Endeis-^  the  daugh-
ter of  Sciron  and  Chariclo  :  and  it  was  not  probable,
that  the  best  of  men  should  make  such  alliances  with
one  of  so  vile  a  character,  giving  and  receiving  the
greatest  and  dearest  of  pledges.  Besides,  we  are  told
that  Theseus  did  not  slay  Sciron  in  his  lirst  journey

Tiieviikl  sow  was,  certainly,  not  a  less  respectable  aninial  than  '  the
Pine-bender.'

^'  Apollodorus  makes  her  the  daughter  of  Chiron  ;  but,  beside
the  resemblance  of  tiie  names  (which  mijrht  easily  lead  a  transcri-
ber of  that  author  into  the  mistake)  it  is  highly  probable  that  Plu-
tarch's statement  is  the  more  correct,  as  he  builds  an  argument
upon  the  connexion;  and  Pausanias  gives  the  same  account,
(ii.l.)*


J2  THESEUS.

to  Athens ;  but  afterward,  Avlien  lie  took  Eleusis
from  the  Megarensians,  luivino-  expelled  Dioeles,  its
ciiici"  magistrate,  by  a  stratagem.  In  sucli  contra-
dictions are  these  things  involved.

At  Eleusis  he  engaged  in  wrestling  with  Cercyoii
the  Arcadian,  and  killed  him  on  the  spot^^  Pro-
ceeding to  Hermione  -',  he  put  a  period  to  the
cruelties  of  Damastes,  surnamed  Procrustes,  making
his  body  fit  the  size  of  his  own  beds,  as  that  barba-
]ian  had  previously  treated  strangers.  These  things
he  did  in  imitation  of  Hercules :  for  that  hero  alwavs
returned  upon  the  aggressors  tlie  same  sort  of  treats
ment  which  they  had  intended  for  himself;  having
sacrificed  Ihisiris,  destroyed  Antaeus  in  wrestling,
killed  Cycnus  in  single  combat,  and  broken  the  skull
of  Termerus  :  v.hence  this  is  called  '  the  Termerian
mischief-^;'  as  Termerus  it  seems  destroved  the
passengers  he  met,  by  dashing  his  head  against  theirs.
Thus  Theseus  pursued  his  travels  to  punish  aban-
doned wretches,  who  suffered  from  him  the  same
kind  of  death  that  they  had  inflicted  upon  others,
and  "were  requited  with  vengeance  appropriate  to
their  crimes.

In  his  ])rogress  he  came  to  the  Cephisus,  where
he   was   first   saluted  by  some  of  the  Phytalidae  -'•'.

~^  Tiiut  spot,  even  in  Pausnnias'  time,  was  called  *  Cercyon's
PalcTStra.'  Cei-cj-on  was  the  first  who  used  art  in  his  wrestling
(i.  39)  ;  but  Minerva,  by  her  training,  enabled  Theseus  to  gain  tho
victory.*

*'  This  seems  to  be  a  mistake ;  for  we  know  of  no  place  called
I larmione,  or  Hermione,  between  Eleusis  and  Athens.  Pausanias
calls  it  Erione  ;  and  the  authors  of  the  Universal  History,  after  Phi-
loehorus,  call  it  Termione.

^*  Other  originations  of  tliis  proverb  are  assigned  by  other  au-
thors. Suidas  derives  it  from  a  strong  place  in  Caria  (between
jVIelos  and  Halicarnassus)  called  Termerium,  which  was  used  by
tyrants  as  a  dungeon  :  Apostolius  and  Suidas refer  it  to  the  last  day
ofilfe,  called  Terniia.     See  also  Erasm.  C'I>il.  I.  i.  f^!).,  &c.*

-'■>  These  were  the  descendents  of  Phytalus,  with  whom  Ceres
entrusted  the  secret  of  the  cultivation  of  the  fig-tree,  and  the  su-
prrintendcnce  of  her  Mysteries,  in  recompence  for  the  hospitality
wicli  wl'.ich  she  had  been  treated  at  his  house.  To  those  Mysteries,
Theseus  thought  himself  unfit  to  be  admitted  without  expiation,  be?

9


THESEUS.  13

Upon  Ills  desire  to  have  the  customary  purifications,
they  granted  them  in  due  form,  and  having  otFered
propitiatory  sacrifices,  invited  him  to  their  houses.
This  was  the  first  ]u!spita1)le  treatment  which  he  met
■with  on  the  road.  He  is  said  to  have  arrived  at
Athens  on  the  eiglith  day  of  the  month  Cronins,
■which  now  they  call  Hecatombeon.  There  he  found
the  state  full  of  troubles  and  distraction,  and  the  royal
family  in  extreme  disorder  :  for  Medea,  who  had  fled
from  Corinth,  had  promised  by  her  art  to  enable
^'Egeus  to  have  children,  and  was  admitted  to  his
bed.  She  first  discovering  Theseus,  whom  his  fa-
ther had  not  yet  recognised,  ])ersuaded  the  old  king
(now  in  years,  and  full  of  jealousies  and  suspicions)
on  account  of  the  faction  that  prevailed  in  the  citv,
to  prepare  an  entertainment  for  him  as  a  stranger,
and  take  him  off  by  poison.  Theseus,  coming  to
the  banquet,  did  not  intend  to  declare  himself  at
first;  but,  willing  to  give  his  father  occasion  to  find
him  out,  when  the  meat  was  served  up  he  drew  his
sword  *',  as  if  he  designed  to  carve  with  it,  and  took
care  it  should  attract  his  notice,  ii^geus,  quicklv
perceiving  it,  dashed  down  the  cup  of  poison,  and
after  some  questions  embraced  him  as  his  son:  then,
assembling  the  people,  he  acknowiedged  him  also  in

eause  he  had  dipped  his  hands  in  hlood,  though  it  was  only  that  of
thieves  and  robbers.  (L.)  This  idea  of  purification  the  uucients
carried  to  8uch  an  extreme,  that  even  Apollo  himself  was  oblige<l
to  submit  to  the  iustral  ceremony,  after  he  had  shiin  the  t^crpent
Python,  the  destrover  of  Greece.  The  expiation  of  Theseus  took
place  at  the  altar  of  Jupiter  Pa.ificus,  near  the  Cephisus.   (Pausan.

i.  37.)"

2°  Some  needless  learning  has  been  adduced  to  show,  t))at  in  the
heroic  times  they  carved  with  a  cutlass  or  large  knife,  and  not  with
a  sword  ;  and  that,  conscquentljs  Plutarch  fiiust  be  mistaken  :  but,
as  iJijv.-x,a.\^a.  signifies  either  a  cutlass  or  a  sword,  how  do  we  know
that  it  was  a  sword,  and  not  a  cutlass,  wbich  /Egeus  hid  under  the
stone;  (I..)  Because  h<poc,  is  the  term  used  u[)i)n  that  occasion.
The  more  probable  interpretation  is,  that  in  drawing  his  hanger  to
carve  v.ith,  he  fperh.aps  necessarily)  threw  back  his  cloke,  and  thus
contrived  to  show  the  v.-ell-known  sword.  To  justify  this  version,
it  is  only  requisittj  to  supply  the  word  Irp^c,  as  by  sonie  accident
9mitte4.*


1*  THESEUS.

their  presence  ;  and  by  chem  he  was  received  wilTi
great  satisfaction,  on  account  of  his  valour.  Tlie
cup  is  said  to  have  fallen,  and  the  ])oison  to  have
been  spilled,  where  the  inclosure  now  is  in  the  ])lace
called  Delphinium  ;  for  there  it  was  tlial  ^^geus
dwelt:  and  the  Mercury,  which  stands  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  temple,  is  yet  called  '  the  Mer-
cury of  ^^g'eus'  fjate.'

The  PailantidcE,  who  had  ho]"!ed  to  recover  tlie
Isingdom  if  ^Egeus  died  childrc^s,  lost  all  patience
when  Theseus  vras  declared  his  successor.  Exas-
perated at  tJie  thought  that  ^']geus  (who  was  not
in  the  least  allied  to  the  Erechthid^e,  but  only  adopt-
ed by  Pandion  ^')  should  first  gain  the  crown,  and
afterward  'i'heseus,  an  emigrant  and  a  stranger,  they
prepared  for  war :  and,  dividing  their  forces,  one
party  marched  openly  with  their  father  from  8j)het-
tus  to  the  city  ;  v.hile  the  other,  concealing  them-
selves in  Gargettus,  lay  in  ambush,  with  a  design  to
attack  the  enemy  from  two  several  quarters.  They
liad  with  them  a  herald  named  Leos,  of  the  tribe  of
Agnus.  This  man  carried  to  Theseus  an  account  of
all  the  designs  of  the  Pallantidie  ;  upon  which  he
immediately  attacked  those  that  lay  in  ambush,  and
destroyed  them.  Pallas  and  his  company,  being  in-
formed of  this,  thought  fit  to  disperse.  Hence,  it  is
said,  the  tribe  of  Pallene  never  intermarry  with  the
Agnusians,  nor  suffer  any  proclanjation  to  begin  with
these  words,  Akouete  Ltos,  '  Hear,  O  ye  people;'
for  they  hate  the  very  name  of  Leos,  on  account  of
that  herald's  treachery.

Theseus,  desirous  to  keep  himself  in  action,  and
at  the  same  time  courtmg  the  iu,vour  of  the  people,
went  in  (piest  of  the  Marathonian  bull,  which  did
no  small  mischief  to  the  inhabitants  of  Tetranolis^^


^'  It  had  been  actually  reported,  that  il^lgeus  was  not  the  son  of
J*;i;idion,  but  of  Scyrias.

'  A  district  of  Attica,  so  denominated  from  containing  four
citie?  (Zenoe,  Marathon,  Prooalinthus,  and  Trycorithus)  founded
tv  Xuthus,  son-in-law  of  Erechtheus.*


THESEUS.  IC

When  he  had  taken  him,  he  brouo-ht  liim  alive  in
triumph  through  the  city,  and  aftei'ward  sacrificed
him  to  the  Delphinian  Apollo '^  Hecale  also,  and
the  story  of  her  ieceivin<?  and  entertaining^  Theseus,
do  not  appear  wholly  destitute  of  foundation  :  tbr^
the  people  in  that  neighbourhood  assembled  to  per-
Ibrm  the  Hecalesian  rites  to  Ju.piter  Hecalus,  and
paid  honour  to  Hecaie  too,  addressing  her  by  the
diminutive  '  Hecalene;*  because  when  she  enter-
tained Theseus,  while  he  was  but  a  youth,  she  caress-
ed him  as  persons  in  years  use  to  ao  children,  and
called  him  by  such  tender  diminutive  names.  She
vowed  moreover,  when  he  went  io  battle,  to  offer
sacrifices  to  Jupiter,  if  he  returned  safe ;  but,  as  she
died  before  tlie  end  of  the  expedition,  Theseus  per-
formed those  holy  rites  in  testimony  of  the  grateful
sense  which  he  liad  of  her  hospitality.  So  Fhilo-
chorus  relates  the  story  '\

Not  long  afterward,  there  came  the  tliird  tin^e
from  Crete  the  collectors  of  the  tribute,  exacted  o!«
the  following  occasion:  Androgeus^'^  having  been
treacherously  slain  in  Attica,  a  tatal  war  was  carried
on  against  that  country  by  Minos,  and  Divine  Venge*
ance  laid  it  waste ;  for  it  was  visited  by  fiirnine
and  pestilence,  and  want  of  v^^ater  increased  their
misery.  The  remedy  that  Apollo  proposed  was,
that  they  should  appease  Minos,  and  be  reconciled
to  him  ;  npon  which  tlie  wrath  of  Keaven  would
cease,  and  their  calarnfcf^es  come  to  a  period.  In
consequence  of  this,  they  despatclied  embassadors
with  their  submission ;  and,  as  most  v.-riters  agree,
engaged  themselves  by  treaty  to  send  every  nintli

^5  This- sacrifice  Diod.  Sic.  (iv.  59.)  ascribes  to  iEgeus.*

"=''  Philochorus  was  au  Athenian  historian,  who  flourished  in  tlie

reign  of  Ptolemy  Philopater,  about  two  hundred  years  before  Chritit.

He  wrote  many  valuable  pieces,  of  which  a  list  is  given  in   Suidas  ;

but  none  of  them  remain,  except  a  few  fragments  preserved  hv  other

v.riters.

^>  Some  say,  ^geus  caused  him  to  be  murthered,  because  he  wai

in  the  interest  of  the  Palluutidas;  others,  that  he  was  killed  by  tJie

Marathonian  bull.


18  THESEUS.

year  a  tri!)utc  of  seven  young  men  and  as  many
virgins.  When  these  were  brouglit  into  Crete,  as
the  fabulous  account  intbrms  us,  tlie}'  were  destroy-
ed by  the  Minotaur  ^°  in  the  Labyrinth,  or  wander-
ing about  and  miable  to  find  tlie  way  out  of  it,
perished  in  it's  mazes.  The  Minotaur,  according  to
Euripides,  was

A  niingled  form  prodigioas  to  btliold,
Half-bull,  halt-man !

The  Cretans,  however,  according  to  Philoehorus,
deny  this,  and  contend  that  the  Labyrinth  was  only
a  prison,  of  wliich  the  sole  inconvenience  was,  that
those  who  were  confined  in  it  could  not  escape  :
and,  Minos  having  instituted  games  in  honour  of
Androgens,  the  prize  for  the  victors  was  those  youths,
who  had  been  kept  till  that  time  in  the  Labyrinth.
He  that  first  won  the  prizes  in  those  games  was
Taurus,  a  person  of  high  authority  in  the  court  of
jMinos,  and  general  of  his  armies ;  and  being  un-
merciful and  savage  in  his  nature,  he  had  treated  the
Athenian  youths  with  great  insolence  and  cruelty.
Aristotle  himself  likewise,  in  liis  Account  of  the
^'  Botti(x?an  Governments^,  obviously  supposes,  not
1^-  f  that  the  young  men  were  put  to  death  by  Minos,
but  that  they  lived,  some  of  them  to  old  age,  in
servile  employments  in  Crete.  He  adds  that  the
Cretans,  in  pursuance  of  ai)  ancient  vow,  once  sent
a  number  of  their  first-born  ^;o  Delphi,  among  whom
were  some  of  the  descenden.s  of  these  Athenian
slaves ;  who,  not  being  able  to  support  themsehes
there,  first  passed  thence  into  Italy,  where  they  set-
tled about  lapygia  ;  and  again  migrated  subsequently'

3f>  Pc'gnQj  ])y  (],e  poets  to  have  been  bc;,f()tten  by  a  bull  upon  Pasi-
phati,  Mill!)'*'  queen  ;  Inspired  it  seems  with  this  horrid  passion  by
Neptune,  in  revenge  tor  Minos'  having  refused  him  a  beautiful  bull,
V. Iiich  he  expected  as  an  offering.  (L.)  'l"he  solution  of  this  storj',
offered  by  Palephatus  (II.)  is  not  very  probable.*

3'  Whicli;  vvitli  many  oliier  of  his  accounts  of  the  same  nature,
is  unfortunately  lost.'^


' '  THESEUS.  17

into  Tlirace,  and  weic  called  Botti(raiis.  Where-
fore the  Botticran  virghis,  in  some  solemnities  qf  re-
ligion, sing,  "  To  Athens  let  us  go."  And  indeed  it
seems  dangerous  to  be  at  enmity  with  a  city,  which
is  the  seat  of  eloquence  and  learning,  for  Minos
was  always  a  subject  of  satire  upon  the  Athenian
stage :  neither  was  his  fl\me  sufiiciently  rescued  by
Ilcsiod's  calling  him  '  Supierne  of  Kings,'  or  Ho-
mer's ^^  saying  that  he  "  conversed  with  Jove  ; "  since
the  writers  of  tragedy  prevailing  represented  him  as
a  man  vicious^'-',  violent,  and  implacable:  stating
however  at  the  same  time,  inconsistently  enough,
that  he  w'as  a  king  and  a  legislator;  and  that  llha-
damanthus,  an  upright  judge,  was  the  guardian  of
his  laws.

When  the  time  of  the  third  tribute  came,  and
those  parents  who  had  sons  not  arrived  at  full  ma-
turity were  obliged  to  resign  them  to  the  lot,  com-
plaints against  ^Egeus  sprung  up  again  among  the
people;  who  expressed  their  grief  and  resentment,
that  he  who  was  the  cause  of  all  their  misfortunes
bore  no  part  of  the  punishment,  and  w\hile  he  waj?
adopting  and  raising  to  the  succession  a  stranger  of
spurious  birth,  felt  nothing  for  those  that  were  losing
their  legitimate  children.  This  was  matter  of  deep
concern  to  Theseus,  who,  to  express  his  regard  for
justice,  and  take  his  share  in  the  common  fortune,
voluntarilv  offered  himself  as  one  of  the  seven  with-
out  lot*.  The  citizens  were  charmed  with  this  proof
of  his  magnanimity,  and  public  spirit;  and  ^geus
himseltj  when  lie  saw  that  no  entreaties  or  i:)ersua-'

■-■^  Od.  xix.  179. — -''te?  (,'.£7^; a  cvfiTz^.  Might  not  this  fable  ba
fouadecl  upon  Exod.  xxxiii.  11.'  And  the  Lard  spske  unto  Moses
l\\ce  to  face,  as  a  nuin  spcakctli  to  his  friend.'*

^^  This  is  a  niist'ike,  into  which  PhUirch  and  several  other
writers  (among  the  re-st,  Plato)  have  fallen.  There  were  two  of
the  name  of  Minos.  One,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Europa,  waa  a
just  and  excellent  prince  ;  the  other,  his  grandson  and  the  sou  of
Lv'castes,  of  whom  Plutarch  is  here  speaking  as  t!i?  father  oi"  Andro-
gtM^s,  was  a  tv'rant.

*  F/isjar.sv  liiuiot,  anv ;i?.r,^^  7:(,c;/3&r.,  (Wakefield,  Silv.Crit,  iv.  1"5.}*

VOL.    I.  C


IS  TlIESEUS.

sions  availed  to  change  his  purpose,  gave  out  the
lots  for  the  rest  of  the  young  men.  Ilellanicus  how-
ever says,  that  the  youths  and  virgins  which  the
city  furnished  were  not  chosen  by  lot,  but  that
Minos  came  in  person  and  selected  them,  and  The-
seus before  the  rest,  upon  these  conditions  :  that  the
Athenians  should  furnish  a  vessel,  and  the  young
men  embark  and  sail  along  with  him,  but  without
arms;  and  that,  if  they  could  kill  the  Minotaur,
there  should  be  an  end  of  the  tribute.  There  ha\ing
appeared  no  hopes  of  safety  for  the  youths  in  the
two  former  tributes,  they  had  sent  out  a  ship  with  a
black  sail,  as  carrying  them  to  certain  ruin.  But
^geus  being  encouraged  by  his  son's  contidence  of
success  against  the  Minotaur,  gave  another  sail  (a
■white  one)  to  the  pilot,  ordering  him,  if  he  brought
Theseus  safe  back,  to  hoist  the  white  ;  if  not,  to
sail  with  the  black  one  in  token  of  his  misfortune.
vSimonides  informs  us,  that  it  was  not  a  white  sail
•which  ^geus  gave,  but  a  scarlet  one  dyed  with  the
juice  of  the  flower  of  a  very  flourishing  holm-oak '^'^,
and  that  this  was  to  be  the  signal  that  all  was  well.
He  adds  that  Phereclus,  the  son  of  Amarsyas,  was
pilot  of  the  ship  :  but  Philochorus  says,  that  Iheseus
had  a  pilot  sent  him  by  Sciras  from  Salamis,  named
Nausitheus,  and  one  Pha^ax  to  stand  at  the  prow,

*°  It  is  not  the  flower,  but  the  fruit  of  the  Querctts  Ilex  (alow
evergreen  oak,  with  the  prickly  leaves  of  the  holly,  aquifoUiim)  full
of  little  worms,  vThich  the  Arabians  call  Kcrmes,  from  which  a
scarlet  dye  is  procured   (L.)

Of  this  fruit  Theoplirustus  speaks,  in  his  History  of  Plants,  as
w-ell  as  Fiiny,  H.  N.  xxiv.  4. :  Beckmann  likewise  proves  that  it  was
used  as  a  dye  in  very  remote  antiquity,  and  was  soon  so  much  im-
proved, as  to  excel  and  finaliy  to  supersede  the  celebrated  Tyrian
purple.  In  the  niid«iie  ages  ksrnies  occurs  under  the  name  vcrmi-
culus  or  vermicnhim,  wlience  cloth  dyed  with  it  was  called  vermicu-
lala  ;  and  the  French  vermeil,  with  it's  offspring  the  English  vermi-
lion, is  derived.  In  Spain,  where  the  best  is  produced,  it  forms  at
present  a  valuable  branch  of  commerce.  For  the  mode  of  gathering
and  preparing  it,  &c.  see  Excycl.  Brit.  art.  Coccus  Ilicis.  There
is  a  valuah.le  paper  also  by  Mr.  Ilatehett  on  Lac  in  the  Phil.  Trans,
for  1801',  Part  II.  which  would  abundantly  repay  the  reader  for. the
trouble  of  procuring  and  perusing  it.*


THESEUSf.  19

Wcaiise  as  }'et  tlie  Athenians  had  not  applied  them-
selves to  navigation ''^;  and  that  Sciras  did  this,  be-
cause one  of  the  young  men,  named  Menesthes,  was'
Ids  daughter's  son.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  monu-
ments of  Nansitheus  and  Phasax,  built  by  Theseus
at  Phalerum  near  the  Temple  of  Sciron  ;  and  the
feast  called  Cvbernesia  or  '  the  Pilots'  Feast,'  is  said
to  be  kept  to  their  honour.

AVhen  the  lots  were  cast,  Theseus  taking  witii
lilm  out  of  the  Prytaneum'*^  those  upon  whom  they
fell,  went  to  the  Delphinian  temple,  and  made  an
oiFering  for  them  to  Apollo.  This  offering  was  a
branch  of  consecrated  olive,  bound  about  with  white
wool.  Having  finished  his  devotions,  he  embarked
on  the  sixth  of  the  month  Munychion  ;  at  whicii
time  they  still  send  the  virgins  to  Delphinium,  to
propitiate  the  god.  It  is  reported,  that  the  oracle
at  Delphi  commanded  him  to  take  Venus  for  his
H'uide,  and  entreat  her  to  be  his  companion  in  the
voyage ;  and  that,  while  he  was  sacrificing  to  her  a
she-goat   on  the   sea-shore,    it's  sex   was  instantly


'*'  The  Athenians,  according  to  Homer,  sent  fifty  ships  to  Troy;
but  these  were  only  transport-ships.  Thucydides  assures  us,  that
they  did  not  begin  to  make  any  figure  at  sea  till  ten  or  twelve  years
after  the  battle  (if  Marathon,  nearly  seven  hundred  years  after  tha
siege  of  Troy.  (L.)

That  so  shortly  after  their  application  to  maritime  affairs,  which
only  commenced  under  Theseus,  they  should  have  been  able  to
send  so  many  vessels  to  Troy;  and  that,  after  a  lapse  of  almost  seven
centuries,  their  navy  should  still  be  in  it's  infancy,  though  it  was  so
soon  to  attain  it's  mighty  maturity,  are  singular  circumstances  in
the  history  of  that  great  people.  Themistocles,  however,  was  the
chief  cause  of  their  last  sudden  advance.*

•'^  In  this  place  the  ruling  senators,  called  Prytanes,  assembled;
and  here  likewise  were  supported,  at  the  public  expense,  those
citizens  who  were  decreed  to  have  '  deserved  well  of  their  country.*
To  the  latter  noble  custom  Milton,  speaking  of  the  kind  treatment
which  he  experienced  in  his  blindness  from  the  English  republicaa
leaders,  has  the  following  allusion  ;  *  kumana  qualia  sint  repiitantes^
taiiqiiam  emerito  fax^ent,  indulgent,  vacafionem  atque  otiumjaqile^
concfdunt — eodem  plane  honore  ac  si,  id  olim  ^Itheniensibus  tuqs  €rat^
in  Prijtaneo  alendum  decrevisseni.'  (Def,  S?ec.)*

c  2


20  THESEUS.

clianged  :  hence  the  goddess  had  the  name  of  Epi-
tragia  ^^.

Wlien  he  arrived  in  Crete,  according  to  most  his-
torians and  poets,  Ariadne  fulHng  in  k)ve  with  liim,
gave  him  a  chie  of  thread,  and  instructed  him  how
to  pass  with  it  through  the  intricacies  of  the  Laby-
rinth. Thus  assisted,  he  killed  the  Minotaur  ",  and
then  set  sail,  carrying  off  Ariadne  and  her  young
companions.  Pherecydes  *''  says,  that  Theseus  broke
up  the  keels  of"  the  Cretan  ships,  to  prevent  their
pursuit.  But,  according  to  Demon's  statement,  he
slew  Taurus,  Minos'  commander,  who  engaged  him
in  the  liarbour  just  as  he  was  ready  to  set  sail.  Again,
according  to  Philochorus,  when  Minos  was  celebrat-
ing the  games  in  honour  of  his  son,  it  was  believed
that  Taurus  would  bear  away  the  prizes  in  them  as
formerly,  and  every  one  grudged  him  that  honour ;
ibr  his  excessive  power  and  arrogance  were  iutoler-
able,  and  he  was  farther  accused  of  too  great  a  fa-
miliarity with  Pasiphae :  when  Theseus  therefore  re-
quested permission  to  encounter  him,  J\Iinos  readily
consented.  In  Crete  it  was  ttlie  custom  for  the  wo-
men, as  well  as  the  men,  to  see  the  games  ;  and  Ari-
adne, being  present,  was  struck  with  the  person  of
Theseus,  and  with  his  superior  vigour  and  address
in  the  wrestling-ring.  Minos  too  wa's  greatly  de-
lighted, especially  when  he  saw  Taurus  vanquished

••5  To  this  story  most  probably  is  to  be  referred  Montfaucon'*
figure  of  a  Venus  on  the  waves,  stretched  upon  a  goat,  which  ^hc
Jiolds  by  the  beard,  and  attended  by  Cupids  on  dolphins,  Tritons,
&c.     f  Aniiq.  cxpliquc'e,  i.  10.)*

'**  In  one  of  the  most  exquisite  paintings  found  at  Hercuhincutn,
Tlieseus  is  represented  as  traniphng  upon  the  Minotaur  (wliich  has
tlie  head  of  a  bull  upon  a  human  body)  while  young  children  are
kissing  his  liands,  and  clasping  his  knees.*

•<5  There  were  two  ilkistrious  ancients  of  this  name:  the  elder  of
Scyros,  the  tutor  of  Tliales  and  IVthag<n-as,  and  surnanied  '  the
Theologian,'  first  taug'it  in  Greece  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ((Mc.
Tusc.  i.  It).);  the  other  (to  wliom  Plutarch  most  probably  refers)
wns  an  historian  of  Leros,  an  island  iii  the  .ligean  sea,  and  but  littla.
senior  to  Herodotus.*


THESEUS.  21

and  disgraced ;  and  this  induced  him  to  give  up  tlie
young  men  to  Theseus,  and   to  remit  the  tribute.
CHdemus  '^^,  beginning  higher,  gives  as  usual  a  pi'o-
lix  account  of  these  matters.     There  was  (it  seems)
a  decree  throughout  all  Greece,  that  no  vessel  should
sail  with   more  than  five  hands,  except   the  Argo
commanded  by  Jason,  w-ho  was  appointed  to   clear
the  sea  of  pirates.     But  when  Daedalus  escaped  by
sea  to  Athens,  Minos  pursuing  him  with  his  men  of
war,  contrary  to  the  decree,  was  driven  by  a  storm
to  Sicily,  and  there  ended  his  life.     And  when  Deu-
calion his  successor  in  a  hostile  manner  demanded
of  the  Athenians,  that  they  should  deliver  up  Dae-
dalus ;  and  threatened,  if  they  did  not,  to  put  to
death  the  hostages  that  Minos  had  received ;  The-
seus gave  him  a  mild  answ^er,allegingthat  Dffidalus  was
his  near  relation,  being  son  to  Merope  the  daughter  of
Erechtheus.   At  the  same  time  he  privately  prepared
a  fleet,  part  of  it  among  the  Thymietadse  at  a  dis-
tance from  any  public  road,  and  part  under  the  direc-  .
tion  of  Pittheus  at  Trcezene.     With  this,  as  soon  as
it  was  ready,  he  set  sail ;  taking  Daedalus  and  the
rest  of  the  fugitives  from  Crete  for  his  guides.     The
Cretans  having  received  no  information  of  the  mat-
ter, and  when  they  saw  his  fleet  regarding  them  as
friends,  he  easily  gained  the  harbour,  and  disembark-
ing proceeded  immediately  to  Gnossus.     There  he
engaged  with  Deu9alion  and  his  guards,  before  the
gates  of  the  Labyrinth,  and  slew  them.   The  govern-
ment then  devolving  on  Ariadne,  he  entered  into  an
agreement   vv^ith   her,   by  which  he  recovered  the
young  captives,  and  made  a  perpetual  league  be-
tween the  Athenians  and  the  Cretans,  both  sides
swearing  to  proceed  to  hostilities  no  more.

There  are  many  other  reports  about  these  things,
and  as  many  concerning  Ariadne,  but  none  of  any

■"^  Vossius  (De  Hist.  Gr.  iii.)  mentions  an  historian  of  this  name,
who  wrote  an  Account  of  Attica,  and  of  the  Unexpected  Returns
of  those  that  had  been  long  absent:  under  either  head  this  :iari-a-
five  might  occur.*


22  ■  THESEL^S.

<:crtainty.  For  some  say  tliat,  being  deserted  by
Theseus,  slie  hanged  lierself;  others,  that  she  was
carried  by  the  mariners  to  Naxos,  and  there  married
Onarus  the  priest  of  Bacchus^',  Theseus  having
left  her  for  another  mistress ;

Fair  iEgle's  charrrs  had  pierced  the  hero's  heart.

For  Hereas  the  Megarensian  informs  us,  that  Pisis^
tratus*"*  struck  this  Jme  out  of  Hesiod  ;  as  on  the
contrary,  to  gratify  the  Athenians,  he  added  this
other  to  Homer's  description  of  tlie  state  of  the
dead  :

The  godlike  Theseus,  and  the  great  Pirithous.

Some  affirm,  that  Ariadne  had  two  sons  by  The-
seus, CEnopion  and  Staphylas.  With  these  agrees
Ion  of  Chios  ^^,  who  says  of  his  native  city,  that  it
was  built  by  QEnopion  the  son  of  Theseus.

But  the  most  striking  passages  of  the  poets,  re-
lative to  these  tilings,  are  in  every  body's  mouth.
Something  more  particuhir  is  delivered  by  Paeon  the
A^mathusian.  By  him  we  are  told,  that  Theseus
being  driven  by  a  storm  to  Cyprus,  and  having  with
liim  Ariadne,  who  was  big  v.ith  child,  and  extremely
discomposed  by  the  agitation  of  the  waves,  set  her
on  shore  and  left  her  alone,  wliile  he  returned  to
take  care  of  the  ship  ;  but  by  a  violent  wind  he  was
ibrced  out  again  to  sea :  that  the  women  of  the
country  received  Ariadne  kindly,  consoled  her  under
her  Joss,  and  brouglit  her  feigned  letters  as  from
Theseus :  that  thev  attended  and  assisted  her,  when
she  fell  in  labour,  and  as  she  died  in  child-bed,  paid

*^  \yhence,  undoubtedly,  the  current  fable  of  her  having  mar-
ried Bacchus  hinisclt'.*

"■^  The  tyrant  of  Athens,  who  hoivever,  as  appears  from  Plu-
tarcli's  Life  of  Solon,  cherished  and  cultivated  letters.*

■t?  A  tragic  writer,  contemporary  with  Pericles.  All  his  dra-
matic workf.  are  lost,  but  sQnie  fragments  of  his  elegies  are  pre-
served by  Alhena:us.*


THESEUS.  23

her  funeral  honours  :  tluit  Theseus  on  his  return,
deeply  afflicted  at  the  news,  left  money  with  the
inhabitants,  ordering  them  to  pay  divine  honours  to
Ariadne  ;  and  caused  two  little  statues  of  her  to  be
made,  one  of  silver  and  the  other  of  brass  :  that
they  celebrate  her  festival  on  the  second  of  the
month  Sorpiaeus,  when  a  young  man  lies  down,
and  imitates  the  cries  and  gestures  of  a  woman  in
travail:  and  that  the  Amathusians  call  the  grove,  in
which  they  show  her  tomb,  '  the  Grove  of*  Venus
Ariadne.'

Some  of  the  Naxian  writers  relate,  that  there  were
two  Minoses,  and  two  Ariadnes  ;  one  of  whom  was
married  to  Bacchus  in  Naxos,  and  had  a  son  named
Staphylus  ;  the  otlier  of  a  later  age,  being  carried
off  bv  Tlieseus  and  afterward  deserted,  came  to
Naxos  with  her  nurse  Corcyne,  whose  tomb  is  still
shown:  tliat  this  Ariadne  died  tliere,  and  had  ho-
nours paid  to  her  different  from  those  of  the  former  j
for  the  feasts  of  one  were  celebrated  with  mirth  and
revels,  while  tlie  sacriiices  of  the  other  were  mixed
with  sorrow  and  mourning  ^^.

Theseus,  in  his  return  from  Crete,  put  in  at
Delos^';  and  having  sacrificed  to  Apollo,  and  de-
dicated a  statue  of  Venus  which  he  received  from
Ariadne "'",  joined  with  the  young  men  in  a  dance,

5°  The  feasts  of  Ariadne,  the  wife  of  Bacchus,  were  celebrated
with  jo\',  to  denote  that  she  was  become  a  divinity;  the  sacrifices
of  the  other  Ariadne  signified,  that  she  fell  like  a  mere  mortal.

^'  Hence  arose  the  custom  of  sending  annually  a  deputation
from  Athens  to  Dtlos,  to  sacritice  to  Apollo.

^^  This  was  a  small  wooden  statue,  carved  by  Daedalus,  with  a
square  base  instead  of  feet;  which  were  first  added  to  statues  by
that  artist,  but  only  in  his  last  works.  Ariadne  probably  received
it  from  Daedalus,  and  carried  it  otf  with  her  in  her  flight.  And
Theseus  (as  the  Delians  add)  dedicated  it  to  Apollo,  lest  if  he  re-
tained it  in  his  possession,  it  shoulil  remind  liini  of  it's  lost  mistress.
(Pausan.  ix.  ^O.)  It  is  mentioned  also  by  Callimachus  (Hymn,  in
Del.  S37  )   as  crowned  on  festival  days  with  flowers.

It  may  be  subjoined,  tliat  M.  I'Abbe  Barthelemy  (in  his  Voya{![e
d'Anacharsis)  ascribes  the  above  important  improvement  in  sta-
tuary to  a  later  Dtedalus  of  Sicyon,  without  however  dispntinj^^  the
exittence  of  the  first.     This  he  infers  from  the  consideration,  that


'2i^  THESEUS.

■^vliicli  the  Dclians  are  said  to  practise  at  tiiis  da}".
It  consists  in  an  imitation  of  the  mazes  and  outlets
of  the  Labyrinth  ;  and,  with  various  involutions  and
evolutions,  is  performed  in  regular  time.  This  kind
of  dance,  as  Dicasarchus  ^^  informs  us,  is  called  by
the  Delians  the  Crane  •^^.  He  danced  it  round  the
altar  Keraton ",  vvhich  was  built  entirely  of  the
left-side  horns  of  beasts.  He  is  also  said  to  have  in-
stituted games  in  Delos,  where  he  began  the  custom
of  giving  a  palm  to  the  victors.

When  they  drew  near  to  Attica,  both  Theseus
and  the  pilot  were  so  transported  with  joy,  that
they  forgot  to  hoist  the  sail,  the  appointed  signal  to
^.geus  of  their  safety ;  upon  which  he  threw  him-
self from  the  rock  in  despair,  and  was  dashed  to
pieces.  Theseus  disembarked,  and  performed  those
sacrifices  to  the  gods,  which  he  had  vowed  at
Phalerum  when  he  set  sail ;  and  sent  a  herald  to  the
city,  with  an  account  of  his  safe  return.     The  mes-


the  great  efforts  of  painting  ar«l  sculpture  among  tlie  Greeks  were
made  in  the  century  imniedifttely  beibre  and  after  the  a:;ra  of  the
Olympians  (B.C.  776);  and  the  more  modern  Da:da!us,  whose
name  frequently  occurs  in  Pausanias,  flourished  within  this  in-
terval.*

55  Dicsearchus  of  Messenia,  a  scholar  of  Aristotle,  composed
(according  to  Suidas)  many  works,  of  which  the  one  in  highest  es-
timation was  his  Account  of  Sparta.  Tins  was  recited  annually  to
the  youth  of  that  state,  by  order  of  the  Ephori.  He  is  much  com-
mended by  Cicero  (Tusc.  i.  11.  &  31.)*

^*  This,  Callimaclius  informs  us,  was  a  circular  dimce  ;  and  pro-
bably called  *  the  Crane,'  because  Cranes  commonly  fly  in  the
figure  of  a  circle.  Before  the  time  of  Theseus,  Eustathius  says,
men  and  v,«men  always  danced  in  separate  parties,  and  this  prince
first  ijnited  the  two  sexes  in  that  amusement,  upon  rescuing  his
ycuiig  companions  from  the  Labyrinth,  (Comm.  II.  xviii.)  This
dance,  after  a  lapse  of  3000  years,  still  exists  in  Greece,  under  the
name  of  *  the  'Candiot.'  (See  an  account  of  it  in  M.  Guys,  Hisl.
Lit.  dc  la  Grecc,  Lett.  xiii. ;  and  a  plate  in  Leroy,  Raines  des  plus
leuiix  Monuriiens  de  la  Grccc.)*

^^  From  it's  sale  material  (''ff«'?,  '  a  horn').  This  ancient
Etruct.ue  is  ascribed  to  the  workmanship  of  Apollo,  and  the  horns
are  waid  to  Inve  been  those  of  the  roebucks  of  Cynthus,  killed  by
l»is  huatrcss-£;.--t3r.  (Call.  Hymn.  Apoll.  CO.)  It  was  built  without
gli:c,  or  mortar,  or  any  other  cement.*


THESEUS.  25

senger  met  with  numbers  lamenting  the  flite  of  the
king,  and  others  rejoicing  (as  it  was  naturally  to  be
expected)  at  the  return  of  Theseus,  welcoming
him  with  the  greatest  kindness,  and  ready  to  crown
him  with  flowers  for  his  good  news.  He  accepted
the  chaplets,  and  twined  them  round  his  herakrs
staff,  lletiu'ning  to  the  sea-shore,  and  finding  that
Theseus  had  not  yet  finished  his  libations,  he  stopped
without,  not  choosing  to  disturb  the  sacrifice.  When
the  libations  were  over,  he  announced  the  death  of
>35geus.  Upon  this  they  hastened,  with  sorrow  and
tumultuous  lamentations,  to  the  city.  Hence  (they
tell  us)  it  is,  that  in  the  Oschophoria,  or  '  Feast  of
Boughs,'  to  this  day  the  herald  is  not  crowned,  but
his  staff;  and  those  that  are  present  at  the  libations
cry  out,  Eleleu !  loii,  loi't  ^^'  /  The  former  is  the
exclamation  of  haste  and  triumph,  and  the  latter
of  trouble  and  confusion  *.  Theseus,  having  buried
his  father,  paid  his  vows  to  Apollo  on  the  seventh
of  the  month  Pyanepsion  ;  for  on  that  day  they
arrived  safe  at  Athens.  The  boiling  of  all  sorts  of
pulse  at  that  time  is  said  to  take  its  rise  from  their
having  mixed  the  rem.ains  of  their  provisions,  when
they  found  themselves  safe  ashore,  boiled  them  in
one  pot,  and  feasted  upon  them  all  together.  Hence
also  in  that  feast  they  carry  a  branch  bound  about
with  wool,  such  as  they  then  made  use  of  in  their
supplications,  which  they  call  Eiresione,  l-iden  with
all  sorts  of  fruits  ;  and,  to  signify  the  ceasing  of
scarcity  at  that  time,  they  sing  this  strain :

The  golden  ear,  th'  ambrosial  hive.
In  fair  Eiresione  thrive.
See,  the  juicy  figs  appear  !
Olives  crown  the  wealthy  year !
See  the  cluster-bending  vine  !
See,  and  drink,  and  drop  supine !

5^  EW<?«  denotes  the  joy  aod  precipitation,  with  v/hich  Theseus
marched  toward  Athens ;  and  loii,  ioii,  his  sorrow  for  his  father's

death.

--C.  T.  ^,  (Wakefield,  Silv.  Crit.  iv.  131.)*


26  THESEUS.

Some  pretend,  that  this  ceremony  is  retained  in
memory  of  the  IleraclidiK '^'',  wiio  were  entertained
in  that  manner  by  the  Athenians  ;  bnt  it  is  generally
related  as  above.

The  vessel,  in  which  Theseus  sailed  and  returned
safe  with  those  young  men,  went  with  thirty  oars.
It  was  preserved  by  the  Athenians  to  the  times  of
Demetrius  Phalereus  " ;  being  so  pieced  and  new-
framed  with  strong  planks  (as  they  removed  the  old
and  unsound  parts)  that  it  affoided  an  example  to
the  philosophers,  in  their  disputations  concerning
the  identity  of  things  which  are  changed  by
growth  ''' ;  some  contending  that  it  was  the  same,
and  others  that  it  was  not.


^'^  The  descendents  of  Hercules,  being  driven  out  of  Pelopon-
nesus, and  tlie  rest  of  Greece,  applied  to  the  Athenians  for  their
protection,  which  was  granted :  and,  as  they  were  suppliants,  they
went  with  branches  in  their  hands.  This  subject  is  treated  by
Euripides  in  his  Heraclida.

'**  That  is,  nearly  1000  years.  For  Theseus  returned  from  Crete
about  B.  C.  1235;  and  Callimachu-,  v.ho  was  contemporary  with
Demetrius,  and  who  (Hymn.  Del.  i.  314-'.)  tells  us  the  Athe-
nians'continued  to  send  this  s';'?red  and  immortal  ship  to  Delos  in
his  time,  flourished  about  B.  C.  280.   (L.)

This  Demetrius,  during  the  ten  years  in  which  he  governed
Athens,  had  360  statues  erected  to  his  honour ;  all  of  which,  after
his  disgrace,  those  ancient  Iconoclasts  destroyed  in  one  day.  And
so  it  has  ever  been:

Descendiint  statucc,  restemque  scqiiunlur.     Juv.  x.  58.

It  was  a  shrewd  and  pithy  observation  of  pope  Alexander  VI.
to  his  son,  upon  entering  some  Italian  town  after  an  unexpected
reverse  of  fortune  and  remarking  the    subsequent   change  of  ar-


rangements:


Vides,  mi  fill  ^  quam  leve  discrimen  inter  patibidum  et  statuam!

Demetrius  died,  B.  C.  284.*

=''  The  invention  of  this  species  of  sophism  Plutarch,  in  his
Treatise  upon  the  Tardiness  of  Divine  Vengeance,  imputes  to
Epicharmus,  who  flourished  in  the  fifth  century  before  Christ.
Its  object  was,  from  the  change  of  corporeal  particles  in  the  suc-
cessive periods  of  youth  and  manhood  and  old  age,  to  infer  a
change  oi  personal  identity  :  and  the  result  of  the  argument  (con-
venient enough  to  a  philosopher)  would  have  been,  to  exonerate
a  debtor  from  the  necessity  of  repaying  the  sum  borrowed.  Our
bishop  Butler  would  have  puzzled  the  old  Sicilian  with  regard  to
12


THESEUS.  27


The  feast  called  Oschophoria  ^°,  which  the  Athe-
jiians  still  celebrate,  was  then  first  instituted  by
Theseus.  For  he  did  not  take  with  him  all  the  vir-
gins, upon  whom  the  lot  had  fallen,  but  selected
two  young  men  of  his  acquaintance  who  had  femi-
nine and  florid  aspects,  and  at  the  same  time  suffi-
cient spirit  and  presence  of  mind.  These  by  warm
bathing,  and  keeping  them  out  of  the  sun  ;  by  pro-
viding unguents  for  their  hair  and  complexions,  and
every  thing  necessary  tor  their  dress ;  by  forming
their  voice  and  manner  and  step,  he  so  effectually
altered,  that  they  passed  among  the  virgins  designed
for  Crete,  and  no  one  could  discern  the  difference.

Upon  his  return,  he  walked  in  procession  with
the  same  young  men,  dressed  in  the  manner  of  those
who  now  carry  the  branches.  These  are  borne  in
honour  of  Bacchus  and  Ariadne,  on  account  of  the
story  before  related  ;  or  rather,  because  they  re-
turned at  the  time  of  gathciing  ripe  fruits.  The
Deipnophorae  fwomen,  who  carry  the  provisions]
take  a  part  in  the  solemnity,  and  have  a  share  in  the
sacrifice,  to  represent  the  mothers  of  those  upon
whom   the    lots  fell,  bringing   them  provisions  for


sentient  subjects  at  least.  See  his  Dissertation  of  Personal  Identity,
See  also  Locke,  II.  xxvii.  9.  &c.  This  ship  might  have  vied  with
that  of  Deptford,  traditionally  asserted  (upon  similar  grounds)  to
be  the  identical  one,  in  which  sir  Francis  Drake  circumnavigated
the  globe,  and  received  from  Queen  Elizabeth  upon  his  return  the
honour  of  knighthood — '  an  honour,'  as  Johnson  observes,  *  in
that  illustrious  reign  not  made  cheap  by  prostitution.'  (xii.  145.)*

<5°  This  ceremony  was  performed  in  the  following  manner  :  They
made  choice  of  a  certain  number  of  youths  of  the  most  noble  fa-
milies in  each  tribe,  whose  respective  fathers  and  mothers  were  both
living.  These  bore  vin.i-branches  in  their  hands,  with  grapes  upon
them,  and  ran  from  the  temple  of  Bacchus  to  that  of  Minerva
Sciradia,  which  was  near  the  Phalerean  gate.  He  that  arrived
there  first,  drank  off  a  cup  of  wine,  mingled  with  honey,  cheese,
meal,  and  oil.  They  were  followed  by  a  chorus,  conducted  by
two  young  men  dressed  in  women's  apparel,  singing  a  song  in  their
praise.  Certain  women  with  baskets  on  their  heads  attended  them,
and  were  chosen  for  ihr.t  office  from  among  the  most  wealtl>y  of  tlie
citizens.  The  whole  procession  was  iieaded  by  a  herald,  bearing  a
§taff  encircled  with  bougiis.


\


•$  THESEUS.

the  vayagc.  Fables  and  tales  are  the  chief  disconrsc,
because  they  tb.en  told  their  children  stories,  to
coiiitbrt  tliCTi  and  keep  up  their  spirits.  These
particulars  are  taken  from  Demon's  History.  There
was  a  place  consecrated,  and  a  temple  erected  to
Tlieseus ;  and  those  families,  which  would  have
been  liable  to  the  tribute,  if  it  had  continued,  were
obliged  to  pay  a  tax  to  the  temple  for  sacrifices.
Tliese  were  committed  to  the  care  of  the  Phvtalida?,
upon  whom  Theseus  conferred  that  honour  in  re-
compence  of  their  hospitality.

After  the  death  of  /Egeus,  he  undertook  and
effected  a  prodigious  v/ork.  He  settled  all  the  inha-
bitants of  Attica  in  Athens,  and  made  them  one
people  in  one  city ;  whereas  before  they  were  scat-
tered up  and  down,  and  could  with  difficulty  be  as-
sembled upon  any  pressing  occasion  tor  the  public
good,  isay,  frequently  such  difterences  had  liap-
pcned  between  them,  as  ended  in  bloodshed.  The
method,  which  he  took,  was  to  apply  to  them  in
particular  by  their  tribes  and  families.  Private  per-
fjons  and  the  poor  easily  listened  to  his  summons.
To  the  rich  and  great  he  represented  the  advantage
of  a  government  without  a  king,  where  the  chief
authority  should  reside  in  the  people,  while  he  him-
self desired  only  to  command  in  war,  and  to  be  the
guardian  of  the  laws  ;  and,  in  all  the  rest,  every  one
should  be  upon  an  equal  footing.  Part  of  them
hearkened  to  his  persuasions  ;  and  others  fearing  his
power,  which  was  already  very  considerable,  as  well
as  his  enterprising  spirit,  chose  rather  to  be  persuaded
than  compelled  to  submit.  Dissolving  therefore  the
corporations,  the  councils,  and  courts  in  each  parti-
cular town,  he  built  one  common  Prytaneum  and
court-hall,  where  it  stands  to  this  day.  The  citadel
v»ith  it's  dependencies,  and  the  city,  he  united  under
th?,  common  name  of  Athens^",  and  instituted  the

*''  Whicii  had  before  belonged  exclusively  to  the  old  town.     M.
Ricaid  has  observed  from  Meii.iriac,  for  the  benefit  of  liis  less  clas-
ti'jul  reader?,  that  Athens  was  often  called  -by  the  generic  nam*
9


THESEUS.  29

Fanatbenaea  as  a  common  sacrifice "^^  He  appointed
also  the  Metoecia,  or  Feast  of  Migration'^',  and  fixed
it  on  the  sixteentli  of  Hecatombcjcon,  upon  which  it
still  continues.  Giving  up  the  kingly  power,  as  he
hail  promised,  he  settled  the  cornnionw-ealth  under
the,  auspices  of  the  gods;  for  he  consulted  the  Ora-
cle at  Delphi  concerning  his  new  governnientj  a-iid
received  tliis  answer :

From  royal  stems  tiiy  honour,  Theseus,  springs  ;

By  .fove  beloved,  the  sire  supreme  of  kings.

See  rising  tou-ns,  see  wide-extended  states.

On  thee  dependent,  ask  their  future  fates  !

Hence,  hence  \>ith  fear!  Thy  favoured  bark  shiill  ride

Safe  o'er  the  surges  of  the  foamy  tide  ^+.

With  this  agrees  the  Sibyl's  propliecy,  which  (we

A^!),  '  the  City'  (as  Rome  was  denominated  UrLs  among  tlie  Ro-
mans) byway  of  cmiaence.  Cecrops,  it's  rirst  sovereign,  l>ui]t  th&
citadel  upon  an  elevated  site,  and  named  it  from  himself  Cei»-opia  .-
but  this  appellation  in  after-times,  when  the  enlarged  building*
were  denonnnated  n«/.(j,  they  exchanged  for  tite  terns  Acropolis.*

^'-  The  Athenffiawere  celebrated  before,  in  honour  of  the  goddess
^ilinerva ;  but,  as  that  was  a  feast  peculiar  to  the  city  of  Athens,
Thesaus  enlarg-ed  it,  and  made  it  comn>on  to  all  the  inliabilants  of
Attica,  whence  it  was  talJed  Pa/iatheilsea.  There  were  the
greater,  and  the  less  Panathenaea.  Tlie  less  v.ere  ke|>t  an-
nually on  tlie  twentieth  of  Thargelion,  and  the  greater  every  fiiik
y^ar  on  the  twenty-third  of  1-Iecatom.bfeon.  In  the  latter  they
carried  in  procession. the  mystejioits  peplum  or  veil  of  rilinerv?.,  upoi-3
which  were  euibroidered  the  victory  of  the  gods  over  tiie  giants,
and  the  most  remarkable  achievements  of  their  heroes.

<5>  In  memory  of  their  quitting  tlie  boroughs,  and  uniting  in  one
city.  This  is  called  by  Tiiucydides  (ii.  15.)  Syneecia,  but  t lie  pur-
port is  the  same.

UpoTi  this  oecnston  he  likewise  instituted,  or  at  least  restored,
the  Isthmiiin  aames  in  honour  of  Neptune.  Tliess  were  chiefly
designed  to  draw  a  concourse  of  strangers  ;  and,  as  a  farllier  en-
couragement to  them  to  settie  in  Athens,  he  bestowed  upon  theui
the  privileges  of  nativfs.

^+  In  the  original  it  is,  '  Safe,  like  a  bladder,  &:c.'  Wlien  Sylla
liad  taken  Athens,  and  exercised  all  kinds  of  cruelty  there,  some
Athenians  v/ent  to  Delphi  to  inquire  of  tiie  oracle,  Vriiether  the  last
liour  of  their  city  was  come?  and  the  priestess  (according  to  Paa-
snn.i.  20.)  made  answer,  -rre  ft?  tjv  i^.o-^o^  t;(,ovTci,  '  Tiiat  which  be-
longs to  the  bladder,'  now  has  an  end ;  obviously  referring  to  the
old  propliccy  lierc  delivered.


30  THESEUS.

are  told)  she  delivered  ]onn:  afterward,  concerninn:

4       1  ^

Athens  :

The  bladder  may  be  dipp'd,  bnt  never  drown'd.

Desiring  yet  farther  to  enlarge  the  city,  he  invited
all  strangers  to  equal  privileges  in  it;  and  the  words
still  in  use,  "  Come  hiiher,  all  ye  people,"  are  said
to  be  the  beginning  of  a  proclamation,  whicli  The-
seus ordered  to  be  made,  when  he  composed  a  com-
monwealth as  it  were  of  all  nations.  He  did  not
however  leave  it  in  the  confusion  and  disorder,  likely
to  ensue  from  the  confluence  and  strange  mixture  of
people,  but  distinguished  them  into  noblemen,  hus-
bandmen, and  mechanics.  The  nobility  were  to  have
the  care  of  rehgion,  to  supply  the  city  with  magis-
trates, to  explani  the  laws,  and  to  interpret  whatever
related  to  the  worship  of  the  gods.  As  to  the  rest,
he  balanced  the  citizens  against  each  other  as  nearly
as  possible;  the  nobles  excelling  in  dignity,  the  hus-
bandmen in  usefulness,  and  the  artificers  in  number.
It  appears  from  Aristotle,  that  Theseus  was  the  first
who  inclined  to  a  democracy,  and  gave  up  the  regal
power  ;  and  Homer  also  seems  to  testify  the  same  in
his  Catalogue  of  Ships,  where  he  gives  the  name  of
*■  People"  to  the  Atiienians  exclusively  "^  To  his
money  he  gave  the  impression  of  an  ox,  either  on
account  of  the  Marathonian  bull,  of  Minos'  general
Taurus,  or  because  he  wished  to  encourage  the  citi-
zens in  agriculture'^.     Hence  came  the  expression

^5  In  this  passage  (II.  ii.  K-y-rctx.  51..)   the  Athenians  are  called

'  The  people  6f  the  great  Erechtheus,'

which  would  seem  to  convey  a  sense  hostile  to  Plutarch's  infe-
rence; but  perhaps  he  considered  the  phrase  as  implying  The
pjople,  who  nncehixd  Erechtheus  for  their  king.*

^  Some  think  it  was  allusive  to  those  animals,  as  the  previous
medium  of  commerce  ;  aiul  this  would  invert  the  inference  of  the
next  paragraph.  But  Athenian  medals  have  exhibited  the  im-
press of  a  bull's  head,  and  tlie  conflict  with  the  Minotaur,  which
•oem  to  decide  the  (juestion  in  favour  of  the  Cretan  story.  It  is
obvious  to  trace,  from  one  of  these  sources,  the  Roman  term
pcttiHiia.*


THESEUS.  31

of  a  thing's  being  worth  ten  or  a  hundred  oxen.
Having  also  made  a  secure  acquisition  of  the  country
about  Megara  to  tiie  territory  of  Athens,  he  set  up
the  celebrated  pillar  in  the  Isthmus^''',  and  inscribed
it  with  two  verses  to  distinguish  the  boundaries.
That  on  the  eastern  side  ran  thus^

This  is  not  Peloponnesus,  but  Ionia  ;

and  that  on  the  western,

This  is  Peloponnesus,  not  Ionia,

He  likewise  instituted  games,  in  imitation  of  Her-
cules ;  being  ambitious  that  as  the  Greeks,  in  pur-
suance of  that  hero's  appointment,  celebrated  the
Olympic  games"^  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  so  they
should  celebrate  the  Isthmian ^'^  in  honour  of  Nep-
tune :  for  the  rites  performed  there  before,  in  me-
mory of  Melicertes,  were  observed  in  the  night,  and
had  more  the  air  of  Mysteries  than  of  a  public
spectacle  and  assembly.  Some  authors  however
assert,  that  the  Isthmian  games  were  dedicated  to
Sciron,  from  Theseus'  wish  to  expiate  his  untimely

^^  This  pillar  was  erected  by  the  common  consent  of  the  lonians
and  Peloponnesians,  to  put  an  end  to  the  disputes  about  their
boundaries,  and  it  continued  till  the  reign  of  Codrus.  It  was  then
demohshed  b}'  the  Heraclidie,  who  had  made  themselves  master*
of  the  territory  of  Megara,  which  thereby  passed  from  the  lonians
to  the  Dorians.  StraI)o.  (L.)  This  inscription  was  subsequently
imitated  by  Had'-ian,  upon  tiie  monument  which  he  erected  be-
tween the  old  and  new  city  of  Athens:  on  (,ne  side  he  wrote,

Tliis  is  Athens,  the  old  city  of  Tlieseus;
and  on  the  other,

This  is  the  city  of  Hadrian,  not  of  Theseus.*

^^  These  games  must  have  been  instituted  long  after  the  assigned
date  of  Hercules,  as  Strabo  proves  that  tiiey  were  unknown  in  the
time  of  Homer.  Perhaps  indeed  they  bad  sunk  into  neglect,  and
were  only  revived  by  Jphitus  at  the  aera,  which  is  usually  assigned
for  their  commencement.*

**'  So  denominated  from  the  Isthmus  of  Peloponnesus,  upon
vvhich  thej  took  place.*


S2  THESEUS.

fate,  on  account  of  their  being  so  nearly  related;  for
Sciron  was  the  son  of  Canethus  and  Henioche,  the
daughter  of  Pittheus.  Others  will  have  it,  that  Sinnis
was  their  son  ;  and  that  to  him,  and  not  to  Sciron,
these  games  were  dedicated.  He  inade  an  agree-
ment also  with  the  Corintliians,  that  they  should
yield  the  place  of  honour  to  the  Athenians  who
came  to  the  Isthmian  games,  as  far  as  the  ground
could  be  covered  with  the  sail  of  the  public  ship'^
which  brought  them,  when  it  was  stretched  to  it's
full  extent.  This  particular  we  learn  from  Helhmi-
cus,  and  Andron  of  Halicarnassus.

Philochorus  and  some  others  relate,  that  he  sailed
in  company  with  Hercules  into  the  Euxine  Sea,  to
wage  war  with  the  Amazons'',  and  that  he  received
Antiope '"  as  the  reward  of  his  valour:  but  the  greater
number  (among  whom  are  Pherecydes,  Hella-
nicus,  and  Herodorus)  tell  us,  that  Theseus  made
the  voyage  with  his  own  fleet  alone,  some  time
after  Hercules,  and  took  that  Amazon  captive  :  and
this  is  the  more  probable  account,  as  we  do  not

'°  This  ship  (in  the  original  called  ©f&'pi;)  was  properly  that,
which  the  Athenians,  in  cciiformity  with  Theseus'  vow,  sent  annu-
ally to  Delos  crowned  with  the  sacred  olive,  and  freighted  with
sacrifices  to  Apollo.  From  the  period  of  it's  coronation  till  it's  re-
turn the  city  undervrent  a  purification,  and  all  public  executions
vrere  suspended,  Heuce  (as  the  classical  reader  will  recollect)  an
interval  of  thirty  days  occurred  between  the  sentence  of  Socrates,
and  his  martyrdom  ;  and  to  this  piece  of  superstition  we  owe  the
interesting  account  given  by  his  disciples  of  the  manner,  in  which
that  interval  was  spent.*

^'  Nothing  can  be  more  fabulous,  than  the  whole  history  of  tlie
Amazons.  Strabo  observes,  that  the  most  credible  of  Alexander's
historians  have  not  so  much  as  mentioned  them:  and  i-deed,  if
they  were  a  Scythian  nation,  how  came  they  all  to  have  Greek
names?   (L.)

Their  entire  story,  as  connected  with  Hercules,  is  resolved  by
M.  Gebelin  into  an  allegory  upon  the  sun's  track  in  the  zodiac:  nor
is  this  opinion  aiiectcd  by  Plutarch's  suggestions  on  the  allusive
names  of  places  about  Athens';  as  these  might  have  had  a  totally
different  orig'.n,  or  might  have  been  imposed  by  the  inventive  histo-
rians of  the  Amnzonian  war.*

'"  Justin  says,  that  Hercules  gave  Mippolytc  to  Theseus,  and
kept  Antiope  for  himself.


THESEUS.  sa

read,  that  any  other  of  his  ,  fellow-warriors  made
any  Amazon  prisoner.  Bion  however  affirms,  that
he  took  and  carried  her  off  by  a  stratagem.  The
Amazons  (he  informs  us)  being  naturally  lovers  of
men,  were  so  far  from  avoiding  Theseus,  when  he
touched  upon  their  coasts,  that  they  sent  him  pre-
sents. Theseus  invited  Antiope,  who  brought  them
into  his  ship  ;  and,  as  soon  as  she  was  aboard,  set
sail.  But  the  account  of  one  Menecrates,  who
published  a  History  of  Nice  in  Bithynia,  is  that
Theseus,  having  Antiope  aboard  his  vessel,  remain-
ed in  those  parts  some  time  ;  and  that  he  was  at-
tended in  this  expedition  by  three  young  men  of
Athens,  who  were  brothers,  Euneos,  Thoas,  and
Soloon.  The  last  of  these,  unknown  to  the  rest,  fell
in  love  with  Antiope,  and  communicated  his  passion
to  one  of  his  companions,  who  applied  to  her  about
the  affair.  She  firmly  rejected  his  pretensions,  but
treated  him  with  civility,  and  prudently  concealed
the  matter  from  Theseus.  But  Soloon  in  despair
having  leaped  into  a  river  and  drowned  himself,
Theseus  then  sensible  of  the  cause  and  the  young
man's  passion,  lamented  his  fate,  and  in  his  sorrow
recollected  an  order  of  the  priestess,  which  he  had
formerly  received  at  Delphi ;  that  when,  in  some
foreign  country,  he  should  be  labouring  under  the
greatest  affliction,  he  should  build  a  city  there,  and
leave  some  of  his  followers  to  govern  it.  Hence  he
called  the  city  which  he  built  Pythopolis,  after  the
Pythian  god,  and  the  neighbouring  river,  in  honour
of  the  young  man,  Soloon.  Ke  left  the  two  surviving
brothers  to  govern  it,  and  give  it  laws  ;  and  along
with  them  Hermus,  who  was  of  one  of  the  best'  fa-
milies in  Athens.  From  him  the  inhabitants  of
Pythopolis  call  a  certain  place  in  their  city  Hermus*
House,  and  by  exchanging  an  accent"^  transfer  the
honour  from  the  hero  to  the  god  (Mercury).

Hence  the  war  with  the  Amazons  took  it*s  rise.

'  73  The  acute  for  the  circumflex.*

VOL.  I.  D


34  THESEUS.

And  it  appears  to  have  been  no  slight  or  womnnish
enterprise ;  for  they  could  not  have  encamped  in
the  town,  or  joined  battle  on  the  ground  about  the
Pnyx'*,  and  the  Museum'^,  or  fallen  in  so  intrepid
a  manner  upon  the  city  of  Athens,  unless  they  had
first  reduced  the  country  about  it.  It  is  difficult,
indeed,  to  believe  (though  the  story  is  told  by  Hel-
lanicus)  that  they  crossed  the  Cimmerian  Bosporus'®
upon  the  ice  ;  but  that  they  encamped  almost  in  the
heart  of  the  city  is  confirmed  by  the  names  of  places,
and  by  the  tombs  of  those  that  perished  there.

There  was  a  long  pause  and  delay,  before  either
army  would  begin  the  attack.  At  last  Theseus,  by
the  direction  of  some  oracle,  having  offered  a  sacri-
fice to  Fear'%  directed  the  onset.  It  was  fought  in
the  month  Boedroniion,  upon  the  day,  on  which  the
Atheriians  still  celebrate  the  feast  called  Boedro-
mia.  Clidemus,  who  is  minutely  particular,  states
that  the  left  winaj  of  the  Amazons  moved  toward
what  is  now  railed  the  Araazonium,  and  tluit  the
right  extended  as  far  as  the  Pnyx  near  Chrysa  :  that
the  Athenians  first  engaged  with  the  left  wing  of  the
Arnazons,  falling  upon  them  from  the  Museum  j
and  that  the  tombs  of  the  slain  are  in  the  street
leaciing  to  the  gate  called  Piraica,  which  is  by  the
monument  erected  in  honour  of  Chalcodon,  where
the  Athenians  were  routed  by  the   Amazons,  and

"+  The  Pnyx  uas  a  place  (near  the  citadel)  whei-e  the  people  of
Athens  used  to  a?sonible,  and  where  the  orators  addressed  them
upon  public  affairs  (L.)  : — so  called  from  the  crowded  buildings  in
that  quarter  ;  or,  according  to  others,  from  the  conflux  of  the  pub-
lic asseniblies.-*

'i  The  Museum  was  upon  a  little  hill  qver-against  the  citadel,
aiid  probably  so  called  from  a  temple  of  the  Muses  there  (L.)  :  or
rather  from  the  poet  Mi'.s;rus,  \vho  recited  his  verses,  and  was  af-
terward interred  in  it.      (Pausan.  i.  2.5.)*

"'^  The  channel  between  the  Palus  Moeotis,  hod,  the  Sea  of
Asoph,  and  the  Euxine  or  Black  Sea.*

'^  The  heathens  cor.sidered  not  only  the  passions,  but  even  dis-
tempers -and  tempests,  as  divinities  ;  and  worshipped  them,  that
they  might  dti  them  no  harm.  (L.)  For  '1>9(^»',  which  occurs  in  tlie
tr-xf.  II.  Eticnne  has  very  justly  substituted  <Po«a'.  See  the  Life  ft'
Ai^^xandcr,  Vol.  IV.  nOL  (97.)*


THESEUS.  35

fled  as  far  as  the  temple  of  the  Furies '® :  but
that  the  left  wing  of  the  Athenians,  which  charged
from  the  Palladium,  Ardettus  '^  and  the  Lyceum,
drove  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy  to  their  camp,
and  slew  many  of  them  ;  and  that  after  four
months,  a  peace  was  concluded  by  means  of
Hippolyte  (for  so  this  author  calls  the  Amazon,  who
lived  with  Theseus,  not  Antiope)  :  others  however
inform  us  that  this  heroine  fell  fighting  by  Theseus*
side,  being  pierced  with  a  dart  by  Molpadia ;  and
that  a  pillar,  by  the  temple  of  the  Olympian  Earth  ^°,
was  set  up  over  her  grave.  Nor  is  it  to  be  regarded
as  matter  of  wonder  that,  in  the  account  of  things
so  very  ancient,  history  should  be  thus  uncertain ;
since  we  are  told  that  some  Amazons,  wounded  by
Antiope,  were  privately  sent  to  Chalcis  to  be  cured,
and  that  some  were  buried  tliere  at  a  place  now
called  Amazonium.  But  that  the  war  was  ended  by
a  league,  we  may  assuredly  gather  from  a  place
called  Horcomosium,  near  the  temple  of  Theseus,
where  it  was  ratified  by  oaths  ;  as  well  as  from  an
ancient  sacrifice,  which  is  offered  to  the  Amazons
the  day  before  the  feast  of  Theseus.     The  people  of

'8  This  temple  indeed  was  not  then  in  existence,  having  been
built  subsequently  to  the  trial  of  Orestes  (Pausan- vii.  25.)  ;  but
the  place,  intended  by  Plutarch,  is  not  therefore  the  less  accurately
defined.*

'3  The  Palladium  was  a  court  for  the  trial  of  murtherers.

Ardettus  was  so  named  from  an  Athenian  hero,  who  had  quelled
the  discords  of  his  fellow-citizens,  and  induced  them  to  bind  them-
selves by  an  oath  to  mutual  union.  Of  this  oath  (called  '  theHeliatic')
the  formula  is  preserved  by  Demosthenes  (in  Timocr.)  containing
an  adjuration  of  Apollo,  Ceres,  and  Jupiter.  Upon  the  situation
of  the  place  where  it  was  administered,  and  the  etymology  of  it's
name,  different  opinions  are  entertained.*

8^  By  this  is  meant  the  moon,  so  called  (as  Plutarch,  in  his
Treatise  on  the  Cessation  of  Oracles,  supposes)  because,  like  the
(ienii  or  Demons,  she  is  neither  so  perfect  as  the  gods,  nor  so  im-
perfect as  man.  But,  as  some  of  the  philosophers  (we  mean  the
Pythagoreans)  had  astronomy  enough  afterward  to  conclude  that  the
sun  is  the  centre  of  this  system,  we  presume  it  might  occur  to
thinking  men  in  the  more  early  ages,  that  the  moon  was  an  opaque,
and  therefore  probably  a  terrene  body.  She  was  sometimes,  like^
>vise,  called  the  Terrestrial  Star.

p  2


56  THESEUS.

Megara  likewise  show  a  place,  in  the  ligurc  of  a
lozenge,  where  some  Amazons  were  buried,  as  you
go  from  the  market-place  to  Rhus.  Others  also  arc
said  to  have  died  bv  Cha:ronea,  and  to  have  been
buried  by  tlie  rivulet,  which  it  seems  was  formerly
called  Thermodon,  but  now  Hjismon  ;  of  which  I
have  given  a  farther  account  in  the  Life  of  De-
mosthenes. It  appears  too  that  tlie  Amazons  tra-
versed Thessaly,  not  without  opposition  ;  for  their
sepulchres  are  shown  to  this  day,  between  Sco-
tussa^a  and  Cynosccphahe.

This  is  all,  that  is  memorable  in  the  story  of  the
Amazons  :  for  as  to  what  the  author  of  the  Theseid
relates,  of  the  Amazons  rising  to  take  vengeance  for
Antiope,  when  Theseus  quitted  her  and  married
Phsedra,  and  of  their  being  slain  by  Hercules,  it  has
plainly  the  air  of  fkble.  He  married  Phaedra  indeed
after  the  death  of  Antiope,  having  had  by  the  Ama-
zon a  son  named  Hippolytus,  or  (according  to  Pin-
dar^') Demophoon.  As  to  the  calamities  which
befel  Phsedra  and  Hippolytus,  since  the  historians  do
not  differ  from  what  the  w^riters  of  tragedy  have  said
of  them,  we  may  consider  them  as  matters  of  fact.
Some  other  marriages  of  Theseus  are  spoken  of  (but
have  not  been  represented  upon  the  stage)  which
had  neither  an  honourable  beginning,  nor  a  happy

8'  In  this,  Pindar  has  fallen  into  a  mistake,  as  Demophon  was
one  of  his  sons  by  Phaedra:  the  other  was  Acamas.*  Theseus,
upon  his  marriage  with  Phadra,  sent  Hippolytus  to  be  brought  up
by  his  own  motiier  ^Ethra,  queen  of  Trcczene  :  but,  he  coming  af-
terward to  some  Athenian  games,  Phaedra  fell  in  love  with  him  ;
and,  having  solicited  him  in  vain  to  a  compliance,  in  a  lit  of  re-
sentment accused  him  to  Theseus  of  having  made  an  attempt  upon
her  chastit}'.  The  fable  adds,  that  Theseus  prayed  to  Neptune  to
punisli,  him  by  some  violent  death  ;  and,  all  solemn  execrations  (ac-
cording to  the  notions  of  the  heathens)  necessarily  taking  effect,  as
Hippolytus  was  riding  along  the  sea-shore,  Neptune  sent  two  sea-
calves,  which  frightened  the  horses,  overturned  the  chariot,  and
tore  him  to  pieces.  The  poets  subjoin,  that  the  lustful  queen  hanged
herself  for  grief;  and  that  Diana  being  taken  with  Hippolytus*
chastity,  and  pitying  the  sad  fate  which  it  had  brought  upon  him,
prevailed  upon  iEsculapius  to  restore  him  to  life,  to  be  a  compa-
pioa  of  her  diversions.


THESEUS.  S7-

coiK-Iiision.  For  he  is  said  to  have  forcibly  carried
off  Anaxo  of  Trcezene ;  and,  having  slain  Siniiis
and  Cercjon,  to  have  committed  rapes  upon  tlieir
daughters :  to  have  married  Peribcea  likewise  the
mother  of  Ajax,  and  Phereba^a,  and  lope  the
daughter  of  Iphicles.  Besides,  they  charge  him
with  attaching  himself  to  .Eo;lc,  the  daim-hter  of
ranopeus  (as  above  related)  and  for  her  sake  de-
serting Ariadne,  contrary  to  the  rnles  both  of  justice
and  honour  ;  but  above  ail  with  the  rape  of  Helen,
which  involved  Attica  in  war,  and  ended  in  his
banishment  and  death,  of  which  w^e  shall  speak  more
at  large  by  and  by.

Though  there  were  many  expeditions  undertaken
by  the  heroes  of  those  times,  Herodorus  thinks  that
Theseus  was  not  concerned  in  any  of  them,  except
in  as'sfsting  the  Lapithfr  against  the  Centaurs.  Others
wTite,  that  he  attended  Jason  to   Colchos,  and  Me-
leager  in  killing  the   boar ;  and  that  thence  came
the  proverb,  /'-  Nothing  without  Theseus.''     It  is
allowed  however  that  Theseus,  without  any  assist-
ance, did  himself  perform  many  great  exploits  :  and
that  these  extraordinary  instances  of  his  valour  gave
occasion  to  the  savino-    "  This  man  is  another  Her-
cules."     He   assisted  Adrastus  likewise,  in  recover-
ing the  bodies  of  those  who  fell  before  Thebes ;  not
by  defeating  the  Thebans  in  battle,  as  Euripides  has
it  in    his  tragedy  ^',    but  by  persuading   them    to   a
truce,  for  so  most  writers  agree  ;  and  Philochorus
is  of  opinion,  that  this  was  the  first  truce  for  barj^ing
the   dead  ever  ne!»-otiated.     But  Hercules  was,  in-
deed,  the  first,  as   we  have  shown  in  his  Life,  who
gave  v.p  to  th.e  enemy  their  dead.     The  burying-
place  of  the  common  soldiers  is  to  be  seen  at  Eleu-

s-  Tills  hovi-ever  Isocrates  likewise  affirms,  in  his  Panejryi'ic  upon
Helen;  ihough  in  his  P:inath.  he  observes,  tliat  Tiieseus  sent  em-
hansadors  to  Eteocies :  but  the  apparent  contradiction  is  reconciled
by  his  contemporary  Lvsias,  who  relates  that  Theseus,  after  an  in-
fflectnal  attempt  at  negotiation,  had  more  successful  rcM;ourii.-  Lu
arms.^'


3S  THESEUS.

therae^^,  and  of  tlie  officers  at  Eleusis  ;  in  whicli
particular  Theseus  gratified  Adrastus.  iEscliyhis,
in  whose  tracfedy  of  the  Elciisinians  Theseus  is  in-
troduced rehiting  the  matter  as  above,  contradicts
what  Euripides  has  delivered  in  liis  SLip])liants.

The  friendship  between  Theseus  and  Tirithous  is
said  to  have  commenced  thus  :  Theseus  being  much
celebrated  for  his  strength  and  valour.  Pirithous  was
desirous  to  prove  it,  and  therefore  drove  away  his
oxen  from  Marathon  :  and,  when  he  heard  that  The-
seus pursued  him  in  arms,  instead  of  flying  he  turn-
ed back  to  meet  him.  But,  as  soon  as  thev  met,
each  was  so  struck  with  admiration  of  the  other's
person  and  courage,  that  they  laid  aside  all  thoughts
of  fighting;  and  Pirithous,  first  giving  Theseus  his
hand,  bade  him  be  judge  in  this  cause  himself,  and
he  would  willingly  abide  by  his  sentence.  Theseus,
in  his  turn,  left  the  cause  to  him,  and  desired  him  to
be  his  friend  and  fellow- warrior.  They  then  con-
firmed  their  friendship  with  an  oath.  Pirithous  sub-
sequently marrying  Deidamia^"*  entreated  Theseus
to  visit  his  country,  and  to  become  acquainted  with
the  Lapithae^\  He  had  also  invited  the  Centaurs  to
the  entertainment.  These  in  their  cups  behaving
with  insolence  and  indecency,  and  not  even  refrain-
ing from  the  women,  the  Lapitliae  rose  up  in  their
defence,  killed  some  of  them  upon  the  spot,  and
soon  afterward  beating  them  in  a  set  battle,  with
the  assistance  of  Theseus  drove  them  out  of  the
country.  Herodorus  gives  a  different  account  of  the
matter.  He  says  that,  hostilities  being  already  be-
gun, Theseus  came  in  aid  to  the  Lapitlue,  and  then
had  the  first  sight  of  Hercules ;  having  made  it  his

^^  A  city  of  Attica  on  the  confines  of  Bfcotia.  (Pausan.  i.  33.)*
*^  Ali  other  writers  call  her  Ilippodamia,  except  Propertius,  who
calls  her  Ischoniache.  (II.  ii.  9.)  She  was  the  daughter  of  Adrastus.
s>  Homer  calls  the  Lapithir,  '  heroes,"  The  Centaurs  are  feign-
ed to  have  been  haif-men  half-liorses,  either  from  their  brutality,  or
because  (if  not  the  inventors  of  horsemanship)  they  generally  ap-
p<'ared  on  horseback.


THESEUS.  S9

business  to  find  him  out  at  Trachin  ^^',  where  he  re-
posed himself  rifter  ali  his  wanderings  and  labours :
arid  that  this  interview  passed  in  marks  of  great  re-
spect, civility,  and  mutual  com.pliments.  We  rather
liowever  prefer  those  historians,  wlio  assure  us,  that
they  had  very  frequent  interviews  ;  and  that  by
means  of  Theseus  Hercules  was  initiated  into  the
Mysteries  of  Ceres  ^'',  having  first  obtained  lustration,
as  he  desired,  on  account  of  several  invohuitary  pol-
lutions.

Theseus  was  now  fifty  years  old,  according  to  Kel-
lanicus,  when  lie  was  concerned  in  the  rape  of  Helen,
who  had  not  yet  arrived  at  her  maturity.  Some
vv'riters,  thinking  this  one  of  the  heaviest  cliarges
against  him,  endeavour  to  correct  it  by  saying,  that
it  was  not  Theseus  that  carried  off  Helen,  but  Idas
and  Lynceus  who  committed  her  to  his  care ;  and
that  tlieretbre  he  refused  to  give  her  up,  when  de-
manded by  Castor  and  Pollux  :  or  rather  that  she
was  delivered  to  him  by  Tyndarus  himself,  to  keep
her  from  Enarsphorus,  the  son  of  Hippocoon,  who
endeavoured  to  possess  himself  by  violence  of  her,
though  then  but  a  child.  But  what  authors  gene-
rally agree  in,  as  most  probable,  is  as  follows:  the
two  friends  went  togetlier  to  Sparta,  and  liaving  seen
the  girl  dancing  in  the  temple  of  Diana  Orthia  ^'\

"'"'  A  small  place,  near  Mount  Qita.*

^^  Prior  to  kiitiation  in  tlie  Greater  Mysteries  at  EleusI?,  a  public
lustration  in  the  Less  (celebrated  at  Agra,  near  the  Ilissus)  was  in-
dispensably necessary.  After  preparing  himself  by  fasting  and  con-
tinence, the  claimant  was  made  to  kneel  upon  the  extended  skin  of
a  pregnant  sow,  wliich  had  been  previously  sacrificed  to  Jupiter;
washed  with  sea-water,  in  whicli  had  beeii  mingled  salt,  laurel,  and
barley ;  then  passed  through  the  fire,  and  finally  crowned  with
flowers,  A  jFubsequent  year  of  noviciate  was  eni[)loyed  in  studying
the  ceremonies  of  this  new  Revelation,  to  all  of  which  (except  a
few  esoteric  ones,  reserved  ior  the  priesthood)  he  was  fully  admit-
ted. He  afterward  wore  the  dress,  in  which  he  had  been  initiate4,
till  it  dropped  in  ])ieces;  it  was  then  consecrated  to  Ceres  or  Pro-
serpine, or  preserved  for  the  use  of  children.  (Seo  Meursius  ou
■these  particular  Mysteries,  &c.)*

■'*"  Upon  the  altar  of  this  temple  the  Spartans  used  to  whip  their
cliildren  with  tlu;  utmost  severity,  to  teach  them  fortitude.     Helen,

12


40  THESEUS.

carried  her  off  and  fled.  Their  pursuers  Ibllowin^
DO  farther  tlian  Tegea,  they  thouglit  themselves  se-
cure J  and,  ha\"ing  traversed  Peloj)Oiinesus,  entered
into  an  agreement,  that  he  who  should  gain  Helen
by  lot  should  have  her  to  wife,  on  condition  of  assist-
ing to  procure  a  wife  for  the  other.  In  consequence
of  these  terms,  the  lots  being  cast,  she  fell  to  The-
seus ;  who  received  the  virgin,  and  conveyed  her,
as  she  was  not  yet  marriageable,  to  Aphidnee  ^'•^.  Here
jie  placed  his  mother  with  her,  and  committed  them
to  the  care  of  his  friend  Aphidnus,  charging  him  to
keep  them  in  the  utmost  secrecy  and  safety ;  while,
to  pay  his  debt  of  service  to  Pirithous,  he  himself
travelled  with  him  into  Epirus,  with  a  view  to  the
daughter  of  Aidoneus,  king  of  the  Molossi.  This
prince  named  his  wife  Proserpine  ^^,  his  daughter
Core,  and  his  dog  Cerberus :  with  this  dog  he  com-
manded all  his  daughter's  suitors  to  fight,  promising
her  to -him  that  should  overcome  him.  But  under-
standinj^:  that  Pirithcius  came  not  with  an  intention
to  court  his  daughter,  but  to  carry  her  off  by  force  ^',
he  seized  both  him  and  his  friend,  destroyed  Piri-
thous  immediately  by  means  of  his  dog,  and  shut  up
Theseus  in  prison.

In  the  mean  while  Menestheus,  the  son  of  Peteus,
grandson  of  Orneus,  and  great-grandson  of  Erech-
theus,  appeared  ;  the  first  (it  is  said)  that  undertook
to  be  a  demagogue,  and  by  his  eloquence  to  ingra-

the  reputed  daughter  of  Jupiter  by  Leda  the  vife  of  Tyndarus,
wlien' thus  carried  off  by  Theseus  and  Pirithous,  was  at  the  utmost
under  tej]  years  of  age.*

8'-^  A  citv  near  Athens.*

^°  PiOserpine  and  Core  was  tlie  same  person,  daughter  to  Aido-
neus, whose  wife  vvas  named  Ceres.  Plutarch  himself  tells  us  so  in
his  Morale,  where  he  adds  that  !)y  Prosei-pine  is  meant  the  Moon,
whom  Pluto,  or  the  God  of  Darkness,  sometimes  carries  off.  Core,
indeed,  signifies  nothing  more  than  '  young  woman'  or  '  daughter;'
and  they  migljt  tay  *  a  daughter  of  ICpiriis,'  as  we  say  *  a  daughter
of  France, '  or  *  of  Spain.'

-"  Plato  however  (ilepwh.  iii.)  wishing  to  screen  tliese  *  sons  of
the  gods'  from  .such  diL^crcdiLabic  imputations,  rejects  this  tradi-
tion.*


THESKU8.  41

tiate  himself  with  the  people.  He  endeavoured  also
to  exasperate  and  seduce  the  nobility,  who  had  but
ill  borne  with  Theseus  for  some  time  from  the  re-
flexion that  he  had  deprived  every  person  of  family
of  his  separate  government  and  command,  and  shut
them  up  together  in  one  city,  where  he  used  them  as
his  subjects  and  slaves.  Among  the  common  people
he  sowed  disturbance  by  telling  them  that,  though
they  pleased  themselves  with  the  dream  of  liberty,
in  fact  they  were  robbed  of  their  country  and  reli-
gion ;  and,  instead  of  many  good  and  native  kings,
were  lorded  ever  by  one  man,  a  new-comer  and  a
stranger.  While  he  was  thus  busily  employed,  the
war  declared  by  the  Tyndaridae  greatly  helped  for-
ward the  sedition.  vSome  plainly  affirm,  that  they
were  invited  by  Menestheus  to  invade  the  country.'
At  first  they  forbore  proceeding  to  hostilities,  and
only  demanded  their  sister  :  but  the  Athenians  an-
swering, that  they  neither  had  her  among  them  nor
knew  where  she  was,  they  began  tlieir  warlike  ope-
rations. Academus  however,  finding  it  out  by  some
means  or  other,  told  them  she  was  concealed  at
Aphidnge.  Hence  not  only  the  Tyndaridce  treated
him  honourably  during  .  his  life,  but  the  Lacedae-
monians, who  in  after-times  often  maJ.e  inroads'into
Attica,  and  laid  waste  all  the  country  besides,  spared
the  Academy  for  his  sake.'  But  Dicaearchus  asserts
that  Echedemus  and  Marathus,  tv^^o  Arcadians,  be-
ing allies  to  the  Tyndarids  in  that  war,  the  place
which  is  now  denominated  the  Academy,  was  from
one  of  them  first  called  Echedemy  ;  and  that  from
the  other  the  district  of  Marathon  had  it's  name,  be-
cause he  freely  oiiered  himself,  in  pursuance  of  some
oracle,  to  be  sacrificed  at  the  head  of  the  army.  To
AphidnaD  then  they  came,  where  they  beat  the  ene-
my in  a  set  battle,  and  afterward  took  the  city,  and
rased  it  to  the  ground.  There  (they  tell  us)  Alycus,
the  son  of  Sciron,  was  slain  fifj-htino;  for  Castor  and
Pollux ;  and  that  a  certain  place,  v/ithin  the  terri-
tories of  Megara,  is   called  Alvcus  from  his  havinii'


42     ^  THESEUS.

been  biiricd  there  :  and  Hereas  writes,  that  Alycas
received  his  death  from  TJicseiis'  own  hand.  These
verses  also  are  cited,  as  a  proof  in  point :

For  bright-bair'd  Helen  he  was  slain
By  Theseus,  on  Aphidnae's  plaui.

Bnt  it  is  not  probable  that  Aphidnae  would  have
been  taken,  and  liis  mother  made  prisoner,  had
Theseus  been  present.

Aphidnar,  however^  was  taken,  and  Athens  itself
in  danger.  Menestheus  seized  this  opportunity  of
persuading  the  people  to  receive  the  Tyndarida?  into
the  city,  and  to  treat  them  with  hospitality;  since
thev  only  levied  war  af2:ainst  Theseus,  who  was  the
aggressor,  and  were  benefactors  and  deliverers  to  the
rest  of  the  Athenians.  Their  behaviour  confirmed
what  he  stated;  for,  though  conquerors,  they  desired
only  to  be  admitted  to  the  Mysteries,  to  whicii  they
had  no  less  claim  tlian  Hercules  ^",  since  they  were
equally  alhed  to  the  city.  This  request  was  easily
granted  them,  and  they  were  adopted  by  Aphidnus,
as  Hercules  was  by  Pylius-".  They  had  also  divine
honours  paid  them,  with  the  title  of  Anakes,  which  v/as
given  them,  either  on  account  of  the  truce  \_anGchc\
which  thev  made,  or  because  of  their  e^reat  care  that
no  one  should  be  injured,  though  there  were  so  many
ti'oops  in  the  city  (tor  the  phrase  anakus  echcin  sig-
nifies to  keep,  or  take  care  of  any  thing ;  and  for
this  reason,  perhaps,  kings  are  called  Anaktcs) :
some  again  say,  they  were  called  Anakes,  because
of  the  appearance  of  their  stars  ;  for  the  Athenians
use  the  words  anekas  and  antkathcn  instead  of  ano
and  anUhui^  that  is,  '  above'  or  '  on  high  ^'.'

'^  For  Castor  and  Pollux,  like  him,  were  sons  of  Jupiter,  from
whom  the  Athenians  too  preteiided  to  derive  their  origin.  It  was-
necessary,  however,  that  they  should  be  naturalised  before  they  were
admitted  to  the  Mysteries;  and,  accordingly,  they  were  naturalised
by  adoption.

y^  King  of  Tbespia;  in  Bacotla.*

'•»  Of  these  M.  Ricard  prefers  the  second,  as  best  confinned  by
the  name  given  to  kings.*


THESEUS.  •     4-,

Vv^e  are  told  that  ^^thra  (tlie  mother  of  Theseus)
wlio  vvas  now  a  prisoner,  was  carried  to  Laceda?mon,
and  thence  with  Helen  to  Trov ;  and  that  Homer
confirms  it  when,  speaking  of  those  that  waited  upon
Helen,  he  mentions

The  beauteous  Clymene,


And  -lithra  born  of  Pittlieus.

Others  reject  this  verse,  as  not  Homer's  ^^;  as  they
do  also  the  story  of  Munychus,  who  is  said  to  have
been  the  fruit  of  a  secret  commerce  betvv'een  Dcmo-
phoon  and  Laodice,  and  brought  up  by  iEthra  at
Troy.  But  Ister,  in  the  thirteenth  book  of  his  his-
tory of  Attica,  gives  an  account  of  ^"Ethra  different
from  all  the  rest.  He  was  informed  (it  seems)  that
after  the  battle,  in  which  Alexander  or  Paris  was
routed  by  Achilles  and  Patroclus  in  Thessaly  near
the  river  Spercliius,  Hector  took  and  plundered  the
city  of  Troezene,  and  carried  off  yEthra,  who  had
been  left  there.  This,  however,  is  highly  impro-
bable.

It  happened  that  Hercules,  in  passing  through
the  countrv  of  the  Molossi,  was  entertained  by
Aidoneus  the  king;  who  accidentally  mentioned
to  him  the  bold  attempts  of  Theseus  and  Pirithous,
and  the  manner  in  which  he  had  punished  them
when  discovered.  Hercules  was  much  disturbed  {o
hear  of  the  inglorious  death  of  the  one,  and  the
danger  of  the  other.  As  to  Pirithous,  liowever,  he
thought  it  vain  to  make  any  expo^;tulations  ;  but  he
begged  to  have  Theseus  released,  and  Aidoneu'i
granted  his  request.  Theseus,  thus  set  at  liberty,
returned  to   Athens,  where  his  party  was  not  yet

'^^  It  appears  indeed  scarcely  probable,  that  Helen  should  have
as  a  v/aitintr-niaid  one,  who  was  her  mother-in-law  and  had  been  a
queen  :  and  yet  this  story  of  iEthra's  captivity  seems  not  a  little
corroborated  by  a  picture,  which  existed  at  Delphi,  where  she  vvas
to  be  seen  shaven  as  a  slave,  and  her  grandson  Demophon  was  re-
presented as  meditating  the  means  «f  her  deliveiance.  (Pausa;),
X.  25.)*


4.*  THESEUS.

entirely    suppressed:    and    whatever   temples   and
i^roves  the  city  had  assianed  to  liim,  he  consecrated
them  all,  except  four,  to  Hercules,  and  called  them
(as  Philochorus   relates)  instead  of  Thesea,  Hera-
clea  ^^     But   desiring   to   preside    in   the  common-
Aveaith,  and  direct   it  as  before,  he   found  Iiiniself
encompassed    Vvith    turbulence    and    sedition  :    for
those,  who  were  his  enemies  before  his  departure,
had  now  added  to  their  hatred  a  contempt  of  his
authority;  and  he  beheld  the  people  so  generally
corrupted    that,    instead   of  silently  executing   his
commands,  they  wished  to  be  flattered  into   their
duty.     Upon  attempting  to  reduce  them  by  force,
he  was  overpowered  by  the  prevalence  of  faction.
Finding  his  affairs  therefore  desperate,  he  privately
sent  his  children  into  Euboea  to  Elephenor,  the  sou
of   Chalcodon ;  and   after    uttering  solemn  execra-
tions  against   the   Athenians   at   Gargettus,  where
there   is   still  a  place  thence  called  Araterion,  he
himself  sailed  to  Scvros  '^\     There  he  in"!af2:ined  he
should  find  hospitable  treatment,  as  he  had  a  pa-
ternal estate  in  that  island.     Lycomedes  was  then
king  of  the  Scyi'ians.     To  him  tiierefore  he  applied,
and  desired  to  be  put  in  possession  of  his  lands,  as
intending  to  settle  there.     Some  sav,  he  asked  as-
sistance  of  him  against  the  Athenians.     But  Lyco-
medes, either  jealous  of  the   glory  of  Theseus,  or
willing  to  oblige  Menestheus '■^'^,  having  led  him  to
the    highest   cliffs   of  the    country   on    pretence   of
thence  shov.ing  him   his   lands,    threw   him    down
headlong  from  the  rocks,  and  killed  him.     Others
say  he  fell  of  himsclfj  missing  his  step,  as  he  took
a  v*-alk  according  to  his  custom  after  supper.     At

^'^  This  consecration  Theseus  is  represented  by  Euripides,  in  his
Hercules  Kavini^,  cis  proii)isiiig  to  his  deliverer.*

i^'  Tiiis  island  is  opput^ite  to  Euhcca.  'J'iic  ungrateful  Athenians
were  in  process  of  time  made  so  sensible  of  the  effects  of  his  curse,
that  to  appease  his  gjioyt,  they  appointed  solemn  sacrifices  and
divine  honours  to  his  mcmor}'.

ss  Or,  as  others  .«tate,  having  detected  him  in  his  endeavours  to'
corrui.t  the  loyalty  of  his  subjects,  and  tlie  chastity  of  his  wife.*

9


THESEUS.  ^$

that  time  his  death  was  disregarded,  and  Menes-
theus  quietly  possessed  the  kingdom  of  Athens  j
while  the  sons  of  Theseus  attended  Elephenor,  as
private  persons,  to  the  Trojan  war.  But,  Menes-
theus  dying  in  the  same  expedition,  they  returned
»  and  recovered  the  kingdom.  In  succeeding  age^j
the  Athenians  honoured  Theseus  as  a  demi-god  ;
induced  to  it  as  well  by  other  reasons,  as  because,
when  they  were  fighting  the  Medes  at  Marathon,
a  considerable  part  of  the  army  thought  they  saw
the  apparition  of  Theseus  completely  armed,  and
bearing  down  before  them  upon  the  barbarians.

After  the  J^Iedian  war,  when  Phsedon  v/as  archon  °^,
The  Athenians  consulting  the  oracle  of  Apollo,
were  ordered  by  the  priestess  to  take  up  the  bones
of  Theseus,  and  lay  them  in  an  honourable  place  at
Athens,  where  they  were  to  be  preserved  with  the
greatest  care  ^^'^.     But  it  was  difficult  to  take  them


&'


'■'  Codrus,  the  seventeenth  king  of  Athens,  contemporary  vvitl|
Saul,  devoted  himself  to  death  for  the  sake  of  his  country,  in  the
contest  with  the  Dorians  and  Heraclidae,  B.  C.  1070;  having
learned,  that  tlie  oracle  had  promised  victory  to  those,  whose  chief
should  fall  in  battle.  His  subjects,  upon  this  account,  conceived
such  veneration  for  Iiira,  that  they  esteemed  none  worthy  to  bear
the  royal  title  after  him :  and  therefore  committed  the  manage-
ment of  the  state  to  elective  magistrates,  to  whom  they  gave  the
title  of  '  Archons;'  choosing  Medon,  the  eldest  son  of  Codrus,  to
this  new  dignity.  These  were  at  first  for  life,  and  of  this  de-
scription there  v/ere  thirteen,  who  governed  for  the  space  of  S16
years.  After  the  death  of  Alcmaeon,  the  last  of  them,  the  office
was  made  decennial,  still  however  continuing  in  the  same  family,
till  the  death  of  Eryxias  (or,  according  to  others,  of  Thesias)  the
seventh  of  this  second  class  of  supreme  magistrates.  In  him  the
family  of  Codrus  (the  Medontidre)  ending,  the  Athenians  created
annual  Arehons,  and  instead  of  one  appointed  nine  every  year.
Of  these  state-officers  see  a  farther  account,  in  the  Notes  on  the
Life  of  Solon.

^°°  How  nearly  superstition  and  infidelity  are  allied!  Who  does
not  recollect,  in  a  more  modern  instance,  the  solecistic  mummery
of  bones  transferred  by  atheists  to  a  Pantheon;  and  that  divinity
conferred  by  apotheosis  upon  mortals,  which  was  denied  to  God  !
To  this  passage  Dr.  Middleton  refers,  in  his  '  Letter  from  Rome,*
to  '  show  the  exact  conformity  between  Popery  and  Paganism,*
from  the  *  superstitious  veneration  and  solemn  translations  of  re-
ii(iue?,  which  make  so  great  a  part  of  the  Popish   worship,  and


4c?  TIIESEUS:

up,  or  even  to  discover  tlie  grave,  on  account  of
the  sava!2:e  and  inhospitable  disposition  of  tlie  bar-
barians who  dwelt  in  Scvros  '"'.  Nevertlielcss,  Ci-
mon  having  taken  the  island  (as  is  related  in  his
Life)  and  being  very  desirous  to  find  out  tlie  place
where  Theseus  was  buried,  by  cliance  sa\v  an  eagle
on  a  certain  eminence  breaking  the  ground,  we  are
told,  and  scratching  it  up  with  liis  talons.  This  he
considered  as  divine  direction  ;  and  digging  there,
found  the  coffin  of  a  nian  of  extraordinarv  size,  with
a  lance  of  brass  and  a  sword  lying  by  it.  V\'hen
these  remains  were  brouarht  to  Athens  in  Cimon's
galley,  the  Athenians  received  them  with  splendid
})rocessions  and  sacrifices;  and  were  as  mucli  trans-
})ortcd,  as  if  Theseus  himself  had  returned  to  the
city.  lie  lies  interred  in  the  middle  of  the  town,
near  the  Gynmasium  :  and  this  is  a  place  of  refuge
for  servants  and  all  persons  of  mean  condition,  wlio
ily  from  men  in  power  ^"- ;  as  Theseus,  while  lie
lived,  was  a  humane  and  benevolent  patron,  who
graciously  received  the  petitions  of  the  indigent.
The  chief  sacrifice  is  oflTei'ed  to  him  on  the  eighth  of
Pyanepsion,  the  day  upon  which  he  returned  with
the  young  men  from  Crete.  They  sacrifice  to  him
likewise  on  each  eighth  day  of  the  otiier  months ;
either  because  he  first  arrived  from  Trcjezene  on  the
eighth  of  Hecatombocon  (as  Diodorus  the  geogra-
pher relates),  or  else  thinking  this  number  above  all
others  most  proper,  because  he  was  said  to  be  the  son
of  Neptune,  whose  solemn  feasts  are  observed  on
th,e  eighth  day  of  every  month.  For  the  number
eiglit,  as   the  first   cube  of  an   even  number,  and

.vhich  (as  here  also)  arc  usually  groumled  on  some  pretended
vision  or  revelation  from  heaven.'  (I'refatory  Discourse,  p.  Ixii.
'^vo.)*

'°'  Tills  account  of  the  Scvrians  can  hardly  be  admitted  by
tliose,  who  recollect  that  Achilles  had  been  sent,  seven  centuries
bf'fbre  the  age  of  Cimon,  to  tlie  court  of  Lyconiedcs;  and  tluit
Scvros,  irom  it's  proximity  to  Eubcea,  must  necessarily  have  hiu{
.some  intercourse  with  Greece*

'°-  Could  he  have  had  a  nobler  monument  t*


THESEUS.  47

the  double  of  the  first  square '°^,  properly  repre-
sents the  firmness  and  immoveable  power  of  this
god,  who  thence  has  the  names  of  Asphalius  and
Gaieochus.

'°5  This  doctrine  of  numbers,  derived  through  Pythagoras  from
jfche  Egyptians,  was  a  great  favourite  with  Plutarch.*


■^  ■'=:*..


THE


I,  I  F  E


OF


ROMULU8\


SUMMARY.


Di^erent  opinions  about  the  origin  of  Rome ;  and  of  the  iivin  bro-
thers, Romulus  and  Remus.     Most  probable  account  of  their  birth.
Then  ^^^^  suckled  by  a  ivolf.     Their  first  cmplo/pncnts  ;  and  quar-
■vel  xuth  Nmnitor^s  herdsmen.     Remus  addresses  that  prince  xdth
great  intrepidity.     Faustulus  arrested  by  Aniulius'  guards.    Amu-
lius  slain  by  Romulus  and  Remus.     Foundation  of  Ro7ne.     Dis-
pute bctxceen  the  brothers,     Remus  slain  by  Romulus.     Ceremonies
observed  in  marlcing  out  the  xvalls  of  the  city.     Epoch  of  it^s foun-
dation.    Distribution  of  the  people  ;  establishment  of  the  senate.
Right  qfp>atronage.   Rape  of  the  Habines.    Origin  of  the  Talassio.
F^nbassy  of  the   Sabiucs.     Romidus^  victory  over  the  Cceninenses.
Origin  of  the  Triumph.     Conquests  of  Romulus  ;  ivar  of  the  Sa-
lines.    Battle  in  Rome  betiveen  the  Romans  arid  Sabines.     Ro-
midus,  pressed  by  the  enemy,  invoices  Jupiter  Stator.     The  Sabine
xvomen  declare  in  favour  of  the  Romans.     The  ttvo  nations  unite.
Form  of  public  deliberations.     Festivals  of  the  Romans.      Vestals,
and  the  Sacred  Fire.      Laws   of  Romulus.     Death  of  Tatius.
FidencB  taken.     The   Camerini  defeated.     War  tvith    Veii.     Ro-
viulus  abuses  his  poiver.     The  patricians  discontented.     He  sud-
denly disappears.     Conjectures  about  his  death.     The  people  re-
strained from  insurrection   by   Proculus.     Some  Grecian  fables^
like  those  circidatcd  about  Romulus.     Reflections  upon  the  nature
of  the  soul.     Different  interjrretations  of  the  7iame  '  Quirinus.  *
The  Caprotiiic  Nones.


KOMULUS.  49


V  llOIM  wliom,  and  for  what  cause,  the  city  of
iloiue  obtained  that  name,  of  which  the  s:\orv  has
(lifilised  itself  over  the  world,  historians  are  not
agreed".  Some  say  that  the  Pehisgi"^,  after  they  had
ov'er-run  great  part  of  the  globe,  and  conquered
many  nations,  settled  tliere ;  and  gave  tJieir  city  the
name  of  Rome"*,  on  account  of  their  strength  in  war.
Others  inform  us  that,  when  Troy  was  taken,  some
of  th.e  Trojans  having  escaped  and  gained  their
ships  put  to  sea,  and  being  driven  by  tlie  winds  upon
the  coasts  of  Tuscany  came  to  an  anchor  in  the
river  Tiber :  that  here,  their  wives  being  much  fa-
tigued and  no  longer  al}le  to  bear  the  hardships  of
the  sea,  one  of  them  superior  to  the  rest  in  birth
and  prudence,  named  Roma,  proposed  that  they
should  burn  the  fleet :  that,  this  having  been  effected,

'  Upon  this  subject,  to  adopt  the  most  generally-received  date,
wc  must  place  tlie  foundation  of  Rome  at  ]i.  C.  75.3.  01.  vi.  4. ;  and
the  death  of  Komulus  B.  C.  716.  A.  U.  C.  38.  But,  though  tl:e.^a
events  are  universally  allowed  to  have  happened  at  a  period  not
long  prior  to  the  christian  jcra,  they  are  involved  in  much  uncer-
tainty. Some  represent  them  as  astronomical  allegories  ;  otliers
conHne  the  obscurity  of  the  history  of  Rome  to  the  reigns  of  it's
seven  kings,  which  include  a  space  of  '244  years;  while  a  third  class
admit  of  little  as  well  authenticated,  which  is  referred  to  any  of  the
five  first  centuries  from  it's  foundation.  The  writers  of  Greece,
indeed  (at  that  time  almost  the  only  writers,  and  the}'  too  chiefly
poets  or  fabulist  historians)  cared  little  for  what  was  passing  in  Italy ;
and  Numa  left  notiiing  behind  him,  except  what  had  reference  to
religion  or  philosophy.  The  annalists  of  Rome  began  to  make  their
cippearancc  only  about  the  time  oftlie  first  I'unic  war.-

-  Such  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  origin  of  Imperial  Rome,  and
indeed  of  most  cities  and  nations,  that  are  of  any  considerable  anti-
quity. 'I'hat  of  Rome  iTu'glit  bo  the  more  uncertain,  because  it's
first  inhabitants,  being  a  collection  of  fugitives  and  outlaws  from
other  nations,  could  not  be  supposed  to  leave  histories  keliihd  them.
Livv  however,  and  most  of  the  Latin  historians,  agree  that  Rome
was  built  bv  Romulus,  and  both  the  city  and  the  people  named  nfier
him  ;  while  the  vanity  of  the  Greek  writers  seeks  to  refer  alnio.sl
every  tiling,  and  Rome  nmong  the  rest,  to  a  Grecian  originaL

'  These,  origimlly  from  Arcadia,  were  the  oldest  inhabitants  of
Greece;  wiience  they  were  driven  into  Thessaly,  and  tlieiiue  iutu
lupin's,  Macedon,  Italy,  Crete,  and  Asia.*

■i  'Poju,})  sio-nifies  '  strength.'  See  alio  Fejtus,  voc.  Euna

VOL.  r.  SI


59  ROMULUS.

the  men  v.cre  at  first  poiicli  exasperated ;  but  after-
ward through  necessity  fixed  their  seat  on  the  Pa-
latine hill,  and  in  a  sliort  time  found  things  succeed
beyond  their  expectation,  for  the  country  was  good  '
and  the  people  hospitable :  that  therefore^  beside
other  honours  paid  to  Romaj  they  called  their  city
(as  she  was  the  cause  of  it's  being  built)  after  her
name.  Hence  too,  we  are  informed,  the  custom
arose  for  the  women  to  salute  their  relations  ixnd
husbands  with  a  kiss  ;  because  those  women,  when
they  had  burned  the  ships,  used  such  kind  of  en-
dearments to  appease  their  husbands*  resentment.

Amoni:r  the  various  accounts  of  historians,  it  is
said  that  Roma  was  the  daughter  of  Italus  and  Leu-
caria;  or  of  Telephus  the  son  of  Hercules,  and
married  to  ^^Eneas ;  or  of  Ascanius  the  son  of
JEne-d^,  and  that  she  gave  name  to  the  city  ;  or
that  Romanus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe,  built
it;  or  Romus,  the  son  of  JEmathion,  whom  Dio-
medes  sent  from  Troy;  or  Romus  king  of  the
Latins,  after  he  had  expelled  the  Tuscans*^,  who
passed  originally  from  Thessaly  into  Lydia,  and
thence  into  Italy.  Even  they  who,  with  the  greatest
probability,  declare  that  the  city  had  its  name  from
Romulus,  are  far  from  agreeing  about  his  extrac-
tion :  for  some  state  that  he  was  the  son  of  ^Eneas
and  Dexithea,  the  daughter  of  Phorbus,  and  was
brought  an  infant  into  Italy  with  his  brother  Remus ;
that  all  the  other  vessels  were  lost  by  the  violence
of  the  flood,  except  that  containing  the  children,
which  driving  gently  ashore  where  the  bank  was
level,  they  were  saved  beyond  expectation,  and  the

5  Whatever  desirable  things  Nature  has  scattered  frugally  in
other  countries,  were  formerly  found  in  Italy,  as  in  their  original
seminary.  But  there  has  been  so  little  encouragement  given  to
t'ae  cultivation  of  the  soil,  since  it  became  subject  to  the  pontifFi-,
that  it  is  now  comparatively  barren.

"  That  these  Tuscans  however  were  not  the  same  as  tlie  Pelasgi,
nor  cTen  a  colony  from  Lydia,  is  inferred  by  Dion.  Halic,  with
great  probability,  from  tlie  iUftereacC  of  their  language,  customs,
religion,  and  laws."^


ROMULUS.  51

place  from  tlicm  called  Rome.  Some  will  have  it
that  Roma,  daughter  of  the  Trojan  woman  who
was  married  to  Latinos,  the  son  of  Telemachus,
was  the  mother  of  Romulus.  Others  say  that  ^irailia,
the  daughter  of  .tineas  and  Lavinia,  had  liim  by
jMars  :  and  others  again  give  an  account  of  his  birth,
which  is  entirely  iiibulous.  There  appeared,  it  seems,
to  Tarchetius  king  of  the  Albans,  who  was  the  worst
and  most  barbarous  of  men,  a  supernatural  vision
in  his  own  house,  the  figure  of  Priapiis  rising  out
of  the  chimney-hearth,  and  staying  there  many  days.
The  goddess  Tethys  had  an  oracle  in  Tuscany",
which  being  consulted  upon  the  occasion,  gave  thii
answer  to  Tarchetius  ;  That  it  was  necessary  some
virgin  should  admit  the  embraces  of  the  phantom,
from  which  would  spring  a  son  eminent  for  valour,
good  fortune,  and  strength  of  body.  Upon  thi^^
Tarclictius  acquainted  one  of  his  dauohters  with  the
prediction,  and  ordered  her  to  entertain  the  appa-
rition ;  l>ut  she,  declining  it,  sent  her  maid.  V/hen
Tarchetius  knew  tliis,  he  was  highly  olfended,  and
confined  them  both,  intending  to  put  them  to  death.
Vesta  however  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  and
forbade  his  killing  them  ;  directing,  that  the  young
women  should  Vveave  a  certain  web  in  their  fetters,
and  when  that  was  finished  should  be  given  in  m.ar-
riage.  They  wove  therefore,  in  the  day-time  ;  while
others,  by  Tarchetius'  order^  unravelled  it  in  the
night.  The  woman  having  twins  by  this  comm.erce,
Tareiietius  delivered  them  to  one  Teratius,  with  au
injunction  to  destroy  them.  But,  instead  of  that,  lie
exposed  them  by  a  river-side ;  v.here  a  slie-wolf
came  and  gave  them  suck,  and  various  kinds  of
birds  brought  food  for  their  support ;  till  at  last  a
herdsman,  wlio  beheld  it  with  surprise,  ventured  to
approach  and  take  them  up.     Thus  secured  from

^  Til  ere  was  no  oracle  of  Tethyt;,  but  of  Themis  there  was.
Theiiiis  was  the  savne  with  Carmenta,  the  mother  of  Evanjer,  v/hich
last  name  she  had,  because  she  delivered  her  oracles  in  cr.nnip.ef


m  noMULUs.

danger,  they  grew  up,  attacked  Tarclictius,  aiul
overcame  him.  This  is  the  account,  which  Proma-
thion  gives  in  his  History  of  Italy.

But  the  principal  parts  of  that  account,  which
deserves  the  most  credit,  and  has  the  greatest  num-
ber of  vouchers,  were  first  published  among  the
Greeks  by  Diodes  the  Peparethian,  v/hom  Fabias
Pictor  ^  commoidy  fblhnvs  ;  and  though  tlicre  are
different  relations  of  the  matter,  the  story  may  be
despatched  in  a  few  words,  as  follows :  The  kings  of
Alba  ^  descending  lineally  from  ^^neas,  the  suc-
cession fell  to  two  brothers,  Numitor  and  Amulius.
The  latter  di\ided'°  the  whole  inheritance  into  two
parts,  setting  the  treasures  brought  from  Troy
against  the  kingdom,  and  Ninuitor  made  choice  of
the  latter.  7\mulius  then  iiaving  the  treasures,  and
consequently  being  more  powerful  than  Numitor,
easily  possessed  himself  of  the  kingdom  too;  and
fearincT  Numitor's  dauc^hter  mio-ht  have  children,  an-
pointed  her  priestess  of  A'^esta,  in  which  capacity
she  w^as  alwavs  to  live  unmarried  and  a  vircrin.
Some  say  her  name  was  Ilia,  some  Rhea,  and  otlvers
Sylvia.     Tliis    lady,    contrary  to    the    law    of   the

s  Pe{);ivcthus  was  one  of  the  Cytlades,  eminent  for  it's  wine.
Who  Diodes  was,  is  unknown;  but  Fabiius  Pictor,  called  by  Livy
'  the  oldest  Roman  writer,'  was  one  of  the  deputies  sent  to  Delphi
after  the  fatal  battle  of  Caanie,  to  in(|uire  into  the  means  of  con-
ciliating tiie  otfended  gods.  lie  is  charged,  by  Polybius,  with
liaving  treated  the  Carthaginians  unjustly  in  his  Annals.  (Voss.  de
Ilist.Lat.  i.  S.)*

^  From  .'Eneas,  down  to  !!^umitor  and  Amulius,  there  were
thirteen  kings  of  the  same  race  ;  but  we  scarcely  know  any  tiling  <>£
them,  except  th.eir  names  and  t'he  years  of  tiieir  respective  reign-j.
Amulius  the  last  of  tliem,  who  surpassed  his  brother  in  courage  and
Miidcrstanding,  drove  hito  i'rom  t!ui  t!)rone  ;  and,  in  order  to  secure
it  for  himself,  nuirthercd^'Egestus,  Numitor's  only  son,  and  conse-
crated his  dangliter  !(hea  Sylvia  to  the  worship  of  Vesta.

'°  Of  this  division  Dion,  llalic.  (i.  17.)  makes  no  mention,  but
only  says  that  Amulius  ""oy  force  sei;red  the  throne  to  the  exclusion
of  his  elder  brother,  whose  claim  v.-as  incontestal)lc  :  and  his  state-
ment is  apparently  proved  by  a  passage  in  Livy  (i.  6.),  wlio  re-
marks tluU,  as  Iiomukis  and  Remus  were  twins,  tliere  was  no
method  of . determining  v/hich  of  tiicjn,  in  rigiit  of  scnioriiy,  shoiijjd.
•ule  the  other.*


ROMULUS.  53

Vestals,  was  soon  discovered  to  be  with  child.  But
Antho,  the  king's  daughter,  by  much  entreaty,  pre-
vailed upon  her  father,  that  she  should  not  be  capi-
tally punished.  She  was  confined  however,  and  ex-
cluded from  society,  lest  she  should  be  delivered
without  Amulius'  knowledge.  On  the  completion
of  her  time,  she  was  delivered  of  two  sons  of  un-
common size  and  beauty ;  upon  which  Amulius,
still  more  alarmed,  directed  one  of  his  servants  to
destroy  them.  Some  say,  the  name  of  the  servant
was  Faustuius  ;  others,  that  this  was  the  name  of
the  person  who  took  them  up.  Pursuant  to  his
orders,  he  put  the  children  into  a  small  trough  or
cradle,  and  went  down  toward  the  river  with  a  de-
sign to  cast  them  in  ;  but  seeing  it  very  rough,  and
running  with  a  strong  current,  he  was  afraid  to  ap-
proach it.  He  therefore  laid  them  down  near  the
bank,  and  departed.  The  flood  increasing  conti-
nually set  the  trough  afloat,  and  carried  it  gently
down  to  a  pleasant  place  now  called  Cermanum,
but  formerly  (as  it  should  seem)  Germanum,  be-
cause they  call  brothers  Germani.

Near  tliis  place  was  a  wild  fig-tree,  which  they
called  Ruminalis,  either  on  account  of  llomulus
(as  is  generally  supposed)  or  because  the  cattle
there  ruminated,  or  chewed  the  cud,  during  the
noon-tide  in  the  shade :  or,  rather,  because  of  the
suckling  of  the  children  there ;  for  the  ancient
Latins  called  the  breast  ruma^  and  the  goddess  who
presides  over  the  nursery  Rumilia^^,  whose  rites
they  celebrated  v/ithout  wine  '-,  and  only  with  liba-
tions of  milk.  The  infants,  as  the  story  goes,  lying
there  were  suckled  by  a  she-wolf,  and  fed  and  taken
care  of  by  a  wood-pecker.     These  animals  are  sacred

"  The  Romans  called  that  goddess  not  Rumilia,  but  Rumina.  (L.)
Heyne,  in  his  Excurs.  IV.  on  Virg.  .'En.  vii.,  rejects  this  deriva-
tion, and  the  fable  of  the  wolf  as  nrafted  upon  it ;  and  thinks  it  much
more  probable  that  the  city  had  it's  name  from  Run;on,  the  old  ap-
pellation of  the  Tiber.   (8evv.  ad  ^n.  viii.  90,  &c.)*
' '  As  pernicious  to  that  period  of  life.*


51  ROMULUS.

to  Mars  ;  and  the  wood-pecker  is  lield  in  ,G:rcat  ho-
nour and  veneration  by  the  Latins.  .Such  vvonder-
iul  events  contributed  not  a  little  to  sain  credit  to
the  mother's  report,  that  she  had  the  children  by
Mars  :  thon2;h  in  this  thev  inform  us  she  was  herself
deceived,  having  suffered  violence  from  Amnlius,
who  came  to  her  and  lay  with  her  in  armour.  Some
say,  the  ambiguity  of  the  nurse's  name  gave  occa-
sion to  the  fable  :  for  the  Latins  call  not  only  she-
wolves,  but  prostitutes,  htpce ;  and  such  was  Acca
Larentia,  the  wife  of  the  children's  foster-father
Faustulus.  To  her  also  the  Romans  offer  sacrifice,
and  the  priest  of  Mars  honours  her  wilh  libations  in
the  month  of  April,  when  they  celebrate  her  feast
Larentalia.

They  worship  also  another  Larentia  '^,  on  the  fol-
lowing account :  The  keeper  of  the  temple  of  Her-
cules, having  it  seems  little  else  to  do,  proposed
to  play  a  game  at  dice  with  the  god,  upon  condition
that,  if  he  won,  he  should  receive  something  va-
luable from  that  deity;  but,  if  he  lost,  he  sliould
provide  a  noble  entertainment  for  him,  and  a  beauti-
ful Woman  to  sleep  with  him.  Then  thro vving  the
dice,  first  for  the  god  and  next  for  himself,  it  ap-
peared that  he  had  lost.  Willing  therefore  to  fulfil
his  bargain,  and  to  perform  the  stipulated  condi-
tions, he  prepared  a  supper ;  and  engaging  for  tlie
purpose  one  Larentia,  who  was  Mtry  handsome  but

'5  This  lady,  iNI,  llicard  remarks,  should  be  called  Acca  Ta-
runtla,  from  the  name  of  her  keeper.  She  is  supposed  to  he  the
^.ime  vviUi  Flora,  who  bequeathed  her  infamous uealih  tu  tiif  Rouian
pf^ople,  and  was  honoured  in  return  with  the  institution  of  the  li-
rontious  Fl«ral  games.  (.See  Varr.  de  L.  L.  v.  3.,  Macrob.  Saturn,
i.  10.,  and  Ovid.  Fast.  iv.  94-7.  v.  ;>3J.)

All  this  however  the  aeute  and  classical  Gifford,  in  a  long  note
vipon  Juv.  vi.  219->  pronounces  •  an  idle  story;'  affirms  that  '  the
flowers  of  ffalv  had  a  presiding  power,  ages  before  Rome  <;r  her
■"■■enale  was  heard  of  i'  and  states  the  perplexities  of  some  of  the
Koman  writers  upon  this  subject,  as  well  as  the  date  of  the  first
N-^nl  sanction  extended  to  the  Floralia,  and  his  own  opinion  oF
their  remote  and  barbarous  origin,  with  the  time  and  manner  of
tiif ir  celebration,  &c.*


ROMULUS.  55

?ii?  yet  little  known,  treated  her  in  the  temple,  where
he  had  provided  a  bed,  and  after  supper  left  her  for
the  enjoyment  of  the  god.     Accordingly  the  deity
(it  is  said)  had  intercourse  with  lier,  and  ordered
her  to  go  early  in  the  morning  to  the  market-place,
salute  the  first  man  whom  slie  should  meet,  and  make
iiim  lier  friend.     'Jlie  first  that  met  her  was  one  far
advanced  in  years,  and   in   opulent  circumstances,
Tarrutius   by  name,  who  had  no  children  and  had
nev'Cr  been  married.     I'his  man  took  Larentia  to  his
bed,  and    loved   her  so  well,  that  at  his  death  he
left  her  heir  to  his  whole   estate,  which   was  verv
considerable ;  and    she    afterward   bequeathed    the
greatest  part  of  it  by  wnll  to  the  people.    It  is  added,
that  at  the  time  when  she  was  in  high  reputation,
and  considered  as  the  favourite  of  a  god,   she  sud-
denly disappeared  about  the  place  where  the  former
Larentia  was  laid.     It  is  now^  called  \  elabrum,  be-
cause the  river  often  overflowing,  they  passed  it  at
this  place  in  ferry-boats,  to  go  to  the  Forum.     This
kind  of  passage  they  called  velatiu^a  '*.     Others  de-
rive the   name  fi'om  velum  (' a  sail ')  because  they,
who  have   the  exhibiting  of  the  public  shows,  be-
ginning at  Velabrum,  overshadow  all  the  w^ay  that
leads   from   the   Forum    to    the   Hippodrome    w4th

'•*  Tills  etymology  Is  confirmed  by  Vavro  de  L.  L.  iv.  7-,  who  de-
rive? vclahrum  (as  contracted  from  veJtcIahrnm)  froin  who.

The  subsequent  conjecture,  which  would  deduce  ifs  origin  from
I'elum  (as  INI.  Dacier  rightly  observes")  nuist  he  wrong;  because  the
c.usto.m  alluded  to  of  stretchiiig  canvas  at  the  public  shows  com-
menced, long  after  the  date  of  the  name  Velabrum,  at  the  time
when  Q.  Catulits  dedicated  the  Capitol.   (Plin.  H.  N.  xix.  1.)

M.  Ricard  gives  a  long  note  in  this  place,  upon  the  fanciful  theory
of  M.  le  Compte  de  Gebelin,  who  resolving  the  whole  story  of
Romulus  and  Remus  into  an  allegory,  from  considerations  'whim-
sically ingenious)  of  date,  derivation,  &C.  identified  them  respectively
with  the  summer  and  winter  sun.  Hercules  is  likewise  i)y  a  strong
effort  brouiS!;ht  in,  *  head  and  shoulders,'  as  a  parailol  to  Homulus :
but  the  render  will  not  be  sorry  to  escape  the  perusal  of  Egyj)tian
or  Phoenician  calendars  and  etymologies.  The  number  of  the  Dii
Majo.res,  tv.'elve,  was  indeed  temptingly  critical  for  one  disposed  to
allegorise  about  months,  iVc*


55  ROMULUS'.

canvas.     Upon  thc:-.e  accounts,  is   the  second  La-
rentia  so  much  honoured  among  the  Romans.

In  the  mean  time  Faustuhis,  Amulius'  herdsman,
brought  up  tlie  children  entirely  undiscovered  ;  or
rather,  as  others  Avith  more  probability  assert,  Nu-
mitor  knew  it  from  the  first'"',  and  privately  supplied
the  necessaries  for  their  maintenance.  It  is  also
said  that  they  were  sent  to  Gabii  '^',  and  there  in-
structed in  letters,  and  otlier  branches  of  educa-
tion suitable  to  their  birth  :  and  history  informs  us,
that  they  had  the  names  of  Romulus  and  Remus,
from  the  teat  of  the  wild  animal  which  they  had
been  seen  to  suck.  The  beauty  and  dignity  of  their
persons,  even  in  their  childhood,  promised  a  ge-
nerous disposition  ;  and  as  they  grew  up,  they  both
discovered  great  bravery,  with  an  inclination  to  ha-
zardous attempts,  and  a  spirit  which  nothing  could
subdue.  But  Romulus  seemed  more  to  cultivate  the
powei's  of  reason,  and  to  excel  in  political  know-
ledge ;  while,  by  his  deportment  among  his  neigh-
bours in  the  employments  of  pasturage  and  hunting,
he  convinced  them  that  he  was  born  to  command
rather  than  to  obey.  To  their  equals  and  inferiors
they  behaved  most  courteously ;  but  they  despised
the  king's  bailiffs  and  chief  herdsmicn,  as  not  loftier
than  themselves  in  courage,  though  they  were
higher  in  authority,  disregarding  at  once  their  threats
and  their  resentment.  They  applied  themselves  to
generous  exercises  and  pursuits,  considering  not
idleness  and  inactivity,  but  hunting,  running,  ba-
nishing or  apprehending  robbers,  and  delivering
those   who  were  oppressed,    as  liberal  and  praise-

^s  Numitor  might  build  upon  this  the  hopes  of  his  re-establish-
ment ;  but  his  knowing  the  place  where  the  children  were  educated,
and  supplying  them  with  necessaries,  is  quite  inconsistent  with  the
manner  of  their  discovery  when  grown  up,  wliich  is  the  most  inte-
resting part  of  the  story.

'^  An  Alban  colony,  twelve  miles  from  Rome,  where  (according
to  Dion.  Halic.  i.  19.)  they  were  instructed  in  Greek  literature,  the
Belles  Lcttres,  and  the  use  of  arms.*


KOMULUa  57

wortliy.     By  these  things  they  acquired  considerable
renown.

A  dispute  arising  between  the  herdsmen  of  Nu-
mitor  and  Amidius,  and  the  former  having  driven
away  some  cattle  belonging  to  the  latter,  iiomulus
and  Remus  fell  upon  them,  put  them  to  flight,  and
recovered  the  greatest  part  of  the  booty.  At  this
conduct  Numitor  was  highly  offended  ;  but  they  lit-
tle regarded  his  indignation.  Ttie  first  steps,  v>hich
tliey  took  upon  this  occasion,  were  to  collect  and
receive  into  their  company  persons  of  desperate  for*
tunes,  and  a  number  of  slaves  ;  a  measure,  which
gave  alarming  proofs  of  their  bold  and  seditions  in-
clinations. It  happened  that  when  Romulus  was
employed  in  sacrificing,  for  to  that  and  to  divination
he  was  much  inclined,  Numitor's  herdsmen  met  with
Remus,  as  he  was  walking  with  a  small  retinue,  and
attacked  him.  After  some  blow.-  exchanged,  and
wounds  given  and  received,  Numitor's  people  pre-
vailed, and  took  Remus  prisoner.  He  was  carried
before  Numitor,  and  had  several  things  laid  to  his
charge  ;  but  Numitor  did  not  choose  to  punish  him
liimself,  from  apprehension  of  his  brother's  resent-
ment. To  him,  therefore,  he  confidently  applied
for  justice ;  since,  though  brother  to  the  reigning
prince,  he  had  been  injured  by  some  of  the  royal
servants.  The  people  of  Alba  moreover  expressing
their  uneasiness,  and  thinking  that  Numitor  suffered
great  indignities,  Amulius  moved  with  their  com-
})laints  delivered  Remus  to  him,  to  be  treated  as  he
should  think  proper.  When  the  youth  was  conducted
to  his  house,  Numitor  was  deeply  struck  with  his
appearance,  as  he  was  remarkable  for  size  and
strength:  he  observed  likewise  his  presence  of  mind,
and  the  steadiness  of  his  looks^  which  had  nothing
servile  in  them,  and  remained  unaltered  under  the
sense  of  his  present  danger ;  and  he  was  informed,
that  his  actions  and  whole  behaviour  corresponded
with  these  appearances.  But,  above  all,  some  di-
vine influence  Tas  it  seems)  directing  the  beginnings
9


58  noiMiTLua

of  the  extraordinarv  events  that  were  to  follow,
Numitor,  by  his  sagacity  or  by  a  fortimato  conjec-
ture suspecting  the  truth,  questioned  him  conc<?in-
hig  the  circumstances  of  liis  birth  ;  speaking  miidJy
at  the  same  time,  and  regarding  liim  witli  a  gracious
eye.  Upon  which,  he  boldl}^  replied  ;  "  I  will  hide'
"  nothing  from  you,  for  you  behave  in  a  more
"  princely  manner  than  AmuHus,  since  you  hear
"  and  examine  before  you  punish  ^'  :  but  he  has  de-
"  livered  us  up,  without  making  any  inquiry  into
"  the  matter.  I  Iiave  a  twin-brother,  and  hitherto
*'  we  have  believed  ourselves  the  sons  of  Faustulus
"  and  Larentia,  servants  of  the  king.  But  since
''  we  have  been  accused  !)efore  you,  and  are  so  pur-
''  sued  bv  slander  as  to  be  in  dans^er  of  our  lives,  we
hear  nobler  things  concerning  our  birth.  V»'l]ether
they  be  true  or  not,  the  present  crisis  will  show'**.
Our  birth  is  sard  to  iiave  been  secret,  our  support
"  in  infancy  miraculous.  We  were  exposed  to  birds
"  and  Vvild  beasts,  and  by  tliem  nourished;  suckled
by  a  she-wolf,  and  fed  by  the  attention  of  a  wood-
pecker, as  vvC  lay  in  a  trough  by  the  great  river.
The  trough  is  still  preserved,  bound  about  with
brass   bands,   and  inscribed  with    letters    partly


Si

ii


'■^  I  subjoin  a  note  from  liigli  authority  upon  this  subject:  "  Tiie
philosophical  poet  doth  notabl}-  describe  the  damnable  and  damned
proceedings  ot' the  judge  of  hell,

Giiosins  hcec  Rhadamanihiis  hahel  clunssima  reo-na,
Casligatqtie,  auditquc  dohs,  sahigitquc  fateri.

(Virg.  .^n.vi.- 566.)
J'ir.'-t  he  punisheth,  and  iJicn  he  hcarcth,  and  lastly  compelleth  to
coriTj.^s,  and  makes  and  mars  laws  at  his  pleasure  ;  like  as  the  Cen-
turion, ill  tlie  hoiy  history,  did  to  St.  Paul:  tor  the  text  saiib,
'  Then  the  chief  cnptain  came  near,  and  took  him,  and  c^onimand-
ed  him  W,  be  bon^d  with  tv.o  chains;  and  demanded  who  he  v--as^
•ind  what  he  Iiad  done.'  Acts  xxi.  .33.  But  good  judges  abhor
these  courses."     ((]o;.:e,  2  Inst.  5-5.)*

''^  Tliey  had,  untioubt'jdiy,  heard  some  vague  story  of  their  sin-
r:ular  preservation  in  infancy;  and  hencs  Remus  would  naturally
conclude  that,  if  it  were  tree,  the  god  wiio  had  thus  miraculouslv
prnrrctcd  them  in  their  inisacy,  would  d-liver  him  from  his  present
peril.


ROMULUS.  59

''  effaced  ;  which  may  prove  perhaps  hereafter
"  useless  tokens  to  our  parents,  when  we  are  cle-
"  stroyed."  Numitor  hearing  this,  and  comparing
the  time  witli  the  young  man's  looks,  was  con-
firmed in  the  pleasing  hope  which  he  ha'd  con-
ceived, and  considered  how  he  might  consult  his
daughter  about  this  affair;  for  she  vvas  still  kept  in
close  custody.

MeanwJiile  Faustulus,  ho.ving  heard  that  Remus
was  taken  and  delivered  up  to  punishment,  desired
Romidas  to  assist  his  brother,  inlbrming  him  clearly
at  the  same  time  of  the  particulars  of  his  birth  ;  for
he  had  previously  only  given  dark  hints  about  it,  and
signified  just  so  much,  as  might  divert  the  attention
of  his  wards  from  every  thin^  mean  and  discredit-
abic.  He  himself  took  the  trough,  and  in  all  the
tumult  of  concern  and  fear  carried  it  to  iXumitor.
His  disorder  raised  some  suspicion  in  the  king's
guards  at  the  gate,  and  that  disorder  increasing,
while  they  looked  earnestly  upon  him  and  perplexed
him  with  their  questions,  he  was  discovered  to  have
a  trough  under  his  cloke.  There  happened  to  be
among  them  one  of  those  ^-^  who  had  had  it  in
charge  to  throw  the  children  into  the  river,  and  who
was  concerned  in  the  exposing  of  them.  This  man
seeing  the  trough,  and  knowing  it  again  by  it's  make
and  inscription,  rightly  guessed  the  business ;  and
tliinking  it  an  affair  not  to  be  neglected,  immedi-
ately acquainted  the  king  with  it,  and  induced  him
to  examine  the  matter.  Amidst  these  pressing  diffi-
culties, Faustulus  did  not  entirely  preserve  his  pre-
sence of  mind,  nor  yet  fully  discover  the  matter.
He  acknowledged,  that  the  children  were  indeed
saved,  but  said  that  they  kept  cattle  at  a  great  dis-
tance from   Aiba ;  and  that   he  was  carrying   the

"'  T'its  seems  to  co;itradict  what  Plutarch  has  ahove  related,  viz.
that  only  one  servant  (most  probably,  Faustulus  hiaiseU")  had  been
einployed  upon  this  unnatural  coraniissio'a  :  but  Dion.  Halic.  ex-
pressly states,  tha.t  liiere  were  several  so  enga^jed.*


t


GO  RO^ilULUS.

trough  to  Ilia,  \vIio  liad  often  desired  to  see  it,  to
encourage  herself'  in  the  hope  that  her  sons  were
5till  alive.  All,  that  persons  perplexed  and  actuated
with  fear  or  anger  usually  sutier,  Amulius  then  en-
dured ;  for  in  his  hurry  he  sent  an  honest  man,  a
friend  of  Nuinitor,  to  inquire  of  him,  whether  he
had  any  account  that  the  children  were  living '°.
AVhcn  the  man  was  come,  and  saw  llenuis  almost  in
the  embraces  of  Numitor,  he  endeavou.red  to  con-
firm him  in  the  persuasion  that  the  youtli  was  really
his  grandson  ;  entreating  him  at  the  same  time,  to
take  instantly  the  best  measures  that  could  be  de-
vised, and  give  his  zealous  assistance  to  sup[)ort
their  party.  The  occasion  admitted  no  delay,  if  they
had  been  inclined  to  it;  tor  Romulus  was  now  at
hand,  and  a  number  of  the  citizens  were  gathered
about  him,  cither  out  of  hatred  or  tear  of  Amulius.
He  brought  also  a  considerable  force  along  with
him.,  divided  into  companies  of  a  hundred  men  each,
headed  by  an  officer  who  bore  a  handful  of  grass
and  shrubs  upon  a  pole.  These  the  Latins  call
jManipiiH  ;  and  hence  it  is,  that  to  tliis  day  soldiers
of  the  same  company  arc  called  Maulpularcs.  Re-
mus then  having  gained  those  within,  and  Romulus
assaulting  tiie  palace  from  vvithoutj  the  tyrant  knew
not  what  to  do  or  whom  to  consult,  but  amidst  his
doubts  and  perplexity  was  taken  and  slain.  These
particulars,  though  mostly  related  by  Fabius  and
Diodes  the  Pcparethian,  who  seems  to  have  been
the  first  that  wrote  about  the  founding  of  Rome,  arc
yet  suspected  by  some  as  fabulous  and  groimdless.
Perhaps  however  we  ought  not  to  be  so  incredulous,
when  we  see  what  extraordinary  events  fortune  pro-
duces ;  nor,  when  we  consider  what  height  of  great-
ness Rome  attained,  can  we  think  it  could  ever  have

'°  Nothing  can  well  appear  more  incredible  than  the  conduct,
here  assigned  by  Plutarch  to  Amnlius;  especially,  it'  we  compare
V.  ith  it  the  account  ot"  the  same  transaction  preserved  by  Dion.
lialic.  i.  Id.'^


ROMULUS.  61

been  effected  without  some  supernatural  assistance,
at  first,  and  an  orio^in  more  than  human  ^'.

Arauhus  being  dead,  and  the  troubles  composed,
the  two  brothers  were  not  willing  to  live  in  Alba
without  governing  there,  nor  yet  to  take  the  govern-
ment u.pon  them  dm-ing  their  grandfather's  life.
Having  therefore  invested  him  with  it,  and  paid  C\uq
honours  to  their  mother,  they  determined  to  dwell
in  a  city  of  their  own  ;  and  for  that  purpose  to  build
one  in  the  place,  where  they  hiid  received  their  first
nourishment.  Tliis  seems,  at  least,  the  most  plau-
sible reason  for  their  having  quitted  Alba  :  and  per-
haps too  it  was  an  unavoidable  alternative,  as  a  num-
ber of  slaves  and  fugitives  was  collected  about  them,
either  to  see  their  afiliirs  entirely  ruined  \i  these
should  disperse,  or  with  tliem  to  seek  another  habi-
tation  :  for  that  the  people  of  Alba  refused  to  permit
the  fugitives  to  mix  with  them,  or  to  receive  them
as  citizens,  siifliciently  appears  from  the  rape  of  the
women  ;  which  was  not  undertaken  out  of  a  licen-
tious humour,  but  deliberately  and  throug-h  neces-
sitv  from  the  want  of  wives,  since  after  thev  seized
them,  they  treated  them  with  the  utmost  respect.

As  soon  as  the  foundation  of  tlie  city  was  laid,
they  o})ened  a  place  of  refuge  for  fugitives,  which
they  called  the  Temple  of  the  Asylasan  God".  Here
they  received  all  that  came,  and  would  neither  de-
liver up  the  slave  to  his  master,  the  debtor  to  his
creditor,  nor  the  niurtherer  to  the  magistrate ;  de-
claring, that  they   were  directed  by  tiie  oracle  of

''■'^  T!iis  passogc  miglit  be  quoted,  ?.s  an  instance  of  the  credality
of  Plutarch  ;  hut  it  is  perhaps  a  sli'I  t:trongc;'  proof  of  his  inconse-
quence :  for  without  false  logic,  as  well  as  false  religion,  what  con-
nection can  he  traced  hetween  the  ultimate  flights  of  the  Roman
eagle,  and  the  story  of  tlie  niiracnious  wolf  r*

*^  It  is  not  certain,  who  this  God  of  Refwge  was.  IvT.  Dacier
conjectures,  ."Apollo.  Dionysius  of  Haiicarnasius  informs  us,  that
in  his  time  tlie  place,  where  ihe  Asyluin  had  stood,  was  consecrated
to  Jupiter,  llomuius  did  not  at  first  receive  ti)e  i\u;itives  and  cat-
laws  within  the  walls,  but  allowed  them  the  hill  Saturcius.  after-
ward calh-*d  Capitoli?i:AS,  for  tlieir  habitation.


62  RO.MULITS.


,A.pollo  to  preserve  the  Asylum   from   all  violation.

riiiis  the  city  was  soon  peopled -'^ ;  for  it  is  said,  that
the  houses  at  Mrst  did  not  exceed  a  thousand.  But
of  that  hereafter.  W

While  they  were  ii;itent  upon  biiildinp;,   a  dispute
soon  arose  about  the  place.  Romulus  having  founded
a  square,  which  he   called    Roma,  would  have  the
city  placed  there  ;  but  Remus  marked  out  a  more
secure  situation   on   Mount  Aventine,    which  from
him  was  called  Remonium  -*,  and  lias  now  the  name
of  Riij^narium.     The  dispute  was  referred  to  the  de-
cision  of  augury  ;    and   tor   this  purpose   they  sat
down  in  the  open'  air,   when  Remus  (we  are  told)
saw  six  vultures,  and  Romulus  twice  as  many.  Some
say,  Remus'  account  of  the  number  he  had  seen  was
true,  and  tiiat  of  Romuius  not  so  ;    but,  that  when
Remus  came  u])  to  him,  he  did  really  see  twelve'\
Hence  the  Romans,  in  their  divination  by  the  flight
of  birds,  ciiiefly  regard  the  vulture  :  though   llero-
dorus  of  Pontus  relates,  that  Hercules  used  to  re-
joice \\\\Q:\\  a  vulture  apipeared  to  him,   as  he  was
undertaking  any  great  action.      This  was,  probably,
because  it  is  a  creature  the  least  mischievous  of  any,
pernicious  neither  to  corn,  nor  plants,  nor  cattle.
It  only  feeds  upon  carcasses  ;  and  neither  kills,  nor
preys  upon,  any  thing  that  has  life  -^     As  ibr  birds,

-^  Most  of  the  Trojans,  of  wliom  there  stiil  remained  fifty  families
in  Augustus'  time,  chose  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  Romulus  and
Remus,  as  did  also  the  inhabitants  of  Pallantium  and  Saturnia,
t'AO  small  towns  near  Alba.

--*  Vvi'find  no  mention  either  of  Ilempnium  or  Rignarium,  in  any-
other  writer.  An  anonymous  MS.  reads  '  Remoria  :'  and  Fcbtus
(DeL.  L.  ii.)  informs  us,  that  the  suaimit  of  Mount  Aventine  was
culled  iiemuria,  irom  t'le  time  Rumus  resolved  to  build  the  city
there  But  Dion.  Ilalic.  (i.  20.)  speaks  of  mount  Aventine  and
Uemuria,  as  two  different  places;  and  Steplumus  will  have  Remuria
to  have  been  a  city  in  the  nefglibourhood  of  Rome.

-i  For  more  detailed  particulars  of  this  veiy  improhahle  story,
which  seems  to  incline  even  the  judicious  Ricard  to  M.  Gebelin's
allsi^orical  hypptliesis,  see  Dion.  Ilalic.  i.  20.*

^^  This  is  not  qui^'  accurate;  for,  though  cowardice  inclines  the
vulture  to  prefer  carcasses,  it's  voracity  carries  it  occasionally  to  the
pursuit  of  living  animals;  in  which,  from  natural  pusillamniitv,  it
12


fiOMULUS.  03

it  does  not  touch  them  even  when  dead,  because
they  are  of  it's  own  nature,  whereas  eagles,  owls,
and  hawks  tear  and  kill  their  kind  ;  and,  according
to  ^^schylus,


What  bird  is  clean,  that  fellovz-bircls  devours


Besides,  other  birds  are  frequently  seen,  and.  may
be  found  at  any  time;  but  a  vulture  is  an  uncommon
object,  aud  we  have  seldom  met  with  any  of  their
young  :  whence  the  rarity  of  them  has  occasioned
in  some  an  absurd  opinion,  that  thev  mi,o-rate  from
other  countries  ;  and  soothsayers  pronounce  every
unusual  appearance  preternatural,  and  the  efiect  of
a  divine  power.

When  Remus  learned  that  he  was  imposed  upon,
he  was  higldy  incensed  ;  and,  as  llomulus  was  open-
ing; a  ditch  round  the  olace  where  the  w^alls  were  to
be  built,  he  ridiculed  some  parts  of  the  work,  and  ob-
structed others.  At  last,  as  he  presumed  to  leap
over  it,  some  report  that  hejell  by  the  hand  of  Ro-
mulus'-^ ;    others,  by  that  of  Celer,   one  of  Ins  com-

associates  with  others,  contrary  to  the  usual  practice  of  birds  ot"
prey.  The  rarity  of  these  birds,  mentioned  below,  nsay  be  added
as  a  farther  proof  of  th.e  absurdity  of  the  whole  narrative.*

"-''  The  tv/o  brothers  first  differed  about  the  place,  where  their
new  city  was  to  be  built ;  and  referring  the  matter  to  their  grandfa-
ther, he  advised  them  to  have  it  decided  by  augury.  In  this  augury,
llomulus  imposed  upon  Remus ;  and,  when  the  former  prevailed
that  the  city  shovdd  be  built  upon  Mount  Palatine,  the  builders
being  divided  into  Xy;o  companies  were  no  better  than  two  factions.
At  last  Remus  in  contempt  leaped  over  xki^fosae,  and  said,  '  Thus
v/iU  the  enemy  leap  over  it :'  upon  which  Celer  gave  him  a  deadly
biow,  and  answered,  *  And  thus  v/ill  our  c  tizens  repulse  the  ene-
my.' Romulus,  according  to  some  authors,  was  so  much  aiflictad
at  the  death  of  his  biothex-,  that  he  would  l»ave  laid  violent  hand.'i
upon  himself,  if  he  had  not  been  prevented  (L.)  by  the  soIicit:i-
tions  of  Larentia.  Dion.  Halic.  (i.  29.)  says,  that  Remus  leaped
over  the  wall,  when  finished  ;  but  this  can  surely  refer  only  to  their
line  of  circumraarcation.

Plutarch  here  confounds  the  two  stories  of  Remus'  death,  of
which  Livy  (i.  7.)  details  the  separate  accounts,  though  lie  repre-
sents that,  which  makes  him  fall  by  the  hiind  of  Romulus  ux  a  gene-
ral squabble,  as  the  more  current  tradition.*


64  ROMULUS.

panioiis.  Faustulus  also  perished  in  the  scuffle,  and
Plistinus,  who  being  brother  to  Faustulirs  is  said  to
have  assisted  in  bringing  Romulus  up.  Celer  fled
into  Tuscany  ;  and  from  him  such  as  are  swift  of
foot,  or  expeditious  in  business,  are  by  the  Romans
called  celeres.  Thus  when  Quintus  Metellus,  within
a  few  days  after  his  father's  death,  provided  a  show
of  gladiators,  the  people  admiring  his  quick  de-
spatch gave  liim  the  name  of  Celcr.

Romulus  buried  his  brother  Remus,  together  with
his  foster  fathers,  in  Remonia ;  and  then  built  his
city,  having  sent  for  persons  from  Hetruria  '^\  who
(as  it  is  usual  in  sacred  mysteries)  according  to
stated  ceremonies  and  written  rules,  were  to  direct
Iiow  every  thing  was  to  be  done.  First,  a  circular
ditch  was  dug  about  what  is  now  called  the  Comi-
tium,  and  the  first-fruits  of  every  tln'ng,  that  is  reck-
oned either  good  by  use  or  necessary  by  nature,
were  cast  into  it;  and  then  each,  bringing  a  small
quantity  of  the  earth  of  the  country  whence  he  came,
threw  it  in  promiscuously -^  Tliis  ditch  had  tiie
name  of  Mundus,  th.e  same  with  that  of  the  universe.
In  the  next  place,  they  marked  out  the  city,  like  a
circle,  round  this  centre ;  and  the  founder  having
fitted  to  a  plough  a  brasen  plough-siiare,  and
yoked  a  bull  and   a  cow"^,  himself  drew  a  deep

^8  The  Iletrurians  or  Tuscans  had,  as  Fcstus  informs  us,  a  sort
of  ritual,  in  wiiich  were  contained  the  ceremonies  to  be  observed
in  building  cities,  temples,  altars,  walls,  and  gates.  Tliey  were
instructed  in  augury  and  religious  rites  by  Tagcs,  who  is  said  to  have
been  taught  by  ^Nlercur}'.   (Cic.  Div.  ii.  (5i;5.,  a. id  Ov.  Met.  xv.  35S.)

-y  Ovid  does  not  say,  it  was  a  Iiandful  of  iho  earth  that  each  had
brouglit  out  of  his  own  countrv,  but  of  the  earth  which  he  had  taken
from  his  neighbours;  which  was  done  to  signify,  that  Rome  would
soon  subdiu;  the  neighbouring  nations.  But  Isidorus  (xxv.  2.)  is  of
opinion,  that  by  throwing  tlie  lirst-fi^uits  and  a  handful  of  earth  into
ttie  trencli,  they  admonished  the  heads  of  the  colony,  tliat  it  ought
to  be  their  chief  study  to  procure'  for  their  fellow-citizens  all  the
conveniences  of  life,  to  maintain  peace  and  union  anu)ng  a  people
conio  together  from  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  thus  to  form
themselves  into  a  body  never  to  be  dissolved.

3°   As  emblematical  of  fecundity.     The  clods  turned  inward  wenc
to  imply,  that  the  walls  should  never  be  destroyed.*


ROMULUS.  6S

fiirrov/  round  the  boundaries.  The  business  of  those,
that  followed,  v/as  to  turn  all  the  clods  raised  by
the  {)lough  inward  to  the  city,  and  not  to  suifer  any
to  remain  outward.  This  line  described  the  compass
of  tlie  city  ;  and  between  it  and  the  walls  is  a  space,
called  by  contraction  Pomerium^',  as  lying  behind
or  beyond  the  wall.  Where  they  designed  to  have
a  gate,  they  took  the  plough-share  out  of  the  gi'ound,
and  lifted  up  the  plough,  making  a  break  for  it.
Hence  they  look  upon  the  whole  wall  as  sacred,  ex-
cept the  gate-ways.  If  they  considered  the  gates  in
the  same  light  as  the  rest,  it  would  be  deemed  un-
lawful either  to  receive  the  necessaries  of  life  by
them,  or  to  carrv  out  throu<?h  them  what  is  unclean.

The  day,  upon  which  they  began  to  build  the  city,
is  universally  allovvcd  to  be  the  twenty-first  of  April;
and  is  celebrated  annually  by  the  Romans,  as  the
birth-day  of  Rome.  At  first,  w'e  are  told,  they  sa-
crificed nothing  that  had  life  ;  persuaded,  that  they
ouglit  to  keep  pure,  and  without  bloodshed,  the  so-
lemnity sacred  to  the  birth  of  their  country.  Before
the  city  however  was  built,  on  that  same  day  they^
had  kept  a  pastoral  feast  called  Palilia  ^'\  At  pre-
sent, indeed,  there  is  very  little  analogy  between
the  Roman  and  the  Grecian  months  ;  yet  the  day,
upon  which  Romulus  founded  the  city,  is  strongly
affirmed  to  be  the  thirtieth  of  the  month  Elaphebo-
lion.  On  that  day  likewise,  we  are  informed,  there
was  a   conjunction  of  the  sun  and  moon,   attended

5i  From  Livy  (i.  41'.)  it  appears  that  the  posi-mcerium  or  mwrum
(for  so,  accoitiin^!;  to  Crevier,  Perizonius  divides  the  word)  com-
prised not  only  the  unoccupied  space  betv/een  the  v;all  and  the
nearest  houses  "within,  but  an  equal  extent  without,  which  it  was,
unlawful  to  cultivate.'*

3-  The  Palilia,  or  Feast  of  Pales  (the  Goddess  of  Flocks)  '^
sometimes  called  '  Parilia,'  from  the  Latin  word  j!5«rere,  '  to  bring
forth,'  because  prayers  were  then  oftered  for  the  fruitfulness  of  the
sheep.  According  to  Ovid  (Fast.  iv.  721,  ^c.)  the  diepherds  cele-
brated a  great  feast  at  night,  and  concluded  the  whole  with  danc-
ing rounil  the  iire9,  vvhicli  they  had  made  in  the  fiulds  with  heaps
8f  Straw.

VOL.  I,  F


6(>-  liOMULUS;

with  an  eclipse  ^^,  the  same  that  was  observed  by
Aiitimachus  the  Teiaii  poet,  in  the  third  year  of  the
sixth  Olympiad.

Varro"  the  ])hilosopher,  a  man  of  all  the  Romans
the  most  skilled  in-  history,  had  an  acquaintance
named  Tarntius^',  who  beside  iiis  knowledge  in  phi-
losophy and  the  mathematics,  to  indiilc^e  his  s})ecii-
lative  turn  had  applied  himself  to  astrology,  and  was
thought  to  be  a  perfect  adept.  To  him  Varro  pro-
posed to  compute  the  day  and  hour  of  Romulus*
birth,  founding  his  calculation  upon  tlie  known
events  of  his  life,  as  problems  in  geometry  are  solved
by  the  analytic  method ;  for  it  belongs  to  the  same
science,  when  a  man's  nativity  is  given,  to  predict
his  life,  and  v.lien  his  life  is  given,  to  trace  back  his
nativity.  Tarutius  com}>lied  with  the  request ;  and
when  he  had  considered  the  disposition  and  actions
of  Romidus,  how  long  he  lived,  and  in  what  man-
ner he  died,  and  had  put  all  these  things  togetlier,
he  affii'med  without  doubt  or  hesitation  that  his  con-
ception was  in  the  first  year  of  the  second  01ym})iad,
on  the  twenty-third  day  of  the  month  wliicli  the
Egyptians  call  Chocac  [December]  at  the  third  hou.r,
when  the  sun  was  totally  eclipsed^';  that  his  birth
was  on  tlie  twentv-third  day  of  the  month  Tlioth

55  Not  of  the  moon  (as  Amyot  translates  the  passa<;e),  which
coukl  not  happen  on  thy  thirtieth  ol"  a  lunar  month  ;  but  ot"  the
sun,  Avhich  h;ippened  A.  C.  75:5.*

3*  A^'ith  this  proibund  ristroh)gcr  Cicero  was  niucli  connected
(Div.  ii.  ^T.) :  but,  as  tlicre  was  no  soUu*  echjxse  on  the  day  men-
tioned, we  cannot  -entertain  any  great  veneration  fi)r  Ins  skilK  The
Egyptian  months,  w!ioi;e  beginnings  do  not  entirely  quadrate  with
ours,  are  used  beiow  in  reference  to  the  country,  whose  astrologi-
cal S3'stem  he  had  adopted.-^

'''  There  v.as  no  totid  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  the  first  year  of  the
second  Oly'ntpiad,  but  in  the  second  year  of  that  Olympiad  there
was;  If  Ro'.nulus  wc-.s  conceived  in  Ute  year  last  nan>ed,  it  will  agree
with  the  common  opinion,  tliat  he  was  IS  vears  old  Avhen  heiound-
ed  jlome,  and  that  Rome  vias  founded  Ol.  vii.  I,  (L.)  This  'a
Cato't;  opinion,  and  he  is  supported  in  it  by  Dien.  Halic,  Soiinus,
Euss'bkis,  and  a  hiy$t  of  modern  chronologit;ts :  on  the  other  band
Varro,  Cicero,  and  Scaliger,  fix  tiiat  event  a  year  sooner.  '  V\'e
have  adopted  tlie  canon  of  lilair.*


ROMULUS  67

[September]  about  sini-rise ;  and  tliat  be  founded
lloine  on  the  ninth  of  the  month  Pharmiithi  [April-]
between  the  second  and  tijiid  hour;  for  it  is  supr
posed  that  the  fortunes  of  cities,  as  well  as  oi'  men.,
have  tlieir  proper  periods  determined  by  the  posi-
tions of  the  stars  at  the  time  of  their  nativity.  Tiiese
and  similar  relations  may  perhaps  rather  please  the
reader,  because  they  are  curious,  than  disgust  him,
because  they  are  fabulous.

Yi'hen  the  city  was  built,  Romulus  divided  the
younger  part  of  the  inhabitants  into  battalions.  Each
corps  consisted  of  three  thousand  foot,  and  three
hundred  iiorse  ^^,  and  was  called  a  Legion,  because
the  most  warlike  persons  were  '  selected.'  The
rest  of  the  multitude  lie  called  the  People.  A  hun-
dred of  the  most  consideraljle  citizens  he  took  for
his  council,  with  the  title  of  Patricians  '',  and  the
whole  body  was  called  the  Senate,  vvhich  signifies  an
assembly  of  Old  Men.  It's  members  were  stiled
Patricians ;  because,  as  some  say,  they  were  '  fa-
thers' of  free-born  children  ;  or  rather,  according
to  others,  because  they  themselves  had  '  fatiiers  •'
to  show,  which  was  not  the  case  with  many  of  the
rabble  that  first  flocked  to  th.e  citv  ^'^.     Others  derive

4/

the  title  from  Fatrodmiun  (or  '  Patronage'),  attribut-
e's Instead  of  this,  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  tells  us  the  whole
colony  consir.ted  of  but  S300  men.  These  Romuhi?  divided  into
three  equal  parts,  which  lie  called  'tribes'  or  '  t!iirds,'  each  to
be  commanded  by  it's  praefect  or  tribune.  The  tribes  wer6  divided
into  ten  '  curiae,'  and  these  sxibdivided  into  ten  *  decurife.'  The
number  of  houses,  or  rather  of  huts,  which  was  only  a  thousand,
bears  witness  to  the  truth  of  Dionysius'  assertion.  But  the  raeaa
rabble  (it  is  probable)  who  availed  themselves  of  the  protection  of
the  Asylum,  and  who  mi;..',ht  be  very  numerous,  were  i]ot  reckoned
amonnj  tlie  original  colonists,  thor.^h  they  were  3ub:;-eqyently.  ad-
mitted to  the  privileges  of  citizens.

2'  The  choice  of  these  hundred  persons  vrasnot  made  by  the  king
himself:  each  tribe  chose  three  senators,  and  each  of  the' thirty
curiss  the  like  number,  which  made  in  all  the  nuiiiber  of  ninety-
nine;  so  that  llomulus  named  only  the  hundredth,  who  v,-as"tlie
head  or  prince  of  the  senate,  and  the  chief  governor  of  tiia  city
wlien  the  king  was  in  the  field.   (Dion.  Halic.ii.  5.)

2^  On  this  subject,  see  a  different  opinion  in  Dicn.  Ha'ic.  ii.  4-.*


F    2


es  ROMULUS.

ing  the  origin  of  tlic  tcrrn  to  one  Patron,  wlio  came
over  with  Evander,  and  was  remarkable  for  his  hn-
inanity  and  care  of  the  distressed.  13ot  we  sliall  be
near  the  truth,  if  we  conchide  that  Romulus  stiled
them  Patricians,  as  cxpectiuf]^  that  the  first  and  most
powerful  citizens  \vould  watch  over  those  in  humble
stations  with  a  paternal  care  and  regard :  teaching-
them  in  their  turn,  not  to  fear  or  envy  the  power  of
their  superiors  ;  but  to  behave  to  them  with  love
and  respect,  both  considering  and  afklressing  them
as  fathers.  For,  at  this  very  time,  foreign  nations
call  the  senators  Lords;  but  the  Romans  themselves
call  them  Conscript  Fathers,  a  stile  of  greater  dig-
nity and  honour,  and  likewise  much  less  invidious.
At  first,  indeed,  they  were  called  Fathers  only ;
but  afterward,  w^hen  more  were  enrolled  in  their
body,  Conscript  Fathers  ^'^.  Ky  this  venerable  title,
then,  he  distinguished  the  senate  from  the  people.
He  introduced  likewise  another  distinction  between
the  nobility  and  the  commons,  calling  the  former
Patrons  ^°,  and  the  others  Clients  ;  which  was  the
source  of  mutual  kindness,  and  many  good  oiTices
between  them.  For  the  Patrons  were  to  those,
whom  they  had  taken  under  their  protection,  coun-
sellors and  advocates  in  tlieir  suits  at  law,  and  advi-
sers and  assistants  upon  all  occasions.     On  the  other

59  The  (Tescendents  of  these  two  classes  were,  in  after-tunes,  dis-
criminated by  the  names  of  Patrcs  Majorum  and  Minorum  Gen'

'*°  This  patronage  vras  as  effectual  as  any  consanguinity  or  alli-
nnce,  and  had  a  wonderful  effect  toward  maintaining  union  anions;
the  ])cople  for  the  space  of  620  years;  during  which  period  we  find
no  dissensions  or  jeaioTisies  between  tlie  patrons  and  t!ieiv  clients,
even  in  the  time  of  the  republic,  wlien  the  popidace  frequently
mutinied  against  those  who  were  most  powerful  in  the  city.  At  last
the  great  sedition,  raised  by  Caius  CTracchus,  interrupted  this  har-
mony. A  client  indeed,  who  was  wanting  in  liis  duty  to  his  patroi>,
was  deemed  a  traitor  and  an  outlaw,  and  liable  to  be  put  t  j  death
by  any  person  whatever.  (Dion.  Ilalic.)  It  may  be  proper  to  ob-
serve, that  not  only  plebeians  chose  their  patrons,  but  in  process
sf  time  cities  and  states  nut  themoeivcF,  likev.  ise  luuler  the  same-
protection.


ROMULUS.  6d

hand,  the  Clients  failed  not  in  their  attentions  to
their  Patrons,  whether  they  were  to  be  shown  in  de-
ference and  respect,  or  in  providing  tiieir  daughters'
portions,  or  in  satisfying  tlieir  creditors,  if  their  cir-
cnnistances  happened  to  be  narrow^'.  No  law"  or
magistrate  obhged  the  Patron  to  be  evidence  against
liis  Ciient,  or  the  Chenfc  against  his  Patron.  In  af-
ter-times however,  though  tlie  other  claims  conti-
nued in  full  force,  it  was  looked  upon  as  ungenerous
for  persons  of  condition  to  take  money  from  those
below  them  ■*".     But  enough  upon  this  subject.

In  the  fourth  month  after  the  buildini::  of  the
city  '\  as  Fabius  informs  us,  the  rape  of  the  Sabine
women  w^as  carried  into  execution.  Some  say,  Ro-
mulus himself,  who  was  naturally  warlike,  and  per-
suaded by  certain  oracles  that  the  fates  had  decreed
Home  should  attain  greatness  by  military  achieve-
ments, began  hostilities  against  the  Sabines,  and
seized  only  thirty  virgin^  being  more  desirous  of
war  than  of  wives  for  his  people.  But  this  is  not
])robabIe.  For  as  he  saw^  his  city  soon  filled  with  in-
habitants, very  few  of  whom  were  married,  the  chief
part  consisting  of  a  mixed  rabble  of  mean  and  ob-
scure persons,  to  whom  no  regard  was  paid  and  who
did  not  expect  to  remain  long  together,  the  enter-
prise naturall}^  took  that  turn  :  and  he  hoped  that
from  tills  attempt,  though  an  unjust  one,  some  alli-
ance and  union  with  the  Sabines  would  be  obtained,
when  it  should  appear  that  they  treated  the  women
kindly.  In  order  to  this,  he  first  2:ave  out  that  he  had
found  the  altar  of  some  god,  which  had  been  covered
with  earth.     This  deity  they  called  Consus,  meaning

■•^  To  wliicli  Dion.  Halic.  adds  (ii.  4-.)  paying  the  costs  of  their
unsuccessful  suits  at  law,  and  supplj'ing  thoni  with  money  for  the
expenses  of  their  magistracies,  &c.^

■*^  This  forbearance  did  not  include  strangers.*

'*^  Cn.  Gellius  (quoted  in  Dion.  Halic.  ii.  9.)  says,  it  was  in  the
fourth  i/enr.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  Fasti  Capitolini,  wliich  place
the  war  with  the  Caeninenses  (immediately  subsequent  to  this  event)
A.  U.  C.  4.  Livy  too  (i.  9.)  says,  that  tlie  Komans  had  then  an.
tj'iired  strength  to  resist  their  neighbours.*


70  ROMULUS.

either  the  God  of  Counsel  (for  with  tliem  the  word
concilium  has  that  signification,  and  their  chief  magi-
strate? afterward  were  Consuls,  persons  who  were  to
•^  consult'  the  public  good)  or  else  the  Equestrian  Nep-
tune ;  for  tiie  altar  in  the  Circus  Maximus"*,  at  otiier
times  invisible,  is  duriufj;  the  Circensian  trames  un-
covered.  Some  say,  it  was  proper  that  the  altar  of  that
God  should  be  under  ground,  because  counsel  should
fee  as  private  and  secret  as  possible.  U{)on  this  dis-
covery, Romulus  by  proclamation  appointed  a  day
for  a  splendid  sacrifice,  with  public  games  and  shows.
Multitudes  assembled  at  the  time,  and  he  himself
presided  sitting  among  his  nobles,  clothed  in  purple.
As  a  signal  for  the  assault,  he  was  to  rise,  gather
up  his  robe,  and  fold  it  about  him.  Many  of  his
people  wore  swords  tliat  day,  and  kept  their  eyes
upon  him,  watching  for  the  signal ;  vv^hich  was  no
sooner  given,  than  they  drew  them,  and  rushing  on
with  a  shout  seized  the  daughters  of  the  Sabines,  but
quietly  suffered  the  men  to  escape.  Some  say  ^^  only
thirty  were  carried  off,  who  each  gave  name  to  u
tribe,  but  Valerius  Antias  makes  their  number  five
hundred  arid  twenty-seven  ;  and,  according  to  Juba"'^,
there  were  six  hundred  and  eighty-three,  all  virgins.
This  was  the  best  apology  for  liomulus  ;  for  they
had  taken  but  one  married  woman,  named  Ersilia,
who  was  afterward  chiefly  concerned  in  effecting  a
reconciliation ;  and  her  they  took  by  mistake,  as
.  they  were  not  incited  to  this  violence  by  lust  or  in-
justice, but  by  their  desire  to  unite  the  two  nations

*■*  Tliat  is  to  say,  in  the  place,  where  Ancus  Martins  afterward
built  the  Great  Circus  for  horse-  and  chnriot-races.

•*^  Livy  (i.  13.j  is  of  that  numijer,  though  at  other  times  he  fre-
quently follows  the  authority  of  Val.  Antias.  The  name  of  Ersilia,
introduced  below,  will  be  familiar  to  such  as  have  read  the  elegant
M.  Floricm's  Nunia  Pompiliu^.*

*-'  This  was  the  son  of  Juba,  king  of  Mauritania ;  who,  being
brought  very  young  a  captive  to  Rome,  was  instructed  in  the  Ro-
man and  Grecian  literature,  and  became  an  excellent  historian.
(L. )  Augustus  restored  to  him  a  p;irt  of  his  paternal  dominions,
and  gave  him  Antony's  daughter  Cleopatra  to  wife.  Dion.  liulic,
has  followed  his  account.*


ROMULUS.  7a

in  the  strongest  ties.  Some  tell  us  Ersilia  was  mar-
ried to  Hostilins,  one  of  the  most  eminent  men
among  the  Romans :  others,  that  Romulus  liimself
married  Iier,  and  had  two  children  by  her;  a  daughter
named  PriiDa,  on  account  of  her  being  lirst-boruv
and  an  only  son,  whom  he  called  Aollius  (because
of  the  great  concourse  oi'iieople,  ciolleis,  to  him),  but
after-ages,  Abillius.  This  account  we  have  from
Zenodotus  of  Tra^zene,  wlio  is  contradicted  in  it
however  by  many  other  historians.

Among  those  that  committed  this  rape,  we  are
told  some  of  the  meaner  sort  happened  to  be  carry-
ing off  a  virgin  of  uncommon  beauty  and  stature;
and,  when  others  of  superior  rank  that  met  them
attempted  to  take  lier  away,  they  cried  out,  they
were  conducting  her  to  Talasius,  a  young  man  of
excellent  character.  Upon  hearing  this,  they  ap-
plauded the  design  :  and  some  even  turned  back,
and  accompanied  tliem  vnth  tlie  utmost  satisfaction  ;
all  the  way  exclaiming,  "  Talasio."  Hence  this
became  a  term  in  the  nuptial  songs  of  the  Romans,
as  Hymenseus  is  in  those  of  the  Greeks  ;  for  Talasius
is  said  to  have  been  very  happy  in  marriage.  But
Sextius  Sylla  the  Carthaginian,  a  man  beloved  both
by  the  Muses  and  the  Graces,  told  me,  that  this  was
the  word  which  Romulus  gave  as  a  signal  for  the
rape.  They  all  therefore,  as  they  were  carrying  off
the  virgins,  cried  out  "  Talasio ;"  and  thence  it  still
continues  the  custom  at  marriages.  Most  writers
however,  and  Juba  in  particular,  are  of  opinion,  that
it  is  only  an  incitement  to  ffood  housewifery  and
spinning,  which  the  word  Talasia  signifies  '*'' ;  Italic
terms  being  at  that  time  thus  mixed  with  Greek  *^^

''"  From  r«;>Kpo5.  It  may  be  observed,  that  all  the  Roman  ladies
spun  dresses  for  their  husbands  and  children  ;  and  that  even  Au-
gustus appeared  clothed  in  the  labours  of  his  wife  and  family.*

•'^  The  original,  vvhicli  runs  thus,  'O;  ^i  TrMt^oi  voy^t(^i:<rf/^  coy  y,ui  i

ler.ctc,  tri,  TKfiCKAJjeriv  sivxt  uc,  <f)iXiBy'.x\i  r.eil  tocXcicmv,  OtUD.  Ton  roTi  E/iAif-

ifix-cti;  6''cijjx<ri  rcii'i  IrciPiiy.av  istKix,vfJt'iv<^.y,  is  manifestly  corrupted ;  and
all  the  former  translations,  following  this  corrupt  reading,  assert
what  is  utterly  false,  viz.  '  that  no  Greek  terms  were  then  mixetj


7-2  ROMULUS.

If  this  be  r'l^ht,  and  the  Komans  did  then  use
the  word  Talasia  in  the  same  sense  with  the  Greeks,
another  and  a  more  probable  reason  of  the  custom
may  be  assigned.  For  when  the  Sabines  were  re-
conciled vdth  the  Romans  after  the  war,  conditions


with  the  language  of  Italy. '     The  contrar}^  appears  from  Plutarcli's
Life  of  Niuna,  wjiere  Greek  terms  are  mentioned  as  frequently  used


s
?cjuentlv  used

by  the  Romans,  tmv   'EXXvay-ui  oiiof/jUT6.v   tots   ^xaaov   q   w)    rct^  AcrKoti


But  let  us  inquire  into  the  several  former  translations.  Tiie  Latin
runs  thus:  Plerlque  (inter  quos  est  Juba)  adhortathmcm  el  incita-
tionem  ad  laboris  sechditatem  et  lanifdum,  quod  Grceci  rx?ici<rix-'  dicujit,
ccnscni,  nniiclnm  id  lemporis  Italicis  vcruis  cum  Grrscis  coii/'hsis.
TJie  Engliih  thus:  '  But  most  are  of  opinion,  and  Juba  in  particular,
tl^at  this  word  Talasins  was  used  to  new-married  women,  by  way
of  incitement  to  good  housewifery:  for  the  Greek  word  Taimin
iignifies  '  spinning,*  and  the  language  of  Italy  was  not  yet  mixed
v/ith  the  Greek.'  The  French  of  Dacier  thus :  '  Cependant  la  plu-
]?art  des  auteurs  croient,  ct  Jiiha  est  meive  de  cetSe  opi,iion,  que  cc
mot  ri'ctoil  qiCunc  exhortation  qii^onjamnt  mix  -naricei  d\iimer  Ic
travail^  qm  condste  ajiler  de  la  laine,  que  les  Grecs  appelhnt  Ta-
lasia ;  car  en  ce  lerns-la  la  langao-e  Grecque  n^avoit  pa^  oicore  et^
corromprie  par  lex  mats  Latins.'  Thus  they  declare,  ^vith  one  con-
sent, that  the  language  of  Italy  was  not  yet  mixed  with  the  Greek  ;
though  it  appears  from  what  was  said  immediately  before,  that  7V/-.
iasut,  a  (ireek  term,  was  mada  use  of  in  that  language.  Instead
thercK'Te  of  s^^,  '  not  yet,'  we   should  mo.-.t  certainly   read  ^-u^

*  thus;'    arct   roTi   toi^  EA>.;jnxoi?   o-i!)fJijci<rt  ran  Ira^iiy.ijy  iz-ty-i^^^vut^mu',  '  the

languacrc  of  It.'lv  beinar  at  that  time  thus  mixed  with  Cireek  terms  ;*
for  iiuitance,  Talasia.  By  tiiis  emendation,  which  consists  only  (»f
the  snuiU  alteration  of  the  ^  into  r,  the  sense  is  easy,  and  the  con-,
text  clear;  and  Plutarch  is  freed  from  the  charge  of  contradicting,
in  one  breath,  wjiat  he  h.ad  asserted  in  another.

If  this  wanted  any  farther  support,  we  might  refer  to  a  paf^sage
jVom  Plutarch's  Marcellus,  which  as  well  as  that  in  the  Life  of
Numa  is  express  and  decisive.  Speaking  there  of  tlie  derivation
of  the  word  Fcretrius  (an  appellation,  wliich  Jupiter  probably  first
had  in  the  time  of  Romulus,  on  occasion  of  his  consecrating  to  him
flic  spcha  (ipiiva)  One  of  hi:>  accounts  is,  that  Ferelrius  niigiit  be
derived  from  (p-ftrnov,  the  vehicle  upon  which  the  trophy  was  car-
ried, -/.'J-T u,  Ti^i  ' EAAy,''iaU  y >iuir(rx:' ,  £Tfi7oA/.>iv  rert  aufjijf/jiiJ^iyU'ii'yj  rij  Axriyuv  ;

*  for  at  that  time  t!ie  l^reek  language  was  much  mixed  with  the
Larin.'  (L.)

l\f.  Piicard,  hotvever,  follows  the  old  reading  and  translations ;
v.:\t],  in  a  long  note  in  favour  of  it,  conj;  ctures  that  ujore  Greek
words  would  liaturally  be  incorporated  with  the  Latin  Toiigae,  in
the  advanced  period  of  Rome,  from  tlie  increasing  iiitcrcourse  be-
liceon  the  t»vo  rouiarlc«.  <


ROMULUS.  73

were  obtained  for  the  women,  that  thev  should  not  be
obhged  by  their  husbands  to  do  any  other  work  be-
side spinning.  It  was  usual  therefore  ever  after-
ward that  they,  who  gave  the  bride  or  conducted  her
home  or  were  present  on  the  occasion,  should  cry
out,  amidst  the  mirtli  of  the  Vv-edding,  "  Talasio;"
intimating  that  sl>e  v^as  not  to  be  employed  in  any
labour,  but  that  of  spinning.  And  it  is  a  custom
stili  observed,  that  the  bride  should  not  go  over  tl>e
threshold  of  her  husband's  house  herself,  but  be  car-
ried over  ;  because  the  Sabine  virgins  did  not  enter
voluntarily,  but  were  carried  in  by  violence.  Some
add,  that  the  bride's  hair  is  parted  with  the  point  of
a  spear,  in  memory  of  the  first  marriages  being
brought  about  in  a  warlike  manner ;  of  which  we
have  spoken  more  fully,  in  the  Book  of  Questions  '-'.
This  rape  was  committed  on  the  eighteenth  day  of
tiie  month  then  called  Sextilis,  now  August,  at  v.hich
time  the  feast  of  the  Consualia  is  kept.

The  Sabines  v/ere  a  numerous  and  warlike  people,
but  they  dwelt  in  unwalled  tovrns  ;  thinking  it  be-
qame  them,  as  a  colony  of  the  LacedaL^monians  '",  to
be  bold  and  fearless.  But  as  they  vsaw  themselves
bound  by  such  pledges,  and  were  extremely  solici-
tous for  theit  dau^jhters,  they  sent  embassadors  to

•  -i

Romulus  with  moderate  and  equitable  demands:
That  he  should  return  them  the  young  v/omen,  and
disavow  the  violence  ;  and  that  then  the  two  nations
should  proceed  to  establish  a  correspondence,  and
contract  alliances  in  a  friendly  and  legal  way.  Ro-
mulus, however,  refused  to  part  with  tiie  young  wo-
men, and  entreated  the  Sabines  to  give  their  sanc-
tion to  what  had  been  done ;  upon  which,   some  of

■*>  In  the  passage  referred  to,  Plutarch  has  omitted  one  of  the
most  natural  reasons,  assigned  by  Festus,  viz.  that  the  lance,  as  an
emblcni  ofaatl'ority,  might  imply  in  the  wife  the  duty  of  submis-
sion.    M.  ilicard's  conjectures,  as  conjectures,  I  omit.^

^"°  Of  these  (it  appears  from  Dion.  Malic,  ii.  11.)  a  considerable
number,  shrinking  from  the  rigour  of  Lycurgus'  laws,  had  quilted
Sparta,  and  solljud  in  Italy,  where  their  customs  vere  adopted  b^^
the  natives,*


Ti  ROIvU'LUS.

them  lost  time  in  consulting  and  making  prep-ira-
t?on«.  But-  Acron  king  of'tiie  C'eninensians '■,  a
man  of  spirit  and  an  able  general,  suspected  the  ten-
dency of  Ronjulus'  iirst  enterprises  ;  and,  since  he
had  behav-ed  so  boldly  in  the  rape,  looked  uj)on  liini
fisone-who  would  grow  tbimidable  and  indeed  in-
sufferable to  his  neigiibours,  if  lie  were  not  chastised.
He  therefore  advanced  to  seek  the  enemy,  and  ilo-
iiiiihfs  prepared  to  receive  him.  When  they  came
i'ii  sight,  and  had  well  viewed  each  other,  a  cliallenge
for  siri<>le  combat  was  muttiallv  given,  their  forces
standing  under  arms  in  silence.  Upon  this  occasion
HomuluH  made  a  vow  that,  if  he  conquered  his  ene-
my, he  would  himself  dedicate  his  adversary's  arms
to  Jupiter :  in  consequence  of  which  he  lK)th  over-
came Acron,  and  after  battle  was  joined,  routed  his
army  and  took  his  city.  But  he  did  no  injury  to
it's  inhabitants,  unless  it  were  such  to  order  them
to  dciiiolish  their  houses,  and  follow  him  to  Home,
as  citizens  entitled  to  equal  privileges  witli  the
rest^~.  There  was  nothing  indeed  that  contributed
more  to  the  greatness  of  Rome,  than  that  she  was
alwavs  unitins.^  and  incorporating  with  herself  those,
whom  she  had  conquered.  Romulus  having  con-
sidered how  he  should  perform  his  vow  in  the  most
acce})table  manner  to  Jupiter,  and  at  the  same  time
make  the  procession  most  agreeable  to  his  people,
cut  down  a  great  oak  that  grew  in  the  camp,  and
hewed  it  into  the  fgure  of  a  trophy  ;  to  this  lie  flist-
ened  Acron's  whole  suit  of  armour,  disposed  in  it's
proper  form.  He  then  put  on  Ids  own  robes,  and
with  a  crown  of  laurel  on  his  head,  his  hair  grace-
fully flowing,  took  the  trophy  erect  upon  his  right
shoulder,  and  marched  forward,  singing  the  song  of


"  A  people  of  ancient  Latium.*

5*  Thvre  are  many  discrepancies  (and  some  of  them  of  consider-
able maf^nitude)  with  regard  to  tiic  detail  of  this  expedition,  be-
tuee«  Plutarch  and  the  move  regular  historians,  Dion.  Ilalic.  and
Livy  ;  the  statement  of  which,  even  if  it  were  of  more  hnportance,
n-ould  exceed  the  just  limits  of  a  note.*

9


ROMULUS.  13

victory  before  his  troops,  who  followed  in  complete
armour,  while  the  citizens  received  him  with  joy
and  admiration.  This  procession  was  the  origin  and
model  of  future  triumphs.  The  trophy  was  dedicated
to  Jupiter  Feretrius,  so  called  from  the  Latin  word
J'erlrc^\  '  to  smite ;'  for  Romulus  had  prayed,  that
he  might  have  power  to  smite  his  adversary  and  kill
him.  Varro  says,  this  sort  of  spoils  is  termed  opima  '■*
from  cpes,  which  signifies  '  riches  :'  but  more  pro-
bably they  are  so  stiled  from  opus,  the  meaning  of
which  is  '  action.'  For,  when  the  general  of  any
army  kills  the  enemy's  general  with  his  own  hand,
then  only  he  is  allowed  to  consecrate  the  spoils  call-
ed opima.,  as  the  sole  performer  of  that  action '\
This  honour  has  been  conferred  only  upon  three
Roman  chiefs ;  first,  on  Romulus,  when  he  slew
Acron  the  Ceninensian  ;  next,  on  Cornelius  Cos-
sus,  for  killing  Tolumnius  the  Tuscan;  and  lastly
on  Claudius  Marcellus,  when  Viridomarus,  king
of    the    Gauls,    fell    by    his    hand.      Cossus    and

^3  Or  [\{'  ferire  was  not  then  in  use,  Dae.)  from  the  -wovAfcrre,
*  to  carry,'  because  Romulus  had  himself  carried  the  armour  to  the
temple  of  Jupiter ;  or  still  more  probably  from  the  Greek  word
pherelron,  which  Livy  (i.  10.)  culls  iu  'LdXinftrculimiy  and  which
properly  signifies  '  a  trophy.'

^'''  Festus  derives  the  word  opima  from  ops,  which  signifies  *  the
earth,  and  it's  riches  ;'  so  that  opima  spolia,  according  to  that  writer,
signify  '  rich  spoils.'  (L.)  Opus  was  then  probably  as  little  known
'ds ferire,  Dae*

5S  This  is  Livy's  account  of  the  matter;  but  Varro  (as  quoted  by
Festus)  informs  us,  a  lloman  might  be  entitled  to  the  spolia  opima,
though  but  a  private  soldier  (miles  mnnipuhiris),  provided  he  kill-
ed and  despoiled  th.e  enemy's  general.  Accordingly  Cornelius  Cossus
had  them  for  killing  Tolumnius,  king  of  the  Tuscaiis  ;  though  Cossus
was  but  a  tribune,  who  fought  under  the  command  of  ^'Emilius.
Cossus  thcrelbre,  in  all  probability,  did  not  enter  Rome  in  a  tri-
umphal chariot,  but  followed  that  of  his  general,  with  the  trophy
upon  his  shoulder.  (L.)  For,  though  Livy  (iv.  20.)  seems  to
waver  in  his  opinion  with  regard  to  Cossus'  rank  at  the  time  of  his
victory  ( in  consequence  of  his  having  been  assured  by  Augustus,
that  in  the  inscription  he  was  denominated  consul)  this  could  only
be  in  deference  to  his  imperial  patron :  as  Varro's  testimony  must
decidedly  outweigh  a  doubtful  legend,  in  which  the  title,  if  it  ex-
isted at  all,  was  most  probably  borrov/cd  from  the  sabsequent  ele-
yation  of  Cossus  to  the  Consulship.*


rs  ROMULUS.

jMarccliiis  iridced,  bearing  tlic  trophies  them-
selves, drove  into  Rome  in  triumphal  chariots  ;  but
J)ionysius  is  mistaken  in  saying,  that  RomuUis  made
use  of  a  chariot ;  for  some  historians  assert  that
Tarqiiinius,  the  son  of  Demaratus,  was  tlie  first  of
the  kings,  that  advanced  triumplis  to  this  pomp  and
grandeur  :  and  others  affirm,  Publicola  was  the  first,
who  triumphed  in  a  cliariot.  There  are  statues  ''^
however  of  Romulus  bearing  these  trophies,  yet
to  be  seen  in  Rome,  wliich  are  all  on  foot.

After  the  defeat  of  the  Ceninensians,  while  tlie
rest  of  the  Sabincs  wxre  busied  in  preparations,  the
people  of  Fidenir,  Crustumerium,  and  AntcmniC
united  ''  against  the  Romans.  A  battle  ensued,  in
wiiich  they  likewise  were  defeated,  and  surrendered
to  Romulus  their  cities  to  be  spoiled,  their  lands  to
be  divided,  and  themselves  to  be  transplanted  to
Rome.  All  the  lands  thus  acquired  he  distributed
among  the  citizens,  except  what  belonged  to  the
parents  of  the  stolen  virgins  ;  for  tliosc  he  left  in
the  po- session  of  their  former  owners.  The  rest  of
the  Sabines^  enraged  at  this,  a})pointed  Tatius  their
general,  and  carried  the  war  to  the  gates  of  Rome.
The  city  was  diilicult  of  access,  having  a  .strong  gar-
rison on  the  hill  where  the  Capitol  now  stands,  com-
manded by  Tarpeius,  not  by  the  virgin  Tarpeia,  as
Rome  say,  who  in  this  represent  Romulus  as  a  veiy
weak  man.  This  Tarpeia,  however,  the  governoj's
daughter,  charmed  \\  ith  the  golden  bracelets  of  the
Sabines,  betrayed  the  fort  into  their  hands  ;  and
demanded,    in  return   for   her   treason,  what  they

5«  Ami  medals,  to  the  same  purport.  Qu.  Yef  —  now  that  lie,
•whom  Burke  in  one  of  his  splendid  invectives  dcnouMtrntcs  '  the
universal  robber,'  has  boon  there?   (]80,5.)*

^'i  Or  (according  to  other  authors)  fought  each  separately,  as
soon  as  they  had  respectively  completed  their  preparations  for  nar,
and  with  t!ie  usual  issue;  dmn  siju^xli piigncmt,  iniivern  vmcunlur.
(Tac.  Cierni.)  Tlie  Fideiiatcs,  more  especial!}',  could  have  nothing
to  do  in  tbis  coalition:  as  they  were  Tuscans  (Liv.  i.  15.),  a  de-
pendencv  ofVeii;  and  indeed  had  no  struggle  with  the  Romans,
till  alterthe  death  of  Tatius,'


ROMULUS.


i  i


wore  on  tlicir  left-arms.  Tatiiis  agreeing  to  the
condition,  she  opened  one  of  the  gates  by  night,
and  let  in  the  Sabines.  It  was  not,  it  seems,  the
sentiment  of  Antigoniis  alone,  who  observed,  "  He
"  loved  men  while  thev  Avere  betravinj^  but  hated
"  them  when  they  had  betrayed  ;"  nor  of  Caesar,
who  said,  in  the  case  of  llhymitalces  the  Thracian,
"  He  loved  the  treason,  but  hated  the  traitor.*'
But  men  are  commonly  affected  toward  villains,  for
whom  they  have  occasion,  just  as  tliey  are  toward
venomous  creatures,  of  which  they  have  need  for
their  poison  and  their  gall.  While  they  are  of  use,
they  like  them,  but  they  abhor  them,  as  soon  as
their  purpose  is  effected.  Such  were  the  sentiments
of  Tatius  with  regard  to  Tarpeia,  wlien  he  ordered
the  Sabines  to  remember  their  promise,  and  to
jrrudg-e  her  nothinsr  which  thev  had  on  their  left-
arms.  He  was  himself  the  first  to  take  off  his
bracelet,  and  throw  it  to  her,  and  with  it  his  shield  ^*'.
As  every  one  did  the  same,  she  was  overpowered  by
the  gold  and  shields  thrown  upon  her,  and  sinking
under  the  weight  expired.  Tarpeius  was  also  ap-
prehended, and  as  Juba  after  Sulpitius  Galba  relates,
condemned  by  Romulus  for  treason.  As  for  the
account  given  of  Tarpeia  by  other  writers,  among
whom  Antigonus^^  is  one,  it  is  absurd  and  incre-
dible :  They  say,  that  she  was  daughter  to  Tatius
the  Sabine  general ;  and  being  compelled  to  live
with  Romulus,  acted  and  suffered  thus  by  her  father^s
contrivance.     But  the  poet  Simclus  makes  a  most

5s  Plso  and  other  liistorians  say,  that  Tatius  treated  her  in  tliis
manner  because  she  had  acted  a  double  part,  and  endeavoured  to
betray  the  Sabines  to  Romulus,  ^vhile  she  was  pretendinj,^  to  betray
the  Romans  to  them.  (L.)  (Dion.  Halic.  ii.  lO.)  ;  and,  in  prctxf
of  this  opinion,  refer  to  the  honours  paid  her  by  the  Romans  after
her  death.  Livy  (i.  11.)  records  the  same  statement,  and  without
contradicting  it.*

»'*  Antigonus  Caristius  wrote  a  History  of  Italy,  and  compiled
a  Collection  oi  Marvellous  Stories,  under  Ptolemy  Philadelphus.
■   Simulus,  mentioned  below,  wrote  a  History  of. Italy  in  yer^t^:''-

12


78  ROMULUS.

eg:re<pous  blunder,  when  he  says  Tarpciii  betrayed
the  Capitol,  not  to  the  Sabines  but  to  the  Gauls,
having  fallen  in  love  \vith  their  king.  His  account
is  as  follows  :

From  lier  lii'di  dome  Tarpein,  wretched  maid.
To  tiic  tell  (iauls  the  Capitol  betray  d;
The  hapless  victim  of  unchaste  desires,
She  lost  the  fortress  of  her  sceptred  sires.

And  a  little  afterward,  upon  her  death,

Not  swarming  Celts,  nor  fierce  barbarians  bore
The  fair  Tarpeia  to  their  stormy  shore;
Press'd  by  those  shields,  whose  splendom*  she  admired,
She  sunk,  and  in  the  shining  death  expired.

From  the  place,  Avhere  Tarpeia  vras  buried,  the
hill  had  the  name  of  tlie  Tarpeian  ;  till  Tarquin
consecrated  the  place  to  Jupiter,  at  vrhich  time
her  bones  were  removed,  and  so  it  lost  her  name ;
except  that  part  of  the  Capitol,  whence  malefactors
are  tiirown  down,  which  is  still  called  '  the  Tar-
peian rock.'

The  Sabines  thus  possessed  of  the  fort,  Koniuhis
in  great  fury  oiiered  tjiem  battle,  whicli  Tatius  did
not  decline,  as  he  saw  lie  had  a  place  of  strength  to
retreat  to,  if  he  were  v»?orsted.  And  tlic  spot  indeed
upon  which  he  was  to  engage,  being  surrounded
with  hills,  seemed  to  promise  on  both  sides  a  sharp
and  bloody  contest ;  because  it  was  so  confined,  and
the  outlets  were  so  narrow,  that  it  was  not  easy
either  to  fly  or  to  pursue.  It  happened  likewise
that  the  river  had  overilowed  a  few  davs  before,  and
left  a  deep  nuid  on  the  plain,  where  the  Forum  now
stands;  which,  as  it  v/as  covered  with  a  crust,  was
not  easily  discoverable  by  the  eye,  but  at  the  same
time  was  soft  underneath  and  impassable.  The  Sa-
bines, ignorant  of  tliis,  were  pushing  forward  into
it,  but  by  good  fortune  were  prevented :  For  Cur-


IIOMULUS.  T0

tius,  a  man  of  high  distinction  and  spirit,  beini:<
mojuiiied  on  a  p;ood  horse,  advanced  a  considerable
Vv'ay  before  the  rest''^.  Presently  his  iiorse  pkmged
into  the  slouff^i,  and  for  a  vvliile  he  endeavoured  to
disengage  him,  encouraging  hini,witii  his  voice,  and
lu'ging  him  with  blows  ;  but  iinding  ail  inetfectiial,  .
he  quitted  hirn,  and  saved  hiniseltl  From  him  the
place,  to  this  very,  time,  is  called  the  Cartian  Lake.
The  Sabines,  having  escaped  this  danger,  began
the  figlit  with  great  bravery.  The  victory  inclined
to  neither  side,  though  many  were  slain,  and  among-
the  rest  Hostiiiiis ;  wlio,  they  say,  was  husband  to
Ersilia,  and  grandfather  to  Numa's  successor,  IJos-
tilius.     There  v.'ere  probably  many  other  battles  in

A  "*•  *'

a  short  time,  but  the  most  memorable  was.  the  last;.
in  which  Romulus,  having  received  a  blow  unon  tht*,
head  with  a  stone,  was  almost  beaten  to  the  ground,
and  no  longer  able  to  oppose  the  enemy :  the  Ro-
mans then  gave  way,  and  were  driven  from  the
plain  as  far  as  the  Palatine  Hill.  By  this  time  llor
mulus,  having  recovered  from  the  shock,  enclea-
\'oured  bv  force  to  stop  his  men-  in  their  flight,  and
loudly  called  upon  them   to  stand  and  renew  the

«°  Livy  (i.  13.)  and  Dicn.  Halic.  (ii.  1.0.)  rciate  tlic  matter
otherwise.  Tlicy  tell  us,  tliat  Curtius  at  tirst  repulsed  the  Konians;
but  behiu;  hi  his  turn  overnowered  bv  Kdinulus,  and  endeavouring?
to  make  good  his  retreat,  Imppe-ived  tofall  (not'so  liowevtr^  as  to
prevent  his  escape)  into  tiie  Jake,  which  from  that  time  bore  big
name:  for  it  was  called  Lacus  Curtius,  evea  wheii  it  was  dried  up,
and  almost  in  th«  centre  of  the  Uoman  Forum.  Procilius  says  that,
the  earth  having  opened,  the  Aruspices  declared  it  neeestiary  for
the  safety  of  the  republic,,  that  the  strength  of  the  city  fj'dj  quo
jylaritnum  porjuliis  Romiiuiis  posset,  Liy,  vii.'(),)  should  be  devoted  to
the  gulf.  This  a  young  man,  named  Curtius,  rightlv  ipterpretcd  qf
arms  and  Ijravery,  and  mounting  his  horse  in  its  richest  housings,
leaped  into  it  in  complete  armour;  upon  which,  it  immediately
closed.  Before  tlie  building  of  the  connnon  sewers,  this  pool  was
St-swirt  of  sink,  wliich  received  all  the  filth  of  tiie  city.  Some  writers
think  tiiat  it  received  it's  nanic  from  Curtius  the  consul,  coli'egue  to
JM.  Geuucius,  because  he  e.iused  it  to  be  walled  in  by  the'advice  ot
the  Aruspiccs,  after  it  had  been  .stj-uck  with  liulittning.'  (Varrb  d<i-'
L.L.iv.)


80  ROMULUS.

engagement.  But  when  he  saw  that  the  rout  was
tcncral,  and  that  no  one  had  courage  to  face  about,
he  Hfted  up  his  hapds  toward  heaven,  and  prayed  to
Jupiter  to  stay  the  army,  and  to  re-estabUsh  and
maintain  the  Roman  cause,  which  was  now  in  ex-
tretnc  dan^.'^er.  When  the  prayer  was  ended,  many
of  the  i'ligitives  were  struck  with  reverence  for  their
kino^,  and  their  fear  was  chanfred  into  courairc.
They  fir^^t  stopped  where  novv'  stands  the  temple  of
Jupiter  Stator,  so  called  from  his  having  put  a  stop
to  their  fliLdit^'.  There  they  a«:ain  encca^xed,  and
repulsed  the  Sabines  as  far  as  the  palace  now  called
Kegia,  and  the  temple  of  Vesta.

V/hile  they  were  here  preparing  to  renew  the
combat  with  their  original  animosity,  their  ardour
was  repressed  by  an  astonishing  spectacle,  which
the  powers  of  language  are  unable  to  describe.
The  daughters  of  the  Sabines,  that  had  been  forcibly
carried  off,  were  seen  rushing  forward  with  loud
cries  and  lamentations  like  persons  distracted,  amidst
the  drawn  swords  and  over  the  dead  bodies,  to  conic
at  their  husbands  and  fathers ;  some  carrying  their
infiuUs  in  their  arma.,  some  darting  onward  with
dij^hevclled  hair,  but  all  caUing  by  turns  both  upon
the  Sabines  and  the  Romans  bv  the  tenderest
names.  Both  parties  were  much  agitated  at  the
sight,  and  room  was  made  for  them  between  the
armies.  Their  lamentations  pierced  to  the  extreme
ranks,  and  all  were  deeply  affected ;  particularly
when  their  upbraiding  and  complaints  ended  in  sup-
])lication  and  entreaty :  "  What  heavy  injury  have
Vv'c  done  you,"  said  th^y,  "  that  we  have  suffered,
and  do  still  sujGer,  so  many  miseries  ?  We  were
"  carried  off,  by  those  to  whom  we  now  belong,
violently  and  illegally :  after  this  violence  we
were  so  long  neglected  by  our  brothers,  our  fa-


^'  Of  thi»  story,  which  occurs  likewise   in  Li%'y,   Dion.  Halic.
iDakcs  no  meution.*


ROMULUS.  ai

"  thers,  and  relations,  that  we    were   necessitated
"  to  unite  ourselves  in  the  strongest  ties  to  those,
"  who  had  been  the  objects  of  our  hatred  ;  and  we
"  are  now  brought  to  tremble  for  the  men  that  had
"  so  much  injured  us,  when  we  see  them  in  danger,
*'  and  to   ];ament  them    when   they  fall.     For  you
"  came  not  to  deliver  us  as  virgins  from  violence,
"  or  to  avenge  our  cause  ;  but  you  tear  wives  from
"  their  husbands,  and  mothers  from  their  children  :
an  assistance   more  grievous  to  us,  than  all  yooi^
neglect  and  disregard.     Such  love  we  experienced
from    them,    and    such     compassion    from    you  I
"  Were  the  war  undertaken  in  some  other  cause,
"  yet   surely  you  would    stop  it's  ravages  for  us,
who  have    made   you   fathers-in-law   and  grand-
fathers,  or  placed  you  in  some  other  near  affinity
to  those,  whom  you  seek  to  destroy.     If  the  war
however  be  for  us,  take  us  along  with  your  sons-
in-law  and  their  children,  and  restore  us  to  our
parents   and  kindred  ;  but   do   not,  we  beseech
you,  rob  us  of  our   children  and  husbands,  lest
we  again  become  captives.'*     Ersilia  having  said  a
great  deal  to  this  purpose,  and  others  joining  in  the
same    request,  a  truce  was   agreed  upon,  and  the
generals  proceeded  to  a  conference.     In  the  mean
time  the  women  presented  their  husbands  and  chil-
dren to  their  fathers  and  brothers,  brought  refresh-
ments  to  those   who  stood   in  need  of  them,  and
carried  the  wounded  home  to  be  cured.     Here  they
showed  them,  that  they  had  the  ordering  of  their
own    houses,    what  attentions  their  husbands  paid
them,  and  with  what  respect  and  indulgence  they
were  treated.     Upon  this  a  peace  was  concluded,
the  conditions   of  which  were,    that   such   of  the
women    as   chose   to   remain   with   their   husbands
should  be  exempt  from  all  labour  and  drudgery,  ex-
cept spinning  (as  we  have  mentioned  above)  ;  that
the  city  should  be  inhabited  by  the  Romans  and
^"'sfrbines  in  common,  with  the  name  of  Rome  from
Romulus;  but  that  all  the  citizens  should  be  called

VOL.  I.  G  *


cc
a
a

cc
cc
cc
cc


82  ROMULUS.

Qiiirites^\  from  Cures,  the  capital  of  tlic  SabineS^?
and  the  country  of  Tatius,  and  that  the  regal  power
and  the  connnand  of  the  army  siiould  be  equally
shared  between  them.  The  |)Iacc,  where  these  ar-
ticles were  ratified,  is  still  called  Comitiimi'''^,  from
the  Latin  word  6w;r,  which  signifies  '  to  assemble.'

The  city  having  doubled  the  number  of  it's  inha-
bitants, a  hundred  additional  senators  were  elected
from  among  the  Sabines^'"*,  and  the  legions  were  to
consist  of  six  thousand  foot>  and  six  hundred  horse  *^'.

^^  The  word  Qiiiris,  in  the  Saljino  language,  signified  both  '  a
dart,'  and  '  a  warlike  deity  armed  v/ith  a  dart.'  It  is  uncertain,,
whetlier  the  god  gave  name  to  the  dart,  or  the  dart  to  the  god ;
but,-  however  tiiat  be,  this  god  Quiris  or  Quirinus  was  either  Iviars
or  some  other  god  of  war,  and  was  worshipped  in  Rome  till  Ro-
mulus, who  after  his  death  was  honoured  with  the  name  Quirinus^
took  his  place.  (I^.)  Dion.  Halic.  says,  that  the  individual  was
called  Romanus,  and  the  people)  collectively  Quirites :  But  the
former  part  of  his  assertion  is  controverted  by  the  ancient  formula
of  announcing  burials,  OUus  Quiris  Idho  datus  est*

^'^  The  CoTnitiunn  v.as  at  the  foot  of  the  Palatine  hill,  over-against
the   Capitol.     Not  far  .from    that   place   the   two  kings  built  the
temple  of  Vulcan,  where  they  usually  met  to   consult  the  senate
.about  the  most  important  affairs.   (L.)   The  name  itself  was  im-
posed long  after  the  tune  of  Romulus.*

<54  How  happened  it  then,  that  during  the  interregnum  whicli
followed  Romulus'  death  (as  Plutarch  hKn.?clf  states,  in  his  Life  of
Numa)  there  were  only  150  senators  to  divide  among  them  tlie  go-
vernment? Is  the  biographer  unconsciously  at  variance  with  him-
iielf?  Or  had  Romulus  toward  the  despotic  end  of  his  reign,
through  his  undisguised  contempt  for  the  senate,  neglected  to  rill
i>p  the  vacapeies  in  tliat  body?*

.    .  "^j  Ruaijld,  in  his  animadversions  upon  Plutarch,  has  discovered
two   considerable  errors  in   this  jiluce.     The  first  is,  that  he  says-
there  {vere  600  horse  assigned  by  Romulus  to  every  legion,  whereas
ther£  nevcj"  wet-e,  at  any  time,  so  many  in  any  of  t!)e  legions:  for
,  there  w;ere  at  first  200  horse  in  each  legion  ;  after  that  they  rose  to
,  300,  and  at  lust  only  to  ^•OO.     The  second,  that  Romulus  made  the

■  legiuii to  consist  of '6000  foot;  wiiereas,  in  his  time,  it  was  never
more  than  half  tiiat  number.:    It  is  said  by  some,  that  Marius  was

■  the  first  who.r/iiic:ed  the  legion  to  6000  ;  but  Livy  informs  us,  tliat
the.  augmeritation  was  made  long  before  Marius,  by  Scipio  Afri-
can'us.     After  t!;e  cx'pulsion  of  the  kings,  it  was  augmented  from

■  three  to  four  thou'saml,  some  time  afterward  to  five,  and  at  last  by
Scipiottw  six.     But  this  was  never  dojie,  except  upon  pressing  oc-

.casJQrit;.^  ,  The  stated  force  ofaJegion  was  4000  foot,  and  200  horse.
(L.)  M,  Ilicard  justifies  Plutarch,,  by   rcprcscntiiig  the  num^jeri


ROMULUS.  8S

The  people  likewise  were  divided  into  three  tribes^
Ccillcd  Khamnenses,  from  llomiikis  ;  Tatienses,  from
Tatius;  and  Li.'cerenses  '■^'\  from  the  Lucus  or '  Grove '
v.here  tlie  asjhun  stood,  vvliither  many  hiad  fled  who
v/cre  admitted  citizens.  Tiiat  they  were  precisely
three,  appears  from  the  very  name  of  Tribes,  and
from  that  of  tlieir  chief  oliicers,  ^vho  were  called
Tribunes.  Each  tribe  contained  ten  Curies,  or
'  Wards,'  which  some  say  were  called  after  the  Sa-
bine women.  But  this  seems  to  be  false  ;  for  several
of  them  have  their  names  from  the  several  quarters
of  the  cit}^,  which  were  assigned  to  them.  Many
honourable  privileges  however  were  conferred  upon
the  women,  some  of  which  were  these  :  That  the
men  should  give  them  the  way,  wherever  they  met
them  ;  that  they  should  not  mention  an  obscene
word,  or  appear  naked,  before  them;  that,  in  the
event  of  their  killing  any  person,  they  should  not  be
tried  before  the  ordinary  judges''';  and  that  their
cliildren  sliould  wear  an  ornament  about  their  necks,
called  Bulla '^^•,  from   it's  likeness   to   'a   bubble,'

mentioned  in  tlin  text,  as  a  Co-legion  ol'  Romans  and  Sabines,
i.  e.  in  effect  two.*

''^  Tpon  the  etymology  of  this  name,  however,  there  are  various
liypotheses.  Livy  (i.  13.)  represents  it  as  uncertain  •  while  Festus
derives  it  from  one  Lucerus,  king  of  Ardea,  and  Varro  (de  L.  L.
iv.  9.)  from  one  Lucuaio,  a  fariious  Etrurian  chieftain,  both  of
whom  had  assisted  Ronudus  in  liis  wars.  The  Rbamnenses  ware
clu'eliy  from  Alba,  and  dwelt  on  the  Palatine  and  Celian  liiils  :  the
Tatienses  were  Sabines,  and  to  them  the  Capitoline  and  Qnirinal
liills  were  assipT.ed :  the  remaininir  tribe  consisted  of  the  refuiTees
from  Etruria  and  Latium,  and  occupied  the  interval  between  the
two  former  ^••

''''  But  by  cfmmissioners  appointed  out  of  the  senate.*

*3  The  young  men,  v.hen  they  took  upon  them  the  Toga  viriiis,
(or  '  man's  robe ')  quitted  the  Bulla,  which  is  supposed  to  Iiave
been  a  little  hollow  i)all  of  gold,  and  made  an  offering  of  it  to  ths
J)/i  Lnres  or  '  Household  Gods.*  (L.)  If  they  died  before  IG,  it
was  usually  enclosed  in.  the  urn,  wiiich  lu.'ld  flieir  a:5lics.  i'Voin
jMacrob.  ''Sjturn.  i.  G.)  we  learn  that  the  Bulla  was  not  confined  to
children,  but  Vv-ora  (of  a  larger  size  Iiowever)  by  those  who  tri-
umphed, by  the  chief  vestal  as  an  emblem  of  disitinction,  and  by
the  matrons  in  general  Ua  an  ornament  of  dress.*

As  to  the  Pru'tcda.  or  '  robe  edged. with  purple,'  it  was  \rov»  by

e    2  '      *


54  ROMULUS.

atid  a  c^arment  bordered  with  purple.  The  two
kings  did  not  presently  unite  their  councils,  each
meeting  ibr  some  tinie  their  hundred  senators  apart,
but  afterward  tliey  all  assembled  together.  Tatius
dwelt  wliere  the  temple  of"  Moneta  now  stands,  and
Romulus  bv  the  Steps  of  the  Fair  Shore,  as  they  are
called,  at  the  descent  from  the  Palatine  Flill  to  tlie
Great  Circus.  Tiiere,  we  are  tohl,  grew  the  sacred
Cornel-tree  ;  tlie  fabuh)us  account  of  which  is,  that
Romulus  once  to  try  his  strength  ^"-^  threw  a  spear
with  a  shaft  of  cornel-wood  from  Mount  Aventine
to  that  place,  the  head  of  which  stuck  so  deep  in
the  ground,  that  no  one  could  pull  it  out,  though
many  tried ;  and  the  soil  being  rich  so  nourished
the  wood,  that  it  shot  forth  brandies,  and  became  a
trunk  of  cornel,  of  considerable  bigness.  This,  pos-
terity preserved  with  religious  care,  as  a  thing  emi-
nently sacred,  and  therefore  built  a  wall  about  it :
and  when  any  one  that  approached  it  saw  it  not
very  flourishing  and  green,  but  inclining  to  fade
and  perish,  he  presently  proclaimed  it  to  all  he  met ;
who,  as  if  they  were  summoned  to  assist  at  a  fire,
cried  out  for  water,  and  ran  from  all  quarters  with
full  vessels  to  the  place.  But  when  Caius  Cssar
ordered  the  Steps  to  be  repaired,  and  the  workmen
were  digging  near  it,  it  is  said  they  inadvertently
injured  the  roots  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  tree
witliercd  aw^ay.

The  Sabincs  received  the  Roman  months.  All,
that  is  of  importance  upon  this  subject,  is  men-
tioned in  the  Life  of  Numa.  Romulus  on  the  other
hand  adopted  the  use  of  their  shields,  making  an
alteration  in  his  own  armour  and  that  of  the  Ro-
mans '",  who  before  wore  bucklers  in  the   manner

r

girl"  t^l  \hr-\\-  marrJafre,  and  by  boys  till  they  were  seventeen.     But
what  in  the  tune  of"  Romulus  was  a  mark  of  distinction  foi*  the  chil-
dien  Or   th'-^   Sf'bine  womnn,  b^'cume   ^subsequently  very  common;
for  even  t!ie  children  of  tlie  LibeHi,  or  *  freed-men,'  wore  it.
*9  Or,  according  to  Servius,  to  designate  a  space  for  augury.*
^°  '  -On  doii  rcmarqucr  que  cc  qui  a  Ic  phis  couiribuc  d  rendre  Ics


ROMULUS.  83

of  tlie  Greeks.  They  mutually  celebrated  each
oilier's  feasts  and  sacrifices,  not  abolishing  those
of  either  nation,  but  over  and  above  appointing
some  new  ones;  one  of  which  is  the  Matronalia '",
instituted  in  honour  of  the  women,  for  their  having
put  an  end  to  the  war;  and  another,  the  Carmen-
talia  ■.  Carmenta  is  by  some  supposed  to  be  one
of  the  Destinies,  who  presided  over  human  nati-
vities ;  she  is,  therefore,  particulaily  worshipped  by
moihers.  Others  say,  she  was  wife  to  Evander  the
Arcadian,  and  a  Vv'oman  addicted  to  divination,
receiving  inspirations  from  Apollo  and  delivering
oracles  in  verse,  and  tlience  called  Carmenta  (for
Carm'uia  signifies  '  verse');  but  her  proper  name,  as
it  is  upon  all  hands  agreed,  was  Nicostrata.  Others
again  with  greater  probability  assert,  that  the  former
irame  was  o'iven  her,  because  she  was  distracted  with
enthusiastic  fury  ;  for  ccirere  mcntc  signifies  ^  to  be
insane.'  Of  the  feast  of  Palilia  we  have  already  given

Romaiiis  les  mattres  du  monde,  c'est  qii'  ai/nnt  comhatlti  successh^e-
vicnt  conire  tons  les  penplcs,  its  out  toitjours  renoncc  a  Icirrs  nsagcx^
.shot  qii''ilsc!i  ont  trouve  de  niciUeitrs.'  (Montesq.  Grand,  et  Decad.
dos  Ilomains,  i.)*

''^  During  this  feast,  such  of  tlie  Roman  women  as  were  marrieej
served  their  siaves  at  tabic,  and  received  presents  from  their  husr
bandt',  as  the  husbands  did  from  their  wives  in  the  time  of  the  Sa-
turnalia. As  t!ie  festival  of  the  xMatronalia  was  not  only  observed
in  honour  of  the  Sabine  uornen,  but  consecrated  to  ?*I  irs,  and  (as
soniC  v/ili  have  it)  to  Jmv)  Lucinu,  sacrifices  were  oilered  to  both
tliece  deities.  This  feast  wa^tlie  subject  of  Horace's  Ode  ;  Mar/iis
Calebs  quid  agam  calcndis,  &c.  and  Ovid  describes  it  at  large,
Fast.  iil.  Dacier  by  mistake  says,  that  this  feast  was  kept  on  the
1st  of  April,  instead  of  the  1st  oi  March,  and  the  former  English
annotator  has  followed  him.  (L.)  M.  Ricard  thinks,  that,  as  sacred
to  two  deities,  it  was  kept  on  both.*

"*  This  is  a  very  solemn  feast,  kept  on  the  11th  of  January,
v.nder  the  Capitol,  near  the  Caniiental  gate.  In  it  they  supplicated
the  goddess  Carmenta  .to  render  their  womon  fruitful,  an.i  to  giv^
them  happy  deliveries.  (Ov.  Fast.  i.  617.)  (L.)  In  another  part  of
his  works,  Plutarch  makes  her  the  mother  of  Evander,  as  do  like-
wise Livy  and  Dion.  Halle.  The  whole  story,  however,  of  this
lady  and  her  s»n,  .as  well  as  of  the  Lupercalia,  wUich  follov/s,  is  by
some  resolved  inio,£;strQnpa)icaliiliegoJ'y,*   .


86  ROMULUS.

an  account.     As  for  the  Lupcrcalia"^,  from  ihc  time
it  should  seem  to  have  been  a  feast  of  lustration  ;  for
it  was  celebrated  on  one  of  the  inauspicious  days  of
the  month  of  February,  which  name  denotes  it  to  be
the  month  of  '  purifying,'  and  the  day  was  formerly
called  Februata.     But  the  true  meaning  of  Luper-
calia  is,  '  the  Feast  of  Wolves  ;'   and  on  that  account
it  must  apparently  have  been   very  ancient,  as  re-
ceived  from   the   Arcadians,  who   came    over  with
Evander.     This  is  the  general  opinion.     The  term
may  be  indeed  derived  from  Lupa,  '  a  she-wolf,'  for
"vve  see  the  Luperci   begin    their  course  from   the
place,  where  they  say  Romulus  was  exposed.    If  we
consider  the  ceremonies,  hovv-ever,  the  reason  of  the
name  seems  hard  to  guess  :  For  first,  goats  are  kill-
ed ;  then  two  noblemen's  sons  arc  introduced,  and
some  are  to  stain  their  foreheads  with  a  bloody  knife,
while  others  instantly  wipe  off  the   stain   with  wool
steeped  in  milk,  which  they  bring  for  that  purpose.
After  this,  the  young  men  are  to  laugh.    They  next
cut  the  goats'  skins  in  pieces,  and  run   about  per-
fectly naked  except  their  middle,  and  lash  v.ith  those
thongs  all  whom  they  meet.      The  young  women
avoid  not  the  stroke,  as  they  think  it  assists  concep-
tion and  child-birth.     Another  thine;  peculiar  to  this
feast  is,  that  tlie   Luperci   sacrifice  a  dog.     Butas,
who  in  his  Elegies  has  given  a  fabulous  account  of
the  origin   of  the  Roman  institutions,    writes   that
after  Romulus  had  overcome  Amulius,  in  the  trans-
ports of  victory  he  ran  with  great  speed  to  the  place
Avhere  the   wolf  had  suckled  him   and  his  brother,
V^hen  iniants :  and  that  this  feast  is  celebrated,  and


'5  This  festival  was  celebrated  on  the  11th  of  February,  In  honour
of  the  Gi'yd  Pan  (L.);  who,  from  his  hostility  to  wolves,  was  denor
minated  Lupercus.  Of  the  fecundating  power  of  his  priests  Ovici
speaks,  Fast.  ii.  427.,  Sec.

Excipe JcBciinda;  patienter  verhera  dextree^
^am  socer  optati  nomcn  habehit  avi.*


\  ■—


i


ROMULUS.  87

€lie  young  noblemen  run  in  imitation  of  that  action,
striking  all  that  are  in  their  way  ;

As  the  famed  twins  of  Rome,  Amulius  slain.
From  Alba  rush'd,  and  struck  th'  opposing  train
Witli  reeking  blades.


And  the  touching  of  the  forehead  with  a  bloody
knife  is  a  symbol  of  that  slaughter  and  danger,  as
wiping  off  the  blood  with  milk  is  in  memory  of  their
iirst  nourishment.  But  Caius  Acilius'^  relates  that,
before  the  building  of  Rome,  Romulus  and  Remus
having  lost  their  cattle  first  prayed  to  Faunus  for
success  in  the  search  of  them,  and  then  ran  in  quest
jof  them  naked,  that  they  might  not  be  incommoded
by  sweat ;  and  that,  therefore,  the  Luperci  run
about  naked.  As  to  tlic  dog,  if  this  be  a  feast  of
lustration,  we  may  suppose  it  sacrificed,  in  order  to
be  used  in  purifying ;  for  the  Greeks,  in  their  puri-
fications, make  use  of  dogs,  and  perform  the  cere-
jnonies  which  they  call  F.criskulakisinoi'^  But,  if
these  rites  are  observed  in  gratitude  to  the  wolf  that
nourished  and  preserved  Romulus,  they  kill  a  dog
with  great  propriety,  because  it  is  an  enemy  to
w-olves :  perhaps  however  nothing  more  was  meant
by  it,  than  to  punish  that  animal  for  disturbing  the
Luperci  in  their  running.

Romulus  is  likewise  said  to  have  introduced  the
Sacred  Fire,  and  to  have  appointed  the  holy  virgins
called  Vestals '°.   Others  attribute  this  to  Numa,.  but

'■*  Tribune  of  the  people,  A.  U.C.  556.  He  v/rote  in  Greek
son^e  Annals,  which  (as  Livy  informs  us)  were  translated  into  Latin
by  Claudius.     His  History  is  quoted  by  Cicero.*

7?  These  consisted  in  drawing  a  dog  or  whelp  round  the  person,
upon  whom  the  lustration  was  to  be  performed,  and  were  very  ge-
neral 1}'  in  use  among  the  Greeks.*

76  Plutarch  must  mean,  that  Romulus  was  the  first  who  intro-
<luced  the  Sacred  Fire  at  Rome.  That  there  were  Vestal  virgins
before  this,  at  Alba,  we  are  certain,  because  the  mother  of  Ro-
mulus was  one  of  them.  The  sacred  and  perpetual  fire  was  kept  up
«iot  only  in  Italy,  but  in  Egypt,  in  Persia,  in  Greece,  and  in  almost
^W  nations.  (L  )  The  Greeks  had  adopted  the  custom  from  the
9


S8  Kt)]^JULUS.

allow  that  E.omulu3  was  remarkably  strict  in  observ-
ing other  religious  rites,  and  well  skilled  in  divina-
tion, tor  which  purpose  he  bore  the  Lituus.  This
is  a  crooked  stan,  with  which  those,  that  sit  to  ob-
serve the  flight  of  birds ''',  describe  the  several  quar-
ters of  the  heavens.  It  was  kept  in  the-Capitol,  but
lost  when  Rome  was  taken  by  the  Gauls;  aiid  found,
after  the  barbarians  had  quitted  it,  buried  deep  in
ashes,  untouched  by  the  fire,  v/hile  every  thing
about  it  was  consumed  '^.  llomulus  also  enacted
some  laws,  and  among  the  rest  that  severe  one,
which  forbids  the  wife  in  any  case  to  leave  her  hus-
band'^j  but  gives  the  husband  power  to  divorce  his
^x'ifQ^  in  case  of  her  poisoning  his  children,  or  coun-
terfeiting his  keys,  or  committing  adultery "".  But
if  upon  any  other  account  he  put  her  away,  she  was
to  have  one  moiety  of  his  goods,  and  the  other  was
to  be  consecrated  to  Ceres ^' ;  and  whoever  put  away
his  wife,  was  to  make  an  atonement  to  the  gods  of
the  earth.  It  is  something  particular,  that  Romulus
appointed  no  punishment  for  actual  parricides,  but

east,  where  it  was  a  natural  consequence  of  the  worship  of  the  sun,
or  of  fire.*

'^  The  Angnrs.

'i^  Cicero  (Div.  i.  17.)  states,  that  it  was  discovered  in  a  chapel
of  the  Sah'an  priests  upon  Mount  Palatine.*

■'-'  Yet  tliis  privileges  v,hich  Plutarch  thinks  a  hardship  upon  the
women,  was  granted  to  the  men  by  Moses  in  greater  latitude.  The
women,  however,  among  the  Romans  came  at  length  to  divorce
their  husbands,  as  appears  from  Juvenal  (Sat.  ix.)  and  Martial  (x.
4)1.)  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed,  to  the  honour  of  Ro-
man virtue,  that  no  divorce  was  known  at  Rome  for  five  hundred
and  twenty  years.  One  P.  Servilius,  or  Carvilius  l^purius,  was  the
first  of  the  Romans,  that  put  away  his  w;fe.     See  Parallel,  not.  (6).

^°  Upon  this  subject  Dion.  Halic.  (ii.  8.)  is  at  variance  witli  Plu-
iarch.  That  Romulus  vii'cy  probably  ordained  severe  punisinnents
for  drunkeimess  and  adultery  in  women,  he  pllows;  but,  with  most;
other  authors,  he  denies  that  h.e  instituted  the  law  of  divorce.  Nei-
ther indeed  is  it  probable,  that  the  Subines  would  have  concurred
in  a  regulation,  which  left  their  women  so  much  at  the  mercy  of
their  Reman  husbands.^'-

^'  The  tbrintiila  ran,  FamiUam  ad  csdcm  Ccreris  ;  if^'C  Dili  .■mrrr


tlOMULUR.  83

called  all  murther  parricide  ^^ ;  looking  upon  the  one
as  abominable,  and  the  other  as  impossible.  For
many  ages  indeed  he  seemed  to  have  judged  rightly,
as  no  one  was  guilty  of  that  crime  in  Home  for  al-
most six  hundred  years  ;  and  Lucius  Ostius,  after
the  wars  of  Annibal,  is  recorded  to  have  been  the
iirst  thai  committed  it.  But  upon  these  topics  I
have  dwelt  sufficiently.

In  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tatius,  some  of
his  friends  and  kinsmen,  meeting  certain  emba'-^sa-
dors  who  were  going  from  Laurentum  to  Rome'*^,
attempted  to  rob  them  upon  the  road  ;  and  as  they
Avould  not  surfer  it,  but  stood  in  their  own  defence,
killed  them.  As  this  was  an  atrocious  crime,  Ho-
rn ulus  required  that  those  v.ho  committed  it  should
immediately  be  punished,  but  Tatius  hesitated  and
put  it  off.  This  was  the  first  occasion  of  any  open
variance  between  them  ;  for  till  now  they  had  be-
haved themselves  as  if  directed  by  one  soul,  and  the
administration  had  been  carried  on  with  all  possible
unanimity.  The  relations  of  those  that  had  been
murthered,  finding  that  they  could  have  no  legal  re-
dress from  Tatius,  fell  upon  him  and  slew  him  at
Lavinium,  as  he  was  offering  sacrifice  with  Romu-
lus ^^ ;  after  which  they  conducted  Romulus  back
with  applause,  as  a  prince  who  paid  all  proper  regard
to  justice.  To  the  body  of  Tatius  he  gave  an  ho.
nourable  interment,  at  iirmilustrium'^V<^ii  Mount

8-  It  js  not  a  little  remarkable,  as  Dacier  observes,  that  the  nam*
*  parricide'  should  have  existed  so  lon;^  before  the  tiling  itselt'.*

S3  Dion.  Halic.  says,  they  were  embiis-sador^i  nom  Lavinium,  u'ho
in  the  sixth  year  of  Tatius'  reign  had  been  at  Rome  to  comphiin  of
the  incursions  made  by  some  of  his  frieiids  upon  tiieir  territories ;
and  that,  as  they  were  returning,  the  Sabines  lay  in  wait  for  them
on  the  road,  and  stripped  and  killed  several  of  them.  Lavinimii
and  Laurentum  vrere  neighbonring  towns  in  Latiura.

^•*  Tliis  was,  probably,  a  sacrifice  to  the  Dii  Indigetes  of  Latium,
in  which  Roiiis  was  included  :  as  the  Trojan  Penates  reniaincnl  at
that  place.  Licinius  however  states,  that  Tatius  did  not  go  thither
vvith  Komulus,  nor  on  account  of  tbe  sacrifice;  but  that  he  went
'alone,  to  persuade  the  inhabitants  to  pardon  the  nunthcrers.

£5  X2je  place  v.-as  so  caiied,  becau.^ie  of  a  ceremony  of  the  sii


amt


90  ROMULUS.

Aventlne  ;  but  he  took  no  care  to  revenge  his  death
•upon  the  persons,  who  had  killed  him.     kSome  histo-
rians write,  that  the  Laiirentians  in  great  terror  gave
Tip  Tatius'  murtherers  ;    but  Romulus  let  them  go,
saying,  "  Blood  should  be  repaid  with  blood."  This
occasioned  a  report,  and  indeed  a  strong  suspicion,
that  he  was  not  sorry  to  get  rid  of  his  partner  in  the
government.      None  of  these  things,   however,  oc-
casioned any  disturbance  or  sedition  among  the  Sa-
bines;  but  partly  out  of  regard  for  Romulus,  partly
out  of  fear  of  his  power,  -or  because  they  reverenced
him  as  a  ffod,  thev  all  continued  firm  in  their  alle-
giance.      This  their  veneration   extended   to   many
other  nations.  The  ancient  Latins  sent  embassadors,
and  entered  into  league  and  alliance  with  him.     Fi-
densE,  a  city  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome,   he
took  (as  some  say)  by  despatching  a  body  of  horse
before,  with  orders  to  break  the  hinges  of  the  gates,
and  then  appearing  unexpectedly  in  person.  Others
will  have  it,  that  the  Fidcnates  first  attacked  and  ra-
vaged the   Roman  territories,  and  were  carrying  off
.considerable  booty,    when  Romulus  lay  in  ambush
for  them,  cut  many  of  them  off,  and  took  their  city^'"'.
He  did  not  however  demolish  it,  but  made  it  a  Ro-
.  :jR3an  colony,  and  sent  into  it  two  thousand  five  hun-
•  dred  inhabitants  on  the  thirteenth  of  April.

Afcer  this,  a  plague  broke  out  so  fatal,  that  peo-
ple died  of  it  without  any  previous  sickness:  while
the  scarcity  of  fruits,  and  the  barrenness  of  the
•cattle,  added  to  the  calamity.  It  rained  blood  too
in  the  city  ^'' ;  so  that  their  unavoidable  sufferings

name,  celebratcfl  every  year  on  tlie  19th  of  October,  when  the
'  troops  were  mustered  and  purified  by  sacrifices.

^<^  In  this  account  Livy  (i.  14.)  agrees  with  Plutarch  ;  but  Dion,
Hah'c.  (ii.  13.)  states,  that  as  the  Crustumerians  were  sending  a
supply  of  provisions  to  the  Romans,  then  afflicted  with  famine  or
the  plague,  the  Fidenatcs  attacked  und  plundered  the  convoy.*

^7  These  alarming  showers  M.  Rictird  imputes  to  insects  and
•crimson  vapours,  and  represents  them  as  being  far  from  unusual  in
Jater  times.  We  read  likewise  among  the  prodigies  of  former  days,
which  (it  would  seem)  have  likewise  had  their  modern  parallel,  of
^howefs  of  stones.*     .  ...


ROMULUS.  91

were  increased  by  the  terrors  of  superstition  :  and,
M'hcn  the  destruction  spread  itself  to  Xaurentum,  all
agreed  it  was  for  having  neglected  to  do  justice  upon
the   murtherers  of  the  embassadors  and  of  Tatiiis,
that  tlie  divine  vengeance  pursued  both  cities.    And
indeed,  after  those  murtherers  were  given  up  and
punished  by   both  parties,    their  calamities  visibly
abated  ;   and  Romulus  purified  the  city  with  lustra-
tions, which  (they  tell  us)  are  yet  celebrated  at  the
Ferentine  gate.     Before  the  pestilence  ceased,  the
people   of    Cameria®^   attacked   the    Romans,-   and
over-ran  the    country^  thinking   them  incapable  of
resistance  on  account  of  the  sickness.     But  Romulus
quickly  met  them  in  the  field,  gave  them  battle  in
which  he   killed   six  thousand  of  them,  took  their,
city,  and  transplanted  half  it's   remaining   inhabi-
tants to  Rome ;  adding,  on  the  first  of  August,  to
those  whom  he  left  in  Cameria  double  their  number
from  Rome.     So  many  people  had  he  to  spare,  in
about  sixteen  years'  time  from  the  building  of  the
city.     Among  other  spoils,  he  carried  from  Cameria
a  chariot  of  brass,  which  he  consecrated  in  the  tem-
ple of  Vulcan,  placing  upon  it  his  own  statue  crowned
by  victory.

His  afiairs  thus  flourishing,  the  weaker  part  of  his
neighbours  submitted,  satisfied  if  they  could  only
live  in  peace :  but  the  more  powerful,  dreading  or
envying  Romulus,  thought  they  should  not  by  any
means  let  him  pass  unnoticed,  but  oppose  and'put
a  stop  to  his  growing  greatness.  The  Veientes,  who
had  a  strong  city  and  extensive  country  ^^,  were  the
first  of  the  Tuscans  who  began  the  war,  demanding
Fidena?  as  their  property.  It  was  both  unjust  how-
ever and  ridiculous,  that  they  who  had  given  the

^*  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  which  Romulus  had  before  taken.
Ifs  old  inhabitants  seized  this  opportunity  to  rise  in  arms,  and  mas-
sacre the  Roman  garrison.

.  89  Veii,  the  capital  of  Tuscany,  was  situated  on  a  craggy  rock,
about  a  hundred  furlongs  from  Rome  ;  and  for  extent  arid  riches  k
compared  by  Dion.  Ilalic.  to  Athens.


&2  ROMULUS.

people  of  Fidcns  no  assistance  in  the  greatest  extre-
mities, but  'iKid  suiiered  them  to  perish,  should
challenge  their  houses  and  lands,  now  in  the  posses-
sion of  other  masters.  Romulus  therefore  returned
them  a  contemptuous  answer,  upon  which  they  di-
vided their  forces  into  tw^o  bodies  ;  one  attacked  the
garrison  o{  Fidenn?,  and  the  otlier  marched  to  meet
Romulus.  That  vvdiich  went  against  Fidenas  defeated
the  Romans,  and  killed  two  thousand  of  them  ;  but
the  other  was  beaten  by  Romulus,  witli  the  loss  of
more  than  eight  thousand  men.  They  gave  battle
however  once  more  at  Fidena;,  where  all  allow  the
victory  was  chiefly  owing  to  Rom.ulus  himself,
whose  skill  and  courage  were  then  remarkably  dis-
played, and  whose  strength  and  swiftness  appeared
more  than  human.  But  what  some  report  is  entirely
fabulous,  and  utterly  incredible,  that  there  fell  that
day  fourteen  thousand  men,  above  half  of  whom
Romulus  slew  with  his  own  hand.  For  even  tlie
Messenians  seem  to  have  been  extravagant  in  their
boasts,  when  they  inform  us  that  Aristomenes  of-
fered a  hecatomb  three  several  times,  for  ha\  ing  as
often  killed  a  hundred  Lacedaemonians  ^^.  After  tlie
Veientes  were  thus  ruined,  Roinulus  suffered, tr.e
scattered  remains  to  escape,  and  marched  directly
to  their  city.  The  inhabitants,  unable  to  bear  up
after  so  dreadful  a  blow,  humbly  sued  for  peace;
and  obtained  a  truce  for  a  hundred  years  i)y  giving
up  a  considerable  part  of  their  territory  called  Sep-
tempagium,  (signifying,  '  a  district  of  seven  towns'^")
together  v/ith  the  salt-pits  by  the  river ;  beside
which,  they  delivered  into  his  hands  fifty  of  their

5'  Pausanias  (iv.  19.)  conflrnis  this  account,  mentioniug  both
the  time  and  the  place  of  those  achievements,  as  well  as  the  heca-
tombs otFercd  to  Jupiter  Ithomates.  Tiiose  wars  between  the
ISIcssenian.s  and  Spartans  were  about  the  time  or'  Tiillus  Ilostilius.

''  So  translated  by  Dion.  Ilalic.  Plutarch's  vcrtion,  *  seven
parts,'  proves  but  too  well.,  as  does  likewise  his  subsequent  account
oi'  the  Lietors,  &c.,  that  he  did  not  without  sufficient  reason  con-
fess himself  a  mere  smatterer  in  the  Latin  language.  The  district
in  question  extended  from  Veii  to  the  Tiber.*


ROMULUS.  as

laobility  as  hostages.  He  triumphecP-  upon  this  oc-
casion on  the  fifteenth  of  October  :  and  was  followed
among  many  other  captives  by  the  general  of  tlie
Vcientes,  a  man  in  years,  who  seemed  not  to  have
belKued  with  the  prudence,  v^'hich  miglit  have  been
expected  from  his  age.  Hence  it  is  that  to  this  day,
when  they  offer  a  sacrifice  for  victory,  they  lead  an
old  man  through  the  Forum  to  the  Capitol,  in  a
boy's  robe  edged  witii  purple  and  v,'ith  a  bulla  about
his  neck,  and  the  herald  cries,  "  Sardians  to  be
*'  sold'-'';"  tor  the  Tuscans  are  said  to  have  been  a
colony  of  the  Sardians,  and  Veii  is  a  city  of  Tus-
cany.

This  was  the  last  of  Romulus*  wars.  He  now
behaved  as  almost  all  men  do,  who  rise  bv  some  un-
expected  good  fortune  to  dignity  and  power ;  for
exalted  by  his  exploits,  and  loftier  in  his  sentiments,
•he  dropped  his  popular  affability,  and  assumed  the
monarch  to  an  odious  degree.  The  first  offence  he
caused  by  his  dress  ;  his  habit  being  a  purple  vest^"*,
over  which  he  wore  a  robe  bordered  with  purple.
He  gave  audience  in  a  chair  of  state.  He  had  al-
ways about  him  a  number  of  young  men  called  Ce-
leres  ^-'',  from  their  despatch  in  doing  business  j  and

9^  For  the  third  time,  as  Dion.  Halic.  remarks,  and  in  a  manner
much  more  mamiificent  than  before.*

9'  The  Veientes,  v.-ith  the  otlier  Hetrurlans,  \vere...a  colony  of
"Lydians,  whose  metropoh's  was  the  city  ofSardis.  Festiis,  after  the
historian  Sincius  Capito,  dates  this  custom  from  the  time  of  the
conquest  of  Sardinia  by  Tib.  Semp.  Gracchus  ;  when  such-  a  num-
ber of  slaves  was  brought  from  that  island,  that  none  were  to  be
seen  in  tiie  market  but  Sardinians.

w  This  was  the  sfigicf?},  or  '  military  dress,'  over  which  he  wore
the  paludatncntuni,  or  '  general's  robe,'  fastened  on  the  shoulder.
.But  wliat  chiefly  rendered  him  odious  was,  his  excessive  severity  in
punishing  the  guilty.  Some  young  men  in  particular  of  good  f;*mi-
lies,  wlio  were  accused  oi'  having  made  predatory  incursions  into
the  neighbouring  states,  by  his  sole  judgement  he  condemned  to
be  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian  rock.  (Dion.  Halic.  li.  It.)  If  this
were  a  proper  place,  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  suggest  a  modern
parallel  to  these  activeguards,  this  prodigal  splendour,  and  thij  extra-
judicial severity.*

•5^  Romulus  ordered  the  Curis  to  choese  him  a  guard  of  three

12


54  ROMULUS.

before  him  went  men  with  staves  to  keep  off  the  prr-
pLihice,  who  also  wore  thongs  of  leather  at  their
<^irdles,  ready  instantly  to  bind  any  person  upon  his
orders.  This  binding  the  Latins  formerly  called
ligare,  now  all/gare :  whence  those  serjeants  are
called  Lictores,  and  their  rod^  fasces  ;  for  the  sticks,
which  they  used  upon  that  occasion,  were  sm.all.
Though  perhaps  at  first  they  were  called  Litorcs,
and  afterward,  by  inserting  a  c,  Lictorcs  :  being  the
same  that  the  Greeks  called  Leitourgoi  ('  officers
for  the  people')  ;  and  leitos  in  Greek  still  signifies
'  the  people,'    but  laos  *  the  populace.*

¥/hen  his  grandfather  Numitor  died  in  Albc^,
though  the  crown  undoubtedly  belonged  to  him,  yet
to  please  the  people  he  left  the  administration  in
their  own  hands ;  and  over  the  Sabines'-^'  he  ap-
pointed yearly  a  particular  magistrate :  thus  teach-
ing the  great  men  of  Rome  to  seek  a  free  common-
wealth without  a  king,  and  by  turns  to  rule  and  to
obey.  For  now  the  patricians  had  no  share  in  the
government,  but  only  an  honourable  title  and  ap-
pearance, assembling  in  tlie  senate-house  more  for
form  than  business.  There  with  silent  attention  they
heard  the  king  give  his  orders,  and  differed  only  from
the  rest  of  the  people  in  this  respect,  that  they  went
home  with  the  first  knowledge  of  what  had  been
determined.  This  treatment,  however,  they  digested
as  well  as  thev  could  ;  but  when  of  his  own  autho-
rity  he  divided  the  conquered  lands  among  the  sol-
diers, and  restored  to  the  Ycientes  their  hostages

■hundred  incn,  ten  out  of  each  Curia;  and  these,  for  th,c  reason
uliicii  Phitarch  has  assigned,  he  called  Celeres.

'^^  Xylander  and  11.  Stephap.us  are  rationally  enough  of  opinion,
that  instead  of  *  Sabines'  we  should  read  '  Albans;'  and  so  the
Latin  translator  renders  it.  (L.)  To  this  usa^e  too  of  the  Albans
Dion,  llalic.,  when  speaking  of  the  creation  of  the  first  lloman  dic-
tator, obviously  refers.  And  why  indeed  should  the  Sabines  have
contended  (which  we  find  they  did)  that  the  second  king  siiould  be
selected  from  their  nation,  as  the  tirsi  liad  been  a  Roman,  if  tiiey
had  previously  possessed  the  privilege  of  an  independent  chief
magistrate  ?  •


ROMULUS.  g$

Vvitlioiit  the  consent  or  approbation  of  the  senate,
thev  considered  it  as  an  intolerable  insult.     Hence
arose  strong  suspicions  against   him,-  and   Romuhis
soon   afterward   unaccountably  disappeared.      Thi.s
happened  on  the  7tli  oiZy^y.^  as  it  is  now  called,
then    Quintilis :   and  we  have  no  certainty   of  any
thing   about  it,  but  the  time;   various  ceremonies,
with  reference  to  the  event,  being  still  performed
upon  that  day^''.     Neither  ought  we  to  be  surprised
at  this  uncertainty;   since,  when  Scipio    Africanus
was  found  dead  in  his  house  after  supper'^''',  there*
.vras  no  clear  proof  of  the  manner  of  his  death  :  for
some  say,  that  being  naturally  infirm  he  died  sud-
denly ;  others,  tliat  lie  took  poison  ;  and  others,  that
his   enemies    broke  into   his   house    bv   niijht,  and
strangled  him.      Besides,  all  were  acTmitted  to  see
8cipio's  dead  body,  and  every  one  from  the  sight  of
it  formed  his  own  suspicion  or  opinion  of  the  caufe.
But  as  llomulus  vanished  on  a  sudden,  and  no  part
of  his  body  or  even  his  garments  could  l)e  founds
some  conjectured  that  the  senators,  who  were  con-
vened in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  assaulted  and  killed
him ;  after  which,   each  carried  away  a  part  of  the
corpse  under  his  gown.     Others  affirm,  that  his  dis-
appearance did  not  happen  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,
nor  in  the  presence  of  the  senators  alone  ;  but  while
he  was  holding  an  assembly  of  the  people  without
the  citv,  at  a  place  called  the  Goat's-Marsh.     The
air  upon  that  Occasion  w'as' suddenly  convulsed,- and
wondcrfullv  altered  ;  for  the  light  of  the  sun  failed'-'^


'..'9


9^  As  the  populifu^him,  the  nones  capr.Gtinc?i  and  thejeslum
nncillnrum*  ,        .'  ■ .   ■

!''8  This  was  Scipio,  ths  sonof  Paulus  iErailius;  adopted  by  Scipio
Africanus.  As  he  constancy  opposed  the  designs  of  tlie  Gracchi,
it  was  supposed  that  his  wife)  Sen;prQnin,the  sister  of  thoric  sechtious.
men,  took  him  off  hy  poison.  According  to  \^alerius  Maximu>,  no
judicial  inquiry  was  made  into  the  cause  of  his  death.;. and  Victor
{58.)  tells  us,  the  corpse  was  carried  out  with  the  face  coveted  hy
a  linen  cloth,  lest  the  blackness  of  it  should  appear.  See  also  Veil.
Paterc.  ii.  4.  .  .

^'  Cicero  mentions  tliis  remarkable  darkness,  in  a  fragtnent.of  his


95  KOT\lULUS.

and  tlicv  Vv'CiG  involved  in  nn  astonishing  darkness,
attended  upon  every  side  witli  dieadtul  thuuderings,
and  violent  hurricanes.  The  multitude  then  dis-
persed and  fled,  but  the  nobility  gatliered  into  one
body.  When  tiie  tempest  was  over,  and  the  light
re-appeared,  the  people  returned  to  the  same  place,
and  an  anxious  inquiry  was  made  for  the  king:  but
the  patricians  \\ithout  suii'ering  them  to  examine
closely  into  the  iviatter,  commanded  them  to  honour
and  worship  Romulus,  who  had  been  caught  up  into
heaven ;  and  who,  as  he  had  been  their  gracious,
king,  would  become  thenceforward  their  ])ropitious
deity.  Upon  this,  the  nndtitude  went  away  with
great  satisfaction,  and  worshipped  liim  in  hopes  of
his  favoiu'  and  protection.  Some  however,  searching
more  minutely  into  the  atlair,  gave  the  patricians  no
small  uneasiness;  they  even  accused  tliem  ofliaving
iujposed  u})on  the  ipeople  a  ridiculous  tale,  after  they
had  nnnthered  tiie  king  with  their  own  hands.

While  things  were  in  this  disorder,  a  senator  (v.'C
are  told)  of  high  distinction  and  famed  for  sanctity  of
manners,  Julius  Frocuius  by  name  ^%  who  came  fj-om
Alba  with.  Romulus  and  had  been  his  faithful
friend'"',  went  into  the  lorum  ;  and  declared  with
the  most  solemn  oaths  before  all  the  people  that,  as  he
was  travelling  on  the  road,  Romulus  met  him  in  a
form  more  noble  and  au^'ust  than  ever,  and  clad  in
bri<2:lit  and  dazzlinfij;  armour.  Astonished  at  the
_§ight,  he  said  to  him;  "  For  Vv'hat  misbehaviour  of

SKvth  hook  de  Repuh.    i\n<X  it  appc-irs,  iVoni  tiie  astronomical  tables,

that  tlieie  was  a  great  eclipse  oi'tlic  sun  Ol.  xvi.  1.,  supposed  to  be

tae  year  ol"  Roc^.uiiis'  death,  on  the  '26th  of  !May  ;  which  considering

the  little  exr.ccn.e^'S  there  was  at  that  time  in  the  Roman  calendar,

.Kiijzht  very   v.-ell  coincide  with  tiie  month  of  July.  (L.)     Or   the

.Homans  were  perliaps  bat  little  more  enlightened  on  the  subject  of

■  his  death,  than  on  tlu't  of  his  birth."

'*^°   A  descendent  ol"  Ivdus  or  Ascanius.

*"'  Ilenee  most  pvoba!)ly  selected  by  the  senators,  to  report  their
fabricated  revelation.  Upon  this  passage,  as  supplying  a  parallel  to
the  canonisatiors  of  i>iodern  Ronu;  (Avhich  is  allowed,  however,  in
tlie  single  art  of  inventing  miracles  to  excel  the  ancient),  see  Mid-
UUton's  LtUcr,  Prcf.  Disc.  Ixvii.*


ROMULUS.  97

*'  our's,  O  king,  or  by  what  accident,  have  you  so
"  unseasonably  left  us  to  labour  under  tlie  heaviest
calumnies,  and  the  whole  city  to  sink  under  inex-
pressible sorrow  ?"  To  which  he  replied,  "  It
pleased  the  gods,  ray  good  Proculus,  that  we  should
*'  dwell  with  men  for  a  time ;  and  after  having
"  founded  a  city  which  will  be  the  most  powerful  and
"  glorious  in  the  world,  return  to  heaven  whence  we
*'  came.      Farewel  then,    and  go  tell  the    Romans


ii


that,  by  the  exercise  of  temperance  and  fortitude,
they  shall  attain  the  highest  pitch  of  human  great-
ness ;  and  I,  the  god  Quirinus,  will  ever  be  pro-
pitious to  you."  This  from  the  character  and  oath
of  the  narrator  gained  credit  with  the  Romans,  who
were  caught  with  a  kind  of  enthusiasm,  as  if  they  had
been  actually  inspired  ;  and  far  from  contradicting
what  they  had  heard,  bade  adieu  to  all  their  suspi-
cions of  the  nobility,  united  in  the  deifying  of  Qui-
rinus, and  addressed  to  him  their  devotions.  This
is  very  like  the  Grecian  fables  concerning  Aristeas
the  Proconnesian,  and  Cleomedes  the  Astypalensian.
For  Aristeas,  we  are  told,  expired  in  a  fuller's  shop  ;
and,  when  his  friends  came  to  take  away  the  body,
it  could  no  where  be  found.  Soon  afterward  some
persons,  coming  in  from  a  journey,  said  they  had
met  Aristeas  travellincr  toward  Croton  ^'^".  As  for
Cleomedes,  their  account  of  him  is,  that  he  was  a
man  of  gigantic  size  and  strength ;  but,  behaving  in
a  foolish  and  frantic  manner,  was  guilty  of  many  acts
of  violence.  At  last  he  went  into  a  school,  where  he
struck  the  pillar  which  supported  the  roof  with  his
fist,  and  broke  it  asunder,  so  that  the  roof  fell  in  and
destroyed  the  children  ^"^.     Pursued  for  this,  he  took

^''~  For  a  more  detailed  account  of  this  puerile  fable,  see  Hero-
dot,  iv.  13  —  15.*

'°5  This  phrensy,  according  to  Pausanias  (v!.9.)j  ^^-^  occasioned
by  his  having  been  refused  the  prize,  after  a  successful  wrestiing-
Hiatch  with  one  Iccus  of  Epidaurus:  and  for  the  heroic  achievement,
which  it  inspired,  he  was  to  be  worshipped  as  a  god  !  Astypal£5a
was  one  of  the  Cycladcs,  near  Crete.*
VOL.  I.  H


b's  ROMULUS.

refuge  In  a  hvf^e  cliest ;  and  having  shut  the  lid  upon
him,  he  held  it  down  so  fast,  tliat  many  men  togc-
"ther  were  unable  to  force  it  open  :  and  '.vlien  they  had
cut  tlie  chest  in  pieces,  they  could  not  find  him
cither  dead  or  alive.  Struck  with  this  strange  affair,
they  sent  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  and  re-
ceived from  the  priestess  this  answer,

T\\e  race  of  heroes  ends  in  Cleoniedes.

It  is  likewise  said,  that  the  body  of  Alcmena  was
lost,  as  tliey  were  carrying  it  to  the  grave,  and  a
stone  was  seen  lying  on  the  bier  in  its  stead.  Many
such  improbable  tales  are  told  by  writers,  who  wished
lo  deify  beings  naturally  mortal.  It  is  indeed  im-
pious and  illiberal,  to  leave  nothing  of  divinity  to
virtue  :  but,  at  the  same  time,  to  unite  heaven  and
earth  in  the  same  subject  is  absurd.  We  should
therefore  reject  fables,  when  we  are  possessed  of
undeniable  truth  ;  for,  according  to  Pindar,

The  body  yields  to  death's  supreme  decree  ;
But  the  bright  image  of  eternity
Survives.

This  alone  is  from  the  gods  :  from  heaven  it  comes,
and  to  heaven  it  returns,  not  indeed  with  the  body  j
but  after  it  is  entirely  set  free  and  separated  from  the
body,  and  disengaged  from  every  thing  sensual  and
unholy.  For  in  the  language  of  Heraclitus,  the
ppre  soul  is  of  superior  excellence  '°^,  darting  from
the  body  like  a  flash  of  lightning  from  a  cloud  ;  biit

'°*  This  is  a  very  difficult  passage.  The  for;ner  translator,  with
,  an  unjustifiable  liberlj-,  has  turned  civrti  yxp  ■^vx''  ^''f '  «?'«■•;>  '  A
virtuous  soul  is  pure  and  unmixed  light;'  which,  however  excellent
the  sentiment  (as  borrowed  from  the  Scripture,  where  he  had  found
that  '  God  is  light')  is  by  no  means  tlie  sense  of  the  original.  Da-
cier  has  translated  it  literally  I'mne  scchc,  and  remarks  the  propriety
of  the  expression,  with  respect"  to  that  position  of  Heraclitus,  that
fire  is  the  first  principle  of  all  things.  The  French  critic  went  upon
the  supposed  analogy  between  fire  and  dryness  :  but  there  is  a  much
more -natural  arid  more  obvious  analogy,  which  may.  h»lp  us  to  the
interpretatioQ  of  this  passage,  that  is,  the  noav  relation  v.hich  dry-
ness "has  to  purity  or  cleanliness  ;  .we  find  indeed  the  word  I,.-?':?  used
wetaphorically  in  the  latter  hzxne'^'rjT^i  rpe?r-.i.      -


ROMULUS.  p9

the  soul  that  is  carnal  and  immersed  in  sense '^"'j  like

a. heavy  and  dank  vapour,  witli  difficulty  .kindles  ajid

e-%pires.     There   is   therefore   no    occasion,  against

■nature,  to  send  the  bodies  of  good  men,to  heaven' ;

but  we  are  to.conchidethat  virtuous  souls,  by  nature

and  the  divine  justice,  rise  from  men  toheroes,  from

heroes  to  genii ;  and  at  last,  if  (as  in  the_^Mysteries)

.they  be  perfectly  cleansed  and  purified,  "shaking  dit'

.all  reroains  of  mortahty  auid  all  tlie  povvcr  of  thepas-

siojns,  fumlly  , attain    the  most  glorious  .and  .perfect

happiness ;  and  ascend  from  genii  to  gods,  not  l^y

the  vote  of  the  people,.but  by  the  just  and  established

order  .of  nature  ''*\  ■ "  ■

Tiie  surname,  which  Romiilus   had  of  Quirinus,

-some    tiiink   was    given   hhn,   as   [another]   Mars  ^

others,  because  the}''  call  the   Roman  citizens  Qiii-

rites ;  others  again,  because  the  ancients  .gave  the

'"■^  Milton,  iu  bis  Comas,  uses  the  same  comparison :

• 'The  lavish  act  of  sin

Lets  in  (iefilenient  to  the  inward  parts.

The  soul  grows  clotted  by  contagion,

Imbodies,  and  imbrutes,  till  ehe  quite  lose

The  divine  property  of  her  first  being.

Such  are  those  thick  and  gloomy  shadows  dainp

Oft  seen  in  charnel  vaults  and -sepulchres.

Lingering  and  sitting  by  a  new-made  grave.

As  loth  to  leave -the  body  that  it  loved,

And  link'd  itself  by  carnarsensuaJity

To  a  degenerate  and  degraded  state.

(vv.4e5— 4.75.)  tL.)

The  same  idea  may  he  traced  P.  L.  vi.  660.,  ix.  165.  Nor  need'
we  be  surprised.  ?{t  its  recurrence:  for,-  as  Vv'ar  ton  remarks  (in  loc  )
the  noti(jn  is  to  be  found  much  expanded  in  the  Phsedon  of  Plato.;
and  Henry  iVIore  the  Platonist,  who  was  Milton's  conte^Tiporary  in
Christ's  College,  might  have  given  his  mind  an  early  bias  to  the
study  of  tiiat  great  master.  '  This  poetical  philosophy  (saysBi>~!iop
Hurd)  nourished  the  fine  spirits  of  Milton's  time,  though  it  cor-
rupted some.'*  .      ■     .  ..

'°^'  Hesiod  was  the  first,  who  distinguished  these  foilj-  natures,
men,  heroes,  genii,  anil  gods.  He  saw  room,  it  seems,  for  perpe-
tual progression  and  improvement  in  a  state'  of  immortality.  And
when  the  heathens  tell  us  that,  before  the  last  degree  (that. of  divi-
nity) is  reached,  those  beings  are  liable  to  be  replunged  into  their
primitive  state  of  darkness,  one  would  imagine  they  had  heard  some-
thing of  the  fallep  angels.  '      •

H  2


100  ROMULUS.

name  of  Quiris  to  the  point  of  a  spear,  or  to  the
spear  itself;  and  that  of  Juno  Quiritis  to  the  statuetr
of  Juno,  in  which  she  was  represented  leaning  on  a
spear.  They  likewise  stilcd  a  certain  spear,  whicli
was  consecrated  in  the  palace,  Mars ;  and  those,
who  distinguished  themselves  in  battle,  were  reward-
ed with  a  spear.  Romulus  then,  as  a  martial  or
warrior-god,  was  named  Quirinus  ;  and  the  hill,  upon
which  his  temple  stands,  has  on  this  account  the  name
of  Quirinalis.  The  day  of  his  disappearance  is  called
"  The  flight  of  the  people,"  and  Nona!  CaprothuEj
because  then  tb.cy  go  out  of  the  city  to  offer  sacrifice
at  the  Goat's-Marsh.  Upon  this  occasion  they  pro-
nounce aloud  some  of  their  proper  names,  Marcus
and  Caius  for  instance,  representing  the  flight  which
then  happened,  and  their  calling  to  one  another
amidst  the  general  terror  and  confusion.  Others,
however,  are  of  opinion  that  this  is  not  a  representa-
tion of  flight,  but  of  haste  and  eagerness,  deriving
the  ceremony  from  the  following  source  :  When  the
Gauls,  after  the  taking  of  Home,  were  driven  out  by
Camilhis,  and  the  city  thus  weakened  did  not  easily
recover  itself,  many  of  the  Latins  under  the  conduct
of  Livius  Posthumius  marched  ac^ainst  it.  This
army  sitting  down  before  Home,  a  herald  was  sent
to  si£>;nifv  that  the  Latins  were  desirous  of  renewing
their  old  alliance  and  affinity,  which  was  now  declin-
ing, by  nev/  intermarriages.  If  therefore  they  would
send  them  a  number  of  their  virgins  and  widows,
peace  and  friendship  should  be  established  between
them,  as  before  with  the  Sabines  upon  the  like  occa-
sion. Wfien  the  Romans  heard  this,  though  they
would  have  willingly  avoided  the  war,  they  yet  con-
sidered the  giving  up  of  their  women  as  not  at  all
more  eligible  than  captivity.  While  they  were  still
in  suspense,  a  servant-maid  named  Philotis  (or,  ac-
cording to  others,  Tutola)  advised  them  to  do  nei-
ther ;  but  by  a  stratagem,  which  she  had  concerted,
to  avoid  both  the  war  and  the  giving  of  hostages.
The  stratairem    was,   to   dress   Philotis  herself  and

9


ROMULUS.  101

other  handsome  female  slaves  in  good  attire,  and
send  them  instead  of  free-born  virgins  to  the  enemy.
After  which,  Philotis  in  the  night-time  was  to  light
a  torch,  as  a  signal  for  the  Komans  to  attack  the
enemy,  and  despatch  them  in  their  sleep.  The
Latins  were  satisfied,  and  the  scheme  was  carried
into  effect.  For  Philotis  set  up  a  torch  on  a  wild
fig-tree,  screening  it  behind  with  curtains  and  cover-
'lets  from  the  sight  of  the  enemy,  while  it  was  visible
to  the  Romans.  As  soon  as  they  beheld  it,  they  set
out  in  great  haste,  often  calling  to  each  other  at  the
gates  to  be  expeditious  ;  and  falling  upon  the  Latins,
who  expected  nothing  less,  cut  them  in  pieces.
Hence  this  feast,  in  memory  of  the  victory.  The
day  was  called  Noiicp  Caprotincc,  on  account  of  the
*  wild  fig-tree,'  in  the  Roman  tongue  caprlficus.
The  women  are  entertained  in  the  fields,  in  booths
made  of  the  branches  of  the  fig-tree ;  and  the  servant-
maids,  in  companies,  run  about  and  play :  they  after-
ward come  to  blows,  and  throw  stones  at  one  an-
other, in  remembrance  of  their  having  then  aided
and  assisted  the  Romans  in  the  battle.  These  par-
ticulars are  admitted  but  by  few  historians.  Their
calling  upon  each  other's  names  in  the  day-time  in-
deed, and  their  walking  in  procession  to  the  Goat's-
Marsh  '°',  like  persons  that  were  going  to  a  sacrifice,
seem  rather  referable  to  the  former  account :  though
possibly  both  these  events  might  happen,  in  distant
periods,  upon  the  same  day  ^"^    Romulus  is  said  to

'°'  Instead  of  »« tirt  3-«^«tTr«v  (the  reading  in  Bryan's  text)  whick
has  no  tolerable  sense,  an  anonymous  copy  gives  us  Aur^rsp  uXu,Au.'Cikt,
And  that  *  to  sacrifice,'  or  rather  '  to  offer  up  prayers  at  a  sacrifice,*
is  one  sense  of  «Aa;i«i^*(!',  appears  from  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles*
Trachiniae,  where  he  explains  u.Xix,?Mycnt,  by  tu-Ki  sjrt  tu»  i)v<ria'«  tvxouc.
This  signification,  we  suppose,  it  gained  from  the  loud  accent,  in
which  those  prayers  were  said  or  sung.

'°8  A  happy  illustration  of  this  conjecture  occurs  in  Bishop
Watson's  Apology  for  the  Bible,  Lett.  ii. :  where,  in  answer  to
Paine's  objection  with  regard  to  the  double  reason  assigned  in  Sci'ip-
lure  for  hallowing  the  Sabbath  (Exod.xx.  ii.,  ^nd  Dent,  v  15,'  he
adduces  with  singular  felicity  the  detection  of  the  gunpowder-plot,
and  the  arrival  of  William  III.,  as  having  •  happened  in  distant  pe*


102    THESEUS  AND  llOMULUS  COMPARED.

have  been  fifty-four  years  of  age,  and  in  the  thirty-
eighth  of  his  reign  ^%  when  he  was  taken  from  the
world;


THESEUS  AND  ROMULUS

COMPARED.


THIS  is  all  I  have  met  with,  that  deserves  to  be
related  concerning  Romulus  and  Theseus.  To  come
therefore  now  to  the  comparison.  First  it  appears,
that  Theseus  was  inclined  to  great  enterprises  of  his
own  choice,  compelled  by  no  necessity;  since  he
might  have  reigned  in  peace  at  Tr^x^zene,  ever  a
Ivingdom  by  no  means  contemptible,  which  would,
have  fallen  to  him  by  succession  :  Whereas  Romu-
lus, in  Older  to  avoid  present  slavery  and  impending
punishment,  became  vaHant  (as  Plato  expresses  it)
through  fear,  and  was  driven  by  tlie  terror  of  ex-
treme sufferings  to  arduous  attempts.  Besides,  the
most  illustrious  action  of  Romulus  was  the  kilHng
of  one  tyrant  in  Alba:  But  the  first  exploits  of  The-
seus, performed  occasionally  and  by  way  only  of'
prelude,  were  those  of  destroying  Sciron,  Sinnis,
Procrustes,  and  Ccrynetes ;  by  whose  j)unishment
and  death  he  delivered  Greece  from  several  cruel
tyrants,  before  he  was  even  known  to  those,  for
wiiose  preservation  he  was  exerting  himself.  PJe
might  likewise  have  gone  safely  to  Athens  by  sea,
without  any  danger  from  robbers;  but  Romulus
could  have  no  security,  as  long  as  Amulius  lived.


riods  on  the  sa-.Tie  day ;'  and   therefore  investing  it  with  a  douhlc
sanctity,  and  supplying  tu'o  reasons  for  it's  annual  observance.*

"='  Di'm.  Halic.',  and  indeed  Plutarch  himsdi"  in  the  bej^inninj^
<5f  the  Life  of  Niima,  says  that  Koinuiiis  left  the  world  in  the  tliirty-
£f6'venth  year  ftftcr  the  foundation  of  Rome.  But  perliiips  those
mvo  hir5toriari.s  may  be  reconciled,  as  to  the  age  at  which  he  died.
For  Plutarch  st-Ates,  that  he  was  then  full  fifty-four  years  of  age,
and  Dionysius  that  he  waa  in  his  fifty-fifth  year.


THESEUS  AND  ROMULU$  COMPARED,     loa

This  difference  then  is  evident :  Theseus,  when  un-r.
oppressed  himself,  went  forth  to  rescue  others  from
tlieir  oppressors.  On  the  other  hand,  Romulus  and
his  brother,  so  long  as  they  themselves  remained  un-
injured by  the  tyrant,  quietly  suffered  him  to  exercise
his  cruelties.  And,  if  it  was  a  great  thing  for  Ro-
mulus to  be  wounded  in  the  battle  with  the  Sabines,
to  kill  Acron  and  to  conquer  m.any  other  enemies,
we  may  set  against  these  distinctions  the  battle  with
the  Centaurs  and  the  war  with  the  Amazons.

But  as  to  Theseus'  enterprise  with  respect  to  the
Cretan  tribute,  when  he  voluntarily  offered  to  go
among  the  young  men  and  virgins,  whether  he  might
have  expected  to  become  food  for  some  wild  beast,
or  to  be  sacrificed  at  Androgens'  tomb,  or  (v^'hich.
was  the  lightest  of  all  the  rumoured  evils)  to  submit'
to  a  vile  and  dishonourable  slavery,  it  is  not  easy  to
express  his  courage  and  magnanimity,  his  regard  for
justice  and  the  public  good,  and  his  love  of  glory,
iind  virtue.  Upon  this  occasion,  it  appears  to  me,
that  the  philosophers  have  not  ill  dcMned  Love  to  be
*  a  remedy,  provided  by  the  gods  for  the  safety  and
preservation  of  youth'.'  For  Ariadne's  love  seems
to  have  been  the  work  of  some  god,  who  designed
thus  to  preserve  this  eminent  man.  Neither  should
we  blame  her  for  her  passion,  but  rather  wonder
that  all  were  not  alike  affected  toward  it's  object.
And,  if  she  alone  was  sensible  of  that  tenderness,  I
may  justly  pronounce  her  worthy  the  love  of  a  god  %
as  sli£  shewed  so  liigh  a  regard  for  virtue  and  excel-
lence in  her  attachment  to  so  great  a  man.

Both  Theseus  and   Romulus  were   born  with  po-
litical talents :    yet  neither  of  them  preserved  the

'   See  Plat.  Conviv.

*  Plutarcii  here  enters  into  the  notion  of  Socrates,  who  teachos
that  it  is  the  love  of  virtue  and  real  excellence,  which  alone  can
unite  us  to  the  Supreme  Being.  But,  though  tliis  maxim  is  good,
ft  is  not  applicahle  to  Ariadne.  For  where  is  the  virtue  of  that
princess,  who  fell  in  love  with  a  stranger  at  first  sight,  and  hastened
lo  the  completion  of  her  v/ishes  through  the  ruin  of  her  kindr^4
and  of  her  country  ?  .     *     .      .


104    THESEUS  AND  ROMULUS  COMPARED.

proper  character  of  a  king,  but  deviated  from  the
due  medium ;  erring,  according  to  their  different
tempers,  the  one  on  the  side  of  democracy,  the  other
on  that  of  absohite  power.  For  a  prince's  tirst  con-
cern is,  to  preserve  the  government  itself,  and  this
is  effected,  not  less  by  avoiding  what  is  improper,
than  by  cultivating  what  is  suitable  to  his  dignity.
He,  who  relaxes  or  stretches  his  autliority,  continues
not  a  prince  or  a  king,  but  degenerates  into  a  re-
publican or  a  tyrant,  and  thus  incurs  either  the  con-
tempt or  the  hatred  of  his  subjects.  The  former
seems  to  be  the  error  of  mildness  and  humanity  of
disposition,  the  latter  of  selfishness  and  severity.

If  then  the  calamities  of  mankind  are  not  to  be
entirely  attributed  to  ibrtune,  but  we  are  to  seek
the  cause  of  them  in  their  different  manners  and
passions,  here  we  shall  find  that  unreasonable  anger,
M'ith  quick  and  unadvised  resentment,  is  to  be  im-
puted both  to  Romulus  in  the  case  of  his  brother,
and  to  Theseus  in  that  of  his  son.  But  if  we  con-
sider whence  their  anger  took  it's  rise,  the  latter
seems  the  more  excusable,  from  the  greater  cause
which  he  had  for  resentment,  as  yielding  to  the
heavier  blow.  For,  as  the  dispute  began  v.hen  Ro-
mulus was  in  cool  consultation  for  the  common
good  ',  one  w^ould  think  he  could  not  suddenly  have
given  way  to  such  a  passion  :  Whereas  Theseus  was
urged  against  his  son,  by  emotions  which  few  men
have  been  able  to  withstand,  proceeding  from  love,
jealousy,  and    the    false  suggestions   of  his  wife'.


'  Plutarch  does  not  seem  to  have  had  a  just  idea  of  the  contest
between  Romulus  and  Remus.  The  two  brothers  were  not  so  soli-
citous about  the  situation  of  their  new  city,  as  which  of  them  should
have  the  comr/iand  in  it,  when  it  was  built.  (L.)  Besides,  an  insult
(and  that  too  of  evil  augury  for  the  rising  walls)  had  been  offered
by  Remus,  in  contemptuously  leaping  over  thejv.sse.*

*  Of  these  calumnies  Plutarch  makes  no  mention,  in  his  Life  of
Theseus;  the  calamities  to  which  they  gave  birth  being  too  noto-
rious, as  subjects  of  tragedy,  to  require  more  particular  specification.
Or  may  we  here  trace  the  national  partiality,  so  generally  ascribed
to  the  Grecian  biographer?*


THESEUS  AND  ROMULUS  COMPAJIED.     lOS

What  is  more,  the  anger  of  Romulus  discharged
itself  in  an  action  of  most  unfortunate  consequence;
but  that  of  Theseus  proceeded  no  farther  than
words,  reproaches,  and  imprecations,  the  usual  re-
venge of  old  men.  The  rest  of  the  young  man's
misery  seems  to  have  been  owino-  to  fortune.  Thus
far,  then,  Theseus  appears  to  deserve  the  prefe-
rence.

But  Romulus  has,  in  the  first  place,  this  eminent
advantage,  that  he  rose  to  distinction  from  very  small
beginnings.  For  the  two  brothers  were  reputed
slaves,  and  sons  of  herdsmen  ;  and  yet,  before  they
attained  to  liberty  themselves,  they  bestowed  it  upon
almost  all  the  Latins  ;  gaining  at  once  the  most  glori-
ous titles,  as  destroyers  of  their  enemies,  deliverers  of
their  kindred,  kings  of  nations,  and  founders  of
cities  :  not  transplanters,  like  Theseus,  who  filled
indeed  one  city  with  people,  but  did  it  by  ruining
many  others,  which  bore  the  names  of  ancient  kings
and  heroes.  And  Romulus  subsequently  effected
the  same,  when  he  compelled  his  enemies  to  de-
molish their  habitations,  and  incorporate  with  their
conquerors.  He  had  not  however  a  city  ready  built
to  enlarge,  or  to  fill  with  inhabitants  from  other
towns  ;  but  he  created  one,  gaining  to  himself  lands,
a  country,  a  kingdom,  children,  wives,  alliances ;
and  this,  without  destroying  or  ruining  any  one.
On  the  contrary,  he  was  a  great  benefactor  to  persons
who,  having  neither  house  nor  habitation,  willingly
became  his  citizens  and  people.  He  did  not  indeed,
like  Theseus,  destroy  robbers  and  ruffians ;  but  he
subdued  nations,  took  cities,  and  triumphed  over
kings  and  generals.

As  for  the  fate  of  Remus,  it  is  doubtful  by  what
hand  he  fell  ;  m.ost  w^'iters  ascribing  it  to  others,
and  not  to  Romulus.  But  he  confessedly  saved  his
mother  from  destruction  ;  and  placed  his  grand-
father, who  was  living  in  mean  and  dishonourable
subjection,  upon  the  throne  of  ^neas:  He  likewise


106    THESEUS  AND  ROiMULUS  COMPARED.

voluntarily  did  him  many  kind  offices,  and  never
even  inadvertently  offered  him  any  injury.  On  the
other  hand  Theseus  I  think,  in  forgetting  or  neglects
ing  the  command  about  tlie  sail,  can  scarcely  by  any
excuses,  or  before  the  mildest  judges,  avoid  the  im-
putation of  parricide.  Sensible  how  difficult  the  de-
fence of  this  afiliir  would  be  to  those  who  should  at-
tempt it,  a  certain  Athenian  v/riter  feigns  that,  when
the  ship  approached,  iEgeus  ran  in  great  haste  to
the  citadel  lor  the  better  view  of  it,  and  missing  his
step  fell  dov.'u  ;  as  if  he  were  destitute  of  servants,  or
went  (in  whatever  hurry)  unattended  to  the  sea.

Moreover,  Theseus*  rapes,  and  offences  w^ith  re-
spect to  women,  admit  of  no  plausible  excuse  :  be-
cause, in  the  first  place,  they  were  frequent — for  he
carried  off'  Ariadne,  Antiope,  and  Anaxo  the  Troe-
zenian,  and,  alter  the  rest,  Helen ;  though  she
was  a  girl  not  yet  come  to  maturity,  and  he  so  far
advanced  in  years,  that  it  was  time  for  him  to  think
HO  more  even  of  lawful  marriage.  The  next  aggra-
vation is,  the  cause  ;  for  the  daughters  of  the  Troe-
2enians,  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  Amazons  were
in  no  respect  nsore  suitable  for  child-bearing,  than
those  of  the  Athenians  sprung  from  Erechtheus  and
Cecrops.  These  things,  therefore,  expose  him  to
the  suspicion  of  a  wanton  and  licentious  appetite.
On  the  other  hand  Romulus,  having  carried  off'  at
once  almost  eight  hundred  women,  did  not  take  them
all,  but  only  Ersilia  (as  it  is  said)  for  himself,  and  dis-
tributed the  rest  among  the  most  respectable  citizens.
And  afterward,  by  the  honourable  and  affectionate
treatment  which  he  procured  them,  he  turned  that
injury  and  violence  into  a  glorious  exploit,  perform-
ed witii  a  political  view  to  the  good  of  society.  Thus
lie  united  and  cemented  the  two  nations  together,
and  opened  a  source  of  future  kindness  and  of  addi-
tional power.  Time  bears  witness  to  the  conjugal
modesty,  tenderness,  and  fidelity,  which  he  establish-
ed J  for  during  two  hundred  and  thirty  years  no  maia

12


TKESEUS  AND  ROMULUS  COMPARED.     107

attempted  to  leave  his  wife,  nor  any  woman  her  hus-
band ^.  And,  as  the  very  curious  among  the  Greeks
can  tell  you,  v/ho  was  the  first  person  that  killed  his
father  and  mother,  so  all  the  Romans  know  that  Spu-
riiis  Carvilius  was  the  .first  who  divorced  his  wife,
alleging  her  barrenness^.  The  immediate  effects,
as  well  as  length  of  time,  attest  what  I  have  said.
i\)r  by  means  of  these  alliances,  the  two  kings  shared
the  kingdom,  and  the  two  nations  came  under  the
same  government.  But  the  marriages  of  Theseus
procured  the  Athenians  no  friendship  with  any  other
state  :  on  the  contrary,  they  generated  enmity,  wars,
the  destruction  of  their  citizens,  and  at  last  the  loss
of  Aphidnae;  which  merely  through  the  compassion
of  the  enemy  ^,  whom  the  inhabitants  supplicated
and  honoured  like  gods,  escaped  the  fate  that  beiel
Troy  on  account  of  Paris.  The  mother  of  Theseus
however,  deserted  and  given  up  by  her  ison,.not  only
risked,  but  actually  suffered,  the  misfortunes  of  He-
cuba, if  her  captivity  indeed  be  not  a  fiction,  as
niucli  besides  may  very  well  be.  As  to  the  stories,
which  we  have  concerning  both,  of  a  supernatural
kind,  the  difference  is  great.  For  Romulus  was
preserved  by  the  signal  favour  of  heaven  ;  but  as  the
oracle,  which  commanded  ^geus  not  to  approach  any
woman  in  a  foreign  country,  was  neglected,  the
birth  of  Theseus  appears  to  have  been  unacceptable
to  the  GTods.


o


5  Dion.  Halic.  (ii.  8.)  xvlih  greater  exactness  acquaints  us,  that
it  was  A.  U.  C,  520,  iu  the  consulate  of  M.  Fompouius  Malho  aod-
C.  Pupirius  Masso.

'  Carvilius  made  oath  before  the  censors,  that  he  had  the  highest
rogardibr  his  wife;  and  that  it  was  solely  in  compliance  with  the
sacred  engagement  of  marriage,  the  design  of  whicn  was  to  have
criildien,  that  he  (divorced  her.  But  this  did  not  prevent  his  cha-
ra<ler  from  being  ever  afterward  odious  to  the  people,  who  thought
he  had  set  a  most  pernicious  example.  (Aul.  Gell.  iv.  3.,  and  xvi:,
2].)     See  not.  {71>.)

''  (;'->stoi-  and  Polliix.


THE


LIFE


OF


LYCURGUS.


SUMMARY.


Diff'ertnt  opinions  about  the  age  of  Lycurgus.  His  origin.  He
bscorAes  king  of  Sparta,  and  afterward  guardian  to  the  king  his
nepherv.  His  travels:  and  return  to  Sparta.  He  consults  the
Delphic  oracle.  His  latvs,  and  senate.  Respective  rights  of  the
people  and  kings  in  their  assejnblies.  Authority  of  the  Ephori.
Division  of  the  territory.  Substittdion  of  iron  currency  to  that  of
gold  and  silver.  The  useless  arts  banished  from  Sparta.  Public
recasts  established.  Insurrection  of  the  rich  citizens.  Alcaiider
thrusts  out  one  of  his  eyes.  The  regidations  of  the  public  repasts.
Their  use.  Black  broth.  No  tvritten  laws.  Regulations  about
building;  and  military  affairs.  Marriages ;  end  education  of
daughters.  Encouragements  of  marriage,  and  laws  on  the  subject.
Community  of  women.  Education  of  infants  :  of  boys  of  seven,
und  of  twelve  years  of  age.  Theft  j^ennitted.  Mode  of  cultivating
the  judgc7nent  of  infants.  Short  and  litely  repartees  of  the  Spar-
tans.  Music  and  songs.  Military  dress.  March  to  battle.  Ly-
curgus* war-talents.  The  mechanic  arts  resigned  to  the  Helots,
No  law-suits  at  Sparta.  Peipeiual  festivals.  The  god  cf  laugh-
ter. Laws  regulating  the  election  of  senators :  fmerals,  and
mourning :  travels,  andforeigneis.  Reflexions.  Lycurgus  exacts
an  oath  of  the  citizens,  that  they  will  observe  his  orditiances  ;  and
sets  out  for  Delphi.  His  code  subsists  fve  ceniuries.  Epoch  and
cause  of  it^s  decay.  It's  advantages.  Lycurgus,  after  his  death,
receives  divine  honours.


LYCURGUS.  lOS


Of  Lycurgus  the  lawgiver  we  have  nothing  to  re-
late, that  is  certain  and  un controverted.  For  there
are  different  accounts  of  his  birth,  his  travels,  his
death,  and  especially  of  the  laws  and  form  of  govern-
ment which  he  established.  But  least  of  all  are  the
times  agreed  upon,  in  which  this  great  man  lived.
For  some  say  he  flourished  at  the  same  period  with
Iphitus-,  and  joined  with  him  in  settling  the  cessa-
tion of  arms^  during  the  Olympic  games.      Among

'  The  Life  of  Lycurgus  was  written  before  that  of  Theseus,  as
Plutarch  himself  observes  in  his  Life  of  the  latter.  He  seems,  like
Xenophon,  to  have  had  a  strong  attachment  to  the  Spartans  and
their  customs.  For  beside  this  Life,  and  those  of  several  other
Spartan  chiefs,  we  have  a  Treatise  of  his  on  the  Laws  and  Customs
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  another  of  Laconic  Apophthegms.  He
makes  Lycurgus  in  all  things  a  perfect  hero,  and  adduces  his  beha-
viour as  a  proof  that  the  wise  man,  so  often  described  by  the  philo-
sophers, was  not  a  merely  ideal  character  unattainable  by  human
nature.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  encomiums  bestowed  upon
him,  and  his  laws  by  the  Delphic  oracle,  were  merely  a  contri-
vance between  the  Pythoness  and  himself;  and  some  of  his  regula-
tions, (for  instance,  that  concerning  the  women)  higlily  excep-
tionable.

^  Iphitus  king  of  Elis  is  said  to  have  instituted,  or  rather  resto-
red, the  Olympic  games,  IDS  years  before  what  is  commonly  reck-
oned the  first  Olympiad,  which  commenced  R.  C.  776  and  bore  thtr
name  of  Corcebus,  as  the  following  Olympiads  did  those  of  other
victors.

Iphitus  began  with  offering  a  sacrifice  to  Hercules,  whom  the
Eleans believed  to  have  been  upon  some  account  exasperated  against
tbem.  He  next  ordered  the  Olympic  games,  the  discontinuance
of  which  was  said  to  have  caused  a  pestilence,  to  be  proclaimed
throughout  Greece  with  a  promise  of  free  admission  to  all  comers,
and  fixed  the  tune  for  their  celebration.  He,  likewise,  took  upon
himself  to  be  sole  president  and  judge  of  those  gai;ies;  a  privilege
which  the  inhabitants  of  Pisa  had  often  disputed  with  hh  predeces-
sors, and  which  continued  to  liis  descendents,  as  long  as  the  regai
dignity  subsisted.  After  this  the  people  appointed  two  presidents,
which  in  time  increased  to  ten,  and  at  length  to  twelve.

2  During  the  celebration  of  the  Olympic  (as  well  as  of  the  Py-
thian, Isthmian,  and  Nemean)  games,  there  was  always  a  general
armistice  throughout  Greece,  in  consequence  of  a  solemn  decree
issued  for  tliat  purpose.  (Pausan.  v.  20.)  If  any  troops  entered  Elis
after  this  proclamation,  they  incurred  a  fine  of  two  ipinse  per  scl'»
disr.     (Thucyd.  V,  4-9.}*


-no  LVcuiieus.

these  is  Aristotle  the  philosopher,  who  refers  for
proof  to  an  Olympic  quoit,  upon  which  was  pre-
served the  inscription  of  Lycurgus'  name.  13ut
others  who,  witii  Eratosthenes  and  Apollodorus  *,
compute  the  time  by  the  succes.>^ions  of  the  Spartan
kini^s  %  place  him  much  earlier  than  the  first  Olym-
piad. Tima^us  however  supposes  that,  as  there  were
two  Lycurguses  in  Sparta  at  different  times,  the
actions  of  both  are  ascribed  to  one  on  account  of  liis
particular  renown,  and  that  the  more  ancient  of  tlicm
lived  not  loup*  after  Homer :  nav,  some  sayitliatiic
had  seen  him.  Xenophon  likewise  confirms  the
opinion'of  his  antiquity,  when  he  makes  him  contem-
porary with  the  Heraclids.  It  is  true,  the  latest  of
the  Lacedaeiiionian  kings  were  of  the  lineage  of  the
HenichdfE;  but  Xeno})hon  there  seems  to  speak  of
the  first  and  more  immediate  descendents  of  Her-
culcs'.  As  the  historv  of  those  times  is  thus  involved,
Ave  shall  endeavour,  in  relating  the  circumstances  of
Lycurgus'  Hfe,  to  select  such  as  are  least  contro-
verted, and  follow  authors  of  the  greatest  credit.

Simon  ides  the  poet  informs  us  that  Prytanis,  not
Eunomus,  was  the  father  of  Lycurgus.  But  most
writers  give  us  the  genealogy  of  Lycurgus  and  Euno-
mus in  a  different  manner;  for,  according  to  them,
Soils  was  the  son  of  Patrocles,  and  grandson  of  Aris-

*  Eratosthenes  (for  his  learning  denominated  *  tJie  second  Plato)
an  eminent  historian,  poet,  and  philosopher,  flourished  under  Pto-
lemy Philopator;  by  whose  father,  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  he  had
been  invited  From  Athens,  to  superintend  the  celebrated  Alexan-
drian library.  His  contemporary,  Apollodorus,  wrote  a  work  (still
extant)  upon  Mythology,  contaip.ing  an  abridgement  of  the  history
of  the  gods  and  heroes  of  antiquity:  beside  some  other  volumes,
now  lost.*

^  Strabo  says,  that  Lycurgus  the  lawgiver  certainly  lived  in  the
fifth  generation  after  Althemenes,  who  led  a  colony  into  Crete.
This  Althemenes  was  the  son  of  Cissus,  who  founded  Argos  at  the
same  time  that  Patrocles,  Lycurgus'  ancestor  in  the  fifth  degree,
laid  the  foundation  of  Sparta.  So  that  Lycurgus  flourished  a
s-liort  time  after  Solomon,  about  B.  C.  900.

^  This  passage  is  in  Xenophon's  excellent  Treatise  on  the  Re-
public of  Sparta,  from  which  Plutarch  has  taken  the  chief  part  of
this  Life.


LYCURGUS.  Ill

'todeimiis ;  Eurytion  the  son  of  kSoiis,  ~  Prytanis  of
Eurytion,  and  EuuoiTiaS  of  Prytauis  ;  to  EunoiTJiis
was  born  Polydectes  by  a  former  wife,  and  by  a
second  named  Dianassa,  Lvcur2:us.  Eutvchidas^
however,  says  Lyciirgus  was  the  sixth  from  Fatrocles,
and  the  eleventh  from  Plercules.  The  itiOBt  distin-
guished of  his  ancestors  vvas  Soiis,  under  whfim  the
Lacedaemonians  made  the  Helots  their  slaves  ^,  and
gained  an  extensive  tract  of  land  from  the  Area-
dians.  Of  tliis  Soiis  it  is' related  that,  beingbesipo-ed
by  the  Clitorians  ^  in  a  difiiciilt  post  where  there  was
no  water,  he  agreed  to  give  up  all  his  conquests,  'if
he  and  his  army  might  drink  of  the  neiglibonring
spring.  When  these  conditions  were  ratified,  he
assembled  his  forces,  and  ofi'ered  his  kingdom  to  the
man  that  would  forbear  drinking :  not  one  of  them,
however,  could  deny  himself,  but  they  all  drank.
Then  Soiis  himself  Vv'ent  down  to  the  snrins:,  and
having  only  sprinkled  his  face  in  sight  of  the  enemy
marched  off,  and  still  held  the  country,  because  all
had  not  drank.  Yet,  though  he  was  highly  honoured
for  this  action,  the  family  had  not  their  name  from
him,  but  were  called   after  his  son  Eurytionidae


9  .


7  The  Helots  were  inhabitants  of  Helas,  a  maritime  town  of
Laconia.  The  Lacedeemonians,  having  conquered  and  made  slaves
of  them,  called  not  only  them,  but  all  their  other  slaves  Helots.  It
is  certain,  however,  that  the  descendents  of  the  original  Helots,
though  they  were  extremely  ill-treated  and  some  of  them  assassin-
ated, subsisted  many  ages  in  Laconia.

8  A  people  of  Arcadia,  so  named  from  their  metropolis,  which
was  denominated  after  one  of  their  kings.  '  Near  this  city  was  a
fountain,  the  water  of  which  excited  the  greatest  disgust  for  wine.
(Ov.  Met.  XV.  322.)*

5  It  may  be  proper  here  to  give  the  reader  a  short  view  of  the
regal  government  of  Laceda;mon,  under  tlie  Kcrculean  line.  Ti^e
HeracHdae  having  driven  out  Tisamenes  tlie  son  of  Orestes,  Eurys-
thenes  and  Proclee  (Patrocles,  or  Protocles)  the  sens  of  Aristode-
mus,  reigned  in  that  kingdom.  Under  them  the  governm.ent  took
a  new  form,  and  instead  of  one  sovereign  became  s'jbject  to  two.
These  two  brothers  did  not  divide  the  kingdom  betweeni  them,
neither  did  they  agree  to  reign  alternately ;  but  governed  jointly,
and  with  equal  authority.  What  is  surprising  is  that,  notwith-
standing their  mutual  jealousy,  this  diarchy  did  not  end  with  these


112  LYCURGUS.

and  this,  because  Eurytion  seems  to  have  been  tins
first  who  relaxed  the  strictness  of  kingly  government,
inclining  to  the  interest  of  the  people,  and  insinu-
ating himself  into  their  favour.  Hence  their  en-
croachments increased,  and  the  succeedine:  kinirs
cither  becoming  odious  from  treating  them  ^vitli
greater  rigour,  or  else  giving  way  through  weakness
or  in  hopes  of  popularity,  for  a  long  time  anarchy
and  confusion  prevailed  in  Sparta;  by  which  one  of
its  kings,  the  father  of  Lycurgus,  lost  his  life.  For,
while  he  was  endeavouring  to  part  some  persons
concerned  in  a  fray,  he  received  a  wound  by  a
kitchen-knife  of  which  he  died,  leaving  the  kingdom
to  his  eldest  son  Polydectes.

But  he  too  dying  soon  afterward,  the  general  voice
called  Lycurgus  to  ascend  the  throne ;  and  he
actually  did  so,  till  it  appeared  that  his  brother's
widow  was  pregnant.  As  soon  as  he  perceived  this,
he  declared  that  the  kingdom  belonged  to  her  issue,
provided  it  were  male  ;  and  retained  the  administra-
tion only  as  his  guardian,  with  the  title  of'  Prodicos,'
which  the  Lacedaemonians  gave  to  the  guardians  of
infant-kings.  Within  a  little  time  the  queen  made
him  a  private  overture,  that  she  would  destroy  Jier
child  upon  condition  that  he  would  marry  her,  v.hen
king  of  Sparta.  Though  he  detested  her  wickedness,
he  said  nothing  against  the  proposal ;  but  pretending
to  approve  it,  chaiged  her  not  to  use  any  drugs  to
procure  an  abortion,  lest  she  should  endanger  her
own  health  or  life  ;  for  he  would  take  care  that  the
child,  as  soon  as  born,  should  be  destroyed.  Thus  art-
fully drawing  on  the  woman  to  her  full  time  ;  when  he
heard  that  she  w^as  in  labour,i,he  sent  persons  to  attend
and  watch  her  delivery;  with  orders,  if  it  were  a  girl,  to

two  brothers,  but  continued  under  a  succession  of  thirty  princes  «f
the  lineof  Euryathenes,  and  twenty-seven  of  that  of  Procles.  Eurys-
^henes  was  .succeeded  by  his  son  Agis,  from  whom  all  the  de^cend-
ents  of  that  line  were  surnamed  Agidrr,  as  the  other  hue  took  the
name  of  Eurytionidac  from  Eurytion,  tlie  grandson  of  Procie*.
(Pausan..  ytrab.,  «^  a/.)


LYGURGUa  113

give  it  to  the  women,  but  if  a  boy  to  bring  it  to  liim,
in  wliMtever  business  he  niiHit  be  en2:a,q;c(I.  It  hap-
pened  that  he  was  at  supper  ■with  the  magistrates,
wiien  s!ie  was  dehvered  of  a  boy,  and  his  servants
who  were  present  carried  liini  the  chikh  Wlien  he
received  it,  he  is  reported  to  have  said  to  the  com-
pany, "  Spartans,  see  here  your  new-born  king.'*
He  then  kiid  him  down  npon  the  chair  of  state,  and
named  him  Charilaus,  because  of  tlie  joy  (chani)
and  achniration  of  his  magnanimiLy  and  justice,  tes-
ti.fied  by  all  pi-esent.  Thus  the  reign  of  Lycurgus
lasted  on]y  eight  months.  But  tlie  citizens  had  z%
hig'i  veneration  for  iiim  u])on  other  accounts,  and
there  v/ere  more  tliat  paid  him  attention,  and  were
ready  to  execute  ids  commands,  out  cf  regard  to  his
virtues,  than  that  obeyed  him  as  a  guardian  Iq  the
king  and  director  of  the  administration.  There  v;cre
not  wanting  however,  those  that  envied  him,  and
opposed  his  advancement  as  too  high  for  so  young  a
man ;  particuk^a'ly,  the  rekitions  and  friends  of  the
queen-mother,  who  seemed  to  have  been  treated
with  contempt.  Her  brother  Leonidas  one  da}^-
boklly  attacked  liim  wdtli  virulent  language,  and
scrupled  not  to  tell  him,  that  he  was  well  assured  he
would  soon  mount  the  throne;  thus  preparing  sii",pi-
cions  and  matter  of  accusation  against  Lycurgus,
in  case  anv  accident  should  befil  the  kins'.  Inpi-
n-iations  of  the  same  kind  v/ere  likewise  spread  by
the  queen-mother  herself  Moved  with  this  ill  treat-
ment, and  fearing  some  dark  design,  he  determined
to  avoid  suspicion  by  travelling  into  other  countries^
till  his  nephev/  should  be  grown  up  and  have  a  son
to  succeed  him  in  the  kingdom.

He  set  sail,  tlierefore,  and  landed  in  Crete.  There
having  observed  the  forms  of  government,  and  con-
versed with  the  most  illustrious  personagesj  he  was
struck  with  admiration  of  some  of  their  laws  ^°j  and

'°  The  moFt  ancient  writers  (as  Ephorun,  Callistbenes,  viriitotle,
and  Fitno)  are  of  opinion,  that  Lycurgus  adopted  many  tilings  from
tiie  Cretan  polity.     But  Polybius  (vi.;  will  have  it,  that  they  are  ali

VOi.    I.  I


114.  LYCURGUS.

resolved  on  his  return  to  introduce  tlicm  into  Sparta.
Some  others  he  rejected.  Among  the  friends  he
gained  in  Crete  was  Tliales  ",'  whom  he  had  interest
enough  to  persuade  to  go  and  settle  at  Sparta.
Thales  was  tamed  for  his  wisdom  and  pohtical  abih-
ties  :  he  was  withal  a  lyric  poet  wlio,  under  colour
of  exercising  his  art,  performed  tilings  as  surprising
as  the  most  excellent  lawgivers.  For  his  odes  were
so  many  persuasives  to  obedience  and  unanimity  ;  as
by  means  of  melody  and  runnbers  they  had  great
grace  and  power,  softened  insensibly  the  manners  of
the  audience,  drew  them  off  from  the  animosities
which  then  prevailed,  and  united  them  in  zeal  for
excellence  and  virtue.  So  that  he,  in  son^e  measure,
prepared  the  way  for  Lycurgus  toward  the  instruc-
tion of  the  Spartans.  From  Crete  Lycurgus  passed
to  Asia,  desirous  (as  it  is  said)  of  comparing  the
Ionian  ^'^  expense  and  luxury  with  the  Cretan  fru-
gality  and  hard  diet,  so  as  to  judge  what  effect  each
produced  on  their  several  manners  and  governments;
just  as  physicians  compare  bodies,  that  are  weak  and
sickly,  with  the  healthy  and  robust.      There    also,


mistaken :  '  At  Sparta,'  says  lie,  '  the  lands  are  equally  divided
among  all  the  citizens,  wealth  is  banished,  the  crown  is  hereditary  ;
whereas  in  Crete  the  contrary  obtains.'  But  this  does  not  prove,
that  Lycurgus  might  not  take  some  good  laws  and  usages  troui
Crete,  and  omit  what  he  thought  defective.  There  is,  indeed,  so
great  a  conformity  between  the  laws  of  Lycurgus  and  those  of
Minos,  that  we  must  with  Strabo  (xvi.)  believe  the  one  the  Ibun-
dation  of  the  other.

"  This  Thales,  who  was  a  poet  and  musician,  must  be  distin-
guished from  Thales  tl»e  Milesian,  who  was  one  of  the  seven  wise
men  of  Greece.  The  poet  lived  250  years  before  the  ])liiloso-
j)her.  (L.)  The  compliment  here  paid  to  the  lyre  ought  not,  in
these  times  of*  sweet  sounds,'  to  escape  our  notice.  '  Often  (says
Plato,  as  quoted  by  Plutarch)  the  soul,  withdrawn  iVom  the  influence
of  the  Muses  and  the  Graces,  sinks  into  disorder,  loses  it's  moral
harmony,  and  requires  the  aid  of  music  to  attune  it's  jarring
stri  njis.'*

'-  The  lonians  sent  a  colony  from  Attica  into  a  part  of  Asia
Minor  between  Lydia  and  Caria,  abAut  B.  C.  1050,  and  1.30  years
before  Lycurgus.  And,  though  they  might  not  be  greatly  dege-
nerated ill  io  bhort  a  time,  yet  our  lawgiver  would  be  able  to  judgi?


LYCURGUS.  115

probably ^^  he  first  met  with  Homer's  poems,  which
were  preserved  by  the  posterity  of  Cicophyliis.  Ob-
serving that  mamMiioral  sentences  and  much  political
knowledge  were  intermixed  with  his  stories,  which
had  an  irresistible  charm  '^,  he  collected  tiicm  into
one  body,  and  transcribed  them  with  pleasure,  in
order  to  take  them  hom.e  with  him.  For  this  noble
poct:ry  was  not  yet  fully  known  in  Greece  ;  some
particular  pieces  only  being  in  a  few  hands,  as  they
happened  to  be  dispersed.  Lycurgns  was  the  first
who  made  them  generally  known.  The  Egyptians
likewise  suppose,  that  he  visited  their  country  ;  and
that  of  all  their  institutions  being  most  pleased  with
their  distinguishing  the  military  men  from  the  rest  of
the  people  ^\  he  adopted  the  samiC  method  at  Sparta ;
and,  by  separating  from  these  the  mechanics  and
artificers,  dignified  the  constitution,  and  rendered  it
more  of  a  piece.     This  assertion  of  the  Egyptians  is

of  the  effect,  which  the  climate  and  plenty  of  Asia  had  produced.
They,  afterward,  became  proverbial  for  their  effeminacy.

'^  He  adds  'probably'  (^'?  feot")  because  some  Greek  autliorg
have  affirmed  that  LycuVgus  saw  Homer  himself,  who  was  at  that
time  at  Chios.  But"  Plutarch's  opinion  is  more  to  be  relied  upon.
Homer  died  before  Lycur^us  was  born.  Before  the  time  of  Lycur-
gus,  they  had  nothing  of  Homer  in  Greece,  except  some  detached
pieces  :  which  were  severally  named,  from  their  respective  subjects,
'  The  Valour  of  Diomedes,'  '  Hector's  Ransom,'  and  the  like.  (L.)
So  the  Romans,  previously  to  the  death  of  Virgil,  had  only  separate
portions  of  the  /Eneid;  '  Tlie  Eloge  on  ^^.Tarcellus,'  '  the  Passion
and  Death  of  Dido,'  '  the  Descent  into  tlie  Shades,'  &c.  But  this
in  no  degree  affects  the  integrity  of  those  illustrious  poems  in  tlieir
present  arrangement.*

'••  Plato's  judgement  upon  this  subject  was  so  different  from  that
of  Lycurgus  that,  when  he  excludes  poets  from  his  refAiblic,  he
makes  no  exception  in  fivour  even  of  Ploiner  Iiimself;  whom
on  account  principally  of  his  misrepresentation  of  the  gods,  ha
regards  as  a  writer  pernicious  to  youtli.  In  this  hostility,  however,
he^stands  nearly  single  ;  for  tiie  mere  Zoili  of  antiquity  deserve  not
to  be  mentioned:  and  the  reader  will  easily  recollect  the  high  tes-
timony of  Alexander  the  Great,  among  those  of  others,  in  his  behalf,
Horace  indeed  (Ep.  I.  ii.  3,  4.)  asserts  his  superiority,  as  an  ethical
writer,  to  the  most  eminent  teachers  of  the  Academy  and  the  Porch.*

''  The  ancient  Egyptians  Vpt  not  only  the  priests  and  military
men,  who  consisted'^chieay  of  the  nobility,  di-tinct  from  the  rest  of
the  people ;  but  the  other  employments,  viz,  these  of  herdsaieo,

I  2


116  l.YCniGUS.

confirmed  by  some  of  the  Greek  writers.  But  wc
know  of  no  one  except  Aristocrates,  tlic  son  of  Hip-
parcliLis  and  a  Spartan,  wholias  affirmed  that  he  went
to  Lybia  and  Spain,  and  in  his  Indian  excursions
conversed  with  tlie  Gymno.sophists  "*.

The  Lacedsemonians  found  tiieir  need  of  Lycur-
gus  when  absent,  and  sent  many  embassies  to  entreat
him  to  return.  For  they  perceived  that  their  kings. had
barely  the  title  and  outward  a})pcndages  of  ro}'alty,but
in  nothing  else  diifercd  from  the  multitude;  whereas
Lycurgus  had  a  natuial  ability  to  guide  the  measures
of  government,  and  })o\vers  of  persuasion  which  won
the  human  heart.  The  kings,  however,  were  con-
sulted about  his  return,  and  they  hoped  that  in  his
presence  they  should  experience  less  insolence
among  the  people.  Returning  then  to  a  city  thus
disposed,  he  immediately  applied  himself  to  alter  the
whole  frame  of  the  constitution  :  sensible  that  a  par-


shepherds,  merchants,  interpreters,  and  seamen,  descended  in  parti-
cular tribes  or  Cas:;es  from  father  to  son.  (L.)  The  above  institu-
tion however,  according  to  Herodot.  (ii.  168.),  might  have  beea
derived  by  Lycurgus  from  a  source  nearer  home,  as  it  prevailed
among  the  Thracians,  Scythians,  ike*

'^  Indian  priests  and  philosophers,  who  went  almost  naked  and
lived  in  woods.  The  Brachmans  were  one  of  their  sects.  They
had  a  great  dislike  to  idlencas.  Apuleius  informs  us,  that  their
pii[)i!s  uere  obliged  to  give  account  every  day  of  some  good  which
they  h:id  done,  either  by  meditation  or  in  action,  before  they  were
admitted  to  sit  down  to  dinner.  So  thoroughly  were  they  per-
suaded of  the  transmigration  of  the  soul,  and  of  a  happy  one  for
Themselves,  that  they  used  to  commit  themselves  to  the  flames,
Tvlien  they  liad  lived  to  satiety  or  were  apjn-ehensive  of  any  misfor-
tune. We  are  alVaid  Iiowever  that  it  was  vanity,  uliich  induced  one
of  them  to  burn  himself  before  Alexander  the  Great,  and  another
to  do  the  same  before  Augustus  Ca:sar.  (L.)

Whether  Lycurgus  did  or  not  visit  India,  is  a  point  in  dispute
between  the  Frencii  translators,  yiM.  Dacier  and  liicard ;  the  tirst
being  disposed  to  claim  for  Alexander  the  Great  the  honour  of
having  opened  to  the  ancients  the  way  into  tlie  East;  tiiough  ho
elsewhere  seems  to  admit  ti)at  Pytliagoras,  v/lio  preceded  '  .Macc-
donias  madman'  i)y  more  than  three  centuries,  had  travelled  thither
— and  M.  Ricard  conceiving  that  the  lionour  of  Alexander  is  suffi-
ciently consulted  by  allowing  hiin  to  have  been  the  first,  v/ho  led  an
iU'my  into  that  remote  part  of  tb.e  world.*


LYCURGUS.  in

tial  chaiigc,  and  the  introducing  of  some  new  laws,
would  be  of  little  advantage;  and  that,  as  in  the  case
of  a  body  diseased  and  full  of  bad  humours,  whose
temperament  is  to  be  corrected  and  regenerated  by
iTicdicines,  it  was  necessary  to  begin  a  new  regimen.
With  these  sentiments,  he  went  to  Delphi ;  and  when
lie  had  offered  sacrifice  and  consulted  the  god  ^",  he
returned  with  that  celebrated  oracle,  in  which  the
priestess   called  him,    "  Beloved   of  the   gods,  and
"  rather  a  god  than  a  man."     As  to  his  request,  that
he  might  enact  good  laws,  she  told  him  ;  "  Apollo
"  had  heard  his  prayer,  and  promised  that  the  consti-
"  tution,  which  he  was  about  to  establish,  should  be
"  the  most  excellent  in  the  world."     Thus  encou-
raged, he  applied  to  the  nobility,  and  desired  them
to  put  their  hands  to  the  work ;  addressing  himself
at  iir^t  privately  to  his  friends,    and   afterward   by
degrees  trying  the    disposition   of  others,  and  pre-
paring them  to  concur  in  the  business.     When  mat-
ters   were  ripe,  he  ordered  thirty  of  the  principal
citizens  to  appear  armed  in  the  market-place  by  break
of  day,  to  strike  terror  into  such  as  niight  be  inclined
to  oppose  him.     Hermippus  has  preserved  the  names
of  twenty  of  the  most  eminent  of  them,  but  he  who
had  the  greatest  share  in  the  whole  enterprise,  and
crave  Lvcurjxns  the  most  efiectual  assistance  in  the
estabh'shing  of  his  laws,  vras  called  Arithmiades.  Upon
the  first  alarm  king  Charilaus,  apprehending  it  to  be
a  design  against  iiis  person,  took  refuge  in  the  Chal-


'''  As  Minos  liacl  persuaded  the  Cretans  that  liis  laws  were  deli-
vered to  hiai  from  J'ajiiter,  so  Lycurgus,  his  imitator,  was  willing  to
n)ake  the  Spartans  believe  that  he  did  every  tiling  by  the  direction
of  Apollo.  Orher  legislators  have  found  it  very  convenient  to  pro-
p:'.gate  an  opinion,  that  their  in^titntions  were  from  tlie  gods.  For
tiuit  seli'-iove  in  human  natur^',  which  would  but  ill  have  tolerated
ihe  superiority  of  genius  implied  in  an  unassisted  lawgiver,  found
an  ease  and  satisfaction  in  admitting  his  new  regulations,  when  they
vv-ere  said  to  come  from  heaven.  (L.)  It  not  only  secured  the  pre-
judices of  the  j)eople  indeed,  but  strengthened  the  sanctions  of  the
laws  themselves,  by  calling  in  the  aid  of  conscience,  to  ratif}'  thu
external  principles  of  obedience.*


118  LYCURGUS.

cioecos  '^  But  he  was  soon  satisfied,  and  accepted
of  their  oath.  Nay,  far  from  being  obstinate,  he
joined  in  the  undertaking.  He  was  indeed  so
remarkable  for  the  gentleness  of  his  disposition,  that
Archelaus,  his  partner  in  the  throne,  is  reported  to
have  said  to  some  who  were  praising  the  young
king ;  "  Yes,  Charilaus  is  a  good  man  to  be  sure,  for
"  he  cannot  find  in  his  heart  to  punish  the  guilty.'*
Among  the  many  new  institutions  of  Lycurgus,  the
first  and  most  important  was  that  of  a  Senate  ;  wliich
sharing  (as  Plato  says  '*')  in  the  power  of  the  kings,
betore  too  imperious  and  unrestrained,  and  having
equal  authority  with  them,  was  the  means  of  keeping

'8  That  is,  '  the  bnsen  temple.'     It  was  standing  in  the  time  of
Pausanias,  who  was  conteinporary  with  Marcus  Antoninus.

'3  The  passage  to  wliich  Plutarch  refers,  is  in  Plato's  third  book  of
Laws,  where  he  is  examining  the  causes  of  the  downfall  of  states.
An   Athenian  is  introduced,  saying  to  a  Lacedaemonian;  '  Some
god,  I  b..lieve,  in  his  care  for  yoiu*  sJate  and  in  his  foresight  of  what
would  happen,  has.  jriven  vou  two  kings  of  the  same  family  ;  in  order
that,  reigninjT  jointly,  tliey  might  govern  with  tlic  more  modera-
tion, and  Sparta  exper-encc  ths  greater  tranquillity'.     After   this,
when  the  regd  authority  -.vas.  grown  again  too  absolute  and  imper
rious,  a  divine  spir't  residing  in  a  human  nature  (i.e.  Lycurgus)
reduced  it  within  the  bounds  of  equity  and  moderation,  by  the  wise
provision  of  a  senate,  whose  authority  was  to  be  equal  to  that  of  the
kings.'      Aristotle  (Pol.  ii.  ?•)  finds  fault  with  this  circumstance  in
t!ie  institution  of  the  senate,  that  the  senators  were  to  continue  for
life  ;  for,  as  the  mind  grov.s  old  with  the  body,  he  deemed  it  absurd
to  put    the  fortunes  of  the  citizens   into  the  power  of  men,  who
through  age    might  become  incapable  of  judging.     He    likewise
thought  it  um-easonablc,  that  they  were  not  rendered  accountable
for  their  actions.     But  for  the  latter  inconvenience  sufficient  provi-
sion  see.Tis  to  have  bet';i  afterward  made  by  tlie  institution  of  the
Ephori,  who  had   it  chief! v  in  charge  to  defend  the  rights  of  the
people;  and  therefore  Plato  adds,  '  A  third  blessing  to  Sparta  was
the  prince  v.ho,  finding  the  power  of  the  senate  and  the  kings  too
arbitrary  and  uncontrolled,  contrived  the  authority  of  the  Ephori  as
a  restraint  upon  it,'  &c.  (L.)

The  most  extraordinary  circumstance  in  this  constitution  was  the
cO-existv.nce  of  two  kings  ;  but  after  the  institutions  of  Lycurgus
had  lost  their  primitive  iiifluence,  tlie  factions,  to  which  this  rivalry
gave  birth,  ruined  Sparta,  yerifying  the  first  part  of  the  old  maxim.

Nee  regna  sociumj'crre,  nee  iccdce  seiunt.

and  yet  to  tins  division  of  power  Aristotle  (Pol.  v.  11.)  attributes
the  duration  of  that  state  !*


LYCURGUS.  111^

them  within  the  bounds  of  moderation,  and  hishlv
contributed  to  the  preservation   of  the  state.     For
till  that  time   it  had    been  veering  and   unsettled,
scrmetimes  inclining  to  arbitrary  power,  and  some-
times to  a  pure  democracy ;  but  this  establishment
of  a  senate  as  an  intermediate  body,  like  ballast,
kept  it  in  a  just  equilibrium,    and  placed  it  in  a
safe  posture :  the  twenty-eight  senators  adhering  to
the  kings,  whenever  they  saw  the  people  too  en-
croaching ;  and  on  the  other  hand  supporting  the
people,  whenever  the  kings  attempted  to  make  them-
selves absolute.     This,  according  to  Aristotle,  was
the  number  of  senators  fixed  upon,  because  two  of
the  thirty  associates  of  Lycurgiis  deserted  the  busi-
ness through  fear.     But  Sphairus  informs  us,  there
w^ere  only  twenty-eight  at  first  entrusted  with  thede^
sign.     There  is  something,  perhaps,  in    it's  being
formed  of  seven  multiplied  by  four,  and  withal  the
first  number  after  six,  that  is  equal  to  all  it's  parts,
or  perfect"".     But  I  rather  think  this  precise  num-
ber of  senators  was  created  that,  together  with  the
two  kings,  the  whole  body  might  consist  of  thirty
members.

This  institution  he  had  so  much  at  heart,  that  he
obtained  from  Delphi  an  oracle  in  it's  behalf,  called
Ilhetra  or  '  the  Decree,'  which  was  couched  in  very
ancient  and  uncommon  terms,  and  being  interpreted
ran  thus:  "  When  you  have  built  a  temple  to  the
Syllanian  Jupiter  and  the  Syllanian  Minerva'^^,  di-
vided the  people  into  tribes  and  classes,  and  esta-
blished a  senate  of  thirty  persons,  including  the  two


*°  The  doctrine  of  numbers  was  most  probably  unknown  to
Lycurgus,  who  was  besides  but  Httle  Hkely  to  found  any  part  of  his
constitution  upon  a  pun.*

^'  As  no  account  can  be  given  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  '  Syl-
lanian,' it  is  supposed  it  should  be  either  read  '  Sellasian,'  from  Sel-
lasia,  a  town  ot'Laconia  upon  the  Eurotas  or  Qinus  (Liv.  xxxiv.
28.);  or  else  '  Hellanian,'  as  much  as  to  say,  the  Grecian  Jupiter,
&c.  (L.)

This  oracle,  delivered  in  the  old  Doric  dialect,  Plutarch  in  the
original  interprets :  but  in  a  version  such  a  measure  would  be  su-
perfluous, and  is  therefore  omitted.*


150  LYCURGUS.

Icings,  jou  shall  occa>;ionally  siimiiioii  the  people  to
an  iissembly  between  Babvce  and  Cnacion,  and  they
shall    have   the    determinin"-   voice."     Bnbvce   and
Cnacion  are  now  called  CEnus:  but  Aristotle  thinks,
that  by  Cnacion  is  meant  the  j'iver,  and  by  Babyce
the  bridge.     Between  these  they  held  ihcir  assem-
blies, having  neither  halls,  nor  any  kind  of  building
for  that  purpose.     These  things  he  deemed  no  ad-
vantage to  their  conncils,  but  rather  a  disservice ;
as  they  distracted  the  attention  and  turned  it  u}>on
triiies,  on  observing  the  statues   and   pictures,  tlie
solendid  roofs,  and  other  theatrical  ornaments.   The
people  thus  assembled  had  no  right  to  propose  any
subject  of  debate,  and  were  only  authorised  to  ra-
'J:il"y  or  reject  what  might  be  proposed  to  them  by
the    senate  and   the  kings.     But  as  in    process   of
lime,  by  additions  or  retrenclnnents,  they  changed
the  terms  and  perverted  the  sense  of  the  decrees,  the
icings  Polydorus   and  Theopompus  inserted  in   the
ilhetra  this  clause  ;  "  If  the  people  attempt  to  cor-
rupt  any  law,  the  senate  and  cliiefs  shall  retire :"
that  is,  they  shall  dissolve  tlie  assembly,  and  annul
the  alterations.     And  they  found  means  to  persuade
the    Spartans,  that   this    likewise  was    enjoined    by
Apollo,  as  we  learn  from  tliese  verses  of  lyrta^iis"  :

Yc  sons  of  Sparta,  -.vlio  at  Pha^]>;is'  slirine

Your  hi'.ui'ole  vows  prefer,  your  ear  incliiie

To  his  dread  voice.    Your  beauteous  realru  to  cuide

Two  iruardiaa  kinirs,  a  senate  bv  tlicir  side,

And  the  concurring  people  h\Fting  laws

Shall  with  joint  power  establish.

Though  the  government  was  thus  tempered  by
Lvcnro'us,  vet  it  soon  afterward  decjenerated  into
an  oligarchy,  whose  power  was  exercised  with  sucli
v/antonness  and  violence,  that  it  wanted  indeed,  as
Plato  expresses  it,  '  a  curb.'     Tins  they  found  in  the

--  A  jvric  poet,  whom  t])c  Atlicnians  sent  as  a  jienernl  to  assist
the  Spartans;  a)id  who,  by  the  inspiring-  efi'cct  of  sonyj  verses  re-
cited at  the  head  of  his  troop-,  gained  L'lcm  u  signal  victory  over
the  Messeniaus.'^


LYCURGUS.  121

authority  of  theEphori-%  about  a  hundred  and  thirty
years  after  Lycurgus.  Elatus  was  the  first  person
invested  with  this  dignity,  in  the  reign  of  Theopom-
pus ;  who  wlien  his  wife  upbraided  him,  that  he
woukl  leave  the  regal  power  to  his  children  less
than  he  received  it,  replied,  "  Nay,  greater,  because
"  more  lasting."     And  in  fact  the  prerogative,  so


-^  riLTodotus  (i.  65.)  and  Xenopliou  (de  Rep.  Lac.  viii.)  tell  us,
that  tiie  Ephori  were  appointed  bv  Lycurgus  liiuisclf".  But  the  ac-
count, which  Plutarch  gives  us  from  Aristotle  (Polit.  v.)  and
others,  of  their  being  instituted  long  afterward,  seenas  more  agree-
able to  reason.  For  it  is  not  likely  that  Lycurgus,  wiio  in  all  things
endeavoured  to  support  tlie  aristocracy,  and  left  the  people  only
the  right  of  assenting  or  dissenting,  would  appoint  a  kind  of  tribunes
of  the  people,  to  be  masters  as  it  were  of  both  the  kings  and  the  se-
nate. Some,  indeed,  suppose  the  Ephori  to  have  been  at  first  the
ki;igs'  friends,  to  whom  they  delegated  their  authority,  when  they
were  obliged  to  be  in  the  field.  But  it  is  very  clear,  that  they  were
elected  by  the  people  out  of  their  own  body,  and  sometimes  out  of
it's  very  dregs;  for  the  boldest  citizen,  whoever  he  was,  was  most
likely  to  be  chosen  to  this  office,  which  was  intended  as  a  check
upon  the  senate  and  the  kings.  They  were  five  in  number,  like
the  Quinqueviriin  the  republic  of  Carthage;  were  annually  elected;
and,  in  order  to  effect  any  thing,  were  obliged  to  be  unanimou>\
Their  authority,  tiiough  well  designed  at  first,  came  at  length  to  be
in  a  manner  boundless.  They  presided  in  popular  assemblies,  col-
lected their  suflVages,  declared  war,  made  peace,  treated  with  fo-
reign princes,  determined  the  number  of  forces  to  he  raised,  ap-
pointed the  funds  to  maintain  them,  and  distributed  rewards  and
])unisiiments  in  the  name  of  the  state.  They  likewise  held  a  court
of  justice,  inquired  into  the  conduct  of  all  magistrates,  inspected
tlie  beliaviour  and  education  of  youth,  had  a  particular  jurisdiction
over  the  Helots,  and  in  short  by  degrees  drew  the  whole  adminis-
tration into  their  hands,  'i'hey  even  went  so  far,  as  to  put  king
Agis  to  death  under  a  form  of  justice,  and  were  themselves  at  last
killed  by  Cleomenes.   (L.)

M.  Barthelemy  however,  in  his  Travels  of  Anachai-sis,  thinks
that  the  function  of  the  i'^phori  vv'as  a  magistracy  anterior  to  the
time  of  Lycurgus,  as  they  roused  the  people  to  resist  his  innova-
tions. 'J"!ie  Cretans  too,  whom  he  copied,  had  officers  called
Cc^sii.i.i,  compared  by  Aristotle  with  the  Ephori.  Besides,  most
nuihors  mention  them,  not  as  a  novelty  of  Theopompus,  but  as
a;)p':ie'l  oy  him  in  the  wav  of  a  check  to  the  royal  power.  The
T>ro!;a!)ility  therefore  is,  that  Lycurgus  continued  to  them  some
of  their  existing  privileges;  and  th.at  Theopompus  invested  them
with  othe;-^,  whic'.i  converted  the  goverpmcnt  into  a  kind  of  oli-
garchy.*


122  LYCURGUS.

stripped  of  all  extnivagant  pretensions,  no  longer
occasioned  either  envy  or  danger  to  it's  possessors.
By  tliese  means  they  escaped  tlie  miseries,  which
befel  the  Messenian  and  Argive  kings,  who  would
not  in  tlie  least  remit  the  severity  of  their  power  in
favour  of  the  people.  From  nothing  more  indeed
does  the  wisdom  and  foresight  of  Lycurgus  appear,
than  from  tlic  disorderly  governments,  and  the  bad
iniderstandine^  that  subsisted  between  the  kinsfs  and
the  people  of  Messene  and  Argos,  states  near  in
blood  and  in  situation  to  Sparta'"*.  For  as  at  first
they  were  in  all  respects  equal  to  her,  and  possessed
a  better  country-'',  and  yet  preserved  no  lasting  hap-
piness, but  througli  the  insolence  of  the  kings  and
disobedience  of  the  people  were  harassed  with  per-
petual troubles ;  they  most  clearly  evinced  that  it
was  really  a  felicity  more  than  human,  a  blessing
from  heaven  to  the  Spartans,  to  have  had  a  legislator
who  knev/  so  well  how  to  frame  and  temper  their
government -^  But  this  was  an  event  of  a  later
date.

A  second  and  more  adventurous  political  enter-
prise of  Lycurgus  was,  a  new  division  of  the  lands.
In  these  he  had  found  a  prodigious  inequality,  the
city  overcharged  with  many  indigent  persons  who
had  none,  and  the  great  pro})erty  accumulated  in
the  hands  of  a  few.     Determined  therefore  to  root


^4  These  three  states  claimed  a  common  origin,  from  the  Hera-
clidae ;  Argos  and  Messene  deriving  tliemselves  from  Temenus  and
Cresphontes,  and  Sparta  from  Kurysthenes  and  Procles  (the  sons
of  Aristodemus)  their  nephews.*

^5  The  mountains,  which  intersected  the  territory  of  Sparta,
ahnost  prevented  it's  cultivation ;  while  we  have  Straho's  autho-
rity for  representing  Messenia  and  Argolis,  from  their  extensive
and  well-watered  plains,  as  two  of  the  richest  parts  of  (ireece.*

^<^  Whatever  Plutarch  might  mean  by  ravTce.  yjtv  nv  v^ifiov,  it  is  cer-
tain th.at  kingly  power  had  given  place  to  democracy  in  Messene
and  Argos,  lonr;  before  the  time  of  l^ycurgus.  Those  states  in-
doid  experienced  great  internal  troubles,  not  only  while  under  the
government  of  kings,  but  when  in  the  form  of  commonwealths  ;
and  never,  after  the  age  of  that  legislator,  made  any  figure  equal  to
Lacedieuion.


LYCURGUS.  12S

«ut  the  evils  of  insolence,  envy,  avarice,  and  lux-
ury, and  those  still  more  inveterate  and  fatal  dis-
tempers of  a  state,  poverty  and  riches,  he  persuaded
them  to  cancel  all  former  divisions  of  land  and  to
make  new  ones,  in  such  a  manner  that  they  miglit
be  perfectly  equal  in  their  possessions  and  manner
of  living.  Hence,  if  they  were  ambitious  of  dis-
tinction, they  must  seek  it  in  virtue,  as  no  other  dif-
ference was  left  between  them,  but  that  which  arises
from  the  dishonour  of  base  actions  and  the  praise  of
good  ones.  His  proposal  was  carried  into  effect.
He  made  nine  thousand  lots  for  the  territory  of
Sparta,  which  he  distributed  among  so  many  citi-
zens, and  thirty  thousand  for  the  inhabitants  of  tlie
rest  of  Laconia.  But  some  say,  he  made  only  six
thousand  shares  for  the  city,  and  that  Polydorus
subsequently  added  three  more :  others,  that  Poly-
dorus doubled  the  number  appointed  by  Lycurgus,
which  were  only  four  thousand  five  hundred.  Each
lot  was  capable  of  producing  (one  year  with  another)
seventy  mcdimni  of  grain  for  each  man'-'',  and
twelve  for  each  woman,  beside  a  quantity  of  wine
and  oil  in  proportion.  Such  a  provision  they  thought
sufficient  for  health  and  a  good  habit  of  body,  and
they  wanted  nothing  more.  A  story  is  told  of  him
that,  not  long  afterward,  returning  from  a  journey
through  the  fields  just  reaped,  and  seeing  the  shocks
standing  parallel  and  equal,  he  smiled,  and  said  to
some  that  were  near  him  ;  "  How  like  is  Laconia  to
"  an  estate,  newly  divided  among  many  brothers  !**
After  this  he  attempted  to  divide  also  the  move-
ables, in  order  to  banish  all  appearance  of  inequa-
lity :  but  he  soon  perceived,  that  they  could  not
bear  to  have  their  goods  directly  taken  from  them  ;
and  therefore  he  adopted  another  method,  counter-
working their  avarice  by  a  stratagem  -**.     First,  he

^7  By  a  man  is  meant  the  master  of  a  family,  whose  household
was  to  subsist  upon  tliis  allotment.

^^  For  a  long  time  after  Lycurgus,  the  Spartans  gloriously  op-
posed the  growth  of  avarice :  insomuch  that  a  young  man,  who  hud


I2i  LYCURGCS.

stopped  the  currency  of  tlic  gold  and  silver  coin,
and  ordered  that  they  should  make  use  of  iron  money
only  :  then,  to  a  great  quantity  and  weight  of  this
he  assisrned  but  a  very  small  value ;  so  tliat  to  con-
tain  ten  minae  '^  a  whole  room  was  required,  and  to
remove  it,  a  yoke  of  oxen.  Vt^hen  this  became  cur-
rent, many  kinds  of  injustice  ceased  in  Lacedajmon.
Who  would  steal  or  take  a  bribe,  who  would  defraud
or  rob,  when  he  was  unable  to  conceal  the  booty;
when  he  could  neither  be  dignified  by  the  possession
of  it,  nor  if  it  were  cut  in  pieces,  be  served  by  it's
use  ?  For  we  are  told  tliat  after  having  heated  it,
they  quenched  it  in  vinegar,  to  make  it  brittle  and
iinmalleable,  and  consequently  unfit  for  any  other
service.  In  the  next  place,  he  put  dovrn  unprofit-
able and  superfluous  arts:  if  he  had  not  indeed  done
this,  most  of  them  would  have  fallen  of  themselves,
when  the  new  money  took  place,  as  the  manufac-
tures could  not  be  disposed  of.  Their  iron  coin
would  not  pass  in  the  rest  of  Greece,  but  was  ridi-
culed and  despised  ;  so  that  the  Spartans  had  no
means  of  purchasing  any  foreign  or  curious  wares,
neither  did  any  merchant-ship  unload  in  their  har-
bours. There  vvcre  not  even  to  be  foimd  in  tlicir
whole  country  cither  sophists,  itinerant  fortune-
tellers, keepers  of  infamous  houses,  or   dealers  in


bought  an  estate  at  a  great  advantage,  was  called  to  account  for  it,
and  a  fine  set  upon  him.  For,  beside  tlie  injustice  of  wiiicli  he  had
been  guilty  in  buying  a  thing  for  less  than  it  was  worth,  they  judged
that  he  was  too  desirous  of  gain,  since  his  mind  v/as  employed  in
getting,  at  an  age  when  others  think  only  of  spending.  But  when
^1  the  Spartans,  no  longer  satisfied  with  their  own  territories  (as  Ly-
*  r.urgus  liad  enjoined  them  to  be)  engaged  in  foreign  wars,  t1i(~i:-
money  not  being  current  in  other  counti'ies,  they  found  themsv^Ue.s
obliged  to  apply  to  the  Persians,  v/hose  gold  and  silver  dazzled  their
ej'es.  And  tlieir  covetousiiess  grew  at  length  so  infamous,  that  il
occasioned  the  proverb  mentioned  by  Plato,  *  One  may  sec  a  gicat
deal  of  money  carried  into  Lriccdac-nion,  but  one  never  sees  any  of
ir  brought  out  again.'  For  modern  instances  of  a  similar  kind,  in
which  the  stcrmiess  of  republicanism  yielded  to  the  temptations  of
avarice,  sec  Naylor'?  spirited  History  of  Helvetia.  See  alto  not.  (71-)
'^  32^.  OS.  lOcI.  sterling.

12


LYCURGUS.  125

gold  and  silver  trinkets,  because  there  was  no
money.  Thus  luxury,  losing  by  degrees  the  means
by  which  it  is  cherished  and  supported,  died  awav  :
even  they  vrho  had  great  possessions  derived  no  ad-
vantage from  tliem,  since  they  could  not  be  exhibited
in  public,  but  must  lie  useless  in  unregarded  reposi-
tories. Hence  it  was,  that  excellent  wori<manship
was  shown  in  their  useful  and  necessary  furniture,
as  beds,  chairs,  and  tables ;  and  the  Laceda?monian
cup,  called  Cothon^*^  (as  Critias  informs  us)  was
highly  valued,  particularly  in  campaigns :  for  tlie
M'ater  which  must  then  of  necessity  be  dnmk,  though
it  would  often  otherwise  oiFend  the  sight,  had  it's
muddiness  concealed  by  the  colour  of  the  cup,  and
the  thick  part  stopping  at  the  shelving  brim,  it
came  clearer  to  the  lips.  Of  these  improvements,
the  lawgiver  Vv^as  the  cause;  for  the  workmen,  ha\-
iuff  no  more  emnloyment  in  utensils  of  mere  curio-
sity,  displayed  the  excellence  of  their  art  in  such  as
were  necessary.

Desirous  to  complete  the  conquest  of  luxury,  and
to  exterminate  the  love  of  riches,  he  introduced  a
third  institution,  which  was  wisely  and  ingeniously
contrived.      This  was   the    use   of  public   tables  ^'^

3°  A  description  of  this  small   earthen  cup,  and  the  passage  of
Critias  referred  to,  occurs  in  Athenacus  xi.  iO.*

3'  Xenophon  seems  to  have  penetrated  farther  into  the  reason  of
this  institution  tlian  any  other  author,  as  indeed  he  had  a  better  op-
portunity of  doini^.  The  rest  only  say,  that  it  wa?  intended  to  re-
press.luxury ;  but  he  very  wisely  remarks,  that  it  was  alpo  intended  <
to  serve  fov  a  kind  of  school  or  acaden:y,  v.  here  the  yoi;:5<pvere  in-
structed by  the  old  ;  the  former  relating  the  great  thi:;gs  that  had
been  performed  within  their  momory,  and  ihcs  exciting  the  grow-
ing generation  to  distinguish  themselvey  by  performances  cqusllj
Iionourable.  It  was  found  impracticable  however  for  all  the  citi-
zens to  eat  in  common,  when  the  number  of  them  came  to  exceed
the  number  of  the  lots  of  land:  and  Dacier  therefore  thinks  it  ijiight
have  been  better,  if  the  lawgiver  had  ordained,  that  those  public
tables  should  be  maintained  at  the  public  expense ;  as  was  the  case
in  Crete,  whence  he  had  borrowed  the  chief  part  of  this  institution.
( Aristot.  Pol.  ii.  8.)  But  it  mu-t  be  considered  that,  v.hile  the  1
discipline  of  Lycurgus  was  kept  up   in  it's  purity,  thej'  provided  '


126  LYCURGUS.

where  all  were  to  eat  in  common  the  same  meat,  and
such  kinds  of  it  as  were  appointed  by  law.  At  the
same  time  they  were  forbidden  to  eat  at  home  upon
expensive  couches  and  tables,  to  call  in  the  assist-
ance of  butchers  and  cooks,  or  to  fatten  like  vora-
cious animals  in  private.  For  so  not  only  their  man-
ners would  be  corrupted,  but  their  "bodies  disor-
dered ;  abandoned  to  every  species  of  sensuality
and  dissoluteness,  they  would  require  long  sleep,
warm  baths,  and  the  same  indulgences  as  in  perpe-
tual sickness.  To  effect  this,  was  certainly  very
great ;  but  it  was  still  greater,  (as  Theophrastus  ex-
presses it)  to  secure  wealth  from  rapine  and  from
envy ;  or  rather,  by  their  eating  in  common  and  by
the  frugality  of  their  tables,  to  take  fiom  it  it's  very
being.  For  what  use  or  enjoyment  of  it,  m  hat  pecu-
liar display  of  magnificence  could  there  be,  where
the  poor  man  went  to  the  same  refreshment  with  the
opulent  ?  Hence  arose  the  observation,  that  it  was
only  at  Sparta  where  Pint  us  (according  to  the  pro-
verb) was  kept  blind,  and,  like  an  image,  destitute
of  life  or  motion.  It  must  farther  be  observed,  that
they  had  not  the  privilege  of  eating  at  home,  and
thus  of  coming  without  appetite  to  the  public  repast.
They  made  a  point  of  observing  any  one,  who  did
not  eat  and  drink  with  them  ;  and  reproached,  as
an  intemperate  and  eflfeminate  person,  him  that  was
sick  of  the  common  diet.

The  rich  therefore,  we  are  told,  were  more  offend-
ed with  this  regulation  than  with  any  other,  and
rising  in  a  body  loudly  expressed  their  indignation  :
nay,  they  proceeded  so  far  as  to  assault  Lycurgus
with  stones,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  fly  from  the  as-
sembly and  take  refuge  in  a  temple.  Unha})pily
however,  before  he  reached  it,  a  young  man  named


against  any  Inconvenience  from  the  increase  of  citizens  by  sending
out  colonies;  and  Laccclfemon  was  not  burthcned  with  poor,  till  it's
authority  was  on  the  decline.  ''

9


LYCURGUS.  127

Alcanclei%  ha?ty  in  his  resentments  though  not  other-
wise ill-tempered,  came  up  with  him,  and  upon  his
turning  round,  struck  out  one  of  his  eyes  with  a
stick.  Lycurgus  then  stopped  short  and,  without
giving  way  to  passion,  exhibited  to  the  people  his
eye  beat  out,  and  his  face  streaming  with  blood.
At  this  spectacle  they  were  so  affected  with  shame
and  sorrow,  that  they  surrendered  Alcander  into
his  hands,  and  conducted  him  home  with  the  utmost
expressions  of  regret.  Lycurgus  thanked  them  for
their  care  of  his  person,  and  dismissed  them  all  ex-
cept Alcander.  Him  he  took  to  his  house,  but
showed  him  no  ill-treatment,  either  by  word  or
action  ;  only  ordering  him  to  wait  upon  him,  instead
of  his  usual  servants  and  attendants.  The  youth,
who  w^as  of  an  ingenuous  disposition,  silently  did  as
he  was  commanded.  Living  in  this  manner  with
Lycurgus,  and  having  an  opportunity  of  observing
the  mildness  and  goodness  of  his  heart,  his  strict
temperance,  and  his  indefatigable  industry,  he  told
his  friends  that  he  was  not,  (as  might  have  been  sup-
posed), proud  or  severe,  but  above  all  otiiers  gentle
and  en2:ao;inc^  in  his  behaviour.  Tliis  then  was  his
chastisement,  and  this  punishment  he  suffered,  from
a  wild  and  headstrong  young  man  to  be  converted
into  a  modest  and  prudent  citizen.  In  memory  of
!iis  misfortune,  Lvcurs-us  built  a  tem.ple  to  Minerva
Optiletis,  so  called  by  him  from  a  term,  which  the
Dorians  use  for  the  eye.  Yet  Dioscorides  (who
wrote  a  Treatise  upon  the  Lacedsemonian  govern-
ment) and  others  relate,  that  his  eye  was  hurt,  but
not  put  out,  and  that  he  built  the  temple  in  grati-
tude to  the  goddess  for  his  cure.  The  Spartans,
however,  never  carried  staves  to  their  assemblies  af-
terward.

The  public  repasts  were  called  by  the  Cretans
Andria  ;  but  the  Lacedaemonians  stiled  th efn  Phi-
ditia,  either  from  their  tendency  to  '  friendship'
and  n)utual  benevolence,  plt'tditlahamg  used  instead
oi  phllilia;  or  else  from  their  teaching  frugality  and


12S  LYCURGUS.

'  parsimony,*  which  the  word  plicido  signifies.  Bat
it  is  not  at  all  impoisihle,  that  tlie  iirst  letter  might
by  some  means  or  otlier  be  added,  and  so  phidkia
take  place  ol'  cditia^  which  barely  signifies  '  eating.*
There  were  lifteen  persons  to  a  table,  or  a  few  more
or  less.  Each  of  them  was  obliixed  to  contribute
monthly  abont  a  bushel  of.  meal,  eight  gallons  of
wine,  live  pounds  t)f  cheese,  two  ])ounds  and  a
half  of  file's,  and  a  little  monev  to  buv  flesh  and  ri>b.
If  any  of  them  happened  to  offer  a  sacrifice  of  lirst-
fruits,  or  to  kill  venison,  he  sent  a  part  of  it  to  the
public  table  :  for,  after  a  sacrifice  or  hunting,  he
was  at  liberty  to  sup  at  home  ;  but  the  rest  were  to
appear  at  the  visual  place.  For  a  long  time,  this
eating  in  common  was  observed  with  great  exact-
ness :  so  that  when  kino;  Ao:is  returned  from  a  sue-
cessful  expedition  against  the  Athenians,  and  wish-
ing to  sup  vrith  his  wife  requested  to  have  his  por-
tion at  home^^,  the  Polemarchs  refused  to  send  it^'^ :
nav,  wlicn  through  rcsentnient  he  neglected  the  day
following  to  ofi'er  the  sacrifice  usual  on  occasions  of
victory,  they  imposed  a  fine  upon  him  for  disobe-
dience.

Children  also  were   introduced    at   these  public

ft.

tables,  as  so  many  schools  of  sobriety.  There  they
lieard  discourses  concerning  govcrninent,  and  were
instructed  in  the  most  liberal  breeding.  There  they
v\'ere  allowed  to  jest  without  scunilityj  and  vrere  not
to  take  it  ill,  when  the  raillery  was  returned.  For
it  v.'as  reckoned  worthy  of  a  Lacedaemonian,  to  bear
a  jest;  but  if  any  one's  patience  failed,  he  had
cnly  to  desire  them  to  be  quiet,    and  they  imme-


3-  The  kings  of  Sparta  luul  al'n-nys  double  co?????;o;m  allowed  tlicm  ;
not  that  they  were  permitted  to' indulge  tlu-ir  jippetites  more  than
other:-,  but  that  they  might  have  an  opportaiiitv  of  sharing  their
portion  vvith  some  brave  man,  whom  tliey  chose  to  distinguish  by
that  honour.

33  The  Polemarchs  of  Sparta  were  those,  who  Ii.'td  eommandcd
the  army  under  tlie  kings.  The  principal  men  in  the  state  always
divided  the  provisions  at  tc.ble»     (See  Tollux  viii.  8.)


LYCURGUS*.  129

iliaiely  desisted.  When  they  lirst  entered,  the  oldest
man  present  pointed  to  the  door,  and  said,  "  Not  a
"  word  S])oken  in  this  company  goes  out  tlicre  ^■*."
The  adrnittino-  of  any  nian  to  a  particular  table  wa'^
under  the  foik)\vin2:  regulation  :  Each  member  of
that  small  society  took  a  little  ball  of  soft  bread  iii
liis  hand  ;  this  he  was  to  drop,  without  saying  a  word,
into  a  vessel  called  '  Caddos,'  whrich  the  v.aiter  car-
ried u])()n  hi^  head.  If  he  approved  of  the  candidatej
he  did  it  without  altering  tiie  figure:  if  not  lie  first
pressed  it  Hat  in  liis  hand ;  for  a  flatted  ball  vvas  con-
sidered as  a  neo'ative.  And  if  but  one  such  was
found,  the  person  was  excluded,  as  they  thought  it
proper  tisat  the  vvhole  company  should  be  satisfied
with  each  other.  He,  wlio  was  thus  rejected,  was
said  to  '  have  no  luck  in  the  caddos/

The  disli,  that  was  in  the  highest  esteem  among
them,  was  the  black  broth.  Of  this  the  old  men
were  so  fond,  that  they  ranged  themselves  on  one
side  and  ate  it,  leaving  the  meat  to  the  young  peo-
ple. It  is  related  of  a  king  of  Fontus  ^\  tliat  he
purchased  a  Laceda?monian  cook,  for  the  sake  of  this
broth.  But,  when  he  came  to  taste  it,  he  strongly
expressed  his  dislike;  upon  which  the  cook  answered,
*'  Sir,  in  order  to  relish  this  broth,  it  is  necessary
"  first  to  bathe  in  the  Eurotas."  After  thev  had
drurdv  moderatelv,  thev  went  home  without  lights.
They  were  forbidden  indeed  to  v/alk  with  a  light,
upon  either  this  or  any  other  occasion,  that  they
might  accustom  themselves  to  march  boldly  and  re-
solutely in  the  darkest  night  "^  Such  was  the  order
of  their  public  repasts.

5*  Mi(r:d  f.t,v/,u,ovu  ctw/a^/Ijjv  was  a  judicious  itTaxim  for  the  followers'
of  Anacreon,  who  under  the  infiaence  of  wine  unlocked  their  bo-
soms to  each  other,  and  made  a  mutual  display  of  their  follies  and'
their  vices.  The  same  principle  applies,  with  still  stronger  obliga-
tion, to  the  con'.idental  intercourse  of  more  qorrect  society.'^

^5  This  story  is  elsewhere  told,  hy  Plutarch,  of  Dionysius  the
tyrant  of  Sicily  ;  and  Cicero  likewise  asserts,  that  he  was  the  person,-
The  Eurotas  was  the  river  of  Sparta.

^'^  Xcnophon  conrines  this  prohibition  to  the  young;  and  assigns'

You  I.  K


L,<)  LYCURGUS.

Lycuigus  left  none  of  his  ItiM-s  in  writing :  it  \V^^
ordered  indeed  in  one  of  the  Uhetr,T,  that  none  of
them  shoidd  be  written.     For  what  he  th.ouHit  most

\  conducive  to  the  virtue  and  liappiness  of  a  city,  was
principle  interwoven  with  the  manners  and  breeding
of  tiie  people.  Tiiis  would  ren)ain  immoveable,  as
resting  on  inclination,  and  be  the  strongest  and
most  lasting  tie ;  and  the  habits,  which  education
produced  in  the  youth,  w-ould  answer  in  each  the
purpose  of  a  lawgiver.  As  for  smaller  matters,  con-
tracts a!)out  property,  and  whatever  occasionally
varied,  it  was  better  not  to  reduce  these  to  a  written
and  unalterable  method ;  but  to  sufier  them  to
ch-ange  with  the  times,  and  to  admit  of  additions  or
retrenchments  at  the  pleasure  of  persons  so  well  edu-
cated. For  he  resolved  the  whole  business  of  lej^is-
lation  into  the  bringing  up  of  youth.  And  this,  as
we  have  observed,  was  the  reason,  whv  one  of  his
ordinances  forbade  them  to  have  any  written  laws.

Another  ordinance  levelled  against  magnificence
and  expense  directed,  that  the  ceilings  of  houses
should  be  wrought  with  no  tool  but  the  ax,  and  the
doors  only  with  the  saw.  For,  as  Epaminondas  is
reported  to  have  said  afterv/ard  of  his  table,  "  Trea-
'•  son  lurks  not  under  such  a  dinner*  j"  so  Lycurgns
betbre  him  perceived,  that  a  house  of  this  description
does  not  admit  of  luxury  and  needless  splendour.
No  man  indeed  could  be  so  absurd  as  to  bring,  into
a  dwelHng  so  homely  and  simple,  bedsteads  with
silver  feet,  purple  coverlets,  golden  cups,  and  a  coi-

,  responding  train  of  other  extravagances:  but  all
would  necessarily  have  the  bed  suitable  to  the  room,
the  coverlet  to  the  bed,  and  the  rest  ol' their  utensils
and  furniture  to  that.  From  this  plain  sort  ofdvvcll-
ingg   proceeded    the   question    of  Leotychidas   the

as  it'sobject  the  necessity  of  keeping  ihcn-sclvcs  sober,  that  thev
i/iight  not  mis:?  t!)t;ir  way  home*

*  . Nulla-  ac^nita  bibunlur

i'icl-itibus. Juv.  Sfit.  X.  '_'''>.*


LYCURGUS.  ISC-

elder  to  his  host,  when  he  supped  at  Corinth,  and
^'dw  the  ceiling  of  the  room  most  splendidly  aud  ca-
riously  wrought,  "  AVhethcr  trees  grew  square  in  his
"  country  ^^r"

A  third  ordinance  of  Lycurgus  was,  that  they
should  not  often  make  war  against  the  same  enemy  j
lest,  by  being  frequently  put  upon  defending  them-
selves, thev  too  should  become  able  warriors  in  their
turn.  Hence  they  aiterward  most  heavily  censured
king  Agesilaus,  that  by  frequent  and  continued  in-
cursions into  B(Potia  ^'^  he  had  tau«:ht  the  Thebans
to  make  head  against  the  Lacedaemonians  :  and  hence
Antalcidas  observed,  when  he  saw  him  wounded,
"  The  Thebans  pay  you  well  for  making  them  good

soldier:;,  who  neither  were  willing  nor  able  to  fight

you  before."  These  ordinances  he  called  Rhetra^,
as  if  they  had  been  oracles  and  decrees  of  the  Deity
himself'-^.

As  for  the  education  of  youth,  which  he  looked
upon  as  the  loftiest  and  most  glorious  work  of  a  lav.'-
giver,  he  began  with  it  at  the  very  source,  taking
into  consideration  their  conception  and  birth,  by  re-
gulating the  marriages.  For  he  did  not,  as  Aristotle
observes  ^°,  desist  from  his  attempt  to  bring  the  wo-
men under  sober  rules.  They  had,  indeed,  assumed
great  liberty  and  power  on  account  of  the  frequent
expeditions  of  their  husbands,  during  which  they
Vv'cre  left  sole  mistresses  at  home,  and  thus  gained  an
undue  deference  and  improper  titles  ;  but,  notwith-
standing this,  he  took  all  posible  care  of  them.  He
ordered  the  virgins  to  amuse  tliemselves  in  running,

''  This  is  rendered  by  the  former  English  translator,  as  if  Leoty-
chidas'  question  proceeded  from  ignorance,  whereas  it  was  really  an
arch  sneer  upon  the  expensive  buildings  of  Corinth.

5*5  As  appeared  plainly  at  the  battle  of  Leuctra,  where  the  Lace-
demonians were  overthro'.vn  by  Epaminondas,  and  lost  then-  kin^
Cleombrotus  t.o.'.!;eiher  with  the  flower  of  their  armv.

^'  Or  so  called,  perhaps,  because  transmitted  by  oral  tradition.*

^°  Pol.  ii.  7.,  wliere  he  imputes  this  usurpation  of  the  ladies  to  the
lonp:  wars  necesspvily  maintained  by  their  husbands  against  the.-  stat(j«;
of  Argos,  Arcadia,  and  Messene.*

K   2


132  LYCURGUS.

wrestling,  and  throwing  quoits  and  darts  :  that,  then'
bocHcs  being  strong  and  vigorous,  the  cliilchen  after-
ward  produeed  from  tliem  might  be  the  same ;  and
that,  thus  fbrtihed  by  exercise,  they  nn'ght  better
support  the  pangs  of  child-birth,  and  be  delivered
wdth  safety.  /In  order  to  take  av\'ay  the  excessive
tenderness  and  delicacy  of  the  sex,  the  conse-
quence of  a  recluse  lite,  he  accustomed  the  young
maidens  occasionally  to  be  seen  naked  as  well  as  the
young  men,  and  to  dance  and  sing  in  their  presence
upon  certain  festivals.  There  they  sometimes  in-
dulged in  a  little  raillery  upon  those  that  had  misbe-
haved themselves,  and  sometimes  recited  encomiums
on  such  as  deserved  them  ;  thus  kindhng  in  the
young  men  an  useful  emulation  and  love  of  glory.
For  he  who  was  praised  for  his  bravery,  and  cele-
brated among  the  virgins,  went  away  perfectly  happy;
while  their  biting  sarcasms,  thrown  out  in  sport,  were
not  less  cutting,  than  serious  admonitions ;  especi-
ally as  the  kings  and  the  senate  went  with  the  other
citizens  to  see  all  that  passed.  As  for  the  virgins  ap-
pearing naked,  there  was  nothing  disgraceful  in  it,
because  every  thing  was  conducted  with  modestv,
and  without  one  indecent  word  or  action.  Nay  it
produced  a  simplicity  of  manners,  and  an  emulation
for  the  best  habit  of  body  ;  their  ideas  likewise  were
naturallv  enlarged,  while  thcv  were  not  excluded
from  their  share  of  bravery  and  honour  ''.  Hence
they  were  furnislied  v.-ith  sentiments  and  language,
such  as  Gorgo  the  wite  of  Leonidas  is  said  to  have
uttered:  when  a  woman  of  another  country  remarked

'*'  And  yet,  tliough  Plutarch  appears  to  approve  this  institution,
he  elsewhere  (inconsistently  indeed,  but  more  correctly)  imputes
the  corruption  and  ultimate  subjugation  oi  Greece  to  llie  indecent
exhibitions  ot"  their  gymnai>ia.  Whatever  were  ihc  ends  of  the  le-
gislator, nothing  can  excuse  the  niea.ns.  Montesiiuieu  (Sp.  of  Laws
iv.  G.)  sa}s,  that  '  at  Sparta  ciiastity  was  without  modosty  ' — sepa-
ration, inevitably  fatal  to  her  existence !  '  A  woman  who  throws  o&'
her  dress,'  observes  Herodotus  (and  may  modern  ladies  profit  l)y
the  remark!)  '  throv/s  olfai  the  .'-auic  time  her  modesty,  and  soon
Teanis  not  to  blush  at  any  thing:.'  *

12


LYCURGUS.  ISS

toiler,  "  You  of  Laccdsemon  are  the  only  women  in
^'  the  world  that  rule  men  ;"  she  replied,  "  We  are
"  tlie  only  women  that  bear  men."

These  public  dances  and  other  exercises  of  the
young  maidens  naked,  in  siglit  of  the  young  men,
were  moreover  incentives  to  marriage ;  and,  to  use
Plato's  expres;ion,  drew  them  almost  as  necessarily  |
by  the  attractions  of  love,  as  a  geometrical  eonclu-|
sion  is  drawn  from  the  premises.  To  encourage  it
still  farther,  some  marks  of  infamy  were  set  upon
those,  that  continued  bachelors'-.  For  they  were
not  permitted  to  see  these  exercises  of  the  naked
virgiiis ;  and  the  magistrates,  commanded  them  to
march  naked  round  tiie  market-})lace  in  the  winter,
and  to  smg  a  song  composed  against  themselves,
which  expressed  hov/ justly  they  were  punished  for
their  disobedience  to  the  laws.  They  were  also  de-
prived of  that  lionour  and  respect,  which  the  young
paid  to  the  old ;  so  tliat  nobody  found  fault  with
what  was  said  to  DercylHdas,  though  an  eminent
commander:  upon  his  going  one  day  into  company,
a  young  man  (it  seems)  instead  of  rising  up  and  giv-
ing hin\  place,  told  him,  "  You  have  no  child  to  give
"  place  to  me,  when  I  am  old."

In  their  marriages,  the  bridegroom  carried  off  the
bride  by  violence ;  and  she  was  never  chosen  in  a
tender  age,  but  v^'hen  she  had  arrived  at  full  matu-
rity. Then  the  woman  who  had  the  direction  of  the
wedding,  cut  the  bride's  hair  close  to  the  skin,
dressed  iier  in  man's  clothes,  Jaid  her  upon  a  mat-


■»'  The  time  of  niarriap-e  was  fixed,  and  if  a  man  di;l  not  many
when  he  was  of  full  a;;o,  h'j  was  liable  to  a  prosecution  ;  as  were  tnose
also,  who  married  above  or  below  themselves.  Such  as  had  three
children,  had  great  immunities;  and  those,  who  had  four,  were  free
irom  all  taxes.  Virgins  v.ere  married  without  portions,  because
neither  want  should  prevent  marriage,  nor  riches  induce  to  it,  with-
out tiie  concurrence  of  inclination.   (L.)

Clearclius,  a  })upil  of  Aristotle,  adds  that  there  was  a  festival  at
Sparta,  in  which  the  women  were  permitted  to  flog  bachelors  round
an  altar  ;  t!}at  they  might  be  constrained  by  feelings  of  shame,  or  of
pain,  to  take  a  wife!*


1S4.  LYCUllGUS.

trass,  and  left  licr  in  the  dark.  The  bridegTOOin,
neither  oppressed  with  wine  nor  enervated  with
luxury,  but  perfectly  sober  (as  liaving  supped  at  the
common  table)  went  in  privately,  untied  her  girdle,
and  carried  her  to  another  bed.  Having  stayed
there  a  short  time,  he  modestly  retired  to  his  usual
apartment,  to  sleep  with  the  otiier  young  men  :  and
continued  afterward  to  observe  the  same  conduct,
spending  the  day  with  his  companions,  and  reposing
himself  with  them  in  the  night,  nor  even  visiting
his  bride  but  with  the  utmost  modesty,  and  the
most  cautious  apprehensions  of  being  discovered  by
the  rest  of  the  family  ;  the  bride  at  the  same  time
exerting  all  her  art,  to  contrive  convenient  oppor-
tunities for  their  private  meetings.  And  this  they
did  not  for  a  short  time  onlv,  but  some  of  tlicm  even
had  children,  before  they  v/ere  admitted  to  an  inter-
view with  their  wives  in  the  day-time.     This  kind  of

\  commerce  not  only  exercised  their  temperance  and
chastity,  but  kept  their  bodies  fruitful,  and  the  first
ardour  of  their  love  fresh  and  unabated  ;  for  as  they
were  not  satiated,  like  those  that  are  always  with
their  wives,  there  was  still  place  for  unextinguished
desire.  When  he  had  thus  established  a  proper
regard   to   modesty  and   decorum,  with  respect  to

(marriage,  he  was  equally  studious  to  drive  from  that
state  the  vain  and  womanish  passion  of  jealousy ;
by  making  it  quite  as  reputable  to  have  children
in  common  with  persons  of  merit,  as  to  avoid  all
offensive  freedom  in  their  own  behaviour  to  their
wives.  [He  laughed  at  those,  who  revenge  with
wars  and  bloodslied  the  communication  of  a  married
woman's  favours ;  and  allowed  that,  if  any  one  in
years  should  have  a  young  M'ife,  he  might  introduce
to  her  some  handsome  and  worthy  young  man,
v.'hom  he  most  approved,  and  when  she  had  borne  a
child  of  this  generous  race,  bring  it  up  as  his  own.
On  the  other  hand  he  permitted*'  that,  if  a  man  of

*'  In  this  case,  the  kings  were  excepted 3  for  they  were  not  at
liberty  to  lend  their  wives.

9


LYCURGUS.  135

character  should  entertain   a  passion  for  a  married
woman  upon  account  of  her  modesty  and  the  beauty
of  her  children,   he  might  treat  with   her  husband
for  admission  to  her  company ;  that  so,  planting  in
a  beauty-bearing  soil,  he  might  produce  excellent
children,  the  congenial  offspring  of  excellent  parents.
For,  in  the  first  place,  Lycurgus  considered  children
as  the  property  less  of  their  parents,  than   of  the
state  ;  and  therefore  he  would  not  have  them  begotr-
ten  by  ordinary  persons,  but  by  the  best  men  in  it.
He  next  observed  the  vanity  and  absurdity  of  other
nations,  wliere  people  study  to  have  tiieir  liorses  and
dogs  of  the  finest  breed,   v/hich  they  can  procure
either   by  interest   or  money ;  and  yet  keep  their
wives  shut  up,  that  they  may  have  children  by  none
but  themselves,  though   they  may   happen,    to    be
doting,    dccrepid,  or  infirm :   as  if  children,   when
sprung    from     a     bad     stock,     and     consequently
c'ood  for   nothinsT,    were    no    detriment    to     those
to    v/hom   they  belong,  and  who   have  the    trouble
of  bringing  them  up  ;  nor  any  advantage,  when  well
descended   and   of  a  generous  disposition.      These
regulations  tending  to  secure  a  healthy  offspring,
and  consequently  one  beneficial  to  the  state,   were
so  far  from  encourao:in2:  that  licentiousness  of  the
women  which  subsequently  prevailed,  that  adultery
was  not  known  among  them.     A   saying,  upon  this
subject,  of  Geradas  an  ancient  Spartan   is   thus  re-
lated :  A  stranger  had  asked  him,  "  What  punish-
"  ment  their  law  appointed  for  adulterers?"    He
answered,  "  My  friend,  tliere  are  no  adulterers  in
"  our  country."     The  other  rejoined,  "  But  what,
*'  if  there  should   be    one?"     "Why  then,"    said
Geradas,  "  he  must  forfeit  a  bull  so  large,  that  from
"  the  top  of  Mount  Taygetus  he  might  drink  of  the
"  Eurotas  ^\"      When    the  stranger    expressed  his
surprise  at  this,  and  inquired,  "  But  how  can  such

*•♦  The  highest  mountain  in  Laconia,  whence  the  whole  of  Pelo-
ponnesus might  be  descried.*


136  LYCUIiGUS.

*'  a  bull  be  found?"  Geradas  replied  with  a  smile,
"  And  how  can  an  adulterer  be  found  in  Sparta?"
Such  is  the  account,  Avhich  we  have  of  tlicir  mar-
riages.

It  was  not  left  to  the  father,  to  rear  what  offspring;;
he  pleased  ;  but  he  was  obliged  to  carry  each  child
to  a  place  called  Lesche,  to  be  examined  by  the  most
ancient  men  of  the  tribe,  who  were  there  assembled.
If  it  was  strong  and  well-proportioned,  they  gave
orders  for  it's  education,  and  assigned  to  it  one  of
the  nine  thousand  shares  of  land :  but,  if  it  was
weakly  and  deformed,  they  ordered  it  to  be  thrown
into  the  place  called  Apotheta?,  a  deep  cavern  near
the  mountain  Taygetus ;  concluding  tiiat  it's  lire
could  be  of  no  advantarre  either  to  itself  or  to  the
public,  since  nature  had  not  given  it  any  radical
strength  or  goodness  of  constitutior.^'.  For  the
same  reason  the  women  did  not  Vvash  their  new-born
infants  with  water,  but  with  wine,  thus  making  some
trial  of  their  habit  of  body ;  as  tliey  imagined,  that
the  sickly  and  epileptic  would  sink  and  die  under
the  experiment,  wliilc  the  healthy  would  become
more  hardv  and  vi^^orous.  Great  care  and  art  wixh
also  exerted  bv  tiie  riurses  ;  for  as  they  never  swathed
the  infants,  their  limbs  had  a  freer  turn,  and  tlieir
countenances  a  more  liberal  air  :  besides,  they  accus-
tomed them  to  any  sort  of  meat,  to  have  no  terrors
in  the  dark,  not  to  be  afraid  of  being  left  alone,  and
to  forbear  all  ill-humour  and  unmanlv  crvinii: '".
Hence  people  of  other  countries  purchased  Laceche-
moniau   nurses  for  tlicir   children  ;  and  Alcibiades,

•*'  The  general  expediency  of  this  law  may  vvell  be  tlispulec^,
though  it  suited  the  r.uirtial  constitution  of  Sparta;  since  maiiy
persons  of  weak  coiistitutious  make  up  in  ingenuity  wliat  they  \var,t
in'  strencth,  and  so  becojuc  more  valuable  nien)bci.p  of  tiic  commu-
rity  than  the  most  robust.  It  se£m^:,  however,  to  Iiave  Iiud  one  good
cifoct,  viz.  making  uoiiien  very  cartful  during  tlieir  pregnancy  of
cither  eating,  drinking,  or  exercising,  to  exces-s.  It  uude  thcnx
ja'so  excellent  nurses,  as  is  observed  jubt  below.

■*''  Aristotle  (Pol.  vii.  17.)  would  permit  children  to  cry,  as  a
I'nm  of  exercise  favourable  to  thtir  iica!th  and  growth. ■!*


LYCURGUS.  137

the  Atlienian,  Is  said  to  have  been  nursed  by  Amycla
a  Spartan.  But,  if  he  M^as  fortunate  in  a  nurse,  he
was  not  so  in  a  preceptor;  for  Zopyrus,  who  was
a])pointed  to  that  office  by  Pericles,  was  (as  Plato
informs  us)  not  better  quahfied  than  a  common
slave'''.  The  Spartan  children  v»'erc  not  thus  placed
under  tutors  purchased  or  hired  with  money,  neither
vvere  the  parents  at  liberty  to  educate  them  as  they
pleased ;  but  as  soon  as  they  were  seven  years  old,
Lycurg'us  ordered  them  to  be  enrolled  in  companies,
where  they  were  all  kept  under  the  same  order  and
discipline,  and  had  their  exercises  and  recreations  in
common.  He,  who  showed  the  s^reatest  conduct
and  courage  among  them,  was  made  captain  of  the
company.  Upon  him  the  rest  fixed  their  eyes,  obeyed
his  orders,  and  bore  with  patience  the  punishments
v/hich  he  inflicted  :  so  that  their  whole  education
was  an  exercise  of  obedience.  The  old  men  were
present  at  their  diversions,  and  often  suggested  some
occasion  of  dispute  or  quarrel,  that  they  might  ob-
serve with  exactness  the  spirit  of  each,  and  their
firmness  in  battle.

As  for  learning ''",  they  had  just  so  much  as   was

*"  Mark  the  severity  with  which  Plutarch  condemns  the  ordinary
practice  of  leaving  children  amonj>;  servants  !  This  has,  also,  been
heavily  censured  by  one  of  our  very  ablest  writers  upon  Education,
Miss  Edgevvorth.*

•^s  The  plainness  of  their  manners,  and  their  being  so  very  muchX
addicted  to  vvar,  made  the  Lacedcrnionians  less  fond  of  fhe  sciences
than  the  rest  of  the  Greeks.     If  they  wrote  to  be   read,  and  spoke
to  be  understood,  it  was  all  they  sought.     For  this  the  Athenians,
who  Avere   excessively  vain  of  their  learning,   held  them   in   great
contempt ;  insom.uch  tluit  Thucydidcs  himself,  drawing  the  character
of  Brasidas,  says,  '  he  spoke  well  enough  for  a  Lacedaemonian.'
'i'iie  Spartans,  hov.-ever,  had  a  force  and  poignancy   of  expression,
which  excelled  all  the  fiovvers  of  studied  elegance.     This   was  the
consequence  of  their  concise  way  of  speaking,  and  their  encourag-
ing, upon  all  occasions,  decent  repartee.     Arts  were  in  no  greater-,
credit  with  them,   than  sciences.     Theatrical  diversions  found   no  ^
countenance :  temperance  and  exercise  made  the  physician    unne-  (
ces«ary  :  their  justice  left  no  room  for  the  practice  of'  the  lawyer;  /
.and  all  the  trades,   that  niinistcr  to  luxury,  were  unknown.     (See  \
^Jso  below,  p.  150. — passages,  jointly  almo?t  realising  the  mytlios  pf  )


138  X.YCURGUS.

absolutely  necessary.  AJi  the  rest  of  their  ediica"
lion  was  calculated  to  make  them  subject  to  corn-
maud,  to  endure  labour,  to  %ht,  and'  to  conquer.
They  added  therefore  to  their  discij)hne,  as  they
advanced  in  age ;  cutting  their  hair  very  close,
making  them  go  barefoot,  and  play  for  the  most
part  quite  naked.  At  twelve  years  of  age,  their
under-garment"'^  was  taken  away,  and  only  a  single
u[)per  one  a  year  allowed  them.  Hence  tliey  were
necessarily  dirty  in  their  persons,  and  denied  the
great  favour  of  baths  and  oil,  except  on  some
particular  days  of  the  year.  They  slept  in  com-
panies, upon  beds  made  of  the  tops  of  reeds,
which  they  gathered  with  their  own  hands  with-
out knives,  and  brought  from  the  banks  of  the
Eurotas.  In  winter  they  were  permitted  to  add
a  little  thistle-down  ■^^  as  that  appeared  to  have  some
warmth  in  it.

At  this  age,  the  most  distinguished  among  them
became  fixvourite  companions  of  the  elder '^  ;  the
old  men  attended  more  constantly  their  places  of
exercise,  observing  their  trials  of  strength  and  wit,
not  in  a  slight  and  cursory  manner,  but  as  their
fathers,  guardians,  and  governors :  so  that,  at  no
time  or  place,  were  persons  wanting  to  instruct  and

the  acute  but  pernicious  work  which  once  excited  so  much  atten-
tion in  England,  *  the  Fable  of  the  Bees.')*  As  for  agriculture,
and  necessary  mechanic  business,  it  was  left  to  the  slaves.  (I.,)

Plato  indeed  expressly  affirms,  that  they  cultivated  the  mind  still
more  than  the  body;  but  that  they  disguised  their  superiority  of
intellectual  attainments,  lest  they  should  awaken  the  envy  and  emu-
lation of  the  rest  of  Greece.*

"^  The  one  next  their  skin.*

-'°  This  M.  Ricard  specifically  states  to  be  the  cartlum  tonicntosns.*

j'  Though  the  youth  of  the  male  sex  were  much  cherished  and
beloved,  as  those  that  were  to  build  up  the  future  glory  of  the  state,
yet  in  Sparta  it  was  a  virtuous  and  modest  affection,  untinged  with
that  sensuality  which  was  so  scandalous  at  Athens  and  other  places.
Xenophon  (de  Kcp.  Laced,  ii.)  says,  these  lovers  lived  v.ith  those
to  whom  they  were  attached,  as  a  father  does  with  his  children,  or
a  brotlier  v.ith  his  brethren.  The  good  eifects  of  this  part  of
Lycurgus'  institutions  v.et"e  seen  in  li'c  union,  uhich  reigned  anion;;
tiie  citizens.


LYCURGUS.  139

chastise  them.  One  of  the  best  and  ablest  men  in
the  city  was,  moreover,  appointed  Inspector  of  the
Youth ;  who  gave  the  command  of  each  company
to  the  discreetest  and  most  spirited  of  those  called
Irens.  An  Iren  was  one,  that  had  been  two  years
out  of  the  class  of  boys  :  a  Meiliren  ^'\  one  of  the
oldest  boys.  This  Iren  then,  a  youth  twenty  years
old,  gives  orders  to  those  under  his  command  in
their  little  battles,  and  employs  them  to  w^ait  upon
him  at  his  house.  He  sends  the  oldest  of  them  to
fetch  wood,  and  the  younger  to  gather  pot-herbs :
these  they  steal  where  they  can  find  them  ",  either
slyly  getting  into  gardens,  or  else  craftily  and  warily
creeping  to  the  common  tables.  But,  if  any  one  be
caught,  he  is  severely  flogged  for  his  negligence,  or
his  want  of  dexterity.  They  steal  too  wliatever
victuals  they  possibly  can,  ingeniously  contriving  to
do  it  when  persons  are  asleep,  or  keep  but  indifferent
watch.  If  they  are  discovered,  they  are  punished
not  only  with  whipping,  but  with  hunger.  Their
supper  indeed  is  only  slender  at  all  times,  that  to
fence  against  want  they  may  be  forced  to  exercise
their  courage  and  address.  This  is  the  first  inten-
tion of  their  spare  diet ;  a  subordinate  one  is,  to
make  them  grow  tall.  For  when  the  animal  spirits
are  not  too  much  oppressed  by  a  great  quantity  of
food,  which  stretches  itself  out  in  breadth  and  thick-

5^  'Hereafter  to  become  an  Iren.'  In  this  institution  may  be
recognised  the  proto-lyne  of  the  barbarous  system  of  '  fagging,*
still  unaccountably  retained  amidst  the  honourable  and  successful
improvements  of  our  public  schools !  The  better  part  of  the  model
however,  the  queries  proposed  after  supper,  &c.,  have  somehow  or
other,  I  fear,  slipped  out  of  the  modern  copy.*

^^  Not  that  the  Spartans  authorised  thefts  and  robberies ;  for,  as
vill  was  in  common  in  their  republic,  those  vices  could  there  have
no  place.  But  the  design  was  to  accustom  cliildren,  who  were
destined  for  war,  to  keep  themselves  on  the  alert,  and  to  e>;pose
themselves  courageously  to  the  severest  punishments,  in  case  they
failed  of  the  necessary  dexterity :  a  dexterity,  that  would  have
been  Attended  with  fatal  effects  to  the  morals  of  any  youth  but  the
Spartan,  educated  (as  that  was)  to  contemn  riches  and  superfluities,
and  guarded  iu  all  other  respects  by  the  severest  virtue.


UO  LYCURGUS.

ness,  tlicyri.e  by  tlieir  natural  levity,  and  the  body
easily  and  freely  shoots  up  in  height ''^  I'his  also
contributes  to  make  them  handsome;  for  thin  and
slender  liabits  yield  more  freely  to  nature,  which
then  gives  a  fine  proportion  to  the  limbs,  while  tlie
irross  and  heavy  resist  her  bv  tlieir  wei^'lit.  So
women  that  take  physic  during  their  pregnancy
have  slighter  cliiidren  indeed,  but  of  a  finer  and
more  delicate  turn,  because  the  sujipleness  of  tlie
matter  more  readily  obeys  the  plastic  power  ^^
These,  however,  are  speculations,  which  we  shall
leave  to  others.

The  boys  steal  with  so  much  caution,  that  one  of
them,  having  conveyed  a  young  fox  under  his  gar-
ment, suffered  the  creature  to  tear  out  his  bowels
with  his  teeth  and  claws,  clioosing  rather  to  die
than  to  be  detected.  Neither  does  this  appear
incredible,  if  v/e  consider  what  their  young  men
can  endure  to  this  dav  ;  manv  of  whom  we  have
seen  expire  under  the  lash,  at  the  altar  of  Diana
Orthia  '\

The  Iren,  reposing  himself  after  supper,  used  to
order  one  of  tlie  boys  to  sincj  a  soncj :  to  another  he
put  some  question,  which  required  a  judicious  answer;
for  example,  "  \\\\o  w^as  the  best  man  in  the  city  r"

5+  This  doctrine  Plutarcli  lias  borrowed  from  Xenoplion  (de
Rep.  Laced,  ii.) ;  and  lie  elsewhere  relates,  tliat  Epaniinondiis
adopted  it  so  far,  as  to  dismiss  from  his  army  a  soldier  too  miuh
inclined  to  embonpoint.*

55  To  this  purport  Hippocrates  (Aphor.  Iv.  1.)  directs  that  preg-
nant women,  who  have  any  grossncss  of  humours,  ought  to  take
physic  from  the  fourth  to  the  seventh  month.*

•■"^  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  Diana  Taurica,  whose  statue
Orestes  is  said  to  have  brought  to  Lacedfcmon,  and  to  whom  lunnaa
victims  were  oftcred.  Lycurgus,  it  is  pretended,  abolished  these
^  vsacrifices,  and  substituted  in  their  room  the  flagellation  of  young
men,  with  whose  blood  the  altar  was  at  least  to  be  sprinkled.  But
in  truth  a  desire  of  overcoming  all  the  v/eaknesses  of  human  nature,
and  thereby  rendering  his  t^'partans  not  only  superior  to  their
neighbours,  but  to  their  species  pervades  many  of  the  institutions
of  Lycurgus.  This  principle,  if  well  attended  to,  thoroughly  exr
plains  them  ;  and,  without  this,  many  of  them  cannot  he  explained
at  all.


LYCURGUS,  HI

or,  '•  What  he  thought  of  such  or  such  an  action  ?"
This  accustomed  them  from  their  childhood  to  judge
of  the  virtues,  and  to  enter  into  the  affairs,  of  their
countrymen.  For  if  one  of  them  was  asked,  "  Who
"  is  a  good  citizen  ?"  or,  "  Who  is  an  infamous
"  one  r'  and  hesitated  in  his  answer,  he  was  con-
sidered as  a  boy  of  slow  parts,  and  of  a  soul  that
would  never  aspire  to  honour.  The  answer  was
likev^/ise  to  have  a  reason  assigned  for  it,  and  it's
proof  conceived  in  fe^v  words.  He,  whose  account
of  the  matter  was  wrong,  by  way  of  punishment  had
his  thumb  bit  by  the  Iren.  I'he  old  men  and  the
magistrates  often  attended  these  little  trials,  to  seei
whether  the  Iren  exercised  his  autliority  in  a  ra-
tional and  proper  manner.  He  was  permitted,  in-
deed, to  iniiict  the  penalties  ;  but  Vv/hen  the  boys
were  gone,  he  was  to  be  chastised  himself,  if  he
had  punished  them  either  with  too  much  remissness
or  too  much  severity.

The  adopters  of  favourites  also  shared  both  in  the
honour  and  the  disgrace  of  their  boys  j  and  one  of
them  is  said  to  have  been  fined  by  the  magistrates,
because  the  boy  whom  he  had  selected  let  some  un-
generous word  or  cry  escape  him,  as  he  was  fighting-
This  love  was  so  honourable,  and  in  so  much  es-
teem, that  the  virgins  too  had  their  lovers  among
the  most  virtuous  matrons.  A  competition  of  af-
fection caused  no  misunderstanding,  but  rather  a
mutual  friendship  between  those  who  had  fixed  their
regards  upon  the  same  youth,  and  a  joint  endea-
vour to  make  him  as  accomplished  as  possible.

The  boys  were  taught  likewise  to  use  sharp  re-
partee, seasoned  with  humour,  and  whatever  they
said  was  to  be  concise  and  pithy.  For  Lycurgus,  as
we  have  observed,  fixed  only  a  small  value  upon
a  considerable  quantity  of  his  iron  moziey  ;  whereas
he  made  the  worth  of  speech,  on  the  contrary,  con-
sist in  it's  being  comprised  in  a  few  plain  words,
pregnant  with  a  great  deal  of  sense ;  and  contrived
that,  by  long  silence,  they  might  learn  to  be  sen-


142  LYCURGU^.

tentious  and  acute  in  their  replies.     As  debaucliery
often  causes  weakness  and  steiility  in  tiie  bodv,  so
the  intemperance  ot  the  tongue  renders  conversa-
tion empty  and  insipid.     King  Agis  therefore,  when
a  certain   Athenian  laughed  at  the  Lacedemonian
short    swords,  and  said,  "  The  jugglers    upon  tlie
*'  stage  wo'.dd  swallow  th.cm  with  ease;"  answered,
in  his  laconic  way,  "  And  yet  we  can   reach  our
*'  enemies'  hearts  with  them/*     To  me  indeed  there
seems  to  be  something  in  this  concise   manner  of
speaking,  which  immediately  hits   the  object  aimed
at,  and  forcibly  strikes  the  mind  of  the  hearer.     Ly-
curgus  himself  w^as  brief  and  sententious  in  his  dis-
course, if  we  may  judge  by  some  of  his  ansv>'er9,
which   are  left  on  record  ;  that,  for  instance,  con-
cerning the   constitution  :  When    one  advised  him
to  establish   a  popular  government  in  Lacedsemon,
"  Go,"  said  he,  "  and  first   make   a  trial  of  it  in
"  your  own  family."     That  again,  concerning  sa-
critices  to  the   Deity  ;  when  he  was  asked  why  he
appointed  them    so  trifling,  and  of  so  little  value  ?
"  'Jhat  we  may  never  be  in  want,"  said  he,  "  of
"  something  to  offer  him."     Once  more,  when  they
inquired  of  him   what  sort  of  martial  exercises  he
allowed,  he  answered  ;  "  All,  except  those  in  which
"  you  stretch  ''  out  your  hands."     Many  similar  re-
plies  of  his  are  said  to  be  taken  from  the  letters,
which    he   wrote   to  his    countrymen  :  as   to   their
question,  "  Hov/   shall  we   best  guard  against  the
invasion   of  an  enemy  r"     "  By  continuing  poor,
and  not  desiring  in  your  possessions  to  be  one
"  above   another".**     And  to   the  question,  "  Shall
"  we  inclose  Sparta  with  walls  ?"     "  That  city  is
"  well  fortified,  which  has  a  wall  of  jnen,  instead  of
"  brick."     Whether  these  however,  and  some  other
letters  ascribed   to   him,  be   genuine  or   not,  is   a
difficult  matter  to  determine.     But  that  they  hated
long  speeches,    the   follovving   apophthegms    arc    a

^7  This  was  tlie  form  of  demanding  quarter  in  battle.


LYCURGUS.  1 45


&rther  proof.  King  Leoiiidas  said  to  one,  .v/lio  dis-
coursed at  an  improper  time  about  affairs  of  some
concern,  "  Mv  friend,  you  should  not  talk  so  much
"  to  the  purpose,  of  wliat  it  is  not  to  the  purpose
"  to  talk  about."  Charijaus,  the  nepliew  of  Ly-
curgus,  being  asked  why  his  uucIq  had  made  so  few
laws,  answered  ;  "  To  men -of  few  words,  few  lav/s
"  are  sufficient'."  Some  people  finding  fault  with
Hecateus  the  sophist,  because  when  admitted  to
one  of  the  public  repasts,  he  did  not  utter  a  single
syllable,  Archidamidas  replied ;  "  He,  who  knows
"  how  to  speak,  knows  also  when  to  speak."

The  manner  of  their  repartees,  which  (as  I  said)
were  seasoned  with  humour,  may  be  gatliered  from
the  following  instances  :  When  a  troublesome  fellow-
was  pestering  Demaratus  with  impertinent  questions,
and  this  in  particular  several  times  repeated,  "  Who
"  is  the  best  man  in  Sparta  ?"  He  answered,  "  He,
'•'  that  is  the  least  like  you."  To  som.e,  Vvho  were
commending  the  Eleans  for  managing  the  Olympic
games  with  so  much  justice  and  propriety,  Agi.^
said;  "  What  great  matter  is  it,  if^he  Eleans  do
"  justice  once  in  five  years'^?"  When  a  stranger
was  professing  his  regard  for  Theopompus,  and  say-
ing that  his  own  countrymen  called  him  Philolacon
('  a  lover  of  the  LacediJemonians '),  the  king  an-
swered him  ;  "  My  good  friend,  it  were  much  better,
•'  if  they  called  you  Philopolites"  ('  a  lover  of  your
own  countrymen ').  To  an  orator  of  Athen's,  \vho
observed  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  no  learning,
Plistonax,  the  son  of  Pausanias,  said  ;  "  Triie,  for
"  we  are  the  only  people  of  G^xece,  that  Jiave
"  learned  no  ill  from  you."  To  a  person,  who  in-
quired  what  niunbcr  of  n:sen  there  v*'ere  in  Sparta,

^s  The  Hellanodics,  who  distributed  tlie  prizes  to  the  conquer-
ors at  the  v)!yinpic  games,  took  the  gretUest  pains  during  t!ie  pre-
ceding ten  monthB  (PrtUoan.  EI.  vi.  ai.)  to  qualify  themselves,  by
an  accurate  study  of  all  the  decree*  upon  tiie  subject,  for  tbJr
iiDportaiit  though  britf  dut\.*


>


lit  LYCURGUS.

Arcbidamidas  replied,  "  Enow  to  keep  bad  men  a£
"  a  distance.'*

Even  when  they  indulged  a  vein  of  pleasantry,  it
was  obvious  that  they  would  not  use  one  unnecessary
word,  nor  let  a  single  expression  escape  them,  that
had  not  some  sense  wortii  attending  to.  For  one,
being  asked  to  go  and  hear  a  person  who  imitated
the  nightingale  to  perfection,  replied,  "  I  have  heard
*'  the  nightingale  herself*."  Auothcr,  upon  read-
ing this  epitaph.

Victims  of  Mar?,  they  per'usli'd  at  Selinus,
Who  qvjench'd  tl.e  rage  of  tyranny


said,  "  And  they  deserved  to  perish,  for  instead  of
"  quenching  it  they  should  have  let  it  burn  out."
A  young  man  ansv\-ered  one,  who  promised  him
some  game-cocks  that  would  die  fighting,  "  Give
"  me  those  that  vvill  kill  fighting."  Another,  see-
ing some  people  relieving  the  necessities  of  nature,
on  stools  for  the  purpose,  said,  "  May  I  never  sit
"  in  any  place,  wliere  I  cannot  rise  beibre  tho
"  aged  1 1"  Such  was  the  character  of  their  apoph-
thegms :  so  that  it  has  been  justly  enough  observed,
that  the  term  lakouizc'ni  ('  to  act  the  Lacediemo-
nian ')  is  to  be  referred  rather  to  the  exercises  oi'
the  mind,  than  to  those  of  the  body.

Nor  were  poetry  and  music  less  cultivated  among
them,  than  a  concise  dignity  of  expression.  Their
songs  had  in  them  a  spirit,  which  could  rouse  the
soul,  and  impel  it  enthusiastically  to  action.  The
language  was  plain  and  manly,  the  subject  serious
and  moral.     For  they  consisted  chiefiy  of  the  praises

*  Tliis  is  nscribed  to  Agcsilaus,  in  liis  Life,  W.  97.*
f  For  a  reference  to  Toup's  Enient).  ad  Suid.  II.  37G.,  iioticinjij
the  error  of  tlic  Latin  version,  which  has  hitherto  clung  to  the
En<:h:sh  ones,  I  am  indebted  to  E.  H.  Barker,  l">?q.  of  Trinity-
ColIe<re,  Caml)ridfrc.  Wyttenbach,  in  his  edition  of  the  Morals,
(8vo.  II.  928.)  lias  given  a  more  correct  translation; — Exoncrandcf:
alvi  cause  in  scllis  sederc  videns.*


LYCUilGUS.  U&

of  heroes  who  had  died  for  Spafta,  or  else  of  ex-
pressions of  detestation  for  such  wretthes  as  had
declined  the  glorious  opportunity,  and  rather  chose
to  drag  on  life  in  misery  and  contempt.  Neither
did  they  iorgct  to  express  an  ambition  for  glory,
suitable  to  their  respective  ages.  Of  this,  it  may
not  be  aniiss  to  give  an  instance  :  There  were  three
choirs  on  their  festivals,  corresponding  with  the
three  ages  of  man.     The  old  men  began.

Once  in  battle  bold  v>e  shone :

the  young  men  answered,

Tiy  us;  our  vigour  is  not  gone  J

and  the  boys  concluded.

The  pahn  remains  for  us  alone  -^'^.

If  we  consider  indeed  with  some  attention  such  of
the  Lacedaemonian  poems  as  are  still  extant,  and
study  those  airs  which  were  played  upon  the  flute
when  they  marched  to  battle,  we  must  agree,  that
Terpander '''^  and  Pindar  have  very  fitly  joined  valour

■^'^  These  iambic  verses  are  the  fragments  of  a  song,  of  which
Tyrtaeus  probably  was  the  author.  For  Pollux  (iv.)  affirms  tliat  lie
composed  a  threefoid  dance  for  the  old  men,  the  young  men,  and
the  boys  :  and  this  he  perhaps  accompanied  with  some  poetry.

It  appears,  from  Athena^us  (iv.  1.)  that  all  the  Lacedaemonians
learned  to  play  upon  the  flute;  and  A.  Gellius  (i.  11.)  ascertains,
from  Tluicydides  (v.  70.)  that  Lycurgus'  motive,  for  introducing
this  soft  instrument  among  his  hardy  soldiers,  was  to  moderate  their
dtHigerous  impetuositj'.*

^■^  Terpander,  a  poet  and  a  musician  (as  indeed  the  poets  of
those  times  in  general  were),  added  three  strings  to  the  harp,
v.'hich  till  then  had  but  four.  He  flourished,  about  a  hundred  and
twenty  years  after  Homer,  (L.)  at  Lesbos ;  and  was  sent  for  to
Sparta,  by  order  of  the  oracle,  to  appease  a  sedition.  He  is  said
to  have  versified  the  code  of  Lycurgus :  a  work  not  less  difiicult,  if
tile  statutes  of  that  legislator  had  any  resemblance  to  an  English
act  of  parliament,  than  the  attempt  of  a  Jesuit  to  display  the  Frin-
cipia  of  Newton  in  iicroic  metre!     In  comparison  ^vitia  these  la-

voL.  r.  L


»  .•;


146  LYCURGUS.

and  mu-ic  together.  The  former  thus  speaks  of
Laccdaemon,

There  gleams  the  youth's  bright  falchion  ;  th-re  the  Muse
Lifts  ber  sweet  voice  ;  th.n-e  awefai  Justice  views
Her  wide  pavilion  open.

And  Pindar  sings.

There  in  grave  council  sits  the  sage ;
There  burns  the  youth's  resistless  rage

To  hurl  the  quivering  lance  ;
The  Muse  witJi  glory  crowns  their  arms.
And  Melody  exerts  her  charms,
And  Pleasure  leads  the  dance.

Thu5  we  are  informed,  not  only  of  their  warhke
turn,  but  of  their  skill  in  music.  For,  as  the  Spar-
tan poet  says.

To  swell  the  thunders  of  the  lyre
Becomes'  the  warrior's  lofty  fire.

And  the  king  always  offered  sacrifice  to  the  ^^  Muses
before  a  battle,  putting  his  troops  in  mind  (I  sup-
pose) of  their  early  education,  and  of  the  judgement
which  would  be  passed  upon  tliem  ;  as  well  as  that
those  divinities  might  teach  them  to  despise  danger,
in  the  performance  of  exploits  fit  for  them  to  cele-
brate.

Upon  these  occasions  ^  they  relaxed  the  severity

hours,  light  was  the  toil  of  the  poet,  who  harmonised  the  yfs  in
prfcsentiy  and  of  that  composer  who  has  still  more  recently  set  the
Multiplication-table  to  Music!*

^'  Xenophon  says  the  king,  who  commanded  the  army,  sacrificed
to  Jupiter  M\d  Minerva  on  the  frontier  of  his  kingdom.  The  Muses
probably  were  joined  with  Minerva,  the  patroness  of  science.

<5*  The  true  reason  of  this  was,  in  ail  probability,  tliutv.ar  might
be  less  burt'.iensome  to  them  ;  for  to  render  them  bold  and  warlike
was  the  reigning  passion  of  their  legislator.  Under  this  article  we
may  add,  that  they  were  forbidden  to  remain  long  encamped  in  the
?ame  place,  as  well  to  hinder  their  being  surprised,  as  that  they
flight  be  more  troublesome  to  their  enemies,  by  wasting  every
corner  of  their  country.     Tiiey  slept  all  night  in  their  armour;  but

12


LYCURGUS.  H7

of  tbeii-  discipline,  permitting  their  men  to  be  cu-
rious in  dressing  their  hair,  and  elegant  in  their  arms
and  apparel,  while  they  expressed  their  alacrity,  like
liorses  full  of  fire  and  neighing  for  the  race.  They
let  their  hair  tlierefore  grov/  from  tlieir  youth,  but
took  more  particular  care,  when  they  expected  an
action,  to  have  it  well-combed  and  shining;  re-
membering a  saying  of  Lycurgus,  that  "  a  large
"  head  of  iiair  made  the  handsome  more  graceful,
"  and  tlie  ug!y  more  terrible."  The  exercises  hke-
wiseof  the  young  men,  during  th.e  campaigns,  were
more  moderate,  their  diet  less  hard,  and  their  whole
treatment  more  indulgent :  so  that  they  were  the
only  people  in  the  world,  with  whom  military  disci-
pline wore  in  time  of  war  a  gentler  face  than  usuaL
When  the  army  was  drav;n  up  and  tlie  enemy  near,
the  king  sacrificed  a  goat,  and  ccmmanded  them  all
to  place  garlands  upon  their  heads,  and  the  musi-^
cians  to  "play  Castor's  march  ^^,  while  he  himself
beo'an  the  Paean,  which  was  the  signal  to  advance.
It  was  at  once  a  solemn  and  a  dreadful  sight,  to  see(
them  m.easuring  their  steps  to  the  sound  of  music,
and  without  the  least  disorder  in  their  ranks  or  tu-
mult of  spirits,  moving  forward  cheerfully  and  com-
posedly with  harmony  to  battle.  Neither  fear  nor
rashness  was  likely  excessively  to  affett  men  so  dis-
posed, possessed  of  a  firm  presence  of  mind,  with
courage  and  confidence  of  success,  as  luider  the
conduct  of  heaven.  When  the  king  marched  against
the  enemy,  he  had  always  with  him  some  one,  w^ho
had  been  crowned  in  the  public  games  of  Greece.
A  Lacedseraonian  once,  we  are  told,  when  large
suras  v.'ere  offered  him,  on  condition  that  he  would

tlicir  oat-guards  were  not  allowed  their  shields  that,  being  unpro-
vided with  defence,  they  might  not  dare  to  sleep.  In  all  their  ex-
peditions, they  carefully  attended  to  the  performance  of  religiour
rites ;  and,  after  their  evening-meal  was  over,  the  soldiers  sung
together  hymns  to  their  gods.

05  So  calledj  as  supposed  to  have  been  invented  by  that  hero,  or
as  containing  on  account  of  his  exploits.   Vide  Poll.  iv.  x>.  7-8  *

L    2


us  LYCURGUS.

not  enter  the  Olympic  lists,  refused  tbem.  PlaviiTg
with  much  difliculty  thrown  his  antagonist,  he  was
asked  ;  "  Spartan,  what  will  you  gain  by  this  vic-
"  torv?"  He  answered  with  a  smile,  "  1  shall  have
"  the  honour  of  fighting  foremost  in  the  ranks  be-
"  fore  my  prince."  When  they  liad  routed  the
enemy,  they  continued  the  pursuit  till  they  w^er'e  as-
sured of  the  victory,  upon  wdnch  they  immediately
.desisted  •,  deeming  it  neither  generous,  nor  worthy
of  a  Grecian,  to  destroy  those  who  made  no  farther
resistance.  This,  while  it  proved  their  magnanimity,
was  also  of  considerable  service  to  their  cause.  For
when  their  adversaries  found  that  they  killed  such
as  stood  out,  but  spared  the  fugitives,  they  deemed
it  better  to  fly,  than  to  meet  their  fate  upon  the
spot.

Hippias  the  sophist  informs  ns,  that  Lycnrgus
himself  v>'as  a  man  of  great  personal  valour,  and  an
experienced  commander  ^\  Philostephanus  also  as-
cribes to  him  the  first  division  of  the  cavalry  into
troops  of  fifty,  who  were  drawn  up  in  a  square  body.
But  Demetrius  the  Phalerean  affirms,  that  he  never
had  any  military  employment,  and  that  there  was
the  profoundest  peace  imaginable  when  he  was  esta-
blishing the  constitution  of  Sparta.  His  providing
for  a  cessation  of  arms,  during  the  Olympic  games,
is  Kkewise  a  mark  of  the  humane  and  peaceable  man.
Some  however  acquaint  us,  and  among  the  rest  Her-
niippus,  tliat  Lycnrgus  had  at  first  no  communica-
tion with  Iphitus ;  but  coming  that  way,  and  hap-
pening to  be  a  spectator,  he  heard  behind  him  a
Innnan  voice  (as  he  thouglit)  which  expressed  some
-wonder  and  displeasure,  that  he  did  not  encourage
his  countrymen  to  resort  to  so  illustrious  an  assem-
bly. U])on  this  he  immediately  turned  round  to
discover  whence  the  voice  came  ;  and,  as  there  was

^*  Xenophon,  in  lils  Treatise  on  the  Si)iM-tan  Commonwealth,
says  that  Lycurgns  brought  military  disciphne  to  high  perfection,
iind  gives  us  a  detail  of  Iiis  regulation.-^  ;aul  ip.iprovenicnts  in  the  arc
'(^r  v/ar ;  some  of  which  have  been  mentioned  in  the  foregoing  note^


LYCURGUS.  149

lio  one  to  be  seen,  concliided  that  it  was  from  hea-
ven. He  therefore  joined  Iphitus,  and  ordering
along  with  him  the  ceremonies  of  the  festival,  ren-
dered it  more  magnificent  and  more  lasting.

The  discipline  of  the  Lacedaemonians  continued,
after  they  wej-e  arrived  at  years  of  maturity.  For  no  /
man  was  at  liberty  to  live  as  he  pleased,  the  city
being  like  one  great  camp,  where  all  had  their  stated
allowance  and  knew  their  public  charge  ;  each  man
concluding  that  he  was  born  not  for  himself,  bat  for
his  country.  Hence,  if  they  had  no  particular  or-
ders, they  employed  themselves  in  inspecting  the
boys  and  teaching  them  something  useful,  or  in
learning  from  those  that  were  older  than  themselves.
One  of  the  highest  privileges  that  Lycurgus  pro-
cured for  his  countrymen,  was  the  enjoyment  of  lei-
sure, the  consequence  of  his  having  forbidden  them
to  exercise  any  mechanic  trade  ^\  It  was  not  worth
their  while  to  take  pains  to  raise  a  fortune,  since
riches  there  were  of  no  account :  and  the  Helots,
who  tilled  the  ground,  were  answerable  for  the  pro-
duce above-mentioned.  To  this  purpose  we  have,
a  story  of  a  Lacedaemonian,  who  happening  to  be
at  Athens  while  the  court  sate,  was  informed  of  a
man  that  had  been  fined  for  idleness  ;  and  when  the
poor  fellow  was  returning  home  in  deep  dejection,
attended  by  his  condoling  friends,  desired  the  com-
pany to  show  him  the  person,  who  had  been  con-
demned for  keeping  up  his  dignity.  So  much
beneath  them  they  reckoned  all  attention  to  mecha-
nic arts,  and  all  desire  of  riches!

With  money,  law-suits  were  banished  from  La- :
cedaemon.      The  Spartans  knew  neither  riches  nor
poverty,  but  possessed  an  equal  competency,   and
had  a  cheap  and  easy  way  of  supplying  their  few

*^  How  tlifferent  was  the  opinion  of  Socrutesl  who  contended
that  there  was  nothing  in  the  arts  or  trades  beyond  the  capacity,  or
improper  for  the  acquirement,  of  a  gentleman;  as  they  might  even-
tually, upon  any  signal  reverse  of  fortune,  afford  an  invaluable  re-
source.*


IJO  LYCURGUS.

wauls.  Hence,  when  they  were  not  engaged  in
war,  their  time  was  taken  up  with  dancing,  feasting,
hunting,  or  meeting  to  exercise  or  to  converse.
They  never  went  to  market  under  thirty  years  of
age^°,  all  their  necessary  concerns  being  managed
by  their  relations  and  adopters.  I^ieither  was  it
deemed  creditable  to  the  old,  to  be  seen  saunterin.^jf
in  the  market-place*,  but  rather  to  pass  great  part
of  the  day  in  the  schools  of  exercise,  or  places  of
conversation.     Their  discourse  seldom  turned  upon

(  money  or  business  or  trade,  but  upon  the  praise  of
the  excellent,  or  the  contempt  of  the  worthless  ;
the  last  of  which  was  expressed  with  a  degree  of
pleasantry  and  humour,  conveying  instruction  and
correction  without  seeriimg  to  intend  it.  Lycurgus
himself,  indeed^  was  not  immoder>  ely  severe  in  his
manner;  but,  as  Sosibius  ir.forms  us,  dedicated  a
litile  statue  to  the  god  of  laughter  in  each  hall :

/  considering  facetiousness  as  a  seasoning  of  their  hard
exercise  and  diet,  and  therefore  ordering  it  to  take
place  upon  all  proper  occasions,  in  their  conunou
entertainments  and  parties  of  pleasure.

Upon  the  whole,  he  taught  \v  citizens  to  think
nothing  more  disagreeable,  than  to  live  by  (or  for)
themselves.  Like  bees,  they  acted  with  one  impulse
lor  the  public  good,  and  always  assembled  about
their  prince.  Thev  were  inflamed  bv  a  thirst  of  ho-
nour,  an  enthusiasm  bordering  upon  insanity,  and
had  not  a  wish  but  for  their  country.  These  senti-
ments are  confirmed  by  some  of  their  apliorisms.
When  Pa3daretus  lost  his  election  lor  one  of  the
Three  Hundred,  he  went  away  rejoicing,  that  t!]cre
were  three  hundred   better  men  than  hir.;seif  fouiui

^  Thfs  also  is  said  to  Iiave  bojen  the  age,  when  thoy  began  to

Fcrve  ill  the  aiMiy.      i3ut,  as  they  were  oblii^od  to  i  '  ty  years'  ser-

"vice  before  the  hiw  exempted  them  from  goiiir::  to  the  f-;chl,  i  inchne

to  the  opinion  of  those  writers,  who  th'w.k  that  the  ^iii]itary  age  is

not  well  ascertained.

*  This  was  an  Athenian  feature,  and  subsisted  uniinpuirod  for  at
least  nearly  fsur  centuries,  as  we  learn  from  the  charges  conveyed
iii  Deniosth.  Philipp.  i.  5.  and  Act.  Apo;t.  xvii.  21.*


LYCURGUS.  151

in  the  city  ^\  Pislstratidas,  goino^  with  some  others
embassador  to  the  king  of  Persia's  lieutenants,  was
asked  whether  they  came  with  a  pubHc  commission,
or  upon  tlieir  own  accoimt ;  to  which  he  answered,
*'  If  successful,  for  the  pubhc  ;  if  unsuccessful,  for
*'  ourselves."  Argilconis,  the  mother  of  Brasidas^%
inquiring  of  some  Ampln'politans  that  waited  upon
her  at  her  house,  whether  her  son  had  died  honoiu'-
ably,  and  as  became  a  Spartan ;  they  loudly  ex-
tolled his  merit,  and  said  there  was  not  such  a  man
left  in  Sparta :  upon  which  she  replied,  "  Say  not
"  so,  my  friends ;  for  Brasidas  was  indeed  a  man  of
''  honour,  but  Lacedaimon  can  boast  of  many  better
"  men  than  he^^."

The  senate,  as  I  said  before,  consisted  at  first  of
those,  wliu  had  been  assistants  to  Lycurgus  in  his
great  enterprise.  Afterward,  to  fill  up  any  vacancy
that  might  happen,  he  ordered  the  most  worthy
man  to  be  selected,  from  such  as  were  full  three-
score years  old.  Tin's  was  the  most  respectable  dis-
pute in  the  world,  and  the  contest  was  truly  glo-
rious: for  it  was  not  who  should  be  swiftest  among
the  swift,  or  strongest  among  the  strong,  but  who
was  the  wisest  and  the  best  among  the  good  and
the  wise.  He  who  had  the  preference,  was  to
bear  this  mark  of  superior  excellence  through  life,
this  high  authority,  which  placed  in  his  hands  the

^'^  According  to  Xenoplion,  it  was  the  custom  for  tl)e  Ephori  to
appoint  three  officers,  each  of  whom  was  to  select  a  liundred  men,
the  best  he  could  find  ;  among  these,  it  was  a  point  of  great  emula-
tion to  be  included.

^^  Brasidas,  the  Lacedasmonian  general,  defeated  tlie  Athenians
in  a  battle  fought  near  Amphipolls,  a  town  of  Macedon  on  the  banks
of  the  Strymon,  bat  lost  his  lite  in  the  action.  (Thucj'd.  v.  10.)

'^^  Who  will  not  be  reminded,  by  this  answer,  of  the  spirited  ob-
servation of  our  English  king,  especially  as  contrasted  with  the  de-
jectlon  of  the  Scottish  prince,  on  the  event  of  Chevy-chase?

*  I  trust,  I  have  wltliin  my  realm
Five  hundred  as  good  as  he.'

A  trait,  which  Addison  has  thouglit  worthy  of  speciaJ  observation,
»n  his  comiDent  upon  that  national  ballad  f  Spect.  70.)*


152  LYCURGUS.

lives  and  honour  of  the  citizens  and  every  other  im-
portant affair.  The  manner  of  the  election  was  as
follows  :  When  the  people  were  assembled,  some  per-
sons appointed  for  the  purpose  were  shut  up  in  a  rooni
near  the  place,  where  they  could  neither  see  nor  be
seen,  and  only  hear  the  shouts  of  the  constituents'":
for  by  them  they  decided  this,  and  most  other  af-
fairs. Each  candidate  walked  silently  throucch  the
assembly,  one  after  another  according  to  lot.  Those
that  were  shut  up  had  writing-tables,  in  which  they
set  down  in  different  columns  the  frequency  and
loudness  of  the  shouts,  without  knowing  for  whom
they  were  intended  ;  only  they  marked  tliem  as  first,
second,  third,  and  so  on,  according  to  the  number
of  competitors.  He,  that  had  the  most  and  the
loudest  acclamations,  was  declared  duly  elected.
He  was  then  crowned  with  a  garland,  and  went
round  to  give  thanks  to  the  gods  :  many  young  men
followed,  striving  who  should  extol  him  most  highly,
and  the  women  celebrated  his  virtues  in  their  songs,
and  blessed  his  worthy  life  and  conduct.  Each  of
his  relations  offered  him  a  repast,  and  their  address
on  the  occasion  was,  "  Sparta  honours  you  with  this
"  collation."  When  he  had  finislied  the  procession,
he  went  to  the  common  table,  and  lived  as  before.
Only  two  portions  were  set  before  him,  one  of  which
he  carried  away :  and,  as  all  the  women  related  to
him  attended  at  the  gates  of  the  public  hall,  he
called  her  for  whom  he  had  the  Jiighest  esteem,  and
presented  her  with  the  portion,  saying  at  the  same
time  ;  "  That,  which  I  received  as  a  mark  of  honour,
*'  I  give  to  you.'*  Upon  which,  she  was  conducted
home  with  great  applause  by  the  rest  of  the  women.

'°  As  this  was  a  tumultuary  and  uncertain  way  of  deciding  who
had  the  majority,  they  were  often  obhged  to  separate  the  people,
and  count  the  votes.  A  striking  proof  of  it's  inconvenience  oc-
curred, upon  an  important  occasion,  to  tlie  Ephorus  Stheneliiidas.
(Thucyd,  i.  87.)  Aristotle  thinks,  that  in  such  a  case  persons
should  not  offer  themselves  candidates,  or  solicit  the  office  or  em-
ployment, but  be  called  to  it  merely  for  their  abilities  and  their  me-j
rit.  (Pol.  ii.  7.)


LYCURGUS.  15%

Lycurgus,  likewise,  made  good  regulations  with
respect  to  burials.     In  the  first  place,  in  order  to
take  away  all  superstition,  he  ordered  the  dead  to
be  buried  in  the  city  ^\  and  even  permitted  their
monuments  to  be  erected  near  the  temples :  accus-
toming the  youth  to  such  sights  from  their  infancy,
that  they  might  have  no  uneasiness  from  them,  nor
any  horror  of  death,  as  if  people  were  polluted  wdtlii
the  touch  of  a  dead  body,  or  by  treading  upon  a
grave.     Next,  he  suifered  nothing  to  be  buried  with
the  corpse,  except  the  red  cloth  and  the  olive-leaves
in  which  it  was  wrapped  ^'^     Neither  would  he  per-
mit the  relations  to  inscribe  any  names  upon  the
tombs,  except  of  those  men  that  had  fallen  in  battle,
or  of  those  women  who  had  died  in  some  sacred
office.     He  limited  the  time  of  mourning  to  eleven
days :  on  the  twelfth  they  were  to  put  an  end  to  it,
after  offering  i  sacrifice  to  Ceres.     No  part  of  life
was  left  vacant  and  unimproved,  but  even  with  their
necessary  actions  he  interwove  the  praise  of  virtue
and  the  contempt  of  vice  :  and  he  so  filled  the  city
with  Kving  examples,  that  it  was  next  to  impossi-
ble for  persons,  who  had  these  from  their  infancy
before  their  eyes,  not  to  be  drawn  and  formed  to,
Jionour.

For  the  same  reason  he  would  not  permit  all,  who


'^  It  was  almost  the  universal  custom  in  Greece,  and  Rome,  to
t)ury  the  dead  by  the  sides  of  the  highways ;  of  which  practice,
whatever  superstition  might  ostensibly  be  the  basis,  the  real  found-
ation was  doubtless  a  regard  to  the  general  health.  Besides,  Ly-
curgus rejected  every  thing,  that  might  generate  infection  ;  from
which  indeed  the  rite  of  burning  the  dead,  and  inclosing  their  ashes
in  urns,  was  a  farther  preservative.

The  venerable  bishop  Hall,  who  died  A.  D.  1656.  a;t.  82.,  by  a
regulation  as  favourable  to  the  health  of  his  parish  as  indicative  of
liis  own  humility,  was  buried  in  the  churchyard  of  the  village  where
he  resided  at  the  time  of  his  death ;  observing  in  his  will,  '  I  do
not  hold  God's  house  a  meet  repository  for  the  dead  bodies  of  the
greatest  saints.'*

7i  JEYiSLn  tells  tis  (vi.  6.)  that  not  all  the  citizens  indifferently
were  buried  in  '  the  red  cloth  and  olive-leaves,'  but  only  such  as  had
distinguished  themselves  particularly  in  the  field.


154  LYCURGUS.

desired  it,  to  go  abroad  and  sec  other  countries ;
j.est  tiiey  should  contract  foreign  manners,  a  prone-
ness  to  imitate  the  undisciplined,  and  a  variety  of
opinions  upon  government.  He  excluded  strangers'^
likewise  from  >iparta,  who  could  not  assign  a  good
motive  for  their  coming  ;  not,  as  Thucydides  states,
out  of  fear  lest  they  should  imitate  the  constitution
of  that  city,  and  make  improvements  in  virtue,  but
lest  they  should  teach  his  ov/n  people  some  evil.  For
with  foreigners  are  imported  new  subjects  of  dis-
course "^  •,  new  discourse  produces  new  opinions  ;
and  from  these  necessarily  spring  new  passions  and
desires  which,  like  discords  in  music,  would  disturb
tlie  established  government.  He  therefore  thought
it  more  expedient  for  the  city,  to  keep  out  of  it  cor-
rupt customs  and  manners,  than  to  prevent  the  in-
( troduction  of  a  pestilence.

Thus  far  then  we  can  perceive  no  vestiges  of  a
disregard  to  right  and  wrong,  which  is  the  charge
some  people  lay  to  the  laws  of  Lycurgus ;  owning
them  well  enough  calculated  to  produce  valour,  but
not  to  promote  justice ''\  Perhaps  it  Avas  the
Cryptia^^  (as  they  called  it)  or  *  ambuscade,'  if  that

'*  He  received  with  pleasure  such  strangers,  as  came  and  sub-
^mitted  to  his  laws,  and  assigned  them  shares  of  land,  which  tliey
were  not  permitted  to  alienate.  The  lots,  indeed,  of  all  the  citi-
zens were  inalienable.

"•'  Xenophon,  who  was  an  e5'e-witness,  imputes  the  changes  in
the  Spartan  discipline  to  foreign  manners :  but,  in  fact,  they  had  a
deeper  root.  When  the  Lacedcemonians,  instead  of  obeying  their
lawgiver's  injunction,  to  content  themselves  with  defending  their
0\vx\  country  and  to  make  no  conquests,  carried  their  victorious
firms  over  the  whole  of  Greece  and  into  Asia  itself,  then  foreign
gold  and  foreign  manners  entered  Sparta,  corrupted  the  simpli-
pity  of  it's  institutions,  and  at  last  overturned  the  republic.  Sc-e
iiot.  (28.)

'i^  por  this  object,  and  for  inspiring  a  general  thirst  of  conquest,
from  the  imputation  of  wliich  Plutarch  but  feebly  defends  his  legis-
lator, Lycurgus  is  severely  and  very  justly  blamed  by  many  respect-
able authors,  as  Aristotle  Pol.  ii.  7.  vii.  14.,  Plato  de  Legg.  i.,
Polyb.  yi.  8.,  &c.*

'*  The  cruelty  of  the  Lacedaemonians  towards  the  Helots  is  fre-
quently mcntioDed,  and  generally  decried  by  all  authors;  thougl^,.


LYCURGUS.  153

was  really  one  of  this  lawgiver's  institutions,  as  Aris-
totle affirms  it  was,  which  gave  Plato  so  bad  an  im-
pression both  of  Lycurgus  and  of  his  laws.  The
;G^overnors  of  the  youth  ordered  the  shrewdest  of
them  from  time  to  time  to  dis{)erse  themselves  in  the
country,  provided  only  with  daggers  and  some  ne-
cessary provisions.  In  the  day-time  they  hid  them-
selves, and  rested  in  the  most  private  places  which
they  could  find ;  but  at  night  they  sallied  out  into
the  roads,  and  killed  all  the  Helots  they  met  with.
Nay  sometimes  by  day  they  fell  upon  them  in  the
fields,  and  murthered  the  ablest  and  strongest  of
them.     Thucydides,  in  his  History  of  the  Peiopon-

Piiitarcli,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  Spartans,  endeavours  to
palliate  it  as  much  as  possible.  These  poor  wretches  were  marked
.but  for  slaves  in  their  dress  and  gesture,  and  in  short,  in  every
tlu'ng.  They  wore  dog-skin  bonnets  and  sheep-skin  vests,  ami  were
ibrhidden  to  learn  any  liberal  art,  or  to  perform  any  act  wortliy  of
their  masters.  Once  a-day  they  received  a  certain  number  of  stripes,
lest  they  should  forget  the}"  were  slaves:  and,  to  crown  all,  they
were  liable  to  this  cri^ptla,  vv^aich  was  sure  to  be  executed  upon  all
such  as  spoke,  looked,  or  walked  like  freemen ;  a  cruel  and  unne-
pessary  expedient,  and  unworthy  of  a  virtuous  jieople  !  *  But  tJie
Ephori  declared  war  against  them.'  Against  whom  I  Wh}-,
against  poor  naked  slaves,  who  tilled  their  lands,  dressed  their  food,
and  o:'  all  those  offices  for  them,  which  they  were  too  proud  to  do
for  t;:ems<"'Ives.  Plutarch  endeavours  to  place  all  this  cruelty  fiir^'v
lower  than  the  times  of  Lycurgus;  and  alleges,  that  it  was  intro-
duced on  account  of  the  TIelots  having  joined  with,  the  Messenians
alter  a  terrible  earthquake  (A.  C.  467.)  by  nhicli  a  great  part  of
Lacedajmon  was  overtiirown,  and  above  twenty  thousand  Spartans
destroyed.  But  vElian  expressly  states  it  (Hist.  Var.)  as  the  com-
mon opinion  in  Greece,  that  thi-^  very  eartiiquake  was  a  judgement
from  heaven  upon  the  Spartans,  for  havirig  treated  tlieir  Helots  with
such  inhumanit}'.   (L.)

It  is  contended  however  by  IVI.  Barthelemy  (in  his  Travels  of
Anachai'sis)  that  the  Cryptia,  as  originally  instituted  by  Lycurgus,
was  simply  a  kind  of  introduction  to  military  operations;  in  which
the  youyg  men  formed  ambuscades,  made  sorties  by  night,  &c.,
uithout  any  reference  whatever  to  the  Helots:  and  that  the  killing
of  that  class,  provoked  perhaps  at  (irst  by  some  sturdy  resistance  in
these  nocturnal  sallies,  only  began  to  take  place  about  the  date  of
Plato's  Treatise  on  Laws;  and  was,  thenceforward,  confounded
with  the  chace  of  these  unhappy  slaves.  If  this  be  tiie  case,  Plu-
tarch has  erroneously  blended  the  two  institutions,  to  Lycurgus' inr
dei'ble  di^'-race.


156  LYCURGUS.

nesian  war,  vclatci^j  that  the  Spartans  selected  such  of
them  as  were  distinguished  for  their  courage,  to  the
number  of  tvv'o  thousand  or  more,  declared  them
free,  crowned  them  with  garlands,  and  conducted
them  to  the  temples  of  the  gods  :  but  soon  afterward
they  all  disappeared,  and  no  one  could,  either  at
that  time  or  subsequently,  give  any  account  in  what
manner  they  were  destroyed.  Aristotle  particularly
says,  that  tl^e  Ephori,  as  soon  as  they  entered  upon
their  office,  declared  war  against  the  Helots,  that
they  nn'ght  be  massacred  under  pretence  of  law.  In
other  respects  they  treated  them  with  extreme  inhu-
manity. Sometimes  they  made  them  drink  till  they
were  intoxicated,  an.d  in  that  condition  led  them
into  the  public  halls,  to  shovv  the  young  men  the  na-
ture of  drunkenness.  They  ordered  them  likewise
to  sing  mean  songs,  and  to  dance  ridiculous  dances,
but  not  to  exhibit  any  that  were  genteel  and  graceful.
When  the  Thebans,  we  are  told,  at  a  later  period
invaded  Laconia^^  and  took  a  great  number  of  the
Helots  prisoners,  they  ordered  them  to  sing  the
odes  of  Terpander,  Alcman"^,  or  Spendon  the  Lace-
daemonian :  but  they  excused  themselves,  alleging
that  it  was  forbidden  by  their  masters.  Those  who
say  that  a  freeman  in  Sparta  was  most  a  freeman,
anda  slave  most  a  slave,  seem  not  ill  to  have  consi-
dered the  difference  of  states.  But,  in  my  opinion,
it  was  in  after-tim.es  that  these  cruelties  took  place
among  the  LacedoBmonians  ;  chiefly  after  the  great
earthquake  '^,  v>  hen  (as  history  informs  us)  the  He-

77  Under  EpaniinorKlas,  after  the  battle  of  I-euctra,  B.  C.  .S71.*
"s  Alcman,  a  celebrated  lyric  poet  about  the  27th  Olympiad,
was  born  (as  may  be  concluded  from  one  of  his  own  epigrams,
quoted  by  Plutarcli)  at  Sardis  in  Lydia;  but  carried  thence  at  an
early  age  to  Laccdienion,  and  employed  as  a  fclave.  From  this
state  of  humiliation,  however,  his  poetical  talents  procured  him  his
release.*

^^  This  earthquake  occurred  under  Archidamus,  nearly  R.  C,
500.  Beside  destroying  the  city,  it  swallowed  up  (as  Diod.  Sic,
xi.  f)?..,  informs  us)  more  than  20,000  men,  and  shook  Tiiygetus  to
it's  i'cuudutioiis.     It  is  imputed,    elsewhere,    by   Plutarch  to  the


LYCURGUS.  157

lots  joining  tlie  Messenians  attacked  tlvein,  did  infi-
nite damage  to  the  countiy,-  and  reduced  tiie  city  to
the  lowest  extremity.  I  can  never  ascribe  to  Ly^
curgus  so  abominable  an  act,  as  that  of  the  '^  am-
buscade.' I  would  judge  in  this  case  by  the  mild-
ness and  justice,  wliich  appeared  in  the  rest  of  his
conduct,  to  which  also  the  gods  gave  their  sanction^

When  his  principal  institutions  had  taken  root  iu
the  manners  of  the  ])eople,  and  the  government  w^hj  .
come  to  such  maturity  as  to  be  able  to  support  and  \
preserve  itself^  then  (as  Plato  says  of  the  Deity,  that  \
"  he  rejoiced  when  he  had  created  the  world,  and  ^
given  it  it's  first  motion")  was  Lycurgus  charmed
with  the  beauty  and  magnitude  of  his  political  esta-  i
blishment,  upon  seeing  it  actually  exempliiied  and'
moving  on  in  due  order.     He  was  next  desirous,  as
far  as  human  wisdom  could  effect  such  a  purpose,  to
render  it  immortal,  and  to  deliver  it  down  unchanged
to  the  latest  posterity.     For  this  end  he  assembk^d
all  the  people,  aiid  told  tliem,  that  the  provisions
v/hich  he  had  already  made  tor  the  state  were  indeed
sufficient  for  virtue  and  liappiness,  but  the. greatest --
and  most  important  matter  was  still  behind,  whicli
he  coidd  not  disclose  to  them  till  he  had  consulted
the  oracle:  that  tliey  must  therefore  inviolably  ob-
serve his  laws,  without  altering  any  thing  in   them'
till  he  returned  from  Delphi;  and  that  then  he  Vi'oidd
acquaint  them  with  the  pleasure  of  Apollo.      \Vhcii
they  had  all  promised  to  do  so,  and  desired  him  to
set  forward,  he  exacted  an  oath  from  the  kinoes  and
senators,  and  afterward  from  all  tlie   citizens,  that
"  they   wcndd  abide   by  tiie  present  establishment
"  till  he  returned."  Upon  this,  he  set  off  to  Delphi.

When  he  arrived  there,  he  offered  sacrifice  to  tlie
gods,  and  consulted  the  oracle,  v/hether  his  laws
were  sufficient  to  promote  virtue  and  secure  the
happiness  of  the  state.     Apollo  answered,  that"  Tlve

niiseonduct  of  the  Spartans  toivard  the  daugliters  of  Alclppus:  and
by  Ailhn  (see  note  76.)  to  their  savage  tveatmeut  of  the  Helots,*

9


155  LYCURGUS.

"  laws  were  excellenf,  and  that  the  city  which  ad-
"  liered  to  tlie  constitution  he  had  established,  wouki
"  be   the  most  glorious  in  the  world."     This  reply
he  committed  to  writing,  and  sent  it  to  Sparta.     He
then   offered   another   sacriUce,    and    embraced  his
ti'iends  and  his  son,  determined  never  to  release  his
citizens  from   their  oath,   but  voluntarily  there  to
put  a  period  to  his  life^°,  while  he  was  yet  of  an  age
when  life  was  not  a  burthen,  nor  deatli  desirable,
and  while  he  was  not  in  any  one  circumstance  un-
happy.    He  therefore  destroyed  himself  by  abstain-
ing from   food  :    persuaded  that  the  very  death  of
lawgivers   should   have   it's  use,  and  their  decease,
instead  of  being  insignificant,  possess  it's  share  of
virtue,  and  be  considered   as  a  great  action  ^\     To
him  indeed,  whose  performances  were  so  illustrious,
the  conclusion  of  life  was  the  crown  of  happiness  ;
and  his  death  was  left  guardian  of  those  invaluable
blessings,  which  he  had  procured  for  his  country-
men through  life,  as  tiiey  had  taken  an   oath  not  to
depart  from  his  establishment  till  his  return*^'.     Nei-
ther was  he  deceived  in   his  expectations.     Sparta
continued  superior  to  the  rest  of  Greece,  both  in
it's  government  at  home  and  it's  reputation  abroad,
so  long  as  it  retained  the  institutions  of  Lycurgus  ;
and  this  it  did  during  the   space  of  live  hundred
years,  and  the  reign  of  fourteen  successive  kings,
down  to  Agis  the  son  of  Archidamus.     As  for  the
appointment  of  the  Ephori,  this,  far  from  weakening
the  constitution,  supplied  it  with  additional  vigour  ;
and,  though  it  seemed  to  be  established  in  favour  oi
the  people,  it  strengthened  the  aristocracy  ''^.

8°  Yet  Lucian  says,  that  Lycurgus  died  at  the  age  of  85.

*'  Upon  this  subject,  again,  how  much  more  just  was  the  opiniou
of  Socrates  ;  who  decisively  condemns  suicide.*

^^  After  al!  this  jiompous  account  Plutarch  himself  acknowledges,
that  authors  arc  not  well  agreed,  how  and  where  this  great  man
died.  That  he  starved  himself,  is  improbable  ;  but  that  he  return-
ed no  more  to  his  country,  seems  to  be  perfectly  agreeable  to  his
manner  of  acting,  as  well  as  to  the  current  of  history.

85  This  Aristotle  dcuies    (Pol.  ii.   17.).     Neither  indeed  is  it


LYCURGUS.  159

But,  in  the  reign  of  Agi«^,  money  burst  into  Sparta;
and  with  money  came  it's  inseparable  attendant,
avarice.  This  was  by  means  of  Lysander ;  who,
though  himself  incapable  of  being  corrupted  by
wealth,  filled  his  country  with  the  love  of  it,  and
with  luxury  too.  He  brought  both  gold  and  si]\'er
from  the  w^ars  **%  and  thus  violated  the  laws  of  Lycur-
gus.  While  these  were  in  force,  Sparta  was  not  so
much  under  the  political  regulations  of  a  common-
wealth, as  the  strict  rules  of  a  philosophical  life  :  and
as  the  poets  feign  of  Hercules,  that  witli  only  a  club
and  a  lion's  skin  he  traversed  the  world,  clearing  it
of  lawless  ruffians  and  cruel  tyrants ;  so  the  Lacede-
monians with  a  piece  of  parchment  ^^  and  a  coarse
coat  kept  Greece  in  a  voluntary  obedience,  destroy-
ed usurpation  and  tyranny  in  the  states,  put  an  end
to  wars  and  laid  seditions  asleep,  often  without  either

likelj'-,  that  officers  invested  with  such  a  paramount  authority  should
depress  the  demociMtical  part  of  the  coastitutiwn,  from  which  they
had  originally  sprung.*

^*  From  Sc'Stus.  as  we  are  informed  by  Diod.  Sic.  (xviii.  lOS.),  he
remitted  1500  r.alents  to  Sparta,  with  other  valuable  plunder ;  and
Xenophon  also  acquaints  us  that,  when  he  took  Athens,  he  sent;
home  many  rich  spoils,  and  470  talents  of  silver.  The  arrival  of
this  immense  mass  of  wealth  created  great  disputes  at  Sparta,
Many  celebrated  Lysander's  praises,  and  rejoiced  exceedingly  at
this  good  fortune,  as  they  called  it :  while  others,  wlio  were  better
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  things,  and  with  their  constitution,
were  of  a  quite  diiferent  opinion.  They  looked  upon  the  receipt
of  this  treasure,  us  an  open  violation  of  the  laws  of  Lycurgus  ;  and
expressed  their  appiehenjions  loudly,  that  in  process  of  time  they
might,  by  a  change  in  their  manners,  pay  infinitely  more  for  it  than
it  was  worth.  The  event  justified  their  fears.  See  the  Life  of  Ly-
sander, in  the  sequel  of  this  work.

8>"  This  was  the  Scytale,  the  nature  and  use  of  which  Plutarch
explains  in  the  Life  of  Lysander.  He  there  informs  us,  that  when
the  magistrates  grMe  their  commission  to  any  admiral  or  general,
they  took  two  rou:id  pieces  of  wood,  exactly  equal  in  breadth  and
thickness  (Thucydides  adds,  th:  t  they  were  smooth  and  long) ;  one
they  kept  thcmsLives,  and  the  other  they  delivered  to  their  officer,
"When  they  had  any  thing  of  moment  which  they  would  secretly
convey  to  him,  they  cut  a  long  narrow  scroil  of  parchment,  and
rolling  it  about  their  own  staff,  one  fold  close  upon  pnother,  tl-.ey
wrote  tb.eir  business  on  it,  and  sent  it  him ;  and  he  applying  ;t  to
his  own  staff,  the  characters,  wliich  before  were  in  the  utmost  cob-
fusion,  became  plain  and  intelligible.


160  LYCURGUS.

shield  or  lance,  and  only  by  sending  one  embassador,
to  whose  directions  all  parties  concerned  immedi-
ately snbmitted.  Thus  bees,  when  their  prince  ap-
pears, compose  their  quarrels,  and  unite  in  one
swarm  *.  So  much  did  justice  and  good  government
prevail  in  that  state,  that  I  am  surprised  at  those
who  say,  the  Lacedaemonians  knew  indeed  how  to
obey,  but  not  how  to  govern  ;  and  upon  this  occa-
sion quote  the  saying  of  king  Theopompus,  who
Avhen  one  told  him,  that  "  Sparta  was  preserved  by
"  the  good  administration  of  it's  kings,"  replied  ;
"  Nay,  rather  by  the  obedience  of  their  subjects."
It  is  certain,  that  people  will  not  long  continue
pliant  to  those,  who  know  not  how  to  command  ;
but  it  is  the  part  of  a  good  governor,  to  teach  obe-
dience. He,  who  knows  how  to  lead  well,  is  sure
to  be  well  followed :  and  as  it  is  by  the  art  of  horse-
manship, that  a  horse  is  made  gentle  and  tractable,
so  it  is  by  the  abilities  of  him  who  fills  the  throne,
that  the  people  become  ductile  and  submissive.  Such
was  the  conduct  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that  people
not  only  endured,  but  even  desired  to  be  their  sub-
jects. They  asked  not  of  them  either  ships,  money,
or  troops,  but  only  a  Spartan  general.  When  they
had  received  him,  thev  treated  him  with  the  utmost
honour  and  respect :  so  Gylippus  was  revered  by
the  Sicilians,  Brasidas  by  the  Chalcidians,  and  Ly-
sander,  Callicratidas,  and  x^gesilaus  by  all  the  people
of  Asia  ^°.  These,  and  such  as  these,  wherever  they
came,  were  called  moderators  and  reformers,  both
of  the  magistrates  and  people  j  and  Sparta  itself  was


*  Rege  incolumi  mens  omyiihus  una  e.ft  :

Amisso  rupcre  Jiditm.         (Virg.  Georg.  iv.  213.)*

s<5  Gj'lippus  was  sent  by  the  Spartans  to  the  defence  of  Syracuse,
•nhen  absurdly  invaded  by  the  Athenians  upon  the  suggestion  of
Alcibiades.  The  Chalcidians,  in  whose  service  Brasidas  fell,  were
a  people,  not  of  Chalcis  in  Euboea,  but  of  the  ncighbourliood  of
Amphipolis.  Ry  *  the  people  of  Asia*  are  hieant  those  of  Asra
IMinor  or  Ionia,  and  the  neighbouring  isles.  C-illicratidas  was  a
Lacedicnionian  admiral,  about  the  conclur-ion  of  thd  rdoponncsian
war.*


LYCURGUS.  161-

....  ■   ■

<!:  on  side  red  as  a  scliool  of  discipline,  wliere  the
beauty  of  life  and  political  order  were  taught  in  tlie
lUniost  perffction.  Hence  Stratonicus.  seems  face-
tiously enonfT;!!  to  have  said,  that  "  He  would  order
"  the  Athenians  to  liave  the  conduct  of  mysteries.
"  and  processions ;  the  Eleans  to  preside  in  cjames,
"  as  their  particular  province ;  and  the  Lacediumo-
''  nians  to  be  beateu,  if  the  others  did  amiss  *^"
This  was  spoken  in  jest :  but  Antistlienes,  one  of
t!ie  scholars  of  Socrates,  said  (more  seriously)  of  tiie
Thebans,  when  he  sav/  them  pluming*  them^.elves
upon  their  success  at  Leuctra,  "  Tliey  were  ju=.t
"  like  so  manv  school-boys,  reioicino-  that  thev  had
"  l)eaten  their  master."

it  was  not  however  the  principal  design  of  Lycnr-
gus,  that   his  city  shouhi  govern  many  others.     He^
considered  it's  happiness,  like  that  of  a  private  man,
as  flowing  from    virtue   and  self-consistency;     and
therefore  so  ordered  and  dispose<l  it,  that  by  the
freedom   and  sobriety  of  it's  inhabitants,  and' their
having  a  sufnciency  v/ithin  themselves,  it's  continu-,
ance  might  be  the  more  secure.     Plato,  DiogenesT
Zeno,  and  other    writers   upon   government,  liave
taken  Lycurgns  lor  their  model ;  and  these,  though
they  left  only  an  idea  of  something  excellent,  have
attained  p;reat  praise.     Yet  lie  v;ho,  not  in  idea  and
in  words,  but  in   fact  j)roduced  a  most  inimitable
ibrm  of  government,  and  by  showing  a  whole  city
of  philoiopliers'^^  confounded  those,  who  imagine/

^^  Because  tiie  teachers  should  be  answerable  for  the  faults  of
their  pupils.  The  pleasantry  of  tlie  observation  seems  to  be  this  t
thatj  as  the  Lacedemonians  used  to  punish  the  parents  or  adopters,
of  those  yonnf;  people  that  behaved  ami?G,  now  that  thtv  uerc  the  '
instructors  of  other  nations,  they  ought  to  suffer  for  tiicir  pupils'
faults.  Bryan's  Latin  text  has  it,  '  that  the  Lacedaemonians  should
beat  them  !'     But  there  is  no  joke  in  that.  (L.)

Stratonicus  was  an  Athenian  musician,  and  celebrated  by  Athe-
nacus  (viii.  8.)  for  his  bon-mnts  and  general  pleasantry.  The  su-
perstition however  of  his  countrymen  survived  his  sarcasm,  as  we
find  it  subsisting  in  the  days  of  St.  Paul.  (Acts  xvii.  22.)  The
Kleans  were  absorbed  in  their  attention  to  the  Olympic  games.*

s^  Aristotle  and  Plato  differ  in  this  from  Plutarch.     Even  Pdv-,

VOL.  I.  M


162  LYCURGUS.

tliat  the  so-miich-boasted  strictness  oi'  a  philosopln'd
life  is  impracticable  ;  he,  I  say,  stands  in  the  rank
of  glory  far  before  the  founders  of  ail  the  other  Gre-
cian states^®.  Aristotle  is  therefore  of  opinion,  that
the  honours  paid  to  him  in  Lacedcemon  were  fiir  be-
neath his  merit.  Yet  those  honours  were  very  con-
siderable ;  for  he  has  a  temple  there,  and  they  offer
him  a  yearly  sacrifice,  as  a  god.  It  is  also  said  that,
when  his  remains  were  brought  home,  his  tomb  was
struck  with  lightning :  a  seal  of  divinity,  which  no
other  man  however  eminent  has  had,  except  Euri-
pides, who  died  and  was  buried  at  Arethusa  in  Ma-
cedon  ^.  This  was  matter  of  particular  satisfaction
and  triumph  to  the  friends  of  Euripides,  that  the
same  thing  should  have  befallen  him  after  death,
which  had  formerly  happened  to  Lycurgus,  the  most
venerable  of  men  and  the  most  favoured  of  heaven.
Some  say,  Lycurgus  died  at  Cirrha'^':  but  Apollo-
themis  will  have  it,  that  he  was  brought  to  Elis  and
died  there,  and  Timajus  and  Aristoxenus  write,  that
he  ended  his  days  in  Crete  ;  nay,  Aristoxenus  adds,
that  the  Cretans  show  his  tomb  at  Pergamia  near
the  high  road.  He  left  an  only  son,  we  are  told,
named  Antiorus ;  who  dying  without  issue,  the
family  became  extinct.  His  friends  and  relations
observed  his  anniversary,  which  subsisted  for  many
ages ;  and  the  days,  upon  which  they  met  for  tint

hiu?,  who  was  so  profound  an  admirer  of  the  Spartan  governnicnti
allows  that,  though  the  Spartans  considered  as  individuals  were
wife  and  virtuous,  in  their  collective  capacity  they  paid  but  little
regard  to  justice  or  moderation.

8'  Solon,  though  a  person  of  a  different  temper,  was  not  les«
disinterested  than  Iyycurg;jjs.  He  settled  the  Athenian  common-
wealth, refused  the  sovereignty  viien  offered  him,  travelled  to
avoid  the  importunities  of  his  countrymen,  opposed  tyranny  in  his
old  age,  and  when  he  found  resistance  vain,  went  into  voluntary
rxile.  Lycurgus  and  Solon  were  both  great  men  ;  but  the  former
livid  the  stronger,  the  latter  the  milder  genius;  th.e  effects  of  which
appeared  in  their  respective  commonwealths.

'''^  Whither  he  had  retired,  to  the  court  of  Archelaus.  He  had
acenotoph,  however,  at  Athefls.*

«"  A  city  near  Delphi.


LYCURGUS.  163

purpose,  they  called  Lycurgldjp.  Aristocrates  ^^3
the  son  of  Hipparcbus,  relates  that  the  friends  of
LycLirgus,  with  \vhom  he  sojourned  and  at  last  died
in  Crete,  burned  his  body,  and  at  his  request  thre\y
his  ashes  into  the  sea.  Thus  he  iniardcd  as;ainst  tlie
possibility  of  his  remains  being  carried  back  to
Sparta  by  the  Lacedctmonians,  lest  they  should  then
think  themselves  absolved  from  their  oath  on  the
pretence  that  he  was  returned,  and  make  innovations
in  the  government.  This  is  what  we  had  to  say  of
Lycurgus.

^-  Author  of  a  History  of  Lacedsemon,   quoted  by  Atheuaeus
(ill.  7.)-^


M   2


THE

1. 1  F  E


or


N   11   M   A,


SUMxMARY.


Uncertainty  nf  the  time,  ia  xvhich  he  lived  :  //«  origin.     Death  of
Romidua.     Interregnum.     Election  of  Niuna  to  the  croivn.     His
character.     Hit  recluse  life  gives  birth  to  many  fabulous  reports.
He  at  first  refuses  the  crown.     His  father  determines  him  to  accept
it.     The  Romans  receive  him  tvith  transport.      He  chanf-cs   the
government:  His  religious  institutions.   Qu.?  Whether,  or  not,  he
tvere  the  pupil  o/^  Pythagoras.     His  intercourse  xiith  the  nymph
Egeria.     Establisltment  of  the  college  of  High-Priests.      i)f  the
Vestals,  and  the  Sacred  Fire.     Privileges  and  penalties   of  the
Vestals.     Temple  of  Vesta  :   Goddess   Libitina.     The  Salii  and
Feciales.     Pestilence  in  Rome  :  Ancile.      Nrcma's  palace  :  Reli-
gious ceremonies.     Relation  between  his  institutions,  and  the  pre-
cepts of  Pythagoras.     Influence  oj'  Religion  upon  the  manners  of
the  Romans.    Numa  introduces  among  them  a  tastcfor  agriculture.
Institutions  of  arts  and  trades  :  Law  in  favour  of  children.     Re-
formatio.i   of  the   calendar.      Temple   of  .Janus.     Happiness   of
Xnma^s   reign.     His   death,   and  funeral.     His    Sacred  Bool.':.
His  glory  increased  under  tliefoUoxving  reigns.


i  HERE  is  likewise^  a  i?reat  diversity  anioiicc  his-
torians  about  the  time,  in  which  king  Nunia  lived,
though  some  families  seem  to  trace  their  genealogy
up  to  him  with  sufficient  accuracy.     A  certain  writer

*  As  vtcUas  about  tlic  epoch  of Lycurgus.*


NUMA.  IGr,

however  named  Ciodius,  in  his  emendations  of  chro-
nology, affirms  that  tlie  ancient  archives  were  de-
stroyed, when  Home  was  sacked  by  the  Gauls  *  ;  and
that  those,  now  shown  as  such,  were  forged  in  fa-
vour of  some  persons  who  were  solicitous  to  stretch
their  lineage  far  back,  and  to  deduce  it  from  the
most  illustrious  houses.  Some  say,  that  Numa  was
the  scholar  of  Pythagoras'-;  but  others  contend,  that
he  was  unacquainted  with  the  Grecian  hterature,
allep^inff  either  that  his  own  genius  was  sufficient  to
conduct  him  to  excellence^,  or  that  he  was  instructed
by  some  barbarian^  philosopher  superior  to  Pytha-
goras. Some  again  affirm,  that  Pythagoras  the  Sa-
mian  flourished  about  five  generations  after  the  time
of  Numa';  but  that  Pythagoras  of  Sparta,  who  won
the  prize  at  the  Olympic  race  in  the  sixteenth  Olym-
piad (about  tiie  third  year  of  which,  Numa  came  to
the  tin-one)  travelling  into  Italy,  became  acquainted
with  that  prince,  and  assisted  him  in  regulating  the
government.  Hence  many  S})artan  customs,  taught
by  Pythagoras,  were  intermixed  with  those  of  Rome.
But  this  mixture  might  have  another  cause,  as  Numa
was  of  Sabine   extraction,  and  the  Sabines  declare


*  Upon  tliis  subject  see  the  Preface  to  the  last  Edition  of  Fer-
guson s  lioman  Republic,  dated  1805  (referred  to  by  the  Editor
in  his  Preface),  and  a  French  Dissertation  '  sur  ies  cinq  premier
siecles  de  I'liistoire  Komaine,'  par  Mons.  L.  D.  B.,  Utrecht  1738.*

"  Pythagoras  the  philosopher  did  nut  visit  Italy  until  tiie  fifty-
first  Olynipiad,  and  four  generations  (as  Dion.  Halic.  informs  us,  ii.
15.)  after  Xuma.  (L.)  The  same  historian  adds  that,  so  far  from
his  beipg  engaged  in  philosophical  studies  at  Crotona  at  the  time
of  his  election,  that  ciiy  was  only  built  in  the  fourth  year  of  liLs
reign.*

^  Siwpte  igilnr  higenio  tcmperatum  animum  vlrtutibusjidsse  opinor
7nagis,  iiisiriictinvqiic  non  tain  pcrcgrinis  arlibns,  quam  dUciplinh  te-
trica  ac  irisii  vctcrura  Snhniorum  ;  quo  genere  mdlum  quondam  iii'
cnrruptivsfiiit.   (Liv.  i.  18.)*

''  So  the  Greeks  and  Romans  pronounced  every  nation,  situated
bej'^ond  the  confines  of  th'eir  own  states.*

5  lavy  (i.  18.)  places  him  under  Servius  Tullius,  and  Cicero  (de
Orat.  ii.  '57. )  still  later,  afiirming  that  he  came  into  Italy  under  Tar-
ijuinius  ,Suj5erbus.*


165  NUMA.

themselves  to  have  been  a  Lacedaemonian  colony  ^.
It  is  difficult  however  exactly  to  adjust  the  times,
particularly  those  that  are  only  regulated  by  the
names  of  the  Olympic  conquerors ;  of  which  (we
are  told)  Hippias,  the  Klean,  made  a  collection
at  a  late  period,  without  sufficient  vouchers.  We
shall  now  relate  what  we  have  met  with  most  re-
markable concerning  Numa,  beginning  from  that
point  of  time  which  is  most  suitable  to  our  pur-
pose.

It  was  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  from  the  build-
ing of  Rome,  and  of  the  reign  of  Romulus,  on  the
seventh  of  July  (now  called  Noiue  Caproibict'')
^vhen  that  prince  went  out  of  the  city  to  offier  a
solemn  sacrifice,  at  a  place  called  the  Goats'-Marsh,
in  the  presence  of  the  senate  and  a  considerable
part  of  the  people.  Suddenly  there  happened  a
great  alteration  in  the  air,  and  the  clouds  burst  in
a  storm  of  wind  and  hail.  The  rest  of  the  assembly
were  struck  v/ith  terror  and  fled,  but  Romulus  dis-
appeared, and  could  not  be  found  cither  alive  or
dead.  Upon  this,  the  senators  incurred  a  violent
suspicion,  and  a  report  was  propagated  against  them
among  the  people,  that  having  been  long  weary  of
the  yoke  of  regal  government,  and  desirous  to  get
the  power  into  their  own  hands,  they  had  murthercd
the   king :    particularly,    as  he  had  for  some   time

^  The  same  Dionysius  (ii.  11.)  discovered  in  the  history  of  the
Sabines  that,  while  Lycurgus  was  guardian  to  his  nephev/  Eunomus
(Charilaus,  it  sliould  be)  some  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  unable  to  en-
dura  tiie  severity  of  hi.s  laws,  fled  into  Italy  and  settled  first  at  Po-
metia :  whence  several  of  them  removed  into  the  country  of  the  Sa-
bines, and  uniting  with  that  people  taught  them  their  customs ;  par-
ticularly those  relating  to  the  conduct  of  war,  to  fortitude,  to  pa-
tience, and  to  a  frugal  and  abstemious  manner  of  living.  This  co-
lony, then,  settled  in  Italy  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  before  the
birth  of  Numa.

7  This  occured  before,  in  the  Life  of  Romulus,  p.  95.  But  the
Life  of  Numawjis,  probably,  written  first;  and  what  is  here  stated
for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  in  the  subsequent  account  of  Romulus
became  matter  of  necessity.*


NUMA.  167

treated  them  in  an  arbitrary  and  imperious  manner.
7iut  they  found  means  to  obviate  this  suspicion,  by
paying  divine  honours  to  Romuhis,  as  a  person  that
had  been  privileged  from  the  fate  of  other  mortals,
and  merely  removed  to  a  happier  scene.  Moreover
Proculus,  a  man  of  high  rank,  made  oath  that  he  had
seen  Romulus  carried  up  to  heaven  in  complete  ar-
mour, and  heard  a  voice  commanding  that  he  should
be  called  Quirinus.

Fresh  disturbances  and  tumults  arose  in  the  city
about  the  election  of  a  new  sovereign ;  the  latter
inhabitants  being  not  yet  thoroughly  incorporated
with  the  first,  the  commonalty  fluctuating  and  un-
settled in  itself,  and  the  patricians  full  of  animosity
and  jealousies  of  each  other.  All  indeed  agreed,
that  a  sovereign  should  be  appointed  ;  but  they  dif-
fered and  debated,  not  only  about  the  person  to  be
iixed  upon,  but  from  which  of  the  two  nations  he
should  be  selected.  For  neither  could  thev,  who
with  Romulus  had  built  the  city,  endure  that  the
Sabines,  who  had  been  admitted  citiz€ns  and  ob-
tained a  share  of  the  lands,  should  attempt  to  com-
mand those  from  whom  they  had  received  such  pri-
vileges ;  nor  could  the  Sabines  depart  from  their
claim  of  giving  a  king  in  their  turn  to  Rome,  having
this  good  argument  in  their  favour  that,  upon  the
death  of  Tatius,  they  had  suffered  Romulus  peace-
ably to  enjoy  the  throne  without  a  collegue.  It  was
also  to  be  considered,  that  they  did  not  come  as  in-
feriors to  join  a  superior  people,  but  by  their  rank
and  number  added  strength  and  dignity  to  the  city
into  which  they  had  been  received.  These  were
the  arguments,  upon  which  they  founded  their  pre-
tensions. Lest  this  dispute  should  produce  an  utter
confusion,  while  there  was  no  king  nor  any  steers.
man  at  the  helm,  the  senators  made  an  order  that
the  hundred  and  fifty  members  who  composed  their
body  ^,  should  each  in  their  turns  be  attired  in  the

^  According  to  our  author,  in  the  Life  of  Romukis,  the  number
of  the  senators  was  two  hundred.     Dionysius  iuaeed  says,   that


16S  XUMA.

robes  of  state,  in  the  room  of  Quirinus  offer  the
stated  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  and  despatch  the  whole
piibhc  business,  six  hours  in  the  night  and  six  in  the
day.  This  distribntion  of  time  seemed  well  con-
trived, in  point  of  equahty  among  the  regents,  and
the  change  of  power  from  hand  to  hand  prevented
it's  being  obnoxious  to  the  people,  who  saw  the
same  person  in  one  day  and  one  n'ight  reduced  from
a  king  to  a  private  man.  An  occasional  administra-
tion of  this  kind  the  Romans  call  an  '  Interregnum.'
But,  though  the  matter  was  managed  in  so  mo-
derate and  popular  a  way,  the  senators  could  not
escape  the  sus[)ici6ns  and  complaints  of  the  people,
tlyit  they  were  changing  the  government  into  an
oligarchy,  and'afithey.  retained 'the  whole  direction
of  affairs  iii  tlfeir  hands,  were  unwilling  to  have  a
king.  ^  At  last  it  was  agreed  between  the  two  par-
ties, that  one  nation  should  choose  a  king  out  of  the
other.  This  was  considered  as  the  best  means  of
putting  a  stop  to  the  present  contention,  and  of  in-
spiring the  king  with  an  aliection  tor  liotli  parties  ;
since  he  would  be  gracious  to  the  one  because  they
had  elected  him,  and  to  the  other  because  they  were
]ns  kindred  and  countrymen.  The  Sabines  leaving
-the  llomans  to  their  option,  they  preferred  a  Sa-
bine king  of  their  own  electing  to  a  Roman  elected
by  the  Sabines.  Consulting  therefore  anioi}g  tliem-
sclves",  they  fixed  upon  Numa  Pompilius  a  Sabine,

5%ritcr.s  differed  in  this  particular:  some  affinnin<;,  that  one  linndrcd,
and  otiicrs  th;it  only  fiity,  senators  were  added  to  the  original  num-,
ber  upon  the  onion  of  the  Sabiney  with  the  Romans.  Of  the  man-
lier of  tiie  liiterregnum,  Livy  gives  tlie  niost  prohnble  account.
The  senators,  he  says,  divided  themselves  into  decui  ies,  or  tens :
thcfe  dievv  lots  which  should  govern  first,  and  successively  enjoyed
the  .>upreme  authority  for  five  days;  yet  in  such  y  manner,  that
one  person  only  of  the  governing  decury  had  the  ensigns  of  sove-
reignty at  a  tiu/u.

'^  The  intorrex  for  tiie  time  being,  having  summoned  the  peo-
j-)lc,  addressed  them  thus:  "  Uomaiis,  elect  yoursclvts  a  king:  the
*'  senate  give  their  consent:  and,  if  you  choose  a  prince  worthy  to
*' succcid  Romuius,  the  senate  will" conlirm  your  choice."  Wilh
this  condescension  of  the  senate  the  people  were  so  well  pleased,
pUzt  they  declined  the  exercise  of  the  privilege,


NUMA.  1G9


^vho  was  not  of  the  number  of  those  that  had  migrat-
ed to  Rome,  but  so  much  celel)rated  for  his  virtue,
that  the  Sabines  received  the  nomination  with  even
greater  appkiuse  than  the  Romans  themselves.  When
tiiey  had  acquainted  the  people  wdth  their  resolution,
they  sent  the  most  eminent  personages  of  both  na-
tions embassadors,  to  entreat  him  to  come  and  take
upon  him  the  government.

Numa  was  of  Cures,  a  considerable  city   of  the
Sabines,  fi-om  which  the  Romans  together'  v.ith  the
incorporated    Sabines   had    the    name   of    Quirites.
He  was  the   son  of  a  person  of  distinction   named
Pomponius,  and  the  yonngest  of  foin-  brothers.     It
seemed  to  have  been  by  the  direction  of  the  gods,
that  he  was  born  upon  the  tv/enty-hrst  of  x^lprif,  the
day  on  which  Rome  was  founded  by  Romulus.     Ilis
mind  was   naturally   disposed  to  virtue,  and  he  still
farther  su!)dued  it  by  discipline,  patience,  and  phi-
losophy ;   not  only  purging  it  of  the   grosser  and
more  infamous  passions,  but   even  of  that  ambition
and    rapacity,    which    were    reckoned   honourable
among  the  barbarians;    as   being  persuaded,    that
tree  fortitude  consists  in  the  conquest  of  the  appe-
tites by  reason  *.     Upon  this  account,  he  banished
all  luxury  and  splendour  from  his  house;  and  botii
the   citizens  and   strangers  found  iu  him  a  faithfid
counsellor,    and    an  upright  judge.     Kis  hours   of
leisure   he   si)ent,    not   in    pursuits  of  pleasure  or
schemes  of  profit,  but  in   tiie  worship  of  the  gods,
and  in  rational  inquiries  into  their  nature  and  power.
His  name  became  at  length  so  iilustrious  that  Tatius,
the  associate   of  Romulus  in   the  kiua'dom,  having
an  only  daughter  named  Tatia,  bestowed   her  upon
him.     He   v>'as   not  however  so  much   elated  with
tins  match,  as  to  remove  to  the  court  of  his  father-
in-law,  b'.it  continued  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines,
paying  his  attentions  to   his  ov/n  father,  who  was

*■  Appetiti!<i  rnlioni parent  is  not  more  the  heraldic  motto,  than
tl'e  moral  principle  of  one  of  the  noblest  of  English  familica — the
Wentworth  Fitzwilliams.*


170  KUMA.

now  grown  old.  Tatfa  was  partaker  of  his  retire-
ment, and  preferred  the  calm  enjoyment  of  life,
with  her  husband  in  privacy,  to  the  honours  and
distinction  in  which  she  might  have  lived  with  her
iather  at  Rome.  Thirteen  years  after  their  marriage,
she  died.

iS^ima  then  left  the  society  of  the  city,  and  passed
his  time  in  wandering  about  alone  in  the  sacred
groves  and  lawns,  in  the  most  solitary  places.  Hence
the  report  concerning  the  goddess  Egeria  chiefly
took  it's  rise  '" ;  and  it  was  believed  that  he  avoided
liuman  conversation  not  from  any  inward  sorrow  or
melancholy  turn,  but  from  his  being  admitted  to
that  which  was  more  venerable,  to  the  honour  of  a
celestial  bride,  and  to  the  familiar  intercourse  of  an
enamoured  divinity,  which  led  him  to  happiness  and
knowledge  more  than  mortal.  This  obviously  re-
sembles many  of  the  ancient  stories  received  and
delivered  down  by  the  Phrygians  of  Atys  ",  by  the
Bithynians  of  Herodotus,  and  by  the  Arcadians  of
Endymion  ;  to  whom  might  be  added  many  others,
supposed  to  have  attained  superior  felicity,  and  to
be  beloved  in  an  extraordinary  manner  by  the  gods.

^°  Numa's  inclination  to  solitude,  and  his  custom  of  retiring
into  tlie  secret  places  of  the  forest  of  Aricia,  gave  rise  to  several
popular  opinions.  Some  believed,  that  the  nymph  Egeria  herself
dictated  to  him  tl)e  laws,  both  civil  and  religious,  which  he  esta-
blished. And  indeed  he  himself  affirmed  it,  in  order  to  procure  a
divine  sanction  to  them.  Ik>t,  as  no  great  man  is  without  asper-
sions, others  have  thought  that,  under  this  aft'ected  passion  for  woods
and  caves,  was  concealed  another  more  real  and  less  chaste.  This
gave  occasion  to  that  sarcasnj  of  Juvenal,  in  speaking  of  the  grova
©f  Egena,

Ilic,  tihi  nocturnce  Ntcma  constituebat  amicic.  (iii.  15.)

Ovid  says  that,  to  remove  her  grief  for  the  loss  of  Nunia,  Diana
changed  her  into  a  fountain,  which  still  bears  her  name.  (Metam.
XV.)  (L)  This  latter  poet,  and  IMutarch  who  appears  to  have
adopted  his  opinion,  are  the  only  writers  that  give  her  the  credit  of
having  been  his  wife.  See  also  Dion.  Halic.  ii.  15.*

"  Atys  was  said  to  have  been  beloved  by  the  goddess  Cybele,
Endymion  by  Diana;  but  this  Herodotus  (or  Rhodotus,  as  Dacier
fronj  liis  MS.  calls  him)  we  believe,  is  no  where  else  men-
tioned.

9


NUMA.  171

And  indeed  it  is  reasonable  enough  to  suppose,  that
the  deity  would  not  place  his  affection  upon  horses
or  birds,  but  rather  upon  human  beings  eminently
distinguished  by  virtue  ;  and  that  he  neither  dis-
likes, nor  disdains  to  hold  conversation  with,  a  man
of  wisdom  and  piety.  But  that  a  divinity  should
be  captivated  v/ith  the  external  beauty  of  any  human
body,  it  is  irrational  to  believe.  The  Egyptians
make  a  distinction  (by  no  means  an  absurd  one)  in
this  case,  that  it  is  not  impossible  for  a  woman  to
be  impregnated  by  the  approach  of  some  divine  spirit,
but  that  a  man  can  have  no  corporeal  intercourse
with  a  e^oddess.  They  do  not  however  considei',
that  a  mixture  of  beings  mutually  communicates  to
each  the  nature  of  the  other.  In  short,  the  regard
which  the  gods  have  for  men,  though  like  a  human
passion  it  is  called  love,  must  be  employed  in  form-
ing their  manners  and  raising  them  to  higher  de-
grees of  virtue.  In  this  sense  we  may  admit  the
assertion  of  the  poets,  that  Phorbas  ^-,  Hyacinthus,
and  Admetus  were  beloved  by  Apollo  ;  and  that
Ilippolytus,  theSicyonian,  vv^as  equally  in  his  favour:
so  that,  whenever  lie  sailed  from  Cirrha  to  Sicyon,
the  priestess,  to  signify  Apollo's  satisfaction,  re-
peated this  heroic  verse  j

He  comes,  aarain  the  much-loved  hero  comes.

'^  Phorbas  was  the  son  of  Triopas,  king  of  Argos.  He  deli-
vered the  Rhodians  from  a  prodigious  number  of  serpents,  that
infested  their  island;  and  particularly  from  a  furious  dragon,  which
had  devoured  a  great  many  people.  He  was,  therefore,  supposed
to  be  dear  to  Apollo,  who  had  slain  the  Python.  After  his  death  he
was  placed  in  tlie  heavens,  with  the  dragon  which  he  destroyed,  m
the  constellation  Opliiuchus  or  Serpentajius.

Hyacinthus  was  the  son  of  Amyclas,  founder  of  the  city  of
Amyclae,  near  Sparta.  He  was  beloved  by  Apollo  and  Zephyrus,
and  was  killed  in  a  fit  of  jealousy  by  the  latter,  who  with  a  puff  of
wind  caused  a  quoit  thrown  by  Apollo  to  fall  upon  his  head.  After
this,  he  v/as  changed  into  a  flower,  which  still  bears  his  name.
(Pausan.  Lacon.  iii.  19.,  and  Ovid.  Metam.  x.  5.)  For  an  account
of  the  annual  celebration  instituted  to  his  honour  at  Amyclae,  see
also  Athena^us  iv.  4.

Admetus  was  the  son  of  Pheres,  king  of  Tiiessaly.  Apollo,  It
is  fabled,  kept  his  «heep.


173  NUMA.:

It  is  also  fabicd,  thnt  Pan  was  in  love  with  Pindar  ''^,
and  his  ])()etrv  ;  and4hat  Aichilochas  and  Hesiod  '%
alter  their  death,  were  honoured  by  the  heavenly
])ovvers  as  having  been  dear  to  the  I\Iuses.  Sophocles
likewise  (we  are  told)  was"  blessed  in  his  lire-time
with  the  conversation  of.  the- god  -^sculapius,  of
which  nuiuy  proofs  still  remain  ;  and  another  deity
procured  him  burial  '\  If  then  we  admit  tliat  these
were  so  highly  favoured,  shall  we  affirm  that  Zaleu-
cus'^,  MinoSj  Zoroaster,  Numa,  and  Lycnrgus,
kings  and  ]av>^glvers,  w-ere  not  similarly  happy  ?  Nay,
we  shall  rather  think,  that  the  gods  might  seriously
converse  with  such  excellent  persons  as  these,  to  in-
struct and  encourage  them  in  their  great  attempts  ;
whereas,  if  they  indulged  poets  and  musicians  in
tiie  same  grace,  it  must  have  been  by  way  of  diver-
sion. To  such  however  as  are  of  a  different  opinion
I  shall  say,  with  Eacchylides  ^\

The  way  is  broad.
For  it  is  no  unplausible  account  of  the  matter  v»hich

'3  Pindar  had  a  particular  devotion  for  the  god  Pan,  and  there-
fore took  up  his  abode  neal-  the  temple  of  Jlhea  and  Pan.  He  com-
posed the  hymns,  which  the  Theban  virgins  stxng  on  the  festival  of
that  deity  ;  and,  it  is  said,  he  had  the  happiness  to  heav  Pan  himself
singing  one  of  his  odes.

'••  Archilochus  vas  slain  by  a  soldier  of  Naxos  (called  Calcon-
des,  or  Archias)  who  was  obliged  by  the  priestess  of  Apollo  to
make  expiation,  for  liaving  killed  a  man  consecrated  to  the  jMu.-^es.
As  for  Hesiod  (who  had  fallen  a  victim  to  unjust  suspicions,  i>eing
cast  into  the  Daphnus,  carried  by  it's  current  into  the  sea,  and
thence  conveyed  by  dolphins  to  Uhyum,  a  promontory  of  t!ie  gulf
of  Corinth)  the  Orcliomenians  a  people  of  Boeotia,  being  terribly
afflicted  by  a  plague,  were  ordered  by  the  oracle  to  remove  liis
bones  into  their  own  country;  upon  whicl),  their  suiFeringi  ceased.

'■■■  Sophocles  died  at  Athens,  while  L3'sander  was  carrying  on  iiie
iiege  of  the  city;  and  Bacchus  is  said  to  have  ordered  the  Spartan
L^cneral,  in  a  dream,  *  to  permit  the  new  Athenian  Siren  to  be  iii-
terred  at  Decelea,  the  burial-place  of  his  ancestors:'  with  whioli,
upon  a  repetition  of  the  command,  he  thouglit  fit  to  comply.  (Seo
Pausan.  i.  iU.,  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  29.)

^^'  Zaieucus  gave  laus.  Sis  from  Minerva,  to  tlie  Locrians  in
Magna GrcEcia;  Zoroaster,  one  of  the  magi  and  king  of  the  Bactrians,
to  his  own  subjects;  and  Minos  to  tiie  people  of  Crete.

''  Tliis  poet,  like  Pindar,  celebrated  the  victories  of  Hiero  in  the
Grecian  games,  aiid  soa^ctimes  even  more  successfully    than  hisj


NUMA.  173

Qtliers  c-ive,-  when  thev  tell  us,  that  LycnriinSi
Numa,  and  other  eminent  men,  finding  it  difficult
to  manage  their  respective  states  and  make  altera-
tions in  their  governments,  pretended  commissions
from  heaven,  which  were  salutary  at  least  to  those
for  whom  they  were  invented.

Numa  was  now  in  his  fortieth  year,  when  embas-
sadors came  from  Rome  to  ofler   him  the  kingdom.
The  speakers  v^^ere  Proculus  and  Velesus,  whom  the
people   had  previously  been  likely  to  select  for  the
royal  dignity,  the   Romans  being  attached  to  Vro-
culus,  and  the  Sabines  to  Velesus.    As  they  imagined,
that  Nnma  would  gladly  embrace  his  good  fortune,
they  made  but  a  short  sj^eech.     They  found  it,  how-
ever, no  easy   matter  to  persuade  him  ;  but  were
obliged  to  use  much  entreaty  to  draw  him  from  the
peaceful    retreat,    of   which    he   was    so   much    en-
amoured, to  the  government  of  a  city  born  as  it  were
and  brought  up  in  war.     In  the  presence  therefore
of  his  father,  and  one  of  his  kinsmen  named  Mar-
cius,  he  gave  them  the  following  ansvver :  "  Eveiy
"  change  of  human  life  has  it's  dangers ;  but  when
"  a  man  has  a  sufficiency  for  every  thing,  and  there
is  nothing  in  his  present  situation  to  justify  corn-
plaint,  what  but  madness   can   lead  him  fl'om  his
usual   track  of  life  (v/hich,  if  it   has  no  farther
advantage,  has  at  least  that  of  certainty)  to  ex-
perience another,  as  yet  doubtful  and  unknown  ?
"  But  the  dano;ersattendin£C  this  o-overnment  are  be-
"  yond  an  uncertainly,  if  we  may  form  a  judgement
"  from  the  fortunes  of  R^omulus,  who  laboured  un-
der the  suspicion  of  having  taken  ofi'  Tatius  his
collegue,  and  was  supposed  to  have  lost  his  ovvu
life  with  equal  injustice.     Yet  Romulus  is  celebrat-
ed as  a  person   of  divine  origin,  supern^iturally
"  nourished  when  an  infant,  and   most  wonderfully
preserved.     For  my  part,  I  am   only  of  mortal


iC


il
ii

il

a


£(


mighty  rival.     His  verses  were  in  great  esteem  Vi^ith  the  emperor
Jalian,  and  often  quoted  by  him.     (Amm.  Mac.  kxv-  4.)*
12


Ci

a


n4.  KUMA.

"  race,  and  yon  are  sensible  my  nursiiii]:  and  ediica-
"  tion  pretend  to  nothing  extraordinary.  As  for  my
character,  if  it  has  any  distinction,  it  has  been
gained  in  a  manner  not  likely  to  qnalify  me  for
the  flut.ies  of  royalty,  in  scenes  of  repose  and  em-
plo3'ments  by  no  means  ardiions.  My  genius  Ts
inclined  to  peace,  my  love  has  long  been  iixcd
upon  it,  and  I  have  studiously  avoided  the  confii-
"  sion  of  war :  I  have  also  drawn  others,  so  far  as
*'  my  inflnence  extended,  to  the  worship  of  the
'"  gods,  to  mutual  offices  of  friendship,  and  to  spend
''  the  rest  of  their  time  in  tilling  the  ground  and
*'  feeding  cattle.  The  Romans  may  have  unavoid-
able wars  left  upon  their  hands  by  their  late  so-
vereign, for  the  maintaining  of  which  you  have
"  need  of  one,  as  his  successor,  more  active  and
"  more  enterprising.  Besides,  the  people  arc  of  a
"  warlike  dis])osition,  elevated  by  victory,  and  ob-
viously anxious  to  extend  their  conquests.  Of
course,  therefore,  a  person  who  has  set  his  heart
upon  the  promoLing  of  religion  and  justice,  and
*'  drawing  men  oif  trcin  the  love  of  violence  and
"  war,  would  soon  become  ridiculous  and  contemp-
"  tible  to  a  city,  tliat  has  more  occasion  for  a  genc-
"  ral  than  a  king."

Numa  in  this  manner  declining  the  crown,  the
Romans  on  the  other  hand  exerted  all  their  endea-
vours to  obviate  his  objections,  and  implored  him
not  to  throw  them  back  again  into  confusion  and
civil  war,  as  there  was  no  other  whom  both  parties
would  unanimously  elect.  When  the  embassadors
had  retired,  his  father  and  his  friend  Marcius  pri-
vately urged  him,  by  all  the  arguments  in  their
power,  to  receive  this  noble  and  valuable  gift  of
heaven  :  "  If,  contented  (said  they)  with  a  compe-
"  tence,  vou  are  indifferent  to  riches  and  unambi-
*"'  tions  of  sovereignty,  having  a  higher  and  better
*'  distinction  in  virtue  ;  yet  consider  that  a  king  is
'*  tlie  minister  of  God,  wJio  now  rouses  and  no  longer
"  permits  to  lie  dormant  your  eminent  love  of  jus-


a
a


NUMA.  17S

"  tice*.  Decline  not  therefore  an  authority,  which
*'  to  a  wise  man  affords  opportunities  for  heroic  and
"  good  actions  ;  wliere  dignity  may  be  added  to  rc-
"  iigion,  and  men  may  be  brought  over  to  piety,  in
"  the  easiest  and  readiest  way,  by  tlie  influence  of
the  prince.  Tatius,  though  a  stranger,  was  be-
loved by  this  people,  and  tlicypay  divine  honours
"  to  the  memory  of  Romulus.  Besides,  who  knows,
*'  as  they  are  victorious,  but  they  may  be  now  sa-
*■'  tiated  with  war;  and,  having  no  farther  v;ish  for
"  triumphs  and  spoils,  may  be  desirous  of  a  mild  and
just  governor  for  the  establishing  of  good  laws
and  the  settling  of  peace  ?  But,  should  they  be
*''  ever  so  ardentiv  inclined  to  v/ar,  yet  is  it  not
*•  better  to  turn  their  violence  another  way,  and  to
"  be  the  centre  of  union  and  friendship  between
*'  the  country  of  the  Sabines,  and  so  great  and  fiou-
"  rishing  a  state  as  that  of  Rome  r"  These  inducc-
jnents,  we  are  told,  were  strengthened  by  auspicious
omens,  and  by  tlie  zeal  and  ardour  of  his  fellow-
citizens  ;  who,  as  soon  as  they  had  learned  the  sub-
ject of  the  embassy,  w^ent  in  a  body  to  entreat  hiui
to  take  upon  him  the  government,  as  the  only  means
to  appease  all  dissensions,  and  eflectually  incorporate
the  tv/o  nations  into  one.

When  he  had  determined  to  go,  he  offered  sacri-
fice to  the  gods,  and  then  set  forward  to  Rome-
Struck  with  love  and  admiration  of  the  man,  tlie
senate  and  people  met  liim  on  the  way:  th€  wom.en.
welcomed  him  with  blessings  and  shouts  of  joy:
the  temples  were  crowded  with  sacrii^ces;  and  so  luii-
versal  was  the  satisfaction,  that  the  city  might  seem
to  have  received  a  kingdom,  instead  of  a  king.
When  they  were  come  into  the  Forum,  .Spurius  Vet-
tius,  whose  turn  it  then  was  to  be  Interrex,  put  it
to  the  vote  whether  Numa  should  be  king,  and  all
the  citizens  with  one  voice  agreed  to  it.  The  robes,
and  other  distinctions  of  royalty,  were  then  offered

Crit.  iii.  42.)*  '


176  NUMA.

him  ;  but  lie  cominanded  them  to  stop,  as  In's  au-
thority yet  wanted  the  sanction  of  heaven.  Tiiking
therefore  with  him  the  priests  and  auo-nrs,  he  went
U}3  to  the  Capitol,  wliich  the  Romans  at  that  time
called  '  tlic  Tarpeian  rock.'  There  thechief  of  the
augurs  covered  the  head  of  iVuma  '%  and  turned  his
face  toward  the  south  ;  then  standing  behind  him,
and  laying  his  right  hand  upon  his  head,  he  offered
up  his  devotions  and  looked  around  him,  in  hopes
of  seeins^  birds  or  some  other  sio;nal  from  the  ^'ods.
An  incredible  silence  reigned  among  the  yjeople,
anxious  for  the  event  and  lost  in  suspense,  till  t]\Q
auspicious  birds  appeared  and  passed  oii  the  riglit
hand.  Upon  this  Niuna  took  the  Iloyal  Robe,  and
went  down  from  the  mount  to  the  ])cople,  who  re-
reived  him  with  loud  acclamations,  as  the  most  piouti
of  men  and  most  beloved  of  the  gods.

His  first  act  of  government  was  to  discharge  .the
body  of  three  hundred  men,  called  Celeres '■',  whom
Romulus  always  kept  about  his  person  as  guards;
for  he  chose  neither  to  distrust  those  who  put  a  con-
fidence in  him,  nor  to  reign  over  a  people  that  could
distrust  him.  In  the  next  place,  to  the  priests  of
Jupiter  and  Mars  he  added  one  for  Romulus,  whom
he  stiled  Flamen  Quirinalis.  Flamines  was  a  com-
mon name  for  priests  before  that  time,  and  it  is  said


'■^  So  it  is  in  the  text  of  Plutarch,  us  it  nov;  stands;  but  it  ap-
pears from  Livy  (i.  8.),  that  the  augur  covered  his  own  head,  not
that  of'  Nuuia,  Aii^iir  ad  la^Mtn  ejus.,  capitc  velafo,  .sedem  cep/t,  <!\rc.
And  indeed  the  auj^ur  ah.vays  wrapped  his  liead  in  a  gown  pecuhar
to  his  office,  called  Lcena,  when  he  uiade  his  observations.  TNlezeray
reconciles  these  writers,  and  removes  the  seeming  mistake  of  I'lu-
tarch,    by   a  reading  v.hieh   Frances    llobortel  liad  found  in   aa

ancient    ^IS.,      "f-'  ^^2-   f<9    jUt-(r>iiitj^(:'y.:'  T^v^xCy    i'/y.iv.u,Avyj'>A-o<,  civroCy    Kcii

^Tcifccrxi  ffo;T;o.>fv.     ix  this  be  considered  only  as  an  emendation,  it  is
a  very  good  one.

19  Dion.  Ilalic.  (ii.  16.)  says,  tliat  Numa  introduced  no  altera-
tion? into  the  institutions  of  Ivorauluf,  as  deeming  them  well  adapted
for  their  purposes;*  and  t^.at  therefore,  though  he  did  not  make
use  of  the  Ct.leres  as  guards,  he  retained  them  as  inferior  minis-
ters, wlio  were  to  take  care  of  the  sacrifices  under  the  direction  61
the  tribunes,  their  foiaicr  oiiicers.


NUMA.  117

to  have  been  corrupted  from  Pilamiiies,  Ji  term  de-
rived from  FHoi,  wliich  in  Greek  signiiies  '  caps*"''
(for  they  wore  a  kind  of  caps,  or  hoods,  on  their
heads)  ;  aiul  the  Latin  Language  had  then  many
more  Greek  words  mixed  with,  it,  than  it  has  at  pre-
sent''. Tlius  royal  mantles  were  by  the  Romans
called  L;ena3,  which  Juba  assnres  us  w\as  from  the
Greek  Chtccmi' ;  and  the  name  of  Camiilus'',  g'wen
to  the  youth  who  served  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter,
and  "who  was  to  have  both  his  parents  alive,  was
t!ie  same  which  some  of  the  Greeks  give  to  Mer-
cury, on  account  of  liis  being  an  attendant  upon  that
god.

Numa,  having  settled  these  matters  w'ith  a  view
to  estabhsh  himself  in  tiie  people's  good  graces,  im-
mediately  afterward  attempted  to  soften  tliem,  as
iron  is  softened  by  fire  ;  and  to  bring  them,  from
a  violent  and  warlike  disposition,  to  a  juster  and
more  gentle  temper.  For,  if  any  city  ever  was  "  in
a  state  of  inflammation"  (as  Plato  expresses  it)
Home  certainly  was  ;  being  composed  at  iirst  of  the
most  hardy  and  resolute  men,  ^vhom  boldness  and
despair  had  driven  thither  from  all  quarters,  nou-
rished and  matured  to  power  by  a  series  of  wars,
and  strengthened  even  by  blows  and  conflicts,  as
piles  fixed  in  the  ground  become  firmer  under  con-

^°  Others  think  they  took  their  names  from  the  flame-coloured
tufts,  Wiiich  tliey  had  on  their  caps;  (or  from  theJ/Y/nH  lamv,  which
they  wore  on  their  heads,  when  the  heat  of  the  weather  rendered
their  caps  inconvenient,  as  they  were  forbidden  to  appear  withoiit
some  covering.)*  Tiioy  were  denominated  fron)  the  particular  god,
to  whom  their  ministry  v/as  confined,  as  Flamen  Dialis,  the  Pric£t
of  Jupiter  ;  Fhimen  MnriiaJis,  tlie  Priest  of  ^Jarf. ;  &c.

''■^  Being  cliietly  formed  from  tlie  ohl  R\ollc  Greek,  tliougli  time
and  successive  improvements  gave  it  at  hist  a  very  different  appear-
ance.*

^^  Camillus  is  derived  from  the  Boeotic  >^ciJ)/w;^■5?,  which  properly
signifies  '  a  servitor.'  In  every  temple  there  was  a  youth  of  qua-
lity, whose  business  it  was  to  minister  to  the  priest.  It  was  neces-»
sai-y,  that  the  father  and  mother  of  the  youth  should  bcboth  alive;
for  which  reason  Plutarch  uses  the  word  «W'<p<9-«A;;,  winch  the  La-
tins cull  pair vmim  et  matrimum.

VOL.  r.  N


]78.  XCMA.

cussion  '^.  Persuaded  that  no  ordinary  means  were
sufiicient,  to  form  and  reduce  so  high-spirited  and
nniractable  a  jieople  to  feelings  of  peace,  he  called
in  the  assistance  of  religion.  By  sacrifices,  religious
dances,  and  processions*,  which  he  appointed  and
in  which  he  himself  officiated,  he  contriycd  to  mix
the  charms  of  festiyity  and  social  pleasure  with  the
solemnity  of  the  ceremonies.  Thus  he  soothed
their  minds,  and  calmed  their  fierceness  and  martial
fire.  Sometimes  also,  by  announcing  to  them  pro-
digies from  heayen,  by  reports  of  dreadful  appari-
tions and  menacing  voices,  he  inspired  them  with
terror,  and  humbled  them  with  superstition.  This
was  the  principal  cause  of  the  rej)ort,  that  he  drew
his  wisdom  from  the  souices  of  Pythagoras  :  for  a
great  part  of  the  philosophy  of  the  latter,  as  well  as
of  the  government  of  the  former,  consisted  in  rcli^
gious  attentions  and  the  worship  of  the  g^ods.  It  is
likewise  said,  that  this  solemn  a})pc^irance  and  air  of
sanctity  were  copied  from  the  same  authority.  That
philosopher  had  so  far  tamed  an  eagle  that,  bv  pro-
nouncing certain  words,  he  could  stop  it  in  it's  ilight,
or  bring  it  down  to  the  ground;  and,  passing  thi'ough
the  multitudes  assembled  at  the  Olympic  games,  he
showed  them  his  golden  thigh ;  beside  other  arts  and
actions,  by  which  he  pretended  to  something  super-
natural.    This  led  Timon  -^   tliePhliasian  to  yvrite,

To  catch  a|)])]ausc,  Pythagoras  affects
A  soicniu  air  and  grandeur  of  expression.

-^  ThTs  is  parallel  to  Annilntl's  observation  upon  tlie  sanre  people
nearly  five  centuries  afterward.     (Mor.  ()d.  iv.  1-.  60.)

J-'er  (lamiia,  per  crcdcs,  ah  ipso
Jjucil  opes  an'nninnque Jerro.'''

-  'j'o  this  passage  Dr.  Middleton  refers,  as  proving  in  conjimc-
rion  with  the  pomp  and  solcuniity  of  Popish  '  IIoli(Uiys,  and  es-
pecially theiy.r'^ligious  processions/  tliat  Kome  '  is  still  tlie  sasne
Jiome  which  oldXtuna  first  tauicd  and  civilised  by  the  arts  of  rcli-
giou.'     (Letter,  p.  185.)

=-t  The  autlior  of  the  Silli,  a  species  of  satire  so  denominated  from
Siloiuis,  in  which  he  bore  hard  upon  the  pliilosophcrs  tot  ilieir  dog-^
uiatism.     (i^i^'g-  Lacrl.  viii.y^


NUMA.  179

But  Numa  feigned,  that  some  goddess  or  moun-
tain-iiynipli  (as  we  have  ah'eady  observed)  favoured
hini  Vvith  her  private  regard^,  and  that  heliad  more-
over frequent  conversations  with  the  Muses,  .'io  the
latter  he  ascribed  most  of  his. revelations  ;  and  there
was  one  in  particular^  that  he  called  Tacita  (as  much
as  to  say,  the  '  nnise  of  silence '"'')  Vvhom  he  taught
the  Romans  to  distingnisii  v>'ith  peculiar  and  distin-
guished veneration.  lly  this,  too,  he  seeraed  to
show  his  knovvdedge  and  approbation  of  the  Pytha-
gorean precept  of  taciturnity.

His  regulations  concerning  images  likewise  seem
to  have  some  relation  to  the  doctrine  of  Pythasroras;
who  v;as  of  opinion  that  the  First  Cause  was  not  an
object  of  sense,  nor  liable  to  passion,  but  invisible  *,
incorruptible,  and  discernible  only  by  the  mind^''.
Thus  Numa  forbade  the  Romans  to  represent  the
Deity  in  the  form  eitlier  of  man,  or  of  beast.  Nor
was  there  among  them,  formerly,  any  image  or
statue  of  the  Divine  Being  :  During  the  fir^t  hun-
dred  and  seventy  years  indeed  they  built  temples,^
and  other  sacred  domes,  but  .placed  in  them  no
figure  of  any  kind  ;  as  persuaded,  that  it  is  impio^is-
to  represent  things  divine  by  what  is  perishable,  and
that  we  can  have  no  conception  .of  God  but  by  the
understanding-''.      His   sacrifices,    also,    resembled

^^  The  common  reading  of  the  text  is,  e/ap  <riu^-^-^,v  ?)  mxK  The
Mord  vixv  signifies  young;  but  it  should,  undoubtedly,  be  read  t-fccj
•  mute,'  nut  only  from  the  analogy  of  the  sense  and  the  conjecture
of  Stephens,  but  on  the  authority  of  a  MS.  In  the  city  ofErythrLU
tiiere  was  a.temph;  of  Minerva,  where  the  priestess  was  called
TIesychia,  that  is,  the  '  compos.ed'  or  '  tlie  silent/

Silv.  Crit.  V.  139.)'*  '

^^  This  is  \.\\ii' sola  roverenlia  vidcnt;  wliich  Tacitus  (De  Mor.
Germ.  9.)  ascribes  to  the  barbarous  Germans,  and  still  more,  ex-
actly the  Viieiite  .sola  lonniique  uumcn  intoUigiint,  which  he  applies  to
tJie  more  civilised  Jews  (Hist.  v.  5.)*

^'''.  In  the  jutlieious  M.  Ilicard,  t!ie   Abbe  now  and  then  subdues,
frlie  Commentator.     What  need  liere  lor   a  note  of  censure  upon
the  more   sensible   Roman  pagans,    to   excuse  the  image-uorship
of  the  lloaii.sh  ("hristians,   as'  *  furnishing  an  assistance  to  human'
i3iiirini^y  in    risin.'.;-  to   invinible  objects,.^  and  justitieJ   f^rsuuLh  la.

N    2


130  KL'MA.

the  Pythagorean  worship  :  For  they  were  wftliout
any  effusion  of  blood,  consisting  chiefly  of  flour,
libations  of  wine,  and  other  very  simple  and  unex-
pensive  things.

To  these  arguments  other  circumstances  are  added,
to  prove  that  these  two  great  men  were  acquainted
with  each  other.  One  of  which  is,  that  Pythagoras
was  enrolled  a  citizen  of  Rome.  This  account  wc
have  in  an  addrerss  to  Antenor  from  Epicharmus,  a
writer  of  comedy  and  a  very  ancient  author,  who
was  himself  of  that  philosopher's  school  '\  An-
otlier  is,  that  Numa  having  four  sons^^  called  one
of  them  Mamercus,  after  the  name  of  a  son  of  Py-
thagoras. From  him  likewise,  they  tell  us,  the
^^milian  family  is  descended,  which  is  one  of  the
noblest  in  Home  ;  the  king  having  given  him  the
surname  of  ^Emihus,  on  account  of  his  gentle  and
graceful  l^anner  of  speaking.  And  I  have  myself
been  informed,  by  several  persons  in  Rome,  that  the

all  ages  and  nations,  from  the  elegant  sculptures  of  heatlien  nij'-
thology  to  the  hideous  monsters  of  the  savages  of  New-Zealand  !'

Dr.  JNIiddlcton,  in  his  '  Letter  from  Rome,'  bittvrly  invciglis
against  the  Popish  idolatry,  and  quotes  several  laws  from  Gotho-
pedus'  '  Commentary  on  the  State  of  Paganism  under  the  Christian
Emperors,'  to  prove  how  anxiously  they  proscribed  this  species  of
jmpiet}^  Pccncc  capitis  snbJKgari  prcvcipimus,  quos  simulacra  colere
constilcrit.  *  *  In  nulla  iirhc  scn.su  carentibiis  simnlacris  vel  accendat  lu-
mina,  imponat  thiira,  scrta  suspendaf.  *  *  Si  quis  vero  mortali  opere
facta  et  cevum  passura  simnlacra  iniposito  tJiure  vencrabitiir — i.-f,  ntpote
xiolatce  religionis  reus,  ed  domo  icu  possessinne  multabitur,  in  qua
eum  constiterit  gentilitia  superstitione  /?;r??u(/fiin»7,  &c.  See  p.  157.*

^^  As  Uv'^rayofMYi!,  dtai ^i-y,):,  fj^iTia"/,i!KMc  docs  not  ncccssarily  signify
*  scholar  to  Pythagoras,'  we  have  rendered  it  '  of  the  school  of
Pythagoras'  or  '  a  Pythagorean,'  to  avoid  involving  Plutarch  in  a
glaring  anachronism.  According  to  the  Marm.  Ox.,  Epicharmus
(to  whom  was  ascribed  tliu  invention  of  comedy)  flourished  B.  C.
iTS ;  and  it  certainly  must  have  been  about  that  time,  because  he
was  at  the  court  of  Hiero.

-9  Some  writers,  to  countenance  the  vanity  of  certain  noble  fa-
milies in  Rome,  in  deducing  their  genealogy  from  Numn,  liave
given  that  prince  four  sons.  But  the  common  opinion  i>,  tliathe
had  only  one  daughter,  named  Ponipilia.  The  A:milii  •were  one  of
the  most  coiisiilerable  families  in  Rome,  and  branched  into  the
Lepidi,  the  Fauli,  and  the  Papi.  The  word  A^mylus  (in  Greekj
xtLov>.e<.)  signifies  *  gentle,  graceful.'


NUMA.  i«l

Bomans  being  commanded  by  the  oracle  to  erect
two  statues  ^^,  one  to  the  wisest  and  the  other  to  the
bravest  of  the  Grecians,  set  up  in  brass  the  figures
of  Pythagoras  and  Alcibiades.  But,  as  these  mat-
ters are  very  dubious,  to  support  or  explore  them
farther  would  look  like  the  juvenile  affectation  of
dispute.

To  Numa  is  attributed  the  institution  of  that  higli
order  of  priests  called  Pontifices  ^^,  over  which  he
is  said  to  have  presided  himself.  Some  say,  they
were  called  Pontifices,  as  employed  in  the  service
of  those  '  powerful '  gods  that  govern  the  world ;
for  pottns,  in  the  Roman  language,  signifies  '  power-
ful :'  Others,  from  their  being  ordered  by  the  law-
giver to  perform  such  professional  offices  as  were  in
their  '  power,'  and  standing  excused  when  there
was  some  great  impediment.  But  most  writers
assign  a  ridiculous^-  reason  for  the  term,  as  if  they
were  so  called  from  their  offering  the  sacrifices  upon

^°  Accoi'ding  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxiv.  5.)  it  was  in  the  time  of
their  war  with  tlie  Satnuites,  that  the  Romans  were  ordered  by  the
Pythian  Apollo  to  set  up  these  statues :  they  were  accordingly
placed  in  the  comitium,  and  remained  there  till  the  dictatorship  ot"
Sylla.  The  oracle,  by  this  direction,  probably  intimated  that  the
llomans,  if  they  desired  to  be  victorious,  should  imitate  the  wis-
dom and  valour  of  the  Greeks.

3'  Numa  created  four,  who  were  all  patricians.  But,  A.  U.  C.
■453  or  454<,  four  plebeians  were  added  to  the  number.  Under
Sylla,  they  were  increased  to  fifteen.  The  king  himself  is  here  as-
serted to  have  been  the  chief  of  them,  or  I'ontifex  Maximus ;
though  Livy  (i.  20.)  attributes  that  honour  to  another  person  of  the
same  name,  viz.  Nama  Marcius,  the  son  of  Marcius  one  of  the
senators.  Plutarch  was,  probably,  deceived  by  the  co-incidence  of
iiarnes.  Nuuia  however,  who  was  of  so  religious  a  turn,  might  re-
serve the  cliief  dignity  in  the  priesthood  to  himself,  as  kings  had
done  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,  and  as  the  emperors  of  Rome
did  at  a  still  later  period,

^^  And  yet  this  is  regarded  both  by  Varro  (L.  L.  iv.)  and  by
Dion.  Halic.  {ii.  20.)  as  the  most  probable  etymology.  Tlie  former
^particularly  states,  that  the  Pons  Hubhcius  was  at  first  built,  and
afterward  frequently  repaired,  under  their  direction.  These  spe-
cific public  labours  were  always  preceded  by  sacrifices,  in  compli-
ment to  the  divinity  of  the  river.  Under  Augustus  this  function
\vas  transferred  from  the  pontifts  to  the  quaestors.*


182  NUMA.

i    *

'  tlic  bri(lp;'e '  (by  the  Latins  called  pouicm),  which
were  looked  upon  as  their  most  sacred  and  ancielit
ceremonies.     These  priests,  too,    arc  said  to  have
been  commissioned  to  keep  the  bridges  in  repair,  as
one  of  the  most  indispensable    parts   of  their   holy-
office.     For  the  Romans  considered  it  as  an  execra-
ble impiety  to  demolisli  \\\q.  wooden  bridge^'%  which
(we  are  told)  was  built  without  iron,  and  pnt  tog'c-
ther  with   pins  of  wood  only,  by  the  direction   of
some   Oracle'^     The   stone-bridc^e   was  built  manv
ages  afterward,  when  JEmilius  was  qua?stor.     Some,
however,  inform  us  that  the  wooden  bridge  was  not
finished  in  the  time   of  Numa,  havin.a:  had  the  last
hand  put  to  it  by  Ancns  Marcius,  -who  was  grandson
to  Numa  by  his  daughter.

The  Pontifex  Maximus,  chief  of  these  priests,  is
interpreter  of  all  sacred  rites,  or  rather  a  superin-
tendent of  relid-ion  ;  havino'  the  care  not  only  of
public  sacrifices,  but  even  of  private  rites  and  offer-
ings, forbidding  the  people  to  depart  from  the  stated
ceremonies,  and  teaching  them  how  to  honour  and
propitiate  the  gods^\  He  had  also  the  inspection  of
the  holy  virgins,  called  Vestals.  For  to  Numa  is
ascribed  the  sacred  establishment  of  the  vestal  vir-
gins "*",  and  the  whole  service  with  respect  to  the
perpetual  fire,  which  they  watch  continually.  This
office  seems  appropriated  to  them,  either  because
fire,  which  is  of  a  pure   and  incorruptible   nature,

'5  This  is  the  celebrated  Paii/i  SuhUciiis,  stil!  preserved  and
treated  witli  reverence,  wliich  joined  the  Janiculum  to  tlie  city.
See  Dion.  Ilalic.  (iii.  It.)  and  Lumisden's  Account  of  Modern
Kome.*

34  This  mode  of  structure  Pliny  (xxxvi.  1,5.)  ascribes  not  to
an  oracle,  but  to  the  inconvenience  vvhicli  the  Romjins  found  in
breaking  it  down,  when  .connected  with  .iron  cramps,  in  the  wjtr
.against  Porsena.*

3i  He  was  vested  likewise  with  supreme  authority  in  all  causes
relating  to  religion,  had  an  absolute  jurisdiction  over  all  magistrates
connected  witli  him  in  his  spiritual  administration,  and  was  amen-
able to  the  king  alone.     (Dion.  Halic.  ii.  20.)*

sfi  Or  rather  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Vesta  (Id.  ii.  17.)  ;  for
]lhea  Sylvia,  the  mother  of  Romulus,  was  a  vestal  of  Alba,*


NUMA.  183

eliould  be  watched  by  persons  untouched  and  unde-
flled;  or  else  because  virginity,  like  fire'",  is  barren
and   unfrnitful.     Agrecaljiy   to  tins  last  reason,  at
the  places  in  Greece  where  the  sacred  iire  is  pre-
served unextinguished,  as  at   Delphi  and   Athens,
not  virgins  but  widows  past  child-bearing  have  the
charge  of  it.     If  it  happen  by  any  accident  to  be  put
out,  as  the  sacred  lamp  is  said  to  have  been  at  Athens,
under  the  tyranny  of  Aristion  ^"^ ;  at  Delphi,  when
the  temple  was   burned   by   the  Medes"-'f  and    at
Home,  in  the  Mithridatic  and  also  in  the  civil  wa-r""^*,
when  not  only  the  fire  was   extinguished,  but  the
altar  itself  overturned  ;  it  is  not  to  be  lighted  again
from  another  tire,  but  new  fire  is  to   be  gained  by
drav.'ing  a  pure  and  unpolluted  flame  from  the  beams
of  the  sun.     This  is  dojie   generally  with  concave
vessels  of  brass,  formed  by  the  conic  section  of  a
rectangled  isosceles  triangle,  whose  lines  from  the
circumference  meet  in   one    central   point.     These,
being  placed  against  the  sun,  cause  it's  rays  to  con-

37  To  reconcile  this  with  a  subsequent  passage  (in  tJje  Life  of
Camlllus)  where  Plutarch  represents  fire  as  *  the  principle  and
"orijrin  of  all  things,  and  the  soul  of  the  world,'  M.  Ilicard  suggests,

■  that  the  latter  sentiment  a{)plies  to  it  only  when  combined  with
other  elements ;  and  that  singly  considered  it  is,  as  here  stated,
barren  and  even  destructive.*

38  This  Aristion  held  out  a  long  time  against  Sylla,  who  be-
'^iecedand  took  Athens  in  the  time  of  the  Mithridatic  war.     Aris-

tion  himself  committed  innumerable  outrages  in  the  city,  and  was
at  last  the  cause  of  it's  being  sacked  and  plundered.  The  sacred
fire  was  kept  in  the  temple  of  jNIinerva,

39  Under  Xerxes.*

'*°  Livy  informs  us  .{Suppl.  Ixxxvi.  6.)  that  toward  the  conclusion
©f  t]ie  civil  war  between  Sylla  and  3Iarius,  Mutius  Scievola  the
pontiff  was  killed  at  the  entrance  of  the  temple  of  Vesta;  but  we
do  not  find,  that  the  sacred  fire  was  put  out.  Though  Lucan  says,
he  fell  near  the  altar,  and  that  his  blood  almost  extinguished  the
hallowed  fiarae.  Even  when  that  temple  was  burned,  near  the  end
of  the  first  Punic  war,  A.  U.  C.  512,  L.  Cecilius  Metellus  the
pontiff"  rushed  tlu-ough  the  flames,  and  brought  oif  the  Palladium
and  other  sacred  things,  though  with  the  loss  of  his  sight.  (L.)  It
was  likevv-ise  burned  again,  about  the  end  of  Commodus'  reign.
Plutarch  in  the  present  instance,  perhaps,  confounds  this  temple
"with  the  Capitol.   (Life  of  Sylla.)*


iSi  .  KUMA,

verge  in  the  centre :  wliicli,  by  reflection  acquiring
the  force  and  activity  of  lire,  rarefy  the  air,  and  im-
mediately kindle  such  light  and  dry  matter  as  they
think  fit  to  apply'*'.  Some  are  of  opinion,  that  the
sacred  virgins  have  the  care  of  nothing  but  the  per-
petual fire.  But  otiiers  say  they  have  some  private
rites  besides'*',  kept  from  the  sight  of  all  but  their
own  body  ;  upon  which  subject  I  have  stated,  in  the
Life  of  Carnillus,  as  much  as  it  was  proper  to  dis-
cover, or  to  declare.

It  is  reported,  that  at  first  only  two  virgins  were
consecrated  bv  Numa,  whose  names  were  Gesrania
and  Veiania ;  and  afterward  two  others,  Canuleia
and  Tarpeia,  to  whom  Servius  added  two  more ;
and  that  number  has  continued  to  this  time.  The
vestals  were  obliged  by  the  king  to  preserve  their
virginity  lor  thirty  years.  The  first  ten  years  they
spent  in  learning  their  office,  the  next  ten  in  prac-
tising what  they  had  learned,  and  the  third  in  in-
structin<>'  others.  At  the  conclusion  of  this  time,
such  as  chose  it  had  liberty  to  marry,  and  quitting
their  sacred  employment  to  take  up  some  other.  "We
have  account  of  but  very  fev»%  however,  that  accepted
this  indulgence,  and  those  did  not  ])rosper.  They
generally  became  a  prey  to  repentance  and  regret,
upon  which  account  the  rest,  inspired  with  a  reli-
gious fear,  were  willing  to  end  their  lives  under  the
same  institution  '^^.

■*'  Burning  glasses  of  refraction  were  invented  by  Archimedes,
who  flourished  five  hundred  years  after  Nurjia.  (L.)  Hence  (1\I.
Ricard  suggests)  the  account  of  Festus,  who  represents  the  fire  as
regenerated  by  friction,  might  for  the  firfit  live  centuries  after  it's
institution  be  correct.  This  passage  is  the  subject  of  a  very  learned
niemoir  by  M.  Dupuy  (Mem.  do  1'  Acad,  des  Inscript.,  xxxv.  395.)
in  vv'hicl)  he  proves,  in  opposition  to  Meiziriac,  that  these  vessels
were  not  parabolic,  &c.*

■^^  As  those  connected  with  tlie  Palladium,  the  statues,  &C.
of  the  gods  of  Samothrace  (Life  of  Carnillus).  See  also  Dion,
Halic.  it.   17.*

''5  ourcly  for  this  we  may  find  a  sufficient  cause  in  the  advanced,
^ge,  at  which  only  they  were  pern)itted  to  marry,  without  referring
it  to  any  supposed  rosentraent  of  heaven.*


NUMA.  ^     >       185

The  king  honoured  them  with  great  privileges ;
such  as,  power  to  make  a  will  during  their  fiithcr's
life,  and  to  transact  their  other  affliirs  without  a
guardian,  like  the  mothers  of  three  children  at  pre-
vsent.  When  they  went  abroad,  they  had  the  fasces
carried  before  them  '* ;  and,  if  by  accident  they  met
a  person  led  to  execution,  he  was  immediately-
reprieved ;  But  the  vestal  was  to  make  oatli^^  that
it  was  by  chance  she  met  him,  and  not  by  design.
It  was  death  to  go  under  the  chair,  in  which  they
were  carried.

For  smaller  oilences  these  virgins  were  punished
with  stripes  ;  and  sometimes  the  Pontiiex  Maximos
gave  them  the  discipline  naked,  in  some  dark
place,  and  under  the  cover  of  a  veil :  but  she,  that
had  broken  her  vow  of  chastitv,  was  buried  alive  ^"^
by  the  Colline  gate.  There,  witliin  the  walls,  is
raised  a  little  mount  of  earth,  called  in  Latin  'Agger ;'
under  which  is  prepared  a  small  cell,  with  steps  to
descend  into  it.  In  this  are  placed  a  bed,  a  lighted
lamp,  and  some  slight  provisions,  such  as  bread,
water,  milk,  and  oil ;  as  they  thought  it  impious  to
take  oft  a  person,  consecrated  with  the  most  avv'ful
ceremonies,  bv  such  a  death   as  that  of  famine  *^

■^•»  This  honour  was  not  conferred  upon  them  by  Numa,  but  by
the  triumvirate  A.  U.  C.  712.  (L.)  The  _;ms  irium  liberorum  was
granted  by  Augustus,  to  encourage  population  after  the  ruinous
effects  of  the  civil  wars.*

''^  Neither  a  vestal,  nor  a  priest  of  Jupiter,  was  obliged  to  take
an  oath.  They  were  believed  without  that  solemnity.  (L.)  They
might  however  make  their  depositions  upon  oath,  if  tliey  Ciiose;
but  the}'  were  directed  to  do  it  rarely,  and  to  swear  only  by  their
own  goddess  Vesta.*

""^  In  Alba  they  were  only  scourged  for  this  offence  with  rods.
(Dion.  Flaiic.  i.  17.)  Numa  heiglitencd  the  penalty  to  atoning;
and  at  last  Tarquinius  Priscus  (Id.  iii.  20.)  condemned  them  to
be  buried  alive.*

''^  There  seems  to  be  something  improbable  and  incor-sistent  in
•tliis.  Of  what  use  could  provisions  be  to  the  vestal,  v/ho  when  the
grave  was  closed  upon  her,  must  expire  through  want  ©f  air  ?  Or,
if  she  could  make  use  of  those  provisions,  was  she  not  at  last  to  die
by  famine?  Perhaps,  what  Plutarch  here  calls  provisions,  were
Huaterials  for  some  sacrifice.     (See  Lipsius  ou  Vestals,  xiii.)

12


The  criminal  is  carried  to  ])unishnicnt  throiigii  the
Forum,  in  a  Httcr  well  covered  without,  and  bound
W])  in  such  a  manner  tliat  lier  cries  cannot  be  iieard.
The  people  silently  make  way  for  the  litter,  and
folk)w  it  with  marks  of  extreme  sorrow  and  dejection.
Tiiere  is  no  spectacle  more  dreadful  than  this,  nor
any  day  which  the  city  spends  in  a  more  melancholy
manner.  "When  the  litter  comes  to  the  place  ap-
pointed, tlie  officers  loose  the  cords,  the  high-priest
with  hands  lifted  up  toward  heaven  offers  some  ])ri-
vate  jirayers  just  before  the  fatal  minute,  then  takes
out  the  prisoner  who  is  covered  with  a  veil,  and
places  her  upon  the.  steps  which  lead  down  into  the
cell  :  after  this,  he  retires  with  the  rest  of  the  priests,
and  when  she  is  gone  down  the  steps' are  taken-  away,
and  the  cell  is  covered  with  earth  ;  so  that  the
place  is  made  level  with  the  rest  of  the  mount.
Thus  were  punished  vestals,  who  failed  to  preserve
their  chastity.

it  is  also  said,  that  Nuraa  built  the  temple  of
,Vesta,  v.here  the  perpetual  fire  was  -to  -be  kept^%  hi
an  orbicular  form  :  not  intending  to  represent  the
figure  of  the  earth,  as  if  that  were  meant  by  Vesta;
kilt  the  frame  of  the  universe,  in  the  centre  of  which
the  Pythagoreans  place  the  element  of  fire  ^^,  and
give  it  the  names  of  Vesta  and  Unity.  The  earth
they  suppose  not  to  be  wathout  motion,  nor  situated
in  the  centre  of  the  world,  but  to  make  it's  revo-
lution round  the  sphere  of  fire,  being  neither  one  of
the  most  valuable  nor  one  of  the  principal  })arts  of
the  great  machine.  Plato  likewise,  in  his  old  age,
is  reported  to  have  been  of  the  same  opinion,
assigning  the  earth  a  diflcrent  situation    from    the

^^  Dion.  Ilalic.  is  of  opinion,  and  probably  be  is  rigbt,  that
Kimia  built  the  temple  of  Vesta  in  a  round  form,  to  represent  the
figure  of  the  earth  ;  lor  by  Vesta  was  meant  the  earth.  With  him
i'cstos  agrees.

•»y  That  this  was  tlie  opinion  of  Philolails,  and  other  Pythago-
reans, is  well  known :  but  Diogenes  Laertius  tells  us,  that  Pytha-
goras himself  held  the  earth  to  be  the  centre.


.  NUMA.  .  .1.S7

centre,  and  leaving  that  as  the  place  of  honour  to  a
nobler  clement.

The  l^ontitices  were,  moreover,  to  prescribe  tlie
form  of  funeral  rites  to  such  as  consulted  them.
Numa  himself  taught  them  to  look  npon  the  last
ofrices  to  the  dead,  as  no  pollution.  He  instructed
them  to  pay  all  due  honours  to  tb.e  infernal  gods,
as  receivihg  the  most  excellent  part  of  us ;  and
more  particularly  to  venerate  the  goddess  Libi-
tina,  as  he  called  her,  v/ho  presides  over  funeral
•solemnities :  whether  he  meant  by  ■  her  Proserpine,
or  rather ^Yenus''"^,  as  some  of  the  most  learned
Romans  suppose ;  not  improperly  ascribing  to  the
same'  divine  power  the  care  of  our  birth,  and  of
'our  death  #    '

He  himself  also  fixed  the  time  of  mournings
according  to  the  ditlerent  ages  of  the  deceased.
He  allowed  none  for  a  child,  tiiat  died  under  three
years  of  age;  and  for  one  older  the  mourning  was
"only  to  last  as  many  months  as  he  had  lived  years,
■provided  those  did  not  exceed  ten.  The  longest
mourning  was  not  to  continue  above  ten  months,
after  which  space  widows  were  permitted  to  marry
'again  :  but  she  who  took  another  husband  before
that  term  was  out,  was  obliged  by  this  decree  to
sacrifice  a  cOw  with  calf '^


5°  This  Venus  Libitinn,  was  the  same  with  Proserpine  :  She  was
called  at  Delphi  Venus  Epitumbia.  Pluto  was  the  Jupiter  of  the
shades  below;  and  there  too  they  had  tlicir  Mercury.

^''  Sucli  an  unnat\»ral  sacri'.ice  was  intended  to  deter  the  widows
from  marrying  again  before  the  expiration  of  their  mourning,  llo-
midus'  year  consisting  bat  of  ten  months,  when  Numa  afterward
added  two  months  more,  he  did  not  alter  the  time  which  he  had
before  settled  for  mourning;  and  therefore,  though  after  that  time
We  often  meet  with  Lncttis  ammns,  or  *  a  year's  mourning,'  we
must  take  it  only  for  the  old  year  of  Romulus.

The  ordinary  colour,  used  alike  by  both  sexes  to  express  their
grief,  was  black,  without  trimmings.  But  after  the  establishment
of  the  empire,  when  abundance  ot  colours  came  into  fashion,  the  old
primitive  white  grew  so  much  into  contempt,  that  it  becaine  peculiar
•to  the  women  tor  their  mourning.  (Pint.  Qusest.  Rom.)  (L.)  It
is  now  the  colour  of  mourning  among  the  Chinese.*
'9


1S8  xi:ma.

Numa  instituted  several  other  sacred  orders ;  twa
of  which  I  shall   mention,   tlie  Sahi'-  and  the   Fe-
ciales^'%  as  affording  particular  proofs  of  his  piety.
The  Feciales,  who  were  like  the   Irenoplni lakes,  or
'  g-uardians  of  the  peace/  among  the   Greeks,  had
this   denoiiiination,   I   apprehend,   as    expressive  of
their  oliicc ;  for  they  were  to  '  act '    and    mediate
l)etween  the  two  parties,  to  decide  their  differences
by  reason,  and  not  to  suffer  them  to  go  to  v.-ar  till
all  hopes  of  justice  were  lost.     The  Greeks  give  tlie
name  of  Irene  to  such  a  peace,  as  puts  an  end  to
strife  not  by  mutual  violence,  but  In  a  rational  way.
In  like  manner,  t\\Q  Feciales   or  heralds   were  often
despatched  to  such  nations,  as  had  injured  the  Ko-
nians,  to  persuade  them  to  entertain  more  equitable
sentiments :  if  they  rejected  their  application,  they
called  the  gods  to  witness,  with  imprecations  against
themselves  and  their  coimtrv,   if  their   cause   was
not  just ;  and  this  was  their  declaration  of  war.    But,
if  the    Feciales   refused  their  sanction,  it   was  not
lawful  for  any  Roman  soldier,  nor  even  for  the  king

There  were  several  accidents,  vvliich  often  occasioned  tlie  coa-
cluding  of  a  public  mourning,  or  the  suspension  of  a  private  one,
before  the  fixed  time ;  such  as  the  dedication  of  a  temple,  the
sol^jmnity  of  some  public  games  or  festivals,  the  censorial  lustration,
and  the  discharging  of  a  vow  made  by  a  magistrate  or  a  general.
They  likewise  put  off  their  mourning-habit  when  a  father,  a  brother,
or  a  ssn  rei-urned  from  captivity,  or  when  some  of  the  family  were
advanced  to  a  considerable  employment.

^^  Tlie  Salii  were  the  guardians  of  the  Ancilia,  or  twelve  shields*,
hung  up  in  the  temple  af  INIars.  The)'^  took  their  name  from  their
dancing  in  the  celebration  of  an  annual  festival,  instituted  in
memorj"-  of  a  miraculous  shield  v»hich,  as  Numa  pretended,  fell
down  frovn  heaven.  (L.)  See  below.  They  were  originally  twelve
in  number,  and  selected  from  the  patrician  youth  of  the  finest  figure.
(Dion.  Halic.  ii.  18.)*

^'5  Dion.  Halic.  finds  them  among  the  Aborigines;  and  Numa  is
said  to  have  borrowed  the  institution  from  the  people  of  Latium.
He  appointed  twenty  Feciales,  chosen  out  of  the  most  eminent
families  in  Rome,  and  settled  them  in  a  college.  The  pater
pntratus,  who  made  peace  or  denounced  war,  was  probably  one  of
their  body  selected  for  that  purpose,  who  had  both  a  father  and
9.  son  alive.  Liv,  i.  24r.  32.,  Dion.  Halic.  ii.  19.,  and  Aul.  Gell.
xv:.  l-t.


^■UMA.  189

himself,  to  begin  hostilities.  War  was  to  commence
with  their  approbation,  as  being  the  proper  judges
whether  or  not  it  was  just ;  and  then  the  supreme
magistrate  was  to  deliberate,  concerning  the  proper
means  of  carrying  it  on.  The  great  misfortunes,
which  befel  the  city  from  the  Gauls,  are  said  to
have  proceeded  from  the  violation  of  these  sacred
rites.  For,  when  those  barbarians  were  besieging
Clusium,  Fabius  Ambustus  was  sent  embassador  to
their  camp,  with  proposals  of  peace  in  favour  of  the
besieged.  But,  receiving  a  harsh  answer,  he  thought
himself  released  from  his  diplomatic  character,  and
rashly  taking  up  arms  for  the  Clusians  challenged
the  bravest  man  in  the  Gaulish  army.  He  :;ri)ved
victorious  indeed  in  the  combat,  for  he  killed  his
adversary,  and  carried  oft  his  spoils:  but  the  Gauls,
having  discovered  who  he  was,  sent  a  lierald  to
Rome  to  accuse  him  of  having  borne  arms  against
them,  contrary  to  treaties  and  good  faith,  and
without  a  declaration  of  w^ar.  Upon  this,  the
Feciales  exhorted  the  senate  to  deliver  him  up  to
the  Gauls ;  but  he  applied  to  the  people,  and
being  a  favourite  with  them,  got  himself  screened
from  the  sentence.  Soon  afterv/ard,  the  Gauls
marched  to  Rome,  and  sacked  the  whole  city  except
the  Capitol ;  as  we  have  related  at  large,  in  the  Life
of  Camilhis.

The  order  of  priests,  called  Salii,  is  said  to  have
been  instituted  upon  the  following  occasion  :  In  the
eighth  year  of  Numa's  reign,  a  pestilence  prevailed
in  Italv ;  Rome  also  suffered  under  it's  ravag-es.
While  the  people  were  much  dejected,  we  are  told,
that  a  brasen  buckler  fell  from  heaven  into  the
hands  of  Numa.  Of  this  he  g-ave  a  wonderful
account,  received  from  Egeria  and  the  Muses —
that  the  buckler  was  sent  down  for  the  preservation
of  the  city,  and  should  be  kept  with  the  utmost
care :  that  eleven  others  should  be  made  as  like  it
as  possible  in  size  and  fashion,   in  order  that,  if  any


196  XUMA.

person  were  disposed  to  steal  it,  be  mi<!;]it  not  he,
able  to  distinguisb  it  from  the  rest,  ile  fartlier
declared,  that  the  place  and  the  meadows  about  it,
where  he  ireqaently  conversed  witii  the  Miiscs,
should  be  consecrated  to  those  divinities  ;  and  that
the  spring,  which  watered  the  ground,  should  be
sacred  to  the  use  of  the  vestal  virgins,  daily  to
i^prinkle  and  purify  their  temple.  The  inmiediate
cessation  of  the  pestilence  is  said  to  have  confirmed
the  truth  of  this  account.  Numa  then  showed  the
buckler  to  the  artists,  and  commanded  them  to  exert
alf  their  skill,  in  order  to  produce  an  exact  resem-
blance. They  all  declined  the  attempt  except  Vetu-
rius  Mamnrius,  who  was  so  sncccssful  in  the  imita-
tion, and  made  the  other  eleven  so  like  it,  that  not
evpn  Numa  himself  could  distinguish  them.  These
bucklers  he  gave  in  charge  to  the  Salii  ^  not  so
named  (as  some  pretend)  irom  Saiius  of  Samothrace
or  Mantinea,  who  taught  the  way  of  dancing  in
arnis ;  but  I'ather  from  the  leaping  kind  of  dance
itself,  which  they  lead  up  along  the  streets,  when  in
the  month  of  March  they  carry  the  sacred  bucklers
through  the  city.  Upon  that  occasion  they  are
habited  in  purple  vests,  girt  with  broad  belts  of
brass  ;  they  wear  also  brazen  helmets,  and  carry  short
swords,  v/ith  which  they  strike  the  bucklerSj-'ffWl  to
those  sounds  they  kecj)  time  with  their  feet.  They,
move  in  an  agreeable  manner,  performing  certain
involutions  and  changes  in  a  quick  measure,  with
vigour,  agility,  and  ease.

"^J'hese  bucklers  are  called  Ancilia,  from  the  form
of  them.  For  they  are  neither  circular,  nor  yet  like
the  Pelta  semicircular,  but  fashioned  in  two  crooked
indented  lines,  the  extremities  of  which  meeting
close  form  a  curve,  in  Greek  anciilon.  Or  they  may
be  so  named  from  the  ancon,  or  '  bend  of  the  arm,*
upon  which  they  are  carried.  This  account  of  the.
matter  we  have  from  Juba.  who  is  verv  desirous
to  derive  the  term  from  the  Greek.     But  if  we  must


NUMA.  19i

liave  an  etymolcgyfrom  that  language,  it  maybe  taken
from  their  descending  anchathai^  '  from  on  high  j'
or  from  akcms,  'their  Iieahng  of  tlie  sick  ;'  or  ti-om
(ui-clniioii  lusLs',  '  their  putting  an  end  to  the  drought  9'
or  Jastly  fi-om  (inaschcMS,  '  dehverance  from  cahimi-
ties  : '  tor  which  reason,  also,  Castor  and  Pollux
were  by  the  Athenians  called  cuiakes  *'.  Mamurius'
reward  for  this  art  was  (we  are  told)  an  ode,  wliicii
tlie  Salians  sunc^  to  his  memoi'V,  alono-  with  the
P}ni-rhic  dance.  8ome  however  say,  that  it  was  not
A^eturius  Mamurius,  who  was  celebrated  in  that
composition,  but  "cetus  memoriae  the  ancient  re-
membrance '  of  the  thin<x.

After  Xuma  had  instituted  these  several  orders
of  priests,  he  erected  a  royal  palace,  called  llegia,
near  the  temple  of  Vesta ;  and  there  he  passed  most
of  liis  time,  either  in  perfonning  some  sacred  func-
tion, or  in  instructing  the  priests,  or  at  least  in  con-
versing with  them  upon  some  divine  subject.  Ho
had  also  another  house  upon  the  Quirinal  mount,
the  situation  of  which  is  still  exhibited.  In  ail
public  ceremonies  and  processions  of  the  priests,  a
herald  went  before,  who  gave  notice  to  the  people
to  keep  holiday.  For,  as  they  inform  us  that  the
Pythagoreans  would  not  snlfer  their  disciples  to  j)ay
any  homage  or  worship  to  the  gods  in  a  cursory
manner,  but  required  them  to  come  prepared  for  it
by  meditation  at  home;  so  Numa  was  of  opinioiij
that  his  citizens  should  neither  hear  nor  sec  any
religious  service  in  a  sliglit  or  careless  way,  but
diseno-ai^ed  from  other  aftaiis,  brinii'  with  them  that
attention,  v^hich.  an  object  of  so  much  importance
required.  The  streets  and  ways  upon  such  occa-
sions were  cleared  of  clamour,  and  all  kinds  of
noise  which  attends  manual  labour,  that  the  so-
lemnities miidit  not  be  disturbed.  Some  vestifjes  of
this  still  remain  ;  for,  when  the  consul  is  employed
either  in   auffurv  or  sacrilicin.o'    tliev  call  out  to  thg

>*  See  tiie  Life  oi"  Theseus,  p.  I'J/


192  NttMA.

people,  Hoc  agc^  '  Mind  this,'  and  thus  admonisli
thern  to  be  orderly  and  attentive.

]\lany  others  of  his  institutions  resemble  those  oi"
the  Pythagoreans.     For  as  these  had  precepts,  which
enjoined  them   not  to  sit  upon   a  bushel '%  not  to
stir  the  fire  with  a  sword  '*^',  uot  to  tiu'U  back  uj)on  a
journey^'',  to  offer  an  odd  number  to  the  celestial,
and  an  even  one  to  the  terrestrial  gods'"* ;  the  sense
of  which    precepts   is  hidden    from  the  vulgar :  so
some  of  Numa's  have  a  concealed  meaning;  as,  not
to  oiler  to  the  srods  wine  procccdins;  from  a  vine  uii-
pruned,    not   to   sacrifice   without    meaP^,  to    turn
round  when  you  are  worshipping^'*^,  and  to  sit  down
when  you  have  worshipped.     The  two  first  precepts
seem  -to  recommend  agriculture,  as  a   part  of  re-
ligion ;  and  the  turning  round  in  adoration  is  said  to
represent  the  circidar  motion  of  the  world.     Cut  I
rather  think,   that   as    the   temples    opened  toward
the  east,  such  as  entered  tiiem  necessarily  turning
their  backs  upon  the  rising  sun  made  a  half-turn  to
that  quarter,  in  honour  of  the  god  of  day  ;  and  tlien

55  That  is,  not  to  give  up  ourselves  to  idleness.
"     ^^  Not  to  irritate  him,  who  is  already  angry.

5'  In  another  place  Plutarch  gives  this  precept  thus,  '  Never
return  from  the  borders.'  But  the  sense  is  the  same :  Die  like  a
man  ;  do  not  long  after  life  when  it  is  departing,  or  wish  to  be
young  again.

^^'  The  Pagans  deemed  an  odd  number  the  more  perfect,  and'
the  symbol  of  concord;  because  it  cannot  be  divided  into  two  equal
parts,  as  the  even  number  mav,  which  is  therefore  the  symbol  of
division.  This  prejudice  was  not  only  the  reason,  why  the  first
month  was  consecrated  to  tlie  celestial,  and  the  second  to  the
terrestrial,  gods;  but  gave  birth  to  a  thousand  superstitious  prac-
tices, which  in  some  countries  are  still  kept  up  by  those,  whom
reason  and  religion  ought  to  liave  undeceived.

^'■^  The  priiicipal  intention  of  this  precept  might  be,  to  wean
them  from  sacriliees  of  blood,  and  to  bring  them  to  offer  only
cakes  and  figures  of  animals  made  of  paste.  (L.) — Or,  as  INI.  Ri-
card  conjectures,  to  imply  that  meal  is  one  of  the  best  gifts  of
nature,  and  is  therefore  gratefully  to  be  ottered  to  the  bountiful
God  of  nature.  The  unpruned  vine  is  of  no  value,  and  it  is  not
from  that  which  *'  hath  any  ill  blemish  '  (Dcut.  xv.  'il.)  that  we  are
to  select  our  sacrifice.*

*•  Probably  to  represent  the  immensity  of  the  Godhead,


NUMA.  p^

coir.pletcd  tlie  circle,  as  well  as  tlieir  devotio.ns,
will/  tb.eir  faces  toward  the  god  of  tlie  temple.
Unless  {.erh.aps  tliis  cliaiigc  of  posture  may  have  an
enigmatical  nieaning,  like  tlie  Egyptian  wheck'",
adinoiiirihing  lis  of  the  instability  of  every  thing
liuiiian,  and  preparing  us  to  acquiesce  and  rest  sa-
ti.sficd  with  whatever  turns  and  changes  the  Divine
Being  may  allot.  The  sitting  down  after  an  act  oY^
religion  was  intended,  we  are  told,  as  an  omen  qf
success  in  prayer,  and  of  lasting  happiness  .after-
ward. They  add  that,  as  actions  arc  divided  by
intervals  of  rest,  so  when  one  business  was  over,
•they  sate  dovrn  in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  that
under  their  auspicious  conduct  they  might  bcgiri
another.  Neither  is  this  repugnant  io  what  h^as
l)een  already  advanced ;  since  the  lawgiver  wishefi
to  accustom  us  to  address  the  deity,  not  in  the
midst  of  business  or  hurry,  but  when  we  have  tiirie
and  leisure  to  do  it  as  we  ought.

By  this  sort  of  religious  discipline  the  people  be-
came so  traceable,  and  were  impressed  with  such, a
veneration  of  Numa's  power,  that  they  admitted
many  improbable  and  even  fabulous  tales,  and
thought  nothing  incredible  or  impossible  which  he
undertook.  Thus  he  is  said  to  have  invited  ujany
of  the  citizens  to  his  table  ^',  where  he  took  care  the
vessels  should  l)e  paltry,  and  the  provisions  plain
and  inelegant ;  but  after  they  were  seated  he  toM
them  that  the  o;oddess,  with  whom  he  used  to  con-
verse,  was  coming  to  visit  him;  when,  on  a  sudden,

''''  Clement  of  Alexandria  (Strom,  v.  S.)  quotes  a  passage  frQ.m
a  p:raminarian  of  that  city,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the  Egyptian
priests  presented  to  such,  as  came  to  worship  in  their  temples,  a
wheel  to  represent  the  instability,  and  ftowers  to  exhibit  the  brevity^
of  life.*

^^  Dion.  Ilaiic.  (ii.  \').)  tells  us,  that  Nnma  shov/sd  tlvese  Rc-
inans  all  the  rooms  qf  his  palace  in  the  morning  meanly  fiirnished,
and  without  any  signs  of  a  great  entertainment ;  that  he  kept  thein
with  him  a  considerable  part  of  the  day;  and,  when  they  returned
to  sup  with  him  by  invitation  in  the  evening,  they  found  every  thing
surprisingly  magnificent.  Tliia  he  imputed,  most  probably,  to  ids
invisible  friend,

VOL.  I.  O


T9-4  NOMA.

file  room  waf)  supplied  with  the  most  costly  vessefo,
and  the  table  with  a  magnificent  entertainment.
But  nothing  can  be  imagined  more  absurd,  tlian
what  is  related  about  his  conversation  with  Jupiter.
It  is  said,  that  when  mount  Aventine  was  yet  with-
out the  walls  and  uninhabited,  abounding  with  flow-
ing springs  and  shady  groves,  it  was  frequented  by
two  demi-gods,  Picus  and  Fauiius.  These,  in  other
tespects,  were  like  the  Satyrs,  or  the  race  of  the
Titans"';  but  in  the  wonderful  feats,  which  they
performed  by  their  skill  in  pharmacy  and  magic,
more  resembled  the  Ida?i  Dactvli''*,  as  the  Greeks
call  them  ;  and,  thus  provided,  they  roamed  about
Italy.  Numa,  they  tell  us,  having  mixed  the  foun-
tain of  W'hich  the}'  used  to  drink  with  wine  and
honey ''^5  surprised  and  caught  them.  Upon  this,
they  turned  themselves  into  many  forms,  and  quit-
t'mfj:  their  natural  fio'ure  assumed  strano-e  and  horrible
appearances.  But,  when  they  found  they  could  not
break  or  escape  from  the  bond  by  W'liich  tliey  were
-  lield,  they  acquainted  him  with  many  secrets  of  fu-
turity, and  taught  him  a  lustration  for  thunder  and

^'5  Some  MSS.  give  us  nf;»&-v  instead  o^Tirav^v,  which  is  a  better
-  reading,  because  Picus  and  Faunus  were  horned  Sylvan  deities  like
Pan.  (L.)  See  an  account  of  these  old  Italian  gods,  in  Ileyne's
F-xcur.s.  V.  on  Virg.  JEn.  vii.*

^■i  Diodorus,  from  Epliorus,  informs  us  that,  the  Idaei  Dactyli
were  originally  from  mount  Ida  in  Phrygia,  whence  they  passed
into  Europe  with  king  Minos.  They  settled  first  in  Somothrace,
where  tliey  taught  the  inhabitants  religious  rites.  Orpheus  is
thought  to  have  been  their  disciple,  and  the  first  who  imported  a
fwrm  of  worship  into  (/reece.  Tiie  Dactyli  are  likewise  said  to
have  found  out  the  use  of  fire,  and  to  have  explained  the  nature  of
iron  and  braso  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  near  mount  Be-
recynthus,  and  the  way  of  working  them.  For  this,  and  many
other  useful  discoveries,  they  were  worshipped  after  their  death  asf
^ods.   (L).

Their  name  they  had  from  JUxtkA*?,  *  a  finger,'  being  ten  in
number.  Tliis  name  was  used  as  a  ch;u-m  against  terrors;  and
some  stones,'  called  after  them  '  Ida;i  Dactyli,'  were  worn  a*
amulet?.*

^•^  Ovid  says,  wine  only — and  at  the  same  titnc  he  also  sacrificed
a  feheep.  (Fast.  iii.  300.)  But  can  this  be  true  oi'  the  P}  thagoreau
\uma I  *


:;uMA.  195

lightulng,  composed  of  onions,  hair,  and  pilchards,
which  is  in  use  to  this  day.  Others  say,  these  demi-
gods did  not  communicate  the  lustration,  but  that
by  the  force  of  magic  they  brought  down  Jupiter
from  heaven.  The  god,  resenting  tliis  at  Numa's
hands,  ordered  "  the  charm  to  consist  of  heads  " —
"  Of  onions,"  rephed  Numa.  "  Human  " — "  Hairs,"
said  Numa,  desirous  to  fence  against  the  dreadful
injunction,  and  interrupting  the  god.  "  Living,"
said  Jupiter: — "  Pilchards,"  said  Numa.  He  was
instructed  (it  seems)  by  Egeria,  how  to  manage  the
matter.  Jupiter  went  away  propitious,  in  Greek
ileos,  whence  the  pLacc  was  called  Ilicium  ^° ;  and  so
the  charm  vv'as  effected.  These  things,  fabulous  and
ridiculous  as  they  are,  demonstrate  how  supersti-
tion confirmed  by  custom  operated  upon  the  minds
of  the  people.  As  for  Numa  himself,  he  placed  his
coniidence  so  entirely  in  the  Deity,  that  when  one
brought  him  word  tlie  enemy  was  coming,  he  only
smiled,  saying;  "  And  I  am  sacrificing."

He  is  recorded  to  have  been  the  first  that  built
temples  to  Fides''"  or  Faith,  and  to  Terminus'*^ :  he

'''5  This  is  Plutarch" ■^  mistake.  Ovid  informs  u?  (Fast.  iii.  .038.)
that  Jupiter  was  called  Elicius  from  elicere,  '  to  draw  out,'  becaii.se
he  was  drawn  out  of  heaven  upon  this  occc^sion.  (L.)  But  Plu-
tarch owns  himself  to  have  been  only  sliglitl)-  acquainted  with  the
Latin  language,  and  it  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  he  should  oc-
casionally err,  in  regard  to  some  of  it's  etymologies.*

"5^  This  was  intended  to  make  tlie  Romans  pay  as  much  regard
to  their  word,  as  to  a  contract  in  writing.  And  so  excellent,  in
fact,  were  their  principles,  tliat  Poiybius  gives  the  Romans  of  his
time  this  honourable  testimony  :  '  They  niost  inviolably  keep  their
word,  without  being  obliged  to  it  by  bail,  witness,  or  promise  ;
wheveas  ten  securities,  twenty  promises,  and  as  many  witnesses
cannot  hinder  the  faitiiless  Greeks  from  attempting  to  deceive  and
disappoint  you.'  No  wonder,  then,  that  so  virtuous  a  people  were
victorious  over  those,  who  were  become  thus  degenerate  and  dis-
hone.st !

<'s  The  Dii  Termini  were  represented  by  stones,  wliich  Xunia
caused  to  be  placed  on  the  borders  of  the  Roman  state,  and  of  each
man's  priva"te  lands.  In  honour  of  these  deities,  he  instituted  a
festival  called  Tenninalia,  v/lrich  was  annuuiiv  celebrated  on  tlu;
'2'2d  or  2kl  of  February,  (L.)— or  sext.  Cal.  Mart.  This  (kiv  mj>
anciently  the  last  of  the  Yt-iir  (Varr.  I..  L.  v.),  and  was  tiierefure

0  2


196  XUMA.

likewise  taught  the  Koliuins  to  swear  by  Faitli,  a."?
the  greatest  of  oaths  ;  wliieh  tliey  still  continue  to
.observe  "^     In  our  times  they  sacrifice  animals  in  the
fields,  both  on  public  and  private  occasions,  to  Ter-
minus as  the  god  of  boundaries;  but,  formerly,  the
offering  was  an  inanimate  one  :  for  Numa  prgued,
that  tliere  should  be  no  effusion  of  blood  in  the  riles
of  a  god,  who  is  the  guardian  of  peace  and  the  wit-
ness of  justice.     It  is  certain  indeed  that  Numa  was^
the  first,  who   marked   out  the   Iwundaries  of  the
iloman  territory  ;  Romulus  being  unwilling,  by  de-
fining his  own,  to  show  how  much  he  had  encroached
upon   the    neighbouring   countries :    for   bounds,  if
preserved,    are  barriers    against   lawless  power  ;  if
violated,  are  evidences   of  injustice.     The  territory
of  the  city  was  originally  far  from  being  extensive^
but  Romulus  added   to  it   a    considerable   district
gained  by  the  sword.     All  this  Nunia  divided  among
the  indigent  citizens,  that  poverty  might  not  drive
them  to  rapine  ;  and,  as  he  turned  the  appHcatioii
of  the  people  to  agricultu.rc,  their  temper  was  sub-
dued together  wit!\  t!ie  ground.     For  no  occupation
implants  so  speedy  and  so  effectual  a  love  of  peace,
as  a  country-life  ;  w^here,  without  diminishing  the
courage  and  bravery  necessary  to  deiend  property,
the  temptations  to  injustice  and  avarice  are  removed.
Numa,  thereibre,  introduced  among  his  subjects  an
attachment  to  husbandry,  as  a  charm  of  peace ;  an.d
contriving  a  business  for  them,  which  v/ou.ld  rather
form  their  manners  to  simplicity  than  raise  them  to


the  clay  doubled  by  Julius  Cstsar's  intercalation,  whence  the  j^ear
w'iis  denoiriiuritetl  '  Bissextile."  Tiie  victim,  sacrificed  upon  these
occa;>i()ns,  was  a  iamb  ov  a  SHcldng  pig.  lV!)ruaiy,  either  as  the
h'.st  month  cftiie  twelve,  or  as  consisting  (alone,  accordip.g  to  Nu-
mu's  regulation  of  the  calendar)  of  an  even  nuiiiber  (see  not.  fM),
was  reckoned  unfcrtunate,  reserved  for  the  dead,  and  consecrated
to  Typhon  or  the  Evil  Genius.*  •  To  remove  tlic  Dii  Tennini  was
deemed  a  sacrilege  of  so  lieinous  a  nature,  that  any  nnui  might  kill
ilie  transgressor  with  niipunity.

*'•'  In  the  phrase,  McJius  fidius,  which  may  be  regarded  as  nearly
cfjuivalentto  the  English  '  L'pon  my  honour.'*


NUMA.  .     X97

opulence,  lie  divided  the  country  into  several  por-
tions, which  he  called  pagi  or  '  boroughs,'  and  ap-
pointed over  each  of  tlicm  a  governor  or  overseer.
Occasionally,  also,  h-e  inspected  them  himselt':  and,
judging  of  the  disposition  of  the  people,  by  the  con-
dition of  th.eir  farms,  some  he  advanced  to  posts  of
honour  and  trust;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  re-
primanded and  endeavoured  to  reform  the  negligent
and  tlie  idle  '^.

But  the  Kiost  admired  of  all  his  institutions,  is  his
distribution  of  the  citizens  into  companies,  accord-
ing to  their  arts  and  trades.  For  the  city  consisting,
as  v/e  liavc  observed,  of  two  nations  or  rather  fac-
tions, wlio  instead  of  uniting  and  blotting  out  the
remembrance  of  their  orio-inal  diifercnce,  maintained
perpetual  contests  and  party-quarrels  ;  lie  pursued
the  method  adopted  to  incor-porate  hard  and  solid
bodies,  v;hich  while  entire  v.ill  not  mix  at  all,  but
when  reduced  to  powder  combine  v.ith  ease.  To
attain  his  ])urpos€,  he  divided  (as  I  said)  the  whole
multitude  into  small  bodies,  who  gaining  new  dis-
tinctions lost  by  degrees  the  great  and  original  one,
in  consequence  of  their  being  thus  broken  into  so
many  parts.  This  distribution  was  made  according
to  the  several  trades,  of  nuisicians,  goldsmiths,  ma-
sons, dyers,  shoemakers,  tanners,  braziers,  and  pot-
ters'^^  He  collected  the  other  artilicers  also  into
companies,  who  had  their  respective  halls,  courts,
and  religious  ceremonies,  peculiar  to  eacli  society.
By  these  means  iie  first  took  away  the  distinction  of

"°  To  neglect  t^e  cultivation  of  a  farm,  was  considcrecl  among
tlie  Konuins  as  a  ccnuurium  jyrohrKmi  '  a  fault,  t!iat  merited  the
t'hastij'ciiient  ol' tile  censor.'

■''  Many  political  ce*jono.nists  blame  these  guiiJs,  as  introducing
a  selfish  corporiife  spirit;  as  hostile  to  industry,  by  their  foruiajiiies
and  quaUHcation>:,  which  arrest  it's  progress ;  ajitl  as  causing  in-
trigues and  jealousies,  so  often  liital  to  real  talent.  But,  ia  tliis
instance  at  least,  they  were  of  service;  and  perhaps  eliieily  so  bj
destroying  other  princi[)]es  ol*  a^:sociation,  of  a  still  moi-e  dangerous
nature,  in  the  lieterogene*R!s  mass  of  Koman  pOj)ulation.  For
i.hese,  he  judiciously  substitutiod  the  strong  cement  of  peculiar  re-
ligious rites.*


I9S  XU3.IA.

Sabines  and  Romans,  subjects  of  Tatius  and  sul-jccts
of  Romulus,  both  name  and  thing;  the  very  sepa-
ration into  parts  mixing  and  uniting  the  whole  to-
gether.

He  is  celebrated  also  in  his  political  capacity,  for
having  corrected  the  law,  vvhicli  empowered  fatliers
to  sell  their  children  ''\  by  excepting  such  as  had
married  under  their  father's  command  or  consent ;
for  he  reckoned  it  a  great  hardship,  that  a  woman
should  marry  a  man  as  free,  and  then  live  with  him
as  a  slave.

He  attempted  likewise  the  reformation  of  the  ca-
lendar, which  he  executed  with  some  degree  of  skill,
though  not  with  absolute  exactness.  In  the  reign
of  Romulus,  it  had  neither  measure  nor  order,  some
months  consisti]]g  of  fewer  than  twenty  days'%  while


'*  Romulus  had  allowed  fathers  greater  power  over  their  children,
than  masters  had  over  their  slaves.  For  a  master  could  sell  his  slave
only  once  ;  whereas  a  father  could  sell  his  son,  of  what  age  or  con-
dition soever,  three  times.  (L.)  This  power  of  selling  children  ex-
isted likewise  in  Greece,  till  the  time  o't  Solon ;  and,  when  he  set
limits  to  it,  by  directing  that  it  should  not  affect  such  as  had  attain-
ed manhood,  he  made  exceptions  with  regard  to  dauglsters  or  sisters
surprised  in  any  heinous  oft'ence.  Nunia's  mitigation  of  this  privi-
lege was  but  of  short  duration;  for  the  Decemvirs,  in  their  fourth
Table,  revived  it  to  it's  original  extent  (Dion.  Halic.  ii.  8.);  and
though,  as  Gravina  iiiforras  us  (Espr.  des  Loix  Rom.,  Art.  Droit
Paternel),  it  was  gradually  moderated  by  the  influence  of  civilisa-
tion and  literature,  instances  occur,  even  in  the  time  of  Cicero,
which  prove  that  the  right  itself  continued  to  subsist  in  all  it's
rigour.''^

'^  But  Macrobius informs  us  (Saturn,  i.  12.,  &c.)  and  with  him
Solinus  (Polyhist.  i.)  agrees,  that  Ron)uk.s  settled  the  number  of
days  with  more  equdity,  allotting  to  March,  May,  Quintilis  (or
July),  and  October,  one  and  thirty  days  each;  to  April,  June,
Sextilis  (or  August),  September,  November,  and  December,  thirty ;
making  up  in  all  three  hundred  and  four  days.  Kuma,  better  ac-
quainted with  the  celestial  motions,  added  (or,  more  probably,
transposed)  the  two  months  of  January  and  February.  [Neither
Romulus  indeed,  nor  any  other  man,  could  be  so  ignorant  as  to
make  the  lunar  year  consist  of  three  liundred  and  four  days ;  and
that  the  Romans  originally  reckoned  by  lunar  months,  and  conse-
quently by  the  lunar  year,  is  plain  frcm  their  calends,  nones,  and
ides.]  To  compose  these  two  months,  he  added  fifty  days  to  tlie
three  hundred  and  four,  in  order  to  make  them  answer  to  the  course


NUMA.  19d

some  were  extended  to  tlilrty-five,  and  others  even
to  more.  They  had  no  idea  of  the  anomaly  between
the  courses  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  only  laid
down  this  position,  that  the  year  consisted  of  three
hundred  and  sixty  days.  Numa  then,  observing
that  there  was  a  difference  of  eleven  days,  three  hun-
dred and  fifty-four  days  making  up  the  Innar,  and
three  hundred  and  sixty-five  the  solar  year,  doubled
those  eleven  days  and  inserted  them  as  an  intercalary
month,  after  that  of  February,  every  other  year.
This  additional  month  was  called  by  the  Romans
'  Mercidinus.'  But  this  amendment  of  the  irregu-
larity required  itself  a  subsequent  amendment.  He
likewise  altered  the  order  of  the  months,  making
March  the  third,  which  had  been  the  first ;  January

of  the  moon.  Beside  this,  he  observed  the  difference  betueen  the
solar  and  the  tw-elve  lunar  courses  to  be  eleven  days,  and  to  remedy
the  inequality,  doubled  those  days  alter  every  two  years,  adding  an
interstitial  month  after  February;  which  Plutarch  here  calls  '  Mer-
cidinus,'  and  in  the  Life  of  Julius  Caesar  *  Mercedonius.'  Festus
speaks  of  certain  days,  which  he  calls  '  Dies  Mercedonii,'  because
they  were  appointed,  as  at  the  end  of  the  year,  for  the  payment  of
workmen  and  domestics,  which  is  all  we  know  of  the  word.  As
Numa  was  sensible,  that  the  solar  year  consisted  of  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  days  and  six  hours,  and  that  the  six  lioaii-s  made  a
whole  day  in  four  years,  he  commanded  that  the  month  *  Merci-
dinus'  after  every  four  years  should  consist  of  twenty-three  days;
but  the  care  of  these  intercalations,  being  left  to  the  priests^  thej'
put  in  or  left  out  the  intercalaiy  day  or  month,  as  they  fancied  it
iucky  or  unlucky,  useful  or  inconvenient,  advantageous  or  disadvan-
tageous, to  themselves ;  and  thus  created  such  confusion,  that  th.e
i'estivals  came  in  process  of  time  to  be  kept  at  a  seasori  quite  con-
trary to  tt  hat  they  had  formerly  been.  The  Roman  calendar  had
gained  nearly  three  months  in  the  days  of  Julius  Cnssarj  and  there-
fore again  stood  in  need  of  a  great  reformation.  (L.)

But,  upon  this  subject,  neither  the  modern  nor  the  Roman  literati
are  clear.  That  Romulus  indeed,  instead  of  commencing  his  year
(like  most  others)  at  the  autumnal,  prefen-ed  the  vernal  equinox,
and  made  March  his  first  month,  is  generally  considered  as  a  com-
pliment to  the  date  of  the  foundation  of  his  city  :  but  whether  his
year  consisted  of  ten,  or  of  twelve  months,  even  his  countrymen
are  doubtful.  M.  Bailly  (Astron.  Anc)  and  M.  Gebelin  (Hist,  du
Calendrier)  have  written  at  large  upon  this  topic.  M.  Ricard  has
a  long  note  of  censure  upon  the  anomaly  introduced  by  Numa,  in
Hpite  of  his  better  knowledge,  into  the  Roman  calendai',  thr.ough  a
superstitious  Egyptian  veneration  for  odd  numbers.*


200  NUMA.

the  first,  M-hfcb  had  been  the  eleventh  o.^  Romuhi^,
and  February  tlie  second,  wliich  had  been  the  twelfth
and  last.  Many  however  assert,  that  the  two  months
of  January  and  February  were  added  by  Numa,  the
Romans  having  previously  reckoned  but  ten  mor.ths
in  the  year;  as  some  barbarous  nations  had  but
three,  and  among  the  Gree:;s  the  Arcadians  four,
and  the  Acarnaniaus  six.  The  Egyptian  year  like-
wise, they  tell  i;s,  atiirs!:  consisted  only  of  one  month,
and  afferward  of  four.  And  therefore,  though  they
inhabit  a  new  country"-*,  they  seem  to  be  a  very  an-
cient people,  and  reckon  in  their  chronology  an  in-
credible number  of  years,  because  tliey  account
months  for  years '■'.

That  the  E.oman  year  contained  at  first  ten  months
only,  and  not  twelve,  we  have  a  proof  in  the  name
of  the  last ;  for  they  still  call  it  December,  or  the
tenth  month  ;  and  that  March  was  the  first,  is  also
evident,  because  the  fifth  from  it  vras  called  Quin-
tiiis,  the  sixth  Sextilis,  and  so  the  rest  in  their  order,
if  January  and  February  then  had  been  placed  be-
fore March,  the  niontli  Quintilis  v/ould  have  been

'•*  The  Delta,  as  requiring  to  be  drained,  &c.,  was  most  probably
thb  last  part  of  Egypt  that  became  inhabited.*

^5  To  supptve  the  Eg^-ptians  reckoned  months  for  years  does
indeed  bvinfjj  their  computation  pretty  near  the  truth,  with  re.-pcct
to  the  existing  age  of  the  world  ;  for  they  enumerated  a  succes^tion
of  Icings  for  the  space  of  36,000  years.  But  that  supposition  would
itsake  the  reigns  of  their  kings  unreasonably  short.  Besides,  Hero-
i^otus  rajs,  that  the  Egyptians  were  the  first  who  began  to  conipute
by  yeai"  ;  and  that  they  made  tlie  year  consist  of  twelve  n-ouths.
Their  boasted  antiqility  must,  therefore,  be  imputed  to  their  having
stretched  the  fabulous  part  of  tlieir  history  too  far  back.  As  to
FliUarch's  siiying  that  Egypt  was  *  a  new  country,'  it  h  strange
that  such  a  notion  could  ever  be  entertained  by  a  man  of  h.is  know-
ledge. (L.)

For  their  year  of  foiu-  months,  M.  Bailly  is  puzzled  to  assign  a
physical  origin ;  as  he  naturally  concludes,  that  they  could  hardly
compute  it  by  the  I'evolution  of  a  planet  so  difficult  to  ohserve  as
Mercury;  and  therefore,  in  conformity  to  his  favourite  theory  of
deriving  all  our  in'brmation  from  the  north  (rejecting  the  more
oir>vnou;i  and  probable  hypothesis,  which  refeVs  it  to  the  periodicvd
flowing  of  the  Nile)  he  finds  it's  source,  at  the  70°  of  N.  fat.  in  the
a]ti.-n;-.;tions  of  the  Volar  dccln>ntion !  *


KUMA.  201

ilie  fifth  in   name,  but   the  seventh   in  reckoning.
Besides,  it  is  reasonable  to  con  chad  e  that  the  niontli
of  March,  dedicated  by  Romulus  to  the  god  Mars,
should  stand  nrsi ;  and  April  second,  which  has  it's
name  from  Aphrodite  or  Venus,  for  in   tiiis  month
the  women  sacrifice  to  that  goddess,  and  batlie  on
it's  first  day  with  crowns  of  myrtle  on  their  heads.
Some  however  say,  that  April  does  not -derive  it's
name  from  Aphrodite  ;   but  as  th^e  very  sound  of  the
term  seems  to  dictate,  from  apcrirc,  '  to  open  ;'  be-
cause, the  spring  having  then  attained  it's  vigour,  it
opens  and  unfolds  the  blossoms  of  plants^''.     The
next  month,  which  is  that  of  May,  is  so  called  from
Maia,  the  mother  of  Mercury;  for  to  him  it  is  sacred.
June  has  it's  name  fiom  '  the  youthful ''' '  season  of
the   year.     Some   again  inform   us,    that  tliese  two
months  borrow  their  names  from  the  two  ages,  old
and  young ;  as  the   older  men  are   called  inajores,
and  the  yonxigQV  juuiores.     The   succeeding  months
were  denom.inated  according  to  their  order,  of  fifth,
sixth,  seventh,    eighth,     ninth,    tenth.      Aftervv-ard
Quintilis  was  called  July,  in  honour  of  Julius  (icsar,
Vtho  overcame  Fotnpey  ;  and  Sextilis  August,  from
Aup'URtus  the  second  emperor  of  Rome.     To  the
tv/o  foliovv'ing  months  Domitian  gave  his  two  names
ofGermanicus  and  Domitianus,  wliich  lasted  but  a
little  while  ;  for,  wiieu   he    wa-;  slain,  they  resumed
their  old  names,  September  and  October.     The  two
last  w^ere  the   only  ones  that  all   along  retained  the
orio'inal  aopelhition,  v/hich  they  had  from  their  order.
Pebruiiry,  which  was  either  added  or  transposed  by
Nuuia,  is  the  month  of  '  purification,'  for  so   the

^^  This  ip  sunjly  the  more  probai)4e,  though  OviJ  secnis  to  prcfi^r
tlic  foroer  et3iiioiogy :

JJUp'icfcro  Mnrti  primam  cledit  ordine  sorieniy

Quad  !<ibi  nascenti  proxinia  causa Juii:  ;
Sic  Verfrem  ^radilms  imdiis  in  geuic  repertam

AUeuus  vok:k  viensh  habere  locinn,      (Fast.  iv.  2.5.)  *

^'  For  fc'fjjc,  translated  '  _youth,'  Amyot  proposes  to  read  np»?,  or
*,Tnno'-— a  correction  ■ft'-hich  his  editors  approve,  aivd  Reii-kc  iias
juilickmsij'  iarKe5't^^4  i^>  tiae  text.*


202  NUMA.

term  signifies ;  and  at  that  time  rites  are  celebrated
for  the  '  purifying'  of  trees '%  and  procuring  a  bless-
ing on  their  fruits :  then  also  (he  teast  of  the  Luper-
calia  is  held,  the  ceremonies  of  wliich  much  resemble
those  of  a  lustration.     January,  the  first  month,  is  so
named  from  Janus.      And  Numa  seems  to  me  to
have  taken  away  the  precedency  from  March,  which
is  denominated  fi'ora  the  god  of  war,  with  a  design
to  show  his  preference  of  the  political  to  the  martial
virtues.     For  this  Janus'^  in  the  most  remote  anti-
quity, whether  a  demi-god  or  a  king,  being  remark-
able for  his  political  abilities  and  his  cultivation  of
society,  reclaimed  men  from  their  rude  and  savage
manners  ;  he  is  therefore  represented  with  two  faces,
as  having  altered  the  former  state  of  the  Vv'orld,  and
given  quite  a  new  turn  to  life.    He  has  also  a  temple
at  liome  with  two  gates,  which  they  call  '  the  gates
of  war.*     It  is  the  custom  for  this  temple  to  stand
open  in  the  time  of  war,  and  to  be  shut  in  time  of
peace.     The  latter  was  seldom  the  case,  as  the  em-
pire has  been  generally  engaged  in   war  on  account
of  it's  great  extent,  and  it's  having  had  to  contend
W'ith  so  many  surrounding  barbarous  nations.  It  has,
therefore,  been  shut  only  in  the  reign  of  Augustus
Caesar  ^°,  when  he  had  conquered  Antony ;  and  he-
's Another  readinfrlias  it,  roi?  (pSiToi<;  ivccyi^xa-t  instead  of  ro;?  (^vreic, ;
and  then  the  sense  will  be,  '  they  sacrifice  to  the  dead.'     Both  have
their  authorities  ;  the  common  reading  being  supported  by  a  passage
in  Ovid,  who  takes  notice  that  the  Luperci  '  purified'  the  ground ;

Sect  a  quia  pelle  Luperci

Omne  solum  liistrant.  (Fast.  ii.  32.)

And  the  other,  which  seems  the  better,  rests  upon  the  authority  of
Yarro,  &c.,  vvho  mentions  an  oftering  to  the  dead  in  the  month  of
February.  Ab  deis  inferis  Fehruarius  appellatus,  quod  tunc  Ins  pa-
re iifetur.

'9  M.  Ricard  has  a  note  upon  this  passage,  to  prove  from  MM.
Gebclin    and   Bailly,    that  Janus  was   a   purely   allegorical   per-


sonage.*

so    A


ugustus  shut  the  temple  of  Janus  three  several  times ;  one
h  was  A.  U.  C.  750,  before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour,  accord-
ing to  Isaiah's  prophecy,  that '  all  the  world  should  be  blessed  with
peace,  when  the  Prince  of  Peace  was  born.'     This  temple  was  also


XUMA.  203

fore,  in  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Atilius^^  and  Titus
Manlius,  a  little  while  ;  for,  a  new  war  breaking  out,
it  was  soon  opened  again.  In  Numa's  reign,  how^-
ever,  it  was  not  open  for  a  single  day  ;  but  stood
constantly  shut  durini^  the  space  of  fortv-three  years,
while  uninterrupted  peace  reigned  in  every  quarter.
Not  only  the  people  of  Rome  w^ere  softened  and
humanised  by  the  justness  and  mildness  of  the  king,
but  even  the  circumjacent  cities,  breathing  as.it  were
the  same  salutary  and  delightful  air,  began  to  change
their  behaviour.  Like  the  Romans,  they  became
desirous  of  peace  and  good  laws,  of  cultivating  the
ground,  educating  their  children  in  tranqiullity,  and
paying  their  homage  to  the  gods.  Italy  was  then
occupied  with  festivals  and  sacrilices,  games  and  en-
tertainments ;  the  people,  without  any  apprehensions
of  danger,  intermixed  in  a  fi-iendly  manner,  and
treated  each  other  with  mutual  hospitality  ;  the  iove
of  virtue  and  justice,  as  from  the  source  of  Numa's
wisdom,  gently  flowing  upon  all,  and  moving  with
the  composure  of  his  heart.  Even  the  hyperbolical
expressions  of  the  poets  fall  short  of  describing  the
happiness  of  those  days :

Secure  Arachne  o'er  llie  buckler  spreads
Her  slender  toils  ;  upon  the  broad  sword  feeds
Consuming  rust,  and  dims  the  gleaming  spear  :
No  more  war's  hoarse-tongued  trump  awakens  feai'.
And  robs  the  eye  ofsleep^-.

We  have  no  account  of  either  war  or  insurrection
in  the  state,  during  Numa's  reign.  Nay,  he  expe-
rienced neither  enmity  nor  envy ;  nor  did  ambition
dictate  either  open,  or  private,  attempts  against  his
crown.     Whether  it  were  the  fear  of  the  gods,  who


s'  Instead  of '  Marcus,'  we  should  read  '  Caius'  Atilius.  Titus
Manlius,  his  collegue,  shut  the  temple  of  Janus,  at  the  conclusion
of  the  first  Punic  war,  A.  U.  C.  519.  (L.)  From  the  reign  of  Numa
till  this  period,  Rome  had  been  engaged  in  perpetual  contests.*

*^  Plutarch  took  this  passage  from  some  verses  of  liaccbylides,
preserved  bv  Stobneus,  in  praise  of  peace.

9


■20  h  NUMA.

took  so  pious  a  mnn  uncler  their  protection,  or  tbe
rev(?feuce  of  bis  virtue,  or  the  siim'ular  cood  fortune
of  his  times,  which  kept  the  manners  of  men  pure
quel  unsnlhed  ;  he  was  an  illustrious  instance  of  that
truth,  which  Plato  several  ages  afterward  ventured
to  utter  concerning:  government :  "  That  the  only
sure  prospect  of  deliverance  from  the  evils  of  life
will  be,  when  the  divine  Providence  shall  so  order
it,  that  the  coincidence  of  philosophy  and  regal
power  shall  render  virtue  triumphant  over  vice*"."
A  man  of  such  wisdom  is  not  only  happy  in  himself,
bnt  contributes  by  his  instructions  to  the  happiness
of  others.  There  is,  in  truth,  no  need  either  of
force  or  menaces,  to  direct  the  multitude :  for,
when  they  see  virtue  exemplified  in  so  glorious  a
pattern  as  the  life  of  their  prince,  they  become  wise
of  themselves;  and  endeavour  by  frieiidship  and  un-
animity, by  a  strict  regard  to  justice  and  temperance,
to  form  themselves  to  an  innocent  and  happy  con-
duct. This  is  the  noblest  end  of  government ;  and  he
is  most  worthy  of  the  royal  seat,  who  can  thus  re-
gulate the  lives  and  dispositions  of  his  subjects.  Of
this  no  one  was  more  sensible  than  Numa.

As  to  his  wives  and  children,  there  are  great  con-
tradictions among  historians.  For  some  say,  he  had
no  wife  but  Tatia,  nor  any  child  but  one  daughter
named  Pompilia.  Others,  beside  that  daughter,  give
an  account  of  four  sons,  Pompon,  Pinus,  Calpus,  and
Tvlamerciis  ;  every  one  of  which  left  an  honourable
posterity — the  Pomponii  being  descended  from  Pom-
pon, the  Pinarii  from  Pinus,  the  Calpurnii  from
Calpus,  and  the  Mamerci  from  Mamercus.  These
were  surnamed  Reges,  or  '  kings'"'.'     But  a  third

"">  De  Rep.  v.  The  term  •  ventured,'  as  M.  Ricard  observes,  is
in  this  place  an  appropriate  term,  with  regard  to  the  governments
amons::  which  Plato  lived.  The  '  philosophy'  honevcr,  wliicii  lie
would  here  dignity  with  the  regal  purple,  is  not  that  venom  of  states,
■which  has  btely  usurped  tiie  title;  and  which  in  Plato's  linu>,
through  the  channel  of  both  deelalmers  and  sophists,  ovevtlov.  cd
Greece.-'

8*  Rex  was  the  surname  of  the  iEmilii  and  the  Marcii,  but  not  of


NUMA.  205

set  of  writers  accuse  the  former  of  forging  these  de-
scents from  Niima,  in  order  to  ingratiate  themselves
with  particular  families.     And  they  inform  us,  that
Pompilia  was  not  the  daughter  of  Tatia,  but  of  Lu-
cretia,  another  wife,  whom  that  prince  married  after
lie  had  ascended  the  throne.     All  however  agree,^
that  Pompilia  ^v'c\s  married  to  Marcius,  the  son   of
that  Marcius,  w!io  persuaded  Numa  to  accept  the
crown  :  for  he  followed  him  to  Rome,  vdiere  he  was
enrolled  a  senator,  and  after  Kuma's  death  became,
competitor  v.ith  Tullus    Hostilius   for  the  throne;
but,  failing  in  the  enterprise,  starved  himself  to  death.
tils  son  Marcius,  the  husband  of  Pompilia,  remained
in  Rome,  and  had  a  son  named  Ancus  Marcius,  who
reigned  after  Tullus  Hostilius.     This  son  is  said  to
liave  been  but  five  years  old,  at  Numa's  death.

Numa  was  carried  oft  by  no  sudden  or  acute  dis-
temper ;  but,  as  Piso  relates,  wasted  aw-ay  insensibly
with  old  age  and  a  gentle  decline.  He  was  some
few  years  above  eighty,  when  he  died.

The  neighbouring  nations,  that  were  in  friendship
and  alliance  with  Rome,  strove  to  make  the  honours
of  his  burial  equal  to  the  happiness  of  his  life,  attend-
ing with  crowns  and  other  public  offerings.  The
senators  carried  the  bier,  and  the  ministers  of  the
gods  walked  in  procession.  The  rest  of  the  people,
with  the  women  and  children,  crowded  to  the  fune-
ral;  not  as  if  they  were  attending  the  interment  of
an  aged  king,  but  as  if  they  had  lost  one  of  tlieir
beloved  relations  in  the  bloom  of  life  ;  for  tliey  fol-
lowed it  with  tears  and  loud  lamentations.  They
did  not  burn  the  body  ^-'j  because  (as  we  are  told)  lie

the  Pomponii,  the  Pinarii,  or  the  Mamorci.  The  Pinaril  ^-ere  d;^-
scended  from  a  family,  who  were  priests  of  Hercijles,  and  irsore
ancient  than  the  times  of  iS'uma.  (Liv.  i.  ?.,  Dion.  Hv.lic.  i.  9.,
and  Virg.  /En.  viii.  271.)

85  In  the  most  ancient  times  the  bodies  of  tlie  dead,  as  appears
from  the  hi.story  of  the  patriarchs,  were  committed  to  the  ground.
But  the  Egyptians,  from  a  vain  desire  of  preserving  their  bodies
from  corruption,  had  tljem  embahTied ;  persons  of  condition  with
rich  spices,  and  the  poor  vvith  salt.     The  Greeks,  in  order  to  obvi-


206  KUMA.

himself  forbade  it ;  but  they  made  two  stone-coffins  ^^
and  buried  them  under  the  Janiculuni ;  tlie  one  con-
taining his  body,  and  the  other  the  sacred  books
-Nvhicli  he  had  written'^'"',  in  the  same  manner  as  the
Grecian  legishitors  wrote  their  ta!)le.s  of  laws.

Numa  had  taken  care  however,  in  his  life-time,  to
instruct  the  priests  in  all  that  those  bopks  contained;
and  to  impress  both  the  sense  and  the  practice  upon
their  memories.  He  then  ordered  them  to  be  buried
v/ith  him,  persuaded  that  such  mysteries  could
not  safely  exist  in  lifeless  writing  ^\  Influenced  by
the  same  reasoning,  the  Pythagoreans  (it  is  said)
never  committed  their  precepts  to  writing,  but
entrusted  them  to  the  memories  of  such  as  they
thought  wcrthy  of  so  great  a  deposit.  And,  when
they  happened  to  communicate  to  an  unworthy  per-
son their  abstruse  problems  in  geometry,  they
announced  that  the  gods  threatened  to  avenge  his
profaneness  and  impiety  with  some  heavy  and  unpre-
cedented calamity.  Those  therefore  may  be  well
excused,  who  from  so  many  resemblances  infer,  that

ate  the  inconvenience.^  that  might  possibly  happen  from  corruption,
burneJ  t!ic  bodies  of  the  dead;  but  PHnj'  informs  us,  that  Sylla  was
the  first  Roman,  whose  body  vva.s  burned.  When  paganism  was
abolislied,  the  burning  of  dead  bodies  ceased  ;  and,  in  the  belief  of
the  rtiurrcction,  Christians  committed  their  dead  vvitli  due  care  and
honour  to  the  earth,  to  repose  there  until  tliat  great  event.

^'''  To  this  passage  refei-ence  is  made  by  Dr.  Chirke  ( Jcs.  Coll.
Cambridge)  in  his  Dissertation  on  *  the  Tomb  of  Alexander,'  to
prove  that  the  word  St^o?,  used  by  Ilerodian  (Hist.  Iv.,  where  he  re-
lates the  emperor  Caracaila's  visit  to  Alexandria)  signifies  '  the  im-
mediate receptacle  of  the  body;'  in  which  sense  it  is  likewise  used
by  Homer,  II.  xxiii.  90.  and  Dioscorides  v.  142.  The  whole  Disser-
tation is  hi<:;hly  creditable  to  it's  author.  See  Crit.  Rev.  1805.  ii.
p.  274.&c.\;nd  Edinb.  Rev.  No.  xiv.  4S0.  &c:-

8"  This  seems  to  be  contradicted  by  Dion.  Ilalic.  (iii.  12.)  who
says  tliat,  after  tlie  death  of  Tullus  Hostilius,  his  successor  Ancus
IVIarcius  received  from  the  priests  Xuma's  laws  relative  to  the  rites;
of  worship  :  and  that  he  in  consequence  caused  them  to  be  engraved,
and  exhibited  in  public*

88  This  was  the  sentiment  of  the  old  Egyptian  priests,  and  from
them  it  seems  to  have  been  communicated  to  Pythagoras  and  Plato.
Kuma  too,  as  partial  to  the  notions  of  that  country,  may  have  de-
rived his  opinion  from  the  same  source.*


NUMA.  2-(T7-

Numa  was  acquainted  with  Pythagoras.  Valerius
Antias  rehites,  that  there  were  twelve  books  written
in  Latin  concerning  religion,  and  twelve  more  npou
philosophy  in  Greek-,  buried  in  that  coffin  ''^.  But
four  hundred  years  afterward^,  when  Publins  Cor-
nelius and  Marcus  Bi\?bius  were  consuls,  a  prodi-
fifious  fall  of  rain  having;  washed  awav  the  earth  that
covered  the  coffins,  and  the  lids  falling  off,  one  of
them  appeared  entirely  empty,  without  the  least
remains  of  the  body ;  in  the  other,  the  books  were
found.  Pctilius,  then  prtetor,  having  examined  them,
made  his  report  upon  oath  to  the  senate,  that  it
appeared  to  him  inconsistent  both  with  justice  and
religion  to  publish  them  :  in  consequence  of  which,
all  the  volumes  were  carried  into  the  Comitium,  and
there  burned.

8'  Livy  (xL  29.)  says  *  duo  fasces  candeUs  involuti  septenos  ha-
huere  lid/'os,  non  integros  modo,  scd  recentissim/l  specie.  Septem  La-
tini  de  jure  pmitificio  erant ;  septem  Grceci  de  disciplina  ■  s-cip  lent  ice ,
qucF  illiiis  cetatis  esse  potuit.*  But  these,  M.  Ilicard  contends  froui
tlie  word  involitti,  could  not  be  Numa's ;  as  rolls  were  not  then  in
use.  Bruce  (Trav.  V.)  inrbrais  us,  that  Nurria  is  said  to  have  writ-
ten his  books  upon  the  Egyptian  papyrus ;  and,  as  a  proof  of  the
groundlessness  of  Phny's  surprise  with  regard  to  the  duration  of  so
frail  a  substance,  adds  that  he  has  in  his  possession  a  large  and  beau-
tiful manuscript  of  similar  materials,  which  had  been  found  in  ths
ruins  of  Thebes,  of  much  greatei*  antiquity.  Compare  Plin.  xiii.
13.,  and  xvi.  37.,  with  the  above  extract  from  Livy.  ¥v^ith  regard
to  the  number  of  books  found,  historians  widely  differ.*

^■^  Plutarch  probably  wrote  five  hundred  ;  for  this  happened  A.  U.  C,
^73.  '  One  Terentius.'  says  Varro  [cip  S.  August,  de  Civ.  Deil
'  had  a  piece  of  ground  near  the  Janiculura  ;  and  a  husbandman  of
his  one  day  accidentally  running  over  Numa's  tomb,  turned  up  some
of  the  legislator's  books,  wherein  he  gave  his;  reasons  for'establishing
the  religion  of  the  lloraans  as  he  left  it.  The  kusbandtnan  carried
these  books  to  the  prfetor,  and  the  praetor  to  the  senate;  who,  after
having  read  his  frivolous  statements  upon  this  subject,  agreed  that
the  books,  in  pursuance  of  Numa  s  intentions,  should  be  destroyed.
It  was  accordingly  decreed,  that  the  prnstor  should  throw  them  into
the  fire.'  But,  thoujrh  Numa's  motives  for  tfie  reh'irion  which  he
established  might  be  trivial  enough,  that  was  not  tiie  chief  motive
for  suppressing  tliem.  The  principal  reason  was  the  many  new
superstitions  equally  trivial,  which  tlie  Romans  had  introduced,  con-
trary to  Numa's  ajjpointment.  (L.)  Dacier  conjectures,  that  thesu
books  migiit  have  been  forged,  with  the  view  of  restoring  aaiong  the
people  their  primitive  siniplicity  of  vvorship.*


2015      LYCURGUS  AND  :N;UMA  CO!vIPARED,

Glory  follows  in  the  train  of  .great  men,  and  in-
creases alter  their  death  :  for  env;y  does  not  long
survive  tliem  ;  nay,  it  sometimes  dies  l)Oibre  tlieni.
The  mistbrtunes,  indeed,  of  the  succeeding  kings
added  lustre  to  Numa's  character.  Of  the  five  that
came  after  him,  the  last  was  driven  from  the  throne,
and  lived  long  in  exile;  aiul,  of  the  four  others,  not
one  died  a  natural  death.  Three  weie  treacherously
slain.  iVs  for  Tullus  IJostilius,  who  reigned  iiext  after
Numa,  he  ridiculed  and  despised  many  of  his  \>Q^t
institutions  (particularly  his  religious  ones,  as  etfenii-
nate  and  tending  to  inaction)  with  a  view  to  dispose
the  |>eople  to  war.  He  did  not,  however,  abide  by
his  irreligious  opinions  ;  but  falling  into  a  severe  and
com[)licated  sickness,  exchanged  them  for  a  supersti-
tion '^',  very  different  from  Numa's  piety.  Others
likev/ise  were  infected  with  the  same  false  principles,
when  they  saw  the  manner  of  his  death,  which  is  said
-to  have  happened  by  lightning'^-.


LYCUHGUS  AND  NUMA

COMPARED.


HAVING  2;one  through  the  Lives  of  Numa  aiuf
Lycurgus,  we  must  now  endeavour  (though  it  is  no
•easy  matter)  to  contrast  their  actions.  For  the  re-
semblances between  them  are  obvious  enough;  their
wisdom,  for  instance,  their  piety,  their  talents  for

5"  None  are  so  superstitious  in  distress  as  tiiose,  who  in  their  pros-
perity have  laugliec'  at  religion.     The  famous  Canon  Vosiius  was

■  Bot  less  remarkable  for  the  greatness  of  his  fears,  than  for  the  little-,

■  ness  of  his  faitli.

9i  The  palace  of  Tullus  Hostilius  was  burned  down  by  lightning  ;
and  he,  with  his  wife  and  children,  perished  in  the  flames,  'i'hough
some  historians  say  that  Ancus  Marcius,  who  (as  the  grandson  of
Numa)  expected  to  succeed  to  the  crown,  took  the  opportmiity  of
the  storm  to  assassinate  the  king.

12       ^


LYCUIiGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.      209

government,   their   instruction  of  the  people,  and
their  deriving  their  hivv's  from  a  divine  source.

The  first  then  of  their  peculiar  distinctions,  was
Nunia's  accepting  a  crovvU,  and'  Lycurgus'  relin-
quishing one.  The  former  received  a  kingdom
without" seeking  it,  the  latter  resigned  one  Y»lren  he
had  it  in  possession.  Numa  was  advanced  to  sove-
reign power,  wh.en  a  private  person  and  a  stranger  ;
Lycurgus  reduced  himself  from  a  king  to  a  subject.
It  was  an  honour  to  the  one,  to  have  attained  royal
dignity  by  his  justice;  and  it  was  an  honour  to  the
other,  to  have  preferred  justice  to  that  dignity.  Vir-
tue rendered  the  one  so  respectable  as  to  deserve  a
throne,  and  the  other  so  great  as  to  be  above  it.

The  second  observation  is,  that  they  managed
their  res})ective  governments,  as  musicians  do  their,
lyres,  each  in  a  different  manner.  Lycurgus  wound
up  the  strings  of  Sparta,  which  he  found  relaxed  wkli
luxury,  to  a  stronger  tone  :  Numa  softened  the  high
and  harsh  tone  of  Rome.  The  former  had  the. more
difficult  task,  lor  it  was  not  their  swords  and  breast-
plates, which  he  persuaded  his  citizens  to  lay  aside,
but  their  gold  and  sib/er,  their  sumptuous  beds  and
tables:  what  he  taudit  them  was,  not  to  devote
their  time  to  feasts  and  sacrifices,  after  quittuig  the
rugged  paths  of  war,  but  to  abandon  entertainments,
and  the  pleasures  of  wine,  for  the  laborious  exercises
of  arms  and  the  w;estling-ring.  Num.a  effected  his
purposes,  in  a  friendly  manner,  by  the  regard  and
veneration  which  the  people  had  for  his  person  :
Lycurgus  had  to  struggle  with  conflicts  and  dangers,^
before  he  could  establish  his  laws.  The  genius  of
Kuma  was  more  mild  and  gentle,  softening  and
attempering  the  fiery  dispositions  of  liis  people  to
justice  and  peace.  If  vre  be  obliged  to  admit  tiie
sanguinary  and  unjust  treatment  of  the  Helots,  as  a
part  of  the  politics  of  Lycurgus ;  we  must  allow
Numa  to  have  been  far  the  more  humane  and  ecrait-
able  hnvgiver,  who  permitted  absolute  slaves  to  taste
of  the  honour  of  freemen,  laid  in  tlie  Saturnalia  to  b«

VOL.  1.  i*


i,'10  LVCURGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.

entertained  alonor  with  their  masters '.  For  this  alsot
(they  tell  us)  was  one  of  Numa's  institutions,  that  per-
sons in  a  state  of  servitude  should  be  admitted,  at  least
once  a-year,  to  the  liberal  enjoyment  of  those  fruits,,
which  they  had  helped  to  raise.  Some  however  ])rc-
tend  to  find  in  this  custom  the  vestiges  of  that  ecjua-
lity,  which  subsisted  in  the  times  of  Saturn  :  Vvheu
there  was  neither  servant  nor  master,  but  all  were
ii'pon  the  same  footing,  and  as  it  were  of  one  family.

Both  appear  to  have  been  equally  studious  to  lead
their  people  to  temperance  and  sobriety.  As  to  the
remaining  virtues,  the  one  was  more  attached  to  for-
titude, and  the  other  to  justice.  Though,  possibly,
the  different  nature  and  quality  of  their  respective
governments  required  a  different  process.  For  it
was  not  through  vv'ant  of  courage,  but  to  guard
against  injustice,  that  Numa  restrained  his  subjects
from  war  :  neither  did  Lycurgus  endeavour  to  infuse
a  martial  spirit  into  his  people  with  a  view  to
encourage  them  to  injure  others,  but  to  guard
them  au'ainst  beinf?  iniured  themselves.  As  each
had  the  luxuriances  of  his  citizens  to  prune,  and
their  deficiencies  to  supply,  they  must  necessarily
make  very  considerable  alterations.

Numa's  distribution  of  the  people  was  indulgent
and  agreeable  to  the  commonalty,  as  with  him  a
various  and  mi?ied  mass  of  goldsmiths,  musicians,
shoemakers,  and  other  trades  composed  the  body  of
the   city.       But   Lycurgus  in   modelling   his   state

'  The  Saturnalia  was  a  feast,  celebrated  on  the  1  i-th  of  the
ealends  of  January.  Beside  the  sacrifices  in  honour  of  Saturn,  who
WfWU  his  retiring  into  Italy  introduced  there  the  happiness  of  tiie
golden  age,  servants  were  indulged  in  mirth  and  freedom,  in  me-
mory of  tht'  equality  which  prevailed  in  that  agar  presents  were
sent  from  one  friend  to  another;  and  all  procPamntions  of  war,  and
executions  of  criminals,  were  suspended.  It  is  uncertain,  when  thig-
festival  was  instituted.  IMacrobius  says,  it  was  celebrated  in  Italy
long  before  the  building  of  Rome  ;  and  he  is  probably  right,  for  the
Greeks  kept  the  same  feast  under  the  name  of  Chronia,  (Macrob.
Saturn.  1.  7.)  (L.)  M.  Ricard  affirms,  that  it  was  established^
subsequently  to  Numa's  reign,  by  TuUus  Hostilius  or  Tarquinius-
5uperbus.*


LYCURGUS  AND  XUMA  COMPARED.      211

inclined  to  the  nobility,  and  proceeded  in  a  severe
and  unpopular  manner;  putting  all  mechanic  arts
iiito  the  hands  of  slaves  and  strangers,  while  the
citizens  v;ere  solely  taught  how  to  manage  the  spear
and  the  shield.  They  were  only  artists  in  war,  and
servants  of  Mars;  neither  knowing  nor  desiring  to
know,  any  thing  but  how  to  obey,  command,  and
conquer  their  enem.ies.  That  the  freemen  might  be
whollv  and  once  for  all  free,  hewould  not  suffer  them
to  give  any  attention  to  their  circumstances;  but
that  entire  business,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
dressing  of  their  meat,  was  to  be  left  to  the  slaves
and  the  Flelots.  Num.a  made  no  such  distinction  as
this  :  he  only  put  a  stop  to  the  gain  of  military  ra-
pine. Not  solicitous  to  prevent  an  inequality  of  sub-
stance, he  forbade  no  other  means  of  increasing  the
fortunes  of  his  subjects,  or  of  rising  to  the  greatest
opulence'";  neither  did  he  guard  against  poverty,
which  at  the  same  time  entered  and  overflowed  the
city.  While  there  was  no  great  disparity  in  the  pos-
sessions of  his  citizens,  but  all  were  moderately  pro-
vided, he  should  first  have  combated  the  desire  of
gain,  and  like  Lycurgus  have  watched  against
it's  inconveniences ;  for  those  were  by  no  means
inconsiderable,  but  such  as  gave  birth  to  the  many
and  great  troubles,  that  luippcned  in  the  Roman
state.

As  to  an  equal  division  of  lands,  Lycurgus  v/as  as
little  to  blame  lor  having  made,  as  Numa  for  not
leaving  made  it.  The  equality,  which  it  caused,  afforded
the  former  a  firm  foundation  for  his  government ;
and  the  latter,  finding  a  division  already  made,  and
probably  as  yet  subsisting  entire,  had  no  occasion  to
make  a  new  one.

¥/ith  respect  to  the  community  of  wives  and  chil-
dren, each  took  a  politic  method  to  banish  jealousy,

*  And  ibis,  from  the  severity  of  the  wealthy  patricians  tcvard
their  debtors,  was  the  chief  source  of  the  calamities  of  Rome  ;  by
causing  innumerable  disturbances  among  the  plebeians,  which  could
•nlv  in  general  be  quieted  by  the  harsh  remedv  of  a  new  war,^

P   2


212      LYCURGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.

A  Roman  Imsbaiul,  when  he  had  a  sufficient  number
of  children,  and  was  apphcd  toby  one  that  had  none,
jnii^htgive  up  his  wile  to  him  ^,  and  was  at  liberty  both
to  divorce  her  and  to  take  her  au'ain.  But  the  Laceda3-
jnonian,  while  his  wife  remained  in  his  house,  and  the
marriage  subsisted  in  it's  original  force,  allowed  his
friend,  who  desired  to  have  children  by  her,  the  use  of
his  bed :  and  (as  we  have  already  observed)  many
husbands  invited  to  their  houses  such  men,  as  were
likely  to  give  them  healthy  and  well-made  children.
The  difterence  between  the  two  customs  is  this,  that
the  Lacediemonians  appeared  veiy  easy  and  uncon-
cerned about  an  affair,  which  in  other  places  causes
so  much  disturbance,  and  consumes  men's  hearts
with  jealousy  and  sorrow;  while  among  the  Romans
there  was  a  modesty,  which  veiled  the  matter  w^ith  a
new  contract,  and  seemed  to  declare  that  a  partner-
ship in  wedlock  is  intolerable.

Yet  farther,  Numa's  strictness  as  to  virgins  tended
to  form  them  to  that  modesty,  which  is  the  ornament
of  their  sex:  but  the  great  liberty,  which  Lycurgus
gave  them,  brought  upon  them  the  censure  of  the
poets,  particularly  of  Ibycus^:  for  tliey  call  them
Plueuuineiides,  and  Aiidruniancis,  Euripides  de-
scribes them  as  follows ;

These  quit  their  homes  bcneatli  the  eye  of  day.
Proud  'iiiidst  the  youths  their  vigour  to  display,
In  speed  or  wrestling;  while  their  drapery  light
riies  back,  and  gives  their  naked  limbs  to  sight.

The  slvirts  of  the  habit,  which  the  virgins  wore,  were
not  sewed  to  the  bottom,  but  opened  at  the  sides  as
they  walked,  and  discovered  the  thigh,  as  Sophocles
plainly  states :

Still  stalks  Ilermione  in  light  array

Whose  opening  folds  the  naked  thigli  display.

^  It  does  not  appear,  that  Numa  afforded  any  sanction  to  this
liberty.  Plutarch  himself  says,  a  little  below,  that  no  divorce  was
kno^.n  in  Rome  till  jontr  afiorward.

■*  A  lyric  poet  of  Rliegiuni;  who  lived  about  01,  Iv.*


LYCURGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.     213

Tlicir  behaviour,  consequently,  is  said  to  have  been
too  bold  and  masculine,  in  particular  to  their  hus-
bands. For  they  considered  themselves  as  absolute
mistresses  in  their  houses  j  nay,  they  even  aspired  to
share  in  affairs  of  state,  and  delivered  their  senti-
ments with  great  freedom  upon  matters  of  the  highest
importance.  But  Numa,  though  he  preserved  entire
to  the  matrons  all  the  honour  and  respect  paid  by
their  husbands  in  the  time  of  Romulus,  when  they
endeavoured  by  kindness  to  compensate  for  the  rape,
obliged  them  still  to  behave  with  the  utmost  reserve,
and  to  lay  aside  all  impertinent  curiosity.  He  taught
them  to  be  sober,  and  accustomed  them  to  silence,
to  a  total  abstinence  from  wine^  and  not  to  speak
even  of  the  most  necessary  business  except  in  their
husbands*  presence.  When  a  v/oman  once  appeared
in  the  Forum  to  plead  her  own  cause,  it  is  reported
that  the  senate  ordered  the  oracle  to  be  consulted,
what  this  strange  event  portended  to  the  city  ^\  Nay,
what  is  recorded  of  a  few  infamous  women,  is  a  proof
of  the  general  obedience  and  meekness  of  the  Ro-
man matrons.  For  as  our  historians  give  us  accounts
of  those,  who  first  carried  war  into  the  bowels  of

^  Romulus  made  the  drinking  of  wine,  as  well  as  adultery,  a  capi"
tal  crime  in  women.  For  adultery  (he  said)  opens  the  door  to  all
sorts  of  crimes,  and  wine  opens  the  door  to  adultery.  (L.)  One
Egnatius  Mecenius  with  his  own  hands  put  his  wife  to  death  for
having  drunk  wine,  and  was  acquitted  by  the  senate.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xiv.  13.)  And  an  instance  of  still  greater  severity  is  on  record,
in  which  a  woman,  who  had  stolen  the  keys  of  the  cellar,  was  stoned
to  death  by  her  relations.  One  of  the  reasons  assigned  elsewhere
by  Plutarch,  '  why  the  Roman  women  kissed  the  lips  of  their  hus-
bands,' is  that  if  they  had  transgressed  in  this  respect,  they  might
expose  themselves  to  easier  detection.*  The  severity  of  this  law
was  softened  in  the  succeeding  ages:  the  women,  who  were  over-
come by  liquor,  were  not  condemned  to  die,  but  to  lose  their
dowers.

"5  What  then  appeared  so  strange,  became  afterward  common
enough  ;  insomuch,  that  every  troublesome  woman  of  that  descrip-
tion was  called  Afrania,  from  a  senator's  wife  so  named,  who  busied
herself  in  courts  of  justice.  The  eloquent  Hortensia,  daughter  to
the  orator  Hortensius,  pleaded  with  such  success  for  the  women,
M'hen  the  triumvirs  had  laid  a  fine  upon  them,  that  she  got  a  consi-
derable part  of  it  remitted.     (Val.  Max.  viii.  3, 4.)


2H      LYCUilGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.

their  country,  or  against  their  brothers,  or  commit-
ted parricide ;  so  the  Romans  relate,  that  Spuriiis
Caivihus  was  the  first  among  them  that  divorced  his
wife,  no  such  event  having  previously  occurred  for
two  hundred  and  thirty  years  from  the  building  of
Rome^:  and  that  Thalaea,  the  wife  of  Pinarius,  was
the  first  -who  quarrelled  with  her  mother-in-law
Gegania,  in  the  reign  of  Tarquin  the  Proud.  So
well  framed  for  the  preserving  of  decency,  and  pro-
priety of  behaviour,  were  this  lawgiver's  regulations
with  respect  to  marriage.

Agreeable  to  the  education  of  virgins  in  Sparta,
were  the  directions  of  Lycu"gus,  ai  to  the  time  of
their  being  married.  For  he  ordered  them  to  be
married,  when  both  their  age  and  wishes  led  them
to  it :  that  the  company  of  a  husband,  as  then  sug-
gested by  nature,  might  be  the  fonndation  of  kind-
ness and  love,  not  of  fear  and  hatred,  which  would
be  the  consequence  if  nature  were  forced  ;  and  that
their  bodies  miglit  have  strength  to  bear  the  trouble
of  breeding,  and  the  pangs  of  chill-birth,  the  pro-
pagation of  children  being  looked  upon  as  the  only
end  of  marriage.  But  the  Romans  married  their
tlaiighters  at  the  age  of  twelve  years,  or  under;  that
both  their  bodies  and  their  manners  might  come  pure
and  untainted  to  their  husbands,  it  appears  then,
that  the  former  institution,  more  naturally  tended
to  the  procreation  of  children,  and  the  latter  to  the
forming  of  the  manners  for  the  matrimonial  union '^.

In  the  education  of  the  boys  however,  in  regulating
their  classes,  and  laying  down  the  whole  method  of
their  exercises,  diversions,  and  eating  at  a  common
table,    Lycurgus   stands   distinguished,    aiid   leaves

7  A.  U.  C.  520.  See  the  Life  of  Romulus,  p.  107-  nott.  (5.)
arjd  (6.)

8  Aristotle  (Polit.  vii.  13.) prefers  the  Spartan  principle,  as  much
more  beneficial  in  it's  consequences  to  mankind.  Even  the  object
of  the  Roman  regulation,  was,  in  hi.^  opinion,  better  attained  by
deferring  the  nuptial  contract  until  the  female  was  mort;  likely,
fiC>ni  her  raaturer  age,  to  understand  it's  obligation  and  it's  iuipor-.
luncc*


LYCURGUS  AND  NUMA  COMPARED.      215

Nama  upon  the  mere  level  of  ordinary  lawgivers  ^
For  Numa  resigned  it  to  the  option  or  convenience
of  parents,  to  bring  up  their  sons  to  agricultiire,  or
to  ship-building,  to  the  business  of  a  brazier,  or  to
the  art  of  a  nuisician.  As  if  it  were  not  necessary
that  one  design  sliould  pervade  the  general  education^
nnd  that  each  individual  s'hould  receive  a  common  bias;
but  tliat  they  should  rather  resemble  tlie  passengers
in  a  ship,  wlio  coming  each  from  a  diifeVent  employ-
ment, and  with  a  different  intent,  stand  upon  their
common  defence  in  time  of  danger,  merely  out  of
fear  for  themselves  or  their  property,  and  upon  other
occasions  are  attentive  only  to  their  private  ends.
In  su.ch  a  case,  common  legishitors  would  have  been
excusable,  who  might  have  failed  through  ignorance
or  want  of  power;  but  should  not  so  wise  a  man  as
Numa,  who  took  ripon  him  the  government  of  a
■state  recently  formed,  and  not  likelv  to  ofier  the
least  opposition  to  any  thing  he  proposed,  have  made
it  his  first  care  to  give  the  children  such  a  bent  of
education,  and  the  youth  such  a  mode  of  exercise,
as  would  prevent  any  great  difference  or  confusion
in  their  manners;  that  so  they  might  be  formed  from
their  infnicy,  and  persuaded  to  walk  together  in  the
same  paths  of  virtue  ?  Lycurgus  found  the  utility  of
this  in  several  respects,  and  particularly  in  securing
the  continuance  of  his  laws,  l^or  the  oath,  which
the  Spartar.s  had  taken,  would  have  availed  but
little,  if  the  youth  had  not  been  already  imbued  v.ith
his  discipline,  and  imbibed  with  their  milk  a  zeal  for
his  establishments.  Nay,  so  strong  and  deep  was
the  tincture,  that  the  principcd  laws  which  he  enacted
continued  in  force  for  more  than  five  hundred  years.
Biit  the  primary  viev^'  of  Numa's  government,  which
was  to  settle  the  llemans  in  lasting  peace  and  tran-

*  But  It  should  be  stated,  notwithstanding  Aristotle's  panegyric
upon  this  part  of  Lycurgub'  code  (Pol.  viii.  1.),  that  what  was  per-
haps well  ada[)ted  to  the  petty  district  of  Sparta,  might  for  that
very  reason  be  iucoBvenient,  if  not  impracticable,  in  the  swelling
empire  of  Home.*


216      LYCURGUS  AND  KUMA  COMPARED.

quillity,  immediately  vanished  with  liim  :  and  after
his  dcalh  the  temple  of  Janus,  which  he  had  kept
shut  (as  if  he  had  really  held  war  in  prison  and  sub-
jection) was  thrown  wide  open,  and  Italy  deluged
•with,  blood  '^  Tlie  beautiful  pile  of  justice,  which
he  had  reared,  being  without  the  cement  of  educa-
tion, presently  fell  to  the  ground.

You  will  ask  then.  Was  not  Rome  bettered  by  her
wars^^f*  A  question  this,  which  requires  a  long-
answer,  to  satisfy  such  as  place  the  happiness  of  a  state
in  riches,  luxury,  and  an  extent  of  dominion,  rather
than  in  security,  equity,  temperance,  and  content.
It  may  seem  however  to  aiford  an  argument  in  favour
of  Lycurgus,  that  the  Romans  upon  quitting  the
discipline  of  Numa,  soon  attained  a  much  higher
degree  of  power ;  whereas  the  Laceda3monians  as
soon  as  they  departed  from  the  institutions  of  Lycur-
gus, from  being  the  most  respectable  people  of
Greece  became  the  meanest,  and  were  in  danger  of
being  absolutely  destroyed.  On  the  other  hand,  it
must  imply  something  truly  great  and  divine  in
Numa,  to  have  been  invited  from  another  country  to
the  throne ;  by  means  of  persuasion  only  to  have  ef-
fected so  many  alterations ;  to  have  reigned  undis-
turbed over  a  city  not  yet  united  in  itself,  without  the
"use  of  an  armed  force  (to  which  Lycurgus  v>'as  obliged
to  have  recourse,  when  he  availed  himself  of  the  aid
of  the  nobility  against  the  commons)  and,  singly  by
his  wisdom  and  justice,  to  have  conciliated  and
combined  all  his  subjects  in  peace.

""  In  the  wars  with  the  Fidenates,  the  Albans,  the  Latins,  &c.

II  Aggrandised  she  was,  but  surely  not  bettered.  For,  to  say
nothing  of  the  turbulent  period  of  her  growth,  may  we  not  reason-
ably with  M.  Ricard  impute  to  her  very  successes  her  ultimate
decay  and  downfall  ?  Mole  ruit  sua,  in  the  mouth  of  her  own  bard,
was  no  poetical  fiction.  The  only  solid  basis  of  national  grandeur
is,  Morals  and  Virtue  ;  and  these  are  the  invariable  objects  of  sound
and  ej^lightened  policy.*


THE


LIFE


OF


SOLON.


SUMMARY.


Extraction  of  Solon.  His  character,  and  manners.  In  his  youth,
he  engages  i7i  merchandise.  His  taste  for  poetry,  and  moral  phi-
Imophy,  The  golden  tripod  rffered  to  each  of  the  Seven  SageSj
and  rejected  by  them  all.  Interview  of  Solon  and  Anacharsis.
His  conversation  with  Thales,  The  foar  of  losing  should  not
damp  the  ardour  of  acquiring  what  is  necessary,  or  convenient.

,  An  account  of  his  Elegy  upon  Salamis.  The  conquest  of  that
island.  Another  history  of  the  expedition.  The  Laced(emonians
chosen  as  arbitrators  upon  the  subject.  Solonh  zeal  for  the
temple  of  Delphi.  The  Cylonian  conspiracy.  Epimenides  purifies
Athens.  That  city  split  into  many  factions.  Solon  selected  as
mediator.  He  refuses  the  croivn.  Enacts  laws  for  his  country^
men.  Introduces  an  Act  of  Discharge.  His  treatment  upon  that
occasion.  He  repeals  Draco's  laws.  Classes  the  people,  in  refer-
ence to  their  income.  Institution  of  the  Areopagus.  Laws  with
regard  to  seditions,  marriages,  respect  for  the  dead,  mulcts  for
damages;  concerning  wills,  women,  children;  against  adulfert/f
and  rape;  about  ivells,  trees,  Sfc.  Right  of  citizenship:  City-
feasts.  His  laws  confrmed  for  a  hundred  years.  He  i-egulates
the  lunar  month.  Travels  to  Egypt  and  Cyprus,  and  has  an  in-
terview with  Croesus;  who,  after  his  defeat  by  Cyrus,  repeats  So-
lo7i's  conversation,  and  thus  preserves  his  Ife.  Solon,  upon  hit
return,  folds  the  city  again  rent  into  parties.  Tragedies  of  Thespis.
Stratagem  of  Pisistratus.  Solon's  steadiness.  His  Poem  on
the  Atlantic  Isle,    His  death.

9


21?  SOLON.


'IDYMUS  the  grammarian^,  in  his  answer  to
Asclcpiades  concerning  the  laws  of  Solon,  cites  the
testimony  of  one  Philocles,  .  by  which  he  would
prove  that  legislator,  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of
others  who  have  written  about  him,  the  son  of  Eu-
phorion.  For  they  all  with  one  voice  declare,  that
Execestides  v/as  his  father  ;  a  man  of  moderate  for-
tune and  power,  but  of  the  noblest  family  in
Athens,  being  descended  from  Codrus.  His  mo-
ther, according  to  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  was  cousin-
german  to  the  mother  of  Pisistratus.  This  tie  of
kindred  at  first  united  Solon  and  Pisistratus  in  a
very  intimate  friendship,  which  Vv^as  dravrn  closer
(if  we  may  believe  some  writers)  by  the  regard,
which  the  former  had  for  the  beauty  and  excellent
qualities  of  the  latter  '.     Hence  we  may  believe  it


'  Of  Alexandria,  of  tlie  school  of  Aristarchus,  and  contemporaiy
with  Augustus.  His  commentaries,  cliiefly  upon  the  orators  and
poets  of  Greece,  are  said  by  some  writers  to  have  amounted  to  four
thousarid !  The  scholiast  on  Homer,  of  the  same  name,  was  of  a
much  later  date,*

-  Pisiaf.ratus  was  remarkably  courteous,  affable,  and  liberal.
He  had  always  two  or  three  slaves  near  him,  with  bags  of  silver
coin :  when  he  saw  an}'  man  look  sickly,  or  heard  that  any  one
had  died  insolvent,  he  relieved  the  one,  and  buried  tlie  other  at
his  own  expense.  When  he  perceived  people  melancholy,-  he  in-
quired the  cause ;  and  if  he  found  it  was  poverty,  he  furuished  them
with  what  might  cnublo  tliem  to  get  bread,  but  not  to  liv-e  idly.
Nay,  he  left  even  his  gardens  and  orchards  open,  and  the  fruit  free
to  the  citizens.  His  looks  were  easy  and  sedate,  his  language  soft
and  modest.  In  short,  if  his  virtues  had  been  genuine,  and  not  dis-
sembled with  a  view  to  the  tyranny  of  Athens,  he  would  ^as  Solon
told  him)  have  been  the  best  citizen  in  it.  (L.)  He  is  highly  com-
plimented by  Herodotus  (i.  SO)  for  his  administration,  and  for  his
eloquence  and  learning  by  Cicero  (De  Orat,  iii.  3+.),  who  adds
*  prim7i.'!  Homeri  libros,  cotifusos  antea,  sic  dlsposuisse  fertur,  iii
oiunc  kahe)iiu.y.^  But  this  honour  is  claimed  by  Plutarch  (as  we
have  already  seen)  for  LycurgUL-;,  by  Diogenes  Laertius  for  Solon,
and  by  Plato  for  Hipparchus,  And  these  may  all  perhaps,  as  M.
Ricard  thinks,  be  approximated,  though  not  strictly  reconciled  to
each  ntlier,  by  supnosing  that  Lycurgus  first  colle'.'ted  them,  and
brought  them  into  Greece  ;  that  Solon  improved  their  arrangement,
and  timL  Pisistratus  afterward  made  some  alterations,  with  the  at-


SOLON.  219

was,  tliat  when  thev  sabseouentlv  differed  about  inat-
ters  of  state,  this  dissension  broke  not  out  into  any
harsh  or  ungenerous  tieatinent  of  each  other;  but
their  first  union  kept  some  hold  of  their  hearts,  and
the  sparks  of  the  ardent  flame  and  tenderness  of  for-
mer friendslnp  still  glowed  in  their  bosoms.

That  Solon  was  unable  to  withstand  the  attractions
of  beauty,  and  sunk  like  a  feeble  wrestler  under  the
force  of  love,  is  sufficiently  evident  both  from  his
poems,  and  from  his  having  enacted  a  law  v/hich
forbade  slaves  to  anoint  themselves^,  or  to  form
attachments  to  youth :  thus  classing  such  attach-
ments among  things  honourable  and  praiseworthy,
and  virtually  recommending  them  to  the  more  re-
spectable, by  forbidding  them  to  the  base.  It  is
said  too,  that  Pisistratus  was  enamoured  of  Charmas,
and  dedicated  to  him  a  statue  of  Love  in  the  Aca-
deniv,  near  the  ulace  where  those  vdio  run  the  sacred
to]ch-race  light  their  torclies  ^

Solon's  father  having  hurt  his  fortune^,  as  Her-

sistance  of  his  son  Hipparclms,  who  (as  .TlHau,  Var.  Hist.  viii.  2.,
informs  us)  first  introduced  them  into  Athens.*

3  This  involved  an  exclusion  from  theexercises  of  tlie  Gymnasium,
of  which  slaves  (it  seems)  were  deemed  unwortliy.*

*  The  torch-race  was  run  thrice  a-year  at  Athens ;  during  the
Panathena'a  in  honour  of  Minerva,  and  in  h.onour  of  Vulcan  and
Prometheus  likewise,  upon  their  respective  festivals.  It's  celebra-
tion was  as  follows:  the  young  competitors  lit  their  torches  at  the
altar  of  Prometiieus  in  the  Ceramicus,  and  with  their  uti-nost  speed
raa  toward  the  city.  He,  v^hose  torch  went  out  during  the  course,
gave  place  to  the  next;  and  the  victory  was  aujudredto  him,  who
lirst  reached  the  goal  without  such  an  accident.   (Puusan.  i.  SO.)*

^  Aristotle  reckons  Solon  himself  among  the  inferior  citir.ens,  and
quotes  his  own  works  to  prove  it.  The  tvutli  is,  that  Solon  v.  as  never
rich.  In  his  yoith,  he  >/»;•$  much  addicted  to  poetry.  And  Plato
in  his  Tiniteus  says,  that  if  he  had  finished  all  his  poenjs  (particu-
hniy  t!ie  History  o\  the  Atlantic  Isle,  which  he  brought  out  of
Egypt)  and  had  taken  time  to  revise  and  correct  them  as  others
did,  neither  Homer,  Hesiod,  nor  any  other  ancient  poet  would
have  been  more  illustrious.  It  is  evident,  both  from  his  life  and
vvritiiigs,  that  he  was  a  person  not  only  of  exalted  virtue,  but  of  a
pL\isant  and  agreeable  temper.  He  considered  men,  as  men  ;  and
keeping  at  once  their  capacity  for  virtue,  and  their  proneness  to  evil  in
view,  adapted  his  laws  so  as  to  strengthen  ami  support  the  one,  and


220  SOLON.

nrlnpns  informs  11:=;,  bv  indu]<2,inf^  his  a'reat  and  muni-
ficent  spirit,  tliough  the  son  miglit  have  been  su])-
ported  by  liis  friends,  yet  as  he  was  of  a  family  that
had  long  been  accustomed  to  assist  others,  he  was
ashamed  to  accept  assistance ;  and  therefore  in  his
younger  years  engaged  himself  in  merchandise.  Some,
however,  say  tliat  he  travelled  rather  to  gratify  his
curiosity  and  extend  his  knowledge,  than  to  make
a  fortune.  I'or  he  professed  his  love  of  wisdom,  and
when  far  advanced  in  years  made  this  declaration,
"  I  grow  old  in  the  pursuit  of  learning."  That  he
"was  not  excessively  attached  to  wealth,  we  may
gather  from  the  following  verses :

The  man  that  boasts  of  golden  stores,
Ot"  grain  that  loads  his  bending  floors,
Of  fields  with  freshening  herbage  green,
Where  boiinding  steeds  and  herds  are  seen;
I  call  not  happier  than  the  swain
^Vhose  limbs  are  sound,  whose  food  is  plain,
Whose  joys  a  blooming  wife  endears,
Whose  hours  a  smiling  offspring  cheers  ^.

Yet  in  another  place  he  says:

The  fio^v  of  riches  I  desire,

And  fain  w^ould  life's  true  goods  acquire ;

But  let  me  justlj"  them  nttam,

Lest  vengeance  follow  in  their  train.

A  good  man  indeed,  and  a  valuable  member  of  society,
should  neither  set  his  heart  upon  superfluities,  nor
reject  the  use  of  what  is  necessary  and  convenient.
And  in  those  times,  as  Hesiod '  states,  no  businesi
was  regarded  as  a  disparagement,  neither  did  any
trade  cause  a  disadvantageous  distinction.     The  pro-

to  check  and  regulate  the  other.  His  institutions  are  as  remarkable
for  their  sweetness  and  practicabilit}',  as  those  of  L3  curgus  for  their
harsliness  and  violence  to  human  nature.

^  This  passage,  and  another  below,  are  now  found  among  the  Sen-
■  tenccs  of  'i'heognis.

7  Ifv  «"^'  'H/..  309.


SOLON.  ^2<2l

fession  of  merchandise  Vv^as  honourable,  as  it  broujiht
home  the  produce  of  barbarous  eountries,  eiigap;ed
the  friendship  of  kings,  and  opened  a  wide  field  of
knowledge  and  experience.  Nay,  some  merchants
have  been  founders  of  large  cities  ;  Protus  ^,  for  in-
stance, that  built  Marseilles,  for  whom  the  Gauls
about  the  Rhone  had  the  highest  esteem.  I'hales^
also,  and  Hippocrates  the  mathematician,  are  said
to  have  applied  thenjselves  to  commerce  ;  and  the
oil,  which  Plato  sold  in  Egypt  ^'^'5  defrayed  the  ex-
pense of  his  travels.

If  Solon  was  too  extravagant  and  luxurious   in
his  way  of  living,  and  indulged  his  poetical  vein  in
his  description  of  pleasure  too  freely  for  a  philosopher,
it  is  imputed  to  his  mercantile  life.     For  as  he  had
passed  through  many  considerable  dangers,  he  might
surelv  compensate  them  with  a  little  relaxation  and.
enjoyment.     But  that  he  placed  himself  rather  in  then
class  of  the  poor,  than  of  the  rich,  is  evident  fronif  \
these  lines  :

For  vice  though  Plenty  fills  her  lioni,
And  virtue  sinks  in  vant  and  scorn;
Yet  never,  suve,  shall  Solon  change
His  truth  for  wealth's  most  easy  range !
Since  virtue  lives,  and  truth  shall  stand,
While  wealth  eludes  the  grasping  hand.

He  seems  to  have  made  use  of  his  poetical  talent  at

"  Perliaps  Protis — mentioned  by  Justin,  as  one  of  the  chief  emi-
grants who  fled  from  Phocis  to  avoid  the  power  of  Persia,  and
founded  IMarseUles.  To  the  same  name  the  same  colony  is  likewise
ascribed  by  Aristotle.   (Athen.  xiii.  5.)*

^  The  concern  here  ascribed  to  Thales,  in  traSc,  was  most
probal)ly  that  tecorded  of  him  b}'  Diogenes  Laertius  in  his  Life
(i.  26.)  J  who  i-elatss,  that  to  show  the  ease  with  which  riches  might
be  acquired,  and  foreseeing  by  his  meteorological  skill  an  abundant
crop  of  olives,  he  bought  the  wiiole  produce  before-hand,  and  made
an  immense  ibrtune  by  the  speculation.*

'^  It  v.-as  tisurd  to  trade  into  Egypt  with  the  oil  of  Greece  and
Judaea.  It  is  said  in  the  prop'iet  Hosea  (xii.  1.)  '  Eohraim  carrieth
oil  into  Egypt.'  (L.)  This  indeed  was  the  only  produce  of  Atticcu
which  from  it's  abundance  Solon  allowed  to  be  e?:ported.*


222  SOLOK.

first,  not  for  any  serious  ])urpose,  but  only  for  amuse-
ment and  to  fill  up  his  hours  of  leisure  :  afterward
however  he  inserted  moral  sentences,  and  inter-
wove many  political  transactions  in  his  poems,  not
ibr  the  sake  of  recording^  or  of  remembering  them,
but  sometimes  by  way  of  apology  for  his  own  admi-
nistration, and  sometimes  to  exhort,  advise,  or  cen-
sure the  citizens  of  Athens.  Son-iC  are  of  opinion,
that  he  attempted  also  to  put  his  laws  into  verse,
luid  they  give  us  this  beginning  :

Supreme  of  gods,  w'hose  power  we  first  address
Tiiid  plan  to  honour,  and  these  laws  to  bless.

Like  most  of  the  sages  of  those  times,  he  cultivated
chiefly  that  part  of  moral  philosophy,  which  treats
of  civil  obligations.  His  physics  were  of  a  very
simple  and  ancient'^  cast,  as  appears  from  the  fol*
io wins'  lines  :


'fe


From  cloudy  vapours  fall  the  treasured  snows,
And  piercing  hail:  from  lightning's  flashes  flows
The  thunder;  winds  embroil  the  main  serene.
Than  v,hose  unruffled  breast  no  smoother  scene
Shines  'raid  the  works  of  nature  !

Upon  the  whole,  Thales  appears  to  have  been  the
only  philosopher,  who  then  carried  his  speculations
beyond  things  in  common  use,  while  the  rest  of  the
Wise  Men  acquired  their  character  by  rules  for  so-
cial life.

These  are   reported  to  have  met  at  Delphi,  and


"  That  is,  in  other  words,  *  shallov/  and  fniperficial.*  The  na-
ture indeed  of  pliysics,  the  conclusions  of  which  depend  upon  a
long  and  tedious  series  of  experiments,  renders  it  impossible  that
the  ancient  cultivators  of  that  delightful  science  should  have  been
either  accurate  or  profound.  M.  Ricard,  wiio  expatiates  upon
Solon's  mistakes,  rightly  represents  it  as  no  sufficient  apology  to
plead,  that  they  occur  in  poetry.  Since  the  publication  of  Dr.
Darwin's  Botanic  Garden,  we  know  that  it  is  possible  for  poetry
generally  brilliant,  and  philosophy  fre(]ucntly  just,  to  exist  in
union.*


SOLON.  223

subsequently  at  Corinth  upon  the  invitation  of  Pe-
riander,  wlio  made  provision  for  their  entertainment.
But  what  contributed  most  to  their  honour,    was
their  sending  the  tripod  from  one  to  another,  with
an  ambition  to  outvie  each  other  in  modesty.     The
story  is  this :  when  some  Coans  were  drawing  a  net,
certain  strangers  from  Miletus  bought  the  draugitt
unseen.     It  proved   to   be  a  golden  tripod,  which
Helen,  as  she   sailed  from  Troy,    is   said    to  have
thrown  in   there,    in    compliance   with  an   ancient
oracle.       A   dispute   arising   at   first     between    the
strangers  and  the  fishermen  about  the  tripod,  and  af-
terward extending  itself  to  the  states  to  which  they
belonged,  so  as  to  engage  them  in  hostilities,  the
priestess  of  Apollo  took  up  the  matter,  by  ordering
that  the  wisest  man  they  could  find  should  have  the-
tripod.     And  first  it  was  sent  to  Thales  at  Miletus,.
the  Coans  voluntarily  presenting  that  to  one  of  the
Milesians,  for  which  they  had  gone  to  war  witii  them
all.     Thales  declared,  that  Bias  vras   a  wiser  man
than  he ;  to  him,  therefore,  it  was  conveyed.     lie-
sent  it  to  another,  as  wiser  stilL     After  'making  a
farther  circuit,  it  came  to  Thales  the  second  time  ;
and  w^as  finally  carried  from  Miletus  to  Thebes,  and
dedicated  to  the  Ismenian  '^  Apollo.     Theophrastus
relates,  that  the  tripod  v*'as  first   sent  to  Bias,    at
Priene ;  tliat  Bias  sent  it  back  again  to  Thales,  at
ivIiJetus  ;  that  so  having  passed  through  the  hands
of  the  seven,  it  came  round  io  Bias  again,  and  was
at  last  sent  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.     This
is  the  most  current  account :  yet  some  say,  the  pre-
sent was  not  a  tripod,  but  a  bowl  sent  by  Cra^sus  ^
and  others,  that  it  was  a  cop  which   one  BaH;hycles
had  left  for  that  purpose.

We  have  a  particular  account  of  a  conversation
which  Solon  had  with  Anacharsis  '%  and  of  another

'*  An  epithet  derived  from  a  temple  consecrated  to  tljat  deity
upon  the  banks  of  the  Ismenus,  which  flowed  near  Thebes.*

^'  The  Scythians,  long  before  the  days  of  Solon,  had  been  cele-
brated for  their  frugah'ty,  temperance,  and  justice.     Anacharsis  was.

12


224  SOLOX.

which  he  had  with  Thalcs.  Aiiacharsis  went  to  So-
lon's house  at  Atliens,  knociied  at  tlic  door,  and
said  "  he  was  a  stranger,  who  desired  to  enter  into
"  engagements  of  friendship  and  mutual  liospitality
"  with  him."  Solon  replied,  "  Friendships  are  best
"  formed  at  home."  "  Then  do  you,"  said  Ana-
charsis,  "  who  are  at  home,  make  me  your  friend,
"  and  receive  me  into  your  house."  Struck  with
the  quickness  of  his  repartee,  Solon  gave  him  a  kind
w-elcome,  and  kept  him  some  time  with  him,  being
then  employed  in  publicX.  affairs  and  in  modelHng
his  law^s.  When  Anacharsis  knew  what  Solon  was
about,  he  laughed  at  his  undertaking,  and  at  the
absurdity  of  imacininji;  that  he  could  restrain  the
avarice  and  injustice  of  his  citizens  by  written  laws  ;
which  in  all  respects  resembled  spiders'  webs,  and
would  like  them  only  entangle  and  hold  the  poor
and  weak,  while  tlie  powerful  and  the  wealthy  easily
broke  through.  Upon  this  Solon  remarked,  '•  Men
keep  their  agreements,  when  it  is  an  advantage  to
both  parties  not  to  break  them  ;  and  he  would  so
"  frame  his  laws,  as  to  make  it  evident  to  the  Athe-
"  nians,  that  it  would  be  more  for  their  interest  to
"  observe,  than  to  transgress  them."  The  event,
however,  showed  that  Anacharsis  was  nearer  to  the
truth  in  his  conjecture,  than  Solon  in  his  liope.
Anacharsis,  having  seen  an  assembly  of  the  people
at  Athens,  said;  "  He  was  surprised  to  find,  that  in
"  Greece  wise  men  pleaded  causes,  and  fools  detcr-
*'  mined  them."

"When  Solon  was  entertained  by  Thales  at  Miletus,

one  of  tlicse  Scythians,  and  a  prince  of  the  blood.  lie  went  to
Athens  about  the  forty-seventh  Olympiad,  that  is,  B.  C.  590.  His
good  sense,  knowledge,  and  experience  made  him  pass  for  one  of
the  Seven  Wise  Men.  But  the  wisest  have  tlieir  inconsistencies;
for  such  it  certainly  was  in  Anacharsis,  to  carry  back  with  him  the
Grecian  rites  of  Cybele,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  his  country.
Though  he  performed  those  rites  however  privately,  a  Scytiiiau
happened  to  see  him,  and  acquainted  the  king  his  brother  with  it,
wlio  immediately  catne,  and  shot  him  with  an  arrow  upon  the  snot.
(Herodot.  iv.  76.)


cc


SOLON.  225

lie  expressed  some  wonder,  that  be  did  nb£  marry
and  raise  n  famiiv.     To   this  Tiiales  G:ave  no  imme-
diate  answer  ;  but  some  days  afterward  he  instructed
a  stranger  to   say,  "  That  he  had  left  Athens  ten
"  days  ago."     Solon  inquiring,  "  What  news  there
"  was  at  that  place?"  the  man,  according  to  his  in-
structions, replied;  "None,  except  the  funeral  of
a  young  man,  which  was  attended  by  the  whole
city.     For  he  was  the  son  (they  told  me)  of  a  per-
son of  great  honour,  and  of  the  highest  reputa-
tion for  virtue,  who  was  then  abrotld  upon  his
"  travels."     "  Unhappy  man !"  said  Solon  :  "  but
"  what  was  his  name?"  "  I  have  heard  his  name,"
answered  the  strans-er,  "  but  I  do  not  recollect  it.
"  All  I  remember  is,  that  there  was  much  talk  of
"  his  wisdom  and  justice."     Solon,   whose  appre-
hensions increased  with  every  reply,  was  now  much
disconcerted,  and  mentioned  his  own  name,  asking;
"  Whether  it  was  not  Solon's  son,  that  was  dead  ?"
The  stranger  replying  in  the  affirmative,  he  began  to
beat  his  head,  and  to  do  and  say  such  things  as  are
usual  with  men  in  a  transport  of  grief  ^^      Upon  this
Thales,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  said  with  a  smile  ;
"  These  things,  which  strike  down  so  firm  a  man  as
"  Solon,  kept  me  from  marriage  and  from  havingchii'
'^^  dren.  But  take  courage,  my  good  friend,  for  not  a
*^'  syllable  of  what  has  been  told  you  is  true."     Her-
mippus  says,  he  took  this  story  from  Patgecus,  who
«sed  to  boast  that  he  had  the  soul  of  ^sop.

But  after  all,  to  neglect  the  procuring  of  what  is
necessary ^r  convenient  in  life,  from  the  apprehen-


/*  Solon  ('^hetiier  upon  this  occasion,  or  on  the  real  loss  of  a
'son,  is  uncertain)  being  desired  not  to  weep,  since  weeping  would
avail  nothing;  answered,  with  much  humanity  and  good  sense,
*  And  for  that  I  weep.'  (L.)  This  is  the  turn  of  Gray's  Sonnet  on
the  Death  of  \Vest,  a  sonnet,  to  wliicli  Mason  unhesitatingly  applies
Boileau's  sans  defauts  :

I  fruitless  mourn  to  him  that  cannot  hear.
And  jyeep  the  more,  because  i  weep  in  vain.*

vol.  I.  Q  •


226  solo:;.

sion  of  losins^  it,  would  be  acting  a  very  mean  and
absurd  part.  By  the  same  rule  a  man  might  refuse  the
enjoyment  of  riches,  or  honour,  orvvischnri,  because
it  is  possible  for  him  to  be  deprived  of  them  again.
Even  the  excellent  qualities  of  the  mind,  the  most
valuable  and  pleasing  possession  in  the  world,  we
see  destroyed  by  poisonous  drugs  or  by  the  violence
of  some  disease.  Nay,  Thales  himself  conid  not  be
secure  from  fears  by  living  single,  iniless  he  had  re-
nounced all  interest  in  his  friends,  his  relations,  and
his  country.  Instead  of  that,  however,  he  is  said
to  have  adopted  his  sister's  son,  named  Cybisthus.
The  soul  indeed  has  not  only  a  principle  of  sense,
and  understanding,  and  memory,  but  of  love  ;  and,
when  it  has  nothing  at  home  to  engage  It's  affection,
it  unites  itself  and  adheres  to  something  abroad.
Strangers  or  persons  of  spurious  birth  often  insi-
nuate themselves  into  such  a  man's  heart,  as  into
a  house  or  land  that  has  no  lawful  heirs,  and  to-
gether with  love  bring  a  train  of  cares  and  appre-
hensions for  them,  it  is  not  uncommon  to  hear
persons  of  a  morose  temper,  who  talk  against  mar-
riage and  a  family,  uttering  the  most  abject  com-
plaints, when  a  child  which  they  have  had  by  a
slave  or  a  concubine  happens  to  sicken  or  die.  Nay,
some  have  expressed  a  very  great  regret  upon  the
death  of  dogs  and  horses ;  while  others  have  borne
the  loss  of  valuable  chihlren  without  any  severe  af-
fliction, or  at  least  without  any  indecent  sorrow,
and  have  passed  the  rest  of  their  days  in  calnuie?s
and  composure.  It  is  certainly  weakness,  not  affec-
tion, which  brings  infinite  troubles  and  fears  upon
men,  unfortified  by  reason  against  the  pov/er  of  for-
tune ;  who  have  no  enjoyment  of  a  present  good,
because  of  their  a])prehensions,  and  of  the  r^i
anguish  which  tlicy  find  in  anticipating  it's  loss.  No
man  surely  should  take  refuge  in  poverty,  to  guard
against  the  loss  of  an  estate  ;  nor  remain  in  the  unso-
cial state  of  celibacy,  that  he  may  have  neither  friend;-!


SOLON.  227

lior  children  to  lose  :  he  should  be  armed  by  reason
aftJiinst  all  events.  But  in  this  discassiun,  perhaps,
v/e  iiave  been  too  diffuse.

When  the  Athenians,  tired  out  with  a  long  and
troublesome  war  ao-ainst  the  inhabitants  of  Meerara
for  tlie  isle  of  Sahimis,  had  enacted  that  no  one  for
the  future,  under  pain  of  death,  should  either  by
speech  or  writing  persuade  the  city  to  assert  it's
chiim  to  that  island  ;  Solon,  deeply  concerned  at  so
dishonourable  a  decree,  and  observing  great  part  of
the  youth  desirous  to  recommence  the  war,  and  re-
strained from  it  only  bv  their  fear  of  tlie  law,  feio^nod
himselt  insane  '" :  and  a  report  spread  from  his  house
into  tlie  city,  that  he  v/as  out  of  his  senses.  He  had
privately  however  composed  an  elegy,  and  got  it  by
lieart,  in  order  to  repeat  it  in  public  :  thus  prepared,
he  sallied  out  unexpectedly  into  the  market-place,
Vv'ith  a  cap  upon  his  head  '^.  A  great  number  of
people  flocked  about  him,  he  mounted  the  heralds'
stone,  and  su.ng  the  elegy  which  begins  thus,

A  herald  from  fair  Salamis  I  come,
And  bring  you  noble  verses —

This  composition  is  entitled  '  Salamis,'  and  consists
of  a  luindred  very  beautiful  lines.  When  Solon
had  finished,  his  friends  began  to  express  their  ad-
miration, and  Pisistratus  in  particular  exerted  liim-
self  in  persuading  the  people  to  comply  with  his
directions  ;  upon  which  they  repealed  the  law,  once
more  undertook  the  war,  and  invested  Solon  v/ith
the  command.  The  common  account  of  his  pro-
ceedings is  as  follows  :   He  sailed  with  Pisistratus  to

'*  When  tlie  Athenians  were  delivered  from  their  fears  by  the
death  of  Epaminondas,  they  began  to  squander  away  upon  shows
and  plays  that  nioney,  whicli  had  been  assigned  for  the  pay  of  t.'ie
army  and  navy  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  they  made  it  death  for  any
one  to  propose  a  reformation.  In  that  case  Demosthenes  did  not,
like  Solon,  attack  their  error  under  a  pretence  of  insanity ;  but
boldly  and  resolutely  spoke  against  it,  and  by  the  force  of  ^is  elo-
quence induced  thern  to  correct  it.

'■''  None  wore  caps,  but  the  sick.

Q  2


228  SOLON.

Colias,  and  having  seized  the  women  who,  accord-
ing to  the  cnstom  of  the  country,  were  tliere  offering
sacrifice  to  Ceres,  he  despatched  a  trusty  person  to
Salamis  to  feign  himself  a  deserter,  and  to  advise  the
Megarensians,  if  they  liad  a  mind  to  get  possession
of  the  principal  Athenian  matrons,  to  set  sail  imme-
diately for  Colias.  The  Megarensians  readily  em-
bracing the  proposal,  and  sending  out  a  body  of
men,  Solon  discovered  the  ship  as  it  ])ut  off  from
the  island ;  and  causing  the  v/omen  instantly  to
withdravv^,  ordered  a  number  of  }  oung  men,  whose
faces  were  yet  smooth,  to  dress  themselves  in  their
habits,  caps,  and  shoes.  In  this  disguise,  with  wea-
pons concealed  under  their  clothes,  they  were  to
dance  and  play  by  the  sea-side,  till  tlie  enemy  had
landed,  and  the  vessel  was  near  enough  to  be  seized.
Matters  beina-  thus  ordered,  the  Megarensians  were
deceived  v/ith  the  appearance,  and  ran  confusedly
on  shore,  striving  which  should  first  lay  hold  on  the
women.  But  they  met  with  so  warm  a  reception,
that  they  were  cut  off  to  a  man  :  and  the  Athenians,
embarking  immediately  for  Salamis,  took  possession
of  the  island.     /

Others  affirm,  that  it  was  not  recovered  in  this
manner  ;  but  that  Apollo,  being  first  consulted  M
Delphi,  replied.

Go,  to  the  countiry's  cliiefs  due  honours  pay,
Hid  in  iEsopus'  lap,  whojje  mouldering  clay.
Fronts  the  declining  sun.

Upon  this,  Solon  crossed  the  sea  by  night,  and
offered  sacrifices  in  Salamis  to  the  heroes  Periphemus
and  Cichreus''.  Then  taking  five  hundred  Athenian
vohniteers,  who  had  obtained  a  decree,  that  if  they
conquered  tlie  island  the  government  of  it  should  be

'7  Cicineur,  was  a  king  of  Salamis,  and  had  a  temple  consecrated
to  him  in  that  island.  Pausaniits  (i.  3'J.)  relates  that  during  a  naval
engagement  between  the  Athuniuns  and  the  l\>rtians,  a  lurge  !!.\r-
pent  uas  seen  upon  one  of  the  Athenian  vessels,  which,  as  Apollo
informed  thein,  wag  the  hero  Cichvcus.*


SOLON.  229

invested  in  them,  he  sailed  with  a  iiumber  of  fishing-
vessels  and  one  gallej  of  thirty  oars  for  Salamis,
where  he  cast  anchor  at  a  point  looking  toward
Euboea.

The  Megarensians  that  were  in  the  place,  having
heard  a  confused  report  of  what  had  happened,  ran
in  a  disorderly  manner  to  arms,  and  sent  a  ship  to
discover  tlie  enemy.  As  the  ship  approached  too
near,  Solon  took  it ;  and,  securing  the  crew,  put  in
their  place  some  of  the  bravest  of  the  Athenians,
with  orders  to  make  the  best  of  their  way  to  the  city
as  privately  as  possible.  In  the  mean  time,  with  the
rest  of  his  men,  he  attacked  the  IMegarensians  by
land ;  and,  while  these  were  engaged,  those  from
the  ship  took  the  city.  A  custom,  which  afterward
prevailed,  seems  to  attest  the  truth  of  this  account,
ior  an  Athenian  ship  once  a  year  passed  silently  to
Salamis,  and  the  inhabitants  coming  down  upon  it
with  noise  and  tumult,  one  man  in  armour  leaped
ashore,  and  ran  shouting  toward  the  promontory  of
Sciradium,  to  meet  those  who  were  advancing  by
land.  Near  that  place  is  a  temple  of  Mars  erected
by  Solon :  for  there  it  was,  that  he  defeated  the
Megarensians,  and  dismissed  upon  certain  condi-
tions such  as  were  not  slain  in  battle.

The  people  of  Megara  however  persisted  in  their
claim,  till  both  sides  had  severely  felt  the  calamities
of  war,  and  they  then  referred  the  affair  to  the  de-
cision of  the  Lacedaemonians.  Many  authors  relate
that  Solon  availed  himself  of  a  passage  in  Homer's
catalogue  of  ships,  which  he  quoted  before  the  ar>
bitrators,  dexterously  inserting  a  line  of  his  own  :
for  to  this  verse,

Ajax  from  Salamis  twelve  ships  commands,
he  is  said  to  have  added,

And  ranks  his  forces  with  th'  Athenian  bands^s.

■8  This  line  could  be  no  sufficient  evidence  ;  for  there  are  many
passages  in  Homer,  which  prove  that  the  ships  of  Ajax  were  sta-


230  SOLON.

But  the  Athenians  regard  this  as  an  idle  story ;  and
by  their  account  Solon  made  it  appear  to  the  judges,
that  Philfeus  and  Eurysaces  the  sons  of  Ajax,  being
admitted  by  the  Athenians  to  the  freedom  of  their
city,  gave  up  to  them  the  island ;  and  removed,  the
one  to  Brauron  in  Attica,  and  the  other  to  Melite :
and,  that  from  that  Philasus  likewise  the  tribe  of  the
Philai'dae,  of  which  Pisistratus  was,  had  it's  name.
He  brought  another  argument  against  the  Megaren-
sians,  from  the  manner  of  burying  in  Salamis,  vv'hich
was  agreeable  to  the  custou)  of  Athens,  and  con-
trary to  that  of  Megara ;  for  the  Megarensians  inter
the  dead  with  their  face  to  the  east,  and  the  Athe-
nians turn  theii's  to  the  west  '^.  On  the  other  hand,
liereas  of  Megara  insists,  that  the  Megarensians
likewise  turn  the  faces  of  their  dead  to  the  west;  and
moreover  that,  like  the  people  of  Salamis,  they  put
three  or  four  corpses  in  one  tomb,  whereas  the  Alhe-
nians  liave  a  separate  tomb  for  each  -^.  But  Solon's
cause  was  farther  assisted  by  certain  oracles  of
Apollo,  in  which  the  island  was  called  '  Ionian  -^
Salamis.'  This  matter  was  determined  by  five  ,^par-
tnns,  Critolaides,  Amompharetus,  Hypsechidas,
Anaxilas,  and  Cleomenes.
V  Solon  gained  considerable  honour  and  authority  in
\4Lthens  by  this  affair ;  bat  he  acquired  still  greater
glory  and  celebrity  among  the  Grecians  in  general,
by  negotiating  succours  for  the  temple  at'Oelphi,
against  the  insolent  and  injurious  behaviour  of  tlie


tioned  near  the  Tliessalians.  II.  xiii.  681.,  &-c.  (Strabo,  x.)  (L.)
l-l)il;cus,  nientionud  below  (according  to  Pausan.  i.  ;:j.)  was  the
gjar.dson  of  Ajax.'^"

'0  Tliis  is  indued  positively  denied  by  Diogenes  Laeitius,  but
most  probably  by  mistake,  as  Ai,\r,,v.  (Var.  Hist.  vii.  19.)  agrees
M-ith  Plutarch  upon  the  mode  of  Atiienian  sepulture.  Vv'itli  regard
tothat  of  the  Megarensiiins,  however,  he  di  tiers  from  him;  as  he
5ays  that  they  assigned  their  dead  no  determined  position,  but  left
it  entirely  to  chance.*

^°  Probably,  as  ?>I.  Ricard  suggests,  from  the  relative  extent  of
the  population  and  territory  of  the  two  countries.*

^'   Ancient  Ionia  only  comprehended  Attica.*


SOLON.  231

( jnhijcans  ",  and  by  persuading  the  Greeks  to  arm  for
the  honour  of  the  god.  'Upon  his  motion,  the  Am-
])hictyons  declared  war ;  as  Aristotle  among  others
testifies,  in  his  Book  concerning  the  Pythian  gan).es,
in  which  he  attributes  the  measure  to  Solon.  |He
W' as  not,  however,  appointed  general  in  tliat  war,fas
Hermippus  relates  from  Euanthes  the  Samian.  Foi
yEschines,  th.e  orator,  states  no  such  appointment ;
iin^  we  find  in  the  recoids  of  Delphi  that  Alcmiieon,
not  Solon,  commanded  the  Athenians  upon  that  oc-
casion.

The   execrable   proceedings    against  the  accom-
plices of  Cylon  "^  had  long  occasioned  great  troubles

'^  The  inhabitants  of  Cirrha,  fi  town  seated  on  the  bay  of  Co-
rintl),  after  having  by  repeated  incursions  wasted  the  nciglibonring
territory  of  Dt"i})hi,  besieged  ti'.e  city  itself,  from  a  desire  of  mak-
ing themselves  nuiKters  of  the  riches  contained  in  the  temple  of
Apollo.  Ads  ice  of  this  being  sent  to  the  An.p'iictyons,  who  were
tlie  States-General  of  Greece,  Solon  advised  that  the  matter  should
he  universally  resented.  Accordingly  Clisthenes,  tyrant  of  Sicyon,
was  despatched  as  commander-in-chief  against  the  Cirrha^ans;  Alc-
nu€on  was  general  of  the  Athenian  quota  ;  and  Solon  went  as  coun-
isellor  or  assistant  to  Clisthenes.  When  the  Greek  army  had  be-
sieged Cirrha  some  time,  without  nnich  appearance  of  success,
Apollo  was  consulted ;  who  answered,  that  they  v.ould  never  be
able  to  reduce  the  place,  till  the  waves  of  tlie  Ciirha^an  sea  washed
tile  territories  of  Delphi.  This  answer  struck  the  array  with  sur-
jn-ise  ;  but  it  was  soon  removed  by  Solon,  who  advised  Ciistlienes
to  consecrate  the  wliole  territories  of  Cirrha  to  the  Delphic  Apollo,
uhence  it  would  follow  that  the  sea  nuist  wash  the  sacred  coast.
Cirrha  was  now  taken,  and  became  thenceforth  the  arsenal  of
Delphi,  (L.)  Pausanias  (i'hoc.  x.  S7.)  mentions  another  stratagem,
less  wortliy  of  Solon;  the  turning  of  the  river  Piistus,  which  sup-
plied Cirrha  v,ith  water,  and  afterward  impregnating  it  with  the
violently  emetic  root  of  hellebore.*

^2  For  a  long  time  after  the  democracy  took  place,  there  was  a
strong  party  against  it,  wlu)  left  no  measures  untried,  in  order  if
possir)!e  to  restore  their  ancient  form  of  government.  Cylon  a  man
<)f  quality,  and  son-in-law  to  Theagop.es  tyrant  oi"  Megara,  repined
at  the  sudden  change  of  the  magistrates,  and  hated  the  thoughts
of  soliciting  that  as  a  favour,  which  he  had  ])een  accustomed  to
regard  as  due  to  his  birth-right.  He  formed  tiierefore  a  design  to
seize  the  citadel,  which  in  the  forty-fifth  Olympiad,  when  many  of
the  citizens  were  gone  to  the  Olympic  games,  he  carried  into  effect.
Alegacles,  who  was  at  that  time  ciiief  Archon,  with  the  other  ma-
gistrates and  the  whole  power  of  Athens,  immediately  laid  siege  to
it ;  and  reduced  the  conspirators  to  such  distress,  that  Cylon  and


232  SOLON.

in  the  Athenian  state.     The  conspirators  had  taken
sanctuary  in  Minerva's  temple :  but  Megaclcs,  then
Archon,  persuaded  them  to  quit  it,  and  stand  tlicir
trial ;  under  the  notion  that  if  they  tied  a  thread  to
the  shrine  of  the  goddess,  and  kept  hold  of  it,  they
should  still  be  under  her  protection.     As  soon  as
they  came  ovcr-against  the  temple  of  the  Furies,
however,  the  thread  broke  of  itself;    upon  wliich,
Megacles  and  his   collcgues  rushed  upon  them  and
seized  them,  as  if  they  had  lost  their  privilege.   8uch
as  were  out  of  the  temple,  were  stoned;  those,  who
fled  to  the  altars,  were  there  cut  in  pieces  ;  and  they
alone  were  spared,    who  made  application  to  the
wives  of  the  mao'istrates.     From  tluit  time  those  ma-
gistrates  were  called  '  execrable,'  and  became  ob-
jects of  the  public  liatred.     The  remains  of  Cylon's
faction  subsequently  recovered  strength,  and  kept
up   the  quarrel  with  the  descendents  of  Megacles.
The  dispute  ran  higher,  and  tlie  two  parties  were
more  exasperated  than  ever,  when  Solon  (whose  au-
thority was  now  very   great)    and   other  principal
Athenians  interposed,  and  by  entreaties  and  argu-
ments persuaded  the  '  execrables'  to  submit  to  jus-
tice and  a  fair  trial,  before  three  hundred  judges
selected  from  the  nobility.     Myron,  of  the  Phylen-
sian   ward,  managed   the   impeachment,    and   they
were   condemned :    As  many   as  were  alive,  were
driven  into  exile  ;  and  the  bodies  of  the  dead  were
dug  up,  and  cast  out  beyond  the  borders  of  Attica.
Amidst   these   disturbances,    the  Megarensians  re-
newed the  war,  took  Nisaja^^  from  the  Athenians,
and  once  more  recovered  Salamis.

his  brother  fled,  and  left  the  meaner  sort  to  shift  for  themselves.
Those,  who  escaped  tlie  sword,  took  refuge  (as  Plutarch  relates)
in  Minerva's  temple ;  and  though  they  had  deserved  death  for  hav-
ing conspired  against  the  government,  yet  the  magistrates,  by  put-
ting them  to  death  in  breach  of  the  privilege  of  sanctuary,  brought
upon  themselves  the  indignation  of  the  superstitious  Athenians,  who
deemed  such  conduct  a  greater  crime  than  treason.  (L.)  The
whole  story,  condensed  by  Herodotus  (v.  71.),  is  related  in  detail
by  Thucydides  (i.  126).*

^  A  city  situated  upon  the  gulf  of  Corinth.*


SOLON.  233

About  this  time,  the  city  was  likewise  afflicted
with  superstitious  fears,  and  strange  appearances:
and  the  soothsayers  declared,  that  there  were  cer-
tain abominable  crimes,  pointed  out  by  the  entrails
of  the  victims,  which  demanded  expiation.  Upon
tins,  they  sent  to  Crete  for  Epimenides  the  Phoes-
tian  -^,  who  is  reckoned  the  seventh  among  the  Wise
Men,  by  those  that  do  not  admit  Periander  into  the
number.  He  w^as  reputed  a  man  of  great  piety,  be-
loved by  the  gods,  and  skilled  in  matters  of  religion,
particularly  in  what  related  to  inspiration  and  the
sacred  mysteries  :  whence  the  men  of  those  days
called  him  the  son  of  tiie  nymph  Balte,  and  one  of
the  Curetes  revived.  Upon  his  arrival  at  Athens,
he  contracted  a  friendship  with  Solon,  and  privately
gave  him  considerable  assistance,  pre])aring  the  way
ibr  the  reception  of  his  laws.  For  he  taught  the
Athenians  to  be  more  frugal  in  their  religious  wor-
ship, and  more  moderate  in  their  mourning,  by
intermixing  certain  sacrifices  with  the  funeral  so-

^5  This  Epimenides  was  a  very  extraordinary  person.  Diogenes
Laertius  informs  us,  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  the  art  of  lustrating,
or  purifying  houses,  fields,  and  persons ;  which,  if  confined  to
Greece,  may  be  true :  but  Moses  had  long  before  taught  the  He-
bi'ews  something  of  the  same  nature.  (Levit.  xvi.)  Epimenides
took  some  sheep  that  were  ali  black,  and  others  that  were  all  vvhite ;
these  he  led  into  the  Areopagus,  and  turning  them  loose,  directed
certain  persons  to  follow  them,  who  should  mark  where  they  lay
down,  and  there  sacrifice  them  to  the  deity  of  the  place.  Altars
were  then  erected  in  all  these  places,  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of
this  solemn  expiation.  (L.)  Altars,  uninscribed  with  any  name,
as  Diogenes  Laiirtius  informs  us,  existed  in  his  time.  Qu.  ?  Might
not  the  altar,  inscribed  "  To  the  Unknown  God"  (Acts  xvii.  23.),
have  been  erected  upon  this  or  a  similar  occasion  ;  and  the  Apostle
have  thence  taken  occasion  to  "  declare  to  the  Athenians  Him,
v.hom  they  ignorantly  worshipped.""'  The  only  compensation,
which  Epimenides  requested  for  his  trouble,  was  that  the  Athenians
would  contract  an  alliance  with  his  countrymen  in  Crete.  The  fables
of  his  fifty  or  fifty-seven  years'  sleep,  of  his  moderate  and  mysterious
sustenance  which  was  unproductive  of  secretions  of  any  kind,  and
of  the  extreme  old  age  at  which  he  died,  are  too  generally  known
to  require  i-ecital.*

There  were  other  ceremonies  practised  for  the  purpose  o^  lu?tra-
tlon,  of  which  Tzetzes  in  his  poetical  chronicle  gives  a  particular
"ccount,  but  which  are  too  trifling  to  be  here  mentioned.  (L  )


->


/


23i  SOLON.

]emnitic«,  and  abolisliini^  tlie  cruel  and  barbarous
customs  which  had  generally  prevailed  among  the
women  beibre  '^''.  And  what  v/as  of  still  greater
consequence,  by  expiations,  lustrations,  and  the
erecting  of  temples  and  shrines,  he  hallon'cd  and
purified  the  city,  and  made  the  people  more  obser-
vant of  justice  and  more  inclined  to  union.

Vv'hen  he  iiad  seen  Munychia,  and  considered  it
some  time,  he  is  reported  to  have  said  to  those  about
him-",  "  How  blind  is  man  to  futurity!  If  the
"  Athenians  could  foresee  v/hat  trouble  that  place
'^  v.ill  give  them,  they  v/ould  tear  it  in  pieces  with
"  their  teeth."  Something  similar  to  this  is  related
of  Thales.  For  he  ordered  the  Milesians  to  bury
him  in  a  certain  obscure  and  neglected  place,  and
foretold,  at  the  same  time,  tliat  there  the  market-
})lace  would  one  day  stand.  As  for  Ej)imenides,  he
was  held  in  admiration  at  Athens:  high  honours  and
many  valuable  presents  were  offered  him  ;  but  he
requested  nothing,  except  a  branch  of  the  sacred
olive,  and  with  that  he  departed.

When  the  troubles  about  Cylon's  affair  were  over,
and  the  sacrilegious  persons  removed,  in  the  manner
which  we  have  mentioned,  the  Athenians  relapsed
into  their  old  disputes  concerning  the  government ;
for  there  were  as  many  parties  among  them,  as  there

^'''  Of  lieating  tliemsdves,  anci  tearing  their  liair,  faces,  S.c.  as
hereafter  mentioned.*

*7  This  prediction  was  fuirillcd  270  years  afterward,  Avhcn  Anti-
pater  constrained  the  Athenians  to  admit  his  garrison  into  that
place.  (See  Pint.  Life  of  Demosthenes,  and  Diod.  Sic.  xviii.  18.
XX.  45.)  Beside  this  prophecy,  Epimenides  (according  to  Plato  i
uttered  another,  during  his  stay  at  Athens;  for,  hearing  that  t!iP
citizens  were  alarmed  hy  tiie  progress  of  the  Persian  power  at  sea,
he  advised  them  to  make  tliemselves  easy,  as  that  pcoiile  would  not
for  many  years  attempt  any  tiling  against  the  Greeks;  and,  wlien
they  did,  would  receive  heavier  loss  than  they  would  be  able  to  in-
flict. (Laert.  in  Vit.)  (L.)  This  passage  Clem.  Alex.  (Strom,  v.)
misinterprets,  as  if  by  his  sacrifice.^  he  had  suspended  the  Persian
invasion.  A  great  many  works  are  ascribed  to  Kpimenides  by  the
ancients.  One  of  his  hexameters  (from  a  Treatise,  as  it  is  conjec-
tured by  St.  Jerom  and  others,  upon  Oracles)  lias  liad  the  honour
of  being  quoted  by  St.  Paal  (Tit.  i,  12.)*


SOLON.  235

were  different  tracts  of  land  in  their  country.      The  i
inhabitants  of  the  mountainous  part  were  for  a  de-  'i
mocracy  ;  those  of  the  plains  for  an  oligarciiy  ;  and  \
those  of  the  sea-coasts,  contending  for  a  mixed  kind  ]
of  government,  prevented  either  of  the  other  two   ■
iTom  gaining  their  respective  points.      At  the  same
time,  the  inoquahty  between  the  poor  and  the  rich
occasioned  the  greatest  discord,  and  the  state  v;as
in  so  dangerous  a  situation,  that  there  seemed  to  be
no  metiiod  of  quelhng  the  seditious,  or  of  saving  it
from  ruin,  but  by  converting  it  into  a  monarchy.
So  greatly  were  the  poor  in  debt  to  the  rich,  that  \
they  were  obliged  either  to  pay  them  a  sixth  part  of  1
the  produce  of  the  land  (whence  they  were   called  \
Hc'Ctemor'ti,  and  Thetcs)^  or  to  engage  their  persons   •
to  their  creditors,  who  might  seize  them  upon  fail-
ure of  payment.       Accordingly,  some   made  slaves    ^
of  them,  and  others  sold  them  to  foreigners.     Nay,
some  parents,  to  avoid  the  severe  treatment  of  those
usurers,  were  forced  to  sell  their  own  children  (for
this  no  law  forbade)  and  to  quit  the  city.     Tiie  more
numerous  and  spirited  part  of  the  inhabitants,  how-
ever, agreed  to  stand  by  each  other,  and  not  to  bear
such  impositions  any  longer ;  but,  choosing  a  trusty
person  for  their  leader,  to  deliver  those  who  had  failed
in  their  time  of  payment,  to  divide  the  land,  and  to
give  an  entire  new  face  to  the  connnronv/ealth.

At  that  tim.e  the  most  prudent  of  the  Athenians
east  their  eyes  upon  Solon,  as  a  man  the  least  oh-  ^<<—
noxiou:  to  either  partv,  havino;  neither  been  eno:a2:ed
in  oppressions  with  the  rich,  nor  entangled  in  neces-
sities with  the  poor.  Him  therefore  they  entreated
to  assist  the  public  in  this  exigency,  and  to  compose
these  differences.  Phanias  the  Lesbian  indeed  asserts
that  Solon,  to  save  the  state,  dealt  artfully  with
them  both,  and  privately  promised  to  the  poor  a  di-
vision of  the  lands,  and  to  the  rich  a  confirmation
of  tiieir  securities.  At  first,  on  account  of  the  ava-
rice of  some  and  tlie  insolence  of  others,  he  was
loth  to  take  upon  him  the  administration  :  he  was,
12


236  SOLON.

however,  chosen  arclion  next  after  Piiilombrotns',
and  at  tlie  same  time  arbitrator  and  lawgiver ;  the
rich  accepting  him  readily,  as  one  of  themselves,
and  the  poor,  as  a  good  and  worthy  man.  They
tell  as  likewise,  that  a  saying  of  his  (which  he  had
littered  some  time  before),  "  Eqnality  causes  no
war,"  was  then  much  repeated,  and  yjleased  botli
the  rich  and  the  poor  ;  the  latter  expecting  to  come
to  a  balance  by  their  numbers,  and  by  the  measure
of  divided  lands  ;  and  the  ibrmer  to  preserve  at  least
an  equality,  by  their  dignity  and  power.  Thus  both
parties  cherishing  great  hopes,  their  heads  were  ur-
gent with  Solon  to  make  himself  king ;  and  endea-
voured to  persuade  him,  that  he  might  with  better
assurance  take  upon  himself  the  direction  of  a  city,
w^here  he  had  the  supreme  authority.  Nay,  many  of
the  citizens  who  leaned  not  to  either  party,  seeing
the  intended  change  difficult  to  be  effected  by  rea-
son and  law,  were  wiUingto  entrust  the  government
to  the  hands  of  one  wise  and  just  man.  Some  wri-
ters also  add,  that  he  received  the  following  oracle
from  Apollo :

Seize,  seize  the  helm ;  the  reeling  vessel  guide :
With  aiding  patriots  stem  the  raging  tide.

His  friends  in  particular  suggested,  that  he  would
appear  deficient  in  courage,  if  he  rejected  the  mo-
narchy from  a  fear  of  the  name  of  '  Tyrant"*^ ;'  as-
serting, that  the  sole  and  supreme  power  woidd  soon
become  a  lawful  sovereignty  through  the  virtues  of
him,  upon  whom  it  was  bestowed.  "  Thus  formerly
"  (said  they)  the  Eubocans  set  up  Tynnondas,  and
"  more  recently  the  Mitylena;ans  Pittacus  for  their


*s  It  should  here  be  remarked,  tliat  the  term  *  Tyrant '  was  not
used  among  the  ancients  in  the  odious  acceptation,  vvliich  it  very
deservedly  has  in  these  days ;  but  generally  implied  a  legitimate
authority,  exercised  with  justice  and  moderation.  Tlie  maxim
which  follows,  stretched  to  it's  full  extent,  is  horrible;  as  it  might
be  used  to  justify  every  usurpation.*


SOLON.  237

'*  prince-^.'*  l>^onc  of  these  observations  moved
tSolon  from  his  purpose ;  and  the  answer^  whicl)  he
is  said  to  have  given  to  his  friends,  v.as,  "  Absoline
"  monarchy  is  a  iiiir  field,  but  it  has  no  outlet/*
And,  in  one  of  his  poems,  he  thus  addresses  himself
to  his  friend  Phocus  ;

If  on  my  country  I  disdain'd  to  prey.

If  gilded  violence  and  lordly  sway

Fail'd  to  seduce  ine,  thence  I  bear  no  shame;

Still  thrives  the  gentle  hocour  of  my  name;

There  stands  my  empire.

Whence  it  is  evident,  that  his  reputation  was  very
great,  before  he  appeared  in  the  character  of  a  legis-
lator. As  for  the  ridicule,  v.hich  he  incurred  by
rejecting  kingly  power,  he  has  described  it  in  the  fol-
lowing verses :

Nor  wisdom's  palm  to  Solon's  lot  is  given,
Nor  deep-laid  craft :  for  when  indulgent  heaven
Orter'd  it's  noblest  boon,  he  spurn'd  the  lure.
Wiiere  was  his  fjallant  spirit,  when  secure
He  found,  nor  deign'd  to  drag  to  land  his  prey  ?
Who,  to  command  fair  Athens  but  a  day,
WoiiUl  not  the  morrow,  with  his  race,  have  pa.3t
To  cheerless  exile  in  some  wintry  waste  ?

Thus  has  he  in  his  Poems  represented  the  multitude,
and  men  of  low  minds,  as  discoursing  about  him.
But,  though  he  rejected  absolute  power,  he  pro-
ceeded with  sufficient  spirit  in  the  administration  :

^^  Pittacus,  one  of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,  made  himself  master
of  Mitylene;  for  which  AIccEus:,  who  v/as  his  townsman  and  con-
temporary, and  a  friend  to  liberty,  satirised  him,  as  he  did  the  other
tyrants.  PittacuS  disregarded  his  censures;  and  having  by  his  au-
thority quelled  the  seditions  of  his  citizens,  and  established  peace
and  harmony  among  tliera,  Voluntarily  ijuitted  his  power,  and  re-
stored his  country  to  it's  liberty.  (L.)  Forced  however,  in  his
old  age,  by  the  unanimous  suffrages  of  his  fellgw-citizens,  to  resume
the  hein.',  he  pronounced  the  nieinorable  maxim,  that  '  "\''irtue  is
not  without  her  incumbra:u"e.'  After  accomplishing  th.e  purpose,
for  which  he  had  baen  recused  to  his  high  post,  he  again  descended
into  the  vale  of  private  life,*


C3j$  SOLON.

he  made  no  concessions  in  belialf  of  tlie  powerful;
nor,  in  tlie  framinr^  of  his  hiws,  did  he  indulg-e  the
hunionr  of  his  constituents.  Where  the  existing
estabhshment  was  tolerable,  he  neither  applied  reme-
dies, nor  nsed  tlie  incision-knife ;  lest  he  should
throw  the  whole  into  disorder,  and  find  himself  after-
ward incapable  of  settling  or  composing  it  in  the
temperature  which  he  could  wish.  tJ^u!l21']x_"^^'''^"
duced  such  alterations,  as  he  trusted  he  could  either
by  persuasion  or  authority  enforce^  making  (as  he
says)  "  force  and  right  conspire.  Hence  it  wa<,
that  when  subsequently  questioned,  ^^  Whether  or
"  not  he  had  provided  the  best  laws  for  the  Athe-
"  nians  r'*  he  replied,  "  The  best,  which  they  were
"  capable  of  receiving."  And  as  the  moderns  ob-
serve, that  the  Athenians  used  to  qualify  the  harsh-
ness of  things  by  giving  them  softer  and  politer
names,  calling  whores  '  unstresses,*  tributes  '  contri-
butions, '  garrisons  '  guards,'  and  prisons  '  castles  ^  ;  *
so  Solon  seems  to  liave  beeu_the_firstj  who  distin-
guished the  cancelling  of  debts  by  the  name  of  '  a
discharge.'  For  this  was  the  iirst  of  his  public  acts,
that  debts  should  be  forgiven,  and  that  no  man  for
the  future  should  take  the  bodv  of  his  debtor  for
security.  Though,  according  to  Androtion  and
some  others,  it  was  not  by  cancelling  the  debts,  but
by  moderating  the  interest,  tiiat  the  poor  were
relieved  ;  they  yet  thought  themselves  so  happy  in
it,  that  they  gave  the  name  of'  discharge'  to  this  act
of  humanity,  as  w^ell  as  to  the  enlarging  of  measures
and  the  value  of  money,  by  which  it  was  accompa-
nied. I  For  he  ordered  the  mina,  which  before  passed
])ut  for  seventy-three  dracinnas,  to  go  for  a  hun-
dred :  so  that,  as  they  paid  the  same  in  value  but
much  less  in  weight,  those  who  had  great  sums  (o
advance  were  relieved,  while  those  who  received
them  were  no  losers.  ,

^°  Who  does  not  recollect  the  courtly  periphrasis  of  the  Bastilc
used  by  Mr.  Barke — *  the  king's  castle? '*


SOLON.  239

The  greater  part  of  writers  however  affirm,  that
it  was  the  abolition  of  past  securities  which  was
called  '  a  cUscliarge ;  '  and  with  these  the  Poems  of
.Solon  himself  agree.  For  in  them  he  values  himself
upon  having  taken  away  the  marks  of  morta:a£?C(l
land^',  whicii  before  were  almost  everywhere  setup,
and  made  free  such  fields  as  were  previously  boimd :
and  not  only  so,  but  of  such  citizens  as  were  seizable
by  their  creditors  for  debt,  som.e,  (lie  tells  u:C)  he  had''
brought  back  from  other  countries,  where  thev  had
wandered  so  long,  that  they  had  forgotten  tlie  Attic
^  dialect ;  and  others  he  had  set  at  liberty,  who  had
experienced  a  cruel  slavery  at  home.

This  affair  indeed  brought  upon  him  the  greatest
trouble,  which  he  had  yet  encountered  :  for  vvhen  he
undertook  the  annulling  of  debts,  and  was  medi-
tating a  suitable  speech  and  a  proper  method  of  in-
troducing the  business,  he  told  some  of  his  most
iutimate  friends  (Conon,  Clinias,  and  Hipponicns)
that  he  intended  only  to  abolish  the  debts,  and  not
to  meddle  with  the  lands.  These  friends  of  his,
hastening  to  make  their  advantage  of  the  secret  be-
fore the  decree  took  place,  borrov/ed  large  sums  of
the  rich,  and  purchased  estates  with  them.  Subse-
quently, when  the  decree  was  published,  they  kept  •
their  possessions,  without  paying  the  money  which
they  had  borrowed  ;  and  this  broijght  heavy  charges
and  reiiections  upon  Solon,  as  if  he  had  not  suffered
with  the  rest,  but  had  rather  concurred  with  his
friends  in  the  fraud.  This  charge  indeed  was  soon
removed,  by  his  being  the  first  to  comply  with  the
law,  and  remitting  a  debt  of  five  talents,'  which  he
had  placed  out  at  interest.  Others,  among  whom  h
Polyzelus  the  Rhodian,  say  it  was  fifteen.  Eh
friends,  hov/ever,  went  by  the  name  of  CJircoco-
pidie^\  or  '  debt-cutters,'  ever  afterward.

But  the  method,  which  he  adopted,  satisfied  iiei-

3'  The  Athenians  had  a  custom  of  fixing  up  billets,  to  show  that
houses  or  lands  were  mortgaged.

3'  This  is  an  obvious  pua  upon  the  name  Cccropidcv,  by  which


240  SOLON.

ther  the  indigent  nor  the  opulent.  The  latter  wcic
displeased  at  the  cancelling  of  their  bonds,  and  the
former  at  not  obtaining  a  division  of  lands :  upon
this  they  had  fixed  their  hopes,  and  they  complained
that  he  had  not,  like  L)  curgus,  made  all  the  citizens
equal  in  estate.  Ly curgus  however,  being  the
eleventh  from  Hercules  and  having  reigned  many
years  in  Laceda^mon,  had  acquired  great  authority,
interest,  and  connexions,  of  which  he  admirably
knew  how  to  avail  himself  in  setting  up  a  new  form
of  government.  Yet  even  he  was  obliged  to  have
recourse  to  force,  rather  than  to  persuasion  ;  and  had
an  eye  struck  out  in  the  dispute,  before  he  could
bring  it  to  a  lasting  settlement,  and  establish  such
an  union  and  equality,  as  left  neither  rich  nor  poor
in  the  city.  On  the  other  hand,  SoLon's  estate ^^  was
but  moderate,  not  superior  to  that  of  some  oiher
commoners ;  and  therefore  he  did  not  attempt  to
erect  a  commonwealth  like  that  of  Lycurgus,  con-
sidering it  as  out  of  his  power :  but  proceeded  so  far
only,  as  he  thought  he  could  be  supported  by  the
confidence,  which  the  people  had  in  his  probity  and
wisdom.

That  he  answered  not  the  expectations  of  the
generality,  but  ofi'endcd  them  by  failing  short,  ap-
pears from  these  verses  of  his :

Eyes,  which  once  hall'd  nic  sparkh'ng  at  the  view,
Those  eyes  with  cold  regard  behold  me  now.

And  yet,  he  says.

Who  with  such  power,  save  I,  coidd  have  allay'd
Their  waves'  l;>ad  roar,  and  not  have  sunk  dismay'd  ^'^  ?

the  Athenians  affected  to  call  themselves,  as  the  descendeuts  of
Cecrops,  their  first  king  :

Ast  ego  Cecropides —  (Juv.  viii.  46.)*

33  That  the  passage  in  the  original,  ^f,f/-»riy.c^  wi  kch  fjc>'.<roc,  must
l^fer  to  h'li,  forlune,  is  clear  from  the  account  above  given  by  Plu-
tarch of  his  extraction,  wliich  he  represents  as  on  the  father's  side
royal.  Aristotle  likewise  (Polit.  iv.  11.)  places  him  in  this  station,
and  adds  that  hence  usually  issue  the  best  legislators.*

^* /T<as/)  i\i}^7)  yxxx.  is  a  proverbial  expression,  which  v/ill  not

9


SOLON.  ,241

But  beiiii];:  soon  made  sensible  of  the  utilitv  of  the
decree,  they  laid  aside  their  complaints,  offered  a
])ublic  sacrifice,  which  they  called  Scisactliia  (or  '  the
sacrifice  of  t!ie  discharge'),  and  constituted  Solon
I^awgiver  and  Superintendent  of  tlie  Commonwealth;
committing  to  him  the  regulation  not  of  a  part
only,  but  of  the  whole — the  magistracies,  the  assem-
blies, the  courts  of  judicature,  and  the  senate  ;  and  t>
leaving  him  to  determine  the  qualification,  number,  |
and  time  of  meeting  for  them  all,  as  well  as  to  abro-
gate or  continue  the  former  constitutions  at  his  plea-
sure.

First  then,  he  repealed  the  laws  of  Draco  ^'\  ex-
cept those  conceruing  murther,  because  of  the
severity  of  their  punishments,  which  for  almost  all  ^
offences  were  capital :  even  those,  that  had  been  "'
convicted  of  idleness,  were  to  suffer  death  ;  and  such,
as  stole  only  a  few  apples  or  pot-herbs,  were  to  be
punished  in  the  same  manner  as  sacrilegious  persons

bear  a  literal  prose  translation,  much  less  a  poetical  one:  it  was  ne-
cessary therefore  to  give  a  new  turn  to  the  sentence,  only  keeping
the  Sense  in  view.

^^  Draco  was  Archon  in  the  second  (though  some  say,  in  the
last)  year  of  01,  xxxix.,  about  B.  C.  6'23.  Tiiough  the  name  of
this  great  man  occurs  frequently  in  history,  yet  we  no  where  find
so  much  as  ten  lines  tosjretlier  concernina:  him  and  his  institutions.
He  may  be  considered  as  the  first  legislator  of  the  Athenians ;  for
the  laws,  or  ratlier  precepts,  of  Triptolemus  were  very  few  ;  viz.
*  Honour  your  parents,'  '  Worship  the  gods,'  '  Hurt  not  animals.'
Draco  was  the  first  of  the  Greeks,  who  punished  adultery  %vith
death  ;  and  he  esteemed  nuu-ther  so  high  a  crime,  that  to  imprint  a
deep  abhorrence  of  it  upon  the  mind,  he  ordained  legal  process  to
be  carried  on  even  against  inanimate  things,  if  they  were  acciden-
tally the  cause  of  death.  But  beside  murther  and  adultery,  which
deserved  death,  he  made  a  number  of  smaller  offences  capital  ;  and
that  brought  almost  all  his  laws  into  disuse.  (A.  Geil.  xi.  18.)  Se£
uot.  (73.)  Their  extravagant  severity,  like  an  edge  too  finely
ground,  hindered  his  Thesmi,  as  he  called  them,  from  striking  deep.
Porphyry  (de  Abstin.)  has  preserved  one  of  them  concerning
divine  worship;  '  It  is  an  everlasting  law  in  Attica,  that  the  gods
are  to  be  worshipped,  and  the  heroes  also,  according  to  the  custom*
of  our  ancestors  ;  and  in  private  only  with  a  proper  address,  first-
fruits,  and  annual  libations.'

VOL.,  I.  R


242  SOLON.

and  iTiurtherers.  Hence  a  saving  of  Demadcs"'',  wlio
lived  long  afterward,  was  much  admired ;  "  that
"  Draco  wrote  his  laws  not  with  ink,  but  with  blood.''
And  he  himself  being  asked,  "  ^Vhy  he  made  death
"  the  punishment  for  most  offences  ?"  repHed,
"■  Small  ofiences  deserve  it,  and  tor  the  most  heinous
"  I  can  ftnd  no  o;reater."

In  tlie  next  place,  Solon  took  an  estimate  of  the
estates  of  the  citizens ;  intending  to  leave  the  great

"T*  offices  in  the  hands  of  the  rich,  but  to  give  the  rest
of  tlie  people  a  share  in  the  other  departments,
which  they  had   not  previously  possessed.     Those,

N  wlio  had  a  yearlv  income  of  five  hundred  measures
in  wet  and  dry  goods,  he  placed  in  the  first  rank,
and  called  Pcntacos'iowcdimnr'^  :  the  second  con-
sisted of  those  tliat  could  keep  a  horse,  or  whose  lands
produced  three  hundred  measures ;  these  were  of
the  equestrian  order,  and  denominated  Il'ippada
teloiintcs.  Those  of  the  third  class,  who  had  but
two  hundred  measures,  were  called  Zcugitce.  The
rest,  named  Thctcs^  were  not  admitted  to  any  office ;
they  had  only  a  right  to  appear,  and  give  their
votes  in  the  general  assembly  of  the  people.  This,
at  first  apparently  a  slight  privilege,  eventually
provfed  to  be  of  great  importance,  for  by  them  most
causes   came    at  last   to   be  decided ;  and  in  such

3^  An  Athenian  orator,  contcmporarj^  with  Fhihp  and  Alexander
the  Great.*

^7  The  Pcntncosiomedimni  paid  a  talent  to  tlie  public  treasur}" ;
the  Hippadn  telouiifeg  were  obliged,  as  the  phrase  signifies,  to  fiiid
a  horse,  and  to  serve  as  cavalry  in  the  wars;  the  ZeugkiC  were  so
called,  as  beings  a  tniddle  rani;  between  the  knights  and  tliose  of  the
lowest  order  (tor  rowers,  who  have  the  middle  bench  between  the
Thalaniites  at  the  prow  and  tiie  Thranites  at  the  stern  are  so  deno-
minated) ;  and  tiioiigli  the  Th'Hes,  who  paid  no  i;iij)0st,  had  barely'
a  vote  in  tlic  gefseral  assoinblics,  yet  that  (as  I'kitarch  observes)
eveiitually  proved  a  great  privilege,  most  causes  being  brought  by
.'ippeal  b"forc  the  pso))le.  (L.) — So  great  indeeil,  from  the  perni-
rioLis  intliience  of"  corrupt  dvuiagognes,  as  uUiaiatelv  (in  the  opi-
nion of"  Aristotle,  :Polit.  ii.  10.)  to  Ivave  reduced  Athens  uiid;;r  the
edious  despotism  oi' th"  mob.*


SOLOING  ^iS

■  tnatters,  as  were  under  the  cognizance  of  tbe  ma-
gistrates, there  lay  an  appeal  to  the  'people.  Besides,
he  is  said  purposely  to  have  drawn  up  his  laws  in  an
obscure  and  ambiguous  manner,  in  order  to  enlarge
the  authority  of  the  popular  tribunal.  For,  as  dispu-
tants could  not  adjust  their  differences  by  the  letter
of  the  law,  they  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to
jiving  judges;  I  mean  the  whole  body  of  citizens,
who  therefore  had  all  controversies  brought  before
them,  and  were  in  a  manner  superior  to  the  laws.
Of  this  equality  he  himself  takes  notice,  in  the  fol-
lowinc^  words :

By  me  the  people  their  full  rights  maintain'tl
Ilniujured,  unoppress'd  :  Tlie  great  restrain'd
From  lawless  force,  from  rnpine's  fang  the  poor,
i  made  the  mighty  just,  the  weak  secure.

Desirous  yet  fu'thcr  to  strengthen  the  common
people,  he  empowered  any  man  whatever  to  enter  j  ^
an  action  in  behalf  of  one  who  had  been  injured.
If  a  person  had  been  assaulted,  or  suffered  damage
or  violence,  any  one  that  was  able  and  wilhng  to  do
it  might  prosecute  the  offender.  Thus  the  lawgiver
wisely  accustomed  the  citizens,  as  members  of  the
same  body,  to  feel  and  to  resent  one  another's  in-
juries. And  we  are  told  of  a  saying  of  his,  agree-
able to  this  law  :  Eeina;  asked,  "  What  citv  was  best
modelled  ?"  he  answered,  "  That,  where  those
wdio  are  not  injured,  are  as  ready  to  prosecute
♦'  and  punish  offenders,  as  those  Vvho  are."

Yvlien  these  points  were  adjusted,  he  established    i
the  council  of  the  Areopagus  %  v-'hich  was  to  con-    \

33  The  court  of  the  Areopagus,  though  settled  long  befin-e,  iiad
lost  much  of  it's  power  by  Draco's  preferring  the  Ephette.  la
ancicRt  times,  and  till  Solon  became  K;gis]ator,  it  consisted  of  sucii
persons  a*,  were  most  conspicuous  in  the  state  for  their  wealth,
power,  and  probity;  but  Solon  made  it  a  rule,  that  those  only
should  have  a  seat  in  it,  who  had  borne  the  office  of  Archon.  Tins
produced  the  eilvct  which  he  designed  ;  it  raised  high  the  repu-
tation of  the  Areopagites,  and  rendered  their  decrees  so  venerable,

SX         AW


I


24*  SOLON.

sist  of  such  as  had  borne  the  office  of  Archon^^,  and
he  himself  was  one  of  the  number.  But  observing
that  the  people,  now  discharged  from  their  debts,
grew  insolent  and  imperious,  he  proceeded  to  con-
stitute another  council  or  senate,  of  Four  Hundred  •"*
(a  hundred  out  of  each  tribe),  by  wlioni  all  aithirs
were  to  be  previously  considered  ;  and  ordered  that
no  matter,  without  their  approbation,  shouhl  be
laid   before    the   general   assembly.     In   the   mean

that  none  contested  or  repined  at  them  through  a  long  course  of
aires.

<9  After  the  extinction  of  the  race  of  the  Medontidac,  the  Athe-
nians made  the  office  of  Archon  annual;  and,  instead  of  one,  created
nine  magistrates  of  that  name.  By  t!ie  latter  expedient,  they
provided  against  the  too  great  power  of  a  single  person,  jis  by  the
former  they  took  away  all  apprehension  of  tiie  Archon's  usurping
the  sovereignty.  In  one  word,  they  attained  now  what  the}'  had
long  sought,  the  rendering  of  their  supreme  magistrates  dependent
on  tlie  people.  This  remarkable  a;ra  oi'  the  completion  of  the
Atlieuian  democracy  was  OI.  xxiv.  1.,  B.  C.  684-.  That  these  ma-
gistrates might  however  retain  sufficient  authority  and  dignity,  they
had  high  titles  and  honours  annexed  to  their  offices.  Tlie  first  uas
ftiled  by  wa}'  of  eminence  The  Arclinn,  and  Kpoiiijmits,  and  by  his
name  tlie  year  was  distinguished.  Tiie  second  was  called  Basileus^
.-or  '  King;'  for  they  chose  to  have  that  title  regarded  as  a  se-
condary one:  this  officer  had  the  care  of  religion.  The  thir,l  bore
the  name  of  Po/emnrc/ius,  for  war  was  his  particular  province.
The  otiier  six  had  the  title  of  Tlusmothetce^  and  were  considered
as  the  guardians  of  their  laws:  (L.)  having  the  charge  of  pre-
serving and  explaining  them,  of  reconciling  their  occasional  con-
tradictions, and  of  preventing  them  from  falling  into  disuse.  Prior
to  the  election  of  all  these  magistrates,  they  underwent  a  very  severe
scrutiny  with  regard  to  their  extraction  (which,  for  the  three  pre-
ceding generations  was  to  be  strictly  on  both  sides  Athenian)  their
p[ety  toward  the  gods,  their  parents,  and  tlicir  country;  their
fortune,  Sec.  The  magistracy  itself  continued  till  the  time  of  the
emperor  (iallienus.*.  ...

•♦°  The  number  of  tribes  was  raised  by  Callisthenes  to  ten,  after
he  had  driven  out  the  Pisistratidrv,  and  this  senate  increased  to  live
hundred,  fifty  f:)eing  chosfin  out  of  each  tribe.  Toward  the  close
of  the  year  the  president  of  each  tribe  gave  in  a  list  of  candidates,
put  of  wiiom  the  senators  were  elected  by  lot.  The  senators  then
appointed  the.  officers,  called  Prytanes.  These,  while  the  senate
con^i^ted  .of  five  hundred,  v/ere  fifty  in  number ;  ten  of"  whom,
«-!th  the  name  of  Proedri,  for  the  avoiding  of  confusion,  presided
1  week;  out  of  them  was  chosen  an  Epistates,  or  '  nrebident,*
whose  oifice  lasted  but  a  single  day.


solon;  245

time,  the  high  court  of  t!ie  Areopagus  wcre-to  be  the
inspectors   and   guardians    of   the   laws.     Thus   he
supposed  the  common wealtli,  secured  by  two  coun-
cils, as  by  two   anchors,  would  be  less  liable  to  be
sh-aken  by  tinnults,  and  the  people  would  become
more  orderly  and  peaceable.     Most  writers,  as  we
have  o[)served,   affirm  that  the  council  of  the  Areo-
pagus was  of  Solon's  appointing  ;  and  in  support  of
their  assertion,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  Draco  has
made  no  mention  of  the  Areopagites,  but  in  capital
causes  constantly  addresses  himself  to  the  Ephetae :
yet  the  eighth  law  of  Solon's  thirteenth  table  ex-
jpressly  enacts,  that   "  Whoever  were  declared   in-
famous, before  Solon's  Archonship,   should  be   re-
j^tored  in  honour ;  except  such  as  having  been  con-
clcmned  in  the  Areopagus,  or  by  the  EphetJE,  or  by
the  kings  in  the  Prytaneum,  for  murther  or  robbery
/or  having  attempted  to  usurp  the  government,  had
fled  their  country  before  the  law  was  made."     I'his
then  shows,  on  the  contrary,  that  before  Solon  was
chief  magistrate  and  delivered  his  laws,  the  council
of  the   Areopagus   was  in    being.     For  who  could
have  been  condemned  in   the  Areopagus  before  So-
lon's time,  if  he  had  been  the  first  that  erected  it
i^ito  a  court  of  judicature"  ?     Unless  perhaps  there
be  some  obscurity  or  deficiency  in  tlie  text,  and  the
meaning  be,  that  '  such  as  have  been  convicted  of
crimes  uoiv  cognizable  before  the   Areopagites,  the
^Cphetaj*',  and  the  Prytanes,  sliall  continue  infamous,

*'  It  appears  however,  both  indirectly  from  the  testimony  of
Aristotle,'  wlio  affirms  (Poiit.  ii.  3  0.)  tliMt  Soion  niadeno  change
in  the  existing  institutions,  and  directly  from  that  of  Pausanias
(iv.  5.)  who  rliates  a  story  of  one  Polichares,  as  charged  with
murther  before  that  court  one  hundred  and  forty-one  years  before
rhe  time'of  Solon,  that  he  only  revived  it's  authority.  (Acad.des
Jnscript.  vii.  177.)  It  took  cognisance  of  murther,  of  the  crimes
which  fall  under  our  Black  Act,  of  arson,  of  poisoning,  and  of
every  thing  relating  to  religion,  wiTich  last  article  brought  Sov-rateg
under  it's  animadversion."*

■♦^  The  Ephetfc  were  first  appointed  in  the  reign  of  Demophon,
theson  of  Theseus,  for  tlie  trying  of  wilful  murthers  and  cases  of
manslaughter.     They  originally  consisted  of  fifty  Athenians,  and  as


2t5  SOLOX.


r  and  surprisin*]^  of  his  otlicr  laws     ,
res  the  man  iniiimous,  that  stands    \
dition  '".     He  would  not  have  iis    [


while  all  othei*?;  are  restored.'     But  this  I  submit  to
the  judgement  of  the  reader.

The  most  peculiar  and  surprisin*]^  of  his  other  laws
is  that,  which  declare
neuter  in  time  of  sedi
intlifierent,  it  seems,  and  insensible  to  the  fate  of
the  public,  when  our  own  concerns  are  in  safety ;
nor  backward,  when  we  ourselves  are  in  iicalth,  to
sympathise  with  the  distempers  and  distresses  of  our
country.  He  would  have  us  espouse  the  better  and
the  juster  cause,  and  hazard  every  thing  in  it's  de-
fence, rather  than  wait  in  safety  to  see  to  which  side
the  victory  will  incline.  That  law  too  appears  quite
ridiculous  and  absurd,  which  permits  a  rich  heiress,
whose  husband  happens  to  be  impotent,  to  console
herself  with  his  nearest  relations.     Yet  some  rcpre-

many  Arglves;  but  Draco  excluded  tlie  Argivcs,  and  ordered  that
it  should  be  composed  of  fifty-one  of  the  riiost  rct;pectablc  Athe-
nians, who  were  all  to  be  above  fifty  (as  Pollux,  but  as  Suidas  states,
eighty)  years  of  age.  He  also  fixed  their  authority  above  that  of
the  Arenpagites ;  but  Solon  brouglit  tiiem  under  that  court,  and
limited  their  jurisdiction.

*^  Aulus  Gellius,  who  has  preserved  tlie  very  words  of  this  law,
adds,  that  one  who  so  stood  neuter  should  lose  his  houses,  his
country,  and  his  estate,  and  be  sent  into  exile.  (Noct.  Att.  ii.  12.)

Plutarch,  in  another  place,  condemns  this  law,  but  Gellius
highly  connnends  it ;  because  the  wise  ^md  just,  as  well  as  the
envious  and  wicked,  being  obliged  to  choose  some  side,  matters
were  easily  accommodated;  whereas,  if  the  latter  only  (as  is  gene-
rally the  case  with  other  cities)  had  the  man:!geme'.it  o^  factions,
they  would  for  private  reasons  be  continually  kept  up,  to  the  great
hurt,  if  not  utter  ruin  of  the  state.  (L.)  Montesquieu  has  a  pas-
sage to  tliis  purport  (Espr.  des  Loix  xxix.  3.)  '  La  hi  de  Solon,
qui  declaroit  inf,!mes  totis  ccux  qui,  dans  une  sedition,  7ie  praidroient
aucun  patii,  a  pane  bien  extraordinaire.  Mais  il  Jaut  /aire  atten-
tion aux  circonstances,  dans  lesquelLcs  la  Grece  se  trouvoit  pour  lors.
Eile  etoit partaoee  en  de  tres-petits  etnts ;  il  etoit  H  craindre  que,
dans  une  r^publique  iravaillec  par  des  dissensions  civiles,  les  gens  les
plus  prudens  ne  se  misseiit  ii  couvert,  et  que  par-la  les  chases  ne  fas-
sent  porte.es  a  I'cxtrcme.  Dans  les  seditions,  qui  arrivoient  dans  ces
petits  etats,  le  gros  de  la  cite  eiitroit  daus  la  qucrelle  on  la  faisoit. —
Dans  ce  cas,  il  est  naturel  de  rappelcr  les  scditieux  au  siros  des
citoyens,  von  pas  les  pros  de  ciloyens  aux  seditieux. — C'cst  ainsi,  que
la  fermentatinn  d' une  liqueur  peut  etre  arretee  par  une  seide  goute.
4' une  autre.'*


SOLON.  2i7

sent  it  as  very  properly  levelled  against  those  who,
conscious  of  their  own  disability,  match  v/ith  heir-
esses for  the  sake  of  their  portions,  and  under  colour
of  law  do  violence  to  nature.  For,  when  they  know
that  such  heiresses  may  make  choice  of  others  to
receive  their  favours,  they  will  either  decline  those
matches,  or  if  they  do  so  marry,  they  must  endure
the  shame  of  their  avarice  and  dishonesty.  And  the
heiress  is  properly  authorised  to  choose  not  at  large,
but  only  among  her  husband's  relations,  that  the
child  which  is  born  may  at  least  belong  to  his  kin-
dred and  family.  Agreeable  to  this  is  the  direction,
that  the  bride  and  bridcgioom  should  be  shut  up
together,  and  eat  of  the  same  quince '^^;  and  that
the  husband  of  an  heiress  should  approach  her  at
least  three  times  in  a  month.  For,  though  they
may  happen  not  to  have  children,  yet  it  is  a  mark
of  honour  and  regard  due  from  a  man  to  the  chas-
tity of  his  wife  :  it  removes  many  uneasinesses,  and
prevents  differences  from  proceeding  to  an  absolute
breach.

In  all  other  marriages,  he  ordered  that  no  dowTies
should  be  ffiven  :  the  bride  was  to  brine-  with  her
only  three  suits  of  clothes,  and  some  household-
stuff  of  small  value  "'\  For  he  wished  marriages  to
be  made  without  mercenary  or  venal  views^  and
would  have  that  union  cemented  by  the  endearment
of  children,  and  every  other  instance  of  love  and
friendship.    Nay,  Dionysius  himself,  when  his  mother

4-*  The  eating  of  the  quince,  which  was  not  peculiar  to  an  heiress
and  her  husband  (for  all  new-married  people  ate  it)  implied,  that
their  discourses  ought  to  be  pleasant  to  each  other,  that  fruit  mak-
ing the  breath  sweet.  (L.)  M.  Dacier,  however,  assigns  to  this
ceremony  a  different  meaning.  According  to  him,  it  implied  that
they  should  watch  over  each  other's  safety,  as  the  quince  (it  was
vulgarly  thought)  afforded  an  excellent  antidote  against  poisons.
It  was  a  fruit  in  high  esteem  among  the  ancients  on  many  accounts,
as  appears  from  Plin.  H.  N.  xv.  11.,  xxiii.  6.*

*^  The  bride  brought  with  her  an  earthen  pan,  called  ph r?!gcfeon,
in  which  barley  was  parched;  to  signify  that  she  undertook  the
business  of  the  house,  and  would  do  her  part  toward  providing  for
the  family.

9


21S  SOLON.

desired  to  be  married  to  a  young  Syracusan,  told  her ;
*'  He  had  indeed  by  his  tyranny  violated  the  laws  of
"  his  country,  but  he  could  not  violate  those  of
*^  nature,  by  countenancing  so  disproportionate  a
"  match."  And,  surely,  such  disorders  should  not
be  tolerated  in  any  state ;  nor  those  marriages  over-
looked where  tliere  is  no  equality  of  years,  or  induce-
ment of  love,  or  probability  that  the  end  of  marriage
will  be  answered.  So  that  to  an  old  man,  who
espouses  a  young  woman,  some  prudent  magistrate
or  lawgiver  might  express  himself  in  the  words  ad-
dressed to  Philoctetes  '*° ;

Poor  soul !  how  fit  art  thou  to  marry !

And  if  he  found  a  young  man  in  the  house  of  a
rich  old  woman,  like  a  partridge,  growing  plump
from  his  private  services,  he  would  remove  him  to
some  young  virgin  who  wanted  a  husband.  But
enougli  of  this.

That  law  of  Solon  is  also  justly  com.mended,
which  forbids  men  to  speak  ill  of  the  dead^^  For
piety  requires  us  to  consider  tiie  deceased  as  sacred  ;
justice  calls  upon  us  to  spare  tliose,  who  are  no
longer  in  being ;  and  good  policy,  to  pievent  the
perpetuating  of  hatred.  He  forbade  hi.s  people  also
to  revile  the  living  in  a  temple,  in  a  court  of  justice,
in  the  great  assembly  of  the  people,  or  at  the  public
games.  He,  who  ofiended  in  this  respect,  was  to
pay  three  drachmas  to  the  person  injured,  and  two
to  the  public.     Never  to  restrain  anger  is,  indeed,  a

'^''  Philoctetes,  the  friend  and  companion  of  Hcsculcs,  upon  his
death  succeeded  to  his  arrows,  vvliich  Iiad  been  dipped  in  the  blood
of  the  H3dra.  One  of  thein  accidentally  falling  upon  his  foot,  the
wound  was  so  offensive,  that  the  Greeks  were  obliged  on  their  way
to  Troy  to  leave  him,  in  excessive  agoiiy,  at  Leninos.  As  without
those  fatal  arrows,  however,  that  city  could  not  be  taken,  a  depu-
tation ^v■as  sent  back  to  him ;  and  upon  this  circumstance  Sopho-
cles has  founded  a  tragedy,  which  is  still  extant.*

"^  Even  when  injured  by  their  children  (Demosth.  adv.  Lept.),
v.liich  was  carrying  the  prohibition  to  it's  utmost  extent.*


SOLON.  24U

proof  of  want  of  breeding,  or  of  infirmity  ;  and  always
to  guard  against  it  is  very  difficult,  and  to  some
persons  im})03sii)]e.  Now,  wliat  is  enjoined  by  law
should  be  practicable,  if  the  legislator  desires  to
punish  a  few  to  some  good  purposii,  and  not  many
to  no  purpose  at  all.

His  law  concerning  wills  has  likewise  it's  merit.
For,  before  his  time,  the  Athenians  were  not  allowed
to  dis])Ose  of  their  estates  by  will  ;  the  houses  and
other  substance  of  the  deceased  remaining  among
liis  relations.  But  he  permitted  any  one,  that  had
not  children  '*^,  to  leave  his  possessions  to  whom  he
pleased ;  thus  preferring  the  tie  of  friendship  to
tliat  of  kindred,  and  choice  to  necessity,  he  gave
every  man  the  full  and  free  disposal  of  his  own.  Yet
he  did  not  allow  all  kinds  of  legacies,  but  those  only
which  were  not  extorted  by  phrensy  (the  conse-
quence of  disease,  or  of  poison),  by  imprisonment,
by.  violence,  or  by  the  persuasions  of  a  wile.  For
he  considered  inducements,  th.at  operated  against
reason,  as  no  better  than  force:  to  be  deceived
was,  with  him,  the  same  thing  as  to  be  compelled  ;
and  he  looked  upon  pleasure  to  be  as  great  a  per-
verter  as  pain  '^'^

lie  regulated,  moreover,  the  journeys  of  women,

48  Lerritimate  so7is,  as  Demosthenes  states.  And  this  M.  Dacier
properly  blames  as  unjust  towavd  daughters,  and  by  tolerating  the
concentration  of  many  distinct  properties  in  one  individual,  preju-
dicn!  to  the  state.  But  the  Athenian  orators  justify  it,  from  it's
tendency  to  promote  kindness  amon^  rir-lations;  and  especially  as
(according  to  Pftit,  Leg.  Att.)  the  sucee-sion  to  an  inheritance
involved  adoption  iiito  the  family  of  the  testator,  Plutarch,  in  his
Lives  of  Agis  and  Cleomenes,  relates  that  a  similar  law  <  v.ithout,
however,  tlie  above  exception)  was  enacted  at  Sparta,  in  conse-
quence of  a  quarrel  between  one  of  the  Ephori  and  his  son  ;  and
adds  that,  by  it's  pernicious  effects  upon  the  radical  equality  of
that  state,  it  completely  sapped  tlie  surest  foundation  of  their
whole  polity.^

-'^  He  like«  ise  ordained,  that  adopted  persons  sliould  make  no
will,  but  as  soon  as  they  had  children  lawfully  begotten,  tliey  were
at  liberty  to  return  into  the  Family  wl>ence  they  had  been  ad(5pted  ;
or,  if  they  continu(>d  childless,  the  estates  revc'ited  to  tl)e  reh.tion^
of  the  adopters.     (Demoeth.  in  Lcpt.)

12


?50  SOLON.

their  mournings,  and  their  sacrifices,  and  endea-
voured to  keep  tbcjn  fiee  from  all  disorder  and
excess.  They  were  not  to  go  out  of  town  with  more
than  three  habits  :  the  provisions,  which  they  carried
witli  them,  were  not  to  exceed  the  value  of  an
obohis  :  their  basket  was  not  to  be  above  a  cubit
high  ;  and  they  were  not  to  travel  in  the  night
except  in  a  carriage,  with  a  torch  before  them  ^".
At  funerals  tliey  were  forbidden  to  tear  themselves  ''^,
and  no  hired  mourner  was  to  utter  Inmentable  notes,
or  to  act  any  tiling  else  which  tended  to  excite  sor-
row. They  were  not  permitted  to  sacrifice  upon
those  occasions,  or  to  bury  more  than  tluce  garments
with  the  body,  or  to  visit  any  tombs,  except  at  the
time  of  interment,  beside  those  of  their  own  family^-.
Most  of  these  things  are  likewise  forbidden  by  our
laws,  with  the  addition  of  this  circumstance,  that
those  who  thus  offend  are  fined  by  the  censors  of  the
women,  as  giving  way  to  weak  passions  and  childish
sorrow.

As  the  city  was  filled  with  persons  who  assembled
from  all  parts,  on  account  of  the  great  security  in
which  the  inhabitants  of  Attica  lived,  Solon  observ-
ing farther  that  the  country  was  poor  and  barren,

5°  To  prevent  their  committing  any  crime,  under  the  conceal-
ment of  darkness.*

5*  Demosthenes  (in  Timocr.)  recites  Solon's  directions  with
regard  to  funerals  as  follows :  '  Let  the  dead  bodies  be  laid  out  in
the  house,  accordingly  as  the  deceased  gave  order,  and  the  day
following  before  sun-rise  carried  forth.  While  the  body  is  on  the
way  to  the  grave,  let  the  men  go  before,  and  the  women  follow.
It  slvall  not  be  lawful  for  any  woman  to  enter  upon  the  goods  of  the
dead,  and  to  follow  the  body  to  the  grave  under  threescore  years
of  age,  except  such  as  are  within  the  degree  of  cousins.'  (L.)  This
rt'gulation  was  most  probably  made,  from  what  has  been  above
stated,  upon  the  suggestion  of  Epimenides ;  as  he  is  there  said
to  have  given  Solon  'considerable  assistance.'  It  was  afterward
adopted  by  the  compilers  of  the  Twelve  Tables  for  the  use  of
Rome.*

^^  It  was  considered  as  an  act  of  piety,  to  pay  freq,uent  visits  to
the  tombs  of  relations;  but  to  visit  those  of  strangers,  subsequently
to  their  interment,  was  supposed  to  involve  the  saiirilegious  desiga
of  stealing  their  bones  for  superstitious  purposes.*


SOLON.  251

and  that  merchants  who  traflic  by  sea  seldom  import
their   goods    where   they    can    receive    nothing   in
exchange,  turned    the   attention  of  the  citizens  to
manufactures.      For    this  purpose  he  made  a  laWj
tiiat  no  son  should  be  obliged  to  maintain  a  father,
who  had  not  taug^ht  him  a  trad-e^^     As  for   Lycur-
gus,  wliose  city  was  clear  of  strangers,  and  whose
country  (according  to  Euripides)  was  sulHcient  for
twice  it's  number  of  inhabitants  ;  where  there   was
moreover  a  multitude  of  Kelots,  not  only  to  be  kept
constantly  employed,  but  to  be  humbled  and  worn
out  by  servitude  ;  it  was  right  for  him  to  emancipate
the  citizens  fiora  laborious  and  mechanic  arts,  and
to  employ  them  in  arms,  as  the  only  art  fit  for  them
to  learn  and  to  exercise.  k^Bnt  Solon,  rather  adapting
his  lavv's  to  the  state  of  his  country  than  his  country
to  his  laws,  and  perceiving  that   the  soil  of  Attica,
which    hardly  rewarded   the   husbandman's  labour,
was  far  from   being  capable   of  maintaining  a  lazy
multitude,  ordered  trades  to  be   accounted  honour-
able, and  directed  the  council  of  the  Areopagus  to
examine  into  every  man's  means  of  subsisting,  and
to  chastise  the  idle.

That  law,  however,  was  more  rigid,  which  (as
Heraclides  of  Pontus  informs  us)  excused  bastards
from  relievin"'  their  fathers.  Yet  the  man  who
disregards  so  honourable  a  state  as  that  of  marriage,
does  not  take  a  woman  for  the  sake  of  children,  but
merely  to  indulge  his  appetite.  He  has,  therefore,
his  reward  ;  and  there  remains  no  pretence  for  him

^5  He,  who  was  tiivice  convicted  of  idleness,  was  to  be  declared
*  infamous.'  Draco  had  before,  according  to  most  writers,  made  a
single  conviction  capital;  but  this  punishment  Solon  rightly  deemed
excessive,  and  commuted  it  for  a  hundred  drachmas.  Herodotus
vii.,  Diod.  Sic.  i.,  and  Val.  Max.  ii.  6.  agree,  that  a  law  of  this
kind  prevailed  in  Egypt.  It  is  probable  therefore  thut  Sulon,  who
was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  learning  of  that  nation,  bor-,
rowed  it  from  them.  (L.)  Diphilus  >  quoted  by  Athenaeus,  vi.  S.)
says  that  a  law  nearly  similar  prevailed  at  Corinth,  '  by  which  any-
one, who  without  visible  resources  lived  in  splendour,  was  con-
signed to  the  executioner,  as  necessarily  indebted  for  the  means  oi^
supporting  his  prodigality  to  secret  guilt.'*


252  SOLON.

to  upbraid  those  children,  M'hosc  very  birth  he  has
made  tJicir  reproach.

In  truth,  his  laws  concerning  women   in  general
appear  very  absurd.     For  he  permitted  any  one  to
kill  an  adulterer- taken  in  the  llict '^  ;  but,  if  a  man
committed  a  rape  upon  a  free  woman,  he  was  only
to  be  lined  a  hundred  drachmas ;  and,  if  he  gained  his
purpose  by  ])ersaasion,  twenty :  with  the  exce})tion
liov.'cver   of  erostitntes,   because   they    have    their
price.     Neither    would  he   allow   a    daughter   or  a
sister  to  be  sold,  unless  she  were  taken  in  an  act  of
di>]u>notu'   before    marriage.      Now   to  pu.nish    the
same  fault  sometimes  in  a  severe  and  rigorous  man-
ner, and  sometimes  lightly  and  as  it  vrere  in  sport
■with  a  trivial  line,  is  not  agreeable  to  reason  ;  unless
perhaps  the  scarcity  of  money  in  Athens,    at  that
time,  m.ade  a  pecuniary  mulct  a  heavy  one.     And
indeed,  in  the  valuation  of  things  for  the  sacrifice,  a
sheep  and  a  medimnus  of  corn  were  reckoned  each
at  a  drachma  only.     To  the  victor  in   the   Isthmian
games,  he  appointed  a  reward  of  a  hundred  drachmas;
and  to  the  victor  in   the   Olympic,  five  hundred  '\'
He,  that  caught  a  he-wolf,  was  to  have  five  drachmas ;
he,  who  took  a  she-wolf,  one :  and  the  former  sum
(as  Demetrius  Thalereus  asserts)  was  the  value  of  an
ox,  the  latter  of  a  sheep.     Though  the  prices,  which
he   fixes   in  his  sixteenth  table    for  select  victims,
were  probably  much  higher  than  the  common,  yet
compared  with  the  present,   they  are  small.     The
Athenians   of  old   were  great  enemies  to   wolves,

^*  No  adulteress  was  to  adorn  herself,  or  to  assist  at  the  public
sacrifices ;  and  whenever  she  did,  he  gave  liberty  to  anj'^  one  to
tear  her  clothes  ofFher  back,  and  beat  her  into  the  bargain,  (L.) — •
onb'  taking  care  not  to  kill  her,  or  to  put  out  her  eyes,  u^ilsch.  adv.
Timarch.)'^

^^  The  age  of  heroism,  when  a  branch  of  the  pahn  or  the  olive
was  reckoned  an  ample  re^vard  for  the  most  vigorous  and  success-
ful exertions,  was  now  gone.*  Solon  diminished  however  the
rewards  bestowed  upon  wrestlers,  esteeming  such  gratuities  useless,
and  even  dangerous ;  as  they  tended  to  encourage  idleness,  by
indu'cing  men  to  waste  that  time  in  exercises,  which  ought  to  he
employed  in  providing  for  their-  families.'  (L.)


SOLON.  ,'J53

because  their  country  was  better  for. pasture  than
ibr  tiJhige  :  and  some  say  their  tribes  had  not  tlieir
names  from  the  sons  of  Ion '^  but  from  the  diliereiit
occupations  which  tiiey  followed  ;  the  soldiers  being
called  IJoplita^^  the  artificers  E)-gades,.  and  of  the
other  two,  the  husbandmen  2clcontes,  and  tiie
graziers  jT^gicorcs.

As  Attica  was  not  supplied  with  water  from  peren-
nial rivers,  lakes,  or  springs  '',  but  chiefiyfrom  wells
dug  ibr  that  purpose,  he  made  a  law  that  where
there  was  a  pui)lic  well,  all  within  the  distance  of  a  4^
Hippicon  or  four  furlongs  should  make  use  of  it ;  but,
where  the  distance  was  greater,  they  were  to  pro-
vide a  well  of  their  own.  And  if  thev  du»'  ten  fa-
thoms  deep  in  their  own  ground,  and  could  find  no
water,  thev  had  liberty  to  fill  a  vessel  of  six  gallons
twice  a  day  at  their  neighbours'  Vvell.  Thus  he
tFought  it  proper  to  assist  persons  in  real  necessity^
but  not  to  encourage  idleness.  His  regulations,  with
respect  to  the  planting  of  trees,  were  also  very  judi-
cious. He,  who  planted  any  tree  in  his  field,  was
to  plant  it  at  least  five  feet  from  his  neighbour'^
ground  ;  and,  if  it  vvere  a  fig-tree  or  an  olive,  nine  :
tor  these  extend  their  roots  farther  than  others,  and
tlieir  neighbourhood  is  prejudicial  to  some  trees,  not
only  as  they  take  away  the  nourishment,  but  as  their
efliuvia  is  noxious.  He,  who  wished  to  dig  a  pit  or
a  ditch,  was  to   dig  it  as  far  from    another  man's

■'■^  As  Herodotus  v.  66.,  and  Euripides  (Ion  1576.)  :>fnrm,  and
after  them  Pollux,  tjnd  Steph.  Byzant.  voc.  AiyiMiac,.  Wt:iat,  if
this  proffssional  classification  of  the  Athenians  preceded  the  birtji
of  Ion's  children  ;  and  that  prince,  as  a  coiripliuient  to  the  tribes,
bestowed  their  names  upon  his  four  sons ?

^.I.  Ricard  has  a  long  note  from  M,  Larcher,  the  trrnslator  of
Herodotus,  upon  the  meaning  of  these  names ;  pa.-tiv  ularly  the
third,  which  Herodotvis  and  a  marble  of  Cyzicum  (a  colony  of
Athenian  extraction)  ^yrite  Gehontes.*

/^  Strabo  informs  us,  there  v.as  a  spring  of  fresh  water  near  the
Lyceum;  and  Plato  mentions  one  extremely  clear  and  cool,  in  a
manner  so  striking  as  to  be  quoted  by  Cicero  (de  Orat.  i,  7.)  :  Uut
the  soil  of  Attica  in  general  was  dry,  and  tlie  rivers  liissus  and
Eridanus  did  not  run  constantly.  (L.)  Even  the  Cephisus,_  which
had  often  the  force  of  a  torrent,  was  in  the  summer  (according  to
Strabo)  generally  dry.*


251-  SOLON.

ground,  as  it  was  deep  :  and,  if  any  one  would  raise
stocks  of  bees,  he  was  to  place  them  at  the  distance
of  three  hundrecl  feet  from  those  already  raised  by
Another.

Of  all  the  products  of  the  earth,  he  allowed  none
to  be  sold  to  strangers,  except  oil :  and  wlioever  pre-
sumcd  to  export  any  thing  else,  the  Archon  was
solemnly  to  declare  him  accursed,  or  himself  to  pay
a  hundred  drachmas  into  the  public  treasury.  This
law^  is  in  the  first  table.  And  therefore  what  some
affirm  is  not  absolutely  improbable,  that  the  expor-
tation of  %s  was  formei'ly  forbidden,  and  that  the
informer  against  the  delinquents  was  called  '  a  s)co-
phant-"'.'

He  likewise  enacted  a  law  for  the  reparation  of
damages  received  from  beasts.  A  dog,  that  had
bitten  a  man,  was  to  be  delivered  up  bound  to  a  log
of  four  cubits  long  ^'^ ;  an  agreeable  contrivance  for
security  against  such  an  animal.

But.  the  wisdom  of  the  law,  concerning  the  na-
turalising of  foreigners,  is  rather  dubious ;  because
it  forbids  the  freedom  of  the  city  to  be  granted  to
any,  but  such  as  are  for  ever  exiled  from  their  own
country,  or  transplant  themselves  to  Athens  with
their  whole  family,  for  the  sake  of  exercising  some
manual  trade.  This  (we  are  told)  he  did,  not  with
a  view^  to  exclude  strangers,  but  rather  to  invite  them
to  Athens,  upon  the  sure  hope  of  being  admitted
to  the  privilege  of  citizens  :  and  those,  he  imagined,
might  be  entirely  depended  upon  in  that  respect  %


^3  Literally  *  an  cxliibitcr  of  figs,'  as  thereby  substantiating  his
specific  ciiiiTge.  T!ie  name  was  afterward  more  extensively  applied,
and  is  now  associated  with  the  ideas  of  meanness,  servility,  and
calumny.*

^'•^  This,  and  several  other  of  Solon's  laws,  were  adopted  into
the  Twelve  Tables  of  Home.  The  llomans  A.  U.  C.  SOO  sent
deputies  to  Atliens,  to  make  selections  and  transcripts  from  tlie
laws  of  Greece,  in  order  to  form  thence  a  civil  code  for  their  own
state.

'^°  But  surely  in  no  other.  For  what  dependence  could  be  placed
upon  those,  v,  horn  either  tlieir  own  country  could  not  endure,  or
who  could  not:  endure  their  own  couiitrv  i*


i^OLON.  255


who  had  either  been  driven  from  their  native  country
by  necessity,  or  quitted  it  through  choice.

Pecuhar  to  Solon,  was  the  law  which  regulates  the
going  to  entertainments  made  at  the  public  .  charge,
hy  him  C'dlled  parasUcin^\  I^or  he  does  not  allow
the  same  person  to  go  thither  frequently,  and  he
imposes  a  penalty  upon  such  as  refuse  to  go  in  their
turns  ;  regarding  the  former  as  a  mark  of  epicurism,
and  the  latter  of  contempt  of  the  public.

The  whole  of  his  laws  w'ere  to  continue  in  force  for    '
a  hundred  years,  and  were  w^ritten  upon  wooden  ta-
bles, wdiich  might  be  turned  round  in  the  oblong    '
cases  that  contained  them.     Some  small  remains  of  \
them  are  preserved  in  the  Prytaneum  to  this  day.
They  were   called  ajrbcs,  as   Aristotle  informs  us ;
and    Cratinus,   the    comic  poet'^-,    thus    speaks    of
tliem :

By  Solon's,  and  by  Draco's  honour'd  name.
Whose  ci/rhcs  now  but  parcli  our  pulse -

Some  say,  those  tables  were  properly  called  cj/rhcs,
on  which  were  written  the  rules  for  religious  rites
and  sacrifices,  and  the  others  cLvoncs.  The  senate,
in  a.body,  bound  themselves  by  oath  to  establish  the
laws  of  Solon  ;  and  the  ThcsmoiJictce^  or  '  guardians
of  the  laws,*  severally  took  an  oath  in  a  particular
ibrrn,   by  the  stone   in    the  market-place,  that  for

^'  In  the  earl}'-  ages,  the  name  of  *  parasite'  (according  to  Athe-
naeus,  vi.  6.)  was  venerable,  for  it  properly  sigiiified  a  messmate
at  the  table  of  sacrifices.  There  v/as  in  Greece  a  college  of  peT-
sons  particularly  honoured  with  this  title,  whose  business  was  to
select  the  grain,  <S:c.  necessary  for  the  public  offerings,  viuch  like'
those  whom  the  Romans  called  Epuloncs,  a  religious  order  instituted
by  Numa.  Solon  ordained  that  every  tribe  should  ofter  a  sacrifice
once  a  month,  and  at  tlie  eud  of  the  sacrifice  make  a  public  entei'-
tainment,  at  v.hich  all  the  members  of  that  tribe  should  be  obligefl
to  assist  by  turns,  (L.)  or  denounced  and  cojiipelled  to  assign  rea-
sons for  their  absence.*

''^  •CtTr.tcrtiporary  wiih  Pericles,  and  about  150  years  posterior
to  Solon,  whose  laws  (it  v/ouldseem  from  the  subjoined  quotatfou)'
had  fallen,  in  the  course  of  a  century  and  a  half,  into  complete
neglect.*


4


2J6  SOLON.

every  law  whicli  tliey  broke,  they  would  eacli  dcdr-
cate  a  golden  statue  at  Delphi  of  the  same  weight
'vvith  hiuiselt'"^.

Observing  the  irregularity  of  the  months^',  and
that  the  moon  neitlier  rose  nor  set  at  the  same  time
with  tlie  sun,  as  it  often  liappcned  tiiat  in  the  same
day  she  overtook  and  passed  by  him,  he  ordered  that
day  to  be  calied  hoic  kai  iica  ('die  old,  and  the  new);
thinking,  that  the  part  of  it  which  elapsed  before  the
S  conjunction  belonged  to  the  old  month,  and  the  rest
to  the  new.  He  seems  therefore  to  have,  been  the
first  who  understood  the  verse  in  Homer,  mentioning
a  day,  in  Vvhich

The  old  month  ended,  and  the  new  began  ^j.

The    day  following   he   called  '  the  new   moon/

<55  Gold  at  this  time  was  so  scarce  in  Greece,  that  when  tlic
Spartans  were  ordered  by  the  oracle  to  gild  tiie  face  of  Apollo's
statue,  they  inquired  in  vain  for  gold  all  over  the  country,  and
v,ere  directed  by  the  Pytlioness  to  purchase  some  from  CrcEsus  king
of  Lydia.

^*  Solon  discovered  the  inaccuracy  cif  Thales'  theorem,  tliat  the
moon  performed  Iier  revolution  in  thirty  days,  and  found  that  the
true  time  was  twenty-nine  days  and  a  half  He  directed,  therefore,
that  each  of  the  twelve  -.nonths  should  be  accounted  twenty-nine
and  thirty  days  alternately.  Thus  a  lunar  year  was  formed  of  three
hundred  and  iifty-four  days  ;  and  to  reconcile  it  to  the  solar  one,  he
ordered  a  month  of  twenty-two  and  of  twenty-three  days  alternately
to  be  intercalated  every  two  years.  (See  the  Life  of  Xuma,
p.  193.,  not..  7:3.)  lie  likewise  engaged  the  Athenians  to  divide
their  months  into  three  parts,  stiled  the  beginning,  middle,  and
ending;  each  of  tiiese  consisted  of  ten  days,  when  the  month  w;is
thirty,  and  the  last  of  nine,  when  it  was  twenty-nine  days  long.
In  speaking  of  the  two  first  parts,  they  reckoned  according  to  the
usual  Older  of  numbers,  viz.  '  the  fn-st,  &c.  day  of  the  moon  be-
ginning;' '  the  first,  second,  etc. of  the  moon  middle;'  but  with  re-
f  pect  to  the  last  part  of  the  month,  they  reckoned  backward  ;  that  is,
iiistead  of  sayu^g  '  the  Hrst,  second,  i\c.  day  pf  the  moon  ending,'
they  said  the  tenth,  ninth,  \'c.  of  the  moon  ending.'  This  is  a
circumstance,  which  should  be  carefully  attended  to.

<'■  Odyss.  xiv.  ICri.  T'.riz  day  of  the  new  rnccrr,  cr  r*».tfi.^r  when
theai--?on  was  first  seen  by  some  one  stationed  for  the  purpose,  wa?
yf  great  importance  to  the  Greeks,  m  regulating  their  public  assem-
blies, sacrifices,  festivals,  <Sc.*


SOLON.  257

After  tlic  tv/enticth  he  counted  not  by  adding  to,
but  by  subtracting  fiom  the  thirtieth,  according
to  the  decreasing  phases  of  the  moon.

When  Ins  laws  took  place  '^°,  Solon  had  his  vi-
sitors every  day,  finding  tauit  witli  some  of  them  and
connnenrhng  others,  or  advising  him  to  make  cer-
tain additions  or  retrenchments.  But  the  greater
part  came  to  desire  a  reason  for  this  or  that  article,

^^  Plutarch  has  only  mentioned  such  of  Solon's  laws,  as  he  thought
the  most  singular  and  remarkable  ;  Diogenes  Laertius  and  De*nos-
tlienes  have  given  us  an  account  of  some  others,  vi-hich  ought  not
to  be  forgotten.  1.  '  Let  him,  who  refuses  to  maintain  his  father
and  mother,  be  pronounced  infamous  (a)  :'  2.  '  So  let  him  be,
that  has  consumed  his  patrimony.'  3.  '  Let  him,  v.ho  frequents  the
houses  of  lewd  v/omen,  be  debarred  from  speaking  in  the  assem-
blies of  the  people.'  4'.  '  Let  not  the  guardian  live  in  the  same  hquse
with  (or,  as  some  interpret  the  passage,  cohabit  with,  cr  marry)
tiie  mother  of  his  wards.'  5.  '  Let  not  the  tuition  of  minors  be
committed  to  him,  who  is  next  after  them  in  the  inheritance  (b).'
6.  '  Let  not  an  engraver  keep  the  impression  of  a  seal,  which  ha
has  engraved.'  7.  '  Let  him,  that  puts  out  the  eye  of  a  man  who
has  but  one,  lose  both  his  own.'  8.  '  If  an  Archon  is  taken  in  li-
quor (f),  let  him  be  put  to  death.'  The  rest  occur  in  Demos-
thenes. '  Let  him,  who  refuses  to  go  to  war,  flies,  or  behaves
cowardly,  be  debarred  the  precincts  of  the  Forum  and  places  of
public  worship.'  '  If  a  man  surprises  his  wife  in  adultery,  and  lives
with  her  afterward,  let  him  be  deemed  infamous.'  '  Let  a  pandar
be  pursued,  and  put  to  death  if  taken.'  •  If  any  man  steal  in  the
day-time,  let  him  be  carried  to  the  eleven  officers;  if  in  the  nighty  it
shall  be  lawful  to  kill  him  in  the  act,  or  to  wound  him  in  the  pursuit,
-and  carry  him  to  the  aforesaid  officers:  if  he  steal  common  things,^
let  him  pay  double,  and  (if  the  convicter  thinks  fit)  be  exposed  in
chains  five  days ;  if  he  be  guilty  of  sacrilege,  let  him  be  put  to
death.'

(a)  This  (according  to  iEschines  adv.  TImarch.)  extended  to
such  as  struck  their  parents,  or  refused  them  lodging;  unless,  a*
has  been  above  stated,  they  had  not  been  instructed  by  them  in  any
trade.*

(b)  Roth  this  and  the  preceding  law  were  doubtless  enacted  fof
the  safety  of  orphans,  by  withdrawing  theiji  from  the  power  o£
persons  interested  in  their  death :  but  the  Romaos  adopted  a  di-*
rectly  contrary  principle,  in  order  to  preserve  their  property  from
dilapidation  !  -^

(c)  Pktacus,  tyrant  of  Mitylene,  cue  of  the  Seven  Wise  Men,
inflicted  double  punishment  upon  crimes  committed  in  a  state  of
drunkennes.-J.*

VOL.   1,  S


258  -  SOLON.

or  a  dear  and  precise  explication  of  tlie  meaning  and
design.  Sensible  that  it  might  appear  inexcusable  to
reject,  and  invidious  to  comply  with  tlieir  desires,
he  determined  to  withdraw  from  the  difficulty,  and
to  get  rid  at  once  of  their  cavils  and  exceptions.
For,  as  he  himself  observes.

None  to  offend  in  arduous  toils  is  hard.

Under  pretence  tlierefore  of  traffic,  he  set  sail  for
another  country,  having  obtained  leave  of  absence
from  the  Athenians  lor  ten  years.  In  that  time,
he  trusted,  they  would  become  familiarised  with
his  laws.

His  first  voyage  was  to  Egypt  ^''',  where  he  abode
some  time,  as  he  himself  relates,

By  Nile's  deep  mouth,  on  the  Canopian  shore.

There  he  conversed  on  points  of  pliilosophy  with
Psenophis  the  Heliopolitan,  and  Sonchis  the  Saite,
the  most  learned  of  the  Egyptian  priests  ;  and  re-
ceiving from  them  an  account  of  the  Atlantic  Isle  ^^,

"^  That  he  went  thither  about  this  time,  and  not  (as  Diog.
Lacrt.  states,  i.  150.)  to  escape  existing,  or  (as  A.  (icil.  xvii.  2].,
affirms)  impending  tyranny,  is  probable,  as  well  from  the  concur-
rent testimony  of  iElian  ( Var.  Hist.  viii.  16.)  and  many  other  his-
torian?, as  from  the  age  of  Solon  himself;  which,  at  the  epoch  of
Pisistratus'  usurpation,  would  be  much  kss  equal  to  such  a  voyage.
To  justify  h(iwever  the  opinion,  that  many  of  his  laws  are  of  Egyptian
origin,  we  must  suppose  that  in  his  youth,  when  (to  use  Plutarch's'
phrase)  he  '  travelled  to  gratify  his  curiosity  and  extend  his  know-
ledge,' he  had  previously  visited  that  country.  Canopus  was  a  city,
situated  upon  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  liod.  Maadie.  He-;
liopolis  and  Sais  likewice,  now  known  by  the  name  of  Matarea  and
JSa  respective!}-,  were  places  of  great  extent  and  antiquity.*

^^  Plato,  as  may  be  seen  in  hi:j  Tima:us  and  Critias,  tinished  this
history  fcqm  Solon's  memoirs.  The  Atlanti.s  (so  called,  as  situated
in  the  Atlantic  ocean)  v/as  larger,  he  pretends,  than  Asia  and
Africa,  and  notwithstanding  it'.s  vast  extent,  was  drowned  in  a
sinsrle  day  and  liiKht.  Diodorus  Siculus  informs  us  that  the  Cai  tha-
ginians,  who  discovered  it,  made  it  o.cath  tor  anj'  one  to  settle  m  it.
Amidst  a  number  of  conjcctuns  concerning  it,  one  of  the  most
probable  is,  t!iat  in  those  (iays  the  African.^  had  some  knowledge  oil"


SOLON.  259

as  Plato  informs  us,  he  attempted  to  describe  it  to
the  Grecians  in  a  poem.  From  Egypt  he  sailed  to
Cyprus,  and  was  there  honoured  with  the  best  re-
gards of  Philocyprus,  one  of  the  kings  of  that  island,
who  reigned  over  a  small  city  built  by  Demophon
the  son  of  Tlieseus  near  the  river  Clarius,  in  a  strong
situation  indeed,  but  a  very  indifferent  soil.  As
there  was  an  agreeable  plain  below,  Solon  persuaded
him  to  raise  there  a  larger  and  more  pleasant  city,
and  to  transfer  thither  the  inhabitants  of  the  other.
He  also  assisted  in  laying  out  tiie  whole,  and  build-
ing it  in  the  best  mode  for  convenience  and  defence  ;
so  that  Philocyprus  shortly  had  it  peopled  in  such  a
manner,  as  to  excite  the  envy  of  the  other  princes.
And  therefore,  though  the  former  city  was  called
Aipia,  yet  in  honour  of  Solon  he  called  the  new  one
Soli.  He  himself,  in  his  Elegies,  speaks  of  the
building  of  this  city,  addressing  himself  to  Philo-
cyprus :

For  you  be  long  the  Solian  throne  decreed  !
For  you,  a  race  of  prosperous  sons  succeed !
If  in  those  scenes,  to  her  so  justly  dear,
My  hand  a  blooming  city  help'd  to  rear,
May  the  sweet  voice  of  smiling  Venus  bless,
And  speed  me  home  with  honours  and  success !

As  to  his  interview  with  Crcrsus,  some  pretend  to
prove  from  chronology  ^^  that  it  is  fictitious.     But

America.  Another  opinion  worth  mentioning  is,  that  the  Atlan-
tides,  or  '  Fortunate  Islands,'  were  what  v/e  now  call  the  Canaries,
These  Homer  thus  describes  :

Stern  winter  smiles  on  that  auspicious  clime  :
The  fields  are  florid  with  unfading  prime.
From  the  bleak  pole  no  winds  inclement  blow.
Mould  the  round  hail,  or  flake  the  fleecy  snow ;
But  from  the  breezy  deep  the  blest  inhale
The  fragrant  murmurs  of  the  western  gale.     (  Pope. )      (L. )
Of  the  moderns,  Baer  has  written  an  Essay  upon  this  isle ;  and
M.  d'Anville  in  his   Anc.  Geogr.,  Olaus  Pi,udbeck  in   his  Atlantis,
and  M.  Bailly  in  his  Anc.  Astron.  aud  his  Letters  on  the   Ancients'
may  be  consulted  by  the  curious.*

■"'  The  controversy  upon  this  subject  between  the  French  literati^

.s  2


^


260  SOLON.

since  tlie  story  is  so  celebrated,  and  so  well  attested,
nay  (what  is  more)  so  agreeable  to  Solon's  character,
so  worthy  of  his  wisdom  and  maernanimitv,  I  cannot
prevail  upon  myself  to  reject  it  for  the  sake  of  cer-
tain chronological  tables,  which  thousands  are  cor-
recting to  this  day,  without  being  able  to  bring  them
to  any  certainty.    Solon,  then,  is  said  to  have  visited
Sardis  at  the  request  of  Cra\sus  ;  and  when  he  came
thiTher,   to   have  been   aflected   much  in   the  same
manner  as  a  person  born  in  an  inland  country,  when
he  first  goes  to  see  the  ocean  :  for,  as  he  takes  every
great  river  he  perceives  for  the  sea,  so  Solon,  when
he  passed  through  the  court,  and  saw  many  of  the
nobility  richly  dressed  and  walking  in  great  pomp
amidst  a  crowd  of  attendants  and  guards,  took  each
of  them  for  Cra^sus.     At  last,  when  he  was  conduct-
ed into  the  presence,  he  found  the  king  set  off  with
whatever   can   be   imagined    curious  and    valuable,
either  in  beauty  of  colours,  elegance  of  golden  orna-
ments, or  splendour   of  jewels  j  in  order   that  the
grandeur  and  variety  of  the  scene  might  be  as  strik-
ing as  possible.     Solon,    standing  over-against   the
throne,  w^as  not  at  all   surprised,  neither  did  he  pay
those  compliments  which    were   expected  ;    on  the
contrary,  it  v.^as  obvious   to  all  persons  of  discern-
ment, that  he  despised  such   vain  ostentation   and
littleness  of  pride.     Cra^sus  then  ordered  his  trea-
sures to  be  opened,  and  his  magnificent  apartments
and  furnitu.re  to  be  shown  him ;  but  this  was  quite
a  superfluous  trouble  :•  for  Solon,  upon  the  first  view
«)f  the  king,  was  able  to  read  his  character.     When
he  had  seen  all,   and  was  conducted  back,   Crttsus
asked  him,  "  If  he  had  ever  beheld  a  happier  man
"  than  himself ?"     Solon  answered,  "  lie  had;  and
*•■  that  WLVs  one  Tellus,  a  plain  but  wortliy  citizen  of
"  Athens,  who  left  valuable  children  behind  him  ;
^"^  and  who,  having  been  above  the  want  of  neces-

MM.  Frerct  and  Lr.rciier,  witli  M.  Kicaid's  reasons  for  adoptinjr
the  conclusions  of  the  latter  (which  coincide  with  tliOhC  of  riutujch,
here  stated)  would  be  tedious  to  Lbc  English  reader.*


SOLON.  261


cc


ii


sarlcs  during  his  whole  life,  died  gloriously  %ht-
"  ing  for  his  country  ""^."     By  this  time  he  appeared
to  Croisus  a  strange  uncouth  kind  of  rustic,  who  did
not  measure  happiness  by  gold  and  silver,  but  could
prefer  the  life  and  deatii  of  a  private   and   obscure
person  to  so  much  dignity  and  power.     He  asked
liim,    however,    again ;    "    Whether,    after    Tellus,
"  he  knew  any  other  happier   man  ?"     To  which
Solon    replied,    "  Yes,    Cleobis    and    Biton,   famed
"  for    tiieir    brotherly  affection,    and   their  dutiful
"  behaviour    to    their  motlier ;    for   the  oxen    not
being  ready,  they  put  themselves  in   the  harness,
and  drew  their  mother,  hap})y  in  having  such  sons
"  and   hailed  by  the  acclamations  oftlie  people,  to
"  Juno's  temple.     After  the  sacrifice  they  drank  a
"  cheerful  cup  with  their  friends,  and  then  laid  down
"  to  rest,  but  rose  no  more  ;  having  expired  in  the
"  night  without  sorrow  or  pain,  in  the  midst  of  all
"  their  glory."     "  Well  1"  said  Crcpsus,  now  highly
displeased,  "  and  do  you  not  then  rank  us  in  the
"  number  of  happy  men?"     Solon,  unwilling  either
to  flatter  him  or  to  exasperate  him  farther,  replied ;
"  King  of  Lydia,  as  God  has  given  the   Greeks  a
"  moderate  proportion  of  other  things,  so  likewise
"  has  he  favoured  them  with  a  democratic  spirit  and
a  liberal  wisdom,  which  lias  no  taste  for  the  splen-
dours of  royalty.     The  vicissitudes  of  life  likewise
prevent  our  being  elated  by  any  present  good  for-
tune, or  admiring  that  felicity,  which  is  liable  to
change.     Futurity  carries  for  every  man  many  va-


Ci

il

ii
cc
cc

''  rious  and  uncertain  events  in  it's  bosom.  He
"  therefore,  whom  heaven  blesses  with  success  to  the
"  last,  is  in  our  estimation  the  happy  man*.     But

"°  Herodotus  (i.  30.)  relates  the  same  story,  but  somewhat  more
■in  detail ;  and  likewise  (ib.  31.)  that  which  follows,  of  the  two  sons
of  Juno's  priestess,  who  received  death  as  the  reward  of  their  piety,
in  consequence  of  their  mother's  having  prayed  that  they  niighf
obtain  the  greatest  of  earthly  l)lessin2;s.*

*  The  lines  of  Ovid  have  become  almost  proverbial:

Ultima  semper

Kxpectanda  dies  honiini,  dicique  hcatns

Ante ohitum  nemo  supremaqiiej'anera  debet.  (Met.iii.  137.)*


262  SOLON.

"  the  happiness  of  hiin,  who  still  lives  and  has  the
"  dangers  of  life  to  encounter,  appears  to  us  no
"  better  than  that  of  a  champion  before  the  combat
"  is  determined,  and  while  the  crown  is  yet  uncer-
"  tain."  With  these  words  Solon  departed,  leaving
Croesus  chagrined,  but  not  instructed.

At  that  time  .^sop,  the  fabulist,  was  at  the  court
of  Croesus,  who  had  sent  for  him  and  caressed  him
exceedingly.  He  Vv'as  concerned  at  the  unkind  re-
ception, which  Solon  met  with,  and  gave  him  this
advice ;  "  A  man  should  resolve  either  not  to  con-
"  verse  with  kings  at  all,  or  to  converse  with  them
agreeably  :"  To  which  Solon  replied,  *'  Nay,  he
should  either  not  converse  with  them  at  all,  or
"  converse  with  them  usefidlv."

Though  Crcesus  at  that  time  held  our  lawgiver  in
contempt,  yet  after  his  defeat  in  battle  by  Cyrus,
when  his  city  was  taken,  and  himself  made  prisoner,
and  laid  bound  upon  the  pile  in  order  to  be  burned,
in  the  presence  of  Cyrus  and  all  the  Persians  he
cried  out  as  loud  as  he  could  1  "  O  Solon  !  Solon  !
*"■  Solon  !"  Cyrus,  surprised  at  this,  sent  to  inquire
of  him,  "  What  god  or  man  it  was,  whom  he  thus
"  exclusively  invoked  under  so  great  a  calamity  ?'*
To  this  Cra^sus,  without  the  least  disguise,  replied  ;
"  He  is  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  v/hom  I  in-
"  vited,  not  with  a  design  to  hear  his  wisdom,  or  to
"  learn  what  might  be  of  service  to  me ;  but  that
he  might  see  and  extend  the  reputation  of  that
glory,  the  loss  of  which  I  find  to  be  a  far  greater
misfortune,  than  the  possession  of  it  was  a  bless-
ing. My  exalted  state  was  only  an  exterior  ad-
vantage, the  happiness  of  opinion  ;  but  the  re-
verse plunges  me  into  real  sufferings,  and  ends
in  misery  irremediable.  This  was  foreseen  by
"  that  great  man  ;  v/ho,  from  what  he  then  saw
"  forming  a  conjecture  of  the  future,  advised  me  to
"  consider  the  end  of  life,  and  not  to  rely  or  grow
"  insolent  upon  uncertainties."  When  this  was
told  to  Cyrus,  who  was  a  much  wiser  man  than
Croesus,  he  finding  Solon's  maxim  confirmed  by  an


ct

cc

£C

CC

cc

cc


SOLON.  263

example  before  him,  not  only  set  Croesus  at  liberty,
but  honoured  him  with  his  protection  as  long  as  he
lived.  Thus  Solon  had  the  glory  of  saving  the  life
of  one  of  those  kings,  and  of  instructuig  the  other.

During  his  absence,  the  Athenians  were  much
divided  among  themselves  ;  Lycurgus  being  at  the
head  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  plains  ^^,  Megacles  the
son  of  Alcma2on,  of  those  that  lived  near  the  sea-
coast,  and  Pisistratus  of  the  mountaineers  :  among
tliese  last  was  a  multitude  of  labouring  people,  whose
enmity  was  chiefly  levelled  at  the  rich.  Hence  it
was,  that  though  the  city  observed  Solon's  laws,  yet
all  expected  some  change,  and  were  desirous  of  a
fresh  establishment  ;  not  in  hopes  of  an  equality,
but  with  a  view  to  be  gainers  by  the  alteration,  and
entirely  to  subdue  their  opponents.

While  matters  stood  thus,  Solon  arrived  at  Athens,
where  he  was  received  with  the  utmost  respect,  and
still  held  in  veneration  by  all :  but,  on  account  of
his  great  age,  he  had  neither  the  strength  nor  spirit)
to  act  or  speak  in  public,  as  he  had  formerly  done.
He  applied  therefore  in  private  to  the  heads  of  the
factions,  and  endeavoured  to  appease  and  reconcile
them.  Pisistratus  seemed  to  pay  him  more  attention
than  the  rest ;  for  he  had  an  affable  and  engaging
manner^-,  was  a  liberal  benefactor  to  the  poor^%

"'  These  three  parties,  into  which  the  Athenians  were  divided ;
viz.  the  Pediaei,  the  Parali,  and  the  Diacrii,  have  been  mentioned
above.

'^  I  will  transcribe  his  character  from  M.  Barthelemi.  *  Jamais
homme  ne  reuuit  plus  des  qualhes  (que  Vis'iSirsXe)  pour  captiver  les
esprits.  JJne  naissance  illiistrc,  des  richesses  considei-ablcs,  une
valeur  brillante  et  soiwent  eprouvee,  unejigure  imposante,  une  elo-
quence persuasive,  a  laquelle  le  son  de  sa  voix  pretoit  des  nouveaux
charmes  ;  un  esprit  enriche  des  agremens  que  la  nature  donne,  et  des
connoissances  que  procure  Vetude.  Jamais  homme,  d'ailleurs,  nefut
plus  maitre  de  ses passions,  et  nesid  mieuxfaire  valoirles  vertus  qic'il
possedoit  en  effct,  et  celles  dord  il  n'avoit  qve  les  apparences.  Ses
suedes  ant  prouve  que,  dans  les  projets  d'une  execution  lente,  rien  ne
donne  plus  de  superiorite  que  la  douceur  et  la  Jlexibilite  du  caractere*
(Tom.  i.)*

'^  By  *  the  poor'  we  are  not  to  understand  such  as  asked  alms,
for  of  such  there  were  noneto  be  found  at  Athens.  '  In  those  days,*


I


t'64.  SOLON.

and  even  toward  his  enemies  conducted  himself  with
great  candour  and  moderation.  He  counterieitcd
indeed  so  dexterously  the  good  qualities,  which  na-
ture had  denied  him,  that  he  gained  more  credit  than
the  real  possessor  s  of  them  y  and  stood  foremost  in
the  public  esteem  in  point  of  gentleness,  fairness,
and  equity,  zeal  for  the  present  government,  and
aversion  from  all  who  were  desirous  of  a  change.
AYith  these  arts,  he  imposed  upon  the  people  :  but
Solon  soon  discovered  his  real  character,  and  was
the  first  to  detect  his  insidious  designs.  Yet  he  did
not  absolutely  break  v.ith  him,  but  endeavoured  to
soften  him  and  advise  him  better ;  declaring  both  to
him  and  to  others,  that  if  ambition  could  but  be
banished  from  his  soul,  and  he  could  be  cured  of  his
lust  for  absolute  power,  there  would  not  be  a  better
disposed  or  a  worthier  citizen  in  Athens.

About  this  time  Thespis  began  to  change  the  form
of  tragedy"*,  and  the  novelty  of  the  thing  attracted


says  Isocrates,  *  there  was  no  citizen  who  died  of  want,  or  begged
in  the  streets,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  community.'  This  was  owing
to  the  laws  against  idleness  and  prodigality,  and  the  care  which  the
Areopagus  took,  that  every  man  should  have  a  visible  livelihood ;
a  measure  recommended  by  the  illustrious  More  in  the  first  book  of
his  Utopia,  as  a  nicrcifid  and  effectual  substitute  for  the  excessive
severities  of  our  laws  against  theft.  Uecernuntur  emm  furnnti
gravia  atque  horrcnda  supplicin,  cum  j)otiiL%  muJtofiierit.  provideii'
dum  uii  aliqnis  esset  jirovenfus  vitce,  oje.  aiiquam  tavi  dim  sit  furendi.
primiim,  dehinc  pcreundi  necessitas.  But  on  the  laniental>le  an^
luineccssary  frequency  of  our  capital  punishments,  sec  the  second
volume  of  Character  of  C.  J.  Fox,  by  Philopatris  N'aivicensis,  pj).
321 — 526.,  and  ivlontagu's  Opinions  of  different  Autlxirs  upon  the
Punishment  of  Death,  in  2  vols.  Svo.  drav^-p  up  by  the  desire  of  a
fccicty  lately  instituted  under  the  auspices  of  the  truiv  patriotic
JSir  Samuel  ilomilly.     See,  also,  not.  (3.5.)*

''•♦  Tragedy  had  previously  been  only  a  chorus,  ctianting  hymns
in  honour  of  Bacchus,  at  the  conclusion  of  the  vintage-ictes.  Thes-
pis was  the  first  to  break  the  monotony  of  this  simple  exiiibition,
by  the  iptroduction  of  an  additional  personage,  wlio  recited  some
story  to  tlie  audience.  The  subsequent  statement  of  Plutjuch,  with
respect  to  the  establishment  of  prizes,  must  be  received  with  some
modification,  as  referring  to  contests  of  increased  celebrity  (tlie
■{"etralogies,  &c.)  :  since  froai  the  Oxford  Marbles  in  particular,  as
Vi  11  as  his  own  remark  in  another  part  of  his  v.orks,  it  appears  thai


SOLON.  265

many  spectators  ;  for  this  was  before  any  prize  was
proposed  for  those,  who  excelled  in  this  respect,
<5olon,  who  was  always  willing  to  hear  and  to  learn,
and  in  his  old  age  still  more  inclined  to  any  thing
that  might  divert  and  entertain,  particularly  to  music
and  good  fellowship,  went  to  see  Thespis  himself  ex-
hibit accordiiig  to  the  custom  of  the  ancient  poets.
At  the  end  of  the  play,  he  called  to  him,  and  asked
him,  "  If  he  was  not  ashamed  to  tell  so  many  lies  be-
^'  fore  so  numerous  an  assembly  ?"  Thespis  answered,
*'  It  was  no  great  matter ;  they  speak,  or  act,  in
"  jest."  To  which  Solon  replied,  striking  the  ground
violently  v^'ith  his  staff,  "  If  we  encourage  such  jest-
^^  ing  as  this,  we  shall  quickly  trace  it  in  our  con-
*'  tracts  and  agreements."

Soon  after  this,  Pisistratus  having  wounded  liim-
self ''^  for  the  purpose,  drove  in  that  condition  into
the  market-place,  and  endeavoured  to  inflame  the
minds  of  the  people,  by  telling  them  that  his  ene.
mies  had  laid  in  wait  for  him,  and  had  treated  him
in  tliat  manner,  on  account  of  his  patriotism.  Upon
this,  the  multitude  loudly  expressed  their  indigna-
tion :  but  Solon  came  up,  and  thus  accosted  him  ;
Son  of  Hippocrates,  you  act  Homer's  Ulysses  but
very  indifferently  :  for  he  wounded  himself  to  de-
ceive his  enemies,  whereas  you  have  done  it  to
deceive  your  countrymen."  Notwithstanding
this,  the  rabble  were  eager  to  take  up  arms  in  his
fivoin- :  and,  a  general  assembly  of  the  people  being
summoned,  Ariston  made  a  motion  that  a  body«»
guard  of  fifty  clubmen  should  be  assigned  for  his  de-
fence. Solon  ^tood  up,  and  opposed  it  with  many
arguments,  of  the  same  kind  with  those  which  he
has  left  us  in  his  poems  :

prizes  of  poesy  and  contests  of  poets  formed  a  very  ancient  portion
of  the  s:icred  sjanies  of  Greece.*

"5  Herodotus  adds  (i.  59.)  that  ho  Avounded  also  his  carriage-
mules,  and  in  an  animated  liarangiic  to  the  people  reminded  thein
tf  Iiis  acliieveinents  in  tlieir  service  against  the  Megarensiaus,  &c.
'J.'his  event  took  place  01.  Iv.  1.,  A.  C.  560.*  '  ""    \


a
(i,


2G(3  SOLOX.

You  hang  v.itli  rapture  on  })is  honcyM  tongue.
And  again,

Still  in  yourself,  to  public  interest  blind.
Your  fox-like  art  concentrated  we  faid.

But  when  he  saw  the  poor  behavin<3^  fn  a  riotous
manner,  and  determined  to  gratify  Pisistratus  at  any
rate,  while  the  rich  out  of  fear  dechncd  the  opposi-
tion, lie  retired  with  the  declaration  that,  "  He  had
"  shown  more  wisdom  than  the  former,  in  discerning
*'  what  mctliod  should  be  taken  ;  and  more  courage
"  than  the  latter,  who  did  not  want  nnderstanding,
"  but  spirit,  to  resist  the  establishment  of  a  tyrant.'*

The  people,  having  made  the  decree,  did  not
anxiously  inquire  into  the  number  of  guards  whom
Pisistratus  employed,  but  visibly  connived  at  his
keeping  as  many  as  he  pleased,  till  he  seized  the  ci-
tadel. When  this  was  done,  and  the  citv  was  throv/n
into  great  confusion,  Megacles  with  the  rest  of  the
Alcmgeonidae  immediately  took  to  flight.  But  Solon,
though  he  was  now  very  old  and  had  none  to  second
him.  appeared  in  public,  and  addressed  himself  to
the  citizens ;  sometimes  upbraiding  them  with  their
past  indiscretion  and  cowardice,  and  sometimes  ex-
horting and  encouraging  them  to  stand  up  for  their
liberty.  Then  it  was,  that  he  spoke  those  memora-
ble words ;  "  It  would  previously  have  been  easier
for  them  to  repress  the  advances  of  tyranny,  and
prevent  it's  establishment :  but  now,  that  it  was  es-
tablished, and  grown  to  some  height,  it  would  be
more  glorious  to  effect  it's  demolition."  Finding
however  that  their  fears  prevented  their  attending
to  what  he  said,  he  returned  to  his  own  house,  and
placed  his  weapons  at  the  street-door  with  these
words,  "  I  have  done  all  in  my  power  to  defend  my
"  country  and  it's  laws."  This  was  his  last  public
effort.  Though  some  exhorted  him  to  fly,  he  took
no  notice  of  their  advice,  but  was  composed  enough
to  make  verses,  in  which  he  thus  reproaches  the
Athenians :


ii
ii


SOLON.  267

If  fear  or  folly  has  your  rights  betray'd,
Let  not  the  fault  on  righteous  heaven  be  laid.
You  gave  them  guards  ;  you  raised  your  tyrants  high.
To  fix  the  heavy  yoke  that  draws  the  sigh.

Many  of  his  friends,  alarmed  at  this,  told  him  the
tyrant  would  certainly  put  him  to  death  for  it,  and
asked  him  ;  "  Upon  what  he  relied,  that  he  went
"  such  imprudent  lengths?"  He  answered,  "  Upon
"  old  age."     When  Pisistratus  however  had  fully  es-
tablished himself*  he  made  his  court  to  Solon,  and
treated  him  with  so  much  kindness  and  respect,  that
Solon  became  as  it  were  his  counsellor,  and  gave
sanction  to  m.any  of  his  proceedings.     He  observed
the  greatest  part  of  Solon's  laws,  himself  showing  the
example,  and  obliging  his  friends  to  follow  it.  Thus,
w^hen  he  was  accused  of  niurther  before  the  court  of
Areopagus,  he  appeared  in  a  modest  manner  to  make
his  defence ;  but  his  accuser  dropped  the  impeach-
ment.    He  likewise  added  other  laws,  one  of  which
was,    that  persons  maimed  in  the  wars  should  be        \
maintained  at  the  public  charge.     Yet  this,  Hera-       \
elides  informs  us,  was  in  pursuance  of  Solon's  plan,
who  had  decreed  the  same  in  the  case  of  Thersippus.
But  according  to  Theophrastus  Pisistratus,  not  So-
lon, made  the  law  against  idleness,  v/hich  produced
at  once  an  increase  of  industry  in  the  country,  and
of  tranquillity  in  the  city.

Solon,  moreover,  attempted  in  verse  a  large  de-
scription or  rather  fabulous  account  of  the  Atlantic
Isle  "^,  which  he  had  learned  of  the  wise  men  of  Sai's,
and  which  particularly  concerned  the  Athenians ;
but  by  reason  of  his  age,  and  not  from  his  want  of
leisure  (as  Plato  would  have  it),  he  was  apprehen-  '
sive  the  work  would  be  too  much  for  him,  and
therefore  he  did  not  complete  it.     That  business

7'^  This  fable  imported,  that  the  people  of  Atlantis  having  sub-
dued all  Lybia,  and  a  considerable  part  of  Europe,  tln-eatened
Egypt  and  Greece  ;  but  the  Athenians,  making  head  against  their
victorious  army,  overthi-ew  them  in  several  engagements,  acd  con-
fined them  to  their  own  island.


'26S  SOLON.

was  not  the  Iiindrancc,  these  verses  will  sufficlentlv
prove :

I  grow  in  learning,  as  I  grow  in  3'ears,

And  asrain  :


*»■


Vrinc,  wit,  and  beauty  still  theJr  charms  bestow,
Light  life's  dull  siiacies,  and  cheer  us  as  we  go.

Plato,  ambitious  to  cultivate  and  adorn  tlic  subject
of  the  Atlantic  Isle,  as  an  unoccupied  spot  in  some
delightful  licld  (to  which  also  he  had  some  claim,
by  his  beino-  related  to  Solon  "')  laid  out  niaG:nificent
courts  and  enclosures,  and  erected  a  grand  entrance
to  it,  such  as  no  other  story,  fable,  or  poem  ever
possessed.  But,  as  he  began  it  late,  he  ended  his
life  betbre  the  work  ;  so  that,  the  more  the  reader  is
delighted  with  the  part  actually  written,  the  more
regret  he  feels  to  find  it  unfinished.  As  the  temple
of  Jupiter  Olympius'^  in  Athens  is  the  only  one  that
has  not  the  last  hand  put  to  it,  so  the  wisdom  of
Plato,  among  his  many  excellent  works,  has  left
nothing  imperfect  except  the  Atlantic  Isle.

Heraclides  Ponticus  relates,  that  Solon  lived  a  con-
siderable time  after  Pisistratus  had  usurjicd  the  go-
vernment ;  but,  according  to  Phanias  the  Ephesian'^,

"^  Plato's  mother  was  a  descendant  of  Solon's  brother.

'^  Under  this  title  tliere  were  several  erected  to  that  deity  at
Athens — b}'  Deucalion  (Pausan.  i.  18.),  the  Pisistratidno  (Aristot.
Pol.  V.  11.),  and  Perseus,  king  of  iVIacedon;  which  last,  according
to  Livy  (xli.  20.)  was  the  only  one  bj-  it's  grandeur  and  magnificence
worthy  of  the  god.  Suetonius  also  (Aug.  Ix.)  mentions  one
erected  there  by  the  joint  contributions  of  several  kings,  and  dedi-
cated to  the  Genius  of  Augustus  Caesar.  Of  these  it  is  most  proba-
ble, from  Aristotle's  account,  that  Plutarch  here  means  the  se-
cond. The  whole  paragraph  involves  a  high,  but  deserved  compli-
ment, not  only  to  the  Critias  of  Plato,  but  to  the  rest  of  his  works,
'as  virtually  placed  in  parallel  with  the  other  sacred  structures  of
Athens ;  which,  by  th.eir  splendour,  obtained  for  that  city  the  lio-
nourable  appellation  of  '  The  Residence  of  the  Gods.'*

'9  This  is  obviously  an  error  (a  very  natural  one,  the  Greek  cri-
tics would  tell  us,  arising  from  the  easy  confusion  of  the  two  similar


SOLON.  269

he  survived  that  event  at  the  utmost  not  quite  two
years.  For  Pisistratus  began  his  tyranny  in  the
Archonship  of  Comias,  and  (as  Phanias  states)  Solon
died  in  the  Archonship  of  Hegestratus,the  immediate
successor  to  Comias.  The  story  of  his  ashes  ^"  being
scattered  about  the  isle  of  Salamis  appears  absurd
and  fabulous  ;  and  yet  it  is  related  by  several  authors
of  credit,  and  in  particular  by  the  philosopher
Aristotle.

letters  <I>  and  P)  as  tiie  ancients  only  mention  one  Phanias,  of  Eresa
or  Eressa,  a  city  of  Lesbos.*

^°  This,  we  are  told  by  Diogenes  Laertius  (who  says,  that  he
died  in  the  isle  of  Cyprus,  1.  621.),  was  done  after  his  own  direc-
tion. In  thus  disposing  of  his  remains  either  Solon  himself,  or  his
biographers,  imitated  the  story  of  Lycurgus,  who  left  an  express
©rder,  that  his  a«ihes  should  be  thrown  into  the  sea.


THE


LIFE


OP


PUBLICOLA,


/        ,,.,^


SUMMARY.


Extraction  of  Valerius  Puhlicola.  Tarqicin  drivoi  from  Rome.
The  election  of  tvoo  Consuls.  Puhlicolci's  animosity  against  the
Tarquins.  Tarquin^s  effort  to  remount  the  throne.  Conspiracy
at  Rome  in  his  favour  ;  detected.  Brutus  consigns  his  otim  sons
to  the  executioner.  Cullatinus  abdicates  the  considship ;  and  is
succeeded  hy  Puhlicola.  Campus  Martins  ;  Sacred  Isle.  Bloody
battle  beliveen  the  Romans  and  Tuscans ;  and  Publicola^s
triumph.  Funeral  oration  over  Bndus.  Publicola's  generous
conduct ;  his  moderation,  and  popular  laws — against  tyranny,
on  finance,  Sjc.  The  election  of  tzvo  Qjucestors.  Temple  of
Jupiter  Capitolinus  built  by  Tarquinius  Supej-bns  :  and  dedicated.
Frequently  burned,  and  rebuilt.  It's  magnificence.  Porsena
assists  Tarquin  in  his  endeavours  to  regain  his  authority :  Pub'
licola  a  second  time  consul.  Horalius  Codes  singly  opposes  the
enemy.  Puhlicola'' s  third  constdship  :  Exploit  of  Mutius  SccEvola.
Porsena,  by  the  intervention  of  Puhlicola,  concludes  a  peace  tvith
Rome.  Enterprise  of  Clcelia  ;  and  the  honour,  ivhich  she  receives
from  Porsena.  Victory  of  Valerius,  Puhlicola' s  brother,  over
the  Sabines.  Puhlicola  a  fourth  time  consul.  Romaii  terrors.
Appius  Clausus  quits  his  residence  among  the  Sabines,  and  settles
at  Rome.  Defeat  of  the  Sabines.  Publicola's  triumph,  death,
andfuneral.


PUBLICOLA.  271

oUCH  is  the  character  of  Solon ;  and  therefore
with  liim  we  will  compare  Piiblicola,  so  surnamed
afterward^  by  the  llonian  people  in  acknowledge-
ment of  his  merit;  for  his  paternal  name  was  Vale-
rius''^, the  principal  author  of  the  union  between  the
Romans  and  the  Sabines.  For  he  it  was,  who  most
effectually  persuaded  the  two  kings  to  come  to  a
conference,  and  to  settle  their  differences.  From
this  man  Valerius  deriving  his  extraction,  distin-
guished himself  by  his  eloquence  and  riches,  even
while  Rome  was  yet  under  kingly  government^.
His  eloquence  he  employed  vv'ith  great  propriety  and
spirit  in  the  defence  of  justice^  and  his  riches  in
relieving  the  necessitous.  Hence  it  was  obvious  to
conchide  that,  if  the  government  should  become  re-
publican ^,  his  station  in  it  would  soon  be  one  of  the
most  eminent.

A\lien  Tarquin  the  Proud,  who  had  made  his  wav
to  the  throne  bv  the  violation  of  all  rights  ^  divine
and  lunnan,  and  exercised  his  power  not  like  a  king
but  like  an  oppressor  and  a  tyrant,  became  odious  and
insupportable  to  the  people  ;  by  the  unhappy  fate
of  Lucretia,  who  killed   herself  on  account  of  the

'  At  the  end  of  his  first  consulship,  when  lie  had  rased  his  house,
and  liumbled  the  fasces  before  the  majesty  of  the  people!*

^  Tlie  first  of  his  family,  who  settled  at  Home,  -.vas  (according  to
Livy)  Valerius  Volesus,  or  as  Festus  and  the  Fasti  Capitolini  call
him,  Vekisus  a  Sabine.  (L.)  lie  was  one  of  the  three  principaf
nobles,  who  followed  Tatius  to  Rome.  (Dion  Halic.  ii.  10.)*

3  Plutarch  by  this  would  insinuate,  that  arbitrary  power  is  no
friend  to  eloquence.  And  undoubtedly  the  want  of  liberty  does
generally  depress  the  spirit,  and  restrain  "the  force  of  genius:  whereas
in  republics  and  limited  monarchies  ample  scope  is  given,-  as  well
as  frequent  occasions  atibrded,  to  the  richest  vein  of  oratory.  Sec
Longin.  ns^t  Yi]/.  sect.  last.

*  Governments,  as  u'ell  as  other  tilings,  pushed  to  excessive
lengths,  often  cluinge  to  the  contrary  extreme.

>  Among  other  abuses,  he  had  trampled  upon  ti)e  body  of  his
murthered  father-in-law,  Scrvius  Tullius,  iu  ]ijs  v/aj  to  the  throne.
See  Dion.  Halic.  iv.  10  ,  Liv.  i.  48.,  &c,*

9


272  PUBLICOLA.


rape  committed  upon  her  by  the  son  of  Tarqum
tliey  were  iirst  roused  to  revolt.  Lucius  Brutus,  me-
ditating a  cliange  of  government,  applied  first  to
Valerius,  and  with  his  powerful  assistance  ex])elled
the  monarch  and  his  tamily.  Vv'hilc  the  people  in-
deed seemed  inclined  to  give  to  one  person  the  chief
command,  and  to  set  up  a  general  instead  of  a  king,
Valerius  acquiesced,  and  willingly  yielded  the  first
place  to  Brutus,  under  whose  aus])iccs  the  republic
had  commenced.  "\^  iien  it  appeared  however  that
ihey  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  being  governed
by  a  single  person,  but  seemed  more  ready  to  obey
a  divided  authority,  and  indeed  proposed  and  de-
manded to  have  two  consuls  at  the  head  of  the  state,
he  then  offered  himself  as  a  candidate  for  that  high
oflice  along  with  Brutus,  but  lost  his  election.  For
contrary  to   Brutus'   desire  Tarquinius  Collatinus ",

^  Livv  (i.  58.)  tells  us,  that  she  desired  her  father  and  husband  ta
meet  her  at  her  own  house.  With  her  father  Lueretius,  canid'
Publius  ^'alerius  (afterward  Publicola),  and  with  her  husband,  Lu-
cius Junius  Brutus  and  many  other  Romans  of  distinction.  To
them  she  disclosed  in  few  words  the  whole  matter,  declared  her
tirni  resolution  not  to  outlive  the  loss  of  her  honour,  and  conjured
them  not  to  lut  the  crime  of  her  ravisher  go  unpunished.  iVfter
which,  not<.)>rnistanding  their  endeavours  to  dissuade  her  Iroiu  it,,
she  plun^'cl  a  dagger  in  lier  breast.  While  the  rest  were  liiled
with  i^r-lef  and  consternation,  Brutus,  who  till  that  time  had  feigned
-hii'iibclf  an  idiot  to  prevent  his  l)eing  obnoxious  to  the  tyrant,  seized
thebloodv  poniard;  and  holding  it  up  to  the  assembly,  exclaimed;
"  I  swear  l)y  tiiis  blood  which  once  was  so  pure,  and  which  nothing
"  but  the  detestable  villainy  of 'J'arquin  could  have  ))olluted,  that  f
"  will  pursue  Tarquin  the  Proud,  Ins  wici^ed  wife  and  their  chil-
*'  dren,  with  lire  and  sword:  nor  will  I  ever  suffer  any  of  that  fa-
"  mily,  or  any  other  whatsoevor,  to  reign  at  Rome.  Ye  gods!  I
"  call  you  to  witness  this  my  oath,"  At  theee  words,  he  presented
the  dagger  to  Collatinus,  Lucretius,  Valerius,  and  the  rest  of  the
company  ;  and  engaged  them  to  bind  themselves  by  the  same  engage-
ment. (L.)  Dio'u.'llalio.  (iv.  15.)  says,  that  Brutus  emphatically
harangued  the  peo])le  at  large  :  that  the  conspirators  elected  him
and  Collatinus  consuls:  and  that  Tarquin,  liaving  had  informa-
tion of  the  revolt,  hurried  to  Rome  ;  but  finding  it's  gates  sliut
against  him,  and  being  refused  admittance  into  tlie  cauip  on  his
lituru,  took  rei'uge  at  (nibii.*

''   vSo  called  from  his  government  of  Collatia,  a  city  which  had

^12


PUBLICOLA.  273

the  husband  of  Lucretia,  was  appointed  his  col-
legii.e.  Not  that  he  was  abler,  or  more  wortliy  tlian
Valerius ;  but  those  that  had  the  chief  interest  in
the  state,  apprehensive  of  tiie  return  of  the  Tar-
qnins,  wlio  were  making  great  eiforts  without,  am}
endeavouring  to  soften  the  resentment  of  the  citi-
zens  within,  were  desirous  to  place  at  their  head  the
most  implacable  enemy  of  that  house.

Valej'ius,  taking  it  ill  tliat  it  shoidd  be  supposed  he
would  flot  do  his  utmost  for  his  country,  because  h^c
bad  received  no  particular  injury  from  the  tyrajits,
withdrew  from  the  senate,  forbore  to  attend  the
Forum,  and  would  not  intermeddle  in  the  legist  witb
public  afihirs.  So  that  many  began  to  express  their
fear  and  concern,  lest  through  resentment  he  should
join  the  la^e  royal  family,  and  overturn  the  common-
wealtfi,  which  as  yet  Vv-as  but  tottering.  Brutus  was
not  without  his  suspicions  of  some  others,  and  there-
lore  determined  to  brin.o-  the  senators  to  their  oath
(m  a  solemn  day  of  sacrifice,  which  he  appointed  for
that  purpose.  Upon  this  occasion  Valerius  went
with  the  utmost  alacrity  to  the  Forum,  and  v/as  the
first  to  make  oath  that  he  would  never  give  up  the
least  point,  or  listen  to  any  terms  of  agreement  with
Tarquin,  but  v/ould  defend  the  Roman  liberty  with
his  sword  ;  which  afforded  great  satisfaction  to  the
senate,  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  consvils  ^.

been  takpn  froui  tlie  Sabi-ncs  by  the  elder  Tarquin.  Ilis  father
K'jerius,  and  Tarquin  the  Proud,  were  first  cousins.*

^'-  Thus  ended  the  rci'.al  state  of  Rome,  according  to  the  common
computation,  A.  U.  C.  244<.  But  Sir  Isaac  Newton  justly  observes,
that  tin's  can  sctircely  be  reconciled  to  the  course  of  nature  ;  for  we
meet  with  no  instance  in  all  history,  since  chronology  was  certain,
of  seven  kings  (must  of  whom  were  slain)  reigning  io  many  year€
in  continual  succession.  By  contracting  therefore  the  reigns  of  tlxese
Jiings,  and  those  of  the  kings  of  Alba,  he  dismisses  126  years  from
the  number  ordinarily  assigned  as  the  interval  between  Romulu^
and  Christ,  and  places  the  building  of  Rome,  not  in  the  sixth  but
in  the  ihiriy-eighth  Olympiad,  and  B.  C.  627.  (L.)

Dr.  Mu/grave  liovvever  has  very  ably  opposed  our  great  pliUdso'
pher's  arguments,  in  a  Treatise  expressly  composed  on  that  subject ;
Avliich  receives  no  vulgar  praise,  when  the  editor  states  that  he  h^
heard  it  quoted  and  commended  bv  PJchard  Porsqn.*

VOL.  r.  1


2-i  PrBLICOLA.

His  actions  soon  confiimed  the  sincerity  of  his  oatli.
For  embassadors  came  from  Tarquin  with  letters
calculated  to  gain  the  people,  and  instructions  to
treat  with  them  in  a  manner  most  likely  to  corrupt
them  :  being  directed  to  assure  them  on  his  part,
that  he  had  bidden  adieu  to  his  high  notions,  and
was  willing  to  listen  to  very  moderate  conditions.
The  consuls  were  of  opinion,  that  they  should  be
admitted  to  confer  with  the  people  ;  but  Valerius
strongly  opposed  this  measure,  insisting  that  no  pre-
text for  innovation  should  be  given  to  the  needy
multitude,  who  might  consider  war  as  a  greater
grievance  than  tyranny  itself.

After  this  other  embassadors  arrived  from  the  ex-
pelled prince,  to  declare  that  he  would  renounce  all
thoughts  of  the  kingdom,  and  lay  down  his  arms,  if
they  would  but  send  him  his  treasures  and  other  ef-
fects, that  his  family  and  friends  might  not  want  a
subsistence  in  their  exile.  In  this,  many  persons
inclined  to  indulge  him,  and  Collatinus  in  particular
agreed  to  it;  but  Brutus  %  a  man  of  high  spirit  and
quick  resentment,  ran  to  the  Forum,  and  called  his
collegue  traitor,  for  being  disposed  to  grant  the
enemy  the  means  of  carrying  on  the  war  and  reco-
vering the  crown,  when  indeed  it  would  be  too  much
to  allow  them  even  bread  in  their  exile.  The  citi-
zens being  assembled  upon  that  occasion,  Caius  Mi-
nutius,  a  private  man,  was  the  first  who  delivered
liis  sentiments  to  them ;  advising  Brutus,  and  ex-
horting the  Romans,  to  take  care  tliat  the  treasures
should  fight  tor  them  against  the  tyrants,  rather  than
for  the  tyrants  against  them.     The  Roilians  however

9  Dion.  Halic,  on  the  contrary,  says  that  the  aftair  was  debated
ill  the  senate  with  great  moderation;  and  when  it  could  not  be  settled
there,  whetlier  they  should  prefer  honour  or  profit,  it  was  referred
to  the  people,  who  to  their  immortal  praise  carried  it  for  honour  by
a  majority  of  one  vote.   (  L. )

The  same  liistorian  (v.  1.)  states  that  this  was  not  a  second  em-
bassy, but  a  second  demand  (made  for  the  purpose  of  iraiuing  time)
by  the  first.  A  slight  correction  of  Livy's  text  (ii.  '<.)  sugj;;c.-.t,ed
by  the  critics,  leads  to  the  surae  conclusion.*


PUBLICOLA,  271

were  of  opinion  that,  so  long  as  they  obtained  that
liberty  for  wliich  they  began  the  war,  they  should
not  reject  the  ofiered  peace  for  the  sake  of  the  trea-
sures,* but  cast  them  out  along  with  the  tyrants.

In  the  mean  time,  Tarquin  made  small  account  of
his  effects;  but  the  demand  of  them  furnished  a
pretence  for  sounding  the  people,  and  for  prepar-
ing a  scene  of  treacliery.  lliis  was  carried  on  by
the  embassadors  under  pretence  of  taking  care  of
the  effects,  part  of  which  they  said  they  were  to  sell,
part  to  collect,  and  the  rest  to  send  away.  Tlius
they  gained  time  to  corrupt  two  of  the  best  families
in  ilome,  that  of  the  Aquilii,  in  which  were  three
senators,  and  the  Yitellii,  among  whom  were  two.
All  these  were  nephews  by  the  mother's  side,  to
Collatinus  the  consul.  Tlie  Vitellii  were  likewis»
allied  to  Brutus ;  for  their  sister  was  his  wife,  and
he  had  several  children  by  her  ^^;  two  of  whom,  just
arrived  at  years  of  maturity  and  being  of  their  kin-
dred and  acquaintance,  the  Vitellii  drew  in,  and
persuaded  to  engage  in  the  conspiracy  :  insinuating,
that  by  these  means  they  might  marry  into  the  family
of  the  Tarquins,  share  in  their  royal  prospects,  and
at  the  same  time  be  emancipated  from  the  yoke  of  a
stupid  and  cruel  father.  For  his  inflexibihty  in  pu-
nishing criminals,  they  called  '  cruelty ;'  and  the
stupidity,  which  he  had  long  used  as  a  cloke  to
shelter  "him  from  the  bloody  designs  of  the  tyrants,
had  procured  him  the  surname  of  '  Brntqs  ",  by
which  he  objected  not  afterward  to  be  distinguished.

The  youths,  thus  engaged,  were  brought  to  confer
with  the  Aquilii ;  and  all  agreed  to  take  a  great  and

^°  Dionysius  and  Livy  only  mention  two ;  but  Plutarch  agrees
with  those  who  say  that  Brutus  hatl  more,  and  that  Marcus  Erutus,
who  killed  Ca^s^r,  was  descended  from  one  of  them.  Cicero  is  of
the  latter  class  ;  or  else  he  pretended  to  be  so,  to  make  the  cause
and  person  of  Brutus  more  popular.  (L.)  There  is,  however,  much
confusion  in  these  ancient  genealogies.*

"  Tarquin  had  put  the  father  and  brother  of  Brutus  to  death,  an
jir.count  of  their  wealth.

T  a


^76  PUBLICOLA.

horrible  oath,  by  drinking  together  of  tlic  blood '-,
and  tasting  '^  the  entrails  of  a  man  sacrificed  for
that  purpose.  This  ceremony  was  performed  in  the
house  of  the  Aquihi ;  and  the  room  chosen  for  it
was,  most  appropriately,  dark  and  retired.  Ihit  a
slave,  named  Vindicius,  lurked  there  undiscovered.
Not  that  he  had  placed  himself  in  that  room  by
desisjn,  neither  had  he  any  sus])icion  of  what  was
about  to  be  transacted  ;  but  happening  to  be  there,
and  perceiving  with  what  haste  and  concern  they  en-
tered, he  stopped  short  from  fear  of  being  seen,  and
hid  himself  behind  a  chest ;  yet  so  that  he  could  see
what  was  done,  and  hear  ^\hat  was  determined  '*.
Their  resolution  was,  to  kill  the  consuls  ;  and  having
written  letters  to  this  purport  to  Tarquin,  they  deli-
vered them  to  the  embassadors,  who  were  at  that
time  guests  to  the  Aquilii  '^,  and  present  at  the  con-
spiracy.

When  the  affair  was  over,  they  withdrew ;  and
Vindicius,  stealing  from  his  lurking-hole,  was  un-
certain what  use  he  should  make  of  his  accidental
discovery,  and  disturbed  with  doubts.  He  thought
it  shocking,  as  indeed  it  was,  to  accuse  the  sons  of
the  most  horrid  crimes  to  their  father  Brutus,  or  the

'*  Such  a  horrid  sacrifice,  they  supposed,  would  oblige  every
member  of  the  conspiracy  to  inviolable  secrecy.  Catiline  put  the
same  in  practice  afterward.  (L.)  This  shocking  rite  is  not  men-
tioned by  Livy,  or  Dion.  Halic*

'3  The  word  ^r/uv  signifies  '  to  taste,'  as  well  as  *  to  touch.*

'•»  Dion.  Halic.  (-v.  2.)  says,  that  Vindicius  entertained  some
suspicion  of  mischief,  and  watched  the  party:  and  Livy  (ii.  4.)  af-
tirins,  that  he  actually  knew  of  the  plot,  and  only  deferred  the  dis-
closure, till  by  means  of  their  letters  to  the  embassadors  he  could
ensure  their  conviction.  Plutarch's  account,  however,  appears  to
M.  Ricard  the  most  natural.^'^

'*  There  is  here,  perhaps,  a  little  inaccuracy ;  as  it  was  not  at  that
time  usual  for  embassadors  to  take  up  their  res! Jnice  at  private
houses,  and  from  what  follows  it  appears,  that  some  of  their  letter*
and  servants  were  seized  at  the  late  king's  palace.  ''>•«»  avrc^i  tm
AKvXta-j  ti>oi  ytyc'JOTii  may  liowevcr  imply,  that  they  had  been  invited
from  the  mansion  publicly  assigned  their  residence,  to  spend  a  few-
days  with  thechicf  of  the  conspirators.*


X^UBLICOLA.  277

nephews  to  tlieir  unde  Collatimis ;  and  it  did  not
presently  occur  to  him,  that  any  private  Roman  was
tit  to  be  trusted  with  so  important  a  secret.  On  the
other  hand,  he  was  so  much  tormented  with  the
knowledge  of  such  an  abominable  treason,  that  he
could  do  anv  thinr;  ratlier  than  conceal  it.  At  ]en£i:th,
induced  by  the  public  spirit  and  humanity  of  Vale-
rius, he  bethought  himself  of  applying  to  him  ;  a
man  easy  of  access,  and  willing  to  be  consulted  by
the  necessitous,  whose  house  was  always  open,  and
who  never  refused  to  hear  the  petitions  even  of  the
meanest  of  the  people.

.  When  Vindicius  then  came  and  discovered  to  him
the  whole,  in  the  jiresence  of  his  brother  Marcus
and  his  wife,  Valerius  astonished  and  terrified  at  the
plot  v.ould  not  let  the  man  go,  but  slnit  him  up  in
the  room,  and  left  his  wife  to  watch  tiie  door.  He
afterward  ordered  his  brother  to  surround  the  late
king's  palace,  to  seize  the  letters  if  possible,  and  to
secure  the  servants  ;  v.'hile  he  himself,  with  many
clients  and  friends  whom  he  always  had  about  him,
and  a  mmierous  retinue  of  servants,  went  to  the
house  of  the  Aquilii.  As  they  were  gone  out,  and
no  one  expected  him,  he  forced  open  tlie  doors,  and
found  the  letters  in  the  embassadors'  room.  While
he  was  thus  employed,  the  Aquilii  ran  home  in  the
utmost  haste,  and  engaged  with  him  at  the  door,
endeavouring  to  force  the  betters  from  him.  But
Valerius  and  his  party  repelled  their  attack,  and
twisting  their  gowns  about  their  necks,  after  much
struggling  on  both  sides,  dragged  them  with  great
difficult}^  through  the  streets  into  the  Forum.
Marcus  Valerius  had  the  same  success  at  the  royal
palace,  where  he  seized  other  letters  ready  to  be
conveyed  away  among  the  goods,  laid  hands  upon
what  servants  of  the  king*s  he  could  find,  and  drag-
ged them  also  into  the  Forum.

Wlien  the  consuls  had  put  a  stop  to  the  tumult,
Vindicius  was  produced  by  order  of  Valerius ;  and
the  accusation,  being  lodged,  the  letters  were  read,


278  PUBLICOLA.

which  the  traitors  had  not  tlie  assurance  to  contra-
dict. A  melancholy  stilhiess  reigned  among  the  rest;
but  a  few,  wilHng  to  favour  Brutus,  suggested  banish-
ment. The  tears  of  Collatinus,  and  the  silence  of
Valerius,  gave  some  hopes  of  mercy.  But  Brutus,
called  upon  each  of  his  sons  by  name,  and  said;
"  You,  Titus,  and  you,  Valerius  '^,  why  do  not  you
"  make  your  defence  against  the  charge?"  After
they  had  been  thus  questioned  three  several  times,
and  made  no  answer,  he  turned  to  the  lictors,  and
said ;  "  Yours  is  the  part  that  remains."  The  lic-
tors immediately  laid  hold  on  the  youths,  stripped
them  of  their  garments,  and  having  tied  their  hands
behind  them,  flogged  them  severely  with  their  rods.
And  though  others  turned  their  eyes  aside,  unable
to  endure  the  spectacle,  yet  Brutus  (it  is  said)  nei-  -
ther  looked  another  way,  nor  permitted  pity  in  the
least  to  smooth  his  stern  and  angry  countenance  ^^ ;
regarding  his  sons  in  the  midst  of  their  sufferings
\vith  a  threatening  aspect,  till  they  were  extended
upon  the  ground,  and  their  heads  cut  off  with  the  ax.
He  then  departed,  leaving  the  rest  to  his  collegue.
This  was  an  action,  w-hich  it  is  not  easy  to  praise  or
to  condemn  with  propriety.  For  either  the  excess
of  virtue  raised  his  soul  above  the  influence  of  the
passions,  or  else  the  excess  of  resentment  depressed
it  into  insensibility.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other
was  natural,  or  suitable  to  the  human  faculties,  but
was  either  divine  or  brutal.  It  is  more  equitable,
however,  that  our  judgement  should  give  it's  sanction
to  the  glory  of  this  great  man,  than  that  our  weak-

^^  The  name  of  Brutus*  second  son  was  not  ValeriuSj  but  Ti-
berius.

'7  Livy  gives  a  different  account  of  Brutus' behaviour :  Quum
inter  omne  tempiis  paie)\  vultiisque  et  os  ejus,  spectaculo  esset,  emi-
nente  animo  patriu  inter  publicce  pcirna^  minif.teriwn.  There  could
not  be  a  more  striking  spectacle,  than  the  countenance  of  Brutus  ;
for  anguish  sat  mixed  with  dignity,  and  he  could  not  conceal  the
fatb.cr,  though  he  supported  the  magistrate.  Liv.  ii.  5.  (L.)  Dion,
Halic.  (v.  2  )  agrees  with  Plutarch,  that  whatever  he  might  feel,
he  showed  neither  grief  nor  pity  at  the  time  of  the  execution,*


PUBLICOLA.  279

iiess  should  incline  us  to  doubt  his  virtue.  For  the
Romans  look  upon  it  as  a  less  glorious  work  for
Romulus  to  have  built  the  city,  than  for  Brutus  to
have  founded  and  established  the  commonwealth.

After  Brutus  had  left  the  tribunal,  the  thought  of
what  had  been  done  involved  the  rest  in  astonish-
ment, silence,  and  horror.  But  the  easiness  and  for-
bearance of  Collatinus  gave  fresh  spirits  to  the
Aquilii ;  they  begged  time  to  make  their  defence,
and  desired  that  their  slave  Vindicius  might  be  re-
stored to  them,  and  not  remain  with  their  accusers.
The  consul  was  inclined  to  grant  their  request,  and
dismiss  the  assembly ;  but  Valerius  woidd  neither
suffer  the  slave  to  be  taken  from  among  the  crowd,
nor  the  people  to  dismiss  the  traitors  and  withdraw.
At  last  he  seized  the  criminals  himself,  and  called  for
Brutus ;  exclaiming  that  Collatinus  acted  most  un-
worthily, in  having  laid  his  collegue  under  the  hard
necessity  of  putting  his  own  sons  to  death,  and  then
inclining  to  gratify  the  women  by  releasing  the  be-
trayers and  the  enemies  of  their  country.  Collatinus
upon  this,  losing  all  patience,  commanded  Vindicius
to  be  taken  away :  the  lictors  made  way  through  the
crowd,  seized  the  man  and  came  to  blows  with  such
as  endeavoured  to  rescue  him.  The  friends  of  Va-
lerius stood  upon  their  defence,  and  the  people  cried
out  for  Brutus.  Brutus  returned,  and  silence  being
made,  he  said :  "  It  was  enough  for  him  to  have  pro-
nounced judgement  upon  his  own  sons ;  as  for  the
rest,  he  left  them  to  the  sentence  of  the  peo-
ple, who  were  now  free,  and  any  one  that  chose
might  come  forward  in  their  defence."  They  did
not  however  wait  for  pleadings,  but  immediately  put
it  to  the  vote,  and  with  one  voice  condemned  them
to  die ;  upon  which,  they  were  beheaded.  Collati-
nus, it  seems,  was  somewhat  suspected  before,  on
account  of  his  near  relation  to  the  royal  family  ;  and
his  second  name  was  obnoxious  to  the  people,  who
.abhorred  the  very  word  '  Tarquin.'     But,  upon  this


<?&0.  PUBLICOLA.

occasion,  he  had  provoked  them  beyond  expression;
and  therefore  he  voluntarily  resigned  the  considsliip,
and  retired  from  the  city  '^  A  new  election  con-
sequently was  held,  and  Valerius  was  chosen  in  his
stead  with  great  honour,  as  a  proper  mark  of  grati-
tude for  his  patriotic  zeal.  The  new  consul,  think-
ing that  Vindicius  should  have  his  sliare  of  reward,
procuied  a  decree  of  the  people  that  he  should  re-
ceive the  freedom  of  the  city,  which  had  never  been
(Conferred  upon  a  slave  before ;  and  that  he  phonld  be
enrolled  in  what  tribe  he  pleased,  and  give  his  suf-
frage with  it.  For  other  freedmen  Appius,  wishing
to  make  himself  popular,  procured  a  right  of  voting
long  afterward.  The  act  of  enfranchising  a  slave  is
to  this  day  called  Vindicia,  as  we  are  told,  from  this
Vindicius  '^.

•  The  next  steps  taken  were,  to  give  up  the  goods
(5f  the  Tarquins  to  be  plundered,  and  to  level  their
palace  and  their  other  houses  with  the  ground.  The
pleasantest  part  of  the  Campus  Martins  had  been  in
their  possession,  and  this  was  now  consecrated  to  the
god  Mars  -^.  It  happened  to  be  the  time  of  harvest,
and  the  sheaves  then  lay  upon  the  ground  ;  but  as  it
Was  consecrated,  they  thought  it  not  lawful  to  thresh
the  corn,  or  to  make  use  of  it :  a  great  number  of  peo-
ple therefore  took  it  up  in  baskets,  and  threw  it  into
the  river.    The  trees  were  also  cut  down  and  thrown

'8  Throagh  a  great  part  of  this  story,  Dion,  Hnlic.  (v.  2.)  is  at
variance  bath  with  Plutarch  and  Livy.  But  sojue  parls  o['  iiis  nar-
rative are  scarcely  consistent  with  his  own  portriiit  of  the  austere
Bratus.*

?9  Tlrere  were  three  motTes  of  regular  emancipation,  !>ut  nono  of
theiw  gave  tlie  right  of  ?ufiVage.  It  was  only  in  the  third  gf  aeration,
that  perfect  citizenship  was  attained.  In  fhe  multiplied  Kgulations
ormuniclpalhiw  however,  an  en!  igliteued  foreigner,  like  IlutHrch,
might  pardonabfy  fa^l  rnto  mrisapprehcnsioRs.  Fov  che  name  vrndida
other  Sou  tee*  are  ftSR'gned  by  ctyrnologistf.*

"  Plutarch  shoolJ  have  raid,  '  re-conaecratcd.'     For  it  ht>d  hcen


PUBLICOLA,  281

in  after  it,  and  the  ground  left  entirely  without  fruit
or  produce,  for  the"  service  of  the  god  '".     A  great
quantity  of  different  sorts  of  things  being  thus  thrown
in  together,  they  were  not  carried  far  by  the  cur-
rent, but  only  to  the  shallows  where  the  first  heaps
had  stopped.     There  every  thing  rested,  finding  no
farther  passage,  and  the  whole  was  bound  still  faster
by  the  river  :  for  that  washed  down   to  it  a  great
quantity  of  mud,  which  not  only  enlarged  but  ce-
rnentcd  the  mass  •,  and  the  current,  far  from  dissolv-
ing it,  by  it's  gentle  pressure,    gave  it  additional
firnmess.     The  bulk  and  solidity  of  this  mass  received
continual  accessions,  most  of  what  was  brought  down
by  the  Tiber  settling  there.     It  is  now  an  island
sacred  to  reh'gious  uses  '\  several  temples  and  por-
ticos having  been  built  upon  it,  and  is  called  in  La-
tin,  //2/^er  duos  pontes  ",  the  island    '  between  the
two  brido-es.'     Some  sav,  however,  that  this  did  not
hapi)en  at  the  dedication  of  Tarquin's  field,  but  many
ages   afterward;    when   Tarquinia,    a,  vestal,    gave
another  adjacent  field  to  the  pubh"c,  for  which  she
Vcas  honoured  with  great  privileges,  particularly  that
of  bearing  her  testimony  in  court,  a  privilege  refused
to  all  other  women :  they  likewise  voted  her  the

-'  A  field  so  kept  was  very  properly  corisecrated  to  the  god  of
war,  u  ho  lays  waste  all  before  him.

"  Livy  says,  it  was  secured  against  the  force  of  the  current  by
jettees.

^5  The  Fabrician  bridge  [liod.  Ponte  dei  quattro  Capi,  bn  account
of  a  stiitue  of  marble  with  four  heads,  supposea  to  represent  .TanusJ
ioiiied  it  to  the  city  on  the  side  of  the  Capitol,  and  the  Cestian
bridye  {hod.  Ponte  S.  Bartolotneo)  on  the  side  of  the  Janiculine
e-;Ue.  It  is  now  called  '  the  isle  of  St.  Bartholomew,'  from  a  church.
built  upor.  it  in  honour  of  that  saint.  The  story  is  rendered  the
more  credible,  if  we  consider  that  the  rapidity  of  the  river  was  at
tlust  season  much  diaiinished  by  the  summer  heats,  that  the  treet
cut  do«  n  in  the  Cnn.pu.Q  Martius  would  not  easily  be  carried  down
by  it's  force,  and  tliat  the  Romans  probably  (as  Livy  observes,  ii.
^.)  woukl  assist  it  by  their  labours,  to  give  it  as  much  stability  as
possible  for  v]i*?ir  temples,  porticos,  &c.  It  is  about  a  quarter  of  £^
mik-'long,  pointed  at  it's  e>;t!-emities,  and  viot  much  unhke  a  ship
in  ifis  general  ;;}>p:.'iirance.*


585  PUBLICOLA.

liberty  of  marrying-^,  bat  of  this  slie  declined  to
avail  herself.  This  is  the  account,  though  seemingly
fabulous,  which  some  give  of  the  matter.

Tarquin,  hopeless  of  re-ascending  the  throne  by
stratagem,  applied  to  the  Tuscans,  who  afforded  him
a  kind  reception,  and  prc))ared  to  conduct  him  back
with  an  immense  force.  The  consuls  led  the  Roman
troops  against  them  ;  and  the  two  armies  were  drawn
lip  in  certain  consecrated  parcels  of  ground,  the  one
called  the  Arsian  grove,  the  other  the  ^^suvian  mea-
dow. When  they  came  to  charge,  Aruns  the  son  of
Tarquin  and  Brutus  the  Roman  consul'-'  met  each
other,  not  by  accident,  but  bv  desi£?;n.  Stimulated
by  hatred  and  resentment,  the  one  against  the  tyrant
and  enemy  of  his  country,  the  other  against  the
author  of  his  banishment,  they  spurred  their  horses
to  the  encounter.  As  they  engaged  rather  witli
fury  than  with  judgement,  they  laid  tiiemselves  open,
and  fell  by  each  other's  hand.  The  battle,  whose
onset  was  so  dreadful,  had  a  not  less  dreadful  con-
elusion  :  the  carnage  was  prodigious,  and  equal  on
both  sides,  till  at  length  the  armies  were  separated
by  a  storm.

Valerius  was  in  the  utmost  perplexity,  as  he  knew
not  which  side  had  the  victory,  and  found  his  men
as  much  dismayed  at  the  sight  of  their  own  dead,  as
animated  by  the  slaughter  of  the  enemy.  So  great
indeed  was  the  carnage,  that  it  could  not  be  distin-
guished which  had  the  advantage ;  and  each  army
having  a  near  view  of  their  own  loss,  and  only  guess-

."■*  From  tliis  passage  it  appears,  and  A.  Gellius  (vi.  7.)  affirms,
tliat  the  vestals  had  not  originally  the  privilege  of  marrying  even
al^ter  tlieir  thirty  years  of  priesthood  were  expired.  It  was  after*
ward,  however,  made  general.*

-'"  Brutus  is  deservedly  reckoned  among  the  most  illustrious
heroes.  He  restored  liberty  to  his  country,  secured  it  with  the
blood  of  his  own  sons,  and  died  in  defending  it  against  a  tyrant.
The  llonians  subsequently  erected  his  statue  in  the  Capitol,  where
he  was  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  kings  of  Home,  with  a  Baked  sword
in  hii^  hand.


PUBLICOLA.  28S

ing  at  that  of  their  adversaries,  were  inclined  to
think  themselves  vanquished  rather  than  victorious.
When  night  came  on — such  a  night,  as  one  might
imagine  after  a  day  so  bloody— and  both  camps  were
Jiushed  in  silence  and  repose,  the  grove  (it  is  said)
shook,  and  a  loud  voice  proceeding  from  it  declared,
that  "  the  Tuscans  ]md  lost  one  man  more  than  the
"  Romans."  The  voice  was,  undoubtedly,  divine  -^z
for  immediately  the  Romans  recovered  their  spirits,
and  tlie  field  rung  with  acclamations;  while  the
Tuscans,  struck  with  fear  and  confusion,  deserted
their  entrenchments,  and  most  of  them  dispersed.
Those  that  remained,  who  were  not  quite  five  thou-
sand, the  Romans  took  prisoners,  and  plundered  the
camp.  When  the  dead  were  numbered,  there  were
found  on  the  side  of  the  Tuscans  eleven  thousand
three  hundred,  and  on  that  of  the  Romans  as  many,
excepting  one.  This  battle  is  said  to  have  been
fought  on  the  last  day  of  February.  Valerius  was
honoured  with  a  triumph,  and  was  the  first  consul
who  made  his  entry  in  a  chariot  and  four.  The  oc-
casion rendered  the  spectacle  glorious  and  venerable,
not  invidious,  and  (as  some  v.ould  have  it)  grievous
to  the  Romans ;  for,  if  that  had  been  the  case,  the
custom  Avould  not  have  been  so  zealously  kept  up,
nor  would  the  ambition  to  obtain  a  triumph  have  con-
tinued so  many  ages.  The  people  were  pleased
likewise  with  the  honours  paid  by  Valerius  to  the
remains  of  his  collegue,  his  burying  him  with  so
much  pomp,  and  pronouncing  his  funeral  oration ;
with  which  last  the  Romans  were  so  generally  grati-
fied, or  rather  so  much  delighted,  that  afterward  all
their  great  and  illustrious  men,  upon  their  decease,

^^  It  was  said  to  be  the  voice  of  the  god  Pan.  (L.)  ILlyy  (ii.  7.)
ascribes  it  to  Sylvanus,  Dion.  Halic.  to  Faunus.  Pan,  one  of  Bac-
chus" officers,  was  the  first  who  made  use  of  stratagem  to  terrify  the
enemy's  army,  whence  (according  to  some)  the  name  of  '  panic
terrors.'  See  however  Plut.  njfx  Irio'.  Kxt  Oa-ifii^.  «5'.  (Polyaen.  Strat.
i.  2.)  Dion.  Hahc.  differs  from  PluJarch  in  the  sequel  of  this
story.*


^4  mJEUCOLA.

had  their  en comi'wm  from  persons  of  distinction-'.
This  funeral  o^ration   was   more   ancient  than   any
among  the  Greeks ;  unless  we  allow  that  Solon,  as^
Anaximenes  the  orator  affirms,  was  the  author  of
this  custom.

But  what  oiTcnded  and  exasperated  the  people,
was  this:  Brutus,  whom  they  considered  as  the
father  of  liberty,  refused  to  rule  alone,  and  took  to
himself  a  first  aiid  a  tiecond  colleguc;  "  Yet  this  man,"
said  they,  "  grasps  tiie  whole  authority,  and  is  the
"  successor  not  to  tlie  consulate  of  Brutus,  to  which
^'  he  has  no  right,  but  to  the  tyranny  of  Tarquiu.
"  To  what  purpose  is  it  in  Avords  to  extol  Brutus,
"  and  in  deeds  to  imitate  Tarquin  ;  while  he  has  all
"  the  rods  and  axes  carried  before  himself  alone,  and
*'  sets  out  from  a  mansion  more  stately  than  the  ro}al
"  palace  which  he  lias  demolished?"  Valerius,  it
is  true,  lived  in  a  house  too  lofty  and  superb  on  the
Velian  eminence,  which  commanded  the  Forum  and
every  tiling  that  passed ;  and  as  the  avenues  were
difficult,  and  the  ascent  steep,  when  he  came  down
from  it  his  appearance  v/as  extremely  imposing,  and
resembled  the  state  of  a  king  more  than  that  of  a
consul.  But  he  soon  showed,  of  what  consequence
it  is  for  persons  in  high  stations  and  auth.ority  to
have  their  ears  open  to  truth  and  good  advice,  rather
than  to  flattery.  For  when  his  friends  informed  him,
that  most  people  thought  he  was  taking  wrong  steps,
he  made  no  resistance  nor  expressed  any  resentnient,
but  hastily  assembled  a  number  of  workmen  while  it

*■  Funeral  orations  were- not  in  use  amoJig  the  Greeks,  till  th«
hattieof  Miu-atlioii  (as  Diod.  Sic.  cifilrms,  xi.  33.)  which  was  sixteen
years  after  the  death  of  Brutus.  (L.)  I'Liblic  games  were  celebrated
at  tlje  obsequies  of  their  great  men,  but  the  law  which  ordained
their  elo^c^  was  of  much  later  institution.  Plutarch  assigns  to  it  too
early  a  date,  when  he  ascribes  it  to  Solon.*  The  heroes  of  Mara-
thon did,  indeed,  well  deserve  a  panegyric  ;  and  the  Grecians  never
granted  it  but  to  thoss,  who  were  slain  fighting  for  their  country.
In  this  respect,  the  custom  of  the  Romans,  as  Dion.  Halic.  (v.  3.)
obser%-es,  was  more  equitable;  for  they  honoured  with  those  public
Miark^  of  regard  such,  as  had  served  their  country  in  any  capacity.


PUBLICOLA.  ^ftS

was  yet  night,  who  entirely  demolished  his  house :
so  that,  when  the  Romans  in  the  morning  assembled
to  look  upon  it,  they  admired  and  adored  his  mag-
nanimity ;  but  at  the  same  time  grieved  to  behold  so
grand  and  magnificent  an  edifice  ruined  by  the  envy
of  the  citizens,  as  they  would  have  lamented  the
death  of  a  great  man,  who  had  fallen  as  suddenly
and  by  the  same  cause.  It  gave  them  pain  likewifte
to  see  the  consul,  who  had  now  no  home,  obliged  to
take  shelter  in  another  man's  hou.se.  For  Valerius
w^as  entertained  by  his  friends,  till  the  peo}->^le  pro-
vided a  piece  of  ground  for  him,  Vv'here  a  less  stately
house  was  built,  on  the  spot  upon  which  the  temple
of  Victory  now  stands  ^^.

Desirous  to  make  his  high  office,  as  well  as  him-
self, rather  agreeable  than  formidable  to  the  people^
he  ordered  the  axes  to  be  separated  from  the  rods ;
and  directed  that,  whenever  he  went  to  the  great
assembly,  the  rods  should  be  vailed  in  respect  to  the
citizens,  as  if  in  them  resided  the  supreme  power :
a  custom,  which  the  consuls  observe  to  this  day  "^.
The  people  were  not  aware,  that  by  this  he  did  not
lessen  his  own  power  (as  they  imagined)  but  only  by
moderation  obviated  and  cut  off  all  occasion  of  envy,
and  gained  as  much  authority  to  his  person,  as  he
seemed  to  forego  in  his  office  :  for  they  all  submitted
to  him  with  pleasure,  and  were  so  much  charmed
•with  his  behaviour,  that  they  gave  him  the  name  of

^''  Plutarch  lias  it,  '  where  the  temple  called  Vicus  Pubiicus.novr
stands.'  He  had  found  in  the  historians  vicce  po!i3,  which  in  the
old  Latin  signifies  '  victory;'  but  as  he  did  not  understand  it,  he
substituted  Vicus  Puhlkus',  which  would  here  have  no  sense -at  all.
(L.)  The  name  Vicce  Poiae  occurs  in  Livy  (ii.  7-)»  a^^d  is  suj^posed
to  be  derived  from  inncerc  and  f.ntiri.  The  prohibition  subsequently
issued,  that  no  patrician  should  reside  near  the  Capitol,  Fiutarch
elsewhere  ascribes  to  this  event ;  but  Livy  (vi.  20.)  makes  it  poste-
rior to  the  condemnation  of  Manlius,  who  after  having  saved  that
building  from  the  Gauls,  was  suspected  of  aspiring  to  sovereign
power,  and  upon  that  account  precipitated  from  the  Tarpeian
rock.*

^9  The  axes  too  were  still  borne  before  the  consuls,  when  thej
were  in  the  field


285  PUBLICOLA.

Publieola,  that  is  '  tlie  People's  respectllil  friend/
In  this,  botli  his  former  names  were  absorbed  ;  and
this  we  shall  make  use  of  throughout  the  sequel  of
his  Life.

It  was  no  more,  indeed,  than  his  due  ;  for  he  per-
mitted all  to  sue  for  the  consulsliip  ^''*  Yet  before  a
collegue  was  appointed  him,  as  he  knew  not  wliat
might  happen  and  was  apprehensive  of  some  oppo-
sition from  ignorance  or  envy,  while  he  had  the  sole
power,  he  made  use  of  it  to  establish  some  of  the
most  important  and  excellent  regulations.  In  the
first  place,  he  filled  up  the  senate,  which  was  at  that
time  very  thin  ;  several  of  that  august  body  having
been  put  to  death  by  Tarquin  before,  and  others
having  fallen  in  the  late  battle.  He  is  said  to  have
completed  their  number  to  a  hundred  and  sixty-four.
He  next  caused  certain  laws  to  be  enacted,  which
considerably  augmented  the  power  of  the  people.
The  first  gave  liberty  of  appeal  from  the  consuls  to
the  people  ;  the  second  made  it  death  to  enter  upon
the  magistracy  without  the  people's  consent ;  the
third  was  greatly  in  favour  of  the  poor,  as  by  exempt-
ing them  from  taxes  ■^^,  it  promoted  their  attention
to  manufactures.  Even  his  law  aoainst  disobedience
to  the  consuls  was  not  less  popular  than  the  rest ;
and,  in  effect,  it  favoured  the  commonalty  rather
than  the  great ;  for  the  fine  was  only  the  value  of
five  oxen  and  two  sheep.  The  value  of  a  sheep  was
ten  oboH,  of  an  ox  a  hundred^-;  the  Romans  as  yet
not  making  much  use  of  money,  because  their  wealth

^^  If  Publieola  gave  the  plebeians,  as  well  as  the  patricians,  a
fight  to  the  consulate,  that  right  did  not  then  take  place.  He  him-
self" indeed  (it  appears  below)  procured  the  election  oftwo  patrician
consuls,  Lucretius  Tind  Marcus  Ploratius,  as  his  collegues,  in  sucr
cession.  Lucius  Sextius  was  the  first  plebeian  who  attained  thsit
honour,  many  ages  after  the  time  of  which  Plutarch  speaks :  and
this  continued  only  eleven  years.  (Liv.  vii.  18.)

3'  He  exempted  artificers,  widows  and  old  men,  who  had  no
children  to  relieve  them,  from  paying  tribute.

^^  Before  this,  the  fine  was  such  as  the  coinmonalty  could  not  pay
without  absolute  ruin.


PUBLICOLA.  287

consisted  in  abundance  of  cattle.  To  this  day  tliey
call  their  substance  pcculia,  from  peciis,  'ca-ltJe;*
their  most  ancient  coins  having  the  impression  of  an
ox,  a  sheep,  or  a  hog,  and  their  sons  being  dis-
tinguished with  the  names  of  Suilli,  Bubuici,  Ca-
prarii,  and  Porcii,  derived  from  the  names  of  thoss
animals  ''^^.

Though  these  lavvs  of  Publicola  were  popular  and
equitable,  yet  amidst  this  moderation  the  punishment,
which  he  appointed  in  one  case,  was  severe.  For  he
made  it  lawful,  w^ithout  form  of  trial,  to  kill  any  man
that  should  attempt  to  set  himself  up  for  king  ;  and
the  person,  who  took  away  his  life,  was  to  stand
excused,  if  he  could  adduce  proof  of  the  intended
crime.  His  reason  for  such  a  law,  we  presume,  was
the  tbllowing:  thougli  it  is  not  possible  that  he,  wdio
undertakes  so  great  an  enterprise,  should  escape  all
notice;  yet  he  may  very ,  probably,  even  if  sus-
pected, accomplish  his  designs,  before  he  can  be
}>rouo;ht  to  answer  for  it  in  a  iudicial  way  :  and
as  the  crime,  if  connnitted,  would  })revent  liis
being  called  to  account  for  it  at  all,  this  law  em-
powered anv  one  to  punish  him  before  such  cogni-
sance was  taken.

His  law  concern ine:  the  treasury  did  him  honour.
It  was  necessary,  that  money  should  be  raised  for
the  wa.r  from  the  estates  of  the  citizens:  but  he  de-
termined that  neither  he  himsellj  nor  any  of  his
friends,  should  have  the  disposal  of  it ;  neither  would
he  suffer  it  to  be  lodged  in  any  private  house.  He
therefore  appointed  as  a  treasury  the  temple  of  Saturn,
whicli  is  stiil  used  for  that  purpose,  and  empowered
the  people  to  choose  two  young  men  asqua3stors,  or
treasurers  ^^     The  first  were  Fublius  Veturius  and

33  The  best  families,  as  M.  Rlcard  observe?,  often  bore  names
derived  from  country-animals,  because  they  were  of  tberuttic  tribes,
a  class  much  more  honourable  tlian  tliose  of  the  city,  v»bich  chiefiy
consisted  of  tradesmen  fi.nd  artisans.*

3-*  "The  cfrice  of  the  quaestors  was  to  take  care  of  the  public  trea-
sure, for  which  they  were  accoui-.t  ible  whep  their  year  e.\pite4;

9


ess  PUBLICOLA.

Marcus  Minutius ;  and  a  large  sum  v.as  collected :
for  a  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  persons  were
taxed,  though  the  orphans  and  widows  stood  ex-
cused.

These  matters  thus  regulated,  he  procured  Lucre-
tius, the  father  of  the  injured  Lucretia,  to  be  ap-
])ointed  his  collegue.  To  him  he  gave  the  fasces  (as
they  are  called)  together  with  the  precedency,  as
the' older  man  ;  and  this  mark  of  respect  to  age  has
contiiuicd  ever  since.  As  Lucretius  died  a  few  days
afterward,  another  election  was  held,  and  ?>larcus
Horatius''  was  appointed  in  his  room  for  the  re-
mainder of  the  year.

About  that  time,  Tarquin  making  preparations
for  a  second  war  against  tJie  Romans,  a  great  pi'o-
digy  is  said  to  have  taken  place.  This  prince,  while
vet' upon  tiie  throne,  had  almost  finished  the  temple
"of  Jupiter  Ca})ito]inr;s,  when  either  by  the  direction
of  an  oracle",  or  from  some  whim  of  his  own,  he

to  furnish  the  necessTiry  sums  for  the  service^of  the  public;  end  hi
receive  and  attend  embassadors,  and  provide  them  with  lodgings
and  other  -nt'cesr-arios.  A  general  could  not  obtain  the  honours  of
a  triumph,  till  he  had  given  them  a  faithful  account  of  the  i^poils
which  he  had  taken,  and  confirmed  it  by  an  oath.  There  were  at
first  only  two-quncsiors,  but  when  tlie  Roman  empire  vais  cansider-
ablv  euiarffed,  their  number  was  increased.  Their  office,  though
freijuentlv  discharged  by  persons  who  had  been  consuls,  was  tlie
first  step' fo  great  employments.  (L.)  Plutarch  seems  to  refer  to
the  dAte  of  their  first  institution ;  see  also  Livy  iv.  11.  But  Ta-
citus ('Ann.  xi.  22.)  assigns  them  to  the  aera  of  the  kings,  and  says
tlrat  it  was  sixty-three  years  alter  the  expulsion  of  Tarquin,  before
the  right  of  electing  them  was  transferred  to  the  people.  Of  this,
probabiv,  Tlutarch  here  speaks.*

S5  Horatius  Pulvillus.

3«  It  was  a  usual  thing  to  place  chariots,  <S:c.  on  th.e  tops  of  tem-
ple?:, called  Fa^ii^sia.  Neither  Livy,  however,  nor  Dion.  Malic,
mention  this  chariot;  though  they  detail,  with  suriicient  minute-
ness, tiie  building  of  the  temple"^  by  Tarquin.  The  increase  or
r.<>ntraction  of  any  fatal  substance  was  considered  as  an  omen  ot^
AMiod  or  ill  fortune  respectively.  The  enlargemeiit  of  a  loaf  ot
bread  in  the  oven  announced  to  the  shepherd  Perdicca?  the  crown
.of  Macedon  {Herod,  viii.  1S7.);  and  the  diminution  of  the  Soi/es
Prcenectivcc  (Liv.  xxL  (S2.,  xxii.  1.)  sent  the  decemvirs  to  their  sa-
jcred  books,  to  learn  how  they  might  avert  the  dreadful  augury.*

12


I'UBLICOLA.  289

ordered  the  artists  of  Veil  to  make  an  earthen  cha-
riot, which  was  to  be  pkiced   r.jion   it's  top.     Soon
after  this,  he  lost   the  crown.     The  1  uscans  liow-
ever  moulded  the  chariot,  and  set  it  in  the  furnace  ;
but  the  case  was  very  dificrcnt  with  it  from  that  of
other  clay  in  tlie  fire,  wh.ich  condenses  and  contracts
upon  the  exhalation  of  the  moisture ;  whereas  this
enlarged  itself  and  swelled  to  such  a  size  and  hard-
ness, that  it  was  with  difficulty  drawn  out,  even  after
the  furnace  was  dismantled.     The  soothsayers  bein^^
of  opinion,  that  this  chariot  betokened  power  and
success  to  the  persons  w^ith  v/hom  it  should  remain,
the  people  of  Veii   determined  not  to  give  it  up  to
the  Romans;  but  upon  their  demanding  it  replied,
"  That  it  belonged  to  Tarquin,  not  to  those  who
"  had  driven  him  from  his  kingdom."     It  happened
that,  a  few  days  afterward,  there  was  a  chariot-race
at  Veii,  which  went  Oii  in  the  usual  manner ;  ex-
cept that  as  the  charioteer,  who  had  w^on  the  prize
and  received  the  crown,  was  gently  driving  out  of
the  ring,  the  horses  took  fright  without  any  Visible
cause  ;  and,  either  by  some  direction  of  the  gods  or
some  turn  of  fortune,  ran  away  with  their  dri\'er  at
full  speed  toward   Rome.     It  was  in  vain   that  he
pulled   the    reins,    or    soothed   them    with  words  ;
he  was  obliged  to  give  w-ay  to  their   career,    and
was  whirled  along   till  they  came  to   the  Capitol,
where  they  threw  him   out  at  the  gate  nov/  called
Ratamcna  '^K     The  Veientes,  surprised  and  terrified
at  this  incident,  ordered   the  artists  to  give  up  tlie
chariot  ^^

Tarquin  the  son   of  Demaratus,  in   his  wars  v/ith
the  Sabines,  made  a  vow  to  build  a  temple  to  Jupiter


37  The  young  man's  name  was  Ratumenas.     See  Plin.  viii,  42.,
and  Fcfttiis  voc.  Ratitmeiias.^

3**  A  miracle  of  tijis  kiiul,  and  not  less  extraorclinarv',  is  said  to
Imve  happened  in  modern  Rome.  When  pooii*  St.  Michael's  church
MHs  in  a  ruinous  condition,  the  hoHies,  tli?.t  were  emplovcid  in
drawino-  stones  for  other  purposes  through  the  city,  unanimJUilj
a"Teed  to  carrv  theii-  loads  to  St.  Michael !
VOT.i  I*  I J


290  rUBLICOLA.

Capltolinus  ;  whicli  was  performed  by  Tarquin  tlie
Proud,  the  son  or  grandson  of  the  former '''•^.  lie
did  not  however  eonsecrate  it,  for  before  it  wa^
quite  linished,  ht\  was  expelled  fiom  jlonie  ■*".  \\'heti
it  was  completed,  and  had  received  every  suitable
ornament,  Publicola  was  ambitious  of  the  honour  of
dedicating  it.  This  excited  the  envy  of  some  of  the
nobility,  wiio  could  better  brook  his  other  honours  ;
to  which  indeed,  in  his  legislative  and  military  capa-
cities, he  had  a  superior  claim  :  but,  as  lie  had  no
concevn  in  this,  instead  of  granting  it  to  him,  tlicy
encouraged  and  importuned  Horatius  to  apply  for  it.
In  the  mean  time,  Tublicola's  conmiand  of  the  army
necessarily  requiretl  his  absence ;  and  his  adversa-
ries, seizing  this  opportunity  to  procure  an  order
from  the  people  that  Horatius  should  dedicate  the
temple,  conducted  him  to  the  Capitol:  a  point,
which  they  could  not  have  gained,  had  Publicola
been  present.  Yet  some  say,  the  consuls  ha\ing
cast  lots  for  it  ^',  the  dedication  fell  to  Horatius;
and  the  expedition,  against  his  inclination,  to  Pub-
licola. AVe  may  easily  conjecture,  however,  how
they  stood  disposed,  by  the  proceedings  upon  tljc
day  of  dedication.  This  was  the  thirteenth  of  Sep-
tember, which  is  about  the  full  moon  of  the  month
Metagitnion  ;  when  prodigious  numbers  of  all  ranks
beinq;  assembled,  and  silence  enioined,  Horatius
after  the  other  ceremonies  took  hold  of  one  ot  the
gate-posts  (a:i  the  custom  is),  and  w-as  going  to  pro-

39  Livy  (i.  4(5.)  has  the  same  doubt  upon  this  .subject,  though  lie
seems  inclined  to  th.c  former  opinion.  But  Dion.  Hiilic.  has  proved
(iv.  'J.)  by  indisputi^hle  arguments,  that  Lucius  and  Aruns  Tarciui-
liius  wero  the  grandchildren  of  tlie  elder  Tarquin.*

•"  This  temple  was  two  Iiundred  feet  long,  and  up'vard  of  one
hundred  and  eighty-five  broad.  The  front  uas  adorned  vith  three
rows  of  colunnvj,  and  the  sides  with  two.  In  the  nave  were
three  slrrines,  owe  of  Jupiter,  another  of  Juno,  and  the  third  of
Minerva.     See  a  description  of  it  in  Dion.  Halic.  iv.  \':i.

•»'  Livy  says  poriilively  (^ii.  8.),  '  tliey  cast  lots  for  it.'  And  from
him  Plutarcii.  seems  to  have  taken  the  sequel  of  the  story.  (L.)  It-
was  a  high  honour,  because  the  name  of  the  dedicator  wtis  inscribed
oh  the  no;;t  oi't'h;.'  tcrjple.*


PUBLICOLA.  '291

r.onnce  the  prayer  of  consecration.  But  Marcus
the  brother  or'  rublicola,  who  had  stood  for  some
time  !)y  the  pites  watching-  his  opportuiiity,  cried
out;  *^  Consiii,  your  son  lies  dea/l  in  the  camp."
This  gave  great  pain  to  all,  who  heard  it :  but  the
consul,  not  in  the  least  disconcerted,  replied,  "  Then
"  cast  oui  the  carcase  where  you  please,  I  admit  of
"  no  mourning  upon  this  occasion  ;"  and  so  pro-
ceeded to  iinish  tlie  dedication.  The  intelligence
however  was  ;i  fabrication  of  Marcus,  wlio  hoped
thus  to  prevent  Horatius  from  completing  what  he
v^as  al)oul:.  But  his  presence  of  mind  is  equally  ad-
mirable, whetiier  he  inunediately  perceived  the
falsity,  or  believed  the  account  to  be  correct  without
betraying  any  emotion  upon  it.

The  same  fortune  attended  the  dedication  of  tlia
second  temple.  The  first  built  by  Tarquin,  and  de-
dicated by  Horatius  as  we  have  related,  was  sub-
sequently destroyed  by  iire  in  the  civil  Vvurs"*-.
Sylla  rebuilt  it,  but  did  not  live  to  consecrate  it ;
npon  which  the  fledication  of  this  second  temple  fell
to  Catukis.  it  was  again  destroyed  in  the  troubles,.
which  happened  in  the  time  of  Viteilius  ;  and  a  third
was  built  by  Vespasian,  who  with  his  usual  good  for-
tune put  the  last  hand  to  it,  but  did  not  see  it  demo-
lished, as  it  u  as  soon  afterward  :  happier  in  this  re-
spect than  oylla,  who  died  before  his  was  dedicated,
Vespasian  died  before  his  was  destroyed.  For,  im-
mediateiy  after  his  decease,  the  Capitol  was  burned..

"•^  After  it's  destruction  in  the  \vars  between  Sylla  and  Marias
(A.U.  C.  669.)  Sylla  rebuilt  it  with  columns  of  marble,  whieh  be
liad  taken  out  of  the  ternple  of  Jupiter  Olyrnpius  at  Atliei's,  ar.d
transported  to  Rome.  But  (as  Plutarch  observes)  he  did  r.r^l  live
to  coaseerate  it;  and  he  was  heard  to  say,  as  he  was  dying,  tliat  his
leaving  that  temple  to  be  dedicated  by  another  was  the  only  un-
fortunate ciiciimstance  of  his  life.  (L.)  It  was  burned  a  second
time,  when  Viteilius  was  besieging  Flavins  Sabinus  in  the  Capitol  j
but  whether  by  the  besiegers  or  besiegeel,  as  Tacitus  (Hist,  iii,
71,  72.)  states,  is  doubtful.  Vespasian  restored  it  the  year  follov/-
itjg;  and  tiie  last-u)entioned  historian  (Hist.  iv.  53.)  details  ail  the
ceremonies  used  upon  tlie  occasion.  It  was  finally  rebuilt  by  Do-
mitian,  and  inscribed  (as^  Suetonius  afErms)  with  his  name,  \vith<2ut
any  n;eiUi(iu  of  it's  original  founder.*

U   2


293  PUBLICOLA.

The  foLirtli,  which  is  now  standing,  w^as  built  and
dedicated  by  Doniitian.  Tarquin  is  said  to  have  ex-
pended tliirty  thousand  pounds'  weiglit  of  silver
upon  the  Ibundations  alone  ;  but  the  greatest  wealth,
oKwiiicli  any  piivate  man  is  sup})osed  to  be  now  pos-
sessed in  Rome,  would  not  defray  the  expense  of
the  mere  gilding  of  the  present  temple,  which
amounted  to  more  than  twelve  thousand  talents ■'^.
The  pillars  are  of  Fentelic  marble,  and  the  thickness
was  in  most  exact  proportion  to  their  length,  when
"we  saw  them  at  Athens  :  upon  being  cut  however
and  polished  anew  at  Rome,  they  gained  less  in  the
polish,  than  they  lost  in  the  proportion  ;  for  their
beauty  is  injured  by  tiieir  appearing  too  slender  for
their  hcnVht ".  But  after  admirinu'  the  mafirnificence
of  the  Capitol,  if  any  one  v^ere  to  go  and  sec  a  gal-
lery, a  bailor  bath,  or  the  apartments  of  the  women
in  Domitian's  palace  j  what  is  said  by  Epicharmus  of
a  prodigal,

Your  lavisli'd  stores  speak  not  the  liberal  mind,
But   the  disease  of  giving,

he  might  apply  to  that  emperor  in  some  such  man-
ner as  this :  "  Neither  piety,  nor  magnificence,
"  appears  in  your  expense  ;  you  have  the  disease

_y  Livy  (i.  55.)  judiciously  prefers  the  more  -moderate  estimate
«if  Fabius,  an  elder  historian,  to  that  of  Piso,  whom  Plutarch
seems  to  tblloH-.*  The  great  interval  between  the  wealth  of  private
citizens  in  a  free  country,  and  that  of  the  subjects  of  an  arbitrary
monarch,  is  highly  deservinir  of  remark.  In  Trajan's  time,  there
was  not  a  private  man  in  Itome  worth  '2()0,()0()/.;  whereas  unikr
the  commonwfe'alth  ylLmilius  8caurus,  in  his  a?dilesliip,  erected  a
tempor.T.y  theatre  which  cost  above  500,000/.;  Marcus  Crassus  had
ail  estate  in  land  oi"  above  a  million  a  year;  L.  Cornelius  Balbus  left
by  will  to  tvcry  Koman  citizen  twenty-five  denarii,  which  amounts
to  about  sixteen  shillings  of  our  money;  and  many  private  men
among  tiie .  Roman.?,  more  for  ostentation  th;Tn  for  service,  main-
rained  from  ten  to  tuenty  thousand  slaves.  No  wonder  then  that
the  slaves  once  took  up  arms,  and  went  to  war  with  the  common-
wealtii.

^■*  Tiie  lloman  artist?,  by  the  concession  of  their  ov.  n  writers,
were  :d.vays  both  in  t'uste  and  execution  inferior  to  those  of  Greece.
Stfc  Ilor.  i'"p.  to  Aug.,  and  Art.  Poet.*


PUBLICOLA.  293


of  building  ;  like  Midas  of  old,  you  would  turn
every  thing  to  gold  and  marble."     So  much  for
this  subject.

Let  us  now  return  to  Tarquin.  After  the  great
battle,  in  which  his  son  was  killed  in  single  combat
by  Brutus,  he  fled  to  Clusium,  and  begged  assist-
ance of  Laras"*^  Porsena,  the  most  powerful  prince
in  Italy,  and  a  man  of  eminent  worth  and  honour.
Porsena  promised  him  succours  ^^ ;  and,  in  the  first
place,  sent  to  the  llomans,  commanding  them  to
receive  Tarquin.  Upon  their  refusal,  he  declared
war  against  them  ;  and  having  informed  them  of
the  time  when,  and  the  place  where,  he  intended
to  make  his  assault,  he  marched  thither  accordingly
w^ith  a  considerable  army.  Publicoia,  who  was  then
absent,  w^as  chosen  consul  the  second  time^'';  and
with  him  Titus  Lucretius.  Returning  to  Rome,
and  desirous  to  outdo  Porsena  in  spirit  *%  he  built
the  tovv-n  of  Sigliuria,  notwithstanding  the  enemy's
approach ;  and  when  at  an  immense  expense  he  had
finished  tlie  walls,  he  placed  in  it  a  colony  of  seven
hundred  men,  as  if  he  held  his  adversary  very  cheap.
Porsena  however  assaulted  it  in  a  spirited  manner,
drove  out  the  garrison,  and  pursued  the  fugitives  so
close,  that  he  was  very  near  entering  Rome  along
with  them.  But  Publicoia  met  him  w^ithout  the
gates,  and  engaging  him  by  the  side  of  the  river,

♦?  Many  commentators  rcj;avd  this  as  a  name  of  honour,  imply-
ing the  head  or"  the  twelve  Lucumons,  or  dodecarchy  of  Etruiiaj
but  Dion.  Halic,  v.  4.,  considers  it  as  a  private  name.*

•*"  Beside  that  Porsena  was  willing  to  assist  a  distressed  king,  he
considered  tlie  Tarquins  as  his  countrymen,  on  account  of  their
Tuscan  extraction.  But  the  announcing  of  his  plans  is  not  men-
tioned either  by  Livy  or  by  Dion.  Halic.

''"  It  was  when  Publicoia  was  consul  the  third  time,  and  had  for
collegue  Horatius  Pulvillus,  according  to  Dion.  Halic,  tliat  Por-
sena marched  against  Rome.  (L.)  Livy,  however,  agrees  with
Plutarch.*

•48  Sigliuria  was  not  built  at  this  time,  nor  out  of  ostentation,  as
Plutarch  says;  for  it  was  built  as  a  barrier  against  the  Latins  and
the  Hernici,  and  not  in  the  third,  but  in  the  second  consui6.hip  of
Publicoia.  (L.)  It  is  probably  the  »ame  place,  which  Livy  (i.55.)
calls  Signia.*


591  J'UBLICOLA.

siistaified  the  enemy's  attack,  vvho  pressed  or\  with
n limbers ;  till  at  last,  sinking  under  the  wounds  lie
had  gallantly  received,  he  was  carried  out  of  the
bactle.  Lucretius  his  coiicsjue  having  had  the  same
fate,  the  courage  of  the  ilomans  drooped,  and  they
retreated  into  the  city  for  security.  Tlie  enemy
jnaking  good  their  pursuit  to  the  wooden-bridge,
Rome  was  in  great  danger  of  being  taken ;  when
Horatius  Codes  ^^  and  with  him  two  others  of  the
first  rank,  Herminius  and  Spurius  Lartius  '",  stopped
them  at  the  bridge.  Horatius  had  the  surname  of
'  Codes'  from  iiis  liaving  lost  an  eye  in  war  ;  or
(as  some  will  have  it)  from  the  form  of  his  nose,
win'ch  was  so  extrem.dy  flat  that  both  his  eyes,  as
well  as  eye-brows,  seemed  to  be  joined  together  ;  so
that  when  the  vulgar  intended  to  call  him  '  Cyclops,'
by  a  misnomer  they  called  him  Codes,  which  name
he  retained '\  This  man,  standing  at  the  head  of
the  bridge,  defended  it  against  the  enemy,  till  the
Romans  broke  it  down  behind  him.  He  then,  '  ac-
couti'ed  as  he  was,*  plunged  into  the  Ti[)er,  and
swam  to  the  other  side,  but  was  wounded  in  the
hip  with  a  Tuscan  spear.  Fublicola,  struck  with
admiration  of  his  valour,  immediately  prociued  a
decree,  that  every  lloman  should  give  him  one
day's  provisions  •^- J  and  that  he  should  have  us  much

•"  He  was  SOI  to  a  brother  of  Horatius  the  coiifvil,  and  a  cle-
PCtntVent  of  that  n()ratir.s,  who  roniaiiiod  victarioiiy  in  the  siLjiial
combat  !)ct\veen  the  Horatii  and  Cufiatii  under  Tullus  Ilobtihiit;.
(L.)  Ill  the  account  ol"  this  enifa^eiiient,  the  details  of  Phitarch
and  Dion.  Hah'c.  nuist  be  considered  as  suppienii.-iUarv  to  each
olln^r.*

f*  In  tlio  GrCL'k  text  it  is  '  Lucretius,'  whicli  is  i«,-.)'>aS!y  a  cor-
ruption of  *  Lartius,*  the  name  we  find  in  Livy.  (L.)  The  bridge
Wfis  the  Po»v  Sui)l!ciu.<;.*

^*  Dion.  Halic.  says,  that  he  was  so  called,  from  having  lost  an
cy<s  in  thi-^  battle  CvThicli  is  the  aiost  probable)  :  was  a  very  intrepid
warrior,  and  was  thennly  one  o'" the  three  wlio  held  out  to  the  last;
hrs  two  companions  having  retreated,  before  the  biic'r^e  \y,\&  broken
do\vn  behind  them.*

5^  lis  had  probably  three  hundred  thousand  ccntrihutors,  for
even  the  women  n  odily  furnished  their  quota.  (L.)  There  was  at
tliat  time,  too,  a  coiisiderablc  scarcity  at  Rome.*

12


PUBLICOLA.  2§5

land,  as  he  coiild  encircle  with  a  plough  in  one
day.  They  erected  likev/ise  liis  statue  in  brass  in
the  teni})lc  of  Vulcan,  with  a  view  to  console  him
l)V  tliis  honour  ibr  his  wound,  and  the  lameness
consequent  upon  it  '^.

While  Porsena  laid  close  siege  to  i^Q  city,  the
Romans  were  attacked  with  famine,  and  another
body  of  Tuscans  rava^-ed  tlie  country.  Publicola,
■who  was  now  consul  the  third  time,  was  ot  opinion
that  no  operations  could  be  carried  on  against  Por-
sena but  defensive  ones.  Pie  marched  ont'^"^  how-
ever privately  against  those  Tuscans  who  had  com-
mitted such  ravages,  defeated  them,  and  killed  five
thousand.

The  story  of  Mucius  '"  has  been  the  subject  of
inany  pens,  and  is  variously  related  :  I  shall  give
that  account  of  it,  v.hicii  appears  the  most  credible.
}lucius  was  in  all  respects  a  man  of  merit,  but  par-
ticularly distin<2:uished  by  his  valour.  Having  se-
cretly  formed  a  sciieniC  to  take  oil  Porsena,  he  made
his  way  into  his  camp  in  a  Tuscan  dress,  where  he
likewise  took  care  to  speak  the  Tuscan  languap;e.
Thus  disguised  he  approached  the  scat,  wliere  the
king  sat  with  his  nobles ;  and  as  he  did  not  certainly
know  Porsena,  and  thought  it  improper  to  inquire,
lie  drew  his  sword,  and  killed  the  person  whrt
seemed  most  likely  to  be  the  king.  Upon  this  he
was  seized,  and  examined.  In  the  mean  time,  as
there  happened  to  be  u  portable  altar  in  the  })lace
with  fire   upon  it,  where  the  king  Was  about  to  ofl'er

^'^  This  tlefcrt,  Riul  Iiis  havilitr  but  one  eye,  prevented  his  ever
hi-in;^  consul.  (L.)  To  reconcil.^  tlie  site  heiL'  assi<;iied  to  t'le  statue
rti(h  the  dccounts  given  by  Livy  (ii.  10.)  t'.hfl  Dion.  Ilalic.,  Who
h.'th  .<;tate  t'.Kit  it  was  placed  in  a  difi'ercnt  i^ituation,  consult.  A.
(Teilti!>;  iv.  ,5.*

''■*  The  consuls  spread  a  report,  which  was  soon  carried  into  the
Tuscan  camp  by  the  slaves  who  de.-erted,  tliat  the  next  day  all  the
cattle  brought  thither  tVoin  the  country  \\ouId  be  sent  to  f^raze
ifi  the  fields  under  a  gunrct.  This  biiit  dtcw  the  eneiiiy  into  diV
rimbush.

-5  C.  Mucius  Cordus.


2&6  PUBLICOLA.

sacrifice.  Mucins  thrust  Iiis  right  hand  into  it '" :
and,  while  the  flesh  was  burning,  kept  looking  upon
Porsena  with  a  firm  and  menacing  aspect :  till  tiie
king,  astonished  at  liis  fortitude,  returned  him  his
sword  with  his  own  hand.  He  received  it  with  his
left-hand  (whence  we  are  told  he  had  the  surname  of
'  Scsevola,'  signifying  '  left  handed')  and  thus  ad-
dressed himself  to  Porsena  ;  "  Your  threatenings  I
"  regarded  not,  but  I  am  conquered  by  your  gene-
"  rosity,  and  out  of  gratitude  will  declare  to  you,
*'  what  no  force  should  have  wrested  from  me.
"  There  are  three  hundred  Romans  that  have  formed
"  the  same  resolution  with  mine,  who  now  wander
"  about  your  camp,  watching  their  opportunity.
"  It  was  my  lot  to  make  the  first  attempt,  and  I  am
"  not  sorry  that  my  sword  was  directed  by  fortune
"  against  another,  instead  of  a  man  of  so  much
*'  honour  ;  who,  as  such,  should  rather  be  a  friend
*'  than  an  enemy  to  the  Romans."  Porsena  believed
this  account,  and  was  more  inclined  to  liearken  to
terms,  not  so  much  (in  my  opinion)  through  fear  of
the  three  hundred  assassins,  as  from  admiration  of
the  dignity  of  the  Roman  valour'.  All  authors  call
this  man  Mucins  Scaevola  ^%  except  Athenodorus
Sandon,  who  in  a  work  addressed  to  Augustus'  sister
Pctavia,  affirms  that  he  was  named  Posthumius.
Publicola,  who  did  not  regard  Porsena  as  so  bitter

s^  Livy  (ii.  12.)  says,  that  Porsena  tlireatencd  Mucins  v/itli  the
torture  by  fire,  to  make  him  discover  his  accouipliccs  ;  upon  which
iMucius  thrust  his  hand  into  the  flame,  to  let  hiiu  see  that  he  was
not  to  be  intimidated.  (L.)  In  the  particulars  of  tlie  narrative  this
historian,  Val.  Max.  (iii,  S.),  and  riutarch  nearly  agree.  Those
detailed  by  Dion.  Halic.  (v.  4.)  are  somewhat  dilierent.  Among
other  circumstances,  he  wholly  omits  the  mention  of  his  burning  off
hi.<  right-hand.*         '    ,

i7  Dion  Halic.  however  ascribes  the  pacification  to  the  success-
ful sally  of  Publicola,  niLintioned  above,  which  he  relates  as  sub-
sequent to  Mucius'  exploit."^

58  Muci  IS  was  re..arded  with  a  large  piece  of  ground  belong-
ing to  the  public.  (L.)  Sandon,  a  stoic  philosopher  of  Tarsus
mentioned  below,  was  successively  Hitor  to  Augustus  and  Tiberius
Ca^sar.*


PUBLICOLA.  297

iin  enemy  to  Rome,  but  that  he  deserved  to  be  taken
jiito  it's  friendship  and  alliance,  far  from  refusing  to
refer  the  dispute  with  Tarquin  to  his  decision,  was
really  desirous  of  it ;  and  several  times  offered  to
prove,  that  Tarquin  was  the  worst  of  men,  and  justly
deprived  of  the  crown.  Tarquin  roughly  replying,
that  he  v/ould  admit  of  no  arbitrator,  much  Jess  of
Porsena,  if  he  changed  iiis  mind  and  forsook  his
alliance  ^"^ ;  Porsena  was  offended,  and  began  to  en-
tertain an  ill  opinion  of  him  :  and  being  solicited  by
liis  son  Aruuo,  who  used  all  his  interest  for  the
Eomans,  he  was  prevailed  upon  to  put  an  end  to
the  war,  on  condition  of  their  ceding  the  part  of
Tuscany  Avhich  they  had  conquered''",  together
witli  their  prisoners,  and  receiving  their  deserters.
For  the  performance  of  these  conditions,  they  gave
fis  hostages  ten  youiig  men  and  ten  virgins,  of  the
best  tiunilics  in  Rome ;  among  whom  was  Valeria,
the  daughter  of  Publicola.

Upon  the  faitli  of  this  treaty,  Porsena  had  dis-
continued all  acts  of  hostility;  when  the  Roman
virgins  went  down  to  bathe,  at  a  place  where  the
bank  forming  itself  in  a  crescent  embays  the  river
in  such  a  manner,  as  to  make  it  quite  calm  and  un-
disturbed with  waves.  As  no  guard  was  near,  and
they  saw  none  passing  or  repassing,  they  had  a
violent  inclination  to  swim  over,  notwithstanding
the  depth  and  the  strength  of  the  stream  °\  Some
say  one  of  them,  named  Clcelia,  passed  it  on  horse-
back, and  encouraged  the  other  virgins  as  they
swam.  When  they  came  safe  to  Publicola,  he  nei-
ther commended  nor  approved  their  exploit ;  but
was  grieved  to  think  that  he  should  appear  inferior

59  This  answer  is  not  recorded  by  Livy,  nor  from  the  statement
of  Dion,  rialic.  (v.  4'.)  does  it  appear  at  all  probable.*

^°  The  Romans  were  required  to  re-instate  the  Vcientes  in  the
possession  of  seven  villages,  which  they  had  taken  from  them  in
former  wars.  (Liv.  ii.  13.)

^'  Here  the  historians  so  often  quoted,  Livy  and  Dion.  Halic,
vary  from  Plutarch  and  from  each  other ;  but  to  an  extent  so  slight,
as  not  to  justify  any  detail  of  theu-  differences.*

9


rr


^9-B  PUBLIGOLA.

to  l^Oi-i^ena  in  priint  of  honour,  and  that  tin's  darin^j
enterprif^e  of  the  virgins  should  subject  the  Romans
to  a  sii5!picion  of  unfair  proceeding.     He  took  them,
therefore,  and   sent  them   back   to   Por.sena.     Tar-
quin,    having   timely   intelligence   of  this,  laid    an
ambuscade   for   them,    and    attacked  tlieir   convoy
with  a  great  superioi-ity  of  force.     They  stood,  how-
ever,  upon  tlieir  defence  ;  and  Valeria,  the  daughter
of  Publicola,  broke  through    the   combatants  "with
three  servant.".,  who  conducted  her  safe  to  Porsena's
camp.     As  the  skirmish   was  not  yet  decided  nor
the    danger  over,  Aruns  the  son  of  Poj'sena,  being
informed  of  it,  marched  up  with  all  speed,  put  the
enemy  to  flight,  and  rescued  the  Romans.     When
Porsena   saw   the   virgins    returned,    he   demaiided
whicli  of  them  was  sl^.e  that  proposed  the  desio;n,  and
set  the  example.     Being  informed  that  Cla^ia  was
the  person,  he  treated  her  with  great  politeness;
and,    commanding   one   of  his   own    horses    to   be
brouglit  with  very  elegant  trappings,  made  her  a
present  of  it.     Those    who    contend,    that   Cloelia
was  the  only  one   that  passed  tlie  river  on   hor'ie-
back,  allege  this  as  a  proor!     Eut  others  affirm,  that
no  such  consequence  can  be  drav,-n  from  it,  and  that
it  was  nothing  more  than  a  mark  of  honour  to  her
from  the  Tuscan  king,  for  her  bravery.     An  eques-
trian statue  of  her  stands  in  the  Via  8acra'"",  where
it  leads  to  mount   Palatiiic ;  which   some  however
will  have  to  be  A'aleria's,  not  Cloelia*s  statue.

Porsena,  thus  reconciled  to  the  Romans,  gave
many  proofs  of  his  greatness  of  mind.  Among  the
rest,  he  ordered  the  Tuscans  to  carry  off  nothijig
but  their  arms,  and  to  leave  their  camp  full  of  pro-
visions and  many  other  things  of  value  lor  the  Ro-
mans. Hence  it  is  that  even  in  our  times,  whenever
there  is  a   sale  of  goods  belonging  to  the  public,

^-  Dion.  Halic.  expressly  infcrms  us,  th.-^t  in  hi?  time  (that  is,  in
the  rei;;n  of  Angust-j-.)  there  tvere  no  remains  of  thfvt  statue,  it
hiaving  been  consumed  by  fire.  (L.)  Pliny,  ho'.Vever  (kxxiv.  6.),
'tgrees  with  Plutarch.*


PUB  LI  COLA.  29d

they  are  cried  first  as  *  the  goods  of  Porsena%*  to
eternise  the  memory  of  his  generosity.  A  brasen
statue,  of  rude  and  antique  workmansliip,  was  also
erected  to  his  honour,  near  tiie  senate-liouse''^

After  this,  the  8abines  invading  tlie  Roman  ter-
ritory, Marcus  Valerius,  the  brother  of  Publicola,
and  Posthumius  Tubertus  were  elected  consuls.  As
every  important  action  was  stiil  conducted  by  the
ad^'ice  and  assistance  of  Publicola,  Marcusgained  two
great  battles  ;  in  the  second  of  which  he  killed  thir-
teen thousand  of  the  enemy,  without  the  loss  of  a
single  lloman.  For  this  he  was  not  only  rewarded
with  a  triiunph,  but  a  house  uas  built  for  him  at  the
])ublic  expense  on  mount  Palatine^'.  And  whereas
the  doors  of  other  houses  at  that  time  opened  inward,
it's  street-door  was  made  to  open  outward,  to  show
by  this  honourable  distinction,  that  he  was  always
ready  to  receive  any  proposal  for  the  {jublic  ser-
vice^'. Ail  the  doors  in  Greece,  they  tell  us,  were
ibrmeriy  made  to  open  in  this  manner ;  which  they
prove  from  those  passages  in  the  comedies,  w^here  it
is  mentioned  that  persons  going  out  knocked  loudly
on  the  inside  of  the  doors  first,  to  give  warning  to
such  as  were  passing  by  or  standing  bcibre  theni)  lest
the  doors  in  oneniiig  should  dasii  against  them.

The  vear  rbliowing,  Publicola  was  appointed  con-
sul the  h)urth  time,  because  a  confederacy  between
the  Sabiiics  and  Latins  th.reatened  a  w'ar ;  and,  at
t!ie  same  time,  the  city  v.as  oppiessed  with  supersti-

'■'  'iliis,  liov.tver  f ac'CGV.ling  to  Liv.  ii.  1 1-.),  was  differently  in-
ti.'rprctuil ;  for,  though  he  agrees  with  I'Ku-arch,  otiicrs  it.  seemS'
con-iclcred  the  ])hruso  a?  intended  to  record  the  tiuhire  olTorsena's
en!:vrprise.*

'•-♦  The  senate  likeu'if.ej  according  to  Dion,  Hahc.  sent  an  em-
ba-ty  to  biiiJ,  v,iti>.  a  presei;t  oF  a  tlirone  adorned  with  ivory,  a
peeptre,  a  crov.n  of  gold,  find  a  triumphal  rohe.  Neither  he,  nor
Livy,  nier:ti():i>  thi.s  hraseii  statue.

■  '''  Before  tliis  Itouse  ^vas  erected  a  hrasen  hull,  as  an  emblem
that  Yalerins  hy  his  victories  had  restored  agriculture  and  abun-
daiice  to  Iv  >n>c.     f^ee  Piin.  \xxvi.  I.>.*

^^'  Posthumiii!--  iuid  Lis  >bare  in  the  triumph,  as  well  as  in  thi^-
achieveraciits.


300  PUBLICOLA.

tioiis  terrors,  on  account  of  the  imperfect  births  and
general  abortions  among  the  women.  Piibiicola,
iiaving  consulted  the  Sibyl's  books  upon  it "',  otlered
sacrifice  to  Pluto  ;  and  renewed  certain  games,  which
liad  formerly  been  instituted  by  the  direction  of  the
Delphic  oracle.  When  he  had  revived  the  city  with
the  pleasing  hope,  that  the  gods  were  appeased,  he
prepared  to  arm  against  the  menaces  of  men  ;  for
there  appeared  a  formidable  league  and  a  strong
preparation  to  encounter.  Among  the  Sabines,  Appius
Clausus"^  was  a  man  of  opulent  fortune,  and  remark-
able personal  strength ;  famed,  moreover,  for  his
virtues,  and  the  force  of  his  elov-juence.  It  was  liis
fate,  like  all  great  men,  to  be  persecuted  by  envy  :
and  his  opposing  the  war  gave  a  handle  to  malignity
to  insinuate,  that  he  wished  to  strengthen  the  Roman
power,  in  order  the  more  easily  to  enslave  his  own
country.  Perceiving  that  the  populace  gave  a  will-
ing ear  to  these  calumnies,  and  that  he  was  become
obnoxious  to  the  abettors  of  the  quarrel,  he  was
apprehensive  of  an  impeachment;  but,  being  power-
fully  supported   by    his   friends   and   relations,   he

*^  An  unknown  woman  is  said  to  have  come  to  Tarqufii  with
nine  volumes  of  oracles  written  by  the  Sibyl  ofCuma,  for  which  she
demanded  a  very  considerable  price.  Tarquin  refusing  to  purchase
them  at  her  rate,  she  burned  three  of  them,  and  then  asked  the
same  price  for  the  remaining  six.  Her  proposal  l)eing  rejected
with  scorn,  she  burned  three  more,  and  notwithstanding  still  insisted
on  her  first  price.  The  king,  surprised  at  the  novelty  of  tlie  thing,
put  the  books  in  the  hantls  of  the  augurs  to  be  examined,  who  ad-
vised liim  to  purchase  them  at  any  rate.  This  he  did,  and  appointed
two  persons  of  distinction,  stiled  Duumviri,  to  be  their  guardians ;
who  locked  them  up  in  a  vault  under  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitoli-
nus,  and  there  they  were  kept  till  that  edifice  was  consumed  by
fire  in  the  Marsian  war.  (Dion.  Halic.  iv.  li.)  These  officers,
whose  number  was  afterward  increased  to  ten,  consulted  the  Sibyl-
line books  by  direction  of  the  senate,  whenever  any  dangerous  sedi-
tion was  likely  to  break  out,  when  the  Roman  armies  had  been  de-
feated, or  v.-hen  any  of  those  prodigies  apj)cared  which  were  thought
fwtd.  They  also  presided  over  the  sacrifices  and  shows,  which
those  books"  appointed  to  appease  the  wrath  of  heaven.

'^^  Called  by  Dion.  Ilalic.  (v.  7.)  '  Titus  Claudius,'  and  by  Livy
(ii.  16.)  '  Attu  Claasus, '  and  afterward  «  Appius  Claudius.  '*


PUBLICOLA.  301

excited  disturbances,  \vhicli  delayed  and  suspended
the  determination  for  war  among  the.Sabines.  Pub*
iicola  making  it  his  business  not  only  to  gQ,t  intelli-
gence of  this  sedition,  but  also  to  encourage  and
inflame  it,  sent  proper  persons  to  Appius  to  repre-
sent to  him  ;  "  That  he  knew  he  was  a  man  of  too
"much  goodness  and  integrity  to  avenge  himself  of
"  his  countrymen,  though  deeply  injured  by  them  :
"  but  if  he  chose  for  his  security  to  come  over  to  the
"  Romans,  and  to  withdraw  out  of  the  way  of  his
"  enemies,  he  should  find  such  a  reception,  both
"  public  and  private,  as  was  suitable  to  his  virtue
"  and  the  dignity  of  Rome.'*  Appius  considered
this  proposal  with  much  attention,  and  the  necessity
of  his  affairs  induced  him  to  accept  it.  He  therefore
persuaded  his  friends,  and  they  influenced  many
others;  so  that  Ave  thousand  nien*^^  of  the  most
peaceably  disposed  among  the  ^abines,  with  tlieir
families,  removed  with  him  to  Rome.  Publicoia,
who  was  prepared  for  this  measure,  received  them  in
the  most  friendly  and  hospitable  manner,  admitted
them  to  the  freedom  of  the  city,  and  gave  them  two
acres  of  land  a-piece  by  the  river  Anio.  To  Appius
lie  gave  twenty-five  acres,  and  a  seat  in  the  senate.
This  laid  the  foundation  of  his  greatness  in  the  re-
public, and  he  used  the  advantage  with  so  much
prudence,  a'>  to  rise  to  the  flrst  rank  in  power  and
authority.  The  Claudian  family''^,  descended  from
him,  is  as  illustrious  as  anv  in  Rome.

Though  the  disputes  among,  the  Sabines  w^ere  de-


^^  This  would  impi}-,  at  the  lowest  estimate  (of  four  persons  in  a
laniily)  20,000  persons,  v.ho  Vvere  provided  for  by  the  allotment  of
half  an  acre  a-piece.  Such  was  the  nioderation  oi  the  ancient  lio-
uians.*

'■°  There  were  too  families  of  the  Claudii  in  Rome  ;  one  patriciaa
and  tl;e  other  pleheian.  The  first  hiul  the  surname  of  Pulcher,  and
the  other  of  iJarcellus.  In  course  of  time  the  patr4cian  family  j)ro-
duced  twenty-three  consuls,  five  dictators,  and  seven  censors;  and
obtained  two  triumphs,  and  two  ovations.  Of  this  family  the  empe-
ror Tiberius  was  descended.  (L.)  Out  of  his  follouer?,  accOiJi'-i^-
lo  Dion.  Halle,  and  Livy,  the  Ciaudian  tribe  was  formed.?


802  FUBLICOLA.

cidecl  by  this  migration,  the  demagogues  would  not
suffer  them  to  rest ;  representiiig  it  as  a  matter  of
deep  disgrace  that  Appius,  now  a  deserter  aiul  an
cnemv,  should  l)e  able  to  obstruct  their  takinsr  venire-
iince  of  the  Romans,  when  he  could  not  prevent
it  by  his  presence.  Tliey  advanced  therefore  witii  a
great  army,  and  encamped  near  Fiden«.  Having
ordered  two  thousand  men  to  He  in  ambush  in  the
shrubby  and  hollow  places  before  Rome,  they  ap-
pointed a  t'cw  liorse  at  day-break  to  ravage  the  coun-
try up  to  the  very  gates,  ai^d  then  to  retreat,  till
they  (h-ew  the  enemy  into  the  arubuscade '"'.  But
Publicola  gaining  inlbrmation  that  very  day  of  these
particulars  from  deserters,  prepared  himself  accord-
ingly, and  made  a  suitable  disposition  of  his  forces.
Posthumius  Balbus  his  son-in-law  went  out  with
three  thousand  men,  as  it  began  to  grow  dark,  and
having  taken  posse^-ion  of  the  summits  of  the  hills,
under  wliich  the  Sabines  had  concealed  themselves,
watched  his  opportunity.  His  collegue  Lucretius,
with  the  lightest  and  most  active  of  the  R^omans,  was
appointed  to  attack  the  Sabine  cavalry,  as  they  v/erc
driving  off  the  cattle;  wliile  he  himself  with  the  rest
of  the  forces  made  a  large  circuit,  and  enclosed  the
enemy's  rear.  The  morning  haj)pened  to  be  very-
foggy,  when  Posthumius  at  dawn  with  loud  shouts
tell  upon  the  ambuscade  from  -the  heights,  Lucretius
charged  the  horse  in  their  retreat,  and  Publicola
attacked  tlie  enemy's  camp.  The  Sabines  were
every  where  worsted,  and  put  to  the  rout.  As  the
Romans  did  not  meet  with  the  least  resistance,  the
slaughter  was  prodigious.  The  vain  confidence  of
the  Sabines  was,  obviously,  the  principal  cause  of
their  ruin.  "While  one  part  thought  the  other  wa*.
sale,  they  did  not  stand  upon  their  defence;  those
ii\  the  camp  ran  toward  the  corps  placed  in  ambus-
cade, while  they  in  their  turn  endeavoured  to  retrain

'■'  plon.  Hali>.  gives  a  different,  and  much  less  probable,  account
of  this  e-jwajj-emcat.  *  ,


PUBLICOLA.  30^

tlie  camp.  Thus  they  fell  in  with  each  other  in  great
(lisorder,  and  in  ntutiial  want  of  that  assistance,
which  neither  was  able  to  give.     The  Sabines  wou](i

,  ~w-      -

have  been  entirely  cut  ofF,  had  not  the  city  of  Fidenae
been  so  near,  which  proved  an  asylum  to  some,  par-
ticularly to  tiiose  that  fled  when  the  camp  was  takers
.Such  as  did  not  take  refuge  there,  were  either  de-.
stroyed  t)r  made  prisoners. -

The  Romans,  though  accustomed  to  ascribe  every
great  event  to  the  interposition  of  the  gods,  gave  the
credit  of  this  victory  solely  to  th.e  general;  and  the
first  thing  wliich  tlie  soldiers  were  heard  to  say  was,
that  Publicola  iiad  put  the  enemy  into  their  hands,
lame  and  blind,  and  almost  bound  for  the  slaughter.
The  people  w^ere  enriched  witli  tlie  plunder,  and
the  sale  of  prisoners.  Publicola  was  honoured  svith  a
triumph,  and  having  surrendered  tiie  administration
to  the  succeeding  consuls,  died  soon  afterward  ;  thus
finishing  his  life  in  circumstances  esteemed  the  hap-
piest and  most  glorious  attainable  by  man  ' '.  Tlie
people,  as  if  they  had  done  nothing  to  requite  his
merit  in  his  life-time,  decreed  that  his  funeral  should
be  solemnised  at  the  public  charge  ;  and  to  make  it
the  more  honourable,  every  one  contributed  a  piece
of  money  called  '  Quadrans.'  The  women  likewise,
out  of  particular  regard  to  his  memory,  continues!
the  mourning  for  him  a  whole  year.  His  body  also,
by  an  order  of  the  citizens,  was  interred  witliin  the

''  hla  was  tlie  most  virtuous  citizen,  one  of  the  greatest  generals,^
and  the  most  popular  con  .ul  Pi'>:ne  ever  had.  As  he  had  takea
more  care  to  transmit  virtue  than  weakh  to  his  posterity,  and  as
notwithstanding  tlie  frugahty  of  his  hfe,  and  the  high  offices  whicls
he  had  home,  there  vas  not  found  money  enough  in  hi^  house  t<\
defray  the  charges  of  his  funeral,  he  v.as  buried  at  the  expense  o£
the  piablic.  Mis  poverty  is  a  circumstance,  which  Plutarch  should
have  mentioned,  because  a  funeral  at  tlie  public  expense  vva:^  an
honour  sometimes  paid  to  the  opulent.  (L.)  It  is  not  ovevlooked  by
Livy  and  Dion.  Hallc.  The  amount  of  the  contribution,  in  that  age
of  poverty,  must  have  been  considerable  :  but  Sallust  has  told  u.%
that  they  \ve-i,-e  zw  ■ruppUciis  dsdnim  ■mag7iifxi,  do^ni  pa:-ci,  (Belh
Catil.  ix.}*


sot  PUBLICOLA.

city^^  near  the  place  called  Vclia,  and  all  Ins  family
were  to  have  a  burying-place.  tlicre.  At  present,
indeed,  none  of  his  progeny  are  interred  in  that
gronnd  :  the  attendants  only  carry  thither  the  corpse,
and  set  it  down  ;  when  one  of  them  puts  a  liglited
torch  under  it,  which  he  immediately  withdraws
again.  By  this  act  they  claim  the  right,  but  vrave
the  privilege ;  for  the  body  is  taken  away,  and  in-
terred without  the  walls.


SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA

COMPARED.


THERE  is  something  singular  in  this  parallel,
and  wdiat  has  not  occurred  to  us  in  any  other  of  the
Lives  which  we  have  written,  that  Publicola  should
exemplify  the  maxims  of  Solon,  and  that  Solon  should
proclaim  before-hand  the  happiness  of  Publicola.  For
the  definition  of  happiness,  which  Solon  gave  to
Croesus,  is  more  applicable  to  Publicola  than  to
Tellus.  It  is  true,  he  pronounces  Tellus  happy  on
account  of  his  virtue,  his  valuable  children,  and  his
glorious  death  ;  yet  he  does  not  mention  him  in  his
poems  as  particularly  distinguished  by  his  virtue,  his
children,  or  his  employments.  But  Publicola,  ih  his
life-time,  attained  the  highest  reputation  and  autho-

^'  This  was,  at  first,  the  general  practice  ;  but  in  after-times  tlie
Twelve  Tables  prohibiting  its  continuance,  the  dead  were  interred
bv  the  side  of  the  pubHc  way.-,  and  the  distinction  of  being  buried
within  the  walls  was  reserved  (as  in  CJreece)  for  those,  who  had
rendered  eminent  services  to  the  conunonwealth.  Dion.  Halic.
says,  it  was  exclusively  bestowed  upon  Publicola;  but  Plutarch
elsewhere  states  that  Fabricius  enjoyed  the  same  privilege,  as  did
all  (according  to  Pyrrho  of  Lipara)  wlio  had  attained  the  honour  of
a  triumph.  The  claim,  asserted  by  Publicola's  descendants,  is  not
mcnticned  either  by  Livv  or  Dion.  Ilalic*


SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA  COMPARED.     305

rity  among  the  Romans,  by  means  of  his  virtues ;
and,  after  his  death,  his  family  was  reckoned  among
tlie  most  iHustiious :  the  houses  of  the  Publicolai,.
the  MessaJa^,  aiid  Valerii^"*,  eminent  for  the  space  of
six  hundred  years''',  still  acknowledging  him  as  the
f:)initain  of  their  honour.  Tellr.s  like  a  brave  man,
keeping  liis  ])ost  and  fighting  to  the  last,  fell  by  the
enemy's  hand  ;  whereas  Publicola,  after  having  slaia
his  enemies  (a  much  happier  circumstance,  than  to
be  slnin  by  them)  after  seeing  his  country  victorious
under  his  guidance  as  consul  and  as  general,  after
triumplis  and  every  otlier  mark  of  honour,  died  that,
death,  which  Solon  had  so  passionately  co\'eted,  and.
declared  so  happy.  Solon  again,  in  his  answer  to.
iVIimnermus,  concerning  the  period  of  human  lifej
thus  exclaims :

Let  friendship's  Paithful  heart  attend  my  bier,
Ileave  the  sad  sigh,  and  drop  the  pitying  tear  'i^\

And  Publicola  had  this  felicity.  For  he  was  lament-
ed, not  only  by  his  friends  and  relations,  but  by  the

'"*  That  is,  the  other  Valerii,  viz.  the  Maximi,  the  Corvini,  the
Potiti,  the  Laevini,  and  the  Fhicci.

• '  It  appears,  from  thir,  passage,  that  Plutarch  wrote  the  life  of
Publicola  about  the  beginning  of  Trajan's  reign.

•''  Cicero  (Tusc.  i.  19.,  and  de  Scnecf.  20.)  thought  this  wish  of
Solon's  unsuitable  to  so  v/ise  a  man,  and  preferred  to  it  that  of  the
]M)ct  Ennius,  who  pleasing  himself  v.Ith  the  thought  oi  an  immor-
tality upon  earth  as  a  poet,  desired  to  die  unlamented,  Cicero  re-
joiced in  tiie  same  prospect,  as  an  orator.  The  passion  for  immor-
t;ility  is,  indeed,  a  natural  one ;  but  as  the  chief  part  of  our  happi-
n<.'ss  consists  in-  the  exercise  of  the  benevolent  afiections,  in  giving
and  receiving  sincere  testimonies  of  regard,  the  undoubted  expres-
sions of  that  regard  must  sooth  the  pains  of  a  dying  man,  and  com-
foit  him  with  the  reflection  that  he  has  not  boea  wanting  in  t.'ie
offices  of  humanity.  (L.)

Mimnermus,  ti^e  inventor  of  the  pentameter  verse  (/ithen.  xili.
8.)  was  a  poet  and  nmsician  of  Colophon,  and  distinguished  chitifiy
by  his  Kiegies,  of  v/hich  onl}'  a  few  fragmeiats  are  extant.  Horace,
who  sets  him  above  Callimachus  (Ep.  II.  ii.  101.)  represents  him  as
placing  all  Ijis  liappiness  in  amore  jocii^que  (Ep.  I.  ii.  G5.) ;  so  that,
whatever  poetry  may  have  suffered  by  the  Joss  of  his  works,  morality
J?as  probably  been  a  gainer  by  it.*

VOL.    I.  X


806     SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA  COMPARED.

whole  citv  ;  tlioiisands  attended  his  funeral  with
tears,  with  regret,  witli  the  deepest  sorrow  ;  and  the
Koman  matrons  mourned  for  him,  as  for  a  son,  a
brother,  or  a  common  parent-

Another  wish  of  Solon's  is  thus  expressed :

The  flow  of  riches  I  desire,

And  fain  would  life's  true  ijoods  acquire;

But  let  me  justl}'  tlieni  attain,

Lest  vengeance  follow  in  tlieir  train.

And  Publicola  not  only  acquired,  but  employed  his
riches  honourably,  for  he  was  a  generous  benefactor
to  the  poor  :  so  that,  if  Solon  was  the  wisest,  Publi-
cola was  the  happiest  of  mankind.  What  the  former
had  wished  for,  as  the  gTeatest  and  most  desirable  of
blessings,  the  latter  actually  possessed  and  long  con-
tinued to  enjoy.

Thus  Solon  did  honour  to  Publicola,  and  he  to
Solon  in  his  turn.  For  he  considered  him  as  the
most  excellent  pattern,  that  could  be  proposed,  in
regulating  a  democracy  ;  and  like  him  laying  aside
the  j)ride  of  power,  he  rendered  it  gentle  and  accept-
able to  all.  He  also  adopted  several  of  Solon's  laws  ;
for  he  empowered  the  people  to  elect  their  own  ma-
gistrates, and  left  an  appeal  to  them  from  the  sen-
tence of  other  courts,  as  the  Athenian  lawgiv^er  had
done.  He  did  not  indeed,  with  Solon,  create  a  new
senate  ""^ ;  but  he  almost  doubled  the  number  of  that,
which  he  found  in  being.

His  reason  for  appointing  quaestors  or  treasurers
was  that,  if  the  consul  were  a  worthy  man,  he  might

''  By  t8V-),  we  apprcIuMid  tliat  Plutarch  here  means  rather  the
senate  or  council  of  Tour  Hundred,  than  the  council  of  Areopa-
j;us.  The  Four  Hundred  liad  the  pre-co;jnisance  of  all  that  was  to-
come  before  the  people,  and  nothing  could  be  proposed  to  the  ge-
neral assf^nblv,  till  di,i;-ested  by  tliemselves  ;  so  that,  as  far  as  he
was  able,  he  {jroviclcd  against  a  thirst  of  arbitrary  power  in  the
hitrher,  and  a  desire  of  licentious  freedom  in  the  lower  orders  ;  the
AreojMtrus  being  a  check  upon  the  for.ner,  iis  the  senate  was  a  curb
lipon  the  latter.  fL.l  M.  P.icard  unJerstaiids  this  passage  of  tl»t-
Areopagus,*


SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA  COMPARED.    S07

have  leisure  to  attend  to  more  important  affairs ;  if
unworthy,  that  he  might  not  have  greater  opportuni-
ties of  injustice,  when  both  the  government  and  the
trcasurv  were  under  his  direction.

Publicola's  aversion  from  tyrants  was  stronger
even  than  that  of  Solon.  For  the  latter  made  every
attempt  to  establish  arbitrary  power  punishable  by
law  ;  but  the  former  made  it  death,  without  the  for-
mality of  trial.  Solon,  indeed,  justly  and  reason-
ably pknnes  himself  upon  liaving  refused  absolute
power,  when  both  the  state  of  altairs  and  the  inclina-
tions of  the  people  would  have  readily  admitted  it :
and  yet  it  was  no  less  glorious  for  Publicola,  that
finding  the  consular  authority  too  despotic,  he  ren-
dered it  milder  and  more  popular,  and  did  not  stretch
it  so  far  as  he  might  have  done.  That  this  was  the
best  method  of  governing,  Solon  appears  before  him
to  have  discovered,  v>'hen  he  says  of  a  republic,

The  reins  nor  loosely  held  nor  strictly  tied,
Safely  the  car  of  slippery  power  you  guide.

But  the  annulling  of  debts  was  peculiar  to  Solon,
and  was  indeed  the  most  effectual  way  to  support  the
liberty  of  tlie  people.  For  laws  intended  to  establish
an  equality  would  be  of  no  avail,  so  long  as  the  poor
were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  that  equality  by  their
debts.  Where  tliey  seemed  most  to  exercise  their
liberty,  in  offices,  iti  debates,  and  in  deciding  causes,
there  they  were  most  enslaved  to  the  rich,  and  most
entirely  under  tlieir  control.  What  is  still  n)ore  re-
niarkaole  is  that,  though  the  cancelling  of  debts
generally  produces  seditions,  Solon  seasonably  ap-
plied it,"^  as  a  strong  though  hazardous  medicine,  to
remove  the  sedition  then  existing.  Inc  measure
likewise  lost  it's  infamous  and  obnoxious  nature,
when  introduced  by  a  man  of  Solon's  probity  and
character.

if  we  consider  tlie  whole  administration  of  each,
that   of   Solon   was   more  iliustrious  in  the   outset.

X  2


30S     SOLON  AND  rUBIJCOLA  COMPARED.

lie  was  an  ori2:iiia],  and  followed  no  example  ;  be-
sides, by  himself,  without  a  eolleguc,  he  effected
many  great  things  for  the  public  advantage.  Eut
Publicola's  fortune  was  more  to  be  admired  at  the
conclusion.  For  Solon  lived  to  see  his  own  establish-
ment subverted  ;  whereas  that  of  Publicola  preserved
the  state  in  2:ood  order  till  th.e  time  of  the  civil  wars.
And  no  wonder  ;  since  the  former,  as  soon  as  he  had
enacted  his  laws,  left  them  inscribed  on  tables  of
"wood  without  any  one  to  sup))ort  their  authority,
and  de})arted  from  Athens ;  whereas  the  latter,  re-
jnaining  at  Home,  and  continuing  in  the  magistracy,
th(n-oughly  settled  and  secured  the  commonwealth.

.Solon  was  sensible  of  the  ambitious  designs  of
Pisistratns,  and  desirous  to  prevent  their  being  car-
ried into  execution  ;  but  he  miscarried  in  the  attempt,
and  saw  a  tyrant  set  u\).  On  the  other  hand,  Publi-
cola demolished  kingly  power,  when  it  had  been  es-
tablished for  some  ages,  and  was  at  a  formidable
height.  He  was  equalled  by  Solon  in  virtue  and
patriotism,  but  he  had  (what  Solon  wanted)  power
and  good  fortune  to  second  his  virtue.

As  to  warlike  exploits,  there  is  a  considerable
difference;  for  Daimachus'**  of  Plata^a?  does  not  at-
tribute to  Solon  even  that  enterprise  against  the
Megarensians,  which  we  have  done  ;  whereas  Publi-
cola, in  many  signal  battles,  performed  the  duty
both  of  a  general  and  of  a  private  soldier.

Again ;  if  we  compare  their  conduct  in  civil
affairs,  we  shall  find  that  Solon,  only  acting  a  part
as  it  Avere,  and  under  the  form  of  a  maniac,  went
out  to  s])eak  concerning  the  recovery  of  Salamis.
But  Publicola  in  the  face  of  the  most  imminent
danger  rose  up  against  Tarquin,  detected  the  plot,
])revented  the  escape  of  the  vile  conspirators,  pro-
cured their  punishment,  and  not  only  excluded  the

"^  This  Da'iaiaelius,  according  to  Strabo,  was  sent  on  an  em-
bassy to  AllitrfHhji'.ic'S  an  Indian  jn-incc ;  and  wrote  a  Iiistory  of
the  country  which  he  visited,  as  httlc  entitled  to  credit  as  that  of
Megasthenes.*


SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA  COMPARED.     309

tyrants  from  the  city,  but  cut  up  their  hopes  by  the
roots.  If  he  was  thus  v'igorous  in  prosecuting  affairs
that  demanded  spirit,  resolution,  and  open  force,  lie
was  still  more  successfid  in  negociation,  and  tlie
gentle  arts  of  persuasion  ;  for  by  his  address  he
gained  Porsena,  whose  power  was  so  formidable  that
he  could  not  be  quelled  by  dint  of  arms,  and  made
him  a  friend  to  Rome.

But  here  perhaps  some  will  object,  that  Solon  re-
covered ISalamis,  when  the   Athenians  had  given  it
up  ;  whereas  Publicola  surrendered  lands,  of  which
the  Romans  were  in  possession.     Our  judgement  of
actions,  however,  should  be  formed  according  to  the
respective  times  and  posture  of  affiiirs.     An  able  poli-
tician, in  order  to  manage  all  for  the  best,  varies  his
conduct,    as  the  present   occasion   requires  ;  often.
surrenders  a  part,  to  save  the  whole  ;  and,  by  yield-
ing in  small  matters,  secures  considerable  advantages.
Thus  Publicola,  by  giving  up  what  the  Romans  had
lately  usurped,  saved  all  that  was  really  their  own  ;
and,  at  a  time  when  they  found  it  difficult  to  defend
their  city,  obtained  for  them   the  possession  of  the
besiegers'   camp.     In  effect,  by  referring  his  cause
to  the  arbitration  of  the  enemy,  he  gained  his  point ;
and,  with  that,  all  the   advantages  which  he  could
have  proposed  to  himself  by  a  victory.     For  Porsena
put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  left  the  Romans  all  the
provision   he  had  made  for  carrying  it  on,  induced
by  that  iinpression  of  their  virtue  and  honour,  which
he  had  received  from  their  (general's  behaviour.


THE


LIFE


OF


THEMISTOCLES.


SUMMARY.


His  extraction.  EvjpJoymaits  of  his  r/oidli.  He  en-rngc^i  in  the
study  of  politics.  His  rivalry  tvilh  Aris/ides:  his  love  of  glory.
He  si/ggests  to  the  Athenians  the  formation  of  a  navy.  His  niao-~
nifcence  and  ambition.  He  procures  the  bar.ishmcnt  (f  Aristidcs.
His  firmness  :  he  is  chosen  general  against  the  Persians,  and
persuades  his  countrymen  to  go  on  hoard  their  vessels.  He  yields
the  command  to  the  Spartan  general.  Battle  of  Artcmisium.
Xerxes  gains  possession  of  the  pass  of  ThermopylcB.  Stratagem  of
Themistocles  to  make  the  Atheiiians  set  sail.  His  sclieme  for
paying  the  troops.  He  causes  Aristidcs  to  be  recalled  from  exile.
His  memorable  speech  to  Eurybiades.  He  reduces  the  Greeks  to
the  necessity  of  engaging.  Three  young  Persians. offered  in  sacri-
fice by  the  Greeks.  Number  of  Xerxes'  navy  :  Themistocles  gains
the  advantage  of  the  uind.  ■  Battle,  and  victory,  of  Salamis.
Xerxes,  upon  a  false  suggestion  of  Themistocles,  files.  Ho7iours
bestowed  on  Themistocles.  His  passion  for  glory,  and  his  remark-
able expressions.  He  rebuilds  the  ivalls  of  Athens,  and  fortifies
the  Pirceus.  An  advantageous  project  of  his  rejected,  as  unjust.
He  incurs  the  hatred  of  Sparta  ;  and  the  sarcasms  of  the  poet
Timocreon.  He  rates  his  services  too  highly,  and  is  banished  by
the  O.^tracism  :  Is  suspected  of  being  concerned  in  Pausanias*
conspiracy,  and  files  to  Corcyra.  Passes  thence  to  Epirus.  Dif-
ferent opinion'^  with  regard  to  his  travels.  He  proceeds  to  Persia  ;
and  solicits,  through  Artabanus,  to  be  presented  to  the  king.  His
interiie-o  tvit/i   Artaxerxes ;    and  hind  reception.      That  prince


THEMISTOCLES.  Sil

nssigjis  him  the  revenue  of  three  cities.  Danger  incurred  in  his
travels.  Artaxerxes  prepares  cm  armament  against  /Ithens  :
Themistocles,  tluit  he  may  not  be  constrained  to  serve  against  his
country,  destroys  himself.  His  children,  and  his  magnificent
sepulchre  at  Magnesia.


J.  HE  family  of  Tliemistocles  was  too  obscure,  to
have  contributed  to  his  distinction.  He  was  the
son  of  Neocles,  an  inferior  citizen  of  Athens,  of  the
ward  of  Phrear',  and  the  tribe  of  Leontis.  By  his
mother's  side,  he  is  said  to  have  been  illegitimate  %
according  to  the  following  verses  :

Though  born  in  Thrace,  Abrotonon  my  name.
My  son  enrols  nie  in  the  lists  of  fame,
The  great  Themigtocles.

Yet  Phanias  writes,  that  the  mother  of  Themistocles
was  of  Caria,  not  of  Thrace,  and  that  her  name  was
not  Abrotonon  but  Euterpe.  Neanthes  mentions
Halicarnassus,  as  the  city  to  which  she  belonged.
Be  that  as  it  may,  when  all  the  illegitimate  youth
assembled  at  Cynosarges^,  in  the  wrestling-ring
dedicated  to  Hercules,  without  the  gates  (v/hich  was

^  This  ward  was  so  named  from  it's  situation  on  the  sea-shore
near  the  Pira-us,  where  was  a  well  (Gr.  <fgia.o)  by  the  side  of  which
any  one,  who  prior  to  his  transportation  for  homicide  v/as  charged
with  a  fresh  crime,  underwent  a  new  trial.     (Pausan.  i.  28.)*

-  It  was  a  law  at  Athens,  that  every  child  of  a  foreign  woman
should  be  deemed  a  bastard,  though  born  in  wedlock,  and  should
consequently  be  incapable  of  inheriting  his  fiither's  estate.  (L.)
They  were  also  occasionally  (as  we  shall  see  in  the  Life  of  Pericles,
vol.  II,  p.  .57.)  excluded  from  the  distributions  made  to  the  legi-
timate citizens.*

3  In  this  place,  according  to  Pausan.  i.  19.,  were  altars  conse-
crated to  Hercules,  his  wife  Hebe,  his  mother  Alcmena,  and  the
partner  of  most  of  his  labours  Idlaus.  It's  etymology  is  given  by
Suidas.  The  object  of  the  separation,  here  mentioned,  must  have
been  to  preserve  the  purity  of  manners  and  the  dialect  of  the
genuine  youth  from  contamination.*


SI?  THEMISTOCLES.

appointed  for  that  purpose,  Ijecanse  Hercules  him-
-^cif  was  not  altogether  of  divine  extraction,  but
partly  spurious,  as  jiaving  had  a  mortal  for  his  mo-
ther), The.'Viistocles  found  means  to  persuade  some
of  the  young  noblemen  to  go  to  Cynosarges,  and
take  their  exercise  with  him.  This  was  an  ini^-enious
contrivance  to  de-^trcy  the  disrincti(;n  between  the
illegitimate  or  aliens,  and  the  legitimate,  whose
parents  were  both  Athenians.  It  is  plain,  however,
that  he  v/as  related  to  the  house  of  the  Lycomedae' ;
for  Siniunides  informs  us,  tliat  when  a  chapel  of  that
family  in  the  ward  of  Phlya,  where  the  Mysteries  of
Ceres  used  to  be  celebrated,  was  burned  down  by
the  barbarians,  Themistocles  rebuilt  it,  and  adorned
it  with  pictures.

It  appears  that,  when  a  boy,  he  was  full  of  spirit
and  tire,  quick  of  apprehension,  naturally  inclined
to  bold  attempts,  and  likely  to  make  a  great  states-
man. His  hours  of  leisure  and  vacation  he  spent,
not  like  other  boys  in  idleness  and  play,  but  in  invent-
ing and  composing  declamations,  the  subjects  of
which  were  either  the  impeachment  or  the  defence
of  some  of  Ins  school-fellows:  so  that  his  ma-ter
would  often  say,  "  Boy,  you  will  be  nothing  com-
"  mon  or  indifferent ;  you  will  either  be  a  blessing,
"  or  a  curse  to  the  community."  As  for  moral  phi-
losophy and  the  polite  arts,  he  learned  them  but
slowly,  and  with  little  satisf^action  ;  but  instructions
in  political  knowledge,  and  the  administration  of
public  afiairs,  he  recei\ed  with  an  attention  above
his  years,  because  they  suited  his  genius.  Vv'lien
therefore  long  afterward  he  was  ridiculed  in  a  party,
•^•here  iiec  scope  was  given  to  raillcr}-,  hy  persons
•who  were  considered  as  more  accomphslied,  he  was
obliged  to  answer  them  with  some  asperity  :  "  'lis

*  The  T.ycomedse  (so  named  from  Lycus,  the  son  of  Pandion)
were  a  family  in  Athens  wlio,  accordin:;  to  P;ui;:aniHii,  iiaJ  the  cvtre
at  the  sacrifices  oH'ered  to  (.^eres ;  and  in  that  chaot-l,  which  The-
stii.«;  rebuilt,  initiations  aod  othc-r  mysteries  were  celebrat^^^d.  (i.  22.,
iv.  J.)     The  ward  PMva  wn-j  iu  the  tribe  Cecropis.

12


THEMISTOCLES.  31^

"  true  I  never  learned  how  to  tune  a  harp,  or  handle
"  a  lute  ;  but  I  know  how  to  raise  a  small  and  in-
"  considerai)ie  city  to  glory  and  greatness."

By  Stesinibrotus  iudeed  we  are  told,  that  Themis-
tocles  studied  natiu"al  philosophy,  both  under  Anaxa-
g'oras  and  Melissus.  But  in  this  he  errs  against  chro-
noloo'v  .  For  when  Pericles  who  was  much  youno:er
than  Themistocles,  besieged  Samos,  Melissus  de-
lended  it ;  and  Anaxagoras  lived  with  Pericles.
Those  seem  to  deserve  more  attention,  that  represent
Themistocles  as  a  follower  of  Mnesiphiius  the  Phrea-
rian  ;  who  was  neither  orator,  nor  natural  philoso-
pher, bat  a  professor  of  what  was  then  called  wisdom  ^,
and  consisted  in  a  knowledge  of  the  arts  oi*  govern-
ment, and  the  practical  part  of  political  prudence.
This  was  a  sect  formed  upon  the  principles  of  Solon ',
and  descendmg  in  succession  from  him  ;  but  when
the  science  of  government  came  to  be  mixed  with
forensic  arts,  and  passed  from  action  to  mere  words,
it's  professors  instead  of  '  sages*  were  called  '  so-
phists ".'     Themistocles,  however,  was  conversant  in

^  Anaxagoras  was  born,  01.  Ixx.  1.;  Themistocles  won  the
battle  of  Sakimis,  01.  Ixxv.  1. ;  and  Mt'lissus  defended  Sair.os  against
Pericles,  01.  Ixxxiv.  4.  Theniistocles  thereiore  couid  neither  study
under  Anax!i<.roras,  who  was  only  twenty  years  old  wlicnthat  gene«
val  gained  the  battle  of  Salamis,  nor  yet  under  Melissus,  wlio  did
not  begin  to  ilourish  till  35  years  after  thnt  battle.  (L.)  Otiiers,
however,  say  that  Anaxagoras  tlourisht'd  at  the  period  above  assign-
ed Tor  his  birth  ;  whicli  would  obviate  Plutarch^s  objection,  as  far  as
he  is  concerned.*

''  The  firbt  stiges  were  in  reality  great  poh'ticitms,  who  gave  rules
and  precepts  for  tlie  governmejit  of  connnuuities.  I'liales  v/as  the
first,  who  carried  his  speculations  into  physics.

7  During  the  space  of  about  a  hundred,  or  a  hundred  and  twenty
vears.

"  Tile  Sophists  were  ratlier  rhetoricians,  than  philosophers ;
.■killed  in  words,  but  superlicial  in  knowledge,  as  Diogenes  Laertius
informs  us.  Frotagor;is,  v,ho  flourislied  about  OL  Ixxxiv.,  a  little
l>-,'fore  the  birch  of  Plato,  was  the  iirst  who  had  tlie  appelhition  of
'  Sophist.'  (Vid.  Phit.  Protag.,  and  Diog.  Laert.  ix.  52.)  But  So-
crates, v.JK)  was  more  conversant  in  nsorahty  than  in  politics,
physics,  or  rhetoric,  and  nlu)  was  desirous  to  improve  the  world
rather  ill  practice  than  in  tliL^ory,  modestly  took  the  name  of  PA/-
inwphos,  i.e.'  '  a  lover  of  wisdon)/  and  not  that  of  Sovho?,  i*e,  'a
wise  man.'


ait  TIIEMISTOCLES.

public  business,  ^^hen  he  attended  the  lectures  of
Mnesiphilus.

In  the  first  sallies  of  yoiitl),  he  was  inegular  and
unsteady ;  as  he  followed  his  own  disposition,  with-
out any  moral  restraints.  He  Yivci]  in  extremes,
and  those  extremes  were  often  of  the  worst-  kind^.
This  he  afterward  admitted,  and  excused  by  observ-
ing, that  the  wildest  colts  make  the  best  horses,  when
they  come  to  be  properly  broken  and  managed.  The
stories  however,  which  some  tell  us,  of  his  father's
disinheriting  him,  and  his  mother's  laying  violent
hands  upon  herself  because  she  could  not  bear  the
thoughts  of  her  son's  infamy,  seem  to  be  (juite
fictitious.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  say  that  his  father,
to  dissuade  him  from  accepting  any  public  employ-
ment, showed  him  some  old  galleys  which  lay  worn
out  and  neglected  on  the  sea-shore,  just  as  the  po-
pulace neglect  their  leaders,  when  they  have  no  far-
ther service  for  them.

Themistocles  had  an  early  and  violent  inclination
for  public  business,  and  was  so  strongly  smitten
with  the  love  of  glory,  and  a  desire  of  the  highest
station,  that  he  involved  himself  in  troublesome
quarrels  with  persons  of  the  iirst  rank  and  influence
in  the  state,  particularly  with  Aristides  the  son  of
Lysimachus,  by  whom  he  was  constantly  opposed.
Their  enmity  began  early,  but  the  cause  (as  Ariston,
the  philosopher,  relates)  was  nothing  more  than  their
common  regard  for  Stcrsileus  of  Teos.  After  this,
their  disputes  continued  about  public  affairs,  and
were  naturally  augmented  by  the  dissimilarity  of
their  lives  and  manners.  Aristides  was  of  a  mild
temper,  and  of  the  utmost  probity.  He  managed
the  concerns  of  government  with  inflexible  justice.


0  Idomeneus  says,  that  one  morning  Tliomistocles  harnessed  four
naked  courtesans  in  a  chariot,  and  made  them  draw  him  across  the
Ceraniicus  in  the  sight  of  all  tlie  people  there  assenihled;  and  that,
at  a  time  when  the  Athenians  uure  perfect  strangers  to  dehauchery,
both  in  wine  and  women.  But,  if  that  vice  was  then  so  little  known
in  Athens,  how  could  there  be  found  four  prostitutes  impudent
enough  to  consent  to  such  an.  exposure  i


THEMISTOCLES.  ^15

not  with  a  view  to  Ingratiate  himself  with  the  people,
or  to  promote  his  own  repLitation,  but  solely  for  the
advantage  and  safety  of  tlifi  state.  He  was  therefore
necessarily  obliged  to  oppose  Themi^^tocles,  and  to
prevent  his  promotion,  because  he  frequently  urged
the  people  to  unwarrantable  enterprises,  and  vvas
ambitious  of  introducing  great  innovations.  Thc-
mistocles  indeed  was  so  hurried  away  with  the  lust
of  glory,  and  so  immoderately  anxious  to  distinguish
himself  by  some  brilliant  actJon,  that  though  he  was
very  young  when  the  battle  of  Marathon  was  fought,
and  when  tlie  generalship  of  Miltiades  was  every
w^here  extolled  ;  he  was  even  then  observed  to
remain  much  alone,  to  be  very  pensive,  to  watch
whole  nights,  and  not  to  attend  the  usual  enteitain-
ments  :  and  when  he  was  asked  the  reason  by  his
friends,  who  wondered  at  the  change,  he  said,  "  The
"  trophies  of  I*<liltiadcs  would  not  suffer  him  to
*'  sleep*."  While  others  imagined  the  defeat  of  the
Persians  at  Marathon  had  put  an  end  to  the  war,  he
considered  it  as  the  beginning  of  greater  conflicts  ^^;
and,  for  the  benefit  of  Greece,  he  was  always  pre-
paring himself  and  the  Athenians  against  them,  be-
cause he  foresaw  them  at  a  distance  '\

And  in  the  first  place,  whereas  the  Athenians  had
used  to  share  the  revenue  of  the  silver-mines  of
Laurium  ^^  amiong  themselves,  he  alone  had  the
courage  to  make  a  motion  to  the  people,  that  instead

*  To  this  reference  is  made,  as  illustrative  of  Theseus'  feelings
with  regard  to  the  glory  of  Hercules,  p.  9.*

'°  He  did  not  question  hut  Darius  would  at  length  perceive,  that
the  only  way  to  deal  with  the  Greeks  vi'as  to  attack  them  vigorously
by  sea,  where  they  could  make  the  least  opposition.

"  The  two  principal  qualifications  of  a  general  are  a  quick  and
comprehensive  view  of  what  is  to  be  done  uj)on  any  uigent  emer-
gency, and  a  happy  foresight  of  what  is  to  come :  both  these  quali-
fications Themistocles  possessed.  With  respect  to  the  latter,  Thu-
cydides  gives  him  this  elogium,  i^n  t^Xh^c-j  ts  '/sw/.-o^sia  a^i-^oi
siyM^^,c,.  (L.)   How  correctly  true  of  the  immortal  Fox!*

'^  A  mountain  in  the  south-eastern  part  of  Attica,  near  Cape
Suniura.  These  mines  were  exhausted  in  the  time  of  Pausauias,
L  1.*


.316  TIIEMISTOCLES.

of  that  division,  tbcvbliould  build  with  the  produce
a  luimber  of  galleys  to    be  employed   in   the   war
against  the  zEginetaa,  who  then  made  a  considerable
fioiire  in  Greece,  and  by  means  of  their  ninnerous
navy  w'cre  masters  of  the  sea '^.     By  seasonably  stir-
I'ing  up  the  resentment  and  emulation  of  his  coun-
trymen against  these  islanders  '"*,  he  the  more   easily
prevailed   upon  them   to   provide   themselves   with
xships,  than  if  he  had  displayed  the  terrors  of  Darius
and  the  Persians,  w^ho  were   at  a  greater  distance,
and  of  whose  coming  they  had  but  slight  apprehen-
sions.    With  this  money  a  hundred  galleys,  of  three
banks  of  oars,  wxre  built,   vrhich  afterward  fought
Tigainst  Xerxes.     From   this  step  he   proceeded   to
others,  in  order  to  draw  the  attention  of  the   Athe-
nians   to   maritime  affairs  ;    and  to  convince  them
that,  though   by  land  they  were  not  able  to  cope
W'ith  their  neighbours,  yet  with  a  naval  Ibrce  they
might   not  only  repel  the  barbarians,  but  hold  all
Greece  in  subjection.     Thus  of  good  land-forces,  as
Plato  ^^  says,  he  made  them  mariners  and  seamen,
and  brought  upon  himself  the  aspeision  of  having
taken  from  his  countrymen  the  spear  and  the  shield,

'■»  This  island,  from  it's  situation,  was  pronounced  by  Pericles
*  a  speck  in  the  eye  of  the  Pira;ns.'  In  the  Persian  war  it  fur-
nished, next  to  Athens,  the  most  considerable  quota  of  vessels.
(Pausan.  ii.  29.)*

'■*  Plutarch  in  this  place  follov.-s  Herodotus,  vii.  J 14;.  But  Thu-
cydides  i.  14'.  expressly  states,  that  Themiitocles  availed  himself
of  both  these  arguments,  the  appreliensions  which  I'le  Athenians
entertained  of  the  return  of  the  Persians,  and  t)ie  vv'ar  a^Gjainst  the
iEginetfc.  He  could  not  indeed  well  neglect  so  powerful  an  argu-
nicnr  as  the  former,  since  (according  to  Plato)  accounts  were
daily  brought  of  the  formidaI)le  prey^arations  of  Darius;  and,  Uj)on
his  death,  it  appeared  that  Xerxes  inherited  all  his  father  s  rancour
against  the  Greeks.

'^  De  Legg.  iv.,  in  the  beginning,  where  he  enters  at  large  into
a  comparison  of  the  effects  of  their  naval  and  military  victories  upon
the  Athenians.  Aristotle  (vii.  7.)  inquires,  whether  or  not  a  marine
be  useful  for  civilised  states ;  anr,  with  a  cau'ion  against  the  cor-
ruption too  often  introduced  by  foreign  commerce,  decides  in  the
afnrmative.  From  this  passage  it  appears  for  »oy^i;Ai>)i,  in  Plato,  we
bhuuld  read  ujchu^oi/,*


THEMISTOCLES.  317

and  sent  tliem  to  the  bench  and  tlie  oar.  Stesiii^-
brotus  writes^  that  Theniistocles  carried  these
measures  into  effect,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of
Miltiades.  Whetlier  or  not  by  this  proceeding  he
corrupted  the  parity  and  simplicity  of  the  Athenian
constitution,  is  a  speculation  too  philosophical  to  be
here  pursued.  Ikit  that  tlie  Greeks  owed  their
safety  to  his  naval  preparations,  and  that  those
ships  re-established  the  city  of  Athens  after  it  had
been  destroyed  (to  omit  other  proofs)  Xerxes  him-
self is  a  sufficient  witness.  For,  after  his  defeat  at
sea, -he  was  no  longer  able  to  make  head  against
the  Athenians,  though  his  land-forces  remained
entire  ;  and  in  my  opinion  he  left  Mardonius  rather
to  prevent  a  pursuit,  than  with  any  hope  of  his
subjugating  Greece.

Some  authors  state,  that  Themistocles  was  intent
upon  the  acquisition  of  money  '^',  with  a  view  to
spend  it  profusely  ;  and  indeed  for  his  frequent
sacrifices,  and  the  splendid  manner  in  which  he
entertained  strangers,  he  required  a  large  supply.
Others  on  the  contrary,  accuse  him  of  meanness
and  attention  to  trifles,  and  say  that  he  even  sold
presents,  which  had  been  made  him  for  his  table.
Nay,  when  lie  begged  a  colt  of  Philides  (a  breeder
of  horses)  and  was  refused,  he  threatened  that  he
would  soon  make  a  Trojan  horse  of  his  house  \,
enigmatically  hinting,  tliat  he  would  raise  up  trou-
bles and  impeachments  against  him  from  some  of
his  own  family.

In  ambition,  however,  he  had  no  equal.  For
when  he  was  yet  young,  and  but  little  known,  he
prevailed  upon  Epicles  of  Ilermione,  a  performer
on  the  lyi'e  much  valued  by  the  Athenians,  to  prac-
tise at  liis  house  ;  hoping  thus   to  draw  thither  a

'^  Herodotus  (viii.  112.)  represents  Themistocles  as  insatiably-
covetous:  he  probably,  however,  amassed  wealth  chiefly  with  a
view  of  indulging  his  ambition,  by  purciiasing  tiie  attachment  of  a
jjreat  number  of  partisans,  or  of  gratifying  his  taste  iov  niagnifi-.
cenct;.*


318  TIIErvIISTOCLES.

number   of  people.     And   when    he    went   to   the
Olympic  games,  he  endeavoured  to  rival  Cimon  in
the  elegance  of  his  table,  the  splendour  of  his  pavi-
lions, and  the  other  expenses   of  his  train.     Tlicse
things  were    not   agreeable  to  the   Gj-eeks.     They
looked  upon  them  as  suitable  to  a  young  man  of  a
noble  famdy  ;  but,  when  an  obscure  person  set  liim-
self  up  so  much  above  his  fortune,  he  gained  nothing
by  it  but  the  imputation  of  vanity.     He  exhibited  a
tragedy '''  also  at  his  own  cost,  and  gained  the  prize
with   his    tragedians,  at  a  time   when  those  enter-
tainments were  pursued  with  great  emulation  and
avidity.     In  memory  of  his  succ-ess,  he  put  up   this
inscription  ;  "  Tliemistocles  the  Phrearian  exhibited
"  the  tragedy,  Phrynichus   composed  it ''',  Adiman-
*'  tuspreuded."     This  gained  him  popularity  ;  and
what  added  to  it  was,  his  charging  his  memory  with
the  names  of  the  citizens,  so  that  he  readily  called
each  by  his  own.     He  was  an  impartial  judge  like-
wise in  the  causes,  which  were  brought  before  him  ;
and  Simonides  of  Ceos  "''^  making  an  unreasonable
request  to  him  when  Archon  -",  lie  answered,  "  As

'7  Tragedy  was  at  this  time  just  arrived  at  perfection;  and  so
great  a  passion  had  the  Athenians  for  it,  that  the  principal  person'^
in  the  commonwealth  could  not  oblige  them  more,  than  by  e^whibit-
ing  the  best  tragedy  with  the  most  elegant  decorations.  Public
prizes  were  appointed  for  thoae,  who  excelled  in  this  respect.

i»  Phrynichus  v.as  the  disciple  of  Thespis,  who  was  esteemed  the
inventor  of  tragedy.  He  was  the  iirst,  that  brought  female  actors
up?)n  the  stage.  His  chief  plays  were  Acta;on,  Alcestis,  and  the
Danaules.     yEschylus  v.as  his  conicniporary.

'5  Simonides  celebrated  the  battles  of  Marathon  and  Salamis  iu
his  poems,  and  was  the  author  of  several  odes  and  elegies,  some  of
which  are  still  extant  and  well  known.  He  was  a  great  favourite
of  Pausanias  king  of  .Sparta,  and  of  Hiero  king  of  Sicily.  Plato
had  so  high  an  opinion  of  his  merit,  that  he  gave  him  the  epithet
of  '  divine.'  He  died  01.  Ixxviii.  1.,  at  almost  ninety  years  of
age;  so  that  he  v.-as  nearly  fourscore,  when  he  described  the
battle  of  Salamis.

^°  The  foriaer  trnnslator  renders  »:yrfc'  ^par^/isyTo^,  *  when  he
was  commander  of  the  army,'  whieli  is  indeed  the  sense  of  it  a  little
below,  but  not  here.  Plutarch ,uses  the  word  s-f-'trviy-:?  for  '  pra:tor,'
which  is  almost  synonymous  with  Archon.  And  in  this  passege  be
so  explains  It  himself,  '  Xor   I   a   '^nod  magistrate'   {■-^p-^^-'^)'" (Ju)


THEMISTOCLES.  51?)


€?


<C


you  would  be  a  bad  poet,  if  you  transgressed  the
rules  ofharmouy  ;  so  should  I  be  a  bad  magistrate,
if    I   granted   your   petition    contrary   to   law."
Another   time    he  rallied   Simonides  for    "  his   ab-
"  surdity  in  abusing  the  Corinthians,  who  inhabited
so   elegant  a  city,   and  getting  his  own  picture
drawn,  when  he  had  so  ill-favoured  an  aspect."
At  length,  having  acquired  great  power  and  po-
pularity, his  faction  prevailed,  and  he  procured  the  i
banishment  of  Aristides  by  what  is  called  tlie  Ostra-  j
cism'^'.

The  Medes  now  preparing  again  to  invade  Greece,
{.he  Athenians  considered  who  should  be  their  gene-
ral ;  and  many  (we  are  told)  thinking  the  commis-
sion dangerous,  declined  it.  But  Epicydes  the  son
of  Euphemides,  a  man  of  more  eloquence  than  cou-
rage, and  capable  withal  of  being  bribed,  solicited
it,  and  was  likely  to  be  chosen.  Themistocles  how-
ever, fearing  the  consequence  would  be  fatal  to  the
public,  if  tiie  choice  fell  upon  Epicydes,  prevailed
upon  him  by  pecuniary  considerations  to  drop  uis
pretensions.

This  however,  it  should  be  acUed,  could  not  be  the  chief  Archon-
gjiip;  as  he  was  then  too  young  for  that  responsible  dignity,  is
above  pronounced  '  an  obscure  person^'  and  a})pears  both  from
Thucyd.  i.  3:1,  and  Herod,  vii.  IVX,  to  have  first  attained  that
distinguished  ^iLuation  several  years  afterward.*

^'  It  is  not  certain,  "by  whom  the  Ostracism  was  introduced:
some  sa}',  by  Pisistratus,  or  rather  by  his  sons ;  others,  after  the
expulsion  Oi  the  Pisistratida; ;  while  others  make  it  as  ancient  as  tlie
time  of  Theseus.  By  this,  men  who  became  powerful  to  such  a
degree  as  to  threaten  tlic  state  with  danger,  were  banished  for  tea
(or,  according  to  Diod.  Sic.  xi.  55.,  for  live)  years;  and  they  were
to  quit  the  x\thenian  territories  in  ten  days.  The  method  was  as
follows;  every  citizen  took  a  piece  of  a  broken  pot  or  shell  (Gr.
i<rfi!tKov),  upon  which  he  wrote  the  name  of  the  person,  whom  he
wished  to  have  banished.  This  done,  the  magistrates  counted  the
shells,  and  if  they  amounted  to  6000,  sorted  them  :  and  the  man,
whose  name  was  found  on  the  greatest  number  of  shells,  was  exiled
for  ten  years.  (L.)  Ostracism  was  likevvise  in  u.-^e  in  the  cities  of
Argos,  Miletus,  Megara,  &c.  It  difiered  from  banishment,  us,  being
temporary,  assigning  a  fixed  residence,  sparing  the  property  of  the
sufferer,  generally  inflicted  in  a  moment  of  rashness  and  jealousy,
and  never  in  it's  consequences  involving  disgrace.*


S20  TiIE?^IISTOC].ES.

His  behaviour  is  also  cominGiuled  Avitli  respect  to
the  interpreter,  u'ho  came  with  the  kin^^;  of"  Persians
embassadors,  that  were  sent  to  demaiul  earth  and
water".  By  a  decree  of  tlie  people  he  })nt  him  to
death,  for  having  presumed  to  make  use  of  the  Greek
language  to  express  the  dciaands  of  barbarians.  To
tliis  we  may  add  his  proceedings  in  the  aflair  of
Arthmius  the  Zelite  '^ ;  who  ui)uri  his  suggestion
M^as  declared  '  infamous/  v.ith  his  children  and  all
his  posterity,  for  having  introduced  Persian  gold,
into  Greece.  But  what  redounded  most  of  all  to  hijj)
honour,  was  his  putting  an  end  to  the  Grecian  wars,
recouciiing  the  several  states  to  each  other,  and  per-
suading them  to  lay  aside  their  animosities  during
the  Persian  war.  In  this,  he  is  said  to  have  been
luuch.  assisted  by  Chileus'^  the  Arcadian.

As  soon  as  he  had  taken  upon  himself  the  com-
mand, he  endeavoured  to  persuade  the  })eople  to
quit  the  city,  to  embark  on  board  their  ships,  and
to  meet  the  barbarians  at  as  great  a  distance  as  pos-
sible from  Greece.  But  many  opposing  it,  he
marched  at  the  head  of  a  considerable  army  along
with  the  Lacedirmonians  to  Tempe,  intending  to
cover  Thessaly,  which  had  not  as  yet  declared  for
the  Persians.  Upon  his  returning  however  without
having  efiected  any   thing,   the   Thessalians  having

'*  This  v/as  a  demand  of  absolute  and  unconditional  submission.
But  Herodotus  (vii.  3'2.)  assures  us,  tliat  Xerxes  did  not  send  such
an  embassy  to  tl;e  Athenians  or  the  Laccda;monians.  The  embas-
sadors of'liis  father  Darius  were  treated  with  great  indignit)^  when
tliej- made  tbat  . demand ;  for  the  Athenians  threw  them  into  the
ditch,  into  which  they  precipitated  their  copital  convicts,  and  told
them,  '  There  was  earth  and  water  enough.'     (Id.  ib.  133.)

-■'  4rthmiuswas  of  Zele,  a  town  in  Asia  Minor  betAveen  Cappa-
docia  i\rn]  the  Euxine  sea,  but  resident  for  some  time-  at  Athens.
He  was  not  only  declared  '  infamous'  ibr  '  having  introduced  Per-
sian gold,'  and  endeavoured  to  corrupt  with  it  some  of  the  principal
Athenians,  but  btniished  by  sound  of  trumpet.  See  .Eschin.  adv.
Ctesipb.     Demosthenes  likewise  mentions  him,  Philipp.  iv.

'■*  Who  exerted  hi?  interest  with  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  convince
them  that  tliey  ought  to  send  assistance  to  the  Athenians  against
Mi;!-'*?.^'.!^!?,  and  succeeded.*


TIIE^vIISTOCLES.  S2l

embraced  tlie  king's  party,  and  all  the  country  as
till-  as  B(£otia  having  followed  their  example,  the
Athenians  were  more  willing  to  h.earken  to  his  pro-
posal to  fight  the  enemy  at  sea,  and  sent  him  with  a
fleet  to  guard  the  straits  of  Artemisium'"'.

When  the  majority  of  the  combined  fleets  were  of
opinion,  that  Eurybiacles  should  have  the  chief  com-
mand, and  vvith  his  Lacedemonians  begin  the  en-
gagement ;  the  Athenians,  who  had  a  greater  num-
ber of  ships  than  all  the  rest  united  -'^  thought  it  an
indignity  to  part  with  the  place  of  honour.  But
Themistocles,  perceiving  the  danger  of  any  disagree-
ment at  that  moment,  gave  np  the  command  to
Eui-ybiades  ;  and  satisfied  the  Athenians  by  repre-
senting to  them  tliat,  if  they  behaved  like  men  in
that  w^ar,  the  Grecians  would  \'oluntarily  yield  to
them  the  superiority  for  the  future.  To  him  there-
fore Greece  seems  to  have  owed  her  preservation,
and  the  Athenians  m  particular  the  distinguished
glory  of  surpassing  their  enemies  in  valour,  and  their
allies  in  moderation.

The  Persian  fleet  coming  up  to  Aphets^^,  Eury-
biades  was  astonished  at  such  an  appearance  of  sliips;
particularly  when  he  was  informed,  tliat  there  were
two  hundred  more  sailing  round  Sciathus.  He  was
therefore  desirous,  without  loss  of  time,  to   draw

'^  At  the  same  time  that  the  Greeks  t'lought  of  defending  the
pass  of  Thermopykc  by  laud,  they  serj  a  fleet  to  prevent  the  pas-
basj;e  of  the  Persian  navy  through  the  straits  of  Euboea  {/lod.  Ke-
<j;ropont),  whicli  fleet  rendezvoused  at  Artetnisium,  one  of  the  pro-
nicintories  of  t!iat  island.     Herodotut;  relates  this  story,  vii.  173.

-''  Herodotus  informs  us,  viii.  ].,  that  the  Athenians  furnished.
127  vessels,  which  v.-ere  afterward  reinforced  by  5S  more  (ib.  14-.),
and  that  the  Avhoie  complement  of  tlie  rest  of  the  Greeks  amounted
only  to  91 ;  of  which  number  likewise  twenty  more  belonged  to  the
Athenians,  who  had  lent  them  to  the  Chalcidians.

-"  Aphets,  situated  in  the  gulf  of  Magnesia,  was  so  called  (ac-
cording to  Strabo.  ix.)  because  the  Argonauts  took  thence  their
lh-»it  departure  in  quest  of  the  Golden  Fleece;  or  rather  (if  we  may
trust  Herod,  vii.  193.)  because  from  this  place,  having  watered,  they
set  sail,  leaving  Hercules  behind.  Propertius  |{.  xx.  17.)  reprt-
sents  them  as  originally  embarking  at  Pagiissi.  For  the  particulars
of  the  Persian  project,  see  Herod,  viii.  7.*
VOL.  I.  Y


322  TIIEMISTOCLES..

nearer  to  Greece,  unci  to  keep  close  to  tlie  Pelopori-
TK^sian  coast,  where  he  miglit  have  an  army  occa-
sionally to  ashiist  the  fleet ;  for  he  considered  the
naval  force  of  the  Persians  as  invincible.  Upon  this
the  Euba'ans,  apj)rehending  that  the  Greeks  vvoidd
forsake  them,  sent  Pelagon  to  negociate  privately
with  Theniistocles,  and  to  oiler  him  a  large  sum  of
money.  Me  took  the  money,  and  gave  it  (as  Plero-
dotus  writes)  to  Enrybiadcs'^.  Finding  himself  most
opposed  in  his  designs  by  Architeles,  captain  of  the
kSacred  (ialley--',  who  had  not  money  to  pay  his
men,  and  therefore  intended  immediately  to  with-
draw ;  he  so  incensed  his  countrymen  against  him,
that  they  went  in  a  tumultuous  manner  on  board  his
ship,  and  took  from  him  what  he  had  provided  for
his  supper.  Architeles  being  much  provoked  at  this
insult,  Themistocles  sent  him  in  a  chest  a  quantity
of  provisions,  and  at  the  bottom  of  it  a  talent  of
silver;  desiring  him  to  refresh  himself  that  evening,
and  to  satisfy  his  crew  in  the  morning  :  otherwise,
he  would  accuse  him  to  the  Athenians  of  having
received  a  bribe  from  the  enemy.  This  particular
is  mentioned  by  Phanias  the  Lesbian.

Though  the  several  engagements''"  with  the  Per-

*'  According  to  Herodotus  (viii.  5.)  tlie  affair  v/as  as  follows:
the  Eubtcans,  not  being  able  to  persuade  Eur3'biades  to  remain  on
their  coast  till  they  could  carry  off  their  wives  and  children,  ad-
dressed themselves  to  Tlu  .nistoeles,  and  made  him  a  present  o1^
thirty  talents.  He  took  the  money,  and  with  five  talents  bribed
Eurybiades.  Then  Adiamanthus  the  Corinthiim  being  the  only
conmiar.der  who  insisted  on  weighing  anchor,  Themistocles  v.  ent
on  board  him,  and  told  him  in  few  words;  '  Adiamanthus,  you  shall
not  abandon  us,  for  I  will  give  you  more  for  doing  your  duty^
than  the  king  of  the  Medes  would  give  you  for  betraying  it  :*
"VVhieh  he  performed,  by  sending  him  three  talents  on  board.  Thus
he  did  wluit  the  Eubceans  requested,  and  saved  tweiity-two  talents
ior  himself.

^'>  The  Sacred  Galley  was  that,  which  the  Athenians  sent  every
year  to  Delos  v.ith  s-^icrifice-s  to  Apollo;  and  (as  they  pretended)
the  same,  in  which  Theseus  carried  the  tribute  to  Crete.  See  the
Life  of  Theseus,  Vol.  I.  p.  26.

-     '=  They  came  to  three  several  engagements  within  three  days  ;
in  the   la^^t  of  whicli  Ciinias,  the  father  of  Alcibiades,  perforojed


THEMISTOCLES.  32.0

sian  fleet  in  the  straits  of  Eubaa  were  not  decisive,
yet  were  they  of  great  advantage  to  tiie  Greeks,  who
learned  by  experience  that  neither  the  nuniber  of
.•••Iiips,  nor  the  beanty  and  splendour  of  their  orna-
ments, nor  the  vaunting  shouts  and  songs  of  the
barbarians  have  any  thing  dreadful  in  them  to  men,
who  know  how  to  %ht  hand  to  hand,  and  are  de-
termined to  behave  gallantly.  These  things  they
were  taught  to  despise,  when  they  came  to  close
action,  and  grappled  with  the  foe.  In  this  case
Pindar's  sentiments  appear  just,  when  he  says  of  the
/ight  at  Artemisium  ;

'Twas  then,  that  Athens  the  foundations  laid
Of  Liberty's  fair  structure.

Intrepid  courage,  indeed,  is  the  commencement  of
victory.

Artemisium  is  a  maritime  place  of  Euboea,  to  the
north  of  Hestirea  \  Opposite  to  it  lies  Olizon,  in
the  territory  which  was  formerly  subject  to  Philoc-
tetes  ;  where  there  is  a  small  temple  of  Diana  of  the
East,  in  the  midst  of  a  grove.  This  temple  is
encircled  with  pillars  of  white  stone,  which  when
rubbed  with  the  hand,  has  both  the  colour  and  the
smell  of  saffron.  Upon  one  of  the  pillars  are  in-
scribed the  following:  verses  :

When  on  these  seas  the  Athenian  niigljt  subdued
The  Asian  hosts,  in  pious  gratitude
Here  tliey  to  Dian  rear'd  the  fane.

Upon  this  shore  there  is  a  place  still  to  be  seen,  con-
taining a  large  heap  of  sand  which,  if  dug  into,  ex-
hibits toward  the  bottom  a  black  dust  like  ashes,  as
if  soine  tire  had  been  there ;  supposed  to  have  been

wonders.  He  had,  at  his  own  expense,  fitted  out  a  ship,  which
carried  two  hundred  men.

^'  HestiaiLj,  a  maritime  city  in  Euboea;  Olizon,  a  city  in  Thes-
saly.  Plutarch  here  alludes  to  Homer's  0/\ti^i.j»«  Tp>!x,ti»v  (II.  ii,
717.)  as  supplying  part  of  Philoctetes'  troops  at  the  siege  of  Trey.*'

Y    2


324  TIIEMISTOCLES.

that,  in  which  the  wrecks  of  the  ships  and  the  bodies
of  tlie  dead  were  burned.

The  news  of  what  had  haj^pcned  at  Tliermopyhie
being  brought  to  Arteniisium '-,  when  the  confede-
rates were  informed  that  Leonidas  was  shu'n,  and
Xerxes  master  of  tlie  ])ass  by  land,  they  returned
to  Greece ;  and  tlie  Athenians,  dated  with  their
late  distinguished  valour,  brought  up  tlie  rear.  As
Themistocles  sailed  along  tlie  coasts,  wherever  he
saw  any  harbours  or  places  proper  for  the  eneiny^s
ships  to  put  in  at,  he  took  such  stones  as  he  hap-
pened to  find  or  caused  to  be  brought  thit'.ier  for  that
purpose,  and  set  them  up  in  the  ports  and  watering-
places,  with  the  following  inscription  engraved  in
large  characters  and  addressed  to  the  lonians^'^:
"  Let  the  lonians,  if  it  be  possible,  come  over  to
the  Greeks  from  whom  they  are  descended,  and  wlio
now  risk  their  lives  for  their  liberty.  If  this  be  im-
practicable, let  them  at  least  })erplex  the  barbarians,
and  throw  them  into  disorder  in  the  time  of  action.'*
By  this  he  hoped  either  to  bring  the  lonians  over  to
his  side,  or  to  sow  discord  among  them,  by  exciting
sus})icion  against  them  in  the  minds  of  the  Persians.

Though  Xerxes  had  passed  through  Doris  down
to  Phocis,  and  was  burning  and  destroying  the  Pho-
cian  cities,  yet  the  Greeks'^^  sent  them  no  assistance.
And,  notwithstanding  all  the  entreaties  which  the

'*  Th{,»  last  engagement  at  Thermopylae,  in  whicli  Xerxes  forced
the  p;:sses  of"  t!ie  n)Ountains  by  the  ctei'eat  of  the  Lacedfcnionians,
Thespi.ins,  and  Thehans,  hap})encd  on  the  same  day  with  the  battle
at  Artemisium  ;  and  tl'.c  intelligence  of  it  was  brought  toTheniisto-
cles  bv  an  Athenian,  called  Abronychus.  Though  the  action  at  Ther-
mopylaj  had  no  immediate  relation  to  Thcmistocles,  it  would  have
tended  more  to  the  glory  of  that  general,  if  Plutarch  had  taken
more  notice  of  it;  since  the  advantage  gained  there  by  Xerxes
opened  (ireece  to  him,  and  rendered  him  nmcli  more  formidable.
Thermopylae  is  v.ell  known  to  be  a  narrow  pass  in  the  mountains,
near  tiie  Euripus.

33  A  colonv  from  Attica,  settled  in  Asia  Minor.  Flerotiotus,.
viii.  22,  gives  the  in.bcriiition  at  full  length,  of  which  Plutarch  has
only  preserved  an  abridgement.*

^*  Of  Aeh.iia,  and  Peloponnesus.  The  Dorians  had  sided  wltU
Xerxes.     See  iierodot.  viii.  -10.*


THEMISTOCLES.  325

Athenians  could  use,  to  prevail  upon  the  confede-
rates to  repau'  wuh  them  into  Boeotia  and  cover  the
frontiers  of  Attica,  as  they  themselves  had  sent  a
fleet  to  Arteniisium  to  serve  the  common  cause,  no
one  listened  to  their  request.  All  eyes  were  turned
upon  Peloponnesus,  and  all  were  determined  to  col-
lect their  forces  within  the  Isthmus,  and  to  build  a
wall  across  it  from  sea  to  sea.  The  Athenians  were
greatly  incensed  to  see  themselves  thus  betrayed,
and  at  the  same  time  dejected  and  discouraged  by  so
general  a  defection.  They  alone  could  not  think  of
giving  battle  to  so  prodigious  an  army.  To  quit  the
city,  and  embark  on  board  their  ships,  was  tlie  only
expedient  remaining  ;  and  to  this  the  generality
weie  very  unwilling  to  hearken,  as  they,  could  nei-
ther have  any  great  anticipation  of  victory,  nor  idea
of  safety,  when  they  had  left  the  temples  of  their
gods  and  the  monuments  of  their  ancestors.

h  emistoclcs,  perceiving  that  he  could  not  by  the
force  of  human  reason  prevail  with  the  multitude ^\
set  his  machinery  '"""  to  work,  as  a  poet  would  do  in
a  tragedy,  and  had  recourse  to  prodigies  and  ora-
cles. The  prodigy,  of  which  he  availed  himself
was,  the  disappearing  of  the  dragon  of  Minerva^'',
which  at  that  time  quitted  the  holy  place ;  and  the
priests  finding  the  daily  offerings  set  before  it  un-
touched announced  to  the  people,  on  the  suggestion

^^  He  prevailed  so  efFectually  at  last,  tJiat  the  Athenians  stoned
Cyrsilus,  an  orator  who  vehemently  opposed  him  with  all  the
common  topics,  of"  love  to  the  place  of  one's  birth,  and  the  affec-
tion due  to  wives  and  helpless  infants.  The  women  too,  in  order  to
show  how  far  they  were  from  desiring  that  the  cause  of  Greece
should  suffer  upon  their  account,  stoned  his  wife.   (Demosth.  vtfi

3^  To  this  kind  of  machinery  Horace  alludes  :

Nee  Deus  intersity  nisi  dignus  vindice  nodus

Incident. (A.  P.  191.)*

3'  This  dragon,  according  to  Herod,  viii.  4-1.,  was  the  guardian
of  the  citadel,  where  it  was  supported  by  monthly  offerings  of  cakes
of  honey.  The  same  historian  also,  with  more  probability,  aicribet
the  report  mentioned  below  to  the  priestess  of  Minerva**


tin


26  THEMISTOCLES.

of  Themistocles,  that  the  goddess  had  forsaken  the
city,  and  offered  to  conduct  them  to  sea.  More-
over, by  way  of  explaining  to  the  peojile  an  oracle
then  received  '■"\  he  told  them  that  by  '  wooden
walls'  there  could  not  possibly  be  any  thing  meant
but  ships ;  and  that  Apollo,  now^  called  Salamis
'  divine,'  not  (as  formerly)  '  wretched  and  imfortu-
nate,'  signified  by  such  an  epithet-,  that  it  would  be
productive  of  some  great  advantage  to  Greece.  His
counsels  prevailed,  and  he  proposed  a  decree  that
the  city  should  be  left  to  tne  protection  of  Mi-
nerva^", the  tutelary  goddess  of  the  Athenians  ;  that
the  young  men  should  go  on  board  the  ships ;  and
that  every  one  should  provide  as  well  as  he  possibly
could  for  the  safety  of  the  children,  the  women,  and
the  slaves.

When  this  decree  was  made,  most  of  the  Athe-
nians removed  their  parents  and  wives  to  Trttzene '*",
where  they  \vere  received  with  a  generous  hospi-
tality.    The    Troezenians    came  to  a  resolution  to

^s  This  was  the  second  oracle,  vhich  tlic  Atlienian  deputies  re-
ceived from  Aristonicc,  priestess  of  Apollo.  [The  fhst,  w  iiii  jrreatcr
severit}',  had  enjoined  them  to  abandon  their  cit  ;<'e],  and  had  an-
nounced the  total  destruction  of  their  city.  Both  however,  from
tlieir  according  so  well  with  the  system  of  TliLmistocles,  had  oeen
obviously  suggested  by  him  to  t!ie  Pythone&s.*]  Many  were  of
opinion,  that  by  the  '  wooden  walls,'  to  which  she  advised  thcni
to  have  recourse,  was  meant  the  citadel,  because  it  was  palisaded  ;
while  others  thought,  it  could  signify  nothing  but  ships.  The  ad-
vocates of  the  ibrmer  opinion  urged,  against  such  as  supported  the
latter,  that  the  last  line  but  one  of  the  oracle,

without  question  portended  the  destruction  of  the  Athenian  fleet
near  Salamis.  Thenn'stocles  ailcced  in  answer  tlu'.t,  if  tiie  oracle
had  intended  to  forctcl  the  dcstructi-.^n  of  the  Athenians,  it  would
not  have  called  it  '  tlie  divine,'  but  '  the  unhappy '  Salan)is ;  and
that  by  '  the  sons  of  women  '  could  be  meaiit  no  other  than  tiie
Persians,  who  were  scandalously  fciTeminatc.   (Herod  vii.  llf'-,  1-J4.)

39  IIov/  was  tl)is,  when  he  had  before  tuld  the  people,  that  Mi-
nerva had  forsaken  liie  city  !

^'^  Theseus,  the  great  hero  in  Athenian  story,  v.as  originally  q,£
this  place.  (L.)  Otiicrs  sent  their  families  to  /Egina  and  Sa-
lamis.*


THEMISTOCLES.  S27

Jiiainlain  them  at  the  public  expense,  for  wliicli  pur-
pose they  allowed  eacli  of  them  two  oboli  a  day :
tliey  permitted  the  children  likewise  to  gather  fruit
wherever  they  pleased,  and  provided  for  their  edu-
cation bv  payinj^  their  tutors^'.  This  order  was
procured  by  Nicagoi'as.

As  the  treasury  of  Athens  was  then  empty,  Aris-
totle informs  us  that  the  court  of  Areopagus  distri-
buted to  every  man,  who  took  part  in  the  expedi-
tion, eight  drachmas ;  which  was  the  principal
means  of  manning  the  fleet.  But  this  also  is  as-
cribed to  a  stratagem  of  Themistocles  by  Clidemus,
who  tells  us  that,  when  the  Athenians  went  down  to
the  harbour  of  Pir^us,  the  ^gis  was  lost  from  the
vStatue  of  Minerva  ;  and  Themistocles,  as  he  ran-
sacked every  thing  under  pretence  of  searching  for
it,  found  large  sums  of  money  hidden  among  the
baggage,  wliich  he  applied  to  the  public  use,  pro-
viding out  of  it  all  necessaries  for  the  fleet  ^-.

The  embarkation  of  the  people  of  Athens  was  a.
very  afiecting  scene.  What  pity,  what  admiration
of  the  firmness  of  those  men,  who  sending  their
parents  and  families  to  a  distant  ])lace,  unmoved
witii  their  cries  and  tears  and  embraces,  had  the
fortitude  to  leave  the  city  and  embark  for  Salamis !
What. greatly  heightened  the  distress,  was  the  num-
ber of  citizens  whom,  on  account  of  their  extreme
old  age ''^,  they  were  forced  to  leave  behind.  And
some  emotions  of  tenderness  were  due  even  to  the
tame  domestic  animals,  vvhich  running  to  the  shore,
with  lamentable  hov»'lings  expressed  their  affection
and  regret  for  the  persons  by  whom  tliey  had  been
fed.     One  of  these,  a  dog  belonging  to  Xanthippus

•*'  This,  at  a  period  of  so  much  trouble,  proves  the  value  which
■the  Greeks  set  upon  education.*

•*^  As  Herodotus  ho\vever,  amidst  all  his  details,  does  not  men-
tion this  circumstance,  and  Clidemus  is  an  historian  littlj  known,
liie  first  is  perhaj'js  the  more  accurate  account.*

■•^  Many  citizens  al'^o,  {'roui  their  religious  attachment  to  Athens,
<;hose  to  remain  behind."*  In  this  description,  Vv-e  find  strong  traces
of  Plutarch's  liuinanity  and  good-nature.


S28  THEMISTOCLES.

the  father  of  Pericles,  iinv,ining  to  be  left  behind,  is
said  to  have  leaped  into  the  sea,  and  to  have  swam
by  the  side  of  the  ship  till  it  reached  Salainis,  wliere
quite  spent  with  toil  it  immediately  died.  And
they  show  to  this  day  a  place  called  '  Cynos-sema,*
where  they  tell  us  it  was  buried.

To  these  illustrious  actions  of  Thcmistoclcs  may
be  added  the  following.  Perceiving  tliat  Aristides
(who  had  been  banished,  through  his  machinations,
before  the  war)  was  much  regretted  by  the  people,
who  were  apprehensive  that  out  of  revenp;c  he
might  join  the  Persians,  and  do  great  prejudice  to
the  cause  of  Greece ;  he  caused  a  decree  to  be
made,  that  all  v/ho  had  been  banished  onlv  for  a
fixed  time  should  have  leave  to  return,  and  bv  their
counsel  and  valour  assist  their  fellow-citizens  in  the
preservation  of  their  country.

Eurybiades,  on  account  of  the  dignity  of  Sparta,
had  the  command  of  the  fleet ;  but,  as  he  was  ap-
prehensive of  the  danger  ''*,  he  proposed  to  set  sail
for  the  Isthmus,  and  tix  his  station  near  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  army.  Themistocles,  however,  opposed
it ;  and  the  account  which  we  have  of  the  confer-
ence upon  that  occasion,  deserves  to  be  recorded.
"When  Eurybiades  said  *^,  "  Don't  you  know,  The-
"  mistocles,  that  in  the  public  games  such  as  rise
"  lip  before  their  turn,  are  chastised  for  it  ?"  "  Yes,'*
answered  Themistocles  j  "  yet  those,   who  are  left

*•*  It  docs  not  appear,  tliut  Eurybiades  wanted  cournije.  After
Xerxes  had  gained  the  pass  of  Therniopyla?,  it  was  the  general
opinion  of  the  chief  ofFicers  of  the  confederate  fleet  (with  the  ex-
ception of  those  of  Athens)  assembled  in  council,  that  their  only
resource  was  to  build  a  strong  wall  across  the  Isthmus,  and  to  defend
Peloponnesus  against  the  Persians.  The  Lacedaemonians  likewise
(as  we  learn  below)  who  were  impartial  judges  of  men  and  things,
gave  the  pal  :i  of  valour  to  Eurybiades,  and  that  of  prudence  to
Themistocles ;  and  twice  appointed  the  former,  though  not  of  the
blood-royal,  to  the  command  of  their  fleet.

*'"  This  conversation,  according  to  Herodotus  (viii.  ,59.),  passed
between  Adiamanthus  general  of  the  Corinthians  and  Themistocles;
but  Plutarch  relates  it  with  more  probability  of  Eurybiades,  who
was  commander- in-chief.


cc
ii
cc
cc

C(


THEMISTOCLES.         •  329

*'  behind,  never  gain  the  crown."    Eui7bia(Ies  upon
this  liftinsr  im  his  staff,  as  if  he  intended  to  strike
him,  Themistocles  said,    "  Strike,    but   hear   me.*'
The     LacedcEmonian,    admiring    his    command    of
temper,  bade  him   speak   what  he  had  to  say  :  and
Th.emistoclcs  was  leading  him  back  to  tlie  subject,
when  one  of  the  officers  thus  interrupted  him  ;  "  It
"  ill  becomes  you,  who  ha\e  no  city,  to  advise  us
"  to  quit  our  habitations,  and  abandon  our  country.'*
Upon  which  Themistocles  retorted  ;  "  Wretch  that
"  thou  art,  we  have  indeed  left  our  v/alls  and  houses,
"  not   choosing  for   the   sake   of  those   inanimate
things  to  become  slaves;  yet  we  have  still  the
most  respectable    city   of  Greece   in   these    two
hundred  ships,  v.hich  are  here  ready  to  defend
you,  if  you   will  give   them    leave.     But,  if  you
betray  us  a  second  time,  Greece  shall  soon  find
the  Athenians  possessed   of  as  free  a  city'*'',  and
"  as  valuable   a    country  as  that  which  they  have
"  quitted."     These  \^ords  struck  Eurybiades  with
the  apprehension,  that  the  Athenians  might  fall  off
from  him.     We  are  told  also  that,  as  a  certain  Ere-
trian    was   attempting  to    speak,    Themistocles   ex-
claimed, "  What !  have  you  too  something  to  say
"  about  war,  who  are  like  the  fish  that  has  a  sword,
"  but  no  heart ''  ?"

While  Themistocles  was  thus  maintaining  his
argument  upon  deck,  an  owl  (as  some  tell  us)  was
seen  flying  to  the  right  of  the  fleet  "*%  which  came

^^  The  address  of  Themistocles  is  much  to  be  admired.  If  Eu-
rybiades was  really  induced  by  liis  fears  to  return  to  the  Isthmus,
the  Athenian  took  a  right  method  to  remove  tliose  fears  by  sug-
gesting greater  :  for  what  else  could  he  intimate,  except  that  when
driven  from  their  own  city,  in  their  distress  and  despair,  the  Athe--
nians  might  seize  the  state  of  Sparta  ?  For  a  different  account  of
this  speech,  however,  see  Ilerodot.  viii.  62.

'•'  Gr.  T.vrtic,  This  observation,  whatever  be  the  fish  alluded  to,
is  probably  founded  on  a  mistake.  Comparative  anatomy,  and  in-
deed anatomj'^  of  all  kinds,  was  little  understood  by  the  ancients.*

"8  The  owl  was  sacred  to  Minerva,  the  protectress  of  Athens,
and  is  found  upon  almost  all  the  Attic  medals  extant.


330  TIIEMISTOCLES.

and  pcrclicd  upon  the  shrouds.  This  omen  deter-
mined tlic  confederates  to  accede  to  his  opinion,
and  to  prepare  ibr  a  sea-%ht.  But  no  sooner  did
the  enemy's  iieet  appear  advancing  toward  the  Iiar-
bonr  of  Phalerus  in  Attica,  and  covering  all  the
iieiglibouring  coasts,  while  Xerxes  Iiimself  was
seen  marching  his  land-forces  to  the  shore,  than
the  Greeks  struck  with  the  sight  of  such  prodigious
armaments  began  to  forget  the  counsel  of  Themis-
tocles,  and  the  Peloponnesians  once  more  looked
toward  the  Isthmus.  Nay,  they  resolved  to  set  sail
that  very  night,  and  orders  to  that  effect  were  issued
to  all  the  pilots.  Themistocles,  deeply  concerned
that  tlie  Greeks  were  about  to  abandon  the  advan-
tage of  their  station  in  the  straits  ^^,  and  to  retire
to  their  respective  countries,  contrived  the  strata-
gem wiiich  was  put  in  execution  by  Sicinus.  This
Sicinus  was  of  Persian  extractions^  and  a  ca})tive,
but  much  attached  to  Themistocles,  and  the  tutor
of  his  children.  Upon  this  occasion  Themistocles
sent  him  privately  to  the  king  of  Persia,  with  orders
to  inform  him  that  the  commander  of  the  Athenians,
having  espoused  his  interest,  was  the  first  to  apprise
liim  of  the  intended  flight  of  the  Greeks ;  and  ex-
horted him  not  to  suffer  them  to  escape,  but  while
they  were  in  this  confusion,  and  at  a  distance  from
their  land-forces,  to  attack  and  destro}'  their  whole
navv.

Xerxes   received   this    information    kindly,    sup-
posing it  to  proceed  fi-om  friendship  ;  and   imme-

"9  If  the  confederates  had  quitted  the  straits  of  Salamls,  where
they  could  equal  the  Persians  in  the  line  of  battle,  such  of  the  Athe-
nians as  were  in  that  island  must  have  become  an  easy  prey  to  the
enemy ;  and  the  Persians  would  h.ave  found  an  open  sea  upon  the
Pcloponnosiaii  coast,  where  they  could  act  with  all  their  force
against  tlie  ships  of  tlie  allies.

^°  jr.%chy\i\s,  who  was  in  this  action,  speaking  of  Sicinus  says,
*  A  cei-tain  Greek  from  the  army  of  the  Athenians  told  Xerxes,'  i<c.
(L.).  It  is  not  at  all  likely,  indeed,  that  Themistocles  would  have
entrusted  the  care  of  his  children  to  a  foreigner.  Herodotus,  v.ho
calls  him  Sicinnus,  says  (most  probably,  by  mistake)  that  he  a,;i-
dressed  himself  to  all  tlie  Persian  generals,  (viii.  To.)*

12


TIIEMISTOCLES.  S31

diately  gave  orders  to  his  officers,  with  two  hundred
ships,  to  surround  all  the  passages  and  enclose  the
islands,  that  none  of  the  Greeks  might  escape,  and
then  to  follow  with  the  rest  of  the  ships  at  their
leisure.  Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysimachus,  was  the
first  who  perceived  this  nnotion  of  the  enemy ;  and
though  he  was  not  in  friendsliip  with  I'hcmistocles,
but  (as  it  has  been  related)  had  been  banished  bj
his  means,  he  went  to  him,  and  told  him  they  were
surrounded  by  the  enemy  "'.  Thcmistocles  knowing
his  probity,  and  charmed  witli  his  coming  to  give
this  information,  acquainted  him  with  the  affair  of
Sicinus,  and  entreated  him  to  lend  his  assistance  to
keep  the  Greeks  in  their  station ;  and,  as  they  had
a  confidence  in  his  honour,  to  persuade  them  to
come  to  an  encyao-ement  in  the  straits.  Aristides
approved  Thcmistocles'  proceedings,  and  going  to
the  other  admirals  and  captains,  encouraged  them
to  engage.  While  they  scarcely  gave  credit  to  his
report,  a  Tenian''  galley  conunanded  by  Pansetius
came  over  from  the  enemy  to  bring  the  same  ac-
cormt;  so  that  indignation,  added  to  necessity,  ex-
cited the  Greeks  to  the  combat^"^.

^'  Ari:>ti(les  was  not  then  in  the  confederal e  fleet,  bat  in  the
idand  of /Egina;  vvhitlier  he  had  retired  upon  his  baoiyument  from
v'ithens,  ani!  whence  he  sailed  by  night  with  great  hazard  through
the  Persian  fleet,  to  carry  this  intehigence.    {Herod,  viii.  79.)

•5-  Tenos  was  a  small  icland  in  ihe  vEge.in  sea,  in  the  group
named  the  Cyclades.  In  grateful  nieniory  of  this  event,  the  name
of  the  Tenians  was  engraved  on  the  tripod  consecrated  at  Delphi,
among  those  of  the  otiier  vanquis!;;'rs  of  Xerxes.  See  Ilerodot.
viii.  8"2.,  vvlio  had  been  indefatigable  in  !iis  historic  researches.*

'^  The  (liiFerePt  conduct  of  the  Spartans  an''.  t!ie  /Athenians  upon
this  occasion  seems  to  show,  how  much  iuperior  tiie  accommodating
lav/s  of  Solon  were  to  the  austere  discipline  of  Lycurgus,  While
the  iustitutiens  of  the  latter  indeed  remained  in  force,  the  Lacedae-
monians were  the  greatest  of  all  people.  But  their  continuance
was  i!npo>sible.  Tiie  severity  of  Lycurgus'  legislation  naturally
ten.ded  to  destroy  it.  N(m-  was  this  all.  From  the  extreme  of  ab-
stemious hardship  the  n.xt  step  way,  not  to  a  modornte  enjoyment
of  life,  but  to  all  the  licentiousness  of  the  most  effeniinate  luxury.
The-iavvs  of  Lycurgus  made  men  of  the  women  :  nhcn  tiiey  u'cre
broken,  they  made  women  of  the  men.


352  THEMISTOCLES.

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  Xerxes  sat  down  on  an
eminence  to  view  the  fleet  and  it*s  order  of  battle.
He  placed  himself,  as  Plianodenuis  writes,  above
the  temple  of  Hercules,  where  the  isle  of  Salamis
is  separated  fi'om  Attica  by  a  narrow  frith  ;  but
according  to  Acestodorus  on  the  coiifines  of  Me-
gara,  upon  a  spot  called  Kerata,  or  '  the  horns.*
He  was  seated  upon  a  throne  of  gold  '**,  and  had
many  secretaries  about  him,  whose  business  it  was
to  write  down  the  particulars  of  the  action.

In  the  mean  time,  as  Themistocles  was  sacrificing:
on  the  deck  of  the  admiral-galley,  three  captives
were  brouiiht  to  him  of  uncommon  beauty,  eleij^antlv
attired  and  set  off  with  golden  ornaments.  They
were  said  to  be  the  sons  of  Autarctus  and  Sandace,
sister  to  Xerxes.  Euphrantides  the  soothsayer  cast-
ing his  eye  upon  them,  and  at  the  same  time  observ-
ing that  a  bright  flame  blazed  out  from  the  victims  ^'',
while  a  sneezing  was  heard  to  the  right,  took  The-
mistocles by  the  hand,  and  ordered  that  the  three
vouths  should  be  consecrated  and  sacrificed  to  Bac-
ehus  Omestes"^;  for  thus  the  Greeks  might  be
assured,  not  only  of  safety,  but  of  victory.

^•».  This  throne  or  seat,  whether  of  gold  or  silver  or  hoth,  was
taken  and  carried  to  Athens,  where  it  was  consecrated  in  the  temple
of  Minerva,  uith  the  golden  sabre  of  Mardonius,  which  was  taken
afterward  in  the  battle  of  Platjca;.  Demosthenes  calls  it  oKpf-ov
ar/fp«3-eJu,  '  a  chair  with  silver  feet.'  See  Olynth.  in'.,  and  Harpo-
cration  voc.  apyj^o-ac.

^'  A  bright  flame  was  always  considered  as  a  fortunate  omen,
whether  it  were  a  real  one  issuing  from  an  altar,  or  a  seeming  one
(what  we  call  *  shell-fire')  from  tlie  head  of  a  living  person.  Virgil,
JiLn.  ii.  682.,  mentions  one  of  the  latter  sort,  which  appeared  about
the  head  of  lulus  ;  and  Florus  another,  that  was  seen  upon  the  head
of  Servius  Tullius.  A  sneezing  to  the  right  likewise  was  deemed
a  lucky  omen,  both  by  the  Greeks  and  Latins.  (L.)  (See  Aristot.
de  Anim.  i.  11.)  Homer,  in  Odyss.  xvii.  5i^5.,  introduces  it  as  a
fortunate  omen,  without  any  reference  to  right  or  left;

To  advert  to  modem  superstition,  Strada  in  his  Prolus.  Aead.  iii.
4.  has  a  learned  dissertation  entitled  '  Pictor  Suburranus,  sive  ^rpo-
Sy.ny^a  Cur  sternuentes  salidentur.''*

^^  In  the  same  manner  Chios,  Tcncdos,  and  Lesbos  offered  hu-

9


THEMISTOCLES.  533

Themistocles  was  astonished  at  the  strangeness
and  cruelty  of  the  order ;  but  the  multitude,  who
in  great  and  pressing  difficulties  trust  rather  to  ab-
surd than  rational  methods,  invoked  the  god  with
one  voice  ;  and  leading  the  captives  to  the  altai',  in-
sisted upon  their  being  offered^  as  the  soothsayer  had
directed.  This  particular  we  have  from  Phanias  the
Lesbian,  a  man  not  unversed  in  letters  and  philo-
sophy.

As  to  the  number  of  the  Persian  sliips,  tlie  poet
if^^schylus  speaks  of  it,  in  his  tragedy  entitled  Persag^'',
as  a  matter  of  which  lie  was  well  assured  :

A  thousand  ships  (for  we]]  tlielr  sum  I  know)
At  Persia's  bidding  arm'ci  their  haughty  prcv  :
Two  hundred  more  and  seven  tiia  seas  o'ersnread.

The  Athenians  had  only  one  hundred  and  eighty
galleys  ;  each  carried  eighteen  men  that  fought  upon
deck,  foiir  of  whom  v/ere  archers,  and  the  rest  heavv-
arnied.

If  Themistocles  was  happy  in  choosing  a  place
for  action,  he  was  not  less  so  in  taking  advantage
of  a  proper  time  for  it ;  for  he  would  not  engage  the
enemy,  till  that  hour  of  the  day  when  a  brisk  wind
usually  rises  from  the  sea,  which  occasions  a  high
surf  in  the  channel.  This  w^as  no  inconvenience  to
the  Grecian  vessels,  which  were  low-built  and  weli-
cornpacted ;  but  a  very  considerable  one  to  the
Persian  ships,  which  had  high  sterns  and  lofty  decks,
and  were  heavv  and  unwieldy  :  for  it  caused  them
to  veer  in  such  a  manner,  that  their  sides  were  ex-
posed to  the  Greeks,  v;ho  attacked  them  furiously.
During  the  whole  dispute,  great  attention  was  given

man  sacrifices  to  Bacchus,  surnamed  Omodius.  But  this  is  the  sole
instance  on  record  among  the  Athenians;  (L.)  and  even  tlii«  is
not  recorded  by  Hero(Jotus.  Pausan.  ix.  8.  has  a  story,  relative  to
a  temporary  oiFerin^  of  human  sacrifices  in  Bceotia.  ^^nmiotlicr
respect,  however,  Bacchns  is  entitled  to  tin's  epithet :  as  it  was
usual  at  Aleva  in  Arcadia  to  whip  Women  with  rods  at  his  altar.*
i»  V.  34-1.  See  not.   SO.;^


3d*  ,  THE^IISTOCLES.

to  tlic  motions  of  Themistoclcs,  as  it  was  bdieved
that  he  knew  best  liow  to  proceed.  Against  hiai
Ariamencs  "  the  l^ersian  adiiJiral,  a  man  of  distin-
guislicd  honour,  and  by  far  the  bravest  of  the  king's
brothers,  chiefly  directed  liis  manceuvres.  His  ship
\yas  very  tall,  and  tlience  he  threw  darts  and  shot
forth  arrov.s,  as  from  the  wails  of  a  castle.  But
Aminias  the  Decelean  and  Sosieles  the  Pedian,  who
sailed  in  the  same  vessel,  bore  down  upon  him  with
their  prow,  and  both  ships  meeting,  they  were  fasten-
ed together  by  means  of  their  bnisen  beaks  ;  wh.en
Ariamenes  boarding  their  galley,  they  received  him
■with  their  pikes,  and  pushcci  hiin  into  the  sea.  Ar-
temisia "•'  knew  the  body  among  others,  which  were
floating  with  the  wreck,  and  had  it  conveyed  to
Xerxes.

While  the  %ht  was  tlnis  raging,  vrc  are  told  a
great  light  apipeared  as  fi'om  "Eleusis  ;  and  loud
sounds  and  voices  v.ere  heard  through  all  the  plain
of  Thriasia  to  the  sea,  as  of  an  immense  number  of
people  carrying  the  mystic  symbols  of  Bacchus  in
procesdon  '^^.     A  cloud  likewise  seemed  to  rise  from

^3  He  is  differently  named  by  Hsrodotus  (vii.  '2.,  viii.  89.)  wlio,
however,  says  nothing  about  the  manner  of  his  death.

Aminias,  mentioned  below,  is  said  by  Died.  Sic.  (xi.  27.)  to  have
•  been  the  brotber  of  /lischvlas.*

•;9  Artemisia,  queen  of  Hahearnassus,  distinguished  herself  above
all  the  rest  oi'  the  Persian  forces,  her  ships  being  the  last  that  fled  ;
which  Xerxes  observing  cried  out,  that  '  the  nieu  beluived  like
ivomen,  and  the  women  like  men.'  The  Athenians  were  so  in-
censed against  her,  as  a  wonmn  and  a  lieroine,  that  they  offered  a
reward  oi'ten  tlinusand  drachmas  to  any  one,  who  should  take  her
«hve.  [And  Ileroilotus  (viii.  9.'.)  has  preserved  an  account  of  her
very  narrow  escape,  and  the  stratagem  by  which  it  was  ett'ected.
ir'ee  also  PoIvrpn.Stratag.  viii.  53.,  which  gives  farther  probability
to  the  story.*]  This  princess  must  not  be  confounded  with  tha"^t
Artemisia,  who  was  the  wife  of  Mausolus  king  of  Caria,  and  lived
at  a  much  later  period.

'°  These  voices,  according  to  Herodotus,  viii.  6.5.  (who,  however,.
doe.i  not  mention  the  '  great  light  )  were  heard  some  days  b.'fore
the  battle,  while  the  Persian  land-forces  were  ravaging  the  terri-
tories of  Attica.  Dicacus,  an  Athenian  exile  (who  hoped  thereby
to  procure  a  mitigation  of  his  country's  fate:  was  the  first  who
observed  the  thing,  and  carried  an  account  of  it  to  Xerxes.  (L.)


THEMISTOCLES.  fisr.

among  the  crowd  that  made  this  noise,  and  to  ascend
by  degrees,  till  it  fell  upon  the  galleys.  Other  phan-
toms also  and  apparitions  of  armed  men  the  Greeks
saw,  in  imagination  at  least,  stretching  out  their
hands  from  iEgina  in  the  van  of  their  fleet.  These
tliej  conjectured  to  be  the  ^'Eacidae^",  to  whom  be-
fore the  battle  they  had  addressed  their  prayers  for
succour.

The  first  man  that  took  a  ship  was  an  Athenian
nam.ed  Lycomedes,  captain  of  a  vessel,  who  cut
down  the  ensigns  ^'^  from  the  enemy's  vessel,  and
consecrated  them  to  '  the  Laurelled  Apollo.'  As  the
Persians  could  advance  in  the  straits  but  few  at  a
time,  and  often  threw  each  otlier  into  confusion,
the  Greeks  equalling  them  in  the  line  fought  them
till  the  evening,  when  they  broke  them  entirely  and
gained  that  signal  and  complete  victory,  which  vv'as
never  exceeded  in  glory  (as  Simonides  says)  by  any
other  naval  achievement  either  of  the  Greeks  or  of
the  barbarians.  This  success  was  owing  to  the  va-
lour, indeed,  of  all  the  confederates,  but  chiefly  to
the  sagacity  and  conduct  of  Themistocles  ^\

After  the  battle  Xerxes,  full  of  indignation  at  his
disappointment,  attempted  to  join  Salamis  to  the
continent  by  a  mole  so  well  secured,  that  his  land-
forces  might  pass  over  it  into  the  island,  and  that  he


He  affirmed,  that  he  heard  the  hymn  called  litcchus,  and  recited
in  honour  of  Bacchus  during  the  procesbion  from  Ceramicus  to
Eleusis.*

^'  A  vessel  had  been  sent  to  i^gina,  to  implore  tlie  as-iistance
of  ^?iacus  and  his  descendents.  (Herod,  viii.  iji.)  /Eacus  was  the
son  of  Jupiter,  and  had  been  king  of  iEgina.  He  was  so  remark-
able  for  his  justice,  that  his  prayers  are  said  to  have  procured  con-
siderable advantages  to  the  Greeks,  particularly  in  a  great  drought,
Avith  vi'hich  Greece  had  been  airlicted  (Pausan.  ii.  29.)  ;  and,  after
his  death,  it  was  believed  that  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  three
judges  in  tlie  infernal  regions.

''-  These  were  the  figures,  &c.  usually  attached  to  the  prows  of
vessels,  for  the  sake  both  of  ornament  and  of  distinction.*

^'3  in  this  battle,  which  was  one  of  the  most  memorable  in  an-
cient liistory,  the  Grecians  lost  forty  ships  and  the  Persians  two
hundred,  beside  a  great  many  more  that  were  taken.


S3S  THEMISTOCLES.

might  shut  up  the  pass  entirely  against  the  Greeks".
At  the  same  time  Themistocles,  in  order  to  sound
Aristides,  pretended  it  was  hif-,  own  opinion  that  they
sliould  sail  to  the  Hellespont,  and  break  down  the
bridge  of  ships  ;  "  For  so,"  said  he,  "  v/c  may  take
"  Asia  without  stirriui^  out  of  Eurooe."  Aristides^'
not  in  the  least  relishing  his  proposal,  replied  ;  "  Till
now,  we  have  had  to  do  with  an  enemy  immersed
in  luxury*,  but  if  we  shut  him  up  in  Greece,  and
drive  him  to  necessity,  he  who  is  master  of  such
prodigious  forces  will  no  longer  sit  under  a  golden
canopy,  and  be  a  quiet  spectator  of  the  proceed-
"  ings  of  the  wai- ;  but  awakened  by  danger,  at-
"  tempting  every  thing  and  present  every  where,
"  will  correct  his  past  errors,  and  follow  counsels
"  better  calculated  for  success.  Instead  therefore
*'  of  breaking  down  th.ai;  bridge,  we  should  if  possible
"  provide  another,  that  he  may  retire  the  sooner
"  out  of  Europe."  ••  If  that  be  the  case,"  said
Tliemistocles,  "  we  must  all  consider  and  contrive,
"  how  to  urge  him  to  the  most  speedy  retreat  out
"  ofGreece>'

This  being  determ.ined,  he  sent  one  of  the  kin«:^*s
eunuchs  whom -he  foiaid  among  the  prisoners  ^%  Ar-

^*  But,  according  to  Herod,  (viii.  97.)  Xerxes  meant  only  to  de-
lude tlie  Greeks  into  a  notion,  that  he  intended  to  try  tlie  fortune
of  another  sea-fight,  lest  tlicy  *  should  sail  to  the  Hellespont,  and
break  down  iiis  bi'idge  ol'ship;-;.'  This  was  constructed,  during  that
prince's  residence  at  Sardis,  by  Phoenician  and  Egyptian  workmen,
who  tV.stened  the  ves.sels  together  witli  cables  of  hemp  and  bark.
The  width  of  the  strait  was  about  a  mile.  A  violent  tempest  de-
stroyed the  effect  of  their  labours,  before  they  were  fully  completed.
The  rage  of  Xerxes,  and  his  ordering  the  sea  to  be  scourged  for  it  s
misconduct,  are  well-known  tales.  A  second  effort  was  more  suc-
cessful.    See  Herodot.  vii.  S3— -36.*

^'  According  to  the  more  probrdilo  account  of  Herodotus  Cviii.
]0S.)  it  was  not  Aristides,  but  Eurybiades  the  commander-in-chief,
wiio  made  this  reply  to  Tliemistocles.

66  Herodotus  (xiii.  110.)  says  '  Siiinnus,'  who  had  been  previ-
ously emjjloycd  on  a  sinuMar  errand  :  and  Dacier  c.nd  Larcher,  the
commentators  of  Plutarch  and  of  that  historian,  stoutly  contend  for
the  superior  probability  of  the  narratives  of  their  respective  au-
tliori.'*^


THEMI8T0CLES.  S37

naces  by  name,  to  acquaint  him,  "  That  the  Greeks,
"  since  their  naval  victory,  were  determined  to  sail
"  to  the  licilespont  ancl  destroy  the  bridge;  but
"  that  Themistocles,  in  care  tor  the  king's  safety,
"  advised  him  to  hasten  toward  his  own  seas,  and
''  pass  over  into  Asia,  while  his  liiend  endeavoured
"  to  find  out  pretences  oi  dehxy,  in  order  to  prevent
"  the  confederates  from  pursuing  him."  Xerxes,
terrified  ac  the  news,  retired  with  the  greatest  pre-
cipitation''.  Of  the  prudence  of  this  management
on  the  part  of  Themistocles  and  Aristides,  Mardo-
nius  afforded  a  proof,  when  w^ith  a  small  part  of  the
king's  forces  he  put  the  Greeks  in  imminent  danger
of  losing  all,  at  the  battle  of  Plata^a^.

Herodotus '^'^  informs  us  that,  among  tlie  cities,
JEginn.  bore  away  the  palm  ;  but,  among  the  com-
manders, Themistocles  in  spite  of  envy  was  univers-
ally allov.'ed  to  have  distinguished  himself  the  roost.
For  w^hen  they  camq  to  the  Isthmus,  and  every  ofUcer
took  a  billet  from  the  altar  %  to  inscribe  upon  it  the
names  of  those  who  had  done  the  best  service,  every
one  put  him.self  in  the  first  place,  and  Themistocles
in  the  second.  The  Lacedaemonians,  having  con-
ducted him  to  Sparta,  adjudged  to  Eurybiades  the
prize  of  valour,  and  to  Themistocles  that  of  wisdom,
honouring  each  with  a  crown  of  olive.  They  pre-
sented the  latter  likewise  wath  the  handsomest  chariot

^'^  Xerxes,  having'Jeft  Mardonius  in  Greece  with  an  array  of  three
hundred  thousand  men,  retired  with  the  rest   toward  Thrace,  in


thej'  were  not  in  a  condition  to  pursue  ..heir  route  so  expeditiously
as  he  desired,  advanced  with  a  s.iial!  retii^ue ;  but,  when  he  arrived,
at  the  Hellespont,  he  found  his  bridge  of  boats  broken  down  by  the
violence  of  the  storms,  and  was  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  crf).*sing
over  in  a  fishing-boat.  From  the  Helkspont  he  continued  his  Q.\'^]i%
to  Sard  is.

<58  viii.  123.*

•"'9  Of  Neptune.  This  solemnity  was  designed  to  make  them  v:\vq
their  judgement  impartially,  as  in  the  prescnct;  of  the  ^  >is.  iZc-
rodot.  ib.

VOL.  r.  Z


33S  THEMISTOCLES.

in  the  city,  and  ordered  three  hundred  of  their  youth
to  attend  him  to  the  borders ''".  At  the  next  Olym-
pic games  also,  \ye  are  told,  as  soon  as  Themistocles
appeared  in  the  ring,  the  champions  were  overlooked
by  the  spectators,  who  fixed  their  eyes  upon  him
the  whole  day,  and  pointed  him  out  to  strangers  with
the  utmost  admiration  and  applause.  This  incense
was  extremely  grateful  to  him  ;  and  he  acknow-
ledged to  his  friends,  that  he  then  reaped  the  fruit
of  his  labours  for  Greece.

He  M^as  naturally  indeed  very  ambitious,  if  we  may
form  a  conclusion  from  his  memorable  acts  and  say-
ings.

When  elected  admiral  by  the  Athenians,  he  would
not  separately  despatch  any  business  public  or  pri-
vate, but  deferred  all  affairs  to  the  day  upon  which
he  was  to  embark  ;  that,  having  much  to  do,  he  might
appear  with  the  greater  dignity  and  importance.

One  day,  as  he  was  looking  upon  the  dead  bodies
cast  up  by  the  sea,  and  saw  a  number  of  chains  of
gold  and  bracelets  upon  them,  he  passed  by  them,
and  turning  to  his  friend  said  ;  "  Take  these  things
"  for  yourself,  for  you  are  not  Thcmistocles."

To  Antiphates,  who  had  formerly  treated  him
with  disdain,  but  in  his  glory  made  his  court  to  him,
he  remarked ;  "  Young  man,  we  are  both  come  to
"  our  senses  at  the  same  time,  though  a  little  too
*'  late.*'

He  used  to  say,  "  The  Athenians  paid  him  no
"  honour  or  sincere  respect :  but  when  a  storm
"  arose,  or  any  danger  appeared,  they  sheltered
"  themselves    under  him,    as    under  a  plane-tree;

which,   when  the   weather  was  fair  again,   thej

would  strip  of  it's  leaves  and  branches."

When  one  of  8eriphus "'  told  him,  "  He  was  not

'°  The  only  instance  of  sucli  an  honour  paid  by  the  Laccdccino-
nian-,  accordinj^  to  Herodotus.  Diod.  Sic.  (xi.  27.)  ascribes  it  to
their  fear  of  his  resenting  their  neglect.*

''  A  small  ishnd  among  the  Crclades,  ridiculed  for  it's  insig-
nificance by  Juvenal  (Sat.  x.),  and  by  Tacitus  (Ann.  iv.  ^l.)  repre-


(C

cc

cc


THEMISTOCLES  339

*'  so  mudi  honoured  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  that
*'  of  his  country  ;'*  "  True,"  replied  he  ;  "  for  nei-
"  ther  should  I  have  been  greatly  distinguished,  if
"  I  had  been  of  Seriphus,  nor  vou,  if  you  had  been
"  of  Athens."

Another  officer,  who  thought  lie  had  done  the
state  some  service,  setting  himself  up  against  The-
mistocles  and  venturing  to  compare  their  exploits,
he  answered  him  with  this  fable  :  "  There  once  hap-
pened a  dispute  between  tlie  Feast-day,  and  the
Day  after  tlie  feast.  Said  the  Day  after  the  feast,
"  I  am  fuil  of  bustle  and  trouble ;  whereas,  with
you,  folks  enjoy  at  their  ease  every  thing  ready
provided.  You  say  right,  replied  the  Feast-day,
but  if  I  had  not  been  before  you,  you  would  not
liave  been  at  all.  So,  had  it  not  been  for  me  then,
where  would  you  have  been  now  '-  ?"
His  son  being  master  of  his  mother,  and  by  her
means  of  himself,  he  observed  laughing,  "  This
"  child  is  greater  than  any  man  in  Greece ;  for  the
*'  Athenians  command  the  Greeks,  I  command  the
"  Athenians,  his  mother  commands  me,  and  he
"  commands  his  mother."

As  he  loved  to  be  particular  in  every  thing,  when
he  happened  to  sell  a  farm,  he  ordered  the  crier  to
add,  "  that  it  had  a  good  neighbour."

Two  citizens  courting  his  daughter,  he  preferred
the  worthy  man  to  the  wealthy  one,  and  assigned  as
his  reason  ;  "  He  had  rather  she  should  have  a  man
"  without  money,  than  money  without  a  man."
Such  was  the  ))ointed  manner,  in  which  he  often  ex-
pressed iiimself  "^.


sentv^d  as  one  entire  rock,  to  which  the  Romans  commonly  trans-
ported their  exiles.*

"'^  There  -is  the  genuine  Attic  salt  in  most  of  these  retorts  aaii
observations  of  Theniistocles.  His  wit  seems  to  have  been _viqual
to  his  military  and  political  ability.

"5  Cicero  (De  Fin.  u.  32.)  has  preserved  anoth^i;  of  his  sayings,
which  deserves  mentioning.  Wlien  Simon  ides  offered  to  te?.c]i
Theinistflcles  the  art.  of  memory,  he  answered,  <  Ah  1  rather  tead\

z  2


340  TIIEMISTOCLKS.

After  these  aclilevemcnts,  his  next  enterprise  was
to  rebuild  and  fortify  tlie  city  of  Athens.  Accord-
ing to  Thcoposnpus,  Jic  bribed  tlie  Laceda*monian
Ephori,  that  they  might  not  oppose  it;  but  most
historians  agree,  that  he  over-reached  tliem.  He
was  despatched,  it  seems,  on  pretence  of  an  embassy,
to  Sparta.  The  Spartans  complained,  that  the  xVtlie-
nians  were  fortifying  their  city  ;  and  tlie  governor  of
^^gina,  who  was  come  for  that  purpose,  supported
the  accusation.  But  Thcmistocles  absolutely  de-
nied it,  and  challenged  them  to  send  proper  persons
to  Athens  to  inspect  the  walls;  thus  at  once  gain-
ing time  for  finishing  them,  and  contriving  to  have
hostages  at  Athens  for  his  return.  The  event  an-
swered his  expectation.  For  the  Laceda?monians,
when  assured  how  the  fact  stood,  dissembled  their
resentment,  and  suffered  him  to  depart  with  im-
punity ''^.

After  this,  he  built  and  fortified  the  Pirreus,  hav-

incT  observed  the  coiiveniency  of  that  harbour  ;  by

which  means  he  gave  the  citv  cverv  maritime  accom-

modation.     In   this  respect,  his  politics  were  very

different  from  those  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Athens,

They,  we  are  told,  used   their   endeavours  to  draw

the  attention  of  their  subjects  from  th.e  business  of

navigation,  that  they  might  turn  it  entirely  to  the

culture  of  the  ground  ;  and  to  this  purpose  they

^published  the  table  recording  the  contention  of  Mi-

■  ncrva  and  Neptune  for  the  patronage  of  Attica,  when

the  former,   by  producing  an  olive-tree   before  the

Tudii'es,- gained   her   cause.      Thcmistocles   did   not

bring  the  Piraeus  into  the  city,  as  Aristophanes ''"  the

mc  tlie  art  of  (bigctting;  for  I  often  remember  what  I  would  not.
and  cannot  forgot  ^vliat  I  would.'

■+  Tills  story  is  fully  (U^tailed  by  Tlv.icyd.  i.  90.  The  pretext  -(he
state^;)  upon  which  the  Lacoda^nionians  resisted  the  foi'tilyiiv^  of
Atiiens,  was  that  the  city,  in  the  event  of  aiiotlicr  Persian  invasionj
ini^htbe  converted  into  a  fortress  by  tlip  enemy.*

'5  i7Tft?  ii.  3.,  where,  under  tlie  injsk  of  prai.^e,  he  covertly  in-
sinuat"<  that  Themistocles  introduced  into  the  city  the  hccntiou*.-
ness  of  a  ui.iiitime  place.*


THEMISTOCLES.  341

comic  poet  would  have  it :  but  he  joined  the  city  by
a  hne  of  communication  to  the  Piia3us,  and  the  land
to  the  sea.  This  measure  strengthened  the  people
against  the  nobility,  and  made  them  bolder  and
more  untractable,  as  power  came  with  wealth  into
the  hands  of  masters  of  ships,  mariners,  and  pilots.
Hence  it  was,  that  the  Oratory  in  Pnyx,  wiiich  had
been  built  to  front  the  sea,  was  afterward  turned  by
the  Thirty  Tyrants  toward  the  land '" ;  for  they  be-
lieved a  maritime  power  inclinable  to  a  democracy,
whereas  persons  employed  in  agriculture  would  be
less  uneasy  under  an  oligarchy.

Themistocles  had  something  still  more  important
in  view  for  strengthening  the  Athenians  by  sea.
After  the  retreat  of  Xerxes,  when  the  Grecian  fleet
was  gone  into  the  harbour  of  Tagasa)  to  winter,  he
acquainted  the  citizens  in  full  assembly,  "  That  he
"  had  hit  upon  a  design  which  might  greatly  contri-
"  bute  to  tlieir  advantage,  but  it  was  unfit  to  be
"  communicated  to  their  whole  body.'*  The  Athe-
nians ordered  him  to  communicate  it  to  Aristides
exclusively'" ;  and,  if  he  approved  of  it,  to  carry  it
into  execution.  Themistocles  then  informed  him,
"  That  he  had  a  project  for  burning  the  confederate
"  fleet  at  Pagaso}."  Upon  which,  Aristides  went
and  declared  to  the  people,  "  Tliat  the  enterprise
"  w^iich  Themistocles  proposed  was  indeed  most
"  advantageous,  but  at  the  same  time  most  unjust.**
The  Athenians,  therefore,  commanded  him  to  lay
aside  all  thoughts  of  it'^.

'<'  It's  use  was  finally  discontinued,  as  the  site  was  foimd  under
every  aspect  to  be  too  dcaiocratical.  See  the  Life  of  Caniillus,
in  this  vol.,  and  the  Life  of  Caius  (iracchus,  Vol.  \'.*

Tlie  thirty  tyrants  were  established  at  Athens  by  Lysander,
B.  C.  40i.

"7  How  glorious  this  testimony  of  public  regard  to  Aristides,  from
a  people  then  so  free,  and  so  virtuous!  And  how  much  more  glo-
rious to  that  people  itself!  The  same  principle  does  not  appear  to
have  been  adopted  in  the  seizure  of  the  Danish  fleet  (1807).
,     "'*  It  is  hardly  possible  for  the  railitarv  and  political  genius  of
Themistocles  to  save  him  from  contempt  and  detestation,  when  we


3i5  THEMISTOCLES.

About  this  time  the  Lncednemonians  made  a
motion  in  the  assembly  of  the  Amphictyons,  to  ex-
clude from  that  council  all  those  states,  which  had
not  joined  in  the  confederacy  against  the  king  of
Persia.  But  Themistocles  was  apprehensive  that  if
the  Thessalians,  the  Arrives,  and  the  Thc1)ans  were
expelled  from  the  council,  the  Lacedaemonians  would
have  a  large  majority  of  voices,  and  might  conse-
quently procure  what  decrees  they  pleased.  He
therefore  patronised  those  states,  and  induced  the
deputies'^  to  lay  aside  their  design,  by  representing
that  thirty-one  cities  only  had  their  share  of  the  bur-
then of  that  war,  and  that  of  these  tlie  greatest  part
were  but  of  small  consideration  ;  that  consequently
it  would  be  both  unreasonable  and  dangerous  to  ex^
elude  the  rest  of  Greece  from  the  league,  and  leave
the  council  to  be  controlled  by  two  or  three  large
cities.  Hence  he  became  very  obnoxious  to  the
Lacedaemonians,  who  for  this  reason  set  up  Cimon*
against  him  as  a  rival  in  all  afiairs  of  state,  and  used
their  whole  interest  for  his  advancement.

He  disobliged  the  allies,  also,  b}'^  sailing  round  the
islands,  and  extorting  money  from  them  ;  as  we  may
conclude  from  the  answer,  which  (Herodotus  informs
us)  the  Andrians  ^°  returned  to  a  demand  of  that
sort.     He  told  them    that  "  he  brought  two  gods

arrive  at  this  part  of  his  conduct. A  serious  ])roposal  to  Lurn

the  confederate  fleet !  that  fleet,  uhose  united  eflbrts  had  saved
Greece  from  destruction,  and  wliich  had  foujrht  under  his  auspices
with  such  irresistible  valour !  that  sacred  fleet,  the  minutest  parts
of  which  should  have  been  religiously  preserved,  ojr  if  consumed,
consumed  only  on  the  altars  and  in  the  service  of  the  r^ods !  How
diabolical  is  that  policy,  v/hich  in  it's  way  to  power  tramples  upon
humanity,  justice,  and  gratitude!

"^  Called  '  Pylagone '  in  the  original,  from  their  meeting  at  Ther-
mopylae, the  straits  so  denominated  on  account  of  their  proximity  to
some  warm  baths  (^£(i/*«?),  and  their  resembling  in  uiu-rowness  a
gate  (7v\yi)*

*  In  the  Life  of  Cimon  we  are  told,  this  opposition  was  concerted
by  Aristides.*

^°  Andros  was  one  of  the  Cyclades,  between  Kiiboeaaad  Naxus.
}{cvodotus  gives  the  demand,  atid  the  reply,  more  at  lengtli,
Tiii.  Hi.*


THEMISTOCLES.  34S

*^^  along  with  him,  Persuasion  and  Force."  They
replied,  that  "  they  likewise  had  two  powerful  gods
"  on  their  side,  Poverty  and  Despair,  who  forbade
"  them  to  satisfyhim."  Timocreon,  the  Rhodian  poet,
writes  with  great  bitterness  against  Themistocles  ;
and  charges  him  with  having  betrayed  him,  though
his  friend  and  host,  for  money,  while  for  the  like
paltry  consideration  he  procured  the  return  of  other
exiles.     So  in  these  verses  :

Pausanias  you  may  praise,  and  you  Xantippus,

And  3'ou  Leutychidas:  But  sure  tlie  hero,

Who  bears  the  Athenian  pahii,  is  Aristides.

What  is  the  traitor,  false  Themistocles?

The  very  h"ght  is  grudged  him  by  Latona,

Who  for  vile  pelf  betray*d  Timocreon,

His  friend  and  host ;  nor  gave  him  to  behold

His  dear  Jalysus^'.     For  talents  three

He  sail'd,  and  left  him  on  a  foreign  coast.

\\'hat  fatal  end  awaits  the  man  that  kills.

That  banishes,  that  sets  the  villain  up,

To  till  his  glittering  stores ;  while  ostentation

Ridiculously  boasts  the  generous  hand.

And  at  the  Isthmus  spreads  a  public  board

Tor  crowds  that  eat,  and  curse  him  at  the  banquet  ?

But  Timocreon  gave  a  still  looser  reign  to  his  abuse
of  Themistocles,  after  the  condemnation  and  banish-
ment of  that  illustrious  man,  in  a  poem  which  begins
thus :

Muse,  crown'd  with  glory,  bear  this  faithful  strain,
Far  as  the  Grecian  name  extends.

Timocreon  is  said  to  have  been  banished  by  Themis-
tocles, for  favouring  the  Persians.  VvHien  therefore
Themistocles  was  accused  of  the  same  traitorous
inclinations,  he  wrote  against  him  as  follows :

Timocreon's  honour  to  the  Medes  is  sold,
But  yet  not  his  alone  :  Another  fox
Finds  the  same  fields  to  prey  in.

8'  A  city  of  Rhodes,  so  called  from  its  celebrated  painting  (by
Piotogenes)  of  the  hunter  Jalysus  and  his  dog.*


SU  TIIEMISTOCLES.

As  the  Athenians  tiirough  envy  readily  gave  ear
to  caUimnies  against  him,  he  was  often  obhged  to
recoiuit  liis  own  services,  which  rendered  him  still
more  insupportable ;  and,  when  they  expressed
their  displeasure,  he  said,  "  Are  you  tired  of  re-
"  ceiving  frequent  benents  from  the  same  hand  ?"

Another  cause  of  offence  to  the  people  was,  his
having  built  a  temple  to  Diana  under  the  name  of
Aristobule,  or,  Diana  '  of  the  best  counsel;'  inti-
mating that  he  had  given  the  best  counsel,  not  only
to  Athens,  but  to  all  Greece.  This  temple  he
erected  near  his  own  house,  in  the  quarter  of  Melita,
where  the  executioners  now  cast  out  the  bodies  of
those  who  havesuftercd  death,  and  Vv  here  they  throw
the  halters  and  clothes  of  such  as  have  been  stranaied
or  otherwise  put  to  death.  There  was,  even  in  our
times,  a  statue  of  Themistocles  in  this  temple  of
Diana  Aristobule,  from  which  it  appeared  that  his
aspect  was  as  heroic  as  his  soul.

At  last  the  Athenians,  unable  any  longer  to  bear
the  high  distinction  in  wJiich  he  stood,  banished  him
by  tlie  Ostracism.  This  was  nothins;  more  than
wnat  they  had  done  to  others,  whose  power  v»as  be-
come a  burthen  to  them,  and  who  had  risen  above
the  equality  required  in  a  commonwealth;  for  the
Ostracism  was  not  so  much  intended  to  punish  this
or  that  great  man,  as  to  sooth  and  alleviate  the  fury
of  envy,  who  delights  in  the  disgrace  of  superior  cha-
racters, and  loses  a  part  of  her  rancour  by  their  fall.

In  the  time  of  his  exile,  while  he  took  up  his  abode
at  Argos,   the   atfair  of  Pausanias  ^'^  gave  consider-

^^  This  illustrious  man  (son  of  Cleombrotus,  and  king  of  Sparta)
who  had  beaten  the  Persians  in  the  battle  of  Platseae,  and  who  upon
many  occasions  had  behaved  with  great  generosity  as  well  as  mode-
ration, at  last  degenerated ;  and  entered  into  a  scandalous  treaty
with  the  Persians,  in  hopes  through  their  interest  to  make  himself
sovereign  of  Greece.  [His  project  v.as  to  deliver  up  that  country
to  Xerxes,  and  to  hold  it  under  him  as  his  tributary,  on  condition  of
his  receiving  his  daughter  in  marriage.  (Thucyd.  i.  128.)*]  As
goon  as  he  had  conceived  tliesc  strange  notions,  he  adopted  the
manners  of  the  Persians,  affected  all  their  luxury,  and  derided  the


THEMISTOCLES.  S43

able  adv^antage  to  the  enemies  of  Themistocles.  The
person,  who  accused  him  of  treason,  was  Leobotes  the
son  of  Alcma^on  of  Agraiile,  and  the  Spartans  joined
in  the  impeachment.  Pausanias  at  first  concealed
his  plot  fiom  Themistocles,  though  he  was  his
friend ;  but  when  he  saw  him  an  exile,  and  full  of
indis'nation  arainst  the  Athenians,  he  ventured  to
communicate  to  him  his  designs,  showing  liim  the
king  of  Persia's  letters,  and  exciting  him  to  venge-
ance against  the  Greeks  as  an  unjust  and  ungrate-
ful people.  Themistocles  rejected  indeed  his  solici-
tations, and  refused  to  have  the  least  share  in  his
projects  ;  but  he  gave  no  information  of  what  had
passed  between  them,  nor  suffered  the  secret  to
transpire  :  whether  he  thought  that  he  would  desist
of  himself,  or  that  he  would  be  detected  some  other
way,  as  he  had  embarked  in  an  absurd  and  ex-
travagant enterprise  without  any  rational  hopes  of
success.

When  Pausanias  however  was  put  to  death,  there
were  found  letters  and  other  writings  relative  to  the
business,  w^hich  excited  no  small  suspicion  against
Themistocles.  The  Lacedaemonians  raised  a  clamour
against  him  ;  and  those  of  his  fellow-citizens,  who
envied  him,  insisted  on  the  charge.  He  was  not  able
to  defend  himself  in  person,  but  he  answered  by
letter  the  principal  parts  of  the  accusation.  For,  to
obviate  the  calumnies  of  his  enemies,  he  observed
to  the  Athenians ;  "  That  he  who  w^as  born  to  com-
"  mand,  and  incapable  of  servitude,  could  never
"  sell  himself,  and  Greece  along  wdth  himselfj  to
"  enemies  and  barbarians.'*  But  the  people  listened
to  his  accusers,  and  sent  persons  wath  orders  to  bring

plain  customs  of  his  country,  which  he  had  formerly  idolised.  The
Ephori  waited  some  tim.e  for  clear  proof  of  his  treacherous  designs  ;
and,  v/hen  they  had  obtaisied  it,  determined  to  imprison  him.  But
he  fled  into  the  temple  of  Minerva  Ciialcioecos  ;  upon  which  they
walled  up  all  the  gates,  his  own  mother  silently  laying  the  fust  stone.
When  tiicy  had  almost  starved  him  to  death,  they  laid  hands  on
liim,  and  by  the  time  they  had  dragged  liiai  out  of  tlie  temple,  he
expired.     (Thucyd.  ib.  ISi.,  and  Diod.  Sic.  xi.  -15.)


S46  TIIEMISTOCLES.

him  to  his  defence  before  the  states  of  Greece.  Of
this  he  received  timely  notice,  and  passed  over  to
the  isle  of  Corcyra ;  the  inliabitants  of  which  had
great  obhgations  to  him :  for  a  difference  between
them  and  the  jicople  of  Corinth  had  been  referred  to
his  arbitration,  and  he  Iiad  decided  it  by  awarding
the  Corinthians  ^'''  to  pay  down  twenty  talents,  and
the  isle  of  Lencas  to  remain  in  common  between  the
two  parties,  as  a  colony  from  both.  Thence  he  fled
to  Epirns,  and  finding  himself  still  pursned  by
the  Athenians  and  Lacedaemonians,  had  reconrse
to  a  very  hazardous  and  imcertain  measure,  by  im-
ploring the  protection  of  Admetus,  king  of  the  Mo-
lossians.  Admetus  had  made  a  request  to  the  Athe-
nians, which  being  rejected  with  scorn  by  Themis-
toclcs  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity  and  political  in-
fluence, that  prince  entertained  a  deep  resentment
against  him,  and  made  no  secret  of  his  intention  of
revenging  himself,  if  ever  the  Athenian  should  fall
into  his  power.  While  he  was  thus  flying  however
from  place  to  place,  he  was  more  afraid  of  the  recent
envy  of  his  countrymen,  than  of  the  consequences
of  an  old  quarrel  with  the  king ;  and  he  therefore
"went  and  put  himself  into  his  hands,  appearing  before
him  as  a  suppliant  in  a  particular  and  extraordinary
manner.  He  took  the  king's  son,  who  was  yet  a
child,  in  his  arms,  and  kneeled  down  before  the
household-gods  ^'.    This  manner  of  offering  a  petition

*3  The  scholiast  upon  Thucydides  informs  us,  that  Themistocles
served  the  people  of  Corcyra  in  an  affair  of  still  greater  importance.
The  states  of  Greece  were  inclined  to  make  war  upon  that  island,
for  not  having  joined  in  the  league  against  Xerxes  ;  but  Themistocles
represented  that,  if  they  were  in  that  manner  to  punish  all  the  cities
which  had  not  acceded  to  the  league,  their  proceedings  would  bring
heavier  calamities  upon  Greece,  than  it  had  suffered  from  the  bar-
barians. ( L.)  Fear  however  had  more  influence  over  the  Corcyrfpans,
than  g:atikide;  for,  under  the  apprehension  of  giving  offence  to  the
states  of  Athens  and  Sparta,  they  refused  their  benefactor  an  asy-
lum, and  sent  him  to  Epirus.  Thucydides  (i.  30.)  represents
Lencas  as  exclusively  a  Corinthian  colony.*

^  It  was  nothing  particular  for  a  suppliant  to  do  homage  to  the
household-gods  of  the  person,  to  whom  he  had  a  request.  [Ulysscv^,


THEMISTOCLES.  347

the  Molossians  consider  as  the  most  effectual,  and
tlie  only  one  that  can  scarcely  be  rejected.  Some
say  the  queen,  whose  name  was  Pluhia,  suggested
this  mode  of  supplication  to  Themistocles.  Others,
that  Adraetus  himself  taught  him  to  act  the  part,  in
order  that  he  might  have  a  sacred  obligation  to  allege
in  this  solemn  adjuration,  against  surrendering  him
to  those  who  might  come  to  demand  him.

Thither  Epicrates,  the  Acarnanian,  found  means
to  convey  the  wife  and  children  of  Themistocles  out
of  Athens;  for  which  Cimon  afterward  condemned
liim,  and  put  him  to  death.  This  account  is  given
by  Stesimbrotus  ;  yet  strangely  forgetting  what  he
bad  asserted,  or  making  Themistocles  forget  it,  he
tells  us  he  sailed  thence  to  Sicily,  and  demanded  king
Hiero's  daughter  in  marriage,  promising  to  bring
the  Greeks  under  his  subjection ;  and  that,  on
Hiero's  refusal,  he  passed  over  into  Asia.  But  this
?s  not  probable.  For  Theophrastus,  in  his  Treatise
upon  Monarchy,  relates  that  when  Hiero  sent  his
race-horses  to  the  Olympic  games,  and  erected  a
superb  pavilion  there,  Themistocles  harangued  the
Greeks  to  persuade  them  to  pull  it  down,  and  not  to
suffer  the  tyrant's  horses  to  contend  for  the  prize.
Thucydides  writes,  that  he  went  by  land  to  the
^Egean  sea,  and  embarked  at  Pydr.a  ;  that  none  in
the  ship  knew  him,  till  he  was  driven  by  a  storm  to
]s!axos,  which  w^as  at  that  time  besieged  by  the  Athe;
uians ;  that  through  fear  of  being  seized,  he  then,
informed  the  master  of  the  ship  and  tlie  pilot,  who
he  was  ;  and  that  partly  by  entreaties,  and  partly  by
threatening  to  declare  to  the  Athenians,  however
fiiisely,  that  they  knew  him  from  the  first,  and  had

on  his  arrival  at  tlie  court  of  Alclnoiis  (Od.  vii.  153.)  sits  down
upois  tlie  ashes  of  his  hearth:

See  also  Thucyd.  i.  136.*]     But  to  do  it  with  the  king's  son  in
his  arms,  was  an  extraordinary  circumstance.


318  tiiem::stocles.

been  bribed  to  receive  him  into  tlieir  vessel,  he
obliged  Lheiii  to  weigh  anclior  and  sail  for  Asia^''.

Tiie  greatest  part  of  his  treasures  vvas  privately
sent  after  liini  to  Asia  by  his  friends.  AVhat  \vas  dis-
covered and  sei>:ed  for  tljc  public  use,  Theopompus
states,  amounted  to  a  liundred  talents;  Theophrastus
says,  fourscore:  though  he  did  not  possess  three
talents,  before  his  employments  in  the  govern-
ment "^'l

When  he  landed  at  Cuma,  he  understood  that  a
number  of  people,  particuJarly  Ergoteles  iuid  Py-
thodorus,.  were  matching  to  take  liim.  He  was  in-
deed a  ricli  booty  to  those,  who  were  determined  to
get  money  by  any  means  whatever;  for  the  king  of
Persia  Jiad  oHered  by  proclamation  two  hundred
talents  for  apprehending  him '"'.  He  therefore  re-
tired to  iEgtE,  a  little  town  of  the  /Eolians,  where
he  was  knovvu  onlv  to  Nicownes  his  host,  a  man
of  great  wealth  and  powerful  connexions  at  the  Per-
sian court.  In  his  house  he  lay  concealed  a  few  days ;
and  one  evening  after  supper,  when  the  sacrifice  was
offered,  Olbius  tutor  to  Nicogenes'  children  cried
out,  as  in  a  rapture  of  inspiration,

Voice,  art,  O  Night,  and  victory  are  thine  ^^.

After  this,  Themistocles  went  to  bed,  and  dream-
ed he  saw  a  dragon  coiled  round  his  body,  and  creep-
s' 111  the  detail  of  this  subject  Thucydides  is  much  more  parti-
cahir,*

80  This  is  totally  inconsistent  with  that  splent- our,  in  which  (accord-
ing to  Plutarch's  own  account)  he  lived,  btfore  he  had  any  public
anpointnicnts.

8'  The  resentment  of  Xerxes  is  not  at  all  to  be  wondered  at,  since
Tiicniistocles  had  not  only  beaten  him  in  the  battle  of  Salamis,  but
what  was  still  more  disgraceful,  had  made  him  a  dupe  to  his  devices.
In  the  loss'of  victory,  he  had  some  consolation,  as  he  was  not  him-
si'if  the  inmiediate  cause  of  it ;  but,  for  his  ridiculous  return  to
Asia,  his  anger  could  fall  only  upon  himself  or  upon  Themistocles.

*"*  i.  e.  *  List  jn  to  the  suggestions  of  thy  pillow,  and  thou  shalt
succeed.'*


TIIEMISTOCLES.  519

Ing  lip  to  his  neck  ;  whicli,  as  soon  as  it'  touched  hh
tiice,  was  clian^'ed  intoan  eagle,  and  covering  him  with
it's  wings  took  hiai  up,  and  carried  iiim  to  a  distant
place  ;  where  a  golden  sceptre  appeared  to  him,  v.pim
which  he  rested  securely,  and  was  delivered  from  ail
his  fear  and  trouble  ^^.

In  consequence  of  this  warning,  he  was  sent  awaf
bv  NicofTcnes,  under  the  followini!;  contrivance  :  Tlie
barbarians  in  general,  especially  tlie  Persians,  are
jealous  of  women  even  to  madness:  not  only  of  their
wives,  but  also  of  their  slaves  and  concubines :  iov,,
beside  providing  that  they  shall  be  seen  by  none  but
their  own  family,  they  keep  tlieni  like  prisoners  m
their  houses,  and  v.hen  they  travel,  convey  them
in  a  carriaixe  close-covered  on  all  sides.  In  such  a
carriage  as  this  Themistocles  was  conveyed ;  the  at-
tendants being  instructed  to  tell  tliose  whom  tiicj
met,  if  thev  hapnened  to  be  Questioned,  that  thev
were  carrying  a  Grecian  lady  from  Ionia  to  a  noble-


man at  court '^'^


Thucydides  and  Charon  of  Lanrpsacus  relate,
that  Xerxes  was  tlien  dead,  and  that  it  v*'as  to  his
son  ^''  Artaxerxes,  that  Themistocles  addressed  hi ni-
self.  l>nt  Ephorus,  Dinon,  Clitarchus,  Heraclidc's  ^^,
and  several  others  affirm,  that  Xerxes  himself  was

^'  Synesius,  it  seems,  has  pronounced  it  disgraceful  to  be  incapa-
ble of  interpreting  a  dvcani,  after  -attaining  one's  twentieth  year.
To  avoid  so  harsh  a  stigma,  M.  Dacier  considers  the  serpenrasa
s_vnii)ol  of  Xicogencs  protecting  Themistocles,  like  tiic  drii^coR  of
Minerva  vvhicli  guarded  the  Athenian  citadel.  Tiiis,  as  soon  as  aii
intimate  connexion  takes  place  between  the  parties,  conveys  the
futjitive  ranidlv  tv  the  foot  of  the  Persian  throne,  &c.  &c.*

^°  In  the  origirial,  £~i  ^t-f-asi^  fiua-j^mc^  and  translated  by  M,
Hicard,  'u  an  di!<  xc'r^iicHru  de  kt  Ports  da  roi  ;'  as  an  explanntifjn  of
which  he  states  in  a  note,  that  the  Persian  court  (like  thai  of  Tur-
key in  our  limes)   was  stiled  '  the  Forte.'*

y'  Themistocles,  therefore,  arrived  at  the  Per-rian  court,  03,
Ixxix.  1.,  B.  C.  ■toi';  for  that  was  the  fir^t  year  >^^!  Artaxerxc?'
reign.  (L.)  (Tlnicyd.  i.  137.)  This,  the  more  probable  account,
is  adopted  by  Dodwcil  (A'nnal.  Tiiucyd.)  andCorsini:  the  partisan?
of  the  other,  headed  by  Diod  Sic.  (xi.  S^.^,  bring  Theiiustdcles  into
Persia  seven  years  earlier.-*

^^  Of  these  authors,  it  may  sufuce  to  re.Tiark,  tliat  Eph.oVus-  (of
Cu:xi€e  in  E!is)   by  his  History  of  Greece  ranks  nf.xt  to"  iieiOdotars

9


S50  THEMIS70CLES.

still  upon  the  throne.  The  opinion  of  Thucvdiclcs
seems  most  ap'ecable  to  chronology,  though  that  is
not  })erfecLly  ."settled.  Theniistocles,  now  ready  for
thedangerons  experiment,  applied  first  to  Artabanus^',
a  military  ofiicer  ;  and  told  him  that  "  He  was  a
"  Greek,  who  desired  to  ha^•e  an  audience  of  the
"  king  about  matters  of  great  im])ortancc,  which  the
"  king  himself  had  much  at  heart."  Artabanus  an-
swered, "  The  laws  of  men  are  different ;  some  es-
"  teem  one  thing  honourable,  and  some  another:
"  but  it  becomes  all  men  to  honour  and  observe  tlie
"  customs  of  their  own  country.  With  you,  the
"  thino'  most  admired  is  said  to  be  Liberty  and
*^'  Equality.  We  have  many  excellent  laws  ;  and  we
*^  regard  it  as  one  of  the  most  indispensable,  to  ho-
"  nour  the  kino:,  and  to  adore  him  as  the  image  of
"  that  deity,  who  preserves  andsupports  the  universe.
"  If  therefore  you  are  v/illing  to  conform  to  our
"  customs,  and  to  prostrate  yourself  before  the  king,
you  may  be  permitted  to  see  him  and  speak  to  him.
But,  if  you  cannot  bring  yourself  to  this,  you
must  acquaint  him  with  your  business  through
"  the  medium  of  a  third  person.  It  would  be  an
infringement  of  the  custom  of  his  country,  for  the
king  to  admit  any  one  to  an  audience,  that  does
not  worship  him.'*  To  this  Theniistocles  replied  :
My  business,  Artabanns,  is  to  add  to  the  king';^
"= 'honour  and  power ;  I  will  comply  therefore  with
"  vour  customs,  since  the  sjod  who  has  exalted  the
Persians  will  have  it  so ;  and  by  my  means  the
number  of  the  king's  worshippers  shall  be  increas-
ed. Let  this,  then,  be  no  hindrance  to  my  com.-
municating  to  the  king  what  I  have  to  say."  "  But
who,"  asked  Artabanus,  "  shall  we  say  you  are  ?
lor,  by  your  discourse,  you  appear  to  be  no  ordi-
nary person."     Themistocles  answered,  "  No  one


id


ii


and  ThucycTides;  ami  tliat  Dinon,  the  father  of  Clitarclius,  wrote  a
Hiirtory  of  Persia  in  the  time  of  Alexander  tlie  (Jreat.*

*^  Son  of  thct  Artabanus  captain  of  the  guards,  vvlio  slew  Xerxes,
and  peisuadtjd  Artaxerxes  to  cu;  off  his  elder  brother  Darius.


THEMISTOCLES.  $51

*'  must  know  that,  previously  to  the  king  himself."
80  Phanias  writes;  and  Eratosthenes ^\  in  his  Trea-
tise upon  Riches,  adds  that  Themistocles  was  intro-
duced and  recommended  to  Artabanus  by  an  Erctrian
woman,  who  belonged  to  that  officer.

When  he  was  brouglit  before  the  king,  and  after
his  prostration  stood  silent,  the  king  commanded
the  interpreter  to  ask  him  who  he  was.  The  inter-
preter accordingly  putting  the  question,  he  replied  ;
The  man,  O  king,  who  is  now  come  to  address
himself  to  you,  is  Themistocles  the  Athenian,  an
exile  persecuted  by  the  Greeks.  The  Persians
have  suffered  much  by  me,  but  it  has  been  more
than  compensated  by  my  preventing  your  being
pursued  ;  when  after  I  had  delivered  Greece,  and
saved  my  own  country,  I  had  it  in  my  power  to
do  you  also  a  service.  My  sentiments  are  suitable
to  my  present  misfortunes  ;  and  I  come  prepared
either  to  receive  your  favour,  if  you  are  reconciled
*'  to  me,  or  if  you  retain  any  resentment,  to  disarm
it  by  my  submission.  Pteject  not  the  testimony,
which  my  enemies  have  given  to  the  services  I
"  have  rendered  the  Persians ;  and  make  use  of  the
"  opportunity,  which  my  misfortunes  afford  you,
rather  to  show  your  generosity,  than  to  satisfy
your  revenge.  If  you  save  me,  you  save  your
suppliant ;  if  you  destroy  me,  you  destroy  the
enemy  of  Greece  ^\'*  In  hopes  of  influencing
the  king  by  an  argument  drawn  from  religion,
Themistocles  added  to  this  speech  an  account  of
the  vision  whicli  he  had  seen  in  Nicogenes'  house,
and  of  an  oracle  of  Jupiter  of  Dodona,  which  had
ordered  him  '  to  go  to  one,  wlio  bore  the  same
name  with  the  god  ;  *  from  which  he  concluded  he

9-»  This  writer  was  invited  by  Ptolemy  Euergetes,  from  his  na-
tive city  Cyrene,  to  superintend  the  celebrated  Ai'^xandrian  library:
and  on  account  of  his  learning  was  denominated  '  a  second
Plato.'*

95  How  extremely  abject  and   contemptible   is  this   petition,  in
which  the  suppliant  founds  all  his   arguments  upon  ins  vices  !
12


cc
ii
ii
(«
<c
cc
<c
a

(C


552  TIIEMISTOCLES.

was  sent  to  him,  since  botli  were  called  and  were
in  reality  '  great  kings.'

The  king  gave  him  no  answer,  thougli  he  ad-
mired his  courage  and  magnanimity  ;  but  with  his
friends  lie  felicitated  himself  npon  this,  as  the  most
fortunate  event  imaginable.  We  are  told  also,  that
he  prayed  to  Arimanins'",  that  his  enemies  nn'ght
ever  be  so  infatuated,  as  to  drive  from  among  them
their  ablest  men  ;  that  he  offered  sacrifice  to  tlic
gods,  and  immediately  afterward  made  a  large  en-
tertainment ;  and  was  even  so  much  affected  with
joy  that,  when  he  retired  to  rest,  in  the  midst  of
his  sleep  he  exclaimed  thrice,  "  1  have  Thcmi^itocles
"  the  Athenian."

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  he  called  to,2;ether  his
friends,  and  ordered  Themistocles  to  be  brought
before  him.  The  exile  expected  no  flavour,  when
he  found  that  the  guards  at  the  first  hearing  of  his
name  treated  him  with  rancour,  and  loaded  him  v/ith
reprcaclies.  Nay,  when  the  king  had  taken  his  seat
and  a  respectful  silence  ensued,  iloxanes  one  of  his
oflicers,  as  Themistocles  passed  him,  whispered  him
with  a  sigh  ;  "  Ah  !  thou  subtile  serpent  of  Greece,
"  the  king's  good  genius  has  brought  thee  hither.'*
When  he  had  ])rostrated  himself  however  twice  in
the  presence,  the  king  saluted  him  and  spoke  to
him  graciously,  telling  him,  "  He  owed  him  two
*'  hundred  talents  ;  for,  as  he  had  delivered  him-
"  self  up,  it  was  but  just  that  he    should    receive

the  reward  offered  to  any  one  that  should  bring

him."  He  promised  him  likewise  much  more,
assured  him  of  his  protection,  and  ordered  him  to
declare  freely  whatever  he  had  to  propose  concern-
ing Greece.  Themistocles  replied,  "  That  a  man's
*'  discourse  was  like  a  piece  of  tapestry"",    which

^^  The  god  of  darkness,  the  supposed  autlior  of  plagues  and
calamities,  wns  called  Ahriuuin  or  Arimauius.  (L.)  Tiie  opposite
deity  of  j^Oi-d  (for  the  Persians,  in  their  theological  system,  admitted
two  coiiHictiir^  principles)  was  named  Orniusd,  or  Oromasder.-

5"  111  this,  ho  artf  illy  conformed  to  tlie  figurative  manner  of  speak-
ing in  use  among  eastern  nations.    "See  Thucyd.  i.  iCK.


TIIEMISTOCLES.  '  353

when  spread  open  displays  it's  figures,  but  when

folded  up,  conceals  and  obscures  thera  ;  he  tliere-
"  fore  begged  time."  The  king,  delighted  with  the
comparison,  bade  him  take  what  time  he  pleased  ;
and  he  desired  a  year  :  in  which  space  he  learned
the  Persian  language,  so  as  to  be  able  to  converse
with  the  king  without  an  interpreter.

Those,  who  did  not  belong  to  the  court,  believed
that  he  entertained  their  prince  on  the  subject  of
the  Grecian  aiTairs  ;  but  as  there  were  then  many
changes  in  the  ministry,  he  incurred  the  envy  of  the
nobility,  who  suspected  that  he  had  presumed  to
speak  too  fi^eely  of  them  to  the  king.  The  honours,
that  were  paid  him,  were  far  superior  to  those,
which  other  strangers  had  experienced:  the  king
took  him  a-hunting,  conversed  familiarly  with  him  in
his  palace,  and  introduced  him  to  the  queen-motherj
who  honoured  him  with  her  confidence.  He,  likc-
Avise,  gave  orders  for  his  being  instructed  in  the
learning  of  the  Magi.

Demaratus  the  Lacedaemonian,  who  was  then  at
court,  being  ordered  to  ask  a  favour,  desired  that
lie  might  be  carried  through  Sardis  in  royal  state '^®
with  a  diadem  upon  his  head.  But  Mitlnopaustes,
the  king's  cousin-german,  took  him  by  the  hand
and  said,  "  Demaratus,  this  diadem  does  not  carry
"  brains  along  with  it  to  cover  ;  nor  would  you  be
"  Jupiter,  though  you  should  lay  hold  on  his  thun-
"  der."  The  king  was  highly  displeased  at  Dema-
ratus for  having  made  this  request,  and  seemed  de-
termined never  to  forgive  him  ;  yet,  at  the  entreaty
of  Themistocles,  he  was  persuaded  to  be  reconciled.
And  in  the  follovv'ing  reigns,  when  the  affairs  of
Persia  and  Greece  were  more  closely  connected^
as  often  as  the  kings  requested  a  favour  of  any
Grecian  captain,  they  are  said  to  have  promised
him  in  express  terms,  "  That  he  should  be  a  greater

98  This  u-a>,  the  highest  mark  of  honour,  wjiich  the  Persian  kings
could  give.     See  Esth.  vi.  11.

VOL.  I.  2   A


S54  THEMISTOCLES.

*'  man  at  their  court,  than  Themistocles  had  been.'*
Kay,  we  are  told  that  Thcmistocles  himself^  in  the
midst  of  his  power  and  the  extraordinary  respect  that
was  shown  to  liim,  seeing  his  table  most  ejej2;ant]y
spread,  turned  to  his  children  and  said,  "  Ciiildrei],
''  we  should  have  been  undone,  had  it  not  been  for
"  our  undoing-''^."  Most  authors  agree  that  lie
had  three  cities  assigned  him,  for  bread,  wine,  and
meat.  Magnesia,  Lampsacns,  and  Myus  ^"".  Ne-
anthes  of  Cyzicum  and  Phanias  add  two  more,
Percotc  and  Pala^scepsis,  for  his  chamber  and  his
wardrobe.

Some  business  relative  to  Greece  having  brought
him  to  the  sea-coast,  a  Persian  named  Epixyes
governor  of  Upper  Phrygia,  who  had  a  design  upon
his  life,  and  had  long  prepared  certain  Pisidians  to
kill  him,  when  he  should  lodge  in  a  city  called  Leon-
tocephalus^"^'  or  '  Lion's  Head,'  now  determined
to  carry  it  into  execution.     But,  as  he  lay  sleeping


•99  This  sentiiiicnt  was  expresse  ;  by  St.  Augustine,  I  believe,
on  the  awetul  subject  of  the  Redemption,  as  consequent  upon  the
fall  of  man,  and  placing  him,  according  to  the  argument  of  8t.
Paul  (Rom.  v.  15 — 20.,  &c.)  in  a  much  loftier  situation ;  Periisacyn,
ni  prriissem.'^

'°°  The  country  .about  Magnesia  (situated  upon  the  river  JSIsp-
ander,  in  Asia  Minor,  not  far  from  Ephesus)  was  so  fertile,  that  it
brought  Tliemistocles  a  revenue  of  fifty  talents ;  Lampsacns  (on
the  Hellespont)  had  in  it's  neighbourhood  the  noblest  vineyards  of
the  cast;  and  Myus  or  Myon  (a  city  of  Caria,  near  the  nmuth  of
the  above-mentioned  river)  abounded  with  provisions,  particularly
with  fish.  (Thucyd.  i.  138.)  It  was  usual  with  the  eastern  monarch:-,
instead  of  pensions  to  their  favourites,  to  assign  them  cities  aiid
provinces.  Even  those,  of  which  the  kings  retained  the  revenue,
were  under  particular  assignments;  one  province  furnishing  so  much
for  wine,  another  for  victuals,  a  third  ibr  the  priv^'-purse,  and  a
fourth  for  the  wardrobe.  One  of  the  queens  had  all  Egypt  for
her  clothing;  and  Plato  tells  us  (1  Alcib.)  that  many  of  the
provinces  were  appropriated  for  the  queen's  wardrobe  ;  one  lor  her
girdlie,  another  for  her  head-dress,  <S:c.;  and  that  each  province  bore
the  name  of  tliat  part  of  the  dress,  which  it  was  to  furnish.   (L.)

Percote  was  a  city  al^o  on  the  Hellespont,  between  Abydus  and
Lampsacns:  and  Pala?sccpsis  was  situated  in  the  Troad.*

''='  This  nanse  does  wot  occiu-  eillicr  in  Strabo,  in  Steph.  Byaint.,
or  in  I'liny.'^'


THEMLSTOCLES.  S.55

one  day  at  noon  on  bis  v/av  tbither,  tbe  motber  of
tbe  god:',  is  said  to  bave  appeared  to  bini  in  a  dream,
and  to  bave  tbns  addressed  bini :  "  Deware,  Tbe-
*'  mistocles,  of  tbe  Lion's  FIcad,  lest  tiie  Lion  crnsb
*'  you.  For  this  Avarning,  I  reqriire  of  you  Mnesip-
"  toleaia  for  mv  servant."  Tbemistocles  awoke  in
great  disorder,  and  when  be  bad  devoutly  returned
thanks  to  tlie  goddess,  left  the  high-road  and  pur-
sued another  way,  to  avoid  the  \\i;iQQ.  of  danger.
At  night,  be  took  up  bis  lodging  beyond  ii  ;  but  as
one  of  tbe  horses  which  bad  carried  bis  tent  had
fallen  into  a  river,  and  his  servants  were  busied  in
spreading  tlie  wet  hangings  to  dry,  the  Pisidians,
who  v/ere  advancing  with  their  swords  drawn,  sav\^
these  bano'incrs  indistinctly  bv  moonliirbt,  and  taking:
them  for  the  tent  of  Tbemistocles,  expected  to  find
him  reposing  himself  y-ithin.  They  approached,
therefore,  and  lifted  up  the  hangings  ;  upon  which
the  servants,  who  bad  the  care  of  them,  fell  upon
them  and  took  them.  Tbe  dan^^er  thus  avoided,
Tbemistocles  admiring  tbe  goodness  of  the  goddess
that  had  appeared  to  him,  built  a  temple  in  Mag-
nesia, which  he  dedicated  to  Cybele  Dindymenc,
and  appointed  his  daughter  Mnesiptolema  it's
priestess.

When  he  was  come  to  Sardis,  he  diverted  himself
with  looking  upon  the  ornaments  of  the  temples  ;
and  among  a  great  number  of  offerings,  he  found  in
the  temnle  of  Cvbcle  a  female  fiiiure  of  brass,  two
cubits  high,  called  Hydrophorus  or  '  the  water-
bearer;'  which  be  himself,  when  surveyor  of  the
aqueducts  at  Athens,  bad  caused  to  he  made  and
dedicated,  out  of  the  fines  of  such  as  bad  stolen  the
water,  or  diverted  the  stream.  Whether  it  were  that
he  was  moved  at  seeing?  this  statue  in  a  stran2:e
country,  or  that  he  was  desirous  of  showing  the
Athenians  how  mucli  he  was  honoured '"-,  and  what

15-^  It  is  not  inipfoba])k%  tl'.at  this  proceeded  from  a  principle  oF
vanity.  Tl^.e  love  of  admiration  was  tiie  ruling  passion  of  Tiienns"
tocles,  and  discovers  itself  uniformly  throwgliout  liis  viliol.e  conduct.

O     \    o


356  TIIEMISTOCLES.

power  he  had  over  all  the  king's  dominions,  he
addressed  Inmseli'  to  the  2;overnor  of  Lvdia,  and
beirsred  leave  to  send  back  the  statue  to  Athens.
The  barbarian  inmiediatcly  took  fire,  and  said  he
would  certainly  acquaint  the  king  what  kind  of  a
request  he  had  made.  Thcniistocles,  alarmed  at
this  menace,  applied  to  the  governor's  women,  and
by  money  prevailed  u})on  them  to  pacify  him.
After  this,  he  beluived  with  more  prudence,  sensible
how  much  he  had  to  fear  from  the  envy  of  the
Persians.  Hence  he  did  not  travel  about  Asia,  as
Theopompus  says,  but  took  up  his  abode  at  jMag-
iiesia  ;  where  loaded  with  valuable  presents,  and
equally  honoured  with  the  Persian  nobles,  he
long  lived  in  t!ie  utmost  security  :  for  the  king,
who  was  much  engaged  in  the  ati'airs  of  the  Upper
Provinces,  gave  but  little  attention  to  the  concerns
of  Greece.

But  M'hen  Egypt  revolted,  and  was  abetted  in
that  revolt  by  the  Athenians  ;  when  the  Grecian
fleet  sailed  as  far  as  Cyprus  and  Cilicia,  and  C'inioii
rode  triumphant  master  of  the  seas,  then  the  king
of  Persia  applied  himself  to  oppose  the  Greeks,  and
to  prevent  the  growth  of  their  power.  He  put  iiis
forces  in  motion,  sent  out  his  generals,  and  des-
patched messengers  to  Themistocles  at  Magnesia,
to  command  him  to  perform  his  promises  and  exert
himself  against  Greece.  Neither  resentment  how-
ever against  the  Ath.enians,  nor  the  honours  and
authority  in  which  he  now  flourished,  could  prevail
upon  him  to  engage  in  the  M-ar.  Possibly  he
might  doubt  the  event  of  it,  as  Greece  had  then
several   great  generals  ;  and  Cimon,   in  particular,

Tliere  might  however  he  another  reason,  which  Plutarch  has  not
iiientionect.  Thcinistocles  was  an  excellent  manajrer  in  political
v-'liyiuii.  Ho  had  lately  been  ensinently  distinguished  by  the  favour
of  Cybele.  He  finds  an  Athenian  statue  in  h^r  temple.  The  god-
dess consents,  that  he  should  send  it  to  Athens  ;  and  the  Athenian?,
<3ut  of  respect  to  the  goddess,  mutt  of  course  cease  to  persecute
hi-v  favourite  Themistocles.


THEMISTOCLES.  'J57

was  distiimuislicd  by  extrnordinarv  success.  Above
all,  recard  for  his  own  achievements  and  trophies,
tiie  glory  of  vv'hich  he  was  unwilling'  to  tarnish,
deterniined  him  (as  the  best  method  he  could  adopt)
to  put  an  end  to  his  life  in  a  manner  becoming  his
dignity  "^\  Having  therefore  sacrificed  to  the  gods,
assembled  his  friends,  and  taken  his  last  leave,  he
drank  bull's  blood  '"%  as  it  is  generally  reported  (or,
as  otiiers  state,  a  quick  poison)  and  ended  his  days
at  Magnesia,  having  lived  sixty-five  years,  most  of
which  he  had  spent  in  civil  or  military  employments.
When  the  king  v/as  acquainted  with  the  cause  and
manner  of  his  death,  he  admired  him  more  than
ever,  and  continued  his  fiivour  and  bounty  to  his
friends  and   relations  '"'.

By  Archippe,  the  daughter  of  Lysander  of  Alo-
pece,  Tliemistocles  had  live  sons,  Neocles,  Diodes,
Archeptolis,  Polyeuctes,  and  Cleophantus.  The
three  last  survived  him.  Plato  takes  notice  of  Cleo-
})han!:us  as  an  excellent  horseman  "^^,  but  a  man  of
no  merit  in  other  respects.  Neocles  his  eldest  son
died,  when  a  child,  by  the  bite  of  a  horse  ;  and  Dio-

'^5  Thucydi.les  (i.  138.)  who  was  contemporarv  with  Tliemisto-
cles, only  8iiyp,  '  He  (lied  of  a  distemper;  but  some  report  that  he
poisoned  Iiiniseif,  ihidins;  it  iinpot:v.ib!e  to  aceop.iplish  what  lie  had
proaiised  the  kiii-^.'   (L.)

See  also  Diod.  Sic.  xi.  .57.,  and  Cic.  Brut,  ii.,  from  whom  tlic
ol)yioas  inference  k;  tliat  he  died  a  natural  dealh.  But  Plutarch,
beside  his  desiie  to  tiu-o\v  a  lustre  round  his  iiero's  exit,  was  soli-
citous to  give  a  g!oi-i()us  example  of  his  favourite  exploit,  suicide — •
a  subject,  upon  whicii  he  most  widely  differed  from  tlie  demi-
chrisiian  So'.rates,  tiu)u<;h  in  so  many  other  respects  he  was'  proud
to  make  him  l>is  model.*

'^-*  When  they  uere  sacrineiiifj  the  hull,  he  caused  the  blood  to
be  received  in  a  cup,  and  drank  it  while  it  was  warm,  which
recording' to  Pliny)  is  uiortal,  because  it  coagulates  or  thickens
in  nn  instant.

'°'  There  is,  in  our  opinion,  more  true  heroism  in  the  death  of
'i'lieniistocies,  than  in  ti;at  of  Cato.  It  is  indeed  enthusiastically
great,  when  a  maa  determines  not  to  survive  his  liberty  ;  but  it  is
still  greater,  wiien  lie  refuses  to  survive  his  honotu".

'°^  This  ancient  Aj-tley,  it  appears,  could  stand  upright  on
horseback,  and  use  his  bow  in  that  attitude;  hut  had  been  less
industrious  to  prolit  by  liih  lather's  moral  lessons.'-


3.-S  THEMISTOCLES.

cles  was  adopted  by  Iiis  graiidfatlier  Lysaiuler.  He
had  several  daughters  ;  namely,  Mnesiptolema,  by  a
second  wife,  who  was  mariicd  to  Archeptolis,  her
liali'-ljrother  ;  Italia,  whose  husband  was  Panth.idcs
of  Chios;  Sibaiis,  married  to  Kicomedes  the  Athe-
nian ;  and  Nicomaqhe  at  Ivlag)icsia  to  his  nephew
Phrasicles,.  who  atier  her  father's  death  took  a
voyage  for  that  purpose,  received  her  at  the  hands
of  her  brothers,  and  broright  up  her  sister  Asia,  the
youngest  of  the  children.

The  Magnesians  erected  a  very  handsome  monu-
ment to  him,  which  still  remains  in  the  market-place.
No  credit  is  to  be  given  to  Andocides,  who  writes  to
his  friends,  that  the  Athenians  stole  his  ashes  out  of
the  tomb,  and  scattered  them  in  the  air  ;  for  it  is  a
mere  artifice  of  his,  to  exasperate  the  nobility  against
the  people.  Phylarclius  likewise,  more  like  a  writer
of  trao'edv  than  an  historian,  availinghimself  of  what
may  be  called  a  piece  of  machinery,  introduces  Neo-
cles  and  Demopolis  as  the  sons  of  Themistocles,  to
render  his  story  more  interesting  and  pathetic.  But
a  very  moderate  degree  of  sagacity  may  detect  the
fiction.  Yet  Diodorus  the  geographer  writes,  in  his
Treatise  upon  Sepulchres  (rather  however  from
conjecture  than  from  ceriain  knowledge)  that  near
the  harbour  of  Piraeus,  from  the  promontory  of
Alcimus  '^",  the  land  makes  an  elbow ;  and,  when
you  have  doubled  it  inward,  by  the  still  water  there
is  a  vast  foundation,  upon  which  stands  the  tomb  of
Themistocles  '°^  in  the  form  of  an  altar.     With  him


'°7  Mcursius  rightly  corrects  it  *  Alimus.'  We  find  no  place  in
Attica  called  ♦  Alcimus,'  but  there  was  a  borough  named  Alimus
on  the  cast  of  the  Piraeus,  celebrated  for  it's  temple  of  Ceres,  and
as  the  birth-place  of  Thuc3'dides.  (Pausan.  i.  31.)
-  '='  Thuc}  tides  i.  138.  says  that  the  bones  of  Themistocles,  in
obedience  to  his  own  command,  were  privately  carried  back  into
Attica  by  his  relations,  and  buried  there.  But  Pausanias  agrees
with  Diodi.rus  tliat  the  Athenians,  repenting  of  their  ill  usage  of
this  grvat  man,  honoured  him  with  a  tomb  in  the  I'iraeus  (which
was  still  remaining  in  his  time)  and  other  eminent  marks  oi'  dis-
tinction, (i.  1.)


THEMISTOCLES.  359

Plato,  the  comic  writer,  is  supposed  to  agree  in  the
following  hnes  :

Oft  as  tlie  mercliant  speeds  the  passing  sail,
Thy  tomb,  Themistocles,  he  stops  to  Imil :
When  hostile  ships  in  martial  combat  meet,
Thy  shade  attending  hovers  o'er  the  fleet.

Various  honours  and  privileges  were  granted  by
the  Magnesians  to  the  descendents  of  Themistocles,
which  continued  down  to  our  times  ;  for  they  were
enjoyed  by  one  of  his  name,  an  Athenian,  with
whom  I  had  a  particular  acquaintance  and  friendship
in  the  house  of  Ammonius  the  philosopher.

It  does  not  appear,  indeed,  that  Themlstoeles  when  banislied
had  any  design  either  to  revenge  himself  on  Athens,  or  to  take
refuge  in  the  court  of  the  king  of  Persia.  The  (i reeks  themselves
forced  him  upon  this,  or  rather  the  Laceda3monians ;  for  as  by
their  intrigues  his  countrymen  were  induced  to  banish  him,  so  by
their  importunities,  after  he  was  banished,  he  was  not  suffered  to
enjoy  any  refuge  ia  quiet.


THI


LIFE


ov


C  A  M  I  L  L  U  S.


SUMMARY.

Camillns  attained  every  dignity y  except  that  of  the  consulship.  Hi's
valour  :  he  is  chosen  censor.  Siege  of  Veii.  Overflotiing  of  the
Alban  lake.  The  oracles  consulted  upon  this  subject :  Camillus
elected  dictator  :  defeat  of  the  Falisci :  taking  of  Veii.  The  statue
of  Juno  Conveyed  thence  to  Rome.  Camilbis'  triumph.  He  resists
the  plan  of  removing  part  of  the  people  to  Veii.  The  Romans  of-
fended at  his  voiv.  Offering  sent  to  Delphi  ;  and  danger  incurred
by  the  bearers  of  it,  Faliscan  ixar.  C(nnillus'  generous  condtu:t
ioivard  the  Falisci ;  ivhich  induces  them  to  surrender  iJicmselves
to  the  Romans.  The  project  of  removing  to  Veii  rexixvd.  Camil-
lus banished.  Invasion  of  Italy  by  the  Gauls.  They  pour  into
Tuscany;  and  besiege  Clusium.  Rashness  of  the  Fabii  counte-
nanced by  the  Romans.  The  Gauls  march  to  Rome.  Battle  of
Allia.  Lucky  and  unlucky  days.  Consternation  of  the  Romans.
'The  Vestals  carry  off"  the  Sacred  Fire.  The  Palhidiiim  and  other
sacred  relics  removed.  The  Gauls  enter  Rome  ;  and  massacre  the
senators.  Camilhcs^  address  to  the  Ardeatcs.  He  drfcats  the
Gaids  near  Ardea.  The  Romans,  tvho  have  retired  to  Veii,  offer
him  the  chief  command.  He  is  recalled  from  exile,  and  made
dictator.  The  Gauls,  on  the  point  of  surprising  the  Capiinl,  are
repulsed.  Critical  situation  of  both  parties.  Treaty.  Camillus
intervenes,  fills  upon  the  Ganls,  and  defeats  them.  Re-enters
Rome  in  triumph,  and  undertakes  it^s  restoration.  Still  resists  the
plan  (f  migrating  to  Veii ;  and  the  people  give  it  up.  Rome  is  re
built.     War  xvilh  the  Aujui,    Vulsci,  and  Latins.     Cami'lui,'  third


CAMILLUS.  SGI

dictatorship.  Victory  of  the  Romans.  Different  account  of  this
XKiar.  Sutriiun  taken  and  retaken  in  the  same  day.  Manlius
asjnres  to  the  sovereignti/ of  Rome  ;  and  is  thrown  headlong Jrom
the  Capitol,  xi^hich  he  had  preserved  froin  the  Gaals.  War  ■with
the  Prcenestines  arid  Volscians.  Valour  and  victory  of  CamiUus.
He  reduces  tlic  Tascalans,  'who  had  revolted.  Disturbances  excited
by  one  of  the  tribunes.  New  invasion  by  the  Gauls:  opposed  by
CamiUus  ;  tvho  gains  a  complete  victory.  The  people  obtain  a  ple-
beian consul.  Temple  of  Conccrd  built.  Pestilence.  Death  of
CamiUus.


-f\MONG  the  many  remarkable  things  related  of
Farias  Camillas,  the  most  extraordinary  seems  to  be
this,  that  though  he  was  often  in  the  highest  com-
mands and  performed  the  greatest  actions,  though
he  was  five  times  chosen  dictator,  triumphed  four
times,  and  was  stiled  '  the  Second  Founder  of
Rome  ;'  yet  he  was  never  once  consul.  Of  tliis  we
may,  perhaps,  discover  the  reason  in  the  existing
state  of  the  commonwealth.  The  people,  then  at
variance  with  the  senate  ',  refused  to  alo-ct  consuls,
and  in  their  stead  placed  the  government  in  the  hands
of  military  tribunes ;  who,  though  invested  with  /
consular  power  and  authority,  were  in  their  admini-
stration less  grievous  to  the  people,  because  they
were  more  in  number.  To  have  the  direction  of
affairs  entrusted  to  six  persons  instead  of  tv.o,  was
some  ease  and  satisfaction  to  a  populace  who  could
not  bear  to  be  controlled  by  the  nobihty.  Casniihis,
at  that  time  distinguished  by  his  achievements  and

'  The  Old  quarrel  aboiU  the  distribution  of  lands  was  revived,
the  people  iusij^tiug  that  every  citizen  should  have  an  equal  share.
Tiie  senate  met  fiequently,  to  bafrle  the  proposal;  and  at  last
A))pius  Claudius  moved,  that  some  of  the  tribunes  of  tlie  people
should  be  gained,  as  the  only  remedy  against  the  tyranny  of  that
body  ;  which  was  accord in.^^ly  carried  into  execution.  The  com-
mons, thus  disappointed,  chose  military  tribunes  instead  of  consuls,
and  sometimes  had  tbeiu  aii  plebeians.   (Liv.  iv,  i'6.)


362  CAMILLUS.

at  the  heififlit  of  ixlorv,  did  not  choose  to  be  consul
against  the  inclination  of  the  pcoj)lc  ;  tliough  the
Comitia,  or  asscmbhes  in  which  they  might  have
elected  consuls,  were  several  times  held  within  that
period'.  In  all  his  other  commissions,  Vvhich  were
many  and  varions,  he  so  conducted  himself  that,  if
he  was  entrusted  with  the  sole  aulhorit}',  he  shared
it  with  otiiers ;  and,  if  he  had  a  collcgue,  the  glory
was  his  own.  The  autliority  appeared  to  be  shared
irom  his  singular  modesty  in  command,  which  gave
no  occasion  to  envy;  and  the  glory  was  secured  to
him  by  his  genius  and  capacity,  in  which  he  was  uni-
versally allowed  to  have  no  equal.

The  family  of  the  Furii^  was  not  before  his  time
very  illustrious ;  he  Avas  the  first,  who  raised  it  to
distinction,  when  he  served  under  Posthumius  Tu-
bertus  in  the  great  battle  with  the  iJ^qui  and  Volsci  ^
lu  that  action,  spurring  his  horse  beibre  the  ranks,

-  From  A.  U.  C.  310.,  v.' Tien  Military  Tribunes  (according  to
lAvy  iv.  7.)  were  first  elected,  to  A .  U.  C.  358,  when  the  consuls  were
regularly  re-established,  there  had  been  occasional!}'  afew  consulships,
but  not  more  than  two  or  three  during  the  period  ofCamillus'  pub-
lic life.  The  Comitia  however  for  both  were  the  centuriata,  in  ;\  hich
the  people  voted  by  centuries  for  the  higher  state-appointments  of
Consul,  Censor,  and  Praetor.  The  Military  Tribunes  were,  at  first,
only  three  in  number.

^  Furius  was  the  family-name.  Carnillus  (as  has  been  already  ob-
served. Life  of  Numa.p.  177.  not.  22.)  was  an  appellation  of  children
of  quality,  who  ministered  in  the  temple  of  some  god.  Our  Camillus
was  the  tirst  who  retained  it  as  a  surname.  (L.)  His  first  name
was  r'.Iarcus.  Ey  the  term  '  illustrious,'  Plutarch  must  refer  (as
M.  Ilicard  suggests)  rather  to  military,  than  to  civil  glory:  for  we
find  a  Sextus  Furius  consul,  A.  U.  C.  266.  (Dion.  Halic.  viii.  3.,
Liv.  ii.  39.),  and  in  the  interval  of  less  than  a  century,  which  elapsed
between  that  period  and  the  date  of  Camillus*  first  tribuneship,  no
less  than  seventeen  others  of  the  same  family  rose  to  an  equal  ele-
vation.*

*  This  was  A.  U.  C.  321,  when  Camillus  might  be  about  fourteen
or  fifteen  years  of  age,  though  the  Koman  youth  did  not  usually
bear  ;Trms  sooner  than  seventeen.  And,  though  Plutarch  says  that
bis  gallant  beliaviour  at  that  time  procured  him  the  censorship,  it
must  have  been  only  from  the  recollection  of  bis  bravery,  as  the
Rortians  never  conferred  the  censorship  upon  a  young  person;  Ca-
miiliis,  in  fact,  v/as  not  censor  till  A.  U.  C.  353.  (L.)  Of  this  gal-
lant behaviour,  Livy  (iv.  28,  29.)  takes  no  notice.*


CAMILLUS.  363

he  received  a  wound  in  the  thigh ;  but  instead  of
retiring  he  phicked  the  javelin  out  of  the  wound,
engaged  with  the  bravest  of  the  enemy,  and  put  them
to  iiis-ht.  For  this,  amoncr  other  honours,  he  Vv'as
appointed  censor,  an  office  at  that  time  of  great  dig-
nity '.  There  is  upon  record  a  very  laudable  act  of
his,  which  took  place  during  his  discharge  of  this
office.  As  the  v/ars  had  made  many  widows,  he
obliged  such  of  the  men  as  lived  single,  partly  by
persuasion  and  partly  by  threatening  them  with  fines,
to  marry  those  widows.  Another  necessary  measure
of  his  was  causing  orphans,  who  had  previously  been
exempt  from  taxes,  to  contribute  to  the  suppHes:
for  these  were  very  large,  on  account  of  the  con-
tinual wars.

What  was  then  most  urgent  was  the  siege  of  Veii,
whose  inhabitants  some  call  Venetani.  This  city
was  the  barrier  of  Tuscany,  and  in  the  extent  of  her  ^
equipments  and  the  num})er  of  her  soldiery  not  infe-
rior to  Rome.  Proud  of  her  wealth,  her  elegance,
and  her  luxury,  she  had  maintained  with  the  Romans
many  long  and  gallant  disputes  for  glory  and  for
power.  But  humbled  by  several  signal  defeats,  the
Veientes  had  now  bid  adieu  to  that  ambition  ;  and
satisfied  with  building  strong  and  high  walls,  and
filling  the  city  with  provisions,  arms,  and  all  kinds  j
of  warlike  stores,  awaited  the  enemy  without  fear.
The  siege  was  tedious,  but  not  less  laborious  and

5  The  authority  of  the  censors  (first  established  A.  U.  C.  311.)
in  the  time  of  the  republic  was  very  extensive.  They  had  n  power
to  expel  senators,  to  degrade  knights,  and  to  disable  pkbeians  from
giving  tiieir  votes  in  the  assemblies  of  the  people.  But  the  em-
perors took  tiie  office  upon  tlieniselves :  and,  as  by  many  of  them  it  was
fibused,  It  lost  it's  honour,  and  sometimes  the  very  title  was  laid
aside.  As  to  what  Plutarch  says,  that  Camilius,  when  censor,
obliged  many  of  the  bachelors  to  marry  the  widows  of  those  who  had
fallen  in  the  w?,rs ;  that  v/as  in  pursuance  of  one  of  the  powers  of
his  office. — Ccelibes  esse  prohibcnto.  (L,)  For  their  first  creation,
variations,  &c.  see  Livy  iv.  8.  24.,  Dion.  Halic.  xi.  15.;  for  their
functions,  of  whicli  the  primary  one  was  the  census  or  numbering  of
the  people  every  fifth  year,  Cic.  de  Legg.  iii.  &c.*


set  CAMILLUS.

troLibJesome  to  the  besiegers,  than  to  themselves,
i'or  the  Romans  had  long  been  accustomed  to  sum-
mer-campaigns only,  and  to  winter  at  home ;  and
then  for  the  first  time  their  officers  ordered  them  to
construct  forts,  to  raise  strong  works  about  their
camp,  and  to  pass  the  winter  as  well  as  the  sumnier
in  the  enemy's  country.

The  seventh  year  of  the  war  was  now  almost
passed,  when  the  generals  began  to  be  blamed  :  and,
as  it  was  thought  that  they  had  not  displayed  suf-
ficient vigour  in  the  siege  %  they  were  superseded,
and  othei's  sent  in  their  room  ;  among  whom  was
Camillus,  then  aj)pointed  tribune  the  second  time'.
He  was  not  however  at  present  concerned  in  the
siege,  for  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  licad  the  expedition
against  the  Falisci  and  the  Capcnates  ^ ;  who,  while
the  Romans  were  otherwise  employed,  committed
considerable  depredations  in  their  territories,  and
harassed  tlicm  during  tlie  whole  Tuscan  war.  Rut
Camillus  falling  upon  them  slew  immense  numbers,
and  shut  up  the  rest  within  tlieir  walls.

During  the  heat  of  th.e  war,  a  phenomenon  occur-
red in  the  Alban  lake,  which  might  be  reckoned
among  the  strangest  of  prodigies  :  and  as  no  common
or  natural   cause  could  be   assigned  for  it-*,  it  oc-

"  Of  the  six  militaiy  tribunes  of  that  year,  only  two,  L.  Virginius
aad  Manius  Sergius,  carried  (.n  t!ie  siege  of  Veil.  Sergius  toui-
ttianued  the  attack,  and  Virgip.ias  covered  the  siege.  While  the-
army  was  thus  divided,  the  Fali^-ci  and  the  Capenates fell  upon  Sergius,
and  at  the  same  time  the  besieged  sallying  out  attacked  him  on  the
other  fide.  The  Koimans  under  his  command,  thinking  that  they
had  all  tlie  forces  of  Iletruria  to  deal  with,  began  to  lose  courage
and  retire.  Virginius  could  have  saved  his  collegue's  troops  ;  but,  as
Sergius  was  toK>  proud  to  send  to  him  for  succour,  !,e  resolved  not
to  give  him  any.  The  enemy  therefore,  made  a  dreadful  slaughter
of  the  Romans  in  their  lines.     (Liv.  v.  8.)

7      A      T"     f'       'J.t"
•.  * .  Kj  •  Vj  •    \j\y  i  •

^  Livy  (v.  14.)  says  that  Valerius  Potitus,  then  military  tribune
fv)r  the  fifth  time,  attacked  and  defeated  the  Fjlisci,  andCamiJlns
tlie  Cnpcnate's-,  with  great  slaughter  and  j)il!age.*

^  The  moderns,  from  the  improved  state  of  physics,  have  suc-
ceeded better.  8trabo  indeed,  iu  the  age  of  Augustus,  could  have
12


CAMILLUS.  365

oasloned  great  consternation.  The  summer  was  de-
clining, and  the  season  by  no  means  rainy,  or  re-
markable for  south-winds ;  of  the  many  spiings,
brooks,  and  lakes,  with  which  Italy  abounds,  some
were  dried  up,  and  otliers  but  feebly  resisted  the
drought ;  the  rivers,  always  low  in  the  summer,  at
that  particular  time  ran  with  a  very  slender  stream  :
when  the  Alban  lake,  which  has  it's  source  within
itself  and  discharges  no  part  of  it's  v/ater,  being  quite
surrounded  vvith  solid  mountains,  vv  ithout  any  cause
(unless  it  vvcre  a  supernatural  one)  began  to  rise  and
swell  in  a  most  remarkable  manner,  increasing  till  it
reached  the  sides  and  at  last  the  very  tops  of  the
hills,  all  which  happened  without  any  agitation  of
it*s  waters.  For  a  while,  it  was  the  wonder  of  the
shepherds  and  herdsmen  :  but  when  the  earth,  which
like  a  mole  kept  it  from  overflowing  the  country  be-
low, w'as  broken  down  with  the  quantity  and  weight
of  water,  then  descending  like  a  torrent  through  the
ploughed  fields  and  other  cultivated  grounds  to
the  sea,  it  not  only  astonished  the  Romans,  but  was
thought  by  all  Italy  to  portend  some  extraordinary
event.  It  was  the  principal  subject  of  conversation
in  the  camp  before  Veii,  so  that  it  at  last  reached  the
ears  of  the  besieged.

As  durinii  lon^r  sieves  there  is  usually  some  inter-

O  c*  O  ^  *

course  with  the  enemy,  it  happened  that  a  Roman
soldier  had  formed  an  acquaintance  with  one  of  the
townsmen,  a  man  versed  in  ancient  traditions,  and
supposed  to  be  more  than  ordinarily  skilled  in  divi-
nation. The  Romans,  perceiving  that  he  expressed
great  satisfaction  at  the  story  of  the  lake  and  laughed
at  the  siege,  told  him,  "  This  was  not  the  only  won-
"  der  which  the  times  had  produced,  but  other
"  prodigies  still  stranger  had  happened  to  the  Ro-
"  mans :  which  he  should  be  glad  to  communicate


helped  them  to  a  solution,  in  his  comments  on  the  Fttcine  kke  (v.).
But  every  thing  new  was  'a  prodigy'  wit,  the  ancients.  Thj6-
'^'ater  is  now  called  *  tlie  Lake  of  CasUe  Gandolfo.'*


366  CAMILLUS.


"  to  him,  if  by  those  means  he  could  provide  for
"  his  own  safety  in  the  midst  of  the  pubhc  ruin.*'
X'le  man,  readily  hearkening  to  the  proposal,  came
out  to  him,  expecting  to  hear  some  secret ;  and  the
iloman  continued  the  discourse,  drav\inf>'  him  for-
ward  by  degrees,  till  they  were  at  some  distance
from  the  gates.  He  then  snatched  him  up  in  his
arms,  and  by  his  superior  strength  Iield  hnn,  till  with
the  assistance  of  several  soldiers  from  the  camj)  he
was  secured  and  carried  before  the  generals.  The
man  reduced  to  thi>  necessity,  and  knowing  that
destiny  cannot  be  avoided,  declared  the  secret
oracles  concerning  his  own  country ;  "  That  the  city
"  could  never  be  taken  till  the  waters  of  the  Albau
"  lake,  wliich  had  now  forsaken  their  bed  and  found
"  new  passages,  were  turned  back  and  so  diverted,
"  as  to  be  prevented  from  mixing  with  the  sea    .'*

The  senate,  to  whom  inLellis';ence  of  this  predic-
tion was  conveyed,  after  some  deliberation  were  of
opinion  that  it  v.ould  be  best  to  send  to  Delphi  to
consult  the  oracle.  For  this  purpose  they  chose
three  persons  of  honour  and  distinction,  Licinius
Cossus,  Valerius  Foiitus,  and  Fabius  Ambustus ;
who,  having  had  a  prosperous  voyage  and  consulted
Apollo,  returned  with  this  among  other  answers^
"  That  they  had  neglected  some  ceremonies  in  the
"  Latin  Feasts  "."     As   to  the  water  of  the  Albau

1°  The  propliecy,  according  to  Livy  (v.  15.),  vvas  this,  <  Veil
slinll  nevei-  be  taken,  till  all  the  water  is  run  out  of  the  lake  of
Alba.'   (L.)

The  Raman  historian  has  been  much  more  minute,  and  natural,
in  hfe  account  of  this  event.     Sec  also  Cic.  de.  Div.  i.  14.

The  senate  were,  reasonably  enough,  apprehensive  of  the  inter-
pretation suggested  by  an  enem)'^ :

— Timeo  Danaos  etdonaferenles.  (Virg.  ^in.)*

"  This  festival,  one  of  the  most  dignitied  in  the  Roman  calendar,
was  instituted  by  Tarquin  the  Proud  (see  Dion.  Malic,  iv.  il.).
The  Romans  presided  in  it;  but  all  the  people  of  I,atiiim  were  to
attend,  and  to  partake  of  a  bull  then  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  Latialis.
(L.)  It's  duration  was  gradually  extended  from  one  day  to  four.
Id.  vi.  11.,  I.iv.  vi.  12,  i^cc.     This  however  wiis  not  at  any  f}>t.e(i  .


CAMILLUS.  SG7

lake  they  were  ordered  if  possible  to  shut  it  up  in  it's
ancierit  bed;  or  if  that  could  not  be  effected,  to  dig
canals  and  trenches  for  it,  till  it  should  have  lost
itself  on  the  land.  Agreeable  to  this  direction,  the
priests  were  employed  in  oiiering  sacrilices,  and
the  people  in  labouring  to  turn  the  course  of  the
water  ^-.

In  the  tenth  year  of  the  siege,  the  senate  removed
the  other  magistrates  and  appointed  Cainillas  dic-
tator ^^,  who  chose  Cornelius  Scipio  for  his  general
of  horse.  In  the  iirst  place  he  made  vov;s  to  the
gods,  if  they  favoured  him  with  putting  a  glorious
period  to  the  war,  to  celebrate  the  great  Circensian
games  to  their  honour  '\  aiKl  to  consecrate  the  tem-
ple of  the  goddess,  whom  the  Romans  call  '  tlie
mother  Matuta.'  This  last,  by  her  sacred  rites,  VvC
may  suppose  to  have  been  the  goddess  Leucothea.
For  they  take  a  female  slave  into  the  inner  part  of
the  temple  ",  wh.ere  they  beat  her  and  tiien  drive
her  out  :  they  carry  their  brothers'  children  in  their
arms,  instead  of  their  own  ^^ ;  and  they  represent  in
the  ceremonies  of  the  sacrifice  all  that  happened  to
the  nurses  of  Bacchus,  and  wliat  Ino  suii'ered  for
having  saved  the  son  of  Juno's  rival.

time,  but  varied  at  the  pleasure  of  the  consuls ;  and  hence  tl^a
name  of  ferirc  concept ix\c.*-

'-  This  wonderful  work  '^.vM  subsists,  and  the  waters  of  the  lake
Albano  ran  thrcuijh  it.

'^  A.  U.  C.  'iBi^.  This  nomination  (>;ays  Livv,  v.  19.)  produced
a  wonderful  revolution,  in  the  public  ieeling.  iVora  despondeucy  to
cnnfidence."

^•^  These  were  a  l-ind  of  tournameiit  in  the  Great  Circus,  first
instituted  by  the  dictator  Posthunnus,  after  his  ensratjenient  with
the  Latins  at  the  lake  llegillus.  For  their  ceremonies,  see  Dion.
Halic.  vii.   \?,*

'^  Leucothcie  or  Ino,  the  sanse  with  Matuta,  was  jealous  of
one  of  her  feaialo^  skives,  v.ho  was  the  favourite  of  her  husband
Athamas.

"^  Ino  was  a  very  unhappy  mother;  for  she  had  seen  her  son
Lcarchus  slain  by  her  husband,  upon  v.liicli  she  threw  herself  ir.to
the  sea  with  h-^r  other  son  Melicertes.  But  fshe  was  a  more  fortu-
nate aunt,  bavin;,'  ])reserved  Bacchus,  tiie  son  of  h.er  sister  Semeie
by  the  universal  debaucher  Jove.     See  Ovid,  Fast.  vj.  559..  <S:c.

9


568  CAMiLLU^.

After  thcsfe  vow"^,  Caniilhis  penetrated  into  the
country  of  the  Falisci,  and  in  a  general  battle  over-
threw them  and  their  auxiliaries  the  Capenates.     He         \
then  turned  to  the  siege  of  Veii ;  and  pereeiving  it       /
would  be  both  difficult  and  dangerous  to  endcavou.r  .J;
to   take   it  by  assault,  ho  ordered  mines  to  be  dug,
the  soil  about  the  city  being  easy  to  work,  and  luUy^
mitting  of  depth  enough  for  the  works  to  be  carried'*^
on  un^^een  by  the  enemy.     As  this  succeeded  to  hi.=;
wish,  he  made  an  assault  witliout,  to  call  the  enemy
to  the  walls  ;  while  others  of  his  soldiers  passed  along
the  mines,  and  secretly  penetrated  to  Juno's  teniple*
in  the  citadel.     This  was  the  most  considerable  tem-
ple in  the  city,  and  at  that  instant  (we  are  told)  tlic
Tuscan   general  happened  to  be   sacrificing ;  when
the  soothsayer,  upon  inspection  of  the  entrails,  cried
out,  "  T'ne  gods  promise  victory  to  him,  that  shall
"  finish  this  sacrifice  ''."     The  Romans  who  were
tinder  a;rou]]d,  hearing:  what  he   said,  immediately
burst  through  the  pavement,  and  came  out  vvith  loud
shouts  and  clasliing  of  arms :  this  struck  the  enemy
with  such  terror,  that  thev  fled  and  left  the  entrails,
which  were  carried   to  Camillus.     But  perhaps  this
has  more  the  air  of  fable,  than  of  history  '^

The  city  thus  taken  by  the  Romans  sword  in
hand,  while  they  were  busy  in  plundering  it  and
carryino;  off  it's  immense  riches,  Camillus  beholding
from  the  citadel  what  was  done,  at  first  burst  into
tears :  and,  when  those  about  him  began  to  magnify
his  iiappiness,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  toward  heaven,

'7  Words  ppoken  bv  persons  unconcerned  in  their  adhirs,  and
upon  a  quite  dilVerent  suhjcet,  were  interpreted  by  the  heathens
as  good  or  bad  omens,  if  tliey  happened  to  be  in  any  way  apph-
eal)ie  to  their  case.  And  they  took  great  pains  to  tullil  tiie  omen,
if  they  tlionght  it  lucky,  as  well  as  to  evade  it,  if  it  appeared
unlucky.

'^  Livy's  reflection  upon  this  occasion  is  as  modest,  as  it  is  just;
Scfl,  in  rcbna  lav.  (inti;]His  si.  qua:  umiVm  veri  sunt  pro  veris  acci-
pinntnr,  salis  habcam  :  hccc,  ad  ostcntaiionem  scence  gauc/entis  mira-
sulis  apiiorn  quam  ad  jnlcniy  ncqiie  nffrmare  ncquc  refellere  opera:
pretimi!  est.  (v.  21.)*


a


CAMILLtJS.  S69

and  uttered  this  prayer ;  "  Great  Jupiter,  and  ye
gods  tiuit  have  the  inspection  of  our  good  and
evil  actions,  ye  know  that  the  Romans  not  with-
out just  cause,  but  in  their  own  defence,  and  con-
"  strauied  by  necessity,  have  made  war  ag-ainst  this
"  city  and  tlien*  enemies  it's  unjust  inhabitants.  If
"  we  must  have  some  misfortune  in  lieu  of  this  suc-
"  cess,  I  entreat  that  it  may  fall  not  upon  Rome  or
"  the  Roman  army,  but  upon  myself:  yet  lay  not,
"  ye  gods,  a  heavy  hand  upon  me'^!'*  Haying
pronounced  these  words,  he  turned  to  the  right,  as
the  manner  of  the  Romans  is  after  prayer  and  sup-
plication, but  fell  in  turning.  His  friends,  who  were
present,  expressed  much  uneasiness  at  the  accident ;
but  he  soon  recovered  himself  from  the  fall,  and  told
them,  "  It  was  only  a  small  inconvenience  after
*'  great  success,  agreeably  to  his  pra3'er."

After  the  city  was  pillaged,  he  determined,  pur-
suant to  his  vow,  to  remove  this  statue  of  Juno  to
Rome.  The  workmen  *^°  were  assembled  for  the  pur-
pose, and  he  offered  sacrifice  to  the  goddess,  be-
seeching her  *'  to  accept  their  homage,  and  gra-
ciously to  take  up  her  abode  among  the  gods  of


((


'9  Livy,  who  has  given  us  this  prayer,  has  not  quahfied  it  with
the  modification  so  unv.'^orthy  of  Camillus,  nc,  ifA^uvTcv  i^xyj^u  xxk'm
rsXivrrio-cci,  '  raav  it  be  with  as  little  detriment  as  possible  to  myself!*
On  the  contrary,  he  says,  ut  earn  invidiam  lenire  suo  privato
incommodo,  quam  miiiimo  jmblico  popidi  Romani  liccret.  Camillus
prayed  that,  '  ii'tliis  success  must  have  an  equivalent  in  some  ensu-
ing misfortune,  that  misfortune  might  fall  upon  himself,  and  tha
Roman  people  escape  with  as  little  detriment  as  possible.'  This
was  heroic.  Tlutarch,  having  but  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the
Roman  language,  probably  attached  the  quam  minimo  to  the  wrong
clause :  and  hence  the  explication  subjoined  of  Ins  subsequent
accident,  winch  both  I. ivy  and  Val.  Max.  (i.  5.)  considered  as  the
presage  of  his  political  fall.

^°  These  were  not  common  labourers,  whose  touch  would  have
profaned  this  celebrated  idol  (Liv.  t.  22.),  but  elegant  young  men
selected  from  the  whole  body  of  the  army,  who  underwent  previous
purification,  and  approached  her  clothed  in  white  with  every  pos-
sible demonstration  q>f  reverence.  Livy  no  where  says,  that  Camil^p
lus  'touched'  the  statue.  Hence,  as  well  as  frjni  ihe  mistake
mentioned  in  the  last  note,  it  seems  probable  that  Plutn  fh  quoted
him  from  memory.*

VOJ.«  L  *  2    B


370  CAMILLUS.

"  Rome."  To  Avhich,  it  is  said,  the  statue  soft)_r
answered,  "  She  was  willing  and  ready  to  do  it."
But  Li\7  informs  us  that  Camillus,  in  offering  up  his
petition,  touched  the  image  of  the  goddess,  and  im-  .
plored  her  to  go  with  them  ;  and  that  some  of  the  '
by-standcrs  replied,  "  She  consented,  and  would
""  willingly  follow  theni."  Those  who  support  and
defend  the  miracle,  have  the  fortune  of  Rome  on
their  side,  which  could  never  have  risen  liom  such
small  and  contemptible  beginnings  to  such  a  height
of  glory  and  empire,  without  the  constant  assistance
of  some  god,  favouring  them  with  many  considerable
tokens  of  his  ])resence.  Several  miracles  of  a  similar
nature  are  also  alleged :  as,  that  images  have  often
sweated  ;  that  they"  have  been  heard  to  groan  ;  and
that  sometimes  they  have  turned  from  their  votaries,
and  shut  their  eyes.  Many  such  accounts  we  have
from  the  ancients:  and  not  a  tew  persons  of  our  own
times  have  recorded  wonderful  stories,  deserving  of
notice.  But  to  give  entire  credit  to  them,  or  alto-
gether to  disbeUeve  them,  is  equally  dangerous  on
account  of  human  weakness  ;  which  has  no  certain
limits  or  power  of  selt-control,  but  falls  sometimes
into  vain  superstition,  and  sometimes  into  an  impious
nedect  of  all  reliction.  It  is  best  to  be  cautious,  and
to  avoid  extremes    .

Whether  it  were,  that  Camillus  was  elated  with
his  exploit  in  taking  a  city  the  rival  of  Rome,  after
it  had  been  besieged  ten  years,  or  that  he  was  misled
by  his  flatterers,  he  took  upon  him  too  much  state
for  a  magistrate  subject  to  the  laws  and  usages  of  his-
country :  lor  his  triumph  was  conducted  with  ex-
cessive pomp,  and  he  rode  through  Rome  in  a  cha-
riot drawn  by  four  white  horses,  which  no  general

^'  Addison  ?eems  to  have  had  this  passage  in  his  eye,  \vhen  he
delivered  his  opinion  concerning  the  doctrine  of  witches.  (I...)  If
Plutarch  any  where  ap])ears  superstitions,  we  must  recollect  in  his
excuse!  that  on  his  return  to  (Miccronea  he  was  consecrated  a  priest
of  Apollo.  For  such  a  functionary,  he  appears  to  have  been  woa-
iJiM-i\ill-3-  Iree  from  prejudices.*
12


CAMILLUS.  371

ever  did  before  or  after  liira.     This  kind  of  carriage
indeed  is   esteemed  sacred,  and  is  appropriated  to
the   king  and  father  of  the  gods "-.     The  citizens,-
therefore,  considered    this   unusual    appearance   of
grandeur   as   an   insult  upon  them.     Besides,  tiiey
were  offended  at  his  opposing  the  law,  by  which  the
city  was  to  be  divided.     For  their  tribunes  had  pro-
posed, that  the  senate  and  the  people  should  be  di-
vided into  two  equal  parts ;  one  part  to  remain  at
]lome,  and  the  other  (as  the  lot  happened  to  fall)
to  remove  to  the  conquered  city;  by  v/hich  means
they  would  not  only  have  more  room,  but  by  pos-
sessiuQ-  two  considerable   cities  be  better  able  to  de-
fend  their  territories,  and  to  watch  over  their  pros-
perity.    The  people,  who  w^ere  very  numerous  and
enriched  by  the  late  plunder,  constantly  assembled
in  the   Forum,    and   in   a   tumultuous    manner  de-
manded to  have  it  put  to  the  vote.      But  the  senate
and  the  other  principal  citizens  considered  this, pro-
posal of  the  tribunes  as  less  the  dividing  than   the
destroying  of  Rome'^,  and  in  their  uneasiness  ap-
plied to  Camillus.    Camillus  was  afraid  of  contesting
the  matter,  and  therefore  invented  demurs  and  pre-
tences of  delay,  to  prevent  the  bill's  being  offered  to
the  people,  by  v»diich  he  incurred  their  displeasure.    .
But  the  strongest  and  most  obvious  cause  of  their
hatred  was,  his  behaviour  with  respect  to  the  tenths
of  the  spoils :  and,  if  the  resentment  of  the  people
was  not  in  this  case  altogether  just,  yet  it.  had  some
show  of  reason.     He  had  made  a  vow  (it  seems)  as
he   marched  to  Veii,  that  if  he  took  the  city,    he
would  consecrate  ihe  tenths  to  Apollo.     But  when
the  city  was  taken  and  came  to  be  pillaged,  he  was

^^  Livy  says,  tliat  he  enjoyed  this  equipage  jointly  uitli  Apo]lo.
(v.  23.)  Coaclies  and  six,  it  u'ould  appear,  were  unknown  to  the
Romans.*  Camillus  likewise  coloured  his  face  with  vermilion,  tiie
colour  with  which  the  statues  of  the  gods  were  commonly  painted.

^3  1  hey  feared,  that  two  such  cities  would  by  degrees  become
two  diiferent  states,  which  after  destructive  wars  with  each  other
would  at  lengtli  fall  a  prey  to'their  common  eoemies.

2  B  2


S72  CAMILLUS.

cither  unwilling  to  interrupt  his  men,  or  in  the  hurry
forgot  his  vow,  and    so  gave  them    up   the  whole
plunder.     Alter  he  had  resigned  his  dictatorshij),  he
laid  the  case  before  the  senate :  and  the  sootlisavers
declared,  that  the  sacriiices  ainiounced  the  anger  of
the  gods,  which  ougiit   to   be  a])peased  by  otferings
expressive  of  their  gratitude  ti:jr  the  favours  they  had
received.     I'he  senate  then  made  a  decree,  that  tlie
plunder  should  remain  with  the  takers,  tor  they  knew
not  how   to  manage   it   othervv  ise  ;    but  that   each
should  produce,  upon  oath,  the  tenth  of  the  value
of  what  he  had  gotten.      This  was  a  great  hardship
on   the  soldiers  ;    and  those  poor  fellows  could  not
without  force  be  brought  to  refund  so  large  a  por-
tion of  the  ti'uit  of  their  labours,  and  to  make  good
notonlv  what  thev  had  hardlv  earned,  but  had  now
actually  spent.     Camillus  distressed  with  their  com-
plaints, for  want  of  a  better  excuse,   made  use  of  a
very  absurd  apology,  by  acknowledging  that  he  had
forgotten  his  vow.     This  they  deeply  resented,   that
having  then  vowed  the  tenths  of  the  enemies'  goods,
he  should  now  exact  the  tenths  of  those  of  the  citizens.
They  all  however  jiroduced  their  j)ro])orli()n,  and  it
was  resolved  that  a  vase  of  massy  gold  should  be
made  and  sent  to  Delphi.   But  as  there  was  a  scarcity
of  gold    in   the    city,    while  the   magistrates   were
considering  how  to  procure  it,   the   Roman  matrons
met,  and   having  consulted  among  themselves  gave
up  their  golden  ornaments,  which  weighed  eight  ta-
lent<5,  as   an  offering  to  the  god.     And  the  senate.
in  honour  of  their  ])iety,  decreed  that  theneeibrtli
they  should  have  funeral  orations  as  well  as  the  nicn,
which  had  not  been  the  custom  beiore  ■'.     Thev  then

-*  The  matrons  liad  tlic  viiUio  of  tlie  gold  piiid  to  tliem  :  and  it
was  iiol  upon  tJiis  orcMsion  \vM  attov'.ard,  when  they  contributed
their  iroldeii  orniuneuu  to  nmkc  up  the  sum  deinaritled  I)y  the
Gauls,  that  tunerul  onitions  were  granted  them  (see  Liv,  v.  50.)
The  privilege,  \\\tU  which  they  were  now  uivourcd  was,  leave  to
ride  in  chariots  fp'id'uin )  at  tlie  jiublie  gtirtos  and  >;acrilices,  imi\  in
open  carriiti^es of.i  less  liononrable  sort  (cirpcnla),  npon  other  uc-
casiuns,  in  the  strLet^  So.  '2.3  ).


CA:MILLUS.  373

sent  three  of  the  chief  of  the  nobility  embassadors,
ill  a  large  ship  well  manned,  and  fitted  out  in  a
manner  becoming  so  solemn  an  occasion.

In  this  voyage,  tiiey  were  equally  endangered  by
a  storm,  and  by  a  calm ;  but  escaped,  beyond  all
expectation,  when  on  the  brink  of  destruction.  For
the  wind  slackening  near  the  ^Eolian-'  islands,  the
galleys  of  the  Lipareans  gave  them  chace  as  pirates.
Upon  their  stretching  out  their  hands  indeed  for
mercy,  the  Lipareans  used  no  violence  to  their  per-
sons ;  but  towed  the  ship  into  harbour,  and  there
exposed  both  them  and  their  goods  to  sale,  having
first  adjudged  them  to  be  a  lawful  prize.  With  much
difficulty,  however,  they  were  persuaded  to  release
them,  out  of  regard  to  the  merit  and  authority  of
Timesitheus?  the  chief  magistrate  of  the  place  ;  who,
moreover,  conveyed  them  in  his  own  vessels,  and  as-
sisted in  dedicating  the  gift.  For  this,  suitable  ho-
nours were  paid  him  at  Rome  '^^

And  now  the  tribunes  of  the  people  attempted
once  more  to  bring  forward  the  law,  for  removing  part
of  the  citizens  to  Veii ;  but  the  war  with  the  Falisci
very  seasonably  intervening  threw  the  management
of  the  elections  into  the  hands  of  the  patricians,  and
they  nominated  Camillus  a  military  tribune^",  toge-
ther with  five  others  ;  as  affairs  then  required  a  ge-
neral of  considerable  dignity,  reputation,  and  expe-
rience. When  the  people  had  confirmed  this  nomi-
nation, Camillus  marched  his  forces  into  the  country
of  the  Falisci,  and  laid  siege  to  Falerii,  a  city  well
fortified  and  provided  in  all  respects  for  the  war.
This  he  was  sensible  was  likely  to  be  no  easy  affair,

*^  The  islands  {hod.  Lipari)  lying  between  Italy  and  Sicily;  so
called,  as  being  the  supposed  residence  of  i^olus  and  his  winds.
Here  too,  from  their  volcanic  character,  the  ancients  placed  the
forge  of  '  the  Blacksmith  of  the  Gods.'*

^^  Livy,  with  venial  nationality,  thinks  he  pays  him  one  of  the
highest,  when  he  calls  him  Romanis  vir  similior  quum  suis.  The
other  remunerations,  he  adds,  were  hospitiiim  earn  eo  S.  Cyaciumi
duimcjue  publice  data.     (v.  28.)*

^^  A.  U.  C.36I.


S-Ti  CAMILLUS.

nor  soon  to  be  despatched,  which  was  one  reason
for  his  engaging  in  it  ;  fbi'  lie  was  desirous  to  kee[)
the  citizens  employed  abroad,  that  they  might  liave
no  leisnre  to  sit  down  at  home,  and  raise  tumults
and  seditions  :  a  remedy,  to  which  the  Romans  al-
ways had  recourse,  like  good  physicians,  in  order  to
CNpel  dangerous  humours  from  the  body  politic.

The  Falerians,  trusting  to  the  fortifications  with
which  thcY  were  surrounded,  made  so  little  account
of  the  siege,  that  the  inhabitants  (except  those,  who
guarded  the  wnlls)  walked  the  streets  in  their  com-
mon habits.  The  boys  likewise  went  to  school,  and
.the  master  took  them  out  to  walk  and  exercise
about  the  walls.  For  the  Falerians,  like  the  Greeks,
cliose  to  have  their  children  bred  at  one  public
school,  that  they  might  betimes  be  accustomed  to
imiformity  of  discipline,  and  form  themselves  to
friendship  and  society.

This  schoolmaster  then,  designing  to  betray  the
Falerians  by  means  of  their  children,  took  them
every  day  out  of  the  city  to  exercise;  keeping  pretty
close  to  the  walls  at  first,  and  Vvhen  their  exercise
was  over,  leading  them  back  again.  By  degrees  he
took  -them  out  farther,  accustoming  them  to  divert
themselves  freely,  as  if  they  had  nothing  to  appre-
hend. At  last,  having  got  them  all  together,  he
brouGrht  them  to  the  Roman  advanced  aiiard,  and
delivered  them  up  to  be  carried  to  Camilhis.  When
he  came  into  his  presence,  he  told  him,  "  He  was
*'  the  schoolmaster  and  tutor  of  Falerii ;  but,  pre-
"  ferrinjj[  the  favour  of  Carhilius  to  the  obliirations
'*  of  duty,  he  catne  to  surrender  to  him  those  chil-
"  dren,  and  in  tliem  the  whole  city."  This  action
appeared  to  Camiilus  most  infamous,  and  he  said  to
tiiose  who  were  present,  "  Vv'ar  at  best  is  a  savage
*'  thinii',  and  is  transacted  with  much  violence  and
"  injustice;  yet  even  war  itself  has  it's  laws,  from
'•  which  men  of  honour  will  not  depart;,;  neitlrer  do
''  thev  so  pursue  victory,  as  to  avail  theuiselves  of
"  acts  of  villainy  and  l)ascnesf>,     For  a  great  general


CAMILLUS.  375

"  should  rely  onl}'^  upon  his  own  virtue,  and  not
*'  upon  the  treachery  of  others -^"  He  then  order-
lid  the  lictors  to  tear  off  the  man's  clothes,  to  tie  his
iiands  behind  him,  and  to  t\n-nish  the  boys  with  rods
and  scourges  to  punisli  the  traitor,  and  whip  him
back  into  the  city.  By  this  time,  the  Falerians  had
discovered  the  schoolmaster's  treason,  and  the  town
(as  might  be  expected)  was  full  of  lamentations  for
so  heavy  a  loss;  the  principal  inhabitants,  both  men
and  women,  crowding  about  the  walls  and  the  gate
like  persons  distracted  ;  when  they  espied  the  boys
whipping  forward  their  nuister,  naked  and  bound,
and  calling  Camillus  "  their  god,  their  deliverer,
"  and  their  father."  At  this  spectacle  not  only  the
parents  of  those  children,  but  all  the  citizens  in  ge-
neral, were  struck  with  admiration  ;  auvd  conceived
such  an  aiiection  for  the  justice  of  Camillus,  that  they
immediately  assern]:)ied  in  council,  and  tiespatchcd
deputies  to  surrender  to  him  both  themselves  and
their  city.

Camillus  sent  them  to  Rome  ;  and,  when  they
were  introduced  to  the  senate,  they  said,  "  The
"  Romans,  in  preferring  justice  to  conquest,  have
"  taucrht  us  to  be  satisfied  with  submission  instead  of
"  liberty.  At  the  same  time  we  declare,  that  we  do
"  not  think  ourselves  so  much  interior  to  you  in
"  strength  as  in  virtue."  The  senate  referred  the
suggesting  and  settling  of  the  articles  of  peace  to
Camillus,  who  contented  himself  with  receivina;  a
sum  of  money  from  the  Falerians;  and,  having  en-
tered into  an  alliance  with  the  whole  nation  of  the
Falisci,  returned  to  Rome.

But  the  soldiers  who  expected  to  have  liad  the
plundering  of  Falerii,  when  they  came  back  empty-
handed,  accused  Camillus  to  their  fellow-citizens
as  an  enemy  of  the  plebeians,  and  one  that  invidi-
ously  thwarted    the    interests    of   the   poor.     And

-*  Compare  with  this  speech  that,  which  is  gi\en  upon  the  same
occasiou  by  Livy  (v.  27-)*


S76  CAMILLUS.

tN^hen  the  tribunes  again  proposed  the  law  for  trans-
planting part  of  the  citizens  to  Veii  ",  and  sum-
moned the  people  to  give  their  votes,  Caniilliis
spoke  very  freely  or  rather  with  much  asperity  against
it,  appearing  remarkably  violent  in  his  opposition  to
the  people ;  who  upon  this  loot  their  object,  but
conceived  a  deepened  resentment  ogainst  Camilhis.
Even  his  family-misfortune,  in  losing  one  of  his  sons,
did  not  in  the  least  mitigate  their  rage  ;  though,  as
a  man  of  great  goodness  and  tenderness  of  heart,
he  was  inconsolable  for  his  loss,  and  shut  himself  up
at  home,  a  close  mourner  with  the  women,  at  the
very  time  that  they  Vv^ere  lodging  an  impeachment
against  him.

His  accuser  was  Lucius  Apuleius,  who  brought
against  him  a  charge  of  {raud  with  res[)ect  to  the
Tuscan  spoils  ;  alleging  that  certain  brasen  gates,  a
part  of  those  spoils,  were  found  in  his  possession.
The  people  were  so  much  exasperated,  that  it  was
obvious  they  would  seize  any  pretext  to  condemn
him.  He  therefore  assembled  his  friends,  his  col-
legues,  and  his  fellow- soldiers,  a  great  number  in
all ;  and  entreated  that  they  would  not  suffer  him
to  be  crushed  by  false  and  unjust  accusations,  and
exposed  to  the  scorn  of  his  enemies.  AVhen  they
had  co'isulted  together,  and  fully  considered  the
affair,  they  answered,  that  they  did  not  believe  it
possible  to  prevent  the  sentence ;  but  that  they
would  willingly  assist  him  to  pay  the  fine,  which
might  be  laid  upon  him.  He  could  not  however
bear  the  thoughts  of  such  an  indignity,  and  giving
way  to  his  resentment,  determined  to  quit  the  city

*9  The  patricians  carried  it  by  a  majority  of  one  tribe.  And  they
were  now  so  well  pleased  with  the  people,  that  the  very  next  morn-
ing a  decree  was  passed,  assigning  six  acres  of  the  lands  of  Veii,
not  only  to  every  father  pt'  a  family,  but  to  every  single  person  of
free  condition.  On  the  other  hand  the  people,  delighted  with  this
liberality,  allowed  the  electing  of  consuls  instead  of  military  tri-
bunes. (L.)  Livy  gives  the  particulars  with  much  more  detail,
(v.  30.)*


CAMILLUS.  377

as  a  voluntary  exile.  Having  taken  leave  of  his
wife  and  children,  he  went  in  silence  from  his  house
to  the  gate  of  the  city '^^.  There  he  stopped,  and
turning  about  stretched  out  his  hands  toward  the
Capitol,  and  prayed  to  the  gods,  "  That  if  he  was
"  driven  out  without  any  fault  of  his  own,  and
"  merely  by  the  violence  or  envy  of  the  people,  the
"  Romans  might  quickly  repent  it,  and  express  to
"  all  the  world  their  need  of  Camillus  and  their
"  regret  for  his  absence/'

When  he  had  thus,  like  Achilles^^,  uttered  his
imprecations  against  his  countrymen,  he  departed  ;
and,  leaving  his  cause  undefended,  was  condemned
to  pay  a  fine  of  fifteen  thousand  Ases.  This,  re-
duced to  Grecian  money,  is  fifteen  hundred  drach-
mas: for  the  As  (a  small  coin)  is  the  tenth  part  of  a
piece  of  silver,  thence  called  Denarius,  answering
to  our  drachma.  There  is  not  a  man  in  Rome,  who
does  not  believe  that  these  imprecations  of  Camillus
had  their  effect ;  though  the  punishment  of  his
countrymen  for  their  injustice  proved  in  no  respect
agreeable  to  him,  but  on  the  contrary,  matter  of  la-
mentation. Yet  how  great,  how  memorable  was
that  punishment !  How  remarkably  did  vengeance
pursue  the  Romans !  What  danger,  destruction,
and  disgrace,  did  those  times  bring  upon  the  city !
Whether  it  were  tlie  w'ork  of  fortune,  or  whether  it
be  the  office  of  some  deity  to  see  that  virtue  shall
not  be  oppressed  by  the  ungrateful  with  impunity  ^'^.

The  first  token  of  the  approaching  calamities,  was

'°  Tins  was  four  years  after  the  taking  of  Falcrii,  A.  U.  C.  SGi.

^'  Under  the  influence  of  strong  resentment,  and  in  this  in-
'  stance  alone  foregoing  the  distinguished  patriotism  of  his  cha-
racter.*

3^  It  was  the  goddess  Nemesis,  whom  the  heathens  beh'eved  to
have  the  office  of  punishing  evil  actions  in  this  world,  particularly
|)ride  and  ingratitude.  (L.)  With  reference  to  this  conviction
among  the  ancients,  of  the  efficacious  curses  of  the  injured,  Horace
says,

■ — Dira  detestatio

Nulla  expiatur  victinii.  (Epod.  v.  89.)*


ii


37S  CAMILLUS.

the  death  of  tlie  censor  Julius^'.  For  the  Romans
have  a  particular  veneration  for  the  censor,  and
look  upon  his  office  as  sacred.  A  second  token
happened  a  little  before  the  exile  of  C-amilhis.
Marcus  Cedicius,  a  man  of  no  illustrious  family  in-
deed nor  of  senatorial  rank,  but  of  great  probity
and  virtue,  informed  the  military  tribunes  of  a
matter  which  deserved  the  utmost  attention.  As
he  was  going  the  night  before  along  what  is  called
the  New  Road,  he  was  addressed  (he  said)  in  a  loud
voice.  Uoon  turning'  round  he  saw  nobodv,  but
heard  these  words  in  an  accent  more  than  human  ;
"  Go,  Marcus  Cedicius,  and  early  in  the  morning
acquaint  the  raagistratesj  that  they  must  shortly
expect  the  Gauls."  The  tribunes  however  made
a  jest  of  the  information,  and  soon  afterward  ensued
the  disgrace  of  Camillus.

The  Gauls  are  of  Celtic  origin  '^^,  and  are  said  to
have  left  their  country,  which  was  too  small  to
maintain  their  vast  numbers,  in  search  of  another.
These  emigrants  consisted  of  many  thousands  of
young  and  able  warriors,  with  a  still  larger  number
of  women  and  children.  Part  of  them  took  their
route  toward  the  northern  ocean,  crossed  the
Rhipaean  mountains,  and  settled- in  the  extreme
parts  of  Europe  ;  and  part  established  themselves
for  a  long  time  between  the  Pyrenees  and  the  Alps,
near  the  Senones  and  the  Celtorians^'.     But  hap-

**  The  Greek  text  as  it  now  stands,  instead  of  the  '  ctnsor  Julius,'
has  '  the  month  of  July,'  through  the  error  of  some  i<:norant
transcriber.  Lpon  the  death  of  Julius,  Marcus  Cornelius  was
appointed  to  succeed  him  :  but  a?  the  censorship  of  the  latter  proved
unfortunate  b}'  the  capture  cf  Home,  whenever  a  censor  happened
afterward  to  die  in  his  office,  they  not  only  forbore  naming  another
in  his  place,  but  obhged  his  coUeguc  likewise  to  quit  his  dignity.
(Liv.  V.  31.)

54  The  ancients  called  all  the  inliabitants  of  the  west  and  north,
as  far  as  Scythia,  by  the  common  name  of  '  Cclta:.'

*5  The  country  of  tlie  Senones  contained  Sens,  Auxerre,  and
Troyes,  as  far  upward  as  Paris.  Who  the  Celtorii  were,  is  not
known  :  the  word,  probably,  is  corrupted.  They  are  not  mentioned
bvLivv.  (v.  34,35.)


CAMILLUS.  S79.

pening  to  taste  wine,  which  was  then  for  the  first
time  brought  out  of  Italy,  they  so  much  admired
the  liquor,  and  were  so  enchanted  with  this  new
pleasure,  that  they  seized  their  arms,  and  carrying
their  parents  along  with  them,  marched  to  the
Alps^^,  to  seek  the  country  producing  such  ex-
cellent fruit,  in  comparison  with  which  they  consi-
dered all  others  as  barren  and  ungenial.

The  man  who  first  carried  wine  among  them,  and
excited  them  to  invade  Italy,  is  said  to  have  been
Aruns  a  Tuscan  ;  a  person  of  some  distinction,  and
not  naturally  disposed  to  mischief,  but  led  to  it  by
his  misfortunes.  He  was  guardian  to  an  orphan
named  Lucumo'^'',  of  the  greatest  fortune  in  the
country,  and  most  celebrated  for  beauty.  Aruns
had  brought  him  up  from  a  boy,  and  when  grown
to  manhood  he  still  continued  at  his  house,  under  a
pretence  of  enjoying  his  conversation.  Meanwhile
he  and  his  guardian's  wife  had  mutually  corrupted
each  other,  and  for  a  long  time  the  criminal  com-
merce subsisted  undiscovered.  At  length  their  pas-
sion becoming  so  violent,  that  they  could   neither

3^  Liv}'  tells  us,  that  Italy  was  known  to  the.Gauls  tM^o  .hundred
years  before,  though  he  docs  indeed  mention  the  story  of  Aruns.
He  then  proceeds  to  state,  that  the  migration  of  the  Gauls  into
Italy  and  other  countries  was  occasioned  by  their  numbers  bcinijj
too  great  for  their  old  settlements ;  aYid  that,  the  two  brothers  Bel-
lovesus  and  Sigovesus  casting  lots  to  determine  vvhieh  way  thty
should  steer  their  course,  Italy  fell  to  Bejlovesus,  and  Germany  to
Sigovesus.  (L.)  Tiie  former  he  represents  as  the  more  fortunate,
because  the  Gauls  were  not  insensible  to  the  chdcecioj'rti^uvi,  lua.vi-
mcqne  rini  nova  turn  voliipfns,  (v.  33.)  This,  however,  surely  does
not  justify  the  censure  of  Ruauld,  who  ridicules  the  idea  of  referring
tlie  irrujition  of  a  warlike  people  to  the  exclusive  allurement  of
;vinc.     How  beautifully  has  our  own  Gray  amplified  this  topic!

With  crim  delight  the-brobd  of  winter  view
A  brigiiter  day,  and  heavens  of  azure  hue;
Scent  the  new  fragrance  of  the  breathing  rose,
And  quaff  the  pendent  vintage  as  it  grov/s.

(Ethical  Essay,  54.)*

"  '  Lucnmo  '  was  not  the  name,  but  the  title  of  the  young  man.
He  V.  as  Lord  of  '  a  Lucumony.'  ■  Kotruria  was  divided  into  twelve
of  these  principuHties.


.•?<S0  CAMILLUS.

restrain  nor  conceal  it,  the  young  man  carried  her
off,  and  attempted  to  keep  her  openly.  The  hus-
band endeavoured  to  find  his  redress  at  law,  but
was  difraj)pointed  by  the  su})erior  interest  and  wealth
of  Lncumo.  He  therefore  quitted  his  own  country,
and  having  heard  of  the  enterprising  spirit  of  the
Gauls,  joined  them,  and  conducted  tiieir  armies
into  Italy.

In  their  first  expedition  they  soon  possessed  them-
selves of  that  country  which  stretches  from  the  Alps
to  both  seas.  Tliat  this  of  old  belojiged  to  tlic
Tuscans,  the  names  theniselves  are  a  proof:  tor  the
r^orthern  sea  is  called  the  Adriatic,  from  a  Tuscan
city  named  Adria,  and  that  on  the  other  side,  which
lies  to  the  south,  is  called  the  Tuscan  Sea.  The
whole  of  the  country  is  well  planted  with  trees,  has
excellent  pastures,  and  is  finely  watered  with  rivers.
It  contained  ei_irhteen  considerabh:^  cities,  whose
maniifactfn-es  and  trade  procured  them  the  gratifica-
tions of  luxury.  The  Gauls  expelled  the  Tuscans,
and  made  themselves  masters  of  these  cities ;  but
tin's  was  done  long  before.

The  Gauls  were  now  besieging  Clusium,  a  city
of  Tuscany.  The  Clusians  applied  to  the  Romans,
entreating  them  to  send  embassadors  and  letters  to
the  barbarians.  Accordingly,  they  despatched  three
illustrious  persons  of  the  Fabian  family,  who  had
borne  the  highest  employments  in  the  state.  These
llic  Gauls  received  courteously,  on  account  of  the
name  of  Rome ;  and,  suspending  their  operations
against  the  town,  came  to  a  conference.  But  when
they  were  asked  what  injury  they  had  received
from  the  Clusians,  that  they  came  against  their
citv,  Brennus  their  prince  laughed  and  said;  "  The
injury  wliich  the  Clusians  do  us,  is  their  keeping
to  themselves  a  large  tract  of  ground,  when  tiiey
can  only  cultivate  a  small  one,  and  refusing  to
resign  a  part  of  it  to  us,  who  are  strangers,  nu-
merous, and  poor.  In  the  same  manner  th$
Romans  were  injured  by  the  Albans,  the  Fide-

9


ti.

a

It


«c


ii


li


CAMILLU8.  3M

"  nates,  and  the  Ardeates,  and  lately  by  the  people
of  Veii  and  CapentK,  and  the  greatest  part  of
the  FaHsci  and  th.e  Volsci.  Upon  tliese  you  make
war,  if  they  refuse  to  share  with  you  tlieir  goofls  ;
you  enslave  their  persons,  lay  waste  tlieir  country,
"  and  demolish  their  cities.  Neither  are  your  j)ro-
"  ceedings  dishonourable,  or  unjust ;  for  you  follow
"  the  most  ancient  of  huvs,  that  directing  the  weak
to  obey  the  strong,  from  the  Creator  down  even  to
the  irrational  part  of  the  creatioji,  which  are  tauscht
by  nature  to  make  use  of  the  advantage  tlseir
strength  affords  them  against  the  feeble.  Cease
^'  then  to  express  your  compassion  for  the  Clusians,
'-  lest  you  teach  the  Gauls  in  their  tmn  to  com-
*'  miserate  those,  who  have  been  ojipressed  by  the
*'  Romans."

By  this  answer  the  Romans  clearly  perceived,  that
Breniius  would  come  to  no  terms:  they  entered
therefore  into  Clusium,  where  thev  encoiirau-ed  and
anunated  the  iniiabitants  to  a  sally  against  the  bar-
barians, either  to  make  trial  of  the  stiength  of
tlie  (lusians,  or  to  display  their  own.  The  Clusians
made  the  sally,  and  a  sharp  conflict  ensued" near  the
w^alls;  when  Quintus  Ambustus,  one  of  the  Fabii,
spurred  his  horse  against  a  Gaul  of  extraordinarv
size  and  figure,  who  had  advanced  far  before  the
lanks.  At  first  he  was  not  known,,  because  the
encounter  was  hot,  and  his  armour  dazzled  the  eves
of  the  beholders  :  but  when  he  had  overcome  and
killed  the  (laul,  and  came  to  despoil  him  of  Ids
arms,  Brennus  recognized  him,  and  caJied  the  gods
to  witness;  "  That  against  all  the  laws  and  usages
"  of  mankind,  which  were  esteemed  the  most  sa-
"  cred  and  inviolable,  Ambustus  came  as  an  em-
"  bassador,  but  acted  as  an  enemy."  Upon  this,
he  directly  drew  off  his  men,  and  biddin'i^  the  Cju-
sians  farewel,  led  his  army  toward  H{jme.  But  that
he  might  not  seem  to  rejoice  at  tlie  affront,  or  to
have  sought  a  pretext  for  hostilities,  he  sent  to  de-
niand  the-  offender  in  order  to  puiiish  hijn,  and  in  th#
mean  time  advanced  slowlv.


382  CAMILLUS.

The  herald  beinc^  arrived,  the  seriate  was  as-
.^enibled,  and  many  spoke  against  the  Fabii ;  par-
ticularly the  priests  called  Feciales  represented  the
action  as  an  offence  against  religion,  and  adjtned
the  senate  to  lay  the  expiation  of  what  had  been
done  upon  the  person  who  alone  was  to  blame,  and
thus  to  avert  the  wrath  of  Heaven  from  the  rest  of
the  Romans.  These  Feciales  had  been  appointed  by
Numa"^*^,  the  mildest  and  most  equitable  of  kings,
as  conservators  of  peace,  as  well  as  judges  to  give
sanction  to  the  just  causes  of  war.  The  senate  re-
ferred the  matter  to  the  people,  and  the  priests  ac-
cused Fabius  with  the  same  ardour  before  them;
but  such  was  the  disregard  which  they  expressed  for
their  persons,  and  such  their  contempt  of  religion^
that  they  constituted  that  very  Fabius  and  his  bre-
thren military  tribunes  ^^.

As  soon  as  the  Gauls  were  informed  of  this,  they
were  much  enraged,  and  no  longer  delaying  their
inarch,  hastened  forward  with  the  utmost  celerity..
Their  prodigious  numbers,  their  glittering  arms,
their  fury  and  impetuosity  struck  terror  wherever
they  came:  people  gave  up  their  lands  for  lost,  not
doubting  that  the  cities  would  soon  follow.  Con-
trary however  to  all  exjiectation,  they  injured  no
man's  property  :  they  neither  pillaged  the  fields,  nor
linsulted  the  cities ;  but  as  they  passed  by,  cried  out,
"  They  were  going  to  Rome,  they  were  at  war  with
"  the  Romans  alone,  and  considered  all  others  as
"  their  friends."

AVhile  the  barbarians  were  advancinc:  in  this  ve-.
hement  manner,  the  tribunes  led  out  their  forces  to
battle,  in  number  not  inferior  "*"  (for  they  consisted
of  forty  thousand  foot)  but  the  greatest  part  undisci-

38  See  his  Life,  p.  188.  not.  (53.)

^'^  A.  U.  C.  I'.GG,  or  (according  to  some  chronologcrs)  365.  (L.)
M.  llicard,  however,  supposes  that  this  was  a  conipHment  paid  by
the  people  to  tlie  high  rank  of  the  Fabii.*

■*°  Tliey  were  '  inferior  in  number,'  for  the  Gauls  were  seventy
thousand  ;  and  therefore  the  Romans,  when  they  came  to  action,
were  obliged  to  extend  their  wings  so  as'to  weaken  their  centre,
which  was  one  reaspn  of  their  being  soon  broken.


CAMILLUS.  3S3

•plined,  and  such  as  had  never  handled  a  weapon  be-
ibre.  Besides,  thev  paid  no  attention  to  religion,
having  neither  propitiated  the  gods  by  sacrifice  nor
consulted  the  soothsavers,  as  was  their  dutv  in  (he
time  of  danger  and  before  an  engagement.  Another
thing,  which  occasioned  no  small  confusion,  was  the
number  of  persons  joined  in  the  command;  whereas
before  they  had  often  appointed  for  wars  of  less  con-
sideration a  single  leader,  whom  they  call  Dictator  ;
sensible  of  what  consequence  it  is  to  good  order  and
success,  at  a  dangerous  crisis,  to  be  actuated  as  it
were  with  one  soul,  and  to  have  the  absolute  com-
mand vested  in  one  person.  Their  ungrateful  treat-
ment of  Camillus,  likewise,  was  not  the  least  un-
happy circumstance  ;  as  it.  now  appeared  dangerous
for  the  generals  to  use  their  authority,  without  some
flattering  indulgence  to  the  people.

In  this  condition  they  marched  out  of  the  city,
and  encamped  about  eleven  miles  from  it,  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Allia,  not  far  from  it's  confluence
with  the  Tiber.  There  the  barbarians  attacked
them  ;  and,  as  the  Romans  engaged  in  a  disorderly
manner,  they  were  shameful;/  beaten  and  put  to
flight.  Their  left  wing  v\'as  soon  pushed  into  the
river,  and  destroyed.  The. right,  which  quitted  the
field  to  avoid  the  charge,  and  gained  the  hills,  did
not  suffer  so  much,  many  of  them  escaping  to  Rome.
The  rest  who  survived  the  carnage,  when  the  enemy
were  satiated  with  blood,  stole  by  nig-htto  Veii,  con-
eluding  that  Rome  was  lost,  and  it's  inhabitants  put
to  the  sword.

This  battle  was  fought  at  the  full  moon,  about  the
summer-solstice,  on  the  very  day  upon  which  the
slaughter  of  the  Fabii  had  happened  long  before''*,
when  three  hundred  of  them  were  cut  off  by  the
Tuscans.  The  second  misfortune,  however,  so
much  effaced  the  memory  of  the  first,  that  the  day


^'  The  sixteenth  of  July.  (L.)    The  Fabii  fell,  A.  U.  C.  27%
This  defeat  happened  A.  U.  C  361-.*


S84.  CAMILLUS.

is  still  denominated  thence  '  the  day  of  AUfa,'  from
the  river  of  that  name  *'.

As  to  the  point,  whether  there  be  any  lucky  or
unlucky  days^'^,  and  whether  or  not  Heraclitus  were
right  in  blaming  liesiod  for  having  distinguished
them  into  '  fortunate*  and  '  unfortunate,'  as  not
knowing  that  the  nature  of  all  days  is  the  same,  it
has  been  discussed  in  another  place.  But  upon  this
occasion,  perhaps,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention  a
few  examples.  The  Boeotians,  on  the  fifth  of  the
month  which  they  call  Hippodromius  and  the  Athe-
nians Hecatombaion,  gained  two  signal  victories,
both  of  which  restored  liberty  to  Greece  ;  the  one  at
Leuctra,  the  otiier  at  Gera3stus,  above  two  hundred
years  before  ^^,  when  they  defeated  Lattanivas  and
the  Thessalians.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Persians
were  beaten  by  the  Greeks  on  the  sixth  of  Boedro-


■•*  Hod.  Torrente  di  Catino.  The  day  was  expressly  marked  im
the  old  Roman  calendars,  DiF.s  Alliensis.*

^'^  The  ancients  deemed  some  days  luck)'  and  others  unlucky,
either  from  some  occult  power  which  they  supposed  to  exist  in
numbers,  from  the  nature  j.'^'the  deities  who  presided  over  them,  or
from  observing  fortunate  and  unfortunate  events  to  have  often  hap-
pened upon  particular  days.  (L.)  Hesiod  in  his  Y.^y.  kxi  'H/^.,  and
after  him  Virgil  in  his  Georgics,  have  (allowably,  as  poets,)  made
this  unphilosophical  distinction.  It  may  app?ar,  perhaps,  some-
what singular — if  any  inconsistency,  arising  from  superstition,  can
be  so  called — when  we  consider  the  first  illustration  adduco<l  in  the
text,  that  both  these  writers  should  have  marked  ihejijth  day  with
a  black  stone ;  tiie  first,  in  his

and  the  other  in  his

Quintamyuge.

Shall  we  reconcile  them,  by  saying  that  these  were  *  unfortunate*
days  for  the  vanquished  ?  This  theorem  w  ould  untie  every  knot.*

-♦•»  The  Thessalians,  under  the  command  of  Lattnmyas,  were
beaten  by  the  Bujotians  nnt  long  before  the  battle  of  Thcrmopyhe,
and  little  more  than  o/ic  hundred  years  before  the  battle  of  Leuctra.
There  is  also  an  error  here  in  the  name  of  the  place,  probably  intro-
duced by  some  blundering  transcriber,  for  Plutarch  must  have  been
well  acquainted  with  the  names  of  places  in  Bccotia:  instead  of
Geracstus,  wc  should  read  C'eressus ;  the  former  was  a  promontory
in  Eubcea,  the  latter  was  a  fort  in  Bccotia.     See  Pausan.  ix.  H.


CAMILLUS.  283

mion  at  Marathon,  on  the  third  at  Platasge  as  also  at
Mycale,  and  on  the  twenty-sixth  at  Arbeli.  About
the  full  nioon  of  the  same  month,  the  Athenians,
under  the  conduct  of  Chabrias,  were  victorious  in
the  sea-fight  near  Naxos ;  and  on  the  twentieth  they
gained  the  victory  of  Salamis  ^^,  as  we  liave  men-
tioned in  the  Treatise  upon  Days.  The  month
Thargehon  was  also  remarkably  unfortunate  to  the
barbarians  :  for  in  that  month  Alexander  defeated
the  king  of  Persia's  generals  near  the  Granicus,  and
the  Carthaginians  were  beaten  by  Timoleon  in  Si-
cily on  the  twenty-fourth  of  the  same  ;  a  day  still
more  remarkai)le  (according  to  Ephorus,  Callis-
thenes,  Damastes,  and  Phylarchus)  for  the  taking  of
Troy.  On  the  contrary,  the  month  Metageit-
nion,  which  the  Boeotians  call  Panemus  *,  was  very
unlucky  to  the  Greeks ;  for  on  it's  seventh  day  they
were  beaten  by  Antipater  in  the  battle  of  Cranon  and
utterly  ruined,  and  before  that  they  were  defeated
by  Philip  at  Cha?ronea.  And  on  the  very  same  day
and  month  and  year  the  troops,  which  under  Archi-
damus  made  a  descent  upon  Italy,  were  cut  to  pieces
by  the  barbarians  ''^  The  Carthaginians  have  set  a
mark  upon  the  twenty-second  of  that  month,  as  a
day  that  has  always  brought  upon  them  the  greatest
of  calamities.  I  am  not  ignorant,  however,  that
about  the  time  of  the  celebration  of  the  Mysteries
Thebes  was  demolished  by  Alexander  j   and  after

''^  Here  Dodwell  (in  his  Ann.  Thucyd.)  according  to  M.  Ricard,
makes  a.  gross  n)istuke,  while  he  is  imputing  one  to  Plutarch,  by
confounding  the  battle  of  Salamis  gained  over  the  Persian  navy,
A.  C.  18().  with  one  fought  at  Salamis  in  Cyprus  near  thirty  year*
afterward.     Kuauld  has  fallen  into  the  same  error.

Of  the  historians  mentioned  belov^^,  Callisthenes  was  a  pupil  of
Aristotle,  and  fell  a  victim  to  the  suspicions  of  his  royal  master,
Alexander,  whose  Life  he  had  written.  (Voss.  de  Hist.  Graec.  i.  9.)
Damastes  was  a  native  of  Sigeum,  and  anioog  other  works  drew  up
an  account  of  the  ancestry  of  Those,  who  had  been  at  the  siege  of
Troy.     (Id.  ib.  i,  2.,  iv.  5.)*

*   See  tiic  Life  of  Aristides,  Vol.  U.  and  not.  (60.)*

'"5  This  prince  was  on  his  way  to  the  relief  of  Tarentum,  whea
he  was  slaiu  at  Maduria,  a  city  near  the  rcodern  Casal-Nuovo  i&
Calabria.*

VOL.  r.  2  C


386  CAMILLAS.

lluit,  on  the  samo  twentieth  of  Bockhomlon,  a  day
sacied  to  the  solemnities  of  Eacclius,  the  Athenians
■weie  obh"ged  to  receive  a  Macedonian  garrison.  On
one  and  the  same  day  the  Romans  under  the  com-
niand  of  C'a^pio  were  stripped  of  their  camp  by  the
Cimbri  ^\  and  afterward  under  Lucullus  conquered
'rigrancs  and  tlic  Armenians.  King  Attahis  ar.d
Pompcy  the  Great  botli  died  on  their  birth-da}s.
And  I  could  cite  manv  others,  who  on  the  ?ame
day  at  different  periods  have  experienced  both  good
and  bad  fortune.  Be  that  as  it  may,  tlie  Romans
marked  the  day  of  their  defeat  at  Allia  as  '  unf()rtu-
nate ;'  and,  as  superstitions  fears  generally  increase
upon  a  nnsfbrtune,  they  not  only  distinguished  that
day  as  such,  but  also  upon  it's  account  two  others  ^'^
in  every  month  throughout  the  year.  But  this  1
have  more  copiouslv  discussed  in  mv  Roman  Re-
searches.

If  after  so  decisive  a  battle  the  Gauls  had  imme-
diately pm-sued  the  fugitives,. there  would  have  been
nothing  to  hinder  the  entire  destruction  of  Rome
and  all  that  remained  in  it ;  with  such  terror  was
she  struck  at  the  return  of  those,  who  siu^vived  the
battle,  a)]d  so  filled  with  confusion  and  distraction  !
But  the  Gauls,  not  imaij^inincj  the  victory  to  be  so
signal  as  it  was,  in  the  excess  of  their  joy  indulged
themselves  in  good  cheer,  and  shared  the  ])lunder  ol
the  cam]) ;  by  which  means  the  numbers  who  fled
iuid  leisure  to  esca))e,  and  those  who  remained  had
time  to  recover  their  spii  its,  and  pre]iare  for  their
defence.  For,  quitting  the  rest  of  the  city,  they
retired  to  the  Ga}>itol,  which  they  fortified  with  strong
ramparts,  and  stored  well  with  arms.  But  their
first  care  was  that  of  their  holy  things,  most  of  which
they  conveyed  into  the  Gapitol.  As  for  the  sacred
lire,  the  Vestals  took  it  up  together  with  other  hal-
lowed  relics,  and    lied:    though  some   assert,    that


*7  In  this  iictioii  (A.  l.'.  ('.  649)  the  Konmrs  lost  80,000  men.*
,  *"  The>e  u(>re  th,c  d:iy  after  the  calends,  and  that  aiter  the  ides
6r  each  monti).*


CAIMILLUS.  S87

they  have  not  the  chars-e  of  anv  thiufi  but  that  ever-
living  fire,  which  Numa  appointed  to  be  \vorship})ed
as  the  principle  of  all  things.  It  is  indeed  the  most
active  thing  in  nature  ;  and  ajl  generation  is  either
motion,  or  at  least  with  motion.  Other  parts  of
matter,  when  the  lieat  fails,  lie  sluggish  and  dead,
and  crave  the  force  of  tire  as  an  intbrniing  soul ;  ac-
quiring, when  that  comes,  some  active  or  passive
quality.  Hence  it  was,  that  Nnm.a  (a  man  curious
in  his  researches  into  nature,  and  on  account  of  his
wisdom  supposed  to  have  conversed  vvith  the  Muses)
consecrated  this  fire,  and  ordered  it  to  be  perpe-
tually kept  up,  as  an  image  of  that  eternal  power,
which  preserves  and  actuates  the  universe.  Others
however  affirm  that,  according  to  the  usage  of  the
Greeks,  the  fire  is  kept  ever  burnina'  before  the  holy
places,  as  an  emblem  of  puiity :  but  that  there  are
other  things  in  the  most  secret  part  of  the  temple,
kept  from  the  sight  of  all  except  those  virgins,  whom
they  call  Vestals ;  and  the  most  current  opinion  is
that  the  palladium  of  Troy,  which  ^'Eneas  brought
into  Italy,  is  there  reposited.

Others  say,  that  the  Samothracian  gods  are  there
concealed  ;  whom  Dardanus  ^^,  after  he  had  built
Troy,  brought  to  that  city,  and  caused  to  be  wor-
shipped ;  and  that  after  the  taking  of  Troy  ^'Eneas
privately  carried  tliem  off,  and  kept  them  till  he
settled  in  Italy.  But  those  who  pretend  to  know
most  about  these  matters  say,  tiiat  two  casks  are
placed  there  of  a  moderate  size,  tiie  one  open  and

49  Dardann",  who  Hourislied  in  the  time  of  Moses  (about  B.  C.
ItSO)  is  said  to  have  be^in  originally  of  A  rend 'a,  wheiico  he  passed
to  S:i;nothrac?.  He  after.vard  nutrried  Batea  or  Arista,  the
daughter  of"  Teucer  king  of  Plirygia,  Of  tlie  Samothracian  gods
we  iiave  already  given  an  account ;  but  may  add  here  from  'Macro-
bins  that  the  Dii  }}iag>!i,^^lii<:h  Dnrdanus  brougtU  fromSamotlirace,
wefe  the  penates  or  '  househoid-gods'  which  i¥.neas  subsequently
conveyed  into  Italy.  Dion.  Halic.  (who  writes  at  S'nne  lengtii  upon
this  subject)  says>  he  had  seen  the  ppnutes  in  an  old  temple  at  Runic.
They  were  o''  antifjue  workmanship,  rpres'^nting  two  young  men
sitting  in  warlike  accoatrenients  and  holding  each  a  lance  in  his
hand,  aud  inscribed  Denas  instead  of  Pkn.as.

2  c  2


I*


385  CAMILLU.S.

empty,  the  other  fiill  and  sealed  up,  but  that  neither
of  them  is  to  be  seen  by  any  except  those  holy  vir-
gins. Others  again  think  this  all  a  mistake,  orig-i-
iiating  ill  their  having  ])!:it  most  of  their  sacred  uten-
sils in  two  casks,  and  liidden  them  under  ground  in
tlie  temple  of  Quirinus,  and  that  the  place  fiom  those
casks  is  stiil  called  I  >ohola  '"\

They  took  with  them  however  their  choicest  and
most  sacred  tilings,  and  fled  along  the  side  of  the
river ;  where  Lucius  Albinns  a  plebeian,  among
others  who  were  making  their  escape,  was  carrying
his  wife  and  children  and  some  of  his  most  necessary
moveables  in  a  waggon.  I>ut  when  he  saw  the
Vestals  in  a  helpless  and  weary  condition,  bear-
ing in  their  arms  the  sacred  symbols  of  the  gods,  he
immediately  took  out  his  family  and  goods,  and  put
tlie  virgins  into  the  waggon,  that  they  might  efiect
their  escape  to  some  ot  the  Grecian  cities  ^^  This
piety  of  Albinus,  and  the  veneration  which  he  ex-
pressed for  the  gods  at  so  dangerous  a  juncture,
deserve  to  be  recorded.

.  As  for  the  other  priests,  and  the  most  ancient  of
the  senators  who  w'ere  of  consular  dignity  or  had
been  honoured  with  triumphs,  they  could  not  bear
to  think  of  quitting  the  city.  They  therefore  put  on
their  holy  vestments  and  robes  of  state,  and  in  a  Ibrm
dictated  by  Fabius  the  Pontifex  Maximus  making
their  vows  to  tlie  gods  "^  devoted  themselves  for
their  country.  Thus  attired,  they  sat  down  in  their
ivory  chairs  in  the  Forum  ",  prepared  for  their  ap-
proaching fate.

3°  Varro  (de  Ling.  Lat.  iv.  32.)  assigns  two  other  origins  to  this,
word.     Fostus  and  Livy  (v.  40.)  agree  with  Plutarch.

''  Albinus  (as  Livy  intbrnns  us)  conduciod  tlieni  to  Caere,  a  city
ot"  Iletiuria,  where  they  met  w  ith  a  favourable  reception,  and  sonic
of  the  Roman  priesthood,  who  had  liLewise  tied  thither  for  refuge.
The  vestals  remained  a  considerable  time  at  ('tfre,  and  there  per-
formed the  u.'^ual  rites  of  religion  ;  wlience  those  rites  were  called
*  Ceremonies.'

5-  The  Romans  believed  that,  by  tlie.^c  voluntary  consecrations
to  the  infernal  god^,  disorder  and  confusion  were  brought  among
the  enemy.  ■  ,

'5  The:^e  ivory,  or  curule,  chair?  were  u-od  onlv   bv  those  who


CAMILLUS.  SS9

Tlie  tliird  day  after  the  battle,  Breniuis  arrived,
with  his  army  ;  and  iinding  the  gates  of  the  city
opened  and  the  walls  destitiite  of  guards,  felt  at  first
some  apprehension  of  a  stratagem  or  ambuscade,  for
he  could  not  think  the  Romans  had  so  entirely  re-
signed themselves  to  despair.  But,  when  he  found
it  to  be  so  in  reality,  he  entered  by  the  Colli ne  gate
and  took  Rome,  a  little  more  than  three  hundred
and  sixty  years  after  it's  foundation  ;  it'  it  be  likely
that  any  exact  account  has  been  kept  of  those
times",  the  confusion  of  which  has  occasioned  so
much  obscuritv  in  thin^-s  of  a  later  date.

Some  uncertain  rumours  however,  of  Rome's
being  taken,  appear  to  have  quickly  passed  into
Greece.  For  Heraclides  of  Pont  us  '^  who  lived
not  long  after  these  times,  in  his  Treatise  upon  the
kSoul  mentions  an  account  brought  from  the  west
that  an  army  of  Hyperboreans  had  taken  a  Greek  city
called  Rome,  situated  somewhere  near  the  great  sea.
But  1  do  not  wonder  that  such  a  fabulous  writer  as
Heraclides  should  embellish  his  account  of  the  tak-

bad  borne  tlie  i«ost  honourable  offices,  and  the  pereons  who  hud  a
right  to  sit  in  them  carried  also  ivorv-staves.

^■*  Livy  inlbiin?  us  (vi.  1.)  that  t!ie  Romans  of  those  times  did
not  much  apply  themselves  to  writing,  and  that  the  commentaries  of
the  Pontiticos,  and  their  other  monuments  both  public  and  private,
were  destroyed  when  the  citv  was  burned  by  the  Gauls.

^'  lie  lived  at  thai  verj- time :  for  he  was  at  first  the  pupil  of
Plato,  and  afterward  of  Arittotle  ;  and  Plato  was  but  ibrtv-one
years  old,  when  Rome  was  taken.  (L.)  The  little  noise,  which  this
event  made  in  Greece,  abuiidanllv  proves  that  the  intercourse  be-
tween the  t'v'o  c^ountries  at  tliat  period  must  have  been  very  incon-
sidera!)le.  But  the  times  were  hastening  on,  when  Greece  was  to
exchanjf'j  her  jceptre  for  a  ferula,  and  to  acknowledge  and  refine
her  concpieror.  M.  Ricard  justlv  reproaches  Piatarcn  tor  his  undue
severity  toward  Heraclides.  '  H\perborean'  (used  likewise  b}''
."^trabo)  simpiy  implies  per.pie  tar  to  the  north;  ;;nd  '  the  great  sea,'
among- those  to\ihon!  the  ocean  was  unknown,  accurately  distin-
guished the  Mediterranean  i'vo.v.  the  Euxins.  Heraclides  however,
though  right  in  this,  migiii  be  a  writer  of  fables :  so  was  Herodotus,
and  ;o  were  the  ancient  historians  of  almost  aii  countri-.s,  for  this
obvious  reason,  they  had  little  more  than  tradition  to  write  from.
Aristotle's  mistake  in  the  praenomen  of  Cauiilius  was  hardly  worth
ttoticinij.*


590  CAxMILLUS.

ing  of  Rome  witli  tlic  pompous  terms  of  '  Hyper-
'  boreans,'  and  '  the  great  sea.'  Aristotle  the'  plii-
losoplier  luicl  ecrtainly  lieard,  that  Roirie  was  tnkeii
by  the  Gauls  :  but  he  calls  it's  deliverer  Lucius  ;
whereas  Camilluswas  not  called  Lucius,  but  Marcus.
Thcse  auihors  had  no  better  authority,  than  con-
jectural report.

Brennus,  thus  in  possession  of  Rome,  set  a  strong
guard  about  the  Capitol,  and  himself  went  down
through  the  Forum  ;  where  he  was  struck  with
amazement  at  the  sight  of  so  many  men  seated  in
great  state  and  silence,  who  neither  rose  up  at  the
approach  of  their  enemies,  nor  changed  countenance
or  colour,  but  leaned  oii  their  staves,  and  sate  look-
ing upon  each  other  without  fear  or  concern.  The
Gauls  astonished  at  so  surprising  a  spectacle,  and
regarding  them  as  superior  beings,  for  a  long  time
wcie  afraid  to  approach  or  touch  tliem.  At  last
one  of  them  ventuied  to  go  near  Manius  Papirius,
and  advancing  his  hand  gently  stroked  his  beard,
which  was  very  long  :  upon  which  Papirius  struck
him  on  the  head  with  his  staff,  and  wounded  him.
The  barbarian  then  drew  his  sword,  and  killed  him.
After  this,  the  Gauls  fell  upon  the  rest  and  slew
them,  and  continuing  tlieir  rage  despatched  all  that
came  in  their  way,  pillaiTjed  and  destroyed  the  houses
lor  many  days  together,  and  at  last  set  fire  to  the
city  and  dem.olished  what  escaped  the  flames,  to
express  their  indignation  against  those  in  the  Capi-
tol, vv'ho  obeyed  not  their  summons  but  made  a  viiro-
rous  defence,  and  greatly  annoyed  the  besiegers
from  the  walls.  This  it  was,  that  provoked  them  to
destroy  the  city,  and  to  massacre  all  that  fell  into
their  haiuls,  without  sparing  either  sex  or  age.

As  from  the  length  of  the  siege  provisions  began
to  fail  the  Gauls",   they  divided  their  forces  ;  and

■  ^^  Not  anticipating  this  siege,  the  im])rovi({ent  barbarians  had,
with  the  cit\,  uonsuiiied  all  the  grniii  and  other  provisions  uhich  it
contained ;  and  the  country  stock  had  been  conveyed  to  Veil.
(Liv.  V.  42.)*


CAMILLUS.  391

part  remained  with  the  king  before  that  fortress,
while  jiart  foraged  the  country,  and  laid  waste  the
towns  and  villages.  Their  success  had  inspired  them
x\'ith  such  confidence,  that  they  did  not  keep  in  a
body,  but  carelessly  rambled  about  in  different
troops  and  parties.  It  happened  that  the  largest
and  best  disciplined  corps  went  against  Ardea,  where
Camillas  since  his  exile  had  lived  in  absolute  retire-
ment. This  great  event,  however,  roused  him  into
action  ;  and  his  mind  was  employed  in  contriving,
not  how  to  keep  himself  concealed  and  to  avoid  the
(lauls,  but  if  an  opportunity  should  offer,  to  attack
I  hem  with  success.  Perceiving  that  the  Ardeates
were  deficient,  not  in  numbers,  but  in  courage  and
discipline,  (which  was  owing  to  the  inexperience  and
inactivity  of  their  officers)  he  applied  first  to  the  young
men  and  told  them,  tliat  "  They  ought  not  to
"  ascribe  the  defeat  of  the  Romans  to  the  valour
"  of  the  Gauls,  or  to  consider  the  calamities  which
"  they  had  suffered  in  the  midst  of  their  infatuation
"  as  brought  upon  them  by  men  who  in  fact  could
"  not  claim  the  merit  of  the  victory,  but  as  the  work
"  of  fortune.  That  it  would  be  glorious,  although
they  risked  something  by  it,  to  repel  a  foreign  and
barbarous  enemy,  whose  end  in  conquering  was
like  fire  to  destroy  what  he  subdued :  but  that,  if
they  would  assume  a  proper  spirit,  he  would  give
tliem  an  opportunity  to  conquer  without  any
hazard  at  all."  Finding  the  young  men  pleased
with  his  discourse,  he  w'ent  next  to  the  magistrates
and  senate  of  Ardea;  and  having  persuaded  them
also  to  adoj)t  his  scheme,  he  armed  all  that  were  of
a  proper  age  for  it,  and  drew  them  up  within  the
walls;  that  the  enemy  vv^ho  were  only  at  a  small  dis-
tance,  miixht  not  know  what  he  was  about.

The  Gauls  havinii;  scoured  the  country,  and
loaded  themselves  with  phmder,  encamped  upon  the
plains  in  a  careless  and  disorderly  manner.  Night
found  them  intoxicated  with  wine,  and  silence
reigned  in  the  camp.     As  soon  as  Camillus  was  in-


a


Sr»2  CAMILLUS.

ibrnied  of  this  by  his  spies,  he  led  the  Ardeates  oufj
and,  having  passed  the  intermediate  space  without
noise,  reached  their  camp  about  midnight.  He
then  ordered  a  loud  shout  to  be  set  up,  and  the
trumpets  to  sound  on  all  sides,  to  cause  tlie  greater
confusion  ;  but  it  was  with  difficulty  that  they  reco-
vered themselves  from  their  sleep  and  intoxication.
A  few,  whom  fear  had  made  sober,  snatched  up
their  arms  to  oppose  Camillus,  and  fell  with  their
weapons  in  their  hands  :  but  the  chief  part  of  them,
buried  in  sleep  and  wine,  were  surprised  unarmed,
and  easily  des])atchcd.  A  small  number,  who  had
escaped  out  of  the  camp  in  the  night  and  wan-
dered in  the  fields,  were  chased  next  day  by  the
cavalry,  and  put  to  the  sword.

The  fame  of  this  action,  soon  reaching  the  neigh-
bouring cities,  drew  out  many  of  their  ablest  war-
riors. ^Particularly  such  of  the  Ilomrn %  a^  had
escaped  from  the  battle  of  Allia  to  Veii,  thouglit
with  deep  concern,  "  What  a  general  has  heaven
"  taken  from  Rome  in  Camillus,  to  adorn  the  Ar-
"  deates  with  his  exploits :  while  the  city,  v>hich
produced  and  brought  up  so  eminent  a  man,  is
absolutely  ruined  ;  and  we  for  want  of  a  leader  sit
idle  within  the  walls  of  a  strange  place,  and  betray
the  liberties  of  Italy.  Let  us  send  tlien  to  tiie
Ardeates  to  demiand  our  general,  or  else  take  our
weapons  and  go  to  him:  for  he  is  no  longer  an
exile,  nor  we  citizens,  having  no  country  but
what  is  in  the  possession  of  an  enemy/*
This  motion  was  adopted,  and  they  sent  to  Camil-
lus to  entreat  him  to  accept  the  command.  But  he
answered,  he  could  not  do  it,  before  lie  was  legally
appointed  to  it  by  the  Romans  in  the  Capitol  '.  For
he  looked  upon  them,  while  they  w'ere  in  being,  as

■'''  Livy  sp.yp,  the  Uoiiian  soldiers  at  Veii  applied  to  the  remains  of
tlie  senate  in  tlie  Capitol  for  leave,  belorc  the}'  oiTered  the  command
to  Camillus.  So  nu'.ch  regard  had  those  brave  mm  tor  the  con^ti-
tution  of  t'leir  couiitrv,  though  Koine  then  lay  in  asl.e?!  Every  pri-
'  ate  man  wa'^,  indeed,  a  patriot.


cc

il
ii
ti

(C

ec


CAMILLUS.  393

the  commonwealth,  and  would  readily  obey  their
orders;  but,  without  them,  he  would  not  be  so  ofli-
tious  as  to  interpose.

They  admired  the  modesty  and  honour  of  Camil-
ius,  but  they  knew  not  how  to  send  the  proposal  to
the  Capitol.  It  seemed  indeed  impossible  for  a  mes-
senger to  pass  into  the  citadel,  while  tlie  enemy
were  in  possession  of  the  city.  At  last  a  young  man
iiamed  Pontius  Cominius,  not  distincjuished  bv  his
birth  but  enamoured  of  honour  and  glory,  readily
took  upon  him  the  commission.  He  carried  no
letters  Ijowever  to  the  citizens  in  the  Capitol,  lest  if
he  should  happen  to  be  taken,  the  enemy  should  by
them  discover  the  intentions  of  Camillus.  Having
dressed  himself  in  mean  attire,  under  v;hich  he  con-
cealed some  pieces  of  cork,  he  travelled  all  day  withr
out  fear,  and  approached  the  city  as  it  grew  dark.
He  could  not  pass  the  river  by  the  bridge,  because
that  was  guarded  by  the  Gauls :  he  therefore  took
iiis  clothes,  which  were  neither  many  nor  heavy,  and
bound  them  about  his  head ;  and  having  kiid  him-
self upon  the  pieces  of  cork,  easily  floated  over  and
reached  the  city.  Then  avoiding  those  quarters
where,  by  the  lights  and  noise,  he  concluded  they
kept  watch,  he  went  to  the  Carmental  gate  where
there  was  the  2;reatest  silence,  and  wdiere  the  hill  of
the  Ca[)itol  is  the  steepest  and  most  craggy.  Up
this  he  clambered  unperceived,  by  a  way  the  most
difficidt  and  dreadful,  and  advanced  near  the  guards
upon  the  walls.  After  he  had  hailed  them  and  told
them  his  name,  they  received  him  with  joy,  and  con-
ducted him  to  the  masiistrates.

The  senate  wa,s  presently  assembled,  and  he  ac-
quainted tliem  with  the  victory  of  Camillus  (which
they  had  not  learned  before)  as  well  as  v.ith  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  soldiers  at  Veil,  and  exhorted  them
to  conrirm  Cainiiliis  in  the  command,  as  the  citizens
out  of  Rome  wouid  not  obey  any  otlier.  Having
Iieard  his  report  and  consulted  together,  they  de-
clared Camillus  dictator,  and  sent  Pontius  back  the

12


59*  CAMILLUS.

,  satire  way  he  came.  He  was  equally  f()rtiinate  in
his  return  ;  for  he  passed  the  enemy  undiscovered,
and  dehvered  to  tlie  Romans  at  Veii  the  decree  of
the  sei^ate,  which  they  received  witli  pleasure.

Camillus  upon  his  arrival  foun:l  twenty  thousand
of  them  in  arms,  to  whom  he  added  a  rrpcater  num-
ber of  the  allies,  and  prepared  to  attack  the  enemy.
Thas  was  he  appointed  the  second  time  dictator ;
and,  luiving  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Ko-
mans  and  confederates,  he  maiched  out  against  the
Gauls.

IiT  the  mean  while,  some  of  tlie  barbarians  cm-
ployed  in  the  siege,  haj)|)cning  to  pass  by  the  place
where  Pontius  had  made  his  wav  bv  niacht  to  the
Capitol,  observed  many  traces  of  his  feet  and  hands,
as  he  had  worked  himself  up  the  rock,  torn  off  what
pTcvv'  there,  and  thrown  down  the  mold.  Of  this
they  informed  the  king,  who  coming  and  viewing  it,
for  the  present  said  nothing  ;  but  in  the  evening  he
Rssem.bled  the  lightest  and  most  active  of  his  men,
Avho  were  the  likchest  to  ch'md)  anv  diliicult  hei'du,
mm  thus  addressed  them:  "  The  enemy  have  them-
*'•  selves  shown  us  a  M'av  to  reach  them,  of  which
we  were  ignorant,  and  have  proved  that  this  rock
is  neither  inaccessible  nor  untrodden  by  human
•'*  feet.  What  a  shame  would  it  be  tlien,  after
having  made  a  beginning,  not  to  finish;  and  to
quit  the  place  as  impregnable,  when  the  Romans
themselves  have  taught  us  how  to  take  it!  Where
it  was  easy  for  one  man  to  ascend,  it  cannot  be
'•  difricult  for  many  to  do  it  in  succession  ;  nay,
shoLiid  many  attempt,  it  together,  they  will  find
<;onsiderable  advantac;e  in  assistiu";  each  other.  1
shall  bestow  ade<juate  rewards  and  honours  upon
such,  as  shall  distincjnish  themselves  on  this  occa-


a


"  Mon."


The  Gaids  readily  embraced  tlie  king's  jiroposal,
and  about  midnioht  a  number  of  them  tou'cthcr  be-
gan  to  climb  tlie  rock  in  silence,  which  though  steep
and  craggy  proved  more  jiracticablc  and  accessible

9


CAMILLUS.  395'

tban  they  had  expected.  The  foremost  having
gained  the  top  arranged  themselves  in  order,  and
were  just  ready  to  take  possession  of  the  wail,
and  to  fall  upon  the  guards  who  were  flist  asleep;
for  neither  man  nor  dog  had  perceived  their  coming.
There  were  some  sacred  geese,  however,  kept  near
Juno's  temple  ^"^j  which  had  hitherto  been  plentifully
fed ;  but  at  this  time,  as  corn  and  other  provision*^
scarcely  sufficed  for  the  men,  were  neglected  and  in
poor  condition.  This  animal  is  naturally  quick  of
hearing,  and  soon  alarmed  by  any  noise  ;  and  as
hunger  kept  them  waking  and  uneasy,  they  imme-
diately perceived  the  coming  of  the  Gauls,  and  run-
ning at  them  with  much  noise,  awoke  all  the  guards.
The  barbarians  now,  perceiving  they  were  disco-
vered, advanced  with  loud  shouts  and  the  utmost
fury.  The  Romans  in  haste  snatclied  up  such  wea-
pons as  came  to  hand,  and  strenuously  exerted  them-
selves upon  this  sudden  emergency.  Foremost  of
all,  Manlius  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  remarkable
for  his  strength  and  extraordinary  courage,  engaged
two  Gauls  at  once,  and  as  one  of  them  was  lifting  up
his  battle-ax,  with  his  sword  cut  ofr  his  right-hand  ;
at  the  same  time  he  thrust  the  boss  of  his  shield  in
the  face  of  the  othei;,  and  dashed  him  down  the  pre-
cipice. Thus  standing  upon  the  rampart,  with  those
who  had  come  to  his  assistance  and  fought  by  his
side,  he  drove  back  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  that  had
climbed  up,  who  were  not  many  in  number,  and  who
performed  nothing  worthy  of  such  a  daring  attempt.
The  Romans  having  thus  escaped  the  danger  that
threatened  them,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  threw  the
officer  on  guard  down  the  rock  among  the  enemy;


-^  Geese  were  ever  afterward  held  in  honour  at  Rome,  and  a
flock  of  thorn  always  maintained  at  the  public  expense.  A  golden
image  of  a  goose  was  erected  in  memory  of  those  patriots,  and  a
goose  every  year  carried  in  triumph  upon  a  soft  litter  finely  adorned  ;
while  dogs  were  held  in  abhorrence  by  the  Romans,  and  one  of  the
species  annually  impaled  upon  a  branch  of  elder.  (Plin.  et  Plut.  de
Fort  Bom.)


39t^  CAMILLUa

and  decreed  Manlius  a  reward  for  his  victory,  which
had  more  of  lioiiour  in  it  liowevcr  than  of  proMt"^^ :
ibr  every  man  gave  him  what  he  had  for  one  day's
allowance,  wliicli  vras  half  a  pound  of  bread  and  a
quartern  of  the  Greek  Cotyle.

After  this,  the  Gauls  began  to  lose  courage  :  for
provisions  were  scarce,  and  they  could  not  forage
from  fear  of  Camillus  "'.  Sickness  likewise  j)revailed
among  them,  which  took  its  rise  from  the  heaps  of
dead  bodies,  and  from  their  encamping  amidst  the
rubbish  of  the  demolished  houses ;  the  ashes,  when
raised  by  the  winds  or  heated  by  the  sun,  frojn  their
dry  and  acrid  quality  so  corrupting  the  air  that  re-
spiration was  pernicious.  13ut  what  affected  them
most  was,  the  change  of  climate  ;  for  they  had  lived
in  countries  abounding  with  shades  and  agreeable
shelters  from  the  heat,  and  were  now  amidst  grounds
that  were  low  and  unhealthy  in  autumn  '"''.  All  this,
together  with  the  length  and  tediousnessof  the  siege,
wdiich  had  lasted  mere  than  six  months,  caused  such
desolation  among  them,  and  carried  off  such  num-
bers, that  the  carcases  lay  unburied.

The  besieged,  however,  were  in  not  much  better
condition.  Famine  which  now  pressed  them  hard,
and  their  ignorance  of  what  Camillus  was  doing,
caused  no  small  dejection  :  for  the  barbarians  guarded
the  city  with  so  much  care,  that  it  was  impossible  to
send  him  any  messenger.  Both  sides  being  thus
equally  discouraged,  the  advanced  guards  first  began
to  talk  of  treating.  As  the  motion  was  approved  by
those  who  had  the  chief  direction  of  aiiairs,    8ui-

^^  In  tiie  existing  scarcit}-,  however,  even  tlie  profit  of  sucli  a
contribution  must  have  been  considerable.*

^°  Camillus,  being  master  of  the  country,  posted  strong  guards
on  all  the  roads,  and  in  eflect  besieged  the  besiegers.

*'  The  atmosphere  of  Rome  was  always  unvtholesomc  in  this
season.     Horace  complains  of  the

^-•pluwheus  Austery
Autiunnusqite  gravis,  Libitincc  guccstus  accrbce.

(Sat.  II.  i.  18,  19,)*


CAMILLUS.  ^97

pitius,  one  of  the  military  tribunes,  went  and  con-
ferred with  Brennus  ;  when  it  was  agreed,  that  the
llomans  should  pay  a  thousand  pounds*  weight  of
gold,  and  that  the  Gauls  upon  the  receipt  of  it
should  immediately  quit  the  city  and  its  territories.
The  conditions  being  sworn  to  and  the  gold  brought,
the  Gauls  endeavourins:  to  avail  themselves  of  false
weights,  privately  at  iirst,  and  afterward  openly,  drew
down  their  own  side  of  the  balance.  The  llomans
expressing  their  resentment,  Brennus  in  a  con-
temptuous and  insulting  manner  took  off  his  sword,
and  threw  it,  belt  and  all,  into  the  scale  ;  and,  when
tSulpitius  inquired  what  that  meant,  he  replied,
"  What  should  it  mean,  but  woe  to  the  conquered  ?"
which  thenceforward  became  a  proverbial  saying '*'.
Some  of  the  Romans  were  highly  incensed  at  this,
and  talked  of  returning  with  their  gold,  and  enduring
the  utmost  extremities  of  the  siege ;  but  others
thought  it  better  to  pass  by  a  small  injury,  since  the
indignity  lay,  not  in  paying  more  tlian  was  due,  but
in  paying  any  thing  ;  a  disgrace,  only  consequent
upon  the  necessity  of  the  times.

While  they  were  thus  disputing  with  the  Gauls,
Camillus  arrived  at  the  gates  ;  and  being  informed
of  what  had  passed,  ordered  the  main  body  of  his
army  to  advance  slowly  and  in  good  order,  while  he
with  a  select  band  marched  hastily  up  to  the  Ro-
mans, who  ail  gave  place  and  received  the  dictator
with  respect  and  silence.  He  then  took  the  gold
out  of  the  scales,  gave  it  to  the  lictors,  and  ordered
the  Gauls  to  remove  the  balance  and  the  weights,
and  to  depart ;  telling  them,  "  it  Vv^as  the  custom  of
"  the  Romans  to  deliver  their  country  with  steel,
'^  not  with  gold."  And  when  Brennus  expressed
his  indignation,  and  complained  that  he  had  great
injustice  done  him  by  this  infraction  of  the  treaty,
Camillus  answered,  "  That  it  was  never  lawfully
"  made,  neither  could  it  be  valid,  without  the  con-

^*  VcB  viciis  I


sas  CAMILLUS.

•"  sent  of  himself  who  was  dictator  and  sole  mafn-
*••  strate  ;  they  had,  therefore,  acted  witliout  pr()[)er
"  authority  :  but  that  they  might  make  tlicir  ])ro-
"  posals,  now  lie  was  come,  wliom  the  la\vs  had  in-
"  vested  with  power  either  to  pardon  the  suppliant,
"  or  to  punish  the  guilty,  if  proper  batisfaction  were
"  not  made."

At  this  Brennus  was  still  more  hiddy  incensed,
and  a  skirmish  ensued  ;  swords  were  drawn  on  both
sides,  and  thrusts  exchanged  in  a  confiised  manner,
as  m.ay  easily  be  conceived  amidst  the  ruins  of  houses
and  in  nariow  streets,  where  tliere  was  no  room  to
make  any  regular  disposition  of  forces.  Brennus  how-
ever soon  recollected  himself,  and  drew  off  his  forces
into  the  camp,  with  the  loss  of  a  small  number.  In
the  nio'ht,  he  ordered  them  to  march  and  (uiit  the
city,  and  having  retreated  about  eight  miles  from
it,  encamped  upon  the  Gabinian  road.  Early  in  the
morning  Camillas  came  up  with  them,  his  arms
dazzling  the  sight,  and  his  men  full  of  spirit.  A
sharp  engagement  ensued,  w^hich  lasted  a  long  time  ;
at  length  the  Gauls  were  routed  with  great  slaughter,
and  their  camp  taken.  Some  of  the  fugitives  were
killed  in  the  pursuit;  but  the  chief  part  of  them
were  cut  in  pieces  by  the  people  in  the  neighbouring
towns  and  villages,  who  fell  upon  them  as  they  were
dispersed  ^'^.

Thus  was  Home  stranfjely  taken,  and  more
strangely  recovered,  after  it  had  been  seven  months
in  the  possession  of  the  barbarians  :  for  they  entered
it  a  little  after  the  Ides  (the  fifteenth)  of  July,  and
were  driven  out  about  the  Ides  (the  thirteenth)  of

*3  There  is  reason  to  question  tlie  triitli  of  the  latter  part  of  this
story.  Piutarcli  copied  it  Ironi  Livy.  lint  Polvbius  reprpf-ents  tlie
Ga'jJs  as  hiiviiifj  actLuillv  received  the  gold  frfiiii  the  Itumuiis,  and
returned  in  safety  to  their  own  fountry  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by
.Justin,  Suetonius,  and  even  by  Livv  himself  in  another  part  of  Ins
history  (x.  l(i.)  (L  )  M.  llicard  however,  in  liis  Jwfe  of  i'lutarrli,
though  he  admits  that  the  story  has  an  air  of  marvel,  stands  up
strenuously  for  his  author,  and  jjleads  in  ];is  vuidication  that  it  oc-
curitd  in  an  aL>e  of  marvels.*


CAMILLUS.  $m

Febriiarv  foilovviniv.  Camilliis  returned  in  triunipli,
as  became  the  deliverer  of  his  h)st  country  and  thi'.
restorer  of" Rome.  Those,  who  had  quitted  the  place
before  the  siege  with  their  wives  and  children,  now-
followed  his  chariot :  and  they,  who  had  been  be-
sieg-ed  in  tlie  Ca[)itol  and  w^ere  nearly  perishing  with
hunger,  met  and  embri\ced  them;  weeping  for  joy
at  this  unexpected  pleasure,  which  they  almost  con-
sidered as  a  dream.  The  priests  and  ministers  of
t'le  gods  bringing  back  what  holy  things  they  had
hidden,  or  pi  ivaiely  conveyed  away  when  tliey  fied,
afforded  a  most  desirable  spectacle  to  tiie  people:
and  received  the  kindest  welcome,  as  if  the  gods
themselves  had  retr.rncd  with  them  to  llome''^.  Ca-
milius  then  sacrificed  (o  th.e  gods,  and  purified  the
city,  in  a  form  dictated  by  the  pontiffs.  He  rebuilt
the  fornicr  temples,  and  ereete<l  a  new  one  to  Ju/s
Loquut'ni.'!^  the  '  Speaker'  or  '  Warner/  ui^on  the  very
spot  where  the  voice  from  heaven  annou.nced  to
Marcus  Ceditius  in  the  night  the  coming  of  t!ie  bar-
barians. There  was,  indeed,  no  small  difficulty  in
fliscovering  the  places  where  the  temples  had  stood  ;
])ut  it  was  effected  by  the  zeal  of  Camillus,  and  the
industry  of  the  priests.

As  it  was  now  necessary  to  rebuild  the  city,  which
was  entirely  demolished,  desj)ondency  seized  the
nudtitude,  and  they  invented  pretexts  of  delav.
They  were  in  want  of  all  necessary  materials,  and
had  more  occasion  for  lepose  and  refreshment  after
their  sufferings,  than  to  labour  and  wear  themselves
out,  when  tlicir  bodies  were  weak  and  .their  sub-
stance destroyed.  They  felt  therefore  a  secret  lean-
ing to  Veii,  a  city  which  remained  entire,  and  was
provided  with   e\ery  thing.     This  gave  a  handle  to


^^  Among  the  other  exclamations  of  the  soldiers,  who  had  the
privilege  j^as  ho  are  iufoniifd  by  Dion,  llalic.  vii.  i;:5.  tracinti' it
from  a  Grev^iao  origin  during  the  procession  of  a  triumph,  or  say-
injr  whatever  thev  pleased,  Caniilius  v/as  called  '  Roinulus,'  '  the
Father  of  his  coantrv,'  a!id  '  the  Second  Founder  of  Koine.'  Com-
piinreiits,  most  abundantly  deserved!  *


a
ii.


400  CAMir.LUS.

their  demagogues  to  liarangne  them,  as  usual,  in  a
way  agreeable  to  their  iuclinations,  aud  made  them
listen  to  seditious  speeches  against  Can)iilus  :  "  Ah
"  if,  to  gratify  his  ambition  and  thirst  of  glory,  he
would  deprive  them  of  a  citv  iit  to  receive  them,
force  them  to  pitch  their  tents  among  rubl)ish,  and
rebuild  a  ruin  that  was  like  one  great  funeral-pile;
in  order  that  he  might  be  called  not  only  the  ge-
neral and  dictator,  but  the  founder  likewise  of
Rome,  instead  of  Romulus,  whose  right  he  v/as
thus  superseding."
Upon  this  account  the  senate,  afraid  of  an  insur-
rection, would  not  let  Camillus  lay  down  the  dic-
tatorship within  the  year  as  he  desired,  though  no
other  person  had  ever  borne  that  high  office  more
than  six  months.  In  the  mean  time  they  went  about
to  console  the  people,  and  to  gain  them  by  caresses
and  kind  persuasions.  One  while,  they  showed  them
the  monuments  and  the  tombs  of  their  ancestors  ;
they  then  put  them  in  mind  of  their  temples  and
holy  places,  which  Rom.ulus  and  Numa  and  the
other  kings  had  consecrated,  and  left  in  charge  witii
them.  Above  all,  amidst  the  sacred  and  aweful
symbols,  they  took  care  to  make  them  recollect  the
Iresh   human   head  ^"^5  which  was  found   when    the

^''  This  prodigy  happened  in  the  reign  of  Tarquin  the  Proud,
who  undoubtedly  mast  have  put  tlie  head  there  on  purpose:  (or  ii?
digging  the  foundation  it  was  found  n-arm  and  bleeding,  as  if  just
severed  from  the  body.  Upon  this  the  Romans  sent  to  consult  a  Tu;  -
can  soothsayer  named  OleuusCi'lenus,  who,  after  vainly  endeavouring
to  interpret  the  presage  in  favour  of  liis  own  country,  reluctantly
acl'.nowledged  that  the  place  where  that  head  was  found  would  be-
tome  the  capital  of  all  Italy.  (Dion.  Ilalic.  iv,  13.)  (L.)  Pliny
(M.  N.  xxviii  2.)  relates  this  story,  and  says  that  by  charms  and
other  means  the  destinies  of  one  place  might  be  transferred  to
another.  The  Fate,  indeed,  of  the  ancients  seems  to  have  been
very  diiferent  from  that  of  modern  times.  It  was  evidently  under
control.  Achilies  had  the  option  of  dying  nobly  before  the  walls
of  Troy,  or  sinking  into  inglorious  old  age  on  the  throne  of  Phthia.
Livy,  who  givts  a  more  simple  account  of  the  matter,  agrees  with
Dion.  Hr.lic.  in  deriving  from  this  event  the  name  of  the  Capitol.
Arnobiu?  (adv.  gentes,  vi.)  says,  and  quotes  many  ancient  autho-
fitieu  for  his  assertion,  that  the  name  of  the  man  whose  head  was


■CAMILLUS.  401

foundations  of  the  Capitol  were  dug,  and  which  an-
nounced that  place  as  destined  to  be  the  iiead  of
Italy.  They  urged  tlie  disgrace  of  again  extinguish-
ing the  sacred  tire,  \viiich  the  vestals  had  lighted
since  the  war,  and  of  (luitting  the  city  ;  whether
they  were  to  see  itMnliabited  by  strangers,  or  a  de-
solate wild  for  flocks  to  feed  in.  In  this  moving
iiianner  the  patricians  remonstrated  to  the  peo])]e,
both  in  public  and  private ;  and  were  in  their  turn
much  affected  by  the  distress  of  the  multitude,  who
lamented  their  present  indigence  and  implored  them,
now  the}^  were  collected  like  the  remains  of  a  ship-
wreck, not  to  obhge  them  to  patch  up  the  ruins  of
a  desolated  city,  when  there  was  one  entire  and
ready  to  receive  them.

Camillus  therefore  thought  proper  to  take  the
judgement  of  the  senate  in  a  body.  And  when  he
had  exerted  his  eloquence '°  in  favour  of  his  native
country,  and  others  had  done  the  same,  he  put  it  to
the  vote  ;  beginning  wdth  Lucius  Lucretius,  whose
right  it  was  to  vote  first,  and  who  w'as  to  be  followed
by  the  rest  in  their  order.  Silence  was  made;  and
as  Lucretius  was  about  to  declare  himself  it  happen-
ed  that  a  centurion  who  then  conmianded  the  dav-
guard,  in  passing  the  house,  called  with  a  loud  voice
to  the  ensign,  '•  to  stop  and  set  up  his  standard
"  there,  for  that  was  the  best  place  to  stay  in."
These  words  being  so  seasonably  uttered,  at  a  mo-
ment when  they  were  doubtful  and  anxious  about
the  event,  Lucretius  gave  thanks  to  the  gods,  and
embraced  the  omen  ;  while  the  rest  gladly  assented.
A  wonderful  change  at  the  same  time  took  place  in
the  minds  of  the  people,  who  exhorted  and  encou*
raged  each  other  to  the  work  ;  and  they  immediately

thus  discovered  was  Tolus  Vulcentanus,  and  hence  the  place  was
called  CaphoUum,  qu.  Caput  Tcli.  This,  however,  is  not  even  men-
tioncd  by  Varro.*

^<5  To  this  harangue  Livy  assigrs  tour  entire  chapters  (v,  51 — ■
54.)  and  subjoins  a  remark,  creditable  to  ti'e  Roman  people,  Movisse
eos  turn  alia  oratione,  turn  ea  ipue  ad  religiones  rertinebat,  maxime
dicitur.*

VOL.  I.  2D


402  CAMILLUS.

began  to  build,  not  in  any  order  or  upon  a  rcgnlar
plan,  but  as  inclination  or  convenience  directed.
From  this  liurrv  the  streets  were  narrow  and  intri-
catc,  and  the  houses  badly  laid  out ;  for  both  tlic
walls  of  the  city  and  the  streets,  we  are  informed,
were  built  witiiin  the  compass  of  a  single  year^^

The  persons,  a])pointed  by  Camrllus  to  explore
and  mark  out  the  holy  places,  found  all  in  confusion.
As  they  were  looking  round  the  Palatiuni,  they  came
to  the  court  of  Mars,  wliere  the  buildings  like  the
rest  were  burned  and  demolished  by  the  barbarians ;
but,  in  removing  the  rubbish  and  clearing  the  place,
they  discovered  under  a  great  heap  of  ashes  the  au-
gural staff ''^  of  Romulus.  This  staff  is  crooked  at
one  end,  and  is  called  Lituus.  It  is  used  to  mark  out
the  several  regions  of  the  heavens,  in  any  process  of
divination  bv  the  flic-lit  of  birds,  of  which  Romuhm
from  his  great  skill  in  that  particular  made  consider-
able use.  When  he  was  taken  out  of  the  world,  the
priests  carefully  preserved  the  staff  from  defilement,
like  other  holy  relics :  and  as  it  had  now  escaped
the  fire,  wdien  the  rest  were  consumed,  tliey  indulged
a  pleasing  hope,  considering  it  as  a  presage  that
Rome  would  last  for  ever  '^\


^'7  This  hurr)-  was  tlie  cause  of  many  nuisances,  particularly  v.ifh
regard  ta  the  public  sewers;  which,  instead  of  passing  as  befoyc
under  the  streets,  passed  nou-  under  alaiost  every  private  residence.
(Liv.  V.  55.)*

'•s  This  discovery  is  likewise  mentioned  hy  Cicero  (De  Div.  i.
IT.),  and  the  Lituns  itself  is  found  upon  many  medals,  particularly
those  of  Julias  and  Augustus  Ca-'sar.  To  this  passage  INIiddleton
Hnds  two  parallels  in  tlie  history  of  modern  Rome;  the  Rod  of
Moses,  which,  (lie  affirms)  '  is  still  preserved,  as  the  Ronianisfs
pretend,  and  shown  with  great  devotion  in  one  of  the  princij>al
churches;'  and  the  image  of  our  Saviour,  kept  in  St.  John  Latera»,
over  which  the  flames,  it  ;;eems,  had  no  power,  though  the  church
itself  has  been  t\\  ice  destroyed  by  fire !  7J  (jucsta  imagine  nort
^^abrucio,  efsendola  cJiiesa  slcita  abhruciaia  due  v^lte  !  Rom.  Modern.
(Letter,  pp.  201,  202.)*

^  Al)outthis  time  tlie  tribunes  of  tlic  people  determined  lo  im-
peach Q.  Fabius,  who  had  violated  the  law  of  nations,  and  by  thus,
provoking  the  (Tauis  had  occasioned  the  burning  of  Rome.     Ills
t^iaic  being  noJorious,  he  was  siommoned  by  C.  Marlius  Rutilus  be-
12  .       .


CAMILLUS.  405

Before  they  had  finished  the  laborious  task  of
building,  a  netv  war  broke  out.  The  zlilqui,  tlie
Voisci,  and  the  Latins  jointly  invaded  their  terri-
tories, and  the  Tuscans  laid  siege  to  Sutrium  ''-\  a
city  in  ahiance  with  Rome.  The  military  tribunes
likewise,  who  commanded  the  army,  being  surround-
ed by  the  Latins  near  Mount  Marcius,  and  finding
their  camp  in  extreme  danger,  sent  to  Rome  to  desire
succours ;  upon  which,  Camillas  was  a  third  time
appointed  dictator.

Of  this  war,  there  are  two  different  accounts :  I
begin  with  the  fabulous  one.  The  Latins  (it  is  said)
either  seeking  a  pretence  for  quarrel,  or  really  in-
clined to  renew  their  ancient  aflinity  with  the  Ro-
mans, sent  to  demand  of  them  a  number  of  free-boni
virgins  in  marriage.  The  Romans  were  in  no  small
perplexity,  as  to  the  course  v/hich  they  should  fol-
low :  for  on  one  hand  they  were  afraid  of  war,  as
they  had  not  yet  re-established  themselves,  nor  re-
covered from  their  losses ;  and,  on  the  other,  they
suspected  that  the  Latins  only  wanted  their  daughters
for  hostages,  though  they  coloured  their  design  with
the  specious  name  of  marriage.  While  they  were
thus  embarrassed,  a  female  slave,  named  Tutula^^
(or  as  some  call  her,  Philotis)  advised  the  magistrates
to  despatch  with  her  some  of  the  handsomest  and
most  genteel  of  the  maid-servants,  dressed  like  vir-
e;ins  of  o'ood  families,  and  leave  the  rest  to  her.  The
magistrates,  approving  the  expedient,  chose  a  num-
ber of  female  slaves  proper  for  her  purpose,    and


fore  the  assembly  of  the  people,  to  answer  for  his  conduct  in  the
embassy.  The  criminal  had  reason  to  fear  the  severest  punish-
ment ;  but  his  relations  gave  out,  that  he  died  suddenly  :  an  event,
\vhich  generally  happened,  when  the  accused  person  shrunk;  from
tlie  shame  of  a  public  punishment.

■°  Hod.  Satri,  in  Tuscany.  Mount  Marcius  was  near  Lanuvium,
and  about  ten  leagues  distant  from  Rome.*

''  In  the  Life  of  Romulus,  she  is  called  '  Tutola.'  Macrobius
(i.  11.)  calls  her  '  Tutela.'  (L.)  Of  the  variations  between  Plu-
tarch's former  and  present  account  of  this  slave,  Livy,  vi.  2.,  auth©-
jfises  such  as  occur  in  the  latter.*

2  D  2


•Jtdi  CAMILLUS.

sent  them  richly  attired  to  the  Latin  camp,  which
■was  not  far  from  the  city.  At  night,  \vhile  the  other
slaves  conveyed  away  the  enemies'  sv/ords,  Tntuhi
or  Philotis  got  up  into  a  wild  fig-tree  of  considerabk*
heiglit,  and  liaving  spread  a  thick  garment  i)ehind,
to  conceal  her  design  fi-om  the  Latins,  held  up  a
torch  toward  Rome ;  the  signal  agreed  u};on  be-
tween her  and  the  magistrates,  wlio  alone  M'erc  in
the  secret.  For  this  reason  the  soldiers  sallied  out
in  a  tumultuous  maimer,  calling  upon  each  other
and  hastened  by  their  officers,  who  found  it  difficult
to  bring  them  into  any  order.  They  made  them-
selves masters,  however,  of  the  entrenchments;  and
as  the  enemy  not  expecting  any  such  attempt  were
asleep,  they  took  the  camp,  and  put  the  greatest  part
of  them  to  the  sv;ord.  This  happened  on  the  Nones
(the  seventh)  of  July,  then  called  Quintilis  :  and
upon  that  day  they  still  celebrate  a  feast,  in  memory
of  this  action.  Thev  first  sally  in  a  crowdino- and
disorderly  manner  out  of  the  city,  pronouncing
aloud  the  most  familiar  and  common  names,  as  Cains,
Marcus,  Lucius,  and  the  like ;  by  which  they  imi-
tate the  soldiers,  then  calling  upon  each  other  in
their  hurry.  Next,  the  maid-servants  walk  about
elegantly  dressed,  and  jesting  on  all  they  meet.
They  have  also  a  kind  of  engagement  among  them-
selves, to  express  the  assistance  which  they  gave  in
the  engagement  with  the  Latins.  They  then  sit
down  to  an  entertainment,  shaded  with  branches  of
the  fig-tree  ;  and  that  day  is  called  Nonce  Capruti/he
on  account  of  the  wild  fig-tree,  as  some  suppose,
from  which  the  maid-servant  held  out  the  torch  ;
for  the  Romans  denominate  that  tree  capryicus.
Others  refer  most  of  what  is  said  and  done  to  the
disappearance  of  Romulus  and  the  darkness  or  tem-
pest (or,-  as  some  imagine,  eclipse)  which  then  oc-
curred.. This  happened  on  the  same  day  at  least,
which  might  thence  be  called  Nona  Caprot'uue ;  for
the  Romans  term  a  goat  Capra^  and  Ronnilus  (as
■we  have  related  in  his  Lite)  vanished  out  of  sight.


CAMlLLUa  405

whUe  he  was  holding  an  assembly  of  the  people  at
the  Goats'-Marsh.

The  other  account  which  is  given  of  this  war,  and
is  approved  by  most  historians,  is  as  follows  :  Ca-
millus  being  appointed  a  third  time  dictator,  and
knowing  that  the  army  under  the  military  tribunes
M-as  surrounded  by  tlie  Latins  and  the  Volsci,  was
constrained  to  make  levies  among  those  whom  age
had  exempted  from  service.  With  these  he  took  a
large  circuit  round  Mount  Marcius,  and  unperceived
by  the  enemy  posted  his  army  behind  them,  and  by
lighting  many  fires  signified  his  arrival.  The  Ro-
mans who  were  besieged  in  their  camp,  encouraged
by  this,  resolved  to  sally  out  and  join  battle.  But
the  Latins  and  the  Volsci  kept  close  within  their
Avorks,  drawing  a  line  of  circumvallation  with  pali-
sades (because  they  had  the  enemy  on  both  sides)
and  resolving  to  wait  for  reinforcements  from  home,
as  well  as  for  the  Tuscan  succours.

Camillus  perceiving  this,  and  fearing  that  the
enemy  might  surroimd  him  as  he  had  surrounded
them,  hastened  to  avail  himself  of  the  present  oppor-
tunity. As  the  works  of  the  confederates  consisted
of  wood,  and  the  wind  blew  vehemently  from  the
mountains  at  sun-rising,  he  provided  a  great  quantity
of  combustible  matter,  and  drew  out  his  forces  at
day-break.  Part  of  them  he  ordered  to  begin  the
attack,  with  loud  shouts  and  missive  weapons,  on
the  opposite  side ;  while  he  himself,  at  the  head  of
those  v/ho  were  charged  with  the  fire,  watched  the
proper  moment  on  that  side  of  the  works,  against
v;hich  the  wind  used  to  blow.  When  the  sun  was
risen,  the  wind  began  to  blow  ;  and  the  attack  being
begun  on  the  other  side,  he  gave  the  signal  to  his
own  party,  who  poured  a  vast  quantity  of  fiery  darts
and  other  burning  matter  into  the  enemy*s  fortifica-
tions. As  the  flame  soon  caught  hold,  and  was  fed
by  the  palisades  and  other  timber,  it  spread  itself
all  around  j  and  the  Latins  not  being  provided  with


40G  CAMILLUS.

any  means  of  extinguishing  it,  the  cainp  was  almost
full  c,i'  fire,  and  they  were  circiimscriijed  within  a
small  spot  of  ground.  At  last,  they  were  compelled
to  bear  down  upon  the  forces,  who  were  posted  be-
fore the  camp,  and  stood  ready  to  receive  them
sword  in  hand.  Few  of  them,  consequently,  es-
caped ;  and  those  that  remained  were  destroyed  by
the  flames,  till  the  Romans  extinguished  them  for
the  sake  of  the  plunder.

After  this  exploit,  Camillus  left  his  son  Lucius  in
the  camp  to  guard  the  prisoners  and  the  booty,  while
he  himself  penetrated  into  the  enemy*s  country.
There  lie  took  the  city  of  the  ^^qui,  and  reduced
the  Volsci,  and  then  led  his  army  to  Sutrium,  of
whose  fate  he  was  not  yet  apprised,  and  which  he
jioped  to  relieve  by  engaging  it's  Tuscan  besiegers.
But  the  Sutrians  had  already  surrendered  their  town,
with  the  loss  of  every  thing  except  the  clothes  which
they  wore  ;  and  in  this  condition  he  met  them  by
tlie  way,  with  their  wives  and  children,  bewailing
their  misfortunes.  Camillus  was  extremely  moved
at  the  sight ;  and  perceiving  that  the  Romans  wept
with  pity  at  their  affecting  entreaties,  he  determined
r.ot  to  defer  his  revenge,  but  to  march  to  Sutrium
tliat  very  day :  concluding  that  men  who  had  just
taken  an  opulent  city,  where  they  had  not  suffered
a  single  enemy  to  remain,  and  who  expected  none
from  any  other  quarter,  would  be  found  in  disorder
and  ofi"  their  guard.  Neither  was  he  mistaken  in  his
judgement.  He  not  only  passed  through  the  country
inidiscovered,  but  approached  the  gates,  and  got
})ossession  of  the  walls  before  they  were  aware.
There  were  none,  indeed,  to  guard  them  ;  for  all
were  engaged  in  festivity  and  dissipation.  Nay,
even  when  they  perceived  that  the  enemy  were
masters  of  the  town,  tjiey  were  ro  overcome  by
tlieir  indulgences,  that  few  endeavoured  to  escape;
they  were  either  slain  in  their  houses,  or  surren-
dered themselves  to  t!ie  conquerors.     Thus  the  city


CAMILLUS.  407

©f  Stitiium  being  twice  taken  in  one  day,  the  new
possessors  were  expelled,  and  the  old  ones  restored
by  Camillus.

By  the  ti'imnph  decreed  him  iijx>n  tliis  occasion  he
gained  not  less  credit  and  honour,  than  by  the  two
former.  For  those  of  the  citizens  who  envied  him,
and  were  willing  to  attribute  liis  successes  rather  to
good-fortune  than  to  bravery,  were  compelled  by
these  last  actions  to  allow  liis  great  abilities  and
energy.  Among  those  who  opposed  him,  and  de-
tracted from  his  merit,  tlie  most  considerable  was
Marcus  Manlius;  he  who  first  repulsed  the  Gauls.,
when  they  attempted  the  Capitol  by  night,  and  on
that  account  had  been  surnamed  Capitolinus.  Am-
bitious to  be  the  first  man  ni  Rome,  and  perceiving
that  he  could  not  by  fair  means  outstrip  Camillus  in
the  race  of  honour,  he  took  the  common  road  to  ab-
solute })()wer  by  courting  the  populace,  particularly
those  that  were  in  debt.  Some  of  the  latter  he  de-
fended, by  pleading  their  causes  against  their  credi-
tors ;  and  others  he  rescued,  forcibly  preventing
their  being  dealt  with  according  to  law  :  so  that  he
soon  gathered  a  number  of  indigent  persons  about
him,  who  became  formidable  to  the  patricians  by
their  insolent  and  riotous  behaviour  in  tlie  Forum.

In  this  exigency  they  appointed  Coi'ueiius  Cos-
s-us'^  dictator,  who  named  'fitus  Quintius  Capitoli-
nus his  general  of  horse,  and  by  tins  supreme  ma-
gistrate ManJius  was  conunitted  to  prison  :  upon
which  occasion,  the  peo[)le  went  into  mourning  ;  a
tbing  never  used,  except  in  seasons  of  heavy  ])ub]ic
calamity.  The  senate  tlicrcfore,  afraid  of  an  insur-
rection, ordered  him  to  be  released,  liut  when  set
at  liberty,  instead  of  altering  his  conduct,  he  grew
more  insolent  and  troublesom-e,  and  filled  the  whole
city  with  fiiction  and  sedition.  At  that  time  Camil-
lus was  aii'ain  created  a  military  tribime,  and  Man-
lius  was  taken  and  brought  to  his  trial.     But  the

7-  See  Liv,  vi.  2,


4-08  CAMILLUS.

view  of  the  Capitol  was  a  considerable  disadvaiitaj^e
to  those,  wlio  managed  the  impeachment.  The
place,  where  Manliiis  by  night  engaged  the  Gauls,
was  seen  fi-om  the  Forum  ;  and  all  who  attended
were  moved  with  compassion  at  his  stretching  out
his  hands  toward  that  piace,  and  begging  them  with
tears  to  remember  his  achievements.  The  judges  of
course  were  greatly  embarrassed,  and  often  ad-
journed the  court ;  not  choosing  to  acquit  him  after
such  clear  proois  of  his  crime,  nor  yet  daring  to
carry  the  laws  into  execution  in  a  place,  which  con-
tinually reminded  the  people  of  his  services.  Ca-
millus,  sensible  of  this,  removed  the  tribunal  without
the  gate  into  the  Peteline  Grove,  v/hence  there  was
no  view  of  the  Capitol'^.  There  the  prosecutor
brougfit  liis  charge,  and  the  remembrance  of  Man-
lius'  former  bravery  gave  way  to  the  sense,  which
his  judges  had  of  his  present  crimes.  He  was  con-
sequently condemned,  carried  to  the  Capitol,  and
thi'own  headlong  from  the  rock.  Thus  the  same
place  was  the  monument,  both  of  his  glory,  and  of
his  unfortunate  end.  The  Romans  moreover  rased
his  house,  and  built  there  a  temple  to  the  goddess
'Moneta.  They  decreed  likewise  that,  for  the  fu-
ture, no  patrician  should  ever  dwell  in  the  Capitol  '*.

'*  This  alteration  Livy  (vi.  20.)  imputes  to  the  tribunes  in  gene-
ral. Upon  a  similar  principle,  the  thirty  tyrants  at  Athens  (as  we
have  seen,  in  the  Life  of  Themistocles,  p.  3H.)  changed  the  place
of  the  public  assemblies,  lest  the  view  of  the  sea  should  cherish  or
revive  the  popular  spirit.  See  also  the  Life  of  Caius  Gracchus,
Vol.  V.  Such  influence,  throngh  the  power  of  association,  have
things  in  themselves  apparently  indifferent  on  the  minds  of  the  mul-
titude !*

74  Lest  the  advantageous  situation  of  a  fortress,  which  commanded
the  whole  city,  should  suggest  and  facilitate  the  design  of  enslaving
it.  For  Manlius  wa:.  accused  of  aiming  at  the  sovereign  power.
His  fate  may  serve  as  a  warning  to  all  ambitious  men,  who  seek  to
rise  upon  the  ruins  of  their  country:  for  he  could  not  escape  or  find
mercy  with  the^people,  though  he  produced  above  four  hundred
plebeians,  whose  debts  he  had  paid;  si;ov;ed  thirty  suits  of  armour,
the  spoils  of  thirty  en"mieS;  whom  he  had  slain  in  single  combat ;
had  received  forty  honorary  rewards,  among  which  were  tuo mural
and  eight  civic  crowns  (C-.  ServiliuSj  when  general  of  the  horse,


CAMILLUS.  .     409

CamlliLis,  who  was  now  nominated  military  tri-
bune the  sixth  time,  declined  that  honour.  For,  be-
side his  advanced  age,  he  was  apprehensive  of  the
effects  of  envy,  and  of  some  change  of  fortune  '^  after
so  much  glory  and  success.  But  the  excuse,  upon
which  he  most  insisted  in  public,  was  the  state  of  his
health,  at  that  time  very  infirm.  The  people  how-
ever, refusing  to  admit  that  excuse,  cried  out;
Tliey  did  not  desire  him  to  fight,  either  on  horse-
back or  on  foot :  they  only  wanted  his  counsel
"  and  Ills  orders.'*  Thus  they  forced  him  to  take
the  office  upon  him,  and  together  with  Lucius
Furius  Medullinus,  one  of  his  collegues,  to  march
immediately  against  the  enemy.

These  were  the  Praenestines  and  the  Volsci,  who
with  a  considerable  army  were  laying  waste  the
country  in  alliance  with  Rome.  Camillus  therefore
went  and  encamped  over-against  them,  intending  to

being  of  the  number  of  citizens,  whose  lives  he  had  saved),  and  had
crowned  all  with  the  preservation  of  the  Capitol.  (Livy  vi.  20.)
(L.)  Pliny,  who  enumerates  these  military  honours  (H.  N.  vii.
28.),  differs  in  some  few  respects  from  Livy.  He  says  that  Man-
lius,  before  he  was  seventeen,  had  won  the  spoils  of  two  enemies,
was  the  first  Roman  knight  that  had  gained  a  mural  crown,  had  re-
ceived five  civic  ones  and  thirty-seven  honorary  rewards,  was
gashed  with  three  and  twenty  honourable  scars,  and  at  the  time
of  saving  Servilius  was  himself  wounded  in  the  thigh  and  in  the
shoulder.  Yet  all  this  could  not  expiate  his  treasonable  projects
against  the  liberties  of  his  country.  So  inconstant  however  is  the
multitude,  that  Manlius  was  scarcely  dead,  when  his  loss  was  gene-
rally lamented,  and  a  plague  which  soon  followed  was  ascribed  to
tlie  anger  of  Jupiter  against  the  authors  of  his  death  !  His  whole
family  (Livy  adds)  ordained  that,  for  the  future,  none  of  their  de-
scendents  should  bear  the  name  of  xMarcius.*

'^  One  of  the  numerous  superstitions  of  the  ancients  was  that,
after  an  uninterrupted  career  of  good  fortune,  Nemesis  (the  god-
dess of  vengeance)  often  descended  upon  the  favoured  mortal  in
some  signal  calamity.  See  p.  377.  not.  1,32.)  We  read  of  an  Asiatic
king,  who  to  elude  this  sad  reverse,  threw  his  most  valuable  ring
into  the  sea :  but  it  was  swallowed  by  a  fish,  and  brought  to  him
the  next  morning  by  some  fishermen.  Upon  this,  he  resigned  him-
self to  his  destiny,  and  was  in  a  few  days  deposed  and  murthered.
Camillus,  who  was  now  (A.  U.  C.  373)  about  sixty-six  years  of
age,  was  going  to  take  the  usual  oath  of  ill  health,  but  the  people
refused  to  hear  it.  (Liv.  vi.  22.)*
9


*l(^  CAMILLUS.

prolong  tlie  war,  that  if  there  should  be  any  neccs-
i^hy  for  a  battle,  he  might  be  sufficiently  recovered  to
do  his  part.  But  as  his  collegue  Lucius  from  an  ex-
cessive thirst  of  2;lory  was  violently  and  indiscreetly
bent  upon  fighting,  and  inspired  others  with  the
same  ardour,  he  was  afraid  it  might  be  thought  that
through  envy  he  withheld  from  the  young  officers
the  opportunity  of  distinguishing  themselves.  For
this  reason  he  agreed,  though  with  much  reluctance,
that  Lucius  shotdd  draw  out  the  forces ;  while  he,
on  account  of  his  sickness''',  remained  with  a  hand-
ful of  men  in  the  camp.  But  vv'hen  he  understood
that  Lucius,  who  had  engaged  in  a  rash  and  preci-
pitate manner,  was  defeated  and  the  Romans  put  to
flight,  he  could  not  contain  himself,  but  leaped
from  his  bed,  and  rushed  to  the  gates  of  the  camp
with  his  attendants.  There  he  Ibrced  his  way
through  the  fugitives  up  to  the  pursuers,  and  made
so  good  a  stand,  that  those  who  had  fled  soon  re-
turned to  the  charge,  and  others  that  were  retreat-
ing rallied  and  placed  themselves  about  him,  exhort-
ing each  other  not  to  forsake  their  general.  Thus
the  enemy  were  stopped  in  the  pursuit.  He  next
day  marched  out  at  the  head  of  his  army,  entirely
routed  the  confederates  in  a  ])itched  battle,  and  en-
tering their  camp  along  with  them  cut  most  of  them
in  pieces.

After  this,  being  informed  that  Satricum"''  (a
Roman  colony)  was  taken  by  the  Tuscans,  and  the
inhabitants  put  to  the  sword,  he  sent  home  the
main   body  of  his  forces   consisting  of  the  heavy-

'^  Livy  (vi.  22.)  sa3's,  lie  placed  himself  on  an  eminence,  with  a
corpa  (le  resen^c,  to  watch  t!ie  progress  of  the  battle.

'^  This  is  not  the  same  place  with  the  Sutrium  above-mentioned,
though  they  are  apj)arcnily  confounded  by  Plutarcli.  Our  autlior
indeed,  in  his  account  of  this  war  swerving  from  Livy  too  widel}',
has  fallen  (as  M.  Secousse  has  fully  proved,  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  des
Jnscript.  v.)  into  several  mistakes.  Upon  the  acceptation  of  the
word  ririnm  the  IVench  critics,  ^MM.  Secousse,  Dacier,  and  Kicard
arc  at  variance  ;  whether  it  is  applied  by  Livy  to  the  person,  or  to
fhe  army  of  Camiilus.*


CAMILLUS.  411

armed,  and  with  a  select  band  of  light  and  spirited
young  men  fell  upon  the  enemies  then  in  possession
of  the  city,  some  of  whom  he  killed,  and  the  rest  he
drove  out.

lleturning  to  Rome  with  great  spoils,  he  bore
strong  testimony  to  the  good  sense  of  tlie  Roman
people,  who  entertained  no  fears  on  account  of  the
ill  health  or  advanced  age  of  a  general  not  deficient
in  courage  or  experience ;  but  chose  him,  infirm
and  reluctant  as  he  Avas,  rather  than  those  young
men,  who  had  coveted  and  solicited  the  command '\
Hence  it  was,  that  upon  the  news  of  the  revolt  of
the  Tusculans,  Camillus  was  ordered  to  march
against  them,  and  to  take  with  him  only  one  of  his
tive  colleojues.  They  all  courted  and  made  interest
for  the  commission  ;  but  passing  over  the  rest  he
pitched,  contrary  to  the  general  €?^pectation,  upon
Lucius  Furius  :  for  this  was  the  man,  who  but  just
before,  in  opposition  to  his  opinion,  was  so  eager
to  engage,  and  lost  the  battle.  Yet,  willing  (it
seems)  to  draw  a  veil  over  his  misfortune,  and  to
wipe  ofi'  his  disgrace,  he  was  generous  enough  to
give  him  the  preference''^.

When  the  Tusculans  perceived  that  Camillus  was
coming  against  them,  they  attempted  by  artful  ma-
nagement to  correct  their  error.  They  filled  the
fields  with  liusbandmen  and  sliepherds,  as  in  the
time  of  profound  peace  ;  left  their  gates  open,  and
sent  their  children  to  school  as  before.  Tradesmen
were  found  in  their  shops  employed  in  their  respect-
ive callings,  and  the  better  sort  of  citizens  walking
in  the  public  places  in  their  usual  dress  " '.  The  ma-
's Sn  tlie  Comde  de  Fontanes,  a  celebrated  Spanish  general,
fliovved  (to  use  the  expressions  of  the  oioquent  Bossuet,  in  his
E'lnge  da  grand  CoNDt:')  *  que,  maJgre  ses  injirmitcs,  une  ainc
guFrricre  est  maUresse  dii  corps  qit'elle  animc.'*

'^  This  choice  of  CatniUus  iiad  a  difrerent  motive  from  wlmt  Plu-
tarch nu'iinons.  He  knew  that  Furius,  who  had  lelt  the  ill  effects
of  a  ]-irecipitate  conduct,  would  be  the  first  man  to  avoid  such  teme-
rity for  the  future.

^^  Tlie  toga  was  the  dress  of  peace,  as  thi^  sagirni  was  that  of  war.


412  CAMILLUS.

gislratcs  meanv/nile  were  busily  passing  to  and  fro,
to.  provide  quarters  ipr  the  Romans  ;  as  if  they  ex-
pected no  danger,  and  were  conscious  of  no  offence.
Though  these  arts  could  not  alter  the  opinion,  which
Camillus  entertained  of  their  revolt,  yet  their  re-
pentance disposed  him  to  compassion.  He  ordered
them,  therefore,  to  go  to  the  senate  of  Home,  and
beg  pardon  ;  and,  when  they  appeared  thei'e  as  sup-
pliants, he  used  his  interest  to  procure  theu'  for-
giveness, and  a  grant  of  the  privileges  of  Roman  ci-
tizens^' besides.  These  were  the  principal  actions
of  his  sixth  tribuneship.

After  this,  Licinius  Stolo  raised  an  alarming  sedi-
tion in  the  state  ;  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the
people,  who  insisted  that  of  the  two  consuls  one
siiould  be  a  plebeian.  Tribunes  of  the  people  were
appointed,  but  the  nudtitude  would  suffer  no  elec-
tion of  consuls  to  be  held  ^',     As  this  want  of  chief

irivy  (vi.  25.)  mentions  some  other  artifices,  ta  which  tlicy  resorted
nj/on  this  occasion.*

^*  He  only  was  a  Roman  citizen,  in  the  most  extensive  significa-
tion of  tlie  word,  who  had  a  rigiit  to  possess  a  house  in  Rome,  to
give  bis  vote  in  the  Comilia,  and  to  stand  candidate  Ibr  any  office  ;
and  who,  consequently,  was  incorporated  into  one  of  the  tribes.
Tliefreedmen  in  the  times  of  the  republic  were  excluded  from  dig-
nities: and  of  the  municipal  towns  and  Roman  colonies,  which  en->
joyed  the  right  of  citizenship,  some  had,  and  some  had  not,  the
right  of  suftViXge  and  of  promotion  to  offices  in  Rome.  (L.)

Tlye  simple  and  affecting  address  of  the  Tusculans  upon  this
occasion,  and  the  impression  made  upon  the  senate  by  their  de-
jected appearance,  are  recorded  by  Livy  (vi.  20.)  The  right  of  ci-
tizenship was  granted  them  some  time  afterward.*

*'  This  confusion  lasted  five  years ;  during  which  the  tribunes  of
the  people  obstructed  the  holding  of  the  Cumitia,  necessary  for  the
election  of  the  chief  magistrates.  It  was  occasioned  by  a  triHing
accident.  Fabius  Ambustus  having  married  his  eldest  daughter  to
Servius  Sulpicius  a  patrician,  end  at  that  time  uiilitary  tribune,  and
the  younger  to  Licinius  Stolo  a  rich  plebeian  ;  it  happened  that,
while  the  younger  sister  was  paying  a  vi.sit  to  the  elder,  Sulpicius
came  home  from  the  Forum,  and  his  lictors  witii  the  stulf  of  the
fasces  tiumdered  at  the  door.  The  younger  sister  being  frightened
at  the  noise,  the  elder  laughed  at  her,  as  a  person  quite  ignorant  of
high  life.  This  atiront  greatly  afflicted  her  ;  and  her  father,  to  com-
fort her,  bid  her  not  be  uneasy,  for  she  should  soon  see  as  much  state
at  her  owu  house,  as  had  surprised  her  at  that  of  her  sister.  (L.)


CAMILLUa  il3

jiiagistrates  was  likely  to  cause  still  greater  troubles,
the  senate  created  Camillus  the  fourth  time  dictator,
without  the  consent  of  the  people,  ap.d  not  eveo
affreeablv  to  his  ov  n  inclination  ^''.  For  he  was  un-
willing  to  set  himself  against  those  persons  who,
having  been  often  led  on  by  him  to  conquest,  could
with  truth  affirm  tliat  he  had  more  concern  witli  thenj
in  military,  than  with  the  patricians  in  civii  coji-
cerns :  and  at  the  same  time  he  wa-s  sensible,  that
the  envy  of  those  very  patricians  induced  th.eai  in
the  present  instance  to  promote  him  to  that  high
station,  that  he  might  oppress  the  people  if  he  suc-
ceeded, or  be  ruined  by  them  if  he  failed  in  his  at-
tempt. He  tried,  however,  to  obviate  the  preseiat
danger ;  and,  as  he  knew  the  dajf  upon  which  the
tribunes  intended  to  propose  their  law,  he  pubhshed
a  general  muster,  and  summoned  the  people  from
the  Forum  into  the  iield,  threatening  to  impose  heavy
fines  upon  those  who  should  disobey.  On  the  other
hand,  the  tribunes  of  the  people  opposed  him  with
menaces,  solemnly  protesting  they  would  fine  hiiii
fifty  thousand  drachmas,  if  he  did  not  permit  the
people  to  put  their  bill  to  the  vote.  Whether  lie
were  afraid  of  a  second  condemnation  and  banish-
ment, which  would  bu.t  ill  suit  one  so  full  of  years
and  of  glory,  or  whether  he  thought  th.at  he  couki
not  get  the  better  of  the  people,  Mhose  violence
was  equal  to  their  power,  tor  the  present  he  retired
to  his  own  liouse  :  and  soon  afterward,  under  pre-
tence of  sickness,  resigned  the  dictatorship^'*.     The-

With  p.  vie»v  to  accornplkli  this  purpose,  her  linsbanfl  and  father,  m
conjunction  v/ith  cue  Lucius  Sextins  (fTteruard  made  first  plcheian
consul)  proposed  several  popular  laws  ;  one  to  diminish  the  curreni
rate  of  interest,  another  to  limit  the  landed  property  of  individuals
to  5C0  acres,  and  a  tb.ird.  to  obtain  for  the  popuhice  the  iiiagjs-
ti'acy  in  fjuestion.  Tlie  v.holo  proceedings  upon  this  occasion  zire
fully  detailed  by  Livy.  (vi.  S4~i)8.)*

8J  A.U.C.  388.    '  _  _  ,

s^  He  pretended  to  find  somethin,^  aitiiss  i;i  tlie  auspices,  which
were  taken  v,!)tn  he  was  appointed.  (Liv.  vi.  38.)  lie  vviis  suceeedesi
in  the  dictatorship  by  Pal^lius  Maniius.


-ll-fr  CAMILLUS.

senate  appointed  anotlicr  dictator,  \vho  having*
named  Stolo,  the  very  leader  of  the  sedition,  his  ge-
neral of  horse,  suffered  a  law  to  be  enacted  extremely
hostile  to  the  patrician  interest,  providing  that  no
person  whatever  should  possess  more  than  five  hun-
dred acres  of  land.  Stoio,  having  carried  his  point
with  the  people,  flourished  grealjy  for  a  while  :  but
not  long  aftcrvvard '*',  being  convicted  of  possessing
more  tluui  tire  number  of  acres  wliich  he  had  himself
prescribed  to  others,  he  sufiered  the  penalties  of  his
own  law  ''^

The  most  difficult  part  of  the  dispute  and  that  with
which  they  set  out,  concerning  the  election  of  con-
suls, remained  still  unsettled,  and  continued  to  give
the  senate  considerable  uneasiness  ;  when  certain
information  was  brought,  that  the  Gauls  were  march-
ing again  from  the  coasts  of  the  Adriatic,  vith  an
inHn(  ns3  armv  tovrard  Home.  With  this  intelliG:ence
airived  an  accouJit  of  the  usual  effects  of  war,  the
country  laid  waste,  and  such  of  the  inhabitants  as
could  not  take  refuge  in  Rome  dispersed  about  the
mountains.  The  terror  of  this  put  a  stop  to  the  sedi-
tion ;  and  the  most  popular  of  the  senators,  uniting
unanimously  with  the  people,  created  Camilkis  a
fifth  time  dictator.  He  was  now  very  old,  being
nearly  fourscore ;  yet,  seeing  the  necessity  and
danger  of  the  times,  he  was  wilHng  to  risk  all  incon-
veniences, and  without  alleging  any  excuse,  imme-
diately took  upon  hims-elf  the  command  and  made
the  levies.  As  he  knew  the  chief  force  of  the  barba-
rians lay  in  their  swords,  whicii  they  managed  with-
out art  or  skill,  furiously  rusliing  in  and  aiming
chiefly  at  the  head  and  shoulders,  he  furnished  most


^'  It  was  eleven  years  aflerward,  A.  U.  C.  398.  Popilius  Lainaa
ftned  i)i,n  ten  thousand  sesterces,  for  being  possessed  of  a  thousand
acres  of  land  in  conjunction  uith  his  son,  whom  he  had  emancipated
far  that  purpose.   (Liv.  vii.  16.)

**'  A  siu|^«iiar  parallel  to  this  instance,  of  a  great  public  officer
infringing  a  law  of  his  own  suggestion,  is  supplied  by  t!ie  trial  of
lord  viscount  Melville,  A.  D.  1806.*


CAMILLUS.  4:15

of  his  men  with  helmets  of  well  polished  iron,  that
the  swords  might  eitlier  break  or  glance  aside  ;  and
round  the  borders  of  their  shields  he  drew  a  plate
of  brass,  because  the  wood  of  itself  could  not  resist
the  strokes.  Beside  this,  he  taught  them  to  avail
themselves  of  long  pikes,  by  pushing  with  which
they  might  prevent  the  effect  of  the  enemy's
swords.

When  the  Gauls  reached  the  river  Anio^',  en-
cumbered with  the  vast  body  which  they  had  col-
lected, Camillus  drew  out  his  forces,  and  posted
them  upon  a  hill  of  easy  ascent ;  in  which  vv-ere  many
hollows  sufficient  to  conceal  the  greater  part  of  his
men,  while  those  that  w^ere  in  view  should  seem,
through  fear,  to  have  'aken  advantage  of  the  higher
grounds.  And  the  more  to  confirm  this  opinion  in
the  enemy,  he  made  no  opposition  to  the  depreda-
tions committed  in  his  sight,  but  remained  quietly
in  the  camp  which  he  had  fortified ;  until  he  beheld
part  of  them  dispersed  in  order  to  plunder,  and  part
indulging  themselves  day  and  night  in  drinking  and
revelling.  He  then  sent  out  the  light-armed  infantry
before  day,  to  prevent  their  drawing  up  in  a  regular
manner,  and  to  harass  them  by  sudden  skirmishing
as  they  issued  out  of  their  trenches  ;  and  as  soon  as
it  was  light  he  led  dov/n  the  heavy-armed,  and
formed  them  in  battle-array  upon  the  plain,  neither
few  in  numbers  nor  disheartened  as  the  Gauls  had
expected,  but  numerous  and  full  of  spirits.

This  was  the  first  thing  which  shook  their  resolu-
tion, for  they  considered  it  as  a  disgrace  to  have
the  Romans  the  assailants.  The  light-armed  then
falling  upon  them,  before  they  could  get  into  order
and  rank  themselves  by  companies,  pressed  them  so
warmly,  that  they  were  obliged  to  come  in  great
confusion  to  tlie  engagement-  Last  of  all,  Ca-
millus leading  on  the  heavy-armed,  the  Gauls  vvith
brandished  swords  hastened  to  fi^ht  hand  to  hand  ;


C5


*'  Hod.  II  Teverone,*


416  CAMILLUS.

but  the  Romans  meeting  the  strokes  with  their  pikes,
and  receiving  them  on  that  part  wliich  was  guarded
with  iron,  so  turned  their  thin  and  soft-tempered
swords,  that  they  were  soon  bent  almost  double'*'^  j
and  their  shields  were  pierced,  and  weighed  dow?n,
with  the  pikes  that  stuck  in  them.  They  quitted
therefore  their  own  arms,  and  endeavoured  to  seize
those  of  the  enemy,  and  to  v/rest  their  pikes  from
them.  The  Romans,  seeing  them  disarmed,  now
began  to  use  their  swords,  and  made  dreadful  havock
among  the  foremost.  In  the  mean  time  the  rest
took  to  flight,  and  were  scattered  along  the  plain,
for  Camillus  had  before-hand  secured  the  heights ;
and,  as  in  the  confidence  of  victory  they  had  left
their  camp  unfortified,  they  knew  it  would  be  taken
■with  ease.

This  battle  is  said  to  have  been  fouQ;ht  thirteen
years  after  tlie  taking  of  Rome^° ;  and  by  it's  issue  dis-
pelled the  dismal  apprehensions,  which  the  Romans
had  hitherto  entertained  of  the  barbarians.  They
had  imagined,  it  seems,  that  their  prior  victory  over
the  Gauls  was  owing  to  the  sickness  which  prevailed
in  their  army,  and  to  other  unforeseen  accidents,
rather  than  to  their  owai  valour  ;  and  so  great  had
their  terror  formicrly  been,  as  to  have  given  occasion
to  a  law^,  '  that  the  priests  shoidd  be  exempted  from
'  military  sei'vice,  except  in  the  ereut  of  an  invasion
*  Jrom  the  Gmds.*

This  was  the  last  of  Camillus'  martial  exploits.
For  the  taking  of  Velitras  was  a  direct  consequence
of  this  victory,  and  it  surrendered  w'ithoiit  the  least
resistance.  But  the  o'reatest  conflict,  which  he  ever
'experienced  in  the  state,  still  remained:  For  the
people  were  harder  to  deal  with,  after  they  returned
victorious  j  and  they  insisted  that  one  of  the  con-
suls, contrary  to  the  present  constitution,  shoidd  be

*s  Poljbi'us  (iv.  3S.)  gii^es  a  similar  account  of  the  ease,  with
which  tlie  swords  of  the  Gauls  were  bent  and  blunted.*

^■9  Not  thirteen,  but  twenty-three  years  after  that  event.  (Liv,
vi.  42.)


CAMILLUS.  417

chosen  out  of  their  body.  The  senate  opposed  them,
and  would  not  suffer  Camillus  to  resign  the  dictator-
ship, thinking  that  they  could  better  defend  the
rights  of  the  nobility  under  the  sanction  of  his  su-
preme authority.  But  one  day,  as  Camillus  was
sitting  in  the  Forum  and  employed  in  the  distribu-
tion of  justice,  an  officer  sent  by  the  tribunes  of  the
people  ordered  him  to  follow,  and  laid  his  hand  upon
him,  as  if  he  would  seize  him  and  carry  him  away.
Upon  this,  such  a  noise  and  tumult  was  raised  in  the
assembly,  as  had  never  been  known  before ;  those
who  were  about  Camillus  thrusting  the  plebeian
officer  down  from  the  tribunal,  and  the  populace
calling  out  to  drag  the  dictator  from  his  seat.  In
this  case,  Camillus  was  much  embarrassed ;  he  did
not,  however,  resign  the  dictatorship,  but  led  off  the
patricians  to  the  senate-house.  Previously  to  his
entering  it,  he  turned  toward  the  Capitol,  and  be-
sought the  gods  to  put  a  happy  end  to  the  present
disturbances,  solemnly  vowing  to  build  a  temple  to
Concord  when  the  tumult  should  be  appeased.

In  the  senate  there  was  a  diversity  of  opinions,
and  much  warm  debate.  The  mild  and  popular
counsel  however  prevailed,  which  allowed  one  of  the
consuls  to  be  a  plebeian  ^^.  When  the  dictator  an-
nounced this  decree  to  the  people,  they  received  it
(as  it  was  natural  they  should)  with  great  satisfac-
tion, were  immediately  reconciled  to  the  senate,  and

9°  The  people  having  gained  this  point,  the  consulate  was  re-
vived, and  the  military  tribuneship  laid  aside  for  ever.  But  at  the
same  time  the  patricians  procured  the  appointment  of  a  new  officer,
called  prpetor,  who  was  always  to  be  one  of  their  body.  The  con^
suls  had  been  generals  of  the  Roman  armies,  and  at  the  same  time
judges  of  civil  affairs ;  but  as  they  were  often  in  the  field,  it  was
thought  proper  to  separate  the  latter  branch  from  the  former,  and
appropriate  it  to  a  judge  with  the  title  of  prietor,  who  v.-as  to  be
next  to  them  in  dignity.  [The  first,  who  bore  this  high  office,
was  the  son  of  Camillus.  At  the  same  time,  likewise,  the  curule
sedileship  was  instituted.  Liv.  vii.  1.*]  About  A.  U.  C.  501,  an-
other praetor  was  appointed,  to  decide  the  difterences  among  fo-
reigners ;  upon  the  taking  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  two  others  ;  and
^s  many  more  upon  the  conquest  of  Spain.  ,

VOL.  I.  2  E


418  THEMISTOCLES  AND

conducted  Cam il his  home  with  loud  applause.  Next
day  they  assembled,  and  voted  that  tlie  temple,
which  Camilhis  had  vowed  to  Concord,  should  on
account  of  this  great  event  be  built  upon  a  spot
fronting  the  Forum  and  place  of  assembly.  To  the
Latin  Festival  they  added  one  day  more,  which  was
thenceforward  to  consist  of  four;  and  for  the  present
they  ordained,  that  the  whole  people  of  Rome  should
sacrifice  with  garlands  on  their  heads.  Camilhis
then  held  an  assembly  for  the  election  of  consuls,
when  Marcus  ^milius  was  chosen  out  of  the  nobi-
lity, and  Lucius  Sextius  from  the  commonalty,  the
first  plebeian  who  attained  that  honour.

This  was  the  last  of  Camillus'  transactions.  The
year  following,  a  pestilence  visited  Rome,  which
carried  off  a  prodigious  number  of  the  people,  most
of  the  magistrates,  and  Camilhis  himself.  His
death  could  not  be  deemed  premature,  on  account
of  his  great  age,  and  the  offices  which  he  had  borne;
yet  was  he  more  lamented  than  all  the  rest  of  the
citizens  conjunctively,  who  died  of  that  distemper^^


THEMISTOCLES  AND  CAMILLUS

COMPARED,  t

THE  lives  of  Themistocles  and  Camilhis  exhibit
striking  features  of  resemblance.  To  their  merit
both  were  exclusively  indebted  for  their  renown:
both  distinguished  themselves  by  their  brilliant
achievements;  both  rescued  their  respective  coun-
tries from  the  polluting  grasp  of  barbarian  in-
vaders ;  both  raised  them  from  their  ruins,  and
were  considered  as  their  second  founders  *.     At  the

"  Tliouc;h  It  carried  off  a  censor,  a  curule  oedile,  and  three  tri-
bunes of  the  people.  Livy's  panegyric  is  more  ample  than  this  of
Plutarch,  but  not  more  expressive.*

*  Grotius  finds  a  parallel  to  the  Roman  chieftain  in  Nehemiah,
•R'hom  he  also  con, pares  to  the  elder  Cato.  See  a  note  subjoined
to  the  opening  of  his  sixth  sermon,  beginning,  *  There  is  a  dispo-


CAMILLUS  COMPARED.  419

same  time  however  we  discover,   as  well  in  tlieir
general   character  as  in   their   civil,    political,  and
military  conduct,  several  marked  distinctions.     The-
mistocles  born  in  obscurity,  and  under  all  the  dis-
advantages of  a  very  moderate  fortune,  quickly  an-
nounced to  the  world  his  high  destination.    Camillus,
though  inheriting  patrician  blood,  and  consequently
placed  in  the  track  of  honours,  derived   not  much
advantage  fi'om  that  circumstance  ;  as,  through  the
depression  of  his  house's  fortunes,  he  was  obliged  to
owe  every  thing  to  the  exertion  of  his   own  power-
ful  energies.     Themistocles,  in  his   early  life  little       -V
elevated  above  his  companions,  showed  himself  neg-
ligent of  those  delicate  and  polite  attentions  which,
even  coupled  (as  they  frequently  are)  with   medio-
crity of  talent,  are  so  fascinating  in  general  society.
I3ut  he  soon  displayed  a  strong  faculty  of  reasoning,
profound  judgement,  and  an   eminent  capacity  for
the  art  of  governing.     His  was  however  a  stormy
youth,  ruffled  by  those  tempests  which  rise  from  a
boiling  spirit,  agitated  by  the  passions  of  that  impe-
tuous age.     Camillus,  an  uniform  example  of  honour
and  virtue,  began  almost  from  his  infancy  to  culti-
vate his  great  natural  endowments,   and  to   direct
them  to   the  public  good.     In  his  very  first   cam-
paign, made  in  his   fourteenth  year,  an  exploit  of
extraordinary  gallantry  points    him    out  to  his  ad-^
miring  country,  as  one    intimately  connected  with
her  future  destiny.       He    does    not  disappoint  her
fond  expectations  :  the  maturity  of  his  intellect  out-
runs his  boyhood,  and  he  stands  unrcproached  by
liistory  with  a  single  instance  of  those  irregularities,

sition  of  mind  called  Public  Spirit,  or  the  Love  of  our  Countr3  „
which  good  men  in  all  ages  have  exerted,  which  prudent  men  have
encouraged  by  endeavouring  to  make  it  fashionable  and  Jionour-
ubie,  vvijich  ingenious  men  have  consecrated  to  iunnortality  by  their
praibcs  of  it,  which  few  men,  how  profligate  soever,  have  had  the
impudence  to  censure  openly,  which  ridicule,  that  spares  ncthing,
luitli  been  almost  afraid  to  attack,  and  which  in  our  coindri/  hath
hccn  much  Uilked  of  and  tddom  found  ."  He  then  proceeds  to  show
how  abundantly  it  existed  in  the  Jew  in  question.*

'>   F   2

»0i  X.-f  am*


\H


420  TIIEMISTOCLES  AND

which  often  so  unfortunately  characterise  the  season
of  youth,

A  zealous  regard  for  rehgion  was  common  to
both.  '  In  all  state-emergencies,  their  first  step  is  by
vows  and  sacrifices  to  entreat  the  protection  of  the
gods.  In  this  however  the  Greek  appears  to  have
acted  chiefly  from  the  cool  policy  of  his  head,  the
Roman  from  the  honest  piety  of  his  heart.  AVell
aware  of  the  influence  of  rehgious  feeling  upon  the
human  mind,  Themistocles  dexterously  introduces
it,  upon  occasions  of  pressing  exigency,  to  revive
the  drooping  spirit  of  Athens:  the  first  care  of  Ca-
miJlus  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Gauls,  corres-
pondent with  the  rest  of  his  conduct,  is  to  rebuild
the  temples  which  they  had  destroyed.  His  life  is
wound  up  with  a  bright  display  of  religion  ;  for  a
short  time  before  his  death  he  dedicated  a  temple  of
Concord,  in  acknowledgement  of  the  happy  recon-
ciliation of  the  senate  and  the  people,  which  it  had
been  his  ambition  and  his  glory  to  eiicct.  Themis-
tocles  likewise,  after  the  battle  of  Salamis,  erected  a
temple  to  Diana  Orthobule  ('the  Prudent'):  but
for  this  apparent  act  of  devotion  he  was  reproached
even  by  his  contemporaries,  as  a  monument  erected
by  his  vanity  in  commemoration  of  those  counsels,
])y  which  he  had  saved  Greece.  If  Camillus  be
open  to  any  censure  in  this  respect,  it  is  that  he
forgot  to  fulfil  his  vow^  of  consecrating  to  Apollo
the  tenth  part  of  the  spoils  of  Veii ;  a  vov/,  indeed,
of  which  we  shall  perhaps  be  disposed  to  regard
the  fulfilment  as  impracticable,  when  we  consider
the  tumult  and  distraction  consequent  upon  taking
a  place  by  storm.

Camillus  had,  likewise,  great  benevolence  of  dis-
position. He  could  not  see  an  opulent  city  con-
signed to  the  ravages  of  a  licentious  soldiery  without
compassion,  and  watered  the  laurels  he  had  gathered,
with  his  tears.  Of  this  honourable  sensibility,  which
graces  the  cheek  of  the  warrior,  we  find  no  traces
in  Thcmistoclcs.     Devoted  to  ambition  and  a  thirst

12


CAMILLUS  COMPARED.  421

for  glory,  lie  Is  uniformly,  and  often  criminally
selfisli.  Hence  his  jealousy  of  several  eminent
Athenians,  particularly  of  Aristides,  whom  lie  drives
into  banishment ;  whereas  Camillus  divides  with  his
collegues  the  honour,  in  many  instances  exclusively
due  to  himself,  of  his  most  heroic  achievements.
To  this  remark  his  first  triumph,  after  the  taking  of
Veii,  forms  the  sole  exception.  The  facility,  with
wliich  the  Athenian  seems  to  forget  liis  country
amidst  the  splendours  of  the  Persian  court,  is  no
great  proof  of  his  patriotism  ;  and  though  he  prefers
death  by  his  own  hand  to  the  alternative  of  meeting
her  in  the  field,  it  is  possible  that  he  might  fear  to
risk  his  military  reputation  at  the  head  of  an  effemi-
nate mob  of  troops  against  their  habitual  conquerors,
the  well-disciplined  and  vvell-officered  veterans  of
Greece.  Camillus,  exiled  by  the  unjust  resentments
of  the  people,  quits  Rome  with  the  deepest  regret ;
and  though  in  his  first  bitter  moment  of  suffering  he
utters  against  her  an  inconsiderate  imprecation,  it  is
obvious  that  he  still  cherishes  a  strong  attachment
to  her  in  his  heart ;  and  that  he  only  wishes  to  see
her  involved  in  distress,  in  order  to  have  an  oppor-
tunity of  inflicting  upon  her  the  noblest  of  revenges,
that  of  effecting  her  deliverance.

At  the  epochs  of  their  respective  banishments,  the
superiority  of  Camillus  to  Themistocles  appears  the
most  striking.  This  sentence  the  latter  seems  to
have  incurred  by  the  heavy  contributions,  which  lie
exacted  from  the  allies  of  Athens,  as  well  as  by  his
continual  parade  of  his  toils  and  services.  That  of
Camillus  arose  from  less  dishonourable  causes.
His  unfortunate  neglect  of  the  vow  mentioned
above  might,  from  it's  consequences,  have  a  little
weight  upon  the  occasion  :  but  the  chief  ground  of
his  exile  was  the  inflexibility,  with  which  he  con-
stantly  withstood  the  popukar,  but  ruinous,  project
of  transferring  half  the  population  of  Home  to  Veii.
Themistocles,  in  banishment,  sunk  from  his  high
reputation  :  obsequious  in  his  first  address  to  '  the


422  THEMISTOCLES  AND

great  king,'  tlic  liauglity  republican  degenerated
into  the  servile  satrap ;  and  his  expulsion  from
Athens  proved  the  limit  of  his  exploits,  and  the
sepulchre  of  his  glory.  Camillus,  at  Ardea,  pre-
serves all  tlic  dignity  and  patriotism  of  his  character.
Upon  the  first  rumours  of  the  Roman  disasters,
he  arms  the  inhabitants  of  that  place,  and  attacks
the  enemies  of  his  country  with  considerable  success:
but  he  rigidly  refuses  to  place  himself  at  the  head
of  his  countrymen  collected  at  Veii,  till  their  choice
is  sanctioned  by  the  concurrence  of  their  brethren
shut  up  in  the  X^?-pitol.  Upon  the  notification  of
that  concurrence,  he  instantly  rushes  to  the  rescue
of  Rome,  and  irresistibly  compels  it's  ferocious  in-
vaders to  retire.

With   regard  to  their  military  prowess  however,
we    teel    ourselves   disposed,  at    the  first  view,  to
assign  the  palm  to  Themistocles.     The  most  splen-
did actions  of  the  Roman  general  "  hide  their  dimi-
nished  heads,"    when   placed   by  the   side   of  the
batt^o  of  Salamis.     That  deluge  of  barbarians,  which
thre?itcned  to  convert  the  beautiful  plains  of  Greece
into  '  a  solitude  so  frightful,  that  no  Greek  should
in  future  desire  to  inhabit  it;'   a    fleet    of  twelve
hundred  vessels,  not  to  mention  the  countless  my-
riads of  land-forces  acting  in  it's  support,  defeated
by  one  less  than  it's  sixth  part  in   number,  gives
an   unrivalled  brilliancy  to  this  wonderful  conflict.
But,  if   to  this  bright  day,  almost  the  single  gem
in    Themistocles'  crown    of  glory,  we  oppose  Ca-
jnilius'  sixty  years  of  victory  unsullied  by   defeat,
the   latter    may  hardily  challenge  comparison  with
his  rival,  if  not  assert  his  superiority.      We  must
admit,  indeed,  that  upon  the  event  of  the  action  of
Salamis  htuig  the   salvation  of  Greece ;  and,  if  the
merit  of  an  ex])Ioit  is  to   be  measured  by  it's  con-
sequences, no    single  deed  can   vie   in  Justre   with
that  memorable  effort.     To  this  we  must  likewise
add,  as  further  sources  of  credit  to   Themistocles,
liis  dexterity  in  selecting  the   most  fivourable   spot

9


CAMILLUS  COMPARED.  428     '

for  the  engagement,  in  constraining  the  Greeks
(notwithstanding  their  injudicious  reluctance)  to
avail  themselves  of  the  advantage,  and  in  influencing
Xerxes  to  a  precipitate  retreat.  On  the  other
hand,  to  estimate  the  importance  of  Camillus*
achievements,  we  must  place  in  the  balance  with
Greece  Rome,  a  city  already  powerful,  and  destined
soon  to  sway  the  sceptre  of  the  world :  we  must
consider  the  cool  and  steady  valour  with  w^iich  he  *,

wrested  the  ransom  of  his  country  from  the  gripe        *^m
of  her    insolent   and   formidable    conqueror ;    the         *    -
penetration,  with  which  he  always  saw  and  seized
the  expedient ;  the  address,  with   which  he  set  fire
to  the  Latin  camp,  and  destroyed  the  whole  army ;  ^

finally,  his  last  victory  over  the  Gauls,  in  which,
notwithstanding  his  extreme  age,  he  displayed  so
much  foresight,  resolution,  and  activity — and  we  shall
pause,  before  we  venture  to  pronounce  a  decisive
opinion  upon  their  relative  merits.  Themistocles
too,  it  ought  to  be  subjoined,  at  the  battle  of  Sal"-
mis  had  several  collegues,  particularly  Aristidcb,
who  miglit  justly  claim  a  portion  of  the  common,
glory  ^^ :  v^^hereas  Camillus,  in  all  his  labours,  stood
independent  and  alone.

Themistocles  was  principally  distinguished  by
his  political  talents.  With  a  natural  taste  for  the
science  of  government,  he  made  it  his  principal
study ;  and  was  little  less  useful  to  Athens  by  his
civil,  than  by  his  military  services.  In  the  dispute
prior  to  the  engagement  at  Salamis  about  the
command  in  chief,  he  not  only  promptly,  as  far  as
concerned  his  own  claim,  surrenders  the  honour  in
debate,  but  determines  his  countrymen  likewise
to  make  the  same  patriotic  sacrifice  to  the  general
weal.      He   strenuously  opposes   the   project    sug-

5-  Might  it  not  however  almost  as  probably  be  inferred,  from
many  passages  in  Grecian  history,  that  these  collegues  embarrassed,
rather  than  promoted,  his  measures;  and  therefore  multiplied,
rather  than  divided,  his  glory.


4U  THEMISTOCLES  AND

gested  by  the  Spartans,  of  excluding  from  the  Anl=.
phictyonic  coimcil  the  delegates  of  those  republic.^,
Avhich  had  not  taken  up  arms  against  Xerxes ;  a
project,  calculated  in  it's  issue  to  leave  Greece
wholly  at  the  disposal  of  tlie  two  or  three  principal
states.  Camillus  had  fewer  opportunities  of  exhi-
biting his  political  skill.  In  this  respect,  indeed,
he  was  probably  inferior  to  the  Athenian  leader  :
the  laws  how^ever,  which  under  the  pressure  of
circumstances  he  enacted,  were  highly  judicious.
The  plan  suggested  by  Themistocles  to  the  Athe-
nians, of  making  their  principal  exertions  by  sea,
has  been  the  subject  of  much  commendation,
as  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  their  subsequent
power  :  it  has  likewise  incurred  not  less  censure,
as  having  eventually  contributed  to  their  ruin.
It  completely  changed,  without  doubt,  the  military
constitution  of  Athens ;  and  Plato  reproaches  it's
adviser  with  havino;  converted  excellent  soldiers
into  crews  of  sailors  and  marines.  This  gave  the
inferior  orders  too  great  an  ascendency  in  the
government ;  and,  by  corrupting  the  marines,  led
to  the  decay  of  the  state.  Camillus,  in  opposing
the  scheme  of  the  Veian  m.igration,  acted  with  more
enlarged  views  ;  and  by  his  vigorous  resistance
evinced  as  much  prudence,  as  perseverance  and
intrepidity.  His  moderation  and  wisdom  he  like-
wise equally  evinced  in  conceding  to  the  people  the
privilege  of  a  plebeian  consul,  and  thus  terminating
one  of  the  longest  and  most  perilous  dissensions  of
the  commonwealth.

If  tlicn  his  political  system  had  less  of  compre-
hension and  of  finesse,  than  that  of  Themistocles,
it  had  more  of  honour  and  of  virtue.  His  treat-
ment of  the  Falcrian  schoolmaster  forms  a  most
striking  and  creditable  contrast  with  the  plan  de-
vised by  the  Athenian  chieftain  of  setting  fire,  in
the  time  of  profound  peace,  to  the  confederate  navy
of  Greece.     Camillus  could  never  have  conceived  a


CAMILI.US  COMPARED.  425

project,  which  Aristides  would  have  condemned  as
'  not  more  useful  than  unjust;'  and  Themistocles,
in  Camillus'  situation,  would  probably  not  have  re-
jected the  proposal  made  to  him  by  the  pedagogue
of  Falerii.


1


END    OP   VOL.    I.


I'rinCtfd  by  C.  B  ;ld\vin,  N^w  Bridge-street,  London,


BINDING JUL  171970


£


DE  Plutarchus

7  Lives.      2d  ed,

P55

1813

V.I


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET     ,     . j/


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
