Plutarch's Lives, Vol. III (Langhorne, 1813) (Plutarch (John & William Langhorne, trans.), 1813)
================================================================================================
Langhorne's Plutarch's Lives, Vol. 3. Completes the 6-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

PLUTARCH'S LIVES,

TRANSLATED FROM / / ^^

THE ORIGINAL GREEK; 3^

I

r
WITH

NOTES CRITICAL AND HISTORICAL,

AND A

LIFE OF PLUTARCH.

BY JOHN LANGHORNE, D.D.

AND

WILLIAM LANGHORNE, A.M.
IN SIX VOLUMES.

THE SECOND EDITION,'.

BY ; -^

THE REV. FRANCIS Vl^RANGHAM, M.A. F.R.S.

Wnil CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

T

VOL. IIL

LONDON:

Printed pon J. Mawman; F. C. and J. Rivinoton; G. Wilkie and J. Robinson; J. Walkeh ;
W. Clarke AND Sons; Cadeu. and Davieb; F. Wingrate; C. Liw; .T. anu A, Arch;

SCATCHBRD AND LETTERSIAN ; B. AND R. CUOSBY ; AVhITE, COCHRANE, AND CO. ; LoNGMAN.

Hurst, Rees, Okme, and Brown; J. Booker; J. RrcnARDSON; J. M, Richardson ; Black,
Parry, and Co.; J. Hatchard; J. Murray; R. Scholey; R. Baldwin ; Crauock and
Joy; T. HajultoS; J. Faclder; Gale, Curtis, and Fenner ; and G. and S. Robinson j
and Wilson and Soss, York.

1813.

''1

P6^

fruited by C. Baldwin, New Dridgt:-^trcct, Lomliai.

CONTENTS

OP THE

THIRD VOLUME.

. PhUopcemcn . 1

XX. Titus Qidiicthis Flam'mius 30

Philopamen and Titu6- Quinctius Fla-

mi?ims compared 60

XXI. Pyrrhus .\ 64

XXII. Cams Marius .- . , .' 119

k

Pyrrhus and Cakes Ularius compared\ 181

XXIII. Lysander . . .J.-. :'. 187

XXIV. Sijlla 229

Lysander and Sylla compared 284-

XXV. Cimon , 292

XXVI. LucuUus 324

Cimon a?2d Lnculliis compared , 390

XXVIL Nicias 396

XXVIII. Marcus Crassus 446

Nicias and Marcus Crassus co77ipared 498

THE

LIFE

OF

PHILOPGEMEN.

SUMMARY.

His birth and education : personal appearance : character and pu7-'
suits. His first campaigns, and other employments. His tastejbr
study. He goes to the assistance of Megalopolis. Hisjirst exploit.
He is xoounded by a javelin : his/ortitude upon the occasion. He
serves in Crete, and upon his return is elected general of the horse.
He kills the general of the enemies' cavalry. Sketch of the Achcean
league. Changes introduced by Philopcemen in the arming and
manceuvring of the troops. He directs the prevalent passion for
luxury to military equipage : gains a victory over Machanidas,
tyrant of Lacedcemon ; and kills him -uoith his own hand. Honour
paid to him at the Achcean games. High opiyiion entertained of
him by strangers. He recovers Messenefrom the tyrant Nabis :
at the earnest entreaty of the Gortynians, passes into Crete ; and
by that measure offends the Megalopolitans, who however are pre-
vented by the Achceans from declaring him an outlaw. He is
tvorsted at sea by Nabis ; but defeats him twice on land, in return,
within a very few days. He draws Lacedcemon into the Achcean
league : refuses the magnificejit presents sent him by that state :
defends Sparta against Flaminius and Diophnnes ; but subse-
quently treats it with great severity. He ojoposes the ascendency
which the Romans affect over the Achceans : goes to attack Dino-
erates ; is taken captive, and thrown into prison. Grief of the
Achceans on receiving this intelligence, and plans to effect his
release. He is poisoned by Dinocrates. His death avenged by
the Achceans. His interment : honours decreed to his memory.
VOL. in. B

2 PHILOPCEMEN.

At Mantinea tlierc was a man of great quality
and power named Cassander ', who being obliged by
a reverse of fortune to quit his own country, went
and settled at Megalopolis. He was induced to fix
there, chiefly by the friendship which subsisted be-
tween himself and Crausis^ the father of Fhilopoemen,
^vho was in all respects an extraordinary character-
While his friend lived, he had all that he could wish;
and, being desirous after his death to make some
return for his hospitahty, he educated his orphan
son, in the same manner as Homer represents Achil-
les to have been educated by Pha:^nix, and formed
him from his infancy to generous sentiments and
royal virtues.

But, when he was past the years of childhood,
Ecdennis and Demophaues 'had him principally under
their care. They were both Megalopolitans ; who
having learned the Academic philosophy of Arcesi-
laus "■, applied it, above all the men of their time, to
action and aflairs of state. They delivered their
country from tyranny, by providing persons privately
to tiike ofl'Aristodemus ; assisted Aratus ' in driving
out Nicocles, the tyrant of Sicyon : and at the re-
quest of the people of Cyrene, whose government
^vas in great disorder^', sailed thither, settled it on the
foundation of good laws, and thoroughly regulated

' Pausanias (viii, 49.) ami Strabo call him * Cleancler ;* and
some MSS. of I'lutarch agree with them. So it stands, likewise,
in the translation ot'Guarini. (L.) Mantinea and Megalopolis were
cities in Arcadia. Philopccmen was contemporary with T. Q. Fla-
minius, with whom he is here compared, and gave lessons to Poly-
bius in the art of government.*

" Fie is called Craugis in Pausania.s, in tlie inscription of a statue
of Philop(rmen at Tegea^, and in an ani-ient collection of Epigrams.

5 In I'ausanias their names are Ecdelus and Megalophanes.'

■* Arcesilaus was founder of the Middle Academy, and made
some alterations in the doctrine which had previously prevailed.

5 See his Life, in the sequel of this wotk.*

* This, it appears from history, was frequently the case. Plato
had refused to be their legi>lator, on account of their excessive
prosperity. Sec belo\s', in ihc Life oi" LuCuUus.,*

PHILOPCEMEN. S

the commonwealth. But, among all their memorable
actions, they vahicd tliemselves most upon the edu-
cation of Pliilopoomen ; as having rendered liim, by
tiiC principles of philosophy, a common benefit to
Greece* And indeed, as he came the last of so
many excellent generals, Greece had an entire love
for him as tlic child of her old age, and with his
■growing reputation enlarged his power. For whicii
reason, a certain Roman calls him " The last of the
Greeks ;" meaning, that Greece had not produced a
single illustrious man, or one that was Vv'orthy of her,
after him.

His visage was not very homelys as some imagine
it to have been ; for we see his statue still remaining
at Delphi. As for tlie mistake of his hostess at Me-
gara, it is said to have arisen from his easiness of be-
haviour and the simplicity of his garb. She, having
intelligence that the general of the Achaans ^ M^as
coming to her house, was in great care and hun-y
to provide his supper, her husband happening to be
out of the v;av. In the mean time Philop(rmen
arrived ; and, as his habit was ordinary, she took him
for one of his own servants or a courier, and desired
him to assist her in the business of the kitchen. He
presently threw off his cloke, and began to cleave
some wood ; when the master of the house return-
ing, and seeing him so employed, said, " What is
*' the meaning of this, Philopocmen ?" to which he
replied, in broad Doric, " I am paying the fine of

' Pausanias assures us, that his visage was homely (which is the
obvious inference, indeed, of the Megarensian anecdote), but at the
same time declares, that in point of size and strength no man in
Peloponnesus exceeded hinu (viii. 49.)

s The word Axatot, in it's most general sense, was taken for flie
whole population of Greece between Macedon and the isthmus of
Cofinth. See Homer, &c.: here, however, as well as in the Lives
of Pelopidas and Aratus, it is more specifically applied to the inha-r
bitants of that part of Peloponnesus (formerly called iEgialos)
bordering on the Corinthian gulf, between Patrce and Sicyon, and
of which the capital was Corinth. These v.ere tlu^y, from whoai
the celebrated Lea<rue took itt. name.*

C 2

4 PHILOPCEMEN,

*' my deformity." Titus FJaminius, rallying' huri
one day upon his make, said, " What iine hands
" and legs you have ! but then you have no lielly :"
and he was, indeed, very slender in the waist. This
raillery, however, nn'g'ht rather be referred to the
condition of his fortune : for he had good soldiers,
both horse and foot, but very often wanted money
to pay them. These stories are subjects of disputa-
tion in the schools^;

As to his manners, we find that his pursuits of
honour were too nnich attended with roughness and
passion. Epaminondas was the person whom he
proposed for liis pattern ; and he succeeded in imi-
tating his activity, his shrewdness, and his contempt
of riches ; but his choleric contentious humour pre-
vented his attaining the mildness, gravity, and can-
dour of that eminent man in political disputes ; so
tliat he seemed rather lit for war, than for the civil
administration. From a child, indeed, he was fond
of every tiling in the military way, and readily enter-
ed into the exercises which tended to that purpose,
those of riding (for instance) and handling of arms.
As he seemed welbformed likewise for wrestlino- his
friends and governors advised him to improve him-
self in that art ; which gave him occasion to ask,
" Whether that species of exercise would be inju-
" rious to his proficiency as a soldier ?" They told
him the truth ; that the habit of body and manner
of life, the diet and exercise, of a soldier and a wrest-
ler were radically different : that the wrestler must
have nnicli sleep and full meals, with stated times of
exercise and rest, every little departure from hii
rules being extremely prejudicial ; whereas the sol-
dier should be prepared for the most irregular
changes of living, and should chiefly endeavour to
bring himself to bear the want of food and sleep

'' Wliere every subject, political, historical, and n1nr.1I, was dis-
r-.is;-.td. Plutarch's ' Morals' indeed, as they are called, are pro-
bably only a collection of his disquisitions, delivered to general or
select undicuci's in Greece or at Rome.*

PHILOPCEMEN. 5

without difiiculty. Philopocmen, hearing this, not
only avoided and derided the exereise of wrestling
himselfj but subsequently, when he came to be ge-
neral, to the utmost of his power exploded the whole
art by every mark of disgrace and expression of con-
tempt ; satisfied that it rendered persons, who were
the most fit for war, quite unable to fight upon neces-
sary occasions*.

When his governors and preceptors had quitted
their charge, he engaged in those private incur-
sions into Laconia, Vvhich the city of Megalo-
polis made for the sake of booty ; and in these
he was sure to be the first to march out, and the
last to return.

His leisure he spent either in the chase, which
increased both his strength and activity, or in the
tillage of the field ; for he had a handsome estate
twenty furlongs ti'om the city, to which he went
every day after dinner, or after supper : and at night
he threw himself upon an ordinary mattress, and
slept as one of the labourers. Early in the morning
he arose, and went to work along with his vine-
dressers or ploughmen ; after which he returned to
the town, and employed his time about the public
affairs with his friends and with the magistrates.
What he gained in the wars, he laid out upon horses
or arms, or in the redeeming of captives : but he
endeavoured to improve his own estate the justest
way in the world, I mean by agriculture ^*^, Neither
did he apply himself to it in a cursory manner, but
with the full conviction, that the surest way not to

* See the Life of Alexander, Vo!. IV.

'° Columella says, * agriculture is next a -kin to philosophy.' It
does, indeed, afford a person who is capable of speculation an op-
portunity of meditating upon iiatui'e ; and such meditations enlarge
the mind. (L.) He subsequently mentions it, as * the only method
of improving one's income noble in itself, and fit for a gentleman to
pursue.' And it has, fortunately for England, so appeared of late
(1806) to some of her most illustrious characters.*

e PIIILOPCEMEN.

touch what bclonsfs to others is to take care of one's

*--' I

own "

He spent some time in hearing the discourses, and
studyinf^ the writings, of philosophers ; but selected
such, as he tliought might assist his progress in vir-
tue. Among the poetical images in Homer, he at-
tended to those which seemed to excite and en-
courage valour: and, as to other authors, he was
most conversant in the Tactics of Evangelus ''\ and
in the Histories of Alexander ; being persuaded that
learning sliould conduce to action, and not be re-
garded as mere pastime, and an idle fund for talk.
In the study of tactics, he neglected those plans and
diagrams which are drawn upon paper, and exem-
plified the rules in the field : considering with him-
self as he travelled, and pointing out to those about
him, the difficulties of steep or broken ground; and
liow the ranks of an army must be extended or closed,
according to the difference made by rivers, ditches,
and defiles. He seems, indeed, to have set rather
too high a value upon military knowledge ; embrac-
ing war as the most extensive exercise of virtue, and
desi)ising those who were not versed in it, as persons
entirely useless.

He was now tln'rty years old, when Cleomenes '"
king of the LacedoL^monians surprised Megalopolis
by night, and having forced the guards, entered and
seized the market-place. Philopoemen ran to suc-
cour the inhabitants, but though he fought with the
uiost determined and desperate valour, he was not

" See a similar idea, and the sentiment will bear repetition, in
the Parallel of Ariitides and Cato, \'ol. II."

•i This author is mentioned by Anian, who himself wrote a Dis-
course upon TrtCtics. He observes that the treatise of Evangelus,
like those of many others on that subject (Polybius, Eupolemus,
Inhicratus, Posidonius, .*'.c.) v/ere become of little use in his time,
because they had omitted several tilings as sufficiently kn©wn in
[heir days which how., vcr at tliat lat - period stood in need of ex-
plication. Tiiis may serve us a caution to future writers.

' i li-. C. '223.

PHILOPCEMEN. 7

able to drive out the enemy. He prevailed how-
ever so far, as to give the people an opportunity oi*
stealing out of the town, by maintaining the combat
with the pursuers, and drawing Cleomenes upon
himself; so that he retired the last with difficulty,
and after prodigious efforts, being wounded and hav-
ing had his horse killed under him. When they had
gained Messene, Cleomenes made them an offer of
their city with their lands and goods. Philopoemen,
perceiving that they were glad to accept the pro-
posal and in haste to return, strongly opposed it ; re-
presenting to them in a set speech, that Cleomenes
did not wish to restore them their city, but to be
master of the citizens, in order that he might be more
secure of keeping the place : that he could not long
sit still to watch empty houses and walls, for the very
solitude would force him away. By this argument,
he diverted the Megalopolitans from their purpose ;
but at the same time he furnished Cleomenes with a
pretence to plunder the town, and after having de-
molished the greatest part of it, to march offloaded
with booty.

Soon afterward, Antigonus came down to assist
the Achaeans against Cleomenes ; and finding that
he had possessed himself of the heights of Sellasia^%
and blocked up the passages, drew up his army near
him, with a resolution to force him from his post.
Philopoemen with his citizens was placed among the
cavalry, supported by the lllyrian foot, a numerous
and gallant body of men who closed that extremity.
They had orders to wait quietly, until from the
other wing, where the king fought in person, they
should see a red robe lifted up on the point of a
spear. The Achaeans kept their ground, as they had
been directed ; but the lllyrian officers with their
corps attempted to break in upon the Lacedaemo-

" This was a city of Laconia on the river GEnus, and was de-
stroyed by Aratus after a victory over the Lacedaemonians. See
Pausan. viii. 49, Liv. xxxiv. 28, and Polyb. ii. near the end.*

^ PITILOPGEIMEN.

rjians. Euclidas the brother of Cleomenes, seeing
this opening made in tlie enemy's army, imme-
diately ordered a party of his Jight-armed infiuitry to
■wheel about and attack the rear of the Illyrians, thus
separated from the horse. This being carried into
execution, and the Illyrians harassed and broken,
Fhilopocmen perceived that it would be no diilicult
matter to drive off that light-armed party, and that
the occasion called for it. llefirstmentionedthething
to the king's officers ; but they rejected the hint,
and considered him as no better than a madman, his
reputation being not yet sufficiently great or respect-
ableto justify such a movement. He therefore himself
with his Megalopolitans attacked them, threw them
into confusion, and routed them witli considerable
slaughter. Desirous still farther to encourage An-
tigonus' troops, and quickly to penetrate into the
enemy's army, which w^as now in some disorder, he
quitted his horse ; and advancing on foot in his
horseman's coat of mail and other heavy accoutre-
ments, upon rough uneven ground fidl of springs
and bogs, he was making his way with extreme diffi-
culty, when he had both his thighs pierced with a
javelin, so that the point came through on the other
side, and the wound was great though not mortal.
At first he stood still, as if he had been shackled,
not knowing what method to take. For the thong-
in the middle of the javelin rendered it difficult to
be drawn out, nor would any one about him venture
to do it. At the same time the fight being at the
hottest, and likely to be soon over, honour and in-
dignation urged him on to take his share in it ; and
therefore by moving his legs backward and forward,
he broke the staff, and then ordered the pieces to be
pulled out. Thus set free he ran, sword in hand,
through the first ranks to charge the enemy ; at the
same time animating the troops, and firing them
with emulation.

Antigonus having gained the victory, to try his

PHILOPCEMEN. J)

IVIacedonian officers, demanded of them, " Why
" they had led on the cavahy, before he had given
" the signal ? By way of apology, they said, "They
" were obliged against their will to come to action,
" because a young man of Megalopolis had begun
" the attack too soon." " That young man," re-
" plied Antigonus smiling, " has performed the
" office of an experienced general."

This action, as we may easily imagine, raised Phi-
lopocmen into high reputation ; so that Antigonus
was very desirous of having his service in the wars,
and offered him a considerable command with great
appointments : but he declined it, because he knew
that he could not bear to be under the direction of
another. Not choosing however to remain idle, and
hearing that there was a war in Crete, he sailed thi-
ther, to exercise and improve his military talents.
When he had served there some time along with a
set of brave men, who were not only versed in all
the stratagems of war, but temperate besides, and
Strict in their manner of living, he returned with so
much renown to tlie Achseans, that they imme-
diately appointed him general of the horse. Here
he found that the cavalry made use of small and
mean horses, which they picked up as they could,
when they were called to a campaign ; that many of
them shunned the wars, and sent others in their place;
and that shameful ignorance of service and timidity
universally prevailed. The former generals had
connived at all this, because it being a degree of
honour among the Achaeans to serve on horseback,
the cavalry had much power in the commonwealth,
and considerable influence in the distribution of re-
wards and punishments. But Philopoemen would
not yield to such considerations, or grant them the
least indulgence. Instead of that, he applied to the
several towns, and to each of the young men in par-
ticular; rousing them to a sense of honour, punish-
ing them when necessity required, and practising
them in exercise, reviews, and mock-battles in

10 PHILOrCEMEX.

plnres of the most public resort. By these means, in
a liule ti:r.e, he brought them to surprising strength
an:i spirit ; iintl what is of the i^reatest consequence
in discipline, rendered them so light and quick, that
all tlieir evolutions and movements, whether per-
formed separately or together '', were executed with
a degree of readiness and address, causing their mo-
tion to resemble that of one body actuated by an in-
ternal voluntary principle. In the signal battle,
wiiich they fougiit with the iEtolians and Elcans
near the river Larissus '^ Demophantus general of
the Llean horse advanced before the lines at full
speed against Thilopannen. Philopaunen, preventing
his blow, widi a push of his spear brought him dead
to the ground. Tlie enemy, seein^r Demophantus
tall, immediately fled. And now Philopoemen was
universally celebrated, as not inferior to the young
in ])ersonal valour, nor to the old in prudence, and
as equally well qualified both to %ht and to com-
mand.

Aratus was indeed the first who raised the com-
mon v.ealth of the Acliffians to dignity and po\yer.
For wliereas before they were in a low condition,
scattered in unconnected cities, he combined them
in oiie body, and gave them a moderate civil go-
vernment worthy of Greece. And as it happens in
running waters that, when a few small bodies stop,
others stick to them, and one part strengthening
another, the whole becomes one firm and solid mass,
so it was with Greece. At a time when she w^as
weak and easily broken, dispersed in a variety of in-
dependent cities, the Achaeans first united them-
selves ; and then attaching some of the neighbour-
mg cities, by assisting them to expel their tyrants,
while others Voluntarily joined them for the sake of
that unanimity, which they beheld in so well-consti-
tuted a government, they conceived the design of in-

5 K«V 8>a(i>t,3 , which Plutarch elsewhere defines a body of fifty
se (Qu *orty-nin<;, and a captain ?) drawn up in a square.*

'5 K

horse

»<> B. C. 'JO^.

PHILOPCEMEN. 11

coi'poratliii^ Peloponnesus into one great power.
During the life-time of iVratus indeed, they attended
tlie motions of tlie Macedonians, and made their
court iirst to Ptolemy, and subscvquently to Anti-
gonus and Phihp, who had all a considerable share
ill the aflairs of Greece. But when Philopoemen had
taken upon him the administration, the Achasans
linding themselves respectable enough to oppose
their strongest adversary, ceased to call in foreign
protectors. With regard to Aratus, he (as we have
related in his Life ) not being so fit for conflicts in
the field, managed most of his affairs by address and
moderation, and the friendships which he had
contracted vvith foreign princes : but Philopcemen
being a warrior, vigorous and fortunate and suc-
cessful in his first battles, raised the ambition of the
Acha^ans together with their power ; for under him
they were accustomed to conquer, and to prosper in
almost all their undertakings.

In the first place, he corrected their errors in
drawing up their forces, and in the make of their
arms. For hitherto they had used bucklers, which
were easy indeed to manage on account of their
smallness, but too narrow to cover the body, and
lances much shorter than the Macedonian pikes :
they answered the end in fighting at a distance, but
were of little use in close engagement. As for the
order of battle, they had not been accustomed to
draw up in a spiral form ^'^ ^ but in the square bat-
talion, which having no front either of pikes or of

^" The ISIacedonian phalanx occasionally changed from the
square to the spiral or orbicular form, and sometimes to that of th^
cuiieus or ' wedge.'

M. Ilicard has a tactical note upon this passage, but it's evolution
is not very easy, nor perhaps very necessary.*

Tu^ic, uc, a-TTu^cii might also be translated ' to draw up in platoons,*
the word «r/TS((!:* (derived from o-^aa) signifying ' a band,* or 'pla-
toon.' But then in the original it would rather have been a-xufocif
than a-^itpctv : besides, the context seems to determine it to the for-
mer signification. It was necessary for the phalanx to throw them-
selves into the spiral or orbicular form, whenever they were sur-
rounded, in order that they might face and fight the enemy on
every side.

1? PHILOPCEMEX.

shields fit to lock together, like that of the Mace-
donians, was easily penetrated and broken. Philo-
pa-men altered both ; persuading them, instead of
the buckler and lance, to take the shield and pike ;
to arm their heads, bodies, thighs, and legs ; and,
instead of a light and desultory manner of fighting,
to adopt one "more close and firm. After he had
brought the youth to wear complete armour, and on
that account to consider themselves as invincible,
his next step was to reform them v/ith respect to
luxury and the love of expense. He could not in-
deed entirely cure them of the distemper, with
which they had long been infected, the vanity of
appearance ; for they had vied with each other in
fine clotlies, in purple carpets, and in the rich ser-
vice of their tables. But he began with diverting
their love of show from superfluous things to those
that were useful and honourable, and soon pre-
vailed upon them to retrench their daily expenditure
upon their persons, and to display their splendour
and magnificence in their arms and the whole equi-
page of war. The shops therefore were seen strewed
with plite broken in pieces, while breast-plates were
gilt wi h the gold, and shields and bridles studded
with the silver. On the parade the young men were
managing their horses, or exercising their arms.
The women were observed adorning helmets and
crests with various colours, or embroidering military
vests both for the cavalry and the infantry. The
verv siglit of these things inflaming their courage,
and calling forth their vigour, made them adven-
turous and rcadv to face anv danger. For much
expense in other things which attract our eyes
tempts to luxury, and too often produces effeminacy,
the indul; cnce of the senses relaxing the vigour of
the mind ; but, in this instance, it strengthens and
improves it. Thus Homer represents Achilles, at
the sight of his new armour, exulting with joy ^% and

'^ She drops the radiant burthen on the ground ;
Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around*

PHILOPCEMEN. 13

burning with impatience to use it. When Pliilopcp-
men had persuaded tlie youth thus to arm and to
adorn themselves, he mustered and trained them
continually, and they entered with pride and plea-
sure into his exercise. For they were highly de-
lighted with the new form of the battalion, which was
so cemented, that it seemed impossible to break
it. Their arms likewise became easy and light in
the wearing, because they were charmed v/ith the
richness and beaiity ; and tliey longed for nothing
more than to use them against the enemy, and to
try them in a real encounter.

At that time the Achseans were at war with Ma-
chanidas the tyrant of Lacedagmon, who wilh a nu-
merous and powerful army was watching his oppor-
tunity to subdue the whole of Peloponnesus. As
soon as intelligence was brought that he had at-
tacked the Mantineans, Philopoemcn took the field,
and marched against him. They drew up their ar-
mies near Mantinea, each having a considerable
number of mercenaries in pay, beside the whole
force of their respective cities. The engagement
being begun, Machanidas with his foreign troops
put to flight the spearmen and the Tarentines, who
were placed in the Achaean front ; but afterward,
instead of falling upon that part of the army who
stood their ground, and breaking them, he went
in pursuit of the fugitives'^; and, when he should
have endeavoured to rout tlie main body of the
Achaians, left his own uncovered. Philopoemcn
after so indifferent a beginning had made light of
the misfortune, and represented it as a trifle, though

Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes,
Unmoved, the hero kindles at the show,
And feels with rage divine his bosom glow ;
From his fierce eye-balls living flames expire,
And flash incessant like a stream of fire.

PorE, II. xix. 18.

'9 B. C. 208. See Polyb. xi., who does not however entircly
asiee with Plutarch in the details of this action.*

14 PHILOPCEMEX.

the day seemed to be entirely lost. But when he
saw what an error tlie enemy had committed, in
quitting their foot and going upon tlie pursuit, by
which they left him a good opening, he did not try
to stop them in their career after the fugitives, but
suffered them to pass by ; and when they were at a
great distance, rushed upon the Lacedaemonian in-
fantry, now left unsupported by their right wing.
Stretching therefore to the left he took them in
flank, destitute as they were of a general, and far
from expecting an attack ; for they tliought Macha-
iiidas absolutely sure of victory, wiien they saw hiin
following the enemy.

After lie had routed this infantry with dreadful
slaughter (for four thousand Laceda3monians, it is
said, were left dead upon the s])ot) he marclicd
against Machanidas, who was now returning with
his mercenaries from the pursuit. There was a
broad and deep ditch between them, where they
botii strove awhile, the one to get over and ^y, and
the other to prevent him. Their appearance was
not like that of a combat between two generals,
but between two wild beasts [or, rather, between
a hunter and a wild beast] v>-hom necessity reduces
to fight. Philopoemen was the great hunter. The
tyrant's horse being strong and spirited, and vio-
lently spurred on both sides, ventured to leap into
the ditch ; and was raising his fore-feet in order to
gain the op})osite bank, when Simmias and Polyae-
nuH, who always fought by the side of Phih)poemen,
rode up and levelled their spears against Machani-
das. But Philopoemen prevented tliem ; and per-
ceiving that the horse with his head reared aloft
covered the tyrant's body, he turned his own a
little, and pushing his spear at him with all his force,
tumbled him into the ditch. The Acha^ans, in ad-
miration of this exploit and of his conduct in the
whole action, set up his statue in brass in tins very
attitude at Delphi.

It is reported that at the Nemean games, a little

PHILOPGEMEK 25

after he had gained the battle of Mantinen, Philo-
poemen (who had then been chosen a second time
general, and was at leisure on account of that cele-
brated festival) first caused this phalanx in the best
order and attire, to pass in review before the Greeks,
and to make all it's tactical movements with the ut-
most vit-'our and ac^ilitv. After this, he entered tlie
theatre, while the musicians were contendmg tor
the prize. He v.as attended by the youth, in their
military clokes and scarlet vests. These young men
were all well made, of the same age ar.d stature,
and though they shov^ed great respect for th.eir ge-
neral, yet appeared not a little elated themselves
with the many glorious battles which they liad
fought. At the moment of their entrance, Pylades
the musician happened to be singing to his lyre the
Persae of Timotheus"'', and was pronouncing the
verse with which it begins,

*' Freedom's illustrious palm for Greece I wOn;"'

when the people, struck w^th the grandeur of the
poetry sung by a voice equally excellent, turned their
eyes from every part of the theatre upon Phiiop(r-
men, and welcomed him v;ith the loudest plaudits.
They caught in idea the ancient dignity of Greece,
and in their present confidence aspired to the lofty
spirit of former times.

As young horses require their accustomed rider?,
and are wild and unruly Vv'hen mounted by strangers,
so it was with the Achaeans. When their forces
were under any other commander, upon every press-
ing emergency they grew discontented, and looked
round for Philopannen ; and if he did but make his
appearance, they were soon satisfied again, and

'° Timotlieus was a Dithyrambic poet ol' Miletus, tl-.e capitiil of
Ionia, who died B. C. S56. (I..) According; to Pausanias iii. ]2., he
added four, or as SuidSs Ray^, two new strings to the lyre, making
tlie whole number eleven. This rausicinri, h.owevcr, as appeai-s
from the date, was not the Timotiieus of Drvdeji's ' Aiexauier'ai
Feast :' but a namesake of hi.•^ of Brcotia.*

16 PHILOPCEMEX.

fitted for action by the confidence ^v]lich they reposed
in liim : well knowing that he was the only general,
whom their enemies dnrst not look in the face, and
that they were ready to tremble at his very nama
and character.

Phili}) king of Maccdon, thinking that he could
easily subjugate the xVchiKans again, if Philopoemen
were out of the way, privately sent some persons to
Argos to assassinate him. But this treachery was
seasonably discovered, and brought upon Philip the
hatred and contempt of all the Greeks. The B(r-
otians were besieging Mcgara, and hoped to be soon
masters of the place ; when, a report (though not a
true one) being spread among them that Philopoe-
men was approaching to the relief of the besieged,
they left their scaling-ladders already planted against
the walls, and fled.

Nabis, tyrant of Laceda^mon after Machanidas,
had taken Messene by surprise. Philopfjemen, who
was out of command, had endeavoured to persuade
Lysippus, then general of the Acha'ans, to succour
the Messenians : but not prevailing upon him, be-
cause (he said) the enemy was within, and the town
irrecoverably lost, he went himself; taking with
him his own citizens, who waited neither for form
of law nor commission, but followed him on the na-
tural principle, that he who excels should always
command -\ When he was near the place, Nabis
was informed of it ; and not daring to wait, though
his army lay quartered in the town, stole out at
another gate with his troops and ])recipitately ma]-ch-
cd off, thinking himself fortunate in effecting his
escape. He did indeed escape, but Messene was
rescued.

Thus far every thing in Philopocmen's character
is heroic. But as for his G-oinsi: a second time into
Crete at the recpiest of the Gortynians, who were

" Tliis can only be admitted in the most critical extremities,
and even then it is a ha/ardous expedient : for what mob shall de-
cide upon execllentt'>.

PIIILOPOEMEN. if

enG;ao:cd in war and wished him to be their ^eneral,^
it has been blamed either as an act of cowardice,
in deserting' his own country when sive was dislressed
by Nabis, or as an unreasonable ambition to exhibit
himself to strangers. And it is true, the Megalo-
pohtans were then so hard pressed, that they were
obliged to shut themselves up within their walls, and
to sow corn in their very streets ; the enemy having,
laid waste tlieir lands, and encamped almost at their
gates. Philopoemen therefore, by entering into the
service of the Cretans at such a time, and taking a
command beyond sea, furnished his enemies with a
pretence to accuse him of basely flying from the war
at home.

Yet it was urged in his vindication that, as the
Achseans had chosen other generals, Philopoemen
lacing unemployed bestowed his leisure U])on the
Gortynians, and took a command among them at
their earnest entreaty. For he had an extreme aver-
sion from idleness, and was desirous above all things
to keep his talents, as a soldier and a general, in
constant practice. This was clear from what he
said of Ptolemy: when some were commending
that prince for daily studying the art of Nvar, and
improving his strength by martial exercise ; " Who/'
said he, " can praise a prince of his age, that is ai-
** ways preparing, and never performs ?"

The Megalopolitans, highly incensed at his ab-
sence, and regarding it as a desertion, were inclined
to pass an outlawry against him. But the Aehaeans
prevented them, by sending their general" Aristae-
netns to Megalopolis ; v/ho, though he differed with
Philopoemen about matters of government, would
not suffer him to be declared an outlaw. Philopoe-
men, finding himself neglected by his citizens, drew

^^ Polyl)ius, in liis Excerpt. Leg. xVu, and Livy xxxii. 19, coll
him Arista:nus; (L.) and Polybius in particular, from his con-
nexion with those places and events, is likely to be correct. This
general was ofDymx-in Achaia, Pans. vii. 17. Polybius has draws-
a fine comparison betivcen him and Phil<*posmen.^
VOL. Ill, C

18 philopcemen.

off from them se\eral of the neighbouring boroughs ;
and instructed them to allege, that they \vere not
comprised in their taxations, nor originally of their
dependencies. By assisting them to maintain this
pretext, he lessened the authority of Megalopolis
in the general assembly of the Achaeans. But tiiese
things happened some time afterward.

While he commanded the Gortynians in Crete,
he did not, like a Pcloponncsian or an Arcadian,
make war in an open generous manner ; but adopt-
ing the Cretan cilstoms, and using their artifices and
sleights, their stratagems and ambushes against
themselves, he soon showed them that their devices
were like the short-sighted schemes of children,
when compared with the long reach of an expe-
rienced general.

Having highly distinguished himself by these
means, and performed many exploits in that coun-
try, he returned to Peloponnesus with honour.
Here he found Philip -^ beaten by T. Q. Flaminius,
and Nabis engaged in war both with the Romans
and the Acha'ans. He was immediately chosen ge-
neral of the Acha'ans ; but venturing to act at sea,
he fell under the same misfortune with Epaminondas,
the great ideas which had been formed of his cou-
rage and conduct vanisliing in consequence of his
inferior success in a naval engagement. Epaminon-
das indeed, as some assert, was unwilling that his
countrymen should have any participation in naval ad-
vantages, lest " from good soldiers (as Plato expresses
it""*) they should become licentious and dissolute
sailors ;" and he therefore chose to return from Asia
and tiie isles, without having effected any thing.
But Philop(Fmcn, ])crsuadcd that his skill in the
land-service would ensure his success at sea'-', found

*i The last kinp hut one of Maccdon.*

^* This ohservatioii is (juoteil betbrc in tlic Life of Tlicniistoclcs,
not. (1.-5.) Vol. I,

** rio«- different is this from the ^reat Conde, wlioni Dacier in-
froduccH (in a note upon this passage) lis dedaring thai, if he >v(Jr«

PHILOPCEMEN. 19

to his cost how much experience contributes to vic-
tory, and how much practice adds in all things to
our powers. For he was not only worsted in the
sea-fight for w^ant of skill ; but having fitted up an
old ship, which had been a famous vessel forty years 4
before, and manned it with his townsmen, it proved
so leaky that they were in danger of being lost.
Finding that after this the enemy despised him, as a
man who disclaimed all pretensions at sea, and that
they had insolently laid siege to Githium ^°, he set
sail again ; and as they did not expect him, but
were dispersed without any precaution on account
of their late victory, he landed in the night, burned
their camp, and killed a considerable number of
them.

A few days afterward, as he was marching through
a difficult pass, Nabis came suddenly upon him.
The Achaeans were in great terror, tliinking it im-
possible to escape out of so dangerous a passage,
of which the enemy had already taken possession.
But Philopoemen making a short halt, and observing
at once the nature of the ground, proved that
skill in drawing up an army is the capital point in
the art of war. For altering a little the disposition
of his forces, and adapting it to the present occa-
sion, he easily disengaged them, without bustle,
from the difficulty, and then falling upon the enemy
put them entirely to the rout. AVhen he saw that
they fled not to the town, but dispersed themselves
about the country; as the ground was woody and
uneven, and on account of the brooks and ditches
impracticable for the horse, he did not go upon the
pursuit, but encamped before the evening. Con-
cluding however that the fugitives would return as
soon as it grev/ dark, and draw in a straggling man-
in a naval action, * he would not so much as presume to giv'e his
opinion, but remain quietly upon the deck, and carefully observe
all their motions and operations for his instruction !'*

-^ Tiie arsenal and port of Lacedfemon, on the gulf of Laconia-
See Livy xxxiv. 29.*

C 2

20 piiilopcl:<.iex.

Jier toward the city, he placed in ambiisli, by the
brooks and hills which sarroundcd it, many parties of
tlie Achjrans with their swords in their hands. By
these means, the cliief part of Nabis' troops were
cut off; for not returning in a body, but as they had
been dispersed by the chance of flight, they fell
into their enemies' hands, and were caui^lit like so
many birds, before they could enter the town.

Philopd'mcn being received upon this account
■with great honour and applause in all the theatres
of Greece, it gave some umbrage to Flaminius, a
man naturally ambitious. For, as a Roman consul,
he deemed himself entitled to much higher marks
of distinction among the Achasaus than a man of
Arcadia, and thought tliat as a public benefactor he
I'anked infinitely above him ; having by one procla-
mation set free the whole of that part of Greece,
which had been enslaved by Philip and the Mace-
donians.

After this, Fiaminius made peace with Nabis ;
and Nabis was assassinated by the ^F^tolians. Upon
which Sparta being in great confusion, Philopocmen
seizing the opportunity came upon it with his army ;
and partly by force, partly by persuasion, induced
thatcity to join in the Achaean league '^^ The gain-,
ing over of a city of so much dignity and power
made him perfectly adored among the Achirans.
And indeed Sparta was an acquisition of no small
importance to Achaia, of which she was now be-
come a member. It was also a ffratefnl service to
the principal LacedaMnonians, who hoped hencefor-
ward to have him ibr the guardian, of their liberty.
For whicli reason, having sold the house and goods
of Nabis by a public decree, they voted the money
(which amounted to a hundred and twenty talents)
to Philoj)(rmen, and determined to send it by per-
sons deputed fh)m their body.

Upon tiiis occasion he evinced his integrity; that

'' B.C. 191.*

PHILOPCEMEN. 21

he not only seemed, but was-% a virtuous man.
For not one of the Spartans chose to speak to a
person of his character about a present; but, afraid
of tlic office, they all excused themselves and put
it upon Timolaus, to whom he was bound by the
rites of hospitality. Timolaus v/ent to Megalopolis,
and was entertained at riiilopaMnen's house; but
when he observed the gravity of his discourse, the
simplicity of his diet, and the integrity of his man-
ners, inaccessible and impregnable to the attacks
of money, he uttered not a word concerning the
present, but having assigned another cause for his
coming returned home. He was sent a second time,
but could not mention the monev. In a third visit
he brouglit it out with much difficulty, and declared
the kind intentions of Sparta. Philopannen heard
with pleasiu'c what he had to say, but immediately
went himself to the people of Laceda?mon, and
advised them not to try to tempt good men with
money, who were already their friends, and of whose
virtues they might freely avail themselves ; but to
buy and corrupt bad men, who opposed their mea-
sures in council, that thus silenced they might give
them the less trouble : it being much better to stop
the mouths of their enemies, than those of their
friends. Such was Philopaunen's contempt of
money.

Some time afterward Diophanes, being general of
the Achijeans, and hearing tliat tlie Lacedaimonians
had thoughts of withdrawing from the league, de-
termined to chastise them. In the mean while,
they prepared for war, and raised great commotions
in Peloponnesus. Philoptrmen tried to ap]:)ease Dio-
phanes, and keep him quiet ; representing to him,
" That while Antiochus and the Romans were con-
" tending in the heart of Greece with two such
" powerful armies-^, an Achican general should

^8 This high compliment is paid by Sallust (D. C xvii.) to Cato,
and by Plutarcli to Aristides. See his Lite, not. (13.) Vol. II.*

=y In the same year, Caius Livins \vith the Roman fleet defeated
that of Antiochus near Ephesus, (Liv. xxxjv, 44, 45.)

22 PHILOPCEMEN.

" confine to them his attention ; and, instead of
*' lighting up a war at home, overlook and pass by
" some real injuries." When he found that Dio-
phanes did not hearken to him, but marched along
vith Flaminius into Laconia, and that they took
their route toward vSparta, he did a thing which
cannot indeed be vindicated by law^ and strict jus-
tice, but which dii^covers a lofty and noble daring.
He got into the town himself; and, though but a
private man, shut the gates against an Achaean ge-
neral and a Roman consul, healed the divisions
among the Lacedaemonians, and brought them back
to the league.

At a subsequent period however, when he was
general himself, upon some new subject of com-
plaint against that people, he restored their exiles
and put to death eighty, as Polybius informs us, or
according to Aristocrates three hundred and fifty
citizens. He demolished their walls, took from
them great part of their territory, and added it to
tliat of Megalopolis. All, who had been made free
of Sparta by the tyrants, he disfranchised and car-
ried into Achaia; except three thousand, who re-
fused to quit the place, and those he sold for slaves.
By way of insult as it were to Sparta, with the mo-
ney tiience arising he built a portico in Megalopolis.
Pursuing his vengeance against that unhappy people,
who had already suffered more than they deserved,
by an additional cruel and most unjust procedure,
he filled up the measure of it : he destroyed their
constitution. He abolished the discipline of Lvcur-
gus '"^, and compelled them to give to their children
and youth an Achaean education, instead of that of
their own country ; convinced, that their spirit
could never be humbled, so long as they adhered to
Jiis institutions. Thus, brouoht bv the weight of

try ^ ^^

their calamities to have the sinews of their city cut
by Phil()p(rmen, tliey grew tame and submissive,
^omc time afterward indeed, upon application to

?° Wluch had now lasted nearly seven centuries.*

PHILOPCEMEN. 23

t?ic Romans, they shook off the Achaean customs
and rc-cstabhshcd tlieir own, as far as it coukt be
done after so much misery and corruption.

While the Ronuais were carrying on the war with
Antiochus in Greece, Plulopcrmen was in a private
station. But when lie saw Antiochus sitting still at
Chalcis, and spending his time in youthful love and
a marriage unsuitable to his years ^^, and the Syrians
licentiously roaming from town to town without
disciphne or officers, he repined extremely that he
was not then general of the Acha\ans, and scruj)]ed
not to declare that he envied the Romans their
victory; " For had I been in command," said he,
" I would liave cut them all to pieces in the ta-
" verns." After Antiochus was overcome, the Ro-
mans pressed still harder upon Greece, and henmied
in the Acha[>ans with their power ; the orators, like-
wise, inclined to their interest. Under the auspices
of Heaven, their strength ])revailed over all; and
the moment was at hand when fortune, who had
long veered, was to stand still. In these circum-
stances, Philopocmen like a good pilot struggled
wnth the waves. Sometimes he was forced to give
way a little, and yield to the times ; but upon most
occasions, maintaining the conflict, he endeavoured
to draw over all who w^ere considerable either for
their eloquence or ricli€s to tfie side of liberty.
Aristacnetus the Mcgalopohtan, who had great in-
terest among the Achicans but always courted the
Romans, declared it in council as his opinion, " That
" they ought not to be opposed or disobliged in any
" thing." Philopamen heard him with siknt indigna-
tion ; and at last, when he could refrain no longer,
exclaimed, " And why in such haste, wretched
" man, to see an end of Greece r" Manius"- the
Roman caBsul, after the defeat of Antiochus, re-
quested the Achaians to permit the Lacedaemonian

3' See the Life of Flaminius, in the sequel of this work.*
3' Manius Acihus (Jlabrio. A. U. C. 563. An account of his
victory over Antiochus has been given in the Life of Cato, Vol. IL

24 PHILOPCEMEN.

exiles to return, and Titus seconded ]nm in his
ap})iica(ion : i'hilopoemen however opposed it, not
out of any ill-will to the exiles, but because he
wished them to be indebted for that benefit to him-
self and the Achaeans, and not to the Ikvour of
Titus and the Romans. For the next year, when
he succeeded to the generalship, he restored them
Iiimselt. Thus his gallant spirit led him to contend
with the prevailing powers.

He was elected general of the Achseans, the
eighth time, when he was seventy years of age ;
and now he hoped not only to pass the year of his
magistracy without war, but the remainder of his
life in quiet. For, as the force of distempers abates
with the strength of the body, so in the states of
Greece the spirit of contention Tailed with their au-
thority. Some avenging deity however threw him
down at last, like one who with matchless speed
completes the course, and stumbles at the goal. It
seems, that being in company where a certain ge-
neral was mentioned as an extraordinary man, Phi-
lopocinen said; " There was no great account to be
" made of a man who had suffered himself to be
" taken alive ^\" A few days after this Dinocrates
the Messenian, who was upon particularly ill terms
with Philopoemen, and indeed not upon good terms
with any one on account of his profligate and wicked
life, found means to draw off Messene from the
league; and it was also said, that he was about to
seize a little place called Colonis'^'. Pliiiopcrmen
v.-as then at Argos, sick of a fljver : but upon this
intelligence he hastened to Megalopolis, and reached
it in one day, ttiough it was at the distance of four
hiuidred furlongs. Thence he presently drew out
a body of horse consisting of the nobility, but all

■•* This sentiment is- iir.ely expanded by lvc"ulul in Horace.
(Od. Illv.)*

'"> There is no sjch place known as ' Colonis.' Li\ y (xxxix.
4!).) ciills it ' Coronc;' and Plutarch probably wrote ' Clirona,' or
♦ Coronis.' Strabo viii. mentions the latter, as a maritime place in
it:)e neighbourhood of Mcssenc.

PHILOPCEMEN. 25"

young men, v.lio from affection to liis person and
ambition for glory followed him as volunteers.
With these he marched toward Messene, and meet-
ing Dinocrates on Evauder's Hill'^ attacked him
and put him to flight. But five hundred men, who
guarded the flat country, suddenly coming up, the
fuu'itives seeimr them rallied acraiu about the hills.
Upon which Philopcrmen, afraid of being surrounded
and desirous of saving his young cavalry, retreated
over rough ground, while he himself brouglit up
the rear, often turning on the enemy, and endea-
vouring to draw them entirely upon himself. Yet
none of them dared to encounter him ; but only
shouted, and rode about him at a distance. As he
often faced about and left his main body, on account
of his young men, each of whom he was solicitous
to jnit out of danger, he at last found himself alone
amidst a number of the enemy. Even then however
they durst not attack him hand to hand, but hurling
their darts at a distance drove him upon steep and
craggy places, where he could scarcely make his
liorse go forward, though he spurred him continu-
ally. He was still active through exercise, and for
that reason his age was no hindrance to his escape ;
bnt being weakened by sickness and extremely fa-
tigued with his joiu'ney, his horse threw him, now
heavy and encumbered, upon the stones. His head
was wounded with the fall, and he lav a lona: time
speechless ; so tliat the enemy, thinking him dead,
began to turn him in order to strip him of his arms.
But finding that he raised his head and opened his
<.\yes, they gath.ered thick about him, bound his
hands beiiind his back, and led him off with such
unvv'orthy treatment and gross abuse, as Philopoe-
men could never have dreamed he should have to
suffer even from* Dinocrates.

" ' Evander's Hill' is likewise unknown. Polybius ii., and after
i)!m Pausanias iv. .'>]., mentions a liill called ' Evan' (which name
it, probably, had from tise cries of the l?acehanals) not far fron^
dMcssene.

25 PIIILOPCEMEX.

The Messcnians, elated at the ncAvs, flocked to
the gates. But when they saw Philopa'men dragged
along, in a niaiiiier .so' uiiwoitliy of the glory of his
achievements and trophies, most of them were touch-
ed with pity and compassion for liis misfortune.
'J'hey shed tears, and contemned all human great-
ness as a faitliless support, as mere vanity and no-
thing. Their tears by little and little turned to
j\ind words, and they began to observe that they
ought to remember his former benefits, and the
liberty which he had procured tor them by expelling
the tyrant Nabis. A few of them indeed, to gratify
Dinocrates, talked of torturing and executing him
as a dangerous and implacable enemy, and the more
to be dreaded, if he should escape after having been
made prisoner and treated with such indignity.
At last they put him in a dungeon called ' the Trea-
sury,* which received neither air nor light from
without, and having no doors was closed with a
great stone ^". In this dungeon they shut him up
with the stone, and placed a guard around it.
Meanwhile the Achtcan cavalry, recollecting them-
selves after their flight, found that Philopcrmen was
not with them, and liad probably lost his life. They
now made a long stand, and called him with loud
cries, blaming each other for havinfi: effected a base
and shameful escape bv abandoninir their ircneral,
who had been prodigal of his own life in order to
save theirs. By much search and inquiry about the
country, they got intelligence that he was taken
prisoner, and carried tlic heavy news to the states
of Achaia -, who, considering it as the greatest of
losses, resolved to send an embassy to demand him
of the Mcssenians, and in the mean time prepared
ior v.-ar.

M'hile the Achc'eans were taking tliese resolutions,
Dinocrates, who most of all dreaded time, as the
likeliest thing to save Philopocmen, determined to

^^ iScc Liv. xxxix. 50.*

PIIILOPCEMEN. 27

be before-liand witli the league. When night there-
fore was come and the mukitude retired, he opened
the dungeon, and sent in one of his servants with a
dose of poison, and with orders not to leave him till
he had taken it. Philopcrmen had lain down in his
clokc, but was not asleep : vexation and resentment
kept him awake. When he saw the light, and the
man standing by him with a cup of poison, he raised
himself up as well as his weakness v/ould permit, and
receiving the cup asked him, " Whether he had heard

any thing of his cavalry, and particularly of Ly-

cortas "^'"' The executioner answering that they
had almost all escaped, he nodded his head in sign
of satisfaction ; and looking kindly upon him said,
" Thou bringest good tidings, that we are not in all
" respects unhappy." Witliout uttering another
word, or breathing the least sigh, he drank off the
poison and lay down again. He was already brought
so low, that he could not make much struggle with
the fatal dose, and it despatched him presently.

The intelligence of his death filled the whole of
Achaia with grief and lamentation. All the youth
immediately repaired with the deputies of the several
cities to Megalopolis, where they resolved without
loss of time to take their revenge. For this purpose,
having chosen Lycortas for their general, they enter-
ed Messcne and ra\'aged the country, till the Messe-
nians vv/ith one consent opened their gates and re-
ceived them. Dinocrates prevented their revenge
by killing himself; and those, who had voted lor
liaviiig Philopcemcn put to death, followed his ex-
am})Ie^'. But such, as had been for having him like-
wise put to the toiture, were taken by Lycortas, and
reserved for more })ninful punishments.

When they liad burned his remains, they put the

•^^ R. C. 183. Lycortas was the fatlier of Polybius the historian,
who was in the preceding action, and might be then about twenty
years of age.

3' Ly('()rtar, intended to have had them beaten with rods, before
they were put to death.

us PHILOPCEMEX.

ashes in an urn, and returned; not in a disorderly
and promiscuous manner, but uniting a kind of tri-
umphal march with the funeral solemnity. First
came the foot, ^vith crowns of victory on their heads
and tears in their eyes, and attended by their cap-
tive enemies in fetters. Polybius, the general's son,
with the principal Achasans about him, carried the
urn, which was so adorned with ribbons and garlands,
that it was scarcely visible. The march was closed
by the cavalry, completely armed and superbly
mounted ; expressing in their looks neither the me-
lancholv of such a mourning, nor the iov of a vie-
tory. The people of the towns and villages on the
M'ay flocked out, as if it had been to meet him return-
ing from a glorious campaign, touched the urn with
the utmost respect, and conducted it to Megalopolis.
The old men and women and children, who joined
the procession, raised such a bitter lamentation,
that it spread thoughout the army, and was re-
echoed by the city ; which, beside her grief for Phi-
lopoemenj bemoaned her own calamity, as in him she
thought she had lost the pre-eminence among the
Achaians.

His interment was suitable to his dignity, and the
Messenian prisoners were stoned to death at his
tomb. Many statues were set up'^, and manv ho-
nours decreed to him by the Grecian cities. But
when Greece was involved in the misfortunes of
Corinth, a certain lloman attempted to get them

*"> Pausanias in his A readies (viii. 52.) gives us the inscription,
^rhich the Tegcatae put upon one of those statues; (L.) and, as
I3aeier pronounces it a composition * of wonderful beauty,' tht*
editor has attempted a translation of it :

In arms and councils famed, Arcadia's son.
His long career of patriot glory run,
ilerc Philopcemen stands — no more to Avield
The su'ord, which won fair Freedom in the field.
This his twin trophies o'er two tyrants slain.
This Sparta blazons, rescued from her chain ;
Tegca for tliis, to grace his gallant name,
The grateful statue dedicates to fame,^

PHILOPCEMEN. 29

all pulled down"", accusing him in form (as if he
had been alive) ofimplacable enmity to the llomans.
When he had finished the impeachment, and Poly-
bius had replied to his calumnies, neither Mummius
nor his lieutenants would suffer the monuments of so
illustrious a man to be defaced, though he had not
a little opposed both Flaminius and Glabrio. For
they made a proper distinction between virtue and
interest, between honour and advantage ; Vvcll con-
cluding, that rewards and grateful acknowledgements
are always due from persons obliged to their bene-
factors, and respect from men of merit to each other.
So much concerning Philop(x?men.

^° This happened B. C. Ur)., Uurty-seven years after hii death.

THE

LIFE

or

TITUS QUINCTIUS FLAMINIUS,

SUi^DIARY.

His cJinracfer, and first campaigns. He is cliosen consul, and dcs-
patdied against Philip, king of Maccdon : sets ajfexpcdiliousli/,
and arrives in Epirus. First skirmishes bctiveen Philip and the
Romans. He is injbnned bi/ some shepherds of a tvatj betxvecn the
mountains, and defeats Philip. Many Greek states, won by his
mildness of character, come over to the Romans. He secures their
attachmenty by proposing to Philip to declare them free, xvhich the
latter refuses. He gains the Thehaits to his party; is continued in
the command ; and offers battle to Philip, xvhich takes place on tfic
Jollon:iug day. Flamiitlus obtains the victory. Alcceus' epigram^
a7id Philip^s reply. Flaminitis grants Philip peace : his pj-udence
upon this occasion. He procures from tJie senate independence for
Greece, ivhich is proclaimed at tJic Isthmian ganics. Joy of the
Greeks. Reflections upon the/ate of Greece. Flaminius' care to
insure the continuance of her freedom. He causes it to be pro-
claimed a second time at the Xemean games. His gifts to the
temple of Delphi. His proclamation compared with the subsequent
one of Nero. He makes peace xvith Nabis, tyrant of Sparta. The
Achceans present to him all tlie Romans, then prisoners in Greece.
His triumph. He is sent again into Greece, to quell the troubles
excited there by Antiocfius. The service he does tiie Greeks, and
the honours which they pay him in return. His repartees. He is
elected censor. Origin of his quarrel with Cato. His brother
expelled by Cato from the senate. Flaniinius' embassy to P7-usiaSf
to demand the surrender of Annibal. That general destroys fiim-
self. Different opinions with regard to Flaminius' conduct on the
occasio'l. Rifections in his favour.

T. Q. FLAMIXIUS. 31

X HE peiTon whom we place in parallel with Phi-
lopoemen, is Titus Quinctius Flaminius'. Those
who are desirous of being ac(|nainted with his coun-
tenance and figure, need hut inspect the braseu
statue", erected at Rome with a Greek inscription
upon it opposite the Circus Maximus, near the large
statue of Anollo which was brou^'ht from Carthajre.
As to his disposition, he was quick both to resent
an injury, and to do a service. But his resentment
was not in all respects like his affection, for he
punished lightly and soon forgot the offence ; where-
as his services were lasting and complete. For the
persons whom he had obliged, he ever retained a
kind regard, as if instead of receiving they had con-
ferred a favour ; and, considering them as his great-
est treasure, he was always leacl}' to protect and to
promote them^ Naturally covetous of lionour and
fame, and not choosing to let others have any share
in his great and good actions, he took more pleasure
in those whom he could assist, tlian in those who
could give him assistance^; looking upon the for-

' It ought to be written ' Flaniininus' (according to Polybius»
Livy, Cicero, &c.) and not « Flaminius.' The Flaniinii, indeed,
were a very diiferent family from the Flaminini. The hitter were
patricians, the former plebeians. Caius Fhmiiniu?, who fell at the
lake of Thrasymenus, w;i.s of the plebeian family. Besides, some
MSS. have it ♦ Flamininns;' which would be sufiicient autliority for
the correction. But, as Plutarch has elsewhere called him Fla-
minius (and in this lie has been follosved by several modern writers)
it may be sufficient, once for all, to have made this remark upon the
subject.

^ Either Plutarch must have made a very exce-sive estimate of
the duration of this statue, or a very humble one of that of his own
labours. For what satisfaction do his present readers reap from his
reference? Or what indeed did the chief part of his compatriots
and contemporaries; especially, if (as it has been usually believed)
these Lives were written in Greece ?*

^ Oclisse quern hexeris, is a trait of human cliaractcr sk;etci)ed by
the liand of a great ma^i-ter, and may be referred to the fear of retri-
bution. To ' protect those whom you have obliged' is, perhaps,
connected with thcj)ride of patronage*

^ Ma^is dandis, qnam accipierulh berwfc'iis amiciii'a? parabuTit, is

3!> T. Q. FLAMIMUvS.

iiicr as persons wlu) afrbrdecl room for the exertion
of" virtue, and the latter as his rivals in glory.

I'Voni his boyhood, he was trained up to the pro-
fession of arms. For Rome having then many im-
portant wars upon lier hands, her youth had early
()[)p()rtunities by serviee to qualify themselves for
conmiand. rianiinius served like the rest, and was
first a legionary tribune under the consid Marccllus%
in the war with Annibal. i\Iarce!lus fell into an am-
buscade, and was slain ; after which Flaminius was
appointed governor of Tarentum, then newly re-
taken, and of the surrounding country. In this
commission he attained not less celebrity for his ad-
ministration of justice, than for his military skill;
for which reason he was appointed chief director of
the two colonies, sent out to the cities of Narnia and
Cossa.

This inspired him with such lofty thoughts that,
overlooking the previous steps by which young men
ordinarily ascend (1 mean the offices of tribune^
pra?tor,and nsdile) he aimed directly at the consulship.
Supported by those colonists, he presented himself
as a candidate. Ijiit the tribunes Fulvius and Man-
lius opposed him, insisting that it was an unheard-of
thing for a man so young, who Vv'as yet -uninitiated
in the first rites and mysteries of government, to in-
trude, in contempt ofth.e laws, into the highest office
in the state. Tlie senate referred the affair to the-
suffrages of the people; and the people elected him
consul with Sextus yElius, though he was then under

the high cliaracter given by Sallust (Bell. Cat. vi.) of the primitive
Romans. He derived the expression probably from one, to whom
he owes many similar obligations. Ou yap Trac-y^o^iK; iv, c/.X/.cc ^^uini^
xiaf/jiSa. Tifij <P'},iS',. (Thucyd. ii. 40.)*

^ He was appointed a tribune at the aire of twenty,. B.C. 207..
He was consequently born B. C. 227., A. V. C. 54-7, Livy inlbrnis
us, thiit lie was tliirty-t!n-ee years of age, when he proclaimed the
liberty of (Jreece. (xxxiii. S3.)

'' Iribune, as a patrician, he could not be. But perhaps Plu-
tarch heiu speaks in general of the

* steps in young ambition's laddeu.'*

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 33

thirty years of age. The lots being cast for tlie pi'o-
vinces, tlie war with Piiilip and the Macedonians fell
to Flaniinius : a circunistance extremely fortunate for
the Roman people : as tliat department required a
general, who wished to effect his object not bj lx)rce
and violence, but rather by gentleness and persua-
sion. For Macedon furnislied Philip with a suffi-
cient number of men for his wars, but Greece was
his principal dependence for a war of any lengths
She it was, who supplied him wnth money and pro^
visions, with strong-holds and places of retreat, and
(in a word) with all the materials of war. So that,
unless she were disengaged from Philip, the war with
him could not be decided by a single battle. Besides,
the Greeks as yet had but little acquaintance with
the Romans ; it was now first to be established by
the intercourse of business : and therefore they w'ould
not so soon have embraced a foreign authority, in-
stead of that to which they had been accustomed, if
the Roman general had not been a man of great
good-nature, who w^as more ready to avail himself
of treaty tiian of the sword, who had a persuasive
manner where he applied, was affable when applied
to, and had an invariable regard to justice. But this
will better appear from his actions themselves.

Titus finding that Sulpicius and Publius'', his pre-
decessors in command, had not entered Macedon
till late in the season, and then had not prosecuted
the war with vigour, but spent their time in skir-
mishing to gain some particular post or pass, or to
intercept some provisions, determined not to act in
the same manner. They had wasted the year of
their consulate in the enjoyment of their new ho-
nours, and in the administration of domestic aitairs,
and towards its close they re])aired to their province ;
by which artifice they got their command continued
another year, the first as consul, the second as pro-

' Publius Sulpicius Galba had been consul two years before, and
Publius Villius Tappulus (whom Livy, xxxii, 1., calls ' Publius Vil-
lius') the intermediiite year.

VOL. III. D

31. T. Q. FLAMIXIUS.

•consul. But Titus, UDibitioiis to distinguisli his
consulship by some important expedition, quitted
the honours and prerogatives which he possessed in
Rome ; and having' requested tlie senate to permit
his brother Lucius to conunand the naval forces, and
selected three thousand men as yet in full vigour and
spirits and the glory of the field, from those troops,
who under Scipio had subdued Asdrubal in Spain
and Annibal in Africa, he crossed the sea and ar-
rived safe in Epirus. I'here he found Publius en-
camped over-against Philip (who had been a long
time defending the fords of the river Apsus*, and the
adjoining straits) and unable to eflect any thing, on
account of the natural strength of the place.

Titus having taken the command of the army, and
sent Publius home, began with examining the cha-
racter of the country. It's natural fortifications are
equal to those of-Tempe, but it is not like Tempe in
the beauty of woods and groves, and the verdure of
valleys and delicious meads. To the right and left
runs a chain of loftv mountains, between which there
is a deep and long channel. Down this flows the
river Apsus, resembling the Peneus both in it's ap-
pearance and it's rapidity. It covers the foot of the
hills on each side, so that there is left only a narrow
craggy path cut out close by the stream, which
is not easy to be passed by an army at any time, and
when guarded is not passable at all.

Flaminius was advised, therefore, to take a com-
pass through Dassaretis along the Lycus^ which was
an easy passage. But he was afraid that, if he re-
moved too far from the sea into a barren and ill-
cultivated country, while Philip avoided a battle, he
might eventually want provisions ; and be constrain-

8 Liyy (xxxii. 10.) says ' xious,' a river near the former, and
for which, from proximity of place and rcisenib! \nce of nan)e, it
might easily be mistaken. See Strabo rii. Philip's object was to
prevent the Roi;i;nis from penetniting into Macetlon.-'^

9 A city, it would appear from Livy, xxxii. 3:3. and 9 Palmerius
would read ' Lyncus,' a Macedonian city, which gave it's namu t«
the province Lynce^tiii. ,Sce Thuryd. iv. 83, 121," 129.*

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 33

ed, like the general before liiin, to retreat to the sea
without having accomplished any thing effectual.
Tins deterniined him to make his way up the moun-
tains sword in hand, and to force a passage. But
Philip's army, being possessed of the heights, shower-
ed down their darts and arrows upon the Romans
from every quarter. Several sharp contests ensued,
in which many were killed and v/oundcd on both
sides, but none of them were decisive.

In the mean time, some shepherds of those moun-
tains came to the consul with the discovery of a
•winding-way, neglected by the enemy, by which
they promised to conduct his army to the top at the
farthest in three days. And, as. an evidence and
coniirmation of the truth of what they stated, they
brought with them Charops the son of Machatas
prince of the Epirots, who was a friend to the Ro-
mans, and gave them assistance, though privately,
from fear of Philip. As Flaminius could confide in
him, he sent away a tribune with four thousand foot
and three hundred horse. The shepherds in bonds
led the way. In the day-time they lay still in the
hollows of the woods, and in the night they marched
forward ; for the moon was then at the full. Fla-
minius, having detached this party, let his main body
rest the three days, and had only some slight skir-
mishes with the enemy to engage their attention.
But the day that he expected those who had taken
the circuit to appear upon the heights, he drew out
his forces early, both the heavy and light-armed, and
dividing them into three parts, himself led tlie van ;
marching his men along the narrowest path, by the
side of the river. The Macedonians called him with
their darts, but he maintained the combat notwith-
standing the disadvantage of ground ; and the other
two parties fought with all the spirit of emulation,
and clung to the rocks with astonishing ardour.

Meanwhile the sun arose, and a smoke appeared
at a distance, not very strong, but like the mist of
the faiils. Being on the back of the enemy (for it

1)2

36 T. Q. FLAMIXIU:^.

came from the troops, who liad readied the top) vt
■Nvas not observed by the latter. Amidst the fatigue
of the engagement, the llomans themselves were in
doubt whether it was a signal or not, bnt thev inclin-
ed to believe it to be what they wished. And when
they saw it increase, so as to darken the air, and
mount higher and higher, they were w^ell assured
that it came from the th'es which their friends had
h'ghted. Upon this they set up loud shouts, ainel
charging the enemy with augmented vigour, pushed
them into the most craggy places. The shouts were
re-echoed by those behind at the top of the moun-
tain. And now the Macedonians fled with the ut-
most precipitation. Yet there were not above two
thousand slain, the pursuit being impeded by the dif-
ficulty of the ascent. The llomans however pillaged
the camp, seized the money and slaves, .'^nd became
absolute masters of the pass. They then traversed the
whole of Epirus, but with such order and discipline
that, though they were at a considerable distance
from their ships and the sea, and had not the usual
monthly allowance of corn or convenience of
markets, they yet spared the country, which at the
same time abounded in every thing. For Flaminius
was informed that Thilip, in his passage or rather
flight through Thessaly, had compelled the people
to quit their habitations and retire to the mountains,
had burned the towns;, and had given as plunder to
liis men whatever was too abundant or cumbersome
to be carried otf; having thus, as it were, yielded
up the country to the llomans. The consul there-
tore made a j)oijit of prevailing with his men to re-
spect it in tlicir march, as cc^ded to them, and now
their own»

The event quickly showed the benefit of this good
order. For, as soon as thev entered Thessaly, all
it's cities declared for tliem ; and the Greeks within
Thermopylae longed for the protection of Flaminius,
and resigned to him their hearts. The Aclnuansrc-
iiaunced their alliance with Philip, and by a solcuu*

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. S7

decree resolved to take part with the Romans
against him. And tliough the ^toHans, who at
tliat time v;cre strongly attached to the Romans,
made the Opuntians an offer to garrison and defend
their city, tliey refused it ''^ ; and, iiaving sent for
Flaminiiis, put themselves into his hands.

It is reported of Pyrrluis that, when he first beheld
from an eminence the disposition of the Roman
army, he said, " I observe notiiing barbarian-like in
*' the ranks of these barbarians," All indeed, who
once saw Flaminiiis, spoke of him in the same terms.
They had heard th.e Macedonians represent him as
the fierce commander of a host of barbarians, who
was come to destroy, and to enslave every thing :
and, when afterward they met a young man of a
mild aspect, who spoke very good Greek, and was a
lover of true honour, they were extremely struck
with him, and excited the kind regards uf their
cities to him, as to a general who would lead them
to liberty.

After this, Philip seeming inclined to treat, Flami-
nius came to an interview with him'*, and offered
him peace and friendship with Rome, on condition
that he left the Grecians free, and withdrew his gar-
risons from their cities. And as he rejected those
terms, it was obvious even to the partisans of Philip,
that the Romans were not come to fij^ht acjainst
the Greeks, but for the Greeks against the Mace-
.donians.

The rest of Greece having voluntarily acceded to
the confederacy, the consul entered Bcrotia, but in
a peaceable manner, and the chief of the Thebans
came to meet him. They were inclined to the Ma-

^° Distrusting their word, or knowing them to be a capricious
and faithless people. Polybius has, in several places, given them
this character,*

" This interview lasted three days. (Polyb. xvii.) Brachyllas,
mentioned below (for so according to this author, his name should
-be written) was a great philippiser, who was subsequently ass3S>
^nated. Livy, xxxiii.J^,, calk him * Barcillus.'*

SS T. Q. FLAMIXIUS.

cedonian interest on account of Brachyllelis, but
they honoured and respected Flaminius, and were
wiliing to preserve the friendship of both. Flami-
nius received them with great goodness, embraced
them, and went on slowly with them, asking various
questions and entertaining them with discourse, on
purpose to give his soldiers time to come up. Thus
advancing insensibly to the gates of Thebes, he en-
tered tlie city along with them. They did not in-
deed quite relish the thing, but they were afraid to
forbid him, as he came so well attended. Then, as
if he had not been master of the town, he endea-
voured by persuasion to bring it to declare for the
Romans ; king Attains seconding him, and using all
his rhetoric to theThebans. But that prince (it seems)
in his eagerness to serve Flaminius, exerting himself
more tlian his age could bear, was seized, as he was
speaking, with a giddiness or rheum which made him
swoon away. A few days afterward, his fleet con-
veyed him into Asia, where he died. The Boeo-
tians took part Avith the Romans.

As Philip sent an embassy to Rome, Flaminius
also despatched his agents to procure a decree of the
senate prolonging his commission if the war con-
tinued, or else empowering him to make peace'\
For his ambition made him apprehensive that, if a
successor were sent, .he should be robbed of all the
honour of the war. His friends managed matters so
well for him, that Philip failed in hisap])lication, and
the comojandwas continued to Flaminius. Flaving
received the decree, he was greatly elevated iir his
hopes, and immediately marched into Thessaly to
carry on the war against Philip. His army con-
sisted of more than twenty-six thousand men, of
whom the iEtolians furnished six thousand foot and
three hundred horse. Philip's forces were about
equal in number. They marched therefore against

'- See Polyb. xvii., and I,iv. xxxii. 36., &c. anil for their subse-
fjuent stations in the field, xxxiii. 6.*

T. Q. FLAMiNIUS. 39

each otlier, and arrived near Scotusa, where they
proposed to decide the affair with the sword. The
vicinity of two sticii armies had not the usual effect,
of striking" the officers with a mutual awe; on the
contrary, it increased their couracre and ardour : the
Romans being ambitious to conquer the Macedo-
nians, whose valour and power Alexander had ren-
dered so illustrious ; and the Macedonians hoping,
if they could beat the Romans, whom they looked
upon as a more respectable enemy than the Persians,
that they should raise the glory of Philip above that
of Alexander. Fkiminius therefore exhorted his
men to behave with the utmost courage and gal-
lantry, as tlicy had to contend with brave adv^ersa-
ries in so 2:lorious a theatre as Greece. On the
other side Philip, in order to address his army, as-
cended an eminence without his camp, which hap-
pened to be aburying-place ^*^, either not knov/ing it
to be so, or in his hurry not attending to it. There
he began an oration, such as is usual before a battle;
but the omen of a sepulchre spreading a dismal me-
lancholy among the troops, he stopped in confusion,
and put off the action till another day.

Next morning at day-break, after a rainy night,
the clouds turning into a mist darkened the plain ;
and, as the day came on, a foggy air descending
from the hills covered all the ground between the
two camps. Those therefore who had been des-
patched on both sides to seize posts or to make dis-
coveries, soon meeting unawares, engaged at the
CynoscephaliG, which are the sliarp tops of many
small hills standing opposite each other, and are so
called from the resemblance [to the heads of dogs].
The success of these skirmishes was various on
account of the unevenness of the ground, the same
parties sometimes flying and sometimes pursuing,

'3 Neither Polybius, nor Livy (ib. 9, 10.), mentions this piece of
iperstition: b' "

aminius in th
wboily omits,'^

superstition: but both of tlieni notice the elepliants employed by
Flaminius in the ensuing action with so much effect, which Plutarch

iO T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

and reinforcements were sent on both sides as tlie
combatants were seen to be alternately hard-pressed,
and ii'iving way; till at length, the day clearing up,
the action became general. Philip, in the right wing,
advanced from the rising ground with his whole plia-
lanx against the Romans ; who could not, even the
bravest of them, stand the shock of the united
shields and the projected spears ''. But Flaminius
observing the enemy's left wing separated and inter-
sected by the hills, and having no hopes on the side
upon which his troops had retreated, hastened to the
other, and there charged the enemy ; where on ac-
count of the inequahty and roughness of the coun-
try they were unable to preserve the compactness of
form, or line their ranks to any considerable depth,
and were forced to hght man to man in heavy and
unwicldly armour. For the Macedonian phalanx is
like an animal of enormous strength, while it keeps
in one body, and preserves it's union of locked
shields ; but when that is destroyed, each ])articular
soldier loses his force, as well on account of the form
of his armour, as because the strength of each cour
sists rather in his being a part of the whole, than in
his single person. When these were routed, some
gave chace to the fugitives ; others took in flank the
Macedonians, who were still fighting : the slaughter
was prodigious, and the wing lately victorious was
soon broken in such a manner, that they threw
down their arms and fled. There were not fewer
tlian eight thousand slain, and about five thousand
were taken prisoners. That Philip himself esca[)ed,
was chiefly owing to the ^^tolians ; who began to
})lunder and ravage the camp, while the Romans
were busied in the pursuit, .so that at their return
tliey found nothing left for theinselves.

This, tiom the hrst, occasioned mutual quarrels

'■* The pike of the fifth man in file projected beyond the front.
There uas, therefore an amazing strength in the phahuix, while it
stood firm. Rut it had, likewise, it's ineonvcniences. It could not
act at all, except in a Ivwl and clear ftcld. (Polyb. xvii. sub fin.)

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 41

and reproaches. But afterward Flaminiiis was
miicli more sensibly luirt, when the ^tolians as-
cribed the victory to themselves ^^, and endeavoured
to give a similar impression to the Greeks. This re-
port got such ground, that the poets and others, in
the verses, &;c. which were composed and sung upon
this occasion, places them before the Romans. The
verses most in vogue were the following :

Stranger ! unwept, vmhonoured with a grave,
See thrice ten thousand bodies of the brave !
The fierce .T.tolians, and tlie Latian power
Led by Fkiniinius, ruled the vengeful hour —
ililmathia's scourge! beneath whose stroke they bled ;
And, swifter thai>the roe, the mighty Philip fled.

Alca^us wrote this epigram in ridicule of Philip,
and purposely misrepresented the number of the
slain. The epigram Avas indeed in every body's
mouth, but Fiaminius was mu.ch more affected by^
it than Philip ; for the latter parodied Alcaeus, as
follows :

Stranger ! luileaved, unhonourcd e'en with bark,
This tree, the gibbet of Alca}us, mark !

But Fiaminius, who was ambitious of the praise of
Greece, was not a little provoked ; and therefore
nsanagcd every thing subsequently by himself, pay-
ing very little regard to the .'F^tolians. They in
tlieir turn indulged their resentment ; and, when
Fiaminius had admitted proposals for an accom-
modation, and received an embassy for that purpose
from Philip, the iCtolians exclaimed in all the cities
of Greece, that he had sold the peace to the Mace-
donian, at a time when he might have put a final
period to the war, and have destroyed that empire,

'5 Polybius (xvii.) inCqnns us, that the Macedonians in the first
encounter had the advantage, and beat the Romans from the tops of
l!ie mountains, of which they hnd taken possession. And the
lutter, lie affirms, would in all probability have been put to flight, had
they not been supported by tine /Etoliaii cavalry.

42 T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

which first enslaved the Greeks. These speeches,
though groundless, much perplexed the allies ; but
Philip coming in person to treat '% and submitting
himself and his kingdom to the discretion of Flami-
nius and the Romans, removed all suspicion.

Thus Flaminius put an end to the war. He re-
stored to Philip his kingdom, but obliged him to re-
nounce all claim upon Greece ; fined him a thou-
sand talents ; took away all his ships, except ten ;
and sent Demetrius, one of his sons, as hostage to
Kome. In this pacification, he made a happy use
of the present, and wisely provided for the future.
For Annibal the Carthaginian, an inveterate enemy
to the Romans and at tliis time an exile, being at
the court of Antiochus *% exhorted that prince to
meet fortune who now opened her arms ta him ; and
Antiochus himself finding his power very consider-
able, and that his exploits had already gained him
the title of Great, began to think of universal mo-
narchy, and particularly of setting himself against
the Romans. Had not Flaminius therefore in his
wisdom foreseen this, and concluded a peace '% An-
tiochus might have joined Philip in the war with
Greece ; and those tw^o kings (then the most power-
ful in the world) making a common cause, might
have involved Rome afresli in conflicts and dangers,
as alarming as those which she had experienced in
the war with Annibal. Rut Flaminius, by thus inter-
posing an interiuLcliate space of peace between the
two wars, and finishing the one before the other be-

''^' SeePolyl). xvii. and Liv. xxxiii. 13.*

'^ Tliis is ii mistake. Annibal did not arrive at the court of An-
tiochus till the year after Flaminius had proclaimed the liberty of
Cireece at the Isthniitm shames ; Cato and Valerius Flaccus, the
consuls of that year, having sent an embassy to Carthage to com-
plain of him, upon which he privately left the city. (Liv. xxxiii.
48, 19.)

'8 Flaminius, according to Polybius, was induced to conclude a
peace, u])i)n learning th.at Antiochus was marching towards Greece
witli a powerful army ; and Philip, he was afraid, might thereby be
induced to continue the war.

6

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 43

gan, cut off at once the last hope of Pliih'p and the
lirst of Antiochus.

The ten commissioners sent by the senate to assist
Flaminius advised him to set the rest of Greece free,
but to keep garrisons in the cities of Corintli,
Chalcis, and Demetrias, in order to secure them in
the event of a war with Antiochus. But the iEto-
lians, always veliement in their accusations, vehe-
mently laboured to excite a spirit of insurrection in
the cities, calling upon Flaminius to loose ' the
shackles of Greece ;' for so Philip used to term
those cities. Thev asked the Greeks, " If they did
' not find their chain verv comfortable, now it was

more polished, though heavier than before ; and
' if they did not consider Flaminius as the greatest
" of benefactors, for having unfettered their feet and
*' bound them bv the neck." Flaminius distressed
by these clamours implored the council of deputies,
and at last prevailed with them, to deliver those
cities from the garrisons, in order that his favour to
the Grecians might be complete.

They were then celebrating the Isthmian games ^^,
and an innumerable company was seated to see the
exercises. For Greece, now enjoying full peace
after a length of wars, and big with the expectation
of liberty, had come together in great crowds upon
this festive occasion. Silence being commanded by
sound of trumpet, a herald went forth and made pro-
clamation ; '• That the Roman senate, and Titus
" Qtiinctius Flaminius the general and proconsul,
'' having vanquished king PhiHpand the Macedonians,
" took ofi'ail impositions and withdrew all garrisons
" from Greece, and restored iibertyand tlieir own laws
'' to the Corinthians, Locrians, Phocians, Eubrcans,
" Achp^ans, Phthiota;, Magncsians, Thessalians, and
*' Perrha^bians."

At first, the proclamation was not generally or

'' These games were so namcfl, from being celebrated in the
isthmus of Corinth. I'hey had been originally instituted by Siiyphus,
and revived by Theseus.*

4-t T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

distinctly heard, but ii confused murmur rnn through
the theatre; some \v()iuleri!ig, some questioning,
and otlicrs calling upon the herald to repeat what he
had said. Silence being again commanded, the
lierald raised his voice, so as to be clearly under-
stood by the whole assembly. The shout which
they gave in the transport of joy was so prodigious,
that it was heard as far as the sea. The people left
their seats ; there was no farther regard paid to the
diversions ; all hastened to embrace and to address
the preserver and protector of Greece. The hyper-
bolical accounts, which have often been given of the
effect of loud shouts, were then verified. For the
crows, which happened at that time to be flying
over their heads, fell dov/n into the theatre. The
breaking of the air seems to have been the cause.
For the sound of many united voices being violently
strong, the parts of the air are separated by it, and a
void Is left which affords the birds no support. Or
perhaps the force of the sound strikes the birds like
an arrow, and kills them in an instant. Or possibly
a circular motion is caused in the air, as a whirlpool
is produced in the sea by the agitations of a storm "'^.
If Flaminius, as soon as he saw the assembly risen
and the crowd rushing toward him, had not avoided
them and slipped aside, he must have been sur-
rounded and in all probability suffocated by such a
multitude. When they had almost spent them-
selves in acclamations about his jiavilion, and night
was now come, they retired ; and whatever friends
or feliow-citizens they happened to see, they em-
braced and caressed again, and then went and con-
cluded the evening together in feasting and merri-
ment. There doubtless redoubling their joy, they
bejzan to recollect and discourse of the state of
Cireece : thev observed, "That notwithstandinoj the
" many dreadful wars in which she had been engaged
'' for liberty, she had never gained a more secure or

-° Val. Max. iv. .'<- mentions the same fact; ami a similar instajicc
ii recorded in the sLibtequcut Liie oi'Pcnipey, Vol. iv,*

it

T. Q. FLAMIXrUS. 45

" agreeable enjoyment of it, than at present when
" others had fought tor her ; that glorious and im-
" portant prize having hardly cost them a drop of
" blood, or a single tear: that, of human excellences,
" valour and prudence were only seldom met with, but
that justice was still more uncommon : that the
Agesilauses, Lysandei-s, Niciascs, and Alcibiadeses
'' knew how to manage a war, and to gain victories
both by sea and land; but not how to apply
their success to generous and noble purposes. So
" that with the exception of the battles of Mara-
" thon, Salamis, PlataDiX^, and Thermopylae, and the
" actions of Cimon upon the Eurymedon and near
" Cyprus, Greece had fought to no other purpose
" but to bring tlie yoke upon herself: all the tro-
" phies, which she had erected, were monuments of
" her dishonour, and at last her allhirs were ruined
by the unjust ambition of her chiefs. But these
strangers, who had scarcely a spark of any thing
" Grecian left-', who hardly retained a faint tradi-
" tion of their ancient descent from us^ iiom whom
** the least inclination or even word in our behalf
" could not have l)ecn expected ; these strangers
" have run the greatest risks and submitted to the
greatest labours, to deliver Greece fiom her cruel
" and tyrannical masters, and to restore her to li-
" berty/*

These were the reflexions which the Grecians
made, and by the actions of Flaminius, which were
quite in unison with his proclamation, they were
abundantly justified. For he immediately despatched
Lentulus into Asia to set the Bargyllians free, and
Titillius-^ into Thrace to draw Philip's garrisons
out of the towns and adjacent islands. Publius Vib
Jius set sail, in order to treat with Antiocbus about

'' AcconlingtaDion. Halic. Rome was stocked with inhabitant*
at first chiefly Ironi tliose Grecian colonies, which had settled in the
^oLith of Italy before the time or' Romulus.

" Polybius and Livy call him ' Luciius Stertiniiis.' The Barg\i'-
iians werea Carian people

4G

T. Q. FLAMIXIUS.

the freedom of tlic Grecians under his sway. And
I'laininiiis liimsclf went to Chalcis, and thence sailed
to ]Mag!icsia, wiiere he removed the garrison, and
replaced the govenuncnt in the hands of the peo})le.

At Argos, being appointed director of the Ne-
mean games, he settled the whole order of them in
the most correct manner, and npon that occasion
caused liberty to be again proclaimed by the crier.
And as lie passed through the other cities, he
strongly recommended to them an adherence to law,
a strict course of justice, and domestic peace and
imanimity. He healed their divisions : he restored
their exiles. In shoit, he took not more pleasure
in conquering the jMacedonians, thnn in reconciling
the Greeks to each other ; and their liberty now ap-
peared the least of the benefits, which they had re-
ceived at his hands.

It is said, that when Lycurgus the orator had de-
livered Xenocrates the philosopher out of the hands
of the tax-gatherers, who were hurrying him to pri-
son for the tax pi>id by strangers, and had ])rosccuted
them for their insolence, Xenocrates subseolientlv
meeting Lycurgus' children, said to them, " Chil-
" dren, I have ma'de a noble return to your father
*' lor the service he did me : for all the world praise
" him for it." But the returns, which attended Fla-
minius and the Romans for their beneficence to tlie
Greeks, terminated not in praises alone, but justly
procured them the confidence of all mankind, and
added greatly to their power. For now a variety of
people not only acce})ted the governors set over
them by P.ome, but even sent for them, and deli-
vered themselves into their hands. And not only
cities and commonwealths, but kings when injured
by other kings, had recourse to them tor i)i'oleclion.
iSo tliat, the Deity j^erhaps likewise co-operating, in
a short time the whole woild became subject to their
domiipon. Flaminius al^o valued himself most u])on
the liberty, which lie had bestowed on Greece.
For, having dedicated some silver bucklers together

-T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 47

with his own shield at Delphi, he put upon them the
following inscription :

Ye Spartan horsemen, twins oi' race divine !
This oti'ering Titus of ^luieas' line
Presents, oblation proud to liberty :
Titus, who bade the sons of Greece be free.

He offered likewise to Apollo a golden crown, with
these verses inscribed upon it :

This crown, which scatters far it's golden rays.
On thy ambrosial locks see Titus place !
O grant him, Phoebus, bright in fame tosiiine.
Who led the warriors of . Eneas' line.

The Grecians have had the noble gift of liberty
twice conferred upon them in the city of Corinth ;
by Flaminius on that occasion, and by Nero in our
own days. It was granted, both times, during the
celebration of the Isthmian games. Flaminius had
it proclaimed by a herald ; but Nero himself de-
clared the Grecians free, and at liberty to be go-
verned by their own laws, in an oration which he
made from the rostrum in the public assembly. This
however happened long afterward -^.

Flaminius next undertook a very just and honour-
able war against Nabis, the wicked and abandoned
tyrant of Lacedfcmon ; but, in this case, he disap-
pointed the hopes of Greece. For, though he might
have taken him prisoner, he would not ; but struck
up a league v/ith him, and left Sparta unworthily in
bondage. Whether it was that he feared, if the war
were protracted to any length, he miglit be super-
ceded by a successor sent from Rome, who would
rob him of the glory of it'% or in his passion for

*^ Two hundred and sixty-three vcars.

^■» Livy touches upon this reason ; but at the same lime he men-
tions others, more to the honour of this great man. Winter was now-
coming on, and the siege of Sparta might have lasted a considerable
time. The enemy's country was so" exhausted, that it could not
supply him with provisions, and it was difficult to procure convoys

48

T. Q. fla:\iinius.

fame, was jealous of the reputation of Pliilopocmen :
a man who upon all occasions liad distinguished
himself among tlie (rreeks, and had particularly in
that war given wonderful proois both of courage and
conduct ; insomuch that the Acha?ans gloried in
him, as much as in Flaminius, and jiaid him the same
respect in their theatres. This deeply chagrined
Flaminius ; he could not bear that an Arcadian,
who had only commanded in some inconsiderable
wars upon the confines of his own country, should
be held in equal admiration with a Roman consul,
who had fought for all Greece. Flaminius, however,
did not want apologies for his conduct ; " He had
" put an end to the war," he said, " because he
" foresaw he could not destroy the tyrant, without
" involving all the Spartans in the mean time
" in heavy calamities."

The Acha^ans decreed to Flaminius many ho-
nours ; but none seemed equal to his services, ex-
cept one present, which pleased him above all the
rest. It was this: the llomans, who had had the
misfortune to be taken prisoners in the war with
Annibal, had been sold for slaves, and dispersed in
various places. Twelve hundred of them were now
in Greece. Their sad reverse of fortune made them
always unhappy, but now (as might be expected)
they were still more so, when they met their sons,theii'
brothers, or their acquaintance, and saw them free
while they themselves were slaves, and conquerors
while they were captives. Flaminius did not pre-
tend to take them from their masters, though his
heart sympathised with their distress. But the
Achavuis redeenied them at the rate of five mina' a

from any othtr quarter. Besides, Villius was returned from tlie
court of Antioclius, and hrouiilit advice that tlie peace with tliat
prince was not to be depended upon. In fact, he had already en-
tered Europe with a fieet and an army more numerous than before.
And wh;it forces l)ad thi'v to oppose to hini, in the event ofa rup-
ture, if Flaaiinius continued to employ his iu the siege of Sparta?
(xxxiv. 3:3, 3-1-.)

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 49

man, and having collected them together made Fla-
minius a present of them, just as he was going to
embark ; so that he set sail with the higliest satisfac-
tion, having found a glorious recompcnce for his
glorious services, a return suitable to a man of such
Jnunane sentiments and such a lover of liis country.
This, indeed, made the most illustrious part of his
triumph. For these poor men got their heads
shaved and wore the cap of liberty, as the custom of
slaves is upon their manumission ^', and in this habit
followed his chariot at his triumph. But to add to
the spendour of the show, there were the Grecian
helmets, the Macedonian targets and spears, and
the other spoils borne in great pomp before him.
And the quantity of money was not small ; for, as
Itanus'-^ relates it, there were carried in this triumph
three thousand seven hundred and thirteen pounds
of unwrought gold, forty-three thousand two hun-
dred and seventy of silver, fourteen thousand five
hundred and fourteen pieces of coined gold called
Philippics ; besides which, Philip was indebted a
thousand talents. But the Romans were subse-
quently induced, chiefly by Flaminius' mediation, to
remit this debt ; Philip was declared their ally, and
his son, who had been with them as an hostage, was
sent home.

After this, Antiochus passed over into Greece
with a large fleet and army, and solicited the states
to rise in arms and to join him. The iEtolians, wha
had long been very ill-affected to the Romans, took
his part, and suggested (as a basis, and pretence for
the war) that he came to bring the Grecians liberty.
The Grecians had no want of it, for they were free

'^' Allusions to this custom abound in the ancient writers :

Ut ego liodie rasa capite calviis capiampileum, (Src.

(Plaut. Amphitr. I. i.)
This ceremony at Rome was performed in the temple of Feronia.
'^^ To ' Itanus,' the editors of Amyot's French version ingeniously
prefix the syllable ' Tud.' Tuditan'us is mentioned as a writer, both
by Macrob. Sat.i. 13, 16., and Plin. H. N. xiii. 13.*
VOL. III. E

So T. Q. FLAMIXIUS:

iilrcady ; but as he had no better cause to assign,
tliey instructed him to cover his attempt with that
splendid pretext.

The Romans, fearing upon this account a revolt
in (jrecce, as well as the strength of Antiochus, sent
the consul Manius Acilius to command in the war,
but appointed Flaminius his lieutenant"" for the
sake of his influence in Greece. His appearance
there immediately confirmed such as were yet friends
in their fidelity, and prevented those who were
waverino; from an entire defection. This was effected
by the respect which they bore him ; for it operated
like a potent remedy at the beginning of a disease.
There were a few indeed so entirely gained and
corrupted by the ^5^tolians, that his interest did not
prevail with them ; yet even these, though he W'as
mucli irritated and exasperated against them at pre-
sent, he saved after the battle. For Antiochus,
being defeated at Thermopylae and forced to fly,
immediately embarked for Asia. Upon this, the
consul Manius went against some of the ^tolians,
and besieged their towns, abandoning others to
Philip. Thus great ravages were committed by the
Macedonians among the Dolopians and Magnesians
on one hand, and among the Atharaanians and
Aparantians on the other : and Manius himself,
having sacked the city of Heraclca, besieged Nau-
pactus, at that time in the hands of the iEtolians.
But Flaminius, touched with compassion for Greece,
went from Peloponnesus to the consul by water,
and began to remonstrate with him for suffering
Philip to reap the fruits of his victory : adding, that
while he, to gratify his resentment, was spending his
time about one town, the Macedonians were sub-

^■^ According to Livy, it was not Titus, but Lucius Quinctiui?
Flaminius (his brother) wlio was appointed lieutenant to Gla-
brio. (L.) (xxxvi. 1.) Plutarch's account however is the more
probable, for the reason subjoined in t!ie text. M. llicard has a
lon<^ note on the word ' Lieutenant,' but it dots not appeal" of
suKicient importance to justify transcription.*

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 51

tilling "whole provinces and kingdoms"^. The be-
sieged liappened to see i^'Jaminiiis, called to hini
from the walls, stretched out their hands, and
begged his interposition. He gave them no, answer,
but turned round and wept, and then immediately
withdrew. Afterward, however, he discoursed witli
Manius so effectually, that he appeased his anger,
and procured the yEtolians a truce, and time to
send deputies to Rome to petition for favourable
terms.

But he had much greater difficulties to encounter,
when he applied to Manius in behalf of the Chalci-
deans. The consul was highly incensed against
them, on account of the marriage which Antiochus
had celebrated among them, even after the war was
bcs^un ; a marriao;e every way unsuitable, as well as
imseasonable, for he was far advanced in years, and
the bride extremely young. The person with whom
lie thus fell in love was the daughter of Cleoptole-
mus, and a virgin of incomparable beauty. This
match brought the Chalcideans entirely into the
king's interest, and they suffered him to make use
of their city as a place of arms. After the battle, he
had fled with the utmost precipitation to Chalcis ;
and taking with him his young w'ife, his treasures,
and his friends, sailed thence to Asia. And now
Manius in his indignation marched directly against
Chalcis, Flaminius followed, and endeavoured to
appease his resentment. At last, by his assiduities
with him and the most respectable Romans who were
likely to have an influence upon him, he succeeded.
The Chalcideans, thus saved from destruction, con-
secrated the most beautiful and the noblest of their
public edifices to Titus Flaminius; and such, in-
scriptions as these are to be seen upon them to this
day : " The people dedicated this Gymnasium to
Titus and Hercules :" and again elsewhere ; " The
people consecrate the Delphinium to Titus and

** See Liv. xxxvi. 3 1. for a more enlarged detail.*

E 2

52 T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

Apollo." Nay, what is more, even in our days a
priest of Titus is formally elected and declared ; and
Upon occasions of sacrifice to him, when the libations
are over, they sing a hymn, the greatest part of
which on account of it's length I omit, and only
give the conclusion :

With Rome's pure faith let echo ring ;
Her liallou'd faith, ye maidens, sing !
Still, as our strains to heaven aspire,
Jove, Rome, and Titus wake tlie lyre !
Titus, our saviour, claims our praise:
To him then grateful paeans raise ^' !

The rest of the Grecians conferred upon him all
due honours ; and what realised those honours, and
added to their lustre, was the extraordinary affection
of the people, which he had gained by his modera-
tion. For if he happened to be at variance with
any one upon account of business, or about a point
of honour (as for instance with Philopoemen, and
with Diophanes general of the Acha^ans) he never
indulged malignity, or carried his resentment into
action ; but let it expire in words, in such expostur
lations as the freedom of public debates may seem to
justify. No man indeed ever found him vindictive,
but he often discovered a hastiness and levity of
temper. Setting this aside, he was the most agree-
able man in the world, and a pleasantry mixed with
strong sense distinguished his conversation.

Thus, to divert the Acha?ans from their purpose
of conquering the island of Zacynthus^°, he told
them, " It was as dangei'ous for them to put their
** heads out of Peloponnesus, as it was for the tor-

*'> This passage is considered as a rcmarkahle one hy the editors
of Aniyot's French version, implying the apotheosis of a living
mortal : and the woi sliip thus paid is the subject of a curious dis-
sertation hy the Ahbe Mongault, Mem. dc I'Acad. des Inscript.
toin. i. The duration, as well as the character, of this superstitious
institution is worthy of attention. The lapse of less than three
centuries usuallv eHaccs popular gratitude.*

'° Hod. Zantc.*

<c
cc

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 53

" toise to trust his out of his shell.'* In the first
conference which PhiHp and he had about peace,
Philip taking occasion to say, " Titus, you come
with a numerous retinue, where;i3 I come quite
alone ;'* Flaminius answered, " No wonder that
you come alone, for you haye killed all your
" friends and relations "\'* Dinocrates the Mes-
senian, being in company at Rome, drank until he
was intoxicated, and then put on a woman's habit,
and danced in that disguise. Next day he applied
to Flaminius, and entreated his assistance in a de-
sign, which he had conceived, to withdraw Messene
from the Achaaan league. Flaminius answered, " I
" will consider of it ; but I am surprised that you,
" who have conceived such great designs, can sing
" and dance at a carousal." And w^ien Antiochus'
embassadors represented to the AchjBans how nu-
merous the king's forces were, and to make them
appear still more so, reckoned them up by all their
different names; " I supped once," said Flaminius,
" with a friend ; and upon my complaining of the
" number of dishes, and expressing my wonder
" how he could furnish his table with such an im-
" mense variety ; ' Be not uneasy about that,' said
my friend, ' for it is all hog's flesh, and the differ-
* ence is only in the dressing and the sauce.* In
like manner I say to you, my Achasan friend, be
not astonished at the number of Aiitiochus' forces,
at these pikemen, these halberdiers, and these cui-
rassiers ; for they are all Syrians, only distinguish-,
ed by the trifling arms which they bear."
After these illustrious actions in Greece, and the
conclusion of the war with Antiochus, Flaminius
was created censor. This is the chief dignity in the
state, and the perfection, as it were, of all its ho-
nours ^-. He had for coUegue the son of Marcellus,
who had been five times consul. They expelled four

'' See Livy xl. 3, 4.*

?^ See the Life ofCaraillus, not, (5.) Vol. J,

a

54 T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

senators, uho were men of no joartlcular note : and
they admitted as citizens all who ofiered themselves,
}3rovi(led that their parents were free. But they
were forced to this by Terentius Culeo, a tribune
of the people, v.ho, out of opposition to the no-
bility, procured such orders from the commons.
Two of the greatest and most powerful men of those
times, Scipio Africanus and Marcus Cato, w^ere then
at variance wdth each other. The former of these
Flaminius appointed president of the senate, as the
first and best man in the commouAvealth ; and with
the latter he entirely quarrelled, upon the following
iinliappy occasion"^: Titus had a brother named
Lucius Quinctius Flaminius, unhke him in all re-
spects ; a man quite abandoned in his pleasures, and
totally regardless of decorum. This Lucius had a
favourite boy, whom he cariied with him, even when
lie commanded armies and governed provinces.
One day as they w'ere drinking, the boy making his
court to Lucius said ; " I love you so tenderly,
" that preferring your satisfaction to my own, I left
*' a show of gladiators to come to you, though I
" have never yet seen a man killed." Lucius, de-
. lighted with the flattery, rej)]ied ; " If that be all,
" you need not be in the least uneasy, for I will
" soon cure your longing." Upon which, he or-
dered a convict to be brought from the prison ; and,
having sent for one of his lictors, commanded him
to strike off the man's head, in the room where
they were carousing. Valerius Antius whites, that
this was done to gratify a mistress. And Livy re-
lates, from Cato's writings, that a Gaulish deserter
being at the door with his wife and children, Lucius
took him into the banqueting-room, and, to gratify
liis minion, killed him with his own hand ; but Cato
(it is probable) said this, for the pur[)ose of aggra-
vating the charge. For that the person killed "was

" See the Life of Cato, Vol. II., and also Liv. xxxix. 42., who
gives Valerius Antias' account.*

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 55

not a deserter, but a prisoner and a condemned one
too, appears from many writers ; and particidarl}'
from Cicero, in his Treatise upon Old Age, where
he introduces Cato himself giving tliat statement of
the matter.

Upon this account Cato, when he was censor,
and undertook to remove all obnoxious persons from
the senate, expelled Lucius, though he was of con-
sular dignity. His brother thought this proceeding
reflected dishonour lipon himself; and they both
went into the assembly in the form of suppliants,
and besought the people with, tears, that Cato might
be obliged to assign his reason for having fixed such
a stigma upon so illustrious a family. The request
appeared reasonable. Cato without the least hesi-
tation came forward, and standing up with his col-
legue interrogated Titus, whether or not he knew
any thing of that feast. Titus answering in the ne-
gative, Cato related the affair, and called upon.
Lucius to declare on oath, whether it were not true.
As Lucius made no reply, the people determined
the brand of infamy to be just, and conducted Cato
home with great honour from the tribunal.

Titus, deeply concerned at his brother's misfor-
tune, leagued with the inveterate enemies of Cato,
and gaining a majority in the senate quashed and
annulled all the contracts, leases, and purchases
which Cato had made, relating to the public re-
venues ; and stirred up many and violent prosecu^
tions against him. But I know not whether he
acted well or agreeably to good policy, in thus be-
coming a mortal enemy to a man, who had only
done what became a lawful magistrate and a good
citizen, for the sake of one who was a relation in-
deed, but a most unworthy one, and who had only
met with the punishment he deserved. On a sub-
sequent exhibition of shows, however, the people
being assembled in the theatre, and the senate (ac-
cording to custom) in the most honourable row,
Lucius was observed to' seat himself in an humble

$6 T, Q. FLAMINIUS.

and dejected manner upon one of the lowest
benches. This excited general compassion. The
people could not bear to see it, but incessantly
called out to him to change his place ; till he went
to the bench allotted to the consular party ''% who
made room for him.

The native ambition of Flaminius was applauded,
while it found sufficient matter of employment in
the wars, of which we have given an account. And
his serving in the army as a tribune, after he had
been consul, when no one required it of him, was
regarded with a favourable eye. But after he had
arrived at an age which excused him from all em-
ployments, he was censured for indulging a violent
passion for fame, and a youthful impetuosity in that
inactive season of life. To some excess of this kind
seems to have been owing his behaviour with re-
spect to Annibal ^\ at which the world was not a little

34 The distinction of places for the senators and knights, esta-
blished by Tarquinius Priscus (Liv. i. 35.) at the Great Games,
had fallen into neglect ; for tlie senators were not permanently se-
parated from the people till A. U. C, 560, nor the knights till
twenty-seven years afterward by C. lloscius Otho. See Liv. xxxiv,
5-1'., Suppl. xcix. 3. The mixture likewise of men and women at
the public shows (though prohibited, as appears from a passage
near the end of the Life of Sylla, before the time of Plutarch) is
often referred to by Ovid, in his Amatory Poems, as then sub-
sisting.*

5^ Flaminius was only about forty-four years of age, when he
went embassador to Prusias. It was not therefore an unseasonable
desire of a public character, or an extravagant passion for fame,
which was blamed in him upon this occasion, but an unworthy per-
secution of a great though unfortunate man. We are inclined,
however, to think that he had secret instructions from the senate
for what he did; for it is not probable, that a man of his mild and
humane disposition would choose to hunt down an old unhappy
warrior: and Plutarch in a subsequent passage confirms this opi-
nion. (L.) For an account of AnnibaPs death, see Livy xxxix.
51, 52. We may farther remark, with a former annotator, the in-
consistency of this allusion to the exemptions of age in a writer,
who has expressly treated the question, ' Whether or not a man in
advanct'd life ought to concern himself in the administration of
public affairs ;' and often attirnjs, with justice, that no age can aur
tiiorise a good man in withdrawing himself from the sei'vice of his
country-.

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. S^

offended. For Annibal having fled from Carthage,
his country, took refuge at the court of Antiochus.
]3ut Antiochus, after he had lost the battle of Phry-
gia, gladly accepting conditions of peace, Annibal
was again forced to fly ; and after wandering through
many countries, at length settled in Bithynia, and
put himself under the protection of Prusias. The
llomans knew this perfectly well, but they paid no
attention to it, considering him now as a man en-
feebled by age, and cast ofi' by fortune. Flaminius
however, being sent by the senate upon an embassy
to Prusias about other matters, and seeing Annibal
at his court, could not endure that he should be
sufiered to Vive. And though Prusias used much
intercessi<;>ji and entreaty in behalf of a man, who
came to him as a suppliant, and lived with him
under the sanction of hospitality, he could not
prevail.

It seems there was an ancient oracle, which thus
prophesied concerning the end of that general,

Libyssan earth shall hide the bohes of Annibal.

He therefore thought of nothing but ending his
days at Carthage, and being buried in Libya. But
in Bithynia there is a sandy place near the sea,
which has a small village in it called Libyssa. In
this neighbourhood Annibal lived. Having always
however a distrust of Prusias on account of his ti-
midity, and dreading likewise the machinations of
the Romans, he had some time before ordered seven
subterraneous passages to be dug beneath his house ;
which were continued a long way under ground,
and terminated in several distant places, all of them
nearly indiscernible from without. By those passages,
as soon as he was informed of the orders which
Flaminius had given, he attempted to make his
escape ; but finding the king's guards at the outlets,
he resolved to kill himself. 8ome say, he wound
his cloke about his neck, and ordered his servant

5» T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

to put Ills knees upon his back and pull with all liis
force, and not to leave twisting till he had quite
strangled him. Others inform us that, like The-
iTiistocles and Midas, he drank bull's blood. But
Livy M'rites, that having poison in readiness, he
mixed it for a draught ; and taking the cup in his
hand, " Let us deliver the llomans," said he, " from
" their anxieties, since they think it too tedious
" and dangerous to wait for the death of a poor
*' hated old man. Yet shall not Titus gain a con-
** quest worth envying, or suitable to tiie generous
*' proceedings of his ancestors, who sent to caution
*' Pyrrhus, though a victorious enemy, against the
" poison that was prepared for him."

Thus Annibal is said to have died. When the
intelligence was brought to the senate, many in that
august body were highly displeased. Flaminius
appeared too officious and cruel in his precautions
to procure the death of a chieftain, now tamed by
his misfortunes, like a bird which through age had
lost it's tail and feathers, and suffered to live in
that condition. And as he had no orders to put him
to death, it was plain that he did it out of a passion
for fame, and to be recorded to after-times as the
destroyer of Annibal ^^. Upon this occasion, they
recollected and admired more than ever the humane
and generous behaviour of Scipio Africanus ; for
afterhe had vanquished Annibal in Africa, at a time
M'hQn he was extremelv formidable and deemed in-
vincible, he neither insisted on his banishment, nor
demanded him of his fellow-citizens ; but, as he had
embraced him at the conference preceding the
battle, so likewise after it, when he settled the con-
ditions of peace, he offered not the slightest con-
tumely or insult to his misfortunes.

'* If this was really the dastardly motive of Flaminius, and no-
thing; of a political tendency entered into his destruction of that
illustrious general, it would hardly be possible for all the virtues,
all the triuuiphs of the llouiuns, to redeem him from the infamy of
BO base an action.

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 59

It is reported, tluit they met again at E|)hesus ;
and Annibal, as they walked together, taking the
iipj)er hand, AfVicanus suffered it and walked on
without the least concern. They subsequently fell
into conversation about great generals, and Annibal
asserted that Alexander was the greatest general
the world had ever seen, Pyrrhus the second, and
he himself the third. Scipio smiled at this, and said,
" But in what rank would you have placed yourself,
" if I had not conquered you ?" " Oh, Sci}no !'*
said he, " then I should not have placed myself the
*' third, but the first ^'^"

The generality, admiring this moderation of Sci-
pio, found the more fault with Flaminius for taking
the spoils of an enemy whom another man had
slain. There were some indeed, who applauded the
thing, and observed ; " That so long as Annibal
lived, they must have regarded him as a fire,
which required only to be blown into a flame.
That, when he was in the vigour of his age, it
was not his bodily strength or his right-hand,
*' which was so dreadful to the Romans ; but his
*' capacity and his experience, together with his
" innate rancour and hatred to their name. And
*' that these are not altered by age ; fbr the native
"^ disposition still over-rules the manners : whereas
" fortune far from remaining the same changes
" continually, and by new hopes invites those to
" new enterprises, who were ever at war with us in
" their hearts." And subsequent events contri-
buted still more to Flaminius' justification. For in
the first place Aristonicus, the son of a harper's
daughter, upon the strength of his being reputed
the natural son of Eumenes, filled the whole of Asia
with tumult and rebellion : and Mithridates next,
after such strokes as he had encountered fi'om Sylla
and Fimbria, and so terrible a destruction among ^

'"> This is recorded by Livy xxxv. 14., and (with some variation)
by Plutarch himself, in his Life of Pyrrhus.*'

6i

<50

T. Q. FLAMINIUS.

hi<^ troops and officers, rose up stronger than ever
against Lucullns* both by sea and land. Annibaly
indeed, was never brought so low as Caius Marius
had been. For he enjoyed the friendship of a king,
from whom he received liberal supplies, and with
"whose officers both in the navy and army he had
important connections ; whereas Marius was a wan-
derer in Africa, and compelled to beg his bread.
But the Romans, who had laughed at his African
wanderings and distresses, soon afterward bled in
their own streets under his rods and axes, and pros-
trated themselves at his feet. So true it is, that there
is nothing either great or httle at this moment,
which is of sure continuance ; and that the changes
which we have to experience terminate only with
our lives. For this reason, some inform us that
Flaminius did not act from himself; but that he was
joined in commission with Lucius Scipio, and that
the sole purpose of their embassy was to procure
Annibal's death ^^. As we have no account after
this of any political or military act of Flaminius,
and only know that he died in his bed, it is time to
proceed to the parallel.

FLAMINIUS AND PHILOPCEMEN

COMPARED.

IF we consider the extensive benefits which
Greece received from Flaminius, we shall find that
neither Philopcemen, nor other Greeks more illus^
trious than Philopamen, will stand the comparison
with him. For the Greeks always fought against
Greeks j but Flaminius, who was not of Greece,

" See Livy xxxix. 51., where Annibal is represented as laying
this to the charge of the Romans in his last speech,^

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. ei

fought for that country. And at a time when Phi-
lopoemen, unable to defend his fellow-citizens who
were engaged in a dangerous war, passed over into
Crete, Flaminius having vanquished Philip in the
heart of Greece, set cities and whole nations free.

I If we examine their battles, it will appear that Phi-
lopoemen, while he commanded the Achaean forces^
killed more Greeks, than Flaminius in asserting the
Grecian cause killed Macedonians.

As to their failings, ambition was the fault of
Flaminius, and obstinacy that of Philopocmen. The
former was passionate, and the latter implacable,
Flaminius left Philip in his royal dignity, and par-
doned the ^tolians : whereas Philopoemen, in his
resentment against his country, robbed her of se*
veral of her dependencies. Besides, Flaminius was
always a firm friend to those, whom he had once
served ; but Philopoemen, merely for the purpose
of indulging his anger, was ever ready to destroy
the merit of his former favours. For he had been
a great benefactor to the Lacedaemonians ; yet he
subsequently demolished their walls, and ravaged
their country, and in the end entirely changed and
overturned their constitution. Nay, he seems to
have sacrificed his life to his passion and perverse-

■ ness, by too hastily and unseasonably invading Mes-
senia ; instead of taking, like Flaminius, every pre-
caution for his own security and that of his troops.
But Philopoemen's military experience was per-

I fected by his many wars and victories. And, while
Flaminius decided his dispute with Philip in two
engagements, Philopoemen by conquering in an in-
credible number of battles left fortune no room to
question his skill.

Flaminius moreover availed himself of the power
of a flourishing commonwealth, and raised himself
by it's strength ; but Philopoemen distinguished
himself at a time, when his country was upon the
decline. t>o that the success of the latter is to be
ascribed .solely to himself, and that of the foriner to

^2 T. Q. FLAMINIU^.

all the Romans. The one had good troops to coifl^
mand; and the other made those good, whom he
commanded. And though the achievements of
Philop'icmen, being performed against Greeks, do
not prove him fortunate, yet they prove him coura-
geous. For, wliere other things are equal, eminent
success must be owing to superior excellence. He
had to do with two ot' the most warlike of the Gre-
cian nations ; the Cretans who were the most artful,
and the Lacedaemonians who v>'ere the most valiant :
and yet the former he mastered by policy, and the
latter by bravery. Add to tliis, that Flaminius had
his men ready armed and disciplined to his hand ;
whereas Philopoemcn had the armour of his to
alter, and their discipline to new-model. So that
the things most contributing to victory Avere the in-
vention "of the one, while the other only practised
^vllat was already in use. Accordingly, Philopoe-
incn's personal exploits were many and signal ; but
we find nothing of that kind remarkable in Flaminius.
On the contrary, Archedemus a certain .-Etolian said,
by way of raillery, " While I ran with my drawn
" sword to charge the Macedonians, who stood firm
" and continued fighting, Titus was standing still,
with his hands lifted up toward heaven and pray-

" ing."

It is true, all the acts of Flaminius were glorious
while he was general, and during his lieutenancy too ;
but Piiilopcrmen showed himself not less serviceable
and active among the Achfeans, while in a private
capacity, than when he liad the command. For,
when commander-in-chief, he drove Nabis out of the
city of Messene, and restored the inhabitants to their
liberty ; but he was only in a private station, when
he shut the gates of Sparta against the general Dio-
])hanes and against Flaminius, and thus saved the
Lacedaemonians. Nature indeed Iiad given him such
talents for command, that he knew not only how to
govern according to the laws, but how to govern the
laws themselves, when the public good required it ;

T. Q. FLAMINIUS. 6*

not waiting for the formality of the people^'s appoint-
ing him, but rather employing them, when the occa-
sion demanded it. For he was persuaded, that not
he who is elected by the people, but he who thinks
best for the people, is the true general.

There was undoubtedly something noble in the
clemency and humanity of Flaminius toward the
Greeks ; but there was something still nobler in the
resolution, which Philopoemen showed in maintain-
ing the liberties of Greece against the Romans. For
it is a much easier matter to be liberal to the weak,
than to oppose and thus to risk offending the strong.
Since therefore, after all our inquiry into their cha-
racters, the superiority is far from obvious, perhaps
we shall not greatly err, if we give to the Greek the
palm of generalship and military skill, and to the
Roman that of justice and humanity.

THE

LIFE

or

P Y R R H U S.

SUMMARY.

Origin of the Ihigdom of Epinix, and geyiealogij of Pijrrhus. His
father dethroned hxj the sons of Neoptolemus : Pijrrhns, ■while nn
infant, rescued from their hands. Glaucias, king of lUt/ria, re-
ceives him under his protection, and places him on his paternal
throne. He is again driven from Epirus ; again returns, and
divides the kingdom ivith Neoplolemus. The two sovereigns (quar-
rel : Pyrrhus anticipates, and kills his collegne. He goes to assist
Alexander against Antipater. Dispute and tvar with Demetrius.
Pyrrhus compared, in militari/ talents, Ivith Alexander the Great.
Mildness of his character. His wfe and children. He seizes
part of Maccdon ; but quicklij loses it, and makes peace ivith
Demetrius: he takes up arms a second time against that prince,
ivhosc troops desert him. Pi/rrhus is declared king of Macedon.
He divides it tvith Lijsimachus : goes to Athens : gives up Mace-
don, and itiithdravos into Epirus. He meditates the assisting of
the Tarentines against the Romans. Character of Cineas : his
conversation xvilh Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus embarks for Italy. His
feet shattered hij a tempest. He establishes rigorous discipline at
Tarentum, and encamps near the Uomans : engages them. His
prudence and bravery. He defeats the Romans, and takes pos-
session of their camp. Dispatches Cineas to Rome to negociate
peace. Appius Claudius opposes the measure. T7ie senate^s replxf,
Fabricius tent embassador to Pyrrhus, xvho in vain endeavours to
make an imprcssioJi upon him by presents and by terror. Fabri-
cius* opinion of Epicurus. The cotisuls apprise Pyrrhus of his

PYRRHUS. 65

physichni^s treaclery. He. gains a second victonj. Different ac-
■CQimt of Hicronijmits : Pj/rr//us' remark upon his success. He
receives an embussijfrom the Sicilians, and goes over tJito Sicily ;
takes Eryx; refuses the Carthaginians peace ; offends the Sicilians^
tvho rise up against him ; returns into Italy, ivhcre he is. attacked
by the Mamertines ; attacks the Romans, and is defeated. He
passes over into Macedon, where he routs Antigonus ; places a
garrison of Gaids in JEgcc, x^.^ho plunder the tombs of the Mace-
donian kings. He leads a povcerful army against Sparta, and
encamps near the city. The Spartans in the night-time dig a
trench before it. Pyrrhus commences the attack. Exploits of
some Spartans. He is at last obliged to retire. The Spartans
receive succours. Pyrrhus quits Laconia, and marches to Argos ;
is attacked by the Lacedccmonians in his retreat, and cuts them in
pieces. His son falls in the engagement. Omens upon his march'
He enters Argos : Battle by night : Disastrous presage. He
meets ivith various obstacles to his retreat ; is twunded by a ivomaa
tvith a tile. His head cut off' by a soldier. Fun-eral honours paii
}iim by Antigonus.

^at^^^m^

^OME historians write, tliat Phaeton was the first
king after the deluge [of Deucalion] who reigned
over the Thesprotians and Molossians \ and that he
was one of those who came with Pelasgus into
Epirus. Others say, that Deucalion and Pyrrha,
after they had built the temple of Dodona-^, settled
among the Molossians. At a subsequent period
Neoptolemus^ the son of Achilles, taking his people
with him, possessed himself of the country, and
left a succession of kings after him called Pyrrhidas :
for in his infancy he was called Pyrrhus ; and he
gave that name to one of his legitimate sons, whom

' These were inhabitants of Epirus. {Hod. Albania.) The
latter province was remarkable for the size and strength of it's
■mastiffs.*

* This was, probably, only a druidical kind of temple.

5 Between Deucalion's flood (about B. C. 1501).) and the times
of Neoptolemus, there Avas a space of nearly three hundred and forty
years. See Pausan. i.

VOL. III. F

66 - PYRRHUS.

he liad bv Lanassa the daufijhter of Cleotles son of
llylhis. From that time Acliillcs received divine
honours in Epirus, being stiled in the language
of that country Aspetos (' the Inimitable'). After
these first kings, those who followed became
entirely barbarous, and both their power and their
actions sunk into the utmost obscurity. Tharrytas
is the first whom history mentions, as remarkable
for having polished and improved his cities with
Grecian customs "*, witli letters and good lav/s.
Alcetas was the son of Tharrvtas, Arvbasof Alcetas ;
and of Arybas and Troias his queen was born JEsl-
cides. He married Phthia the dan^'hter of Menon
the Thessalian, who acquired great reputation in the
Lamian war", and next to Leosthcnes was the most
considerable of the confederates. By Phthia, ALa-^
cidcs had tvro dauu'hters named Deidamia and
Troias, and a son named Pvrrhus.

But tlic jMolossians, rising against ^^lacides, de-
posed him and brought in the sons of Neoptolemus''.
Upon this occasion, the friends of ^'Eacides were
taken and slain : only Androclldes and Angelus
escaped with his infant son, though he was much
sought by his enemies, and carried him oft' with his
nurses and a few^ necessary attendants. The train
rendered their fli";ht difficult and slovv-, so that thcv
were soon overtaken. In this extrenutv tiiev placed
the child in the hands of Androcleon, Hippias, and
Neander, three active youn-T; mfii uoon v.hom they
could depend ; and ordered them to make the best
of their way to Meganie, a town in Macedon : while
they themselves, partly by entreaty and partly by
force, stopped tl.e course of the pursuers till even-
ing ; when, having with much diffictilty gotten rid

* Justin (xvii. 3.) (Iocs not ascri!>c the civili.-iiijj of the IMolo?-
f^ians to Tharrytas, but to Arybos iho i;oii ot" Alcetas I., who hcsl
liimsclf been humanised by his education at Athens;.

5 Tills war was declared by the Athenians acjainst Alexander's
sucees^sors, and was so denoir.imated iroiii Lamia, a city of Thessaly,
where Antipaler king of I^Iaeedon was besieged by Leo.ithenes,''

^ This Xcoptoleuius was the brother ei' Arybas.

PYRRHUS. 67

©f tliem, they hastened to join those who carried tlic
young prince. At sun-set they thought themselves
near the summit of their hopes, but they met with
a sudden disappointment. When they came to the
rix'er which runs by the town, it looked rough and
dreadful, and upon trial they found it absolutely nn-
fordable. For the current beinor swelled with the
late rams was very higli and boisterous, and the
darkness added to it's horror. They now despaired
of getting the child and his nurses over, without ad-
ditional assistance ; v.hen perceiving some of the in-
habitants on the other side, they implored them to
assist their passage, and held iip Pyrrhus toward
them. But, thougli they called out loudly and en-
treated earnestly, tiie stream ran so rapidly and made
such a roaring, that they could not be heard. Some
time was spent, Mhile tlicy were thus bawling out on
one side, and listening to no puj-pose on the other.
At last one of Pyrrhus' company thought of peeling
off a piece of oak-bark, and of expressing upon it
with the tongue of a buckle the necessities and the
fortunes of the child. This he accordingly put in
execution ; and having rolled the piece of bark about
a stone, which was made use of to give force to the
motion, he threw it to the other side. Some say, he
bound it fast to a javelin, and darted it across. V\ hen
the people on the other side had read it, and saw
there was not a moment to lose, they cut down trees
and made a raft of them, and passed the river upon
it. It happened that the lirst man, who reached the
l)ank, was named Achilles. He took Pyrrhus in his
arms, and conveyed liim over, while his companions
performed tlie same service for his followers.

Pyrrhus and his train, having thus reached the
other side in safety and escaped their pursuers, con-
tinned their route, till they arrived at the court of
( daucias king of Illyria'. Here they found the king

' Hod. Sclavonia, Dalniatia, Croatia, and Bosnia.*

F 2

6S PYRRHUS.

sitting in his palace with the queen his consort", and
laid t!ie child in tlie posture of a suppliant at his feet.
The kin2^, who stood in fear of Cassander the enemy
of^'Eacidcs, remained a longtime silent, consider-
ing? what part he slioidd act: while Pyrrhus of his
own accord creeping closer to him, took hold of his
robe, and raising himself up to his knees, by this
action first excited a smile, and afterward compas-
sion ; for he thought he saw a petitioner before him,
begging his protection with tears. Some say it was
not Glaucias, but the altar of the dome tic gods
which he approached, and that he raised himself by
embracing it ; whence it appeared to Glaucias, that
heaven itself was interested in the infant's flivour.
For this reason, he immediately put him into the
Iiands of tiie queen, and ordeied her to bring him
Tip wi h his own childieu. His enemies demanded
him soon afterward, and Cassander offered two hun-
dred talents in return, but Glaucias refused to deliver
him up ; and when he attained the age of twelve
years, conducted him into Epirus at the head of an
armv, and placed him upon the throne.

Pyrrhu* had an air of majesty rather terrible, than
august. Instead of teeth in his upper jaw, he had
one continued bone, marked with small lines re-
sembling;' the divisions of a row of teeth. It was be-
lieved, that he cured the swelling of the spleen by
sacrificing a white cock, and with his right foot
gently pressing the part affeci^ed^, the patients lying
upon their backs for that purpose. There was no

8 Justin (ib.) calls tliis princess Beroa, and saj's she was of the
family of the i'llacida; ; wiiicli nrist iiave been the reason of their
seeking refuge for Pyrrhus in that court. (L.) The same historian
subsequently states that ho \v (S not re-instated in his dominions
by Glaucias, but recalled by tiie compassion of his subjects, who
assigned him tutors during his minority^*

^ The effect of a royal touch upon morbid habits of bod}'^, xvas
highly estimated in tliis coui.try till a very late period. Dr. John-
son was carried from Lichfield to London, at the begimiiug of the
last century, to enjoy the benefit of it!*

iPYRRIIUS. 69

person, however poor or mean, to wliorn this relief,
if requested, v/as refused. He received no reward,
except tlie cock for sacrifice, and this present was
very agreeable to liim. It is also said, that the great
toe of that foot had a divine virtue in it ; for after
his death, when the rest of his bodv was consumed.
It was found entire and untouched by the flames.
But this account belongs to the sequel /°

When he was about seventeen years of age, and
seemed to be quite established in his kingdom, he
happened to be called out of his own territories to
attend the nuptials of one of Glaucias' sons, with
whom he had been educated. Upon this occasion
the Molossians again revolting drove out his friends,
pillaged his treasures, and put themselves once more
under Neoptolemns. Pyrrhus having thus lost the
crown, and being in want of every thing, applied to
Demetrius the son of Antigonus, Vvho had married
his sister Deidamia. This princess, when very young,
had been promised to Alexander the son of lioxana
(by Alexander the Great) but that family being un-
fortunately cut oit^\ she was given at a proper age
to Demetrius. In the celebrated battle of Ipsus,ni
which all the kings of the earth were engaged",
Pyrrhus accompanied Demetrius ; and, though but
young, bore dovrn all before him, and highly distin-
guished himself among the combatants. Neitlier did
he forsake Demetrius, when unsuccessful, but kept
for him those cities of Greece with which he had
been entrusted; and, when the treaty was concluded
with Ptolemy, went to Egypt as an hostage. There,
both in hunting and in other exercises, he gave
Ptolemy proois of his strength and indefatigableness.

'° See Plin, H. N. vii. 2., xxviii. S.*

" See Diod. Sic. xix. 11, 105, &c.*

" About B. C. 301. Plutarch says ' all the kings of the earth
were enguged,' because Lysimachus, Seleucus, Ptolemy, and Cas-
sander on one side, and Antigonus and Demetrius on" the other,
were there in person. (L.) The numbers engaged were upward of
150,0(K), and victory declared for the ibriner T Antigonus having
fallen in the action, and Demetrius flying into Greece.*

Td fYRRHUS.

Observing that among Ptolemy's wives Berenice was
she who liad tlie greatest power, and was most emi-
nent for virtue and understanding, to her he most
strongly attached himself. For he had a particular
art of making his court to the great, while he over-
looked those that were beneath him. And as in his
whole conduct he paid the utmost attention to de-
cency, temperance, and prudence, Antigone (who
"Was the dauixhtcr of Berenice, bv her first husband
Philip) was given to him, in preference to many
other young princes.

Upon this account, he was held in higher honour
than ever ; and Antigone proving an excellent wife
procured him men and money, which enabled him
to recover his crown. On his arrival in Epirus, his
subjects jeccived him with open arms ; for Neopto-
lemus, by his arbitrary and tyrannical government,
had rendered himself obnoxious to the people. Never-
theless Pyrrhus, apprehending that Neoptolemus
might have recourse to some of the other kings,
came to an agreement with him, and associated him
in the kingdom. But in ])rocess of time there were
some, who privately sowed dissension and jealousies
between them. Pyrrhus' chief quarrel with Neopto-
lemus is said to have taken it's rise as follows : It had
been a custom for the kings of Epirus to hold an
assembly at Passaron, a place in the province of the
Molossians ; -where, after sacrificing to Jupiter ' the
Warrior,' mutual oaths were taken by them and
their subjects : by the kings, " to govern according
to law ;" and by the people, " to defend the crown
according to law." Ujion this occasion, both the
kings met attended by their friends, and after the
ceremony great ])resents were made on all sides.
Among the rest (xclon, who was most cordially at-
tached to Neoptolemus, paid his respects to Pyrrhus,
and made him a present of two yoke of oxen

13

'' This present of an animal, so liiLjhly valued for it's agricultu-
ral uses, was charactcriitical of the simplicity of ancient tinie*^

PYRRIIUS. Tl

MvrtilLis, one of tliis prince's cupbearers, bcijged
them of him ; but Pyrrhus refused liim, and gave
tliem to anotlier. Gelon ])erceiving that Myrtilus
took the disappointment extremely ill, invited liini
to sup with him. After su]:)per (and, as some say,
other drunken famiharities) he solicited him to cm-
brace the interest of Neoptolenius, and to poison
Pyrrhus. Myrtilus seemed to listen to his sugges-
tions with satisfaction ; but he discovered tl:e whole
to his master. He then, by Pyrrhus' order, intro-
duced to Gelon the chief cupbearer Alexicrates, as
a person who wished to participate in the conspiracy ;
for Pyrrhus was anxious to have more than one v, it-
ness to so black an enterprise. Gelon being thus
deceived, Neoptolemus was deceived along with
him ; and thinking the affair in great forwardness,
could not contain himself, but in the excess of his
joy mentioned it to his friends. One evening in par-
ticular, being at supper with his sister Cadmia, he
discovered the whole design, thinking no body else
within hearing. And indeed there was no person in
the room but Phienarete, the wife of Samon chief
keeper of Neoptolemus' cattle ; and she lay upon a
couch with her face turned toward the wall, and
seemed to be asleep. She heard the whole however
without being suspected, and going the next day to
Antigone, Pyrrhus' wife, related to her all that Ne-
optolemus had told his sister. This was immediately
laid before Pyrrhus, who for the present took no
notice of it. But upon occasion of a solenni sacriiice
he invited Neoptolemus to supper, and seized that
opportunity to kill him. For he was well assi.u-ed,
that all the leading men in Epirus were strongly at-
tached to him, and wished him to remove Neoptos
lemus out of the way ; in order that, no longer satis-
fied with a small share of the kingdom, lie might
possess himself of the whole, and by following his
genius rise to lofty attempts. And as they had now
a strong suspicion besides, that Neoptolemus wa«

7^ PYRRIIUS.

practising against liim, they thought this the very
time to prevent him by giving him tlie latal blow.

In acknowledgement of tlie obligations v.hich he*
had to Berenice and Ptolemv, he named his son by
Antigone Ptolemy ; and called the city, which he
built in the Chersonese of Kpirus, iJerenicis. From
this time he began to conceive many great designs,
but his first hopes comprehended all that was near
home; and he soon found a plausible pretence to
concern himself in the affairs of Macedon. An-
tipater, tlie eldest son of Cassander, had killed his
mother Tlicssalonica, and expelled his brother
Alexander. Alexander sent to Demetrius for suc-
cour, and implored likewise the assistance of
Pyrrhus. Demetrius, having many affairs upon his
hands, could not immediately comply; but Pyrrhus^
came and demanded, as the reward of his services,
the city of Nympliam'^ and all the maritime coast
of Macedon, together with Ambracia, Acarnania,
and Amphilochia, which were some of the coun-
tries not originally belonging to tliat kingdom.
The young prince agreeing to the conditions, Pyrrhus
took possession of these countries, and secured them
^vith his garrisons; after Vvhich he went on con-
quering the rest for Alexander, and driving Antipater
before him.

King Lysimachus was well inclined to give An-
tipater assistance, but he was so much engaged
with his own affairs, that he could not find time
for it. Recollecting however that Pyrrhus would
refuse nothing to his friend Ptolemy, he fbro-ed

• *" • • • ^ ^

letters in Ptolemy's name, injoining him to evacuate

'■t Dacier tliinks ApoUonia might be called 'Nymplia?a' from
Kyinphicum, a celebrated rock in it's neighbourhood so well described
in the subsequent Lite of SylUj. See also Dion. Cass. xii. 45, and
b^trabo, vii. Palmerius would read ' Tyniphrca,' that being the name
of ;i (own in those parts. There was a town called ' Nympha^um *
in the Tauric Chersonese, but tliat could not bo meant in thi*
place. (I..)

Anibriicia,Acarnania, and Amphilochia wercprovinGeeofEpiruSv*

PYRRHU5. 73

Macedon, and to be satisfied with three hundred
talents from Antipater. But Tyrrhus no sooner
opened the letteris, than he perceived the forgery.
For instead of the customary salutation, " The father
to his son, greeting," they began with, " King Pto-
lemy to king Pyrrhus, greeting." Upon this he in-
veighed against Lysimachusfor the fraud, but listened
notw^ithstandhig to proposals of peace; and the three
princes met to offer sacrifices on the occasion, and
to swear upon the altar to the articles. A boar, a
bnll, and a ram being led up as victims, the ram
dropped down dead. The rest of the company laugh-
ed at the accident; but Theodotus the soothsayer
advised Pyrrhus not to swear, declaring that the Deity
presignificd the death of one of the kings; upon
which he refused to ratify the peace '^.

Alexander's aifairs v/ere thus advantageously set-
tled: nevertheless, Demetrius came; but it soon ap-
peared that he now came unrequested, and that his
presence excited rather fear than gratitude. When
they had spent a few days together in mutual distrust,
they laid snares for each other; but Demetrius find-
ing the first opportunity, was beforehand with Alex-
ander, killed him, and got himself proclaimed king
of Macedon.

He had for a long time had subjects of complaint
against Pyrrhus, on account of the inroads which that
prince had made into Thessaly. Besides, the ambition
to extend their dominions, which is a distemper na-
tural to kings, rendered their neighbourhood mutually
alarming. These jealousies increased after the death
of Deidamia. At last each having possessed himself
of part of Macedon, and having the same object in
view (the gaining of the whole), this produced of
course new causes of contention. Demetrius marched
against theiEtolians,and reduced them. After which,

*^ Alexander, as it appears below, was murtlieredsoon afterward;
the oracle most probably, as was usually the cascj suggesting and
inspiring it's own accomplishmeot.*

74. PYRRHUS.

]ie left Pantanclins among tlicm with a considerable
force, and went himself to see Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus,
as soon as lie was apprised of his design, set off to
meet him; but taking a wrong route, they inadvert-
ently passed each other. Demetrius entered Epirus,
and committed great ravages; and Pyrrhus, falling
in with Pantauchus, gave him battle. The dispute
was warm and obstinate on both sides, especially where
the generals fought. For Pantauchus, who in dex-
terity, courage, and strength stood foremost among
Demetrius' officers, and was besides a man of a high
and ambitiousspirit, challenged Pyrrhus to the combat.
And Pyrrhus, who was behind none of the princes of
his time in valour and renown, and who was desirous
to appropriate to himself the honours of Achilles
rather by his sword than by kindred, advanced through
the first lines against Pantauchus. They began with
the javelin; and, then coming to the sword, exh.;uisted
all that art or strength could supply. Pyrrhus re-
ceived one wound, and gave his adversary two, one
in the thigh and the other in the neck, by which he
overpowered him and brought him to the ground ; but
he could not kill him, because he was rescued by his
friends. The Epirots, elated v.-ith their prince's vic-
tory and admiring his valour, broke and dispersed
the Macedonian phalanx, and pursuing the iiigitives
slew immense numbers of them, and took five thou-
sand prisoners.

This battle did not so much excite the resentment
and hatred of the Macedonians against Pyrrhus for
what they suffered, as it ins})ired them with an esteem
of his abilities and admiration of his valour, and fur-
nished a subject of discourse to all who were witnesses
of his exploits, or were engaged against him in the
action. Eor he recalled to their minds (he counte-
nance, the swiftness, and the motion of Alexander
the Great; in Pyrrhus, they thought they saw the
very image of his force and his impetuosity. And
while the other kings represented that hero only in
their purple robes, the number of their guards, the

PYRRIIUS. 15

bend of the neck '", and the lofty manner of speaking,
the king of Epirus represented liim in deeds of arms
and personal achievements. And of his eminent skill,
in ordering and drawing up an army, we have proofs
in the writings which he left beliind him. It is also
said that Antigonus, being asked, " Vv'ho v/as the
" greatest general?" answered, " Pyrrhus would be
" so, if hv? lived to be old." Antigonus, indeed, spoke
only of the generals of his time: but Annibal said
that of all who had ever existed, the first in genius
and skill Vv'as Pyrrhus, the second Scipio, and he him-
self the third; as we have stated in the Life of
Scipio ^^ This was the only science, to which he
applied himself, the subject of all his thoughts and
conversation : for he considered it as a royal study,
and looked upon other arts as mere trifling amuse-^
ments. And it is reported that, when he was asked,
" Whether he thought Python or Caphisias the best
*' musician?" " Polysperchon '**," said he, "is the
*' general ;" intimating that this was the only point,
which it became a king to examine or to understand.
In the intercourse of life he was mild, and not
easily provoked, but ardent and quick to repay a
kindness. For this reason, he was dee{)ly afflicted at
the death of ^•Eropus: " His friend," he said, " had
only paid tiie tribute to nature ; but he blamed and
reproached himself for having put off his acknow-
ledgments, till by these delays he had lost the op-
portunity of making any return. For those, who
owe money, can pay it to the heirs of the deceased ;
but, when a return of kindnesses is not made to a
person in his life-time, it grieves the heart that has

'^ Which was the courtly carriage of the times, during Alexander's
reign. So Alcibiades' friends imitated that great man in his defec-
tive articulation!*

'^ This is differently related In the Life of Flaminius, p. 59 of this
vol., which is most probably referred to in this place. There it is said
that Annibal placed Alexander first, Pyrrhus second, and himself
third. Plutarch was probably, in one or both cases, obliged to
ijuote from memory.

'8 One of Alexander's chief captains.*

76 PYRRHUS.

" in it any goodness and honour." When some advised
him to banish a certain ill-tongucd Ambracian, who
abused him behind his back ; " Let the fellow stay
" here," said he, " and speak against me to a few,
*' rather than ramble about, and give me a bad cha-
" racter to the whole world." And some young men
having taken considerable liberties with his character
in their cups, and being subsequently brought be-
fore him to answer for it, he demanded of them,
" Whether they had really said such things ?" " We
" did indeed, sir," answered one of tliem, " and
*' should have said a great deal more, if we had had
" more wine." Upon which he laughed, and dis-
missed them.

After the death of Antigone, he married several
wives for the purposes of interest and power; namely,
the daugiiter of Autoleon king of the Pteonians '■',
Eircenna the daughter of Bardyliis king of the Illy-
rians, and Lanassa the daughter of Agathocles of
Syracuse, who broughthim in dowry theisle ofCorcyra
which her father had taken. Bv Antia^one he had a
son named Ptolemy, by Lanassa Alexander, and by
Eircenna his youngest son Helenus. All these princes
had naturally a turn for war, and he quickened their
martial ardour by giving them a suitable education
from their infancy. For it is said, when he was asked
by one of them, at that time a child, " To which of
*' them he v.'ould leave his kingdom?" he replied,
" To him, who has the sh.arpest sword." This was
very like G^dipus' tragical legacy to his sons,

The sword's keen point th' inheritance shall part ^°.

After the battle Pyrrhus returned home distin-
guished with glory, and still more elevated in his
sentiments. The Kpirots having given him on this
occasion the name of ' Eagle,' he said, " If I am
" an eagle, you have made me one ; for it is upon

'> A people of Macedon.* *° Eurip. Phccn. Q6.

PYRRHUS. 77

*' your arms, as upon wings, that I have risen so

*' hig-h."

Soon afterward, having received intelligence that
Demetrius lay dangerously ill, he suddenly entered
Macedon '■^^, intending only an inroad to pillage the
country. But he was very near seizing ib.e whole, and
taking the kingdom without a blow. For he pushed
forward as tar as Edessa, without meeting any resist-
ance: on the contrary, many of the inhabitants re-
paired to his camp, and joined him. The danger
awakened Demetrius, and made him act above his
strength. His friends likewise and ofiicers quickly
assembled alargebody of troops, and advanced against
Pyrrhus with niiich spirit and vigour. But, as he had
come only with a design to plunder, he did not wait
to receive them. lie lost however a considerable
number of men in his retreat, for the Macedonians
harassed his rear the whole way.

Demetrius, though he liad driven out Pyrrhus with
so much ease, was far from slighting and despising
him afterward. But as he meditated great things, and
had determined toattempt the recovery of his paternal
kingdom "-- with an army of an hundred thousand men
and five hundred sail of ships, he thought it not pru-
dent either to embroil himself with Pyrrhus, or to
leave behind liim so dangerous a neighbour. And as
he was not at leisure to continue the war, he concluded
a peace with him, that he might turn his arms with
more security against the other kings '^. His designs
were soon discovered by this peace, and by the mag-
nitude of his preparations. The kings were alarmed,
and sent embassadors to Pyrrhus with letters, express-
ing their astonishment that he should neglect this
opportunity of making war upon Demetrius. They
represented with how much ease he might drive him
out of Macedon, engaged as he was in many trouble-
some enterprises J instead of which he waited till

*' B.C. 284. " Of Asia.*

^* Seleucus of Asia, Ptolemy of Egypt, and Lysimachusof Thrace.

78 PYRRIiL'S.

Demetrius had despatched all his other affairs, and
was grown so much more powerful as to be able to
bring the war to his own doors, and to put him under
the necessity of fiditino- for the altars of his o'ods and
the sepulchres of his ancestors in Molossia itselt; and
this too, when lie had just been deprived by Deme-
trius of the isle of Corcyra together with his wife.
For Lanassa having lodged her complaints against
Pyrrhus, as paying more attention to his other wives
(though barbarians) than to herself, had retired to
Corcyra; and wishing to marry another king, invited
Demetrius to receive her hand, knowing him to be
more inclined to marriage than any of the neighbour-
ing princes. Accordingly he sailed to the island, mar-
ried Lanassa, and left a garrison in the city.

The kings, at the same \\vqq, that they wrote these
letters to Pvrrluis, took the field tliemselves to harass
Demetrius, who delayed his expedition and continued
his preparations. Ptolemy put to sea with a large
fleet, and drew off many of the Grecian cities. Ly-
simachus entered the Upper Macedon from Thrace,
and ravaged tlie country. And Pyrrhus taking up
. arms at the same time marclied against Beroea, ex-
pecting (as It actually fell out) that Demetrius would
go to mcetLysimachus, and leave the Lower Macedon
unguarded. The night before he set out, he dreamed
that Alexander the Great called him; and that when
he came to him, he found him sick in bed, but was
received with many obliging expressions of friendship
and a promise of sudden assistance. Pyrrhus said,
" How can you, sir, who arc so sick, be able to assist
" mer" Alexander answered, " I will do it with my
" name;" and at the same time mounted a Nisaean
horse ', and seemed to lead the way.

-■* Nisscawasaprovincc near tlie Caspian sea, celcbrated(as Strabo,
M. ii.tbrms us) for it's breed of horses. (L.) One of it's meadows,
upoii which upward of rifty thousand mares were generally feeding,
ivsis very properly eallod ' ilippobotos.' The kings of Persia used
to furnisli their stud from tliat place. It's character flourishes to
this day. Louis XV., say the modern editors of Aniyot, requested
a supply of them from Thainas Khouli-Kan,*

J

PYRRHUS. 79

PyrrhnSjliIglily encouraged by this vision, advanced
with the utmost expedition; and having traversed the
internicdiate countries, came before Beroea, and took
it. 'J'here h.e fixed his head-quarters, and reduce;!
the other cities bv his o;enerals. When Denietriiss
received intelligence of" this, and perceived moreover
a spirit of mutiny among the Macedonians in his
camp, he was afraid to proceed farther; lest when
they came in sight of a Macedonian prince",' and
one of an illustrious character too, they should go
over to him. lie therefore turned back, and led
them against Pvrrhus, who was a stranger, and the
object of their hatred. Upon his encamping near
Beroea, many inhabitants of that place mixed wiJi
])is soldiers, and higlily extolled Pyrrhus. They re-
presented liim as a man invincible in arms, of uncom-
mon magnanimity, and one vvho treated those that
fell into his hands Vvith the utmost gentleness and hn-
njanity. There were also some of Pyrrhus' emissarie;5,
wlio pi-etending to be Macedonians observed to De-
metrius' men, that then was the time to get free from
liis cruel voke, and to embrace the interests of Pvr-
j'hus, who was a popular man and who loved a soldier.
After this, the chief part of the army was in a ferment,
and they cast their eyes around for Pyrrhus. It ha;>-
pened, that he was at that moment without his hel-
met; but recollecting himself j he quickly put it or.,
and was immediately known by his lofty plume and
liis crest of goat's horns-''. Many of the Macedo-
nians now ran to him, and begged him to give their,
the word; while others crowned themselves with.
branches of oak, because they saw them worn hv
those about him. Some had even the confidence t;>
tell Demetrius, that his most prudent measure would
be to withdraw, and lay down the government. As

^' Lysimachus.

^^' Alexander t!ic Great is represented on liis medals with such ;i
crest. TJie goat, indeed, v,-as the sjMuhol of the kingdom of Mac't-
don. The prophet Daniel (vlii. 5, <S:c>) uses it a.s such. The cri-
l^hv.il of that symbol niuy be found in Justin.

80 PYRRIIUS.

he found the motions of the army agreeable to this
kind of discourse, he was terrified and went off pri-
vately, disguised in a mean cioke and a common
Macedonian hat. Thus Pyrrlius became master of
the camp without striking a blow, and was proclaimed
king of Macedon.

Soon afterward Lysimachus made his appearance,
and, pretending that he had contributed equally to
Demetrius' flight, demanded his share of the kingdom.
Pyrrhus, as he tliought himself not sufficiently esta-
blished among the Macedonians, but rather in a
dubious situation, accepted the proposal; and they
divided the cities and provinces between them. This
partition seemed to be of service for the present, and
prevented their going directly to war; but, instead
of a perfect reconciliation, they quickly found it to
be the beginning of perpetual complaints and quar-
rels. For how is it possible that they, whose ambition
is not to be terminated by seas and mountains and
uninhabitable deserts, whose thirst of dominion is not
to be confined by the bounds which separate Europe
and Asia, should, when so near each other and joined
in one lot, sit down contented and abstain from mutual
injuries ? Undoubtedly they arc always at war, having
the seeds of perfidy and envy virtually in their hearts.
As for the two terms of ' Peace ' and ' War,' they
apply them occasionally like money to their use, not
to the purposes of justice. And they act with much
more probity when they professedly make war, than
when tliey sanctify a short truce and cessation of
jiiutual injuries by the names of justice and friendship.
Of this, Pyrrhus was a complete proof For opposing
Demetrius again when his affairs began to be a little
re-established, and checking his power, wliicli seemed
to be recovering as it w^ere from a grievous illness,
he marched to tiie assistance of the Grecians, and
went in person to Athens. There he ascended to
the citadel, and sacrificed to the goddess; after which
he came down into the city the same day, and thus
addressed the people: " I think myself happy in this

PYRRHUS. 81

testimony of the kind regard of the Athenians, raid

of tlic confidence Avhich they have phiced in me; 1
" advise them however, as they tender their safety,
" never to open their gates again to admit another
" king within their walls'-'.*'

Soon after this, he concl'ided a peace with Deme-
trins: and yet Dcmetrins was no sooner passed into
Asia, than Pyrrhus at the instigation of Lysimachus
drew off Thessaly from it's allegiance, and attacked
his garrisons in Greece. He found indeed the Ma-
cedonians better subjects in time of war than in peace,
and was moreover himself more iit for action than
repose. At last Demetrius being entirely defeated in
Syria, Lysimachus, who had notliing to, fear from
that quarter nor anv other ailiiirs to cnp'aG;ehim, im-
mediately turned his forces against Pyrrhus, who lay
in quarters at Edessa. On liis a^Tival he fell upon
one of the king's convoys and took it, by w-hich he
sorely distressed his troops for want of provisions.
Beside this he corrupted the principal Macedonians
by his letters and emissaries, reproaching them for
having chosen for their sovereign a stranger, v» hose
ancestors had always been subject to the Macedonians,
to the expulsion of the friends and companions of
Alexander the Great. As the majority listened to
these suggestions, Pyrrhus fearing the event v^'illidrew
with his Epirots and auxiliary forces, and thus lost
Macedon in the same manner in which he had gained
it. Kings, therefore, have no reason to blame the
people for changing from motives of interest: since
in this they do but imitate their masters, who are
patternsof treachery and perfidiousness, and account
that man the most capable of serving them, who pays
the least res:ard to honestv.

When Pyrrhus had retired into Epirus and leffe
Macedon, he had a fair occasion given him by fortune
to enjoy himself in quiet, and to govern his own

' The Athenians followed his advice, and drove out Demetrius*
rison.

VOL. III. G

garrison.

84 PYRRIIUS.

Tvingdom in peace. J>ut he was persuaded, that iiei'
ther to annoy others, nor to be annoyed by them,
was a life insufferably langaishingand nauseous. Like
Achilles, he could not endure inaction 5

rie pined in dull repose, and his full heart
Panted for war's loud din -s.

His anxiety for fresh employment was relieved ai?
follows: The Romans were then at war with the Ta-
rentines. The latter v/ere not able to support the
dispute, and yet the bold and turbulent harangues of
their leading men would not suffer them to put an end
to it. Thev resolved therefore to call in Pvrrhus,
and put their forces under his conmiand; there being
no other prince of the time, who had so much leisure,
or was so able a f^eneral. The oldest and most sen-
sible of the citizen?; opposed this measure, but were
overborne by the noise and violence of the multi-
tude ; and, when they saw this, they seceded from the
assemblies. But there was a v/orthv man named
Meton, who on the dav upon which the decree was
to be ratified, after the people had taken their seats,
came into the assembly with an air of intoxication;
having (like persons in that condition) a withered
garland upon his head, a torch in his hand, and a
woman playing on the flute before him. As no de-
corum can well be observed by a crowd of people in
a free state, some clapped their hands, others laughed,
but nobody pretended to stop him. On the con-
trary, they called ujion the woman to play, and
upon him to come forward and sing; and when he
iscemed ready to begin, silence being made, he
said, " Men of Tarentum, ye do extremely well
to sutler those, who are so inclined, to play and
be merry while they may; and if ye be wise, ye will
all awhile longer enjoy the same liberty: for ye
" must have other business, and another kind of life
and system, v^-hcn Pyrrhus once enters your city/*

'-^ il. ix. Wl.

ti

<.(

6(

PYRRHUS. 8S

This address made a deep impression upon tlie Ta-
rentines, and a whisper of assent ran throngh the
assembly. But some fearing that they should be
delixcred up to the Romans, if peace were made,
reproached tlie people with so tamely suffering them-
selves to be flouted and insulted by a drunkard; and
then, turning upon j\Icton, thrust him out. The
decree being thus confirmed, they sent embassadors
to Epirus, not only in the name of the Tarentines but
of the other Greeks in Italy, v.-ith presents to Pyrrhus
and orders to tell him, " That they wanted a general
" of ability and character. As for troops, he would
" find a large supply of them upon the spot from the
I.ucanians, the Messapians, the Samnites, and the
Tarentines, to the amount of twenty thousand horse
and three hundred and fifty thousand foot." These
promises not only elevated Pyrrhus, but gave the
Epirots a strong inclination for the war.

There was at that time at the court of Pyrrhus a
Thessalian named Cineas, a man of sound sense, and
who having been a disciple of Demosthenes was the
only orator of his time, capable of presenting his
hearers with a lively image of the force and spirit of
that sublime master. This man had devoted himself
to Pyrrhus, and in all the embassies upon which he
was despatched confirmed the saying of Euripides %

Avhat hostile steel effects,

Dread eloquence annuls.

This made Pyrrhus observe, " that Cineas had gained
" him more cities by his address, than he had himself
" won by his arms:" and he continued to heap upon
him honoin's and employments. Cineas now perceiv-
ing Pyrrhus intent upon his preparations for Italy,
took an opportunity, when he saw him at leisure, to
draw him into the following conversation : " The
" Romans have the reputation of being excellent sol-

^9 Phcen. $27.
G 2

U PYRRHUS.

" dicrs', and have the command of many warlike na-
" tions: ifit plca58rieaventhat\veconquerthem,wliat
" use, sir, shall \\c make of our victory?'* " Cineas,*'
replied the king, '• your question answers itscl£
" When the lionians are once sulxlned, there is no
" town, Greek or barbarian, in the whole country
" wliich will dare to op])ose us: we shall immediately
" become masters of all Italy, whose exteiit, power,
** and im'";ortancc no man knows better than vour-
*' self." Cineas, after a short pause, continued ; " But,
" after we have conquered Itidy, what shall Vv'e do
*' next, sire?" Pyrrhus, not yet perceiving his drift,
replied, " Next Sicily, which is at no great distance,
*' stretches out her arms to receive us, a fruitful and
" popobus island, and easy to be taken. For Aga-
" tliocles was no sooner gone, than faction and anar-
" chy began to prevail amojig her cities, and every
" thing is kept in confusion by her turbulent dema-
" gogues." ''^ What you say,ray prince," said Cineas^
" is very probable: but is the taking of Sicily to con-
" elude our expeditions?" "Far from it," answered
Pyrrhus ; " for, if Heaven grant us success in this,
" that success shall only be the prelude to greater
" achievements. Who can forbear Libya and Car-
*' thage, then within reach? of which Agathocles,even
" when he fled in a clandestine manner from Syracuse,
" and crossed the sea with only a few ships, had al-
" most rendered himself master"". And when we
" have made such conquests, who can pretend to say
t]]at any of our enemies, now so insolent, vvill tliink
of resisting us ?" " To be sure," said Cineas, " they
*' will not; for it is clear that so m.uch power will
" enable you to recover Macedon, and to establish
" vourself uncontested sovereiq:n of Greece. But,
" when we have conquered all, what are we to do
" then?" " Why then, my friend," said Pyrrhus
laugiiing, " Ave will take our ease, spend whole days
*' in banqueting andagreeable conversation, andmake^

>° Sc'j Diud. Sic. XK. 3 — TOO; ami Ju-^tin, xx. 5, &c.*

a

PYRRHUS. 8a

*' one anotlier merry." Cineas, liaving brought liini
thus far, replied, " And what hinders us from ban-
queting and taking our ease now ; when we have
aheady those tilings in our hands, which we pro-
pose to attain through seas of blood, through infi-
nite toils and dangers, and through innumerable ca-
*' lamities which we must both iniiict and suffer ^^ r"
Tliis discourse of Cineas gave Pyrrhus pain, but
produced no reformation. He saw the certain hap-
piness which he gave up, but he was not able to
forego the hopes which flattered his desires. In the
first place, therefore, he sent Cineas to Tarentum
with three thousand foot ; whence there arrived
quickly afterward a large number of galleys, trans-
ports, and flat-bottomed boats ; on board of these
he embarked twenty elephants, three thousand
horse, twenty thousand foot, two thousand archers,
and five hundred slingers. When all was ready, he
set sail; but as soon as he had reached the midst of
the Ioniansea,hewas attacked bya violent north-wind
which was unusual at that season. The storm raged
terribly : by the skill however and the extraor-
dinary efforts of his pilots and mariners, his ship,
with infinite labour and beyond all expectation,
made the land. The rest of the fleet could not hold
their course, but were dispersed far and wide. Some
of the ships were quite beaten off from the coast of Italy,
and driven into the Lvbian and Sicilian sea: others,
not being able to double the cape of lapygia, were
overtaken by the night, and a heavy and boisterous

2' Dacier thinks Horace must have referred to this conversation
and conclusion (Ep. I. xi. 28.)

Slrenita nos cxercet inertia : nax'tbiis atqiie
Qimdrigis pethmis bene vivere. (Inod pctis, hie est :
Et Ulubris, caiimus si te nan di-fic'tl a-(juus.

<)f this spirited dialogue BoiJeau has given an admirable paraphnise
in his fir:it epistle :

i'c conseil efoit .tage^ eijticile n gottter ;
Pyrrhus "vivoit heurcuxt .sf'il euf pit I'ccoufcry'

86 PYRRITUS.

swell driving them u])on a difilccdt and rocky >i)orc'',
they Vv'erc all in the utmost distress. The king's
ship indeed by it's size "and strength resisted tiie
force of the wavep, while tlie wind blew from tlie
sea : but that coming about and blowing directly. off
shore, as she stood with her head agaiiist it, she was
in danger of opening by the shocks which she re-
ceived. And yet to be driven off again into a tem-
pestuous ocean, wdiile the wind continualiy siiiftcd
from point to point, seemed the most dreadfnl case
of all. In this extremity Pyrrhus threw himself
overboard, and was immediately followed by his
friends and guards, all anxiously striving which
should give him the best assistance. But the dark-
ness, and the dreadful height of a raging surf, ren-
dered it extremely difficult to save him. At last, by
day-break the v/ind being considerably fallen, with
much trouble he got ashore greatly weakened in
body, but with a strength and iirmness of mind
which bravelv combated the distress. At the same
time the Messapians, upon whose coast he was cast,
ran dowm to give them all the succour in their power.
They also met with some other of his vessels wdiich
had weathered the storm, having on board a small
number of horse, not quite two tiiousand foot, and
two elephants. With these Pyrrhus marched to
Tarentum.

When Cineas w^as informed of this, he drew out
Lis forces and marched to meet him. Pyrrhus, upon
his arrival at Tarentum, did not choose to have re-
course to compulsion at first, nor to do any thing
aguhist the inclination of the inhabitants ; till his
ships were safe arrived, and the chief ])art of his
forces collected. Then however observing the
Tarentines so far from being in a condition to de-
fend others, that they would not even defend them-
selves, except they were driven to it by necessity ;
and that they sat still at home, or spent their time about
the baths, or in idle parties, as expecting that he
would fight for them j he shut up the places of ex.-

pyhriius, «7

r-rcise and tlie walks, -vvlicrc they used to saunter
iilong, and conduct the wur witli words. He also
j)ut a stop to their unseasonable entertainments,
revels, and diversions. Instead of these, he called
^hem to arms, and in his musters and reviews was
extremely severe and inexorable, so that many of
them quitted the place ; for being unaccustomed to
be under command, they called tliat a slavery, which
was not a life of pleasure.

He now received intelligence, that Licvinus the
Roman consul was advancing against him with an
immense army, and ravaging Lucania by the way.
And though the confederates were not come up, yet
looking upon it as a disgrace to sit still and see the
enemy approach still nearer, he took the field with
the troops about him. But first he sent a herald to
the Romans with proposals, before they came to ex-
tremities, to terminate their differences amicably with
the Greeks in Italy, by taking him for the mediator
and umpire. Lasvinus answered, " That the Romans
" neither accepted Pyrrhus as a mediator, nor feared
•' him as an enemy." Upon which he marched for-
w^ard, and encamped in the plain between the cities
of Pandosia and Heraclea : and having notice that
the Romans were at hand and lay on the other side
of the river Sirus ^^, he rode up to the river to take a
view of them. When he saw the order of their
troops, the appointment of their watches, and the
regularity of their whole encampment, he was struck
with admiration, and said to a friend who was near
him ; " Megacles, the disposition of these barba-
*' rians has notliing of the barbarian in it : we shall
•*' see, whether or not their actions are corre-
*' spondent.'* He now became anxious about the
€vent, and determirLing to wait for the allies, set a
.guard upon the river to oppose the Romans, if they
should endeavour to pass it. The Romans on their
part, solicitous to prevent the coming up of those

3* Hod. the Sauno, which falls into the Gulf of Tarentum *

88 PYRRHUS.

forces which he had resolved to wait for, attempted
the passage. The infantry took to the fords, and
the cavahy got over wherever they could ; so tliat
the Greeks were afraid of being surrounded, and re-
treated to their main body.

Pyrrhus, deeply concerned at this, ordered his
foot-officers to draw up the forces and to stand to
their arms ; while he advanced with the horse, who
were about three thousand, in hopes of finding the
llomans yet busied in the passage and dispersed
without any order. But M'hen he saw an immense
number of shields glittering above the water, and
the horse preserving their ranks as they passed, he
closed his own ranks and began the attack. Besides
his beins: distintruished by the beautv and lustre of
liis arms, v/hich were of very curious fabric, he per-
formed acts of valour not unworthy the high reputa-
tion which he had acquired. For though he ex-
posed his person in the hottest of the engagement,
and charged with the utmost vigour, he was never
in the least disturbed, or lost his presence of mind ;
but gave his orders as coolly as, if he had been out
of the action, and moved to this side or that as occa-
sion required, to support his men v.-herev'er he saw
them maintaining an unequal fight.

A Macedonian named Leouatus, observed an
Italian horseman very intent upon Pyrrhus, changing
his post as he did, and regulating all his motions of
every kind by tliose of the king. Upon which he
rode up, and said to him ; " Do you see, sir, that
*' barbarian upon tlie black horse with white feet .'*
" He seems to meditate some great and dreadful de-
" sign. Full of fire and spirit, he keeps you in his
" eye, singles you out, and takes no notice of any
" body else : be on your guard therefore against
*' him." Pj-rrhus answered; "It is impossible, Leon-
" atus, to avoid our destiny. But neither this, nor any
" other Italian, shall have much satisfaction in en-
*' gaging with me." AVhile they were yet speaking,
the italiaii levelled his spear, and spurred his horse

PYRRHUS. 89

against Pyrrluis. He missed the king indeed, but
he ran his horse th.roiigh, as Leonatus did that of
the Itahan at the same moment, so that both horses
fell together. The friends of PyrHuis gathering
around him carried him off, and killed the Italian,
who fbuffht to the verv last. This brave man had
the command of a tvoop of horse ; Ferentum was
the place of his birth, and his name was Oplacus.

This made Pyrrhus more cautious. And now see-
ing his cavalry give ground, he sent his infantry
orders to advance, and formed them as soon as they
came up. Then giving his robe and arms to Me-
gacles one of his friends, he disguised himself in his,
and proceeded to the charge. The Romans re-
ceived him with much firmness, and the success of
the battle remained long undecided. It is even said,
that each army was broken and gave v>^ay seven
times, and as often rallied again. He changed his
arms very seasonably, for it saved his life ; but at
the same time it had nearly ruined his affairs, and
lost him the victory. Many aimed at Megacles ; but
the person, who first wounded him and brought him
to the ground, was named Dexous. This man seiz-
ing his helmet and his robe, rode up to Lsevinus,
showing the spoils, and crying out that he had slain
Pyrrhus. The spoils being passed from rank to rank
as it were in triiunph, the Roman army shouted for
joy, while that of the Greeks was struck with grief
and consternation. This continued till Pyrrhus, ap-
prised of what had happened, rode about the army
uncovered, stretching out his hand to his soldiers,
and enabling them to know him by his voice. At
last the Romans were worsted, chiefly by means of
the elephants. For the horses, before they came
near them, were frightened and ran back with their
riders ; and Pyrrhus commanding his Thessalian ca-
valry to fall upon them, while in this disorder, they
were routed with great slaughter. Dionysius affirms,
that nearly fifteen thousand Romans fell in this
battle J but Hieronymus makes the number only

90 PYRRHUS,

seven. On Pyrrbus' side, Dioiiysiiis says, there
were thirteen thousand killed ; llieronymus, not
quite four. Among these however were the most
vahiable of liis fiiends and officers, of wliose services
be had made considerable use, and in whom he had
placed the highest confidence.

PyrrJnjs innnediately entered the Iloman camp,
wliicli he found deserted. He gained over many
cities, which had been in alliance with Rome, and
laid waste the territories of others. Nay, be ad-
vanced to within thirty-seven miles of Rome itselfl
The Lucanians and the Samnites joined him after
the battle, and were reproved for their delay ; but it
was plain, that he was greatly elevated and de-
Jighted with having, by the single assistance of the
Tarentines, defeated so powerful an army of the
Romans.

The Romans, upon this occasion, did not take the
command from Laevinus (though Caius Fabricius is
reported to have said, " That the Romans were not
*^ overcome by theEpirotSjbut Laevinus by Pyrrbus:"
intimating, that the defeat was owing to the infe-
riority of the general, not to that of bis troops) ; but
raising new levies, filling up their legions, and talk-
i-ng in a lofty and menacing tone about the war,
they struck Pyrrhus with amazement. He thought
proper therefore to send an embassy to them first, to
try vWiether they were disposed to peace ; being sa-
tisfied that to take the city, and make an absolute
conquest, was an undertaking of too much difficulty
to be effected by such an army as his then was ;
whereas if he could bring them to terms of accom-
modation, and conclude a peace with them, it would
be extremely glorious for him after such a victory.

Cineas, who was despatched with this commission,
applied to the chief men, and sent them '' and their

35 For TTxa-it some critics would read Truta-iv, < their children,' and
not, as M. Ricard observes, without some plausibility ; as this (he
suggests) would be an infallible way of winning the ladies, and
through tlicm their husbaxids*

PYRRIIUS. 91

-wives presents in his master's name. But tliey all
refused tJiem ; the women as well as the men deelar-
ing, " That when Home had publicly ratified a
" treaty with the king, they should then on their
" parts be ready to show him every mark of their
" friendship and respect." And though Cineas made
a very engaging speech to the senate, and used
many arguments to induce them to close with him,
yet they lent not a willing ear to his propositions ;
notwithstanding that Pyrrhus offered to restore with-
out ransom tlie ])risoners whom he had taken in the
battle, and promised to assist them in the conquest
of Italy, desiring nothing in return but their friend-
ship for himself and security for the Tarentines.
Some indeed seemed inclined to peace, urging that
they had already lost a great battle, and had a still
greater to expect, since Pyrrhus was joined by se-
veral nations in Italy. There was at that time an
illustrious Roman, Appius Claudius '^^ by name, who
on account of his advanced age and the loss of his
sight had renounced and discontinued all attendance
upon public business. When he heard however of
the embassy from Pyrrhus, and the report prevailed
that the senate v^'as going to vote for the peace, he
could not contain himself, but ordered his ser-
vants to take him up, and carry him in his chair
through the Forum to the senate-house. Upon his
arrival at the door, his sons and sons-in-law received
him, and led him into the senate. A respectful
silence was observed by the whole body on his ap-
pearance, and he delivered his sentiments in the fol-
lowing terms: " Hitherto I have regarded my blind-
*' ness as a misfortune ; but now, Romans, I wish I
*' had been as deaf as I am blind. For then I should
** not have heard of your shameful counsels and de-

i* This Ap|)ius made and gave name to the Via Appia, and to
an aqueduct which conveyed water from tlie Anio to Rome. See
Liv. ix, 29. Diod. Sic. xx. 36. says, that he counterfeited blind-
ness in order to ekide the hostility of the senate, whom he had
offended in his censorship.*

Si PYRRHUS.

iC

crees, so ruinous to your country's renown.
*' Where are all your spceclies so inucli echoed about
" the world, that if Alexander the Great had come
*' into Italy, when we were young and your fathers
" in the vigour of their age, he v»'ould not now be ce-
" lebrated as invincible, but either by his flight or his
" fall would have added to tlie o^lorv of Rome ? You
*' now show the vanity and folly of that boast, while
" vou dread the Chaonians andlVlolossians, whowere
*' constantly a prey to the Macedonians ; and
" tremble at the name of Pyrrhus, who has all his
" life been paying his court to one of that Alex-
" ander's guards. At present he wanders about
" Italy, not so much to succour the Greeks here,
" as to avoid his enemies at home ; and promises to
*^ procure for us the empire of this country with
" forces, which could not enable him to retain a
'^ small part of Macedon. Do not expect then to

get rid of him, by entering into alliance with him.

That step will only open a door to many invaders.
" For who is there that will not despise you, and
*' think you an easy conquest, if Pyrrhus not
*' only escapes unpunished for his insolence, but
" gains the Tarentines and Samnites as a reward for
" having insulted the Romans."

Appiushadnosoonerdoncspeakingjthan they voted
unanimously for the war, and dismissed Cineas with
this answer: " That when Pyrrhus had quitted Italy,
" they would conclude a treaty of friendship and
" alliance v.ith him, if he desired it; but while he
" continued there in a hostile manner, though he
" should defeat a thousand La^vinuses in succession,
" they would prosecute the war against him with
** their whole force."

It is said that Cineas, while he was upon this bu-
siness, took considerable pains to observe the man-
ners of tlie Romans, and to examine into the nature
of their government. And, when he had gained the
desired information by conversing with their great

PYRRIIUS. <fz

n^en, he made a faithful report of all to Pyrrlius; and
told him, among the rest, " That the senate appeared
'' to him an assembly of kings ; and as to the people,
" thev were so nnmcrous, that he was afraid lie had
" to do with anotlier hydra of Lcrna. For the con-
*' snl had already an army on foot twice as larcre as
*' the former, and had left mullitiides behind in
" liome of a proper age for enlisting, and siiliicient
'* to form many similar armies.'*

After this, rabricins came embaissador to Pyrrhu?r,
to treat about the ransom and exchange of prisoners.
This Roman, as Cineas informed Pyrrhus, was highly
valued by his countrymen for his probity and his
martial abilities, but he was extremely poor. Pyrrhus
received him with particular distinction, and pri-
vately offered him gold ; not for any base purpose,
but as a pledge of friendship and hospitality. Fa-
In'icius refusing the present, Pyrrhus pressed him no
farther : but the next day, wishing to surprise him,
and knowing that he had never seen an elephant, he
ordered the bitj-ffest he had to be armed, and placed
behind a curtain in the room where they were to
hold their conference. This was accordinfflv done,
and upon a sign given the curtain vras undrawn ;
upon wliich the elephant, raising his trinik over Fa-
bricius' head, made a horrid and frightfid noise.
Fabricius turned round, without the least discompo-
sure, and said to Pyrrims, smiling ; " Neither your
" gold yesterday, nor your beast to-day, has made
" any impression upon me."

In the evening, the conversation at table turned
upon many subjects, but chiefly upon Greece and
the Grecian phiIosoj)hers. TJiis led Cineas to men-
tion Epicurus'% and to give some acco!uit of tlie
opinions of his sect upon the gods and civil govern-

55 Epicurus was then living. The doctrines of that philosopher
were <^reatly in voj^ue at llonie, just before the vuinof the comnion-
weaitli. (L. ) They had previously, as M. Montesquieu observes,
corrupted and (;onsequently ruined Greece. (Grand, et Decad,
«les lloni. X.)*

cc
cc

9i PYRRTIUS.

ment. " They placed the chief happmes^ of man
in pleasure," he said ; " avoided all interference
in pnbhc affairs, as the bane of a happy Vii'e; and
attributed to the Deity neither benevolence jior
*' anger, but maintained that, far removed from the
care of human concerns, he passed his time in
total inactivity, and was completely immersed in
pleasure." AViiile he was yet speaking, Fabriciiis
cried out, " O heaven;-: ! maj'^ Pyrrhus and the Sam-
nites continue to maintain these opinions, as long
as they are at war with tiie Romans !" Pyrrhus,
admiring the noble sentiments and principles of Fa-
bricius, was more desirous than ever of establisliing
a friendship with Home, instead of continuing the
war. And taking Fabricius aside, he pressed h.im
to mediate a peace, and then go and settle at his
court, where he should be the first of all his generals
and friends. Fabricius replied in a lov/ voice ;
That, sir, would be no advantage to you : for
those who now honour and admire you, should
they once have experience of me, would rather
" choose to be governed by me than by you." Such
was the character of Fabricius.

Pyrrhus, far from being ofiended at this answer,
or taking it like a tyrant, made his friends acquaint-
ed with Fabricius' magnanimity, and entrusted the
prisoners to him ; witli tin's sole condition, that if
the senate did not agree to a peace, they should be
sent back, after they had embraced their relations
and celebrated the Saturnalia.

After this, Fabricius being consul"'^, an unknov/n
person came to his camp with a letter from the
king's physician, who offered to take off Pyrrhus by
poison, and so put an end to the war without any
fiirther hazard to the Romans, on condition of re-
ceiving a proper compensation for his services. Fa-
bricius detested the fellow's villainy; and, iiaving
brought his collcguc into the same sentiments, in-

>'-' B. C. 2T7.

PYRRHUS, 95

stantly sent despatches to Pyrrluis to caution him
against the treason. The letter ran thus :

" Caius Fabricius and Quintus ^milius, consuls,
to king Pyrrhus, health.

" It appears that you judge very ill both of your
friends and of your enemies. For you will find by
this letter, which was sent to us, that you are at war
with men of virtue and honour, and repose confidence
in knaves and villains. Neither is it out of kindness^
that we give you this information ; but we do it lest
your death should bring a disgrace upon us, and w&
should seem to have put a period to tlie war by
treachery, when we could not do it by valour.'*

Pyrrhus, having read the ktter and detected the
treason, punished the physician ; and to show hiy
gratitude to Fabricius and the llomans, delivered up
the prisoners without ransom, and sent Cineas a second
time to negociate a peace. The Romans, unwilling
to receive a favoiu' from an enemy, or a reward for
not having concurred in a flagitious proposal, re-
ceived indeed the prisoners at his hands, but sent
him an equal number of Tarentines and Samnites in
return. As to peace and friendship, they would not-
hear any proposals about it, till Pyrrhus should have
laid- down his arms, withdrawn his forces from Italy,
and returned to Epirus in the same ships in which he
came.

His affairs now requiring another battle, he assem-
bled his armv, and marched and attacked the llo-
mans near Asculum. The ground was very rough
and uneven, and marshy also toward the river: so
that it was extremely inconvenient for the cavalry,
!j and quite prevented the elephants from acting with
I the infantry. For this reason he had a considerable
;! number of men killed and wounded, and might have
i\ been entirely defeated, had not night put an end to
1 i the battle. Next day, contriving by an act of gene-
i\ ralship to engage upon even ground, where his ele-
phants might be able to act against the enemy, he

S6 PYRRIIU^'.

seized in tunc tlic difficult post where they had
fought the day before. He then phiDted a number
of archers and sHngers among his elephants, thicken-
ed his other ranks, and moved forward in good order,
thougii with great force and impetuosity, against the
liomans.

The Romans, who liad not now tlie advantage of
ground for attacking and retreating as they pleased,
were obliged to %ht upon the plain, man to man.
They hastened to break the enemy's infantry, before
the elephants came up, and made prodigious efforts
with their swords against the pikes ; not regarding
themselves, or the Avounds which they received, but
only looking v/herc they might strike and slay. After
a long dispute, Iiowever, the Ilomans were forced to
give way, which they did first w^here Pyrrhus fought
in person, for they could not resist the fury of his
attack. It was the force and the weight of the ele-
phants, indeed, which put them wliolly to the rout.
The Roman valour being of no use against those
fierce creatures, the troops thought it wiser to give
way, as to an overwhelmi^ng torrent or an earthquake,
than to fall in a fruitless opposition when they could
gain no advantap;e, thougli they suffered the greatest
extremities. And they had not far to fiy, before they
gained their camp. Hieronymus says, the Romans
lost six thousand men in the action ; and Pyrrhus,
according to the account in his own Commentaries,
lost three thousand five hundred. Dionysius how-
ever does not tell us, that there were two battles at
Asculum, nor that tlie Romans were decisively de-
feated ; but that the action lasted till sun-set, and
that then the combatants reluctantly separated,
Pyrrhus being wounded in the arm with a javelin,
and the Samnites having phmdered his baggage ; and
that the number of the slain, computing, the loss on
both sides, amounted to above fifteen thousand men.
When they had all quitted the field, and Pyrrhus was
congratulated upon the victory, he said, " Such
" another victory, and we are undone!" For he

PYIIRHUS. 07

had lost the chief part of the forces wliich he brought
>vith liim, and all his friends and officers, except a
very small number. He had no others to send for
to supply their place, and he Ibund his Italian con-
iederatcs completely spiritless. Wliereas the llo-
inans lilled up their legions with ease and despatch,
from an inexhaustible fountain which they had at
home ; and their defeats were so fiir from discourag-
ing them, that indignation gave them fresh strength
and indignant ardour for the war^'.

Amidst these difficulties new hopes, vain as the
former, offered themselves to Pyrrhus, and enter-
prises which distracted him in the choice. On one
side, embassadors came from Sicily, proposing to
put Syracuse, Agrigentum, and the city of the Leon-
tines in his hands, and entreating him to drive the
Carthaginians out of the island and free it from ty-
rants : on the other, intelligence was brought him
from Greece, that Ptolemy Ceraunus was slain in
battle by the Gauls, and that this w ould be a season-
able juncture for him to offer himself to the Macedo-
nians w^ho were in want of a king °^ Upon this oc-
casion he complained greatly of fortune, for having
offered him two such glorious'opportunities of action
at once ; and, afflicted to think that in embracing
one he must necessarily give up the other, he was
a long time perplexed and doubtful which to prefer.
At last the expedition to Sicily appearing to him the
more important, on account of it's nearness to Africa,

37 A character very similar to tliat, which Horace (Od. IV. iv.
59.) puts into the mouth of Annibal, an enemy (whatever he him-
self might determine upon the subject) still more illustrious thaa
Pyrrhus :

Per damna, j)er cccdes, ab ipso
Ducit opes mmnunigiiejerro.*

'8 Ptolemy Ceraunus was slain three years before, during the
consulate of Lsevinus. After him, the Macedonians had several'
kings (INIeleager, Antipater, Sosthenes, and Antigonus) in quick
succession. All therefore, that the letters could import, must be
ttiat the Macedonians would prefer Pyrrhus to Antigonus, who was
tlien in possession. (See Justin, xxv. 5.)

VOL. JII. H

DH PYRRIIUa

lie tletcrnnncd to go thither ; and immediately de^
spatched Cineas before him, according to custom^
to treat ^vith the cities in his belialf. He placed
however a strong garrison in Tarcntnm, notwith-
standing the remonstrances of tlie people ; who in-
sisted that he sliould cither fulfil the purpose for
which lie came, by staying to assist tlieni effectually
in the Ivoman war, or if he would desert them, that
he should leave tlicir city as he found it. But he
gave them a severe answer, ordered them to be quiet
and wait his time, and so set sail.

When he arrived in Sicily, he found every thing-
disposed agreeably to his hopes. The cities readily
put themselves into his hands : and, wherever force
was necessary, nothing at first made any considerable
resistance to his arms. But M'ith thirty thousand
foot, two thousand five hundred horse, and two hun-
dred sail of ships, he advanced against the Cartha-
ginians, chased them before him, and ruined their
province. Eryx^'^ was the strongest city in those,
parts, and the best provided with men for it's de-
fence ; yet he resolved to take it by storm. As soon
as his army was in readiness to give the assault, he
armed himself at all points; and advancing toward
the walls, made a vow to Hercules of games and
sacrifices in acknowledgement of the victory, if in
that day's action he should distinguish himself be-
fore the Greeks in Sicily, in a manner becoming hi?;
Iiii2;h descent and his fortunes. He then ordered the
signal to be given by sound of trumpet ; and having
driven the barbarians from the walls with his missive
weapons, planted the scaling-ladders, and was him-
self the first to ascend.

He was there attacked by a crowd of enemies,
some of whom he drove back, others he pushed down
from the wall on both sides; but the chief part he
§lew with his sword, so that there was quite a ram-

-"' Had. S:in Giuliano. Tt is sentcd njion a promontorv of tlie
same niioie on the western siilc of Sicily, luul a temple dedicated ttt
Venus, aud i> >iupposed to have been founded by .^neas.*

PYRTIIIUS. 99

part of dead bodies around him. In the mean time,
lie himself received not the least harm ; but appeared
to his enemies in so awtul a character, as to evince
that Homer spoke with judgement and knowkHlge,
when he represented valour as the only virtue which
discovers an enthusiastic energy, and raises a man
above himself. When the city was taken, he offered
a magnificent sacrifice to Hercules, and exhibited a
variety of shows and games.

Of all the barbarians, those about Messina, who
were called Mamertines, gave the Greeks the great-
est trouble, and had subjected many of them to tri-
bute. They Avere a numerous and warlike people,
and thence had the appellation of Mamertines, which
in the Latin tongue signifies ' martial^".' But
Pyrrhus seized tlie collectors of the tribute, and put
them to death ; and having defeated the Mamer-
tines in a set battle, destroyed many of their strong
holds.

Upon this, the Carthaginians were inclined to a
])acification, and oitered him both money and ships,
on condition that he would grant them his friend-
ship. But Jiaving farther prospects he made answer,
that there vras only one way to peace and amity,
which was, for the Carthaginians to evacuate Sicily,
and make the Lybian sea the boundary between
them and the Greeks. Elated with prosperity and with
his present strength, he thought of nothing but pur-
suing the hopes, which first drew him into Sicily.

His ])rimary object was now Africa. He had ves-
sels enow for his purpose, but he wanted mariners.
And, in the levying of them, he was far from pro-
ceeding with lenity and moderation : on the con-
trarv, he carried it to the cities with a hi2;h hand and
with great rigour, seconding his orders for a supply
with force, and chastising those who disobeyed them.
This was not the conduct which he had at first ob-
served ; for he was then gracious and affable to an

*• See Fest., and Polyb. i, 7 «
H 2

100 PYRRHUS.

extreme, placed an entire confidence in tlie people,
and avoided giving them the least uneasiness. By
these means he had gained their hearts. But now-
turning from a popular ])rince into a tyrant, his auste-
rity drew upon him the imputation both of ingrati-
tude and perfidiousness. Necessity, however, ob-
liged them to furnish him with what he demanded,
though they were little disposed to it. But what
chiefly alienated their affections, was his behaviour
to Tha^non and Sostratus, two persons of the chief
authority in Syracuse. These were the men who
had originally invited him into Sicily, who upon his
arrival immediately put their city into his hands, and
who had been the principal instruments of the great
thinscs which he had done in the island. Yet his
suspicions would neither let him carry them along
with him, nor leave them behind him. Sostratus
took the alarm, and fled : upon which Thaanon was
seized by Pyrrhus, who alleged that he was an ac-
complice with Sostratus, and })ut him to death. After
this his affairs ran to ruin, not gradually and by
little and little, but all at once. And the violent
hatred which the cities conceived for him, led some
of them to join the Carthaginians, and others the
Mamertines. While he thus saw nothing around him
but cabals, seditions, and insurrections, he received
letters from the Samnites and the Tarentines ; who
being quite driven out of the field, and with difficulty
defending themselves within their walls, implored
his assistance. This afforded a handsome pretext
for his departure, without it's being called a fliglit and
an absolute giving up of his affairs in Sicily. But
the truth Mas, that being unable to hold the island
any longer, he (juittcd it, like a shattered ship, and
threw himself again into Italy. It is reported that,
as he sailed away, he looked back upon the isle, and
said to those about him, " AVhat a field do we leave
" to the Carthaginians and the Romans, in which
*' to exercise their arms 1" And his conjecture was
<juickly verilicd.

PYRRirUS. 101

The barbarians rose against him as he set sail, and
being attacked by the Carthaginians on liis passage,
he lost many of his sliips : with the remainder, how-
ever, he gained the Italian shore. The Mamertines,
to the number of ton thonsand, had arrived there
before him ; and, thongh tliey were afraid to come
to a pitched battle, yet they attacked and ha-
rassed him in tlie diflhlcult passes, and threw his
wliole army into disorder. He lost two elephants,
and a considerable part of his rear was cnt in pieces.
But he immediately pnshed from the van to their
assistance, and risked his person in the boldest man-
ner against men trained by long practice to war, who
fought with a spirit of resentment. In this dispute
he received a wound in the head by a sword, which
forced him to retire a little out of the battle, and
still farther animated the enemy. One of them
therefore, distinguished both by his size and his arms,
advanced before the lines, and with a loud voice call-
ed upon him to come forth, if he was alive. Pyrrhus,
incensed at this, returned with his guards ; and with,
a visage so fierce with anger and so besmeared with
blood, that it was dreadful to look upon, made his
way through his battalions, notwithstanding their re-
monstrances. Then rushing upon the barbarian he
prevented his blow^, and gave him such a stroke on
the head with his sword, that M'ith the strength of
his arm and the excellent temper of the weapon he
cleft him ({uite down, and in one moment the parts
fell asunder. This achievement stopped the course
of the barbarians, who were struck with admiration
and amazement at Pyrrhus, as at a superior being.
lie made the rest of his march therefore without dis-
turbance, and arrived at Tarentum with twenty thou-
sand foot and three thousand horse. Then taking
with him the best troops that he found there, he im-
mediately advanced against the Romans, who were
encamped in the country of the Samnites.

The affairs of the Samnites were gone to ruin, and
their spirits sunk, because they had been beaten in

102 PYRRHUS;

several battles by tlic Romans. There remained also
in tiieir liearts some resentment against Pyrrhus, on
account of liis having left them to go to Sicily, so
that few of them re})aired to his standard. The forces
that he had he divided into two bodies, one of which
he detached into Lucania, to occupy the attention
of one erf the consuls ", and prevent him from assist-
ing his collegue; with the second he marched iu
person against the other consul Manius Curius, who
lay safely entrenched near the city of Beneventnm,
and declined fighting as well in expectation of the
succours from Lucania, as on account of his having
been deterred from action by the augurs and sooth-
sayers.

Pyrrhus, hastening to attack him before he could
be joined by his collegue, took the choicest of his
troops and tlie most v.arlike of his elephants, and
•pushed forward in the night to surprise his camj).
15ut as he had a lon<^- circuit to take, and the roads
were entangled with trees and bushes, his lights
fliiled, and numbers of his men lost their way. Thus
the night was wasted. At day-break he was dis-
covered by the enemy descending from the heights,
whicli caused no small disorder in their camp. Ma-
nias however, iinding the sacrifices auspicious and
the time pressing, issued out of his trenches, attack-
ed the vanguard of the enemy, and put them to flight.
This spread a consternation throughout tlieir whole
army, so that many of them were killed, and some
of the elephants taken. On the other hand, the suc-
cess led Manius to try a pitched battle. Engaging
therefore in the open field, one of his wings defeated
tliat of the enemy ; but tlie other was borne
down by the elephants, and driven back to the
trenches. In this exigency he sent for the troops
WJiich had been left to guard the camp, all fresh men
and well armed. These, as they descended from
their advantageous situation, pierced the elephants

''' Cornelius Lcntulus.

PYRRIIUS. 103

^Ylth their javelins, and forced them to turn their
backs ; and those creatures, rusliing upon their own
battahons, threw them into the greatest confusion.
This gave victory to the Romans, and along with it
empire. For by the courage exerted and the ex-
ploits achieved this day, they acquired a loftiness of
sentiment and an enlargement of power, with the
reputation of being invincible, which soon gained
them the whole of Italy, and not long afterward
Sicily.

Thus Pyrrhus fell from his hopes of Italy and
Sicily, after he had w^asted six years in these expedi-
tions. It is true, he was not successful ; but amidst
all his defeats he preserved his courage unconquer-
able, and was reputed to excel in military expe-
rience and personal prowess all the princes of his
time. But what he gained by heroism, he lost by
vain hopes ; his desire of something absent never
suffering him effectually to persevere in a present
pursuit. Hence it was, that Antigonus compared
him to a gamester, who makes many good throws at
dice, but knows not how to improve his game.

With eight thousand foot, and five hundred liorse,
he returned to Epirus ; but, not having funds to
maintain them, he sought for a war which miglit
answer that end : and being joined by a body of
Gauls, he marched into Macedon, where Demetrius*
son Antigonus at that time sat on the throne. His
design was only to pillage, and carry off booty ; but
having taken many cities, and drawn over two
thousand of Antigonus' men, he enlarged his views
and marched against the king. Coming up with
him in a narrow^ pass, he put his whole army in dis-
order. The Gauls however, who composed Anti-
gonus' rear, being a numerous body, made a gallant
resistance. The dispute was sharp, but at last most
of them were cut in pieces ; and they who had the
charge of the elephants, being surrounded, delivered
up both themselves and the beasts. After so signal
an advantage Pyrrhus, following his fortune rather

10* PYRRHUS.

tlian any rational plan, pushed against the Mace-
donian phalanx, now struck with terror and con-
sternation at their loss. And perceiving that they
refused to attack or engage with him, he stretched
out his hand to their commanders and other officers,
at the same time calling them all by their names ;
by which means he drew over the enemy's infantry.
Antigonus, therefore, was forced to fly: he per-
suaded, however, some of the maritime towns to
remain under his government.

Amidst so many instances of success Pyrrhus,
concluding that his exploit against the Gauls was far
the most glorious, consecrated the most splendid
and valuable of the spoils in the temple of Minerva
Itonis ^% with this inscription ;

These shields, which Pyrrhus wrested from the Gaul,
To th^e, Itonis, he suspends. Yet small
The wonder, crush'd Antigonus displaj's:
Heroes were ever iEacus's race.

After the battle, he soon regained possession of the
cities. Wlien he had made himself master of TEga;'*^,
among other hardships put upon the inhabitants, he
placed in it a garrison draughted from those Gauls
who had served under him. The Gauls of all men
are the most covetous of monev ; and thev innne-
diately broke open the tombs of the kings who w ere
buried there, plundered the treasures, and insolently
scattered their bones. Pyrrhus passed the matter
very slightly over ; whether it were, that tlie afiairs
which he had upon his hands obliged him to defer
the inquiry, or that he was afi'aid of tlie Gauls, and

*' Nenr Larissa, in Thcssaly. She had another temple, dedi-
cated to her under the same name, near Corouu-'a in Ikcotia. Tliis
denomination was derived to her from Itonus, the son of Ampliic-
tyon, the founder. (See Pausan. ix. 3k, and i. IS.)*

*5 Originall}'^ called Edessa, and the residence of the Macedo-
nian kings, till Philip removed the court to Pellu. The name v/as
changed by Caranus, the founder of that kingdom, from his
having surprised it during a storra, under the guidance of a herd of
goats.^

PYRRIIUa 105

did not dare to punish them. This connivance,
however, was much censured by the Macedonians.

His interest was not well established anions^ them,
neither had lie any good pros])ect of it's security,
when he began to entertain new visionary hopes ;
and in ridicule of Antigonus said, " He wondered
" at his impudence, in not laying aside the purple,
" and taking tlie habit of a private person."

About this time, Cleonynuis the Spartan came to
entreat him to niarch to Laced^emon, and he lent a
Avilling ear to his request. Cleonyraus was of the
blood royal ; but as he seemed to be of a violent
temper and inclined to arbitrary power, he was
neither loved nor trusted by the Spartans, and Areus
was appointed to the throne. This was an old com-
plaint, which he had against the citizens in general.
And to this we must add that, when advanced in
years, he had married a young lady of great beauty
named Chelidonis, who was of the royal family and
daughter to Leotychides. Chelidonis entertaining a
violent passion for Acrotatus the son of Areus, who
Avas both young and handsome, rendered the match
not only uneasy but disgraceful to the enamoured
Cleonynuis ; for there was not a man in Sparta, who
did not know how much he was despised by his wife.
These domestic misfortunes, added to his public
ones, ])rovoked him to apply to Pyrrhus ; who
marched to Sparta with twenty-five thousand foot,
two thousand horse, and twentv-fonr elenhants.
Such mighty pre})arations rendered it evident at one
view, that Pyrrhus did not come to gain Sparta for
Cleonymus, but Peloponnesus for himself. He made
indeed very different professions to tiie Lacedaemo-
nians, who sent an embassy to him at Megalopolis :
lor he told them, that he was only come to set free
the cities, which were in subjection to Antigonus ;
and (vvliat is more extraordinary) that he fully in-
tended, if nothing happened to prevent it, to send
bis younger sons to Sparta for a Lacedeemonian edu-

6i

i06 PYRFJIUS.

cation, that they might in tliis respect have the ad-
vantage of all other kings.

With such pretences he amused those who came
to meet him on liis march ; but, as soon as he set
loot in Laconia, he began to phmder and ravage it.
And, upon the embassadors representing that he had
commenced hostihties without a previous declaration
of war, he said ; " And do we not know, that you

Spartans never declare beforehand what measures

you are going to take ?" To which a Spartan
named Mandricidas, who was in company, replied
in his Laconic dialect ; " If thou art a god, thou

wilt do us no harm, because we have done thee

none : if thou art a man, perhaps we may find a
" better man than thyself.*'

In the mean time he moved toward Lacedasmon,
and was advised by Cleonymus to give the assault
immediately upon his arrival. But Pyrrhus (as we
nre told) fearing that his soldiers would plunder the
city if they took it by night, put him off, and said
they would proceed to the assault the next day.
I'or he knew, that there were but few men within the
city, and those unprepared on account of his sudden
ap])roach ; and that Areus the king was absent,
being gone to Crete to succour the Gortynians. The
contemptible idea, which Pyrrhus had conceived
of it's weakness and want of men, was the principal
cause of it's salvation. For, supposing that he
should not encounter the least resistance, he ordered
his tents to be pitched, and sat quietly down ; while
the helots and friends of Cleonymus busied them-
selves in adorning and preparing his house, in ex-
pectation that Pyrrhus would sup with them there
that evening.

Xiglit being come, the Laceda?monians resolved
in the first place to send off their women to Crete,
but they strongly opposed it : and Archidamia, en-
tering the senate with a sword in her hand, com-
plained of the mean opinion which they entertained

PYRRIIUS. 107

of the women, If tliey imap,incd tbat.tlicy would sur-
vive the destruction of Sparta. They next deter-
mined to draw a trencli parallel to the enemy's
camp, and at each end of it to sink waggons into
the ground as deep as the naves of the wheels, that
so being firmly fixed tliey iiiight stop the course of
the elephants. As soon as the work was begini, both
matrons and maids came and joined them : tlie
former with their robes tucked up, and the latter in
their under-garments only, to assist the more aged.
Those that were intended for the fight they advised
to repose themselves, and in the mean time they
undertook to finish a third part of the trench, which
tJiey effected before morning. This trench (ac-
cording to Phylarchus) was in breadth six and in
depth four cubits, and eight hundred feet long.
Plieronymus makes it less.

At day-break, the enemy was in motion : upon
which tlie women armed the youth with their own
hands, and gave them the trench in charge, ex-
hortirig them to guard it well, and representing.
How delightful it v;ould be to conquer in the view
of their country, or how glorious to expire in the
arms of their mothers and their wives, when they
had met their deaths as became Spartans." As
for Chelidonis, she retired into her own apartment
with a rope about lier neck, determined to end her
days by it, rather than to fall (if the city w-ere taken)
into Cleonymus' hands.

Pyrrhus now pressed forward with his infantry
against the Spartans, who waited for him under a
rampart of shields. But, beside that the ditch was
scarcely passable, he foiuid that there was no firm
footing on the sides of it for his soldiers, because
of the looseness of the fresh earth. His son Ptolemy
observing this, made a circuit about the trench with
two thousand Gauls and a select body of Chaonians,
and endeavoured to open a passage on the quarter
of the waggons. These however were so deeply
iixed and so closely locked together, that they not

lOS PYRRHUS.

onlv obstrncted their passao^e, but rendered it iMffi-

.' 1 O -^ -111

ciii( for the Spartans to come up and make a close
defence. The Gauls were now beginning to drag
01:1; the wheels, and draw the waggons into the
river ; when young Acrotatus perceiving the danger
traversed the city with three hundred men, and by
the advantage of some hollow ways surrounded
Ptolemy, not having been seen till he began the
attack upon his rear. Ptolemy was now forced to
face about, and stand on the defensive. In the
confusion many of his soldiers, running foul upon
each other, either tumbled into the ditch or fell
under the waggons. At last, after a long dispute
and much effusion of blood, they were entirely
routed. The old men, and' the women, were wit-
nesses of this valiant exploit of Acrotatus ; and as
he returned through the city to his post covered with
blood, bold and elated with his victory, he appeared
to the Spartan women taller and more gracefid than
ever, and they could not help envying Chelidonis
such a lover. Nav, some of the old men followed
and cried. out ; " Go, Acrotatus, and enjoy Cheli-
" donis : and may your offspring be worthy of
« Sparta 'M'*

The dispute was more obstinate, where Pyrrhus
fought in person. Many of the Spartans distin-
guished themselves in the action, and among the
rest Phvllius made a ij-lorious stand. lie slew num-
bers, who endeavoured to • force a passage; and
when he found himself ready to faint under his
wounds, he gave up his post to one of the officers
near him, and retired to die in the midst of his own
party, that the enemy might not get his body into
their power.

Night parted the combatants ; and Pyrrhus, as he
lay in his tent, had the following dream : he thought

** How fallen from the purity of their ancestors, who (as appears
from the Life of Lycurgus, Vol. I.) did not think adultery a
possible crime at Sparta^ and had therefore made no penal pro-
vision against it! *

6i

PYRRHUS, ' 109

he darted lightening npon Laced.Tmon*', wln'ch set
all the city on fire, and tliat the sight tilled him with
joy. The transport awakin-^ him, he ordered hig
officers to put their men under arms; and to some
of his friends he related his visi(m, ti-om which he
assured himself that he should take the city by
storm. The thing was received with admiration,
and a general assent ; but it was not satisfactory to
Lysimachus. He said that, " As no foot is to tread
on places struck by lightening, the Deity by this
might presignify to l\rrhus, that the city should
remain inaccessible to him^^\" Pyrrhus rephed,
" These visions may serve as amusements for the
vulgar, but there is not any thing in the world
more uncertain. While then you have your
weapons in your hands, remember, my friends,

** The best of omeas is the cause of Pyrrhus ''7.'*

So saying, he arose, and as soon as it was light re^
newed the attack. The Lacedaemonians stood upou
their defence, ^vith an alacrity and a spirit above their
strength : and the women attended, supplying them
with arms, giving bread and drink to such as wanted
them, and taking care of the w^ounded. The Ma-
cedonians then attempted to fill up the ditch, bring-
ing inmiense quantities of materials, and throwing
them in so as to cover the arms and bodies of the
dead. The Lacedaemonians, on their part, re-
doubled their efforts against them : when suddenly

-^ Some, instead of mvTai;, read utToc; and then the Enghsh will
run thus, ' He thought an eagle darted hghtening, &c.' But if
that reading be preferred, because the eagle bore Jupiter's thun-
der and Pyrrhus had the name of ' Eagle,' it ought to take place
likewise in the last member of the sentence, -which should be ren-
dered, * and that the sight filled the eagle with joy.'

^"5 To this Persius alludes, ii. 2~. — Kvitandumgiie bideutal.*
••7 A parody of a line in Hector's speech to Polydaniiis (II, xii.
2V3.) (L.) iu which the word ' Pyrrhus' is substituted for ' our
Country.' A noble maxim, in it's original form ! Ejianiiriondas at
the battle of ' Leuctra,' when dissuaded on account of some unfa-
vourable omens from ijiving battle, made a similar, reply,*

no PYRKTIUS.

Pyrrluis appeared upon tbcir side of tlie trencli, ^vllerc
the waggons had been planted to stop the passage,
advaneing at full s])eed toward the city. The sol-
diers who had the cliarge of that post cried out, and
the women fled with loud shrieks and wailings. In
the mean time Pyrrhus was pushing on, and over-
throwing all who opposed him. But his horse re-
ceiving a wound in the belly from a Cretan arrow,
ran away, and plunging in the pnins of death, threw
him upon steep and slippery ground. As his friends
pressed toward him in great confusion, the Spartans
came boldly up, and making good use of their
arrows drove them all back. U})on this Pyrrhus put
an entire stop to the action, thinking the Spartans
would abate of their vigoiu', now that they were
almost all wounded, and vast numbers of them slain.
Eut the fortune of Sparta, whether she were satis-
fied with this trial of the unassisted valoiu* of her
sons, or wished to show her power to retrieve the
most desperate circumstances, just as their hopes
were beginning to expire, brought to their relief
from Corinth Aminius the Phocensian, one of Anti-
gonus' officers, with an army of strangers ; anci
these had no sooner entered the town, than Areus
their king arrived from Crete with two thousand
men more. The women now immcdiatelv retired to
their houses, thinking it needless to concern them-
selves any flirtlier in the war : the old men likewise,
who notwithstandino' their asre had been forced to
bear arms, were dismissed, and the new supplies
substituted in their place.

These reinforcements served only to invigorate
the courage of Pyrrhus, and make him more ambi-
tions to take the town. Pinding however that he
could effect nothing, after a series of losses and ill
success he quitted the siege, and began to collect
booty from the country, intending to pass the winter
there. Put late is unavoidable. There existed at
that time a strong conteiition at Argos, between the
parties of Aristcas and Aristippus j and, as Aristip-

rYKRIlUS. lU

pus appeared to have a connection with Antigonus,
Aristeas to be beforeliand with him called in Pyrr-
hus. Pyrrhiis, whose hopes grew as fast as they
were cnt off, who if he met with success only con-
sidered it as a step to higher tilings, and if with dis-
appointment, endeavoured to compensate it by some
new advantage, would neither let his victories nor
his losses put a period to his disturbing both the
world and himself. He began his march, therefore,
immediately tor Argos. Areus by frequent am-
bushes, and by possessing himself of the difficult
passes, cut off many of the Gauls and Molossians
who brought up his rear. In the sacrifice, which
Pyrrhus had ofiered, the liver was found without a
Iiead ; and the sootlisaycr had thence forewarned
him, that he was in danger of losing some person
dear to him. But in the hurrv and disorder of this
unexpected attack he forgot tlie menace from the
victim, and ordered his son Ptolemy with some of
his guards to the assistance of the rear, wliilst he
himself pushed on and disengaged his main body
from those dangerous passages. In the mean time,
Ptolemy met with a very v/arm reception ; for he
was engaged by a select party of Lacedaemonians,
under the command of Evalcus. In the heat of
action a Cretan of Aptera named Onrsus, a man of
remarkable strength and swiftness, came up with the
young prince as he was fighting with great gallantry,
and with a blow on the side laid him dead upon the
spot. Upon this, his party turned their backs and
tied. The LacedErmonians pursued them, and in
the ardour of victory insensibly advancing into the
0])en plain, got at a considerable distance from tlieir
intantry. Pyrrhus, who by this time had heard of
the death of his son, and was deeply afflicted by it,
drew out his Molossian horse, and charging at the
head of them satiated himself with the blood of the
LacedaMiionians. He always indeed appeared great
and invincible in arms, but now in point of courage
imd force he outdid all his former exploits. Having

found out Evalcus, lie spurred his horse against
him : but EvaJcus, inclining a little on one side,
aimed a stroke at him, which had nearly cut off his
bridlC'liand. It happened, however, only to cut the
reins ; and Pyrrhus, seizing tlie favourable moment,
ran him through with his spear. Then springing
from his horse, he fought on foot, and made a ter-
rible havock of those brave LacediiMnoniaiis, who
endeavoured to protect the body of Evalcus. The
heavy loss, w'hich Sparta now suffered, was solely
owing to the ill-timed ambition of her leaders ; for
the war was at an end before the engagement ''^.

Pyrrhus having thus sacrificed to the manes of his
son, and celebrated a kind of funeral games for him,
had vented much of his grief in the fury of the com-
bat, and marched more composed to Argos. Find-
ing that Antigonus kept the high grounds adjoining
to the plain, lie encamped near the town of Nauplia.
Next day he sent a herald to Antigonus, charged
with abusive terms and with a challenge to come
down into the field, and fight with him ibr the king-
dom. Antigonus said, " Time is the w^eapon which
" I use, as much as the sword ; and, if Pyrrhus is
" weary of his life, there are many ways to end it.'*
To both tiie kings came embassadors from Argos,
entreating them to retire, and to spare that city the
humiliation of being subjected to either, which had
a friendship for them both. Antigonus agreed to
the overture, and sent his son to the Argives as a
liostaofe. Pvrrhus at the same time promised to re-
tire, but sending no hostage he was much sus})ectea.

Amidst these transactions, Pyrrhus was alarmed
"*ith a tremendous prodigy. Tor the heads of tho
sacrifice-oxen, when severed from the bodies, were
seen to thrust out their tongues, and lick up their
own gore. And in Argos the priestess of Apollo

" Dacier quotes a proverb upon this occasion, ** That one ought

ay a silver bridge for a flying enemy;" and upon the spirit of

this Themi.stocles acted, iu hurrying X^rxas out of Greece alter the
battle of SaUuuis.*

"IB

to

PYRRHUS. lis

Lyceus ran about the streets, crying ont that she
.saw the city full of dead carcases and Wood, and an
eagle joining in the %'lit, and then immediately
vanishing.

In the dead of nigiit Pyrrhus approached the walls,
and finding the gate called Diamperes opened to
liim by Aristeas, he was not discovered till his
Gauls had entered and seized the market-place. But
the gate not being high enough to receive the ele-
phants,they were forced to take ofFtheir towers; and
having afterward to put them on again in the dark,
it could not be done without noise and loss of time,
by which means they were discovered. The Argive.s
ran into the citadel called Aspis '^^, and other places
of defence, and sent to call in Antigonus. But he
only advanced toward the walls, to watch his oppor-
tunity tor action, and contented himself v/ith de-
spatching to them some of his principal officers and
his son with considerable succours.

At the same time, Arcus arrived in the town with
a thousand Cretans and the most active of iiis Spar-
tans. All these troops fell at once upon the Gauls,
and threw them into great disorder. Pyrrhus en-
tered at a place called Cylarabis ^° vvith great noise
and loud shouts, which vv^ere echoed by the Gauls ^
but he thouijht their shouts were neither full nor
bold, but rather expressive of terror and distress.
He therefore advanced in the utmost haste, pushing

•♦^ There was an annual feast at Argos in honour of Juno, called
npa.ict ^lunonia) and also ' Ilecatombia ' from the hecatomb of oxen
tiien oifered. Among other games, the following prize was pro-
posed for the youth : In a place of considerable strength above the
tiieatre, a brazen buckler was nailed to the wall, and they were to
try their strength in plucking it off. The victor was crowned with a
myrtle garhuul, and had the buckler [in Greek 'Aspis'] for his pains ;
lience the name of the fort. Not only the youth of Argos, but
strangers were admitted ta the contest ; as appears irom Pindar,
where speaking of Diagoras of iihcdes he says.

The Argive buckler Jcnev/ him. (01, vii. 152.)

^° Cylarabis was a place of exercise, near one of the gates of
Argos. (Pausan. ii. '22., Liv. xxxiv. 26.)
VOL, III. I

114. PYRRHUS;

forward bis cavalry, tliough they marched in danger,
on account of the drains and sewers of which the
city was full. Besides, in this nocturnal war it was
impossible either to see what was done, or to hear
Avliat orders were given. The soldiers were scat-
tered about, and lost their way among the narrow
streets ; neither could the officers rally them in the
darkness, amidst such a variety of noises iind in such
straiglit passages ; so that both sides continued with-
out effecting any thing, and waited for day light.

At the first dawn, Pvrrhus was concerned to see
the Aspis full of armed men ; but his concern was
changed into consternation, when among the many
figures in the market-place he beheld a wolf and a
bull in brass, represented in the act of engaging.
For he recollected an old oracle, which had foretold,
" That it was his destiny to die, whenever he should
" see a wolf encountering a bull.'* The Argives
say, these figures were erected in memory of an ac-
cident, M'hich had happened among them long be-
fore. They inform us, that when Danaiis first en-
tered their country, as he passed through the dis-
trict of Thyreatis ^\ by way of Pyramia which leads
to Argos^ he saw a wolf fighting with a bull. Danaiis
imagined, that the wolf represented himself; for
being a stranger he came to attack the natives, as the
wolf did the bull. He therefore waited to see the
issue of the fight, and the wolf proving victorious, he
offered his devotions to Apollo Lyceus, and then as-
saulted and took the town ; Gelanor, who was at
that time king, being deposed by a faction. Such is
the history of those figures.

Pyrrluis quite dispirited at the sight, and perceiv-
ing at the same time that nothing succeeded accord-
ing to his hopes, thought it best to withdrawn Fear-
ing that tlie gates were too narrow, he sent orders to
his son llelenus, who had been left with the main
body without the towai, to demolish part of the wall

s' See Strabo viii., and Thucyd. T. iL*

PYRRIIUS. 115

and assist the retreat, if tlie enemy tried to obstruct
it. ]^iit the person whom he sent mistaking the
order in the hurry and tumult, and dehvering it in
(juite a contrary sense, the young prince entered
the gates widi the rest of the elei)hants and the best
of his troops, and marched to assist ins iiitlicr. Pyr-
rhus was now retiring ; and, while tlie market-
place afforded room both to retreat and to fight, he
often faced about and repulsed the assailants. But,
M hen from that broad place he came into the narrow
street leading to the gate, he fell in with those who
were advancing to his assistance. It was in vain to
call out to them to fall back : there were but few
that could hear him ; and such as did hear, and
were most disposed to obey his orders, were pushed
back by those who came pouring in behind. The
largest of the elephants, likewise, was fallen in the
gateway on his side ; and, braying there in a horrible
manner, stopped those who were striving to get out.
And among the elephants already in the town one
named Nicon, seeking to recover his master who
had fallen off wounded, rushed against the party
that was retreating ; and overturned both friends
and enemies promiscuously, till he found the body.
He then took it up with his trunk, and carrying it
on his two tusks returned in great fury, and trod
down all before him. When they were thus pressed
and crowded together, none of them could do any
thing singly, but the whole multitude like one close
compacted body rolled this way and that all toge-
ther. They exchanged but few blows with the
enemy, either in front or rear, and the greatest harm
they did was to themselves. For, if any man drew
his sword or levelled his pike, he could not recover
the one, or put up the other ; the next person there-
fore, whoever he happened to be, was necessarily
wounded, and thus many of them fell by the hands
of each other.

Pyrrhus, seeing the billows and the tempest
rolling about him, took off the plume by which hi*

I 2

116 PYRRHU^-

helmet was distinguished, and gave it to one of Ins
friends. Then trusting to the goodness of liis horse,
he rode in among the enemy, who were harassing
his rear ; and was accidentally wounded through
the breast-plate with a javelin. The wound was
neither dangerous nor large ; but he turned against
the man that gave it, who was an Argive of no note,
the son of a poor old woman. This woman among
others, looking upon the fight from the roof of a
house, beheld her son thus engaged. Seized with
terror at the sight, she took up a large tile with both
hands, and threw it at Pyrrhus. The tile fell upon
his head, and notwithstanding his helmet crushed
the lower vertebrae of his neck. Darkness in a mo-
ment covered his eyes, his hands let go the reins,
and he fell from his horse by Licymnius' tomb ^-.

^ There is something strikingly contemptible in the fate of this
ferocious warrior. What reflections may it not afford to those
scourges of mankind, who in order to extend their power and
gratify their pride, tear out the vitals of human society ! How un-
fortunate that they do not recollect their own personal insignili-
cance, and consider, while they are disturbing the peace of the
earth, that they are beings whom an old woman may kill with a
stone ! It is impossible here to forget the obscure fate of Cliarles
the Twelfth, or the following verses which describe them,, extracted,
from Johnson's ' Vanity of Human Wishes :'

On what foundation stands the warrior's pride.

How just his hopes, let S^vedish Charles decide ;

A frame of adamant, a soul of fire.

No dangers fright him, and no labours tire.

O'er love, o'er fear extends his wide domain,

Unconquer'd lord of pleasure and of pain :

No joys to him pacific sceptres yield ;

War sounds the trump, he rushes to the field.

Behold surrounding kings their power combine.

And one capitulate, and one resign.

Peace courts his hand, but spreads her charms in vain :

" Think nothiig gain'd," he cries, " till nought remain?

" On Moscow's wall till C^iothic standards fiy,

" And all be mine beneath the polar sky."

The march begins in military state.

And nations on his eye suspended wait.

Stern famine gua;-ds the solitary coast,

And -winter barricadpsf the realm of fiu^jt.

Fi'RRIIUS. 117

Tlie crowd around him did not know wlio he was ;
but one Zopyrus who served under Antigonus, and
two or three others coming up recognised him, and
dragged him into a porch near at iiand, just as he
was beginning to recover from the blow. Zopyrus
had drawn his lllyrian bhide to cut off his head,
when Pyrrhus opened his eyes, and gave him so
^erce a look that he w^as struck with terror. His
hands trembled, and between his desire to give the
stroke and his confusion he missed his neck, and
only wounded him in the mouth and chin, so
that it was a long time before he could separate the
liead from the body.

By this time, the thing was generally known ; and
Alcyoneus the son of Antigonus came hastily up,
and asked for the head, as if he wished only to look
upon it. But as soon as he had gotten it, he rode
off with it to his father, and cast it at his feet, as he
was sitting with his friends. Antigonus looking
upon the head, and knowing it, thrust his son from
him and struck him with his staff, calling him an im-
pious and a barbarous wretch. Then putting his robe
before his eyes, he wept in remembrance of the fate
of his grandfather Antigonus ^% and that of his fa-
He comes : not want and cold his course delay

Hide, blushing Glory, hide Pultowa's day !

The vanquibh'd hero leaves his broken bands.

And shows his miseries in distant lands ;

Condenin'd a needy supplicant to wait.

While ladies interpose, and slaves debate.

But did not Chance at length her error mend?

Did no subverted empire mark his end ?

Did rival monarchs giye the fatal wound ?

Or hostile millions press him to the ground f-—

His tall was destined to a barren strand,

A petty fortress, and a dubious hand.

He left the name, at which the world grew pale.

To point a moral, or adorn a tale !

*5 Antigonus L, as we have stated in a former note, was killed
at the battle of Ipsus ; and Demetrius I. whose Life Plutarch has
written, died in the dungeon, where he had been long confined by
his son-in-law Seleucus.

lis PYRRHUS.

ther Demetrius, two instances in his own liouse of
the mutability of fortune. As for the head and body
of Pyrrluis, he ordered them to be laid in magni-
ficent attire upon the funeral-pile, and burned. After
this Alcyoneus meeting with Helenus in deep dis-
tress and shabby apparel, addressed him courteously,
and conducted him to his father ; who said, " In
" this, my son, you have acted much better than be-
" fore, but still you are deficient : for you should
" have taken off that mean habit, which is a greater
" disgrace to us the victors, than it is to the van-
" quished."

He then paid his respects to Helenus in a very
obliging manner, and sent him to Epirus with a
proper equipage. He gave also the same kind re-
ception to Pyrrhus' friends, after he had made him-
self master of his whole camp and army,

THE

L I F E

or

CAIUS MARIUS.

SUMMARY.

Different customs of the RomanSy tvith regard to proper names,
Mar'tns^ character, and Jirst campaigns. Scipio's anticipation of
his J^uture greatness. His tribune ship. Rejected in his competition
for the ccdileslnp : he obtains the ojfce of prcetor, as surmised, by
bribery : takes the command in Spain : marries Jidia, of the fa-
mily of the Casars. His fortitude in enduring pain. He goes
into Africa, as Metelltis' Ueidenant. His cojiduct in that ivar.
He gets Turpilius capitally condemned : is elected cotisul : pro-
nounces his otvn eulogy, and shoivs great contempt for the patricians.
Bocchus surrenders Jugurtha to Marias' qutv.stor Sylla, whence the
implacable quarrel of those tvoo Roman officers. Marias' second
consulship. Origin of the Cimbri, They resolve to attack Rome,
Marins' election opposed, but without success : his triumph. Jur-
gurtha's death. Marius sets off for the army. He enures his
troops to hardship. His admirable behaviour to Trebonius. Third
and fourth considships. He opens a canal, as a nexio mouth to the
Rhone: declines eng^igi'ig^ in order to accustom his soldiers to the
looks of the barbarians. His Syrian fortune-teller. Various
presages of his success. He pursues the enemy, ivho had decamped:
his victory. Anxiety of the Romans, during the night. Prepara-
tiunsfor a second action : his second victory. He is a fifth time elected
consul. Intelligence ofCatulus* army. Marius sets off to join it.
His arrangements for battle : the Romans victorious : the two con-
suls honoured with a triumph. Reflections on Marius' character.
He associates himself tvith Glaucias and Saturninus, His sixth

120 CAIUS MARIUS.

conaidship ; and dishonest condescensions. He swears to Satiir-
viniis' law : Mctellus refuses^ and goes into exile. Marius is
obliged to take up arms against Satiirninns, who iviih his accom-
plices is killed. Mctellus is recalled. Marius passes into Asia.
Commencement of the War of the Allies. Marius* conduct. He
solicits the command of the armij against Mithridates : is obliged
to leave Rome. His son escapes from his enemies. Marius' Jiighty
and sufferings. Old presages, bi/ xvhich he supports himsflf. Fresh
dayigcr, xvhich he escapes. He conceals himself in a mars^h but is
taken. No one dares to despatch him, and he is set at tiberty. He
lands in AJ'rica, whence he is driven by Sextilius : is rejoined by
his son, and returns to Italy : unites with Cinna, and takes posses-
sion of the Janiculum. Death of the consul Octavius. Marius*
cruelties. Cornutu'i is preserved by his slaves. Death of Mark
Antony, and Catuius. Atrocities committed in Rome. Marius*
seventh consulship : his anxieties ; and death. Reflections on his
ambition, attachnenf to life, Sfc, Death of his son Marius.

fVEknowno third name of Cains Marius', any
more than we do ol Quintas ^^^irtorins wiio held
Spain so long, or of Lucius Mummius who took Co-
rinth. For the surname of Achaicas, Mui iriius
gamed by his conquest, as Scipio did that of Alica-
nus, and Metellus that of Macedonicus. Posidonius
avails himself chiefly of this argument to confute
those, who hold the third to be the Roman proper
name (^Camillus, for instance, and Marcellus, and
Cato) ; for in that case those, who had only two
names, would have had no proper name at all. But
he did not consider, that by this reasoning he robbed
the women of their names ; for no woman bears the
first, which Posidonius supposed to be the proper
name among the Komans. Of the other names, one
was common to the whole family, as the Pompeii,

^ Hence the name of Nepos, given him by some historians, is
obviously without foundation.*

CAIUS MARIUS. 121

Manlii, Cornelii, (in the same manner as, with us,
the Heiaclida! and I'dopida-^and the oiher -wasa siir-
iiamc given ^hcm ivom something I'cmarkable in
their dispositions, their actions, or the form of their
bodies ; as Macrinii.-, Torquatus, ■ .Ila, which are
like Mnemon, Grvpus, and Caliinicus, among the
Greeks. But the di , ersity of ciistonis in this respect
leaves much room for farther inquiry '.

As to the ligure of Marius, we have seen at Ra-
venna in Gaul ' his statue in marble, which perfectly
expressed ail that has been said of Jiis sternness and
austerity of behaviour. For being naturally robust
and warlike, and better acquainted with the disci-
pline of the camp than that of the city, he was fierce
and untractable when in authority. It is said that

* The Romans had usually three names; the Pranoineiiy the
Noniaiy and the Cognomen.

1'lie Pirciwmen, as Aulas, Cains, Decimus, was the proper or
distinguisliing name between brothers, during the time of the re-
public.

The Nomen was the family-name, answering to the Grecian pa-
tronymics. For, as among the Greeks the posterity of iEacus were
called yEacida?, so the Julian family had that name from lulus or
Ascanius. But there were several other things, which gave rise to
the Xonicn, as animals, places, and accidents ;"for instance, Porcius,
Ovilius, S:c.

The Cognomen was originally intended to distinguish the several
branches of a family. It was assumed from no certain cause, but
generally from some particular occurrence. It became howevei
hereditary, except it happened to be changed for a more honour-
able appellation, as Africanus, Macedonicus. But it should be well
remarked, that under the emperors the Cognomen was often used as
a proper name, and brothers were distinguished by it, as Titus Fla-
vius Vespasianus, and Titus Fiavius Sabinus.

As to women, they had anciently their Prccnomen as well as
the men, such as Caia, Lucia, Sec. (Val. Max. x.) But afterward
they seldom used any other beside the family-name, as Julia, Tullia,
and the like. Where there were two sisters in a house, the distin-
guishing appellations were Major and Minor ; if a greater number,
Prima, Secunda, Tertia, &c.

With respect to the men, who had only two names, a family might
be so n.oan as not to have gained-the Cognomen ; or there might be
so few of the family, that there was no occasion for it to distinguish
the branches.

^ Viz. Cisalpine Gaul; for so part of the north of modern Italy
*vas denominated by the Romans.*

125 CAIUS MARIUS.

he iieltlier learned to read Greek, nor would ever
make use of that language upon any serious occasion;
thinking it ridiculous to bestow time on learning a
lansuatie, of whicli the teachers were slaves. And
when, alter his second triumph, at the dedication of
a temple, he exhibited shows to the people in the
Grecian manner, he barely entered the theatre and
sat down, and then immediately departed. As Plato
therefore used to say to Xenocrates the philosopher,
^vho had a morose and unpolished manner, " Good
" Xenocrates, sacrifice to the Graces ;" so if any one
could have persuaded Marius to sacrifice to the
Grecian Muses and Graces, he would never have
brought his noble achievements both in war and
peace to so shocking a conclusion; neither would
he ever have been hurried by passion, unseasonable
ambition, and insatiable avarice to split upon the
rocks of a barbarous and cruel old age. But this
will soon appear from his actions themselves.

His parents were obscure and indigent people,
who supported themselves by labour : his father's
name was the same with his own ; his mother was
called Fulcinia. It was late before he came to Rome,
or had any taste of the refinements of the city. In
the mean time he led at Cirraetum, a village in the
territory of Arpinum^, a life which, compared with the
elegance of polished life, was perfectly rustic ; but
at the same time it was temperate, and much re-
sembled that of the. ancient Romans.

He made his first campaign against the Ccltibe-
rians ', when Scipio Atiicanus was besieging Nu-
niantia. That general did not fail to notice his supe-
riority to the other young soldiers in courage, and
his ready adoption of the reformation in point of

* A corruption of' Ccrnetuni.' Pliny informs us (N. II. iii. 5.)
that tlic inliabitants of Ceint'tuni were calleil ' ^lariani,' undoubt-
edly from Marius their townsman, who liad distinguished himself in
so extraordinary a manner. (L.) Arpinumwas also the native pro*
vince of Cicero.*

^ B. C. 133, The Celtiberians were a people of Old Castile.*

CAIUS MARIUS. 123

diet, whicli lie had introduced into armies before al-
most ruined by luxury and pleasure. It is said also,
that he encountered and killed an enemy in the
sight ofkScipio ; ^vho therefore distinguished him by
many marks of honour, and among the rest by invit-
ing him to his table. One evening the conversation
happening to turn upon the illustrious commanders
then in being, some person in the party, either out
of complaisance to Scipio, or because he really
wished to be informed, asked ; " Where the Romans
" should find sucli another general, when he was
" gone ?" upon which Scipio, putting his hand upon
the shoulder of Marius, who sat next him, said,
" Here, perhaps." So happy was the genius of both
those great men, that the one while but a youth
gave tokens of his future abilities, and the other
from those beginnings could discover the long series
of glory which was to follow.

This saying of Scipio's we are told, raised the
hopes of Marius like a divine oracle, and was the
chief thing which animated him to apply himself to
affairs of state. By the assistance of Caecilius Me-
tellus, on whose house he had an hereditary depen-
dence, he was chosen a tribune of the peopled In
this office he proposed a law for regulating the man-
ner of voting, which tended to lessen the authority
of the patricians in matters of judicature. Cotta the
consul therefore persuaded the senate to reject it,
and to summon Marius to give an account of his
conduct. This decree being passed, Marius upon
entering the senate showed none of the embarrass-
ment of a young man advanced to office without
having previously distinguished himself: but, assum-
ing before-hand the elevation which his future ac-.
tions were to give him, he threatened to send Cotta
to prison, if he did not revoke the decree. Cotta
turning to Metellus, and asking his opinion, Me-
iellus rose up and voted with the consul. Upon

^ B. C. 119,

124. CAIUS MARIUS.

"wbicli Marius called in a lictor, and ordered him to
take Metellus into custody. MeteHus appealed to
the other tribunes : but, as not one oi them gave him
any assistance, the senate yielded and rcj^ealed their
decree. Marius, highly distinguished by rliis victory,
■went immediately from the senate to the Forum, and
got his law confirmed by tiie people.

From this time, he passed for a man of inflexible
resolution ; one not to be infiaenced by fear or respect
of persons, and consequently one who would prove a
bold defender of the people's privileges against the
senate. But this opinion was soon altered by his
taking quite a different part. For a law having been
proposed concerning the distribution of corn, he stre-
nuously opposed the plebeians, and carried it against
them. By which action lie gained equal esteem from
both parties, as a person incapable of serving either
against the public advantage.

When liis tribuneship was expired, he stood can-
didate for the office of chief sedile. For there are two
otiices of aidiies: the one called ' Curule,* from the
chair with crooked feet, in which the magistrate sits
-while he despatches business ; the other, of a degree
much inferior, denominated ' Plebeian.' The more
honourable fL'diles are first chosen, and then the people
proceed on the same day to the election of the other.
When Marius found he could not carry the first, he
dropped his pretensions, and immediately applied for
the second. But as this proceeding of his betrayed
a disagreeable and importunate obstinacy, he miscar-
ried in that also. Yet, though he was twice baffled
in his application in one day (which never happened
to any man except himself) he was not in the least dis-
couran;ed. For not lonjj^ afterward he stood for the
pra?torship, and was near being again rejected. He
was indeed returned last of all, and was even then
accused of bribery. What contributed most to the
{suspicion was, that a servant of Cassius Sabaco had
been seen within the rails among the electors; for
Sabaco was one of Marius* intimate friends* He was

CAIUS MARIU;?. 12.>

summoned therefore by the judges, and being inter-
rogated upon the point replied, " That the heat hav-
" ing made him very thirsty, he had asked for cold
" water; upon M'hich his servant brought him a cup,
*' and withdrew as soon as he had drank." Sabaco
■was expelled the senate by the next censors ^, and it
was thought he deserved that brand of infamy, as
having been guilty either of falsehood, or of intempe-
rance. Caius Herennius was also cited, as a v/itncss
against Marius; but he alleged, that it was not cus-
tomary for Patrons (so the Romans call protectors)
to give evidence against their Clients^ and that the
law excused them from that obligation. The judges
were going to admit the plea, v/hen Marius himself
opposed it, and told Herennius that, upon his being
first created a magistrate, he ceased to be his client.
But this was not altogetlier true. For it is not every
office, that frees clients and their posterity from the
service due to their patrons, but only those magis-
tracies to which the law assis^ns a curule chair. Ma-
rius however, during the first days of trial, found that
matters ran against him, his judges being very unfa-
vourable: at last tlie votes proved equal, and he v;as
unexpectedly acquitted.

In his prffitorship, he did nothing to raise him to
distinction. But at the expiration of this office, the
Farther Spain filling to his lot, he is said to have
cleared it of robbers. That province was as yet un-
civilized and savage in it's manners, and the Spaniards
thought there was notlii ng but what v/as highly ho-
nourable in robbery **. Upon his return to P^ome, lie
was desirous to have liis share in the administration,
but he had neither riches nor eloquence to recom-
mend him; though these were the' instruments, by
which the great men of those times governed the
people. His high spirit however, his indefatigable

' He had, probably, cnused one of hh slaves to vote among the
freemen. \^L.) For the privileges of Patrons, armdci.1 to below, see
« the Life of Romulus, Vol. 1.*

* This is no uncommon feature iur.ong barbarians. Thucvd. i, 5.^

126 CAIUS INIARIUS.

indiistiy, and his ])laiii manner of living recom-
mended him so effectually to tiie connnonalty, that
he gainecl offices and by offices power: so that he
was deemed worthy of the alHance of the Caesars, and
married Julia of that illustrious family. Cassar, who
subsequently raised himself to the head of Roman
aifairs, washer ne[)hew ; and, on account -of his re-
lation to Marius, showed himself extremely solicitous
for his honour, as we have related in his Life'^.

Marius, along with his temperance, was possessed
of great fortitude in enduring pain. Of this an ex-
traordinary proof occurred, during a process in sur-
gery. Having botii his legs full of wens, and being
vexed at the deformity, he determined to put himself
into the hands of a surgeon, lie would not be bound
however, but stretched out one of his legs to the
knife; and, without motion or groan, bore the inex-
pressible ogony of the operation in silence and with
a settled countenance. I»ut when the surgeon was
going to begin with the other leg, he would not suffer
him; saying, " I see the cure is not worth the pain."

About this time Caecilius Metellus the consnl "^,
being appointed to the chief command in the war
against Jugurtha, took Marius with him into Aliica
as one of his lieutenants. Marius now finding an op-
portunity for great actions and glorious toils did not
seek, like his collegues, to contribute to the reputa-
tion of Metellus, or to direct his views to his credit:
but regarding himself as called to the lieutenancy not
by that general, but by Fortune, who had offered him
at most seasonable opportunity and a most noble
theatre for splendid achievements, he exerted all his
powers. That war presenting many critical occasions,
he neither declined the most difficult service, nor

* When at his aunt's funeral, he prodiiceil the hiilliant and higlil^"^
finished images of Marius victorious over the Cimbri, which till tlicn
iiobodv uniler Sylla's government durst exhibit, and by this instance
of hardihood captivated the hearts of the Roman people.*

'" Q. Ca-'cilius Metellus was consul with M. Junius Silanus, B. C.
107. In this expedition, he acquired the surname of Numidicus.

CAIUJ^ MAllIUS. 127

thought the most servile beneath liim. Thus sur-
passing his equals in prudence and foresight, and ri-
valling the conunon soldiers in abstemiousness and
hibour, heentirelv o:ained tlieir affections. For it is no
small consolation to any one, who is obliged to work,
to see another voluntarily participating in his hard-
ships; as it seems to take off the i'eeling of compulsion.
There is not indeed a more agreeable spectacle to a
Koman soldier, than that of his general eating the
same dry bread ^' which he eats, or lying on an ordi-
nary bed, or assisting his men in drawing a trench or
throwing up a bulwark. For the soldier does not so
much admire those ofllicers, who permit him to share
in their honours or their money, as those who will par-
take with him in toil and danger; and he is more
attached to one who will assist him in his labour, than
to one who will indulge him in idleness.

By these steps Marius gained the hearts of the sol-
diers: his glory, his influence, his reputation spread
throughout Africa, and extended even to Rome : the
men under his command wrote to their friends at
home, that the only means of putting an end to the

*' E* e^it, wliich the English translator renders 'publicly,' and
the French * a la vice de tout le monde,^ is never to be met with in
any good Greek author in that sense. The text indeed plainly ap-
pears to be corrupted; for the word ^icfj^x, ' spectacle,' just before,
entirely precludes the expression « o-<^ii, 'publicly.' Bryan saw the
corruption, and has proposed to read unu c-^n, 'without meat or
sauce ;' but we would ratl>er choose to read uvo-^sv^ because the literal
alteration will be the less. It certainly must be matter of great joy
to the common soldier, to see ' his general eat the same dry bread
with him.' Dacier, likewise, noticed the error, and proposed to
read sk e|ei, ' dipped in vinegar.' Here, it must be owned, is the
change of one letter only; but the sense does not seem to be so
strong. The learned reader will choose which emendation he
pleaics. (L.)

Langhorne hardly does Dacier justice, in suppressing the autho-
rities upon which he founds his conjecture: vix. that of Ruth ii. 14-.,
and of Plautus (Rud. iv. 2. 32.)

Sedhic rex cum aceto pransurus est et sale, sine bono pulmento.

This custom has, likewise, been referred to in a former note.*

t

155 CAIUS MARIU;^.

war in those parts would be to elect i^Iariiis consii].
This occasioned no small anxiety to Metcllus, but
what distressed him most was the affiiir of Tiirpihiis.
This man and his family had long been retainers to tliat
of Metelhis,andhe attended him in that war in the cha-
racter of master of the artificers'"; but being through
his interest appointed governor of the large town of
Vacca, his humanity to the inhabitants and the un-
suspecting openness of his conduct gave them an
opportunity of delivering up the place to Jugurtha '^.
Turpilius, however, suffered no injury in his person;
for the inhabitants, having prevailed u])on Jugurtha
to spare him, dismissed him in safety. On this account,
he was accused of having betrayed the place. Marius,
who was one of the council of war, was not only him-
self severe against him, but stirred up most of the
other judges; so that it was carried against Metellus*
opinion, and much against his own inclination he
passed upon him sentence of death. A little while
afterward, the accusation appearing to have been a
false one '*, all the other officers sympathised with
Metellus, who was overwhelmed with sorrow: but
Marius with joy declared the thing was his doing, and
was not ashamed to acknowledge in all companies,
*' That he had lodged an avenging fury in IMetellus*
" breast, who would not fail to punish him for liaving
" put to death the hereditary friend of his family."

Tliey now became o])en enemies ; and one day when
Marius was standing by, we are told that Metcllus
said by way of insult, " You intend then, my good
" friend, to leave us, and go home to solicit the con-
*' sulship: would you not be contented to stay, and
" be consul with this son of mine ?" The son of

" An officer, like our CoiDplroller of the Board of Works.
Among (iruter's inscriptions, suvcral persons have the title of '■ Prce-
Jcctus Fahroruv.J'

'J They put the Roman garrison to the sword, sparing none but
Turpilius.

'♦ Not, liowevcr, at the time when Sallust wrote his History.
See Bell. Jug. Ixxi.*

CAIUS MARIUS. 129

Metclliis ^vas, at that time, very young. Notwith-
standing;- this, Maiius still kept applying for leave to
be gone, and Metellus found out new pretences for
delay. At last, when there wanted only twelve days
to the election, he dismissed him. Marius had a long
journey from the camp to Utica, but he despatched
it in two days and a night. Upon his arrival, he
offered sacrifice before he embarked : and the sooth-
sayer is said to have told him, " That heaven an-
*' nounced the noblest success, superior to all his
" hopes." Elevated with this promise, he set sail,
and having a fair wind crossed the sea in four days.
The people immediately expressed their inclination
for him ; and being introduced by one of their tribunes,
he brought many false charges against Metellus, in
order to secure the consulship for himself; promising
at the same time either to kill Jugiutha, or to take
him alive.

He was elected with great applause, and immedi-
ately began his levies ; in which he observed neither
law nor custom, for he enlisted many needy pereons
and even slaves ^\ These had not been admitted by
former generals, who entrusted only persons of pro-
perty with arms as with other honours, considering
that property as a pledge to the public for their be-
haviour. Neither was this the only obnoxious thing
in Marius. His bold speeches, accompanied with
insolence and ill manners, gave the patricians con-
siderable uneasiness. For he scrupled not to say,
" That he had taken the consulate, as a prey, from
the effeminacy of the high-born and the rich ; and
that he could glory to the people in his own wounds,
"not in the images of others or the monuments of
" the dead." He took frequent occasion likewise to
mention Bestia and Albinus, generals who had been
chiefly unfortunate in Africa"^, as men of illustrious

*^ Florus (iii. 1.) does not say he enlisted slaves, but capitc censos;
such as, having no estates, had onjy < their names entered in the
registers.'

'^' Having basely allowed themselves to be corrupted by Jugurtlia.*

vp;-. III. K

ii

ISO CAIUS MARIUS.

families, but unfit for war, and consequently unsuc-
cessful through want of capacity. He would then ask
the people, " Whether they did not think, that the
" ancestors of those men would have wished rather to
'* leave a posterity like him ; since they themselves
" had risen to glory not by their high birth, but by
" their virtue and their heroic achievements." These
things he said not out of mere vanity and arrogance,
or needlessly to embroil himself with the nobility ;
but he saw the people took pleasure in seeing the
senate insulted, and that they measured the greatness
of a man's mind by the insolence of his language ; and
therefore, to gratify them, he spared not the noblest
men in the state.

Upon his arrival in Africa, Metellus was quite over-
come with grief and resentment, to think that when
he had as it were finished the Avar, and there remained
nothing to take but tlie person of Jiigurtlia, Marius
who had raised himself merely by ingratitude, should
come to snatch away both his victory and his triumph.
Unable therefore to bear the sight of him he retired,
and left his lieutenant ilutilius to deliver up to him
the forces. But, before the end of the v.-ar, tlie divine
venc;cance overtook Marius. For Sylla robbed him
of the glory of his exploits, as he had previously rob-
bed Metellus. I shall bricfiy relate in this place the
manner of that transaction, having already given a
more particular account of it in the Life of Sylla.

Bocchus, king of the Upper Numidia'S was father-
in law to Jugurtha. He gave him however very little
assistance in the war, pretending that he detested his
perfidiousness, though in reality he dreaded the increase
of his power. But when he became a fugitive and a
wanderer, and was reduced to the necessity of apply-

'^ Or ^lauritania. (L.) AF. L'Abbe Brotier, relying upon one of
the readings of Sallust, and some of Sylla's medals, proposes to
substitute here, 'Son-in-law:.' but M. Vauvilliers more judiciously
contends from six MSS. of Sallust, and in conformity with Florus
iii. 1., for the present term. The medals he, likewise, explains
agreeably to his own tlieory. In this M. Larchcr, the celebrated ^
i'rench critic, concurs.*

CAIUS MARIUS. 131

mg to TiOCchuR as his last resource, tliat prince re-
ceived him rather as his siippHant than as his son-in-
law. When he had him in his hands, lie affected in
public to intercede with Mariusin his behalf; alleging
in Ins letters, that he would never give him up., but
•defend him to the last. At the same time in private
intending to betray him, he sent for Lucius Sylla, who
was Marius' quiiistor, and had rendered Bocchusmany
services during the war. When vSylla, confiding in
his honour, was come to him, the barbarian began to
repent, and for some days fluctuated whether he
should deliver up Jugurtha or retain Sylla too. At
2ast, adhering to the treachery which he had first
conceived, he put Jugurtha alive into Sylla's hands.

Hence the first seeds of that violent and implacable
quarrel, which almost ruined the Roman empire.
For many, out of envy to Marius, were willing to
attribute this success solely to Sylla; and Sylla him-
self caused a seal to be made, which represented
Bocchus in the act of delivering up to him Jugurtha ^'^.
This seal he alwavs wore, and constantly sealed his
letters with it ; a circumstance highly offensive to
Marius, who was naturally ambitious and could not
endure a rival in glory. Sylla was instigated to this
by Marius* enemies, who ascribed the beginning and
the most considerable actions of the war to Metellus,
and the last and finishing stroke to Sylla : that so the
people might no longer admire and remain attached
to Marius, as the most accomplished of commanders.

The danger however, which now approached Italy
from the west, soon dispersed all the envy, hatred,
and calumnies which had be€n raised against Marius.
The people in want of an experienced comijiaijder,
and searching for an able pilot to sit at the he]m that
tlie commonwealth might bear up against so dreadful
a storm, found that no one jof an opulent or noble
family would stand for the consMlship ; and therefore"

^^ There are still extant consular medals of the family of Sylla^
?vith the same device.*

K 2

a32 CAIUS MARIUS.

they elected Mariiis '^, though abticnt. For tliey had
no sooner received the news that Jugurtha was taken,
than reports were spread of an invasion froni the
Teutones and the Cinibri. And, though the account
of the number and strength of their armies seemed at
first inc/e^ible, it subsequently appeared short of the
truth. For thice hunded thousaiid well-armed war-
riors weie upon tlie march ; and the women and chil-
dien, whom they brought along with them, v^^ere said
to be still more numeroi.s. This vast muUitude were
in search of lands on which they ujight subsist, and
cities wherein to live and .^^ettle ; as they had heard
that the Celiae before them had expelled the Tuscans,
and possessed tiiemsejves of the best part of Italy '^^
As for these, who now hovered like a cloud over Gaul
and Italy, it was not knov^nwho they were"^ or
whence they came, on account of their small com-
merce with the rest of the world, and the length of
way which they had marched. It was conjectured
indeed from the largeness of their stature and the
blueness of their eyes^ as well as because the Ger-

' '9 B C. 102

^° In the reign of Tarquinius Priscus. (Liv. v. 34.)
. ^' The Cimbri were descended from the ancient Gomcrlans or
Celts; Ciniri, or Cynibri, being only a harsher pronunciation of
Goinerai. They were, in all probability, the most ancient people
in German)''; and gave their name to the Cimbric Chersonese, [liod,
Jutland,) a kind of peninsula extending from the mouth of the
Elbe into the North Sea. They were all accounted the same with
the Cimmerians, who inhabited the comitries about the Palus
Macotis (Diod Sic. v. 32,, and Strabo vii.); which is highly probable,
both from the likeness of iheir names, and from the descendents of
Gomer having spread themselves over the whole of that northern
tract. (L.)

Some descendents of the Cimbri, it is said (though Whitaker, in
his Review of Gibbons last three tto. volumes, ridicules the idea,
p. 40), are still to be found in the neighbourhood of Verona.*

^^ This (lerman feature is noticed, along with their size, by Tac.
de Mor. Germ. iv. And it forms a fine trait, in Grays beautiful
picture oT these northern invaders of Italy ;

As oft have issued, ho<t impelling host.

The blue-eyed myriads of the Baltic coast, ^c.

(Ethical Essay, 51.)
See the Life of Camillas, not. (36.) Vol. I,*

CAirS IMAPcIUS. 133

mans call banditti ' Cinibri,' that they were some of
those German nations who dwell bv the North Sea.

Some say, the country of the CeitaBis of such im-
mense extent, that it stretches from the western ocean
and the most northern climes to the lake Maeotis east-
ward, and to that part of Scythia which borders upon
Pontus : that there tlie two nations mingle and thence
issue, not all at once nor at all seasons, but in the
spring of every year: that, by means of these annual
supplies, they had gradually opened themselves a way
over the chief part of the European continent; and'
that, thouijrh tliev are distino'uished by different
names accordino- to their tribes, vet their whole body
is comprehended under the general appellation of
' Celto-Scvtiue.'

Others assert that tliey were a small part of the
Cinnnerians, well known to the ancient Greeks ; and
that quitting their native soil, or having been expel-
led by the Scythians on account of some sedition,
.they passed from tlie Palus Tvl^eotis into Asia, under
the conduct of Lygdamis their chief: but that the
greater and more warlike part dwelt in the extremi-
ties of the earth, near the North Sea. These inhabit
a country so dark and woody, that the sun is seldom
seen on account of the many high and spreading
trees, wdiich reach inward as far as the Hercvnian
forest'-^. They are under that part of the heavens,
wdiere the elevation of the pole is such, that by the
declination of the parallels it makes almost a vertical
point to the inhabitants ; and their day and night are
of such a ]en.5^th, that they serve to divide the year
into two equal parts, which gave occasion to Horiier's
fiction concerninfT the infernal regions'-*.

-&'

'3 This forest anciently covered nearly the whole of Gaul and
Germany, extending to a length of sixty days' journey. (Pomp.
Mel, iii.'s,)*

^■^ Odyss. xi. Homer liovvever places them in Campania, near
the lake Avernus, Baia?, and Cuma.\ (See Fest. in vac. '■ Clinmerii.')
Pk'.tarch is here far from accurate in his geo<;rai)hy. The iii^;lust
latitude of tlie Cimbri does not reach beyond 70° N., whicli is nearly
that of Iceland, the idtima Tlude of the ancients, and in their, idea

134- CAIU8 MARIUS-

Hence thei-efore these barbarians, wlio cjinTe inf^
Italy, first issued; being anciently called C^immerii,
and subsequently Cimbrr, but not at all lioni any
reference to their manners. Yet tliese things rest
rather upon conjecture, than upon historical cer-
tainty. iSIost historians however agree, that theit'
numbers, instead of being less, were rather greater
than we have related. As to their courage, their
spirit, and the force and vivacity with which they
made an impression. Me may compare them to a
devouring flame. Nothing could resist their impe-
tuosity ; all that came in their way were trodden
down, or driven before them like cattle. Many re-
spectable armies and generals-^, employed by the
llomans to guard the Transalpine Gaul, were shame-
fully routed ; and the feeble resistance, which they
made to the first elibrts of the barbarians, was the
chief thing which drew them toward Rome. For
having beaten all they met, and loaded themselves
\vith plunder, they determined to settle no where,
till they had destroyed Home and laid waste the
whole of Italy.

The Romans, alarmed from all quarters with this
intelligence, called Marius to the command, and
elected h.im a second time consul. It was indeed
unconstitutional for any one to be chosen who was
absent, or who had not waited the regular time be-
tween a first and a second consulshi}) ; but the people
over-ruled all that was said against him. They con-
sidered that this was not the first instance, in which
the law had given way to the public utility : neither
Wcis the present occasion less urgent than that, when,
with the same violation of law", tiiey made Scipio

fheboumlavy oi' the world. The longest tbys and nigiits under
tUis puriillel are not more than two months. The i)ighest noitherii
latitude yet iittainod is upward of i)° .^hort of the jiole.*
. -> Cassius Longinus, Auielius, Scaurus, Ccepio, and Cn. Mailius.
• ( Tuc. d(i iMor. (icnn., xxxvii.)

*• Scipi;) was elected consul bufora ho was thirty years old,
tiioiiCTh the common ntSQ reciuired in the candidates was fortv-lwo.
The people, indeed^ disj^jcnt^cU w.th it ia oiIil:" instances bciide tins*.

CAIUS MARIUS. 1S5

cotisiil ; for then tliey were not trembling for the
safety of their own city, but only ambitious of de-
stroying Carthage. These reasons prevailing, Ma-
rius returned with his army from Africa ; and enter-
ing upon his consulship on the first of January, which
theRomans reckon the beginning of tiieir year, led
up his triumph the same day. Jugurtha, now a cap-
tive, was a spectacle as agreeable to the Romans, as
it was beyond their expectation ; no one having ever
imagined, that the war could be brought to a period
so long as he was alive. So various was the cha-
racter of that man, that he knew how to accommo-
date himself to all kinds of fortune, and amidst all
his subtilty possessed a vein of high spirit. It is said,
that when he was led before the car of the conqueror,
he lost his senses. After the triumph, he was thrown
into prison ; where, while they were in haste to strip
him, some tore his robe ofi' his back, and otheis
catching eagerly at his pendants pulled off the tips of
his ears along with them. When he Vv'as thrust down
naked into the dungeon, all confused, he said with a
frantic smile, " Heavens ! how cold is tliis bath of
" yours !" There having struggled for six days with
extreme hunger, and to the last hour labouring for
the preservation of life, he met with such an end a?
his crimes deserved. Tliere were carried (we arc;
told) in this triumph three thousand and seven
pounds ot' gold, five tliousand seven hundred and
seventy-five of sib/er bullion, and of silver coin seven-
teen thousand and twenty-eight drachmas.

After tlie solemnity was finished, Marius assem-
bled the senate in the Capitol, wheie, either throngli
inadvertency or gross insolence, he entered in his
triumphal robe ; but soon perceiving that the senate
was offended, l)e went and put on his ordinary habit,
and tlieii retu.rned to his place.

V/hen he set out witli the army, he trained his
soldiers to hardship while upon the road, accustom-
ing them to long and tedious marches, and compel-
ling evcrv man to carrv his own bac?i[i:a^c and pro-

136 CAIUS MARIUS.

vide his own victuals. So that in after periods laba-
rioLis people, who executed readily and without mur-
muring' whatever they were ordered, w^re called
' Marl us* mules/ Some, indeed, assign another
reason for this proverbial saying. They state, that
when Scipio besieged Numantia, he chose to inspect
not only the arnis and horses, but the very mules
and waggons, that all might be in readiness and good
order ; upon which occasion Marius brought out his
horse in fine condition, and his mule likewise in
better case and stronger and gentler than those of
others. The general, much pleased with Marius'
beasts," often made mention of them; and hence
those, who by way of raillery praised a continually
drudging patient man, called him ' Marius' mule -^*
Upon this occasion, it was a most fortunate cir-
cumstance for Marius that the barbarians turninsjc
their course, like a reflux of the tide, first invaded
Spain. For this gave him time to strengthen his
men by exercise, and to raise and confirm their con-
rage, and (what was of still greater importance) to
show them what he himself was. His severe beha-
viour and inficxibility in punishing, when it had once
accustomed them to regulate their conduct and
practise obedience, appeared botli just and salutary.
After they had been a little used to his hot and vio-
lent spirit, to the harsh tone of his voice and the
fierceness of his countenance, thev no longer con-
sidered them iis terriljle to themselves, but to the
enemy. Above all, the soldiers were charmed with
his integrity iti judging; * * * * and this con-
tributed not a little to procure ]\Iarius a third con-
sulate. Besides, the barbarians were expected in
the spring, and the people were not willing to meet
them under any other general. They did not how-
ever come so soon as they were looked for, and his
year of consulship again expired. The time of a new
election coming on, and his collegue being dead,

^7 See, also, Fest. in voc. ' Muli MarianL'*

CAIUSMARIUS. 137

Mariiis left the command of tlie army to Manius
Aqiiilius, and went himself to Rome. Several per-
sons of high merit stood for the consulate ; but Lu-
cius Saturninus, a tribune who had the greatest in-
fluence with the people, being gained by Marius, in
all his speeches exhorted them to choose him consul.
Marius for his part desired to be excused, pretend-
ing that he did not wisli for the office ; upon which
Saturninus called him '' a traitor to his country, who
*' deserted the command in such a time of danger.'*
It was not difficult to see that Marius dissembled,
and that the. tribune was acting a bungling part un-
der his direction ; yet the people, considering that
the present juncture required both his capacity and
his good fortune, created him consul a fourth "time ;
and appointed Lutatius Catulus his collegue, a man
much esteemed by the patricians and not unaccept-
able to the commons.

I\Iarius being informed of the enemy's approach,
passed the Alps witli the utmost expedition ; and,
having marked out his camp by the river iliione,
fortifi'jd it and brought into it an immense supply
of provisions ; that the want of necessaries might
never compel him to %ht at a disadvantage. But,
as the carriage of provisions by sea was both very
tedious and extremely expensive, he found out a
method of making it easy and expeditious. The
mouth of the Rhone was at that time choked up with
mud and sand, which the beating of the sea had
lodged tiiere ; so that it was very dangerous, if not
impracticable, for vessels of burthen to enter it.
Marius therefore set his army, now quite at leisure,
to v.'ork upon it ; and having caused a cut to be
made, capable of receiving large ships, he turned a
great part of tlie river into it : thus drawing it to a
coast, where the opening into the sea' is easy and
secure. This cut still retains his name^^.

The barbarians dividizig themselves into two:

'« Some remains of it still subsist, and it's name {Fossa Msrhria)

iSS CAIUS MARIU3.

bodies, it fell to the lot of the Cimbri to march the
upper way through Noricum against Catulus, and to
force that pass ; while the Teutoncs and Ambrones
took the road through Liguria along the sea-coast,
in order to reacli Marius. The Cimbri spent some
time in preparing for their march . but tlie Teutones
and Anibrones set out immediately, and pushed for-
ward with much expedition ; so that they speedily
traversed the intermediate country, and presented
to the view of the Romans an incredible number of
enemies, terrible in their aspect, and in their voice
and shouts of war different from all other men.^
They then spread themselves over a vast extent of
ground near Marius ; and, when they had encamp-
ed, challenged him to battle.

The consul however paid them no regard, but
kept his soldiers within the trenches, rebuking the
vanity and rashness of those who were anxious to
come to action, and calling them traitors to their
country. He told them, " Their ambition should
" now be not for triumphs and trophies, but to dis-
" pel the dreadful storm that hung over them, and
" to save Italy from destruction." These things he
said privately to his chief officers, and men of the
first rank. As for the common soldiers, he made
them mount guard by turns upon the ramparts, to
accustom them to bear the dreadful looks of the
enemv, and to hear their savas^c voices v. ithout fear,
as well as to make them acquainted with their arms,
and their method of using them. Thus what at first
was terrible, by being often looked upon, would in
time become indifferent, lie well knew indeed that,
with res})ect to objects of terror, novelty adds many
unreal circumstances, and that things really dreadful
lose tlieir effect by fiuniliarity. The daily sight in-
deed of tlie barbarians not only lessened tiie dismay

may be traced In tlie place called ' Toz.' The canal itself is now
obstructed, and is appropriately denominated ' Lc Bras-mort.'

Noricum at present form.j the Circle ol' Bavaria, and Liguria the
territory of Genoa.*

ii

CAIUS MARIUa 139

of the soldiers, but the menacing behaviour and in-
tolerable vanity of the enemy provoked their resent-
ment and inflamed their courage. For they not only
plundered and ruined the adjacent country, but ad-
vanced to the very trenches with the utmost inso-
lence and contempt.

Marius at last was told, tliat the soldiers vented
their grief in such complaints as these: " What effe-
minacy has Marius discovered in us, that he thus
keeps us locked up like so many women, and re-
*' strains us from fighting ? Come on : let us with
" the spirit of freemen demand of him whether he
" expects others to fight for the liberties of Rome,
*' and intends to employ us only as the vilest labour-
" ers in digging trenches, in carrying out loads of
" dirt, and in turning the course of rivers ? It is for
these noble works, no doubt, that he exercises us
in such painful labours ; and when they are finish-
" ed, he will return, and show his fellow-citizens the
" glorious fruits of the continuation of his power,
*' It is true, Carbo and Ca^pio were beaten by the
*' enemy : but does their ill success terrify him r
** Surely Carbo and Cecpio were generals as nuich
*' inferior to Marius in valour and renown, as we an*
*' superior to the troops which they conunandcd.
*' Better it were to be in action, though like them
" we suffered from it, than to sit still and see the de-
*' struction of our allies.'*

Marius, delighted with these speeches, talked to
them in a soothing way. He told them, " It was
not from any distrust of them, that he sat still ;
but that, by order of certain oracles, he waited
" both for the time and place, which were to ensure
" to him the victorv." For he had with him a
Syrian woman named ?vlartha% who was said to have

^"^ This, as we learn frqm the Go?pel, was a name not unusual
among the women of that country. (Luke x. 38, &c.) Women of
an entliusiastic character were often employed upoa these occasionb.
Hence the Sybils, and Pythonesses of Greece, the reverence showji
to that sex by the Germans (Tac. de Mor. GeriM., viii.) and Gauls,
audas M. Ilicardadds, the chivalrous.§pirit of later ages.*^

4(

UO CAIUS MARIUS.

the gift of propliecy. She was carried about in a
litter vvith great solemnity, and the sacriHces which
he offered were all by her direction. She had for-
merly applied to the senate in this character, and
made an offer of predicting for them fiitnre events,
but they refused to hear her. She then betook her-
self to the women, and gave them a specimen of her
art. She addressed herself more particularly to Ma-'
rius' wife, at whose feet she happened to sit, ^\hen
there was a combat of irladiators, and luckilv told
her which of tliem would prove victorious. Upon
this she sent her to her husband, who received her
with the utmost veneration, and provided her the
litter in which slie was generally carried. Vv'hen she
went to sacrifice, she wore a purple robe^", lined
with the same and buttoned up, and held in her
hand a spear a(h)rned with ribands and garlands'.
Upon viewinsT this pompous scene, many doubted
whether Marius was really persuaded of her pro-
phetic abilities, or only pretended to be so and acted
a part, wliile he sliowed the woman off in this gor-
geous appearance' \

But what Alexander of Mvndos relates, concern-
ins; the vultures, is a real suhiect cf astonishment.
Two of them, it seems, v,cll known by their brasen
collars, always appeared and followed the army, pre-
viously to any great success. The soldiers, when
they took tiiem, had put these collars upon them,
and then let them go. Thenceforth they knew, and
in a manner saluted, the soldiers ; and the soldiers,
whenever these were seen upon their march, rejoiced

3" • Double-dyed,' which was sold (as Pliny, H. N. ix. 39, in-
forms i..s) at ii most exorbitant price*

5* TI;k probability is, that he was at once both a hypocrite and ^'
dupe. He was, certainly, extremely credulous in matters of super-
stition ; and yet the subjoined story of the vultures, &e. like that of
Sertorias' hind at a somewhat lower period, smells strongly of iai-
posturc. Plutarch himself, however, appears to entertain no suspi-
cion upon the occai^ion; tliuugh the historian, whom he quotes as.
bio aixthority, wrote professedly upon tiabulous subjects.*

J

CAIUS MARIUS. Ill

in tlic assurance of performing sometliing extraordi-

naiT«

About this time, there happened many prodigies,
most of them of the usual kind. But intelhgence
was brouglit from Ameria and Tudertum"^', cities
iu Italy, that one night there were seen in the sky-
spears and shields of fire, now waving about and then
ciasliing against each other, in imitation of the pos-
tures and motions of men fighting ; and that, one
party giving way and the other advancing, at last
they all disappeared in the west. Much about the
same period also, there arrived from Pessinus, Bata-
baces, tlie priest of [Cybcle] the Mother of the gods,
with an account that the goddess had declared from
her sanctuary, '* That the llomans were on the eve
" of obtaining a signal and glorious victory." The
senate gave credit to his report, and decreed the
goddess a temple upon account of the victory. But
when Batabaces went out to make the same declara-
tion to the people, Aldus Pompeius one of the tri-
bunes prevented him, calling him an impostor, and
driving him in an ignominious manner from the
Kostrum. VVliat followed, indeed, was the circum-
stance which contributed most to the credit of the
prediction ; for Aulus had scarcely dissolved the as-
sembly and reached his own house, when he was
seized with a violent fever, of which he died within
a v.'eek. This was a fiict universally known and cir-
culated.

Marius still keeping close, the Teutones attempt-
ed to force his entrenchments ; but being received
with a shower of darts from the camp, by which they
lost a number of men, they resolved to march for-
ward, concluding that they might pass the Alps in
full security. They packed up therefore their bag-
gage, and marched by the Roman camp. Then it
was, that the immensity of their numbers appeared

^^ Hod. Amelia and Todi. The appearance here mentioned wa«
nothhig more, probably, than a vivid Auroi'a Borealis. Pessinua,
referred to below, was a city in Plirygia. -

\

WS CAIUS MAHIUS.

in the clearest light, from tlie length o^ their train
and the time which they took up in passing : for it
is said, that though they moved on without intermis-
sion, they were six days in going by Marius' camp.
They apj)roached very near it indeed, and asked the
llomans by way of insult, " Whether they had any
" commands to their wives, for they should shortly
*' be with them ?" As soon as the barbarians had
all passed by, and were in full march, Marius like-
wise decamped and followed ; always takirig care to
keep near them, and choosing strong places at some
small distance for his camp, which he also fortified,
in order that he might pass the nights in safety. Thus
they moved forward, till they came to Aquee Sex-
tiae'^5 whence there is but a short march to the
Alps.

There Marius prepared for battle ; having pitch-
ed upon a place for his camp, which was unexcep-
tionable in point of strength, but aftbrded little water.
By this circumstance, the^^ tell us, he wished to ex-
cite the soldiers to action ; and when many of tliem
complained of thirst, he pointed to a river which ran
close by the enemy's camp, and told them, " That
*' thencethey must purchase water with theif blood.*'
" Why then,'* said they, " do you not immediately
*' lead us thither, before our blood is quite parched
*' up ?" To which he replied, in a softer tone,
" Thither I will lead you ; but, first, let us fortify
" our camp.'*

The soldiers, though with some reluctance, obey-
ed. But the servants of the army, being in great
want of water both for themselves and their cattle,
ran in crowds to the stream, some with pick-axes,
some with hatchets, and some with swords and jave-
lins along with their pitchers ; for they were resolv-
ed to have water, though they were obliged to fight
for it. These were, at first, encountered by only a

J? So called from some warm baths in the neigliboiirhood, and
it's founder J?extius. (See Sappl. Liv. Ixi. 1, :5.) Hod. Aix in

Provence.*

CAIUS MARIUS. H3

s"mall party of the enemy ; for of the mani body some
having bathed were engaged at dinner, and others
were still bathing, the country there abounding in
liot wells. This gave the Romans an opportunity of
cutting off a number of them, while they were in-
dulging themselves in those delicious baths, and
charmed with the sweetness of the place^^ The cry
of these brought others to their assistance, so that it
was now difficult for Marius to restrain the impe-
tuosity of his soldiers, who were in pain for their
servants. Besides, the Ambrones to the number of
thirty thousand, who were the best troops the enemy
had, and who had already defeated Manlius and
Ctrpio, were drawn out and stood to their arms.
Though they had overcharged themselves with eat-
ing, yet the w^ine which they had drunk had given
them fresh spirits ; and they advanced, not in a wild
and disorderly manner, or w^ith a confused and in-
articulate noise, but beating their arms at regular
intervals, and all keeping time with the tune, and
crying out, ' Ambrones! Ambrones^^!' This they
did, either to encourage each other, or to terrify the '
enemy with their name. The Ligurians w^re the
first of the Italians who moved against them ; and
Avhen they heard the enemy cry ' Ambrones,* they
echoed back the word, which was indeed their own
ancient name. Thus the shout was often returned
from one army to the other, before they charged ;
and the officers on both sides joining in it, and striv^

^* A passage, how delightfully amplified by our English Pin-
dar !

The prostrate South to the destroyer yields
Her boasted titles, and her golden fields :
With grim delight the brood of winter view
A brighter day, and heavens of azure hue ;
Scent the new fragrance of the breathing rose,
And quaff the pendent vintage as it grows.

(Gray's Ethical Essay, 57.^
See not. (22.)*

'^ These national cries are not unusual among barbarous and
semi-civilised combatants. The Russians, we are told, in modern,
times rush to the onset, crying out < Owr ! Owr !' *

144 CAIUS MARIUS.

ing which should pronounce the word loudest, in-
creased by this means the courage and impetuosity
of their trooj)s.

The Ambroncs were now obliged to cross the
river, and this broke their order ; so that before tliey
could form again, the Ligurians charged the fore-
most of them, and thus began the battle. The Ro-
mans came to support the Ligurians, and pouring
down from the higher ground pressed the enemy so
hard, that they soon threw them into di-^order. Many
of them jostling each other on the banks of the river
were slain there, and the river itself was filled with
blood and carcases. Those who were got safely
over, not daring to make head, were cut off by the
Romans, as they fled to tb?ir camp"^ and carriages.
There the women meeting them with swords and
axes, and setting up a horrid and hideous cry, iell
iipon the fugitives as well as the pursuers, the former
as traitors and the latter as enemies. Mingling with
the combatants, they laid hold on the Roman shields,
caught at their swords with their naked hands, and
obstinately suffered themselves to be hacked and
h^wed to pieces. Thus the battle is said to have
been fought on the banks of the river, rather by
accident than from any design of the general.

The Romans, after having destroyed so many of
the Ambrones, retired as it grew dark ; but the
camp did not resound with songs of triumph, as might
have been expected upon such success. There were
no entertainments, no mirth in the tents, nor (what
is tlie most agreeable circumstance to the soldier
after victory) any refreshing sleep. The night was
passed in the greatest dread and perplexity. The
camp was without trench or rampart. There re-^.
mained yet many myriads of the barbarians uncon-
quered j and such of the Ambrones as had escaped,

^^ This, Dacicr observes, must have been the camp of the Ten-
tones (and his interpretation is, indeed, deducible from tlie context
below) for their own was on the other side of the river. Yet when^
and how, had the Tcutones effected their passage?^

CAIUS MARIUS. US

mixing with them, a cry was heard all night, not like
the sighs and groans of men, but like the howling and
bellowing of wild beasts mingled with menaces and
lamentations. As this proceeded from such an in-
riUmerable host, the neiglibouring mountains and the
hollow banks of the river returned the sound, and
the horrid din filled the \yh()le plains. The Romans
felt the impressions of terror, and Marius himself
was irritated with dismay by the apprehensions of a
tumultous night-engagement. The barbarians how-
ever did not attack them, either that night or the
next day, but spent the time in consulting how to
dispose and draw themselves up to the best advan-
tage.

In the mean time Marius, observing the sloping
hills and woody hollows that hung over the enemy's
camp, despatched Claudius Marcellus with three
thousand men to lie in ambush there till the fight
was begun, and tlien to fall upon the enemy's rear.
The rest of his troops he ordered to sup, and go to
rest in good time. Next morning as soon as it was
light he drew up before tlie camp, and commanded
the cavalry to march into the plain. The Teutones,
seeing this, could not contain themselves, nor stay
till all the Romans were come down into the plain,
where they might engage them upon equal terms ;
but, arming hastily through thirst of vengeance,
they advanced up to the hill. ]\Iarius sent oihcers
throughout the whole army, with orders that they
should stand still, and wait for the enemy. When
the barbarians were within reach, the Romans were
to throw their javelins, then to draw their sworcis,
and pressing upon them v.ith then- shields push
them with their whole force. For he knew the
place was so slippery, that the enemy's blows could
not have much weight ; neither could they preserve
any close order, where the declivity of the ground
continually changed their poise. At the same time
that . he gave these direction.'^, he was tlie first who
set the exarapic. Tor he was inferior to none in,

Vol. III. ^ L

146 CAIUS MARIUS.

personal agility, and in resolution lie far exceeded
them all.

The llomans by their firmness and united charge
kept the barbarians from ascending the hill, and by
little and little forced them down into the plain.
There the foremost battalions were beginning to
form again, when the utmost confusion discovered
itself in the rear. For Marcellus, who had watched
liis opportunity, as soon as he found (by the noise,
which rose up to the hills \vhere he lay) that the
battle was begun, with great impetuosity and loud
shouts fell upon the enemy's rear, and destroyed a
considerable number of them. The hindmost being
pushed upon those before, the whole army was soon
thrown into disorder. Thus attacked both in front
and rear, they could not stand the double shock,
but forsook their ranks and fled^^ The Romans
pursuing either killed or took prisoners above a
hundred thousand, and having made themselves
masters of their tents, carriages, and baggage, voted
as many of them as were not plundered a present to
Marius. This indeed was a noble recompence, yet
it was thought very inadequate to the generalship,
which he had shown in that imminent danger "^

Other historians give a different account, both of
the disposition of the spoils, and the number of the
slain. From these writers we learn, that the Mas-
silians walled in their vineyards with the bones,
which they found in the field ; and that the rain
which fell the following winter soaking in the moist-
ure of the putrefied bodies, the ground was so en-
riched by it, that it produced the next season a ])ro-
digious crop ''''\ Thus the opinion of Archilochus

J" This victory was gained B. C. 101.

38 And yet there does not apj)ear any thing very extraordinary
in the generalship of Marius upon this occasion. Tlie ignorance
and rashness of the"barbm-ians did every thing in his favour. Tliii
Teutones lost the battle, as Ilauley lost it at Falkirk, by attempt-
ing the hills.

^^ Horrid manure! and yet the same effect is said to have been
produced at Fontcnoi, the year after the celebrated battle fouglit

CAIUS MARIUS. 147

is confirmed, tliat " fields arc fiittened with blood."
It is observed, indeed, that extraordinary rains ge-
nerally fidl after great battles : whether it be, that
some deity chooses to wash and purify the earth
■with water from above "" ; or that the blood and cor-
ruption, by the moist and heavy vapours they emit,
thicken the air, which is generally liable to be
affected and altered by the smallest cause.

After the battle, Marius selected from among the
arms and other spoils such as were elegant and
entire, and hkely to make the most brilliant show in
his triumph. The rest he piled together, and offered
them as a splendid sacrifice to the gods. The army
stood round the pile crowned with laurel; and he
himself arrayed in his purple robe", and girt after
the manner of the Romans, held a lighted torch.
He had just lifted it with both hands tow^ard heaven,
and was going to set fire to the pile, when some
friends were seen galloping up to him. Great si-
lence and expectation followed. On their arrival,
they leaped from their horses and saluted him the
fifth time consul, delivering him letters to the same
purpose. This added considerable joy to the so-
lemnity, which the soldiers expressed by acclama-
tions and by clanking their arms ; and, while the
officers were presenting Marius with new crowns

at that place. Flanders indeed, in genei-al, has been nearly one
continued scene of bloodshed, and is one of the most fertile pro-
vinces in Europe. The inference is shockingly obvious.*

*° Here Dacier remarks, as singular, the notion entertained by
the Heathens, that when the cartli had been polluted by human
crimes, it was to be purged with water iVom heaven: referring
of course to the deluge, of which this might be a traditionary de-
duction.*

■♦' Ipfie Quirinali trabeci, cinctuqrie Gnbino

Insignis. ( Virg. ^n. vii. 612.) (L.)

The custom is traced by Servius to a sacrifice at Gabii, inter-
rupted by an incursion of the enemy; when the inhabitants of
that city tucked up their robes, and drove them back with great
slaughter. The fashion was subsequently retained, as a favourabW
presage, in all sacritices preceding declarations of war.*

L 2

us CAIUS MARIUS.

of laurel, he set fire to the pile, and finisTied tli^
sacrifice.

But whatever it is, that will not permit us to en-
joy any great pros[)erity pure and unmixed, but
chccquers human life v?ith a variety of good and
evil ; whether it be fortune, or some chastising
deity, or necessity and the nature of things; a few
days after this joyful solemnity, the sad intelligence
Avas brought to Marius of what had befallen his
colleffue Catulus : an evi^nt which, like a cloud in
the midst of a calm, brought fresh alarms upon
Home, and threatened her with another tempest,
Catulus, who had the Cimbri to oppose, h.ad come
to a resolution to give up the defence of the heights,
lest he should weaken himself by being obliged to
subdivide his forces into many parts. He therefore
descended quickly from the Alps into Italy, and
posted his army behind tlie river Athesis ^- ; where
lie blocked up the fords with strong fortifications on
both sides, and threw a bridge over it: that so he
might be in a condition to succour the garrisons
beyond it, if the barbarians should make their way
through the narrow passes of the mountains, and
attemnt to storm them. These latter held their
enemies in such contempt, and came on with so
much insolence, that rather to show their strength
and their courage than out of any necessity, they
exposed themselves naked to the show^ers of snow ;
and, having pushed through the ice and the deep
drifts to the tops of the mountains, tliey put their
broad shields under them and so slid down, in spite
.of the broken rocks and vast shppery descents.

When they had encamped near tiie river, and
taken a view of the channel, they determined to
fiil it up. They then tore up the neighbouring
hills like the giants of old, pulled up trees by the
roots, broke off massy rocks, and rolled in huge

*» [{o(L the Adige;

CAIUS MARIUS. U>>

h-eaps of earth. Tliese were to dam the current.
Other biiliky materials were thrown in, to lorce away
the bridge ; and these, being carried down tlie
stream with great violence, beat against the timber
and sliook the foundation. At the sight of this, the
Iloman soldiers were struck with terror, and num-
l>ers of them quitted the camp and drew back.
Upon this occasion Catulus, like an able and excel-
lent general, evinced that he preferred the glory of
his fellow-citizens to his own. For when he found
that his men could not be persuaded to keep their,
post, but were basely deserting it, he ordered his
eagle to be plucked up, and running to the foremost
of the f iigitives placed himself at their head ; choosing
tliat the disgrace should rather fall upon himself
than his country, and that his soldiers should not
seem to fly but to follow their general.

The barbarians now assaulted and took the for-
tress on the other side of the Athesis ; but admiring
the bravery of the garrison, who had behaved in a
manner suitable to the glory of Rome, they dis-
missed them upon certain conditions, having first
made them take an oath upon a brasen bull * . In
the battle which ensuocl, this bull was found among
the spoils, and is said to have been carried to Ca-
tulus' house as the first-fruits of the victory. The
country being then without defence, the Cimbri
spread themselves over it, and committed great de-
predations.

Upon this, Marius was recalled. On his return
every ^one expected that he would have a triumph,
and the senate readily passed a decree for that pur-
pose. He declined it, however j whether it v»ere
that he was unwilling to deprive his men, who had
shared in the danger, of their part of the honour ;
or that, to cheer the people in the present extre-
mity, he chose to deposit the glory of his former

*^ ^I. Ricard has amassed many particulars relative to the bull-
worship of the Gauls, Chilperic, &e. <S:c. : but they would have
Jiltle interest for an English reader,*

ISQ CAIUS MARIUS.

achievements with the fortune of Rome, in order
to have it restored to liim witli interest upon his^
next success. Having made an oration suitai)le to
the time, he went to join Catuhis, who was much
encouraged by his coming. He then sent for his
army out of Gaul, and upon ii's arrival crossed the
Po, with a design to keep the barbarians from pene-
trating into the interior parts of Italy. But they
deferred the combat, pretending that they expected
the Teutones, and wondered at their delay ; either
being really ignorant of their fate, or choosing to
appear so. For they punished those, who brought
them an account of it, with stripes ; and sent to
ask Marius for lands and cities, sufficient both for
themselves and for their brethren. When Marius
inquired of the embassadors, " Who their brethren
" were ?'* they told him, " The Teutones." The
assembly burst into laughter, and Marius tauntingly
replied, " Don't trouble yourselves about your bre-
" thren ; for they have land enough of our giving,
" and they shall have it for ever." The embassadors
perceiving the irony scurrilously assured him in
reply, " That the Cimbri would chastise him imme-
" diately, and the Teutones when they came up."
And they are not far off," said Marius ; " it will
be verv unkind in you, therefore, to 2:0 awav
without saluting your brethren." At the same
time, he ordered the kings of the Teutones to be
brougiit out, loaded as they were with chains : for
they had been taken by tlie Sequani, as they weie
endeavouring to escape across the Alps.

As soon as the embassadors had acquainted the
Cimbri with what had passed, they marched directly
against I\Iarius, v/ho at that time lay still and kept
within his trenches. It is reported, that upon this
occasion he contrived a new form for the javelins.
Till then they had been accustomed to fasten the
shaft to the iron head with two iron pins. But
Marius now, letting one of them remain as it was,
Juid the other taken out and a weak wooden peg put

CAIUS MARIUS. 151

in it's place. By this contrivance he intended that,
when the javelin stuck in the enemy's sliield, it
shoukl not stand right out ; but that, the wooden
}3eg breaking and the iron pin bending, the shaft of
the weapon should drag upon the ground, while the
point stuck fast in the sliield.

Boiorix, king of the Cimbri, came now with a
small party of horse to the Roman camp, and chal-
lenged Marius to appoint the time and place where
they should meet, and decide by arms to whom the
country should belong. Marius answered, '' That
*' the Romans never consulted their enemies when
" to fight ; but that he was nevertheless willing to
" indulge the Cimbri in this respect." Accord-
ingly, they agreed to fight the third day afterward ;
and that the plain of Vercellae should be the field
of battle, Avhich was convenient for the Roman ca-
valry to act in, and for the barbarians to display
their numbers.

Both parties kept their day, and drew up their
forces over-against each other. Catulus had under
his command twenty thousand three hundred, and
Marius thirty-two thousand men. The latter were
stationed in the two wings, and Catulus was in the
centre. Sylla, who was present in the battle, gives
us the above account : and it is reported that Marius
made this disposition, in hopes of breaking the Cim-
bric battalions with the wings onlv, and securino- to
hmiself and his soldiers the honour of the victory,
before Catulus could have an opportunity of coming
up to the charge ; it being usual, in a large front,
for the wings to advance before the main body.
This is confirmed by Catulus' defence of his own
behaviour, in which he insisted much on Marius*
malignant designs against him.

The Cimbric infantry marched out of their trenches
without noise, and formed so as to have their flanks
equal to their front ; each side of the square ex-
tending to thirty finlongs. Their cavalry, to the
number of fifteen thousand, issued forth in great

152 CAIUS MARIUS.

splendour. Their helmets represented the heads
and open jaws of strang(^ and fiighti'ul wild beasts ;
upon these were fixed high plumes, which made the
men appear taller. Their breast-; Jates were of po-
lished iron, and their shields were white and glitter-
ing. Each man had two-edged dartSj to tight with
at a distance ; and, vvhen they came hand to hand,
they used broad and heavy swords. In this engage-
ment, they did not tall chrectly upon the front of the
Romans, but wheeling to the right endeavoured by
little and little to enclose the enemy between them
and their infantry, who were posted on the left.
The Roman generals perceived the manijeuvre, but
were unable to restrain their own men ; one of
whom happening to cry out that the enemy fled, they
all set oft' upon the pursuit. In the mean time, the
barbarian foot came on like a vast sea. Marius,
having purified his hands, lifted them toward heaven,
and vowed a hecatomb to the gods ; and Catulus,
in the same posture, promised to consecrate a tem-
ple to the fortune of that day"^^. As Marius was sa-
crificing upon this occasion, it is said that the en-
trails were no sooner shovrn to him, than he cried
. out with a loud voice, " The victory is mine." U-
AVhcn the battle however was joined, an accident
happened, wliich (as Sylla states ^^) appeared in-
tended by heaven to humble Marius. A prodigious
dust it seems arose, whicii hid both armies, ^larius,
moving hrst to the charge, had the misfortune to
miss the enemy ; and, lia\ ing passed by their army,
wandered about with his troops a long time in the
field. In the mean while, the good fortune of Ca-

"^ In conformity to tin*?, as Dacier observes, it was dedicated,
* Fortunae IIujus Die!.' (Plin. H. N. xxxiv. 8.) The account
of the battle which foll( ws, and of its consequences, is horridly pic-
turesque.*

"s It is a great niis'ortune that Catulus' History of his Consul-
ship, commended by C'.'cero (15rut. xxxv.) as resembling Xenophon
in it's stile, and a still !.'reater one, that Sylla's Comimntaries are
no longer extant. (T>.) The latter have been alluded to above^
aud are again iioticcd in our author's Lives of Sylla and Lucullus.*

CAIUS MARIUS. 155

tuliis directed the enemy to him, and it was to the lot
of his legions (in which, Sylla tells us, he himself
fought) that the chief conflict fell. The heatof tlio
weather, and the sun \vhich shone full in the faces
of tiie Cimbri, fought for the Romans. Those bar-
barians, being bred in shady and frozen countries,
could bear the severest cold, but were not proof
against heat. Their bodies soon ran down with
sweat ; they drew their breath with difficulty, and
were forced to hold up their shields to screen their
faces. The battle indeed was Ibught not long after
the summer-solstice, and the Romans celebrate a
festival in commemoration of it on tiie third day of'
the calends of August, then called Sextilis. The
dust likewise, which hid the enemy, lielped to en-
courage the Romans : for as they could have no
distinct view of the vast numbers of their antago-
nists, they ran to the charge, and were involved in
close engagement, before the sight of such multi-
tudes could give them any impressions of terror.
Besides, the Romans were so strengthened by labour
and exercise, that not one of them was observed to
sweat or be out of breath, notwithstanding the sufFo-
catind; heat and violence of the encounter. So Ca-
tulus himself is said to have written, in commenda-
tion of his soldiers.

The greatest and best part of the enemy's troops
were cut to pieces upon the spot ; those who fought
in the front fastened themselves together, by long
cords run through their belts ^'^, to prevent their
ranks from being broken. The Romans drove back
the fugitives to their camp, where they found the
most shocking spe(5tacle. The women, standing in
mourning by their carriages, killed those that fled ;
some their husbands, others their brothers, ajid
others their fathers. They strangled their little
children with their own hands, and threw them

'"5 This was an absurd contrivance to keep their ranks ; but they
intended, also, to have bound their prisoners with the cords after
the battle.

15i CAIUS MARIUS.

under the wlicels and the horses* red. Last of all,
they killed themselves. They tell us of one, that
"vvas seen slung from the top of a waggon, with a
child hansririq; at each heel. The men for want of
trees tied themselves by the neck, some to the horns
of the oxen, others to their legs, and then pricked
them on ; that, by the starting of the beasts, they
Blight be strangled or trodden to pieces. - Yet, though
they were thus industrious to destroy themselves,
above sixty thousand were taken prisoners, and the
killed were said to have been twice that number.

Marius' soldiers plundered the baggage ; but the
other spoils with the- ensigns aild trumpets, we are
informed, were brought to Catulus' camp ; and he
availed himself chieliy of this, as a proof that the
victory was his. A hot dispute, it seems, arose
between his troops and those of Marius, which had
the better claim ; and the embassadors from Parma,
who happened to be present, were chosen arbitra-
tors. Catulus' soldiers led them to the field of
battle to see the dead, and clearly proved that they
had been killed by their javelins, because Catulus
had taken care to have the shafts inscribed with his
name. Nevertheless, the whole honour of the day
was ascribed to Marius, on account of his former
victory and his present authority. Nay, such was
the applause of the populace, that they called him
' The Tiiiid Founder of Home,* as having rescued
her li'om a danscer not less dreadful than that before
incurred from the Ciauls^'. In their festive suppers
at home, witli their wives and children, they offered
libations to him along with the gods '*", and would
have conferred upon him exclusively the honour of
both triumphs. But this he declined, and shared it
with Catulus, being desirous to evince his modera-
tion after such extraordinary instances of success.
Or perhaps he was afraid of some opposition from

■*' In the time of Camillus.--

*s For similar instances of profane devotion, see Ilor. Od. IV, v.,
end XV,*

CAIUS MARIUS. i53

Ciitulus' soldiers, who might not have suffered him
to trill mj)h, if he had deprived tlieir general of his
portion of the compliment.

In this manner his fifth consulate was passed.
And now he aspired to a sixth, with more ardour
than any man liad ever shown for his first. He
courted the people, and endeavoured to ingratiate
himself with the meanest of them by such servile
? condescensions, as were not only unsuitable to his
i dignity, but even contrary to his disposition; as-
[■ suming an air of gentleness and complaisance, for
j whicli natiu'C never intended him. It is said that,
' in civil aliairs and amidst the tumultuous proceed-
1 ings of tlic populace, his ambition had given him an
\ uncommon timidity. The intrepid firmness which
I he discovered in battle forsook him in the assemblies
i of the people, and the least brcatli of praise or cen-
sure disconcerted him in his address. Yet we are
told, that when he had ^ranted the freedom of the
citv to a thousand Camerians, who had distinguished
I themselves by their behaviour in the wars, and this
I proceeding was arraigned as contrary to law, he
said, " The law spoke too softly to be heard amidst
*' the din of arms '^." The noise however which he
most dreaded, and which chiefly robbed him of his
presence of mind, was that of popular assemblies.
In war lie easilv obtained the hiHiest rank, because
Rome could not do without him ; but, in the ad-
i uTinistration, he was sometimes in danger of losing
j the honours which he solicited. In these cases ho
I had recourse to the partiality of the multitude, and
j never scrupled to make his honesty subservient to his
i ambition.

I Bv sucii means, he rendered himself obnoxious to
I all t'le })atriciaus. But he was most afraid of Me-
j telhis, wliom he had treated with ingratitude. Be-
I sidcS;, Metcllus, from a spirit of true virtue, was

''^ The Latins had an adage, Lilrr arma silent leges.

(Cic. Orat- pro. Milon., iv.)

355 CAIUS MARIUS.

naturally an enemy to those who endeavoured to
gain the mob by dishonourable arts, and directed all
their measures to that object. Marius, therefore,
■was very desirous to remo\'e him out of the way.
For this purpose he associated himself with Glaucias
and Saturninus, two of the most daring and turbu-
lent fellows in Rome, who had the indic^ent and se-
ditious part of the populace at their command. By
their assistance, he got several laws enacted ; and
' having distributed many of his soldiers in the as-
semblies, his fliction prevailed, and jNletellus was
overborne.

Rutilius''°, in other respects a man of credit and
veracity, but particularly prejudiced against Marius,
informs us that he obtained his sixth consulate by
large sums which he distributed among the tribes ;
and, having thrown out Metellus by dint of money,
prevailed with them to elect Valerius Flaccus, ratlier
his servant than his collegue. The people had never
bestowed so many consulates upon any one man,
except Valerius Corvinus^\ And there was this
difference, that between the first and sixth consulate
of Corvinus elapsed an interval of Ibrty-five years;
whereas Marius, after his first, was carried through
five more in succession by a single tide of fortune.

In the last of these, he exposed himself to much

5° P. Rutilius Rufus was consul the year before the second con-
sulsliip of Marius. He wrote his own Life in Latin, and a Roman
History in (}reek. Cicero mentions liim, upon several occasions,
as a man of honour and probity. He was exiled in consequence
of having defended the Asiatic provincials from the exactions of
the Roman farmers-general, six or seven years after this sixth con-
sulship of Marius. Sylla would have re-called him, hut he re-
fused to return. (L.) Cicero says, he died of grief in conseqvience
cf his brotlicr's having been refused tlie consulsiiip. ( Brut. xxix.
XXX., De Orat. i. 53., Tusc. iv. 18.)*

^' Valerius Corvinus was first elected consul, when he was only
twenty-three years of age, A. U. C. 106 ; and for the sixth time,
A.U. C. 452. (L.) About this latter date however, and conse-
quently Plutarch's accuracy, as also wliether Corvinus' dictatorship
prior to his Isst consulate have not been confounded with it, theFC
exist some doubts."-

(C
(£
it

CAIUS MAMUS, 157

hatred by abetting Saturninus in all his crimes ; par-
ticularly in his miirther of Nonius, whom he slew
because he was h.is competitor for the tribuneship.
SaturninuSjOnhis appointment to this office, proposed
an Agrarian law, in which there was a clause ex-
pressly providing, " That the senate should come
and swear in full assembly to confirm whatever the
people should decree, and not oppose them in any
thing"." Marius in the senate pretended to de-
clare against this clause, asserting tliat " He would
" never take such an oath, and that he beheved no
" wise man would. For even supposing the law not
" a pernicious one, it would be a disgrace to the
senate to be compelled to sanction a measure,
when they ought only to be influenced by choice
or persuasion."
- These, however, vv-ere not his real sentiments ;
but he was laying a snare for Metellus, which he
should not be able to escape. As for himself, he
judged that tlie better part of virtue and prudence
consisted in dissimulation, and therefore made but
small account of his declaration in the senate. At
the same time, knov/ing Metellus to be a man of
immoveable firmness, who with Pindar esteemed

Truth the spring of heroic. virtue*,

he hoped, by refusing the oath himself, to induce
him to refuse it also ; which would infallibly expose
him to the implacable resentment of tlic people. The
event answered his expectation. Upon Metellus de-
claring that he would not take the oath, the senate

5^ Upon this subject tliere is an admirable pa^sasze ia Cic. cle
Orat. i. 52, ,'^3.* . ^ '

* Piud. Fragm. by Schneider, p. 99.

* Tliese words, sars Parr, very truly (in a passage, wl)ere for
Marcellus read Metellus), might have been applied by Mr. Fyx X.Q
Iris ownpeliticfil engagen\ep.ts.' (Character, ii. .530.) '

158 CAIUS MARIUS.

was (llsmisscd. A few days afterward, SaturnJnu<t
summoned the fathers to appear in the Forum, and
swear to tliat article ; and Mariiis made hi:? appear-
ance among tlie rest. A profound silence ensued,
and all eyes were fixed upon him ; wheu bidding a
Ions; farewell to the fine thini^^s which he had uttered
in liic senate, he told the audience, " That he was
" not so stifi-necked, as to pretend in one moment
" to j)rejadge a matter of s;ich importance ; and
^ therefore he would take the oath, and keep the
*' law too, provided it was a law/' This proviso he
added, merely to give a colour to his impudence j
and he was sworn immediately^'.

The people, charmed with his compliance, ex-
pressed their sense of it by loud acclamations; while
the natricians were abashed, and held his double-
dealing in the highest detestation. Intimidated
however by the people, they successively took the
oath, till it came to Metellus. But Metellus, though
his friends exiiorted and entreated him to comply,
rather than expose himself to the dreadful penalties
which Saturninus liad provided for nonjurors^ did not
shrink from the dignity of his resolution, or take
the oath. That illustrious man abode by his princi-
ples : he was ready to suffer the greatest calamities,
^•at!icr than do a dishonourable thing ; and as he
quitted the Forum, he said to those about him, " To
do a bad action is base : to do a good one, which
involves you in no danger, is nothing more than
common : but it is the })roperty of a virtuous man
to do good ones, though he risks every thing by
" doing them."

iSatuniinus then caused a decree to be made, tliat

55 Thus Marius iniulc tlie first step toward the rain of the Roman
cor.stitutioiT, which happened not h)n;.^ afterward. If the senate
were to swear to cf-nirtr.n whatever the people should decree, \vl;e-
>^^ ther bad or Jjood, the}' ceased to have a weiglit in the scale, and

^ the a;()vcr!uncnt bccnnie a democracy. And, as tlie people cor-

t ruplly began to take tlie highest price offered them, absolute power

advanced with hasty strides. A nation indeed, which lias no prin-
ciple of public virtue left, is not fit to be governed by any other, ,

\

CAIUS MARIUS. 159

the consuls should declare Metellus a person inter-
dicted the use of fire and water'"*, whom no man
shoidd admit into his house. And the meanest of
the people, adhering to that party, were ready even
,. to assassinate him. The nobility, now anxious ibr
Metellus, ranged themselves on his side ; but he
would suffer no sedition upon his account. Instead
of that, he adopted a prudent measure, which was
to leave the city. " For (said he) either matters
" will take a better turn, and the people will in that
" case repent, and recal me ; or, if they remain the
*' same, it will be best to be at a distance from
" Rome." AVhat regard and what honours were paid
to Metellus during his banishment, and how he spent
his time at llhodes in the study of philosophy, it will
be more convenient to mention in his Life^\

JVIarius was so highly obliged to Saturninus for
this last piece of service, that he was forced to connive
at him, though he now indulged in every act of inso-
lence and outrage. He did not consider that he thus
gave the reins to a destroying fury, v/ho was making
his way through blood to absolute power and the sub-
version of the state. All the while Marius v/as de-
sirous to keep fiir with the nobility ; and at the same
time to retain the good graces of the people ; and
this led him to act a part, than whicii nothing can
be conceived more ungenerous or deceitful. One
night, some of the first men in the state came to his
house, and pressed him to declare against Satur-
ninus ; but at tliat very time he, unknown* to tiiem,

5" This aqu<T et ignis inierdictio was a virtual hanisliment from
Italy. The proscribed citizen was never forcibly expelled, but his
goods were confiscated, and he was forbidden "the use of tlie two ■
elements considered as essential to existence. The two ibrnis of
banishment called Deporlalio (in which the criminal, deprived of
liis whole property, was contined to some certain place for \\[\') and
Relegatio, in whitth liis fortune remained untouched, and Jiis cxiie ^

was son)etimes only temporary, were introduced !)y Augustus.* \

^^ Whether or not Plutarch ever rcdeesned this pledge, is uncer- "i

tain. It is not mentioned in the insperfect Catidogue of his works /

drawn up by his son Laniprias, nor anv where quoted bv other
writers. *

260 CAIUS MARIUS.

let in Saturn inns at anotlier door. He then, ]>rc-
tending a disorder in his bowels, went from one
party to the other ; and tliis trick he played several
times over, still exasperating each against the other.
At last the senate and the equestrian order rose in a
body, and expressed their indignation in such strong
terms, that he was obliged to send a party of soldiers
into the Forum to suppress the sedition. Saturninus,
Glaucias, and the rest of the cabal tied into the Ca-
pitol. There they were besieged, and at last forced to
yield for want of water, the pipes being cut off. When
they could hold i^ut no longer, they called for Ma-
rius, and surrendered themselves to him upon the
public faith. He tried every art to save them, but
nothing would avail : they no sooner came down into
the Forum, than they were all put to the sword^^ He
was now become equally odious both to the nobility
and the commons, so tliat when the time for the elec-
tion of censors came on, contrary to expectation
he declined offering himself, and permitted others
of less note to be chosen. But, though it was his
fear of a repulse which made him sit still, he gave
it another colour ; pretending that he did not choose
to render himself obnoxious to the people, by a se-
vere inspection into their lives and manners.

After this, an edict was proposed for tlie recal" of
Metellus. Marius opposed it with all his power ;
but finding his endeavours fruitless, he gave up the
point, and the people passed tlie bill with pleasiu-e.
Unable to bear the sight of Metellus, lie contrived
to take a voyage to Cappadocia and Galatia, under
pretence of offering some sacrifices, which he had
vovv'cd to the Mother of the j^ods. But he had ano-
ther reason, which was not known to the people.
Incapable of making any figure in peace, and un-
versed in political knowledge, he saw that all his
greatness arose from war, and that in a state of in-

'" The people, as Floras informs lis, despatched tliem with cKibs
and st;>;i'j«. (iii; I'J.)

CAIUS MARILTS. - 161

action it's lustre bof^an to fade. He, therefore, stu-
died to raise new commotions. If he could but rouse
and stir up the Asiatic kings, particularly Mithridates
who seemed most inclined to quarrel, he hoped soon
to be appointed c^eneral against him, and to have an
opportunity of tilling the city with new triumphs, as
well as of enriching his own house with the spoils of
Pontus and the wealth of it's monarch. For this
reason, though Mithridates treated him in tlie poli-
test and most respectful manner, he was not in the
least molliiied, but addressed him in the following
terms : " Your business, Mithridates, is either to
render yourself more powerful than the Romans,
or to submit quietly to their commands." The
king was perfectly amazed. He' had often heard of
the liberty of speech, which prevailed among the
Romans, but this was the first time that he had ex-
perienced it.

On his return to Rome, he built a house near the
Forum, either (as he stated) for the convenience of
those who wished to w'ait upon him, or because he
hoped to have a more numerous concourse of people
at his gates. In this, however, he was mistaken.
He had not those graces of conversation, that en-
gaging address, of which others were masters; and
therefore, like a mere implement of war, he was
neglected in time of peace. At the preference given
to others, however, he was not so much concerned,
but Sylla's popularity afflicted him exceedingly ; be-
cause Sylla was rising by means of the envy, which
the patricians bore to himself, and had made his first
step to the administration by a quarrel with him.
But when Bocchus king of Numklia, now declared
an ally of the Romans, erected in the Capitol some
figures of Victory adorned with trophies, and placed
by their side a set of golden statues, which repre-
sented him delivering Jugurtha into the hands of J
Sylla, Marius was almost distracted. He considered j
this as an act, by which Sylla sought to rob him of
the glory of his achievements, and prepared to d«-

VOL. III. M

t

162 CAIUS MARIUS.

niolisli these monuments by force. Sjlla, upon his
part, as strenuously opposed him.

This sedition was just upon llie point of flaminpc
out, when the War of the AIHes intervened'", and
put a stop to it. The most fierce and po])ulous na-
tions of Italy conspired against Rome, and luid nearly
subverted her empire. Their strength consisted not
only in the weapons and valour of their soldiers, but
in the courage and capacity of their generals, who
were in no respect inferior to those of Rome.

This war,so remarkableforthe number of it's battles
and the variety of fortune by which it was characterised,
added as much to Sylla's reputation as it subtracted
from that of Marius. The latter seemed slow in his
attacks, as well as dilatory in liis resolutions : v^'he-
ther it were, that age had quenched his martial heat
and vigour, for he v/as now above sixty-five years
old ; or that (as he himself said) his nerves being
weak and his body unwieldy, he underwent the fa-
tigues of war, which were in fact above his strengtit,
merely upon a point of honour. He beat the enemy
however in a considerable battle, in which he killed
at least six thousand of them ; and, throughout tlie
whole, he took care to give them no advantage over
him. Nay, he suffered them to draw a line about
him, to ridicule and challenge him to the combat,
without being in the least exasperated by it. It is
reported that when Pompedius^" Silo, an officer of
the highest eminence and authority among the allies,
said to him, " If you are a great general, IMarius,
" come down and fight us j" he answered, " If you
" are a great general. Silo, make me come down
" and figlit." At another time, when the cnemv
<rave the Romans a crood oi^nortunity of attacking
them, and they were afraid to embrace it ; after
both parties had retired, he called his soldiers toge-

S' This was also called the Social orMarsIan vrar, froin the Marsians
havins; been t!ie first to revolt. It broke out B.C. 91, aud was
tt-rmiuated by Sylla, B. C. 88. (Ftor. lii. 18.)

^s Not UB;;Xio<,y as in the text. C^/cll. Paterc. ii, VS.)*

CAIUS MARIUS. 1(JS

ther and made this short speech to them, " I know
**• not whether of the two to call t\\e greater cow-
" aids, tlie enemy or yourselves : for neither dare
" they face your backs, nor you theirs." At lastj
pretending to be incai)acitated for the service by his
infirmities, he laid down the command.

Yet when the war with the confederates drew to
an end, and several applications were made through
the popular orators for the command against Mithri-
dates, the tribune Sulpitius a bold and daring man,
contrary to all expectation, brought forth Marius
and nominated him proconsul and general in the
Mitlu'idatic war. The people, upon this, were di-
vided ; some accepting Marius, wlnle others called
tor Svila, and bade Marius go to the warm baths of
Bii'iic for cure, since by his own confession he was
quite worn out v/ith age and defluxions. Marius,
it seems, had a fine villa at Misenum^^, more luxu-
riously and eiteii,iinately furnished than became a
man, who had been at the head of so many armies,
and had directed so many campaigns. This house
Cornelia is said to have purchased for seventy-five
thousand drachmas ; yet not long afterward, Lucius
Lucullus ii'ave for it five hundred thousand two
liundred : to such a height did expense and luxury
rise in the course of a few years.

Marius however, affecting to shake off the infir-
mities of age, went every day into the Campus
Martins ; where he took the most robust exercises
aloui^: with the voun^^ men, and showed himself nim-
!)le in his arms and active on horseback, though his
years had now made him heavy and corpulent. Some
were pleased with this, and went to witness the spi-
rit which he exerted in these exercises. But the
more sensible soi t of people, v/hen they beheld its
could not help pitying the avarice and ambition of o
person who, though raised from poverty to opulence

59 A promontory in Campania, so named (according to Vire. .^n,
vi. K'!J.) froia one of ^^neas' companions, wJio was buried there*

M 2

VI

p

1

1

164. CAIUS MAIIIUS.

and from the meanest condition to greatness, kne\r
not how to set bounds to his good fortune. It
shocked them to think that this man, instead of be-
ing happy in the admiration wliich he had gained,
and enjoying liis present possessions in peace, as if
he were in want of all things, was going at so ad-
vanced an age and after so many honours and tri-
umphs to Cappadocia and the Euxine sea, to fight
with Archelaus and Neoptolcmus, the lieutenants of
Mithridates. For the reason which Marius assigned
for this step, namely that he wished to train up his
son to war under his own eye, was perfectly ridicu-
lous.

The commonwealth had been sickly for some time,
and her disorder now came to a crisis. Marius had
found a fit instrument for her ruin in the audacity of
Sulpitius, a man who in most respects admired and
imitated Saturninus, but who considered him as hav-
ing been too timid and dilatory in his proceedings.
Determined himself to commit no such error, he got
six hundred men of the equestrian order about him
as his guard, whom he called his 'Anti-senate.*

One day, while the consuls were holding an as-
sembly of the people ''^, Sulpitius came upon them
with his assassins. The consuls immediately fled,
but he seized the son of one of them, and killed him
on the spot. Sylla [the other consul] was pursued,
but escaped into the house of Marius, which nobody
tiiought of; and when the pursuers were gone by, it
is said that Marius himself let him out at a back-gate,
whence he got safe to the camp. But Sylla, in his
Commentaries, denies that he fled to Marius' house.
He says, that he was taken thither to debate about
certain edicts, which they wished him to pass against
his will ; that he was surrounded with drawn swords,
and carried forcibly to that house; and that he was
thence at last remo\ed to the Forum, where he wa*

^° Sylla and Pompeius Rufus were Consuls. It \ras the son of
fljc latter who was slain.

CAIUS MARIUS. 16S

compelled to revoke the order of vacation^', which
had been issued by him and his collegue.

Sulpitius, now carrying all before him, decreed the
command of the army to Marius; and Marius, pre-
paring for his march, sent two tribunes to Sylla, with
orders that lie should deliver up to them the army.
But Sylla, stimulating the indignation of his soldiers,
led them, to the number of thirty thousand foot and
five thousand horse, directly against Rome. The
tribunes, whom Marius had sent to demand the army
of Sylla, they seized and cut to pieces. Marius on
the other hand put to deatli many of Sylla's friends
in Home, and proclaimed liberty to all slaves that
would take up arms in his behalf. But there were
only three, we are told, who accepted the offer. He
could therefore, make but a slight resistance ; Sylla
soon entered the city, and Marius was forced to fly
for his life.

As soon as he quitted Rome, he was abandoned
by those who had accompanied him. They all dis-
persed themselves, as they could; and, night coming
on, he retired to a small house which he had near
Rome called Salonium. Thence he sent his son to
some neighbouring farms of his father-in-law Mutius,
to provide necessaries. He did not, however, wait
for his return ; but went down to Ostia, where a
friend of his called Numerius had prepared him a ship,
and there embarked, having with him only Granius,
his wife's son bv a former husband.

AVhen vounc: Marius had reached his grandfather's
estate, he hastened to coUectsuch things as he wanted,
and to pack them up. But before he had finished, he
was overtaken by day-light, and neaily discovered
by the enemy; for a party of horse had hurried thither,
suspecting that Marius might be lurking in that neigh-
bourhood. The bailiff", however, perceived them in
time, and hid the young man in a cart-load of beans.

''* If that order had not been revoked, no puhh'c business could
have been done; consequently, Miirius could not have been ap-
pointed to the command agaiu!»t Mithridates.

166 CAIUS MAIIIUS.

He then yoked Ills team, and driving by the party of
horsemen passed onward to Rome. Thus young
Marius was conveyed to his wife, who supphed him
with some necessaries; and as soon as it grew dark
he made for the sea, where findi;ig a ship ready to
sail for Africa he went on board, and passed over to
that country.

In the mean time, his father, with a favourable
gale, was coasting Italy. B(3ing afraid however of
tailing into the hands of Geminius a leading man in
Tarracina, who was his professed enemy, he directed
the mariners to keep clear of that place. The mari-
ners w^ere anxious to oblige him ; but the wind shift-
ing on a sudden and blov/ing hard from sea, they
were afraid they should not be able to weather the
storm. Besides, Marius was indisposed and sea-sick;
thev determined therefore to make land, and with
great difficulty got to Circa?um. There, finding the
tempest increase and their provisions beginning to
tail, they went on sliore, and wandered up and down
they knew not whither. Such is the method taken
by persons in deep perplexity : they shun the present
as the greatest evil, and seek for hope in the dark
events of futurity. The land was tlieir enemy, the
sea was the same : it was dano-erous to meet with
men ; it was dangerous also not to meet with them,
because of their extreme want of provisions. In the
evening they passed a few herdsmen, who liad nothing
to give them; but happening to know Marius, they
desired he would immediately quit those parts, be-
cause they had just seen a number of horse upon that
very spot, riding about in quest of him. He was now
involved in all kinds of distress, and his attendants
were ready to abandon him through hunger. In this
exigency he turned out of the road, and threw him-
self into a thick wood, where he ]>asscd the night in
great anxiety. Next day, sinking through want of
refreshment, and willing to make use of the little
strength he had before it quite forsook him, he moved
down to the sea-side. As he went, he encouraged

CAIUS MAllIUS. 1G7

his companions not to desert him, and earnestly en-
treated them to await the accomplishment of his
last hope, for whicli upon the credit of some old
])rophecies he still reserved himself He told them,
that when he was very young and lived in the coun-
try, an eagle's nest fell into his lap with seven young
ones in it. His parents, surprised at the sight, ap-
plied to the soothsayer ; who answered, " That their
" son would be the most illustrious of men, and that
" he would seven times attain the highest office and
" authority in his country.'*

According to some writers, this had actually hap-
pened to Marius; others are of opinion, that the per-
sons who were then about him, and heard him relate
it upon that as well as several other occasions during
his exile, gave credit to it and committed it to writing,
thouG:h nothina: could be more fabulous. For an eao;le
has not more than tv/o young ones at a time. Nay,
even Musa?us is accused of a false assertion, when
he sayS;,

Three eggs she lays, two covers, hatches one ^*.

However this may be, it is agreed on all hands that
Marius, during his banishment and in the greatest
extremities, frequently said, " He should certainly
" come to a seventh consulship."

They were now not above two miles and a half
from the city of Minturna? ^'^ when they espied at a
considerable distance a troop of horse making toward
them, and at the same time happened to see two barks
sailing near tliem. They ran down therefore to the
sea, with all their remaining speed and strength; and,
when they had reached it, plunged in and swam to-

^^ Pliny likewise gives her three eggs, and sometimes even three
eaglets : and Aristotle before him had quoted this very line of Musaeus,
without arraigning it's truth. (Hist. Anim. vi. 6.)*

^3 Minturnae was a city of Cauipania, near the mouth of the Liris,
Hod. II Garigliano.

..^naria, mentioned b&low, is the modern isle of Ischia.*

168 CAIUS MARIUS.

\vaiTl the ships. Graniiis gained one of them, and
passed over to the island opposite called ^naria. As
for Marius, who was very heavy and unwieldy, he
was sustained with much difficulty by two servants
above the water, and lifted into the other ship. The
party of horse had by this time readied the sea-side,
whence they called to the ship's crew either to put
ashore immediately, or else to throw Marius over-
board, and then they might go where they pleased.
Marius with tears implored them to save him ; and
the m.asters of the vessel, after consulting together
a few moments, in which they changed their opinions
several times, resolved to make answer, " That they
" would not deliver up Marius." Upon this, the soldiers
rode off in a great rage; and the sailors, soon re-
nouncing their resolution, made for land. They cast
anchor in the mouth of the river Liris, where it over-
flows and forms a marsh; and advised Marius, who
was much harassed, to go and refresh himself on shore
till they could get a better wind. This they said
would happen at a certain hour, when the breeze
from the sea would fall, and that from the marshes
rise. Marius believing them, they helped him ashore ;
and he seated himself on the grass, little thinking of
what was about to befal him. For the crew imme-
diately went on board again, weighed anchor, and
sailed away; thinking it neither honourable to deliver
lip Marius, nor safe to protect him.

Thus deserted by all the world, he sat a good while
upon the shore in silent stupefaction. At length,
recovering himself with much difficulty, he rose
and walked in a disconsolate manner through those
wild and devious places ; till by scrambling over deep
bogs, and ditches full of water and mud, he came to
the cottage of an old man who worked in the fens.
He immediately threw himself at his feet, and begged
him " To save and shelter a man who, if he escaped
" the present danger, would reward him far beyond
*' his hopes." The cottager, whether he knew him

CAIUS MARIUS. 169

before, or wns then moved with his venerable aspect,
told him " His hut wotdd be sufficient, if he wished
" only to repose himself; but, if he was wandering
" about to elude the search of his enemies, he would
'•' hide him in a place mucli safer and more retired.'*
Marius desiring him to do so, the poor man took him
into the fens, and bade him cower down in a hollow
place near the river; where he laid upon him a quan-
tity of reeds, and other liglit things, that would cover
but not oppress him.

In a short time, however, he was disturbed by a
tumultuous noise from the cottage. For Geminius
had sent a number of men from Tarracina in pursuit
of him; and one party coming that way, loudly
threatened the old man for having entertained and
concealed an enemy of the Romans. Marius, upon
this, quitted the cave; and, having stripped himself,
plunged into the bog amidst the thick water and mud.
This expedient rather discovered, than screened him.
They liauled him out naked and covered with dirt,
and carried him to Minturnge, where they delivered
him to the magistrates. For proclamation had been
made throughout all those towns, that a general
search shouhl be made for Marius, and that heshould
be put to death wiierever he was foimd. The magis-
trates however thought proper to consider of it, and
sent him under a guard to the house of Fannia. This
woman was supposed, upon an old grudge, to bear
a strong hatred to Marius. "When she was divorced
iiom her husband Tinnius, she had demanded her
whole fortune, wliich was considerable ; and Tinnius
allcginga{lultery,the cause wasbrought before Marius,
wlio was then for tlie sixth time consul. On the trial
it appeared, that Fannia was a woman of bad fame
belbre her marriage, and that Tinnius was no stranger
to her character when he married her. Besides, he
had lived with her a considerable time in the state of
matrimony. The consul, of course, reprimanded
them both. The husband was ordered to restore
his wife's fortune; and the wife, as a proper mark of

170 CAIUS MARIUS.

her disgrace, was sentenced to pay a fine of four
chalci^'.

Fannia liov/ever, forgetful of female resentment,
entertained and encouraged Marius to the utmost of
her power. He acknowledged lier generosity, and
at the same time expressed the greatest confidence,
(jf this an auspicious omen was the occasion : when
he was conducted to her house, as he approached
and the gate was opened, an ass came out to drink
at a neighbouring fountain. The animal with a vi-
vacity uncommon to it's species fixed it's eyes stead-
fastly upon Marius, then brayed aloud, and as it
passed him skipped wantonly along. The conclusion,
which he drew from this omen was, that the gods
meant he should seek his safety by sea ; it not being
in consequence of any natural thirst, that the ass
went to the fountain*". This circumstance he men-
tioned to Fannia, and having ordered the door of his
chamber to be secured, retired to rest.

The magistrates and council of Minturna2, how-
ever, concluded that Marius should immediately be
put to death. No citizen would undertake this
oftice ; but a dragoon, either a Gaul or a Cimbrian
(for both are mentioned in liistory) went up to him
sword in hand, with an intent to despatch him. The
chamber, in which he lay, was somewhat gloomy ;
and a light, they say, glanced from Marius' eyes
upon the'face of the assassin ; while at the same time
lie heard a solemn voice saying, " Dost thou dare to
'■' kill Marius ?" Upon this the assassin threw down
Ins sword and fled, crj-ing, " I cannot kill Marius."
The people of Minturna3 were struck with asto-
nishment ; pity and remorse ensued. Should they
put to death the preserver of Italy ? Was it not

^■^ A sinall Grecian coin. Fannia seems to have been more grate-
ful tor the restoratiuu of her fortune, than resentful for the imposi-
tion of the iine.*

''5 AH that was extraordinary in this circumstance was that the ass,
like the sheep, is seldom seen to drink: (L.) Ami Marius must have
been a ver^' ass in superstition, to found upon such a circumstance
such a conjecture*

CAIUS MARIUS. 171

even a disgrace to them, tliat they did not contribute
to his rehef ? " Let the exile go," said they, " and
" await his destiny in some otlier region ! It is time
" that we should deprecate the anger of the gods,
" for having refused to a poor naked wanderer the
" common privileges of hospitality !" Under the
influence of this enthusiasm, they immediately con-
ducted him to the sea-coast. Yet, in the midst of
their officious expedition, they met with some delay.
The Marician grove which they hold sacred, suffer-
ing notliing that enters it to be removed, lay imme-
diately in theii" way ; and to go round it, would be
tedious. At last an old man of the company cried
out, that no place however religious v»/as inaccessible
or impermeable, if it coidd contribute to the preser-
vation of Marius. No sooner had he said this, than
he took some of the baggage in his hand, and marched
through the place. The rest foUov/ed with the same
alacrity ; and when Marius came to the coast, he
found a vessel provided for him by one Belasus.
Some time afterward, he presented a picture repre-
senting this event to the temple of Marica^^ When
Marius set sail, the wind drove him to the island of
^naria, where he found Granius and some other
friends, and with them he departed for Africa. Being
in want of fresh water, they were obliged to put in
at Sicily near Eryx ; where the Roman quaestor kept
such strict watch, that Marius very narrowly escaped,
and not fewer than sixteen of the watermen were
killed. Thence he immediately sailed for the island

66 Virgil mentions this nymph (i^in. vii. 167.)

Et nijmphd genitum Laurente Marica. (L.)

Upon which passage Servius remarks, that * Marica was the tute-
lary goddess of the shore of Minturnae, near the mouth of the Liris.*
Some affirm, that Marica was the posthumous name of Circe, as
Romulus and Leda after their deaths were called Quirinu'* and
Nemesis. (Lactant. i. 21.) Hence Latinus, whom Virgil repre-
sents as ' sprung from Marica,' is by Hesiod called ' the son of Circe.*
(Theog. 1011, 1013.) In the regulation likewise mentioned above,
relative to the Marician grove, a sagacious critic may trace the
etiects of Circe's grief for the departure of Ulysses.*

17^ CAIUS MARIUS.

of Meninx"', wlicre he first learned that Iiis ?;on had
escaped v/ith Cethegus, and was gone to implore the
&iicc(Hir of Kiempsal king of Numidia. This gave
him some enconragement, and he immediately ven-
tured for Carthage.

The Roman governor in Africa was Sextilius. He
had neither received tavonr nor injury from Marius,
but the exile hoped something from his pity. He
w^asjust landed with a few of his men, wlien an
officer came up and thus addressed him : " ]\Iarius,
'' the prsntor Sextilius forbids you to set foot in Africa.
"If you do not obey, he Avili support the senate's
" decree, and treat you as a public enemy." Marius,
upon hearing this, was struck dumb Mith grief and
indignation. He uttered not a word for some time,
bur stood regarding tlie officer with a menacing
aspect. At length the officer asked him, " What
" answer he slioidd carry back to the governor?'*
*' I'ell him," said the unfortrjiate man witli a deep
sigh, " that thou hast seen the exiled Marius sitting
*' upon the ruins of Carthage ^^\" Thus, in the hap-
piest manner in the world, he proposed as warnings
to fhe praetor the fate of that city and his own.

In the m.can time Hiempsai, king of Numidia,
wa^ unresolved how to act with respect to young
Marius. He treated him in an honourable manner
at his court, but whenever he desired leave to depart,
he always found some pretence or other to detain
him. At the same time, it was plain that these delays
did not proceed from any intention of serving him.
An accident, however, set him free. The Vounc:

(''^ Hod. Zerbi, an island on the African coast, between Tripoli
and T.,nis.*

"s Ther? is not perhaps in the whole o.' Marius' life a nobler ex-
pr.^; ^lon, or a greater proof of genius, than this saying. (L.) What
an iniage does it present ! Marius, who liad been six times consul !
Marius, who had been dc.'noniinated ' The Third Founder of Rome!*
M.;riu?, wl.oni the Romans, in their libations, had associated with
t heir gods ! — on the rums of Carthage ! Carthage, once so eminent
for weiilti) and power, as to have disputed with Rome herself im
three bioody wars the sceptre of the world !*

CAIUS MAUIUa 17

e>

man was handsome. One of the king's concubines
was affected with his misfortunes ; and pity soon
turned to love. At first, lie rejected the woman's
advances : but when he saw no other wav to s-ain his
liberty, and found that her reg'ards were rather deli-
cate than gross, he accepted tJie tender of her heart;
and by her means he escaped with his friends, and
came to his fither.

After the iirst salutations, as they walked along
the shore, they saw two scorpions fighting. This
appeared to Marius a bad omen ; they went therefore
on board a fishing-boat, and made for Cercina^'-', an
island not far distant from the continent. Thev were
fiCarcely got out to sea, when they saw a party of the
king's horse on full speed toward the place, where
they had embarked ; so that Marius thought he had.
never escaped a more imminent danger.

He was now informed, that while Sylla was en-
gaged in Btrotia with the lieutenants of Mithridates,
a quarrel had happened between the consuls at
Rome '°, and that they had had recourse to arms.
Octavius having gained the advantage drove out
Cinna, who was aiming at absolute power, and ap-
pointed Cornelius jMerula consul in his room. Cinna
collected forces in other parts of Italy, and main-
tained the war against them. Marius, upon this in-
telligence, determined to hasten to Cinna. He took
with him some Maurusian horse which he had levied
in Africa, and a few others that were come to him
from Italv, not amountino; in the wliole to above a
thousand men, and with this h.andiiil he began his
voyage. He arrived at a port of Tuscany called Tela-
nion, and as soon as he was landed proclaim ;'(! liberty
to the slaves. The name of Marius brought down
numbers of freemen likewise, and husbandmen and
nihepherds to the shore ; the ablest of whom he en-

**' Hod. Kerkejil I. near Zcrbi, above mentioned.*
'° A. U. C. mCi, B. C. 88. Cinna was for recalling the exiles,
ayd Octavius was against it.

174. CAIUS iMARIUS.

listed, and had thus in a shoi't time a great army on
foot, with wliich he filled forty shij)s. He knew
Octavius to be a man of good principles, and dis-
posed to govern agreeably to justice; but Cinnawas
obnoxious to his enemy Sylla, and at that time in
open war against the established government. Ilim
he, therefore, resolved to join with all his forces.
Accordingly, he sent to acquaint him that he con-
sidered him as consul, and was readv to obev his
commands. Cinna accepted his offer, declared him
proconsul, and sent him the fasces and other ensigns
of authority. But Marius declined them, alleging
that such pomp did not become his ruined fortunes.
Instead of that, he wore a mean garment, and let his
liair grow as it had done from the day of his exile.
He was now indeed upward of seventy years old, but
he W'alked with a pace affectedly slow. This appear-
ance w^as intended to excite compassion. Yet his
native fierceness, and something more, might be
distinguished amidst all this look of misery ; and it
was evident that he was not so much humbled, as
exasperated, by his misfortunes.

When he had saluted Cinna, and made a speech
to the army, he immediately began his operations,
and soon chanG:ed the face of aliliirs. In tlie first
place, he cut off the enemy's convoys with his fleet,
plundered their store-ships, and made himself master
of the bread-corn. He next coasted alon^:, and
seized the sea-port towns. At last, Ostia itself was
betrayed to him. He pillaged the town, slew most
of the inhabitants, and threw a bridge across tiie
Tiber, to prevent the carrying of any provisions to
his enemies in Rome by sea. He then marched to
Rome and posted himself upon the hill called the
Janiculum.

Mean while, the cause did not sufier so much bv
Octavius' incapacity, as by his unseasonable atten-
tion to the laws. For, v. hen many of his friends
advised him to enfranchise the slaves, he replied.

CAIUS MARIUS. 175

*' He would not grant to such persons the freedom
" of that city, in defence of whose constitution he
" had shut out Marius."

But upon the arrival of Metellus, the son of that
Metellus who had commanded in the African war,
and was afterward banislied bv Mariiis, the armv
within the walls leaving Octavius applied to him as
the better officer, and entreated him to take the
command ; adding, that thev should fi<2;]"it and con-
quer, when they had obtained an able and active
general. Mctelhis however rejected their suit vvitli
indignation, and bade them go back to tiie consul ;
instead of which, they went over to the enemy. At
the same time Metellus himself also v.ithdrew, giving
up the city for lost.

As for Octavius, he remained behind, at the persua-
sion of certain Chaldseaii soothsayers and expositors
of the Sibylline books, v,ho promised him that all
would be well. Octavius Avas, indeed, one of the
most upright men among the Romans : he supported
his diirnity as consul, without <4ivini>' anv ear to ilat-
terers, and regarded the laws and ancient usages of
his country as rules never to be violated. Yet he liad
all the weakness of superstition, and spent more of
his time with fortune-tellers and prognosticators,
than with men of political or military abihties. Before
Marius however entered the ciiv, lie v;as dra.'jji'ed
from the tribunal, and slain by persons commissioned
for that purpose ; and a Chalda^an scheme, it is said,
v/as found in his bosom as he lay. It seems unac-
countable, that of two such generals as Marius and
Octavius the one should be saved, and tiie other
ruined, by a confidence in divination '^'.

While aflah's were in this posture, the senate assem-
bled, and despatched some of their ovvU body to
Cinna and Marius, with a request that they would

"' And yet the mystery is in a f-rcr.t measure solved, if we con.
sider that Octavius suffered himself to be guided by these wretched
creature?, while Marius very probably made iip;e of them in p-eneral
to gaiiic others. They were his engines, Qctavius was theirs,*

176 CAIUS MAUI US.

come Into the city, but spare the inhabitants. Cinna,
as coiisu], received them sitting in liis chair of state,
and gave them an obhging answer. But Mariiis
stood by the consul's chair, and spoke not a word.
But the gloominess of his look, and the menacing
expression of his eye too intelh'gi])ly declared that
he would soon fill tlie city with blood. Liimediateiy
after this, they moved forward to Rome. Cinna
entered the city with a strong guard ; while
Marius, with a dissimulation dictated by his resent-
me!it, stopped at the gates, lie said, " He was a
*' banished man, and the lav.s prohibited his return.
" If his country wanted his service, she must repeal
" the law which drove him into exile :" As if he had
a real regard for the laws, or were approacliing a city
still in possession of it's liberty.

The people, therefore, were summoned for that
purpose. But before three or four tribes had given
their suffrages, he threw off the mask, and without
waiting for tlie formality of a re])eal, entered with a
guard selected from the slaves who had repaired to
his standard. These he called his 'Bardi^eans "-.' At
the least word or sign given by Marius, they min*-
thered all, whom he marked for destruction. So
that Vvhen An^harius a senator and a man of praeto-
rian dignity saluted Marius, and he returned not
the salutation, they stabbed him in his presence.
xA-fter this, they considered themselves as authorised
to kill any man, who saluted Marius in the streets,
and was not spoken to or taken notice of: hence his
very friends were seized with horror, whenever they
went to pay their respects to him.

When they had butchered great numbers, Cinna's
revenge began to pall : it was satiated with blood.
But the furv of Marius seemed rather to increase:
his appetite for slaughter was sharpened by indul-

'* M. de T!iou conjectured tliat we slundd read ' Bardyetse,'
because there was a fierce find barbarouv; people in Spain ot" that
came. Some Misis. liavc ' Ortitenns.' Uacier's guesses are not
very probabl^is.

CAiUS MARIUS. 177

gcnce, and he went on dr'^troyitig all, who gave him
the least sliadow of suspicion. Every road, every
town, was full of assassins pursuing and hunting the
unhappy victims.

Upon this occasion, it was fband that no obliga-
tions of friendship, no rights of hospitality, can stand
the shock of ill fortune. For there were very few,
who did not betray those who had taken refuge in
their houses. The slaves of Cornutus, therefore,
deserve the highest ad nu" ration. They hid their
master in the house, and took a dead body out of the
street from among the slain, and hanged it by the
neck : they then put a gold ring on the finger, and
showed the corpse in that condition ..to Marius' ex-
ecutioners ; after v\]iich, they dressed it for the fu-
neral, and buried it as their master's body. No one
suspected the matter ; and Cornutus, after having
been concealed as long as it was necessary, was con-
veyed by those servants into Galatia.

Mark Antony the orator '^ likewise found a faith-
ful friend, but he did not save his life by it. This
friend of his was in a low station of life. As he had
one of the sireatest men of Rome however under his
roof, he entertained him in the best manner he
could, and often sent to a neighbouring tavern for
wine. The vintner, finding that the servant who
fetched it, was critical in tasting the wine, and in-
sisted on having better, asked him ; " Why he was
" not satisfied with the common new wine which
*' he used to have, but demanded the dearest and the
" best?" The servant, in thesimplicityof hisheart,told
him (as his friend and acquaintance) that the wine
-was for Mark Antony, who lay concealed in his
master's house. As soon as he was gone, the perfi-
dious and rascally vintner went himself to Marius,
who was then at supper, and told him he .could put
Antony into his power ; upon whicli Marius clap{)cd
his hands in the agitation of joy, and would even
have left his company and gone to the place himself,

'5 Grandfather to the triumvir pf that name.*
VOL. III. N

i:n CAIUS MARIUS.

had not he been dissuaded by his friends. He scut
an officer however, named Anniiis, with some sol-
diers, and ordered him to bring Antony's head. Wiieii
theycametothchoiise, Anniusstood ntthe door, wliile
the soldiers mounted by a ladder into Antony's cliam-
ber. When they saw him, they encouraged each other
to the execution; but such was the power of his elo-
quence, when he pleaded for his life, that far from
laying haiids upon him they stood motionless with de-
jected eyes, and wept. During this delay Annius
ascends, beholds Antony addressing the soldiers,
and the soldiers confounded and softened by the
ibrce of his address. Upon this, he reproved them
for their weakness, and with his own hand cut off
the orator's head. Lutatius Catulus, Marius' col-
legue, who had jointly triumphed with him over the
Cimbri, finding that to every entreaty and interces-
sion of his friends he invariably replied, " lie must
" die ;" shut himself up in a narrow chamber, and
suffocated himself by the steam of a large coal-tire.
When the bodies were thrown out, and trampled
upon in tlie streets, it was not pity which they ex-
cited ; it was horror and dismay. But what shocked
the people much more, was the conduct of the Bar-
dia?ans ; who after they had murthered the masters
of families, exposed the nakedness of their children,
and indulged their passions v.ith their wives. In
.short, their violence and their rapacity were beyond
all restraint ; till Cinna and Sertorius determined in
council to fall upon them in their sleep, and slew
them to a man.

At this time, the tide of affairs took a sudden turn.
Intelligence was brought, that Syila had put an end
to the IMithridatic war ; and that, after having re
duced the provinces, he was returning to Rome with
a large army. Tliis p;ave a short respite, a breath-
ing from these inexpressible troubles ; as the appre-
hensions of war had been imiversaliy prevalent.
Marius was now chosen lor the seventh time consul ^
and as he was walkiuG; out on the caloids ofjanuarv,.
the first day of t'ac year, he ordered Scxtus I-ucinus-

CAIUS MARIUS. 179

to be seized and thrown down the Tarpeian rock ; a
circumstance, wliicli occasioned an unhappy presage
oF approaching evils. . The consul himself, worn out
with a series of misfortunes and distress, found his
faculties fail, and trembled at the approach of battles
and conflicts. For he considered that it was not an
Octavius or a Merula, the desperate leaders of a small
sedition, with whom he had to contend ; but with
Sylla, wlio had formerly driven him from his country,
and had recently cooped up Mithridates near the
coasts of the Euxine. Thus agitated^ and revolving
the miseries and flights and dangers which he had
experienced both by land and sea, his inquietude
affected him even by night, and a voice seemed con-
tinually to pronounce in his ear j

Dread "is tlie den, even of tlie distant lion.

Unable to support the painfulness of watching, he
liad recourse to the bottle, and indulged in excesses
by no means suitable to his years. At last, when
intelligence from sea v/as conveyed to him of Sylla's
approach, his apprehensions were heightened to the
greatest degree : and partly by his fear of the future,
partly by the burthen and satiety of the present,
inider a slight trepidation of the balance he was
thrown into a pleuritic fever ; in which state Posi-
donius, the piiilosophcr, informs us he found him,
when he went to speak to him upon some affairs of
his embassy. But Caius Piso'* the historian relates,
that walking out v\'iih liis friends one eveninp- at
supper, he gave them a short history ofJiis life from
it's commencement; and, after expatiating on the
uncertainty of fortune, concluded that it was be-
neath the dignity of a wise man to live in subjection
to that flckle deity. Upon this, he bade farewell to

">* Tliere were many Roman writerr, of this name, but Vossiui
thinks the one licre mentioned was the C. Calpurnius Piso, spcheu
of hyCici'ia in hisBruius,sect. 68 ; tliougii he i.^ tliere meiitionad ai
an oratj!. 2ul\ not as an Iiistcrian. (Hist. Latt. i. C-) *

N 2

180 CAlUg MARIUS.

his friends ; and, betaking himself to his bed, dic^!
within seven days. There are some who impute hi.4
death to the excess of liis ambition, which, according
to their account, threw him into a dehrium ; inso-
much that he fancied he was carrying on the war
aixainst Mithridates, exhibiting all the various mo-
tions and attitudes, and nttering all the loud and
characteristic expressions used in an engagement.
Such wap the strength and violence of his passion
for that command !

Thus, at the age of seventy, distinguished by the
unparalleled honour of seven consulships, and pos-
sessed of a more-than-regal fortune, Marius died
with tlie chagrin of an unfortunate wretch, who had
not obtained what he desired.

Plato at the point of death congratulated himself,
in the first place, that lie had been born a man ; next
that he had the happiness of being a Greek, not a
brute or barbarian ; and, last of all, that he was
the contemporary of Sopliock^s. Antipater of Tarsus
likewise, a little before his death, passed in review
the several advantages of his life, not forgetting even
his successful voyage to Athens. In settling his ac-
counts with fortune, he gratefully entered and pre-
served every favour in that excellent ledger-book of
agreeable things, his memory. The negligent and
unthinking gradually forget every blessing which
they have received, record nothing, renounce for
airy hope the solid subtance, and while they are idly
grasping at the future, forego the enjoyment of the
present ! Though the future is in the power of for-
tune, and the present out of it, they despise her pre-
sent blessings, as foreign to man, and dream of fu-
ture uncertainties. But they are justly punished for
it. Before plulosophy and the cultivation of reason
have laid a proper foundation for the management
of extrinsic goods, they ])ursue and court them with
avidity ; but they can never gratify their insatiable
cravings.

Marius died on the seventeenth day of his seventh

PYRRI lUS AND MARIUS COMPARED. 1 8 J

<x>nsulship. His death was productive of the great-
est joy in Rome, and the citizens looked upon it as
an event which fieed them from the worst of tyran-
nies. It was not long, however, before they found
that they had changed an aged tyrant for one, who
had youth and vigour to carry his cruelties into exe-
cution. Such they found the son of Marius to be,
whose sanguinary spirit displayed itself in the de-
struction of numbers of the nobility. His martial
intrepidity and ferocious behaviour at first procured
him the title of 'the Son of Mars,' but his subse-
quent conduct denominated him ' the Son of Venus.*
When he was besieged in Pra'neste, and had tried
every petty artifice to escape, he put an end to his
life, to avoid falling into Sylla's hands.

PYRRHUS AND CAIUS MARIUS

COMPARED, t

IF from the lives and actions of these illustrious
men, we proceed to draw their parallel, we shall dis-
cover in them strong traits of resemblance, and still
stronger of dissimilitude. Pyrrhus was of royal ex-
traction, and his lineage reached upward to the gods.
Marius, the child of indigence, passed the chief part
of his youth in obscurity. But nature compensated
this difference in their natal fortunes by a more
equal distribution of loftier qualities. Both owed to
themselves their elevation, and were the sole artists
of their own glory. In this respect, however, the
Roman general appears preferable to the king of
Epirus. The latter, it must be admitted, was ex-
posed in his infancy to considerable danger : but he
had the assistance of princes to replace him on the
throne. At the age, at which he was tranquilly
enjoying his regal dignity, Marius was still the

182 PYRRHUS AND MARIUS COMPARED.

imknown inhabitant of a country-village ; and from
this dark abode he suddenly burst into a desfree of
military splendour, and civil honours, before unpa-
ralleled. Pyrrhus had the cifectual aid of great alli-
ances, to forward his designs : whereas Marius, in
almost all his objects, had to struggle against a host
of powerful competitors.

They both received an education exclusively mili-
tary. That of Marius, rude and coarse, rendered
him totally unfit for every thing but war. Pyrrhus,
with a choice of pursuits, preferred the taste that led
him to arms.; and indulged, as a passion, what the
other practised as a habit. The Greek discarded,
the Roman despised, every thing elegant and refined.
Hence the latter, in war courted for his talents, was
in peace neglected for his austerity.

In nothing indeed were they more unlike each
other, than in their moral characters. Pyrrhus, with
an air calculated to inspire rather terror than re-
spect, was soft, affable, and humane : seldom pro-
voked, and easily pacified, he was backward to re-
venge, and munificent to reward. Marius, of a
temper naturally bad and fierce, in power became
terrible and untractable : passionate and vindictive
to excess, he yielded to every impulse cf resentr
ment, and pertinaciously acted under it's impression.
One of his most prominent features was ingratitude.
Metellus, his first benefactor, he caused to be ba-
nished from Rome. From this reproach however
Pyrrhus himself, in his treatment of the Sicilian
cities, is not wholly free.

They had botli a strong attachment to their sol-
diers, as the associates of their toils, and the instru-
ments of their glory : but in Marius this attachment
appears more visibly the result of a sense of interest;
as his followers were not less useful to him by their
suffrages in the Comitia, than by their services in
the field. From avarice Pyrrhus was completely ex-
em})t ; Marius, though he had amassed a more-than-
ioyal fortune, was still insatiable ; and one of his

PYRRHUS AND MARIUS COMPARED. 183

principal motives for soliciting", at the age of se-
venty, the command against Mithridates, was his
lust of gold. *

To great austerity Marius united great arrogance,
and great inflexibility ; of these we have instances
in his haughty treatment (wlien tribune) of one of
the consuls, and the ])ersevering insolence of his
conduct toward the nobles, during his canvas for the
consulship. His civil conduct, however, is not
universally reprehensible. After having declared him-
self the zealous friend of the people, he strenuously
and effectually opposed a popular bill, as prejudicial
to the interests of the state. In general, with the
exception of the case of Turpilius, whom he caused
to be condenmed as Metellus' friend, his early public
decisions were rigorously just.

His sublime reply to the officer, who was sent to
order him out oi' Africa; " Go, tell the governor,
" thou hast seen the exiled Marius sitting upon the
" ruins of Carthage," is too dignified for the guilty
lips by which it was uttered. There is no single trait
in Pyrrhus, comparable to this ; but there are se-
veral of inferior splendour, which are conjunctively
much more brilliant. His admiration of Fabricius'
sturdy virtue, liis magnificent offers to that general,
his moderation on finding them disdainfully rejected,
his generosity on learning his physician's treachery —
all these prove a liberal disposition, and a lofty mind.
His less creditable actions we must refer, not to his
natural character, but to his intemperate thirst of
glory. In him, however, this was a passion more
easily to be accounted for, than in the low-born
Marius. Ever forming vast projects, and cherishing
extravagant expectations, he frequently abandoned
what he possessed, to run after what he desired ; oc-
casionally, by a not unusual consequence, to the loss
of both. His conversation with Cineas, prior to his
Italian expedition, and his complaint with regard to
the option of two great enterprises offered him by
fortune, of which he chose the more hazardous as

184. PYRUHUS AND MARIUS COMPARED.

the more honourable, evince his boundless ambition.
In Marius however the passion, as less naturally ex-
cited by existing circumstances, appears to have
been still more ungovernable, lleiving solely on the
energy of his character, from his very entrance upon
his political career he solicited the successive offices
of state with resistless importunity, and regarded
each new^ function only as a stc}) to higher appoint-
ments. I^ar from sinking under the unprecedented
disgrace of being twice rejected in one day, he
founded upon it an additional hauteur in urging his
subsequent pretensions.

Pyrrhus, by his station, fortunately eluded the ne-
cessity of those humiliating condescensions, which
the Romans exacted from all their candidates ; but
he was not, therefore, the less indelicate in his public
transactions. Regulating his conduct by his interest,
he murthcred Neoptolemus at a sacrificial supjier,
availed himself of Demetrius' indisposition to invade
his territories, deceived the Spartans by a gross piece
of periidy, and entered Argos after having given it's
inhabitants a solenui pledge to the contrary. Of
falsehood and duplicity, however, JMarius w-as
equally guilty. Associated with Glaucias and Sa-
turninus, the wicked instruments of his ambition,
and an accomplice in all their crimes ; courting the
public derision by exposing his unwieldly carcase, at
an advanced age, in the active exercises of the
Roman youth ; proscribed and a vagabond, in-
debted (it w^ould seem) to little less than miracles
for his escape — on the first glimpse of hope he hastens
back to Rome, takes possession, for the seventh
time, of her consular chair, and deluges her streets
with civil blood.

Both were superstitious ; the dupes apparently of
dreams, and omens, and old women. Rut in Marius,
Avith whose uniform ferocity religious feeling, even
in it's worst perversion, is hardly compatible, we
may reasonably suspect the language he held upon
this subject. Ilis presages are, in general, en-

PYRRIIUS AND MARIUS COMPARED. 185

couraging ; his prophetess announces victories. Pyr-
rhiis, on the other hand, trusts these deliiders to his
ruin. A dream led him to the siege of Sparta,
which he was obhocd to raise with disiTfrace : and at
Arijfos the recollection of a disastrous oracle de-
stroyed his presence of mind, urged him to a pre-
cipitate retreat, and eventually occasioned his death.
At the head of their respective armies, they both
displayed the accomplishments of consummate ge-
nerals. In Pyrrhus, with uncommon strength and
indefatigable perseverance were united restless ac-
tivity of mind, and a degree of courage which inces-
santly hurried him into the midst of dangers. There,
however, he retained all the coolness of his character,
and profited as fully by his power of observation, as
if he had been consciously invulnerable. Marius,
naturally not less robust than Pyrrhus, and equally
enured to hardships, with a power of suffering which
no hardship could overcome ; brawny, alert, and in-
trepid ; in his very first campaign drew from Scipio a
prognostic of his future greatness, which he ulti-
mately verified, even beyond that discerning judge's
high anticipation. This was particularly exemplifiecl
in the Cimbric tempest, when the people unanimously
called him to the helm : and the two exterminating
battles, which followed his judicious delay to engage,
proved that it could not have been entrusted to an
abler hand. But Pyrrhus' success in Italy must be
admitted as an evidence of his superior generalship,
when we consider that his antaa:onists were not like
the Cimbri, an undisciplined rabble of barbarians ;
but, as well as those opposed to him in Macedon, at
8parta, and at Argos, the most experienced warriors
of their day. It may be observed, however, in
Marius' favour, that he never committed a single
military fault : whereas Pyrrhus, by delaying to as-
sault Sparta immediately upon his arrival, by con-
tinuing the siege after it had received strong rein-
forcements, and still more by his rash conduct at

18G PYilRHUS AND MAPJUS COMPARED.

Argos, exposed himself to the imputation of having'
incurred several fatal errors.

If the victories of the Roman chieftain were less
gaudily brilliant than those of the Epirot prince,
they v/ere more substantially useful. I'he continual
Avars of Pyrrhus were usually fruitless to himself,
and destructive to his subjects. Marius, on the
other hand, quelled Jugurtha (next to Annibal, one
of the most formidable enemies of his country), and
rolled back the deluge of northern savages, wh.ich
\vas about to burst into her fertile })Iains. Is there,
in fact, any denomination in Pyrrhus' whole cata-
logue of titles, comparable to that of ' Third
Founder of Rome ?* And yet how dreadfully tar-,
nisiied is this pure glory by the events of his closing
life ! Pyrrhus, it must be confessed, shed much
blood ; but it was not that of his countrymen. His
subjects he uniformly treated with kindness ; and
neither in the infliction of punishment, nor in the
pursuits of vengeance, was he harsh or inflexible.
Happy for Marius, had he died after his triumph
over the Cimbri ; leaving behind him a name dear
to Rome, and glorious to posterity ! The civil war
Avas the tomb even of his military renown.

Pyrrhus at his death, which lie luul provoked by
Iiis temerity, preserves all his courage and his dignity.
His very glance, like that of Marius at Minturna?,
appals the soldier, whose arm is raised to destroy
him The death of the latter in his bed may, to the
superficial observer, appear of a more tranquil cha-
racter : and vet if we view him. worn out with toils
and haunted by remorse, expecting on the arrival of
Sylla the retaliation of all his enormities ; we can
regard that bed in no other light than as a scaffold,
upon which he is stretched tor punishment. His
crimes are his executioners ; and he sinks imder the
agonies which they inflict, an object of detestation
to the good, and of abhorrence even to himself!

THE

LIFE

OF

L Y S A N D E R.

SUMMARY.

Lj/sandcf^s statue in the temple of Delphi. His instruction, education,
and character. He is appointed admiral of the Lacedtsmonianjieet
in the Pelopomiesian tvar : obtains from Cyrus an increase of the
seamen^ s pay : gains a naval victory over the Athenians. His be-
haviour to Callicratidas, who is sent to supersede him. Callicrati-
das can obtain nothing from Cyrus. His death. Lysander is rc'
appointed to the command ofthejleet. His perfidy at Miletus : little
regard for oaths. Cyrus supplies him tvith money. His different
expeditions. The Athenian fleet nears that of the Spartans. Ly-
sander^s conduct. Alcibiades' advice rejected by the Athenian ad-
mirals. Lysander'' s stratagem. He gains the victory. Prodigies.,
by ivhich it ivas 2^receded. The Athenian prisoners executed. Ly"
Sander's treatment of the Greek cities. He xvishes to besiege Athens,
but is baffled by the vigo7-ous defence of its inhabitants. Surrender
of that city : demolition of its ivcdls. Government of the Thirty
Tyrants. Gylippus embezzles part of the money, tvhick he is con"
veying to Lacedcemon. The Spartans deliberate, tvhether or not
they shall receive it. Lysatidcr's statue erected at Delphi: his
honours, insolence, and cruelty. He is recalled: deceived by Phar-
nabazus ; and applies for leave to visit the temple of Jupiter Am-
mon. Re-establishment of Athens. He assists Agesilaus to ascend
the throne of Sparta ; persuades him to make ivar upon the king
of Persia, and accompanies him thither. Their mutual jealousy.
Lysander' s intrigues to change the constitution of Sparta, tie
Jbrges some oracles : his project defeated by the cotvardice of one

1 85 LYSAXDEll.

of his accomplices. lie engages the Spartans in a u-nr ivith the
Thebans ; takes the cities of' Orchomenus and Lebadia; and is
slain bijhre the mails of Haliartus. His funeral. Oracles an-
nouncing his death. Regret of the Lacedcemonians. Detection of
i he plot f ivhicJi he had concerted to get jiossession of the Spartan
trotcn»

Among the sacred deposits of tlie Acanthians at
Delphi, one has this inscription, ' Brasidas and the
Acanthians took this from the Athenians '.' Hence
many are of opinion that the marble statue, which
stands in the chapel of that nation just by the door,
is the statue of Brasidas. But it is really that of Ly-
sander, whom it perfectly represents with his hair at
full growth- and a length of beard, both after the
ancient fashion. It is not true indeed, as some would
have it, that while the Argives cut their hair in sor-
row for the loss of a great battle ", the Lacedaemo-
nians began to let theirs grow in the joy of success.
Neither did they commence this custom when the
Bacchiadae^ fled from Corinth to Lacedsemon, and
made a disagreeable appearance with their shorn
]cx:ks. But it is derived from the institution of Ly-
curgusj who is reported to have said, that " long

' Brasidas, when general of the Lacedsemoniang, persuaded the
people of Acanthus to quit the Athenian interest, and to receive the
S[)artans into their city. In consequence of which, he joined with
tlicm in consecrating certain Athenian spoils to Apollo. This statue
tlierefore was probably his, though Plutarch thinks otherwise.
Acanthus was a Thracian city, near mount Athos. (Thucyd. iv.
g4._S8.)

^ Why might not Brasidas, who was a Lacedaemonian, and a
contemporary of Lysunder, be represented with long hair as well
as he?

s This v/as the opinion of Herodotus (i. 82, &c.), but without
any foundation.

^ The Bacchiadfc, descended from Bacchis, the son of Prumnis,
had kept up an oligarchy in Corinth for two hundred years; but were
at last expelled by Cypselus, one of their coUateral kinsmen, wbo^
laadt; himself absolute master there. {Herodot. v.)

LYSAXT3EII. I89l

** hair makes the handsome more beautiful, nnd thc^
*' uii'lv more terrible."

Aristoclitus ^, the father ofLysander, is said not
to have been of the royal line, but to have descended
from the Heraclidae by another family. As for Ly-
sander, he was bred up in poverty. No one con-
formed more freely to the Spartan discipline than he-
He had a firm heart, above yielding to the charms of
any pleasure, except that which results from the ho-
nour and success gained by heroic actions. And it
^vas no fault at Sparta, for young men to be led by
this sort of pleasure. There they choose to instil into
their children an early passion for glory, and teach
them to be much depressed by disgrace, as well as
elated by praise. And he who is not affected and
moved by these things, is despised as a mean-spirited
wretch, unambitious of the improvements of virtue.

That love of fame then and jealousy of houoiu',
which ever influenced Lvsander, were imbibed in his
education ; and for them, consequently, nature de-
serves no blame. But the attention which he paid to
the great, in a manner unbecoming a Spartan, and
the ease with which he bore the insolence of power
whenever his ovvu interest was concerned, may be
ascribed to his disposition. This complaisance,
however, is considered bj some as no small part of
politics.

Aristotle somewhere'' observes, that great genuise<5
are generally of a melancholy turn, of which he gives
instances in Socrates, Plato, and Hercules : and
Lysandcr (he informs us) though not in his youth,
was in his age inclined to it. But what is most pecu-
liar in his character is, that though he bore poverty
well himself and was never either conquered or cor-
rupted by money, yet he filled Sparta with it and

5 Pausanias calls him Aristocrltus (vl. 3) ; and, clsewhese, Arla-
tocratcs (iii. 8.)

^' Prubloni. sect. 30. One critic, by a specious coniccturp, for
'HpxK/fir? proposes to read 'U|,5<k>jit». and the passa2;e woukl therebv
bq rendered much more conformable to ancient fable.*

190 LYSAXDER.

witli the love of it too, and robbed Iier of the honcnr
which she had previously derived from not honouring
riches. For after the Athenian war he brouoht in

CD

an immense quantity of gold and silver, though
he reserved no part of it tor himselfl And, v.heii
Dionysius the tyrant sent his daugliters some rich
Sicilian garments, he refused them ; alleging, that
" He was afraid those fine clothes would make tliem
*' look more homely." Being despatched however
soon afterward as embassador to Dionysius, the tyrant
offered him two vests, that he might take one of them
for his daughter ; upon which he said, " His daugli-
" ter knew better how to choose than he/' and so
took them both.

As the Peloponnesian vrar was protracted to a
considerable length, the Athenians, after their over-
throw in Sicily, saw their fleets driven out of the sea
and themselves upon the verge of ruin. But Alci-
biades, on liis return from banishment, applied him-
self to remedy this evil; and quickly made such a
change, that they were once more equal in naval
conflicts to the Lacedaemonians. Upon this the
Lacedaemonians began to be afraid in their turn, and
resolved to prosecute the war with double diligence ;
and as they saw it required an able general, as well
as great preparations, they gave the command at sea
to Lysander ^

"When he came to Ephesus, he found that city well
inclined to the Lacedannonians, but in a wretched
condition as to it's internal policy, and in danger of
falling into the barbarous manners of the Persians ;
because it was near Lydia, and the king's lieutenant*
frequently resided thei'e for a considerable time.
Lysander therefore, having fixed his ([uarters in it,
ordered all his store-ships to be brought into it's
harbour, and built a dock for his galleys. By these
means he iilled it's port with merchants, it's market

7 01. xciii. 1., B. C. 108. Of the Athenian (lis;i?tcrs in SkWy,
>he Lives of AJcibiadcs and Nicias supply us witli ample details.*

LYSANDER. Uj,

with business, and it's houses and shops with money.
No that from time, and from his services, Ephcsus
began to conceive hopes of that greatness and splen-
dour, in which it now flourishes.

As soon as he heard that Cyras the king's son was
arrived at Sardis, he went thither to confer with him,
and to acquaint him with the treachery of Tisaphernes,
Tiiat viceroy had an order to assist the Laceda3mo-
Jiians, and to destroy the naval force of tlie Athenians ;
but from his partiality to Alcibiades he acted with
no vigour, and sent such poor supphes that the fleet
was almost ruined. Cyrus w^as vciy glad to receive
tin's charge against Tisaphernes, knowing him to be
a man of bad character in general, and an enemy in
particular to himself By this and the rest of his
conversation, but most of all by the respect and
attention which he paid him, Lysander recommended
himself to the young prince, and engaged him to
prosecute the war. When the Lacedaemonian v/as
going to take his leave, Cyrus desired him at an
•entertainment provided upon the occasion not to
refuse the marks of his regard, but to ask some favour
of him : " As you are so very kind to me," said
Lysander, " I beg you would add an obolus to the
*' seamen's pay, so that instead of three oboli a day
" they may have four.'* Cyrus, charmed with thisi
generous answer, made him a present often thousand
pieces of gold ^ Lysander employed the money to
•increase his men's wages, and by this encouragement
he in a short time almost emptied the enemy's sliips.
For great numbers came over to him, when they
knew that they should have better pay ; and tliose
who remained became indolent and mutinous, and
gave their ofticers continual trouble. But tliough
Lysander had thus drained and weakened liis adver-
saries, he was afraid to risk a naval engagement ;
knovvijig that Alcibiades not only was a commander
of extraordinary abilities, but also had the advantage

s Darics, pieces of Persian coin, so called from the prin(,-e hr
ivhoin tliey were originairy struck, vritli the. device of an archt.'r.'*

19* LYSANDER.

in number of ships, and likewise liad been succcssfnl
in all the battles, which he had hitherto fought both
bv sea and land.

Wlicn Alcibiades however was ffone from Samos
to Phoca^a^ and had left the command of the fleet
to his pilot Antiochus, the latter, with a view of insult-
ing Lysander and making a j)arade of his own braver}-,
sailed to the harbour of Ephesus with only two gal-
leys ; where he hailed the Laceda?monian fleet with
much noise and laughter, and passed by in the most
insolent manner. Lysander, resenting the affront,
got a few of his ships under sail and gave him chase.
But when he saw the Athenians advance to support
Antiochus, he called up more of his galleys, and at
last the action became general. Lysander gained
the victory, took fifteen ships, and erected a trophy.
Upon this the people of Athens, incensed at Alci-
biades, deprived him of the command ; and, as he
found himself slighted also and censured by the army
at Samos, he quitted it and withdrew to the Cher-
sonese ^". This battle, though not considerable in
itself, was made so by Alcibiades' misfortunes.

Lysander now invited to Ephesus the boldest and
most enterprising inhabitants of the Greek cities in
Asia, and sowed among them the seeds of those
aristocratical innovations, which subsequently sprang
up. He encouraged them to enter into associations,
and to turn their thoughts to politics ; upon a^promise
that, when Athens was once subdued, the popular go-
vernment in their cities likewise should be dissolved,;
and the administration \'csted in themselves. His ac-
tions gave them a confidence in his promise. For
those, who were already attached to him by friendsliip
or the rights of hospitality, he advanced to the lu'gliest
honours and employments civil as well as mihtary ;
not scrupling to join with them in any act of fraud
or oppression, to satisfy their avarice. So that every

^ An Ionian city, in Asia Minor, wliose fugitives colonised Ma'f-
scillcs, ,B. C. 539.* . "■

'° That of Thrace, situated upon the Dardanelles.*

LYSANDER. 193

one endeavoured to ingratiate liimself witli Lysander :
to liim they paid tlieir court, and upon liim fixed
their hearts; persuaded that nothing was too much
for them to e\j)ect, so long as lie had the manage-
ment of affairs. Hence it was, that from tiie first
they looked with an evil eye upon Callicratidas, v^'ho
succeeded liim in the command of the fleet : and
though they subsequently found him the best and
most upright of men, they were not satisfied with his
conduct, which they thought had too much of the
Doric ^^ plainness and sincerity. It is true they
admired Callicratidas* virtue, as they would the
beauty of a hero's statue ; but they sought in vain
for the countenance, indulgence, and support, whicli
they had experienced in Lysander ; insomuch that,
Avhen he left them, they were quite dejected and burst
into tears.

He took every method indeed, which he coulcf
devise, to strengthen their dislike to Callicratidas.
He even sent back to Sardis the remainder of \\\q
money, which Cyrus had given him for the sujiply of
the fleet, and bade his successor go and ask for it as
he had done, or contrive some other means ibr the
maintenance of his forces. And when he was upon
the point of sailing, he made this declaration, " 1
" deliver to you a fleet, which is the mistress of the
" seas." Callicratidas, wishing to show the insolence
and vanity of his boast, said; " Why do not you
" then take Samos on the left, and sail round to
" Miletus, and deliver the fleet to me there ? For
*' we need not be afraid of passing by our enemies in
" that island, if we have the dominion of the seas."
Lysander made only this superficial answer, " You.

" Dacier interprets this of t!ie Dorian music, and illustrates tlie
passage by reference to the opinions of Socrates and Aristotle, both
of wliom pronounce the Doric a composed and manly tone. But
tlie Doric manners had a simplicity iu them, as well as their music.
The modern editors of Amyot consider the allusion as made to tlie
old laxvis of the Dorians, upon which Pindar jjronounces a high
encomium in hi?, iirst Pythic ode.-

VOL. III. O

19i LYSANDER.

" command the ships, and not I j" and immediate!/
set sail for Peloponnesus.

CalHcratidas \va<^ left in extreme difficulties. For
he had not brought money from home with liim, and
he "was unwilling to draw contributions from the
cities, which were already distressed. The only way
left therefore was to go, as Lysander had done, and
beg it of the king's lieutenants. And no one was
more unfit for such an office, than a man of his free
and great spirit ; who thought any loss wdiich Greeks
might sustain from Greeks preferable to an abject
attendance at the doors of barbarians, who had indeed
a great deal of gold, but nothing else to boast of.
Kecessity, however, forced him into Lvdia ; w'here
he went directly to Cyrus' palace, and bade the por-
ters tell him that Callicratidas, the Spartan admiral,
desired to speak with him. " Stranger," said one of
the fellows, " Cyrus is not at leisure; he is drinking.'*
*' Very well," said Callicratidas w^ith the utmost
simplicity, " I will w^ait here till he has done." But
Avhen he found that these peoj^le considered him as
a rustic, and only laughed at him, he went away. He
came a second time, and could not gain admittance.
And now he could bear it no longer, but returned
to Ephesus, venting execrations against those who
had first cringed to the barbarians, and thus taught
them to be insolent on account of their w'ealth. At
the same time he protested that, as soon as he got
back to Sparta, he would use his most strenuous
endeavours to reconcile tlic Greeks among them-
selves, and to make them formidable to the barbarians,
instead of poorly petitioning those people for assist-
ance against each other. But this Callicratidas, who
had sentiments so worthy of a Spartan, and who in
point of justice, magnanimity, and valour was equal
to the best of the Greeks, fell soon afterward in a
sea-fight at Arginusa? ''^ wiiere he lost the day.

'- Near Lesbos. It was after this action, that the victorious
Athenian p^cnerals were capitaJly coavJcttd, for having neglected
to barn their dead.

LYSANDER. 195

Affairs being now in n declining condition, tliCj
confederates sent an embassy to Sparta to desire
that the command of tiie navy might be restored to
Lysander, })roraising to support the cause with aug-
mented vigour, if he had the direction of it. Cyrus,
likewise, made a similar requisition. But as the law
forbade the same person to be chosen admiral twice,
and the Lacedaemonians were nevertheless anxious
to oblige their allies, they vested a nominal com-
jnand in one Aracus ; while Lysander, under the
title of lieutenant, had the whole power. His arri-
val was most agreeable to those who had, or who
wished to have, the chief authority in the Asiatic
cities ; for he had long given them hopes that the
democracy would be abolished, and the government
devolve entirely upon themselves.

To those however who loved an open and gene-
rous mode of procedure, when they compared Ly-
sander and Callicratidas, the former appeared only
a man of craft and subtilty, directing his military
operations by a set of shifty contrivances, and cry-
ing up justice for the advantages it brought ; or
otherwise deeming interest a first-rate consideration,
and believing that natiu'e had made no difference
between truth and falsehood, but defined the value
of each by its utility. When he was told, it did not
become the descendents of Hercules to adopt such
artful expedients, he turned it ofi' with a jest, and
said ; " \Vhere the lion's skin falls short, it must be
*' eked out with that of the fox."

There was a remarkable instance of this subtilty,
in his behaviour at Miletus. His friends and others
of his connexions at that place, who had promised
to abolish the popular government and to drive out
all it's partizans, had charged their minds, and re-
conciled themselves to theii adversaries. In public
he pretended to rejoice at the event, and to cement
the union ; but in private he loaded them with re-
proaches, and excited them to attack the commons.
When however he knew the tumult was begun, he

o 2

196* LYSAXDER.

entered the city in baste, and running' iii) to the
leaders of the sedition, gave them a severe repri*
mand, and threatened to punish them in an ex-
emplary manner. At the same time, he desired the
people to be perfectly eas}', and to fear no farther
disturbance while he was there. In all which he
acted only like a cunning dissembler, to hinder the
heads of the plebeian party from quitting the citv,
and to make sure of their being put to the sword.
Accordingly there was not a man, that trusted to
his honour, who did not lose his life.

There is a saying likewise of Lysander*s recorded
by Androclides, which shows the little regard he
had for oaths : " Children,** he said, " were to be
*' cheated with cockals, and men with oaths." In
tliis,* he followed the example of Polycrates of Sa-
mos ; though it ill became the general of an army to
imitate a tvrant, and was unworthy of a Laced?emo-
man to hold the gods in a more contemptible light
than even his enemies. For he, who OAcr-reaches
by a false oath ^^, declares that he fears his enemy,
but despises his God.

Cyrus, having sent for Lysander to Sardis, pre-
sented him with great sums and promised more.
Nay, to prove how high he stood in his favour, he
went so far as to assure him that, if his father would
give him nothing, he would supply him out of his
own fortune ; and if every thing else failed, he
w^ould racit down the very throne, upon which he
sat when he administered justice, and which was of
solid gold and silver. And when he set ofl* to at-
tend his father in Media, he made over to him the
tribute of "the towns, and put the care of his whole
province into his hands. At parting he embraced

'^' The reverence, invariably paid by the ancients to an oatli^
niii>ht raise a blush on some Christian cheeks. Hierocles* note oii
the second line oF Pythagoras' Golden Verses is admirable. T!j«
wurt'ilt.ss brother of Flaminius, mentioned (as the reader will re-
n»e:iibvi:) in tlie Life I)oth of that general and of Cato the Ccasor^
»luiuik from the probation of it's rigarous scrutiny.*

LYSANDER. 197

Iiim, and entreated him not to engage the Athe-
nians at sea before his return, beeause lie intended
to bring with him a large fleet out of Pha^nicia and
Cilicia.

After the departure of the prince Lysander not
choosing to %ht the enemy, who were equal to him
in force, nor yet to lie idle with such a number of
ships, cruised about and reduced some islands,
^gina and Salamis he pillaged ; and thence sailed
to Attica, where he waited on Agis, who had
marched his land-forces down from l)ecelea to the
coast, to show them what a powerful navy there
was, giving them the command of the seas in a
inanner they could not have expected. Lysander
however, observing the Athenians in chase of him,
steered another way back through the islands to
Asia. As he found the Hellespont unguarded, he
attacked Lampsacus '^ by sea, while Thorax made
an assault upon it by land ; in consequence of which
the city was taken, and the plunder given to the
troops. In the mean time the xVthenian fleet, which
consisted of a hundred and twenty ships, had ad-
vanced to Eleus a city in the Chersonesus. There
receiving intelligence that Lampsacus was lost, they
sailed immediately to Sestos ; where they took in
provisions, and then proceeded to ^gos-Potamos.
They were now just opposite the enemy, v>ho still
lay at anchor near Lampsacus. The Athenians
were under the command of several officers, among
whom Philocles was one ; the same who had per-
suaded the people to pass a decree, that tlie prison-
ers of war should have their right thumbs cut off,
that they might be disabled from handling a pike,
but might still be serviceable at the oar.

For the present they all went to rest, in hopes of
coming to an action the next day. But Lysander

'•* A city in Asia Minor, near the entrance of the Propontis, ce-
lebrated for it's wines. Decelea was an Attic fortress upon Mount
Hyniettus. Sestos was a city in the Thraciaa Chersonese, opposite
to Abydus,

198 LYSANDER.

liad a different design. He commanded the seamen
and pilots to go on board, as if he intended to tight
at break of day. These were to wait in silence fop
orders ; tlie land-forces were to form on the shore,
and \vatch the signal. At sun-rise the Athenians
drew np in a line directly before the Laceda^mo^
nian?, and gave the challenge. Lysander however,
thongh he had manned his ships over-night and
stood facing the enemy, did not accept it. On the
contrary, he sent orders by his pinnaces to the ships
in the van not to stir, but to keep the line without
makino^ the least motion. In the evcnino;, when the
Athenians retired, he would not suffer a single man
to land, till two or three gallej^s which he had sent
to look out, returned with an account that the
enemy were disembarked. Next morning tliey
ranged themselves in tlie same manner, and the like
was practised a day or two longer. This made the
Athenians extremely confident ; and they consi-
dered their adversaries as a dastardly set of men,
Vv'ho durst not quit their station.

In the mean time Alcibiades, w'ho lived in a
castle of his own in the Chersonese, rode to the
Athenian camp, and represented to the generals
two material errors which they had committed.
The first was, that they had stationed their ships
near a dangerous and naked shore ; the other, that
they were so far from Sestos, whence they were
obliged to fetch all their provisions. He told them,
it was their business to sail to the port of Sestos
vv'ithout loss of time ; Avhere tliey would be at a
greater distance fiom the enemy, wdio were watch-
ing their opportunity with an army commanded by
one man, and so well-disciplined that they would
execute his orders upon the least signal. Such were
the le^^sons, which he gave them, but they paid him
no attention. Nav, Tvdeus said, with an air of
contempt, " You are not general noAv, but we*."

* See the Life of Alcibiades, Vol. II,

LYSANDER. 199»,

Alciblacles even suspected some treachery, and there-
fore withdrew.

• On the fifth day, when tlie Athenians had offered
battle, they returned, as usual, in a careless and
disdainful manner. Upon this, Lysander detached
some galleys to observe them ; and ordered the
officers, as soon as they saw the Athenians landed,
to sail back as fast as possible, and when they were
come lialf-way, to hoist a brasen shield a,t the head
of each ship, as a signal for him to advance. He
then sailed along the wliole line, and gave instruc-
tions to the captains and pilots to have all tlieir men
in good orders, marinei's as well as soldiers ; and,
when the signal was given, to push forward with
the utmost vio-our ai^ainst the enemv. As soon
therefore as the signal appeared, the trumpet
sounded in the admiral-galley, the ships began to
move on, and the land-forces hastened along the
shore to seize the promontory. The space between
the two continents in that place is fifteen fin^longs,
which was soon passed by the diligence and spirit of
the rowers. Conon, the Athenian general, was the
first wlio descried them from the land, and hastened
to get his men on board. Sensible of the impending
danger, some he commanded, some he entreated,
and some he forced into the ships, liut all his en-
deavours were in vain. His men not in the least
expecting a surprise were dispersed up and down, in
the market-place or in the fields, asleep in their
tents, or preparing their dinners. All this was
owing to the inexperience of their commanders,
which had made them quite regardless of what
might bappen. The shouts and the noise of the
enemy rushing on to the attack were now heard,
when Conon fied with eight ships, and escaped to
Evagoras king of Cyprus. The Peloponnesians fell
upon the rest, took those which were empty, and
disabled the others as the Athenians were embark-
ing. Their soldiers, coming unarmed and in a
straggling manner to defend the ships, perished in

200 LYSANDER.

the attempt, and those' who fled were slain by that
part of the enemy which had landed. Lysander
took three thousand prisoners, and seized the wliole
fleet, except the sacred galley called Paralus ' ', and
those w^hich had escaped with Conon. When he
had fastened the captive gnlleys to his own, and
plundered the camp, he returned to Lampsacus, ac-
companied with flutes and songs of triumph. This
important action cost him but little blood ; in one
hour he terminated a long and tedious war '^, which
had been diversified beyont^ all others hy an incre-
dible variety of events. This cruel struggle, which
had occasioned so many battles, appeared in such
different forms, produced so many vicissitudes of
fortune, and destroyed more generals than all the
wars of Greece put together, v/as terminated by the
conduct and capacity of a siiigle man. Some, there-
fore, deemed it the effect of a divine interposition.
It was even asserted, that the stars of Castor
and Pollux appeared on each side of tlie helm of
Lysander's ship, when he first set out against the
Athenians. Others thought that a stone, which ac-
cording to the common opinion fell from heaven,
was an omen of this overthrow. It fell at ^gos-
Potamos, and was of a prodigious size : the people
of the Chersonesus hold it in great veneration, and
show it to this day '". Anaxagoras (it is said) had

^^ Upon the destination of this vessel the ancients are not fully
agreed ; but it was most probably employed to convey such things,
as were necessary for the public shows and sacrifices. (See Suid.
in voc. ' Paralus.') The Athenians had others likewise, diiicrently
named, for dittl;rent purposes.*

'* This war had lasted twenty-seven years ; (B. C. 431 — l-O^.)
and has been recorded, the first twenty-one years by Thucydides,
and the last six. by Xenophon.*

'^ This victory was gained 01. xciii. 4- : B. C. i05. (L.) Like the
ct^lebrated Yorkshire stone, of which tlie Editor can safely speak
from living very near the place where it made its appearance (in
179^), it bore marks of the action of fire ; and like it gave rise to
many conjectures, and much scepticism. Pliny seems to ridicule
the story, Aristotle thinks it had been I'fted up by a whirlwind and
fcarricd to the place where it full, and M. Pticard suggests, as very

LYSANDER. 201

foretold '^ that one of those bodies, which are fixed
to the vault of heaven, would one day be loosened
by some shock or convulsion of the whole machine,
and fall to the eartli. For he tauglit, that the stars
are not now in the places in which they were origi-
nally formed : that being of a stony substance and
heavy, the light which they give is caused only by
the reflexion and retiaction of the aather ; and that
they are carried along and kept in their orbits by the
ra})id motion of the heavens, which from the begin-
ning, when the cold ponderous bodies were sepa-
rated from the rest, prevented them from falling.

But there is another and a more probable opinion,
that falling stars are not emanations or detached parts
of the elementaiy fire, which go out at the moment
of their inflammation, nor yet a quantity of air
bursting from some compression, and taking fire in
the upper region ; but that they are really heavenly
bodies, which from some relaxation of the rapi-
dity of their motion or by some irregular concus-
sion are loosened and fall, not so much upon the
luibitable part of the globe as into the ocean, and
that hence their substance is seldom seen.

Damachus'* however, in his Treatise upon Reli-
gion, confirms the opinion of Anaxagoras. He re-
lates, that for seventy-five days together before the
fall of that stone there was seen in the heavens a
large body of fire, like an inflamed cloud, not fixed
to one place but carried this way and that with a

probable, that it never fell at all ! But see a Memoir by M. Proust,
Journ. Phys. LX. and the Comment in lletrosp. of Phil. &c. Discov.
ii. 201. Also Izarn, Dcs Pierres tombees du Ciel, ou Lithologie
Aii)iogp/ie>ii/ue, and Ed. Rev. vi. 386. — There were shown at Troy
two massy lumps, to which (Homer inibrras us) Jupiter had once
fastened Juno's feet.*

's As Pliny (N. H, xi 58.) affirms, sixty-two years before the
event.*

'9 Not Daraachus, but Daimachus, of Plataea?, a very fabulous
writer, and wholly ignorant of the mathematics ; in which however,
as well as in history, he pretended to great knowledge. (L.) He
has been previously quoted bv Plutarch, in his parallel of Solon and
Publicola.*

%d^ LYSAXDER. ' -

broken and irregular motion ; and that by it's vio-
lent aoritation several fierv Irasrments v/ere forced
from it, which were impelled in various directions,
and darted w^ith the celerity and brightness of so
many falling stars. After this body had fallen in the
Chersonese, and the inhabitants recoverin£3^ from
their terror assembled to look for it, they could not
find £My inflammable matter or the least sign of fire,
but a real stone, which thougti large v,^as as nothing
compared with the size of the fiery globe they had
seen in the sky, but appeared only like a bit crum-
bled from it. Damachus, obviously, requires very
indulgent readers. If his account hov/ever be the
true one, it absolutely refutes such as contend that
this stone was nothing but a rock rent by a tempest
from the top of a mountain, wliich after having been
sustained and hurried for some tim.e through the air
by a whirlwind, fell in the first place where it's vio-
lence abated and ceased. Perhaps at last this pha?-
ilomcnon, as it continued for so many days, was a
real globe of fire ; which when it came to disperse
and draw toward extinction, mio'ht cause such a
chansre in the air and oroduce such a violent whirl-,

O i.

wind, as tore the stone from it's native bed and
dashed it on the plain. But these are investigations,
^hicli beloni^ to writino^s of another nature.

When the three thousand Athenian prisoners were
condemned by the council to die% Lysander called
Philocles, one of the generals, and asked him what
punishment he thought he deserved, for having
given his citizens such cruel advice with respect to
the Greeks. Philocles, undismayed by his misfor-
tunes, replied ; " Do not bring forward an im-
^' peachmcnt, where there is no judge : but, now
" you are a conqueror, proceed as you would have
'*■ been proceeded with, had you been conquered.'*

, *° By way of retaliation, as Xcnopliou (Hcllen. ii.) informs us,
ri)r the severities, whicii the Atl:cnians had previously pr'actise4
upon some of their Spartan prisoners.*

lYSANDER. goi"

After this, be bathed and dressed himself in a rich
robe, and tlien led his countrymen to execution,
being the first (according to Theophrastus) who of-
fered his neck to the ax.

Lysander next visited the maritime towns ; and
ordered all the Athenians, whom he found in them,
upon pain of death to repair to Athens. His design
was, that tlie crowds forced into the city might
quickly occasion a famine, and so prevent the trou-
ble of a long siege, which must have been the case,
if provisions had been plentiful. Wherever he
came, he abolished the democratic and otlier forms
of government, and set up a Lacedii^monian governor
called ' Harmostes,' as«)isted by ten Archons, se-
lected from the clubs which he established. These
changes lie made as he sailed about at his leisure, not
only in the enemy's cities, but in those of his allies;
and thus he, as it were, engrossed to himself the
principahty of all Greece. For in appointing go-
vernors he had no regard to family or opulence, but
chose them from among those who were connected
with himself by acquaintance or hospitality, and in-
vested them with tliefull povrer of life and death. He
even assisted in person at executions, and drove out
ail who opposed his favourites; thus giving theGreeks
a xery indifferent specimen of the LacedsEmonian
government. Theopompus'^ therefore, the comic
writer, w^as under a great mistake, when he com-
pared the Lacedaemonians to vintners, who at first
gave Greece a delightful diaugiit of liberty, but
siibsequeritly dashed the wiiie wlih vinegar. The
draua'ht from the bep'inning was disagreeable and
bitter ; for Lvsander not onlv took the adiuinistra-
tion out of the liands of the people, but composed
his oligarcliies of the boldest and most factious of
the citizens.

When he had despatched this business, which did

*^ Muretus shows (Vom a passage in Theodorus Metocliites, that
we should read here ' Theonompus the historian,' instead of ' The-
opoaipus the coniic v.rittr.'

504 LYSANDER.

not occupy any long time, he sent messengers to
Lacedsemon, with an account that he was returning
with two hundred ships. He proceeded however to
Attica, where he joined the kings Agis and Pausa-
nias, in expectation of the immediate surrender of
Athens. But, finding that the Athenians made a
vigorous defence, he crossed over again to Asia.
Theie he introduced the same alteration in the
government of cities, and set up his decem-
virate~\ after having sacrificed in each city a
number of people, and forced others to quit their
country. As for the Samians"^, he expelled them
all, and delivered their towns to the persons whom
they had banished. And when he had taken Sestos
likewise out of the hands of the Athenians, he drove
away the Sestians, and divided both the city and it's
territory among his pilots and boatswains. This was
the first step of his, which the Lacechrmonians dis-
approved : they annulled what he had done, and re-
stored the Sestians to their country. But, in otlier
respects, the Grecians were well satisfied with his
conduct. They saw with pleasure the ^gineta? re-
covering their city, of which they had been long
dispossessed, and the Melians and Scionasans re-
established, while the Athenians were driven out, and
constrained to relinquish their claims.

By this time, he vv'as informed that Athens was
greatly distressed with famine ; upon which he sailed
to the Piraeus, and obHged the city to surrender at
discretion. The Lacedaemonians say, that Lysander

'^ How strongly does this progress of Lysander through Greece,
and in Asia, remind the reader of Buonaparte's conduct in his first
invasion of Italy ! ' What shall be the constitution of Genoa? A
Directory and Two Councils. What of Mantua ? A Directory and
Two Councils. What again of Bologna? You are very tiresome;

look into page of the Constitution of 1795: W'hat does it say^

A Directory and Two Councils.' (' Introd. to Intercepted Corresp.
of the Egyptian Army of Buonaparte;' I. xiii.) •

*^ These things did not happen in the order here stated. Samos
was not taken, till a considerable time after the Long Walls of
Athens were demolished. (Xenoph. Ilellen. ii.)

LYSANDER. fOi

wrote an account of it to the Ephori In these words,
"^^ Athens is taken ;" to which they returned this
answer, " ' I have taken it,' is sufficient." But
this was only an invention, to make the matter
look more plausible. The real decree of the Ephori
ran thus: " The Lacedaemonians have come to these
resolutions: You shall pull down the Pirseusand the
Long Walls, quit all the cities of which you are
possessed, and confine yourselves within the bounds
of Attica. Upon tliese conditions you shall have
peace, provided you pay v/hat is reasonable, and
restore tlie exiles**. As for the number of ships,
which you are to retain, you must com.ply with our
directions."

The Athenians, by the advice of Theramenes the
son of Ancon^% submitted to this decree. Upon
this occasion (we are told) Cieomenes, one of the
yoiuig orators, thus addressed him : " Dare yo!i
*' contravene the sentiments of Themistocles, by
•' delivering up those walls to the Lacedjemonian^^
" which he built in defiance of their pOv/er." The-
ramenes answered, " Young man, I do not in the
*' least contravene Themistocles' sentiments ; for he
" built those walls for the })reservation of the citi^^
" zens, and we for the same purpose demolish
" them. If walls alone could make a city happy
*' and secure, Sparta, which has none, would be
" the most unhappy place in the world."

After Lysander had taken from the Athenians all
their ships except twelve, and their fortifications
were delivered up to him, he entered their city on
the sixteenth of the month JMunychion ; the very
day upon which they had overthrown the barbarians
in the naval fight at Salamis. He presently set liim-
self to change their form of government j and, ob-

** T!ie Laceda?nionians knew tliat, if the Athenian exiles were
restored, they would be friends and partisans of theirs ; and, if
they were not restored, they should liave a pretext for distressing
the Athenians whenever they pleased.

*^' Or A^non.

206 LYSANDEK.

serving that tlic people resented his proposal, he
toid them, " That they had violated the terms ot'
" their capitulation; for their walls were still stand-
" ing, afier the time fixed for their demolition : and
*' that, since they had broken the first articles, they
*' must expect new ones from the council." Some
say, he actually proposed in the council of the allien
to reduce tlie Athenians to slavery ; and that Eri-
anihus, a Theban oHicer, gave it as his opinion
that the city should be levelled with the ground,
•and the spot upon which it stood converted to pas-
turai2"e.

Subsequently however, when tlie general officers
met at an entertainment, a musician of Phocis hap-
pened to begin a chorus in the l^^lectra of Euri-
pides-"*, the first lines of which are these 3

Electial, of Agamemnon sprung,
Approach thy straw-crown'd palace-

At this incident, the whole company were deeply
moved, and could not help reflecting how barbarous
a thing it would be, to rase and destroy that noble
city, which had produced so many illustrious men.
But Lysander, finding the Athenians wholely in his
power, collected the musicians in the city, and hav-
ing joined to them the band belonging to the camp,
pulled down the walls and burned the ships to the
soiuid of their instruments ; while the confederates,
crowned with flowers, danced and hailed the day, as
the coram.encement of their liberty.

Immediately after this lie changed the form of
their government, appointing Thirty Archons in the
city and ten in the Pirceus, and placing a garrison in
the citadel, the command of which he gave to a
Spartan named Callibius. This Callibius, upon some
occasion or other, lifted up his staff to strike Auto-

^^ It was {he happy lot of this poet, upon another occasion, to
preserve such of the Athenian captives, as could recite any part of
iuj» tragedies, from capital pujusbment, at Syracuse.*

LYSANDER. 207

lycus, a wrestler wliom Xenojihon lias mentioned in.
his Symposiacs^' ; upon which Autolycus seized hini
by tlie legs, and threw him to the ground. Lysander,
instead of resenting this, told Cailibius by way of
reprimand, " He knew not how to govern iree-
" men." The Thirty Tyrants however, in com-
plaisance to Cailibius, soon afterward put Autolycus
to death. Lysander, when he h.ad settled tiiese
affairs, sailed to I'Jn'ace-^ As for the money re-
maining in his coffers, with the crowns and other
presents, which were very considerable (as may well
be imagined) since his power was so extensive and
he was in a manner master of all Greece, he sent
them to Laceda^mon by Gylippus, who had the chief
command in Sicily. Gylippus (we are informed)
opened the bags at the bottom, and took a consider-
able sum out of each, and then sewed them np
again ; little suspecting that in every bag was in-
closed a note, giving an account of the sum which
it contained. As soon as he arrived at Sparta he hid
the money, which he had thus taken out, under the
tiles of his house, and then delivered the bags to the
Ephori with the seals entire. Vvlien opening them,
and counting their contents, they of course found
that the sums differed from the bills. At this they
were not a little embarrassed, till a servant of Gy-
lippus enigmatically told them, " a great number of
" owls roosted in the Ceramicus-'V' Most of the

^^ The very entertainment, celebrated in that vv ork, was given
upon Autoljxus' victory in the Pentatiilum, by CalHas one oi" his
admirers ; and Socrates was of the party.*

"■" Xenophon (ib.) sa}-?, he went now against Samos. Phitarch
should have mentioned, in this place, the conquest ot' the isle of
Thasos; and the cruel manner in which Lysander, contrary to his
solemn promise, massacred suci; of the inhabitants, as had been in
the interest of Athens. This is related by Polyasnus, Strat. I. xlv. 4.
But as Plutarch subsequently hiforms us, that he behaved in this
manner to the Milesians, the story is probably the same, and there
niay be a mistake only in the names.

^'^ Ceramicus was the name of a place near At'iens (Pausan.
i. 3.), wliere were buried all those who fell in battle. -It likewise
signifies ' the tihng of a house.'

«08 LYSAXDER.

coin at that ilmc, out of respect to the Atlienians^
bore tiie impression of an owi.

Gylippiis, having sullied his former great and
glorious actions by so base and unworthy a deed,
quitted Lacedaemon. Upon this occasion in parti-
cular the wisest among the Spartans observed the
influence of money, which could corrupt not only
tne meanest but the most respectable citizens, and
were therefore very warm in their censiu'e? of Ly-
sander for having introduced it. They insisted like-
wise, that the Ephori should send off all the silver
and gold, as evils destructive in proportion as they
Were all urine*.

In pursuance of this a council was called, and a
decree proposed by Sciraphidas, as Theopompus
writes, or (according to Ephorus) by Phlogidas,
** That no coin, whether of gold or silver, should
be admitted into Sparta, but that they should use
their current miCtal." This money was of iron dipped
in vinegar, v/hile it was red hot, to make it brittle
and unmalieable, so that it might be rendered inca-
pable of application to any cJther use. Besides, it
was heavy and difficult of carriage, and a large quan-
tity of it was but of little value. All the ancient
money was perhaps of this kind, and consisted of
pieces either of iron or of brass, which from their
form were called Obelise! : Avlicnce we have still a
quantity of small money called ' Oboli,' six of which
make a drachma or ' handful,' these being as many
as the hand can crrasn.

The motion, for sending, away the money, was
opposed by Lysander's party ; who procurccl a de-
cree, that it should be considered as the public trea-
sure, and that it should be a capital crime to convert
any portion of it to private uses : as if Lycurgus
had been afraid merely of the money, and not
of the avarice which it produces. And avarice was
not so much prevented by forbidding the use of
money in the occasions of private persons, as it was
encouraged by allowing it in those of the public j

LYSANDER. 209

for this added dignity to it's use, and excited strong
desires for it's acquisition. It was not to be ima-
gined indeed, that while it was vahied in public, it
would be despised in ])rivate ; or that what they
found so advantageous and acceptable to the state,
would be regarded as of no concern to tliemselves.
It is obvious, on the contrary, tliat customs de-
pending npon national institutions much sooner
aifect the lives and manners of individuals, than the
errors and vices of individuals corrupt a Vvholc na-
tion. For, v.hen the whole is distempered, the in-
dividual parts must be equally atiected ; but, when
the disorder subsists only in some particular parts, it
may be corrected and remedied by those which iiave
not yet received the infection, ^o that these magis-
trates, while they set guards (I mean, law and the
fear of punishment) at the doors of the citizens to
hinder the entrance of money, did not keep their
minds unsmitten and untainted with the love of it ;
but rather inspired that love, by universally exhibit-
ing wealth as a great and admirable thing. 'Iliis
conduct of theirs, however, we have censured in
another place ^".

Lysander, out of the spoils which he had taken,
erected at Delphi his own statue and those of his
officers in brass : he also dedicated in i^old the stars
of Castor and Pollux, which disappeared^' before the
battle of Leuctra. The srallev made of ffold and
ivory ^% which Cyrus sent in congratulation of his
victory, and v/hich was tvv^o cubits long, was placed
in the treasury of Brasidas and the Acanthians.
Alexandrides of Delphi writes'"', that Lysander de-

^° See the Life of Lycurgus, Vol. T.

'' They were stolen. Piutarch nieutions It as an omen of the
dreadful loss, which the Spartans were to siif.er in that battle. (See,
also, Cic. de Div. i. 'M.)

5* In like manner Aristobulus, the Jewish prince, pvsented
Pompey with a golden vineyard or garden, valuiid at five iiunilrcd
talents. That vineyard was consecrated in the teaiple or" Jupiter
Olympius, as this galley was at Delpiii.

ii "ihh- Alexandrides, or rather Anaxandrides, wrote an Ac-
count of the Offerings stolen from the t^!i:iplc at l)i.'iphi.
VOL. III. P

310 LYSANDtll.

posited there a talent of silver, fifty-two minse, and
eleven staters ; but this does not correspond with
the accounts of his poverty, which we have from all
historians.

Though Lj^saiuler had now attained greater power
than any Grecian l)efbre him, yet it was exceeded
Uy the pride and loftiness of his heart. For he was
tlie first of the Grecians (according to Duris)^^ to
whom altars were erected by several cities, and sa-
crifices ofiered, as to a god. To Lysander two hymns
were first sung, one of which began thus :

To the filmed cliief of (rreece let triumph's strain,
Loud ' lo paeans' raise from Sparta's plain !

Nay, the Samians^^ decreed that the feasts, which
they had been accustomed to celebrate in honour of
Juno, should be called ' the feasts of Lysander.' He
always kept the 8})artan poet Chcerilus in his re-
tinue^^% that he might be ready to add lustre to his
actions by the power of verse. And when Anti-
lochus had written some stanzas in his praise, he was
so delighted, that he gave him his hatful of silver.
Antimachus of Colophon^'" and Niceratus of Hera-

^* For some account of this historian, see the Life of Pericles,
Vol. IL and not. (58.) and of Alcibiades, ib. and not. (82.)

35 They must iiave worshipped him, as tlie Indians do tlie devil,
that he miaht do them no more hurt: that after one dreadful sacri-
fice to his cruelty, he might seek no more.

^^ There were three poets of this name (an unlucky name in
poetry! See Hor. A. P. '357.) who flourished at intervals of about
ieventv years ; but their works, perhaps fortunately, are all lost.
The first, who w;is of Sanios, sung the victory of the Athenians over
Xerxes, for whieii he received a stater per verse, and was honoured
■by a decree, enacting that his poem should be recited along with
those of Homer: he flourished about 01. Ixxv. The second wa»
this of Sparta ; and the third attended AlexAider the (ircat. Vos-
sius mentions one prior to all these, a tragic writer of Athens, who
lived in Ol. Ixiv., composed a hundred and fifty dramatic works, was
thirteen times crowned as victor, and (according to vSuidas) invent-
ed masks. Sec*

3^ Or Claros, a neighbouring city in Ionia. This poet, though
occasionally turgid and verbo<5e in his compoitions, was considered
as next to Homer in heroic verse; and Adrian even went so far, as
So endeavour to set the latter asitle in liis iavour.*

/" V

LYSANDER. 211

clea composed each a panegyric wliich bore his name,
and contested in form lor the prize. He adjudged
the crown to Niceratiis, at which Antimachus was so
mnch offended, th'at he suppressed his poem. Plato,
who was then very young, and a warm admirer of
Antimachus' poetry, addressed him while under liis
chagrin, and told him, hy way of consolation, " That

the ignorant are sufferers by their ignorance, as

the blind are by their want of sight." Aristonolis
the lyrist, who had six times won tlie prize at the
Pythian games, in order to pay his court to Lysander
promisecl him that, if he were once more victorious,
he would declare himself his retainer, or even his
slave.

Lysander's ambition was a burthen only to the )
great, and to persons of equal rank with himself [
Jjut the arrogance and .violence implanted in hist
temper along with his ambition by the ilatteries, wiih|
which he was besieged, had a more extensive iniiu-j
ence. He set no moderate bounds either to his re- 1
gard, or to his resentment. Governments unlimited^
and unexamined authorities v/ere the rewards of any'
friendship or hospitality, which he had experienced,
and the sole punishment which could appease his
anger was the death of his enemy ; nor was there
any way to escape.

Of this, an instance occurred at Miletus. He was
afraid, that the leaders of the plebeian party there
would secure themselves by flight ; and therefore,
v/ith a view of drawing them from their retreats, he
took an oath not to do any of them the least injury.
Relying upon his assurance, they made their appear-
ance ; when he immediately delivered them, to the
number of eight hundred, to the opposite party, and
they were put to death. Infinite were the cruelties, I
which he exercised in every city, against such as
were suspected of any inclination to poi)ular govern-
ment. For he not only consulted his own passions,
and gratified his own revenge, but co-operated in \
these respects with the re.;cntments and avarice of !

11 o

H /

■Nr>

'212 LYSANDER.

all his friends. Hence, the saying of Eteocles the
Lacedaemonian was reckoned a g'ood one, " Tliat
" Greece could not bear two Lvsandcrs." Theo-
plirastus indeed informs iis, that Arcliistratus^*^ had
said the same thing of Alcibiades. But of Alcibiades*
character, insolence, luxury, and vanity were the
niost disagreeable part; whereas the power of Ly-
sander was attended with a crueltv and savauencss
of manners, which rendered it insupportable.

There were many complaints against him, to which
the Lacedaemonians paid no regard. AVhen Pharna-
bazus however despatched embassadors to Sparta,
to represent the injury which he had received from
the depredations committed in his province, the
Ephori were incensed and put Thorax one of his
friends and collegues to death, having found silver in
his possession contrary to the late law. They like-
wise ordered Lysandcr home by their Scytale, the
nature and use of v»hich was as follows : \V hen ever
the magistrates sent out an admiral or a general,
they prepared two round pieces of wood witii so
much exactness, that they were perfectly equal both
in length and thickness. One of these they retained
themselves, and the other was delivered to the officer
then employed. These pieces of wood were called
' Scytahe.' When they had any secret and import-
ant orders to convey to him, they took a long nar-
row scroll of parchment and rolled it about their
own staff, one fold close to another, and then v/rote
upon it their commands. This done, they took off
the scroll, and sent it to the general. As soon as he
received it, he applied it to his staff; which being
just like that of the magistrates, all the folds fell in
with one another, exactly as they had done at the
writing : and though 'previously tlie characters were
so broken and disjointed, that nothing could be made
of them, they now became plain and legible. The

"^ It should be i-oad Arcliestratus. vSoc the Life of Alcibiades,
V 1. II.

LYSANDER. 213

parclimcnt, like the staff, is called ' Scytale ;' as the
thing measured bears the name of the measure.

Lysander, who was then in the Hellespont, was
mucli alarmed at the Scytale. Pharnabazus being
the person whose accusation he most dreaded, he
hastened to an interview with him, in hopes of being
able to compose their differences. When they met,
he desired him to send another account to the
magistrates, signifying that he had neither suffer-
ed any injury, nor made any complaint. He was
not aware (as the proverb has it) that ' He was play-
ing the Cretan with a Cretan ^^* Pharnabazus pro-
mised to comply with his request, and wrote a letter
in his presence agreeable to his directions, but had
contrived to have a second along with him of a quite
contrary purport. When the letter was to be sealed,
he palmed that upon him which he had privately
written, and which exactly resembled the other.
Lysander upon his arrival at Laced^emon went ac-
cording to custom to the senate-house, and delivered
Pharnabazus' letter to the magistrates, assuring him-
self that the heaviest chars^e was removed. For he
knew that the Lacedaemonians paid a particular at-
tention to Pharnabazus, because of all the king's
lieutenants he had rendered them the greatest ser-
vices in the war. Wlien the Ephori had read the
letter, they showed it to Lysander. He now^ fbiuid
to his cost, that

Others have art beside Ulysses''°,

and in the utmost confusion left the senate-house.

A few days afterward he applied to the magistrates,
and informed them that he was obliged to visit the

39 This proverb has already been quoted and explained, in the
Life of Paulus /Emilius, Vol. II. not. (69.)

^° This Iambic verse is apparently quoted from some tragic
writer, and probably (as M. Ricard plausibly suggests) from the
Palamedes of Euripides. Palamedes detected tllysses' artifice,
when he counterfeited the madman, in order to avoid going to tlie
siege of Troy.*

214. LYSAKDER.

temple of Jupiter Ammon, and offer the sacrifices,
which he had vowed before his baitles. Some say
that, when he was besieging the city of the Aphy-
ggeans in Thrace, Ammon actually appeared to him
in a dream ^\ and ordered him to raise the siege :
that he complied with the order, and bade the Aphy-
gjEans sacrifice to Amnion ; aad, for the same rea-
son, was now anxious himself to pa}^ his devotions
in Lybia to that deity. But it was generally believed,
that he only used the deity as a pretext, and that
the true reason of his retiring was his fear of the
Ephori, and his abhorrence of subjection. He chose
rather to roam and wander in foreigu countries, than
to be controlled at home. His haijghty spirit was
like that of a horse, which has long ranged the pas-
tures at liberty, and returns with reluctance to the
stall and to his former burthen. The reason, which
Ephorus assigns for this voyage, I sliall mention by
and by.

With much difficulty he obtained leave of the
Ephori to depart, and took bis voyage. While he
was upon it, the kings considered, that it was by
means of the associations which he had formed, that
he held the cities in subjection and was in eficct
master of all Greece. They resolved therefore to
drive out his friends, and re-establish iDe popular
governments. This occasioned new commotions.
First of all, the Athenians from the castle of rhyle*'
attacked the Thirty Tyrants, and defeated them.
I nuiicd lately upon this Lysander returned, and per-
suaded the Lacedasmoiu'ans to support the oligarchies,
and to chastise the people ; in consequence of which,
they remitted a hundred talents to'^the Tyrants, to
ena!<le them to carry on tlie war, and appointed Ly-
sander himself their general. But the envy by which
the kings were actuated, and their fear that he would

•*' See Pausan. iii. 28.*
_ ''' A casitle above Athens, remarkable for the strcngUi of it's
situation. Xenophon often mentions it, Heljen, ii, Thrasybulus
was at the head of this party of exiles.

/^

LYSANDER. 215

% second time take Athens, led them to determine
that one of them slionld attend tlie expedition. Ac-
cordingly Pausanias marched into Attica, ni appear-
ance to support the Tliirty Tyrants against the
people, but in reality to put an end to the war, lest
Lysander by his interest in Athens should again 1)e-
come master of it. This he easily effected. By re-
conciling the Athenians among themselves, and com-
posing their tumults, he frustrated Lysander's am-
bition. Yet as the Athenians revolted soon after-
ward, Pausanias was blamed for having removed the
curb of the oligarchy outof tlie mouth of the people,
and suffered them to recover their former insolence
and audacity. On tlie contrary, it added to Lysan-
der's reputation : he was now considered as a man,
who took not his measures either through favour or
ostentation, but in all his operations kept a steady
eye upon the interests of Sparta.

Lysander indeed had a ferocity in his expressions,
as well as in his actions, which confounded his ad-
versaries. AVhen the Argives had a dispute with
him about their boundaries, and thought their plea
better than that of the Lacedaemonians, he showed
them his sword, and said ; " He, wlio is master of
*' this, can best plead about boundaries."

When a citizen of Megara treated him with great
freedom in conversation, he said, " My friend, those
" words of thine should proceed only from strong
" bulwarks."

The Ba^otians hesitating upon some propositions,
which he had made to them, he asked them, " Whc-
'^ ther he should trail, or push his pikes among
" them?"

The Corinthians having deserted the league, he
advanced up to their walls ; but the Lacedaemonians,
he found, were very loth to begin the assault. A
hare just then happening to start out of the trenches,
" Are you not ashamed," he cried, " to dread those
" enemies, who are so idle that the vcrv hares sit in
^' quiet under their walls ?"

^

216 LYSANDER.

When king Agis died, he left behind him a bro-
ther named Agesiiaus, and a reputed son named
Leotychidas. Lysander, who had an extraordinary
regard for Agesiiaus, persuaded him to ]ay claim to
the crown as a genuine descendent of Hercules ;
whereas Leotychidas was suspected to be the son of
Alcibiades, the fruit of a private cominerce, which
he had had with Timaea the wife of Agis during his
exile in 8parta. Agis (we are told) from his com-
putation of the time, concluded that the child was
not his, and therefore took no notice of him, but ra-
ther openly disavowed him throughout his whole life.
When he fell sick however, and was carried to
Ilerrea''^, he was prevailed upon by the entreaties of
the youth himself and of his friends, before he died,
to declare before many witnesses that he was his
lawful son. At the same time, he desired all per-
sons present to testily these his last words to the
Lacedaemonians, and immediately expired.

Accordingly, they gave their testimony in favour
of Leotychidas. As for Agesiiaus, he was a man of
uncommon merit, and supported besides by the in-
terest of Lysander : but his affairs were nearly ruin-
ed by Diopithes, a famous interpreter of oracles, who
applied this prophecy to his lameness :

Illustrious, Sparto, as thou art, beware

Lest a lariie government thy strength impair •*-^:

Woes unforeseen shall be th}^ certain doom,

And war's strong tide shall whelm thee in the tomb.

■•^ Xenophon (Ilellen. iii.) informs us that Agis fell sick at
Heraea, a city of Arcadia, on his way from Delphi ; and that he was
carried to Sparta, and died theres His suspicions of the legitimacy of
Leotychutas are recorded, likewise, in the Life of Alcibiadcs, Vol. IL

"•^ The oracle considered the two kings of Sparta, as it's two legs,
the supports of it's freedom ; which in iact they were, by being a
check upon each other. The Lacedaemonians were therefore ad-
monished to beware of a ' lame government,' of having their re-
public converted into a monarchy; which, indeed, eventually proved
their ruin. (.Tuslin. vi.) These lines are again quoted in the begin-
ning of the Life of Agesiiaus, where the ensuiug conversation be-
tween Lysander and that chieftain is likev.ise to be found.

LYSANDER. 217

Many believed this interpretation, and were turning
to Leotychidas. But Lysander observed, that Dio-
pithes had mistaken the sense of the oracle; for that
the deity did not give himself any concern about
their being governed by ' a lame king,* but meant that
their government would be lame, if spurious persons
' sliould wear the crov/n among the race of Hercules.
Thus, partly by his address, and partly by his inte-
rest, he prevailed upon them to give the preference
to Agesilaus, w^ho was accordingly declared king.

Lysander immediately pressed him to carry the
w'ar into Asia, encouraging him with the hope of
destroying the Persian monarchy, and becoming him-
self the m.ost illustrious of mankind. He likewise
instructed his friends in Asia, to entreat that the
Lacedaemonians would give Agesilaus the conduct
of the war against the barbarians. They complied
with his request, and despatched embassadors to
Laceda^mon for that purpose. This command in-
deed, which Lysander procured for Agesilaus, seems
to have been an honour equal to the crown itself^
But ambitious spirits, though in other respects not
unfit for affairs of state, are shut out from many
great actions by the envy, which they bear their
fellow-candidates tor fame. For thus they make
those their adversaries, who would otherwise have
been their assistants in deeds of glory.

Agesilaus took Lysander v/ith him, made him one
of his thirty counsellors, and gave him the first rank
in his friendship. But when they came into Asia,
Agesilaus found that the people, being unacquainted
with him, seldom applied to him and were very brief
in their addresses ; whereas Lysander, whom they
Jiad long known, had them always at his gates or in
his train, some attending out of friend-.hip and others
out of apprehension. Just as it happens in tragedies,
that a principal actor represents a messenger or a
servant, and is admired in that character, while he
who bears the diadem and sceptre is hardly listened
to, when he speaks ; so in this case the counsellor

, ^

?1S LYSANDER.

engrossed all the hoiioiir, and the king had only iho
barren title of commander-in-chief.

Doubtless this unseasonable ambition of Lysandcr
deserved correction, and he was to be made to
/Hnow that the second place only belonged to him.
But entirely to cast olf a friend and benefactor, and
from a jealousy of honour to expose hmi to scorn,
was a step unworthy the character of Agesilaus.
He began with taking business out of his hands, and
making it a })oinfc not to employ him upon any
occasion where he might distinguish himself. In
the next place, those lor whom Lysander interested
himself were sure to miscarry, and to meet with
less indulgence than others of the meanest station.
Thus the king gradually undermined and enfeebled
his power.

When Lysander found that he failed in all his
applications, and that his kindness was only a hin-
drance to his friends, he desired them to forbear their
addresses to him, and to wait only upon the king or
the present dispensers of his favours. In conse-
quence of this, they gave him. no fartlier trouble
about business, but still continued their attentions,
and joined him in the public walks and other places-
of resort. This caused Agesilaus more pain than
ever, and his envy and jealousy continually increased ;
insomuch that, while he bestowed commands and
governments upon common soldiers, he appointed
Lysander his carver. Then, to insult the lonians,
he bade them " go and make their court to his
" carver."

Upon this, Lysander determined to come to an
explanation with him, and their dialogue was ex-
tremely laconic : " Truly, Agesilaus, you know very
*• well how to tread upon your friends." " Yes,"
said he, " when they seek to be greater than myself.
" It is but fit that those, who are willing to advance
" my power, should share it." '' This is rather
*« perha})s," said Lysander, " an assertion of yours,
^? than an action of mine. I beg of you howeveiv

LYSANDER. 219

*' for the sake of strangers wlio Iiave their eyes upon
" us, that you will put me in some post, where I
" mar be least obnoxious and most useful to you.**

xlgrceablv to this request, the lieutenancy of the
Hellespont was granted him ; and, though he still
retained his resentment against Agesilaus, he did
not neglect his duty. He fband Spithridates ''^ a
Persian remarkable for his valour, and with an army
at his command, at variance with Pharnabazus, and
persuaded Iiiin to revolt to Agesiiaus. This was the
only service, upon which he was employed ; and
when his commission was expired, he returned to
Sparta in disgrace, highly incensed against Agesiiaus,
and more displeased than ever w^ith the whole frame
of government. He resolved therefore, without
any farther loss of time, to bring about the change,
which he had long meditated in the constitution.

When the Heraclidae mixed with the Dorians, and
settled in Peloponnesus, there was a large and flou-
rishing tribe of them at Sparta. The whole however
were not entitled to the regal succession, but only
two families, the Eurytionidae and the Agidae, while
the rest derived no share in the administration from
their high birth ; for, as to the conunon rewards of
virtue, they were open to all men of distinguished
merit. Lysander, who was of this lineage, no sooner
saw himself exalted by his acliievements and sup-
ported with friends and f)owcr, than he became
uneasy to think that a city, which owed it's grandeur
to his exertions, should be ruled by others no better
descended than himself Hence he projected a plan
of altering the settlement, which coniined the suc-
cession to the above two families, and of laying it
open to all tiie Heraclidfr. Som^e sav, his intention
was to extend this high honour not only to all the
Heraclidie, but to all the citizens of Sparta ; that it

'♦^ So Xenophon calls him, not ' Mithriilates,' the common
reading in Plutarch. 8oTnc> MSS. indeed, in the Life of Agesiiaus,
Iiave it * Spithridates.'

"^

520 LYSAXDER.

might belong not so much to the posterity of Her-
cules, as to those who resembled Hercules in that
virtue, wliich numbered him with the gods. He
hoped likewise that, when the crown was settled in
this manner, no Spartan would have higher preten-
sions than himself.

At first, he prepared to draw the citizens into his
scheme, and committed to memory an oration writ-
ten by Cleon of Ilalicarnassus for that purpose. But
he quickly perceived, that so great and difficult a
reformation required more extraordinary methods to
bring it to bear. And as in tragedy machinery is
introduced [where more natural means will not do],
so he resolved to assail the people witii forged oracles
and prophecies; well knowing that Cleon's eloquence
would avail but little, unless he previously subdued
their minds with divine sanctions and tlie terrors of
superstition. He first, therefore, as Ephorus informs
lis, endeavoured to corrupt the priestess of Delphi,
and afterward those of Dodona by means of one
Pherecles ; and having no success in either applica-
tion, he applied in person to the oracle of Ammon,
and offered the priests large sums of gold. But they
likewise rejected his proposals with indignation, and
sent deputies to Sparta to charge him with the
attempt. When these Lybians found he was acquit-
ted, they took their leave of the Spartans, saying ;
" We will pass better judgements, when you come
^' to live among us in Lybia." There was an ancient
prophecy it seems, that the Lacedasmoninns would
some time or other settle in Africa. This whole
scheme of Lysander's was of an extraordinary tex-
ture, not originating from accidental circumstances,
but deep laid, and conducted with unconunon art
and address: so that it may be compared to a
mathematical demonstration, in wliich from some
principles first assumed the conclusion is deduced
through a variety of abstruse and intricate steps.
We shall therefore explain it at large, taking Epho-

/

LYSANDER. 2ai

rus ^^, wlio was both an historian and a philosopher,
for our guide.

There was a woman in Pontus, who announced
that she was pregnant by Apollo. Many very natu-
rally rejected her assertion, and many believed it.
So that when she was delivered of a son, several
persons of the greatest eminence took particular
care of his education, and for some reason or other
gave him the name of Silenus. This niiraculous birth
Lysander adopted for a foundation, and upon it
raised his whole superstructure. He made choice
of such assistants, as might bring the story into
reputation, and place it beyond suspicion. He then
got another story propagated at Delphi, and sj)read
at Sparta ; " That certain ancient oracles were kept
in the private registers of the priests, which it was
not lawful to touch or to look upon ; till in some
future age a person should arise, who could incoii-
trovcrtibly prove himself the son of Apollo, and
to him those oracles were to be deh vered." The
way thus prepared, Silenus was to make his appear-
ance as the son of Apollo, and to demand the oracles.
The priests, who were in combination, were to
inquire into every article, and examine him strictly
as to his birth. At last they were to pretend to be
convinced of his divine parentage, and to show him
the books. Silenus was then publicly to read all
those propliccies, particularly that for which the
whole design w-as set on foot ; namely, " That it
would be more for the honour and interest of Sparta
to ciioose their kings out of the m.ost worthy men in
the commonwealth." But when Silenus was grown
up and came to undertake his part, I^ysander had
the mortification to see his piece miscarry through
the cowardice of one of the accomplice-actors, whose
heart failed him, just as the business was going to be
carried into execution. Nothing of this, however,
was detected during the life of Lysander.

"♦^ Of this historian both Polyhius and Straho, witli some fc\r
exceptions, havi' izivcn a iijvourabl-j account.*

222 LYSANDER.

He died before Agesikus returned from Asict,
after he had encajijed his country, or rather involved
all Greece in tlie Boeotian war. This, indeed, is
variously stated ; some laying the blame upon him,
some upon the Thebans, and some upon both.
Those who charge the Thebans with it, assert tiiat
they overturned the altar, and profaned the sacrifice ^^
which Agesilaus was offering at Au.lis ; and that
Androclides and Araphitheus, imder the inliuence
of Persian gold"'**, attacked the Phocensians and laid
waste their country, in order to draw upon the
Lacedaemonians the Grecian war. On the other
hand, as they who make Lysander the author of the
war inform us, he was highly displeased that the
Thebans alone of all the confederates should claim
the tenth of the Athenian spoils taken at Decelea,
and complain of his having sent the money to Sparta.
But what he most resented w^as, their having put the
Athenians in a w^ay of delivering themselves from
the Thirty Tyrants, whom he had set up. The
Lacedaemonians, in order to strengthen the hands of
those Tyrants and render them more formidable.

^' Beside this affair of the sacrifice, the Lacedaemonians ^-ere of-
fended at tlie Thebans for having claimed the tenth of the treasure
taken at Dccelea, as well as for having refused to attend them in
their expedition against the Piraeus, and dissuaded the Col'inthians
from joining in that enterprise. The Thebans, indeed, began to be
jealous of the growing power of the Lacedtenionians ; and did not
wish to see the xlthenians, whose weigiit had been considerable in
the balance of power, entirely ruined. (Xenoph. Hellen. iii.)

•^s These were not the only persons, who had received bribes
from Persia. Tithrawstes, alarmed at the progress which Agesilaus
'eras making in Asia, sent Timocrates the Rhodian with fifty talents
to be distributed among the leading men in the states o'i Greece.
Those of (!orinth and Argos had their share, as well as t!ie Thebans.
In const.(}uence of this, the Thebans persuaded the Locrians to
pillage a tract of land, at that time in dispute between the Pho-
censians and the Thebans : the Phocensians made reprisals, Thci
Thebans supported tlie Locrians : upon which the Phocensians>
applied to the Spartans, and the war became general. (L.)

Xenophon, to whom we are indebted for this detail (ib.), does
ivot mention Anrphitheus, but Pausaniiis does under the name of
Amphitlieniis. -(iii. 9.)*

y

LYSANDER. 225

had decreed, " That if any Athenian fled out of the
city, he should be apprehended, wherever he was
found, and obh'ged to return ; and that whoever
opposed the taking of such fugitives, should be
treated as the cneniies of Sparta." The Thebans
upon that occasion issued orders, which deserve to
be enrolled with the actions of Hercules and Bac-
chus. They caused proclamation to be made,
" That every house and city should be open to such
Atlienians as desired protection ; that whoever
refused assistance to a fugitive that was seized,
should be fined a talent ; and that if any one should
carry arms through Bcrotia against the Athenian
lyrants, he should not meet with the slightest mo-
lestation." Neither were their actions unsuitable
to these decrees, so humane and worthy of Greeks.
When Thras^^bulus and his company seized the
castle of Phyle, and laid the plan of their other ope-
rations, it was from Thebes that they set out ; and
the Thebans not only supplied them with arms and
money, but gave them a kind reception and every
encouragement. These were the grounds of Lysan-
<3er's resentment against them.

He was naturally prone to anger, and the melan-
choly which grew upon him with years made him
still more so. He importuned the Ephori, there-
fore, to send him against the Thebans. Accordingly
lie was employed, and marched out at the head of
one army, and Pausanias was quickly despatched
after him with another, Pausanias took a circuii, by
mount CithicM'on, to enter Bcrotia ; and Lysander
passed through Piiocis with a very considerable
force to meet him. The city of Orchomenus
opened her gates to him, as he was upon his march,
and he took Lebadia by storm and plundered it,
Tlience he sent letters to Pausanias, to desire him
to move from PlatiPce, and join h'lm at Haliartus, for
he intended to be there himself by break of day.
But the messens-er was taken bv a Tlieban recon-
Hoitrmg party, and the letters were carried to Thebes.

224. LYSANDER.

Upon this, the Thebans entrusted their city to a
body of Athenian anxiliaries ; and marching' them-
selves about midnight for Haliartus, reached tlie
town a little before Lysander, and entered it with
part of their forces. Lysander at first tliought pro-
per to encamp upon an eminence, and wait for
Pausanias. But, when the day began to decline, he
grew impatient, and ordered the Lacedieaionians
and confederates to arms. He then led out his
troops, in a direct line along the high road, up to
the walls. The Thebans w^ho remained without,
taking the city on the left, fell upon his rear at the
fountain called Cissusa"^^. In this fountain the
nurses of Bacchus, it is fabled, washed him imme-
diately after his birth. The water is indeed of a
bright shining colour like wine, and a most agree-
able taste. Not far from it grow the Cretan canes^^,
of which javelins are made ; whence the Haliartians
would prove, that Rhadamanthus dwelt there. Be-
sides, they show his tomb, which they call Alea.
The monument of Alcmena, likewise, is near that
place ; and nothing, they say, can be more probable
than that she was buried there, because she married
Rhadamanthus after Amphitryon's death.

The other Thebans, v/ho had entered the city,
drew up with the Haliartians, and stood still for
some time. But when they saw Lysander with his
vanguard approaching the walls, they rushed out at
the gates, and killed him with a soothsayer by his
side, and some few more ; the chief part of his fol-
lowers having retreated as fast as possible to the
main body. The Thebans improved their advantage,
and pressed upon them with so much ardour, that

*'^ The name of this fountain should probabl}', after Pausanias
and Strabo, be read ' Tilphusa ' or * Tilpliosa. '

5° Strabo (ix.) informs us, that Hahartus was destroyed by the
Romans in the war with Perscu>, He also speaks of a lake in it's
iieighbourjjood, nhicli produces canes or reec's, not for shafts of
javelins, but for pipes or flutes. Plutarch likewise mentions the
latter use, in the Life of Syila.

9

LYSANDKR. 225

tliey were soon put to tlie rout, and fled to the liills.
Their loss amounted to a thousand, and that of the
Thebalis to three hundred. The latter lost their
lives hy chasing the enemy into craggy and danger-
ous ascents. These three Jiundred had been accu.sed
of favouring the Lacedaemonians; and, being deter-
mined to wipe otF tlie stain, pursued them with a
degree of rashness which proved fatal to themselves.
Pausanias received the news of this misfortune, as
he was upon his march from PlatJEJie to Thespias, and
continued his route in good order to Haliartus.
Thrasybulus, likev/ise, brought up his Athenians
thither from Thebes. Pausanias was desirous of a
truce, that he might stipulate for the dead ; but the
older Spartans could not think of it without indig-
nation. They accordingly went to him and declared,
" That they would never recover the body of Ly-
" sander by truce, but by arms: that, if they con-
" quered, they shoidd bring it off and bury it with
" honour; and, if they were worsted, they should
" fall gloriously upon the same spot with their
" commander." Notwithstanding these representa-
tions of the veterans, Pausanias saw it v^-ould be very
difficult to beat the Thebansnow flushed with victory;
and that, even if he should gain the advantage, he
could hardly without a truce carry off the body, which
lay so near the walls. He therefore sent a herald
who settled the conditions, and then retired with his
army. As soon as they were beyond the confines of
Egeotia, they interred LysaUder in the territories of
the Panopa^'ans^', Vvhich v/as the first ground belonging
to their friends and allies. His monument still re-
mains, by the side of the road from Delphi to Ghae-
ronea. While the Lacedaemonians had their quar-
ters there, it is reported that a certain Phocensian,
in giving an account of the action to a friend of his
who had not been in it, said, " The enemy fell upon
" them, just after Lysandcr had passed the Hoplites."

^"' A tribe in Phocip. See Pausan. x. 4.*
VOL. III. Q

226 LYSANDER.

While the man stood woiideriiig at the account, a
Spartan, one of Lysander's friends, asked the Phocen-
sian, " What he meant by ' Hoplitcs ",' for he could
" make nothing* of it." " I mean," said he, " the
" place, where the enemy cut down our first ranks.
" The river, which runs by the town, is called Ho-
" plites." The Spartan, when he heard this, burst
into tears, and exclaimed, " How inevitable is fatel"
Lysander, it seems, had received an oracle couched
in these terms ;

Shun loud Hoplites, and the earth-born dragon
Which stings thee in the rear.

Some say, the Hoplites does not run by Hallartus,
but is a brook near Coronea, which mixes with the
river Phliarus, and passes by that city. It was for-
merly called Hoplias, but is now knovvii by the name
of Isomantus. The Haliartian, who killed Lysander,
\vas named Neochorus,and bore a dragon in his shield,
to which it was supposed the oracle referred.

They tell us likewise, that the city of Thebes dur-
ing the Peloponnesian war had an oracle from the
•Ismenian Apollo, which foretold the battle at De-
lium '^ and tliis at Haliartus, though the latter did
not happen till thirty years after the other. The
t)racle runs thus;

Shun the wolf's confines, nor employ thy skill
Pei'verse tor foxes on th' Orchalian hill.

The country about Delium he calls * the confines,*
because Bax)tia there borders upon Attica ; and by

5^ Hoplites, though the name of a river, signifies also ' a heavy-
armed soldier.'

53 The battle of Delium, in which the Athenians were defeated
by the Thebans, was fought 01. Ixxxix. 1., B. C. 4-2-1', according to
Diod. Sic. xii. 76; and, according to Thucyd. v. 32, the year before:
and that of Haliartus fvdl twenty-nine years afterward. But it is
common for historians to make use of a round nunibcr, except ij)
cases where great precision is required.

LYSANDER. 227

' th' Oi'clialian hlir' is particularly meant that called
Alopecus *, on the side of Helicon looking toward
Ha Hart us.

After the death of Lys-ander, the Spartans so much
resented Pausanias' whole behaviour with respect to
tliat event, that they summoned him to be tried for
his life. He did not however appear to answer to
the charge, but fled to Tegea and took refuge in
Minerva's temple, where he spent the rest of his days
as her suppliant.

Lysander's poverty, which was discovered after his
death, added lustre to his virtue. It was then found,
that notwithstanding the money which had passed
through his hands, the authority which he had exer-
cised over so many cities, and indeed the immense
empire of which he had been possessed, he had not
in the least improved his family-fortune. This ac-
count we have from Theopompus, whom we uiorc
readily believe when he commends, than when he
finds fault ; for he as well as many others, was more
inclined to censure than to praise.

Ephorus informs us that subsequently, upon some
disputes between the confederates and the Spartans, it
was thought necessary to inspect Lysander*s papers,
and for that purpose Agesilaus went to his house.
Among the rest he found one of apolitical cliaracter,
calculated to prove the propriety of taking the right
of succession from the Eurytionida3 and Agidai, and
of electing kings from among persons of the greatest
merit. This he v/as going to produce before the
citizens, in order to show what the real principles of
Lysander were. But Lacratidas, a man of sense and
the principal of the Ephori, restrained him from it
by representing, " How improper it would be to dig
" Lysander out of his grave ; when this oration, which
" was written in so artful and persuasive a manner,
" Ouixht rather to be buried with him."

Among the other honours paid to his memory,

«^ Tliatis, * fox-hill/
Q 2

228 LYSANDEK.

that which I am about to mention is none of the least.
Some persons, who had contracted themselves to his
daughters in his life-time, when they found that he
died poor, renounced their engagements. The Spar-
tans fined them for having courted the alliance while
they had riches in view, and breaking it off when
they discovered that poverty, which was the best
proof of Lysaiider's probity and justice. There was
a law (it seems) at Sparta, which punished not only
those who continued in a state of celi]:)acy, or mar-
ried too late, but those also who married ill; and it
was levelled chiefly at persons, who married into rich,
rather than into good families. Such are the parti-
culars of Lysander's Life, with which history has sup-
plied us.

THE

LIFE

OF

S Y L L A.

SUMMARY.

Extraction and fortune of Sylln. His fgnre, love of repartee, and
good living. Bocchus delivers up to him Jugurtha : Source of hit
hostility against Marius. He is elected prcetor, and sent as lieu-
tcjiant into Cappndocia. His future greatness predicted. A'etw
subjects of quarrel between Marius and himself. His success in
the Social War: ascribed by himself to fortune. Presage of his
sovereign authority. Inconsistency of his conduct. He is elected
consul : commencement of the Civil War announced by prodigies.
Mai'ius combines tvith the tribune Sulpitius, tvho jjrocicres him the
management of the Mithridatic War. Prcetors insulted by Sylla's
soldiers. Omens, ijohich determine him to march to Rome. ^ The
senate sends an embassy to him. He enters the city. Marius
flies. Sijlla sets a price upon his head. Situation of Mithridates*
affairs. Sylla lays siege to Athens ; and plunders the Grecian
temples : Compared with the ancient Roman generals. Portrait
of the tyrant Aristion. Capture and sack of Athens. Sylla puts
a stop to the carnage. Aristion surrenders himself. Sylla goes
into Bceotia. His small force desjnsed by the enemy. He seizes
an advantageous position, and saves Chceronea. Presages of his
success. He encamps near Archelaus. Two Chceroneans drive
the enemy from the port of Thurium. Sylla gains a complete vic-
tory, and erects trophies: is attacked in Thessaly by Dorylaus,
a7id gains a second victory. Has an intervieiv with Archelaus, and
grants him a peace. Mithridates* envoys refuse to confrm it.
Sylla's interview with that prince^ and ratif cation of the treaty,

9

230 SYLLA.

He oppresses Asia Minor : carries (jjffrom Aihenn the tvrilings of
Aristotld^and Theophrastus : is seized uoith the gout, while in that
cilij. Sati^r found near Apollonia, Sylla defeats the consul A'or-
banus. Lvcidlus, his lieutenant, raids a vuch more mimerous
army. Sylla corrupts the troops of Scipio; and gains a great
victory oxer young Maruis. Telesinns the Sanniite nearly gets
possession nfJRome : iv engaged by Sylla, and defeated. He con-
venes the senate, and during their sitting massacres six thousand
men. His change of behaviour, on oLtaining the supreme poiver ;
and horrible proscriptions. He orders twelve thousand racn to be
put to death at Prceneste : declares himself dictator : lays down
the office, and predicts to Pompey the wir ivhirh he ST.hr-equently
waged ivith Lepidus. Dt'dicates thete: th of his stdjifance to Her-
cides ; is attacked by the Morbus Pediculosus : dies. His funeral.

Lucius Cornelius sylla was of a patri-
cian family. One of his ancestors, named llnfiniis^,
is said to have been consul, but lo have fallen luider
a disgrace more than equivalent to that hoi*our. He
was found to have in his possession more than ten
pounds of plate, which the law did not permit ; and
for that he was expelled from the senate. Hence it
was, that his posterity continued in a lov. and ob-
scure con^'litioii ; and Sylla himself was born to a
very scanty fortune. Even when 'lie was grov/n up,
he lived in hired lodgings, for Vvhich he paid but a
srsiall consideration ; and with this he was subse-
quently reproached, \vhcii risen to such opulence as
he had had no previous reason to expect. For one day,
as he was braggiiig and priding himself upon the ex-
ploits wiiich he had achieved in Africa, a person of

' Publius Cornelius Ilufinus, a mar. of grcjit military talents and
dishonest avarice (A. Gell. iv. 8.), was tvc'xce consul ; the first time
A.U.C. 4'63, and the second thirteen yer..rs afterward. He was
expelled the senate two y'--!"S after his second consulship, when
Q. Fiibriciui Lucinus and Caius ..'Emilius Papus were censors. (See
Val. Max. ii. d.) Velleius Patei cuius (ii. 17.) informs us that Sylhi
was the sixth in descent from this lluhnus, whicli might. very well be;
for between the first consulsiiip of lluhnus and the first campaign of
Sylla, there was an interval of a hundred and eighty-eight years.

12

SYLLA. ' 231

some name and character asked, " How canst thou
" be an lionest man, who art master of such a for-
" tune, when thy fatiier left thee nothing?" Though
the Romans at that time did not retain their ancient
integrity and purity of manners, but were degene-
rated into hixury and expense, yet it seems they
still considered it as not less disgraceful to have de-
parted from family-poverty, than to have spent a pa-
ternal estate. And a long time afterward, when
Sylla had made himself absolute and put numbers to
death, a man who was only the second of his family
that was free, being condemned to be thrown down
the Tarpeian rock for having concealed a friend in-
cluded in the proscription, spoke of Sylla in this
upbraiding manner ; " I am his old acquaintance;
" we lived Ions: under the same roof: I hired the
" upper apartment at two thousand sesterces, and
" he the one under me at three thousand." So that
the difference between their disbursements was then
only a thousand sesterces, which in Attic money is
two hundred and fii'ty drachmas. Such is the ac-
count, which we have of his origin.

As to his figure, we have the whole of it in his
statues, except his eyes. They were of a lively
blue,' fierce and menacing ; and this ferocity was
heightened by his complexion, which was a strong
red, interspersed with spots of wliite. From this
complexion, we learn, he had the name of Sylla~ ;
and an Athenian droll deduced from it the following
jest :

Sylla's a mulbeny sprinkled with meal.

Neither is it foreign to make these observations
upon a man, who in his youth, before he emerged
from obscurity, was such a lover of drollery that he
spent his time with mimics and jesters, and went
with them to every length of riot. Nay, when ill

* Sil or Syl is a yellow kind of earth, which when burnt becomes
red. Hence Sj/llaceus Colar, in Vitruvius, signiHes ' purple.'

332 SYLLA.

the height of his power, he would collect the most
noted players and buffoons every day, and in a man-
ner extremely unsuitable to his aije and dio-nitv drink
and join with them in licentious wit, while business
of consequence lay neglected. He would never, in-
deed, admit any thing serious at his table; and
though at other times a man of business, and austere
in his manner, he would change instantaneously
whenever he had company, and begin a carousal.
vSo that to buffoons and dancers he was the most
affable man in the v^^orld, the m.ost easy of access,
and the most capable of being moulded just as they
pleased.

To tliis dissipation may be imputed his libidinous
attaclnnents, and his disorderly and inflimous love of
jpleasure, which stuck by him even in age. One of
his mistresses named Nicopolis, wa& a courtesan, but
very rich. This woman was so captivated by his
company and the beauty of his person, that she en-
tertained a real passion, for him, and at her death
made him her heir. His mother-in-law likewise, who
loved him as her own son, left him her estate. With
these additions to his fortune, he was tolerably pro-
vided for.

He was appointed quaestor to Marius in his first
consulship, and went over with him into Africa to
carry on the war with Jugurtha. In the military de-
partment he acquired great honour, and among other
things availed himself of an opportunity to make a
friend of Bocchus, king of Numidia. The embas-
sadors of that prince had just escaped out of the
hands of robbers, when Sylla gave them the most
humane reception, loaded them with presents, and
sent them back with a strong; "uard.

i3occhus, who tor a long time had both hated
and feared his son-in-law Jugurtha, had him then
at his court. He had taken refuge there after his
defeat; and Bocchus, now meditating to betray him,
chose rather to let Sylla seize him, than to deliver
liim up himself. Sylla communicated the affair to

SYLLA. 233

Marius^ and taking a small party with him set out
upon the expedition, dangerous as it was. What
indeed could be more &o than, in hopes of getting
another man into his power, to put himself into
that of a barbarian who was treacherous to his own
relations ? In fact, when Bocchus saw them at his
disposal, and that he was under a necessity of be-
traying either the one or the other, he debated long
within himself which shoidd be the victim. At last,
lie determined to abide by his original resolution,
and gave up Jugurtha into the hands of Sylla.

This procured Marins a trium.ph, but envy as-
cribed the whole glory of it to Sylla ; a circumstance
which jMarius in his heart not a little resented : es-
pecially when he found that Sylla, who was naturally
tbnd of fame and from a low and obscure condition
now rose to general esteem, sulfered his ambition to
carry him so far as to order a signet to be engraved
witli a representation of this adventure, which he
constantly used in sealing his letters. The device
was, Bocchus delivering up Jugurtha, and Sylla re-
ceiving him.

This touched Marius to the quick. As he thought
Sylla however not considerable enough to be an ob-
ject of envy, he continued to employ him in hi&
wars. Thus in his second consulship he made him ^
one of his lieutenants, and in his third bestowed
upon him the command of a thousand men. Sylla,
in these several capacities, pertbrmed many import-
ant services. In that of heutenant, he took Copillus
chief of the Tectosagae^ prisoner ; and, in that of
tribune, he persuaded the great and popular nation
of the Marsi to declare themselves friends and allies
of the Romans. But finding Marius uneasy at his
successes, and that instead of giving him new oc-
casions to distinguish himself he rather opposed
his advancement, he applied to Catulus, Marius'
collegue.

3 This is rather differently stated in the Life of Marius, p. 130.*
^ Whose capital waa Toulouse.*

•

23 i. S"YLLA.

Catuliis was a worthy man, but he had not ilie de-
gree of 'vigour necessary for action. He, tlierefore,
employed Sylla in the most difficult enterprises, and
this opened to him a fine iiekl both of honour and
power. He subdued most of the barbarians who in-
habited the Alps, and in a time of scarcity under-
took to procure a supply of provisions ; which he
performed so effectually, that there was not only
abundance in Catulus' camp, but that of Mariusalso
was relieved with the overplus.

Sylla himself writes, that Marius was deeply af-
flicted at this circumstance. From so petty and
childish a cause did that enmity spring, which after-
ward grew up in blood, and was nourished by civil
wars and the incurable rcge of faction, till it ended
in tyranny and the confusion of the whole state.
This shows hov/ wise a man Euripides was, and how
well lie understood the distempers of government,,
when he called upon mankind to beware of ambi-
tion', as a daemon most destructive to her worship-
pers,

Sylla by this time thought the glory, which he had
acquired in war, sufficient to procure him a share in
the administration; and he therefore immediately left
the camp, to go and make his court to the people.
The ofiice, which he solicited, was the city-praetor-
ship, but he flviled in the attempt. For this he as-
signs the following; rccison : the people, knowing
the friendship between him and Bocchus, expected
if he were aedile before his prajtorship, that he
would treat them with magnificent huntings and
combats of African wild beasts ; and upon that ac-
count chose other ])netors, that he might be forced
upon the aedileship. Subsequent events, however,
sliowcd the cause alleged by Sylla not to have been

' PiKcn. 531. (L.) Bqt the English stage can Bupplj' as strong
9 (lit-.suasive :

(Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition ;
\$y that sin I'eii the angels, &c.

(Shaksp. Hen. Vlll.iii. 2.)*

SYLLA. ^33

the true one. For the year following^ he got him-
seh' elected praetor, partly by his assiduities and j)artly
by his monty. \Vi]iie he bure that ofnce, he hap-
pened to be provoked at Caesar, and said angrily to
him, '' I will use my authority against you." Caesar^
with a smile replied, " You do well to call it ' yours,'
for you bought it\"

After his prffitorsliip^ he was sent into Cappadocia.
His oretence for that expedition was the re-establish-
ment of Ariobarzanes ; but his real design was to
restrain the enterprising spirit of Mitlnidates, who
was acquiring dominions not less re=^pectable than his
paternal ones'^. He did not take many troops with
him out of Italy, but availed himself of the service
of the allies, whom he found well affecied to the^
cause. With these he attacked the Cappadocians,
and cut in pieces vast numbers of them, and still
more of the Armenians wht> came to tlieir succour:
in consequence of which Gordius was driven out,
and Anobarzanes restored to his kingdom.

Di::inghis encampment on the banks of the Eu-
phrates, Orobazus came embassador to him from
Arsaces king of Parthia. There had as yet been no
intercourse between the two nations ; and it must
be consitler^ad as a part of Sylla's good fortune, that
he was the first Roman, to wdiom the Parthians ap-
plied for friendship and alliance. At the time of
audience he is said to have ordered three chairs, one

<5 A. U.C, 6.37.

-" This must have been Sextus Julius CtC-"ar, who was consul a
few years after Sylla's prt^^torslu'p. Caius JuUus Cuesar was only
four years old, when Sylla was praetor. (L.)

Plutarch's reasor.ing here, as M. Ricard observes, is not very
logical ! for t'lougji the people, as Sylla stated, would have liked
his shows well, i\)ky probably liked his money better.*

8 T!iis will remind the reader of one of Martial's epigrams, which
has been thus translated :

The golden hair, which Galla wears,

Is hers : who would have thought it ?
She sweitrs 'lis hers ; and true she swears —

For I know where she bought it.*

' For the history of these princes, see Justin xxxviii.3, «S:c.*

256 8.YLLA.

for Ariobarzanes, one for Orobazus, and one in the
middle for himself. Orobazus was subsequently put
to death by the king of Parthia, for having submit-
ted so far to a Roman. As for Sylla, some com-
mended his lofty behaviour to the barbarians, while
others blamed it as insolent and unseasonably im-
perious.

It is reported, that a certain Chalcidian ^° in the
train of Orobazus looked at Sylla's face, and observed
v.ery attentively the turn of his ideas and the motions
of his body. These he compared with the rules of his
ai*t, and then declared, " That he must infallibly be
" one daythe greatest of men; and that it was strange,
'* he could bear to be any thing less at present.'*

Upon his return, Censorinus prepared to accuse
him of extortion, for having illegally drawn vast
sums from a kingdom in alliance wdtli Rome. He
did not however carry it to a triid, but dropped the
intended impeachment.

The quarrel between Sylla and Marius broke out
afresh, on the following occasion: Bocchus, to make
his court to the people of Rome and to Sylla at the
same time, dedicated several images of Victory in the
Capitol, and close by them a figure of Jugurtha in
gold, in the form in which he had delivered him up
to Sylla. Marius, unable to digest the affront, pre-
pared to pull them down, and Sylla's friends were
determined to prevent it. Between them both, the
whole city was set in a flame ; when the Social War
which had long Iain smothered broke out, and for
the present put a stop to the sedition.

In this important war, which was so various in it's
fortune and brought so many mischiefs and dangers
upon the Romans, it appeared from the small execu-
tion done by Marius, that military skill requires a
strong and vigorous constitution to second it. Sylla
on the other hand performed so many memorable

'° An inhabitant of Chalcis, the metropolis of Chalcidene in
Syria (Plin. H.N. v. 28.); if Plutatch did not rather, as Aroyot
fsuspects, write * Chakbean.*

SYLLA. 257

tilings, that tlie citizens looked upon him as a great
general, his friends as the greatest in the world, and
his enemies as the most fortunate. Neither did he
behave, with respect to that notion, like Timotheus
the son of Conon. When the enemies of that
Athenian ascribed all his successes to Fortune, and
got a picture drawn in whicli he was represented
asleep, with the goddess by his side taking cities for
him in her net, he gave way to an indecent pas-
sion, and complained tliat he was robbed of the
glory due to his achievements. Nay, subsequently,
upon his return from a certain expedition, he ad-
dressed the people in these terms ; " In this, my
** fellow-citizens, Fortune has no share." The
goddess, it is said, piqued herself so far upon having
her revenge for this vanity of Timotheus, that he
could never in future effect any thing extraordinary,
but was baffled in all his undertakings, and became
so obnoxious to the people that they sent him into
banishment.

Sylla took a different course. It not only gave
him pleasure to hear his success imputed to Fortune,
but he encouraged the opinion, thinking it added an
air of grandeur and even of divinity to his actions.
Whether he did this outof vanity, or from a real per-
suasion of it's truth, we cannot affirm. He himself
states in his Cpmmentaries, " That liis enterprise*^
executed on a sudden, in a manner different from
what he had originally intended, always succeeded
the best." It is plain likewise from his saying,
" That he was born rather for fortune, tlian for war,"
that he attributed more to lack than to valour. In
short, he makes himself entirely Fortune's creature;
since to her divine influence he ascribes the ffood
understanding, which always subsisted between him
and Metelhis, a man in the same sphere of life with
himself, and his father-in-law. For, whereas he ex-
pected to have found him a man troublesome in
office, he proved on the contrary a quiet and oblig-

238 SYLLA.

ing colIegLie^'. Add to this, that in the CoirimeiT-
taiies inscribed to LucuHus, he advises him to de-
pend upon nothing so much, as wh.at heaven should
suggest to him in the visions of the night. He far-
ther informs us, that when he was despatched at the
head oFan army against the confederates, the earth
opened on a sudden near l.averna ^' ; and that there
issued out of the cha>m, which was extremely hu-ge,
an immense quantity of fire and a fiame that sliot up
to the heavens. The soothsayers, being consulted
upon it, answered ; " That a man of courage and of
" most distinguished personal appearance, should
" take the reins of government into his hands, and
" suppress the tumults with which Rome was then
" agitated." >Sylla says, he was the man ; for that
Lis locks of gold were sufHcictit proof of his 'dis-
tinguished personal appearance,' and that after so
many signal actions he could unhesitatingly pro-
nounce himself 'a man of courage.' Thus much
concerning his confidence in the gods.

In other respects, he was less consistent with him-
self. Rapacious in a high degree, but still more
liberal ^^ ; in preferring or disgracing whom he
pleased, equally unaccountable ; submissive to those
who might be of service to him, and severe to those
who stood in need of his services : so that it was
Iiard to say whether he was more insolent, or more
servile in his nature. Such was his inconsistency in
punishing, that he would sometimes inflict torture

'' Tliis was in the year (A. U. C. 673) in which Cicero made his
first public oration, for Sextiis Kosclus Amerinui, with a still more
creditable degree of courage than of eknjuence ; as Chr3-sogonus
(the free(hiian of Sylla, who was tlicn also perpetual dictator) was
interested in lloscius' ruin.*

'^ In the Saiarian way, tiicre was a grove and temple consecrated
to Laverna, (L.) the goddess of swindlers and thieves. (See Hor.
Ep. I. xvi, 60.) In that grove indeed, according to Festus, the par-
tition of their plunder was usually made.*

'' Exactly the ^ rillnii nppcfciis, siii prnfusjis,' with Vvhich Sallust
lias so well expressed a striking part of Catiline's cliuracter. (Bell.
Cat. 5.)=^

SYLLA. 233

on the slightest grounds, and sometimes overlook
the greatest crimes ; he would easily receive some
persons into favour after the most unpardonable
offences, while he took vengeance unon others for
the most triMing fault by deaih and conliscation of
goods. These things can no otherwise be reconciled,
than bv concludinq: that he was harsh and vindictive
in his temper, but occasionally checked those in-
clinations Vvlien his own interest was at stake.

In this very war with the confederates, his soldiers
murthered v/ith clubs and stones a lieutenant of his
named Albinus '', who had been honoured with the
prastorship ; yet he suffered them, after such a crime,
to escape with impunity. lie only took occasion
thence to boast, that he should find they would exert
tliemselves more during the rest of the war, because
they would think themselves obliged to atone for
their offence by extraordinary acts of valour. The
censure, v/iiich he incurred upon this occasion, dhl
not in the least affect him. His great object was
Marius,' destruction ; and, finding that the coufede-^
rate war was drawing to it's conclusion '% he paid
his court to the army, that he might be appointed
general against him.

Upon his retiuii to Rome, being then fifty years
of age, he was elected consul with Quinctus Pom-
peius, and at the same time made an illustrious match
with Csecilia, the daughter of Metellus the high-
priest. This union gave occasion to many sarcas-
tical songs, and (according to Livy's account) many
of the principal citizens invidiously deemed him un-
worthy of such an alliance, though they liad not
thought him iinu'orthy of the consulship. Csscilia
was not his first wife, for in the early part of his life,
he had married Ilia, by whom he had a daiigliter ;

'"^ Tliis officer is mentioned, hut with verv diftevcnt characterv,
l)y the Suppl. Liv. ulio follows Orosius, in cailioj^ Iijm ' ii^tolerably
proud' (v. 18.), and by Valerius Maximus, who says ' hij was ia
vinanncrs, hirtli, and conduct, irreproachab!."-"'-

's A. U. C. 6GJ.

240 SYLLA.

subsequently he espoused .-^lia, and after her CVrlia,
•whom on account of her barrenness he repudiated
without any other marks of di:;grace, and dismissed
with valuable presents. As he soon after^vards
however married Metella, the dismission of Coelia
became an object of censure. Metella he always
treated with the utmost respect; insomuch that
when the people of Rome v»'ished him to recal the
exiles of Marius' party, and could not prevail with
him, they entreated Metella to use her good offices
in their favour. It was thought likewise that, when
he took Athens, that city met with harslicr usage,
because the inhabitants had jested vilely on Metella
from the walls. But these things happened at a
later period.

The consulship was now^ but of small considera-
tion with him, in comparison with what he had in
view. His heart was fixed upon obtaining tlie
management of the Mithridatic war. In this. respect
he had a rival in Marius, who was goaded by an un-
seasonable ambition and madness for fame, passions
which never wax old. Though now unwieldy in
his person, and obliged on account of his age to give
up his share in commands near home, he coveted
the direction of foreign wars and expeditions. This
man watching his opportunity in Rome, wlien Sylla
was gone to the camp to settle some unfinished con-
cerns, fram.ed that fatal sedition, which hurt her
more essentially than all the wars she had ever en-
countered. Heaven sent prodigies to prefi.gurc it.
Fire blazed out of it's own accord from the ensign-
staves, and was with difficulty extinguished. Three
ravens brought their young into the city, and de-
voured them there, and then carried their remains
back to tlieir nests. Some rats having gnawed the
consecrated gold in a certain temple, the sacristans
caught one of them in a trap, where she bore five
young ones, and eat three of them. And (v.-hat
was most remarkable) one day wlien the sky was
serene and clear, there was heard in it the sound of a

SYLLA. 241

trumpet, so slirill and mournful, that it fiiglitcncd
and astonished the whole city. The Tuscan sages
said, it portended a new race of men and a renova-
tion of tlie world. For they observed, that there
were eight several kindsofn]en,all differing in life and
manners; tliat heaven had allotted to each it's time,
which was limited by the circuit of the great year 5
and that, when one race came to a period and ano-
ther was rising, it vras announced by some w^onderful
sio;ii from either earth or heaven. So that it was
evident at one view to those who attended to these
things and were versed in them, that a different sort
of men were come into the world, with other man-
ners and customs, and more or less the care of the
gods than those who had preceded them. They
added, that in this revolution of ages many strange
alterations happened : that divination (for instance)
should be held in high honour in some one age, and
prove successful in all it's predictions, because the
Deity afforded pure and perfect signs to proceed by ;
whereas in another it should be in small repute, being
chiefly extemporaneous, and calculating future
events from uncertain and obscure principles. Such
was the mythology of the most learned and respect-
able of the Tuscan soothsayers. While the senate
w^ere attending to their interpretations in the temple
of Bellona, a sparrow in the sight of the whole body
brought a grasshopper in her mouth ; and after she
liad torn it asunder, left one part among them^ and
carried the other off. From this the soothsayers de-
clared they apprehended a dangerous sedition and
dispute between the town and the country. F'or
the inhabitants of the town are noisy like the grass-
fiopper, and tiiose of the country are domestic like
the sparrow'^

Soon after this Marius got Sulpitius to join him.

'* The original is obviously conirit in tliis place. One MS.
indeed gives a reading, which would reverse that ol' the text : ' 'f lie
inliahitants of the town are noisy hke the sparrow, and tho-t; o." the
country rVequeiit the fields like the i^rasshopper.'

■VvL, III. R

242 SYLLA.

This man was second to none in desperate attempts.
Instead of inquiring indeed for another more em-
phatically wicked, you must ask in what instance
of wickedness he exceeded himself. He v,'as a com-
pound of cruelty, impudence, and avarice ; and
cared not for whatever disgrace or guilt he might
incur by his actions. He sold the freedom of Home
openly to persons who had been slaves, as well as to
strangers, and had the mioney counted out upon a
table in the Forum. He kept constantly about him
a guard of three hundred men well armed, and a
company of young men of the equestrian order,
whom he called his ' Anti-senate :' and thous^h he
got a law made, that no senator should contract
debts to the am.ount of more than two thousand
drachmas, it appeared at his death that he himself
owed more than three millions. This wretch was
by Marius let loose upon the people, and regulated
every thing by the sword. Among other pernicious
edicts, which he procured, was that which gave to
Marius the management of the Mithridatic war.
Upon this, the consuls ordered all the courts to be
shut up. But one day, as they were holding an as-
sembly before the temple of Castor and Pollux, he
set his ruffians upon them, and many were slain. The
son of Tompey the consul, who was a mere boy, was
of the number. Pompey concealed himself, and
saved his own life. Sylla was pursued into the house
of Marius, and thence dragged to the Forum, to re-
voke the order for the cessation of pubhc business ^^
For this reason Sulpitius, when he deprived Pompey
of the consulshiu, eonthmcd Svlla in it, and onlv^
transferred to Marius the superintendence of the
war with Miiliridates. Upon which he immediately
despatched some military tribunes to Nola, to receive
the army at the hands of Sylla, and to bring it to
Marius. But Sylla got before them to the camp j
and his soldiers were no sooner apprised of the com-

'^ See the Life of Marius, p. 164vc'tc

SYLLA. 243

mission of those officers, than they stoned them to
death.

Mariiis in retnrn dipped his hands in the blood of
Sylla's friends in lioine, and ordered their houses to
])c pUmclercd. Nothing now Vv'as to be seen but
hurry and confusion, some flying from the camp to
the city, and others from the citv to the cami). ihe
senate were no longer free, but under the direction
of I\Iarius and Sulpitius. 80 that, \\\\Qn they were
informed Sylla vras marching towards Rome, they
sent two prstors, Brutus and Servilius, to stop him..
As these magistrates delivered their orders to Sylla
with some haughtiness, the soldiers prepared to kill
them ; but at last tliey contented themselves with
breaking their fasces, tearing off their robes, and
sending them away with eveiy mark of disgrace.

The very sight of them, robbed as they were of
the ensigns of their authority, spread sorrow and con-
sternation throughout Rome ; and announced a se-
dition, for Vv^hich there was no longer either restraint
or remedy. Marius prepared to repel force by force.
Sylla moved from Nola at the head of. six complete
legions, and had his coilegue along with him. His
army, he saw, was ready at the first w^ord to march
to Rome, but he was unresolved in his own mind
and apprehensive of the danger. Upon his offering
sacrifice however, the soothsayer Poslhumius had no
sooner inspected the entrails, than he stretched out
both his hands to Sylla, and proposed to be reserved
in chains till after the battle for the worst of punish-
ments, if every thing did not presently succeed to
the general's entire Vvish. It is said, likewise, that
j there appeared to Sylla in a dream the goddess,
I whose worship the Romans received from the Cap-
1 padocians, Avhether it be the Moon, Minerva ^^, or
Bellona. She seemed to stand by him, and put
thunder into his hand, and having summoned each

'* Dacier solves this doubt, by what follows respecting the
thunder. This he represents as not wielded by any of the three ex-
cept Minerva, who was one of the deities of the Capitol.*

II 2

24.4. StLLA,

of his enemies by name, bade him strike them ;
lipo'n whic]i they fell, and were consumed to ashes^
Encouraged by this vision, wliicli he related tlie
next morning to his collegue, he bent his way to-
ward Home-

When lie had reached Picinae^^, he was met by an
embassy entreating him not to advance in that
hostile inanner, since the senate had come to a re-
solution to do him all the justice Vv'hich he could
desire. This request he promised to grant, and as
if he intended to encamp there, ordered his officers
as usual to mark out the ground : upon which the
embassadors, with entire confidence in his honour,
took their leave. But as soon as they v/ere gone,
he despatched Basillus and Caius Mummius, to make
themselves masters of the gate and the v»\all by
the ^squiline mount ; and followed them liimscli*
with the utmost expedition. Accordingly, Easillus
and his party seized the gate, and entered tlie city.
But the unarmed multitude got upon tlie tops of tho*
houses, and with stones and tiles drove them back
to the foot of the wall. At that moment Sylla ar-
rived, and observing the opposition which his sol-
diers met with, called out to them to set fire to the
hour^es. lie himself seized a flaming torch, and
advanced before them : at the same time, he ordered
his archers to shoot fn^e-arrows at the roots, lleason
had no longer any power over him : passion and fury
governed all his motions : he thought of nothing
but his enemies ; and neither considered nor pitied
his fiiends, his relations, or his acquaintance. ►Sucli
w*as th.e case, when he forced his wa\- with lire,
which makes no distinction between the innocent
and gnilty.

Meanwhile Marius, v.ho had been driven back to

'"> There being no place between Nola and Rome called ' Picl-
I'lne,' T-ubinus thinks we should read ' I'iota?,' which was a place of
p.ublic entertainment about twenty-five niilcs from the capital,
h'trabo, and Antoninus (in liis Itinerary) menticn it as such,
tvhich renders the coniectuve verv plausible.

' 9 ■

t

SYLLA. 245

the temple of Vesta, proclaimed liberty to the slaves
that would repair to liis standard. But the enemy
pressed on witli so much vigour, that he was forced
to quit tiie city.

Sylla immediately assembled the senate, and got
Marius and a few others condemned to death. The
tribune Sulpitius, who was of the number, was be-
trayed by one of his own slaves, and brought to the
block. Sylla gave the slave his freedom, and then
had him thrown down the Tarpeian rock. Upon
Marius' head he set a price, in which he behaved
neither with gratitude nor good policy, since he had
not long before tied into Marius"* house, and put his
life into his hands, and yet was dismissed in aafety.
Had Marius, at that time, instead of letting him go,
given him up to Sulpitius who thirsted for his blood,
he might have been absolute master of Rome. But
he spared his enemy ; and a few days afterv/ard,
when a similar opportunity offered, had to regret
that he met not with similar generosity in return.

The senate did not express the concern, which
this gave them ; but the people obviously by facts
showed their resentment, and their resolution to
make reprisals. Tor they rejected from the consul-
ship his nephew Nonius, wlio relied upon his re-
commendation, and his fellow-candidate Servius in
an ignominious manner, and appointed others in
their stead, whose promotion they thought w^ould
be most disagreeable to him, Sylla pretended much
satisfaction at the thing, and said, " He ^vas quite
happy to see the people by his means enabled to
enjoy the liberty of proceeding as they thought
proper." Nay, to obviate their hatred he pro-
posed Lucius Cinna, who was of the opposite fac-
tion, for consul ; but he first laid him under the
sanction of a solemn oath to assist him in all his
affairs. Cinna went up to the Capitol, with a, stone
in his hand. There he swore before i^reat numbers
to preserve the friendship between them inviolate,
adding this imprecation, " If I be guilty of any

ii

ii

2tG SYLLA.

*' breach of it, may I be driven from the cilv as this
" stone is from my hand!" at the same time throw-
ing the stone upon the ground. Yet, as soon as he
entered upon his office, he began to raise new com-
motions, and drew up an impeachment against Sylla,
of which Verginius one of the tribunes was to be
the manager. But Sylhi left both the manager and
the impeachment behind him, and m.arched against
'Mithridates.

About the time that Svlla set sail from Italy, Mi-
thridates (we are told) was visited by many ill pre-
sages at Pergamus. Among the rest, an image of
Victory bearing a crown, which v/as contrived to
be let down by a machine, broke just as it was going
to place the crown upon his head, and the crown
itself vv'as dashed to pieces upon the lioor of tlie
theatre. The people of Pergamus were seized with
astonishment, and Mithridatcs felt no small concern,
though his affairs were then prosperous beyond his
hopes. For he had taken Asia iiom the Romans,
and Bithynia and Cappadocia trom their respective
kings, and v;as now quietly settled at Pergamus,
disposing of rich governments and kingdoms among
his friends at pleasure. Of his sons, the eldest go-
verned in peace the ancient kingdoms of Pontus and
Bosporus, extending as far as the deserts above the
Mseotic lake ; the ether, named Ariarathes, was
subduing T!u-ace and Macedon with a great army.
His gener*Js with their armies were reducing other
considerable places. Tlie principal of these was
Archelalis, who commanded the seas with" his fleet,
v.as conquering tlie Cyclades and all the other
iskrnds within the bav of Malca, and was master of
Vjuhiva itself lie had met, indeed, v.-ith a check
\ at Chpjronca. There Brutms Sura, lieutenant to
■ iSentius wiio conimanded in Macedon, a man dis-
tinguished by his courage and capacity, opposed
him as he was overilowing Boeotia like a torrent, de-
feated him in three engagements near Cha^ronea,
and confined him again to the sea. But as Lucius

SYLI.A. 247

Liiciillus came and ordered the victor to give place
to Sylla, to whom that province and the conduct of
the war were decreed, he immediately quitted Boe-
otia, and returned to Sentius ; though his success
was beyond his ho[)e, and Greece was ready to de-
clare again for tlie Romans on account of his valour
and conduct. Tliese, it is true, were the most shining
actions of llrutius' life.

^Vhen Sylhi arrived, the cities sent embassadors
with an offer of ooeninii; their ^ates to him. Athens
alone was held by it's tyrant, Aristion, for Mithri-
dates. He therefore attacked it with the utmost
vigoiu', invested the Pirfeus, brought up all sorts of
engiijes, and left no kind of assault unattempted.
Had he waited awhile, he might without the smallest
danger have taken the upper town, which was al-
ready reduced by famine to the ]viAt extremity. Bufe
his haste to return to Rome, where h.e apprehended
some change in affairs to his prejudice, made him
run every risk, and spare neither men nor money to
bring this war to a conclusion. For, beside his
other warlike equipage, he had ten thousand pair of
mules which worked every day at the engines. As
wood began to fiiil, on account of the immense
weiarhts which broke down his machines or of their
being frequently ^burnt by the enemy, he cut down
the sacred groves. The shady walks of the Aca-
demy and the Lyceum in tlie suburbs fell beneath
his ax. And as the war required })rodigious sums of
money to support it, he scrupled not to violate the
holy treasures of Greece, but took from Epidaurus
as well as Ohunpia the most beautiful and precious
of their gifts. He wrote also to the Amphictyons at
Delphi, " That it would be better for them to place
" the treasures of Apollo in his hands : for either
" he would keep them safer than they could, or if
" he applied them to his own use, he would return
*' the full value.'' Caphis the Phocensian, one of
his friends, was despatched u^yon this commission,

2i8 SYLLA.

and was iiijoined to have every tiling weighed to
him.

This oflicer, upon his arrival at Delphi, was lotli
to touch the sacred deposits, and lameiited to the
Amphictyons the necessity, under wliich he acted,
with many tears. Some said, they heard the sound
of the lyre in the inmost sanctuary ; and C'aphii,
either believinsr it or wishino; to strike Svlla with a
rehgious terror, sent him an account of it. But he
wrote back jestingly, " Tliat he was surprised
Caphis should not know that music was the voice
of joy, not of resentment. lie might, therefore,
boidly take the treasures, since Apollo resigned
" tiiem to him with the utmost satisfaction."

These treasures were carried off, without being
seen by many of the Greeks. But of the royal offer-
ings there remained a silver urn, v/hich was so large
and heavy that no carriage could bear it, and there-
fore the Amphictyons were obliged to cut it in
pieces. At the sight of this they called to mind now
Plaminius and Manius Acilius, and now Faulus
j^milius ; of whom one having driven Antiochus
out of Greece, and the others subdued the kings of
Macedon, not only restrained their hands from
spoiling the Grecian temples, but expressed their
regard and reverence for them by additional gifts.
Those great men indeed were legally commissioned,
and their soldiers were persons of sober minds, wlio
had learned to obey their generals v»'ithout murmur-
ing. The generals, vvith tlie magnanimity of kings,
did not in their expenses exceed private persons, or
bring upon the state any charge but what was com-
mon and reasonable. In short, they thought it not
less disgraceful to flatter their own men, than to be
afraid of the enemy. But the commanders of these
latter times raised themselves to high j>os'ts by force,
not by merit : and as they wanted soldiers to fight
their countrymen, rather than foreign enenn'es, they
were obliged to treat them with complaisance.

SYLLA. Sid

Wliile they thus bought their service, at the price of
miiiisterina: to their vices, tliev were not aware that
they were scIUng their entire country ; and makmg
themselves skives to the worst of mankind, in order
to command the best. This banished Marins from
Rome, and afterward brought him back against
iSyila. This made Cinna dip his hands in the blood
of Octavius, and Fimbria the assassin of Flaccns.

Of this corruption Sylla opened one of the first
sources. For, to seduce the troops of other officers
from them, he lavishly supplied the necessities of his
own. Thus, while he was at once inviting the former
to desertion and the latter to hixnry, he had occa-
sion for infinite sums, and particularly in this siege.
For his anxiety to take Athens was irresistible :
whether it were, that he v/ished to fight against that
city's ancient renown, of which nothinc; but the
shadow now remained ; or that he could not bear
the scoffs and taunts, with which the tyrant Aristion
in all the wantonness of ribaldry insulted him and
Metella from the walls.

The composition of this fellow's heart was inso-
lence and cruelty. He v.as the sink of all the follies
and vices of Mithridates. Poor Athens, which had
survived innumerable wars, tyrannies, and seditions,
perished at last by this monster as by a deadly dis-
ease. A medimnus"" of wheat was now sold there
for a thousand drachmas. The people eat not only
the herbs and roots, which grew about the citadel,
but sodden leather and oil-bags ; while Aristion was
indulging himself in riotous feasts and dancings in
the day-time, or mimicking and laughing at the
enemy. He suffered the sacred lamp of the goddess
to go out for want of oil ; and, when thQ principal
priestess sent to ask him for half a measure of barley,
he sent her in return that quantity of pepy)er. The
senators and priests came to entreat hi in to take

^9 The ' lierbs and roots,' mentioned below, are in the original
Kuoijiviov, for an account of which see the Life of Pericles, Vol. II.
note (-tS.) Sec also Piin. H. N. xxii, 17.*

250 SYIXA.

compassion en tLe city, and capitulate with Sylla,
but he received them with a shower of arrows. At
last, when it was too late, he with much ditliculty
agreed to send two or three of the companions of his
riots to negotiate peace. These, instead of making
any proposals tending to save the city, talked in a
lofty tone about Theseus, and Eumolpus, and the
conquest of the Medes; which provoked Sylla to
say, " Go, my noble souls, and take back your line
" speeches with you. For my part, I was not sent
*' to Athens to learn it's antiquities, but to chastise
*' its rebels."

In the mean time Sylla's spies heard some old men,
"who were conversing together in the Ceramicus,
blame the tyrant for not having secured the wall near
the lleptachalcos, which was the only place not im-
pregnable, 'i his intelligence they carried to Sylla ;
and he, far from disregarding it, went by night to
take a vievv' of that part of the wail, and found that
it miglit be scaled. He then set immediately about
it ; and in his Commentaries he informs us, that
Marcus Teius*' was the first man who mounted the
wall. He there met with an adversary, and gave
him such a violent blow on the skull, that he broke
his sword ; notwithstanding which, he stood firm and
kept his place.

Thus Athens'-' was taken, as the old men had
foretold. Sylia, liaving levelled with the ground the
whole wall between the Pn'san and the Sacred Gate,
entered tiie town at midnight in a manner the most
dreadful tliat can be conceived. All the trumpets
and horns sounded, and were answered by the shouts
and clang of the soldiers, let loose to plunder and
destroy. With diawn swords they rushed along the
streets. The number of the killed was incalculable;
but we may form some judgement of it, by the quan-
tity of ground which v/as overflowed with blood.

-' Probably it should bo Ateius. In the Life of Crassus, on
Ateius is mentioned as a tribune of the people.
- I). C.26.

e

SYLLA. 2S1

Iw, beside those who fell in other parts of the city,
the blood shed in the marlvet-pUice alone covered
the whole Ceramicus as far as Dipyhis. Nay, there
are several who assure us that it; ran through the
gates, and overspread the suburbs.

But though such numbers were put to the svv'ord,
there were as many who laid violent hands upon
tlicmselves, out of regret and pity for their sinking
country. Yv^Iiat reduced th.e best men among tliem
to this despair, of finding any mercy or moderate
terms for Athens, was the well-known cruelty of
83'lla. Yet partly by the intercession of Midias and
Calhphon, and the exiles who threv/ themselves at
his feet, partly by the entreaties of tlie senators who
attended hirn in the expedition, and by his own
satiety of blood, he was at last persuaded to stop his
liand ; and in compliment to the ancient Athenians
said, " He forgave the many for the sakeof tlie few,
" the living for the dead.'*

In his Commentaries he informs us, that he took
Athens on the calends of March, which coincides
with the new moon in the month Anthesterion ;
when the Athenians Vv^ere performing many rites, in
memory of the destruction of the, country bv water :
for t!ie deluge v/as believed to have happened about
that time of the \ear^^

The city thus taken, the tyrant retired into the
citadel, and was there besieged by Curio, to whom
8}lla gave tliat charge. He held out, however, a
considerable time, but was at last forced to surrender
lOY v.'ant of water. \\\ this, the hand of Heaven was
most visible. For the veiv same day and hour
that Aristion was brought out, the sky, which
before had been* T)erfectlv serene, f^rew black with
clouds, and such a (juantity of rain fell as quite over-
flov/ed the citadel. 8oon afterward, Svlla made him-
self master of the Piraeus ; the greatest part of which

B

^3 The Deluge of Ogygcs happened in Atlica, according to Blair,

he lalvl In ashes, and anuniir the rest that admirablr
work, the arsenal built bv i'hilv^ '*.

Uurinp: titcso transactions Taxile^, Mitlnidatcs*
crcTioraK came down tVvnn Thraee and ^^needon with
a huiuhcd tlu>usanil toi^t, and ten thousand liorsc,
and ninety chariots armed with sithes, and sent to
fle^uro Archelai\s to meet iiim. Arehe'aiis had then
his station at Mtniychia, and neither chose to ({nit
the ^ea nor vet to tiu'ht tl>e Komans ; bnt was per-
snailed. th;U his point was to protract the war, and
to cnt otK the enemy's convo\'s. Sylla saw, better
than he, the distress which he miirht inenr tor pri>-
visions; and rheretbiv ivmoved tixnn that barren
ce>nntrv, wbieli was searcelv snilieient to maintain
iiis tr(K>psin lime ot' peace, and led them iitto Inixnia,
^lo5t people thonght this an error in his coimsels,
to qnit tKc ix^cks ot* Attica where hoi^e ei>ald scarce-
ly act, and to expose himself on the large and <>pen
plains of Ikvotia, w hen he knew that the clhef strength
of llie barbarians eons^istcil in cavalry and chariots.
Unt to avcHil Inmirer and tiiiuine, he was tbrced (as
^NT have observed'^ to ha/arti a battle, l^esides. he
was in pain tor Uortensins a man ota lotty and en-
terprising spirit, who was bringing hi:n a consider-
able ivinibrcement tVom Thessaly, anil was watclv-
Cvl by the enemy in the straits. Ihe^c were the
iTasons which indnced Sy Ifa to march into l>ax>tia.
As K>r lloriensins, ("aphis a conntryman of onrs letl
him another wav, antl disiippointed the barbarians.
Me condnercti l\im by monnt Tarnassns to Tithoni,
which is now a largv city, Uit was at that time oidy
a tint sitirateil on the brow of a steep precipice,
whoiY thelMiocensiansofold took rethge when Xerxes
invacleil their conntry. Hortensil^^ having pitcheil
his tents there, in the day-ttme kept ot^' the enemy :
ami i« the night made his way down the bn^kea
rocks to Patronis, where Sylla met him with his
w hole armv.

i .. V.U v.^aU. i, li,, Val. Ma\. vui. i:?., and Viir,. 11. >». vu. :>".*

SYLLA. 25.1t

Thus united, tliey took possession of a fertile hill
in tlie middle of the plains of Elatia, well sheltered
with trees and watered at the bottom. It is called
Philoba'Otus, and is highly commended by Sylla for
the fruitfulness of it's soil and it's agreeable situation.
When they were encamped, they appeared to the
enemy not more than a Piandful. They had not in-
deed above fifteen hundred horse, and not quite
fifteen thousand foot. The other generals as it were
forced Archelaiis upon action ; and when they came
to marshal their forces in order of battle, they filled
their whole plain with horses, chariots, bucklers,
and targets. The clamour and hideous roar of so
manv nations, ranked tiiick tofs^ciher, seemed to
rend the sky ; and the pomp and splendour of their
appearance was not without it's use in exciting ter-
ror. For the lustre of thefr arms, whicli were richlr
adorned with gold and silver, and the colours of their
^Median and Scvthian vests, intermixed with brass
and polished steel, vvhen the troops were in motion
backward and forward, kindled the air with an av.e-
ful fiame like that of lightening.

The Romans, in the utmost consternation, shut
themselves up v.-ithin their trenches. Syila could not
^vitil all his arguments remove their fears ; and, as
he did not choose to force them thus dispirited into
the field, he sat still and bore, though with great re-
luctance, the vain boasts and insults of the barba-
rians. This was of more service to him, than any
other measure which he could ha\ e adopted. The
enemy, who held him iu sovereign contempt, and
v>ere not before, on account of their numbers, very
obedie!it to their own generals, nov/ forgot ail dis-
ciphne ; and but few of them remained within their
entrenchments. Invited by rapine and plunder, the
chief part had dispersed themselves at several days'
journey fiom the camp. Jn tlicse excursions (it is said)
they ruined the city of Panopea, sacked Lebadia'-',

^'' Lebadia was chliBy celo'^rated fcr the tcmpis and oracle cf

Trop!;oniu6-*

254> SYLLA.

and pillaged a temple v/here oracles were delivered,
without orders from any of their generals.

8y]la, fidl of sorrow and indignation to have these
cities destroyed before his eyes, was desirous to try
what effect toil would have upon his soldiers. He
compeiird them therefore to dig trericlies to draw
the Opliisus from it's channel, and made them work
at it without intermission ; sU-nding inspector him-
self, and severely pnnishing all whom lie found back-
ward. His view in this was to tire tliem with labour,
thai: they nn'ght give the preference to danger ; and
it answered the end which he proposed. On the
third day of their drudgery, as Sylla passed by, they
called out to him to lead them against the enemy.
Sylla said, " It is not any inclination to fight, but an
" unwillin2:ness to Vv^ork, v/hich induces you to make
" this request. If you really wish to come to an
*' engagement, go sword in hand, and seize that post
" immediately." At the same time he pointed to
the place, vvhere had formerly stood the citadel of
the Tarapotamians ^^ ; but all the buildings were now
demolished, and there v»'as nothing left but a steep
craggy mountain, just separated from mount Edylium
by the river Assus, which at the foot of the moun-
tain falls into the Cephisus. The river, growing very
raT);d by this ccnfluencTe, makes the ridge a sate
place for an encampment. Sylla, seeing those of
the enemy's troops called Chalcaspides hastening to
seize this post, was anxious to gain it before them ;
and, by availing himself of the present spirit of his
men, he succeeded. Archelaiis, disappointed of his
aims, turned his arms against Cha^ronea. The Chas-
roneans, who had borne arms under Sylla, entreat-
ing him not to desert the place, he sent along with
them the military tribune Gabinius with one legion ;

*'' There were a people on the confines oC Breotia and Phocis,
vliose city had been dt\->troyod by Xerxes. Ilcrod. viii. 33., Pausnn.
X. 33. The above artiticc, ol" employing- an insubordinate soldier}'^
lud been j)rcviouslv practised by ,Marius in the war with the Cini-
bii, p. 137.^

SYLLA. 25^

and with all their ardour to reach home, the Chasro-
neans did not arrive sooner than their anxiharies: such
was his honour, when engaged in their defence, that it
even eclipsed the zeal of those who implored his
assistance. Juba informs us, that it was not Gabinius
but Ericius'-'', who was despatched upon this occa-
sion. In this critical situation, hov,'ever, was the
city of Chjeronea.

The Ilomans now received from Lebadia and the
cave of Trophonius most agreeable accounts of
oracles, announcing to them victory. The inhabit-
ants of that country tell us many stories about them;
but what Sylla himself writes, in the tenth book of
his Commentaries, is as follows : Quintus Titius, a
man of some note among the Romans employed in
Greece, can^e to him one day after he had gained
the battle of Chaaronea, and told him that Tropho-
nius foretold another battle should shortly be fought
in the same place, in which he should likewise prove
victorious. Afterward came a private soldier of his
own, with a promise from heaven of the glorious
success which would attend his affairs in Italy. Both
agreed as to the manner, in which these prophecies
had been communicated : " The deity,*' they said,
" who appeared to them, both in beauty and ma-
" jesty resembled the Olympian Jupiter."

AVhen Sylla had passed the Assus, he encamped
under mount Edylium over-against Archelaiis, who
had strongly entrenched himself between Acontiuni
and Edylium> near a place called Assia. The spot
is still designated by the nam.e of Archelaiis. Sylla
passed one day, witliout attempting any thing. On
the next, he left ^lursna with a legion and two
cohorts to harass the enemy, who were already in
some disorder, while he himself went and sacrificed
on the banks of the Cephisus. After the ceremony
was finished, he proceeded to Chaironca to join the

^^ This, it is probable, should be read * Hirtius,' for so soiue ?vISS,
have it, where the same person is again mentioned in the sequel. (L.)
lifouie likewise fof ' Gabinius ' read ' Geniinius.' *

13

2oS SYLLA.

forces there, and to take a view of Thuriiim, a post
which the enemy had gained before him. This is a
craggy eminence, running up gradually to a point,
which we express in our language by the term ' Or-
thopagus.' At the foot of it runs the river I\[orius'^%
and the temple of Apollo Thurius likewise is placed ;
so denominated from Thuro the mother of C.hr!?ron,
Avho (as history informs us) was the founder of Chjc-
-ronea. Others say, that the heifer which the Pythian
Apollo appointed to Cadmus for his guide, first pre-
sented herself there, and that the place was thence
named Thurium; for the Phccnicians call a heifer
' Thor.'

As Sylla approached Cha?ronea, the tribune who
had the city in charge led out his troops to meet
him, having himself a crown of laurel in his hands.
Just as Sylla received them, and began to animate
them to the intended enterprise, Homoloichus and
Anaxidamus two Clijcroneans addressed him, with a
promise to cut off the corps occupying Thurium, if
he would give them a small party to support them in
the attempt. For there was a path of v.hich the bar-
barians were not apprised, leading from a place call-
ed Petrochns, by the temple of the Muses, to a part
of the mouHLain that overlooked them; whence it
was easy eitlier to destroy them with stones, or to
drive them down into the plain. Sylla, finding the
character of these men ibr courage and fidelity sup-
ported by Gabinius, ordered them to carry the thing
into execution. In the mean time, he drew up his
forces, and placed the cavalry in the wings ; taking
the right himself, and giving tlie left to Mura^ia.
Gallus^'-^ and Hortensius, his lieutenants, command-
ed a body of reserve in the rear, and kept watch upon
the heights to prevent their being surrounded. For

*8 This river is subsequently called * Molus ;' but which is the
right residing, is uncertain.

•9 Gu.uin., iiW Aupuai's M.thrid., rrads ' Culba.' And so it
is ill st.vral ?,IS3. Dacier proposes to read ' i^albus,' which name
eccurs afterward.

SYLLA. 557

it vvas easy to see that the enemy were preparing' with
their wings, wliicli consisted of an infinite number
oi'liorse and all their Jig-ht-armed ibot, troops capable
of moving with great agih'ty and winding about at
pleasure, to take a circuit and completely enclose
tiie Roman army.

In the mean time the two Cha^roneans, supported
(according to Sylla's order) by a party under the
command of Ericius, stole unobserved up Thurium
and gained the summit. As soon as they m.ade their
appearance, the barbarians were struck with con-
sternation and sought refuge in flight ; but, in the
confusion, many of them perished by each other's
Ikands. For unable to find any firm footing, as they
moved down the steep mountain, they fell upon the
spears of those who were next before them, or else
pushed them down the precipice. All this while,
the enemy were pressing upon them from above
and galling them behind, so that three thousand
men were killed upon Thurium. Of those who got
down, some fell into the hands of Murtcna, who met
tliem in good order and easily cut them in pieces ;
others, who fled to the main body under Archelaiis,
wherever they joined it, filled it with terror and dis-
may ; and this was what gave the officers their chief
trouble, and principally occasioned the defeat.
Svlla, takinc; advantai^e of their disorder, moved with
such vigour and expedition to the charge,- that lie
prevented the effect of the armed chariots. For the
cliicf strength of those cliariots consists in the length
of their course, and their consequent impetuosity :
with a short compass, tliey are as insignificant, as
arrows sent from a bow not well drawn. This was
tlie case, at present, with respect to the barbarians.
Iheir chariots moved at first so slow, and their at-
tacks were so lifeless, that the Romans clapped their
hands, and received them with the ntmost lidicule.
They even called for fresh ones, as they Irad been ac-
customed to do in the Hippodrome at Rome.

Upon this, the infantry engaged. The barbarians

VOL. III. S

268 8VLLA.

tried what the long pikes would do, and by locking
their shields together endeavoured to keep them-,
selves in good order. As for the Romans, after
their spears had accomplished, all that could be ex-
pected from tliem, they drew their svvords, and met
the enemy's cimiters with the strength, v^hich a just
indignation inspires. For Mithridates' generals had
brought over fifteen thousand slaves upon a procla-
mation of liberty, and placed them among the heavy-
armed infantry. Upon which occasion, a certain
centurion is said to have exclaimed, " Surely these
" are the Saturnalia"^; for Vv'c never, at any other
" time, saw slaves with any portion of liberty." As
their ranks, however, were so close and their files so
deep, that they could not easily be broken, and as
they exerted an unparalleled degree of spirit, they
were not repulsed and thrown into disorder, till the
archers and slingers of the second line discharged
upon them all their fury.

Archelalis was now extending his right wing in
order to surround the Romans, when Hortensius
with the cohorts under his command pushed down
to take him in flank. But Archelalis. by a sudden
manoeuvre turned against him with two thousand
horse whom he had at hand, and by little and little,
drove him toward the mountains ; so that, being
separated from the main body, he was in danger of
being quite hemmed in by the enemy. Sylla, ap-
prised of this, pushed up with his right wing, which
had not yet engaged, to Hortensius' assistance. On
the other hand Archelalis, conjecturing from the
dust the real state of the case, left Hortensius and
hastened back to tlie right of the Roman army,
whence Sylla had advanced, in hopes of finding it
without a commander.

5° At tin's tcstival of Saturn, Mhicli took place annually on Dec.
17, all orders were devoted to mirth and tlasting, friends sent pre-,
sents to one another, and masters treat cd their slaves upon an equal
footing (See I lor. Sat. II. vii.), at lirst for one da\v and in latec
periods for more.* , .

SYLLA. 269

At the same time, Taxiles led on the Chalcaspides
against Murijena ; so that shouts were set up on both
sides, which were re-echoed by the neighbouring
mountains. Sylla now tarried, to consider which way
he should direct his course. At length, resolving to
return to his own post, he sent liortensius with ibur
cohorts to Min'o^na's assistance, and himself at the
head of the fifth made up to his riglit wing with the
utmost exj)edition. This, he found, had bravely
maintained it's ground without him against the troops
of Archelaiis ; but as soon as he appeared, his men
made such prodigious efforts, that they entirely routed
the enemv, and pursued them to the river and mount
Acontium.

Amidst this success, Sylla was not unmindful of
Mura^na's danger, but hastened with a reinforcement
to that quarter. He found him however victorious,
and therefore had nothing to do but to johi in tlie
pursuit. Great numbers of the barbarians fell in the
field of battle, and still greater, as they were endea-
vouring to gain their entrenchments ; so that, out of
so niany myriads, only ten thousand men reached
Chalcis. Sylla says, he missed only fourteen of his
men, and tw^o of these came up in the evening. For
this reason he inscribed his trophies ' To ]\Iars, to
Victory, and to Venus ^',* to shov/ that he M^as not
less indebted to good fortune, than to capacity and
valour, for the advantages which he had gained.
This trophy was erected, for the victory vron, on the
plain where Archelaiis' troops began to give way,
and to fly to the river Mohis : another was placed
upon the top ofThurium, in memory of their getting.
above the barbarians, and inscribed in Greek cha-

3' Venus is often considered as the deit}' of Good Fortune, and
tl)c best tin-0'.v of the Roman dice was palled by her name: it was no
wonder therefore that Sylla, who valued himself upon his good luck,
should inscribe to her one of his trophies. Tcj this we may add the
considerations, that she bad a fabulous connexion u ith Mars, that
fincient monuments often entitle her ' Victrix,' and that Pompey
(according to Plin., H. N. viii, 7.) erected a temple to her under
that title, on the step's of liis celebrated theatre.'^

s 2

t66 SYLLA.

meters, ' To tlie valour of Homoloichus and Anax-
idamus.'

Upon this occasion he exhibited games at Thebc?,
in a theatre erected for the purpose near the fountain
of (Edipus '"-. But the judges, on account of the
implacable hatred -vvliich he bore to the Thebans,
Tvere selected from other cities of Greece. The for-
mer he deprived of half their territories, and conse-
crated them to the Pythian Apollo and the Olympian
Jupiter ; leaving orders, that out of their revenue-
the money should be repaid, which he had taken from
their temples.

After this, he received intelligence that Flaccus,
who was of the opposite faction, was elected consul ;
and that he was bringing a great army over the Ionian,
in pretence against Mithridates, but in reality against
himself. He therefore marched into Thessaly to
meet him. When he arrived however at Melitea,
information readied him from several quarters, that
the countries behind him were laid waste by another
army of the king's superior to the former. Dorylaiis
was arrived. at Chalcis with a large fleet, whicli
brought over eighty thousand men of Mithridate^^'
best-equipped and best-disciplined troops. With
these he entered Boeotia, and made himself master
of the country, in hopes of drawing Sylla to a battle.
Archelaiis remonstrated, indeed, against the m-easure;
but Dorylaiis was so tar from regarding him, that he
scrupled not to assert, " So many myriads of men
*' could not have been lost without treachery." But
Sylla soon turned back, and showed Dorylalis how
prudent was the advice which he had rejected, and
what a proper stnse it's author had of the lioman
valour. Dorylaiis in fact himself, after some slight

3* This fountain Pausanias informs us wss so called, becauss^
CEJipus there washed oil' the blood, v.itli \vl:ich he was stained in
the ruurther of his father Lahis. (ix. 18.) (L.)

By ' selecting his judges from the other cities of Grcsce,' Svlla
meant to insinuate his di, trust of the competency cf the Boeotiaus,
^Tllo were indeed jiioverbially stupid *

SYLLA. 261

skirmishes with Sylla at Tilphosium, was the first to
agree that action was not the thing to be pursued any
longer, hut that the war was to be spun out, and de-
cided at last ]jy dint of money.

The fiekl of Orchomenus however, w'here they
encamped, being most advantageous for those w-hose
chief strength consisted in cavahy, gave fresh spirits
to Archelaiis. For of all the plains of Boeotia this is
the largest and most beautiful, extending without
either tree or bush from the gates of Orchomenus to
the fens, in which the river Melas is absorbed. That
river rises under the walls of the city just mentioned,
and is the only Grecian river which is navigable from
it*s source. About the summer-solstice it overflows
like the Nile, and produces plants of the same nature ;
except that they are meagre and bear but little fruit.
It's course is short, the greatest part of it soon dis-
appearing in those dark and muddy fens. The rest
falls into the river Cephisus, about the place where
the water is bordered with such excellent canes for
flutes ^\

The two armies being encamped opposite to each
other, Archelaiis did not vcKture to make any attempt.
But Sylla began to cut trenches in several parts of the
field, that he might if possible drive the enemy from
the firm ground, which was so suitable for cavalry,
and force them upon the morasses. The barbarians
could not bear this, but upon the first signal from
their generals rode fiercely up at full speed, and dis-
persed the labourers. The corps likewise, designed
to support them, was put to flight. Sylla instantly
leaped from his horse, seized one of the ensigns, and
pushed through the middle of the fugitives toward the
enemy, crying out ; " Here, Romans, is the bed of
" honour, in which I am to die. Do you, when you
" are asked where you betrayed your general, re-
member to say, ' It was at Orchomenus.' " These

«

^^ For an account of these canes see tlie Life of I^ysander, p. 224'.
note (50).*

262 SYLLA.

v.-ords stopped them in their flight : besides, two co-
horts came from the right wing to his assistance,
and at the head of this united corps he repulsed the
enemy.

Sylla then drew back a Httle, to give his troops
some refreshment; after which he again brought
them to work, intending to draw a hne ofcircumval-
Jation rouiid the barbarians. Upon this, they returned
in better order than before. Diogenes, son-in-hiw to
Archelaiis, fell gloriously, as he was perfbrir-ing won-
xlers on the righc. Their archers however were charged
so close bv the Romans, tliat thev had not room to
manage their bow^s ; and they therctbre took a quan-
tity of arrows in their hands, which they used i:istead
of swords, and witli them killed several of their ad-
versaries. But at last they were broken and shut up
in their camp, where they passed (he night in great
misery, on account of their dead and wounded. The
next morning, Sylla drew out his men to continue the
trench ; and as numbers of the barbarians advanced
to engage him, he attacked and routed them so ef-
fectually, that in their terror none of Lliem made a
stand to guard the camp, and lie entered it along
\vith them.. The f^ns were then tilled with the blood
of the slain, and the lake with dead bodies ; insomuch
that even now many of the weapons of the barbarians
(bows, helmets, fragments of iron breast-plates, and
swords) are found buried in the mud, though it is
almost two hundred years since the battle. Such is
the account, whicJi we luue of the actions at Chas-
ronca and Orchomenus.

Meanv hile Cinna and Carbo behaved with so much
rigour and injustice at Rome, to persons of the higliest
distinction, that many in order to avoid their tyranny
retired to Sjdia's cam}), as to a safe harbour ; so that,
in a short time, he had a kind of senate about him.
Metella, with much dithculty, stole from Rome with
his children, and came to tell him that his enemies
had burnt his house and all his villas, and to entrcvit
him to return home where his assistance was so much

32

SYLLA. 26S

wanted. Upon this he was much perplexed in liis
deliberations, neither enduring to neglect his afflicted
country, nor knowing how to go and leave such an
important object as the Mitlnidatic war in it's present
unfinished state ; when lie was addressed by a mer-
chant of Dcliurir'^ named Archclaiis, on the part of
the general of that name, who wished to sound him
as to an accommodation, and to treat privately about
it's conditions.

Svlla was so charmed with the thing, that he
hastened to a personal conference with the general.
Their interview was on the sea-coast near Delium,
where stands the celebrated temple of Apollo. XJpon
their mcetiiig, Archclaiis proposed that Sylla should
quit tlie Asiatic and Pontic expedition, and turn his
whole attention to tiie civil war ; engaging on the
king's behalf to supply him with money, vessels, and
troops. Sylla in reply suggested that Archelalis
should quit the interest of Mithridates, be appointed
king in his place, assume the title of' an Ally to the
Romans,' and put the royal shipping into his hands.
When Archelaiis expressed his detestation of this
treachery, Sylia thus proceeded ; " Is it possible then
that you Archelaiis, a Cappadocian, the slave (or,
if you please, thefriend)of a barbarous king, should
be shocked at a proposal which, however in some
respects exceptionable, must be attended with the
most advantageous consequences ? Is it possible
that to me, the Roman general, to Sylla, you should
take upon you to talk of treachery ? As if you were
" not that same Archelaiis, wlio at Cha?ronea fled
with a handful of men, the poor remains of a hun-
dred and twenty thousand, hid himself two days
in the marshes of Orchomenus, and left the roads
of Bncotia blocked up with heaps of dead bodies."
Upon this, Archelaiis had recourse to entreaty, and
begged at last a peace for Mithridates. This was al-
lowed upon certain conditions : Mithridates was to

?* A' city of Boeotia, near Tanngra.*

a

a

ti

564( S.YLLA.

give up Asia and Paphlaironia, to cede Bithynia to
Nicomedes and Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, and was
farther to allow the Romans two thousand talents to
defray the expenses of the war, beside seventy armed
galleys fLdiy equipped. Sylla, on the other hand, was
to secure Mithridatcs in the rest of his dominions,
and to procure him the title of ' Friend and Ally to
the Romans.*

These conditions being mutually rafiiied between
them, Sylla returned through Tliessaly and Macedon
toward the Hellespont. Archelaiis, who accompa-
nied him, was treated with the greatest respect ; and
when he happened to fill sick at Larissa, Sylla halted
there for some time, and showed him all the attention,
which he could have paid to his own general officers,
or even to his collefnie himself. This circumstance
rendered the battle of Chsronea a little suspected,
as if it had been unfairly gained ; and what added to
the suspicion was the restoring of all the prisoners of
Mithridates' party except Aristion, the avowedenemy
of Archelaiis, who was taken oft' by poison. But it's
fullest confirmation was inferred from the cession of
ten thousand acres in Eubcea to the Cappadocian, and
the ti lie bestowed upon him of ' Friend and Ally to
the Romans.' Svlla however, in his Commentaries,
opposes all these censures.

During his stay at Larissa, he received an embassy
from Mithridates, entreating him not to insist upon
his giving up Paphlagonia, and representing that the
demand of the shipping was inadmissible. Sylla heard
these remonstrances w^ith indignation: '* What," said
he, " does Mithridates pretend to keep Paphlagonia,
" and refuse to send the vessels which I demanded?
Mithridates, whom I should have expected to im-
plore me on his knees, that I would spare that
right-hand, which had slain so many Romans? But
" I am satisfied that, when I return to Asia, he will
" chaij.^e his stile. "While he resides at Persjamus,
" he can direct at ease the war which he has never be-
" held." With this indignant answer, the embassa-

9

it

SYLLA. 265

tlors were struck cUmib, while Archelaiis endeavoured
to sooth and appease Sylla*s anger by every mitigating
expression, and bathing his hand with his tears. At
length, he prevailed upon the Kornan general to send
him to Mithridates, assuring him that he would ob-
tain his final ratification of all the articles, or perish
in the attempt.

Sylla upon this assurance dismissed him, and in-
vaded I\Icdica^', where he committed great depreda-
tions, and then returned to Macedon. At Philippi, he
received Archelaiis, wlio informed him that he had
succeeded perfectly well in his negociation, but that
Mithiidates was extremely desirous of an interview.
His reason for it was the tbllowing : Fimbria who had
slain tlie consul Fiaccus, one of the heads of the op-
posite faction, and defeated the king's general, was
now marching against Mithridates himself. Mithri-
dates, alarmed at this, wished to form a friendship
with Sylla.

Their interview was at Dardanus, in the Troad.
Mithridates came with two hundred galleys, an army
of twenty thousand foot, six thousand horse, and a great
number of armed chariots. Sylla had only four co-
horts, and two hundred horse. Mithridates advanced,
and held out his hand ; but Sylla first asked him,
" Whether he would confirm the conditions, which
*' Archelaiis had settled with him ?*' I'he king he-
sitated upon it, and Sylla then said, " It is for peti-
" tioners to speak first, and for conquerors to listen
" in silence." Mithridates upon this began a long
harangue, in which he endeavoured to apologise for
himself, by throwing the blame partly upon the gods
and partly upon the Romans. At length Sylla inter-
rupted liim. " I have often,'* said he, " heard that
" Mithridates v/as a good orator; but now 1 know it
** by experience, since he has been able to give a
colour to such unjust and abominable transac-
tions." He then unanswerably and in the bitterest

^^ A province of Thrace. See Strabo vii.*

256 SYLLA.

terms arraigned the king*s shameful conduct, and iii
conchision VLU-dln asked him, " Whether he would
" abide by tlie conditions settled with Archelaiis ?"
Upon his answering in the afiirmative, Sylia took him
in his arms and sahited him. He subsequently pre-
sented to him the two kings, Ariobarzanes and Ni-
comedes, and reconciled them to each other.

Mithridates, having delivered up to him seventy
of his ships and five hundred archers, sailed back to
Pontus. Sylla perceived, that his troops were much
offended at the peace : they thought it insufferable
that a prince who, of all the kings in the universe,
was the most inveterate enemy to Rome, and had
caused a hundred and fifty thousand Romans to be
murthered in Asia in one day, should go off with the
wealth and the spoils of Asia, which he had been
plundering and oppressing for four years. But he
excused himself to them by observing, that they
should never iuivc been able to carry on the war
against both Fimbria and IMithridates, if they had
joined their forces.

From Philippi he marched against Fimbria, who
was encamped at Thyatira ^^ ; and, having maiked
out a camp very near him, began the entrenchment.
The soldiers of Fimbria came out in their vests,
saluted those of Svlla, and readily assisted ihem in
their work. Fimbria observing this desertion, and
dreading Sylla, moreover, as an implacable enemy,
despatched himself upon the spot.

8ylla laid a fine upon Asia of twenty thousand
talents ; and, beside this, the houses of private per-
sons were ruined by the insolence and disorder of
the sokliers, whom he quartered upon them. For
he commanded everv householder to c'ive the soldier
who lodged with him sixteen drachmas a day, and
to provide a supper for him and as many friends as
he chose to invite. A centurion was to have fifty

^^ This was a city cf I^ydia, not far from Sardis, originally coIo-
»ised by the Macedomans.*

SYLLA. 257

drachmas a day and two robes, one to wear within
doors, and another in pubHc.

These things arranged, he set sail from Ephesus
with his whole fleet, and reached the harbour of
Piraeus on the third day. At Athens, he got himself
initiated in the Mysteries of Ceres ; and from that
city he took with him the library of Apelhcon the
Teian, in which were most of the works of xlristotle
and Theophrastus, books at that time not sufficiently
known to the woild^^ When tliey were brought to
Rome, Tyrannio tlie grammarian (it is said) prepared
many of them for publication "^^ and Andronicus the
Rhodian, procuring the manuscripts by his means,
actually published them, together with those indexes
which are now in every body's hands. The old
Peripatetics appear, indeed, to have been men of
curiosity and erudition : but they had neither met
with many of Aristotle's and Theophrastus' books,
nor were those wliich they had met with correct ;
because the inheritance of Neleus the Scepsian, to
whom Theophrastus bequeathed his works, tell into
mean and obscure hands.

Diu'ing Sylla's stay at Athens, he felt a painful
and heavy numbness in his feet, which Strabo calls
' the lisping of the gout.' This obliged him to sail
to ^depsus, for the benefit of the warm baths ^^,
where he lounged away the day with mimics, and buf-

^T For t'le history of these books, see Diog'. Laert. Life of
Theophnistus, v. .?}. Striibo xili., A then, v 14. Tyrannio,
mentioned bvlovv, was made prisoner in the war between Augustus
and Antony, and beca.nt; the slave of Cicero's wife Terentia, who
gave him his liberty. Strabo, as he himself informs us, was one
of his pupils.*

^s Tiic Latin interpreter renders tv(rx£j;;<o-«(r.7<z< infervcrtisse, and
D'dc'iiii- (I e'tourna, both which slgnhy 'converted to hU own use:*
but they are (-ertainly v/rong. It is Azraa-y-st^aa-ac-.S-^f, which has that
sense. Besides, both Cicero and Strabo give Tyi-annio a character,
which sets him above any meanness.

'^'> The warm baths of this Euba?an city are-<lescribcd by Plutarch
in hi.s Moral Works, and mentioned more than once by Strabo.
I'here was also a very celebrated cold bath, according- to Athenaeu*,
iii. l.,'at the same place.*

fSSj 3YLLA,

foons, and all the train of Bacchus. One day, as he
was walking by the sea-side, some fishermen pre-
sented him with a curious disli of fish. Delighted
with the present, he asked the people, " Of what
*' country they were ? " and when lie heard they
v.?ere Aheans, '^ What," said he, " are any of the
*'* Altcans then alive ? " For after his victory at Or-
choraenus, in taking vengeance upon his enemies
he had rased three cities of Bceotia, Anthedon,
Larymna, and Alasae. The poor men were struck
dumb with fear, but he told them with a smile ;
^' They might depart in perfect security, for they
'* had brought very respectable mediators with them."
From that time the Aleeans inform us, they took cou-
rage, and re-established themselves in their old
habitations.

8ylla, now recovered, passed through Thessaly
and Macedon to the sea, intending to cross over
from Dyrrachium^" to Brundusium witli a fleet of
twelve hundred sail. In that neighbourhood stands
Apollonia, near which is a sacred spot of ground
called NymphiEum *". The lawns and meadows are
of incomparable verdure, though interspersed wdth
springs from which continually issues fire. In this
place we are told, a satyr was taken asleep, exactly
like those which statuaries and painters represent to
iis^'. When brought to Sylla, he was interrogated
in many languages who he was, but he uttered no-
thing intelhgible ; his accent being harsh and inar-

*° Called also anciently Epidamnus {hod. Durazzo), in Albania,
a province of Turkey in Europe, Brundusium was an Italian sea-
port, near Tarentuni.*

'" In this place the nymphs had an oracle, about the manner of
consulting which Dion (xli. 45.) relates several ridiculous stories,
^lian likewise (Hist. Var. xiii. 16.) gives a description of it.
jStrabo, in his seventh book, informs us tiie Nymphaeum is a rock,
out of which issues fire, and that beneath it flow streams of flaming
bitumen. (8ee also Flin., H. N. ii. 106.)

^- One of these horned gentry, M. Ilicard informs us, was ac-
tually taken in Le Maine in 1599, and carried to Henry IV.; and
upon some such monster has the whole theory of satyrs been ibund-
ed by the poets.*

SYLLA. $e<>.

liculate, something between the neighing of a horse
and the bleating of a goat. Sylla waf^ shocked with
his appearance, and ordered him to be taken out of
his presence.

When he was upon the point of embarking \vith
his troops, he began to be afraid that, as soon as they
reached Italy, they would disperse and retire to
their respective cities. Upon this they came to him
of their own accord, and took an oath that they
would stand by him to the last, and not wilfally do
any damage to Italy. And, as they saw he would
want large sums of money, they went and brought
him each as much as ho could afford. He did not
however receive tiieir contribution, but having
thanked them for their attachment, and encouraged
them to hope the best, he set sail. He had to ad-
vance, as he himself intbrms us, against fifteen gene-
rals of the op|)osite j^iarty, wlio had under them not
Jess than two hundred and fifty cohorts. But heaven
gave him evident tokens of success. Immediatelv
upon his landing at Tarentum, he offered sacrince ;
and the liver of the victim had tiie plain impression''*
of a crown oflaiu'ei, with two strings hanging dowi^.
A little before his passage, there were seen in the
<lav-time upon Mount Hep!i{i:'um '^'^ m Campania two
hiYge he-goats engaged, wh.ich used all tlie move-
juents that n>en do in fighting. The phenomenon
raised itself by degrees from tlie earth into the air,
where it dispersed in the manner of shadowy phan-
tonis, and totally disappeared.

■'■'' The priest traced on Iiis liand whatever figures he chose, and
by holding it very close to the hver, ei?si!y made the inrpression
upon it while it was warm and pliant. (L.) Agesilaus, by the same
trick, inscribed the word ' Victory' on the liver of one of his vic-
tims, to the effectual encouragement of liis troops, who were dh-
Binyed by the numbers of the enemy .-"

^* There is no such mountain as ' Hepligcum ' known. Livy
(vii. 29.) mentions the hills of Tifata, which in the Greek might
^'perhaps be 7if&AfOM (with it's two first letters not unlike the H of
the receivefl reading), near Capua, hod. Monte di Capoaa. They-
are, likewise, to be found in Festus. And it was to Cspua, ive find,
that ^ylla compelied Norbanus to retire.*

270 SYLLA.

A little while after this, young Marius and Nor-
banus the consul, with two very powerful bodies^
ventured to attack Sylla ; who without any regular
disposition of his troops or order of battle, by the
mere valour and impetuosity of his soldiers, after
havincr slain seven thousand of the enemv, obliged
Norbanus to seek refuge within the v.alls of Capua.
Iliis success he mentions as the cause, why his sol-
diers did not desert, but despised the enemy, though
greatly superior in numbers. lie states, moreover,
that an inspired servant of Pontius met him in the
town of Silvium, and upon the authorit}^ of Bellona
pronounced him victorious ; but informed him at
the same time that, if he did not liasten, the Capitol
would be bu:nt. This actually happened on the day
predicted, which was the sixth of July"*\ About
this time it was that Marcus Lucullus, one of Sylla's
officers, v,'ho had only sixteen cohorts under his
command, found himself on the point of engaging
near Fidentia "* an enemv with fiftv ; and, thouo'h
he had the utmost confidence in the valour of his
troops, yet as many of them were without complete
armour, he hesitated with respect to the onset.
While he was deliberating about the matter, a gentle
breeze bore from a neighbouring field a quantity of
ilowers which covered the shields and helmets of the
soldiers in such a manner, that they seemed crowned
with garlands. This circumstance had such an
effect upon them^", that they charged the enemy
with double vigour and courage, killed eighteen

' ■♦^ I'^pnn the different fires, by which the Capitol sufTered, see
the Life of Puhhcolu, Vol. I. not. (12.) clc.*

•*'' Had. Borijo San Domino, between Parma and Placentia.*
•♦^ The use wliich tlie ancient Romans as vveli as Greeks made of
enthusiasm and superstition, particularl> in war, was so great, and
so frequent, that it appears to take off much from tlie idea of their
native courage and valour, Tlie slightest circumstance (as in the
impro'jahle instanco referred to) of a preternatiu-al kind, or bear-
ing the least shadow of a religious ccrt-'uiony, would a\iimate them,
to exploits which, though a rational valour was certainly capable of
efTecting them, without such influence they would never have un-
dertaken.*

8YLLA. 271

thousand, and became complete masters of' the field
and of the camjx This Marcus Luculhis was the
brother of that Luculhis, who subsequentJy conquer-
ed IMithridatcs and Tii>Tanes.

Sjlla still saw himself surrounded with armies and
jiowerful enemies, to whom he was inferior in point
of force, and he therefore had recourse to fraud.
}Ie made Scipio, one of the consuls, proposals for
an accommodation, upon which many interviews
and conferences ensued. But tSylla, constantly find-
ing some pretext for gaining time, was all the while
corrupting Scipio's soldiers by means of his own,
who were as well practised as their general in every
art of solicitation. They entered their adversaries*
ca;np, and mixing among them soon gained them
over ; some by direct bribery, some by fair promises,
and some by the most insinuating adulation. At last
Sylla advancing to their entrenchments wutli twenty
cohorts, Scipio's men saluted them as fellow-soldiers,
and came out, and joined them; so that Scipio v/as
left alone in his tent, where he v-as taken, but im-
mediately afterward dismissed in safety. These
twenty cohorts were Sylla's decoy-biids, by which
he drew forty more into his net, and then brought
them altogether into his camp. Upon this occasion,
Carbo is reported to have said that, " In Sylla he
" had to contend both with a fox and a lion, but the
" fox caused him the grcr.test trouble."

The year following, at Signiuni"'" young Marius,
with fourscore and five cohorts, gave Sylla the chal-
lenge. Sylla was very ready to accept it on that day
in particular, from a dream which he had had the
night before. He thought he saw old Marius, who
had now been long dead, advising his son to beware
of the ensuing day, as big with mischief to him.
This made Sylia impatient for the co;nbat. The
first step which he took with this view Vv-as to send

4S On the Via Latina, about thirty miles froin Roms; Appiaa
says, this action happened at Eliuni, a neighbouring city.*

n SYLLA.

for DolabeJla, then encamped at some (listnncc.
The enemy had blocked up the roads ; and Sylla's
troops were extremely harassed in endeavoming to
open them. Besides, a \iolcnt rain happened to fall,
and still more incommoded them in their \vork.
Upon which, the officers went and entreated Sylla to
defer the battle till another dav. showing? him his
men qnite exhausted with iatigiie, and seated on the
ground upon their shields. Sylla yielded to their
arguments, though with great reluctance, and gave
them orders to entrench themselves.

They had just began to put these orders into exe-
cution, when Marias rode bt)ldly up, in hopes of
lindinG^ them disnersed and in disorder. Fortune
seized this monieut for accomplishing Sylla's dream.
His soldiers fired with indi^'nation left their work,
stuck their pikes in the trench, and with drawn
swords and loud shouts ran to the charge. The
enemy, after a sliolit resistance, were routed, and
vast numbers fell in the flight. Marius himself fled
to PrsLMieste, where he found the gates shut ; but a
rope was let down, to whicli he fastened himself,
and was thus diawn up over the Vv'all.

Some authors indeed (and, among the rest, Fenes-
telia) write, that Marius saw nothing of the battle;
but tluit being oppressed with watching and fatigue,
he lay down in a shade, after the signal was given,
and was not awaked without ditficulty when all was
lost. tSylla savs, he lost onlv three and twenty men
ill this battle, tliough he killed teii thousand of the
enemy, and took eight thousand prisoners. He was
equally successful with respect to his lieutenants
Fom].^ey, Crassus, Metellus, and Servilius ; who with
no miscarriage at all, or with none of any conse-
quence, defeated considerable bodies of the enemy ;
insomuch that Carbo, who was the chief support of
the opposite party, stole out of his camp by niglit,
and passed over into Africa.

Sylla's last conflict was with Telesinus the Samnite,
who entered the lists like a fresh^ champion against

SYLLA. 273

oliG tluit was weaiy, and was near throwing l:im at
tlie very gates of Rome. Teiesinns, with the assistance
of a Liicanian naincd Lamponiiis, had collected a
Jarge force; and Vv'as hastening to the rcHef of Ma-
riiis, who was besieged in Piaeneste. But he re-
ceived intehigence, that SyiJa and Pompcy were ad-
vanciiig against liim by long marches, tiie one to
take him in front and the otlier in rear, and that he
was in the utmost danger of being hemmed in both
before and behind. In this case, like a man of iz:reat
abihties and experience of the most critical kind, lie
decamped by night and marched with his vvhole
army directly toward Home, vv-hicli was in so un-
guarded a condition that lie might have entered it
without difficulty. But he stopped when he vvas
only ten furlongs from the Colline gate, and con-
tented himself Vv'ith pa-sing the night before the
■walls, highly encouraged and elevated at the thouglit
of having outdone so many eminent commanders iu
point of generalship.

Early the next morning, the young nobility
mounted their horses, and fell upon him. He defeated
tliem, however, and killed a considerable number-^
among the rest Appius Claudius, a young man- of
spirit, and of one of the most illustrious families in
Home. The city was now full of terror and confu-
sion ; the women ran about the streets, bewailing
themselves, as if it were just going to be taken by
assault ; when Balbus, who had been sent before by
Sylia, appeared advancing at full speed with seven
hundred cavalry. He stopped just long enough to
give the horses time to cool, and then bridled them
again, and proceeded to attack the en?my.

In the mean time, Sylia made his appearance ;
and, having caused his first ranks to tiTne a hasty re-
fresliment, began to marshal tliem in order of battle.
Dolabella and Torquatus pressed him to wait some
time, and not lead his men in that fatii?:ued condition
to an engagement, which must, prove decisive. For
he had now to do not with Carbo and Marius but

VOL. in. T

274 SYLLA.

with Sanniites and Liicuiiians, tlic most inveterate
enemies of the Roman name, lie over-ruled their
motion liowever, and ordered the trumpets to sound
to the charge, thougli it Avas now so late as the tenth
hour of the day "■'. There was no battle, during the
whole war, tbnght with so much obstinacy. The
riffht wintj; commanded bv Crassus, had Q-reatlv the
advantage ; but the left was much distressed, and be-
gan to give way. Sylhi made up to it's assistance.
He rode a white horse of uncommon spirit and swift-
ness ; and two of the enemy, knowing him by it,
levelled tiieir spears at him. He himself did not
perceive it, but his groom did, and witli a sudden
lash made the horse spring forward, so that the
spears only grazed his tail and fixed themselves in
the oTound. It is said, that in all his battles lie
wore in his bosom a small golden image of Apollo,
which he had brought from Delphi. Upon this oc-
casion he kissed it with particular devotion ^°, and
addressed it in these terms : " O Pythian Apollo,
" who hast conducted the fortunate Cornelius Sylla
*' through so many engagements w^ith honour, when
*' thou hast brought him to the threshold of his
*' country, wilt thou let him fall there ingloriously
" by the hands of his own citizens ?"

After this act of devotion, he endeavoured to rally
his men : some he entreated, some he threatened,
and some he forced back to the charge. But at
length his whole left wing was routed, and he was
obliged to mix with the fiigitives to regain his camp,
after having lost many of his friends of the highest
distinction. A great number likwise of those, who
had come out of the city to see the battle, were
trodden under toot and perished. Nay, Kome itself
was thought to be absolutely lost ; and the siege of

^'^ That is, reckoning \vlth the Romans froia six o'clock in the
morning, as the beginning ot' their day, lour o'clock in the alter-
noon *

'^° By this it ajjpcars, that the Romans marie the same use of the
iwiagcB of tlieivgoils, as the Romanists ilo of images aiid reliques. i

»

SYLLA. 2

4^ 1 O

Pi-tTneste, wliere Marius had taken Tip his quarters,
was near being raised. Yov, after the defeat, many
of the fugitives repaired thither ; and desired 1-Aiere-
tins OfeUa, who had the direction of the siege, to
quit it innnediately, as SylUi (they affirmed) was .sknn,
and his enemies masters of Rome.

But the same evening, wlien it was quite dark,
messengers arrived at Sylla's camp on the part of
Crassus, to desire refreshments for liimself and his
sokliers. For he had defeated tlie enemy, and pur-
sued tliem to Antemna ^', where lie was then besieg-
ing them. Along with tliis intelligence Sylla learned,
that the chief part of the hostile force had been cut
off in the action. As soon theretbre as it was day,
he repaired to Antemna. Three thousand of the
opposite taction sent deputies to him, to intercede
for mercy ; and he promised them impunity, upon
condition that they would come to him after some
notable ettbrt against the rest of his enemies. Con-
fiding in his honour, they fell upon another corps,
and thus many of them were slain by the hands of
their fellow-soldiers. Svlla however collected these
and what was left of the others, to the number of
six thousand, into the Circus ^-, and at the same
time assembled the senate in the temple of i3ellona.
The moment he began his harangue, his soldiers (as
they had been ordered) fell upon those six thousand
poor wretches, and cut them in pieces. The cry oi'
such a number of people, massacred in a place of no
great extent, as may well be imagined, was most
dreadful. The senators were struck with astonish-
ment. But he, with a firm and unaltered counte-
nance continuing his discourse, bade them " Attend
" to what he was saying, and not trouble tfiemseives
" about what was doing without ; for the noise,

5' A city in the country of the Sabines, which was one of the first
enemies of intant Rome. Liv. i. 10, 11.*

'- Of these, there were several at Homo : bt)t the one most cele-
brated was tliat constructed by Tarquinius Priscjs^*

't 2

27& SYLLA.

" uliicli tficy heard, came only from some male^
" factors, wliom he had ordered to be chastised."

It was hence evident to tiie least discerning,
among the Romans, that they were not delivered
from tyranny, but had only changed their tyrant.
IMariiis indeed from the first was of a harsh and se-
vere disposition, and power did not p/rdduce, but
only added to his cruelty. Whereas Sylla, at the
beginning, bore prosperity with great courtesy and
moderation : though he seemed more attached to
the patricians, it was thought that he would protect
the rights of the people: he had loved to laugh from
his youth, and had been so compassionate, that h&
readily melted into tears. This change in him,
therefore, could not but cast a blemish upon power.
From his example, it was inferred that hfgh honours
and fortunes will not sufier mcii's manners to re-
main in their original simplicity ; but that it beget:?
in them ii-isolencc, arrogance, and inhumanity.
AVhether power does really produce such a change
of disposition, or whether it only displays the native
badness of the heart, belongs however to another
department of letters to inquire. -

Sylla, now turnin": himself to kill and to destroy,
iilled the city wit!> massacres, which had" neitlier
number nor bounds. He even gave up many per-
sons,- against whom he had no complaint, to tlie
private revenge of his creatures. At last one of tiie
young nobility, named Caiihs Metdlus, ventured to-
put these questions to him in the senate : " Tell us.
Sylla, when we sliall' have an end of our calami-
ties ?• How far thou wilt proceed, and when v.e^
may hope thou wilt stop? We ask thee not ta
spare those, whom thou hast marked out for
p.unishment; but we do- ask an exe^nijvticm from'
anxiety for thoae, whom thou hast determined to
save." Sylla "said, " He did not yet know, whom,
he siiould save." " Tiien," replied Metelius,
let us know, whon> thou intciidest to destroy j.'*'

cc

iC

&c

SYLLA. 277

aiicl Sy.]la answered, " He would do it." Some in-
deed ascribe the last reply to Aufidius, one of Sjlla's
flatterers.

Immediately npoii this, without in the least con-
SLdting any of" the magistrates, he proscribed eighty
citizens. And, as the public expressed their indig-
nation, the second day following he proscribed two
Inmdred and twenty more, and as many on the third.
He then told the people from the Rostrum, " He
" had now proscribed all that he remembered, and
"" such as he had forgotten must be included in
" some future proscription.'" Death was the punish-
ment ordained for any one, who should harbour or
save a person proscribed, without excepting even a
brother, a sou, or a parent. Such was to be the re-
eompence of humanity ! But two talents were to be
the reward of assassination, whether it were, a slave
who killed his master, or a son his fath er. Themost
unjust circumstance however of the whole seemed to
be, that he declared the sons and grandsons of pro-
scribed persons infamous, and confiscated their
goods.

The lists were put up not only at Rom<^, but in all
the cities of Italy. Neither the temple of the
gods, nor the paternal dwelling, nor the hearth of
hospitality, was any protection against murther.
Husbands were despatched in the bosoms of
their wives, and sons in those of their mothers.
And those, who fell sacrifices to resentment and re-
venge, were as nothing, compared with the nmnbers
destroyed on account of their wealth. So that it
was a common saying among the ruffians, " His
" fine house was the death of ^ such a one, his
" gardens of another, and his hot baths of a third."
Quintus Aurelius a quiet man, who thought he
could have no share in those miseries, but that
w^hich compassion gave him, came one day into the
Forum, and out of curiosity read the names of the
pi'oscribed. There finding his own among the rest,
ii€ cried out, * Wretch that I am ! my Alban villa

M SYLLA.

" pursues me ;" and had not gone far, before a ruf-
iian came up and murthered him.

In the mean time, young Marius being tal;en ^^
slew himself. Sylhi then came to Pracneste, where at
iirst he tried the inhabitants, and had them executed
singly. But afterward finding that he had not lei-
sure for such formalities, he collected tliem all to the
number of twelve tliousand, and ordered them to be
put to deatli ; excepting only one, who had for-
merly entertained him at his house. This man with
A noble spirit told him, '' He would never owe his
" life to the destrover of his country ;" and, volim-
tarily mixing with the crowd, died with his feUow-
citizens. The strangest, however, of all his proceed-
ings was that with respect to Catiline. This wretch
had assassinated his own brother durinix the civil
•war, and he now desired Sylla to putliim among the
proscribed, as a person still alive ; which he made no
difficulty of doing. Catiline in return went and
killed one Marcus Marius who was of the opposite
faction, brought his head to Sylla as he sat uj)on his
tribunal in the Forum, and then washed his hands in
the lustral water ^* at the door of Apollo's temple,
winch \vas close by.

Tliese massacres were not the only thino- which
nfflicted tlie Romans. Sylla declared himself dic-
tator ■"', reviving tJiat office in his own favour,
(hougti there had been no instance of it for a hun-
dred and twentv veai's. He "ot a decree of amnesty
for all that he had done ; and another investing him
for the future with the power of life and (Icath, ot

-'^ lie uas not taken : b>U, as he was enrte;ivouring to make liit;
escapie by a subterraneous passage, he found it beset by Syihi's sol-
fliers ; upon whieh, he onlered one oi" his slaves to kill hiiu. S§e
Paterc. ii. 27., and Val. yiax. vi. S. ;

J-* Here is another instance of a heathen custom adopted by tlfe
Romanists: an exelusiou from the use of this holy water was con-
sidered by the Greeks as a sort of excotnnuinieatiun. We tind
.(Kdipus prohibiting it to the murtherers of L;Vius. (Soph. OLi.
lyr. li. 1.)

■>" See Suppl. Liv. Ixxklx. s.**

SYLLA. 279

conliscating, of colonising, of building or demolish-
ing cities, and of giving or taking away kingdoms at
his pleasure. 'Jliis power he exercised in such an
insolent and despotic manner, with regard to confis-
cated £2:oods, that his sales of them from the tribunal
were more intolerable than the confiscations them-
selves. Upon handsome prostitutes, and harpers,
and buffoons, and the most wicked of his enfranchised
slaves he bestowed the revenues of whole cities and
provinces; and he even compelled women of con-
dition to marry some of those rufhans.

He was ambitious of an alliance with Pompey the
Great, and made him divorce his wife in order to
marry ^-^imilia, the daughter of Scaurus bv hi.5 own
wife Metella, though he had to force her from
Manius Glabrio, by whom she was pregnant. The
young lady, however, died in child-bed in the house
of Pompey her second husband*.

Lucretius Ofella, who had besieged JNTarius in
PriEneste, now aspired to the consulship, and pre-
pared to sue for it. Sylla forbade him to proceed ;
and when he saw that brave man enter the Forum,
attended by great numbers, as a candidate, he sent
one of his centurions to despatch him, while he him-
self sat on his tribunal in the temple of Castor and
Pollux, and looked down upon the murther. The
people seized the centurion, and brought him with
loud complaints before Syjia. Pint commanding
silence, he mfbrmed them that the thing was done
by his order, and that the centurion therefore must
immediately be dismissed.

About this time he led up his triumph, which was
magnificent for the ilisplay of wealth, and of a new-
spectacle in the royal s])oils ; but what crowned all,
was the procession of the exiles. Some of the most
illustrious and most powerful of the citizens followed
the chariot, and called Sylla * their Saviour and
Father,* because through him they had been enabled

"* See the Life of Poinpey In the sequd of this work.
12

280 SYLLA.

to return to tlieli" country, and Were restored to
their wives and children. When the triumph was
finished, he gave an account of his great actions in a
set speech to the people, and was not less particular
in relating the instances of his. good fortune, than
those of his valour. He even concluded with an
order, that for the future he should be called Felix,
that is, ' the Fortunate/ But in writing to the Gre-
cians, and in his answers to their applications, he took
the additional name of Epaphroditus '"\ The inscrip-
tion upon the trophies left among us is, ' Lucius
Cornelius Sylla Epaphroditus.' And to the twins,
whom he had by Metella, he gave the names of
Fau«l as and Fausta, which in the Roman language
signifv.' Auspicious, and Happy.'

A still strongei proof of his placing more con-
fidence in his goodtbrtune, than in his achievements,
"was his laying dovvu the dictatorship '''. After he
l)ad put an intinite number of; people to death,
violated the constitution, and revolutionised the form
of government, he had the hardiness to give the
people full power to choose consuls again ; vdiile he
himself^ without pretending to any direction of their
suffrages, walked about the Forum as a private man,
and left it in the power ofany person to take his life.
In the very first election h.e had the mortification to
see his enemy Marcus Lepidus, a bold and enter-
prising man, likely to be declared consul ; not by his
ovv'u interest, but bythatof Pompey,who upon this oc-
casion exerted hiniself with the people. And, when
lie saw Fompey going off elated with his victory, he
called to him and said, " No doubt, young man,
your politics are most excellent ; since you have
gotten Lepidus named before Catulus *, the vilest
of men belbre the best. It is hio'h time for you to
av/ake, now that you have strengthened your ad-

ii

a

55 * The favourite of Venus.' *

^^ After having held it for three years, from A U.C. 672 — 6'75.,
* Lepidus and Cutuhis were joiiit con.siilK, A. U. C. 67(3. See the
Life of Fompey, Vol. IV. *

SYLLA. . 281

cc

versary against yourself." Sylla spoke tliis from
something lii<e a prophetic spirit; for Lepidus soon
afterward acted with the utmost insolence, as Pom-
pey's declared enemy.

iSylla gave the people a magnificent entertainment,
on account of his dedicating the tenth of his siib-
stance to Hercules ^\ The provisions were so over-
abundant that a large quantity was daily thrown into
the river ; and the wine, which was drunk, was at
least forty years old. In tlie midst of this feasting,
which lasted many days, Metella sickened and died.
As tiie priests forbade him to approach her, and to
have his house detiled with mourning, he sent her a
bill of divorce, and ordered her to be carried to ano-
ther house while the breath was still in her body.
His superstition niade him very punctilious in observ-
ing these laws of the priests ; but by indulging the
utmost profusion, he transgressed a law of his own,
which limited the expense of funerals. He broke in
upon his own sumptuary lavv^ likewise with respect to
diet, by passing his time in the most extravagant
banquets, and having recourse to debauches to com-
bat anxiety.

A few months afterward, he presented the people
with a show of gladiators. And as at that time men
and women had no separate places, but sat promis-
cuously in the theatre,a woman of great beauty and of
one of the best families happened to sit near 8ylla.
She was the daughter of Messala, the sister of the
orator Hortensius, of the name of Valeria, and had
been lately divorced from her husband. This woman
coming behind Syila touched him, took off a little of
the nap of his robe, and immediately returned to her
place. He fixed his eyes on her, quite amazed at
her familiarity; upon which she said, "Wonder
" not, my lord^ at what I have done, I only wished
" to share a little in your good fortune.'* Sylla was
far from being displeased ; on the contrary, he ap-

58 Plutarch, in one ofhisMoral Treatises (Qusest. Rom.) has in-
vestigated the origin of this custom.* ,

2S5 SYLLA.

peaiTd agreeably tickled by it : for he sent to ask
lier name, aud to iiKjuire into Iier family and cha-
racter. Then followed an interchange of amorous
glances and ogles and smiles, which ended in a con-
tract and marriage. The lady, perhaps, was not to
blame; But Sylla, though he got a woman of re]ni-
tation and great accomplishments, yet came into the
match upon wrong principles. Like a youth, he was
caught with soft looks and languishing airs, things
which arc wont to excite tlie lowest and most worth-
less of the passions.

Yet, notwithstanding he had married so extraor-
dinary a woman, he continued his commerce with
actresses and female musicians, and sat drinkin^r
whole days with a company of buffoons. His chief
favourites at this tinie were lloscius the comedian,
Sorex the mimic, and Metrobius who used to act a
-woman's part"-^, for whom (though past his prime)
he ever retained a professed kindness. These courses
added strength to a distemper, which was but slight
at the beginning ; for he was long ignorant, that he
had an abscess within him. This abscess corrupted
his flesh, and turned it all into lice ; so that, though
he had many persons employed both day and night
to clean him, tlvepart removed was trifling compared
with what remained. His whole attire, his baths, his
basons, and his food, were tilled with a perpetual
flux of vermin and corruption. And though he
bathed many times a day, to cleanse and purify him-
self, it was all in vain. The corruption gained upon
him so fast, that it was impossible by any remedies
to overcome it.

Of this sickness, we are told, among the ancient?,
Acastus, ^!i\^ son of "elias, died ; and of those
iiearer our own times Alcman the poet, Pherecydes
the divine, Callistbcnes the Olynthian who was kept
in close prison, and Mucins the lawyer'''\ And if

5« A>Ti«.v?.q. Sep Athen. siv. l-. Sylla's Phthir'asis, mentioned
i^'iow, is qjt^jstioned by Dr. Shaw, in his Nat. MiscelL*

^° Speu-sippus also, F'.ato's pe-phew lUiti tmccessor in the Ac%

SYLLA. "283

tlfter these wc may mention a man, wlio did not dis-
tinGjLiish himself by any thing* laudable, but acquired
notoriety a different way, it may be added that the
fugitive slave Kunus, who kindled the Servile War
in Sicily, and was subsequently taken and carried to
Home, died tliere of tliis disease.

Sylla not only foresaw liis death, but has left some-
th'mcr relatinij- to it in his writina^s. He finished the
tv*'enty-second l)ook of his Commentaries, only two
days before he died : and the Chaldeans, he informs
us, had predicted that after a life of glory he would
depart in the height of his pros})crity. He farther
acquaints us, that his son who died a little before
Metella appeared to him in a dream, dressed in a
mean garment, and desired him to bid adieu to his
cares and go along with him to his mother Metella^
with whom he should live at ease and enjoy the
charms of tranquillity. He did not, however, with-
draw his attention from public affairs. It was but
ten days before his death, that he reconciled the
contending parties of Puteoli'^^ and gave them a set
of laws for the regulation of their police. And the
very day before he died, upon information that the
quaestor Granius would not pay what he owed to the
state, but waited for his death to avoid paying it at
all, he sent for him into his apartment, placed his
ficrvants about him, and ordered them to strangle
him. The violence, with which he spoke, strained
him so mncli that the impostluune broke, and hft
voided a great quantity of blood. His strength now
failed fast, and after he had [)assed the night in ex-
treme agonies, he expired. He left two young
children by ^Metella, and Valeria after his death was
delivered of a daughter called Posthuma ; a name

demy, is said by Diog. Laert. to have died of the same disease. But
the passage is a suspected one. Of the slave Eunys, mentioned
be'.O'.v, Floriis (iii. 19.) has sketched a ludeous portrait. The Seri
vile V.'ar took place, A. U. C. 619, and continued thi-ee years.*

^' In tlie (xreek ' Dica^chia,' which is another' name for
* Puteoii,' (L.) so called on account of ifs numerous M-el.'s, or the
sulphureous .st'^nch of it's hot v-aters.*""

$Si LYSANDER AND SYLLA COMPARED.

given, of course, by the Romans to such as are born
after the death of their father.

Many of SylJa's enemies now combined with Lepi-
dus, to prevent his having the usual honours of bu-
rial: but Pompey, though he was somewhat displeased
at Svlla, because of all his friends lie had left him
alone out of his will, interposed and prevailed upon
«ome by his interest and entreaties, and upon others
by menaces, to drop their opposition. He then
conveyed the body to Rome, and conducted the
whole funeral not only with security, but with ho-
nour. Such was the quantity of spices brought in
by the women, that exclusive of those carried in
two hundred and ten large baskets, a full-length
figure of Sylla, and of a lictor besides, was formed
entirely of cinnamon and frankincense. The day
happened to be so cloudy, and the rain was so much
expected, that it was about the ninth hour'^" before
the corpse was carried out. It was no sooner laid
upon the pile, however, than a brisk wind blew, and
mised. so strong a flame that it w^as immediately
consumed. But after the pile was burnt down, and
the fire began to decay, a heavy rain fell v/hich
lasted till night. So that his good fortune continued
to the last, and assisted at his funeral. His monu-
ment stands in the Campus Martins ; and he wrote
an epitaph for himself!, we are informed, to the fol-
k>wing purport : " No friend ever did me so much
good, or enemy so much harm, but I repaid him
with interest."

LYSANDER AND SYLLA

COMPARED.

"WE havfe how gone through the Life of Sylla, and
will proceed to our comparison.

tz '["iiYQQ jj) t],c afternoon.

LYSANDER AND SYLLA COMPARED. 28 J

This then Lysander and he have in common, that
they were entirely indebted to themselves for their
elevation. But Lysander has this advantage, that
the high offices which he gained were with the con-
sent of the people, while the constitution of hi<;
country "was in a sound and healthy state ; and that
he got nothing by force, or by acting against the
laws : whereas

In civil broils the worst emerge to honour;

And SO it was at that time in Rome. The people
were so corrupt, and the republic in so sickly a
condition, that tyrants sprung up on every side.
Neither is it any subject of wonder, that Sylla gained
the ascendency at a period, when wretches like
Glaucias and Saturninus expelled such men as Me-
tcllus, when the sons of consuls were murthered in
the public assemblies, when men supported their se-
ditious purposes Vvith soldiers purchased by money,
and laws were enacted with fire and sword and every
species of violence'.

In such a state of things, I do not blame the man
who raised himself to supreme power ; but neither
do I admit that, when the commonv/caith was in so
depraved a condition, power was any evidence of
merit. As the laws however and public virtue never
flourished more at Sparta, tlian when Lysander wa*
sent upon the highest and most unportant commis-
sions, we may conclude that he was worthiest among
the wortliy, and greatest among the great. Thus the
one, though he oiten surrendered the command, had
it as often restored to him by his fellow-citizens ;
because his virtue, which alone has a claim to the
prize of honour, continued still unvaried'. Tlic.

' We need no other instance tlian this, to showtliat a republicviii
goveninient will never do in corrupt tiir,L\s.

- Vvhat kind of virtue can Plutarch porisibly ascribe to Lysnnder?
Unless, indeed, he means military virtue. "lie v.a';, undoubtedly,
a m\x\\ of tlic greatest duplicity and prafancness: for he ^.-orrupte'd.

286 LYSANDEIl AND SYLLA COMPARED^

other, after lie Avas once appointed general, usurped
the coninumd and kept In arms for ten years j some-
times stiling iiimself consul, sometimes proconsul,
and sometimes dictator, but being always in reality
a tyrant.

Lysander, it is true (as we have observed above),
attempted a change in the Spartan constitution, but
he took a milder and more legal metliod than »Sylla^
It was by persuasion", not by arms, that he proceed-
ed ; neither did he seek to overturn every thing at
once. He onlv wanted to correct the establishment,
as to kings. And indeed it seemed natural that in a
state, which had the supreme direction of (xreece on
account of its virtue, rather than any other supe-
riority, merit should gain the sceptre. For as the
hunter and the jockey do not so much consider the
breed*, as the dog or horse already bred (for vchat,
if the foal should prove a muler), so the politician
would entirely miss his aim\ if he examined not the
qualities, but the quality, of the person proposed
for first magistrate. Thus the Spartans deposed some
of their kings, because they had not kingly talents,
but were worthless and disreputable. Vice, even
with high birth, is dishonourable : and the honour,
which virtue enjoys, is all her own ; family has no
share in it.

the priests, and prostituted the honour of the gods, to gratif}' his.
personal envy and ambition.

^ It was by hypocrisy, by profane and impious expedients.

■* And yet this forms a great part of the principle of modern
improvements in the inferior aniitials:

Fortes creanturJbrtUiiis el bonis,

(Ilor. Od.IV. iv. 29.)
is the maxim at Vv'oburn and Holkam. With regard to the higher
creature man, however, it must be qualified by a reference to the
times. In days of extreme refinement, the language of Juvenal in
his eighth satire is usually, it is to be feared, more correct :

yU X'os, TrojiigcncCy vohis ijynnscilis ; ct ijiuc
Tiirpia cerdoui, T'olesus ]3rnfn7>t(/iie dccebiint. (182.)*
"■ Upon this passage we meet with a remark in Dacier, which
characteri.sos more the Frenchnutn of ancient times, than those of
the present period : * Let the kiuj^s be good or bad, the peopl^
art; bound to submit !'^

>^

LYSAXDEll AKD SYLLA COMPARED. 287

They were both guiity of injustice ; but Lysander
in favour of his friends, and Sylla in ojiposition to
his. Most of Lysander's frauds were committed in
behalf of his creatures; and it was to advance them
to high stations and absolute power, that he dipped
his hands in so nuich blood : wlicrcas Sylla envied
Pornpey the army and Dolabella the naval com-
mand, whicli he had bestowed upon tliem, and at-
tempted to take them away. And, Vvhcn Lucretius
Ofella after the greatest and most faithful services
solicited the consulship, he ordered him to be de-
sjiatched before his eyes. Terror and dismay seized
all the world, when they saw one of his best friends
thus murthered.

It' we consider tlieir behaviour with respect (o
riches and pleasure, we shall lind one the prince,
--and the other the tyrant. When the power and au-
thority of Lysander were at their heiglit, he was not
guilty of a single act of intemperance or youthful
dissipation. He, if any man, avoided the sting of
that proverb :

* Lions within doors, foxeis still without/

tSo sober, and regular, and truly Spartan was his
manner of living. Sylla, on the other hand, neither
let poverty set bounds to his passions in his youth,
nor years in his agQ. But, as Sallust says^ while
he was giving his countrvmen laws tor the regulation
or marriages and the promotion of sobriety, he in-
dulged himself in adultery and every species of lust.
By his debaucheries lie so drained the public trea-
sures, that he was obliged to permit many cities, in
alliance and friendship with liome, to purchase iu-
dependence and the privilege of being governed by
their own laws ; though, at the same time, he was
daily confiscating the riciiest and best houses m

" In a pas-'-ai^e not now extant, most probably forming part of
Ills Roman History, of which only a ftiw frajjuients at r.'re:;;cnt rt-

tory, of which only

388 LYSAN^DER AND SYLLA C0:MPARED.

Home. Still more immense were the sums, whicft
he squandered upon liis Hattcrcrs. What bounds or
moderation indeed could be expected in his private
gifts, when his heart was dilated with wine, if we
attend but to a single instance of his public beha-
viour ? One day as he was selling a considerable
estate, which he wished a friend to obtain at an
imder-price, another offered more ; and the crier
proclaiming the advance, lie turned with indigna-
tion to the people, and exclaimed ; " What outrage
" and tyranny is this, my fiiends, that I am not ai-
" lowed to dispose of my own spoils as I please !"

Far from such rapaciousness, Lysander to the
spoils which he sent his countrymen added his own
share. Not that in this I think him worthy of oraise:
for perhaps he liurt Sparta m.ore essentially by the
money, which he brought into it, than Sylla did
Home by what he took fi-om li. I only mention it,
as a proof of the little regard, which he had for
riches. It was something very particular however
that Sylla, while he abandoned liimself to all the pro-
fusion of luxury and expense, should bring the
Romans to sobriety : whereas Lysander subjected
the Spartans to those passions, which in himself he re-
strained. The former acted worse than his ov.n laws
directed, and the other brought his people to act
worse than himself: for he iilled Sparta with the
love of that, which he himself knev,* how to despise.
Such they were, in their political capacity.

As to military achievements and acts of general-
ship, the number of-victories gained and of dangers-
encountered, Sylla is beyond comparison. Lysander
indeed obtained two naval victories, to which we
may add his taking of Athens ; for, though that
affair was not difficult in it's execution, it was glo-
rious in it's consequences. As to his miscarriage in
Rt.eotia and at Haliartus, ill- fortune perhaps Jiad
some concern in it, but it was principally owing to
indiscretion ; since he would not wait for the great
rcinibrcement, which the king was bringing from

9

lYSANDER AND SYLLA COMPARED. 2S8

Plat;!??^, and which was upon the point of joining
liini, but with an ill-timed rcsentnient and ambition
inarched up to the w'alls. Hence it happened, that
he wiis slain by some troops of no consideration,
who sallied out to the attack. He lell not bv an
honourable wound, as Cleombrotus did at Leuctra,
making head against an impetuous enemy ; nor like
Cyrus', or Epaminondas, as he was rallying his men
and ensuring to them the victory. These illustrious
men died the death of kin<2;s, and of (generals. But
Lysander threw away his life ingloriously, like a
common soldier or a partisan. By his death he
evinced the judgement of the ancient Spartans, in
not choosino- to fio^ht ai;ainst stone-walls where the
bravest man in the world may be killed (I will not
say, by an insignificant man, but) by a cliild, or a
woman. Thus Achilles is said to have been slain by
Paris, at the gates of Troy. On the other hand, so
many pitched battles were won by Sylla, and so
many myriads of enemies killed, that it is not easy
to number them. Twice he took Rome itself', and
the Piranis at Athens, not by famine (as Lysander
had done) but by assault, after he had defeated
Archelaiis in several great battles at land, and forced
him to take refuge in his fleet.

It is a material point likewise to consider, what
generals they had to oppose. I look upon it as mere
trifling and child's play to have beaten Antiochus,
who was only Alcibiades' pilot, and to have out-
witted Phiiocles the Athenian demaijoii'ue,

A man whose tongue was sharpened, not his sword.

Mithridates would not ha\e compared them with his
groom, nor Marius with one of his lictors. But
Sylla had to contend with princes, consuls, gQ.WQ-

■7 Viz. Tlie younger, warring against his brother Artaxerxes,
B.C. 401.*

8 Whatever raiHtary merit he might display in other battles, he
had certainly none in the taking of Rome : for it was not general-
ship, but necessity, which made it fall into his hands.

VOL. III. U

^<J0 LYSANDER AXD SYLLA COMPARED.

rals, and tribunes of tlie liigliest influence and abl*
lities ; and, to name but a tew of them, wb.o among"
the Romans v;as more formidable than ]Marius ;
among the kings, more powerfhl than Mitln-idates ;
or among the people of Italy, more warlike than
Lamponius and Telesinus ? Yet Sylla banished the
first, subdued the second, and killed the other two.

What is of more consequence however, in my
opinion, than any tiling yet mentioned is, that I^y-
sander was supported in all enterprises by his friends
at home,' and owed all his success to their assist-
ance ; whereas Sylla, a banished man overpowered
by a fiction, at a time when his enemies Mcre ex-
])elling his wife, destroying his house, and putting
his friends to death, ibnght the battles of his coun-
try on the plains of Bcieotia against armies v.hich
could not be numbered, and was victorious in Jier
cause. Nay, this was not all : Mithridatcs ofi'ered
to second him with his whole power, and join liim
Vvith all his forces aQ:ainst his enemies at Rome ; yet
he relaxed not the least in his demands, nor showed
him the smallest countenance. Me would not so
much as return his salutation or give him his hand,
till lie had promised in person to relinquish Asia, to
deliver u\) his ships, and to restore Bithynia and
Cappadocia to tiieir respective kings. There was
3i()thingin the whole condvict of Sylla more glorious,
or demonstrative of greater magnanimity. He prefer-
red the public good to his own : like a dog of gene-
rous breed, he kept his hold till his adversary had
yielded, and after that he turned to revenge his own
can.se.

The different methods, which they observed with
respect to the Athenians, contribute not a little to
mark their characters. Sylla, though they had borne
arms against him for Mithridatcs, after he had taken
tlieir city, indulged thein with their liberty and the
jjriviicge of their own laws : Lysander showed no
compassion toward a people, previously so glorious
and powerful, but abolished the popular govern-

LYSANDER AND SYLLA COMPARED. 291

iiient, and set over them the most cruel and unjust
of tyrants.

We shall not perliaps be far from the truth, if we
conclude that in the life of Sylla there were more
successes, and in that of Lysander fewer faults ; if
we assign to the Grecian the prize of temperance
and prudence, and to the Koman that of valour and
capacity for war.

i: 2

THE

LIFE

or

C I M O N.

SUINIMARY.

Peripoltas, the soothsayer, establishes himself at Ckarotiea. Damon
conspires against the Roman commandant in that place, assassi-
nates him, and flies : Is decoyed back, and despatched. The
ChcEroneans are accused of the murther committed by him, and ac-
quitted on the evidence of Lucullus, to uhom they erect a statue.
Plutarch, xmshing out of gratitude to rvrite Lucullus* Life^ deter-
mines to place him in parallel tvith Cimon.

Cimon's birth, youth, conduct, and character : Profligacy. Mar-
riage of his sister. His Jinc qualities. He distivguishes himself
at Halamis : engages in the administration of public affairs. Story
ofCleonice. Cimon besieges Pausanias in Byzantium: Defeats
the Persians of E'ion in Thrace, and takes possession of the ivkolff
district: and of the isle of Scyros. He carries Theseus'* bones to
Athens. His division of the spoils of Sestos, and Byzantium.
His liberality, most disinterested. His conduct toward the allies,
and it's success. He continues the xmr against the Persians, and
gains a naval victory over them near the river Eurymcdon. He
subsequently va7iguishes their land-army, and obtains a third vic-
tory over the Phoenician fleet. Treaty bctiveen the Athenians and
the king of Persia. Athens enriched tvith the Persian spoils :
Ii*s embellishments. Cimon lakes possession of the Thracinn Cher-
sonese, and of the Isle of Thasos ; is impeached upon that occasion,
and acquitted. During his absence from Athens, the people gain
the ascendency : He is persecuted on his return. Mutual reerard
hetivecn Cimon and the Lacedccmoniuns, Earthquake at Lacedce-

CIIviON. 293

tmn. Insurrection of the Helots. The Sj}artans demand succour
from the Athenians : Cimon sent to their assistance. He is banish-
ed by the Ostracism, and recalled. He mahes p?-eparations to
renetv the icar in Cyprus, and in Egypt ; defeats the Persianjleeif
and dies. His reviaias brought to Attica.

PeRIPOLTAS the soothsayer \ who conducted
king Opheltas and his subjects from Thessaly into
Boeotia, left a family that flourished for many years.
The greatest part of them dwelt in Chaeronea, where
they first established themselves after the expulsion
of the barbarians. But as they were of a gallant and
martial turn, and never spared themselves in time
of action, they fell in the wars with the Medes and
the Gauls. There remained only a young orphan,
named Damon, and surnamed Peripoltas. This boy,
in beauty of person, and dignity of mind, far ex-
ceeded all his co-evals ; but he was of a harsh tem-
per, and unpolished by education.

He was now in the dawn of youth, when a Roman
officer, who wintered with his company in Ch^ronea,
conceived a criminal regard for him ; and, as he,
found solicitations and presents of no avail, he was
preparing to use force. He despised (it seems) our
city, whose affairs were then in a wretched situation,,
and whose size and poverty rendered it an object of
no importance. As Dam.on dreaded some violence,
and besides was highly provoked at his past attempts,
he formed a design against the officer's life, and drew
some of his comrades into the scheme. The num-
ber was but small, that the matter might be more
private ; in fact, they were no more than sixteen.

' Plutarch here introduces an obscure and dirty story, for the
sake of talking about the place of his nativity, (L.) Pausanias,
ix. .>., makes no mention of these particulars; and from Died. Sic,
V. 65., it appears, that Opheltas was a Boeotian.*

294 CIMON.

One night they daubed tlieir faces over with soot,
after they had elevated themselves by drinking, and
next morning fell upon the Roman, as he was sacri-
ficing in the market-place. The moment they had
killed him, and many of those who were about him,
they fled out of the city. All was now in confusion.
The senate of Chteronea met, and in order to excuse
themselves to the Romans, condemned the assassins
to death. But as the magistrates were supping to-
gether according to custom, Damon and his accom-
plices returned in the evening, broke into the town-
hall, slew the whole party, and then a second time
made their escape.

It happened that Lucius Luculhis, who was going
upon some expedition, marched that w^ay. Stop-
ping to inquire into the affair, which was then
quite recent, he found the city so far from having
been accessary to the death of the Roman officer,
that it was itself a considerable sufferer. He there-
fore withdrew the garrison, and took the soldiers
along with him.

Damon for some time continued to commit depre-
dations and robberies in the adjacent country, and
greatly harassed the city. The Cha[?roneans endea-
voured to decoy him, by frequent messages and de-
crees in his favour ; and, when they had gotten him
among them again, they appointed him master of
the wrestling-ring : but they soon seized an oppor-
tunity of despatching him, as he was anointing him-
self in the bagnio. On that spot, our fathers inform
us, for a long time certain spectres appeared, and
sad groans were heard, for which reason the doors
of the bagnio were walled up '\ And to this very
day the neighbourhood imagine they see strange
sights, and are alarmed with doleful voices. There
are some remains however of Damon's family, who

* This opinion, viz. that the scenes of murthcr are occasionally
liaunttd by the ghosts of the victims, seems to have been of very
ancient origin. Pliny has left a siwgular letter (vii. 27.) upon the
subject.* • ^

live mostly in tlie town of Stlris in Phocis. These
are called according to the Ai.o\\c dialect ' Asbolo-
meni ' (that is, ' Sooty-faced'), on account of their
ancestor's having smeared his face with soot, • when
he engaged in the assassination.

The people of Orchomenus, Mho were neighbours
to the Cha^roneans, having some prejudice against
them, Jiired a Roman informer to accuse the city of
the murther of those, who had fallen by the hands of
Damon and his associates ; and to prosecute it, as
if it had been an individual. The cause came before
the governor of Macedon, for the Romans had not
yet sent prastors into Greece^; and the persons,
employed to plead for the city, appealed to the tes-
timony of Luculliis. Upon this the governor wrote
to Lucullus, who gave a true account of the aftair,
and thus rescued Cha^ronea from utter ruin.

Our forefathers, in gratitude for their jn-eserva-
tion, erected a marble statue to Lucullus in the
market-place, close by that of Bacchus. And,
tliough many ages are since elapsed, we consider the
obligation as extending downward even to ourselves.
We are persuaded, likewise, that a rej^resentation of
the body is not comparable to that of the mind and
the manners ; and therelbre, in this work of Lives
compared, we shall insert his. We shall, however,
always adhere to the truth ; and Lucullus will think
himself sufficiently repaid by our perpetuating the
memory of his actions '. He cannot want, in return

3 This was a measure, however, which they adopted soon after
the date of this att'air. See Cic. in Pison. 36.*

■* This was no less accurately, than nobly spoken. The name of
Lucullus is chiefly embahucd by the biographer of Cha^ronea. So
true is it, that

— Honour ever waits on virtuous deeds;
And, though a late, a sure reward succeeds*

These two Lives, of Cimon and Lucullus, are supposed to Iiave
been Plutarch's first pieces oC biography: they appear certainly,
fium internal evidence, to have preceded those of Theseus and llo-
inulus ; but, in the arrangement of the MSS. and printed eilitions»

296 CIMON.

for his true testimony, a false and fictitious account
of himselt' When n painter has to draw a line and
elegant form, wliich happens to iiave some little
blemish, we do not wish him entirely to pass over
that blemish, nor yet to mark it with exactness.
The one would spoil the beauty of the picture, and
the other would destroy it's resemblance. So in our
present work, since it is very difficult (or rather im-
possible) to find any life whatever wiuiout it's spots
and blemishes, we must set the good qualities in full
light with all the likeness of truth. But we consider
the faults and stains, which proceed either from
some sudden passion, or from political necessity,
rather as defects of virtue, than signs of a bad heart ;
and shall therefore cast them a little into shade, in
reverence as it were to human natiuT, which pro-
duces no spechmen of virtue absolutely immaculate
and unimpeachable.

In looking out for one, to place in comparison
with Cimon, IaicuHus seemed to us the most proper.
They were both of a warlike turn, and both dis-
tinguished themselves against the barbarians. They
v;ere both mild in their administration, and recon-
ciled the contending factions in their country.
They both gained great victories, and erected glo-
rious trophies. No Grecian carried his arms to
more dist?>.nt countries than Cim.on, no Roman than
Lucullus. Hercules and Baccluis alone exceeded
them ; unless we add the expeditions of Perseus
against the ^-Etiiiopians, ]\Iedes, and Armenians,
and that of Jason against Colchis. Ent the scenes
of tiiese latter achievements arc laid in such very
ancient times, that we have some doubt whether the
truth can have reached us. 1 his also they have in
common, that they equally left their v/ars unfinished ;
they both pulled their enL'mies down, but neither of
them gave tlicm their deitth's blow. The principal

attention was chiefly paid by tlic transcribers, S:c. to considerations
of chronology.*

CIMON, 297

mark, however, of likeness in their characters is,
their affability and courtesy in doing the honours of
tlieir houses, and the niagnificence and splendor
with v,hich tliey furnished their tables. Some other
rescinblances, pcrlians, which we here omit, may
easily be collected (lom their historv^ itself.

Cimon was the son of jMiltiades and Hcffesipyla a
Thracian lady, and the daughter of king Olorus, as
it stands recorded in the poems of Archelaiis and
Meianthius ', v.hich were written in honour of Ci-
mon. So that Thucydides, the historian, was his
relation; for his father was called Olorus (a name,
which he referred to his ancestors), and he had
gold mines \\\ Thrace. Thucydides is said likewise
to have been killed in Scapte Hyle", a place in
that country. His remains however were brought
to Attica, and his monument is shown among those
of Cimon's family, near the tomb of his sister Ei-
pim'ce. But Thuycidides was of the ward of Alimus,
and Miltiades of that of Lacias. Miltiades was con-
demned to pay a fine of fifty talents, for which he
was thrown into prison by the government, and there
died ; leaving his son Cimon very young, and his
daughter Elpinice not yet marriageable.

Cimon was at first a person of no reputation, but
censured as a disorderly and riotous young man.
He was even compared' to his grandfather Cimon,
v;ho for his stupidity was surnamed Coalemos [that
is, ■= Idiot']. If we mgy believe Stesimbrotus, the
Thasian (who was his contemjiorary), he had no
knowledge of music or of any other accomplishment
which was in vogue among the Greeks, and pos-
sessed not a single spark of Attic wit or eloquence ;
but there was a generosity and sincerity in his be-

5 Arclielaus was a pupil of Anaxagoras, and the master of So-
craics. ]\reianthius is mentioned b}^ Athenocus (viii. ti.) as a tragic
and elegiac writer, and a very great enter.

^' Scjpte Hyle signifies ' a wood full of trenches.' St^phanus
(de Urb.) calls it * Scaptesule.' (L.) It was a sraall town in tlie
north of Thrace, near the sea-side, opposite the isle of Thasos.*

" See V^al. Max. (vi. 9.) vvho remarks, that this i.uputcd folly avm
highly advantageous to his country.*

1598 CIMON.

havionr, which showed the composition of his soul
to be rather of the Pelopoiiiicsiaii kind. Like the
Hercules of Euripides, he was

Rough and unbred, but great on great occasions * ;

and therefore we may well add to our account of
him the article which Stcsimhrotus has recorded.

In his vouth, he was accused of a criminal com-
merce M'itli his sister Elpinice *. There are other
instances, indeed, mentioned of Elpinicc's irregular
conduct, particularly with respect to Polygnotus the
painter. Hence it was (we are told) that, when
that artist painted the Trojan women in the portico
then called Plesianaction '-', but now Po^cile, he
drew Elpinice's face ^^ in the character of Laodice.
Polygnotus however was not a painter by profession,
neither did he receive washes for his work in the
portico, but in order to recommend himself to his
countrymen, painted without reward. 80 the histo-
rians write, as well as the poet Melanthius in these
verses ;

— — The temples of the gods.

The fanes of heroes, and Cecropian halls

His liberal hand adorn'd.

* See the Life of Marcellus, Vol. II.

3 Some say Elpinice was only half-sister to Cimon, and that a*
such he nmrricd her ; the laws of Athens not forbidding to marrv
orne, wlio was sister only by the fother's side. (L.) This is indeed
expressly aflirmed by Cornelius Nepos ; and a Juvenal, inclined to
throw out a sarcasm against the ladies, might ascribe the permission
to an idea, that the parties were not necessarily akin : but Barthe-
lenii assigns the real reason, where he states that the object of the
law was to prevent the union of two properties. // seroit a craindre
gu^unJVcre, en s^uuissant nvec sa sa'VJ- ider'nic, j/'accumnldt siir sa
tete et VJifrcdiie de son pcrc, et celle du premier marl dc aa mere,
(Voyage du Jcnne Anachars. 1., Introd.)*

^ Diogenes Laertius (Life of Zeno, vii. 5.), Suidas, and others,
call it ' Pcisianaction.' (L.) Pausanias describes it in detail, i. 15.
The same author observes, x. 35, that he has not found in any poet
the name of Laodice among those of the Trojan captives.*

'° This, in the later times of Rubens, &:c. has been, naturally, a
very hacknicd piece of ga!lantr_v.*

CnrON. 299

There arc some, it is true, \vho assert that Elplnice
did not live in a private commerce with Cimon, but
was publicly married to him, her poverty prevent-
iuir her from o:ettinf>: a husband suitable to her birth.
Afterward Callias, a rich Athenian, falling in love
with her, made a proposal to pay the government
her father's fine, if she would give him her hand ; to
which condition she agreed, and with her brother's
consent became his wife. Still hov/ever it must be
acknowledged, that Cimon had his attachments to
the sex. Witness his mistress Asteria of Salamis,
and one ^Menstra, on whose account the poet Melan-
thius jests upon him in his Elegies. And though he
was legally married to Isodice, the daughter of
Euryptolemus the son of Megacles, yet was he too
uxorious Vvhile she lived ; and upon her death he
was inconsolable, if we may judge from the Elegies
addressed to him by way of comfort and condolence.
Of these Elegies, Pana^tius the philosopher thinks
Archelaiis the physician was the author ; and, from
the times in which he flourished, the conjecture
seems not improbable.

The rest of Cimon's conduct was great and admi-
rable. In courage he was not inferior to Miltiades,
nor in prudence to Themistocles, and he was con-
fessedly an honester man than either of them. He
could not be said to fldl short of them in abilities for
war : and, even while he was young and without
military experience, it is surprising how much he
exceeded them in political virtue. When Themis-
tocles upon the invasion of the Medes, advised the
pecple to quit their city and territory, and retire to
the straits of Salamis to try their fortunes in a naval
combat, the generality were astonished at the rash-
ness of the enterprise. But Cimon briskly led the
way with his friends through the Ceramicus to the
citadel, carrying a bridle in his hand to dedicate to
the goddess. This was to signify to them that
Athens had no need of cavalry, but of marine forces,
upon the present occasion. After he had conse-

9

500 CIMOX.

crated the brld'e, and taken down one of the shields
huiig up against the wall, he paid his devotions to
tlie goddess, and then proceeded to the sea-side, by
\v]]ich means he inspired numbers with courage to
embark. Besides, as the poet Ion informs us, he
was not unhandsome in his person, but tall and ma-
jestic, and had an abimdance of hair which curled
upon his shoulders. In the battle he so eminently
distinguished himself, as to gain not only the praise,
but the hearts of his countrymen ; insomuch that
many joined his train, and exhorted him to conceive
designs and actions worthy of those of Marathon.

When he applied for a share in the administration,
the people received him with pleasure. By this
time, tliey were weary of Themistocles ; and as they
knew Cimon's cnoraoino- and humane beha\iour to
their wh^le body, consequent upon his natural
mildness and candour, they prom.oted him to the
highest honours and offices in the state. Aristides,
the son of Lysimachus, contributed not a little to his
advancement. He saw the goodness of his disposi-
tion, and set him up as a rival against the keen and
daring spirit of Themistocles*.

When the Medes were driven out of Greece, Ci-
mon was elected admiral. The Athenians had not
now the chief command at sea, but acted under the
orders of Pausanias the Lacedaemonian. The first
thing, wliich Cimon did, was to equip his country-
men in a more commodious manner, and to make
them much better seamen than the rest. And as
Pausanias began to negociate with the barbarians,
and write letters to the king about surrendering to
him the fleet, in consequence of which he treated the
alHes in a rough and haughty style, and foolishly
connnitted many unnecessary and oppressive acts of*
authority ; Cimon on the other hand listened to the
complaints of the injured with so much gentleness

* In the Life of Tlicniistocles, Vol. I., Plutarch says, this ri-^
Talry was devised by the Lacedgsmonians. Seo also below, p. 315,

CIMON. 301

and humanity, that he insensibly, not by arms but by
kind and cbligiug manners, acquired the command
of Greece. For the chief part of the ailies, no
longer able to bear the severity and pride of Fausa-
nias, put themselves under the direction of CImon
and Aristides. At the same time they wrote to the
Ephori, to desire them to recall Pausanias, by whom
Sparta was dishonoured and Greece disunited.

It is related, that when Pausanias was at Byzan-
tium, he cast his eyes upon a ^^oung virgin named
Cleonice, of a noble family of that place, and in-
sisted on having her for a mistress. The parents,
intimidated by his power, were under the hard ne-
cessity of giving up their daughter. The young wo-
man implored, that the light might be taken out of
his apartment, that she might go to his b'id in secrecy
and silence. He was asleep when she entered, and
she unfortunately stumbled upon the candlestick,
and threw it down. The noise waked him suddenly;
and he in his confusion, thinking it was an enemy
coming to assassinate him, unsheathed a dagger
which lay by his side, and plunged it into the vir-
gin's heart. After this, he could never rest. Her
image appeared to hnu every night, and v;ith a me-
nacing tone repeated this heroic verse ;

Go to the fate, which pride and lust prepare !

The allies, highly incensed at this infamous action,
ioined Cimon to besiesjcc him in Bvzantlum. But
he found means to escape thence ; and as he was
still haunted by the spectre, he is said to have ap-
plied to a temple at Heraclea" v.here the manes of
the dead were consulted. There he invoked the
spirit of Cleonice, and entreated her forgiveness.
She appeared, and assured him that, " He would
" quickly after his return to Sparta be delivered

" Heraclea was a place near Olympia. See Strabo, and Pausan.
vi. 22. Pausanias applied to the necromancers there, called ' Psy-
chagogi,' whose ofSce it was to call up departed spirits.
12

302 CIMOK

'^ from all his troubles ;" in which, it seems, his
death was enigmatically predicted ^'. These parti-
culars we have from many historians.

All the confederates had now put tliemselvcs
under the conduct of Cimon, and he sailed with
them to Thrace, on receiving intelligence that some
of the most honourable of the Persians and of the
king's relations had seized the city of Eibn upon
the river Strymon, and greatly harassed tlie Greeks
in that neio-hbourhood. Cimon enGfas^ed and de-
feated the Persian forces, and then shut them up in
the tovv'n. After this, he dislodged the Thracians
above the Strymon, who had been accustomed to
supply the town with provisions, and kept so strict
a guard over the country that no convoys could es-
cape him. Thus the place was reduced to such ex-
tremity, that Butes the king's general in absolute
despair set fire to it, and perished in it with his
friends and all his substance.

In consequence of this, Cimon became master of
the town; but there was no advantage to be reaped
trom it worth mentioning, because the barbarians
had destroyed every thing by fire. The country
about it however Vvas extremely beautiful and fertile,
and that he settled with Athenians. For this reason,
the people of Athens permitted him to erect there
three marble liermai^^, which had the following in-
scriptions :

r.

Brave wove the youths, who fiist defied
The INIedes bv Strvuion's silver tide
At Eion ; where, with fimnne press'd,
The foe then- matchless force confess'd.

^* The Lacedaemonians havinjT resolved to seize him, he fled for
refuge to a temple of Minerva called Chalcicecos. There they shut
him up, and starved him to death. (See Died. Sic. xL 45, and
Thucyd. i. l;34-.)

'^ These were pillars of stone or marble, surmounted with heads
of ^lercury. The three here mentioned are referred to by .'I's-
chines (In Ctesiph.), for the purpose of o!:; .jrving, that even Cimon
was not permitted to inscribe his name upon them.*

CIMON. 308

II.

Let travellers born in distant days,
Behold these monuments of praise.
By Athens to her chiefs raised high;
.And for their country leoi'n to die.

III.

Afar to Phrygia's fixted lands

When Mnestheus leads his Attic band?.

Behold ! he bears in Homer '•* still

The palm of mihtary skill.

In every age, on every coast,

'Tis thus the sons of Athens boast !

Though CImon*s name does not appear in any of these
inscriptions, yet his contemporaries considered them
us the highest pitch of honour. For neither Theinis-
tocles, nor Miltiades, had been favoured with any
thin^ of the kind. Nav, wlien the hitter asked onlv
for a crown of ohve, Sochare.s '* of the ward of Decclia
stood up in the midst of the assembly, and spoke
against it, in terms uncandid indeed, but agreeable
to the people. " When you siudl have fought the
" barbarians alone, Ivliitiades," he said, " and con-
" quered them, then ask to liave honours paid
" to you alone." What was it then, wln'ch induced
them to G;ive so distin2:uislied a preference to this
action ofCimon? Was it not, tliat under the other
generals they had fougiitfor their lives and existence
as a people ; but that under him they had been al)le
to distress their enen)ics, by carrying war into the
coiiYitries where they had established themselves, and
by colonising Eion and Amphipolis? They planted u
colony likewise in the isle of Scyros '", which was
reduced by Cimon on the following occasion: The

'■» II. ii. "->?>.*

' >■ This, Palmerlu9 plausibly conjecture.-, should be read * Sophnnes/
ai) eminent Athenian of the ward here mentioned, of whom licro-
dotu* speak? in vory favouranlc terms, ix. 7:i, <S:c.*

"' About tl;e beginning ofOl. Ixxvii. (L.) .See Thucyd. i. 9S.
Thi- island, situated in the /Egcan sea bet\vec;i Kuboea and Le?hos,
was chiefly celebrated (according to Strabo ix.j for it'-i goats, and
iv-i :narble-(iuarrieji.''

30i CIMOX.

Dolopcs, ^vho tlicn Iield it, paid no attention to agri-
cuiiuie. Tbi^ people had been so lono; addicted to
piracy, that at ]a~.t thev spared not even the merchants
and strangers who visited tneix- ports, but in that of
Ctesium piimdercd some Ihessalians who had come
to traffic Willi them, and put them in prison. Thence
however they found means to escape, and went and
lodged an impeacliment against ihe place before tljC
Ar.iphictyon> [whio commanded tlie whole island to
make iestitiuit/n^. 'ihose, who had no concern in
the robbery, were unwiihng to pay any thing ; and
called upon the persons who had committed it, and
who had the goods in their possession, to make satis-
faction. But these pirates, apprehensive of the con-
sequence, sent to invite Cimon to come with his
ships aiid take the town, which they promised to
deli .er into his hands. In pursuance of this, Cimon
took the island, expelled the Dolopes, and cleared
the ^^gean sea of corsairs.

This done, he recollected that their ancient hero
Theseus, the son of yEgeus, had retired from Athens
to Scyros, and had been theretreacherously murthered
by king Lycomedes, who entertained some suspicion
of him. And as the.'e was an oracle, which injoiued
the Athenia.is to bring back his remains '', and to
honour him as a demi-god, Cimon anxiously under-
took to find his tomb. This was no easy matter, for
the people of S'c) ros had uniformly refused to declare
where he k. v, or to suller any search for his bones.
At last v/ith much minute inouiry he discovered the
repository, put his lemains (decorated with all hna-
ginable magnificence) on board his own galley, and
carried them to the ancient seat of that hero, ahnost
four hundred years after he had left it '^

'^ This oracle was tle'ivcred to them four years before, 01. Ixxvi.
1. See ihe Life of Theseus, Vol.1.

'8 Plutarch could not make a mistake of four hundred ycgrs. We
are persuaded, tliorefore, that he wrote * eight hur.dred.' (L.)

The arch.oi), meniioned b' low, is by Corsini ( Fast. Att. 11.) called
* Apsephion ;' durinf.r H'hose'niai>istrr.cy, 01. Ixxvii. 4., he represent*
this conveyance of Theseus' bones to have taken plice.*

I,

CIMON. 305

Nothing could give the people more pleasure than
this event. To commemorate it, they instituted
games, in which the tragic poets wex^e to try their
skill ; and the dispute was particularly remarkable.
Sophocles, then a younj^ man, brought liis lirst piece
on the theatre: and Aphepsion the archon, perceiving
that the audience were prejudiced and in parties, did
not appoint the judges by lot in the usual manner.
The me:hoJ, which he took, was as follows: When
Cimon and his office :s had entered the theatre, and
made 'he due libations to the gods who presided over
the games, the archon woidd not suffer them to retirej
bat obliged them to sit down, and select ten judges
upon oath, one out of each tribe. The dignity of
the arbiters caused an extraordinary emuiiition among
the actors. Sophocles gained tlie prize ; at which
^Esciiylus was so much grieved and disconcerted,
that he could not bear to stav much lender in Athens,
but retired in an.'rcr to Sicily, where he died and was
buried near Geli.

Ion informs us, that when he vv'as very young, and
recently come from Chios to Athens, he supped at
Laoraedon's with Cimon. After supper, when the
libations had been offered, Cimon was desired to
sing ; and he did it so agreeably, that the company
preferred him in point of politeness to Themistocles,
who once upon a similar occasion observed: '" He
'• had not leanied to sing, or play upon the harp;
'• but he knew how to raise a small city to wealth
" and greatness.^'* The conversation subsequently
turned upon the actions of Cimon, and each of the
guests dwelt upon such as a]:)p€ared to him the most
considerable : he for his part mentioned only the fol-
lowing, which he looked upon as his most arttul ex-
pedient. A great number of barbarians had been
made prisoners in Sestos, and at Byzantium ; and
the allies desired Cimon to divide the "booty. Cimon
placed the prisoners quite naked on one side, and

* See bis Life, Vol. I.
VOL. III. X

306 CIMON.

all their oriiamciits on the other. The allies com-
plained;, t!uit tJic shares were not equal ; upon which
he bade them take whether part they pleased, assur-
ing the-m that the Athenians would be satisfied with
what they left. Bv the advice of Herov^hytus the
Samian they chose the Persian -jpoils, and of course
the captives fell to the share of the Athenians. At
the time, Cimon v/as ridiculed in pri\'at.e for the di-
vision, which he had made; because the allies had
chains of gold, rich collars and bracelets, and robes
of scarlet and prirple to display ; uhile the Athenians
had nothing but a parcel of naked slaves, and those
very unfit for labour. But, a little while afterward,
the friends and relations of the prisoners came down
from Phrygia and Lydia, and gave large sums for
their ransom. So that Cimon with the money pur-
chased four months' provisions for his ships, and sent
a quantity of gold besides to the Athenian treasury.
Cimon had now acquired an innnense fortune :
and what he had "'ained G:loriouslv in the war from
the enemy, he laid out with as much reputation upon
his fellow-citizens. He ordered the fences of his rields
and gardens to be throvrn down, that strangers a^
^v.cll as bis own countrymen might freely partake of
his fruit. Pie had a supper provided at his house
every day, in which the dishes were plain, but suffi-
cient for a multitude of guests. Every poor citizen
repaired to it at pleasure, and received liis food with-
out care or trouble; by which means he was enabled
to give proper attention to public affairs. Aristotle
indeed savs, this supper was provided not for all the
citizen "> in general, but only for those of liis own
tribe, which was that of Lacias'^.

•/' That Cimoii's 'ward is subsequently called (l^ne'iV, (p f318.)
m'ti,st be rec'onciifd \viththis pl'ace froiii iStepluiniis, who informs u!s,
' the,Liiciatl:c were a i^orou!i:h of the ward (or rather tribe) CEnLis-.'

(^-.) .... .■ " .

■ **/F6r the division oi" the people into ^w/«<, or tribes, tlieir sirbdivi-

.sion into J^-n/t;., or l)nrou<;h ■, See: and the names of each, see Potter

(.\rclia:ol, Gr. I. ix.).*

CIMO]^. SOT

When he walked out, lie used to have a re'inue of
young men well clotlied ; and if he Iiappeiied to meet
an ac:e(l citizen in a mean dress, he oixlered some one
of them to change apparel with him. This was great
and r.oble. . But, beside tins, the same attendants
carried with them a quantity of money ; and when
they observed in the market-place any necessitous
person of tolerable appearance, they took care as
privately as possible to slip some })ieces into his
hands. Cratinus, the comic writer, seems to have
referred to these circumstances in one of his pieces,
entitled Archilochi :

Even I Metrobius, though a scrivener, hoped
To pass a ciiccri'ul and a sleek old age,
And live to my last hour at Cimou's table;
Cinion, the best and noblest of the Greeks,
Whose wide-spread bounty vied with that of heaven!
15ut, ah! he's gone belbre nie !

Gorgias, the Leontine, gives him this character;
" lie got riches to use them, and used them so as
" to be honoured on their account." And CritiaSy
one of the Thirty Tyrants, in his Elegies tlms ex-
presses the utmost extent of his wishes ;

The wealtli o" Scopas'^° heirs, the soul of Cimon,
And the lamed trophies of Agesiliius.

IJchas the I.acedoemonian, we know% gained a great
name among the Greeks, by only entertaining stran-
gers, who came to see the public exercises of the
Spartan youth*'. But Cimon's magnilicence ex-
ceeded even the ancient hospitality and bounty of
the Athenians. They indeed taught the Greeks
to sow bread-corn, to avail themselves of the use of
wells, and of the benefit of fire. But Cimon's house

^° Scopa?, a rich Thessalian, is mentioned in the Life of Cato.
^' Xenophon has given him the same character, lie died in the
twenty-first year of the Peloponnesian war.*

X 2

^Oft .CLMON.

was a kind of common-hall" for the whole people:
the first-fhiits of his lands were theirs ; whatever the
seasons produced excellent and agreeable, they freelv
gathered : neither were strangers in the least debar-
red from them ; so that he in some measure revived
the community of goods, which })revailcd in the
fabled reign of Saturn. Those, who malevolently
/ ascribed this liberality of his to a desire of flattering
\ or courting the i)eopIe, were refuted by the rest of
I his conduct; in which he tavoiu'ed the nobihty, and
I inclined to the constitution of Sparta. Wlien The-
' mistocles sought to raise the pow-er and privileges of
the commons too high, Cimon joined Aristides to
oppose him. In like manner he opposed Ephialtes,
who in order to ingratiate himself with tlic people,
attempted to abolish the court of Areopagus. He
saw all who were concerned in the administration,
except Aristides and Epliialtes, pillaging thepu])lic;
yet he kept his owai hands clean, and in all his
speeches and actions continued to the last ])erfectly
disinterested. One instance of this is recorded in
his behaviour to llhffisaces, a barbarian who had re-
volted from the king of Persia, and was come
to Athens with great treasures. This man, finding
himself harassed by informers, applied to Cimon for
his protection ; and in order to gain his favour placed
two cups, the one full of gold and the other of silver
darics, in his anti-chamber. Cimon, ^casting his eye
upon them, smiled and asked him, " V/hether lie
" would choose to have him his mercenary, or his
" friend?" " My friend undoubtedly," replied the
barbarian. " Go then," said Cimon, " and take these
" things back with you; for, if 1 be your friend,
" your money will be mine, whenever I have occa-
" sion for it."

About this time the allies, though they paid their

^^ Or Prytaiieum ; a place whor-<.>, as it has been already observed,
Life of Theseus, Vol. 1. no.*:. (42.), those who had deserved well of
their country, were maintained at the public expense.*

CIMON. 309

contributions, began to scruple the furnishing of
sliips and men. They wished to bid adieu to the
troubles of war, and to till the ground in quiet and
tranquillity; particularly, as the barbarians kept at
home, and gave them no disturbance. The other
Athenian generals took every method to compel them
to make good tiieir quota, and by prosecutions and
lines rendered the Athenian government oppressive
and invidious. But Cimon, when he had the com-
mand, pursued a different course. He used no com-i
])ulsion toward any Greek ; he received money, and'
ships unmanned, from such as did not choose to serve
in person, and thus suffered them to be led by the
charms of ease to domestic employment, to husbandry
and manutkctures : so that, from a wiirlike people,
they became through an inglorious attachment to
luxury and pleasure quite unfit for any thing in the
military department. On the other hand, he made
all the Athenians in their turns serve on board his
ships, and kept them in continual exercise ■^. By
these means he extended the Athenian dominion over
the allies, who were all the while paying him for it.
The Athenians were constantly engaged in one ex-
pedition or other, had their weapons for ever in their
hands, and were trained up and disciplined to every
fatigue of service. Hence it was, that the allies
learned to fear and flatter them ; and, instead of being
their fellow-soldiers as formerly, insensibly became
their tributaries and their subjects.

Add to this, that no man more than Cimon hum-
bled the pride and arrogance of the great king. Not
satisfied with having driven him out of Greece, he
pursued his footsteps, and without suffering him to
take breath, ravaged and laid waste some parts of
his dominions, and drew over others to the Grecian
league ; insomuch that in all Asia, from Ionia to
Pamphylia, there was not a Persian standard to be

*5 Thucydides, i. 99, has a shrewd maxim of precisely the same
purport.*

SIG CiMON.

,seen. As soon as he was informed, that tlie king's
fleets and armies hw upon the ramphyhan coasts, he
was desirous so to intimidate tiiem, that they should
never more venture beyond the Chelidonian isles-'\
For this purpose he set sail from Cnidus and Trio-
pium with a fleet of two hundred galleys, which
Thcmistoclcs had in their first construction made
light and fit to turn v\nth the utmost agility. Cimon
widened them, and joined a platform to the deck of
each ; that in the time of action, there might be room
for a greater number of combatants. When he arrived
at Phase] is which was inhabited by Greeks, but would
neithor'ieceive hii; fleet nor revolt from the king, he
ravaged their territories, and advanced to assault
their walls. Upon this, the Chians who were among
his forces, having of old had a friendship for the
people of Phaselis, on one side endeavoured to pacify
Cimon, and on the ofher addressed themselves to
the townsmen bv letters fastened to arrows, which
they shot over the walls. At length, they reconciled
the two partie- ; the conditions were, that the Phase-
]ites should pay down ten talents, and should follow
Cimon's standard against the barbarians.

Tithrauste^":, according to Ephorus, commanded
the king's fleet, and Pherendates his land-forces ;
but Callisthenes"^ will have it, that Ariomandes the
son of Gobryas was at the head of the Persians.
Upon the same authority we are told, that he lay at
anchor in the river Edrymcdon, as not yet choosing
to come to an ena-ai^ement with tlie Greeks, because

^'' These, Strabo xiv. informs us, Mere three islands situated ofF
the coast of Pnmphylia. And the p.issage tlierefore implies, that
Cinlon meant to deter the Persians from venturing into any part of
the Mediterranean Sea. CniduS and Triopinni were towns in
Caria.*

^^ This cousin and pup!; of Aristotle, who attended Alexander
in his eastern expedition, incurrcnl his displeasure 'oy his sarcasms
and austerity; and having refused to pay hira adoration was, under
the pretence of being concerned in a plot ai;ainst him, put to a
cruel death. See the Life of Camiihus Vol. I. not, {.15.) Th-
Eurymedon, mentioned below, was a river in Famphylia.*

12 " •

CIMOX. 311

lie expected a reinforcement of eighty Pluienician
shi})s from Cyprus. On the oilier band, Cimon
wished to prevent tliat junction ; and lie tliereforc
sailed with a resolution to compel the Persians to
light, if they declined it. In order to avoid it, they
pushed up the river. But when Cimon came up,
they attempted to make head against him v»'ith six
hundred ships (according to Phanodcmus) or, as
Ephorus vv^'ites, with three hundred and hfty. They
perfbrriicd however nothing worthy of such a fleet,
but presently made for land ; where the foremost dis-
embarked, and succeeded in effecting their escape
to the army, which was drawii inp at a great distance:
but the Greeks laid hold on the rest, and handled
them very roughly, as well as their ships. A certain
proof that the Persian fleet was very numerous is,
that though many in all probability got av\'ay, and
{nany others were destroyed, yet the Athenians took
no less than two hundred vessels.

The barbarian land-forces advanced close to the
sea ; but it appeared to Cnnon an arduous under-
taking to make good his landing by dint of sword,
and with wearied troops to engagG those who were
quite fresh, and many times their number. Not-
withstanding this, he saw the courage and spirits of
his men elevated with their late victory, and that
thev v.ere very desirous to be led against the enemy.
He therefore disembarked his heavy-armed infantrv,
yet warm from the late naval action. These rushed
torvv^ard with loud shouts, and the Persians stood and
received them .gallantly. . A sharp conflict ensued,
in w^hich the bravest and most distin.gaisb.ed amonu:
the Athenians were slain. At last, with much diffi-
culty, the barbarians were put to the rout : many
were killed, and many others taken, together with
iheir ])aviHons full of all kinds of rich spoil.

Thus- Cimon, like an excellent champion, won
two prizes in one day, and by these two actions out-
did the victory of Salamis at sea, and of Platjeas at
kn.d. He added, however, ii new trophy to his \ic-

812 CIMON.

tories. Upon intelligence that the eighty Phoeni-
cian giiUeys, v/hich were not in the battle, had ar-
rived at Hydras ''. he steered that way as fast as pos-
sil)le. These galleys had not received any certain
account of the greater forces, to whose aiisistance
they weie going :. and as this suspense nnich intimi-
dated them, they were easily defeated, with the loss
of all their ships and of the chief part of their men.

Humbled by such a series of disasters, the king
of Pe.sia consented to the celebrated peace, which
limited him to the distance of a day's journey "' on
horseback from the Grecian sea ; and stipulated, that
none of his galleys or other ships of war should ever
come within the Cyanean '^ or Cheiidonian isles.
Callisthenes, indeed, denies that the king agreed to
these conditions ; but he allows, that his subsequent
behaviour was equivalent to such an agreement. For
liis fears generated by the defeat made him retire
so far from Greece, that Pericles with fifty ships,
and Ephialtes with only thirty, sailed beyond the
Cheiidonian rocks without meeting any barbarian
fleet. In the collection however of Athenian de-
crees made by Craterus, there is a copy of the ar-
ticles of this peace, which are in substance the same
as we have here stated. We are told also, that the
Athenians upon this occasion built an altar to Peace,
and paid particular honours to Callias, who had ne-
gociated the treaty "^^ So much was raised from the

-^ As Hydrus is nowhere to be found, Lubinus thinks we should
read ' Sydra,' which was a maritime town of filitia. Dacier pro-
poses to read * H3Hlriissa,' which was one of the Cychides. But,
perhaps, * Hydrus' is only a corruption of Cyprus; for thither, as
Polyecnus informs us, Ciinon immediately sailed after his twofold
victory; disguised (he adds) in a Persian dress, which must have
been with a view to deceive the Phoenicians.

^' Four hundred furlongs.

-3 Tiiese islands, which were supposed to meet and recede like
electrical balls, were near the entrance of the Euxine ; and are
familiar to the ear of the classictd reader, on account of their con-
nexion with the Argonautic expedition.*

^» Demosthenes, on the other hand, in his oration defalf:. Leg.^
represents the Athenians as so much irritated agaiast Callias, that

9

CIMON. S15

sale of the spoils, tliat beside wliat was reserved for
other occasions, the people had money euoiigli to
hiiild the wall on the southern side of the citadel.
Nay, by it were laid tiie foundations of the long walls,
cailed the * Legs;* they were not finished, indeed,
till some time afterward. And, as the place where
they were to be erected was marshy and full of water,
Cimon, at his own expense, had the bottom secured,
])v ramniinff down lar^-e stones and binding; them
with gravel. He likewise first adorned the city with
those elegant and noble places for exercise and dis-
putation, which were soon so much admired. He
])lauted the l^orum also Avith plane-trees; and brought
water to the Academy, previously a dry and sterile
plat, and sheltered it with groves, so that Jt abounded
with clean alleys and shady walks.

IJy this time some of the Persians refused to eva-
cuate the Chersonese, and in lieu thereof called
down the Thracians to their assistance. Cimon set
out against them from Athens, with a very few gal-
leys ; and as they looked upon him on that account
with contempt, he attacked them, and with only four
ships took thirteen of theirs. Thus he expelled the
Persians, and beat the Thracians too ; by which suc-
cess he reduced the whole Chersonese to the obedi-
ence of Athens. After this, he defeated at sea the
Thasians who had revolted from the Athenians, took
thirty-three of their ships, and stormed their town.
The gold-mines likewise, which were in the neigh-
bouring continent ^°, he secured to his countrymen,
toijjether with the whole Thasian territories.

Thence there w^as an easy opening to invade Ma-
cedon, and possibly to conquer great part of it ; and,
as he neglected the opportunity, it was thought to
iiavc been owdng to the presents which king Alex-

they imposed upon him a heavy fine, and were near putting him to
«leath. But Pal:Tierius explains the apparent contradiction of the
two passages, by the proverbial ficklenesg of the Athenian popu-
Jace.*

s" See Tlmcyd. i. 101.*

5-U CIMOK

ander^' made Iiim. His ePieinies therefore impeach-
ed him ibr it, and broii^'ht him to his trial, in liis

4C
ti

IC
(C

defence, he thus addressed his judges : " I have no
connexion with rich lonians, or Thessalians, to
whom other generals have applied, in hopes of re-
ceiving compliments and treasures from them.
My attachment is to the Macedonians'"-, wliose
frugality and sobriety I honour and imitate; things
preferable, with me^ to all the wealth in the world.
I love, indeed, to enrich my country at the ex-
pense of it's enemies." Stesimbrotus, who men-
tions this trial, informs us that Elpinicc waited upon
Pericles at his ov,^n house, to entreat that he would
show some lenit}' toward her brother ; for Pericles
was his most vehement accuser. He with a smile
said, " YoVi are old, Elpinice, much too old to
" transact such business as this*." When the cause
however came on, he was extremely fa\ourable to
Cimon, rising up only once to speak during the whole
impeachment, and even then doing it in a slight
manner. Cimon, therefore, was honourably acquit-
ted.

p As to the rest of his administration, he opposed
and restrained the people, Vvho were invading the
province of the nobility, and sought to engross the
direction of every thing to themselves. But, when
/he was gone upon a new expedition, they broke out
again ; and overturning the constitution and most
sacred customs of their country, at the instigation of
Ej)hialtes, deprived the council of Areopagus of those
causes v»hich used to come before it, and left it the

•"' T!ic first of that name, wlio sat upon tho tlironc of IMacedon.*
5- The MSJS.in general Iiave ' Lacedicir.oiHans ;' and that i?,
probably, the true reading. For Cimon is well known to have had
a strong attachment to that people. (See the two following pages.)
r.csides, the Macedonians were not a sober people. As to what
:-ome object, that it is strange he sliould make no mention of the
Macedonians, when he was accused of having been bribed by tb.em,
the answer is easy ; we are not certain, t'lat Plutarch has given vis
ihc wh.ole of his Defence.

* See the Life of Pericles, Vol. II-

CIMON. SIS

cognisance of but very few. Thus, by bringing all
matters before themselves, tbey changed the govern-
ment into a perfect democracy. And this they did
with the concurrence of Pericles, who was now grown
very powerful, and had espoused tlicir parfy. It was|
with great indignation that Cimon found, on his re-
turn, the dignity of that high court insulted ; am
he set himself to restore it's jurisdiction, and to re-\
vive such an aristocracy as had existed under Clis-
thenes^^. Upon this, his adversaries raised a loud
clamour, and exasperated the people against him ;
not forgetting those stories about his sister, and his
attacb.ment to the Lacedaemonians. Hence those
verses of Eupolis about him :

He's not a villain, but a debauchee,
Whose careless heart is lost on wine and women.
The time has been, he slept in Lacedaemon,
And left poor Elpinice here alone,

X5ur if with' all his neglisjence and love of wine he
took so many cities, and gained so many victories,
it is plain, that had he been a sober man and atten-
tive to business, none of the Greeks either before
or after him could have exceeded him in glorious
actions.

From lus first setting out in life, he had an attach-
ment to the Lacedaemonians. According to Stesim-
brotus, he'called one of the twins whom he had by
a Chtonian woman Lacedasmonius, and the other
Eleus ; and Pericles often took occasion to reproach
them with their mean descent by the mother's side.
But Diodorus the geographer writes, that he had
both these sons and a third named Thessalus by Iso-
iiice the daughter of Megacles' son Euryptolemus.

The Lacedaemonians contributed not a little to
Cimon's })romotion. Being declared enemies to
Tiiemistocles, they much rather chose to see Cimon,

33 This was he, who expelled the Pisistratidae from Athens, B. C.
510, increased the number of tribes from four to ten, &c. &c.*

S16 CIMOX.

though but a young man, at the head of affairs in
Athens. The Athenians at first witnessed this par-
tiahty with pleasure, because they reaped consider-
able advantages from it. When they began to take
the lead among the alHes, and were gaining the
chief direction of tlie wiiole business of the lengue,
it was no uneasiness to them to observe tlie ho-
nour and esteem, in which he was lield. He was
the person, indeed, selected by them to transact
that business, on account of his humane beha-
viour to the alh'es, and Jiis interest with the Lace-
daemonians. But, when they were become great
and powerful, it gave them pain to behold him still
adoring that people. For he was always magnifying
them at his countrymen's expense ; and particularly
(as Stesimbrotus informs us) when he had any fault to
iind with them, he used to say, " The Laccdaemo-
" nians would not have done so.'* Hence his coun-
trymen began to envy, and to hate hini.

Their heaviest complaint, however, against him
took it*s rise as follows : In the fourth year of the
reign of Archidamus the son of Zeuxidamus, there
happened the greatest earthquake ^^ at Sparta which
had ever been known. The ground in many parts
of Laconia was cleft asunder; Mount Taygetus felt
the shock, and it^'s ridges were torn of}'; and the
whole city, w-ith the exception of five houses, was
dismantled. The youns: men and boys were exer-
cising in the portico ; and a little before the earth-
quake, a hare, it is said, crossed the place ; upon
which [many of 3 the young men, naked and anoint-
ed as they were, ran out in sport after it. The
building fell upon those Avho remained behind, and
destroyed them all tocrether. Their monument is
still called, from that event, Sismatia ^

Archidamus, amidst the present danger, perceived
that another was likely to ensue ; and, as he saw the
people endeavouring to save their richest moveables,

^* This happened, according to Diod. Sic. xi. 63, in 01. bcxvii. 4.*
'^ From Q-niry^ecy • an earthquake.' *

CIMON.

fie ordered the trumpets to give the alarm, as if
some enemy were ready to fall upon them, that
they might immediately repair to iiim with their
weapons in their hands. This alone, at that crisis,
saved Sparta. For the Helots flocked together
on all sides from the fields, to despatch such as
had escaped the earthquake ; but, finding them arm-
ed and in good order, they returned to their villages
and declared open war. At the same time they per-
suaded some of their neighbours, among whom were
the Messenians, to join them against Sparta.

In this great distress the Lacedemonians sent
Periclidas to Athens, to solicit succours. Aristo-
phanes ^, in his comic way, says.

Thus, M'iiJi his pale face and his purple robe,
He sat a humble suppliant at our altars,
imploring help.

Ephialtes strongly opposed and protested against
givin^g any assistance to re-establish a city which Vva>^
tlie rival of tlieir own, insisting that they ougiit ra-
ther to suffer the pride of Sparta to be trodden under
foot. Cimon however, as Critias informs ui>, pre-
ferred tlie relief of Sparta to the enlargement of
Athens, and persuaded the people to march with a
great army to it's aid. Ion preserves the very words,
which had the most pov/erful effect upon them : he
desired them, it seems, " Not to suffer Greece to
" be maimed, nor to deprive their own city of it's.
" companion^'."

V/hen he returned from assisting the Lacedfcnio-
nians, h.e marched with his army througli C.'orinth.
.Lacliartus complained in high terms of liis introduc-
ing his troops, without permission from the citizens :
" For," said he. " v/hcn we knock at another man's

Y' Lyaistr. lUO.

''' Besides, the pride of Athens required some stronL^ check.
The destructioa of Cartilage was move fatal to ilome. tliuu a'l her
preceding rivalry*

SIS CIMON.

(C

door, we do not enter witliont leav.e from tlie mas*
" ter." "You, Lachartus, however," answered
Cimon, " did not knock at the gales of Cleone, and
" Megara, but broke tliem in pieces, and forced

your way upon this principle, that nothing should

be shut against the strong." Vvith this proper
oontidencc did he reply to the Corinthian, and then
pursued his march.

After this, tiic Spartans called in the Athenians a
second time against the Messenians and Helots in
Ithome^*^. But when they arrived, they were more
afraid of their spirit of enterprise, than of the enemy :
and therefore, of all their allies, they sent them
alone back again, as persons, suspected of some dis-
honourable design. They returned full- of resent-
ment of course ^'^, and now openly declared them-
selves against the partisans of the Lacedremonians,
and particularly against Cimon ; whom they banish-
ed, upon a slight pretence, for ten years — the term,
to which the Ostracism universally'extends.

In the mean time the Laceda^m.onians, on their
return from an expedition in which they had deli-
vered Delphi from the Phocians, encamped at Ta-
nagra. The Athenians marched to give them battle.
Upon this occasion Cimon appeared in arms among
those of his own tribe, which was that of CEneis,
to fight for his country against the Lacedyemonians.
When the council of Five Hundred heard of it, they
were afraid that his enemies would raise a clamour
against him,* as if he were only come to create dis-
orders, and to bring the Lacedaemonians into Athens,
and therefore they forbade the generals to receive
him. Cimon upon this retired, after he had desired
Euthippiis the Anaphlystian and the rest of his
friends, who had been most severely censured as

3s The Spartans, as it has already been observed, were not skilled
in sieges.

^' in consequence of this affront, they broke off their nlliancD
with Spavtn, and joined in confeileracv vvith the Argives. (Thucyd.
L 102.)

CIMON. 319

{jiirtisans of Sparta, to exert themselves gloriouslv
against the enemy, and by tlieu' behaviour to wipe
otf the aspersion.

These brave men, in number about a hundred,
took Cimon's armour''^ (as a sacred pledge) into the
midst of their httle band, formed themselves into a
close body, and fought with a kind of frantic ardour
till thev^ all fell. The Atlienians reo-retted tliem
exceedingly, inid repented of the unjust censures^
which they had fixed upon them. Their resentment
against Cimon likewise quickly abated, partly from
the remembrance of his past services, and partly
from a sense of their present difficulties. They had
been !)eaten in the great battle fouglit at Tanagra,
and they expected that another army w^ould come
against them'frohi Peloponnesus the next spiing.
They therefore recalled Cimon ii-om banishment,
and Pericles himself was the first to propose it-
With so much candour were differences then ma-
naged 1 So moderate w^re the resentments of men.,
and so easily laid aside where the public good re-
quired it ! Ambition itself^ the strongest of all
])assions, yielded to tiie interests and the necessities
of their countrv !

Cimon, "soon after his return, put an end to the
war, and reconciled the two cities. After the peace
however, was made, he perceived the Athenians
could liot sit down quietly, but still wished to bf

intestine vrars and heavy complaints of the allies
against Athens, on account of their formidable
navies traversing the seas about the islands and
round Peloponnesus, lie fitted out a fleet of two
luuulred sail, to carry war again into Egypt and
Cyprus ^\ This, he thought, would answer two in-

^ 4° See the Life of Pericles, Vol. IL*

•*' The histoiy of the first expedition is as follows : While Ciraou
vas eniploved in his enterprise ag-ainst Cynrus, Inarus kinp- ©f

320 CLMON.

tentions ; it would accustom the Athenians to con-
flicts with the barbarians, and it v,ould improve their
substance in an honourable manner, by bringing the
rich spoils of their natural enemies into Greece.

When all was now ready, and the army on tlie
point of embarking, Cimcn had the following dream :
An angry bitch seemed to bay at him, and with a
kind of sound between barking and a human voice
to utter these words ;

Come on ;

I and my whelps with pleasure shall receive thee.

Though the dream was hard to interpret, Astyphilus
the Posidonian, a great soothsayer and a friend of
Cimon's, told him it signiticd liis death. He argued
thus : A dog is an enemy to the man, at whom he
barks ; and no one can give his enemy higher plea-
sure than by his death. The mixture of the voice
pointed out that the enemy was a Mede, for the
armies of the Medes are composed of Greeks and

Lybia, having induced the greatest part of Lower Egypt to revolt
from Artaxerxes, called in the Athenians to assist him in complet-
ing his conquest. Upon tliis, the Athenians quitted Cyprus, and
sailed into Egypt. There ihey made themselves masters of tlic
Nile, and attaclnng Memphis seised two of the outworks, and at-
tempted the third called ' The White Wail.' But the expedition
proved extremely unfortunate. Artaxerxes sent Megahyzus with
a powerful army into that country. He defeated the rebels, and
the Lyhians their associates; drove the Creeks from Memphis,
shut them up in the island of l^ospitis eighteen months, and at last
forced them to surrender. Tliey almost all perished in that war,
which lasted six years. Inarus, in violation of the public faith, was
crucified.

The second expedition was undertaken a few years afterward,
and was not more successful. The Athenians went against Cvprus
with two hundred galleys. While they Mere besieging Citium in
that island, Amyrtajus the Siute applied to them for succours ia
Egypt, and Cimon sent him sixty of his galleys. Some say, he went
with them himself; others, that he continued before Citium. But
nothing of moment was transacted, at this time, to the prejudice of
the Persians in Egypt. In the tenth year of Darius Nothus, how-
ever, Amyrtfcus issr'.^d from the frns, and being joined by all the
Egyptians drove the Persians out oi" the kingdom, and became
king of the whole country. (Thucyd. ii., Diocl. Sic.xi,)

CIMON. 321

barbarians. Sulrscquently to tins dream, he had
another sign ill sacriiicing to Bacclms : When the
priest had killed thv? vietim, a swarm of ants took
lip the elotted blood by little and little, and laid it
upon Cimon's great toe. This they did for some
time, without any one's taking notice of it: at last
Cimon himself observed it, and at the same instant"^
the soothsayer came up, and showed him the liver
without a head.

The expedition hov/ever could not now be defer-
red, and he therefore set sail. Sixty of his galleys
lie sent against Egypt ; and with the rest he made
for the Asiatic coast, where he defeated the king's
fleet consisting of Phcrnician and Ciiician ships,
took possession of th.e cities in that circuit, and
watched his opportunity to penetrate into Egypt.
Every thin<r was great in his desic^ns. He thoiiccht
of nothmg less than overturning the whole Persian
empire ; and this the rather, because he was inform-
ed that Themistocles was in great reputation and
power with tlie barbarians, and had promised the
king to take the conduct of the Grecian war, w^hcn-
ever he entered upon it. But Themistocles (they
tell us) in despair of managing it to any advantage,
and of surmounting the good fortune and the valour
of Cimon, fell by his own hand*.

When Cimon had formed these lofty projects, as
a first step toward them, he cast anchor before Cy-
prus. Thence he sent persons, in whom he could
confide, with a private question to the oracle of
Jupiter Ammon ; for their errand Vvas entirely uu-
known. Neither did the deity return them any
answer, but immediately upon their arrival ordered
them back again; " Because Cimon," said he, "is
" already with me." The messengers, upon this,
took the road to the sea ; and when they reached •
the Grecian camp, which was on the coasts of Egypt,
they found that Cimon was dead. They then*^ in.

* See his Life, Vol. I.
VOL. III. Y

52ii CIMON.

quired, ^ipoii what day he died; and comparing' if
with the time of the dehvery of the oracle, they
perceived that his departure was eniginatically
pointed out in the expression, " That he was
" ah'eadv with the o-ods."

According to most authors, he died a natural
death during tlie siege of Citium. There are some,
however, who state that lie died of a wound, which
he received in an engagement with the barbarians '\
The last advice, which he gave to those about him,
was to sail awav inmiediately, and to conceal his
death. Accordingly, before the enemy or their
allies knew^ the real state of the case, they returned
in safety through the generalship of Cimon, ex-
ercised (as Phanodcmus remarks) thirty days after
his death.

After him, there was not a single Grecian general,
who performed any thing considerable against the
barbarians. The leading orators were little better
than incendiaries, who set the Greeks one against,
another, and involved them in intestine wars ; nor
was there one healing hand to interpose. Thus the
king's afKiirs had time to recover themselves, and
inexpressible ruin was brought upon the powers of
Greece. Long after this indeed^", Agesilaus carried
his arms into Asia, and renewed the war awhile
at/ainst the kin<>;'s lieutenants on the coast : but he
was recalled by the seditions and tunuilts, which
broke out afresh in Greece, before he could eiicct
any thing of any brilliance or magnitude. The Per-
sian tax-i>:atherers Vv'cre then left amidst the cities in
alliance and friendship with the Greeks ; whereas,
while Cimon had tlie counna)id, not a single collector
was seen, nor so much as a horseman appeared with-
in tour hiuidred furlonc's irom the sea-coast".

That his remains were brought to Attica, hii>

■•- ISee Thucyd. i. 1I2.''' *^ Above a century.*

"^ niiis proves at once flic prcv-ous t'K!icti'ins ot'tlif s.iiraps, and

the saiatary terror ol" Cimuii's uaDU; employed ivi clii-Clin;;^ oin; of

ilji.' iHust patriotic of objects.*

CIMON. 323

monument is a sufficient proof, for it still bears the
title of ' Cimonia.* Nevertheless, the people of
Citium have a tomb of Cimon, which (as Nausicrates
the orator informs us) they hold in great veneration ;
the gods having ordered them in a certain tlimine
not to disregard his ma?ics, but to honour and wor-
ship him as a superior being. Such was this Grecian
general.

y2

THE

LIFE

OF

L U C U L L U S;

SUMMARY,

Family ofLueullus. He accuses the migur Servilms. His eloquence,
and command of both the Greek and Latin tongues. His affection
for his brother. Sylla attaches him to his party, and employs him
upon several occasions. He goes into Egypt, where he is •voell
received by Ptolemy. He escapes the enemy by a stratagem, on
his return. Fimbria proposes to him to attack Mithridates by sea.
He surprises and defoats the Mitylenians. Sylla constitutes him,
by wll, guardian to his son. He is elected consid ; and employed
to manage the ixicr against Mithridates ; re-establislies discipline
among the troops. Mithridates makes new preparations for tvar ;
and defoats Cotta by land and sea. Lucullus marches against him ;
but is prevented, by a singidar j)hcEnomenon,foom engaging. He
determines to gain time. Mithridates besieges Cyziciun. Alarm
of the inhabitants. They are supported by several remarkable
signs. Lucullus gains a considerable advantage over Mithridates.
His second victory. He takes one of that prince's galleys : and
pursues him, flying luith the rest ; tvhich are destroyed by a tern'
pest. The complaints of his soldiers, and his vindicatioji of him-
self. He encamps opposite Mithridates, and gains some advantage
over him in a skirmish. A Dardariari grandee undertakes to
assassinate Lucidlus, but luithout success. Successes of Luctdlus*
officers over those of Mithridates. The latter decamps. Cabira
taken. Violent death of that princess tvives. Lucullus makes him-
self master of Amisus ; and repairs as much as possible the damage
xtfhich it had sustained from frc : visits the Asiatic cities, and in-

LUCULLUS. 32J

iyodnces into them some useful reforms. Appius Claudius seduces
Zarbieniis Jrom bis alliance xvith Tigranes. Pride and insolence
ofTigranes. Appius demands (if him the surrender of Mithridates'
Inicrvieui of those two sovereigns. Lucullus takes Sinope ; is in-
Jormcd that Mithridates and Tigranes are advancing, and marches
to meet them : passes the Eujihrates, and enters Armenia. Ti'
grane&* coiidnct upon hearing these news. Lucullus invests Tigrano-
certa. Tigranes marches against him. Hopes of that prince and
his courtiers, founded upon the small number of Luctdlus* forces.
Lucullus crosses the river, advances against the enemy, and gains
a complete victory . Mithridates receives Tigranes. Luctdlus takes
Tigranocerta. Many nations submit to him. He luishes to pro-
ceed against the Parthians : but his soldiers mutiny. He gains
several victories over the Armenians, and goes to besiege Artaxata :
gains another victory over Tigranes and Mithridates : has a sedi-
tion in his army : takes Nisibis. Reflexions on his change of for-
tune. Clodius practises xoith the army against him. Triarius is
defeated by Mithridates. Lucullus^ soldiers refuse to foolloiv him.
His interview tvith Pompey. They part tdth mutual rancour.
Remarks upon the Pcwthian expedition projected by Lucullus, and
executed by Crassus. Lucullus xvith difficulty obtains the honour
of a triumph : it's description. He divorces his ivife Clodia, in
order to marry Servilia, u7zo?» hoxvever he likeivisc divorces. He
quits public lifo, for the sake of repose. Reflexions on the magni-
fcence ajid indidgence of his closing years. The daily expenses of
his table. He gives Cicero and Pompey a supper in ' The Ajjollo.*
His library ; ajid attachynent to the Old Academy, Pompey
combines with Crassiis and Ccesar against Cato and Lucullus. The
latter is accused of a design against Pompey' s life. His death.

X HE grandfather of Lucullus was a man of con-
sular dignity ; Metellus, surnamed Numidiciis, was
his uncle by the mother's side. His father was
found guilty of having embezzled the public money,
and his mother Caecilia had but an indifferent repu-
tation for chastity. As for Lucullus himself, while he
was but a youth, before he solicited any public charge
"^12

326 LUCULLUS.

or attempted to gain a share in the administratioil,
he made his first appearance in impeaching Servilius
the augur, who had been his father's accuser. As
he had detected Servilius in some act of injustice in
the execution of his office, every body com?nended
the prosecution, and represented it as an indication
of extraordinary spirit. Where tliere was no perso-
nal injury indeed to revenge, the Romans considered
the business of impeachmenls a.-, a generous piu'suit;
and they chose to have their young men fasten upon
criminals, like so many well-bred hounds upon their
prey.

The prosecution was carried on with so much
vehemence, tliat several were wounded, and some
even killed ; in the end, however, Servilius was ac-
quitted. But, though Luculhis lost his cause, he
had great command both of the Greek' and Latin
tongues ; insomuch that Sylla dedicated his Com-
mentaries to him, as a person who cotdd arrange and
combine the incidents much better than himself.
For his eloquence was not merely occasional, or ex-
erted when necessity called for it, like that of other
orators who in the Forum

Sport, as the vaulting tunny in the main ;

But, when they are out of it,

are dry, inelegant, and dead.

He had applied himself to the sciences called Libe-
ral, and was deep in the study of belles lettrcs from
his youth : and in his age he withdrew from public
labours, in which he had borne a great share, to re-
pose himself in the bosom of philosophy, and to en-
joy the speculations which she suggested ; bidding

' This had now become very common at Rome, was understood
by great numbers, spoken by many, and written by not a i'ew.
Cato the Elder learned it at a very advanced age, and it was usual
to send the Roman youth of distinction to Athens for the same
purpose.*

LUCVLLUS. -3?:

31 timely adieu to ambition, after his difference witli
i*ompev.

To what we have said, about liis ingenuity and
skill in lanfjjuages, the following- story may be added:
While he was yet but young, as he was jesting one
day with Hortcnsius the orator and Sisenna the his-
torian, he undertook to write a short History of the
Marsi- either in Greek or Latin verse, as the lot
should fall. They took him at his word, and the lot
iletermined it to be in Greek. This history of his rs
■still extant.

Among the many proofs of his affection for his
brother Marcus, the Romans speak most of the first.
Though he was much older than Marcus, he Avould
Yiot accept of any office without him, but vraited his
time. This was so agreeable to the people, that in
his absence they created him a:3dile along with his
brother.

Though he was only a stripling at the time of the
Marsian war, there appeared many instances of his
courage and understanding. 13ut Sylla's attachment
to him was principally owing to his constancy and
mildness. Upon this account he made use of his
services, from fust to last, in his most important af-
fairs. Among other thino:s, he ^ave him the direc-
tion of the mint. It was he, who coined most of
Sylla's money in Peloponnesus during the Mithri-
datic war; from him it was called ' Lucullia;' and
it continued to be chiefly in use for the occasions of
the army, from it's convenient exchange.

Some time after this, Sylla engaged in the siege
of Athens ; and, though he was victorious by land,
the superiority of the enemy at sea straitened him
for provisions. For this reason he despatched Lu-
€ullus into Egypt and Lybia, to procure him a supply

^ The Marsian or Social War, according to Paterculus xi. 9.,
had been described by Sisenna when young; and the same liisto-
rian in his more advanced life composed a history of Sylla's civil
war, of which he had been a witness, and probably a partaker.
{See Suppl. Liv. xcix. 13., and Voss, de Hist. Lat. i. 10.}*

328 LUCULLL\S.

of ships. It was then the depth of winter ; yet he
scrupled not, withtliree small Greek brigantines and
the same number of little llhodian aallevs, to en-
counter strona; seas and a number of the enemy's
vessels, which kept watch on all sides because their
strength lay there. In spite of this opposition he
reached Crete, and brought it over to Sylla's in-
terest.

Thence he passed to Cyrene, v.here he delivered
the people from the tyrants and civil wars, with
which they had been harassed, and re-established
their constitution. In this he availed himself of a
saying of Plato ; who wlien he was desired to give
them a body of laws, and to settle their government
upon rational principles, returned them this oracu-
lar answer, " It is very difficult to give laws to so
prosperous a people." In fact, nothing is more dif-
iicult to govern than man, when fortune smiles ; nor
any thing more tractable, when calamity lays her
hands upon him. Hence it was, that Lucullus found
the Cyrenians so thoroughly submissive to his regu-
lations.

From Cyrene, he sailed to Egypt : but he was at-
tacked by pirates on his way, and lost most of the
vessels v» hicli he had collected. He himself however
escaped, and entered the port of Alexandria in a
magniiicent n.anner, escorted by the whole Egyptian
fleet set off' to the best advantage, as it used to be
when it attended the king in person. Ptolemy'^
who v.as then but a youtii, received him with every
demonstration of respect, nnd even provided him
apartments and a table in his own palace \ an ho-
nour, which had not been previously conierred upon

' Auletes, as Pulmcrius supposes ; but Aulctos was not king till
B. C. 6.5. It must, tlierefor.', have been Ptolemy Lathyrus. For
byjia concluded the peace with Mithridates B. C. 8k (L.)

And yet Lathyrus, who first began to reign B. C. 116, could
har-.Uy then be ' a youth.' Du ^oul thinks it must have been Alex-
ander IT, who reigned but nineteen dajs; and M. Iiicard, Alex-
ander ill- ; but the earliest of tlicse princes did not mount the
throne of Ejrypt till B. C. 81. •'^

LUCULLUS. 329

■anv foreiii'n commander. Neither was the allowancQ
for his expenses tlie same whicli others had had, i)ut
four times as much. Luculhis ho w ever took only
what was absolutely necessary, and refused tlie
king's presents, though he was offered no less than
the value of eighty talents. He neither visited
Memphis, it is said, nor any of the other celebrated
wonders of Egypt ; deeming it rather the bubiness
of a person who has leisure, and travels merely for
pleasure, than of him who liad left his general en-
gaged in a siege, and encamped belbre the enemy's
fortifications.

Ptolemy refused indeed to enter into an alliance
with vSylhi, from the apprehension of bringing war
upon himself; but he gave Liicullus a convoy to
escort him to Cyprus, embraced liim at parting, and
respectfully offered him a rich emerald set in gold.
Lucullus at first declined it ; but on the king's
shovving him his own picture engraved upon it, he
was afraid to refuse it, lest he should be thought to
go away with hostile intentions, and in conse-
(juence have some fatal scheme formed against him

In his return he collected a number of vessels from
the maritime towns, excej^ting those which had
given shelter and protection to pirates, and with this
feet he passed over to Cyprus. At that island he
learned, that the enemy's ships lay in wait for him
under some point of land; and th.eretbre he laid up
his fleet, and wrote to the cities to provide him
quarters and all necessaries, as if he intended to pass
the winter there. But as soon as the wind served,
he immediately launched again, and proceeded on
his voyage, lowering his sails in the day-time and
hoisting them again when it grew dark ; by wliich
stratagem he arrived safe at Rhodes. There he pro-
cured a fresh sujipjy of ships, and found means to
persuade the peo])le of Cos and Cnidus to quit Mith-
ridates, and join him against the Samians. With his
own forces he drove the king's troops out of Chios,

it
<i.
il.
<i

ti

350 LUCULLUS.

took Epigoniis the Coloplionian tyrant prisoner, and
set the people free.

At this time Mithriclates was forced to aliandon
Pergamus, and had retired to Pitana^. As Fimbria
shut him up by land, he cast his eyes upon the sea ;
and, despairing to face in the field that bold and vic-
torious officer, collected his ships from all quarters.
Fimbria saw this, but was sensible of his want of naval
strength ; and therefore sent to entreat Lucullus to
come with his fleet and assist him in taking a king,
who was the most warlike and virulent enemy the
ilomanshad. "Let not JMithridates," said he, " the
glorious prize which has been sought in so many
labom's and conflicts, escape ; as he has fallen into
the hands of the Romans, and is already in their
net. When he is taken, who will have a greater
share in the honour than he, who stops his flight,
and catches him as he goes ? If 1 shut him up
" by land, and you do the same by sea, the palm
" will be all our own. What value will Home then
*' set upon the actions of Sylla at Orchomenus and
*' Checronea, though now so much extolled ?'*

There was nothing absurd in the proposal. Every
body saw that if Lucullus, who was at no great dis-
tance, had brought his fleet and blocked up the
harbour, the war would have been at an end,
fuid they would all have been delivered from in-
finite calamities. Put wlicther it was that he pre-
ferred his fidelity, as Sylhi's lieutenant, to his own
interest and that of the public ; or abhorred Fimbria,
Tts a villain whose ambition had lately led him to
murther his generaP and friend; or by some over-
ruling influence of providence reserved Mithridates
for his own antagonist, he absolutely rejected the
proposal. He suffered him to escape out of the har-
bour, and to make a mock of Fimbria's land-forces.
After this, he had the honour of beating the king's

* Another cit}' in the Troiid, situated upon the river Evenus.*
5 Valerius Flaccus, pro-consul of Asia as stated below. See
SuppL Liv. Ixxxii. 61.*

LUCULLUS. ' 331

fleet twice: first at Lectuni, a promoDtory of Troiis ;
and next at Tcnedos, where he found Neoptolenuis
at anchor with a more considerable force. Upon this,
Luculhis advanced before the rest of his ships in a
Khodian galley of five banks of oars commanded bj
Demagoras, a man strictly faithful to the Romans
and of considerable experience in naval affairs,
Neopotolemns met him with great fury, and ordered
the master of his ship to run his vessel against that
of Luculhis. But Demagoras fearing the weight of
the admiral's galley, and the shock of it's brascn
beak, thought it dangerous to meet him a-hcad. He
therefore tacked about, and received him a-stern
with little damage, because the stroke was upon the
lower parts of the hull, which were under water. In
the mean time the rest of his fleet coming up, Lu-
cullus ordered his own ship to tack again, fell upon
the enemy, and after manygallant actions put them to
flight, and pursued Neoptolemus to some distance.

This done, he went to meet Sylla, who was about
to cross the sea from the Chersonese. Here he se-
cured his passage, and helped to transport his army.
When the peace was agreed upon*^, Mithridates
sailed into the Euxine sea, and Sylla laid a fine upon
Asia of twenty thousand talents. Lucullus was com-
missioned to collect the tax, and to coin the money;
and it was some consolation to the cities amidst
vSylla's severity, that Lucullus acted not only with
the utmost justice, but with all the lenity which so
difficult and odious a charere would admit.

As the Mitylenians had openly revolted, he w^as
desirous to make them acknowledge their fault, and
pay a moderate fine for having joined Marius' party.
But, under the influence of their evil genius, they
continued obstinate. Upon this, he went against
them with his fleet, beat them in a great battle, and
shut them up within their walls. 8ome days after

* This peace was concluded, A. U. C 670, six jears before the
death of Sylla.

352 LtXT.^LLUa

he had begun the siege, he had recourse to the fol-
lowing stratagem : In open day he set sail toward
Elea% but returned privately at night, and hiy close
near the city. The Mitylenians then sallying out in
a bold and disorderly manner to plunder his camp,
which they thought he had abandoned, he fell upon
them, took most of them prisoners, and killed live
liundred who stood upon their defence. Here he
got six thousand slaves, and an immense quantity
of other spoil.

In the various and unspeakable evils, which Sylla
and Marius brought upon Italy, he had no rhar^:. ;
for, by the favour of providence % he was eng-aged
an the affairs of Asia. Yet none of Sylla's friends
had greater interest with him. Sylla, as we have
already said, out of particular regard dedicated to
him his Commentaries ; and, passing by Pompey, in
his last will constituted him guardian to his son.
This seems to have first occasioned those differences
and jealousies, which subsisted between Pompey and
Lucullus, both of them young men and full of ar-
dour in the pursuit of glory.

Soon after Sylla's death, Lucullus was chosen con-
sul along with Marcus Cotta, about the hundred and
seventy-sixth olympiad. At this time many pro-
po'^ed to renew the war with Mithridates, and Cotta
himself remarked, " The fire was not extinguished ;
" i: only slept in embers." Lucullus therefore M-as
mnch concerned at having the Cisalpine Gaul allot*
ted as his province, which held out to him no op-
portunity of distinguishing himself But the honour,
which Pompey had acquired in Spain, gave him the
greatest concern ; because that general's superior
reputation, he clearly foresaw, after the Spanish war
was ended, would entitle him to the command against
Mithridates. Hence wlien Pompey applied lor

7 A city on the coast of Asia INIinor, opposite Mitylene in
Lesbos, which had a road and liarbour.*

8 How creditable tliese frequent references to providence by a
writer, surely not to be regarded as superstitious J*

LUCULLIIS. 333

money, and informed the government, that: if he
were not furnished witli it, he must leave Spain and
Sertorius and biiiiiT' his Ibrces back to Ital}'', LucuL'hS'
readily exerted himself to procure the supplies, and
to prevent his returning upon any pretext Avhatso-
cver during his consulship.* Every measure at
home, he foresaw, would be under Pompey's direc-
tion, if he came with such an army. For at this
particular period the tribune Cethegus, who had be-
come popular by consulting notliing in his speeches
and actions but the humour of the people, was at
enmity with Lucullus ; on account of his detestins^
that tribune's life, polluted as it was with infamous
amours, insolence, and every species of profligacy.
Against this man he had declared open war. Lucius
Quintius likewise, another tribune, sought to annul
the acts of Sylla, and to disorder the whole face of
affairs, which was now tolerably comj^osed. But
Lucullus, by private representations and public re-
monstrances, drew hi'n from his purpose and re-
strained his ambition. Thus, in the most courteous
and salutary way imaginable, he destroyed the seeds
of a very dangerous disease.

About this time, intelligence was brought of the
death of Octavius, governor of Cilicia. For that
province there were m.any competitors, all of v/hom
paid their court to Cethegus, as the person most
likely to procure it for them. Lucullus set no great
value, indeed, upon it ; but as it was near Cappa-
docia, he concluded, if he could obtain it, that the
Romans would not think of employhig any other
general against Mithridates. Hence, he exerted all
his art to secure it to himself. At last he was ne-
cessitated, against the bent of his disposition, to
adopt a measure in itself indirect and illiberal, but
very conducive to his purpose.

There was a woman then in Rome named Prr^cia,
celebrated tor her fascinating wit and beauty, but in

* See the Life of Pompey, Vol. IV,

$5^ LUCULLUS,

other respects no better than a common prostitute ^
who, by applying her interest with those, that fre-
quented her house and were fond of her company,
to serve her friends in the administration and in other
affairs, had added to her other accomphshmcnts the
reputation of being a useful friend and a woman of
business. This not a httle exalted her. But when
she had captivated Cethegus, who was at that time
in the height of his glory, and carried all before him
in Rome, the whole power fell into her hands. No-
thing was done without the favour of Cethegus, nor
by Cethegus without the direction of Prajcia. To
her Lucullus applied, by presents and the most in-
sinuating compliments; nor could any thing have
been more acceptable to a vain and haughty woman,
than to see herself courted by such a suitor. The
consequence was, that Cethegus immediately es-
poused his cause, and solicited for him the province
of Cilicia. When he had gained this, he had no
farther need either of Praec*ia or Cethegus. All
came into his interest, and with one voice gave him
the command in the Mithridatic war. Ke could
not but be considered indeed as the fittest person
for that charge, because Pompey was engaged with
Sertorius, and Metellus had resigned his preten-
sions on account of his crreat acre ; and these were
the only persons who could stand in competition for
it with Lucullus. His collegue Cotta however bj
much application prevailed upon the senate, to send
him with a fleet to guard the Propontis, and to pro-
tect Bithynia.

Lucullus with a legion levied in Italy passed over
into Asia, where he found the ri\st of the troops,
which were to compose his army. These had all
been long entirely corrupted by luxury and avarice ;
and that part of them called Inmbrians, on account
of tlicir having been under no command, were more
uniractable thun the rest. At the insti2:ation of
Fimbria, they had murthared Flaccus, their consul
aiid general, and had betrayed Fimbria himself to

LUCULLUS. 355

Sjlla; and they were still mutinous and lawless,
though in other respects, brave, hardy, iind expe-
rienced soldiers. Nevertheless, Lucullus in a short
time subdued the seditious spirit of these men, and
corrected the faults of the rest ; so that now first
they found a real commander, wliereas before they
had been brought to serve by indulgence and every
promise of pleasure.

The affairs of the enemy were in the following
posture : Mithridatcs, like a sophistical warrior, had
formerly met the Komans in a vain and ostentatious
manner, with forces showy and pom^pous indeed, but
of very little use. BafHed and disgraced in liis at-
tempt he grew wiser, and therefore in this second
war he had provided troojis capable of real service.
lie retrenched that mixed multitude of nations, and
those bravadoes which had issued fiom his camp in
a barbarous variety of language ; together with the
rich arms adorned with gold and precious stones,
which he now considered rather as furnishing spoils
to the conqueror, than as adding vigour to the
wearer. Instead of this, he armed them with swords
in the Roman fLishion, and with large and heavy
shields ; and his cavalry he provided with horses
rather well-trained than gaily accoutred. His in-
fantry consisted of a hundred and twenty thousand^
and his cavalry of sixteen thousand men, beside
armed chariots to the number of a hundred. Neither
was his navy equipped as before with gilded pavi-
lions, baths, and delicious apartments for the wo-
men : but with ail kinds of weapons offensive and
dcfensi\e, and with money to pay the troops.

In tliis respectable form he invaded 13ithynia,
Vvhere the cities received him with ])leasure ; and
2U)t only that country, but all Asia relapsed into it's
fbrmcr distemper, on account of the intolerable
evils wliich the Roman usurers and tax-gatherers
had brought upon them. These Lucullus subse-
quently drove away, like so many harpies which
robbed the poor inhabitants of their food. At pre-

5r>6 LUCULLUS.

sent he Y.as satisfied with reprimanding them, and
brinirine them to exercise iheir office with ijreater mo
deration ; by which nieans he kept the Asiatics from
revolting, though their inclination almost universally
lay that way.

While Lucullus was employed in these matters,
Cotta, thinking he had found his opportunity, pre-
pared to give M'tinidates battle. And as he had
accouhis -jom jnany ha'ids that Lucn.llus was coming
tip, and was already encamped in Phrygia, he did
every ! li.ig to expedite the engagement; in order
to prevent Llicnilus from having any share in the
triumph T which he believed was now^ all his own.
He was defeated however both by sea and land,
with the loss of '■uxty sliips and all their crowds, as
well as four thousand land-forces ; after which he
was shut iw in Chalcedon'^, and had no resource
except in his collegue's assistance. Lucullus was
advised notvvithstanding to take no notice of him,
but to march forward ink) tlie kingdom of Mitliri-
dates, which he vn'ouM find defenceless. Upon this
occasion, the soldiers were extremely loud in their
complaints. They represented, that Cotta had by
his r-^sli counsels not only ruined himself and his
own men, but done them likewise great injury ;
since, had it not been for his error, they might
have conquered without loss. But Lucullus, in a
set speech upon the subject, told them, " He had
" I'ather deliver one R'.man out of the enemy's
" hand, than take ihc whc-le of the enemy's posses-
" sions." .'\nd when Arclielaiis, wdio had formerly
comnianded the king's forces in Boeotia, but was
now come over to the Tiomans and fought on their
side, cis-erted. " Tliat if Lucullus would only make
" his appearance in Pontus, every thing would im-
" mefliatcly ihll before him ;" he replied, " He
" would not act in a more cowardly manner than
" hunters, nor pass the wild beasts by, and go to

" A city of Bitbynia, situated upon the Bosporus.*

LUCULLU& 3.^7

*' their empty dens." He had no sooner uttered
tJicse words, tliaii he marched against Mitliridates
with thirty thousand foot, and two thousand five
hundred horse.

Wlien he got siglit of tlic enemy, he was asto-
nished at their numbers, and determined to avoid a
battle aiui sC'^in time. But Marius ^*^ a Iloman officer,
whom kSertorius had sent with some troops to Mi-
thridates out of 8})ain, advanced to meet Lucullus,
and gave him the challenge. Lucnllus accepted it,
and drew up his army in order of battle. The sig-
nal was jnst ready to be given, when without any
visible alteration there was a sudden explosion in
the air, and a large luminous body was seen to fall
between the two armies ; in form it resembled a
large tun, and it's colour was that of molten silver.
With this phgenomenon, both sides were so much
affected, that they parted without striking a blow.
The prodigy is said to have happened in Phrygia, at
a ])lace called Otryae.

Lucullus, concluding that no hum.an snppHes
coidd be sufficient to maintain so many myriads as
Mithridates had for any length of time, especially
in the presence of an enemy, ordered one of the pri-
soners to be brought before him. The first question
which he put to him was, " How many there were
" in his mess .?" and the second, " What provisions
"he had left in liis tent ?" When he had received
this man's answer, he commanded him to withdraw ;
and he then examined a second, and a third, in like
manner. He next compared the quantity of pro-
visions, which Mithridates had laid in, with the
number of soldiers whom he had to support ; and
thus he discovered, that in three or four days they
would be in want of bread-corn. This confirmed
him in his design of gaining time ; and he caused
great plenty of provisions to be brought into his

" Appian calls him * Varius,*
^'0L. III. Z

^5n LUCULLU??.

own camp, that in the midst of abundance he might:
watch the enemy's distress.

Notwithstanding this, Mithridates formed a design
against the Cyzicenians, who were beaten in the
late battle near Chalcedon ^\ and had k)st tlu'ee
thousand men and ten ships. In order to deceive
Lucullus, he decamped one dark tempestuous niglit,
soon after sup])er, and marched witli so much exj)c-
dition, that at break of day he got before the town,
and posted liimseh' upon Mount Adrastia '-. As
soon as Lucullus perceived he was gone, he followed
his steps ; and without falling unawares upon the
enemy in the obscurity of the night (as lie might
easily have done) he reached the place of his desti-
nation, and sat down at a village called Thracia, in
the most commo<:lious i-ituation imaginable for guard-
ing the roads and passing-places, and cutting off the
enemy's convoys.

He was now so sure of his aim, that he concealed
it no longer from his men ; but, when they had en-
trenched themselves and returned from their labour,
he called them together, and triumphantly assured
them, " In a few davs he would tcain them a
" victorv, which should not cost them a single drop
" of blood."

Mithridates had planted his troops in ten different
posts about the city, and with his vessels blocked up
the frith which parts it from the continent ^^, so that
ft was invested on all sides. The Cyzicenians were
prepared to struggle with the greatest difficulties,
and to suffer the last extremities in the Roman
cause : but they did not know where Lucullus was,

" Along with Cotta.

'' So called finm a temple in the city, consecrated by Adrastus
to the goddess Nemesis, who had thence the name of Adrastia.
(Strab.xii.)

^^ Cyzicum (according to' Strabo, x. 6.) lies upon tlie Propon-
tis, and is an island joined to the continent by tu'^o bridges ; near
whitli is a city of the same nanii', witli two harbours capable of
f'ontaininjr two hundred vessels.

LUCULLUS. 3S9

and were much concerned that they could get no ac-
count of him. Though his camp was sufficiently
visible, the enemy had the art to impose upon them.
Pointing to the Uomans posted on the heights, '■' Do
" vou see that armv ?" said thev ; " those arc the
" Armenians and Medes, whom Tigranes has sent
" as a reinforcement to Aiithridates." Surrounded
by such an immense number of enemies, as they
conceived, and having no hope of relief but from
the arrival of Lucullus, they were in the utmost
consternation.

When Demonax, therefore, whom Archelaiis
found means to send into tlie town ^% brought them
news that Lucullus was arrived, they could h.ardly
at first believe it, imagining he came only with a
feigned story to encourage them to bear up in their
present distress. At the same moment however a
boy made his appearance, who had been a prisoner
among the enemy, and had just made his escape.
Upon their asking him where Lucullus was, he
laughed, thinking them only in jest; but when he
saw they were in earnest, he pointed with his finger
to the Roman camp. This completely revived their
drooping spirits.

In the lake Dascylitis, near Cyzicum, there were
vessels of a considerable size. Lucullus hauled up
the largest of them, placed it upon a carriage, and
drew it down to the sea. He then put on board of
it as manv soldiers as it could contain, and ordered
them to get into Cyzicum, which they efiected in the
course of the night.

It seems likewise that heaven, delighted with the
valour of the Cyzicenians, supported them by se-
veral remarkable signs. The feast of Proserpine was
come, when they were to sacrifice a black heifer to
her ; and as they had no living animal of that de-

'■• He swam into the town by the assistance of bladders. (Florus.
iii. V.) (L.) Caesar, according to Suetonius (Ivii.), in sending
despatches acror;s rivers, occasionally availed hirasejl" of t!ie same
struLiigcni.*

z 2

I

310 LUCULLUS.

scription, they made one of paste, and were ap-
proaching the altar with it ^\ The victim, bred for
that purpose, was at pasture with the rest of their
cattle on the other side of the frith. Upon that verv
day howe\er she separated from the herd, swam
alone to the town, and presented herself before the
altar. The same goddess appeared to Aristagoras,
the public secretary, in a dream ; and said, " Go
" and bid vour fellow-citizens take courao'e. for I
" shall bring the piper of Libya '^ against the trum-
" peter of Pontus."

AVhile the Cvzicenians were wonderim? at this
oracular expression, in the morning a strong wind
blew, and the sea was in the utmost agitation. The
king's machines erected against the walls, the won-
derful v.ork of Niconides the Thessalian, by the
noise and cracking tirst announced what was to
come. After that a south wind incredibly violent
arose, and in the short space of an hoiu- broke all
the engines to pieces, and destroyed the wooden
tower which was a hundred cubits high. It is added
likew-ise, that ^Minerva was seen by many at Ilium
in their sleep all covered with sweat, and with part
of her veil rent; and that she said, " She was just
" come from assisting the people of Cyzicum."
Xay, a pillar was shown at Ilium, which had an in-
scription to that purport.

As Ion 2: as ]\Iithridates was deceived bv his officers,
and kept in ignorance of the famine which prevailed
in the camp, he lamented his miscarriage in the
siege. But when he learned the extremity, to which
his soldiers had been reduced, and that they had

*' The Pythagoreans, who thought it unlawful to kill any an i-
Kal, seem (according to Porphyry, Athen. i. 2.) to have been the
first amon^ the Greeks, who olFerecl the figures of animals in paste,
nivrrh, or some other composition. The poorer sort of Eg^T)-
tians are said to have done the same from a ditrerent principle,
(ilerod. ii.)

"■' Meaning the wind called Aj^t;, or Africus, against the ma-
chines of Mlthridates, which then only waited the sound of the
* trumpet ' to commence the assaiilt.*

LUCULLUS. 341

beep, forced even to eat human flesh ^', all liis am-
bition and spirit of contention died away. He found
LucLdkis did not make v/ar in a theatrical ostenta-
tious manner, Ijut ain^ied his blows at his very heart,
and leit nothing unattempted to deprive him of pro-
visions. He therefore seized his opportunity, while
the Roman w-as attacking: a certain fort, to send
off almost all his cavalry and beasts of burthen, as
well as the least useful part of his infantry, into
Bithynia.

When Lucullus was apprised^ of their departure,
he retired durinsc the niuht into his camp. The
next morning, there was a violent storm ; neverthe-
less, he began the pursuit with ten cohorts of loot,
beside his cavalrv. All the wav he was ffreatlv
incommoded by the snow, and the cold Avas so
piercing, that several of his soldiers sunk under it,
and were comipelled to stop. AVith the rest he over-
took the enemy at the river Rhyndacus, and made
such havock among them, that the women of Apol-
lonia came out to plunder the convovs, and to strip
the slain. These, as it may well be imagined, were
very numerous, and Lucullus made fifteen thousand
pnsoners ; beside which, he took ^x thousand
horses, and an infinite number of beasts of burthen.
And he studiously led them all by the enemy's camp.
I am surprised at Sallust's representing this as the
first time, that the Romans had seen a camel '^
How could he think that those, who had formerly
under Scipio conquered Antiochus, and who had

^^ There is something extremely improbable in this. It tloes not
appear, that Mlthridates was so totally blocked up by Lucullus, as
to be reduced to this extremity : and even had that been the case,
it v.oukl have been more eligible to have risked a battle, than to
have submitted to the dreauiul aiternati\'e here mentioned. But
V. herefore eat human flesh, when we are afterward expressly told,
that they had beasts to send a-.vav ?

'° In a passage not now extant. Livy expressly tclis us, thero
were camels in Antiochus' army. ' Before the cavalry were placed
the chariots, armed with sithes, and camels of the species called
Dromedaries." (xxxvii. -lO.)

342 LUCULLUS.

lately defeated Aichelaiis at Orchomciius and ChfC-
ronea, should be unacquainted with that animal ?

Mithridates now resolved upon a speeciy flight ;
and, in order to amuse Lucullus with employment in
another quarter, sent his admiral Aristonicus to the
Grecian sea. But just as he was on the point of
sailing, he was betrayed to Lucuilus together witli
ten thousand pieces of gold, ^ which he took with
him to corrupt some part of the Roman forces.
After this, Mithridates made his escape by sea, and
left his generals to get off with the army in the best
manner they could. Lucullus coming up with them
at the river Granicus killed full twenty thousand,
and made a prodigious number of prisoners. It is
asserted, that in this campaign the enemy lost nearly
three hundred thousand men, including the servants
of the army as well as the soldiers.

Lucullus immediately entered Cyzicum, where he
was received with every testimony of respect and
joy. After which he went to the Hellespont, to col-
lect ships to make up a fleet. Upon this occasion
he touched at Troas, and slept there in the temple of
Venus. That goddess, he dreamed, stood by him,
and addressed him as follows :

Sleep's! thou, dread lion, when the fawns are near thee?

Upon this, he rose ; and, calling together his friends
while it was yet dark, related to them the vision.
He had scarcely made an end, when messengers ar-
rived from Ilium with an account, that they had
seen off the Grecian harbour ^^ thirteen of the king's
large galleys steering toward Lemnos. He instantly
went in pursuit of them, took them, and killed their
admiral Isidorus. When this was done, he made all
the sail he could after some others, which were
a-head of them. These lay at anchor by the island ;
and as soon as the officers perceived his approach,

'9 Plutarcli means the harbour, where the Greeks landed, when
they were going to the siege of Troy.

LUCULLUS. 34S

they hauled them ashore, and fighting from the
decks galled the Romans exceedingly. For they
could not surround them ; neither could their gal-
leys, from the continual fiuctuation of the waves,
make any impression upon the others, placed as they
were on firm ground and immoveable. At last, hav-
ing with much difficulty found a landing-place, he
disembarked some of his troops, who taking them in
the rear killed many of them, and forced the rest to
cut their cables and stand out to sea. In the confu-
sion, the vessels dashed against each other, or fell
upon the beaks of those of Lucullus. The destruc-
lioii, consequently, was immense. Marius, the
general sent by Sertorius, was among the prisoners.
He had but one eye ; and Lucullus, when he first
set sail, had given his men a strict charge not to
kill any one-eyed person, in order that he might be
reserved for a death of greater torture and disgrace.
After this, he himself hastened to pursue Mith-
ridates, whom he hoped to find in Bithynia blocked
up by Voconius. He had sent this officer forward
with a fleet to Nicomedia -", to prevent the king's
escape. But Voconius had loitered in Samothrace,
about getting himself initiated in the Mysteries*',
arid celebrating festivals. Mithridates in the mean
time had set sail with his fleet, and was making
strenuous efforts to reach Pontus, before Lucullus
could arrive to stop him. But a violent tempest
overtook him, by which many of his ships were

^° A city in Bithyniti, not for from the Propontis.*
^' The Mysteries of the Cabiri. T!ie worship of these gods was
probably brought from Phoenicia ; for cabh; in the language of that
country, signifies ' powerful.' They were reverenced as tlie most
tremendous of superior beings ; the more so, because of the myste-
rious and awful solemnities of their worship. Some have pretended
to give us an account of their names, though they were locked up in
the profoundest secrecy. (L.) In these Mysteries women and
children were initiated, Ter. Phorm. I. 1. 15. They have lately
been made the subject of an elaborate disquisition by the Rev.
G. S. Faber, Vicar of Stockton upon Tees. A French writer like-
wise, M. de Sainte-Croix, in his ' Mijsteres du Pa^ranismc," ha?
treated the topic with great and profound detail.*

$U LUCULLUS.

dashed to pieces, and many sunk : and tlie wliolc
beach was covered Vv'ith the wreck, which the sea
threw up for several days. As for the king himself,
the vessel in w^iich he sailed was so large, that the
pilots could not make land v/ith it amidst such a ter-
rible agitation of the waves ; and it w^as by this time
ready to ibunder, with the water which it had
shipped. He therefore got into a shallop belonging
to some pirates, and trusting his life to their hands,
tv^as beyond all hope and expectation brought safe
to Ileraclea in Pontus.

In this war Lucullus behaved to the senate of
Rome with an hone:=;t pride, which Lad it's success.
They had decreed him three thousand talents, to en-
able him to fit out a fleet. But he wrote to them, that
lie had no need of money; and boasted lliat, without
so much expense and such mighty preparations, he
would drive Mitliridates out of the sea Vvith the
ships which the allies v;ould give him. And, by the
assistance of a superior power, he performed liis pro-
mise. For the tempest, which ruined the Pontic
fleet, is said to have been raised by the resentment
of Diana of Priapus":^ in consequence of their hav-
ing plundered her temple and beaten down her
statue.

Lucullus was now advised by many of his officers
to suspend the prosecution of the war; but, without
regarding their opinion, he penetrated into the king-
dom of Pontus bvthe wayof i3ithvnia and Galatia. At
first he found provisions so scarce, that lie was
obliged to order thirty thousand Gauls to follow lum,
witli each a measure of wheat upon his shoulders.
Jlut as he proceeded farther in his march, and bore
down all opposition, he came to such plenty, that
an ox was sold for one drachma and a slave for
foin-. The rest of the bootv was so little re^-arded,
that some left it behind them, and others destroyed

^'- A maritime city of JNIysia, situated upon the Hellespont neat
the common mouth of the ..Esepus and the Gi-anicus.*

LUCULLUS. 345

it ; for, amidst such abundance, tliey could not find
a purcliaser. Having, in the excursions of their
cavalry, laid waste all the country as far as Themis-
cyrae and about the river Thermodon, they com-
plained that Lucullus took all the towns by capitula-
tion instead of storm, and gave not up a single one
to the soldiers for plunder. " Now," said they,
" you arc Icaxing Amisus a rich and flourishing city,
" which miglit be easily taken, if you would assault
" it vigorously ; and drag us after Mithridates, into
" the wastes of Tibarene and Chalda^a -^."

Lucullus however, not imagining that they would
break out into that rage which subsequently made
it's appearance, neglected their remonstrances. He
was more solicitous to excuse himself to those, who
blamed his slov/ progress, and his losing time in re-
ducing towns and villages of little consequence,
while Mithridates was again gathering power.
This is the very thing," said he, " that 1 am wish-
ing and contriving in all my operations ; that
Mithridates may get strength, and collect an
army respectable enough to make him stand an en-
gagement, and not continue to fly before us. Do
not you see, what vast and boundles^ deserts lie be-
" hind him ,? Is not Caucasus with all it's immense
*' train of mountains at hand, sufiicient to hide him
and numberless other kings beside, who may seek
lo avoid a battle.'* It is but a tew days' journey
from the country of the Cabiri ' into Armenia,
" where 'J'igranes ' the king of kings ' is seated ;
surrounded with that power which has wrested

a

ie

ii
ii

a

-? The country of the ' Chalybes,' for so the Chaldaci, i^tc. of Asia
•were denominated, from their being employed in the numufacture
of iron and steel (Strabo x., Xenoph. Anab. iv.) is the place here
alluded to : it lay immediately to the east of Tibarene. Ahiisus was
feituated between tlie rivers Halys and Iris*.

^'* Hence it appears, as well as from a passage in Strabo, that
there was a district on the borders of Phrygia, caWed • Tiie country
of the Cabiri.' The worship of those gods indeed had prevailed in
several parts of Asia, and they are supposed to have had homage
^lui.d to them at Rome under the title of Divi Poles.

346 LUCULLUS.

(C

t-i

cc
ti

ii.

ii
cc

Asia from the Parthians, which carries Grecian colo-
" nies into Media, subdues Syria and Palestine, cuts
'' off the Seleucidse, and leads their wives and
" daughters into captivity. This prince is nearly
" allied to Mithridates ; he is his son-in-law. Do
you think he will disregard him, when he comes
as a suppliant, and not take up arms in his cause ?
Why will you therefore be in such haste to drive
Mithridates out of his dominions, and risk bring-
ing Tigranes upon us, v»ho has long been seeking a
pretence for it? And surely he cannot find a more
specious one, than that of succouring a father-in-
law, and a king reduced to such extreme necessity.
What need is there then for us to push this aflair,
and to teach Mithridates (what he may not other-
wise know) who are the confederates he is to so-
" licit against us ; or to drive him, against his incli-
*•' nation and his notions of honour, into the arms
'' of Tigranes ? Is it not better to give him tinie to
" make preparations, and regain strength in his own
" territories ; that we may have to encounter the
" Colchians, Tibarenians, and Cappadoeians, whom
" we have often beaten, rather than the unknown
" forces of the Medes and the Armenians ?"

Agreeably to these sentiments, Lucullus spent a
long time before Amisus, proceeding very slowly in
the siege. At the expiration of the winter, however,
he left that charge to Murena, and marched against
^\Iithridates, who was encamped on the plains of the
Cabiri with a resolution to wait for the Romans
tliere. Plis army consisted of forty thousand foot
and four thousand horse, which he had lately col-
lected ; and in these he placed the utmost con-
fidence. Nay, he passed the river Lycus, and gave
the Romans the challenge to meet him in the field.
In consequence of this, the cavalry engaged, and the
Romans were put to the rout. Pomponius, a man
of some dignity, was wounded and taken. Though
much indisposed with his wounds, he was brought
before ?<lithridates, who asked him j " Whether, if

LUCULLUS. S47

*' liis life were spared, he would become his friend?"
" On condition tliat you will be reconciled to the
" Romans," said he, " I will : but if not, I must
" still remain your enemy." The king, struck with
admiration of his patriotism, did him no injury.

Lucullus was apprehensive of farther danger on
the plain, on account of the enemy's superiority in
horse ; and yet he was loth to proceed to the moun-
tains, which were at a considerable distance, as well
as woody and difficult of ascent. While he was in
this perplexity, some Greeks ^^ happened to be
taken, who had hidden themselves in a cave. Of
these the eldest, Artemidorus, undertook to conduct
him to a post where he might encamp with the ut-
most security, and where stood a castle which com-
manded the plain of the Cabiri. Lucullus gave
credit to his report, and began his march in the
night, after he had caused a number of fires to be
lighted in his old camp. Having safely cleared the
narrow passes, he gained the heights; and in the
morning appeared above the enemy's heads, in a
situation where he might fight with advantage when
he chose it, and might not be compelled to it, if he
preferred sitting still.

At present, neither Lucullus nor Mithridates was
inclined to risk a battle ; but, some of the king's
soldiers happening to pursue a deer, a party of
Romans went out to intercept them. This brought
on a sharp skirmish, numbers continually coming up
on each side. At length the king's troops had tiie
advantacfe.

The Romans, beholding from the camp the flight
of their fellow-soldiers, were greatly disturbed, and
ran to Lucullus to entreat him to lead them out,
and give the signal for battle. But he, willing to
show them of how much weight in all struggles the
exigency of the danger and the sight of an able

*5 Most probably some, who had been previously carried into
Armenia by Tigranes.*

CAS LUCULLUS.

geiici-cil arc, ordered tlieni to stand still ; and de-
scending into the plain himself, seized the foremost
of the fugitives, and commanded them to face about.
They obeyed ; and the rest rallying with them, they
easily put the enemy to flight, and pursued them to
their entrenchments. Lucullus, upon his return, in-
flicted on the fugitives the usual punishment. He
made them strip to their vests, take off their girdles,
and then dig a trench tu^elve feet long, the rest of
the troops all the while standing and looking on.

In the army of Mithridates there was a Dardarian
grandee, named Olthacus. The Dardarians are one
t)f the barbarous tribes, "vvho live near the lake
Ma^otis ^^'. Olthacus was a man fit for every w-arlike
attempt that required strength and courage, and in
counsel and contrivance inferior to none. Beside
these accomplishments, he was affable and courteous
in the commerce of the world. He was always in-
volved however in some dispute or jealousy with the
other ffreat men of his countrv, who like himself
aimed at the chief authority in it ; and in order to
secure the support of Mithridates, he undertook the
daring enterprise of killing Lucullus. Mithridates
commended his design, and, to afford him a pretence
for his resentment, publicly gave him some affronts.
Olthacus laid hold on it, and rode off to Lucullus,
who received him with pleasure. For his reputation
was well known in the camp ; and the ilomau
general upon trial found his presence of mind and his
address so extraordinarv, that he took him to his
table and his council-board.

Vrhen the Dardarian thouglithe had found his op-
portunity, he ordered his servants to have his horse
ready without the camp. It was now mid-day, and
the soldiers were sitting in the sun, or otherwise re-
posing themselves, when he went to the general's
})aviiion ; expecting, that none would pretend to
t)bstruct the entrance of a man who was intimate

'6 Hod. the Sea of Asoph,

LUCULLUS. M9

with Liicullus, and wlio said lie liad business of im-
portance to communicate. And he would certainly
iiave been admitted, had not sleep, whicli has been
the ruin of many other generals, pro\ed Luciillus'
protection. But Menedemus, one of his cliaml){n--
lains, then in waiting, told Olthacus, " This was not
" a proper time to see his master, who after lowr
" watching and fatigue was now enjoying a little
" rest." Olthacus however, not taking tliis denial,
replied ; " I must enter, whether you will or not,
" for I have imi^ortant and necessai'v business to lav
*' before him." Upon which Menedemus, incensed
at his insolence, answered, " Nothing is more neces-
" sary than the preservation of Lucullus ;" and
thrust him back with both hands. Olthacus, fear-
ing his design was discovered, withdrew privately
from the camp, took horse, and returned to Mithri-
dates without having effected any thing. Thus the
crisis in other matters, as v^'cll as in medicine, either
saves or destroys.

After this, Sornatius was sent with ten cohorts to
escort a convoy. Mithridates detached against him
one of his officers, named Menander. An engage-
ment ensued, and the barbarians were routed with
considerable loss. At another time I*ucullus des-
patched Adrianus. with a considerable corps, to protect
the party employed in collecting provisions and sup-
plying his camp. Mithridates did not let iiim pass
unnoticed, but sent Menem.achus and Myron against
them, with a strong body of cavalry and another of
infantry. All these combatants, except two, the
llonians put to the sword. Mithridates dissembled
his loss, pretending that it was small, and entirely
owing to the misconduct of the commanding officers.
But when Adrianus passed by his camp in great
pomp, with many waggons loaded with provisions
and rich spoils in his train, the king's spirits began
to droop, and the most distressing terror fell upon
his army. They determined, therefore^ to quit
that post.

J50 LUCULLUS.

Accordingly, the nobility about the king began
to send oft' their baggage with all the privacy they
could, but they would not suffer others to do the
same. The soldiers, finding tliemselves jostled and
thrust back in the gate-ways, v.'ere so much provok-
ed that tliey turned upon them, fell to plundering
the baggage, and killed several of them. Dorylaiis,
one of the generals, lost his life for nothing but a
purple robe vdiich he wore. Hermaeus, a priest,
was trodden under foot at the gate. Mithridates
himself, without any attendant or groom to assist
him, got out of the camp amidst the crowd. Of all
his royal stud, there was not a single horse left him ;
but at last Ptolemy the eunuch, seeing him carried
along with the torrent, and happening to be on
horseback, dismounted and gave !iim his. The Ro-
mans pressed hard upon him, and indeed came up
time enougli to have taken him. He was, in fact,
ahnost absolutely in their hands ; but in their covet-
ousness, and military fondness for trifles, he found
his safety. The prey, which had been pursued
through numberless conflicts and dangers, escaped ;
and the victorious Lucullus was robbed of the
reward of his toils. The horse which the king rode,
was nearlv overtaken ; when a mule loaded with
gold, either by accident or by the king's contrivance,
came between him and his pursuers. The soldiers
immediately began to rifle the load, and quarrelled
about the contents, which gave Mithridates time to
get off. Nor v;as this the only disadvantage, which
Lucullus experienced from theii' avarice. Callistra-
tus the king's secretary was taken, and the Roman
general had ordered him to be brought before him ;
but those who had the charge of it, perceiving he
had five hundred crowns in his girdle, despatched
him ■^^ Yet to such men as these, he gave up the
plunder of the enemy's camp.

*■' Thus depriving Lucullus of all the intelligence, which he
might have derived from the papers and communications of such
an iniportaul captive.*

LUCULLU8. 351

After this, he took Cabira, and many other places
of strength, in wliich he found much treasure. He
hkewise found in their prisons many Greeks, and
several of the king's own relations confined -, and,
as tliey had long considered themselves in the most
desperate circumstances, the liberty which they now-
gained through Luculhis appeared to them not so
much a deliverance, as a resurrection and a new life.
One of the king's sisters named Nyssa, happily for
her, was of the number. The other sisters ayd wives
of Mithridates, who seemed placed more remote
from danger and disturloance at Phernacia, all mise-
rably perished : for he despatched the eunuch Bac-
chides thither, with orders to see them put to death.

Among the rest were two of his sisters, Roxana
and Statira, who were about the age of forty, and
still virgins; and two of his wives, both ionians,
Berenice of Chios and Monime of^liletus. The lat-
ter was much celebrated among the Greeks. Though
the king had tried every expedient to bring her to
listen to a lawless passion, and made her a present
of fifteen thousand crowns at one time, she rejected
all his solicitations till lie agreed to marry her, sent
her a diadem, and declared her his queen. BeiYjrt^
the last sad message, she had passed he-s- lime verv
unhappily, and looked with grief upon that beaut\\
which instead of a husband had procured her 'a
despot, and instead of the domestic comforts of
marriage a guaixl of barbarians. Baiiiihed far from
Greece, she had lost the real blessings of life, and
where she hoped for happiness, had found nothing
but a dream.

When Bacchidcs came, and informed those prin-
cesses that they must die, but that they were at liberty
to choose the death most easy and agreeable to
them ; Monime snatclied the diadem from her h.ead,
and applied it to her neck, that it might execute
the fatal office. But it broke ; and the jirincess
exclaimed, " O cursed band ! w^ouldest thou not, at
^' least, serve me upon this occasion r" Then spit-

552 LUCULLUS.

ting upon it, she threw it fi'om her, and stretched
out lier neck to Bacchides.

Berenice took poison ; and, as her motlier who
was present begged a share of it, she granted her
request. They both drank of it, and it's force ope-
rated sufficiently upon the weaker body ; but Bere-
nice, not having taken a sufficient quantity, was
long a-dying. Bacchides, therefore, strangled her.
Roxana one of the unmarried sisters, after having
vented the most bitter imprecations and reproaches
against MItlnidates, took poison. Statira, however,
died witliout one unkind or ungenerous word. She
rather commended her brother, when he must have
had his anxieties about his own life, for not having
forgotten them, but provided that they might die
free and undishonoured. These events gave great
concern to the native goodness and humanity of
Lucullus.

He continued his pursuit of Mithridates as far as
Talaura, where having learned that he was fled four
days before to Tigranes into xVrmenia, he turned
back ao'ain. He subdued however the Ciialdaeans
and Tibarenians, and reduced Armenia the Less,
with the towns and castles. He then sent Appius
to Tigranes, to demand Mithridates ; and in the
mean time returned to Amisus, which his troops
were still besieging. The length of the siege was
owing to Callimachus, who commanded in the town,
an able engineer skilled in every art of defence.
By this he gave the Romans much trouble, for which
he subsequently suffered. But Lucullus availed
liimself of a stratagem, against which he had not
guarded. He ordered a sudden assault at the time,
Vv'hen Callimachus used to draw off his men for re-
freshment. Thus he made himself nsaster of some
part of the wall ; upon which Callimachus, either
envying the Romans the plunder of the place, or
with a view to facilitate his own escape, set fire ta
the tovv-n and quitted it. For no one paid any atten-
tion to those, who fled by sea. The flames spread'

12

LUCULLUS. 35S

with p^rcat rapidity round the walls, and the soldiers
prepared themselves to pillage tlie houses. Lucullus,
in commiseration of a fine city thus sinking into'
ruin, endeavoured to assist it from without, and or-
dered his troops to extinguish the nre. They paid
no regard to him however, but went on collecting
the spoils, and clashing their arms ; till he was
forced to give up the plunder to them, in hopes of
savins^ tb.e citv from the flames. But the event
turned out quite the reverse : for in rummaging
every corner, with torches in their hands, they set
fire to manv of the houses themselves. So that,-
W'hen Lucullus entered the town next morning, he
said to Ills friends, with tears in his eyes ; " I have
" often admired the good fortune of Sylla, but never
" so much as I do tliis day. He desired to save
" Athens, and succeeded. I wished to imitate him
" upon this occasion : but, instead of that, the gods
" have classed me with Mummius ■**."

Nevertheless, he endeavoured to restore the place,
as far as it's unhappy circumstances would permit.
A shower, which providentially fell about the time
of it's capture, extinguished the fire, and saved
many of the buildings ; and, during his stay, he
rebuilt most of those which had been destroyed.
Such of the inhabitants also as had fled, he received
with pleasure, and added to them a draught of other
Greeks, v.^-ho were willing to settle there. He gave
them, likewise, a territory of a hundred and twenty
furlongs.

The city was a colony of Athenians, planted at a
time when their power was at the height, and they
were masters of the seas. Hence it was, that those
who escaped from the tyranny of Aristion retired to
Amisus, and were admitted to the privilege of citi-
zens ; thus fortunately gaining abroad, what they
had lost at home. The remainder Lucullus now
clothed in an honourable manner, gave e^reh of them

's The destroyer of CorinUi, B. C, 146.
VOL. Ill, 2 A

srA LucuLLUa

two hiiiulrcd drachmas, and sent them back info
their own country. Tyrannio"--', the grammarianv
■was of the number. Murena beG,i>Td liim of Lucul-
lus, and afterward enfrancliiscd him ; in whicli he
acted ungenerously by tlie present of his su})erior
oflicer. Luculhis would not have been wiHing, that
a man so honoured for his learning should be tirst
considered as a slave, and then set iiee, lor the
real liberty to which he was born must be taken
awav, before he could have this seemino; freedom.
But this was not the only instance, in which Murena
acted with less generosity than became an officer of
his distinction.

Lucullus then turned toward the cities of Asia ;
that he might bestow tlie time, which was not em-
})loyed in war, on the promotion of law and justice.
Tliese had long lost their influence in that province,
which was overwhelmed with unspeakable misfor-
tunes. It was desolated and enslaved by the iarmers
of the revenue, and by usurers. The poor inhabi-
tants were forced to sell the most beautiful of their
sons and daughters, the ornaments and offerings in
their temples, their paintings, and the statues of their
gods. Their last resource was, to serve their cre-
ditors as slaves. Tlieir suitcrings, jn-ior to this, had
been still more cruel and insupportable ; })risons,
racks, tortures, exposures to the burning sun in sum-
mer, and in winter to extreme cold amidst ice or
mire : insomuch that servitude seemed a hap])y deli-
verance, and a scene of peace. l^ucuUus, finding
the cities in such dreadfid distress, soon rescued the
oppressed from all their burthens.

In the iirst place, he ordered the creditors not to
take above one per cent, tor a month's interest^":
he next abolislied all Interest, which exceeded the
principal : the third and most important regulation
was, that the creditor should not seize more than a

^9 See the Life of S^'Ua, p. 267, rot. (37).*
5° This was t'.ie ]cg:;l interi^'st ;iii!()ng- the Konians; wjience we
luay Icurn the comparative sciu'clt v' of uionev in iho&c timci.

i)

LUCULLUS. 355

fourth ])iirt of tlic debtor's income. And, if any
one added the interest to his capital, lie was to lose
all. l>y these means within less than four years all
the debts were paid, and the estates restored free to
their proprietors. The public line, which Sylla had
laid upon Asia, was twenty thousand talents. This
had been twice paid ; and yet the merciless collect-
ors, by usurious claims, had now made it amount to
a hundred and twenty thou.sand talents.

These men, pretending" that they had been un-
justly treated, raised a clamour in Rome against
Lucullus, and hired a number of })opular orators to
speak against him. They Iiad indeed a considerable
interest, because many persons who ])0ssessed a
share in the administration were their debtors. Lu-
cullus, on the other hand, was not only beloved by
the nations which had experienced his good offices,
but the hearts of the other provinces also were his,
and thev lono'cd for a erovernor who had rendered
such numbers happy.

A])pius Clodius, v.ho had been sent embassador
to Tio-raues bv Lucullus, and wlio was his wife's

CD ^ ^

brotlier, at first fell under the direction of guides
who were subjects to IMithridates. These men made
iiim take an unnecessary circuit of many days' jour-
ney in the Ujiper Countries; but at last an enfran-
chised servant of his, a Syrian by nation, discovered
to him the imposition, and showed him the right
road. He then bade adieu to his barbarian guides,
and in a few days passed the Euphrates, and readied
Antioch of Da})hue"^

There he had orders to wait for Tigranes, who
was at that time em})loyed in reducing some citie-i
of Phirniciar and he found means to bring over to

^' Among .sevL'i-isl cities of that name, this was the princ!])al. It
was called by way of distinction, ' T!ie Antioch of Daphne.'
Daphne was a beautiful villajje, about forty fuvlongs from it, conse-
crated to the nytnph of that nanie, and adorned witli groves of a
largo extent (seveVal of them probably ot" laurel) in the midst of
which stv>od the temple of AjjoIIo and Diana. The grov\; iind
f.t'injilo wore a suJictuarv.

2 A 2

3S6 LUCULLUS.

the Roman interest many princes, who had submitted
to tlie Armenian out of pure necessity. Among these
was Zarbienus, king ofGordyene. A number of the
cities hkc wise, Vvhich Tigranes had conquered, private-
ly sent deputies to Clodius ; and received from him in
return, a promise of all the succour which Lucuhus
could give, cou})Ied with a request that they would
make no immediate resistance. The Armenian go-
vernment was, indeed, an insu}")portable burthen to
the Greeks. The king's pride in particular, through
a long course of prosperity, had become so enor-
mously arrogant, that he thought whatever was great
and admirable in the eyes of the world was not only
subject to his power, but even made for his use.
For, though his prospects at first were but small and
contemptible, he had subdued many nations, and
humbled the Parthian power more than any prince
before him. He had colonised Mesopotamia with
Greeks, whom he draughted in great numbers out
of Cilicia and Cappadocia. He had drawn the
Scenite ^' Arabians from their wandering way of life,
and placed them nearer to Armenia, that he might
avail himself of their mercantile abilities. He had
many kings at his court in the capacity of servants, and
four"^^ in particular as mace-bcarers or footmen, who
whenever he rode on horseback ran before him in
short jackets, and when he sat to give audience,
stood by with their hands clasped together ; which
last circumstance seems a mark of the lowest slavery,
a token that they had not only resigned their liberty,
but that they had likewise surrendered to their mas-
ter their body itself rather to sufier than to act.
Appius, not in the least disconcerted by all this

^' So called, probably, from their living in tents.

^^ Ilunie, upon the authority of \V. 5lahno?b. and Hoveden,
informs us of an English prince (Edgar), wJio 'obliged twice tljat
numl)er of tributary princes to row him in a barge upon the Dec*
But kings were then as numerous in this island, as they have lately
become in the west of Germany, where the name of ' king-maker '
has been won from our English Warwick by a wlxolesale mauu-,
liictuier c£ the article. (iSOb".)*

LUCUIXUS. 357

pomp, plainly set forth his commission at his first
audience : " that he was come to demand Mithri-

dates, whom Lucullus chiimed for his triumph ;

otherwise, he must declare war against Tigranes.'*
Whatever efforts that prince made to receive the
message with an easy countenance, and a kind of
smiJe, it was visible to all that he was afl'ected with
the younof man's bold address. This was indeed the
first free speech, which he had heard for five and
twenty years ; for so long he had been a king, or
rather a tyrant. The answer however, which he
returned to Appius was, " that he would not deliver

up Mithridates ; and, if the Romans began the

war, he was able to defend himself." Pie was
displeased with Lucullus for having given him, in
his letter, barely the title of ' king,' and not that
of ' king of kings ; ' and therefore, in his reply, he
would not address him as ' Lnptrator.^ This did
not prevent him, hov/ever, from sending magnificent
presents to Apj)ius ; and, when he found he did not
accept them, lie sent more. At last Appius, that
he might not seem to reject them out of any parti-
cidar pique, took a cup, and sent back all the rest.
He then returned with the utmost expedition to
his general.

Before this, Tigranes had not deigned to admit
Mithridates into his presence, nor to speak to a
prince who was so nearly allied to him, and who
had lately lost so great a kingdom. He had con-
temptuously sent him to remote marshes and a sickly-
air, where he was kept like a prisoner. But he now
recalled him to court, with great marks of honour
and regard. In a private conference, they excul-
pated themselves at the expense of their friends.
Metrodorus the Scepsian was of the number, an able
speaker and a man v>i' extensive erudition, who had
been in such high favour that he was stiled ' The
king's father.' When he went embassador (it seems)
from Mithridates to the Armenian court, to beg
assistance against the Romans, Tigranes said j

ri5s Li;cuj>Li:.s.

" W^hat would you, Metrodonis, a(l\ ise mc to do !)♦
"this case?" Vvlictlier il were lliat he had the
interest of 'J'igranes in vic;\v, or wished to see Mitiui'
dates absohif ely ruined, lie repHed, " As an euibas-
*^ sador, 1 should exhort you to comply ; ]n\l, as
" your counseiloi", to refuse." 1 ii^rnues disch)sed
this to Mithridates, not iniai»'inlu<>' that he woidd
resent it in the savage niaiujcr he did. Metrodoius,
however, was iiumediately ])ut to death ; and Ti-
^rancs o^reatly repented the step which he had taken,
th(>u<rh he had not l)een absolutely the cause oi" that
event, but only added stints to the hatred which
Mithridates Iiad lono- entertained aii;ainst his minister.
Tiiis appeared, when his private memorandums were
seized, in which Metrodorus was h)inid amon<^ those
jnarked out lor the a\. Tio-ranes buried him ho-
nourably, andtliough he had in his lil(;-time betrayed
iiiin, spared no expense in his linierai.

Amphicrates the orator likewise, if we may i)e al-
lowed to record hisnanni (or the sake; of Alliens, died
at tliat court. Jle is said to ha\e be(;n banished liom
his country, and to have; retired to Neleucia upon tlui
'J'ij^ris, where the inhabitants desired him to open a
school of rhetoric ; but he answered in the most con-
tcmj)tuons inanncr, and with all the \ anity ofu s{)phist,
" that a plate could not contain adol|)hiii." Thence
he went to the court of ('leoi)atra, the daijf^hter of
Mithridates and wdc of Tigranes, where he soon len-
dered himself" so obnoxious, that he was iin bidden
all intercourse with the Oreeks, upon which he
starved himself to death. Cleopatra l)estowed upon
him likewise a mafrnjficent funeral, and his tomb is
near a place called Saj)ha.

Lucullus, liaving established peace and i^ood laws
in Asia, did not nt'glect what mii^ht be conducive
to elepfance and j)leasure ; l)ut durin;^ his stay at
Epiiosus entertained the (xrecian cities with shows,
triumphal feasts, and trials of ukill between wrestlers
and f^ladiators. 'The cities in return instituted a feast
to his honour, called ' Luculliaj' and the real affec-.

I-UCULLU-S. S59

lion wlilcli inspired tlicni with the tiiought, was more
agreeable tlian tlie honour itself.

When Ap[)ins was returned, and had ac(|uainted
hhn that it was necessary to go to war with Tigranes,
]ie went back to Pontus, and placed himself at the
head of his troops. His tirst operation was to lay
siege to Sinopc, or rather to a corps of Cilicians of
tlie king's party, who had thrown themselves into
that town. These, upon the ap})roach of Lucullus,
put a great number of the inhtibitants to the sword,
;ind iifter setting tire to the city, endeavoured to es-
cape in tlie night- But Lucullus, discovering their
intention, entered the town; and having killed eight
thousand of them who were left behind, restorexl to
the old inhabitants their effects, and strenuously ex-
erted himself iii saving the town Irom the Hame.s.
His particular inducement was the following dream:
A person appeared in his sleep to stand by him, and
say, " Go forwar<l, Lucullus ; tor Autolycus is coming
" to meet you." When he awaked, he could form
no conjecture about the signification of the dream.
He took the city however the same day, and in pur-
suing the Cilicians to their ships saw a statue lying
on tlie shore, which they ha<l not been able to get
on board. This was one of tiie master-pieces of
Sthenis ; and he learned that it was the statue of An-
tol} ens, the founder of Sinope ^\ Autolycus is said
to have been the son of Deimachns, and one of those
Thessalians who assisted Hercules in the war against
the Amazons. Li his voyage back, along Avith Dc-
moleon and Phlogius, his ship stru.ck on a rock of the
Chersonese called Pedalion, and foundered. He and
his friends howe\.er saved their lives and arms, and

5^ This Autolycus is likewise mentioned, vitli some of these clr-
rumstances, by .Straho (xii.) as haviiipj been probably one of the
Argonauts, and established himself at Sinope, a city of Paphlagonia
on the Euxine near the mouth of the Ilalys, on his return. Upon
his death he received divine honours, and had an oracle at Ihat
jilacc*

360 LUCULLUS.

went to Sinope, which they took from the Syrians ;
so called (we are told) as being' the desceudcnts of
Syrus, the son of Apollo and Sinope tiie daughter of
Asopus. When Lucullus heard this, he recollected
the observation of Svlla in his commeniaries, "That
nothing moro deserves our belief and attention, than
what IS signitied to us in dreams.'*

After intelligence was brought that Mithridates
and Tigraneswere on the ponit of entering Lycaonia
and Cilicia with their whole forces, in order to seize
Asia before him, he could not help thinking it strange
that the Armenian had not made use of Mithridates
when in his glory, and joined tiie armies of Pontus
while they were in their full strength, but suffered
them to be broken and destroyed; and now at last
with cold hopes of success bescan the war, or rather
threw himself down headlong with those, who could
stand no longer. Amidst these transactions Machares
the son of Mithridates, who was master of the Bos-
porus, sent Lucullus a corone' of gold of a thousand
crowns' value, and begged to be numbered afuong
the friends and allies of Rome.

I^ucullas, concluding that the first war v.-as
finished, left Sornatius with a corps of six thousand
men to settle the affairs of that province ; and, with
twelve thousand foot and less than three thousand
horse, marched to oegin another. It seemed aniazing
and irrational temerity to go with a mere handful of
men against so many warlike nations, so many my-
riads of cavalrv, and such a vast country, intersected
with deep rivers and barricaded with nn)untains eter-
nally covered 'A'ith snow. His soldiers of course, who
were not otherwise ur>der the best discijilinc, followed
him with t;reat reluctance and were ready to mutiny.
On the other hand, the popular orators clamoured
against him in Rome, representing that he com-
menced war after war J not that the public u.tdity
rcqtiired it, but that he might always retain the
command and continue in arms, accumulating riches

LUCULLUS. 361

at tlie risk of the commonwealth. These at last suc-
ceeded in their design [which was, to get him re-
called].

He reached the Euphrates, however, by long
marches; and finding it swoln and muddied by the
late rains, he was apprehensive he should have much
delay and difficulty in collecting boats, and making
a bridge of them. I3ut in the evening the iiood began
to subside, and lessened in sucli a manner in the
night, that next morning the river appeared consi-
derably witliin it's channob The people of the coun-
try observing little islands in it's bed, which had
seldom been visible, and the stream breaking gently
about them, considered Luculhis as something more
than mortal. For they saw the great river put on a
mild and obliging air to him, and afford him a quick
and easy jiassage.

He availed himself of tlie opportunity, and passed
it with his army. Immediately afterward, an auspi-
cious omen ap{)eared. A number of heifers sacred to
the Persian Diana, the goddess Vvdiom the inhabitants
of those parts particularly worship, were pasturing on
the other side. These heifers are used only in the
way of sacrifice ; at otlier times they ranged at large,
marked with the figure of a toreh ^ as a token of their
dv signation ; and it was difficult to take them, when
tiicy were wanted. But now the aimy had no sooner
crossed the river, than one of them went and stood
by a rock deemed sacred to the goddess, and hanging
down her head in the manner of those v/hich are
bound, offered herself to Luculhis as a victim. He
sacrificed also a bull to the Euphrates, on account of
his safe passage.

1 here he rested that whole day, to refresh his army.
The next he marched forward through Sophene,

55 As eriiblcmutica] of Diana, the torch of the night. The cus-
tor.i of marking anim;ils v, ith au iron is very ancient, being alliKled
to in Anacreon. Herds, of the kind here sjxiken of, were coiunion
in the Piigan world: such were 'the oxen'of the fcun,' mentioned
in the Odjssey, &c.*

■^62- LUCULLUS.

without cToInorthe least iniurv to those, who submit-
ted and received his troops in a proper manner. Nay,
when his men wished to stop and take a fort supposed
to be full of treasure, he pointed to mount Taurus in
the distance, and said, " Yonder is the fort, which
'• you are to take ; as for these tilings, tiiey will of
" course belong to the conqueror :" and then, push-
ing his march, he crossed the Tigris and eiUered
Armenia.

AsTigranes ordered the first man who brought him
an account of the enemy's arrival, to lose his head
for his reward, no one afterward presumed to menlion
it. He remained in ignorance, tliough the hostile
iire already touched him; and with pleasure heard
liis flatterers say, " Lucullus would be a courageous
'' general, if he durst await Tigranes at Kphesus,
" and Cxid not quit Asia at the very sight of his im-
" mense armies.'* Thus it is not every constitution
which can bear much wine, neitlier can an ordinary
mind endure great prosperity without staggering.
The first of his friends, who ventured to tell him the
truth, was i\iithrobarzanes ; and he was but ill re-
warded for the liberty, which he had taken. He was
sent against. Lucullus, at the head of three thousand
horse and a more respectable body of foot, with or-
ders to take the Roman general alive, but to tread the
rest under his feet.

Part of the Roman forces werepitcliing their tents,
and the rest were upon the march, when tlieir scouts
brought intelligence that the barbarians were at hand.
Lucullus therefore had his apprehensions that, if they
attacked him before his troops were all assembled and
f()rmed, thev might be thrown into disorder. He
therefore set about entrenching himself: and in the
mean time despatched his lieutenant Sextilius, with
sixteen liundred horse and not many more infantry,
including both the light and the heavy-armed, with
orders when he approached the enemy, to stop and
amuse them, till he should be informed that the cnr
trenchments were finished.

LUCULLUS. 563

Scxtilliis was anxious to obey liis orders, but
JMithrobarzaucs came upou him so boldly, that he
\vas forced to fiirht. Mitlirobarzaues behaved with
great bravery, but he fell in the action ; upon which
his troops took to flight, and were most of them cut
in pieces.

After this Tigranes left Tigranocerta, the great
city which he had built, and retired to mount Taurus,
where he intended to collect all his forces. But Lu-
culliis, not giving him much time for preparatioi],
sent Murena to harass and cut off the parties on one
.side, as fast as they came up; and on the other side,
tSextilius advanced against a large corps of Arabians,
which was going to join the king. These he attacked
as they were encamping, and killed the greatest part
of them. Murena following the steps of Tigranes,
seized an opportunity of falling upon him, as he was
leading a large army along a rugged and narrow defile.
The king himself fled, abandoning the whole of his
baggage. Many of the Armenians were put to the
sword, and stiil more made prisoners.

LucuUus after this succet^s marched against Ti^ra-
noccrta, and invested it vnth his army. There were
in that city many Greeks, who had been transplanted
out of Cilicia, and many barbarians whose fortune
had been no better than that of the Greeks ; Adia-
benians, Assyrians, Gordycnians, and Cappadocians,
whose cities Tigranes had demolished, and removing
the inhabitants, compelled them to settle in that
which he had built. The place was full of treasure,
and rich ornaments; every private person as well as
grandee, in order to make their court to the king,
striving which should contribute most to it's improve-
ment and decoration. For this reason, Lucullus car-
ried on the siege with great vigour; thinking that
Tigranes would, contrary to his better judgment, be
provoked to give him battle. And he' was not mis-
taken. Mithridates, by messengers and lettei^?,
strongly dissuaded the king from hazarding a battle,
and advised him only to cut off the Roman convoys

36i LUCULLUS.

■^Vith his cavalry. 7axiiestoo, \vho came on the part
of Mithi'idafes to co-operate with Tigranes, entreated
him to avoid encountering the Roman arms which,
he assured him, Avere invincible.

At first, the king heard liim with patience. But
when the Armenians and Gordyenians arrived with
all their forces, when the kings of tlie Medes, and
Adiabenians liad brought in their armies, when the
Arabians po'ared in from the coasts of the Babylo-
nian '^ sea, and the Albanians and their neighbours
the Iberians from the Caspian (beside a considerable
body, gained by presents and persuasion, from, those
nations about tlie Araxes which live without regal
government) then nothing was expressed at the king's
table or council board, but sanguine hopes and bar-
barian menaces. Taxiles was in dane:er of his life for
having attempted to oppose the resolution of engag-
ing, and Mithridates himself was accused of envying
the glorious successes awaiting the arms of his son-in-
law.

Tigranes therefore would not tarry for him, lest
he should share with him the honour of the victory,
but immediately advanced with his whole forces; and
is said to have expressed to his friends great uneasi-
ness, " That he should have to do onlv with Lucullus,
" and not try his strength at once against all the ge-
" nerals of Rome." His boasts indeed do not appear
entirely frantic and destitute of reason, when he was
surveying so many nations and princes under his
standard, such astonishing numbers of heavy-armed
infantry and so many myriads of cavalry. He had
twenty thousand archers and slingers, and fifty-five
thousand horse, of which seventeen thousand (ac-
cording to the account sent by Lucullus to thesenate)
were completely clad in steel. His infantry, divided
into companies and battalions, consisted of a hundred
and fifty thousand men; and there were thirty-five

'* The Persian gulf. The Araxes, mentioned below {Jiod. the
Arafs), rises in mount Taurus, and falls into the Caspian sea.*'

LUCULLUS. 365

thousand pioneers and other labourers to make roads,
prepare bridges, cleanse the courses ofriv^ers, provide
wood, and answer all the other occasions of the arm v.
Tliese were drawn up behind, to give it a more for-
midable appearance of strength and numbers.

When he had passed mount Taurus, and spread
his troops upon the plain, he could see the Roman
army besieging Tigranoccrta. TJie mixed multitude
of barbarians in the city likewise saw him, and in a
menacing manner pointed to their king's armies from
the walls.

Luculhis, before the battle, held a council of war.
Some advised him to quit the siege, and meet Tigranes
with all his forces ; others were of opinion, that he
should continue the siege, and not leave so many
enemies beliind him. He told tliem, that " Neither
" separately gave good counsel, but both togetlier
'* did." He therefore divided his forces, and left
Murena before the place with six thousand men;
while he with the rest of the infantry, consisting of
twenty-four cohorts which contained not more than
ten thousand combatants, tlie whole of his cavalry,
and about a thousand slingers and archers, marche(l
against Tigranes.

He encamped on a large plain with a river before
him ; where his army appeared so very inconsiderable,
as to afford much matter of mirth to the royal flatter-
ers. Some ridiculed it's diminutive appearance;
others, by way of jest, cast lots for the spoiP': and
there was not one of the generals and princes, who
did not express his desire to be employed exclusively
upon that service, while Tigranes should only sit still
and look on. The king likewise, thinking it neces-
sary to show himself facetious and sarcastic upon the
occasion, made use of the celebrated expression,

That if they came as embassadors, there were too

<(

^^ So the grandees of France are said to have done, previously to
the fatal battle of Agincourt. — ' Who v.'ill go to hazard with me
for twenty English prisoners?' (Shaksp. Hen. V. iii. 7.)*

S5G LUCULLUS.

" many of tliem ; if as soldiers, too few." Thus tliev
passed the iirst day in niirtli and raillery.

The next morning early, LucLdlus drew out his
army. The camp of the barbarians was on the eastern
side of the river. But the current, ^vhcre it is most
fbrdable, makes a bend to the west. As LuculJus
marched hastily down toward that quarter, Tigranes
thought he was retreating. Upon this, he called out
to Taxiles, and said with a scornful smile, " Seest
" thou not these invincible Roman les^ions takinc,- to
flicrht?" Taxiles ansv;ered, " I sincerely wish, mv
lord, that your good genius may work a miracle
" in your favour; but these legions do not use their
" best accoutremeiits in a mere march. They do not
wear their polished shields, nor take their bright
helmets out of their cases, as you see they have
" now done. All this splendid appearance indicates
their intention to %ht, and to advance against
their enemies as fast as possible." AVhile Taxiles
was yet speaking, they saw the eagle of the foremost
legion make a motion to tlie right by Lucullus*
order, and the cohorts proceed in good order to pass
the river.

Upon this, Tigranes witli much difficulty awaked
from his intoxication, and exclaimed two or three
times, " Are these men then really coming against
" us r" After this he drew out his forces in a hasty
and disorderly manner ; taking himself the commaiul
of the main bodv, and giving the left wing to the
king of the Adiabenians, and the right to the king of
the Medes. In front of this right wing were placed
most of the cavalry, who were armed in steel.

As Lucullus was about to cross the river, some of
his officers admonished him to beware of that day
uhich was one of the inauspicious, or (as they call
them) black ones to the Ivomans: for upon that day,
Caspio's army had been defeated by the Cimbri. Lu-
cullus returned the memorable answer, *' I will make
" this day, too, an auspicious one for Rome-" ir
was the sixth ci" October.

LUCULLU^. - 367

Having tlins spoken, and exhorted his men to
exert themselves, hie advanced at their head against
the enemy. He was armed with a breast-pUite of
steel formed in scales, wiiich cast a surprising lustre;
and the robe which he wore over it, was adorned
v.ith fringe. He immediately drew his sv/ord, to show
his troops tlie necessity of coming hand to hand with
an adversary accustomed to fight at a distance, and
by the vigour of their cliarge of not leaving them
room to exercise their missive weapons. Observing
that the enemy's heavy armed cavahy, upon w'liich
they placed their chief dependence,' was covered by
a liill which was })lain and even at the top, and which
with an acchvitv of onlv four furlon^rs v/as not vcrv
difPicult to ascend, he despatched his Thracian and
Ciaulish horse with orders to take them in flank, und
TO strike at nothing but the shafts of their pikes.
'I'heir wliole strength, indeed, consists in the ])ikc ;
and tliey have no other weapon, either offensive or
defensive, which they can use, on account of the
heavy and unpliable armour in which they are as it
were immured.

Meanwhile, he began to climb tlic hill with two
companies of infantry ; and the soldiers followed
him with great readiness, when they saw him, en-
cumbered as he was with his armour, the first to
labour on loot up the ascent. After he liad reached
the summit, lie placed himself on t'ie most conspi-
cuous part of'ir, and cried ontj '" riie victory is ours,
" my fellow-soldiers, the victory is ours !" At the
same time he advanced again>t the heavy-armed
cavalry, and ordered iris men not to make any use of
their javelins, but to come to clor.Q action, and to
tiim their blows at tlicir enemies' legs and thighs, in
which parts alone tiicy were unarmed. There was
no need, liowever, to carry this into execution. For,
instead of staiiding to receive tlie Romans, they set
up a cry of fear, and most despicably fled v.ithouv
having struck a stroke. In their iiiglit they and
their horses, heavy with armourjran buck upon their

568 LUCULLUS.

own infantry, and threw them into confusion; so that
all tliose myriads were routed, without standing to
receive one wound, or spilling a single drop of blood.
Multitudes however were slain in their fligiit, or
rather in their attempt to fly ; their ranks being so
thick and deep, that they entangled and impeded
each other.

Tigranes rode off one of the first, with a few at-
tendants; and seeing his son involved in his mis-
fortune, he took the diadem from his head, gave it
to him with tears, and desired him to save himself
in the best manner he could, by taking some other
road. The young prince did not venture to wear
it, but put it into the hands of one of his most faith-
ful servants, who happened to be subsequently taken
and brought to Lucullus. Thus the royal diadem
of Tigranes added to the honours of the spoil. It is
said, tliat of the foot there fell above a hundred thou-
sand, and of the horse very few escaped ; whereas
the Romans had but five killed, and a hundred
wounded. Antiochus the philosopher^^, in his
Treatise upon the Gods, speaking of this action says,
" The sun never beheld such another." Strabo^'-^
likewise, another philosopher, in his Historical Com-
mentaries informs us, that even the conquerors were
ashamed, and ridiculed each other for having em-
ployed weapons against such vile slaves. And Livy
asserts, that the Romans with such inferior numbers
never enc^acjed such a multitude as this. The victors
did not, indeed, make up the twentieth part of the
vanquished. The most able and experienced com-
manders among the Romans paid the highest com-
pliments to the generalship of Lucullus ; principally,
because by metiiods entirely diiierent he had defeat-
ed t\\o of the greatest and most powerful kings in
the world ; the first by an expeditious, and the other

3s Antiochus of Ascalon : Cicero was his disciple. See his
Acad, ii 2.

3"' Stnibo, tlic geographer and historian, was- also a philosopher-
of" the Stoic lenn.

LUCULLUS{. SG9

byn slow process. He ruined Mithridatcs, when m
the height of his power, by protraction unci delay,
and Tigranes by celerity. Among all the generals
indeed in the world, there have been few instances
of any one's availing himself of delay for execution,
or of expedition for security.

Hence it was, that Mitliridates made no haste to
come to action, or to join Tigranes ; imagining, that
Lueulhis would proceed with his usual slowness and
circumspection. ]]ut when he met a few Armenians
on the road, with the utmost marks of consternation
upon them, he formed some conjecture of wdiat had
ha])pened ; and many more frequently coming up
naked and wounded, he was too well assured oftlie
loss, and inquired for Tigranes, ]3ut though he
found him in the most destitute and deplorable con-
dition, he did not ofler him the least insult. Instead
of that, he dismounted and bewailed with him their
connnon misfortunes, gave him his own royal equi-
page, and held up to him aprospect of better success.
Thev innnediately l)CG:an to levy fresh forces.

In Ti2:ranocerta the Greeks had mutinied aa:ainst
the barbarians, and wished to deliver the citv to
Lucullus. Accordingly, he assaulted and took it.
After he had secured the roval treasures, he resi^'ued
the plunder of the town to his soldiers ; and they
foiuid there, beside other rich booty, eight thousand
talents in coined monev. In addition to this, he dis-
tributed to each man from the spoils eight hundred
drachmas. And learning, that there ^vere found in
the town a number of the artists requisite in thea-
trical amusements, wliom Tigranes had collected
from all parts for opening the tlieatre he had built,
he made use of tliem in the games and other public
diversions exhibited in honou.r of his victory.

Hie Greeks he sent back to their own countries,
and furnished tlienrwith necessaries for tliat purpose.
He likewise permitted the barbarians, who had been
fompelled to settle there, to return to tljcir respect-
i\c al)odes. Thus it happened that, by tlie disper-

roL. in. tl 15 -

S70 LUCULLUS.

sion of the people of one city, many cities recovered
their former inhabitants : for which reason, Luculhis
was reverenced by tliem as a patron and founder. He
succeeded, also, in his other undertakings agreeably ta
his merit ; being more desirous of the praise of justice
and humanity, tlian of that which arises from miHtary
achievements. For in those the army claims a great
part, and fortune a still grctiter ; whereas the otlier
are proofs of a gentle disposition and well-disciplined
mind, and by them I.ucuflus brought the barbarians
to submit without the sword. Tlie kings of the
Arabs came over to him, and put their possessions-
in his power : the whole nation of Sophene followed
their example ; and the Gordyenians were even de-
sirous to quit their habitations, and follow him with
their wives and children. The cause was as follows: —
Zarbienus, king of Gordyene, unable (as it has
been stated) to support the tyranny of Tigranes, ap-
plied privately through Appius to Lucullus, and de-
sired to be admitted as an ally. This application
being discovered, he v.as put to death with his v/ife
and children, before the Romans entered Armenia.
Lucullus, however, did not forget it ; but as he
passed through Gordyene, he, took care that Zar-
bienus should have a magnificent funeral, and adorn-
ed the pile with gold stuffs and royal vestments found
among the spoils of Tigranes. The Roman general
himself set fire to it, and together with the friends
and relations of the deceased offered the accustom-
ed libations, declaring him his own friend and an
ally of the Roman people. He caused a monument,
likewise, to be erected at a considerable expense to
his memory : for there was found in the royal trea-
sury a great quantity of gold and silver, beside three
millions of measures of wheat laid up in his store-
liouses. This was a sufTicicnt provision for tlie sol-
diers ; and Lucullus was much admired for making
th^ war maintain itself '% and carrying it on with-

4P

This art, if entitled to atlmiration, has been much more ad-

LUCULLUS. S7I

out takiug a single drachma out of the public trea-
sury.

About this time, tliere came an embassy from the
king oi'Partln'a, to sohcit his friendship and alhancc.
Lucullus received the proposal v/ith pleasure, and
sent eml)assadors in his turn ; wlio while th.ey were
at that prince's court, discovered that he v/as yet
unresolved what })art to act, and that he was private-
ly treating with Tigranes for Mesopotamia, as a, re-
ward tor the succours vvith wiiich he should supply
him. As soon as Lucullus learned this, he deter-
mined to let Tigranes and Mithridates alone, as ad-
versaries already exhausted, and to try his strength
with the Parthian by entering his territories. lie
thought it would be gh)rious, if by one vigorous effort
like an able wrestler he should throw three princes
successively, and victoriously traverse the dominions
of three of the most pov.'erful kings under the sun
without a single fall.

For this reason he sent orders to Sornatius and his
other otficers in Pontus to bring their forces to him,
as he intended to begin his march for Parthia from
Gordyene. These officers had already perceived
then' soldiers to be refractory and obstinate, but now
they found them absolutely mutinous, and incapable
of being wrought upon by any method of persuasion
or of force. On the contrary, they loudly declared
they would not even stay there, but would go and
leave Pontus itself imguarded. Wlien an account
of this behaviour was brought to Lucullus, it cor-
rupted the troops he had with him : and they wer.e
most ready to receive the impression, loaded as they
were with wealth, enervated with luxury, and pant-
ing after repose. Upon hearing therefore of thii
bold terms, in which the others had expressed them-
selves, they said they had acted like men, and set
an example worthy pf imitation ; " And surely,'"
continued they, " our services entitle us to a dis-

mirably managed of late years by the modern over-ramier ef Eu-
rope. (1806.) *

2 B 2

'6TI LtJCULLtTS.

** cliarg'e, that we may return to our own couiifi'vv
" and enjoy ourselves in security and quiet/'

These speeches, and worse than these, coming to'
the ears of Lucullus, he gave up all tlioughts of his*
Parthian expedition, and marched once more against
Tigranes. It was now the heigiit of summer ; and
3^et, when he had gained the summit of Taurus, he
saw with regret the corn only green : so backward
arc the seasons in those parts, on account of tlie ex-
treme cokP^ He descended however into the plain,
and beat the Armenians, who ventured to face him^
in two or three skirmishes. He then plundered the
villages at pleasure, and by taking the convoys de-
signed for Tigranes, brought tliat want upon the
enemy, which he had dreaded for himself.

He omitted no measure, which might urge them
to a decisive battle: he drew a line of clrcumvalla-
tion about their camp ; he laid waste their country
before their eyes ; but they had been too often de-
feated, to think of risking an engagement. He
therefore marched against Artaxata the capital of
Tigranes, where he liad left his wives an.d childi-en ;
concluding that he would not suffer it to be taken,
without attempting it's relief.

• It is said tliat Annibal the Carthaginian, after An-
tiochus had been subdued by the Romans, addressed
himself to Artaxas king of Armenia. "While he was
at that prince's court, lieside instructing and improv-
ing hii-i in other important matters, he pointed out
to him a place which, though it then lay unoccupied
and neglected, afforded the happiest situation ima-
ginable ibr a cit\'. Of this he gave him the j)lan,
and strongly advised him to carry it into execution.
T'he king, charmed with the suggestion, desired him
to take the direction of the work ; and in a short
time there was seen a large and beautiful city, which

^' This particular is. confirmed by modern travellers: Tliev tell
us, tlic snow lies in thixt country till Aufjn.st; an utfect pt'ilicij)*
nrisinj; tVoni the lulry ridges of 'Jaurus and C.iuoasus, by which it
's hounded.

LUCULLUS. fiVS

bore tliat prince's name, and was declared the me-
tropolis of Armenia.

When Lucnlhis advanced to lay siege to this place,
the patience of Tigranes failed hinn He marched
in quest of the Romans, and the tbiarth day encamp-
•ed ov<3r-against them, being separated from them
only bv the river Arsanias, which thev must neces-
sarily cross in their march to Artaxata. T^u€«llus
having sacrificed to the gods, in full persuasion that
the victoiy was his own, passed over in order ol'
battle v.ith tw-elve cohorts in froiit. The rest were
placecl in the rear, to prevent their being surround-
ed by the enemy. For their motions w^re watched
^)v a laro'e and select body of cavalry, covered bv
some flying squadrons of Mardian archers and Ibe-
rian spcannen, in whose courage and skill, more
than that of all his other foreign troops, Tigranes
placed tlie highest confidence- Their behaviour,
however, did not distino-uirJi them. Thev exchanc:-
ed a few blows with the Roman horse, and then,
without waiting the charge of the infantry, dispersed
themselves i-H flight, and drew ofi'the Roman cavalry
to the pursuit.

Tigranes now, seeing his advantage, advanced
with his cavalry. Lucullus was a little intimidated
hy their numbers, and the splendour of their appear-
ance. He therefore recalled his own horse ; and in
the mean time was the foremost to advance against
the nobility^-, who with the flower of the army were
about the king's person. But they fied at the sight
of him, without having struck a blow. Of the three
kings engaged in the action, the flight of Mithridates
seems to have been the most disgraceful, for he did
not stand the very shouts of the Romans. The pur-

*^ In tlie original, if is SstTpa^r^jw?, by wIhcIi (though sorae would
read ATfOTvunivnic, and some A^iar/ivci^) in all probability is meant thti
king's body-guard, consisting chiefly of the nobility. According to
Livy, no fewer than sixty of Tigranes' friends and great officers
walked in the procession of Lucullus' triumph. Nor is it wonder-
ful, that he had a guard of his own nobility, when he liad princess
ibr liis menial servants.
9

374 LUCULLUa

suit continued the vbole night, until wearied M'ith
carnage, and satisfied with their prisoners and booty,
the Romans desisted. Livy informs us, tiiat in tlie
former battle there were greater njimbcjs killed and
taken prisoners, but in this persons of higher qu;dity.

IaicuHus, elevated with his success, resolved to
penetrate the Upper Country, and to tinisii the de-
struction of this barbarian prince. It was now the
autumnal equinox, and he met with storms which he
had not expected. The snow fell almost constantly ;
and when the sky vvas clear, the frost was so intense,
that from the extreme cold the horses could scarcely
drink of the rivers ; nor could they pass them but
with the utmost difficulty, because the ice broke and
cut the sinews of their legs. Besides, the greatest
part of their march v/as through close and woody
roads, where the troops were daily wet and covered
with snow ; and they had only damp places, in which
to pass their miserable ni.'jhts.

They had not therefore followed I^ucullus many
days, before they began to be refractory. At first
they had recourse to entreaties, and sent their tri-
bunes to intercede for them : but afterward they
met in a more tumultuous manner, and their mur-
murs were heard all over the camp by night ; the
surest token, perhaps, of a mutiny ^\ I ucullus tried,
what every milder measure could do : be exhorted
them only to compose themselves a little longer,
until they had destroyed the Armenian Carthage
built by Annibal, the bitterest enemy to the Roman
name. But, finding his eloquence inefiectual, he
marched back and passed the ridge of mount Taurus
another way. Thence he descended into Mygdonia,
an open and fertile country, where stands a great
and pojitdoiis city, by the baibarians called Nisibis,
and by the Greeks Antioch of Mygdonia ' '. Gouras,

*-' Witness the nocturna couJoqida and tlie nox minax of the Pan-
nonian, and tlie vox conciihia of" the German mutiny, so admirably
desorihod by Tscitus, Ann. i. 16, 28, 39. -^

.*•> It was cailvd Au'tioch, because in it's delicious walks ami plea-

LUCULLUS. S7^

brother to Tigranes, had the title of it's governor,
on account of his dignity; but tlie real commander
there was Callin>achus, wlio by his eminent abilities
as an engineer, iiad already given Lucullus so much
tr(Mible at Amisus.

Lucullus, having invested the place, availed him-
self of all tlie arts used in a siege, and pressed it
with so much vigour, that he carried it sword in
liand. Gouras surrendered himself, and was treated
with the utmost huaianity. But he refused to listen
to Callimachus, though he offered to discover to him
a vast quantity of hidden treasure ; and put him in
fetters, in ord^r tliat he might sufier capital punish-
ment for havini]^ set fire to the citv of Amisus, and
thus deprived him of the honour of showing his cle-
mency to the Greeks.

Hitherto, one might say, fortiuie had followed
Luculhis, and fought for him. But from this time
the gale of her favour fell ; he could do nothing
without infinite difficulty, and struck upon every
rock in his way. He behaved indeed with all the
valour and persevering spirit of a good general, but
his actions had no lonsrer their wonted e'lorv and fa-
vourable acceptance with the world. Nay, tossed
as he was upon the waves of fruitless contention, he
was in danger of losing the glory which he had al-
ready acquired. For great part of his misfortunes,
however, he might blame himself; because, in the
first place, he would never study to oblige the com-
mon soldiers, but looked upon every compliance
with their inclinations as the source of Ids disgrace,
and the destruction of his authority. What was of
still more consequei>ce, he could not behave in an
easy affable manner to those, who were upon a foot-
ing with him in point of rank and birth, but treat-
ed them with hauij'htiness, and considered himself
as greatly their superior. These blemishes Lucullus,

€ant situation, it resembled the Antioch of Daphne, mentioned
p- 5^5, not. i'S\.\

376 LUCULLUS.

Ave are told, combined with every otlier perfection.
He was tall, well-made, gracelal, ehxjuent, and had
abilities for the Fornm as well as for the field.

The soldiers, Sallust informs us, were ill-affected
to him from the beo'inninai; of the war, because he
had made them keep the field two winters succes-
sively, the one before Cyzicum and the other before
Amisus. The rest of the winters, likewise, were
disao;rceable to them : thev either i)asscd them in
liostuities agamst some enemy, or if they happened
to be among friends, they were obliged to live in
tents. For Lucullus never once suffered his troops
to enter any Grecian city, or any other in alliance
with Rome.

While the soldiers were of themselves thus ill-dis-
posed, they were rendered still more mutinous by
the demai;02:ucs at home : who, throuijjh envv to
Lucullus, accused him of protracting the war fi'om
11 love of power and of pilhige. " lie had almost
the entire direction (they said) of Cilicia, Asia,
Bithynia, Paphlagonia, Galatia, Poritus, Armenia,
and all the provinces as far as the Phasis^' ; and
now he was plundering the royal palaces of Ti-
gran.es, as if he had been sent to strip, not to
subdue kings." So Lucius Quintius, one of the
tribunes, is said to have expressed himself; the same
"who was principally concerned in procuring a de-
cree, that Lucullus should be superseded in his com-
mand, and that most of his troops should have their
discharge.

To these misfortunes was added another, which
absolutely ruined Lucullus' affairs. Publius Clodius,
a man of the utmost insolence and effrontery, was
brother to his wife ; a woman so abandoned, that it
"was even believed she had an incestuous commerce
with him. He bore arms at the time under Lucul-
lus, and imagined that he was not promoted as he

'*^ This is a rapid river in Colchis, which after passing (as Strabo,
xi., informs us) under a hundred and twenty bridges, pours itself'
into the Euxinc Sea.*

cc

cc
<c

LUCULLUS. S77

tleserved; for he was ambitious of the highest station,
and on account of his disorderly hfe many were put
above him. FincHui;' this, he intriiJ^ned with the
lumbnan troops ; and endeavoured to set tliem
against Lucidlus by flattering specclies and insinua-
tions, to which tiiey were neither unaccustomed, nor
unwilling to attend. For these were the men, wliom
Fimbria had formerly persuaded to kill the consul
Ilaccus, and to appoint himself their general in liis
stead. Still retaining their old principles, they re-
ceived Clodius with pleasure, and called him ' the
Soldiers' Friend.' He did indeed pretend to be
concerned at their sufferings, and used to say,
" Shall there no period be put to our wars and toils^
" Sliall we go on fighting one nation after another,
" and wear out our whole lives in wandering over
the world ? And what is the reward of so many
laborious expeditions ? What, but to guard Lu-
cullus' M-aggons and camels, loaded with cups of
gold and precious stones ? Whereas Pompey*s
soldiers, already discharged, sit down with their
" wives and children upon fertile estates and in plea-
sant towns; not for having driven Mithridates and
Tigranes into inaccessible deserts, and destroyed
the royal cities in Asia, but for having fought with
fugitives in Spain and slaves in Italy. If we must
for ever have our swords in our hands, let us re-
serve all our hearts, and what remains of our
lin]bs, for a general who thinks the wealth of his
men his greatest ornament."
These complaints against Lucullus corrupted his
soldiers to such a degree, that they would not follow
iiim either against Tigranes or Mithridates, who from
Armenia had thrown himself into Pontus, and w^as
beginning to recover his authority there. They
l)retended that it was impracticable to march in the
winter, and therefore loitered in Gordyene, expect-
ing Pompey or some other general would be sent as
successor to Lucullus. But when intelligence was
!)rought that Mithridates had defeated Fabius, and

a

iC

iC

a
it
a

3TS LtJCULLUS.

\vas mnrching against Sornatius and Tnariiis, tliey
were asharncd of their inactiou, and told Liicullns
he might lead tliem wherever he pleased.

Triarius being informed of the approach of Lo-
cnlliis Mas ambitious, before he arrived, to seize the
victory which he tliought perfectly secure ; in con-
sequence of which, he hazarded and lost a great
battle. It is said that above seven thousand Romans
M'ere killed, among whom were a hundred and fifty
centurions and twenty-four tribunes. Mithridates
likewise took their camp. Lucullus, fortunately for
Triarius, arrived a few days afterward, and conceal-
ed him from tlie soldiers, who were anxious to wreak
their vengeance upon him.

As Mithridates now avoided an action, and chose
to wait for Tigranes v/ho was coming up with a large
army, Lucullus in order to prevent their junction,
determined to ffo once more in ouest of Tiorranes.
But while he was upon his march, the Fimbrians
mutinied and deserted his standard, alleging that
they were discharged by an express decree, and no
longer obliged to serve under Lucullus, when those
provinces were consigned to another. Lucullus,
upon this occasion, submitted to many things be-
neath his dignity. He applied to the private men
one by one, going round to their tents witli a sup-
plicating aspect, and with tears in his eyes ; nay, he
condescended to take some of them by the hand.
But they rejected all his advances ; and, throwing
down their empty purses before him, bade liim go
alone and fight the enemv, since he alone knew how
to make his advantage of it.

As the other soldiers however interposed, the
Fimbrians were prevailed upon to stay the whole
summer,- on condition that, if no enemy during that
time faced them in the field, they should be at liberty
to retire. Lucullus was obliged either to accept this
proposal, or to abandon the country, and leave it
an easy prey to the barbarians. He kept the troops
togctlier, therefore, without pretending to exercise

12

LUCULLUS. S19

ally act of anthorltv over them, or to lead them out
to battle; thinking it all he could expect tliat they
should remain upon the spot, and o1)Hged inactively
to look on, while Tigranes was ravaging Cappadocia,
and Mithridates was ajjain ffrowinjx strong; and inso-
lent ; though he had ac(]aain<-ed the senate by letter,
that that prince M'as completely SLd)d;tod, and depu-
ties were come to settle the aii^airs of Pontus, as a
province entirely reduced. These deputies, upon
their arrival, found that he was not even master of
himself, but exposed to every in3tance of insult and
contempt from h's own soldiers. Nay, with such
wanton mockery v/as he treated by them, that at
tlie expiration of the summer they armed and chal-
lenged the enemy, who were now retired into quar-
ters. They .^houted as in the charge, made passes
in the air, and tlien left the camp, calling Lucuilus
to witness that they had stayed as long as they had
pronused to do.

Pompey wrote to the other legions to attend him.
For through his interest with the people and the flat-
tering insinuations of" the orators, he was already
appointed general against Mithridates and Tigranes.
To the senate indeed, and all the best of the Ro-
mans, Lucuilus appeared to liave very hard treat-
ment ; since he was superseded, not so much in the
war as in the triumph, and was deprived rather of
tile prize of honour than of the command. Tliose,
who were upon the spot, found the maiter still more
invidious. Lucuilus had no longer tl»e power either
of rewarding, or of punishing. Pompey •sufiered no
man to wait upo i liim about any business whatever,
OF to pay any regard to the regulations which he had
made in concurrence witli the ten commissioners.
He forbade it by exj)ress public orders ; and his in-
fluence was pre[)onderant, on account of his com-
ing with a more respectable army.

Yet their friends thought it proper, that they
ijliould have an interview ; and, accordingly, they
met in a village of Galatia. 'Ihey addressed each

SSO LUCULLUS.

other with much politeness, and Avith mutual com-
pliments on their sic;nal successes. Lucullus was the
older man, but P()m])cy had the higher dignity; for
3ie had commanded in a greater number ot wars, and
had been honoured witli two trium])hs. Each had
the fasces carried before him adorned with laurel, on
account of their respective victories : but, as Pom-
pey ha-d travelled a long way through dry and
parched countries, the laurels about his tiisces were
withered*. The lictors who preceded Luculhis, ob-
serving this, freely gave tlieni a suHk-ient quantity of
their fresh and green ones ; which rompey's friends
<:'onsidered as an auspicious circumstance. And, in
fact, tiie achievements of Lucullus cast a lustre
over this ex[>cdition of Pompey.

This interview, however, had no good effect :
they parted with deeper rancour in their hearts, than
they had entertained at their meeting. Pomj)ey an-
imlled the acts of Lucullus, and taking the rest of
the troops from him, left him only sixteen hundred
men for his triumph ; and even these followed him
with reluctance. So ill qualified or so unfortunate
vvas Lucullus, with respect to the iirst and most im-
portant requisite in a general, the gaining of the
hearts of his soldiers. Had this been superadded to
his many other lotty <ind admirable talents, his cou-
rage, his vigilance, hi^ prudence, and his justice,
tlie jioman empire would not have been terminated
on the side of Asia by the Euphrates, but by the
liyrcanian'*" sea and the extremities of the earth.
For 'J'igranes had already concjuered the other na-
tions ; and the power of the Parthians was neither
so strong nor so cojnpact, during this expedition of
Lucullus, as it had subsequently become in the time
■ of Crassus. On the contrary, they were so weakened
by intestine wars, and by hostilities with their neigh-
bours, that they were not able to repel the insults of

* This incident is repeated in the Life of Pompey, Vol. IV.*
*f' Or Caspian.^*

LUCULLl'S. 381

the Armenians. In my opinion indeed the advan-
ta<»'es, which Lucnlhis obtained for his country, were
not equivalent to the calamities, which he occasion-
ed others to bring upon it. The tro])Iiies of Armenia
just in tlic neii^hbourliood of Parthia, the })alms of
Tigranocerta and Nisibis with all their immense
wealth carried in triumph to Home, .and the captive
diadem of Tig-i-ancs adorning the show, drew Crassns
into Asia ; as if it's barbarous inhabitants had been
a sure and easy prey. \\'hen he met the Parthian
arrows, however, he soon foiuid that Lucullus' suc-
cess was owing to liis own courage and capacity, and
not to the folly and ctibminacy of the enemy. But
of this we shall hercafier speak more at large ^".

Upon his return to Rome, Lucullus found liis
brother Marcus impeached by ]Vremmius, at Sylla's
connnand, for his practices during his qufcstorship.
And, when ^larcus was acquitted, Memmius turned
against i.ucullus himself; alleging, that he had
con\erted a considerable part of the booty to liis
own pii\ate use, and had wilfully protracted the
war. By thesie means he endeavoured to exasperate
the ipeopie against him, and to prevail upon them to
refuse him his triumph. lie v>as in imminent dan-
ger, indeed, of losing it; but at this crisis the first
and greatest men in P^ome mixed with the tribes,
and after much canvassing and the most ensj-asing
application, v.ith the utmost diiiiculty procured him
that honour.

It's glory did not consist like that of many others
in the length of a tumultuous procession, or in the
astonisliing pomp and quantity of spoils; but in ex-
Jiibiting the enemy's arms, the engines, and other
warlike equipage of the kings. With these he had
adorned the Circus*^ Flaniinius, and thev made a
most respectable appearance. lu the procession

"■ 111 the Life oF Cnissus.

■f^ Of these edifices, desi<juecl i'or public games, spectacles, iic ,
th re were no fewer than ei^^lit at Kinne, the greuteat of which w;ii
bu.lt b^v Tarquinius Priseus.- '^ '

J82 LUCin.LUS.

there were a few of the heavy-armed cav'alry, and
ten chariots arrned with sithes. Tliese were foh\)\ved
by sJMty grandees, eitiier friends or lieutenants of
the kings. After them, were drawn a hundred and
ten galleys with braseu beaks. The next objects
were a statue of Mitiuiddtcs in massy gold, fiill six feet
high, and his shiehl set with piecious stones. Then
came twenty exiiibitions of silver vessels, and thirtv-
two more of gold cups, aniis, and gold coin. All
these were borne by nien. Aftc;' ihem followed
eight mules, which carried ])eds of gold, and fifty-
six more loaded with silver bullion. I'lien came a
hundred and seven other mules, bearing silver coin
to the amount (^f near two million seven himdred
thousand drachmas. The procession was closed with
the re<^isters of the money, v.ith which he had fur-
irished Tompey for the war with the pirates, which
he had remitted to the qiixestors for the public trea-
sury, and which he had distributed among the sol-
diers at the rate of nine hundred and fifty drachmas
each man. I'he triumpli concluded with a magni-
ficent entertaijnnent, provided for the whole city
and the adjacent villages.

He now divorced Clodia for her infamous in-
trigues, and married Servilia the sister of Cato ; but
this second match was not more fortunate than the
first. Servilia had every stain in common with
Ck)dia, except tliat of a commerce with her brothers.
In other respects, she was equally profligate and
abominable. He forced himself however to endure
her for a long time, out of reverence to Cato ; but
at last l.e divorced her too.

Tlie senate liad conceived great hopes of Lucullus,
that he woukl prove a cormterpoise to the tyranny
of Pompey, and a protector of the v, hole patrician
order ; the rather, because he had acquired so much
honour and authority by his illustrious actions. He
gave up the cause, however, and quitted all preten-
sions to tlie administration: "Whether it were, that he
saw the constitution in too sickly and declining a

LUCULLLS. SS3

condition to be corrected, or satiated wltli public
lionours (as others will have it) he chose to retire
from his many labours and conflicts, which had not
had the most fortunate issue, to a life of ease and in-
dulgence. And they commend this change in his
conduct, as mucii better than the distempered mea-
sures of Marius ; who, after liis victories over the
Cimbri and all his glorious achievements, unglutted
with the admiration of his countrymen, from an in-
satiable thirst of power contended in the decline of
life with the ambition of young men, and fell into
dreadful crimes and sufferings still more dreadful.
" How much happier," said they, " would it have
" been for Cicero, if after the affair of Catiline he
" had spent his old age in retirement ; and for
" Scipio, if he had concluded his public life after
" adding Numantia to Carthage ! For there is a
" period, when we ought to bid adieu to political
" contests : these, as well as those of wrestlers,
*' being absurd after the strength and vigour of man-
" hood are gone"-'."

On the other hand, Crassus and Pompey ridiculed
LucuUus for having fallen into a course of pleasure
and expense ; thinking it full as unseasonable at his
age to plunge into luxury, as to direct the adminis-
tration or to lead armies into the field. The life of
Lucullus indeed does somewhat resemble the an-
cient comedy ^^, where we first see great actions
both political and military, and afterv/ard feasts, de-
bauches (I had almost said, masquerades), races by
torch-light, and every species of frivolous amuse-
ment. For among frivolous amusements I cannot but
reckon his sumptuous villas, his walks, and liis Laths^

■^9 This hov/ever was not Plutarch's real opinion ; as he has left a
Treatise written expressly to show, that ' a good raan ouglit to spend
his life in the service of his country.' And Homer makes Agamen-
non pray, not for Ajaxes or Diomedes, but for Nestors, in his great-
est emergency.*

5° The ancient satirical or comic pieces were partly tragical, and
partly comical. The Cyclops of Euripides is the only one of the
kind now extant.

S84. Li:C I'LL US.

and (.still more) the paintings, statues, and otlici*
works of art which he had collected at an innnense
cost, idly squandering upon them the vast fortune
which he had amassed in his wars^^ : so that even in
these days, when luxury has made sucli enormous
advances, the ' gardens of Lucullus ' are numbered
with the most magnificent of those of kin^-s. Vi'l)cn
Tubero, the Stoic, beheld his works on the sea-coast
near Naples, the hills which he had excavated for
vaults and cellars, the reservoirs which he had
formed--about his houses to receive the sea for the
feeding of his fish, and his edilices in the sea itselfj
the philosopher called him Xerxes in a toga '^ Be-
side these, he had the most superb pleasure-houses
in the country near Tusculum, adorned with grand
galleries and open saloons, as well for the prospect as
lor walks. Pompey, upon a "\isit there, blamed
Lucullus for havinc: made the villa commodious onlv
for the summer, and absolutely uninhabitable in the
winter. I^ucullus answered with a smile, " What
" then, do vou think I have not so much sense as
" the cranes and storks, which change their habita-
" tions with the seasons :"

A praetor, who wished to exhibit magnificent
eames, applied to Lucullus for some purple robes for
the chorus in his tragedy ; and was told in reply,
that " He would inquire, whether he could furnish
'• him or not." Next dav he asked him, " How

■ 5' Plutarch's philosopliy upon tliis occasion seems a little too
severe ; lor it is not easy to deterniino liow public ibrtiuies of tliis
kind can be more properly expended, than in the encouniyenient of
the arts. It is ty be observed however that the immense wealth,
vhich Lucullus reserved to himself fram his Asiatic expedition, la
some measure justifies the con)p!a:nts of his army upon tliat subject.
^^ This refers to the hills, wliich Lucullus bored for the comple-
tioi\ of his vaults, or for the adn^ission of water, Xerxes had boreil
mount Athorf, and made a passage through it for his ships. (L.)
Tubero waseminentasa philosopher, a law3'er,and an historiographer.
Cicero (Ihut. 31.) gives him ;in excellent moral cliaracter, but ob-
serves .that there was a hardness in his stile, correspondiiig >> ith the
austerity of his manners. This passage accounts for his surcasnx
upon Lucullus' prodigality.'^'

LUCULLUS. 58,5

'' Inany lie wanted ?" The prcctor answered, " A
" hundred would suffice." Upon which Luculliis
snid, " He nii^-ht have twice that number, if he
'' pleased '^" The poet Horace'-* makes this re-'
mark upon the occasion ;

Poor is the house, where pltiiitv lias not store.
Neglected or unseen, in number more
Tiuui those that meet the eye.

His daily repasts were like those of a man recently
i'Town rich ; pompous not only in couches covered:
with purple carpets, side-boards of plate set with
])recious stones, and all the entertainment which mu-
sicians and comedians could furnish, but in the vast
variety and exquisite dressing of the provisions.
These things excited the admiration of men of
narrow minds. Pompey therefore was highly ap-.
plauded for the answer, which he gave his physician
in a fit of sickness. The physician had ordered him
to eat a thrush ^'" ; and his servants told him, *' That
" as it was summer, there were no thrushes to -be
" found, except in the menageries of LucuUus.'*
But he would not suffer them to apply for any there ; •
and said to his ])]iy.sician, " Must Pompey then have
" died, if Lucuihis had not been an epicure ?" At

• "^^ This ivill remind tlie reader of the "More phaetons," ascribed
to an oriental enrichi of modern da}'?.*
^^ Ep. I. vi. 4,5.

Ex'dis domus est, uhi non et midia S'(pe)-simf,
Et doiniiiLnnJhlliuit, et jjrosuntj'tiribus —

a sentiment, as M. Ricard observes, exclusively adapted to the
wealthy. Horace hov/ever informs us, with much more poignancy,
that I.ucullus in reply oii'ered the petitioner five thousand !*^'

^^ The Cireck y.ix^i, as it appears from Aristotle and Athena?us,
signifies also ' a sea-tis^h,' and it is not easy to determine which is
])!ere meant; fur Lucullus was not less curious in his tishponds than
in his aviaries, and by adniilting salt-water into them, could be sup-
phed with every species' throughout every season. Thii story is re-
peated in t!ie Life of Pornpey, Vol. IV p, 128.

V0,L. !H. 2 C

5€<^ LUCULLUS.

the same time, lie bade them provide liim somethings
which was to be procured without difFicidty.

Cato, thougli he was a friend as well as a relation,
to Luculhis, was so much displeased with the luxury
in which he lived, that when a yo«ng man made a
long and unseasonable speech in the senate about
frugality and temperance, Cato rose up and said^
" Will you never have done ? Do you-, who have the
" wealth of Cnissus and live lifke Luculhis, pretend
" to speak like Cato ?" But some, thougli rliey
admit that there was such a rebuke, say it ciune from^
another person.

That Lu<:ullus was not only delig:hted with this
way of living, but even piqued himself upon it, ap-
pears from several of his remarkable sayings. II &
entertained for a considerable time some Greeks,
w'ho had travelled to Rome ; till, remembering the
simplicity of diet in their own country, they were
ashamed to accept his iiivitations any longer, and de-
sired to be ex.cused on account of the daily expense
in which they involved him. He smiled, and said ;
" It is true, my Grecian friends, a small portion of
*' this provision is for you, but the greatest part is for
" LucuUus.''* At another time, when he happened
to sup alone, and saw but one table and; a very mode-
rate provision, he called the servant who had thc'
care of these matters, and expressed his dissatisfac-
tion. The servant replied, " He thought, as no
" body was invited, his master would not wish for
" a- costly supper.'* " What !" said he, "• didst
" thou not know, that this evening Lucnllus sups
" with Lucullus ?" As tliis was naturallv the sub-
ject of much conversation in Rome^, Cicero and Pom-
pey addressed him one day in tlie Forum, when he,
ap])eared to be pei-fcctly disengaged. Cicero was
one of his most intimate friends ; and though he had
had some diflerence with Pompey about the com-
mand of the army, yet they used frequently to meet
each other, and to converse freely together. Cicero.

12

LUCULLUS. , SS7

after the common salutations, asked lum, " Whether
*' or not he was at leisure to see company r" lie;
answered, " Xotliing could be more agreeable,'* and
})ressed them to come to his house. " We will wait
"• upon you," said Cicero, *' this evening, on con-
" dition that you give us nothing but what is pro-
" vided ibr yourself." This condition Lucullus
made some difficulty of accepting, and desired them
to put off their favour till another day. But they
insisted, it should be that very evening; and would
not siiiTer him to spe;!.k to his servants-, lest he
should order some addition to the supper. They
only allowed liim, at his earnest request, to tell one
of them in their presence, '^ He should sup that
" evening in the Apollo ;" which was the name of
one of his most magnificent rooms. The persons in-
vited had no notion of his stratagem ; but, it seems,
each of hi^ dining-rooms h.ad it's particular allowance
for provisions and it's service of })late, as well as
other furniture. So that the servants, hearinc what
room he would sup in, knew exactly what expense
they were to incur, and what side-board and carpets
they were to use. The stated charge of an entertain-
ment in the Apollo was fifty thousand drachmas, and
the whole sum was laid out that evening. Pompey
of course, when he saw so enormous and sumptuous
a provision, was surprised at the expedition, willi
which it had been prej)ared. In this respect, Lu-
culhis used his riches with all the disregard naturally
shown to so many captives and barbarians.

But the great expense, which he incurred in col-
lecting books, deserves our serious approbation.
The number of volumes was immense, and they
were written in elegant hands ; yet the nse, which
he made of them, was still more honourable than the
acquisition. His libraries were open to all : tlui
Greeks repaired at pleasure to his galleries and por-
ticos, as to the retreat of the Muses, and there speiit
whole days in conversation upon subjects of litera-
tiue, delighted to retire to such a scene from other

2 c 2

^88 LUCULLUS.

pursuits. Luculliis himself often joined tlie.sc*
learned men in tlieir walks, and conferred with
them, and when he was applied to about the affairs
of their country, gave them his best advice. So that
his house was in fact a sanctuary and an asvlum to
all the Greeks, who visited Home.

He had a veneration for philosophy in general ;
and there was no sect, which he absolutely rejected.
But his principal and original attachment was to the
Y^cadcmy ; not that called the New (though it
flourished and was supported by Philo, who walked
in the steps of Carneades) but the Old Academy,
whose doctrines were then taught by Antiochus of
Ascalon, a man of the most persuasive powers. Lu-
ciillus sought liis friendship with great avidity ; and,
having prevailed upon him to give him Ins company,
set him to oppose the disciples of Philo. Of these
Cicero was one ; and in an ingenious book of his
arrainst the Old Academv, he makes Lucullus defend
the principal doctrine in dispute, x'lz. that there is
such a thing as certain knowledge, while he himself
maintains the contrary. The book is entitled ' Lu-
cullus ^^.' Yet were tliey (as vre liave observed) sin-
cere friends, and acted upon the same principle in
the administration. For Lucullus had not entirely
abandoned the concerns of government: he only
gave up the point, as to the primary influence and di-
rection. The contest for that, he saw, might be at-
tended not only with danger but disgrace, and there-
fore lie readily resigned it to Crassus and Cato.
When he had refused to take the lead, those who
regarded Pompey's power Vvith a susj)icious eye,
selected Crassus and Cato to support the })atrician
interests. Lucullus, notwithstanding, gave his at-
tendance in the Forum, when the business of his
friends recjnired it ; and in tlie senate-house like-
wise, when there v.as any ambitious design of Pom-

>^ It is the second Book of his orijjinal Academic Questions. lu
this (xlx. and xHii.) he reproaches Antiochus, nentioacd p. S'iS,
uot. (yn.) \vit!i some vinsteadiiiess in his principles. ■^'

LUCULLUS. .38y

pey to be opposed. Thus lie procured the annul-
snent of that wneral's orders, which he had made

-I'll

after the coiKjiiest of the two kinp;s ; and, with the
assistance of C.'ato, quashed his bill for a distribution
of lands among his veterans '^

This threw Pompey into the arms of Cra'ssus and
Cajsar, or rather he conspired with them against the
commonwealth ; and having filled the city with
soldiers, drove Cato and Lucullus out of the Forum,
and got his acts established by force.

As these proceedings were highly resented by all,
who had the interest of their country at heart,
Pompey's party instructed one A^ettius'^^ to act a
part; and circulated a report, that they had de-
tected him in a design against their leader's life.
This, Vettius upon his examination in the senate
stated, he liad undertaken at the instigation of
others; but in the assembly of the people he affirmed,
that Lucullus was the man who had compelled him
to it. No one gave credit to the assertion ; and a
few days afterward, it was perfectly evident that the
wretch had been suborned to accuse an innocent
person, when his dead body was thrown out of
the prison. His employers asserted, he had laid
violent hands upon himself; but the marks of the
cord W'liich had strangled him ^^, and of the blows
which he had received, plainly proved that he had
been murthered by the persons v.^ho had suborned him.

This event made Lucullus still more unwilhng to
interfere in the concerns of government ; and when

^' Plutarch says simply xfjur^a-iv n:*, * a certain distribution."
Amyot and Dacier say, it was of money : But we agree, witli tlie
Latin and former English translator, that it was of lands. That this
indeed was the case, appears from the ancient historians, who inform
us, that in the same bill Pompey moved to have inserted a couHrma-
tion of all his acts in the East.

^8 In the text it is B^imev nvx, ' one Brettius,' or * u certain Brut-
tian.' But it is clear from Cicero (Pro Sext. 63., in Vatin. 10.,
et Ep. ad Att. ii. 24>,), Appian, and Dion., that it should be read
' Vettius.'

-'> Still more parallels with modern times !*

r,90 LUCULLUS.

.Cicero was banisbctl, and Cato sent to Cyprus, lie
entirely gave them up. His understanding, it is said,
gradually fill led, and before liis deatli was absolutely
wasted away. Cornelius Nepos indeed state,, that
this decay of his intellects was owing not to sickness
or old age, but to a potion given him by one of his
bondmen, named Callisthenes, as a love-philtre '''', for
such were it's reputed virtues. Instead of conciliat-
ing his master's regards to liim, however, it deprived
him of his senses ; so that, during the last years of
his life, his brother had the care of his estate.

Nevertheless, when he died, he was as much re-
gretted by the people, as if he had departed in that
height of glory, which he had attained by his emi-
nent military and civil merits. They crowded to the
procession j and, the body being carried into the
forum by some young men of the first quality, they
insisted it should be buried in the Cam])us Martins,
as that of vSvlla had been. As this was a motion en-
tirely unexpected, and the preparations for th&
funeral there could not easily be made, his brother
^vith much entreaty prevailed upon tiicm to have
the obsequies performed on the Tusculan estate,
where every thing had been provided for the pur-
pose. Neither did he long survive him. As he had
ibllowed him close in the course of years and ho-
nours, so he was not far behind him in his journey
to the grave, into which he descended with the
character of the most affectionate of brothers.

CIMON AND LUCULLUS

COMPARED.

AVE cannot but deem the end of Lucullus happy,
as he did not live to see that change in the cousti-

'i° Pliny mentions the same story, II, X. xxy. ?.*

€IiVION AND LUCULLUS COMPAKED. 391

<utIon, which fate was prcparinj^ for his country in
the civil wars '. Thoiioh tlie commonwealth was in a
.^ickl}^ slate, yet he left it free. In this respect, the
case of Cimon was particularly similar. Tor he died
wjiilc Greece was at tlie lieight of her prospenty,
and betbre she was involved in her ruinous troubles.
One difference, indeed, must be admitted : Cimon
expired in his ca«ip, m the office of general ; not
like a man who, fatigued with war and avoiding it's
conflicts, soun^ht the reward of his military labours

7 0 •-

and laurels in the delicacies of the table and the joys
of wine. In this view Plato was right in liis cen-
sure of the tbilovvers of Orpheus '^ who j)laccd the
rewards of futurity provided ibr the good in ever-
lasting intoxication^ No doilbt ease, tranquillity,
literary researches, and tlie pleasures of contempla-
tion furnish tlie most suitable retreat for a man in
years, who has bidden adieu to military and political
pursuits. But to propose pleasure as the end of
great achievements, and after long expeditions and
commands to lead up the dance of Venus and riot
in her smiles, was so far from being v>'ortiiy of tlie
famed Academy and a follower of the sage Xeno-
crates, that it rather became a disciple of Epicurus.
This is the more surprising, because Cittion seems
to have spent his youth in luxury and dissij)ation,
and Lucullus in letters and sobriety. It is certainlv,
however, the characteristic of a better disposition to
change for the better ; and hap])ier is the nature, in
wh.ich vices graduallv die, and virtue flourishes.

They were equally wealthy, l)ut they did not apply
ilieir riches to the same piu'poses. For we cannot

' The Eilitoi- cannot help referring; to the splewlid remarks of
Cicero, upon a similar occasion, uhere he spoaks of the death of
Hie orator Crassus : (l)e Orat. iii. 2.) O fallncan liominian spem,
fragilrnxiiicjortiincnif et iiiatics nostras cniitentwTics, ^-c*

* The passage, here alluded to, occurs in the second book of
Plato's Republic. Pinto does not indeed censure Orpheus, but
^Musxus and his son Euniolpus, for having taugh.t this doctrine^
Xhese Avere, however, Orpheus' disciples; and t>sc s-Epi to' O^ft^i
niaj admit ol" that interpretatLon,

392 CIMQN AND LUCULLUS COMPARED.

compare the palace at Na))les and the prospect- house
amidst the water, erected by LucuUus from the bar-
barian spoils, to the soiithern wall of the citadel
.which Cimon built with his military earnings. Nei-
,ther can tlie sumptuous board of tiie former, which
savoured too much of eastern magnificence, be put
in competition \vith the open and beiievolent table
of the latter. The one, at a moderate charge, daily
nourished vast numbers of poor ; the other, at an
enormous expense, pampered the a])petites ofafev/ of
the rich and the voluptuous. Perhaps, indeed, some
allowance must be made for the difference of the
times. We know not whether Cimon too, if he had
•lived to be old and retired from the concerns of war
and of the state, might not ha\'e adopted a more
pompous and luxurious method of living: for lie
naturally loved v/ine and company, was a promoter
of public feasts and games, and remarkable (as we
have observed) for his proiiigate attachment to the
sex. But glorious enterprises and noble actions,
,being attended with pleasures of another kind, leave
no leisure for inferior gratifications ; nay, they ba-
nish them from the pursuits, and even the thoughts,
of persons of military and civil abilities. And if
Lucullus had finished his days in high commands
and amidst the conflicts of war, the most envious
caviller, I am persuaded, could have found nothing
to reproach him v»ith. So much with respect to
their mode of life.

As to their military character, it is certain they
were able commanders both at sea and land. But
as the champions, who in one day gain the garland
not only in wrestling but in the Pancration ^, are
called', not sim})ly ' victors,' but by the custom of
the ffames ' the flowers of the victorv ;' so Cimon,
having crowned Greece with two victories gained in

3 The Pancration consisted of boxing and wrestling together.
The Pentatlilon, or five games (whicli Dacier seems to have
strangely confounded with the former) were boxing, the ra^c,
leaping, playing at quoits, and wrestling.*

CIMON AND LUCULLUS COMPARED. 393

one day, the one at land and the other at sea, de-
serves some preference in the listof generals.

The country of Luculkis promoted his power, and
Cim m promoted the power of his country. The one
Ibund Rome commanding the aUics, and under her
auspices extended lier conquests ; the other found
Athens obeying instead of commanding, and yet
gained her the chief authority among her alhes, as
well as vanquislied her enemies. The Persians he
defeated, and drove them out of the sea ; and he
persuaded the Lacedaemonians vohuitarily to sur-
render the supremacy of Greece. "

If it he tlie best work of a general, to make his
men obey him from a principle of affection, we shall
find Luculhis in this respect greatly deficient. He
M'as despised by his own troops ; whereas Cimon
commanded the veneration, not only of his own
soldiers, but of all the allies. The former was de-
serted by his fellow-countrym&u, and the latter was
courted by strangers. The one set out with a fine
army, and returned abandoned by them all ; the
other, with an army subject to the orders which they
should receive from a foreia^n general, and at his
return they were at the head of the whole league.
Thus he gained three of the most difficult points
imaginable, peace with the enemy, the command
among the allies, and a good understanding with
Sparta.

They both attempted to conquer immense king-
doms, and to subdue all Asia ; but their purposes
were unsuccessful. Cimon's course was stopped by
fortune ; he died in the possession of his commission,
and in the height of his prosperity. Lucullus, on
the other hand, cannot possibly be excused for the
loss of his authority ; since he must either liave been
ignorant of the grievances and complaints of his
army, which ended in so incurable an aversion, or
unwilling to grant them redress.

This he has in common with Cimon, that he was
impeached by his countrymen. The Athenians, it

tm COIOX AXD LUCULLUS COMPARET).

i":; tnie, went fartlier; thcv banished Cimon bv the
Ostracism, that th.cy might not (as Plato expresses
it) ' hear his voice for ten years.' The proceedings,
indeed, of the aristocratical party are seldom accept-
able to the people ; tor v/hiJe they arc obliged to
use some violence for the correction of what is {nniss,
their measures reseml^le the bandages of surgeons,
which are uneasy at the same time that they reduce
the dislocation. But in this respect, perhaps, we
may exculpate both the one and the other.

Liicullus carried his arms much the farthest. He
was the first, who led a Roman army over Mount
Taurus, and passed the Tigris. He took and binned
the royal cities of Asia, Tigranocerta, Cabira, Sino])e,
and Nisibis, in the sight of their respective kings.
On the north he penetrated as far as the Phasis, on
the east to Media, and on the south Vv-ith the assist-
ance of the Arabian princes to the Ked Sea. He
overthrew the armies of tiie two rrrcat kinc^s, and
M'ould certainly have taken tliem, had they not fled
like savages into distant solitudes and inaccessible
woods. A certain proof of the advantaire which
Lucullus has in this particular is, that the Persians,
as if they had suffered nothing from Cimon, soon
made fresh head against the Greeks and cut in pieces
a large army of theirs in Egypt; whereas Tigrnncs
and Mithridates could effect nothing after the blow,
which they had received from Lucullus. The latter,
enfeebled and shattered by his former confiicts, did
not once venture to face Pompey in the fi(;id ; but
fled to the Bosporus, and there put a period to hi:-",
life. And the former delivered himself naked and
unarmed to Pompey, taking his diadem from his
head, and laying it at his feet: in which he compli-
mented Pompey, not with what was his own, but with
what belonged to the laurels of Lucullus ; confessing
by thxi very joy, with w'lich he received the ensigns
of royalty again, tliat they liad been absolutely lost.
That warrior must undoubtedly be deemed the
greater general, as well as the greater champjon.

CIMON AND LUCULLUS COMPARED, 'jyj

who delivers his adversary in a state of exhaustion
to the next combatant.

Beside.^. Cimon found tlie king of Persia extrenw!!-
ly weakened, and the pride of his people humbled,
by the losses and defeats 'vhich they had previously
sustained from Themistocles, PaiicarJas, and Leoty- .
chidas ; and their hands could not make much resist-
ance, vvhen their hearts A'cre gone. But Lucullus
met Tigranes, uufoilcd a?id exulting in his numerous
battles'*. Neither is the number of the enemy's
troops, which Cimon defeated, in the least to be
compared with that of those, who fled before
Lucullus.

In short, when we weigh all the advantages of
each of these illustrious men, it is difficult to say to
wliich side the balance inclines. Heaven appears
to have favoured both ; directing the one what he
should do, and warning the other what he should,
avoid. So tliat the gods bore witness to their virtue,
and regarded them as persons, in whose nature there
was something divine.

4 M. Dacier thinks, that if, beside the advantages just mention-
ed, the advantage be also allowec' to Lnculius in respect of the
numbers defeated, the balance must clearly incline to his side. But,
^diile he says this, he seems to have forgotten the preference given
to Cimon, in t}\e beginning of the Parallel, with regard to his hav-
ing continued his labours for his country to the end of his life ;
his more excellent application of his riches ; his having won, and
kept, the hearts of his soldiers; and his having gained two impor-
iant victories upon two different elements in one day.

THE

L 1 F E

OS

,N I C I A S.

SUMMARY.

Animadversions on the historian Timceus. Plutarch's plan in •writing
this Life. Nicias' character : Influence in the government .♦
Magnificence and liberalitj/. He conducts the Athenian chfiir to
JOelos, and makes rich presents to Apollo. His superstition and
timiditjj. His scheme to defend himself from calumniators. He
has no part in the Athenian disasters. His various victories as
general. Reproached about Sphacteria^bi/ Cleon, xvho is sent on
the expedition, a?id succeeds. Consequent sarcasms upon Nicias.
^icias rctestablishes peace betxveen Athens and Laceda-mo)i, tvith
great credit to himself. Alcibiades' intrigues to break it. A'icias
takes a fruitless journeij to Lacedccmon, and the xvar recom-
mences : is apprehensive of the Ostracism, and combines tcith AU
ciliiades to get Hijperholus banished : is appointed general ivith
Alcibiades and Lamachus for the Sicilian expedition, ivhich he
disapproved. Various discouraging omens. Meton and Socrates
anticipate it^s disastrous issue. N^icias^ subsequent timid conduct.
The Athenians range themselves in order of battle before the port
of Syracuse. Nicias incurs contonpt by his mode of managing[the
liar : dupes the Syracusans, and defeats them, after having taken
possession of their harbour. His dilatory proceedings. He ivinters
at Naxos. He nearly encloses Syracuse ivith a tvall. Lamachus
is killed. Gylippus arrives in Sicily, enters Syracuse, and defeats
the Athenians. Nicias gains some advantages, but his troops are
again routed. Demosthenes arrives with reinforcements, receives
a check, and p)roposcs to leave the island. Nicias refuses. Eclips^

NICIAS. n07

of the moon : and reflexions iipon it. It conjirms Nicias in Jiis
resolution to remain. His jicet xvorsted. Another engagement
and defeat. Hermocrates* stratagem to prevent him from re-
treating. Nicias' Jhrtitilde in the midst of his misfortunes. De-
moithenes taken prisoner. Nicias, reduced to the last extremity^
surrenders ; and, tvith Demosthenes, is put to death. Many of
the /W.cttian captives oive their preservation to the recital of
verses from Euripides, a great favourite ivith the Hiciiians. Hozv
the intelligence of this disaster voas carried to Athens.

E have selected Crassus, as proper to be placed
in parallel with Nicias ; and the misfortunes, which
betel the one in Parthia, with those \vhich overtook
tlie other in Sicily. But we have an apology to
make to the reader upon another account. As we
are now undertaking a history, where Thucydides
has even outdone himself in the pathetic, and in
energy and variety of composition is peifectly in-
imitable ; we trust no one will suspect us of the am-
bition of Timieus, w^io flattered himself that he
could exceed the force of Thucydides, and make
Philistus' pass for an inelegant and ordinary writer.
Under the influence of this deception, he plunges
into the midst of the battles (both at sea and land)
and ^j)eeches, in which those historians most emi-
nently excel. He soon however appears,

Not like a footman by the Lydian car ^,

' For an account of Philistus, see the Life of Timoleon, Vol, If.
not. (29). Upon the subject of Timacus, a Sicilian contemporary
with Ayathocles, the ancients Jiave been much divided. Cicero
(De Orat. ii. l-k), a great authority, and Diodorus 8iculus, speak
of him very favourably, while Hesychius, Suidas, Longinus, and
I'lutarcli appear to have considered him as an inferior author.
Lunginus however admits, that he is sometimes grand and sub-
Jime.-

* A proverb, founded probably on the success of Pelops the
Lvdian [ur Flirvgian) over {Knjn.aiis king or' Pisa in tl.u: charivt-

9

mfi NICIAS.

as I*in(Iar expresses it ; but a sliallow puenle writer,
or (to use the words of the poet Diphilus)

A heavy aminal

Cased in Sicilian lard.

Sometimes he tails into the dreams of" Xenarclius^:
for instance, where he says, " He could not but
consider it as a bad omen lor the Athenians, tlmt
thev had a G:eneral witli a name derived from vie-
tory% who disapproved the expedition." As also,
''•' That bv the mutilation of the Ilernne the ffods
presin'uified, they should suiler most in the Syracusan
War fi'om Herniocrates the son of Hermon \" And
ngain, " It is probable that Hercules assisted the
Syracusans, because Proseroine had delivered up
Cerberus to him ; and that he was offended at the
Athenians for having supported the .Egesteaus,
descended as they were from the Trojans his mortal
enemies, whose city he had sacked in reyenge for
Laomedon's injuries." These fine observations he
made with the s-ame discernment, wliich induced
him to find fault with the language of.Philistus, and
censure the writings of Plato and Aristotle.

For my part, I cannot but think all emulation
about expression and jealousy of others betrays si
littleness of mind, and is the characteristic of a
sophist : and, Vvhen this spirit of contest attempts
tilings inimitable, it is perfectly absurd. Suice

rare, by « Iiic-h he won Ilippodaniia, the daughter of that prince,
and ('.■tahlishcd himself in the peninsula, from him denominatetl
Pi'loponiiesu.-,^

^ Xenarchus the Peripatetic wns the master of Strabo, and Xe-
3Kn\!iii> the comic poet was the author of several pieces of humour.
(Aiist. Poet, 1.) ; but v.e know no historian of that name.

•• 'J'hat is, Nicias. Hiy-i signifies ' victory.'

^ L(ni<i;ii)us (ili) ({uotes this passage as an example of the frigid
stile, and of those puerilities which he had condenuied in 'riuuvus ;
(L). and adds, he might as well have said of Dionysius the tyrant,
that ' He was chased out of his kingdom by Dion and Ileraclides,
bi^cause of tlie disrespect which he had shown to Dios and He-
vaelfS;' i. c. Jupiter and Hercuks,*

lUcrcfore it is impossible to pass over in silence
those actions of Nicias recorded by Thiicydides and
riiilistns, especially such as indicate his manners
and disposition which often lay concealed nnder the
weight of his misfortunes, we shall give a brief ab-
stract from them of v»'hat appears most necessary,
lest we should be accused of indolence or neglect.
As for other matters not generally known, which are
ibund scattered in historians or m ancient inscrip-
tions and decrees, we shall collect them with care ;
not to gratify useless curiosity, but by drawing from
them the true lines of this general's character, to-
serve the purposes, of real instruction.

The first thing, which I shall mention relating to
him, is the observation of Aristotle : Tliat three of
the most worthy men in Athens, who had a paternal
regard and friendship for the people, were Nicias
tJie son of Niceratus, Thucydides the son of Mi-
lesias, and Tlieramenes the son of Agnon. The
last indeed v/as not so remarkabic in this respect,
as the other tv.'o. For he had been reproached with
his birth, as a stranger come from the isle of Ceos j
and from his want of firmness^ or rather versa-
tility in matters of government, he was called ' The
Buskin ^'

Thucydides was the oldest of the three ; and, \
when at any time Pericles was cajoling the people,, \
he often opposed him in behalf of the superior
classes. Thousrh Nicias- was much the voupiirer
man, li^ gained some reputation Vvhile Pericle;>
lived ; so that he was several times his coUegue in

^ The form of the buskin was such, tliat it might be worn in-
ditfereMtly upan either leg. (L.) (Xenoph. Hellen. ii.) Thera-
ineiics subse'^uently became one of the 'thirty Tyrants, but Ironi
an abhorrence of tlicir i-.lrocities incurred, through the accusation
of Critias (the most viohin;of the number) the sentence of death,
and was instantly led to execution; falhng tiie victim of a savage
power, which lie liad been one of the foremost to establish;

ncc lex est jusiior ulki,

Qiiam necis artifices arte perlre sua.*

•100 KICIAS.

tlie \\-ar, and often commanded alone. But when
! Pericles died, he was csuicklv advanced to the head
of the administration, particularly by the influence
of the rich and great, who hoped that he would
pro've a barrier against the daring insolence of
Cleon ". The good wishes of the people, likewise,
contributed their sliare to his advancement.

It is true, Cleon had considerable interest, Avhich
he gained by making his court to the old men, and
by his frequent donations to the poor citizens.
; Yet even many of those whom he studied to oblige,
' observing his avarice and arrogant effrontery, came
over to Nicias. For the gravity of Nicias had no-
thing austeie or morose in it, but Vv-as mixed with a
reverence ibr the })copIe, in which fear seemed a
constituent part, and consequently vv^as very agree-
able to them, lie v/as naturallv, indeed, timid and
cold-hearted ; but this defect was concealed bv the
Jong course of success with which fortune had fa-
voured his expeditions. And his timidity in the
assemblies of the people, with his dread of such per-
sons as made a trade of impeachments, was a popular
thin"-. It contributed not a little to i^ain him the
regard of the multitude, who fear those that despise,
and promote those that fear them ; because in ge-
neral the highest honour, which they can hope to
obtain, is not to be contemned by the great.

As Pericles kept tlie reins of government in his
hands by, means of real virtue, and by the force of
his eloquence, he had no need to hold out false
colours, or to use any artifice with the peoj)le. In
those great endowments Nicias was deficient, but
he had greater wealth; and he applied it to the
])urposes of popularity. On the other hand, he
could not, like Cleon, divert and attract the people
by an easy manner and the sallies of buffoonery ;
and therefore' he amused them with public shows,

' For sojue account of this man, see the Life of rcriclesj
Vol. ii.

NICIAS. 401

gymnastic exercises, and various exhibitions of the
same kind, far exceeding in point of magnificence
and elegance all that went before him, and those of
his own times too. Two of his offerings to the gods
are to be seen at this day ; the one, a statue of
Pallas dedicated in the citadel, which has lost part
of it's gilding; the other, a small chapel in the
temple of Bacchus under the tripods % usually
ofiered l)y those who gain the prize in tragedy.
Nicias, indeed, had been already victorious in se-
veral of those contests, and was never defeated. It
is said, that in a chorus of that kind one of hh
slaves appeared in tlie character of Bacchus. This
slave was of an uncommon size and beauty, though
he had not }'et arrived at maturity ; and the people
were so charmed with h.im, that they gave him long-
plaudits. At last, Nicias rose up and said, " He
" should think it an act of impiety to retain a person
" in servitude, who seemed by the public voice to
" be consecrated to a god ;" and enfranchisetl him
upon the spot.

His regulations with respect to Delos are still ce-
lebrated, as worthy of the tutelar deity of the place.
Before his time the choirs, wdiich the cities sent to
sing the praises of Apollo^, were accustomed to
land in a disorderly manner ; because the inha-
bitants of the island used to run up to the ship, and
press them to sing before they had disembarked, so
that they were forced to strike up, as they were
putting on their robes and garlands. But when Ni-
cias had the conduct of this ceremony, known by
the name of ' Theoria,' he landed first in the isle of
Khenia with the choir, the victims, and all the
other necessary preparations. He had taken care

8 These are mentioned likewise by Plato, in his Gorgias, wliere
it appears that they were a joint otFering of himself and his bro-
thers.*

** There was a select band of music, annually sent by the principal
cities of Greece J and it was looked upon as an honourable com-
mission, to have the management of it. Rhenia, mentioned below,
was separated by a very narrow strait from Delos,
VOL. III. 2 D

402 KICIAS.

to have a bridge constnicted before he left Allien?,
which should reach from that isle to Delos, and
which was magnificently gilded and adorned with
garlands, rich stuffs, and tapestry. In the night he
threw his bridge over the cliannel, which was not
large, and at break of day marched over it at the
head of the procession, with his choir richly ha-
bited and singing hymns to the god. After the sa-
crifices, the games, and the banquets were finished,
he consecrated a palm-tree of brass to Apollo, and
likewise a field which he had purchased for ten
thousand drachmas ; the rent of which the Delians
were to expend in sacrifices and feasting, and at the
same time to pray for Apollo's blessing upon the
founder. This is inscribed on a pillar, which he
left in Delos as a monument of his benefaction.
As for the palm-tree, it was broken by the winds ;
and the fragment falling upon a great statue '*^, which
the people of Naxos had set up, demolished it.

It might seen], that most of these things were
done for ostentation, and with a view to vulgar po-
pularity. Nevertheless, we may collect from the
rest of his life and conduct, that religion had the
principal share in these dedications, and that popu-
larity was but a secondary motive. For he certainly
was remarkable for his fear of the gods, and pious
(as Thucydldes " observes) to a degree of supersti-
tion. It is related in the Dialogues of Pasiphon '-,
that he sacrificed every day; and that he had a
soothsayer in his house, who was professedly re-
tained to inquire into the success of the public af-
fairs, but was in reality much more frequently con-
sulted about his own ; particularly as to the success
of his silver-niines in the borough of Laurium '%

'• A statue, which the Xaxians had dedicated to Apollo, The
pedestal has been discovered by some uiodern travellers, with tht
inscription, Nf,|*3» Axo>,A(i»i.

" vii. 50.

" Mentioned by Diog. Laerl. ii, 6.*

" Sec the Lite "of Themistocles, Vol, I. not. (12-)*

NICTAS. 403

which in general afforded a large revenue, but were
not worked without some danger. He maintained
there a multitude of slaves, and the greatest part of
his fortune consisted in silver : so that he had many
retainers, who asked favours, and were not sent away
empty. For he gave not only to those, who de-
served his bounty, but to such also as might be able
to do him harm ; and bad men found resources ia
his fears, as well as good men in his liberality.
The comic poets bear witness to what I have ad-
vanced. Teleclides ^* introduces a trading informer
speaking thus :

Not a mina would Charicles give to prevent me
From telling, tl)at he was his mother's first brat :

While Nicias gives me four, ovit of his plenty :

You ask perhaps, " Why >" But I won't tell you that.

I know though : but then he's my friend, and he's prudent —

Eupolis, in his ' Marica,' brings another informer
upon the stage, who meets with some poor ignorant
man, and thus addresses him :

Inf. How longis't, since you met with Nicias?

Poor Man. Till now i'th' inarket, I ne'er saw his face.

Inf. You've heard, my friends, this honest man confesses

He has seen Nicias ; and wherefore seen him,
Except to sell his vote ? He's caught i'th' fact.

Poet. Fools! to suppose that such a man as Nicias

(Jan e'er be caught in vicious practices!

Cleon, in Aristophanes, menacingly exclaims,
I'll outbawl every orator, and make e*en Nicias tremble '^.

'•* Teleclides was a comic writer of Athens, contemporary witli
Pericles, Nicias, and Aristophanes. Eupolis was rather earlier, and
perished iu crossing the Hellespont, a victim (it is supposed) of
some one, whom he had offended by his sarcastic compositions.*

'^ This is in Aristophanes, Equit. 357. It is not Cleon, but
Agoracritus, who speaks.

Phrynichus, mentioned below, was also a dramatist of those
times.

2 D 2

404 NICIAS.

And Phfyirlclms glances at liis excessive timidity,
when speaking of another person lie says.

He was a gallant so\il, tliat well know I ;

And ne'er, like Nicias, walk'd with downcast eye.

Under this apprehension of informers, he would
not snp or discourse with any of the citizens, or mix
in any of tho^/C conversations or parties, which make
the time pass so agreeably. During his Archonship,,
lie used to remain in court till night, being always
the first who came and tlie last who went away. AVhen
lie had no public business upon his hands, he shut
himself up at home, and was extremely difficult of
access. Andif any personscametothegate, his friends
went and begged them to excuse him, because he
had affairs under consideration of great importance
to the state.

The person, who assisted liim most in acting this
farce, and gaining him the reputation of a man con-
stantly intent upon business, was one Hiero ; who had
been brought up in his house, and had had a liberal
education, and a taste for music given him there. He
pretended to be the son of Dionysius, surnamed Chal-
CU3 ^"; some of whose poems are still extant, and who
having conducted a colony into Italy founded the city
of Thurii. This Hiero transacted all the private bu-
siness of Nicias with the soothsavers i and whenever
he came among the people used to inform them, what
a id)orious and miserable life Nicias led for their sakes.
" He cannot go to the bath," said he, " or to the
" table, but some affair of state solicits his attention j
*' and he neglects his own concerns, to take care of
those of the public. He can scarcely find time for
repose, till the other citizens have had tlieir first
sleep. Amidst these cares and labours his health

"^' From having first taught the Athenians the coining of brass
money, as we learn from Athenajus, xv. For an accoimt of Thurii»
seethe Life of rei;iclcs, Vol. II. not. (38.)*

NICIAS. 405

^ declines daily, and his temper is so broken, tliat
" his friends no longer approach him with pleasure -,
" but he loses them also, along with Ins fortune, in
" your service. JMeanwliilc, other statesmen gain
" friends, and grow rich in their employments, and .
" are sleek and merry in the steerage of govern-
" ment."

In fact, the life of Nicias was a life of so much care,
that he might have justly applied to himself the ex-
pression of Agamemnon;

In vain the glare oFpomp proclaims me lord,
I'm servant oftiie people ' '.

The commons, he perceived, availed themselves of (
the services o*' tliose, who ^vere distinguished for their j
eloquence or <^apacity.; but were always jealous and j
on their ffuard aq^ainst their c:reat abilities, and en- \
deavoured to humble them, and to obstruct their pro-
gress in glory. This appeared in the condemnation
of Pericles, in the banishment of Damon, in the
sujjpiQpns, entertained , of Antipho the llhamnusian,
but (above all) in the despair of Paches, who had
taken I.,esbos, and who being summoned to give an
account of his coiiduc-t drev/ his sword, and killed
himself in open court ^^

Warned by these examples, he endeavoured to
avoid such expeditions, as he thouglit long and diffi-
cult; and whenever he did take the command, made
it his business to proceed upon a sure plan. For this
reason, he was generally successful: yet he ascribed
his successes, not to his own wisdom, valour, or virtue,
but to Fortune, and took refuge under the wmgs of tlie

'' Eurip, Iph- in Aul. H-Q.

's See tlie Life of Pericles, VoL II. With regard to Antipho.
an orator who chiefly contributed to establish the tyranny of the
Four Hundred upon the luins of the democracy of Athens, see
Thucyd. viii. 68.: who likewise (iii. 2H.), as well as Diod. Sic. xii.
£5., gives a detailed account of the expedition of Paches to Lesbos,
but makes no mention of his deatli,*

406 MCI AS.

divinity; contenting himself with a smaller portion
of honour, lest envy should rob him of the whole.

The event showed the prudence of his conduct.
For, though the Athenians received many great
blows in those times, none of them could be imputed
to Nicias. When they were defeated bv the Chalci-
dians in Thrace, Calhades '^ and Xenophon had the
command; Demosthenes was general, when they mis-
carried in ^tolia ; and, when they lost a thousand
men at Delium -'^, they were under the conduct of
Hippocrates. As for the plague, it was commonly
i thought to have been occasioned by Pericles ; who in
order to draw the burghers out of the w'ay of the war,
shut them up in the city, where they contracted sick-
ness by their change of situation and diet""\

None of these misfortunes were imputed to Nicias.
On the contrary, he took Cythera ", an island well
situated for annoying Laconia, and at that time in-
habited by Lacedsemonians : he recovered many
places in Thrace, which had revolted from the Athe-
nians : he shut up the Megarensians Avithin their w' alls,
and reduced the island of Minoa. Thence he sallied
soon afterward, and got possession of the port of
Nisaea. He likewise made a descent upon the terri-
tories of Corinth, beat the troops of that state in a
pitched battle, and killed great numbers of them ;
Lycophron, their general, being included among the
slain.

He happened to leave behind the bodies of two of
his men, who were missed in carrying off the dead.

^9 We ought perhaps, with M. Reiske, to read * Callias.' (See
Menag. on Diog. Lae'it. ii. 45.)

*° Delium in Bceotia. ' Delos,' the common reading, is vm-
dovibtedly wrong: for the Athenians had no such loss there. Their
defeat at Delium is related at large by Thucydides, iv. 100.

^' See the Life of Pericles, Vol. II. not. (98.) The number shut
upi n the city might augment, but could hardly have created it.*

^* Had. Cerigo; an island not far from Cape Malca, where the
Lacedaemonians kept a garrison, and annually sent a magistrate to
administer justice. For it's captm*e, see Thucyd. iv. 53, &c.

Minoa, mentioned below, was oft' the coast of Megara, of which
jSIisaea was a maritime town.''-

NICIAS. 407

But as soon as he knew it, he stopped his course, and
sent an herald to the enemy to ask permission to take
them away. Tliis he did, though there was a law
and custom subsisting, by which generals requesting
a treaty for carrying off the dead give up the victory,
and are not at liberty to erect a trophy. And indeed
those who are so tar masters of the field, that the
enemy cannot bury their dead without permission,
appear to be conquerors, because no man would beg
what he could command. Nicias, however, chose
rather to renounce the credit of conquest, than to
leave two of his countrymen unburied"^.

After he had ravaged the coast of Laconia, and
defeated the Lacedaemonians who attempted to op-
pose him, he took the fortress of Thyrsea ■"*, then held
by the ^ginetae, made the garrison prisoners, and
carried them to Athens. Demosthenes having forti-
fied Pylos ^\ the Peloponnesians besieged it both by
sea and land. A battle ensued, in which they were
worsted, and about tour hundred Spartans threw them-
selves into the isle Sphacteria. The taking of them
appeared, and indeed was, an object of importance
to the Athenians. But the siege proved difficult,
because there was no water to be had upon the spot,
and it was troublesome and expensive to get convoys
thither : in summer they were obliged to take a long

*^ The burj'ing of the dead was a duty of great importance in the
heathen world: The fable of the ghost of an unburied person not
being allowed to pass the Styx is well known.' About eight years
after the death of Nicias, the Athenians put six of their generals to
death, for not having interred those soldiers that fell in the battle of
Arginusae. See the Life of Pericles, Vol. II. not. (lOS.)

*■♦ Thyraea was a fort situated between Laconia and the territory
of the Argives. It formerly belonged to the Lacedaemonians; but
they gave it to the iEginetas, who had been expelled from their
country. (Thucyd. iv. 56.)

^5 The Peloponnesians and their allies had entered Attica under
the conduct of Agis the son of Archidamus, and ravaged the country.
Demosthenes, the Athenian general, made a diversion by seizing
and fortifying Pylos. This brought Agis back to the defence of his
own country. (Thucyd. ib. 3. &c.) Sphacteria lay off the coast of
JMessenia, a little to the north of the bay of Pylos.

9

408 NICIAS.

circuit, and in winter, it was absolutely impractic-
able. Thev M'ere much perplexed therefore about
the affair, and repented having refused the terms of
peace, which the Lacedaemonians had offered by their
embassadors.

It was through Cleon, that this embassy had not
taken effect; he opposed the peace, because Nicias
gave it his support. Cleon was his mortal enemy,
and seeing him countenance the Laced<rmonians,
persuaded the people to reject their propositions by
a formal decree. But when they found tlie siege
protracted to a great length, and that there was
almost a famine in their camp, they expressed their
resentment asrainst Cleon. He threw the blame
liowever upon Nicias, alleging that if the enemy es-
caped, it must be through liis slow and timid opera-
tions: "Had I been the general," said he, " tliey
" could not have held out so Ions:.'* Tiie Atlie-
iiians instantly replied, " Why then don't you now
*' advance against t-hem ?" And Nicias rose up and
declared, " He would freely resign to him the com-
mand in the affair of Pylos : let him take what
forces he pleased ; and instead of showing his
courage in words, where there was no danger, go,
and achieve actions worthy the attention of his
" country."

Cleon, disconcerted with the unexpected offer, at
fn-st declined it. But when he found that the Athe-
nians insisted upon it, and that Nicias raised a cla-
mour against him on the occasion, his pride was hurt;
and in the heat of his indignation, he not only under-
took the expedition, but affirmed, " He would in
" twenty days either put the enemy to the sword, or
" bring them alive to Athens."

The people lauglicd at his declaration "^^ instead of

'•^ The wiser sf)rt looped cither to have tlie pleasure of sociny the
J^acedacmoiiians brniiglit prisoners to Alliens, or else of getting rid
ni" Cleon'.i iniportvinate pretensions. (L.) But the latter advantage
v-i'iild, suft'Iy, have been dearly purchased. See Thucyd. (ib. 2S.)
'.vhom in general, t!u-oiighoul the whole of this Life, ruttarch has
nlmost exactly copied.*

NICIAS. 409

giving it any credit. They liad long, indeed, been
accustomed to divert themselves with the sallies of
his vanity. One day, for instance, when a general
assemblv was to be held, they had waited for him a
considerable time. At last he came, when their pa-
tience was almost exhausted, with a garland upon his
head, and desired them to adjourn till the day fol-
iovving : " For, to-day/' says he, " I am not at lei-
" sure ; I have strangers to entertain, and I have
" been sacrificing to the gods." The Athenians
only laughed, and immediately rose up, and dis-
missed the assembly.

Cleon, however, was so much favoured by fortune
in this commission, that he acquitted himself better
than any one since Demosthenes. He returned with-
in the time prefixed, after he had compelled all the
Spartans who did not fall in battle to deliver up their
arms, and l^rought them prisoners to Athens.

This reflected no small disgrace upon Nicias. It
was considered as somethini^ baser and worse than
throwing away his shield, voluntarily through coward-
ice to have surrendered his command, and given his
enemy an opportunity of distinguishing himself by
his abdication. Hence, Aristophanes ridicules him
in his comedy called ' The Birds :'

By heaven, this is no time for us to slumber,
Or, Nicias-like, procrastinate.

And in his piece, entitled ' The Husbandmen,' he
introduces two Athenians discoursing as follows :

1. J'd rather mind my farm. 2. And who forbids you?
1 . You do. I'd freely pay a thousand drachma-s,
If you'd excuse my serving. 2. We accept them.
These, with the line of Nicias, make two thousand.

Nicias in this affair was not only unjust to him-
self, but to the state ; having suffered Cleon to gain
a degree of credit and power, which puffed him up
to insupportable arrogance and effrontery. Many
J2

;

iiO XI CIAS.

evils w€re thus brought upon the commonwealth, of
"which Nicias himself had his full share. We cannot
but consider it as one great corruption, that Cleon
now banislied all deconuii from the general assembly.
It was he who in his speeches first broke out into
violent exclamations, flung open his robes, smote
upon his thigh, and ran from one end of the Rostrum
to the other. This presently introduced such a
licentiousness and disregard to decency among those,
who directed the affairs of state, that it threw the
■whole government into confusion.

At this time, there sprung up another popular
prator at Athens, Alcibiades. He did not, however,
prove so radically corrupt as Cleon. As it is said of
the land of Egypt, that on account of it's extreme
fertility.

There plenty sows the fields with wholesome green,
But scatters many a baneful weed between*";

so In Alcibiades there were very different qualities,
but all in extremes : and these extremes opened a
door to many innovations. So that, when Nicias had
got rid of Cleon, he had no time to establish any last-
ing tr-anquillity in Athens; but as soon as he had ar-
ranged matters in a salutary way, Alcibiades' ambition
came upon him like a torrent, and bore him back into
the storms of war.

It happened thus : The persons, who most op-
posed the peace of Greece, were Cleon and Bra-
sidas -^ War helped to hide the vices of the former,
and to display the good qualities of the latter. Cleon
found opportunities for acts of injustice and oppres-
sion, and Brasidas for great and glorious actions.
But after they had both fallen in the battle near
Amphipolis, Nicias applied to the Lacedaemonians
on one hand, w^ho had been for some time desirous

-7 Horn. Od. iv. 229.*

'8 An illustrious Spartan general of that age. The battle of Am-
phipolis, here mentioned, took place 0\. lxx.\i.\. 3., B. C. 4'22,*

NICIAF. 411

of peace, and to the Athenians on the other, now
no longer hot in the pursuit of blood. In fact, l)oth
parties were tired of hostilities, and ready to let tlieir
weapons drop out of their hands. Nicias therefore
used his endeavours to reconcile them, and indeed
to deliver the other Greeks from the calamities which
they had suffered, to bring them to taste the sweets
of repose, and to re-establish a long and lasting reiga
of happiness. At the very outset he found the rich, I
the aged, and all who were employed in the culture
of the ground, disposed to peace ; and by address-
ing himself to the rest, and expostulating with themj
respectively, he soon abated their ardoiu- for war.

His next step was to give the Spartans hopes of
an accommodation, and to exhort them to propose
such measures as might effect it. They readily con-
fided in him, because they knew the goodness of his
heart ; of this, a late instance had occurred in his
humane treatment of their countrymen, who had
been taken prisoners at Pylos, and who found their
chains greatly lightened by his good offices.

They had already agreed to a suspension of arms
for a year ; during which period they often met and
enjoyed again tlie pleasures of ease and security, the
company of strangers as well as of nearer friends,
and expressed their mutual wishes for the continu-
ance of a life undisturbed by the horrors of war.
With pleasure they heard the choruses singing,

Arachne freely now has leave

Her webs around my spear to weave*' ;

and recollected with pleasure the saying, " That in
time of peace men are awaked, not by the sound of
the trumpet, but by the crowing of the cock." They
abused and execrated those, who represented it as

-' Such were the legitimate strains of the chorus, according to
Jlorace,

Ille dupes laudet menscc hrevis ; ille salubrem
Jiisiitiantf kgesque, et apertis otia portis.

(A, P. 199.)*

\

4-V2 NICIAS.

tlie decree of fate, that the war should last tliree
times nine years""; and, this free intercoin'se lead-
ing th.em to canvass every point, they at last signed
the peace"^

It was now the general opinion, that they were at
the end of all their troubles. Nothing v.'as talked
of, but Nicias. They pronounced him a man be-
loved of the gods, who in recompence of his piety
had thought proper that the greatest and most de-
sirable of all blessings should bear his name. To
him, it is certain they ascribed the peace, as they
had done the war to Pericles. And indeed the one
had plunged them upon slight pretences into num-
berless calamities, and the other had persuaded them
to bury their greatest injuries in oblivion, and to
unite again as friends. It is, therefore, called ' the
Nician peace' to this day.

It was agreed in the articles, that both parties
should restore the towns and prisoners, which they
Jiad taken ; and it was to be determined by lot, whe-
ther of them should do it first : but, according to
Theophrastus, Nicias secured the lot by dint of
money, so that the Lacedsemonians were forced to
begin. As the Corinthians and Bcpotians were dis-
pleased at these proceedings, and endeavoured by
sowing jealousies between the contracting powers to
renew the war, Nicias persuaded the Atlienians and
Lacedrcmonians to link themselves still closer toi;e-
ther by an alHance, which should render them more
formidable to such as were disposed to fly off, and
more steady to each other.

During these transactions, Alcibiades at first made
it his business privately to oppose the peace. For

5"^ *' I remember (says Tliucy elides, v. 2G.) that, throughout tbe
^vholc war, many maintained it was to last three times nine years.
And if we reckon tlie first ten years of the war, the truce very
jrliort and ill-observed wliicli fallowed them, the treaties ill-cxe-
tuted, aid the consequent renewal of hostilities, we shall find thf
oracle fully justified by the event."

" I'er.ce for fifty years was agreed upon, and signed the year
following; but it was quickly violated. (Id.ib. 19.)

NICIAS. us

he was, naturally, disinclined to inaction ; and was
moreover oltended at the Laced^rmonians, on ac-
count of their attachment to Nicias, and their ne-
glect and disregard of hirnselfl Bat, when he found
this private opposition incifectual, he adopted ano-
ther method. In a little time, he perceived the
Athenians did not look upon the Lacedemonians so
kindly as usual; because they thought tliemselves
injured by the alHance, wliich their new friends had
contracted with the Jjcrotians, and because they had
not delivered up Panactus^- and Amphipolis in the
condition in which they found them, lie therefore
dwelt upon these points, and endeavoured to inflame
the people's resentment. He then prevailed upon
the republic of Argos to send an embassy, for the
purpose of negociating a treaty with the Athenians.

When the Lacedaemonians had intelligence of this,
they sent embassadors to Athens with full powers to
settle all matters in dispute. These plenipotentia-.
lies were introduced to the senate, and their propo-
sals seemed perfectly just. Alcibiades upon this,
fearing they would gain the people by the samci
overtures, circumvented them by perfidious oatlis
and asseverations : promising to " secure the success
" of their commission, if they would suppress the
" avowal of their full powers ; and assuring them,
" that this would be the only effectual way." They
gave credit to his insinuations, and went over from
Nicias to the other party.

Upon introducing them to the people, tlie first
question which he asked them was, " Whether or
" not they came with full powers ?" They, as they
had been previously instructed by him, denied it.
On which Alcibiades, contrary to their expectation,
changing sides, called the senate to bear v/itness to
their former declarations ; and desired the people,
*' Not to ffive the least credit or attention to such

»■■

^^ A boundary town bet«'een Attica and Boeotia, belonginjj t»
the former,*

414 KICIAS.

manifest prevaricators, who upon tlie same point
asserted one thing one day, and another thing the
" next.*" Their confusion, as may well be ima-
gined, v/as inexpressible, and Nicias was struck
dumb with grief and astonishment. The people of
course immediately sent for tlie deputies of Argos,
to ratify the treaty with them. But at that very mo-
ment there happened a slight shock of an earth-
quake, which fortunately for Xicias broke up the
assembly.

Next day they re-assembled, and Nicias by exert-
ing all his powers with much difficulty prevailed
upon them not to put the last hand to the league
with Argos ; but, instead of that, to send him to
Sparta"^', where he assured them all would be well.
When he arrived there, he was treated with the ut-
most respect as a man of honour, and one who had
shown that republic many marks of his friendship :
but as the party that favoured the Boeotians was the
strongest, he could effect nothing^'. He returned
theretbre not only with disrepute and disgrace, but
in great fear of the Athenians, who were vehemently
chagrined and provoked, that at his jiersuasion they
had set free so many prisoners, and those too pri-
soners of so much distinction. For the captives
brought from Pylos were of the first families in Sparta,
and had connexions of friendship or of blood with
the most eminent personages there. They did not,
however, express their resentment in any act of se-
verity ; they only elected Alcibiades general, and
took the jNIautlneans and Eleans (who had abandon-
ed the Laceda'inoniau interest) into league with
them^, along!" with the Ars-Ives. They then sent a
marauding party to Pylos, for the purpose of mak-

• See the Life of Alcibiades, Vol. II.

'^ There were some others joined in commission with him.
(Thucyd. ib. 4.5, 46.)

2^ Nicias insisted, that the Spartans should renounce tJleir alli-
ance with the Bceotians, because they had not acceded to the
peace, (Id. ib.)

KICIAS. Hi

Ing excursions tlience into Laconia. Thus the war
broke out afresh.

As the quarrel between Nicias and Alcibiades rose
daily to a greater height, the Ostracism was pro-
posed. To this the people have recourse at certain
periods, and by it they expel for ten years any one
who is suspected for his authority, or envied for his
wealth. Both parties were much alarmed at the
danger, not doubting that it would flill to the lot of
one of them. The Athenians detested the conduct
and manners of Alcibiades, and at the same time, as
we have related more at large in his Life, they
dreaded his enterprising spirit. As for Nicias, his
riches exposed him to envy, and the rather, because \
there was nothing social or popular in his manner of
living ; on the contrary, his recluse turn seemed
owing to an inclination for oligarchy, and perfectly
in a foreign taste. Besides, he had combated their
opinions, and by making them pursue their own in-
terest against their inclination was, of course, be-
come obnoxious. In one word, the whole was a
dispute between the young who wished for war, and
the old who wished for peace. The former endea-
voured to make the Ostracism fall upon Nicias, and
the latter on Alcibiades : but;,

In civil broils the worst emerge to honour.

The Athenians being divided into two factions, the
subtilest and most profligate of wretches gained
ground. Such was Hyperbolus of the ward of i^eri-
thoi's ; a man whose boldness was not owing to any
well-grounded influence, but whose influence wa*s
owing to his boldness, and who by the credit, wliicJi
he had acquired, was a disgrace to the city.

Tliis wretch ^^ had no apprehension of being exiled
by the honourable suffrage of the Ostracism, because
he knew himself to be fitter for a i^ibbet, HoDiiiir

" For an account of this fellow, and this transaction, see tlia
Lifeof Alcibittdes. Vol. II*

416 NICIAS.

however that, if one of these great men were ba-
nished, he slionid I;e able to make lieacl against the
other, he did not dissemble his joy at this spirit of
party, but strove to exasperate the j>eopIe against
,both. Nicias and Alcibiades perceiving his malice
icame to a private interview, in which they agreed to
• unite their interests ; and tlins avoided the dreaded
f sentence themselves, and turned it upon Hyper-
bolus.

At first the people were pleased, and laughed at
the ev'ent ; but, upon recollection, it gave them
considerable uneasiness to think, that the Ostracism
Mas dishonoured by it's having fallen upon a person
unworthy of it. They were persuaded, that there
was a dignity in it, or rather that to such men as
Thucydides and Aristldes it was a punishment ;
whereas to Hyperbolus it was an honour, of which
he might be proud, since his profligacy had placed
him on the same list with the greatest patriots.
Hence Plato, the comic poet, thus speaks of him :

No doubt, his crimes were ripe for chastisement;
But different should have been his brand: The shell
For such low villains never was intended.

In flict, no one was subsequently banished by it.
He was the last ; and Hipparchus the Cholargian, a,
relation of the tyrant, was the first ^^ From this
event it appears how intricate are the ways of For-
tune, and how incomprehensible to human reason.
If Nicias had run the risk of the Ostracism, he would
either have expelled Alcibiades, and lived afterward
in his native city in full security : or if it had been

56 With this aocount of the epoch of it's institution Diod. Sic.,
xi. 55., and jElian, Var. Hist. xiii. 21'., agree; though the former
makes no nieiition of the name of it's first victim, and the latter
calls him C!lisi;iienes, grandson of the tyrant of Sicyon of that name,
and it's orijiinal author. Some later writers, without sufficient au-
thority, carry back the date of it's establishment to the time ot
Theseus. This limited and mitigated species of banishment was not
peculiar to Athens, but prevailed in several other of the Greek re-
public*.*

KICIAS. -l^l-T

carried agaInU him,' ^nd he had been forced to re-
tire, he would have avoided tlie impeiidinf^ stroke of
misery, and preserved the repiitatiofi of a wise and
experienced general. I am not ignorant that, ac-
cording to Theophrastus, Kyperbolus was banished
in tlie contest between Pha?ax and Alcibiades, and
not in tiuit with Nicias. But most historians repre-
sent the niatter, as above related.

About this time the ^'^iresteans and Leontines
sent an embass>", to entreat the Athenians to under-
take the Sicilian expedition. Isicias opposed it, but
he was over-ruled by the address and ambition of
Alcibiades"'. Alcibiades indeed had previously
gained the assembly by his discourses, and corrupt-
ed the peo[)le to such a degree with vain hopes, that
tile young men in their places of exercise, and the
old men in the shops and other circles of conversa-
tion drew plans of Sicily, and exhibited the nature
of it's seas with all it's ports and bearings on the side
next Africa. For they did not consider Sicily as
the reward of their operations, but only as a place of
arms ; whence they were to advance to the conquest
of Carthage, nay, of all Africa, and to make them-
selves masters of the seas within the pillars of Her-
cules.

While they were thus intent upon this expedition,!
Nicias had not many on his side, either among thef
commons or the nobility, to concur with him in his op-l
position. For the rich, fearing it might be suspected]
that they were afraid to serve in person, or to incur thej
expense of fitting out men of war, contrary to theirf
better judgement, sat silent. Nicias, however, in-
defatigably and invariably set himself against it ; nei-
ther did he give up Ids point even after the decree
had been passed for the war, and he himself elected
general along with Alcibiades and Lamaehus, his

37 See Thucj'ci. (vi, P, 8cc. ) for all the particulars of the Sicilian,
expedition, and pavticularly for the three admirable speeches made
upon this occasion by theise great rivals. See alio the Life of Alti*
blades. Vol. II.*

vol,, nr, 2 E

413 KICIAS.

own name standing foremost in the suffrage?;. In
the first subsequent assembly he rose to dissuade
them, and to protest against their proceedings. In
conclusion he attacked Alcibiades for plunging the
state into a dangerous and foreign war, merely with
a view to his own emolument and renown. But his
arguments had no effect. They thought a man of
his experience the titter to conduct this enterprise,
and that nothing could contribute more to it's sue-
cess, than to unite his caution with tlie fiery spirit of
Alcibiades, and the boldness of Lamachus"**^. Thev
were still, therefore, more confirmed in their choice.
Besides, Demostratus, who of all the orators took
the greatest pains to encourage the people to that
war, rose and said, " He would soon put an end to
" Nicias' excuses ;*' and immediately procured a
decree, that the generals should have a discretionary
power to lay plans, and carry them into executiosi
both at home and abroad.

It is stated, indeed, that the pi'iests strongly op-
posed the expedition. But Alcil)iadcs had other
soothsayers to set against them ; and announced,
that certain ancient oracles promised the Athenians
great glory in Sicily. The envoys likewise, who
liad been sent to consult the oracle of Jnpiter Km-
mon, returned with an answer, importing that tise
Athenians would take all the Svracusans.
■ If any of the citizens knew of bad presages, they
cautiously concealed them, lest they sliould seem to
speak inauspiciously. Neither would any warnings
have availed, when they w'ere not moved by the
most clear and obvious signs. Such was the mutila-
t-ion of the Hermae% whose heads were all struck
.ot^'in one night, except tliat which was called ' the

3R The reading in the original text, i7c«8tj)t«, seems obviously
from tJie context to be erroneous, ^^ee also the Life ot" Aleibiudeo,

Vol. ir. ■ ■

S5'' These Hermac, or statues of IVTercury (as has been observed
in a former note), were square ti<.;ures placed by the Athenians at
the t;^att.':< of tlieir tcniplv,'?, ui «1 ihc doors of t!;eir jiouses.

NICIAS. 419

Mercury of Andocldes,' and which had been conse-
crated bv the tribe of Ai^Q-ii'h before the door of the
house then occupied by that person. .Such, also,
was the polkition of the altar of the Twelve Gods.
A man got astride upon it, and there emasculated
himself witii a stone. At the temple of Delphi there
Avas a golden statue ,of Pallas, which the Athenians
had erected upon a palm-tree of brass, in comme-
moration of the victory over the Medes. This the
crows came and pecked at for several days, and
devoured or dcstroj^ed the golden fruit of the
tree. The Athenians, however, contended that
these were only fictions propagated at Delphi on
the instigation of the Syracusans. A certain oracle,
likewise, ordered them to fetch a priestess of Mi-
nerva from ClazomeniE ; and when she came, they
Ibund her name was liesychia *^ by which the Deity
seemed to exhort them to remain quiet. Meton'*^
the astrologer, whether he were struck wath tliese
sio-ns or bv the eve of human reason discovered the
impending danger (for he had a command in the
armv), feigned himself mad, and set fire to his house.
Others say, he used no pretence of madness ; but
having burnt down his house in the night, addressed
liimself next morning to the assemblv in a forlorn
condition, and desired the citizens in compassion
for his misfortiuie to excuse his son, who was to have
gone out ca])tain of a galley to Sicily.

The Genius of Socrates ■*" upon this occasion warn-
ed that wise man, by his usual tokens, that the ex-
pedition would prove fatal to Athens. He mention-
ed this to several of his fHcnds and acquaintance,
and the warning was connnonly talked of. Many
were likewise greatly discouraged on account of the

■*■' /'. r. ' trantjuil.'*

■*' For this (act, raid lor the nmtih'.tion of the IlerniEe mentioned
above, see tlie Life of Alcihiades, Vo!. II.

Meton i.s celebialc^l lor his Iraviisg reformed the Athenian caKn-
ilar, uud tVooi liim astronomers have denominated the lunar of niue-
t^'l'l^ years ' the ?<Ietoiiic.'*

'' .See the Life of Alcibiades, ib, not (-iC}

2 E ^'

420 KICIAS.

time, at wliich the fleet happened to be sent out.
The women were thi^n celebratinsj' the feasts of
Adonis, dnriuG: which there were to be seen in every
quarter of the city images of the dead, and funeral
processions ; the v.'omen accompanying them with
dismal lamentations. So that those, wlio set any
value upon omens, were fidl of anxious forebodings
for the fate of their countrymen. They trembled to
think, that an armameiit fitted out at such an im-
mense expense, and vvhicli made so glorious an ap-
pearance, might so quickly lose it's consequence ^^^

As for Nicias, he sho\ved himself a wise and worthy
jTian, in o})posing the expedition while it was under
consideration ; and in not suiiering himself, after it
was resolved upon, to be dazzled by vain hopes, or
by the eminence of his post, into a change of opi-
nion. Nevertheless, when he could neither divert
the people from their purpose, nor by all his efforts
get himself excused from taking the command, but
found himself placed as it were by actual violence
at the head of a irreat armv, it was no lonq;er time
for caution and timid delay; He should not then
have looked back from his ship, like a child ; nor by
a multitude of protestations that his better counsels
Avere over-ruled, have disheartened his collegues, and
abated the ardour of his troops, which alone could
give liim a chance of success. He should have im-
mediately attacked the enemy with the utmost vigour,
and made Fortune blush at the calamities which she
was preparing.

But his condn.ct was very different. Vvhen I.a-
machus proposed to make a descent close by Syra-
cuse ^^ a}]d to give battle under the wails, and Alci-
biades suo<vcsted that they ouii'ht first to reduce the
cities which owned the authority of Syracuse, and
then march against the principal enemy, Nicias o})-
posed both. He preferred coasting along Sicily

''^ Alluding to the transient bloom of the flowers, in tlic gardeiu
oi' Adonis. See the Life of Alcibiades, Vol. II., not. (IS.)
'^^ Tiiucyd. vi. 19-

XICIAS. 421"

without any act of liostility, in order to show what
an armament thev luul. He then recommended tlieir
returning to Atliens, after having left a small rein-
ibrcement with the yEgesteans, as a taste of the
Athenian strength. Thus he intercepted all their
schemes, and broke down their spirits.

The Athenians soon after tliis called Alcibiadcs
home to take his trial, and Nicias remained, joined
indeed with anotiier in commission, ])ut first in au-
thority. Tlicre was now no end of his delays. He
cither made an idle parade of sailing along the coast,
or else sat still deliberating ; until the spirit of con-
fidence which buoyed up his own troops was evapo-
rated, as v.ell as the consternation and alarm, which
the first sight of his armament had excited in the
enemv.

It is true that, previously to the departure of Alci-
biades, they had sailed touard Syracuse with sixty
galleys, fifty of which they drew up in line of battle
before the harbour ; and sent in the other ten to
reconnoitre the place. These advanced to the foot
of the walls, and by proclamation invited the Leon-
fines to return to their old habitations^'. At the
same time they happened to take one of the enemy's
vessels witii the registers on board, in which all the
Svracusans were set dowm accordinG; to their tribes.
These were usually kc]"»t at some distance from the
city in the temple of Juipiter Olympius, but had then
been sent for to be examined, in order to the form-
ing of a list of persons able to bear arms. When
these remsters were brouirht to the Athenian <2:ene-
rals, and such a prodigious number of names was
displayed, the soothsayers were greatly concerned
at the accident ; as fearing that the prophecy, " that

•<' Tliey ordered proclaraulion to be made by a lierald, tbat the
Atlienians were come to restore \he Leontines to tbeir country, in
virtue of the rel;!tion and alliance subsisting between tlieui. In con-
sequence of wliich, Kuch of tlie I^contines as were in Syracu?e, had
nothing to do but to repair to the Athenians, wlio would talic curg
to conduct them. Id. ib.

422 KICIAS.

the Athenians should take a!! the Svracir^ans," nii'^hi
possibly in this have it's entire accomplishment. ■ it
is asserted however, that it was falrilled upon a sub-
sequent occasion, when Callippus th.e Athenian, after
he had killed Dion, made himseii" master of Syra-

cuse '^

When Alcibiadcs quitted Sicily with a small re-
tinue, the whole power devolved upon Nicias. La-
machus indeed was a man of great courage and ho-
nour, and freely exposed his person in the time of
action ; but his circumstances were so mean, that
whenever he made up his accounts of a campaign,
he charged a small sum for clothes and sandals.
Nicias on the contrary, beside his other advantages,
derived considerable authority from his eminence
both as to wealth and name. \Ve are told that upon
one occasion, when the Athenian generals met in a
council of war, Nicias desired Sophocles the poet ^^
to give his opinion first, because he was the oldest
man : " It is true," said Sophocles, *' I am older in
" respect of years ; but you are older in respect of
"^ service.'* In the same manner, he now brought
Lamachus to act under his orders, though he was
the abler general : and his proceedings were, inva-
riablv, timid and dilatory. At first he mride the cir-
cuit of the island, with his ships at an immen.se dis-
tance from the enemv, which ser\ed only to raise
their spirits. His next operation was, to lay siege

■<* The particulars of this story will be detailed in the Life of
Dinn.*

■»" Not the poet, says M. Ricard, who had died long before this
period : from ]>li\ir however it appears, on the contrary, that he did
not die till some time after it, B. C. 406. JEt. 91. The French
translator quotes a happy quatrain from an ode of the Fiench poet
Rousseau, on the death of the prince of Conti, as illustrative of
S>ophocles' sentiment :

Po;i7- qui cnmptc Irf ansd^une vie inutile,
Uagt: dii vicux Priam passe celui d' Hector :
Four qui coinpte lesfaits, Ics ans dujeime Achille
L'egalenf a Nestor.*

NICIAS. 423

to the little town of Hybla ^' ; and, not succeeding
in that affair, he exposed himself to the utmost con-
tempt. He afterward retired to Catana, ^vithout
any other exph)it tlian tliat of ruining Hyccara, a
small ))]acc subject to the barbarians. Lais the cour-
tesan, who was'tlien but a girl, is said to have been
sold among the prisoners, and carried at that time
to Peloponnesus.

Toward the end of the summer the Syracnsans, lie
was informed, were become . so confident, that they
designed to attack him. Nay, some of their cavalry
rode up to his trenches, and asked liis troops in de-
rision ; " Whether they were not rather come to
" settle in Catana themselves, than to settle the
" Leontines in their old habitations r" Nicias now
at last, after much hesitation, determined to sail for
Syracuse. In order to land his forces, and encamp
them v/ithout running any risk, he sent a person of
Catana before him ; who under pretence of being a
deserter should inform the Syracusans that, if they
wished to surprise the enemy's camp in a defenceless
state, and make themselves masters of their arms and
baggage, they had nothing to do but to marcli to
Catena with all their forces on a certain day. " For
" the Athenians," said he, " passed the greatest
" part of their time within the walls ; and such of
" tlie inhabitants as were friends to the Syracusans
" had determined, upon their approach, to shut in
*' the enemy, and to burn their fieet." At the same
time he assured them, their partisans were very
numerous, and waited with impatience their ar-
rivaP^.

This was the best act of generalship, which Nicias
performed in Sicily. Having by his stratagem

42 There were three towns of that name on the eastern side of
Sicily ; Hybla major, Hybla minor, and Hybla Galeotis or JMe^
gara.*

•t^ Nicias knew he could not make a descent from his ships near
Syvacuse, because the inhabitants were prepared for hiip ; neither
could he go by land, for want of cavalry.

424. NICIAS.

drawn the enemy's forces out of Syracuse, so tiiat it
was left almost wholly without defence, he sailed
thither from CatL^na, made himself master of their
ports, and encamped in a situation where the enemy
couid least annoy him by tliat in which their chief
strength consisted, and where he hiiiiself could easily
exert the strength in whicli he was superior.

The Syracusans, on their return from Catana,
drew up before the walls, and Nicias immediately
attacked and beat. them. They did not however
lose any considerable number of men, because their
cavalry stopped the Athenians in the pursuit. As
Nicias had broken down all the bridges upon the
river, he gave Hcrmocrates an opportunity of en-
couraging the Syracusans, by observing, " That it
" was ridicidous in N'cias to contrive means to pre-
" vent fighting, as if fighting were not his grand ob-
" ject." Their consternation indeed and ala-'m were
so great, that instead of tiie fifteen generals whom
they had, they chor.e three others, and the people
promised upon oath to indulge tiiem witli a power
of acting at discretion ■^^.

The temple of Jupiter Olympius was near the
camp, and the Athenians were anxious to rake it,
because of the quantity of it's rich offerings in gold
and silver. But Nicias industriously put otF the at-
tack, and suffered a Syracusan garrison to enter it ;
persuaded that the plunder, which his troops nn'ght
get tliere, Avould be of no service to the public, and
that he should incur the whole blame of the
sacrilege.

The news of the victory soon spread o\er the
wliole island, but Nicias made not the least im{)rove-
inent of it. lie soon retired to Naxos'^ and there

■5° Ovx «v;.:.9.i 3-o/yx5!fKvi», stivs Homer ; and it was upor. this
principle, not from ai^y ' coiutcmation or alarm,' thnt in confbr-
(jiity to ITermocrates' advice they redact d thv nuuihcr of their,
j;c 1 1 crals from fifteen to three: Hermocratcs himscii, ilcraclidcs,
a;.d Sicanu?. (Thucvd. vi. 72, 73.)*

■•'A city between Mcssiiw and Catana. There were t\yo indetd

NICIAS. 425

wintered ; kecnihg an mmy on foot at an enormons
^expense, and effecting but lit.'le, tor only a few Sici-
lians came over to him. The Syracusans, dnring this
interval, recovered their spirits again so as to make
another excursion to Catana, in which they ravaged
the country, and burned the Athenian camp. Mean-
while, all the world censured Nicias ; and said,
that by his tedious deliberations, delays, and ex-
treme caution, he lost the time for action. When
he did act, there was nothing to Be blamed in the
manner of it ; for he was as bold and vigorous in
executing, as he was timid and dilatory in forming,
a resolution.

After he liad determined to return with his forces
to SvracLise, he conducted all his movements vvith
so !T?uch prudence, expedition, and safety, that he
gairied the peninsula of Tiiapsos, disembarketl Iiis
men, and obtained possession of Eiiipolaj, before
the enemy knew of his approach. Pie beat on this
occasion some infanlry, which had been sent to
succour the fort, and made three hundred prisoners;
lie likewise routed their cavalry, which was thouglit
invincible.

But what most astoni'-lied the Sicilians, and ap-
peared incredible to the Gi-eeks was, that in a short
h'pace of time he enclosed Syracuse with a wall ; a
citv not >ess than Athens, and much more dirScnlt
to be surrounded by such a work on account of the
unevenness of the ground, the vicinity of the sea,
ar-d the adjoiriing mar/dies. Add to this, that it was
uearlv completed bv a man, whose health v.as in no
degree equal to sucli an undertaking, for he was
nlHicted with the stone ; a circumstance, which alone
j)revented it's entire completion.

I cannot indeed but admire the attention of the
general, and the invincible courage of the soldiers,
in effecting what they did, upon this as well as other

of tills name vory near enoh ether, of which one for the sake of
distinction was subscqiientiy cailed Tauronunium.^

426 NICiAS.

occasions. Euripide?,, after tlielr defeat and death,
wrote this epitaph for them ;

Eig'.it trophies rliese from S^'racuse obtaln'd.
Era yet the gods were partial.

And in fact we find, that the Athenians gained not
only eight, but several more victories of the Syra-
cusans ; till the gods or fortune declared against
them, at a time when they were arrived at the hjo-h-
est pitch of power. Tsicias forced himself, bevond
what his lieaith would allow, to attend most of the
actions in person ; but, when his distemj..er was
very violent, he was obliged to keep his bed in the
cariip, with a few servants to wait upon him.
' In the mean time, Lamachus at the head of the
army enj^a^cd tlic Syracusans, who were drawino; a
cross wall from the city, to hinder the Athenians
from finishing theirs. The latter, generally having
the advantage, went in too disorderly a manner
upon the pursuit ; and it happened one day, that
Lamaclms was left almost alone to receiv'e the ene-
my's cavahy. Calhcrates, an officer remarkable for
his strength and courage, advanced before them and
gave Lamachus the challenge, which was accepted.
The Athenian general received the first wound,
which proved mortal ; but he returned it upon liis
adversary, and they fell together. The Syracusans,
remaininji: masters of the bodv and arms of Lama-
chtis, carried them off; and ri'.slied forward to the
Athenian wall, where Nicias lay without any guards
to deiend him. Roused however by necessity and
by the sight of his danger, he ordered those about
him to set fire to the materials before the entrench-
ments, which had been provided for the machines,
and to the machines themselves. This put a stop
to the Syracusans, and saved Nicias together with
the Athenian wall and baggage. For as soon as
they beheld the flames, rising in vast columns in the
intermediate space, they retired.

KICIAS. 427

Xicia? now rcniaiiicd sole conimaiider, but he liacl
reason to form tlie most sanguine hopes of success.
The cities declared for him, and shij)s laden with
])rovisions came daily to his camp ; his affairs being
in so good a train, that the Sicilians strove which
should first express their attachment. The Sjra-
cusans themselves, despairing, of holding out much
longer, began to talk of proposals for an acconnno-
dation. Gylippus who was coming from Lacedi^mon
to their succour, being informed of the wall built
around them and their otlier difficulties, continued
his voyage, not with a view to Sicily which he gave
up for lost, but if possible to save the Greek cities
in Italy. For the renown of the Athenians was
now \ery extensive : they were represented as car-
rying all before them, and being under tlic conduct
of a general, whose prudence as well as good fortune
rendered him invincible. Nicias liimself, contrary
to his nature, was suddenly elated by his present
strength and success ; the more so, because he was
persuaded, upon private intelligence from Syracuse
as well as more public application, that the city was
about to capitulate. Hence it was, that he took no
account of the approach of Gylippus, nor placed
any regular guard to prevent his coming ashore ; so
that, screened by his utter negligence, Gylippus
landed with safety. It was at a great distance from
Syracuse, and he found means to collect a conside-
rable army. But the Syracusans were so far from
knowing or expecting his arrival, that they had
assembled that very day to consider of articles of
capitulation : nay, some were for instantly coming
to terms, before the city was absolutely enclosed.
For there was but a small part of the wall left un-
finished, and all the necessaiy materials were upon
the spot.

At this critical and dansjerous instant, Gonc^vlus

arrived from Corinth with one srallev of three banks

of oars. The whole town, as might naturally be

expected, ran together to meet him. He told them,

9

4-28 NICIAS.

Gylippus would soon come with several other ships
to their suecoiir. TJicy could not, at lirst, give him
entire credit ; hut v;hile thev were hesitatiiis:, a
messenger arrived from Gylippus, with orders that
thev should march out to ioirt him. Immediatelv

•/ *' 4.'

upon this, tliey recovered their spirits, and armed.
Gy!ip})us soon arrived, and marshalled his troops
in order of battle. As Nicias v.'as drawing up
against hiin, Gylippus rested his arms, and sent a
Iierald v.ith an offer of safe conduct to the Athe-
nians, if they would quit Sicily. Nicias did not
deign to give him any answer. But some of the
soldiers asked him, by way of ridicule, " Whether
" the Syracusans were become so strong by the
" arrival of one Lacedtemonian cloke and staff, as
" to despise the Athenians, v.ho had lately knocked
" off the fetters of t'lree hinidred Spartans and re-
" leased them, though all abler men and better-hair-
" ed than Gylippus."

The Sicilians themselves, indeed, according to
Timjcus, set no great value upon Gylippus. For
they presently discovered his avarice and meanness,
and on his first coniinir amoncr them ridiculed his
cloke and his head of hair. Yet the same historian
relates, that as soon as he made his appearance,
they gathered about him, like birds about an owl,
and VvCre ready to follow him wherever he pleased.
And the latter account has more of truth in it, than
the former. In the staff and cloke they beheld the
symbols of the Spartan dignity, and therefore repair-
ed to them. Thucydides also informs us, that Gy-
\\\w,us was the only man, who saved Sicily ; and
Philistus, a citizen of Syracuse and an cve-witness
of tliosc transactions, confirms his assertion.

In the first engagement the Athenians had the
advantacre, and killed some of the Svracusans, amoncc
whom fell Gongylus of Corinth. But the next day,
Gylippus showed them the importance of experi-
ence in a general ; with the very same arms and
.horses, and on the very same spot, by only altering

KICIAS. 429

his onlcr of b.ittlc '', lie beat the Atlienfans and
drove tliem to their ciinip. Tiieii taking t!ie stones
and otlier materials, wliicli they had broui^ht for
their wall, he eontiniied the eross-wall of the Syra-
CMsans, and cut througii theirs in sneh a. manner,
that if they ijjaincd a victory they could make no
ad\ antage of it.

Encourai2:ed bv this success, the Svracnsans man-
iicd several vessels; and beating abont the couniry
uith their cavahy and alHcs, made many prisoners.
Gylippus applied to the tovvns in ])erson, and they
readily listened to him, and lent him all the assist-
ance in their power. JSo that Nicias, rchupsiiig into
his former fears and despondence, at the sii>ht of
such a change of affairs, aj)plied to the Athenians by
letter either to send another army, or to recall that
which he had; and entreated them by all means to
})ermit him, on account of his infirmities, to lay
down the command.

The Athenians had designed some time before to
send another army into Sicily; but the envy, which
the first success of Nicias iuid excited, had caused
them upon several pretences to defer it. Now, hov>--
ever, they hastened the snccours. They likewi^ie
came to a resolution, that Demosthenes sliould go
in the spring with a respectable fleet ; and that
i'AU'ymedon '^ should instantly sail (though it wa5
still winter) with money to pay the troops^ and
acquaint Nicias that the people had appointed
Euthydemus and Menander, ofiiiccrs vrho then served
under him, to assist him in his charge.

In the mean time, Nicias was suddenly attaciccd
both b} sea and land. At first, part of his fleet
Avas worsted ; but in the end he proved victorious,

5- He had the address to impute the late defeat to himself, and
to assure his men that their behaviour was irreproachable. He
said, that by ranging them the day before between walls, whers
their cavalry and archers had not room to act, I;o had prevented
their conquering. (Thucyd. vii. 5, Sec.)

'i Ruryniedon v/ent with ten galleys.

430 MCI AS.

and sunk many of the enemy's ships. He could not
hov/ever saccoiir his troops by land, as the exigence
of" tlie case required. Gylippus made a sudden attack
upon the fort of Piemmyrium'% and took ij; ; by
Avhich means he became master of the naval stores of
the Athenians, and a great c|uantity of treasure, there
deposited. Many of the garrison were either killed,
or taken prisoners. I3ut, what was a still heavier
blow to Nicias, by the loss of this place he lost the
convenience of his convoys. For, as long as he pos-
sessed rieminyriu.m, the communication was safe
and easy; but wlien that was taken, his supplies
reached him with the utmost difficultv, as his trans-
ports could not pass without fighting the enem.y's
ships, which lay at anchor inider the fort.

Besides, the vSyracusans thought their fleet was
beaten, not by the superior strength of the Athe-
nians, but bv their havinc; in a disorderlv maimer
engaged in the pursuit. They therefore fitted out
a more respectable armament, with a view to a fre-ih
action. Nicias, however, did not clioose at present
to try the issue of another naval fight ; but declared
it most absurd, wlien a large supply of ships and
fresh troops were hastenino; to him r.nder the conduct
of Demosthenes, to hazard a battle with a force so
much vTaker in number and so ill-provided.

On the other hand Menander and Euthydemus,
who had been appointed to a temporary share in the
command, were led by their ambition and jealousy
of Demostlienes and Nicias to strike some extraor-
dinary stroke, in order to be beforehand with the
one, and to outdo the most shining actions of the
other. Their pretence was the glory of Athens,
which thev said would be utterly ruined and de-
stroyed, if they exhibited any fear of the vSyracusan
fleet- Thus they over-ruled Nicias, and gave battle.
But they Mere (piickly defeated by a stratagem of
Ariston the Corinthian, v.ho was a most excellent

■■"■i At the entrance of the gr(?at Iiaibour of Syracuse*

i

>:iCIAS. 431

seaman ^^ Their left wing, as Thncydidcs relates,
was entirely roiited, and they lost great numbers of
their men. This loss tln-ew Nicias into the ntraost
consternation. lie reflected upon the misfortunes,
wliich he had incurred while he had the sole com-
mand, and that he had now again miscarried through
the obstinacy of his collegues.

While he was indulging tliese reflexions, Demos-
thenes appealed before the port with a verygalb'-n
and formidable fleet. He liad sevcnty-tliree gal-
leys^", on board of which were five tliousand heavy-
armed soldiers; and archers, spearmen., and slinge'rs
to the number of three thousand. Their armour
glittered, the streamers waved, and the prows of the
ships were adorned vWth a variety of rich paintings.
lie advanced with loud cheers and martial music,
and the whole was conducted in a theatrical n]ani>er^
in order to strike terror into the enemy.

The Syracusans were now ready to sink into de-
spair. They saw no end or truce to their n)iseries ;
tlieir labours and conriicts were all to begin anew,
and they had been prodigal of their blood to no
purpose. Nicias, liowever, had not long to rejoice
at the arrival of such an army. At the first inter-
view, Demosthenes recomuiended an immediate at"-
tack of liie enemy, that they miglit take Syracuse by
a quick and decisi\e s-troke, and retmn with glory to
Atliens. Nicias, astonished at his heat and precipi-
tation, desired him to adopt no rash or desperate
measures. He assured him that delay would be in-
jurious to the enemy, since they were aireadv in
v/ant of money, and their allies wordd soon forsake
both them and their cause j so that, v/hen thev bc-

^^ Ariston advised tlie captair.s of the galleys to Lave rcfresh-
•■•icnts ready for their tiien en the shore, v:h'lh^ the Athenians ima-
gined tliey went into the town for tliem. The Atticninns, thus
deceived, landed themseivt'S, and went to dinner. In the mcnn
time the Syracusans, Ijavinj,' made an expeditious uieal, re-eni-
•larixcd, and attacked the Athenian sijips, wlicn tl;ere was scarce)/
aay body on board to defend tlieni. ( Th ucvd. vii. 39.)

■^ Diodoras Siculus makes tficm three hunJr;;d .;;}d tcr'.

4^'2 XICIAS.

gan to feel the liard hand of necessity, they would
HiidyLibtcdiy apply to him again and surrender upon
terms, as tiiev had been about to do before, hi
lact, Nicia'i had a private correspondence with se-
veral persons in Syracuse, who advised h.irn to wait
with patience, because Lhc inhabitants were tired
ou.t witii tlie v;ar, and weary of Gyiipj^us ; and,
vvlien their wants should become a little more press-
ing, tliCy would prcsem'ly abandon tlie disj)ute.

As Nicias hinted these th!];i;S in an eni<i;maticai
manner, and did n.ot choose to speak out, it i>'ave
occasion to the oilier generals to accuse hun of timi-
dity. " He is coming upon us," said they, " with
'- iiis old, dilatory., slow, over-cautious counsels,
*' by which the ardent vigour of his troops was be-
'^'- fore destroved. Instead of leading them on im-
" jnediaf ely, he waited till their spirit was gone,
" and the enemy began to look upon theni with
*' contempt." The oth.er officers therefore listened
to Demosthenes, and Nicias was at iast forced to
give up the point.

Upon this, Demosthenes put himself at the head
of the land-forces, and attacked Epipoke in the
night. As he came upon the guards by surprise, he
slev/ many of them, and routed those who stood
upon tiieir defence. Not content with this advan-
tage, he proceeded till he came to tlie quarter,
v.licre the BirotiariS were posted. 'ihese closed
iheir ranks, and first charged the Athenians, ad-
vancing with levelled pikes, and with r-ll the alarm of
voices ; by which means ihsiy repulsed them, and
killed a considerable number. Terror and confu-
sion spread through the rest of the army. They,
who still kept tlieir ground and were victorious,
were encountered by those that i\'jd -. and they, who
were marching doun from Epipo'a^ to supj)ort the
Ibiemost bands, were thr(nvn into disorder by the
iiiU'itives : for (.hey fell foul of one another, and
took their friends for enemies. The alarm and tu-
mult indeed were inexpressible, occasioned by their

21

KICIAS. 4SS

fears, the- uncertainty of (heir niovcincnts, and the
iiupossibility of disccrnir.g objects in a nigiit, wliich
was neither quite dark nor sufficiently clear; the
moon being near her setting, and her little remain-
ing ViQ^ht rendered useless by the shade of so many
bodies and wea-pons moving backward and forward.
Hence the aj^prehension of meeting with an enemy
made the Athenians suspect their friends, and in-
\'olvcd them in the utmost perplexity and distress.
They happened likewise to have the moon upon
their backs, which casting their shadows before
them both hid the number of their men, and the
glittering of their arms ; whereas the reflexion from
the shields of the enemy made them appear more
numerous, and better armed than they really were.
At last, they gave way, and were entirely routed.
The enemy pressed hard upon them on all sides, and
J^illed great numbers. Many others met their death
from the weapons of their friends. Not a few fell
headlong from the rocks or walls. The rest were
dispersed about the fields, where they were picked
up the next morning by the cavalry, and put to the
sword. In this action the Athenians lost two thou-
sand men ; and very few returned with their arms
to the head-quarters.

This was a severe blow to Nicias, though it was
what he expected ; and he inveighed against the
rash proceedings of Demosthenes. That general
defended himself as well as he could ; but at the
same time he gave it as his opinion, that they should
embark, and return home as fast as possible. " We
cannot hope," said he, " either to receive another
army, or to conquer with that which we have
with us. Nay, supposing we had the advantage,
v.-e ought to relinquish a situation, which is well
known at all times to be unhealthy for the troops,
and which we now find still more fatal from the
season of the year." It was, indeed, the begin-
ning of autumn ; many were already sick, and" aU
were dispirited.

VOL. III. ,2 F

a

(C

43i NICIAS.

Nevertheless, Nicias could not bear to hear of
retiring home; not that he was afraid of any oppo-
sition from tlie Syracusans, but because he dreaded
the Athenian tribunals and unfair impeachments.
He therefore replied, " That there was no imminent
" danger at present ; and if there were, he had ra-
" ther die by the hands of tlie enemy, than by those
" of his fellow-citizens/' In this respect he greatly
differed from Leo of Byzantium, who afterward ''
said to his countrymen, " I had rather die by you,
*• than with you." Nicias added, " That upon the

necessity of encam])ing in another place, they

misfht determine at their leisure."

Demosthenes urged the matter no farther, be-
cause his former counsels had proved nnfortunate.
And he was the more willing to submit, as he ob-
served others fully convinced that it was Nicias'
confident reliance upon his correspondence in the
town, which made him so strongly oppose their
return to Athens. But fresh forces coming to the
assistance of the Syracusans, and the sickness spread-
ing more and more in the Athenian camp, Nicias
himself altered his opinion, and ordered the troops
to be ready to embark.

Every thing was accordingly prepared for em-
barkation, and the enemy paid no attention to these
movements, because they did not expect them.
But in the night there happened an eclipse of th
moon, at which Nicias and all the rest, either
tlu-ough ignorance or superstition, were struck with
a great panic. As for an eclipse of the sun, hich
happens at the conjunction, even the co mon
people had some idea of it's being caused by the
interposition of the moon. But they could not
easily conceive by the interposition or what body
the moon, when at the full, should suddenly lose
her light, and assume such a variety of colours.
They iookerl upon it therefore as a preternatural

'' In the time of Alexander the Great.*

NICIAS. 435

piienomenon, by which the gods announced some
sj'o'nal cahmiitv.

Anaxatcoras was tlie first, who with anv clearness
and certaiiitv showed, in what manner the moon
was illuminated and overshadowed. But he was an
autiior of no antiquity •^^ neither was his treatise
much known ; as it. was confined to a few hands, and
connnunicated with caution and imder the seal of
secrecy. For the people had a dislike to natural
philosophers, and to those who were then called
*" Meteoroleschii} ''V supposing that they detracted
from the divine power and providence by ascribing
effects to insensate causes, unintelligent powers, and
inevitable necessity. On account of such a system,
Protagoras was forced to fly, and Anaxagoras was
thrown into prison, whence Pericles with great
difficulty })rocured his deliverance ^°. Even So-
crates'^', who meddled not with physics, lost his lite
for philosophy. At last the glory of Plato en-
lightened the world, and his doctrine was generally
received ; both on account of his life, and of his
subjecting the necessity of natural causes to a more
powerful and divine principle. Thus he removed
all suspicion of impiety from such researches, and
brought the study of mathematics into fashion.
Hence it was that his friend Dion, though the moon
was eclipsed at the time of his going from Zac}Ti-
thus against Dionysius, was not in the least dis-
concerted, but pursued his voyage and expelled the
tyrant*"'.

^8 He was contemporary with Pericles, and Nicias; for lie died,
01. Ixxxviii. 1., and Nicias was killed fifteen years afterward,
01. xci. 4.

^5 /. e. ' Inquirers into tlie nature of meteors.*

^° See his Liie, Vol. II.*

^'* Socrates informs us, in his Apology, that he bad been accused
of a criminal curiosity in prying into the heavens, and into the
abysses of the earth. He cannot however be said to have lost his
life f >r his philosophy, so much as for his theology.

^'^ The particulars of this achievement will be detailed in the
Life of Dion.*

2 f2

436 :SIICIAS.

It was a misfortune to Kicias, that he had not
along with him at that time an able soothsayer.
Stilbides, whom he had employed upon such oc-
casions, and who used to lessen the influence of liis
superstition, died a little before. Supposing the
eclipse liowever a prodigy, it could not (as Philo-
cliorus observes) be inauspicious to those wlio wanted
to fly, but on the contrary extremely favourable.
For whatever is transacted with fear requires dark-
ness ; light is it's worst enemy. Besides, upon other
occasions (as Autoclides*'^ in his Commentaries re-
marks) people refrained from business only three
days after an eclipse of either sun or moon ; wliereas-
Nicias wished to stay another entire revolution of the
moon"*, as ii' he could not see her restored to her
usual brightness, the moment after she had passed
the shadow caused by the interposition of tlie earth.

He quitted however almost every other care, and
sat still observing his sacrifices, till the enemy came
upon him, and invested his walls and entrcncliments
with their land-forces, as well as encircled the har-
bour with their fleet. Not only the men from tlieir
ships, but the very boys from fishing-boats and
small barks challenged the Athenians to come out,
and offered them every kind of insult. One of these
bovs named Heraclides, who was of one of the best
families in Syracuse, advancing too far, was pursued
by an Athenian vessel, and very near being taken.
His uncle Pollichus, observing his danger, made up
with ten galleys which were under his command ;
and others, in fear for Pollichus, came forward to
^support him. A sharp conflict ensued, in which the
Syracusans were victorious, and Eurymedon and
great numbers with him were slain.

^3 This sliould probably be read ' Anticlines;' for he seems to
he tlie same person, whom l-lutarch has mentioned in the Life of
Alexander, and in his Isis and Osiris. He wrcte a Historv of
Alexander, and some other works, as wc learn from Voss. Hist.
Ur. iii. 1., &.C.

^* Or, as Thucydides (vii. 59) states, ' tliree times nine days/
on the suggestion of his superstitious or corrupt soothsayers.
9

KICIAS. 437

The Atlienians, not brooking any fartlier delay,
indignantly called npon their generals to lead them
off by land. For the Syracusans, immediately after
the victory, blocked np the harbour. But Nicias
would not agree to it, thinking it dreadful to aban-
don so many ships of burthen, and nearly two hun-
dred galleys. He therefore embarked his best in-
fantry and a select number of archers and spearjnen,
and manned with them a hundred and ten galleys,
as far as his rowers would supply him. The rest of
his troops he drew np on the shore ; abandoning
the large camp, and his walls which reached to the
temple of Hercules. The Syracusans had not for a
long time offered the usual sacrifices to that deity,
but now both the priests and the generals went to
observe the solemnity.

Their troops were embarked ; and the inspectors
of the entrails promised the Syracusans a glorious
victory, provided they did not begin the attack, but
only repelled force with force. For Hercules, they
said, was victorious only in standing upon the de-
fensive^', and waiting to be attacked. Thus in-
structed, the Syracusans set out.

The great sea-fight then began ; remarkable not
only for the vigour exerted, but for it's having ex-
cited as much passion and agitation in the specta-
tors, as in the combatants themselves. For those,
who looked on from the shore, could discern all it's
various and sudden unexpected turns. The Athe-
nians suffered as heavily from their own order of
battle and the nature of their armament, as from
the enemy. Their ships were all crowded together,
and were moreover very unwieldy ; while those of
the enemy were so light and nimble, that they
could easily change their situation, and attack the

^^ This could hardly be true of a hero, whose labours must hare
generally implied offensive operations. Of Theseus however, his
great imitator, Plutarch remarks (iu his Life of that hero. Vol. I.)
that on setting off from Trcezene for Atheii*6, he resolved to • a«t
only upon the defeHsive.' *

438 XI CIA 8.

Athenians on all sides ^^ The Syracusans were
likewise provided with a vast quantity of stones,
which scK'lom failed of their effect, wherever dis-
charged ; wliereas the Athenians had nothini^ to op-
pose to them but darts and arrows, the direction of
which was so much affected by the motion of the
ship, that few of them could reach their mark. The
enemy was advised to this expedition by Ariston
the Corinthian, who after having given signal proofs
of his valour, fiell just as victory was declaring for
the Syracusans.

After such a dreadful defeat and loss, there was no
possibility of escaping by sea. At the same time,
the Athenians perceived that it was extremely diffi-
cult to save themselves by land. In this despair
they neither opposed the enemy, who were seizing
their vessels close to the shore, nor demanded their
dead. They thought it a less deplorable circum-
stance to leave the dead witiiout burial, than to
abandon the sick and wounded. And though they
had sad sufferers before their e} es, they looked upon
their own case as still more unliappy, since they had
niany calamities to undergo, and must probably en-
counter the same fate at last.

They at first designed, however, to begin their
march in the night. Gylippus observed the Syra-
cusans employed in sacriHces to the gods, and in en-
tertaining their friends on account of the victory and
the feast of Hercules ; and he knew, that neither
entreaty nor force would prevail upon them to quit
the joys of festivity, and oppose the enemy's flight.
But Hermocratcs found out a method of imposing
upon Nicias "^ He sent some of liis conndential
friends, who were to pretend that they came from

-''' Tills, the rcatlcr will recollect, was one of tlie caui^es, \v!i;ch
decided the fate of the Spanish Annada in 15S8.*

^'^ }Icr;iioer;ites was sensible of the unportancc of preventing
Nicias from retirinj^^ by land. With an army of forty thou.sand men,
-w-hich hehiul still remaining, he might have fortifiedlnniselfin sonic
part of hjicily, and leii^'wed the war. (Thucxd. vii. 7^, 75.)

KICIAS. 439

his old correspondents witliin the town, and to de-
sire him not to march in tlie night, as the Syracusans
liad laid several ambuslics for him, and seized all tlie
passes. This stratagem had it's eficct. Nicias in
J he simplicity of Iiis heart, fearing that he should
really fall into the enemy's snares, sat still. In the
morning, the enemy got out before iiim. Then in-
deed they did seize all the difhcult passes, threw up
works against the fords, broke down the bridges,
and planted their cavalry wherever the ground was
open and even ; so tliat the Athenians could not
move a single step without fighting. They lay close
thereforeallthatday* and the nightfbllowing,and then
began their march witli tears and loud lamentations j
as if they had been going to quit their own native
country, and not that of the enemy. They certainly
were in great want of provision, and it was a miser-
able circumstance to abandon their sick and wound-
ed friends and comrades ; yet they looked u})on
their present misfortunes as small, in comparison
with those which were yet behind.

But, among the various spectacles of misery, there
was not one more pitiable than that of Nicias him-
self; oppressed as he was with sickness, and unwor-
thily reduced to hard diet and a scanty provision,
when his infirmities required a liberal supply. Yet,
in spite of his ill health, he achieved and suffered
many things, which the more robust with difficulty
endured. All this while his troops could not but ob-
serve, it was not for \m own sake, or from any at-
tachment to life that he submitted to such labours,
but that he seemed still to cherish hope on their ac-
count. When dismay and sorrow brought others to
tears and complaints, if Nicias ever wept with them,

* To <rivc their soldiers an opportunity of providing: themselves as
well as eircuiiistances admitted, tor the march. ('I'hucyd. ib.) Tlie
whole of this retreat, only to be paralleled perhaps by that of
the brave army which perished in Iv^ypt under I^ouis IX,, supplies,
as told by the Athenian historian, one of the mosthighjy-Hnished and
affecting pictures of anticpiity. "■

440 NICIAS.

it was obviously from reflecting upon the melancholy
and disgraceful issue of the war, which he had hoped
to have finished with so much honour and success.
Neither was it only by the sight of his present
affliction, that they were moved : recollecting tlie
speeches and warnings, by v^hich he had endeavoured
to dissuade the people from the expedition, they
could not but think his lot much more unhappy than
he deserved. All their hopes likewise of assistance
from heaven forsook them, when they observed that
so religious a man as Nicias, one who had never
thought any expense too heavy in the service of the
gods, had no better fortune than the meanest and
most profligate person in the army*.

Notwithstanding all these difficulties, he still en-
deavoured by the tone of his voice, by his looks, and
by every expression of kindness to the soldiers, to
show himself superior to his misfortunes. Nay,
through a march of eight days, though attacked and
harassed the whole way by the enemy, he preserved
his own division of the army tolerably entire ; till
Demosthenes was taken prisoner and his troops sur-
rounded, after a brave resistance, at a small place
called Polyzeliura. Demosthenes then drew his sword,
and stabbed himself; but as the enemy came imme-
diately upon him, and seized him, he had not time
to give himself the mortal stroke.

Some Syracusans rode up to Nicias with this in-
telligence, and he sent a few of his own cavalry to
know the certainty. Finding from their account
that Demosthenes and his party were really prisoners,
he begged to treat with Gylippus, and offered
hostages for reimbursing the Syracusans the whole
charge of the war, upon condition that they would
suffer the Athenians to quit Sicily. But the Syra-
cusans rejected the proposal, with every mark of in-
solence and outrage, and again fell upon a wretched

• To this, as well as to his sickness, he piously and pathetically
refers in his address to his followers. (Thucyd. ib. 77.)*

ii

61

NICIAS. Ml

man, wlio was in want of all kinds of necessa-
ries *'^

He defended himself however all tliat night, and
continued his march the next day to the river Asinarus.
The enemy galled his troops all the way, and when
tliey came to the banks of the river, pushed them in.
Nay some, impatient to quench their burning thirst,
voluntarily plunged into the stream. Then followed
a most cruel scene of blood and slaughter; the poor
wretches being massacred, as they were drinking.
At last Nicias threw himself at the feet of Gylippus,
and said, " Gylippus, you should show some compas-
" sion amidst your victory. I ask nothing for my-
" self. What is life to a man, whose misfortunes are
?' celebrated even to a proverb ? But, with respect
*' to the other Athenians, consider that the chance
" of war is uncertain ; and remember with what hu-
manity and moderation they treated you, when
they were victorious.'*
Gylippus was somewhat affected both at the sight
of Nicias, and by his speech. He knew the good
offices, which he had rendered the Lacedaemo-
nians, at the last treaty of peace; and he was sensible,
that it would contribute greatly to his own honour,
if he could take two of the enemy's generals pri-
soners. Raising Nicias, therefore, from the ground.

^s Thucyd. ib. S3. Wliat a fine hyperbole (justly commended by
Longinus, 38.) does this writer give us, sect. 84., of the Athenian
sufferings at Asinarus ! K«« to oj'iwp tv^v^ ^a^pBaflt. aaa' ai'tv it<re-o*

HTl'ilo Tl iyjH TOI TTTi'/M r, jjj Cil 01 l/j I «0V^ KCil Tri^it/jXO^ip.Ot J)' TSif T^OXMi^. ' Thc

water was instantly rendered unfit for drinking. Yet was it not the less
greedily drmilc, though mingled with mire and blood, and it became
even to many an object of strong competition !' For similar, though
inferior, disasters see Cicero's account of Darius in his flight (Tusc.
Qua^st. V. 34-.), and Lu can's inflated narrative of the sufferings of
Petreius and Afranius' forces, when cut oS" by Caesar from all commu-
nication with the Ebro. (Phars, iv. 308, &c.) But were the
Syracusans to blame ? Was it not natural for them to use every
means in their power to harass and weaken an enemy, who had
ambitiously considered their country as a property?

Itma3'be remarked, that Thucydides has not preserved Nicias' ad-
dress to Gylippus, though he gives us part of it's spirit, (ib. 85.)*

442 KICIAS. .

lie bade him be of good cheer; and gave orders that
the other Athenians sliould have quarter. But, as
tlie order was slowly communicated, the number of
those who were saved was greatly inferior to that of
the slain ; though the soldiers had spared several,
unknown to their officers.

When the Syracusans had collected all the pri-
soners whom they could find into one body, they
dressed some of the tallest and straightest trees that
grew by the river, as trophies, with the arms taken
from the enemy. After which they marched
homeward, with garlands on their heads, and with
their horses adorned in the most splendid manner ;
havinc; first shorn those of the Athenians. Thus
they entered the city, as in triumph, after the happy
termination of the sharpest dispute which had ever
subsisted between Grecians, and one of the most
complete victories which the sun had ever witnessed,
gained by a glorious and persevering exertion of
firmness and valour.

A general assembly of the people of Syracuse and
of it's allies was then held, in which Eurycles ^'^ the
orator proposed a decree ; " That, in the first place,
the day upon whicli they took Nicias should be ob-
served as a festival, with the title of Asinaria from
the river where that great event had occurred, and
that it should be entirely occupied in sacrifices to
the gods." This was the twenty-seventh day of the
month Carneus, called by the Athenians Metagit-
nion "°. As to the prisoners, he proposed, " Tliat
the Athenian servants and all the allies should be
5old for slaves : that such of the Athenians as were
freemen, and the Sicilians their partisans, should be
confined to tlic quarries j and that the generals should

^'' Diodorus Siculus call him Dioclc?.

'° Though it i? not easy (as we have observed in a former note)
•to bring the (Treoian months to tally with ours, we agree in this
place nith Dacicr, that September is probably meant, or a part of
it; because I'lutarch liad hetbre eaid, that the sickness set in \vilb
* the beginning of autumn.'

NICIAS. 413

be put to death." As the Syracusans were express-
ing their approbation of the motion, Hermocrates
rose up and said, '' It was a more glorious thing to
" make a good use of a victory, than to gain one/*
This remark raised a considerable ferment in the
assembly. Gylippus having expressed his desire to
have the Athenian generals, that he might carry them
prisoners to LacedtL^mon, '.he ;>yracusans now grown
insolent with their good fortune loaded him with re-
proaches. They could not indeed well bear his seve-
rity and Lacedaemonian rigour in command, even
while the war lasted. Besides, thev had discovered
in liim (as Tim.Tus observes) ' a degree of avarice
and meanness,' inlierited like a disease from his fa-
ther Cleandrides, who had been banished for taking
bribes. The son, out of tlie thousand talents wiiich
Lysander sent by him to Sparta, purloined thirty,
and hid them under the tiles of his house. Being
detected in it, however, as Ave have related more at
large in the Life of that general '', he fled his
country with the utmost disgrace.

Timajiis does not agree with Philistus and Thucy-
dides ''^, that Demosthenes and Nicias were stoned
to death by the Syracusans. Listead of that, he in-
forms us, Hermocrates sent one of his attendants, to
acquaint those tw^o generals v.ith what was passing
in the assembly ; and the messenger being admitted
by the guards, before the court was dismissed, these
unliappy men despatched themselves. Their bodies
w^ere thrown without the gates, and lay there ex-
posed to the view of all, who wished to enjoy the
spectacle. I am told that a shield, said to have been
Nicias', is shown to this day in one of the temples at
^Syracuse ; the exterior texture of which is gold and
purple, and executed with surprising art.

As to the otiier Athenians, the greatest part
perished in the quarries, to which they were con-

'■ Vol. III. p.20T.

'^ Tiiucyclides says (vii. S6.} ' The Syracusans iTjurtliereJ

tlieu!.' («;5--o-(p«.|av.j*

44* NICIAS.

fined, by diseases and bad diet'^; for they were
ailowed only a cotyle of barley a-day, and half a
cotyle of water. Many of those who were concealed
by the soldiers, or escaped by passing as servants,
were sold for slaves, and stigmatised with the figure
of a horse upon their foreheads. Several of them,
however, submitted to their fate with patience ; and
the modesty and decency with which they behaved
were such, that they were either speedily released,
or treated by their masters in their servitude with the
utmost respect.

Som.e there were, who owed their preservation to
Euripides. Of all the Grecians, his was the muse,
with whom the Sicilians were most in love. From
the strangers, who landed in their island, they
gleaned every small specimen or portion of his
works, and communicated it with pleasure to each
other. It is said, that upon this occasion a number
of Atlienians on their return home went to Euripides,
and thanked him in the most grateful manner for
their obligations to his pen ; some having been en-
franchised for teaching their masters what they re-
membered of his poems, and others having procured
refreshments when they were wandering about after
the battle, by singing a few of his verses. Neither
is this to be v/ondered at ; since we are told, that
when a ship from Caunus ^% which happened to be
pursued by pirates, was about to take shelter in one
of their ports, the Sicilians at first refused to admit
her ; but upon asking the crew, whether they knew
any of the verses of Euripides, and being answered
in the affirmative, they received both them and their
vessel.

The Athenians, it is asserted, did not give credit

'-^ Crowded together for eight months in the open air, and
alternately parched by the heat of the day, and chilled by the cold of
the night, amidst the intolerable stench of ordure and carcases !
See Thucyd. vii. 87. What a lesson for invaders !*

"* A city of Caria, pearly oppoeite to Rhode?, -and under it's
sway.*

NICIAS. W«

to the first report of this misfortune ; tlie person,
v*-ho brought it, not appearing to deserve their
notice. A stranger (it seems) who had landed iu
the Firsus, while he sat to be shaved in a barber's
«hop, spoke of it as an event ah-eady known to the
Athenians. The barber no sooner heard it than,
before the stranger could communicate it to any
other person, he ran into the city, and applying to
the magistrates, informed them of the nev/s in open
court. This excited great trouble and dismay. The
magistrates immediately summoned an assembly, and
introduced the informant. There he was interrogated,
from whom he had received the intelligence ; and,
as he could give no satisfactory answer, iie w'as con-
sidered as a forger of false new^s and a public incen-
diary''. Upon this he was fastened to the wheel,
where he bore the torture for some time, till at
length some credible persons arrived, who gave a
distinct account of the whole disaster. With so much
difficulty did Nicias' misfortunes find credit among
the Athenians, though he had often forewarned them,
tliat they would certainly come to pass.

'5 Casaubon would infer hence, Uiat the Athenians had a law for
punishing the forgers of false news. But this person was punished,
jess as a forger of false news than as a public incendiary, who by
exciting groundless terrors; iu the people 'aided and abetted' their
enemies. (I^.)

Upon the subject of spreading false news (wspi Aoyosrotai;), Theo-
phrastus has an excellent chapter. And it might be more especially
reprehensible, though not penal, in Athens ; on account of the par-
ticular rage for ' fiomething new,' uith which they were (even at
two later periods) so sarcastically taunted by Demosthenes, and
aoted bv St. I^uke.^

-rm

LIFE

OF

i^IARCUS CRASSUS.

SUMMARY

Crassiis' hirth, education, ivenhJi, and, avarice. His calculation of
hts pr-operfi/. He keeps open house : cultivates oratory. His
obliging jvanner. Marias and Cinnn put his brother to death. He
escapes into Spain; and is vertj kindly received by Vibius. He
forms an intimate union xniii SyUa, and renders him sevsral ser-
vices. His mode of enriching himself. He gives security for
Cainr to a great anion nf, and preserves his credit ivith both that
general and Pompey. Beginning of the tmr tvith Spartacus.
Clodius defeated. Spartacus gains several advantages over the
JRomaii generals sent against Itim. Crassus appointed to oppose
him : his lieutenant, Mummius, ivoisted. Crassus encloses Spar-
tacus in the peninsula of Ilhegium : and defeats him. Spartacus
heats a detachment of his army, but is again defeated, and slain.
Cras.sus, clc-ted consul with Pompey, and aftenvard censor, does
?ioihifig memorable in either of those magistracies : is suspected of
having been privy to Catiline's conspiracy, and enters into a fatal
league xdih Cresar and Pompey against the republic. Their pro-
ject. PomjHy and Crassus again sue for the considt>hip ; and
carry their election by violence. Crassus' extravagant and puerile
anticipations. Ateius frnillessly endeavours to divert him from his
Parthianenterpri.se. He sets out on his crpcdition : his Jirst suc-
cesses. He discovers his avarice in Syria ; and receives there an
embassy from the Parthian king; bid in spite of alarming ac-
counts of the enemy, and inauspicious omens at his sacrifices, per-
sists in hi.s undertaking. Trrachavus advice of Ariamnes. High
12

MARCUS CRASSUS. 447

character of Surena. Messa<re of Artuvasdes to Crassus. lie
ifraivs up his army in line of battle. Eiigagemetit. Parthian
mode of lighting. Crassus despatches his son to chase the eitemi/ :
he is killedf and his detachment fnt in pieces. Address of Crassus
to his ami!/. Nioht separates the combatants. Crassus' conster-
nation. The Itonians retreat to Came. One of his lieutenavts
defeated bij the Parthians. Surena's stratagem to discover, m^r-
ther or not Crassus ivas in Currcc. Crassus betraijcd by Andrn-
ninchus, xvhom he had chosen as guide in his fight, Surena in-
rites him to an interview, •which he is constrained by his troops to
grant. He is assassinated ; and his army almost entirely di:slroy~
ed^ His head and hand sent to Orodcs. His death Jinally avenged
by Divine Justice.

Marcus crassus, whose fatlier had borne the
office of censor and been honoured with a triumph,
was brought up in a small house with his two bro-
thers ; both of whom married while tlieir parents
were living, and all ate at the same table. Tins,
we may suppose, contributed not a little to render
liim sober and moderate in his diet. Upon the death
of one of his brothers, he took the widow into his
house, and had children by her'. With respect to
\ women, there was not a man in Rome more regular
\in his conduct; though, when somewhat advanced in
years, he was suspected of a criminal commerce
with one of the vestal virgins named Licinia. For
this, Licinia was impeached by one Plotinus. She
- had a beautiful country-house, it seems, which
Crassus wishing to purchase at an under-price, paid

. ' Upon the subject of incestuous marriages, under the old and
new civil law of Rome, M. Kicard lias a long and learned note ;
but it may be sufficient in this place to remark that these, as far as
affinity was concerned, only occurred when that affinity was in a
direct li^ie, between parents and their step-children or children-in-
law. Collaterally, witli brothers' or sisters' relics, &c. they were
anciently lawful, especially if there were no children by the prtv
^eding connexion, .See Cic pro P. Quint. 6.*

us MARCUS CRASSUS.

his court to the ]acly with great assiduity, and thence
incurred that suspicion. His judges, knowing tiiat
avarice was at the bottom of the affair, acquitted him
of the cliarge of having corrupted tlie vestal ; and
he never let her rest, till she had sold him her house.

The Romans say, Crassus had only that single
vice of avarice, which cast a shade over his many
virtues. He appeared indeed to have but one bad qua-
lity, because by it's predominance it quite obscured
the rest. His love of money was most evident from
the size of his estate, and his manner of raising it.
At first, it did not exceed three hundred talents.
But during his public employments, after he had
consecrated the tenth of his substance to Hercules,
given an entertainment to the people, and a supply
of bread-corn to each citizen for three months, he
found upon an exact computation, that he was
master of seven thousand one hundred talents. The
greatest part of this fortune, if we may declare the
truth to his extreme disgrace, was gleaned from war
and from fires ; for he made a traffic of die public
calamities. When Sylla took Rome, and sold the
estates of those whom he had put to death, which
he both accounted and denominated the spoils of
his enemies, he was desirous to invoh^e all persons
of consequence in his ciime, and he found in Crassus
a man who declined no kind of gift or purchase.

Crassus observed likewise, how liable the city was
to fires, and how frequently liouses fell down ; which
misfortunes were owing to the weight of the build-
ings, and their standing so close together \ In con-
sequence of this, he provided himself with slaves
who were carpenters and masons, and continued to
collect them till he had upward of five hundred. He
then made it his business to buy houses wliich were
on fire, and others adjoining to them ; and he com-
monly got them at a low price, on account of the
fi^ar and distress of the owners about the event.

* The streets Av.ere i«irrow and crooked, and .the houses chiefly
of wood after the Gauls had burnt the city.

MARCUS CRASSUS. 449

Hence, he gradually became master of great part
of Koine. But, thoiigli he liad so many workmen,
he l)uilt DO more for liimsclf than the single liouse
in whicli he lived. For he used to say, " I'hose who
" loved biiilding will soon ruin themselves, and need
" no other enemies."

Though lie had sex'eral silver-mines and lands of
high value, as well lis laboui-ers who turned them to
the best advantage, yet it may be truly asserted,
that his revenue fom tliese sources was nothing in
c()m[)arison witli VNliat he derived from his slaves.
Such a number he had of them, and all servicea,ble
as readers, amanuenses, book-keepers, stewai'ds, or
cooks. He himself attended to their education, and
often gave them lessons ; esteeming it a principal
part of the business of a master to inspect and take
care of his servants, whom he considered as the Hy-
ing instruments of economy. In this he was cer-
tainly right, if he thought (as he often said) that
" Other matters should be managed by servants,
" but servants by masters." Economics indeed,
so far as they regard only inanimate things, serve
merely the low purposes of gain ; but where they
regard human beings, they rise higher, and form a
considerable branch of }K)litics. He was wrong how-
ever in affirming, that "no man ought to be esteem-
" ed rich, who could not with his own revenue
" maintain an army." For, as Archidamus observes,
' it never can be calculated what such a monster aa
war will devour ;' nor, consequently, can it be de-
termined Vv'hat fortune is sufiicient for it's demands.
Very different, in this respect, were the sentiments
of Crassus from those of Marius. When the latiier
had made a distribution of lauds among liis soldier?^,
at the rate of fourteen acres a-man, and found that
they wished for more, he remarked; " I hope no Ro-
" man will ever think that portion of land too little,
" v.'hich is sufficient to maintain him."

It must be acknowledged, that Crassus behaved
in a generous manner to strangers j to them his
VOL. irr, 9. G

4,30 MARCUS CRASSUS.

Iioiisc stood always open. To wliich wc may add,
that he vised to lend money to his friends without
interest. Nevertheless, his rigour in demanding it,
the very day on which it became due, often made
the apparent favour a greater inconvenience tlian
the paying of interest would have been. As to his
invitations, they were most of them to the common-
alty and the vulgar ; and tliough there was a sim-
plicity in the provision, yet there was a neatness and
an unceremonious welcome, which made it more
agreeable than grander banquets.

With regard to his studies, he cultivated oratory,
most particularly that of the bar, for the sake of
serving his clients. And, though he might be
reckoned equal upon the whole to the first'-rate
speakers, yet by his care and application he exceed-
ed those, whom nature had more hii^hlv fa\"Oured.
For there was not a cause, however unimportant, to
which he did not come prepared. Besides, when
Pompey and Cssar and Cicero refused to speak, he
often rose, and finished the argument in favour of
the defendant. This his promptitude to assist any
unfortunate citizen was a very popular circumstance.
And his obliging manner, in his common address,
had an equal charm. There was not a Roman, how-
ever mean and insignificant, whom he did not salute,
or whose salutation he did not return by name.

His knowledge of history also is said to have been
extensive, and he was not without a taste of Aris-
totle's ])hilosophy. In the latter branch he was assist-
ed by a philosopher, named Alexander^; a man
who, during his acquaintance with Crassus, gave the
most glorious proofs of his disinterested and mdd dis-
position. For it is not easy to say, whether his po-
. verty was greater when he entered, or v^hcn he left,
his house. He w\^s the only friend, that Crassus
would take with him into the country; upon which

? Xylander conjectures this nii^lit be Alexander the ^tlilesian,
wlio is also called Polyhistor and Cornelius, and who is said to have
flourished hi the time of Svlla.

MARCUS CRAS.SUS. 451

occasions he would lend him ;i cloke for the journey,
and demand it again when he returned to Rome.
A\V)ude!-fid indeed was that man's patience ; parti-
cular]}-, if we consider, that the philosophy which he
professed did not look upon poverty as a thing in-
different "*. But this was a later circumstance in
Crassus* life.

Vvlien the faction of Cinna and Marius prevailed,
it soon aj)peared tliat tliey vvcre not returning for
any 'benefit to their count)'}', but for the ruin and
destruction of the nobility. Part of them they had
already seized, and put to death ; among whom were
the flither and brother of Crassus. Crassus himself,
being- then a very young man, escaped the present
danger. But as he saw the tyrants had their hunters
beating about for him on all sides, he took three
•friends and ten servants with him, and fled with sur-
prising expedition into Spain ; where he had attend-
ed his father during his praitorship, and gained him-
self friends. Tlicre too he found the minds of men
full of terror, and trembling at tlie cruelty of Marius,
as if he had been actually present. He did not, there-
fore, venture to apply to any of his friends in public :
instead of that, he went to a farm .which \'ibius Fa-
cianus had contignous to the sea, and hid himself in
a spacious cave. Thence he despatched one of his
servants to sound A^ibius, for his provisions already
began to fail. A'ibius, delighted to hear that he had
escaped, iiiquired th.e number of his party, and the
place of his retreat. He did not indeed wait on
him in person, but inimcdiately sent for the steward
of that particular farm, and ordered him to dress a
suppei- every day, carry it to the foot of the rock.
and then retire in silence. He farther charged him
not to be curious in examining into the affair, under
pahi of death; and promi.^ed him his freedom, if lu.
proved faitliiUl in his commission.

•* The pliilosoph}' of Aristotle, as well ns that of Plato, reckoned
riches among veal blessings, and looked upon tht m as eoiidu'-'ive t»
■. irtue.

2 G 2

452 MARCUS CRASSUS.

The cave is at a small distance from llie sea ; and
the surrounding rocks, by which it is ibrmed, admit
only a slight and agreeable breeze. A little beyond
the entrance, it is astonishingly lofty ; and the com-
pass of it is so extensive, that it has several large
caverns, like a suite of rooms, one within another.
It is not destitute either of water or of light. An
excellent spring flows fro;n tjie rock ; and there are
small natural ajierturcs, where the rocks approach
each other at the top, through which day-light is
admitted. The interior air likewise, on account of
the thickness of the rock, is pure and clear ; the
foggy and moist part of it being carried away with
the stream *".

In this asylum Crassus had his provisions brought
every day by the steward, w^ho neither saw nor knew
him or his people, though he was seen by them, be-
cause they knew his time and watched for his com.-
ing. And he brought not only what w-as sufficient
for use, but delicacies also for pleasure ; for Vibius
had determined to treat his friend with all imaginable
Idpdness. He reflected that regard should be paid
to his time of life, and as he was very young, that he
should have some particular indulgences on that ac-
count: to supply merely his necessities, he thought,
looked more like constraint than friendship. He
therefore one day took with him two handsome
maid-servants, and walked toward the sea. When
they came to the cave, he showed them the en-
trance, and bade them go boldly in, for they had no-
thing to fear. Crassus, when he saw them, was
afraid his retreat was discovered, and began to ex-
amine wdio they were, and what they wanted. They
replied, as they had been instructed, " That they
*' were come to seek their master, who lay there
" concealed." Upon which, he perceived it was
only a piece of gallantry in Vibius, who studied to

'■' This indeed, as in the celebrated cave of Castleton, Derby-
ij^ire, &c, is wljat ^lone renders subterranean caves habitable,/^

MARCUS CRASSUS. ,453

amuse him. He received the damsels tliercfore, and
kept them all the time he staid there ; and tliey
served to carry his messages to Vibiiis, and to bring-
back answers. Fenestella says^ he saw one of them
when she was very old, and often heard her tell tiie
story with pleasure.

Crassus spent eight montlis in this privacy, at the
cud of which he received intelli<>'ence thut Cinna
was dead. He then inunediately made his appear-
ance, and numbers repaired to him ; out of whom
he selected a corps of two thousand five hundred
men. \Vitli these he visited the cities ; and most
historians agree, that he pillaged one called Malaca^
But others inform us, that he absolutely denied and
disclaimed the tact, in the face of those who had
spread the report. After this, he collected vessels
and passed over into Africa, to join Metelhis Pius
an officer of great repntation, who had raised con-
siderable ibrces. He did not, however, stay there
long. Upon some difierence with Metellus, he ap-
plied to .Sylla, who received him witli pleasure, and
ranked him among his principal friends.

When Sylla returned to Italy, he chose to keep
the young men about him in exercise, and sent them
upon various commissions. Crassus was despatched
to levy troops among the Marsi ; and, as his passage
lay througli the enemy's country, he demanded
guards of Sylla: " I gi\e thee for guards," said he
in an angry and emphnticai tone, *' thy father, thy
" brother, thy friends, thy relations ; who have been
" unjustly and abominably sacrificed, and whose
" cause I am about to revenge upon their mur-
" thcrers," Housed and in/lamed by these words,
he ])assed boldly through the midst of the enemy;
raised a respcctidile army, and in all Syila's conflicts
evinced his attachment and his courage. Hence,

' Fenestclla wrote several books of Annals. He might very well
* have seen one of these slaves, when she w;is old;' for he died iiv
the sixth ye^ir of Tiberius' rcJijii, at the age of seventy.

s //cr/." Malaga.*

454 MAIICUS CllASSUS.

we are told, arose his first competition and di.s}3Lttc
with Pompey for the pvAm of honour. Pompcy was
the younger man, and iiad this heavy disadvantage
besides, that liis father was more hated than any man
in Rome. Yet his genius broke forth amidst these
events with such lustre, that Sylhi treated him with
more respect than he generally showed to much
older men, or even to those of his own rank. For
he used to rise up at his approach, and uncover his
head, and salute him ' Im])erator*.*

Crassus was not a little piqued at tliese things,
though there was no reason for his pretensions. He
had not the capacity of Pompey ; besides, his in-
nate blemishes, liis avarice and his meanness, robbed
his actions of all their c^racc and disjnitv. For in-
stance, wlien he took the city of Tudcr" in Umbria,
he was supposed to have appropriated the cliief part
of the plunder to his own use, and vras represented
in that iiirht to Svlla. It is true, in the battle fouo-ht
near Rome, wdiich vv^as the greatest and most deci-
sive of all, Sylla was worsted, his troops repulsed,
and a considerable number of them killed. In the
mean while Crassus, who commanded the right wing,
was victorious ; and having pursued the enemy till
night, sent to inform Sylla of his success, and to
demand refreshments for his men.

But, at the time of the proscriptions and confisca-
tions, he lost all the credit which he had gained ;
buying large estates at an under-price, and often
begging others. Nay, in the country of the Brut-
tians he is said to have proscribed one man without
Sylla' s order, merely to seize his fortune. Upon
this, Sylla gave him up, and never afterward em-
ployed him in any public affair.

Though Crassus was an exquisite flatterer himself,
yet nobody was more easily caught by flattery than
he. And what was very particular, though he was

* See the Life of Pompcy, Vol. IV, p. 133.
9 Hod. Tadi.'^-

MARCrS CRASSUS: 455

one of the most covetous of men, no one more liated
or censured cliaracters of tliat description'". J]ut it
gave him still deeper pain to observe Pompey suc-
cessful in all bis employments, honoured with a tri-
umph, and sabited by the citizens with the title of
' the Great.' One day he happened to be told,
" Pompey the Great was coming ;" upon which be
answered, with a scornful smile, " How big is he?"

As he desixiired of rising to an equality with him-
in war, he betook himself to the administration ;
and by paying his court, defending the impeached,
lending money, and assisting and canvassing tor
persons M-ho were candidates tor offices, he gained
an authority and influence equal to that which Pom-
pey had acquired by his military achievements.
There was something remarkably peculiar in their
case. The name and interest of Pompey were much
greater in Rome, when he was absent, and distin-
guishing himself in the field '^ When present, Crassus
often carried the point against him. This must be
imputed to the stale and grandeur, which he aftect-
ed. Pie seldom showed himself in public, or ap-
peared in the assemblies of the people ; and he very
rarely served those, who made application to him :
imaffinine: that he should thus have his interest en-
tire, when he stood in need of it for himself. Crassus,
on the contrary, had his services ever ready for those
who wanted them, constantly made his appearance,
was easy of access, and spent his life in business and
good offices ; so that his open and obliging manner
got the better of Pompey's distance and stateliness.

As to dignity of person, powers of persuasion, and
engaging turn of countenance, we are told they were
equal. But the emulation, by which Crassus was

'° It was observed by the late ingenious IMr. Shcnstone, that
* a coxcomb will be the first to find out and expose a coxcomb.*
!Mcn of the same virtues love each other, for the sake of those vir-
tues ; but sympathy in vice or folly has generally a contrary eflect.

" This was not peculiar to Pompey; nor in itself, indeed, extra-
ordinary. It was the case of Murius, as Piutaixh has before ob-
served, and niany others.

456 MARCUS CRASSUS.

actuated, liever carried him to hatred and m^liijfnitv.
it IS true, he was concerned to see Pompey and
CsGsar held in higher estimation than himself, but he
did not add rancour and malevolence to his d.hmi-
tion : though Cresar, when he was taken by pirates
in Asia and strictly confined, cried out; *•' O Crassus,
what pleasure Vv'ill it give thee, to hear that I am
a captive!" They were subsequently, however,
upon a footing of friendship ; and when CjB-ar was
selling out for his command in Spain, and his credi-
tors were ready to seize his equipage bccaiise he
could not satisfy them, Crassus kindly delivered him
from his embarrassment, by giving security for eight
hundred and thirty talents.

Rome was at this time divided into three parties,
at the head of which were Pompey, Cssar, ar.d
Cra:>sus. Por as to Cato, his reputation was greater
than his power, and his virtue had more admirers
than followers. The prudent and steady part of the
city were for Pompey ; the violent and the enter-
prising espoused the part of C^sar ; Crassus steered
a middle course, and availed himself of both. He
frequently indeed changed sides, and was neither a
firm friend, nor an implacable enemy. On thr; con-
trary, he oi'teii gave up both his regard and his le-
sentment, when his interest required it ; insomuch
thrit, v/ithin a short ^^pace of time, lie would, appear
.either supporting or opposing the very siinic pPiSons
and lav.s. Pie hud seme iniiuencc fbinided in love,
and some in lear ; but fear was th!3 more serviceable
principle of the two. An instance of the latter we
have in Sicinius, who was a very trotJb!es»>me cha-
racter to the magistrates and leading orators of his
time. When he was a^ked why he did liot attack
Crassus among the rest, he ansv.'cred, " He wears
" wis])s upon his horns'"." In this marmer the Ro-
jiiians used to mark a vicious bull, as a warning to all
persons tliat passed him.

" This passed into a proverb. (See Hor. Sat. I. iv. SLAc.) S'-
cinius is uieiitiuntd vcn lui favourably by Cicu'W' (3e C'ar.Orf\t. 1:*; )

MARCUS CRASSUS. 457

When tlie gladiators took up arms, and ravaged
Italy, their insurrection was commonly called ' Spar-
tacus' war.' It's origin was as follows : One Len-
tulus Batiatus kept at Capua a number of gladiators,
the greatest part of which were Gauls and Thraciaub;
men not reduced to that employment for any crimes
wl'ich they had committed, but Ib/ccd upon it by
the injustice of their emph)yer. Two hundred of
tJiem, tliereibre, agreed to make their escape : and
tliough the plot was discovered, threescore and eigh-
teen by their vigilance effected their pm-pose, and
sallied our. of tov/n, having first made themselves
masters of all the long knives and spits in a cook's
shop. Upon the road they met some waggons, car-
rying a {{uantity of gladiators' arms to another place.
These they seized and put ou. They then retired
to a ].Kice of strength, and elected three leaders^'.
The first was Spartacus, whose extraction was from
one of the Thracian hordes called Nomades; a man,
not only of considerable dignity of mind and
strength'of body, but also of a discernment and a
courtesy superior to his fortune. In his manner, in
short, he was more of a Greek., than a barbarian.

It is said, that when he was first brought to Rome
for sale, a serpent was seen twisted about his face as
he slept. His wife wlio was of ti^e same tribe, hav-
ing the gift of divination, aiid being a retainer be*
sides to the orgies of Bacchus, pronounced it a sigti
that lie would rise to sometiiing \ cry great and for*
nndable, tlic result of v^hich would be happy".
This womnn still lived with hiai, and was tiie com-
panion of his fliglit.

Tiie fugitives first distinguished themselves by de-
feating a party sent against them from Capua, whose
arms they seized and wore with great satisfaction ;
tlirowini? awav those of dadiators, as dishonourable

'3 Spartacus, Clirysui^, and O^iiomnus. Tlvid war began A.I^.C,
^81., ajid hisTeci POine>vh.it iet^s than tuo yetirs.

"» And Ibi- fi giadi:U(>r his end was happy. He died figlitinjr gal-
lantly, like a general, at the head of his tmops. (flor. iii. 20.)

45S MARCUS CRAS8US.

and barbarous. Clatliiis the proctor ■' vras then" de-
spatched against them from Home, with a body of
three thousand men ; and he besieged them on the
hill, where they were posted. To this there was but
one ascent, wliich was very narrow and rugged, and
there he placed a sufficient guard: tlie rest was all a
craggy precipice, covered witli wild vines. Troni
these the fugitives cut off such of the branches as
might l)e of most service, and formed them into a
ladder of sufficient strength and length to reach the
plain below : and thus they all got down safe, leav-
ing one above to let down their arms; who, having
executed his comuiission, descended after them.

The Romans knowing nothing of this m.anoeuvre,
the gladiators came upon their rear and attacked
them so suddenly, that they fled in the utmost con-
sternation, and left their camp to the enemy. Spar-
tacus was there joined by the herdsmen and shep-
herds of the country, men of much bodily vigour,
and remarkably swift of foot. Some of these he
clad in heavy armour, and the rest served as recon-
noitring parties, and for other purposes of light-
armed troops.

The next general sent against them w'as Publius
Varinus^''. They ffi'st routed his lieutenant Furius,
"Xiiho engaged them with a detachment of two thou-
sand men. After this Spartacus v,atched the motions
of Cossinius, who was appointed assistant and chief
counsellor to Yarinus, and was now marchins^ against
him with a considerable force ; and his vigilance
was such, that he was very near taking him in the
bath at Salena^ : with much difficulty however he
escaped, but Spartacus seized his baggage. He then
pursued his steps, and took his camp, having ffi'st
killed great numbers of his troops. Cossinius him-
self was among the slain. His subsequent operations

'' Clodius Glabcr. (I'lor. ib.) In the Suppl. Liv. xcv. 3.
• Claudius Pulcher.'*

"' In the difterent editions o'i" lAvy Epitom. Sc€. it is read ' Van-

drt-iius/ and ' Varinius.'

MARCUS CRASSUS. 4-59

\vere equally decisive. He beat Variiius in several
engagements, and took his lictors, and the very
liorse u])on which he rode.

By thi;^> time lie was become strong and formid-
able. Nevertheless, his views were moderate. He
had too much understanding to expect to conquer
the Romans ; and he therefore led his army to the
Alps, with an intention to cross them, and then dis-
miss his troops, that they might retire to their re-
s))ectivc coimtries, some to Thrace and some to
Gaul. But they, reiving upon their nuinbers and
elated with success, would not listen to his proposal.
Instead of that, thev traversed Italy and laid it
waste.

It was no longer the indignity and disgrace of this
revolt, which afflicted th.e senate ; it was fear and
{langer : and they now employed both the consuls
in this war, as one of the most difficult and import-
ant whicli had ever occurred. One of these magis-
trates, Gellius, having surprised a body of Germans,
who in their rashness and self-confidence had sepa-
rated from the body of Spartacus' army, entirely
defeated them and put them to the sword. Lentu-
lus, the other, endeavoured to surround Spartacus
with his superior number of troops : but that chief-
tain met him fairly in the field, beat his lieutenants,
and stripped them of their baggage. He then con-
tinued his route toward the Alps ; but he was op-
posed by Cassins who commanded in that part of
Gaul near the Po, and advanced against him at the
head often thousand men. A battle ensued, in whicli
Cassins was defeated with considerable loss, and with
difficulty saved himself from being taken prisoner.

No sooner were the senate informed of these mi-
serable proceedings, than they expressed the utmost
indignation against the consuls, and gave orders
that they sliould be superseded in the command.
Crassus was the person, whom they selected as the
successor ; and many of the nobility served under
him as volunteers, as well on account of his political

9

♦CO MARCUS CRASSUS.

influence, as out of personal regard. He went and
•posted himself in tiie Picene, in order to intercept
►Spartacus v. ho was to march that way. At the same
time, he sent Ins lieutenant Mummius round with
two legions ; giving him strict orders only to follow
the enemy, and by no means to hazard either battle
or skirmish. ^Inmmius, however, on the first pro-
mising occasion engaged Spartacus, and vv-as entirely
routed. Numbers fell upon the field of battle, and
many others threw away their arms, and fied for
their lives.

Crassus gave Mummius a severe reprimand, and
new-armed his men ; but insisted withal, that they
siiould find security for their keeping those arms,
with which tliey were now entrusted. The first five
hundred, who had shown the grossest marks of
Cowardice, he divided into fifty parts, and put one
in each decad to death by lot ; thus reviving an an-
cient custom of mihtary punishment, wliich had been
long disused. This kind of punishment indeed is
the deepest mark of infamy, and being carried into
execution before the whole armyj, io attended with
many aweful and affecting circumstances.

After having thus chastised his men, he led them
against the enemy. But Spartacus turned back, and
retired through Lucania to the sea. There happen-
ing to find a number of vessels in harbour, belong-
ing to the Cilician pirates, he resolved to make an
attempt upon Sicily ; where at the head of two thou-
sand men lie thought he could easily rekindle the
^Ser^•ilc war, which had but lately been smothered'',
and which required only a little fuel to make it fiamc
out afresh. Accordingly, the pirates entered into
an agreement with him ; but they had no sooner re-
ceived his money, than tliey broke their engagement,
and sailed another way. Spartacus, thus duped,
quitted the sea, and entrenched himself in the pe-
nin.sula of Khegium.

'' It was on!v nineteen years before, that c pei-iod had been put
to the Scrtiie war.

MARCUS CRASSU8. 4«l

When Crassus came up, he observed that the na-
ture of the place suggested wliat measures lie ouglit
to take, and accordingly determined to buikl a wail
across the Isthmus. This, he knew, would at once
keep liis soldiers from idleness, and cut oft" the
cnemv's supplies. The work was arduous and dilil-
cult. ' Nevertheless he finished it, beyond all expec-
tation, in a very short time; drawing a trench from
yea to sea three hundred furlongs in length, fifteen
I'eet in breadth, and as many in depth: he built a
wall, also, above it of considerable height and
.strength.

Spartacus, at first, made a jest of the undertaking.
But, when his plunder began to fail, and he wished
to go elsewhere, he saw the wall before him, and
at the same time he was conscious that the penin-
sula was exhausted. He watched his opportunity
however, in a snowy and tempestuous night, to fiil
up the trench with earth, wood, and other mate-
rials; and so passed it with the third part of hi.^
army. Crassus now began to fear that Spartacus,
in the spirit of enterprise, would immediately march
to Rome. But when he observed that a number o[
the enemy, on some difference or other, had sepa-
rated and encamped upon the Lucanian lake, he
recovered his spirits. The water of this lake is said
to change in such a manner, as at some times to be
sweet and fresh, and at others so salt that it is impos-
sible to drink it. Crassus fell upon this party, and
drove them from the lake ; but he could not do any
considerable execution, or continue the pursuit very
far, because Spartacus made his appearance, and
rallied his fugitives.

Crassus now repented of his having written to
the senate, " that it was necessary to recall Liicullus
from Thrace and Fompeyfrom Spain," and hastened
to finish the war himself For he was sensible that
the general, who should come to his assistance,
would rob him of the whole honour. He resolved
therefore, in the first place, to attack tlie troops

12

4G2 MARCUS CllASSUS*.

■whicli liad revolted and formed a separate bodv
nnder the command of two officers, named Canniciu.s
and Castus. A\ illi this view, he sent a coips of six
tliousand men l)efbre to seize an eminence whic!)
]]e thought would be of service to him, but ordered
them to conduct their enterprise Vv'itii ail imaginable
secrecy. They observed his directions; and, to
conceal their march better, covered their hehuets
and the rest of their arms. Two women however,
wdio were sacrificing before the enemy's camp, dis-
covered them ; and tliey would probably have been
all cut off, had not Crassus immediately advanced,
and given the enemy battle. This was the most
obstinate action in the whole war. Twelve thou-
sand three hundred of the enemy were killed, of
which number there were only two found wounded
in the back ; the rest died in their ranks, after the
bravest exertions of valour.

Spartacus, after this defeat, retired toward the
mountains of Petclia ^"^ ; and Quintus one of Crassus*
officers, and ►Scropha the qu^stor, marclied after
him in order to harass his rear. But Spartacus
facins; about, the llomans fled in the most dastardly
manner, and with great difficulty carried off the
qutEstor who had been Vv'ounded in the skirmisli.
This success was Spartacus' ruin. It gave the fugi-
tives such spirits, that they determined no longer, in
obedience to their officers, to decline a decisive
action : but as thev were unon the road, addressed
them vrith their swords in- their liaiids, and insisted
on marching back tlirough Lucania with the utmost
expedition, to meet the llomans and face Crassus in
the field.

This Was the very thing, which Crassus desired,
lie had been informed of Pom})ey's approach ; and
of the many speeches, addressed to the people on
occasion of the ensuing election, in v»hic:i it was

"5 Tlie craiital of Lucani;; (Strabo, ii.) founded by Pbiloctetos-
See also ^'irg. ^Eu. iii. 'tO'^*.*

MAPvCUS CRASSrS. 4t53

asserted that tliis laurel belonged to liim, and tluiL
as soon ^is lie made his appearance, he woukl by
some decisive stroke ])nt an end to the war.

Crassus therelbre hastened to give that stroke
himself, and with the same view encamped verv
near the enemy. One day, when he had ordered
his soldiers to dig a trench, the gladiators attacked
them as they were at work. Numbers came up
continually on both sides, to suj)port the comba-
tants ; and at last Spartacus seeing what the case
necessarily required, drew out his whole army.
When they brought him his horse, he drew his
sword and*^ killed" him, saying at the same time,
*' If I prove victorious, 1 shall have horses at com-
" mand ; if I ara defeated, I shall have no. need of
" this." His aim was to find Crassus, and he made
his wav through showers of darts and heaps of the
slain. ' Him indeed he did not reach, but he slew^
with his own liand two centurions, who ventured to
engage him. At last, those that seconded him fled.
He still however stood his ground, and though sur-
rounded by numbers, fought with the utmost gal-
lantry, till he was cut in pieces.

Crassus upon this occasion availed himself of every
circumstance, v.^ith which Fortune favoured him :
lie performed cvi'vy act of generalship ; he exposed
his person in the boldest manner, yet he was only
twining a laurel for Pompey's brows. Pompey met
(it seems) those, w^ho had escaped out of the field,
and put them to the sword. In consequence of
which, he wrote to the senate, ", That Crassus
" had indeed beaten the fugitive gladiators in a
^'pitched battle; but that it was he, who h.ad cut
" up the war by the roots ^\"

Pon^pey, on his return to Ilorne, triumphed in a
magniticc'nt manner for his conquest of *Sertorius and
Spain. As for Crassus, he did not pretend to solicit

'» Labore nhf.no 7nagno partam. gloriam ■ . -•

Vcr/>ift .su'ps in ae iransmovet, qui liabet salcrn, Tcr.

See tlic Liil' uf Ponipcv, Vu!. lY. n. 14S.

4G4 MARCUS CUASSUS.

the greatcM' triiinipli ; and even the less, wliich is lerl
up on toot under the name of an Ovation, seemed
to have no propriety or decorum in the conquest of
fugitive shives. In wliat respects this ditfers from
the other, and wlienee the terra ' Ovation' is derived,
"we have stated in tlie Life of Marcellus°.

Pompey was immediately called to the c(MKsuIship ;
and, thou£::^i Crassus liad interest enouc;]) of lii.s own
to eneourat^e him to ])or)e ibr the same h.oiiour, vet
he seruple<l not to crave hio good oiiiees. Tlii;?
application Poinpey received v.ilh pleasure ; for he
was desirous by all means to Iiave Crassus under aji
obhgation to him. He therefore readiiy espou.sed
his cause ; and at last, wheii he made his speech to
the people, said, " He was as much indebted to them
" for the collegue vviiom tliey liad given him, as for
" their iiivonr to himself" The same good ejidcr-
standinsT, however, did not louix continue : thcv
differed about almost eveiy article which came
before tliem ; and tliose disputes and altercations
prevented their effecting any tiling considerable
during their whole consulship. The most remarkable
thing was, that Crassus oUcred a splendid sacrifice
to Fiercnles, entertained the people at ten thousand
tables, and gave them a supply of bread-corn for
three months.

Whcii thev held one of the last assemblies before
they quitted tlicir chai-ge, a Roman knight named
Ovatius AiireiiuH, who had spent most of his time in
a retired manner in the country and was a man of
no great note, mounted the Rostrum, and gave the
people an aceoinit of a vision which had appeared
to him : " Jupiter," said he, " appeared to me in
" a dream, ar.d commanded me to inform you in tliis
** public manr.er, tiiat you are not to suffer the con-
** suls to lav dovvii their office before thev become
** friends." When he had ended his sj)ecch, th^
people insisted that they should be reconciled,

^° See Vol. IL>^

Si

MARCUS CRASSUS. 465

Pompcy stood without making any motion toward

it ; bnt Crassus went, and offered him his hand : " I

*' am not ashamed, my fellow-citizens," said lie,

" neither do 1 think it beneath me to make the first

*' advances to Pompey, whom you distinguished with

"the name of 'Great' while he was yet but a

" beardless youth, and whom you honoured with a

" triumph before he was a senator."

- These were the only memorable events in Crassus*

consulate. Mis censorship passed without any thing

worth mentioning-''. He made no inquisition into

the hves and manners of the senators : lie neither

reviewed the equestrian order, nor numbered the

people. Lutatius Catulus, one of the best-natured

men in the world, was his collegue : and it is said

that, when Crassus wished to adopt the violent and

unjust measure of rendering Egypt tributary to

ilome, Catulus strongly opposed it. Hence arose

the difference between them, in consequence of

which they both resigned their charge.

When the alarming conspiracy of Catiline, which
brought the commonwealth to the verge of destruc-
tion, broke out, Crassus was suspected of having
had some concern in it. Nay, there w'as one, wha
named him among the conspirators : but nobody
gave any credit to his information '-. Cicero (it is
true) in one of his Orations, openly accuses both
Crassus and Caesar of that crime. But that oration
did not appear in public, till both those illustrious

** He was censor six years after his consulship.

^^ Sallubt suys otherwise. He informs i.;s, that to some it appear-
ed incredible, but tiiat others believed iu Yet, not tbinkia<.r it
adviseal)le to exasperate a man of so much power, they joined hij
retainers, and those who owed him money, in crying out ' it was
a calumny, and the senate ought to exculpate hun;' which, ac-
cordingly, they did. Some were of opinion, and Crassus himself
among the rest, that the informer had been suborned by Cicery.
But what object could Cicero liave in view in accusing a man of
his consequence, unless it were to alarm the senate and the people
with a sense of their danger? And what could Crassus propose to
himself by entering into a plot to burn a city, in which his owji
property was so considerable? (See Bell. Catil. xlix,}

VOL. m. 2 H

466 JMARCUS CRASSUS.

men were dead. On tlic otlier hand the sainr
Cicero, in the Oration Vvhich he dehvered relative
to his consulship, expressly says that Crassns came
to him one night, and put a letter into his hand;i
evincing the reality of the plot, about which they
were then inquiring. Be that as it may, it is certain
tliat Crassns after this conceived a mortal liatred for
Cicero, and would have shown it by some act of
violence, had not his son Publics prevented him.
Piiblius was a man of letters, and particularly fond
of eloquence : hence his attachment to Cicero was
so strong, that when the bill for his banishment v\'as
proposed, he went into mourning, and persuaded
the rest of the Roman youth to do tlie same. At
last, he even prevailed upon his father to be recon-
ciled to him.

About this time, Caesar returned from his govern-
ment to solicit the consulship. Finding Crassus and
Pompey again at variance, he would not apply to
either of thein in particular, lest he should make the
other his enemy ; neither could he hope to succeed
without the assistance of one of them. In this
dilemma he determined, if possible, once more to
effect a reconciliation between them : for which,
purpose; he represented, " That by their quarrels
" they raised the Ciceros, the Catuli, and the Catos ;
'* who v/ould be nothing, if they were themselves
" but once real friends, and took care to act in con-
*' cert. If that were the case," said he, " with
" your united interests and counsels you might carry
" all before you."

These representations had their effect ; and, by
joining himself to the league, he formed that in-
vincible triumvirate, which ruined the senate and
people of Rome. Not that either Crassns or Pom-
pey derived any advantage from their union ; but
Ccesar, by the help of both, climbed to the highest
pinnacle of pov/er. An earnest of this he had, in
being unanimously elected consul. And as he
acquitted himself in lii.s office with great honour.

MARCUS CRASSUS. 4K37

tJiey procured Iiim the command of armies, and
decreed him the jiroviiice of Gaul, where he esta^-
blished himself in in an im pregnable castle. For
they imagined, Ll they did but secure to him tl^e
province which had fallen to his lot, they might
divide the rest betv/een themselves at their leisure.

It was the immoderate love of power, which led
Pompey into this error. And Crassus to his old
disease of avarice now added a new one: the
achievements, the victories, and the triumphs of
Cajsar raised in him a passion for the same ; and he
could not be content to be beneath him in this
respect, thoug;h he was so much superior to him in
others. He therefore never let himself be at rest or
peace, till he met an inglorious fite, and involved
his country in the most dreadful calamities.

On Cassar's coming from Gaul to the city of
Lucca, numbers went to wait upon him, and among
the rest Crassus and Pompey. These, in their pri-
vate conferences, agreed to carry matters with a
higher hand, and to make themselves absolute in
Rome. For this purpose Citsar was to remain at
the head of his army, and the other two to divide
the remaining provinces and armies between them.
There was no way however to carry their scheme
into execution, without suing for another consul-
ship ; in which Ciesar was to assist by writing to
his friends, and by sending a number of his soldiers
to vote at the election.

Vvlien Crassus and Pompey returned to. Rome,
their designs were strongly suspected ; and the gene-
ral discourse was, that the late interview boded no
good to the commonwealth. Upon which, Marceir
linns and Domitius"^ asked Pompey in full senate,
" Whether he intended to solicit the consulship?'*
to which he replied, '' Perhaps I may ; perhaps 1
" may not." And, upon their interrogating him a
second time, he said; " If I solicit it, I shall solicit

'• Domitius Ahenobarbus.
2 H 2

46S MARCUS CRASSUS. -

" it for men of honour, and not for men of a meaner
*' principle." As this answer appeared to have too
much of haughtiness and contempt, Crassus ex-
pressed himself with more moderation, " If it be
" for the public good, I shall solicit it ; if not, I
" shall forbear."

By this some other candidates, and among the
rest Domitius, were emboldened to appear ; but, as
soon as Crassus and Pompey declared themselves,
the rest dropped their pretensions. Only Domitius
was exhorted and encouraged by his friend and kins-
man Cato, " Not to abandon his prospects, but to
" stand up boldly for the liberties of his country.
*' Pompey and Crassus," he told him, " were not
" seeking the consulship, but absolute power ; nei-
** ther was it so much their aim to be chief magis-
" trates at home, as to seize the provinces, and to
*' divide the armies between them."

Having thus expressed his real sentiments, Cato
drew Domitius almost forcibly into the Forum, and
numbers joined them there : for they were greatly
surprised at this step of Crassus and Pompey. " Why
*' do they demand," said they, " a second consul-
" ship ? Why together ? Why not with others ?
" Have we not many persons of merit sufficient to
" entitle them to be collegues with either Crassus,
•^* or Pompey ?"

Pompey's party, alarmed at these speeches, threw
off the mask, and adopted the most violent measures.
Among other outrages, they way-laid Domitius as
he was going to the place of election before day-
break, accompanied by his friends ; killed his torch-
bearer, and wounded Cato, and many others of his
train. They tlien shut them all up together, till
Crassus and Pompey were elected.

A little while after this, they confined Domitius
to his house, by planting armed men about it, drove
Cato out of the Forum, and slew several who made
resistance. Having thus cleared the way, they con-
tinued Cajsar in his government for five years more.

MARCUS CRASSUS. 469

and obtained Syria and botli the Spains as provinces
for themselves. Upon casting lots, Syria fell to Cras-
sus, and the Spains to Pomjiey.

This allotment was not disagreeable to the multi-
tnde. They wished to have Pompey not far froni
Home ; and Pompey, who passionately loved his w^ife,
was very glad of the opportunity to spend most of
his time there. As for Crassus, w hen it appeared that
i Syria was his lot, he discovered the most extravagant
joy, as if it had been the principal happiness of his
life ; insomuch that, even before strangers and the
populace, he could hardly restrain his transports.
To his intimate friends he opened himself more freely,
expressing the wildest and most puerile anticipations,
in a manner totally unsuitable to his age and dispo-
sition ; for in general he was far from being pompous,
or inclined to vanity. But now, elated and cor,-
rupted by his flattering prospects, he considered not
Syria and the Parthians as the termination of his goo4
fortune; but intended to make the expedition of
Lucullus against Tigranes, and of Pompey against
Mithridates, appear only the sports of children. His
design was to penetrate to the Bactrians, the Indians,
the oriental ocean, and in his hopes he had already
swallowed up the entire east.

In the law relative to Crassus' government, no
mention was made of a war in it's neighbourhood,
but all the world knew Crassus had an eye to it ; and
C'cEsar, in the letter which he wrote to him from Gaul,
commended his design, and encouraged him. to attack
the Parthians. But when he was about to set for-
ward, Ateius one of the tribunes threatened to stop
him, and numbers joined the tribune's party. They
could not, without indignation, think of his com-
mencing hostilities against a people who had done
them no injury, and w4io were in fact their allies.
Crassus, alarmed at this, desired Pompey to conduct
him out of Roine, He knew tlie dignity of Pompey,
and the veneration in which he was held by the po-
pulace ; and upon this occasion, though many were
prepared to withstand Crassus and to raise a clamour

470 MARCUS CRASSUS.

against him, yet when tliey saw Pompey marcliing'
before him with an open and gay countenance, they
dropped tlicir rfescntment and made way in silence.

Ateius, however, advanced to meet him. In tiie
first place, by the authority of his office he com-
manded him to sto}), and protested against his enter-
prise. He then ordered one of his officers to seize
him : but the other tribunes interposing, the officer
let Crassus go. Ateius upon this ran forward to tlie
gate, and placed there a censer '•^ with lire in it. On
Crassus' approach, he sprinkled incense upon it, and
offered libations, uttering the most horrid impreca-
tions, and invoking at the same time by name certain
dreadful and stranjre gods. The Romans say, these
mysterious and ancient imprecations have such
power -^, that the object of them never escapes their
effect ; nay (tliey add) the person, who utters them,
is sure to be unhappy; so that they are seldom used,
and never but upon a great occasion. Ateius was
much blamed for his rash zeal. It was for his coun-
try's sake, that he was' an adversary to Crassus, and
yet it was his country which he laid under that ter-
rible curse. ' ■

CrassuSj pursuinghis journey, came toBrundusium ;
and thouirh the winter-storms made the vovaffc dan-
gerous, he put to sea, and lost many vessels in his
passage. A?, soon as lie had collected the rest of his
troops, he continued his route by land through
Galatia. He there paid his respects to Deiotarus -",
who though an old m.an was building a new city,

^* Upon this kind of dish Dacier has a note, chiefly it appears in
order to introduce Seneca (Ep. Ixxxv.) inveigliing against the pro-
fane adoption of it for the purposes of epicurism ; nt' quid palato jam
calloso pariimjerveat, ccenam culina jJroseguitio:*

^^ Dim dctestatio

Nulla expiaUtr victimci. (Hor. Ep. v. 90.)

'•^' The king of Galatia, who followed Pompey's interests, but
was forgiven by Caesar upon the intercession of Cicero. How
strongly does Horace's remonstrance apply in this instance!

Tu secanda marmora

Locas sub ipsumjiinusy et sepnlcn
Immemor^ struis domos. (Od. H. xviii. 19.)* -

MARCUS CRASSUS. 471,

Crassus laughed, and said, " You begin to build at
" the twelfth hour of tlie day !" The king laughed
in his turn, and replied, " You don't set out, gene-
" ral, very early in the morning against the Par-
" thians ! " Crassus indeed was then about sixty
vears of as:e, and he looked much older than he
really was.

Upon his arrival in Syria, his affairs at first pros-
pered to the full extent of his expectation. He threw
a bridge over the Euphrates with ease, and his army
passed it without opposition. Many cities in Meso-
potamia voluntarily received him ; and only one stood
upon it's defence. The prince, who governed it, was
named Apollonius. The Romans having lost about
a hundred men before it, Crassus marched against it
with all his forces, took it by assault, plundered it
of every thing valuable, and sold the inhabitants for
slaves. The Greeks called that city Zenodotia^^
Crassus, on taking it, sufi'ered his army to salute him
* Imperator,' which reflected no small disgrace upon
him ; as it showed the meanness of his spirit, and his
despair of effecting any thing considerable, to value
himself upon such a trifling acquisition.

After he had c^arrisoned the towns which had sub-
mitted, with seven thousand foot and a thousand
horse, he returned into Syria to winter. He was
there joined by his son, whom Caesar sent to him from
Gaul, adorned with military honours and at the head
of a thousand select horse.

Among the many errors, which Crassus committed
in this war, the first and one of the greatest was his
returning so soon into Syria. He ought to have ad-
vanced, and strengthened himself with the accession
of Babylon and Seleucia, cities always at enmity with
the Parthians: instead of which, he gave the enemy
abundant time to prepare themselves. Besides, his
occupations in Syria were heavily censured, having
more of the trader in them, than of the general. In-

^' It lay in the province of Oai'hoenc, in Mesopotamia.

472 MARCUS CRASSUS.

stead of examining into the state of his soldiers' arms,
keeping tliein in exercise, and improving their
strength and activity by proper rewards, he was en-
quiring into the revenues of the cities, and weighing
the treasures in the temple of the goddess of Hiera-
polis'^ And, though he had settled the quotas of
troops, which the states and principalities were to
furnish, he let them off again for a sum of money,
which exposed him to the contempt even of those
whom he excused.

The first sign of his future fortune came from this
very goddess, whom some call Venus, others Juno,
and others Nature, or that great principle which pro-
duces all things out of moisture, and instructs man-
kind in the knowledge of every good. As they were
going out of the temple, young Crassus stumbled and
fell at the gate, and his father fell upon him.

He was now drawing his troops out of winter-quar-
ters, when embassadors came from Arsaces, and ad-
dressed him in the f jllowing short speech : " It^ this
army be sent against the Parthians by the Roman
people, that people has nothing to expect but per-
petual war and irreconcileable hostility. But if
Crassus, against the inciiiiations of liis country (as
we understand is the ca;-,e) to gratity his own a\a-
rice has undertaken this war, and invaded one of
tlie Parthian proviiices, Arsaces will act with more
moderation. He will take compassion on Crassus*
*' age, and let the Romans go, though in fact he
considers them rather as in prison tlian in garri-
son." To this, Crassus boastingly ans\A ered, " He
would give them his answer at Seleucia." Upon
which Vagises the oldest of the embassadors laughed,

-" About twenty miles from the Euphrates stood a city, known
by t!io sevtral names of I^atnbycc, Edessa, and fliernpolis. By the
Syrians it was called Mag-ug. The goddess Atargatis was worship-
fed there wiih groat devotion. Lucian (De Dea wSyria) speaks of
her temple, tis the riciiijst in the world. (L.)

Steph. byz-.nt. mentions three othc: cities of this name ; one be-
tween Ph;-yiTia and Lvdia, celebrated for it's warm spring?, another
in Crete., and a third iii Caria.*

a
a

u
a

a

a

((

a

MARCUS CRASSUS. 473

and turning up the pulm of his hand rephed, " Cras-
*' sus, here will hair grow, belbrc thou scest Seleu-
" cia."

The embassadors then returned to their king
Orodes% and told him he must prepare for war. In
the mean time, some Romans escaped with difiiculty
from the cities which they garrisoned in Mesopo-
tamia, and brought a very alarming account of the
enemy. " They had been eye-witnesses (they said)
" to their immense numbers, and to their dreadful
" manner of fighting, when they attacked the towns.'*
And as it is usual for fear to magnily it's object, they
added. " It is impossible either to escape them when
" they piirsiie, or to take them when they fly. They
" have a new and strange sort of arrows, which
" are swifter than lightening, and strike their mark
" belbre you can see that they are discharged. The
^' otlcnsive arms of their cavalry pierce through every
" thing, and the defensive arms are so well tempered,
" that they do not give way to any thing."

Upon hearing this, tlie courage of the Romans be-
gan to droop. They had imagined that the Parthians
were not unlike the Armenians and Cappadocians,
whom Lucullus had beaten and driven before him
till he was weary; and consequently that the hardest
part of the expedition would be the length of the way,
and the trouble of pursuing men who would never
risk an engagement. But now they found that they
iiad to face war and danger which they had not ex-
})ccted : insomuch that several of the principal ofScers
t iiought Crassns ought to stop, and call a council, to
consider whether new measures sliould not be taken.
Of this number, was Cassius the quaestor. Besides,

-"> Here the kinir of Parlhia is called ' Orodes,' or ' Hyrodes,' \\l)o
bcTore -.vas c:illed ' Arsaecii." Arsaces was probably a name com-
<:um to t!ie kiniis of that country, and Orodt-'s the proper name of
i!,is piirtiL-uhir prince. He was tiie son of Phraates U. and made his
%v<iy to th.^ (.-roun througi) the blood of Ids older brother Michridates,
jl'or this, he deservedly died the L-umc l.irtd of death. See Dion
Cab!''. xjjyi.N. -vC, J'.'Stii;. x\ii, i'..

474. MARCUS CRASSUS.

the sootlisaycrs whimpered that the sacrifices were
not accepted by the gods, and tlie signs appeared
always inauspicious to the generaL He paid no at-
tention to tliem, however, nor to any but those who
were for hastening liis march.

He was the nriore confirmed in his intentions, by
the arrival of Artavasdes "^ king of Armenia. That
prince came with six thousand horse, which he said
were only his body-guard. He promised Crassus ten
thousand more armed at all points, and thirty thou-
sand foot, to be maintained at his own expense. At
the same time, he advised him to enter Parthia by the
way of Armenia. " By these means," said he, " you
" will not only have abundance of provisions, with
" which I shall take care to supply you ,• but your
" march v,ill be safe, as it will he along a chain of
*' mountains and through a country almost impracti-
"' cable for cavalry, in which the Parthian strength
" consists." Crassus received his tender of service,
and his noble offer of succours, but coldly; and said,
'' Pie should march through Mesopotamia, where he
*' had remaining a number of brave Romans." Upon
this the Armenian bade him adieu, and returned to
his own country.

*

As Crassus was passing the Euphrates at Zeugma ,
he met with dreadful bursts of thunder, and lighten-
ings flamed in the face of his troops. At the same
time, the black clouds emitted a hurricane mingled
witli lire, which broke down and destroyed a great
part of his bridge. The place likewise, which he had
marked out for a camp, was struck with lightening.

'° In the text, he is here called * Artabases ;' but Plutarch every-
wliere aftei-Hard denominates him 'Artavasdes.' (L.)

Appian iutbnns us, that Crassus was very grateful for this prince's
suggp'stions, though for the reason here assigned he did not feel
himself at liberty to profit by them. Justin, xxii. 2. varies a little
from botlu*

^' A Syrian city upon the Euphrates, so called, according to
riin. H. N. V. 21., from the bridge there formed by Alexander, the
iron chains of which were still remaining in the time of that wilder,
(lb. xxxiv. 15.)

MARCUS CRASSUP. 473

One of the general's war-horses richly caparisoned
ran away with his rider, leaped into the river, and
was seen no more. And it is said, that when the
foremost eagle was moved [in order to precede the
march] it turned back of it's own accord. Beside
these inanspicious tokens, it happened that upon the
distribution of provisions to the soldiers, after they
had crossed the river, they were first served with
lentiles and salt, which are reckoned ominous, and
commonly placed npon the monuments of the dead.
In a speech made to them by Crassus, an expression
escaped him, which struck them all with horror. He
said, " He had broken down the bridge, that not
" one of them might return." And Avhcn he ought,
upon perceiving the impropriety of the expression,
to have recalled or explained it to the intimidated
troops, his obstinacy vv'ould not permit him. To
which we may add that, in the sacrifice offered for
the lustration of the army, the Aruspex having put
the entrails in his hands, he let them fall. All, who
were present at the ceremony, were struck with asto-
nishment ; but he only said with a smile, " See what
" it is to be old! My sword, however, shall not
" slip out of my hands in this manner."

Immediately afterward, he began his march along
the side of the Euphrates with seven legions, nearly
four thousand horse, and almost as many light-armed
forces. He had not gone far before some of his
scouts returned, and informed him, that " they had
" not found so much as one man in their excursions;
" but that there were many vestiges of cavalry, who
" appeared to have fled as if they had been pursu-
" ed."

Crassus now began to be more sanguine in his
hopes, and the soldiers to hold the enemy in con-
tempt, upon a supposition that they durst not hazard
an encounter. Nevertheless, Cassius again addressed
himself to the general, and advised him, " To secure
" his troops in Some fortified town, till he should
^* have some certain account of the enemy. If he

47« MARCUS CRASSUS.

li

did not clioosc that, he desired him to heep alon^!^
the river, till he reached Seleucia. For thus he
woidd be constantly supplied with provisions from
the vessels which would follow his camp; and, the
" river preventing his being surrounded, he would
" always have it in his power to fight upon equal
" terms."

While Crassus was w^eisrhinsf these counsels with
much deliberation, there arrived an Arabian chief
named Ariamnes^-. This artful and perfidious man
was the principal instrument of all the calamities,
which fortune v/as preparing for Crassus' ruin.
Some of his ofiicers, who had served under Pompey,
knew how much Ariamnes had been indebted to
that general's favour, and that in consequence he
passed for a well-v/isher to the Romans. But now,
in concert with the Parthian officers, he planned a
scheme to draw Crassus from the river and the
higher grounds into an immense plain, where he
might easily be surrounded. For the enemy thought
of nothing less, than fighting a pitched battle with
the Romans.

This barbarian then, addressing himself to Crassus,
at first launched out into the praises of Pompey as
his benefactor, for he was a voluble and artful
speaker. He tlien proceeded to express his admi-
ration of so fine an army, but withal took occasion
to blame Crassus for his delays, and the time which
lie had spent in equipment and preparation ; as if
weapons, and not rather active hands and feet, were
required against a people, who had long been deter-
mined to retire with their most valuable effects and
their families to the Scythians and Hyrcanians.
*' Or suppose you have to fight," said he, " you
" ought to hasten to the encounter, before the king
" recover his spirits, and collect all his forces. At
" present he has only sent out Surena and Sillaces

5* Appian, and Dion Casslus (x. 20.) call hirn * Acbarus,' qr
* Agbai-us.'

MARCUS CRASS'US. 477

*' to amnse you, and to prevent your pursuit of
" liimseUl lor his part, he Vvill take care not to
" appear in the field."

This story was, in every particuh\r, completely
false, lor Orodes had divided his array into two
])arts, with one of v»"hich he was ravaging Armenia,
in order to wreak his vengeance upon Artavasdes ;
while Surena was left with the other, to act against
the Romans. Not that the king, as some assert,
liad any contempt for them ; for Crassus, one of the
most powerful men in Rome, was not an antagonist
whom he could despise, and think it a fairer field
of honour to cro and li^ht with Artavasdes, and lav
waste Armenia. On the contrary his apprehensions
of danger, it is highly probable, made him keep at
a distance, and watch the event; in order to whicii he
despatched Surena before liim to make trial of the ene-
my's strength, and to amuse them with his stratagems.
For Sureua was no ordinary person, but in fortune,
familv, and honour next after the kinix; and in
courage and capacity, as well as in size and beauty,
superior to the Parthians of his time. If he went
only upon an excursion into the country, he had a
thousand camels to carry his baggage, and two
hundred carriasres for his concubines: he was at-
tended by a thousand heavy-armed horse, and many
more of the light-armed rode before him. His
vassals and slaves, indeed, composed a body of
cavalry little short of ten thousand. He had the
hereditary privilege in his family, of placing the
diadem upon the king's head at his coronation.
When Orodes was driven from the throne, he
ixistored him ; and it was he who conquered for
him the great city of Seleucia, having been the first
to scale the wall, and beaten off the enemy witli his*
own hand. Though he was then not quite thirty
years old, his discernment and his opinions were
esteemed tiie best. By these talents he overtlu'cw
Crassus, who laid himself open to his arts first
by his too sanguine confidence, and afterward by

47S MARCUS CRASSUS.

liis apprehensions and his depression under mis-
fortunes.

When Crassus Iiad listened to the lure of Ariamncs,
and left the river to march into the plain, the traitor
led him a way which was smooth and easy at the
onset ; but after a while became extremely difficult,
on account of the deep sands in which he had to
wade, and a vast desert without wood or water,
which exhibited no limits on any side to the view.
So that his troops were ready to abandon the expe-
dition, not only through thirst and the difficulty of
the march, but also on account of the comfortless
and melancholy view before them of a country
where there was neither tree nor stream to be seen,
no hill to shelter them, no green herb grovv'ing, but
the billows of an immense sea of sand surrounded
the whole arm v.

These things gave them sufficient reason to sus-
pect, that they were betrayed ; but, when the en-
voys of Artavasdes arrived, there was no room to
doubt it. That prince informed Crassus, " That
" Orodes had invaded his kingdom with an immense
" army, so that he could not at present send the
*' Romans any succours. He therefore advised
" them to march toward Armenia, where with their
" united forces they might give Orodes battle. If
" Crassus did not relish this advice, he conjured
" him at least never to encamp upon any ground
" favourable to the cavalry, but to keep close to the
" mountains." Crassus, in his resentment and iu-
flxtuation, would return no answer in writing : he
only replied, " He was not now at leisiu'e to think
" about the Armenians ; but by and by he would
" come, and chastise their king for his perfidious-
" ness." Cassius was again extremely chagrined,
but he would not say any thing more to the general,
who was already offended by his remonstrances.
He applied however to the barbarian in private, in
such terms as these, ", O thou vilest of impostors,
"what malevolent daemon has brought thee among

Mz\RCUS CRASSUS. *r5»

" lis ? By what potions, by what enclianlments,
" hast thon prevailed upon Crassus to pour liis army
" into this vast, this amazing desert ; a march more
" fit for a Numidian robber ih.an for a Roman ge-
" ncral ?" Tlie barbarian, who had art enough to
adapt himself to all occasions, humbled himself t(>
Cassius, and encouraged him to have patience, only
a little longer. As for the soldiers, he rode about
the ranks under a pretence of fortifying them
aa:ainst their fatij^ues, and made use of several
taunting expressions to them : " What,'* said he,
do you imagine that you are marching through
Campania? Do you expect: the fountains, the
streams, the shades, the baths, and the houses of
refreshment which you there met with? And
will you never remember, that you are traversing
" the barren confines of the Arabians and Assv-
" rians ?" Thus the traitor admonished, or rather
insulted the Romans, and got off at last before his
imposture was discovered. Neither was this with-
out the general's knowledge : yet even then he had
the art to persuade him, that he was going upon
some scheme to throw the enemy into disorder.

It is said, that Crassus on that day did not make
his first appearance in a puq:)le robe, such as the
Roman generals commonly wore, but in a black
one ; and that, when he perceived his mistake, he
went and chanfved it. Some of the standards like-
wise were so rooted in the Gjround, that thev could
not be moved w-itliout the utmost effort. Crassus
only laughed at the omen, and hastened his march
the more, making the foot keep up with the cavalry.
In the mean time the remains of a reconnoitring
party returned, with an account that their comrades
had been killed by the Parthians, and thnt they
themselves had with great dilnculty escaped. At
the same time they assured him, that the enemy was
advancing with xery numerous forces, and in the
highest spirits.

This intelligence spread deep dismay among the

4-80 MAiiccs cnAssua

troops, aiu\ Crassiis was- the most terrified of all.
In his contusion lie had scarcely understanding"
enough lett, to draw up his army p^opcr]3^ At
tirst, in conformity to the opinion of Cassius, he
extended the front of his infantry so as to occupy a
wide sj)ace of ground to prevent their being sur-
rounded, and distributed the cavalrv in tlie win&s.
But soon altering- his mind, lie drew up the legions
in a close scjuare, and made a front evci-y way, each
front consisting of twelve cohorts. Every cohort
had it's troop of horse allotted to it, that no part
might remain unsupj)oited by the cavalry, but that
the whole might advance witli equal security to the
charge. One of the wings was given to Cassius, the
other to young Crassus, and the general himself
took charare of the centre.

In this order they moved forward, till they came
to a river called Balissus, the sight of which, though
in itself inconsiderable, gave great pleasure to the
soldiers, as well on account of their heat and thirst,
as of the fati^'ue ofmarchins; throuo-h a sandv desert.
Most of the officers were of opinion that they ought
to pass the night there, and after having procured
the best possible intelligence of the number of the;
enemy and their order, to advance against them at
break of day. But Crassus, carried away by the
eagerness of his son and of the cavalry about him,
who called upon him to lead them to the charge,
commanded tliose who wanted refreshment to take
it as they stood in their ranks. Before they had all
finished, he began his march ; not leisurely and with
the proper pauses necessary in going to battle, but
with a quick and continued pace, till they came in
\ lew of the enemy, who appeared neither so nu-
merous nor .so lbrn:idable as they had expected.
l''or Surena had concealed his main force behind
the adxanced guurd, and to prevent their being
betrayed by the glittering of thcii' armour, had
ordered them to cover it with their coats or with
skins. 12

MARCUS CRASSUS. 4SL

When botli armies were near enough to engage,
and the generals had given the signal, tlic tield
resonnded with a horrid din and dreadful bellowing.
For the Rirthians excite their men to action, not by
cornets and trumpets, but by certain hollow instru-
ments C()\ered with leather, and surrounded with
brass bells whicli they beat continually. The sound
is deep and dismal, something between the howling
of wild beasts and the crashing of thunder ; and
wisely had they adopted it, from observing that, of
all the senses, that of hearino; soonest disturbs the
mind, agitates the passions, and unhinges the un-
derstandino:.

While the Romans were trembling at the horrid
noise, the Partliians suddenly uncovered their arms,
and from tiie gleam of their breast-plates and theit
helmets of Margian steel polished to the greatest
perfection, appeared like battalions of tire. Their
cavalry likewise, completely armed in brass and
steel, shed a lustre not less striking. At the head of
them appeared Surena, tall and w^ell-made ; but his
feminine beauty did not hold out the promise of
such courage, as he actually possessed. For he was
dressed in the fashion of the Medes, with his fiice
painted, and his hair curled and equally parted ;
while the rest of the Parthians wore their hair in the
utmost disorder, like the Scvthians, in order to
make themselves look more terrible.

At iirst, the barbarians intended to have charged
with their pikes, and opened a way through the'
foremost ranks ; but when they saw the depth of
the Roman battalions, the closeness of their order,
and the firmness of their standing, they drew back ;
and, under the appearance of breaking their ranks
and dispersing, wheeled about and surrounded the
Romans. At that instant, Crassus ordered his
archers and light-infantry to begin the charge. But
they had not gone far, before they were saluted with
a shower of arrows, which came with such force and
did so much execution, as'drove them back upon the

VOL. III. 2 T

48t? MARCUS CRASSL'S.

battalions. Tliis was the beginning of disorder and
consternation among the heavy-armed, when they
observed the force of the arrows, against whicli no
armour was proof, and whose keenness nothing
could resist. The I'arthians now separated, and
began to exercise their archery upon the Romans on
all sides at a considerable distance ; not needing to
take any exact aim, on account of the closeness and
depth of the square, in which their adversaries were
drawn up. Their bows were large and strong, yet
capable of bending till the arrows were drawn to the
head ; they flew of course with prodigious power,
and the wounds which they inflicted were mortal.

The Romans were now in a dreadful situation.
If they stood still, they were pierced through ; if
they advanced, they could make no reprisals, and
yet were sure to meet their fate. For the Parthians
shoot as they fly ; and this they do with a degree of
dexterity inferior only to that of the Scythians. It
is indeed an excellent expedient, because they save
themselves by retiring, and by fighting all the while
escape the disgrace of flight.

While the Romans had any hopes, that the Par-
thians would spend all their arrows and quit the
combat, or else advance hand to hand, they bore
their distresses v/ith patience. But as soon as it
was perceived, that behind the enemy stood a num-
ber of camels loaded with arrows, whence the first
ranks after they had emptied their quivers were sup-
plied afresh, Crassus seing no end to his sufferings,
experienced the deepest distress. He sent direc-
tions, howe\er, to his son to march up to the
enemy, and charge them if possible, before lie was
quite surrounded ; for it was principally against
iiim, that one wing of the Parthian cavalry directed
their eitbrts, in hopes of attacking him in the rear.
Upon this, the young' man took thirteen hundred
horse (including the thousand received fi'om Caesar),
five hundred archers, and eight cohorts of infantry
which were next at hand, and wheeled about in
9

MARCUS CRASSUS. 483

order to come to the charge. The Pariliians, whe-
ther it was that they were afraid (as some liave
Stated) to meet a detachment which advanced against
tiiem in such good order, or wished to draw young
Grassus as far as they coidd from his father, turned
their backs and fled^^. The young man cried out,
" They dare not stand against us," and followed at
full speed. So did Censorinus and Megabacchus^"* ;
the latter a man celebrated for his strength and
courage, and the former a person of senatorial
dignity and an excellent orator. Both were intimate
friends of young Crassus, and nearly his co-evals.

The cavalry kept advancing, and such was the
alacrity and spirit of hope with which the infantry
were inspired, that they were not left behind ; for
they imagined, they were only pursuing a conquered
enemy. But they had not gone far, before they
found themselves fatally deceived. The pretended
fugiti\cs faced about, and many others joining
them, advanced to the encounter. The Ilomans
upon this made a stand, supposing the enemy would
come to close quarters with them, as their number
was but small. The Parthians however only formed
a line of their heavy-armed cavalry opposite to their -
adversaries, and then ordered their irregulars to
gallop round and raise up the sand and dust, till
the Romans could scarcely either see or speak for
the clouds of it. Besides, the latter were drawn up
in so small a compass, and pressed so close upon
each other, that they were a very fair mark for the

'' It was their corarnon metkod, not to stand a pitclied battle
w 1th troops, whicli were in any dejjree their match. In retreating
and advancing, as occasion required, they knew the advantages
which they possessed in the svJl"! nc^s of their horses, and in the
<^xceiience of their archers.

'■» It is not easy to say, of what Roman name * Megabacchiig'
coukl be thie corruption. Xylander tells us, he found in an olcJ
transkition ' Cnei. PUmcus.' ThaJ translator, probably, had the
authority of some MS. (L.) Still more probably, as Appian gives
bun the same name, he was on-e of the barbarian ii-iends of th.e
Romans, either a native of that part of A^ia, or one of the thousaaci,
cavalry seiU bv ("riisar from Gaul.*

2 I 2

*8* MARCUS CRASSUS.

enemy. Their death, likewise, was both painful an(?
lingering. Tlicy rolled about in agony Avith the
arrows sticking in them, and before they died en-
deavoured to pull out tlie barbed points, entangled
within their veins and sinews ; an efl'ort, m hich only
widened their wounds, and added to their torture.

Manv died in this miserable manner, and those
who survixed were unfit lor action. When Publius^'
desired them to attack the heavy-armed cavalrv,
they showed him their hands nailed to their shields,
and their feet fastened to the ground, so that they
could neither fight nor fly. He therefore encou-
raged his cavalry, and advanced with great vigour
to the charge. But the dispute was by no means
equal, with respect either to attack or to defence.
For his men had only weak and short javelins to at-
tem})t the Parthian cuirasses, which were made of
raw hides or of steel ; while the enemy's strong pikes
easily made an impression upon the naked or light-
armed Gauls. These were the troops, in whom he
had placed his chief confidence, and indeed he
achieved wonders with them. They laid hold on
the pikes of the barbarians, and grappling with
them pulled them oiT' their horses, and threw them
on the ground, where they could scarcely stir on
account of the weight of their armour. Many of
them even quitted their own horses, and getting
imder those of the Parthians wounded them in the
belly; upon which the horses mad with pain plunged
and threw their riders, and treading them under
foot alon»2: with the enemv, at last fell down dead
upon botli. What most distressed the Gauls was
heat and thirst, for they had not been accustomed
to either. And they had lost the chief part of tlieir
horses, by advancing furiously against the enemy's
pikes.

Thev had now no resource but to return to their
infantry, and to carry off young Crassus, who was

^^ Young Grassus.

MARCUS CRASSUS. 485

Tiiuch wounded. But Iiappcniug to see a hill of
.saud by the way, they retired to it ; and having
plaeed their horses in the middle, they locked their
shields together all round, thinking that would
prove the best detence against the barbarians. It
turned out, however, quite otherwise. As long as
they were upon plaui i^round, the foremost rank;?
afforded some shelter to those behind ; but upon an
acclivity the unevenness of the ground showed one
above the other, and those behind higher than those
before, so that there was no chance for any of them
to escape : they fell therefore promiscuously, la-
menting their inglorious fate, and the impossibility
of exertincr themselves to the last.

Young Crassus had with him two Greeks, named
Ilieronymus and Nicomachus, who had settled in
that country in the town of Carrae^^ These ad-
vised him to retire with tiiem, and to make hh
escape to Isclmag, a city which had adopted the
Roman interests, and was at no great distance.
But he answered, " I'here was no death, however
" dreadful, the fear of Vv'hich should induce Publius
" to desert so many brave men dying for his sake."
At the same time, he desired tliem to save them-
selves, and then embraced and dismissed them.
As his own hand was tranfixed with an arrow, and
he could not use it, he exposed his side to his
armour-bearer, and ordered him to strike the blow.
Censorinus is said to have died in the same manner.
Megabaccinis dispatched himself with his own hand,
and the otlier principal ofKcers followed his ex-
ample. Tlie rest fell by the Barthian pikes, after
they had defended theuiselves gallantly to the last.
The enemy did not make above five hundred prir
soners.

When they had cut off the head of young Crassus,
they marched with it to his father, whose afiairs
were thus circumstanced : after he had ordered hi^

^ In >Ic?opotaniia, as well as Iscima? mentioned below,*

485 MARCUS CRASSUS.

son to charge the Parthians, intenigence was brouglit
him that they were flving with the utino.t precipi-
tation, and that the Romans were pursuing them
with equal briskness. He perceived also, that on
his side the enemy's operations were comparatively
feeble ; for the greatest part of them were then gone
after his son. Upon this, he in some degree re-
co\'ered his spirits, and drew his forces back to some
higher ground, expecting every moment his son's
return from the pursuit.

Publius had sent several messeno-ers to inform
him of his danger ; but the first had fallen in with
the barbarians, and were cut in pieces ; and the last
having with much difficulty escaped, told him, " His
" son would be lost, if he did not receive large and
*' immediate succours." Crassus, distracted by dif-
ferent passions, was unable to form any rational
scheme. On one hand, he was apprehensive of
sacrificing the whole army ; and, on the other, he
■was anxious for his son's preservation ; ;:• last, how-
ever, he resolved to marcli to his assistance.

In the mean time, the enemy advanced with loud
shouts and songs of victory, which made then ap-
pear more terrible ; and all the drums, bellowing
again in the ears of the Romans, ga^■e notice of an-
other engagement. The Parthians coming forward
with Publius* head upon a spear, demanded, in the
most contemptuous manner, whether they knew
the fimily and parents of the young man. " For,'*
said they, " it is not possible that so brave and gal-
*' lant a youth should be the son of Crassus, the
"" greatest dastard and the meanest wretch in the
" world."

This spectacle broke and depressed the spirits of
the ilomans, more than all their other calamities.
Instead of exciting them to revenge, as it might
naturally have been expected, it produced a horror
and tremor throughout the whole army. Neverthe-
less Crassus, upon this melancholy occasion, behaved
with more magnanimity than he had ever before

a

c:

(,i
ii
cc

ii

MARCUS CRASSUS. 48Y

displayed. He marclied up and down the ranks, and
cried, " Romans, this loss is mine. In you, the
" fortunes and the glory of Rome stand safe and
" undiminished. If you have any pity for me, be-
reaved as I am of the best of sons, show it by
your resentment against the enemy. Put an end
to their triumph ; avenge their cruelty. Be not
astounded at this disaster ; those must always
luwe something to endure, who aspire to great
things. Lucullus did not pull down Tigranes, nor
Scipio Antiochus, without some expense of blood.
Our ancestors lost a thousand ships before they
reduced Sicily, and many illustrious officers and
generals in Italy ; but no previous suffering pre-
vented their finally subduing the conquerors. For
it is not by her good fortune, but by the perseve-
" ranee and fortitude with which she has at all
" times combated adversity, that Rome has risen to
" her present height of power."

Crassus, though he thus endeavoured to animate
his troops, did not find many listen to him with plea-
sure. He perceived that their depression still con-
tinued, when he ordered tliem to shout for the
battle : for their shout was feeble, and languid, and
unequal, w hereas that of the barbarians was bold and
strong. When the attack began, tlie light-armed
cavalry taking the Romans in flank, galled them
with their arrows ; while the heavy-armed, charging
them in front with their pikes, drove them into a
narrow space. Some indeed, to avoid a more pain-
ful death from the arrows, advanced with the reso-
lution of despair, but they did not do much execu-
tion. Their only advantage consisted in being
speedily despatched by the deep wounds received,
from the broad heads of the enemy's strong pikes,
which they pushed with such force, that they often
pierced through two men at once ^^

The fight continued in this manner all day ; and

'" In this there is nothing incredible: it is"' '^equently done by
the Tartars, who pursue the same mode ol' fighting at this day.

488 MARCUS CRASSUS.

when the barbarians were on the point of retiring,
tliey r.aid, " They would give Crassus one night to
" bewail his son ; if lie did not in the mean time
" consider better, and rather choose to go and sur-
" render himself to Arsaces, than be carried to him.'*
They then sat down near the Roman army, and
passed the night in great satisfaction, hoping to
iinish the affair the next day.

It was a dismal night to the Romans. They nei-
ther took any care to bury the dead, nor paid any
attention to the wounded, many of whom were ex-
piring in the utmost agonies. Every man had his
own fate to deplore, which now appeared inevitable,
wiiether they remained where they were, or threw
themselves in the night into that boundless plain.
They found a material objection likewise against re-
tiring, in the wounded ; who would retard their
ilight, if they attempted to carry them off, and alarm
the enemy with their cries, if they were left behind.

As for Crassus, though they considered him as
the cause of all their miseries, yet they wished him
to make his appearance, and to speak to them. But
he had covered his head in darkness, and stretched
himself upon the ground : a sad example, to the
vulgar, of the instability of fortune ; and, to men of
deeper thoi^ght, of the effects of rashness and ill-
placed ambition ! Not contented with being the
i!rst and the most eminent among many millions of
jiien, he had regarded himself as despicably low, be-
cause there were two above him ^^

Octavius, one of his lieutenants, and Cassius, en-
deavoured to raise him from the ground, and to
dbnsole him ; but they found, that he had entirely
alxmdoncd himself to despair. They then by their
own authority summoned the ccnturioijs and other
(officers to a council of war, in which it w:is resolved
that they should retire. Accordingly, they began to

' "3 This was the very principle wliicb ruined Hanian, whose elc-
vsvted station ' avaiJulhio) nothing, so long as he saw Mordecai the
Jew sitting at the king's gate.' (Esth. v. la.) *

MARCUS CRASSUS'. 489

do so without sound of trumpet, and at first with
some degree of silence. But when the sick and
wounded perceived that they were about to be de-
serted, their doleful cries and lamentations filled the
whole army with confusion and disorder. Still great-
er terror seized them as they j)roceedcd, the fore-
most troops imagining that those beiiind were ene-
mies. They often missed their way, and often stop-
j)ed to range themselves in some order, or to take
some of the wounded off the beasts of burthen, and
to put others on. All this occupied a considerable
time ; insomuch that Ignatius only, who made the
best of his way with three hundred horse, arrived at
Carrae about midnight. He saluted the guards in
Latin ; and when he perceived they heard him, he
bade them go and tell Coponius, who commanded
there, that Crassus had fought a great battle with
the Parthians. He then, without explaining him-
self any farther, or acquainting them who he was,
proceeded as fast as possible to Zeugma ; by which
means he saved himself and his troop, but at the
same time incurred considerable censure for having
deserted his general.

Crassus, however, found his advantage in the hint
given to Coponius. That officer, considering that
the hurrv and confusion with which the messaoe had
been delivered betokened no good, ordered his mea
to arm; and, as soon as he learned that Crassus was,
marching that way, went out to meet him, and -con-
ducted his army into the town.

Though the Parthians in the night perceived tliQ
flight of tlie Romans, they did not pursue thcm'L
but at break of day they fell upon those who had
been left beiiind in the camp, and despatched them,'
to the immber of four thousand. The cavalry also
picked up many others, straggling about upon the
plain. One of the Roman officers named Varsxun-

•lit

tmus, who had strayed in the night from the main
body with four cohorts, was found next morning
posted upon a hill. This little corps the barbariaui^

490 MARCUS CRASSUS.

siirroimded and killed, v*ith tlie exception of twenty
men, who made their way sword in hand lln"ough
the opening files of the enemy, and arrived sate at
Carrse.

A rumonr was now brouglit to Surena, that'Cras-
sus with the best of his officers and troops had
escaped, and that those who had retired into Carra*
were only a mixed nudtitiide not worth his notice.
He was afraid, therefore, that he had lost the frnits
of his victory : bnt not being absohitely certain, he
wished for better information, in order to determine
whether he shoidd besiege Carrjt, or leave it and
pursue CrassLis whithersoever he might have fled.
For this purpose he despatched an interjjreter to the
walls, who was to call Crassus or Cassius in Latin,
and acquaint them that Surena demanded a confe-
rence. As soon as the business of the interpreter
was made known to Crassus, he accepted the proposal.
And not long afterward, certain Arabians arrived
irom the same quarter, who were well acquainted
with the persons of Crassus and Cassius, having been
in the Roman camp before the battle. These seeing
Cassius upon the v/alls, told him, " Surena was ready
" to conclude a peace with them, on condition that
" they would enter into terms of friendship with
" the king his master, and give up Mesopotamia ;
" for he thought this more advantageous to both,
" than coming to extremities." Cassius embraced
tiie overture, and demanded that the time and place
might be fixed for an interview between Surena and
Crassus ; which the Arabians promised, and then
^rodc off.

Surena, delighted to find that the Romans were
in a place where they might be besieged, led his
Parthians against them the next day. These bar-
barians treated them with great insolence, and told
them, if they wished for a truce, they must deliver
up Crassus and Cassius bound. The Romans, deeply
aliiicted at finding themselves so grossly duped, in-
formed Crassus tliat he must renounce his distant

MARCUS CRASSUS. / 491

and vain liopes of succour from the Armenians, and
resolve upon flight. This resohition ought to liave
been concealed ironi all the irihabitants of Carra?,
till the moment it was carried into execution. But
('rassiis revealed it to Andromachus, one of the most
perfidious among them, whom he also chose tor his
guide. From this traitor the Parthians learned every
step, that was taken.

As it was not their custom, nor consequently very
practicable for tiiem to fight in the night, and it was
in the night that Crassus marched out, Andromachus
contrived that they might not be far behind. With
this view he artfully led the Romans sometimes one
way and sometimes another, and at last entangled
them among deep marshes and ditches, where it was
difficult to get either forward or backward. There
were several, who conjectured from this shifting and
turning that Aiidromachus had some ill design, and
therefore refused to follow him any farther. Cassius
himself returned to Carrae; and, when his Arabian
guides advised him to wait till the moon had passed
the Scorpion, he answered, " I am still more afraid
" of the Sagittary^^.'* After which, making the
best of his way, he arrived in Assyria with five hun-
dred horse. Others finding faithful guides reached
the mountains of Sinnaca^ and were perfectly secure
before it was light. These, about five thousand ifi
number, were under the conduct of Octavius, a man
of great merit.

In the mean time day overtook Crassus, while,
through the treachery of Andromachus, he was wan-
dering in bogs and other impracticable ground. He
had with him only four cohorts of infantry, a very
small number of horse, and five lictors. At length,
with much labour and difficulty, he regained the
road ; but by this time the enemy were coming up.
Crassus was now not above twelve furlongs behind
the corps under Octavius. As he could not how-

39 'Anuding to the Partliian arch.prs.

492 MARCUS CRA.SSUS:

ever join liim, he retired to a liill not so secure
against cavairv as Sinnaca, but situated under tliose
mountains, and connected with them by a long ridge
which ran through the plain. Octavius therefore
could perceive Crassus' danger, and he immediately
ran down with a small band to his assistance. Upon
this, the rest rej)roaching themselves for staying be-
hind, descended from the heights, and falling upon
the Parthians, drove them from the hill. Thev then
took Crassus in the midst of them, and fencing him
with their sliields boldly declared, that no Parthian
arrow should touch their general, so long as one of
them was lei't alive.

Surena now perceiving that the Parihians were
less vigorous in their attacks, and that if night came
on and the Romans gained the mountains, they
would be entireiv out of his reach, formed a strata-
gem to get Crassus into his hands. He dismissed
some of his prisoners, after they had heard the con-
versation of the Parthian soldiers, who had been in-
structed to say that the king did not desire perpetual
war with the Romans, but had rather engage their
friendship by his generous treatment of Crassus,
After this manoeuvre, the barbarians withdrew from
the combat ; and Surena, with a few of his principal
officers, advanced gently to the hill, where he un-
strung his bow, and offering his hand invited Crassus
to an agreement. " The king,*' he said, " had
" hitherto, contrary to his inclinations, given proofs
" of his power; but that now he would with plea-
" sure evince his moderation and clemency, in com-
ing to terms with the Romans, and suffering them
to depart in peace."
The troops received this proposal of Surena with
great rapture. But Crassus, whose errors had ail
been owing to the Parthian treachery, and who
thought this sudden change in their behaviour a most
auspicious circumstance, instead of accepting the
ovcrtiuT, stood deliberating. Upon this, the soldiers
raised a loud outcry, apd bade him go down. The^

MARCUS CRASSUa 'iOS

then proceeded to insults and reproaches, telh'ni^
him, " He was very willing to expose them to the
weapons of the Parthians, but he did not dare to
meet them himself, even when they had laid down
their arms, and demanded only a friendly confe-
" rence."

At first, he had recourse to entreaties; and re-
presented to them that, if they woLdd but hold out
for the remainder of the day, they might in the en-
suing night gain the mountains and rocks, which
would be inaccessible to cavalry. At the same time
he pointed to the way, and implored them not to
tbrego the hopes of safety now so near. But when
he found they received his address with anger, and
menacingly clashed their arms, he v/as terrified and
began to go down : only turning round for a, single
moment to utter these few words : " You Octavius,
" and you Petronius,, and all you Roman officers
" here present, are witnesses of the dishonourable
*' violence, by vvhich I am constrained to take this
" step. But when you are safe, pray inform the
" world, not that I was abandoned by my country-
*' men, but that I was deceived by the enemy.'*

Octavius and Petronius hovv^ever would not stay
behind, but descended the hill with him. His lictors
likewise would have followed, but he sent them
back. The first persons who met him on the part of
the barbarians, were two Greeks of the half-breed.'
These dismounted, and made him a low reverence;
and addressing him in Greek, desired he would send
some of his people to see that Surena and his com-
pany came unarmed, and without any weapons con-
cealed about them. Crassus answered, " That if his
" life had been of any account with him, he should
" not have trusted himself in their hands.'* Never-
theless, he despatched two brothers of the name of
Roscius before him to inquire, upon what footing
and with how many attendants they were to meet.
Those messengers Surena seized and detained, while
^le himself advanced with his principal officers on

«

491. MAIICT'S CIIASSUS.

horseback. " What is this," said he, " that I he-
" hold ? A Roman general on foot, wJiile we are on
" horseback !" He then ordered a horse to be
brought tor him. But Crassus answered, " There
" was no mistake on either side, since he came to
" treat after the manner of his country." " Then,'*
said Surena, " from this moment thei'c shall be peace
" and an alliance between Orodes and the Romans.
" But the treaty must be signed upon the banks of
" the Euphrates ; for you Romans remember your
" agreements very ill.'* At the same time, he of-
fered him his hand : and when Crassus would have
sent for a horse, he told him, " There was no need ;
" the king would supply him with one." A horse
was, accordingly, brought with furniture of gold,
and the equerries having seated Crassus u])on it,
began to drive him forward. Upon this, Octavius
laid hold on the bridle ; in which he was followed
by Petronius, one of the legionary tribunes. After-
ward the rest of the Romans who attended endea-
voured to stop the horse, and to draw off those, who
pressed on each side upon Crassus. A scuffle and
tumult ensued, which ended in blows. Octavius
drew his sword, and killed one of the Parthian
grooms ; but was himself slain by another, who came
up behind him. Petronius, who had no arms to de-
fend him, received a stroke on his i)reast-plate, but
leaped from his horse unwoundcd. Crassus was de-
spatched by a Parthian, named Pomaxa^hres ^'^ :
thoiigh some ailirm, that another person killed him,
and that Poniaxasthres cut ort'lii^s head and his right-
hand. All these circumstances indeed must be re-
lated rather from conjecture, than from knowledge.
For part of tlie attendants were slain in attempting
to defend Crassus, and the rest on the first alarm
had run up the hilh

After this, the Parthians went, and addressed

*° A]:pian calls him * Maxoctliixs,' and in some copies of Plu-
tarcl) Ik: i.s.called ' A,\athiTs.' Crassv\s r.'ll X. U. C. 701., B.C. 53.

jVIARCUS CRASSUS. i95

tiiomselves to the troops at the top. They told tlicni,
tliat Crassus had met witli the reward whicli his in-
justice deserved ; but, as for themselves, Surena de-
sired they would come down boldly, tor the\^ liad
jiothiiig to tear. U]ion tlus promise, some weist
down and surrendered themselves. Others attempted
to get off in the night ; but of those, very fev/ es-
t^aped. The rest were hunted by the Arabians, and
either taken captive, or put to the sword. It is said
that in all there were twenty thousand killed, and
ten thousand made prisoners.

Surena sent Crassus' head and hand to Orodes
in Armenia; notwithstanding which, he ordered
his messengers to report at Selcucia, that he was
])ringing him thither alive. Pursuant to this rumour
lie prepared a kind of mock procession, w^hich by
Avay of ridicule he called ' a triumph.' Caius P2-
cianus, who of all the prisoners most resembled
Crassus, Avas dressed in a rich robe after the Par-
thian fasliion, ajid instructed to answer to the name
of Crassus and the title of general. Thus accoutred,
he proceeded on horseback at the head of the
Momans. Before him marched tlie trumpets and
lictors, mounted upon camels. Upon the rods were
suspended empty purses, and on the axes of the
lictors the heads of Romans newly cut off. Behind
came the Seleucian courtesans w4th music, singingi^
scurrilous and farcical songs upon Crassus' cowardice
and effeminacy.

These things were to amuse the populace : after
which Surena assembled the senate of Seleucia, and
produced the obscene books of Aristides called
' Milesiacs.' Neither was this a groundless inven-
tion, to blacken the Romans. For the books, being
actually found in the baggage of Ilustius^^, gave
Surena an excellent opportunity of saying many
sharp and satirical things of t!ie Romans, who even

4^ One of the Bodleian MSS. lias it ' Iloscius ;' peihaps onp^T
tlie two brothers of that name already mentioned.

496 MARCUS CRASSUS.

in the time of war could not refrain from such abo-
minable publications and libidinous practices.

Tliis scene reminded the Seleucians of the wise re-
mark of ^^sop. They saw that Surena had placed
tiie Milesian obscenities in the fore-part of the wallet,
and belnnd thev beheld a Parthian Sybaris*", with a
long train of carriages full of harlots ; insomuch,
that his army resembled the serpents called ' Scv-
talaj.' Fierce and formidable in it's head, it pre-
sented nothing but pikes, artillery, and war-horses ;
while the tail ridiculously enough exhibited nothing
but prostitutes, musical instruments, and nights
spent in singing and riot with prostitutes. Rustius-
was, undoubtedly, to be blamed ; but it was an
impudent thing in the Parthians to censure the Mi-
Jesiacs, when many of the Arsacida?, who filled the
throne, were sons of Milesian or Ionian courtesans.

During tiiese transactions, Orodes was reconciled
to Artavasdes the Armenian, and had agreed to a
marriage between that prince's sister, and his son
Pacorus. Upon this occasion, they freely w^ent to
each other's entertainments, in which many of the
Greek tragedies were presented. For Orodes was
not unversed in the Grecian literature ; and Arta-
vasdes had himself w^ritten tragedies, as well as ora-
tions and histories, some of which are still extant.
In one of these entertainm.ents, while they were yet
at table, the head of Crassus w^as brought to tlie
door. Jason, a tragedian of the city of Tralles, was
reliearsing the Bacchse of FZuripides, and in the
midst of the trn2:ical adventures of Pentheus and
Agave. All the company were expressing their ad-

''* Sybaris was a town in Lucania, famous for it's luxur}' and
eft'eniinacy. (L.) The fable alluded to is that, which Persius has
moralised in his two excellent lines:

Ut nemo in sese tented dcsceudere, nemo !

At prceccdcnli spectatur mantica tergo. (iv. 23.)

For an account of the serpent Scytale, see Columella de R. R.
vi. 17. ; and for a specific against the dangerous wounds inflicted by
it's small teeth, Tlui. H. N. xxxii. 5.*^

MARCUS CRASSUa 197

miration of the pieces, when Sillaces entering the
apartment prostrated himself before tlie king, and
laid Crassus' head at his feet. The Parthians wel-
comed it with acclamations of joy, and the attend-
ants by the king's order placed Sillaces at the table.
Upon this, Jason gave one of the actors the habit
of Pentheus, in which he had himself appeared; and
putting on that of Agave, with the frantic air and
all the enthusiasm of a Bacchanal, sung the part in
which Agave presents the head of Pentheus upon her
Thyrsus, fancying it to be that of a young lion ;

Hither our toils we bring : On yonder brow
We pierced the lordly beast ■'*.

Finding the company extremely delighted, he went
on : The Chorus asks.

Who gave the blow ?

Agave answers,

Mine, mine's the prize.

Pomaxaathres, who was then sitting at the table, on
hearing this started up, and would have taken the
head from Jason, insisting that that part belonged
to him, and not to the actor. The king, highly di-
verted, made Pomaxicthrcs the presents usual upon
such occasions, and rewarded Jason with a talent.
The expedition of Crassus was a real tragedy, and
such was the exodium^^ [or farce] after it.

Divine justice, however, punished Orodes for his
cruelty, and Surena for his perjury. The prince,
envying the glory which his general had acquired,

43 Bacch. 1168.*

^^ Exodium, in it's original sense, signified the '' catastrophe of
the traged}',' the ' unravelling of the plot ;' and it presrrvcd that
sense among the Greeks. But, when the Koniaiis began to act
their light satirical pieces (of which tliey had alwavs been very
fond) after their tragedies, they transferred to them the denomina-
tion in question.

VOL. III. 2 K

493 NICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED.

soon afterward put him to death "^^ ; but losing his
son Pacorus in a battle with the Romans, fell him-
self into a languishing disorder, which changed to a
dropsy. His second son, Phraates, seized this op-
portunity to give him aconite. Finding however that
the poison worked only upon the watery humour,
and was carrying off the disease, he took a shorter
method, and strangled him with his ow^n hands "^^

NICIAS AND CRASSUS

COMPARED.

ONE of the first things which occurs in this com-
parison is, that Nicias gained his wealth in a less ex-

^5 About B. C. 52.*

■^'^ There have been more execrable characters, but there is not
perhaps in the whole history of mankind one more contemptible, than
that of Crassus. His ruling passion was the most sordid lust of
wealth ; and to this the whole of his conduct, political, popular,
and military, was subservient. If he ever exhibited any public
munificence, it was with him no more than a species of commerce.
By thus treating the people, he was laying out his money in the
purchase of provinces. When Syria fell to his lot, his transports
did not spring from the great ambition of carrying the Roman
eagles into the east: they were only the joy of a miser, when he
stumbles upon a hidden treasure. Dazzled with the pro^pect of
barbarian gold, he grasped with eagerness a command, for which
he had no adequate capacity. We find him embarrassed by the
.slightest difficulties in his military operations, and when his obsti-
nacy would permit him, taking his measures from the advice of his
lieutenants. We indignantly behold the Roman squadrons stand-
ing, b}' his arrangement, as a mark for the Parthian archers, and
incapable of acting either on the offensive or the defensive. The
Romans could not be igriorant of the Parthian method of attacking
and retreating, when they had before spent so much time in Arme-
nia. Tiie iame of their cavalry must surely have been known in a
country, where it was so much dreaded. R. was therefore the first
Dusiness ol' the Roman general to have avoided those countries,
wliich might give tliem any advantage in the equestrian action. But
the hot scent of eastern treasure made him a dupe, even to the
gross arts of the barbarians ; and, to arrive at this the nearest way,
tie sacrificed ihc lives of thirty thousand I'omans.

NICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED. 49i)

ceptionable manner than Crassus. The working of
mines indeed does not seem very suitable to a man
of Nicias' character, where the persons employed are
commonly malefactors or barbarians, some of whom
toil in fetters, till the damps and unwholesome air
put an end to their existence. But it is compara-
tively an honourable pursuit, when placed in parallel
with getting an estate by the confiscations of Sylla,
or by buying houses in the midst of fires. Yet Crassus
dealt as openly in these things, as he did in agricul-
ture and usury. As to the other matters for which
he was reproached, and which he denied, 'viz. his
selling his vote in the senate, his extorting money
from the allies, his over-reaching silly women by
flattery, and his undertaking the defence of bad
men ; nothing of this kind was ever imputed to
Nicias, even by slander herself. With regard to his
wasting his money upon those who made a trade of
impeachments, to prevent their doing him any harm,
it was a circumstance which exposed him to ridicule,
and was unworthy perhaps of a Pericles and an Aris-
tides ; but indispensable for Nicias, with his innate
timidity of character. It was a thing, of which
Lycurgus the orator subsequently made a merit to
the people : when censured for having bought off one
of these trading informers, " 1 rejoice," said he,
" that after having been so long employed in the
" administration, I am discovered to have given
" money, and not taken it."

As to their expenses, Nicias appears to have been
the more public-s})irited. His offerings to the gods,
and the games and tragedies with which he enter-
tained the people, were so many proofs of noble and
generous sentiments. It is true, all that Nicias laid
out in this manner, and indeed his whole estate
amounted only to a small part of what Crassus ex-
pended at once, in entertaining so many myriads of
men and supplying them afterward with bread. But
I should be surprised, if there were any one, who
did not perceive that this vice is ngihing'but an ine-

2 K 2

500 XICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED.

quality and inconsistency of character ; particularly,
when he observes men honourably expending that
money, which they have dishonourably accumulated.
80 much v/ith respect to tfieir riclies.

If we consider their behaviour in the administra-
tion, we shall not find in Nicias any instance of cun-
ning, injustice, violence, or effrontery. On the
contrary, he suffered Alcibiades to impose upon him,
and was ever timid in his applications to the people.
Whereas Crassus, in turning from his friends to his
enemies, and back again as his interest required, is
justly charged with illiberal duplicity. Neither could
he deny that he made use of violence to obtain the
consulship, when he hired ruffians to lay their hands
upon Cato and Domitius. In the assembly held for
the allotment of the provinces, many citizens were
wounded, and four actually killed. Nay, Crassus
himself struck a senator named Lucius Annalius, one
of his opponents, upon the face with his fist (a cir-
cumstance, which escaped us in his Life), and drove
him out of the Forum covered with blood.

But, if Crassus was too violent and tyrannical in
his proceedings, Nicias was as much too cowardly.
His poltroonery, and mean submission to the most
abandoned persons in the state, deserves the heaviest
condemnation. Besides, Crassus displayed some
magnanimity and dignity of sentiment in contend-
ing, not with such v/retches as Cleon and Hyper-
bolus, but with the glory of Caasar and the three
trium.phs of Pompey. In fact, he ably maintained
the dispute vvith them for power, and in the high
honour of the censorship rose even superior to the
latter. For he who seeks to stand at the helm
should consider, not what may expose him to envy,
but what is great and glorious, and may by it's lus-
tre eclipse envy itself But, if security and repose
are to be consulted above all things ; if you are
afraid of Alcibiades upon the Rostrum, of the Lace-
daemonians at Pylos, and of Perdiccas in Thrace ;
then surclv, Nicias, Athens is wide enough to afford

NICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED. 501

you a corner, to wliich you may retire, and where
you may weave for yourself, as some of the philoso-
phers speak, the ' soft crown of tranquillity.' The
* love which Nicias had for ])eacc was, indeed, a di-
vine attachment ; and his endeavours, during his
whole administration, to put au end to the war, were
wairthy of the Grecian humanity. This alone places
him in so iionourable aliffht, that Crassus could not
have been compared witli him, even though he had
made the Caspian sea or the Indian ocean the boun-
dary of the Roman empire.

Nevertheless, in a commonwealth which retains
any sentiments of virtue, he who has the chief au-
thority should not for a moment give place to the
profligate, entrust any charge to the incapable, or
place any confidence in the unprincipled. But this
Nicias certainly did, in raising Cleon to the command
of the army; a man, who had nothing to recommend
him, except his impudence and his bawling in the
Rostrum. On the other hand, I do not commend
Crassus for having advanced to action, in the war with
Spartacus, with more expedition than prudence :
though his ambition had this excuse, that he was
afraid Rom pey won Id come and snatch his laurels from
him, as Mummius had done from Metellus at Corinth.
But the conduct of Nicias was much more mean-
spirited and absurd. He would not resign to his enemy
the lioTiour and trust of commander-in-chief, so long
as he could execute that charge with ease, and en-
tertained hopes of success ; but, as soon as he saw
it attended with extreme peril, he was willing to
secure himself, though he thereby exposed the
public. It was not thus, that Them.istocles behaved
in the Persian war. To prevent the advancement of
a man without cither capacity or principle to the
command, which he knew must have been the
ruin of his country, he prevailed wnth him by a sum
of money to renounce his pretensions. And Cato
stood for the tribuneship, when he saw it would in-
volve him in the greatest trouble and danger. On

9

bO'2 KICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED,

ilie contrary, Nicias was williiirr cnoun;h to be gcnc-
r;i], when he had only to attack Minoa, Cythera, or
tlie p(K)r Meh'ans''': but if the T>ace(la?inonians were
to be cnconntered, he put oiV his armour, and en- *
trusted the sliips, the men, tiie warhke stores, iu
short tlic entire direction of a war wliicii recjuired
the most consummate ex})erience, to the ignorance
and rasliness of ('Icon. In this he was unjust not
only to himself, and his own honour, but to tlie
welfare and safety of his country. This made the
Athenians subsctjuently send him, contrary to liis
inclination, a^^yiiist Syracuse. They thouf;,d>t it was
not a conviction of the iuiprobability of success, but
a regard to his own ease and a want of s])irit, which
made him anxious to deprive them of the conqjiest
of Sicily.

There is however this signal proof of his inte-
grity, that though he was perpetually averse from
war and always declined the command, yet they
never failed to appoint him to it as the ablest and
best of their gencials. IJut ('rassus, though he was
for ever aiming at such an apj)ointment, never suc-
ceeded in his wishes, except in the war with the
gh'uliators ; and that only because Pompey, Metellus,
and both the Luculluses were absent. This is the
more remarkable, as Crassus had attained a high
degree of authority and power. J Jut, it seems, his
best friends thought him (as tlic comic poet"* ex-
presses himself)

In ;ill tradcf! skillM, except the trade oCuar.

This knowledge of his talents, however, availed the
liomnns but little; hi; ambition never let them rest,
till they had assigned him a province. The Athe-

1

• *' ]'')r nn account of Mi'los, SCO the I.ilb of Alcibiadrs, II. JfM., i

u')U (v;j.)* *

■"* Mcuand'T, ••n dcnominatod by I'ltitarcii ««»' s^opi*)", as IlnrrnT

wiv/. fi'.iph.itically called * 'I'ho Poet.* Our autlior, elscwhe.T, placf-' *

^(fiKiwdtr tar abow Avii:t(>j)!ianc'.s Ju drnnjalic inci/I..* f

XICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED. 503

nlans cmployctl Nicias against his inclination ; and
it was against the incHnation of the Romans, that
. Cra^sus was employed. Crassus involved his coun-
try in misfortunes ; Nicias was involved in misfor-
tunes by his country.

Nevertheless, in this respect it is easier to com-
mend Nicias, than to blame Crassus. The capacity
and skill of the former, as a prudent general, kept
him from beino: drawn away bv the vain hopes of his
countrymen, and he declared from tiie iirst that
Sicily could not be conquered: the latter summoned
the Romans to the Partiu'an war, as an easy under-
taking. In this, he found himself dreadfully de-
ceived ; yet his aim was great. While Ca?sar was
subduing"^ the west, the Gauls, the Germans, and
Britain, "he attempted to penetrate to the Indian
ocean on the east, and to conquer the whole of
Asia ; objects, which Ponipey and Lucullus would
have accomplished, if it had been in their power.
But thoui:;h thev were both enj^a^ed in the samede-
signs, and made the same attempts with Crassus,
their cliaracters stood unimpeachcd, both as to mo-
deration and universal probity. If Crassus was
opposed by one of the tribunes in his Partliian ex-
pedition, Pompey was opposed by the senate when
lie got Asia for his province. And when Citsar had
routed three hundred thousand (icrmans, Cato voted
that he should be given up to that injured people,
to atone tor the viohitlon of the peace. But the
Roman people, paying no regard to Cato, ordered
a thanksii-ivinsj to the gods for tifteen days, and
thought themselves happy in the victory. In what
raptures then would they have been, and for how
many days would they have offered sacrifices, if
Crassus could have sent them an account from Ba-
bylon that he was victorious ; and if he had thence
proceeded through Media, Persia, Ilyrcania, Susa,
and Bactria, and reduced them to the form of Ro-
man provinces. For according to Euripides, if ju$-

12

.?0i NICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED.

tice must be violated, and men cannot sit down
quiet and contented with their present possessions,
it should not be for taking the small town of Scandia,
or razing such a castle as Mende *, or pursuing the
fugitive ^ginet^r, who like birds have retired to
another country : the price of injustice should be
high ; so sacred a thing as right should not be ba-
nished away for a trifling or common considera-
tion^^. In fact, they who commend Alexander's
expedition, and decry that of Crassus, judge of ac-
tions only by the event ^°.

As to their m.ilitary performiances, several of
IS^icias* are very considerable. He gained many
battles, and was very near taking Syracuse. Neither
were all his miscarriages errors ; but they were im-
putable partly to his ill health, and partly to the envy
of his comitrymen at home. On the other hand,
Crassus fell into so many mistakes, that fortune had
no opportunity of showing him any favour : and
therefore it is less an object of surprise, that the
Parthian power got the better of his incapacity, than
that his incapacity prevailed over the good fortune
of Rome.

As one of them paid the greatest attention to di-
vination, and the other entirely disregarded it, and
yet both equally perished, it is a difficult and deli-
cate matter to ])ronounce, whether the observation
of omens be a salutary thing or not. Nevertheless,
to err on the side of religion, from a reverence to

* ScRndia v"as the naval arsenal of Cythcra (Pausan, iii. 23.), and
Mende a city of Thrace, colonised by Eretrians. (Id. v. 27.)*

^^ How bitterly applicable to the attack and plundering of Co-
pcnha<xen ! (1807.)*

s" This has been justly censured, as an absurd mode of estunat-
ing real merit:

Careat successibusy opto.

Qui^qiiis ah evcntu facta notanda puiat. (Ov. Epist. Her. ii. S6.)

And our Addisor, in his Cato, makes Portias say :

'Tis not in mortals to command success;

But v,-til do more, Senipronius, we'll descr%-e it. (i. 2.)

NICIAS AND CRASSUS COMPARED. 505

ancient and received opinions, is more pardonable
than to err through obstinacy and presumption.

In the close of his hfe, however, Crassus was less
to be reproached. He did not surrender himself, or
submit to be bound, neither was he deluded with
vain hopes ; but in yielding to the importunity of
his friends, he met his fate, and fell a victim to bar-
barian perfidy. Whereas Nicias, from an unmanly
and disgraceful fondness for life, put himself into
the enemy's hands, by which means he came to a
more dishonourable end.

END OF VOL. Ill,

Printed by C. Baldwin, New Bridge-street, London.

b

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

OE Plutarchus

7 Lives. 2d ed

1813
V.3