The Science of English Verse (Sidney Lanier, 1880)
==========================================================
Lanier's lectures treating poetry as scored music — the first systematic American prosody, by the South's poet-flautist. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'scienceenglishv01lanigoog' (https://archive.org/details/scienceenglishv01lanigoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




f 



ud^ 





T 



1^1 



s^ 



I ^ 



'/ 



THE SCIENCE 



OF 



ENGLISH VERSE 



THE SCIENCE 






OF 



ENGLISH VERSE 



BY 

SIDNEY LANIER 



So preye I God that non myswrite the, 
Ne the mysmetere for defaute of tonge. 

Chaucsr: Troylus and Cryseyde. 

If . . . some perfect platform or Prosodia of versifying were . . . ratifyed and 
sctte downe. — Webbk: Discourse ofEng. Poetrie. 

A Poet, no industrie can make, if his owne Genius bee not carried unto 
it. . . . Yet . . . must the highest flying wit have a Dedalus to guide him. — 
Sir Philip Sidney: Apol. for Poetrie. 

. . . Gif Nature be nocht the cheif worker in this airt, Reulis wilbe bot a 
band to Nature . . . ; quhair as, gif Nature be cheif, and bent to it, reulis 
will be ane help and staff. ... — King James I. : Reulis and Cautilis, 6*c. 

Poesie therefore may be an Art in our vulgar, and that verie methodicall 
and commendable. — Puttenham (?) : Arte o/Eng. Poesie. 

But the best conceptions cannot be, save where science and genius are. — 
Trans, from Dante: De VuL Elpg. 



NEW YORK 
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 

743 AND 745 BROADWAY 
1880 






Sept. 9, 1889 
March Bequeet- 



t 
*> 



Copyright, x88o. 
By SIDNEY LANIER. 



Franklin Press: 
EUciroty^d and PrinUd by 

Rand, Avery, d* Co,, ^ 

Boston. • / 



PREFACE. 



If Puttenham in the sixteenth century could wish 
to make the art of poetry "vulgar for all English- 
men's use," such a desire in the nineteenth must needs 
become a religious aspiration. For under our new dis- 
pensation the preacher must soon be a poet, as were 
the preachers before him under the old. To reach an 
audience of a variety so prodigious as to range from 
the agnostic to the devotee, no forms of less subtlety 
than those of tone can be effective. A certain wholly 
unconscious step already made in this direction by 
society gives a confirmation of fact to this view which 
perhaps no argument can strengthen : I mean the now 
common use of music as a religious art. Music already 
occupies one end of the church : the same inward 
need will call poetry to the- other. How the path of 
spiritual development which has arrived at the former 
phenomenon must presently reach the latter will ap- 
pear more clearly in the course of the demonstration to 
follow, which gives an account of the true relations 
between music and verse. It may be, indeed, that there 

••• 

m 



iv Preface, 

are more persons nowadays who retain the "elegant" 
ideal of poetry which was prevalent a century ago 
than would willingly face an explicit statement of that 
ideal. But it must be said that the world, as world, 
has abandoned it. The tepid dilution in which Prior 
thought it necessary to feed to his time the marrowy 
English of the old Nut-Brown Maid ballad ; the labo- 
rious apologies with which Bishop Percy introduced 
his Reliques to the eighteenth century, as if he had 
brought a corse betwixt the wind and its nobility ; the 
painful undertone which we hear in dearest Keats's 
preface to Endymion^ as if he were not free from a 
sense of intrusion in challenging the world's attention 
to forms of pure beauty which did not directly concern 
either trade or politics ; the amateurish trifling which 
crops out in such expressions as " polite literature " 
used even by Poe in a quotation presently given, 
and which is still to be traced here and there in cur- 
rent talk: are things of the past. That all worthy 
poets belong substantially to the school of David, that 
it is the poet's business to keep the line of men 
touching shoulders with each other, that the poet is 
in charge of all learning to convert it into wisdom, 
and that therefore a treatise on the poet's method is 
in its last result a sort of disciplinary preparation and 
fnagister choralis for the congregation as well as for 
the preacher of the future, — these will not be regarded 
nicrely visionary propositions, and perhaps will be here 



Preface. v 

accepted at least as giving a final unity to the principles 
now to be set forth. 

The following historical details will be found to add 
force to these general views. 

It is now about twelve hundred years since Aid- 
helm's Epistola Ad Acirciuntf the first essay on 
verse by an Englishman, was written; and Beda's 
treatise De Arte Metrica followed Aldhelm's dialogue 
closely enough to be fairly called contemporary with 
it : so that we find the thoughts of the fathers ' stir- 
ring upon the subject of poetic science quite at the 
historic beginning of our literature. But notwithstand- 
ing this early start of English research into the nature 
of verse, and the host of subsequent speculations 
ranging from the modest Certayne Notes of Instruction 
concerning the Making of Verse , , , in English, which 
George Gascoigne printed along with his Posies in 1575, 
— through the learned absurdities of the "Areopagus" 
in which Sir Philip Sidney and Fulk Greville and Gabriel 
Harvey and Spenser proposed a scheme for reducing 

* It seems highly probable that Aldhelm — surely the most fascinat- 
ing figure in our literature before Chaucer — must have written vernacular 
verse earlier than Caedmon, and that he is therefore entitled to be called 
the Father of English Poetry. See William of Malmesbury's Life of him, 
here and there, and scraps in Asserts Life of Alfred. Of course, in this 
location of Aldhelm, as hinted in the term " historic beginning " of our 
literature, one bears in mind the possible sixth-century date of Widsith*s 
Traveller's Song, of Dear's Lament, and of other poems. 



vi Preface, 

the English language into subjection to the classic 
laws of quantity, — through the treatises of the seven- 
teenth and eighteenth centuries hereinafter mentioned, 
— down to Mitford's decorous Inquiry into the Har^ 
mony of Language in the beginning of the present cen- 
tury, the fancied discovery of Coleridge in his Preface 
to Christabely the defiant metrical outburst of Poe in 
his Rationale of Verse, and the keen though professedly 
disconnected glimpses of Professor Sylvester in his 
Laws of Verse ; notwithstanding this variety of inves- 
tigation it still cannot be said that we possess a theory, 
or even a working-hypothesis, of the technic of English 
verse. 

Conclusive testimony as to the general feeling upon 
this point is to be found in the circumstance that 
among the later treatises each begins by remarking 
the wholly unsatisfactory nature of all previous ones ; 
while, among the essays of Elizabeth's time, the same 
discontent usually takes the form of a somewhat timid 
argument that a science of English poetry is possible 
— an argument not only addriessed to a large class of 
Englishmen who evidently believed otherwise, but gen- 
erally advanced with a certain tone of low spirits and 
deprecation which is unusual even for the queasy 
niodesty of sixteenth-century dedications. As, for ex- 
Simple, Webbe, waiting in 1586, with a wistfulness 
-Which seems genuine enough desires to have this mat- 
^^r '^ thoroughly taken in hande, and laboured by some 



Preface. vii 

other of greater abilitie . . . who, bothe for learning 
and leysure, may handle this Argument far more 
pythilie then myselfe." 

If these facts be put together in their proper rela- 
tions, they reveal an anomaly which I cannot but be- 
lieve to be without parallel in the history of human 
thought. Remembering that the science of any art 
can be nothing but the body of large facts which pre- 
sents itself upon assembling all the observed small facts 
of that art and classing together such as are substan- 
tially alike, let any one consider that in the last quar- 
ter of the sixteenth century the gravest critics were 
debating the possibility, not only of a science, but of 
an art, of English verse, after that art had been illus- 
trated during a thousand years by Aldhelm, Caedmon, 
Cynewulf, the authors of The Death of Byrhtnoth and 
The Wanderer^ Ormin, Lydgate, the author of The 
Vision Concerning Piers Plowman^ Chaucer, the Scotch 
poets of the fifteenth century, Wyatt, Surrey, Sackville, 
and a host of less known or unknown singers. The 
state of men's minds upon this question at that remark- 
able period of our spiritual history just mentioned — the 
last quarter of the sixteenth century — forces upon us 
a corollary of such importance to my present purpose 
that, before proceeding to show how matters stand at 
the present day, I think it necessary to illustrate the 
attitude of Elizabethan thought towards verse with one 
or two brief citations from contemporary works. 



n/ 



V 



viii Preface. 

It was natural that Aldhelm, writing in the seventh 
century an essay upon prosody, — such prosody as was 
then thought of, — should find pleasure in the reflection 
that he was the first to teach his countrymen upon this 
matter ; and it seems charming to find him, a venerable 
English poet in the year of our Lord 700, aptly quoting 
Virgil to adorn this sentiment, " Siquidem illustris ille 
qui dicebat : — 

* Primus ego in patriam mecum (modo vita supersit) 
Aonio rediens deducam vertice Musas, 
Primus Idumaeas referam tibi, Mantua, palmas.* " 

But, coming down nine centuries to the time when 
Englishmen again begin to treat of verse, we are sur- 
prised to find each writer still claiming in more or less 
indirect methods to be the first prosodian among us. 
At the very beginning of that last quarter of the 
sixteenth century which we are now considering, — in 
1 575* — George Gascoigne enters upon his Certayne 
Notes of Instruction concerning the making of verse or 
ryme in Englishy written at the request of Master 
Edauardo Donatio by reminding Signor Edouardo that 
^^Quot homines y tot Sententice^ especially in Poetrie." 
Of course we gather from Gascoigne's pithy Latin that 
if there were as many opinions as men in poetry the 
science of it had still to be begun. 

Compare this utterance of Gascoigne's with one by 
Webbe, eleven years later, from which several instruc- 
tive inferences are to be drawn. In his " Preface to 



Preface, ix 

the Noble Poets of Englande/' which introduces the 
Discourse of English Poetrie, he speaks here and 
there to this effect : " Among the innumerable sortes 
of Englyshe Bookes, and infinite fardels of printed 
pamphlets, wherewith thys Countrey is pestered, all 
shoppes stuffed, and every study furnished : the great- 
est part I thinke in any one kinde, are such as are 
either meere Poeticall, or which tende in some respecte 
(as either in matter or forme) to Poetry." Neverthe- 
less, these infinite fardels of learning have not helped 
forward any science of poetry ; for " it is to be won- 
dred at of all, and is lamented of manie, that whereas 
all kinde of good learning have aspyred to royall digni- 
tie and statelie grace in our English tongue . . . : onely 
Poetrie hath founde fewest frends to amend it ; " and 
therefore he proceeds to write his Discourse "even 
as it were by way of supplication to the famous and 
learned Lawreat Masters of Englande, that they would 
but consult one halfe houre with their heavenly Muse, 
. . . what enormities they might wipe out of English 
Poetry . . . : if English Poetrie were truely reformed, 
and some perfect platforme or Prosodia of versifying 
were by them ratifyed and sette downe : eyther in 
immitation of Greekes and Latines, or when it would 
skant abyde the touch of theyr Rules, the like obser- 
vations selected and established by the naturall affec- 
tation of the speeche : *' finally, praying the Laureate 
Masters of their courtesies to note particularly "the 



X Preface. 

lyttle somewhat which I have sifted out of my weake 
brayne concerning thys reformed versifying." 

But three years later' comes George Puttenham, — 
if it was really he who wrote the Arte of English 
Poesie, — with declarations and hints which state the 
matter in yet stronger terms. Chapter 11. of his book 
is headed : " That there may be an Art of our English 
Poesiey aswell as there is of the Latine and Greeke*' 
and proceeds to expand this proposition with various 
such utterances as the following : " If againe Art be 
but a certaine order of rules prescribed by reason, 
and gathered by experience, why should not Poesie be 
a vulgar Art with us aswel as with the Greeks and 
Latines ....?... Poesie therefore may be an Art in 
our vulgar, and that verie methodicall and commenda- 
ble." A passage of Puttenham's, in quite another con- 
nection, brings us upon this same view by a different 
and entertaining path. Having spoken of the possi- 
bility of constructing classic dactyls and the like feet 
with English words, he concludes, in a shamefaced way 
that seems incredible when we reflect how even the 
very nursery-songs of our tongue abound in the rhythms 
which Puttenham calls dactyls, "I intend not to pro- 
ceed any further in this curiositie then to show some 
small subtillitie that any other hath not yet done 



2 

... 



' Later in publication, though possibly written a year before Webbe's 
book appeared. 

• This expression, by the way, shows that Puttenham could not have 



Preface. xi 

nor to th' intent to have it put in execution in our 
vulgar Poesie, but to be pleasantly scanned upon, as 
are all novelties so frivolous and ridiculous as it" ! 

And finally, to end these citations, — which must 
have now fulfilled their end, of showing that in the 
latter part of the sixteenth century the science of Eng- 
lish poetry can scarcely be said to have been suspected, 
— the climax of these curiosities was naively capped 
by King James, who, in his Reulis . . . and Cautelis 
(that is, Rules and Cautions) of things to be observed 
and eschewed in making English verse, explains the 
scope of his desire thus :"...! made noght ' my trea- 
tise of that intention that eyther I or any others behoved 
astricktly to follow it; but that onely it should show 
the perfection of Poesie, whereunto few or none can 
attain." 

With these illustrations leaving the sixteenth cen- 
tury, it is now important to show by similar citations 
the very different, though at bottom not more hopeful, 
state which the technical theory of our verse has 
reached in its course from the last quarter of the six- 
teenth to the last quarter of the nineteenth century. 

seen the Discourse of Webbe, who had not only shown this "subtil- 
litie" in 1586, but had published some very quaint and occasionally 
charming English hexameters of his own in the same book; as, for 
example: — 

" Happie olde man. In shaddowy bankes and cool prettie places, 
Heere by the quainted floodes and qnings most holie remaining." 

* Not. 



xii Preface, 

It might have been expected that seventeenth-cen- 
tury works like Ben Jonson's English Grammar, or But- 
ler's, or particularly Wallis's, — which last contained a 
preliminary essay upon sound, the real clew to the 
whole labyrinth of verse, — would have made some con- 
tribution advancing poetic science beyond where it was 
left by the sixteenth-century writers. But they do not ; 
nor do the rhyming vocabularies of the same period, 
such as Willis's Vestibulum Lingua LatincBy or Poole's 
English Parnassus, The eighteenth and early nine- 
teenth centuries help us not : Goldsmith's Essay y Sheri- 
dan's Art of Readings Steele's Prosodia Rationalise 
Chapman's Music of Language, Harris's Discourse^ 
Guest's History of English Rhythms — the last an admi- 
rable history as far as it goes, but a wholly mistaken 
theory, of our rhythm — do little more than repeat, 
or increase, existing errors and confusions. In 1804 
Mitford's Inquiry, &c., into the Harmony of Lan- 
guage presents us with several isolated observations 
which are keen and valuable, though they occur 
in the course of a demonstration so fundamentally 
erroneous as to render the whole work rather a hin- 
drance than a help to formal poetry. Upon the point 
now in hand, however, — the melancholy state of poetic 
science at that time, — Mitford is accurate and un- 
equivocal enough. "When . . . I found" (says he in 
his introductory remarks) "that to follow the Greek 
and Latin rules for the mechanism of Greek and Latin 



Preface. xiii 

verse in writing was easy, but to comprehend the 
ground, to see the reason ... so that the voice might 
follow as well as the pen, and the ear might acknowl- 
edge its performance, not only was beyond me, but, 
as far as I could discover, beyond all teachers; when 
farther I observed that for the very different harmony 
of English verse, no rule could be obtained . . . these 
contradictions engaged my thought.'* 

Mitford*s researches had evidently been extensive; 
and his assertion that " no rule " could be found for 
English verse up to his time was therefore weighty 
enough. But a few years afterwards we come upon an 
utterance which gives us a still more vivid picture of 
affairs : I mean Coleridge's grave announcement, in the 
Preface to Christabel of 1816, that he had discovered 
a new principle of English versification, to wit, that 
of accents. This "principle" had been employed, as 
far as it can be, in English poetry for more than a 
thousand years ; and the very nursery-rhymes and folk- 
songs of our tongue present us everywhere with appli- 
cations of it' far more daring and complex than any 
line of Christabel, 

Perhaps the state of poetic science revealed by Cole- 
ridge's claim may infuse with a certain sympathy the 
smile which must be provoked when we reach, a few 
years after Coleridge, the highly indignant account of 
matters given by Edgar A. Poe in the outset of his 

' See the discussion of Rhythm in Part I. following. 



xiv Preface. 

Rationale of Verse. "There is, perhaps," he cries, 
"no topic in polite literature which has been more 
pertinaciously discussed; and there is certainly not 
one about which so much inaccuracy, confusion, miscon- 
ception, misrepresentation, mystification, and downright 
ignorance on all sides, can be fairly said to exist." 
Under these circumstances, none of us will be prepared 
to refuse pardon when we find Poe's essay permeated 
by a fundamental mistake ^ quite fatal to the usefulness 
of even the shrewd detached glimpses occurring here 
and there. 

If now, advancing from Poe's Essay to that of the 
Rev. W. W. Skeat On Alliterative Metre (printed in 
Messrs. Hale's and Fumivairs reproduction of Percy's 
Folio Manuscript, 1868), we remark the hopeless tone 
of the latter in regard to the present condition of 
English prosody, together with the errors ^ into which 
its author has been led by the failure to test an alleged 
rhythmic principle which has been allowed to pass un- 
examined in English thought for many years, this brief 

* Namely, that the accent makes every syllable long^ — a conception 
wholly unaccountable to the musician, and so absurd as to render a large 
proportion of existent music and verse theoretically impossible. See the 
following discussion of Rh3rthm, Part I. 

' Discussed in Part I. of this book. Meantime it is impossible to 
pass an occasion for noting several most useful suggestions in the essay 
mentioned; and I am tempted to enlarge this into an opportunity for 
acknowledging with gratitude the hours of delight for which I am in- 
debted to the labors of this scholar. 



Preface, xv 

array of citations may fitly be closed with one from the 
Laws of Verse by Professor J. J. Sylvester, a work 
mainly devoted to the exposition of a branch of poetic 
science which, so far as I know, has not hitherto been 
treated by any author — the " Phonetic Syzygy.** Says 
Professor Sylvester, — 

"It does not seem to be at all understood among us in England 

. . . that versification has a technical side quite as well capable 

of being reduced to rules as that of painting or any other fine art 

In Miss Mitford's recently published correspondence there is a 

letter in which she wonders at a * travelling poetess ' asking her 

for a book, of rules on poetry. The wonder should rather have 

been at no such book (as far as I am aware) existing, or, at all 

events, being generally known to do so, in the English lan- 
guage." 

This sketch of our prosodial history and literature 
— meagre as it necessarily is, in a work planned to be 
at once a popular treatise for the general reader and a 
manual for the academic student — would seem, at 
least, full enough to justify any contribution towards a 
complete theory of the technic of English verse. 

SIDNEY LANIER. 
Baltimore, Md., February, 1880. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 

Pagb. 

Investigation of Sound as Artistic Material . . .21 

Verse, a set of sounds and silences with definite relations, 3x. Only four such 
relations possible: duration, intensity, pitch, and tone-color, 24. Physical 
explanation of these, 26. Words depend on tone-color, 31. The sounds and 
silences of verse must be such as are not only generally, but exactly, co-ordi- 
nable by the ear, 33. Intensity an inexact relation, 39. Thus, three physical 
principles of classification for all possible phenomena of verse — duration, 
pitch, and tone-color; whose co-ordinations give, respectively, rhythm, tune, 
and color in formal poetry, 40. Secondary use of the four relations for group- 
ing sounds, 41. Illustration of sound-groups by sight-groups, 43. Art of 
sound, a genus, with two species, music and verse, 46. Differentiation of 
these, 48, by (a) the generic and specific tone-colors of the speaking-voice, 50, 
and (6) the peculiar scale of tones used by the speaking-voice, 54. The physi- 
cal principles thus discussed naturally arrange this treatise in three parts, on • 
the Rhythms, the Tuubs, and the Colors, of English verse, respectively, 58. 



PART I. 

THE RHYTHMS OF ENGLISH VERSE 

CHAPTER II. 
Of the Duration and Grouping of English Verse-Sounds . 59 

Illustration of verse-sounds, 59. English habit of common utterance gives to all 
sotmds definite and simple relations of time, 60, therefore all English sounds 
are primarily rhythmic, 63. Oock-ticks, illustration of primary and secondary 
rhythm, 63. Discussion of time as essential basis of primary rhythm, 65. 
Secondary grouping, or the bar, in music and verse, 67. Limitations of Greek 
and Latin " Quantity," 68. Means for recognition of rhythmic intent in Eng- 
lish, 7Z. English printed or written words really a partial system of notation 
for seoondary rhythm, 73. The bar a unit of measure for secondary rhythm, 

zvii 



xviii Table of Contents. 

Page. 
7$. Quantity inseparable from English sounds, but determined by different 
circumstances from classic quantity, 77. Besides the first order of sound- 
groups, and the second order of sound-groups, thus discussed, English utter- 
ance gives a third, and larger, order of sound-groups — the phrase — constitut- 
ing tertiary rhythm, 78. Illustration of musical phrase, 80. Verse-phrasing, 
in Hamlet y 81. This kind of rhythmic phrasing marked-off for the ear by a 
rest; a second kind by alliteration, 83; a third kind by the logical accent, 85 
Difference in nature and fimction of the rhythmic, from the logical, accent, 86. ^ 
A fourth, and still larger order of sound-groups, the line, 88. Marked-off for 
the ear by the rest, 89. Run-on and end-stopped lines, 90, specially in Shak- 
spere, 91. Line-group also marked-off for the ear often by the rhyme, 93, and 
sometimes by change of pitch, 94. Fifth, and still larger, order of soimd- 
groups — the stanza — and sixth order — the poem, — 94. Synoptical view of 
these orders, preliminary to the special separate discussions of them, 95. 

CHAPTER III. 

Special Discussion of the Relative Duration, or Quan- 
tity, OF English Verse-Sounds, as Constituting Primary 
Rhythm 97 

Errors as to function of accent, and failure to discriminate primary from secon- 
dary rhythm, 98. Illustration of difference betvreen recurrence at given num- 
bers, and at given time-inVsrvals, 99. But further: rhythm is as much a 
matter of silence as of sound: and since accent cannot distinguish one silence 
from another, it cannot be the basis of rhythm; Tennyson's verse reduced to 
musical notation, in illustration hereof, xox. True relation of accent to rhythm, 
X03. Musical system of noting rhythmic relations explained, 104, and showtt 
to be the only system adequate to note all rhythmic variations in utterance, 
X07, as capable of accurately expressing those compensatory silences, xe9, 
which preserve a given rhythmic type through all varieties of individual utter- 
ance, xxo. Methods of initiating rhythm in English verse, xxo. Distribution 
of time-values, xxx, in music and verse, xx2. Inadequacy of "Longs" and 
"Shorts," 1x3. Musical interpretation of Shakspere's time-distributions, in 
Measure for Measure t xx4. Secret of his melody, xx6. Summary of prin- 
ciples as to primary rhythm emerging from the discussions up to this point, 1x7. 

CHAPTER IV. 
Of Secondary Rhythm: its Nature and Causes . . .118 

Recurrence of rhythmic accent at regular intervals of time enables the ear to 
co-ordinate those next-larger groups of sound called bars, the units of secon- 
dary rhythm, XX9. Discrimination of rhythmic accent, pronunciation accent, 
and k>gical accent, xao. 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm, methods of initiating, 135. 
Equivocal bars at beginning, X37. Three forms of 3-rhythm, and two forms 
of 4-rhythm, specialized by long use in English verse, X28. Discussion of 
ft-rhythm, 5-rhythm, 6-rhythm, and similar forms, X39; Japanese rhythm inters 
Ikvttftd musicany, X33 (note) ; illustration of 5-rhythm from Hamerik's Norte 
Suite, 134. Complete review of possible fi^ms according to position of rhyth- 



TMe of Contents. xix 

Pagb. 
mic accent, 135. Comin<m error of confusing number of sounds in the bar 
with number of time-units in the bar, 136. Complete review of possible forms 
according to number of sounds and silences in the bar, 137. Determination of 
typic forms by the sum of appearances, 139. Practical directions for students' 
exercises on the matters set forth, 140. 

CHAPTER V. 

Of 3-Rhythm, Generally; and Specially of its Three 
Forms 141 

Passion of EJaglish ear for 3-rhythm, 141. Illustrated by musical interpretations 
of English rhythms from earliest Anglo-Saxon poetry to the present time, X42. 
Errors of scholars as to Anglo-Saxon rhythm, 143. Rhythmic alliteration in 
Anglo-Saxon verse, 145. Pronunciation of letters in illustrative passage, Z46. 
Description of passage, and musical scheme of one hundred bars, from the 
Anglo-Saxon poem of The Battle of Maldon^ 147. Translation of extract, 
Z49. Classification and summary of Anglo-Saxon rhythmic forms, 151. Ad- 
ditional Anglo-Saxon illustrations, musically noted, from Caedmon, 154, 
Beowulf 1 156, The Wanderer y 157, compared with modem rhythms of Swin- 
burne and Morris, 158. Illustrations from The Ormulum^ 13th century, 159; 
The Cuckoo-Song, 13th century, 160; Piers Plowman, 163. Contrast 
betweeen Langland's (Piers Plowman) and Chaucer's rhythms, 165. Relation 
of Chaucer and Surrey to blank verse, z66. Musical scheme from The 
Knighfs Tale, 167. Transition from Anglo-Saxon rhythm, through Lang- 
land's, to Chaucer's, as appearing in the link of Chaucer's final bars, z68. 
Final e in Chaucer's terminal bars, X69. Scheme of The Song of Ever and 
Never, early z6th or late zsth century, Z7X. Comparison of double-ending 
final bars in Hamlet with same in Chaucer's Prologue to the Canterbury 
Tales, 17a. Musical schemes from Keats's Endymion, Poe's Raven, Long- 
fellow's Psalm of Life, and Emerson's Brahma^ Z74. Schemes of five Eng- 
lish battle-songs, covering twelve centuries, all in same form of 3-rhythm: 
The Fight at Finnesburg, 175, The Death of Byrhtnoth, Z77, Laya- 
mon's Brut, 178, The Ballad of Agincourt, X79, The Charge of the Light 
Brigade, z83. Special discussion of blank verse, or the modem English 
heroic rhythmus, 182. Distinct from ancient English heroic rhythmus, Z83. 
Astonishing prevalence of this rhythm in English poetry, Z84. Treatment 
confined to Shakspere's blank verse', but no less exhaustive; and embraced 
under Shakspere's use of (a) the rest, of (3) the run-on and end-stopped 
line, of {c) the double-ending line, of {d) the weak-ending line, and of (0 
the rhythmic accent, Z85. Shakspere's use of the rest, same as in nursery 
songs, and in the Southern negro's patting of the Juba dance, z86. Musical 
illustrations from Mother Goose, 187, Haydn's Symphony, 188, and Juba, Z89. 
Shakspere's rests in the body of the line: illustration from Measure for 
Measure, 190. Method of determining doubtful lines, Z9X. Such rests aid 
expression in Shakspere, Z93. Errors of commentators in this matter, Z94. 
Discussion of Professor Crsuk's remark on Coleridge, Z95. Musical scheme 
from Christabel, Z97. Shakspere's end-stopped and run-on lines: advance 
Ox>m Love*s Labor's Lost, 198, to The Tempest, X99, shown by respective 



XX Table of Contents. 

Page. 
percentages of such lines, and caution as to this metrical test, aoo. Further 
references on this subject, for students, 2ox. Shakspere's double-ending, or 
feminine-ending, lines, 203, applied to test Henry VIII^ as between Shak- 
spere's and Fletcher's parts, 204. Musical interpretation of Fletcher's double 
endings, 206, which are often really Alexandrines, 208, greatly different from 
Shakspere's double endings, 209. Definition of weak-ending and light-ending 
lines, and Shakspere's advance in the use of them from early to late plays, 
SIX. Shakspere's peculiar management of the rhythmic accent, 2x2, and 
advance, in late plays, towards prose-rhythms, 213, preserving the rhythmic 
type through infinite variation, 214. Statement of principles as to rhythmic 
accent in Shakspere, 2x4, and application of these to interpreting rhythm of 
passage from The Tempest^ 215, showing Shakspere's three habitual methods 
of varying the rhythmic accent, 217. (i) Lines beginning with rests, used 
also by Chaucer, 2x7; and particularly suitable after run-on lines, 2x9. (2) 
Rests changing places with sounds in the line and thus shifting accent, 220. 
(3) Probnging sound into the next bar, to shift accent, 222. Extension of 
these methods to classic prosody, 223. Webbe, Gascoigne and King James, 
on the iambus, i6th century, 334. 

CHAPTER VI. 
Of 4-Rhythm, Generally ; and Specially of its Two Forms 225 

Scheme of Hame Came my Gude Man^ classic dactyls and spondees, 225. 
Logaoedic dactyl, 226. Dactyl and spondee in Beethoven's Seventh Sym- 
phony, 337. Scheme of Jeian Ingelow's Like a Laverock^ 338. Comic 
4-rhythm, 229. Anacrusis, 329. 4-rhythm in Pinafore, 331. Scheme of A 
Slain Lcvti 33a. 

CHAPTER VIL 
Of the Third and Fourth Orders of Rhythmic Grouping 233 

Phrase-group, logical group, alliterative group, matters of individuality, 334. 
No law given for third-order groups, 234. Fourth-order groups, the line; 
number of bars to the line in English verse, 234. System of nomenclature 
proposed, 335. Obliteration of the line-group in Shakspere, 335. Rhythmic 
function of rhyme, in marking-off the line-group, 236. Orm, X3th century, 
uses " Rime " for rhythm, 237. x6th century terms for special sorts of lines: 
*• Poulter*s Measure," 337, " Riding Rhyme," " Metre Heroical," " Rhythm 
Royal," 238. 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Of the Fifth Order of Rhythmic Groups : the Stanza 239 

Various forms of stanza according to number of lines, 339. This number with- 
out limitation in English verse, 240. But one specialized stanza, the sonnet, 
240. Special discussion of the Italian, or legitimate, sonnet, 241, and the 
EUiglish, or illegitimate, soimet, 243. Personal character of sonnet in English 
poetry, 343. English soimet-makers since Surrey and Wyatt, 244. Shak- 



Table of Contents. xxi 

Pagb. 
spare's sonnets, 344 (and see also, 378, 379). Confused notions among the 
Elizabethans about the sonnet, 245. Leigh Hunt's Booh of the Sonnet; no 
good collection of English sonnets yet printed, 245. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Of Rhythm throughout all those Motions which we call 
Nature 246 

Rudest nations have instruments for marking-ofT rhythms, 346. Earliest form 
of rhythmic apparatus, in Southern negro's " patting," 347. Rhythm perhaps 
a universal principle throughout physical nature': Herbert Spencer's generali- 
zation, 248. Rhythmic diseases, 248. Poe's rhythmic simile in Eureha^ 249. 
Puttenham's remark, 249. Antagonism, the essential principle of rhythm in 
plqrsical world; extension of this to moral world, 250. 



PART II. 

THE TUNES OF ENGLISH VERSE. 

CHAPTER X. 
Of Tune in Speech : its Nature and Office . . . .251 

Speech-melodies necessary to ordinary communication; every feeling has its 
tune, 25a. Not only this, but the same words differ in meaning according to 
the tune of their utterance, 252. Precise discrimination of melody, harmony, 
and rhythm; words often vaguely used, 253. Speech-tunes in the German 
comedy, Come Here^ 254. Absence of speech-times has one of two effects, 
(z) idiotic, 256, or (2) unnatural, 257. Elffect of consciously co-ordinating 
the tunes we hear in every-day speech, 258. The clown's speech-melodies in 
AlVs Well thai Ends Well^ 258. Slander, by repeating right words in 
wrong tunes, 259. Other illustrations of subtle tunes of speech, 260. The 
modem " reading," as Charlotte Cushman's, an art now rising, based on 
speech-tunes, 261. Historic outline, showing the differentiation of the 
speech-tune from the music-tune, 262. Relations of these two in antique 
period, 265. Greek musical declamation, first phase of differentiating process, 
366. Clew of the fourth, 266. Mediaeval period: polyphonic music; discant; 
368. Modem period: accompanied recitative in the early X7th century, 269. 
Final differentiation of the symphony, as opposed to the speech-tune, 270. 
Natural to expect the separation just at this present time, 271. Possible 
development in this direction, 271. Nature of speech-tunes; why musical 
system is inadequate to note them, 272. Speech-tunes employ intervals less 
than half-tones, 273. Power of the average ear to discriminate small intervals, 
374. Capacity of the ear for education in this particular, 375. Notation of 
speech-recitative in negro sermon, 276. Contrast with speech-tunes of Dray- 
ton's sonnet. No and /, 277. Speech-tunes of Shakspere's sonnets, 278, 



xxii Table of Contents. 



PART III. 

THE COLORS OF ENGLISH VfiRSE. 

CHAPTER XL 

Pagb. 

Of Colors in Verse, Generally ; and of Rhyme, Specially . 280 

Vowels and consonants phenomena of tone-color, 280. Term " colors of 
verse" strictly scientific, not fanciful, aSx. Curious coincidence in King 
James and Webbe, 283. Four species of verse-color herein treated, rhyme, 
vowel-distribution, consonant-distribution, and alliteration, 383. Precise defi- / 

nitioa of English rhyme, 284. ' Historic outline of rhyme in English verse; 
Anglo-Saxon rhymes, 385. The Anglo-Saxon " rhyming poem," 286 (note). 
Aldhelm's Latin rhymes, 389. Rhymes in The Ormulum : references for 
students, 293. Parties for and against rhyme in x6th century; the Areopagus, 
293. Puttenham, Webbe, Ascham, Ben Jonsoif, Greene, on rhyme, 294. 
Rhyme-test for chronology of Shakspere's plays, 295. Several cautions as to 
use of rhyme in English verse, 296. Must contain reason, 297; must be 
absolutely perfect, 297; not too far apart, 399; not finical, 399; not near 
shades of tone-color, 300; sonorous and dignified tone-colors, 301. 

CHAPTER XXL 
Distribution of Vowel-Colors in the Line-Group. . . 302 

Exaggerated instance of iterant tone-color, 303. Examples firom Daniel, 303, 
and Bartholomew Griffin, 304. ^ 

CHAPTER XHL 
Of Consonant-Distribution : Junction, and Phonstic Syzygy. 305 

Junction of terminal and initial consonants, / with /, / with h, si with si, &c., 
305. Phonetic syrjrgy, 306. 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Of Alliteration 309 

Different rhythmic fimction of alliteration in Anglo-Saxon poetry from that in 
modem English, 3x0 (see also page 84). Example of modem use of allitera- 
tion to vary rhythm, from Watson's Hekaiompatheta, 3x1. Parties for and 
against it m i6th century; Greene's and Shakspere's jokes on it, 3x3. Errors 
of Turner and Tyrwhitt as to Anglo-Saxon alliteration, 313. Warning against 
** loud " alliteration. 

CHAPTER XV. 
Of the Educated Love of Beauty, as the Artist's only Law . 315 

Matters herein treated, only hints; no law for the artist but beauty; the appeal 
is to the ear; and the touch-stone b music, 3x5. 



SCIENCE OF ENGLISH VERSE. 



CHAPTER I. 

INVESTIGATION OF SOUND AS ARTISTIC MATERIAL. 

Perhaps no one will find difficulty in accepting the 
assertion that when formal poetry, or verse, — (^ two terms 
which will be always used here as convertible,^^ — is re- 
peated aloud, it impresses itself upon the ear as verse 
only by means of certain relations existing among its 
component words considered purely as sounds, without 
reference to their associated ideas. If the least doubt 
upon this point should be entertained, it may be dis- 
pelled by observing that all ideas may be abolished out 
of a poem without disturbing its effect upon the ear 
as verse. This may be practically demonstrated by the 
simple experiment of substituting for the words of a 
formal poem any other words which preserve the accent - 
u ation , alliteration, and rhyme, (put which convey no 
ideas to the imhd, -V words ^f some foreign language 
not understood by the experimenter being the most 
effective for this purpose. Upon repeating aloud the 
poem thus treated it will be found that the verse-struc- 
ture has not been impaired. If, therefore, the ear 
accepts as perfect verse a series of words from which 
ideas are wholly absent, — that is to say, a series of 

21 



22 Science of English Verse. 

sounds, — it is clear that what we call " verse " is a set 
% of specially related sounds, at least in the case of a 
formal poem repeated aloud. 

But a much more sweeping proposition is true. If we 
advance from the case of formal poetry repeated aloud 
to that of formal poetry silently perused by the eye of 
a reader, a slight examination will show the proposition 
good that here, as before, verse is still a set of specially 
related sounds. For, in this instance, the characters 
of print or writing in which the words are embodied are 
simply signs of sounds ; and although originally received 
by the eye, they are handed over to the ear, are inter- 
preted by the auditory sense, and take their final lodge- 
^ ment, not at all as conceptions of sight, but as concep- 
tions of hearing. The function of the eye is now 
purely ministerial : it merely purveys for the ear. An 
analogous process is indicated in the Arabian saw 
which affirms that "that is the best description which 
makes the ear an eye." . In general, the reader will 
do well to recall that each sense has not only what is 
ordinarily called its physical province, but also its cor- 
responding imaginative province ; the eye has its ima- 
gination, the ear its imagination ; and when the term 
"imagination of the ear" is hereinafter used it must 
be understood to suggest those perceptions of sound 
which come to exist in the mind, not by virtue of actual 
vibratory impact upon the tympanum immediately pre- 
ceding the perception, but by virtue of indirect causes 
(such as the characters of print and of writing) which 
in any way amount to practical equivalents of such 
impact. Now these signs convey, along with their 
corresponding sounds, the same relations between those 

• 

sounds which are suggested to the ear when the sounds 



Verse a Phenomenon of Sound. 23 

themselves fall upon the tympanum. It is there- 
fore strictly true that, although the great majority of 
formal poems in modern times are perceived by the 
mind through the original agency of the eye, the rela- 
tions indicated by the term " verse " are still relations 
between sounds. 

, Nor — to call the briefest attention to the only other 
case in which this fundamental proposition could seem 
at all doubtful — is this connection of verse with sound 
less essential when the formal poem is merely conceived 
in the thought of its author without ever reaching 
either visible or audible embodiment. For the formal 
poem is necessarily conceived in words, and in the ima- 
gination of the sounds (words) is necessarily involved 
the imagination of the relations between the sounds, 
that is, of verse. 

In short, when we hear verse, we hear a set of rela- 
tions between sounds ; when we silently read verse, 
* we see that which brings to ua^iPL set of relations between 
sounds ; when we imagine verse, we imagine a set of 
relations between sounds. 

Approached in this way, the proposition given below 
will probably not seem difficult of acceptance ; indeed 
it is possible many will be surprised that the ideas 
leading to it -have been dwelt upon so long. In point 
of fact, however, it is the very failure to recognize 
verse as in all respects a phenomenon of sound and to 
appreciate the necessary consequences thereof which 
has caused the non-existence of a science of formal 
poetry. Occasion will presently arise to show how this 
has happened, with some detail ; meantime, we are now 
prepared to formulate a proposition which will serve as 
the basis of a science of verse. 



24 Science of English Verse. 

The term " verse " denotes a set of specially related 
sounds. 

It is clear that if we can now ascertain all the pos- 
sible relations between sounds we will have discovered 
all the possible determinants of verse, and will have 
» secured physical principles for the classification of all 
verse-effects from which there can be no appeal. This 
investigation can fortunately be carried on with the con- 
fidence attaching to the methods of physical science. 
For it involves mainly the observation of sensible ap- 
pearances; and these are, furthermore, in the present 
instance not complex. 

The study of verse must therefore begin with the 
study of sounds. 

Sounds may be studied with reference to four and 
J only four, particulars. We may observe — 

(i) How long a sound lasts {duration) ; 

(2) How loud a sound is {intensity) ; 

(3) How shrill — that is, how high, as to bass or treble — a 
sound is (pitch) ; 

and 

(4) Of what sounds a given sound is composed — for, as in study- 
ing colors we find purple composed of red and violet, and the like, 
so many sounds have been discovered to be made up of other 
sounds {tone-color). 

These differences in sounds, although really so dis- 
tinct from each other as to be the origin of some of 
the most striking and widely-separated phenomena both 
in art and in our daily life, are so confused by most 
persons who have had no special occasion to examine 
them that there are no terms of ordinary use in which 
they can be expressed with scientific precision. The 
reader, however, will not only advance with ease, but 



Four Possible Sound- Relations. 25 

will win a whole new world of possible delight/ by ac- 
quiring at the outset such a familiarity with the sound- 
relations above termed duration, intensity, pitch, and 
tone-color, that the ear will immediately and intelli- 
gently refer every sound heard to all those particu- 
lars and measure its relations to the preceding or 
succeeding sound in terms of them. The remarkable 
powers which the human ear possesses of making per- 
fectly accurate comparisons of sound with sound in 
three of these particulars will presently be detailed. 

Meantime the reader will receive great assistance 
towards a clear conception of these differences by ob- • 
serving exactly how they are caused by the vibrating 
body producing the given sound ; that is, by attending 
to the physical explanation of duration, intensity, pitch, 
and tone-color. 

For this purpose : remembering that all sounds are 
caused by the vibrations of some vibrating body, which 
are impressed upon the air, and through the air upon 
the drum-membrane, or tympanum, stretched inside the 
ear, whence, after being conveyed along a complex 
arrangement of bones and fluids, they are sent to the 
brain and are perceived as sound : remembering, fur- 
ther, that what we call "sound," the physicist only rec- 
ognizes as " vibrations : " let us consider the behavior 
of a vibrating string, as the type of all sound-producing 
bodies. 

If a stretched string be plucked out of its position 
and thus set to vibrating, we can, in observing its 

' See particularly the discussion of the Tunes of Verse in Part II. 
recommending the habit of consciously co-ordinating those remarkable 
tunes of the speaking-voice which constitute, perhaps, a greater element 
in modem speech than words, and which are giving rise to the modern 
art of spoken recitation. 



26 Science of English Verse. 

vibrations, direct our attention to the following four 
matters, which include all the possible classes of such 
phenomena. 

(i)^ We can observe how long the string vibrates, or 
the duration of its activity. 

(2) We can observe how far to one side and the 
other its swing, or " excursion,'* is extended. Upon 
this distance depends the loudness, or intensity, of the 
resulting sound. The reader must associate clearly the 
ideas of distance of swing (called in the science of sound 
" excursion ") and intensity of sound. The greater the 
excursion, the greater the intensity (or loudness) of the 
sound. It is easy to see that if the string be pulled very 
far out of its position and let go, it will vibrate with 
more force than when pulled only a little way out. The 
measure of the far-ness is therefore the measure of the 
force ; and, of course, the impression on the ear, when 
the vibrations reach it, will be more intense according 
as they are more forcible. In short, stated technically, 
the intensity of the sound depends upon the vibratory 

"_^xcursion. 

(3) But, instead of observing how long the string 
continues to vibrate {duration), or how far to one side 
and the other it vibrates {intensity), we may observe, 
thirdly, how fast it vibrates. The pitch of the sound 
depends upon this circumstance. Slow vibrations give 

^sounds of low pitch, or bass sounds : the faster the 
vibrations become, the higher, or more treble, are the 

' These numbers in parentheses are repetitions of those accompany- 
ing the terms " duration," " intensity," &c., and are merely intended as an 
additional association, helpful to the reader, between the physical phe- 
nomena of vibration and the mental phenomena of sound, — the term 
" sound " implying the perception by the ear, while the term " vibrations " 
has reference only to the phenomena occurring up to that point. 



\ 



Duration; Intensity; Pitch. 27 

corresponding sounds. Of course, this observation of 
the rapidity of vibrations could not be carried on by 
the unassisted eye. Every reader, whether specially 
interested in acoustics or not, would do well to be at 
some pains in becoming familiar with the beautiful 
series of apparatus ^ which has been devised by modern 
physicists for counting the vibrations of sounding 
bodies and for confirming and extending many of the 
wonderful facts revealed to us by the knowledge of 
these rates of vibration, particularly the fact of tone- 
color, to be explained in the next paragraph. It 
would not be proper to detail these inquiries here, 
further than to call the reader's attention to the fact 
that the art of sound, with which we are at present 
concerned, has for its materials a body of tones which 
range in pitch from the tone which is produced by a 
body vibrating about twenty-four times in a second to 
that which is produced by a body vibrating about four 
thousand seven hundred times in a second. If one sits 
in front of a low-tuned piano, and presses down the key 
farthest to the left, the string struck by that key will 
vibrate about twenty-four times to the second, and will 
give forth a tone so low in pitch that many ears are 
almost unable to distinguish its tone from that of the 
next key to it. If the key at the extreme right tJe 
pressed down, the string which it strikes will vibrate 
about three thousand five hundred times to the second. 
Higher tones than the latter — reaching to about four 






* The main book to be read for this purpose is, of course, Professor 
Helmholtz's monumental work. Die Lehre von den Tonempfindungen^ I 
which has recently been translated into English, with very important addi- 1 
tions, by Mr. Alexander J. Ellis. Smaller, and perhaps more accessible, \ 
books, are TyndalFs Lectures On Sounds Mayer's work on the same subject 
(Appleton), and Blasema's Theory of Sound (Appleton). 



{ 



28 Science of English Verse. 

thousand seven hundred vibrations per second — can 
be obtained on the piccolo. 

But the sounds with which we shall presently be 
more specially concerned — namely, the sounds of the 
human speaking-voice, in which the art of verse finds 
its primary material — range within narrower limits. 
To produce the lowest tone of a man's bass voice, 
the vibrations must be about sixty-five in a second; 
while, for the highest tones of a woman's voice, the 
upper limit — leaving out exceptional cases — niay be 
taken as lying at about a thousand and forty-four vibra- 
tions in a second. These are the limits for the human 

► singing-voice ; but, as will be seen in the discussion of 
the tunes of verse following, they are also substantially 
the limits of the speaking-voice. To sum up these 
details before proceeding to the next paragraph : the 
reader is asked to form the clearest conception of the 
difference between the intensity of sounds — that is, 

' their loudness or softness — and i^a^ pitch of sounds — 
that is, their bass-ness or treble-ness. We shall pres- 
ently find that great confusion has arisen in the discus- 
sion of what is called ** accent " from inexact ideas upon 
this point. For this reason, the physical explanations 
of intensity and pitch have been dwelt upon in the 
preceding and present paragraphs. The reader can 
always accurately distinguish them by associating the 
intensity of a sound with the distance of the vibratory 
excursion, and th^ pitch of a sound with the rapidity of 
the vibration. 

(4) We have now arrived at the last of the particu- 
lars in regard to which we may observe the vibrations 
of a string. This is the particular called by some phys- 
icists "quality," by others "timbre," by Mr. Tyndall 



Tone -Color. 29 

(whose explanation of it is perhaps the clearest to the 
general reader : see his Lectures on Sound, cited in 
the last paragraph) " clang-tint/* in translation of the 
German term Klang-farbe ; and by still others "tone- 
color." The analogy to the corresponding phenomenon 
in light seems to make the term tone-color a desirable 
one, and it will be adopted in this book. It has been 
discovered that such tones as constitute material for 
the art of sound ^ are not simple, but are made up of 
subordinate tones, much as the color purple consists 
of two other colors — red and violet — in combina- 
tion, and as many other hues are formed by combining 
different tints. The complete physical explanation of 
this phenomenon would require much more space than 
can be given here ; but a partial insight into its nature 
may be gained from the behavior of our stretched 
string when plucked. If the string be observed closely, 
it will be found to be carrying on several sets of vibra- 
tion at the same time : it is not only vibrating as a 
whole between its two extreme fixed points, but, in 
consequence of the reflections to and fro of the force 
applied in plucking the string — which runs along the 
string to the fixed end, and is then reflected along 
the string, thence back again, and so on — certain other 
practically-fixed points are set up, and the string actu- 
ally vibrates in smaller segments between these points 
— called "nodes of vibration" — as if it consisted of 

* This term, "the art of sound," is used as designating a genus, of 
which music and verse are the two species. Purposes of the utmost 
vsStie to the present system are subserved by discussing, as the reader 
oSielres is being done, this genus until a point is reached where the 
differentiation of the two species sharply presents itself. They will be 
found separated by a line muph less broa^ than has been commonly sup 



K 



Science of English Verse. 

several shorter strings : now each of these segments 
vibrates at a different rate per second from the rate of 
the whole string, and therefore makes a tone different 
in pitch (see the last paragraph) from that of the whole 
string which is called the "fundamental tone:" so that 
the tone made by each segment combines with the fun- 
damental tone and all are heard by the ear as one tone. 
But, while heard as one tone along with the fundamen- 
tal tone, the segment-tones influence the resulting tone 
in a manner very striking to the ear according as they 
are more numerous in some vibrating bodies than in 
others, or according as one segment-tone becomes (as 
is found to be the case) more prominent in some bodies 
than in others. It is found, for instance, that when the 
vibrating body is the column of air in a flute, instead of 
a string, the column of air presents a different set of 
segment-tones {or "harmonics," or "partial tones," as 
they are variously called) from the set presented by the 
ng ; and it is precisely this difference which enables 
ir ear to recognize the flute-tone as distinct from the 
ing-tone. So of all instruments : the reed-instru- 
ments, such as the clarinet, hautboy, and bassoon, cause 
the air within them to vibrate in different sets of seg- 
ments from the air in a flute, or a horn, and from the 
string of a violin : each segment giving its own tone, 
the different sets of segments give different resulting 
tones, that is, different tone-colors : and it is by these 
different tone-colors that we discriminate flute from 
violin, horn from clarinet, and the like, when they are 
ilayed out of our sight. This principle makes such deli- 
ite shades of variations that even instruments of the 
.me class differ from each other very strikingly in this 
icular, so that of two violms we often- prefer the 



I 



Dependence of Speech on Tone-color. 3 1 

"tone" (by which we mean the ** tone-color ") of one to 
the other, and so of two flutes, two pianos, and the like. 
The delicate distinctions due to tone-color reach a 
most interesting phase, which is specially used through- 
out the present treatise, in language. It has been found 
that the ability of the ear to discriminate one vowel- 
sound from another, and one consonant-sound from 
another, is due to the fact that the vowels and conso- 
nants differ from each other in tone-color just as violin- 
tones differ from flute-tones, or from reed-tones, in 
tone-color. The human voice is practically a reed- 
instrument of the hautboy class, the vocal chords 
being the two thin vibrating reeds, and the mouth and 
throat (the buccal cavity) constituting the tube. Now 
it is found that the tone-color of wind-instruments 
will vary according to the shape of their tubes : a col- 
umn of air vibrating in a tube like that of the clari- 
net, for instance, gives a different set of prominent 
segment-tones, that is, a different tone-color, from a 
column in a tube like that of the flute. It is thus 
that the voice produces those sounds of differing tone- 
color which we call vowels and consonants ; for the 
voice is a reed-instrument which can alter the shape of 
its tube (the buccal cavity) at pleasure, and which in so 
doing alters its tone-color at pleasure. The general 
fact that we alter the shape of the mouth and throat in 
pronouncing each vowel and consonant must lie within 
the observation of every person. The precise proof, 
however, that tone-color is the principle by which we 
discriminate the constituent sounds of speech, and the 
scientific analysis of the phenomenon, constitute one 
of the most brilliant achievements of modern science, 
which should not be mentioned without specifying the 



3 2 Science of English Verse. 

names of Charles Wheatstone, who first suggested the 
idea, and of Helmholtz, who demonstrated it in a series 
of the most beautiful studies and experiments ever 
made. 

The fact that each vowel-tone in speech is compound) 
X being the resultant of a number of subsidiary tones in 
combination ; the fact that now one, now another, of 
these subsidiary tones comes into prominence according 
as we alter the shape of the mouth-cavity, and thus 
varies the tone-color of the voice ; and the fact that our 
ear recognizes a certain tone-color as the vowel a^ 
another as the vowel ^, another as the vowel /, another 
as the vowel ^, another as the vowel u: were estab- 
lished and verified in a complete manner by Helmholtz, 
who applied the principle in constructing an apparatus 
of tubes and membranes which imitated several of the 
vowels with much exactness. 

To sum up the results of this division, therefore: 
whenever, in discussing the general art of sound, the 
term tone-color is used, it should bring into the reader's 
mind the principle of segmentary or partial vibrations 
which combine with the fundamental vibrations (of a 
string or of a column of air in an instrumental tube) to 
form a composite tone, — as different light-vibrations 
combine to form a composite color, like purple, — result- 
ing in that peculiar set of differences by which we dis- 
criminate fiute-tone from violin-tone, horn-tone from 
clarinet-tone, a from Oy i from u. 

The following, then, comprise all the possible rela- 
tions between sounds, namely : (i) the relative duration 
of sounds, in which the reader must carefully remember 
to include the correlative duration of the silences between 
sounds, which are called " rests," and which are quite as 



Indefinite Comparison of Sounds. 33 

necessary to many forms of verse as are the sounds 
thereof ; (2) the relative intensity of sounds ; (3) the 
relative pitch of sounds ; and (4) the relative tone-color 
of sounds. 

It will now be useful to combine the two last propo- 
sitions in a statement made from a different point 
of view. A formal poem is always composed of suck 
sounds and silences ^ (pr of the signs, or of the concep- 
tions , of suck sounds and silences) as can be co-ordinated 
by the ear. 

By " sounds which can be co-ordinated by the ear " 
are meant sounds which the ear can perceive with 
such clearnes.s that it is able to compare them with 
reference to some one or more particulars. For exam- 
ple, if, in strolling, we hear first the quick chirp of a 
sparrow and then the slow shrilling of the field-cricket 
in the grass, our ear can compare the two sounds as to 
time, and can decide that the latter is longer than the 
former : that is to say, the ear can co-ordinate these two 
sounds with reference to the particular of their duration. 

Again : if, immediately afterwards, we hear the cry of 
a jay, our ear can compare it with the previous sounds 
as to the point of loudness, and can decide that the jay*s 
sound is louder than the other two : that is to say, the 
ear can co-ordinate these three sounds with reference to 
the particular of their intensity. 

' These "silences" are included in Proposition i, under the term 
** specially related sounds." For example, if a couplet of sounds be 
separated by a silence of one minute in duration, while another couplet 
is separated by a silence of two minutes in duration, these differing silences 
constitute an independent means of comparison between the two couplets ; 
and, as such, the measured silence or rest may be considered one species 
of relations between sounds with sufficient accuracy for a proposition in 
which the most general terms are desirable. 



34 Science of English Verse. 

Again : if we now hear in succession the grave coo 
of a dove and the keen piping of a field-lark, our ear 
can compare them as to the point of their relative shrill- 
ness or trebleness, and can decide that the latter is 
the shriller, or more treble, of jthe two : that is to say, the 
ear can co-ordinate these two sounds with reference to 
the particular of i!i\€\x pitch. 

Again : if we now hear in succession the whirr of 
the grasshopper poised above the grass and the whistle 
of the partridge down the field, our ear can compare the 
two sounds as to the point of tone-color^ and can decide 
that the grasshopper's note is somewhat, like the low 
tones of the clarinet (having a certain fluttering quality 
characteristic of the reed-instruments), while the par- 
tridge's note has more likeness to the smoother flute : 
that is to say, the ear can co-ordinate these two tones 
with reference to the particular of their tone-color. 

The foregoing are examples of the general co-ordi- 
nation, or indefinite comparison, of sounds. But the 
reader is now asked to observe that in none of the 
instances given could the ear make any exact co-ordina- 
tion^ or definite measurement, of the sounds compared. 
To recur to the first example : while the ear could 
recognize that the song of the cricket was in a general 
way longer than that of the sparrow, it was unable to 
pronounce exactly how many times as long. So, in the 
second example, though we could say immediately that 
the jay's cry was more intense — that is, louder — than 
the sparrow's, we could not say how much more intense. 
In the third example, while we could pronounce the 
field-lark's note certainly higher in pitch than the 
dove's, we have no scale of degrees, like the musical 
scale, to which we could refer these two tones and as- 



Definite Comparison of Sounds. 35 

certain their precise distance from each other, or musi- 
cal " interval." And finally, in the fourth example, while 
the tone-color of the grasshopper's whirr is sufficiently 
distinct from that of the partridge's whistle, it is not so 
distinct as to admit of more than a general classification 
as reedy. 

But the art of tone, which includes the art of mu- 
sic and the art of verse, depends upon exact co-ordina- • 
tions by the ear. It is therefore necessary for us to 
advance beyond the consideration of such sounds as are 
capable merely of general co-ordination, or indefinite 
comparison, by the ear, to the consideration of such 
sounds as are further capable of exact co-ordination, or 
definite measurement, by the ear. 

Let it be here noticed that in the preceding propo- 
sitions all that has been said generally of verse ap- 
plies equally to music, -^ the other art of sound, — and 
that this will be the case for several propositions to 
come ; though each proposition will be found to contain 
some limitation of the preceding one, so that we can 
presently arrive, by the method of successive limita- 
tions, at a point where a single step will separate the 
definition of verse from that of music. This method 
is of importance. It will presently be found that 
the sound-relations which constitute music are the 
same with those which constitute verse, and that the 
main distinction between music and verse is, when 
stated with scientific precision, the difference between • 
the scale of tones used in music and the scale of tones 
used by the human speaking-voice. 

But this is by anticipation. It is now necessary to 
ascertain what are the capacities of the ear for the 
definite measurement, or exact co-ordination, of sounds. * 



36 Science of English Verse. 

Stating the same purpose in different terms : since the 
four particulars mentioned (duration, intensity, pitch, 
and tone-color) comprise all the possible variations of 
sound and of silence, let us now inquire as to which of 
these particulars, if any, the ear of average persons has 
I the power of exactly co-ordinating sounds. By the power 
I of exact co-ordination is meant the power of conceiv- 
I* ing the relations of sounds in terms of number, or in 
terms of degree. Thus if, of two sounds occupying dif- 
ferent lengths of time, the ear is able to perceive that 
one was exactly twice as long as the other, it may be 
said that the ear has exactly co-ordinated, or definitely 
measured, those two sounds as to their duration, and has 
conceived the result in terms of number. If, again, any 
key of a piano be struck, and then another, and the ear 
recognizes the latter tone as lying at exactly six degrees 
(according to the musical scale of degrees) above the 
former, it may be said that the ear has exactly co-erdi- 
nated, or definitely measured, these two sounds with 
reference to their pitch, and has arrived at a conception 
of such co-ordination in terms of a precise scale of 
degrees. These illustrations will be carried farther in 
the next proposition. 

Actual observation reveals that there are three partic- 
ulars, and only three, as to which the ear has the power 
of exactly co-ordinating sounds. These three are dura- 
tion, pitch, and tone-color. 

Example of exact co-ordination with reference to the 
particular of duration. If a musician be asked to strike 
any key of a piano so that two of its sounds will ex- 
actly fill the time of one second, as marked off by a clock 
ticking seconcis, he is able to do so without trouble: 
if, between any two ticks of the clock, he should hold 



Examples of Exact Co-ordination. 3 7 

the key down longer than its legitimate time of half a 
second, the deviation from the proper time is immedi- 
ately observed : if he be told to make four sounds to the 
second, instead of two, he distributes them thus with 
ease : indeed, these are the simplest forms of example, 
and the musician can interpose between each tick of the 
clock, with unerring precision, sounds bearing to each 
other much more complex relations of duration. It is 
obvious that his power to do so, as well as the power 
to recognize when he does so, depends upon the remark- 
able capacity of the ear (affirmed in the first clause of 
this proposition) to co-ordinate sounds exactly with ref- 
erence to their duration. 

Example of exact co-ordination with reference to the 
particular of pitch. If any two keys of a piano be 
Struck in succession, the musician will immediately 
name the relation of the latter to the former in terms 
of the musical scale, by his ear alone. Thus if the 
first key struck be the middle C, and the next be the 
second white key to the right of it, he will announce 
the second as a major third above the first, or E : if 
the second key struck be the seventh white key to the 
right, he will announce it as the octave of the first ; and 
so on. In other words, the human iar has the power 
of exactly co-ordinating sounds with reference to the 
particular of pitch, and of forming precise conceptions 
thereof which can be accurately expressed in degrees 
of the musical scale. 

Example of exact co-ordination with reference to the 
particular of tone-color. If a given tone, say the mid- 
dle C, be sounded on the piano, and the same tone — 
that is to say, a tone of the same duration (or length), 
of the same intensity (or loudness), and of the same 



38 Science of English Verse. 

• 

pitch — be sounded on the violin, the ear instantly recog- 
nizes a difference ; if the same tone be then sounded on 
the flute, the ear recognizes a difference from both the 
others ; if it be further sounded on the clarinet, the ear 
recognizes a difference from all the preceding. This 
difference, being by the supposition neither a differ- 
ence of duration nor of intensity nor of pitch, must 
belong to the only other class of differences of which 
sounds are capable, namely, the class known as tone- 
color. We have already found that the difference 
between one vowel-sound and another in speech — the 
difference between ^, for instance, and ^, or that be- 
tween / and e — belongs to this class of sound relations. 
The ability of the ear to discriminate the most delicate 
shades of difference in this particular constitutes one of 
the most remarkable of our faculties, and leads to some 
very interesting fields of thought. All the phenomena 
of rhyme and of alliteration, and several allied verse- 
effects which will be found herein treated for the first 
time, are due to this capacity of the ear for exactly 
co-ordinating sounds with reference to their tone-color. 

While, as noted in the last proposition, the ear is 
capable of exactly co-ordinating sounds with reference 
to their duration, their pitch, and their tone-color, it is 
not capable of exactly co-ordinating them with reference 
* to the other particular mentioned — intensity. We have 
already seen that a general or inexact co-ordins^tion 
in respect of intensity was possible : indeed, it is not a 
matter requiring further illustration, that of two given 
sounds every ear can in a general way pronounce one 
to be louder or softer than the other. But how much 
louder or softer ; whether twice as loud, or three times 
as soft ; whether louder or softer according to the de- 



Intensity an Inexact Relation. 39 

• 

grees of any given scale or standard of measurement : 
for such exact co-ordinations of intensity in sounds the 
ear has no means. There is here possible neither an 
appeal to terms of number, as when, in the case of 
duration, we can say that two sounds occupying a given 
time are followed by two sounds occupying exactly 
the same time, and so on; nor an appeal to a given 
scale of degrees, as when, in the case of pitch, the 
musician's ear pronounces definitely the relation of one 
tone to another by referring them to the fixed degrees 
of the musical scale (which is really a kind of primor- 
dial tune, always carried in the memory of the ear, and 
always available as a sort of graduated auditory yard- 
stick for measurement) ; nor, finally, an appeal to those 
easily-preserved and fixed conceptions of tone-color 
which the ear retains, and by which it compares a given 
tone with recollected tones so as instantly to recognize 
them as flute-tones, as piano-tones, as violin-tones, and 
so on. We have no standard within the mind for the 
precise measurement of intensity in sound ; that is, the 
ear is not capable of exactly co-ordinating sounds with 
reference to the particular of intensity. 

Since an art of sound must depend primarily upon 
exact co-ordinations by the ear, and since these exact co- 
ordinations are, as just shown, possible only in respect 
of duration, pitch, and tone-color, it is evident that these 
three sound-relations constitute three distinct principles * 
to one or the other of which all the primary phe- 
nomena of this art must be referred. They thus afford 
us three fundamental principles of classification for the 
effects of sound in art. The effects ordinarily known 
as "rhythm** depend primarily upon duration;' those ^ 

•' For detailed proof of which see the special discussion of rhythm in 
Part L following. 



40 Science of English Verse. 

• known as "tune** depend upon pitch; those known as 
" colors " in music, and as " rhymes '* and " alliterations " 
in verse, — besides many allied effects of verse which 
have never been named, — depend upon tone-color. 
Stated in other terms : — 

I. 

» When the ear exactly co-ordinates a series of sounds 
and silences with primary reference to their dura- 
tion, the result is a conception of . . . . Rhythm. 

11. 

> When the ear exactly co-ordinates a series of sounds 
with primary reference to their pitch, the result is 
a conception of Tune. 

III. 

When the ear exactly co-ordinates a series of sounds 
* with primary reference to their tone-color, the re- 
sult is a conception of (in music, flute-tone as dis- 
tinct from violin-tone, and the like ; in verse, rhyme 
as opposed to rhyme, vowel varied with vowel, pho- 
netic syzygy, and the like), in general . . . Tone-Color. 

The term "primary reference" in the last proposi- 
tion hints at a secondary use which is made, not only 
of the inexact relation, intensity, but also of the three 
exact relations, in the art of sound. As soon as this 
secondary use is explained, — as will now be done, — 
actual illustrations of all the preceding abstract propo- 
sitions can be given, which will clear them of obscurity. 

The secondary use of the four relations — duration, 
intensity, pitch, and tone-color — occurs only by way 
^ of adjunct in that great class of sound-effects marked I. 
above, — the class known as rhythm. 

For the purpose of enabling the ear to make exact 
co-ordinations of a long and complex series of sounds 



Secondary Use of the Four Relations. 41 

with reference to their duration, it becomes convenient 
to arrange the sounds so that the whole body may be ^ 
grouped by the ear into smaller bodies which can be, as 
it were, handled with more ease. It is to effect this 
grouping that the secondary use of the sound-relations 
is made. How they are employed for this purpose will 
appear from the following illustration, which is arranged 
with two purposes : one, to explain certain effects upon 
the ear which have been greatly misconceived, by show- 
ing exactly parallel effects upon the eye which no one 
ever confuses ; and the other, to begin acquainting the 
student with the musical system of notation — a system 
which is adequate to all the phenomena of rhythm, that ' 
is, adequate to express in visible characters all the con- 
ceptions which result when the ear co-ordinates a series 
of sounds with primary reference to their duration and 
with secondary reference to any or all the other sound- 
relations. 

The following scheme presents a series of eight char- 
acters exactly similar in size and in distance apart : — 

r r r f r f f r 

Let it be proposed to mark off for the eye groups of two 
characters each along the whole series. This might be 
done in several ways. For example, we might make 
the stem of the first character longer than that of the 
second, and repeat this variation through the series : — 

r M M M r 

or we might begin with the second character, and effect 
the same result by lengthening every second stem in the 
series ; — 



42 Science of English Verse. 

r r M M rr 

either method dividing the series for the eye into 
groups, of two characters in each. It is obvious that 
we might have effected the same grouping for the eye 
by shortening either every first or every second stem in 
each group, or, in general, by any recurrent variation 
in length. Further : we might apply the same method, 
not to the characters, but to the distances between 
them. Thus we might mark them off into groups for 
the eye by lengthening or shortening, or in any way 
consistently varying, the spaces between the couplets ; 

r r r r r r r r 

that is to say, in general, a series of characters may 
be marked off into groups for the eye by any recurrent 
variation in length, either of the characters, or of the 
spaces between them. 

Before proceeding to other methods of grouping, let 
us now transfer these conceptions of the eye to the ear. 
Suppose the eight characters used above to be eight 
signs of sounds, as they in fact are, beiiig the " quar- 
ter-notes ** of the musical system of noting rhythm to 
be presently explained in full. Now the series of eight 
sounds represented by eight such characters could be 
marked off into groups of two each for the ear, just as 
the characters themselves were marked off for the eye, 
either by varying the length of every second sound (as 
we varied the length of every second sound-sign), or 
by varying the length of the interval of silence between 
every two sounds, as we varied the length of the dis- 
tance between the couplets of sound-signs. 



Grouping by Duration and Intensity. 43 

Thus the ear, having co-ordinated a series of eight 
sounds with primary reference to their duration, and 
having thus set up what we may call a primary rhyth- 
mus among the individual units of sound, may again co- 
ordinate the same sounds with secondary reference to 
their duration in order to divide them into groups of two 
or more units ; each group being distinguished by some 
variation in the duration of either of its sounds, or in 
the duration of the silences between them. 

But again recurring to the eight characters as mere- 
ly visible signs : they might be marked off into groups 
for the eye by variations in their intensity. Suppose, 
for example, the first be printed in ink of an intenser 
black than the second, and this variation be consistent- 
ly carried on through the eight : — 

r r r r r r r r 

It is obvious, without carrying this process through 
the details of the last, that a grouping could be marked 
off for the eye by any recurring variation of intensity. 
It is easy to transfer this process, as before, from the 
eye to the ear. 

Given a series of eight sounds already co-ordinated 
by the ear with reference to their duration, and thus 
already established as primarily rhythmical : such a 
series could be marked off into groups by making any 
sound of each group louder or softer than the other 
sound or sounds of that group, that is, by any recurrent 
variation in the intensity of that sound. Here it may 
be seen how the exact co-ordinations which were neces- 
sary to the artistic use of the other sound-relations, 
duration, pitch, and tone-color, are not necessary in this 
use of intensity, which, we found, cannot be exactly co- 



44 Science of English Verse. 

ordinated by the ear ; for the use of intensity in group- 
ing sounds does not require exact co-ordination. If, for 
example, every second sound in the series be in any 
degree louder or softer than its fellow, the series will 
be grouped into twos ; if every third sound be in any 
degree louder or softer than its adjacent two, the series 
will be grouped into threes, and so on ; no particular 
degree of intensity being needed for the mere purpose of 

• making the ear notice every second, every third, every 
fourth sound, and so on. 

Here, too, an important additional consideration may 
now be mentioned, namely, that both these methods 
(or, as we shall afterwards see, any three or all four 

^ of the methods) may be used at once, to give greater 
distinctness to the grouping of sounds for the ear. 
It is easy to see that in grouping the above-men- 
tioned eight characters for the eye, we might both 
vary the stem and vary the blackness (intensity) of 
every other character, and so group them into twos by 
both the methods of duration and intensity ; and, simi- 
larly, we can group the corresponding series of sounds 
into twos by making every other sound both longer 

. (duration) and louder (intensity), or both shorter (dura- 
tion) and softer (intensity) : in short by varying every 
other sound in both the particulars of -duration and in- 
tensity. So we might group into threes, fours, &c., by 
varying every third, fourth, &c., sound in both these 
particulars. Of course, such a grouping would be all 
the more strikingly marked off for the ear by the use 
of the two methods to distinguish the leading sound in 
each group. 

But, to recur to the eight characters as affecting the 

V sense of sight : they might be marked off into groups 



Secondary Grouping by Pitch. 45 

for the eye by making every second, third, fourth, &c., 
character higher or lower than the rest of its group. 
Thus the scheme 



r r r r r-r 



plainly divides the eight into two groups of four by 
making the first a little higher than the next three, and 
so on. Transferring to the sense of hearing : we might 
group these eight sounds for the ear by making every « 
first, second, third, &c., sound higher or lower in pitch 
than its neighbor or neighbors. Thus we make a secon- 
dary use of pitch in grouping sounds for rhythm, which 
may be at the same time primarily co-ordinated by the 
ear with reference to the same relation, — pitch, — for a 
wholly different purpose, namely, tune — always the pri- 
mary conception resulting from any change of pitch. 

It is scarcely necessary to say that this method, as 
before, can be superadded to the others ; that is to say, 
a series of sounds and silences already co-ordinated 
primarily with reference to duration, to establish their 
general rhythmic nature, may be secondarily co-ordi- 
nated or grouped (and it may be well to notice that 
these two terms, "secondary co-ordination** and "group- 
ing," are always convertible) by making any given 
sound — say the first in every group of two, the second 
in every group of three, and so on — vary from the rest 
of Its group in all the three particulars of duration, inten- 
sity, and of pitch. Of course, each superimposed varia- 
tion upon a given sound would attract the ear's attention • 
to the recurrence of that sound all the more strongly. 

It remains to notice the possible secondary use of 
the only other sound-relation, tone-color, in grouping 



•^■ \ 



46 Science of English Verse. 

sounds. The illustration as to the eye readily sug- 
gests that the eight notes might be grouped for the 
sense of sight by making every second, third, &c., 
note of a certain color, say red, while the other note 
or notes of each group were blue. It is easy to see 
that we could group our eight sounds in any manner we 
pleased by the similar process of a recurrent variation 
in tone-color. Suppose, for example, that the first tone 
should be struck on the piano, the next three on a 
guitar, the next on the piano, the next three on the 
guitar, &c., the series of sounds would necessarily 
divide itself for the ear into two groups of four, the 
varying tone-color of the piano from that of the guitar 
serving to effect the division. In the case of verse this 

• varying tone-color would take the form of a recurrent 
vowel-sound, a recurrent rhyme, and the like tone-colors. 

It is scarcely necessary to add that this secondary use 

* of tone-color in grouping sounds can be superimposed 
upon the three others. In the grouping into fours last 
suggested, for example, each controlling tone struck on 
the piano might be both longer (duration), louder (inten- 
sity), and higher (pitch) than the three struck on the/ 
guitar. Rhythmic groups thus marked off would of courafe 
command the ear's attention in a very powerful way. / 

We have now reached a point where we can pront- 
ably inquire as to the precise differentiation between 

" the two species of the art of sound — music and verse. 
We have found that the art of sound, in general, em- 

•^ braces phenomena of rhythm, of tune, and of tone-color. 
Many will be disposed to think that the second class of 
these phenomena just named — tune — is not found in 
verse, and that the absence of it should be one of the 
first differences to be noted as between music and verse. 



Difference between Music and Verse. 47 

Tune is, however, quite as essential a constituent of 
verse as of music ; aqd the disposition to believe other- 
wise is due only to the complete unconsciousness with 
which we come to use these tunes after the myriad 
repetitions of them which occur in all our daily inter- 
course by words. We will presently find, from numer- 
ous proofs and illustrations which are submitted in Part 
II., on the Tunes of Verse, that our modern speech is • 
made up quite as much of tunes as of words, and that 
our ability to convey our thoughts depends upon the 
existence of a great number of curious melodies of 
speech which have somehow acquired form and signifi- 
cance. These ** tunes *' are not mere vague variations 
of pitch in successive words, — which would deserve [ 
the name of tune only in the most general sense of \ 
that term, — but they are perfectly definite and organ- / 
ized melodies of the speaking-voice, composed of exact * 
variations of pitch so well marked as to be instantly 
recognized by every ear. If they were not thus recog- 
nized a large portion of the ideas which we now 
convey with ease would be wholly inexpressible. Re- 
serving, then, all details upon this matter until their 
appropriate place under the head of the Tunes of 
Verse, in Part II. above cited, it will be sufficient here 
if the reader is asked to realize them in a practical 
way by first attempting to utter any significant sen- 
tences of prose or verse in an absolutely unchanging 
voice from beginning to end. This will be found quite 
difficult, and when successfully executed produces an 
impression of strangeness which all the more clearly 
illustrates how habitually and how unconsciously the 
tunes of speech are used. If, having uttered the sen- 
tences in a rigidly unvarying tone, the reader will then 



48 Science of English Verse. 

utter them in the tunes which we feel — by some inward 
perceptions too subtle for treatment here — to be appro- 
priate to them, it will be easily seen that definite suc- 
cessions of tones are being used, — so definite that they 

* are kept in mind for their appropriate occasions just as 
words are, and so regular in their organizations as to be 
in all respects worthy the name of " tunes," instead of 
the vague terms "intonation,** or "inflection," which 
have so long concealed the real function of these won- 
derful melodies of the speaking-voice. 

The art of verse, then, as well as the art of music, — 
the two species of the genus art of sound, — includes 
all the three great classes of phenomena summed up 

^ under the terms rhythm, tune, and tone-color. We will 
presently find many problems solved by the full recog- 
nition of this fact that there is absolutely no difference 

^ between the sound-relations used in music and those 
used in verse. 

If this be true, — if the sound-relations of music and 
verse are the same, — we are necessarily forced to look 
for the difference between the two arts in the nature 

^ of the sounds themselves with which they deal. Here, 
indeed, the difference lies. Expressed, as far as possi- 
ble, in popular terms, it is as follows : — 

When those exact co-ordinations which the ear perceives 
as rhythm, tune, and tone-color, are suggested to the ear 
by a series of musical sounds^ the result is . . . Music. 

When those exact co-ordinations which the ear perceives 
^ as rhythm, tune, and tone-color, are suggested to the ear 

by a series of spoken words, the result is . . . Verse. 

But it is necessary to attain a very much more 
philosophical view of the relation between "musical 
sounds " and "words " than is generally implied in the 



Words, Strictly Musical Sounds, 49 

popular use of those terms ; for a slight examination . 
will show that words are themselves musical sounds. 
They are the results of regular vibrations ; they are 
capable of the exactest co-ordination in respect of their 
duration, their pitch, and their tone-color ; they are 
capable of as exact co-ordination in respect of their 
intensity (loudness or softness) as any other sounds; 
they give pleasure to the ear by their fall : in short, 
without here attempting a definition of musical sounds, 
it must be said that from a scientific point of view ' 
there is no incident of them which is not also an 
incident of words. For all purposes of verse, words are . 
unquestionably musical sounds produced by a reed- 
instrument — the human voice. It must therefore be* 
clearly understood by the reader that, in the above 
distinction between music and verse, what are called 
musical sounds are only one set out of the possible 
body of musical sounds; while what are called words 
are another set ; that is, that " words " (in the sense of ^ 
the above distinction) means simply one kind of musical 
sounds, and "musical sounds" means simply another 
kind. It is to be regretted that our language does not 
afford us more precise terms for these purposes. Music, 
although a very old art, has only recently been inves- 
tigated by exact methods : the same may be said of 
poetry ; and it is probably owing to this circumstance 
that we have no terms which embody precise relations 
between spoken words and musical tones. The terms 
" vocal " and " instrumental " are not satisfactory, be- 
cause they hide one of the most important facts to be 
kept in view in all such investigations as the present, 
namely, the purely instrumental character of the speak- 
ing-voice and of its tones (words). ** Vocal" here is 



I 



Science of English Verse, 



instrumentaL" Let the reader always conceive, first, 
general body of musical tones ; then let the speaking- 
lice be conceived as an instrument consisting of a 
tube (the mouth, nose, and throat) and a pair of reeds 
(the vocal chords), which produces a certain set of these 
musical sounds. It is true that this certain set has re- 
ceived a special name, "words," because it has come to 
be used for a special purpose, namely, that of commu- 
nicating ideas from man to man. It will assist the 
reader to a clearer conception of this matter, if the fact 
be called to mind that the selection of vocal sounds for 
the purpose of communicating ideas was not at all a 
necessary one. Other sets of musical sounds might have 
been selected for this purpose, those of whistles or 
flutes, for instance ; or no sounds at all might have been 
used, and "words " might have been entirely eye-signs, 
as is actually the case with the deaf and dumb. In 
fine, when the term " words " ts used as describing the 
pecuhar set of sounds used in verse, the reader must 
understand it merely as a convenient method of singling 
out that specialized set of musical sounds made by the 
imusical instrument called "the human speaking-voice." 
But what, then, are the distinguishing characteristics • 
lof these sounds which specialize them into a set distinct 
irom the general body of musical sounds? 

These characteristics are two : {a) the generic and 
specific tone-colors of the human speaking-voice ; and 
{b) the peculiar scale of tones used by the human 
speaking-voice. 

(a) By "the generic tone-color" of an instrument 

let us understand that general peculiarity of tone-color 

Which enables us to distinguish tones made upon any 

istrument of that class as distinguished from tones 



Generic and Specific Tone-colorS, 51 

made upon any instrument of a different class ; for in- 
stance, the violin has its generic tone-color as distin- 
guished from the generic tone-color of the flute, or from 
the generic tone-color of the piano. But subject to 
this general resemblance of tone-color among all the 
instruments of a class, enabling us to distinguish the 
violin-class, the flute-class, the piano-class, &c., there 
exists a great variety of minor or specific tone-colors, 
which not only distinguish one particular instrument 
from another of the same class, but even the tones 
evoked from the same instrument by two different play- 
ers. Thus we not only say, "The tone of this violin is 
better than that one, the tone of this piano is poorer 
than that" (the "tone" in such expressions meaning the 
tone-color) ; but we say of two persons playing on the 
same violin or piano, "I like So-and-So's tone better 
than the other's," and so on ; the word " tone " always 
being used for tone-color. 

But — and this is the point to which the foregoing 
considerations have been gradually bringing the read- 
er's notice — not only do these differences of tone- 
color exist as between instrument and instrument of 
the same class, and as between player and player 
upon the same instrument, but the same player upon 
the same instrument may produce tones of the same 
pitch, yet of different tone-color ; and the tones of any 
instrument differ in tone-color as they are high or low, 
or made upon different parts of the instrument. Thus 
on the violin, for example, a player may make the tone 
D either by playing the next to the lowest string open 
(that is, without any finger on that string), or by put- 
ting his little finger in the First Position on the lowest 
string ; but the two D's made in this way will differ 



5 2 Science of English Verse. 

greatly in tone-color. Similarly, on the piano, if the D 
key be first struck with a short, sharp blow by the fin- 
ger, and then with a lingering, gradual touch, the two 
tones resulting, though the same in pitch, will differ 
greatly in tone-color. Now, in this capacity of varying 
the tone-color of sounds made on the same instrument 
the human speaking-voice is very wonderful, and excels 
all other instruments. Every vowel-sound, every con- 
sonant, every combination of letters in a syllable, every 
shade of pronunciation, is simply a difference of tone- 
color made by the almost instantaneous changes which 
the muscles of the mouth and throat can effect in the 
shape of the buccal cavity. It is this facility in the 
production of tone-colors which gives the human vocal 
apparatus pre-eminence as a speech-instrument. No 
other instrument could be devised which would furnish 
such a copious variety of elements for a language with 
such ease and quickness. 

These considerations have liow brought us to a prin- 
ciple which will be largely used in the present work, 
and which may be stated as follows : — 

Print and writing are systems of notation for the 
tone-colors of the human speaking-voice. The sign 
Uy for instance, gives us to understand a tone-color 
produced by a certain adjustment of muscles which 
we have all learned to make when we see that sign, 
and which results in a certain shape of the buccal 
cavity, giving the tone-color indicated. When we see 
the sign n^ we understand (though we have done it 
so often as to become wholly unconscious of the sepa- 
rate steps of the process unless our attention is specially 
fixed on them) that we are to take away from the inner 
end. of the nostrils the membrane which divides them 



Letters, Signs of Tone-color. 53 

from the mouth-cavity and thus add the length of the 
whole nostril-tube to the length of the mouth-and-throat 
tube, so producing that hollow and resonant tone-color 
which we associate with n. 

This view of written or printed letters as a system 
of notation for tone-color brings into sharp form the 
difference (a) between music and verse. Music has no 
such system for tone-color. The generic tone-color in 
music is, of course, indicated by stating the instrument 
upon which the strain is to be played, as " flute " for 
this strain, " violin " for that, " horn " for another, and 
so on. But beyond certain marks for indicating upon 
what string of the stringed instruments a certain strain 
is to be played, and a few other signs which more or 
less incidentally convey ideas of tone-color, music has no 
system of tone-color notation ; and many uses ^ of tone- 
color are made in verse which are not known in music. 

(p) But we must now go on to discuss the second 
above-mentioned difference between music and verse, 
namely, the different scale of tones used in verse from 
that used in music. It is this difference which renders 
the tunes of verse so much more subtle than those of 
music. 

In explaining it: the reader unfamiliar with music 
must understand that that art does not use by any 
means all the musical tones which are possible, but only 
a particular set of tones which have been chosen out of 
the possible body of tones according to certain prin- 
ciples of selection. A list of the particular set of tones 
thus chosen is called a *' scale." This may be illustrated 
in the following manner : — 

' See particularly the uses of rhyme and alliteration for purely rhythmic 
effects, detailed in Part I. 



54 Science of English Verse. 

Consider the harp-shaped frame of strings arranged 
side by side which is seen when the top of a piano- 
forte is raised. Upon an ordinary piano (tuned usu- 
ally a little below concert-pitch) the lowest of these 
strings — that which is set in vibration by the key lying 
at the extreme left as one faces the piano — will make 
about twenty-four vibrations in a second ; the next 
string — that which is set in vibration by the shorter 
black key lying next to the first — will make about 
twenty-five and one-half ^ vibrations per second ; and if 
one should go on striking the black and white keys in 
succession until the first thirteen keys were struck, the 
strings thus set in motion would execute nearly* the 
series of vibrations presented in the following list : — 

VIBRATIONS IN 
STRING. A SECOND. 

I 24 

2 25i 

3 27 

4 28i 

5 30 

6 32 

7 34 

8 36 

9 38 

10 .......... 40 

" • • 42* 

12 45 

13 48 

' Of course it would be out of place, in an explanation which at its 
simplest is somewhat complex, to go into the question of enharmonic dif- 
ferences. The piano was selected for the present illustration on account 
of the clearness afforded by carrying out its theory of equal temperament 
with only slight inexactness. 

• This series is arranged with a view to presenting as nearly a set of 
round numbers as possible, small fractions being rejected. 



Tones omitted in Musical Scale. 55 

But, confining the attention for a moment to the thir- 
teen tones produced by these thirteen rates of vibra- 
tion, it is clear that several strings might be stretched 
alongside each of these thirteen, which would vibrate 
at difEerent rates, and give different tones. For exam- 
ple, observe that, while the first string vibrates 24 times 
in a second, the next string, instead of vibrating 24^ 
times, or 25 times, in a second, vibrates 25 i times : that 
is to say, the scale omits the tones produced by the 
possible intermediate rates of vibration (24^, 25, to take 
no smaller fraction than i, though, of course, they 
might be 24!, 24I, 24!, 25, 25 i, and so on), and selects 
the rate 25^ to come immediately after 24. And, going 
on with this argument, the next tone beyond 25^ shows 
us a jump over the possible intermediate rates to the 
rate 2^ in a second; the next jumps over the possible 
intermediate rates to the rate 28i in a second ; and so 
on, until the jump from the next last to the last is from 
45 in a second to 48 in a second. Now these jumps, 
which proceed, as the reader easily observes, with a 
certain regularity, show us the principle of selection 
according to which the tones of the scale are chosen 
by the European ear. The procedure, as shown, is to 
start with a given tone for the first, and take for the 
second a tone which is to the first as 25^ is to 24; 
for the third, a tone which is to the first as 27 is 
to 24; and so on, until the thirteenth tone is to the 
first as 48 is to 24, that is, made by exactly twice as 
many vibrations as the first. This tone, made by 
twice as many vibrations as the first, is called the 
" octave ; " and, when we reach the octave, we take that 
tone for a new starting-point, making the next tone bear 
to it the proportion which exists between the first two 



56 Science of English Verse. 

tones considered, that is, the proportion of 25i to 24 ; 
the next tone must be to the octave (48) as 27 to 24; 
the next as 28^ to 24 ; and so on until we reach the 
tone represented by 96 vibrations to the second, or the 
octave of 48; then we repeat the same proportions, 
until we have tuned all the strings of the piano. The 
first octave, it will be noticed (that is, the first thirteen 
tones considered), gave all the proportions necessary 
for arranging the whole scale of the piano according to 
the musical principle of selection; and the series of 
tones included in thirteen ' successive ones thus ar- 
ranged is called a scale. 

In short, European music employs only a small por- 
•^ tion of the tones theoretically capable of being employed, 
since the intervals of the received scale omit many possi- 
ble intermediate tones. 

But the scale used in verse — that is, the list of 
all the tones employed by the speaking-voice — rejects 
* these intervals and includes every tone perceptible by 
the ear within the limits of its range. That is to 
say: if we should set about forming the scale of the 
speaking-voice as we did that of the piano, we would 
begin with (say) the lowest tone of a man's voice — a 
tone produced by about 65 vibrations in a second — 
for the first tone of the scale ; for the second tone we 
would not skip, as in the case of the piano, to another 
tone lying at a distance of several possible intermediate 
tones from the first, but we must take the next pos- 
sible tone, that is, the tone which is so near the first 
in pitch that if it were any nearer our ear could per- 

' For the sake of students who are here stud3ring the scale for the first 
time, all complications of diatonic and chromatic scales are omitted, 
being, indeed, details not the least necessarv to the demonstration. 



Scale of Verse. 57 

ceive no difEerence. Referring the reader to the dis- 
cussion of The Tunes of Verse in Part II., for the 
proofs that the voice does use such a scale, as well as 
for the limits of the ear*s perceptive capacity in distin- 
guishing between the pitch of tones nearly alike, we 
can now formulate this second difference between music 
and verse into the somewhat more definite proposition 
that — 

The scale of music omits many possible tones between 
its limits, selecting only certain tones according to a 
definitely arranged order of intervals : the scale of verse 
embraces all the tones possible within the limits of the " 
human speaking-voice.' 

The foregoing proposition aims only to state the • 
distinctions between music and verse : it will not be 
found complete for other purposes. For example, it 
would not serve to discriminate verse and prose. Prose 
has its rhythms, its tunes, and its tone-colors, like verse ; * 
and, while the extreme forms of prose and verse are suffi- 
ciently unlike each other, there are such near grades of 
intermediate forms that they may be said to run into 
each other, and any line claiming to be distinctive must 
necessarily be more or less arbitrary. The art of sound 
must always be regarded the genus, and music and ' 
verse its two species. Prose, scientifically considered, 
is a wild variety of verse. 

' The author hopes in a future edition to present experimental verifi- 
cations of this doctrine as to the scale of verse. The process of arriving 
at the average capacity of the ear for discriminating slight differences of 
pitch involves many personal equations, as may easily be seen ; and a 
satisfactory result could be obtained only from a large number of experi- 
ments. Meantime perhaps the considerations offered in support of the 
doctrine in Part II. will be accepted as giving it at least the position of a 
working hypothesis. 



58 Science of English Verse. 

The science of verse, then, observes and classifies 
all the phenomena of rhythm, of tune, and of tone-color, 
so far as • they can be exhibited to the ear directly by 
spoken words, — or to the ear, through the eye, by writ- 
ten or printed signs of spoken words, — or to the mind 
by the conception of spoken words ; and, 

The science of English verse observes and classifies 
these phenomena so far as they can be indicated through 
the medium of spoken English words. 

Here the general subject seems sufficiently divided. 
The phenomena having been primarily classified upon 
the principle of referring them to the physical jMro- 
cesses which cause them, the more special investigations 
which follow naturally arrange themselves into three 
parts, to wit : 

Part I. . . . The Rhythms of English Verse ; 

Part II. . . . The Tunes of English Verse ; 
Part III. . . . The Colors of English Verse. 



PART I. 

THE RHYTHMS OF ENGLISH VERSE. 

CHAPTER II. 

OF THE DURATION AND GROUPING OF ENGLISH VERSE- 
SOUNDS. 

Each " sound," for the purposes of verse, is repre- * 
sented by one syllable. Such a syllable may consist 
of a single letter forming a word, as the vocative O ; or 
a single letter forming one syllable of a word, as ^j:-way ; 
or, in general, of any number of letters which may be 
caused to present to the ear the impression* of a single 
discrete mass of tone-color. Thus, within the meaning 
x>i verse, " O " is one sound, though represented by only 
a single letter ; while " through " is also but one verse- 
sound to the ear, though represented to the eye by 
seven letters, or signis of sound. 

The reader must carefully notice the shifting senses 
in which the word "syllable " is often used ; one denoting 
the sound, and one denoting the combination of letters 
which is the sign of that sound. To avoid the confu- 
sion of this double meaning, it is better to use always 
the term "sound" — distinguished, when necessary, as 
" verse-sound " — to denote each discrete impression « 
indicated to the ear by any letter, or combination of 

59 



6o Science of English Verse. 

letters, ordinarily called a syllable. For example, in the 

line : — 

" Among trunks grouped in myriads round," 

there are nine distinct verse-sounds, represented by 
combinations of letters differing widely in number, to 
wit : 

First sound A- 

Second sound mong 

Third sound . trunks 

Fourth sound grouped 

Fifth sound in 

Sixth sound myr- 

Seventh sound ir 

Eighth sound ads 

Ninth sound round 

Here we find that the first verse-sound is represented 
by one letter, the second by four letters, the third by 
six, and the fourth by seven. 

The reader should acquire the habit of consciously 
separating vords, phrases, and sentences into these 
constituent verse-sounds. Every English-speaking per- 
son does this ^^consciously ; for. 

It is the English habit to utter each word, whether 
prose or verse, in such a manner that the sounds 
of which it is composed bear to each other definite 
and simple relations in point of time. By "definite 
and simple relations " is meant the relations either of 
equality or of proportion according to the small numbers 
I, 2, 3, 4, S, &c. For instance, if two sounds occupy 
exactly equal times, they are said to bear to each other 
the relation of equality, or the proportion of i to i ; if 
one of tbe sounds occupies exactly half as much time 
as the other, they are said to bear to each other the 



Simple Relations of English Sounds. 6 1 

definite and simple proportion of i to 2 ; if one is three 
times as long in duration as the other, they bear to 
each other the definite and simple proportion of i to 
3 ; and so on. If one sound were three and a third 
times as long as the other, or two and a seventh times 
as long, or one and a sixth times as long, or any like 
numbers, the proportion would be /;^definite (to the ear, 
at least), and ««simple, or complex. Let the reader 
observe the remarkable circumstance, — which has prob- 
ably not been sufficiently attended to, — that these pro- 
portions between successive English sounds might have 
been quite as indefinite and complex as those between 
the numbers just suggested, or even much more so. 
There seems to be no reason in the nature of things, 
apart from the wonderful rhythmic sense of men, — 
which must presently be set forth, — why the proportion 
of I to Iff (for example) might not have answered all 
economical purposes in speech, as well as that of i to i, 
or I to 2, or I to 3, or i to 4, 

Of course it is understood that this proposition has 
no reference to the absolute time occupied by Eng- 
lish words : it concerns only their relative time. The 
actual average rate of English utterance is probably 
about one hundred and eighty words to the minute, or 
three words to the second, or one word to one-third of 
a second; and if each word were a monosyllable, or 
one-sound word, then we could say that the absolute 
time of each sound was one-third of a second. Of 
course, this rate varies very greatly ; but its variation 
does not in the least affect the truth of the proposition 
concerning the relative time occupied by English 
sounds. Whether the first sound of any series occupy 
the third, the half, the sixth, or any other part of a 



62 Science of English Verse. 

% second, what is asserted is, that the other sounds will 
bear simple and definite relations to it in point of time. 

This principle may now be stated in terms of a 
preceding proposition thus : every series of English 
sounds, whether prose or verse, suggests to the ear 
exact co-ordinations with reference to duration. And 
* inasmuch as "exact co-ordinations with reference to 
duration " is only a scientific term for rhythm from a 
certain point of view, we may say sweepingly that, 
* All English words are primarily rhythmical. 

The term "primary rhythm" will be of great service. 
The following considerations will illustrate its meaning 
more fully. 

If equal or simply-proportionate intervals of time be 
• marked off to any of our senses by any recurrent series 
of similar events, we may be said to perceive a primary 
rhythm through that sense. Thus, if a rose be waved 
. before the eyes once every second, we may be said to 
have a perception of primary rhythm through the sense 
of sight; if the rose be held under the nostrils once 
every second, we would have primary rhythm marked 
o£E for the sense of smell ; if it should be pressed upon 
the forehead once every second, we would perceive 
primary rhythm by the sense of touch ; if it should be 
crushed on the tongue every second, we would perceive 
primary rhythm by the sense of taste ; and, if it should 
be whirred swiftly past the ear every second, we would 
perceive primary rhythm by the sense of hearing. 

But this primary rhythm may be considered a sort 

of primordial material, which the rhythmic sense of 

. man always tends to mould into a more definite, more 

strongly-marked, and more complex form that may well 

be called secondary rhythm. The nature of secondary 



Secondary Rhythm in Clock -Ticks. 63 

rhythm, and the strength of the tendency which all 
ordinary people have to mark off any set of events 
which have established a primary rhythm into subordi- 
nate sets or groups whose relations to each other con- - 
stitute a secondary rhythm, may be gathered from the 
following familiar illustration. 

A clock which ticks seconds may be said to set up a 
primary rhythm for the ear which hears each recurrent 
tick. These ticks are exactly alike : they fulfil the 
definition of primary rhythm, which describes it as a 
conception resulting from a similar event recurring at 
equal (or simply-proportionate) periods of time. But 
every one who has been in a room alone with a ticking 
clock must have observed that every other tick seems 
to be different, somehow, from its fellow, as if it said, 
"Tick-/^r>&, \\Qkrtacky' &c. ; and the effect of this differ- 
ence is to arrange the whole series into groups, of two 
ticks in each group. Now, this grouping is secondary - 
rhythm. The ear not only goes on comparing each tick 
with tick as 2l primary unit of rhythmic measure ; but it 
proceeds to compare each group of two ticks with its 
fellow-group of two ticks, thus constituting a secon- 
dary unit of rhythmic measure. These processes, and 
several extensions of them which must presently be 
detailed, are precisely what are carried on in verse. 
Before transferring them to that, let us examine for a 
moment the means by which the secondary rhythm is 
established in the series of clock-ticks. 

We found that a certain "difference" in the sound 
of every alternate tick from the sound of its fellow-tick 
marks o£E the whole series into twos. What is this 
difference in sound } If we examine it closely, we per- 
ceive that it seems to be not only a difEerence in pitchy 



64 Science of English Verse. 

— as if the clock, instead of saying, " Tick-tick, tick-tick, 
tick-tick," and so on, should say, ^^T'lckrtack, tick-tack, 
tick'tack," and so on, — but also a difference in empha- 
sis, stress, or accent (that is, in intensity), as if the 
clock said, "Tick-tick, tick-tdck," and so on. 

Here we see how a series of clock-ticks already hav- 
ing a primary rhythm — that is, a primary unit-of -meas- 
ure of time as between each separate tick — is also 
made to have a secondary rhythm — that is, a secondary 
unit-of-measure of time as between each group-of-two 
ticks ; and that this secondary unit-of-measure is estab- 
lished by means of a difiEerence in pitch and in inten- 
» sity between every alternate tick and its fellow, or, in 
other words, by a recurrent variation in pitch and in 
intensity. 

This illustration advances us to the principle that 

The tendency to arrange any primary units of rhythm 
into groups, or secondary units of rhythm, is so strong 
in ordinary persons, that the imagination will even 
effect such a grouping when the sounds themselves 
do not present means for it. 

For the grouping of the clock-ticks into twos seems 
really due to our imagination, and not to any difference 
in the sounds actually made by the machinery ; as 
may be proved by concentrating the attention upon 
now one, now another, of the ticks; when it will be 
found that we can at pleasure change the Order of the 
series, converting the "tick" into a "tack," or the re- 
verse. In ' short, we here see evidence that whenever 
the primordial material of rhythm — that is, a series of 
sounds having among themselves definite relations of 
time or duration — is presented to the ear, the tendency 
to rhythmize these further, by grouping the original 



Time^ the Basis of Rhythm. 65 

units into that larger form of rhythm called secondary 
rhythm, is so strong that the imagination will fancy the 
accentuation requisite for the purpose of such seconda- 
ry grouping. 

It will be of use to mention here, by way of an- 
ticipation, that it is this secondary rhythm which is 
usually meant by the term "rhythm" in ordinary dis- "^ 
course, and that the variations in pitch and in intensity 
by which we saw it effected among the clock-ticks are 
what is usually called " accent " in English treatises. 
The point to be rigorously observed here is that all 
secondary rhythm (in ordinary language, all " rhythm ") 
necessarily presupposes a primary rhythm which depends 
upon considerations of time or duration : in other words, 
that rhythm of any sort is impossible, except through ^ 
the co-ordination of time. Time is the essential basis 
of rhythm. "Accent" can effect nothing, except in 
arranging materials already rhythmical through some 
temporal recurrence. Possessing a series of sounds tem- 
porally equal or temporally proportionate, we can group 
them into various orders of larger and larger groups, 
as we shall presently see, by means of accent ; but the 
primordial temporalness is always necessary.* 

' These considerations, which have been purposely put into a some- 
what rambling form in order to present the matter from several points of 
view, can now be summed up in a convem'ent demonstration. The theorem , 
is, there can be no rhythm in sounds^ except thrcmgh their relative time or 
duroHon (" Quantity" ). 

For only four kinds of sound-relation are possible : namely, those of 
(i) duration or time, (2) intensity, (3) pitch, and (4) tone-color. Now, if 
duration be not the sound-relation essential to rhythm, either intensity, or 
pitch, or tone-color must be that relation. 

[A) But intensity cannot be it. 

For, if so, the ear, in co-ordinating sounds with reference to their loud- 
ness or softness alone, would perceive rhythm. Now, co-ordinations must 
be either {a) inexact, or {b) exactt 



1 



66 Science of English Verse. 

That any confusion or doubt upon this point should 
ever have arisen must indeed seem strange, particu- 
larly to those who approach the consideration of verse 
after a practical acquaintance with music: Perhaps 
the best train of reflection for any one whom the cur- 
rent doubts about the so-called " quantity " of English 
words may have caused to hesitate in accepting the 
sweeping propositions just given is to try what possible 
method of rendering sounds rhythmical would remain 
to the musician, if the sounds were not simply related to 

{a) But inexact co-ordinations of intensity cannot result in the percep- 
tion of rhythm ; for, since all sounds have some intensity, no sounds could 
then be unrhythmical, which is absurd. 

{b) Nor can exact co-ordinations of intensity produce perceptions of 
rhythm ; for the ear cannot make exact co-ordinations of intensity. (See 
Proposition 5.) 

{B) Again : pitch cannot be the relation essential to rhythm. 

For, if pitch alone can render sounds rh3rthmical, it must do so either 
by their {c) sameness in pitch, or by their {d) difference in pitch. 

{c) But sounds are rh3rthmical which are not the same in pitch, as the 
existence of music shows. 

{d) While, on the other hand, sounds are rhythmical which are the 
same in pitch, as is shown by all the rhythmic combinations made upon 
the drum, the triangle, the C3rmbal, the gong, the bones, and other similar 
instruments which do not vary in pitch, or by the numberless rhythms 
which can be marked off for the ear upon any single key of a piano 

(C) Lastly, tone-color alone cannot be the basis of rh3^hm. 

For, if it were, it would have to be so either through {e) sameness of 
tone-color, or (/) difference of tone-color, in the successive sounds. 

{(>) But sameness of tone-color cannot be essential to rh3^hm ; for, if so, 
every line of verse could contain but one vowel-sound ; while, on the other 
hand, 

(/) Difference of tone-color cannot be essential to rhythm, because 
numberless rhythms (as in Sect. B) can be marked off for the ear upon a 
drum, — all of whose successive sounds are the same in tone-color, — or 
upon a triangle, a gong, a single key of the piano, &c 

If rhythm is therefore independent upon either intensity, pitch, or tone- 
color, it must be dependent upon the only other possible sound-relation — 
time, duration, or quantity. 



Secondary Grouping. 67 

each other in point of time. He might, of course, divide 
any given sounds off into groups by means of accent, 
or emphasis, or by means of recurrent variations in 
pitch or in tone-color. But groups of what ? No group 
would present any relation to any other group which 
could enable the ear to co-ordinate them as to rhythm. 
Suppose, for example, that we should group eight suc- 
cessive sounds into four groups of two each, by making 
every alternate sound louder and higher than its fellow ; 
but suppose — to take only the simpler forms of un- 
simple relations in time — the first sound to be one and 
a fourth times the second in duration, one and a fifth 
times the third, one and a sixth times the fourth, one 
and a seventh times the fifth, and so on : it is e^sy to 
see, that, while we would here have four groups, they 
would not be groups of any thing in particular, and 
would be wholly incomparable and incommensurable by 
the ear. 

In music this is plainly enough seen. A " bar " in 
music — or a " foot " or " measure " in verse — is 
exactly one of the " groups " described in the clock- • 
tick illustration, only made, not by the imagination,4mt^ ^ 
but by an actual stress clearly calling the ear's attention 
to some given tone of each group. In a strain of music 
any bar is exactly equal to any other bar ^ in the time 
it occupies. If this equality in time were taken away, 
no possibility of rhythm would remain ; and it must be 
apparent that the possibility of rhythm is the same, * 
whether the rhythm be music-rhythm or verse-rhythm ; 
the only difference between the two being that in 

' Of course an accelerando in the course of the strain affects only the 
absolute time : the relative time remains always equal in the type which 
the mind constructs of the rhythm of the piece. 



68 Science of English Verse. 

music the time is marked off for the ear. by musical 
sounds, while in verse the time is marked off for the 
ear by verse-sounds. In both cases, it is always and 
necessarily time which is marked off. 

It seemed necessary to interrupt the discussion of 
English sounds with so much of a digression upon 
the nature of rhythm in general, and of primary and 
secondary rhythm in particular, in order to develop 
intelligibly the remarkable rhythmic properties which 
have arisen in English words and phrases through th^ 
genius of our speech. The essential function of time, 
or duration, in all rhythm, has been dwelt upon, and 
repeated, on account of the great variety of hesitating 
and confused opinions which have been held, and which 
still prevail, as to what is called " quantity " in English 
verse. " Quantity ** is a term originally used to denote 
the relative duration of Greek and Latin verse-sounds. 
In those two languages the duration of successive verse- 
sounds was, or is alleged to have been, not only confined 
to a single proportion, namely, that of i to 2, all the 
sounds being divided into "longs" and "shorts," of 
which any " long " was equal in time to two " shorts ; " 
but this proportion was fixed for each sound, so that a 
long was always a long, a short always a short, and so 
on. 

But as it was evident that neither of these limitations 
held in English verse, — that is to say, as it was evi- 
dent that English verse-sounds bore other proportions 
to each other than that of i to 2, and were not fixed in 
quantity, the same verse-sound sometimes doing duty as 
a "long," sometimes as a "short," and sometimes as 
neither, — many drew from these facts the inference 
that there was no §uch thing as quantity at all in our 



Quantity. 69 

verse. A slight examination will show, however, that 
(leaving out of view the primary fact that no rhythm is 
possible without quantity, — that is, time, — as just 
shown) this inference is not at all warranted by the 
circumstances cited. The logical conclusion from them 
would be, not that there is no quantity among English 
verse-sounds, but that their quantity is difEerently deter- 
mined from that of the classic verse-sounds. 

In point of fact, quantity is inseparable from all 
English words ; though it is shifting, exactly as in 
music (that is, the same sound may be used either for a 
"short" or a "long," according to its varying relations 
with its neighboring sounds) ; and it is not limited to. 
the single proportion, i to 2, but exists clearly in the 
further proportions of i to 3, i to 4, i to 5, and so on. 
That this must be so will perhaps appear more clearly 
from the following train of thought. 

In the first place, it is evident that some time must be 
consumed in uttering each sound of every English word, 
whether of prose or verse. This being so, the inquiry 
narrows itself to finding out whether, in uttering more 
than one sound, the time actually consumed by the first 
sound bears any such simple relation to the time con- 
sumed in uttering the second and succeeding sounds, as 
that the ear can trace a distinct unit-of-measure through 
them all, by which all can be measured in terms of 
small numbers ; the ear saying, This sound is twice that 
in timet this three times that^ this four times that, and 
so on. 

This inquiry is best answered by a practical experi- 
ment 

Suppose we write the line. 

Rhythmical roundelays, wavering downward. 



76 Science of English Verse, 

In order to represent its time-relations, let us resort to 
the simple and unequivocal system for noting rhythm 
used in music. Taking a very slow rate of utter- 
ing words for clearness, the actual number of rhythmic 
sounds (not words, but separate verse-sounds composing 
them) uttered in a minute may be here considered to 
be 1 80. Dividing this by 60, we have three verse- 
sounds to the second, or one verse-sound to each third 
of a second. 

Now, if the musical sign T — called an "eighth-note" 

— be taken to represent a sound whose duration is 
one-third of a second, or that of one ordinary verse- 
sound, then the sign T — called a "quarter-note," =: 2 T's 

— will represent a sound whose duration is two-thirds of 
a second ; and two such sounds in succession — that is, 
an r and a f — would exactly occupy one second. When 
to these elements we add the musical sign a, indicating 
an increase of intensity, or an accefit, on any note over 
which it may be placed, we have an extremely simple 
system of notation, with which we may at least begin to 
note the time-relations of rhythm with accuracy. Post- 
poning a further explanation of the musical system for 
noting rhythm until further need requires it, let us now 
recur to the line above written. Every person with the 
ordinary feeling for rhythm upon seeing such a line 
would recognize it without hesitation as rhythmic ac- 
cording to the following scheme (i) :^ — 

f 1 1 

Rh3^hm - ic - al 
X 2 2 

* This is, more correctly, a scheme of the type of the rhythm. Upon 
the preservation of such types to the ear through many lines, varying it 
very widely, comment is presently made. 



2 






3 


4 


A 




A 




A 




f 




9 


r c 


round - e - 
4 S 


'T 


wav • 
7 


• er - ing 
8 9 


down- ward. 
10 II 



Recognition of Rhythmic Intent. 7 1 

in which each T — representing a sound of the duration 
of one-third of a second — is allotted as a sign to each 
verse-sound which in practice actually occupies about 
that time. 

Now, how could the words of the given line be recog- 
nized by every reader as constituting the rhythm de- 
scribed? Why does the reader recognize the first 
verse-sound, " rhythm,*' as exactly equal in time to the 
second verse-sound, "ic ; '* the second equal to the third, 
"al;" that to the fourth; and so on, until the tenth 
sound, "down," is reached, which is recognized as 
exactly twice as long in time as any one of the others ? 
Why, indeed, should the reader wholly unacquainted 
with the rhythmical intentions of the writer of the line 
imagine any simple relations at all between the times of 
each of these verse-sounds ? Why might not complex 
or utterly vague relations be as easily imagined, so that 
the first sound, "rhythm," might be (say) iff of the 
second, "ic;" the third, "al," 2\%\ of the fourth, 
"round;" the fifth, "e," \^\ of the sixth, "lays;" 
and so on ? 

But, further, why does the reader not only perceive 
the primary rhythm of this line — that is, the simple 
relations in time of its verse-sounds, — but also its sec- 
ondary rhythm, — that is, its grouping into four groups, 
of which the first three groups have each three sounds 
equal in time, while the fourth group has but two 
sounds, which two-group is, nevertheless, collectively 
equal in time to any one of the other three-groups ? 

Postponing the answers to these questions for a mo- 
ment, let us vary the line so as to make the answers 
cover more ground. Suppose, instead of the line, 

Rhythmical roundelays wavering downward, 



72 Science of English Verse. 

one should write, 

Rhythmic roundelays wav'ring downward. 

For the sake of comparison let us place these lines in 
juxtaposition. 

Rhythmical roundelays wavering downward. 
Rhythmic roundelays wavering downward. 

Every ordinary reader would recognize in such a line 
the following rhythmic scheme (2) : — 



r f 

Rhythm - ic 



A 



round - e - lays 



A 



r, f 

wav' - ring 
3 



4 



But here the first verse-sound " rhythm " is recognized 
by the reader as a T, while in the foregoing scheme 
(i) it was as clearly recognized as T; and it does in fact 
discharge the functions thus indicated in a manner 
perfectly distinct to every ordinary English ear. Simi- 
larly, in the third bar (each of the **groups" of verse- 
sounds marked i, 2, 3, 4, corresponds precisely with 
what is called the "bar" in music; and, as "bar" has 
an exact technical signification, it will hereafter be 
used instead of "group") the verse-sound "wav," which 
in scheme (i) appeared as an T, appears now as a f. Re- 
curring to the nomenclature of classic quantity for a 
moment, in order to compare these appearances from 
that stand-point, and regarding the eighth-note T as a 
"short," the quarter-note T as a "long," we may now 
extend our questions, and ask. How is it that the two 
syllables, " rhythm " and " wav," have managed to 
convey to the reader that they have shifted their quan- 
tity, and that, whereas each appeared as a " short " in 



Printed Words, Signs of Rhythm. 73 

the first line, each now appears as a "long" in the 
second line ? By what signs have the printed words 
indicated these changes to the reader ? 

Before pursuing these changes beyond the simple 
forms just given, it is now time to collect the phe- 
nomena which appear from the foregoing analysis, and 
to answer the questions concerning them. We have 
found, first, that an ordinary English reader, in coming 
upon the line, 

Rhjrthmical roundelays wavering downward, 

would immediately recognize in it the rhythmic move- 
ment noted in the musical scheme No. (i). By what 
signs is this recognition made ? 

To this question there can be but one answer : The 
English habit of uttering words, prose or verse, is to 
give each sound of each word a duration which is 
either equal or simply proportionate to the duration of 
each other sound ; and, since these simple proportions 
enable the ear to make those exact co-ordinations of 
duration which result in the perception of primary 
rhythm, we may say that all English word-sounds are 
primarily rhythmical, and therefore that the signs of 
those sounds — that is, written or printed words — are in 
reality also signs of primary rhythm ; so that we may 
say further. Written or printed English words constitute 
a sort of system of notation for primary rhythm. 

But this is not all We found, secondly, that an ordi- 
nary English reader, in coming upon the line, 

Rhythmical roundelays wavering downward, 

would recognize not only the simple relations in time 
among the verse-sounds which suggest primary rhythm, 
but would also recognize a certain grouping of these 



74 Science of English Verse. 

sounds which was intended by the writer and which 
constitutes their secondary rhythm, to wit, the group- 
ing of the eleven syllables into four bars, each bar equal 
in its time to each other bar, the three first bars contain- 
ing three T 's each, and the fourth bar a ^ and an T, which 
together equal three T 's : by what signs does the reader 
recognize this grouping into bars ? 

The answer to this question is. The English habit of 
uttering words is not only to utter them in primary 

» rhythm (see last proposition), but to make a difference of 
intensity (of loudness or softness, the essential principle 
of all rhythmic " accent "), which renders one sound in 

' each word prominent above every other sound in that 
word. The particular sound to be thus distinguished is 
fixed for each word in our language by agreement ; so 
that, in seeing a series of written or printed words, the 
reader understands which syllable of each word is ren- 
dered prominent by the aforesaid difference of intensity. 
If the series of words reveals the difference of intensity 
recurring at regular intervals of time, as in this series. 

Rhythmical roundelays wavering downward, 

where the differences occur four times at intervals of 
three T sounds each time, then this recurrence di- 
vides the series into four bars, and ecu:h separate bar 
becomes a unit-of-measure for the secondary rhythm^ 
as each separate sound is a unit-of-measure for the 
primary rhythm ; so that, practically, written or printed 

« English words constitute a system of notation for 
secondary rhythm. In point of fact, the system of 

. verse is here identical in method with that of music. 
It is understood in music that the first note in each 
bar is to be sounded with somewhat more intensity 



The Bar, a Unit of Measure. 



n 



than any other note in that bar ; ' and every series of 
musical tones is thus divided into groups or bars for the 
ear, so that the ear knows the beginning of each bar by 
the slight increase of intensity (or stress, or " accent ") 
which occurs on the first tone of it. The bar, therefore, 
in music as in verse, is really a unit-of-measure of sec- 
ondary rhythm : in one, as in the other, the ear first 
compares the time of individual sound with sound in 
order to perceive the primary rhythm, and then com- 
pares the time of bar with bar in order to perceive the 
secondary rhythm^ 

In accordance with the musical understanding just 
mentioned, the sign a, which is used in music to indi- 
cate a special stress upon the note over which it is 
placed, will not hereafter be used except in cases where 
a stress is desired upon some note other than the first 
in each bar. Thus, instead of writing, as in scheme (i), 

it is sufficient if we write 

t c tic t C I t t fl f M 

without the a ; every musician understanding that the 
first note in a bar is to be given with a slight increase • 
of intensity, unless some other note in that bar is 
marked for the increase. If it were desired, for in- 
stance, to indicate groups of threes, which the ear could 
distinguish by listening for the second sound in each 
group, we would write 

* Except where specially marked otherwise, as will be hereinafter 
explained. 



*j6 Science of English Verse. 

or, as will often happen in noting the iambus through 
the following discussion of special rhythms, 

A A A A 

c r t r c r t- r 

The recurrence of the terms "ordinary persons," 
"the ordinary English reader," and the like, above, 
makes it proper to mention at this point, once for all, 
that there are persons not ordinary to whom these 
phenomena would not be apparent. , It is, in fact, a 
remarkable circumstance that while the perception of 
rhythm is perhaps the most widely distributed of all our 
aesthetic powers, showing itself even among savage 
tribes in their co-ordination of quite complex rhythmical 
phenomena (see the general considerations of rhythm, 
in Chap. VI. following), yet among the most cultivated 
nations people are not infrequently found who appear 
to be without the sense of rhythm. Perhaps every offi- 
cer of experience in drilling military companies will 
have come upon men who were unable to keep step, 
and who remained so, in spite of all drill. These and 
other similar instances show the existence of persons 
who labor under an inability to apprehend rhythm in 
any form. This inability appears to be as complete as 
that of a person born blind to apprehend color. Such 
persons, however, are sufficiently rare to be considered 
abnormal, and are so few in comparison with that enor- 
mous proportion of the human race which apprehends 
and delights in rhythm that for the purposes of the 
present discussion they may be left out of considera- 
tion, so far, at least, as to omit the limiting terms 
"ordinary persons," "the average ear," and so forth, 
in future. 



Secondary Grouping. 77 

But we have not yet answered all the questions raised 
by the two lines of verse cited. We found that the line 

Rhythm-ic - al roundelays wavering downward 

would suggest to a reader that the quantity of the first 
verse-sound, "rhythm," was that of an eighth-note; 
while the line 

r c 

Rhythm-ic roundelays wav'ring downward 

would suggest to the reader that the very same sound, 
" rhythm," had the quantity of a quarter-note, that is, 
was intended to be held twice as long in pronunciation 
as before. How was this suggestion conveyed to the 
reader ? 

By the secondary rhythm, or grouping into bars. 
The swing, or rhythmic movement, of English words in 
two syllables, reveals to the ear always the primary 

A 

rhythm of P f (where the accent falls on the first syl- 

A 

lable), or f ^ (where the accent falls on the second syl- 
lable) ; and the ear will always interpret it as such, 
unless other suggestions are made by the general group- 
ing. If, for example, the grouping was obyiously into 
fours, — that is, if each bar evidently was intended to 
contain four equal units of time, as in such a line as 

r r iiii I'll I r r 



Rhythm-ic 



round- e - lays a- 



float up - on the 



moun-tains, 



where the accents upon " round " and " float *' occur at 
the distance of four sounds apart, and thus group the 
whole into bars of four eighth-notes each| — then the 



78 Science of English Verse. 

two sounds "rhythm" and "ic" would be interpreted 
and uttered by the reader as f and f ; for the obvious 
necessities of the secondary rhythm require four eighth- 
notes C C C C> or their equivalent, in each bar ; and 
the equivalent in the case of the two sounds "rhythm** 
and " ic *' would be filled out by making each sound a 
quarter-note in length. 

Thus we see that the quantity or duration of English 
sounds is variable ; further, that, since primary rhythm 
depends on the relative quantity or duration of sound 
compared with sound, the primary rhythm of English 
sounds, while always existent, may vary within the limits 
of the simple proportions, i to '2, i to 3, i to 4, and so 
on ; and, finally, that the primary /hythm of a doubtful 
word may be indicated by the secondary rhythm or 
grouping into bars. 

But the ordinary habit of English utterance in cur- 
rent speech, which thus associates primary rhythm with 
the separate sounds of words, and secondary rhythm 
with the words composed of these sounds, goes still 
farther : it associates what we may consistently call a 
tertiary rhythm with phrases composed of separate 
words. If the conduct of a reader's 'voice in deliver- 
ing English prose be closely observed, it will be found 
that the words are not uttered with uniform breaks of 
silence between them, but that they are uttered in 
groups of two, three, four, or more words together, — 
the attention of the ear being called to. each group by 
making the silence which succeeds it longer than any 
silence between any two consecutive words of that 
group : in other words, our prose is marked off into 
groups for the ear by silences of a certain duration. 
Since the musical term "rest** means a "silence of a 



The Phrase, or Tertiary Rhythm. - 79 

certain duration/' let us — upon the general principle 
which will be observed in the present system of adopt- 
ing all possible terms which have already acquired 
precise technical significance — call these measured 
silences "rests." We shall find them used as often, 
and with functions quite as clearly defined, in verse as 
in music. 

The phrase in our printed current prose is often 
marked off for the eye by the comma, or other mark of 
punctuation. But this was not always so, even in the 
older prose of our language; and the modern system 
of punctuation, which allows very few commas as com- 
pared with the older system, leaves the phrasing of a 
sentence almost entirely to the feeling of the reader. 

The offices of the phrase in prose are vital to all clear 
and musical delivery ; but, without here entering into 
them further than to recognize their existence, let us 
proceed to consider the function of the phrase in verse, 

This will appear in an interesting connection by com- 
paring the phrase in verse with the phrase in music. 

The phrase in music is a rhythmic grouping of a 
larger order than the bar, embracing generally more 
than one bar. The following four phrases constitute 
the first strain of the wonderful slow movement in 
Gade*s C Minor Symphony. Each phrase, it will be 
observed, consists of two bars: and just as the bar 
becomes a sort of larger unit-of-measure, enabling the 
ear to make measurements of rhythm on a larger scale 
by comparing bar with bar (group of sounds with group 
of sounds), instead of individual sound with individual 
sound, so the phrase, as here exhibited, enables the 
ear to make rhythmic comparisons of a still larger order 
than thos^ of the bar by co-ordinating phrase with 



8o 



Science of English Verse. 



phrase, that is, group-of-bars with group-of-bars. For 
the purpose of illustrating this relation of bar to phrase, 
the phrases are here written under each other. The 
reader, if uijable to play these phrases, should cause 
them to be played, on the piano, flute, violin, or any 
accessible instrument; noticing particularly how the 
tune of the second phrase forms a sort of replication, or 
answer, to the tune of the first, and the tune of the 
fourth phrase to that of the third, thus extending the 
rhythmic parallelism of the phrases in duration to a fur- 
ther parallelism in pitch. It may augment the interest 
of this illustration to add that the perfection with which 
Gade (a Danish composer of our own time) has done all 
this in the movement cited — the art with which the 
wonderful simplicity of the melodic movement, though 
arraying phrase against phrase most unmistakably to 
the ear, never degenerates into the woodenness and 

w 

uniformity which is so apt to result from a too distinct 
phrasing in music — must always distinguish this work, 
which, on many other accounts, every music-lover is 
obliged to hold as a heavenly outcome of genius. 



First phrase, 




Second phrase, 



Third phrase, 



Fourth phrase. 



The Phrase y in Verse. 8i 

Now, these four opening phrases are given by the 
hautboy in the movement cited, and, just as in reading 
prose the good reader gets a breath at each phrase * 
except at very short ones, so the player on a wind- 
instrument breathes at the end of each phrase, cutting 
off a small part of the tone for this purpose if no rest 
is marked in the music. In the above notation the 
musical sign " 5< " at the end of the second and fourth 
phrases means a rest occupying the same time as a 
quarter-note, and is called a quarter-rest. 

But compare these phrases of Gade's music with the 
following phrases of Shakspere*s verse. In order to 
array these distinctly against each other to the eye, as 
they are in practice arrayed against each other to the 
ear by the device of the rest presently explained, I set 
them under each other like the Gade phrases. They 
are from the speech of Horatio, in Act I. sc. i, of Ham- 
let. Of course the line-division is ignored here for the 
sake of the phrase-division. 

PHRASB. 

Horatio, — So have I heard, one 

and do in part believe it two 

But look, three 

the mom, four 

in russet mantle clad, five 

Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill. . . six 

Break we our watch up ; seven 

and, by my advice, eigh't 

Let us impart what we have seen to-night Unto young 

Hamlet; nine 

for, upon my life, ten 

This spirit, eleven 

dumb to us, twelve 

will speak to him ^ . thirteen. 

It is immediately noticed here, that instead of the regu- 



82 Science of English Verse. 

lar rhythmic antagonism of two-barred phrase against 
two-barred phrase, which we found in Gade's music, we 
have an irregular rhythmic antagonism, the first phrase 
consisting of two bars, the second of three bars, the 
third of one bar, the sixth of five bars, the ninth of 
seven bars, and so on. 

Here we have types of the difEerent use of phrasing 
made in verse from that made in music. While the 
phrases in music are not always so symmetrically op- 
posed to each other as in the illustration from Gade, nor 
those in verse always so unsymmetrically opposed as in 
that from Shakspere, it is still a rule that, in general, 

The phrase in verse is used to set up a sort of in- 
termediate varying rhythm which agreeably breaks the 
, uniformity of such «;^varying rhythms as that of the 
bar and of certain yet larger groups hereafter to be 
explained. Any bar, it will be observed, is always 
exactly equal to any other bar ; and the ear's attention 
is rigorously called to this equality by the recurrence of 
the accent always at the same part of the bar. This 
unvarying symmetry would be likely to grow monoto- 
nous, especially when re-enforced by the other symme- 
, tries in verse presently detailed, if it were not relieved 
by these phrase-groups, which are opposed to each 
other, not in the exact proportion of equality (or i to i), 
as are the bars, but in proportions varying from i to 2, 
I to 3, I to 5, I to 7, &c., as we saw in the Shakspere 
illustration. 

The agency by which the phrase-grouping is marked 
^ off for the ear is the rest, which advises the ear as the 
punctuation-mark does the eye. We shall find, in the 
discussion of the Tunes of Verse, Part II., that in read- 
ing verse the phrase-division is also marked off for the 



\ 

\ 



Tertiary Grouping by Alliteration. 83 

ear by some quite characteristic variations in pitch of 
the voice. 

Another kind of grouping, though wholly different 
from the phrase, must be classed with the phrase as of 
a third order of rhythmic groups because it is typically 
larger than the bar-group or second order, and smaller 
than the line-group or fourth order which is presently 
to be explained. 

This second species of tertiary rhythm is indicated 
to the ear by a recurrence of the same tone-color at the ' 
accented tone of two, three, or more bars, and is indi- 
cated to the eye, in print or writing, by what is called 
"alliteration.'* 

For example, in the following first two lines of a 
very quaint and vigorous poem of Queen Elizabeth's 
which has been preserved to us by Puttenham, let the 
reader observe how the first three bars of the first line • 
are grouped together for the ear by the recurrence of 
the tone-color/ on the accented tone of each bar ; and 
how, in the second line, two groups of two bars each 
are marked off for the ear, one by the recurrence of w, 
and the other by the recurrence of s, 

"The year of /utureybes exiles my present joy, 
And vnX. me ^rns to ^hun such snares as threaten mine annoy." ' 

It is immediately seen that the^J/,/, in "The /ear of 
ybture /oes," the ze/, ze/, in "And ze;it me ze;arns,*' and 
the ^, Sy in " to jhun such jnares," call the ear's atten- 
tion respectively to a group of three bars, a group of " 
two bars, and another group of two bars, and that this 
grouping is, like that of the phrase, less symmetrical 

* The use of " annoy " as a noun, in the sense of modem " annoyance," 
was common in the sixteenth century, though it has now passed away. 



84 Science of English Verse. 

than that of bar to bar. In point of fact, both these 
species of tertiary rhythm, the phrase and the allitera- 
. tive group, are rhythmically used to relieve the stiffness 
arising from the monotony of the more symmetrical 
groups like the bar and the line. 

The agency used to mark off the alliterative group is 
^ always the recurrence of a given tone-color on some 
special tone of the bar, usually the accented tone. 

It is interesting to note the very different use of 
alliterative grouping made by modern English poets from 
that made of it by the earlier poets. In Anglo-Saxon 
poetry it is used, not at all as an irregular relief from 
rhythms otherwise established, but as a powerful re-en- 
» forcement of the main or secondary rhythm, and, in 
this capacity, as a striking determinant of the otherwise 
doubtful primary rhythms of the sounds. A concrete 
review of the abstract principles now being developed 
will presently be given, in which this generous function 
of alliteration in the earliest poetry of our language 
will be illustrated. Besides this, the subject will be 
found further discussed, under the head of the Colors of 
Verse, in Part III., where alliteration is treated specially, 
not as the mere rhythmic agency which gives it a place 
in the present discussion of rhythm, but as an independ- 
ent means of pleasure to the ear on its own account 
as a co-ordination of tone-color. 

Another species of tertiary rhythm remains to be 
mentioned, belonging to this class because its grouping 
is larger than that of the bar and not so large as that 
of the line. This is the grouping which arises from the 
^ English habit of placing a special stress of voice on im- 
portant words, or, more strictly, on the important sound 
of important words, in a sentence. Such stress, or em- 



Tertiary Grouping by Emphatic Words. 85 

phasis, if closely examined, is found usually to consist 
not only of an increase in the intensity, but also of a 
change in the pitch, of the voice. If the conduct of 
the voice in uttering the first line of Horatio's speech 
above-cited, for example, be closely watched, it will be 
found that on certain sounds — varying with differing 
readers, to some extent — a reader will not only make 
a stress somewhat heavier in intensity than that of the 
verse-accent already described as marking each bar- 
group, but will slightly sharpen the pitch of the voice : 
thus, 

^ So have I heardy and do mfart htlieve it." 

This accent, consisting both of an increase of inten- 
sity and a change in pitch (generally a heightening or 
sharpening of pitch, but, observe, by no means always), 
is a characteristic means in English speech for indi- 
cating words which strike the speaker as important, or 
to which the speaker wishes to call a hearer's special 
attention. The function of silch intensity-and-pitch 
accent appears very clearly in all antithetical proposi- 
tions ; and, if the reader once catches the exact move- 
ment of the voice in the comparatively exaggerated use 
of this accent for such a purpose, he will be able to 
trace it easily in those less striking uses of it where it 
is employed, not for a direct and complete antithesis, but 
for the indirect and incomplete antithesis implied in 
merely singling out a comparatively important word 
from among comparatively unimportant ones. For this 
purpose, notice the movement of the voice — it is 
really part of a tune of the voice, commonly employ^ed 
for this purpose, and universally recognized — in en- 
forcing the antithesis between " dumb " and " speak " in 



86 Science of English Verse. 

the last part of Horatio's speech above-cited, as well as 
the antithesis between "us" and "him." 

" For, upon my life, 
This spirit, dumb to «j, will sfeak to Am«." 

We are here brought to make a distinction of the 
gravest importance between the rhythmic accent (or 
slight increase in intensity alone, which is of universal 
use in all music and in English verse to mark off the 

« sounds into the groups called bars) and the logical ac- 
cent, which is used to make the above words, " dumb," 
"speak," "us," and "him," more prominent than the 
other words in the sentence. Let the reader carefully 
discriminate : — 

• (i) that the rhythmic accent consists of increased 
intensity alone, while the logical accent consists of this 
and the change in pitch beside ; 

(2) that the rhythmic accent is the mark of a bar in 
, all music and in all English verse, while the logical 

accent has no necessary connection with the bar ; 

(3) that the rhythmic accent is of absolutely regular 
recurrence, so regular that the musical system of nota- 
tion always considers it a matter of course as occurring 
on the first note of each bar and does not mark it save 
where, as in rare cases for some special effect of inter- 
rupting the rhythm, the musician desires to accent some 
note other than the first in the bar, even in which event 
the rhythmic accent is still indispensable and only 
transferred from the first note to some other, — while 
the logical accent is of irregular recurrence, depending 

'^ upon the number of relatively important words in the 
phrase or sentence ; 

(4) that, as a corollary from the last circumstance. 



Rhythmic and Logical Accent. 87 

the logical accent will scarcely ever be given exactly the * 
same place by two consecutive readers, because the 
relative importance of any particular idea to several 
other ideas will strike different minds differently ac- 
cording to a great number of circumstances — mental 
constitution, previous training, mood of the moment — 
and will even be often simulated unintentionally where 
it is not felt, through vague and careless habits of read- 
ing acquired in childhood, — while the rhythmical ac- 
cent would be placed upon exactly the same point of 
each bar by any ten thousand readers of either a piece 
of music or a piece of verse ; 

(S) that, as may be anticipated from the preceding " 
remark, the effect of the rhythmic accent is to establish ^ 
a definite rhythm for the ear, while that of the logical 
accent is to rf£restablish this rhythm by differently 
timed recurrences which set up different groupings of 
two, three, or more bars. 

Let it be further observed that the logical accent 
nearly always falls upon a sound already distinguished 
by the rhythmic accent and thus re-enforces the latter. 

The distinction between these two species of accent * 
has been dwelt upon with particularity because the fail- 
ure to observe it has caused a number of mischievous 
errors in several otherwise authoritative modern treatises 
upon the versification of Chaucer and of Shakspere. 
These are pointed out in the special treatment of this 
subject following. 

After the foregoing brief preliminary outline of the 
three species of tertiary rhythm, we may now advance 
to the next larger grouping of bars usually called the 
Line, which, as being a process strictly in extension of 
those hitherto detailed as primary, secondary, and ter- 



88 Science of English Verse. 

tiary, rhythm, we may consistently classify as a fourth 
order of rhythm. The term " Metre " has in process of 
time come to be very generally used in this same sense, 
as denoting the number (Metron, measure) of verse- 
sounds in a line, giving rise in hymnology to such 
expressions as "long metre," "short metre," and the 
like. As the first order of rhythm is marked off for 
the ear by duration of sound-compared-with-sound ; the 
second order by the rhythmic accent, marking bar-com- 
pared-with-bar ; and the third order by the phrase-rest, 
(ist species) the alliterative tone-color (2nd species) and 
the logical accent (3rd species); so the fourth order 
of rhythm, the line-group or metre, is mairked off for 
* the ear by either the rest — as in blank verse — or the 
rhyme ; and both of these are usually re-enforced by a 
characteristic change in the pitch of the voice. 

Use of the rest in marking off the line-group in blank 
verse. In the lines, 

(i) But look, the mom, in russet mantle clad, 
(2) Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern hill, 

a rest is made after " clad " which calls the attention of 
the ear to the group of bars (i) embraced by "But" 
and " clad " inclusive ; a similar rest is made after " hill " 
in the next line, which calls the attention to the group 
of bars (2) embraced by " Walks " and "hill " inclusive. 
Thus the ear is able to compare these two fourth-order 
groups, (i) and (2), and to draw its peculiar pleasure 
from finding their rhythmic equality emerging above all 
- the varied phenomena of lesser rhythms, of tune, and 
of tone-color, which they present. 

In this connection, where our development has now 
reached a stage of some complexity, it will be useful to 



Fourth Order of Rhythmic Groups. 89 

mention that if the reader should be surprised at being 
told that the ear in hearing verse (or the imagination 
of the ear, in reading or conceiving verse) actually 
makes, and draws pleasure from, all these varied co-ordi- 
nations upon which the groupings already described 
depend, that surprise will vanish when it is found that 
these groupings, numerous as they seem, form but a 
small proportion of the items actually apprehended and 
co-ordinated by the ear of every ordinary person — 
items which embrace not only the phenomena of dura- 
tion now under discussion, but many widely-differing 
phenomena of pitch manifesting themselves as deli- 
cately-shaded tunes, and phenomena of tone-color mani- 
festing themselves in the complex forms enumerated 
under that head in Part III. The hourly habit of 
making all, or most of, these co-ordinations, involved in 
the most commonplace uses of language, is apt to blind 
us to the truly wonderful powers of the ear in these 
particulars until our attention is specially called to 
them. 

But, to return to the line-group as marked off by the 
rest : the reader is asked to observe particularly that a 
large number of sound-groups printed as lines in blank 
verse are really not lines to the ear at all and are 
deceptive if estimated as such in theories of the versifi- 
cation of special writers. For example : in the speech 
of Horatio cited, the group 

Let us impart what we have seen to-night 

though printed as a line to the eye is really no group 
to the ear; the close connection of the sense at the 
end of this line with the beginning of the next line pre- 
vents any such rest after tjie sound " night " as would 



90 Science of English Verse. 

mark-off the line for the ear, and the actual grouping 
is not made until the ear feels the rest which occurs 
after the word *' Hamlet " in the next line. The real 
rhythmic group here, then, is 

Let us impart what we have seen to-night unto young Hamlet. 

Such a group would be the following from The 

Tempest: 

Had I been any god of power, I would 

Have sunk the sea within the earth, ... 

where the phrase " I would have sunk " demands such 
a continuous pronunciation as forbids any rest after 
"would," so that the actual line-group for the ear is 

Had I been any god of power I would have sunk the sea within 
the earth ; 

or, again, a line ending in a preposition immediately 
connected with its noun at the beginning of the next 
line, like 

Master of this design) did give us : with 
Rich garments, linens, stufEs, and necessaries, 

where "with" runs the voice on to its noun "gar- 
ments " so as to preclude the line-group rest. 

Such incomplete groups have acquired the special 
name of " run-on " lines, in distinction from those com- 
plete groups which from their being marked-off by a 
stop or rest at the end are called " end-stopped " lines. 
This distinction has acquired great importance in 
modern Shakspere criticism. It has been found that 
in his earlier works Shakspere used the end-stopped 
line almost exclusively, while in his later works he used 
a much greater proportion of run-on lines ; and this 
progress from the stiff versification of the inexorably 



The Run-on Line inShakspere. 91 

end-stopped line to the freer and richer rhythms of the 
run-on line would seem to be clearly an accompaniment 
of a parallel growth in Shakspere's whole nature from 
the limited views of his earlier manhood to the wise 
and large freedom of his maturity. 

Inasmuch as these are matters which we can count : 
inasmuch as we can discover exactly the numerical pro- 
portion of run-on lines to the whole number of lines in 
an early play like Lovers Labor's Losty and can then com- 
pare this proportion to that of such lines in a late play 
like The Tempest; it will be seen that this change in 
the line-group constitutes a delicate and precise indica- 
tion of Shakspere's growth as an artist and thence of 
his growth as a man. 

It cannot escape notice, however, that the free use of 
the run-on line in Shakspere's later plays is really an 
escape from metre. Allowing " metre " to mean, as in 
hymnology, the line-group, all metrical verse in Eng- 
lish implies a succession of lines which are either equal 
to each other or proportionate in a simple and regularly- 
recurrent way. Thus blank verse is, in type, a succes- 
sion of lines each having five bars, and each therefore 
exactly equal to each in duration ; while in irregular 
rhymed compositions the lines may often be unequal, 
but the shorter or longer line usually recurs in the 
same position and thus notifies the ear of the regularly- 
recurrent proportion. This is the case except in the 
ode: and we must therefore class Shakspere's later 
verse, as odes should be classed, among that noble and 
free species of verse which is really a prose throughout 
which some secondary rhythm (iambic, trochaic or the 
like) is consistently carried. All English prose is 
rhythmic so far as the primary rhythm of sound com- 



92 Science of English Verse. 

pared with sound is concerned, and so far as the group- 
ing of sounds into words is concerned : but one word 
may be a trochee, the next an iambus, the next a dactyl, 
and so on, and this inequality in the successive bars de- 
stroys the secondary rhythm which is dependent upon 
the absolute equality in the time-contents of any bar 
compared with any other bar. When this equality is 
maintained, — that is, when the secondary rhythm se- 
lected (whether that of the iambus, the trochee, the 
dactyl &c.) is carried on throughout the piece, — then 
we have a true rhythmic prose such as is presented by 
the ode, and by the blank verse of Shakspere's later 
plays : it is only when the bars of this secondary 
rhythm are further grouped, upon some regular system, 
— either of equality, line for line, or of shorter line 
regularly alternating with longer line, — that the ear is 
able to make those exact co-ordinations of line with 
line which should be called fourth-order rhythm or 
metre. 

But reserving further detail of this matter until its 
special discussion, let us now consider the other method 
mentioned, — of indicating the line-group, or fourth- 
order rhythm, by the recurrence of rhyme at the end of 
the line. 

For example : in 

For as the sun is daily new and old, 
So is my love, still telling what is told, 

the recurrence of the compound tone-color " old " calls 
* the attention of the ear to the end of each of the lines, 
and thus groups together for the ear all the sounds in 
each line, enabling it to make rhythmic comparison of 
line with line. 



Rhythmic Use of Rhynu. 93 

The group marked-off by the rhyme, though in most 
cases the line-group, is of course not necessarily so, and 
may be either smaller or larger. For examples of smaller 
groups : in 

And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain 
Thrilled me, filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before 

the recurrent tone-color, "-ertain " "-urtain " marks off 
the first line into two half-lines, while the "illed," 
"illed," of "thrilled," "filled," marks off only the two 
first bars of the second line into an agreeable sporadic 
group. 

For example of larger group than the line marked 
off by rhyme or recurrent tone-color : in 

That time of year thou may'st in me behold, 
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang 

Upon those boughs which shake against the cold, 
Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang, 

the tone-color " -old " at the end of the first line does 
not recur until the end of the third, while the tone- 
color "-ang" at the end of the second line does not 
recur until the end of the fourth, and the effect is to set 
up a grouping for the ear of two lines against two lines. 
It is evident that an analogous process could be used to 
group lines by threes, or fours, though of course if a 
rhyme recur at a much greater distance than this the 
effect is lost, by the ear's forgetting the corresponding 
tone-color in the multitude of intervening tone-colors. 
A's in the case of the alliterative group before de- 
scribed :. this purely rhythmical function of rhyme must 
be clearly discriminated from the independent function 
of rhyme as a pleasurable co-ordination of tone-colors 
for their own sake. Of the two functions, the rhythmic 



94 Science of English Verse. 

would seem to be the most worthy, and probably any 
future development of rhyme in our language should 
be along this direction — of marking-off new sets of 
rhythmic groups either metrically, that is, regularly, or 
unmetrically, that is, for an agreeable variation of mo- 
notonous rhythm. 

A method of indicating the line-group to the ear by a 
certain intonation of the voice somewhat like that used 
in the intoned service of the Roman Catholic church to 
denote the occurrence of the comma is often adopted 
by readers ; but it is not general enough to merit more 
than this brief mention here, as a possible means of 
marking-off the line-group by recurrent variations in 
pitch. 

A fifth order of groups is included in the Stanza. 

For example. In Ophelia's song. 

How should I your true love know 

From another one f 
By his cockle hat and staffs 

And his sandal shoon^ 

is a group of four line-groups, marked ofE by a distinct 
rest from the next similar group, 

He is dead and gone^ lady^ 

He is dead and gone; 
At his head a grass-green turfi 

At his heels a stone. 

These two groups being always of four lines each can 
thus be compared by the ear, stanza with stanza ; and 
their size — larger than the line and smaller than the 
poem — suggests their classification as a fifth order of 
rhythm. 
And thus finally we reach the sixth and last order 



Fifth and Sixth Orders of Rhythm. 95 

of rhythmic groups, which consists of a group of the 
stanza-groups varying .from a single four-lined stanza, 
or from the fourteen-lined stanza of the sonnet, to 
scores and hundreds of stanzas, and which, embracing 
all the rhythmic contents of any complete composition^ 
in verse, is called the Poem. 

The foregoing outline of the progressive series of 
rhythmic groups into which the ear co-ordinates the 
whole body of verse-sounds presented to it by a formal 
poem has been purposely made as abstract as possible, 
in order that the whole process of rhythmic co-ordination 
might be presented in a continuous view, uninterrupted 
by practical illustrations except where these seemed 
necessary to the explanation of particular steps. 

This view has now revealed to us that the sounds of 
English verse suggest to the ear six methods by which 
they can be compared as to their relative duration, 
sound with sound, or group-of-sounds with group-of- 
sounds ; and that these suggestions are conveyed by 
certain recurrent relations of duration, or of intensity, 
or of pitch, or of tone-color; the varying effects of 
which, as just detailed, combine to exhibit to the ear, 

(i) The relative duration of each primary unit or indi- 
vidual verse-sound ("syllable") constituting what 
may be scientifically termed the first order of rh3rthm 
and what is commonly termed QUANTITY. 

(2) The relative duration of each secondary unit, or 
individual group of verse-sounds (the bar, some- 
times also called "measure," same as the classic 
"foot"), constituting what may be scientifically 
termed the second order of rh3rthm and what is 
commonly termed Rhythm. 

(3) The relative duration of each tertiary unit, or larger 
individual group of verse-sounds (the "phrase"), 



96 Science of English Verse. 

constituting what may be scientifically termed the 
third order of rhythm, which divides into . . The Phrase, 

The Alliterative Group, and 
The Emphatic Word Group. 

(4) The relative duration of each fourth-order unit, 
% or still larger group of verse-sounds, (the " line"), 

constituting what may be scientifically termed 
the fourth order of rhythm and what is com- 
monly termed Metre. 

(5) The relative duration of each fifth-order unit, or 
still larger group of verse-sounds (the " stanza ") 
constituting what may be scientifically termed 
the fifth order of rhythm and what is commonly 
termed in English the verse or more correctly 

the Stanza. 

(6) The final rhjrthmic group embracing all these 

and called .... ... The Poem. 

Inasmuch as these six orders of grouping embrace all 
the phenomena of rhythm in English verse, they afford 
us convenient divisions for an exhaustive discussion of 
that subject. To this the next six chapters will be 
devoted. * 



Quantity. 97 



CHAPTER III. 

SPECIAL DISCUSSION OF THE RELATIVE DURATION, OR 
QUANTITY, OF ENGLISH VERSE-SOUNDS, AS CONSTI- 
TUTING PRIMARY RHYTHM. 

So much was necessary to be said upon this subject 
by way of anticipation that the special treatment in 
the present chapter may confine itself to the following 
four points : 

(i) to showing that, since rhythm always depends 
necessarily upon quantity, those who deny the exist- 
ence of quantity in English sounds must deny the 
possibility of rhythm in English verse ; 

(2) to setting forth a complete system of notation 
adequate to express with precision all the possible 
rhythmic relations of English verse-sounds ; 

(3) to illustrating how printed or written English 
words constitute a system of notation for rhythm, pre- 
cise as to the larger orders of rhythm, but susceptible 
of varying interpretations as to primary rhythm, to the 
extent of minute differences of utterance which do not 
affect the essential proportions of the bar ; 

(4) to showing how the liberty of arranging at pleas- 
ure the individual time-relations (or primary rhythm) 
of the constituent sounds in any bar, so long as the 
normal time-value of the bar is preserved, is availed of 
by poets to make their rhythms melodious, varied, and 
characteristic. 

The demonstration heretofore given of the neces- 



98 Science of English Verse. 

svy dependence of rhythm upon quantity may now be 
specially applied as against the opinion that in English 
verse it is accent, and not quantity, which is the basis 
of rhythm. This opinion has prevailed among some 
recent scholars of the greatest eminence who, engaged 
in researches not directly turning upon any minute in- 
vestigation of the true nature of rhythm, have evidently 
adopted without examination an idea which appears to 
have obtained great currency under the authority of 
Coleridge. For example, Mr. Alexander J. Ellis, whose 
name no English student can mention without a new 
sense of grateful obligation for the wonderful skill with 
which he has renewed in our ears the actual' living 
tones of the daily speech of our forefathers, remarks (in 
his Early English Pronunciationy^ Part I., p. 334, note 
i) : "The length of syllables" — meaning English syllar 
bles — "has much to do with the force and character of 
a verse, but does not form part of its rhythmical laws." 
Again, Mr. E. A. Abbot, in A Shakespearian Grammar,^ 
p. 332, note, explains that "the words 'trochaic' and 
'iambic' are of course used, when applied to English 
poetry, to denote accent^ not quantity." So in the essay 
on Alliterative Metre by Mr. E. E. Hale it is remarked : 
"whilst it is pretty clear that it" (English prosody) "is 
based on ... an accentual . . . not on a temporal 
system, &c." 3 

This misconception has arisen out of the failure to 
discriminate primary rhythm from secondary rhythm. 
We have seen how the rhythmical accent is used both 
in music and in verse to lay-off a series of sounds into 

' Chaucer Society Edition. * Macmillan & Co., London, 187 1. 

^ Printed in Hale*s and Fumivall's edition of Bishop Percy's Manu- 
script. 



Experimental Test of Accent. 99 

the well-known groups called " bars " or " measures " 
in music and "feet" in classic prosody. But we have 
also seen that this is by no means a creation of rhythm, 
but is merely an arrangement of pre-existing rhythms 
which exist in virtue of the simple time-relations be- 
tween the units of sound. It is easy to ascertain by 
practical experiment that unless these simple time- 
relations do pre-exist, no grouping by accents can give 
any rhythmical character whatever to the series of 
sounds. The experiment may be made still more con- 
clusive by showing that even where simple time-rela- 
tions exist among the constituent sounds, unless these 
follow each other in such an order that the sum of the 
times included between any two accents is exactly equal 
to the sum of the times included between any other two 
accents, no rhythmization can possibly be effected by 
accents. As a simple form of such an experiment, take 
the following. 

Remembering that each verse-sound must necessarily 
ocQupy some time, and that any two consecutive verse- 
sounds must therefore necessarily possess some time- 
relation to each other ; let us suppose a series of twelve 
verse-sounds whose relations in time are as follows 
("f" representing a sound half as long as /'f," and "^" 
one half as long as " T ") : 

Any effort to group these sounds into rhythm by ac- 
cents will prove utterly futile. If for instance we mark 
them off into bars or feet consisting of two sounds each 
by placing an accent over the first note of each bar, the 
series would be : 



100 Science of English Verse. 



r 51° fir 5lr r \i sir r I 

Here are six bars, or feet, so far as accent can make 
them so : each bar consists of exactly the same number 
of sounds : but there is no rhythm. Although the ac- 
cent recurs regularly upon every second sound, rhythm 
is wholly absent. It is easy to see that this absence is 
due to the fact that although the accent recurs regu- 
, larly as to the number of the sounds, it does not recur 
regularly as to time ; and that this latter sort of recur- 
rence can only be secured by making the time-contents 
of every bar exactly equal. 

It cannot be necessary to carry this expieriment, here, 
into the farther trials of dividing up the given verse- 
sounds into groups of three sounds each, or of four 
sounds each, &c., by placing an accent on every third 
sound, or every fourth sound, &c. 

It will, however, be profitable to consider this experi- 
ment in its bearing upon music. The above notes are 
intended to represent the relative times of words in a 
line of verse. But suppose them to represent musical 
tones : let any one, in considering this experiment, re- 
flect how vain would be the effort to set-up any rhythm 
in music by using accents at every two, three, or other 
number of tones without reference to the time-value of 
those tones. The result of such an effort may be actu- 
ally heard by striking on the piano the notes above 
given with an accent on every second, third, or other, 
tone. It is without rhythm. 

But perhaps the most conclusive method of settling 
this question is to present an experiment in which — as 
constantly happens in all beautiful verse — the rhythm 



Accent cannot rhythmize Silences. loi 

is absolutely dependent upon measured silences, or 
rests, instead of measured sounds. Of course, since we 
cannot pronounce silences, nor distinguish one silence 
from another silence by an accent, it must be immedi- 
ately seen that all possible rhythmic function of silence 
depends upon its duration, the only method of distin- 
guishing one silence xrom another silence being to note 
their relative time. In short, what we call a rest, in 
music and in verse, is practically nothing more than the 
time elapsing between two sounds. Since, therefore, 
accent can indicate only a certain number of sounds 
without reference to their time-value, and cannot indi- 
cate silences at all : if the rhythm of Tennyson's verse 
given below is clearly dependent upon silences, it must 
be as clearly /^dependent of accents. 

To show that it is dependent upon silences : let the 
following rhythmic scheme be played on the piano. 



i 



Andante. 



's;^ 



:^=^ 



^^ ' u ' I -^i iu n "-^ 




^m 



=^=^ 



' •• i'jmuji 



^k-^ 



i 



Upon hearing this strain, eviery ear will accept it as a 
substantial reproduction ^ of the rhythmic movement of 
the voice in reciting the following stanza : 

* It is an exctct reproduction of the type : and the term ** substantial " 
is used merely to hint at those minor individual habits of pronunciation 
which might make the first note representing " Break '* (for example) an 
fj" instead of the f here assigned to it, but which in no way affect the 
relation of bar to bar, or the general type of the rhythm : see the end 
of this chapter. 



I02 Science of English Verse. 

Break, break, break, 
On thy cold gray stones, O sea : 
And I would that my tongue could utter 
The thoughts that arise in me. 

But, examining the noted scheme, it is seen that in the 
first line one-third of the time of the three opening 
bars, and two-thirds of the time of the fourth bar, is 
silence : for the sign i indicates a silence of the length 
of an P and the musical mark H at the beginning is only 

a short way of saying that the series of sounds is 
to be grouped into threes, and that every bar is to have 
the time-value of three eighth-notes (ff's), though, of 
course, this time-value may be made-up by any combi- 
nation of sounds whose sum amounts to three P*s (as a 

r and an f ; or ff ff ff ; or as " f" 'jf" if ^ where ^ ' with 

the dot is equal to li f's, p is equal to i anff, and Pis 

equal to i eighth-note, so that li -|- i -|- i = 3 P's or 
eighth-notes) or by any combination of sounds and 
silences, or of silences alone, occupying the time of 3 
P's. In short, inspection of the scheme reveals that 
more than one-third of the first line, and quite one-third 
of each of the remaining three lines, are made up en- 
tirely of silences. Now these silences, or rests, are of 
differing time-relations among themselves. Of course 
no application of accent could distinguish a quarter-rest 
from an eighth-rest or three quarter-rests ; nor could 
accent even indicate the existence of a single one of 
the rests in this poem. On the other hand, if accent 
were abolished : if the above notes were struck by a 
machine incapable of varying the strength of its stroke 
— that is, incapable of stress of rhythmic accent, or 
upon a drum incapable of variation in pitch — that is, 



Relation of Accent to Rhythm. 103 

incapable of logical accent : the result would still be 
accepted by every ear as unequivocally and pleasingly 
rhythmical by virtue of the clearly-co-ordinable time- 
relations of the sounds and silences involved. 

The true relation of accent to rhythm in verse will 
be found illustrated in the next chapter. The reader 
will always keep the mind clear upon this matter by 
remembering : 

(i) that no one has ever thought of referring rhythm 
in music to any other, principle than the exact time- 
relations among its sounds and silences ; 

(2) that rhythm in verse is precisely the same as 
rhythm in music, the sole difEerence being that one is * 
suggested to the ear by speech-sounds, the other by 
music-sounds ; 

(3) that the office of accent cannot begin until after • 
rhythm is established ; when accent may be used to 
suggest various secondary arrangements of the primary ' 
rhythmic material into groups or bars : but that this 
office is still absolutely dependent upon time or dura- 
tion, the sole use of the accent (even in arranging ' 
rhythmic material) being that it recurs at stated periods 
of time. Let the idea of the rhythmic accent be insepa- 
rably associated with that of the bar. Neither the bar 
nor the accent is essential to rhythm. In point of fact 
the division into bars seems to be comparatively a late 
refinement in music, while it is also at least doubtful 
whether this division in classic verse (there called 
**feet") was ever marked-o£E by means of accent. 

Since the time-relations of verse-sounds do not differ 
from the time-relations of music-sounds, the system of 
noting time-relations which serves for the rhythms of 
music will also serve for the rhythms of verse. This 
svstem is as follows, 



I04 • Science of English Verse. 

The sign <^, called a "whole note," stands for a 
sound whose duration is fixed for every given strain 
by special directions at the beginning of that strain. 
This duration, when fixed,* of course fixes the duration 
of all the other notes of that strain, which are always 
aliquot parts of the whole note. For precisely fixing 
the duration of the whole note, in modern music, such 
signs as "f = 76," and the like, are used : in which the 
reference is to the mark 76 on a metronome. If the 
index of the metronome — which may be simply de- 
scribed as a graduated pendulum, kept in motion by a 
spring which is wound up as occasion requires — be 
placed, in accordance with such a sign, at the figure ^6^ 
then the measured tick of the instrument will give the 
exact rate of time intended by the composer. 

But the habits and traditions of music have established 
a series of signs for this standard duration which refer 
to rates of measurement that can be carried in the 
memory from day to day. These signs are the words 
Presto^ Allegro^ Moderator Andante^ Adagio^ and the 
like, one of which may always be seen at the head of a 
given strain. Presto means very fast: Allegro is 
brisk and lively ; Moderato is relatively moderate in 
time ; Andante^ slower than Moderato ; Adagio^ slower 
than Andante, The musician early learns to associate a 
certain rate of time for the whole note with each of 
these marks ; and, by constant habit, carries this rate 
in his memory, to such a degree that if a hundred or a 
thousand good musician-s be asked in succession to play 
a certain Allegro^ or AdagiOy or other movement, their 
conceptions of the time will be found to vary but little 
from each other. 

Applying this principle to the notation ioj verser 



« 



System for noting Rhythm, 105 

movements : the sign f represents a tone half as long 
as that represented by the whole tone, and is called 
the " half -note ; " ^ is the quarter-note ; P the eighth- 
note ; and p the sixteenth-note ; beyond which the 
needs of verse scarcely extend, though music employs 
sixty-fourths and even one hundred-and-twenty-eighths. 
A dot affixed to a note adds half its time-value to it : as 

f* is equal to p? #; ^ * to ^ ^; and so on. We 

shall find great use for this dot in noting verse-rhythm, 
to represent the very common primary rhythm indi- 
cated by f af f in English utterance, exemplified in 

the ninth and eleventh bars of the scheme of " Break, 
break, break," given above. This sequence occurs so 
frequently that the reader, if not familiar with it, should 
get some one to strike it on a piano-key. The knack 
of it comes to any, ordinary ear almost immediately. 
Perhaps it will be suggested to many by recalling the 
first and third bars of the familiar negro-melody : 




- ny, &C. 

in which, setting aside the change of pitch, the rhythm 

The rhythmical form • i #, so common in music, 

is equally so in verse, and many habits of great poets 
which have caused the widest discussion among com- 
mentators are nothing more than the employment of 
this sequence, which can be made to vary the iterant 



io6 Science of English Verse. 

rhythm of a long poem like one of Shakspere's plays 
in a charming way. • i • is called a "triole," and 

means that the three notes T T T are to be played in 
the time of ^ ^ , that is, in the time of one quarter-note. 
The rhythmic knack of doing this is caught with the 
greatest ease by nearly all persons ; and the reader, if 
he has it not already, should get any musical friend to 
play for him on any key of the piano the following 
sequences : 

Moderato, 



9 






Any other notes may be formed into a triole : 

for example means that the three notes p ? 5 are to 
be played in the time of two p p's, or of one f ; so 

• % m would mean that the three f 's were to be 

played in the time of two f 's, or one j^. 

These are all the signs of primary rhythm which 
will be needful to express those phenomena as sug- 
gested by verse-sounds, when we add the signs for 
rests, viz, :■ j^ = f , i = f , q = ^,y2ind so on, the longer 

rests not being here important^/ 

We have seen that written or printed English words 
themselves constitute a system of notation for primary 
rhythm, in consequence of the English habit of rhyth- 
mic pronunciation, which results in associating some 
sort of definite time-relation in our mind with each word 
as it is acquired, so that the time-relation occurs to 



i 



Variations in Rhythmic Utterance. 107 

us when we see the word in print or writing. This 
system of notation is clearly sufficient for all ordinary 
types of rhythm : the poet sends out his poem in full 
confidence that the printed words themselves will be ' 
sufficient to suggest the intended rhythm to every 
reader. This being so, it may be asked what necessity 
for the musical system of notation in the science of 
verse } The answer to this question lies in the develop- 
ment of the third subdivision mentioned in the begin- 
ning of this chapter. 

While the general rhythmus of each word of more 
than one syllable and of each phrase of more than one 
sound is clearly maintained in ordinary English utter- 
ance, the precise relations of consecutive sounds may • 
vary, with various individuals, within certain narrow 
limits which do not afEect the essential proportions. 
For example : in the first line of the scheme of " Break, 
break, break" given above, a f is assigned to each of 
the sounds "Break, break, break." This would repre- 
sent a sort of long and chanting utterance of the sound. 
But there are many who use a quicker method of utter- 
ance and who would not dwell upon this sound longer 
than an f. In such case the first line of the scheme, 
instead of representing each of these sounds by a f 
should represent it by an P and complete the rhythmic 
proportion of the bar by adding another rest 1, thus 
replacing the ^ with an f and an 1 which are together 
exactly equal to the ? in time-value. 

The reader should observe this substitution of a . 
sound-plus-a-silence (or rest) with the utmost clearness ; 
of conception : for it is a process of universal application « a 
among English speakers, and it accounts for the fact — 
which has been unaccoimtable to many persons — of 



io8 Science of English Verse. 

the perfect preservation of the essential proportions 
of a given rhythm through all the infinite varieties of 
individual utterance. A hundred readers may read the 
"Break, break, break" in succession, and no two of 
them may pronounce every sound with the same pri- 
mary rhythmic relation to its neighbor-sound ; yet, by 
the unerring rhythmic instinct of the ear, every varia- 
tion is so arranged that, if a sound be shortened, a 
compensatory silence between it and the next sound 
. will be correspondingly lengthened, — as in the case 
just cited where the sound Break was shortened from a 
f to an P , and the essential proportion of the bar was 
nevertheless maintained intact by adding an i to the 
P and so keeping up the time of a f. The reader must 
therefore not mistake this illustration for a mere for- 
mality, but must look upon it as an exact reproduction, 
in visible notes, of the actual behavior of the voice 
guided by a rhythmic instinct which always arranges 
the constituent sounds and silences in each bar so 
that their individual time-values, when added, will iSU 
out exactly the typical time-value of the bar. In the 
case just cited the "typical time-value" of each bar 
is three P's: and we have just seen how, instead of 
arranging the constituent sounds and silences of the 



first bar (for instance) as 



r •- 

Break 



in the manner of a 



person with a chanting habit of utterance, a reader of 
short, sharp, and decisive habit of utterance would 



arrange the sounds and silences as 



Break 



, the bar. 



in either case, amounting to three J's in time, and 
thus preserving its relation as bar to every other bar in 
the poem. 



W'^ 



'J 






Compensatory Silences, 



109 



The instance given is of the simplest form. Another 
from the same scheme will illustrate the principle in a 
difEerent shape. In the 13th bar of the scheme of 
" Break, break, break " the sounds " thoughts that a- " 



are noted as 




This notation is exact for 



thoughts that a 

a certain swing of utterance which is quite common : but 
another more decided habit of utterance might make the 

I : : 

thoughts that a 

still another, more jerky, habit might deliver them thus, 

r 



time-relations of these sounds thus 



5 



5 

a 



thoughts that 

arrange them thus. 



yet another, still more jerky, might 

thoughts that a 



: and so on ; though 



it is easily seen that each arrangement rigidly maintains 
the time-value of the 6ar, the sum of the time-values in 
each case always amounting to the time-value of three 

The reader should carefully add the time-values in 
each of these variant bars, and verify them as always 
equalling three ff 's. They show that in arranging the 
time-relations 01^ sounds to suit a special habit of utter- 
ance the reader not only uses silences to fill out the 
needed time of shortened sounds — as in the Break, 
break, break, bars — but distributes the suitable time to 
each of the sounds when there is no silence or rest in 
the bar. 

But this principle — of arranging the primary rhythm 
of the individual sounds in a bar at pleasure so long 
as the typic time-value of the bar is preserved — not 
only shows how the equality of bar with bar is main* 



no 



Science of English Verse. 



^ tained in spite of the widest differences in individual 
utterance, but it affords us clear explanations of many 
individual habits of versification among poets which 
have been interpreted in a most confused and unsatis- 
factory manner by commentators, through the failure to 
refer them to precisely parallel processes which are of 
the most commonplace practical use among musical 
composers. In citing a few illustrations of this matter 
— which will be practically extended in another connec- 
tion, presently — it is necessary to recall what was said 
of the function of the rhythmic accent above. When a 
poet puts forth his verse in print, he indicates the man- 
ner of grouping the verse-sounds for secondary rhythm 
by arranging words whose accent is known in such a 
manner that the ordinary pronunciation-accent falls 
where the rhythmic accent is intended to fall. For 
example if the poet wishes the rhythmic accent to fall 
upon the first sound, and upon every third sound after, 
so as to group the whole series into threes — that is, 
into bars of three sounds each — he may indicate such a 
grouping by beginning with a couple of three-syllabled 
words whose pronunciation-accent falls on the first syl- 
lable, thus initiating the type of the rhythm which the 
reader is intended to carry on through the poem : as, 
for example, 

WistfuUy 
I 2 3 

Sought for the 
I 2 3 

where the pronunciation-accent on the first syllable of 
"wdndering,** recurring at the third sound after its first 
appearance on the sound "Wist-" of "Wistfully,'* 
initiates the type of the rhythm, advising the reader 



wandering 


6ver the 


wdters, she 


I 2 3 


I 2 3 


12 3 


land of the 


blessed. 





Distribution of Time -Values. iii 

that the whole series is to be grouped into bars of three 
sounds each, by placing a rhythmic accent on the first 
sound and on every third sound after. 

With so much of explanation as to the function of 
the rhythmic accent and the poet's means of indicating 
its places in the sound-series, we are now prepared to 
see that just as different reciters of verse can deliver 
the individual sounds' in any bar with different time- 
relations so long as the normal time-value of the bar 
is not disturbed, so the poet, after having clearly indi- 
cated (as in the last illustration) this normal time-value 
of each bar, may then go on to vary the individual i 
time-values of the constituent sounds in any given bar 
at pleasure. It will contribute greatly to the reader's 
full appreciation of what follows in this connection to 
recall the absolute liberty with which this is done in 
music. In a given passage, it is the exception if any 
two bars present exactly the same distribution of time- 
values among their constituent sounds, though the sum 
of the time-values in any bar is always exactly equal to 
the sum of the time-values in any other bar of that 
strain, — unless of course the normal time-value is an- 
nounced as changed. When the poet selects the two 

words 

WfstfuUy I wandering | 

to begin his verse, he does exactly what the musician 
does in writing the figures § at the beginning of his 




strain, thus ^m : both announce to the reader (of the 



poem or of the music) that the normal time-value of 
each bar in that strain (of music or of verse) is to be 



112 Science of English Verse. 

m 

three eighth-notes, with the first of each three accented. 

The poet makes this announcement by presenting two 

words 

wfst-ful-ly I wdnd-er-ing >• 

123 I I 23 

each of which contains three sounds whose relative 
time-value is that of three P 's, and whose ordinary pro- 
nunciation requires an accent on the first sound of 
each. The musician makes the same announcement 

by the figures g, the 3 meaning always the number^ and 

the 8 the time-value, of the notes in each bar, and the 
universal rule being in music to accent the first* note of 
each bar unless otherwise marked. But, as just said, 
the musician having made this initial announcement of 
the normal time-value and accentuation of each bar, 
considers himself at absolute freedom to put as many 
or as few tones into any bar as he likes, so long as 
he distributes the time-values of those tones in such a 
manner that their sum amounts to the normal time- 
value set for each bar. For example, the melody of the 
opening phrase in Beethoven's Eighth Symphony is as 
follows : 




and noting the rhythm of this strain without reference 
to the changes of pitch — by placing all the notes on 
one line — we have 

t r-|r u Mc c r 5 ^ Mr * * 

where each bar is different in the number of notes and 
in the distribution of their time-values from each other 



The ''Longs'' and *' Shorts'' insufficient. 113 

bar, and yet exactly equal to each other bar in normal 

time-value, each containing the equivalent of ^ or three 

quarter-notes. And this is a simple instance : numbers 
of musical compositions will present bars of greatly 
wider divergence in internal constitution than the 
above. 

This being so, it would seem wonderful that precisely 
similar procedures by poets had occasioned such per- 
plexity and confused discussion among commentators, 
if one did not remember that the received classic proso- 
dy had introduced a fundamentally erroneous notion 
into English conceptions of verse which must have 
made such procedures seem contrary to all rule. The 
classic prosody acknowledged but two possible time- 
values as among its verse-sounds, — the long and the 
short, of which the former was to the latter as two to 
one. It was necessary therefore to construct all classic 
rhythmic schemes out of two elements only : the long 
and the short, represented by the signs "-" and "w." 
It is easy to see that this limited number of time-values 
admitted but slight range of variation in the distribu- 
tion of them among the tones of each bar : and in point 
of fact the classic dactyl, for example, — which in our 
notation is I f T T L ^*.^.* a long and two shorts 
- ^ sjy — admitted only one other distribution of time- 
values, namely the spondee, or T f (two longs ^), 

after being once announced as the normal time-value 
of each bar in hexameter verse. 

But in English sounds many time-values besides the 
short and the long exist : as indicated by the notation 
above given, which includes the relation of the whole- 
note o to ^11 the others, f^, T, T, 5, besides the rel^r 



% ♦ 



114 Science of English Verse. 

tions of these to each other, and the relations implied 

in such rhythmical forms as • i • and f * J f . It 

is perfectly evident that these numerous time-values 
could not be interpreted upon any theory of the short 
and the long as exhausting all the capabilities of verse- 
sounds : and the efEort to do so resulted in the confused 

* 

interpretations before mentioned. 

In the light of musical procedure, then, let us now 
proceed to interpret some examples of the liberty which 
Shakspere, with evident eagerness, avails himself of 
to vary the long stretches of iambic rhythm in blank 
verse throughout his plays by variously distributing 
the time-values within the bars. Without taking the 
trouble to repeat simple instances of such varying, 
which must be clear to the reader from the examples 
already given, let us take a more complex instance, such 
as line 173 in Act II, Scene 4, of Measure for Measure, 
Throughout the verse of this play, as in all English 
blank verse, the normal time-value of each bar is three 
P 's, and the typic form of bar (see explanation of Typic 
Forms in the next chapter, on Secondary Rhythm) is 

# # , which exactly corresponds in time-relations to 

the classic iambus (a short before a long) and may well 
enough be called the Iambic Form. The typic metre, or 
line-group, in blank verse cpntains five of these iambic 
bars ; so that the following is a scheme of the type of 
each blank verse line : 



1234 



A 



A 



A 



A 



5 

A 



s u r c; r p r r r c r 

in which, — let it be carefully noticed, — the accent 



Line in Measure for Measure. 115 



does fiot fall on the first note in each bar but on the 
second, and therefore requires to be specially marked 
by the sign a. At the line now to be interpreted Isa- 
bella says : 

To whom should I complain ? Did I tell this, 
Who would believe me ? O perilous mouths ! 

Compare the first line with the type, and then the sec- 
ond, which is the one to which special attention is 
called as presenting a very wide and yet thoroughly 
musical variation. 



Type 

Une 
Words 



I r 
I r 

To whom 



c r 

should I 



c f 

com-plain 



p 


4 

A 

r 


5 

A 

I r 


1 

? 


Did I 


r I 

tell this 



Here we find the actual movement of the voice in read- 
ing the line to coincide with the rhythmic movement in 
the type until we get to the fourth bar, where an adroit 
arrangement of the words so as to suggest a rest for 
the interrogative pause, and an indignant stress on 

" Did," combine to vary the distribution • into the 

distribution 1 • • which is equivalent to it in the 

sum of the time-values, each being equal to three Ps, or 

" g." But the next line shows a much greater diver- 
gence from the type. The place of the accent is 
changed in the first bar, and the time-values of several 
notes are r^atively re-arranged ; yet the time-value of 
each bar is maintained and the music of the line runs 
into that of the next with the suavest connection. 
Writing its notation under that of the type, we h^v^ ; 



ii6 



Science of English Verse. 





I 


2 


3 




A 


A 


A 


Type. 


I r 


I r 


I r 




A 


A 




Line. 


r r 


I r 


I * 


Words. 


Who would 


be - lieve 


me? 





4 

A 


S 

A 


P 


r 


c r 




A 


A 


I 


I t 


: r 


O 


per - il - 


ous mouths! 



In the first bar a process exactly reversing that hitherto 
described for the triole is used with singular effect. 



A triole f f T* for example, indicates that the three 



notes rrr ^^e to be played in the time of two J's ; 

but we may reverse this and indicate that two f's 
are to occupy the time of three Ps. This is what 
Shakspere has done in the bar now under review. 
The normal time-value of each of these bars is, as 
marked at the beginning, 3, or three P*s : but, wishing 

a certain measured and wondering strangeness of stress 
at the beginning of this line, Shakspere has used 
words which suggest it by suggesting a change of 
accent from the second to the first note and a re- 
distribution of rhythmic times from three notes to two 
which occupy the same time. The third and fourth 
bars also present adroit redistributions. That in the 
third bar may be particularly noticed. Just after the 
question " Who would believe me } " comes the rest at 
the place of the typical accented note. Nothing could 
be more effective than this intensified rest, which 
amounts to an accentuation of the silence after the 
question and of the hopelessness that fills it. 

It is by the constant use of such redistributions that 
Shakspere has brought such marvellous and subtle 
music out of the bare type of blank verse. As he 
grew older and got his art mpre in band he used the3^ 



Summary of First-Order Rhythm. 117 

variations more and more liberally, just as he used the 
run-on lines with increasing plentifulness. The run- 
on lines, indeed, are merely an extension, into the prov- 
ince of metre or fourth-order rhythm, of the primary 
rhythmic variations just now described. 

From what has appeared in the present chapter and 
the previous sections relating to the same subject, the 
following principles should have clearly emerged. 

(i) Primary rhythm is the result of simple time- 
relations between individual verse-sounds. 

(2) The English habit of utterance in current speech 
is to deliver the sounds in some sort of primary rhythm. 

(3) The particular sort of primary rhythm thus given 
varies with different speakers, but only within such 
limits as allow every speaker to preserve without diffi- 
culty the larger time-relations of bar to bar in secon- 
dary rhythm. 

(4) In consequence of the habit mentioned, words 
have become so associated with their rhythms as to 
suggest them when written or printed and thus to 
become a system of notation for rhythm. 

(5) But this system is equivocal to the extent of 
being liable to different interpretations according to 
different habits of utterance; and the musical system, 
which is adequate to the minutest variations and precise 
in their expression, is therefore valuable in verse. 

(6) As varying habits of utterance change the rela- 
tive time-values of verse-sounds witl\in a bar without 
changing the absolute value of the bar, so varying 
habits of versification among poets result in similar 
internal distributions within the bar. 

(7) These habits are purely musical and are to be 
interpreted in the light of the corresponding processes 
in music. 



Ii8 Science of English Verse. 



CHAPTER IV. 

OF SECONDARY RHYTHM: ITS NATURE AND TYPES. 

The following chapter will treat : (i) of the func- 
tion of the rhythmic accent in grouping individual 
verse-sounds into bars which constitute a second order 
of rhythmic units for the measurement of secondary 
rhythm ; 

(2) of the principle that this grouping is practically 
always a grouping either into threes or into fours, 
which originates two great classes of rhythm, namely, 
3-rhythm and 4-rhythm ; 

(3) of the three forms in which 3-rhythm appears 
and the two forms in which 4-rhythm appears, as con- 
stituting together five main types of rhythm to which all 
the varieties of English rhythms are clearly referable ; 

(4) of the manner in which 2-rhythm and S-rhythm 
and other such types are really included, in their only 
practicable forms, in the two types given, so that the 
list, 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm, is exhaustive as to all 
rhythmic phenomena in English verse; 

(5) of a complete view of the possible variations of 
3-rhythm and 4-rhythm according as the rhythmic ac- 
cent is placed on the first, the second, or other, unit of 
each bar ; 

(6) of a complete view of the possible variations of 
3-rhythm and 4-rhythm according as the time-value 
of each bar is distributed among different numbers of 
sounds. 



Secondary Rhythm. 119 

As matter of fact, established by observation, the ear 
seems to find more and more pleasure in any series of 
sounds presented to it according as it can make more 
and more varieties of exact co-ordinations of those 
sounds. We have already found that the ear makes 
three very widely-differing classes of co-ordinations in 
listening to sounds, namely, those which result in 
rhythm, those which result in tune, and those which 
result in tone-color; and it will help us to appreciate 
the ear's desire for great numbers 'of these co-ordina- 
tions if we recall at this point that the six species of 
co-ordipation we are now studying are all pleasure- 
giving variations of only the first-named genus of co-ordi- 
nations — rhythm. 

The last chapter discussed the co-ordinations of indi- 
vidual sound with sound which result in the perception 
of what we have agreed to call primary rhythm : the 
present chapter, advancing a step, is to discuss those 
next-larger co-ordinations of group-of-sounds with group- 
of-sounds which result in the perception of what we 
have agreed to call secondary rhythm. 

In listening to a poem the ear is enabled to make 
these co-ordinations by hearing a rhythmic accent recur 
at a given interval of time. This rhythmic accent 
marks off given periods of time for the ear: and the 
ear's power of exactly co-ordinating the duration of 
sounds enables it to say, as each group passes in review 
before it, whether all the sounds of each group (bar) 
fulfil in duration the given period of time which is the 
normal duration or typic time-value of each group. To 
these sequent summings-up and comparisons of particu- 
lars of time the ear attaches a peculiar delight, which is 
traced in some form over all the human race. Such 



I20 



Science of English Verse. 



summings-up into bars are all made by means of ac- 
cent. 

But mention has already been made, in various con- 
nections and with only partial explanations, of three 
kinds of accent, to wit : rhythmic accent, pronunciation 
accent, and logical accent. It is now necessary to dis- 
criminate these with precision. This may be done by 
inquiring what are their common incidents by virtue of 
which they are all named " accent," and then what are 
their peculiar incidents by virtue of which they are 
distinguished into the three kinds, rhythmic accent, 
pronunciation accent, and logical accent. 

Their common function is : to call the ear's attention 
to particular sounds in a series. 

Their special functions are : 



To call the ear's attention to par- 
ticular sounds in a series of verse- 
sounds or music-sounds, for the 
purpose of marking the intervals 
of time allotted to each bar, such 
interval being always that which 
elapses between any two sounds 
thus distinguished by the . 

To call the ear's attention to particu- 
lar sounds in a series of syllabic 
sounds constituting an English 
word, for the purpose of empha- 
sizing the special dignity, above 
other sounds in that word, of the 
root-sound (generally) thus distin- 
guished by the .... 

To call the ear's attention to par- 
ticular words in a series of English 
words constituting a sentence, for 
the purpose of emphasizing the 



Rhythmic Accent; 



Pronunciation Accent ; 



Physics of Accent. 121 

logical importance, above other 
words in that sentence, of the 
word whose main sound is thus 
distinguished by the . . . Logical Accent. . 

These discriminations are based upon varieties of 
functional purpose. If we now consider the three sorts 
of accent as phenomena of sound, we can further dis- 
criminate them by their respective physical explana- 
tions. 

The rhythmic accent in universal use for marking- 
off the bars of music and of English verse is a slight 
increase of intensity. The physical explanation of in- 
tensity refers it (see Chapter I.) to the excursion of the 
vibrating-body, which is wider according to the force of 
the vibratory impulse. The width of the excursion thus 
becomes the measure of the force : and such measure, 
when perceived by the ear, is what we call intensity. 
This process — of signalizing each bar by a slightly 
more forcible production of one of its sounds — is in- 
variable in music and in English verse. The whole 
system of secondary rhythm in both arts turns upon 
the timed recurrence of the slight increase in intensity, 
or rhythmic accent. 

But the pronunciation accent often differs physically 
froili the rhythmic accent in consisting not only of this 
slightly wider excursion which produces the increase of 
intensity, but also of a slightly faster rate of vibration 
which gives rise to the perception of a heightened pitch 
in the sound. This heightening of pitch is easily veri- 
fied by experiment. If the conduct of a reader's voice 
who is not aware of the experiment be narrowly watched, 
it will be observed that in general the emphatic syllable 
— as for example the first in "rhythmic," the second in 



122 Science of Mnglish Verse. 

"compare," the third in "referee" — is given with a 
slightly increased intensity and with a slightly sharp- 
ened pitch. But the sharpening is not inevitable, often 
yielding to those more important variations of pitch 
which constitute the tunes of speech and which may 
frequently require a lowering of voice in the accented 
syllable. The experiment for testing the sharpened 
pitch in the pronunciation accent is conditioned upon 
the reader's not being aware of it, because the thou- 
sand-fold habit of speech has made its processes so 
unconscious that when they become conscious they are 
almost sure to become unnatural. 

Such being the physical constitution of the rhythmic 
accent and the pronunciation accent : when we come to 
investigate the logical accent it is found not to coincide 
precisely with either in its nature. Although the logi- 
cal accent is, in general, an exaggeration of the pronun- 
ciation accent as just described — that is, although the 
logical accent in the majority of cases is a greater 
increase of intensity and a higher sharpening of pitch 
than the pronunciation accent — sometimes it is a low- 
ering or flattening of pitch combined with the increase 
in intensity. Its general nature — as a combination of 
increased intensity and heightened pitch greater than 
that of the pronunciation accent — may be well illus- 
trated by an example in which a logical antithesis is set 
up between two pronunciation accents. For example, 
let the reader utter the following sentence aloud : 

" In English, we do not say * rhythw/cr,' we say * rhythvoic.^ " 

Here a logical antithesis is set up between the first 
pronunciation and the second : and consequently the 
logical accent, which is used to call the attention of 



Logical Accent. 123 

the ear to antithetic words, here falls upon the same 
sounds with the pronunciation accent. The result is 
a very clear and pronounced combination of increased 
intensity and sharpened pitch. But, particularly where 
the expression is of wonder or contempt, the logical 
accent often yields its heightening of pitch in favor of 
a tune of speech which requires a lowering of pitch. 
For example, in the following question the sound 
" wom- *' is lower in pitch than the others : 

" Would you strike an unprotected woman ? " 

as may be more clearly perceived by noticing the rela- 
tively sharp pitch of the antithetic " woman " in utter- 
ing aloud the merely interrogative question, 

" Was ita woman, or a man ? " 

In point of fact, the pronunciation accent is simply 
the logical accent on a smaller scale, — having its origin 
in the logical pre-eminence of the root-syllable over the 
other syllables in a word. Hence the description of 
the logical accent as a physical exaggeration of the pro- 
nunciation accent agrees with its nature ; and it is also 
easily seen that the logical accent in practice partly 
falls on the same sound with the pronunciation accent, 
embracing in its scope the whole word instead of a 
single syllable. 

In fine : let the reader always think of 

The rhythmic accent as concerning the bar, or secondary rhythm ; 1 
The pronunciation accent as concerning, primarily, at least, the ! 

root-syllable of a word; ; 

The logical accent as concerning the prominent words of a sen- / 

tence. 

These accents have been dwelt upon with care for 
the reason that grave errors have arisen in modem 



1 24 Science of English Verse. 

criticism through the confusion of their natures and 
functions. Such errors will be pointed out in the dis- 
cussion of those types of rhythm, particularly that of 
blank verse, which they have specially concerned. 

It is worth while observing finally that the variations 
of pitch which distinguish two of these accents are 
really primordial forms of the tunes of speech discussed 
in Part III. ; and when it was remarked that their pitch- 
variations sometimes yield to those of the more highly- 
developed tunes, this was only another method of say- 
ing that the tune of speech changed from a higher tone 
to a lower one for some special meaning. 

Having thus discriminated the rhythmic accent : we 
are now to trace its function in marking-ofiE bars of 
secondary rhythm for the ear. ^ 

It was above explained that the musician begins his 
notation of ideas by placing at the head certain figures 
which establish the normal time-value of each bar: 

as "V," which advertises the reader that each bar is to 

contain a time-value equivalent to 3 quarter-notes : or 

as "x," which advertises the reader that each bar will 

contain a time-value equivalent to 3 eighth-notes. It 
was then explained that the poet accomplishes the same 
purpose of advertising the reader of the time-value 
intended for each of his bars by initiating the rhythm 
with words which unequivocally suggest the bar. As, 
for example, a poem beginning with 

Wistfully I wandering | 

substantially informs the reader that each bar is to have 
the time-value and rhythmic accent of "wistfully" or 
of "wandering" — that is, a time-value of 3 eighth- 



Initiation of Rhythm. 125 

notes and a rhythmic accent on the first sound of each 
bar. 

Pursuing the subject from this point: it is not 
always, nor even usually, necessary that the rhythm 
should be initiated by a single word, as "wistfully" 
in the example. The same bar — which, as consisting 
of three equal units of time, we may call hereafter 
"3-rhythm" as contradistinguished from the "4-rhythm*' 
presently developed — the same bar of 3-rhythm may 
be hinted by beginning with a two-sound word whose 
accent is on the first sound, following that with one 
unaccented sound, and then placing another accented 
sound : as, for example, instead of the words 

Wistfully I wandering | over the | waters, | 

the words 

Wistful she | wandered a- | way o'er the | waters | 

would unequivocally initiate the same 3-rhythm. 

Indeed, numerous collocations of single words are 
pronounced in familiar conversation with such an ac- 
cent and primary rhythm that the poet may confidently 
initiate a rhythm with them. Thus Tennyson has not 
hesitated to put forth 

Half a league, | half a league | half a league, | onward 

relying upon the ordinary swing of the words " half a 
league *' in current utterance to suggest to the reader 
the 3-rhythm 

These three methods of initiating a 3-rhythm may now 
be placed under each other for better comparison, with 
pumbered 30unds and a typic scheme : 



126 



Science of English Verse. 



t t t 

Wist - f ul - ly 
Wist - ful she 
Half a league, 
I 2 3 



PC t 

wand-er - ing 
wand - ered a - 
half a league, 
I 2 3 



: I I 

- ver the 
way o'er the 
half a league, 

1 2 3 



r I 

wa - ters. 
wa - ters. 
on - • ward. 
[12] 3 



But suppose it should be desired to initiate a type of 
secondary rhythm in which the bar consists of four 
equal units of time — that is, a type of 4-rhythm, of 
the form 

Here, the rhythmic accent must recur on every fourth 
sound, instead of on every third sound as in 3-rhythm. 
The typic bar may therefore be conveyed to the reader 
as follows : 

Wistfully she wandered o'er the desert of the waters, 
where^the rhythm is clearly seen to be 



lilt 



Wist-ful 
I 2 



ly she 
3 4 



I I I I 

wandered o*er the 
1234 



I I I I 

des - ert of the 
1234 



r r 

wa - ters. 
[I 2] [34] 



To these examples of the method of initiating given 
rhythms it is perhaps necessary to add nothing more 
than the caution that opening bars consisting of single 
words are often capable of more than one rhythmic 
interpretation, and that such equivocal bars should 
rarely occur at the beginning of a piece. When occur- 
ring in the body of it, after the type of rhythm has been 
clearly given to the reader, they occasion no trouble of 
course because the type gives the clue by which the 
reader's mind even unconsciously rhythmizes theni. 

For example : in the old English ballad " Proud were 
the Spencers" (see Hale's and Furnivall's edition of 



Equivocal Bars at Beginning. 127 



Bishop Percy's Manuscript) the first two bars might be 
either 3-rhythm, 



% I I I 

Proud were the 

or 4-rhythm of the form 



I t t 

Spen - cers, and 



• • • 



r 



t I 



Proud 



were 



the 



r 



I t 



Spen 



cers. 



and 



and the reader is unable to decide which of these is 
intended until the last two bars of the line are reached, 
which admit of no rhythmic arrangement except that of 
4-rhythm, 



: 


I 


I 


I 


• 


of 


con 


' di 


- tions 


mild. 


i 


2 


3 


4 





All such equivocal beginnings are bad. The resources 
of our language as to rhythm are so copious that not 
the laziest ballad-maker need ever be at a loss for means 
of indicating the intended movement of verse with 
unmistakable clearness. 

The two great classes of secondary rhythm which 
have been named "3-rhythm" and "4-rhythm" com- 
prise, as types, all the rhythmic combinations made 
with English words. When the rhythmic accent recurs 
at that interval of time represented by three units of 
any sort — no matter among how many sounds this 
amount of time may be distributed — we have the 
effect upon the ear of 3-rhythm : when the rhythmic 
accent recurs at that interval of time represented by 
four units of any sort — no matter among how many 
sounds this amount of time is distributed — then the 
effect on the ear is that of 4-rhythm. 



128 



Science of English Verse. 



But the expression above, "no matter among how 
many sounds this amount of time is distributed," refers 
only to the general effect upon the ear as 3-rhythm or 
4-rhythm ; and, in practice, certain favorite methods of 
distributing the given time of each bar have specialized 
three very strongly-marked forms of 3-rhythm, and two 
very strongly-marked forms of 4-rhythm, in English 
poetry. 

These forms are as follows. 3-rhythm occurs under 
the typic form (i) 

of which Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade is a 
modern example (though, as we shall presently find, this 
is the earliest type of rhythm in our language) 

^ t t t t t t t : t r t 

Half a league, half a league, half a league, on • ward. 

or under the form (2) 

i r t \ r t \ r t \ r t \ 

in which the time-value of the 3 eighth-notes t t t 
is distributed among two sounds by making the first 
sound in the bar a quarter-note, equivalent in value to 
the 2 first eighth-notes of the bar : this form finding a 
modern illustration in Poe's Raven, 

ire r t re r t 

Once up - on a 

or under the form (3) 



mid - night drear - y; 



In mai 



A 




A 


A 




A 


^ ^ 




1 


• t r 


t 


r 


den med - 


• 

1 - 


ta • 


tion^ fan - 


cy 


free 



hiU. 



Typic Forms of 4- Rhythm. 129 

where the form (2) is exactly reversed, the two last 
eighth-notes in each bar coalescing into one sound of 
a quarter-note's length, and the rhythmic accent recur- 
ring on the second time-unit in each bar instead of on 
the first. In the separate discussion of these forms 
which is presently to follow, another method of noting 
the present one will be presented and their respective 
merits set forth. 
4-rhythm occurs under the typic form (i) 

t 1,1 I I t : t t : t t t r 

(The) rose was new in bios- som and the sun was on tl 

or under the form (2) 

ir t c r t c r r r 

Hame came my gude - man and hame came he. 

These five forms, or sub-types, of the two main types 
afford us five natural and convenient divisions for the 
special study of secondary rhythm as it appears in Eng- 
lish verse. This special discussion is begun in the next 
chapter, with the consideration of the remarkable cir- 
cumstance that every long poem, and nearly every short * 
one, in the English language since the beginning of our 
poetic history in the seventh century has been written 
in 3-rhythm. 

But before advancing to that division it seems proper 
to end this general view of 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm by 
answering the very natural question which will arise in 
the student's mind as to why there should not be other 
classes of secondary rhythm besides the 3-class and 
the 4-class — why, for instance, we should not have 2- * 
rhythm and 5-rhythm, and so on. 

Considering first the question as to 2-rhythm : its 



1 30 Science of English Verse. 

answer is that 4-rhythm (which we have) is substantially 
2-rhythm in the only form in which it would be tolerable 
to the ear. This may easily be seen if we consider 
what 2-rhythm would be in its typic form if rigidly 
maintained. The scheme of such a type is — 

and so forth. But the quick recurrence of the same ac- 
cent on every alternate sound, without any relief through 
the variation in time-distribution among the sounds — 
which variation the shortness of the bar renders neces- 
sarily limited — would be a monotonous iteration not 
pleasant to the modern English ear. 

It would seem that such a rhythmus existed among 
the Greeks. The grammarians describe a foot of theirs 
called the Pyrrhic which was "two short," or "^v>;" 
and such a foot would be precisely one bar, ff T , of the 
2-rhythm now in hand. It might be an interesting 
point — how the Greek declaimer of such a series of 
sounds could mark-off the feet to the ear of his audi- 
ence without a rhythmic accent. In a succession of 
Pyrrhics there would be no recurrent difference of dura- 
tion to mark off groups ; a recurrent change of pitch in 
the voice, at such short intervals, would be intolerable ; 
and a recurrent tone-color, at the same intervals, would 
be not only intolerable, but well-nigh impossible. If, 
therefore, all the resources of duration, of pitch, and 
of tone-color be thus out of his power : if, as many 
assert, the signs ^ and ' and ^ called "accents" in 
Greek were intensity-accents ; and if, as is evident on 
the least inspection, these accents do not coincide with 
the rhythmic accent but fall at such intervals as would 
Utterly destroy all possible groupings by means of the 



2' Rhythm, 131 

rhythmic accent : it would seem that we must be driven 
to one of two conclusions, either that the Greeks did 
use the rhythmic accent just as we do for secondary 

rhythm, or that the Pyrrhic was in Greek — as the g 

bar f P is in English — a merely theoretical measure. 

Among several acute remarks which peer through 
the mass of error in Poe's Rationale of Verse is one 
which ridicules the idea that any such measure as the 
Pyrrhic exists in English poetry. 

The remark as to the monotony of the recurrence of 
a similar rhythmic accent at an interval so short as f f 
will have prepared the reader to see that the form of 
4-rhythm herein adopted substantially saves to us all 
the swing of 2-rhythm without this disadvantage. In 
4-rhythm, in fact, many bars occur in the form I f T I 

(equivalent of course to I f f f f \) which is 

2-rhythm founded upon the longer unit f instead of 

the unit f; while, in 4-rhythm bars of the form 

I f f r r I there is, in practice, a slight accent 

placed on the third note — an accent well known in 
music as the " secondary " or subsidiary accent, occur- 
ring always on the third time-unit of bars which involve 
four time-units. 

In accordance with these considerations we find in 

music the very common rhythmus t — which is the 

same as our g , or 4-rhythm, in verse, — but so far as I 
am aware no piece of music has been written in the 
rhythmus g» or | T T |. 

Accepting these as sufficient grounds for the absence 
of 2-rhythm from our list of secondary types : when we 



132 Science of English Verse. 

come to consider the absence of 5-rhythm entirely dif- 
ferent reasons present themselves. These are founded 
on the difficulty which the ear finds in co-ordinating 
recurrences of the rhythmic accent at the interval of 5 
units. It is not the length of the interval, but the odd- 
ness of it, which seems to trouble the ear. 5-rhythm 
has been occasionally attempted, as an experiment, in 
music, and Robert Franz has even written a song in 
7-rhythm.» Without here considering the latter, which 

* It is interesting to remark in this connection that the form of the 
Japanese ode is framed upon the numbers five and seven, the entire ode 
consisting of thirty-one syllables which are always distributed among five 
lines, giving five syllables to the first line, seven to the next, five to the 
next, and seven each to the two last. This arrangement is not theoreti- 
cally rhythmical among them, and it is commonly supposed that the Jap- 
anese have no rhythm in their verse. On hearing several poems recited, 
however, by Mr. Mitsukuri and Mr. Kuhara — two highly-intelligent Jap- 
anese gentlemen who are now Fellows of Johns Hopkins University, arid 
who have obligingly favored me with several readings for this purpose — 
I am strongly inclined to think the Japanese verse not only rhythmical, 
but rhythmical according to the forms and limitations just set forth as to 
English verse. Thus although the five-syllabled and seven-syllabled lines 
of the Japanese ode seem to contravene the principles of 2-rh3rthm and 
3-rhythm just now asserted, on investigation they strike my ear as being 
so pronounced in actual utterance as to become genuine 3-rh3rthm. For 
example, the following poem — in which I have divided each syllable of a 
word from its neighbor by a hyphen, for clearness' sake : — 

12345 

Yo-no-na-ka-wa 
I 3345 6 7 

Yu-me-ka u-tsu-tsu-ka 

U-tsu-tsu-to-mo 

Yu-me-to-mo shi-ra-dsu 

A-ri-te na-ke-re-ba 

(the a sounded as our ah and the / as our ee\ might be noted trudely 

• wa 

I t C 

tsu - tsu - ka 



: t 


t 


r 


Yo - no • 


na - 


ka 


Yu - me • 


5 

ka 


5 

u - 



5'Rhythm. 



133 



is a unique tours de force of this charming writer : it 
will help the student's conception of the precise diffi- 
culties of 5-rhythm if I briefly describe what is, so far 
as I know, the most successful conquest of them thus 
far achieved in music. This is the " Hailing Dans," or 

I ^ I t : -^ 



U - tsu - tsu - 

t t I I 

U - me - to - mo 

I t I I 



to • mo 



A - ri 



te na 



shi - ra - dsu 

C t t 

ke - re - ba. 



But it is more than possible that my own strong expectation of finding 
this rhythm, based upon the universality of the form in all European 
rhythmic effort, may have prejudiced my ear to hear it ; and added to this 
is the extreme uncertainty which must attend all nicer judgments upon 
rhythm in a foreign tongue. Of the general fact of rhythm, however, my 
ear brought a quite conclusive verdict. I think it safe to say that if the 
rhythm of the poem was not as above noted, it was a genuine, and very 
interesting, case of pure 5-rhythm and 7-rhythm alternating. It sometimes 
sounded quite plainly so. In this event the notation of the thirty-one 
syllabled ode would be : 



8 



I 



Yo 


' no • 


t 

' na 


r 

- ka - 


t 

wa 






t 


t 


t 


C 


t t 


t 


Yu 


- me - 


ka 


u • 


tsu - tsu 


' ka 


t 


t 


t 


t 


r 






U • 


■ tsu - 


tsu ' 


• to - 


mo 






t 


C 


t 


t 


r t 


C 


u . 


' me • 


• to - 


mo 


shi - ra - 


dsu 


t 


t 


C 


t 


t t 


C 


A 


• 

- n - 


te 


na - 


ke • 


re 


' ba. 



in which each line consists of a single bar, and, further, in which each 
seven-group seemed to be pronounced in the same time with the five-group. 
It may interest the curious to add that the poem given is very striking in 



134 Science of English Verse. 

Fling, movement in a Norse Suite by Mr. Asger Hame- 
rik, of Baltimore. The theme is as follows : 




± 




With the utmost adroitness the author has caused the 
very difficulties of this 5-rhythm to aid the spirit of the 
movement. He is picturing a dance, not of carpet- 
knights or Mabille debauchees, but of men making merry 
between warlike deeds, — Vikings between voyages; and 
the rhythmic turmoil and hilarious riot of their Norse 
fling, or Halling-dance, could not be better conveyed to 
the hearer's ear than through the trouble which the ear 
finds in keeping up with this rhythm — a trouble so 
great that even the trained musicians of the orchestra 
must pay the strictest attention in order to keep the time, 
while to most hearers there seems to be a peculiar mirth- 
ful jerk of time in each bar manifesting itself through 
all the complex beauty of the melody and of its instru- 
mentation in the orchestra. If, now, we investigate this 
"jerk** for a moment, and ascertain exactly by what 
means the orchestral players keep up with the 5-rhythm 
of this movement, we shall find that the question as to 
5-rhythm in our enumeration of types is answered by 
^ the fact that 5-rhythm, in its practical form, is really a 
combination of 3-rhythm and 2-rhythm (the 2-rhythm 
just now described as used in music and as the same 

with our 4-rhythm, ^ being same as g) and is thus in- 

its significance, and sounds as if it came out of Hamlet, though it dates 
from before the tenth century. It may be translated : 

Thislife- 

Is it a dream or a reality f 

Whether a reality 

Or a dream we camiot know, 

For it is, and it is not 



6' Rhythm y S- Rhythm, &€. 135 

eluded in our list. For the musical phrase of the Hail- 
ing Dance just now given is played with the rhythmic 
accents placed as indicated by the mark a in the follow- 
ing, where to prevent perplexing the student I have re- 
duced every note in each bar to the primary unit of the 
bar, thus presenting an outline of the melody : 




^^ 



^ 



2345 12345 

That is, the rhythmic accent recurs the first time at the 
interval of 3 notes, the next time at the interval of 
2 notes, then at 3 notes, then at 2, and so on ; in other 
words we have practically a bar of 3-rhythm, then a bar 
of 2-rhythm (our 4-rhythm), then a bar of 3-rhythm, 
then one of 2-rhythm, and so on : in short, a succes- 
sion of bars in which 3-rhythm regularly alternates with 
4-rhythm. , 

Thus 5-rhythm, so far as it is practicable, is included 
in our two types 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm. 

It is hardly necessary to add that all rhythms above 
5-rhythm are either even rhythms, and mere doubles 
of 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm, — as 6-rhythm which is mere- 
ly 3-rhythm repeated, and 8-rhythm which is merely 
4-rhythm repeated, — or are odd rhythms and are con- 
trolled by the considerations advanced in regard to 5- 
rhythm. 

It is proper here for the sake of completeness to re- 
view all the possible forms of these two great types of 
rhythm according as the rhythmic accent is placed on 
the first, the second, the third, &c., units of the bar. 
Of course either method is sufficient to mark the time, 
bar by bar ; in 3-rhythm, for instance, the grouping into 



136 Science of English Verse. 

threes is sufficiently indicated to the ear whether the 
rhythmic accent falls on the first, the second, or the 
• third unit of the bar, so long as the accent recurs on 
every third unit after the first unit on which it was 
heard. 

In 3-rhythm, different positions of the accent would 
give us the following possible forms of bars : 

I t : t \ 

— accent on first unit, understood always without being 
expressed, as heretofore explained ; 



tt f 



— accent on second unit; 
and 



f f t 



— accent on third unit. 

Similarly, in 4-rhythm, we would have four possible 

forms of bars, according to accentuation : 

it t : : V it I t t V 
tt I t t v-^4t I t t \- 

The general view of the two types, 3-rhythm and 
4-rhythm, will now be complete if the possible forms of 
their bars according to the number of separate sounds 
in each be discussed. 

No more fruitful source of error has vitiated the 
theories of verse than the confusion of the actual num- 
ber of sounds in a bar with the typical number of time- 
units in the bar. For example, we may have a bar of 
3-rhythm in which there is but one sound while there 



Possible Forms of Bars. 



137 



are three time-units, q \ 



; another bar of 3-rhythm 



in which there are two sounds, yet still three time-units, 

g I b h another bar of 3-rhythm in which there 
are three sounds and three time-units ; another bar of 
3-rhythm in which there are four sounds and still three 

time-units, 3 ^ ^ ^ ^ L and this might appear, 
according as we divide the first, the second, or the third. 



eighth-note into two, as ^ ^^ t t^^^ ^ t ^ ^ t' 

or 3 f f S ^ ' another bar in which there are 
five sounds, yet still the normal three time-units, 

§55 i i C, or 5 5 C 5 5, or C 5 5 5 5' 
12345 12345 123^5 

another bar in which there are six sounds and yet only 

the three normal time-units, g b k k k k k 5 and so 
on. 

But again, instead of distributing the normal time- 
value of the bar among sounds entirely, we may dis- 
tribute them among sounds and silences : as, for ex- 
ample, in either one of the above forms of 3-rhythm 
bars, we may substitute for any one of the sounds a rest 
of the same time-value, in which case the one-sound bar 



r 



as 






might appear either as 
1 1 



r 



or 



as 



or 

1 



: 



the two-sound bar 

. or 



k k 



or as I u u p , or as 
other forms ; and so oj>. 



I * , or as ' u 
the three-sound bar as p ^ ' ' * 

p p ^ , or in many 



138 



Science of English Verse. 



In the same way, any bar of 4-rhythra may be greatly 
varied by variously distributing the four time-units 
among different numbers of sounds. 

It is of prime importance for the reader to remem- 
ber in this connection : 

(i) That the bar takes its name, as 3-bar (i.e., bar of 
3-rhythm) or 4-bar (i.e., bar of 4-rhythm), not from the 
• number of sounds in it but from the typic number of 
time-units in it : 

(2) That the verse-maker or the musician may put 
one sound or one silence, or any number of sounds or 
• of silences or of both, into any bar of any form of any 
rhythm in English poetry, so long as the time-values of 
these sounds and silences, when added, exactly make up 
the normal time-value of the bar ; 

{fj That it is not necessary to have all the bars, in 

any given piece of verse, of the same form as to their 

X number of sounds or as to the distribution of time-value 

among those sounds : as is well illustrated in the scheme 

of Tennyson's Breaks break, break. 



r 

Break, 



A 



r 

break, 

A 



o 



r 

break, 

A 

r 

seal 



lit t r 

On thy cold gray stones. 

And I would that my tongue could ut - ter 



t .f I 



t r 



in 



me. 



t r 

The thoughts that a - rise 

where a great diversity of bars is presented , 

^ This different method of writing the scheme fron^ that before 



\ 



Reference to Simplest Farm. 139 

(4) That even a change in the place of the rhythmic 
accent sometimes affords an agreeable variation, if it be 
for only one bar at a time, and made after some rest, or 
silence, in the verse which prepares the ear for a ne'v 
accentuation, as at the beginning of a line, for example, 
which is the usual place for such a change ; 

(5) That in determining the typic form to which a 
given piece of verse may be referred, therefore, we do 
not consider a single bar, nor two bars, but look along 
the body of the piece at the sum of appearances and as- 
certain what is the simplest form of bar predominating 
in the piece, — to which form we then refer it ; as, for 
example, in the scheme of Break y breaks break just 
given, we look along through the stanza, and, finding 



A 



I r 



we refer 



several bars of the simple form 

the poem to that form, as the typic bar, of which all 
the others are varieties ; 

(6) That, in pursuance of this course, we may often 
write schemes of poems which present only the main 
typic forms of the bars, and which are absolutely accurate 
for all purposes except where there is special occasion 
to represent the actual movement of the reader's voice 
in each bar of a poem ; so that hereafter, in presenting 
schemes of verse, unless qualifying words appear at the 
beginning, it is to be understood that the scheme is 
not intended to represent the minuter variations in the 
bars dependent upon this or that distribution of time- 
values among this or that number of sounds, but only 
the simplest form of such distribution which predomi- 
nates in the poem ; 

given is better because it preserves the line-arrangement of the words in 
^e notatioiit 



I40 Science of English Verse. 

(7) That, in point of fact, the practice of English verse 
in persistently repeating certain selected forms of bar 
for many centuries has resulted in the emergence of five 
• great forms — three forms of 3-rhythm and two forms 
of 4-rhythm — out of the large number of possible 
forms already hinted-at, to which all the varieties of 
rhythm in English verse may be referred. 

The student should now be exercised with the utmost 
thoroughness upon the matters discussed in the.present 
chapter. For this purpose : 

(i) The scheme of Break, break, break, should be re- 
quired to be written from memory on the blackboard ; 

(2) Each bar should be taken-up in succession and 
the student caused to add the time-values of its sepa- 
rate sounds and silences so as to demonstrate their 

agreement with the typic time-value g ; 

(3) The various possible forms of bars given above 
/should be repeated, and extended through other distri- 
butions in 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm, with the exactest 
detail, at least until the student has thoroughly mas- 
tered the relations of notes and the distinction between 
the number of sounds and the number of typic time- 
units in a bar. 



V 



Prevalence of 3- Rhythm. 141 



CHAPTER V. • 

OF 3-RHYTHM, GENERALLY; AND SPECIALLY OF ITS 

THREE FORMS. 

The following chapter will deal : 

(i) With the remarkable fact of the almost exclusive 
prevalence of 3-rhythm in English poetry from its be- 
ginning to the present time, illustrating this prevalence 
with citations from the Anglo-Saxon poem of The 
Battle of Maldon (loth century), and the later English 
poems of The Ormulum (13th century), The Cuckoo-Song 
(13th century), The Vision concerning Piers Plowman 
(14th century). The Canterbury Tales (14th century), 
The Song of Ever and Never (early i6th century), Shak- 
spere*s Plays, Endymion, The Raven, The Idylls of the 
King, The Psalm of Life, Brahma, and Atalanta in Caly- 
don; ^ 

(2) Specially with blank verse. 

I think no circumstance in the history of aesthetics is 
so curious as the overpowering passion of the English 
ear for 3-rhythm as opposed to 4-rhythm. From the 
beginning of English poetry with the Song of the Trav- 
eller, which we may perhaps refer to the 6th century : 
or, speaking within the more certain bounds of poetic 
history, from our father Caedmon : through all the won- 
derful list down to the present day, every long poem 
and nearly every important short poem in the English 
language has been written in some form of 3-rhythm. 

This being so, I have thought that a brief outline of 



14^ Science of English Vers^. 

the course of English rhythm — a contour, drawn in 
musically-noted schemes of the rhythms which have 
distinguished our greatest poems — might form a meth- 
od of presenting^ the three forms of 3-rhythm not only 
more agreeable than a stricter order of treatment, but 
more effective for the student's clear conception, since 
such an outline will necessarily be composed of one 
after another illustration of the three forms in question 
as they have been applied by the greatest artists in our 
tongue. 

Beginning with Anglo-Saxon poetry, we find that 
a sihgle form of 3-rhythm prevails in it exclusively 
for the first five hundred years of our poetic history. 
Below will be given a scheme in which one hundred 
bars of a 'very noble and manful Anglo-Saxon poem 
have been carefully reduced to notation; the number 
of simplest forms in the scheme will then be counted, 
and a typic scheme constructed upon the percentage 
which these numbers bear to the whole number of bars. 
This procedure will be found to reveal quite clearly that 
the typic form of Anglo-Saxon secondary rhythm is an 

alternation of bars of the form g ^ ^ ^ "^'ith. bars 

of the form g [ k • An inquiry thus conducted 

offers a means of testing Anglo-Saxon rhythms with 
mathematical precision, which any reader may adopt for 
the purpose of verifying the conclusions herein given. 

Before presenting this scheme it is worth while men- 
tioning that the fundamental misconception, already 
discussed, of the nature of rhythm as based upon ac- 
cent and not on quantity, has resulted in vitiating, to a 
greater or less extent, pretty nearly all the estimates of 
Anglo-Saxon rhythm heretofore given. A couple of 



Errors as to Anglo-Saxon Rhythm. 143 

hundred years ago the learned Hickes declared his be- 
lief that the "feet** of Anglo-Saxon poetry should be 
measured by the laws of classic quantity. This opinion, 
while not quite correct, seems to be more nearly so 
than any subsequent one, except Conybeare's. 

Dr. Guest, in his History of English Rhythms^ pp. 
174-5, has not hesitated to affirm that "in none" of the 
Anglo-Saxon poems " is found the slightest trace of a 
temporal rhythm," — that is of a rhythm based upon 
time, or quantity. Tyrwhitt — though his ignorance of 
Anglo-Saxon perhaps deprives of all authority a judg- 
ment which was often so penetrating in more familiar 
departments of scholarship — could see no rhythm at 
all in Anglo-Saxon poetry, nor even its alliteration. 

In the otherwise admirable grammatical introduction 
of Sweet's Anglo-Saxon Reader — in many respects the 
most worthy work of this nature known to the present 
author — the statement occurs : "the essential elements 
of O. E." (Old English, or Anglo-Saxon) "versification 
are accent and alliteration. . . . The number of unac- 
cented syllables is indifferent,^^ 

The italicized portion of the last sentence is thus 
marked for the purpose of calling attention to another 
form in which the original error as to "the essential 
element of rhythm " (supposed to be accent) appears in 
several modern treatises. The necessary dependence 
of rhythm upon time, or quantity, and that alone, has 
already been set forth ; and " the number of unaccented 
syllables " was therefore so far from being " indifferent " 
that the ear of the old Anglo-Saxon audience before 
whom the gleeman stood forth with his harp and 
chanted the poem could not have kept the mighty 
rhythm which beats through all these songs without a 



144 



SHe?, 



'- of English Verse. 



\ 



strict co-ordination of all the verse-sounds, unaccented | 
as well as accented. 

A similar statement as to the syllables is found in 
that wonderful littie treasury, the Rev. Stopford 
'BTOcik.G' a Ptimer of English Literature: "It" {that is. 
Old English or Anglo-Sa.\on poetry) " was not written 
in rime ' nor were its syllables counted." 

Mr. Morley, in his First Sketch, makes a similar affir- I 
mation as to the syllables. 

Even Conybeare, whose appreciation of Anglo-Saxon 
rhythm was warm and enthusiastic, nevertheless writes, 
with a certain timidity, "The general rhythm and 
cadence of their" — the Anglo-Saxons' — "verse is not 
altogether undiscoverable." I 

But, accepting, if only provisionally, the doctrine 
hereinbefore presented that all rhythm is necessarily 
based upon quantity, and that this quantity is only per- 
ceived through the exact co-ordination by the ear of all 
the individual time-values of the sounds, or syllables, 
both accented and unaccented : if we shall find, upon 
reducing a considerably portion of Anglo-Saxon verse 
to notation according to this hypothesis and actually 
"counting" all the "syllables," that a definite rhythmi- 
cal purpose appears, revealed in quite determinate types 
of rhythm which vary from bar to bar only in details 
for the sake of avoiding monotony, — perhaps it may be 
fairly considered that the case in favor of Anglo-Saxoa ■ 
rhythm has been made out. 

With this view, the following scheme is presented. I 
In order to give it an interest beyond the merely tech-' 
nical, I have chosen for notation a passage from a poem I 



English V 



E ihe Rhyming Poem quoled i 
le, and the rhymes in Tht Phan 



■X the colon of ■ 



Anglo-Saxon Rhythm. 145 

written in 993 called The Battle of Maiden — otherwise 
sometimes The Death of Byrhtnoth — which, in the judg- 
ment of my ear, sets the grace of great loyalty and the 
grimness of wild battle to glorious music. Perhaps no 
man could hear this strain read aloud without a notable 
stirring of the blood. 

The rhythm of this poem — let it be observed as the 
reader goes through the scheme — is strikingly varied 
in time-distribution from bar to bar. The poem in fact 
counts with perfect confidence upon the sense of 
rhythm which is well-nigh universal in our race; often 
boldly opposing a single syllable in one bar to three or 
four in the next. I should not call this " bold," except 
for the timidity of English poetry during the last two 
hundred years, when it has scarcely ever dared to ven- 
ture out of the round of its strictly defined iambics, for- 
getting how freely our folk-songs and nursery-rhymes 
employ rhythms and rhythmic breaks — as "Peas por- 
ridge hot,'* for example, or almost any verse out of 
Mother Goose — which, though ** complex'* from the 
stand-point of our customary rhythmic limitations, are 
instantly seized and co-ordinated by children and child- 
minded nurses. 

A peculiarity of the Old English poetry must be now 
mentioned which enabled the craftsman in words to 
venture upon these variations with certainty that the 
hearer's ear would recognize their rhythmic significance 
at once. This was its well-defined system of allitera- 
tion. In most lines the three first bars or feet begin 
with the same consonant ; in others the three first bars 
begin with a vowel, though not necessarily the same 
vowel ; in otheA the two middle bars begin with the 
same consonant ; and in others the first and third bars 



146 Science of English Verse. 

begin with the same consonant. These four alliterative 
types are rarely departed from : and thus it will be seen 
that in most cases three, and in nearly all other cases 
two, distinct rallying-points of rhythm were unequivo- 
cally indicated to the ear. For example, in the fourth 
line of The Battle of Maldon : j r 

I 2 3 -^ 4 



Ti: f. H=4=r I r r I f-ja 



hyc - gan to ban - dum, to hy - ge go - dum 

the alliterative h's of hycgan, handum, and hyge deter- 
mine the two first bars for the ear as g ' p ^ , and 

the two last as equivalent g f k, with absolute cer- 
tainty. 

I wish now to arrange twenty-five lines from TAe 
Battle of Maldon so that the general reader though 
wholly unacquainted with Anglo-Saxon may represent 
to himself with tolerable accuracy the swing and lilt of 
the original sounds. For this purpose, the following 
simple directions will suffice to indicate the pronuncia- 
tion, letters not given being sounded as in modem 

English. 

a as a in "father." 

ae " " " "m^n." 

e " prolonged e in " m^ry." 

e " e in " m^rt." 

i " i " " mach/ne." 

y " i " " ^'t." 

ea nearly as ea in " rear?'* 

eo " " eo " "Leoville." 

Pronounce all the c'% like k ; and always make a syl- 
lable of e at the end of a word, as "sta^he" = stath-eh^ 
"stithlice" = stith4ik-eh^ "clipode" = clip-o-deh, 

* To combat hand to hand, with good heart 



Scheme front The Battle of Maldon. 147 

The passage given is from line forty-two to line sixty- 
seven, which contains the manful defiance of Byhrtnoth 
to the vikings. We are in the year 993 : scene, the 
coast of England : a party of vikings — ninety-three 
ship-loads of them — have landed, bent upon plunder: 
Byrhtnoth, a stout thane of iEthelred's, leads a party of 
English warriors to oppose the pirates and forms his 
men along one bank of the river Panta which here runs 
into the sea, the enemy being arrayed on the other 
bank: a messenger of the vikings then "stands forth," 
and " strongly calls " over the water to Byrhtnoth that 
if he will pay liberal, tribute — "rings for ransom" — 
the vikings will agree to leave him unmolested and take 
to their ships again and sail away. Whereupon : ^ 






I 




ig— w- 



Byrht - noth math-el - o - de, bord 



haf-en 



W 



de 



£ 



lU: 



wand 



wac . - ne aesc, word 



um 



mael 



de, 




yr 



re and an - raed a - geaf him and-swar-e: "ge - 



^ 



■^ 



hyrst thu, sae - li - da, hwaet this folc seg - eth? hi 




wil - lath cow to 



* It is hardly necessary to say that the E of the bass-clef upon which 
the following notation is arranged has no other significance than that of a 
convenient tone which the reader can strike, if he chooses, on the piano, 
according to the rhythm here indicated. It will be noticed too that — as 
often happens in modern verse — syllables really belonging to the last bar 
of a line often begin the first of the next line. These for the sake of con- 
^venience I have put always where they belong rhythmically, that is, at the 
ends of their rh3rthmic phrases. 



t4S 



Science of English Versi. 



m 



aet - tren 



ord 



and cald 



swurd 




tha 




he - re - gea - tu th' eow aet hild - e ne deah. 




Brim - man - na bod - a, a - beod eft on - gean ; 




■^' 



se - ge thin - um leod-um micl - e lath - re spell, thaet 



H^- 



her stent un - for - cuth eorl mid his we - ro - de 



^^ 



the 



wi 



le gealg - i 



an 



thel thys - ne» 




iEth - el - raed - es eard, 



eald 



res 



X 



mm 



es* 



m 



X 



folc 



and fold 



an: 



feal 



Ian sceol 



on 



^^ 



£ 



'W- 



haeth-en - e aet hild - e. To hean - lie me thync - eth thaet 



:=ip: 



— »- 



ge mid ur-um sceatt-um to 



scip 



e gang - on 




un 



be - foht-en 



nu 



ge thus feor hid - er on 



m. 



s 



ur 



ne 



eard 



mn 



be 



com 



on; 



ne 




sceol - e ge swa soft 



snic 



ge - gang 



^=^ 



g 



us 



sceal ord and ecg ser 



ge 



se 



an: 



man, 



Translation of Passage Noted. 149 



m 



X 



I 



— r 



m 



gnmm 



guth - pleg - a aer we gaf 



ol syll - on." 



m 



Het 



:pi- 



tha bord ber - an, beom - as gang - an, thaet 



on thaem east 



X 



the eal 



lis^dzS? 



^ 




le stod - on. Ne 



L-tethaer for wae - ter 



wer-od to tham oth - rum: 



§=* 



^^^ 



X 



thaer 



com flow - end - e flod aeft - er eb 



ban, 




luc 



on lag- u- stream- as; to lang hit him thuht - e,' 



" Byrhtnoth cried to him, brandished the buckler, shook the slim 
ash,* with words made utterance, wrathful and resolute, gave him 
his answer: *Hearest thou, sea-rover, that which my folk sayeth.? 
Yes, we will render you tribute ... in javelins — poisonous 
point and old-time blade — good weapons, yet forward you not in 
the fight. Herald of pirates, be herald once more: bear to thy 
people a bitterer message, — that here stands dauntless an earl 

Byrhtnoth mathelode, bord hafenode, 

wand wacne aesc, wordum maelde, 

yrre and anraed, ageaf him andsware; 

* Gehyrst thu, saelida, hwaet this folc segeth? 

Hi willath cow to gafole ga^as syllan, 

aettrene ord and ealde swurd, 

tha heregeatu the cow st hilde ne deah. 

Brimmana boda, abeod eft ongean; 

sege thinum leodum micle lathre spell, 

with his warriors, will keep us this country, land of my lord Prince 
yCthelraed, folk and field : the heathen shall perish in battle. Too 
base, methinketh, that ye with your gold should get you to ship all 
unfoughten with, now that so far ye have come to be in our land : 
never so soft shall ye slink with your treasure away: us shall 

> The translation following is nearly literal, and for convenience is accompanied with 
the text. 

* Ash: i.e. ashen shaft of his ^velin, for which " aesc " is a common expression. 



1 50 Science of English Verse. 

persuade both point and blade — grim game of war -r- ere we pay 
you for peace.* 

Bade he then bear forward bucklers, and warriors go, till they 

thsBt her stent unforcuth eorl mid his werode, 
the wile geealgian ethel thysne, 
^thelraedes eard, ealdres mines, 
folc and foldan: feallan sceolon 
haethene aet hilde. To heanlic me thynceth 
thaet ge mid urum sceattum to scipe gangon 
unbefohtene, nu ge thus feor hider 
on ume eard inn becomon; 
ne sceole ge swa softe sine gegangan : 
as sceal ord and ecg aer geseman, 
grimm guthplega, aer we gafol syllan.' 
Het tha bord beran, beomas gangan, 

all stood ranged on the bank that was east. Now there, for the 
water, might never a foeman come to the other : there came flow- 
ing the flood after ebb-tide, mingled the streams: too long, it 
seemed to them, ere that together the spears would come." 

thaet hi on tham eastaethe ealle stodon. 

Ne mihte thaer for waetere werod to tham othrum: 

thaer com flowende flod aefter ebban, 

lucon lagustreamas: to lang hit him thuhte, 

hwaenne hi togaedere garas baeron. 

An inspection gf this musical map reveals a rhythmic 
scheme which admirably secures power, variety, and a 
certain hurrying rush and ordered riot of sounds. 
Each line consists of four bars,^ and each bar of a 
number of syllables which mark off determinate periods 
of time for the ear. The reader will easily catch the 
essential swing of the poem by fixing in his mind, for 

' The importation of this term into the nomenclature of poetic science 
clears away at a single stroke such an accumulation of errors and confu- 
sions as no one would be prepared to believe who had not made special 
study of English criticism during the last three hundred years. The 
" foot " of classic metres was . . . whatever fancy might choose to make 
it : but as soon as it is identified with the " bar " of music, whose nature 
and functions are as well understood as the simplest mathematical for- 
mula, it becomes a thing which can be discussed with profit, as being 
matter of scientific precision. 



Sum of Appearances. 151 

example, the movement of the beautiful line (next to 
the last in the extract just given) 



^f M C r M c r c I r j i 



Thaer com flow - end - e flod ae£ - ter ebb - an 
(There came flow - ing (the) flood af - ter ebb - tide) 

which may be considered the type of all the lines. The 
method of varying this type so as to prevent the move- 
ment from growing . monotonous may be accurately 
ascertained by the following calculation. Out of the 
one hundred bars given above (twenty-five lines with 
four bars each) there are forty-three bars of the form 
(i) r P; thirty-four bars of the form (2) f f f ; 

sixteen bars of the form (3) UJ p W — which I 

have written also as Lg T T, or ^ ZmJ u , or 
^ ' ^U, considering that in the absence of more 

minute data than we possess as to Old English pronun- 
ciation these forms of (3) may be used interchangeably, 
or at least according to the feeling of the reader ; and 
seven bars of the form f *, — which might be written 
r ^^ , or sometimes f X where the syllable is evidently 
not meant to be prolonged. 

Now, classifying these four varieties with reference 
to their effect on the ear, the forms (2) and (3) may be 
considered as one, both conveying a sense of rush and 
hurry ; (i) constitutes a class by itself representing still 

' In the last line of the extract the second bar consists of five syllables 

and has the form ^j f ^, I have classed this — with sufficient accu- 
racy for the purposes of this paper — in number (3) ; its separate consid- 
eration would involve some details too technical to be presented here, and 
its proportion to the others — one out of a hundred — is not sufficient to 
give it importance as a mode of variation of the typical bar. 



1 5 2 Science of English Verse. - 

rapid movement but more ordered and governed than 
(2) and (3) ; while (4) is an arrest of movement for an 
instant ; as if the torrent of metre flowed now into a 
broad pool, now into an eddy. From this point of view, 
grouping (3) with (2), and considering, as is actually the 

case, that (3) \^ \t \t (for which there is no name in 

prosody) is so slightly differentiated from (2) T T T as 
to be substantially the same bar ; we have, in our hun- 
dred bars, of the form T T T fifty bars ; of the form 
f P forty-three bars ; and of the form f ' seven bars. 

This then is a fair idea of the rhythm of TAe Death 
of Byrhtnoth ; for the hundred bars given are thorough- 
ly representative of the whole piece and the number 
seems large enough to render deductions reliable. The 
speech of Byrhtnoth which they include cannot fail to 
delight every ear : in truth I do not know where to look 
in English poetry, old or new, for a succession of words 
which make more manly music as mere sounds. 

The form of bar P p f f which occurs so often in 

1^ 1/ U V 

math -el - o - de 

the foregoing scheme is by no means given as the only 
manner of noting those sounds, and perhaps may not 
suit the actual movement of many voices. It offers an 
interesting point of comparison with exactly similar 
modern forms, where in a 3-rhythm poem we often find 
a bar consisting of four sounds. For example : in Ten- 
nyson's Charge of the Light Brigade, the four sounds 

'* val-ley of death '' are placed in a bar of » time, thus : 



I 


I 


r 


I 11 t 


t i r 


re 


All 


in 


the 


val - ley of death 


rode the six 


hund - red 


I 


2 


3 


1234 


I 2 3 


I 2 



Typic Anglo-Saxon Scheme. > 153 

Instead, however, of delivering this second bar as 
%yyv k > niany voices would make a distribution 

val-ley of death 

of time-values among the four sounds which would be 
represented by the following formula of notation well- 
known in music : § f p p f where the straight 

val - ley of death 

line drawn over the four notes indicates that they are 
to be played, or uttered, in the time of three of the 
same notes : a rhythmic device depending upon a pro- 
cess exactly opposite to that of the triole already ex- 
plained, where P h P (for example) indicates that 

the three notes T T T are to be played in the time 

of two ^ J. 

The method illustrated in 



%l I I I 

Math -el - o - de 



X J P P J , seems generally 

val - ley of death 

preferable to the form g^^b b * %y y ^ ^ 

Math-el - o - de val -ley of death 

and would have been adopted in the foregoing scheme 
except for the desire to concentrate the student's atten- 
tion upon the special purpose of the scheme and there- 
fore to avoid all preliminary explanations that could be 
dispensed-with. It will be hereafter used, except when 
other forms specially commend themselves. 

The rhythm revealed by the scheme given for Byrht- 
noth's speech is the typic rhythm of Anglo-Saxon 

poetry, and its typic scheme g u ^ U I U 
(representing the two typic simple forms of bar which. 



154 



Science of English Verse. 



alternating with each other, largely predominate in 
every poem) never varies from the beginning to the 
end of what we may call Anglo-Saxon poetry, though 
the number of bars to the line is occasionally difEer- 
ent. This may appear in illustrative passages from the 
Song of the Traveller^ probably 6th century ; Caedmon's 
Paraphrase, /th ; Beowulf 8th ; The Wanderer (unknown 
date ; possibly), gth ; the scheme already given from 
the Battle of Maldon, loth. 

From Caedmon (as preserved in King Alfred's Anglo- 
Saxon translation of Beda's Ecclesiastical History) : 



:: t t c 

Nu we sceol-on 



C t C 

her - i - an 



c r e c 

heo - f on - ric - es 



r 



c t t 

Met - od - es 



t t t t 

mih - te and his 



r 

mod 






Weard, 
8 

r •• 

thonc.1 



Though belonging more strictly to a monograph on 
Anglo-Saxon rhythm, it is worth while interrupting this 
series for a moment in order to call attention to a prin- 
ciple, illustrated in the bars marked i and 3 of this 
Caedmon scheme, which is of application in the proper 
delivery and notation of almost every line of Anglo- 
Saxon poetry. Considering first the bar number 3, 



heo- ion -nc - es, 

the word is a compound one, of "heo-fon" — which is 
heaven — and "ric-es,** which is the genitive case of 

^ Nu we sceolon herian heofonrices Weard, 

Now we shall praise (the) heaven-kingdom* s Ward (i.e» guardian) 

Metodes mihte and his modgethonc 
(the) Creator's might and his mood-thinking (i,e. the thoughts of his koart)^ 



Anglo-Saxon Contractions. 155 

"rice," kingdom. This genitive in es is the origin of 
our modern English possessive case, formed by the apos- 
trophe and s. There can be no doubt — but the reasons 
cannot here be given — that this contraction of the pos- 
sessive case prevailed in common speech a long time 
before it was indicated in writing, * — as indeed always 

1234 
happens: and hence a four-sound word like "heofonrices" 

was, in the gleeman's oral reproduction, practically a 

three-sound word " heofonric's " — or, as it would be if 

"rice*' had survived in this connexion, heavenric's — 

and should therefore have the notation g p p p , 

heo-fon-ric*s 

in which it presents us with the simple typic bar of 
3-rhythm, instead of the rarer form § f p p p 

• heo-fon-ric^ es 

A process exactly similar converts bar number i of 

into the same 



for the word sceolon 



the Caedmon scheme o f p p f 

Nu wesceol-on 

Nu we sceol'n 
I 2 3 

(sc here representing our modern sh) is the first person 
plural of the modern form shall, agreeing with *'we*' 
— "Nu we sceolon" = Now we shall— 3Xid just as in 
modern English we contract such a two-sound word as 

' We begin to find similar ones indicated early in the 13th century, as 
for example in the Cuckoo-Song presently quoted where immediately after 
" bleteth " (bleateth) comes " louth ** which is a one-sound contraction of 
the two-sound " lou-eth " or loweth (sc. the cow loweth after the calf, &c). 
All through the Cuckoo-Song the liberty of making or not making sucl\ 
contractions, according as the rhythm may suggest, is apparent, 



156 



Science of English Verse. 



"swollen'* into a one-sound word "sworn," — or as in 
German verse schullen appears as schuirn, siehen as 
sieh'n, gliihen as gluh*n, and the like — so there can be 
no doubt that in the excited utterance of the Anglo- 
Saxon gleeman "sceolon" would cease to be a two- 
sound word " sceol-on ** and become a one-sound word 

I 2 

" sceol'n/* * thus giving us the simple typic bar 
g J ' ' instead of x J J J ^ • 

Nu we sceorn Nu we sceol-on 

A further application of the principle which underlies 
both these processes — the principle of connected utter- 
ance, which drops out or slurs over so many unaccented 
sounds in every sentence of modern speech — would 
reduce bar number 6 in the Caedmon scheme, from 

to g ^ ^ ^ — the typic simple 

miht - e ond his miht' ond his 

form — by the well-known custom of eliding or slurring- 
out the last vowel of a word (here the e in " miht-e *') 
before the first vowel of the next (here the o in " ond "). 
Proceeding, in the light of these developments, to 
note the later Anglo-Saxon rhythms : the following, 
from the great Anglo-Saxon epic of Beowulf ^ continues 

the same forms of g bar which we find in Caedmon's 

Paraphrasey 



rrt t 



Tha waes on 

t t t 

3weord o - fer 



r 

heal 

r 

setl 



t r 



le 

t 

van. 



t r t 



heard 

r 

sid 



ecg 



to - gen, 

t r t 

rand man - ig 



' Chaucer gives it as schulln : one syllable. 



Schemes from Beowulf and The Wanderer. 157 



r I t I I t I z 

haf • en hand - a faest, helm ne ge - mund 

Where we perceive always the typic forms f T C 
f f prevailing. 

Scheme of the opening lines of The Wanderer: 



t 



e. 

and 



r 



t t : t t t t 



Oft him 

t I t 

Met - od - es 

t t t 

geond lag - u • 

c : c 

hre - ran mid 



an - ha 

r 

milts 

r 

lad 

r 

hond 



- ga 

: 

e, 

t 

e 

C 

van 



a - re ge- 

t t t 

theah the he 

r t 

long - e 

t t t 

hrim - cald - e 



r t 

bid - eth, 

C C I 

mod-cea- rig 

r I 

sceold - e 

r •• 

sae.' 



It is impossible to quote these opening thoughts of 
The Wanderer without calling attention to a profound 
mournfulness and gentle dignity which breathe subtly 
out of the melodious movement of the verse. Nothing 
could be more beautiful than the rhythmic play of this 
poem. Even those who understand no word of Anglo- 
Saxon must be deeply impressed with the tender sing 
which goes all along through the poem, when it is prop- 
erly read aloud. 

As the reader easily observes, it carries on the 
rhythmus of P P P and f P, so striking in the other 
poems. 

It will afford some striking suggestions if we now 

* There was in hall (the) falchion brandished, 
Swords over benches, maipr a buckler 

(was) high-hoven, fast in hand, helmet not minded. 

* Often the Solitary prayeth for mercy, 

— (for) (jod's compassion, — though he, mood-careful, 
over the water-ways long-time should 
ttir with (his) hands the rime-«old tea. 



158 



Science of English Verse. 



compare these very earliest rhythms of our language 
with the very latest: and for this purpose let the 
schemes of modem rhythm be next given, instead of at 
the last, leaving the intermediate schemes to be after- 
wards presented in their historical order. 

For this purpose compare the following schemes, (i) 
from Swinburne's Atalanta in Calydon, and (2) William 
Morris's Love Is Enough, 

From Atalanta in Calydon: 

U I I r I t I I I I I 



Where shall we 

. r c 

Fold our 



find her, 

I t t 



hands round her 



how shall we 

r t 

knees, and 



sing to her 

1 



r 

cling? 



From Love Is Enough : 



Love is e 

t t I 

woods have no 



nough : tho' the 

I t C 

voice but the 



t t t 

world be a 



C C C P 

wan - ing, And the 



t t t C t 

voice of com> plain -ing. 



Nothing can be more suggestive than the evident 
tendency of these latest rhythms to return to the precise 
rhythmic forms of the fathers. 

Resuming the historic order : after the purer Anglo- 
Saxon, of which specimens have been given from Caed- 
mon, Beowulf, &c., up to the loth century (the Battle of 
Maiden probably dates 993), take the following scheme 
from the Ormulum, a poem probably of the early part 
of the 13th century. Orm,. or Ormin, the author, is 
addressing his brother in the beginning of the poem 
and recounting how his brother had thought that if he 
(Orm) would put "inntill Ennglissh" (into English) 



Scheme from The Ormulum. 



159 



the Gospel's holy lore (Goddspelless hallghe lare) it 
might well turn to mickle profit (frame) &c. The 
metre of this poem is most artfully arranged to carry 
out its 3-rhythm, and the flow of it is wonderfully fine. 
The final ^'s must all be pronounced, as in Anglo- 
Saxon : for instance " wolld-e yern-e lern-en/' where 
each final e makes a separate syllable, in sound much 
like the exclamation eh^ or somewhat more open than 
the French mute e as read in poetry ; except where, as 
in "forr lufe off Crist" (for love of Christ) the e of 
"lufe" is plainly slurred into the of "off" making 
practically one sound. 



* 




A 




A 




A 


\i r 

Thu thohht - 

A 


est 


r 

tatt 


itt 


r 

mihht - 


e 


r 

wel 


A 

c r 

Tm mik - 


ell 


r 

fram - 


e 


r 

turm - 


en, 


X 


I r 

Yi£f Enngl - 


issh 


r 

foUk, 


forr 


r 

luf-e 


of 


r 

Crist 


c r 

Itt woUd - 


e 


r 

yem - 


e 


r 

lem - 


enn. 


;( 

t 


t r 

And foUgh - 


enn 


r 

itt, 


and 


fill - 


enn 


9 

itt 


I r 

Withth thoht, 


withth 


r 

word, 


withth 


r 

ded - 


e. 


X 



It will be profitable, with the insertion of only a few 
occasional 30unds of eh and en to replace the termina- 
tional e and en, to reproduce this rhythm by giving the 
modern equivalents, word for word, of the text, which 
should be read aloud, pronouncing the eh and en wher- 
ever they occur : 



1 60 Science of English Verse. 

Thou thoughtest that it might (-eh) well 

To mickle profit turn (-en) 
If English folk, for love of Christ, 
It would (-eh) gladly ' learn (en), 
And follow it and fill (-en) * it 

With thought, with word, with deed (-eh) : 

a process exactly parallel with the modem French habit 
of reading their poetry in which the old custom of pro- 
nouncing the (now) mute-/ is retained though it has 
long vanished from current speech. 

Take next a rhythmic scheme of the Cuckoo-Song, 
which may be a few years later in date. This bright 
spring-song is of special interest in the present connex- 
ion because the music to which its words are found set 
has a rhythm so exactly reproducing the typical rhyth- 
mic scheme of the poem that it is hardly necessary to 
do more than transcribe the notes of the music, disre- 
garding the changes of pitch, in order to obtain the 
following scheme, — with the exception of a minute 
variation in one bar where the sound " in " is prolonged, 
in singing, during the time of the rest which would pre- 
vent its drawl in utterance. 

On this account, as well as because the poem has 
pre-eminence as not only one of the first English songs 
but as the first found with the music to which it was 
sung,3 the first four lines of the typic scheme are here 
given and then the music of the whole is added, with 
the accompanying words. 

* The word in the text is yeme, i.e., yearningly, 

« Fillenn itt, i.e.,/«/fill (-en) it. 

' It was recovered from Harleian Ms. 978 in the British Museum, which 
seems to have been a monk's commonplace-book or omnium gatJurum, 
Sir Frederic Madden dates it about 1240. 



The Cuckoo- Song. 



i6i 



V^ C 


r 


C 


r 


t 


r 


1 


Sum - er 


• is 


• 

1 - 


cum 


- en 


in, 




r : 

Lhud • e 


r 

sing 


cue - 


r 

cu, 


1 


5t 


1 


r t 

Grow - eth 


r 

sed 


and 


r 

blow 


- eth 


r 

med 


t 

And 


r c 

springth* the 


r 

w 


t 

de • 


r 

nu*. 


1 


;( 


1 



CUCKOO-SONG.' 



AUtardto* 




r i r nr nojU J' i ^ ; i 




JMJ J' l J J' 



Simi - er is i - cum -en in . . . Lhud - e sing cuc- 



cul 




Grow - eth sed, and blow - eth med. And 



r\*' \ r\r 



t 



*-r 



springth the uu - de nu. 



Sing cue • cut 




I 



^ 



t 



A - we blet - eth aft - er lomb, Ihouth aft - er calv - e 



^ For spring^M/ see the preceding remarks on contractions. 
* Summer is (y-) come (-n) in, 
Loudly sing, cuckoo! 
Groweth seed and bloweth mead 
And spring (e) th the wood (e) now. 

' In the two bars marked with a cross near the end the words are 
assigned to the notes differently from the original, the monkish transcriber 
having been careless, as is apparent from his wholly gratuitous and un- 
necessary disregard of the ordinary custom, at this point As for the 
pronunciation it may be sufficiently imitated, for all present purposes, by 
giving all the vowels long — except the i short as in modern in, and e 
much like long 0, and pronouncing all the final e*% as separate syllables, 
like fh, 



l62 



Science of English Verse. 



P 



J J U ^ i r r i r 



■*-T- 



cu. 




Bui - loc stert - eth, buck - e vert - eth 

I- 



nr i r i ^ J' l 



Mur - ic sing cue - cu, 



cue - cu, cue - cu, wel 




siiig - es thu euc-cu, ne . . . swik thu nav - er nu. 



Sumer is icomen in. 
Summer is come in 

Lhude sing, cuccu I 
Loudly singt cuckoo / 

Groweth sed, and bloweth med, 
Groweth seed and bloweth mecuL 

And springth the uude nu. 
And spring {e) th the wood now. 

Sing, cuccu t 
Sing^ cuckoo. 

Awe bleteth after lomb. 
Ewe bleateth after lamb, 

Lhouth after calve cu. 
Loweth after calf (the) cow 

(i>., the cow loweth after the calf), 

Bulloc sterteth, bucke verteth, 
^ullock starteth^ buck vertethy 

(/>. seeketh the green ; French, vert : — but the word is not certainly this) 

Murie sing, cuccu I 
Merrily sing, cuccu / 

Cuccu, cuccu! 
Cuckoo, cuckoo I 

Wel singes thu, cuccu, 
IVell singest thou, cuckoo 

Ne swik thu naver nu. 
Cease not thou never now. 



Scheme from The Vision of Piers Plowman. 1 63 



Here * the typic bar is the g I C which we found to 

be one of the two predominant forms in Anglo-Saxon 
poetry. 

Coming down from the 13th to the 14th century, next 
is a scheme of the four opening lines of The Vision con- 
cerning Piers Plowman, Probably no rhythm was ever 
so thoroughly misunderstood as the gentle and inces- 
sant sing which winds along through these alliterative 
fixed-points as a running brook among its pebbles. 
The reader will observe that we have here still the 

typic bar § C I I \ overwhelmingly predominant 

in the poem, but with the rhythmic accent at the second 
time-unit of the bar instead of the first 



A 

In a som 


er 


A 

se - son 


I shop - e 


me in 


shroud - es as 



A 


C 


the son 


• ne 


A 




: : 


t 


e wer 


- e 



whan soft was 
I a shep 



* This was sung as a part-song for four or six voices. As such it pro- 
duces a delightfully outdoor and breezy effect The method of singing it 
was as follows. The melody is of such a character that any four bars of 
it will harmonize with any other four. Therefore, taking three sopranos 
and either contralto or bass voice, the procedure is : first soprano sings 
first four bars alone : second strikes-in at fifth bar, singing from the be- 
ginning, and goes on with the first voice which is always four bars ahead 
of the second : third voice strikes-in on the ninth bar, singing from the 
beginning, and then goes on with the other two, in the manner of a catch 
or round. Meantime the contralto, or bass, sings all the time, over and 
over, the following /^j, or burden, until the song is finished : 




^^ 



1 — 



^ 



cue - cu 



no, 



Sing cue - cu. 



1 64 



Science of English Verse. 



In 


hab- 


i-te 


as an her- e - mit 


Went 


A 

wyd- 


•ein 


A 

I r 

this world. 





A 




I 


I 


I 


e un 


- ho ■ 

A 


•ly 


1 


I 


I 




wond 


-res 



I 


A 


I 


of 


werk 

A 


-cs 


r 


U 


r 


to 


her- 


e. 



This is the rhythmus of the third movement in Bee- 
thoven's Seventh Symphony which succeeds the awful 
Heart-beat March of the second movement. It is con- 
ventionally written with an arsis or unaccented note at 
the beginning, thus 



r r fi^r^i^^^ i ^^^ 



^ 



but the more accurate method would be 




r f rf ^ ^f U 



if the music were, like the poem, in lines each of which 
begins with an unaccented sound. 

An expression occurs in the Palladis Tamia^ Wit's 
Treasury,^ of Francis Meres, printed in 1598, concern- 
ing this rhythm of Piers Plowman which is very remark- 
able as betraying an appreciation of its true nature for 
which one would- not look in the i6th century. Says 
Maister Meres (p. 156, line 24, of the New Shakspere 
Society's Series IV, Part /, 1874): "As Homer was 
the first that adorned the Greek tongue with true quan- 
tity: so Piers Plowman was the first that observed the 

* The book so dear to all Shakspere students from its mentioning —^ 
^d thus limiting the date of — several of Shakspere's plays. 



Langland's and Chaucer s iihythms, 165 

true quantity of our verse without the curiositie of 
rime.** This utterance of Meres becomes all the more 
curious if we compare it with Puttenham's remark in 
The Arte of English Poesie upon "that nameles who 
wrote the Satyre called Piers Plowman " — as he terms 
Langland^ in another place. . . . "His verse" (says 
Puttenham) "is but loose metre, and his termes hard 
and obscure, so as in them is litle pleasure to be taken." 

This outline of our rhythmic history has now reached 
a most notable point as we advance from Langland to 
Chaucer. Although Langland and Chaucer were con- 
temporaries and were writing their books at the same 
moment, yet Langland differs from Chaucer in such a 
way that he must be considered to terminate the ancient 
period, as clearly as Chaucer begins the modern period, 
of English poetry. Langland belongs with Aldhelm, 
Caedmon and Cynewulf; Chaucer with Shakspere, 
Keats and Tennyson. A cunning enough confirmation 
of this view crops-out in the citation just made from 
Puttenham. In the same chapter ^ in which he finds 
Langland such as in him " is litle pleasure to be taken " 
he finds Chaucer thoroughly delightful : a curious in- 
stance where, of two contemporary poets, the one is so 
archaic in rhythm and speech that neither is under- 
stood by a critic of his own tongue only two centuries 
off, while the other is so modern in both that he is not 
only understood but freely enjoyed by the same critic. 

Not that we get out of 3-rhythm, at all, when we 
leave Langland and the ancients for Chaucer and the 

' Or Langley: see Professor C. H. Pearson's paper in The North 
British Review for April, 1870. 

* Chapter XXXI ; v,pp. 75-6 j of The Arte of English Poesie, Arber 
reprint, Murray & Son. London, 1869. 



1 66 Science of English Versd. 

moderns : that maintains its hold undisturbed. But in 
Chaucer we come for the first time upon a special form 
of 3-rhythm which thereafter prevails with almost un- 
broken uniformity throughout English poetry. It has 
been customary to refer the origin of English blank 
verse to Surrey's translation of part of the iEneid in the 
earlier half of the i6th century, in which that noble 
poet used lines consisting of five bars, the typic bar 

A 

having the form # # . But this is Chaucer's rhyth- 

mus : all the Canterbury Tales in verse — except the 
comical Sir Thopas and the surely spurious Cokeys 
Tale of Gamelyn — are written in a rhythm whose 
description merely repeats that given above for Surrey's 
rhythm, — namely, lines of five bars each, the typic bar 

A 

having the form m # . It is true that Chaucer used 

rhyme, while Surrey did not : and in this respect Sur- 
rey's verse was " blank," as opposed to Chaucer's : but it 
was not blank as opposed to Caedmon's and Cynewulf's ; 
in fact English poetry for its first five hundred years 
was without rhyme * — that is, was blank verse. Surrey 
therefore was neither the first, by nearly a thousand 
years, to discard rhyme in English verse ; nor was he 
the first, by more than a hundred and fifty years, to use 

the line of five 



I r 

Inasmuch as this form 



— to which we 



s. 

A 

I r 

now come in the Chaucer scheme — corresponds to the 
classic iambus, which is described as a short (f ) before 

* Except as heretofore noted. Observe, further, the error of Meres in 
affirming that Piers Plowman is the first English poem which observes 
the true quantity of our verse " without the curiositie of rime." 



Chaucer^ s and Surrey* s Rhythms. 167 



a long (f ), let us, for the sake of a convenient and suf- 
ficiently precise term, always hereafter designate this 
as the iambus : the reader always understanding that 
when the word "iambus" is used, it is equivalent to 

And, to acquire beforehand another convenient term 
which belongs to the consideration of the fourth order 
of rhythm — the line-group, or metre — let us designate 
a line which consists of five bars as a line of 5. 

In this terminology, therefore, the lines both of 
Chaucer and of Surrey may be conveniently .called 
iambic S*s so far as the rhythm is concerned : though 
the term "blank verse" has come to be exclusively 
limited to that rhythm when it is used without rhyme. 

The reader is . therefore to understand that when 
Surrey is said to be the father of blank verse, nothing 
more can be meant than that he first used without 
rhyme a rhythm which was at least as old as Chaucer. 

The typic scheme of the first four lines in Chaucer's 
Knyghtes Tale (the first of the Canterbury Tales) is this : 



li r 

Whil-om 

A 

c r 

There was 

A 

Of Atth 

I r 

And m 



A 
as . old - 

A 

f / 

a due 



y ^ ^ 

en-es he 



t r 

e sto - 

A 

: r 

that hight - 

A 

was lord 



p r 

nes tell - 

A 

e The - 

A 

and gov - 

t r 



t r 

en us 

A 

u r 

se - us 

A 

t r 

er - nour 
que - rour.* 



a con - 
^ Text taken from Ellesmere Manuscript, six-text editkm, Chaucer Society. 



1 68 



Science of English Verse. 



Two points in connection with this scheme are of 
interest. 

(i) Let the student observe jthe process of transition 
from the pure Anglo-Saxon rhythm, through Lang- 
land's, to Chaucer's. The Anglo-Saxon presented us 

with the typic g ^ ^ U ; Langland presents us 

, the same, only the accent has been transferred to the 

eA 
r r r 

while Chaucer presents the same as Langland, only the 
last two of the three eighth-notes have joined together 
into a quarter-note — as if in music we should write 

■^^ binds together the two sounds 

P P into one sound precisely equivalent to f — so that 



^ ^ where the slur 



in Chaucer we have instead of 



I r 



I I t 



, the form. 



The second point is connected with this same transi- 
tion, and concerns the very interesting link of it which 
we find in the resemblance of the last bar in most of 
Chaucer's lines to the last bar in nearly all of Lang- 
land's lines. In Chaucer, the last sound of almost 
every line is an e (the lines quoted from the Knight's 
Tale happen not to be such lines), whose rhythmic 
value is expressed in the fifth bar of each line of the 
following scheme noting the first two lines of The 
Canterbury Prologue : 



5r c 

Whan that 

I r 

Thedroghte 



2 
A 


K 


\ 


A - pnll - 




e with 


p. r 

hise shour - 


t r 

of March 


: r 

hath perc - 


ed to 




A 

es swoot • e 
€ root - e. 



I 



Chaucer^ s Final E. 169 

The reader may catch very nearly the exact sound of 
this e which terminates so many of Chaucer's lines by 
getting any intelligent Frenchman to read aloud a 
French poem and observing a certain sound of the fi^al 
e's which, though mute in prose, the French retain as a 
syllable in poetry. It will be observed that this sound 
is often scarcely more than that remission of breath 
with which one relieves the lung when, in speaking, the 
words end before the breath is expended which has been 
accumulated in the lung for the purposes of utterance. 
When an American, in impatiently trying to remember 
a word in the midst of discourse says, for example, " I 
was walking down the -eh — the -eh —7 the Hofsstrasse 
when I met &c.," the ek*s have almost the sound of 
the French e and are often indeed a mere remission of 
breath to relieve the lung. It would seem that such a 
necessity in some way suggests that shape of the buccal 
cavity which results in the tone-color of the French 
mute e as given when rather slurred in reading French 
poetry : a tone-color perhaps better represented by the 
sound of our short u in " but,** somewhat finically pro- 
nounced, than any other in our language. 

Now, that this final e at the end of Chaucer's lines 
was mainly a sort of audible remission of the breath 
having the rh)rthmical effect noted in the last scheme 
from Chaucer seems to be clearly the result of the 
following considerations : 

(i) that Chaucer evidently did not intend this final e 
at the end of each line to have the full force of a sylla- 
ble, else he would have used more of other terminations 
than e in the same place : or in other words his ten- 
dency to confine the sound to that of the final e, which 
was already becoming a sound that could be slurred at 



■i70 



Science of English Verse. 



I 



pleasure,' shows a peculiarity in that sound which must 
have suited his rhythmic purpose ; 

(2) that this rhythmic purpose did not demand a full 
sj^lable at the end of the bar, as shown by the large 
numbers of such lines as the four quoted from the 
Knight's Tale which have no final e; 

(3) that the pronunciation and rhythmical effect 
herein given harmonize all these kinds of lines, for the 
lines not terminating in a final e would admit a similar 
audible remission of the breath, — as we hear it used 
by many readers of the present day ; 

(4) that thus the original rhythmic intent would be 
consistently carried out in every line, and would reveal 
itself as merely a sort of reminiscence of the final bar 
in each line of Anglo-Saxon poetry and particularly in 
each line of Piers Plowman. 

Coming down from Chaucer, and skipping the ijth 1 
century during which, if one excepts a few passages of ' 
Lydgate and Gower, no English poetry was made except 
among the Scotch makers — who however carry out the 
3-rhythm modus without exception — the following very 
striking ballad, which belongs to the early part of the 
l6th century and which I find among the Bright Ms. ' 
published by the Shakspere Society in 1848, gives us 
the genuine old Anglo-Saxon rhythmus of the two forms 

g ' C U r Z \ w'lth almost a typic regularity 
of alternation. I give the scheme of the first two lines 
and then the poem nearly entire. 

* As seems 10 be ihe net conclusion resulling from Ihe careful 
Bchoiarly labors of Mr. Ellis and Professor Child with regard lo the 
eral use of the final e in Chaucer. See Pare 11. Earlji Engthk Promat. I 
eiati'nn, by Mr. A. J. Ellis (published by both tbe Chaucer and New I 

, Shakspere Societies), which contains an admiiable summary of Professor 1 

L Child's paper on this subject. 



Scheme of Ever and Never. 



171 



I 


t 


C 


Li-T 


: 


t 


: 


L/ - 


Ev 


- er 


in 


graf-f3mg and 


nev - 


er 


in 


grow-ing, 


I 


t 

■ er 


f 

in 


plow-ing and 


t 

nev - 


er 


m 


sow- mg. 



SONG OF EVER AND NEVER. 

• • • • • 

Ever in grafEyng and never in growing, 
Ever in plowing and never in sowing, 
Ever in rep)mg and never in mowinge, 
Ever in trowing and never in knowinge. 

Ever full gorged, and never from * tappynge, 
Ever at sylence and never from clappynge, 
Ever a-cold and never from wrappynge 
Ever in hoping and uever in happyng. 

Ever in travell * and never at byrth, 
Ever in smylyng and never in myrth, 
Ever in swellyng and never slack gyrth, 
Ever in purchace and never ought worth. 

Ever at hand and never at wyll,' 
Ever styk fast and never stand styll, 
Ever cum toward and never cum tyll,* 
Ever a clarke and never can skyll. 

• 

Syns ever and never shall never have end, 
Good is it ever never to offend ; 
For ever shall never kepe fawtes in safe mend 
But ever shall scourge fawtes that never amend. 



* " From," in the sense of away from; " never from tappynge " = never free from the 
necessity of tapping, that is, always at it. 

* Travail. 

B Pleasure (for example) erer near by (at hand) but never quite reachable (at will). 
« Tyll = /<? = »/ A?. 



172 



Science of English Vers6. 



Coming from the early part of the i6th century to the 
early part of the 17th: if we take the following four 
lines from Hamlet we will be presented not only with a 
further illustration of 3-rhythm but with an interesting 
illustration of the survival through our blank verse of 

# P 'jf — just now 

discussed in Chaucer. Such lines occur with great fre- 
quency in Shakspere, and with the greatest frequency 
in Fletcher.' On comparing the final bars in each line 
of the following scheme of the opening lines in the 
Hamlet soliloquy with that just given of the opening 
lines in the Canterbury Tales Prologue^ we may see 
the historic connection and rhythmic reason of the 
so-called "double-ending" or " feminine-ending*' lines 
in Shakspere which have in modern times acquired so 
much interest, not only as affording a^^other rhythmic 
test of his growth as an artist but as offering means for 
nice discrimination between Shakspere's and Fletcher's 
parts (for instance) in the play of Henry VHL^ or that 
of the Two Noble Kinsmen,^ 



SCHEME FROM HAMLETS SOLILOQUY. 



A 




A 


To be 


or 


r 

not 


r I 

Whether 


I 


A 

no 



to be 



bier m 



A 

I f 

that IS 

A 

the mind 



the question 
to suf - fer 



* But Fletcher uses them very differently from Shakspere. See spe- 
cial treatment of blank verse, end of this chapter. 

' For interesting discussions of both plays from this and similar points 
of view, see Transactions qf the New Shakspere ^Society for 1874, series L 



Scheme of Hamlet's Soliloquy. 173 



A 


A 


A 


I r 

The slings 


and ar - 


rows of 




A 


A 


Or to 


take arms 


a -gainst 



A 

I r 

out - ra 
A 

I r 

a sea 



geous f or-tune ; 
A 

of troubles. 



In connection with this scheme it may be remarked 
once for all that in reading-off every such notation of 
lines from an acting-play, it must always be remembered 
that the long pauses and stage-silences which occur in 
stage-delivery — especially in the stage-delivery of such 
a soliloquy as this of Hamlet's — will necessarily inter- 
rupt the continuity of the movement, and that the 
scheme can therefore only claim to be a scheme of that 
rhythmic intention upon which the writer projected his 
work and which in its general type only is carried in the 
hearer's mind throughout the progress of the play. For 
example: after the word "question" at the end of the 
first line in the foregoing soliloquy the actor would 
doubtless be silent for some time, in the meditative 
blank of thought which suits Hamlet's unquiet leaping 
from one idea to another here; but in the rhythmic 
intention this line is run-on to the next, and artfully 
run-on, the unaccented syllable " -tion " of " question " 
allowing an effective change of the accent to the first 
sound of "whether" in the next line. 

The four lines just given present an unusual example 
of the occurrence of double-endings four times in suc- 
cession. 

Passing Milton with the single remark that Paradise 
Lost is written in the same typic form of 3-rhythm with 
Shakspere's plays; and giving a scheme of only the 
lirst line of Endymion because it present3 us with an- 



174 



Science of English Verse. 



A 

I r 


A 

I r 


A 

I r 


of beau - 


ty IS 


a joy 



for - ev - er 



Other instance of the double-ending in blank verse just 
discussed, 

Q ^ 

A thing 

we may come to Poe's Raven which offers a new treat- 
ment of 3-rhythm so far as metre (or the line-group) is 
concerned, but consists entirely of the form so familiar 

in Anglo-Saxon poetry, g | v y 

ir c r ^r c r c r t r t r t r c 

Once up -on a mid-night drear-y while I pon-der*d weak and wear-y 



r t 

Over 



man-ya 



r : ur r t 



quaint and 



cu-n-ous 



vol-ume 



r t 

of for- 



r c 

got-ten 



r •- 

lore. 



The Idylls of the King is in the typic form of 3-rhythm 
which is specially named blank verse ; though the 
special treatment of it is such as to make a wholly 
different music from Shakspere's. 

Longfellow's Psalm of Life is in the same form of 
3-rhythm as Poe's Raven up to the management of the 
line-group, which is quite difEerent : 



r I 



Tell 



me 



Life 



IS 



r I 



not 



in 



but 



r I 



num 



mourn - ful 

I r I 

an emp - ty 

Emerson's Brahma is in a different form of 3-rhythm : 



r . I 



dream. 



bers 
1 



when me 



I f 

they fly, 



w 



r 

am 



i 



A 

.r 

e wmgs. 



Schemes from Swinburne's Atalanta in Calydon, and 
Morris's Love Is Enough^ all illustrating the unbroken 



Five Battle 'Songs in 3- Rhythm. 175 

employment of some form of 3-rhythm, have been 
already given. 

So that we find the English love for 3-rhythm not 
only unabating after more than twelve hundred years' * 
use of it, but the most modern English verse tending 
into the very ^Specific forms of 3-rhythm used by our 
earliest ancestral poets. 

As exhibiting not only the strength of our passion 
for 3-rhythm but the subtle tenacity with which even 
specific forms of it have associated themselves with 
certain classes of poetic ideas, perhaps the following 
five poems may fitly terminate this brief review of our 
rhythmic history. I have selected out of the body of 
English poetry five battle-songs, written at intervals of 
three centuries apart, namely : a scene from The Fight 
at Fitmesburgy dating before the 7th century ; a battle- 
scene from the Death of Byrhtnoth, loth century ; a 
battle-scene from Layamon's Brut, 13th century; a 
battle-ballad of Agincourt, i6th century; and Tenny- 
son's Charge of the Light Brigade^ 19th century. Surely 
no one can regard without interest this succession of 
manful songs, all moving in exactly the same verse-beat 
and carrying us on their rhythmic movement, by three- 
century leaps, through twelve centuries of English 
verse. 

SONG OF THE FIGHT AT FINNESBURG. 
Typic scheme. 

^r 'f re z I I I I I 



8 

Ban - helm 



bers - tan 



burh - thel - n 



dyn - ed - e. 



Hleothrode tha heathogeong cyning : 

** Ne this ne dagath eastan, ne her draca ne fleogeth, 



1 76 Science of English Verse. 

ne her thisse healle horn naes ne byrnath ; 

fugelas singath, 

gylleth graeg-hama, guth-wudu hlynneth, 

scyld scefte oncwyth ; nu scyneth thes mona 

Wathol under wolcnum, nu ariseth wae^aeda 

the thisse folces nith fremman willeth ; 

Ac onwacingath nu, wigend mine, • 

habbath eowre land, hicgeath on ellen, 

Winnath on orde, wesath anmode. 

Tha arses manig 

gold-hroden thegn, gyrde him his swurde. 

Tha waes on healle wael-slihta gehlyn, 

sceolde nalses bord genumen handa, 

ban-helm berstan, burh-thelu dynede, 

oth aet thaere guthe Garulf gecrang, 

ealra aerest eorth-buendra, 

Guthlafes sunu ; ymb hyne godra fela hwearf 

lathra hraew ; hraefen wandrede, 

sweart and sealo-brun ; swurd-leoma stod 

swylce eal Finns burh fyrene waere. 

Hig fuhton fif dagas, swa hyra nan ne feol 
driht-gesitha ; ac hig tha duru heoldon.* 

* Cried aloud, then, war-young king: "this dawneth not from easf, nor 
here dragon flieth, nor here of this hall light bumeth ; birds sing, chirpeth 
cricket, war-wood soundeth, shield answereth shaft ; now shineth the moon, 
wandering under skies, now arise woe-deeds that this folk's quarrel will 
perform. But wake ye now, warriors mine ! hold your lands, think upon 
valor, strive in battle-line, be one-minded." . . . Then arose many a gold- 
adorned thane, girded him with his sword. . . . Then was in the hall 
slaughter's din, might not shield be taken in hand, bone-helm burst, house- 
floor dinned, until in the fight Garulf fell soonest of all earth-dwellers, 
Guthlaf's son; about him a crowd of many good foes' corpses; raven 
wandered, swart and sallow-brown; sword-light stood, as if all Finn's 
burgh were a-fire. . . . They fought five days, so none of the companions 
fell ; but they held the door. ... 



Scheme from The Death of Byrhtnoth. 177 



BATTLE-SCENE FROM THE DEATH OF BYRHT- 
NOTH. 



Typic scheme. 

(Hi)let-on tha of 



f C 

fol - mum 



1 1 f .p J 5 

ge - grund-en - e 

I : t 

by - sig - e, 

t I, I 

bead • u - raes, 



bo-gan waer-on 
bit -erwaesse 



U I t 

feol - heard - e 

r ^ 

gar - as 

: t t 

bord ord on - 

r t 

beor • nas 



r c 

spear - u - 

/ ^ 

neo - gan; 



r •- 

feng, 

: t it 

feol- Ion, on ge 



hwaeth-er - e 



r •> 

hand 



hys - sas I la - gon. 



r 



(tha)Byrht - noth 

r t 

brad and 



braed 



bill of 



sc6ath e 



bnin - ecg and on tha 



bym - an 



hrath - e hi - ne ge - 


r : 

let - te 


tha he thaes 


eor 


1 - es 



feoll tha to 
miht - c he ge 



r r 

fold - an 



heald -. an 



r ^ 5 

lid mann-a 

r c 

earm a 



t t t t 

f eal - o - hilt - e 

/a f 

heard - ne 



r c 

sloh : to 



r ^ 

sum, 
myrd - e ; 



f c 

mec • e, 



1 Pkobobly a word omitted in die MS. 



178 



Science of English Verse. 



r c 




» 


t 












wsep - nes 


weald - an. 




, 


• • • 
tha) im - e 


« • • • 
heow - on 


• • 
haeth - en - 


• i 

e 


l..iL 


C C C 


P I l\l 


# • 


r c 


beg - en tha • 


beom - as the hi - ne 


big - 


stod - on, 


C I I 


I : t 


f 


c 


t t t 


^1£ - noth and 


Wulf-maer be - 


weg 


- en 


lag - on thao- 


nemn hyr - 


a 




frean 


J 


1 

3rh 


ge - 


r p 

seald - on.' 



BATTLE-SCENE FROM LAYAMON'S BRUT. 
Typic scheme. 



c : t 


r 


t 


C t C 


r 


Hard - lich - e 


hew - 


en, 


helm - e ther 


gull 



_ • en. 

Togadere heo tuhten and lothlice fuhten ; 
hardliche hewen, helme ther gullen, 
starcliche to-stopen mid steles egge. 
Alia daei ther ilaeste faeht mid tham mseste, 

1 " They let fly from their hands the file-hard spears, the sluup-ground javdins; bows 
were busy, brand met buckler, bitter was the battle-rush, warriors fell, on every hand men 
lay." 

(The battle goes on: after a while Bjrrhtnoth, now in bad condition, is striking at a 
pirate who has run over to rob a fallen chieftain of his gold rings and bracelets.) 

" Then Byrhtnoth drew from sheath his sword, broad and brown-bladed, and smote on 
his (the pirate's) corselet: but one of the pirates too quickly hindered him, and maimed 
the chieftain's arm; fell then to earth (his) yellow-hilted sword, he might no longer hold the 
brand, (he might no longer) wield weapon." . . . 

(Byrhtnoth is surrounded: he calls over to his men from the midst of his enemies, 
speaks a few cheerful words, offers up a short manful prayer to heaven: and then) 

" The heathen hewed him to pieces and both the warriors that stood by him. .£lfiiod 
and Wulfm^r lay together: by the side of their prince they gave up their Itfk" 



Schemes from The Brut, and Agincourt. 1 79 

a thet thustere niht to-daeld^ heore muchele fiht 
Laeien a ba halve cnihtes to-hewen. 

Ther was muchel blod gute ; balu ther wes rive ; 
brustiede scaeftes, beomes ther veoUen.' 



THE BALLAD OF AGINCOURT, OR THE ENGLISH 

BOWMAN'S GLORY.» 



Typical scheme* 

III III C P P 



A - gin -court, 



Know ye not 



I I I 

A - gin-court? 



A - gin-court 1 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
Where English slue and hurt 

All their French foemen ? 
With our pikes and bills brown, 
How the French were beat downe. 

Shot by our bowmen. 



Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt, 
Never to be forgot 

Or known to no man ? 
When English cloth-yard arrows 
KilPd the French like tame sparrows. 

Slain by our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt, 
Where we won field and fort ? 

' Together they came and bitterly fought ; hardly hewed, helms there 
resounded, starkly to-stepped against steel's edge. All day there lasted 
fight amid the wood, until darkening night brought-to their muckle fight 
Lay about knights in half to-hewn. 

There was muckle blood ; bale there was rife ; bristled shaft, men there 
fell. 

' See Appendix to Vol. IL, Messrs. Hales & Fumivall's Bishop Percys 
Folio Manuscript: p. 595. 



i8o Science of English Verse. 

French fled like women 
By land and eke by water ; 
Never was seen such slaughter 

Made by our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
English of every sort, 

High men and low men, 
Fought that day wondrous well as 
All our old stories tell us. 

Thanks to our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
Either tale or report 

Quickly will show men 
What can be done by courage, 
Men without food or forage, 

Still lusty bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
Where such a fight was fought 

As, when they grow men, 
Our boys shall imitate, 
Nor need we long to waite ; 

They'll be good bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt I 
Know ye not Agincourt, 
Where our fifth Harry taught 

Frenchmen to know men ? 
And when the day was done 
Thousands there fell to one 

Good English bowman. 

Agincourt, Agincourt! 
Huzza for Agincourt ! 
When that day is forgot 



AgincoMrty and Tennysatis Song. i8i 

There will be no men. 
It was a day of glory, 
And till our heads are hoary, 

Praise we our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt, 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
When our best hopes were nought, 

Tenfold our foemen, 
Harry led his men to battle, 
Slue the French like sheep and cattle : 

Huzza our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
O, it was noble sport ! 

Then did we owe men : 
Men who a victory won us 
'Gainst any odds among us : 

Such were our bowmen. 

Agincourt, Agincourt ! 
Know ye not Agincourt ? 
Dear was the victory bought 

By fifty yeomen. 
Ask any English wench, 
They were worth all the French ; 

Rare English women.' 

The rhythm of our last battle-song. The Charge of 
the Light Brigade^ has already been illustrated with a 
partial scheme, so that it will not here be necessary to 
give more than a reference to that, — for the purpose 
of illustrating how finely Tennyson has carried-on the 
ancient battle-rhythmus of the fathers, — and to cite 
the reader to the poem itself for further comparison. 

' Collier changes this "women** to ''bowmen." 



l82 



Science of English Verse. 



CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE. 



Half a league 


t c : 

half a league 

• 


: t t 

half a league 
rode the six 


r t 

on - ward 
hun - dred. 


All in the 


y 


: t : : 

7al - ley of death 



BLANK VERSE, OR THE ENGLISH HEROIC RHYTH- 

MUS. 

Blank v^rse — as has been already stated in another 
connection — means, in its primary sense, any verse 
which does not rhyme ; but the term has come to be ap- 
plied to a particular sort of verse which does not rhyme, 



namely, 3-rhythm of the typic form o P P > five 

' such bars constituting the line-group. 

It is often called, also, the English " heroic measure," 
because the great English poems have been written in 
it, — poems which though not strictly "heroic," bear 
the same relation to our body of literature which the 
strictly heroic poems of other languages bear to theirs. 

Although both these terms — "blank verse," and 
" heroic measure " — have acquired such currency that 
they are useful, the student will find it profitable to re- 
member always, in using them or hearing them : 

(i) that English verse was mainly blank' — that is, 
unrhymed — for about the first five hundred years of its 
existence : 

(2) that all the essential rhythmus of blank verse is 
found in Chaucer (as heretofore explained), and that 
when Surrey is called the father of blank verse on ac- 

' See the rhyming poem in Part III., and occasional rhymes in-other poems. 



Ancient and Modern Heroic Measure. 183 

count of his employment of it in his partial translation 
of the -^neid, all that can be meant is that he disused 
rhyme in a rhythm which was well-known ; 

(3) that the term "English heroic measure** as ap- 
plied to blank verse can apply only to our poetry since 
Chaucer: before whom, for several centuries, the 
English heroic measure was a very different form of 
3-rhythm, namely, the form seen in the schemes already 
given from the Anglo-Saxon poem The Battle of Maldon^ 



I I I t I 



in which the form i alternates 



with 2, and both are often replaced by bars of the forms 
H V V ^ T'^'^H' '^^ other similar varieties. 



that moreover the for- 



while the overwhelmingly prevalent bar in the modern 



mer was nearly always used in line-groups of four bars " 
to the line, while the latter has always five bars to the 
line ; and that in view of these differences it would be 
at least an intelligent discrimination to use two terms, 
— " ancient heroic measure '* and " modern heroic meas- 
ure,'* — the ancient including our verse from Caedmon 
to Langland inclusive, and the modern beginning with 
Chaucer who in the Canterbury Tales uses the modern 
heroic measure with rhyme while Surrey used it without 
rhyme. 

There are two circumstances which give such impor- 
tance to the form of rhythm just described as blank 
verse, or the modern heroic measure, that it must claim 

' Sometimes an arrangement of six bars to the line is evident : and 
sometimes the intention is not clear : but the texts 9,X^ often not reliable, 
from variolis causes. 



1 84 Science of English Verse. 

special study in the science of English versp. These 
circumstances are as follows. 

(i) From any stand-point commanding a large view, 
one may almost say that English poetry since Chaucer 
has been written in this form. Gorboduc (or Ferrex and 
Porrex)y the first English tragedy ; Shakspere's Plays, 
Marlowe's, the English drama, nearly; Milton's Paradise 
Cy«le, Keats's Endymiofiy Wordsworth's Excursion^ Ten- 
nyson's Arthurian Cycle ; are in blank verse. And if we 
should add to these the great poems which have been 
written in the same form with the addition of rhyme — 
which we might well do, from a rhythmic point of view, 
since the rhyme really does not affect the rhythnjpof 
blank verse in any other way than to give the ear one 
more series of rhythmic co-ordinations, thus making the 
tissue of rhythm merely richer, but no whit different in 
fibre — we could increase this list with Chaucer's Can- 
terbury Tales; several of Chaucer's short poems; 
Spenser's Fairy Queen; the Scotch poetry of the late 
15th and early i6th centuries; all the infinite treasure 
of English sonnets — Surrey's, Wyatt's, Constable's, 
Griffin's, Daniel's, Drayton's, Watson's, Sidney's, 
Drummond's, Habington's, Spenser's, Shakspere's, 
Carew's, Wordsworth's, Keats's, Mrs. Browning's, Gil- 
der's ; and a large number of shorter poems and songs. 
In short, one may say that the corpus of English poe- 
try since the last quarter of the 14th century is written 
in this form. 

(2) Being thus generally the rhythmic genius of 



A 



has ac- 



modern English poetry, the form 5 f f 

quired special interest in quite recent times through 
certain pecliarities of it which have been revealed by 



Metrical Tests of Shakspere. 185 

the analysis of Shakspere' s verse and which appear to 
characterize periods of his life and artistic growth in 
such a way as to afford a basis for an arrangement of 
his plays in the order in which they were written, — or 
at least in such a way as to afford a most valuable sys- 
tem of tests and counter-checks to arrangements based 
upon other evidences. 

These two considerations taken together suggest that 
our special treatment of blank verse may be made more 
interesting than if it were a purely formal discussion by 
grouping all the phenomena of this form about the 
characteristic methods in, which Shakspere used it. 
Such a treatment need be, indeed, no less than exhaus- 
tive. For Shakspere' s art in the management of blank 
verse was truly miraculous, and there is perhaps no 
technical possibility of music in this form which may 
not be illustrated from his writings. Of course, to dis- 
cuss all these possibilities as they appear in Shakspere 
would alone require a monograph quite as large as the 
present volume ; and, inasmuch as the principles already 
stated should now enable every student to interpret all 
the plainer secrets of Shakspere's art without difficulty, 
the present treatment may be confined to (i) those 
points about which the most remarkable misconceptions 
have been entertained and (2) those which have fur- 
nished material for the tests of chronology just now 
mentioned. 

These points may all be comprised under the follow- 
ing heads : 



Shakspere's use of 


the rest 
r the run-on ^ 


in blank verse ; 
) 


! 


and end-stopped 
lift? i 





1 86 Science of English Verse. 

( the double-ending \ 
Shakspere's use of ] or feminme-ending ^ in blank verse; 

( line ) 

" « \ the weak-ending > « " « 

( line > 

«' « the rhythmic accent " " " 

SHAKSPERE'S USE OF THE REST. 

Nothing can be more remarkable than the confidence 
with which English nursery-songs and proverbial expres- 
sions count upon the rhythmic perceptions of the people, 
as contrasted with the timidity of minor poets and the 
forgetfulness of commentators in this particular. The 
most complex rhythms of our language — the rhythms 
which rely most on the hearer's or reader's ear to 
replace lacking sounds with rests of the right time-value, 
to make one sound very long and others very short, to 
run-on or end-stop the lines, and the like — are to be 
found in Mother Goose and in the works of our greatest 
poets. It is in the verse of those who must be classed 
between these limits that we find those rigid and inex- 
orable successions of iambus to iambus, of end-stopped 
line to end-stopped line, and the like, which betray 
either the writer's fear that his rhythmic intention 
might not be understood or the limitations of his 
rhythmic intention itself. 

It is only an extension of the same remark to say that 
music is almost entirely fearless in this respect, and the 
rudest music almost as much so as the finest. I have 
heard a Southern plantation " hand," in "patting Juba" 
for a comrade to dance by, venture upon quite complex 
successions of rhythm, not hesitating to syncopate, to 
change the rhythmic accent for a moment, or to indulge 
in other highly-specialized variations of the current 



Rests, in Mother Goose. 187 

rhythmus. Here music, let it be carefully observed, is 
in its rudest form, consisting of rhythm alone : for the 
patting is done with hands and feet, and of course no 
change of pitch or of tone-color is possible. 

In considering Shakspere's use of the rest we shall 
find these facts of the utmost importance. Approached 
from the direction of music and of the folk-song or 
nursery-rhyme, the problems which have been explained 
sometimes as licenses, sometimes as irregularities, some- 
times as faults of stupid printers in wrongly arranging 
the lines, sometimes even as corruptions of the text, 
will mostly be seen to resolve themselves simply into a 
great artist's use of his rhythmic materials with a free- 
dom founded upon the rhythmic practices of the fathers 
and the rhythmic perceptions of children and common 
people. 

A single illustration from Mother Goose, with one 
from the negro's patting, will supply us with a precisely- 
noted formulation of the facts just stated which we can 
then apply in the analysis of Shakspere's supposed 
peculiarities in this particular. 

Let any one listen to a child rdKting this passage out 
of Mother Goose : 

Is John Smith within? 
Ay, that he is. 
Can he seta shoe ? 
Ay, marry, two. 
One a penny,' two a penny, 
Tick, tack, two. 

The rhythmic movement of the child's utterance is as 
follows : 



1 88 



Science of English Verse. 



^ it 



Is 



r LJ* 


# 


X 


John Smith with - 


in? 




r c f 

Ay, that he 


r 

IS. 


X 


Can he set a 


shoe? 


X 


r I c 

Ay, mar - ry, 


r 

twa 


X 


C C C r 

One a pen - ny, 


two a 


pen - ny, 


P t f t 

Tick, tack, 


r • 

two. 


• 



An examination of this scheme will show that the 
child's rhythmic sense has here arranged a series of 
time-values, both for sounds and silences (rests), which 
presents considerable complexity. Let the student ob- 
serve particularly the rests which have been supplied 
by the child between the words, and upon which the 
whole rhythm depends. 

Here we see a rhythmic intention based ppon the 
occurrence of rests \^hin the body of the line. These 
rests happen to occur on unaccented sounds in the bar : 
but it is important to notice that rests may occur at the 
place where the accent belongs, and that this is fre- 
quently resorted-to in music to produce striking rhyth- 
mic effects. To take an example from the most culti- 
vated music and enforce it with one from the rudest 
form of that art : in Haydn's " Queen of France " sym- 
phony the slow movement has a flute obligatQ ^t one 
point, of which the first strain commences ; 

± 




Rests, in the t^egro^s Patting. 189 

while the second strain has a r6st at every accented 
point of the bar throughout, each bar being of the form. 





f f ^f 




On the other hand, every one who has noticed a South- 
ern negro's " patting " will have been tipt to hear an 
effect of the same nature as in Haydn's movement, 
produced by omitting the stroke, of foot or of hand, 
which the hearer expects to fall on the accented note at 
the first of the bar, thus : 

Allegro vivace. 

t p p c c h p c c I * r I f * 

and similar forms. 

These instances might be indefinitely multiplied; 
but they will surely suffice here to authorize us in 
formulating the assertion that : 

In popular poetry, and in the crudest as well as the 
most refined music, a rest may supply a sound not only »- 
in the body of the line or phrase but even on the 
accented place of the bar. 

Now, just as Haydn uses the rhythmic device of 
the negro, so Shakspere uses the rhythmic device of the 
nursery-rhyme. Let us then apply the principle just 
formulated to the interpretation of certain lines in 
Shakspere's plays which have been accounted for very 
variously by v^ious commentators. 

The following line, for example — 117, in Measure for 
Measure^ Act II. Scene 2 — has occasioned much per- 
plexity : 

Than the soft myrtle ; but man, proud man.' 

^ Ddius text: same in the first folio. 



1 90 Science of English Verse. 

Regarded from the stand-point of well-known pro- 
cedures in music, this line offers no difficulty. If we 
now analyze the means by which the rhythmic intention 
is here discovered and verified, the student will have a 
mode of procedure set before him for application in all 
future cases of doubt ; and if we find not only that this 
rhythmic intention is for the reader to supply a rest in 
the body of the line, but that many of Shakspere*s lines 
exhibit a similar intention for the purpose of producing 
a clearly-defined correspondence between rhythm and 
idea, it may surely be claimed — in view of the principle 
just now developed — that Shakspere is simply employ- 
ing the common rhythmic devices of ruder poetry just 
as Haydn and Beethoven employ those of ruder music, 
and that it is as incorrect to call the one an " irregu- 
larity " or a " license " as it would be to call the other 
so. 

Our analysis may be comprehended in the following 
four propositions. 

(i) The accentual construction of the line 

Than the soft myrtle ; but man, proud man 

SO limits its possibilities that the reader is forced to 
supply a quarter-rest immediately after the syllable 
"-tie** in "myrtle," as by the following scheme: 





A 




A 


r r 

Than the 


soft myr 


- tie; 


X 



c r 



rr 



but man, J. proud man. 

(2) This suggestion to the reader is»instantly con- 

' The familiar Shaksperean beginning of a line with ^ ^ instead of 

A * ^ 

the typic ^ ^ : presently treated in full under the head of Shakspere' s 

u r 

Use of the Rhythmic Accent 



Rests, in Measure for Measure. 191 



firmed by the fact that the semicolon — which is a logi- 
cal rest — appears at the very point where the rhyth- 
mical rest falls, namely just after the "-tie " in "myrtle." 

(3) The reader's assurance becomes doubly sure when 
he finds that the context shows a movement of idea 
which is strikingly embodied in this special movement 
of rhythm, as is always the case in Shakspere. 

(4) And finally investigation reveals that it is really 
a habit with Shakspere to intensify just' such antitheses 
as occur here in the ideas with just such a rest to be 
supplied at the place of an accented note, — wherein, 
indeed, he only carries out the unconscious habit of 
every ordinary reader or speaker of English. 

To examine these propositions separately : 
(i) If we construct the scheme of a typic line of 
blank verse : 

Q A A A A A 

i t r t t : ^ t t t t 

and apply the line in question to this typic scheme as 
far as it will go, being guided by the place of the pro- 
nunciation accent, or of the logical accent, for the place 
of the rhythmic accent, we find that the only note left 
without a corresponding word is the note occupying the 
place suggested for the rest, namely that after " -tie " in 
" myrtle,'* thus : 



['nan the 



Li 



t r 

tie; 



but man, 



proud man. 



The student observes that in thus measuring the given 
line by the type, we are guided by the accentual con- 
struction, as follows : the first two bars and a third fit 
exactly : 



19^ 



Science of English Verse. 



^ f 

han the 



Than 



t r 

proud myr 



tie; 



t r 



: r 



but, if we should go on with the sounds, the next two 
accents would fall upon " but " and " proud " thus 



LI 



A 

proud myr 



- tie ; but 



iX. 



c f 



man 



in which the "but man proud man" is of course in- 
tolerable: for though the accent can occasionally be 
reversed, as at the beginning of this very line, or occa- 
sionally placed upon unimportant words (as presently 
explained), this is always done with a light hand, and 
under a certain artistic guidance of the ear which does 
not allow it except for pleasing variations of rhythm. 
Finding therefore that the accentual construction does 
not allow "but" on the note immediately after "-tie," 
we try the next note, of course, and finding that here 
the " but " and all that follows it fit perfectly to the 
type: 

c r 



c r 


: r 


t 


9 


t r 


Than the 


proud myr 


- tie; 


— 


but man, 



proud man 

we conclude straightway that the author's rhythmic 
intention was for a rest to occupy the place and time of 
the typic quarter-note after "-tie." 

This rest makes the line perfectly musical : as may 
be strikingly illustrated by inserting an actual sound in 
its place. For example, suppose the line read " myrtle- 
tree " instead of "myrtle : " if we apply this to the type, 
we find that it fits exactly, and on reading it aloud it 
forms a perfect line of blank verse : 



Expression helped by Rests. 193 

A A A A A 

, r p r ^ r i r p r 

Than the soft myr - tie - tree ; but man, proud man. 

The rest, however, is here far more effective than 
any sound could be : as we shall presently see when we 
consider the idea Shakspere is dealing with. 

(2) This position of the rest is immediately confirmed 
when the reader observes that it is the same position 
with that of the semicolon. The semicolon has the 
same relation to the logic of the sentence that the rest 
has to the rhythm of it. 

(3) Along with these two considerations straightway 
comes a third which supports them both, namely : that 
the expression of the idea involved in the context is 
heightened, according to English habits of utterance, 
by just such a rest. The speaker is drawing a sharp 
and passionate contrast between the use of authority 
made by Jove, or Heaven, and that made of it by man ; 

Merciful heaven ! 
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt 
Splitt'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak, 
Than the soft myrtle ; but man, proud man ! 
Dressed in a little brief authority, 

Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven 
As make the angels weep. . . . 

It is Isabella, in the extremity of love and terror, 
pleading with Angelo for her brother's life : what more 
natural, or more striking, than the momentary pause, 
after the word "myrtle" which ends the description 
of Heaven's course, before showing, like as not with 
a great sob at the very place of the rest, and in a 
changed voice which the accented rest well introduce, 
the meaner ways of man ? 



194 



Science of English Verse. 



(4) These considerations seem to reach certainty 
when we find that in the same act of the same play 
Shakspere has used the same rhythmical effect — name- 
ly, that of accentuating a silence by suggesting a rest 
in the place of an accented sound — for%a similar pur- 
pose, namely, to heighten the current idea. This is 
line 173, dready commented upon in another connec- 
tion : 



r r 

Who would 



oe - lieve 



A 
me? 



O per - il - 



I r 



ous mouthy 1 



These instances could easily be supplemented with 
similar ones, all showing that Shakspere, just like the 
nursery-rhymer, does not hesitate at a rhythmic inten- 
tion which requires a rest to be supplied in the body of 
the line, while, far in advance of the nursery-rhymer, he 
uses this device with special purpose, where he desires 
that the rhythmic dress of his idea should not flap 
about its body but clothe it with absolute fitness. 

It is instructive to note that this line, and similar 
ones, which thus readily resolve themselves into rhyth- 
mic proportion when approached from the direction of 
familiar practices in popular poetry and in music, have 
presented such insuperable difficulty to those who have 
considered them with other preconceptions that a cor- 
ruption of the text has been deliberately posited as the 
only refuge from the supposition of an unconquerable 
defect in the rhythm. The method just shown of deal- 
ing with disputed rhythms — by first constructing a 
typic line, and then placing all the certain sounds under 
their proper notes, in a process analogous to the "ex- 
clflfcive diagnosis'* of the physician — will become all 



Argument against Rests. I95 

the more valuable to the student if we consider for a 
moment the fundamental error underlying the argument 
of those who have abandoned these lines as irreducible 
to any rhythm. 

The following citation from Professor Craik's Eng- 
lish of Shakspere^^ concerning the line just now dis- 
cussed, may perhaps fairly be taken as representative of 
this argument. "So much cannot be said " — that is, 
that such lines are not "irregular" or strained by 
"license" — " for another form of verse (if it is to ba 
so called) which has also been supposed to be found in 
Shakspere" such as for instance "the well-known line 
in Measure for Measure . . . 

* Than the soft myrtle ; but man, proud man.' 

This, it will be observed, is different from a merely 
truncated line of nine syllables ...;... the syllable 
that is wanting is in the middle. . . . 

The existing text, of the plays presents us with a con- 
siderable number of verses of this description. Is the 
text in all such cases to be accounted corrupt ? I con- 
fess myself strongly inclined to think that it probably 
is. The only other solution of the difficulty that has 
been offered is, that we have a substitute for the omitted 
syllable in a pause by which the reading of the line is 
to be broken. This notion appears to have received the 
sanction of Coleridge. But I cannot think that he had 
fully considered the matter. // is certain that in no 
verse of Coleridge's own does any mere pause ever per- 
form the function which would thus be assigned to it. 
Nor is any such principle recognized in any other English 

' Prolegomena, pp. 36-7, here and there ; edition, Chapman and Hall, 
London, 1857. 



1 g6 Science of English Verse. 

verscy modem or ancient^ of which we have a text that 
can be absolutely relied uponJ . . . How is it possible 
by any length of pause to bring any thing like rhythm 
out of the above quoted words, — 

* Than the soft myrtle. But man, proud man.' 

If this be verse, there is nothing that may not be so 
designated." 

The logic of this passage may be thus compressed, 
for the purpose of examination : 

(i) That the laws of English verse, as deduced from 
the practices of English poets, do not admit the substi- 
tution of a rest (" pause ") for a sound, in the body of a 
line; 

(2) That Coleridge, who interpreted the given line 
upon the principle that such laws did allow such substi- 
tution, never applied the principle in his own verse ; 

(3) That even if the laws of English verse did allow 
such substitution, the allowance would not avail for the 
given line, since no length of rest can possibly make it 
rhythmical. 

Perhaps the argument (i) may be considered suffi- 
ciently met by the considerations just now advanced 
under the head of Shakspere's use of the rest, showing 
that even our popular poetry is built upon the necessity 
of such substitutions and upon perfect confidence in 
the rhythmic perceptions of the ordinary ear as to 
where to place them. In point of fact Mother Goose 
would not be rhythmical without them. As to the prac- 
tices of poets, see the scheme of Tennyson's Break, 
break, break, which involves such rests ; and a thousand 
simily songs could be cited. 

* The italics here are the present writer's. 



Rests, in ChristabeL 



197 



(2) But tke assertion that " in no verse of Coleridge s 
own does any mere pause ever perform the function 
which would be thus assigned to it" is so far from 
being correct that the entire poem of Christabely in 
which Coleridge explicitly supposed that he had made a 
new departure in verse, depends for its rhythm upon 
the constant substitution of rests ("pauses '*) for sounds, 
by the reader, in the body of the line. This was the 
true innovation made by Coleridge in this poem — an 
innovation, let it be carefully noted, not at all upon the 
practices of English verse in general but upon that par- 
ticular phase of them represented by the inexorable 
stiffness of the " elegant " period which bred Pope and 
other like monsters of refinement. Nothing is more 
common than such rests in the body of the line in 
Anglo-Saxon verse, and, as shown, in popular verse and 
in music, and — to return to our point — in Coleridge's 
own ChristabeL For example : 



Tis 
And 


A 

the mid 
the owls 


1 


A 

Tu-whit! 



I c t 

- die of night 
have a - wa - 



1 5 t 

by the cas 
ken*d the crow 



t t C 



tie clock, 
ing cock. 



A 
And hark, 

A^ 



How I 



A 

a - gam, 

A 



Tu-whoo 

the crow - mg cock 



>wdrow - 81 - ly it crew 



presents us with a scheme of the first stanza in Chris- 
tabel, which reveals that the entire rhythmus depends 
on the occurrence of definite rest? in the body of the 



198 Scietue of English Verse. 

line as well as at the end of the line. No one indeed 
was more familiar with such rhythmic devices than 
Coleridge, and many instances of such rests could be 
given from his work 

(3) Finally, as to the assertion that no length of 
pause could bring any thing like rhythm out of the 
given line : if the words be uttered according to the 
scheme offered above, they must certainly sound per- 
fectly rhythmical to every ear. 

SHAKSPERE'S USE OF END-STOPPED AND RUN- 
ON LINES. 

The explanation of end-stopped and run-on lines 
already given need not be repeated here, and perhaps 
it will be sufficient to give the briefest outline of the 
manner in which these varieties of the line-group in 
blank verse have become tests of genuineness — as in 
determining the respective shares of Shakspere and 
Fletcher in the play of Henry VIII. for example, or 
tests of chronology — as in determining, or at least 
helping to determine, the comparative dates of Shak- 
spere's plays. 

In order to place vivid examples before the reader's 
mind at the outset : here are four end-stopped lines 
from near the opening of Love's Labor's Lost: 

Our late edict shall strongly stand in force : 
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world ; 
Our court shall be a little academe, 
Still and contemplative in living art 

Let it be observed how each of these lines is so 
" stopped " at the '* end " (hence " end-stopped " lines), 
by comma or other mark of punctuation or sometimes 



Shakspere's Run-on Lines. 199 

by a stop only logical and without mark, as to necessi- 
tate a rest or pause of the voice. 

Here, on the other hand, are four run-on lines from 
The Tempesty which I have chosen because it is one of 
Shakspere's latest plays while Love's Labor's Lost is 
one of the earliest, and, although the end-stopped test 
is not to be relied on alone nor pushed too far, there 
seems no doubt that the timid use of run-on lines is in 
general characteristic of Shakspere*s earlier period and 
the free use of them characteristic of his maturity in 
art. These lines are from Act I. Scene 2 : 

. . . and by my prescience 
I find my Zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star, whose influence 
If now I court not, but omit, my fortunes 
Will ever after droop. 

Here it is perceived that neither of these lines logi- 
cally admits of a rest at the end but that . the close 
connection between the last word of each line and the 
first word of the next inevitably "runs " the voice "on " * 
(hence " run-on '* lines) past the end of the line, usually 
to some point in the body of the next line. Now the 
proportion of run-on lines to end-stopped lines in Love's 
Labor's Lost is only a little more than one in eighteen 
while that in The Tempest is a little more than one in 
three. It will thus be readily seen that here is a very 
precise method of estimating the changes in Shak- 
spere's habits of versification, and that this precise 
method must be far more reliable as tracing the true 
course of his artistic growth than those vague judg- 
ments which embody so much of the personal equation 
and which were for so many years the bane and dis- 
grace of Shakspere criticism. In fact it may be sai^ 



200 Science of English Verse. 

that the spirit of precise inquiry has had the same stim- 
ulating effect in Shakspere scholarship as in physical 
science, and that under its influence the world is begin- 
ning for the first time to get insight into the true life 
and artistic growth of our master. 

The student should now familiarize himself with this 
branch of Shakspere criticism by choosing some play of 
Shakspere, counting first all its blank-verse lines, then 
its end-stopped and run-on lines respectively, and finally 
deducing the proportion of each variety of line to the 
whole number of lines. Treated in this manner the 
plays after a while begin to assume a distinctive physi- 
ognomy even to the eye*: as one reads one sees, in a 
delightful half-consciousness, the face of the young 
Shakspere glowing through the lines, or the more 
reverend countenance of the grave and mature artist 
who has embodied the whole of his life in his art and is 
become a great and forgiving and patient Prospero, 
ready to lay down his mantle and depart. 

Yet — it is worth while repeating the warning, for 
ideas of this sort are apt to run-away with one — the 
end-stopped and run-on line test is not to be relied on, 
alone, for determining the relative priority of plays near 
together. While, as between the early extreme of 
Shakspere's growth represented by Love's Labor's Lost 
and the late extreme represented by The Tempesty the 
difference in versification with regard to these varieties 
of lines is perfectly plain ; while, indeed, every one but 
moderately acquainted with the secrets and necessities 
of dramatic blank verse must see that the progress of 
an artist like Shakspere could not be otherwise than 
from the hardness and four-square-ness of the end- 
stopped line to the rounded grace and freedom of the 



Shakspere's Double-ending Lines. 201 

run-on line; nevertheless many other considerations 
arise before the grave and careful Shakspere scholar 
which must be held steadily in view along with this, 
or any other single one of the "metrical tests." 

The method of end-stopped and run-on lines was first 
discussed by C. Bathurst in his work, Changes in 
Shakspere* s Versification at Different Periods of his 
Life, Those desirous of pursuing the subject may 
consult that; Dowden's admirable Shakspere Primer^ 
Macmillan & Co., London and New York (but I believe 
more lately published by Messrs. Appleton & Co., New 
York) ; Mr. Furnivall's Introduction to the Delius Text 
embodied in The Leopold Shakspere^ Cassell, Petter, & 
Galpin, London, Paris and New York ; and, here and 
there, the papers and discussions set forth in the Trans- 
actions of the New Shakspere Society for 1874. 

The method of using this test for the determination 
of the genuineness of Shakspere's plays can be better 
explained when we consider the next branch of our 
present subject, namely : 



SHAKSPERE'S USE OF THE DOUBLE-ENDING, OR 

FEMININE-ENDING, LINE. 

The following is a specimen of the double-ending 
line, from The Two Gentlemen of Verona^ Act I, 
Scene i : 



A 

I r 

And built 



A 
so shelv 



- mg that 



I r 



Here the final bar has the form J 

not climb it 



one can 

A 



- not climb it 



instead of 



the typic form J f 

not climb 



In the treatment of Chau« 



202 



Science of English Verse. 



cer's verse we became familiar with the special rhyth- 
mic effect of this breaking-up of the typic f which ter- 
minates the line into f^^* its equivalent ; and the " it " 
in "climb it " here is much like the final e in Chaucer, 
as to rhythmic value. 

The feminine ending is a species of double ending : 
where the two sounds at the end of the line constitute 
separate words, as in "climb it/' the ending is called 
double; where these two sounds belong to the same 
word, as the terminal word " slander " in 

t 

to s 

the ending is called feminine. Not infrequently the 
terminal f is broken into three sounds, as in "mira- 
cles " at the end of the following line : 





A 




A 


A 


A 


The 


leaf 


i 


eg - 


t r 

Ian - 'tine, 


w lom not 




A 

t r 

Must be 



A 


A 


A 


t r 


t r 


t r 


a faith 


that rea 


- son with 



-out mir - ac-les 



Let it be carefully observed that in the above three lines 
the first, if typic, would end with the sound " climb," 
thus 



Q A 


A 


A 


A 


A 




i t r 


t r 


t r 


t r 


c r 




And built 


so shelv - 


ing that 


we can - 


not climb 


• 


the second line, if typic, would end with " slan-," thus : 


Q ^ 


A 


A 


A 


A 




i t r 


c r 


t r 


r r 


c r 




The leaf 


of eg - 


Ian - tine, 


whom not 


to slan- 


• 


and the third, if typic, would end with " mir-," thus : 


Q ^ ^ ^ I ^ , ^ 


i c r 


t r 


t r 


t r 


t r 




Must be 


a faith 


that rca - 


son with 


- out mir - 


• 



Double Ending as Metrical Test. 203 



From this circumstance such syllables as the "it" in 
"climb it," "d^r" in "slander," and "acles" in "mira- 
cles," are often called "extra syllables." The reader 
in hearing this term must of course understand that 
the extra syllable is simply another sound which takes 
off part of the time-value of the typical f at the end of ' . 
blank verse lines, and that there is no such thing in ^ 
rhythm as a really "extra" syllable, whatever time- 
value is in the bar being distributed among all the 
sounds in that bar, whether these be one, or five, or 
none — that is, rests. 

Care must be had against mistaking lines as double- 
ending which are not so. For example the following 
italicized lines look like double-ending ones at first : 

Thou shalt not lack 
The flower thafs like thy face, pale primrose, nor 
The azured harebell like thy veins, no, nor 
The leaf of eglantine, &c. 

Neither of them however is a double-ending line : both 
have the typic termination f, as shown by the scheme : 



A 


A 


A 


A 


A 


I r^ 


r r 


r r 


I r 


I r 


The flower 


tliat'slike 


thy face, 


pale prim- 


rose, nor 


A 


A 


A 


A 


A 


r r 


c r 


I r 


I r 


I r' 


The a- 


zured hare - 


bell like 


thy veins 


no, nor. 



Two very interesting applications of the double-end- 
ing as a metrical test have been made by modern schol- 
arship. 

^ This is only a typic scheme, sufficient for the purpose in hand. The actual movement 
of the voice does not accent the two "nor"8 at the end of these lines, but disposes of 
them in a very interesting way which will presently be explained under Shakspere's usq 
of the rhythmic accent 



204 Science of English Verse. 

(i) For example, it has been applied, in conjunction 
with the end-stopped line test, to determine the relative 
shares of Shakspere and Fletcher in the play of Henry 
VIII, The very palpable unlikeness in the style of 
different passages in this play had attracted the atten- 
tion of critics as early as the time of Dr. Johnson ; but 
it was in 1850 that the subject was taken hold of in 
earnest. 

The Gentleman' s Magazine for that year contained a 
notable paper by Mr. James Spedding,' in which, after 
having assigned certain parts of the play to Fletcher 
and certain parts to Shakspere upon general considera- 
tions of their respective styles, the writer proceeded to 
announce at least the possibility of a metrical test, and 
partly to shape the method of applying it. The stu- 
dent will derive such a valuable lesson as to the manner 
in which reverent scholarship avails itself of apparently 
trivial facts and applies them in the precise determina- 
tion of what seem to be insoluble problems, that I think 
it well worth while to trace the progress of this metri- 
cal test from the beginning made by Mr. Spedding to 
the development of it afterwards made by Mr. Fleay 
and Mr. Furnivall. " It has been observed *' (said Mr. 
Spedding, in the latter part of his paper) . . . that 
lines -with a redundant syllable at the end '* — by which 
he means double-ending and feminine-ending lines — 
"occur in Henry VIII. twice as often as in any of Shak- 
spere's other plays. Now, it will be found on examina- 
tion that this observation does not apply to all parts of 
the play alike, but only to those which I have noticed 
as, in their general character, un-Shaksperian." He 

« Entitled " Who wrote Shakspere's Henry VIII. ? " It may be found 
reprinte4 iQ th^ Transactions of the Nevf Shaksfert Society for 1874. 



Mr. Spedding's Test with Double Endings. 205 

then arranges a table in which he gives the proportion 
of double-ending lines to the whole number of lines, for 
each scene of the play. Having next ascertained what 
is the ordinary proportion of such lines in two of Shak- 
spere's plays which were written about the same period 
with Henry VI I L — namely, Cymbeline and Winter's 
Tale — he goes through the table, and wherever he finds 
this proportion substantially carried out in any scene, 
he assigns that scene to Shakspere ; wherever he finds 
a greatly larger proportion of double-ending lines in a 
scene, he assigns that scene to Fletcher. Having com- 
pared these assignments with those which he had pre- 
viously made, based upon broader grounds of style, he 
finds them substantially agreeing. 

Before showing the further development of this pro- 
cess, it is impossible to forbear an acknowledgment of 
gratitude to the author of the paper just quoted as a 
genuine discoverer in criticism. While, as has been 
before remarked, the double-ending test should not be 
pushed into minuter offices than it or any other such 
test can discharge; yet, as a precise and numerically- 
verifiable check to critical estimates which have been 
formed upon other considerations often liable to bias 
from personal temperament and always more or less 
vague, it is of very great value ; and, as importing into 
criticism the methods of exact science and to that ex- 
tent relieving it from its long-time opprobrium of uncer- 
tainty, the service of Mr. Spedding to modern culture 
must be regarded very great. 

In course of time a clew which made the process of 
reasoning just detailed still more precise was found. 
Mr. Fleay, in examining several Elizabethan dramatists 
besides Shakspere with reference to the use of rhymes, 



2o6 



Science of English Verse. 



double-endings, &c., in their verse, had observed amongst 
other things that Fletcher's verse is distinguished, 

" (i) By number of double or female endings ; these 
are more numerous in Fletcher than in any other writer 
in the language, and are sufficient of themselves to dis- 
tinguish his works ; " 

" (2) By frequent pauses at the end of lines ; this 
union of * the stopped line ' with the double ending is 
peculiar to Fletcher." ' 

Without going farther into Mr. Fleay's skilful and 
laborious researches : if we examine, by the musical 
method of schemes, a double-ending line of Fletcher's 
with reference to the peculiarity marked (2) above, we 
shall find Fletcher's combination of "double-ending" 
with "end-stopped" line to be a rhythmic idiosyncrasy 
so individual as to form a very well-marked test be- 
tween Fletcher and Shakspere, especially when we add 
the characteristic circumstance that Fletcher's double 
endings very often consist of two important words, as 
"a friend's part" (which is the final bar of the first 
Fletcher line given below), instead of " to climb it," a 
heavy word and a light one (" it ") as in Shakspere's 
double-ending line before cited. Here then is a scheme 
of five consecutive lines from Fletcher, in the Little 
French Lawyer: 



r r 

Col - our'd 

A 

% r 

A gen - 



I r 

with smooth 

A 

I r 

tie - man's, 



A 


A 


c r 

ex - cu - 

A 


I r 

ses. Was't 

A 


I r 

a man's 


r r 

that wears 



a friend's part, 

A 

t r 

a sword, 



* p. 53, Rev. F. G. Fleay's paper number 2, On Metrical Tests as ap- 
plied to Dramatic Poetryy printed in The Transactions of the New Shak- 
spere Society^ for 1874. 



Scheme of Fletcher's Double Endings. 207 



A 


A 


A 


A 


A 


I r 

And stands 


c r 

up - on 


r r 

the point 


I r 

of rep - 


u - ta - tion, 


A 


A 


A 


A 


A 


I r 

To hide 


c r 

his head 


I r 

that when 


'I r 

his hon - 


our caird him, 




A 


A 


A 


A 


r r 

Call'd him 


I r 

a - loud 


I r 

and led 


I r 

him to 


I t t 

his for - tune 



If the final bars in the first, third, fourth, and fifth of 
these lines be examined, it will be found that each ends 
not only in two sounds, but that these two sounds have 
a comma after them, indicating a rest of the voice be- 
tween their last sound and the first of the next line, and 
thus distinguishing them from run-on lines which have 
no such rest. Now it must be remembered that in the 
ordinary end-stopped line this rest is supplied out of 
the time-value of the last f in the final bar, thus : 



A 

t r 


A 

t r 


A 

t r 


A 

t r 


A 


But, as 


I think. 


(for tru - 


ly would 


I speak, — 



where the silence indicated by the dash in the text is 
indicated by the 1 in the scheme, and the time-value of 
" speak," which would otherwise be T, has been reduced 
to f to make room for the rest. But if the first line of 
Fletcher's above-cited be read aloud one easily feels 
that this procedure will not do : after the words " a 
friend's part," a longer and more pronounced rest is 
needed before the intercalary clauses, " a gentleman's, a 
man's that wears a sword," &c. Whence is this rest 
to come? We cannot slice o£E a cantle of the time- 
value of "part" for it, — for " part " itself has had to 
share some of • the time-value of " friend's " — thus 



208 



Science of English Verse. 



P fJ_^ ~" ^^^ ^^s time-value P is not enough for 

a friend's part 

the rest here needed. 

In point of fact the voice makes another bar to the 
line here : and — relying upon the rhythmic sense 
which will never tolerate any thing like an " extra " 
or " redundant " sound, but which inexorably fills out 
with rests any bar partly occupied by sound — the 
actual conduct of the reader's voice in such a line is 
as follows : 



r r 

Col-our'd 



A 


A 


c r 


cr 


with smooth 


ex - cu - 



I 



ses. 



A 


A 


A 


» 


I r 


r * 


Was't 


a friend's 


part 



Here the requisite rest is obtained at the end; but 
obtained by making the line-group consist of six bars 
instead of the five bars which constitute a typic line of 
blank verse. Thus the precision of the musical system 
of noting rhythm acquaints us with the important fact 
that many of Fletcher's end-stopped double-ending lines 
are really Alexandrines,^ and that this is the secret of 
the characteristic effect which Fletcher's rhythm * pro- 
duces upon every ear, — an effect smooth, yet heavy and 



' Lines consisting of six bars of the form g ^ |0 are called 

" Alexandrines " from their use in the French poem The Alexandriad, 

* Mr. Emerson, in Representative Men, gives a perfect description of it, 
though apparently not suspecting Fletcher here. He describes the verse 
of Fletcher's part of Henry VIII. as " written by a superior, thoughtful 
man, with a vicious ear," adding : " I can mark his lines, and know well 
their cadence. . . . The lines are constructed on a given tune, and the 
verse has even a trace of pulpit eloquence." 

Mr. Spedding in a letter to The Gentleman's Magazine, October, 1850, 
(reprinted in the Shaks. Soc. Trans, for 1874, Appendix, p. 21) mentions: 
'* The resemblance of the style, in some parts of the play, to Fletcher's, 



Fletcher's Double Endings y Alexandrines. 209 

crawling withal. If now we compare this fact with the 
curiously-differing practice of Shakspere, we obtain a 
very striking mark of distinction. While Shakspere 
used the double-ending line far more freely in his late 
period than in his early one — the early Love's Labor* s 
Lost has but nine' double-ending lines in a total of 
2,789 while the late Winter's Tale has six hundred and 
thirty-nine double-endings in a total of 2,758 — he also 
used the run-on line with a similarly-increased frequen- 
cy : so that while by virtue of the more frequent double- 
endings his verse grew more like Fletcher's, it grew more 
unlike Fletcher's by virtue of the enormous musical dif- 
ference between Shakspere's run-on lines, which are 
merely rendered more elastic and varied by the double- 
ending, and Fletcher's end-stopped lines, which are really 
impressed with the sluggishness of the Alexandrine by 
the double-ending. In other words, Shakspere's run-on 
double-ending line preserves the metrical type of the 
five-barred blank verse line, and agreeably varies the 
rhythmical type ; while Fletcher's end-stopped double- 
ending line frequently destroys the metrical type of 
blank verse, giving it six bars instead of five to the line, 
and does not vary the rhythm at all. 

But, to return from this digression. The procedure 
described by Mr. Spedding in his paper on Henry VIII. 
was carried out by Mr. Fleay on a larger scale, with the 

was pointed out to me several years ago by Alfred Tennyson . . . ; and 
long before that the general distinctions between Shakspere's manner 
and Fletcher's had been admirably explained by Charles Lamb in his note 
on the Two Noble Kinsmen^ and by Mr. Spalding in his Essay." 

' Perhaps it is worth while noting a probable lapsus of the pen which 
gives this number as " seven " in Mr. Fleay's paper number I On Metrical 
Tests applied to Shakspere^ p. 7, while the figure in the annexed table 
is " 9." 



2IO Science of English Verse. 

additional clew of Fletcher's habitual combination of 
the double-ending with the end-stop ; and the result was 
a substantial confirmation of Mr. Spedding's original 
distribution. It is worth the student's while to remem- 
ber the general proportions of double-endings as be- 
tween Fletcher and Shakspere at the period when 
Henry VIII. was written — probably about 1613. This 
proportion appears, from the table in Mr. Fleay's note 
printed on page 23 of the Appendix to the New Shak- 
spere Society's Transactions for 1874, to have been as 
follows. Out of the 1,146 blank verse lines m Henry 
VI I L assigned to Shakspere, 380 were double endings : 
while, out of 1,467 blank verse lines assigned to Fletch- 
er, 863 were double endings. 

Again : Mr. Spedding's distribution was independent- 
ly confirmed, upon an examination of the play with 
reference to the end-stopped line only, by Mr. Furnivall. 

When it is stated that Mr. Samuel Hickson, before 
1850, had made an independent distribution of the parts 
between Shakspere and Fletcher on general grounds of 
style, which, after the publication of Mr. Spedding's 
paper, was found to agree with its conclusions in a 
surprising manner, the student will be able to perceive 
the valuable aid which minute criticism — as we may 
perhaps call the verse-tests — can render in afEording 
checks to large criticism. 

The mention of Mr. Fleay's name in connection with 
the double-ending researches above makes it necessary 
to add that he has associated his name most completely 
with the rhyme-test — which ascertains chronology &c. 
from Shakspere's growing disuse of rhymes as he be- 
came older — while Mr. Spedding places more reliance 
upon the pause-test, that is, the relative occurrence of 



Shakspere's Weak Endings. 211 

rests in the body of the line and at the end of the line, 
at different periods of Shakspere's work. 

SHAKSPERE'S USE OF WEAK-ENDING AND LIGHT- 
ENDING LINES. 

A line of blank verse ending in a merely conjunctive 
word such as and^ as, if, in, nor, than, with, is called a 
weak-ending line : while one ending in an auxiliary verb 4 
such as am, have, is, would, and the like, or in a relative 
pronoun who, which, that, and the like, or in since, while^ 
through, till, and such words, is called a light-ending 
line. In the following lines from The Winter's Tale, 
the first is a light-ending, and the second is a weak-end- 
ing line : 

Since what I am to say, must be but that 

Which contradicts my accusation, and 

The testimony on my part no other 

But what comes from myself, it scarce shall boot me. 

It is readily seen that weak and light endings really 
make a species of run-on lines, for they have in common • 
the incident that the voice does not pause after their 
last sound but runs-on its rhythmic grouping into the 
next line. The use of these endings therefore forms an 
important part of phrasing ; and nothing is more notice- 
able than the parallelism between the advance which 
Shakspere made in the breadth and freedom of his 
phrasing and the advance which every growing musi- 
cian makes in precisely the same particulars. Observe 
for instance how grand and sweeping are the phrases in 
the lines quoted : the real metrical grouping is 

Since what I am to say, 
Must be but that which contradicts my accusation, 
And the testimony on my part no other but what com^s fron^ 
myself \ 



212 Science of English Verse. 

and the words are so arranged that the rhythm is of 
incessant variety while the type is never lost sight of. 

The weak and light-ending lines, like the run-on 
lines of which they are a species, are highly character- 
istic of Shakspere's later periods as contradistinguished 
from his earlier ones : but they differ from the double- 
ending and run-on lines in the circumstance that they 
do not show a gradual increase in frequency but seem 
to appear almost suddenly in Macbeth and Antony and 
Cleopatray after which they are freely used. 

For example, in the 1,146 lines constituting Shak- 
spere's part of Henry VIIL there are 82 weak and light 
endings ; and CymbelinCy another very late play, shows 
130 weak and light endings; while some earlier plays, 
such as Comedy of Errors and Two Gentlemen of Verona^ 
have none at at all. Midsummer Night's Dream one, and 
Henry IV, one in each. part. 

The subject of weak and light endings in its relation 
to Shakspere's art has been developed by Professor 
Ingram, of Trinity College, Dublin, who has formulated 
his researches in a most useful table showing the per- 
centages of such endings in the plays. 

SHAKSPERE^S USE OF THE RHYTHMIC ACCENT. 

In his peculiar management of the rhythmic accent, 
also, Shakspere*s supreme mastery of the technic of 
blank verse shows itself with great clearness. We can 
see him learning to think in verse. Indeed, growing 
always, in the way of the artist, — always profiting by 
the practice of his earlier comedy, of his middle-period 
tragedy, — always converting acquisition into second 
i)3,ture, — he finally made his whole teqhnic a constitv;- 



Skakspere *s use of the Rhythmic Accent. 213 

tional grace, so that his passion flowed with a hereditary 
pre-adaptation to rhythm. 

The great underlying principle, however, of all Shak- 
spere's applications of his technic in practice was a 
superb confidence in the common rhythmic perception 
of men and a clear insight into the rhythmic habit of 
familiar English utterance. This method of working 
with a constant inward reference to the great average 
and sum of men, and with an absolute reliance upon 
their final perception, is the secret of that infinitely- 
varied rhythm which we find plashing through all the 
later blank verse of Shakspere ; and one of the most 
frequent means by which he effected these variations 
without either impairing the type of the verse or strain- 
ing the habit of utterance out of its familiar course was 
the artful transferrence into verse of the actual use 
which English-speaking people make of the rhythmic 
accent in their current discourse. 

Perhaps every one has observed that particularly in 
Shakspere's later plays he seems absolutely careless as 
to what kind of word the rhythmic accent may fall on. 
Sometimes it is on the article the^ sometimes the prepo- 
sition ofy sometimes the conjunction andy sometimes 
the unaccented syllable of a two-sound word as quickins 
instead of quickens^ and so on. 

This apparent carelessness is really perfect art. It 
is the consummate management of dramatic dialogue in 
blank verse, by which the wilder rhythmic patterns of 
ordinary current discourse are woven along through the 
regular strands of the orderly typic lines. 

The following illustrative schemes aim to show the 
student precisely how this is done. Every one knows 
what is called an " air with variations," in music, and has 



214 Science of English Verse. 

observed how in each "variation" the "air" is to be 
heard, maintaining its comparatively simple melody, as 
a sort of type, through all the complexities of the varia- 
tion-forms. If, then, the typic form of blank verse — 
which is, a line of five bars, each bar of the form 

# # — be considered the air, and the actual 

rhythmic movement of the voice in uttering each line 
be considered the variation, we shall have a tolerably 
precise conception of the relation between type and 
variety. And such a conception suggests the course 
pursued in arranging the following schemes for the pur- 
pose of showing Shakspere's peculiar freedom in using 
the rhythmic accent. A given passage being taken, we 
first apply each line of the words to a line of the musi- 
cally-noted type of blank verse: such application will 
show the rhythmic accent falling upon sounds which do 
not receive any accent in familiar discourse ; but if we 
then read the words for the sense, note down the actual 
conduct of the voice in so reading them, and compare 
the resulting notation with that of the type, we will 
always find that the type is carefully preserved in all its 
essential features but only varied by different distribu- 
tions of time-values in each bar to accommodate the 
proper position of the accent. This proposition sounds 
obscure in the abstract, but becomes quite clear in the 
concrete illustration. 

In studying these schemes, the student should have 
always in mind the following principles : 

(i) That in Shakspere's verse the only way to get 
the exact rhythm is to read for the sense ; 

(2) That Shakspere never mangles the type of his 
blank verse ; 



Rhythmic Accent in The Tempest, 215 



(3) That consequently, in every line,^ five rhythmic 
accents are always present ox accounted-for : and that 
it is in his method of " accounting-for " them that 
Shakspere's mastery is so apparent, for it is the method 
of common speech, and his verse thus forever crowds 
the firm fabric of the type, as a canvas, with all the 
multitudinous and floating rhythmical figures of every- 
day utterance. 

Only the most frequent forms of this accentual varia- 
tion are here given. An exhaustive presentation of 
them all would be impossible in this space. But it is 
hoped that every student with an ordinary musical ear 
will be able to perceive, and to note down, the philoso- 
phy of all Shakspere's music, from the illustrations 
given. 

Let us apply the process detailed in a previous sec- 
tion, for example, to the following passage from Ferdi- 
nand's soliloquy in The Tempest, Act III. Scene i. 

This my mean task 
Would be as heavy to me as odious ; bUt 
The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead 
And makes my labors pleasures. 

Applying the first three lines to their types, we have 
the scheme : 

q A 

i c r 

This my 

A A A 



t r 

Would be 



t U 

as heav-y 



t r 

to 



me 





A 


meat 


I task 




A 


as 


u 

- di - 



t r 

ous, but 



' Of course those lines excepted which are evidently meant to contain 
three, or less, bars, or four, or six, bars : some of which are written to 
vary the metrical type, some due to corrupt texts, some to lapsus of hurry, 
and the like causes. 



2i6 



Science of English Verse. 



t r 

The mist 



t r 

ress which 



t r 



t f 

quick -ens 



t f 

what's dead 



I serve 

On observing the position of the stress-mark ^ in this 
scheme we find the accentuation in three places to be 
such as would sound very absurd in usual speech. In 
the first line an accent falls on " my ; " in the second 
on "but ; " in the third on the syllable "-ens" of quick- 
ens. Of course no one would read: This m^ mean 
task would be as heavy to me as odious biit the mistress 
which I serve quick/«j what's dead. 

But, when read for the sense as if it were prose, this 
is the rhythmic movement . as heard in the ordinary 
reader's utterance: 



A 

r .c 

This my 

A 



A 

r r 

mean task 



A 

c r 

would be 



1 1 



but 
A 



t r 

The mist 



ress which , 




tttc 



as 



o - di-ous, 

A 



. . quick^ens 



r 



what's dead 



If now we take this prose utterance and divide it oflF 
into line-groups of five bars each, we will be able to 
compare it bar for bar with the typic scheme. For this 
purpose let us write the typic scheme, then under it bar 
for bar the actual scheme, and finally the corresponding 
words. 



Typic Scheme : 



Actual Scheme , 
Words : . 



• I f 

A 
This my 



I r 



r f 

mean task 



7 



Discussion of Scheme from The Tempest. 217 



3 


\ 


K 


6 

A 


''•'■ t r 


^^ 


^i 


^ .M 


A.S. p p 
Words: Would be 


as heav-y 


to me 


nil 

as - di - ous 


8 

A 


% 


10 

A 


II 

A 


T.S. J p 


^ C 


f L 


-IJ 


A.S. p p 
Words: The mist - 


c r 

ress which 


I serve 


. . quick-ens 



c r 



A 
1 1 



12 



but 



.5 r 
t r 

what's dead. 

Let US compare such bars of this actual scheme as 
differ from their corresponding bars in the typic scheme. 
This particular passage was selected because it rieveals 
the three methods most habitual with Shakspere of vary- 
ing the rhythmic accent and still preserving the type. 

(i) On comparing bar i of the actual scheme with its 
corresponding bar of the typic scheme above, we find 
that the typic accent has been shifted to the first in- 
stead of the second word in the bar; the typic form 

A A 

1 ^ 

This my 



I r 

This my 



, with the accent on "my" becomes 



with the accent on " this." 

A 

We have here a form of varying- the typic bar m m 

which was in great favor with Shakspere, and indeed 
with Chaucer two hundred years before him, though not 
nearly so freely used by Chaucer as by Shakspere. The 



substituted form 1 



L/ 



might be better written — 



to suit the more flowing and less snapped-o£f utterance 



of some readers — thus 1 



ff 



in which 



r'f 



is 



2 1 8 Science of English Verse. 

given in the same time as f, being indeed only another 

form of the familiar triole f h f- Now the occurrence 

of the rest at the beginning of this form connects it- 
self in an interesting manner with the circumstance 
that Shakspere's favorite places for using this form are : 
(i) at the beginning of a line ; and (2) at the beginning 
of a phrase, just after the rest which marks off the pre- 
ceding phrase. 

The fitness of such places for this sort of bar may be 
thus explained. 

The form 1 # * • » or 1 #• # » (which we 

may hereafter use quite interchangeably) presents a 
curiously plastic bar to come at the beginning of a line 
because it can be made by the ear to fit-on to the end 
of either a double-ending run-on line or an end-stopped 
line with great facility by means of the vacant place 
represented by the *i . For example, here is a double- 
ending line out of Cymbeline, running-on to a line 
which begins with this form, that is, with the first sound 
accented : 

Perfumes the chamber thus : the flame o* the taper 
Bows toward her. 

Now in practice the last sound " -er " of " taper " would 
here be put in the place of the *i which begins the 

usual form of such a bar as Ik 

Bows to- 

of being what is usually called the "redundant syllable" 
of the double-ending line "Perfumes the &c. tap^r" it 
would be the unaccented first syllable of the next line, 
as in this scheme : 



and instead 



Chaucer^ s Lines beginning with Rests, 219 



A 




A 


A 


A 


A 


Per-fumes 


t r 

the chamb- 


t r 

er thus : 


the flame o' 


t r 

the U - 


^-^ 










per Bows 


to- 


• 









Thus after a run-on line with a double-ending, the next 
line may begin upon an accented syllable — instead of 
upon the unaccented syllable always beginning a typic 
line of blank verse — with peculiarly dove-tailing effect 
Shakspere is evidently fond of it, and we find many 
pairs of lines for which the scheme just given would 
serve. 

On the other hand, in beginning the line after an 



end-stopped line, the in the form 1 



ft 



fur- 



nishes the proper pause which the voice must make in 
ending an end-stopped line, — without the necessity of 
slicing-o£f a part of the time-value of the last sound 
in the final bar of the end-stopped-line for that rest 



Here it is evident that the *i in the form 1 



r t 



discharges two functions : (i) of marking-off the line- 
group or phrase-group which precedes it, and (2) of 
accounting to the ear for the customary unaccented syl- 
lable which precedes every accented syllable in typic 
blank verse. 

Chaucer evidently likes to set-off with this form, in 
beginning a tale, or a stanza, or a line. The prologue 

r> A 

Whan that 
the first tale, TAe Knighfs opens with it. 



to the Canterbury Tales opens with it, 



' L'-f '-■• 



55(5 



Science of English Versi. 



A 


A 


A 


^ f^l 


I r 


I r 


Whil - om 


as old - 


e sto - 



A 

r f 

ries tell 



the Pardoner's prologue opens with it, 



Lord-ynges, 



A 


A . 


t r 


c r 


quod he, 


in chirch- 



A 

t r 

es whan 



t r 

en us 

A 

I prech - e 



many lines begin with it, such as, in the Wife of Batfis 
tale, 



Kisse me, 



A 


A 


I r 


I r 


quod sche 


we be 



A 

t r 

no leng - 



er wroth -e 



Continuing our comparison of corresponding bars in 
the typic and actual schemes, and passing-over bars 
2, 3, 4, and s which are alike in both : we come to bars 
6 and 7 which reveal one of Shakspere's characteristic 
methods of disposing of the rhythmic accent. Here 
the accent in the typic line would fall on " but : " 

7 

A 

but the rhythmus of common 



6 

A 



o - di - 



as 



A 

t r 

ous dut 



Utterance, such as any one would unconsciously use in 
speaking these words, makes a different distribution of 
the time-values in each of these bars (as Shakspere well 
knew) and not only throws the whole of the word "-odi- 
ous " into the 6th bar, but fills up the place of "-ous" 
in the 7th bar with the rest ^, at the same time slicing 

A 

off part of the # in the typic bar for another rest 1, thus 

leaving "but," as it should be, unaccented and easily 
running on to the next line, — so easily, in fact, that 
many voices — perhaps most — would put it in the next 
line entirely, and make the 7th bar all rest, thus : 



The Rest both Rhythmic and Logical. 221 




7 



5 I r 

but the mist 



: r 

ress which &c 



This rest in bar 7 is here of great importance and inter- 
est. We had occasion in discussing the line "Than 
the soft myrtle &c.," above, to observe how cunningly 
Shakspere interposes a rest in the body of the line at 
a point where there is to be a great change or antithe- 
sis in the idea — where indeed many writers would 
punctuate with a dash, or a semicolon. The rest here is 
of exactly similar logical function : Ferdinand, a prince, 
set by Prospero to carrying logs, says : " This, my mean 
task, would be as heavy to me as odious " — here how- 
ever the image of Miranda comes to him ; his frowa of 
disgust changes to the rapturous smile of love ; a wholly 
antithetical idea is to be expressed, and before express- 
ing it, Shakspere inserts the rest after the unaccented 
syllable "-ous" of "odious" just as for the same pur- 
pose he inserted the rest after the unaccented syllable 
"-tie" of "myrtle," — " but the mistress which I serve 
quickens what's dead &c." The rest, therefore, of the 
7th bar discharges both the logical office of separating 
the antithetic clauses, and the rhythmical office of re- 
lieving " but " from the rhythmic accent. 

Passing-over bars 8 and 9 which are alike in both 
schemes, we come to bars 10 and 11 which show us a 
third method of Shakspere's for relieving sounds from 
the rhythmic accent which would not take the pronun- 
piation-accent, herein aljsp remembering how this relief 



222 Science of English Verse. 

is given in ordinary speech and applying the principle in 
verse. In the typic bar 1 1 the rhythmic accent would 



lO 

A 



II 

A 



r f 

quick-ens 



&C.: 



fall on "-ens" of "quickens/* g p P 

I serve 

but in uttering these words, the reader would make a 
different distribution of the time-values : the sound 
"serve" — which is a good sound for prolonging with- 
out the drawl which English ears hate — 'is held-over 

into the next bar until it occupies the P time-value pre- 
viously occupied by "quick-;" and the sound "quick-," 
being thus relieved, is assigned to the next note forward, 
which is the accented note, while its other sound " -ens 



it 



is given to the third eighth-note, the P of the typic bar 

being broken intp two T T for "quick" and "ens" re- 
spectively. 

There are many voices, of decisive or jerky utterance, 
which will not prolong a note : such voices, instead of 
relieving the sound "quick" as above by a prolongja- 
tion of " serve " through the time of the first T in the 

"quickens** bar, would give "serve** only its own time 
and simply substitute a rest *^ for that f, thus: 

10 II 

Q A A 

if r *^ c-T 

I serve quick-ens &c 

The Student who will patiently master the three 
methods now detailed in connection with (i) bar i, (2) 
bars 6 and 7, and (3) bars 10 and 11, will be at no loss 
in interpreting Shakspere's subtlest dispositions of the 
rhythmic accent. Although these methods may appear 



Type and Variety in Verse. 223 

abstruse at first to those unfamiliar with the logic of 
rhythmical processes, they will presently become en- 
tirely plain : they are indeed the most familiar phe- 
nomena in music, in popular poetry, and in the utter- 
ance used for ordinary English conversation, nor ought 
they to be regarded as any thing more than the mere 
A B C of English verse. They would not be so re- 
garded if it were not for certain wide-spread misconcep- 
tions which have resulted in blinding many persons to 
the vitally-important distinction between type and vari- 
ety in verse. When the classic prosodies inform us 
that the hexameter consists of dactyls and spondees 
alternating at pleasure except that the last foot in a 
line must always be a spondee and the next-last always 
a dactyl, they give us but the type of the hexameter. 
The actual movement of a Greek or Latin reader's voice 
in delivering Homer or Virgil would without question 
exhibit variations of the type analogous to those which 
have just been discussed in Shakspere's verse. It is 
likely that if the knowledge of classic prosody was not 
so often confined to the knowledge of the classic hex- 
ameter only, these misconceptions as to the type might 
be dissipated by facts which must attract the attention 
of all thorough students of forms of classic verse other 
than the hexameter. For example, the interposition of 
the rest in the body of the line, ^nd the relief of sylla- 
bles not admitting the rhythmic accent by the various 
methods just detailed, might — if we understood familiar 
Greek utterance as well as we do our own — easily solve 
many of the Greek choruses which are at present but 
rhythmic confusion ; and I think there can be no doubt 
that these choruses are, like Shakspere's verse, an 
escape out of the rigidities of the type into the infinite 



224 Science of English Verse. 

fields of those subtle rhythms which pervade familiar 
utterance. Thus, approached from the direction of 
classic prosody — and often from that of only so much 
classic prosody as is involved in the narrow •tjrpe of the 
hexameter — Shakspere's verse has often seemed a 
mass of "license," of "irregularity," and of lawless 
anomaly to commentators ; while, approached from the 
direction of that great rhythmic sense of humanity dis- 
played in music, in all manner of folk-songs, and in 
common talk, it is perfect music. 

In closing this necessarily meagre account of blank 
verse it is interesting to note that the prevalence in 
English poetry of the iambus — which is the basis of 
blank verse — had already attracted attention as early 
as the third quarter of the i6th century. I find Webbe 
speaking of it, in his Discourse : " The naturall course 
of most English verses seemeth to run uppon the old 
Iambic stroake," he says. Gascoigne, in his Certayne 
Notes of InstructioHy also refers to it: "Commonly now 
a dayes in english rimes we use none other order but a 
foote of two sillables, whereof the first is depressed or 
made short, and the second is elevate or made long," 
i.e. f f I, or the iambus : "and surely I can lament" 
— he adds — "that wee are fallen into such a playne 
and simple manner of wryting, that there is none other 
foote used but one." 

A still more cunning testimonial to the exclusive 
prevalence of the iambus occurs in King James's 
Reidis &c. for verse : for he gives no " Reulis " for any 
other kind ! as if he were unconscious that English 
verse admitted any rhythm besides the iambic. His 
pithy injunction is that "your first syllable in the lyne 
be short, the second lang." 



Schemes of ^-Rhythm. 



225 



CHAPTER VI. 

OF 4-RHYTHM, GENERALLY ; AND SPECIALLY, OF ITS 

TWO FORMS. 

The type of 4-rhy thm is g U u v U • ^^ Eng- 
lish verse it usually occurs under the form (i) 

g [ U U r r L or the less common form (2) 

g U t U U [ ^ > the two varieties of bar 
in each form alternating with each other subject to no 

restriction except that usually the variety | ^ X | 
in form (2) terminates the line. 

(I) The form (i) | f C C | f f | is the 

classic dactyl and spondee. The dactyl is "one long • 
before two short," which corresponds with f C Cj ^ti^d 
the spondee is two long, which corresponds with f f. 

The movement of this rhythmus in English is well 
illustrated by the following old Scotch poem : 



\r : : r t : r r 

Hame came my gude • man, an' hame came 



t t t t 

There he saw a 



r r 

horse where 



r : I 

nae horse should 



r -^i 

he ; and 

r * 

be. 



It is of great importance to distinguish this f Tj Tj^ 
the true classic dactyl, from the bar which is usually 

called a dactyl in English verse, s ^ p ^ . The 



2 1 8 Science of English Verse. 

given in the same time as f, being indeed only another 

form of the familiar triole f ^ f* Now the occurrence 

of the rest at the beginning of this form connects it- 
self in an interesting manner with the circumstance 
that Shakspere's favorite places for using this form are : 
(i) at the beginning of a line ; and (2) at the beginning 
of a phrase, just after the rest which marks off the pre- 
ceding phrase. 

The fitness of such places for this sort of bar may be 
thus explained. 

The form 1 • * # » or 1 #• # » (which we 

may hereafter use quite interchangeably) presents a 
curiously plastic bar to come at the beginning of a line 
because it can be made by the ear to fit-on to the end 
of either a double-ending run-on line or an end-stopped 
line with great facility by means of the vacant place 
represented by the *i . For example, here is a double- 
ending line out of Cymbeliney running-on to a line 
which begins with this form, that is, with the first sound 
accented : 

Perfumes the chamber thus : the flame o' the taper 
Bows toward her. 

Now in practice the last sound ** -er " of " taper '* would 
here be put in the place of the *i which begins the 



Ax— 
8 



and instead 



usual form of such a bar as [ k 

Bows to- 

of being what is usually called the " redundant syllable " 
of the double-ending line "Perfumes the &c. tap^r" it 
would be the unaccented first syllable of the next line, 
as in this scheme : 



Chancery's Lines beginning with Rests. 219 



A 

t r 

Per-fnmes 


A 

: r 

the chamb- 


A 

c r 

erthus: 


A 

the flame o' 


A 

t r 

the ta 


per Bows 


to- 


• 









Thus after a run-on line with a double-ending, the next 
line may begin upon an accented syllable — instead of 
upon the unaccented syllable always beginning a typic 
line of blank verse — with peculiarly dove-tailing effect. 
Shakspere is evidently fond of it, and we find many 
pairs of lines for which the scheme just given would 
serve. 

On the other hand, in beginning the line after an 



end-stopped line, the in the form 1 



f'C 



fur- 



nishes the proper pause which the voice must make in 
ending an end-stopped line, — without the necessity of 
slicing-off a part of the time-value of the last sound 
in the final bar of the end-stopped-line for that rest. 

Here it is evident that the *• in the form 1 f * P 

discharges two functions: (i) of marking-off the line- 
group or phrase-group which precedes it, and (2) of 
accounting to the ear for the customary unaccented syl- 
lable which precedes every accented syllable in typic 
blank verse. 

Chaucer evidently likes to set-off with this form, in 
beginning a tale, or a stanza, or a line. The prologue 

to the Canterbury Tales opens with it, g. ** f * ff &c 1 

Whantiiat 

the first tale, The Knight's opens with it. 



{ 



228 



Science of English Verse. 



SCHEME OF FIRST STANZA OF LIKE. A LAVEROCK 

IN THE LIFT. 



It's 



we two, it's we two, it's we two for aye, 

All the world and 1 we two,and Hea-venbeour stay. 



Like a lav-er-ock 



in the lift, 



sing,0 bon-ny 



r 



bndel 



Adam once with 



All the world was 



Eve 



b]|^his 



side. 






LIKE A LAVEROCK IN THE LIFT. 

It's we two, it's we two, it's we two for aye, 
All the world and we two, and Heaven be our stay. 
Like a laverock in the lift, sing, O ionny bride ! 
All the world was Adam once, with Eve by his side. 

What's the world, my lass, my love — what cJUpit do ? 
I am thine, and thou art mine : life is syptifim&d new. 
ii the world have missed the mark, let it stand by ; 
For we two have gotten leave, and once more we'll try. / 

Like a laverock in the lift, sing, O bonny bride ! 
It's we two, it's we two, happy side by side. 
Take a kiss from me, thy man ; now the song begins, 
All is made afresh for us, and the brave heart wins. 






When the darker days come, and no sun will shine, 
Thou shalt dry my tears, lass, and I'll dry thine. 
It's we two, it's we two, while the world's away, 
Sitting by the golden sheaves on our wedding day. 

1 A piece of music quite as commonly as otherwise begins with part of a bar, often 
the last note of a bar, This scheme does; the single note pf such ^ b^;iiuunf is oUM tlw 
fumcru^, 



Comic Form of ^-Rhythm. 



229 



(2) The number of bars of the form g T (T jT IT 

in the last scheme, though the general prevalence of 

the dactyl-form g f C C classes it with that 

species, shows how easily these two run into each other. 
In fact it is merely a division for convenience of dis- 
cussion, — to treat these as separate forms. 

The student cannot too carefully observe, however, 

that a large predominance of the form g U U U ^ 

inevitably produces a comic effect. This is indeed the 
rhythm which humorous verse-makers in English find 
most to their hand. For example : 

hist - o 

C t 

M)rst - er 



An 
En 



Has 



en-ter-tain-ing 
ti-tled " Saul a 
re-cent - ly been 



>7 

: = 



t: 



pub-lished by the 



t 1 1 nr-'= 

RevVend Arthur Coze 



The foregoing scheme is purposely arranged to illus- 
trate the custom of sometimes noting a given rhythm 
by using the anacrusis, or last note of the preceding bar, 
to begin each line. This method is used to preserve 
the line-arrangement of the verse : in the scheme just 
given, each line, of the scheme corresponds with a line 
of the verse, which is arranged as follows : 

An entertaining history 
Entitled " Saul, A Mystery," 
Has recently been published by the Reverend Arthur Coxe, &c. 

1 Eadi of these lines is here written as beginning with an anacrusis. The notation 
might be difierent. It is a matter not of principle but of convenience. The advantages of 
each method are presently set forth. The anacrusis of every line except the first is seen 
tP b«10fif to the tost bar of thd preceding line, of wbigh last bar it is the fourth ^, 



230 



Science of English Verse. 



But the same object could be better accomplished by 
discarding the anacrusis entirely. The first sound "An " 
is unaccented ; the second " en- " is accented ; taking 
the sounds therefore by fours — for this is 4-rhythm — 
and accenting the second unit of each bar, the scheme 
when exactly written would be as follows : 



mi 

An ent - er -tain- 

ill I 

En - titled "Saul 

III I 

Has re-cent - ly 



c r r c 

ing hist - o - ry 

r. rc I 

, A Myst- er - y 

f r C f 

been pub-lished by 



I I I I 

the Rev'rend Ar 



I r -' 

thur Coze, &c 



It is of advantage to use this last method, as most 
exact, whenever the lines invariably, or nearly always, 
begin with one unaccented syllable, as in blank verse 
where the student will observe it has been adopted. 
The only disadvantage of it is that many routine musi- 
cians are so accustomed to look for the accented note 
at the beginning of the bar that to find the second unit 
of every bar accented is perplexing. This is, of course, 
mere matter of habit. In beating time for the orches- 
tra the director always makes a down-beat for the first 
note, or accented unit, of the bar: in interpreting a 
rhythmus like that of blank verse, or of the scheme just 
given, where the second unit is accented, all that is 
necessary is to make the down-beat On the accented 
note — that is, the second unit — instead of the first. 
Of course it is easily seen that by writing blank verse 
with the first unaccented note as an anacrusis, thus : 



DisadvJintage of Anacrusis. 



231 



c 


r I 


r I 


r I 


r I 


r . 


Na- 


varre shall 


be a 


lit . tie 


Ac - a - 


deme. 



we can bring the accented note to the first place in each 
bar, as customary in music. But (i) this changes the 



form of each bar from the iambus 



I r 



to the 



trochee \ f ff I ; and (2) makes each line begin with 

the anacrusis, as if a new scheme; and, (3) what is 
worst of all, results in the fact that the bar of the 
scheme does not represent the real bar of the verse, the 
former being in this case a trochaic bar while the bar 
of blank verse is always distinctively an iambic bar. 
But, after this digression, I wish to return to the 

comical effect of the rhythmic form g T IT T IT 
when largely predominating over the equivalent form 
of C C M^ ^ poem, for the purpose of warning 
the student against using it except in a very careful 
way. Perhaps this warning may be most effectually 
conveyed through a scheme of the following piece of 
anonymous newspaper verse in which a most tragical 
sentiment is attempted to be conveyed in a rhythm 

almost entirely composed ^^ g T IT IT T bars. 

The particular arrangement here adopted happens to be 
the rhythmus not only of the famous Pinafore song 



I I I ^ I c : c t r r 

I nev - er thought o' think - in' for my - self at 



r * 

aUI 



but also of the most popular dance of the negro-minstrels, 

A A 

preserving even the vigorous slam # # f X 
at the end of the strain where the dancer brings the 



232 



Science of English^ Verse. 



entire sole of his foot down on the board with all the 
possible leverage of his leg, to the delight of the ground- 
lings, his shuffle being of the exact form 



% 





A 


A 


A 


A 


t t 


t t t t 


t t t t 


r r 


r * 


Tick - y 


tack - y - tick - y 


tack -y - tick - y 


slam bam 


Bam! 



The scheme of the first stanza is here given. 



A SLAIN LOVE. 

ttt' t t t t r tt r r r = 

Ah the au- tumn days fade out, and the nights grow chill 

=ttct t t t ttt r r r = 

And we walk no more to - geth-er as we used of yore 

=tt c c c c t ttt ttt t r = 

When the rose was new in blos-^om and the sun was on the hill, 

=tt c c t t t ttt ttt t r = 

And the eyes were sweet -ly vo-cal with the hap-py whip-poor -will. 



tt t t t I t tit f r 

And the land-breeze piped its sweet-est by the o • 



cean 



r X 

shore. 



t r J nr r 



It is worth noting that this rhythmus which is so 
absurd in the comic song and the plantation dance 
differs but in minor particulars from the form 

which Beethoven selected for 

the most reverend and pathetic of all his works, and 
which constitutes the grave rhythmic movement of the 
Iliad, of the iEneid, and of Lucretius* De Natura Rerutn, 

^ An anacrusis of two notes instead of one. The anacrusis is only the remainder of 
a broken bar, and may be as many sounds as the bar will contain, lacking one. 

' The mark := denotes that the bar is broken, its remainder being found at the b^ia- 
ning of the pext line, as anacrusis. 



Phrase - Groups. 233 



CHAPTER VII. 

OF THE THIRD AND FOURTH ORDERS OF RHYTHMIC 

GROUPING. 

The subject of secondary rhythm, or that species of 
sound-groups called the bar, has now been presented, 
in the discussion of the two great types of such group- 
ing, 3-rhythm and 4-rhythm, with their respective subor- 
dinate forms. We therefore come to the next order of , 
rhythmic groups which was called tertiary rhythm. 
This, as explained in the general outline which preceded 
the more special discussions, is a grouping together not 
of individual verse-sounds, but of bars, which are already * 
groups of such sounds. It is, in other words, a grouping 
of groups. And inasmuch as these phrase-groups are 
mostly not so large as those which we call the line, they 
may be termed of the third order, while the line-group 
of bars may be termed of the fourth order. 

It is not necessary to repeat here the explanation 
given of the manner in which the phrase-groups, the 
alliterative groups and the logical-accent groups are 
marked off for the ear. And the illustrations which 
have been incidentally given in the various schemes 
already presented will perhaps sufficiently acquaint the 
student with the manner in which these minor groups 
are made to relieve the possible monotony which might 
result from the invariable equality of bar with bar, and 
from the usuaj equality of line with line, in point of 
Jheir time-va^lu^. In the manner of using this third 



234 Science of English Verse. 

order of groups I do not think it well for the student to 
pay any attention to models beyond such as is necessary 
to understand the philosophy of the technical processes 
involved. The phrase-group, the logical group, the 
alliterative group, — these are matters of the subtlest 
individuality ; it is in these that each writer must show 
the stuff of his own ego: in other matters of rhythm 
— the bar, the line — Shakspere and the anonymous 
newspaper versifier are alike confined by certain fixities ; 
but these irregular groupings of the third order let 
down the bars and turn Pegasus out into the universe. 

Considering the nature and function of these irregular 
groups therefore to have been sufficiently explained, 
and leaving students to work their own wills therein, 
without meddling with models, we may now pass to the 

FOURTH ORDER OF SOUND-GROUPS — THE LINE. 

The ear may co-ordinate one bar with more than one ; 
two bars with two or more than two ; three with three 
or more ; and so on : and to this extent it may be said 
that a line may consist of any number of bars. 

But the practice of English verse is to use (very 
rarely) two, (less rarely) three, (very commonly) four, 
(most commonly) five, sometimes six, seven, or eight, 
bars to the line. In other words the line, in English 
verse, usually ranges between the limits of two and 
eight bars, with a very great majority of four-bar and 
five-bar lines. 

It has been before explained that the term metre has 
come to be associated, in a connection very familiar to 
all English-speaking persons, with the number of bars 
in a line, the hymn-book usually describing a given 
hymn or psalm as common metre, long metre, &c. This 



• Rhythm without Line -Groups, 235 

term seems therefore well enough established to war- 
rant its use as the peculiar designation of the line-group. 
"3-rhythm, iambic, 5 metre" for example would fully 
connote all the rhythmic phenomena of blank verse ; 
and so on, the first term in such combinations always 

referring to the rhythm (trochee f f I iambus 



I r 



,) and the latter figure to the metre. 

It has been already explained how, in Shakspere's 
later dramatic dialogues especially, the line-group is 
often obliterated for the ear, either by run-on lines 
which carry over the separating pause into the body of 
the next line, or by phrase-groups which insert pauses 
within the body of the line. A great prevalence of 
run-on lines renders this obliteration so complete that, 
as remarked in the general outline, verse so treated is 
practically without metre, or line-grouping. I am 
strongly inclined to believe that English poetry might 
be a great gainer if we would at once frankly recognize 
this rhythmic but unmetric verse as a strictly-rhythm- 
ized prose, and print it as such without the decep- 
tive line-division. Particularly in using the rhythm 

8 r ^ U r U in English verse a certain fini- 

calness attaches to a regularity of line-grouping : while 
if it be employed without lines, but merely in great 
masses of unlined prose, the effect is noble in the high- 
est degree. A development of English rhythm lies, I 
feel sure, in this direction. 

The habit of placing the rhyme — when rhyme is used 
— most commonly at the end of the line has made the 
rhyme a distinctive feature of the line-group for the ear, 
in English verse, Of gourse the rhyme could be placed 



236 Science of English Verse. 

— and sometimes is, as in Poe's Raven — at other points 
in the line : and there is no reason for placing it at the 
end except the rhythmic function which it then dis- 
charges — of marking-ofif for the ear each rhythmic 
group of bars comprehended in each line. 

This purely rhythmic office of rhyme does not seem to 
have occurred to Puttenham and several of his fellow- 
critics in the i6th century, who were in the habit of 
using the term "rhyme" as the very antithesis of 
"rhythm." A strong party had grown up in Putten- 
ham*s time who were for doing away with "rhyme," in 
favor of "rhythm," the latter being treated as a term 
referring to blank verse or to English hexameters. Of 
course the contempt which some of them felt for 
" rhyme" was due as much to the abuse of it which had 
been made by finical poetasters as to their unconscious- 
ness of the rhythmic powers of rhyme. If a line-group 
is to be marked-off for the ear — and such a group is 
marked-off by every end-stopped line — there is certainly 
no reason in the nature of things why it should not be 
marked-off with rhymes, as well as with mere rests : the 
rhyme marks it off quite as clearly and more agreeably, 
by being itself an independent source of pleasure to the 
ear ; just as one might mark-off the miles of a road with 
marble statues instead of ordinary mile-stones, the 
statues at once discharging the function of mile-markers 
(that is, the rhythmic function) and of pleasure-givers 
on their own account to the eye. In this connection 
it is interesting to find the word "rhyme" used for 
" rhythm " before Puttenham. Ormin (also called 
"Orm"), writing probably early in the 13th century, 
says, in dedicating The Ortnulum to his brother Walter, 



Poulter's Measure. ^37 

Ic hafe sett her o thiss boc 
/ have set here in this book 

Amang Godspelless wordess, 
Among GospeVs words 

All thurrh me sellfenn, manig word 
All through my selfy many (a) word 

The rime swa to fillenn. 
The rime so to fill : 

and inasmuch as rhymes occur only here and there while 
the rhythm of the poem is skilfully carried out every- 
where, he must mean that he has set here in this book 
many a word to fill the rhythm. 

The subject of rhyme as rhyme — that is, as a pleas- 
ure of the ear dependent on tone-color and unconnected 
with rhythm — is treated in Part III. under the title 
" Colors of English Verse." 

Since the i6th century the favorite lines of English 
verse have been almost entirely 4*s and 5*s. During 
that century, however, a great deal of poetry was writ- 
ten in the long I2*s and I4*s, as they were called from 
the number of syllables in alternate lines, like the fol- 
lowing lines of Queen Elizabeth's poem (notice the 
pause in the middle of the first line and of every alter- 
nate line thereafter, which Puttenham comically calls a 
" Cesure ") : 

The fear of future foes, exiles my present joy, 

And wit me warnes to shun such snares as threaten mine annoy. 

This was called "poulter's measure," as Gascoigne 
quaintly informs us, because the "poulters," in selling, 
were in the habit of giving twelve for the first dozen 
and fourteen for the next, and so on. 



23 S Science of English Versi. 

Other sorts of lines had acquired special designations 
at this time. Puttenham calls the metre in which the 
Canterbury Tales are written " Riding Rime," and that 
of Chaucer's Troylus and Cryseyde ** mteXi^ HeroicalL" 
Gascoigne and others term " Rithme Royall " the stanza 
in which each verse — their " verse " here meaning our 
"line" — has "tenne sillables, and seven such verses 
make a staffe" (stanza), "whereof the first and thirde 
lines do awnswer (acrosse) in like terminations and 
rime, the second, fourth, and fifth do likewise answere 
eche other . . . and the two last do combine and shut 
up the sentence." It is the stanza of Chaucer's Trqylus 
and Cryseyde, and of King James's Tke King^s Qukair. 



•*' 



Various Stanza -Groups. 239 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE FIFTH ORDER OF RHYTHMIC GROUPS. — THE 

STANZA. 

» 

As the line is a group of smaller groups (or bars), so 
the stanza is a group of the line-groups. 

A stanza — -often called a "verse" in the common 
speech of the present day — may be a group of two, 
three, or any number of lines, in English verse. Per- 
haps I should say in English verse since the i6th cen- 
tury : for it is evident that Puttenham had never seen 
stanzas of two or of three lines. He says : " The 
shortest staffe " — by stafEe he means stanza — "con- 
teineth not under foure verses," ^ — using "verses" in 
its classic sense as lines. 

But we have poems in stanzas of two lines, as Tenny- 
son's Locksley Hall, of which the first stanza is, 

Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet 'tis early mom ; 
Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle horn. 

And we have poems in stanzas of three lines, as Tenny- 
son's The Two Voices, of which the first stanza is, 

A still small voice spake unto me, 
" Thou art so full of misery, 
Were it not better not to be ? " 

or as Miss A. C. Thompson's perfect little Song- of the 
Night at Dawn, of which the first stanza is, 

" Arte o/Engiish Poesies p. 79, Arber Reprint 



^4^ Science of English Vers^. 

Whither shall I run 

Till the set of sun, % 

Till the day be done ? 

Besides these we have poems in stanzas of four lines, 
too common to need illustration ; of five lines, as Ten- 
nyson's On a Mourner ; of six lines as Shakspere's 
Venus and Adonis ; of seven lines, as Chaucer's Troylus 
and Cryseydcy or Shakspere's Lucrece ; of eight lines, as 
Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade ; of nine lines, 
as Spenser's Faery Queen ; and so on. 

The Faery Queen by the way was not known to Put- 
tenham, whose quaint argument against five lines to the 
stanza would apply equally well to the nine-lined 
stanzas of that poem : " A staffe of five verses," he says, 
meaning a stanza of five lines, '* is not much used be- 
cause he that can not comprehend his periode in foure 
verses, will rather drive it into six then " (than) "leave 
it in five, for that the even number is more agreable to 
the eare then the odde is." 

We are therefore practically without limitation as to 
the number of lines in any stanza of English verse. 

There is however one form of stanza which has re- 
mained a strictly-specialized form ever since its intro- 
duction into English by Surrey and Wyatt in the earlier 
part of the i6th century, and which, as such a strictly- 
specialized form, as well as by virtue of its remarkable 
fitness for particular purposes, must claim separate 
mention under the present head. This is the form 
known as - — 

THE SONNET. 

The sonnet is always one stanza of fourteen lines. 
These lines are iambic s's, rhymed according to fixed 
rules. Of these rules there are two sets, governing 



Italian, or Legitimate^ Sonnet. 241 

respectively (i) the Italian, or Legitimate, sonnet, and 
(2) the English, or Illegitimate, sonnet. 

(i) The Italian sonnet is so called from the fact that 
this form of stanza was imported into our language from 
the Italian ; and the synonymous term " legitimate " is 
applied to it because soon after its introduction another 
form of fourteen-lined stanza began to be used in which 
the succession of rhymes was different in order from 
that authorized by the Italian laws for this sort of 
verse ; and to distinguish the two one was called the 
Italian, or Legitimate, the other the English or Illegiti- 
mate, sonnet. The Italian is often called, also, the 
" Strict " form of the sonnet. 

The order of rhymes in the Italian, legitimate, or 
strict, sonnet may be gathered from the following beau- 
tiful example of this species of poem by Sir Thomas 
Wyatt. The order as to the first eight lines is always 
that presented in this poem : but the last six lines may 
be varied in the order of their rhymes so far as to rhyme 
either in couplets or triplets, and so far as to allow the 
rhymes to be either successive, alternate, or three apart. 
The first eight lines of this Italian sonnet are often 
called the " major portion," and the last six lines the 
"minor portion;" we find the major portion often 
separated, in printing, from the minor portion, by a 
space ; and some have even gone so far as to hold that 
there should be a certain change of sentiment on pass- 
ing from the major portion to the minor portion. This 
seems, however, to be a somewhat finical regulation, 
and without any particular authority. It may be re- 
marked, however, that every sonnet, whether legitimate 
or illegitimate, ought to be really a little drama, with 
every idea in every line converging directly upon soma. 



242 Science of English Verse. 

special idea in the last two lines, like rays of light into 
a focus. A good sonnet should always therefore be 
read with a certain suspension of the reader's thought 
until the end is reached, and the end should always 
throw back a new and comprehensive interest upon all 
that precedes it. 

SIR THOMAS WYAXrS "NOLI ME TANGERE"* 

SONNET. 

MAJOR PORTION. 
First Quatrain, 

Who list to hunt ? I know where is an hind 
But as for me, alas, I may no more, 
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore ; 
I am of them that furthest come behind. 

Second Quatrain, 

Yet may I by no means my wearied mind 
Draw from the deer ; but, as she fleeth afore, 
Fainting I follow. I leave off, therefore, 
Since in a net I seek to hold the wind. 

MINOR PORTION. 

Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt. 
As well as I, may spend his time in vain ; 
And, graven with diamonds in letters plain, 
There is written her fair neck round about: 
" Noli me tangere ; for Caesar's I am, 
And wild^ for to hold, though I seem tame." 

Here it is seen that in the major portion the ist, 4th, 
5th, and 8th lines rhyme together, and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th 
and 7th lines rhyme together ; while in the minor por- 
tion the first four lines present alternate rhymes, and 
the last two make a couplet. 

" It has been thought that Wyatt loved Anne Boleyn, and wrote this 
sonnet with cunning hints as to his dangerous rival Henry VIII. 



English, or Illegitimate, Sonnet. 243 

(2) The English, illegitimate, or free, sonnet pre- 
serves all the strictness of the Italian so far as concerns 
the law of fourteen iambic 5's ; but has its rhymes in 
the order displayed by the following sonnet of Henry 
Howard, Earl of Surrey, the co-worker of Wyatt in 
introducing this species of verse into English. This 
sonnet is a translation from one of Petrarch's. 

Love, that liveth and reigneth in my thought, 

That built his seat within my captive breast, 
Clad in the arms wherein with me he fought. 

Oft in my face he doth his banner rest : 
She that me taught to love and sufEer pain. 

My doubtful hope and eke my hot desire 
With shamefaced cloak to shadow and restrain. 

Her smiling grace converteth straight to ire : . 
And coward Love then to the heart apace 

Taketh his flight, whereas he lurks and plains 
His purpose lost, and dare not show his face. 

For my lord's guilt, thus faultless, bide I pains. 
Yet from my lord shall not my foot remove : 
Sweet is his death that takes his end by love ! 

This form of the sonnet has become sacred to all seri- 
ous people since the heavenly series of private prayers 
and confessions which Shakspere whispered in it. 

THE SONNET IN ENGLISH POETRY. 

For this purpose, the sonnet has come to be an 
acknowledged and set method in English. During the 
last three hundred years, whenever an English poet has 
had any personal and holy matters which he could not 
refrain from putting into form, he has mostly adopted 
the sonnet — one or other species of it — for that form. 
Each sonnet is like a letter from the poet to you, 
marked " conTBdential " at the top. Of this personal 



244 Science of English Verse. 

nature are many beautiful series of sonnets ki English : 
those of Wyatt and Surrey; Constable's To Diana; 
Griffin's To Fidessa; Drayton's, called Ideas ; Daniel's, 
To Delia; Habington's, To Castara ; Drummond's, 
to his Beloved who died before their marriage ; Spen- 
ser's Amorettiy to his Beloved; with many separate 
ones, of Donne, Milton, Wordsworth, Keats, Mrs.-Brown- 
ing, Tennyson, Longfellow, Gray, AUingham, Rossetti, 
Bryant, Taylor, Boker, Hayne, Timrod, Mrs. Kemble, 
Gilder, and others. It is curious to observe that some 
have nearly approached poethood in the sonnet who 
have remained hopelessly below it in other forms, par- 
ticularly certain Elizabethans, whose longer works were 
diluted beyond the point of poetry by a wordiness — 
the besetting literary sin of the i6th century — which 
could not be indulged within the limits of a sonnet. 

Above all works in this kind are Shakspere's son- 
nets, of which the first one hundred and twenty-six are 
revelations of friendship, and the last twenty-eight of a 
curious sort of love. Of course, to the young student 
these sonnets must be mostly dark ; but to the older 
soul they become as light itself ; and perhaps it might 
be said without strain that one's love and reverence for 
Shakspere's sonnets and one's delight in -them may 
fairly be taken as a gauge of the exaltation of one's 
growth, so that the higher and sweeter we are, just so 
much deeper is our private glory in these wonderful 
modern psalms of the person. 

It ought to be added that among many Elizabethan 
critics and authors the most confused notions prevailed 
as to what constitutes the sonnet. In the old collec- 
tions such as The Handfull of Pleasant Delites^ TJte 
Paradise of Dainty Devices^ and the like, many poems 



Origin of Sonnet. 245 

appear as "A Proper Sonet" or "A Sonetto" whirch 
have no resemblance to the sonnet whatever, and are 
mere lawless lyric poems. The name sonnet comes 
from the Italian suonarey to sound, and appears to have 
been given from tlie circumstance that the sonnets 
were originally written to be sounded in recitation, — 
that is, chanted and accompanied by a musical instru- 
ment mainly by the lute. 

The student interested in pursuing the history of the 
sonnet in Italy will find a pleasant account of it by 
Leigh Hunt in The Book of the Sonnet ^ published by 
Roberts Brothers, Boston : though one cannot cite this 
work without mentioning the wholly pitiful and un- 
worthy showing it makes of the sonnet in the i6th and 
early 17th centuries. It is in fact a disgrace to our 
tongue that we have no collection of the English son- 
nets which is even tolerable, although the sonnet is 
really the primordial form of modern English lyric 
poetry ; and it is a result of this circumstance that the 
prodigious wealth of our language in beautiful works of 
this genre is almost unknown except to the professional 
worker among books 



238 Science of jEnglisk Versd, 

Other sorts of lines had acquired special designations 
at this time. Puttenham calls the metre in which the 
Canterbury Tales are written " Riding Rime," and that 
of Chaucer's Troylus and Cryseyde *^ mtoXr^ Heroicall." 
Gascoigne and others term " Rithme Royall " the stanza 
in which each verse — their "verse" here meaning our 
"line" — has "tenne sillables, and seven such verses 
make a staffe" (stanza), "whereof the first and thirde 
lines do awnswer (acrosse) in like terminations and 
rime, the second, fourth, and fifth do likewise answere 
eche other . . . and the two last do combine and shut 
up the sentence." It is the stanza of Chaucer's Troylus 
and Ctyseyde, and of King James's The King^s Quhair, 



Various Stanza -Croups. 239 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE FIFTH ORDER OF RHYTHMIC GROUPS. — THE 

STANZA. 

As the line is a group of smaller groups (or bars), so 
the stanza is a group of the line-groups. 

A stanza^ often called a "verse" in the common 
speech of the present day — may be a group of two, 
three, or any numbef of lines, in English verse. Per- 
haps I should say in English verse since the i6th cen- 
tury : for it is evident that Puttenham had never seen 
stanzas of two or of three lines. He says : " The 
shortest staffe *' — by staffe he means stanza -—" con- 
teineth not under foure verses," ^ — using "verses" in 
its classic sense as lines. 

But we have poems in stanzas of two lines, as Tenny- 
son's Locksley Hally of which the first stanza is, 

Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet His early mom ; 
Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle horn. 

And we have poems in stanzas of three lines, as Tenny- 
son's The Two Voices^ of which the first stanza is, 

A still small voice spake unto me, 
" Thou art so full of misery, 
Were it not better not to be ? " 

or as Miss A. C. Thompson's perfect little Song of the 
Night at Dawn^ of which the first stanza is, 

* Arte ofE^giish Poeste^ p. 79, Arber Reprint 



^4^ Science of English Vers^. 

Whither shall I run 

Till the set of sun, • 

Till the day be done ? 

Besides these we have poems in stanzas of four lines, 
too common to need illustration ; of five lines, as Ten- 
nyson's On a Mourner ; of six lines as Shakspere's 
Venus and Adonis ; of seven lines, as Chaucer's Troylus 
and Cryseyde, or Shakspere's Lturece ; of eight lines, as 
Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade ; of nine lines, 
as Spenser's Faery Queen ; and so on. 

The Faery Queen by the way was not known to Put- 
tenham, whose quaint argument against five lines to the 
stanza would apply equally well to the nine-lined 
stanzas of that poem : " A staffe of five verses," he says, 
meaning a stanza of five lines, '* is not much used be- 
cause he that can not comprehend his periode in foure 
verses, will rather drive it into six then " (than) "leave 
it in five, for that the even number is more agreable to 
the eare then the odde is." 

We are therefore practically without limitation as to 
the number of lines in any stanza of English verse. 

There is however one form of stanza which has re- 
mained a strictly-specialized form ever since its intro- 
duction into English by Surrey and Wyatt in the earlier 
part of the i6th century, and which, as such a strictly- 
specialized form, as well as by virtue of its remarkable 
fitness for particular purposes, must claim separate 
mention under the present head. This is the form 
known as — ; 

THE SONNET. 

The sonnet is always one stanza of fourteen lines. 
These lines are iambic s's, rhymed according to fixed 
rules. Of these rules there are two sets, governing 



ItaliaUy or Legitimate^ Sonnet, 241 

respectively (i) the Italian, or Legitimate, sonnet, and 
(2) the English, or Illegitimate, sonnet. 

(i) The Italian sonnet is so called from the fact that 
this form of stanza was imported into our language from 
the Italian ; and the synonymous term " legitimate " is 
applied to it because soon after its introduction another 
form of fourteen-lined stanza began to be used in which 
the succession of rhymes was difEerent in order from 
that authorized by the Italian laws for this sort of 
verse; and to distinguish the two one was called the 
Italian, or Legitimate, the other the English or Illegiti- 
mate, sonnet. The Italian is often called, also, the 
" Strict " form of the sonnet. 

The order of rhymes in the Italian, legitimate, or 
strict, sonnet may be gathered from the following beau- 
tiful example of this species of poem by Sir Thomas 
Wyatt. The order as to the first eight lines is always 
that presented in this poem : but the last six lines may 
be varied in the order of their rhymes so far as to rhyme 
either in couplets or triplets, and so far as to allow the 
rhymes to be either successive, alternate, or three apart. 
The first eight lines of this Italian sonnet are often 
called the " major portion," and the last six lines the 
"minor portion;" we find the major portion often 
separated, in printing, from the minor portion, by a 
space ; and some have even gone so far as to hold that 
there should be a certain change of sentiment on pass- 
ing from the major portion to the minor portion. This 
seems, however, to be a somewhat finical regulation, 
and without any particular authority. It may be re- 
marked, however, that every sonnet, whether legitimate 
or illegitimate, ought to be really a little drama, with 
every idea in every line converging directly upon soma 



242 Science of English Verse. 

special idea in the last two lines, like rays of light into 
a focus. A good sonnet should always therefore be 
read with a certain suspension of the reader's thought 
until the end is reached, and the end should always 
throw back a new and comprehensive interest upon all 
that precedes it. 

SIR THOMAS WYATT'S "NOLI ME TANGERE"* 

SONNET. 

MAJOR PORTION. 
First Quatrain, 

Who list to hunt ? I know where is an hind 
But as for me, alas, I may no more, 
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore ; 
I am of them that furthest come behind. 

Second Quatrain, 

Yet may I by no means my wearied mind 
Draw from the deer ; but, as she fleeth afore, 
Fainting I follow. I leave off, therefore, 
Since in a net I seek to hold the wind. 

MINOR PORTION. 

Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt. 
As well as I, may spend his time in vain ; 
And, graven with diamonds in letters plain, 
There is written her fair neck round about: 
" Noli me tangere ; for Caesar's I am, 
And wild^ for to hold, though I seem tame." 

Here it is seen that in the major portion the ist, 4th, 
Sth, and 8th lines rhyme together, and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th 
and 7th lines rhyme together ; while in the minor por- 
tion the first four lines present alternate rhymes, and 
the last two make a couplet. 

' It has been thought that Wyatt loved Anne Boleyn, and wrote this 
sonnet with cunning hints as to his dangerous rival Henry VIII. 



English, or Illegitimate, Sonnet. 243 

(2) The English, illegitimate, or free, sonnet pre- 
serves all the strictness of the Italian so far as concerns 
the law of fourteen iambic 5's ; but has its rhymes in 
the order displayed by the following sonnet of Henry 
Howard, Earl of Surrey, the co-worker of Wyatt in 
introducing this species of verse into English. This 
sonnet is a translation from one of Petrarch's. 

Love, that liveth and reigneth in my thought, 

That built his seat within my captive breast, 
Clad in the arms wherein with me he fought, 

Oft in my face he doth his banner rest : 
She that me taught to love and suffer pain, 

My doubtful hope and eke my hot desire 
With shamefaced cloak to shadow and restrain. 

Her smiling grace converteth straight to ire : 
And coward Love then to the heart apace 

Taketh his flight, whereas he lurks and plains 
His purpose lost, and dare not show his face. 

For my lord's guilt, thus faultless, bide I pains. 
Yet from my lord shall not my foot remove : 
Sweet is his death that takes his end by love ! 

This form of the sonnet has become sacred to all seri- 
ous people since the heavenly series of private prayers 
and confessions which Shakspere whispered in it. 

THE SONNET IN ENGLISH POETRY. 

For this purpose, the sonnet has come to be an 
acknowledged and set method in English. During the 
last three hundred years, whenever an English poet has 
had any personal and holy matters which he could not 
refrain from putting into form, he has mostly adopted 
the sonnet — one or other species of it — for that form. 
Each sonnet is like a letter from the poet to you, 
marked "confidential" at the top. Of this personal 



244 Science of English Verse. 

nature are many beautiful series of sonnets ki English : 
those of Wyatt and Surrey; Constable's To Diana; 
Griffin's To Fidessa ; Drayton's, called /ofe/w/ Daniel's, 
To Delia; Habington's, To Castara; Drummond's, 
to his Beloved who died before their marriage ; Spen- 
ser's Amorettij to his Beloved; with many separate 
ones, of Donne, Milton, Wordsworth, Keats, Mrs.-Brown- 
ing, Tennyson, Longfellow, Gray, AUingham, Rossetti, 
Bryant, Taylor, Boker, Hayne, Timrod, Mrs. Kemble, 
Gilder, and others. It is curious to observe that some 
have nearly approached poethood in the sonnet who 
have remained hopelessly below it in other forms, par- 
ticularly certain Elizabethans, whose longer works were 
diluted beyond the point of poetry by a wordiness — 
the besetting literary sin of the i6th century — which 
could not be indulged within the limits of a sonnet. 

Above all works in this kind are Shakspere's son- 
nets, of which the first one hundred and twenty-six are 
revelations of friendship, and the last twenty-eight of a 
curious sort of love. Of course, to the young student 
these sonnets must be mostly dark; but to the older 
soul they become as light itself ; and perhaps it might 
be said without strain that one's love and reverence for 
Shakspere's sonnets and one's delight in -them may 
fairly be taken as a gauge of the exaltation of one's 
growth, so that the higher and sweeter we are, just so 
much deeper is our private glory in these wonderful 
modern psalms of the person. 

It ought to be added that among many Elizabethan 
critics and authors the most confused notions prevailed 
as to what constitutes the sonnet. In the old collec- 
tions such as The Handfull of Pleasant Delites, T/u 
Paradise of Dainty Devices^ and the like, many poems 



Origin of Sonnet. 245 

appear as "A Proper Sonet" or "A Sonetto" whfch 
have no resemblance to the sonnet whatever, and are 
mere lawless lyric poems. The name sonnet comes 
from the Italian suonarCy to sound, and appears to have 
been given from the circumstance that the sonnets 
were originally written to be sounded in recitation, — 
that is, chanted and accompanied by a musical instru- 
ment mainly by the lute. 

The student interested in pursuing the history of the 
sonnet in Italy will find a pleasant account of it by 
Leigh Hunt in The Book of the Sonnet^ published by 
Roberts Brothers, Boston : though one cannot cite this 
work without mentioning the wholly pitiful and un- 
worthy showing it makes of the sonnet in the i6th and 
early 17th centuries. It is in fact a disgrace to our 
tongue that we have no collection of the English son- 
nets which is even tolerable, although the sonnet is 
really the primordial form of modern English lyric 
poetry ; and it is a result of this circumstance that the 
prodigious wealth of our language in beautiful works of 
this genre is almost unknown except to the professional 
worker among books 



246 Science of English Verse. 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF RHYTHM THROUGHOUT ALL THOSE MOTIONS WHICH 

WE CALL "NATURE." 

Cries the Ass in A Midsummer Night^ s Dream: "I 
have a reasonable good ear in music : let's have the 
tongs and the bones." 

This selection of instruments is a cunning illustra- 
tion — and all the more cunning that it was wholly 
unpremeditated as to its present application — of the 
wide possession of the rhythmic faculty by all classes 
of men from highest to lowest in culture. The tongs 
and the bones are rhythmic instruments, exclusively: 
they are incapable of tune (change of pitch) and of any 
variation in tone-color ; but they can mark-off rhythms 
for the ear, and so even an ass might enjoy them. 
There are many men who appear to have no perception 
of melody, — that is, of relations of pitch between suc- 
cessive single tones ; and more who have no perception 
of harmony, which is a more subtle kind of pitch-rela- 
tion between simultaneous groups of tones heard in 
succession. But among the rudest nations, and long 
before any conceptions of music proper have developed 
themselves, we find instruments devoted to the sole 
purpose of marking-off and accentuating rhythmic 
intervals of time. These are the percussive instru- 
ments, such as drums, gongs, triangles, jawbones, 
cymbals, various forms of castanets, and the like. 
Successive blows upon any one of these instruments 



Rhythmic Motion in Nature. 247 

perform exactly the same office for the ear as that 
which is performed by all those agencies which we have 
seen marking-off the rhythms in English verse. Per- 
haps the very earliest form of marking-off rhythms is 
one which exists in our own country to the present day. 
I mean the " patting " of the Southern negroes. This 
method of indicating rhythms merely with the interplay 
of strokes between hands and thighs, feet and floor, is 
capable of a considerable degree of complexity ; and I 
remember when a boy among the Southern plantations 
to have seen negroes excited to a frenzy of delight in 
dancing to no other music than that purely rhythmical 
form of it afforded by the patting of hands and feet. 
The degree of what musicians call "attack," and the 
intensity of a certain fiery indescribable spirit found in 
Chopin's music (that which Liszt calls by the untrans- 
latable word "zal") which these strange people exhibit 
in their patting dances by a lightwood fire when the 
day's work is done, would be, I think, almost incredible 
to one who has never seen them. This is but another 
illustration of the felicity with which the Ass cries " Let 
us have the tongs and the bones." These are purely 
rhythmical instruments. 

But rhythm not only thus appears as perhaps the 
widest artistic instinct in man : it would seem to be a • 
universal principle throughout nature. Perhaps every 
one, in these days, is more or less familiar with the 
complete way in which modern physical science has 
reduced all that enormous and complex mass of phe- 
nomena which we call physical nature to a series of 
motions. Older conceptions of substance as opposed 
to form have resolved themselves into the general con- 
ception of force producing motion in certain modes. 



23 S Science of JEnglisk Versd. 

Other sorts of lines had acquired special designations 
at this time. Puttenham calls the metre in which the 
Canterbury Tales are written " Riding Rime," and that 
of Chaucer's Troylus and Cryseyde " meetre Heroicall." 
Gascoigne and others term " Rithme Royall *' the stanza 
in which each verse — their " verse " here meaning our 
"line" — has "tenne sillables, and seven such verses 
make a stafEe" (stanza), "whereof the first and thirde 
lines do awnswer (acrosse) in like terminations and 
rime, the second, fourth, and fifth do likewise answere 
eche other . . . and the two last do combine and shut 
up the sentence." It is the stanza of Chaucer's Troylus 
and Cryseyde^ and of King James's The King*s Qukair. 



•*' 



Various Stanza -Croups. 239 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OF THE FIFTH ORDER OF RHYTHMIC GROUPS. — THE 

STANZA. 

As the line is a group of smaller groups (or bars), so 
the stanza is a group of the line-groups. 

A stanza — often called a "verse" in the common 
speech of the present day — may be a group of two, 
three, or any number of lines, in English verse. Per- 
haps I should say in English verse since the i6th cen- 
tury : for it is evident that Puttenham had never seen 
stanzas of two or of three lines. He says : " The 
shortest staffe ** — by staffe he means stanza -—" con- 
teineth not under foure verses," ^ — using "verses" in 
its classic sense as lines. 

But we have poems in stanzas of two lines, as Tenny- 
son's Locksley Hall, of which the first stanza is, 

Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet *tis early mom ; 
Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle horn. 

And we have poems in stanzas of three lines, as Tenny- 
son's The Two Voices, of which the first stanza is, 

A still small voice spake unto me, 
" Thou art so full of misery, 
Were it not better not to be ? " 

or as Miss A. C. Thompson's perfect little Song of the 
Night at Dawn, of which the first stanza is, 

* Arte af En^ish Poesie, p. 79, Arber Reprint 



^4^ Science of English Vers^. 

Whither shall I run 

Till the set of sun, • 

Till the day be done ? 

Besides these we have poems in stanzas of four lines, 
too common to need illustration ; of five lines, as Ten- 
nyson's On a Mourner ; of six lines as Shakspere's 
Venus and Adonis ; of seven lines, as Chaucer's Trqylus 
and Cryseyde, or Shakspere's Lucrece ; of eight lines, as 
Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade ; of nine lines, 
as Spenser's Faery Queen ; and so on. 

The Faery Queen by the way was not known to Put- 
tenham, whose quaint argument against five lines to the 
stanza would apply equally well to the nine-lined 
stanzas of that poem : " A staffe of five verses," he says, 
meaning a stanza of five lines, ** is not much used be- 
cause he that can not comprehend his periode in foure 
verses, will rather drive it into six then " (than) "leave 
it in five, for that the even number is more agreable to 
the eare then the odde is." 

We are therefore practically without limitation as to 
the number of lines in any stanza of English verse. 

There is however one form of stanza which has re- 
mained a strictly-specialized form ever since its intro- 
duction into English by Surrey and Wyatt in the earlier 
part of the i6th century, and which, as such a strictly- 
specialized form, as well as by virtue of its remarkable 
fitness for particular purposes, must claim separate 
mention under the present head. This is the form 
known as — ; 

THE SONNET. 

The sonnet is always one stanza of fourteen lines. 
These lines are iambic s's, rhymed according to fixed 
rules. Of these rules there are two sets, governing 



Italian^ or Legitimate^ Sonnet. 241 

respectively (i) the Italian, or Legitimate, sonnet, and 
(2) the English, or Illegitimate, sonnet. 

(i) The Italian sonnet is so called from the fact that 
this form of stanza was imported into our language from 
the Italian ; and the synonymous term " legitimate " is 
applied to it because soon after its introduction another 
form of fourteen-lined stanza began to be used in which 
the succession of rhymes was different in order from 
that authorized by the Italian laws for this sort of 
verse; and to distinguish the two one was called the 
Italian, or Legitimate, the other the English or Illegiti- 
mate, sonnet. The Italian is often called, also, the 
" Strict " form of the sonnet. 

The order of rhymes in the Italian, legitimate, or 
strict, sonnet may be gathered from the following beau- 
tiful example of this species of poem by Sir Thomas 
Wyatt. The order as to the first eight lines is always 
that presented in this poem : but the last six lines may 
be varied in the order of their rhymes so far as to rhyme 
either in couplets or triplets, and so far as to allow the 
rhymes to be either successive, alternate, or three apart. 
The first eight lines of this Italian sonnet are often 
called the " major portion," and the last six lines the 
"minor portion;" we find the major portion often 
separated, in printing, from the minor portion, by a 
space ; and some have even gone so far as to hold that 
there should be a certain change of sentiment on pass- 
ing from the major portion to the minor portion. This 
seems, however, to be a somewhat finical regulation, 
and without any particular authority. It may be re- 
marked, however, that every sonnet, whether legitimate 
or illegitimate, ought to be really a little drama, with 
every idea in every line converging directly upon soma 



242 Science of English Verse. 

special idea in the last two lines, like rays of light into 
a focus. A good sonnet should always therefore be 
read with a certain suspension of the reader's thought 
until the end is reached, and the end should always 
throw back a new and comprehensive interest upon all 
that precedes it. 

SIR THOMAS WYATT'S "NOLI ME TANGERE"* 

SONNET. 

MAJOR PORTION. 
First Quatrain, 

Who list to hunt ? I know where is an hind 
But as for me, alas, I may no more, 
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore ; 
I am of them that furthest come behind. 

Second Quatrain, 

Yet may I by no means my wearied mind 
Draw from the deer ; but, as she fieeth afore, 
Fainting I follow. I leave off, therefore. 
Since in a net I seek to hold the wind. 

MINOR PORTION. 

Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt. 
As well as I, may spend his time in vain ; 
And, graven with diamonds in letters plain, 
There is written her fair neck round about : 
" Noli me tangere ; for Caesar's I am. 
And wild^ for to hold, though I seem tame." 

Here it is seen that in the major portion the ist, 4th, 
Sth, and 8th lines rhyme together, and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th 
and 7th lines rhyme together ; while in the minor por- 
tion the first four lines present alternate rhymes, and 
the last two make a couplet. 

* It has been thought that Wyatt loved Anne Boleyn, and wrote this 
sonnet with cunning hints as to his dangerous rival Henry VIII. 



English, or Illegitimate, Sonnet. 243 

(2) The English, illegitimate, or free, sonnet pre- 
serves all the strictness of the Italian so far as concerns 
the law of fourteen iambic s's ; but has its rhymes in 
the order displayed by the following sonnet of Henry 
Howard, Earl of Surrey, the co-worker of Wyatt in 
introducing this species of verse into English. This 
sonnet is a translation from one of Petrarch's. 

Love, that liveth and reigneth in my thought, 

That built his seat within my captive breast, 
Clad in the arms wherein with me he fought, 

Oft in my face he doth his banner rest : 
She that me taught to love and suffer pain, 

My doubtful hope and eke my hot desire 
With shamefaced cloak to shadow and restrain. 

Her smiling grace converteth straight to ire : 
And coward Love then to the heart apace 

Taketh his flight, whereas he lurks and plains 
His purpose lost, and dare not show his face. 

For my lord's guilt, thus faultless, bide I pains. 
Yet from my lord shall not my foot remove : 
Sweet is his death that takes his end by love ! 

This form of the sonnet has become sacred to all seri- 
ous people since the heavenly series of private prayers 
and confessions which Shakspere whispered in it. 

THE SONNET IN ENGLISH POETRY. 

For this purpose, the sonnet has come to be an 
acknowledged and set method in English. During the 
last three hundred years, whenever an English poet has 
had any personal and holy matters which he could not 
refrain from putting into form, he has mostly adopted 
the sonnet — one or other species of it — for that form. 
Each sonnet is like a letter from the poet to you, 
marked " conTBdential" at the top. Of this personal 



244 Scuaux ff Emgiisk 



.^JL. 



t g^ "TsiT r liga ..rfa l icdcs of sooncts m English 



±i::i£e ic 1¥j2=r znd Ssttct; Constable's 7# Dimma; 
GzzEiz^s Zjg Fidmrn; I hai tu o's, called /dhgf / Daniel's, 
7# Delim; Hghrngtpn's, 7# Cmsiawm; Dnmunond's, 
to bis Bei:7red vt>o died before tkeir marriage ; Spen- 
ser's AwicrMi, to his BcSoied; witb many separate 
oces, of Donne, Milton, Woidsvoitb, Keats, Mrsw Brown- 
ing, Tennyson, Longfellow, Gray, ADingfaam, Rossetti, 
Bryant, Tajrior, Boker, Hayne, Timrod, Mrs. Kemble, 
Gilder, and others. It is carious to observe that some 
have nearly ^proached poethood in the sonnet who 
have remained hopelessly below it in other forms, par- 
ticularly certain Elizabethans, whose longer works were 
diluted be)'ond the point of poetry by a wordiness — 
the besetting literary sin (rf the i6th century — which 
could not be indulged within the limits of a sonnet. 

Above all works in this kind are Shakspere's son- 
nets, of which the first one hundred and twenty-six are 
revelations of friendship, and the last twenty-erght of a 
cfurious sort of love. Of course, to the young student 
these sonnets must be mostly dark; but to the older 
soul they become as light itself ; and perhaps it might 
be said without strain that one's love and reverence for 
Shakspere's sonnets and one's delight in -them may 
fairly be taken as a gauge of the exaltation of one's 
growth, so that the higher and sweeter we are, just so 
much deeper is our private glory in these wonderful 
modern psalms of the person. 

It ought to be added that among many Elizabethan 
critics and authors the most confused notions prevailed 
as to what constitutes the sonnet. In the old collec- 
tions such as The Handfull of Pleasant Delites, Tlie 
Paradise of Dainty Devices^ and the like, many poems 



Origin of Sonnet. 245 

appear as "A Proper Sonet" or "A Sonetto " whrch 
have no resemblance to the sonnet whatever, and are 
mere lawless lyric poems. The name sonnet comes 
from the Italian suonare^ to sound, and appears to have 
been given from the circumstance that the sonnets 
were originally written to be sounded in recitation, — 
that is, chanted and accompanied by a musical instru- 
ment mainly by the lute. 

The student interested in pursuing the history of the 
sonnet in Italy will find a pleasant account of it by 
Leigh Hunt in The Book of the Sonnet^ published by 
Roberts Brothers, Boston : though one cannot cite this 
work without mentioning the wholly pitiful and un- 
worthy showing it makes of the sonnet in the i6th and 
early 17th centuries. It is in fact a disgrace to our 
tongue that we have no collection of the English son- 
nets which is even tolerable, although the sonnet is 
really the primordial form of modern English lyric 
poetry ; and it is a result of this circumstance that the 
prodigious wealth of our language in beautiful works of 
this genre is almost unknown except to the professional 
worker among books 



246 Science of English Verse. 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF RHYTHM THROUGHOUT ALL THOSE MOTIONS WHICH 

WE CALL "NATURE." 

Cries the Ass in A Midsummer Night* s Dream: "I 
have a reasonable good ear in music : let's have the 
tongs and the bones." 

This selection of instruments is a cunning illustra- 
tion — and all the more cunning that it was wholly 
unpremeditated as to its present application — of the 
wide possession of the rhythmic faculty by all classes 
of men from highest to lowest in culture. The tongs 
and the bones are rhythmic instruments, exclusively: 
they are incapable of tune (change of pitch) and of any 
variation in tone-color ; but they can mark-off rhythms 
for the ear, and so even an ass might enjoy them. 
There are many men who appear to have no perception 
of melody, — that is, of relations of pitch between suc- 
cessive single tones ; and more who have no perception 
of harmony, which is a more subtle kind of pitch-rela- 
tion between simultaneous groups of tones heard in 
succession. But among the rudest nations, and long 
before any conceptions of music proper have developed 
themselves, we find instruments devoted to the sole 
purpose of marking-off and accentuating rhythmic 
intervals of time. These are the percussive instru- 
ments, such as drums, gongs, triangles, jawbones, 
cymbals, various forms of castanets, and the like. 
Successive blows upon any one of these instruments 



Rhythmic Motion in Nature. 247 

perform exactly the same office for the ear as that 
which is performed by all those agencies which we have 
seen marking-off the rhythms in English verse. Per- 
haps the very earliest form of marking-off rhythms is 
one which exists in our own country to the present day. 
I mean the "patting" of the Southern negroes. This 
method of indicating rhythms merely with the interplay 
of strokes between hands and thighs, feet and floor, is 
capable of a considerable degree of complexity ; and I 
remember when a boy among the Southern plantations 
to have seen negroes excited to a frenzy of delight in 
dancing to no other music than that purely rhythmical 
form of it afforded by the patting of hands and feet. 
The degree of what musicians call "attack," and the 
intensity of a certain fiery indescribable spirit found in 
Chopin's music (that which Liszt calls by the untrans- 
latable word "zal") which these strange people exhibit 
in their patting dances by a lightwQod fire when the 
day's work is done, would be, I think, almost incredible 
to one who has never seen them. This is but another 
illustration of the felicity with which the Ass cries " Let 
us have the tongs and the bones." These are purely 
rhythmical instruments. 

But rhythm not only thus appears as perhaps the 
widest artistic instinct in man : it would seem to be a • 
universal principle throughout nature. Perhaps every 
one, in these days, is more or less familiar with the 
complete way in which modern physical science has 
reduced all that enormous and complex mass of phe- 
nomena which we call physical nature to a series of 
motions. Older conceptions of substance as opposed 
to form have resolved themselves into the general con- 
ception of force producing motion in certain modes. 



248 Science of English Verse. 

It would seem that the general primordial mode of all 
these motions which we assemble under the general 
term " nature " is rhythm. The essential principle of 
rhythm — the student must have observed — is recur- 
rence at an interval of time which furnishes a unit of 
measure by which all the times marked-off by the recur- 
rences may be co-ordinated. Mr. Herbert Spencer 
claims to have observed such a prevalence of this 
rhythmic periodicity throughout nature as to convince 
him that it is universal : and states that this belief is 
shared by Mr. Tyndall. It would indeed seem that 
every thing moves to measure (gydinbq). The spiral 
distribution of the remote nebulae hints at rhythmic 
motion : the variable stars brighten and pale at rhyth- 
mic intervals ; planet, satellite, comet, revolve and 
return in proportionate periods ; the seasons, the mag- 
netic variations, the sun-spots, come and go, orderly; 
the great tides in the sea, the great trade-winds in the 
air, flow by rhythmic rule ; the terrible sawyer in the 
Mississippi marks a vertical rhythmus, the sweet teng 
grasses in running brooks a horizontal one ; the lungs 
of the man, the heart of the beast, the cilia of the 
animalcule, play to and fro with rhythmic systole and 
diastole. 

And even those forms of motion which seem at first 
view most lawless appear to range themselves under 
this orderly principle at last. Storms, earthquakes, 
upheavals of continents, recessions of waters, wouRi 
seem to show some traces of recurrence at ordered 
intervals. Even disease, — as I am informed by ob- 
servant physicians, — the more it is studied, appears 
to show the tendency to take on this yoke, from th^ 
yvell-marked periodicities of the ague to the vaguer and 



Poe's Eternal Rhythm. 249 

more baffling exacerbations and remissions of obscure 
fevers and ills. And so from the prodigious recurrences 
of the great worlds in space which are measured by- 
ages, to the inconceivably rapid recufrences of the 
vibrating string or air-column in the production of 
sound which are measured by thousandths of a second, 
or those of the ether in the production of light which 
are measured by hundredths-of-thousandths of a second, 
everywhere we find rhythm. 

One of the most striking similes in all literature 
involves this rhythmic idea. Edgar Poe, in his fan- 
tastic Eureka, after having detailed the process of the 
primal diffusion of matter in space, the aggregation of 
atoms into worlds, the revolution of these worlds for a 
time, their necessary return after that time into the 
central sftn, and the then necessary re-diffusion of th6 
atoms into space, again to aggregate into worldsj to fall 
into the central sun, and to be again re-diffused — ever 
contracting, ever expanding — closes his raptus of 
thought with declaring that this prodigious process is 
nothing more than the rhythmic beating of the heart of 
God. 

It is curious, indeed, to find another assertion in this 
connection, almost as vague as Poe's dream, meeting 
confirmation in the exacter views of modern science. 
Puttenham, in beginning his chapter "Of Proportion 
Poeticall" says: "It is said by such as profess the 
Mathematicall sciences, that all things stand by propor- 
tion, and that without it nothing could stand to be good 
or beautiful. The Doctors of our Theologie to the same 
effect, but in other termes, say : that God made the 
world by number, measure and weight : some for weight 
say tune, and peradventure better." 



X 



^4^ Science of English Versd. 

Whither shall I run 

Till the set of sun, % 

Till the day be done ? 

Besides these we have poems in stanzas of four lines, 
too common to need illustration ; of five lines, as Ten- 
nyson's On a Mourner ; of six lines as Shakspere's 
Venus and Adonis ; of seven lines, as Chaucer's Troylus 
and Cryseydcy or Shakspere's Lucrece ; of eight lines, as 
Tennyson's Charge of the Light Brigade ; of nine lines, 
as Spenser's Faery Queen ; and so on. 

The Faery Queen by the way was not known to Put- 
tenham, whose quaint argument against five lines to the 
stanza would apply equally well to the nine-lined 
stanzas of that poem : " A staffe of five verses," he says, 
meaning a stanza of five lines, '* is not much used be- 
cause he that can not comprehend his periode in foure 
verses, will rather drive it into six then " (than) "leave 
it in five, for that the even number is more agreable to 
the eare then the odde is." 

We are therefore practically without limitation as to 
the number of lines in any stanza of English verse. 

There is however one form of stanza which has re- 
mained a strictly-specialized form ever since its intro- 
duction into English by Surrey and Wyatt in the earlier 
part of the i6th century, and which, as such a strictly- 
specialized form, as well as by virtue of its remarkable 
fitness for particular purposes, must claim separate 
mention under the present head. This is the form 
known as — ^ 

THE SONNET. 

The sonnet is always one stanza of fourteen lines. 
These lines are iambic 5's, rhymed according to fixed 
rules. Of these rules there are two sets, governing 



Italian^ or Legitimate^ Sonnet. 241 

respectively (i) the Italian, or Legitimate, sonnet, and 
(2) the English, or Illegitimate, sonnet. 

(i) The Italian sonnet is so called from the fact that 
this form of stanza was imported into our language from 
the Italian ; and the synonymous term " legitimate " is 
applied to it because soon after its introduction another 
form of fourteen-lined stanza began to be used in which 
the succession of rhymes was difEerent in order from 
that authorized by the Italian laws for this sort of 
verse; and to distinguish the two one was called the 
Italian, or Legitimate, the other the English or Illegiti- 
mate, sonnet. The Italian is often called, also, the 
" Strict " form of the sonnet. 

The order of rhymes in the Italian, legitimate, or 
strict, sonnet may be gathered from the following beau- 
tiful example of this species of poem by Sir Thomas 
Wyatt. The order as to the first eight lines is always 
that presented in this poem : but the last six lines may 
be varied in the order of their rhymes so far as to rhyme 
either in couplets or triplets, and so far as to allow the 
rhymes to be either successive, alternate, or three apart. 
The first eight lines of this Italian sonnet are often 
called the "major portion," and the last six lines the 
"minor portion;" we find the major portion often 
separated, in printing, from the minor portion, by a 
space ; and some have even gone so far as to hold that 
there should be a certain change of sentiment on pass- 
ing from the major portion to the minor portion. This 
seems, however, to be a somewhat finical regulation, 
and without any particular authority. It may be re- 
marked, however, that every sonnet, whether legitimate 
or illegitimate, ought to be really a little drama, with 
every idea in every line converging directly upon some. 



242 Science of English Verse. 

special idea in the last two lines, like rays of light into 
a focus. A good sonnet should always therefore be 
read with a certain suspension of the reader's thought 
until the end is reached, and the end should always 
throw back a new and comprehensive interest upon all 
that precedes it. 

SIR THOMAS WYATTS "NOLI ME TANGERE"* 

SONNET. 

MAJOR PORTION. 
First Quatrain, 

Who list to hunt ? I know where is an hind 
But as for me, alas, I may no more, 
The vain travail hath wearied me so sore ; 
I am of them that furthest come hehind. 

Second Quatrain, 

Yet may I by no means my wearied mind 
Draw from the deer ; but, as she fleeth afore, 
Fainting I follow. I leave off, therefore. 
Since in a net I seek to hold the wind. 

MINOR PORTION. 

Who list her hunt, I put him out of doubt. 
As well as I, may spend his time in vain ; 
And, graven with diamonds in letters plain, 
There is written her fair neck round about : 
" Noli me tangere ; for Caesar's I am. 
And wild^ for to hold, though I seem tame." 

Here it is seen that in the major portion the ist, 4th, 
Sth, and 8th lines rhyme together, and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th 
and 7th lines rhyme together ; while in the minor por- 
tion the first four lines present alternate rhymes, and 
the last two make a couplet. 

' It has been thought that Wyatt loved Anne Bole5m, and wrote this 
sonnet with cunning hints as to his dangerous rival Henry VIII. 



English, or Illegitimate, Sonnet. 243 

(2) The English, illegitimate, or free, sonnet pre- 
serves all the strictness of the Italian so far as concerns 
the law of fourteen iambic s's ; but has its rhymes in 
the order displayed by the following sonnet of Henry 
Howard, Earl of Surrey, the co-worker of Wyatt in 
introducing this species of verse into English. This 
sonnet is a translation from one of Petrarch's. 

Love, that liveth and reigneth in my thought, 

That built his seat within my captive breast, 
Clad in the arms wherein with me he fought. 

Oft in my face he doth his banner rest : 
She that me taught to love and suffer pain, 

My doubtful hope and eke my hot desire 
With shamefaced cloak to shadow and restrain. 

Her smiling grace converteth straight to ire : 
And coward Love then to the heart apace 

Taketh his flight, whereas he lurks and plains 
His purpose lost, and dare not show his face. 

For my lord's guilt, thus faultless, bide I pains. 
Yet from my lord shall not my foot remove : 
Sweet is his death that takes his end by love ! 

This form of the sonnet has become sacred to all seri- 
ous people since the heavenly series of private prayers 
and confessions which Shakspere whispered in it. 

THE SONNET IN ENGLISH POETRY. 

For this purpose, the sonnet has come to be an 
acknowledged and set method in English. During the 
last three hundred years, whenever an English poet has 
had any personal and holy matters which he could not 
refrain from putting into form, he has mostly adopted 
the sonnet — one or other species of it — for that form. 
Each sonnet is like a letter from the poet to you, 
marked " conTidential" at the top. Of this personal 



244 Science of English Verse. 

nature are many beautiful series of sonnets ki English : 
those of Wyatt and Surrey; Constable's To Diana; 
Griffin's To Fidessa ; Drayton's, called Aafe^w; Daniel's, 
To Delia; Habington's, To Castara ; Drummond's, 
to his Beloved who died before their marriage ; Sj>en- 
ser's Amorettiy to his Beloved; with many separate 
ones, of Donne, Milton, Wordsworth, Keats, Mrs.-Brown- 
ing, Tennyson, Longfellow, Gray, AUingham, Rossetti, 
Bryant, Taylor, Boker, Hayne, Timrod, Mrs. Kemble, 
Gilder, and others. It is curious to observe that some 
have nearly approached poethood in the sonnet who 
have remained hopelessly below it in other forms, par- 
ticularly certain Elizabethans, whose longer works were 
diluted beyond the point of poetry by a wordiness — 
the besetting literary sin of the i6th century — which 
could not be indulged within the limits of a sonnet. 

Above all works in this kind are Shakspere's son- 
nets, of which the first one hundred and twenty-six are 
revelations of friendship, and the last twenty-erght of a 
curious sort of love. Of course, to the young student 
these sonnets must be mostly dark; but to the older 
soul they become as light itself ; and perhaps it might 
be said without strain that one's love and reverence for 
Shakspere's sonnets and one's delight in -them may 
fairly be taken as a gauge of the exaltation of one's 
growth, so that the higher and sweeter we are, just so 
much deeper is our private glory in these wonderful 
modern psalms of the person. 

It ought to be added that among many Elizabethan 
critics and authors the most confused notions prevailed 
as to what constitutes the sonnet. In the old collec- 
tions such as The Handfull of Pleasant DeliteSy The 
Paradise of Dainty Devices, and the like, many poems 



Origin of Sonnet. 245 

appear as "A Proper Sonet** or "A Sonetto" whfch 
have no resemblance to the sonnet whatever, and are 
mere lawless lyric poems. The name sonnet comes 
from the Italian suonare, to sound, and appears to have 
been given from tlie circumstance that the sonnets 
were originally written to be sounded in recitation, — 
that is, chanted and accompanied by a musical instru- 
ment mainly by the lute. 

The student interested in pursuing the history of the 
sonnet in Italy will find a pleasant account of it by 
Leigh Hunt in The Book of the Sonnet^ published by 
Roberts Brothers, Boston : though one cannot cite this 
work without mentioning the wholly pitiful and un- 
worthy showing it makes of the sonnet in the i6th and 
early 17th centuries. It is in fact a disgrace to our 
tongue that we have no collection of the English son- 
nets which is even tolerable, although the sonnet is 
really the primordial form of modern English lyric 
poetry ; and it is a result of this circumstance that the 
prodigious wealth of our language in beautiful works of 
this genre is almost unknown except to the professional 
worker among books 



246 Science of English Verse. 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF RHYTHM THROUGHOUT ALL THOSE MOTIONS WHICH 

WE CALL "NATURE." 

Cries the Ass in A Midsummer Night' s Dream: "I 
have a reasonable good ear in music : let's have the 
tongs and the bones." 

This selection of instruments is a cunning illustra- 
tion — and all the more cunning that it was wholly 
unpremeditated as to its present application — of the 
wide possession of the rhythmic faculty by all classes 
of men from highest to lowest in culture. The tongs 
and the bones are rhythmic instruments, exclusively: 
they are incapable of tune (change of pitch) and of any 
variation in tone-color ; but they can mark-off rhythms 
for the ear, and so even an ass might enjoy them. 
There are many men who appear to have no perception 
of melody, — that is, of relations of pitch between suc- 
cessive single tones ; and more who have no perception 
of harmony, which is a more subtle kind of pitch-rela- 
tion between simultaneous groups of tones heard in 
succession. But among the rudest nations, and long 
before any conceptions of music proper have developed 
themselves, we find instruments devoted to the sole 
purpose of marking-off and accentuating rhythmic 
intervals of time. These are the percussive instru- 
ments, such as drums, gongs, triangles, jawbones, 
cymbals, various forms of castanets, and the like. 
Successive blows upon any one of these instruments 



Rhythmic Motion in Nature. 247 

perform exactly the same office for the ear as that 
which is performed by all those agencies which we have 
seen marking-o£E the rhythms in English verse. Per- 
haps the very earliest form of marking-off rhythms is 
one which exists in our own country to the present day. 
I mean the " patting '* of the Southern negroes. This 
method of indicating rhythms merely with the interplay 
of strokes between hands and thighs, feet and floor, is 
capable of a considerable degree of complexity ; and I 
remember when a boy among the Southern plantations 
to have seen negroes excited to a frenzy of delight in 
dancing to no other music than that purely rhythmical 
form of it afforded by the patting of hands and feet. 
The degree of what musicians call "attack," and the 
intensity of a certain fiery indescribable spirit found in 
Chopin's music (that which Liszt calls by the untrans- 
latable word "zal") which these strange people exhibit 
in their patting dances by a lightwQod fire when the 
day's work is done, would be, I think, almost incredible 
to one who has never seen them. This is but another 
illustration of the felicity with which the Ass cries " Let 
us have the tongs and the bones." These are purely 
rhythmical instruments. 

But rhythm not only thus appears as perhaps the 
widest artistic instinct in man : it would seem to be a • 
universal principle throughout nature. Perhaps every 
one, in these days, is more or less familiar with the 
complete way in which modern physical science has 
reduced all that enormous and complex mass of phe- 
nomena which we call physical nature to a series of 
motions. Older conceptions of substance as opposed 
to form have resolved themselves into the general con- 
ception of force producing motion in certain modes. 



248 Science of English Verse. 

It would seem that the general primordial mode of all 
these motions which we assemble under the general 
term " nature " is rhythm. The essential principle of 
rhythm — the student must have observed — is recur- 
rence at an interval of time which furnishes a unit of 
measure by which all the times marked-off by the recur- 
rences may be co-ordinated. Mr. Herbert Spencer 
claims to have observed such a prevalence of this 
rhythmic periodicity throughout nature as to convince 
him that it is universal : and states that this belief is 
shared by Mr. Tyndall. It would indeed seem that 
every thing moves to measure {gvOiibg), The spiral 
distribution of the remote nebulae hints at rhythmic 
motion : the variable stars brighten and pale at rhyth- 
mic intervals ; planet, satellite, comet, revolve and 
return in proportionate periods ; the seasons, the mag- 
netic variations, the sun-spots, come and go, orderly; 
the great tides in the sea, the great trade-winds in the 
air, flow by rhythmic rule ; the terrible sawyer in the 
Mississippi marks a vertical rhythmus, the sweet Ibng 
grasses in running brooks a horizontal one ; the lungs 
of the man, the heart of the beast, the cilia of the 
animalcule, play to and fro with rhythmic systole and 
diastole. 

And even those forms of motion which seem at first 
view most lawless appear to range themselves under 
this orderly principle at last. Storms, earthquakes, 
upheavals of continents, recessions of waters, wouM 
seem to show some traces of recurrence at ordered 
intervals. Even disease, — as I am informed by ob- 
servant physicians, — the more it is studied, appears 
to show the tendency to take on this yoke, from th^ 
ysrell-marked periodicities of the ague to the vaguer and 



Poe's Eternal Rhythm. 249 

more baffling exacerbations and remissions of obscure 
fevers and ills. And so from the prodigious recurrences 
of the great worlds in space which are measured by- 
ages, to the inconceivably rapid recufrences of the 
vibrating string or air-column in the production of 
sound which are measured by thousandths of a second, 
or those of the ether in the production of light which 
are measured by hundredths-of-thousandths of a second, 
everywhere we find rhythm. 

One of the most striking similes in all literature 
involves this rhythmic idea. Edgar Poe, in his fan- 
tastic Eureka^ after having detailed the process of the 
primal diffusion of matter in space, the aggregation of 
atoms into worlds, the revolution of these worlds for a 
time, their necessary return after that time into the 
central stn, and the then necessary re-diffusion of the 
atoms into space, again to aggregate into worlds^ to fall 
into the central sun, and to be again re-diffused — ever 
contracting, ever expanding — closes his raptus of 
thought with declaring that this prodigious process is 
nothing more than the rhythmic beating of the heart of 
God. 

It is curious, indeed, to find another assertion in this 
connection, almost as vague as Poe's dream, meeting 
confirmation in the exacter views of modern science. 
Puttenham, in beginning his chapter "Of Proportion 
Poetical]" says: "It is said by such as profess the 
Mathematical] sciences, that all things stand by propor- 
tion, and that without it nothing could stand to be good 
or beautiful. The Doctors of our Theologie to the same 
effect, but in other termes, say : that God made the 
world by number, measure and weight : some for weight 
say tune, and peradventure better." 



250 Science of English Verse. 

And there is yet a more general view of the rhythmic 
principle which hints that this proportion in which the 
worlds move and by which " things stand to be good or 
beautiful *' is due to antagonism. Mr. Herbert Spencer 
has formulated the proposition that where opposing 
forces act, rhythm appears, and has traced the rhyth- 
mic motions of nature to the antagonistic forces there 
found, such as the two motions which carry the earth 
towards, and away from, the sun and so result in the 
periodicity of the earth's progress, and others. 

Perhaps this view may be made, without strain, to 
bind together even facts so remote from each other as 
the physical and the moral. When we compare what 
one may call the literal rhythm which rules throughout 
physical nature with that metaphorical rhythm or pro- 
portion which governs good behavior as well as good 
art ; when we find that opposition in the physical world 
results in rhythm, and that so opposition in the moral 
world — the fret, the sting, the thwart, the irreconcilable 
me as against all other me*s, the awful struggle for 
existence, the desperate friction of individualities, the 
no of death to all requests — may also result in rhythm ; 
when we perceive that through all those immeasurable 
agitations which constitute both moral and physical 
nature this beautiful and orderly principle of rhythm 
thus swings to and fro like the shuttle of a loom and 
weaves a definite and comprehensible pattern into the 
otherwise chaotic fabric of things : we may be able to 
see dimly into that old Orphic saying of the seer, 
"The father of metre is rhythm, and the father of 
rhythm is God." 



PART II. 

THE TUNES OF ENGLISH VERSE. 
CHAPTER X. 

OF TUNE IN SPEECH : ITS NATURE AND OFFICE. 

The preceding chapters of Part L have been devoted 
to discussing all those various co-ordinations of duration 
in verse-sounds which we are in the habit of assembling 
under the general name of rhythm. It is earnestly 
asked that the foregoing discussion should not be con- \ 
sidered exhaustive. It is in fact but an outline, confined j 
by the necessary limitations of an elementary work like j 
the present, and intended only to furnish the student 
with such an outfit of facts and principles as will serve 
for pursuing farther researches. It can claim no more • 
completeness than is implied in the endeavor to show , 
that the study of rhythm is at once more extensive and \ 
more fruitful than is apt to be thought by those whose ^ 
attention has not been specially called to this subject. 

We are now to investigate a class of phenomena which 

differ widely from those of rhythm and which appeal to 

some of the subtlest and least understood operations of 

the human soul. It was stated in the outset that the 

employment of the physical means of duration, pitch, 

intensity and tone-color produced a great variety of 

251 



252 Science of English Verse. 

poetic effects which fall under one or other of three 
great classes, namely, 



V 



I. The rhythms 
II. The tunes \ of English verse. 
III. The colors 



Part II. is to treat the second of these classes — the 
tunes of English verse. In doing so it will be necessary 
to call attention iSrst to the tunes of ordinary talk, or 
speech-melodies. 

If one had not otherwise learned to appreciate the 
completeness with which habit can overlay and cover 
up phenomena that assail our senses a thousand times 
an hour, one would be astonished to find that many 
persons are sceptical upon being told that ordinary talk 
r is a series of tunes and that the greater part of expres- 
sion is carried on by means of melodies rather than 
words. Most persons associate the idea of melody 
solely with musical performances, and the term usually 
suggests either a musical instrument or the singing-tone 
of the voice. 

In point of fact, (i) tunes — melodies, distinctly 
formulated patterns of tones varying in pitch — exist 
not only in poetic readings, but in all the most common- 

• place communications between man and man by means 
of words. 

(2) Further : every affirmation, every question, has its 
own peculiar tune ; every emotion, every shade of emo- 

• tion, has its tune ; and such tunes are not mere accidents 
but are absolutely essential elements in fixing the precise 
signification of words and phrases. 

(3) Further still : these tunes not only affect the sig- 
nification of different words, but they greatly modify 



Rhythm y Melody, and Harmony. 253 

the meaning of the same words, so that a phrase uttered •- 
according to one tune means one thing, according to 
another tune another thing. 

These propositions are now to be illustrated. 

Before doing so, it will save trouble to clear up a 
certain very vague sense in which the terms " melody " 
and "harmony" are often used as to verse, — a sense 
wholly different from that intended in the present dis- 
cussion. We hear often of "melodious" verse, or 
"harmonious" verse: in such expressions the meaning 
always has reference simply to the rhythmic structure, 
— " melodious " or " harmonious " verse in this sense • 
being simply verse that flows along smoothly and pleas- 
antly in its rhythmic movement. 

But in any precise use of terms "rhythm" and 
" melody " and " harmony " have the widest differences • 
in their signification. It is easy to bring these dif- 
ferences clearly before the mind by the system of nota- 
tion which has already been employed in part. 

Observe that rhythm, or the differences in duration 
of notes, may be noted on a single straight line, or no 
line at all : thus in 

Oh that my 

there is no occasion to place the notes in any particular 
vertical relation to each other, the rhythmical relations 
being all denoted by those shapes of the characters 
which indicate their relative duration. 

But if we should wish to place the above notes in 
relations of melody : if we should wish to add tune to 
their rhythm, — that is to vary their pitch as well as 



c t 


t 


t 


t 


C 


r 


t 


heart were 


a 


rose 


of 


the 


gar 


- den 



254 Science of English Verse. 

their duration, — we must now use more than one line 
in the musical system of notation, thus : 




1^ \^ — ■ ■ •-• m — 

Oh that my heart were the rose of the gar - den 

by comparing which, bar for bar, with the other, it is 
perceived that while the rhythm has been exactly pre- 
served — there being three eighth-notes in each bar — 
the pitch of each tone has been varied, so that what 
was before a mere pattern of durations, or rhythm, is 
now that and something more, to wit, a pattern of pitch, 
— that is, a tune or melody. 

But — relations of rhythm and tune being thus dis- 
criminated — relations of harmony must on the other 
hand be distinguished from those of melody with equal 
care. Melody consists of tones, differing in pitch, 
struck successively: while harmony consists of tones 
differing in pitch struck simultaneously, or chords : as 



f 1 i i . 



i 



f 



This distinction will be 



found assuming a position of great interest in certain 
connections which will presently engage attention. 

Such being tunes or melodies : in order to under- 
stand the wonderful parts they play in ordinary speech, 
let us analyze the mental and physical processes upon 
which a certain little German comedy called " Come 
Here ! " is based. This comedy admirably illustrates 
the extent to which the meaning of the same words can 
be varied by uttering them in different tunes, and the 
curious manner in which these tunes are recognized by 
all persons as conveying certain definite significations. 



Comedy of ''Come Here'' 255 

The plot of the comedy mentioned is as simple as possi- 
ble. An old theatrical manager is testing the capacity 
of a young actress who seeks an engagement. The 
whole play is based upon the two words " Come here : " 
the manager, in order to try the genius of the actress, 
explains to her a certain situation hinging upon the 
words " Come here," and tells her to express the whole 
situation by the manner in which she utters these two 
words. Then a wholly different situation is suggested, 
which she must express by uttering the same words to 
a different tune : then atiother, and so on, the entire 
action of the piece being thus carried out by ringing 
the changes upon these two words "Come here." The 
number of these changes far exceeds the belief of any 
one whose attention has never been specially dr^wn to 
the subject. 

Now (i) the possibility of such a comedy is evidently 
based upon the facts already asserted : namely, that in 
some way men have associated a certain tune of the 
speaking-voice with each emotion, and that when the 
tune is heard, the emotion is recalled. But, secondly, 
the possibility of such a comedy entirely dissipates the 
vague terms " intonation " and " inflection " which by 
their very incompleteness have so long concealed from 
view the real nature and office of the tunes of speech. 
For these terms are based upon the underlying idea 
that the variations of pitch which accompany uttered 
words are merely casual and lawless, and have no fixed 
connection with the words which they accompany. The 
play just cited shows, by the crucial test of actual experi- 
ment, that precisely the opposite of these vague ideas is 
true, namely, that the variations of pitch which accom- 
pany all spoken words are, in the strictest sense of the 



256 Science of English Verse. 

term, tunes : that they are definite successions of tones, 
so definite as to be remembered and reproduced by the 
actress (in the case given) and as to be remembered and 
instantly recognized by the audience : for how else 
would the propriety of each difEerent tune to each dif- 
ferent situation be discovered by the hearers, the words 
always remaining the same ? Nothing can be more 
irresistible than the logical inference from this comedy 
that somehow — exactly how, would be *too subtle an 
inquiry for this place — it has happened that certain 
fixed successions of tones varying in pitch — that is, 
certain fixed tunes — have been from of old associated 
with the emotions expressed in this play, and that when 
the actress uttered the proper tune, the audience invari- 
ably recalled the emotion with which it is associated. 

We may now illustrate the same fact on a wider 
scale, from another direction. In order to show how 
unconsciously and universally we associate tune with 
any utterance in the speaking-voice, let us consider the 
effect when tune is absent from such utterance. This 
efEect is always, in tendency at least, to produce the 
impression of either the idiotic or the supernatural. 

(i) The idiotic effect may easily be illustrated by a 
trivial example, — and the more trivial the better, as 
showing the association of fixed tunes with all the most 
commonplace and familiar talk of men. Recall, for 
instance, and imitate aloud, the absolute monotone 
with which the very young schoolboy pronounces the 
following words, when he is learning to read. Fancy 
him standing at the teacher's knee, his brows puckered 
with concentration, his attention so completely fixed 
upon the unfamiliar forms of the words which he is 
painfully spelling out letter by letter between each 



Effect of Monotone in Speech. 1257 

utterance that he really utters them without the least 
idea attaching to any of them, and, since without idea, 
therefore without tune. This tuneless speech makes 
an impression which every one recognizes as idiotic. 
*' The . . . cat . , . ran ... at ... . the .... rat 

. . . and ate . . the , . . rat. . . . The . . . rat 

. . . ran . . from .... the . . cat &c." These words 
have, as I say, no meaning for him, because he is think- 
ing of the words themselves, not of the ideas which they 
symbolize and therefore he utters them without their 
tune ; but when he gets back to his desk, and has occa- 
sion to speak ideas, he will be sure to speak them in a 
certain tune; as, for example, the tune of indignant 
protest and demand, when he finds that in his absence 
his desk-mate has. wilfully and feloniously appropriated 
his goods : " You, Johnny Smith, give me my apple ! " 
a tune which every one can imitate. 

(2) Such being the idiotic impression conveyed by 
words without tune in the high squeak of the boy's 
voice : words without tune in more sonorous and dig- 
nified tones of a man's voice may be made to convey 
the impression of the unnatural, even the supernatural. 
This the reader may illustrate by uttering in an abso- 
lute monotone the speech of the ghost in Hamlet^ and 
contrasting this monotone with the ever-varying tune 
in which Hamlet must utter the interjections of tender- 
ness and of horror which occasionally interrupt the 
ghost's speech. The result will very clearly prove the 
point now in hand : the monotone of the ghost, that is, 
the absence of tune from his utterance, freezes us with 
a sense of the unnatural, while the fervent tunes of 
Hamlet's brief cries remind us unconsciously of our 
Jiuman kinship with him. 



258 Science of English Verse. 

In order to place the mind in a proper attitude 
towards the true nature of the tunes of speech, let the 
reader endeavor for several days to concentrate atten- 
tion upon the variations of pitch which accompany 
ordinary conversation. At first, the keenest ear finds 
it difficult to do consciously that which we all do uncon- 
sciously ; but presently this difficulty will vanish, and 
the explorer will straightway discover a new world of 
tune. The unconscious melodies of the speaking-voice 
are indeed subtle and beautiful beyond description, and 
the habit of consciously co-ordinating them is a pro- 
digious gain to the ear's field, of pleasure. 

Once upon the track, the reader will doubtless beg^n 
presently to recall a thousand cunning effects in speech 
based wholly upon tune. To give a few examples of 
these, before proceeding to other considerations : con- 
sider the happy way in which the tunes of speech are 
used by the clown in All's Well That Ends Well to 
give all manner of different meanings to the words " O 
Lord, sir." The clown contends that this is an answer 
of the greatest service at court, for that it will fit every 
occasion. 

Clown. . . . But, for me, I have an answer will serve all 
men. 

Countess. Marry, that's a bountiful answer, that fits all 
questions. 

Clown. From below your duke to beneath your constable, it 
will fit any question. 

Countess. It must be an answer of most monstrous size, 
that must fit all demands. 

Clown. But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned shotild 
speak truth of it. Here it is, and all that belongs to it : . . . ask* 
me, if I am a courtier ... 



CloTvn's Tunes in All's Well. 259 

Countess. ... I pray you, sir, are you a courtier ? 
Clown. O Lord^ sir / — there's a simple putting o£E. — More, 
more, a hundred of them. 

Countess. 5Vr, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you. 
Clown. O Lord, sir/ — Thick, thick, spare not me. 
Countess. / think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat. 
Clown. O Lord, sir/ Nay, put me to 't, I warrant you. 
Countess. You were lately whipped, sir, as I think. 
Clown. O Lord, sir/ — Spare not me. 

Countess. I play the noble housewife with the time, 

To entertain it so merrily with a fool. 
Clown. O Lord, sir ! — Why, there 't serves well again. 

Here each of the clown's ejaculations is uttered in a 
different tune, namely : 

The 1st in a tune which means Of course, I am; 
a 2nd " " " " Oh,-^ another suitor; 

" 3rd " " " " r II condescend to try ; 

" 4th " " " " And soundly, too; 

and SO on. 

Or, again, every one can perhaps recall when one's 
letter has been misread as to the tune of some phrase, 
with the result of heart-burning and bitterness ; or how 
often a quarrel between neighbors, in being traced to 
its source, has been found to flow from the gossip's 
report of what Mrs. Smith said of Mrs. Brown in a dif- 
ferent tune from that actually used in the utterance, 
for, even though the words were reported exactly as ut- 
tered, unless the tune were also reported exactly as given, 
the whole meaning would be changed, and a sympathetic 
exclamation might easily be converted into a derisive 
sneer. 

The extravaganza printed in children's books is here 
directly in point, for when analyzed, its basis is clearly 



26o Science of English Verse. 

the unconscious recognition of the wonderful manner 
in which tunes change the meaning of words. 

A certain king sent to another king, saying : " Send 
me a blue pig with a green tail, or" . . . The other 
king replied, " I have none ; if I hcuiy I . . ." Here- 
upon ensued a great war ; and after many thousand per- 
sons were killed, the two kings, coming together by 
accident, discovered that the first king's message was 
only this : " Send me a blue pig with a green tail, or 
... a green pig with a blue tail : " and that the sec- 
ond king's reply was: "I have none: if I had, ... I 
would send it.'* 

Upon analysis, we find the plot of this story to be 
based upon the circumstance, taken for granted, that 
even the child who reads it will understand the wrong 
tunes in which these messages were reported, each 
being in the tune of a threat instead of the tune of a 
request. 

Or again what lawyer in tracing the astonishing con- 
tradictions which equally credible witnesses often give 
to each other's testimony has not found them due to 
the failure of one or other witness, — or both, — to give 
correctly tunes as well as words. 

But when, leaving these broader and more striking 
tunes of everyday speech, we come to consider the 
extremely delicate shades of meaning which can be 
imparted to every phrase and sentence by slight va- - 

nations in its customary tune, we are met with a I 

truly wonderful series of phenomena. If the reader 
will examine closely the conversation which goes on 
between daily intimates such as friends, husband and 
wife, and the like, who have thoroughly learned each 
Other's habitual tunes of speech, it will be found that 



New Art of Speech -Tunes. 261 

the words used in their communications to each other, 
if taken without these tunes, would bear the strangest 
relations to the matters in hand in the great majority of 
instances. All the most subtle complexities of passion, 
of petulance, of satiric under-meaning of affection, of 
humor, are expressed in this way. Relying upon the 
examples already given to recall to every one's mind 
innumerable instances of this sort, perhaps it will not 
be necessary to delay longer upon these preliminary 
illustrations, and the reader may be now prepared to 
see for himself that in point of fact words form the 
smaller element in language. In truth our modern life 
is so complex that we could never get along with mere 
words. Existence is so many-thoughted, conscience is 
so cunning, passion is so refined, men's relations to 
nature are so subtle, wit is so knowing, humor is so 
deep, — in this nineteenth century that the few thou- 
sand words of our English vocabulary, rich as that is, 
would leave us dumb half the time if we could not say 
them in manifold and expressive tunes which multiply 
their meanings. 

But, having thus called attention to the fact of these 
tunes, it is now time to discuss their artistic application 
in verse and to analyze their nature. 

Within quite recent times the world has seen what / 
we may fairly call a new art rising in our midst, based \ 
upon the tunes of speech. Consider for a moment what \ 
a remarkable exhibition it is when a single person — a • 
woman, for instance, like Charlotte Cushman — presents '^ 
herself on the stage of a theatre or concert-room, not to \ 
sing, not to play, but to entertain the audience with : 
what we call " readings," or recitations. Now these 
" readings " are really nothing more than performances 



262 Science of English Verse. 

of speech-tunes. We can all take Macbeth in the 
printed copy and read the words for ourselves ; but we 
gather in crowds to hear those particular tunes of 
speech in which Miss Cushman will embody these 
words. Here, simply by the melodies of speech which 
in their crude forms I have tried to recall by several 
instances, she reproduces before a popular audience a 
whole play of Shakspere with all its complex elements 
of situation and of character. In truth there are many 
persons who derive more pleasure from hearing a play 
of Shakspere's thus reproduced through the medium of 
speech-tunes than in seeing it rendered with all the 
properties of the stage. For the realistic limitations of 
even the best stage-setting are very great, and grow 
daily more and more intolerable to the modern man : it 
is getting to be very hard to forgive the four roustabouts 
in jackboots who personate the army, and the rosin and 
dried pease which make the lightning and the rain. 
Moreover in the *' reading " the whole play is rendered 
with a symmetrical evenness not to be obtained in a 
time when it is the custom of managers to present one 
good actor, or "star," " supported " by merely wooden 
people. When Charlotte Cushman reads Macbeth^ for 
instance, it is really a great cast: for — as the bills 
would put it — we have 

Macbeth Charlotte Cushman 

Lady Macbeth Charlotte Cushman 

Duncan Charlotte Cushman 

The Porter Charlotte Cushman 

and so on, through the dramatis personce. 

It may now be of profit to pass lightly along a line of 
inquiry which seems to reveal that the speech-tune has 
but recently segregated itself as an art from the main 



Historic Separation of Poetry and Music. 263 

stem of music proper ; that it is an art in its infancy, ' 
which we may observe actually rising among us at the 
present day ; and that it is destined to noble and beau- 
tiful extensions in the future. If the reader will follow 
for a few moments the remarkable course of develop- 
ment which music has pursued through its three great 
epochs of the antique music, mediaeval music, and 
modern music, it will be seen that we can trace with 
great clearness, all along, the ever-increasing tendency 
of poetry to split away from music and to become a 
wholly separate art with wholly separate methods. 

A fact which must have come within the experience 
of the most cursory observers meets us at the outset of 
this inquiry, and furnishes a clew which guides us along 
its whole extent. This is the comparatively little impor- ^ 
tance which the words of a modern song bear to the 
tune of it. We shall find, in point of fact, that the 
whole line of musical tendency has been to discard 
words as words — or vehicles of ideas — and to use • 
them purely as vehicles of tone, without reference to 
their meaning: while on the other hand poetry, pur- 
suing similarly its own course, has tended to relieve 
itself from all dependence on, or association with, 
music, and to rely upon the more subtle and practicable " 
tunes of the speaking-voice. 

Thus when we find — as all do who attend the aver- 
age modern concert — that in the vocal part of the 
performance the words are of little importance; that 
they are indeed very often in some foreign language not 
understood by the great majority of the audience ; and 
that, when not so, the music is commonly of such a com- 
plex nature as to require a pronunciation which renders 
them quite unintelligible ; we can understand the signifi- 



\ 



264 Science of English Verse. 

cance of the fact. It is not — as many are apt to think 
— a mere temporary afEectation or carelessness on the 
part either of composer or singer. It is reaUy one 
phase of that differentiating process we are now to 
trace, which has resulted in the complete independence 
of music on the one hand and of poetry on the other, 
the former having found its fullest expression in the 
purely instrumental symphony, while the latter finds its 
fullest expression in the purely vocal tunes of the speak- 
ing-voice. 

A brief historic outline of the relations of music to 
poetry will show us not only how the speech-tune art is 
the result of natural development, but how its rise was 
to be expected at the present time, from the conditions 
at which music and poetry have now arrived. 

There are three strongly-marked epochs in the histo- 
ry of music which logically arrange themselves into the 



Antique, 
Mediaeval, 

and 
Modem, 



•• Periods. 



These periods are not so called merely to identify them 
with the corresponding periods in man's political and 
social history, but on account of striking and inher- 
ent differences in the stages of music itself. It is true 
that these are all connected, in the closest manner: 
whenever a change occurs in the condition of men, 
political, social or other, a change will also occur in the 
art predominant during that time : for, little as it may 
seem to busy contemporaries, a vital union exists be- 
tween the art of any time and the common life of any 
time, and one may say with truth that symphonies and 



Egyptian Song^ Dance, and Poem, in One. 265 

paintings, like marriages, vary with the price of corn. 
In our rasping life of trade we are apt to imagine that 
art is of little account after all, and that the poor artist 
who is sitting off in his narrow ill-furnished room writ- 
ing his poem or jotting down his symphony is a pitiful 
cipher quite out of the actual march of important affairs. 
It always seems so, while we listen to the noise of 
trade on the pavements. But men do not really think 
so, and they have shown in a thousand ways that they 
do hot. One can hardly recall a more vivid illustration 
than that Aldhelm of whom mention was made early in 
this book. This Aldhelm standing on the bridge, — as 
the story goes, — singing ballads and sweet gospels to 
the traders as they passed by, was likely a pitiful enough 
figure to the practical men. But when the years roll 
by, we see well enough what the ages — what the people 
— really hold as valuable : for now we do not know 
even the name of the richest merchant who passed the 
bridge, but generation after generation has preserved 
not only the name of Aldhelm but many particulars of 
his life, and all the wealth of those who passed him on 
the bridge would now be given for one of his songs. 

Without however being able now to trace how the 
common life of a time connects itself with and colors 
the art of the time — and most especially the music of 
the time — the main features which characterize the 
music of these three periods may be now developed. 
As the old Egyptian devotee sings, dances and per- 
haps plays some musical instrument before his God, 
we find the three arts of music, poetry, and dancing 
united in the closest bonds. The words or poetry of 
the song, the music of the song, and the dance, are of 
equal importance in the artistic act as a whole. As we 



266 Science of English Verse. 

come down in time, first the dance splits o£E from the 
union and becomes a separate art. Among the Jews 
the triple union is preserved for some time : David 
danced before the ark, and there are several records of 
similar religious art among his people. Even in the 
Greek period dancing is esteemed as a fine art on equal 
terms with the others. But here an interesting change 
begins to show itself. While the art of dancing has 
confirmed its individual existence, a process of separa- 
tion begins to show itself between music and poetry — 
the two other members of the once triple union. The 
first phase of this differentiation exhibits itself in the 
form of the musical declamation accompanied by the 
lyre wliich was so popular among the Greeks. This 
musical declamation may be regarded as the beginning 
of an effort on the part of poetry to set up a separate 
form of expression for itself apart from the musical 
form : the music then, as now, seems apt to swallow up 
and drown the words of a song ; and from this point on, 
down to the present time, we will find more and more 
clearly declaring itself an effort on the part of words, 
or poetry, to gain some form of utterance which will be 
indeed in a sense musical but which will be so in a way 
to bring out, rather than obscure, the meanings of the 
words. 

A little clew seems to appear, at this point, connect- 
ing the Greek musical declamation with the modern 
speech-tune. In our usual talk nowadays, when we ask 
a question the voice rises at the end of the interroga- 
tory through an interval of about a fourth ; that is, for 

instance, from (^n ! to (fK J . On the contrary 





Cadence of ike Fourth, in Speech. 267 

when we make an ordinary affirmation, the voice falls 
at the end of it through about the same interval of a 
fourth. This rise and fall of the fourth may be re- 
garded as the crudest and most general form of the end 
of a speech-tune. We all know and instantly recognize 
these inflections as meaning either interrogation or 
affirmation. If one meets a paralyzed man who cannot 
articulate, for instance, and hears him mumble some- 
thing like this : 



j J J M 



humph humph humph humph humph? 

one knows that he is asking some sort of a question : 
while if the tune of his voice should have a cadence (as 
the end of a strain is called in music) consisting of a 
fall of the voice through this same interval one would 
know that he was making an assertion. 

This tendency of the voice to fall through the interval 
of the fourth seems to show itself in the Greek music. 
In that memorable collection of instructive questions 
which Aristotle calls his Problems, some words occur 
which make it probable that the Greek tune usually 
ended with a stroke on that string of the lyre called 
jtcfiiny, followed by a stroke on the string called wtdr^: 
and according to the Doric mode of tuning the lyre this 
would be a fall of a fourth, the string fiscrj corresponding 

with ( R \ J and vrtdtrj with (fk j . This striking 





similarity between the cadence, or end, of a musical 
tune, and the commonest cadence or end of a speech- 
tune we will find again recurring as we come on down 
the history of music* 

' See Helmholtz, as hitherto dted, here and there. 



268 Science of English Verse. 

But the main point now is that among the Greeks a 
struggle for independence begins on the part of words 
as against pure musical tones, and shows itself in the 
so-called musical declamation, which was not exactly 
musical tune nor exactly speech-tune. 

Leaving the antique period : if we now consider the 
mediaeval period, we find the progress of music charac- 
terized by its first faint approach towards harmony. 
The Greeks had no harmony at all. Their music was 
all melody, that is, a succession of single tones : and 
what they called an accompaniment seems to have been 
merely striking the same tones on the lyre (or other 
musical instrument) which were uttered by the voice, 
perhaps in a different octave. The intervals of the 
fourth and the fifth were certainly known by Pythago- 
ras, but their modern harmonic relations would seem to 
have been wholly unsuspected. This absence of har- 
mony continues in the mediaeval period, but an approach 
to it becomes visible in what is called the polyphonic 
music which distinguishes this period. In polyphonic 
music several different melodies are so arranged that 
they may be sung or played at the same time, without 
discord. There is no attempt yet at chords, as we 
strike them, in accompanying a paramount melody: 
but the separate melodies move independently, though 
not discordantly. An interesting specimen of this early 
polyphonic music in the mediaeval period is presented to 
us in the Cuckoo Song which has been given in another 
connection. It was mentioned that this is notable as 
the first English song found accompanied by the musi- 
cal notes to which it was sung. These musical ootes 
give us one of the tunes which were called by the tech- 
nical name of Discant in the polyphonic system. 



Sonnet y Ballad y Chant: Transition -Forms. 269 

Here the words are still subordinated to the music : 
they have not yet achieved their independence; but 
we find the musical declamation or recitative acquiring 
great prominence during this time, and presenting us 
with a farther stage of the struggle. The little clew of 
the fourth, too, recurs in an interesting manner in the 
intoned church service which takes form during this 
period. In chanting the Catholic service there are 
certain short musical phrases which denote marks of 
punctuation ; when the priest makes this interval 
(but they differ in different services), for example, 

, the congregation knows that a comma has 




occurred in the text, when he makes this ^ ^ 



^ 



they understand a semicolon : when he makes this, 

, it is the sign of a full stop, and here may 




be recognized the familiar cadence of the fourth. 

In this time too we find words manifesting their 
struggle for independence in various specialized forms 
of poems intended to be sung or recited with accompa- 
niment of music or of dancing or of both. The " son- 
net" takes its name from the sounding of the lute 
which it was intended to take on as an accompaniment : 
the "ballad" is from ballare, to dance, and is originally 
a song to be danced to ; the " chant " begins to assume 
a meaning different from cantuSy and to lean towards a 
prolonged sort of speech-tune. 

Coming now to the distinctively modern period of 
music: in the i6th century appears both in Italy and 
England a great passion for the accompanied declama- 



270 Science of English Verse. 

tion {recitativo accompagnato). In Italy the operatic 
recitative flourishes; in England Nicholas Lanier re- 
cites a whole masque composed by Ben Jonson, to a 
musical recitative of his own accompanied by an instru- 
ment, while the noble company of masquers perform in 
dumb show the action of the poem. At this time 
music is striving as hard on its side for separate exist- 
ence as poetry on its side : until Palestrina and Haydn 
and Bach and Beethoven finally bring-out the perfect 
glory of harmony and of instrumentation, on the one 
hand, while Shakspere and Milton and Keats and Ten- 
nyson bring-out the perfect glory of poetic words on 
the other hand. Now, we find music almost exclusively 
expressed through the instrumental tune — a term in- 
cluding the song, which belongs to the singing-voice as 
a reed-instrument — while poetry is expressed through 
the speaking-voice tune. Now, the musician uses the 
voice simply as a reed-instrument, and the word simply 
as a tone-color; while the word-artist, the poet, uses 
music only in that range of it comprehended between 
the limits of the speaking-voice. In fine we have on 
the one hand the Symphony : on the other the Tunes 
of Verse. 

The advantage to each art in thus setting-up for 
itself and growing alone is seen in the wonderful devel- 
opment of both. The progress of music since it became 
purely instrumental and harmonic is one of the most 
striking phenomena in the history of art. The body of 
music made before Palestrina bears such an insignifi- 
cant proportion to that made since, that one may say, 
with substantial truth, music is the product of the last 
three centuries. And if we find music thus bounding 
forward to an astonishing development as soon as it has 



Realism in Recitative. 271 

freed itself from the fetters of poetry, of conventional 
words, and has obtained a completely instrumental 
medium of expression ; we are forced to believe that 
poetry must also find new power and freedom in its 
emancipation from the restraints of music and its acqui- 
sition of an independent medium of expression through 
the speech-tune. 

And if we wish to see how natural it is to expect, 
just at this time, that poetry would thus free itself from ^ 
music and take to its own mouthpiece, we have only to 
consider the attitude of a modern English-speaking 
audience towards the recitative of the ordinary Italian 
opera. The realism of the modern hearer makes it 
almost impossible to divest this recitative of a certain 
absurdity. The audience knows that people in ordinary 
life never sing at each other, in this way ; the audience 
also is becoming acquainted with the perfectly adequate 
speech-tune for expressing all these emotions ; and so 
it grows more and more unwilling to forgive this un- 
reality, along with the others of the stage. This feeling 
of unreality in the sung recitative of the opera is pre- 
cisely the same feeling which delights in the realism of 
the "reading," of the speech-tunes; for in the latter we 
are sure that the words are being spoken in the tunes 
that belong to them, in the actual tunes of life, in the 
melodies of everyday speech. 

Here we open up a fascinating field for a possible 
extension of our poetic achievement. We have seen 
what delicate variations in meaning were effected by 
uttering the same words to a different tune : once we 
get a fair command of all these subtle resources of 
speech-tunes, once we have trained bur ears to recog- 
nize and appreciate them properly, once we have learne4 



272 Science of English Verse. 

to use them in combination with the larger rhythms 
which are easily within the compass of our English 
tongue, what strides may we not take towards that goal, 
— of the complete expression of all the complex needs 
or hopes or despairs of modern life — ^ which ever glit- 
ters through all the clouds of commonplace before the 
eyes of the fervent artist ! 

It remains now to investigate the nature of speech- 
tunes. 

In doing so we are met at the outset by the fact that 
no one has yet succeeded in devising a system of nota- 
tion which could express even those crude forms of the 
speech-tune which have from time to time caught the 
attention of this or that elocutionist or speculator as 
" intonations " or " inflections." This failu^re has caused 
many minds to take on a state of vague scepticism about 
the matter, or rather of hopelessness. Such a result is 
however as illogical as it would be to deny the fact of 
bird-songs because we cannot note them accurately. 

The reason for our inability to note the tunes of 
speech in visible characters however lies in the circum- 
stance that the scale of tones used by the speaking- 
voice differs entirely from that used in music. This 
scale of tones is explained in the preliminary chapter, 
to which the reader may here refer. I have there set 
forth, in a physical explanation of vibratory phenomena 
which will be intelligible to many who find the "whole 
tones" and half-tones" of music insoluble problems, 
that the tones used in music are a special set of tones, 
selected from the body of possible tones according to a 
fixed law which chooses certain tones, rejects others 
lying near them, chooses the next, and so on, until the 
-^ale is completed. This scale is composed of so-called 



I 



Musical Notation inadequate for Speech-Tunes. 273 

"whole tones " and "half-tones ; " and nothing less than 
half-tones is employed in the tunes of music — of, at 
least, European music. 

The tunes of speech, however, do employ less inter- 
vals than the half-tone ; and in so far as they do, they 
are beyond the capacity of the musical system of nota- 
tion. That system indicates a change of pitch to the 



extent of a whole tone thus : rh I J — where the 




first note is on a space below the first line of the stafE, 
and the second is on the first line of a stafE. Between 
these two tones, only one other is possible in music: 
namely the semitone, which is indicated either by adding 

i 



a % ("sharp ") to the first note, thus ^ ) ^ | , making it 



a semitone higher, or by adding a ^ ("flat ") to the sec- 



^ 



ond one, making it a semitone lower,' thus 

But, the musical system of notation being thus inad- 
equate to express more than one tone between ^ | 

and ^ ^ J , it is for that reason wholly inadequate to 



f 



note a speech-tune ; for, in the scale of the speaking- 
voice, several tones — certainly at least nine — lie be 

tween ^ J and ^ J , These thirds of tones, 

fourths of tones, fifths of tones, and so on up to ninths 

' As before mentioned it would be a needless perplexity to explain 
here the differences of temperament, which are not at all necessary to the 
point in hand. 



274 Science of English Verse. 

of tones, used by the speaking-voice constitute the 
characteristic peculiarity of its tunes and present us 
with the obstacle which has defeated all attempts to 
note them by the limited resources of the musical sta£E. 
There is no musical character for the third of a tone, 
the fourth of a tone, and so on, or for any less interval 
than the half of a tone : and thus at least four-fifths of 
the tones actually used by the speaking-voice in its 
tunes are incapable of expression by this system. 

Of course nothing would be easier than to devise a 
system which would be adequate to the scale of the 
speaking-voice. It would be necessary only to increase 
very largely the number of lines in the staff, and to note 
the tones with the understanding that the note on the 
lowest line of the staff should express the lowest tone 
of the speaking-voice, the note in the next space a tone 
one-ninth higher, the note on the next line a tone one- 
ninth higher, and so on, ascending by the ninth of a 
tone at each step, to the highest limit of the speaking- 
voice. This limit would range through a little over two 
octaves for the ordinary voice. 

But the difficulty in the construction of such a scale 
is that we have not yet ascertained with precision the 
power of the ear in exactly co-ordinating small intervals 
such as the third, fourth, &c., of a tone. While the 
ear, as ascertained by quite recent experiments, can un- 
questionably detect a difference in pitch between two 
tones of much less than the ninth of a musical whole 
tone, yet how minute, exactly, may be the interval be- 
tween two speaking-voice tones beyond which the ear's 
discrimination is not reliable, is not yet ascertained. 
The present writer hopes before long to find this inter- 
val through some experiments now in progress ; but in 



Capacity of Ear for Small Intervals, 275 

the mean time, disregarding co-ordinations of speaking- 
voice tones beyond the ninth of a tone, it is perhaps 
sufficient to say that many reasons concur to authorize 
the belief that very much smaller intervals than this 
enter into the composition of speech-tunes. 

It must be said that the speech-tune is in its infancy 
and that no man can tell what will be the development 
of the powers of the ear in this direction. There can 
be no doubt that if, as has been already recommended 
to the reader, the habit of consciously listening to the 
tunes of speech should become generally cultivated, an 
enormous increase of capacity in the general nicety of 
discrimination and in the understanding of these flitting 
melodies would result. Perhaps few persons are prop- 
erly aware of the endless capacity of the ear for culti- 
vation in these matters. This capacity has been very 
remarkably illustrated in the history of music during 
the past two hundred years. There are notable in- 
stances that during that time the ear of the whole civil- 
ized race of men has undergone such a change by cul- 
tivation that chords which even musicians could not 
easily tolerate have come to be universally recognized 
as not only tolerable but beautiful. 

One can positively declare from personal experience 
that the ear can be brought to such a capacity in co-or- 
dinating these speech-tunes that as much more pleasure 
is derived from them as a fervent and skilful musician 
derives from intelligently following a symphony of 
Beethoven, when compared with one whose uncultivated 
ear perceives in the mass of music only a chaotic 
splotch of tones. 

In the case of rhythm we found that perhaps the 
most primitive form of rhythm-producing apparatus 



276 



Science of English Verse. 



was to be seen in- our own country, in the " patting " 
which the Southern negroes so delight-in for a dance- 
accompaniment. I can now again point to the negro as 
exhibiting a most striking example of the transition- 
period from pure musical poetic recitative to the speech- 
tune, or more refined recitative. One who has ever 
heard a typical negro sermon will have observed how 
the preacher begins, in the ordinary tones of voice, 
announcing his text and gradually clearing the way to 
the personal appeal of the sermon : here he rises into a 
true poetic height, and always falls into what is an 
approach to musical recitative : "Yes, my bretherin and 
sisterin,'* (he will say) "ef you don' make haste and 
repent of all your sins and wish yourself cl6an in de 
river of life, de Lord will fling de 14s' m4n of you down 
into everldsting perdition." 

The transition-nature of this, between musical recita- 
tive and the speech-tune, appears from the fact that its 
tones are almost exactly reproducible in musical nota- 
tion. Every one who has heard it will readily recognize 
it in the following scheme : 




Yes, my breth - er - in and sis - ter - in 




s rs fs rs 
J J ^ 



^ 



you don* make haste and re - pent 

A A A 




all yo* sins and wash yo' • self clean 



Negro Sermon^ in Musical Recitative. 277 



A 



i 



i 



3 



in 



de 



wa 



ter of life, 



\ \— 

de Lord 




de las* 



man 



wo -man 



you 



t 



5 



^ 



s 



J n II 



all 



in - to ev - er - last - ing pah - di - shuni 



The effect of this upon the more cultivated ear is a 
curious confirmation of the account given of the func- 
tion of speech-tunes. The sing-song is not bearable: 
it is so much less subtle and capable than the speech- 
tune that our minds take towards it the same attitude as 
toward the musical recitative.' 

And now, as affording an instructive contrast between 
the crude approach to the speech-tune made in the half- 
chanted sermon of the negro ji|st given and the high- 
est delicacy of the cultivated speech-tune, let the 
student read aloud the following sonnet of Michael 
Drayton's which in a still more artful manner illustrates 
not only the necessity of speech-tunes but their power 
of infusing subtle, dainty and delicately-shaded differ- 
ences of meaning into the same words. The word " I 
is here sometimes used as a pun upon the word " ay 
(meaning ^^j, as in the ayes and noes), sometimes as a 
liberal grammatic application of the pronoun meaning 

* So that the long recitatives of Wagner are music of the past rather 
than of the future. This great genius has indeed revived the mediaeval 
polyphony in modern instrumentation. 



» 



>» 



278 •^ Science of English Verse. 

me, and sometimes in its own signification. Here is, 
therefore, material for a complex and delicate interplay 
between the three meanings which the word has as 
word and the other meanings given it by the tune in 
which the voice pronounces it. This interplay is so 
subtle that even with the poem before the eye, I think 
one does not get nearly all the cunning turns of thought 
until after several readings and some reflection. You 
are however to fancy that the poet is diligently making 
love to some saucy, red-lipped, slender, bright-eyed 
beauty of the time, who half in sport, half in fighting 
off her own love which she does not wish to hide and 
yet is unwilling to display, continually drives him off 
and then lures him on, wholly by the peculiar tunes of 
speech in which she utters the monosyllables no and ay. 
At last he grows into a fit of desperation, and cries 
out to her : 

X. (of The Sonnets to Idea.) 

Nothing but No and I, and I and No : 
How falls it out so strangely you reply ? 
I tell you (fair) I'll not be answered so, 
With this affirming No, denying I. 
I say I love, you slightly answer // 
I say, You love, you peule me out a No : 
I say, I die, you echo me with /.• 
Save me, I cry, you sigh me out a No, 
Must Woe and I have nought but No and I ? 
No I, am I, if I no more can have ; 
Answer no more, with silence make reply 
And let me take myself what I do crave : 
Let No and I with I and you be so : 
Then answer No and I, and I ajid No. 

And finally here — in this matter of the tunes of 
English verse — the soxviiets of Shakspere are supreme 



Tunes of Drayton and Shakspere. 279 

for subtlety and often for beauty. Sometimes the 
antitheses of thought are so manifold, the turns of 
expression so doubling and twisting, that we can hardly 
find any tunes for them : they can scarcely be read 
aloud ! While others such as " When I consider every- 
thing that grows " (XV), or " No longer mourn for me 
when I am dead " (LX), or " Not from the stars do I 
my judgment pluck" (XIV), or "When in disgrace 
with fortune and men's eyes" (XXIX), or "When to 
the sessions of sweet silent thought " (XXX), or " Be- 
twixt mine eye and heart a league is took " (XLVII), 
or " Tir'd with all these for restful death I cry " 
(LXVI), or " But be contented : when that fell arrest " 
(LXXI V), or '* Then hate me when thou wilt ; if ever, 
now" (XC), — and many more — create in our voices 
as we read them such faint-changing, indefinable, 
strange, and beautiful tunes that we seem to be speak- 
ing some language out of a finer and brighter star than 
our own. 



PART III. 

THE COLORS OF ENGLISH VERSE. 

CHAPTER XL 

OF COLORS IN VERSE, GENERALLY; AND OF RHYME, 

SPECIALLY. 

When the voice utters the sound denoted by the 
English character A, it makes, not a single tone, but a 
tone composed of a number of other tones : when it 
utters the sound denoted by the English charaitter O, 
it again utters a tone which is not single but composed 
of a number of other tones ; and the difference between 
the two sounds, by which the ear distinguishes A from 
O, is due to the fact that certain of the ingredient 
sounds are prominent in A, while certain others are 
prominent in O. As, in making the color purple out 
of a composition of red and violet, we would have differ- 
ent shades of purple according as we should make the 
red or the violet more prominent in the mixture, so in 
making up a sound the buccal cavity^ manages, by 
co-ordinations of muscles which are learned in child- 
hood, to render now one, now another, ingredient-sound 
more prominent, and thus to bring out different shades 
of tone. It is a certain shade of tone which we call A, 

' Consisting oi the moutii, I^tyiix, nose, &c^ 
280 



Colors of Verse. 281 

another which we call O, another which we call E, 
another which we call U, and so on : and the ear dis- 
criminates one of these shades of tone from another as 
the eye discriminates one shade of color from another. 

It is this analogy between processes belonging to 
sound and processes belonging to light which has origi- 
nated the very expressive term "tone-color" ^ in acous- 
tics. And inasmuch as vowels and consonants are 
phenomena of tone-color, the present system of verse 
acquires a safe and sure basis of classification by refer- 
ring all those effects of English verse which depend 
directly upon vowels and consonants to this fact and 
assembling all such effects under the term " the colors 
of English verse." 

The reader in beginning the study of these colors 
should refresh the memory as to their nature and their 
relations to musical tone-color by re-reading the sections 
of the introductory chapter in which the physical ex- 
planation of tone-color is given. 

It is important to observe that the term "colors of 
verse" is therefore a scientific term, and not based 
upon those fanciful analogies which have in a vaguer 
way imported terms drawn from sound into the art of 
painting ^.nA — vice-versa — t^rm^ drawn from light 
into the art of music. These terms, though fanciful, 
have been found of great use. It would be diflficult to 
find a word by which we could as well express what has 
come to be known as the "tone" of a painting or draw- 
ing : while, in the same way, we could scarcely replace 
the word " color " as it has come to be applied to musi- 
cal compositions. Perhaps the most unmusical person, 

» Otherwise "Timbre," "Clang-tint" (Mr. Tyndall, translating th^ 
German IClang'farbe)^ " Quality." See chap. I, pp. 28, 29. 



282 Science of English Verse. 

after hearing Gade's Eighth Symphony, for instance, 
would instantly recognize the felicity of the expression 
upon being told that it was " scarlet in color," from a 
certain pervading splendor of sound distinguishable 
through all the beautiful rhythmic, melodic and har- 
monic movements : while on the other hand a person 
quite out of the range of painters' slang would under- 
stand what was meant upon being told that a certain 
picture was " purple-gray in tone." 

But, recognizing from these brief examples the happy 
way in which expressions originally referring to phe- 
nomena of sound lend themselves to the description of 
phenomena of light, — and the opposite, — the student 
is to bear in mind, as was said, that the term " colors of 
verse " is not drawn from these fanciful analogies, but 
. refers to the actual physical process which has come to 
be scientifically designated "tone-color," as it reveals 
itself in those colors which we call A, E, O, B, X, &c. 
in speech and in verse. 

In this connection it is not a little curious to remark 
that one of the phenomena hereinafter treated under this 
head — that of rhyme — happened by a mere glance of 
the mind to be called ** color" in verse long before the 
time when the actual process now known as tone-color 
was suspected. It is nearly three hundred years ago 
since King James in his Reulis &c. for verse-making 
said : " First, ze sail keep just cuUouris " {Firsts ye shall 
keep just colors)^ " quhairof the cautelis are thir " {where- 
of the cautions are these) : " that ze ryme nocht twyse in 
ane syllabe " (that ye rhyme not twice in one syllable) &c. 

I find Webbe, in 1586, using the same term as to 
rhyme : in a most contemptuous abuse of rhyme, which 
he regarded as all unworthy, he declares that "our 



Four Main Effects of Tone -Color in Verse. 283 

speeche . . . might bee adorned with farre more 
excellent collours then ryming is." 

When the ear co-ordinates a series of verse-sounds 
with special reference to their tone-colors, the resulting 
perceptions may be considered under the following four • 
divisions, which embrace most of such co-ordinations as 
are of artistic importance in English verse, to wit : 

(i) Rhyme : which involves both vowels and conso- # 
nyits; 

(2) Vowel-distribution : which involves the considera- , 
tion of vowels alone, with reference to securing agreea- 
ble successions of them in the line ; 

(3) Consonant-distribution : which involves the con- 
sideration of consonants alone, with reference to (d) 
securing agreeable junctions of the terminal consonant • 
of each word with the initial consonant of the next 
word, and with reference to {p) arranging pleasant 
recurrences of similar consonant-colors. 

(4) Alliteration : which involves both vowels and 
consonants ; 

These divisions suggest a convenient order for dis- 
cussing the main effects of tone-color as exhibited in 
the sounds of verse. 

RHYME. 

(i) Those whose lot it is to receive for helpful criti- 
cism the poetic endeavors of doubtful beginners will 
have observed that very indefinite ideas as to what con- 
stitutes rhyme in English verse often prevail among 
persons of considerable culture. To find "able" 
rhymed with " possible " — the common syllable " ble " 
being evidently supposed to sanction the rhyme; or 
♦' vine " rhymed with " time," and " vain " with " name," 



284 Science of English Verse. 

and " over " with " sober/* and the like ; is not uncom- 
mon. 

In English verse, two words which rhyme must 
always have : the initial consonant-sounds different^ and 
all the sounds following these initial ones alike ' — 
whether vowel-sounds, or both vowel and consonant- 
sounds. Thus, in the simple rhymes " go " and " so," 
the initial consonant-sounds are "g" and "s" — that 
is, different : while the sounds succeeding the init^ 
ones are both " o " — that is, alike. The rule would of 
course include the possible case where one of the words 
is without any initial consonant-sound : as " oh," with 
" go " or "so," is a good rhyme. 

Let it be carefully observed that the rule uses the 
term " consonant-J^««^ " and " vowel-j^wfwfo," rather 
than "consonants" and "vowels:" for, in English it 
often happens that not only different sounds are indi- 
cated by the same vowel or consonant, but also that 
different vowels or consonants indicate the same sound. 

Thus "though" is a good rhyme with "so," — and 
follows the rule given ; for the initial consonant-sounds 
"th" and "s^ are different, while the vowel-sounds 
and consonant-sounds following them are alike though 
the vowels and consonants (meaning vowel-letters and 
consonant-letters) standing for those sounds are wholly 
unlike. So " do " and " few " and " true " and " coo " 
all rhyme, though the vowel-letters which follow the 
differing initial consonants all differ also; for these 
different letters express in English utterance like 
sounds. Similarly: "do" and "go" do not rhyme: 
for while the initial consonant-sounds differ and the 

' The rule differs in other languages. 



Historic Outline of English Rhyme, 285 

following vowel-letters are alike, the following vowel- 
sounds are not alike. 

The rule given applies as well to rhymes of more than 
one syllable. Thus in rhymes like "slumber" and 
" number " — often called " feminine/' " female," or 
" double-ending " rhymes — the initial consonant-sounds 
differ, and all the following sounds agree : it is there- 
fore a good rhyme. So in rhymes of three syllables — 
the Italian ** Sdrucciole'* — as " slumbering " and "num- 
bering,", "beautiful" and "dutiful," and the like, we 
always have the initial consonant-sounds of the two 
words differenty and all the other sounds alike. 

The office of rhyme in marking-o£f rhythmic groups 
for the ear has been already explained ; and the present 
discussion may therefore confine itself to (d) A Historic 
Outline of rhyme in English poetry particularly as bear- 
ing upon the proposed rhyme-tests for Shakspere, and 
(p) Practical Cautions for its use in verse. 

(d) The employment of rhyme in English verse as a 
pleasant effect upon the ear dates from a very early 
period. It is often said to have been brought from 
Eastern sources ; but we find rhymes in very early An- 
glo-Saxon poems, and one — called by Conybeare " The 
Riming Poem," a strange and obscure paraphrase upon 
some passages in the Book of Job — is written entirely 
in a remarkably effective succession of mostly double, 
or feminine, rhymes. For example, in the beautiful 
Anglo-Saxon poem of The Phcenixy the following coup- 
let, which occurs in a fervent description of Paradise, 
or the Happy Land, presents some striking rhymes : 

Ne iox%Xt% fnasty ne fyres blasts 
Ne haegles hryrey ne hrimes dryre; 



286 



Science of English Verse. 



while the rh3rming poem, which is given in the note ' 
below as being probably the first entire English poem 



* RHYMING POEM. 



TYPIC SCHEBIE. 



Wic o 

r 

Wen - 

t t 

Lis - se 
Leo -ma 



Me lifes onlah 
Se this leoht onwrah, 
And thaet torhte geteoh 
Tillice onwrah. 

Glsed was ic gliwum, 
Glenged hiwum, 
Blissa bleoum 
Blostma hiwum. 



fer 

t 

nan 

t 

mid 



r t 

wong - lun 

r c 

gong - mn 

r c 

long - um 
tong - um. 



He raised me to life 
Who displayed this light. 
And this bright possession 
Bountifully disclosed. 

Glad was I in glee, 
Adorned with [fair] colors, 
With the hues of bliss 
And the tints of blossoms. 



Secgas mec segon 
Symbel ne alegon 
Feorh-giefe gefegon. 
Fraetwed waegum 

Wic ofer wongum, 
Wennan gongum 
Lisse mid longum 
Leoma getongum ; 

Tha waes waestmum aweaht 
World onspreht, 
Under roderum aweaht 
Rsd maegne ofer theaht. 



Men would say concerning me 
That perpetually I should not desist 
To rejoice in the gifts [blessings] of 

life. 
Adorned in its paths 

[Was my] habitation on the earth 
[So that I might] expect in my 

joumejrings 
Favor with long 
Dispensations of light (felicity) ; 

Then was I abounding in fruits 
And flourishing in the world, 
Springing up beneath the heavens. 
And excelling in the force of coun- 
sel. 



Anglo-Saxon Rhyming Poem. 287 



in rhyme, shows great skill in the use of this effect, and 
makes a most sonorous piece of speech-sound when 



Giestas gengdon 
Ger-scype mengdon, 
Lisse lengdon, 
Luftum glengdon. 

Scrifen scrad glad 
Thurh-gescad inbrad 
Waes on lagu-streame lad 
Thaer me leothu ne biglad. 
Hsefde ic haeanne had 
Ne wses me in healle gad 
Thaet thaer rof word rad ; 
Oft thaer rinc gebad 

Thaet he in sele saege 
Sine gewaege. 

Thegnum gethyhte . . . 
Thendum waes ic maegen, 

Horsce mec heredon, 
Hilde generedon, 
Faegre feredon, 
Feondon biweredon. 

Swa mec hyht-giefu heold 
Hyge Dryht befeold ; 
Stathol aehtum steald, 
Stepe-gongum weald ; 
Swilce eorthe ol • 

Ahte ic ealdor stol ; 
Galdor wordum gol, 
Gomel sibbe neof oil. 



Ac waes gefest gear, 
Gellende sner, 
Wuniende waer, 
Wil-bec be scaer. 



Guests came 

They intermixed in commerce, 
They prolonged my pleasures, 
And adorned me with luxuries. 

Vestments of joy carefully wrought 

Shed around in breadth 

Were led over the ocean flood 

Where my vessel miscarried not. 

I held a high state 

Nor was there in my hall any peer 

Who would utter a haughty word 

there ; 
Warrior often begged there 

[For the treasures] which he beheld 

in my court, 
The weighed silver. 



Thence was I powerful 

Warriors obeyed me, 
Delivered me in battle. 
Fairly supported me, 
Protected me from enemies. 

So faithfully the gifts of hope 
Did the Lord pour into my mind ; 
He established a firm foundation 

for my possessions, 
And directed my steps in their goings 
So in the earth 
I possessed a royal seat ; 
I sang magic strains. 
And grown old in peace, I had no 

disgrace. ^ 

But I was formerly firm, 
Affluent 
Abiding safely 

With an abundant stream [of good] 
by my portion. 



288 



Science of English Verse. 



properly read aloud, even to those who do not under- 
stand its meaning. 



Scealcas waeron scearpe 
Scyl waes heaxpe. 



My servants were sagacious. 
There was skill in their harping. 



Hlude hlynede, 
Hleothor dynede, 
Swegl-rad swinsade 
Swithe, ne minsade. 



It resounded loud. 
The strain re-echoed. 
Melody was heard 
Powerfully, nor did it cease. 



Burg sele beofode, 
Beorht hlifade ; 
Ellen eacnade, 
£ad eacnade ; 
Freaum frodade, 
Fromum godade, 
Mod msegnade, 
Mine faegnade. 
Freow telgade, 
Tir welgade, 
• • • . 
Blaed blissade, 
Gold gearwade, 
Gim hwearfade, 
Sine searwade, 
Sib*nearwade ; 



The hall vfljrated, 
Splendor shone ; 
My spirit expanded. 
My happiness increased ; 
I was prudent among princes. 
And successful among the brave, 
Powerful in mind. 
Rejoiced in spirit 
My tree flourished. 
My sway increased, 
.... 
Fruit blessed me, 
Gold was at hand, 
Gems poured around me. 
Treasures tempted, 
Kindred drew near ; 



From ic waes in fraetwum 
Freolic in in-geatwum, 



I was brave in adornment, 
And graceful in carriage. 



Waes min dream dryhtlic, 
Drohtad hyhtlic ; 



My glory was lordly. 
Conversation joyful; 



Foldan ic freothode, 
Folcum ic leothode ; 
Lif waes min longe 
Leodum ingemonge, 
Tirum getonge 
Teala gehonge. 



I was benevolent to the land 

I sang lays to the people ; 

My life was long 

Among my nation, 

My condition in my dominions 

Was happily supported. 



Rhymes of A Id helm. 



289 



The Carmen Aldhelmi which occurs with the Letters 
of Boniface shows us — if it be really the song of our 



Nu min hrether is hreoh 
Heoh-sithum sceoh, 
Nyd bisgum neah ; 
Gewited nihtes infleah 



Se aer in daege was dyre ; 
Scrithed nu deop feor, 

Brond hord geblowen 
Breostum inforgrowen; 
Flyhtum to-flowen 
Flah is geblowen 

Miclum in gemynde 
Modes gecynde ; 

Greteth ongrynde, 
Grom ofen pynde. 

Bealo-fus bymeth, 
Bittre wyrneth ; 

Wid sith onginneth, 
Sar ne sinneth, 
Sorgum cinnith, 
Blaed his blinnith, 
Blisse linnath, 
Listum linneth, 
Lustum ne cinneth. 

Dreamas swa her gedresath, 
Dryht scyre gehreosath j 
Lif her men forleosath, 
Leahtras oft geceosath. 
Treow thrag 
Is to-trag, 
Seo untrume genag 
Steapum eatole misthah 
Ond eal stund genag 



But now my breast is stormy 
Shaken by the season of woe, 
Need is nigh ; 

And he is tormented at the ap- 
proach of night 

Who before in the day was highly 

esteemed ; 
Deep fire now is wrapt around, 

And the hoard of brands inflamed 
Increasing round his breast ; 
Flowing in flights 
The dart is blown forth 

Against the haughty of soul 
In the disposition of his mind ; 

He lamenteth in the abyss, 
Pained in the furnace of woe. 

Bale-fire burneth. 
Bitterly wameth ; 

A wide journey beginneth, 

Affliction ceaseth not ; 

He exclaimeth in sorrows, 

His joy hath ceased. 

His bliss hath declined. 

He is fallen from his delights ; 

He exclaimeth not in happiness. 

Thus glories here are prostrated. 
And the lordly lot brought low; 
[So] men here lose their life. 
And often choose crimes ; 
A faithful course 
Is withdrawn, 

And that which hath no firmness 
aboundeth, 



290 



Science of English Verse. 



Aldhelm — an Anglo-Saxon poet rhyming Latin words 
together certainly as early as the beginning of the 8th 



Swa nu world wendeth 
W3n'de sendeth 
And hetes henteth 
Hselethe scyndeth, 

Wer c)mge witeth, 

Wael gar sliteth, 

Flah mah fliteth, 

Flan man hwiteth, 

Burg sorg biteth ; 

Bald aid thwiteth, 

Wraec-faec writhath, 

Wrathath smiteth ; 

Sin-grynd sidath, 

Saecre [saearo] fearo glideth, 



Thus now the world wendeth ; 
Fate sendeth [men to their doom] 
And hate pursueth ; 
Chieftains oppress, 

War-kings go forth, 

The dart of slaughter pierceth, 

The violent arrow flieth, 

The spear smiteth them, 

Sorrow devoureth the city ; 

The bold man in age decayeth. 

The season of vengeance torment- 

eth. 
And enmity easily assaileth ; 
The abyss of sin increaseth. 
Sudden treachery glideth in. 



Grom torn graefeth, 
Graeft hafath, 



Grim rage grieveth. 
Woe possesseth. 



Searo hwit solath, 
Sumur het colath, 



Sere soileth white, 
Summer's heat cooleth. 



Fold fela fealleth, 
Feond-scire wealleth, 
Eorth maegen ealdath, 
Ellen colath. 



Many things fall to the ground, 
The portion of strife aboundeth. 
Earthly power groweth old. 
Courage cooleth. 



Me thaet wyrd gewaef, 
And gehwyrt forgeaf 
Thaet ic grofe graef. 
And thaet grimme graef 



This Fate wove for me. 

And as decree assigned it 

That I should grieve with this grief. 

And the grim grave 



Flean flaesce ne maeg ; 
Thon flah hred daeg, 



Flesh may not flee ; 

Soon as the rapid day hath flown 



Nid grapum nimeth 
Thon seo neah becymeth ; 



Necessity seizeth in her grasps 
When she cometh nigh; 



Early Latin Rhymes. 



291 



century, in the following fashion, (the rhythm is that of 

The Raven 

Once up-on a mid-night drear-y, 
Led ' or cast-e cath- - lie - e 
While I pond-ered weak and wear-y\ 
At - que ob - ses ath - let - ic - e) 

Lector caste catholice 
Atque obses athletice 
Tuis pulsatus precibus 
Obnixe flagitantibus 

&*c. 
Usque diram Dornoniam 
Per carentum Cornubiam 
Florulentis cespitibus 
EtfcBCundis graminibus. 



Seo me ethles onfonn, 

And mec her heardes onconn. 



Thonne lichoma ligeth, 
Lima wyrm friteth, 
Ac him wen ne gewigeth, 
And tha wist gehygeth ; 

Oththaet beath tha ban an ; 

And set nyhstan nan 
Nefne se nede tan 
Balawan her gehlotene. 
Ne bith se hlisa adroren 



iEr thaet eadig gethenceth 
He hine the oftor swenceth, 



Byrgeth him tha bitran S3mne, 
Hogath to thaere betran wynne. 



She that hath taken me from my 
country 

And here exerciseth me in hard- 
ship. 

Then the corpse lieth, 
Worm fretteth the limbs, 
And the worm departeth not, 
And there chooseth its repast, 

Until there be bone only left ; 

And at the last there is no one 
But that his fate compels 
A prey to that destructive host 
Nor shall he be conversant with 
happiness 

Ere the blessed one [God] thinketh 
That he hath sufficiently often af- 
flicted him, 

And burieth for him bitter sin. 
And exalteth to the better joy. 



292 



Science of English Verse. 



Again, the following couplet out of a poem preserved 
in William of Malmesbury, probably of the^ time of 
Athelstan, shows Latin hexameters rhymed not only 
at the end but in the body of the line — an effect which 
this specimen will show might be capable of great 
splendor with the majestic Latin vocables : 

^t tt t tt n ft r r r r f 



8 



Reg-i - a 



pro-gen- 1 



es pro- 



dux - it 



no - bil-e 



stam-ma 



r ^ c r r t r r r r c c r r 

Cum ten - e - bris nost - ris il - lux - it splend-id - a gem-ma. 



Gemon mortha lisse, 
Her sinden miltsa blisse 



Remember death's favor, 
Here are merciful blessings, 



Hyhtlice in heofona rice. 
Uton nu halgum gelice 



Full of hope in heaven's kingdom. 
Ah, may we be like the saints 



Scyldum byscyrede, 
Scyndum generede, 
Wonmium biwerede, 

Thaer mon cjm mot 
For meotude rot, 



Washed from our sins, 
Liberated from condemnation, 
Protected from terror, 

Where mankind shall 
Before their Creator splendid, 



Sothne God geseon 
And aa in sibbe gefean. 



Behold the true God 

And joy in peace evermore. 



Text from Conybeare. I have, however, changed his translation in 
some points where he seems manifestly wrong ; and in the line " Bealo-fus 
byrneth " I have ventured to conjecture Bezlch/yr (bale-fire) for the text. 
In several places the poem is so obscure that interpretation is guess-work, 
and here Conybeare's guesses are left untouched. Of course textual, or 
any further, criticism would not be in place for the present purpose, and 
it seems proper only to cite the inquirer to the original poem in the Codex 
Exoniensisy- or Exeter Book, and to Conybeare's Illustrations of Angl(h 
Saxon Poetry y London, 1826. 



Rhyme against Rhythm in the i6th Century. 293 

In the Ormulum, of the early 13th century, the 
rhymes, though not continuous, are too frequent to be 
unintentional ; and from this time on a vast amount of 
rhymed English popular poetry (of which the student 
will find many interesting specimens in Warton*s His- 
tory of English Poetry y in Halliwell and Wright's Reli- 
quice Antiques ^ in the publications of the Shakspere 
Societies, The Roxburghe Club, The Chaucer Society, 
The Early English Text Society) appears to have been 
written, besides the greater works known to all. 

Thus we find rhyme appearing continuously in our 
poetry from the beginning of it to the present day. In 
fact, it had appeared so continuously that about the last 
quarter of the i6th century the word "rhyme** had 
come to be pretty nearly synonymous with vernacular 
poetry in England as opposed to' the more dignified 
Greek and Latin verse, and a strong party was formed 
in opposition to all rhyming verse. The notion got 
abroad — and how long it prevailed has been shown 
in the Preface to this book — that rhythm was a prop- 
erty peculiar to the classic verse and did not exist 
in English verse ; whence the former was distinctly 
spoken of as rhythm and the latter as rhyme. Sir 
Philip Sidney lays down this distinction quite explicitly 
in the Apologiefor Poetrie: " Now of versifying there are 
two sorts, the one Auncient, the other Moderne ; the 
Auncient marked the quantitie of each silable and ac- 
cording to that framed his verse ; the Moderne, observ- 
ing only number (with some regarde of the accent) the 
chiefe life of it, standeth in that lyke sounding of the 
words which we call ryme'' Hereupon Sir Philip, Fulk 
Greville, Spenser, Gabriel Harvey and others formed 
their club or society called the Areopagus, which was 



>ll 



294 Science of English Verse. 

to bring back the English verse from the error of 
rhyme into the orthodoxy of classic rhythm ; for which 
purpose the Areopagus set to work at laying down a 
rigid law for the quantity of every syllable in English. 
Of course it was not long before Spenser, who had an 
ear that knew wherein music consisted, gradually drew- 
out from this folly. 

But others grew all the more outspoken against 
rhyme. Puttenham has frequent side-flings at it : as 
that "about the time of Charlemaines raigne . . . many 
simple clerks, . . . following either the barbarous rude- 
ness of the time or els their own idle inventions, . . . 
thought themselves no small fooles when they could 
make their verses goe all in ryme ; *' ^ and in another 
place he speaks of the word rhyme as " an abusion " of 
the word rhythmus from which he considers it derived 
in English. 

Webbe, again, becomes quite furious against rhyme : 
"... Ryme or like ending of verses : which though it 
is of least importance, yet hath won such credite among 
us, that of all other it is most regarded of the greatest 
part of Readers. And surely as I am perswaded, the 
regarde of wryters to this hath beene the greatest decay 
of that good order of versifying which might ere this 
have beene established in our speeche :'* and in another 
place he abuses "the uncountable rabble of ryming 
Ballet" (ballad) "makers and compilers of senseless 
Sonets" as a "rout of ragged Rymers," declaring that 
" every one that can frame a Booke in Ryme, though 
for want of matter it be but in commendations of Cop- 
per noses or Bottle Ale, wyll catch at the Garlande due 
to poets." 

* P. 28, Arte of English Poesie^ Arber Reprint 



Shakspere's Disuse of Rhyme. 295 

Roger Ascham in The Scholemaster was equally 
severe. 

To the same effect, though in somewhat more genial 
mood, I find Ben Jonson making rhymes against rhym- 
ing. 

These expressions, particularly those of Webbe, will 
prepare the reader to see a great disdain cropping out 
between the lines of that famous fling at Shakspere in 
poor Robert Greene's Groatsworth of Wit, in which 
Greene accuses the rising poet of thinking himself 
" able to bumbast out a blank verse ** with the rest of 
them : as if young master Shakspere should take his 
place with Webbe*s rout of ragged Rymers and not 
presume so high as rhythmic verse. 

I have brought the sketch of English rhyme to the 
particular point now arrived at, as contributing to 
enlarge the reader's view of an important test which 
has been proposed, in addition to the metrical tests 
described in Part I., for ascertaining the chronology of 
Shakspere's plays. This test is based upon the idea 
thstt Shakspere grew more and more out of liking with 
rhyme as he became older, and that this dislike shows 
itself in the regularly decreasing frequency of rhymes 
as we go from his early plays to his late ones. The 
circumstance that a general decrease of rhymes does 
occur had been noticed as early as 1778 by Malone. 
"In the whole number of pieces'* — he means by 
" pieces " Shakspere's plays — '* which were written 
antecedent to the year 1600 . . . more rhyming coup- 
lets are found, than in all the plays composed subse- 
quently to that year. . . . As, therefore most of his 
early productions are characterized by the multitude of 
similar terminations" (i.e., rhymes) "which they ex- 



286 



Science of English Verse. 



while the rh3rming poem, which is given in the note ' 
below as being probably the first entire English poem 



* RHYMING POEM. 







TYPIC SCHEME. 


\ 


t 


t 


t 


r t 




Wic 


o - 


fer 


wong - um 




r 

Wen 


^ 


nan 


r p 

gong - am 




Lis - 
Leo- 


se 
ma 


mid 
ge - 


r : 

long - um 
tong - um. 


Me lifes onlah 
Se this leoht onwrah, 
And thaet torhte geteoh 
Tillice onwrah. 




He raised me to life 
Who displayed this light, 
And this bright possession 
Bountifully disclosed. 


Glaed was ic gliwum, 
Glenged hiwum, 
Blissa bleoum 
Blostma hiwum. 




Glad was I in glee, 
Adorned with [fair] colors. 
With the hues of bliss 
And the tints of blossoms. 



Secgas mec segon 
Symbel ne alegon 
Feorh-giefe gefegon. 
Fraetwed waegum 

Wic ofer wongum, 
Wennan gongum 
Lisse mid longum 
Leoma getongum ; 

Tha waes waestmum aweaht 
World onspreht, 
Under roderum aweaht 
Raed maegne ofer theaht. 



Men would say concerning me 
That perpetually I should not desist 
To rejoice in the gifts [blessings] of 

life. 
Adorned in its paths 

[Was my] habitation on the earth 
[So that I might] expect in my 

joumeyings 
Favor with long 
Dispensations of light (felicity) ; 

Then was I abounding in fruits 
And flourishing in the world. 
Springing up beneath the heavens. 
And excelling in the force of coun- 
sel. 



Anglo-Saxon Rhyming Poem. 287 



in rhyme, shows great skill in the use of this effect, and 
makes a most sonorous piece of speech-sound when 



Giestas gengdon 
Ger-scype mengdon, 
Lisse lengdon, 
Luftum glengdon. 

Scrifen scrad glad 
Thurh-gescad inbrad 
Waes on lagu-streame lad 
Thsr me leothu ne biglad. 
Hsefde ic hsanne had 
Ne wses me in healle gad 
Thaet thaer rof word rad ; 
Oft thaer rinc gebad 

Thaet he in sele saege 
Sine gewaege. 

Thegnum gethyhte . . . 
Thendum waes ic maegen, 

Horsce mec heredon, 
Hilde generedon, 
Faegre feredon, 
Feondon biweredon. 

Swa mec hyht-giefu heold 
Hyge Dryht befeold ; 
Stathol aehtum steald, 
Stepe-gongum weald ; 
Swilce eorthe ol • 

Ahte ic ealdor stol ; 
Galdor wordum gol, 
Gomel sibbe neof oil. 



Ac waes gefest gear, 
Gellende sner, 
Wuniende waer, 
Wil-bec be scaer. 



Guests came 

They intermixed in commerce, 
They prolonged my pleasures, 
And adorned me with luxuries. 

Vestments of joy carefully wrought 

Shed around in breadth 

Were led over the ocean flood 

Where my vessel miscarried not. 

I held a high state 

Nor was there in my hall any peer 

Who would utter a haughty word 

there ; 
Warrior often begged there 

[For the treasures] which he beheld 

in my court, 
The weighed silver. 



Thence was I powerful 

Warriors obeyed me, 
Delivered me in battle. 
Fairly supported me. 
Protected me from enemies. 

So faithfully the gifts of hope 
Did the Lord pour into my mind ; 
He established a firm foundation 

for my possessions, 
And directed my steps in their goings 
So in the earth 
I possessed a royal seat ; 
I sang magic strains. 
And grown old in peace, I had no 

disgrace. ^ 

But I was formerly firm. 
Affluent 
Abiding safely 

With an abundant stream [of good] 
by my portion. 



290 



Science of English Verse. 



Aldhelm — an Anglo-Saxon poet rhyming Latin words 
together certainly as early as the beginning of the 8th 



Swa nu world wendeth 
Wyrde sendeth 
And hetes henteth 
Haelethe scyndeth, 

Wer cynge witeth, 

Wael gar sliteth, 

Flah mah fliteth, 

Flan man hwiteth, 

Burg sorg biteth ; 

Bald aid thwiteth, 

Wraec-faec writhath, 

Wrathath smiteth ; 

Sin-grynd sidath, 

Saecre [saearo] fearo glideth, 



Thus now the world wendeth ; 
Fate sendeth [men to their doom] 
And hate pursueth ; 
Chieftains oppress, 

War-kings go forth, 

The dart of slaughter pierceth, 

The violent arrow flieth, 

The spear smiteth them, 

Sorrow devoureth the city ; 

The bold man in age decayeth. 

The season of vengeance torment- 

eth. 
And enmity easily assaileth ; 
The abyss of sin increaseth. 
Sudden treachery glideth in, 



Grom torn graefeth, 
Graeft hafath, 



Grim rage grieveth. 
Woe possesseth, 



Searo hwit solath, 
Sumur het colath. 



Sere soileth white. 
Summer's heat cooleth, 



Fold fela fealleth, 
Feond-scire wealleth, 
Forth maegen ealdath, 
Ellen colath. 



Many things fall to the ground, 
The portion of strife aboundeth, 
Earthly power groweth old, 
Courage cooleth. 



Me thaet wyrd gewaef, 
And gehwyrt forgeaf 
Thaet ic grofe graef. 
And thaet grimme graef 



This Fate wove for me. 

And as decree assigned it 

That I should grieve with this grief. 

And the grim grave 



Flean flaesce ne maeg ; 
Thon fiah hred daeg, 



Flesh may not flee ; 

Soon as the rapid day hath fioim _- 




Nid grapum nimeth 
Thon sec neah becymeth ; 



Necessity aeizeth in her gn 
When she cometh nigh; 



Rhymes of Aldhelm, 



289 



The Carmen Aldhelmi which occurs with the Letters 
of Boniface shows us — if it be really the song of our 



Nu min hrether is hreoh 
Heoh-sithum sceoh, 
Nyd bisgum neah ; 
Gewited nihtes infleah 



Se aer in daege was dyre ; 
Scrithed nu deop feor, 

Brond hord geblowen 
Breostum inforgrowen; 
Flyhtum to-flowen 
Flah is geblowen 

Miclum in gemynde 
Modes gecynde ; 

Greteth ongrynde, 
Grorn ofen pynde. 

Bealo-fus byrneth, 
Bittre wyrneth ; 

Wid sith onginneth, 
Sar ne sinneth, 
Sorgum cinnith, 
Blaed his blinnith, 
Blisse linnathy 
Listum linneth^ 
Lustum ne cinneth. 

Dreamas swa her gedresath, 
Dryht scyre gehreosath ; 
Lif her men forleosath, 
Leahtras oft geceosath. 
Treow thrag 
Is to-trag, 
Seo untrume genag 
Steapum eatole misthah 
Ond eal stund genag 



But now my breast is stormy 
Shaken by the season of woe, 
Need is nigh ; 

And he is tormented at the ap- 
proach of night 

Who before in the day was highly 

esteemed ; 
Deep fire now is wrapt around, 

And the hoard of brands inflamed 
Increasing round his breast ; 
Flowing in flights 
The dart is blown forth 

Against the haughty of soul 
In the disposition of his mind ; 

He lamenteth in the abyss, 
Pained in the furnace of woe. 

Bale-fire burneth. 
Bitterly wameth ; 

A wide journey beginneth. 

Affliction ceaseth not ; 

He exclaimeth in sorrows. 

His joy hath ceased, 

His bliss hath declined. 

He is fallen from his delights ; 

He exclaimeth not in happiness. 

Thus glories here are prostrated, 
And the lordly lot brought low ; 
[So] men here lose their life. 
And often choose crimes ; 
A faithful course 
Is withdrawn. 

And that which hath no firmness 
aboundeth. 



290 



Science of English Verse. 



Aldhelm — an Anglo-Saxon poet rhyming Latin words 
together certainly as early as the beginning of the 8th 



Swa nu world wendeth 
Wyrde sendeth 
And hetes henteth 
Hselethe scyndeth, 

Wer cynge witeth, 

Wael gar sliteth, 

Flah mah fliteth, 

Flan man hwiteth, 

Burg sorg biteth ; 

Bald aid thwiteth, 

Wraec-faec writhath, 

Wrathath smiteth ; 

Sin-grynd sidath, 

Saecre [saearo] fearo glideth, 



Thus now the world wendeth ; 
Fate sendeth [men to their doom] 
And hate pursueth ; 
Chieftains oppress, 

War-kings go forth, 

The dart of slaughter pierceth. 

The violent arrow flieth, 

The spear smiteth them, 

Sorrow devoureth the city ; 

The bold man in age decayeth. 

The season of vengeance torment' 

eth. 
And enmity easily assaileth ; 
The abyss of sin increaseth, 
Sudden treachery glideth in. 



Grom torn graefeth, 
Graef t haf ath. 



Grim rage grieveth. 
Woe possesseth. 



Searo hwit solath, 
Sumur het colath. 



Sere soileth white, 
Summer's heat cooleth. 



Fold fela fealleth, 
Feond-scire wealleth, 
Forth maegen ealdath, 
Ellen colath. 



Many things fall to the ground. 
The portion of strife aboundeth. 
Earthly power groweth old. 
Courage cooleth. 



Me thaet wyrd gewaef. 
And gehwyrt forgeaf 
Thaet ic grofe graef. 
And thaet grimme graef 



This Fate wove for me. 

And as decree assigned it 

That I should grieve with this grief. 

And the grim grave 



Flean flaesce ne maeg ; 
Thon flah hred daeg, 



Flesh may not flee ; 

Soon as the rapid day hath flown 



Nid grapum nimeth 
Thon seo neah becymeth ; 



Necessity seizeth in her grasps 
When she cometh nigh ; 



Early Latin Rhymes. 



29 1 



century, in the following fashion, (the rhythm is that of 

The Raven 

Once up-on a mid-night drear-y, 
Led ' or cast-e cath- o - lie - e 
While I pond-ered weak and wear-y\ 
At ' que ob - ses ath - let - ic - e' 

Lector caste catholice 
Atque obses athletice 
Tuts pulsatus precibus 
Obnixe flagitantibus 

dr'c. 
Usque diratn Dornoniam 
Per carentum Cornubiam 
Florulentis cespitibus 
Etfacundis graminibus. 



Seo me ethles onfonn. 

And mec her heardes onconn. 



Thonne lichoma ligeth, 
Lima wyrm friteth, 
Ac him wen ne gewigeth, 
And tha wist gehygeth ; 

Oththaet beath tha ban an ; 

And aet nyhstan nan 
Nefne se nede tan 
Balawan her gehlotene. 
Ne bith se hlisa adroren 



Mr thaet eadig gethenceth 
He hine the oftor swenceth, 



Byrgeth him tha bitran synne» 
Hogath to thaere betran wynne. 



She that hath taken me from my 
country 

And here exerciseth me in hard- 
ship. 

Then the corpse lieth, 
Worm fretteth the limbs, 
And the worm departeth not, 
And there chooseth its repast, 

Until there be bone only left ; 

And at the last there is no one 
But that his fate compels 
A prey to that destructive host 
Nor shall he be conversant with 
happiness 

Ere the blessed one [God] thinketh 
That he hath sufficiently often af- 
flicted him, 

And burieth for him bitter sin, 
And exalteth to the better joy. 



292 



Science of English Verse. 



Again, the following couplet out of a poem preserved 
in William of Malmesbury, probably of the time of 
Athelstan, shows Latin hexameters rhymed not only 
at the end but in the body of the line — an effect which 
this specimen will show might be capable of great 
splendor with the majestic Latin vocables : 



Reg-i - a 



pro-gen- 1 



es pro- 



dux - it 



no - bil-e 



stam-ma 



Cum ten-e- bris nost- ris il - lux - it splend-id-a gem-ma. 



Gemon mortha lisse. 
Her sinden miltsa blisse 



Remember death's favor, 
Here are merciful blessings, 



Hyhtlice in heofona rice. 
Uton nu halgum gelice 



Full of hope in heaven's kingdom. 
Ah, may we be like the saints 



Scyldum byscyrede, 
Scyndum generede, 
Wommum biwerede, 

Thaer mon cyn mot 
For meotude rot, 

Sothne God geseon 
And aa in sibbe gefean. 



Washed from our sins, 
Liberated from condemnation, 
Protected from terror, 

Where mankind shall 
Before their Creator splendid. 

Behold the true God 

And joy in peace evermore. 



Text from Conybeare. I have, however, changed his translation in 
some points where he seems manifestly wrong ; and in the line " Bealo-fus 
byrneth " I have ventured to conjecture Bealo^^r (bale-fire) for the text. 
In several places the poem is so obscure that interpretation is guess-work, 
and here Conybeare *s guesses are left untouched. Of course textual, or 
any further, criticism would not be in place for the present purpose, and 
it seems proper only to cite the inquirer to the original poem in the Codex 
Exoniensisj or Exeter Booky and to Conybeare's Illustrations of AnglO' 
Saxon Poetryy London, 1826. 



Rhyme against Rhythm in the i6th Century. 293 

In the Ormulum, of the early 13th century, the 
rhymes, though not continuous, are too frequent to be * 
unintentional ; and from this time on a vast amount of 
rhymed English popular poetry (of which the student 
will find many interesting specimens in Warton's His- 
tory of English Poetry, in Halliwell and Wright*s Reli- 
quice Antiquce, in the publications of the Shakspere 
Societies, The Roxburghe Club, The Chaucer Society, 
The Early English Text Society) appears to have been 
written, besides the greater works known to all. 

Thus we find rhyme appearing continuously in our 
poetry from the beginning of it to the present day. In 
fact, it had appeared so continuously that about the last 
quarter of the i6th century the word "rhyme" had 
come to be pretty nearly synonymous with vernacular 
poetry in England as opposed to* the more dignified 
Greek and Latin verse, and a strong party was formed 
in opposition to all rhyming verse. The notion got 
abroad — and how long it prevailed has been shown 
in the Preface to this book — that rhythm was a prop- 
erty peculiar to the classic verse and did not exist 
in English verse ; whence the former was distinctly 
spoken of as rhythm and the latter as rhyme. Sir 
Philip Sidney lays down this distinction quite explicitly 
in the Apologiefor Poetrie: *' Now of versifying there are 
two sorts, the one Auncient, the other Moderne ; the 
Auncient marked the quantitie of each silable and ac- 
cording to that framed his verse ; the Moderne, observ- 
ing only number (with some regarde of the accent) the 
chiefe life of it, standeth in that lyke sounding of the 
words ivhich we call ryme'' Hereupon Sir Philip, Fulk 
Greville, Spenser, Gabriel Harvey and others formed 
their club or society called the Areopagus, which was 



■ 1 
. I 

I 



- t 



294 Science of English Verse. 

to bring back the English verse from the error of 
rhyme into the orthodoxy of classic rhythm ; for which 
purpose the Areopagus set to work at laying down a 
rigid law for the quantity of every syllable in English. 
Of course it was not long before Spenser, who had an 
ear that knew wherein music consisted, gradually draw- 
out from this folly. 

But others grew all the more outspoken against 
rhyme. Puttenham has frequent side-flings at it: as 
that "about the time of Charlemaines raigne . . . many 
simple clerks, . . . following either the barbarous rude- 
ness of the time or els their own idle inventions, . . . 
thought themselves no small fooles when they could 
make their verses goe all in ryme ; " ^ and in another 
place he speaks of the word rhyme as " an abusion " of 
the word rhythmus from which he considers it derived 
in English. 

Webbe, again, becomes quite furious against rhyme : 
"... Ryme or like ending of verses : which though it 
is of least importance, yet hath won such credite among 
us, that of all other it is most regarded of the greatest 
part of Readers. And surely as I am perswaded, the 
regarde of wryters to this hath beene the greatest decay 
of that good order of versifying which might ere this 
have beene established in our speeche :*' and in another 
place he abuses "the uncountable rabble of ryming 
Ballet" (ballad) "makers and compilers of senseless 
'sonets '* as a " rout of ragged Rymers,'* declaring that 
" every one that can frame a Booke in Ryme, though 
for want of matter it be but in commendations of Cop- 
per noses or Bottle Ale, wyll catch at the Garlande due 
to poets." 

* P. 28, Arte of English Poesiey Arber Reprint 



Shakspere's Disuse of Rhyme, 295 

Roger Ascham in The Scholemaster was equally 
severe. 

To the same effect, though in somewhat more genial 
mood, I find Ben Jonson making rhymes against rhym- 
ing. 

These expressions, particularly those of Webbe, will 
prepare the reader to see a great disdain cropping out 
between the lines of that famous fling at Shakspere in 
poor Robert Greeners Groatsworth of Wit, in which 
Greene accuses the rising poet of thinking himself 
" able to bumbast out a blank verse ** with the rest of 
them : as if young master Shakspere should take his 
place with Webbe's rout of ragged Rymers and not 
presume so high as rhythmic verse. 

I have brought the sketch of English rhyme to the 
particular point now arrived at, as contributing to 
enlarge the reader's view of an important test which 
has been proposed, in addition to the metrical tests 
described in Part I., for ascertaining the chronology of 
Shakspere's plays. This test is based upon the idea 
th^t Shakspere grew more and more out of liking with 
rhyme as he became older, and that this dislike shows 
itself in the regularly decreasing frequency of rhymes 
as we go from his early plays to his late ones. The 
circumstance that a general decrease of rhymes does 
occur had been noticed as early as 1778 by Malone. 
"In the whole number of pieces" — he means by 
"pieces" Shakspere's plays — "which were written 
antecedent to the year 1600 . . . more rhyming coup- 
lets are found, than in all the plays composed subse- 
quently to that year. . . . As, therefore most of his 
early productions are characterized by the multitude of 
similar terminations" (i.e., rhymes) "which they ex- 









296 Scien£e of English Verse. 

hibit, Whenever o£ two early pieces it is doubtful which 
preceded the other, I am disposed to believe, (other 
proofs being wanting,) that play in which the greater 
number of rhymes is found, to have been first com- 
posed, " • Nearly a hundred years afterwards the Rev, 
F. G. Fleay carried out the idea thus suggested by 
Malone and constructed a table showing the number of 
rhymes in each play. While it can scarcely be said 
that the percentages founded on these tables justified 
the hopes which were originally built upon the rhyme 
test, no doubt can be felt that it furnished a valuable 
adjunct to the other tests and added one more means of 
checking and verifying conclusions. The student will 
iind Mr. Fleay's paper on the rhyme-test as applied to 
Shakspere, together with an instructive debate upon it 
by eminent Shakspere scholars, set forth in The Trans- 
actions of the New Shakspere Society for 1874. 

PRACTICAL CAUTIONS FOR THE USE OF RHYME IN ENG- 
LISH VERSE. 

{h) Whether, with Shakspere and Ben Jonson and 
the 16th century critics, the world will outgrow the use 
of rhyme, would be too much to discuss here. Mean- 
time, several cautions suggest themselves which will be 
of use to the learner. 

First and foremost : look upon the rhyme as merely 
the good garment of reason, and beware leaving the 
coat with no body in it. On this point I cannot do 
better than quote gentle old George Gascoigne. " I 
would exhorte you also to beware of rime without rea- 
son : my meaning is hereby that your rime leade you 
not from your iirste Invention, for many wryters when 
' Note, in Bell's Shakspere, vol. II., p. 315. 



Rhymes perfect^ or none. 297 

they have laid the platform of their invention, are yet 
drawen sometimes (by ryme) to forget it or at least to 
alter it, as when they cannot readily finde out a worde 
whiche maye rime to the first . . . they do then eyther 
botche it up with a worde that will ryme (howe small 
reason soever it carie with it) or els they alter their first 
worde and so percase decline or trouble their former 
Invention : But do you alwayes hold your first deter- 
mined Invention, and do rather searche the bottome of 
your braynes for apte wordsy than chaunge good reason 
for rumbling rime, " * The words which I have itali- 
cized at the conclusion contain the root of the whole 
matter; and the resources of our tongue are so great 
that we are entitled to hold eveiy poet down to the 
strictest measure of the law which forbids the least 
intrusion of the rhyme as rhyme — that is, as any thing 
less than the best word in the language for the idea in 
hand. 

Secondly : having thus secured reason in rhyme, one 
cannot do better than quote, for the next caution, a 
remark of Puttenham*s in beginning his 8th chapter. 
It may be well to premise that the word "maker" used 
in this citation was the common term in his time, par- 
ticularly at the north, for a poet : it means, indeed, the 
same, " maker " being merely the Ei^lishing of " poet ** 
which is from ttowoj, to make. *' Now " says Puttenham 
" there cannot be in a maker a fowler fault, then "... 
(than) ... "by untrue orthographie to wrench his 
words to helpe his rime, for it is a signe that such a 
maker is not copious in his owne language, or (as they 
are wont to say) not halfe his crafts maister. . . . For 

' Certayne Notes &c. : pp. 35-6 of The Steele Glasy Arber Reprint. 



298 Science of English Verse. 

a licentious maker is in truth but a bungler and not a 
poet:' 

In short, in this caution as in the last, I can again 
say that the resources of our English tongue .are such 
that we are entitled to hold the poet always down to 
the rigid mark of perfection. If the rhyme is not per- 
fect, if it demands any the least allowance, it is not 
tolerable : throw it away. 

Puttenham's indignation over an example he gives of 
a poet who in extremity for a rhyme had to fly to 
ano|:her language is most comical. . . . "Having no 
word at hand to rime to this word (joy) he made his 
other verse end in (Roy) saying very impudently thus, 

O mightie Lord of love, dame Venus ' onely joy^ 
Who art the highest God of any heavenly Rcy, 

which word was never yet received in our language for 
an English word." 

It is difficult to fancy what might have been Putten- 
ham's feelings if he had seen a still more "impudent" 
foray upon the French language made in later times by 
Churchill, with witty design — 

Next came the treasurer of either house, 
One with full purse, t'other with not a sous, 

or Mr. Thackeray's sonnet of Jeames "on the deer killed 
by Prince Albert — 

Some forty ed of sleak and hantlered deer 
In Cobug (where such hanimals abound) 

Was shot, as by the newspaper I 'ear, 

By Halbert, usband of the British crownd. 

According to the rule of this caution many rhymes 
considered "allowable" fifty years ago must now be let 
alone, as "join'd" and "mind," "brow" and "glow," 



Rhymes not too far apart. 299 

" good " and " flood," and the like ; even later than that 
" abroad " has been rhymed with ** Lord." The student 
may rest with confidence in the belief that no rhyme 
but a perfect rhyme is ever worth a poet's while. 

Thirdly : as to the position of rhymes in English . 
verse there is no law but the poet's own ear. They 
may be at the end, the middle and end, or the beginning 
of a line, or irregularly disposed, at the maker's pleas- 
ure. It is true Puttenham thought that "rime or 
Concorde is not commendably used both in the end and « 
middle of a verse;" but he had not seen Tennyson's 

song, 

The splendor ya//f on castle-w^Z/y 

And snowy summits old in story, 
The long light shakes across the lakes 

And the wild cataract leaps in glory, 

which is perfect music. 

But it may be of profit to notice that the opposite 
fault — of placing the rhymes too far apart — is often 
committed in English verse. For, the reason of rhyme 
is that the ear takes "pleasure to hear the like tune 
reported, and to feele his returne ; " and if the rhymes 
be too far apart a greater trouble happens than that 
which Puttenham quaintly condemns as incident to the 
over-long line in verse: it "kepeth the eare too long 
from his delight, which is to heare the cadence or the 
tuneable accent in the ende of the verse:" and hence 
the "delight," whatever it may be, is lost. 

Fourthly : rhymes of more than two syllables are to 
be handled with care, as easily running to the finical, 
and passing into the province of the comic verse-maker. 
For instance, the couplet quoted by Coleridge in the 
Biographia Literatia: a Welshman having failed to 



300 Science of English Verse. 

send a present of a hare to a friend as promised, the 
friend wrote him, 

Say, O thou son of great Cadwallader, 

Hast sent the hare, or hast thou swallowed her ? 

Or, again, the rhyme made by the late Thomas Bu- 
chanan Read on Popocatapetl, (communicated to me by 
his friend Mr. John R. Tait) : 

Po - po- cat - a - petl ! 
^ Oh, oh, what a kettle 

To boil on, &c. 

Perhaps the comical tendency of rhymes of more than 
two syllables in English is due to the fact that the more 

/ dignified function of rhyme is as a rhythm-marker (as 
hereinbefore detailed) and that whenever rhyme ap- 
pears as mere jingle, the result is loss of dignity; 
wherefore, since one-syllable rhymes mark-off rhythm 

. as well as any larger-syllabled ones, the excess is liable 
to seem childish, if not professedly comic. 

Puttenham, for a different reason, condemns many- 
syllabled rhymes. ". . . Wordes of exceeding great 
length, which have been fetched from the Latine ink- 
horne or borrowed of strangers, the use of them in 
ryme is nothing pleasant." 

Fourthly : avoid neighboring rhymes which are very 

N nearly alike in tone-color. For example, if two lines 
rhyme with "name" and "fame," do not have the two 
next lines rhyming in "vain" and "stain" or similar 
near shades of vowel-color. The result is like two con- 
tiguous shades of pink in a dress : one of the rhymes will 
seem faded. Daniel, in one of his most beautiful sonnets 
to Delia, has permitted a fault of this sort to escape him : 
the first four lines end respectively in " haires " (hairs) 



\ 



Near Shades of Color in Rhymes. 301 

"neere" (near) "cleares" (clears) and " deere " (dear), 
which are so near in color that the reader is apt to take 
them for bad rhymes until he sees that " haires *' and 
" cleares '* are intended to rhyme together, and " neere " 
and "deere." The sonnet has a pathetic tone in it: 
the " picture " mentioned is the picture he has drawn 
of her in the other sonnets : and the whole may be col- 
lated interestingly with those of Shakspere's in which 
he promises a similar immortality to his friend through 
his verse. 

When winter snowes upon thy sable haires, 
And frost of age hath nipt thy beauties neere, 
When darke shall seeme the day that never cleares, 
And all lies withered that was held so deere, 
Then take this picture which I here present thee. 
Limned with a Pensill . . . not all unworthy : 
Here see the gifts that God and Nature lent thee. 
Here read thyself e and what I sufEered for thee. 
This may remaine thy lasting monument. 
Which happily posterity may cherrish : 
These colours with thy fading are not spent, 
These may remain when thou and I shall perish. 
If they remaine, then thou shalt live thereby : 
They will remaine and so thou canst not die« 

Fifthly : rhymes involving sweet, sonorous, and dig- 
nified vowel-colors, such as "ore" and "restore," 
"name*- and "blame," "harm" and "alarm," and th^ 
like, are in general to be favored beyond those of more 
finical color, as " pity " and " witty," " seem " and 
"gleam," " hid " and " kid," and so on. 



302 Science of English Verse. 



CHAPTER XII. 

DISTRIBUTION OF VOWEL-COLORS IN THE LINE-GROUP. 

Few points in the physical well-being of a formal 
poem require more artistic care than the insidious recur- 
rence of the same vowel-color in consecutive or neigh- 
boring words, to the extent of wearying the ear or its 
imagination. 

Consider, for example, the following lines, which have 
been made as atrocious as possible in order to set the 
fault forth clearly. 

'Tis May-day gay : wide-smiling skies shine bright, 
Through whose true blue cuckoos do woo anew 
The tender spring &c. 

In the first four words of the first line, the vowel- 
color ay recurs three times consecutively : in the five 
next words of the same line the vowel-color i occurs 
five times nearly in succession, the only break being 
the vowel-color ^in "ing." 

In the second line, the vowel-color U (long «, or od) 
occurs eight times, relieved only by the shorter sound 
of u in " cuck- *' and the color of a in " anew." 

This exaggerated iterance of the same vowel-color is 
of course intolerable, and teaches the necessity of care 
in this matter. Perhaps no person who has never been 
a practical craftsman in verse would be aware how care- 
fully the technic of the word-artist unconsciously leads 
him away, after that technic has become — as it should 
be — instinctive, from these recurrences. 



Examples from Daniel and Griffin. 303 

It must not be imagined for a moment that this is a 
small defect, condemned only by over-refinement. The 
good craftsman always avoids it : the bad craftsman 
may be known by its presence. 

Here, indeed, no rules beyond the judgment of the 
artist's ear need be given. Once the student's attention 
is called to the matter, it will be easy to observe how 
the works of all the conscientious makers are free from 
this fault, and how closely their continued acceptance 
among men from age to age is connected with that 
scrupulous love for the beautiful which lies at the bot- 
tom of their substance as well as their form, and which 
can abide no flaw. 

To assign limits to the number of recurrences of one 
vowel-color which may be permitted in a line, would be 
to make rules subject to many exceptions. For exam- 
ple, Samuel Daniel, in a certain ravishing sonnet to his 
Delia, has come dangerously near such a limit in th^ 

first line, 

Restore thy tresses to the golden ore, 

where long o occurs four times : yet the vowel-color o is 
itself so fine, as a mere sensuous impression, that one 
would not dare to suggest any less frequent appearance 
of it in the given line. Perhaps therefore the most 
profitable lesson for the student will be to cite some 
poem for analysis in which this fault is finely avoided, 
under peculiarly troublesome circumstances. To this 
end, scrutinize each vowel-color in the following sonnet 
of Bartholomew Griffin's (i6th century) to his Fidessa. 
Here, since every line ends in the same color — that of 
ear in heart — it was particularly difficult to avoid dis- 
agreeable recurrences, the choice being thus more than 



304 Science of English Verse. 

usually limited : yet — though of course Griffin was not 
conscious of any special exertion to this end — the suc- 
cession of colors is everywhere grateful to the ear, and 
there are few poems which are pleasanter to read aloud. 

The lover is speaking to Cupid, much as Prosper© 
would speak to his airy servant Ariel ; and is apparently 
giving Cupid instructions how to proceed in laying siege 
to his mistress's heart in his behalf. As his whole 
thought is upon this " heart " of his mistress, he makes 
that word the burden of the poem : it is thus really a 
sort of sonnet with a refrain. 

Says Griffin : and one may imagine that Cupid, with 
gay wings all in a flutter, is hovering just at his ear, 
like a humming-bird poised over a flower-bell, ready to 
dart off on his errand as soon as he may : 

XXIII. 

Fly to her heart, hover about her heart, 
With dainty kisses mollil&e her heart, 
Pierce with thine arrows her obdurate heart, 
With sweet allurements ever move her heart ; 
At midday and at midnight touch her heart, 
Be lurking closely, nestle about her he^t ; 
With power (thou art a god) command her heart, 
Kindle thy coales of love about her heart, 
Yea even into thyself transforme her heart. 
Ah, she must love, be sure thou have her heart. 
And I must dye, if thou have not her heart. 
Thy bed (if thou rest well) must be her heart : 
He hath the best part sure that hath the heart ; 
What have I not, if I have but her heart ? 



Difficult Junction of st and st. 305 



CHAPTER XIII. 

OF CONSONANT-DISTRIBUTION : JUNCTION, AND PHONETIC 

SYZYGY. 

Every one must have more or less experience of the 
great difference in the ease with which different conso- 
nants can be uttered after a given consonant. For ex- 
ample : if the student will utter as rapidly as possible 
the sounds lal lal lal lal lal lal &c., the terminal / of 
each lal is found to make an easy junction with the ini- 
tial / of the next, and consequently a very rapid utter- 
ance of the syllables is easy. * 

But other successions of consonants will be found 
more and more troublesome. For example a terminal g 
before an initial b involves such awkward re-arrange- 
ments of the vocal organs that, upon trying to utter the 
sounds bag bag bag bag &c., the student will find it im- 
possible to make the succession any thing like so rapid 
as in the case of lal lal lal &c. 

If again the three words shouldst stand still be tried, 
it will be found impossible to utter them rapidly at all ; 
the distinct enunciation of the initial consonant-sounds 
St in " stand " after the terminal consonant-sound st in 
"shouldst" involves such an entire new adjustment of 
the vocal organs as to necessitate a perceptible interval 
of time between one st and the other. 

Now this awkwardness is very cJearly felt in a series 
of words, even if they are not uttered aloud, but merely 
read by the eye in silence ; and the selection of sqch 



3o6 Science of English Verse. 

words as melt flowingly into each other is one of the 
most important of those cares that brood unseen in the 
mind over the birth of a poem. 

Here, again, no directions are necessary, beyond call- 
ing attention to the matter. The good artist is all 
conscience : he has but to know a sin against beauty, 
to take all precautions against permitting it. The more 
the student searches the art of words, the more it will 
be found that all the great artists have been scrupulous 
in this particular. Not to be so is to make a poem 
which saws the ear with sharp notches of sound. 

PHONETIC SYZYGY. 

It will be remembered that in alliteration the impor- 
tant limit is necessary that the alliterative letter must 
be^n always an accented syllable. 

There is however an important co-ordination of con- 
sonant-colors made by the ear in every series of verse- 
sounds, which takes pleasurable note of the recurrence 
of all same, or like, consonant-colors, whether at the 
beginning, middle or end, of accented or unaccented 
syllables. 

The extent of this co-ordination cannot be properly 
set forth until the relations of several consonants are 
recalled. If the consonants D, T, and Th, be carefully 
uttered, the student will observe that the three involve 
nearly the same adjustment of the vocal organs ; so do 
P, B, and V ; so do G, C (hard), and K. This similari- 
ty involves a similarity of tone-color, and we may say 
therefore that D, T, and Th, are similar consonant- 
colors ; P, B, and V, are similar colors ; and G, C, and 
K. 

J^'ow if a given line of verse show such a succession 



Phonetic Syzygy. 307 

of colors — that is a succession of the same, or similar, 
colors — all the colors may be taken note of by the ear 
as a general prevalence of a given color, without refer- * 
ence to whether they occur at the beginning (allitera- 
tive letter), at the end (junction consonant) or in the 
body, of words. Such a succession of consonant-colors 
has been called Phonetic Syzygy (syzygy, from sun- 
zugia, yoking together) by Professor Sylvester, in his 
Laws of Verse, and the term seems so happy as to be a 
genuine contribution to the nomenclature of the science 
of English verse. 

To take a simple illustration of phonetic syzygy : in 

the phrase 

The daily torment of untruth 

(from one of Daniel's sonnets) the ear may not only 
co-ordinate the alliterative /'s which begin the accented 
syllables "tor-" and "-truth," but may take further 
account of the dm "daily," — for rf belongs to the class 
of T-sounds, as just explained — of the last t in "tor- 
ment," and of the tk in "untruth." Here are five 
T-sounds occurring closely together; and this is a 
syzygy of T-sounds. 

Similarly let the student pick out the /^-colors, and 
the d and / colors, in the opening of Shakspere's 

sonnet 

Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments ; * 

these constituting respectively syzygies of M-sounds 
and of T-sounds. 

The term " syzygy," it should be noted, was used in 
the classic prosody for a wholly different sort of co- 
ordinations, namely, a rhythmic kind, which consisted 



3o8 Science of English Verse. 

of the possible irregular groups of quantities larger than 
those included in their rhythmic system of verse. For 

example feet of the form ^ ^ ^ » or of the form 

-^--^-, or many other such possible combinations 
not specified by prosody, were included under the gen- 
eral term syzygies, or yokings-together of quantities. 

As in the other cases, it is not deemed proper to give 
specific directions for phonetic syzygy in verse. The 
habit of noting such sequences will presently breed in 
the mind that unconscious care of them which will 
guide the thought, in its working, towards the proper 
combinations. 

It is impossible not to cite in this connection the two 
perfect lines of Tennyson whose physical beauty depends 
on their suave syzygy of M-colors, aided by a delicious 
distribution of vowel-colors : 

Or moan of doves in immemorial elms 
And murmur of innumerable bees. 



Sounds, not Letters^ alliterate. 309 



CHAPTER XIV. 

OF ALLITERATION. 

Alliteration occurs where the initial vowel-sounds 
or consonant-sounds of two or more consecutive, or near, 
accented syllables are the same. In the rhyme these 
initial sounds are necessarily different : and to this 
extent alliteration is the counterpart of rhyme. 

For example, in 

FuU/athom/ive thy/ather lies, 

the italicized /'s are alliterative, for they begin accented 
sounds : while the first F^ in " Full," is not strictly 
alliterative since it comes on an unaccented syllable. 

Observe that it is the sound, and not the letter, which 
is alliterative ; and hence, as in the case of rhyme, we 
may have alliteration when the letters are different, as 

The sea that doth exceed his banks, 

where the '*^" in "sea" and the *V" in "exceed" 
alliterate, being the same color, though different letters ; 
and so we may not have alliteration where the letters 
are the same, as in 

The harp not honored with a song, 

where the h in " harp " does not alliterate with the h 
in " honor' d," the one being pronounced and the other 
not. 

I have already detailed the rhythmic function of 
alliteration and have called the student's attention to 



3IO Science of English Verse. 

the wholly different part played, as to this function, by 
alliteration in Anglo-Saxon poetry from that in more 
modern English verse. We found that while allitera- 
tion was used among the Anglo-Saxon poets to establish 
and fortify the main rhythm of the verse, its effect in 
modern verse is to vary the main rhythm by irregular 
and unlooked-for groups which break the monotony of 
the set rhythmic movement. 

The law of alliteration was strikingly specialized in 
Anglo-Saxon verse, as already detailed. Many lines' 
were found to present one of the two following tjrpes : 
either the first three accented verse-sounds begin with 
the same consonant-color, or with some vowel-color ; or 
the second and third accented sounds begin with the 
same consonant-color, or with some vowel-color. Thus 
a passage from The PhomiXy already partly quoted, has 
every line of the first type (3 alliterative letters) except 
the third, which presents the second type (2 alliterative 
letters). To show these alliterative letters clearly to 
the eye, they are printed in Italic capitals. 

Ne /^orstes i^naest, ne /^yres blaest, 

ne //aegles ^ryre, ne Crimes dryre, 

ne .Sunnan haetu, ne .Sincald, 

ne W^arm ff^eder, ne Jf'inter scur, 
IVihte ge ff^irdan, ac se JVong seomath 
^^dig and 6^nsund ; is thaet ^thele lond 
-^lostmum ge-51owen. 

Inasmuch as this alliterative letter is, except in very 
rare cases, the initial letter of an important word, — and 
moreover of the important sound of an important word 
— it is easy to see that such alliteration must have 

' I speak of the double section as a " line : " it corresponds precisely 
with the line-group as herein detailed. 



Line -Groups broken by Alliteration. 311 

made the beat of the rhythmic movement very strong 
and commanding to the ear ; for the first verse-sound in 
every alliterated bar is thus signalized to the ear by a 
pronunciation-accent, a logical accent, a rhythmic ac- 
cent, and a tone-colon 

The fondness for alliteration thus displayed in our 
early poetry remains palpable to this day in a thousand 
alliterative proverbs, saws, and sayings which have 
come down from old times, such as " J/any A/en, Many 
J/inds," " Time and Tide wait for no man," 

" When Ba\Q is highest 
^oon is nighest " 

which is equivalent to " The Z^arkest hour's before the 
Z?awn ; " and many such which every reader will recall. 

But, as was said, the rhythmic office of alliteration in 
modern English verse is to break the monotony of 
regular groups by interjecting irregular groups. In the 
following lines, for example, which are the last six of a 
charming sonnet by Thomas Watson, (a i6th century 
sonnet-maker whose Hekatompatheiaj or Hundred Pas- 
sionSy contains some good sonnet-work), the letters 
which I have printed in capitals to attract the eye really 
attract the ear in the same way. Observe that two 
alliterative sounds are found, often, one near the end 
of one line, the other near the beginning of the next 
line : thus the line-group, which is apt to grow monoto- 
nous, is relieved by other groups which are bound 
together and forced upon the ear by the alliterative 
letters. 

In the first lines the sonnetteer has been expressing 
his rapture on hearing his mistress sing. 



312 Science of English Verse. 

And who so mad that Jf^ould not ^Tith his WV\ 
Zeese Zibertie and Zife to heare her sing 
Whose voice exceeds those harmonies that -Fill 
Elisian /^ieldes where growes eternall Spring ? 
If mightie Jove should /feare what I have ZTard, 
She (sure) were ZTis, and all my i^arket il/arde I 

Alliteration, like rhyme, had come to excite a party 
against it in the i6th century, though there was an 
opposite party who ran it fearfully beyond its province. 
Even Chaucer, with his "Rim, ram, ruf," had made 
fun of the dismal long alliterative poems written in the 
two centuries preceding him, whose dull iterations were 
indeed enough to drive the ear mad. King James and 
the Scottish poets of the 15 th century held it in high 
regard : the king even says, in his Reulis &c., " Let all 
your verse be Literall " — meaning by "literall " alliter- 
ative. Gascoigne, on the other hand, is more guarded : 
" many writers ** he says, indulge " in repeticion of sun- 
drie wordes all beginning with one letter, the whiche, 
(beyng modestly used), lendeth good grace to averse: 
but they do so hunt a letter to death, that they make it 
Crambe, and crambe bis positum mors est : therefore, Ne 
quid nimisr And in another connection he declares 
that "it is not inough to roll inpleasant woordes, nor 
yet to thunder in Rym, Ranty Ruff, by letter. . . .*' 

I find Robert Greene, too, burlesquing Stanihurst's 
alliteration, later than Gascoigne's utterances above : 

Then did he make heaven's vault to rebound 

With rounce robble bobble 
Of ruffe raff e roaring 
With thwick thwack thurlerie bouncing. 

And, still later, we all know Shakspere*s jokes on the 
alliterators, in " Raging rocks with shivering shocks," 



Error of Turner and Tyrwhitt, 313 

and " The preyful princess pierced &c." of Love's 
Labor^s Lost. 

It is one of those curiosities of opinion which make 
us pinch ourselves and ask if we are all in a dream, that 
Sharon Turner, a laborious historian of the Anglo- 
Saxons, only partly believed in the alliteration of their 
verse, and that Tyrwhitt flatly denied the presence of 
any alliteration in it. 

Says Turner : " I am willing to concur with Mr. J. 
Conybeare that alliteration was used in Saxon poetry. 
. . . But I think it was as an occasional beauty, not as 
in Pierce Ploughman the fundamental principle '* (Hist, 
of England, Vol. III., Ang. Sax. Period, pp. 357-8, note 

4). 

Tyrwhitt, however, is more sweeping: as if one 
should stand forth and offer to maintain against all 
comers, Paynim or Christian, that there was never such 
a building as the Tower of London. " That the Saxons 
had a species of writing which differed from their com- 
mon prose, and was considered by themselves as poetry 
is very certain ; but it seems equally certain, that their 
compositions of that kind were neither divided into 
verses of a determinate number of syllables, nor embel- 
lished with what we call rhyme." To which he adds in 
a note : " We do not see any marks of studied allitera- 
tion in the old Saxon poetry." 

These citations are given as instructive examples to 
the student of the quaint absurdities into which criti- 
cism may be led when working on the vague estimates 
prevalent until quite recent times, and as testimonials 
to the value of the exacter methods which are indicated 
by the metrical tests heretofore described. While, as 
often before remarked, these metrical tests are not to 



314 Science of English Verse. 

be made the excuse for swinging into the opposite 
error of over-minuteness, they represent, when properly 
• estimated, a tendency to precise, well-founded and truth- 
ful judgments which must be regarded as bound to 
initiate a literary scholarship of more character than 
the world has yet seen. 

The brief account given of alliteration has been de- 
vised to replace for the student any formal rules or 
cautions for its use. None could be given, indeed, 
which would be more definite than the inference which 
the student must necessarily draw from the preceding 
outline, namely, that all alliteration for the sake of 
alliteration is trifling, and that in modem English verse 
it is to be used with such delicate art that the ear will 
unconsciously feel its indefinite presence, varying the 
verse as brief irregular bird-calls, heard in the wood 
here and there, seem to add a delight to the mass of 
green. There was never a more consummate artist in 
the use of this delicate effect than Shakspere. I do 
not recollect one instance in his works where an alliter- 
ation occurs that makes any claim on its own account 
Such alliteration is felt, through the infinite decorum 
and gentility which broods at the bottom of art, to be 
always tawdry, vulgar, and intrusive. Scarcely any 
word so well expresses the feeling produced by it as 
that which is often applied in America to certain styles 
of dress — "loud." And perhaps no more definite 
eaution can be given the student than that all allitera- 
tion which attracts any attention as alliteration is loud 



I 



The Artist's Law. 315 



CHAPTER XV. 

OF THE EDUCATED LOVE OF BEAUTY, AS THE ARTISTES 

ONLY LAW. 

And this sketch of the colors of English verse may 
now be closed with the statement, already partly anti- 
cipated in several other connections, that the matters 
herein treated are only in the nature of hints leading to 
the widest possible views of poetic form, and by no 
means laws. For the artist in verse there is no law : 
the perception and love of beauty constitute the whole 
outfit ; and what is herein set forth is to be taken 
merely as enlarging that perception and exalting that 
love. In all cases, the appeal is to the ear ; but the ear 
should, for that purpose, be educated up to the highest 
possible plane of culture. . With this sort of ear under- 
stood, one may say that King James has summed up 
the whole matter in his homely Scotch words : " Zour 
eare maun be the onely iudge, as of all the other parts 
oi Flowing,'' (that is, of rythmic movement) "the verie 
twichestane quhairof is musique." 






•1 1 



■^' ^ 



■ V «■ 



3 2044 018 875 591 



r A FINE IS INCURRED IF THIS BOOK, IS I 

L j NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON I 
U^^^R BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED | 
^^^KLOW.
