MÉCANIQUE CÉLESTE, VOL. 4 (BOOKS 8-10)
Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827)
Translated, with a commentary, by Nathaniel Bowditch. Boston: Charles C. Little and James Brown, 1839. Vol. 4 of 4.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier mcaniquecles04laplrich.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

NATHANIEL BOWDITCH, LL.  D.

YELLOW or THE ROYAL SOCIETIES OE LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND DUBLIN  ; OE THE ASTRONOMICAL SOCIETY

or LONDON, or THE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, OE THE AMERICAN

ACADEMY or ARTS AND SCIENCES  ; CORRESPONDING MEMBER OF THE ROYAL

SOCIETIES OF BERLIN, PALERMO  ; ETC.

*  VOLUME  IV.

WITH A MEMOIR OF THE TRANSLATOR,

BY HIS SON,

NATHANIEL  INGERSOLL  BOWDITCH.

BOSTON:

PROM THE PRESS OF ISAAC R.  BUTTS  ;

CHARLES C.  LITTLE AND JAMES BROWN, PUBLISHERS.
M  DCCC  XXXIX.

Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  m  the  year  1839,  by

N.  I.  BowDiTCH  and  J.  Ingersoll  Bowditch,

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  Disuict  Court  of  Massachusetts.

MEMOIR.

(^^ncnA-q. oJooudWc^

( Ontf^^tf^^yO-^^y.  <_^..^^*«i!i?;^%^^»«^</-e'<^^s^«/^i<^/^c^.  0^^a^!a/Kn>'^

/

THIS

TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY

ARE  DEDICATED,  BY  THE  AUTHOR,

c:o  ttr  iWtmorg  of  ^in  223(fe,

MARY BOWDITCH;

WHO DEVOTED  HERSELF TO HER DOMESTIC AVOCATIONS WITH GREAT JUDGMENT,  UNCEASING
KINDNESS, AND A ZEAL WHICH COULD NOT BE SURPASSED  ;

TAKING UPON HERSELF THE WHOLE CARE OF HER FAMILY,
AND THUS PROCURING FOR HIM THE LEISURE HOURS TO PREPARE THE WORK  ;

AND SECURING TO HIM,

BY HER PRUDENT MANAGEMENT,

THE MEANS FOR ITS PUBLICATION IN ITS PRESENT FORM,

WHICH SHE FULLY APPROVED  ;

AMD

WITHOUT  HER  APPROBATION  THE  WORK  WOULD  NOT  HAVE  BEEN  UNDERTAKEN.

MEMOIR.

The  children  of  the  late  Dr.  Bowditch  feel  assured  that  every
reader  of  this  Translation  and  Commentary  will  be  desirous  to
know  something  of  the  life  and  character  of  him  who  planned
and  executed  so  vast  a  work,  and  of  her  to  whose  memory  it  is
dedicated.  We  have  been  blessed  in  our  parents  far  beyond  the
lot  of  others.  Such  a  father  and  such  a  mother  are  but  rarely
given  by  Heaven  to  any  one.  Both  now  sleep  in  the  grave ;  and
our  kindred  dust  will  soon  be  mingled  with  theirs  in  that  last
resting-place.  But  after  the  lapse  of  many  years,  this  work,
devoted  to  the  elucidation  of  one  of  the  most  abstruse  and  profound
subjects  of  human  investigation,  will  still  endure,  a  memorial  of
the  genius  of  its  author.  Upon  this  monument  we  would  inscribe
our  filial  tribute  —  a  record  of  the  parents'  virtues,  of  the  children's
gratitude  and  affection.

Nathaniel  Bowditch  was  born  at  Salem,  in  Massachusetts,
March  26,  1773,  being  the  fourth  of  seven  children  of  Habakkuk
Bowditch,  by  his  wife  Mary,  who  was  the  daughter  of  Nathaniel
Ingersoll.  His  ancestors  had  always  resided  in  that  place  from
its  earliest  settlement,  having  been,  for  the  four  last  generations,
ship-masters. Tradition has handed down  the  fact,  that three

VOL. IV.  c

10  MEMOIR.

brothers,  Jonathan,  Joel,  and  WiUiam  Bowditch,  emigrated  to  this
country  from  England,  and,  as  is  believed,  from  the  city  of  Exeter,
or  its  immediate  vicinity.  William  became  an  inhabitant  of  Salem
in  1639.  His  humble  situation  in  life  may  be  inferred  from  the
title  of  "  Goodman,"  by  which  he  is  mentioned,  as  distinguished
from  the  more  dignified  appellation  of  "  Mr."  He  was  living  in
1649,  in  which  year  he  had  a  grant  of  thirty  acres  of  land  from
the  town. The  time  of  his  death  is  unknown.

He  left  an  only  child,  of  the  same  name,  who  was  born  in
1640,  and  died  in  1681.  He  was  collector  of  the  port  of  Salem
under  the  Colonial  government,  and  owned  a  warehouse  and
other  real  estate,  and  several  small  vessels,  but  died  insolvent.
He  likewise  left  an  only  child,  also  named  William,  who  was  born
in  September,  1663,  and  died  May  28,  1728,  in  the  sixty-fifth
year  of  his  age.  He  was  actively  engaged  as  a  ship-master  for
many  years,  and  was  well  known  as  an  enterprising  merchant.  A
dangerous  rock  in  the  channel  of  the  harbor,  of  which  the  original
Indian  name  was  *'  Tenapoo,"  still  bears  the  name  of  "  Bowditch's
Ledge,"  which  was  given  to  it  in  consequence  of  a  vessel  called
the  **  Essex  Galley,"  under  his  command,  having  struck  upon  it
about  the  year  1700.  He  was  for  many  years  one  of  the  selectmen
for  managing  the  affairs  of  his  native  town,  and  served  also,  during
several  sessions,  as  a  representative  in  the  General  Court  of  the
Province.  He  married,  August  30,  1688,  Mary,  the  daughter  of
Thomas  Gardner,  Esq.,  a  wealthy  merchant.  She  died  in  1724,
four  years  before  her  husband.  He  left  an  estate  valued  at  between
four  and  five  thousand  pounds.  The  grave-stones  of  both  husband
and wife are still to be seen  in  the burial-ground at Salem,

MEMOIR.  11

though  the  inscriptions  are  partially  effaced.  There  were  eleven
children  from  this  marriage,  the  seventh  of  whom  was  Ebenezer,
who  was  born  April  26,  1703,  and  died  February  2,  1768,  also
in  the  sixty-fifth  year  of  his  age.  He  was  the  only  son  of  this
numerous  household  who  left  male  descendants,  and  thus  became
the  common  ancestor  of  all  who  now  bear  the  family  name  in
Salem.  He  married,  August  15,  1728,  Mary,  the  daughter  of
the  Hon.  John  Turner,  one  of  the  most  distinguished  citizens  of
Salem,  long  a  member  of  the  Provincial  Council,  and  well  known
in  the  local  history  of  that  time.  The  annalist  of  Salem  says  of
him,  "His  deserts  were  equal  to  his  honors."*

Ebenezer  Bowditch  preserved  through  life  an  irreproachable
character,  and  possessed  in  a  high  degree  the  confidence  and
respect  of  the  community.  He  pursued  his  father's  occupation,
but,  as  it  seems,  without  much  success,  since  he  left  but  little
property  at  his  death.  His  wife  survived  him  till  May  1,  1785,
living  in  reduced  circumstances,  and  being  dependent  upon  her
young  grandson,  the  subject  of  this  memoir,  for  many  little
attentions,  by  which  her  declining  years  were  rendered  more
comfortable.  They  had  six  children,  of  whom  the  fifth  was
Habakkuk,  born  in  1738.  He  also  was  in  early  life  a  ship-master,
and,  as  was  the  custom  of  that  day,  learned  the  trade  of  a
cooper,  a  practical  acquaintance  with  which  was  then  deemed
an  important,  though  subordinate  qualification  for  the  discharge
of  the  appropriate  duties  of  his  situation.  At  the  commencement
of  the revolutionary  war, he  met  with  misfortunes in business,

*  Annals  of  Salem,  from  its  first  Settlement ;  by  Joseph  B.  Felt ;  p.  423.

\%  MEMOIR.

by  which  his  circumstances  became  very  much  reduced ;  and  he
was  so  disheartened,  that  he  had  not  the  energy  to  attempt  to
retrieve  them.  He  subsequently  worked  at  the  trade  of  a  cooper,
which  he  had  originally  learned  from  the  motive  above  stated.
But  he  was  able  in  this  manner  to  earn  only  a  scanty  subsistence
for  his  wife  and  children.  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  his
poverty,  from  the  circumstance  that,  for  many  successive  years,
he  received  fifteen  or  twenty  dollars  annually  from  the  charity
funds  of  the  Salem  Marine  Society,  of  which  he  was  a  member,
deriving  from  this  sum,  small  as  it  was,  quite  an  essential  aid
toward  the  support  of  his  family.  He  was  a  man  very  remarkable
for  strong  natural  good  sense,  but  had  enjoyed  no  advantages
of  education.  He  was  an  attentive  observer  and  an  intelligent
judge  of  men  and  events  as  they  passed  before  him.  He  was
extremely  conversant  with  the  Scriptures,  and  entertained  liberal
and  enlightened  views  on  the  subjects  of  religion  and  revelation.
He  possessed  a  cheerful  temper  and  an  amiable  disposition.  But
having  yielded  to  the  reverses  which  he  had  encountered,  and
which  would  but  have  stimulated  others  to  greater  efforts,  he
outlived  those  prospects  of  usefulness  and  happiness,  which,
upon  his  entrance  into  life,  seemed  to  be  within  his  reach.  Upon
one  occasion,  his  son,  alluding  to  the  latter  years  of  his  father's
life  as  having  been  less  happy  than  his  earlier  ones,  expressed
the  hope  that  he  might  not  himself  ''  live  too  long."  Habakkuk
Bowditch  was  married  July  23,  1765,  and  died  July  18th,  1798,
at  the  age  of  sixty  years.

Mary,  the  wife  of  Habakkuk  Bowditch,  had  died  December  16,
1783. She  was  an  excellent  woman,  discharging  all  the  duties

MEMOIR.  13

of  life  with  exemplary  fidelity.  By  her  death  Dr.  Bowditch
was  deprived  of  his  earliest  and  best  friend,  at  the  age  of  ten
years.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  she  had  lived  long  enough
to  exercise  a  most  salutary  influence  over  her  son's  mind,  and
that  it  is  in  a  great  degree  to  the  teachings  and  example  of  this
pious  and  affectionate  mother,  that  we  may  trace  the  inflexible
integrity,  the  unwavering  love  of  truth,  and  the  high  moral
principle,  for  which  he  was  through  life  distinguished.  From  her
he  learned  his  first  lesson  as  to  the  value  of  truth.  While  a  child,
playing  behind  his  mother's  chair,  he  had,  unobserved  by  her,
unrolled  a  ball  of  yarn,  from  which  she  was  knitting,  and  involved
it  in  inextricable  confusion.  When  she  discovered  the  mischief,
and  addressed  him  with  some  severity  of  manner,  he  denied  having
done  it.  She  at  once  entered  into  a  very  serious  conversation
with  him,  and  while  she  told  him  that  the  original  matter  of
offence  was  but  trifling,  she  explained  to  him  so  fully  the
meanness  and  criminality  of  falsehood,  and  urged  him  with
so  much  earnestness  never  again  to  be  guilty  of  it,  that  this  lesson
of  his  infancy  became  indelibly  impressed  upon  his  heart.  He
was  always  a  favorite  child.  She  was  interested  in  the  early
development  of  his  character  and  talents,  and,  it  is  said,  was
sometimes  obliged  even  to  restrain  and  check  his  fondness
for  study,  as  being  excessive.  She  has  been  heard  to  say  that  he
would  be  "  something  decided."  To  use  his  own  expression,  "  she
idolized  him ; "  and  he  never  spoke  of  her  but  in  terms  of  the
most  respectful  and  affectionate  remembrance.  Her  excellent
influence  extended  to  all  her  children.  They  grew  up  together,
as one observed of them, "  a loving household," remarkable

VOL. IV.  d

14  MEMOIR.

as  a  family  for  their excellent  moral  character and  their  strong
mutual  attachment.

Dr.  Bowditch  survived  all  his  brothers  and  sisters  for  nearly
thirty  years.  The  eldest,  Mary,  born  March  27,  1766,  took  upon
herself,  after  her  mother's  death,  the  whole  charge  of  the  family,
and  almost  supplied,  towards  the  younger  children,  the  place  of
that  excellent  parent  whom  they  had  lost.  She  married,  April
20,  1791,  Mr.  David  Martin,  a  ship-master,  who  died  a  few  years
afterwards.  She  herself  died  December  2,  1808,  at  the  age  of
forty-two  years,  leaving  to  her  brother's  care  an  only  child,  who
afterwards  always  resided  in  his  family,  repaying  his  kindness
by  the  attentions  of  a  daughter,  and  being  to  us  as  an  elder
sister. As such,  she  unites  with  us  upon  the  present  occasion.

The  second  child,  Habakkuk,  was  born  May  2,  1768,  and
was  drowned  in  Boston  about  forty  years  ago.  It  is  not  known
that  he  manifested  any  peculiar  taste  for  the  study  of  mathematics.

The  third  child,  Elizabeth,  was  born  May  16,  1771,  and  died
December  9,  1791,  in  consequence  of  a  fall  down  a  flight  of
steps,  having  lingered  in  great  agony  a  short  time  after  the
accident.  Dr.  Bowditch  often  mentioned,  with  much  emotion,  the
circumstances  of  the  death  of  this  sister,  who,  being  but  two
years  older  than  himself,  had  always  been  the  object  of  his
peculiar  regard  and  affection.  In  the  midst  of  life  and  health,
and  with  a  countenance  radiant  with  smiles  and  joy,  she  was
about  to  leave  her  friends  for  a  few  moments,  when  a  single
misstep  removed  her  from  them  forever.

MEMOIR.  15

The fifth child, William, was born May 5, 1776. He

embraced  a  sea-faring  life,  and,  while  absent  upon  one  of  his
voyages,  died  at  Trinidad,  in  the  autumn  of  1799,  at  the  age
of  twenty-three  years.  He  was  quite  as  remarkable  for  his
mathematical  talents  as  his  elder  brother,  and,  had  he  lived,
might  perhaps  have  been  equally  distinguished  for  the  successful
cultivation  of  this  branch  of  science.  In  the  first  edition  of  the
Practical  Navigator  he  is  mentioned  as  the  author  of  one  of
the  notes  to  Table  XIV.  Dr.  Bowditch  delighted  to  speak
of  the  purity,  and  almost  holiness  of  character  of  his  brother
William ;  and  another,  who  knew  well  his  early  virtues,  has
said  of  him,  "  He  was  sanctified  from  his  birth."

The  sixth  child,  Samuel,  was  born  September  13,  1778,  and
died  April  5,  1794,  at  the  age  of  sixteen  years.  He  also  possessed
great  quickness  at  mathematical  calculations.  But  he  pursued
his  studies  with  a  waywardness  and  eccentricity  which  would
probably  have  prevented  his  acquirements  from  being  as  great
as  might  have  resulted  from  a  more  regular  and  systematic
cultivation  of  his  naturally  excellent  talents.

The  seventh  child,  Lois,  was  born  March  29,  1781,  married
her  cousin,  Mr.  Joseph  Bowditch,  September  28,  1806,  and  died
without  children,  July  29,  1809,  aged  twenty-eight  years.  The
eldest  and  youngest  daughters  only  of  this  family  were  married,
and  they  were  also  both  on  their  death-beds  at  one  time  and  place,
prostrated  by  the  same  fatal  disease,  consumption.* Dr.  Bowditch,

*  One  of  them,  at  this  time,  presented  to  the  eldest  child  of  Dr.  Bowditch  a  little  silver

16  MEMOIR.

in  his  last  illness,  said  that  it  had  always  been  a  source  of  pleasure
to  him  to  remember  that  these  sisters,  when  dying,  had  each  told
him  that  he  had  been  through  life  a  good  brother  to  them;
"  but,"  added  he,  **  it  gives  me  greater  pleasure  now  than  ever
before."  He  also  said  that  "  they  died  with  the  calmness  of  two
Stoics."  He  once  mentioned  that,  in  settling  the  estate  of  his
deceased  sister,  the  Judge  of  Probate  thought  that  he  had
discovered  a  mistake  in  the  fact  that  the  estate  had  not  been
represented  insolvent,  although  more  money  had  been  paid  away
than  had  been  received.  The  matter  was  explained,  however,
by  the  statement  of  the  administrator,  that  he  should  have  felt
himself  disgraced  by  leaving  undischarged  the  few  small  debts
incurred  by  his  sister,  chiefly  during  her  last  illness,  while  he
possessed  any  means  of  his  own  with  which  to  pay  them.

Such  were  the  parents  and  such  the  brothers  and  sisters
of  Dr.  Bowditch ;  and  amid  the  domestic  influences  which  have
been  described  were  the  years  of  his  infancy  and  childhood  passed.
Many  amusing  and  interesting  incidents  of  this  period  of  his  life
might  be  mentioned.  It  was  one  to  which  he  himself  always
recurred  with  pleasure,  as  having  been  very  happy,  notwithstanding
its  many  privations.  If  he  was  obliged,  from  motives  of  economy,
to  wear  the  thin  garments  of  summer  when  the  near  approach  of
winter  made  them  less  comfortable,  he  would  reply  to  the  laugh
of  his  schoolmates  or  playfellows  by  charging  them  with  effeminacy
for  preferring  warmer  clothing. If,  as  was  often  the  case,  he  sat

medal,  bearing  upon  it  their  names,  and  the  inscription,  "Virtue  and Religion  lead to
Happiness." Such  had  been  the  result  of  her  own  experience.

maioiR.  17

down  to  a  dinner  consisting  chiefly  of  potatoes,  he  felt  that  a
mealy  potato  was  as  good  fare  as  he  desired.  He  humorously
described  one  occasion,  upon  which,  when  sent  to  buy  a  warm
loaf  of  bread  for  breakfast,  he  found  himself  unable,  on  his  way
home,  to  resist  the  temptation  of  gradually  eating  out  the  soft  part,
so  that,  upon  his  arrival,  the  upper  and  under  crusts  had  come  in
contact.  Possessing  health  and  activity  of  body,  he  engaged  at
one  moment  with  earnestness  and  ardor  in  all  the  amusements
of  boyhood,  and  in  the  next  returned  with  increased  pleasure  to
his  studies.  Yielding  sometimes  to  the  impulse  of  the  moment,
as  in  the  instance  last  cited,  he  committed  trifling  indiscretions,
but  nothing  mean  or  vicious  was  ever  developed  in  his  character.
Blessed  with  a  joyous  and  happy  temper,  he  contentedly
accommodated  himself  to  the  necessities  of  his  situation.  The
son  of  a  poor  mechanic,  with  no  expectations  from  family  or
friends,  he  had  within  him  an  energy  of  purpose  by  which  he
was  finally  to  surmount  all  obstacles.

While  he  was  yet  in  his  infancy,  his  father  removed  with
the  family  from  Salem  to  the  adjoining  village  of  Danvers,  and
resided  there  several  years.  The  house  which  he  occupied  is  still
standing.  It  is  a  humble  cottage.  The  main  building,  as  seen  in
front,  exhibits  but  one  door  and  one  window.  It  was  here  that
his  mother  first  showed  him  the  slight  crescent  of  the  new  moon,
and  the  fuller  orb  of  the  harvest  moon,  and  perhaps  first  awakened
in  his  mind  a  curiosity  to  know  more  of  the  nature  and  laws
of  the  planetary  system.  He  here  received  instruction  from  a
school-mistress,  whose  aged  relatives  still  live  in  the  immediate
vicinity,  and  by  whom  it  is  distinctly  remembered  that  he  was
VOL.  IV.  e

18  MEMOIR.

"  a  likely,  clever,  thoughtful  boy ; "  that  "  his  instructress  took
mightily  to  him ; "  that  **  he  was  the  best  scholar  she  ever
had  ; "  that  "  he  learnt  amazing  fast,  for  his  mind  was  fully  given
to  it ; "  and  that  *'  he  did  not  seem  like  other  children ;  he
seemed better,"

Upon  the  return  of  the  family  to  Salem,  he  was  sent,  at  the
age  of  seven  years  and  three  months,  to  the  best  school  in  the
town,  kept  by  a  Mr.  Watson.  The  character  of  this  "  seminary
of  learning "  may  perhaps  be  better  realized  from  the  following
circumstances  than  from  any  more  general  or  elaborate  description
of  it.  There  was  but  one  dictionary  in  the  school ;  and  a
gentleman,  who  was  a  fellow-pupil  with  Dr.  Bowditch,  never
saw  one  while  he  was  there.  Each  day,  the  scholars  were
called  upon  to  spell  aloud,  all  together,  in  chorus,  the  word
honorific abilitudinity  ;*  spelling  and  pronouncing  the  first  syllable,
then  the  two  first,  three  first,  &c.,  which  process,  applied  to  the
whole  word,  of  course  occupied  several  minutes.  He  early
showed  a  great  fondness  for  mathematics ;  but,  on  account  of
his  extreme  youth,  his  master,  it  is  said,  refused  to  permit  him
to  enter  on  that  branch  of  study  until  he  had  obtained  and
produced  from  his  father  a  special  request  to  that  effect.  He,
upon  one  occasion,  solved  a  problem  in  arithmetic,  which  the
instructer  thought  must  be  above  his  comprehension,  and  therefore
charged  him  with  having  procured  the  assistance  of  some  older
scholar,  giving  him  a  severe  reprimand  for  the  attempt  to  deceive
him. The  timely interference and explanations,  indeed,  of his

*  This  word,  meaDing  honor, may  be found  in Bailey's English Dictionary; and
Shakspeare  uses  honorificabilitudinitatibus, in Love's  Labor  Lost,  Act  5,  Scene  I.

MEMOIR.  19

eldest  brother,  saved  him  from  any  actual  chastisement ;  but  this
indignity  and  act  of  injustice Dr. Bowditch  never  forgot.

But  even  the  slight  elementary  instruction  which  he  might
have  obtained  at  this  school,  he  was  obliged  to  forego  altogether
at  the  age  of  ten  years  and  two  months,  when  he  was  taken  by
his  father  into  his  cooper's  shop,  that  he  might  by  his  labor  assist
in  the  support  of  the  family.  After  remaining  here  a  short  time,
he  entered  as  a  clerk  or  apprentice  into  the  ship-chandlery  shop  of
Messrs.  Ropes  and  Hodges,  when  he  was  about  twelve  years  of
age.  In  this  shop  he  remained  till  his  employers  retired  from
business,  at  which  time,  as  early  as  1790,  he  entered  the  similar
shop  of  Mr.  Samuel  Curwin  Ward,  where  he  remained  until  he
sailed  on  his  first  voyage,  in  1795.  Here,  when  not  engaged  in
serving  customers,  he  spent  his  time  in  reading,  and  particularly  in
the  study  of  mathematics,  for  which  he  then  felt  a  confirmed  and
decided  taste.  Upon  one  occasion,  a  visiter  entered  the  shop,  and,
looking  at  the  two  clerks,  one  of  whom  was  asleep  behind  the
counter,  and  the  other  diligently  occupied  with  his  slate  and
pencil,  smiled  and  said,  "  Hogarth's  apprentices  !  "  Another  visiter
observed  that,  if  he  kept  on  ciphering  so,  he  had  not  any  doubt
that,  in  time,  he  would  become  an  almanac  maker!  And  in  fact,
in  the  year  1788,  he  computed  an  almanac  for  the  year  1790,
which  is  still  preserved  in  his  library,  being  one  of  the  most
curious,  if  not  most  valuable,  manuscripts  in  that  collection.  It
is  also  stated  that  he  occasionally  tried  his  dexterity  at
philosophical  experiments ;  one  instance  mentioned  being  that,
while  in  the  shop  of  Ropes  and  Hodges,  he  constructed  quite  a
curious barometer. There  is  now  in his library,  also,  among

20  MEMOIR.

other similar articles, a very  neat wooden sun-dial, which he
made in the  year 1792.

These  pursuits  were,  however,  only  the  amusement  of  his
leisure  hours.  He  never  allowed  them  to  interfere  with  the
discharge  of  his  duty  towards  his  employers.  Upon  one  occasion,
indeed,  a  customer  called  and  purchased  a  pair  of  hinges,  at  a
time  when  the  young  clerk  was  deeply  engaged  in  solving  some
problem  in  mathematics,  which  he  thought  he  would  finish
before  charging  the  delivery  of  them  upon  the  books,  and  when
the  problem  was  solved,  he  forgot  the  matter  altogether.  In  a
few  days,  the  customer  called  again  to  pay  for  them,  when  Mr.
Hodges  himself  was  in  the  shop.  The  books  were  examined,
and  gave  no  account  of  this  purchase.  The  clerk,  upon  being
applied  to,  at  once  recollected  the  circumstance,  and  the  reason  of
his  own  forgetfulness.  From  that  day,  he  made  it  an  invariable
rule  to  finish  every  matter  of  business  which  he  began,  before
undertaking  any  thing  else.  Upon  his  recommendation,  given
quite  late  in  life,  one  of  his  sons  adopted  as  a  motto  for  a  seal,
"  End  what  you  begin."  He  has  himself  more  than  once  said,
that  he  never forgot  the hinges.

Having  once  heard,  in  1787,  from  his  brother  William,  a  vague
account  of  a  method  of  working  out  problems  by  letters,  instead
of  figures,  he  succeeded  in  borrowing  the  book  which  contained
it,  and  was  so  much  interested  and  excited  by  his  first  glance
at  algebra,  that  he  could  not  get  the  least  sleep  during  the  whole
of  the  next  night.  An  old  British  sailor,  residing  at  Salem  on  half
pay,  and  who ended his days as an inmate  of  the Greenwich

21

Hospital,  taught  him  the  elements  of  navigation ;  and  when  they
last  met,  as  he  was  about  to  embark  for  Europe,  he  patted  him  on
the  head,  saying,  "  My  boy,  you  have  a  taste  for  these  things :
keep  on  studying,  and  you  will  be  a  great  man  yet:"  —  an  approval
which  greatly  stimulated  and  encouraged  him.  He  rose  each
day  at  the  earliest  dawn,  and  devoted  his  morning  hours  to  study.
He  has  often  been  heard  to  say,  that  the  time  which  he  thus
gained  from  sleep,  gave  him,  substantially,  all  his  mathematics.  He
passed  the  long  winter  evenings,  too,  by  the  kitchen  fireside  of  his
employer,  Mr.  Hodges,  —  which  his  diffidence,  as  well  as  the  security
it  offered  him  from  interruption,  led  him  to  prefer  to  the  parlor,  —
quietly  engaged  in  his  favorite  pursuit ;  and  occasionally,  it  is  said,
also  rocking,  at  the  same  time,  the  infant's  cradle,  at  the  request
of  the  attendant,  who  wished  to  be  doing  something  else.

It  happened  that  Mr.  Hodges  and  another  gentleman  owned
together  in  moieties  a  very  irregularly-shaped  field  in  Salem,
and  wished  to  divide  it.  Accordingly,  the  young  apprentice
undertook  to  make  the  proposed  survey  and  division,  and
completed  the  task  with  the  most  minute  accuracy.  The
co-tenant,  however,  refused  to  abide  by  this  survey,  since  he
thought  that,  as  it  was  made  by  one  who  was  in  the  employment
of  Mr.  Hodges,  it  was  probable  that  there  had  been  an  unfair  bias
in  his  favor.  A  regular  surveyor  was  then  employed,  and  Dr.
Bowditch,  who  was  very  indignant  at  the  suspicions  entertained
in  regard  to  his  own  result,  said  that  he  could  not  help  feeling  a
malicious  pleasure  when  he  found  that  the  gentleman  alluded  to
received  for  his  half  part  several  square  feet  less  than  he  was
entitled  to. In 1794,  he  was employed by  the town  to  assist

VOL. IV.  /

22  MEMOIR.

Captain  John  Gibaui  in  making  a  survey  of  Salem,  which  labor
he  accordingly  performed ;  and  the  exact  area  of  the  town,  as
ascertained by  this survey,  was  computed  by  him.

Being  very  fond  of  books,  and  having  no  guide  in  the  selection
of  them,  his  reading  in  early  life  was  of  the  most  miscellaneous
character.  Thus  he  read  through  the  whole  of  Chambers's
Encyclopaedia,  in  four  folio  volumes,  without  omitting  an  article  ;
and,  as  his  memory,  except  as  to  persons  and  names,  was
wonderfully  retentive,  he  in  this  manner  acquired  a  fund  of  the
most  varied  information.  His  intimate  friends  have  often  been
surprised  at  finding  him  quite  conversant  with  subjects  apparently
the  most  foreign  from  his  favorite  studies  ;  and  one  of  the  most
profound  scholars  among  them  observed,  that  he  could  hardly
form  an  adequate  estimate  of  the  extent  of  his  general  attainments.
He  was  an  ardent  admirer  of  Shakspeare,  whose  most  beautiful
passages  were  treasured  up  in  his  memory  from  earliest  youth.
His  famiHarity  with  the  Old  and  New  Testament  was  very  great,
surpassing  that  of  many  professed  theologians.  The  family  Bible,
which  he  first  read,  is  still  preserved,  having  in  it  a  curious
map  of  the  wanderings  of  the  Israelites,  and  various  engravings
calculated  to  awaken  that  interest  in  the  young  reader,  which
every  subsequent  perusal  in  manhood  and  old  age  has  a  tendency
to  strengthen  and  confirm.  Through  the  kindness  of  his  friends,
and  especially  of  Dr.  Prince  and  Dr.  Bentley,  both  Unitarian
clergymen  of  Salem,  the  former  of  whom  was  distinguished  for  his
fondness  for  natural  philosophy,  he  obtained  the  use  of  books  which
would  otherwise  have  been  unattainable  by  him.  It  happened
that,  in  his  youth,  the  extensive  scientific  library  of  the  late  Dr.

MEMOIR.  23

Richard  Kirwan  was  captured  in  the  British  Channel  by  a
privateer  fitted  out  from  Beverly,  the  next  town  to  Salem.
The  enlightened  and  liberal  owners  of  the  vessel  permitted  the
library  thus  captured  to  be  sold  at  a  very  low  rate  to  an  association
of  gentlemen  in  Salem,  and  it  became  the  basis  of  the  present
Salem  Athenaeum.*  From  this  extremely  valuable  hbrary,  which
was  a  better  one  than  then  existed  in  any  part  of  the  United  States,
except  at  Philadelphia,  he  obtained  leave  freely  to  take  out  books,
and  to  consult  and  study  them  at  pleasure.  Among  its  treasures
were  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London.  All  the
mathematical  papers  in  these  Transactions,  and  many  scientific
works,  were  wholly  or  partially  transcribed  by  him,  and  are  still
preserved  in  his  library,  contained  in  more  than  twenty  folio  and
quarto  common-place  books  and  other  volumes.  And  this  immense
labor  he  was  obliged  to  undergo  chiefly  from  his  inability  to
purchase  the  books  in  question,  —  which  he  wished  to  have  by
him  permanently,  for  the  purpose  of  convenient  reference,  —  and
partly,  perhaps,  from  his  desire  to  impress  their  contents  more
strongly  upon  his  memory  than  could  be  done  by  a  mere  perusal.
The  title-page  of  one  of  these  volumes  states  that  it  contains,
with  the  next  volume,  '*  A  complete  Collection  of  all  the
Mathematical  Papers  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  ;  Extracts
from various Encyclopaedias, from the Memoirs of the Paris

•  It  is  an  interesting  fact,  that,  many  years  afterwards,  "  an  offer  of  remuneration  was
made  to  Dr.  Kirwan,  who  respectfully  decHned  it,  expressing  his  satisfaction  that  his  valuable
library  had  found  so  useful  a  destination."  —  An  Eulogy  on  the  Life  and  Character  of
Nathaniel  Bowditch,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  delivered  at  the  Request  of  the  Corporation  of  th%
(%  of  Salem,  May  24,  1838;  by  Daniel  Appkton  IVhite;  p.  43.

24  MEMOIR.

Academy  ;  a  complete  Copy  of  Emerson's  Mechanics ;  a  Copy  of
Hamilton's  Conies;  Extracts  from  Gravesande's  and  Martyn's
Philosophical  Treatise,  from  Bernoulli,  &c.  &c."  He  always
read  with  close  attention,  and  endeavored  to  ascertain  the  exact
meaning  of  every  word  about  which  he  was  doubtful.  This  led
him,  in  after  life,  to  collect  around  him  dictionaries,  which  he
constantly  consulted.  He  had  more  than  one  hundred  in  his
library.

He  began  to  learn  Latin,  January  4,  1790,  without  an  instructer,
that  he  might  read  Newton's  Principia,  which  he  had  before
attempted  to  understand  by  means  only  of  his  knowledge  of
mathematical  subjects  and  the  various  equations  and  diagrams
which  it  contained.  He  now  read  a  copy  of  Euclid,  which  had
been  given  him  by  his  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Martin,  and  which  was
once  the  property  of  Dr.  Mather  Byles,  a  clergyman  of  Boston,
distinguished  for  his  humor  and  eccentricity.  The  book  still
retains  his  original  pencil  marks,  recording  the  meaning  of  the
simplest  Latin  words  —  "  tamen,  nevertheless  ;  rursus,  again  ;  "
&c.  He  had  previously  read  Euclid  in  English,  and  the  letters
"  Q.  E.  D.,"  which  had  remained  an  impenetrable  mystery  to  him
on  his  previous  attempt  to  read  the  Principia,  were  now  explained
by  the  *'quod  erat  demonstrandum^^  which  he  here  discovered;
but  he  was  for  a  long  time  perplexed  by  the  words  "  mutatis
mutandis,^^  and  unable  to  conjecture  what  particular  change  they
indicated.  He  had  received  from  Dr.  Bentley  a  copy  of  the
Principia,  which  had  formerly  been  presented  by  that  gentleman
to  a  young  friend,  who  kindly  consented  to  relinquish  his  prior
claims ;  and  this  work  he  at  last  mastered,  as  he  had  done  Euclid

MEMOIR.  25

before.  The  Hon.  Nathan  Reed,  then  an  apothecary  in  Salem,
afterwards  a  member  of  Congress,  being  himself  fond  of  scientific
pursuits,  was  attracted  by  this  love  of  science  manifested  by  Dr.
Bowditch,  and  formed  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  him.  In  his
shop  was  an  assistant  who  was  a  schoolmate  and  friend  of  Dr.
Bowditch,  and  here  their  Sunday  evenings  were  often  passed
together.  Mr.  Reed  states  as  a  fact,  that  Dr.  Bowditch,  while
in  Mr.  Ward's  employment,  actually  translated  Newton's  Principia
into  English.  No  such  translation  is,  however,  now  to  be  found
among  his  papers ;  though  translations  of  parts  of  it,  indeed,  are
contained  in  the  manuscript  volumes  before  mentioned.  In  a
similar  manner,  and  from  the  same  motive,  he  acquired  the
elements  of  the  French  language ;  to  perfect  himself  in  which,
he  took  lessons  during  sixteen  months,  from  a  foreigner  then  in
Salem,  whom,  in  return,  he  instructed  in  English.  At  first,  he
declined  learning  the  pronunciation,  as  a  matter  which  could  not  be
of  any  use  to  him  ;  but  at  last,  the  foreigner  was  so  shocked  at
hearing  him  read  the  words  parlez  vous,  &c.,  as  if  these  had  been
English,  that  he  almost  insisted  upon  instructing  him  in  the  true
pronunciation,  telling  him  that  it  might  be  of  importance  in  the
business  of  life.  And  in  fact,  he  had  scarcely  learned  it,  before
his  first  voyage  was  decided  upon,  and  to  a  French  port,  where
he  was  thus enabled  to act  as  a  successful  interpreter.

Excepting  a  few  lessons  which  he  took  in  book-keeping  from
Mr.  Michael  Walsh,  it  is  believed  that  he  received  no  other
regular  instruction  after  leaving  school.  But  it  has  been  stated
that  Drs.  Bentley  and  Prince  rarely  passed  his  employer's
shop,  without  stopping  to  converse  with  him ;  and thus,  perhaps,

VOL.  IV.  g

26  MEMOIR.

by  the  interest  he  had  awakened  in  their  minds,  he  had  secured
to  himself  the  gratuitous  and  invaluable  assistance  of  the  two  ablest
instructers  whom  the  town  then  contained.  The  world,  indeed,
was  his  school,  and  Nature  herself  his  best  instructor.  She  offers
her  lessons  to  all,  though  many  overlook  or  disregard  her  teachings.
But  his  was  one  of  those  powerful  intellects  which  only  at  intervals
appear  among  men  :  it  was  stimulated  and  aroused  to  action  by
that  sternest  though  best  of  monitors,  necessity  ;  and  it  mastered
every  thing  within  its  reach.  Dr.  Bowditch  never  considered  that
the  obstacles  in  his  path  had  the  slightest  tendency  to  retard  his
progress.  On  the  contrary,  he  felt  that  they  afforded  him  a  foot-
hold by  which  that  progress  was  rendered  more  sure  and  steady.
Much  as  he  valued  all  the  "  means  and  appliances  "  of  learning,
—  and  he  did  value  them  beyond  all  price,  —  he  thought  it  a  great
disadvantage  to  any  one  to  be  born  and  educated  in  the  midst  of  ease
and  luxury,  even  though  surrounded  with  every  facility  for  mental
cultivation  ;  since,  to  such  a  one,  the  needful  stimulus  or  inducement
to  use  the  means  within  his  reach  would  be  almost  surely  wanting.
He  often  mentioned  with  approbation,  as  containing  much  truth,
the  remark  of  a  distinguished  French  mathematician  to  a  young
pupil,  whose  ready  and  intelligent  answers  had  awakened  his
interest,  and  who,  in  reply  to  the  question  of  his  instructor,  had  told
him  his  parentage  and  situation  in  life,  —  **Ah  !  I  am  sorry.  You
are  too  rich.  You  must  give  up  mathematics."  One  remarkable
exception,  indeed,  to  this  rule.  Dr.  Bowditch  readily  admitted  in
the  instance  of  him  whose  genius  reflected  as  bright  a  lustre  on
the  noble  house  of  Cavendish  as  had  been  received  from  it.*

*  "  En  sorte  qu'il  n*y  a  nulle  temerite  a  presager  qu'il  fera  rejailler  sur  sa  raaison  autant  de
lustre  qu'il  en  a  regu  d'elle."  —  Cuvier's  Eulogy  on  Cavendish,  before  the  Institute  of  France.

MEMOIR.  27

In  the  manuscript  volumes  before  mentioned  are  often
contained  the  precise  dates  at  which  he  was  studying  and
recording  the  mathematical  papers  there  collected,  and  occasionally
they  contain  mottoes  or  sentiments  upon  other  subjects.  Thus  the
title-page  of  one  of  them,  under  the  date  of  December  13,  1794,
has  the  well-known  quotation,  "  Nullius  addictus  jurare  in  verba
magistri."  A  minute  analysis,  indeed,  of  these  volumes,  in  a
more  extended  biography,  might  perhaps  enable  the  reader  to
trace,  step  by  step,  the  mental  progress  of  Dr.  Bowditch.  It
is  only  necessary,  however,  here  to  state,  that  he  who,  at  the  age
of  twenty-one  years,  had  read  the  immortal  work  of  Newton,  was,
even  then,  unsurpassed,  and  probably  unequalled,  in  mathematical
attainments  by  any  one  in  the  commonwealth.  Those  habits  were
then  formed  which  were  to  render  him  as  eminent  among  men  of
business,  as,  by  his  talents  and  acquirements,  he  was  to  become
eminent  among  men  of  science.  And  his  character,  also,  then
exhibited  all  those  beautiful  and  harmonious  elements  which  it
ever  afterwards  retained.  That  deep  religious  principle,  which
sustained  and  cheered  him  in  the  last  hours  of  his  life,  had  guided
his  boyhood,  and  was  now  the  familiar  and  inseparable  companion
of  his  mature  years ;  and  already  were  displayed  those  various
social  and  personal  virtues,  which  were  to  render  him  a  moral
exemplar  to  the  community  in  which  he  lived.

Dr.  Bowditch  began  life  with  the  same  pursuits  which  his
ancestors  had  followed  for  so  many  generations.  Between  the
years  1795  and  1804,  he  made  five  voyages,  —  performing  the  first
in  the  capacity  of  clerk,  and  the  three  next  in  that  of  supercargo,  —

28  MEMOIR.

all  under  the  command  of  Captain  Henry  Prince,  of  Salem.  On
his  fifth  and  last  voyage,  he  acted  as  both  master  and  supercargo.
He  sailed  upon  the  first  of  these  voyages,  January  11,  1795,  in  the
ship  Henry,  bound  to  the  Isle  of  Bourbon,  and  w^as  absent  exactly
one  year.  His  three  next  voyages  were  in  the  ship  Astrea,  which
sailed,  in  1796,  for  Lisbon,  Madeira,  and  Manilla,  and  arrived  at
Salem  in  May,  1797 ;  and  again  in  August,  1798,  sailed  for  Cadiz,
thence  to  the  Mediterranean,  loaded  at  Alicant,  and  arrived  at
Salem  in  April,  1799 ;  and  in  July,  1799,  sailed  from  Boston  to
Batavia  and  Manilla,  and  returned  in  September,  1800;  —  and  his
fifth  voyage  was  in  the  Putnam,  which  sailed  from  Beverly,
November  21,  1802,  bound  for  Sumatra,  and  arrived  at  Salem
December  25,  1803.

He  has  related  that,  upon  the  first  of  these  voyages,  he  carried
out,  as  an  adventure,  a  small  box  of  shoes,  which  article  proved
on  his  arrival  at  the  Isle  of  Bourbon  to  be  in  great  demand.
He  sold  them  for  about  three  times  the  first  cost,  and  having
made  an  advantageous  investment  of  the  proceeds,  he  returned
home  quite  elated,  and  feeling  that  the  fickle  goddess  had  smiled
upon  him  more  propitiously  than  she  ever  had  done  upon  any
mortal  before.

Of  his  second  voyage.  Captain  Prince  relates,  that  one  day,
when  dining  at  the  table  of  the  American  consul  at  Madeira,  "  his
supercargo  laid  down  his  knife  and  fork,  and,  after  squeezing  the
tips  of  his  fingers  for  two  minutes,"  gave  to  the  lady  of  the  house
an  answer  to  an  intricate  question  which  she  had  proposed ;  to  the

MEMOIR.  2^

great  astonishment  of  her  clerk,  who,  after  a  long  calculation,
had  succeeded  in  solving  it,  and  **  who  exclaimed  that  he  did  not
believe  there  was  another  man  on  the  island  who  could  have  done
it  in  two  hours."

During  his  third  voyage,  on  the  passage  from  Cadiz  to  Alicant,
they  were  chased  by  a  French  privateer ;  but,  being  well  armed
and  manned,  they  determined  on  resistance.  The  duty  assigned
to  Dr.  Bowditch  was  that  of  handing  up  the  powder  upon  deck.
And  in  the  midst  of  the  preparations,  the  captain  looked  into  the
cabin,  where  he  was  no  less  surprised  than  amused  at  finding  his
supercargo  quietly  seated  by  his  keg  of  powder,  and  busily
occupied,  as  usual,  with  his  slate  and  pencil.  He  said  to  him,
"  I  suppose  you  could  now  make  your  will,"  to  which  he  smilingly
assented.  He  did  in  fact  give  to  his  eldest  son  his  instructions
in  regard  to  his  last  will,  with  the  like  calmness  and  composure,
when  there  was  not  only  an  apparent  danger,  but  an  absolute
certainty,  of  the  near  approach  of  death.

Upon  his  arrival  at  Manilla,  during  his  fourth  voyage,  the
captain,  being  asked  how  he  contrived  to  find  his  way,  in
the  face  of  a  north-east  monsoon,  by  mere  dead-reckoning,
replied,  "  that  he  had  a  crew  of  twelve  men,  every  one  of  whom
could  take  and  work  a  lunar  observation  as  well,  for  all  practical
purposes,  as  Sir  Isaac  Newton  himself,  were  he  alive."  During
this  conversation.  Dr.  Bowditch  sat  **  as  modest  as  a  maid,  saying
not  a  word,  but  holding  his  slate  pencil  in  his  mouth ; "  while
another person remarked, that "  there was more knowledge

TOL. IV.  h

30  MEMOIR.

of  navigation  on  board  that  ship  than  there  ever  was  in  all  the
vessels  that  have  floated  in  Manilla  Bay."  *

In  his  last  voyage,  Dr.  Bowditch  arrived  off  the  coast  in
mid-winter,  and  in  the  height  of  a  violent  north-east  snow-storm.
He  had  been  unable  to  get  an  observation  for  a  day  or  two,  and
felt  very  anxious  and  uneasy  at  the  dangerous  situation  of  the
vessel.  At  the  close  of  the  afternoon  of  December  25,  be-
came on  deck,  and  took  the  whole  management  of  the  ship
into  his  own  hands.  Feeling  very  confident  where  the  vessel
was,  he  kept  his  eyes  directed  towards  the  light  on  Baker's  Island^
at  the  entrance  of  Salem  harbor.  Fortunately,  in  the  interval
between  two  gusts  of  wind,  the  fall  of  snow  became  less  dense
than  before,  and  he  thus  obtained  a  glimpse  of  the  light  of  which
he  was  in  search.  It  was  seen  by  but  one  other  person,  and
in  the  next  instant  all  was  again  impenetrable  darkness.
Confirmed,  however,  in  his  previous  convictions,  he  now  kept
on  the  same  course,  entered  the  harbor,  and  finally  anchored  in
safety,  t  He  immediately  went  on  shore,  and  the  owners  were
very  much  alarmed  at  his  sudden  appearance  on  such  a
tempestuous  night,  and  at  first  could  hardly  be  persuaded  that
he  had  not  been  wrecked. And  cordial  indeed  was  the  welcome-

*  An  interesting  incidental  notice  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  the  case  of  a  black  cook  who
could  work  lunar  observations,  may  be  found  in  Zach's  Correspondance  Astronomique,
Vol.  IV.  p.  62.

f  Upon  this  occasioti,  he  had  given  his  orders  with  the  same  decision  and  preciseness  as  if
he  saw  all  the  objects  around,  and  thus  inspired  the  sailors  with  the  confidence  which  he  felt
himself.  One  of  them,  who  was  twenty  years  older  than  his  captain,  exclaimed,  "  Oar  old
man  goes  ahead  as  if  it  was  noon-day ! "

MEMOIR.  SI

which he received from one who had been listening to the
warfare  of  the  elements  with  all  the  solicitude  of  a  sailor's  wife.

In  his  transactions  with  custom-house  officers  upon  the  continent
of  Europe,  he  found  that  they  almost  universally  required  a  fee,  not
less  for  the  performance  of  duty  than  for  a  violation  of  it;  and
several  amusing  instances  might  be  mentioned  as  illustrating  his
own  experience  in  this  matter.  Indeed,  all  his  subsequent
observation  convinced  him  that  there  is  hardly  a  labor  or  duty
in  life  that  is  not  rendered  more  light  and  easy  by  gratuitous
compensation ;  and  therefore  it  was  always  his  rule,  not  only
during  these  voyages,  but  through  life,  to  make  it  for  the  interest
of  those  about  him  to  be  upon  the  alert  in  attending  to  his
wishes,  or  complying  with  his  requests ;  though  never  did  he
attempt  by  this  means  to  persuade  any  one  to  what  he  considered,
in  the  slightest  degree,  a  violation  of  duty,  or  breach  of  trust.

During  these  voyages,  he  perfected  himself  in  the  French
language,  and  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  Italian,  Portuguese,
and  Spanish,  especially  of  the  latter  language.  Thus  he  read
through  the  whole  of  the  voluminous  Spanish  History  of  Mariana,
during  one  of  these  voyages ;  and  many  interesting  facts  there
stated  respecting  Cardinal  Ximenes  and  the  Great  Captain,  &c.,
he  distinctly  remembered  in  his  recent  perusal  of  Prescott*s
Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  —  the  last  work  which  he  read  before
his  death.  An  interpreter,  with  whom  he  was  transacting
business,  and  whose  piety  consisted  in  the  external  observances
of  a  good  Catholic,  cautioned  him  against  reading  so  many  books,
lest  some of them should bring him into the hands of the

te  MEMOIR.

Inquisition.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  it  was  to  this  acquisition
of  the  Spanish  language,  and  the  consequent  opportunity  afforded
him  of  conferring  an  obhgation  upon  an  active  merchant  in  Salem,
by  gratuitously  translating  for  him  a  Spanish  protest,  that  Dr.
Bowditch  always  attributed  his  appointment  to  the  situation
which  he,  a  few  years  afterwards,  obtained  against  a  powerful
competitor,  and  for  which  he  was  much  indebted  to  the  influence
and  friendship  of  the  merchant  alluded  to.  In  view  of  this
circumstance,  and  that  before  mentioned  respecting  his  knowledge
of  French  pronunciation,  with  other  incidents  of  a  similar
character,  he  used  to  say  that  nothing  which  he  ever  learned
came  amiss.  It  may  here  be  mentioned  that,  as  late  in  life  as  the
age  of  forty-five,  he  learned  the  German  language  thoroughly,*
and  acquired,  at  about  the  same  time,  a  slight  knowledge  of
Dutch.  A  manuscript  in  his  library  contains  probably  ten  thousand
German  words  and  English  meanings,  which  he  had  transcribed
that  he  mio^ht  better  remember  them.  He  deliofhted  to  trace
analogies  between  different  languages,  and  especially  to  discover
resemblances  of  foreign  words  to  those  of  his  mother  tongue,  of
which  many  striking  examples  were  detected  and  mentioned  by
him — the  Handschuh  of  the  German,  meaning  glove;  and  the
verse in the Dutch  New Testament in which the stoning of

*  In  a  letter  of  Dr.  Bowditch  to  Baron  Zach,  dated  November  22,  1822,  published  in
Zach's  Correspondance  Astronomique,  Vol.  X.  p.  224,  he  states  that  he  had,  three  years
previously,  purchased  several  of  the  most  important  works  of  the  German  mathematicians,
and  among  others  Zach's  Monatliche  Correspondenz,  in  twenty-eight  volumes,  —  and  adds,
"  With  this  work  I  began  to  learn  German,  and  have  been  amply  rewarded  for  the  labor."
His  own  experience  led  him  to  say,  that  this  language  could  be  acquired,  in  a  degree
sufficient  for  reading  all  mathematical  works,  by  studying  two  hours  each  day  for  four  months.

MEMOIR.  33

Stephen  is  described,  and  where  it  is  added  that  the  apostles
mode  *'  eenen  grootea  rowe  over  hem/'  &c.  The  serious  attempt
to  prove  that  jour  was  derived  from  diea^  he  thought  not  so  absurd
as  he  might  have  done,  had  not  a  Spanish  boy  who  once  sliipped
with  him,  having  the  Christian  name  of  Benilo,  been  in  the  next
voyage  entered  upon  tlie  books  by  the  good  American  cognomen
of  Ben  or  Benjamin  Eaton,  He  was  often  amused  at  discovering
in  the  dictionary  of  some  foreign  language,  a  definition  expressing
more  clearly  than  elegantly  the  precise  signification  of  a  word.*
He  also  acquired  some  knowledge  of  Greek,  but  how  early  in  life
is  not  known.  He  always  began  to  learn  a  language  by  taking
the  New  Testament  and  dictionary,  and  attempting  immediately
to  translate.  Thus  he  left  in  his  library  the  New  Testament
in  more  than  twenty-five  different  dialects  or  languages.

But  the  long  intervals  of  leisure  which  a  sailor's  life  afforded,
he  chiefly  devoted  to  his  favorite  study,  pursuing  with  unremitting
zeal  those  researches  in  which  he  had  already  made  such  progress,
notwithstanding  the  interruptions  and  embarrassments  of  his  earlier
days.  Here,  with  only  the  sea  around  him,  and  the  sky  above
him,  protected  alike  from  all  the  intruding  cares  and  engrossing
pleasures  of  life,  he  especially  delighted  to  hold  converse  with  the
master-spirits  who  had  attempted  to  explain  the  mysteries  of
the  visible  universe,  and  the  laws  by  which  the  great  energies  of
nature  are  guided  and  controlled.  M.  Lacroix  mentioned  to
one  of  the  sons  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  that  from  him  he  had
received several corrections  and  notices  of  errata in  his works,

*  See  Ebers's  German  Dictionary,  passim,
VOL. IV.  t

.34  "memoir.

which  our  navigator  had  discovered  during  these  long  India
voyages.  And  in  the  ship  in  which  he  sailed  were  witnessed
not  merely  the  labors  and  vigils  of  the  solitary  student,  but  the
teachings  of  the  kind  and  generous  instructer,  anxious  and
eager  to  impart  to  others  the  knowledge  which  he  had  himself
acquired.  **  He  loved  study  himself,"  says  Captain  Prince,  *'  and
he  loved  to  see  others  study.  He  was  always  fond  of  teaching
others.  He  would  do  any  thing  if  any  one  would  show  a
disposition  to  learn.  Hence,"  he  adds,  "  all  was  harmony  on
board  ;  all  had  a  zeal  for  study ;  all  were  ambitious  to  learn."
On  one  occasion,  two  sailors  were  zealously  disputing,  in  the
hearing  of  the  captain  and  supercargo,  respecting  sines  and
cosines.  The  result  of  his  teaching,  in  enabling  the  whole
crew  of  twelve  men  to  work  a  lunar  observation,  has  been
before  stated.  Every  one  of  those  twelve  sailors  subsequently
attained,  at  least,  the  rank  of  first  or  second  officer  of  a  ship.
It  was  a  circumstance  highly  in  favor  of  a  seaman,  that  he  had
sailed  with  Dr.  Bowditch,  and  was  often  sufficient  to  secure  his
promotion.  Connected  with  much  testimony  of  this  sort,  is  that
of  the  uniform  aflfability  and  kindness  of  manner  displayed  by
Dr.  Bowditch  in  his  intercourse  with  all  on  board,  which
were  especially  calculated  to  increase  the  self-respect  of  the
sailor,  and  inspire  him  with  a  due  sense  of  his  own  powers,
and  of  the  importance  of  his  occupation.  In  a  letter  from
an  officer  in  the  United  States  navy,  who  sailed  twice  in  the
Astrea  with  Dr.  Bowditch,  at  first  as  a  cabin  boy,  and  who  died
a  few  months  after  the  friend  of  whom  he  speaks,  the  writer
states  some  of  the  above  particulars  respecting  Dr.  Bowditch,
and  adds that "  his  kindness  and  attention  to  the  poor sea-sick

MEMOIR.  35

cabin  boy  are  to  this  hour  uppermost  in  my  memory,  and  will
be  so  when  his  logarithms  and  lunar  observations  are  remembered
no  more."*

It  is  unnecessary  to  state,  that  Dr.  Bowditch  discharged  his
duty  toward  his  employers  with  the  utmost  fidelity  and  exactness.
His  voyages  were  conducted  with  uniform  skill  and  success,
and  to  their  entire  satisfaction.  It  is  said  by  Captain  Prince,
that  Dr.  Bowditch,  though  he  had  such  a  thorough  knowledge
of  navigation,  knew  but  little  of  what  is  called  seamanship ;
that  he  never  went  to  see  a  launch  in  his  life,  &c.  It
is  without  doubt  true,  that  the  mere  detail  of  seamanship
was  always  irksome  to  him.  He  has  often  told  his  children
that,  upon  common  occasions,  he  left  the  management  of  the
ship  to  his  first  officer ;  but  upon  any  emergency,  he  was
not  only  ready  and  desirous,  but,  as  is  believed,  perfectly
competent,  to  perform  all  the  duties  which  could,  on  such
occasions, be required  of  an experienced and  practical  seaman.

The  following  is  the  account  of  his  habits  when  at  sea,  given
by  one  who  was  his  companion  during  several  voyages.  "  His
practice  was  to  rise  at  a  very  early  hour  in  the  morning,  and
pursue  his  studies  till  breakfast,  immediately  after  which  he
walked  rapidly  for  about  half  an  hour,  and  then  went  below  to
his  studies  till  half  past  eleven  o'clock,  when  he  returned  and
walked  till  the  hour  at  which  he  commenced  his  meridian
observations. Then came the dinner, after which he was

*  Charles  F.  Waldo,  Esq.,  died  August  31,  1838.

36  MEMOIR.

engaged  in  bis  studies  till  five  o'clock ;  then  he  walked  till  tea
time,  and  after  tea  was  at  his  studies  till  nine  in  the  evening.
From  this  hour  till  half  past  ten,  he  appeared  to  have
banished  all  thoughts  of  study,  and,  while  walking  at  his  usual
quick  pace,  he  would  converse  in  the  most  lively  manner,  giving
us  useful  information,  intermixed  with  amusing  anecdotes  and
an  occasional  hearty  laugh.  He  thus  made  the  time  delightful
to  the  officers  who  walked  with  him.  Whenever  the  heavenly
bodies  were  in  distance  to  get  the  longitude,  night  or  day,
he  was  sure  to  make  his  observations  once,  and  frequently
twice,  in  every  twenty-four  hours,  always  preferring  to  make
them  by  the  moon  and  stars,  as  less  fatiguing  to  his  eyes.
He  was  often  seen  on  deck  at  other  times,  walking,  apparently
in  deep  thought,  when  it  was  well  understood  by  all  on
board  that  he  was  not  to  be  disturbed,  as  we  supposed  he
was  solving  some  difficult  problem  ;  and  when  he  darted
below,  the  conclusion  was  that  he  had  got  the  idea.  If  he
were  in  the  fore  part  of  the  ship  when  the  idea  came  to
him,  he  would  actually  run  to  the  cabin,  and  his  countenance
would  give  the  expression  that  he  had  found  a  prize."*
Another  correspondent  states  that  sometimes,  when  he  wished
to  pursue  his  studies  without  disturbing  those  in  the  cabin
by  introducing  a  candle  or  lamp,  he  has  seen  him  standing
in  the  companion-way  with  his  slate  and  pencil,  working  out
some  problem,  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  by  the  aid  only  of  the
binacle  lamp.t

*  Judge  White's  Eulogy,  p.  27.

t  Another  companion of  his voyages  says,  "  He  never  manifested  any  moral  failings
whatever,  but  was  always  remarkable  for  his  strict  principles  of  conduct,  and  for  the  utmost

MEMOIR.  S7

Such  was  Dr.  Bowditcli's  seafaring  life,  — not  wasted  in  ennui
or  idle  reveries,  but  every  moment  of  it  devoted  to  the  improvement
alike  of  his  own  mind  and  character,  and  those  of  every  individual
in  the  little  world  around  him.  Already,  too,  as  might  have  been
expected,  he  was  beginning  to  win  the  honors  of  science ;  and
domestic  life,  from  which  the  sailor  is  almost  wholly  debarred,
was  preparing  for  him  its  sweetest  home.

From  our  venerable  University  at  Cambridge  he  received  the
highest  encouragement  to  pursue  the  career  upon  which  he  had
entered.  In  July,  1802,  when  his  ship,  the  Astrea,  was  wind-
bound  in  Boston,  he  went  to  hear  the  performances  at  the  annual
commencement  of  the  College ;  and  among  the  honorary  degrees
conferred,  he  thought  he  heard  his  own  name  announced  as
Master  of  Arts ;  but  it  was  not  until  congratulated  by  a
townsman  and  friend,  that  he  became  satisfied  that  his  senses
had  not  deceived  him.  He  always  spoke  of  this  as  one  of  the
proudest  days  of  his  life ;  and  amid  all  the  subsequent  proofs
which  he  received  of  the  respect  and  esteem  of  his  fellow-citizens,
and  the  distinctions  conferred  upon  him  from  foreign  countries,
he  recurred  to  this  with  the  greatest  pleasure.  It  is,  indeed,
made the subject of express mention in his will. It was

piirity  of  mind  and  character ;  detesting  any  thing  of  an  opposite  nature,  even  in  word.  His
feelings,  indeed,  were  quick,  and  sometimes,  though  rarely,  he  was  thought  to  give  a  too  quick
utterance  to  tliem ;  but  the  excitement  passed  off  in  a  moment."  Another  says,  "  I  have
known  Dr.  B.  intimately  for  more  than  fifty  years,  and  I  know  no  faults.  This  may  seem
strange;  for  most  of  your  great  men,  when  you  look  at  them  closely,  have  something  to
bring  them  down  ;  but  he  had  nothing.  I  suppose  all  Europe  would  not  have  tempted
him  to  swerve  a  hair's  breadth  (rom  what  he  thought  right."  —  Jtidge  fVkUe*$  Eulogy,  p.  56.
VOL. IV.  k

38  MEMOIR.

gratefully  repaid  by  the  services  of  a  long  life.  For  the  last
twelve  years,  he  was  one  of  the  select  body  of  seven  individuals
intrusted  with  the  immediate  management  and  control  of  the
College,  having  for  many  years  before  been  a  member  of  the
more  numerous  body  of  Overseers,  who  have  the  general  and
more  remote  supervision  of  its  affairs.  Upon  his  decease,  his
associates  in  the  Corporation  of  Harvard  College  state,  "  that
he  so  acquired  the  confidence  of  his  contemporaries,  as  to  be
regarded  as  the  pillar  and  the  pride  of  every  society  of  which
he  was  an  active  member,  the  effects  of  which  never  failed  to
be  seen  and  acknowledged  by  its  prosperity  and  success  ; "  and
they  proceed  to  admit  the  benefit  which  that  institution  *'  has
derived  from  the  extraordinary  endowments  he  possessed,  and
by  which,  in  the  exercise  of  his  characteristic  zeal,  intelligence,
and  faithfulness,  he  ever  sustained  and  advanced  all  its
interests,"

On  the  28th  day  of  May,  1799,  he  was  chosen  a  member  of
the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences.  Some  of  the  most
valuable  and  interesting  papers  in  its  Transactions  were  the
subsequent  contributions  of  his  pen;  and  the  presidency  of
this  society,  to  which  he  was  elected  in  May,  1829,  in  the
place  of  John  Quincy  Adams,  late  President  of  the  United  States,
is  one  of  the  hiorhest  honors  which  Science  offers  to  her  votaries
upon  this  side  of  the  Atlantic.  A  letter  received  from  the  officers
of  the  Academy  bears  a  like  honorable  testimony  to  the  merits
and  services  of  their  deceased  associate  and  President :  —  "It
is  the  common  fate  of  mankind  to  die,  and  be  forgotten.  It  is
the privilege of the just and good to be associated in the

MEMOIR.  39

remembrance  with  tender  and  grateful  recollections.  It  is  the
destiny  of  minds  gifted  above  the  common  lot,  and  acting  beyond
the  common  sphere,  to  involve  in  general  regret  the  communities
that  have  known  tlieir  wortli.  It  is  thus  that,  on  the  present
occasion,  our  sincere  and  general  regret  is  necessarily  mingled
with  the  sadness  of  domestic  affliction."

On  March  25,  1798,  Dr.  Bowditch  married  Elizabeth,
daughter  of  Francis  Boardman,  Esq.,  who  is  said  to  have  been
a  lady  of  remarkable  intelligence,  and  worthy  of  his  choice.
After  a  few  months  spent  in  her  society,  he  went  upon  his  third
voyage,  and  upon  his  return  found  his  home  desolate.  She
whom  he  first  selected  as  his  companion,  was  not  to  be  the
mother  of  his  children.  His  wife  had  died,  October  18,  1798,
aged  only  eighteen  years.  Dr.  Bowditch  felt  that  an  alliance
so  abruptly  terminated,  did  not  justly  entitle  him  to  retain  to
his  own  use  the  property  of  which  he  thereby  became  legally
possessed ;  and  accordingly,  he  surrendered  to  the  relatives  of
his  late  wife,  every  thing  which  he  had  thus  acquired,  including
even  certain  small  articles  of  plate,  &c.,  which,  but  for  the  general
character  of  the  motive  which  influenced  him,  he  would  have
gladly  retained.  Upon  his  second  daughter  and  youngest  child,
he,  many  years  afterwards,  bestowed  the  name  which  had  been
borne  by  the  wife  of  his  youth.

On  October  28,  1800,  he  married  his  cousin  Mary,  the  only
daughter  of  his  uncle,  Jonathan  Ingersoll,  Esq.  She  was  then
scarcely  nineteen  years  of  age,  having  been  born  December
4, 1781. Her father had been an active ship-master, and

40  MEMOIR.

was  then  living  upon  his  estate  in  Dan  vers,  from  which,  more
than  twenty-five  years  ago,  he  removed  to  Windsor,  Vermont,
where  he  still  cultivates  a  farm  upon  the  beautiful  banks  of  the
Connecticut,  finding  in  the  cares  and  labors  of  husbandry,  at  the
advanced  age  of  eighty-eight  years,  a  pleasure  greater  than  he
ever  experienced  amid  the  more  stirring  scenes  of  his  youth.
Long  may  his  honorable  and  peaceful  life  be  preserved!  This
marriage,  which  lasted  more  than  thirty-three  years,  may  be
regarded  as  the  most  happy  circumstance  of  Dr.  Bowditch's
life.  With  personal  attractions  of  no  common  order,  domestic
in  her  habits,  of  the  most  lively  and  cheerful  disposition,  with
affections  which  age  never  chilled,  governed  ever  by  the  strictest
religious  principle,  the  wife  and  mother  was  devotedly  attached
to  her  husband  and  children,  sympathizing  in  the  pursuits  of  the
former,  and  guiding  and  directing  those  of  the  latter,  making
home  the  scene  of  the  purest  and  most  delightful  influences
and  recollections,  and  associating  with  her  presence  in  life  and
her  memory  in  death,  the  idea  of  a  being  whose  every  act  and
thought  were  blameless.  The  stranger  was  attracted  by  her
winning  smile  and  affable  manners.  She  made  her  house  the
agreeable  resort  of  friends  and  visiters.  Many  sons  and
daughters  of  sorrow  acknowledged  in  her  that  active  benevolence
and  liberal  aid  which  discovered  and  supplied  their  wants,  or
that  kindly  sympathy  which  soothed  where  it  could  not  relieve.
But  there  was  one  who  was  her  heart's  idol,  whom  she  reverenced
almost  as  a  being  of  a  higher  order  than  herself,  regarding  as
worthless  every  thing  else,  in  comparison  with  his  approving
smile.  He,  indeed,  had  reason  always  to  rejoice,  that  a
benignant  Providence  had  made  her  the  sharer  and  the  guardian

MEMOIR.  41

of  his  home  and  his  happiness.  That  hosom,  where  his  head
had  reposed  in  life,  with  undoubting  faith  and  trust,  was  the
fittest  pillow  upon  which  it  could  be  placed  for  its  final  rest
in  death  !

The  most  important  result  of  this  period  of  Dr.  Bowditch*s  life,
was  the  publication  of  The  New  American  Practical  Navigator,
a  manual  in  which  were  imbodied  a  scientific  explanation  of
the  principles  of  navigation,  and  also  the  practical  application
of  these  principles  in  the  simplest  and  most  effective  manner.*
Dr.  Bowditch  had  prepared  for  publication  two  editions  of  the
treatise  of  John  Hamilton  Moore,  with  notes  and  corrections,
and  in  preparing  a  third  revised  edition  of  that  work,  he
corrected  so  very  many  errors,  that,  in  1802,  he  was  induced
to  publish  it  under  his  own  name.  From  that  time  to  the
present,  it  has  been  exclusively  used  by  every  ship-master  who
has  sailed  from  this  country,  and  its  tables  and  rules  have  been
adopted  in  the  works  used  in  England  and  elsewhere.  Into
the  original  work,  and  the  eight  succeeding  editions,  many
improvements,  of  great  practical  utility,  have  from  time  to  time
been  introduced.  Thus  in  the  last  edition,  published  in  1837,
"  the body of tables has been increased from thirty-three to

•  This  work  is  meniioned  by  Zach,  in  his  Correspondance  Astron.j  Vol.  VI.  p.  206,
A.  D.  1822,  who  gives  the  entire  title-page  of  the  third  edition,  printed  at  Newburyportj
and  in  Vol.  VII.  p.  167,  is  an  example  taken  from  it.  In  Vol.  X.  p.  234,  A.  D.
1824,  we  find  the  title-page  of  the  fifth  edition,  printed  in  1821.  And  many  other
notices  occur  in  the  same  journal,  of  astronomical  methods  given  by  Dr.  Bowditch  in  this
work,  which,  as  they  were  also  the  subjects  of  particular  communications  made  by  him
to  the  American  Academy,  will  be  noticed  hereafter.
TOL. IV.  /

42  MEMOIR.

fifty-six,  some  being  entirely  new,  and  others  essentially  improved
or  corrected."  *  The  successive  additions  thus  made  by  the
author,  have  prevented  the  competition  of  any  other  work.
More  than  eight  thousand  errors  were  corrected  by  Dr.  Bowditch
in  his  first  edition  of  it  under  his  own  name ;  and  when  it  is
considered  that  one  of  these  was  no  less  than  the  very  criminal
inattention  of  setting  down  the  year  1800  as  a  leap  year,  in  the
tables  of  the  sun's  declination,!  thereby  making  a  mistake  in
some  of  the  numbers  of  twenty-three  miles,  and  causing  the
actual  destruction  of  several  ships,  and  the  imminent  danger  of
others,  some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  great  service  thus
rendered  by  him  to  the  cause  of  nautical  science. J  The  amount
of  labor  requisite  for  insuring  accuracy  in  the  tables,  by  actually
going  through  all  the  calculations  necessary  to  a  complete
examination  of  them,  was  immense  almost  beyond  conception.
The  following  striking  contrast  is  presented  by  the  modest
Preface  of  the  American  editor,  and  the  boasting  language  of
the  original  compiler.  The  one  says,  that  "  the  author  had
once  flattered  himself  that  the  tables  of  this  collection  which
did  not  depend  on  observations,  would  be  absolutely  correct ;  but

*  Eulogy  on  Nathaniel  Bowditch,  LL.  D.,  President  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts
and  Sciences;  including  an  Analysis  of  his  scientific  Publications;  delivered  before  the
Academy,  May  29,  1838  ;  by  John  Pickering,  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Academy ;
p.  13.

t  See  Preface  to  the  last  edition  of  the  work.

t  For  many  interesting  details  respecting  this  work,  see  "  A  Discourse  on  the  Life  and
Character  of  the  Hon.  Nathaniel  Bowditch,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  delivered  in  the  Church  on
Church  Green,  [Boston,]  March  25,  1838;  by  Alexander  Young;"  pp.  34  to  39;  —  and
Mr.  Pickering's  Eulogy,  p.  10,  he,  and  Notes,  pp.  84  to  87.

MEMOIR.  43

in  the  course  of  his  calculations,  he  has  accidentally  discovered
several  errors  in  two  of  the  most  correct  works  of  the  kind
extant,  viz.,  Taylor's  and  Hutton's  Logarithms,  notwithstanding
the  great  care  taken  by  those  able  mathematicians  in  examining
and  correcting  them.  He  therefore  does  not  absolutely  assert
that  these  tables  are  entirely  correct,  but  feels  conscious  that
no  pains  have  been  spared  to  make  them  so."  The  other
says,  that  "  he  sells  no  sea-hookSj  charts,  or  instruments,  but
such  as  may  be  depended  on  ;  consequently  he  excludes  all
those  old,  inaccurate,  and  erroneous  publications,  the  depending
upon  which  has  often  proved  fatal  to  shipping  and  seamen,^  *
The  following  is  the  summary  elsewhere  given  of  this  work :
It  **  has  been  pronounced  by  competent  judges  to  be,  in  point
of  practical  utility,  second  to  no  work  of  man  ever  published.
This  apparently  extravagant  estimate  of  its  importance,  appears
but  just,  when  we  consider  the  countless  millions  of  treasures
and  of  human  lives  which  it  has  conducted,  and  will  conduct,
in  safety  through  the  perils  of  the  ocean.  But  it  is  not  only
the  best  guide  of  the  mariner  in  traversing  the  ocean ;  it  is  also
his  best  instructer  and  companion  every  where,  containing  within
itself  a  complete  scientific  library,  for  his  study  and  improvement
in  his  profession.  Such  a  work  was  as  worthy  of  the  author's
mind,  as  it  is  illustrative  of  his  character ;  —  unostentatious,  yet
profoundly  scientific  and  thoroughly  practical,  with  an  effective
power  and  influence  of  incalculable  value."  t  So,  also,  the
London  Athenteum  says  of  this  work,  "  It  goes,  both  in  American
and  British  crafl,  over  every  sea  of  the  globe,  and  is  probably
the  best  work  of  the  sort  ever  published."

•  Mr.  Pickering's  Eulogy,  p.  11.  t  Judge  White's  Eulogy,  p.  29.

t|4  MEMOIR.

Dr.  Bowditch,  however,  did  not  himself  consider  this  work
as  one  which  would  much  advance  his  scientific  reputation.  It
was,  in  his  view,  only  a  "practical  manual."*  But  it  was  the
work  by  which,  almost  exclusively,  he  was,  for  a  long  time,  known
in  this  country,  and  it  laid  the  basis  of  a  wide-spread  popularity,
such  as  few,  if  any,  works  upon  scientific  subjects  have  ever
gained  for  their  authors.  Several  years  ago,  he  was  much
amused  by  the  following  incident.  Two  young  men  came  into
the  shop  of  his  bookseller  to  purchase  a  copy  of  the  Navigator.
Upon  being  shown  one  bearing  on  its  title-page  the  number  of
the  edition,  and  purporting  to  have  been  revised  and  corrected
by  the  author,  one  said  to  the  other,  "That  is  all  a  mere  cheat;
the  old  fellow  must  have  been  dead  years  ago  ! "  They  were
astonished,  and  perhaps  a  little  embarrassed,  at  being  introduced
to  an  active,  sprightly  gentleman,  in  full  health  and  good  spirits,  as
the  author  of  this  work,  which  they  had  known  from  their  earhest
entrance  upon  a  sailor's  life.  It  was  in  honor,  especially,  of  the
memory  of  him  who  had written  the Practical Navigator,  that,

*  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  his  letter  to  Baron  Zach,  Corr.  Ast.  Vol.  X.  p.  225,  says,  "  You
will  see  that  I  have  studiously  avoided  all  scientific  parade,  and  have  published  the  work
according  to  the  method  of  instruction  used  in  our  country,  where  we  prefer,  in  these
matters,  practice  to  theory."  Thus,  owing  to  the  errors  incident  to  all  nautical  observations,
he  deemed  it  useless  to  aim,  in  the  nautical  tables,  at  the  most  minute  degree  of  exactness,
but  only  at  that  measure  of  it  which  was  requisite  for  practical  purposes;  so  that  these
tables  might  be  used  with  the  greatest  possible  promptness,  and  might,  at  the  same  time,  lead
to  the  greatest  accuracy  of  result  which  was  in  fact  really  attainable.  And  he,  in  this
letter,  states  that  he  is  delighted  to  find  that  Zach,  in  a  previous  publication,  concurs  in
this  opinion.  Upon  this  the  editor  remarks,  p.  244,  "  mais  c'est  a  nous  de  nous  feliciter  de
nous  trouver  d'accord  avec  un  navigateur  d'une  si  grande  experience ;  la  notre  n'est  qu'une
induction."

MEMOIR.  45

when  the  news  of  his  death  was  received  at  Cronstadt,  all  the
American  shipping,  and  many  of  the  English  and  Russian  vessels,
hoisted  their  flags  at  half-mast  in  that  naval  depot  of  the  Czars,
—  a  tribute  of  respect  which  had  been  previously  paid  in  the
ports  of  liultimore,  Boston,  and  Salem.  From  the  same  motive,
the  badge  of  mourning  was  adopted  by  the  members  of  the  Naval
School  of  the  United  States,  as  for  the  loss  of  a  valued  friend
and  instructor.

Immediately  upon  the  close  of  his  seafaring  life,  Dr.  Bowditch
was  elected  President  of  the  Essex  Fire  and  Marine  Company,
which  situation  he  held  till  his  removal  to  Boston,  in  1823.
Here,  also,  he  displayed  his  usual  good  judgment  and  discretion,
and  his  usual  success  attended  him.  It  was,  indeed,  an  ofliice
for  which  he  was  eminently  qualified  by  his  whole  previous  life.
After  paying  to  the  stockholders  an  average  annual  dividend
of  ten  or  twelve  per  cent,  for  the  whole  twenty  years  of  his
presidency,  he  left  the  institution  with  a  large  surplus  of  profits
earned.  In  this  situation,  where  he  was  necessarily  brought
more  in  contact  with  men  of  business  than  ever  before,  his  easy
and  affable  manners  soon  made  him  generally  known ;  and  the
intrinsic  excellences  of  his  character  made  him  no  less  generally
beloved  and  respected.

During  the  years  1805,  1806,  and  1807,  he  employed  himself
in  making  a  survey  of  the  harbors  of  Salem,  Marblehead,  Beverly,
and  Manchester  ;  and  the  result  of  his  labors  was  a  chart  of
remarkable  beauty  and  exactness,  upon  which  all  the  old  and
familiar  landmarks  of  the  pilots,  though  not  known  by  him  to  be

VOL.  IV.  m

46  MEMOIR.

such, were so accurately placed in their true distances and
bearings,  as  to  excite  among  them  the  greatest  surprise.

His  principal  occasional  labors,  during  his  residence  in  Salem,
consisted  of  twenty-three  contributions  to  several  volumes  of  the
Transactions  of  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  of
which  the  following  is  an  accurate  list ;  —

VOLUME SECOND. PART SECOND.

Published  in 1800.

1.  New  Method  of  working  a  Lunar  Observation,

The  object  of  this  method  was  to  establish  a  uniform  rule  for
the  application  of  corrections,  so  that  there  should  be  no  variation
of  cases  resulting  from  the  distance  and  altitude  of  the  observed
bodies.  Dr.  Bowditch  says  of  this  method,  in  a  note,  that  "  it  was
written  several  years  ago,  and  before  the  publication  of  the
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  for  1797,  in  which  is  inserted  a
method  somewhat  similar,  invented  by  Mr.  Mendoza  y  Rios.  An
appendix  to  the  New  Practical  Navigator  has  lately  been  published,
in  which  the  corrections  are  all  additive,  and  the  work  is  shorter."  It
is  particularly  noticed  and  commended  in  the  Connoissance  des  Terns,
(1808,)  then  published  under  the  direction  of  M.  Delambre.*

*  Zach  {Corr.  Astron.,  Vol.  VI.  p.  553,  A.  D.  1822)  says,  "M.  Bowditch  dans  son
New  american  2)roctical  navigator  R  Simsi  donne  pour  la  reduction  des  distances  lunaires  une
nouvelle  metbode  abregee,  avec  des  tables,  qui  merite  d'etre  plus  connue  ;  aucun  auteur
europeen  n'en  a  encore  parle ;  11  vient  de  la  perfectlonner  dans  sa  quatrieme  edition  stereotype
publiee  a  New  York  en  aoiit  1817.  Nous  la  recommandons  a  I'attention  des  professeurs  et
auteurs  des  traites  de  navigation."  In  Vol.  X.  p.  321,  A.  D.  1824,  he  says,  "La  methode
de  M.  Bowditch  a  I'avantage  sur  toutes  les  autres  methodes  d'approximation,  que  toutes  les
coiTections  sont  toujours  additives,  et  qu'on  n'a  jamais  besoin  de  faire  attention  a  des  cas

MEMOIR. ■  47

VOLUME THIRD. PART FIRST.

Published in 1809.

2.  Observations  on  the  Comet  of  1807. [pp.  1—18.]

3.  Observations  on  the  total  Eclipse  of  the  Sun,  June  16,  1806,

made  at  Salem. [pp.  18 — 23.]

In  a  note  to  this  communication,  Dr.  Bowditch  makes,  as  is
believed,  the  first  public  mention  of  an  error  in  Laplace's  Mecanique
Celeste,  in  the  estimate  of  the  oblateness  of  the  earth,  as  calculated
from  the  observed  length  of  pendulums ;  showing  that  Laplace's
result  ought  to  have  been,  upon  his  own  principles,  ^  instead  of  ^.

4.  Addition  to  the  Memoir  on  the  Solar  Eclipse  of  June  16,  1806.

[pp.  23-— 33.]

5.  Application  of  Napier^ s  Rules  for  solving  the  Cases  of  Right-

angled  Spheric  Trigonometry  to  several  Cases  of  Oblique-
angled  Spheric  Trigonometry, [pp.  33 — 38.]

This  communication  so  alters  Napier's  rules,  as  to  make  them
include  most  of  the  cases  of  oblique-angled  spheric  trigonometry,  and
is  marked  by  the  same  neatness,  elegance,  and  simplicity,  which
characterized  his  first  communication.  These  rules  are  now  familiarly
known  in  the  text-books  of  Harvard  College  as  "  Bowditch's  Rules."

VOLUME THIRD. PART SECOND.

Published  in  1815.

6.  An Estimate of the Height, Direction, Velocity, and

partlculiers  ; les  regies  sont  generales ; " and  proceeds  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  it. —
See  also  note  to  article  15.

48  MEMOIR.

Magnitude  of  the Meteor that exploded over Weston,
in  Connecticut,  December  14,  1807. [pp.  213— 237.]

This  communication  is  of  a  very  interesting  character,  and  it  rests
upon  numerous  observations  collected  with  great  labor  and  assiduity.
Dr.  Bpwditch  considers  the  meteor  in  question  to  have  had  a  course
about  eighteen  miles  above  the  earth,  a  velocity  of  more  than  three
miles  a  second,  and  a  probable  cubic  bulk  of  six  millions  of  tons  —
which  others  have  estimated  to  be  the  contents  of  the  pyramid  of
Cheops.*

7.  On  the  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  of  September  17,  1811,  icith  the

Longitudes  of  several  Places  in  this  Country,  deduced
from  all  the  Observations  of  the  Eclipses  of  the  Sun,
and  Transits  of  Mercury  and  Venus,  that  have  been
published  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Societies  of
Paris  and  London,  the  Philosophical  Society  held  at
Philadelphia,  and  the  American  Academy  of  Arts  and
Sciences.'^ [pp.  255—305.]

8.  Elements  of  the  Orbit  of  the  Comet  o/"  1811. [pp.  313—326.]

In  this,  as  in  his  second  communication,  he  arrived  at  his  results
after  almost  incredible  labor,  rendered  necessary  by  the  want  of  the

*  The  Zeitschrift  fur  Astronomie,  Vol.  I.  p.  37,  A.  D.  1816,  gives  the  results  arrived
at  in  this  communication,  and  calls  it  "einer  interressanten  Arbeit."

t  The  Zeitschrift  fur  Astronomie,  Vol.  I.  p.  90,  A.  D.  1816,  mentions  the  observations
of  the  eclipses  of  the  sun,  June  16,  1806,  and  September  17,  1811,  as  contained  in  these
volumes,  Stc,  and  states  that  "Bowditch  hat  den  grossern  Theil  davon  zu  Langen-
bestimmungen  benutzt  und  zugleich  dabey,  fiir  eine  Menge  amerikanischer  Orte,  Hiilfsgrossen
zur  leichtern  Berechnung  des  Nonagesimus  gegeben ; "  and  Zach,  in  his  Corr.  Astron.
Vol.  X.  p.  494,  A.  D.  1824,  has  a  table  of  the  longitudes  and  latitudes  of  places
determined  by  astronomical  observations  calculated  by  Dr.  Bowditch.

MEMOIR.  49

imprdved  methods  of  the  present  day.*  The  original  volume,
containing  his  calculations  in  the  case  of  this  latter  comet,  now
preserved  in  his  library,  contains  one  hundred  and  forty-four  pages
of  close  figures,  probably  exceeding  one  million  in  number,  though
the  result  of  this  vast  labor  forms  but  a  communication  of  twelve
pages.f

9.  An Estimate  of  the  Height of  the White  Hills  in New
Hampshire, [pp.  326—328.]

10.  On  the Variation  of  the  Magnetic  Needle. [pp.  337— 344.]

This  communication,  in  like  manner,  which  is  of  quite  an
interesting  character,  and  of  considerable  practical  importance,  was
the  result  of  five  thousand  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  observations,
during  a  period  of  four  years.

1 1 .  On  the  Motion  of  a  Pendulum  suspended  from  two  Points,

[pp.  413—437.]

This  communication  is  also  one  of  interest  and  value ;  and  the
little  wooden  stand,  from  which  a  leaden  ball  was  suspended,  still
exists,  to  remind  us  of  the  zeal  and  assiduity  with  which  Dr.  Bowditch
watched  the  various  curves  and  lines  which  the  ball  described. J

•  See  Dr.  Bowditch's  letter  (Zach,  Con.  Astron.  Vol.  X.  p.  228)  before  referred  to,
where  this  fact  is  staled.  The  editor,  in  p.  248,  gives  the  elements  of  the  orbits  of  the  comets
calculated  by  Dr.  Bowditch  wholly  from  American  observations.

f  Mr.  Encke,  in  speaking  to  a  friend  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  at  Berlin,  in  \8S6,  said  that  he
had  known  him  from  the  time  when  this  paper  appeared ;  and  that  he  had  never  seen  an
American  since,  without  asking  him  what  he  could  tell  him  about  its  author;  —  and  the
Zeiischrift  fur  Astronomie,  Vol.  I.  p.  44,  gives  an  account  of  this  communication  "  von  dem
amerikanischen  Astronomen  Bowditch."

t  This  subject  is  mentioned  in  his  letter  to  Baron  Zach,  before  alluded  to,  (^Corr.  Astron.
Vol.  X.  p.  227.)  The  editor,  in  his  note,  p.  246,  says  the  remarkable  variety  of  the
VOL.  IV.  n

50  MEMOIR.

12.  A  Demonstration  of  the  Rule  for  finding the  Place  of  a

Meteor,  in  the  second  Problem,  page  218  o/*  this  Volume,

[pp.  437—439.]

VOLUME FOURTH. PART FIRST.

Published  in 1818.

13.  On  a  Mistake  which  exists  in  the  Solar  Tables  of  Mayer,

Lalande,  and  Zach* [pp.  2, 3.]

14.  On the Calculation of  the  Oblateness of  the Earth, by

Means of the observed Lengths of a Pendulum  in
different Latitudes,  according to  the  Method  given  by

motions  of  a  pendulum  thus  suspended,  and  the  very  curious  experiments  of  Professor  Dean,
who  explains,  in  this  mode,  the  apparent  motion  of  the  earth  as  seen  from  the  moon,  engaged
Dr.  Bowditch  in  the  examination  of  the  theory  of  these  motions.  The  result  has  been,  he
adds,  "  une  recherche  tres  interessante."  "  Comme  ce  memoire  merite  d'etre  mieux  connu,
et  qu'il  ne  I'est  pas  generalement,  vu  la  difSculte  de  se  procurer  des  livres  americains,  nous
en  donnerons  la  traduction  dans  un  de  nos  cahiers."

*  Dr.  Bowditch  states,  that  "  The  attraction  of  Jupiter  produces  an  equation  in  the
expression  of  the  Sun's  distance  from  the  Earth,  and  a  Table  is  given  for  its  computation,
by  Mayer,  in  1770,"  &c. ;  "  and  ever  since  this  Table  was  first  published,  which  is  about  fifty
years,  an  error  of  six  signs  has  always  existed  in  the  argument  by  which  the  correction  is
found  ;  so  that,  when  the  equation  is  really  svhtractive,  it  will  frequently  be  found  by  the
Table  to  be  additive,  and  the  contrary."  —  "In  De  Lambre's  Solar  Tables,  published  in  1806,
the  form  of  the  table  is  wholly  altered,  the  method  of  entry  by  a  double  argument  being  used ;
and  by  thus  taking  a  different  path,  the  error  is  avoided,  without  noticing  that  it  really  does
exist  in  the  other  works."

Baron  Zach,  in  his  Monatliche  Correspondenz,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  449,  A.  D.  1803,  says
that  Bowditch,  an  American  astronomer,  has  called  his  attention  to  this  mistake ;  and,  after
admitting  its  importance,  frankly  adds,  "  Allen  Astronomen,  welche  sich  mit  Verfertigung
der  Sonnen-Tafeln  beschaftigt  haben,  einen  La  Caille,  Tob.  Mayer,  La  Lande,  De
Lambre  und  mir  ist  dieser  Fehler  entgangen."

MEMOIR.  51

Laplace,  in  the  Second  Volume  of  his  "Micanique
Cileste;*'  tcith  Remarks  on  other  Parts  of  the  same
Work  relating  to  the  Figure  of  the  Earth. [pp.  3—24.]

The  object  of  this  communication  is  to  correct  certain  errors  in
the  article  "  Earth  "  in  Recs's  Cyclopaedia,  to  the  end  that  currency
should  not  be  given  to  inaccurate  ideas  on  the  subject,  by  that  popular
work.

15.  Method  of  correcting  the  apparent  Distance  of  the  Moon

from  the  Sun,  or a  Star,  for  the Effects  of  Parallax
and  Refraction. [pp.  24 — 31.]

This  is  but  the  rule  given  in  the  Practical  Navigator,  making  all
the  corrections  in  question  additive.  It  is  another  instance  of  the
simplicity  at  which  he  always  aimed  in  his  rules  and  formulas.*

16.  On the Method  of  computing the Dip of  the Magnetic

Needle  in  different  Latitudes,  according  to  the  Theory
of  Mr.  Biot. [pp.  31—36.]

17.  Remarks  on  the  Methods  of  correcting  the  Elements  of  the

Orbit  of  a  Comet,  in  Netcton^s  ^^Principia"  and  in
Laplace* s  ^^ Micanique  Celeste." [pp.  36 — 48.]

This  communication  proves  that  two  equations  in  the  Principia,
the  accuracy  of  which  several  commentators  upon  that  work  had

•  In  Zach's  Monatl.  Carres.,  Vol.  XVII.  p.  411,  A.  D.  1808,  this  method  is  mentioned
as  being  in  the  Appendix  to  the  New  American  Practical  Navigator,  printed  at  Newburyport,
1804  ;  and  the  editor  says,  "  Der  Verfasser  ist  ein  Americaner,  Bowditch,  und  Delambre  hat
69  der  Muhe  werth  gehalten,  eine  umstandliche  Darstellung  dieses  Verfahrens  zu  geben."
Then  follows  a  somewhat  minute  account  of  the  method.  —  See  note  to  article  1.

52  MEMOIR.

attempted  to  prove,  and  as  to  which  no  doubts  had  jet  been  expressed
or  insinuated,  always  made  the  corrections  in  question  "  double  of
what  they  ought  to  be,"  and  restricts  the  method  of  Laplace  as
appropriate  only  where  the  number  of  observations  is  small.

18.  Remarks on the usual  Demonstration  of  the Permanency

of  the  Solar  System,  with  Respect  to  the  Eccentricities
and  Inclinations  of  the  Orbits  of  the  Planets, [pp.  48 — 51.]

19.  Remarks on Dr. Stewarfs Formula  for computing the

Motion  of  the  Moon^s  Apsides ,  as  given  in  the  Supplement
to  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica. [pp.  51 — 61.]

This  is  a  very  curious  and  interesting  communication.  A  method
which,  notwithstanding  doubts  had  been  expressed  respecting  it,
had  been  sanctioned  as  accurate  by  Dr.  Hutton,  by  Lalande,  and
Playfair,  —  the  latter  of  whom  even  considered  its  accuracy  to  have
been  demonstrated,  —  is  in  this  memoir  proved  to  have  been  true  only
in  the  particular  case  supposed  ;  and  it  is  shown  that,  as  a  general
method,  it  wholly  fails.

VOLUME FOURTH. PART  SECOND.

Published  in 1820.

20.  On  the  Meteor  which  passed  over  Wilmington,  in  the  State

of  Delaware,  November  21,  1819. [pp.  3— 14.]

21.  Occultation of  Spica by the Moon, observed at Salem,

[p.  14.]

22.  On a Mistake which exists in the Calculation of Mr,

Poisson  relative  to  the  Distribution  of  the  Electrical
Matter  upon  the  Surfaces  of  two  Globes,  in  Vol.  XII.

MEMOIR.  6S

of  the  **M4moir€8  de  la  classe  dea  sciences  mathimatiques
et  physiques  de  TInstitut  Imperial  de  France^* [pp.  15—17.]

23.  Elements  of  the  Comet  of  1819.* [pp.  17—19.]

Besides  the  above  contributions  to  the  Memoirs  of  the  American
Academy,  Dr.  Bowditch  was  the  writer  of  several  other  articles,
among  which  may  be  mentioned  the  following :  —

1.  Notice  of  the  Comet  of  1807. Published  in  the  Monthly  An-

thology for  December,  1807,  Vol.  IV. [pp.  653,  654.]

2.  Review  of  a  ^^ Report of the Committee (of  Congress,)  to

whom  was  referred,  on  the  25th  of  January,  1810,  the
Memorial  of  William  Lambert,  accompanied  with
sundry  Papers  relating  to  the  Establishment  of  a  First
Meridian  for  the  United  States,  at  the  permanent  Seat
of  their  Government"  Published  in  the  Monthly  An-
thology for  October,  1810,  Vol.  IX. [pp.  245— 266.]

This  article  occupies  twenty-one  pages,  and  proves  very
conclusively  the  great  advantages  of  continuing  to  estimate  the
longitude  from  Greenwich,  which  Mr.  Lambert  considered  "a  sort
of  degrading  and  unnecessary  dependence  on  a  foreign  nation,"  and
an  "encumbrance  unworthy  of  the  freedom  and  sovereignty  of  the
American  people."  This  Memorial  the  reviewer  shows  to  be  "  a
compilation,  with  needless  repetitions  and  palpable  mistakes,
evincing a great want of knowledge in the principles  of the

•  For  a  statement  of  Dr.  Bowdilch's  communications  to  the  Memoirs  of  the  Academy,
and  an  abstract of  their  contents,  from  which several of  our  remarks  in the  text  are
condensed,  see  Mr.  Pickering's  Ekilogy,  pp.  17 — 31.
VOL.  IV.  0

54  MEMOIR.

calculations ; "  and  that,  "  both  as  respects  its  object  and  execution,
it  was  wholly  undeserving  the  patronage  of  the  National  Legislature."

3.  Defence of the Revieic of Mr. Lamberfs Memorial.

Published  in  the  Monthly  Anthology  for  January,  1811,
Vol.  X. [pp.  40—49.]

Mr.  Lambert  having  made  an  angry  reply,  charging  his  reviewer
with  "  twistical  cunning,"  "  ingenious  quibbling,"  "  zeal  for  the  honor
of  the  British  nation,  and  the  convenience  of  British  mariners,"
and  challenging  him  "  to  examine  his  computation  of  the  longitude
of  the  Capitol  at  Washington  from  Greenwich,  and  to  point  out  a
mistake  that  can  be  made  palpable,''''  —  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  this  reply,
considers  these  charges  of  Mr.  Lambert  as  beneath  his  notice,
but  accepts  his  challenge,  and  proves  that  there  is  an  error  in  every
one  of  the  six  examples  he  has  given.

These  two  papers  were  fatal  to  the  proposed  project;  and,
fortunately  for  the  interests  of  science,  Greenwich  continues  to  be
the  first  meridian  of  all  who  speak  the  English  language.

4.  Review of  ^^A Treatise on  the  most easy and  convenient

Method  of  computing  the  Path  of  a  Comet,  from  several
Observations ;  by  William  Gibers,  M.  D. ;  Weimar,
1797;"  —  and  of  ^^Theoria  Motus  Corporum  Ccelestium
in  Sectionibus  Conicis  Solem  ambientium ;  "  by  Charles
Frederick  Gauss;  Hamburg,  1809.  Published  in  the
North  American  Review  for  April,  1820,  Vol.  X.*
[pp.  260—272.]

*  A  copy  of  this article  Dr.  Bowditch  sent  to  Baron  Zach, with  the  letter  before
referred  to,  marJcing  a  part  of  it  as  written  by  Mr.  Everett,  the  editor. Zach  publishes

MEMOIR.  55

This  article  gives  an  account  of  several  German  astronomers
and  their  most  noted  periodical  publications.  Thus  it  contains  a
notice  of  Dr.  Olbers  —  "  the  Columbus  of  the  planetary  world  "  —
and  of  Gauss,  the  authors  of  the  two  works  reviewed ;  an  account
of  Bode's  Astronomisches  Jahrbuch,  Zach's  Monatliche  CorrespondenZf
and  the  Zeitschrifi  fiir  Astronomie.  It  states  tlie  fact  that,  "out  of
thirteen  primary  planets  and  satellites,  discovered  since  the  year
1781,  we  are  indebted  to  persons  born  in  Germany  for  twelve;  and
that,  in  the  determination  of  the  orbits  of  these  new  bodies,  they
have  done more  than  all  the  other  astronomers  in  the  world.''

5.  Review  of  ^^  A  remarkable  Astronomical  Discovery,  and
Observations  of  the  Comet  of  July,  1819;  by  Dr.  Olbers
of  Bremen  ;  published  in  Bode^s  Astronomisches  Jahrbuch
for  1822;"  [and  of  two  other  articles  in  the  same  work,
for  the  years  1822  and  1823,  on  the  same  subject,  by
Professor  Encke  of  the  Ducal  Observatory  at  Seeberg,
near  Gotha.]  Published  in  the  North  American  Review
for  January,  1822,  Vol.  XIV. [pp.  26—34.]

extracts  from  it  in  his  notes  upon  this  letter,  Vol.  X.  p.  231,  and  says,  "  It  will  be  interesting
to  the  reader  to  learn  how  men  of  science  in  America  render  justice  to  those  of  Germany,
while  they  reproach  their  brethren  beyond  the  water  for  the  little  attention  which  they  have
bestowed  upon  our  productions."  Dr.  Bowdltch  mentions  in  this  review  an  interesting
paper  which  Mr.  Ivory  had  published  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,
1814,  giving  a  method  of  his  own  for  computing  the  orbit  of  a  comet,  which,  "  upon  examination,
turns  out  to  be  nothing  more  than  that  which  Dr.  Olbers  had  published  in  his  work  above
seventeen  years  before,  although  this  coincidence  must  have  been  wholly  unknown  to  Mr.
Ivory,  and  to  the  other  members  of  the  Royal  Society.  We  consider  this  as  a  striking
instance  of  the  little  attention  paid  in  Great  Britain  to  works  of  mathematical  science  printed
in  Germany."  The  passage  added  by  Mr.  Everett  was  merely  that  which  states  a  like
neglect  of  German  literature.

56  MEMOIR.

A  copy  ot  this  article  on  Encke's  comet  Dr.  Bowditch  also  sent
with  the  letter  before  mentioned,  to  Baron  Zach,  who,  in  his  notes,
states  that  Dr.  Bowditch  "  has  here  collected  all  that  has  been  said
and  done  respecting  this  famous  comet."  In  the  concluding
paragraph  of  this  article,  the  reviewer  expresses  his  regret  that,
"while  Great  Britain  alone  can  boast  of  more  than  thirty  public
and  private  observatories  of  considerable  note,  we  have  not,  in
the  whole  United  States,  one  that  deserves  the  name."  He  also
speaks  of  the  duties  imposed  on  the  importation  of  mathematical
instruments  and  scientific  works,  as  Jines  and  penalties,  which  had
been  justly  called  "  a  bounty  upon  ignorance,"  &c.  This  whole
paragraph  is  extracted  by  Zach,  (Vol.  X.  p.  245,)  and  he  says,
"Voici  de  quelle  maniere  un  bon  republicain  exhale  son  chagrin
en  public ;  c'est  au  moins  quelque  chose,^^  &c.

6.  Letter to Baron Zach, dated November  22, 1822 ;  with a

Postscript,  dated  December  20,  1823.  Published  in  his
Correspondance  Astronomique  for  the  year  1824,*  Vol.
X. [pp.  223—230.]

7.  Review, entitled ^^ Remarks on several  Papers  published in

former  Volumes  of  this  Journal ;"  [the  first  being  remarks
on  "A  New  Algebraical  Series,  by  Professor  W^allace,  of
Columbia,  S.  C. ;"]  published  in  Silliman's  Journal  for
1824, Vol.  VIII. [pp.  131— 139;]  — and  Remarks  on Mr.

*  This  letter  has  been  already  more  than  once  referred  to,  and  contains  many  interesting
facts.  The  editor's  comments  upon  it  occupy  twenty  pages.  With  this  letter  Dr.  Bowditch
had  sent,  besides  his  articles  mentioned  in  the  two  last  preceding  items,  a  copy  of  the  fifth
edition  of  the  Practical  Navigator.  The  editor  says  of  him,  "  C'est  le  premier,  et  jusqu'a-
present  le  seul  grand  geometre  en  Amerique."

MEMOIR.  57

Wallace's  Reply ;  published  in  the  same  Journal  for  1825,
Vol.  IX. [pp.  293-^04.]

The  reviewer  expresses  his  surprise  that  any  offence  should  have
l)een  given  hy  the  mere  statement  of  the  historical  fact  that  this
"  new  series "  was  but  the  usual  development  of  the  binomial
theorem,  and  the  same  which  had  been  given  by  Euler  fifty  years
before.*

8.  Review  of  ^^Fundamenta  AstronomicB"  by  Frederick  William
Bessel;  1818;  —  of  the  Tables  of  the  Moon,  by  M,
Burckhardt ;  1812  ;  —  of  the  New  Tables  of  Jupiter  and

*  Professor  Wallace,  in  his  Reply,  states  that  he  did  not  claim  the  series  as  neWj  and
appeals  to  a  reference  which  he  had  made  in  his  original  article  to  Mr.  Stainville,  &c.,  and,
not  knowing  wlio  his  opponent  was,  says  that  he  does  not,  like  his  reviewer,  refer  his  readers
"  to  the  Complement  des  Eletncns  d'AIgebre,  however  useful  as  a  school-book"  &c.  He  also
states,  "  that  the  results  which  Euler  has  given  do  not  include  a  single  case  of  a  transcendent
function,  and  were  only  given  as  examples  of  the  applications  of  the  simplest  case  of  the
binomial  theorem,"  &tc.  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  his  rejoinder,  mentions  the  vague  terms  in  which
Mr.  Stainville  had  been  originally  referred  to,  and  says,  "  It  now  appears  that  Mr.  Stainville
gave  it  as  new  for  thejirst  time  in  1818,  and  Professor  Wallace  for  the  second  time  in  1824,
Euler's  having  been  published  in  1775  :  "  and  again  ;  "  It  is  believed  that  most  persons,  after
reading  what  Professor  W.  has  written,  would  suppose  he  claimed  some,  if  not  a  very  large
portion,  for  his  own.  But  the  real  fact  is,  that  none  of  it  is  his.  The  whole  of  the  first  seven
pages,  and  a  large  portion  of  the  two  remaining  pages,  of  Professor  W.'s  first  communication,
are  merely  literal  translations  from  Stainville  and  Gergonne ;  and  what  is  not  copied  from
tijem  is  quite  unimportant."  He  also  says,  "It  is  a  fact,  notwithstanding  the  positive
declaration  of  Professor  W.  to  the  contrary,  that  Euler's  demonstration  is  not  restricted  to  this
very  simple  case,  but  is  general  for  all  values  of  the  exponent,  whether  integer,  fractional
negative,  or  surd ;  and  it  is  characterized  by  Lacroix  as  being  elegant  and  rigorous."  This
review  will  be  found  quite  amusing  and  piquant.  It  is,  like  the  articles  on  Mr.  Lambert's
Memorial,  both  as  to  matter  and  style,  a  fair  specimen  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  powers  as  a
controversial  writer.

VOL. IV.  p

58  MEMOIR.

of  Saturn^  by  M.  Boiivard ;  1808  ;  —  of  the  Tables  of
the  Satellites  of  Jupiter^  ^c,  by  M.  Delambre ;  1817;
—  of  the  Tables  of  Venus,  of  Mars,  and  of  Mercury,  by
B.  de  Lindenau ;  1810,  1811,  and  1813;  —  and  of  the
Memoir  on  the  Figure  of  the  Earth,  by  M.  de  Laplace  ;
1817  and  1818.*  Published  in  the  North  American
Review  for  April,  1825,  Vol.  XX. [pp.  309— 367.]  f

This  brief  but  most  comprehensive  article  upon  modern  astronomy
will  be  found  to  possess  an  uncommon  degree  of  interest.  It
consists  of  a  series  of  biographical  sketches,  in  which  are  described
all  who  have  been  remarkable  for  the  successful  cultivation  of
physical  science  in  modern  times,  bringing  into  view  their  actual
and  relative  services  and  merits,  and  awarding  to  each  the  degree
of  approval  to  which  he  was  entitled ;  —  the  writer  now  dwelling
with  enthusiasm  upon  his  favorite  Lagrange,  now  bestowing  a
more  qualified  and  guarded  approbation,  or  a  positive  censure,  upon
others  inferior  in  powers  and  attainments  to  that  distinguished
mathematician,  or opposite to  him in character. J It comprises,

*  The  titles  of  the  particular  works  reviewed,  are  here  given  in  an  abridged  form.

t  In  the  Notes  to  Mr.  Pickering's  Eulogy,  p.  95,  a  list  is  given,  without  comment,
of  six  of  the  above  eight  articles,  the  fifth  and  seventh  not  being  noticed.  All  these
occasional  publications  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  excepting  the  letter  to  Baron  Zach,  were  collected
by  him  in  two  volumes,  now  in  his  library.

X  Thus  he  says,  "  Upon  the  decease  of  Euler,  Lagrange  remained  undisputedly  the
greatest  mathematician  then  living,"  &;c. ;  while  of  Dr.  Bradley's  successor  he  says,  "  Dr.
Bliss  was  wholly  unworthy  of  the  office  of  astronomer  royal.  The  account  of  his  life  by
La  Lande  is  comprised  in  less  than  a  dozen  words  — '  Bliss  etait  astronome  royal ;  il  mourut
en  1765.' "  This  article  is  the  one,  of  all  Dr.  Bowditch's  occasional  publications,  which
exhibits  in  the  clearest  light  his  peculiar  talents  and  acquirements.  Evidently  the  work  of  one
possessing  a, knowledge  of  the  actual  state  of  mathematical  science,  in  its  various  departments,

MEMOIR.  as

especially,  a  very  full  account  of  Dr.  Bradley's  observations,  and
of  Bessel's  services  in  reducing  them ;  of  the  best  makers  of
mathematical  instruments  —  Graham,  Bird,  Ramsden,  Troughton,
Jones,  Reichenbach,  Frauenhofer,  Herschel,  &c. ;  of  the  successive
astronomers  royal  at  Greenwich,  and  of  the  other  chief  European
observers ;  and,  lastly,  "  it  gives  an  account  of  the  labors  of  those
mathematicians  who  have  improved  the  science  of  astronomy  by
their  calculations  of  the  effects  of  the  mutual  attractions  of  the
heavenly  bodies."

,  Dr.  Bowditch  was  also,  for  many  years,  a  contributor  to  the
Annalist  and  Mathematical  Diary,  solving  every  question  there
proposed,  in  his  usual  style  of  simple  elegance.  He  also  wrote
or  corrected  various  articles  in  the  American  edition  of  Rees*8
CyclopsDdia.  And  all  these  various  publications  were  the
employment  merely  of  those  leisure  hours  which  were  left  to  him
after  all  the  calls  of  active  business,  and  all  the  claims  of  social
and  domestic  life,  had  been  most  fully  answered;  and  more  than
this,  and  notwithstanding  all  these  duties  and  engagements,  and
all  the  occasional  scientific  labors  which  have  been  mentioned,  such
was  his  wonderful  economy  of  time,  that,  within  the  same  period,
he  also  completed  what  has  justly  been  characterized  as  the
gigantic  undertaking  of  making  the  Translation  and  Commentary
now  before  the  reader,  —  a  work  upon  which,  almost  exclusively,
will  rest  his  fame  as  a  man  of  science.*

as  extensive  and  minute  as  was  possessed  by  any  individual  then  living,  —  it  is,  throughout,  a
record  of  the  most  sound  and  impartial  criticism.  Any  biography  of  him,  which  has  not  this
review  in  an  appendix,  must  be  incomplete.

•  Baron  Zach,  in  his  Correspondance  Astronomupu,  Vol.  X.  p.  234,  A.  D.  1824,  says,
**  Nous  finirons  cette  note  par  apprcndre  a  nos  lecteurs  ce  que  nous  a  r^v^i^  le  professeur

60  MEMOIR.

Upon  recurring  to  the  Translator's  Preface,  in  the  first  volume,
it  will  be  found  there  stated  that  "  the  notes  were  written  at  the
time  of  reading  the  volumes,  as  they  were  successively  published.
The  translation  was  made  between  the  years  1814  [misprinted
1815]  and  1817,  at  which  time  the  four  first  volumes,  with  the
several  appendices  and  notes,  were  ready  for  publication."  The
fifth  volume,  published  by  La  Place  twenty  years  after  the  others,
was  never  translated  by  Dr.  Bowditch,  though  he  wrote  many
important  notes  upon  it.*  It  was  his  intention,  however,  had  he
lived,  to  translate  the  volume.  Death  has  defeated  forever
that  intention.  The  work  which  he  had  so  nearly  completed,  no
one  lives  to  finish  as  he  would  have  finished  it;  but,  like  the
beautiful  painting  from  which  was  taken  the  engraving  prefixed  to
this  memoir,  and  which  never  received  the  final  touch  of  the  dying
artist,  it  is  the  more  interesting  from  the  circumstances  under
which  it  was  left  incomplete.

Everett,  que  M.  Bowditch  a  traduit  en  anglais  toute  la  Mecanique  Celeste  de  M.  La  Place,
avec  un  ample  commentalre,  mais  qu'on  n'a  pu  encore  le  persuader  de  publier  cet  ouvrage  qui
ne  pourrait  que  lui  faire  un  honneur  infini,  ainsi  qu'a  son  pays,  mais  nous  soupconnons
qu'il  attend  pour  cela  I'ouvrage  de  MM.  Plana  et  Carlini,  qui  est  sur  le  metier,  et  qui  ne
tardera  pas  a  paraitre."  A  similar  public  announcement  of  this  fact  had  been  made  in  the
North  American  Review  for  April,  1820,  Vol.  X.  p.  272;  and  the  editor  says  that  Dr
Bowditch  "  has  not,  however,  yet  been  prevailed  upon  to  do  honor  to  himself  and  to  his
country,  by  the  publication  of  so  great  and  arduous  a  work."

*  A  day  or  two  only  before  his  death,  he  received  from  Europe  a  translation,  executed
by  a  young  lady  whom  he  had  never  seen,  but  who  was  soon  to  become  his  daughter,
embracing  in  seventy  manuscript  pages  the  first  part  of  the  fifth  volume  ;  —  a  suitable  offering
of  filial  duty  to  one  who  never  lived  to  thank  her  in  person  for  her  kindness,  but  who  left
for  her  at  his  decease  an  affectionate  letter,  written  exactly  a  week  before  his  death.

MEMOIR.  6|

As,  in  the  course  of  publication,  it  became  necessary  to
incorporate  into  the  notes  much  additional  matter,  owing  to  the
subsequent  progress  of  mathematical  science,  they  were  all,  in  a
great  measure,  rewritten;  and  thus,  perhaps,  the  present  four
volumes  will  be  found  to  contain  almost  every  thing  of  importance
in  the  whole  five  volumes  of  the  original  work,  excepting  what
relates  to  the  earth's  temperature  and  the  velocity  of  sound.*
Still,  it  was  Dr.  Bowditch's  intention  to  introduce  into  the  fifth
volume  more  original  matter  than  into  either  of  the  preceding
ones,  making  it,  as  it  were,  the  general  depository  alike  of  all  the
results  of  his  extensive  theoretical  investigations,  and  of  the
practical  experience  of  a  long  life.  It  was,  especially,  a  source  of
regret  to  him,  that  he  could  not  prepare  the  Index  to  the  work,
which  he  felt  assured,  from  his  intimate  knowledge  of  its  contents,
and  of  the  relative  importance  of  the  difierent  matters  of  which
it  treats,  he  was  more  competent  to  prepare  than  any  one  else.
That  duty,  we  believe,  however,  will  at  a  future  time  be  ably
performed  by  a  friend,  (Benjamin  Peirce,  Esq.,  Professor  of
Mathematics  in  Harvard  University,)  whose  revision  of  the  entire
Work,  when  in  the  process  of  publication,  and  vigilance  in  detecting
typographical  errors.  Dr.  Bowditch  always  valued  as  an  additional
means  of  insuring  its  accuracy.

'  ■  ■-•-I
It  would  not  be  our  desire,  were  we  competent  to  the  task,  to

ofTer  any  criticism  upon  the  present  work. It  will  itself  speak  to

every  reader. A  few  remarks,  however,  upon  the  motives,  views,

and  objects  of  the  translator  may  not  be  inappropriate.

•  Mr.  Pickering's  Eulogy,  p.  54.
VOL.  IV.  q

62  MEMOIR.

In  the  first  place,  then,  his  great  design  was  to  supply  those
steps  in  the  author's  demonstrations,  which  were  not  discoverable
without  much  study  and  research,  and  which  had  rendered  the
original  work  so  abstruse  and  difficult,  as  to  lead  a  writer  in  the
Edinburgh  Review  to  say  there  were  not  twelve  individuals  in
Great  Britain  who  could  read  it  with  any  facility.*  Dr.  Bowditch
himself  was  accustomed  to  remark,  *'  Whenever  I  meet  in  La
Place  with  the  words  *  Thus  it  plainly  appears,'  I  am  sure  that
hours,  and  perhaps  days,  of  hard  study  will  alone  enable  me  to
discover  how  it  plainly  appears."  So  important  did  he  consider
the  object  which  he  thus  had  in  view,  that  every  letter  which  he
received,  proving  to  his  satisfaction  the  fact  of  some  young  man's
having  read  his  Translation  and  Commentary,  afforded  him
much  more  pleasure  than  the  favorable  mention  of  it  in  popular
journals,  or  even  than  the  flattering  approbation  bestowed  by
competent  judges  ;  since,  while  the  one  would  be  but  an  opinion,
the  other  would  be  a  proof,  that  the  great  end  of  his  labors  had
been  accomplished.  He  received  several  such  letters.  M.
Lacroix  wrote  to  him  that  he  had  recommended  the  work  to  a
young professor  at  Lausanne. There can,  indeed,  be  no doubt

*  "  We  will  venture  to  say,  that  the  number  of  those  in  this  island  who  can  read  that  work
with  any  tolerable  facility,  is  small  indeed.  If  we  reckon  two  or  three  in  London  and  the
military  schools  in  its  vicinity,  the  same  number  at  each  of  the  English  Universities,  and
perhaps  four  in  Scotland,  we  shall  hardly  exceed  a  dozen ;  and  yet  we  are  fully  persuaded  that
our  reckoning is beyond  the  truth."  —  Edinburgh Review,  1808,  Vol.  XI.  p.  281.

In  America,  two,  and  perhaps  three  persons,  besides  Dr.  Bowditch,  were  able  to  read  the
original  work  critically ;  but  a  competent  judge  has  doubted  whether  the  whole  of  it  had
been  so  read  even  by  one.

.^Q■'f

MEMOIR.  63

that  it  has  been  truly  said  by  a  late  foreign  review,*  respecting
this  Translation  and  Commentary,  "  a  work  which  existed  in  mere
abstraction  before,  has  been  made  as  accessible,  to  all  public  and
popular  purposes,  as  its  essential  nature  would  permit ; "  and  by
another  review,t  "  the  notes  to  each  page  leave  no  step  in  the
text,  of  moment,  unsupplied,  and  hardly  any  material  difficulty
of  conception  or  reasoning  unelucidated."  J  Mr.  Babbage,  in  a
letter  to  the  translator,  August  5,  1832,  says,  "It  is  a  proud
circumstance  for  America,  that  she  has  preceded  her  parent
country  in  such  an  undertaking ;  and  we  in  England  must  be
content  that  our  language  is  made  the  vehicle  of  the  sublimest
portion  of  human  knowledge,  and  be  grateful  to  you  for  rendering
it more  accessible."

A  second  great  object  of  the  translator  was,  to  continue
the  original  work  to  the  present  time,  so  that  it  should  place
in  possession  of  the  reader  the  many  recent  improvements
and  discoveries  in  mathematical  science.  That  the  most
eminent  living  mathematicians  consider  this  end  to  have  been
attained,  clearly  appears  by  the  following  extracts  from  letters
addressed  by  them  to  Dr.  Bowditch,  and  now  before  us: — M.
Lacroix  says,  July  5,  1836,  **  I  am  more  and  more  astonished
at your continued perseverance in a task so laborious and

*  London  Athensum,  1838.

f  London  Quarterly  Review,  Vol.  XL VII.  p.  558.

t  An  English  professor  of  mathematics,  who  was  at  Rome  in  the  winter  of  1836-1837,
told  a  friend  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  that  he  was  indebted  to  these  notes  for  his  knowledge  of
La  Place ;  and  tliat,  though  he  did  not  expect  to  be  very  long  absent  from  England,  he  had
ordered  the  next  volume  to  be  sent  after  him  to  Italy,  if  it  slxxild  appear  before  bis  return
home.

64  MEMOIR.

extensive.  I  perceive  that  you  do  not  confine  yourself  to  the
mere  text  of  your  author,  and  to  the  elucidations  which  it
requires  ;  but  you  subjoin  the  parallel  passages  and  subsequent
remarks  of  those  geometers  who  have  treated  of  the  same  subjects  ;
so  that  your  work  will  embrace  the  actual  state  of  science  at
the  time  of  its  publication."  —  M.  Legendre,  in  a  letter  dated  at
Paris,  July  2,  1832,  says,  "  Your  work  is  not  merely  a  translation
with  a  commentary;  I  regard  it  as  a  new  edition,  augmented
and  improved,  and  such  a  one  as  might  have  come  from  the
hands  of  the  author  himself,  if  he  had  consulted  his  true  interest,
that  is,  if  he  had  been  solicitously  studious  of  being  clear,"  &c.  —
Mr.  Bessel,  also,  in  a  letter  dated  at  Konigsberg,  February  18,
1836,  writes,  "  Through  your  labors  on  the  Mechanism  of  the
Heavens,  La  Place's  work  is  brought  down  to  our  own  time,
as  you  add  to  it  the  studies  of  geometricians  since  its  first
appearance.  You  yourself  enrich  this  science  by  your  own
additions,  for  which  especial  obligations  are  due  to  you."  —  M.
Puissant  (in  a  letter  dated  May  31,  1835,  and  addressed  to
D.  B.  Warden,  Esq.,  through  whose  agency  Dr.  Bowditch  had
transmitted  to  him  a  copy  of  this  work)  observes,  "  The  numerous
additions  which  accompany  the  text,  and  which,  in  their  turn,
deserve  to  be  translated  into  French,  are  the  more  important,
as  they  clear  away  the  difficulties  which  the  subject  frequently
presents,  and  moreover  include  whatever  Dr.  Bowditch  and  other
geometers  have  added  to  the  theory  of  the  motions  of  the
heavenly  bodies."

A third object of the translator was one which, though
wholly  subordinate  to  the  others,  he  still  thought  of  considerable

MEMOIR.  65

importance.  La  Place  had  so  modified,  by  the  action  of  his  own
mind,  the  various  productions  of  other  men  of  genius,  that,  while
he  stated  the  results  of  their  labors,  or  adopted  their  improvements,
he  did  not  remember,  or  at  least  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  admit,
the  source  to  which  he  was,  in  each  particular  instance,  indebted.
His  work  told  the  great  truths  of  science,  but  omitted  to  state  by
whom  those  truths  had  been  first  discovered  and  announced.  But
it  must  be  remembered  that  it  was  concise  in  all  its  processes  and
expressions  ;  and  he  probably  felt  that  every  reader,  whose  genius
could  follow  him  into  the  depth  of  his  abstruse  speculations,  must
necessarily  have  previously  read  the  same  works  from  which  he  had
himself  derived  assistance  ;  and  that,  familiar  as  they  must  be  to  the
reader  already,  it  would  be  superfluous,  by  any  acknowledgment
or  quotation,  to  direct  attention  to  them.  Be  this  as  it  may,
the  fact  is  certain  that,  in  the  original  work,  credit  is  frequently
not  given  to  the  eminent  mathematicians  of  ancient  and  modern
times,  by  whose  labors  those  of  its  author  were  rendered  less
difficult  or  more  effective.  But  Dr.  Bowditch  thought  it  due
to  the  cause  of  literary  justice,  that,  in  every  such  instance,  the
omission  in  the  original  work  should  be  supplied.  Several  of
the  communications  which  he  received,  mention  his  course  in
this  respect  with  high  approbation,  and  express  the  regret  of
the  writers  that  La  Place  should  himself  have  thought  and  acted
otherwise.  Dr.  Bowditch  was  well  aware  of  that  natural  self-
love,  by  which  every  one  is  gratified  at  finding  his  labors  approved
by  others  ;  and  he  could  especially  realize  how  great  must  have  been
the  pleasure  felt  at  being  quoted  by  La  Place  for  some  important
process  or  discovery  which  had  contributed  to  the  completeness  of
the  Micanique  Cileste.  lie  had  communicated  to  the  public,  and
VOL.  IV.  r

66  MEMOIR.

to  La  Place  himself,  a  notice  of  an  error  in  the  original  work,
which  was  corrected  in  a  subsequent  edition,  but  without  even  a
private  acknowledgment.  That  it  was  not  publicly  noticed  by
the  author,  was  of  course,  for  the  reason  above  stated,  no  cause
of  any  especial  complaint.  And  Dr.  Bowditch  well  knew  by
personal  experience,  upon  more  than  one  occasion,  that  it  was  very
possible  his  own  letter  to  La  Place,  or  La  Place's  reply,  might
have  miscarried.*  It  has  also  been  suggested,  that  La  Place  was
extremely  averse  to  the  act  of  writing  a  letter  at  any  time,  however
strong  or  urgent  a  motive  existed  for  so  doing.  This  was  certainly
the  case  with  Dr.  Bowditch.  Often,  upon  the  receipt  of  an  epistle
or  note,  he  has  taken  his  hat,  called  personally  upon  the  writer,
and  given  him  a  verbal  answer. t

*  Eight  copies  of  the  first  volume  of  this  Translation  and  Commentary,  sent  by
him  as  presents  to  the  most  distinguished  institutions  and  astronomers  of  Germany,  wholly
failed  to  reach  their  place  of  destination ;  and  several  copies  of  the  first  volume  of  Struve's
Observations,  transmitted  by  the  author  as  presents  from  the  Imperial  Observatory  at  Dorpat
in  Russia  to  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  in  1821,  found  their  way,  with  the  original  letter-
which  accompanied  them,  to  a  bookstore  in  Boston,  in  1824,  where  Dr.  Bowditch  accidentally
saw  and  purchased  them ;  retaining  one  of  which  for  his  own  use,  he  transmitted  all  the  others
as  at  first  directed.  He  received  no  reply  whatever,  and  presumed  that  the  same  evil  destiny
had  again  followed  them.  But  some  years  afterwards,  he  found  in  Schumacher's  Astronomische
Nachrichten,  Vol.  IV.  p.  398,  a  letter  to  the  editor,  from  Francis  Baily,  Esq.,  of  London,
dated  January  19,  1826,  giving  an  account  of  their  curious  wanderings ;  of  the  agency  of
"  Mr.  Bowditch,  the  celebrated  American  astronomer,"  in  the  matter ;  and  of  their  safe  arrival
at  last,  "  after  a  long  and  circuitous  voyage  of  five  years,  from  Dorpat  to  Boston,  and  fix)m
Boston  to  London.

f  When  his  third  son  went  to  Europe  to  pursue  his  medical  studies,  he  gave  him  no
letters  of  introduction,  but,  as  a  substitute  for  them,  certain  copies  of  a  newly-published
volume  of  this  work  to  deliver  as  presents.

MEMOIR.  e?

We  should  much  regret  that  any  of  the  preceding  remarks
should  be  construed  as  in  the  least  degree  attributing  to  La  Place
an  intentional  or  unfair  appropriation  to  himself  of  the  fruits  of
the  labor  of  others.  We  allude  only  to  an  error  of  judgment,
which,  though  easily  accounted  for  upon  the  above  suppositions,
is  much  to  be  regretted,  as  having  occasionally  exposed  him  to  this
more  serious  imputation.  Any  such  omission  of  the  author,  as
far  as  Dr.  Bowditch  was  himself  concerned,  was,  long  before  his
decease,  wholly  effaced  from  his  memory  by  the  kindness  shown
to  one  of  his  sons  by  the  widow  of  La  Place,  who  transmitted,  by
his  hands,  as  a  present  to  his  father,  a  bust  of  her  late  husband,
which  has  ever  since  been  one  of  the  ornaments  of  his  library,
and  which,  by  a  provision  of  his  will,  is  eventually  to  be  deposited,
with  the  manuscript  of  this  work,  in  the  Library  of  Harvard
College,  there  to  remain  an  interesting  joint  memorial  of  the
author  and  the  commentator.

Such  were  the  three  chief  objects  which  it  was  the  design  of
this  Commentary  to  accomplish  ;  and  the  general  merits  of  the  work
have  been  acknowledged,  in  language  no  less  strong  than  that
already  quoted,  by  Professor  Airy,  Francis  Baily,  Esq.,  the  late
Bishop  of  Cloyne,  and  other  astronomers  of  Great  Britain,  as  well
as  by  those  of  France,  Germany,  and  Italy.  Thus,  Sir  John
Herschel,  in  a  letter  to  the  translator,  dated  March  8,  1830,  says,
'*  It  is  very  gratifying  to  me  to  commence  a  scientific  intercourse,
which  I  have  long  desired,  with  the  congratulations  which  the
accomplishment  of  so  great  a  work  naturally  calls  for ;  and  I  trust
that  its  reception  by  the  public  will  be  such  (of  which,  indeed,
there  can  be  little  doubt)  as  to  encourage  you  to  proceed  to  the

68  MEMOIR.

publication  of  the  succeeding  volumes,  and  that  you  will  be
favored  with  health,  strength,  and  leisure,  to  enable  you  to
complete  the  whole  of  this  gigantic  task  in  the  masterly  manner
in  which  you  have  commenced  it.  It  is  a  work,  indeed,  of  which
your  nation  may  well  be  proud,  as  demonstrating  that  the  spirit
of  energy  and  enterprise  which  forms  the  distinguishing  feature
of  its  character,  is  carried  into  the  regions  of  science ;  and
every  expectation  of  future  success  may  be  justified  from  such
beginnings."  —  There  was  also  one  delicate  attention  which  he
received  from  a  female  hand.  Mrs.  Somerville  sent  a  copy  of  her
translation  of  a  part  of  this  work  to  him  who  was  so  happily  ai*d
successfully  engaged  in  the  same  labors.  This  volume,  invested  by
him  in  a  rich  and  beautiful  binding,  still  attests  the  pleasure  which
he  derived  from  it  as  a  tribute  of  respect  to  his  genius  from  one  of
the  most  gifted  women  of  the  age.  —  M.  Lacroix,  in  a  letter  of
April  5,  1830,  writes,  ''Besides  doing  honor  to  the  able,  patient,
and  conscientious  geometer,  who  has  undertaken  this  great  labor,
your  work,  by  the  beauty  of  its  typographical  execution,  does  honor
to  the  country  where  it  is  published.  It  is  perhaps  the  most
beautiful  book  which  has  appeared  upon  mathematics.  The
calculations  in  it  possess  the  greatest  neatness ;  and  the  figures
which  you  have  inserted  in  the  body  of  the  work  itself  unite
the  greatest  elegance  with  convenience.  An  undertaking  so
remarkable  entitles  you  to  the  gratitude  of  those  who  are
desirous  of  studying  to  the  bottom  the  theory  of  the  system  of
the  world,  which  rests  upon  transcendental  mechanics;  and  it
makes  us  wish  for  the  speedy  publication  of  the  remaining
volumes."  —  So  also  Mr.  Encke  of  Berlin,  in  a  letter  dated
May  5, 1836, speaks of  it as a work ''which, by the depth

MEMOIR.  6$

of  the  researches  with  which  it  is  accompanied,  will  insure
to  you  a  distinguished  place  among  the  astronomers  who
have  employed  themselves  on  the  difficult  branch  of  physical
astronomy."  —  Mr.  Cacciatore,  conductor  of  the  Royal  Observatory
at  Palermo,  in  a  letter  dated  May  1,  1836,  mentions  it  as
having  "  excited  the  enthusiasm  of  all  who  took  an  interest  in  the
subject  of  it ; "  and  in  his  treatise  on  Goniometry  he  remarks,
**  The  profoundness  and  clearness  which  are  conspicuous  in
that  work,  demonstrate  that  it  was  only  by  the  aid  of  such
powers  of  analysis  that  a  commentary  could  be  written  upon
the  immortal  work  of  La  Place,  and  that  La  Place  cannot  be
read  with  advantage  unless  it  is  accompanied  with  the  notes  of
Bowditch. Italy  must  have  a  translation  of  it."  *

The  translation  of  this  work  was,  as  has  been  stated,  completed
as  early  as  1817 ;  but  so  limited  was  Dr.  Bowditch*s  income,
that  it  hardly  sufficed  to  meet  the  expenses  of  a  growing  family,
upon  all  of  whom  he  was  desirous  to  confer  the  advantages  of  the
best  education  which  the  country  affijrded  ;  and  all  that  was  not
needed  for  this  purpose  was  expended  in  collecting  around  him
the  choicest  scientific  works  of  ancient  and  modern  times.  The
American  Academy,  with  that  kindness  and  liberality  which  ever
marked  their  intercourse  with  their  late  President,  and  which  have
characterized  their  proceedings  since  his  decease,  offijred  to  publish
the  work  at  their  own  expense.  He  was  also  solicited  to  publish
it  by  subscription.  But  his  natural  and  praiseworthy  independence
of  spirit  induced him  unhesitatingly to  decline these gratifying

*  See  Notes  to  Mr.  Pickeriog's  EuIoqt,  pp.  96^100
VOL.  lY.  $

70  MEMOIR.

proposals.  He  was  aware,  from  the  character  of  the  work,  that
it  would  find  but  few  readers,  and  he  did  not  wish  any  one  to  feel
compelled,  or  to  be  induced  to  subscribe  for  it,  lest  he  should  have
it  in  his  power  to  say,  "  I  patronized  Mr.  Bowditch  by  buying  his
book,  which  I  cannot  read."  He  was  thus  obliged  to  wait  even
longer  than  the  time  prescribed  by  the  poet,  "  nonumque  prematur
in  annum,"  —  until,  under  more  favorable  circumstances,  he  was
enabled  to  commence  the  publication  at  his  own  expense.

But,  though  this  work  was  not  yet  published,  his  fame  as  a
mathematician  had  become  fully  established,  and  several  of  the
scientific  institutions  of  this  country  and  of  Europe  conferred  upon
him  their  highest  honors.  The  following  are  the  foreign  societies
of  which  he  was  admitted  a  member,  and  the  date  of  the  several
diplomas  :  —  The  Edinburgh  Royal  Society,  January  26,  1818  ;  the
Royal  Society  of  London,  March  12,  1818  ;  Royal  Irish  Academy,
March  16,  1819;  Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London,  April  13,
1832 ;  Royal  Academy  of  Palermo,  March  12,  1835  ;  British
Association,  June  29,  1835 ;  Royal  Academy  of  Berlin,  March,
1836.  It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  France,  the  labors  of  whose
greatest  author  have  been  by  him  rendered  of  so  much  more
practical  value  and  extensive  usefulness,  should  alone  have
withheld  from  him  the  like  honors.*  In  this  country,  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society  held
at  Philadelphia,  April  21,  1809;  of  the  Connecticut  Academy
of  Arts  and  Sciences,  October  26,  1813;  and  of  the  Literary  and

*  It  is  indeed  mentioned  in  Mr.  Pickering's  Eulogy,  p.  101,  that,  but  for  his  death,  he
would  probably  soon  have  been  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Institute  of  France.

MEMOIR.  71

Philosophical  Society  of  New  York,  January  17,  1815  ;  &c.  &c. ;
and  at  the  annual  commencement  in  1816,  he  received  from
Harvard  College  the  honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Laws.

Dr.  Bowditch  always  felt  a  deep  interest  in  the  various  literary,
scientific,  and  charitable  institutions  of  his  native  town.  It  was
chiefly  through  his  instrumentality  that,  in  1810,  a  union  was
effected  between  the  Philosophical  Library,  before  referred  to,  and
tlie  Social  Library,  so  called,  which  was  the  origin  of  the  Salem
Athena)um  ;  and  from  that  period,  during  his  whole  residence  in
Salem,  he  continued  to  be  one  of  its  most  active  and  influential
trustees.  Having  felt,  in  early  life,  the  importance  of  a  ready
access  to  books,  he  labored  to  promote  a  most  free  and  extensive
circulation  through  the  community,  of  the  works  in  this  institution,
and  to  make  its  advantages  as  easy  of  attainment  as  possible,  by
every  deserving  individual.  The  gratitude  inspired  in  his  breast
by  the  recollection  of  his  own  obligations  of  this  nature,  when  ho
was  but  a  poor  apprentice,  ended  only  with  his  life.  Recurring  to
this  subject  in  his  will,  he  says,  "These  inestimable  advantages
have  made  me  deeply  a  debtor  to  the  Salem  Athenaeum ; "  and  in
return  he  bequeathed  to  it  the  sum  of  one  thousand  dollars.  In
accepting  this  bequest,  the  trustees  admit  most  fully  that  **  the
early  benefits  which  he  thus  gratefully  remembered  in  his  will,"  he
had  before  repaid  by  his  services  and  donations ;  and  they  add
that  they  ''  see  in  this  last  act  the  unconscious  and  disinterested
devotedness  with  which  he,  through  a  life  of  activity  and  business,
fostered  all  the  interests  of  learning  and  education."

Equally  strong  and  lasting  was  his  gratitude  towards  another

72  MEMOIR.

excellent  institution,  the  Salem  Marine  Society.  Composed
exclusively,  as  its  name  denotes,  of  such  as  had  made  the  sea  the
scene  of  their  enterprising  labors.  Dr.  Bowditch  and  his  father
had  been  both  successively  enrolled  among  its  members.  The
kind  and  timely  aid,  to  which,  during  several  years  of  his  infancy
and  childhood,  he  had  been  indebted  for  some  of  the  absolute
necessaries  of  life,  he  mentioned  with  emotion  to  his  children,
during  his  last  illness,  and  deemed  that  he  but  paid  a  debt  to  this
institution  when  he  bequeathed  to  it  a  like  sum  of  one  thousand
dollars,  in  aid  of  its  charitable  objects  and  purposes.  His  associates
in  this  society  were  peculiarly  competent  judges  of  the  value  of
his  labors  and  services ;  and  we  doubt  if  our  language  could
be  made  to  present  a  more  simple  and  beautiful  expression  of
gratitude  and  regard  than  is  imbodied  in  the  following  extracts
from  resolutions  adopted  by  them  upon  the  occasion  of  his  decease  :
— "  In  his  death  a  public,  a  national,  a  human  benefactor  has
departed.  Not  this  community,  nor  our  country  only,  but  the
whole  world,  has  reason  to  do  honor  to  his  memory.  When  the
voice  of  Eulogy  shall  be  still,  when  the  tear  of  Sorrow  shall  cease
to  flow,  no  monument  will  be  needed  to  keep  alive  his  memory
among  men ;  but  as  long  as  ships  shall  sail,  the  needle  point  to
the  north,  and  the  stars  go  through  their  wonted  courses  in  the
heavens,  the  name  of  Dr.  Bowditch  will  be  revered  as  of  one  who
helped  his  fellow-men  in  a  time  of  need,  who  was  and  is  a  guide
to  them  over  the  pathless  ocean,  and  of  one  who  forwarded  the
great  interests  of  mankind."

Each stranger who visits the hospitable city of  Salem, is
desirous to see the Museum  of  the Salem  East India  Marine

MEMOIR.  ^5

Society,  or,  as  it  is  familiarly  called,  the  Salem  Museum.  It  is
readily  and  gratuitously  opened  to  his  inspection.  As  he  enters  its
spacious  hall,  his  attention  is  arrested  by  a  full  length  portrait  of
its  late  President.  There  the  Commentator  on  the  M^canique
Cileste  seems  still  to  preside  in  person  over  a  favorite  scene  of
his  labors,  inviting  the  attention  of  the  visiter  to  what  he  has
himself,  in  his  will,  described  as  "  a  museum  of  a  very  rare
and  peculiar  character,  collected  from  distant  countries,  and
affording  a  proof  alike  of  the  enterprise,  taste,  and  liberality  of
such  of  the  citizens  of  Salem  as  have  followed  a  seafaring  life."
The  members  of  this  society  are  such  only  as  have  sailed,  in  the
capacity  of  masters  or  supercargoes,  beyond  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  or  Cape  Horn ;  and  besides  the  obtaining  of  curiosities
from  these  distant  regions,  an  object  of  much  greater  practical
importance,  the  collection  of  facts  and  observations  in  aid  of
nautical  science,  has  always  been  zealously  promoted  by  this
society,  and  is  believed  to  have  been  suggested  by  Dr.  Bowditch
himself.  A  blank  book  is  furnished  to  each  member,  uniformly
prepared  for  recording  these  facts  and  observations  during  each
voyage  ;  and,  upon  the  return  of  the  vessel,  it  is  deposited  with
the  society.  It  is  then  examined  by  a  committee,  who  select
and  record  in  other  volumes,  having  a  convenient  index  for
reference,  all  that  they  *  consider  important ;  and  the  result  is
a  mass  of  nautical  information,  such  as,  probably,  exists
nowhere  else  in  the  world,  and  which  Dr.  Bowditch  found  of  great
service  in  preparing  for  the  press  the  various  editions  of  the
Practical  Navigator.  He  was  for  many  years  Inspector  of  its
Journals,  before  he  became  its  President,  and,  in  both  of  these
relations to the society, highly promoted its progress and

VOL. IV.  t

74  MEMOIR.

success.  Owning  Salem  for  our  birthplace,  we  feel  proud  of  this
institution;  and  we  know  that  the  bequest  to  it  by  its  former
President  of  the  like  sum  of  one  thousand  dollars,  was  made  from
an  actual  sense  of  obligations  conferred,  as  in  the  case  of  the  two
other  institutions  which  he  thus  remembered.

Besides  these  duties  and  engagements  of  a  public  nature,  Dr.
Bowditch  became,  in  1818,  and  was  at  his  death,  trustee  for
managing  an  estate  of  nearly  half  a  million  of  dollars,  which  had
been  left  by  a  merchant  of  Salem ;  and  it  may  truly  be  said  that
there  seemed  to  be  no  end  to  the  various  little  services  and  good
offices  which  he  constantly  delighted  to  render,  and  for  which  he
was  always  sure  to  find  the  requisite  leisure.  His  fondness  for
imparting  as  well  as  acquiring  knowledge,  was  still  manifested  ;
as  an  instance  of  which  it  may  be  mentioned  that  he  instructed
several  young  ladies  of  Salem  in  French.

In  his  political  opinions,  he  was  a  decided  Federalist,  and
during  the  late  war  between  this  country  and  Great  Britain,  he
took  great  interest  in  the  absorbing  and  important  events  of
the  time.  It  has  been  stated  that,  when  this  war  was  first
declared,  he  was,  for  two  or  three  days,  wholly  unable  to  attend
to  his  usual  engagements  of  business  or  study.  At  the  end  of
this  time,  however,  he  addressed  his  wife  with  "  This  will  never
do ; "  and,  summoning  a  resolution  to  hope  for  the  best,  as  the  evil
could  not  be  avoided,  he  returned  with  alacrity  to  his  ordinary
course  of  life  ;  and  nothing  more  was  ever  heard  from  him  about
the  war,  except  that  he  often  expressed  the  ardent  hope  of
obtaining  a  speedy  and  an  honorable  peace,  and used all those

MEMOIR.  75

exertions  which  he  thought  the  crisis  required  to  accomplish  so
desirahle  an  end.*  It  is  beheved  that,  later  in  life,  and  in  view
of  its  incidental  and  remote  results,  he  regarded  this  war,  if
not  as  a  necessary  vindication  of  the  national  honor,  at  least  as
far  less  disastrous  in  its  consequences  than  he  had  anticipated.

An  instance  may  be  mentioned  of*  a  fearless  and  independent
discharge  of  duty,  upon  an  occasion  involving  quite  an  exciting
political  topic.  The  legislature  had  passed  a  law  in  which  a
comma  was  inserted  contrary,  probably,  to  the  true  intention  of
the  law-makers ;  but  the  mistake  (if  it  were  one)  existed  in
the  original  draft,  and  in  all  the  printed  copies  of  the  statute.
Certain  acts  had  been  done  by  the  Federalists,  under  authority
of  the  law  as  actually  promulgated,  which  their  political  opponents
thought  indictable  oflfences,  and  which  would  have  been  so,  if  the
comma  had  been  transposed.  A  term  of  court  was  held  in  Salem,
and  Dr.  Bowditch  was  returned  upon  the  grand  jury,  and  his
associates  elected  him  foreman.  lie  had  made  himself  thoroughly
acquainted  with  this  particular  case,  and  had  with  him  a  legal
opinion  drawn  up  by  one  whose  knowledge  of  law  commanded
universal  respect.  The  prosecuting  officer  of  the  government
attended  before  the  jury,  and,  after  stating  that  it  was  incumbent

•  On  one  occasion,  he  was  distributing  votes  at  the  ballot  box,  upon  a  very  inclement
day,  by  the  side  of  a  political  opponent,  whose  efforts  just  counteracted  his  own.  Each  was
troubled  with  a  severe  cold,  and  Dr.  Bowditch  proposed  that  they  should  both  go  home,
as  he  was  satisfied  that  their  absence  would  leave  the  final  result  the  same  as  if  they  both
continued  their  labors.  His  opponent  smiled,  and  objected  to  the  proposition,  that  it  would
indicate  a  lukewarmness  in  a  good  cause.  This  reason  immediately  operated  upon  Dr.
Bowditch  to  withdraw  his  proposition,  and  the  equal  struggle  was  resumed.

76  MEMOIR.

upon  him  to  give  them  any  legal  information  which  might  be
needed  in  the  course  of  their  duties,  added  that  complaints  would
be  laid  before  them  of  violations  of  this  statute,  which  he
accordingly  proceeded  to  explain.  Dr.  Bowditch  said,  '*  Sir,  I
doubt  the  accuracy  of  your  explanation.  Have  you  got  the  statute
with  you?"  The  legal  adviser  said  he  had,  and  produced  it,  and
read  it  with  a  wrong  emphasis,  as  if  the  comma  were  otherwise
inserted.  Dr.  Bowditch  indignantly  interrupted  him :  "  Please,
sir,  to  show  me  the  book  : "  and  on  looking  at  it,  he  added,  "  Why
did  you  so  read  it  as,  by  your  emphasis,  to  give  us  a  false  impression
of  its  meaning]"  The  reply  was,  "There  is  no  doubt  the  comma
is  inserted  where  it  now  is,  only  by  mistake."  Dr.  Bowditch
said  **  It  is  your  duty,  sir,  to  tell  us  what  the  law  is  as  you
find  it,  not  to  tell  how  you  think  it  ought  to  be  improved  or  altered.
We  have  no  further  occasion  for  your  services  at  present ;  when
we  wish  them,  we  will  send  for  you."  His  associates  on  the
jury,  though  nearly  equally  divided  in  political  sentiments,  were
highly  gratified  by  his  characteristic  promptness  and  energy,  and
refused  to  find  any  bills  of  indictment  for  the  supposed  violations
of  law,  and  unanimously  passed  a  very  full  vote  of  thanks  to  him
for  the  fairness  and  independence  with  which  he  had  presided
over  their  deliberations.

For  the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life,  he  retired  altogether
from  the  exciting  scenes  of  political  strife  to  what  he  called  his
"peaceful  mathematics  ;"  though  he  still  continued  to  entertain  and
express  decided  opinions  upon  public  men  and  measures,  and  to  act
upon  these  convictions.  Dr.  Bowditch  was  never  fond  of  public  life.
He  never  held  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Representatives  of  his  native

MEMOIR.  77

State,  and  was  never  a  speaker  in  the  assemblies  of  his  fellow-
citizens.  He  was,  however,  elected  to  the  honorable  ofRce  of
one  of  the  Executive  Council  of  Massachusetts,  which  he  held
during  the  years  1815  and  1816,  being,  during  one  of  those
years,  at  the  council  board  under  the  administration  of  Governor
Strong,  for  whose  dignified  manners,  commanding  talents,  and
exalted  character,  he  entertained  the  highest  respect ;  and  this
sentiment,  it  is  believed,  was  cordially  reciprocated  on  the  part
of  the  chief  magistrate.  At  this  board,  upon  more  than  one
trying  occasion,  he  gave  his  vote  and  exerted  his  influence  in
support  of  the  law,  and  refused  to  screen  from  its  penalties  the
murderer  and  other  criminals  who  had  deliberately  violated  its
provisions  without  any  palliating  circumstances ;  notwithstanding
the  strong  and  urgent  appeals  in  their  behalf,  made  by  many
excellent  and  benevolent  citizens,  among  whom  were  some  of
his  own  personal  friends.  He  considered  that  a  capricious
exercise  of  even  the  prerogative  of  mercy,  would,  in  efiect,
convert  a  government  of  law  into  a  government  of  men.

Dr.  Bowditch's  father  had  originally  worshipped  at  the  Episcopal
church  in  Salem,  but  became  a  member  of  Dr.  Bentley's  society
while  his  son  was  quite  young.  Upon  his  second  marriage,
Dr.  Bowditch  removed  to  a  different  part  of  the  town,  and,  for
this  and  other  reasons,  became  a  member  of  the  society  under
the  pastoral  care  of  his  friend  Dr.  Prince,  and  always  continued
so  during  his  residence  in  Salem.  Within  the  walls  of  its
ancient  church  was  the  first  simple  rite  of  the  Christian  religion
administered  to  all  his  children.  A  coolness  on  the  part  of  Dr.
Bentley,  originating in  this removal from  his  society, resulted,

VOL.  IV. .  u

78  MEMOIR.

from  political  causes  during  the  war,  in  an  entire  estrangement,
which  was  always  a  source  of  regret  to  Dr.  Bowditch,  who  made
the  first  advances  toward  a  reconciliation,  by  a  direct  call  at  his
house  with  a  friend  who  desired  an  introduction.  The  visiters
were  received  with  the  utmost  cordiality,  and  the  intercourse,
thus  happily  renewed,  was  never  afterwards  interrupted  ;  and  the
family  still  retain  in  their  possession  memorials  both  of  the  early
and  the  late  friendship  of  Dr.  Bentley.  It  was  indeed  particularly
delightful  to  Dr.  Bowditch  to  find  that  the  restoration  of  peace  to
the  country,  brought  with  it  a  renewal  of  that  social  intercourse
which  political  dissensions  had  wholly  interrupted.  He  often
mentioned  the  visit  of  Mr.  Monroe,  the  President  of  the  United
States,  to  the  town  of  Salem,  in  1817,  as  an  occasion  never  to  be
forgotten,  because  it  was  the  first  upon  which,  after  a  separation
of  many  years,  were  again  brought  together  within  the  same
circle  so  many  of  his  earliest  and  most  valued  friends.

Many  and  very  flattering  and  advantageous  proposals  were
made  to  Dr.  Bowditch,  from  time  to  time,  to  induce  him  to  leave
Salem ;  but  his  attachment  to  his  native  place  proved  stronger
than  any  temptation  to  which  he  was  thus  exposed.  In  1806^
he  was  elected  Hollis  Professor  of  Mathematics  in  Harvard
University.* In  1818,  President Jefferson  desired  him  to  accept

*  By  a  singular  coincidence,  it  happened  that,  at  the  annual  commencement  of  that  year,
he  was  seated  between  two  strangers,  one  of  whom,  reaching  forward,  observed  to  the  other
the  fact  of  his  nomination  to  this  office,  and  asked  whether  it  would  probably  be  accepted ;
to  which  the  other  replied,  that  he  rather  thought  not,  since  Mr.  Bowditch  would  probably  be
afraid  of  "  singing  small  on  classic  ground."  But  with  the  classics  of  his  own  science
Dr.  Bowditch  was  sure  that  he  was  more  conversant  than  any  one  there,  and  his  ability  to

MEMOIR.  79

the  like  professorship  in  his  University  at  Charlottesville  in
Virginia ;  and  in  his  letter  containing  this  request  he  says,  "  We
are  satisfied  we  can  get  from  no  country  a  professor  of  higher
qualifications  than  yourself  for  our  mathematical  department."
In  the  same  year,  he  was  also  urgently  requested  to  take  charge
of  an  insurance  office  in  Boston.  In  1820,  Mr.  Calhoun,  the
Secretary  of  War  of  the  United  States,  requested  him  to  consent
to  a  nomination  to  the  vacant ,  professorship  of  mathematics  at
West  Point,  and  says,  "  I  am  anxious  to  avail  myself  of  the  first
mathematical  talents  and  acquirements  to  fill  the  vacancy."

In  1823,  he  received  an  invitation  to  take  upon  himself  the
charge  of  an  institution  in  Boston,  —  similar  to  that  which  he
then  managed,  — jointly  with  another,  recently  incorporated  by  the
name  of  the  Massachusetts  Hospital  Life  Insurance  Company,
for  which  latter  institution  his  services  were  considered  almost
indispensable.  The  salary  offered  at  first  was  exactly  three
times  that  which  he  then  enjoyed.  After  mature  consultation
with  his  friends,  and  after  bestowing  upon  the  proposal  his  own
most  careful  deliberation,  it  was  also  decidedly  declined.  But
those  who  made  it  would  admit  of  no  refusal.  A  new  offer  was
forthwith  made  of  a  still  more  liberal  compensation,  ($5000;)  and
as  he  felt  it  to  be  more  than  an  equivalent  for  any  services  which
he  could  render,  —  and  as  any  further  refusal  on  his  part,  which
should have led to the  offer of  a  still  higher  salary,  he  would

teach  to  others  what  he  knew  himself,  he  had  often  abundantly  tested.  But  he  declined  the
appomtment,  solely  from  an  unwillingness  to  break  away  from  all  the  pleasant  associations
connected  with  Salem.

8D  MEMOIR.

have  regarded  as  a  mere  extortion,  —  he  felt  that,  in  hstening
to  the  proposal,  he  was  now  obeying  a  call  of  duty,  and  he
accordingly,  though  with  great  reluctance,  determined  to  quit
the  town  where,  as  he  says  in  his  will,  **  he  had  passed  so
pleasantly  the  first  fifty  years  of  his  life."  He  could,  indeed,
hardly  determine  to  make  the  sacrifice  in  question ;  and,  even
when  it  was  determined  upon,  a  vague  hope  and  anticipation
were  long  cherished  both  by  himself  and  his  wife,  that  eventually
they  should  return  and  end  their  days  amid  the  scenes  of  their
childhood.  Until  his  death  he  continued  to  take  the  same  lively
interest  as  ever  in  the  afiairs  of  that  city.

He  left  his  early  home  attended  with  as  cordial  and  sincere
expressions  of  respectful  and  afiectionate  regret  as  could  possibly
have  honored  his  departure.  A  public  dinner  was  given  to  him
upon  that  occasion,  which  will  long  be  remembered  by  those
present  as  a  scene  of  the  most  interesting  character  ;  while  the
recorded  account  of  the  festival  will  ever  attest  that  it  was
a  tribute  paid  to  ''  science  supported  by  genius,  guided  by
benevolence,  and  attended  by  all  the  virtues ; "  —  to  their
"  distinguished  citizen,  the  first  of  his  countrymen  in  the  walks
of  science,  and  second  to  no  man  on  earth  for  purity  and  honor ; "
—  to  "their  respected  guest,  who  reflected  upon  his  country  the
brightest  honors  of  science,  and  diflfused  in  social  life  the  warmest
influences  of  benevolence."  And  the  wish  was  expressed,  that
he  might  "  enjoy  a  happiness  as  pure  as  his  fame,  and  constant
as  the  activity  of  his  virtues ;  "  and  it  was  declared  that,  "  as  the
monarchy  of  France  had  done  homage  to  her  La  Place,  so  would
the  republic  of  America  not  be  ungrateful  to  her  Bowditch."

MEMOIR.  81

It  may  here  be  mentioned,  as  an  instance  of  Dr.  Bowditch's
diffidence  and  aversion  to  all  public  displuy,  that  he  previously
obtained  from  the  president  of  the  day  a  promise  not  to  call
upon  him  to  address,  however  briefly,  his  assembled  friends  ;  —  an
incident  which  probably  never  before  occurred  upon  a  like  occasion.
It  is  also  an  interesting  circumstance,  that  that  gentleman  (Hon.
Benjamin  Pickman)  was  the  same  individual  to  whom  he  was
indirectly  indebted  in  early  life  for  his  copy  of  Newton's  Principia.*

This  was  the  last  occasion  upon  which  Dr.  Bowditch  was
personally  to  receive  from  his  native  city  any  public  expression
of  those  sentiments  which  continued,  however,  to  be  uniformly
cherished  and  manifested  towards  him  by  its  citizens  to  the
close  of  his  life.  But  honorable  indeed  to  his  memory  were  the
proceedings  of  Salem  consequent  upon  his  decease,  and  gratefully
will  his  children  ever  cherish  the  remembrance  of  them.  The
resolutions  then  adopted  describe  him  to  have  been  *'  a  townsman
of  singular  simplicity,  integrity,  purity,  and  benevolence  of
character  ;  attaining  from  humble  life,  by  his  intellectual  and
moral energy,  the highest honors of  science, and the respect

•  Dr.  Bowditch  had,  many  years  before,  been  a  member  of  an  engine  club  in  Salem,  —
a  voluntary  association  of  gentlemen  for  securing  each  other's  property  ilrom  the  ravages
of  fire.  At  the  occasional  meetings  of  this  club,  of  a  social  character,  he  stipulated  that
be  should  never  be  called  upon  for  toasts  or  sentiments,  unless  he  could  be  allowed  to
get  them  written  and  delivered  by  proxy.  Thb  was  agreed  to,  and  a  friend,  of  "  infinite
humor,"  prepared  accordingly  a  number  of  them,  of  a  most  appropriate  character,  which
were  fix)m  time  to  time  produced,  and  highly  applauded,  and  the  more  warmly  from  the
above  circumstance  respecting  their  origin,  which,  though  ostensibly  concealed  with
suitable  gravity,  was  yet  known  to  all  the  members.

VOL. IV.  V

82  MEMOIR.

and  gratitude  of  the  community  as  a  public  benefactor ; "  and
*'  earnestly  commend  to  the  admiration  and  imitation  of  all,
and  especially  of  the  young  men  of  his  native  place,  the
noble  example  of  active  and  patient  industry,  unconquerable
perseverance,  unbending  uprightness  and  faithfulness  in  all
the  relations  of  life,  and  ardent  love  and  constant  pursuit  of
knowledge  and  truth,  which  were  the  foundations  of  a  character
of  such  honorable  distinction  and  rare  usefulness  ; "  and  declare
that  *'  the  people  of  Salem  have  ever  retained  a  deep  interest
in  his  happiness  and  fame  since  he  reluctantly  left  his  native
place  for  a  sphere  of  more  extended  usefulness  ; "  and  that
they  "  now  receive  and  acknowledge  with  grateful  sensibility  the
evidence  of  his  generous  remembrance  of  his  first  home  in  the
last  days  of  his  life,  contained  in  his  liberal  bequests  to  three
of  the most  useful  and  important  institutions  of  the city."  *

Thus,  in  1823,  Dr.  Bowditch  removed  to  Boston,  with  his
wife  and  a  family  of  six  children,  —  four  sons  and  two  daughters,
—  the  eldest  of  whom  had  not  completed  his  professional  studies,
and  the  youngest  of  whom  was  but  an  infant.  The  remains
of  one  interesting  child,  who  died  in  1820,  at  the  age  of  ten
years,  and  those  also  of  an  infant  boy,  repose  in  the  burial-
grounds of  Salem. All the anticipations and motives which

*  Pursuant  to  another  resolution,  a  public  Eulogy  was  pronounced  upon  the  deceased
by  Hon.  Daniel  Appleton  White,  which,  listened  to  at  the  time  with  the  deepest  interest,
will  in  its  published  form  remain  as  true,  beautiful,  and  discriminating  a  delineation  of
character,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  one  who  himself  possesses  a  high  order
of  talent,  who  was  long  an  intimate  personal  friend  of  the  deceased,  and  whose  thoughts
are  always  clothed  in  a  classic  elegance  of  style.

MEMOIR.  85

determined  Dr.  Bowditch  to  this  removal,  were  fully  realized
and  justified  by  its  ultimate  results.  In  Boston  he  found  many
of  his  early  friends,  who  had  preceded  him  in  this  removal,  and
was  in  a  few  years  followed  by  others.  Strangers  extended  to
him  the  hand  of  friendship,  and  gradually  became  endeared  to
him.  He  saw  his  three  eldest  sons  engaged  in  the  professions
or  pursuits  which  their  tastes  had  led  them  to  select,  under
circumstances  more  advantageous  than  his  former  place  of
residence  would  have  afforded.  His  own  increased  income
allowed  him  to  enrich  still  more  his  valuable  library ;  and  he
found  himself  surrounded  by  sources  of  the  purest  and  highest
enjoyments.  In  his  will  he  speaks  of  Boston  as  "the  home  of
bis  adoption,  where  as  a  stranger  he  met  with  welcome,  and
bad  continued  to  receive  constantly  increasing  proofs  of  kindness
and regard."

The  affairs  of  the  Commercial  Insurance  Company  were
successfully  conducted  by  him  till  the  increasing  labor  of  his  office
as  Actuary  of  the  Life  Insurance  Company,  induced  the  latter
institution  to  offer  him  the  same  salary  which  had  been  previously
paid  by  both  together,  and  which  was  subsequently  still  further
increased  to  six  thousand  dollars.  He  now  relinquished  the
charge  of  the  other  corporation,  whose  charter  was  surrendered,
and  its  concerns  prosperously  closed.  And  it  was  without  any
regret  that  Dr.  Bowditch  bade  farewell  to  the  cares  and  anxieties
attendant  upon  marine  insurance,  where  occasionally  an  unforeseen
accident  intervenes  to  destroy  the  fairest  prospect  of  success.  The
company  of  which  he  was  President  had  met  with  two  losses,
of  thirty  thousand  dollars  each, within one week ; and though

a4  MEMOIR.

one  was  a  case  of  piracy,  of  which  none  lived  to  tell  the  tale,  and
the  other  a  case  of  a  tempest  and  shipwreck,  and  in  each  instance
the  vessels  lost  were  of  the  first  class,  so  that  no  error  of  judgment
could  be  attributed  to  him,  still  the  immediate  influences  of  these
disasters  were  disheartening ;  and  he  felt  that,  with  the  multitude,
success,  and  that  alone,  is  wisdom,  and  that,  in  the  majority  of
cases,  their  verdict  is  a  just  one.  He  himself,  indeed,  always
was  of  opinion  that  continued  ill-luck  indicated  incapacity.
On  one  occasion,  when  he  had  refused  to  underwrite  upon  a
vessel  commanded  by  Mr.  A  .... ,  because  "  he  was  unlucky,"
the  captain  called  upon  him  to  complain  of  his  imputing  to  him
as  a  fault  what  was  but  a  misfortune ;  and,  after  trying  for  some
time  to  evade  a  direct  reply.  Dr.  Bowditch  at  last  said,  "  If  you
do  not  know  that,  when  you  got  your  vessel  on  shore  on  Cape
Cod,  in  a  moon-light  night,  with  a  fair  wind,  you  forfeited  your
reputation  as  an  intelligent  and  careful  ship-master,  I  must  now
tell  you so ; and this is what  i  mean by  being unlucky."

It  was  with  pleasure,  therefore,  that  he  now  turned  his
undivided  attention  to  the  management  of  the  institution  which
was  truly  *'  the  child  of  his  affections."  The  act  incorporating
this  company  with  a  capital  of  a  half  a  million  of  dollars,
conferred  powers  of  effecting  insurance  upon  lives  and  granting
annuities ;  and  Dr.  Bowditch,  before  he  had  even  removed  to
Boston  with  his  family,  expressed  so  decidedly  the  opinion  that  the
business  would  not  be  a  source  of  profit  with  these  limited  powers,
that,  at  his  suggestion,  an  additional  act  was  obtained,  recognizing
the  right  of  the  company  to  take  money  in  trust  to  manage  for
individuals. His judgment proved perfectly correct upon both

MEMOIR.  M

points :  while  the  former  branch  of  business  has  been  very  trifling
in  its  results,  the  amount  of  property  already  received  in  trust
exceeds  five  millions  of  dollars,  and  the  charge  deducted  for  its
management  is  the  chief,  almost  the  only,  source  of  the  profits
of  the  company.  He  calculated  interest  tables,  for  the  common
year  and  leap  year,  specially  designed  for  the  use  of  this
corporation,  involving  a  great  amount  of  labor ;  and  a  few
copies  were  privately  printed.  These  tables  have  saved  the
constant  employment  of  at  least  one  clerk.  The  continually
increasing  degree  of  public  confidence  and  general  popularity
which  this  institution  has  enjoyed,  has  been  chiefly  attributable
to  the  financial  skill,  sound  judgment,  strict  integrity,  and  watchful
vigilance,  with  which  he  devoted  himself  to  its  administration,
and  the  fearless  and  decided  manner  in  which  he  always
checked,  prevented,  and  guarded  against,  every  possible  abuse.  He
considered  the  institution  as  being  morally  the  guardian  of  the
property  intrusted  to  it  belonging  to  widows,  minors,  and  others,
and  was  careful  that  they  should  fully  understand  the  contracts
made  by  them,  or  on  their  behalf,  and  that  those  contracts,  when
made,  should  be  observed  strictly  according  to  their  true  intent
and  meaning.  Displaying  the  utmost  courtesy,  and  the  most
liberal  spirit  of  accommodation  towards  other  institutions  and
individuals  who  dealt  with  the  company,  he  had  always  in  view,
in  its  widest  sense,  the  permanent  and  ultimate  good  of  the
institution  over  which  he  presided,  and  never  compromised  its
interests  or  rights.  Disarming  all  jealousy  upon  the  part  of  the
legislature,  by  the  open  and  frank  communications  which  he  made
to  its  committees,  he  gradually  overcame  much  of  that  prejudice
which  a  republican  form  of  government  naturally  tends  to  foster

VOL. IV.  to

86  MEMOIR.

against  all  large  moneyed  institutions.  Identified  almost  with
himself,  the  public,  no  less  than  the  stockholders  and  depositors,
reposed  in  it  a  degree  of  trust,  which  has  probably  never  been
exceeded  by  the  most  extensive  and  well-earned  popularity  of
any  similar  institution.  In  the  settlement  of  estates  of  deceased
persons  in  the  Probate  Office  for  the  county,  the  records  often
speak  of  it  as  "  the  Bowditch  Office."

Hardly  a  day  passed  which  did  not  exhibit  in  full  view  all
his  most  peculiar  and  methodical  habits  of  business,  and  many
of  the  most  valuable  and  important  of  the  distinguishing  traits
of  his  character.  Instances  without  number  might  be  cited.
One  of  the  wealthiest  citizens  of  Boston,  himself  a  member  of
the  Board  of  Control  of  the  company,  wished,  upon  a  Saturday,
to  deposit  ten  thousand  dollars  to  be  managed  in  trust.  His
balance  in  the  bank,  however,  was  less  than  that  sum  by  three
hundred  dollars,  and  he  offered  to  the  actuary  his  check  for  that
part,  to  be  good  on  the  next  Monday.  Dr.  Bowditch  said,  "  I
cannot,  sir,  receive  any  check  payable  at  a  future  day  as  cash.
It  is  a  rule  of  the  office,  which  you  yourself  assisted  in  making,
that  I  shall  never  part  with  the  money  of  the  institution,  or  make
any  engagement  in  its  name,  without  an  actual  payment,  or
sufficient  collateral  security  received  in  return.  It  is  my  duty
to  enforce  this  rule  against  the  most  powerful  and  influential,
as  well  as  the  most  humble,  individual  who  deals  with  the
institution."  The  gentleman  was  at  first  not  a  little  astonished
at  such  a  novelty  as  the  refusal  to  trust  him  for  three  hundred
dollars  for  one  day.  Dr.  Bowditch  resumed,  —  "I  am  happy,  sir,
that  it  has  become  necessary  to  enforce  this  rule  in  an  extreme

MEMOIR.  87

case.  Having  been  once  applied  to  yourself,  no  one  else  can  ever
object  to  a  compliance  with  it.  And  it  is  in  itself  an  excellent
regulation."  A  moment  aflerwards,  finding  that  his  own  private
balance  in  the  bank  was  more  than  that  sum^  he  offered  to  take
the  gentleman's  check  himself,  giving  to  the  company  his  own
check  payable  that  day;  which  was  done  accordingly.

Upon  another  occasion,  a  person  called  to  take  away  a  policy
for  which  he  had  contracted.  Dr.  Bowditch  asked  him  the  time
of  making  it  and  the  amount ;  then  turned  in  a  moment  to  two
books  in  succession,  went  into  the  vault  in  which  was  contained
the  property  of  the  company,  and  looking  over  a  small  file  of
papers  in  one  corner,  came  out  again,  and  said,  **You  have  got
it,  sir."  —  "  No,  sir,  I  have  not."  —  "I  am  certain  you  have."  —
"  Nothing  but  your  being  so  certain  that  I  have,  makes  me  doubt
at  all  that  I  have  not  got  it."  —  "I  am  ready  to  take  my  oath
in  court,  if  necessary,  that  it  has  been  delivered  to  you."  —  "  O,
then,  you  remember,  I  suppose,  placing  it  in  my  hands."  —  "  No,
sir,  I  have  no  particular  recollection  about  the  matter  at  all.
But  when  a  policy  is  once  recorded  in  that  book  (pointing  to  a
volume  before  him,)  and  has  received  the  examination  both  of
myself  and  the  secretary,  the  original  policy  is  always  put  by
me  in  that  corner  of  the  safe.  It  is  the  rule  of  this  ofHce,  that
nobody  shall  deliver  out  an  original  paper  but  myself.  I  have
the  key  of  that  safe ;  your  paper  is  not  there.  Therefore,  if  I
were  called  upon  in  court,  I  could  take  my  oath  that  you  have
received  it." The  lost  paper  was  of  course  found.

A female  had  deposited  with  the  office all her  property,  in

g8  MEMOIR.

strict  trust  for  her  own  life,  the  sum  being  sufficient  to  secure
her  an  income  of  about  six  dollars  a  week.  She  subsequently
became  insane,  and  a  guardian  was  appointed,  who  took  her  into
his  own  family  to  reside.  He  complained  every  year  that  the
income  was  not  enough  to  pay  the  necessary  expenses  of  taking
care  of  her,  and  said  that  he  must  have  part  of  the  principal.  Dr.
Bowditch  told  him  it  was  impossible ;  that  the  company  never
would  consent  to  any  violation  or  modification  of  the  original
contract  which  the  lady  had  made  when  in  possession  of  her
reason ;  and  added,  "  You  can  have  her  placed  in  any  private
institution  for  the  insane,  at  a  much  less  weekly  expense  than
you  yourself  charge."  Finally,  one  day,  when  he  called  for
the  annual  income  which  was  payable,  he  refused  to  receive  it
unless  he  could  obtain  also  part  of  the  principal ;  and  added  that
if  the  company  would  not  pay  it  voluntarily,  he  should  commence
a  suit  to  compel  them  to  do  so.  Dr.  Bowditch,  fired  with
indignation,  said,  '*  The  moment  a  writ  is  served  upon  the
company  for  such  an  object,  I  will  institute  a  complaint  against
you  as  an  unfaithful  guardian,  and  get  you  removed  from  your
trust."  From  this  time,  the  income  was  amply  sufficient  to  meet
all  the  wishes  of  the  guardian.

A  gentleman  wished  to  obtain  a  loan  upon  mortgage.  On
examination,  it  appeared  that  the  former  owner  of  the  estate  had,
before  his  purchase  of  it,  devised  all  his  property,  of  every  kind,
to  the  lady  he  was  about  to  marry,  and,  several  years  afterwards,
died  without  children,  leaving  her  his  widow ;  and  that  she  had
conveyed  the  estate  in  question  to  the  applicant,  with  warranty.
Notwithstanding the clear  intent  of  the  testator,  this particular

MEMOIR.  8d

estate  legally  belonged  not  to  his  widow,  but  to  his  brothers  and
sisters  as  his  heirs  at  law.  The  loan  must  therefore  be  declined.
But  the  equity  of  the  case  was  so  strong,  that,  upon  the
applicant's  giving  such  further  security  as  was  required,  in
addition  to  that  afforded  by  the  improvements  which  he  had
made  upon  the  estate,  the  loan  was  at  last  agreed  to  ;  and  the
secret  of  the  defect  of  title  thus  discovered,  was  long  preserved
inviolate.  It  happened,  by  a  singular  coincidence,  that  the
widow  had  died,  and  that  her  property,  including  the  proceeds
of  this  very  estate,  had  been  placed  with  the  company  in  trust
for  a  daughter,  who,  with  a  large  family,  was  dependent  upon
the  income  which  it  afforded.  The  gentleman,  ascertaining
this  fact,  and  being  impatient  of  waiting  for  the  expiration  of
about  a  year,  when  his  title  to  the  land  would  be  rendered
perfect  by  the  statute  of  limitations,  actually  disclosed  the
defect  to  those  legally  entitled  to  the  estate,  feeling  sure  that,
if  they  recovered  it  from  him,  he  should  be  able  to  obtain  his
indemnity  from  the  property  thus  placed  in  trust  with  the
company.  The  heirs  at  law,  as  soon  as  they  became  apprized
of  their  rights,  brought  a  suit  to  enforce  the  legal  claim,  which
had  originated  about  thirty-nine  years  before.  When  Dr.
Bowditch  learned  these  circumstances,  and  found  that  the
person  in  question,  rather  than  wait  silently  a  few  months
longer,  had  been  willing  to  give  effect  to  this  unjust  claim,
and  thus  indirectly  to  deprive  of  her  last  resource  this  female
and  her  family,  he  said  to  him,  "You  have  involved  yourself
in  one  suit,  and  must  lose  it ;  and  never  will  I  voluntarily
part  with  one  dollar  of  the  widow's  money  intrusted  to  me,  to
make  good  a  loss  which  you  have  thus  brought  upon  yourself.

VOL.  IV.  X

90  MEMOIR.

You  shall  first  have  still  another  suit,  against  all  the  weight  and
influence  which  this  company  can  command."  The  gentleman
died  during  the  pendency  of  the  original  suit,  by  which  event
the  action  was  ended ;  and  the  period  of  limitation  having  been
previously  completed,  a  new  suit  could  not  be  instituted.  Nothing
but  the  loss  of  life  could  have  prevented  his  losing  the  cause.

A  gentleman  called  to  deposit  a  small  sum  of  money  in  behalf
of  a  young  lady,  his  ward,  to  remain  till  she  was  of  age.  It  was
readily  received.  Before  he  retired,  another  gentleman  entered,
who  happened  to  be  a  very  particular  friend  of  the  actuary.
He  said,  "  Will  you  receive  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  dollars
in  trust  for  me  ? "  —  **  No,  I  cannot  receive  it  from  you."  —
«  Why  not  from  me,  as  well  as  any  one  else  ?  "  —  "  Because  you
can  take  care  of  the  money  yourself.  Whenever,  as  at  present
is  the  case,  there  is  so  much  money  in  possession  of  the  company,
uninvested,  that  it  will  not  be  a  decided  advantage  for  them
to  take  any  more,  I  receive  it  only  from  such  as  cannot  take  care
of  it  themselves.  For  such  cases  especially  was  the  company
designed.  It  is  a  sort  of  Savings'  Bank,  except  that  it  is  on  a
larger  scale  than  usual."

He  also  considered  it  very  important  that  no  money  should
be  received  in  trust  from  foreigners  or  residents  out  of  New
England  ;  both  as  a  means  of  preventing  ill-will  of  any  kind,
and  that  the  whole  affairs  of  the  company  might  be  more
strictly  local,  and  therefore  more  safe,  than  they  could  be  if  its
dealings  were  more  widely  extended.  And  thus  it  once  happened,
in  a  severe  financial  crisis,  when  it  would,  in  his  own  opinion,  have

MEMOIR.  91

been  advantageous  to  the  community,  in  the  particular  case,  to
have  dispensed  with  the  rule,  that  he  yet  looked  to  ultimate
consequences,  and  refused  a  deposit  of  one  or  more  hundred
thousand  dollars,  which  a  resident  in  Nova  Scotia  wished  to
place  with  the  institution.

His  intercourse  with  the  three  individuals  associated  as
immediate  officers  of  the  institution  under  him,  was  uniformly
of  the  most  affectionate  character.  Requiring  at  all  times
great  promptness  and  accuracy  from  them  in  the  discharge  of
their  appropriate  duties,  his  kindness  of  heart  won  from  them
all,  the  same  attachment  which  they  would  have  felt  towards  a
parent.  These  officers  will  never  forget  that  he  summoned  them
as  witnesses  to  his  will,  telling  them  that  before  he  died  he
wished  to  see  them  once  more  together,  adding,  "  This  is,  probably,
the  last  time  that  I  shall  have  that  pleasure."  It  was  the  last
time.  One  of  them  (the  secretary)  had  been  his  colleague
from  the  foundation  of  the  office ;  and  there  had  existed  between
them  a  daily  intercourse  of  the  most  friendly  character,  without
the  slightest  interruption,  during  fifteen  years.  To  him  Dr.
Bowditch  expressed,  on  his  death-bed,  the  earnest  wish  that  he
would  in  no  event  desert  the  institution.  Havinof  been  addressed
by  the  deceased  as  a  son,  he,  as  such,  was  one  of  the  four  individuals
who,  besides  ourselves,  attended  his  remains  to  the  tomb.  He  will,
we  know,  pardon  the  relation  of  the  following  anecdote :  —  Dr.
Bowditch  had  one  day  gone  out  of  the  office  for  a  few  moments,
and,  on  his  return,  found  that  he  had  accidentally  lefl  open  the
trunk  containing  all  the  convertible  property  of  the  company.
The secretary might have had access to it. Without any

^  MEMOIR.

remark  at  the  time,  he  took  out  the  trunk,  and  the  schedule
of  the  property  which  ought  to  have  been  there,  and  carefully
examined  each  item.  He  told  us  at  the  time,  and  the  secretary
of  the  company  himself  afterwards,  that,  though  he  would  have
unhesitatingly  left  his  own  property  uncounted,  and  have  felt
that  there  was  not  the  slightest  risk  from  the  exposure,  he  could
not  answer  it  to  his  conscience,  as  the  responsible  guardian  of
the  property  of  others,  knowingly  to  subject  it  even  to  a  possibility
of  loss.

An  instance  may  be  mentioned  of  his  exact  and  equal  justice,
where  a  member  of  his  own  household  was  made  its  subject.
Several  years  ago,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  individual  then  the
messenger  of  the  office,  to  receive  the  interest  paid  upon  notes
and  mortgages,  and  hand  it  immediately  to  the  actuary,  that
the  proper  endorsements  might  be  made  ;  and  if,  after  business
hours,  persons  called  to  make  such  payments,  and  were  willing
to  leave  the  money  with  the  messenger,  taking  his  word  that  the
proper  endorsements  should  be  made  the  next  day,  this  officer  was
in  the  habit  of  accommodating  them  by  so  receiving  it.  Yielding
to  temptation,  he  spent  a  small  sum  thus  received,  ($120,)
intending  to  replace  it  by  his  salary,  which  would  be  due  in  a
few  days.  Dr.  Bowditch's  eldest  son,  who  then  was,  and  still  is,
solicitor  of  the  company,  was  called  upon  to  write  certain  letters
to  persons  supposed  to  be  delinquent  in  payment  of  interest.
When  he  was  preparing  to  do  so,  the  messenger  of  the  company
called,  and  with  many  tears  confessed  his  wrongful  appropriation
of  the  money,  and  begged  that,  at  least  for  the  sake  of  his  wife  and
children,  it might  be  concealed  till  the  next  day,  when he  had

MEMOIR.  $$

always  intended  to  replace  the  sum ;  adding  the  most  solemn
assurances  that  it  should  then  certainly  be  done.  The  son
consented,  though  reluctantly,  to  conceal  from  the  father  an  act
which  he  was  induced  to  believe  had  been  committed  without  any
deliberate  intent  to  defraud.  On  the  next  morning,  the  salary
was  paid,  and  almost  immediately  afterwards,  instead  of  the
promised  application  of  it,  was  paid  over  by  the  messenger  to
ao  urgent  creditor,  who  threatened  him  with  the  utmost  severity
of  the  law.  Upon  ascertaining  this  fact,  the  original  offence
was  without  delay  disclosed  by  the  solicitor  of  the  company  to
its  actuary.  Dr.  Bowditch's  reply  was,  "  Had  it  been  your  own
money,  you  would  have  been  at  liberty  to  listen  to  the  dictates
of  compassion  and  humanity  ;  but  as  an  officer  of  this  institution,
you  have  committed,  though  unintentionally,  a  great  fault,  which
I  can  with  difficulty  overlook.  You  must  give  me  your  own
check  for  the  whole  amount  of  the  deficit,  since  by  a  timely
exposure  the  company  could  have  withheld  the  salary  which
has  just  been  paid.  This  being  done,  all  further  action  I  leave  to
the  directors."  The  check  was  then  given ;  and  this  important
though  painful  lesson  of  duty  was  cheerfully  learned  at  the
time,  and  has  been  as  gratefully  remembered  since  as  the  most
kind  and  aflfectionate  instructions  which  a  parent's  love  ever
communicated.  Before  this  incident,  and,  if  possible,  still  more
scrupulously  since  that  time.  Dr.  Bowditch  determined  that  no
one  should  remain  in  any  situation  attached  to  the  office,  who
was  laboring  under  pecuniary  embarrassments.  To  see  the  note
of  one  of  its  officers  offijred  upon  change,  would  with  him,  at  any
time,  have  been  a  conclusive  reason  for  his  instant  dismissal.
He  knew  intimately  the  weakness  of  human  nature ;  that
VOL.  IV.  y

94  MEMOIR.

honesty  and  integrity  may  in  a  moment  be  lost  by  those  fatal
entanglements ;  and  he  regarded  the  prayer  for  delivery  from
temptation  as  one  of  vital  importance.  In  his  own  conduct,
he  practised  upon  the  same  rule.  He  never  endorsed  or  became
surety  for  any  of  his  children,  or  made  any  engagements  by
vs^hich  he  might  become  liable  to  forfeit  his  independence.

In  adopting  the  forms  for  various  blanks,  and  the  books  for
the  various  accounts  of  the  company,  Dr.  Bowditch  introduced,  at
the  first  establishment  of  the  institution,  such  perfect  simplicity
of  method  and  arrangement,  that  scarce  any  subsequent  change
has  been  found  from  experience  to  be  necessary ;  the  books  having
different  columns  ruled,  and  the  matters  stated  in  print  at  the  top
of  each,  which  are  to  be  recorded  in  it,  so  that  a  glance  suffices
to  decide  what  would  otherwise  require  perhaps  a  long  search.
Dr.  Bowditch  was  very  rapid  and  exact  in  all  his  calculations,
such  as  computing  interest,  &c.,  and  each  one's  business  was  in
succession  finished  with  the  utmost  despatch,  so  that  it  was
wonderful  how  much  he  was  able  to  accomplish.  He  always
bestowed  his  own  final  revision  upon  every  contract  made  by  the
company,  and  every  note  or  mortgage  or  other  security  made  to
or  taken  by  it ;  *  and  frequently  his  minute and careful scrutiny

*  When  a  mortgage  is  paid  off,  the  law  makes  it  the  duty  of  the  lender  to  go  to  the
public  office  where  the  same  is  recorded,  and  to  acknowledge  satisfaction  in  the  margin
of  the  record ;  for  making  which  entry  the  officer  is  entitled  to  a  small  fee,  which  is
payable  by  the  borrower.  Dr.  Bowditch,  on  such  occasions,  always  look  this  fee,  and,
wrapping  round  it  a  piece  of  paper,  on  which  were  minuted  such  particulars  of  the
mortgage  as  would  identify  it,  and  prevent  him  from  discharging  the  wrong  one,  "This
money,"  said  he,  "  will  answer  as  ballast  for  the  paper,  and  prevent  that  from  getting
out  of  ray  pocket,  and  the  affair  out  of  my  memory."

MEMOIR.  95

would  detect  some  clerical  error,  which  had  escaped  all  who  had
preceded  him.  He  was  equally  exact  and  particular  in  his  mode
of  transacting  all  the  other  business  of  the  company.  Every  day,
at  two  o'clock,  he  balanced  the  cash  account  before  he  closed
the  office,  that  he  might  leave  nothing  unfinished.  Only  the  day
before  his  death,  having  a  week  previously  found  himself  too
feeble  to  make  an  endorsement  upon  a  promissory  note  of  half
the  principal,  and  to  look  over  and  execute  a  deed  of  release  of
half  the  mortgaged  premises,  he  sent  to  the  secretary  to  bring  him
the  papers  again,  saying,  "  You  know  I  never  like  to  leave  any
thing  unfinished."  He  made  the  endorsement,  and  executed  the
release  in  question  only  forty-seven  hours  before  he  died.  He
would  never  listen  to  two  speakers,  or  attempt  to  attend  to  two
matters  at  once.  '^  One  thing  at  a  time,"  was  his  rule.  It  brought
order  out  of  chaos  ;  all  the  elements  of  confusion  vanished  at  its
magic  influence.  It  was  certainly  the  most  efficient,  and  probably
the  only  rule,  that  could  have  been  devised  for  finishing  all  the
various  and  complicated  transactions  which  each  successive  day
brought  with  it.  Often,  when  engaged  in  making  an  entry,  if,
upon  looking  up,  he  saw  a  friend,  he  would  exclaim,  **  In  one
moment ! "  and  then  proceed  and  deliberately  finish  the  matter
before  him ;  afler  which  he  would  say,  "  Now  I  am  free,  and  will
talk  with  you."  He  had  his  La  Place  habitually  by  his  side,  and
in  the  occasional  intervals  of  leisure  from  the  calls  of  business  or
friendship,  he  constantly  recurred  with  delight  to  the  teachings
of  this  his  favorite  author.

Dr.  Bowditch enjoyed most heartily  any  laughable incident
which  occurred,  and  often,  by  his  amusing  comments  or  anecdotes,

9§

MEMOIR.

awakened  a  like  hilarity  in  others.  Thus,  upon  one  occasion,  a
person  who  called  to  buy  a  life  annuity  moved  so  feebly,  and
made  so  many  grimaces  and  contortions,  and  groaned  so  dolefully,
lamenting  his  ill  health,  and  the  short  time  he  had  to  live,  that  it
was  very  evident  he  was  acting  a  part,  with  a  view  to  make  as
good  a  bargain  as  possible.  Dr.  Bowditch  enjoyed  the  affair
highly,  and,  after  the  applicant  had  retired,  he  was  describing
the  incident  to  a  friend  with  so  much  comic  effect,  "  suiting  the
action  to  the  word,  and  the  word  to  the  action,"  that  he  even
surpassed  his  original ;  and  the  two  officers  of  an  insurance
company  in  the  room  immediately  beneath  his  own,  came  running
up  stairs  with  some  anxiety  to  know  the  cause  of  such  sounds
of  distress  and  such  piteous  ejaculations.

It  was  indeed  wonderful  with  what  facility  Dr.  Bowditch
could  in  an  instant  divert  his  attention  from  any  subject  to
another  of  the  most  opposite  character ;  at  one  moment  engaged
in  the  every-day  detail  of  the  business  of  his  office,  at  the  next
abstracted  from  all  around  him  by  the  most  elevated  investigations
of  science  ;  and  then,  again,  displaying  either  the  utmost  cordiality
of  friendship,  or  almost  the  wild  hilarity  of  childhood,  and  apparently
finding from each  change an equal  degree of relaxation.

Dr.  Bowditch's  disposition  to  afford  every  possible  facility,
and  accommodation  to  annuitants,  depositors,  and  stockholders,
was  manifested  upon  all  occasions.  He  habitually  kept  the  office
open  during  the  afternoon  of  the  day  preceding  that  for  the
general  payment  of  interest  or  dividends,  of  which  he  sent  a
private  notice  to  those individuals who  had  the  largest  number

MEMOIR.  97

of  different  sums  to  receive,  stating  his  readiness  then  to  pay
them  ;  which  arrangement  saved  both  them  and  all  others  who
might  have  applied  at  the  same  time  with  them  on  the  following
day,  from  the  disagreeable  but  unavoidable  delay  to  which  they
must  then  have  been  subjected.  This  not  only  gratified  the
individuals  in  question,  but  was  indeed,  indirectly,  an  equal
accommodation  to  every  one  else,  besides  that  it  insured  greater
accuracy  than  if  the  entries  were  made  in  a  hurry,  with  many
standing  around  waiting  impatiently  for  their  own  turn.

He  was  also  desirous  that  females  who  had  annuities  or
deposits  in  trust,  should  come  in  person  to  the  office  to  receive
their  payments,  as  he  wished  them  to  see  and  judge  for  themselves
as  to  the  management  of  their  property,  and  that  he  might  himself
give  them  any  explanations  and  information  which  they  desired;
and  the  moment  a  lady  entered,  she  took  immediate  precedence
of  every  one  else,  and  the  claims  of  some  of  the  most  considerable
depositors  have  often  been  thus  postponed  to  those  of  a  poor
widow  who  had  intrusted  to  the  institution  her  little  all.  No
female  annuitant,  indeed,  ever  left  the  presence  of  Dr.  Bowditch
without  having  been  delighted  with  his  courteous  and  polite
reception,  and  with  the  ready,  frank,  and  kind  manner  in  which
her  inquiries  had  been  answered  or  her  wishes  attended  to.
The  courtesy  thus  shown  to  female  annuitants  was  extended  to
females  applying  for  loans  upon  mortgoge  —  but  in  rather  a
peculiar  way,  viz.  the  uniform  refusal  of  their  request.  And  it
was  certainly  with  some  ingenuity  that  this  rule  of  the  company
was  supported  exclusively  by  reasons  based  upon  gallantry  towards
the  sex. lie  said  to  them,  ''  It  is  impossible  to  accede  to  your

VOL.  IV.  2

98  MEMOIR.

request,  because,  should  any  delinquency  occur,  the  company
could  never  be  so  rude  or  harsh  as  to  institute  a  suit  against  a
woman,  or  to  take  forcible  possession  of  her  estate.  Therefore
we  never  lend  except  to  a  man,  with  whom  we  can  immediately
resort  to  all  the  strict  measures  of  the  law,  in  case  it  becomes
necessary." So  plausible  a  reason  was  always  satisfactory.

Prompted  by  a  similar  motive  of  politeness  was  another  of
his  private  rules.  Aware  of  a  difficulty  which  he  through  life
experienced  in  remembering  names,  and  that  the  self-love  of
applicants  at  the  office  would  be  hurt  at  the  necessity  of
informing  him  who  they  were,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  referring
every  one  whose  familiar  features  thus  perplexed  him,  to  another
officer  of  the  institution,  to  get  the  number  of  the  policy  or
mortgage  respecting  which  question  had  been  made.  The  clerk
understood  this  request,  and  began  by  asking  the  name,  which
was  a  less  mortifying  question  from  him,  than  it  would  have  been
from  the  principal  of  the  office.  He  then  handed  the  name  and
number  to  the  actuary  on  paper.

The  most  difficult  duty  to  be  performed  by  the  actuary  of
this  company,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of  almost  daily  recurrence,
was  that  of  refusing  applications  for  loans  of  money  which  he
thought  it  not  safe  for  the  institution  to  grant.  It  often  required
great  firmness  and  decision.  Powerful  influences,  direct  and
indirect,  were  often  resorted  to  in  order  to  obtain  a  favorable
answer.  But  it  is  emphatically  true  that  Dr.  Bowditch  understood
the  art  of  saying  "  No ;  "  and  while  he  decidedly  and  peremptorily
declined  an  offijr  as  inadmissible,  so  that  no  time  should  be  wasted

MEMOIR.  99

in  profitless  discussion,  it  was  always  his  endeavor  to  do  it  with
as  much  courtesy  of  manner  as  possible.  He  was  well  aware,
however,  that  this  was  the  most  thankless  part  of  the  actuary's
duties ;  that  though  a  manly,  independent,  and  decided  course,
would  certainly  secure  the  respect  and  approbation  of  the  majority,
and  promote  the  interests  of  the  institution,  it  must  also  necessarily
give  offence  in  individual  cases.  Such  cases  did  occur.  There
never  lived  the  man  whom  Dr.  Bowditch  feared  to  address  in
what  he  considered  the  language  of  truth,  and  he  often  spoke
with  a  plainness  and  directness  to  which  his  hearers  had  not
been  accustomed.

It  was  always  a  painful  duty,  however,  to  be  compelled  to
disappoint  applicants  by  the  refusal  of  their  requests,  though  it
was  one  which,  as  has  been  stated.  Dr.  Bowditch  never  hesitated
to  perform.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  declined  requests,  which  he
subsequently  thought  might,  with  some  slight  modification,  have
been  admissible ;  and  in  such  cases  he  was  always  ready  and
willing  to  recede  from  his  first  position.  An  instance  of  this  kind
occurred  a  few  weeks  before  his  death.  The  proposal  made  by
a  friend  was  declined,  as  not  coming  within  the  rules  of  the  office.
The  applicant  had  no  idea  that  Dr.  Bowditch  at  that  time  was
laboring  under  a  serious  disease,  and  manifested  some  surprise
and  irritation  at  this  unfavorable  answer.  With  a  slight  change
in  the  terms  of  the  proposal,  by  which  the  original  objection
was  removed,  it  was,  in  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  acceded  to.  It
was  soon  known  that  Dr.  Bowditch  was  alarmingly  ill.  No  one
was  more  earnest  and  constant  in  his  inquiries  respecting  his
health,  than  the  gentleman  alluded  to. The  day  but  one  before

100  MEMOIR.

his  death,  Dr.  Bowditch  made  some  remarks  to  his  eldest  son,
desiring  him  to  communicate  them  in  his  name  to  that  gentleman.
A  letter  was  accordingly  written,  in  which,  after  stating  his
uniform  sentiments  of  esteem  and  respect  during  a  long  inter-
course, and  alluding  to  a  common  descent  from  the  same  remote
ancestor,  (John  Turner,)  as  having  strengthened  by  relationship
the  feelings  of  good-will  which  a  knowledge  of  character  had
first  produced,  —  Dr.  Bowditch  proceeds  to  say  that  if  any
incident  has  ever  occurred  between  them  of  a  less  friendly
description,  he  has  never  let  the  sun  go  down  upon  his
remembrance  of  it,  and  hopes  that  it  has  been  equally  forgotten
by  his  friend.  A  reply  was  received,  in  which  the  writer  says,  "  I
have  ever  been  inclined  to  reverence  the  silver  hairs  of  an  honest
man.  Associated  with  the  consideration  that  they  are  connected
with  great  public  services,  inflexible  independence  of  thought
and  action,  and  a  very  high  order  of  intelligence,  duty,  not  less
than  inclination,  commands  our  respect."  A  copy  of  the  original
communication,  sent  by  his  son,  as  he  had  desired,  and  the  reply
to  it,  were  read  to  Dr.  Bowditch  only  twenty-three  hours  before
his  death.  They  were  the  last  to  which  he  ever  was  a  listener.
He  died,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  act  of  forgetting  and  forgiving,
and  asking  a  like  forgetfulness  and  forgiveness  of,  all  the  incidents
connected  with  one  occasion  upon  which  he  feared  that,  as  actuary
of  the  Life  Insurance  Company,  he  had  perhaps  unnecessarily
said  "  No."  *

*  Of  a  similar  character  is  the  anecdote  of  his  once  asking  the  pardon  of  some  young
men  in  the  Salem  Athenaeum  for  having  upon  a  certain  occasion  spoken,  as  he  thought,
somewhat  too  quickly  to  them.  —  Judge Whitens  Eulogy,  p.  57.

MEMOIR.  101

During  the  late  disastrous  period,  when  every  bank  in  the  United
States  was  compelled  to  suspend  specie  payments,  Dr.  Bowditch
conducted  the  affairs  of  the  Company  with  such  caution,  that  —
though  this  was  the  largest  moneyed  institution  in  New  England,
having  a  capital  equal  to  that  of  ten  common  banks,  and  tliough  its
dealings  were  necessarily  extended  throughout  the  community  —
the  actual  loss  sustained  by  the  reckless  management  of  other
institutions,  and  by  the  numerous  bankruptcies  which  destroyed
all  commercial  confidence,  was  less  than  that  of  any  one  bank
in  the  city,  and  was  more  than  balanced  by  the  reserved  profits
resulting  from  the  success  of  a  financial  measure  which  he  had
previously  suggested  and  executed.

Such  was  Dr.  Bowditch^  the  Actuary  of  the  Massachusetts
Hospital  Life  Insurance  Company.  He  had  qualifications  rarely,
if  ever,  found  united  in  one  individual,  and  they  had  here  their
happiest  and  fullest  exercise,  and  accomplished  a  most  useful
result.  Not  inferior  to  his  fame  throughout  the  scientific  world
as  the  author  of  this  work,  will  be  the  reputation  which  he  has
left  among  all  connected  with  that  institution,  as  one  who,  (in
the  language  of  the  Board  of  Control  in  one  of  their  resolutions
adopted  after  his  decease,)  "  by  the  clearness  and  simplicity  of
the  regulations  he  devised  and  adopted,  and  the  intelligence,
fidelity,  and  inflexible  resolution  with  which  they  were  adhered
to  and  executed,  has  preeminently  contributed  to  the  present
stabihty  and  prosperity  of  the  institution."  In  another  of  these
resolutions  they  describe  him  as  "  one  who  lived  long  enough  to
perform  all  the  duties  of  a  long  life,  although  not  permitted  to
attain old  age ; who has lefl to his family  a  bright example,

VOL.  IV.  a  a

102  MEMOIR.

and  a  name  that  will  be  known  and  honored  throughout  the  world
so  long  as  virtue  and  science  shall  be  held  in  reverence."

It  is  gratifying  to  us  to  reflect  that  the  institution  whose
continued  prosperity  was  almost  the  last  earthly  wish  of  Dr.
Bowditch,  has  been  intrusted  to  the  hands  of  one  whom,  of  all
others,  he  would  have  himself  selected  to  be  his  successor  ;  under
whose  auspices  we  doubt  not  that  it  will  long  possess,  as  heretofore,
the  unlimited  confidence  of  its  friends  and  of  the  community.

Dr.  Bowditch  was,  from  1826  to  the  end  of  1833,  a  Trustee
of  the  Boston  Athenaeum.  At  the  time  of  his  appointment,  it
was  in  a  situation  far  from  prosperous.  One  whose  name  has
ever  stood  foremost  upon  the  list  of  public  benefactors  in  this
city,  generously  offered  to  the  institution  eight  thousand  dollars,
if  a  like  sum  in  addition  could  be  obtained.  Dr.  Bowditch,  with
the  assistance  of  a  friend  equally  zealous  in  the  cause,  undertook
the  task  of  procuring  the  performance  of  this  condition.  They
first  waited  upon  a  nephew  of  the  original  donor,  who,  upon  the
circumstances  being  stated  to  him,  immediately  said,  "  I  will
follow  the  example  of  my  uncle,  and  give  the  same  sum,  provided
you  can  get  from  others  sixteen  thousand  dollars."  This  brilliant
success  in  the  outset,  in  reality,  as  he  perceived  by  the  condition
thus  annexed,  doubled  his  future  labors.  But  he  saw  in  it  only
an  opportunity  of  urging  more  strongly  upon  others  a  like
munificence,  as  the  withholding  of  each  small  sum  might  endanger
the  loss  of  the  whole  promised  bounty.  His  efforts,  therefore,
were  unremitting.  With  that  persuasive  eloquence  which  is
always  inspired  by  disinterested  zeal  in  a  good  cause,  and  which

MEMOIR.  103

few  could  resist  from  his  lips,  he  appealed  so  forcibly  to  those  he
addressed,  that  he  obtained  much  more  than  the  requisite  sum.
One  great  object  to  which  the  funds  thus  gained  for  the  institution
were  applied,  was  that  of  perfecting  its  collection  of  works  of
science  ;  and  here  his  labors  were  no  less  useful  than  they  had
been  before.  He  had  previously  accomplished  one  measure,  far
more  important  in  his  view  than  any  other,  and  without  which
he  felt  that  any  future  labors  would  be  of  but  little  advantage,  —
namely,  that  of  permitting  subscribers  to  take  books  from  the
library  for  the  use  of  themselves  and  their  families.  The  benefit
of  a  like  arrangement  he  had  long  experienced  while  connected
with  the  Athenaeum  in  Salem.  This  was  at  first  vehemently
opposed  by  some  of  the  most  intelligent  of  his  associates,  who
apprehended  from  this  plan  evil  consequences,  which  have  been
proved  by  experience  not  to  result  from  it.  There  can  be  no
doubt,  indeed,  that  the  final  attainment  of  this  his  favorite  object
has  been  of  great  benefit  to  the  citizens  of  Boston.

These  services  were  remembered  so  gratefully  by  this  insti-
tution, that,  on  his  decease,  its  trustees  felt  themselves  called
upon  publicly  to  declare  their  nature  and  extent,  in  order  that
the  community  might  duly  appreciate  its  obligations  to  him.
Death  had  removed  the  necessity  of  that  silence  which  was
more  grateful  to  the  modesty  of  the  living,  than  would  have
been  even  that  just  and  appropriate  eulogy,  which,  after
alluding  to  his  particular  services  above  mentioned,  proceeds
thus  :  —  **  But  Dr.  Bowditch  has  far  higher  claims  to  notice ;
he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  scientific  men  of  this  country,  and
no  man living  has  contributed  more  to  his  country's  reputation.

104  MEMOIR.

His  fame  is  of  the  most  durable  kind,  resting  on  the  union  of  the
highest  genius  with  the  most  practical  talent,  and  the  application
of  both  to  the  good  of  his  fellow-men.  Every  American  ship
crosses  the  ocean  more  safely  for  his  labors,  and  the  most  eminent
mathematicians  of  Europe  have  acknowledged  him  their  equal  in
the  highest  walks  of  their  science.  His  last  great  work  ranks
with  the  noblest  productions  of  our  age."  —  **  But  it  is  not
merely  the  benefactor  of  this  institution,  and  the  illustrious
mathematician,  v^^hose  labors  have  given  safety  to  commerce
and  reputation  to  his  country,  whom  we  lament.  It  is  one
whose  whole  life  was  directed  to  good  ends  ;  who  combined  the
greatest  energy  with  the  kindest  feelings ;  who  was  the  friend  of
every  good  man  and  every  good  undertaking ;  the  enemy  of
oppression,  the  patron  of  merit,  the  warm-hearted  champion
of  truth  and  virtue.  It  is  the  companion,  whose  simple  manners
and  amiable  disposition  put  every  one  at  ease  in  his  presence,
notwithstanding  the  respect  which  his  genius  inspired ;  and  who
could  turn,  apparently  w^ithout  effort,  from  the  profoundest
investigations,  to  take  his  part,  with  the  light-heartedness  of  a
child,  in  the  mirth  of  the  social  circle.  His  heart  was  as  tender  as
his  intellect  was  powerful.  His  family  found  him  as  affectionate
as  he  was  wise ;  he  was  equally  their  delight  and  their  pride.
They  could  have  no  richer  inheritance  than  his  character ;  and
nothing  but  such  a  character  could  afford  them  consolation  for
such  a  loss."  And  for  this  consolation  they  refer  us,  in  their
concluding  resolution,  to  **  the  contemplation  of  a  life  so  gloriously
spent,  and  which  has  left  such  enduring  monuments  of  excellence
in  every  department,  whether  of  science  or  of  practical  utility,  to
which  it  has  been  devoted."

MEMOIR.  106

A  marble  bust  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  executed  some  years  since
by  John  Frazee,  of  New  York,  was  presented  to  this  institution
by  the  gentlemen  at  whose  request  it  was  taken.  Though  it
accurately  represents  the  features,  the  artist  has  not  succeeded
in  arresting  that  bright  and  cheerful  expression  of  the  deceased,
which  his  children  will  ever  most  delight  to  recall.

Under  his  auspices  as  President  of  the  American  Academy,
one  volume  of  its  Transactions  *  has  been  published.  He  also
procured  an  important  modification  of  the  terms  upon  which  a
donation  had  been  made  to  that  body  by  Count  Rumford ;  so  that,
from  being  wholly  worthless,  it  has  been  rendered  available  for
the  general  objects  of  the  society.  He  obtained  the  hall  over  the
Life  Insurance  Company's  office  for  the  use  of  this  institution,
where  its  excellent  collection  of  books  was  neatly  and  elegantly
arranged  under  his  direction.  His  youngest  son,  who  had
succeeded  in  making  a  fine  catalogue  of  his  own  library,  he  had
requested  at  his  leisure  hours  to  prepare  one  likewise  for  this ;
which  labor  has  been  nearly  completed  since  his  decease.  An
artist  has,  at  the  request  of  the  Academy,  recently  executed  a
marble  bust  of  their  late  president,  in  whose  death  they  lament
the  loss  of  "  their  distinguished  associate  and  head,  whose  name

•  This  is  called  Vol.  I.  of  a  New  Series,  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  sending  to
foreign  members  of  the  Academy  copies  of  all  the  earlier  volumes;  as  he  considered  that
Vd.  I.  of  the  Old  Series  contains  some  mathematical  papers  of  so  inferior  a  character,  as
to  indicate  a  low  state  of  that  science  in  this  country  at  the  time  of  its  publication.  It
may  be  observed  that,  by  this  arrangement,  he  was  obliged  also  to  consign  to  the  like  obscurity
all  his  own  communications,  as  they  are  recorded  in  the  subsequent  volumes  of  the  Old
Series.

VOL.  IV.  6  6

106  MEMOIR.

has  for  many  years  conferred  honor  upon  their  institution,  and
whose  communications  are  among  the  most  valuable  contents
of  the  volumes  of  their  Memoirs ; "  —  *'  of  a  friend  and  fellow-
citizen,  whose  services  were  of  the  highest  value  in  the  active
walks  of  life,  whose  entire  influence  was  given  to  the  cause  of
good  principles,  whose  life  was  a  uniform  exhibition  of  the  loftiest
virtues,  and  who,  with  a  firmness  and  energy  which  nothing
could  shake  or  subdue,  devoted  himself  to  the  most  arduous  and
important  duties,  and  made  the  profoundest  researches  of  science
subservient  to  the  practical  business  of  life.'

ii  #

Dr.  Bowditch  was  accustomed  to  say,  after  his  appointment
to  a  seat  in  the  Corporation  of  Harvard  College,  that  his  two
high  holidays  were  those  occasioned  by  the  literary  exercises
and  festivities  of  the  annual  Commencements  of  that  institution.
On  these  days  he  might  always  be  seen  listening  with  interest
and  attention  to  the  various  performances.

Though  not  himself  a  practical  mechanic,  there  was  no  class
in  the  community  whom  he  more  valued  and  respected.  Many
intelligent  mechanics  will  remember  the  familiar  and  friendly
manner in which Dr. Bowditch has often joined them when

*  The  Eulogy  pronounced,  pursuant  to  another  resolution  of  the  Academy,  by  John
Pickering,  Esq.,  one  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  earliest  and  most  intimate  friends,  has  been  before
referred  to.  It  presents  to  the  reader,  with  the  utmost  fidelity  and  accuracy,  and  with
great  thoroughness  of  research,  an  analysis  and  estimate  of  the  scientific  labors  and  services
of  the  deceased,  to  which  we  with  pleasure  acknowledge  our  own  obligations  in  preparing
the  present  memoir.

MEMOIR.  107

walking,  and  continued  to  walk  with  them  arm  in  arm.  Living
in  a  republic,  he  respected  in  others,  and  aspired  himself  to  no
aristocracy,  but  that  of  character  and  talents  —  that  which  results
from  useful  and  honorable  labors  either  of  the  hands  or  of  the
head.  No  sight  ever  afforded  him  such  pleasure  as  that  of  the
working  classes  of  the  city,  upon  one  day  in  seven,  dressed  in
their  Sunday  clothes,  and  forgetting  the  laborious  occupations
of  the  week,  enjoying  with  their  wives  and  children  the  pure  air
and  beautiful  scenery  of  the  Boston  Common.

The  Boston  Mechanics*  Institution  considered  him  justly  enti-
tled to  the  honor  of  being  elected  its  President,  even  though  his
manual  dexterity  in  any  particular  craft  might  be  doubtful.  He
received  this  appointment  January  12,  1827,  and  resigned  the
office  April  27,  1829.*  A  valuable  apparatus  was  purchased  by
subscription,  which  he  promoted  by  his  influence  and  example  ;
and  lectures  upon  the  steam  engine,  and  other  similar  important
subjects,  were  delivered  with  much  success.  And  it  is  believed
that  all  the  lectures  now  delivered  so  generally  before  various
institutions  in  Boston,  upon  almost  every  evening  in  the  week,  and
by  which  so  much  valuable  information  is  diffused  through  the
community,  find  almost  their  first  precedent  in  this  country  in
the  course  given  by  the  mechanics  of  Boston,  with  Dr.  Bowditch
at  their  head.

By  the  same  body  of  men  Dr.  Bowditch  was  placed  on  the
select  list  of  honorary  members  of  the  Massachusetts  Charitable

•  He  was  chosen  first  honorary  member  of  this  society,  May  15,  1829.

108  MEMOIR.

Mechanic  Association,  (February  4,  1828  ;)  while  those  whom  he
through  Hfe  had  most  benefited  were  proud  to  own  him  as
one  of  their  profession,  and  elected  him  a  member  of  the  Boston
Marine  Society,  (March  2,  1830.)  The  latter  society,  upon  his
death,  say,  "  '  He  hath  wrought  a  good  work,  and  rests  from  his
labors.'  His  intuitive  mind  sought  and  amassed  knowledge,  to
impart  it  to  the  world  in  more  easy  and  comprehensive  forms.
His  life  and  example,  in  all  their  phases,  present  more  to  admire
and  approve  than  we  may  hope  to  see  imitated  and  achieved  by
another  individual."  Both  these  societies,  receiving  unitedly  in
his  will  the  same  affectionate  and  honorable  mention,  unitedly
listened  to  the  Discourse  which  the  Rev.  Alexander  Young  had
previously  delivered  before  his  parishioners,*  in  the  church  where
the  deceased  had  worshipped.

Thus  various and important  were  the  public  relations  which
Dr.  Bowditch  sustained  in  the  community  around  him,  and  thus

*  The  first  in  the  series  of  the  publications  of  this  class  in  point  of  time,  it  details  very  fully
the  incidents  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  life,  and  especially  those  illustrating  his  personal  and  social
habits  and  character.  Some  slight  errors  in  this  Discourse,  chiefly  respecting  the  time  when,
and  the  circumstances  under  which  Dr.  Bowditch  gained  particular  acquirements,  a  subsequent
investigation  has  enabled  others  to  correct ;  but  the  substantial  accuracy  and  fidelity  of  those
moral  delineations,  which  it  was  his  peculiar  province  and  design  to  present,  will  ever  remain
unimpeached.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  day  when  it  was  delivered  in  Boston,  it  was  repeated
at  the  church  of  the  late  Dr.  Prince  in  Salem.  Of  its  delivery  upon  this  latter  occasion,  it  is
recorded  that  "  in  that  compacted  audience,  there  were  several  present  who  had  witnessed
the  whole  career  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  from  earliest  childhood  to  the  lofty  summit  of  his  usefulness
and  fame ;  and  among  others.  Captain  Henry  Prince,  under  whose  command  he  had  performed
his  four  first  voyages ;  "  —  and  it  is  added  that  "  it  was  a  striking  evidence  of  the  sincere  and
deep  sympathy  of  the  audience  in  the  commendations  bestowed  by  the  preacher  upon  the

MEMOIR.  109

uniform  and  unqualified  is  the  testimony  given  respecting  the
value  of  his  diversified  labors  and  services.  Beautifully  has  one
of  his  eulogists*  said,  *' The  world  has  been  the  wiser  and  the
happier  that  he  has  lived  in  it/'  And  his  death  was  announced
in  one  of  the  public  journals,!  with  but  the  following  brief
comment :  "  A  star  has  fallen."  Connected  with  so  many
different  classes  of  society,  he  seemed,  as  he  walked  through  the
streets,  constantly  to  meet  an  acquaintance  or  a  friend.  None
were  so  high  that  they  did  not  feel  themselves  honored  by  his
notice,  and  none  so  humble  as  to  be  beneath  it.  The  little  child
on  its  way  to  school  was  often  arrested  by  some  kind  inquiry
from  one  who  had  been  prepossessed  by  its  sweet  or  intelligent
countenance,  and  detained  by  a  dialogue  which  ended  in  a  kiss,
or  some  other  act  of  endearment ;  and  virtuous  age  ever  received
his  reverence.  The  Chief  Magistrate  of  the  Commonwealth,
with  friendly  sympathy,  was  present  at  those  simple  funeral  rites
by  which  we  felt  that  the  deceased  would  be  most  appropriately
honored ;  and  one  in  humble  life,  who  was  to  us  a  stranger,
asked  permission  to  take  a  last  look  at  his  lifeless  remains,
"because  he  had  known  Dr.  Bowditch  and  loved  him."

character  and  merits  of  the  departed,  that,  after  the  discourse  was  finished,  though  large
numbers  of  them  had  been  standing  for  three  hours,  they  continued  in  the  church  to  listen  to
the  dirge  commencing  with  the  unrivalled  lines,  —

*UnTeiI  thy  bosom,  faithrul  tomb;

Take  this  new  treasure  to  thy  trust,
And  five  these  sacred  relics  room
To  slumber  in  thy  silent  dust*"

*  Mr.  Young.  t  National  Intelligencer,  March  21,  1838.

VOL, IV.  C  C

no  MEMOIR.

But  for  his  residence  in  Boston,  Dr.  Bowditch  would  never
have  possessed  the  means  of  publishing  this  work  at  his  own
expense  ;  and  notwithstanding  all  his  daily  duties  and  occasional
labors  above  described,  during  his  residence  here,  and  the
performance  of  multiplied  good  offices  to  individuals  as  before,
and  by  which,  in  the  aggregate,  almost  as  much  service  was
rendered  to  society  as  by  his  more  public  efforts,  —  he  also  found
the  leisure  which  he  needed  for  this  the  last  great  undertaking
of  his  life.*  The  estimated  cost  of  publishing  the  five  volumes
exceeded  twelve  thousand  dollars,  and  was  equal  to  one  third
of  all  his  property  at  that  time.  To  this  undertaking,  involving
so  much  expense  and  labor,  he  was  strongly  urged  by  his  wife,
who  assured  him  of  her  willingness  to  make  any  sacrifice  which

*  The  first  volume  was  published  in  the  year  1829,  the  second  in  1832,  and  the  third
in  1834.  These  three  volumes  were  from  the  press  of  Isaac  R.  Butts.  The  fourth  volume,
from  page  684,  has  been  stereotyped  at  the  Boston  Type  and  Stereotype  Foundry.  If  Dr.
Bowditch  had  lived,  he  would  probably  have  stereotyped  all  the  others.  Connected  with  the
publication  of  this  work,  may  be  mentioned  two  anecdotes  exhibiting  a  trait  of  character  in
the  translator  which  has  been  before  alluded  to.  Robert  W.  Macnair,  whose  name  is  afSxed
to  the  second  volume  as  a  compositor,  was  one  with  whose  accuracy,  neatness,  and  assiduity,
Dr.  Bowditch  was  always  much  pleased  ;  and  he  was  gratified  to  find  that  he  felt  such  a
pride  in  the  appearance  of  the  volume,  as  the  result,  in  part,  of  his  own  manual  dexterity,
that  he  wished  the  fact  of  his  agency  in  preparing  it  to  be  thus  always  known.  Dr.
Bowditch,  on  learning  his  death,  (which  took  place  after  a  short  illness,  February  27,  1833,)
expressed  to  his  widow  his  sympathy  for  her  loss,  and,  notwithstanding  her  husband  had
been  employed  and  paid  by  another,  gave  her  at  parting  the  sura  of  fifty  dollars,  as  an
acknowledgment  of  the  zeal  and  fidelity  which  had  been  shown  in  his  service.  And
during  his  own  last  illness,  he  told  his  children  that  with  the  printers  and  publishers  of  this
work  he  wished  them  "  to  deal  liberally."  And  when,  after  his  death,  this  circumstance
was  communicated  to  them,  they  said,  "  It  is  like  him ;  he  always  acted  so  towards  us
while  living."

MEMOIR.  Ill

it  might  render  necessary.*  She  knew  that,  in  the  event  of  his
death,  he  had  made  her  his  sole  legatee.  But,  like  himself,  she
valued  money  only  as  a  means  of  attaining  desirable  ends.  And
to  what  more  noble  or  worthy  purpose  could  it  possibly  be  applied  1
She  did  not  live  to  see  the  publication  completed,  though  she  found
the  reward  of  her  advice,  in  those  high  terms  of  commendation
with  which  each  successive  volume  was  mentioned  by  the  most
eminent  scientific  men  of  the  age,  in  this  and  in  foreign  countries,
and  in  the  constantly  increasing  fame  and  reputation  which  were
thus  gained  by  her  husband.  The  letters  of  this  description,
already,  in  part,  laid  before  the  reader,  the  wife  listened  to  as  to
the  sweetest  music,  for  they  contained  the  praises  of  one  dearer
to  her  than  herself.  And  so  deep  was  Dr.  Bowditch's  conviction
that,  but  for  her  disinterested  advice  and  urgent  solicitation,  the
publication  would  never  have  been  commenced,  that  he  prepared  a
dedication  of  the  work  to  her  memory.  This  document,  in  his
own  hand-writing,  manifesting,  as  it  does  throughout,  a  deep
feeling  of  affection,  he  had  always  preserved  ;  and,  during  his  last
illness,  he  gave  to  it  the  sanction  of  a  love  stronger  even  than
death,  by  enjoining  on  his  children  as  his  last  wish,  that  they
should  prefix  it  to  this  the  posthumous  volume  of  his  work,  and
thus  pay  a  public  tribute  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  their  mother.
Willingly  do  we  perform  this  sacred  duty.  It  is  indeed  fitting
that  they  who  in  life  were  inseparably  connected,  no  less  by  the
bonds  of  an  earthly  marriage,  than  by  the  more  intimate  union  of
mind  and  heart,  should  forever  remain  associated  in  the  memory

*  The  publication  was  indeed  decided  upon  in  a  family  conclave,  in  which  there  was
no  dissenting  voice.

112  MEMOIR.

of  every  reader  of  this  work,  as  those  to  whom  he  is  jointly  and
ahke  indebted  for  any  pleasure  or  profit  which  he  may  have
derived  from  its  perusal.

As  early  as  1826,  Dr.  Bowditch  first  perceived  in  his  wife  the
symptoms  of  that  fatal  disease  which  had  deprived  him  of  two
sisters,  and  which,  after  the  lapse  of  eight  years,  was  to  remove
from  him  a  still  nearer  friend.  At  intervals  during  this  period,
his  wife  enjoyed  her  usual  health,  and  her  accustomed  cheerfulness
never  deserted  her.  She  gradually  became  more  and  more  feeble.
Aware  of  her  situation,  and  resigned  to  it,  no  one  except  her
confidential  medical  adviser  heard  from  her  lips  those  convictions
of  her  approaching  end,  which  she  knew,  if  expressed  to  them,
would  send  sadness  to  the  hearts  of  her  husband  and  children.
They  were  not,  however,  deceived.  When,  a  few  days  before
her  death,  she  was  borne  in  a  chair  by  two  of  her  sons  into  that
library  where  she  ever  delighted  to  sit,  it  was  only  her  pale
countenance  and  debilitated  frame  which  told  us  —  and  they  did,
alas  !  tell  us  but  too  truly  —  that  soon  one  seat  would  be  vacant,
and  one  voice  silent,  in  that  assembled  household.  The  blow,
however,  fell  suddenly  and  heavily  at  last.  We  were  awakened
at  midnight,  and  told  that  the  fatal  hour  had  come.  To  him  who
first  reached  her  apartment  she  extended  her  hand,  and,  giving
to  his  a  gentle  pressure,  —  a  proof  of  consciousness  and  of  love,  —
she  murmured  a  few  words  so  feebly  that  they  did  not  reach  his  ear,
but  they  were  distinctly  heard  by  her  attendant :  "  My  dear,  you
have  come  to  bid  me  farewell."  She  died  also  in  the  presence
of  her  eldest  children.  The  unbroken  slumbers  of  the  youngest
left  them, for a  few  hours  longer,  happily  unconscious of  their

MEMOIR,  113

loss;  and  one  was  destined  to  learn  the  event  in  a  distant  land,
who  therefore  had  not  a  personal  knowledge  of  those  consoling
circumstances  wliich  a  brother's  pen  could  at  best  but  inadequately
describe.  It  was  truly,  as  the  historian  of  America  *  has  said,
when  speaking  of  a  similar  death-bed,  "  too  serene  for  sorrow,
too  beautiful  for  fear."  The  wish  which  she  had  often  expressed
had  been  granted.  She  died  before  her  husband,  April  17,  1834,
and  was  followed  to  the  tomb  only  by  those  few  whose  home  had
ever  been  gladdened  by  her  presence.!

Dr.  Bowditch  bore  this  heavy  calamity  as  a  Philosopher  and
a  Christian.  The  early  morning  witnessed  the  funeral  obse-
quies which  he  attended ;  and  that  forenoon  saw  the  Actuary  of
the  Life  Insurance  Company  engaged  in  his  usual  routine  of
business,  and  at  intervals  examining  the  proof-sheets  of  this
work,  upon  whose  progress  he  was  never  more  to  look  with
a  pleasure  heightened  by  her  participation ;  and  the  kindly
ministrations  of  time  were  aided  by  this  cheerful  discharge  of
duty,  and  by  this  devoted  pursuit  of  science,  till  he  was  himself
summoned  to  receive  the  glorious  rewards  of  eternity.  To  the
stranger  he  appeared  as  he  had  ever  done  before.  To  his  friends
and  family  his  character  displayed  a  strength  and  grandeur  never
until then fully appreciated. Most deeply, however, did Dr.

•  George  Bancroft. See  his  History  of  the  United  States,  Vol.  I.  p.  388.

t  Trinity  Church,  in  Boston,  was  rebuilt  after  Dr.  Bowditch  removed  to  this  city ;  and
he  became  proprietor  of  one  of  the  new  tombs  constructed  beneath  it.  On  the  day  of  his
wife's  funeral,  he  executed  an  instrument  transferring  this  tomb  to  his  four  sons  in  trust,  as
the  future  burial-place  of  himself  and  his  descendants.  That  trust  has  already  been  fulfilled
towards  himself,  and  also  towards  a  granddaughter,  bom  subsequently  to  his  death.
▼OL.  IV.  d  d

114  MEMOIR.

Bowditch  feel  this  loss ;  and  sometimes,  particularly  during  his
own  last  illness,  he  alluded  to  it  with  much  sensibility.  His
countenance,  after  her  death,  exhibited,  more  frequently  than
before,  a  degree  of  thoughtfulness  sometimes  amounting  almost
to  sadness.  Indeed,  he  frequently  stated  to  his  children,  though
the  fact  may  not  have  been  apparent  to  the  public,  or  even  to  his
friends,  that  though  life  had  still  many  charms  for  him,  it  had  lost
forever  what  he  had  always  regarded  as  its  brightest  attraction.
And  we  felt  that  this  event  had  devolved  upon  us  additional  duties
of  filial  tenderness  and  regard  towards  him  who  had  been  so
severely  bereft.

The  various  other  incidents  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  life,  during  his
residence  in  Boston,  which  led  to  the  display  of  his  peculiar
talents  and  virtues,  were  few  of  them  so  conspicuous  and
remarkable  as  to  be  especially  deserving  of  selection,  though
scarce  one  can  be  mentioned  which  would  not  add  greater
clearness  to  the  reader's  previous  impressions.  He  one  day
fearlessly  seized  a  carman  who  was  cruelly  beating  a  horse,  and
obliged  him  to  desist  by  the  mere  alarm  which  his  vehement  and
indignant  manner  inspired,  though  in  bodily  strength  wholly  his
inferior.  When  Lafayette  visited  this  country,  Dr.  Bowditch
found  himself,  he  hardly  knew  how,  in  the  street  near  his  chariot
wheels ;  and  amid  the  acclamations  of  the  multitude,  he  too
waved  his  hat  and  joined  his  voice  to  the  praises  of  a  virtuous
and  honorable  life,  which  were  then  spontaneously  rising  from
countless  numbers  of  grateful  citizens.

When a  Roman Catholic school,  in  the adjoining town of

MEMOIR.  115

Charlestovvn,  occupied  by  defenceless  females/  was  attacked  at
night,  and  its  frightened  inmates  dispersed  by  the  imprecations
and  torches  of  a  band  of  deluded  fanatics,  he  felt  indeed  that
the  fair  fame  of  the  state  had  received  a  deep,  if  not  an  indelible
stain,  and  that  the  same  town  which  is  memorable  as  the  scene
of  the  first  of  freedom's  battles  in  modern  times,  would  also
exhibit  a  monument  of  the  most  ruthless  violation  of  private
rights.  He  most  openly  expressed  his  abhorrence  of  this  act,
and  calling  upon  the  Bishop,  whose  church  and  residence  almost
adjoined  his  own,  said  to  him,  "  Though  our  forms  of  worship
are  the  most  opposite  and  widely  separated  of  all  the  creeds  by
which  the  Christian  church  has  ever  been  divided,  upon  this
ground  I  make  common  cause  with  you.  This  act  has  awakened
me  from  a  pleasant  dream  of  security,  and  shown  to  me  that  the
fanaticism  of  one  class  of  this  our  orderly  community,  if  it  had
the  power,  would  not  want  the  will,  to  attack  with  fire  and  sword
all  those  whose  peculiar  modes  of  faith  or  religious  institutions
should  happen  to  excite  suspicion  or  incur  hatred."  And  he
at  the  same  time  gave  him  a  small  sum  toward  the  immediate
relief  of  those  whom  the  fiames  had  deprived  of  the  necessaries  of
life.  In  recollection,  doubtless,  of  this  incident,  the  bells  of  the
Catholic  church  were  prevented,  by  orders  from  the  Bishop,  from
being  rung  during  Dr.  Bowditch's  last  illness,  —  although  it  was
at  the  season  of  Lent,  —  "  that  the  last  days  of  a  good  man
might  not  be  disturbed."

*  The  immediate  cause  of  this  outrage  was  the  supposed  confinement  of  a  female
against  her  will ;  and  this  belief  was  chiefly  occasioned  by  the  popular  prejudice  against
Catholics,  convents,  and  nunneries.  ''i<>'»'n

U6  MEMOIR.

Such,  indeed,  was  his  respect  for  the  law  of  the  land,  that,
when  he  had  but  a  few  days  to  live,  he  expressed  the  determination
to  make  the  effort  to  seethe  Governor  of  the  Commonwealth,  should
he  again  call  to  inquire  respecting  his  health,  that  he  might
assure  him  of  the  pleasure  he  felt  at  a  recent  act,  by  which
he  considered  the  law  to  have  been  suitably  vindicated  ;  namely,
the  disbanding  of  certain  military  companies,  for  an  open  violation
of  discipline  on  a  day  of  public  parade.  The  interview  accord-
ingly took  place.

The  existence  of  domestic  slavery  in  the  Southern  States  of
the  Union  is  a  subject  of  so  much  importance,  and  its  discussion
has  been  the  source  of  so  much  excitement  in  the  community,
that  it  may  perhaps  be  proper  briefly  to  state  Dr.  Bowditch's
views  in  regard  to  it.  Considering  slavery  to  be  one  of  the
greatest  of  moral  evils,  his  whole  principles  and  sympathies  were
on  the  side  of  the  oppressed.  He  scorned  the  selfish  and  timid
considerations  by  which  many  were  led  to  refrain  from  or  to
check  the  free  discussion  of  its  character  and  tendency.  It  was,
however,  a  subject  upon  which  he  thought  and  acted  for  himself.
The  blacks  he  regarded  as  a  race  of  men  naturally  less  intelligent
than  the  whites ;  and  he  believed  that  their  present  servile  condition
had  so  degraded  them,  that  an  immediate  emancipation,  extorted
from  the  slaveholders,  while  it  would  find  the  slaves  ill  fitted  for
self-government,  would  also  prevent  the  experiment  from  having
that  fair  chance  of  success,  which  would  be  afforded  by  a  cordial
cooperation  of  their  former  masters.  He  would  gladly  have  seen
a  national  debt,  even  of  immense  magnitude,  voluntarily  incurred
for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  this  object,  and  at  the  same  time

MEMOIR.  117

indemnifying  the  slaveholders,  and  thus  securing  to  the  slaves
their  aid  and  good-will.  Indeed,  under  the  original  compact  made
between  the  several  states,  he  did  not  think  that  the  moral  right
existed  in  the  free  states  to  attempt  to  compel  the  emancipation
of  the  slaves  without  making  such  compensation.  And  though
Congress  has  exclusive  jurisdiction  within  the  District  of  Columbia,
he  did  not  think  that,  even  there,  the  measure  of  the  immediate
abolition  of  slavery  should  be  introduced,  without  first  obtaining
the  consent  of  those  states  by  which  the  District  was  ceded  to  the
general  government.  He  had  the  greatest  horror  at  the  thoughts
of  the  proposed  annexation  of  Texas  to  this  Union,  and  was
delighted  with  Dr.  Channing's  pamphlet,  as  he  would  also  have
been  with  Mr.  Adams's  speech  in  Congress  upon  this  subject.  He
was  in  like  manner  utterly  hostile  to  the  admission  of  any  new
slave-holding  state  into  the  Confederacy.  He  often  said  that  he
never  wished  to  shake  hands  with,  or  even  to  see,  a  northern  man
who,  surrounded  by  free  institutions  at  home,  had  voted  for  any
extension  of  the  evils  of  slavery.  Such  a  person  he  deemed
rightly  characterized  as  one  of  the  "  white  slaves  of  the  north."
Though  he  did  not  himself  approve  of  all  the  views  and  measures
of  those  who  advocated  the  immediate  abolition  of  slavery,  he
admitted  that  no  great  moral  or  religious  revolution  had  ever  been
accomplished  except  through  the  agency  of  a  few  enthusiastic
and  excited  spirits,  whose  apparently  excessive  and  over-zealous
efforts  at  last  aroused  the  many  to  a  sound,  moderate,  and
successful  reformation  of  abuses.  Such  he  hoped  would  be  the
issue  of  the  like  efforts  in  the  present  instance.  He  considered
the  movement  begun  which  would  sooner  or  later  prove  fatal  to
this  institution.

VOL.  IT.  ee

118  MEMOIR.

Upon  one  occasion,  Dr.  Bowditch  was  introduced  by  a  friend
to  a  stranger,  who  had  heard  much  of  his  reputation,  and  was
obsequious  and  almost  servile  in  his  manner  of  addressing  him.
Dr.  Bowditch  replied  with  stateliness  and  reserve.  After  the
interview  was  ended,  the  stranger  said,  "  If  there  does  not  go
an  aristocrat,  there  never  was  one ; "  to  which  remark  the  friend
replied,  **  He  an  aristocrat !  I  care  not  how  many  such  we  have
among  us.  The  truth  is,  you  treated  him  as  one,  and  he  despised
you  for  your  cringing  manners,  and  want  of  a  proper  self-
respect."

At  the  time  when  Dr.  Bowditch  was  preparing  to  leave  forever
the  home  of  his  ancestors,  almost  his  last  act  had  been  to  repair
with  pious  reverence  the  dilapidated  monument  beside  which  he
had  seen  his  grandmother's  remains  deposited,*  and  beneath  which
reposed  the  ashes  of  all  her  relatives  of  many  former  generations
—  the  tomb  of  John  Turner.  In  September,  1835,  the  board
whose  peculiar  province  it  was  to  take  care  of  the  burial-grounds
of  Salem,  finding  several  tombs  out  of  repair,  advertised  them  for
sale,  and  unceremoniously  ejected  the  remains  of  some  who,  in
their  day,  had  been  Salem's  greatest  benefactors.  The  act  was
at  first  the  result  of  a  want  of  due  consideration  in  two  or  three

*  Dr.  Bowditch  often  mentioned  that  his  grandmother,  on  her  death-bed,  refused  to  be
buried  in  this  tomb,  saying  that,  many  years  before,  at  the  funeral  of  one  of  the  family,  a
mourner  took  up  her  father's  skull,  and  holding  it  before  her,  said,  "  This  is  the  skull  of  an
Indian  warrior."  She  seemed  to  have  a  prophetic  dread  of  the  possibility  of  the  outrage
subsequently  to  be  committed,  and  preferred  that  her  remains  should  be  consigned  to  the
safer  custody  of  her  parent  earth.

"i  ^  .VI .J07

MEMOIR.  119

individuals,  members  of  this  board ;  but  finding  themselves  actually
committed  by  it  so  far  that  they  could  not  retract,  they  induced
their  associates  officially  to  adopt  and  defend  the  measure.  The
tomb  in  question  was  thus  violated.  Dr.  Bowditch  was  indignant
at  an  act  which  was  alike  revolting  to  his  private  feelings,  at
variance  with  every  dictate  of  humanity  and  civilization,  and
which,  if  acquiesced  in,  would  be  a  permanent  public  disgrace
to  the  city  which  he  loved.  He  headed  an  address  to  that  board,
and  subsequently  one  to  the  selectmen.  The  public  press
was  loud  in  its  denunciations  of  the  act.  The  board  reconsidered
their  decision.  None  indeed,  apparently,  at  last  regretted  it  more
sincerely  than  themselves.  Dr.  Bowditch  said,  on  this  occasion,
that  had  the  act  been  rendered  necessary  for  the  promotion  of
any  public  object,  he  would  have  cheerfully  surrendered  his  own
private  wishes  to  the  interests  of  the  community.  Accordingly,
when,  a  short  time  afterwards,  the  city  authorities  of  Boston
wished  to  lay  out  an  avenue  or  public  walk  through  one  of  the
burial-grounds,  —  and  had  met  with  such  sincere  and  vehement
opposition  from  two  or  three  individuals,  whose  relatives  were
there  buried,  that  a  useful  public  measure  was  in  danger  of  being
abandoned,  —  Dr.  Bowditch  waited  on  those  gentlemen,  and,
sympathizing  as  he  did  most  fully  in  all  their  feelings,  yet  wholly
succeeded  in  conquering  the  repugnance,  which  he  satisfied  them
ought  to  yield  to  other  and  higher  considerations.

Dr.  Bowditch  was  in  person  under  the  common  size.  His
hair,  originally  of  a  light  color,  was  entirely  gray  at  the  age  of
twenty-one  years,  and  gradually  became  of  a  silvery  whiteness.
His  high  forehead,  bright  and  penetrating  eye,  open  and  intelligent

120  MEMOIR.

countenance,  are,  we  think,  accurately  shown  in  the  annexed
engraving ;  though  the  changes  which,  with  the  rapidity  of
hghtning,  passed  across  those  expressive  features,  as  they  in
turn  exhibited  the  feehngs  of  benevolence,  or  the  most  intense
thoughtfulness,  —  at  one  moment  radiant  with  smiles,  and  at
another  dark  with  virtuous  indignation,  —  can  never  be  realized
but  by  such  as  have  themselves  seen  and  studied  there  the  outward
manifestation  of  all  that  was  most  excellent  and  beautiful  in  his
character.  His,  indeed,  was  a  face  never  to  be  forgotten.
Intellect  there  altogether  predominated  over  sense.

He  always  possessed  great  bodily  activity,  and  late  in  life  he
might  often  be  seen  running  along  or  across  the  streets  with  as
much  quickness  as  in  youth.  In  his  daily  walks,  indeed,  he
seemed  constantly  eager  to  outstrip  all  his  competitors.  He
was  very  methodical  in  his  habits  of  exercise,  seldom  walking
less  than  five  or  six  miles  each  day.  He  fully  appreciated
the  importance  of  this  practice  to  a  person  of  sedentary  pursuits.
Throughout  the  summer,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  driving  with
a  horse  and  gig  eight  or  ten  miles  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  during
one  or  more  seasons,  he  mounted  his  horse  and  rode  before
breakfast.*

*  He  always  drove  with  great  rapidity.  A  friend,  who  was  riding  at  a  very  moderate
rate,  was  once  passed  on  the  road  by  him,  and  when  they  next  met  said,  "  You  whisked  by
me  like  the  tail  of  a  comet."  At  another  time,  a  person  called  upon  one  of  Dr.  Bowditch's
sons,  and,  after  a  few  remarks  upon  the  furious  mode  in  which  some  young  men  were  in  the
habit  of  driving,  demanded  of  him  compensation  for  a  slight  injury  which  had  been  thus
occasioned,  as  he  believed,  by  him.  The  supposed  youthful  offender  proved  to  be  Dr.
Bowditch  himself,  by  whom,  however,  the  blame  of  the  accident  was  laid  wholly  upon  the

MEMOIR.  121

It  has  been  strikingly  said  of  him  that  **  he  was  a  live  man  /"  *
All  his  processes  of  body  and  of  mind,  all  his  thoughts,  all  his
actions,  were  full  of  life.  When  any  thing  pleased  him,  he  would
rub  his  face  with  his  hands,  or  rub  his  hands  together,  with  an
expression  of  the  most  free  and  unrestrained  delight ;  and  when
any  thing  displeased  him,  and  he  felt  excited  enough  to  determine
to  speak,  he  always,  as  he  said,  found  himself  upon  his  feet,
without  knowing  how  he  got  there ;  and  except  in  a  standing
position,  his  tongue  never  became  effectually  loosed.  On  such
occasions,  his  vehement  and  earnest  manner  was  most  impressive
in  its  eifect  upon  the  beholders,  and  it  truly  appalled  the  individual
against  whose  unjustifiable  opinions  or  conduct  his  censures  were
directed.!

other  party.  He  once  attended  Commencement  at  Cambridge  with  quite  a  spirited  horse,
and  in  the  evening  started  to  return  to  Salem.  His  horse,  however,  seemed  very  unwilling
to  move,  and  almost  insisted  upon  turning  into  the  yard  of  a  clergyman's  house  on  the  road.
Dr.  Bowditch  resorted  to  the  argument  of  the  whip,  and  at  last  reached  Salem,  after  a  drive
at  the  rate  of  about  three  or  four  miles  an  hour.  On  the  contrary,  a  country  clergyman,
who  had  also  attended  Commencement,  was  very  much  alarmed  at  the  rapidity  with  which
his  horse  carried  him  home,  and  at  his  impetuous  and  almost  ungovernable  movements.  The
double  mystery  was  easily  explained ;  and  when  the  clergyman  received  back  his  own  animal,
he  said,  "  I  am  delighted.  Dr.  Bowditch,  that  my  poor  beast  fell  into  such  good  hands.  If  the
mistake  had  happened,  as  I  was  afraid  it  had,  with  some  gay  young  collegian,  my  horse  would
have  been  terribly  beaten."  Dr.  Bowditch  said  that  his  conscience  smote  him  as  he  listened,
and  thought  how  little  cause  there  was  for  this  self-congratulation.

•  See  anecdote  in  Judge  White's  Eulogy,  p.  57.

t  It  has  been  observed  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  that,  "  though  no  *  rude  and  boisterous  captain
of  the  sea,'  there  may  have  been  occasions  when  a  happier  combination  would  have  been
produced,  had  the  same  measure  of  the  fortUer  in  re  been  blended  with  more  of  the  suaviter
m  modo."  {North  American  Review,  January,  1839.)  We  do  not  deny  that  such  instances
sometimes,  though  they  rarely  occurred.  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  a  conversation  with  his  eldest  son
VOL, IV.  //

122  MEMOIR.

Dr.  Bowditch  generally  enjoyed  excellent  health,  the  result,
beyond  doubt,  of  his  regular  and  temperate  habits.  At  the  age
of  thirty-five  years,  however,  his  life  was  considered  in  danger
from  the  disease  of  which,  at  that  precise  time,  (1808,)  his  two
sisters  were  dying.  He,  like  them,  was  attacked  with  the
alarming  symptom  of  bleeding  from  the  lungs.  Upon  this
occasion,  his  friend  Thomas  W.  Ward,  Esq.,  relinquished  all  his
own  engagements,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  invalid  during  a
journey  of  several  weeks.  As  they  were  leaving  an  inn  in  a
town  about  twenty  miles  from  Salem,  the  landlord  beckoned  to
Mr.  Ward,  and  asked  him  where  his  friend  lived,  and,  on  being
told,  advised  their  return,  in  the  apprehension  that  the  latter  could
not  even  live  to  reach  the  next  stage  in  their  intended  route.  By
the  invigorating  effect,  however,  of  the  exercise  thus  taken  in  the
open  air,  his  disorder  was  checked,  and  his  health  completely
reestablished.  Until  this  time,  he  had  never  tasted  wine.  It  was
then  prescribed  as  a  medicine.  When  a  young  man,  —  but  at
what  precise  age  is  not  known,  —  he  had  agreed  to  sit  up  with  a
friend  who  was  ill,  and,  being  unwilling that so much precious

upon  this  subject,  once  said,  "  There  is  a  gentleman  in  this  city,  (naming  him,)  who  possesses
such  courtly  manners,  that  he  can  utter  a  bitter  sarcasm,  or  express  profound  contempt,  in  the
most  mild  and  conciliatory  language.  Such,  however,  is  not  my  case.  If  1  am  obliged  to
measure  my  words,  or  even  to  think  the  least  about  them,  I  lose  the  substance  of  what  I
intended  to  say.  When  I  feel  that  I  cannot  remain  silent,  I  speak  —  and  in  such  terms  that
no  one  can  mistake  my  meaning.  But,  my  speech  being  ended,  the  whole  affair  is  over.  I
pour  out,  indeed,  the  contents  of  my  vial  of  wrath,  but  I  then  let  it  be  seen  that  it  is  left
empty."  And  though  it  is  certain  that  his  was  not  that  guarded  demeanor,  which,  upon  every
occasion  of  life,  prevents  the  utterance  of  a  word  which  it  may  be  desirable  to  recall,  it  is
also  certain  that  this  was  a  source  of  more  regret  to  himself  than  of  pain  to  others.

MEMOIR.  123

time  should  be  idly  spent,  he  passed  the  whole  night  in
mathematical  computations.  He  was  much  alarmed,  the  next
morning,  to  find  his  vision  obstructed  by  little  motes  or  specks
passing  before  him  in  grotesque  variety  and  constant  succession.
It  was  ascertained  that  he  had  taxed  his  eyes  beyond  their  powers,
and  it  was  two  years  before  he  was  able  again  to  use  them  freely.

Dr.  Bowditch  removed  to  Boston  a  few  months  before  the
necessary  arrangements  could  be  made  for  his  family  to  join
him  in  that  city.  Hardly  had  he  been  there  two  days,  when,
under  the  influence  of  a  disorder  to  which  he  had  never  till  then
been  subject,  he  fell  senseless  in  the  street.  It  happened  that
the  hospitable  mansion  of  the  same  friend,  to  whom,  as  just
stated,  he  had  before  been  so  much  indebted,  was  now  freely
offered  him  as  a  temporary  home.  Only  once  again  did  this
vertigo  cause  him  to  fall  in  a  similar  manner ;  and  then  great
indeed  was  the  consternation  excited  in  his  family  as  they
perceived  a  crowd  approaching  bearing  his  apparently  lifeless
body,  while,  from  a  wound  in  his  head,  blood  was  flowing
profusely.  A  tendency  to  this  species  of  attack,  however,  always
continued.  But,  ascertaining  that  it  was  brought  on  by  exercise
immediately  after  eating,  and  that  it  was  always  carried  off*  by
sitting  down  and  resting  a  few  minutes,  he  avoided  its  exciting
cause,  and  thus  never  experienced  any  subsequent  ill  effect  from
it.  It  was  rarely,  however,  after  this,  that  he  walked  alone.  And
often,  when  attended  by  one  of  his  sons,  has  he  stopped  to  look  in
at  the  window  of  some  shop  which  they  were  passing,  or  even
walked  in,  and  asked  for  a  seat,  because  he  felt  the  sure  indications
of  approaching  danger. He  well  knew  the  delicate  organization

124  MEMOIR.

of  human  life,  upon  which  depend  aUke  all  the  functions  of  the
body  and  of  the  mind,  and  he  often  expressed  his  surprise  that
what  seemed  so  fragile  should  yet  be  able  to  resist  so  much.  One
of  his  favorite  quotations,  indeed,  was  that  of  the  beautiful  lines
by  Watts  —

"  Strange,  that  a  harp  of  thousand  strings
Should  keep  in  tune  so  longl"

And  it  should  ever  be  remembered  that  the  publication  of  this
work  was  commenced  after  he  knew  that  he  could  no  more
expect  the  robust  and  fearless  health  of  his  youthful  days.

Dr.  Bowditch  always  continued  his  habits  of  early  rising.
He  greeted  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun  of  summer  as  they  first
entered  his  library,  and  by  hours  of  study  anticipated  its  tardy
beams  in  the  winter.  Often  has  he  been  heard  to  exclaim,  as  it
then  first  met  his  eye,

"  See,  from  ocean  rising,  bright  jflames  the  orb  of  day  1 "

with  as  much  enthusiasm  as  at  that  period  of  his  life  when  he  had
made  the  same  glorious  luminary  his  guide  over  the  trackless  deep.

The  following  may  not  be  uninteresting  as  a  strictly  accurate
description  of  each  day  of  his  life,  for  all  the  period  of  his
residence  in  Boston  :  *  —  He  had  formerly  been  in  the  habit  of
walking  before  breakfast,  but  during  this  period  he  breakfasted
immediately  after  rising,  in  the  winter  by  candle  light,  and
always  before  the  rest  of  his  family. He  then  applied  himself  to

*  See  the  similar  account,  drawn  up  by  us  at  the  request  of  Judge  White,  and  printed  in
the  notes  to  his  Eulogy,  p.  70,  &c.

MEMOIR.  125

mathematics,  gaining  from  two  and  a  half  to  three  hours'  study ;
afler  which  he  walked  about  a  mile  and  a  half,  attended  by  one
of  his  sons,  and  commenced  the  business  of  the  day  at  his  office
a  few  minutes  afler  nine  o'clock.  There  also,  as  has  been  stated,
mathematics  was  the  occupation  of  all  the  moments  lefl  at  his
own  disposal.  He  frequently  walked  home  in  the  forenoon  for  a
few  minutes,  as  he  found  his  eyes  strengthened  and  refreshed  by
being  at  intervals  in  the  open  air  for  a  short  time.*  Every  day
at  two  o'clock  the  office  was  closed,  and  he  then  walked  as  before,
being  usually  accompanied  by  a  friend  who  still  lives  to  find
in  the  recollection  of  this  daily  intercourse  one  of  the  most  pleasing
reminiscences  of  the  past.  He  dined  at  a  quarter  before  three,
P.  M.  After  dinner  he  indulged  in  a  short  "siesta,"  which
lasted  from  fifteen  minutes  to  an  hour,  sometimes  even  longer.
He  always  awoke  bright,  and  prepared  to  recommence  his  studiei»,
which  he  pursued  for  about  an  hour  and  a  half  to  two  hours.
He  always,  near  the  close  of  the  afternoon,  went  to  his  office
again,  though  it  was  not  open  for  the  transaction  of  business,
to  see  if  any  thing  needed  his  attention  or  explanation  ;  and  in
the  latter  months  of  the  year,  he  was  frequently  detained  there  a
considerable  time.  He  then  walked  a  third  time,  usually  with
one  of  his  sons,  and  returned  to  tea.  At  all  his  meals,  his  diet
was  perfectly  simple.  His  health  was  indeed,  latterly,  wholly
dependent  upon  the  observance  of  a  very  exact  and  particular
regimen. During  the  evening  he  continued  his  studies,  and  from

•  It  was  from  this  motive  that  he  performed  his  ablutions  as  regularly  and  frequently  as  tlie
most  pious  Mussulman.  A  basin  of  cold  water  was  as  habitually  resorted  to  by  him  upon
entering  or  leaving  his  house,  as  his  books  were  at  other  times.

VOL. IV.  gg

126  MEMOIR.

time  to  time  joined  in  conversation  with  his  family,  or  threw  aside
his  books  to  devote  himself  to  his  visiters  and  friends.  It  has  been
well  remarked,  that  ^'  you  never  saw  the  mathematician,  unless
you  inquired  for  him"  *  as  mathematics  was  a  topic  which  he
never  obtruded  upon  any  one.  He  had  other  and  most  abundant
resources  of  knowledge,  with  which  he  could  instruct  or  amuse.
He  always  expected  the  members  of  his  household  to  be  at  home  by
ten  o'clock.  The  house  was  then  closed,  and  he  usually  retired
between  ten  and  eleven.  There  is  no  doubt  that,  taking  the  whole
year  together,  he  got  as  much  as  six,  and  perhaps  eight  hours  a
day,  for  his  mathematics,  besides  the  time  devoted  to  his  business
and  other  pursuits.!

Dr.  Bowditch  was  never  fond  of  reading  works  upon  logic,
or  even  upon  moral  philosophy,  or  any  abstract  speculations  upon
the  nature  and  powers  of  the  soul.  He  felt  his  mind  perplexed
rather  than  enlightened  by  most  treatises  of  this  sort.  They
produced,  he  said,  upon  him  the  effect  described  by  Milton,  as
produced  upon  those  who

"reasoned  high
Of  providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and  fate,
Fixed  fate,  free-will,  foreknowledge  absolute ;
And  found  no  end,  in  wandering  mazes  lost."

Hefolt  that  he  was  a  free  and  an  accountable  agent,  and  he  did

*  Christian  Review,  September,  1838.

t  Astronomy  even  entered  somewhat  into  his  management  of  his  family.  Thus  his
children,  for  the  first  few  years  of  their  lives,  on  going  into  the  library  in  the  morning,  if  they
had  behaved  well  during  the  preceding  day,  received  three  dots  on  the  arm  from  his  pen,
which  he  called  "  the  Belt  of  Orion."

MEMOIR.  127

not  care  to  analyze  very  nicely  the  source  of  this  feeling.  He  also
considered  the  time  spent  in  reading  most  works  of  imagination
unprofitahly  employed.  lie  preferred  history  and  biography.
BoswcU's  Johnson  delighted  him.  Raynal's  History  of  the  Indies
he  read  in  early  life  with  great  interest,  and  he  never  forgot  its
facts  or  its  peculiarities  of  style.  The  Eloges  of  Cuvier  he
regarded  as  master-pieces.  There  was,  indeed,  hardly  a  striking
anecdote  of  any  of  the  eminent  men  of  the  present  and  of  former
times,  which  he  did  not  seem  to  have  gathered  up  in  the  course
of  his  miscellaneous  reading ;  and  his  excellent  memory  placed
them  constantly  at  his  disposal.  He  mentioned  with  approbation
the  remark,  **  Why  read  any  thing  which  you  cannot  quote  1 "
Not  that  he  was  himself  ever  in  the  least  degree  pedantic,
or  ostentatious ;  but  only  because  he  valued  fact  far  before
fiction.

Of  late  years,  certainly,  his  reading  was  almost  exclusively
confined  to  mathematics.  He  owned  the  works  of  Scott,  which
he  highly  valued  for  their  true  delineations  of  nature,  and  for  their
freedom  from  the  immorality  which  characterizes  the  pages  of
some  of  the  earlier  novelists ;  but  he  rarely  indulged  himself  in  the
recreation  of  reading  even  his  works  of  fiction.  He  reserved
them,  as  he  said,  till  the  thermometer  stood  at  90°,  and  he  read
them  when  he  did  not  feel  the  energy  to  devote  himself  to  abstruse
studies.  His  recollection  of  the  characters  and  incidents  of  these
novels  was  remarkable.  He  would  dwell  with  delight  on  Jeanie
Deans,  and  oflen  recall  some  of  the  amusing  and  characteristic
scenes of  the Antiquary. The earlier volumes of Lockhart's

128  MEMOIR.

Life  of  Scott  had  been  republished  in  this  country  before  he  died,
and  he  had  read  them  with  avidity  and  dehght.  There  were
many  traits  in  the  character  of  Scott,  as  there  described,  which,
as  we  think,  greatly  resembled  his  own  ;  and  those  later  volumes,
which  carry  the  reader  with  a  saddened  interest  to  the  closing
scene  of  his  life,  and  which  Dr.  Bowditch  never  saw  himself,
spoke  to  us,  who  had  been  thus  recently  bereaved  of  a  parent  in
every  respect  equally  entitled  to  our  love,  with  a  peculiar  pathos.
We  had  seen  the  same  lofty  virtues  displayed  through  many  years,
which  invested  the  poet's  death-bed  with  its  high  moral  interest ;
and  we  actually  beheld  the  euthanasia  which,  though  mentioned
by  Scott,  we  fear  he  was  himself  hardly  able  fully  to  realize ;  and
many  of  the  precise  expressions  which  had  fallen  from  the  dying
lips  of  the  one,  had  been  also  used  by  the  other.  —  The  works  of
Byron,  on  the  contrary.  Dr.  Bowditch  never  admitted  into  his
library ;  and  many  years  ago  he  owned  a  small  French  work,  in
four  volumes,  which  had  been  presented  to  him  during  one  of  his
voyages,  but  which  was  not  a  book  of  very  exemplary  morality.
It  had  engravings  which  attracted  the  notice  of  one  of  his  sons,
when  he  had  begun  to  study  French.  Soon  after,  the  books
disappeared :  Dr.  Bowditch  had  burned  them,  though  he  had  kept
them  many  years  on  account  of  the  donor,  and  the  really  beautiful
execution  of  the  work.  He  subscribed  to  very  many  periodicals,
and  by  glancing  his  eye  over  them  cursorily,  he  seemed  to  find
out  what  articles  were  worth  a  careful  perusal,  and  made  himself
master  of  whatever  was  important.

He  used  playfully  to  denominate  as  "  the  poet's  corner "  that

MEMOIR.  129

part  of  his  library  where  were  to  be  found  Shakspeare,  Pope,
Milton,  Sec. ;  *  and  it  is  quite  a  remarkable  fact,  that  upon  the
inside  of  the  two  leather  covers,  in  which  he  kept  the  proof-sheets
of  this  work  while  in  the  process  of  publication,  and  which  were
therefore  constantly  before  him,  he  had  entered  in  his  own  hand-
writing extracts  from  Burns*s  "  Cotter's  Saturday  Night,"  and  the
following  stanza  of  Hafiz,  the  Persian  poet,  as  given  by  Sir
William  Jones :  —

"On  parents'  knees,  a  naked,  new-bom  child,
Weeping  thou  sat'st,  whilst  all  around  thee  smiled.
So  live,  that,  sinking  in  thy  last,  long  sleep.
Calm  thou  mayst  smile,  whibt  all  around  thee  weep."

So  likewise  there  and  in  his  Newton's  Principia,  we  find  copied
by  him  verses  of  Voltaire  and  other  French  writers  in  honor
of  that  illustrious  author.f  Among  the  poets  of  America,  Bryant
was  his  favorite.  He  has  often  said  that  he  thought  **  The  Old
Man's  Funeral "  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  poetical  pieces  in
the  English  language.  Never  can  it  be  hereafter  perused  by  us
without  recalling  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  touching  scenes
at  the close  of  his  own  life. Dr.  Bowditch  often  delighted to

*  He,  a  few  years  ago,  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  having  been  tempted  to  read  Milton
at^n,  by  the  beauty  of  a  new  Boston  edition  of  that  author.  —  Mr.  Young's  Eulogy y  p.  81.

f  Upon  these  covers  he  had  also  written  the  mottoes, "  Ohne  Hast,  ohne  Rast,"  (Goethe j)
and  "  Ne  tentes  aut  perfice; "  with  extracts  from  Virgil,  Ovid,  Lucretius,  Halley,  Cumberland,
Bolingbroke,  and  Charles  Lamb.  Among  the  lines  quoted  from  Voltaire  are  the  following
upon  "  The  Academicians  who  measured  the  Earth  in  Lapland : "  —

**  Votu  avez  rochcrcM  dans  ces  Iteux  pleins  d^enouif
Ceque  Newton  corniut  noa  aorter  de  chex  lui.'*

VOL.  IV.  h  h

130  MEMOIR.

quote  the  stanzas  "  On two Swallows that flew  into  a  Church
during  divine  Service,"  commencing,

"  Gay,  guiltless  pair,
What  seek  ye  from  the  fields  of  heaven  ?

Ye  have  no  need  of  prayer,
Ye  have  no  sins  to  be  forgiven."

The  author*  was  his  friend,  and he  deemed  that  Boston  might
well  be  proud  to  own  him  as  her  son.

Dr.  Bowditch  was  fond  of  music,  and  when  young  played  a
good  deal  on  the  flute  ;  but  he  soon  abandoned  it  altogether,  as
leading  to  an  unprofitable  employment  of  time,  and  the  formation
of  bad  habits.  For  the  same  reasons,  he  through  life  altogether
abstained  from  the  use  of  tobacco  in  any  of  its  forms,  and  never
played  at  any  game  of  cards.  Chess  he  also  avoided,  as  not
affording  any  relaxation  of  body  or  mind,  and  as  leading  to  no
useful  or  practical  object.  Dr.  Bowditch  was  rarely  induced  to
pass  an  evening  at  the  theatre.  Fictitious  representations  of  life,
either  under  tragic  or  comic  aspects,  always  left  upon  his  mind
a  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  with  its  realities.  But  when  he  did  go
to  hear  some  popular  actor,  his  laugh  was  more  loud  and  cordial,
or  the  starting  tear  betrayed  itself  more  readily,  than  if  this  had
been  an  excitement  to  which  he  was  more  habituated.  Much  as
he  was  gratified  by  the  sight  of  innocent  hilarity,  he  did  not  feel
at  home  in  the  ball-room  or  crowded  assembly.  He  seldom,  it
might  almost  be  said  never,  went  into  general  society,  but  nothing
contributed  more  to  his  happiness  than  a  familiar  intercourse  with
his  friends.

*  Charles  Sprague,  Esq.

MEMOIR.  131

Dr.  Bowditch  was  very  quick  in  his  judgments  of  character,
and  having  formed  his  opinion,  he  was  slow  to  change  it.  A
moral  failing  once  noticed  in  any  one,  he  always  associated  with
the  idea  of  that  individual ;  and  a  character  which  once  attracted
his  respect  and  love  he  ever  continued  to  regard  with  interest,
apparently  overlooking  the  slighter  blemishes  which  a  more  intimate
acquaintance  may  have  disclosed.  He  had  a  few  particular
friends,  in  whose  society  he  especially  delighted.  Thus  while  he
lived  at  Salem,  and  also  during  his  residence  in  Boston,  there
were  three  or  four  individuals  with  whom  he  associated  more  than
with  all  his  other  friends  and  acquaintance  together.  They  were
the  companions  of  his  daily  walks,  and  at  their  houses  almost
exclusively  he  made  his  evening  visits.

Dr.  Bowditch  showed  a  like  constancy  and  perseverance  in
any  course  of  life,  or  in  the  prosecution  of  any  measure  which  he
had  undertaken.  Deciding  only  after  due  deliberation,  he  acted
without  the  slightest  hesitancy  or  vacillation  of  purpose.  He
believed  fully  in  the  scripture,  "  Unstable  as  water,  thou  shalt
not  excel."  He  has  often  reproved  the  use  of  the  expression
"  I  can't  do  it ; "  saying,  **  Never  undertake  any  thing  but  with
the  feeling  that  you  can  and  tcill  do  it.  With  that  feeling  success
is  certain ;  and  without  it  failure  is  unavoidable."

Dr.  Bowditch*s  intercourse  with  his  family  was  entirely  free
and  unreserved.  No  feeling  of  restraint  was  ever  inspired  by  his
presence.  Among  his  children,  he  was  himself  a  child.  One
occasion  is  remembered,  when,  afler  partaking  with  them  in  some

132  MEMOIR.

frolic,  he  laughed  at  his  own  want  of  dignity,  and  proceeded
humorously  to  contrast  the  scene  around  him  with  a  description
of  the  formal  observances  and  requirements  of  past  times.
A  model  for  the  imitation  of  all  parents,  he  avoided  every  thing
calculated  to  interrupt  the  mutual  confidence  and  familiarity  which
existed  between  him  and  his  family.  Though  readily  granting  any
reasonable  favor,  he  was  never  weakly  indulgent.  Inculcating
by  precept  and  example  the  most  valuable  lessons  of  life,  affection
ever  prompted  and  directed  his  admonitions,  and  a  sound  judgment
always  controlled  the  impulses  of  affection.  The  censure  of  an
instructer  uniformly  brought  with  it  the  weight  of  a  father's
displeasure;  since  Dr.  Bowditch  never  weakened  the  authority
which  he  had  thus  delegated  to  another,  by  expressing  a  doubt
whether,  in  any  particular  instance,  it  had  been  judiciously
exercised.  He  devoted  much  of  his  own  time  (though  not  so
much  of  late  years  as  formerly)  to  the  instruction  of  his  children,
particularly  the  elder  ones  ;  his  chief  endeavor  being  to  awaken
in  them  a  taste  for  mathematics.  He  persuaded  one  of  his  sons
to  learn  French  when  very  young,  by  the  stimulus  of  a  small
compensation  for  the  translation  of  a  certain  number  of  pages.
The  result  satisfied  him,  however,  that  this  was  inexpedient.  The
best  works  in  the  language  were  read  before  they  could  be  duly
appreciated,  and  they  could  never  afterwards  be  read  with  the
interest  of  a  first  perusal.  His  experience,  also,  led  him  to
acquiesce  in  a  child's  pursuit  of  any  study,  though  comparatively
useless  in  itself,  if  voluntarily  undertaken,  and  prosecuted  with
ardor;  as  he  believed  that  it  might  be  attended  with  incidental
advantageous  results,  and  that  it  would  certainly  assist  in  forming
a  habit  of  industry.

MEMOIR.  133

If  a  predisposition  were  manifested  for  any  occupation  in  life,
the  father  candidly  stated  his  own  opinion,  and  enforced  his
views  hy  such  arguments  as  occurred  to  him,  hut  left  the  final
choice  of  his  child  free.  In  one  instance  of  this  kind,  he,  by
his  advice,  induced  the  adoption  of  a  profession  other  than  that
for  which  a  slight  preference  had  been  at  first  felt ;  while  in
another  case,  he  readily  yielded  at  last  his  own  wishes  to  the
strong  predilection  which  one  of  his  sons  manifested  for  a  seafaring
life ;  judging  wisely  in  both  cases.  He  often  spoke  of  the  feeling
of  independence  resulting  from  the  consciousness  that  one  is  able
to  maintain  himself  by  his  own  exertions,  saying  that  "  A  man
whose  capital  is  in  his  head  is  free  from  all  anxiety  about
investments,  and  has  a  much  more  certain  income  than  any  one
else."  He  early  impressed  upon  his  sons  the  necessity  which  they
would  be  under  of  earning  their  own  livelihood,  and  he  regarded
it  as  a  most  fortunate  necessity.  One  of  his  eulogists  says,  "  He
would  not,  as  we  happen  to  know,  have  accepted  the  offer  of  a
fortune  for  one  of  his  sons,  at  the  risk  of  any  unpropitious  influence
upon  his  opening  mind  and  character."*

As  his  children  grew  up,  they  became  his  companions.  His
most  intimate  friends  were  those  who  day  by  day  met  around  his
own  fireside.  To  them  his  most  secret  tlioughts  were  disclosed,
except  only  in  those  cases  where  silence  was  a  duty  which  he
owed  to  others.  Each  of  his  children  may  well  apply  to  him
(as  was  indeed  done  by  one  of  them  who  communicated  in
a  letter  to  a  younger brother the information  of  his dangerous

•  Judge  White's  Eulogy,  p.  50.
VOL.  IV.  i  i

134  MEMOIR.

illness) the beautiful language in which Marcia speaks of

Cato :  —

"  Though  stern  and  awful  to  the  foes  of  Rome,

He  is  all  goodness,  Lucia — always  mild,
Compassionate,  and  gentle  to  his  friends ;
Filled  with  domestic  tenderness,  —  the  best.
The  kindest  father ! I  have  ever  found  him
Easy  and  good,  and  bounteous  to  my  wishes."

We  feel  assured  that  only  one  who  had  often  seen  Dr.  Bowditch
by  his  own  fireside,  could  have  penned  the  resolutions  received
after  his  decease  from  the  Faculty  of  a  neighboring  university,
(Yale  College,)  which  state  that  they  *'  respectfully  and  feelingly
sympathize  with  the  children  of  the  illustrious  deceased,  whose
memory,  justly  dear  to  the  country  which  he  honored,  is  cherished
still  more  affectionately  by  those  who  were  so  happy  as  to  call
him  then'  father."*

*  We  have  thought  that  the  reader  might  be  interested  in  the  following  remarks  of  Rev.
N.  L.  Frothingham,  D.  D.,  being  an  incidental  notice  of  the  death  of  Dr.  Bowditch,  in  a
discourse  delivered  at  the  First  Church  in  Boston,  on  Sunday,  March  25,  1838 :  —  "  We
need  not  wait  for  the  consummations  of  a  future  world,  to  see  that  the  righteous  spirit  is  more
than  a  match  for  death.  It  wins  the  victory  even  now.  The  eyes  of  the  public  have  been
turned,  within  a  few  days,  to  a  remarkable  instance  of  this  ;  and  they  will  long  remain  fixed
upon  so  serene  and  noble  a  spectacle.  A  great  man  has  been  struck  down  among  us.  A
good  man  has  gone  his  way  from  us.  His  was  a  mind  eminent  among  the  loftiest,  and  as
benignant  as  it  was  strong.  His  renown,  that  travelled  over  the  world,  was  the  least  portion
of  his  deserts.  His  unaffected  goodness  was  as  noble  as  his  genius.  His  character  was  as
striking  as  his  fame.  Who,  that  ever  saw  him,  forgot  him  ?  There  was  a  divine  stamp  set
upon  his  clear,  high  brow.  A  healthy  vigor  looked  out  of  his  cheerful  but  thoughtful  eyes.
He  was  in  the  midst  of  the  abstractest  science,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  busiest  interests,
at  the  same  time,  —  not  absorbed  by  the  one,  not  disturbed  by  the  other,  seeing  calmly  through

MEMOIR.  135

We  have  endeavored,  by  these  various  details,  to  lay  before  the
reader such facts and circumstances as  would  in  some  degree

both.  Strangers  might  well  turn  as  he  passed,  to  ask  who  he  was ;  and  his  most  intimate
firiends  would  feel  that  they  themselves  knew  of  him  but  the  half.

"  I  can  hardly  bear  to  hear  him  described  chiefly  as  an  Astronomer  or  a  Mathematician,  —
though  among  the  most  illustrious  that  have  lived,  —  he  was  so  honestly,  heartily,  bravely,
entirely,  a  man.  There  was  something  in  him  brighter  than  talent,  and  deeper  even  than  that
profound  knowledge  which  led  the  way  with  a  modest  silence  where  there  were  few  intellects
that  could  so  much  as  attend  him.  It  was  the  light  and  depth  of  a  true  soul.  While  he
demonstrated  the  subtlest  problems,  and  scaled  starry  heights,  he  displayed  the  simplest,  the
most  practical,  the  mast  engaging  worth.  It  was  an  instruction  to  behold  him.  All  the
affections  of  youthful  life  beamed  from  his  face.  His  feeling  was  as  keen  as  his  intelligence.
To  be  with  him  was  a  wholesome  delight ;  for  his  was  the  energy  and  the  very  inspiration  of
good  sense,  —  a  free,  natural,  unseducible  spirit,  playful  and  sublime.  He  was  full  of
humanity.  And  in  using  that  word,  I  do  not  understand  it  in  the  technical  sense  in  which  it  is
commonly  taken,  being  applied  often  to  the  weakly  charitable,  and  assumed  often,  as  if  it
were  exclusively  their  own,  by  visionary  schemers  and  itinerant  philanthropists.  But  I  mean
that  he  was  rich  in  the  elements  and  endowments  that  best  distinguish  our  nature  ;  wise
beyond  books ;  benevolent  without  theory,  or  feebleness,  or  parade ;  active,  affectionate,
manful ;  pursuing  his  way  without  fear  or  favor ;  poised  upon  himself,  and  seeming  to  be  lifted
by  a  calm  philosophy  above  all  tlie  groveling  interests,  and  fanciful  systems,  and  transient
fashk)ns,  and  heated  delusions  of  the  world.

*^  Alas,  that  such  a  one  should  be  withdrawn  in  the  midst  of  his  labors  and  glory !  But
that  *  alas  *  he  left  for  others  to  say.  For  himself,  it  was  neither  expressed  nor  felt.  He  left
life  as  cheerfully  as  he  had  traversed  it.  There  was  no  difference  between  his  last  days
and  those  which  had  gone  before  them,  but  that  they  were  still  more  admirable.  He  had
thought  as  a  philosopher.  He  showed  now  the  most  precbus  fruits  of  his  thought.  He
submitted  and  suffered  like  a  Christian  disciple.  He  expired  like  a  saint.  Such  a
*  euthanasia,'  as  he  himself  called  it,  with  notliing  but  peace  and  hope  in  it,  exhibits  the
full  power  of  Christian  principle.  It  ought  not  to  be  confined  to  the  knowledge  of  a  few,
and  cannot  be.  It  will  spread  as  far  as  his  name,  and  do  good,  as  his  studies  had  done
before."  —  MS.

136  MEMOIR.

enable  him  to  form  his  own  judgment  respecting  the  most  striking
peculiarities  which  marked  the  habits  and  character  of  Dr.
Bowditch.  We  thought  it  not  advisable  to  attempt  an  elaborate
analysis  of  what  we  felt  ourselves  incompetent  fully  to  measure
and  comprehend.  In  his  general  manners  he  was  affable  and
courteous,  social  in  his  feelings,  and  in  all  the  domestic  relations
most  kind  and  tender.  Crowned  with  the  honors  of  science,  he
retained  the  modesty  and  simplicity  of  a  child.  Endowed  with
the  highest  genius,  none  was  more  wholly  free  from  pride.
Frank,  open,  and  naturally  without  reserve,  he  could  yet  be
most  cautious  and  discreet.  No  less  ardent  than  steadfast  in  his
attachments ;  easily  seeing  and  sincerely  regretting  the  foibles
or  faults  of  his  friend,  he  yet  loved  him  still.  Having  a  boundless
extent  of  mental  and  moral  resources,  their  varied  display  gave
to  the  longest  intimacy  the  interest  of  a  recent  acquaintance.
With  a  benevolence  as  universal  and  as  active  as  ever  dwelt  in
the  heart  of  a  philanthropist,  his  treasures  of  knowledge  were
freely  imparted  to  the  world :  and  much  of  his  valuable  time,
and  of  the  small  earnings  of  his  honorable  industry,  w^as  devoted
with  judicious  and  unostentatious  liberality  to  the  promotion  of
the  happiness  and  welfare  of  others.  Holding  in  slight  estimation
the  services  which  he  thus  rendered,  he  manifested  a  lively  and
enduring  sense  of  kindness  received.  Quick  and  excitable,  indeed,
when  he  saw  the  occasion,  he  was  yet  most  placable  and  forgiving,
and  never  harbored  ill-will  for  a  moment.  The  occasional  indis-
cretions of  an  ardent  temperament  he  redeemed  by  displays  of  the
most  magnanimous  virtue.  Devoted  to  the  loftiest  speculations,  he
was  not  neglectful  of  the  most  trifling  and  minute  duty.  Undeterred
by  fear,  uninfluenced  by  any  prospect  of  advantage,  he  followed

MEMOIR.  lat

truth,  and  obeyed  conscience  ;  and  the  popular  clamor,  and  evert
the  coolness  of  some  whose  friendship  he  valued,  were  alike
unheeded.  He  possessed  an  energy,  promptness,  and  decision^
equal  to  every  emergency,  and  which  insured  success  in  each
undertaking.  He  endeavored  to  save  each  moment  of  time,  and
apply  it  to  the  uses  of  eternity.  Governed  by  the  highest  and
purest  motives,  the  most  distinguishing  and  beautiful  trait  of  his
character  was  his  perfect  integrity.  Never  was  he  more  truly
indignant  than  at  the  want  of  this  quality  in  others.  Any
thing,  indeed,  mean  or  dishonorable,  and  especially  any  thing
like  fraud,  equivocation,  or  falsehood,  always  received  his  sternest
rebuke.*  It  has  been  truly  said,  that,  in  questions  of  morals,
you  could  no  more  becloud  or  mystify  him  than  in  questions  of
quantity ;  that  whatever  he  saw  in  right  or  wrong,  he  saw  as
clearly  as  in  plus  or  minus;  and  that  he  carried  out  ^practical
obedience  to  whatever  he  believed,  alike  in  both  cases.f

On  January  Ist,  1838,  Dr.  Bowditch,  to  the  casual  observer,
seemed  likely  to  enjoy  many  more  years  of  health  and  strength.
Nor  had  he  himself  any  idea  that  his  brief  days  were  already
numbered.  To  a  female  annuitant  who  then  called  at  the  office
for  her  quarterly  payment,  he  said  he  felt  "  very  well ; "  but she

•  Thiw,  many  years  ago,  in  Salem,  one  of  his  sons,  at  a  female  school,  being  in  an
apartment  with  one  other  boy,  threw  a  ball  which  broke  a  mirror ;  and  his  comrade  advised
concealment.  He  was  so  much  pleased  when  his  son  told  the  truth  immediately  about  the
affiiir,  that,  though  he  was  then  obliged  to  live  with  rigid  economy,  and  the  payment  was
really  inconvenient  to  him,  he  bought  a  new  mirror,  and  expressed  far  ntore  pleasure  at  the
son's  peribmiance  of  so  high  a  duty  as  telling  the  truth,  than  he  did  regret  at  his  carelessness.

t  Christian  Review,  September,  1838.
VOL.  IV.  k  k

138  MEMOIR.

was  to  receive  her  next  payment  from  the  hands  of  a  stranger.
He  had  attained  the  precise  age  at  which  two  of  his  ancestors
had  been  called  to  the  tomb  ;  and  in  the  midst  of  this  apparently
perfect  health,  in  the  full  and  active  enjoyment  and  exercise  of  all
his  faculties  of  body  and  mind,  and  surrounded  by  so  much  to  make
life  desirable,  his  own  summons  came  to  quit  it.  He  received  it
with  the  calmness  of  a  Philosopher,  and  the  cheerfulness  of  a
Christian.  After  having  experienced  slight  pain  and  uneasiness
for  three  or  four  months,  about  the  end  of  December,  he  mentioned
his  symptoms  to  his  third  son,  —  a  physician,  —  who  wished  him
immediately  to  submit  to  his  prescriptions.  He  replied  that  he
had  not  then  leisure  to  be  ill;  that  the  affairs  of  the  Life  Insurance
Company  required  his  constant  attention  ;  and  that  he  could  not
put  himself  under  the  hands  of  the  doctors  until  after  the  payments
of  the  first  part  of  the  month  of  January  had  been  completed.
As  soon  as  possible,  however,  after  the  period  thus  mentioned,
his  son,  who  considered  the  symptoms  to  be  of  an  alarming
character,  persuaded  him  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  same  eminent
medical  adviser  and  friend,*  to  whose  attentions  his  mother  had
been  so  much  indebted  during  her  protracted  illness.  Almost
immediately  it  was  decided  that  the  disease  under  which  he  labored
was  a  tumor  in  the  abdomen,  of  a  dangerous  and  probably  a  fatal
character.  The  symptoms  rapidly  became  more  and  more  decided,
and  at  intervals  the  most  acute  pain  was  experienced,  lasting
sometimes  for  twenty  or  thirty  minutes,  and  from  which  relief
could  only  be  obtained  by  means  of  hot  applications.  His  stomach
now rejected all solid food,  and could only bear the slightest

*  James  Jackson,  M.  D., now President of  the American Academy of  Arts and
Sciences.

MEMOIR.  139

quantity  even  of  liquid,  and  sometimes  none  at  all.  Death  by
starvation  was  in  prospect.  A  general  debility  of  the  whole
system  was  the  unavoidable  consequence  of  the  small  degree  of
nourishment  which  he  was  able  to  take.  He  became  emaciated
to  a  degree  of  which  even  his  consulting  physician,  with  all
his  extensive  practice,  had  never  before  seen  an  instance.  The
disease  had  wholly  gained  the  mastery  over  his  body.  But
his  mind  seemed  to  acquire  strength  and  energy  as  the  crisis
approached.  He  was  fully  apprized  of  his  danger,  arranged  all
his  worldly  affairs,  and  executed  his  will  in  a  manner  with  which
he  expressed  himself  perfectly  satisfied.  He  continued  to  sit  in
his  library  part  of  each  day,  until  the  day  before  his  death,  when
he  for  the  first  time  was  unable  to  rise  from  his  bed.  He  rode
to  his  office  every  day  until  February  17,  not  quite  four  weeks
before  his  death.  It  was  an  elevating  spectacle  to  see  such  an
unconquerable  spirit  struggling  to  discharge  every  duty,  even
when  the  body  had  almost  refused  to  perform  its  functions,  and
when  death  was  most  legibly  written  upon  the  countenance.
Subsequently,  the  secretary  of  the  company,  by  his  desire,  came
each  day  to  his  house  with  such  papers  as  required  his  signature,
or  with  the  books  for  him  to  examine ;  and  as  lately  as  the  7th
of  March,  he  transmitted  to  the  company  whose  affairs  he  had  so
long  superintended,  the  complete  account  of  the  transactions  of
the  preceding  month,  drawn  up  as  usual ;  and  with  it  he  sent  a
farewell  communication,  which  he  had  dictated  and  signed.  In
this  he  states  that  his  declining  health  would  probably  make  it
the  last  which  he  should  ever  address  to  them,  and  takes  an
affectionate  leave  of  those  who  had  had  the  control  of  the
institution,  and of  those who  had been  associated  with him in

140  MEMOIR.

its  management.  He  also  alludes  to  the  length  of  time  during
which  the  institution  had  been  under  his  charge,  and  earnestly
commends  its  interests  "  to  that  Providence  which  had  seen  fit  to
bless  their  efforts  to  make  it  deserving  of  public  regard."  To  this
letter  he  received  a  most  affectionate  reply,  not  attested  as  an
official  act  by  the  secretary  of  the  company,  but  personally  signed
by  each  of  the  twelve  directors,  who  assured  him  in  the  strongest
terms  of  their  respect  and  regard,  of  their  conviction  of  the  value
of  his  past  services,  and  of  their  deep  and  sincere  sorrow  for  his
serious  illness.  The  promissory  note  upon  which  he  made  the
endorsement  before  mentioned,  has  upon  it  the  latest  specimen  of
his  hand-writing.

In  like  manner  he  continued  to  correct  the  proof-sheets  of  this
volume ;  and  within  a  week  of  his  death,  he  said  that  the  sheet
which  he  was  then  revising  contained  the  discussion  of  a  difficult
problem ;  that  M.  Poisson  thought  he  had  made  an  improvement
upon  the  method  of  the  author,  whereas  he  believed  he  had  shown
that,  on  the  contrary,  the  supposed  improved  method  was  fairly
deducible  from  that  of  La  Place  :  and  he  added,  "  I  feel  that  I
am  Nathaniel  Bowditch  still  —  only  a  little  weaker."  The  last
page  upon  which  his  eye  was  ever  to  rest,  was  the  thousandth,
though  no  part  of  the  volume  subsequent  to  the  six  hundred  and
eighty-fourth  page  has  received  that  final  revision  which  he  was
accustomed  to  bestow  upon  it,  after  the  friend  before  alluded  to
had  laid  before  him  the  list  of  typographical  errata,  which  he  had
discovered.* The  reader  will  therefore  pass  a  charitable  judgment

*  Whenever  one  hundred  and  twenty  pages  were  printed,  Dr.  Bowditch  had  them  bound

MEMOIR.  141

upon  this  latter  portion  of  the  volume.  Dr.  Bowditch  hoped  to
be  spared  to  finish  its  few  remaining  pages.  It  called  forth  the
last  efforts  of  his  powerful  intellect,  and  afforded  him  amusement
and  solace  almost  as  it  were  to  the  hour  of  death.

He  continued  to  take  a  lively  interest  in  all  such  passing
events  as  he  considered  to  have  an  important  bearing  upon  the
welfare  of  the  community.  He  was  able  to  see  a  few,  and  only
a  few,  of  his  most  valued  friends ;  and  he  conversed  with  them
and  with  his  family  upon  his  approaching  separation  with  the
utmost  resignation  and  calmness.  To  two  of  his  most  intimate
friends,  then  absent  in  Europe,  he  sent  a  message,  assuring  them
of  his  continued  attachment.  Throughout  his  illness  he  was  only
"  watched  by  eyes  that  loved  him."  The  kind  offices  of  others
were  not  needed.  Filial  hands  alone  ministered  to  his  wants ;
filial  hearts  alone  anticipated  his  wishes.  To  his  eldest  daughter,
as  she  stood  hour  after  hour  behind  his  chair,  or  beside  his  bed,
gently  rubbing  his  head  in  the  manner  which  had  ever  been
agreeable  to  him,  he  playfully  remarked  that  her  fingers  were  like
"  Perkins's  Tractors,"  and  that  the  process  itself  was  **  Terrible
Tractor ation."  He  said  of  her  to  one  of  his  sons,  "  I  feel
respecting  Mary  to-day,  as  I  did  the  day  when  she  was  born;"
and  to  the  inquiry  how  he  then  felt,  he  replied,  "  It  was  the
happiest  day  of  my  life,  for  I  then  first  had  a  little  daughter."

in  a  pamphlet  fomn,  and  sent  them  to  Professor  Pierce,  who,  in  this  manner,  read  the  work
ibr  the  first  time.  He  returned  the  pages  with  the  list  of  errata,  which  were  then  corrected
with  a  pea  or  otherwise  in  every  copy  of  the  whole  edition.

VOL. IV.  I  I

142  MEMOIR.

He  once  said  to  her  in  a  smiling  manner,  "You  seem  to  my
eyes  to  be  forty  years  old.  This  expression  in  itself  may  not
be  flattering  to  you  ;  but  I  mean  by  it,  that  you  have  compressed
the  services  of  many  years  into  the  brief  period  of  my  illness."
And  one  day,  as  he  was  examining  his  papers,  and  burning  those
he  thought  of  no  value,  he  met  a  copy  which  he  had  made  several
years  before  of  those  beautiful  lines  in  Scott's  Marmion  —

"  O  woman,  in  our  hours  of  ease,
Uncertain,  coy,  and  hard  to  please,
And  variable  as  the  shade
By  the  light,  quivering  aspen  made.
When  pain  and  anguish  wring  the  brow,
A  ministering  angel  thou  ! "

This  he  handed  to  her,  saying  that  of  the  compliment  contained  in
the  two  last  lines  she  was  certainly  deserving.  *

With  no  less  assiduity  did  his  younger  daughter  delight  to
discharge  such  kind  offices  as  did  not  require  the  greater  skill
and  experience  possessed  by  her  elder  sister  ;  and  he  who  of  late
years  had  always  assented  to  her  request  to  be  the  companion
of  his  noon-day  walk  upon  the  Sabbath,  and  who  indeed  had
always  regarded  her  with  peculiar  tenderness  as  the  child  of  his

*  During  his  illness,  he  examined  and  burned  very  many  papers ;  and  after  his  death,
it  was  found  that  he  had  probably,  in  this  manner,  and  at  this  time,  destroyed  all  the
correspondence  between  himself  and  his  wife  before  and  after  marriage ;  and  also  a  manuscript
folio  volume,  in  about  seventy  pages  of  which  his  eldest  son  had,  several  years  before,  recorded
the  details  of  his  early  life,  as  taken  down  from  his  own  lips,  and  which  volume  had  been  left
in  his  library  that  the  narrative  might  be  continued  from  time  to  time.

MEMOIR.  143

old  age,  now  made  a  like  affectionate  return  for  these  her  efforts
to  please  him.  His  eldest  son  he  once  addressed  in  the  language
of  Scripture,  "  My  first-born,  my  beloved."  He  employed  him  to
draf\  his  will,  and  all  his  various  letters  and  other  documents.
His  second  son  attended  to  his  requests  in  regard  to  all  matters
of  business,  and  the  arrangement  of  his  pecuniary  affairs.  He
was  particularly  desirous  to  discharge  all  his  debts,  however
trifling,  before  he  died,  or  to  leave  the  means  for  their  instant
discharge  afterwards.  To  this  son  he  mentioned,  the  day  before
his  death,  a  female,  of  whose  little  concerns  he  had  always  taken
care,  and  said  to  him,  **  I  wish  you  to  call  upon  her  before  you
visit  any  one  else,  (ifter  attending  my  funeral^  and  inform  her
that  I  have  transferred  her  to  your  charge,  and  that  you  will
supply  my  place  to  her  through  life."  His  two  eldest  sons  no
longer  resided  under  the  parental  roof,  and  as  they  were  one
evening  leaving  his  presence,  he  said  to  them,  "  Farewell,  my
sons ;  my  blessing  goes  with  you."  His  third  son  had  the  peculiar
privilege,  as  his  medical  attendant,  to  pass  nearly  all  of  each  day,
and  the  whole  of  each  night,  in  his  apartment,  enjoying  an
unreserved  intercourse  with  him  of  the  most  elevating  character ;
and  boundless  indeed,  to  a  degree,  as  he  admits,  far  beyond  his
deserts,  was  the  gratitude  which  owned  his  constant  attentions.
His  youngest  son  was,  like  the  elder  ones,  absent  from  his  father's
house,  but  upon  learning  his  illness,  each  evening  saw  him  a
visiter  there  ;  and  on  the  last  night  but  one  of  his  life,  when  an
elder  brother  intended  to  act  as  a  watcher,  he  asked  and  readily
obtained  his  father's  consent  to  be  allowed  that  privilege.  The
teachings  of  that  night  he  will  never  forget.  He  had  asked  his
father for a kiss  when leaving  him  upon  one  of  these evening

144  MEMOIR.

visits,  and  received  the  reply  —  "  Kiss  you,  my  dear !  Yes,  if  I
die  in  the  act !  "  At  another  time  he  said,  **  I  leave  behind  me  a
family  of  love,  which,  I  rejoice  to  believe,  will  long  continue  a
united  household,  after  I  shall  have  been  removed  from  it  by
death."  To  her  who  in  early  years  had  been  left  alone  among
strangers,  he  recalled  the  dying  words  of  the  sister  who  had  then
intrusted  her  to  his  care  —  "  Promise  to  be  a  father  to  my  child  ; "
and  he  stated  that  he  had  always  endeavored  to  redeem  the
pledge  then  solemnly  given,  and  had  never  intentionally  made  any
distinction  between  her  and  his  own  children ;  and  that  he  had
made  an  adequate  provision  for  her  by  his  will,  that  she  might
not  feel  herself  dependent  even  upon  them,  though  he  doubted
not  for  a  moment,  that  each  of  them  would  always  be  ready  to
welcome  her  to  his  home  and  his  heart.  He  then  thanked  her  for
that  performance  of  household  duties  which  had  so  much  lightened
the  labors  of  his  wife  and  himself,  and  added  that  if  any  occasion
had  ever  occurred  (which  there  had  not,  to  his  knowledge)  when
he  had  shown  her  less  affection  than  the  kindest  parent  ought  to
have  shown  to  the  most  dutiful  daughter,  she  must  overlook  and
forget  it  as  accidental.  In  various  ways  he  constantly  showed  the
most  considerate  affection  for  his  family.  Thus  he  said  that  he
had  himself  found  great  consolation,  after  the  death  of  friends,  in
reflecting  that  they  met  their  fate  with  a  cheerful  and  resigned
spirit ;  and  he  added,  *'  I  am  happy  that  I  can  leave  to  you  the
same  consolation."  And  we  indeed  saw  in  him  a  soul  perfectly
calm  and  serene.  Two  nights  only  before  his  death,  after  awaking
at  midnight,  and  speaking  a  few  moments  very  impressively
respecting his approaching end to two of  his sons who were

MEMOIR.  145

present,  he  yet  sank  again,  apparently  in  less  than  five  minutes,
into  the  most  tranquil  sleep.

To  one  of  his  sons,  who,  as  he  thought,  was  not  always
sufficiently  careful  of  making  remarks  which,  though  innocently
intended,  might  give  offence,  he  said  that  upon  a  certain  occasion
he  had  himself,  in  speaking  to  a  female  friend,  alluded  to  one  of
her  features  as  not  handsome ;  and  that  after  she  had  gone,  his
wife  hlamed  him  for  doing  so,  because  the  lady  in  question  might
have  received  the  impression  that  he  thought  her  countenance
disagreeable ;  when  in  reality  there  was  scarce  a  being  in  the
world,  to  whom  they  were  both  more  attached,  or  upon  whose  face
they  were  always  more  delighted  to  look  ;  that  this  advice  of  his
wife,  dictated  by  the  truest  kindness  of  heart,  he  had  often
reflected  upon,  and,  as  he  hoped,  had  been  benefited  by  it.  He
then  said,  "  There  is  no  friendship  or  connection  so  intimate  as  to
justify  a  disregard  of  a  constant  endeavor  to  please;"  and  added
that  upon  one  occasion,  when  his  wife  had  appeared  in  the  library
in  a  new  dress,  and  he,  happening  to  be  engaged  in  his  studies,
had  not  noticed  the  circumstance,  she  seemed  quite  disappointed,
and  said  to  him,  '*  I  purchased  this  dress  on  purpose  to  please  you,
as  being  of  your  favorite  color,  and  now  you  do  not  seem  to  care
the  least  about  it."  He  added,  **  I  immediately  left  my  books,  told
her  she  must  lay  the  blame  not  upon  me,  but  upon  mathematics ;
that  the  dress  suited  my  taste  exactly ;  and  thus  succeeded  in
restoring  her  cheerful  looks.  And  ever  afterwards,"  said  he,
**  through  life,  I  endeavored,  whenever  she  came  into  my  presence,
not  to  omit  to  express  towards  her,  outwardly,  something  of  that
pleasure  which  I  always  really  felt."

VOL.  IV.  m  m

146  MEMOIR.

To  another  of  his  sons  he  was  speaking  of  truth  as  never  to
be  in  the  shghtest  degree  or  upon  any  inducement  disregarded,  and
holding  up  his  finger,  and  repeating  the  words  with  most  solemn
emphasis,  said,  "  Follow  truth  —  truth  —  truth  !  Let  that  be
the  family  motto."  So  many,  indeed,  are  the  touching  incidents
of  his  last  illness  which  throng  upon  the  memory  of  his  children,
that  a  selection  is  almost  impossible,  where  each  was  such
an  exhibition  of  moral  greatness.  He  had  expressed  the  wish
to  be  approached  with  smiles  and  cheerfulness.  Feeling  no
melancholy  in  his  own  soul,  he  was  averse  to  the  manifestation
of  it  in  others.  Observing,  therefore,  one  of  his  family  whose
countenance  was  marked  with  sadness,  he  called  for  his  volume
of  Bryant,  and  opening  at  his  favorite  piece,  read,

"  Why  weep  ye,  then,  for  him  who,  having  won

The  bound  of  man's  appointed  years,  at  last,  —
Life's  blessings  all  enjoyed,  life's  labor  done,  —
Serenely  to  his  final  rest  has  passed?"

He  then  proceeded  to  read  all  the  remaining  lines,  remarking  upon
each,  that  he  believed  or  hoped  it  was  applicable  to  himself,  or
that  he  thought  it  not  so.  His  voice,  though  low,  was  throughout
clear  and  firm,  and  the  incident  was  a  truly  impressive  one.

Rarely  was  a  complaint  or  murmur  extorted  from  him  even  by
the  most  excruciating  pain.  One  evening,  as  his  eldest  sons  were
present,  he  said,  "  Much  as  it  usually  gratifies  me  to  see  you,  your
presence  now  is  unwelcome.  I  am  suffering  so  much,  that  I
cannot  enjoy  the  society  of  any  one.  You  can  do  nothing  for  my
relief.  I  had  rather  you  would  go  home."  On  another  occasion,
when the  torture  he  experienced  was  almost beyond  endurance,

MEMOIR.  147

he  exclaimed,  "  Why  was  I  born  I  "  After  he  had  obtained  relief,
one  of  his  sons  asked  him  why  he  had  made  that  remark.  He
said  that  he  meant,  **  Why  was  I  born  to  suffer  so  much  I  But  I
see  the  reason. It  is  that  I  may  be  weaned  from  this  world."

Happily,  a  few  weeks  before  his  death,  he  had  longer
intervals  of  ease.  On  one  of  these  occasions,  he  asked  a  son  if
he  remembered  the  word,  derived  from  the  Greek,  signifying  an
easy  death.  Being  answered  in  the  negative,  he  said  that  in
Pope's  Works  there  was  a  letter  from  Dr.  Arbuthnot,  which  he
had  not  read  for  forty  years,  but  which  he  distinctly  remembered
as  containing  this  word,  with  a  note  mentioning  that  that
excellent  man  died  shortly  afterwards ;  so  that  he  had  always
associated  the  idea  of  an  easy  death  with  that  of  excellence  of
character.  The  book  was  opened,  and  the  letter  found.  The
writer  says,  "  A  recovery  in  my  case,  and  at  my  age,  is  impossible.
The  kindest  wish  of  my  friends  is  euthanasia."  To  this  subject
he  upon  more  than  one  occasion  afterwards  recurred,  and,  applying
it  to  his  own  situation,  said,  "  This  is  indeed  euthanasia."

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  private  journal  of  his
third  son,  under  date  March  4,  1838,  recording  a  dialogue  which
took  place  between  him  and  his  father :  —  "  He  said,  *  I  have  left
in  my  will  the  manuscript  of  La  Place  to  the  College.  I  wish
I  had  not  done  so ;  for  who  will  care  any  thing  about  it  ?  It  is  a
mere  bagatelle.*  I  told  him  that,  though  in  itself  valueless,  it
would  be  interesting,  perhaps,  at  some  future  period,  for  the  lover
of  mathematics  to  look  upon  his  original  manuscript  copy  of  so
great  a  work. *  O,*  said  he,  *  the  work  will  soon  become  obsolete.

148 -  MEMOIR.

and  nobody  will  look  at  it.'  —  *  Very  true,  it  will  become  obsolete  ;
and  what  work  is  there  that  will  not  become  old  ?  but  still  we  honor
talent,  even  if  the  labors  of  that  talent  are  superseded  by  later
writers.'  —  *  Yes,'  replied  father,  *  Archimedes  was  of  the  same
order  of  talent  with  Newton,  and  we  honor  him  as  much  ;  and
Leibnitz  was  equal  to  either  of  them.  Euclid  was  a  second-rate
mathematician ;  yet  I  should  like  to  see  some  of  his  hand-writing.
My  order  of  talent  is  very  different  from  that  of  La  Place.  La
Place  originates  things  which  it  would  have  been  impossible  for
me  to  have  originated.  La  Place  was  of  the  Newton  class ;  and
there  is  the  same  difference  between  La  Place  and  myself  as
between  Archimedes  and  Euclid.'  "  *

Not  less  interesting  were  many  incidents  which  occurred  during
his  interviews  with  others.  A  young  lady  had  been  playing,  by  his
desire,  upon  a  harmonicon. As  the  strains  of  the  music  rose  and

*  A  similar  anecdote  is  mentioned  by  Mr.  Young,  (Eulogy,  p.  83,)  of  Dr.  Bowditch's
admitting  La  Place  to  be  altogether  his  superior,  and  saying,  "  I  hoye  I  know  as  much  about
mathematics  as  Playfair."  The  word  hope  is  probably  a  verbal  mistake  for  think,  since  the
expression  otherwise  seems  to  imply  a  disrespect  for  Playfair,  such  as  Dr.  Bowditch  did
not  entertain,  and  to  which,  therefore,  he  could  not,  as  we  believe,  have  given  utterance.

Dr.  Bowditch  was  always  of  opinion  that  men  are  born  with  the  same  diversities  of
intellectual,  as  of  physical  powers  and  stature.  Thus  he  would  speak  of  one  as  "  a  man  of
small  calibre,"  and  say  of  another  that  he  had  reached  his  "  couche  de  niveau."  And  he
considered  as  wholly  absurd  a  remark  once  made  in  his  hearing,  "  I  have  no  doubt  that  any
man  could  become  a  mathematician  if  he  only  had  time!"  It  seemed  indeed,  in  his  own
case,  that  he  became  a  mathematician  notwithstanding  the  want  of  time;  and  a  striking
contrast  is  exhibited  by  Mr.  Pickering,  (Eulogy,  p.  56,)  between  the  long  life  of  La  Place,
exclusively  devoted  to  the  pursuit  of  science,  and  the  comparatively  short  life  of  his  translator,
of  which  so  much  was  occupied  by  other  important  engagements.

MEMOIR.  149

fell  upon  the  ear,  like  that  of  the  iEolian  harp,  he  listened
intently ;  and  when  the  last  cadence  had  died  away,  and  the
musician  approached  to  take  her  leave,  he  gave  her  an  affectionate
greeting,  and  after  she  had  retired  said,  "  You  must  tell  her  that
she  has  been  playing  my  dirge."  A  lady  visited  him,  and  as  she
was  quitting  the  apartment,  he  said,  "  Good  night,"  twice,
with  a  tone  of  voice,  and  an  expression  of  countenance,  which
indicated  his  conviction  that  he  saw  her  for  the  last  time ;
and  then  he  immediately  added,  "  Good  morning  at  the
resurrection."

Exactly  a  week  before  his  death,  the  President  of  Harvard
College,  Mr.  Quincy,  had  an  interview  with  him,  the  following
account  of  which  he  reduced  to  writing  immediately  afterwards :
—  He  says,  "  I  found  him  sitting  in  his  chair,  in  his  library,
emaciated,  pale,  and  apparently  wasted  by  his  disease  to  the  last
stage  of  life ;  his  mind  clear,  active,  and  self-possessed.  He
spoke  of  his  disorder  as  incurable ;  that  he  felt  himself  gradually
sinking,  and  that  he  could  not  long  survive.  *  I  have  wished  to
see  you,'  said  he,  *  to  take  my  leave,  and  that  you  might  have  the
satisfaction  of  knowing  that  I  depart  willingly,  cheerfully,  and,
as  I  hope,  prepared.  From  my  boyhood,  my  mind  has  been
religiously  impressed.  I  never  did  or  could  question  the  existence
of  a  Supreme  Being,  and  that  he  took  an  interest  in  the  affairs
of  men.  I  have  always  endeavored  to  regulate  my  life  in
subjection  to  his  will,  and  studied  to  bring  my  mind  to  an
acquiescence  in  his  dispensations  ;  and  now,  at  its  close,  I  look
back  with  gratitude  for  the  manner  in  which  He  has  distinguished
VOL.  IV.  n  n

150  MEMOIR.

me,  and  for  the  many  blessings  of  my  lot.  As  to  creeds  of  faith,
I  have  always  been  of  the  sentiment  of  the  poet,  —

For  modes  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots  fight ;
His  can't  be  wrong,  whose  life  is  in  the  right.'  "  *

Then  he  alluded  to  the  lines  of  Hafiz,  before  mentioned,  saying
of  them,  "  *  They  are  lines  of  which  I  at  this  moment  feel  all
the  force  and  consolation.  I  can  only  say,  Mr.  Quincy,  that  I
am  content ;  that  I  go  willingly,  resigned,  and  satisfied.'  t  After
this  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  works,  his  gratification  that  the  four
first  volumes,  which  constituted  the  principal  work,  were  so  nearly
completed.  '  There  are  only  about  ten  pages  wanting  ;  perhaps
I  may  live  to  finish  them.  I  have  been  to-day  correcting  the
proofs.'  He  then  showed  me  his  will,  explained  his  motives,  asked
me  to  read  it,  and  my  opinion.  In  every  respect,  his  state  of
mind  was  such  as  at  such  a  moment  his  best  friends  could  have
wished,  —  calm,  collected,  rational,  resigned,  —  looking  confidently
for  an  existence  beyond  the  grave,  —  happy  in  reflecting  on
the  past,  and  in  anticipating  the  future.  On  taking  leave,  he
impressed  a  kiss  on  my  hand,  saying,  *  Farewell ! ' " On  another

*  Dr.  Bowditch  often  repeated  passages  from  Pope's  "  Essay  on  Man  "  and  "  Universal
Prayer."

f  The  following  lines,  which  he  had  also  copied  on  the  covers  of  his  portfolio,  are
strikingly  applicable  to  the  frame  of  mind  which  he  now  manifested :  —

"  Parent  of  nature,  Master  of  the  world,
Where'er  thy  providence  directs,  behold
My  steps  with  cheerful  resignation  turn.
Fate  leads  the  willing',  drags  the  backward  on.
Why  should  I  grieve,  when  grieving  I  must  bear;
Or  take  with  guilt,  what  guiltless  I  might  share  ?  "

Cleanthes,  translated  hy  Bolinghroke. Orig.  Epist.  107.

MEMOIR.  161

occasion,  he  mentioned  the  early  impression  made  on  his  mind  by
the  remark  of  a  Quaker  lady,  that  the  external  symbols  and
observances  of  religion  were  only  valuable  as  indicating  the
existence  of  an  inward  principle,  and  a  life  in  accordance  with  it.

Among  those,  also,  who  had  the  happiness  of  a  like  interview,
were  two  of  his  subsequent  Eulogists ;  one  of  whom  (Judge
White)  says,  "  Being  deeply  affected  by  his  whole  appearance  and
conversation,  and  absorbed  in  the  feelings  which  these  produced,  I
could  not  retain  much  of  the  language  which  he  uttered,  though
the  general  impression  of  what  he  said  was  indelibly  fixed  in  my
mind.  I  recollect,  however,  very  distinctly  his  expressions  in
speaking  of  his  early  and  deep  feeling  of  religious  truth  and
accountability.  *  I  cannot  remember,*  he  said,  *  when  I  had  not
this  feeling,  and  when  I  did  not  act  from  it,  or  endeavor  to.  In
my  boyish  days,  when  some  of  my  companions,  who  had  become
infected  with  Tom  Paine's  *  infidelity,  broached  his  notions  in
conversation  with  me,  I  battled  it  with  them  stoutly,  not  exactly
with  the  logic  you  would  get  from  Locke,  but  with  the  logic  I
found  herCf  (pointing  to  his  breast ;)  and  here  it  has  always  been
my  guide  and  support :  it  is  my  support  still.*  With  feelings  of
humility  inseparable  from  the  purest  minds  in  such  a  situation,
he  expressed the  satisfaction  which  he felt  from having  always

endeavored  to  do  his  duty '  My  whole  life,*  he  said,  *  has  been

crowned  with  blessings  beyond  my  deserts.  I  am  still  surrounded
with  blessings  unnumbered. Why  should  I  distrust  the  goodness

•  The  well-known  "  Age  of  Reason,"  by  Thomas  Paine,  was  a  work  which  at  that  time
bid  many  readers  in  the  community.

152  MEMOIR.

of  God] Why  should I not still  be grateful and happy, and
confide  in  his  goodness  ? ' And  indeed  why  should  he  not  ]  "  *

In  his  interview  with  the  other,  (Rev.  Mr.  Young,)  he  dwelt
much  upon  the  kindness  and  assistance  which  in  early  life  he  had
received  in  Salem,  and  expressed  a  like  affection  and  gratitude
towards  the  city  in  which  he  was  to  end  his  days.  Mr.  Young
says  that  every  one  of  the  friends  who  then  visited  him  **  will  bear
testimony  to  his  calm,  serene  state  of  mind.  The  words  which
he  spoke  in  those  precious  interviews  they  will  gather  up  and
treasure  in  their  memory,  and  will  never  forget  them  so  long  as
they  live."  t

During  his  illness,  Dr.  Bowditch  was  asked  to  state  his
particular  religious  belief,  and  replied,  —  '*  Of  what  importance
are  my  opinions  to  any  one  ?  I  do  not  wish  to  be  made  a  show
of."  When  mention  was  made  of  the  various  teachers  of  mankind,
inspired  and  others,  (Socrates,  Moses,  &c.,)  at  the  name  of  Christ,
he  said,  "  Yes  —  the  greatest  of  them  all."  He  dwelt  often  upon
the  fitness  of  the  gospel  to  purify  the  heart  and  elevate  the  soul ;
and  preferred  to  rest  its  authority  upon  these  views,  rather  than
upon  any  other.  A  recent  article  in  the  Christian  Examiner,  upon
the  point  that  a  belief  in  miracles  is  not  essential  to  a  belief  in
Christianity,  received  his  approbation.

The  Rev.  John  Brazer,  D.  D.,  of  Salem,  was  a  friend  who
rarely  visited  Boston  without  passing  the  night  under  his  roof,  and

*  Eulogy,  p.  53.  t  Discourse,  p.  94.

MEMOIR.  153

whose  ovTn  house  had  oflen  had  as  an  inmate  for  several  weeks
a  daughter  of  Dr.  Bowditch.  He,  during  the  last  illness  of  the
latter,  oflfered  up  for  him  within  his  church  a  prayer  which,  in  the
words  of  a  correspondent,  "  touched  all  hearts."  More  than  one
interview  left  his  mind  also  filled  with  the  same  delightful
impressions.  In  one  of  them,  Dr.  Bowditch,  after  alluding  to  the
intimacy  which  existed  between  themselves,  and  also  between
himself  and  certain  absent  friends,  observed  that  he  felt  himself
"  capable  of  faithful  friendship."  And  in  a  brief  public  notice  of
his  decease,  this  clergyman  observes,  "  And  so  he  was,  in  a  degree
never  surpassed.  Aching  hearts  can  now  testify  to  this ;  and
there  are  some  who  feel  that  there  is  a  void  left  in  their  affections,
which  can  only  be  filled  by  a  reunion  with  him  in  another  world."
Dr.  Bowditch  had  requested  his  children  to  send  to  Dr.  Brazer  a
small  legacy,  saying,  "  I  know  that  it  will  be  grateful  to  my  friend
to  be  assured  that  I  thought  of  him  with  unabated  love  and
confidence  in  my  dying  moments."

He  had  through  life  delighted  to  attend  to  the  interests  and
feehngs  of  many  who  were  comparatively  alone  in  the  world ;  and
for  these  services,  they  now  expressed  the  warmest  gratitude.  A
short  time  before  his  death,  he  received  from  a  young  lady  who,
being  herself  an  invalid,  could  not  in  person  express  her  sentiments
towards  him,  a  letter,  in  which  she  addresses  him  as  "  her
dear  father,"  and  assures  him  that  "  his  kindness  fell  not  upon
stony  ground,  when  it  fell  upon  an  orphan's  heart;"  and  the
last  person  who  had  an  interview  with  him,  (except  the  members
of  his  own  family,)  was  anotlier  lady,  before  alluded  to,  (p.  143,)
who  expressed  the, delight  which  it  had  afforded  her,  and  said  that

VOL. IV.  0  0

154  MEMOIR.

she  never  could  have  been  happy  if  he  had  died  without  her
having-  had  an  opportunity  of  acknowledging  her  many  and  great
obligations  to  the  best  of  friends.

He  himself  literally  never  forgot  a  kindness.  Thus  he
enjoined  it  on  his  children  to  transmit  a  legacy  from  him  to  the
widow  of  one  of  his  early  employers,  as  being  his  oldest  friend,
"one  whose  affection  had  ever  been  to  him  as  that  of  a  mother,
knowing  no  interruption  or  abatement."  And  he  remembered
in  a  similar  manner  a  near  relative,  from  whom  he  had  always
received  a  sister's  welcome  when  he  visited  Salem.

One  little  being  alone  stood  to  him  in  the  relation  of  a
grandchild,  the  daughter  of  his  eldest  son.  Desirous  of  leaving
for  her  some  small  token  of  his  remembrance,  a  silver  cup  was
made  by  his  directions,  bearing  the  inscription,  "  Elizabeth  Francis
Bowditch,  from  her  grandfather,  Nathaniel  Bowditch,  March  1st,
1838,"  which,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  he  placed  in  her  own  hands.
Though  the  image  of  that  affectionate  relative  has  long  since
faded  away  from  her  infant  memory,  that  visible  emblem  will  in
after  years  remind  her  of  one  who,  on  the  day  of  his  death,  when
his  failing  senses  led  him  erroneously  to  believe  that  he  was
addressing  her  mother,  said,  "  Give  my  love  to  the  little  one."

There  was  one  who  was  a  sister  to  him  by  marriage,  as  she
had  always  been  in  affection.  Her  daily  visits  during  his  illness
were  ever  most  welcome.  She  was  a  wife,  and  is  a  widow;
was  a  mother,  and  is  childless.  She  asked  him  his  belief  in  a
recognition  of  friends  after  death. He  said  to  her,  that,  to  his

MEMOIR.  155

apprehension,  it  was  not  clearly  revealed.  She  exclaimed,  "Do
not  say  so.  The  chief  consolation  I  have  here,  is  the  hope  of
meeting  my  lost  ones  again.**  He  saw  her  grief  as  she  retired,
and  in  the  course  of  that  day  told  his  family  to  be  sure  to  inform
him  when  she  next  called,  as  he  wished  much  to  see  her.  She
came  again.  He  said  to  her,  "  Let  me  assure  you  of  my
conviction  that  if,  in  the  future  world,  it  will  be  best  that  we
should  know  again  the  friends  we  have  here  loved,  that  happiness
will  certainly  be  ours.  What  I  meant  to  say  yesterday  was,  that
I  do  not  think  that  Almighty  Wisdom  has  explicitly  revealed  to
mortals  its  decrees  in  this  particular.  But  of  one  thing  I  am
certain ;  all  will  be  for  the  best.  I  approach  the  unseen  world
with  the  same  reverence  as  I  would  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and
have  no  desire  to  draw  aside  the  veil  which  conceals  its  mysteries
from  my  sight."

He  had  always  entertained  a  most  important  as  well  as  just
sentiment,  to  which  he  constantly  recurred  during  his  illness,
namely,  that  the  highest  intellectual  cultivation  and  acquirements
are  entirely  worthless,  when  compared  with  moral  excellence.
Often  have  we  heard  the  author  of  this  Commentary,  during
his  last  days,  say  that  the  consciousness  which  he  then  felt  that
throughout  life  he  had  endeavored  to  discharge  its  various  duties,
and  the  humble  hope  that  those  efforts  would  be  approved
hereafter,  were  far  sweeter  to  him  than  any  praises  which  he  had
already  received,  or  the  thoughts  of  any  reputation  which  might
await  his  name  in  future  times  as  having  been  a  faithful  laborer
in  the  cause  of  science.

156  MEMOIR.

Indeed,  he  valued  his  own  peculiar  studies  for  their  elevating
moral  tendency,  and  for  producing,  as  it  were,  an  indirect  effect,
more  important  and  lasting  than  their  immediate  results.  Thus,
a  few  days  only  before  he  died,  he  listened  with  attention  and
pleasure  to  a  recent  publication  of  Mrs.  Sigourney,  as  it  was  read
to  him  by  his  eldest  son,  where  that  writer  says,  '*  The  adoring
awe  and  profound  humility  inspired  by  the  study  of  the  planets
and  their  laws,  the  love  of  truth  which  he  cherishes  who  pursues
the  science  that  demonstrates,  will  find  a  response  among
archangels."

His  own  life,  indeed,  which  had  been  spent  in  search  of  the
true  and  the  right,  had  led  to  that  unwavering  belief  and  trust
in  the  wise  providence  of  God,  and  that  humble  and  confiding
submission  to  his  will,  which  dispelled  from  the  chamber  of  death
the  gloom  which  so  often  enshrouds  it.  His  eye  shone  with
its  wonted  brightness.  His  feeble  voice  inculcated,  in  its  low
and  scarcely  audible  accents,  its  lessons  of  wisdom  and  love,  with
an  earnestness  and  solemnity  that  seemed  almost  like  inspiration,
and  spoke  to  the  hearts  of  his  hearers.  Though  his  emaciated
countenance  told  of  many  an  hour  of  severe  pain,  the  patient
sufferer  recalled  the  blessings  he  had  enjoyed  through  life,  and
gratefully  acknowledged  those  which  still  surrounded  him.  He
was  often,  during  his  intervals  of  ease,  playful  and  humorous  in
his  remarks,  but  without  any  levity  of  thought  or  manner.  He
did  not  affect  any  indifference  to  life,  but  was  perfectly  willing  to
quit  it. His  was  !

"Earth's  lingering  love,  to  parting  reconciled."

MEMOIR.  157

He  approached  his  end  with  feelings  the  most  becoming  to  the
man  and  the  Christian.  His  spirit  was  perfected  by  the  sufferings
through  which  he  passed.  Truly  we  esteem  it  a  high  privilege  to
have  been  present  at  such  scenes.  May  the  lesson  of  his  life
and  his  death  be  read  by  us  aright !

On  the  morning  of  Friday,  the  sixteenth  of  March,  at  about
six  o'clock,  when  his  sight  was  quite  dim,  his  third  son  told  him
that  he  thought  the  time  had  come  when  he  had  better  take  leave
of  all  his  children.  He  answered,  "  I  know  it ;  I  feel  it."  Each
in  succession  then  approached ;  and  as  the  father  returned  the  kiss
he  received,  he  inquired  who  it  was ;  and  in  this  manner  he  took
a  most  affectionate  farewell  of  his  children,  all  of  whom  were
gathered  around  his  bedside.  He  said,  ,*  O  !  sweet  and  pretty
are  the  visions  that  rise  up  before  me.  *  Now  let  thy  servant
depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation.'  I  say
these  words  not  because  I  have  entire  love  for  all  the  *  .  .  .  .  but
because  I  love  the  words,  and  feel  kindly  towards  all  *  .  .  .  ."
Upon  drinking  a  little  water,  he  said,  "  How  delicious !  I  have
swallowed  a  drop  —  a  drop  from

'  Siloa's  brook,  that  flowed
Fast  by  the  oracle  of  God.' "

Soon  afler  this  time,  he  fell  into  a  tranquil  sleep,  from  which,
at  about  half  past  nine,  he  awoke,  and  once  more  desired  to  see
his  family  assembled ;  then,  looking  round  upon  them,  and
addressing  each  by  name,  he  said,  **  There,  my  children,  I  have
known  you  all ;  have  I  not,  perfectly  1 O  !  it  is  beautiful  to  me

*  His  voice  here  became  wholly  indistinct.
▼OL.  IV.  pp

168  MEMOIR.

to  see  you  all  about  me  —  pretty  !  It  is  beautiful  to  me  to  bless
you  all.  May  God  forever  bless  you,  my  dears !  It  is  for  the
last  time  that  your  father  blesses  you."  It  pleased  Heaven,  after
this,  to  afflict  him  with  the  most  severe  bodily  suffering  during
nearly  thtee  hours  ;  but  about  noon  it  left  him,  and  the  quiet,
tranquil  state  of  body  and  mind  returned.  He  addressed  his
son  with  the  epithet  "  my  dear,"  and  said,  "  It  is  coming !  I
am  ready."  And  at  one  o'clock.  Death  gently  set  his  seal  upon
that  placid  countenance.

'f
He  was  buried  on  the  morning  of  the  following  Sabbath.  The
face  of  spring  was  hidden  by  the  falling  snow.  The  streets  of
the  city  were  silent  and  deserted.  Every  thing  seemed  to  feel
the  quiet  of  the  day  and  hour.  Dust  was  given  back  to  dust:
the  spirit  had  returned  to  God  who  gave  it.

APPENDIX.

We  have  thought  that  a  few  particulars  respecting  the  library  of  Dr.
Bowditch,  and  its  future  intended  appropriation,  might  be  of  some  general
interest.  Montaigne  has  said  of  the  apartment  which  contained  his  books,
that  he  endeavored  **  to  sequester  this  corner  from  all  society,  conjugal,  filial,
and  civil."  Dr.  Bowditch,  however,  did  exactly  the  reverse ;  he  selected  for
his  library  the  family  parlor.  To  us  it  will  always  be  the  scene  of  the  most
happy  associations.  It  will  ever  present  one  common  centre  of  attraction,
bringing  our  hearts  near  together,  and  uniting  us  in  the  close  and  intimate
circle  of  brotherhood.  It  will  recall  a  husband  never  so  much  immersed  in  his
studious  researches,  as  to  be  forgetful  of  those  little  proofs  of  affection  which
first  won  and  ever  secured  in  return  the  affections  of  the  wife ;  and  a  wife
never  so  much  occupied  with  household  duties  and  cares,  as  to  neglect  for  a
moment  the  kindest  and  most  considerate  attentions  which  woman's  love  ever
prompted.  A  father's  advice,  also,  and  a  mother's  gentleness,  will  speak  to  us
from  the  inanimate  objects  around.  There  the  present  will  be  full  of  the  past.
Nor  will  it  be  without  its  interest  to  many  others.  Who,  indeed,  that  has  ever
seen  Dr.  Bowditch  in  that  library,  will  fail  to  acknowledge  the  truth  as  well  as
beauty  of  the  description  given  by  one  who  was  himself  only  an  occasional,  but
always  a  welcome  visiter  there  :  —  "  You  saw  the  Philosopher,  entering,  with
all  the  enthusiasm  of  youth,  into  every  subject  of  passing  interest.  You  saw
his  eye  kindle  with  honest  indignation,  or  light  up  with  sportive  glee;  you
caught  the  infection  of  his  quick,  sharp-toned,  good-natured  laugh,  and  felt
inclined  to  rub  your  hands  in  unison  with  him  at  every  sally  of  wit,  or  every

160  MEMOIR.

outbreaking  of  mirthfulness.  Let  the  conversation  turn  in  which  way  it  might,
he  was  always  prepared  to  take  the  lead ;  he  always  seemed  to  enter  into  it
with  a  keener  zest  than  any  one  else.  You  were  charmed  and  delighted  ;  the
evening  passed  away  before  you  were  aware,  and  you  did  not  reflect,  until  you
had  returned  home,  that  you  had  been  conversing  with  unrestrained  freedom
with  the  first  Philosopher  in  America."  *

Though,  of  course,  it  cannot  have  the  same  degree  of  interest  to  others,
which  is  felt  by  the  children  of  the  deceased,  we  are  confident,  then,  that
all  who  have  ever  been  favored  with  an  interview  like  that  above  described,
will  be  happy  to  learn  that  it  is  our  hope  and  expectation,  that  for  very  many
years  that  apartment  will  remain  as  it  was  left  by  our  father ;  that  the  chair
in  which  he  sat,  the  desk  and  the  portfolio  containing  the  last  proofs  of  this
work  which  were  ever  submitted  to  him,  the  table  around  which  were
usually  seated  his  family  and  friends,  and  the  noble  array  of  works  of  science
which  adorn  the  walls  of  the  apartment,  will  all  long  remain  undisturbed.
That  collection  is  one  which,  in  its  particular  department,  we  believe  to  be
unsurpassed,  and  probably  unequalled,  by  any  in  the  United  States ;  and  as
no  one  of  our  number  has  in  any  considerable  degree  inherited  the  peculiar
tastes  of  his  father,  it  is  obvious  that  to  us  it  will  be  of  but  little  practical
utility.  But  we  knew  that  he  himself  always  freely  lent  his  books  to
every  one  having  a  fondness  for  scientific  pursuits,  and  who  had  not  the  means
of  otherwise  obtaining  them.  We  remembered,  also,  that  a  free  diOfusion
of  knowledge  was,  indeed,  ever  the  chief  object  of  his  own  life ;  and  we
have  dedicated  "  The  Bowditch  Library  "  to  the  use  of  the  public,  as  far  as,
in  the  exercise  of  a  sound  discretion,  we  deemed  consistent  with  the  safety
of  the  books  loaned.

Many  of  the  most  rare  arid  valuable  works  in  this  library  were  presents  to

•  President  Wayland,  of  Brown  University. Christian  Review,  September,  1838.

APPENDIX.  161

Dr.  Bowditch  from  various  societies  or  authors  in  other  countries,  —  a
circumstance  which  adds  greatly  to  the  interest  of  the  collection ;  and  we
feel  assured  that,  containing  all  the  volumes  which  he  habitually  consulted
while  preparing  this  work,  and  also  all  the  manuscript  proofs  of  his  early
industry,  this  library  will,  as  long  as  it  shall  exist,  remain  a  most  interesting
monument  to  the  memory  alike  of  the  Ship-Chandler's  Apprentice,  and  the
Commentator  upon  La  Place.

ADDITIONAL NOTES.

Note  to  page  28.

Dr.  Bowditch,  in  his  last  illness,  in  answer  to  the  direct  question  of  the  writer,  replied
that  he  had  made  six  voyages ;  and  the  anecdote  respecting  his  being  in  Boston  in  July,
1802,  attending  to  his  vessel,  which  was  wind-bound,  seems  to  favor  the  supposition  of
another  voyage  besides  the  five  mentioned  in  the  text.  We  find,  however,  that  the  ship  Astrea,
Stamcood  master,  arrived  in  Boston,  from  Batavia  and  the  Isle  of  France,  July  10,  1802.
One  who  was  an  inmate  of  his  family  from  the  time  of  his  second  marriage,  October,  1800,
says  that  he  made  but  one  voyage  afterwards.  Of  that  the  journal  is  extant,  to  speak  for  itself,
beginoing  November,  1802. So  that  we  believe  the  text  to  be  correct.

Note  to  page  60.

There  arc  extant  several  portraits  of  Dr.  Bowditch :  —

1.  There  are  two  miniatures,  taken  at  the  times  of  bis  first  and  second  marriage,
apparently  by  the  same  artist. They  have  no  merit  either  as  likenesses  or  paintings.

2.  About  the  year  1820,  portraits  of  Dr.  Bowditch  and  his  wife  were  painted  by  James
Frotbingham  of  Salem,  which,  though  wanting  in  expression,  are  yet  in  other  respects  very
good.  It  was  from  his  portrait  of  Mrs.  Bowditch,  that,  after  death.  Miss  Lalanne  painted  for
the  writer  the  miniature  which  is  engraved  for  this  memoir;  certain  alterations  being  introduced,
which  have  made  the  likeness  more  accurate.

VOL.  iv.  q  q

162  MEMOIR/,

••  3.  The  portrait  by  Gilbert  Stuart  was  painted  in  1828,  and,  even  in  its  unfinished  state,
is,  we  think,  far  superior  to  any  other.  A  friend,  who  admired  it  very  nauch,  and  selected  the
frame  for  it,  has  written  on  the  back,  "  The  last  work  of  Stuart.  '  Sancte  inviolateque
servatum  sit.'  "

4.  The  portraits  belonging  to  the  Salem  East  India  Marine  Society,  and  the  Salem
Marine  Society,  are  by  Charles  Osgood,  having  been  copied  by  him  from  Stuart's  picture,
with  the  aid  of  a  few  additional  sittings.

Note  to  page  69.

In  the  farewell  address  of  his  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  the  President,
delivered  at  the  last  anniversary  meeting  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  November,  1S38,
an  outline  is  given  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  life,  with  the  following  summary  of  the  merits  of  this
Translation  and  Commentary :  —

"  Every  person  who  is  acquainted  with  the  original  must  be  aware  of  the  great  number
of  steps  in  the  demonstrations  which  are  left  unsupplied,  in  many  cases  comprehending  the
entire  processes  which  connect  the  enunciation  of  the  propositions  with  the  conclusions;
and  the  constant  reference  which  is  made,  both  tacit  and  expressed,  to  results  and  principles,
both  analytical  and  mechanical,  which  are  co-extensive  with  the  entire  range  of  known
mathematical  science :  but  in  Dr.  Bowditch's  very  elaborate  Commentary  every  deficient
step  is  supplied,  every  suppressed  demonstration  is  introduced,  every  reference  explained
and.  illustrated  ;  and  a  work  which  the  labors  of  an  ordinary  life  could  hardly  master,  is
rendered  accessible,  to  every  reader  who  is  acquainted  with  the  principles  of  the  differential
and  integral  calculus,  and  in  possession  of  even  an  elementary  knowledge  of  statical  and
dynamical  principles.

"  When  we  consider  the  circumstances  of  Dr.  Bowditch's  early  life,  the  obstacles  which

opposed  his  progress,  the  steady  perseverance  with  which  he  overcame  them,  and  the  courage

'","..■■  - -

with  which  he  ventured  to  expose  the  mysterious  treasures  of  that  sealed  book,  which  had

hitherto  only  been  approached  by  those  whose  way  had  been  cleared  for  them  by  a  systematic

and  regular  mathematical  education,  we  shall  be  fully  justified  in  pronouncing  him  to  have

been  a  most  remarkable  example  of  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  under  difficulties,  and  well

worthy  of  the  enthusiastic  respect  and  admiration  of  his  countrymen,  whose  triumphs  in  thie

field  of  practical  science  have  fully  equalled,  if  not  surpassed,  the  noblest  works  of  the  anciettt

world."  '^

APPENDIX.  les

Note  to  page  82.

The  following  are  the  children  of  Dr.  Bowditch;  mentioned  in  the  order  of  their  ages  :  — >

1.  Nathaniel  IngersoU  Bowditch,  a  graduate  of  Harvard  College,  1922,  is  engaged  in
the  practice  of  the  law  in  Boston.

2.  Jonathan  Ingersoll  Bowditch,  having  made  a  number  of  India  voyages,  is  now  president
of  the  American  Insurance  Company  in  Boston.

3.  Henry  Ingersoll  Bowditch,  a  graduate  of  Harvard  College,  1828,  having  pursued  the
study  of  medicine,  is  now  established  in  that  profession  in  Boston.

4.  Charles  Ingersoll  Bowditch,  bom  December  1,  1809,  died  February  21,  1820.

5.  A  son,  bom  July  7,  1813,  died  the  next  day.

6.  Mary  Ingersoll  Bowditch.

7.  William  Ingersoll  Bowditch,  a  graduate  of  Harvard  College,  1838,  now  a  student
at  law.

8.  Elizabeth  Boardman  Ingersoll  Bowditch.

Note  to  page  108.

We  have  said  that  Mr.  Young's  Discourse  contains  some  trifling  errors.  Prepared  in  the
course  of  a  few  weeks,  it  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise.  Upon  several  points,  we
ourselves  were  at  first  mistaken.  In  justice  to  him,  it  is  proper  to  specify  these  errors,  that
no  vague  impression  of  general  inaccuracy  may  be  left  on  the  reader's  mind.  It  is  incorrectly
said,  in  p.  23  of  his  Discourse,  that  Dr.  Bowditch's  instructer  was  an  Irishman  named  Ford,
and  that  when  he  solved  the  problem  so  quickly,  he  was  actually  punished  for  lying;  in  p.  39,
that  he  learned  French  without  an  instructer ;  and  in  p.  59,  that  his  knowledge  of  navigatron
was  picked  up  during  the  intervals  of  his  voyages.  The  anecdote  in  p.  51,  of  the  report
that  "  La  Place  once  remarked,  *  I  am  sure  that  Dr.  Bowditch  comprehends  my  work,  for  he
has  not  only  detected  my  errors,  but  has  also  shown  me  how  I  came  to  fall  into  them,'  "
may  be  correct ;  but  Dr.  Bowditch  never  heard  of  it.  The  statement  in  p.  68,  of  his  entire
abstinence  from  politics,  is  correct  only  of  the  latter  part  of  his  life.  Such  was  his  political
zeal  in  eariy  life,  that  he  once  assisted  in  carrying  an  invalid  upon  his  bed  to  the  polls  to  vote,
The  anecdote  in  p.  87,  respecting  his  magnanimity  in  giving  up  the  benefit  of  his  chart  of
Salem  to  one  who  had  endeavored  to  appropriate  it  wrongfully  to  himself,  is  related  as  it  was  at
first  told  to  us ;  but  we  are  satisfied,  from  subsequent  inquiries,  that  there  was  but  one  interview

164  MEMOIR.

between  the  parties,  and  that  the  account,  though  it  has  a  basis  of  truth,  is  probably  very  much
exaggerated.  So  in  the  anecdote,  p.  33,  respecting  his  solution  of  a  question  proposed  by
an  Englishman  while  at  the  theatre,  it  is  not  true  that  he  proposed  in  return  one  which  the
latter  could  not  solve ;  as  is  proved  by  a  written  account  of  this  incident  entered  by  Dr.
Bowditch  in  one  of  his  common-place  books  at  the  time.  In  page  88,  it  is  said  that  he,
latterly,  usually  took  one  glass  of  wine  after  dinner,  and  another  in  the  evening;  and
seldom  or  never  more. He  took  two  glasses  at  each  time,  which  he  called  his  certain  qwmtity.

Notwithstanding  the  numerous  details  and  anecdotes  collected  by  Mr.  Young,  it  is  believed
that  the  above  are  all  the  matters  stated  by  him,  relating  to  Dr.  Bowditch,  which  require
correction  or  qualification.

We  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  quote  from  this  Discourse,  in  cases  where  the  original
information  was  obtained  from  conversations  with  us,  or  where  the  same  materials  were
placed  by  others  at  the  disposal  both  of  Mr.  Young  and  ourselves.  A  statement  of  some  of
these  sources  of  information,  will  enable  the  reader  to  judge  of  the  relative  authenticity  of
different  parts  of  the  present  memoir.  During  some  months  before  the  removal  of  the
family  from  Salem,  the  writer,  having  a  taste  for  antiquarian  researches,  spent  several  leisure
hours  of  each  day  in  examining  the  public  records  and  other  sources  of  information,  for
the  purpose  of  tracmg  back  his  ancestry  to  the  first  settlement  of  that  town.  One  of
our  number  went  to  Salem  the  week  after  his  father's  death,  where  he  remained  during
several  days,  making  mquiries  of  those  who  had  fomierly  been  most  nearly  connected  by
business  or  friendship  with  the  deceased.  He  invited  Mr.  Young  to  join  him  in  a  visit  to
Danvers,  and  the  latter  was  thus  present  at  the  interview  with  the  relations  of  Dr.  Bowditch's
first  instructress,  of  which  he  has  given  an  account.  He  likewise  procured  a  drawing
of  the  house  his  father  there  occupied,  which  Mr.  Young  caused  to  be  engraved  for  his
Discourse.  Among  others.  Captain  Prince  was  inquired  of  respecting  his  recollections  of  Dr.
Bowditch.  He  referred  us  to  a  written  account,  containing  anecdotes  of  the  second,  third,
and  fourth  voyages,  which  his  son  had  drawn  up  a  day  or  two  before,  and  sent  to  Mr.
Pickering,  (not  taken  down  by  Mr.  Pickering  from  that  gentleman's  own  lips,  as  was  thought
by  Mr.  Young.)  This  account  was  afterwards  lent  by  Mr.  Pickering  both  to  Mr.  Young  and
ourselves.  The  original  journals  of  all  Dr.  Bowditch's  voyages,  except  the  second,  are  still
preserved  in  his  library,  and  verify  the  accuracy  of  Captain  Prince's  dates,  &:c.,  given  in  his
account.  The  whole  series  of  the  successive  editions  of  the  Navigator  are  also  in  the  library,
the  prefaces  to  which  show  very  clearly  the  most  important  circumstances  connected  with
the  commencement  and  progress  of  that  work.  All  Dr.  Bowditch's  occasional  publications
having  been  collected  and  bound  together  by  him,  we  were  enabled  even  to  add  caie  or  two

APPENDIX.  165

to  those  discovered  by  Mr.  Pickering,  who  himself  added  several  to  the  list  given  by  Mr.
Young.  Dr.  Bowditch's  manuscripts  were  given  to  the  writer  of  the  present  memoir.
Among  them  is  a  separate  file  of  all  the  letters  received  by  him  relating  to  the  Mecanique
Celeste,  and  another  containing  all  his  diplomas,  and  letters  offering  him  any  appointments,
either  of  honor  or  profit.  Every  thing  connected  with  the  printing  of  the  Mecanique
Celeste,  and  the  management  of  the  Life  Insurance  Company,  and  indeed  most  of  the
recent  incidents  of  his  life,  are,  it  is  needless  to  say,  within  our  own  personal  knowledge ;  and
those  of  his  last  illness,  especially,  are  indelibly  impressed  upon  our  memory.  The  information
which  we  possessed  from  these  various  sources,  we  were  happy  to  communicate  to  Mr.  Young.
Every  one  who  reads  them  both,  will  perceive  that  in  its  really  important  details,  his
Discourse  agrees  with  the  present  memoir.  The  summary  of  character  which  is  given  by
him  we  believe  to  be  a  strikingly  just  one,  and  sufficient,  if  nothing  else  had  ever  been
wiitten,  to  place  before  the  reader  quite  a  distinct  and  faithful  portrait  of  Dr.  Bowditch.

Note  to  page  110.

The  property  left  by  Dr.  Bowditch  at  his  death,  exclusive  of  his  dwelling-house  in  Boston,
and  the  librar}',  furniture,  he,  in  it,  consisted  of  printed  copies  of  this  work,

valued  in  the  inventory  at ^5,000  00

And  other  personal  estate,  valued  at 31,571  33

Total, $36,571  38

VOL.  IV.  r  r

166  MEMOIR.

The Translator  presented  this Work  to the  Institutions and  Individuals named
in  the  following  List,  and  perhaps  to  Others  not  known  to  us.*

American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Boston,  Massachusetts.

Boston  Athenaeum.

Salem  Athenaeum.

Nantucket  Athenaeum.

Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts.

Brown  University,  Providence,  Rhode  Island.

University  of  Vermont,  Burlington,  Vermont.

Philosophical  Society  held  at  Philadelphia.

New  York  Philosophical  Society.

Professor  Adrain,  of  New  Brunswick,  N.  Y.

Professor  Anderson,  of  New  York.

Professor  Nulty,  of  Philadelphia.

John  Pickering,  Esq.,  LL.  D.,  of  Boston,  Massachusetts.

Professor  Pierce,  of  Harvard  University.

Professor  Renwick,  of  New  York.

Professor  Strong,  of  New  Brunswick,  N. Y.

Rev.  Francis  Wayland,  D.  D.,  President  of  Brown University.

Royal  Society  of  London.

Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.

Royal  Irish  Academy.

Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London.

British  Museum,  London.

Bodleian  Library,  Oxford.

*  If  any,  to  whom  the  translator  intended  to  present  it,  have  not  received  the  work,  and  will  inform  us
of  an  opportunity  of  sending  it  safely,  it  will  be  forwarded  by  us  according  to  the  wishes  of  our
deceased  father.

APPENDIX.  167

Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

George  B.  Airy,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S., Professor  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  England.

Charles  Babbage,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.

Franc'is  Baily,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.

Henry  Beaufoy,  Esq.,  South  Lambeth,  London.

The  late  John  Brinkley,  D.  D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Cloyne.

Da  vies  Gilbert,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.

Sir  William  Hamilton,  F.  R.  S.,  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  the  Royal Observatory,

Dublin.
Sir  John  F.  W.  Herschel,  F.  R.  S.,  Slough.
James  Ivory,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.
John  William  Lubbock,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.
The  late  John  Pond,  Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  Astronomer  Royal,  Greenwich.
Mrs.  Mary  Somerville,  Chelsea  Hospital.
William  Vaughan, Esq.,  F.  R.  S.,  London.
Rev.  William  Whewell,  Professor  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  England.

Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Calcutta.

Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences  at  St.  Petersburg.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Stockholm.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Copenhagen.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Berlin.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Belles  Lettres  at  Palermo.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  and  Belles  Lettres  at  Brussels.

Royal  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Paris.

Royal  Library  at  Paris.

Library  of  the  University  of  Guttingen.

M.  Arago,  Paris.

Professor  Bessel,  Konigsberg.

Professor  Encke,  BeHin.

The  late  Baron Fourier,  Paris.

Professor  Gauss,  Gottingen.

Profeasor  Harding,  Gottingen.

M.  Lacroixi  Paris.

168  MEMOIR.

Marquis  de  La  Place,  Paris.

M.  Legendre,  Paris.

Signer  Libri,  Paris.

Baron  Lindenau,  Dresden.

Dr.  Olbers,  Bremen.

M.  Poisson,  Paris.

M.  Puissant,  Paris.

M.  Schumacher,  Altona.

Professor  Struve,  Dorpat,  Russia.

D.  B.  Warden,  Esq.,  Paris.

The  late  Baron  Zach,  Paris.

A  copy  is  also  sent  to  Francis  Beaufort,  Esq.,  Captain  in  the  Royal  Navy,  Hydrographer
to  the  British  Admiralty.

PREFACE.

I

After  having  explained,  in  the  two  preceding  books,  the  theories  of  the
planets,  and  of  the  moon,  it  now  remains  to  examine  those  of  the  other
satellites  and  comets,  which  are  the  chief  objects  of  the  present  volume.  The
satellites  of  Jupiter  are  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  satellites,  except  that  of  [6000]
the  Earth.  The  observation  of  these  bodies,  the  first  which  were  discovered
in  the  heavens  by  the  telescope,  goes  no  farther  back  than  two  centuries ;  and
in  fact  we  ought  not  to  estimate  the  interval  of  time  in  which  their  eclipses
have  been  observed,  at  more  than  a  century  and  a  half.  But,  in  this  short
interval,  these  bodies  have  presented  to  our  view,  by  the  rapidity  of  their
revolutions,  all  those  great  changes  which  time  produces  with  extreme
slowness  in  the  planetary  orbits,  the  system  of  the  satellites  being  an  image
of  that  of  the  planets.  Their  frequent  eclipses  have  made  known  the  principal
inequalities  of  their  motions,  with  a  degree  of  accuracy  which  could  never  have  [GOOO']
been  attained  by  observations  of  their  elongations  from  Jupiter.  To  obtain  the
theory  of  these  motions,  we  shall  develop,  in  the  first  place,  the  differential
equations  of  the  orbits,  and  then,  by  integrating  these  equations,  we  shall
ascertain  the  various  perturbations.  These  inequalities  differ  but  little  in  their
forms  from  those  of  the  planets  and  moon;  but  the  relations  which  exist
between  the  mean  motions  and  the  mean  longitudes  of  the  three  inner  satellites
of  Jupiter,  augment  some  of  these  inequalities  so  much  as  to  give  them  a  great
influence  on  the  whole  of  their  theory.  These  mean  motions  are  very  nearly
in  a  subduple  progression,  and  from  this  peculiarity  arise  several  very  sensible

VOL. IV,  A

ii  PREFACE.

inequalities,  whose  periods  are  different ;  but  in  eclipses  they  are  all  transformed
[6001]  into  one  of  437'^*^',659.  Bradley  first  noticed  this  period  in  the  return  of
the  eclipses  of  the  first  and  second  satellites.  Afterwards,  Wargentin  explained
in  a  full  manner  the  law  of  the  inequalities  on  which  it  depends.  The  cause
of  it  he  attributed  to  the  mutual  attractions  of  these  three  satellites,  but
without  submitting  it  to  analysis,  which  was  not  then  sufficiently  advanced  for
that  purpose.  Mathematicians  have  since  improved  their  methods,  and  have
applied  them  to  the  investigation  of  the  perturbations  of  these  satellites.
These  great  inequalities  were  the  first  results  of  the  investigations,  as  they
had  been  the  first  which  were  discovered  by  observation ;  we  shall  here
develop  them  with  all  the  detail  their  importance  requires.

The  relative  positions  of  the  orbits  of  the  three  inner  satellites  give  rise  to  a
singular  phenomenon,  which  at  present  is  unique  in  the  theory  of  the  motions
of  the  heavenly  bodies. The  mean  motion  of  the  first  satellite,  plus  twice  that

[6002]  of  the  third,  would  be  equal  to  three  times  the  motion  of  the  second,  if
these  motions  were  exactly  in  a  subduple  progression ;  but  this  equality  is
incomparably  more  correct  than  the  law  of  the  progression,  and  the  small
variations,  which  have  been  noticed  by  astronomers,  are  within  the  limits  of
the  errors  of  the  observations.  Another  result,  which  is  not  less  remarkable,
is  that,  since  the  discovery  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  the  mean  longitude  of  the
first,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  has
never  differed  from  two  right  angles  but  by  a  nearly  insensible  quantity.  It
would  be  improbable  to  suppose  that  the  primitive  motions  of  these  three  bodies
exactly  satisfied  these  equations. It  is  much  more  reasonable  to  suppose  they

[6002']  were  very  nearly  correct  at  the  origin  of  the  motions,  and  that  afterwards  the
mutual  action  of  the  satellites  was  sufficient  to  make  them  rigorously  accurate.
This  has  been  proved  by  analysis,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  the  eighth
chapter  of  the  second  book.  We  have  here  resumed  this  interesting  subject,
and  treated  it  by  another  method ;  and  the  results,  agreeing  with  those  of  the

PREFACE.  iii

[6003]

book  just  cited,  serve  to  confirm  them.  We  may,  in  the  preceding  equations,
instead  of  the  mean  sideral  motions  and  longitudes,  substitute  the  mean
synodical  motions  and  longitudes,  and  in  general  we  may  refer  tlie  motions  and
longitudes  of  the  three  satellites  to  an  axis  moving  according  to  any  law;
whence  it  follows  that  they  cannot  all  be  eclipsed  at  the  same  time.  For,  in
the  simultaneous  eclipses  of  the  second  and  third,  the  first  is  always  in
conjunction  with  Jupiter ;  it  is  always  in  opposition  in  the  simultaneous
eclipses  of  the  Sun  produced  on  the  surface  of  Jupiter  by  the  other  two  [600&]
satellites.

The  mean  motions  and  epochs  form  six  of  the  twenty-four  arbitrary
quantities,  which  the  integrals  of  the  twelve  differential  equations  of  the
motions  of  the  four  satellites  must  contain.  The  preceding  relations  establish
between  these  constant  quantities  two  equations  of  condition,  which  reduce
them  to  twenty-two ;  but  the  arbitrary  quantities  which  these  equations  cause
to  disappear,  are  replaced  by  the  constant  quantities  of  an  inequality  which  is
denoted  by  the  name  of  the  lihration  of  the  satellites,  whose  period  rather  [GOW]
exceeds  six  years.  This  inequality  is  apportioned  among  the  three  inner
satellites,  according  to  a  ratio  depending  on  their  masses  and  distances ;  but,
as  all  the  researches  of  Delambre,  for  the  discovery  of  such  an  inequality  by
observation,  have  been  fruitless,  it  must  be  very  small.  Therefore,  at  the
origin,  the  motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites  and  their  epochs  must  have  very
nearly  satisfied  the  two  preceding  equations.  The  secular  equations  of  the
mean  motions  of  the  satellites,  do  not  alter  these  inequalities.  In  consequence
of  the  mutual  action  of  these  bodies,  these  equations  are  so  modified,  that  the
secular  equation  of  the  first,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  equal  to  three  times
the  secular  equation  of  the  second ;  and  even  the  inequalities,  which  vary
slowly,  conform  so  much  the  more  to  this  arrangement  as  their  periods  are
longer.  The  libration,  by  which  the  motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites  are
balanced  according  to  the  laws  we  have  just  mentioned,  extends  to  their  rotatory

[6005']

iv  PREFACE.

motions,  if  these  motions  are  equal  to  those  of  revolution,  as  appears  to  be  the
[6005]  .  .

case  by  observation. Then  the  attraction  of  Jupiter,  by  causing  the  rotatory

motions  of  the  satellites  to  participate  in  the  secular  equations,  modifies  these

motions  so  that  the  rotation  of  the  first,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  always

equal  to  three  times  that  of  the  second  satellite. We  may  here  observe  a  great

analogy  between  the  libration  of  the  satellites  and  the  actual  libration  of  the

moon,  whose  theory  has  been  explained  in  the  fifth  book. We  have  there

seen that  the  attraction  of  the  earth  upon  the  lunar  spheroid,  produces  a

rigorous equality between  the  mean  motions  of  rotation  and  of  revolution;

and  that  the  two  arbitrary  quantities,  which  disappear  in  consequence  of  this

equality,  are  replaced  by  those  of  an  equation  produced  by  the  actual  libration.

We  have  also  seen  that  the  secular  equation  of  the  mean  motion  of  revolution

does  not  alter  this  equality,  as  the  earth's  action  causes  the  rotatory  motion

of  the  moon  to  participate  in  that  equation.

The  orbits  of  the  satellites  suffer  changes  analogous  to  those  of  the  great
variations  of  the  planetary  orbits ;  their  motions  are  also  subjected  to  secular
equations  similar  to  those  of  the  moon.  We  shall  explain,  in  detail,  the  theory
of  all  these  inequalities,  the  observation  of  which  will  furnish  the  best  data  for
the  determination  of  the  masses  of  the  satellites,  and  of  the  oblateness  of
Jupiter.  The  great  influence  of  this  last  element  upon  the  motions  of  the
nodes,  determines  its  value  with  greater  accuracy  than  direct  measurement.
By  this  means  we  find  that  the  axis  of  revolution  of  Jupiter  is  equal  to  its
[6006]  equatorial  diameter  multiplied  by  0,9287 ;  which  differs  but  very  little  from  the
ratio  of  thirteen  to  fourteen,  given  by  a  mean  of  the  most  exact  measures  of
the  oblateness  of  that  planet.  This  agreement  is  a  new  proof  that  the  gravity
of  the  planets  towards  the  principal  planet,  is  composed  of  the  attractions  of
all  its  particles ;  as  we  have  found  in  the  seventh  book,  for  that  of  the  moon
relative  to  the  earth.

PREFACE.  V

However  perfect  the  theory  might  be,  there  still  remained  an  immense  task
to  fulfil,  in  order  to  reduce  the  analytical  formulas  into  tables.  Bouvard  first
computed  the  coefficients  of  these  formulas  in  numbers ;  but,  in  that  state,
they  yet  contained  thirty-one  indeterminate  constant  quantities,  namely,  the
twenty-four  arbitrary  quantities  of  the  twelve  differential  equations  of  the
motions  of  the  satellites,  the  masses  of  these  bodies,  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter,
the  inclination  of  its  equator,  and  the  position  of  its  nodes.  To  obtain  the  [6006^]
value  of  all  these  unknown  quantities,  it  was  necessary  to  discuss  a  very  great
number  of  eclipses  of  each  satellite,  and  to  combine  them  in  the  most  judicious
manner  to  obtain  each  element.  Delambre  executed  this  important  work  with
the  greatest  success,  and  his  tables,  which  represent  the  times  of  the  eclipses
with  as  much  accuracy  as  the  observations  themselves,  afford  to  the  navigator  a
sure  and  easy  method  of  finding  immediately,  by  the  eclipses  of  the  satellites,
particularly  by  those  of  the  first,  the  longitude  of  the  places  at  which  he
may  stop.

One  of  the  most  curious  results  of  these  researches,  is,  the  knowledge  of  the
masses  of  the  satellites,  which  seemed  to  be  out  of  our  power  to  find,  because
their  extreme  smallness  renders  it  impossible  to  measure  directly  their
diameters.  We  have  selected  for  this  purpose  the  data  which  appear  to  be
the  most  advantageous  in  the  present  state  of  astronomy ;  and  there  is  reason
to  believe  that  the  values  of  the  masses  which  have  been  obtained  are  very  [GOOCf]
near  the  truth.  These  values  may  hereafter  be  verified,  when  the  course  of
time  shall  have  made  known  more  accurately  the  secular  variations  of  the
orbits.  We  shall  now  give  the  principal  elements  of  the  theory  of  each
satellite,  resulting  from  the  comparison  of  the  formulas  of  the  theory  with  the
observations.

The  orbit  of  the  first  satellite  moves  upon  a  fixed  plane,  which  passes  always
between  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  through  the  mutual  intersection

VOL. IV.  B

vi  PREFACE.

of  these  two  last  planes,  whose  relative  inclination  is,  according  to  observation,
[6007]  equal  to  3^,4352.  The  inclination  of  this  fixed  plane  upon  the  equator  of
Jupiter,  is,  by  theory,  only  W\  consequently  it  is  insensible:  therefore  we
may  consider  the  first  satellite  as  being  in  motion  upon  the  equator  of  Jupiter.
No  excentricity  peculiar  to  this  orbit  has  been  discovered  ;  it  merely  partakes,
in  a  slight  degree,  of  the  excentricities  of.  the  orbits  of  the  third  and  fourth
satellites.  For,  in  consequence  of  the  mutual  action  of  all  these  bodies,  the
excentricity  peculiar  to  each  orbit  affects  the  others  more  feebly  as  they  are
more  distant.  The  only  sensible  inequality  of  this  satellite,  is  that  which  has
for  its  argument  the  double  of  the  excess  of  the  mean  longitude  of  the  first
satellite  above  that  of  the  second,  and  which  produces  in  the  return  of  eclipses
[6007']  the  inequality  whose  period  is  437''^^%659  ;  it  is  one  of  the  data  which  we  have
used  in  finding  the  masses  of  the  satellites ;  and  as  it  depends  wholly  on  the
action  of  the  second,  it  determines  the  value  of  its  mass  with  great  exactness.

The  observations  of  the  eclipses  of  the  first  satellite,  were,  in  the  first
instance,  the  cause  of  the  discovery  of  the  velocity  of  light,  which  has  since
been  better  determined  by  the  phenomenon  of  aberration.  In  the  present
state  of  the  theory  of  this  satellite,  when  the  observations  of  it  have  become
very  numerous,  it  has  appeared  to  me  that  they  can  be  used  to  determine  this
phenomenon  with  greater  precision  than  by  direct  observation.  Delambre,
at  my  request,  has  cheerfully  undertaken  this  discussion,  and  he  has  found
[6008]  62^^,5  =  20',25  for  the  whole  aberration,  which  is  exactly  the  same  as  Bradley
had  determined,  from  a  great  number  of  very  delicate  observations  upon  the
fixed  stars.  It  is  very  satisfactory  to  perceive  such  a  perfect  agreement
between  two  results  deduced  from  entirely  different  methods.  From  this  we
may  infer  that  the  velocity  of  light,  in  all  the  space  comprised  within  the  earth's
orbit,  is  the  same  as  upon  the  circumference  of  that  orbit ;  and  this  result  may
also  be  extended  to  all  the  space  included  within  the  limits  of  Jupiter's  orbit ;
for,  on  account  of  its  excentricity,  the  variation  of  the  radius  vector  of  that

PREFACE.  wu

planet  is  very  sensible  in  the  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the  satellites;  and
the  discussion  of  these  eclipses  proves  that  its  effect  is  exactly  the  same  as  in
the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  motion  of  light.

The  orbit  of  the  second  satellite  moves  upon  a  fixed  plane,  which  passes
always  between  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  through  their  mutual
intersection,  and  with  an  inclination  to  that  equator  of  20P'.  The  inclination  [(J(XO]
of  the  orbit  to  this  fixed  plane  is  5152^^  and  its  nodes  move  upon  this  plane
with  a  retrograde  motion,  whose  period  relative  to  the  tropics  is  29''**",9142 ;
this  is  one  of  the  data  which  are  used  in  determining  the  masses.  No
excentricity  peculiar  to  this  satellite  has  been  perceived  by  observation,  but
it  participates  a  little  in  the  excentricities  of  the  third  and  fourth.  Its  two
principal  inequalities  depend  on  the  actions  of  the  first  and  third  satellites.
The  relation  which  exists  between  the  longitudes  of  the  three  inner  satellites,
reduces  these  inequalities  to  a  single  term,  whose  period  relative  to  eclipses
is  437'***%659,  and  its  coefficient  is  the  third  of  the  data  which  are  used  in

finding  the  masses

*  t

The  orbit  of  the  third  satellite  moves  upon  a  fixed  plane,  which  passes
always  between  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  through  their  mutual
intersection;  the  angle  of  inclination  of  this  fixed  plane  to  Jupiter's  equator
being  931'^  The  orbit  of  the  third  satellite  is  inclined  2284'^  to  its  fixed
plane,  and  its  nodes  have  upon  this  plane  a  retrograde  tropical  motion,  whose
period  is  14P'*",739.  Astronomers  at  first  supposed  that  the  orbits  of  the  [6010]
three  inner  satellites  were  in  motion  upon  the  equator  of  Jupiter  itself;  but
they  found  that  the  inclination  of  this  equator  to  the  orbit  of  the  planet,
deduced  from  the  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  was  less  than  that  obtained
from  the  eclipses  of  the  other  two  satellites.  The  cause  of  this  difference  was
unknown;  but  it  arises,  however,  from  the  circumstance  that  the  orbits  of  the
satellites  do  not  move  upon  Jupiter's  equator,  but  upon  different  planes,  which

viii  PREFACE.

are  so  much  the  more  inclined  to  the  equator,  as  the  satellites  are  more  distant
from  the  planet.  We  have  found  a  similar  result  for  the  moon,  in  the  second
chapter  of  the  seventh  book  [5352]  ;  and  it  is  upon  this  that  the  lunar
equation  in  latitude  depends,  whose  value  being  determined  by  observation,
has  given  the  ellipticity  of  the  terrestrial  spheroid  with  as  much  exactness  as
that  which  is  deduced  from  the  measured  degrees  of  the  meridian.

The  excentricitj  of  the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite  presents  some  singular
anomalies,  the  cause  of  which  has  been  found  from  the  theory.  They  depend
on  two  distinct  equations  of  the  centre.  The  one  peculiar  to  this  orbit
{6011]  corresponds  to  a  perijove,  whose  annual  sideral  motion  is  29010'^ ;  the  other,
which  may  be  considered  as  an  emanation  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the
fourth  satellite,  corresponds  to  the  perijove  of  this  last  body.  It  is  one  of  the
data  which  we  have  used  in  finding  the  masses.  These  two  equations,  by
their  combination,  form  a  variable  equation  of  the  centre,  corresponding  to  a
perijove  whose  motion  is  not  uniform.  They  coincided,  and  were  added
together  in  1682,  and  their  sum  amounted  to  2458^^  In  1777,  the  one  was
subtracted  from  the  other,  and  their  difference  was  only  949'^  Wargentin
attempted  to  represent  these  variations  by  means  of  two  equations  of  the
centre ;  but  as  he  did  not  refer  one  of  them  to  the  perijove  of  the  fourth
satellite,  he  was  compelled  by  observation  to  abandon  this  hypothesis,  and  had
recourse  to  that  of  a  variable  equation  of  the  centre,  whose  changes  he
determined  by  observation,  from  which  he  obtained  nearly  the  same  results  as
those  we  have  just  mentioned.

Lastly,  the  fourth  satellite  moves  upon  a  fixed  plane,  which  is  inclined  to  the

equator  of  Jupiter  by  4547'^  and passes  through  the  line  of  nodes  of  that

equator  between  this  last  plane  and  that  of  the  orbit  of  the  planet. The

[6012] inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  to  the  fixed  plane,  is  2772'^ ;  and  its

nodes  have  upon this  plane a retrograde  tropical motion, whose period is

^  PREFACE.  ix

531  years.  In  consequence  of  this  motion,  the  inclination  of  the  orliit  of  the
fourth  satellite  upon  Jupiter's  orbit  incessantly  varies.  It  was  at  its  minimum
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  remaining  nearly  stationary  at  about  2'^,7
from  the  year  1680  to  1760;  and  during  that  interval  its  nodes  upon  the  orbit
of  Jupiter  had  a  direct  annual  motion  of  about  8^  These  results,  deduced  from
observation,  were  adopted  by  astronomers,  and  used  for  a  long  time  with
advantage  in  the  tables  of  this  satellite.  They  accord  with  the  formulas
[7365',  &c.]  which  make  the  inclination  and  the  motion  of  the  nodes  nearly
the  same  as  those  found  by  astronomers  from  the  discussion  of  the  eclipses ;
but,  in  later  years,  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  has  sensibly  increased,  and  it
would  have  been  difficult  to  discover  the  law  of  its  Vcuriation  without  the  aid  [eels']
of  the  theory.  It  is  curious  thus  to  see,  springing  up  from  analysis,  these
remarkable  phenomena,  which  had  been,  in  some  measure,  discovered  by
observation ;  but  the  results,  being  the  combination  of  several  simple  inequalities,
were  too  complicated  for  astronomers  to  be  able  to  discover  their  laws.  The
excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  fourth  satellite  is  much  greater  than  those  of
the  other  orbits.  Its  perijove  has  an  annual  direct  motion  of  7959^' ;  this  is
the  fifth  of  the  data  which  we  have  used  in  finding  the  masses.

Each  orbit  participates  a  little  in  the  motions  of  all  the  others.  Their
planes,  which  are  called  fixed,  are  not  rigorously  so;  they  move  very  slowly
with  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Jupiter,  passing  always  through  their  mutual  [GOXTT]
intersection.  The  inclinations  of  these  planes  upon  the  equator  of  Jupiter
vary  incessantly,  in  proportion  to  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  upon  the  equator
of  the  planet.

The  theory  of  the  satellites  being  founded  upon  the  observations  of  their
eclipses,  it  is  important  to  have  the  expressions  of  the  durations  of  these
eclipses,  noticing  every  thing  which  can  have  any  influence,  particularly  the
ellipticity  of  the  mass  of  Jupiter. We  have  obtained  these  expressions  by

VOL, IV.  c

X  PREFACE.

considering  generally  the  figure  of  the  shadow  projected  by  an  opaque  body,
from  the  action  of  a  luminous  one.  We  may  from  this  determine  the  durations
of  the  eclipses,  supposing  them  to  commence  at  the  moment  when  the  centres
of  the  satellites  begin  to  penetrate  into  the  shadow  of  the  planet.  But  their
discs,  though  inappreciable  in  themselves,  may  become  sensible  by  means  of
the  times  required  to  make  them  disappear  in  eclipses ;  moreover  the  magnitudes
of  the  satellites,  of  which  but  little  is  known,  their  different  brightness,  the  effect
of  the  penumbra,  and  probably,  also,  that  of  the  refraction  of  the  sun's  light  in
Jupiter's  atmosphere ;  all  these  causes,  whose  effects  it  is  almost  impossible  to
estimate,  make  it  necessary  to  recur  to  observation,  to  determine  the  mean
durations  of  the  eclipses  of  Jupiter's  satellites  in  the  nodes,  or  when  the  latitude
above  the  orbit  of  the  planet  is  nothing.  These  durations,  by  observation,  are
[6013]  9426^'  for  the  first  satellite,  11951^^  for  the  second,  14838^^  for  the  third;
lastly,  1978(y^  for  the  fourth.

The  observations  of  the  satellites  during  the  times  of  entering  and  quitting
the  shadow  of  Jupiter,  and  those  of  their  shadows  upon  Jupiter's  disc,  would
throw  much  light  upon  the  magnitudes  of  their  discs,  and  upon  several  of  the
other  elements  of  the  theory  of  the  satellites.  This  kind  of  observations,  which
has  hitherto  been  too  much  neglected  by  astronomers,  ought  to  receive  more  of
their  attention ;  for  it  appears  to  me  that  the  interior  contacts  of  the  shadows
[G013'}  would  determine  the  times  of  conjunction  with  greater  exactness  than  by
eclipses.  The  theory  of  the  satellites  is  now  so  much  advanced,  that  what
yet  remains  to  be  done,  can  be  determined  only  by  very  exact  observations.
Therefore  it  becomes  necessary  to  try  new  methods  of  observation^  or  at  least
to  satisfy  ourselves  that  those  we  use  deserve  the  preference.

The  extreme  difficulty  of  making  observations  on  the  satellites  of  Saturn,
renders  their  theory  so  imperfect,  that  we  hardly  know,  with  any  great  degree
of  accuracy,  their  revolutions  and  their  mean  distances  from  that  planet ; it  is

[6014]

PREFACE.  xi

therefore  useless  at  present  to  consider  their  perturbations. But  the  position

of  their  orbits  presents  a  phenomenon  deserving  the  attention  of  mathematicians

and  astronomers. The  orbits  of  the  six  inner  satellites  appear  to  be  in  the  plane

pf  the  ring,  whilst  the  orbit  of  the  seventh  differs  considerably  from  it. It  is

natural  to  suppose  that  this  depends  on  the  action  of  Saturn,  which,  by  its

ellipticity,  retains  the  six  inner  orbits  in  the  plane  of  its  equator,  as  it  maintains

in  the  same  plane  the  ring  by  which  it  is  surrounded. The  sun's  action  tends

to  draw  them  from  it ;  and  as  this  effect  increases  very  rapidly,  being  nearly  as

the  fifth  power  of  the  radius  of  the  orbit,  it  becomes  quite  sensible  in  the  outer

satellite. The  orbits  of  the  satellites  of  Saturn  move,  like  those  of  the  moon

and  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  upon  fixed  planes,  which  pass  always  between

the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  the  planet  through  their  mutual  intersection,  and

which  are  so  much  the  more  inclined  to  that  equator  as  the  satellites  are  farther

from  Saturn. This  inclination  is  considerable  relative  to  the  outer  satellite.

Its  orbit  is  much  inclined  to  the fixed  plane  which  corresponds  to it,  and

its  nodes  have  upon  this  plane  a  retrograde  motion,  whose  value  we  have [6014']

endeavored  to  determine,  using  the  observations  that  have  already  been  made

for  this  object ;  but,  these  observations  being  very  uncertain,  the  results  which

we  have  given  can  be  considered  only  as  a  very  imperfect  approximation.

We  know  yet  less  about  the  satellites  of  Uranus.  It  only  appears  from
HerschePs  observations,  that  they  all  move  in  a  plane,  nearly  perpendicular
to  the  planet's  orbit ;  which  evidently  indicates  a  similar  position  in  the  plane
of  its  equator.  We  shall  show  that  the  oblateness  of  the  planet,  combined  [t)0i4"]
with  the  action  of  the  satellites,  can  retain  these  orbits  very  nearly  in  that
plane.  This  is  all  that  can  be  said  relative  to  these  bodies,  since,  on  account
of  their  smallness  and  distance,  we  are  unable  to  obtain  a  more  thorough
knowledge  of  them.

The  theory  of  the  perturbations  of  the  comets  is  the  object  of  the  ninth  book.

xii  PREFACE.

The  greatness  of  the  excentricities  and  of  the  inclinations  of  their  orbits,  does
not  permit  us  to  apply  to  these  bodies  the  formulas  which  are  used  for  the
planets  and  satellites.  In  the  present  state  of  analysis,  it  is  not  possible  to
represent  the  motions  of  a  comet  by  analytical  expressions,  including  an
[6015]  indefinite  number  of  revolutions,  and  we  are  reduced  to  the  necessity  of
determining  them  by  parts,  by  means  of  quadratures.  The  most  simple  method
of  doing  this,  is  that  proposed  by  La  Grange,  in  which  the  orbit  of  a  comet  is
considered  as  an  ellipsis  which  varies  incessantly ;  each  elliptical  element  is
then  expressed  by  the  integral  of  a  differential  function,  which  may  be  obtained,
very  nearly,  by  several  methods  afforded  by  analysis.  We  have  here  given
these  differential  functions,  under  the  forms  which  appear  to  be  the  most
convenient,  and  we  have  also  given  a  very  exact  method  of  integrating  them  by
approximation.  It  would  have  been  pleasant  to  have  made  an  application  of
this  method  to  the  return  of  the  comet  of  1759,  but  various  occupations  have
prevented ;  we  shall,  however,  develop  the  process  with  sufficient  detail  to
prevent  any  other  difficulty  in  its  application  than  what  arises  from  the
substitution  of  the  numbers.

Then  we  shall  notice,  by  a  particular  analysis,  the  case  of  a  comet  which
approaches  so  near  to  a  planet  as  to  have  its  orbit  wholly  changed  ;  this
singular  case  deserves  so  much  the  more  attention,  as  it  appears  to  have
happened  to  the  first  comet  of  1770.  The  fruitless  attempts  of  astronomers
[6015']  to  reduce  the  observations  of  this  comet  to  the  laws  of  the  parabolic  motion,
are  well  known.  Lexell  first  discovered  that  it  had  described,  during  its
appearance,  the  arc  of  an  ellipsis  corresponding  to  a  revolution  of  rather  more
than  five  years  and  a  half.  Burckhardt,  by  a  profound  discussion  of  the
observations  of  this  comet,  and  of  the  elliptical  elements  proper  to  represent
them,  has  confirmed  this  remarkable  result,  upon  which  there  cannot  now  be
the  least  doubt.  But,  with  so  quick  a  revolution,  this  comet  ought  to  have
appeared  several  times  ;  nevertheless,  it  was  never  seen  before  1770,  and  has

PREFACE.  xiii

not  been  seen  since.  To  explain  this  double  phenomenon,  Lexell  remarked,
that,  in  1767  and  1779,  the  comet  passed  very  near  to  Jupiter,  whose  action  in
1767  might  have  decreased  its  perihelion  distance,  so  as  to  render  it  visible  to
the  earth  in  1770,  instead  of  being  invisible,  as  it  was  before;  and,  by  a
contrary  effect,  that  action  in  1779  could  have  increased  its  perihelion  distance
80  as  to  render  it  afterwards  invisible.  But  this  explanation  requires  that  the
elements  of  the  orbit  of  the  comet,  determined  by  its  positions  observed  in  1770,
should  satisfy  the  two  preceding  conditions,  at  least  by  making  but  very  slight
corrections  in  these  elements,  and  such  as  are  included  within  the  limits  of  the
alterations  which  the  attraction  of  the  planets  might  produce  in  them.  Now  this
is  found  to  be  the  case,  by  applying  these  formulas  to  the  investigation  of  the
perturbations  of  the  comet  by  the  action  of  Jupiter  at  these  two  epochs.  The
possibility  of  this  double  change  in  the  perihelion  distance  at  those  times  being
thus  proved,  the  explanation  given  by  Lexell  becomes  highly  probable.

Of  all  the  comets  which  have  been  observed,  the  one  just  mentioned  is  that
which  approached  nearest  to  the  earth ;  it  must,  therefore,  have  suffered  very
sensible  perturbations.  We  find  by  calculation,  that  the  earth's  action  increased
its  sideral  revolution  two  days  ;  and  the  comet,  by  its  reaction  upon  the  earth,  [6015"]
must  likewise  have  altered  the  duration  of  a  sideral  year ;  and  by  calculation  it
appears  that  the  decrement  of  the  year  would  be  a  ninth  part  of  a  day,  if  the
mass  of  the  comet  were  equal  to  that  of  the  earth.  The  researches  lately  made
by  Delambre,  to  improve  the  solar  tables,  do  not  allow  us  to  attribute  to  the
comet's  action  a  decrease  of  three  seconds  in  the  length  of  a  year ;  we  are
therefore  very  sure  that  the  mass  of  the  comet  is  not  a  five- thousandth  part  of
that  of  the  earth.  In  general  the  correspondence  between  the  observed  places
of  the  planets  and  satellites  with  those  which  are  determined  by  noticing  only
the  mutual  actions  of  these  bodies  upon  each  other,  proves  that,  notwithstanding
the  great  number  of  comets  which  traverse  the  planetary  system  in  every
direction,  their  attraction,  up  to  the  present  time,  has  been  insensible ;  thus  their

VOL. IV.  D

xiv  PREFACE.

masses  must  be  extremely  small,  and  astronomers  have  no  reason  to  fear  that
their  action  can  alter  the  accuracy  of  the  tables.

In  the  tenth  book,  several  subjects  are  noticed  relative  to  the  system  of
the  world.  One  of  the  most  interesting,  by  its  connection  with  universal
gravitation,  and  by  its  influence  upon  the  observations  of  the  heavenly  bodies,

[6016]  is  the  theory  of  astronomical  refractions.  The  air,  through  which  we  see
those  bodies,  refracts  their  rays  by  certain  laws,  which  it  is  of  importance
for  astronomers  to  ascertain  fully;  they  depend  on  the  constitution  of  the
atmosphere,  and  on  the  variations  it  suffers  in  its  pressure  and  temperature.
We  have  explained  in  detail  the  analysis  of  these  laws,  which  require  some
particular  expedients  when  the  body  is  very  near  the  horizon.  Then  the  refraction
of  its  light  depends  upon  the  law  according  to  which  the  temperatures  of  the
strata  of  the  atmosphere  decrease  as  they  are  more  elevated.  The  law  which
we  have  assumed  combines  the  advantage  of  an  easy  calculation  with  that  of
representing,  at  the  same  time,  the  experiments  on  the  diminution  of  the  heat,
the  observations  on  the  refractions,  and  the  heights  of  a  barometer  at  different
elevations.  Fortunately,  when  the  elevation  of  any  heavenly  body  exceeds
eleven  or  twelve  degrees,  its  refraction  depends  wholly  upon  the  state  of  the
air  in  the  place  of  the  observer,  and  this  state  is  indicated  by  our  meteorological
instruments.  At  equal  temperatures,  the  volume  of  the  same  quantity  of  air
is  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  pressure  it  suffers ;  but,  to  obtain  the
variations  of  this  volume,  corresponding  to  those  of  a  mercurial  thermometer,
we must know exactly  how this instrument corresponds with an air

[6016']  thermometer.  Gay-Lussac  has  made  a  great  many  very  correct  observations
upon  this  subject;  he  has  taken  an  extreme  degree  of  care  in  graduating
accurately  several  mercurial  and  air  thermometers,  using  particular  caution  in
drying  the  glass  tubes ;  for  their  humidity,  in  the  experiments  upon  this  subject
by  different  observers,  is  the chief  cause of  the difference  of  the results.

PREFACE.  XV

Then,  hy  immersing  these  thermometers  in  the  same  vessel  of  water,  at  the
temperature  of  melting  ice,  and  of  boiling  water,  he  has  found,  by  the  mean  of
a  great  number  of  results  corrected  for  the  effect  of  the  expansion  of  the  glass,
and  for  the  variations  of  the  barometer  during  each  experiment,  that  a  mass  of
air  represented  by  unity,  at  the  degree  of  melting  ice,  becomes  1,373  at  the
heat  of  boiling  water,  under  a  pressure  of  0'^*"',76  of  the  barometer.  Tobias  [6016"]
Mayer,  who  was  as  correct  in  his  experiments  as  he  was  great  in  astronomy,
found,  by  obser\'ations  whose  accuracy  he  warrants,  that,  by  the  same  increment
of  temperature,  the  mass  becomes  1 ,380.  This  differs  but  very  little  from  the
preceding  result,  with  which  the  experiments  of  Dalton  agree  perfectly.  To
obtain  the  corresponding  changes  of  two  mercurial  and  air  thermometers,
Gay-Lussac  divided  exactly  into  two  equal  parts  the  space  taken  up  by  these
two  fluids  in  each  thermometer,  from  the  degree  of  melting  ice  to  that  of
boiling  water,  which  gave  him  the  50th  degree  of  each  thermometer.  By
immersing  them  in  a  vessel  of  water,  raised  to  that  temperature,  he  has
observed  that  their  differences  were  always  extremely  small,  and  alternately  of
a  contrary  sign,  so  that  the  mean  difference  determined  by  twenty  experiments
was  found  to  be  insensible ;  whence  we  may  infer  that,  from  zero  to  the  heat
of  boiling  water,  the  march  of  the  two  thermometers  is  very  nearly  the  same.
These  results  are  sufficient  for  the  theory  of  refractions,  in  which  it  is  only
necessary  to  know  the  density  of  the  air  corresponding  to  the  indications  of  the
barometer  and  thermometer.  But,  in  the  theory  of  heat,  it  is  necessary  to
estimate  the  real  degrees  of  heat  indicated  by  those  of  a  mercurial  thermometer ;
and  this  will  be  given  with  great  accuracy  by  the  experiments  just  mentioned,
if  the  increment  of  heat  of  a  mass  of  air  submitted  to  a  constant  pressure,  be
proportional  to  the  increase  of  its  volume.  Now  this  hypothesis  is  at  least  very
probable ;  for,  if  we  imagine  the  volume  of  the  mass  of  air  to  remain  the  same
whilst  its  temperature  increases,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  elastic  force,
of  which  heat  is  the  cause,  will  increase  in  the  same  ratio. By  submitting  it [6016^'']

xvi  PREFACE.

in  this  last  state  to  the  pressure  it  suffered  in  the  former  case,  its  volume  will
increase  as  its  elastic  force,  and  therefore  as  its  temperature.  Hence  it
appears,  that  an  air  thermometer  indicates  accurately  the  variations  of  heat;
but,  its  construction  being  difficult,  it  is  sufficient  to  have  compared  its  march
with  that  of  a  mercurial  thermometer  by  very  exact  experiments.

Heretofore  no  use  has  been  made  of  hygrometrical  observations  in  the
calculation  of  refraction,  and  it  is  desirable  that  the  influence  of  the  humidity
of  the  air  upon  these  phenomena  should  be  determined  by  direct  experiments.
We  have  endeavored  to  supply  this  defect,  by  supposing  that  the  refractive
powers  of  water  and  its  vapor  are  proportional  to  their  respective  densities.
In  this  probable  hypothesis,  the  refracting  force  of  the  vapor  exceeds  that  of  air
[6016""]  of  the  same  density ;  but,  under  equal  pressures,  the  air  exceeds  in  density  that
of  the  aqueous  vapor;  hence  it  follows,  that  the  refraction  arising  from  that
vapor  diffused  in  the  atmosphere,  is  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  air
whose  place  it  occupies,  so  that  the  effect  of  the  humidity  of  the  air  upon  the
refractions  is  almost  insensible.  This  is  confirmed  by  some  observations  of
the  meridian  altitudes  of  the  sun,  seen  through  clouds  which  left  its  limb
well  defined ;  the  refraction  of  its  light  did  not  appear  to  be  changed  by  this
circumstance.

We  know  that  the  air  is  a  compound  of  two  gases,  azote  and  oxygen ;  and  it
is  probable  that  the  refractive  force  is  not  the  same  for  both  of  them  ;  therefore
the  refractive  force  of  the  atmosphere  would  change  if  the  proportion  of  these
[6017]  gases  should  be  altered.  But  it  follows  from  the  numerous  and  very  exact
experiments  of  Humboldt  and  Gay-Lussac,  that  this  proportion  remains  always
very  nearly  constant  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth ;  and  Gay-Lussac,  having
ascended  in  a  balloon,  obtained  some  atmospherical  air  at  the  height  of  more
than  six  thousand  five  hundred  metres  [over  four  miles]  ;  the  analysis  of  this

PREFACE.  xvii

air has  given  him  the  same  ratio  between  these  two  gases,  as  that  found
on  the  surface  of  the  earth.

The  refractive  force  of  the  atmosphere  may  be  determined,  either  hy  direct
experiments  upon  the  refraction  of  the  air,  or  hy  astronomical  observations.
The  great  number  and  the  accuracy  of  these  observations  have  induced  me  to
prefer  the  last  method,  and  I  have  deduced  from  them  a  formula  for  computing
the  refractions  when  the  apparent  altitudes  exceed  twelve  degrees.  I  believe
that  this  formula  will  give  these  refractions  very  accurately,  supposing  the
refractive  force  of  the  air  to  be  in  the  ratio  of  its  density,  and  that  its
temperature  and  humidity  have  no  sensible  influence  upon  it;  three  points
which  ought  to  be  verified  by  a  great  number  of  observations  and  experiments.
It  appears  to  me  that  the  best  method  of  obtaining  this  object,  is  to  observe,  in  [eoirq
the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  and  in  those  of  elevation  and  depression  of  the
barometer,  the  meridian  altitudes  of  some  stars  which  do  not  rise  more  than
twelve  or  fifteen  degrees  above  the  horizon.  For  this  purpose,  a  series  of
observations  has  been  commenced  at  the  observatory  at  Paris,  and  it  is
proposed  to  continue  them  during  a  great  number  of  years.  The  theory  also
supposes  that  the  density  is  constant  throughout  any  stratum  of  air  concentrical
to  the  earth ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the  winds  and  other  causes  may  produce
variations  of  density  which  cannot  be  ascertained,  but  may  have  an  influence
upon  the  refractions.  It  is  to  this  we  ought  chiefly  to  attribute  the  small
discrepancies  perceived  in  the  observations  of  the  same  star  on  diff*erent  days.
However  perfect  the  instruments  of  astronomy  may  become,  this  source  of
error  will  always  be  an  obstacle  to  the  extreme  accuracy  of  the  observations.

The  preceding  researches,  grounded  upon  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,
have  conducted  to  a  very  simple  formula  for  measuring  the  height  of  a  mountain
by  a  barometer. In  this  formula  we  have  noticed  the  variations  of  gravity

VOL. IV.  E

xviii  PREFACE.

depending  on  the  different  latitudes  and  elevations  above  the  level  of  the  sea.
We  should  be  pleased  to  have  introduced  into  it  the  effect  of  hygrometrical
measures,  but  we  have  not  sufficient  experiments  for  that  object.  Ramond
[6017"]  has  determined,  with  great  exactness,  the  principal  coefficient  of  this
formula,  by  means  of  numerous  and  exact  observations  of  the  barometer,
which  he  has  made  upon  several  mountains  whose  heights  are  well
known.

The  atmosphere  extinguishes  a  part  of  the  rays  of  light  which  traverse  it.
We  have  determined  the  law  of  this  extinction,  which  ought  also  to  take  place
in  the  sun's  atmosphere.  It  follows  from  these  formulas,  compared  with  a
[6017'"]  curious  experiment  of  Bouguer  upon  the  intensity  of  light  of  several  points
of  the  sun's  disc,  that,  if  the  sun  were  deprived  of  its  atmosphere,  it  would
appear  to  us  twelve  times  more  luminous  than  it  now  does.

One  of  the  principal  arguments  formerly  used  in  opposition  to  the  motion
of  the  earth,  was  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  this  motion  with  that  of  bodies
detached  from  its  surface  and  left  to  themselves.  Being  then  ignorant  of  the
[6018]  laws  of  mechanics,  it  was  supposed  that  the  spectator  ought  to  fly  off  with
the  whole  of  the  velocity  depending  on  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth  and
its  motion  of  revolution  about  the  sun.  The  knowledge  of  these  laws  leaves
now  no  doubt  upon  this  subject;  but  they  show  that  the  effect  of  the  earth's
rotation  upon  the  motion  of  projectiles,  although  of  small  moment,  may
become  sensible  by  proper  experiments.  We  have  here  explained  the  analysis
of  this  motion,  which  agrees  with  the  experiments  heretofore  made  to  discover
the  earth's  diurnal  motion  by  the  fall  of  bodies  w^hich  descend  from  a  great
height.

After  having  examined  several  cases  in  which  the  motion  of  a  system  of

PREFACE.  xix

bodies  which  attract  each  other,  may  be  exactly  determined,  we  have  resumed
the  theory  of  the  secular  equations  depending  on  the  resistance  of  an  ethereal
fluid  surrounding  the  sun;  a  theory  which  has  been  before  considered  at  the
end  of  the  seventh  chapter,  but  it  is  here  extended  to  an  unlimited  time.
This  resistance  would  really  take  place  in  nature,  if  the  solar  light  were
produced  by  the  vibrations  of  such  a  fluid.  If  it  is  an  emanation  from  the  sun,
its  impulsion  upon  the  planets  and  upon  the  moon,  being  combined  with  the  [6018']
velocities  of  those  bodies,  will  produce  in  their  mean  motions  an  acceleration
whose  analytical  expression  is  given ;  but  this  effect  is  destroyed  by  the
diminution  of  the  sun's  mass,  which  must  take  place  in  this  hypothesis.  Then,
as  the  attractive  force  of  that  body  incessantly  decreases,  the  orbits  of  the
planets  become  more  and  more  dilated,  and  their  motions  are  diminished
incomparably  more  than  they  are  augmented  by  the  impulsion  of  the  light.
As  no  variation  in  the  mean  motion  of  the  earth  is  indicated  by  observation,
we  may  infer,  Firstj  that  the  sun,  during  the  last  two  thousand  years,  has
not  lost  a  two  millionth  part  of  its  substance ;  Second^  that  the  effect  of  the
impulsion  of  light  upon  the  moon's  secular  equation  is  insensible.  The
analysis  of  this  effect  may  be  applied  to  gravity,  considered  as  being  the
result  of  the  impulsion  of  a  fluid  producing  the  effect  of  gravity,  by  moving
with  extreme  rapidity  towards  the  attracting  body.  From  this  it  follows,
that,  to  satisfy  the  phenomena,  we  must  suppose  this  fluid  to  have  an
excessively  great  velocity,  at  least  one  million  times  greater  than  that  of
light.  This  velocity  would  be  infinite  in  the  hypotheses  admitted  by
mathematicians  relative  to  the  action  of  gravity ;  these  hypotheses  may
therefore  be  used  without  fear  of  any  perceptible  error.  We  shall  here
observe  that  these  various  causes  of  alteration  in  the  mean  motions  of  the
planets  and  satellites,  do  not  produce  any  effect  in  the  positions  of  their
apsides ;  and  since  it  is  evident  from  observation,  that  the  motion  of  the
moon's  perigee  is  subjected  to  a  very  sensible  secular  equation,  we  may  from

xs.  PREFACE.

thence  conclude  that  the  moon's  secular  equations  must  not  be  attributed
either  to  the  resistance  or  to  the  impulsion  of  a  fluid.  We  have,  in  the  seventh
book,  developed  the  laws  of  these  equations,  and  the  real  source  of  them.

Lastly,  we  shall  conclude  this  volume  with  a  supplement  to  the  theories
of  the  moon  and  planets.  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and  Uranus,  compose  a  separate
system,  upon  which  the  inferior  planets  have  no  sensible  influence.  This
[6018"']  system,  by  the  mutual  action  of  the  three  bodies  upon  each  other,  suffers  great
inequalities,  which  we  have  developed  in  the  sixth  book.  The  discovery
of  these  inequalities  has  given  to  the  tables  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  an
unlooked-for  degree  of  accuracy.  Bouvard  has  again  discussed,  with  the
greatest  care,  all  the  oppositions  of  these  two  planets,  from  the  time  of
Bradley  to  the  present  moment,  as  observed  at  Greenwich  and  Paris,  by
means  of  great  transit  instruments,  and  the  best  mural  quadrants.  On  the
other  hand,  the  theories  of  these  three  planets  have  been  reviewed  with
particular  care,  and  I  have  discovered  some  additional  inequalities,  which
render  the  formulas  still  more  accordant  with  observation.  These  formulas,
reduced  to  tables  by  Bouvard,  represent  with  remarkable  accuracy  the  modern
observations,  those  of  Flamsteed  and  Tycho,  and  even  those  of  the  Arabs  and
Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Chaldean  observations,  which  Ptolemy  has  transmitted
to  us  in  his  Almageste.  The  singular  precision  with  which  Jupiter  and
Saturn,  from  the  most  remote  period,  have  obeyed  their  mutual  action,  proves
to  us  that  the  influence  of  causes  foreign  from  the  planetary  system  is
insensible.  One  of  the  principal  advantages  of  these  new  researches  is  the
exact  knowledge  of  Saturn's  mass,  whose  value  is  determined  by  this  means
much  better  than  by  the  elongations  of  the  satellites.  The  inequalities
produced  by  Uranus  are  too  small  to  enable  us  to  determine  its  mass  from
them ;  that  which  we  have  adopted  in  the  sixth  book,  seems  to  agree  very
well  with  observations  [9159a — g^.

PREFACE.  xxi

Nothing  now  remains,  to  fulfil  the  engagement  which  was  entered  into  at
the  commencement  of  this  work,  but  to  give  an  historical  account  of  the  labors
of  mathematicians  and  astronomers  on  the  system  of  the  world  ;  this  will  be
the  object  of  the  eleventh  and  last  book.*

*  Subsequently  the  author  published  this  portion  of  his  work  in  six  books,  making  in  all
sixteen.  This  portion  of  the  work  contains  improvements  and  additions  to  several  parts  of
the  Mecanique  Celeste,  together  with  some  hbtorical  notices  relative  to  the  most  important
subjects,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  fifth  volume.

VOL. IV.  F

CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.

PARTICULAR  THEORIES  OF  THE  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.

EIGHTH BOOK.

THEORY  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER,  SATURN,  AND  URANUS.
Object  of  this  theory  [G019] 1

CHAPTER  I. EaUATIONS  OF  THE  MOTIO.NS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER 1

The  reciprocal  action  of  the  satellites,  the  sun's  attraction,  and  the  oblateness  of  the  spheroid  of
Jupiter,  arc  noticed  [6020—6077] §  1, 3

CHAPTER  n. ON  THE  INEaUALITIES  OF  THE  MOTIONS  OF  JUPITER'S  SATELLITES,  WHICH  ARE

INDEPENDENT  OF  THE EXCENTRICITIES  AND  INCLINATIONS  OF  THEIR  ORBITS 17

Oevelopment  of  the  equations  of  the  motions  of  these  satellites.  Analytical  expressions  of  the
perturbations  of  their  radii  vectores  and  of  their  longitudes.  The  sun*s  action  produces  an
inequality  analogous  to  the  variation  in  the  lunar  theory  [6078 — 6125] §  3

InTestigation  of  the  terras  of  these  expressions  which  can  acquire  considerable  values  by  the
divisors  introduced  by  integration ;  these  divisors  being  very  small,  in  consequence  of  the  nearly
commensurable  ratios  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites.  Necessity  of  retaining,
in  these  small  divisors,  the  terms  depending  on  the  product  of  the  constant  part  of  the  disturbing
force  by  the  variation  of  the  radius  vector,  this  product  having  a  sensible  influence  upon  their
values  [6125'— 6171] §4

Effect  of  tennf  of  this  kind  on  the  times  of  the  eclipses  of  the  three  inner  satellites.  All  the
inequahties  produced  by  such  terms  depend  upon  the  same  angle,  having  a  common  period  of
437'»»^,650. This  result  is  conformable  to  observation  [6173— 61U3] §5

CHAPTER  m. ON THE INEaUALmES OF  THE  MOTIONS  OP  THE SATELLITES DEPENDING  ON

THB  BXCBfTRICITIES  OF  THE  ORBITS « 38

Hspnmixam  of  the  different  equations  of  the  centre  of  the  ntellltes,  and  of  the  motions  of  their
[61W-aW4''l §6

Xxiv  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

Investigation  of  the  tenns  which  can  become  sensible  by  tlie  effect  of  small  divisors,  introduced
by  integration,  although  they  may  be  multiplied  by  the  cxcentricitics,  which  arc  very  small
[G245— C270] §  7

The  sun's  action  produces  also  in  the  motion  of  the  satellites  some  sensible  inequalities,
depending  on  the  excentricities.  Expression  of  these  inequalities.  That  which  affects  the
longitude  is  composed  of  two  parts  analogous  to  the  eveclion  and  to  the  anmial  equation  in
the  lunar  theoiy  [6271—6294] ^8

CHAPTER  IV. ON  THE  INEQUALITIES OP  THE  SATELLITES  IN  LATITUDE 62

Analytical  expressions  of  the  latitude  of  a  satellite  and  of  the  motion  of  its  nodes  [621)5—6336]  §  9

The  part  of  this  expression  which  depends  on  the  displacements  of  the  equator  and  of  the  orbit  of
Jupiter,  represents  the  latitude  which  each  satellite  would  have,  if  it  should  move  in  an
intermediate  plane  which  passes  between  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Jupiter,  through  their
common  intersection.  This  effect  is  analogous  to  that  which  the  earth  produces  upon  the
moon,  as  we  have  seen  in  [5352,  &c.],  but  it  is  much  more  sensible.  Determination  of  its
value  [6337—6431] ; §  10

Investigation  of  the  terms  which  acquire  very  small  divisors  by  integration  in  the  expression
of  the  latitude,  in  consequence  of  the  nearly  commensurable  values  of  the  mean  motions  of  the
three  inner  satellites. Estimates  of  their  values  [6432 — 6486] §11

CHAPTER V. INEaUALITIES  DEPENDING ON THE  SQUARES  AND PRODUCTS OF THE  EXCENTRI-
CITIES AND INCLINATIONS OF  THE ORBITS 102

Calculation  of  these  inequalities.  It  is  sufficient  to  notice  those  only  which  have  a  long  period
[6487—6524] §  12

The  terms  which  become  the  most  important  in  the  secular  equations  of  the  satellites,  are  those
which  depend  on  the  secular  variations  of  the  equator  and  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  and  on  the
motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  fourth  satellite.  They  are  analogous  to  those  which  produce  the
moon's  secular  equation,  and  the  equation  of  the  moon's  motion  depending  on  the  longitude
of  its  nodes. Calculation  of  these  terms  [6525 — 6555'] §  13

CHAPTER VI. ON  THE INEQUALITIES DEPENDING  ON  T[IE  SQUARE  OF  THE  DISTURBING  FORCE.  126

The  most  remarkable  of  these  inequalities  has  already  been  discussed  under  its  general  form,
in  Book  II.  [1214' — 1242if].  It  depends  on  the  circumstance,  that,  at  the  origin  of  tlie  motion,
the  mean  longitude  of  the  first  satellite,  viimis  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that
of  tlie  third,  was  very  iiearly  equal  to  the  scmi-circumfcrence  n ;  and  subsequently,  by  means  of
the  mutual  action  of  the  three  bodies  upon  each  other,  it  became  accurately  equal  to  n.
Development  of  the  theory  of  these  motions  by  a  different  method  from  that  which  is  used  in
[1214',  &c.].  From  this  it  follows,  as  in  [1242^],  that  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  inner
satellites  are  subjected  to  a  species  of  lihralion,  and  it  is  of  importance  for  astronomers  to
investigate  and  determine  the  limits  of  this  libration  by  observations.  Hitherto  it  has  appeared
to  be  insensible.  From  this  it  follows  tiiat  the  relation  which  now  exists  between  the  mean
motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites,  will  continue  unchanged  to  future  ages.  Moreover,  tho
tico  inequalities  of  the  first  satellite,  arising  from  the  attractions  of  the  second  and  third

CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

Mt»Uit0«,  which  are  reduced  to  a  single  inequality,  by  means  of  the  relations  between  the
mean  nu>tion8,  will  never  be  separated  [6S56— <)663] §  14, 15

The  ratios  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites  modify  their  inequalities,  which  have
a  long  poriod.  These  ratios  are  not  changed  by  their  secular  inequalities,  which  are  so
t^joited  as  to  satisfy  them  [««3— 6711'] §16

Hie  ratios  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  inner  satellites  have  a  sensible  influence  on  the
variations  of  their  excentricitios  and  of  their  perijoves.  Examination  of  this  influence,  and  of
the  terms  produced  by  it  It  docs  not  in  any  way  alter  the  inclinations  or  the  nodes  of  the
orbits  [C718— 6748] §17

The  square  of  the  terms  depending  on  these  ratios  may  become  sensible  in  the  expression  of  the
longitude  [6749—6767'] §  18

The  square  of  the  disturbing  force  does  not  introduce  any  sensible  term  in  the  secular  equation  of
the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  nor  in  that  of  the  moon  [6768 — 6777] §19

CHAPTER  VII. NUMERICAL  VALUES  OF  THE  PRECEDING INEaUAUTIES 170

Elements  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites.  Numerical  values  of  the  coefficients  of  the  inequalities
[6778—6826] §20

Numerical  expressions  of  the  inequalities  of  the  radius  vector,  and  of  the  longitude,  independent
of  the  excentricitios  and  inclinations  [6827 — 6849] §21

Numerical  expressions  of  the  inequalities  depending  on  the  excentricitios  [6850 — 6886] §22

Numerical  expressions  of  the  inequalities  of  the  satellites  in  latitude  [6887 — 6934] §23

Numerical  expressions  of  the  inequalities  depending  on  the  square  of  the  excentricitios  and
inclinations  of  the  orbits  [6935—6944'] §24

Numerical  expressions  of  the  inequalities  depending  on  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force
[6945—6947] §25

CHAPTER  Vm. ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  ANY  SATELLITE 207

General  formulas  to  determine  the  shadow  projected  by  an  opaque  body  of  any  figure.  First
application  of  this  formula  to  tlie  shadow  projected  by  Jupiter,  supposing  its  form  to  be  spherical
[iu)S2y  Slc.].  Second  application,  noticing  its  ellipticity  [7015,  &c.].  Equation  of  its  shadow
and  of  its  penumbra  [7050,  d:.c.].  Calculation  of  the  arc  described  by  tlie  satellites  in  passing
through  it  [7063,  &.c.]. Formulas  to  determine  the  duration  of  an  eclipse  [7077 — ^7112'] . . .  .§  26

CHAPTER  IX. DETERMINATION OF  THE  MASSES  OF  THE  SATELLITES,  AND  THE OBLATENE88

OF  JUPITER 236

To  determine  these  quantities,  we  muMt  have  five  data  derived  from  observation.  Selection  of  the
quantities  which  are  the  most  proper  to  be  used  for  this  object  in  the  present  state  of  astronomy.
ValoM  of  the  masses  of  the  satellites  and  of  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter,  which  result  from  tliese
obeervations  [7102 — llOty].  The  ratio  of  the  equatorial  to  the  polar  axis  of  Jupiter  is  determined
by  this  means  with  greater  acfcuracy  than  by  direct  measurement;  and as  both  methods

VOL. IV.  G

XXV

XX vi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

give  the  same  results,  it  proves  that  the  gravity  of  the  satellites  towards  Jupiter  is  composed  of
the  attractions  of  all  the  particles  of  the  planet  [7161,  &c.] §  27

CHAPTER  X. ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES  AND  INCLINATIONS  OP  THE  ORBITS  OF  THE  SATELLITES.  244

Formation  and  resolution  of  the  equations  which  determine  the  excentricities  of  these  orbits,  and
the  motions  of  their  perijoves  [7170 — ^7173].  The  great  influence  of  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter
upon  these  elements  gives  to  each  orbit  an  excentricity  which  is  peculiarly  adapted  to  it ;  but  it
participates  in  the  excentricities  of  the  other  orbits  [7199',  &lc.] §28

Formation  and  resolution  of  the  equations  which  determine  the  inclinations  of  the  orbits  of  the
satellites,  and  the  motions  of  their  nodes  [7221 — 7224],  The  great  influence  of  the  oblateness
of  Jupiter  upon  these  elements  gives  to  each  orbit  an  inclination  which  is  peculiarly  adapted  to
it  [7251] ;  but  it  participates  in  the  inclinations  of  the  other  orbits.  They  all  move  upon  planes
so  much  the  more  inclined  to  the  equator  of  Jupiter,  as  the  satellite  is  farther  distant  from  the
planet  These  planes  pass  always  between  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  through  the
mutual  intersection  of  these  two  last  planes.  Calculation  of  the  inclinations  of  all  these  planes
to  the  equator  of  Jupiter  [7169'— 7251] §28

CHAPTER  XI. ON THE LIBKATION  OF  THE  THREE  INNER  SATELLITES OF  JUPITER 254

The  mean  longitudes  of  the  three  inner  satellites  are  subjected  to  this  law,  namely,  that  the
longitude  of  the  first,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  exactly
and  constantly  equal  to  the  semi-circumference  [7252].  If  this  law  were  not  rigorously  correct,
in  less  than  two  years  the  longitudes  would  vary  from  it  by  a  quarter  part  of  the  circumference
[7274'].  The  observations  made  on  eclipses  satisfy  this  law  with  as  much  accuracy  as  can  be
expected  [7262].  Reasons  why  there  may  be  some  small  variations  from  this  law  [7262',  &c.].
The  libration  of  the  three  inner  satellites  is  apportioned  among  them,  according  to  a  ratio
depending  on  their  masses  and  distances. Calculation  of  this  ratio  [7267 — ^7279] §29

CHAPTER  XII. THEORY OF THE FOURTH SATELLITE

259

Determination  of  its  motion  in  longitude  [7354].  Determination  of  its  motion  in  latitude  above  the
orbit  of  Jupiter  [7355].  Astronomers  have  found  by  observation,  that,  from  the  time  of  the
discovery  of  the  satellites  till  about  the  year  1760,  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite
upon  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  was  nearly  2°,7  [7362] ;  and  that  the  motion  of  its  nodes  was  direct,
and  about  8'  in  a  year  [7362,  &c.].  These  results  of  observation  are  a  necessary  consequence
of  the  formulas.  After  the  year  1760,  the  inclination  increased  considerably,  so  that  these
numbers  could  not  be  used  in  the  tables.  Formulas  for  the  duration  of  an  ecUpse  [7369,  7383],
and  [7385] .§30

CHAPTER  XIII. THEORY  OF  THE THIRD  SATELUTE .  .^ 276

Determination  of  its  motion  in  longitude  [7405].  It  has  an  excentricity  peculiar  to  its  own  orbit,
and  participates  very  sensibly  in  that  of  the  fourth  satellite,  which  introduces  into  its  motion
two  distinct  equations  of  the  centre,  of  which  the  one  corresponds  to  the  perijove  of  the  third
satellite,  and  the  other  to  the  perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  [7406,  &c.].  From  this  there
results  a  compound  equation  of  the  centre,  with  a  variable  excentricity.  Wargentin  had
discovered  this  variable  excentricity  by  obser\'ation  [7406],  but  without  ascertaining  the  law
of  its  variations.

CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.  XXVU

Detenninfttion  of  the  ntellite*s  motion  in  latitude  [7437.]  Fonnula  for  the  duration  of  iti
ecUpeea  [7430, 74a7] §31

CHAPTER  XIV. THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE 288

Detennioation  of  its  motions  in  longitude  [7463],  and  in  latitude  [7483].  Formula  for  the  duration
of  iU  eclipeea  [7483,  74i«,  74i«] §33

CHAPTER  XV. THEORY  OP  THE  HRST  SATELLITE 300

Determination  of  its  motions  in  longitude  [7513],  and  in  latitude  [7522].  Formula  for  the  duration
of  its  eclipses  [7523,  7530,  7531] §33

CHAPTER  XVI. ON  THE DURATION  OF  THE  ECUPSES  OF  THE  8ATELUTES 309

Formulas  for  the  duration  of  eclipses,  supposing  that  the  satellites  are  eclipsed  at  the  moment  of
the  immersion  of  their  centres  in  the  shadow  of  Jupiter  [7533 — 7561].  Comparison  of  this
duration  with  observation  [7558 — 7565] / §34

CrHAPTER  XVII. ON  THE  SATELLTTES OF  SATURN 315

The  inequalities  of  the  motions  of  these  bodies  have  not  yet  been  observed  [7580].  The  only
remarkable  phenomenon  which  they  present  to  our  view,  is  the  constant  position  of  all  their
orbits  in  the  plane  of  the  ring,  excepting,  however,  that  of  the  outer  satellite,  which  varies
seusibly  from  that  plane  [7581'].  Explanation  of  this  last  phenomenon  [7582,  &c.].  It  depends
on  the  circumstance  that  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  moves  upon  a  plane  passing  between
Saturn's  orbit  and  equator,  through  their  mutual  intersection ;  this  orbit  being  very  sensibly
inclined  to  that  equator.  Analytical  and  numerical  determination  of  the  motion  of  the  orbit  of
this  satellite  upon  this  plane  [7583,  &.C.] §  35,  36,  37

CHAPTER  XVIII. ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS 356

The  mutual  action  of  the  planet  and  its  satellites  may  retain  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  in  the
plane  of  its  equator  [7771— 77JX)'] §38

NINTH BOOK.

THEORY  OF  COMETS.

Difficulties  of  this  theory.  The  greatness  of  the  excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  the  comets,  and  of
their  inclinations  to  the  ecliptic,  does  not  permit  us  to  apply  to  their  perturbations  the  formulas
which  are  used  for  the  planets  [7800].  We  must  calculate  these  perturbations  from  point  to
point,  in  different  portions  of  the  orbit,  limiting  ourselves,  in  each  operation,  to  a  small  extent. .  3Cl

Xxviii  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  I. GEXERAL  THEORY  OP THE  PERTURBATIONS OF  COMETS 361

General  equations  of  the  troubled  orbit  [7805— '7812] §  1

We  can  satisfy  these  equations  by  some  analytical  formulas,  which  include  a  large  arc  of  the
orbit,  when  the  radius  vector  of  the  orbit  of  the  comet  is  either  very  small  or  very  great  in
comparison  with  that  of  the  disturbing  planet  In  the  first  case,  the  disturbing  action  becomes
insensible,  and  may  be  neglected ;  in  the  second  case,  the  comet  moves  very  nearly  in  an  ellipsis
about  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  planet  and  sun  [7814 — ^7845] §2

General  formulas  to  determine  the  perturbations  of  the  elements  of  a  comet  [7846 — ^7898']. . ..  .§  3

Formula  to  determine  the  difference  between  two  successive  returns  of  a  comet  to  the  perihehon
[7899'— 7921] §  4

Method  of  determining  the  numerical  values  of  the  perturbations  of  the  elements,  by  means  of
generating  functions. Explanation  of  the  theory  of  these  functions  [7922 — 7942] §  5

Reflections  on  the  use  of  these  formulas,  and  on  the  manner  of  varying  the  application  of  them  to
different  portions  of  the  orbit  [7943—7947] §6

General  analytical  expressions  of  the  perturbations,  in  the  case  where  the  disturbing  planet  is  very
distant  [7947'— 8010] §  7,  8

Manner  of  using  these  formulas,  by  applying  them  to  the  computation  of  the  orbit  of  a  comet,
as,  for  example,  that  of  the  year  1759  [8010'— 8013] §9

CHAPTER  II. ON  THE  PERTURBATIONS OF  THE MOTION OF  A  COMET  WHEN IT APPROACHES

VERY NEAR TO A PLANET 417

We  may  then  suppose  the  planet  to  have  a  sphere  of  attraction,  within  which  it  wholly  controls
the  relative  motion  of  the  comet,  and  beyond  which  the  comet's  motion  depends  solely  upon  the
sun's  action  [8014—8038'] §10

Development  of  this  hypothesis.  Determination  of  the  elements  of  tlie  orbit  of  the  comet  when  it
quits  the  sphere  of  the  planet's  attraction  [8039 — 8075] §11

A  more  simple  method  of  obtaining  these  values,  when  the  perturbations  are  not  considerable
[8076—8092] §  12

Application  of  these  results  to  the  comet  of  1770.  The  attraction  of  Jupiter  could  have  changed
its  orbit  in  1767,  so  as  to  render  the  comet  visible  in  1770,  instead  of  being  invisible,  as  it  had
been  before.  Again,  tlie  attraction  of  the  same  planet  in  1779,  coiild  have  changed  the  orbit  so
as  to  render  the  comet  forever  afterwards  invisible.  Calculation  of  the  perturbations  in  the
time  of  its  sideral  revolution  by  tlie  attraction  of  the  earth  [8093 — 8125] §13

CHAPTER  IH. ON THE MASSES OF THE COMETS, AND THEIR ACTION UPON THE PLANETS..  435

The  comet  of  1770  is  that  which  approached  the  nearest  to  the  earth,  and  its  action  upon  the  earth
did  not  change  sensibly  the  duration  of  the  sideral  year  [8132].  Hence  it  follows,  that  the  mass
of  this  comet  must  be  very  small,  and  that  it  is  less  than  -^^^j  ^^  ^^^  of  the  earth  [8132].  We
may  obtain  the  same  result  from  the  consideration  that  this  comet  passed  through  the  whole

CONTENTS  or  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.  XJUX

wjttata  of  Jupiter's  satellites,  without  producinf^  any  Miwible  alterations  in  their  motions  [813!y].
General  reflections,  tending  to  prove  that  the  massea  of  all  the  comets  are  extremely  small,  so
that  the  stability  of  the  planetary  system  is  not  disturbed  by  their  action  [8134 — 8196] §14

TENTH BOOK.

ON  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  SYSTEM  OF  THE  WORLD.

CHAPTER  I. ON  ASTRONOMICAL  REFRACTIONS

438

Differential  equation  of  the  motion  of  light  in  the  air,  supposing  all  the  strata  of  the  atmoe]^ere
to  be  spherical,  and  the  densities  variable  according  to  a  function  of  their  height
[8141—8154] §1

Investigation  of  the  refraction  suffered  by  light  from  the  various  attractions  of  the  different
mediums  through  which  it  passes  [supposing  the  light  to  be  an  emanation  from  the  luminous
body].  From  tliis  investigation  it  follows  that  the  sine  of  incidence  is  to  the  sine  of
refraction,  in  a  constant  ratio,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  medium.  The  refraction
changes  into  reflexion  beyond  a  certain  degree  of  obliquity.  When  the  successive  mediums
are  terminated  by  plane  and  parallel  surfaces,  the  velocity  of  light  and  its  direction  are  at  each
moment  the  same  as  if  it  passed  immediately  from  a  vacuum  into  each  of  them  [8156 — 8235].  §  2

Application  of  these  results  to  the  successive  attractions  that  the  different  strata  of  the
atmosphere  exert  upon  the  luminous  particles  which  traverse  them.  Differential  equation  of
the  motion  of  light  [8236— 82(>4'] §3

bdegraHon  of  this  differential  equcUion.  To  effect  it  generally,  we  must  know  the  law  according
to  which  the  densities  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  decrease  as  their  heights  increase.
The  two  limits  of  this  law  are  a  constant  density,  and  a  density  decreasing  in  a  geometrical
progression  for  equidistant  heights.  Investigation  of  the  refractions  in  these  two  cases.  The
first  gives  a  refraction  which  is  quite  too  small  [8265 — 8282] §4

The  second  hypothesis  supposes  a  uniform  temperature  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the
atmoaphere  [8283].  Integration  of  tlie  differential  equation  in  tliis  hypothesis  [8286 — 8339].
Reduction  of  the  integral  into  a  continued  fraction,  by  means  of  generating  functions
[8340—8362].  This  makes  the  refraction  too  great  [a370,  &c.] ;  therefore,  this  hypotheda
cannot  be  admitted.  This  is  conformable  to  observations  upon  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere,
which  decreases  as  the  height  increases  [837(K] §5

Integration  of  the  differential  equation,  supposing  the  density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  to
decrease  in  aritlimctical  progression,  whilst  the  heights  follow  a  similar  progression.  This
supposition  makes  the  refraction  too  small,  and  docs  not  satisfy  the  decrement  of  heat  of  the  air;
but  it  agrees  better  with  observation  tlian  tlie  hypothesis  of  a  constant  density.  The  true
eonstitution  of  the  atmosphere  must  therefore  fail  between  these  two  hypotheses  [8371 — 8404].  §  6

VOL. IT.  H

XXX  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

Integration  of  the  differential  equation  in  an  hypothesis  composed  of  the  two  preceding.  The
formulas  which  result  from  it,  for  the  refractions  and  for  the  decrement  of  the  heat  of  the  air,
agree  with  the  observed  phenomena  [8406 — 8462'] §7

Formula  which  gives  the  astronomical  refractions  for  all  altitudes  which  exceed  12°  [8474].  In
these  high  altitudes,  the  refraction  depends  only  upon  the  state  of  the  barometer  and  of  tlic
thermometer,  in  the  place  where  the  observation  is  made  [8474',  &c.] §8

Discussion  of  the  elements  which  enter  into  this  formula.  These  elements  are  the  variations
of  the  density  of  the  air  by  the  variations  of  its  pressure  and  heat ;  and  the  refraction  of
atmospherical  air  corresponding  to  a  given  temperature  and  pressure.  Determination  of  the
most  exact  values  of  these  elements  [8484 — 8505] §9

Examination  of  the  influence  which  the  humidity  of  the  air  can  have  upon  the  refractions  [8.506].
Theory  of  evaporation  [8509,  &c.].  Formula  which  represents  the  variations  of  the  elastic
force  of  the  vapor,  corresponding  to  a  change  of  temperature  [8512].  The  influence  of  the
vapor  of  water  upon  the  refractive  force  of  the  air,  is  nearly  insensible,  because  the  excess  of
its  refractive  force  above  that  of  the  air,  is  very  nearly  compensated  by  its  decrease  of  density
[8537,  &c.] : §10

CHAPTER II. ON TERRESTRIAL REFRACTIONS ^41

Definition  of  these  refractions,  and  determination  of  the  formulas  which  express  them
[8542—8582] §11

CHAPTER  in. ON THE EXTINCTION OF THE LIGHT OF THE PLANETS IN THE ATMOSPHERE

OF  THE  EARTH,  AND ON  THE  SUN'S  ATMOSPHERE 551

Formulas  which  give  this  extinction  of  the  light  in  the  earth's  atmosphere  for  different
inclinations  of  the  luminous  ray  to  the  horizon  [8583,  &c.].  We  may  suppose,  in  these
formulas,  without  any  sensible  error,  that  the  temperature  is  uniform ;  then  the  logarithm  of  the
intensity  of  the  light  is  as  the  astronomical  refraction  divided  by  the  cosine  of  the  apparent
altitude  [8600,  &c.] §12

Calculation  of  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  sun,  using  the  experiments  of  Bouguer  upon
the  different  intensities  of  the  light  near  its  limb  and  near  its  centre.  Determination  of  the
decrement  of  the  light  of  the  sun  in  passing  through  its  own  atmosphere.  If  the  sun's
atmosphere  were  removed,  it  would  appear  twelve  times  as  luminous  as  it  now  is
[8603—8646] §13

CHAPTER IV. ON  THE MEASURE OF HEIGHTS BY  A  BAROMETER 565

Relation  which  exists  between  the  heights  of  a  barometer  and  thermometer,  and  the  elevation
above  the  earth's  surface.  Formula  for  measuring  heights  by  a  barometer,  adapted  to  every
latitude,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  diminution  of  gravity  on  account  of  tlie  height  of
the  observer  [8648—8690] §14

CHAPTER  V. ON  THE  DESCENT OP BODIES WHICH FALL  FROM  A  GREAT HEIGHT.

>73

Equation  of  the  motion  of  a  falling  body,  noticing  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth,  whatever  be
the  figure  of  the  earth  and  the  resistance  of  the  air. If  the  body  falls  from  a  point  at  rest,  it

CONTENTS  OF  THE FOURTH  VOLUME.

deviates  from  the  vertical  towards  the  east  during  its  fall,  but  the  deviation  is  nothing  in  the
dirccUon  of  the  meridian  [8()dl— 8709'] §  15

Calculation  of  the  deviation  of  the  body  when  it  does  not  fall  from  rest  [8770,  Sec.].  If  it  be
projected  upwards,  it  will  fall  to  the  west  of  the  vertical  [8dOD] §16

CHAPTER  VI. ON SOME CASES WHERE WE CAN BUJOROITSLY ASCEKTAIN THE  MOTIONS OF

SEVERAL  BUDIE8  WHICH ACTUALLY ATTRACT  EACH  OTHER 597

Conditions  in  wliich  tliis  motion  may  be  ascertained.  Determination  of  the  curves  described  by
the  bodies  when  the  preceding  conditions  are  satiated.  Application  of  this  method  to  the
motions  of  three  bodies.  If  the  moon,  at  the  origin  of  itis  motion,  had  been  placed  in  opposition
to  the  sun,  and  at  a  distance  from  tlie  earth  which  is  equal  to  a  hundredth  part  of  the  radius
of  the  cartJi's  orbit ;  also,  if  the  earth  and  moon  had  been  projected  in  parallel  directions,  with
velocities  proportional  to  their  distances  from  the  sun ;  the  sun  and  the  moon  would  alternately
have  succeeded  each  other  on  the  horizon,  and  would  always  have  been  in  opposition  to  each
other  [8810—8883'] §17

CHAPTER  VII.  ON  THE  ALTERATIONS  WHICH  THE  MOTIONS  OP  THE  PLANETS  AND  COMETS
NAY  SUFFER  BY  THE  RESISTANCE  OF  THE  MEDIUMS  THEY  PASS  THROUGH,  OR  BY  THE
PUCCFJ3.*IVE TRANSMISSION OF  GRAVITY 609

The  effects  of  this  resistance  are  to  diminish  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  and  its  greater  axis,
while  the  perihehon  remains  immovable  [8884 — 8930] §18

Application  of  this  theory  to  the  resistance  caused  by  the  impulse  of  light  upon  the  heavenly
bodies,  whether  we  consider  it  as  being  produced  by  the  vibrations  of  an  elastic  fluid,  or  as
an  emanation  from  the  sun.  From  this  results  a  secular  equation  of  the  mean  motion
[8931—8959] §19

Comparison  of  the  secular  equations  of  the  earth  and  moon  depending  on  this  cause.  They  are
to  each  other  as  unity  to  63,160  [8987'] §20

Investigation  of  the  secular  equation  of  the  earth,  which  would  result  from  the  diminution  of  the
sun's  mass,  if  the  light  be  an  emanation  of  its  substance  [8988,  &c.].  This  inequality  is  to  that
which  depends  on  the  impulse  of  light,  as  — 1  to  0.0002129  [9015].  It  follows  from  this  theory,
that  the  impulse  of  the  sun's  light  upon  Uie  moon,  does  not  produce  a  secular  equation  of  a
quarter  of  a  second  in  that  satellite  [9018] ;  it  also  follows,  that,  for  more  than  two  thousand
years  last  past,  tlic  sun's  moss  has  not  varied  a  two  millionth  part  [9023] §21

Investigation  of  the  secuhir  equation  which  might  be  produced  in  the  planets  by  the  successive
tranoniisaion  of  gravity,  supposing  it  to  be  produced  by  the  impulsion  of  a  fluid  [9024,  &.c.].
This  equation  decreases  as  the  velocity  of  tlie  gravitating  fluid  increases.  If  we  were  to
attribute  the  moon's  secular  equation  to  this  cause,  we  must  suppose  the  fluid  to  have  a  velocity
>i>ven  millions  of  times  greater  tlian  tliat  of  light  [9034] ;  and  as  it  is  certain  that  nearly  the
whole  of  this  secular  equation  arises  from  the  diminution  of  the  excentricity  of  the  earth's  orbit,
it  followa  that  the  successive  transmission  of  gravity  can  contribute  to  it  only  an  extremely
•mall  portion ;  which  would  require  a  velocity  in  the  gravitating  fluid  at  least  one  hundred
Dtillions  times  greater  tlian  ttiat  of  light  [iKXi.'S] ;  so  that  we  may  consider  its  transmission  as
being  altogether  instantaneous.  Ttie  secular  equation  of  the  earth,  depending  on  tliis  cause,
being  only  a  sixth  part  of  Uiat  of  the  moon,  must  of  course  be  nothing,  or  insensible  [9036].  .§  23

XXX'

XXxii  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  VIII. SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE THEORIES OP  THE  PLANETS AND  SATELLITES 646

Investigation  of  some  new  inequalities  in  the  theories  of  Jupiter  and  Satum,  in  consequence  of
the  nearly  commensurable  ratio  of  their  mean  motions.  Application  of  these  inequalities
to  observation.  Definitive  formulas  of  the  heliocentric  motions  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter
[9037—9150] §23

Investigation  of  a  small  inequality  of  the  same  kind  which  occurs  in  the  moon's  motion
[9150"— 9158] §  24

CHAPTER  IX. ON THE  MASSES OF THE PLANETS  AND  SATELLITES 680

Manner  of  calculating  these  masses,  by  comparing  the  analytical  formulas  of  the  perturbations
with  a  great  number  of  very  accurate  observations.  Table  of  their  most  exact  values  obtained
by  this  method  [9159—9168] §25

ON  ASTRONOMICAL  TABLES.

Method  of  rectifying  and  improving  these  tables,  by  using  the  method  of  equations  of  condition
[9169—9170] §  26

FIRST SUPPLE]M[E]VT BY THE AUTHOR.

OF  THE  SUBJECTS  TREATED  OF  IN  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.
ON CAPILLARY ATTRACTION [9171] 685

Section  I. Theory  of  capillary  attraction  [9222,  &c.] 695

Section  II. Comparison  of  the  preceding  theory  with  observation  [9656,  &c.] 790

SECOND SUPPLEIWrEIVT BY THE AUTHOR.

OF  THE  SUBJECTS  CONTAINED IN THE SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY

ATTRACTION,

On  the  fundamental  equation  of  the  theory  of  capillary  action  [9757,  &c.] 806

New  manner  of  considering  the  capillary  action  [9900,  &c.] 834

CONTEJiTS  OF  THE  FOURTH VOLUME.

On  the  apparent  attraction  and  repulsion  of  raoall  bodies  which  float  apon  the  8urfiu:e  of  a  fluid
[10155,  6lc.] 909

On  the  adhesion  of  a  plate  to  the  surface  of  a  fluid  [10S58,  &c.] 947

On  the  figure  of  a  large  drop  of  mercury,  and  on  the  depression  of  mercury  in  a  glass  tube  of  a
great  diameter  [1037G,  &c.] 971

General  observations  [104G1,  &c.] 1005

ZZZIU

IN THE COMMENTARY.

Aatong  the  tubjtda  contained  in  the  J^otes^  toe  may  mention  the  foUoxcing :

Table  of  the  symbols  which  are  used  in  the  theory  of  Jupiter's  satellites  [G021a — 60Q4f].
Numerical  values  of  the  symbols  n,  n',  n",  n"';  JV,  JV*',  jV",  JV'";  M;  g,gi,g3,gaip,PijP»tpt
[G025o— />].
General  integration  of  a  linear  differential  equation  of  the  second  degree  [6049A,/].
Times  of  the  synodical  revolutions  of  the  satellites,  by  Delambre  [6781t,  &.c.].

Mass  of  Jupiter,  by  Professor  Airy,  deduced  from  the  elongation  of  the  fourth  satellite  — ^  [6787<fj.
Encke's estimate from  the  perturbations  of  Vesta, jjjj^, [6787cf]; Nicolai's  estimate  from  the
perturbations  of  Juno,  ^^^^  [6787e].

Computation  of  the  values  of  a,  a',  a",  a/"  [6790Jfc,  &c.].

Correction  of  the  signs  of  some  of  the  inequalities  [6843A,  684S,  6847e,  6849e,  &c.].

Formulas  of  integration  by  quadratures,  which  are  useful  in  computing  the  perturbations  of  the  orbit
of  a  comet  [7929a — 2].  Application  of  these  methods  to  the  computation  of  the  time  of  the  return  of
Ualley's  comet,  by  Pont^coulant,  Damoiseau,  Lubbock,  &.c.  [8009a — t].

Formulas  for  computing  the  elements  of  the  orbit  of  a  comet,  by  means  of  quadratures,  supposing  the
intervals  of  time  to  be  equal  to  each  other  [80094 — 8015z].  Table  of  the  differentials  of  the  elements  of
the  orbit  [8013</ — k].  Table  of  formulas  for  computing  these  elements  by  means  of  quadratures
[80146— p],  and  [8014u].

Principles  of  the  wave  theory  of  light,  by  Huygens,  and  its  application  to  the  laws  of  reflexion  and
refraction  [8137a — 8139n].  In  this  theory,  the  velocity  of  light  decreases  in  going  from  a  rarer  into  a
denser  medium,  which  is  contrary  to  the  results  in  the  Newtonian  theory  of  emission,  where  the  velocity
b  rappoeed  to  increase  upon  entering  into  a  denser  medium  [8137n — r].  The  demonstrations  of  the
laws  of  reflexion  and  refraction  by  means  of  the  principle  of  the  least  action,  as  usually  given,  will  not
apply  in  the  wave  theory  [8139A],  because  in  this  theory  the  time  is  a  minimum  [8139n].

The  fundamental  equation  [82G2]  which  expresses  the  differential  of  the  refraction,  may  be  considered
as  a  deduction  from  the  usual  law  of  refraction  wliich  is  obtained  from  observation  [8262c—/].  This
eqnaUon  may  be  reduced  to  the  form  [82G2r]  given  by  La  Grange,  and  it  becomes  iotegrable,  as  he
remarked,  by  assuming  a  particular  relation  between  the  elevation  of  any  stratum  of  the  atmosphere  and
hs  density  [82G2z,  Sic]

Experiments  of  Biot  and  Arago  on  the  refractive  power  of  different  gases,  show  that  the  refraction
produced  by  any  gas  is  always  rigorously  proportional  to  its  density  [8264a — p],

VOL. IV.  1

XXXIV

CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

The  hypothesis  of  a  unifonn  density  is  equivalent  to  that  proposed  by  Cassini  [82G7a] ;  and  the  simple
process  proposed  by  him  gives  the  same  form  to  the  expression  of  the  refraction,  for  altitudes  exceeding
ten  degrees,  as  the  more  complicated  hypothesis  of  La  Place  [8267<,  &c.].  Formulas  for  calculating  the
refraction,  by  Bouguer  [8374i],  by  Simpson  [8374i],  by  Bradley  [8383rf].  Bradley's  rule  for  correcting
the  refraction  on  account  of  the  temperature  and  density  of  the  air  [8383/^  ;  correction  of  this  formula
[8383  A].

Expression  of  the  heat  of  a  stratum  of  the  atmosphere  in  terms  of  the  pressure  and  density  of  the  air
[8400c].  La  Place's  formulas  for  the  density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  [8411 — 8412'],  give  a  too
rapid  decrease  of  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at  high  elevations,  and  make  the  decrement  of  heat  too
rapid,  particularly  in  low  altitudes  [8435n,  8444e,t,  8445«,  &c.].  La  Place's  formula  makes  the
temperature  at  the  summit  of  the  atmosphere  equal  to  — 91°,5  of  Fahrenheit's  thermometer  [8444x1,
•which  is  a  much  greater  depression  than  that  which  is  assumed  by  Fourier,  who  estimates  the  temperature
of  the  planetary  space  to  be  — 58°  of  Fahrenheit  [8444y].  Oriani's  formula  [8469A,  8473].  La  Place's
formula  of  the  refraction  in  altitudes  exceeding  twelve  degrees,  is  equivalent  to  the  methods  of  Bradley,
Simpson,  and  Cassini  [8474e — 8475c].  Names  of  several  persons  who  have  treated  on  refraction  [8538c].
Leslie's  hypothesis  of  the  density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  [8538A;].  Ivory's  formulas  for  the  same
purpose  [8539/— I] ;  these  give,  with  a  great  degree  of  accuracy,  the  temperature  and  density  of  the
atmosphere  in  the  two  extreme  cases,  namely,  near  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  at  the  greatest  elevation
to  which  Gay-Lussac  ascended  in  a  balloon  [8540a].  The  temperature  of  the  planetary  space,  deduced
from  Mr.  Ivory's  hypothesis,  is  nearly  — 74°  of  Fahrenheit's  thermometer,  differing  16°  from  Fourier's
estunate  —58°  [8540e,  8444?/'].

Expressions  of  the  terrestrial  refraction  in  various  hypotheses  of  the  decrement  of  heat  [8549^* — k].

Effect  of  the  earth's  atmosphere  on  the  intensity  of  the  sun's  light  [8593e].

In  calculating  the  height  of  a  place  by  a  barometer.  La  Place  uses  for  a  hypothesis  of  the  temperatures
of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere,  the  method  of  De  Luc,  as  modified  by  La  Grange  [8662^].  Reduction  of
La  Place's  formula  for  computing  the  height  of  a  place,  from  metres  to  fathoms,  and  from  degrees  of  the
centigrade  thermometer  to  those  of  Fahrenheit  [8690/'].

Application  of  the  method  of  definite  integrals  to  the  computation  of  the  effects  of  a  resisting  medium
on  the  motions  of  a  heavenly  body  [8908i — o].  Hypothesis  of  the  resistance  assumed  by  Mr.  Encke,  in
computing  the  perturbations  of  the  orbit  of  the  comet  which  bears  his  name  [8908p].  Calculation  of  the
coefficients  of  the  terms  of  the  series  which  expresses  the  resistance,  by  means  of  elliptical  functions
[8909/,  &c.].

Formulas  of  reduction  of  elliptical  functions  [8910A,  &c.].  Determination  of  the  quantities
h3^  b^h  ^,^?^  b^V,  b^?f  b^W  Sic,  by  means  of  elliptical  functions  [8911v— z'].

Expressions  of  8a,  de,  6n,  corresponding  to  one  revolution  of  a  comet  [8917c — I].

Application  to  Encke's  comet  [8917g- — i].  Formulas  used  by  Encke  in  computing  the  resistance
suffered  by  this  comet  [8917?n — 8919A].  From  the  numerical  results  of  the  calculations  in  [8919a — c],
it  is  probable  that  the  periodical  revolution  of  Encke's  comet,  which  is  a  little  over  1200  days,  is  decreased
about  one  tenth  of  a  day  in  each  revolution,  and  the  mean  distance  from  the  sun  is  decreased  about  x'sij^xt
part  of  its  value  [8919  e].  When  this  comet  is  at  the  same  distance  from  the  sun  as  from  the  earth,  the
action  of  the  resisting  medium  upon  the  comet  will  retard  its  progress  in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  of  its
path,  about  one  sixth  part  of  the  attraction  of  the  earth  upon  the  comet  [891 8t*,  &c.].  The  orbit
approaches  nearer  to  a  circular  form  by  means  of  the  resistance  of  the  medium  [8927cr].

Formulas  for  the  heliocentric  motions  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  for  January  1,  1830  [9128 — ^9148].

Method  of  computing  the  perturbations  of  the  planets  by  a  double  integration  by  quadratures,  which
has  the  important  advantage  of  including  all  the  powers  and  products  of  the  excentricities  in  the  values
of  the  terms  which  occur  under  the  signs  of  integration  [91466,  &c.].  This  method  has  been  successfully
applied  to  the  computation  of  the  inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  from  their  mutual  action  [9146c].
Explanation  of  tliis  method,  with  tables  of  formulas  [9146A — 9151A]. Example  of  the  method  of  reducing

CONTENTS  OF  TIIE  FOURTH  VOLUME.  ^^^,

fonnulaj  to  numbers  [9151i,  &c.]. Companson  of  the  results  of  the  calculations  by  Hansen  and
PoBlecouUnt,  of  the  great  inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  by  this  method,  and  by  that  of  La  Place

T*ble  of  the  values  of  the  elements  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  [9150/;  g].

On  CapHlanf  Attradion  [9171].  The  capillary  action  is  expressed  by  the  difference  between  the
■ttractiTe  force  of  the  particles  and  the  ropubive  force  of  heat  [9173e] ;  and  it  may  be  attractive  or
lepalsive  ]9i7Vf\.  Tliis  subject  is  treated  of  by  Gauss  [917%],  and  by  Poisson  [9173i,  &.c.].  Computation
of  the  action  of  a  spherical  mass  of  a  homogeneous  fluid  upon  an  external  column  [9254],  and  upon  an
internal  column  [9873].  Action  of  a  concave  or  convex  spherical  segment  [9275,  927G].  The  effect  of
noticing  the  change  of  density  of  the  fluid  near  its  surface  and  near  the  sides  of  the  vessel  in  which  it  is
contained,  is  to  change  the  functions  K,  H  [i)959rt,fc],  into  K,  H  [91C1/],  respectively.

Action  of  an  ellipsoid  upon  an  internal  column  [9294,  9301].  Action  of  a  body  of  any  form  upon  an
internal  column  [9301].  General  differential  equation  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  [9018] ;
its  Ibnn  when  tlte  tube  is  cylindrical  [9324,  9323n,  9].  Radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid
[9QBKi^  SSStG^].  Integral  of  the  differential  equation  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  in  a  cylindric  tube  [934?
9850].  Capillary  elevation  or  depression  of  a  fluid  in  a  tube  [9355,  9358, 9360,  9374,  9375].  Elevation
of  a  fluid  in  a  conical  tube  [9359e,  &.c.].

Elevation  of  a  fluid  between  two  cylindrical  surfaces  is  the  same  as  in  a  tube  whose  radius  is  equal  to
the  width  of  the  space  between  the  two  surfaces  [9409] ;  and  the  same  result  holds  good  between  two
parallel  planes  [9412,  9453].  Differential  equation  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  between  two  parallel  planea
[9415/  g]. Integration  of  this  equation  by  means  of  elliptical  functions  [9415m — 9417m.]

Extreme  value  of  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  near  the  planes  when  their  distance  is  infinite  [9431].

Figures  of  the  surfaces  of  a  small  column  of  fluid  contained  within  a  conical  capillary  tube  [9456,  &c.].
Inclination  of  the  axis  of  the  cone  to  the  vertical  when  the  capillary  action  balances  the  gravity  of  the
fhiid  [9472,  9474].  Differential  equation  of  tlie  figure  of  a  drop  between  two  parallel  planes  [9486] ;  its
integral  [9511,  &c.].  Form  of  a  drop  of  fluid  suspended  between  two  planes  inclined  to  each  other
[96!2S',  &c.].  Theorem  to  determine  the  inclination  when  the  capillary  action  balances  the  gravity  [9549],
If  two  parallel  planes  be  dipped  into  a  fluid  at  their  lower  extremities,  the  planes  will  tend  towards  each
Other  [9552,  &c.].  Expression  of  this  force  [958O7,  &c.].  Inquiry  into  the  cause  of  the  convexity  or
concavity  of  the  fluid  contained  in  a  capillary  tube,  or  between  two  near  planes  [9587,  &c.].  This  surface  of
a  fluid,  in  a  capillary  tube,  is  very  nearly  that  of  a  concave  hemisphere,  when  the  action  of  the  tube  on  the
fluid  is  equal  to,  or  exceeds,  the  action  of  the  fluid  on  its  own  particles  [9629,  &c.] ;  and  when  the  action
of  the  tube  on  tlie  particles  of  the  fluid  is  nothing,  the  surface  will  be  very  nearly  that  of  a  convex
bemisf^ere  [9650,  &c.]  Experiments  of  the  elevation  of  water  and  oil  of  oranges  in  a  capillary  tube
[9687—9669,  9670,  9670'],  and  between  parallel  planes  [9674,  &,c.].

Experiments  of  a  drop  of  fluid  suspended  between  two  inclined  planes  [9692] ;  comparison  of  this
experiment  with  the  theory  [9709].  Experiments  with  a  bent  capillary  tube  [9719,  9722],  and  with  a
capillary  siphon  [9726],  Experiments  on  the  concavity  and  convexity  of  the  surfaces  of  fluids  in  tubes
[9737,  ate.].

Capillary  effect  of  a  barometer  [9750,  &.c.  9753].  Experiments  of  M.  Dulong  on  the  change  in  the
convexity  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  a  barometer,  by  boiling  it ;  showing  that  this  arises  from  the
oxydization  of  the  mercury  [9754n,  &.c.].

Consideration  of  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface  [9841c,  &c.  9920A,  &.c.].  The  formulas  are  not
changed  by  this  consideration,  but  merely  the  signification  of  the  coeflicients  [9842i,  z].

Calculations  applied  to  a  vertical  cylinder  of  revolution  [989(^,  &c.].

Action  of  a  parallclopiped  upon  a  plane  in  a  vertical  direction  [9974</].  Action  of  a  wedge  upon  a  plane
[9D76c,  &c.] ;  of  the  successive  concentrical  laminie  of  a  homogeneous  fluid  [9977i,  &c.] ;  when  the  change
of  density  near  the  surface  is  considered  [9977r,  iS:c.].  Extension  of  the  calculation  from  a  cylinder  with  a
circalar  to  one  with  any  base  [0U8OA,  &.c.]. Anglo  of  inclination  at  the  side  of  the  tube,  independent  of

XXXvi  CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOURTH  VOLUME.

the  curvature  [9980^] ;  when  the  tube  has  no  action  upon  the  fluid  [9980r,  &c.] ;  when  it  has  the  same
action  upon  the  fluid  as  upon  its  own  particles  [998()y,  &c.] ;  when  it  has  a  greater  action  [9981/,  &c.].
Correction  of  the  computed  pressures  on  opposite  sides  of  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes  dipped  in  a
fluid  [9981n,  &c.].

Elevated  mass  proportional  to  the  circumference  of  the  base  [9985a].  Modification  of  La  Place's
remarks  relative  to  the  action  of  a  tube  upon  a  fluid  at  its  upper  extremity  [10012a,  &c.].  Differential
equations  of  the  upper  and  lower  surfaces  of  a  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  investigated  [10016a,  &c.] ;
difference  between  theory  and  the  experiments  of  Gay-Lussac  [10017g-,  &c.].

Case  of  two  fluids  in  a  vertical  column  [10020a,  &-c.] ;  elevation  of  the  central  point  in  consequence  of
the  introduction  of  the  upper  fluid  [10024a,  &c.].  Dr.  Young's  experiment  explained  [10025/),  &c.] ;
common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  [10027a,  &c.].

Effect  of  change  of  temperature  from  mixture  of  two  fluids  [lOlSOe,  &c.] ;  applied  to  experiments  of
Gay-Lussac  [lOlSOw;,  &c.].

Investigation  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  when  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  [10168A:,  &c.] ;  when  the  two
branches  are  equal  and  similar  [10170p,  &c.] ;  point  of  inflexion  must  be  on  a  level  with  the  outer  fluid
[101956,  &c.]  ;  effect  of  moving  the  planes  towards  each  other  till  the  point  of  inflexion  disappears
[10199i,  &c.] ;  when  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  small  [102006,  &c.].  Case  of  a  concave  surface
[10200m,  &c.];  when  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  [10201n,  &c.].  When  the  planes  will  attract,  and
when  they  will  repel  each  other  [10214m].

Case  of  a  glass  disk  dipped  into  a  vessel  of  water,  and  then  gradually  raised  up  [10280c,  &c.].

Formulas  for  a  drop  of  mercury,  published  by  La  Place  in  the  year  1812  [10385c,/].  Depression  of  the
mercury  in  a  barometer  [10442a,  &c.].

Drop  of  water  upon  a  surface  of  mercury  [10450e,  &c.]. Phenomenon  of  endosmose  [10469a,  &c.].

Comparison  of  La  Place's  theory  with  Poisson's  "  JVouvelle  Thiorie  de  Vaction  capillaire,  etcJ"  [9173A,
9258?/,  9259n,  9323r,  9372*,  t,  9410o,  9415^,  9416n,  o,  9417/i,  9425t,  9485Z,  9514«^,  9522/,  9549c,  9580?,
9702p,  9852e,  9976m,  9980e,OT,  10024z,  10025g',  10027w',  10045/,  m,  10089/i,  10094e,  10103c,  10150i,  10164/,
10169X,  10170/,  10171^,  102006,  10241(Z,  102645,  10280t;,  IO28I3/,  10293*,  1035od,  10380g—k,  10439»,
10440a,  c,m,  5,  10442p,a,  10444a,  104506— g-,  10450/i,  10^52b,  c,d,p,q,r",s,  10453s,  10456c—*].

SECOND PART,

PARTICULAR THEORIES OP THE MOTIONS OF  THE HEAVENLY BODIES.

EIGHTH  BOOK.

THEORY  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER,  SATURN,  AND  URANUS.

We  propose  in  this  book  to  consider  the  perturbations  of  the  satellites,
particularly  those  of  Jupiter.  By  comparing  the  results  of  the  analytical
theory  with  many  observations  of  their  eclipses,  we  find,  that  the  disturbing  ro^.q,
force  of  the  sun,  and  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  satellites  upon  each  other,
produce  all  the  inequalities  in  their  motions.  The  expressions  of  these
inequalities,  being  reduced  to  numbers,  produce  accurate  tables  of  the
motions  of  the  satellites.

CHAPTER I.

EaUATIONS  OF  THE  MOTIONS  OF THE  SATELLITES OF JUPITER.

1.  The  formulas  of  the  second  and  sixth  books,  relative  to  the
perturbations  of  the  planets,  may  be  applied,  in  the  same  way,  to  the
perturbations  of  Jupiter's  satellites.* But  the  almost  commensurable  ratios

[6020]

*(3211) Many  symbols  are  used  in  this  theory  of  Jupiter's  satellites,  and  as  the
definitions  are  scattered  in  various  parts  of  tlie  book,  we  have  here  made  an  alphabetical [602]a]
catalogue  of  the  most  important  of  them,  with  occasional  references  to  the  places  where
they  are  defined.

VOL. IV.

gj

T'^r'

t^y

h]

c,  c

C",

i]

c,

k]

-D,

I]

jy.

m]

d, d'.

d".

n]

£!,

0]

e,  e',  t"

P]

F,

9]

f>

r]

G,

%  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

which  obtain  in  their  mean  motions,  and  the  great  ellipiicity  of  the  spheroid
of  Jupiter,  render  several  of  these  inequalities,  which  can  be  neglected  in

[60216] ^(0)^a)^(2),&c,  Developed  as  in  [6090]  ; ^/l),in  [6141]  ; ^'(0),  ^'(l),  &c.  [6146]  ; ^^—^-^  [QZZ5,  &c.]  ;
c] a,  a',  a",  a'", The  mean  distances  of  the  satellites  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Jupiter  [6061,  6797—6800] ;
c'] at, bt, ct, Arcsdependingouthe variationsoftheequatorandexcentricityofJupiter'sorbit,[6400-6405,6527J;
a] a, b, c.  These  symbols  occur  in  the  equation  of  a  plane  touching  the  shadow  of  Jupiter  [6956,  &c.]  ;

• «] B,  Is  the  radius  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  [6045]  ; and  in  [6082']  it  is  put  jB  =  1 ;

. /] B(0),B(1),B(2)....  Developed  in  [6296];

g\ 6^0>,6P,&(2) Developed  in  [6305,  6802—6826].  For  6,b,  see  the  references  in  [6021  <^,d] ;.

Defined  in  [6706] ;

Is  annexed  at  the  end  of  any  number,  to  denote  that  it  has  been  altered  from  the  original  work,
to  correct  for  some  error  in  the  calculation,  as  in  [6843f,  &c.]  ; ct  is  used  in  [6527,  &c.]  ;
Is  defined  in  [6612']  ;

Represents,  in  [6027] ,  the  radius  vector  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter ;
Is  the  mean  value  of  the  radius  vector D  [6104]  ;
These  symbols  are  defined  in  [6055,  6566]  ;

Is  the  mean  longitude  of  the  sun  at  the  epoch,  in  its  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter  [6101',  6102]  ;
The  excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  [6061',  &c.,  6238,  &c.]  ;
Defined  in  [61.30]  ; F', in  [6147]  ;
Defined  in  [7003  or  7026]  ;
Defined  in  [6137,  6145]  ; G',  [6163]  ;
s] g,  g^,  g-^,  STg.  Defined  in  [6205,  6225,  &c.,  6025O]  ; gf  +  T, g^t+T^, St-{-'^^, ^a'+^s are  longitudes

of  the  perijov^s  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites,  from  the  fixed  equinox  ;
f] H,  The  ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi  major  axis  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  [6275']  ;

u] h,  h',  h",  h'". Defined  in  [6205]  ; h^,  h^,  h^,  [6227-6228'] ; A2  is  used  as  in  the  planetary  theory  [6067—6077]  ;
v] I>  The  longitude  of  the  perihelion  of  Jupiter's  orbit  [6276]  ;

w] i>  The  rotatory  motion  of  Jupiter about  its  axis,  in  the  time t,  is  represented  by it  [6316']  ;

i  is  used  in  [6433,  &c.,  6775,  &c.],  as  a  general  coeflficient;
w'] it-^o.  Is  used  in  [6664— 6708,  &c.]  ;

x] k,  Is  defined  in  [6093, 6122,  &c.]  ;  k,  in  [6609,  &c.]  ;

2/] L,L',  1,1', I", V",  Are  defined  in  [6300]  ; Z,  l^,  l^,  l^,  in  [6427]  ;  »i,  in  [6367]  ;

z] Mt  -f  E,  The  mean  longitude  of  the  sun  in  its  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter  [6102,  6025m]  ;

[6022a] Mt^E—I=:  V,  The  mean  anomaly  of  Jupiter,  counted  from  its  perihelion  [6275d— g-,  7313]  ;

6] M,  The  mass  of  Jupiter  [6028]  ; and  in  [6082] M  =  1 ; and  if  we  neglect m  in  comparison  with

c]  M  we  shall  have,  irom fx  =  M-\-7n  [6054], /*  ==  M  =  1,  nearly  ;

d]  m,  m',  m",  m'",  The  masses  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites  [6021, 6024,  7162—7165]  ;

e]  m,m',m",m"', m=10000.m  ;  ra'=lOOO0.m';  m"=l0000.m";  m'"=10000.m"'  [68416— c] ;
/] nt-\-i, n't-{-i', n"tJ^^', n"'t-{-i"', the  mean  longitudes  of  the  satellites,  viewed  from  the centre  of

gravity  of  Jupiter,  referred  to  the  fixed  plane,  and  counted  from  the  fixed  vernal  equinox,
as  in  [6062',  6091,  6175',  6782,  &c.]  ; nt,  n't,  u"t,  are  defined  in  [61766]  ;
g] ^>  Defined  in  [6112  or  6124]  ; JV'2,  jr'2,  &c.,  [6134, 6162a,  &c.]  ;  JV)i,  in  [6447]  ;  ^/2,  in  [6469']  ;

JV;,  JV/,  JVj',  JVf",  approximate  values  [6485,  6486]  ; values  computed  in  [60256-/]  ;
h\ o,  Is  used  in  connection  with it in  forming  the  angle if +  0  in  [6664— 6708,  &c.]  ;

t] -Pj  Is  used  as  a  constant  coefficient  in  [6683—6691]  ;

k] P^  Pi'  P^'  Pa' Defined  and  computed  [6300,  6424,  6025/?]  ;  "j?,  [6366,  6927]  ;

l] Pt-\-A, p^t-\-A^, pj-]-  A  , p  t-\-A  , represent  the  distance  of  the  nodes  of  the  satellites  fi-om  the

epoch  [6300,  6427,  &c.]  ;
m] Qy  k'^ (i". Are  used  as  coefficients  in  [6671—6689,  6725—6747,  6850—6862,  6873']  ;

Vni.  i.  ^1]  SYMBOLS.

the  planetary  theory,  sufficiently  great  to  be  noticed,  when  we  propose  to
determine  accurately  the  motions  of  the  satellites. We  shall  therefore

[eoQCT

8,

sr.

'.♦V'*.

f,  ^,  f*»  f**, The  mean  valuei  of  the  temi-dianieten  of  the  shadow,  where  the  satellites  pass,  these  discs [6029n]
bcin^  viewed  from  the  centre  of  Jupiter.  [7103—7110,  7533—7667]  ; q,  defined  in  [7032]  ;
General  expression  of  this  function  [6030]  ; similar  functions  R  [6467],  R'  [6566]. In . o]

[6982,  6982',  7019-7110], R,  R\ are  used  for  the  semi-diameters  of  the  sun  and  Jupiter ;
The  radii  vectors  of  the  fimt,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites  [6023,  6024,0036']  ;  the  centre  of . p]

gravity  o(  Jupiter  being  taken  as  their  origin  ;
The  sun  s  mass  [6025]  ;  . q]

The  tangent  of  the  sun's  latitude  above  the  fixed  plane  [6040,  6300,  6398]  ;  . r]

The  tangents  of  the  latitudes  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites,  above  the  fixed • *]
plane  of  zy  [6033,  6036',  6300]  ;  these  are  changed,  in  [6426',  &.C.],  into  the  latitudes  above
the  orbit  of  Jupiter;
,  Thelatitudesuf  these  satellites,  supposing  them  to  move  intheplaneof  Jupiter's  equator,  [6051, &c];  , n

Is  used  in  [7069 — 7579],  for  the  semi-duration  of  an  eclipse  of  any  satellite  when  in  the  nodes;  . u]

In  [7153—7156]  denotes  the  time  of  the  sidereal  revolution  of  the  fourth  satellite  ;  . t>]

Is  the  general  expression  of  the  time,  which  is  expressed  in  Julian  years  in  [7284,  &c.]  ; t ia . tr]
connected  with  constant  coefficients  g.  g  ,  g  ,  g [6229,  &c.]  ; M  [6102] ; n,  n',  «",  n'"
[6175',  &c.]  ; Pi  P  ^  P  ^  P  t  [6427],  &c.  The  value  ol t in eclipses  corresponds

with  the  definition  in  [7070]  ;
Represents  the  whole  time  o(  duration  of  an  eclipse  [7081]  ;  . x'\

The  angle  which  the  projection  of  the  sun's  radius  vector  D,  upon  the  fixed  plane,  makes  with  . y\

the  axis  of  x  [604  i ] ,  •&€. ;
Is  defined  in  [6068  or  6072]  ;  . z]

Represents,  in  [6029—6052],  a  part  of  the  function  — R,  depending  on  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter ; [6023a]
V::=Mt-\-E—I,la  used  in  [7313,  &c.],  for  the  mean  anomaly  of  Jupiter,  as  in  [G022a]  ;  , 6]

•,  r',  »",  b'". The  longitudes  of  the  first,  necond,  third  and  fourth  satellites,  counted  on  the  fixed  plane,  from  the  . c]

axis  ol  X,  [6032,  6036'],  in  their  relative  orbits  about  the  centre  of  Jupiter ;
V  ,  In  the  computation  of  eclipses,  represents  the  angle  which  is  described  by  the  satellite,  by  its . J")

synodical  motion,  on  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  from  the  time  of  the  conjunction  [7065,  &c  ]  ;
Represents,  [6059-6061)],  the  angle  included  between  the  two  radii r,  r-j-</r,of  the  first  satellite ;  . el

Represents,  in  [6045' — 6052] ,  the  sine  of  the  declination  of  the  first  satellite  m,  relative  to  the . /]

equator  of  Jupiter ;
Represent  the  three  co-ordinates  of  the  sun,  in  its  relative  orbit  about  the  centre  of  gravity  of . g'l
Jupiter,  [6026—6042]  ; but  in  [6963,  &c.]  they  represent  the  co-ordinates  of  the  sun's . A]
surface;  and X', V,  Z*,  [6971]  the  co-ordinates  of  Jupiter's  surface;

Ineclipses,hasaIsoanothersignification,asin  [7071, 7376', 7431, 7487, 7526];  and  Z  also  in  [7053']; , {]
x',^,x'; *",  y",  z" ; «"',  y"',  z"'  j the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  four  satellites  [(3022, 6024], . M
the  origin  being  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Jupiter. In  [6956 — 7061]  x,  y,  t  are  taken  for
the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  a  plane  which  touches  the  surfaces  of  the  sun  and  Jupiter.
The  value  of  x  in  ecUpscs  is  used  according  to  the  definition  in  [7066].
In  [6801 — 61)47]  a  represents  the  ratio  of  the  two  semi-major  axes  of  the  satellites  acting  upon  each , n

other; the  least  number,  a,  being  the  numerator,  and  the  greatest,  a',  the  denominator;
In  calculating  eclipses,  in  [7047—7112],  «  represents  the  greater  axis  of  the  elliptical  section  of . m]
the  shadow  of  Jupiter,  through  which  the  satellite  passes; and  in  this  case niafi'^—, , n]

[7073],  u:«ing  the  values  of  a,  «, corresponding  to the  satellite under  consideration;
C  is  used  in  [(J817j  ;

T,

t.

I*.

X,  V, z,

jr.

«.«

0.

•"

4  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

resume the differential  equations  of  these motions, using  the following
symbols ;

[6023o] /3',  ^",  r. Defined  in  [6226]  ;  yS/,  yS/',  ^;"  [6227']  ;  ^;,  y3/,  ^^"  [6228]  ; ^>,  fi^',  fi>"  [6228'];

also  in  a  table  of  these  symbols  [6229d] ;
«] r.  r^,  r  ,  r^. Defined  in  [6205,  6229—6233]  ;
q\ y,  The  inclination  of  Jupiter's  orbit  to  the  fixed  plane  [6313']  ; the  fixed  plane  in  [6398]  is  the

orbit  of  Jupiter  in  1750  ;
y  ^y'^y  "^y  "'»The  inclinations  of  the  orbits  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites  to  the  fixed  plane

[6315,  6489,  &c.] ;
<r,  Is  the  symbol  to  denote  the  variation  of  any  quantity  on  account  of  the  disturbing  force  [6056] ;

I,  «',  «",  «"', The  longitudes  of  the  satellites  at  the  epoch ;  these  being  connected  with nt, n't, n"t, n"'t,

as  in  [6175',  &c.]  ;
^,  Is  used  in  [6558,  &c.]  ;

^,  Corresponding  to  each  of  the  four  satellites,  is  defined  in  [7528,  7490,  7434',  7380]  ;

f ,  r,  r.  r ; r,,  f /.  f/'.  C  ;  f,.  f;>  C'  C  >  ^C  ^/'  C'  C ' """^  ^^^""^^  ^'^  [6422-6426]  ;

0,  ©',  0",  ©'",  The  mean  longitudes  of  the  satellites,  as  viewed  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  Jupiter,  and

counted  from  the  earth's  moveable  vernal  equinox  [7285,  7285a] ;
9,  The  inclination  of  Jupiter's  equator  to  the  fixed  plane  [6312]  ;

6',  The  inclination  of  Jupiter's  equator  to  the  variable  orbit  of  this  planet  [6360]  ;

. u

•  ^'
. w

•  ^

• y

z

[6024a

. 6

. 6']

c

. d

. e
. /

A,  A  ,  A  ,  A  , Defined  in  [6300,  6427,  &c.]  ;  ^A  in  [6368]  ;

X,  x',  k",  \"', Defined  in  [6343—6346]  ; computed  in  [7206—7209]  ;

X/.  ^/, \",  Defined  and  used  in  [6664—6711]  ;  /,  used  in  [63176,  &c.]  ;

X  ,  For  a  spherical  form  of  Jupiter,  is  defined  in  [6999]  ;  for  a  spheroid,  in  [7025] ;

fjc,  Is  first  used  for  M-|-m, as  in  [6054,  &c.]  ; afterwards  in  [6963,  &c.],  ^  =  o is  taken  for  the

equation  of  the  sun's  surface; and  [jl'=:^o for  that  of  Jupiter  [6971]. Both  these

values  of  ^  are  finally  eliminated,  and  it  is  used  in [6863,  7151,  &c.]  for  the  ratio  of

p  — i^ to  0,0217794;
n.  Represents,  in  [7307],  the  mean  longitude  of  Jupiter  in  its  orbit  about  the  sun,  counted  from  the

earth's  moveable  vernal  equinox  ; hence n  -f-  200°  is  the  mean  longitude  of  the  sun  in

its  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter;
KB,  <a'i  -nr",  <tf"' ,  The  longitudes  of  the  perijoves  of  the  satellites  [6062,  6199']. From  [7286c]  to  the  end  of  this

theory,  the  longitudes  are  counted  from  the  earth's  moveable  vernal  equinox ;  <or^,  [6620]  ;
«,  Represents  the  ellipticity  of  the  mass  of  Jupiter  [6044]  ;

p',  Is  defined  in  [7049]  ;

2,  This  symbol  is  defined  in  [6113  or  6325] ; 2'  in  [6324'] ; S^  in  [6235d]  ;

7,  Is  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter,  referred  to  the

fixed  plane  [6314]  ;
7  ,1  ',7  ".T  '">  The  longitude  of  the  ascending  nodes  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites,  relative  to  the  fixed  plane

[6316,  6489,  &c.]  ;
<)>,  The  ratio  of  the  centrifugal  force  to  the  force  of  gravity,  on  the  surface  of  Jupiter's  equator  [6044] ;

•*■,  The  retrograde  motion,  or  precession  of  Jupiter's  equator  upon  the  fixed  plane  [6313]  ;

—  ■*•',  The  longitude  of  the  descending  node  of  Jupiter's  equator  upon  the  variable  orbit  of  the  planet[6361];

m,  Defined  in  [6184]  ;

(0),(1),(2),  (3); 1^|, |T|, I^T], |T|; defined  in  [6216,  &c.,  6217c,  rf],  valued  in  [6864]  ;

(0,1),  (0,2),  &c. ; |"oXl, 1"0^1.  &c. ; defined  in  [6213,  6214,  &c.,  6307]  ; computed  in  [6865—6868]  ;

(1),  (11),  (111),  Defined  in  [6172—6175]  ; used  in  [6749—6766].

VUI.  i.  <^l.]

SYMBOLS.

m  «=  the  mass  of  the  first  satellite;

Xj  y,  2,  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  first  satellite  m,  referred  to  the

centre  of  gravit)'  of  Jupiter,  as  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,

supposing  that  centre  to  be  at  rest;
r  =v^«*-hy*+^  [^l^^]*  the  distance  of  the  satellite  m  from  the  centre  of

gravity  of  Jupiter. The  symbols  w,  ar,  y,  2,  r,  being  marked  with

one,  two  or  three  accents,  correspond  respectively  to  the  second,

third  ox  fourth  satellite ;
5=  the  sun's  mass;
X,  y,  Z,  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  sun,  referred  to  the  centre  of

gravity  of  Jupiter  as  their  origin,  supposing  this  centre  to  be  at

rest,  and  the  sun  to  describe  a  relative  orbit  about  the  planet;
D  =  y/x^-j-l^-f-Z',  is  the  distance  of  the  sun  from  Jupiter's  centre  of  gravity ;
M=the  mass  of  Jupiter. This  is  put  equal  to  unity  in  [6082,  &c.];

-f-<jF  represents  the  sum  of  the  particles  of  Jupiter,  divided  respectively  by
their  distances  from  the  centre  of  the  first  satellite «i.

M

[6031]
[6022]

[6023]
[6024]

[6025]
[6026]

[6097]
[6028]

[6029]

The  numerical  values  of  n,  vl,  n",  n'",  are  given  in  [67S2,  &c.]  ;  JV,  JV',  N",  N'",
in  [6835,  fee]  ;  M,  in  [6840] ;  g,  g,,  g^,  g^,  in  [7176—7195]  j  and  p,  p.yPayjt^,  in
[7226 — 7245].  As  these  numbers  are  frequently  used  in  this  book,  we  have  here
collected  them  together,  to  the  nearest  second,  for  convenience  of  reference.  The  methods
of  computing  them  will  be  given  in  [6781a,  &£c.].  The  numbers,  n,  n',  &c.,  correspond
to  a  Julian  year  of  365^  days,  and  to  a  fixed  equinox.

n  =  n.  1,000000 1

fi'  =  n.  0,498183:

n"  =  n.  0,247274:

n'"  =  ft.  0,106006:

A*=n.  0,999311  =

A*' =  11.  0,498011  =

JT'  =  n.  0,247239  =

A*"  =  n.  0,106996  =

Jlf  =  n.  0,000408  =

n  =  825826010"; n'r

A*=  826266718"; A*'  =

Mmm 88721^;

i»~Jlf=s  825488799";  rtf  —  M'

g=.  606990"; f^=

^-671889"; p^'

=  n".  2,007294  =  ft".  4,044090  =  ft'".  9,433419 ;
=  n'.  1 ,000000  =  n".  2,014697  =  n'".  4,6996«9 ;
=  n'.  0,496353  =  fi".  1 .000000  =  ft"'.  2,332643  ;
=  fi'.  0,212785  =  ft".  0,428698  =  ft"'.  1 ,000000  ;
=  ft'.  2,005911  =  ft".  4,041303  =  ft'".  9,4269167;
=  fi'.  0,999655  =  ft".  2,014003  =  ft'".  4,6979499 ;
:  ft'.  0.496282  =  ft".  0,999857  =  ft'".  2.3323090 ;
:  ft'.  0,212766  =  ft".  0,428658  =  ft'".  0,9999070  ;
:  ft'.  0,000820  =  ft".  0,001651  =  ft'".  0,00386196;
=  411412427"; ft"  =  204206636" ; ft"' =  87642691* ;
411 270707" ; A""  =  204176878* ; A""'  =  87684460* ;

•  411076216";  ft*  — .¥»=  203868424";  fi*'—Af:s  87205880*;
.178142"; If  =29010";  g=7969*;

.  183870* ; |»^=  28375" ;  j»^=  7688*.

[6025a]

»]
«]

•]
f\
g\
*]

*1

"»]
«]
•]

VOL. IV.

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

Function
R.

[6030]

This  being  premised,  we  shall  represent,  by  the  symbol jR, the  following
function  ;*

Jx  =  1^

m'

{ {^  -^f  +  (2/'  -  yf + (^  -  ^Y\^

m".  (xx"  +  j'r:"+  zsf') mf^

m"'.{xx"'i-yf+  zz"') nf[

/''3  {{x"'-xy+  {y"-yr+{^"-^y\'

S.(Xx+Yy+Zz)  S

D"

l(^X-xr+{Y-yy-{-{Z-zfli

^6V.

1

2

3

4
6

[6031]

[6030o]

[60306]
[6030c]

[6030dJ

[6030c]

[6030/]
[6030gr]

[6030/i]

[6030t]

[6030&]
[6030i]

This  function, R  [6030],  contains  all  the  disturbing  forces  of  the  motion

*  (3212)  If  we  suppose,  in  the  values  of  R,  \  m-  [913,  914,  914'],  that  there  are  five
bodies  m,  m',  m",  m'",  rn!'",  revolving  about  the  central  body  or  planet  IVI ;  and  instead  of
m"",  with  its  co-ordinates  x"",  y"",  z""^  we  write  S,  X,  Y,  Z,  respectively ;  we  shall
find,  that  the  expression  of  R  [913]  will  become  the  same  as  in  [6030] ;  the  term  — SV
being  introduced  for  the  correction  arising  from  the  elliptical  form  of  the  planet  INI ;  and
the  terms  of  [914],  depending  on  the  products  mf  m",  m' m"^,  mf  m"" ;  m"  wf",  m"  m"" ;
m'"  Tii"' ,  being  omitted.  Now  these  last  terms  may  evidently  be  neglected,  because  they
contain  only  the  co-ordinates  of  the  disturbing  bodies  m',  m",  ru\  rd'" ^  and  their  partial
differentials  relative  to  the  co-ordinates ar,  y,  z of  the  body m, vanish  from  the  functions

, [  —  j, (-7~)) which  occur  in  the  fundamental  equations  [915],  for  computing

the  motions  of  the  satellite,  in  its  revolution  about  the  primary  planet  M.  It  only  remains
therefore  to  ascertain  whether  the  quantity  5F",  as  it  is  defined  in  [6029],  is  the  correction
to  be  introduced  in  the  value  of  i2,  on  account  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  planet  IVI.  Now
we  have  calculated,  in  the  lunar  theory,  that  the  increment  of Q  [4773],  arising  from  the

Q

elliptical part  of  the planet,  is  represented  by

M-\-m
M

.5V; which,  on  account  of  the

smallness  of  —  is  very  nearly  equal  to ^V; moreover  we  have,  in  [4774a],  R= Q ;

and  as  the  radius  vector  r  is  supposed  to  be  the  same,  whether  the  planet  be  spherical
or  elliptical,  it  is  evident  that  the  increment  of  R,  can  be  derived  from  that  of  Q,  by
merely  changing  its  sign  ;  from  SV  [6030h'\  to  — 8V[60SO,  line  5]  ;  observing  that
the  value  of  SV,  in  the  notation  used  in  [4767,  4765]  is  the  same  as  in  [6029].  We
may  however  observe,  that  the  author  uses  V  for  5  F"  [6029 — 6052];  but  as  the  letter
V  is  used  in  other  parts  of  this  book  [7313,  he]  for  the  mean  anomaly  of  Jupiter,  it  was
thought  best  to  change V into SV, in  order  to  conform  to  the  notation  in  [4767,  Sic.].

[G033]
[6033]

VIIl.  i.  ^  I.]  COMPUTATION  OF  THE  FUNCTION R,  1

qf  the  satellite m; and  we  have  seetif  in [915,  ^c],  that  the  differential [603i'j
equations  of  this  motion  depend  on  its  partial  differentials.

We  shall  refer  these  co-ordinates  to  others^  which  are  more  convenient  for
astronomical  uses ;  putting  g^^^,,

V  =  the  angle  comprised  between  the  axis  of  x, and  the  projection  of  the

radius  vector r, upon  the  plane  of  xy;
s  =  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  of m, above  the  plane  of x  y, [In  the
formulas,  6426',  &c.  5  is  taken  for  the  latitude  of  the  planet  above
the  orbit  of  Jupiter.]
Then  we  shall  have,*

r-  COS.  V  ,«««.,

y  =  ^;  . [6035,

Z  =  -^  .  [6036]

Marking  successively  in  these  expressions  the  quantities r,  5,  t?, with [6036*]
one,  two  and  three  accents,  we  obtain  the  expressions  of x',y',z';  a^\i/',z"; [6037]
x'",  y"',  sf". This  being  premised, if  we  neglect  quantities  of  the  order, 5*,
we  shall  find, for the  part  of R  [6030], relative  to  the  action  of  the  •'

satellites,!

•  (3213) Substituting the expression of «  [4776] in [4777 — 4779], we get [6034al
[6034—6036],  respectively.

f  (3214)  If  we  develop  the  expressions  [6034 — 6036],  according  to  the  powers  of  «,
neglecting  terms  of  the  order  s*,  we  shall  get  the  values  of  a?,  y,  z  [6039a] ;  and  by
accenting  the  symbols  we  get  the  values  of j/,  t/,  si  [6039i].

x  =  r.(l  —  J«').cos.«;  y=:r.(l  —  J«').sin.t>;  2r  =  r.(l  —  i»')-*>  [6039a]

a/=r'.(l_i/«).cos.i/;  3^= /.(I  —  i5'«).8in.»' ;  t! ^r' .{\ —\{*).J.  [60396]

Substituting  tliese  values  in  the 6rst  member  of  [6039e], it  becomes  as  in  its  second
member,  and  by  using  [24]  Int. it  changes  into  [6039/]. Again,  by  developing  the  first [6039c]
member  of  [6039^],  it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member; and  this  is  reduced  to  the  form
[6039A],  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  [6039/,  6023]  and  the  value  of  *^=/?q^ya:p?a, [6039rf]
which  is  similar  to  [6023]. Then  using,  for  brevity,  the  symbol W  [6039Ar],  it  becomes
tiin[6039t]. The  power — \ of  this  expression  is  given  in  [6039/]. Multiplying

[6039/]  by — , and  [6039/J  by —  m, and  adding  the  products,  we  get  [6039m],  which

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

m

Part  of  R
dopending
on  the
latellitcs.

[6039]

Symbols.

[6040]
[6041]

I  r2— 2r/.cos.(«'— ») +7-'2 1  i

m  r

+  ■^i.{a—i^—is"').cos.(v"—v)+ss"]  —  rr-irj, rr^ — rrjJ^^

' r"2 *^ ^ ^ ^  ^  -^  * jr* — 2rr".cos.(t;" — v)+/'2J5

j  r2— 2r/'.cos.  (v''— v)+r"2  j  I

«i  r

+  ^^•f(I-i^-iO-cos.(«"'-»)+ss"'}

m

We  shall  put,  in  the  relative  orbit  of  the  sun  about  Jupiter,

S'  =  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  of  the  sun  *S,  above  the  fixed  plane ;
U=  the  angle  which  the  projection  of  D,  upon  the  fixed  plane,  makes
with  the  axis  of x.
Then  if  we  neglect  the  terms  of  B, divided  by Z)*, which  may  be  done  on
account  of  the  great  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun,  in  comparison  with
[6041'] that  of  the  satellite  from  Jupiter,  we shall  evidently  have,  for  the  part  of  R
[6030],  depending  on  the  sun's  action,  the  following  expression;*

represents  the  value  of the  two  terms  of R  [6030,  line  1], being  the same as  in
[6039,  lines  1,2].

[6039e]  xx'-{-yy'-^zz'  =  r/,{(l — p'^ — |s'2).(cos.t>'.cos.t;+sin.v'.sin.i>)+w'j

[6039/]  =  r/.  j  ( 1  —p^—p'^).cos.{v'—v)-{-ss'  \

[eOS9h]  =r'2— 2r/.cos.(u'— u)4-r2— 27y. \ ss'—l{s^-\-s^).cos.{v'-v)  [

[6039i]  =  W—2rr'.  {  ss—^{s^-j-s'-^).cos.{v'—v)  ]

[6039A;]  W  =  j^^ — 2rr'.cos.(«' — v)-\-r^

[60S91] {{3if-xf-Jr{y'-yy-}-{z'-zY\~^=  W''^-i-W^krr'.{ss'—^{s^-^s'^).cos.(i/—v)\

—m'.W~^.r/.\ss'~^s^-\-s'^).cos.(v—v)\,
In  like  manner  the  terms  [6030,  lines  2,3],  produce  these  in  [6039,  lines  3 — 6]  ;  which
may  also  be  derived  from  [6039,  lines  1,  2],  by  merely  accenting  the  letters.

*  (3215) Developing  the  first  member  of  [60426],  and  using  the  values  of r,  D,

[6042a] [6023,  6027].  we  obtain  [6042c]. Involving  this  to  the  power — i, and  then  multiplying

it  by — S, neglecting terms  of  the order mentioned in [6041'],  we  get [6042d];

VUl.  i.  ^  1.]  COMPUTATION  OF  THE  FUNCTION R.  9

Put  or «

/?  =  —  ^— ^^.  j  I-35»-35"+3(l-5*-5f'»).cos.(2t;'-2r)+1255'.cos.(C/-r)  \ . STtSS.

[6042]
[6043]

D 4Z)»
To  determine  the  part  of R, relative  to  the  attraction  of  the  spheroid  of
Jupiter,  we  shall  observe  that  this  part  is  equal  to — dF  [6030c]. If  we
suppose  this  spheroid  to  be  elliptical,  and  put

P  =  to  its  ellipticity ;  [6044]

9  =  to  the  ratio  of  the  centrifugal  force,  to  the  gravity,  at  the  surface  of rgQ^^r,

the  equator  of  Jupiter:
5=  the  radius  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter; which  is  put  equal  lo  unity

in  [6082-];  ^"^^

V  =  the  sine  of  the  declination  of  the satellite m, relative  to  the
equator  of  Jupiter;
then  we  shall  have,  as  in  §  35  of  the  third  book,*

[6045']

whence,  by  transposition,  we  obtain  [6042c]  ;

=  I^— 2(Xx-f-ry4-Zr)-fr»;  [6042c]

j(X— x)«-H  Y-yf-\-{Z-zfl^  D i)3  V^*~*yT^'^>'  '  2Z>3  2i>5  > l  j

S^Xr+Yy+Zz) S S S,^ _3{Xx-{-Yy+ZzfS

JP  |(x— x)2-HY— yH-(Z— z)8|*  d"^2/?3  2Z)5  •  iwue\

The  terms  in  the  first  member  of  [6042e]  are  the  same  as  the  part  of JR  depending  on  5,

ID  [6030,  line  4] ;  and  we  must  reduce  the  corresponding  expression,  in  the  second  member [6042^]

of  [6042e],  by  substituting  the  value  of Xx-\-Ty-{-Zz. Now  this  expression  is  easily

deduced  from  that  in  [6039e,/],  by  changing a?',  y',  z',  /,  t>', »' into X,  Y,  Z,  D,  U,  S', iQ04Sg]

respectively  ;  hence  we  get  [6042/j] ;  whose  square,  neglecting  s*  [6038],  is  as  in  [6042tJ;

and  by  reduction,  using  [20]  Int.  we  obtain  [6042Z:],

Xr-f-ry+Zr  =  I>r.j(l— ^5*— JS'2).cos.(£7-t>)+5S'j  [6042*]

{Xx-\-Yy+Zzy  =  n»r^ )  (1_,«— S'3).cos.«( U—v)+^S'.cos.(U'-v)  \  [6042i )

=  iDar3j(l-»a— S'=»)-h(l— 48— 5'»).cos.2(f/— t;)4-45S'.cos.(C7-r)j. [6042*]
Substituting  this  last  expression  in  the  second  member  of  [6042e],  and  making  a  slight
reduction,  it  becomes  as  in  [6042].

[6046a]

•  (3216) To  conform  lo  the  notation,  which  is  used  in this  article,  we  must  change

«f  [1726'] into 9  [6044'J ; and oA  [1795'J  into p  [6044] ; hence  [1812]  becomes

M M

Vi=— -{- ~.{ip — p).(fi«— i). The quantity F, in this expression, is defined in [60464]

M
[UaS^'], and is  what is  called --\-iV in  [6029]; hence the expression iF^

corresponding  to  the  notation  of  the  present  article,  is
▼OL. IV.  3

10  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Part  of  '  „3 •  V:3^ r/'  V'^  3 J'

—  R

ortKo'"= If  Jupiter  be  not  elliptical,  we  shall  have,  by  ^  32  of  Book  III.,*

ollipticlty

of  Jupiter.  iVT n^

[6047J  ^V^  £^5(X^_p).  (v^-i)+A.  (l-v^).cos.2.}  ;

[6048]

[6049]

r"

h  being  an  arbitrary  quantity  depending  on  the  figure  of  Jupiter,  and
■a  [1616'^'']  the  angle,  formed  by  one  of  the  two  principal  axes  of  Jupiter
situated  in  the  plane  of  its  equator,  and  the  meridian  of  Jupiter  which  passes
through  the  centre  of  the  satellite.  It  is  easy  to  prove,  by  the  following
analysis,  that  the  term  depending  on  cos.2w,  has  no  sensible  influence
upon  the  motion  of  the  satellite,  by  reason  of  the  rapidity  with  which  the

M
[6046c]  ^^=  ,3  •  C^?— ^)-('^'-*)-

The  symbol  /x  [1434',  1430"],  represents  the  cosine  of  the  polar  distance  of  the  satellite  ;
[6046rf] hence fx  =  v  [6045']. Substituting  this  in  [6046c],  and  then  multiplying  the  expression

by  the  square  of  the  radius B'^  [6045],  which  is  taken  for  unity  in  [1702",  1812],  we  get

[6046] .  The  propriety  of  this  multiplication  by  B'^,  is  evident  from  the  consideration
[6046e] ^|j^^ ^y  j-5029] is  of  the  order 2, relative  to  the  co-ordinates  and  radii,  and M. is

of  the  order  3.

*  (3217) The  expression  of 5^ [6046], corresponds  to  an  ellipsoid  of  revolution;

[6047a[ but  if  we  suppose  the  surface  of  the  planet  to  be  a  curve  of  the  second  order,  and  put  as

in  [1792,  1793] r'3)=0, r^4^  =  0,  &c., Z^3^  =  0,  Z^''^  =  0,  &c. ; changing  also,  as

M

in  [60466], V  into  — -\-^V',  we  find  that  the  expression  [1811]  becomes

[60476]  7  +  *^=-^-/o-p-''-«'+*^-  Y^-^fi!.d.a'-^.Z^^K

[6047c]  Substituting  the  value  of  M  =  l^.y^^  p.<?.a^  [1811'],  and  rejecting  this  term  from  both
sides  of  the  equation,  we  get

[6047d]  hV=J^.Y^^\  r.Y  d.  a^  —  --Z^^^  =  ^.r^2)_  ^  ^T^S).

*■  •■  3r3  J  °  '  7.3  r3  r3

Now  2^^^  [1632]  depends  in  this  case  on  the  centrifugal  force,  and  must  produce  the
[6047c] same  term  of  ^F" as  in  [6046],  namely,  that  which  is  produced  by 9,  or  —j-.^(p(y^ — ^).

[6047/]  ^"t  o.Y'-^\  instead  of  being  —^h.{ixP—^)  [1792],  must  be  — a^.(M.2_^)-f-a^"".(l-fx,2).cos.2ro
[1763] ,  and  if  we  substitute  aA  =  /)  [6046a],  ii=v  [6046^^],  also  aA""=A,  it  becomes
— p.(v2 — ^)+A.(l— v2).cos.2t3. Substituting  this  for  aF^^  in  [6047fZ],  and  then  multiplying

[6047g']  ^^'  ^^  ^"  [6046e],  by  B'^,  using  also  the  part  depending  on  Z^^^  [6047e],  we  get  the  value  of
5  J^  [6047],  corresponding  to  the  general  ellipsoid.

VIII  i.  ^1.]  COMPUTATION  OF  THE  FUNCTION R.  11

angle » varies;* so  that  the  value  of 6V, which  is  here  to  be  used,  is

the  same  as  in  the  hypothesis  of  an  elliptical  spheroid,  whose  ellipticity  is p.  ^ ^

Therefore  we  shall  suppose,

^^=  (P— i?).  a-  V«).  ^.  [6050]

We  have  very  nearly, v  =  5--5,, Si  denoting  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  l^^^]
of  the  satellite m above  the  fixed  plane,  supposing  it  to  be  moved  in  the ^i

•(3218) The  rotation  of  Jupiter  about  its  axis  is  performed  in  about  ^  ofa  day;  and
if  we  compare  this  angular  velocity  with  that  of  the  first,  or  swiftest  of  the  satellites,  whose [6049a]
revolution  is  performed  in  about  1^  days,  we  shall  find  that  it  is  about  4^  times  as  great ;
so  that  the  angle 2a will  vary  about  9  times  as  swiftly,  and  may  be  considered  as  of  the [60496]
form 9nt; that  of  the  satellite  being  of  the  form nt. Now  a  term  of Rj  of  this  kind, [6049e]
being  introduced  into  the  numerator  of  the  expression  of 5v^^  [6060],  in  the  terms  which
contain R explicitly,  under  the  signs  of  integration  ; will  produce  by  the  integrations  a
divisor  of  the  order  9n,  or  even  of  a  higher  order ;  so  that  the  resulting  term  will  be  much r6049rf]
decreased  by  this  divisor  ;  and  as  the  term h, with  which  it  is  connected,  is  found  also,  by
observation,  to  be  much  less  than i<p  —  p,  we  may,  on  both  accounts,  neglect  it,  in  the [6049e]
terms  of 5r^,  now  under  consideration. Similar  results  are  obtained  from  the  part  of  iv^,
[6060],  containing rSr^  or  ir; which  is  obtained  by  integrating  the  equation  [6057],  as [6049/*]
in  [865  a,  6],  changing r5r  into y,  &c. These  last  formulas  being  frequently  referred
to  in  this  volume,  we  shall  here  insert  them,  with  a  slight  modification  in  the  symbols,  so
as  not  to  interfere  with  the  notation  which  is  generally  used  in  this  theory. Substituting

in  [865a3 aQ=2.Jf.  ^^g  (m^<-j-s^), and  changing a into a^,  it  becomes  as  in  [6049^] ; [G049g]

1 being  the  sign  of  finite  integrals. The  terms  under  the  sign 2, are  similar  to  those  in
[870^,  accenting  the  letters m^,  s^,  a^. The  value  of y, obtained  from  the  integral  of [6049A]
[6049Jt] is  given  in  [6049/],  and  is  similar  to  that  in  [871,8656] 6^,  9^, being  the [6049i]
arbitrary  constant  quantities,  introduced  by  the  integration ;

y = ^'  S«/  '+<p.)+2-  ;;^,  •  "cl°..(«».  ^+0-  [6049o

Now  putting y=r6r in  [6049^],  it  becomes  similar  to  the  equation  [6057] ;  and  we  see

that  the  integral  [6049/]  introduces  the  divisor m^ — «* ; which  by  putting,  as  in  [60496], [6049m]

m,=  9n  and  a^=:n,  becomes  equal  to  80n*  ;  so  that  the  part  of  rir,  and  the  corresponding [C049n]

part  of  &v^,  [6060],  is  also  much  decreased  by  the  integration,  and  may  therefore,  on  account

of  its  smallness,  be  neglected,  as  in  [6049/]. This  result  of  the  analysis  in  the  present [6049o]

article  is  confonnable  to  the  remarks  in  [6049]  ; but  we  may  observe  that,  without  using

this  analytical  method,  proposed  by  the  author  in  [60'19],  wo  may  obtain  the  same  result, [6049^]

in  a  more  simple  manner,  by  the  process  used  for  Saturn,  in  [3604a — c].

12  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6051'] plane  of  Jupiter^s  equator;* therefore  we  have  for  the  part —  iF of  the

Part  or  R  '  J. T>

depending expressiou  of li,

[6052]  j[l^^sV=—(p  —  iv)'H  —  (s—S,y}.

2.  We  shall  now  resume  the  differential  equations  of  the  motions  of  a  body
which  is  acted  upon  by  any  forces.  Among  the  several  forms  which  we  have
given  to  these  equations,  in  the  preceding  books,  we  shall  select  those  which
lead,  in  the  most  simple  manner,  to  the  results  we  wish  to  obtain.  We  have,
by  §46,  BookII.,t

[6054]

»=r^-7+7+Vdi^+K^)=  ^^^

dt is  the  element  of  the time,  and  this  element  is  supposed  to  be  constant
[397",  416,  915,  &c.]; (i  =  M'\-m is  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  Jupiter  and

thesatellite m  [914']. Weahoha.ver.(-—j==x.f—j+y.(~j+z.(—}
d [6053e]. The differential  characteristic d  [916'], refers only to  the

[6055]

*  (3219) The  tangents  s,  s^  [6033,  6051]  being  very  small,  we  may  take  their  difference
[6051al 5 — s^  for  the  angle,  or  sine  of  the  angle  of  elevation  of  the  satellite  above  the  equator  of
Jupiter,  which  is  represented  by v, in  [6045'] ; hence  we  get v  =  s — s^  [6051].
[60516] Substituting  this  in  [6050],  and  changing  the  signs  of  the  terms,  we  obtain  [6052].

t  (3220) The  expression  of  R  [6030] contains  the  quantities oc,y,  z; and  if  we
[6053a] suppose R to  be  a  function  of  these  quantities,  and  substitute  their  values  [6034 — 6036],
it  will  become  a  function  of r,  v,  s. Now  taking  its  differential  in  both  suppositions,  we
have  generally,

[6053i]  (f)  .  *  +  (:^)  .  <?„  +  (^)  .  rf.  =  (^) .  cfe  +  (^) .  rfy  +  (^-^) .  dz.

Substituting,  in  the  second  member,  the  values  of  dx,  dy,  dz,  deduced  from  the  differentials

[6053c] of  [6034 — 6036],  the  result  will  be  identical  for  all  values  of dr,  dv,ds;  and  if  we  retain

in  the  second  member  only  the  parts  depending  on dr,  we  shall  get  the  corresponding

part  of  the  first  member,  namely  (  —  j.dr. Now  by  considering x,  r, as  the  variable

COS t)  J*

[6053rf] q^a'^tities,  in  [6034],  we  get dx  =  dr.  — ^  z=dr.-;  and  in  like  manner  from  [6035,6036]

V  z

we  get dy  =  (?r.  - , dz=  dr.  - . Substituting  these  in  the  second  member  of  [60536],

/dR\  /dR\ X  J , /dR\ y  /dR\ z  r

[6053e] ^eget (^- j.rfr=(^— J. -rfr+ (^— j._rfr+ (^— j.-c^rj  multiplying  this  by  ^,  we  get

[6055]  ;  hence  the  equation  [917]  becomes  as  in  [6053].

[60581

VUI.  i.  ^ 2] DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  OF  THESE  MOTIONS.  13

coordinates  of  the  satellite m. If  we  denote,  by i  [dlT'],  the  variation ^
depending  on  the  disturbing  forces,  we  shall  have,  b^'  taking  the  differential
of  the  preceding  equation*  relative  to 6,

0  =  -^'+..V+2./d/?-|-r.(^— ); (I)  fe057]

JVe  shall  determine, by  this  differential  equation,  the  perturbations  of  the

radius  vector ;  we  may  even  include  in  its  integral  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit

of  the  satellite ;  for  by  reason  of  the  extreme  smallness  of  that  excentricity, [6057']

we  may  neglect  its  square  and  higher  potcers  [6051  d—gl,  and  suppose  that

the  vanation 2r6r contains  not  only  the  inequalities  depending on  the

perturbations,  but  also  the  elliptical  part  of r*.

If  we  put dv^ for  the  angle  included  beticeen  the  two  radii  vectores r rf„
and r  +  dr, we  shall  have,  by  §  46  of  the  second  book,t  [6059]

2.d.(rSr)—dr6r 3a ^^  j.  j  d  ,  2rt . ,, /"dBS

— —rh — .ffndt,dR-\ — .fndt.rA  -j- ,cy\ r^h"  «» »«n[l reoeoi

•(3221) If  we  put r=ia-\-6r, and  suppose 5r to  contain  the  elliptical  part  of [6057a]
the  radius  vector  as  well  as  the  perturbations,  we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  the
excentricity  and  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces,  r^^=a^-\-'ia^ry  or  r'=a^-|~2'*^^  >  whose [60576]

second differentialis  d2.(r«)=2.rf8.(r5r). Moreover,  -^=JV='^('l--)~  =  -  +  ^; t^^''*]

hence ^-  —  =  -^  =  ^—^  . Substituting  thb  and  the  preceding  value  of  d2.(r*)  in [6057c^

[6053],  we  get  [6057]. We  may  remark  that  the  smallness  of  the  excentricities  of  the
orbits  of  the  satellites  is  seen  by  the  inspection  of  the  first  line  in  the  values  of  v'",  t/',  »',  v [6057(/]
[7318,7405,7467,7513], which  are of  the  order  of  the  quantities 2c"',  2c",  2c',  2€,
respectively,  as  is  evident  from  the  value  of  v  [669]. Hence  it  appears  that c'",  e",  c',  c, [6057e]
are  of  the  order  4632",  851",  1 83",  20"  j  or  in  parts  of  the  radius 0,007 ; 0,001  j 0,0003 ; ^^^-jfy
0,00003,  respectively  ;  which  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  excentricity  of  Jupiter's
firbit Jx61208"  [6882]. We  may  also  observe  that  in  strictness  we  may  wholly  neglect
the  terms  depending  on e',  «,  [6057c,/],  because  the  terms  in [7467  line  1,  7513  line  1] [6057^-]
refer  to  the  perijove  of  the  third  satellite  ra". These  remarks  agree  with  [6057^].

t  (3222) The  angle r^, in  the  present  article  [6059],  is  the  same  as t>  [923  line  4], [6060a]
and  the  angle v  [6032]  corresponds  to r^  [923'J. Making  tliese  changes  in  [931]  we
get  the  value  of hv^  [6060] ; observing  that  the  two  first  terms  of  [931]  may  be  reduced
by  putting 2r.(/(Jr-|-rfr.(5r=2<?.(r(5r)— rfr.ir  ; which  is  easily  proved,  by  developing  the [60606]
first  term,  as  in  [3715a].

VOL.  iv.  4

14  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Symboli,

[6061]

[6067]

the  symbols  being

a  =  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  satellite m  ;

e  =  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  orbit
[6061']  of m[935'];

[6062]  «=  the  longitude  of  the  perijove  of m;

[6062^  fit  =  the  mean  motion  of  the  satellite m.

Putting V for  the  angle  described  by  the  projection  of  the  radius  vector
r upon  the  fixed  plane,  we  shall  have,  by  the  same  article,*

[6^3  "  dv  =  dvy \_ '^'';

r6065i ^ being  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  the  fixed  plane
[923']  ;  so  that  if  we  neglect  the  square  of s we  shall  have,

[6066]  ^V  =6V^.

To  determine s, we  shall  observe,  that  we  have  in  [526], by  supposing

[6066^ dv to  be  constant,!

»=©+')■  s>-i/(f>jr

h^u^' dv\dv  J~^h^u\duJ~^ hH^ \dsj'

*  (3223) The  equation  [6064]  is  the  same  as  [925],  changing  reciprocally v  into v  ,

[6064a] to  conform  to  the  notation  in  this  article  [6060a]. If  we  neglect s^ and — , as  in

dv,^
[6065],  we  obtain  [6066].

t  (3224) The  equation  [6067],  is  deduced  from  the  third  of  the  equations  [526],  by
[6067a] substituting Q  =  — R-\ [6030A];  and  observing  that  the  part  —  produces  nothing  in

[60676] [6067]. For  if  we  put Q  =  — ,  and  use  the  value  of  r  [6072],  we  get  q=u.{l-\-ss)-i,
whose  partial  differentials  give,

t«^'i C^)=°' Q=(i+«)-'' (^)=— .(i+«)-i.

Substituting  these  in  the  third  of  the  equations  [526],  we  find  that  the  terms  depending  on
this  part  of  Q  mutually  destroy  each  other ;  and  the  remaining  part  of  Q  [6067a]
[6067d]  becomes  Q  =  — R;  and  by  using  this  part  of  Q  we  find  that  this  equation  of  [526]
r^n/w  1  becomes  as  in  [6067] .  In  this  case  jR  is  considered  as  a  function  of  «,  v,  s,  as  is
observed  m  [6069],  and  this  circumstance  is  noticed  by  the  author,  by  annexing  an  accent
to  the  symbol  d,  in  the  partial  differential  relative  to  s  [6069]  ;  and  the  same  accent
might  have  been  placed  in  the  partial  differential  relative  to  w,  in  [6069,  6071,  6074]  ;
and  for  the  sake  of  symmetry  we  have  inserted  it.

VUI.  i.  ^2.] DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  OF  THESE  MOTIONS.  15

— being  the  projection  of  the  radius  vector r upon  the  fixed  plane, [6068]

[517'  &c.],  and h*, a  constant  quantity,  which,  in  the  elliptical  orbit,  is
represented  by A*  =  f*a.(l  — e^)  [534'  line  1] ;  lastly,  the  partial  differential

/d:R\  ,  ^^^^^

(it)  corresponds  to  the  case  where R is  considered  as  a  function  of

«,  Vj  and  s. We  shall  now  consider 72 as  a  function  of r,  t?,  5, as [6070]
in  the  preceding  article,  and  we  shall  have,*

■'•■(S)+*-(?)-*-(f)+''-(")'

r being  represented  by r  = "*"**  [6034flf,  or4776],  we  shall  have,t  [6079]

therefore  we  have,  by  comparing  separately  the  coefficients  of ds in  the
preceding  equation.

us

■.m+r-^=(^).

Hence  the  differential  equation  [6067]  becomes,

[6074]

*  (3225) In  the  first  member  of  the  equation  [6071], R is  considered  as  a  function  of

—  ]  to  its  first [6071al

member. In  the  second  member R is  considered  as  a  function  of r,  r,  5 ; and  its

complete  differential  is  found,  by  adding  the  same  term  dv.  (-—j  to  the  second  member  of [6071i]

[6071].  Rejecting  this  term  fi-om  both  members,  we  get  [6071].  Now  the  differential  of
ii  =  7^>.(l-f5»)^[6072]  is  as  in  [6073] ;  and  by  substituting  it  in  [6071]  we  must  obtain
an  identical  equation  ; in  which  we  may  put  the  coefficient  of ds, in  each  member,

separately  equal  to  each  other;  and  we  shall  get \du)~^  i'dsJ^^KdtJ "^^^ [6071e]

may  be  reduced  to  the  form  [6074],  by  putting  —=—=:»  as  in  [6072].

t  (3226) Squaring  r  [6072]  and  dividing  by A',  we  obtain -^^  =  ^ ;  multiplying

[6074]  by  this,  we  obtain

j_ (^\,{l±ff) (^:^^!l (iR\  [6075al

Substituting  this  value  of  the  two  last  terms  of  [6067],  we  find  that  the  whole  expression
becomes  as  in  [6075].

15  r MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

•/  .;•,•  ,  • :  • 1_ ds_ fdR\ f_ fdR\  2

If  the  disturbing  force  be  nothing,  we  shall  have,

[6076] ^^. .^ .  .^^ ,  "-rft;^"^^'

therefore,  by- neglecting  the  square  of  that  force; then  substituting — -^—

ds
[6076T for w, and  neglecting  the  product  of  the  disturbing  force  by 5^-  ^ » we

shall  have,*

^ dds  . .  r^ fdR\ r^ ds fdR\  ,

.  -T^c:  equations  [6057,  6060,  6077]  give,  in  the  most  simple  manner,  all
the  'perturbations  of  the  satellites,  which  depend  on  the  first  power  of  the
disturbing  force, \

*  (3227) If  the  disturbing  force,  or  the  value  of R  be  nothing,  the  equation  [6075]

[6077o] will  become  as  in  [6076]  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  expression  tt  4"  *  will  vanish ;  therefore

when  the  satellite  is  disturbed,  this  quantity  must  be  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  force  ;

[60776] and  its  product,  by  the  quantity  — 12  */  i"^)'  "a' ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^®  szme  order,  will

be  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force. Neglecting  this  quantity,  we  find  that
the  equation  [6075]  becomes

[6077c]  0^'-^'  +  s-X-'-.m\ L.^y^V

■■ ^  dv^^ '  h^'\ds) mi^dv\dvj

1 r2

Substituting,  in  the  last  term  of  this  expression,  the  value  [6072],  — =— —  =r^.(l-s^-|~*^-^')

and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  «^^,  it  becomes  as  in  [6077].

Vm.  ii.  ^8.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF «,  «',  Uc. ;  r„  y/,  kc.  17

[6078]

CHAPTER  II.

OM  THE  INBaUAUTIES  OF  TBB  MOTIONS  OP  JUPITER'S  SATELLITES,  WHICH  ARE  INDEPENDEfTT  OF  THE
EXCENTRIC1TIE3  AND  INOLUHATIONS  OF  THEIR  ORBITS.

3. We  shall  resume  the  differential  equations  [6037],

0  =  ^)  +  !^  +  2/die  +  n(f). (1)

In  the  elliptical  hypothesis,  if  we  neglect  the  square  of  the  excentricity  of
the  orbit,  the  constant  part  of  the  radius  vector  [659]  will  be  reduced  to  the
semi-major  axis a  ; we  may  therefore  suppose r  =  a, in  the  preceding [6079]
equation. But  for  greater  exactness,  and  for  reasons  which  will  be  given
hereafter  [6128],  we  shall  retain  the  product  of rSr hy  the  constant  parts [6079^
of  the  disturbing  force. Now  this  force  adds  to  the  radius r, a  constant
part,  which  we  shall  denote  by 6a  ; therefore,  by  substituting r  =  a-\-6a [6079^]
in  the  equation  [6078],  we  shall  have  *  [6080]

0=-^^+-^.(^l-— j  +  2/di2  +  r.(^_J;  [6081]

the  part  of B. depending  on  the ellipticity  of  Jupiter's  mass  is  equal  to

— hV  [6043] ; and  if  we  neglect  the  square  of v, we  shall have,  by [6081']

noticing  only  this  part,  and  taking  for  the  unit  of  mass  that  of  Jupiter ;  or

M  =  1  [6028],  and  the  semi-diameter B of  its  equator  [6045],  for  the [6062]

unit  of  distance ;  t  [6082^

♦  (3228) The  equation  [6081]  is  deduced  from  [6078],  by  substituting  in  its  second

. 1 . , 1 1 3Ja  r6081a1

term,  for  — ,  its  value r-rTT,  =  -^ 7  •  i"^ J

t(3229) Putting,  as  in  [6082, 6081'], M  =  l, B  =  l, v«=0, we  find  that  the
expression  [6046]  becomes  6V= , ; and  by  [6043]  the  corresponding  part  of  R

[6084a]

3r»
▼OL. IV.  6

fg  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6083J  (p-^9)

Part  of  /V  — „  , •

dep«ndio|^  ., , ,

.ilipiicity  Hence  we  easily  deduce,

of  Jupiter.  //7/?\

[6084]  fdR  =  R; r.(f)  =  -3iJ;

therefore,
teoa5]  2/diJ+r.(f)  =  -iJ  =  fr^.

[6086]  Substituting r^  =  tt^  +  2r(5r  [60576],  we  shall  obtain

/dR\ (p—i(?) (p—

.  rSr.

[6087]  2/diJ+r.(^^j= 3_^3

If  we  notice  only  the  action  of  the  second  satellite m', and  neglect
[6088] the  squares  and  products  of s and s', we  shall  obtain  from  [6039],*

^  =  ^J2'  COS.  (?;'— i;)  -— .  _ - , 7-7 — rrjni  •

[6089]

Part  of  K
depending
on  the
tatelliteg.

[60846] is  R=--SV=—^—^y as  in  [6083]. From  the  value  of  this  part  of R, we

easily  deduce  the  formulas  [6084,  6085]. Substituting, in  the  last  of  the  expressions
r ^  - . 1 .  t  1  1 3<Jr  .  ,  .  1 3r(Jr. ,

[6084c] [6085],  for -r,  its  value  ,———=— ;  or  as  it  may  be  written  — r- it  becomes

as  in  [6087].

*  (3230) If  we  neglect  the  excentricities  and  inclinations  in  the  part  of  the  expression

[6089a] of  R  [6039  lines  1,2],  depending  on «»', it  will  become  of  the  same  form  as  in  (6089).

[60896] This  may  be  developed,  as  in  [953',  954],  in  a  series  of  the  form  [6090] ;  A^^\  A^^\  A^^\  &c.

being  functions  of r, /, independent  of v, v'. Substituting,  in  [6090],  the  values  of

[6089c] r,  /,  V,  v'  [6091],  it  becomes,  by  putting  for  a  moment,  for  brevity, T=  n't — nt-]-^ — s,

[6089rf]  R  =  m'.\  i^f»+w2^^\cos.  r+.^(2>.cos.2r+^^\cos.3  T+fcc.  J .

Taking  the  differential  of  this  expression  relative  to  the  characteristic d  ; then  integrating

k
and  adding  the  constant  quantity  — , we  get fdR ; multiplying  this  by  2,  we  obtain

[6089c]  [6092].  Again,  we  have  in  [962],  r/—j  =  a.(—j  ;  hence,  by  taking  the  partial
differential  of  R  relative  to  a,  and  multiplying  by  —  ,  weget  the  expression  of  r. (-7-)
[6094]. We  may  observe  that  the  differential  of v  [6091],  being  multiplied  by  — ,  gives

[6089/] -^.dv  =pdtj which  is  used  in  [6300^].

Vin.  ii.  ^3.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  &c. ; 7,,  7/,  fac.  19

We  shall  suppose  this  function  to  be  developed in  a  series  of  cosines  of
angles  which  are  multiples  of xl — u, of  the  following  form ;  *J^'

U  =  m'.  { J^<«>  +  ^^'^cos.(t?'— 1>)  4-  ^^"^cos.2(r'— r)  -f-  ^(=^.cos.3(t/— »)+&c. } . [6090]
If  in  this  series  we  put

nt and v!i being  the  mean  motions  of m and m', we  shall  have,

( ^(*>.cos.  (n'Z— n/+s'— s) \  1

2/^72= -4-H^ )  +  ^^\cos.2(n'/— n/+ /- o(  2 [6095q'

^y° a  "^n— n'*  H^>.cos.3(n'r— n/+  /—  aU  3

v+  &c.  )

it

—  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity,  added  to  the  integral  /di?. Then [6093]
a

we  shall  have,

'-(^)

1

r.  ('^- )  =  m'.  < . /rf^^«^

+  a.  (-^  ].  cos.  (n'i — nt-\-i — s)  ^  2

[6091]

rfrV ""  \  +  a. f-^j.cos.2(n'/—n^-f «'—«)/  3 [6094]

-^  \ .  cos.S(n'^— n^+j/— s)  I  4

+  &c.

We  can  ascertain  the  values  of -4^°\  ^^^>,  ^<% &c. and  their  partial
differentials  in a, a', by  the  formulas  [963'^ — 1003].

As  we  intend  to  retain  the  constant  part,  depending  on  the  square  of  the
disturbing  force  and  connected  with  the  factor r^  [6079'],  we  must  add  to

the  preceding  expressions  of 2/di2 and  '"•f-j-)  [6092,6094],  the  terms

of  this  kind  which  they  contain. If,  in  the  term \w!,A^'>  of  R  [6090],  we

substitute r=^a-\ , we  shall  obtain  the  term* R  :=i  w!  J—- S —-—\\

a  2a \  da  /

therefore  the  function 2f3iR contains  the  term

[6095]

•(3231) The  expression  of R[6089d] contains  the  term i?=:iTO'.^^°\  which [6096o]
is  a  function  of  r,/ [60896]. Substituting  r=sa-\ [6095]  and  developing,  by  Taylor's [60966]

theorem  [617],  according  to  the  powers  of  — ,  it  becomes j^m'.^-j-m'.  — .  ( -7— )  -|-  &tc.,

a  ^ \  da  /  [6099^

A^  being  the  value  of  A-^"^  corresponding  to r^sa. Neglecting  the  second  and  higher

20  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6*96]  2/diZ=».'.^.2(— ).

rSr  /dR\

Substituting,  in  like  manner,  a-\ for r  in  the  function  r.f  —  j,wefind

that  it  contains  the  terms,

/dR\  ,  rSr C  /dA'r\ , /ddA^'^\  }

[6097]  '{dir)-'^'2'a'\[:d^)  +  ''\-d^)\'

Changing  successively  the quantities  relative to the  satellite m', into
those  relative  to  the  satellites m", m'", we shall  have  the  corresponding

[6098]

parts  of 2/di2, ^•(^)  •

Part  of « To  obtain  the  part  relative  to  the  sun's  action,  we  shall  observe,  that  by

depending  ••■  •'

onthesun.  jjQ^jcing  ouly  thls  action,  and  neglecting  the  squares  and  products  of s

[6099]  and S', we  shall  have  as  in  [6042],

[6100]  R  =  _^-_|^'.  |l+3.cos.(2C7— 2i))}.

[6101]  U  is  the longitude  of  the  sun, as  mewed  from  the  centre of Jupiter

[6096c] powers  of  r8r, we  obtain  in R  the  additional  term R  =  m\  - —  ( -j— 1>  as  in  [6095]  ;

[609M] whiohgives  diJ=|.(^).d.(*)=|.(^').rf.(*);  whence/dfi=|,(^).(*);

as  in  [6096], The  same  term  of  il=  Im'.A'-^  [6096a],  being  substituted  in  ^-(^J  gives

[6096e] r.f— J  =  |mr.f -^ — ). Now  substituting  a-\- —  for r  m  {— — J, and  developmg,  as

, ^ , , , . , /dA((^\ /dA'S^X , r6r  /ddJiiO)\
above  by  Taylor  s  theorem,  it  becomes  I -^— )  =  i -jT"  )  H •  ( .  2 1 ;  multiplying  this

/ r5r\
[6096/] expression  by ^in'r  =  ^m'.  {a-\ ),  and  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  first

power  of  rSr,  we  obtain  in  ^«  ( ~p ) the two  additional terms, contained in [6097],
Adding  together  the  expressions  [6096,  6097],  we  obtain
[6096^]  ^/^^+r{^)  =m.  — .  I  3.(_)  +a{^  [  .

[6096A] This  maybe  reduced  to  another  form  by  substituting  —  =  n^a^  [6110]  ;  and  then  using  the

symbol 2 to  denote  the  sum  of  the  terms  similar  to  [6096,  6097],  corresponding  to  all
the  disturbing  satellites m\  m",  m'", with  their  respective  values  of  A''^\ we  shall  have.

VIII.  ii.^ 3.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e,  &c.; ri»  r/»  *ic.  21

[60420^,  6023c] ;  and  if  we  put  the  sideral  motion  of  this  planet  equal  to  Mt,
we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  the  excentricity  of  its  orbit,

U^Mi  +  E.  [6109]

Hence  we  have,*

/?  =  — J,— ^.{l+3.cos.(2n/— 2M+2fi— 210} ;  [«03]

ly  being  the  semi-major  axis  of  Jupiterh  orbit. We  have  as  in  [605',  &c.],

by  neglecting  Jupiter's  mass  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  sun,t  ^ *

^  =  3P;  [6105]

therefore,  by  neglecting  the  arbitrary  constant  quantity,  arising  from  the
integration  in 2/(i/?, because  it  may  be  supposed  to  be  included  in  the [BIOS']
arbitrary  quantity k  [6093J,  we  shall  have,t

♦(3232) Changing cos.2{U—v) into cos.2(t> — Z7), and  then  substituting the
values  of  v,  U  [6091,  6102],  we  find  that  [6100J  becomes  as  in  [6103] ;  D  being  changed C^^^^l
iDto  ly  [6027,  6104], on account  of  the  neglect  of  the  excentricity  of  the orbit  of
Jupiter  [6101'].

t  (3233) It  follows  from  [605',  606]  that  if  the  mean  motion  of  a  planet  be n/, its
mean  distance  from  the  sun a, and fj. the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  sun  and  planet

[530"],  we  shall  have  —  =  n'. To  conform  to  the  present  notation,  we  must  change n [6105a]

ioto M  [6101'],  a  into  I/  [6104],  and  m-  [530'']  into S-fM  [6025,  6028]  j then  the

S4-M  [6105b]

preceding  equation  becomes  -^y  =  AP. Neglecting M in  comparison  with 5, we

get  [6105].

t  (3234) If  we  substitute  [6105]  in  [6103],  we  shall  get,

R  =  --^'-iM^.r^—iM^.r^.cos.{2nt'-2Mt-{-2s—2E).  [6106a]

The  partial  differential  of  this  expression,  relative  to dr, being  mulliplied  by  —,  becomes

as  in  [6107J. The  partial  differential  relative  to d, being  multiplied  by  2,  gives,

2d/?  =  — i.^«.d.(^«)4-3JW».r».«rf^sin.(2^r— 2vW<-}-2s— 2£) ;  [61066]

observing  that  in  the  first  term  we  have  noticed  the  variableness  of r*, because  its  integral
— J,W.r*, corresponding  to  the  first  term of [6106], produces  in  [6108]  the  term
— Al'.rir, which  is  noticed,  for  the  reasons  given  in  [6079',  iic.]. But  in  finding  the [6106c]
leccnd  term  of  [61066]  we  have  considered r* as  constant  and  equal  to a*, on  account
of  the  smallncss  of  the  factor iW*. The  integral  of  this  last  term  being  taken,  supposing [6l06d]
r" to  be  constant,  gives  the  second  term  of  [6106].

VOL. IV.  6

22  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6106]  2/d/2  =  ^m'' ^-  {  1  +  ,-^ .cos.(2nt^2Mt+2s-2E)  |

[6107]  ^'(t)  ^  —hM\r'.{l+3.cos.(2nt—2Ml+2e^2E)l

Hence  we  deduce,*
[6108]  2/ai2  =  — lir.  a\—MK  rSr— _  °  .  cos.(2n^— 2M+2s— 2 JJ)

[6109]  ''•(■^)  ==  —5^-  a'— ^i^r^r— |.  JP.  a^cos.(2nt^2Mt+2s—2E).

This  being  premised,  we  shall  connect  together  all  these  terms  in  the
[6109'] differential  equation  [6057], and  divide  it  by a^; putting  n^  = -^~,  or
very  nearly  ;t

[6110]  ^ ^^'

m being  a  very  small  fraction,  which  is  less  than  0,0001  [7162,  &c.] ; the
mass  of  Jupiter M being  taken  for  unity. We  shall  also  put,  for  brevity,

^ C  , 3Sa (p— J(p) ^.M^ , , , o  To  /^^^°^ , /"ddA^^^X-l  >
[6112] N^  =  n^  j  l^--^^S^-.-^  +  .^,m'M^ls.{^—^+a{-^^^  j  ;

[6113]  the  symbol  2  denotes  that  the  sum  of  the  terms  following  it,  corresponding
to  the  actions  of  all  the  disturbing  satellites,  is  to  be  taken.  Then  we
shall  have,t

[6108a] *  (3235) Substituting r^  =  a^+2rSr  [6051b]  in  [6106,  6107],  we  get  [6108,  6109]
respectively,  observing  that r5r is  retained,  as  in  [6079'],  only  in  the  terms  with  constant

[61086] coefficients. The  square  root  of  this  expression  is r  =  a-\ ;  which  is  used  hereafter.

reilO  1 ^  (3236) Substituting  in  the  expression  of n^  [6105a] the value  of /j,  =  M-j-m
[6021,  6028],  corresponding  to  the  planet  and  satellite  m;  and  then  putting  as  in  [6111]

[61106] ]VI  =  1, we  get |x=l-|-m, n~=^^  [6109^] ;  and  as  the  mass  of  the  satellite  is  very

small  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  planet,  we  may  neglect m, and  we  shall  have

[6110c]  ^,=  1, and n2=--,

a"*

[6110rf] as  in  [6110]. This  last  value  of f* being  substituted  in A^  [6069],  gives  /42=a.(l — c^),

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

t  (3237) Substituting  in [6081]  the  terms  of 2/di?  +  r.  f^\  which  have  been
[6114a] computed  in  [6087,  6092,  6094,  6096i,  6108,  6109],  then  dividing  by a^, and  observing

[6114]

♦  •»«

-fs.ffi.n

Vill.  ii.  ^3]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  &c. ; 7,,  7/,  &c.  23

_3jlfa.  F^^ .  cos.(2n^— 2A7/+25— 21:)  3 [^jLlSr

I  ;;^  •  o^"'+o'-  (^')  I  •  cos-  (n'<— n< V— )  \  *

+  I  ^, .  o^'"+o«.  (^')  I .  cos.2(n7-n<+/-0 1  5

+  J  S^'  •  ''^"'+'''-  (^)  S  •  cos.3(n7-n/+.'-.)  (  6

+  &c.  /

We  may  integrate  this  equation,  without  adding  to  it  any  arbitrary  constant
quantities,  which  may  be  supposed to  be included  in  the  elements  of  the
elliptical  motion. Then  if  we  neglect M  and N — n in  comparison  with [6115]
n,  * in  the  terms  depending  on  the  sun's  action,  because  these  fractions
are  small,  we  shall  have,t

thatby[6110c]wehavet^3=-=n«; -=-; -=n»a.^u.. _.^__^=„v.(— ); ^6,14,3
we  shall  obtain  the  equation  [6114],  using  the  abridged  symbol JV^  [6112].

•(3233) We  have  in [6025c,i]  JV  =71.0,999311; JW=  n. 0,000408  ; hence  we [6115a]
see  that  —  , , are  very  small,  and  that JV*  differs  but  little  from  n.  [6115i]

t(3239) Putting y=~ and  0,=  A*  [6049t],  we  get  [6116al

Comparing  this  with  [6114],  we  6nd that ^.K.cos.(mJ-^e^) embraces the  function [61166]

contained  in  [6114  lines  2 — 6]  ;  and  from  [6049Ar,/],  we  find  that  if  any  term  of  this  part

rifr
of  [6114]  be  represented  by Jf  .cos.  (m^  < -f- sj, the  corresponding  term  of  y  or — will

be  represented  by  — -  -r;^'C0s.(m^<-{-8^)  ; hence  we  may  deduce  the  terms  in  the  second

member  of  [6116] from  the  corresponding  ones  of  [6114  lines  2 — 6]. For  we  have

without  any  reduction  the  terms  in  [61 16,  lines  3, 4,5...],  from  those  in  [6114  lines 4, 5,6...] •• ^

respectively. The  term  in  [6114  line  2]  being  constant,  we  must  put m^  =  0,  in  [6049^],

and  then  the  divisor m' — JV^  [611 6cl  becomes — iV"; so  that  we  must  divide  the  term [6116e]

[6114  line  2],  by — JV*, to  obtain  the  corresponding  constant  term  in  the  second  member

of  [6116  line  1]. Lastly,  the  term  [6114  line  3]  gives m^  =  2n  —  2^, and  the  divisor [611^]

24  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

a»  N-' I  3a2  7*2  ^ ^  \  da  J  ^

e%re«!on  ^  — ,  cos.(2nt-'2Mt+2s--2E).  2

of  n^  ^

ror

[6116]

[6116']
[6117]

[6118]

^' ,,,.  ^  -?!L.aJ(»+a2Y^^  I  .COS.  (?i7— n^+s'— s)\  3

(n— n')*— iV^ i  n— »'  ^ \  da  J  ^  ^  ^ \

. ,  ]  + !^! — .  \  —,.aA^^^  +  a\  (^)  ]  .cos.2(n't—nt-\-^—s)  f  4

9.(n— ?i')2 — iV^ (  n— w'  \  da  J  )  ^  ^1

^+  &c.  /  •

The  constant  part  of  this  expression  is  represented  by  — ,  in  [6079"];  therefore

we  shall  have,  by  observing  that  N^  differs  but  little  from n^  [6115aJ,*

/dR\  rSr

If  w^e  substitute  the  preceding  values  of 2J^R, ^'v^)' "2"' in  the

expression  [6060], we  shall  get  the  value of dz;[6I19]; observing  that

L±^==n2  [61106], and f*  =  1 nearly [6110c]; also  that M is  very

small  relative  to n, and N  differs  but  very  little  from  n  [6115a,  6]t

^2 — j\fz becomes  (2n — 2My — JV^, producing  in  [6116  line  2]  a  term  whose  coefficient

[6116g] is  —SMK  ^^-^ .  (^„_a,^p_;v^- Now  as J^f  is  very  small  m comparison  with n

[6115a],  we  may  neglect  it  in  the  factors 2n — M, 2n — 2M, and  then  the  preceding

coefficient  will  become — 3J\P.  , which,  by  putting N=n nearly [61156],

t a«?  in rfil  16  lin*
w2

Mi

[6116A] becomes r-;  as  in  [6116  line  2].

*  (3240) Substituting  r^a-{-Sa  [6079"],  in  the  first  member  of  [6116],  and  neglecting

[6117a] the  square  of  Sa, it  becomes  — ,  which  represents  very  nearly  the  constant  part  of  this

first  member. Putting  this  equal  to  the  constant  part  of  the  second  member  [6116  line  1],

«2

and  then  substituting  -—=1,  nearly  [6115a]  ;  we  get  [6117].

t  (3241) In  the  expression  of  8v, or Sv  [6060,6066],  we  may  put 11*=  1  [6110c]

[6118a] j^ji(j  neglect e^. We  may  also  neglect  the  term dr.Sr, because dr is  of  the  order e,

and  we  have  in  this  chapter  neglected  such  terms. Hence  [6060]  becomes,  by  a  slight

VIII.  ii.  §  3.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  &c.  j y,,  7/,  kc.

25

JV/2  ^ General

4-.y. Sin.(2n^— 2Jtf^+2s~2£)  2 expression

ov

Cn-n' '  (n-n')2-JV2  Ln-n' \  <^a  /  J ) ^  I [6119]

"^^•^^'•\ ^""" ^4.(n-n')2-JV2 \n-n' ^ \da)\S  ^ ^ M

" ^ ) , C  n ^,o^  . 2JV2 r2n ^,,,  , „/rf^(3)\-i^ •  0/  /^ ^  1 ' \  (  c

\~^ln-n' ~  9.[n-n'f-^r^  \ri-n' ~ \  da  J  \S  ^ \

\-4-  &c.  /  *.

change  in  the  arrangement  of  the  terms,

We  must  substitute,  in  this  expression,  the  values  of dR  , ^\~r  )>  which  are  given  in

[6084,  6092,  6094,  6108,  6109,  6116]; those  in  [6096,  6097] may  be  neglected,  on [6118c]

account  of  their  smallness,  being  only  used  in  forming  the  quantity  JV^  [6112]. We  shall

first  calculate  the  term  in  [6119  line  1],  depending  on  the  constant  coefficient ;  then  the

term  in  [6119  line  2],  depending  on  the  angle 2n< — 2Mt-\-2s — 2iJ ; lastly  the  terms  of

the  general  form  in  [6119  lines  3,  4,  5..],  depending  on  the  angle i{v!t — nt-\-i — s)  , or [6118c]

ir  [6089c].

First. If  3/d^4"2^'("^)  contain  a  com^anHerw,  represented  by  C,  the  corresponding  [6118/"]

term  of 5«  [61186],  will  be 5y  =fandt.  C=C.ant'y hence  the  constant  terms  of  the  [6118g-]

function 3/dJ?-}-2r.  (— j  must  be  multiplied  by ant to  obtain  the  corresponding  parts  [6II8A]
of  h. Now  the  terms  depending  on  the  ellipticity  [6084]  give

3/d2l+2r.  (^^  =  3/2-6/2  =  -^R=k:^  [6083]  ;  [^118*]
multiplying  this  by ant  [6118A]  and  changing r into «,  we  get  the  term  depending  on

p — ^(?  in  [6119  line  1]. The  first  terra  of  [6092]  gives,  in 3/d/2, the  terra  —  ; and  by  [6118A]
multiplying  it  by ant, we  get  the  first  term  of  [6119  line  1]. The  terra  in  [6094  line  1]

gives,  in '^^'\~l~\ the  expression m'.aJ— — j; multiplying this  by ant  [6118A]  it  [6118?]

produces  in 5v the  term nt.}  m'.a^J— — j  >,  and  by  prefixing  the  sign 2,  so  as  to [6118^]

include  all  the  disturbing  satellites,  we  get  the  last  term  of  [6119  line  1].  The  first
terms  of  the  functions  [6108,  6109]  produce,  in  the  expression  [6118/*],  the  terms
— |.^V-.MV  =  — |.MV. IMultiplying  this by ant [6118A], and  substituting [6ii8m]

VOL. IV.  7

26  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  Cel.

The  term  depending  on sm.(2nt—2Mt-{-2s — 2E) corresponds  to  the
[6120] equation,  which  is  known  in  the  lunar  theory  by  the  name  of  the  variation

[6118n]

a3  =  —  [6110c].  we  get  the  third  term  of  [6119  line  1]. The  rest  of  the  functions,
enumerated  in  [6118c],  produce  nothing  of  the  required  form  and  order.

Second. The  term  of  [61186]  depending  on  the  angle 2ni^2Mt-{-2s—2E, is  found
[6II80] in  the  following  manner. Multiplying  the  last  term  of  [6108]  by f ,  and  the  last  term  of
[6109]  by  2,  and  taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  it  becomes,  by  noticing  only  this  term,
and  changing  the  denominator 2n — 2M into 2n,  as  in  [6116^],

[6118i>]  3/djR  +  ^r.(j^\  =  —\KM^aKcos.{2nt—2Mt+2s—2E).

Multiplying  this  by audi, and  then  integrating,  using  the  divisor  2n  instead  of  2n — 2My
we  get,  by  changing a^  into nr^ as  above,

[6II85]  f<indt,  ^  3/di2+2r.(^)  |  =— ¥•  ~.sm.{2nt—2Mt+2e-2E).

Again,  by  noticing  only  the  term  in  [6116  hne  2],  depending  on  the  proposed  angle,  we
get,  by  the  same  reduction,

[6118r]  Vay . J^

=  4.  ^  .sm.(2ni—2Mt+2s—2E).

[6II85]

ndt  *  n2

The  sum  of  the  expressions  [6II85',  r]  being  substituted  in  [61186]  gives  the  term  of  6v
in  [6119  line  2].

Third. If  we  notice  only  the  term  depending  on  the  angle i{ii't—ni-\-^ — s), or
iT[6118e],  we  shall  have  in  [6092,  6094],  by  neglecting,  for  brevity,  the  symbol  2,

[6118f]  3/di2  =  m'.  i^, .  A^^.cos.iT ;  2r.  (^^  =  m'. 2a. (^Y  cos.iT.

The  sura  of  these  two  expressions  being  multiplied  by andt, and  then  integrated,  gives

Taking  the  differential  of  the  general  term  of  [6116  lines  3,  4,  5..],  corresponding  to  the

2
ndt

2

angle  iT,  and  multiplying  it  by  — , we  get  [6118«],  which,  by  successive  operations,  is

reduced  to  the  form  [6118a;]  ;

[6118t;]  ^'^'[a^J

ndt

2{.(n— n')  f 2n  ....  , „  /dA^'A  > . .^

m'.n / ,  2A*2 \ ( 2n  ^n  1 q  /dA(i^\  > . ._

[6118.1  -id^)'  [^+mn-nr-^^}  [  1^''  "'^''+"  Ait)  ]  •^^"•*^-

Adding  together  the  functions  [6118m,  a?]  we  get  the  part  of  5v  [61186]  depending  on  the

[6131]

Vni.  u.  ^3.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  (f,  &c. ; y„  y/,  &c.  27

[5556  line  2] ; but  it  is  less  sensible  in  the  theory  of  Jupiter's  satellites,

because  the  ratio -j is  much  smaller  than  the  corresponding  expression

in  the  lunar  theory.

The  mean  motion  of  the  satellite  w,  being  supposed  equal  to  nt  [6062']  ;
the  coefficient  of  t  must  vanish  from  the  preceding  expression  of  iv
[6119  line  1]  ;  hence  we  get,*

'^  -  ~"  -3^«~^"TT-^  —  i-2-»W-«  •(^-;^j-  [6122]

Substituting  this  value  of k in  that  of —  [6117],  we  obtain,

7  =  ^^-i.^  +  i.^.'na^(^^;  [6123]

hence  we  deduce,t

......  |,-,.fc!l)_,.^+.„.[...(^)+K<^)]|. ..-.

We  shall  obtain the  values  of -7^ ,  iv' ; — - ,  6v"  ; — ^^^ ,  6v"' ; by

changing,  in  the  preceding  expressions  of  — and if  [6116,  6119,  &c.],  fAc  ^

quantities  relative  to  the  first  satellite,  into  those  relative  to  the  second,  third
and  fourth  successively,  and  the  contrary.

[6118y]

angle  »T.  Now  by  inspection  we  see  that  the  terra  of  [611 8z]  containing  JV,  is  the
same  as  the  corresponding  terms  in  [6119  lines  3,  4,  5..].  Of  the  two  remaining  terms  of
[6118j:],  independent  of  iV^,  that  which  contains  dA^^  is  destroyed  by  the  similar  term
in  [6118m];  and  that  which  depends  on A^'^  [6118x],  being  added  to  the  corresponding

term  of  [6118u],  becomes  --- — •  s  -..aA!-^  \  ; being  of  the  same  form  as  the  first [6118zl

^  t.{n— n ) c  n— n  )

terms  of  [61 19  lines  3, 4, 5..] ; therefore  the  expression  of h  [6119]  is  correct,  within  the
limits  of  the  present  approximation.

•  (3242) The  mean  motion  of  the  satellite m is  assumed  in  [6062^  to  be nt, and [6i22a]
th'is  is  supposed  to  comprise  the  tchoh  of  its  value  ;  consequently  the  part  of it,  contained
in  [61 19  line  1],  must  vanish. Putting  therefore  the  coefficient  of  nt  [6119  line  1]  equal [6122&]
to  nothing,  and  dividing  by  3,  wc  get  the  value  of  the  arbitrary  constant  quantity Ic  [6122].

t(3243) SubslituUng  the  value  of  k  [6122] in [6117], we get [6123]  j then

...  6a  [6124a1

substitutmg  the  value  of  —  [6123]  in  [6112],  we  obtain  [6124].

28

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C^I.

[6125']

[6125"]

[6126]
[6127]

[6127']

[6128]

[6129]

F

[6130]

[6130']
[6131]

4.  The  ratios,  which  obtain  in  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  first  satellites,
make  some  of  the  terms  of  the  preceding  expressions  very  large.  These  terms
deserve  particular  attention,  because  they  are  the  source  of  the  principal
inequalities,  which  are  observed  in  the  motions  of  the  three  first  satellites.
The  mean  motion  of  the  first  satellite  is  very  nearly  double  that  of  the
second ;  and  the mean  motion  of  the  second  is  nearly  double  that  of  the

,  rbr

third  [6025a]. Hence  it  follows,  that  the term  of  the expression  of  — ,

depending  on  the  angle  2n't — 2nt-\-%'-^2s,  must  become  very  great,  on
account  of  its  divisor  ^.{n—n'f—N^={2n-—'2,n'+N),(2n—2n!—N)
[61 16  line  4].  For  as  N  and  2n'  differ  but  very  little  from  w  [6025e],
the  divisor  2n — 2n' — N  will  be  very  small ;  consequently  the  term  in
question  will  acquire  a  considerable  value.  At  the  same  time  we  perceive
the  necessity  of  determining  N  with  great  precision,  as  we  have  done  in
[6124]  ;  because  the  difference  between  N  and  n,  which  depends  on  the
disturbing  forces,  although  it  is  very  small,  becomes  sensible  in  the  divisor

2n — 2n' — N; particularly  by  means  of  the  term — n.- — ~ which N

contains  [6124] ;  and  this  is  the  reason  why  we  have  retained,  in  [6079',  &c.],
the  terms  depending  on  the  disturbing  force,  in  which  r6r  is  multiplied  by
constant  quantities  ;  these  terms  having  an  influence  on  the  value  of  N,
In  the  other  divisors,  which  are  not  very  small,  we  may  suppose,  without
any  sensible  error,  that N  =  n. Therefore,  if  we  put

2/1

F:

..aA^^^-

n — n

2 /CZ^^'^

2n't—2nt-{-2s'—2s,
suppose 2n'  and N

and  notice  only  the  term  depending  on  the  cosine  of
observing  that  we  may,  in  the  factor  2n — 2n'-{-N,
equal  to n  [6127],  we  shall  have,*

= ^-^  .  cos.(2nt—2n't-\-2s'-2B').

The  expression  of 5v gives,  by  noticing  only  the  terms  which  have  the

*=(3244) Substituting 2»'  =  n, JV=n  [6127] in  the  first  factor  of  the  second
[6131a] member  of  [6126], we  get 4.(n— n')^— JV2  =  2n.(2n— 2n'— JV). Using  this,  and  the
value  of  F  [6130],  we  find  that  the  term  [6116  line  4]  becomes  as  in  [6131]. We  have
already  seen,  in  [1227,  &,c.],  the  great  importance  of  the  terms  treated  of  in  this  article.

VIII.  u.^  4.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,«',  &c.; y.,y/,  &c.  29

divisor 2ii— 2»'— iV,*

^"^  =  gn-gl^JV"  sin.(2n/-2n7+2i-20.  [6132]
TAw  /)ar/  q/* <Jr 1*5  lAc  wio^/  sensible  inequality  of  the  motion  of  the  first

satellite ;  it  is  the  only  one  which  has  been  discovered  by  observation.  ^ ^

If,  in  the  theory  of  the  second  satellite,  we  denote^  by N', the  quantity  [6134]

which  corresponds  to N  [6124],  in  the  theory  of  the  first; and  if  we  put  ®'"|^*"

^/'^  for  what  corresponds  to -4'*'  in  the  perturbations  of  the  first  by  the  ^i»)

second  satellite;  it  will  follow,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  the  expression  [^'134']

of -r^ contains  the  term,t

The  divisor (w— n^— iV'^ is  equal  to (n— n'-}-iV').(w— »'— iV'). Now  [6135]

we  have  very  nearly, as  in  [6025/*,  a], N' =  n\ n  =  2n'\ therefore the  [6136]
divisor n — n' — N' is  very  small; and  the  preceding  term  [6135]  becomes

important. We  shall  put,  sy^'

G  =  — ,.  a'A^'^^a'\  (^4^)  ;  [6137]

n — n  '  \da J

and  by  substituting n  =  2w' and N' =^n' [Q\S6'\  in  the  factor  n — n'-fiV', [6138]

we  shall  obtain,

•  (3245) The  term  in  question  is  that  depending  on iV^ in  [6119  line  4] ;  which,  by
using  the  value  of  F  [6 130]  and  that  of  the  denominator  [6131a],  becomes
w!.n .  2.Va  t^  . ^  /  /  , , x

-;i=i'-^-2n.i2n-in'-J^-  ■F-sm.2.(n /-„«+/—)  .  [6,32.]

Now  we  have  very  nearly, ,.  i=  1, 2JV3=  2na  [6131a]  ;  also

"-»»  [613»]

sin. 2. (n'< ~ n/+s'— s)  =  — sin.2.(n/— n'/-|-8— /)  ;

hence  the  preceding  term  of  Sv becomes  as  in  [6132]. The  expressions  [6131,6132]

correspond  to  the  values  of 6r,  6v  [1227].

t  (3246) Changing  reciprocally  the  elements  of m into  those  of  m', in  the  tenn
[6116  line  3],  we  get  [6135]  ; observing,  in  the  denominator,  that (n' — ny^=:i{n — n')', [6135«]
If  we  use  the  values  of n,  A*'  [6138],  we  get

^n^ny^y^  =  (n—n'-\-J^').{n—n'-'N')  =  2n'.(n--w'— A^').  nearly .  [6135i]

Substituting  this  and  G  [6137]  in  [6135],  we  obtain  [6139] ;  obsirving  that  in  the  first
terra  of  G,  we  may  change  n—ttf  into  — (n' — n),  to  correspond  with  the  form  in
[6135]. This  expression  [6139]  is  equivalent  to  the  term  defending  on G  in  [1227],

VOL. IV.  8

30  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Then  we  shall  have,  by  noticing  only  the  terms  which  have n — n' — N' for  ]

a  divisor,*

m.nf.  G

[6140]  iv'  = ^-— .  sin.(w^—w'^+£— 0-

We  may  here  observe  thatf

hence  we  get,t
G  =
Now  we  have,§

[6141]  J(I)=^ «__-^4-^(l);

[6142]  G= 7 .  -— ;.  -  H ;.  a!A^'^—a!^\  -^  ).

n—n a^ n — n a n — n  \da J

*  (3247) Changing reciprocally  the  elements  of 7/i into  those  of  m', in  the  part  of
the  term  [6119  line  3]  which  contains JY^,  we  obtain  in Sv'  the  following  term  ;

[6140a]  ^«'  =  ,7Z^  •  (,._,^._^^. .  I  ;i^„  •  «'^;"+«'^{^  )  I  .  sin. (n^-n  ^+a-0.

Changing n' — n into — (n — rt'), and  substituting  the  value  of G [6137],  it  becomes

^  , mn'  2A^'2  ^ . /  , /^  , / n

[61406]  -^^  =^n'-  rn-n-V.-JV-2-  O. sm.(n^-n ^+a'-s).

n'
n — n'
[61356],  in  [61406],  we  get  [6140].

[6140c] Now  we  have  nearly iY'  =  n', and  ,  =  \  [6138], substituting  these,  and that in

t(3248) We  have  in  [997,  1008'] ^u)_«_l ja); ^(D^^^-l.ip;
[6141a]  U" a  a^ a

subtracting  the  first  of  these  expressions  from  the  second,  we  get  [6141].

X  (3249) The  partial  differential  of  [6141],  relative  to a", gives

[6143a]  ('^J^V-+-+('— V

2n'a'
IMultiplying  this  by — a'^, and  [6141]  by ;, then  adding  the  products,  we  get,  for

the  value  of  G  [6137],  the  same  expression  as  in  [6142].

4>  (3250) Neglecting  the  masses m,  mf, of  the  satellites,  in  comparison  with  that  of
[6143a] Jupiter,  we  get  as in  [6110] n^a^  =  lf n'^a'^=l; hence  we easily  deduce  the
expressions  [6143].

Vm.  a.  ^  4.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  &c. ; y.,  7/,  &c.  SI

hence  we  obtaio,*

r^ o  / 4(u _«  /</^^'^ n.(n— 2n') a 2.(n— 2n') ,  ^,,

G  =  2a'.  ^''-o-. (^) L_J.  --- L_^.  o-^');  I6I44]

and  as n — 2n' is  extremely  small  [6138], the  preceding  equation  will
become  very  nearly,

G  =  2a'.  A'^^a\{^\  ;  [6145]

but  for  greater  accuracy  we  shall  use  [6144],  in  the  numerical  calculation  of  G,

The  preceding  values  of —j^  and hxf  [6139,  6140],  correspond  to  the

action  of  the  first  satellite. The  action  of  the  third,  produces  also  sensible [6145']

terms  in ■-^, <5i/. For  the  motion  of the  second  satellite being  very

nearly  double  that  of  the  third,  there  must  occur,  in  these  expressions,  some
terms  analogous  to  those  which  are  produced  by  the  action  of  the  second symboia

Thr  -^^^

satellite,  in  the  values  of  -^ and (Jr. We  sliall  put A^^\  A'^^\  A'^^,  &c., [6146]

a

relative  to  the  second  and  third  satellites,  for  what  we  have  denoted  by

A^^\  ^(Oj  ^:«)^  &c.,  relative  to  the  first  and  second. Then  we  shall  suppose, [6146^

F'  =  —  -F-7,.  a'A^^^—a'\(^  ) ;  [6147]

n—n  \ d(/ J  '  Symbol

we  shall  have,  by  the  action  of  the  third  satellite,!  -^ '

[6144a]

2n'
*  (3251) The  coefficient  of a'A^^^  in  [6142],  is -, , which  is  easily  reduced  to

the  fonn 2 '• 7—  , as  in  [61441. The  term  dependins  on rf^^'^  is  the  same  in  both

expressions  [6142,  6144]. Lastly,  substituting the  second  value  of — [6143] in

the  first  terra  of  [6142],  we  find  that  the  terms  independent  of .4!^'^ and dA^^^ are  [61446]

a^ (  3n'— n n« 2n "> a^ n C  {3n'—n).n „  >  __  «_ »» <  3im'— n5^2ti'»  ^

a' '  \  n—n'  '  n'* n — n'  ) o'  *  n—n'  * (_ n"^  ) **' '  »»—»»'* i  n^  >

_a_ n 5  {n'—n){n—Zn')  }  _ a n.(n— 2n')  ^  [6144c]

a'' n—n''  l  ^  \  "c^ ^ '

and  this  last  expression  is  the  same  as  the  third  term  of  [6144]. If  we  neglect  the  terms
which  are  multiplied  by  the  very  small  factor n — 2/*', in  the  expression  of G  [6144], [^l****]
we  shall  obtain  [6145].

t  (3252) Tlio  relative  situations  of  the  first  and  second  satellites  are  similar  to  those  of
the  second  and  third  ;  and  the  formulas  [6130,  6131,  6132],  corresponding  to  the  action  of ^ ^

32  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^I.

[6149]  iv'  =  —^r  sin.(2n't-2n"t+2/-20.

Connecting  these  values  with  those  in  [6139,  6140]  we  shall  obtain  the

most  sensible  terms  of — —  , 6v'.

A  very  remarkable  relation  which  obtains  between  the  mean  motions  of  the
three  first  satellites,  permits  us  to  unite,  in  one  single  term,  the  two  terms
[6150]  of  each  of  these  expressions,  depending  on  the  actions  of  the  first  and  third
[6150']  satellites.  We  have  observed,  in  [6125",  &c.],  that  the  mean  motion  of  the
first  satellite  is  nearly  double  that  of  the  second ;  and  the  mean  motion  of  the
[6150'^]  second  is  nearly  double  that  of  the  third ;  so  that  we  shall  have,  very  nearly^
[6151]  n  =  2n'  ;  n'  =  2n"  ;  n  =  4>n",

Hence  we  deduce,*
[6152]  n—3n'  +  2n"  =  0.

TfLaSe T^^is  last  cquatlou  is  much  more  accurate  than  the  two  equations  from
ttemofion which  we have  deduced  it : and  conforms  with  observation  to  so  ereat  a

ofJupi-  '  °

satellites, degree  that  no  sensible  value  has  been  perceived  in  its  first  member  since

[6153]  the  first  discovery  of  Jupiter's  satellites  ;  therefore  we  may  suppose  it  to  be
nothing,  at  least  during  one  century.  We  shall  see,  in  [6628,  &c.],  that  the
mutual  action  of  the  satellites  renders  the  expression  n — 3n'-{-2n"  rigorously
equal  to  nothing. Hence  we  get  accurately,

[6154]  2n' — 2n"  =  n—n' ;  n' — 2n"  =  n— 2n'.

Second It  has  bccu  found  by  all  the  observations,  since  the  discovery  of  the  satellites,

law  °f  ,  ,

La  Place, that  thc mcau  longitude  of the  first,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,
[6155] plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  equal  to  the  semi-circumference,  or  200°  ;  so

the  second  satellite  on  the  first,  wilJ  therefore  give  those  in  [6147,6148,6149]  respectively  ;
[61486]  corresponding  to  the  action  of  the  third  upon  the  second  j  by  merely  increasing  the  accents
[6148c] by  unity,  in  the  symbols m',  a,  n,  n',  he.

*  (3253) We  have  already  remarked,  in  [1226a,  &],  that  the  values  [6025a — d]  give
very  nearly,

[6151a] n— 2n'=n'".0,034281=n.0,003634 ; n'— 2n"=n"'.0,034283=n'.0,007294  ; n— 3n'+2n"=-n"'.0,000002;

hence  it  is  evident  that  the  equation  [6152]  is  much  nearer  to  the  truth  than  either  of  the

equations  [6151] ;  and  we  shall  have  as  in  [6151,6025a],  nearly,
[61516]  n  =  2n'=4n"; n'  =  in  =  2n"; n"=in=i7i''; n'"=fn".

VIU.  ii.  ^4.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  «',  &c. ; 7,,  7/,  &c.  S9

tliat  during  the  interval  of  at  least  one  century,  we  may  suppose,*

nt—3tt't  +  2n"i  + » —  Sa'  +  2«"  =  200o  ;  [6i56]

consequently,

2n't  — 2n"/  -f-  2/  —  2/'  =  n^  —  n7  + « —  -^  —  200o  .  [6157]

We  shall  see,  in  [6627],  that  these  equations  are  rigorously  correct. Hence

the  terms  of  -^ and 61/  [6148,  6149], depending  on  the  action  of  the

third  satellite,  become

r^6/  m".  n'.r  .  ,  ,.

^^="-  n—n'—J>f''  ^^M^^—^  ^+f— 0  ;  [6159]

therefore,  by  the  combined  action  of  the  first  and  third  satellites,  we  shall  have

3^  =  ^;^z:^y{mG-m"^].cos.(nt-n't+.-0 ;

[6160]

61/ = __^._^v>  {mG^m"F'l.sin.(nt'-n't-\-e—s'),  [em]

The  action  of  the  second  satellite  produces,  in  the  theory  of  the  third,
some  terms,  analogous  to  those  which  the  action  of  the  first  produces  in  the
theory  of  the  second  ;  therefore,  by  puttingf

4'<')  =  ^'<"  +  J-^,;  [61(8]

we  shall  have

*  (3254) The  mean  longitudes  of  the  three  first  satellites  are nt-\-6, Wt-\-/i  v!'t-\-f
[6022/]  ; substituting  these  in  the  theorem  [6155],  we  get

(n^+O— 3(n'/+0+2(n"i+O  =  200°  ;  [6158a]

which  b  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [6156] ; and  by  transposition,  to  the  form  [6157].
Substituting this  in  [6148,6149],  and  changing  also  the  divisor 2n' — 2n" — N' into
n — T^^N't in  conformity  with  [6154],  we  get  [6153, 6159] ;  adding  these,  to  the  terras  in rgiss^i
[6139,6140],  we  obtain  [6160,  6161]  respectively,  for  the  action  of  both  satelUtes m  and
m"t  upon m',

t (3255) The equations [6162, 6163, 6164, 6165] are derived from tQK^y
[6141,  6137,6139,  6140]  respectively,  by  adding  one  accent  to  each  of  the  symbols
f',  »',  a,  a',  n,  n',  t,  i',  m,  m',  JV',  j1^^\  Ji;^\  G;  as  in  [6148c].

VOL. IV.  9

34  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  C^l.

[6164]  -^  =  -2.(nW-^JV-)  •  ^°«-(^^-^  ^  +  ^-0  ;

[6165]  61,''  =  J^:^j^„  .  sin.C/i'^-n'Y+^'-O .

The  values  of — ;;^ , 6v" , may  also  acquire  some  sensible  terms  from  the
r/>,^^/, action  of  the  fourth  satellite  ;  but  its  mean  motion,  being  sensibly  less  than

[6165]  *^

the  half  of  that  of  the third  satellite,  these  terms  must  be  but  of  little
importance. We  shall  however  notice  them  in  the  course  of  this  work.
We  may  here  observe,  that,  as n differs  but  little  from 2n\ and n'

[6166] but  little  from 2/i"  [6025a], 4 will  differ  but  little  from 4- For*

[6168] This  last  quantity  is  very  nearly  equal  to (5)  .  <  1 — f . >  . In  like

manner  we  have,

SO  that — and —^ differ  but  very  little  from {\y  ; now  A^^\ A'^^\  &c.

[6169]
[6170]

- and —

a  a

being  of  the  degree —1, in  «,  a' [1001'], i^  and G  [6130,  6137] will

2  2

[6171a] *  (3256) We  have,  as  in  [6143fl], a  =  n"^; a'  =  n'~^; hence we get, by
successive  reductions,

>--^ 7=(v)*=  (i)»-(v)»=(i)*- 1  -'-^'P  =  (^)*- 1  -»-(^)-^-  } •

This  agrees  with  [6167,  6168],  neglecting  the  square  and  higher  powers  of n — 2n'. In
like  manner,  by  adding  another  accent  to  the  symbols,  we  get

^=a)M-»-('^')--<=-]'

[6171c] and  by  substituting n! — 'iln"==n — 2n'  [6154], it  becomes  as  in  [6169]  ;  and  as n — 2n'
[6171d] is  very  small, we  shall  have  very  nearly —  =  -;7=(^)^. Now having shown, in

[6171e] [6169,  6170],  that F, G are  functions of ~ of the order 0 ; and F', G'

r617in [6147,  6163]  similar  functions  of — ; also —  =— nearly; it  follows  that  we  must
have,  very  nearly, F'  =  F and G'=  G,  as  in  [6171].

via  a.  ^5.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  Src. ; 7,,  7/,  8ic.  36

[C171]

be  of  the  degree 0, or  functions  of  — ; F'  and  G' are  similar  functions

a
of  —=■ ;  therefore  we  have,  very  nearly, F'  =  J*, and G'  ==  G. But  for

greater  accuracy  we  shall  notice  the  difference  of  these  quantities.

5.  We  shall  now  consider  the  laxo  of  the  preceding  inequalities^  in  the
eclipses  of  the  satellites.  For  this  purpose,  we  shall  put  the  values  of
d»,  6f/,  6v"  [6132,  6161,  6165]  under  the  following  forms  ;*

6v= (  I  ) .  sin.(2nt—2n't  +  2s— 2/) ;  [6172J

ii/=  — (II ) .  sin.(«^— n74-s— -s') ;  [6173]

i©"=  — (ni)  .  sin.(n'/— n'7+8'— «")  ;  [6«74]

the  coefficients  (1),  (11) and  (in), are  positive,  as  we  shall  hereafter  find [6175]
[61726,  &c.]. Instead  of  referring  the  angles nt+s, n'^+e', and w'7-fs" [6175^
to  a  fixed  line,  we  may  refer  them  to  a  moveable  axis ;  because  the  position
of  this  axis  vanishes  from  the  angles 2nt — 2n't-\-% — 2-', nt — n't-{-z — e', [6176]
n't — n"t-\-^ — s".t We  shall  take,  for  this  axis,  the  radius  vector  of  Jupiter,
supposing  it  to  move  uniformly  about  the  am/i. In this  case,  the  angles
nt,  n't,  n"t denote  the  mean  synodical  motions  of  the  three  first  satellites, [6176^
We  shall  also  suppose 6  =  0, s'  =  0  ; or,  in  other  words,  that  at  the  origin [6177]
of  the  time t, the  two  first  satellites  are  in  conjunction. The  equation,

n^_3n7-f-2n"^4-£— 3/+2a"  =  200°  [6156],  [6178]

which  holds  good  relative  to  the  synodical  motions,  givesj s"=100°;  hence [61791

•  (3257) The values [6172,  6173, 6174] represent the parts of iv, ii/, h" reiT^ai
[6S42  line  2; 6844  lines  1,  7  ; 6846  line  4], changing — sin.2(n'/— n<-f  s'— s) into
-fsin.2(7i<— n'/-j-s— 0; also sin.(2n"/— 2n'i-f2£"— Ss') into sin.(n/— n'/-f-s— e'),  as  in
[6157] ;  hence  it  appears  that (1),  (11),  (iii), are  positive  in  [6172— 6174].  [61726]

f  (3258)  This  is  easily  proved,  as  in  [1240!']  ;  where  it  is  shown  that  the  equation  r6i76ol
[6156]  holds  good  when  we  use  the  synodical  motions  as  in  [6176 — 6178]  ;  therefore,  in
the  equations  [6172 — 6174],  we  may  use  ti)e  synodical  motions  ;  and  the  same  is  to  be
observed  in  the  equations  [6156,  6157,  &c.].  To  distinguish  these  synodical  motions,  we
shall  use  the  Roman  letter  n,  denoting  them  in  this  article  by  i\t,  n't,  n"t,  as  in  [6176'J  ;  [61766]
and  it  is  evident  that  we  make  the  same  changes  in  the  equation  [6152],  and  by  this  means
we  shall  obtain n— 3n'-f-2n'' =  0.  [6176c]

X  (3259) Multiplying  [6176r]  by —t, and  adding  the  product  to  [6178],  we  get
•—31'-}- 21^  =  200'^;  substituting  the  values  of »,  •'[6177],  and  dividing  by  2,  we  get t^^'^1
/'=  100°,  as  in  [6179] ;  and  by  using  these  values  of  1,  i*,  «^, we  find  that  the  equations [01795]
[6172-6174]  become  as  in  [6180— 6182J.

36  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

the  expressions  of  6v,  6v',  6v" become
[6180]  6v  = (  I  )  .  sin.(2n^— 2n'0  ;

[6181]  iv'  =  — (II )  .  sin.(n^— ii'O  ;

[6182]  5v"= (iii).cos.(n7— n"0.

In  the  eclipses  of  the  first  satellite,  at  the  moment  of  its  mean  conjunction,
[6183] lit is  nothing,  or  a  multiple  of  400°. We  shall  put,
[6184]  2n — 2n'  =  n  +  w, or n — 2n'  =  w  ;

and  then  we  shall  have,*
[6185]  5v  =  (i).sin.w^.

In  the  eclipses  of  the  second  satellite,  at  the  moment  of  its  mean  conjunction
[6186] n't is  nothing,  or  a  multiple  of 400°  ; then  we  shall  have,t
[6187]  6v'  =  —(n).sm.c,t.

Lastly, in the  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  at  the  instant  of  its  mean
[6188] conjunction, n"^  +  £" is  nothing, or  a  multiple  of 400° ; then  we  shall

have,  by  means  of  the  equations n' — 2n"  =  n — 2n'  =  w  [6176c,  6184J,  and

s"=  100°  [6179],t
[6190]  6v"=  (ill) .  sin.  ut.

Hence  we  see  that  the  preceding  values  of  6i\  6v\  6v"  [6185,  6187,  6190]  in

^ ^ eclipses,  depend  solely  upon  the  angle ut. The  period  of  these  inequalities

is  therefore  the  same,  being  equal  to  the  duration  of  the  synodical  revolution

[6192] of  the  first  satellite,  multiplied  by§ — —  ; n^ and n't being the mean

[6189]

[6185a]

*  (3260) Substituting  2n— 2n'=n-[-w  [6184]  in  [6180],  we  get  5v=(i).sm.(nt-\-ut),
and  at  the  time  of  the  mean  conjunction nt=0  [6183]  ;  hence 5v  becomes  as  in  [6185].

r6187  1 i^  (3261) From  [6184]  we  obtain n^ — n't  =  n't-\-ut'j substituting  this  in  [6181]  and
then  putting,  as  in  [6186], n't  =0, we  get  [6187].

[6190o]
[6190&]
[6192a]

J  (3262)  From  [6189]  we  get  n'^— 2n"^  =  u^  or  n'i—n''t  =  n"t-\-ut;  hence
[6182]  becomes  Sv"  =  (iii).cos.(n"^-f""0*  '^'^^  ^^  ^^^  ^™®  °^  ^^^  mean  conjunction  we
have  n"f4-s"  =  0  [6188,]  or  n"^  =  —£"  =  — 100°  [6179]  ;  hence  the  preceding
expression  of Sv" becomes 5i;"=  (iii).cos.(w^ — 100°)  =  (iii).sin.w<, as  in  [6190].

*§>  (3263) The  mean  synodical  motion  of  the  first satellite,  in  the  time t, is  here
represented  by n^  [6176'] ; and  if  we  put T for the  value  of t, corresponding  to  a
[61926] synodical  revolution  of  this  satellite,  we  shall  have nr=400°. Moreover,  if  we  put T'
for  the  time  required  to  complete  the  period  of  the  inequality,  depending  on  the  angle w  t,

VUI.  a.  ^5.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e.e',  &c.; y„y/,  &c.  37

synodical  motions  of  the  first  and  second  satellites. Substituting  the  values
of n,  n', we  find  that  this  period  is  equal  to  437*'*'%  659/ All  these  results [6193]
agree  perfectly  with  observation ; and it was by  observation  that these
inequalities  were  discovered,  before  they  had  been  indicated  by  the  theory.

we  shall  have 400<5  =  wT' =  (n— 2n').T'  [6184]  ; hence (n--2n').r'  =  nr; or [6192e]
T'  =  ^^,.r, a8m[6192J.  [6l92rf]

*  (3264) The  mean  motion  of  Jupiter  about  the  sun  is Mt=:  n't. 0,0008^  [60525*].

Subtracting this  from  the  mean  motions  of  the  first  and  second  satellites  n'/.  2,007294  l^^^**!

[6025a], and n't [60256], we get their  sy nodical motions n<  =  n'^  2,006474,  [6193&]

n'^  =  n'/.  0,999180;  which  are  to  each  other,  as 2,006474  to  0,999180; or  as  2,008121  [6193c]

to  1  nearly  ; and  these  express  the  ratio  of  n  to  n' ;  hence  we  have  [6193</]

Substituting  this  in  [61 92(ri,  we  get T'=:i247,28.T. To  obtain  the  time T, of  the [619^]

synodical  revolution  of  the  first  satellite,  we  have  the  synodical  motion  in  a  Julian  year,  or

365'^y,25,  n  =  n— Jlf= 825488799"  [6025n]. Therefore  the  time T of  describing [6190^]

the  whole  circumference 4000000",  by  the  synodical  motion,  is

„  4000000"

r=  365-..,  25  X  g^^g-^  =  1^^-,  76986.  [6193A]

Substituting  this  in  the  expression  of T'  [6193/],  we  get T'  =  247,28.  T=  437'J«y,  65,
as  in  [6193]  nearly.

VOL. IV.  10

38  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

CHAPTER  III.

ON  THE INEaUALITIES  OP  THE  MOTIONS OF THE  SATELLITES, DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRIC1TIE3

OP  THE ORBITS.

6.  We  shall  no^v  tibnsider  the  parts  of  the  radius  vector  and  of  the
longitude  of  the  satellites,  depending  on  the  excentricities  of  the  orbits.
These excentricities are  very small [6057e] ; therefore, by substituting

[6194]  r^  =  a^-f-2r(5r  [6108a],  in  the  equation  [6053],  we  may  suppose  that  2nr
represents,  not  only  the  perturbations  of  r^  depending  on  the  disturbing
forces,  but  also  the  part  of r^ depending  on  the  elliptical  motion  [6057«,  b],

[KIDS]  Then  the  differential  equation  [6057],  into  which  the  equation  [6053]  is
transformed,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  6r,  gives,  by  its  integration,  not
only  the  perturbations  of  the  radius  vector,  but  also  the  elliptical  part
depending  upon  the  arbitrary  quantities  introduced  by  the  integrations.  In
this  case  the  expression  of 6v, given  by  the  equation  [6060],  contains the

elliptical  part  of v, and  this  part  is  evidently  represented  by* 5v  = '  ^ ;

neglecting  the  square  of  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit,  and  considering  only  the
elliptical  part  of r^r.

Those  terms  of  the  differential  equation  [6057],  where  r6r  is  multiplied
by  constant  quantities,  also  those  depending  on  the  sines  and  cosines  of
nt-{-s require particular attention, because on  them depend  the secular

[6196]

[6196']

*  (3265) If  we  notice  only  the  purely  elliptical  parts  of r^r,  5v,  we  must  neglect R

l- "•' in  [6060],  which  depends  on  the  disturbing  force;  and  as dr,  dr,  [669,  6200a],  are  each

of  the  order e, we  may  neglect,  as  in  [6057'],  the  term drjJr  [6060],  which  is  of  the

order e^, and  then 5v  [6060]  becomes  as  in  [6196]. Connecting  this  term  of  v, with

its  mean  longitude nt-\-s  [6022/],  we  get  for  these  parts  of  v the  following  expression  ;

2.d.{r5r)
[6196c]  ^=^^  +  '  +  '^wr*

[61966]

Vni.iu.  ^6.]  TERMS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,e',  8ec.; r..r.'.^-  39

variations  of  the  exceniricity  of  the  orbit  and  its  perijove.  We  have  computed,
in  [6112,  6114  line  1],  the  terms  containing  r6ry  multiplied  by  constant
quantities.  To  determine  the  others,  we  shall  consider  the  term
■•'.-<4<'>.cos.(t>' — v)  of  the  expression  of R  [6090],  and  shall  substitute  in  it, ^^^^

r'  =  a'+'-^  [61086]  ;  i/  =  „7+--'4-^a;^^^  [6196c]  ;  [6198]

hence  we  obtain  the  following  terms  of R;*

R=m',  -r .  ( -jT-j* cos.(n7— n/+8'— s) ^^J;^^ .  ^<'>.  sm.  (n'Z— nZ+Z— •) ; [6199]

oV  being  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of m', and w' the  longitude  of  its [C199^

perijove  [6061 — 6062,  &c.]. The  elliptical  part  of —^  is  represented by

—5-= — €'.cos.(n't-\-s' — ra').f Substituting  it  in  [6199],  we  obtain  a  term [6200]

depending  on  the  cosine  of  the  angle nt-^: — 5/, and  it  is  evident  that  this [6200^
term  is  the  only  one  of  the  same  kind,  which  arises  from  the  development  of
the  part  of jR, depending  on  the  actions  of  the satellite m'. The  two

♦  (3266) Tlie  values  of  /,  t?'  [6198] are  similar  to  those  of r,  v  [6108A,  6196c] ;
and  if  we  substitute  tlietn  in  the  term i2=:  m'.  J<'\cos.(r'— »)  [6090], we  can  easily [6198a]

develop  it,  according  to  the  powers  of  — ^  and  its  differentials,  by  means  of  the  formulas

[610 — 615]. Then  if  we  retain  only  the  first  power  of  this  quantity, we  shall  get,  by [619661
using  the  abridged  symbol T  [6089c],  and  the  values  of r,  v  [6091],

the  value  of ^^\ in  this  expression,  being  found  by putting /=a' in  its  general
expression. We  may  observe  that  it  will  not be necessary to  retain  the  first  term [6]98(f]
«'.w^'\cos.T  [6198«],  as  it  is of  no  use  in  the  calculation  in  [6204,  &ic.]  ;  the  other  two
terms  are  as  in  [6199].

t(3267) Neglecting  c'  in  the  expression  of  r  [669],  we  get  —  =  1 — <.cos.(n/-f-* — »)» reaoOal
hence —  =  — e.co9.{ni-\-t — w)  [6057a]. IVIultiplying  these  two  equations  together,  and

rir

neglecting e*, we  get -5-= — e.cos.(n/-f-« — «) ; and  by  accenting  the  symbols  we [gsooci

obtain -15-  =  — c'.co8.(n'/-|-«' — «')> as  in [6200J. Substituting this in [6199] and rQ^QQ^-i

redacing the  products, by [17,  20] Int., we obtain  terms  depending  on  the angle
ni-fi— «/, as  in  [6200^].

40  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

satellites m" and m'" produce  similar  terms  in R ; but  it  is  evident,
[6201] from  the  expression  of R  [6042], that  the  sun's  action  does  not  produce

any,  if  we  neglect  the  terms  divided  by Z)"*, as  in  [6041'].*
[6202] Now  if  we  notice only  the terms depending on nt, we  shall  havef

J^diR  =  R  ; therefore  by  retaining  only  these  terms,  we  shall  have,

/^  P\  \  —To-  •  \  2«  •  (  -FT  )  +  ««  •  (  -7-77  )  >  .  COS.  (»7-W^+s'-s)

(— o^-  1  ^^'^+^«{^)  S  .sm.C..7-.^+aU)
The  differential  equation  [6057] will  therefore  become,  by  noticing  only  the
terms  in  which r6r is  multiplied  by  constant  quantities,  and  those  which

[6203']

depend  on  the  sine  and  cosine  of nt ; observing  also  that 7i^=— very

nearly  [6110]  ;  J

[6201a]

[62016]

*  (3268)  Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  D'~^,  we  get  the  expression  of  R,
depending  on  the  sun's  action,  as  in  [6042].  If  we  substitute  the  elliptical  value  of  r
[6200a],  and  the  similar  one  of  D  [6275],  it  will  not  produce,  in  R,  any  sensible  terra
depending  on  angles  of  the  form  nt-l-s,  similar  to  that  in  [6200']  ;  as  is  evident  by  mere
inspection  and  reference  to  the  values  of  5,  s',  he.  [6300,  &ic.],  also  to  the  calculation  in
[6271,  &ic.].

f  (3269) If  we  retain,  in  the  development  of R, only  the  terms  depending  on.  nt,

[6202al ^i"^'!^^  ^o  those  in  [6200'J, we  may  put  it  under  the  form R  =  :e.G.  cos. {nt-\-s — ts^).

Hence dR  =  — ^.nG.s\n.{nt-\-s — w^) and  fdR  =  :s.G.cos.{nt-\-s — 'si^)  =  R. We  have

[62026] also,  as  in  [6089e], r.(— )  =  «.(— j ;  hence  we  deduce,

[6202c]  .  2/di{  +  r.(^-)  =  2i?  +  a.(^).

The  partial  differential  of  M  [6199],  relative  to a, being  multiplied  by —  , gives, by

using  the  symbol T  [6089f],  and  retaining  terms  of  the  same  order  as  those  in  [6199],
/dR\  , r'dr' /ddA^i)\  ^ 2ni'.d.{r^6/) /dA^i)\ . „

[6202^]  a.(_j  =  »._.„.(__^„,j.cos.r-^j^^'.„.(— ).s,n.r.

Substituting  this  and R  [6199],  in  the  second  member  of  [6202c],  we  get  [6203].

X  (3270)  Dividing  the  equation  [6057]  by  a^,  we  find  that  its  first  and  second  terms,
[6204a] which  contain r^r, must  be  the  same  as  in  [6114],  or  in  [6204]. The  third  and  fourth

terms  of  [6057]  are  the  same  as  in  the  first  member  of  [6203]  ;  and  if  we  divide,"  as  above,
[62046] the  second  member  of  [6203]  by a^,  which  is  equivalent  to  multiplying  it  by nH  [6110],

we  obtain  the  terms  of  [6204],  contained  under  the  sign 2.

VUI.  ui.  ^6.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  41

<''n|w.(-)+^..0|.cos,..-.v-.)

The  most  simple  method  for  integrating  this  equation,  is  to  suppose

0  =  ^'+JV..<*>+W.n..^"',J,^_V-/- >-r.^'  ■  • > l«»Ml

•(3271) The  equation  [6204]  contains  the  four  quantities rSr, /6/, /'S/',  r^'V,
and  the  second  differential  of  r6r  ; all  of  thera  being  under  a  linear  form. If  we  change L***v5«J
reciprocally  the  elements  of  the  satellite m, into  those  of tn', we  shall  get  a  second
equation,  similar  to  the preceding,  containing  the  same  four  variable  quantities,  with  the [63056]
second  differential  of  r'V. In  like  manner  we  have  a  third  linear  equation,  containing  the
second  differential  of  r"6/' ;  and  a  fourth  linear  equation,  containing  the  second  differential
of  r^"V. The  integrals  of  these  four  linear  equations  can  be  found,  by  the  usual  methods [6205c]
of  proceeding  with  such  equations,  as  in  the  similar  example  [1096 — 1102],  where  we  have
integrated  the  linear  equations  of  the  second  order  [1089]. This  process  consists,  in  the r^K>ivtJi
present case, in finding  four  particular integrals, or  values, of each one of the
unknown  quantities rSr, /5/, /'5r", r"'5/",  which  satisfy  the  four  differential  equations
aboveraentioned. Then  multiply  these particular values  of  any  one  of  these  quantities,
as,  for  example,  those  of  rSr, by  arbitrary  constant  quantities, and  take  the  sum  of  the
products  for  its  general  value,  as  in  [6229]. In  like  manner  we  get  the expressions  of [6205«]
/5/, /'6/', /"^r"',  [6230 — 6232],  and  we  shall  soon  see  that  these  may  be  considered  as
the  general  values  of  these  quantities,  because  the  number  of  arbitrary  constant  quantities  is
exactly  what  b  required  for  the  complete  integrals,  as  in [6233^]. For  a  very  slight
attention  will  make  it  evident,  that  we  can  assume,  as  particular  values  of  rSr,  r^S/,  r^'Sr^',  i'"y", [6205/"]
any  quantities  which  are  similar  to  tliose  in  [62006,  c]  ; supposing  the  longitudes  of  the
perijoves zi,  x/,  -a",  x/", counted  from the  fixed axis to  be  represented by gt-\-r, [6Q05g]
git-{-r^, ^j^-j-r,* g^t-\-T^,  respectively,  changing  also  the  excentricities c,  e',  e'',  e'" [6205A]
into — A, — h\ — A", — h!"  respectively ; and  by  this means  they  will  become  as  in
[6205]. Now  if,  for  brevity,  we  put TV=nt-\-s — gt — r, we  shall  have,  from  the [6205t]
first  of  the  equations  [6205],

i^^=A.cos.fF; hence, ^^  =  ^h(n^g)^. cos.  W;  [6305*]

80  that  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  g^, we  shall  get,

^'+JV..<*)  =  A.(JV+2n«-»«).cos.»'.  t«»«]

Substituting  the  value  of —  [6205],  in  the  flnt  members  of  [6205o,p],  and  reducing  the
products  by  means  of  [17, 20]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle fV, [6305m]
we  shall  get  the  second  members  of  these  equations. If  we  neglect  the  very  small  terra  — , [6305ii]

VOL. IV.  11

42  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

tSt  tot

~-  =  A.cos.(w^+s— £-^— r)  ;  — -  ==  /i'.cos.(?i'^+s'— £-^— r)  ;  1

[6205]  ny,  j„y„

hi-  =  r.cos.(»"<+a"-^<-r)  ;  -^  =  r.cos.(n"'<+s"'-g-<-r) ; 2

in  the  last  of  these  equations,  which  produces  only  a  term  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the
[6205n'] disturbing  force  in  [6204],  we  shall  have — ~  =  1, and the  expression [6205p] will

become,  by  successive  reductions,  as  in  [6205r],

r'br'
[6205o]  -^ .  cos.(n'^ — nt-\-4 — s)  =  ^A'.cos.(n^-["^ — E^ — r)  =  i^'-cos.  W,

[6205^,] —^2-  sin.(w7— n^+/— £)  =  A'/"±:^Ysin.(»'^+s'— W— r).sin.(n'^-n<+s'— s)

[6205q]  =  ^h'.  (^-) .  cos.(w^-j- s—gi—T)

[6205r]  =lh'.cos.W.

Substituting  the  values  [6205/,  o,  r],  and  the  similar  terms  depending  on  the  satellites  m",  m'",
[620551 ^^  [6204],  and  then  dividing  by cos.  W, we  get  the  equation  [6208] ;  which  is  afterwards

reduced  to  the  form  [6217]. Hence we  see  that the values  of g, h, A', h", hi",

corresponding  to  a  particular  value  of r6r, must  satisfy  the  equation [6217]. In  like
[6205s'J manner  the  differential  equations  in  /5r',  r"<5r",  7^"^r"'  [6205&,  &c.]  give  the  three  equations

[6220 — 6222]. From  these  four  equations  we  get,  by  the  usual  rules  of  elimination,  four

values of g', which  are  represented, in [6225 — 6228'],  by g,  g^, g^, g^, with
^ ■' corresponding  coefficients h,  h',  he,  so  as  to  form  the  complete  integrals  of  the  unknown

quantities rSr, r'Sr^, r^'Sr", r'"§r"'  [6229—6232].

We  may  also  remark  that  the  whole  of  this  calculation  is  similar  to  that  in  [1102,  &c.],

relative  to  the  planets  ; and  this  ought  evidently  to  be  the  case ;  since  the  action  of  the
[6205m] satellites  upon  each  other, in  their  revolutions  about  Jupiter,  must  produce  variations,  in

the  excentricities  and  inclinations  of  the  orbits ;  also  in  the  motions  of  the  perijoves  and

nodes ;  similar  to  those  which  are  produced  in  the  solar  system,  by  the  action  of  the  planets
^ ■' upon  each  other  ;  and  we  may  deduce  the  expressions  [6205],  from  those  in  [1102,  1102fl].

For  if  we  use  the  sign 2 of  finite  integrals,  in  the  values  of h,  I  [1102,  1102«J,  we  shall

have,  by  putting  these  values  equal  to  those  in  [1022],
[6205u;]  e.sin.TO==2.  JV.sin.(^^-fl3)  ;  e.cos.'zrf  =  2.iV.cos.(^^-}-^).

Multiplying  the  first  of  these  equations  by — sin.(n^-|-s), the  second  by — cos.(n^-j-s)  ;

adding  the  products,  and  reducing  by  means  of  [24]  Int.,  we  get,

[6205af]  — e.  cos.{nt-{-s — ■sj)  = — I,.JV.cos.(nt-}-s — gt—^).

r6r
The  first  member  of  this  equation  is  the  same  as  the  value  of —^  [62005],  and  the  second

member  is  of  the  same  form,  as  the  expression  of -r- [6205], changing h into — N,

[62051/] also r into |3, and  prefixing  the  sign 2, Hence  we  see,  that  the  forms  adopted  in
[6205]  are  easily  deduced  from  those  which  are  used  in  [1102,  &c.].

VIII.  iii.  ^6.)  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  43

g being  a  very  small  coefficient,  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces  upon [G206]
which  it  depends.* Substituting  these  values  in  the  preceding  differential
equation,  and  retaining  only  the terms  depending  on cos.(n/-f « — g^ — ^)» [6207]
we  find  that  the  comparison  of  these  terms  will  give,  by  neglecting the
square  of  g,  f

i2aa'  f—^+a'^a'  (^'^-^
" "^ ^'"V«rf«'y ^.  [02061

Substituting  for N^ its  value  [6124],  we  obtain.

, L/ (  ^ ^n  . 0  /d.i'% . ,  /f/.4^'^ . , „  ,  /ddA<'^\  )  ^

[6209]

A^^^  being  a  homogeneous  function  in a,  rt', of  the  dimension — 1,[6170], [6210]
we  have,  by  the  nature  of  these  functions  [1002],

hence  the  preceding  equation  [6209]  becomes,  J

*  (3272)  The  values  of  g  depend  on  the  disturbing  forces,  as  is  evident  from  the
equations  [6217,6220—6222];  their  numerical  values  are  given  in  [6025o].  The  [^^206o]
corresponding  value  of  gty  during  a  revolution  of  the  first  satellite  l''^y*,769  [6778],  is
less  than  30' ;  so  that  though  this  greatest  value  of  g  [6025o],  appears  rather  large,  when
taken  for  a  year,  its  effect  in  the  motion  of  the  perijove,  during  one  revolution  of  the
satellite,  is  comparatively  small ;  as  in  the  lunar  theory.  The  relative  values  of  g,  n,  are
seen  also  by  the  inspection  of  the  annual  movements  of  the  angles  gt,  nt,  or  values  of
g,  n  [6025o,  k] ;  these  quantities  being  nearly  represented  by  60°  and  82582°,  making [GQOGd]

[6206ft]
[6206c]

g  1

the  fraction —  less  than ^—,

t  (3273) The  equation  [6209]  is  found  as  in  [6205*]. Substituting  in  this  the  value
of  iV*  [6124],  then  dividing  by 2n, and  altering  a  little  the  arrangements  of  the  terras, [6209a]
we  gel  [6209J. We  may  observe  that  the  equations  [6209,  6212],  in  the  original  work,  are
divided  by n, wliich makes  them  of  a  ditfcrent  form  from  that  in  [6217] ; we  have
therefore  omitted  this  divisor.

$(3274) The  equation  [6211]  is  the  same  as  in  [1002];  multiplying  it  by a, and
transposing,  we  get  [6212a]. Multiplying  the  second  of  the  equations [1003]  by ia*,

44

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C61.

[6212]

[6213]
[6214]

2

Now  substituting  as  in  [1073, 1076,1082],

; (0,3), 0,3 1  ; for  what (0,1), loaj become

[6215] also  putting (0,2),

[6216]
[6217]
[6217']

respectively, when  we  change successively  what  relates  to m' into  the
corresponding  quantities  relative  to m"  or  m'"  ; and  lastly  putting,

(p— jy)
a'

(0)

.n:

3 .

^' n '

we  shall  obtain  from  [6212]  the  following  equation ;  *

0  =  ^.  |^-(o)-[7]-(o,i)-(o,2)-(o,3)  I  +[oa].^'+

0,2

.r+

0,3

M". (i)

In  like  manner,  if  we  consider  the  perturbations  of  the  motions  of m',  m!'  or
m'", it  is  evident  that  we  shall  obtain  another  equation,  similar  to  [6217],

[6212a]
[62126]

we  get [61126]. Substituting these  expressions  in  [6209,  line  2], and  reducing,  we
get  [6212],

*  (3275) Substituting  in  [6212]  the  values  [6213,6214],  we  get,
[6217.1  0  =  /l.^^-'^'.«-£.^-X(0,l)|  +  2.|^.A';

and  by  using  the  values (0), 0 ,  [6216], it  becomes  as  in  [6217]. For  convenience
of  future  reference,  we  shall  insert,  in  the  following  table,  the  expressions  of  the  functions
[62176] (0),  (1),  he,  and  I 0  I , [Tl , &tc.

[6217c] (0)=^^^i^^ri;

(l)  =  (-^).n'

(2)  =  (-^^n"

r."2

(3)  =  '-^^'.»"

HJW2  I 1  M^

Vni.  Hi.  ^6] TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.

46

and  which  may  be  deduced  from  it,  by  changing  successively  the  quantities
relative  to m, into  those  relative  to »»',  m",  or  m"\  respectively,  and  the

contrary. Therefore,  by  inserting  in  the  functions (0),  lol, (0,1)  [oTI,

&c.,  for  0,  the  number  of  the  disturbed  satellite,  and  the  quantities
corresponding  to  it ;  and  for  1,  the  number  of  the  disturbing  satellite,  and
the  quantities  corresponding  to  it ; we  shall  obtain  the  following  equations  ;

0  =  A\  j  g-(2)-[T|-(2,0)-(2,lH2.3)  \  +  [Io].A+  [2^].A-  +

0=r.  {^-(3)-[7]-(3,0)-(3,l)-(3..2)  ^  +  [^A+'0.  A'+
We  may  observe  that  we  have,  as  in  [1093,  1094],

(0,l).m.v/a  =  (1.0).mVo';

0,1

1,0

.m'.^a'.

These  equations  hold  good  relative  to  the  similar  quantities  corresponding
to  any  two  satellites  whatever ;  hence  we  have  a  very  simple  method  of
deriving  these  functions  from  each  other.

The  four  equations  [6217,  6220,  6221,  6222]  between.  A,  A',  /t",  /t'",  are
similar  to  the  equations  [1097],  and  may  be  solved  in  the  same  manner  as
in  [1 100" — 1 102,  1102a].  T/iey  give  a  final  equation  in  g  of  the  fourth
degree*  [1100']. We  shall  represent its four  roots  by g^  gi,  g^,  g^^

[G318]
[6319]

1,3

.A'";

(0

[6220]

2.3

.A'";

(i")

[6221]

3.2

•  A".

in

[6222]

[6223]

[6224]

[62241

[6224"]
[6235]

•  (3276) In  order  to  have, at  one  view, the  different  values  of p,  fly  ^",/5"and
A,  A',  A",  A'",  corresponding  to  the  four  different values  of g^ or  to  the  four  different l^*®*]
satellites  ;  according  to  the  notation  adopted  in  [6225 — 6228'J,  we  have  collected  these
symbols  together  in  the  following  table. The  first  column  contains  the  values  of A, for [o2296]
the  first  satellite,  and  for  each  of  the  roots g,  ^,,  ^,,  g*,. In  like  manner,  the  second
column  contains  the  values  of A', for  the  second  satellite  ;  the  third  column,  the  values  of [6229e]
K\  for  the  third  satellite ; and  the  fourth  column,  the  values  of h'\ for  the  fourth
satellite.

Col.  1.

Col.  9.

Col.  3.

Col.  4.

Col.  s. X

Satellite  m.

Satellite  uif.

Satellite  m^.

Satellite  m^.

Valaeof^. 2

A  =  A;

h'=.ff.h

h"==^'.h

A'"  =  p'".A

g 3

A=:A.;

A'  =  P/.A.

y^^C.K

A"'  =  P/".A.

g^ 4

A  =  A,;

A'  =  p;.A,

A"=0,".A.

A-=p;".A.

g. 5

A  =  A,;

A'  =  p;.A,

A'  =  p/.A,

A-=:^;'^A,

g^ 6

The  values  of

h\

A^A^, in

the  third  horizontal  line

of  this  table,  are

the  same  as  those

VOL. IV.

12

[6a3M]

46  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6025o]  ;  then  for  the  root g, we  shall  suppose  the  values  of h,  h',  h",  h'"
to  be  represented  by

[6226]  h'  =  |3'.  h  ; h"  =  ^".  h ; h'"  =  |3"'.  h ;

and  the  preceding  equations  [6217,  6220,  6221,  6222] will  give /3',  /3",  ^"',

^ ^ in  functions  of g  ; and h will  be  the  corresponding  arbitrary  constant

[6227]  quantity.  In  like  manner  we  shall  suppose  p/,  f3/',  |3/",  to  represent  the
values  of  |3',  ^",  ^'",  corresponding  to  the  root  ^, ,  and  /ij,  the  arbitrary
constant  quantity. With  the  root g^, we  shall  suppose ^g',  l^a"?  I^s'",  to

[6228]  represent  the  values  of  /3',  ^",  f3'",  and  ^g  the  corresponding  arbitrary
constant  quantity.  Lastly,  with  the  root  ^3,  we  shall  suppose  ^3',  l^g",  ^3'",
to  represent  the  values  of  (3',  |3",  ^"',  and  /ig  the  corresponding  arbitrary
constant  quantity.  Then  we  shall  have,  by  the  nature  of  linear  differential
equations,

r6229el  i"  [6226]  ;  and  if  we  substitute  them  in  the  four  equations  [6217,  6220,  6221,  6222],  and
divide  by  the  common  factor h, we  shall  obtain  four equations  which  are linear  in

[6229/*]  p',  p",  ^'"'  From  three  of  these  equations  we  may  determine  fi',  ^",  ^'\  in  terms  of  g,
and  by  substituting  these  values  in  the  fourth  equation,  we  obtain  an  equation  of  the  fourth

[6229/*']  degree  in  g,  whose  roots  are  marked  as  in  col.  5,  g,  g^,  g^,  g^  Two  examples  of
this  process  of  calculation  have  already  been  given,  in  [10976 — 1097c]. Each  of  these

[6229g-] roots, g,  gn  gn,  gat may  be  combined  with  the  corresponding  quantities r,  r, ,  r^,  r^,

r5r
[6229^1 ^^  ^^  ^^  produce  a  particular  value  of  —  [6205],  and  the  sum  of  these  four  expressions

will  be  the  general  value  [6229],  which  satisfies  the  differential  equation  [6204]. In  like

r'dr'

manner,  by  substituting  in  the  expression  of  —  [6205], the  values  of h'  [6229d?,  col.  2],

^ ^^ namely p'A, p/.Aii ^2-Ki ^a'-^sj corresponding  to  the  four  roots  of g, we  shall  get

the  four  particular  values,  whose  sum  gives  the  general  expression  of  -—  [6230]. In  the

[6229  A;]  j^'§/' r"'br'"

same  way  we  obtain  the  general  values  of — ;^, — — • [6231,  6232]. Finally  we  may

observe,  that,  as  the  differential  equation  [6204]  is  of  the  second  order,  its  finite  integral

[6229/] j.gquires,  by  the  usual  rules  of  integration,  two  arbitrary  constant  quantities ;  and  as  there

are  four  equations  of  this  kind  [6205a — c],  they  must  require  eight  arbitrary  constant

quantities;  being  the  same  number  as  is  found  in  the  four  integral  expressions  [6229-6232],

[6229m] namely. A,  h,,  h,,  h,; T,  T,,  T,,  T,,  as  in  [6233].

VIII.  iii.  ^6.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  47

^  =:  A.cos.(ni+e— ^/— r)-|-A^.cos.(n/+i— ^i<— r,)  1

-|-A8.cos.(n/4-s— ^9^— r,)  +A3.cos.(nl4-.— ^3^— Fj)  ;  2

-—  =  ^'.  A.cos.(n"i4-^'— ^^— O+^i"- A,.cos.(n"/+s"— 5^1^— r,)  1

^1  ^u  '^a*  ^3  being  four  arbitrary  constant  quantities.  These  expressions
are  complete,  since  they  contain  eight  arbitrary  constant  quantities  [6229m] ;
that  is  to  say,  twice  as  many  arbitrary  quantities  as  there  are  differential
equations  [6204,  6205c,  &c.]  of  the  second  order  in  r6r,  r'6r\  r^'6i^\  r'V.
These  arbitrary  quantities  take  the  place  of  the  elliptical  elements  of  the
satellites.  For  if  we  consider  these  orbits  as  ellipses,  in  which  the
excentricities  and  positions  of  the  apsides  are  variable,  and  put,  as  in
[6061—6062],
ae  =  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  first  satellite,  [6234]

o  =  the  longitude  of  its  perijove, counted  from  the  fixed  axis,  taken  for
the  origin  of  the  angles,
we  shall  have,  as  in  [62006],

—  =  — c.cos.(n<+s— ta).  [ea35]

Comparing  this  with  the  equation  [6229],  we  get,*

•  (3277) From  [24]  Int.  we  easily  obtain,

COS.  (nt-{- 8 — w)  =  COS.  a.  COS. (n<-j-s)-|-sin.w.  sin. (»!<-[-•)»  [6a35o]

coi.{nt-\-s-gt-r)  =  cos.(g^4-r).cos.(n/-|-8)-j-sin.(^<-f-^).sin.(n<-f  «)•  [62354]

Substituting  [6235aj  in  the  second  member  of  [6235],  also  [62356], and the  similar
expressions  relative  to  the  roots ^,,  g,,  g,, in  [6229]; and  then  putting  these  two [6235c]

expressions  of -^  equal  to  each  other,  we  shall  obtain  an  equation  which  must  hold  good

for  all  values  of  n<  -}-«• Putting  therefore  the  terms  in  each  member,  containing  cos.(n/-j-i), [e235c^

[6233]

[6233']
[6233^

48  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6236] €.cos.*  =  — /i.cos.(§'^-f-r)— ^^.cos.(^i^+rj)— ^2.cos.(^2^-f-r2)— A3.cos.(^3^-f-r3);
[6237] e.sin.'n  =  — h.sm.{gt-{-T)—hi.  sin.  (git+^i) — K-  sin.(g2^-|-r2)— ^3.sin.(^3^4-r3) ;

hence  we  easily  obtain e and ^. We  shall  have  by  the  same  process
[6238] ^'^  ^^  &c. The  method  in  [1275,  &c.,  6235/i],  will  give  the  same  values;

but  the  preceding  analysis  is  rather  more  simple.
[6239]  The  elliptical  part  of v is 2e.sin.(?i^  +  e — w)  ; and  if  we  put  this  equal

to 6v, we  shall  have,  *
[6240]  6t?  =  2e.sin.(w^4-£ — ro)  =  2e.cos.-s:f.sin.(n^+£) — 2e.sin.'ci.cos.(n^-|-0  i

separately  equal  to  nothing,  we  get  [6236] ;  and  the  terms  depending  on  €m.{ni-{-z)  give
[6237].

[6235d]  If  we  suppose  the  symbol  2^  to  include  the  four  terms  depending  on  the  four  roots
Si  5*1  J  S2'  S3'  ^^  '^^y  P"^  ^^®  expressions  [6236,  6237],  under  the  abridged  forms
[6235i],  which  are  convenient  for  reference.  In  like  manner  we  obtain  the  expressions
[6235it,  I,  m]  corresponding  to  the  satellites  m',  m",  id" ^  respectively.  We  may  incidentally
observe,  that  the  expressions  [6235i]  may  be  derived  from  the  second  member  of  [6229],

[6235/]  by  putting  successively  n^-}~^  =  ^^^°'  ^^  +  ^  =  ^^^°»  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  as
is  evident  by  inspection.  In  like  manner,  if  we  put  successively  n7 -f- s' =  200°,
n'^-f  s'=  300°,  and  p'/i=  A'  [6226],  in  [6230],  we  get  [6235^] ;  also  n"t-\-s"=  200°,
n"<  +  £"=300o, being  substituted  with p"A==  A"  [6226], in [6231], give [6235/];

[6235/1]  lastly,  n'"i  +  s'"  =  200°  and  n"V+s'"  =  300°,  being  substituted  with  fh=^h"'
[6226],  in  [6232],  give  [6235m].

[6235g-]

Column  1.  Column  2.

[6235i]  e.cos.OT  = — 2^.A.cos.(§-<+r)  ;  e.sin.w= — 2^.  A.sin.(^<-}-r)  ;

[6235fe]  e'. cos. to'  =— 2^.A'.cos.(^^+r)  ;  e'.sin.-n'  =— 2^./i'.sin,(^^-j-r)  ;

[6235Z]  e".cos.-5i"  =  — 2^.A".cos.(^<4-r)  ;  c".sin.-!3"  =— 2^.A".sin.(^^-f-r) ;

[6235m]  e'".cos.TO'"  =  — 2^.  A'".cos.(g-^+r) ;  c'".sin.'5/"=— 2^.A'".  sin.(^f+r).

[6235nl The  same  results  are  obtained  by  the  method  in  [1275,  &c.,  or  1089,  &.C.],  as  is  shown  in
[6205m— y]. This  agrees  with  [6238].

*  (3278) Neglecting  terms  of  the  order e^, as  in  [6196],  we  obtain,  from  [669  line  2],

the  following  expression  of v ;
[6240a]  v=znt-\-s-\-'ile.^m.{nt-{-z — w)  ;

[62405] the  elliptical  part, or  that  which depends  upon e, being 6v  ^=2e.sm.{nt-\-s — ro).

Developing  this,  by  [22]  Int.,  we  get  [6240]. Multiplying  the  expression  of e.cos.-a
[6240c] [6235i]  by ^s\n.{nt-\-z) ;  also  that  of e.sin.w  [6235i],  by — 2cos.(n^-|-£) ; then  taking

the  sum  of  these  products,  we  get  the  expression  of <Jw  [6240],  as  in  [6240fZ]. This  is

Vni.  iJi.  ^6.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  49

hence  we  get,

»>  =s  — 2A.sin.(n/4-i— ^/— r)— 2A,.sin.(n<-f  f— ^,/— Fj)  1

— 2A,.  siii.(nl-f «— ^a/— rj,)-.2A3.  sin.(w/-f  s— ^,/— rg).  2

[6341]

etsily  reduced  to  the  form  [6240e],  by  means  of  [22]  int. The  last  expression  of  6v is
the  same  as  that  in  [6241],

fc  ■»  2e.co6.ti^in.(ni4-s)— 2«.8in.  w.  C08.(nl4-s) «» —I/.  2^.  1 8in.(n/-f-«)'C08.(^/-|-r )— co8.(n/4-6)««>n.(g^4"^ )  | [6240rf]
A>=2«.9in.(nl4-«— «)=»  — j,.2A.sin.(n<4-s— g<— r).  [6340e]

In  like  manner  we  may  obtain  the  values  of 5i>',  M\  6v'". We  may  also  deduce  them
from  [6241],  by  changing  successively  the  elements  relative  to m, into  those  which
correspond  to m',  m",  m'" respectively,  and  the  contrary, as  in  the  table  [6229(/]  ;  by •• *' ^
this  means  we  obtain  the  following  expressions,  which  agree  with  those  in  [6242, 6243, 6244] ;

at/  =  2c'.  sin.  {n't  +  s'  —  t/)  =  — 2 .2A'.  sin.  (n't -\- ^ -^gt—r) ;  [0M%]

6i/'  =  2e".  sin.  (n"< -}- s"— ta")  =  — 2^.2A".  sin. (»"/  +  s"  — g<— r)  ;  [6240*]

ai/"  =  2€"'.sin.(n'"/-fs'"— «"')=— 2^.2/r.sin.(n'"^+s'"-.^<-r).  [6240i]

We  may  observe  that  any  one  of  the  angles  which  occur  in  [6229 — 6232, 6241 — 6244],

as,  for  example, nt-\-6 — gt—r is  the  difference  of  two  angles nt-\-s and gt-^-T^

counted  from  the  same  point ;  it  must  therefore be  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  this  ^

point  bejixedj  as  is  supposed  in  [6022/*],  or  variabht  as  in  [6023a:]. In  other  words,  these

angles  may  both  be  counted from  the  Jixed  equinox,  or  both  from  the  variable  equinox,  at [e24W]

pleasure. Now  if  we  suppose  that  the  mean  longitudes  of  the  satellites,  counted  from  the

fixed  equinox, fit-j-s, n'/-f /, n"t-{-^\ Tl"t-{-f'  [6022/], are  changed  respectively  into

e,  e',  e",  e'", from  the  variable  equinox  [6023j;]  ; and  the  longitudes  of  the  perijoves [^»240m]

5^+r, g,t-\-T^, ^a'+l'aj 5'3<+r3, from  the  fixed  equinox  [6021 5],  into «,  t/,  o",  vi", [ea40n]

from  the  variable  equinox  [6024^]  ;  we  shall  obtain  the  differences  of  these  angles,  as  in

[624()p — 5]. Changing  in  like  manner  the  mean  longitude  of  the  sun,  in  its  relative  orbit

about  Jupiter Mt-\-E  [602 Iz]  from  the  fixed  equinox, into  n4-200°  from  the  variable ^ ^

equinox  [6024/],  we  get  [6X40/] ; observing  that  the  whole  circumference, 400°, may

be  neglected.

i«'/— n<+«'— 6  =  e'— ©;  n''<— n<-f  s"— •  =  e"— e  ; n'"<— tU+Z"— «  =  e'"— e  ; [asuOp]

n''/— n'/-f8"--«'  =  e"-e'; n'"<— n'^+s"'— s^^  e'"— e'j n'"/— n"^-f  s"'— s"=:e"'— ^"; [e240g]

nf-j-i— ^— r=e— o;  w<-f s— ^,<— r,  =  e— ta';  )(We  may also  change [6240,.]

^4  \  , ^  4 T> ^ it  it  A -wy  -Jit ( )n,  «,©  successively  into _

8n^-2J^//+2»-2£=2e-2^;  n/-2JW<-f-f-2E+^+r=e-HB-2n)  („''',  ^,  e'"  respectively! [G34(V]

Substituting  the  values  [6240r,»]  in  [6240e,  gf,  A, »],  and  using  the  symbols  [6229rfJ,  we
obtain  the  following  expressions  of  the  equations  of  the  centre  of  the  four  satellites,
v9,  Or ,  or  f  ov j

▼OL*  iv.  13

60 MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER. [Mec.  C61.

In  like  manner  we  obtain,

6v'  =  — 2/3'.^.sin.(n'^-f-s'— ^/— r)_2i3/./j,.sin.(/i7+^'— ^,^— ^,)  1

[6242] — 2/3'2./i2.sin.(7i'^+s'— ^2^— -2)— 2^'3.^3.sin.(n7-f8'— ^.^-Fg);  2

6v"  =  — 2^"./i.sin.(/i'7+s''— ^^— r)— 2i3,"./i,.sin.(7i"i+."— g,i— r,)  1

[6243] — 2^2".A2.sin.(w"^  y'-.g^t-^v^)^2'^.^',  h,,sm.{;n"t+s"—g.ji—T^)  ;  2

iv"'  =  —2  /3'".^.sin.(7i"7+8'"— g^— r)  -2  /3/"./i,.sin.(w"7+6'"--^,i-  r,)  1

[6244] _2^/'.A,.sin.(/i'''^-f-s'''— ^3f_r2)--.2i33'''.A3.sin.(ri'''f+£'''--^3^---r3).  2

Col.  1./  Col.  2.  Col.  3.  Col.  4,

[6240f] 5»  =  —  2^.sin.(0  —  w)  — 2it,.sin.(e  —  to')  — 2^3.  sin.  (e  —  -a")  — 2^3.sin.(e — •n'")  ;
[6240u] y  =— 2^'.A.sin  (0'— to)  — 2pV^i.sin.(0'-w')  — 2^V^2-sin  (©-ro")  — 2^'3.^3-sin.(0-TO")  ;
[6240»] 5f"  =-2p".  h,  sin.  (0"-^)  -2/,.  A,.  sin.(©"-^')  -2^'V  A^.  sin.  (©"-to")  -2^"3.^3.sin.(©"-TO"') ;
[6240ti;] V"=-2^'".A.sin.(©'"-TO)  -2^"V^rSin.(0"-^')  -'2^\.K'^\a.{Q"'-J')  -^^'\.h,.s\n.{e'"-v/").

If  we  use  the  same values  of h\  h",  h'", as  in  [7177 — 7179],  corresponding  to  the  first

root g  [6229o?  line  3],  we  shall  find  that  the  coefficients,  in  the  first  column  of  the  table
[6240x] [6240 < — w],  will  become — 2/i, — 2A',  — 2h",  — 2A'",  respectively;  so  that  we  shall

have,
[6240y]  —2h  =  — 2A  ; — 2,V  =  -2^^  h  ; — 2A"  =  — 2p".  h  ; —2h'"  =  —2/3'".  h ;

and  by  comparing  these  with  the  expressions  [7177 — 7179],  we  obtain,
[6241a] -2A  =  -2/i;  -2p'.A  =  -0,01 85238. 2A;  -2^".A=0,0034337.2A  ;  -2^'".A=0,00001735.2A.

Again,  by using the values  of h,  h",  h'", as  in  [7184 — 7186],  corresponding  to  the

second  root ^1,  [6229rf  line  4].  we  find  that  the  coefficients  in  the  second  column  of  the
[62416] table  [6240^—2^], will  again  be represented  by —  2A, — 2/i', — 2A",  — 2A"', as  in

[6240a:],  and  by  comparing  these with  the  symbols  in the  second  column  of  the  table

[6240^ — w],  we  get,
[e241c]  — 2A  =  — 2A, ; —2//  =  — 2p/.  \  ; — 2A"  =  -  2^/'.  h, ; — 2A'"=  — 2^/".  h,.

Hence,  by  using  the  values  [7184 — 7186],  we  shall  obtain,
[6241rf] -27t  =0,0375.392x2/1'; — 2^/./i,=— 2/1'; — 2(3/'./i^  =  0,04366S6.2;i'; -2^/".;t  =-0,00004357.2;^'.

In  like  manner,  by  comparing  the  results  in  [7191 — 7193],  corresponding  to  the  third  root
g^,  [6229c?  line  5],  with  the  expressions  in  the  third  column  of  the  table  [6240/ — 10],
we  get,
[6241c] -2;i^=-0,02;381I1.2r; -2(3/.A^  = -0,2152920.2/1"; ~2^J'.h^=-2h" -, -2,3;"./^^=0,1291564.2A".

Finally,  comparing [7196 — 7198],  corresponding  to  the  fourth  root ^3,  [6229^?  line6J,
with  the  fourth  column  of  the  table  [6240/ — lo],  we  find,
[6241/1 -2A3=-0,0020622.2A"'; -2^;./i^=-0,0173350.2A'"; -2^/.fe3=-0,0816578.2r'; -2^^'".\  =  -2h"'.
Substituting  the  expressions  [6241a,  d,  e,f]  in  [6240/ — w],  we  obtain,

VTIT.  i.i.  ^ 6]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.

61

The  whole  process  is  now  reduced  to  the  formation  and  reduction  of  the
equations  [6:217 — 6222]  ;  but  we  shall  see,  in  [6744—^747],  that  they  are

[G5M4']

So  =  —1 ,0000000.2A.sin.(o— tB)+0.037539^.2A'.sin.(e— b')

—0  02381 1 1.2r.sin.(e— w")--0,00206i22.2A'".sin.(e~o"') ;
ir^  z=  — 0,OI85238.2A.sin.(e'— b)— 1 ,0000000.2A'.sin.(e'— «')

—0,2l5-2920.2A"^in.(e'—B")— 0,0173350  2A"'.sin.(e'—o"') ;
iv"  =  0,0034337.2A  sin.(e"— b)  +0,0436686.2A'^in.fe"— ta')

—  1 ,0000000.2/.".sin. (e"— b")— 0,08 1 6578.2A'".sin.  (e"— a'")  ;
ic'^:=  0,OOOOn35.2A.sin.(o"'— «)  — 0,00004357 .2A'.sin.(e"'—i3')

+0,1291564.2A".sin.(e'"— b")— l,C000000.2A'".sin.(e"'— xb'").

We  shall  see  hereafter  that  2A,  2A',  are  insensible  [7441'];  2A"=— 1709".05  [7499],
and  2A'"  =  — 9265".56  [7502]  ;  so  that  all  the  lermS;  except  those  depending  on  A",  A'",
may  be  neglected.  The  coefficient  of  2A,  nejrlectipg  the  signs,  is  greater  in  the  expression
of  Sv  [624\g]j  than  in  those  of  Sv',  Sv",  ho"  [6241A,  t,  A:] ;  therefore  the  coefficient
— 2A,  or  2e  [6205A],  with  the  corresponding  perijove  w,  is  considered  as  the
excentricity  and  perijove  p'-culiar  to  the  first  satellite.  For  similar  reasons  2A',  2c',  ra',
are  considered  as  peculiar  to  the  second  satellite  ;  2A",  2e",  -m",  peculiar  to  the  third ;
and 2A'",  2e"',  ra", peculiar  to  the  fourth. This  assignment  of  peculiar  values  to  each

satellite,  is  very  natural,  and  is  analogous  to  that  in  the  planetary  system,  as  we  may  see  in

J"
[6205x,  lie.]  ;  or  more  simply,  by  adding  together  the  parts  of — depending  on  the  first

power  of  c, in  [669,  1020  line  2], which  give,  when  we  have  only  two  planets m,  m',

f
—  =  1 — {l-\-m'f).ej:o3.(nt-\-s — -a) — m'f'.e'.cos.(nt-\-s — -s/).

Here  we see that the elliptical part of — , independent  of  the  action  of m\  is

— e.cos. (nt-{-s — -a)  ;  moreover,  the  coefficient  — e  is  changed  into  — {l-\-m'f).ej  by
the  action  of  m ;  and  this  large  coefficient,  with  its  perihelion  n,  is  considered  as
peculiar  to  the  planet  m  ;  while  the  other  part  of  the  equation  of  the  centre,
— m'f!e. cos  {ni-\-e — -a)  [6241j?],  has  the  coefficient  — m'f'.tf,  and  refers  to  the  perihelion
t/  of  the  planet rr^.

If  the  values  of  A,  A',  A",  were  much  enlarged,  so  as,  for  example,  to  be  nearly  equal
to  A'",  we  should  find,  in  this  system  of  satellites,  this  singular  result,  that  the  equation
of  the  centre  of  each  satellite  would  consist  of  four  sensible  parts,  each  part  referring  to  a
different  perijove.  This  occurs,  in  some  respects,  in  the  system  as  it  is  now  constituted  ;
for  each  of  the  satellites  has  two  distinct  and  sensible  equations  of  the  centre,  referring  to
the  pcrijoves  ta",  u",  of  the  third  and  fourth  satellites  ;  as  we  shall  find  hereafter  in
[7318  lines  1,9;  7405  lines  1,2;  7467  lines  1,  2  ;  7513  lines  1, 2J.

[«Mi|r]

[634IA]

I6241t]

[624U]
[(524  If]

[G241iii]
[684111]

[G241o]

[624 ]p]

[62419]
[624  Ir]

[6241tl
[624  W]

[694 1«]

52  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6244"]

[6245]

[6245']

[6246]

[6249]

[6250]

incomplete,  and  that  the  ratios  which  obtain,  between  the  mean  motions  of
the  three  first  satellites,  add  to  these  equations  some  sensible  terms,  although
they  depend  on  the  squares  and  products  of  the  disturbing  forces.

7. The  terms  of  the  double  integral — .ffndtAR, in  the  expression  of

fiV  [6060],  which  depend  on  the  angle  nt — 2w'^  +  e — 2s',  acquire,  by
integration,  the  divisor  (n — 2n'y ;  and  as  n  differs  but  very  little  from
2/i'  [61olfl],  this  divisor  is  very  small;  therefore  these  terms  may  become
very  sensible,  although  they  are  multiplied  by  the  small  excentricities  of  the
orbits ;  we  shall  now  proceed  to  determine  them.

We  shall  consider  the  term m'.A^^\Q,os.{v' — v), in  the  expression  of R
[6090]. Substituting  in  it  the  values  [6198,  &c.],

[6247] r'=a'+-7-; ^  =  ^^+£  +  "-^aVrr- , r=a; v  =  nt-^s',

0/  a  til  etc

we  shall  find,  as  in  [6199],  that  this  part  of R  contains  the  following  terms  ;
[6248] R^rn!.-^,  a'.(^-^  j.cos.(w'^— wi+s'— 0 ^,,^^,^^ .  A^^\  sin.(7i'^-w^ +  £'-£)•

^ contains,  as  in  [6205],  the  term ^'.cos.(w'i-fa' — gi — r), and  if  we

substitute  it  for -^g- , in  [6248],  neglectmg  quantities  of  the  order  m'^, we
shall  obtain  the  following  terms  of J? ;  *

jR  =  "^'.  I  a'2/^^_-.2a'.^(•)  \  .cos.(w^— 2^'^+s— 2s'+^^-f-r).

We  have,  as  in  [6145],

[6251]  G  =  2a'.^('>-a'=.(^

*  (3279) If  we  substitute  the  term  of -^  [6249],  in  the  first  members  of  [6250a,  &],

and  reduce  the  products,  by  means  of  [20, 17]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  part  depending  on
the  angle nt — '^Tdt-\-z — '^d -\-gt-\-V ^  we  shall  get,

[6250o]  -^  •  COS.  {rtt  —  nt  -\-  i —  s)  =  |^'.cos.(n<— 2n'^+£— 2^+5"^+^)  J

[62506]  ^^  •  sin.(n'^-n<+s'_£)  =  \  A'-^^)-  cos.(n^-2n'/+s-2£'+^^f  r).

[6250c]

jj' or

Substituting  the  expressions  [6250a,  6],  in  [6248] ;  then  putting  as  in  [6205n'j, — ~  =  1,

we  get  [6250]  ;  and  by  using  [6251],  it  becomes  as  in  [6252].

Vni.  iii.  ^7.] TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  63

hence  the  term  [6250]  becomes,

iJ  = ~  .  cos.(n/— 2»'l-f  •— 2i'4-^4-r),  [(sasai\

We  shall  now  consider  the  term j»'..4'*'.cos.(2r' — 2»), in  the  expression  of

R  [6090]. Substituting  in  it,*  ^^^^

rir  2d.{r6r)

we  shall  find  that  this  term  contains  the  function,!

/?=»'.  ^  .ay^\cos.('2/.'/— 2n/-|-2/— 26)+iii'.  ^^^^®.sin.(2n'<— 2nt-f2/— 2<). [6254]

TOT

Substituting in this function the expression —  =  A.cos.(n/4-6 — gt — ^) [6355]
[6205],  we  obtain  the  following  terms  of /2 ;

/J  =  ^ .  J  4a  J(^'-f  a\  (^)  \  .  cos.(n/— 2n'/+6— .2/+^^+r).  [6256]

The  value  of  F  [6130],  by  putting  as  in  [6151] w  =  2n', becomes

F  =  _4a^<«'— a»/^) ;  [6257]

•  (3280) The  expressions,  in [6253'], are  similar  to those in  [6247], changing

[6252(11
reciprocally  the  elements  of  the  satellite tn into  those  of  m'.

t  (3281) The  development  of  the  term /2==m'.^t«\cos.(2t/— 2t>)  [6253],  is  made
like  that  in  [6198fl,  c], by the substitution  of  the values  of r,  v,  &c.  [6253']  ; then t6253a]

r6r

developing it,  according to  the  powers  of -— , retaining  only the  first  power  of this

"  [62536]

quantity  ;  by  this  means  we  get  the  two  terms  of  R  [6254]. Now  if  we  substitute  the

rir

value  of —  [6255],  in  the  first  members  of  [6253c,  rf],  and  reduce  the  products,  by  means

of  [20,  17]  Int. ;  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle nt — 2n'/-|-s — 2/-!-^+^; [6253iQ

we  shall  get,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order — ,  as  in  [6205n,  &tc.],

fi

^^^  cos.(2n'<— 2n<  4-2/— 2«)  =  j.  cos.(n/— 2n'/-f »— 2/4-^+r) ;  [e253e]

J .  sin.  (2n'/  -  2nt-\-2/-  2«)  =  j .  4.  cos.(  m^— 2nr<-f  i— 2/4-g<4-r).  [6253rf]

Multiplying  [6253c]  by m'.a.(^\  also  [6253(/]  by tn'.Jl^^, and  taking  the  sum  of

\  *''*  /  [6253*1

the  products,  we  obtain,  for  the expression  of R  [6254],  the  value  [6256] ;  a  slight

reduction  being  made,  by  multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  by a.
VOL. IV.  14

[6259]

54  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^I.

hence  the  expression  [6256]  is  reduced  to  the  form,
[6258]  R=  —  "-^ .  cos.(w^— .2n7-t-c-— 2i'+^/+r).

Adding  together  the  expressions  in  [6252,  6258],  we  obtain,  in  jR,  the
following  terms ;

and  it  is  evident  that  the  action  of  m'  upon  wi,  produces  no  other  terms
of  this  kind.

Now  if  we  observe  that f*  [6110c] may  be  supposed  equal  to  unity,  in

[6260] the  function — ■  .JJ'ndt.dR  [62^5],  which  occurs  in  the  expression  of 6Vy

we  shall  find,  that  the  term  [6259]  produces,  in  6v,  the  following  inequality  ;*

n'  being  very  nearly  equal  to  2n"  [6151],  it  is  evident  that  the  action
of  m"  upon  m',  produces,  in  6v',  an  inequality  analogous  to  the  preceding,
and  represented  by

y^  The  action  of m upon m', produces  also,  in hv\ an  inequality  of  the

same  kind,  which  may  be  easily  found  by  means  of  [1208]  ;  for  we  have,
in  that  article,  by  noticing  only  the  proposed  terms,t

[6263]  hv'  = T^ .  6V  :

which  gives,  for  this  part  of 6v\ the  following  expression  ;

[6264]  6v'  =

Second
part of

5l/.

'-nn-^l+lyWr  \^^  +  l-  «*'  \  ■  sin.(n<-2«'<+.-2/+^^+r).

*  (3282) Substituting R  [6259],  in  Sv  =  3aJ[fndt.dR  [6260],  we  get  [6261]  nearly,

fe261a] ^y  neglecting  terms  of  the  order — . Increasing  the  accents  on  the  elements  by  unity,  we

get  the  expression  of Sv'  [6262],  corresponding  to  the  action  of  the  satellite m"  upon  m',
and  to  the  same  angle gt  -j-  r.

t  (3283) The  equation  [6263]  is  the  same  as  [1208] ; changing ^ into Sv, and |'
[62636] into Sv\ in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation. Substituting,  in  this,  the  value  of
8v  [6261],  we  get  [6264].

VIII.  in.  ^7.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  55

We  may  connect  this  term  with  that  in  [6262],  by  observing  that  we  have,

as  in  [6156],

11'/— 2rt"/4- J*— 2/'  =  n/— 2n'/4-«— 2/— 200° ;  [6265]

moreover,  we  have  very  nearly  n=:2n',  [6151];  also  (-^j  "(t)  t^^^^^' t®^^
therefore  we  shall  have,  very  nearly,*

?^=3»'^-.  IC267]

Hence  we  get,  by  adding  together  the  terms  [6262,  6264],

V=^--^!— .$/«/-. FA+GA')+im^(F'A'+^,.G'A'')?.^^^^  [62681

Lastly,  the  action  of m! upon m" produces,  in  the  motion  of m", an Jr'.
inequality  analogous  to  that  which  the  action  of m upon m produces  in
the  motion  of m!  ; therefore  it  will  be  represented  by  f

^^  --J-tn-^gf  \  V  •  ^'^'+^'^"  ]  •  sin.(n/-2n'/-{-s-2/+^/+r).  [6269]

The preceding  inequalities  correspond  to  the  root g. It  is  evident  that
each  of  the  other  three roots, ^, ,  ^3,  ^3, produce,  in  the  motion  of  the [6270]
three  inner  satellites,  similar  inequalities. These  are  the  only  sensible  terms
which  depend,  at  the  same  time,  on the  action  of  the  satellites  and  on  the
excentricities  of  the  orbits.

•  (3284) The  square root of  the  second equation  [6143] gives —^.~=:  —  , [6267o]

Multiplying  it  by fnn' =  3u'* nearly  [6266], we get [6267]. Substituting  this  in

[6264],  we  obtain  the  terms  of Sv  [6268],  which  are  mulliplied  by m, and  arising  from

the  action  of tn upon m'. Again,  from  [6154]  we  get n' — 2n"-\-g  =  n — 2n'-f-^; [62671]

substituting  this  and  [6265],  in  [6262],  we  get  the  part  of  [6268],  which  is  multiplied  by

rt",  arising  from  the  action  of m"  upon  tn'.

t  (3285) The  part  of  Sv'  [6268],  which  is  mulliplied  by m, represents  the  effect  of
the  action  of  the  satellite m upon tn'. Increasing  ihe  accents  on  these  elements  by  unity, [62fl9aj
we  get  the  similar  term  of  6v"  [62696],  arising  from  the  action  of tnl  upon m", and
corresponding  to  the  same  value  of  g;

^~(,^-,^^y.-  { ^'{V' ^'^'+  ^'^0 ]  .sin.(n'<-2»"/4-/-2/+^4-r).  [ex»]

Substituting the  expression nV— 2/i*/4./— 2i"  =  n/— 2ft'/-f  1— 2i— 200°  [6265], ind [e269c]
reducing,  we  get  [6269].

56  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

8.  The  sun's  action  may  also  produce,  in  the  motion  of  the  satellites,
some  sensible  inequalities,  although  they  depend  on  the  excentricities  of  the
orbits. The value of R relative to  this  action, contains the  term

[6271] i2  =  _?^.cos.(2i;— 2£/)[6042]. Substituting,  in  it,*

r'  =  a\\l+2h.cos.(nti-B—gt—T)l  ; v  =  nt-\-s^2h,sin.(nt+s—gt—T)  ;

[6272]

D  =  D'  [6021/]; ^.  =  3P [6105]; we shall obtain, in R, the

following  term ;  f
[6273]  R  =  —l.MK  a%.cos,(nt—2Mt+s—2E+gt-]-r),

The  value  of  R, relative to  the  sun's  action, contains  also  the  term

[6274]  g^

—  — 3  [6042]. Substituting
[6275]  D  =  D',{l—H.cos.(Mt-i-E—I)}  ;  J

*  (3286) The  values  of  r,  v  [6272]  are  like  those  in  [6253'],  using  the  expression  of

[6272a] —  [6205],  and  neglecting  in v, a  term  of  the  order — ,  as  in  [62536']. Moreover,  by

neglecting  the  excentricity  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  we  may  put  the  distance D, equal  to  the
mean  distance D'  [6021/].

t  (3287) If  we  put 8.{i-^)  and  Sv, for  the  parts  of  r^,  v, respectively  depending  on

[6273a] A,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [6272], r^  .^a^-]-5.{r^), v  =  nt -\- s -{- Sv. Substituting  these

in  the  term  of  R  [6271],  then  developing  it  by  the  formula  [610],  retaining  only  the  first

power  of Sr,  6v, and  using M^  [6272],  we  get,  in R, the  terms  [62736]. These  are

easily  reduced  to  the  form  [6273c],  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  of U,  v  [6102, 6247] ;

[62736]  R  =  —iM^8.{r'^).cos.{2v—2U)  +  iM^.r'.^Sv.sm.CHv—^U)

[6273c]  =  — f  M2.5.(r2).cos.(2wr— 2M^+2£— 2E)+f  iW^.  a^.  26v.sm.{2nt—2Mt-^'iis—2E).

Now  by  using  the  values  of S.(r^),  8v  [6272,  6273a],  and  reducing  by  means  of  [17,  20]

[6273d] Int., retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle nt — 2Mt-{-s — 2E-\-gt-{-r,  which,

for  brevity,  we  shall  call W", we  get,
[6273e] 6.(r2).cos.(2n<-2M+2£—2i;)  =  2a2;i.  COS.  (nf-l-s—^t—r).cos.(2n«—2.Mif-f2£—2i;)  =  a2A.cos.fr"
[6273/] 2(5v.  sin.(2nf— 2JW/ + 2s  — 2£)  =  —ih.  sin.  (ni+s— g-f— r).  sin.  {2nt—2Mt-\-2B—2E)  =  — 2/i.cos.  W'\

Substituting  the  values  [6273e,/]  in  [6273c],  we  get
[6273g-]  Jl  =  — f  iW2.a2A.cos.  W"—§  MK  a^h.cos.  W"  =  — |  M\  a^h.cos,  W%

as  in  [6273].

rfi27^  1 t  (3288) This  expression  of  D is  easily  deduced  from  that  of r  [6200a]  ;  changing
r,  a,  e,  n,  e,  ot, into X),  D',  H,  M,  E,  I, to  conform  to  the  elements  of  the  orbit  of

Vni.  iu.  ^8.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  57

H  being  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity,  to  the  semi-major  axis  of  Jupiter'' s  orbit ;  [GUJy]

and /, the  longitude of  its  perihelion; we  shall  obtain the  following  [6276]
terms  of  R ;

/J  =  —  J  M\  o«.  H,coa.(Mt-\-E'-I),  [0B77]

(f  we  neglect  the  term -=r- of  the  expression  of  R  [6042], since  it  would [6277']

be  useless  to  notice  it*  we  shall  have,

This being premised, the differential equation [6078] becomes, by
considering  only the terms  which depend  on the  cosines  of the  angles

Jupiter  f6021c — 6024^]. Substituting  this  value  of  D,  in  the  term  [6274],  it  becomes,
by  development,  using J\P  [6272],

R==  —  ^=^^4l-H.cos.{Mt+E-I)\-^=-lM\r^.\l+3U.cos.{Mt-\-E-I)+kc\. [62756]

If  we  retain  only  the  term  depending  on  the  first  power  of H^ using r  =  a  [6247],  it [6275c]

becomes  as  m  [6277] . We  may  remark  that  the  angle Alt-\-E — /, in  the  expression  of [6275<f]

D  [6275],  represents,  at  pleasure,  either  the  mean  anomaly  of  Jupiter,  in  its  actual  orbit

about  the  sun,  or  the  mean  anomaly  of  the  sun,  in  its  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter,  supposing

the  planet  to  be  at  rest. This  angle  is  represented,  for  brevity,  by f^ in [7313,  &£.];

so  that  we  shall have V=  J\lt-\-E — /. We  may  however  observe,  that,  if  we  suppose [6275«]

Mt-\-E to  represent,  as  in  [6101',  6102], the  mean  longitude  of  the  sun,  in its  relative

orbit  about  Jupiter,  we  must  put / equal  to  the  longitude  of  the  sun's  perihelion  as  seen [6275/]

from  Jupiter;  but  if  we  take Mt-\-E to  represent  the  mean  longitude  of  Jupiter,  in  its

actual  orbit  about  the  sun,  we  must  put /  equal  to  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion  as  seen

from  the  sun.

[637%]

62  78a]

•(3289) The  term «  =  J^  [6277'],  gives d/i  =  0, r.^^Wo;  which  produce

nothing  in  the  equation  [6057],  for  the  determination  of  the  value  of rSr^ or  in  the  value
of  &v  [6060] ;  therefore  it  may  be  neglected,  and  the  expression [6042]  will  become

at  in  [6278c]. Taking  its  partial  differential  relative  to r, and  multiplying  it  by t:  >  we

/dR\  [62786]

get r.  \—A  [6278(/], which  is  evidently  equal  to 2/2  [6278t],  as  in  [6278].

i?  =  —  f*.  1^.  |1— 3*«-35'«+12*S'.cos.(C7— r)-f-3(l— .9-S'«).cos.(2f/-2t>)|. [ejyg^j

*'-(^)  =  ""^'^-  4^5 •  ^ l-3»'-3'S'«-|-12#S'.cos.(C;-t,)-f3(l-,»-5'«).co8.(2C/-2t)|. [GarSrf]

yoL.  IV.  15

58  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

[6278'! ^^— 2iW/4-6— 2f;+^<+r, Mt-\-E—I, and  observing  that M and g are
very  small  in  comparison  with n  \_6025m,  o,k],*

0  =  ^)  +  NK  (*^.  {l-3h.cos.(nt+s-gt-r)}  1

[6279]  a^-^<^  a^ *  V ' 6  ^l

— 9ir.^.cos.(n^— 2M+£— 2i:+^^+r)— |.M^.i?.cos.(Mi5+i:— /). 2
We  have  seen,  in  [6116  line  2],  that  the expression  of —^ contains the

[6280] term -.  cos.(2nt — 2Mt-}-2s — 2E). Hence  it  appears  that  the  following

term  in  the  equation  [6279],

[6281]  ^SNK  '—.  h.  cos.(nti-s^gt—T),

[6282] will  produce  the  expression ^.M^.h.cos.(nt — 2Mt-{-s — 2E-\-gt-\-T)  [6282a]  ;
N^ being  very  nearly  equal  to  n^  [62796]. Hence  the  differential  equation

*  (3290) From  the  equation  [6078],  we  have  deduced  [6081],  by  substituting a-^Sa

for r  ; and  if  we  suppose  the  term  depending  on h  [6205],  to  be  included  in  this  part  of
[6279a]  ^  ^a

Sa, it  will  produce,  in — , the  term —  =  A.cos.(w^-j-s — gt — r)  [6272]. This  produces,

in  [6081],  the  term —^~-^.Sh.cos.(nt+s—irt—T)  ; and  we  have ^  =  n^ [6110c],
[62791]  «^  V  e. /  „3  L  J

and 71^  =  JV^ nearly  [6025e]  ;  hence  this  term  becomes -J\/'^.rSr.Sh.cos.{nt-{-s-gt-r),

[6279c] Substituting  it  in  [6081],  and  then  dividing  by a^, we  obtain  the  following expression,

which  is  similar  to  [6114],  using JY^  [6124]  ;

Now  we  have,  from  [6273,  6277],  the  terms  of  R  [627 9e],  whence  we  deduce  dR  [6279/]
nearly; also ^r.^^ ^6278,  6279e] ;

[6279e] R  ==  — |.iW2.a2A.cos.(nf~2M^+s— 2E+g-<-|-r)-f  .M2.a2jEf.cos.(M^+-E-/)  =  hr.  (— )
[6279/] dR  =  ^.]\P.a%.ndt.sm.{nt—2Mt-{-s—2E-^gt-{-T).

Integrating  this  last  expression  and  changing  the  divisor n — 2M-\-g, into n, on  account

of  the  smallness  of M,  g, in  comparison  with n, we  get,
[e279h]  f^R  =  —iM^.a^h.cos.  (nt—2Mt-\-z—^E-\-gt-\-V) .

Multiplying  the  sura  of  the  expressions  [6279A,  e]  by  2,  we  get,
[6279t] ^fdR-\-r.(^^  =  —9M^.a%.cos.{ni--2Mt-\-s--2Ei-gti-r)-^.M^.a^H.cos.{Mt-\.E-r).

Substituting  this  in  [6279J],  we  get  [6279].

Vni.  iU.  ^8.] TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  59

[6279]  becomes,*

o*.ar  a"

[6383]

—  ^.M\h,cos.(nt—2Mt-\-t—2E-\-gt-\-r)  2

In  this  expression  we  may neglect M and gj in comparison  with n,
£6278'],  except  in  the  small  divisor 2M-\-N—n—g ; and  we  shall  obtain,! ^^^^^^^

+  ^^|;F.cos.(JW/+f;-/).  2

The  expression  of 6v  [6060],  gives  very  nearly,  by  substituting —  for  a'
[6110],  t

♦  (3291) Substituting,  in  [6281],  the  term  of  — [6280] ; and  reducing  the  product

by  [20]  Int., we  obtain  the  terra [6282]; observing  that —  =1, nearly [62796]. [e282a]
Connecting  the  terra  [6282],  with  the  similar  one  in  [6279  line  2],  we  get  [6283J.

t  (3292) The  terms  of  —  [6284],  are  deduced frora  those  containing A,  H, m

"  [6284a]

[6283],  by  the  method  in  [6049(1; namely, by  dividing  these  terms  respectively  by

m* — iV* ; m^  being  the  coefficient  of t in  these  terms. Thus,  in  the  term  depending  on

A  [6283  line  2], we  have m,  —  n—2M-\-g) hence m,— iV  =  — (2Jtf+A*— n— g-) ; [62846]

m-\-N—n-{-N^2M-\-g  =  2n  nearly  [6278']; therefore,

!»;— .7Va  =  (m— JV).(m^-fA*)  =  — 2n.(2JV/-|-JV— n-^).  [62844']

Now  dividing  the  term  in  [6283  line  2],  by  this  factor,  we  get  that  in  [6284  line  1]. In

the  term  depending  on  H  [6283  line  3],  we  have  m,=:M;  hence  m^-JV^=M^-JV^=-n* [oa84e]

nearly [6278'J  ; hence,  by  dividing  the  term  [6283  line  3], by — n«, we  get the [6884^]

corresponding  terra  in  [6284  line  2].

t  (3293) Multiplying  [6279A]  by  3,  and  [6279e]  by  4,  then  adding  the  products,  we
obtain,

3/dJ^f  2r.(^)  =  -V.^f9.o«^.cos.(n<-2^//-f-e-2E-|-g/-f  r)-3JM».a«H.cos.(^^-f  i:-i). [6385a]

Substituting  these  in 6v  [61186],  and  performing  the  integrations,  we  find  that  the  term

depending  on H, Is — 3M.a?nH.s\n.{Mt-{-E—l) ; which,  by  substituting a^n  =  — [63856]

II

[6110],  becomes  as  in  [6285  line  2]. The  other  terra  of  [6285a],  depending  on A, being

60

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  CeL

Erection.

[6285]

Annual
equation.

[6286]

[6287]
[6288]
[6289]

[6290]
[6291]

l5.M^h

2n.  {2M-^N—n—g)

.  sin.(nt--2Mt+B'—2Ei-gt+r)

SM

—  ^^ .  H.sm.(Mt-^E—I).

2

The  first  of  these  inequalities  [6285  line  ]]  corresponds  to  the  evection*  in

the  lunar  theory ;  but  it  is  not  the  only  one,  since  it  is  evident  that  each  of  the

three  roots gi, g^, gs, produces  a  similar  eijuation. In  eclipses,  this

inequality,  like  the  evection,  is  confounded  ivith  the  equation  of  the  centre,  and

decreases  it. For,  in  these  eclipses,  the  sun's  longitude,  seen  from  Jupiter's

centre,  is  less  than  that  of  the  satellite  by 200°  ; so  that  we  shall  have  as

in  [6021^,  6022/]  nearly,

2Mt-{-2E+A00'^  =  2nt-{-2s ;

hence  the  inequality  [6285  line  1  ]  becomes,  f

15.M^h  . ,  ^  , ^ ^.

— — — — — r  .sm.(nt-\-s — £^t — n.

The  corresponding  equation  of  the  centre  [6241  line  1],  is

— 2h.sm.  {nt+e—gt — r).
Hence  the  value  of h, determined  by  eclipses,  is  less  than  its  true  value.

[6285c]

[6285rf]

[6285e]

[6286a]

[6289al

multiplied  by  the  very  small  quantity  of the order J^P, may  be  neglected. The
remaining  term  of Sv  [6118&]  is "^""^a^  J  , in  which  we  must  substitute  the  expression

ndt

[6284].  Now  the  term  in  [6284  line  2]  depending  on  H,  produces,  in  [6285c],  a  term
of  the  order  iW^,  which  may  be  neglected  on  account  of  its  smallness.  The  terra  in
[6284  line  1],  depending  on  h,  being  substituted  in  [6285c],  produces  the  terra  in
[6285  line  1]  ;  observing  that  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  M,  g,  in  comparison  with
n  [6283'] ,  we  may  change  the  factor n — 2M-\-g into n.

*  (3294)  The  evection  in  [5551  line  6]  has  for  its  argument  (23)long.-201ong.-3)  Anora.);
and  the  argument  of  the  inequality  [6285  line  1],  may  be  put  under  the  following  form  ;

[62866]  nf-2M+£-2£+g-f+r  =2(nf  +  B)-2{Mt-\-E)-{nt-\-s-gi-l)

[6286c]  =2{long.  satellite)— 2(Jup.  long.)— (mean  anom.  satellite) ;

which  is  similar  to  that  of  the  lunar  evection  [6286a].

f  (3295) Changing  the  signs  of  all  the  terms  of  [6289]  ;  then  adding,  to  both  members,
nt^s-{-gt-\-r ; we get nt—'UMt^s—'HE-^gt-l-r— 400°  =  —{nt-^s—gt—r) ; hence
[62896] we  obtain, sin.('nt—2Mt-\-s — 'iiE-\-gt-\-r)  = — sin.(nr+s— ^^— r). Substituting  this  in
the  term  of 6v  [6285  line  1],  it  becomes  as  in  [6290].

VIII.  Hi.  ^8.]  TERMS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  $1

m  the  ratio  of 1  —  ^ ,^.-.  ,. r to  unity.*  [6899]

4n.(2.^-f  Jv— n— ^)  •'

The  second  inequality  [6285  line  2]  corresponds  to  the  annual  equation  of
the  moon^s  motion  [3651  line  1]. Its  period  being  very  long,  we  shall  see, [6293]
t»  [6696,  &c.],  that  it  is  sensibly  modified  by  the  terms  depending  on  the
square  of  the  disturbing  force.

Changing successively what relates to m, into the corresponding
quantities relative to m',  m", and m'", we shall obtain the similar [6394]
inequalities  of  the  other  satellites.

•  (3296) Adding  together  tlie  two  terms  [6290, 6291],  we  obtain  for  their  sum,

-2*- 1  »  -  i„J^J^-n-g)  \  ■  «n-('"-H-S^r)  ;  [6292.1

which  represents  very  nearly  the  value  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  in  eclipses ;  and  this
quantity  is  to  its  value  [6291],  in  the  ratio  given  in  [6292].

VOL. IV.  16

62  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  Cel.

CHAPTER  IV.

ON  THE INEaUALITIES  OF  THE  SATELLITES IN LATITUDE-

9. We  shall  now  resume  the  differential  equation  [6077],

and  shall  suppose,  as  in  [956],

[6296]  ^  ,  =  i.B^'^+B^'\cos.(v'->v)+B^'\cos.2(v'^v)+kc.

We  shall  have  in  [6039], by  neglecting  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit,  which
[6296'] is  the  same  as  to  suppose r  =  «,  *

*  (3297) The  terms  of R  [6039  lines  1, 2],  depending  on m', being  multiplied by
a, may  be  put  under  the  following  form  ;

aJ2  =  ^ .  { ss'—his^'+s'^ycos.  (v'—v)  ]  1

+  «.  I  _.cos.(.-.)-  .,._2,^.,,3.(,._,)^^>i  I  2

[6297a]

<  r2_2rr'.cos.(r'— v)-|-r^  |  i
m\rr'a.^ss'—i.{s^-\-3'%cos.{v'—v)l  „

{  r^—2r/.cos.{v'~v)-\-r^^  i

[62976]  The  excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  being  small  [6057 e,/],  they  produce  no
terms,  of  importance,  of  the  forms  adopted  in  [6300] ,  and  may  therefore  be  neglected  in

[6297c]  the  preceding  expression,  by  putting  r  =  a,  i'^  =  a'  [6200a,  &c.].  Now  substituting  the
values  [6089,  6090,  6296],  we  get  the  terms  of  [6297  lines  1,  2,  3],  depending  on  m' ;  and
by  prefixing  the  sign  2,  it  includes  the  other  disturbing  satellites.  The  terms  of  aR
[6297  line  4] depending  on S, are found by  multiplying R  [6042]  by a, putting

[6297d]  r=^a,  and  using  JD'  [6104],  M^  [6105],  a3  =  n-^  [6110].  Again,  if  we  substitute
]\I=1,  5  =  1  [6082],  and  r  =  a,  in  the  part  of  aR  [6052]  depending  on  the
ellipticity,  it  becomes  as  in  [6297  line  5].

VIII.  iv.  ^  9.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  63

{^'  i"-i  ('»+*'").cos.K-r)|  ^1

(-flV. !  w'-i.(»M-«^)-cos-(c'-r)  [ .  j  |.B<«4-B' "•cos-(»'-i>)4-B«>^os.2(c'-r)-f-&c. }  JS ^^^
—  ^  — ~.{1— 3#«— 35'»+3.(l— *•— S'«).cos.(2c— 2f/)  +  12*S'.cos.(i;— 10{ 4

-'■^'•li-(-.)M.  6

7/*  t(76  consider  only  the  terms  multiplied  by *, and  those  which  depend [6297^]
on  the  sines  and  cosines  of r, upon  which  the  secular  variations  of  the
elements  of  the  orbit  depend ;  * observing  also  that  we  have  very  nearly

*  (3298) This is similar to what we have seen in the planetary theory
[1037 — 1039,  1041],  where  the  secular  variations  of  the  planet,  and  the  chief  term  of  the
latitude s of  the  planet,  depend  on  the  angle n<-j-s, which  is  the  mean  value  of  v, [C298a]
[6091] ; and  the  terms  of  this  form  are  therefore  retained,  as  being  by far  the  most
important. In  like  manner,  in  the  lunar  theory,  we  find  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  moon's [6996i]
latitude  is  contained  in  the  first  line  of  the  function  [5308],  namely, 18542*.79.sin.(^r-^),
or 18542'.79.sin.  I  r-j-Cg" — l).t? — 6)1; the  coefficient g — 1 being  of  the same  order [e298c]
as  the  disturbing  force  of  the  sun  upon  the  moon  [4828e,  4842] ;  and  (gv — 6)  representing^
as  in  [5388a],  the  moon's  distance  from  the  ascending  node  of  her  orbit  upon  the  fixed  plane  ; [6298</]
and {g — l)t>  [4817] being  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  moon's  node. If  we  represent
the  mean  value  of {g — l).t; — 6 by pt-\-Ay the  preceding  expression  of  the  chief  part [G298<f]
of  the  moon's  latitude  [6298c]  becomes 18542'.79.sin.(t?4-p<+^)  > being  of  the  same
form  as  that  which  is  assumed  for  the  first  satellite  in  [6300  line  1]  ; so  that v-\-pt-\-\
represents,  as  in [6298cr],  the  distance  of  the  satellite  from  the  ascending  node. The [629e<]
values  of s',  il\  d" , depending  on  the  same  angle pt-\-^.^ must  evidently  have  similar
forms  to  that  of s  ; and  these  are  found  by  changing %> into v\  v'\  v"  ; also / into [629^]
/',  /",  /'", respectively,  as  in  [6300  lines  2,  3,  4]. We  shall  see  in  [6323—6333]  the
methods  by  which S',  *,, are  reduced to  the  forms [6300  hnes  5,  6]. We  may  also
observe  that  the  form  of s  [6300  line  1  ]  may  be  obtained  by  the  same  process  as  that [G296!f  ]
which  is  used  in  the  planetary  theory  [1133, 1137"],  where  we  have  found,

q=^.N.cos.{gt-\-^) ; p  =  l..N.sm.{gt-\-fi)  ; s  =  q.sm.{nt-\-s)^p.cos.{nt-{-t).  [6398*1

Substituting  these  values  of y,  p^ in  that  of  s  [6298A]  and  reducing,  by  [22]  Int.,  we
get $  =  l..:S.s\n.{nt-\-z—gt—^). Now changing JV, —g, — p, into /,  ^,  A, [62961]
respectively; also n/  +  s, which  is  the  mean  value  of  t), into v  [6298a];  it  becomes
of  the  same  form  as in [6300  line  1]. In  like  manner  we  may  deduce  the  forms  of [62984]
/,  #",  &ic.  [6300]  from  those  of q,  /,  &tc.  [1 133]  ;  observing  also  that,  in  this  notation,
the  quantity g, or  the  equivalent  expression — p  [6298»], is  of  the  order  of the L"*^^*J
disturbing  forces^  as  in  [1097c].

We  shall  now  make  a  few  additional  remarks  on  the  process  of  integration,  which  is  used

64  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6298'] h^  =  a  [6110^], we  shall find  that the  preceding differential  equation

by  the  author  in  this  chapter. We  shall  see,  in  the  next  note,  that  by  retaining  only  the

r6298 1 ^^*™^  mentioned  in  [6298],  the  equation  [6295]  can  be  reduced  to  the  form  [6299];  which

is  linear  in  terms  of s,  s',  s",  s'",  S',  St. This  differeniial  equation  corresponds  to  the

satellite m ; and  there  are  three  similar  linear  equations,  corresj^onding  to  the  satellites

m',  rrb',  m'" ; also  an  equation  relative  to  the  motion  of  Jupiter  in  its  orbit ;  and  another

relative  to  that  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter. Now  if  we  suppose s to  contain  a  term  of

the  form s  =  Z.sin.(u-f-i'^-|--'^)) it  will  produce,  in  [6299  line  1],  some  terms  of  the  form

l- ^J l^.sin.(v-^f-pt-\-A)  ; which  must  be  destroyed  by  similar  terms  in  [6299  line  2],  so  that  the

terms  in  this  last  line  must  produce  the  quantity — l^.s\n.[v-\-pt-yA), which  depends  on

the  same  angle v-\-pt-\-A, but  has  a  coefficient — /^, with  a  different  sign  irom  that

[6298p] which  is  produced  by  the  terras  in  [6299  line  1]. We  must  therefore  assume  such  forms

for  /,  /,  /',  S',  s^, as  will,  by  substitution  -n  [6299  line  2],  produce  terms  depending

on sin.("-[-p/-[-A),  and  this  'is  obtained  by  means  of  the  fomis  assumed  ui  j  6300  lines  2-6],

[6298g] as  is  easily  proved  in  the  manner  pointed  out  in  ihe  note  in  [63026,  c.  &:c.J There  is  a

perfect  symmetry  in  all  these  expressions,  since the  argument,  or  angle,  under  tiie  sign

sin. , is  found,  in every  case,  by  adding  the  same  angle pt-\-A, to  ihe  longitude  of  the

object,  whose  latitude  is  to  be  computed  by  that  formula. Thus,  the  longitude  of  the

I- J second  satellite, v\ is  added  to j?^-}-A,  In  [6300  line  2],  to  find  the  argument  of  the

[6298s] latitude / of  the  second  sateUiie ; the  sun's  longitude U, is  used  in  [6300  line  5],  in

finding  the  sun's  latitude S' ; and  ihe  longitude v, of  the  first  satellite,  is used  in

[6300  line  6],  in  findiog  the  latitude s^ of  that  satellite;  supposing  it  to  move  in  the  plane

of  the  equator  of  Juplier  [6051]. In  the  same  manner  as  we  have  found  the  six  expressions

[6300],  corresponding;  to  the  ande pt-l-A, we  m?y  obtain  similar  ones, relative  to  any
[6298u] ■-  -"  '  o  or,}  j  '  j

oiher  angle  pZ-'r^i  vvhich  fcatisfies  the  proposed  diflerential  equations,  enumerated  m
[629Sn] ;  and  by  changing  the  coefficients  I,  V,  I",  k.c.  Into  l^,  //,  &£c.,  we  obtain
another  system  of  equa lions  s  = /^.sin.(«»-l-/?i^f-Aj,  s'=li.s]a.(;o'-\-pJ-{-A^),kxi.,  similar
to  [6300]. A  third  angle, pJ-f-A^, will in  like manner  give s=l2.i,m.(v-\-pJ-\-A2)  ;

[6298w]  s''==//.sin.(//-[-p2/-{-A2),  &c. ;  and  so  on  for  other  values  of  p.  Finally,  it  is  plain,  from
the  linear  form  of  the  equations  [6298m,  &;c.],  that  we  may  add  together  all  these  values
of  s,  for  the  complete  value  of  s ;  all  the  values  of  /,  for  the  complete  value  of  /,
he. ;  so  that  we  shall  finally  have,  by  using  the  symbol  2'  as  in  [6324'],
s  =1.  sin.  [v-[-pt-{-A)-^l^.  sin. {')-}-;)  f+Aj-|-Z  .a\o.{n-\-p^l-\-A^)-\-SLC.  =  'E'.l.sm.{v-{-pt-{-A)  ;  1
s'  =  v.  sm.(,v'-\-pt-\-A)-\-l^.8m.  {v'-\-p^t-\-A^)-\-l^'.  i^in.{o'-\-p^t-\-A^)-\-SLC.  =  2'.  I'.  sm.{v' -^pt  -\-a)
«'' =  Z^sin.K-[-;jf + A) -H  ^sifl.(«''+p^i + A  J +Z;^  si  a.(  y''-l^^f +Ag) +&C.  ^

[6298x] ^,„  ^  p,gin.(  „'"_|-pf-|-A)-|-Z^'".sin.(«'"^-p^f+A^) + l^'".sm.{v'"-\-pJ-\-A^  )t  &c.  =  S'.l'".8m.{v'"-^pt-\-  a  )

S'  =  I.'.sin.(  U-{-pt-^A)-\-L\sm.{  U-\~p^t-i-A^)-^L^.Bm.{  U-\-pt-\-A^)-{-&,c.  =  2'.i'.sin.(L7"-f;)f-f-A)

VUI.  iv.  ^ 9]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  65

becomes,  •  [6298^

These  forms  agree  with  those  in  [6427 — 6430] ;  the  terms  depending  on  the  angles  jp'-j-A,
PJ-h^t* P»'~f"^j> P»^'{'^9i arising  from  the  mutual  action  of  the  sun,  satellites,  and  the [G296y]
ellipticity  of  Jupiter,  are  explicitly  retained,  in [6427 — 6430]. The  remaining  terras
depending  on  the  angles  pJ-\-A^, pj~\~^i>  ^c.,  arising  from  the  displacement  of  Jupiter's
equator  and  orbit,  are  reduced,  in [6342 — 6414],  to  a  single  term  of  the  form  [6362], •• *••
corresponding  to  those  in  the  first  line  of  each  of  the  expressions  [6427 — 6430].

•(3299) Substituting r=a  [6296'],  and h*  =  a  [6298^,  in  [6295],  it  becomes, [G299a]

dds  /dR\ da /dR\

If  we  introduce  into  this  expression  the  value  of aR  [6297],  and  retain  only  the  terms
depending  on s'm.{v-\-pt-\-A)y as  in  [6301],  it  will  become  as  in  [6299]. For  the  terms L^«99c]

dd$

VT  -{-  *  [62996],  are  the  same  as  the  two  first  terms  in  [6299  line  1] ;  and  we  shall  now

proceed  to  prove  that  the  last  term  of  [62996]  may  be  neglected,  and  that  the  remaining

(dR\
—  j, produces  the  rest  of  the  terms  of  [6299]. The  chief  terms  of  ail  [6297]

containing », are  of  the  form ail  =  2.^.cos.»(»' — v);  which  gives,  [62904]

/dR  \  /....//

a.  (  — -j=2.«5t.sm.i(t> — V).

ds  [6299«]

Multiplying  this  by j-  =  Lcos.{v-{-pt-\-A) nearly, [6300  line  1], it produces terms

[6299/]

depending  on  the  angles  tv'—(iztl)v^pt^A;  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  form
v-\-pt-]-A  [6299c],  by  using,  for  i,  any  of  the  integral  numbers  1,  2,  3,  &«:. ;  therefore
it  may  be  neglected. The  other  terms  of  o.(-—j  [6297]  are  of  the  order s, or  of  the

forms  which  are  neglected  in  [6297']. We  shall now  compute  the  terms  of  [6299]

/dti\  r6299^1

depending  on  the  remaining  part «•  (-^J  of  the  equation  [62996]  ;  which,  by  substituting

[6297],  becomes,

a.  (— j  =l.m.~.{  «'-*.cos.(t;'-i;) }  -2.m'.a  V.  { /-».cos. (»'-»)  | .  |  i  B'^^-\-R^\cos.(v''v)-\-kc }  1

—  ^.{—6*— 6*.cos.(2t>-2i7)+12S'.cos.(t;-^)|  4-(f^^|2,— 2*,|. 2 ^^^*^

As  we  retain  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle v-}-pt-]-A^ after  substituting  the

values  [6300],  we  may  neglect  all  the  terms  of  the  first  line  of  [6299A],  except  that

depending  on B^'^ ;  and  this  term  produces 2.iii'.flV.*.cos.(t/— »).J?>*\cos.(o' — »),  or  by [6299i1

reduction,  using  [20]  Int., J  Z.m'.oV.  I?''.  * , which  is  the  last  term  in  [6299  line  1].

It  also  produces  the  last  term  of  [6299  line  2],  namely, —  2.m'.aV.^»./.co3.(t;' — »).

We  may  also  neglect  the  term  depending  on cos.(2j; — 2U)  [6299A],  since  it  does  not [62994J

VOL. IV.  17

66 MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6299]  av  (^  a  n  )

To  integrate  this  equation,  we  shall  suppose,  as  in  [6298c-/],

s  =1.  sin.(v  +pt-\-^);  1

5'  =  /'.  sin.(t)'  -f-^^  +  A)  ;  2

^'=l".sin.(^'+pt  +  A);  3

s"'^r'.sm.(v"'  +  pt  +  A);  4

ASf'  =  L'.sin.(t/  +  p^  +  A)  ;  [6329]  5

Si  =L.sm.(v  +pt  +  A)  .  [6323]  6

[6300'] Putting  pdt  =  ^.dv  [6089/],  and  substituting  the  assumed  values  [6300]

[6301]  in  [6299]  ;  then  comparing  together  the  coefficients  of  sm.(y-\-pt-\-A),
neglecting  the  square  of  ^  ;  p  being  a  very  small  quantity  of  the  same  order
as  the  disturbing  forces  [6298/]  ;  we  shall  obtain,*

[6302]

^'-i.5_..x».'.„V.5<'>5

[6303]  /  1 \  Tl^r

If  we  put,  as  in  [963'%  964],

produce  a  term  of  the  form  [6299c]. The  two  terms  in  the  second  line  of  [6299A],
[6299/:] depending  on — 6s, -}-12*S", produce the  terms in [6299  lines  1,  2], which are
multiplied  by M^  ; and  the  terras  of  [6299A],  depending  on (p — J9), produce  those  in
[6299]  having  the  same  factor.

*  (3300) Substituting  the  values  of  S',  s'  [6300  lines  5,  2]  in  the  first  members  of
[6302a] [6302  6,  c],  and  then  reducing,  by  means  of  [18]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  terms  depending

on  the  angle v-\-'pt-\-A, we  get  the  second  members  of  these  equations  5
[63026]  *S'.cos.  (  U—v)  =  L'.s\n.{  U-j-pi-\-A)  .cos.  (  C7— v)  =  |  L'.sin.  (v+pt+A.)

[6302c]  /.cos.  (v'—v)=r.sm.(v'-\-pt-\-A).cos.{v'—  v)  =  ^Z'.sin.  (v-\-jpt-}-A).

Again,  the  second  differential  of  s  [6300  line  1],  talcen  relative  to  v, using  pdt  [6300']

dds  /  p\^

[6302i] gives t^  =  — Ul -{- ^j  .sm.(v-\-pt-{-A)  ; adding  this  to  the  same  value  of  5, and

[6302c] neglecting  the  term  of  the  order p^, we get -^-j-5  =  — 2?.  — .  sin.(«-|-p^+A)  .

Substituting  the  values  [63026,  c,e;  6300  lines  1,  6],  in  [6299], and  then  dividing  by
— 2.sin.(u+p<+A),  we  get  [6303].

VIII.  iv.  <^  9.J  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  67

~  =  a  ;  [C304]

(1— 2a.cos.«+a«)-  =  J.6/^+6;»>.cos.«-f V.COS.20-I-&C. ;  [6305]

we  shall  obtain,  as  in  [1128],

aV.Bt'>  =  a».6^»>.  [6306]

Now  we  have,  as  in  [1076,  1 130],*

(0,1  )  =  —  ^f:!"^*fj  =  i.m'.n.a«.6(;)  =  ;^.m'.n.aV.B('> ;  [6307]

hence  we  get,t

0=/.^H0)-[T]-(04)-(0,2)-(0,3)|+(0).I^[7]l'4-(0,1).Z'+(0,^  [6308]

We  shall  find,  in  the  same  manner,

0=^^Hl)-[T]-(l,0Hl,2)-(l,3)^+(l).L+[7]x'+(l,0)i+(l^  [6309]

0==r^|p^(2)-[T]-(2,0)-(2,l)-(2,3)|+(2)X+[7]X'+(2,0).Z+(2,^  [6310]

0=r^M3)-Q-(3,0)-(3,l)-(3,2)^+(3)X4-|T].i.'+(3,0)./+^  [6311]

There  is,  between  the  quantities  p^  /,  /',  /",  /'",  L,  L',  an  equation,
which  depends  on  the  displacing  of  Jupiter^s  equator,  by  the  combined
actions  of  the  sun  and  the  satellites.  To  obtain  this  equation,  we  must  [6311*]
determine  the  precession  of  Jupiter's  equinoxes  and  the  nutation  of  its  axis
relative  to  the  fixed  plane,  using,  as  in  ^5  of  the  fifth  book,  the  following
symbols ;  J

•  (3301) The  first  and  third  values  of (0,1)  [6307],  are  the  same  as  in  [1130]  ;  and
by  substituting  the  values  of  a^af.B^^  [6306], in  the  last  expression,  we  obtain  the  second  ■'

form  [6307].

t(3302) Multiplying  [6303]  by n, and  substituting fm'.n.aV.B<'^  =  (0,1)  [6307],

with  the  similar  values (0,2),  (0,3),  &c. ;  also  the  values  of  (0),  I  0  I  [6216] ; we  get [6a06a]

[6308]. Changing  successively  the  elements  relative  to m, into those relative to
m',  m",  &tc.,  we  get  [6309 — 63 11],  corresponding  to  the  other  satellites.

X  (3303) These  symbols  are  similar  to  those  which  are  used  in  figure  58,  page  803,  of
the  second  volume,  in  computing  the  precession  and  nutation  of  the  earth's  axis. The '* ■'
symbol  7  [6314]  represents  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  relative [6313&)

68  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Symbols.

[6312]  6  =  the  inclifiation  of  Jupiter's  equator  to  the  fixed  plane  ;

[6313]  "0-  =  the  retrograde  motion,  or  precession, of the  descending  node  of

Jupiter's  equator  upon  the  fixed  plane,  and  counted  from  the  fixed

axis  of  X ;
[6313'] 7  =  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  to  the  fixed  plane,  [being  the

same  as  that  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  sun  about  Jupiter]  ;
[6314] 7  =  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  counted  from

the  fixed  axis  of x ; [being  the same as the longitude of  the

ascending  node  of the relative orbit  of the sun  about Jupiter]

[6313^0-];

[6315]  7i=  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite m, upon  the  fixed  plane  ;

[6316] 7i  =  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the satellite m, upon  the

fixed  plane,  and  counted  from  the  fixed  axis  of x ;
[6316'] it  =  the  rotatory  motion  of  Jupiter  in  the  time t.

Then  we  shall  have, as  in  §  5  of  the  fifth  book,  bj  neglecting  the  square

[6316"J

[6313c]

[6Sl3d]
[6313e]
[6313/]
[6Sl3g]

[6313/i]

of 6,  *

to  the  fixed  plane,  and  counted  from  the  axis  of  x  ;  observing  that  this  longitude  is  the
same,  whether  we  consider  the  actual  orbit  of  Jupiter  in  its  motion  about  the  sun,  or  the
relative  motion  of  the  sun  about  Jupiter,  supposing  this  planet  to  be  at  rest.  It  being
evident,  that  when  the  sun  is  considered  as  at  rest,  the  heliocentric  longitude  of  Jupiter,  at

[6313e]  the  moment  of  passing  the  ascending  node  of  its  actual  orbit,  will  be  represented  by  "7  ;
and  that  if  the  planet  be  considered  as  at  rest,  the  longitude  of  the  sun,  at  the  time  of
passing  the  ascending  node  in  its  apparent  orbit about  Jupiter,  will  also  be represented

[6313jg-]  by  1,  as  seen  from  the  planet,  and  counted  from  the  same  axis  x,  or  point  in  the  heavens.
This  symbol  1  is  equivalent  to  r^,  in  the  notation  which  is  used  for  the  earth  in
[3067,  &ic.].  The  longitude  7^  [6316]  is  counted  from  the  fixed  axis  of  x;  and  if  we
add  to  it  the  precession ^  [6313], from  the  same  axis,  we  shall  get Ti-f-"^? /or  the

[6313t]  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  satellite  m,  upon  the  fixed  plane,  and  counted
from  the  moveable  vernal  equinox  of  Jupiter.

[6313A;]  We  may  observe,  that  the  planet  Jupiter  revolves  about  its  axis  in  0'^«y%41377  [6920]  ;
hence  its  motion  in  a  Julian  year  is  i  =  353094°  71' nearly,  [6021  w].  Comparing  this
with  the  values  of  n,  n',  n",  n'"  [6025A:],  we  get  the  following  results,  which  will  be  of
use  hereafter ;

[6313;»]  i  =  n.  4,27565  ==  n'.  8,58250  =  n".  17,2911 3  =  n'".  40,33405.

[6313Z]

*  (3304) The  expression  of — , corresponding  to  Jupiter  and  its  satellites,  is  easily
[6317a] deduced  from  the  value  of  6  [3089],  relative  to  the  earth  and  moon. For  */  we  neglect

VIII.  iv.  ^  9.]  INEQUAUTIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.

dt

4».(;

.{ 3P.  r.sin.(7 -|-i')-}-2.ifi.n*.  7|.  sin.  ( ii -[-'»')  I  •

69

[6317]

the  terms  of  [3089]  depending  on  cos.2v,  cos.2p',  which  are  very  small  [3377] ;  then
take  the  differential  of  the  remaining  tenns  relative  to  t,  and  divide  by  dt^  placing  an
accent  below  the  letters  m,  n,  X,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  same  letters  m,  n,  \  which
are  used  in  [6022e?,/;  60246,  iic]  for  other  purposes,  we  shall  get,

^^3_ (p=±Z?J .  {(m,»+/m;).cos.^.2.c.sin.(yi4.p)->m^c'.cos.^.sin.(/'<+^){.

To  obtain  the  similar  expression  for  Jupiter  and  its  first  satellite,  we  must  change,  as
in  [3060],

•an*c  mass  .  snn's  mass

mto mr  =

=  JW«  [6105]  nearly.

(disU  8un  aud  earUi)3  "' (dist.  sun  and  Jupiterp

We  have  also,  as  in  [3079],  by  changing  what  relates  to  the  earth  into  the  corresponding
terms  relative  to  Jupiter  ;  and  using  the  values  of  a,  m,  n^  [6021c,  6022rf,  6110]  ;
2  mass  of  the  satellite  m

' ' (distance  of  satellite  and  planetp o3

The  rotatory  motion  of  the  planet  nt  [3015],  is  changed  Into  tV,  In  [6316']  ;  so  that
n^  =  I.  We  have  in  [3073f/],  by  changing  tang,  y  into  7,  on  account  of  its  smallness,
2.c.sin.(//-|-^)  =7'Sin.A.  Substituting  A=r^-}-'*'  [3069],  and  then  changing  r^
Into  7,  as  in  [6313^],  to  conform  to  the  system  now  under  consideration,  we  get
2.c.sin.(//-|-p)  =7«sln.(7  +  *).  The  quantity  c'  [3086],  is  changed  into  tang.7,
[6315],  or  7j  nearly,  so  that  for  the  satellite  m,  we  shall  have  c'  =  y^.  The
expression  — ft — p'  [3086]  represents  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  orbit  of
the  satellite,  counted  from  the  moveable  vernal  equinox,  and  this  is  changed  Into  li-\-^
in  [6313»].

Now  substituting  the  values  [6317^,  c,  /,  A,  Ic]  in  [6317c],  and  putting  as  in  [6316"],

dd

COS.  ^:^  1,  we  get  the  following  expression  of  —  ,  corresponding  to  the  system  of  Jupiter
and  its  first  satellite  ;

^a^3.(2C-^-B)  J  (^M^^m.n^y^.sm.{n+^)^rn.nyr,.^^n.{\+^)\,

If  we  take,  as  in  [6398],  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  in  1750  for  the  fixed  plane, y will  be  of  the
order  of  the  disturbing  force  [6313']  ;  and  by  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order  of  the  square
of  this  force m.y, we  may  reject  the  term m.n*.7.sln.(7  -j-'r)  [6317fn],  and  we  shall  have,
di 3.(2C— ^— i?)

If  in  the  last  term  of  this  expression,  depending  on  the  satellite  m,  we  change  successively
the  elements  of  m,  into  those  corresponding  to  m',  m",  m"\  we  shall  get  the  parts
depending  on  these  satellites ;  and  by  adding  them  to  those  in  [6317o],  by  means  of  the

symbol  2,  we  shall  get  the  complete  value  of  —, as  In  [6317].

VOL. IV.  18

[63176]
[631761

[6317e]
[6317rf]

[6317e]

[6317/]
[6317^]

[6317A]
[6317t]

[6317A]

[6317/]
[63I7JII]

[6317fi]
[63l7o]

[6317p]

70  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  C61.

[6318] We  shall  also  have,*

[6319] ^-  J  =  ^'^^^7c~^^'K^'+^-^-^')-<>+i^V.COS.(7+-p)+XW.W^7i.COS.(7,+i-)}.

Miiltipljing  [6317]  by sin.^, and  [6319]  by cos.^; then  taking  the  sum
of  these  products,  we  get,t

[6320] — ^-^- — ^  =—=——— — '  ,\(M^+i.m.n^)Xcos.^-\-M^r.cos.i  -\-i.m.'nr,ri'Cos.'}  i].
In  like  manner  we  shall  have,  J

*  (3305) Neglecting  the  terms  of  [3096]  depending  on sin.2w, sin.St;',  as  in  [6317&],
'■ "'^ then  putting  as  in [6316"J, cosJ  =  l, sin. 6^=6, we  get,  by  multiplying  by 6, and
accenting m,  n, as  in  [63176']  ;

[63196] ^.^  =  ?^^?|^M  (^/'+/^.')-^+K"^  (/'<+P')  !•

Substituting  the  values  of mj*,  ^mf',  n^,  c', —ft — ^'  [6317rf,  c,/,  i,  Tc]  ; also  putting
successively,  as  in  [3075,  3069,  6317^],

[6319c]  2.  c.cos.(/if4-^)  =  7.cos.A=  7.cos.(r^4"*)  =  7.003.(74-*)  ;

we  obtain,

[6319(/] ^--^  = ^r  " .j  (JW'»+m.n8).5+(JW8_j_^.„s).7.cos.(  7  +  Y)+»i.n3.7,.cos.(7,+Y)  j .

Neglecting  the  term ni.n^.y.cos.( 7 +  '*')> as  in  [6317n]  ;  and  prefixing  the  symbol 2 to
I- ^1 the  terms  depending  on m, so  as  to  obtain  the  sum  corresponding  to  all  the  satellites,  we
get  [6319].

t  (3306) The  first  member  of  this  sum  is — , which  is  evidently

r6320al  equal  to  the  development  of  the  differential  expression  in  the  first  member  of  [6320].  The
second  member  of  this  sum  may  be  reduced,  by  means  of  tlie  following  expressions,  which
are  easily  obtained  from  [24]  Int. ;

[63206]  sin. (7  -j-^).sin.*-4-cos.(7 -|-^).cos.Y  =  cos.{(7 -j-*^) — *}  s=cos.7  ;

[6320cT  sin.(7i-[-*)-sin.Y+cos.(7i-f-*).cOS.*  =  cos.{(7j+>i') — y}  =cos.7,  ;

hence  the  second  member  of  this  sum  becomes  as  in  the  second  member  of  [6320].

X  (3307) Multiplying  the  equation  [6317]  by cos.^f, and  [6319] by — sin.^, then
taking the  sum of the  products, we find that the first member of this sum is

r6321al — '' — '' 1 ^ — ~' wbich  is  easily  reduced to  the  form  in  the  first  member  of  [6321].

Substituting  in  the  second  member  the  two  following  expressions,  which  are  easily  deduced
from  [22]  Int.,

VIII.  iT.  ^ 9]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  71

— L_ — r  s=  ^.{-(iT-f 2.W.II*) J.iiii.r-f-lfV.»in.7 4-2.»i.»*.-/j.fiii.7 ,}. (6881)

To  integrate  these  two  equations,  we  shall  obsenre,  that  the  latitude  of  the
jirtt  tateliite,  supposing it  to  mote in  the  plane of  Jupiter^s  equator^  is r^MMi
— i.siii.(v-|-r) above  the  fixed  plane.* But  we  have  already  shown  that  this
latitude  is  equal  to  a  series  of  terms  of  the  form L,Bin,(v-\-pt-\-A), and  we [6393]
shall  denote  this  series  by

— *.sin.(t;+*)  =2:'.L.3in.(r+p/+ii).  [6394]

The  characteristic  if  signifies  that  the  sum  of  (dl  the  terms  of  the  proposed [6384^
function^ which  are  similar  to  those  under  this  sign, is  to  be  taken as ^'
in  [6298a:].

The  characteristic 2  [6118/'], denotes  that  the  sum  of  the  terms  relative [6385]
to  the  different  satellites  is  to  be  taken,  ^

Therefore  we  shall  hare,t

w  dbtam,  far  the  second  aieinber  of  the  sum,  tlie  ssune  leault  as  in  the  second  member
of  [6321].

*  (3306) The  motion  of  the  mellite m is  direct, and  reprcMMed  by v  [6092],
eoonted  from  the  axis  of  x. The  retrograde  raotioo  of  the  dese^nding  node  of  Jupiter's l*****'
eqwuor  is y  [6313],  counted  iirom  the  same  axis x. Therefxe  the  dinaiifn  of  the
sMeOke,  from  that  deteerndtng  node,  b (v-f-r) ; conseqneatlj  its  distsnee, from  the
atemdiwg  node  of  the  equator  abore  the  fixed  ptane,  is v-f-r  4-200^. Moltifrfyiog  its
wme,  by  the  inrftwtion I of  the  equator  to  the  6xed  pbne  [6312J,  we  get  rerj  nearly, .,.
as  in  [533a],  the  eleration  or  (fistanee  of  the  satellite  from  the  fixed  pbae,  sopposbg  it  to ^ '
ibM  CfMlor ;  beaoe  this  distanee  is tjm4^9-^^-{''2O0r^), or — ijm^w-j-r),  as VOXUX
[6322]. llovlbiilMgblisicpmcMedby «J6051];  therelbre  «,  » ^^.s^n^v+r) ;
ias *,  isftpwantedi»[6g98>lme6]  byaseriesoftcnnsof  theferm  JLam^w-^pfj-A), [9Uae]
sum is represented by prefitbg the  symbol 2' [6324'J, ve sfasU have
.(•-f*')  =  t.LMuJ(w'^'\'A),  as  in  [6324].  ^*

[6a»]

t(39O0) Devcfepmc  the  first  members  or[«396c,^],  by  MMi  of  [21]  Int.,  we  obtain,

sin.(  V  +  r  )  as  sio.rxos.  *  -|-eoa.v.sin.T  ;  [MMn]

mm^9^'\-A)^9ia.»xm(pt'^-A)+ctmjrMm.(jt-\'A).  [«a»]

SnhrtiMing  these  in  [6324],and  pottmg  the  tanas  dspindiwg  on eos.v, ain.e, separately

aqHl  lo  caell  other,  we  g<!t,  by  ehangpg  the  iipM  of  sB  the  mow,  iIm  two

[«ns,e327].

I«>fc]

72  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C6I.

[6326]  ^ .  sin.  *  =  —  2'.  L.  sin.  {pt  -{-  a)  ;

[6327]  fl.  cos.^  =  — 's!.L.cos.{pt-\-A).

[6328] In  like  manner  the  sun's  latitude,  above  the  fixed  plane, is r.sin.(f7 — i);*

[6329] but  this  latitude  is  equal  to 'l' .LI .s\n.{U-\-pt-\-A)  ; hence  we  get,

[6330]  7.  sin.  1  =  — 2'. L.  sm.{pt  +  a)  ;

[6331]  r.cos.  7= 2'.I/'.cos.(j?^  +  a).

We  have  likevs^ise,t
[6332]  7i.  sin.  -Ji  =  — 2'.;. sin.  {pt -\- a)  ;

[6333]  7l.cos.^^= 2'./.cos.  (;?^  + A)  .

If  we  substitute  these  values  in  [6320,  6321],  w^e  shall  obtain,  by  comparing

separately  the  coefficients  of  the  same  sines,  %

[6328a]

[63286]
[6328c]
[6328rf]

*  (3310)  The  projection  of  the  radius  vector  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter,
makes  the  angle  U  with  the  axis  x  [6041]  ;  and  "7  [6314]  is  the  longitude  of  the
ascending  node  of  the  same  orbit,  counted  from  the  same  axis  of  x.  Hence  U — 7  is
the  argument  of  latitude  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit ;  and  as 7  [6313'] is  the  inclination  of

[6328c]  that  orbit  to  the  fixed  plane,  the  sun's  latitude  above  that  fixed  plane  will  be  found,  as  in
[533a, Sic. ],  to  be  7.sin.(C/ — 7)  nearly;  being  the  same  as  in  [6328].  Therefore  we
have  very  nearly,  for  the  sun's  latitude  S'  [6040],  the  following  expression;
S'  =  7.sin.(C7— 7).  But  by  using  the  symbol  2'  [6324'J,  we  get,  from  [629ac  line  5],
S'  =  "^ .LI .svc\.{U-\'pt-\-A)  ;  hence  we  obtain,

[6328e]  S'  —  7.  sin.(  C7— 7)  =  2'.  L'.  sin.(  U^'pt-\-A).

Now  by  development,  using  [22,  21]  Int.,  we  have,

[6328/]  sin.(  C7  —  7) =sin.f.cos.7 — cos. L/". sin. 7  ;

[63285-]  sin.(£/-|-p^-|-A)=sin.C/.cos.(p^+A)-fcos.C7.sin.(p^-}-A).

Substituting  these  last  expressions  in  [6328e],  and  then  putting  separately  the  coefficients
of — COS.C7, sin.C/, equal  to  each  other,  we  get  [6330,6331].

f  (3311) The  equations  [6332,  6333] are  obtained  in  the  same  manner  as  we  have

'■ "-' found  [6330,  6331]  in  the  preceding  note  ;  changing  the  elements  7,  7,  S',  LJ , U, of

the  sun's  relative  orbit,  into 7, , 7j , s,  I,  v, respectively ; so  as  to  conform  to  the  orbit

of  the  satelHte m  [6313' — 6316]. By  this  means  the  expression  of  S'  [6328e]  changes

[63326] into s  =  y^.sin.(v — 1j)  =  lf.Ls'm.{v-\-pt-{-A)', which represents  the latitude of  the

satellite m above  the  fixed  plane  [6298jc  line  I]  ;  moreover  [6330]  changes  into  [6332],

and  [6331]  into  [6333].

X  (3312) Substituting  the  values  [6326,  6327,  6331,  6333]  in  [6320],  then  putting  the

terms  depending  on cos.(^^-|-a) equal  to  nothing,  and  dividing  by cos.(j?^+a), also

[6334a] transposing  the  terms  to  the  second  member,  we  get  [6334]. In  liiie  manner,  by  substituting

[6326,  6327,  6330,  6332]  in  [6321],  transposing  and  dividing  by sin.(p^+A),  we  get  the

same  equation  [6334].

Vni.  iv.  ^  10.]  INEQUAUTIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  75

0^pL+ ^^^^^^^ .  { Af  ».(L'-.L)+2.».n».(/— L) } .  [6334]

We  may  here  observe  that,  if  we  suppose  Jupiter  to  be  an  ellipsoid,  we  shall
have,  as  in  [3408,  &c.],*

C "" f,^n,H\dH
n^  being  the  density  of  the  elliptical  stratum,  whose  radius  is  R,  [6336]

10. We  shall  now  consider  particularly  the  equations  [6308-631 1, 6334],
putting  them  under  the  following  forms  ;  f

0= \  ;,^(0)-|T|-(0,l)-(0,2)-(0,3)  \  .(L^l)  1

^  ' ■>  [6337]

+(O,l).(I^/0+(O,2).(Z^/'0+(O,3).(Z^/''0+|T].(I^L')--pL ; 2
0=  j;>-(l)^|T]-(l,0)-(l,2)-(l,3)  \  .(L-/')  1

^  ^  [6388]

4-(l,O).(I^O4-(l,2)<I^/'0+(l,3).(L-/''04-|T].(L-Z.')-P^; 2

(H)
0=  j;,--(2)-[7]-(2,0)~(2,l)-(2,3)  j  ,(L-l")  1

[6339]

-f  (2,0).(L~/)+(2,l ).(L-/')+(2,3).(L-/'")  -f  \V\ (L^L')^pL ; 2

0=  |i>-(3)-[r|-(3,0)-(3,l)-(3,2)  I  .(I^/'")  1

+(3,0).(L-/)-f  (3,l).(L-Z')H-(3,2) .  (L-Z")  +  [T|(L-LO~/?L ; 2

•  (3313) If  we  change a(p into 9, and aA into p, as  in  [6046a]; also  the
density p  [2947], into n^,  [6336]; and  the  radius a into 7?,  [2942,6336]; we
shall  find  that  the  equation  [3408]  becomes  as  in  [6335]. We  have  placed  an  accent l®^*'*!
below  n,,  which  is  not  in  the  original  work,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  usual  signification  of
n, or  the  longitude  of  Jupiter  [6024/].

f  (3314) The  terms  of  [6337],  which  are  multiplied  by L, excepting  that  which
depends  on  (0),  mutually  destroy  each  other,  as  is  evident  by  inspection. Neglecting  these [6337a]
terms  and  changing  the  signs  of  the  rest,  it  becomes  as  in  [6308]. In  like  manner  we  find
that  [6338,  6339,  6340]  are  equivalent  respectively  to  [6309,  6310,  6311] ;  observing  also

VOL. IV.  19

[6340]

74

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cef.

[6341']

[6342]
[6342']

[6343]
[6344]
[6345]
[6346]

[6347]

[6348]

[6349]
[6350]

We  must  connect  these  equations  with  those  given  by  the  displacing  of
Jupiter's  orbit  [6347 — 6350],  which  give  the  values  of  p  and  L\  depending
upon  this  cause  ;  observing  that  the  action  of  the  satellites  has  no  sensible
influence  upon  this  secular  change  in  the  orbit.

The  values  of  p^  corresponding  to  the  displacing  of  Jupiterh  equator,  are
much  less  than  those  which  depend  on  the  mutual  action  of  Jupiter'' s  satellites,
as  we  shall  hereafter  see  ;  therefore  we  may  neglect  p  in  comparison  with
(0),  (1),  &c. ;  (0,1),  &c.* in  this  case,  if  we  suppose,

L 1 =X. f]^ ^')  >  [For  the  satellite »}

L V =  X'. (L Zy')  \  [For  the  satellite  m']

Zj /" =  X".  CL U^  J  [For  the  satelUte m"\

L /'"  =  >!".(L Z/')  ;  [For  the  satellite  «'"]

we  shall  obtain  from  [6337 — 6340],  the  four  following  equations  ;t
0  =  [  (0)  +[7]+(0,l)+(0,2)+(0,3)  I  .X  _(0,1).X'-(0,2).X"_(0,3).X"'-|T]  ;

0  =  [  (l)-f  [T]+(l,0)+(l,2)+(l,3)  I  .x'-(l,0).X-(l,2).x"-(l,3).X--[T]  ;

0  =  ^  (2)  +[T]+(2,0)+(2,l)+(2,3)  ^  .X''-(2,0).X_(2,1).X'-(2,3).X--

0  =  \  (3)+|T]+(3,0)+(3,l)+(3,2)  I  .x--(3,0).X-(3,l).X'-(3,2}.X"-|T].
We  can  determine,  bj  means  of  these  equations,  the  values  of  x,  x'^  x",  x'".

that  [6338,  6339,  6340]  may  be  derived  from  [6337],  by  changing  reciprocally  the  elements
[63376]  of  ^  into  those  of  to',  rn,  ml".  The  equation  [6334]  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form
[6341],  by  developing  the  terms  included  under  the  symbol  2,  and  altering  a  little  the
arrangement  of  the  terms.  It  gives  the  following  value  of  pL,  which  will  be  of  use
hereafter;

3.(2C-.^.B)

[6337c] p/>=

4i.C'

^{i»i2.(i-i')+m.n2.(i-Z)+TO^n'2.(i^-Z')+»i^n''2.(2,-Z'')+m^n'''2.(L-r)f.

*  (3315) This  is  evident  by  comparing  the  coefficients  of  t, in  the  values  of  fl', V

r6342o] [6928,  6929],  corresponding  to  the  motion  of  the  equator,  and  representing  the  values  of  p,

with  the  values  of (0),  (1),  (2),  (3),  &£c.  [6864—6868],  depending  on  the  disturbing

forces  of  the  sun  and  satellites,  or  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter. The  former  being  much  smaller

[63426] than  the  latter,  may  be  neglected,  as  in  [6342'],  in  finding  the  equations  depending  on  these

values  of  p.

t (3316) Putting ^  =  0, in  the  equations [6337—6340], then  substituting the
[6347a] values  [6343— 6346],  and  dividing  by — (i— jL'), we  get  [6347-6350]  respectively.

Vin.  iv.  ^  10.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  75

The  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  is  represented
by  a  series  of  terms  of  the  form (/ — L').sin.(v-\-pt-^A) ;  therefore  we  shall [6351]
have,*
x'.(/ — L').sin.(v-i-p(-\-A)  =s  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  Jupiter's  orbit. (6352]

If  we  include  only  the  part  of  this  expression  which  depends  upon  the
displacing  of  Jupiter's  equator  and  orbit,  we  shall  have,  as  we  have  seen  in [6353)
[6343], L—l  =  X.  (L—L)  ;  hence  we  deduce,  f

l—L'  =  (1— x).(L— L').  [6354]

Therefore  we  shall  have,  for  the  part  of  the  latitude  of  wi,  above  the  orbit
of  Jupiter,  and  including  the  terms  depending  on  the  displacing  of  Jupiter's
equator  and  orbit ;  the  following  expression  ;

if,(l—L').sin.(v-\-pt-\-A)  =  (1— x).2'.(Z:^L').sin.(t?+p/-f  A).  [6355]

If  the  satellite  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiterh  equator,  its  latitude  above
Jupiter* s  orbit  will  be,  t

2 '.  (L — L).  sin.(v-\-pti-A).  [6356]

[6354']

[6355^]

♦  (3317) The  latitude  of  the  satellite m above  the  fixed  plane,  in  [6298x  line  1],  is
j!.1.5'm.{v-\-pt-\-A)  ;  and  if  it  were  moving  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  it  would  be l"^'^]
l!.L'.s\n.{v-\-pt-{-A), as  in  [6298rline5]. Subtracting  this  expression  from  the  preceding,
we  get Jf.{l — L').s\n.{v-{-pt-{-A)j for  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  Jupiter's  orbit ; [63526]
as  in  [6352].

[6355a]

t  (3318) The  equation  [6343]  gives 7  =  L — X.(L — L') ;  subtracting L' from  both
sides  of  the  equation,  we  get  [6354]. Multiplying  this  by sin.(t>-|-p^-|-^)»  *i"d  prefixing
the  sign 2', we  obtain  for  the  latitude  [6352] the  expression  [6355]. We  may  observe
that  the  equations [6344,  6345,  6346]  may  be  deduced from  [6343]  by  increasing  the [63556]
accents  on /,  X, by  one,  two  or  three  marks  respectively ;  and  by  performing  the  same
process  on  [6.354],  which  was  deduced from  [6343],  we  obtain  similar  expressions  for  the ^ '
second,  third  and  fourth  satellites. Thus,  by  changing /  into I'", and X  into X'^, the
equation  [6343]  becomes  like  [6346]  ;  and  [6354]  changes  into V'-L'  =  (l-X'").(Z:r-I,') ; [6355rf]
which  is  used  in  [7343].

X  (3319)  If  the  satellite  m  be  supposed  to  move  in  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter,
we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  6^  as  in  [6316"],  t^  [6051]  for  its
latitude  above  the  fixed  plane;  and  this  is  represented  by  1' .  L.  sin.{v -\- pt -}- a)  [6356a]
[6296x  line  6].  In  like  manner,  if  the  satellite  be  supposed  to  move  in  the  plane  of  the
<n'bit  of  Jupiter,  its  latitude,  above  the  fixed  plane,  can  be  obtained  by  changing  U  into  v,  ^
in  [6298r  line  5],  which  gives  lf.L\s\n.{v-\-pt-\-A),  Subtracting  this  from  the  expression
[6356a],  we  get  [6356],  which  represents  very  nearly  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m,  above *■ *

76

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[M6c.  Gel.

The  part

[6357]  (1— X).  2'.  (L—L'). sin.  (?;+^^+ a),

of  the  expression  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite^  above  Jupiter^ s  orbit  [6366],  is
therefore  the  latitude  ivhich  it  would  have,  on  the  supposition  that  it  moves
upon  an  intermediate  plane,  passing  between  the  planes  of  the  equator  and  the
orbit  of  Jupiter,  through  the  common  intersection  of  those  two  planes ;  the
inclination  of  this  intermediate  plane,  to  the  plane  of  Jupiterh  orbit,  being  to
the  inclination  of  Jvpiteih  equator  to  the  same  orbit,  as  1 — x  to  1.  We
shall  suppose,  as  in  [3108,  3104,  &c.],  that

d'  =  the  inclination  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  to  its  variable  orbit ;
— t'=  the  longitude  of  the  descending  node  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter,  on

its  variable  orbit ;  this  longitude  being  counted  from  the  axis  of  x.
Thus  the  part  of  the  latitude of  the  satellite m, above Jupiterh  orbit,
including  the  effect  of  the  changes  in  this  orbit  and  in  the  equator  [6354'],  is*

[6362]  (X— I).^'.sin.(?;  +  ^').

[6358]

[6359]

[6360]
[6361]

[6356rf]  Jupiter's  orbit,  supposing  this  satellite  to  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator.  The
latitude  [6356]  corresponds  to  the  inclination &'  [6360] ;  and  if  this  inclination  be  decreased

r6356e]  in  the  ratio  of  1 — X  to  1,  as  in  [6359],  the  corresponding  latitude  will  be  decreased  in
nearly  the  same  ratio,  and  will  become  as  in  [6357].

[6357a]
[63576]

[6357c]
[6357rf]

[6357e]

[6357/]
[6357g-]

[6357/i]
[6357t]

*  (3320)  If  we  repeat  the  calculation  in  [6323a—/],  changing  {\\e  fixed  plane  into  the
plane  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  it  will  change  5  [6312]  into  5'  [6360],  and  ^[6313]  into  ■*'
[6361]  nearly,  as  in  [3104 — 3105].  By  this  means  the  expression  — d. sin. («-}-'*')
[6323c?],  which  represents  the  elevation  of  the  satellite  m  above  the  fixed  plane,  upon  the
supposition  that  the  satellite  moves  in  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter,  will  change  into
— ^'.sin.(r-f-V),  representing  the  elevation  of  the  satellite  m  above  the  variable  orbit  of
Jupiter,  the  motion  of  the  satellite  being,  as  before,  in  the  plane  of  the  equator.  Putting
the  expression  [6357  J]  equal  to  the  same  latitude,  found  in  [6356],  we  get,

2'.  (L— L').sin.(«-j-pf+A)  =  — ^'.  sin.(i)4-^')-
Multiplying  this  by 1 — X, and  substituting  the  result  in  [6355],  we  get,

I.\{l—L').sm.{v-\-pt-\-A)  =  (1— X).2'.(L— jL').sin.(v+p<+A)  =  (X— l)J'.sin.(«+^')-
The  first  member  of  this  expression  represents,  as  in  [6354',  6355],  the  part  of  the  latitude
of  the  satelUte  m,  above  Jupiter's  orbit,  including  the  terms  arising  from  the  displacing  of
Jupiter's  equator  and  orbit ;  therefore  it  must  also  be  represented  by  the  last  member  of  the
expression  [6357/],  as  in  [6362].  This  expression  [6362]  corresponds,  in  the  lunar  theory,
to  that  in  [5351  or  5357].  But  there  is  this  very  essential  difference,  that  in  the  lunar
theory  the  coefficient  — 6%487,  [5357],  is  but  a  very  small  part  of  the  inclination  of  the
earth's  orbit  to  its  equator,  so  that  X — 1  must  be  very  small ;  but  in  the  theory  of  this
satellite (X — I). 6' is  nearly  equal  to — 6'; X being  very  small  [6923].

VIU.  iv.  '^  10.]  INEQUAUTIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  77

This  result  is  analogous  to  that  which  toe  have  found  in  the  lunar  theory

[5352] ;  observing  that  for  the  moon, 1  —  x is  very  small ; but  for  the [6363]

miellites  of  Jupiter, 1  —  x differs  but  little  from  unity  [6357 1].

ffe  shall  note  determine  the  values  of  <»,  ♦, d',  *', which  depend  upon

the  displacing  of  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Jupiter, We  shall  in  the  first [6364]

place  observe,  that  we  may  satisfy,  very  nearly,  the  equations  [6337-6341],

by  putting,*

L'=0,  or L— L'  =  L;  1

/ =(1— x).L,  L—l =xL;  2

/'  =  (I— X'  ).L,  L— /'  =  X'  L ;  3  t®^J

/"  =  (1— x").L,  L—l"  =  X"  L ;  4

/'"  =  (1— x"').L,  L— /'"  =  X'"  L ;  5

then  the  equation  [6341]  gives  a  value  of  p, which  we  shall  denote  by 'p, [6365']

and  we  shall  have,

'p  =  j.-  ^^^"^'^'^'  • ! ^'+»w.«'. ^ -\-m'. n'^.  x'+m". n"^, x"+ w'". n'"^, x'" } .  [6366]

•  (3321) Taking  as  in  [60^q  or  6398], the orbit  of  Jupiter  in 1750  for  the  fixed
plane,  we shall have  the  sun's  latitude S'  [6040]  of  the  same  order  as  the  disturbing
forces,  which  act  upon  the  planet's  orbit ;  and  if  we  neglect  for  a  moment  this  latitude,  we
shall  have S'  =  0; whence L' =0 [6300  line  5],  as  in [6365  line  1]. Substituting [eaesa]
this  in  [6343 — 6346], and  making  a  slight  reduction, we  get  the  assumed  expressions  of
/,  /',  I",  /'",  [6365  lines  2 — 5]. From  these  we  easily  deduce  the  values  of L^L',
L—l,kc.  [6365]  ;  and  by  substituting  them  in  [6337-6340],  then  dividing  by —L,  they t^^^^^ft]
become  nearly  satisfied  by  using  [6347-6350]. Substituting  the  same  values  in  [6341],  then
dividing  by  JL,  we  get p,  or 'p  [6366]  ;  corresponding  to  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes
of  Jupiter's  equator,  arising  from  the  action  of  the  sun  and  of  the  satellites,  upon  the  ellipsoidal
figure of the planet. By means  of this  value  of 'jp, the argument v-{-  ^pt-\-  a ^ '
[6300  line  6], for  finding  the  latitude a,, supposing  the  satellite  to  move  in  the  plane  of
the  equator,  is  augmented  by  the  quantity *pt in  the  time t  ; and  as  this  argument  must
evidently  represent,  as  in  [533a],  the  distance  of  the  satellite from  the  equinoctial  point. [6365</]
The  part  *pt  must  express  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  [6323^,  &c.] ;  as  this  contains  no
variable  part,  like  that  neglected  in  [631 7o],  it  may  be  considered  as  the  mean  precession
arising  from  the  action  of  the  sun  and  satellites,  on the  ellipsoid  of  Jupiter ;  but  not [6365«]
including  the  efiect of  the  change in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  from  the  value  of  L'
depending  on  the  disturbing  forces  of  the  planets  ; so  that *pt  corresponds  to //, in  the [6365/*]
expression  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  of  the  earth's  orbit  [3100]. Tlie  efiVct
of the change in Jupiter's orbit, from the action of the planets, is noticed in
[6372,  Stc.,  or  6928, 6929],  being  similar  to  that  which  changes  4.  [3100]  into  4-'  [3107]. ^^^^^

VOL. IV.  20

[6372]

78  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6367] The  value  of L remains  arbitrary, and we shall denote it by — 'L.

Hence  we have,  by  noticing  only  this  value,  the  latitude  of  the satellite
[6368] above  the  fixed plane, equal  to — ^iy.sin.(?J  +  '^^  +  ^A),  * ^A being  the

arbitrary  constant  quantity  corresponding  to ^p. But  this  latitude  is  also
[6369] equal  to — &,sm.(v-\--¥)  [6322]  ;  hence  we  deduce,
[6370]  &,  sin.  ^  ==  iL.  sin.  Qpt  +  'a)  ;

[6371]  ^.  COS.*  =  'L.  cos.  (y +U)  .

^pt  denotes  the  mean  precession  of  the  equinoxes  of  Jupiter  ^  [QSQbe']  ;  but  the

true  precession  is  modified  by  the  displacing  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  as  we  have
[6372'j seen,  in  [3111 — 3115],  that  the  change  of  the  ecliptic  modifies  the  precession

of  the  equinoxes  relative  to  the  earth. To  determine  these  modifications,

we  shall  observe  that  the  equation  [6341]  gives,  J

*  (3322) This  expression  of s^ is  deduced  from  its  assumed  form [6300  line  6],
[6368a] changing L into — ^L  [6367], and p into '^p  [6365'J, in  order  to  conform to the

present  notation. Putting  the  value  of  s^  [6368]  equal  to  that  in  [6323rf],  we  get,
[63686]  —Ls\n.{v-\-^)  = —^L.sm.{v-\-^pt-\-^A).

Now  by  means  of  [21]  Int.,  we  have,

sin.(i;-f-'^)  ^^^sin.u.cos.Y-j-cos.iJ.sin.*  ;
sin. (!;-[-  ^V^-\-  ^■^)  =  sin.  v.  cos.(*_p^-|-  ^a)-|-  cos.  v.  sin.  {^pt-\-  'a).
Substituting  these  developments  in  the  equation  [63686],  and  then  putting  separately  the
coefficients  of  — cos.«,  — sin.v,  in  both  members,  equal  to  each  other,  we  get  [6370,6371],

[6368c]
[6368d]

[63726]

t  (3323) We  have  observed,  in  [6365/],  that  the  mean  precession  of  Jupiter's  equinox
[6372a] ^pt,  deduced  from  [6366],  is  similar  to  that  of  the  earth It  [3100]  ;  or,  in  other  words,
that ^p, in  Jupiter's  theory  [6366],  is  equivalent  to I  [3098],  in  the  theory  of  the  earth  ;
and  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  compare  these  two  expressions.

Now  the  first  term  of I  [3098],  dependmg  on  the  sun  s  action,  is -— - .  (  J.cos.A  ;

and  by  changing  m  into  M  [3059,  6101']  ;  also  n  into  i  [6317/],  to  conform  to
[6372c] the  present  notation  ;  then  putting cos.  A  =  1, on  account  of  the  smallness  of h  [7319],

we  get  the  first  term  of  [6366],  depending  on M^. In  like  manner,  the  term  of  [3098],

containing  X,  which  depends  on  the  moon's  action  upon  the  ellipsoid  of  the  earth,  is
[6372rf] similar  to  those  in  [6366],  containing X,  X',  X",  X'", and  depending  on  the  action  of  the

satellites  upon  the  ellipsoid  of  Jupiter.

X  (3324) Multiplying  [6366]  by L—L\ and  substituting  the  values  [6343—6346],
we  get,

[6373a] ^p.{L-U)=  ^  •  ^^^^^^^.\M^l^U)^m.n^.{L-l)^\n'2.{l^')+m'\n''24I^V^

VIII.  \y.  ^  10.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  79

(P—'P)'  L  +  'pL=^0;  [6373]

p being,  in  this  case,  one  oj  the  values  of  p, relative  to  the  displacing  of
Jupiter^ s  orbit. This  equation  gives,  [6374]

L=z — -J——.  [6375]

Therefore,  if  tee  notice  only  the  values  of  p relative  to  the  displacing  of [6375']
Jupiter^s  orbit,  we  shall  have,

6, sin.  T  =  Jp. 2'.  •^'"•(^<+^)  .  ^ggygj

^ , .  L'.cos.(pt4-A)

^.COS.i'  ==  p.  If,  ^^— ^ — ^  .  [6377]

Connecting  these  two  values  with  those  in  [6370,  6371],  we  shall  have,*

6,  sm.  ^  =  'L.  sin.  ('pt + ^a)  +  'p.  if,  Lpu  .  ^^^^

^cos.^  =  ^L,  cos.(^pt + ^a)  +  ^p.  If. '^°^'\Pj-rV  ^^^^^

Hence  we  easily  obtain,t

The  second  member  of  this  equation  is  the  same  as  the  value  of  pL  [6337c]  ; hence  we [637351
obtain ^p.{Jb—L')=pL; and  by  transposition  we  get [6373];  whence  we  deduce L 1-6373^1
[6375]  ;  and  by  substituting  it  in  [6326,  6327],  we  obtain  [6376,  6377]. The  symbol
2' being  supposed  to include the  angles pt-{-Ai depending  on  the  displacement  of [6373rf]
Jupiter's  orbit  [6324'].

♦  (3325) The  sum  of  the  terms  [6370,  6376]  gives  the  value  of  ^.sin.>F  [6378]  ;  and
the  sum  of  those  in [6371,  6377],  gives 6.cos.^  [6379]. Observing  that  the  values C^^^a]
[6370,  6371]  are  founded  on X#'  =  0  [6365a],  corresponding  to  a  Jixed  orbit  of  Jupiter  ; [63786]
and  the  terms  [6376,  6377]  depend  on  the  changes  of  that  orbit ;  consequently  these  sums
represent  the  whole  values  of ^.sin.'r, d.cos.  ^r.

[6380a]

t  (3326)  From  [22]  Int.  we  get  sin.^.cos.»/»/— cos..^.sin.'p<  =  sin.(.5 — ^pt)  ;  hence
if  we  multiply  [6378]  by  cos.'p/,  and  [6379]  by  — sin.'p^,  then  take  the  sum  of  the
products,  we  shall  get,  by  using  [6380a],

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  integral  form  in  [6380],  as  is  evident  by  taking  the  integral,
indicated  by  the  sign  / Tiie advantage  of  this  form  is  seen  in  [6386],  where  we  are [6380c]
enabled  to  introduce  the  symbol 7. In  like  manner,  by  multiplying  [6378]  by sin.  *pt, [GSSOd]
tUo  [6379]  by cos.  •/><, and  reducing  by  means  of  the  formula

Bin. A,  sin. 'pt-\- COB. A.cos.'pt=co8.{A — *pt) [24]  Int.,  [6380*?]

80  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6380]  6,  sin.  (^— >0  =  'L.  sin.  ^a  +  'p.  I'./L'dt.  cos. (pt—'pt+ a)  ;

[6381]  6. COS.  l^—'pt)  =  'L.cos. 'a—Y  I'JL'dt.  sin.  (pt—'pt+A)  ,

Now  we  have,  as  in  [6330,  6331],

[6382]  7.  sin.  7  =  — 2'.  L'.  sin.(;?^  + A)  ;

[6383]  7.  cos. 7= 2'.  L'.  cos.  (^^4-^);

and  from  these  we  deduce,*

[6384]  7,  sin.  (7  +  y)  =  —2'.  L'.  sin.  (pt—'pt-{-A)  ;

[6385]  7.  C0S.(7  +  y)  = 2'.  L'.  COS.  (pt—''pt+^)  5

therefore,

[6386]  5.  sin.  (y— y)  =  ^L.  sin.  ^A -f  >./7<f^.  cos.(7  +  'pt)  ;

[6387]  ^.  COS.  (*— y)  =  ^jL.  cos.  ^A  +  'p.frdt.  sin.  (7  +  Y) .

[6388]  j?!/  'i^eans  of  these  two  equations  we  may  obtain  the  excess  f  ^ — ^pt  of  the
true  precession  of  Jupiterh  equinoxes  above  the  mean  precession ;  and  the
inclination 6 of  the  equator  of  this  planet  to  the  fixed  plane.

The latitude of  the'  satellite w, supposing  it  to move  in  the  equator

[6390] of  Jupiter,  is — ^.sin.(i;+^)  [6322]  ;  and  its  latitude  above  the  same  plane,

[6391] supposing  it to move upon the orbit  of Jupiter, is 7.  sin.  (-y — 7)  ;  f

we  get,

/  NT  /. .  / Ir'.COS.fpf— Ipf+A)

[6380c]  ^'  cos.(*— .  »jpf)  =  ^L.  COS.  A  +  ^p.  2'.  _^  ;

which  is  the  same  as [6381],  as  is  evident  by  taking  the  integral  of  its  last  term,  as  in
[6380/"] [6380c]. This  integration  procures  the  same  advantage as  above,  of  introducing  the
symbol 7 in  [6387].

[6386a]

*  (3327) Multiplying [6382,  6383]  by cos.^;?^, sin.';?^, respectively; taking  the

sum  of  the  products  and  reducing,  by  [21,  22]  Int.  ;  we  get  [6384]. Again,  multiplying

[6382]  by — sin.^jo^, and  [6383] by cos.^p^; taking the  sum of  the  products  and

[63866] reducing  by  [23,  24]  Int.,  we  get  [6385]. Substituting the values  [6385,  6384] in

[6380,6381],  they  become  respectively  as  in  [6386,  6387].

[6388a]

t  (3328)  The  true  precession  being  represented  by  ^  [6313],  and  the  mean
precession  by  "^pt  [6372];  the  excess  of  the  former,  above  the  latter,  will  be  y  —  ^pt,
as  in  [6388].

X  (3329) The  inchnation  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter,  to  the  fixed  plane,

•' is  7  [6313'];  and  the  longitude  of  its  ascent?!/?^  node  is 7  [6314]. Hence v  —  7 is  the

angular  distance  of  the  satellite  from  that  node  ;  and  by  proceeding  as  in  [6328c],  we  obtain

[63916] 7.sin.(i' — 7), for  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m above  the  fixed  plane,  supposing  it  to  move

VIII.  iv.  ^  10.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  81

subtracting  this  last  expression  from  the  preceding  one,  we  get  the  latitude [639r]
of  the  satellite  above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  supposing  the  satellite  to  move  in
the  plane  of  the  equator ;  but  this  last  latitude  is  — a'.sin.(tj4-*')  [6357 </]  ; [6399]
therefore  we  have,

— d'.sin.(r-fi'')  =  — ^.sin.(t-f  i') — r.sin.(v — n)  ;  [€393]

r  being  indeterminate. Ifwe  put  successively  v  =  — '/?/  and tJ=100° — ^pt, [6394]
we  obtain  from  the  preceding  equation,

6',  sin.  (^' — ^pt)  =  6,  sin.  (* — ^pt) — 7.  sin.  (7  -f  ^pt)  ;  [6395]

6'. COS.(i'' —  ^pt)  =  ^.  COS.(i' — ^pt)  +  7. cos.  (7  +  y) .  [6396]

These equations  will make known the  precession ^'  [6361], and the
inclination 6'  [6360],  of  the  equator,  referred  to  Jvpiterh  orbit.

It  is  sufficient,  for  the  uses  of  astronomy, to  have  the  values  of  these ^\i^^.
quantities  in  a  converging  series  for  two  or  three  centuries. We  shall  take, *"*•
for  the  fixed  plane,  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  in  1 750 ;  and  that  epoch  for  the
origin  of  the  time t. We  shall  also  take,  for  the  axis  of  x, the  line  of
the vernal  equinox  of  Jupiter at the  same epoch. Then reducing the
expression  to  series,  and  neglecting  the  second  and  higher  powers  of i, we [6399]
shall  have,*

7.  sin. -7  =  at  ;  [6400]

7.C0S.  n  =  bt ;  [6401]

a  and  b  being  constant  quantities,  which  are  easily  found,  as  in  [6901, 6902], [6402]

[6397]

[6398^

[6391c]

in  the  plane  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit,  or  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter. Subtracting

thb  from  the  expression  in  [6390],  we  get  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m  above  Jupiter's

orbit,  supposing  it  to  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator,  as  in  the  second  member  of

[6393]. Putting  this  equal  to  the  value  of  the  same  latitude,  found  in  [6357rf],  we  get  the [6391rf]

first  member  of  [6393]. Substituting  in  [6393] « =  200^— >/)/, we  get [6395]; and

by  putting i>=.300^ — ^pt, we  obtain  [6396],  by  making  a  few  reductions. The  same [6391e]

results  are  obtained  by  using  the  values  of  v  [6394].

[6400a]

*  (3330) The  developments  in  [6400,  6401]  are  similar  to  those  in  the  earth's  orbit
[4332],  neglecting  terms  of  the  order <"; observing  that  the  assumed  values  of  p",  q"
[4249]  for  the  earth,  are  similar  to  the  expressions 7.  sin.  7, 7.  cos.  7, in  the  present [64006]
theory; because 9",  6",  [4249,  4082,  4083], or  rather 9/,  «/'  [4238c]  are  changed
into 7,  7,  [6313',  6314]. The  analytical  values  of  a,  b, are  given  in  [6901,  6902]  ; ^^^^^
and  their  numerical  values  in  [6906—6908,  or  6928,  6929].

VOL. IV.  21

82

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C^.

rfi402n ^y  means  of  the  expression  of  the  motions  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  given  in  [4246,]
From  the  preceding  equations  we  obtain,*

*  (3331)  Putting  z  =  1 ,  and  a=»p^,  in  [60,  61]  Int.,  we  obtain  the  developments
of  sin.(7-}-*pi),  COS. {l  -\-^pt),  according  to  the  powers  of  t.  Substituting  these
expressions  in  the  terms  under  the  sign  /,  in  [6386,  6387],  and  then  the  values  of
y. sin7,  7. cos. 7  [6400,6401],  we  find  that  these  integrals  are  of  the  order  t^,  or  of  a
higher  order,  which  are  neglected  in  [6399].  Therefore  we  may  reject  the  terms  under
the  sign  /, in  [6386,  6387],  and  we  shall  have,

^. sin.(^ — ^pt)  =  ^i^.sin.^A  ; ^.cos.(^ — ^pt)  =^L.cos.^a.
The sum  of  the  squares  of  these  two  equations,  gives 6^  =  '^L^, or 6=^L, as  m
[6404]  ;  substituting  this  in  the  first  of  the  equations  [6403c],  and  then  dividing  by ^L,
we  obtain,

sin.(Y — 'jp^)  =  sin. *A  ;  whence  ^  —  ^pt  =  ^A.
Now  we  find,  in  [6398'],  that  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  Jupiter,  in  the  direction  of
the  vernal  equinox  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  at  the  epoch  1750,  is  taken  for  the  axis  of  x  ;  and
in  [6313]  Y  represents  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  node  from  this  axis,  after  that  epoch ;
so  that  when  ^  =  0,  we  shall  have  ^  =  0.  Substituting  these  values  of  t  and  ^,
in  the  first  member  of  the  second  equation  [6403e],  we  obtain  0  =  ^a,  as  in  [6403];
and  by  using  this  value  of  the  constant  quantity  *a,  we  find  that  the  second  equation
[6403e]  becomes  generally,  for  any  value  of t, y  —  ^pt  =  0, or ^  =  ^pt,  as  in  [6404].

In  finding  the  values  of  *',  &',  from  the  equations  [6395,  6396],  we  must  observe  that
the  equation  y  —  yt  =  0  [6403A]  gives  6.  sin.  {^f — ^pt)  =  0 ;  5.cos.( •? — ^pt)  =d=^L
[6403d].  Moreover,  by  using  the  developments  [6403a],  in  connexion  with  the  equations
[6400,  6401],  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order t^, we  have,

y. sm.(l -\-^pt)  =  at  ; y. cos. {l -\-^pt)  =  hi.
Substituting  the  expressions  [6403r,  fc]  in  the  equations  [6395,  6396],  we  obtain,
6'.sin.{ir'—^pt)  ==  —at  ; d '. cos. {^'—^pt)  —  ^L-\-bt.

Dividing  the  first  of  these  equations  by  the  second,  we  get tang.(^' — ^pt)  =  -  . If

we  neglect  terms  of  the  order t^, we  may  put  the  second  member  of  this  equation  under

the  form —rr- =  tang.f  — — -j  nearly,  [45]  Int. Hence  the  equation  [6403m]  becomes,

/ /  \  / — (tt\  .  at

tang.(*  — ^pt)  =  tang.f  ^y-  j  ; whence ^  —  ^pt==  —  — .

From  the  last  of  these  equations  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  ^'  [6405].  Taking  the
cosine  of  both  members  of  the  same  equation  [6403o],  and  developing  the  second  member,
according  to  the  powers  of  t,  by  means  of  [44]  Int.,  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  f^,  we
shall  have cos.(*' — ^pO  =  !• Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  the  second  of  the

[6403?] equations  [6403?],  we  obtain fl'  =  ^i-f6^, as  in  [6405]  ;  and  when ^  =  0, it  becomes

[6403r] 6'  =  ^L, as  in  [6406,  6360],  corresponding  to  the  epoch  1750.

[6403a]
[64036]

[6403c]
[6403(f|

[6403e]
[6403/]

[6403g]

[6403/1]
[6403f]

[6403A;]

[6403Z]
[6403ni]

[6403n]
[6403o]

[6403p]

Vin.  it.  ^  10.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  83

*A  =  0;  [6403^]  [64031

^  =>^pt;  s^'L; [6403A,  d]  [6404]

V=>p/— ^; 6'^'L-\-b(. [6403o,7]  [6405]

$0  that ^L is  the  inclination  of  the equator  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  in [6406]
1750  [6403r].

Lastly,  if  we  put y,  for  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite m, to [6407]
the  fixed  plane  [6315]; and 7j  for the  longitude  of  its  ascending  node
[6316]  ;  we  shall  have,  when  we  consider  only  the  quantities  relative  to  the [6408]
displacing  of  the  orbit  and  equator  of  Jupiter  [6342,  6343],

L— /  =  X.  {L—L)  ;  [6409]

and  by  transposition  we  easily  deduce  the  following  expression  of /  ;

/=(1— X).L  +  X.L'.  [6410]

Hence  we  obtain,*

r,.  sin.  ix  =  (1 — ^x).«.  sin.^-f  x.y.  sin.7  ;  [6411]

7,.cos.  7i  =  (X — l).^.cos.i'4-^7.cos.7.  [6412]

Thus,  by  noticing  only  the  displacing  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Jupiter,  we

shall  have,t

•(3332) Substituting  the  value  of I  [6410],  in  [6332],  we  get  [64116]; and  by
osing  the  values  [6326,  6330]  it  becomes  as  in  [6411]. In  like  manner,  the  substitution [6411a]
of /  [6410],  in  [6333],  gives  [6411c]  ;  and  by  using  the  values  [6327,6331],  we  obtain
[6412].

7,.  sin.  7,  =  — (1— X).2'.L.  sm.{pt-\-A)^\.j!  .L  .s\n.{pt-\-h)  ;  [6411i]

7,.cos.7,  = (1 — 'K).i.L.cos.{j)t-\-\)-\-'K.7!.L'.cos.{pt-{-\),  [6411e]

t  (3333) If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order <*, we  shall  obtain,  from  the  first  of  the
«quations  [6404], sin. 4' =  ';)<, cos.*=l. Substituting  these  and 4='L[6404]  in [^^^o]
the  terms  of  [6411,  6412],  whicii  liave  the  factor (1 — X)  or  (X — 1), we  get  the  terms
of  [6413,  6414],  having the  same  factor. Lastly  substituting  the  values  of 7.sin.7, [6413i]
7.COS.7,  [6400,  6401],  in  the  terms  of  [6411,  6412],  containing 7, we  get  the  terras  of
[6413,  6414],  containing  a  or  h. The  formulas  [6113,  6414]  correspond  to  the  satellite [6413c]
m ; and  by  accenting  the  symbols 7, , 7, ,  X, we  get  the  following  expressions  for  the
satellite m' \

7/.8in.7/  =  (l— X').«L.«p<  +  X'.ar  ;  [64I3rf]

7/.COS.  7/  =  (X'— 1).'L. +  >!.ht .  [6413el

By  adding  one  more  accent  we  obtain  the  values  corresponding  to ml' ; and  with  another
accent  they  represent  the  values  for  ml".

84

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C^l.

[6413]  7i.  sin.  7i  ==  (1—^).  ^L,  ^pt -{->-.  at  \

[6414]  j,,cos.\=l>^\yL -{->-. bt.

Relative  to  the  values  of  p, w^hich  depend  upon  the  mutual  action  of  the

*■ J satellites,  we  may  put L' equal  to  nothing ; since  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  is

[6415']  not  sensibly  displaced  by  the  action  of  the  satellites.  We  may  also,  for  these
values  of  p,  neglect  the  value  of  L,  in  comparison  with  the  corresponding
values  of /,  /',  &c.  [6417^]. For  it  follows, from  the  equation  [6341],

[6416] that  the  value  of  pL is  multiplied  by  the  small  factor ;  therefore

it  is  of  the  order  of  the  product  of  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter,  by  the  masses  of
the  satellites  ;  and  such  quantities  we  have  heretofore neglected. Hence
[6417] we  may  neglect pL and (0).Z/,* in  comparison  with (0)./, (1)./,  &c.  ;
then  the  equations  [6337 — 6340]  become,

[6417a]

[64176]
[6417c]
[6417rf]

[6417e]
[6417/]
[6417g-]

*(3334) We  have  in  [6313m], i  =  40n'" nearly; hence  we  obtain  from [6919]
4i~C ^^  Qgo w nearly. Substituting  this,  together  with  the  values  of  n,  n',  w",  M,

in  terms  of  n!"  [6025«,  b,  c,  i],  and  those  of  m,  m',  m\  m!"  [7162—7165],  in  [6337c],
and  retaining  only  the  first  significant  figure  of  the  results,  for  the  mere  object  of  ascertaining
the  order  of  the  terms,  we  get,

pL  =  ^ .  n'".  1 0,00001 .  [L—L')  +  0,002.(L— Z)  +  0,0005.{  L-V) + %QQQ5.{L—l") + 0,00004.(L— r ) } .

Now  we  have,  as  in  [6025A;], —.n'"^  241830"; substituting this in the preceding

expression,  and  transposing  the  terms  depending  on  L  to  the  first  member,  we  get,  by  a
rough  calculation,  neglecting L' as  in  [6415],

{p— 735"J.jL=— 483".?— 121".^— 121"./"— 10".Z'".
Substituting  the  values  of  /',  /",  /"'  [7226 — 7229],  corresponding  to  the  first  angle  p,  we

find  that L is  less  than y^ .  I ; similar results are obtained by using the values

[7233 — 7236],  relative  to  the  second  angle  p^;  those  in  [7238 — 7241],  relative  to  the
third  angle  p^ ;  or  those  in  [7245 — 7248],  relative  to  the  fourth  angle  p^.  Hence  it  is
evident  that  we  may  neglect L, as  in  [6415'].

VIII.  iv.  ^  10.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  85

0=  5;'-(0)-[o]-(0,l)~(0,2)-(0,3)  j  .  /  1

+  (0,l)./'-f(0,2).r+(0,3).r;  2

0=  5;>-0)-[T]-(i,o)-(i,2)-(i,3)J./'  1

+(l,0)./4-(l,2).r+(l,3).Z'";  2

0  =  J ;,-(2)~[T]-(2,0)~(2,l)-(2,3)  j  .  /"  1

+(2,0)./+(2,l)./'+(2,3)./'"  ;  2

0  =  |;,-(3)-[T] -(3,0)-(3,l)-(3,2)  j  .  V"  1

-|-(3,0)./+(3,l)./'+(3,2)./".  2
If  we  suppose,

[6418]

[6419]

[6490]

[6431]

[6423]

I  will  vanish  fr.im  the  preceding  equations,  and  we  shall  obtain  four  equations  s/mboit.

between  the  indeterminate  quantities ^',  ^",  ^", and ^  ; whence  we  may  [6423]

find p hy  an  equation  of  the  fourth  degree. We  shall  put p,  pi,  p^  ps,  [q424]
for  the  four  roots  of  the  equation,  and

^/,  li",  r; ^.',  ^.",  la'"; ^3',  ^3",  r;  [6435]

for  what ?,  ^', |"' become, when  we  change  successively  p into pi,

Pi,  P3. W^e  5A«//  then  suppose  that s,  s\  s!\  s!", instead  of  expressing  as

in  [6033,  6036']  nearly  the  latitudes  of  the  satellites  above  the  fixed  plane, [6426]

express  their  latitudes above Jupiter^s orbit, these last latitudes being

part.vcularly  required  in  the  calculation  of  their  eclipses  ;  in  this  case  we  shall

have,*

[6426']

*  (3335) The  latitude  of  the  satellite m is  expressed  in  [6298x  line  1],  by  a  series
of  terms  of  the  form s  =  lf.l.s\n.(v-{-pt-\-A)  ; and  we  have  observed  in  [6298y]  that  the '■ ■•
terms  depending  on  the  angles pt-\-A,  p,<-|-A, ,  p,<-}-A, ,  Pj^-|-A, , arise  from  the  mutual
action  of the  sun  and satellites, and  on the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter. These  terms  are [64196]
explicitly  retained  in  the  expression  of  s  [6427  lines  2, 3,  4,  5]. We  have  also  observed,
in  [6296z],  that  the  remaining  terras,  depending  on  the  angles pjt-\-^4, P»<+a,, &c.,
and  arising  from  the  displacement  of  Jupiter's  equator  and  orbit,  are  reduced  to  the  single ,^.,n^,
term (X--l).«'.sin.(»-fy)  [6362] ;  which  is  the  same  as  that  in  [6427  line  1],  referred
10  the  variable  orbit  of  Jupiter  [6360—6362]  ;  so  that  the  expressions  [6427—6430]  will

VOL.  IV.  22

86

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[6427]

Latitude*
above  the
variable
orbit  of
Jupiter.

[6428]

[6429}

[6430]

s  ==  (X  —  1).  6',  sin.  (v  4-  y')
+  /.  sin.  (v  -\-  pt  -{-  A)
+  li.  sin.(^+;7i^+Ai)
+  4.  sin.(v  +Piit  +  A^)
+  Z3.  sin.(i?  +p3t  +  A^)

+  ^'.  lsin.(v'-\-pt-{-A)
+^,'.h.sm.(v'+p,t+A,)

-{-^^,h,sm.(v'+p^t-{-A^)
'i'^^'.l3'Sm.(v'i-p,t+A,)

5"  =  (x^'— I).^'.sin.(/'  +  ^)
+f. /.  sin.(v"+p^  +  A)
+^,".h.sin.(v"+p,t-{-A,)

+^3".l2.sm.(v"+p3t+A,)

s"'=  (\"'—l)j'.sm.(v"'+^')
+^"',l.sin.(v'"-{-pt+A)

+^/".Zi.sin.(i/"+pi^+Ai)
+^^",l^.sin.(v"'+p,t+A,)

'

1

[Satellite m]

2

3

4

5

1

[Satellite m']

2

3

4

5

1

[Satellit©  i«"J

2

3

4

K
0

1

[Satellite  m"']

2

3

4

6

[6419rf]

be  very  nearly  the  latitudes  referred  to  the  variable  orbit,  as  in  [6426'].  Hence  it  appears
that  the  expression  of  5  [6427],  contains  the  sensible  terms  of  the  proposed  forms
v-\-pt-]-A,  v-\-pjt-\-A^ ,  he,  depending  on  the  mutual  action  of  the  bodies  and  the  secular
equations  of  the  orbit  and  equator  of  Jupiter.  In  like  manner  we  obtain  from  the
expressions  of  5',  s",  s'"  [6298a;  lines  2,  3, 4],  the  corresponding  values  [6428, 6429,  6430],
We  may  incidentally  remark,  that  if  we  neglect  the  first  term  in  each  of  the  expressions
of  s,  s',  /',  s'"  [6427—6430],  depending  on  *',  we  shall  find  that  the  four  remaining
terms  of  each  of  these  expressions  become  of  similar  forms  to  those  in  the  values  of
6v,  W,  y,  Sv'"  [6241—6244],  changing  g,  T,  h,  ^,  8ic.  into  —p,  —a,  I,  ^,  &c.
respectively,  and  retaining,  in  every  instance,  the  same  number  of  accents  on  the
corresponding  symbols.  Hence  we  shall  have  a  table  of  symbols,  similar  to  that  in  [6229d]f
and  corresponding  to  the  four  roots  p,  p^,  p^,  ps  ;  and  we  may  form,  in  like  manner,  a
table  of  the  values  of  these  parts  of  s,  /,  /,  /",  similar  to  that  in  [6240^-M?,or  6241jg--A:].
From  these  we  deduce  analogous  results  to  those  in  [6241m,  &;c.] ;  namely,  that  the  first
[6419fc]  satellite  has  a  peculiar  inclination  Z,  and  longitude  of  the  node  — pt — a  ;  the  second
satellite  has  a  peculiar  inclination V, and  longitude  of  the  node — p^t — a^  ; the  third

[6419c]

[6419/]

[6419g]

VIII.  iv.  «^11.]

INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.

87

The  expressions /, /,, l^, ^; a, Ai,  Ao,  A3, are the eight arbitrary
constant  quantities,  which  can  be  determined  only  by  observation. Jf  we
wish  to  obtain  the  latitudes  of  the  satellites,  above  the  fixed  plane,  we  must  add
to  the  preceding  expressions  of  s,  s\  s",  5"', their  values,  upon  the  supposition [6431]
that  the  satellites  move  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter.

11.  JVe  shall  nmo  consider  those  inequalities  of  the  motions  of  the  satellites
in  latitude,  depending  on  their  mutual  configuration,  which  acquire  very  small
divisors  by  the  integrations.  It  is  evident  that  the  terms  of  the  differential
equation  [6295],  depending  upon  an  angle  which  differs  but  little  from*  v,  [6432]
will  acquire  such  divisors.  Now  if  we  consider  only  the  first  power  of  the
inclinations  of  the  orbits,  we  shall  find  that  all  the  angles  of  the  different
terms  of  this  equation  will  be  included  in  the  formf i'(v — t/)  zkv' ; and t/ [6433]

satellite  has  a  peculiar  inclination /", and  longitude  of  the  node — p^t — a,  ;  and  that  the

fourth satellite  has  a  peculiar  inclination /'", and longitude of  the node — pj — a,. l"4lin]

Moreover  we  see,  as  in  [624  W — u],  that  each  of  these  latitudes  may  be  considered  as  the

sum  of  four  distinct  latitudes,  computed  for  four  different  orbits,  passing  through  the  places [64191:]

of  the  nodes  of  the  four  satellites  respectively.

♦  (3336)  The  equation  [6295],  for  the  determination  of  s,  can  be  reduced  to  a  form
like  that  in  [6446] ;  in  which  the  coefficient  of  s  is  nearly  equal  to  unity,  as  in  [6447J.
This  equation  is  integrated  like  that  in  [6049A:, /],  changing  t  into  v  ;  observing  that  the
coefficient  «'  is  nearly  equal  to  unity,  so  that  the  divisor  mj^ — aj^  [6049/],  becomes
■i^' — 1,  nearly;  which  is  very  small  when  m,  is  nearly  equal  to  unity,  or  when  the  angle
m^v-\-t^ becomes  nearly  equal  to t>  +  e, , as  in  [6432].

[6433a]

[6432i]

f  (3337)  The  action  of  the  satellites  upon  each  other  being  similar  to  that  of  the
planets,  it  is  evident  that  the  forms  of  the  terms  of  ^s,  relative  to  the  satellites,  will  be
similar  to  those  which  we  have  computed  for  the  planets  in  [1030].  Now  the  general
term  of  Ss,  [1030  line  3),  depends  on  the  angle  i.{n't — ti/-|-«' — «)+w'-f"* — ^  »  *"d  by
neglecting  terms  of  the  second  order  in  e,  7,  we  may  substitute,  in  this  angle,  the  values
n<-f-»  =  r,  nt-\-/-=v'  [953]  ;  hence  it  becomes  of  the  form  i.{v' — v)-\-v;  i  being
any  integer^  positive  or  ne^ntice,  from  »=  —  x  to  «=x  [1028'],  inelu/iing  also
t=0,  in  the  term  [1030  lino  2].  Then  the  corresponding  term  of  [1033  line  3],  has
the  divisor n" — \n — i.{n — w')j", which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form,

jn+[n— i.(n— n')]!.  In—in—i.in—n')]]  =  {2n— t.(n— n')  j.t.(n-ii').

Now  it  is  evident,  from  the  d(;finiiion  of  »  [6434</],  that  we  may  change 1  into  » -|- 1  »  and
bytbisineaos  the  angle  i.{x/—v)-\-v  [6434c],  changes  into  {i-j-l).{v'-v)-\-v=i.{i/-v)-^i/;

[&134a]

[6434&]

[6434«]
[Gi34d]

[6434e]

[643V1

[643lffl
[6434A]

68  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[64341  <^^ff®^s  but  very  little  from  ^v  [6150']  ;  so  that  the  angle  i.(v — v')±v'  will
differ  but  very  little  from v, if ^(izt'i)  =  1  ; which  gives  either i=  1,

[6435]  or  i  =  3.  In  the  case  of  i  =  l,  the  proposed  angle  becomes  v;  and  in
the  case  of  i  =  3,  this  angle  is  reduced  to  3v — Av'.  We  have  just
examined  the  first  of  these  cases,  upon  which  the  secular  variations  of  the

[6436']  orbit  depend,  in  [6298,  &c.].  It  now  remains  to  consider  the  inequalities
depending  on  the  angle Sv — 4y'.

[6437]  The  expression  of  R  [6297]  contains  the  term R  =  m'.A'^^Kcos.(^v-Av');

r^ ds /dR\
[6438] therefore  the  term — li'TT'l^)' ^^  ^^®  differential  equation  [6295],

produces  the  expression  [6440],  by  the  substitution  of  s  =  Lsm.(v-^pt-\-A)
[6439]  v  y2

[6300],  and  putting t='-  [6439a-c],* Ti"  =  «  [6299a],

th  ft

[6434i] and  the  second  form  of  tlie  divisor  [6434/],  becomes  {2n — (i-\-l).{n — n')].{i-]-l).(n — n').

The  form  of  the  angle  i.{v' — v)-\-v'  [6434A],  is  evidently  equivalent  to  that  in  [6433],
[643  lA]  ygijjg  jj^Q  values  of  i  [6434<Z].  Again,  the  divisor  [6434i]  becomes  small  when  the  first
[6434^] of  its  factors  is  nearly  equal  to  nothing,  or 2n — (i-\-l).(n — n')  =  0,  nearly  ;  and  if  we

substitute  n'  =  ^n  [6151],  it  becomes  n.{2 — |.(«-[-l)|  =  Jw.(3 — i)  ;  which  vanishes
[6434m] ^^^^^ i=  3,  as  in  [6435]. The  same  divisor  [6434i]  also  vanishes  when ^-f-l=0, or

i  =  — 1,  as  in  [6435]  ;  the  difference  in  the  sign  being  of  no  importance,  considering  that
[6434ra] i  [6434<Z]  may  be  made  positive  or  negative, as  well  as  the  term zkv'  [6433]. When

i=3, the  angle i.(v' — v)-\-v'  [6434A] becomes 4«' — 3v, as  in  [6436]; and  when
■* i  =  — 1,  it  becomes — {v' — v)-{-v'  =  v, as  in  [6435]. The  terms  depending  on v are
[6434p] noticed  in  [6298,  he]  ;  the  angle 4u' — 3v, or 3v — 4«', is  treated  of  in  [6437,  &tc.].

We  find,  in  like  manner,  for  the  action  of  the  third  satelhte m" upon m, that  the

^■' angle [6434A] becomes i.  {v"  —  v)  -\-  v", and the divisor [6434i] changes into

[6434r] {2n — [i-\-\).{n — r^')\.(i-\-V).{n — n"). This  factor  vanishes  when i-|-l=Oj and  then

the  angle  i.{v" — v)-\-v"  [6434$'],  becomes  v,  as  in  [6435]  ;  which  is  treated  of  in
[6434s] [6298,  &c.] The  other  factor 2w — {i-\-\).{n — ri')  [6434r], does  not  become  small,

because  rf=:iln,  nearly  [6151];  hence  this  factor  becomes  n.{2 — {i-\-^)'i\^  which
'• -l vanishes  when *  =  i; but i being  an  integer  [6434flf], we may  neglect  this terra.

For  similar  reasons  we  may  neglect  the  terms  depending  on  the  action  of  the  satellite
[6434u] rd", and  on  the  sun S ; since they do not produce, by the integrations, terms

having  small  divisors, like  that depending on  the  angle 3v — 4«'  [6434p], which  is

computed  in  [6437,  &;c.].

[6439a]

n'v n's
n n
These  differ  from  the  expressions  in  [6439,6441],  by  the  constant  parts  of t,  v' ;  but  this

*  (3338) The  values  of  v,  v'  [6091],  give <=-^  — -  ; v'=n'i+s'=*^— ^'+£'.

VUI.  iy.  ^11]  INEQUAUTIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  89

4m'.  aA^*\  1 8in.(4ts-4i/).  cos/r  +  •2-  r  +  a  V  [6440]

n'v
If  we  substitute t/= —  [6439a — c], which  may  always  be  done,  when [6441]

we  neglect  the  excentricities  of  the  orbits,  the  function  [6440]  will  give,  by
its  development,  the  term,

2m'.  aA^*K  L  sin/Sr—  ^.v  —  ^,v^a\  [«42]

The  term 75  •(-j-) of  the differential equation [6295], produces the [6443]
following ;  *

produces  no  effect  in  the  subsequent  calculations,  because  the  differentials  of  the  expressions [6431)6]
[6439rt],  which  are  used  in  [6439d,  &.C.],  are  the  same  as  the  differentials  of  the  expressions
given  by  the  author  in  [6439,  6441]  ;  and  the  re-substitution  of  the  assumed  values  of  /,  t/, r/vjop  i
[6455'J  corrects  for  this  neglect  of  the  constant  terms. The  part  of  R  [6437]  gives

— -  j  =  4»i'.^^^\sin.(4»— 4i;')  ; and  the  value  of  s  [6439]  gives,
—  =  /.A  -f-  ^Vcos/i?  -{-  L.v  -^  a\  =  l.cos.fv  -{-  L.v-{-a\ nearly.  [6439rf]

Substituting  these  and tt  =  a  [6439], in  the  term  [6438], it  becomes  as in  [6440].

[6439e]

hi

Reducing  thb  by  [18]  Int.  we  get  the  term  [6442],  using  the  value  of  v'  [6441]. The

4n' p  p

angle 3v .r 1>  [6442],  is  very  nearly  equal  to v, because — is  very  small, [6439/"]

and —  =  i  nearly  [6151]. The  other  terms  of  [6090]  may  be  neglected,  in  computing
the  term  [6438],  because  they  produce  no  angle which  is  nearly  equal  to v. Thus

2n.'  n

the  terms depending on A^\  A^^\  &c., produce the angles t; .v — —  .t>, [643%]

2p —  - — .V .Vf  &ic. ;  and  neither  of  these  angles  is  equal  to v, or  nearly  equal  to  it.

♦  (3339) Taking  the  differential  of  aR  [6297]  relative  to *, and  retaining  only  the
terms  producing  the  same  angle  as  that  in  [6442],  we  find  that  the  part  [6297  line  3]  gives,

a.f^\  =  -iw'.aV.|*'-#.co8.(r'-«)} .  { iJJ^0M-^>.co«.(«'-i>)-|-B<3'.co8.(2tr'-2rH-J5<3).co8.(3r'-^H-&c |. [6444a]

Substituting « =  t«  [6439],  in  the  first  member,  it  becomes  the  same  as  the  term  in

[6443] ;  and  its  second  member  contains  the  terms  in  [6444]. For  the  term — m',a^(^.J, [64446]

being  multiplied  by  the  term jB'^.cos.(3o' — 3r), produces  the  term  of  [6444]  depending

on /; moreover  the  terra +  m'.oV.t.  cos. (t/—r) being multiplied by the terms [6444c]

TOL. IV.  23

90  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  C6I.

[6444]  m'.aV.  ^  Is.IB'^^^+B^'^].cos.(4^v—4>v')—B^''Is'.co3.(3v—3d')  ]  ;

which  introduces,  into  the  equation  [6295],  the  following  term,*

[6445]  im',a^a'.  { B^'Kr—i.(B^^^+B^'^).ll,sm.(3v  —^.v^^.v—a\

Hence  the  equation  [6295]  becomes,  by  noticing  only  the  terms  depending
on  the  angle 3v — 4v',f

^  ddS , ,  An  t

^  =  ^  +  -^>  ,  ^

Nf being  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  s in  [6299  line  1],  namely,

[6447]  iV^  =  1  +  ^-(Prii^  + 1.  "^  +  4.2.m'.aV.  B'^'K

'  an

We  have,  by  means  of  [996,  1006],  J

[6448]  2«>)— i.aV.J^^^'^+jB^^^}  =--.2a.6^^^— i.a^6|)— i.a^6|);

and  the  formulas  [966,  971],  give,§

[6446]

J5'^3\cos.(3u' — 3u)-}-B^\cos.(5v' — 5y), in  the  last  factor  of  [6444o], produces,  by  using
[6444d] [20]  Int.,  the  terms m'.aV.|5.{J5^3^+J5^5^}.cos.(4u' — 4?;), as  in  [6444]. These  are  the
only  quantities  which  are  necessary  to  be  retained  in  finding  terms  of  the  form  [6442].

*  (3340) Substituting  the  values  of  s,  s'  [6300  lines  1,  2] in [6444],  reducing  the
[6445a] products  by  means  of  [19]  Int.,  it  produces  terms  depending  on  the  angle (3y-4«'-^^-A) ;
and  by  using  the  values  of /,  v'  [6439,  6441],  it  becomes  as  in  [6445].

t  (3341) The  differential  equation  [6295] is  reduced  to  the  form  [6299]  ; and  the
r6446  1 *^^"^^  ^'^  [6299  line  1],  are  the  same  as  in  [6446  line  1],  using  for  brevity  the  symbol Nf
[6447]. These  terms,  being  connected  with  those  in  [6442,  6445],  produce  the  equation
[6446].

[6448a] X  (3342) We  have,  in  [996,  963^'], 2rt. ^^^^  =  —  ^  .  6^^  =  —  2a.  i^\ Also  from
[1006,  963*^]  we  obtain,

[64486] — laV.i?(3)  ==  __  i.f^ .  J(3)  ^  _  ,  q^s.  jw  .  _^aV.5^5>=-i.  -^ .  lf=^-\^^. bf,

a^ 2"  5"  a^ 2  2"

Substituting  these  in  the  first  member  of  [6448],  it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member.

<§>  (3343) Substituting ^  =  5, s  =  f in  [966],  we  get  [6449]; also i  =  4, and
[6449a] ^^^^ ^gj^g  substituted  in [971],  give  [6450]. Using  the  values  [6449,  6450] in  the
second  member  of  [6448],  it  becomes  by  reduction  equal  to — |a2.6j|\ as  in  [6451].
[64496] Substituting  this  and ^ aV. 5^^^  =  |  a^.  6|>  [64486],  in  [6446],  we  get  [6452].

Vm.  iv.  ^11.)  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  91

8.(l-|-tt«).A^,<>— 9a.iJ)
b^^^ _7 1;  [6449]

*^<)  = Z _ L  .  [6450]

Hence  we  deduce,

-2a.J<^>--^a».6<')— }a».6^»)  = io.\bf  ;  [6451]

therefore  the  differential  equation  [6446]  becomes,

0  =  ^  -f.  AT*.  5  +  Jm'.a«.i^^\  (/'_/).sin/3i;— ^'.r— :^.  r—A^  .  [6452]

This  gives,  by  integration,*

i.)n'.a«.6^3\(/'— /).sin/3y— ^'.  t,— | . »— A^

This divisor is equal to |  3— ^  — -^  4-iV;  M  3— ^  — ^  — iV,  |  .
Now  — is  very  small  [6302] ; N^  is  nearly  equal  to  1  [6447], and  n is

nearly  equal  to 2n'  [6151] ;  therefore  the  factor 3 —  —  N^ is  very

small,  and  the  factor 3 —  +  iV^ is  very  nearly  equal  to  2. Hence

n  V

m
s  =

'.a«.6^3).(/'— /).sin.(3»— 4t/— J9^-A)

,.(s-±i-L-N)

It  is  evident  that  the  different  values  of p,  /,  /', give,  in  the  expression  of
5,  an  equal  number  of  terms,  similar  to  the  preceding.

These  inequalities  of  5,  by  reason  of  the  smallness  of  the  divisors,
considerably  exceed  the  others,  which  are  produced  by  the  action  of  the
satellites. They  are  the  only  ones  which  require  any  notice  ;  and  we  shall

[6454]

[6455]

we  get,  by  re -substituting  the  values v'  =  —  .v, <  =  — , [6441,  6439], [6455^

[6456]

[6457]

•  (3344) Integraung  the  equation  [6452]  by  the  method  in  [6049k,  /],  we  get  [6453]  ;

and  by  substituting  for  T  e  denominator  of  [6 .53]  its  value 2.^3 ""*  "^z )  °^^W» C^56a]

it  becomes  as  In  [6456].

92

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

hereafter  find,  in  [6931,  &c.],  that  even  these  are  insensible.*  The  sun's
action  produces,  in  the  vahie  of  s,  an  inequality  which  might  become
[6457'J  sensible,  bj  reason  of  the  smallness  of  its  divisor.  This  inequality  depends
on  the  angle  v — 2U;  and  we  easily  find, -by  §  9,  that  the  difierential
equation  in 5 becomes,  by  noticing  this  term  only,t

[6457a]

*  (3345)  This  is  evident  from  the  expression  of  s  [6931  line  1],  using  the  values
of  mf  [7143]  ;  from  which  it  appears  that  the  coefficient  of  this  inequality  is  of  the
order  0;0008.(Z' — Z),  which  is  very  small  in  comparison  with I.

t  (3346) The  expression  of  aR  [6297  line  4],  depending  on  the  sun's  action,  produces,

in  «-(-7~)j the  terms  given  below  in  [6458&],  depending  on  the  angles v — U, 2v — '2U.

[6458al  Substituting  the  values  of  s,  S',  [6300],  we  obtain  the  terms  in  [6458c]  ;  and,  by
reduction,  those  in  [6458(/],  depending  on  the  angle  v — 2U — pt — a.  These  terms
increase  considerably,  in  consequence  of  the  divisors  introduced  by  the  integrations
[6049^,  /]  ;

[64586]
[6458c]
[6458c/]

[6458*]

JW2

[6458/]
[6458g-]

[6458/i]

[6458i]

=  — —  .j— 6/.sin.(t;+^^-fA).cos.(2u— 2C/)+12i'.sin.(l/4-p^+A).cos.(«— C/}

=  —  — .  J  3?.sin.(i;— 2 Z7— 2?^— a)— 61.'. sm.{v—2U—pt—A)  \ .

The  terms  in  [6458c]  produce  also,  by  means  of  [18,  19]  Int.,  some  terms  depending  on
the  angles  3u — 2U-{-jpt-{-A,  v-\-pt'{-A.  This  last  angle  has  already  been  noticed  in
[6300],  and  the  terra  depending  on  the  other  angle  is  not  increased  by  the  integration
[6049A:,/j.

Again,  the  same  part  of  the  value  of aR  [6297  line  4]  gives

ds

neglecting  the  other  terms. Multiplying  this  by j-  =  l.cos.{v-\-pt-\-^)  [6439J], then

reducing,  by  [18]  Int.,  and  retaining  only  the  term  depending  on  the  angle v — 2U—]}i — a,

we  get,

/dR\ ds  3M^ J . , ^^j ^ ,

-''\-^)-d-v=-4^'  '•  sm.(.-2/7-p^-A).

Adding  together  the  expressions  [6458J,  A],  and  substituting,  in  the  first  member  of  the  sum,
«  =  -^  [6439],  we  get,

Substituting  this  in  [6295],  and  changing  the  second  term s into JVj^Sf as  in  [6446a],  it

VIII.  iv.  ^11.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  98

0  =  ^  +  iV;'.s-|-  _ .  (L'— /).sm.f  r—  — .  ©—  ^.  r—  aJ  ;  [«58]

whence  we  obtain,  by  integration,

-^^.(L-/).sin.(.-~.n--..-AJ

5  =

^  +  ^+-'^,-1

[6459]

Connecting  together  the  parts  of  5,  which  depend  upon  the  configurations
of  the  satellites  and  the  action  of  the  sun,  we  obtain,

m'.o.\bf.{l'—l).s\u.{^v-^v'—pt  —a)  SZfo  •'

* 4.(3_il_iL_A;)  '

\  n  n  V

^.(L'-/).,i„.(.-2[/-p<-A)

±!!  +  Z  +  JV-l

each  of  these  terms  being  supposed  to  represent  the  sum  of  the  similar  terms, [6460']
corresponding  to  the  different  values  of  p.

In  the  eclipses  of  the  satellite  m,  U  is  very  nearly  equal  to  v  —  200°
[6032,6041]  ;  hence  the  inequality  [6460  line  2]  is  reduced  to  the  following
form ;  *

[6461]

^^.(i'-4).sin.(.,  +  p(  +  A)

[6462]

becomes  as  in  [6458]. Integrating  this  equation,  as  in  [6049A:,  /], we  get  the  term  of  s
[6459]  ;  observing  that the divisor  m^ — a^  [6049/j.  becomes, in  the  present  case,  hy *■ J
using  the  values  of Uy  t  [6102,  6455'J,

('-^-f^^=('~-l+---)•0-^'-^^v,)=..(.-»^-^iv,).  ,^,

(2.V p  \
}-  —  +  A] — 1  j ,  as  in  [6459J. Connecting

together  the  two  terms  of  s  [6456,  6459],  it  becomes  as  in  [6460]  ; taking  care  to

re-substitute 2C7  for — .r, and  pi for —.v  [6455',  &c.].

[6458m]

•  (3347) The  longitude  of the  sun,  as  seen  from  Jupiter, is U  [6041] ; and  in
eclipses  of  the  first  satellite,  the  longitude  of  the  satellite v is  equal  to  this  quantity ^ ''I
increased,  or  decreased,  by  200°  ;  hence U=sv — 200°,  as  in  [6461]. Substituting  this
in  the  term  [6460  line  2],  and  reducing,  it  becomes  as  in  [6462] ;  observing  that,
8in.|B— 2(t— 200°)— p<— a|  =sin.(iH-2r— ^<— A)=siQ.(-r-;pr-A)=  —s'm.{v-^pi-\-A). [64616  J
VOL.  IV.  24

94  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

When  the  values  of  p  are  relative  to  the  motions  of  the equator  and  of

the  orbit  of  Jupiter, we  maj  neglect p  [6342] in  comparison  with M

[6463] [6927,  6025m]. Moreover  the  sum  of  all  the  terms  (L'— Z).sin.(r-}-jo/+A),

is then equal to — (>^— l).a'.sin.(t5-f^') [6357/]; and the preceding

inequality  becomes,*

3JW2
[6464]  -(X-l)-,-;;^.^'.s.n.(.+V)

-  +  iV,-l

n  '

[6462a] *  (3348) Prefixing  the  symbol  2'  [6324'J  to  the  function  [6462], so  as  to  include  all
the  terms  of  that  form,  it  becomes  as  in  the  first  member  of  [646"2c]  ;  substituting  the  value

[6357/],  we  get  its  second  member,  neglecting  — . This  second  member  is  the  same  as

[64626'! ^^^  function  [6464]  ;  the  sign  being  changed  from  what  it  is  in  the  original  work,  to  correct
for  a  mistake.

m&^c^  —  ^.{L'-r).sm.(v+pt+A) 3m^  (x-i).^.sin.(r+T')

n ' n  '  n ' '

Adding  this  to  the  chief  term  of  the  expression  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite  m  above
[6462<ri Jupiter's  orbit  (X— l).d'. sin. (v-{-^')  [6427  line  1], we  get  the  following  expression  of  the
part  of  the  latitude  depending  on  this  argument  v-\-^',  in  eclipses,

The  ratio  of  the  general value [6462<i],  to  the  value  in  eclipses  [6462e], is  as  1  to
3J
2M

3M^

[6462/"] 1 —  THirs r  ,  as  in  [6465]. Hence  it  is  evident  that  if  we  determine  this

[6462g-]  inclination  by  means  of  eclipses,  we  must  increase  it,  in  the  ratio  mentioned  in  [6465].
We  may  observe  that,  in  the  original  work,  the  word  increased  [6465]  is  printed
decreased,  and  we  have  changed  the  sign  of  the  term  depending  on  M^  to  correct  for  the
mistake [6465]. The  same  phenomenon occurs in  the lunar  theory. For  in  eclipses,

[6462f] when  2  3)  long. —  2olong.  =  0°,  or  400°,  we  find  that  the  two  chief  terms  of  the  moon's

latitude  [5595  lines  1,  3],  give  for  the  general  inclination 18524'.5.sin.arg.lat. ; and  in

J eclipses  (18524*.5— 528*.4).sin.arg.lat. The  ratio  of  these two  expressions is  as  1  to

1 — ttV  nearly. This  is  nearly  the  same  as  the  ratio  [6465]; for  by  putting  N^=l,
[6462Z]  j^^

which  is  nearly  correct  in  the  lunar  theory  [5049  lines  1-4],  it  becomes  as  1  to  1 — f.  —  •

M

In  this  expression —  is  equivalent  to m  =  0,0748..  [5117];  hence  the  preceding  ratio

becomes  as  1  to  1—0,028,  or  1  to  1— i^,  as  in  [6462/].

Vni.  iv.  ^  11]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  95

Hence  the  inclination (f of  the  equator  to  the  orbit of  Jupiter,  deduced
from  the  eclipses  of  the  satellite m,  ought  to  be  increased  in  the  ratio  of  1

to 1—

[6468]

We  shall  now  consider,  in  the  same  manner,  the  periodical  inequalities  of
the  motions  of  the  second  satellite  in  latitude.  For  this  purpose,  we  shall
resume  the  differential  equation  [6295],  which  becomes,  relatively  to  the
second  satellite,*

R'  being  what  R  becomes  relative  to  this  satellite.  The  terms  of  this
differential  equation, which  depend  on  the  angle  2v — 3v',  acquire  a  small  '^

divisor,  because  v  differs  but  little  from  2v'  [6151],  so  that  the  coefficient
of  i/,  in  the  angle  2v — 3v\  differs  but  very  little  from  unity ;  therefore
it  is  important  to  consider  these  terms.  If  we  notice  these  terms  only,  it
will  be  evident  from  ^  9,  that  the  preceding  differential  equation  becomes,t

•  (3349) Substituting 75  =«  [6439],  in  the  third  term  of  [6295],  and  then  changing

''  [6466a]

reciprocally  the  elements  of  m into  those  of  m', it  becomes  as  in  [6466] ;  R'  being

the  value  of  R  deduced  from  [6297],  by  changing,  in  the  same  manner,  the  elements  of [64666]

m  into  those  of  m',  and  the  contrary  ;  by  this  means  we  obtain,

*^'*^"^''"-)  4- Ja'^<'>^+a'^^'>.cos.(»'— t>)-j-a'^«'*>.cos.(2i/— 2»)+&c.  (2

. ^-aa'^,  \  »»'-^  .(5»-f »'3).cos.  {y'-v)  \ .{ Jfi^o^+fi^^.cos .(tj'-i;)+5«»\cos.(2t?-2i/)+&c }  )3 ^ ^

_-  ^  -_  ^ .  I  l>3*'«-3S'3+3.(  l-y»-*S"«).cos.(2p'-2i;)+ 1  ^'S'. cos. (1/- 17) }  4

it  being  evident  from  [6089,  6090,  6296]  that  the  values u4<'^ R'\ are  not  changed,

except  in  the  term  A^*\ as  it  observed  in  [997,  IOCS']  ;  but  the  tertn  ^<'>  is  not  med  in [6466rf]

the  subsequent  part  of  the  calculation  ;  therefore  this  difference  is  not  noticed,

t  (3350) We  have  found,  by  developing  the  equation  [6295],  as  in  [6299],  that  the

dds  [GiG9a]

two  first  terras  become  -r-r  -f-  ^*''  ; '^,^  being  used  for  brevity,  as  in  [6447]. The  same

process  being  performed  with  the  similar  equation  [6466],  we  obtain,  for  its  two  first  terms,

M^  [64696]

~-f  JV;*.«', as  in  [6469] ; A*;« being deduced  from iV," [6447], by changing

96  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6469]  «v

reciprocally  the  elements  of  m  into  those  of  ml ;  hence  we  have,
[6469c]  iV'2=  1+2.^-^^^4-1.  ~+i.2.m.aa'2.B^i\

The  remaining  terms  of  the  equation  [6466]  depend  on  /?',  and  in  substituting  the  value

[6469rf]  of  R'  [6466c],  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  retain  the  terms  depending  on  angles  which
differ  but  little  from  v',  because  they  increase  considerably  by  integration,  as  in  the
siniilar  case,  relative  to  the  first  satellite,  treated  of  in  [6432fl — 6]. Now  by  proceeding  as

[6469c]  in  [6434a — m],  we  find,  that  by  changing  the  elements  of  m,  into  those  of  m',  and  the
contrary,  the  form  of  the  angle  [6434A],  %.{y! — v)-\-v ,  will  become  i.{y — 1?')-]-^;  and
the  corresponding  divisor  [6434iJ  will change  into {2u' — {i-\-\').{r^—n)\.{i-\-\).{}{ — n).

r6469  1  '^^'^  becomes  0,  when  t-|-l=0;  and  then  the  angle  i.{vi — i'')-f-v  [6469/J,  is  equal
to  v' ,  producing  terms analogous to  those  of  v  [6436'J  ; it  also  becomes  0  when the

[6469/1]  factor  2«'— (i+I).(n'— w)  =  0,  [6469/].  Substituting  w  =  2n'  [6151],  in  this  last
expression,  it  becomes n'.  (2-{- i-{-l)  ; which vanishes when «'  =  — 3, and  then the

r6469'l  ^"S^^  *-(^ — ^')"f"'^  [^'169/]  becomes  3v' — 2t;.  or  2i; — 3y',  as  in  [6468].  The  satellite
rd'  produces  in  /  a  similar  term.  For  the  factor  [6469^]  changes  into
2w' — {i-\-\).{id — n")  ;  and  by  putting  n"^^w',  it  becomes  nearly  w'.{2 — \i — \\.
This  factor  is  very  small  when  i  =  3,  and  then  the  angle  [6469i]  changes  into
3.(u" — '/)-!-«"  =  4«" — 3v',  or  3i;' — A.v" ,  being  of  the  same  form  as  that  which  is
computed  in  [6476].  The  satellite  w!"  produces  nothing  of  importance,  because  the
factor  [6469A]  changes  into  2n' — (t-|-l).(n' — n"')  ;  and  by  putting  n'"  =  |^n',  it  becomes
nearly  w'.|2 — |i — 1|  ;  being  small  only  with  fractional  values  of  ^,  which is  contrary  to

[6649m]  the  supposition  in  [6434^]  ;  so  that  these  terms  may  be  neglected.  We  shall  now  proceed
to  compute  the  terms  of  [6466],  connected  with  the  angle  2« — 3v'  [6469t].

[6469A]
[6469Z ]

[6469n] From  [6300  line  2]  we  have —  =  Z'.cos.(i;'-{~F^+a)  ;  observing  that  pt  =  —;^  nearly,
[6439,  6441],  and —^ is so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected,  as  in  [6439c?]. Moreover,

/f]Tf'\

[6469o] from  [6466c]  we  get  — a'.f  —  ]  =2w.a'-4'^^\sin.(2v' — 2y)  ;  neglecting  the  other  quantities,

which  do  not produce the required angle 2v — 3v', connected with sensible terms.
Multiplying  these  two  expressions,  and  reducing,  by  [19]  Int.,  we  obtain  the  following  terra;

[6469p]  —a'.  '^£,.(~\  =  —m.r.a'A^^Ks\n.{2v-^3v'—pt—A).

Again,  the  expression  of  a'R'  [6466c]  produces,  in  «'-("T7)> the  terms in the second
[6469^] member  of  [6469/-,  s]. Reducing  them  successively,  by  means  of  [18 — 20]  Int. ;  then

VIII  iv.  <^  U.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  97

[6469^

iV/*  [6469c]  being  what  N^  [6447]  becomes  relative  to  m',  and  the
values  of  A^\  B^'\  B^\  &c.  [996,  1006],  being  the  same  for  R'  as  for
R  [6466rf]. Therefore  we  shall  have,  by  means  of  [996,  I006],»  [6470]

o  =  ;^+iv,".y

•  (3351) From  [996J  we  get  the  first  of  the  following  equations. In  like  manner

a

a

[6471]

We  have,  by  using  [971,  966],

*f  —  i ""' ^l'—  i^'bf==^i a. bf  ;  [6472]

hence  [6471]  becomes,t

substituting  the  values  of s,  /  [6300], and  retaining  only  those  terras  which  produce  the
proposed  angle 2v — 3d' — pi — a;  we  get  [6469^,  u].

a'Y^=-m.fla'«.|»-»'.cos.(wU)|.{iB^«^+B(>\cos.(t/-t>)+5»>.cos.(2»'-2t))+&c.}  [6469r]

— -in-aa^^  .B^3).cog.(3r'_3u)4-m^rt'a.a'K;os.(v'-o).  1 5^^>^os-(t/-t;)+i?^3'K;os-(3r'-3t>)  J  [6469*]
=='-m.ad^.s.B^^\cos.{^v'^v)-\-imMa'^.s'.\m^-irB'^^.cos.{^vf-^v)  [6469*]

=  { \m.aa'^.  l.  m^-\m.a(^\  I'.  {m^+W^)  \  .sin.(2tf-3r'-p/-A).  [6469u]

Substituting  the  values  [6469/?,  m]  in  [6466],  and  the  value  of  pt  [6469n],  we  obtain  the

terms  of  [6469]  depending  on  the  angle  now  under  consideration.

[6470o]

we  obtain  the  second  and  third,  from  [1006],  by  substituting -7  =a  [963''].

Substituting  these  expressions  in  [6469]  we  get  [6471]  ;  observing  that 2t>=  -7-  nearly [6470e]
[6439a,  kc.] ;  neglecting  the  constant  parts  depending  on s,  /, as  in  [6439,  8a;.].

t(3352) Putting t=2  and  «  =  i,  in  [971],  we  get i|'=§a.6|)— i.(14-a«).W>. ^5473^^

Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [6472]  it  becomes,  by  reduction,

TV*.^^'-i.(l-K«).^-ia.6|>.  [6472^3

Now  putting »  =  3 and «  ==|  in  [966],  and  transposing  the  terms  into  the  first  member,

4
we  get fcl'—g^.  (l+a«).&|)-f^.6^>  =  0. Multiplying  this  by — ^a, and  adding  the [6472c]

product  to  [64725],  we  find  that  the  terms  depending  on 6y\ b^ mutually  destroy  each

r6472</]
other,  and  by  reduction  the  sum  becomes — ia.  ij',  as  in  [6472]. Substitutbg  this  last

expression  in  [6471],  we  get  [6473].
VOL.  IV.  26

98  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

[6473]  ^=^,  +  ^/'•^'+  4  ^-  ^-  bf'G-n-  sm.(^.v'—3v'--  ^ .  v'-'iS .

whence  we  get,  by  integration,*

72n
m.^.b'i'.^l — rj.sir

[6474]  5'  ==

4.f:_3-4-iv;)

The  action  of  the  third  satellite  adds  also  to  the  expression  of  5', a  term

which  may  become  sensible  by  its  small  divisor. This  term  is  analogous  to

that which the action of w! upon m, produces  in s ; therefore, by

[6475] putting y^f for  what Ul^ becomes, relative to the second satellite,

compared  with  the  third  ; we  shall have,  for  the  part  of 5' depending  on
the  action  of  m",  f

w".a'2.6'f.(Z''— r).sin.(3i;'— 4i;"^i?<— A)
[6476]  5'  = ^— ^, .

V  n n  'J

We  may  therefore  unite,  into  one  term,  the  two  terms  of  the  expression  of

*  (3353)  Tlie  equation  [6473]  being  integrated  as  in  [6049Ar,  /],  acquires  the  divisor
which  is  given  in  the  first  member  of  the  following  expression,  and  this  is  easily  separated
into  two  factors,  as  in  the  second  member  ;

[6474a]

|:-3-„^y-^;==(^"-3-5-^:')-(|-3-^+iv;).

/2n

2n
Now  we  have  nearly —  =  4, iV/=  1  [6151,  6469c]  ;  therefore  the  factor

n'

2n

3-^  +  iV;  =  2 nearly;

[64746]

hence  the  divisor  [6474o]  becomes 2.  (  —  —  3 —  4-  — ^/)  • Dividing  the  last  term  of

[6473]  by  this  quantity,  according  to  the  directions  in  [6049ZJ,  we  get  the  expression  of
s'  [6474].

t  (3354) If  we  change,  in [6456],  the  elements  of  w,  m', into  those of m',  ni'

respectively,  the  expression 01=-^  [6470«],  will  change  into ^; A*^  will  become  JV/

[6447,6469c],  &c.; and  the  value  of  s  [6456],  will  change  into /  [6476] ; using 6f>

[6475]. IMultiplying  [6477]  by — 2, and  adding Su — 3w' to  both  members  of  the
[6476  ] profjuct,  we  get 3u' — 4«"  =  2v — 3i/ — 400^  ; substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of
[6478],  we  get  its  second  member.

TTII.  iv.  ^11.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  99

y, which  depend  on  the  action  of  the  first  and third  satellites. For  we
have  ver^  nearly,  as  we  have  seen  in  [6155],

V  — 3i/4-2©''  =  200°;  [6477]

which  gives,  as  in  [64766],

sm.(3v'—A,v"^pt'-A)  =  sin.(2r— 3i/— ;i<— A).  [6478]

If  we  connect  this  term  with that  which  depends  on the  sun's  action,
observing also that the equation n  —  3w'  +  2n"  =  0 [6152], gives [64781

—, 3  =  3 -;  we  shall  have,  for  the  expression  of  the  inequalities  of [6479]

%  n

the  second  satellite  in  latitude,  relative  to  the  mutual  configurations  of  the
satellites  and  the  sun,  the  following  expression ;  *

[«4801
3Af «.  (L^-r).sin.  (t/-2  U-pt-A)

We  shall  find  in  the  same  manner,  for  the  expression  of  the  corresponding
inequalities  of  the  third  satellite  in  latitude,!

[6479al

2  4n"

•(3355) Multiplying the  equation  [6478',  or  6152] by -7, and  adding  3 ;-,

n  n

in"
to  both  members,  we  get  the  equation  [6479]. Substituting  this  value  of 3 ;-, in  the

divisor  of  the  expression [6476] we  get 3 -, ^  —  JV/  =  -^  —  3  —  -^  —  iV/ , [64796]

which  is  the  same  as  that  in  the  divisor  of  [6474]. Substituting  also  in  [6476]  the
expression  [6478],  we  get  the  term  of  [6480]  depending  on m" ; that  depending  on m'
being  the  same  as  in  [6474],  using  the  value  of  a  [6476a]. Lastly,  the  term  of  [6-180] ^ ^
depending  on  the  sun's  action,  is  easily  obtained  from  [6459],  by  changing  the  elements  of [6479i<
m  into  those  of  m'; by  this  means  it  becomes  as  in  [6480  line  2].

t  (3356) The  satellite m" is  situated,  relative  to m', in  the  same  manner  as m' is
relative  to m  ;  hence  it  is  evident  tliat  we  may  deduce  the  value  of a", arising  from  the ^ "^
action  of  the  satellite m', and  the  sun ;  by  adding  an  accent  to  each  of  the  symbols m,  a,
t^f  It  /',  t>,  n,  n'f  JV*/, 6J\ In  this way we  find that  the  terms  depending  on m, [64816]

[6480  line  1],  produce  those  in  [6481  line  1] ; and  those  in  [6480  line  2]  give  the  terms
depending  on  the  sun's  action  in  [6481  line  2] ;  observing  that  the  angle 2v — 3v' — pt — a, [6481*]
[6480  line  1],  b  the  correct  form  under  which  this  argument  appears,  in  [6474],  after

[6484]

100  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Periodical  ,.  *  ' 4  . .  _, , a ii  ^  a\

terms  of  5"= -— ^ ,  Sm.(2v' 3v"—pt A)  J

^^^^^^  _  SM^{L'—r).sm.(v"—2U-r^—A)  2

Periodical Lastlj  the  same  expression  becomes,  relatively  to s'"*

'"/'"'  ,, SM^U—r).sm.(v'"—2U—pt—^)  .

[6482]  -  4n-(^  +  Z^  +  ^^;._l)  '

[6483]  iV/'  and  Nl"  being  what  iV  [6447]  becomes,  relative  to  the  third  and
fourth  satellites.  We  must  apply  to  the  terms  of  5',  5",  5'",  contained  in
[6480  line  2,  6481  line  2,  6482],  what  we  have  said  upon  the  corresponding
term  of  s  ;  namely,  that  in  eclipses  each  of  these  terms  is  confounded  with
the  corresponding  term,  depending  upon  the  inclination  of  the  equator  to  the
orbit  of  Jupiter ;  and  that,  on  this  account,  it  increases^ the  inclination

re-substituting  the  assumed  value  of  —  =  t,  Sic,  in  the  terms  where  it  had  been  introduced.

[6481tf|  It  is  not  necessary  to  notice  the  action  of  the  two  satellites  m  and  m!"  upon  m" ;  for
the  factors  similar  to  2n — (t-|-l).(n — n')  [6434i],  corresponding  to  the  action  of  the  two
satellites m,  rd", become  respectively 2n" — (*4-l)-  (w" — n)  ; 2n" — {i-\-\).{n" — n'").

[6481e]  Now  we  have  very  nearly,  in  [61516],  n  =  4n",  n'"=fn";  hence  the  preceding
factors  become n".(5-f-3i), and n".(^-  —  f  i)  ; which  do  not  vanish  with  the  integral

[6481/j yj^iygg  Qf  I  [6434rf]  J  therefore  we  may  neglect  these  terms.

*  (3357) Changing  the  elements  of  m" into  those  of m'", in  the  terms  depending
[6482o] Qjj  ^|jg  gyjj5g  action  [6481  line  2],  we  obtain  the  terms  of  /'  [6482],  corresponding  to  the

sun's  action  on  the satellite m'". We  may  neglect  the action  of  the  three  satellites
[64825] 'm,m',rri'  upon m'" ;  because  the  factor 2n — {i-{-\).{n — n')  [6434tJ becomes,  for  these

three  satellites  respectively,
[6482c]  2n'"-(z+l).(n'"_n)  ; Sti'"— (i+l).K-n')  ; 2«'"— (t+l).K-n").

[6482d] Now,  by [61516],  we  have  nearly n  =  -^w'"; ?t'  =  J/-n'"; vS'^lvl"-, hence  the
[6482e] factors  [6482c]  become  respectively f  (31+25i).7i'", ^.(17-i-lli).n'", ^.(10+4i).n'";

and  neither  of  them  vanish  with  the  integral  values  of i  [64346?]  ;  therefore  these  terms

may  be  neglected.

t  (3358) In  the  original  work  this  is  said  to  decrease  the  inclination ;  we  have  altered
^ "^ it  to  correct  for  the  mistake  of  the  author,  as  in  [6462/,  &£c.].

Vm.  IT.  ^  11.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  101

Approsi-

which  is  deduced  from  observations  of  eclipses. We  may  also  observe,  that ^"^  ^
we  can  put,  in  all  these  expressions,  without  any  sensible  error,*  N^  N',

*(3359) Wc  have,  in  [6796,6797], 2.  ^i^^=  2.  ^^^^  =  0,001  nearly,  and [6485«]

JM«

from  [6025»]  J. -^=}- (0,0004)'  is  a  very  small  fraction  in  comparison  with  the
preceding;  therefore  it  may  be  neglected  in  [6447].  Multiplying  the  second  of  the
equations  [64706],  by  m'.  —  =  m'.a  [6470a],  we  get

[64856]

a:
m'

I'-aV-B*"  =  m'.a«.W)  =  -Sm'/^V.  6^ [992]  ;  [6485c]

and  by  substituting  the  values  of  a,  6"\  [6801,  6802],  it  becomes  of  the  order 2m' or

"^  [6485rf]

0,00005  [7163]  ; so  that  this  term  and  the  similar  ones  depending  on m",  fn"\ are  very

small  in  comparison  with  that  in  [6485a]  ; therefore  if  we  neglect  these  terms  of iV,' [6485e]

(P — ^9)
[6447],  we  shall  have A'/=l-{-2.  , whose square root gives very nearly

A'^=  1  -j — ,  as  in  the  first  of  the  equations  [6485]. Changing  successively a  into [6485/']

df  fl*,  t^'f  we  get  the  other  expressions  in  [6485,  6486].

VOL.  ir.  26

102

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

CHAPTER  V.

INEaUALITIES DEPENDING ON THE  SQUARES AND  PRODUCTS  OF  THE  EXCENTEICITIES AND

INCLINATIONS OF THE ORBITS.

[6487]
[6487']

Action
of  the

satellite.

[6488]
[6489]

12.  It  will  suffice,  in  calculating  these  inequalities,  to  notice  the  secular
variations  analogous  to  those  which  we  have  determined  for  the  planets,  in  §  5,
Book  VI.  It  follows,  from  this  article,  that  if  we  notice  only  the  action  of
m!  upon  m,  the  part  of  an.R,  depending  wholly  upon  the  secular
inequalities,  is*

an.il  =  -J.(0,l).|e2+e'2|-f[^l.eer(^'-^)+i.(0,l).{7/2_27,.7/.cos.(7;-'70+7i'l;

7i  and 7/ being  the  inclinations  of  the  orbits  of  m,  m' to  the  fixed  plane ,
\ ,  '7/, the  longitudes  of  their  ascending  nodes  upon  this  plane.

The  part  of an.R, depending  on  the  sun's  action,  corresponding  to  the

[6488a]

[64886]
[6488c]

[6488d]

[6488e]
[6488/]
[6488g]
[6488ft]

*  (3360) That  part of an.R, depending  on the squares and products  of the
excentricities  and  inclinations,  and  which  is  independent  of  the  configuration  of  the  bodies,

affects  the  secular  inequalities,  and  is  as  in  [3765]

an.R  =-|.(0,l)  ! h^-\- Z24-A'2^Z'2 5  +  0,1  .(M'+^Z0+i(o,i). !  {p'-pfM^-qY\ .

Now  we  have,  in  [3756&,  e],  the  equations  [6488e].  From  [1032]  we  easily  deduce  the
expressions  [6488/],  by  using  [24]  Int. ;  observing  also  that  cp,  9',  &,  &'  [1030',  1030"],
are  changed  into  7^ ,  7/,  7^ ,  ?/,  respectively,  in  [6489]  ;  and  that  on  account  of  the
smallness  of  7^ ,  7/,  we  may  take  these  arcs  instead  of  their  tangents.  Substituting  the
values  [6488/]  in  the  development  of  the  first  member  of  [6488^],  we  get  successively  its
sfecond  member  [6488^,  or  6488/i].  Finally,  substituting  [6488e,  A]  in  [64886],  we  get
[6488].

A2  _{_  ^2  =  e2 ;  A'2  _}-  /'2  =  e'2 ;  hh!  -f  //'  =  ee'.cos.(^-ra)  ;

P'  +  ?^

P'^  +  ?'"  =  7/'  ; PP'  +  ??'  =  7x.7/-cos.(7/~70  ;

{p'-pf-\-  W-qy  =  ip'' + q'')  -  ^{fp'+  qq') + {p'+  q')

=  7.'"— 27,.  7i'.cos.(  %'—\)  +  7,2.

VIII.  V.  §  12.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e»,  e'«,  &c. ; 7',  7^,  &tc.  103

secular  inequalities,  is  by  ^1,*  AeikMor

^___^  the  tan.

an./J==— J.[Tj.{f'+//«-.yi«+27,.y.cos.(ij--7)---/»}.  [6490]
Lastly,  the  part  of an./?, depending  on  the  ellipticity  of  the  spheroid  of

Cllbct  of

Jupiter,  is  by  [6052,  &c.],t  S.?!"'^

an./J=  J.(0).{a»  +  2tf.7,.cos.(>i'-f  i,)-f  ^,«— e''}.  l«9i]

0
•(3361) These  terms  of  /i may  be  deduced  from  those  in  [6042],  neglecting — ,

as  in  [6277'J,  and  substituting  the  elliptical  values  of  r,  D, together  with  those  of s,  S',

&c.  [63326, 6328c,  S:c.], retaining  only  the  terms  independent  of the configurations. ^  '

We  may  also  derive  [6190]  from  [6488],  by  changing  the  elements  of  the  satellite m',

into  those  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Jupiter. This  is  done  by  changing m',  e',  xs', •• J

7/1  '^11  *»,  a, into S,  H,  /,  7,  1,  M, —  , respectively,  as  appears  by  the  comparison [6490c]

of  the  definitions  of  these  quantities,  in  [6021c — 6024»i]. Now  if  these  changes  be  made

a?  [6490rf]

in  the  expression m.a', it  becomes S.  —  =JW.<r'  [6105]; and  by  substituting  the

▼alue o'  =  n~' [6110],  we  find  that w'.a' changes  into -^ ; so that this quantity, [6490e]

multiplied  by a or jr,j must  be  very  small  [64856],  and  may  be  neglected  ;  or,  in  other

words,  we  may  neglect  terms  of  the  order a*. In  this  case  it  will  only  be  necessary  to

take  the  first  terms  of  the  developments  in  [989],  which  give 6^]1  =  2 ; 6^^\  =  — a. [6490/"]

Substituting  these  in  [1082],  developing  according  to  the  powers  of a, and  neglecting

tt*, we get 0»1 = — foum'.n.^ — a4-a.}  =  0j moreover [1076] becomes, by [6490^-]

neglecting  quantities  of  the  same  order, (0,l)  =  f.m'.a'.n. Now  changing,  as  in  [6490e],

J|f9 I 1

m'.a» into M^.tt^, it  becomes (0,1  )  =  f.  —  = 0 [6216]. Hence it appears [G490A]

that  the  change in the  symbols, mentioned  in  [6490c], makes 0,1 vanish, and r^vjq^-.

(0,1)= 0 . Substituting these  and  the  values  [6490c] in  [6488], changing  also

I 1  [6490*]

cos.(7— li) into cos.(7i — 7), we  get  the  expression  [6490],  corresponding  to  the  part

of  an.Rj which  depends  on  the  sun's  action.

t  (3362) The  part  of R, depending  on  the  ellipticity,  is  given  in [6052]. We
must  substitute,  in  it,  the  values M  =  1, ^=1  [6082,6282']; and  the  part  of  the ^ "^
elliptical  value  of f^  [3702c], which is independent  of the configuration, namely r649i&]
r-3x=s<r^.(l -{- J«")  ; then  multiplying  by  oiif and  using  the  value  of  (0)  [6216],  we

104  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[649rj Therefore  we  shall  have,*

obtain  the  first  and  second  expressions  of  an.R  [649  lc(].  Multiplying  together  the  factors
of  this  last  expression,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  fourth  order  in e,  s,  s^ , we  get

^  ^^  [6491e].  Developing  this  expression  and  neglecting  the  term  — ^-(0),  which  produces
nothing  in an.dR  [6492],  we  obtain  [6491/].

[6491rf] an.i?  =  -«n.(p-J9).{^-(.-50^].«-3.(l+3e2)  =  _(o).{i_(,_5j2j.;i_|.3e2j

[6491e]  =  _  (0)  [  ^  4-  J  e^-{s-s,y  \

[6491/]  = (0)\s,^^2s,s-\-s^'-ie^.

Now  we  have,  as  in [6323<Z,  63326],
[6491g-]  Sj  =  — 5.  sin.(i;+'i')  ;  s  =  %.s\n.{v — 7j.

Taking  successively  the  squares  and  product  of  these  values  of 5,  5^, and  reducing,  by
'■ ■' means  of  [17]  Int.,  we  get  the  following  expressions,  by  retaining  only  those  terms  which

are  independent  of  the  configurations  ;
[649H]  5,2=i^^; s2^^7,2. s^s  =  —ldy,.cos.{-f  +  '],).

Substituting  these  last  values  in  [6491/],  we  get  [6491].

[6492al

*  (3363) Adding  together  the  three  functions [6488,  6490,  6491],  we  obtain  the

complete  value  of  that  part  of  an.R, which  is  taken  into  consideration  in  this  article.

The  difierential  of  this  expression,  relative  to  the  characteristic d, is  taken  in  [6492],
[64926] considering  the  elements  of  the  satellite m as  the  only  variable  quantities,  as  in  [6055] ;

so  that  we  must  suppose e,  zs,  7^,  7^  [6061,  &z;c. ;  6315,  &ic.]  to  be  the  variable  quantities,

a being  constant  as  in [1044"]  ; also e',  zs',  7/,  7/,  H,  7,  7,  6,  ^, are  considered  as
[64926'] constant,  relative  to  the  characteristic d. As e is  connected  with sin.w, or cos.w,  in

[6493,  6494];  and 7^ with sin.7i  or  cos.7i,  in  [6499,  6500]  ;  the  quantities  (e.sin.'ci),

*  (e.cos.-Bj),  (7j.sin.7j, (7j.cos.7i), are  considered  as  the  variable  quantities  in  [6492];

[6492d] and  the  parts  of an.R  [6488,  6490,  6491]  may  be  made  to  contain  these  terms,  by  the

substitution  of  the  following  expressions,  which  are  easily  deduced  from  [23,  24]  Int. ;
[6492c] e2==(e.cos.z3)2-j-(e.sin.'w)2;  e'^=:{e'.co5.z/)^-\-{e.sm.z/f;  7i^={7i'0os.1^y+{y^.sm.l^Y;
[6492/"] ee'.cos.('ia'  —  zs)  =  (e.cos.'Zj).(e'.cos.'cj')+(e.sin.'cj).(e'.sin.'3/) ;
[6492g-] 7,7.cos.(7,— 7)  =  (7,.cos.7,).(7.cos.7)+(7i.sin.7,)-(7.sin.7)  j
[6492/1] ^  7i-cos.(^  +  7i)  =  (71-  cos.  7  J.(^.cos.^)— (71-  sin.  7i).(^.sin.^).

Substituting  these  developments  in [6488,  6490,  6491],  and  then  taking  the  differentials.

considering  the  variable  quantities  to  be  as  in  [6'^92c],  we  shall  get  the  terms  of  [6492]

depending  on (0), 0 , (0,1), 0,1  L Adding  one  accent  to  the  terms  between  the
[6492i]

braces,  connected  with (0,1), 0,1  L we  get  those  depending  on (0,2), 0,2 ; and  by
adding  another  accent,  we  get  those  depending  on (0,3),

0,3

Vni.  V.  ^  12.) INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON «•,  e^,  &c. ; y*,  y",  &ic.  106

<  1  (0)-|-rori+(0.l)  +  (0.2)  +  (0^)  I  r.cos.« )  1

«..d/J  =  -rf.(«xos.:.).  ;  ^^ ^ I 1 ^ ^  ^  }

/-  0.1  le'.cos.tj'-  0.2  .e\cos.W-.  M  .€"'.005.0"^  *

[6492]

(  1  (0)+ro'l4-(0,l)+(0,2)+(0.3)  \  .c.sin.ta )
-</.(e.sin.tB).  ;  ^ ' ' >  V

(  1  (0)+ro1+(0,l)-f  (0,2)+(0,3)  \ r,cos.1.  ^5

i -HO)-«^os.i'-loJ  •  ycos-l  -  (0, 1  ).y/-cos.l/-(0,2).y,".cos.7/'-(0,3).y/"-cos.'7/")6

(  j  (0)+ro1+(0,l)+(0,2)+(0,3)  I  .y,.sin.7.  il

^-(0).^^in.>P-|  0  |.y.sin.7-(0,l).y/.sin.7/-(0,2)7/^sin-7/^(0,3)^/Vin-7/^^)8

We  have,  as  in  [6236,  6237],

c.sin.o  =  — /i.sin.(^/-f  r) — A,.iuvt.(^i^+r,) —  ,  &c. ;  [6498]

e.cos.a  =  — h. cos, (gt-i-r) — hi.  e.(n.(git-\-ri) — ,  &C. ;  [6494]

hence  we  obtain,  from  [6217 — 6222],  the  following  expressions;*

♦  (3364) Multiplying  [6217]  by cos.{gt-^r), and  transposing  its  first  term,  we  get,
-1vxoB^-\^)^{-l(0}^\T]-\^0^)^0,2)+{0^)lh+[o^].h'^  [6495„j

We  may  obtain  similar  results  for  all  the  other  values  of  g  ;  namely, g^,  ^„  gy Taking
the  sum  of  these  expressions,  which  is  done  by  prefixing  the  sign 2^  [6235rf],  we  get,

-2^.c<«.(^+r)  =  24-[(0)+Q4^0,lHK0^m0,3)]Ji+[O].A'+[ig^^^^  [6495^3

The  first  member  of  this  last  equation  is  the  same  as  the  differential  of  the  second  member
of  [6493]  divided  by dt  j hence  we  get,

^"•?^«24-[(OH-[T]H^O,lH^O,2HKO,3)].M-[«I|^'+[og.*''+0  [6495c)

Now  the  expressions of e.cos.xtf, e'.cos.t/, e''.cos.ra", tf'.cos.v^" [6235t — to], being [6495<r|
substituted  in  the  second  member  of  [6495c],  we  get  [6495].

In  like  manner,  if  we  multiply  [6217]  by — sin.(^4"r'), then  trans[)ose  its  first  terra,
and  prefix  the  sign 2^, we  get  the  following  equation,  which  is  similar  to  [64956]  ;

X^*y.tin.(^+r)-24[(OH-[3W,im0^mO,3)].fc-[o;g.V-[og.A--[o;g.A^^  [6495,j

The  first  member  of  this  equation  is  equal  to  the  differential  of  the  expression  of f.cos.«,
[6494],  divided  by di'f and  if  we  substitute  in  the  second  member  of  [6495e],  the  values [6495/*]
l,.h.ti\'a.{gt-\-V)  =  — e.sin.w,  Ilc.  [6235t,  Ar,  /,  wij,  it  becomes  as  in  [6 196j.

VOL.  IV,  27

106  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Ca

d.(e.s\n.-a)

[6495]

= [  (0)+[7]+(0,l)  +  (0,2)4-(0,3)  I  .C.COS.^

1

[6496]

di

—  ro,l]-e\cos.z3'— fo^lc''.cos.x3''---ro,3l.c'''.cosV'' ;  2

d.(e.cos..)^_^  (0)+[T]+(0,l)+(0,2)+(0,3)  j  .c.sm.«  1

Then  we  have,  as  in  [63326],

[6497]  5=71.8^.(1;— '7,).

Comparing this equation with the following, which is similar to

[6300  line  1,6427],
[6498]  s  =  1.  sin.(v-\-pt-^A)  +  li,sm.(v-\-pit-\-Ai)  +  &C.,.

we  obtain,*
[6499J  7i.sin.7i  =  — Z.sin.(p^4-A) — /i.sin.(jpi^+Ai) — ,  &c. ;

[6500]  7i.COS.7i  = Z.COS.(j9^+a)+?i.COS.(^i/+Ai)+,  &C.

Therefore  the  equations  [6308 — 6311]  will  give  the  following  expressions  ;t

*  (3365) We  obtain  from  [21,  22]  Int.  the  following  developments  ;

[6498o]  sin.(v — 7,) =sin.v.cos.7ji — cos.v.sin.  7j ;

[64986]  sm.(y-{-pt-\-A)  =  sm.v.cos.{pt-\-A.)-^cos.v.s'm.{pt-\-A)i  &c.

Substituting  these  expressions  in  the  values  of s  [6497,  6498]  ; and  then  comparing
separately  the  coefficients  of ^-cos.v and sin.ij, we  obtain  the  equations  [6499,  6500]  ;

'  '^^  and  if  we  use  the  symbol  S',  in  like  manner  as  in  [6298a?]y  to  include  the  terms  depending
on  all  the  roots  p,  p„  pj,  ^3,  &c.  [64982;],  these  equations  may  be  put  under  the  forms
[6498rf].  From  these  last  expressions  we  easily  derive  the  similar  ones,  corresponding  to
the  satellites  m',  m",  m'",  as  in  [6498e — g]  respectively  ;  the  whole  system  of  equations
being  similar  to  those  in  [6235i — /»].

Column  1.  Column  2.

[6498rf]  7,.sin.7, =—lf.lsm.(pt-^A);  7i-cos.7i =  2'.?.cos.(p<-f  a)  ;

[6498cl  7/.sin.7/  =— 2'.r.sin.(^^-fA),-  r/.cos.?/ =  2'.r.cos.(;7/+A)  ;

[6498/]  y"- sin. 7/'  =  —:^.r.sm,{pt-{-A)  ;  7/'.  cos.  7/'  =  ^.  r'.cos.{pt  +a)  ;

[6498g]  r/".sin.  7/" = —2^.  /'".sin.(pi-f-A) ;  7/".cos.  7/"  =  2'.  /'".cos.  (pt^-A) .

f  (3366) Multiplying  [6308]  by cos.{pt-{-A),  transposing  its  first  term,  and  prefixing
[6501a] ^jjggigj, 2' [6498c],  we  get,

VIII.  V.  ^  12.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e«,  «'«,  he. ; 7*,  7",  &c.  107

^:krp2A  =  -  5  (0)+|T]4-(0,l)4-(0,2)+(0,3)  \ . n.cos.7,  1

_^  ' '  ^  [6501]

-(O).*.cos.i'  +  [Vj  .7.cos.7H-(0,l  ).7/.cos.7/4-(0,2).-//'.cos.7,"+(0,3).r/".cos.7/".  2

"^•^^'•J''^  =  I  (0)+[o]+(0,l)+(0,2)+(0,3)  I  .r,.sin.7,  1

-(0).a.sin.t'-[T].^sin.7~(0,l).y/.siD.7;~(0,2).y/^sin.7/^-(0,3).r/^sin.7/^2

Substituting these values of rf.(e.sin.«), c?.(e.cos.w), </.(/,. sin. 7,),
rf.(7,.cos.7,), in  the  expression  of an.dR  [6492],  we  find  that  it  vanishes; [650^]
hence an.dR  =  0.*

—2'. lp.cos,{pt  4.  A)  =  -  I  (0)  +  [T]  +  (0,1)  +  (0,2)  +  (0,3)  I .  S'.  /.  COS.  Cp<  +  a)

+  (0)  .If.  L.cos.(pt  +  a)  +  rV\ .  If.  V.cos.(pt  +  a) [«5W«n

+(0,1  ).2'.  Z'^os.(p<+A)-J-(0,2).2'. /"K:os.(p<4-A)-f  (0,3).2'./"'^os.(p/-|-A).
The  first  member  of  this  equation  is  equal  to  the  difierential  of  7,.sin.7j,  deduced  from
the  second  member  of  [6499],  and  then  divided  by  dt,  as  in  the  first  member  of
[6501].  Moreover,  if  we  substitute,  in  the  second  member  of  [6501a'],  the  values
[6498</— 5-,  col.  2  ;  6327, 6331],  it  becomes  as  in  the  second  member  of  [6501].  In  like  C650U|
manner,  if  we  multiply  [6308]  by  sin.(p<-{-A),  we  shall  obtain  an  equation  exactly  similar
to  [6501a'],  cos.(/;f-f"A)  being  changed  into  sin.(p<-|"^)>  i"  both  members.  Then  the
Jirst  member  of  the  product  becomes  equal  to  the  differential  of  the  second  member  of
[6500],  divided  by  dt,  as  in  [6502]  ;  and  the  second  member  of  the  product  is  easily  [GSOlrf]
reduced  to  the  form  of  the  second  member  of  [6502],  by  the  substitution  of  the  values
[6498</— ^,  col.  1  ;  6326,  6330].

• (3367) We find, by inspection, that the coefficients of — rf.(<.cos.'B),
d.{e.s\n.-a)y — <f.(7,.cos.7,), </.(7,.sin.7,), in the second member  of [6492], are [6503a]
respectively  equal  to  the  second  members  of  the  equations  [6495,  6496,6501,  6502] ;  we
may  therefore  substitute  the  first  members  of  these  equations  in  [6492],  instead  of  their
equivalent  values,  and  we  shall  get,  without  any  reduction,

an.dR  =  — tf.(«.cos.w).  -^— - — '  +  rf.(e.sm.w).  — - — '

<"  *"  [6508*3

V <'(>',.«in.7i) , J , . . </.(>,.co«.7,)
^d.{r,A:os.1,).-^ 4-  d.[7,.sm1,). '^^ .

Now  the  terms  in  each  line  of  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  mutually  destroy  each rgj^jj^^
other ;  hence  we  have an.dH  =  0, as  in  [6502'J.

108  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

We  shall  now  resume  the  equation  [6060], or  rather  its  differential,  from
which  we  have  deduced,  in  [931],  the  following  expression  ;*
d.i'Zr.ddr-^dr.Sr) San  2an /dR\

[6503]  ^  __  Ac/^^  '^T'''^ '^V'''\^)  .

dt ~"  \/i—e^

[6503'] fVe  may  here  neglect  the  divisor y/i — e^, and  suppose  it  equal  to  unity. It
is however  plain, that if the numerator  contain  a  constant  quantity g,

[6504] it  will  produce,  in -^', the  term ^g.e", by  the development  of this

divisor  in  a  series ;  and  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  retain  this  divisor.
[6504'] But  the  constant  quantity g, will  produce,  in 8v^, the  term g^,t and

then nt will  no  longer  express  the  mean  motion  of m, which  is  contrary

to  what  we  have  supposed  ;  therefore  the  constant  quantity g 7nust  vanish.
[6505] This  condition  may  always  be  satisfied  by  adding  an  appropriate  constant

quantity  to  the  integral  J^dR.

If  we  notice  only  the  secular  inequalities  of e and w, we  shall  have,  J

*  (3368) The  equation  [6060]  becomes  as  in  [6503],  by  dividing  its  differential  by

t"^  J  dt,  and  substituting  the  expression  [60606] ;  observing  also  that,  as  a  =  n~i  [6110]  is
constant  [64926 — 6'J,  we  may  bring a,  n, from  under  the  sign  of  integration.

[6504a] t  (3369) If  the  second  member  of  [6503]  contain  the  terra -7===  g.(l+ie2-|-,  &:c.),

[65046]  it  will  produce,  in  its  integral,  or  in  the  value  of  5v^,  the  terms  Sv^  =  gt -\-^^fe^.dt  ;
neglecting  e'*,  he. ;  therefore  the  mean  motion  nt  will  be  increased  by  the  quantity  g  t ;
which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis  in  [6062'],  where  we  have  assumed  its  value  from
observation,  to  be  nt ;  so  that  we  must  put  g  =  0,  and  then  the  term  ^^.fe^.dt  [6504b]
vanishes  also  from  the  expression  of Sv^ ; by  talcing  the  constant  quantity  connected  with

[650id] j^ji  [6503],  so  as  to  produce  this  result,  as  is  observed  in  [6505]  and  in  [6121,  &;c.].

X  (3370) The  expression  of  r  [6506]  is  the  same  as  in  [6200fl?]  j and  by  taking its

'•  ■' differential,  supposing e,  zs, to  be  the  variable  quantities,  we  get  the  value  of  — ,  depending

on  the  secular  inequalities  [6506c],  observing  that cf,  n, are  constant  [6503a]. Again,
if  we  develop r  [6506]  according  to  the  powers  of t, by  Taylor's  theorem  [607,  fee],
[65066] noticing  only  the  secular  inequalities,  and  supposing r and  its  differentials  in  the  second
member  to  correspond  to  the  epoch,  or ^  =  0, we  shall  get  the  expression  [6506c?J ;

VIII.  V.  ^  12] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e»,  e^,  Sw. ; y^  y'*,  &c.

109

r  =  a.{  l—-e.cos.(n/ +•—«)} ;  [6506]

ir  =  — rt/. }  J.  cos.(fil-f-f — w)+e.  -J- .  8iii.(iiH-« — «)  \  •  [6507]
From  these  we  get,  by  retaining  only  the  terms  multiplied by /, without

sines  and  cosines  of  n/, and  neglecting  the  differentials —  , -r-^  ,  which  [C508]

dt^ ' rf/»

are  incomparably*  smaller  than  -r  t  -r  'A

(^)  =  — a.  I  ^.  cos.(n^-f-s— o)-f-c.  — .  sin.(n/-f-8— id)  |  ;  [6506<r]

r  =  r+(^).<+,&c.  [6506«f]

Subslituling  [6506c]  in  [6506rfJ,  we  get  the  value  of  r, or r-j-^^> whence  we  obtain 5r,

as  in  [6507].

*  (3371) The  sniallness  of  these  quantities  is  manifest  in  the  perfectly  analogous  case
of  the  planets  in  [1122,  &c.]. For  the  first  of  the  equations  [1122]  shows  that ~ is [6508a]

composed  of  terms  of  the  order 0,1 .e', or  of  the  order mV[1082];  and  its  differential,

divided  by rfe, gives —  , of  the  order m'.  — , and  this  last  expression  is  of  the  order

m'^ as  is  evident  from  [1122  line  2]. Hence  it  appears  that — ,  is  of  the  order m' in [65086]

comparison  with —, and  must  therefore  be  much  smaller,  as  in  [6508]. A  similar  result
is  obtained  by  the  numerical  calculation  in  [385da].  '

t  (3372) Using  for  brevity  the  symbol W=  nt  -^s —  w, we  may  put  the  equations
[6506,  6507]  under  the  forms  [65096,  c]  ;  and  their  differentials  under  the  forms  [6509(/,  c],
neglecting  terms  of  the  order dde, ddzSy de  X  dia^ c/e".  Sec,  as  in  [6508]  ;
r=s:a — ac.  cos.  W^;

de  rtr  d^  rw7

cr=z — at.  -— .cos.fy — at.e.  -— ,svn.fV  ',
at  at

—  =  — a.  — .  COS.  W4-  ane.  sin.  W — ae.  -^ .  sin.  W ;
at  at  at  '

-—  =  — a.  —• .  COS.  W-\- ant.  -r- .  sin.  fV — ae.  -— .  sm.  W — ant.e.  —- .  cos.  n.
at  at  at  at  dt

In  substituting  these  expressions  in  the  first  members  of  [6509^,  A],  and  retaining  only  tlie

terms  which  are  independent  of  the  configurations,  we  may  neglect  the  quantities  which

VOL.  IV.  28

[6509a]
[6509a']

[65096]
[6509c]

[6509(r]
[6509e]

110

[6509]
[6509'J

[6510]

[6511]

. IVIOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

2r.d5r-\-dr.Sr

[Mec.  C61.

=  4^.5

d.(e.5in.'!z)  . d.Ce.cos.zi)

e.cos.w.  — ^^ — : — -  — e»  sin.TO.  —

1-

a^.ndt  '^'^'  I  dt  ' dt

Taking its  differential, neglecting the differentials and  products  of the

.  . de dts  . ,,  ,

quantities —  , —  , we  shall  have,

dt  ' dt

d.{2r.dSr-\-dr.Sr)

.  <  e.cos.T^.

<?.(e.sin.p)

-e.  sin.^j.

c^.(e.cos.w)

a^ndt^  '^'  i^' dt  dt

Substituting  for ^i^^) , ^J^:^  ^ their  values [6495,  6496],

shall  obtain,*

d.(2r.dSr-{^r.5r)

dt

we

d.Sv
Hi

a^.ndt^

4.  \  (0)+[o]+(0,l)+(0,2)+(0,3)  J  .6^

-J.  [0,1]  .f-e'-cos.  (tjj'-^)-J.  Fo^l  .ee",cos.(zs"-^)-l.  [q^  .ee"'.cos.(ra'"-w).
The  term  fdR vanishes  from  the  expression  [6503],  as  we  have  seen

[6509/]

[6509g]
[6509K]

[6509{]
[6509A]

contain  the  first  power  of  sin.  W^,  cos.  ^, as  well  as  their  product, sin.  ^.cos.^F;  putting
also sin.^?F=|, cos.^  rF=|  [1,6]  Int. Hence  we  shall  have,

lit  '  lit.  at *

dt
dr.dr

dt

=  — a^.nt.e^.  —r '  ^in.^W  = — ha^.nt.  -^ —
dt  dt  dt

[6509Z]

The  sum  of  the  two  expressions  [6509^,  A],  being  divided  by a^n, gives,

2r.  d6r  -\-  dr.  6r ede  ^^ e^.diS

a^.ndt  ndf" ' ^  *  "dT  *

We  may  neglect  the  first  term  of  the  second  member,  because  its  differential  produces,  in
[6510],  only  terms  of  the  order  edde,  or  dt^,  which  are  neglected  in  [6509a'].  The
remaining  term  of  [6509i]  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  of  the  second  member  of  [6509],
by  substituting  the  following  value  of  <Ztrf,  which  is  easily  deduced  from  [54]  Int.  by
putting 2;  =  TO.

dTs  ==  cos.^tn.  <Z.(tang.«)  =cos.2ot.</.( )  =  ^ — i ~ '—^ 1.

The  differential  of  [6509]  being  divided  by  dt,  neglecting  the  quantities  mentioned  in
[6509^],  gives  [6510].

*  (3373) Multiplying  [6495]  by Je.cos.«, and  [6496]  by — Je.sin.w,  then  taking
[65ila| ^^^  g^^  ^|.  ^1^^  products,  we  get  the  second  member  of  [6510]. This  sum,  being  reduced
[651161 hy  means  of  the  expression  of e^  [6492e], and  that  of  ee'.cos.(ra' — w)  [6492/],  with
the  similar  expressions  of  ee".eos.(x!i" — zi), becomes  as  in  [6511].

VIII.  V.  <^  12] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON t\  «^,  &c. ; y»,  y",  &c.  1 11

in  [6502'].* The  remaining  term  of  [6503]  is  — .  r/— Yand  it  follows, [6512]

from  §  5,  Book  VI.,  that  by  noticing  only  the  action  of m' upon m, and

putting  jA=  1  [61 10c],  the  constant  part  of  —  •  '"•  (  T"  )»  which  is  multiplied [6513]

by  the  squares  and  products  of  the  excentricitics  and  inclinations  of  the
orbits,  gives,  in  [6503],  the  following  terras  ;  f

-m'.n.e.'.cos.(.'-..).  |  2a\{^-^^  +  4 a\  (^^)  j  2 [65i4|

•^{m'.n,  I  aV.5(H«'a'.(^')  | .  |  7i'^-2r/.7i.cos.(7/-70+r,^  | .  3

The  action  of  the  satellites w" and m'", produces  terms  similar  to  those

2an /f//2\  [6514']

in  [6514]. The  sun's  action  produces,  in —  •  '*•(  7~  )  [^^03],  the  termt

♦(3374) We  have  in  [6502'] an.dJ?=0, whence diR  =  0 and  /di?  ==  constant ; u^l2^^^
so  that  it  may  be  neglected  in  [6503],  as  in  [6504c?J.

t  (3375) Neglecting  the  divisor ^/T^j  as  in  [6503'J,  we  shall  have,  for  the  last  terra

2an /dR\  t6514a]

of  the  second  member  of  [6503],  the  expression —  .  ^I  y  )• Substituting  in  it  the  value

,*=  1  [6513],  and  that  in  [6089e],  it  becomes 2an.a/— )  =2nn«.(^— V The  symbol [65146]

R  [6503] is  equivalent  to 6R m [3757  J] ; so  that  to  conform  to the  notation  in
[3757</,  &MJ.]i  we  must  change R into 5ii, in  the  expression [65146], and  it  will

become 'Unt^.i—r—y The  secular  part  of  6R, depending  on  the  second  power  of  the [65I4f]

excentricities  and  inclinations  [3763],  is  given  in [3764]. The  part  of  this  expression [6514</]
depending  on .^'%  w2^'^  [3764  lines  1,2,3], produces  in 6R  [37726,  &c.]  some  terms

which  give  in 2ndt.a^.  (  -7"  )» tl>^  terms  in  the  second  member  of  [3772]  ;  and  by  dividing

them  by <//, and  substituting  [6488e],  we  get,  in  [6514(r],  the  terms  in  [6514  lines  1, 2]. [65l4f]
The  terms  of  SR depending  on 2?'^  [3764  line  4],  being  substituted  in  the  first  member
of  [6514/],  produces  in  this  last  function  the  following  expression ;

buustituting  the  value  of (p'— ?)*+(?' — 9)"  [6488A],  it  becomes  as  in  [6514  line  3].

X  (3376) Using  the  value  of R  [6042],  and i*  =  1  [6513],  we  get,  by  taking  its

^ 2anj-  [G&lSa]

partial  differential  relative  to r, and  multiplying  by -—  ,

112  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

Lastly,  the  part  of  —  .r.(  —  j,  depending  on  Jupiter's  ellipticity,  produces

the  term,*
[6516]  ^'  =  3.(0).  J6^— 5^—2^.  n.cos.C^  +  ^O-^i^}.

Therefore  we  shall  have,  by  adding  the  functions  [6511,  6514,  6515,  6516],
[6516'] the  expression  of -— -' . To  obtain  that  of -^ , or,  in  other  words, the

projection  of d.6v^ upon  the  fixed  plane,  divided  by dt; we  must,  as  in

[3782],  add  to  the  preceding  term  of -^, the  quantity, f

[6515a'] — .  r.(~)=:-an.  ~ .  { l-3s^-SS'^+S{l-s^-S"'').cos.{W-2v)4-m  S'.cos.{U-v)  }.

o

^,  ^x". Supposing  the  term — ,  in  the  value  of  R  [6042],  to  be  neglected  as  in  [6277',  6490,  &c.] ;
[65156]  D

we  shall  find,  that  the  expression,  in  the  second  member  of  [6515a'],  is  equal  to  the  retained
part  of  R  [6042]  multiplied  by 4aw  ; so  that  we  shall  have,

[6515c]  -.r.(-)  =  4a».B;

_  „ and  if  we  substitute  the  value  of  an.R, depending  on  this  part  of  the  sun's  action  [6490],
it  will  become  as  in  [6515].

*  (3377)  The  part  of  R,  depending  on  Jupiter's  ellipticity,  is  given  in  [6052].
[6516a] Substituting  it  in  the  first  member  of  [6516c],  and  putting fjii=l  [6513],  we  get  the

second  member  of  [6516c]  ;  and  by  substituting  in  it  the  value  of  jR  [6052],  it  becomes
[651661 ^s  in  [6516c?]. Lastly,  if  we  substitute  in  [6516rf]  the  part  of  an.R  [6491],  depending

on  Jupiter's  ellipticity  it  becomes  as  in  [6516].

2an /dR\ ^ . , x  r ,  no> -^^

[6516c]  T  • ""'  V rfr  j  ""  6««-(p— 2<P)-U— («— ^i)'|-  ^3-

[6516d]  =  —6an.R.

1(3378) The  expression  to  be  added  to dv^, or  to d.Sv^, in  the  present  notation,  is
given  in  [3782],  under  the  form ^{qdp — pdq). Now  the  quantities 9,  6  [1030'] are
changed  into 7,, 7i respectively,  in  the  present  notation  [6315,6316]  ;  and  if  we  put y,
for tang.y^, on  account  of  its  smallness,  we  shall  find  that  the  expression  of  p,  q,  [1032]
[6517c] will  become  p  =  7i.sin.'7i ; q='y^.cos.li. Substituting  these  in  the  reduction  of d.5v^

[6517rf] or  ^qdp—pdq)  [6517a],  we  obtain  in -^ the  terra  [6517]. Now  multiplying  [6501]

[6517a]
[65176]

VIII.  V.  ^  12.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e«,  e'«,  &c. ; r«,  y^,  &c.  113

— '  =  J.  I  y,.  COS.  1,.  -^^^^j i^  —7,.  sin.  7^.  -^^ — |-^  ^  [6517]

i.  5  (0)+[o]+(0,l)  +  (0,2)+(0,3)  I .  y,«  1

-i.(0).4.yi.cos.('r+i,)+^[T].7.7i.cos.(V'?)4-i-(0,l).yi.7/.cos.(irt')2 [gsi?']
+i-(0,2).7,.y/'.cos.(i,— 7/')  +  J.(0,3).yi.yr.cos.(  7,-7/").  3

Collecting  together  all  the  terms*  of  -j— and  integrating,  we  shall  obtain

the  secular  equation  of  the  satellite m. We  may  observe  that  we  have,  as
in  [6492c--^],

e«  =  (c.cos.in)^  +  {e.sin.viy  [6518]

ce'.cos.(ra' — a)  =  e.  cos.  th,  e'.cos.ra'4-  6.sin.w.  c'.sin.t/.  [6519]

We  have  seen,  in  [6493,  6494],  that e.sin.w, e.cos.w, are  represented  by

a  series  of  terms  of  the  following  forms ;

e,  sin.«  =  —h.  sin.(gt+T)—hi.  sin.(^i<+r,)_-,  &c. ;  [6520]

c.cos.«  =  —h.cos.(gt-\-r)^hi,cos,(git-{-T'i)—,  &c. ;  [6521]

and c'-sin.^/, c'.cos.^',  &c.  [6235A:,  /,  m], are  the  sums  of  similar  terms. [6522]

Hence  we  shall  have,  in  the  expression  of -^ ; First. Some  constant [6522^

at

terms ; Second. Some  terms  multiplied  by  cosines  of  angles  of  the  forms

{gi — ^).^  +  ^i — ^»  &c.t ^e  may  neglect  the  constant  parts,  because  the ^6523]

by iy,.cos.7,, and  [6502]  by — iyrsin.  7, ; then  taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  we

get  the  value  of  the  function  [6517]. This  sum  can  be  reduced  by  substituting  the  values [65i7e]

of  7i'> y,-y.cos.(7, — 7), ^.7,.cos.(4'4-7j,  &m;.  [6492c,^,  ^, &c.]  ; and  by  this  means

it  will  become  as  in  [6517'].

•(3379) We  must  add  together  the  expressions  [6511,6514,6515,6516,65171,
and  also  the  terms  depending  on ml\  ml"  [6514],  which  are  similar  to  those  explicitly [6518a]

d  io

^ven  in  [6514]. The  sum  will  be  the  complete  value  of  the  terms  of ~ , now  under
consideratioo.

t(3380) Several  of  the  terms  of -^  [651 1,6514],  contain  e«,  or  (c.cos.«)«+(e.sm.o)« [6523a]

[6518] ;  and  if  we  substitute  the  values  of  e.sin.ci, «.cos.0,  [6520, 6521],  and  reduce,  by
means  of  [17, 20]  Int.,  we  shall  get,

ea  =  A«-f  A,«-f&c.+2M,.cos.{(^,— j').r  +  r,— r}+&c.;  [65236]

VOL.  IV.  29

114  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

terms  which  result  from  them,  after  integration,  are  proportional  to  the  time,
*■ ■' and  are  therefore  confounded  with  the  mean  motion  of m. We  may  apply
the  same  considerations  to  the  terms  depending  on  the  inclinations  of  the
orbits.

13. The  most  important  terms  of  the  expression  of  the  secular  equation

of m, are  those  depending  on  the  secular  variations  of  the equator  and

orbit  of  Jupiter.* They  are  analogous  to  those  from  which  the moon's
[65251  i  ^  o

secular  equation  arises,  which  we have  developed in  the seventh book

[6528a;]. t To  obtain  them  we  must  substitute,  in  the  preceding  expression

as  is  evident,  by  the  calculation  in  the  first  note  in  page  601  of  the  first  volume  of  this
[6523c] work. Similar  results  are  obtained  from  the  terms  of  [6511,  6514],  depending upon

ee'.cos.('Z3' — -m),  developed  as  in  [6519].  The  constant  terms,  spoken  of  in  [6522'],  are
[6523rf] like ]i^-\-h'^-\-k.c. [65235]; and  the  variable  terms, or  those  which  contain t, in

[65236,  &c.],  are  similar  to  those  which  depend  on '2lih^.cos.\{g^ — g).  t-\-T^ — r|  [6523].,

[6523e]  The  integral  of  these  terms  produces  in  5y,  terms  of  the  form  — 3-^  s^n.{(^^-^).^-f"^l~^l•
Developing  this,  according  to  the  powers  of  t,  by  means  of  [60]  Int.,  it  produces  terms
depending  on  the  first  power  of  t,  of  the  form  2hhi.t.cos.{T^ — r),  which  is  of  the  same
order  as Mj, or e^,  ee',  Stc,  and  may  therefore  be  neglected  on  account  of  its  smallness

[6523g-] [6057e]. The  author  also  investigates  the  remaining  term  in  [6514  line  3],  depending  on

[6523A] ^(^^ ; and  finds,  in  [6547],  that  it  is  too  small  to  be  noticed. The  other  terms  of -^  ,

[6523i]  enumerated  in  [6518a],  are  contained  in  the  functions  [6515,  6516,  6517'],  and  they
produce,  by  development;  thg  expression  [6528]  j  as  we  shall  see  in  [6528m — t<j].

[6525a] *  (3381) This  is  shown  in  [6536],  and  in  the  corresponding  note  [6536g- — ^].

[6528a]

t  (3382) We  shall  now  develop,  according  to  the  powers  of t, the  parts  oi -^

which  are  mentioned  in  [6523i]  ;  namely,  those  in  [6515,  6516,  6517'],  being  the  only
[65286] ones  of  importance. In  these  developments  we  shall  always  neglect  the  constant  parts,

for  the  reasons  stated  in  [6524]  ;  also  the  terms  depending  on  i^,  and  the  higher  powers
[6528c]  ^^  ^ .  because  they  introduce  into  the  integral  5v,  only  terms  of  the  order  t^,  f*,  &;c.,
[6528d] which  are  insensible. Moreover  we  shall  neglect  the  terms  depending  on  the  excentricities

e,  e',  &c.,  on  account  of  their  smallness  [6057e].  Retaining  therefore,  as  in  [65286,  he],
[6528e] Qjjjy  jjjg  jgj^g  which  are  multiplied  by  the  first  power  of t, we  find  that  the  sum  of  the

squares  of  [6400,  6401]  gives y^  [6528^] ; the  sum  of  the  squares  of  [6413,  6414]  gives

7j2  [6528^].  Moreover,  the  double  of  the  product  of  the  two  equations  [6400,  6413],
[6528/] i^gjj^g  ^jj^gj  jQ  jjjg  similar  product  of  [6401,  6414],  gives  the  third  of  the  equations

VUI.  V.  ^  13.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON ««,  e'«,  &c. ; y*,  y",  &tc.  116

of  -7-, the  values  of  y.sin.?,  7.COS.7, '»',  ^  yi.sin.ii,  &c.,  which  are  found

"^  [6526]

in  §  10. Therefore  if  we  neglect  the  constant  terms,  as  in  [6523],  and

[652%],  the  terras  in  its  first  member  being  reduced  by  means  of  [21]  Int.

yi.O; 7,«=2(X— l)A.'2i.K; Sy,./. J 8in.7.8iii.7,-H:o8.7.co8.7, | -»2y ,.7.008.(7,— 7)  =  2(X—1).'I^. [652%]
Substituting  these  values,  together  witli H*  =  2H,.rt  [6527], and e'^0, in  [6515], TQs;i8k]
it  becomes,
-.2[T].|ajf,.d-a(X-l).X.«i;MM  +  2(X-l).  ^LM]  =-4[o;].H,.d  +  4[T].(l_X)9.  'Ufti [6528t]

being  the  same  as  the  two  terms  in  [6528  line  1]  depending  upon 0 •

Again  we  have,  as  m  [6404],  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order <',

d='L;  d.cos.^  =  'L;  —d.sm.^=—'^L.pt.  [65284]

Muhiplying  the  equations  [6414,  6413]  respectively,  by  these  values  of  ^.cos.^, — d.sin.'^';
taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  reducing  by  means  of  [23]  Int.,  and  retaining  terms  of  the [6528/]
order /, we  get,

tf.7,.Jcos.^.cos.7, — sin  .i'.  sin.  7,}  =^.7,.cos.(i'-f-'7i)  =^-'-'^-^^'  [6528m]

Subsiituling  this  and  the  values  of 7,^,  ^,  c^,  [6528^,  A,  A;],  in  [6516], it  becomes,  by
retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on if

3(0).}— 2X.»i.6i— 2(X— l).X.«L.6/j  ==  — 6(0).X2.«L.6<;  [6528n]

which  is  the  same  as  the  term  depending  on (0), in  [6523  line  1].

We  shall  now  compute  the  terms  of  [6517']. Substituting,  in  the  first  line  of  this
expression,  the  value  of  7,^  [6528^],  it  produces  the  terms  in  [6528  line  2],  as  is  evident
by  inspection. In  like  manner,  by  substituting  the  value  of d.7,.cos.(i'  +  7,)  =X.  »i.6<, [6528o]
[6528)n],  in  the  term  depending  on (0),  [6517'  line  2],  it  produces  the  term  depending  on
(0),  in  [6528  line  3]  ; also  by  substituting 77,.cos.(7, — 7)=(X — 1).»jL.6<  [6528^],  in [G528p]

the  term  of  [6517' line  2],  depending  on 0 ,  it  produces  the  term  depending  on 0 ,

in  [6528  lined].

If  we  change 7,  7, into 7,',  7/, respectively,  in  the  identical  equation  [649%],  we  get,

7,.r  ,'.cos.(7,— 7,')  =  (r,.cos.7,).(7,'.cos.7,')-f(7,.sin.7,).(7,'.sin.  7/).  [6528^]

Again,  if  we  change  the  symbols 7,,  7,,  X, [6315,6316,  6313],  corresponding  to  the
satellite i», into  y,',  7/,  X',  respectively,  corresponding  to  the  satellite  m',  [6489, 6344], [6528r]
we  shall  find  that  the  equations  [6413,  6414]  become,

7/.  sin.  7,'  =  ( 1— X').  ^L.  'pt  4-  >!.at ;  \eS2»$]

7,'.cos.7,'  =  (X'— l).>L-f-X^6^  [6528<]

Substituting  these  values  and  those  of  [6413, 6414],  in  the  second  memoer  of  [6528^],  and
retaining  only  the  terms  of  the  order t^ we  obtain,

7..7.'.cos.(7.— 7.0  =  {(X-l).X'-j-(X'-l).X}.>L.6^  [6528«]

Moltiplying  this  by i(0,l), we  get  the  term  of  [6517Mine2]  depending  on  (0,1),  and

116  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

[65083 suppose  the  excentricity H of  Jupiter's  orbit  to  be  developed  in  the

following  series,
[65B7]  H  =  H,^ct  +  hc.\ [4407  line  1]

[6927'] JJ^  being  the  value  of H  at  the  origin  of  the  time i ; we  shall  have,

^^  ^  =  --4.[T].£r,.d  +  4.[T|.(1— x)^ii:.6^_6(0).x*.'L.6^  1

-I-  (l_x).x.  I  (0)+[T]+(0,l)4-(0,2)+(0,3)  I .  'L.  ht  2

4-J.(0,l).{(>^l).V+(x'— l).x}.^L.6^  4

+J.(0,2).{(x— l).x"+(x"— l).x}.  ^LM  5

+i.(0,3).{(x_l).v"+(x'"_i).x}.  ^LM.  6

Hence  it  is  easy  to  find,  by  means  of  the  equations  between x,  x',  x",  x**
[6347—6350],*

arising  from  the  action  of  the  satellite mf  upon  n^  as  in  [6528  line  4]. We  may  deduce

■- ' fix>m  it  the  similar  expression  in  [6523  line  5],  arising  from  the  acticm  of  m" upon m,  or

from  the  term  depending  on  (0,2)  in  [6517' line  3],  by  merely  changing  (0,1)  into  (0,2),

and X into X". We  may  also  obtain,  in  the  same  way,  that  in  [6528  line  6],  arising

*■ ' from  the  action  of  m'" upon m,  or  from  the  term  depending  oa  (0,3)  in  [6517'  line  3],

by  changing,  in  [6528  line  4], (0,1) into (0,3), and  x'  mto X'". Finally  we  may

observe,  that  if  we  multiply  the  expression  [6528]  by dt, and  integrate  it,  we  shall  obtain

[6538r] tenns  of  Sv, depending  on <®,  which  are  similar  to  those  in  the  lunar  theory  [5541,  5543]

depending  upon  the  moon's  secular  equation,  as  is  ol^erved  in  [6525].

*  (3383) Transposing  in  [6347]  the  terms  dependmg  on (0,1),  (0,2),  (0,3),  we  get,
[6529a]  X.(0)+(X-1).|T]  =  (0,1).(X'-X)+(0,2).(X''-X)+(0,3).(X--X)  ;

multiplying  thb  by  | — X,  we  obtain,
[65296]  (i-X).^X.(0)+(X-l).jT]^  =  (i-X) .  {(0,1)  .  (X'-X)  +  (0,2)  .  (x"-X)  +  (0,3)  .  (X^-X)}.
Now  the  terms  in  the  first  member  of  this  expression  are  the  same  as  those  of  [6528  lines  2,3]
which  depend  on  the  functions  (0),  i  0  L  multiplied  by  the  common  factor  ^L.btj  as
is  easily  seen  by  connecting  the  coefficients,  and  making  some  slight  reductions.  We  may
[6S9c^  therefore  neglect  the  terms  depending  on  (0),  I  0  I  [6528  Unes  2,  3],  and  instead  of
them  substitute  the  second  memberof  [65296], multiphed  by  the  common  factor  ^L.bt,  namely,

VIII.  T.  ^  13.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON ««,  «^,  kc. ; y\  y'»,  &c.  117

it.  =  — 4.[7].-«^,.c/+4.[T].(l-->^)«.'L.6/--6(0).x».'L.6/ ;  [6529]

which  produces  in 6r, or  in  the  motion  of  the  satellite m, the  following
secular  equation  ;*

ar  =  — 2.[T].^i.c/»-f  2.[^.(1— x)«JL.6/»— 3(0).x».'L.6/».  C««o)

We  ma^  obser?e,  with  respect  to  the  three first  satellites,  that  the  ratios
which  obtain,  between  their  mean  motions,  change  considerably  their  secular [6o3i]
inequalities,  as  we  shall  see  in  [6663 — 6711,&c.].

When  there  is  but  one  satellite,  we  shall  obtain,  from  [6347],  t  vtineof

I  0  I  ««  »*•

'^  =  -j=ij [6532]

H+(o)

In  the  lunar  theory o is  incomparably  greater  than (0)  , and  thus  we [6533]

(J— X).  «X..6/.|  (0,1).(X'-X)4-(0,2).(X"— X)+(0,3).  (X"'^X) }.  [6589rf]

Hence it appears that the coefficicDt of (0,1). 'i^. 5^, in the three lines
[6528  lines  2, 4  ;  6529rf],  are  respectively,

(I— X).X;  J(X— l).x'+J(X'— 1).X;  (J-X).(X'— X).  [6529f]

If  we  add  these  terms  together,  we  find  that  they  mutually  destroy  each  other.  For  the
coefficient  of  X',  in  the  sum,  setting  the  terms  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur,  without
any  reduction,  is  i(X — l)-f-Jx-f-(i — X)=0;  and  by  neglecting  X',  in  the  sum,  it
becomes,  without  reduction,  (1 — X).X — Jx — (J — X).X  =  0.  In  like  manner  we  find,  ^"®^
that  the  coefficients  of  (0,2).  ^L.ht,  and  (0,3).  ^L.ht,  io  [6528  lines  2,  4  ;  6529rfJ,
raoish.  Therefore  the  whole  expression  [6528  lines  2 — 6]  vanishes ;  aiid  the  formula  i"**^l
[Oo-^]  is  reduced  to  its  first  line,  as  in  [6529].

•  (3384) Multiplying  [6529]  by rf/, and  integrating,  we  obtain  in r, or 3r, the r«eoA--|
expressioD  [6530].  ^

t  (3385) If  there  be  only  one  satellite m, we  must  neglect (0,1),  (0,2),  (0,3), in
the  equation  [6347],  and  it  will  become,

Dividing  this  by (0)+|  0  I,  we  get  [6532],

TOL. IT.  30

118  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

shall  have  very  nearly,*

[6534]  '^  —  I  —  -==zr  ,

[6535] SO  that  >- will  differ  but  very  little  from  unity  ;  w^hich  reduces  the  preceding
[6536] expression of  the  secular  equation  to  the  single  termf —2.1  o  l.Hi.cf^.

[6534a]

(3386) The  values  of  (0),  [o],  [6216]  give J?L  =  |.  liJi^  ^ ;  and  if  we

change  the  elements  relative  to  Jupiter  and  its  first  satellite,  into  those  of  the  earth  and  moon

respectively, we  shall have  the ellipticity  of  the earth p  =  -j^-^  [6044,  5593]  ; the

■' centrifugal force cp  =  ^^ [6044', 1594a]; hence p  —  |(p  =  ^^^. Moreover,

M earth's  mean  motion  r,r,<^Aa  i r^im/ anccv m  tj-i i

—  = ; : —  =m  =0,0748  nearly,  [6101,  6062^,  5117]  ; also,

n moon's  mean  motion  ''

'*"^''  i= ^"'"''f" ,  =  0,0165510, [6061,6082,5329].

a moon  s  dist.  from  earth  ■*

Substituting  these  values  in  the  expression  [6534rt],  it  becomes,

-^  =*-*-(0,0165510)2.  (0,0748)-2  =^^Vt nearly.

H
This  quantity  being  very  small  we  may  neglect  its  square  and  higher  powers,  in  the

development  of X in  terms  of ^  ^ , and  then  it  becomes  as  in  [6534].

[6534rf]
[6534e]

a

f  (3387) Substituting  the  value  of  X  [6534],  in  the  second  term  of  [6530],  it  becomes
[6536a]  /QN

of  the  order —^—L. .  (0), which  may  be  neglected  on  account  of  its smallness  [6534e].

0

0

The  third  term  is  also  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  first. For  the  ratio  of  these  two
[65366] terms  is  represented  by |. ^  ^ .  —  .  —  =  f .  ^^Vt-  "77"  •  ~ [6534^?]  ; and  we  have  in

a-

b

[6536c] [6937,6938] —  =  yV  nearly; moreover  thfe  value  of  ^£«  [6937], expressed  in  parts  of

the  radius,  is  nearly  equal  to 0,05 ; and  the  excentricity jH^  [6527',  4080  line  5],  is

0,048.., which  may  be  considered  as  equal  to ^L; hence  the  ratio [65366]  becomes

[6536rf] I .  ig-g\Y .  t'j-  nearly ; consequently  the  term  depending  on (0) may  be  neglected  in

[6536e] comparison  with  the  first  term  of  [6530],  and  then  this  expression  of  Sv will  be  reduced

VIII.  V.  ^  13] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e«,  «'•, &c. ; y«,  7", &c.  119

=  f .  —  [6216],  it  becomes,  as  in  [6536/^,  -|.  — .H^.cl"; [6537]

which  agrees  with  what  we  have  found  in  [5541,  6536 1].

The  terms,  which  we  have  just  had  under  consideration,  will  finally
become  very  sensible.  Of  the  other  terms,  the  greatest  are  those  which
depend  upon  the  products*  ^7,  6' I',  &c. ;  and  we  shall  see  hereafter,  that
/,  /',  &c.  are  small  quantities,  whose  squares  may  be  neglected,  without  any
sensible  error. This  being  premised,  we  shall  consider  the  following  term

[6537']

of  ^  [6515];

dM

iir  =2.[T|.{ri'*— 27Ti.COS.(7,-7)+'/}.  [fi538]

Now  it  is  easy  to  prove  that,t

10  its  first  term, 5»  =  — 2. 0 .!/,.«•, as  in  [6536]. Substituting  the  value  of  T  0

jip  [6536/]

[6216],  it  becomes Sv=: — ^.  —  ,H^.ct^, as  in  [6537]. This  is the  same  as that

which  is  deduced  from  the  expression  [5541] Sv=  —  f  .m'./(e'* — E'^).ndt, by  changing

M  [653%]

u  [5117] into .—  [6534c], E'  into  H^f and tf  into  H, to  conform  to  the  present

n

JLfQ

notation. For  by  this  means  it  becomes  nearly — |.  —  -/{H^ — H^^).di', and by [6536A]
substituting  the  value  of  H  [6527],  we  get  the  term,

JUS  Jl|9

••  in  [6537].

•(3338) If  we  compare  [6430  line  2]  with [7352  line  2], we  see  that ^'1  =  1'" [6537a]
[6422J is  of the  order 2771"; moreover ^  =  34352"  [7217]. The  squares and
products  of  tiiese  expressions  being  divided  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  give (f^  =»  1854",
#r=150", r'«=l2". The  other  values  of r'  [7352 lines  3,  4] are  much  less  than [6537el
the  preceding,  so  that  generally  their  squares  may  be  neglected,  as  in  [6537^]. The  terms

depending  on ffl, tfl't produce  in ~, sometermsconnected  with  cos.  (|;^-f~^~'*'0>^'>

which  do  not  contain  v,  as  in  [6540] ;  and  by  integration  they  introduce  into  the
•zpressinn  of  Jr,  the  divisor  p,  which  is  small  in  comparison  with  n  [6025/f,  p]  ;  and
00  this  account  it  becomes  necessary  to  notice  them,  as  in  [6537',  he.].

[6537e]

t  (3.389) The  function  [6538]  is  part  of  [6515],  the  other  part  being  neglected  as  in
[6S&2</] ; and  we  shall  see,  in  [6540],  that  the  retained  part  of  the  function  [6538]

[6539'j

120  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6539]  j.5y^2__.277i.C0S.(7,— 7)  +  7'},

is  equal  to  the  part,  which  is  independent  of  v,  in  the  square  of  the
expression  of  the  latitude  of  m,  above  the  plane  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter.
We  have  given  the  expression  of  the  latitude,  in  [6427]  ;  and  by  developing
its  square,  in  sines  and  cosines  of  v  and  its  multiples;  neglecting  the
squares  and  products  of / and /' ; we shall  find,  for  the  double  of  the

[6539"] part  which  is  independent  of  these  sines  and  cosines,* the  following  value ;

(  +/2-C0S. (;?2^  +  A2 *  )  +  h' COS. (p3^+A3 *')  )

Hence  the  preceding  term  of  -^ produces  the  following  expression ;

contains 6' I, 6'V,  &c. Now  the  latitude  of  the satellite m, above  the  iSxed  plane,  is
represented  by 'y^.sm.(v — 7J  [6332^]  ;  and  this  latitude  would  be 7.sin.(i;  —  7)  [6391],

r6539&l  ^^  *^  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  orbit.  Hence  the  latitude  of  the  satellite  m,  above
the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  is  7i.sin.(t; — q^) — 'y.sm.{v  —  7).  Squaring  this,  and  reducing  the
product  by  [17]  Int.,  neglecting  also  the  terms  containing 2b, we  may  put,

[6539c]  sm,%v — /i)  =i  ; sin.2(v — 7)  =i  ; sin.(i; — 7j).sin.(tj—  7)  =|.cos.(7i— 7)  ;

and  then  by  substitution  we  get,  as  in  [6539],

[6539f^]  Iri-sin-C'^  — ^i)— 7.sin.(v— 7)}2=  iy^2 — y^^^cos.(l^  —  '])  -{-  ^7^.

*  (3390) The  expression  [6427]  becomes,  by  using  the  symbol if  [6324'J,  of  the

following  abridged  form,  which  represents the  latitude s, of  the  satellite m, above  the

orbit  of  Jupiter ;
[6540a]  s  =  {\—l).6'.sm.(v-{-f')-j-^\l.sm.{v-{-pt-}-A).

Squaring  this  expression,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  second  order  in /,  /',  &c., as  in

[6539'J,  we  shall  have,
[65406]  s^=  (1— X)2J'2,sin.2(v+Y')4-2(X— l).a'.sin.(v4-^').2'.Z.sin.(i;  -{- pt  +a).

Reducing  these  products  by  [17]  Int.,  and  then  neglecting,  as  in  the  preceding  note,  the

terms  depending  on 2v, we  get,
[6540c]  sin.2(«-{-V)  =  ^; sin. {v-{-^). sin. (v-\-pt-\- a)  =  ^. cos. {pt-{- A— ^)  ;  &c.

Substituting  these  in  [65406],  and  then  doubling  the  product,  as  in [6539^'], we  obtain

[6540]. This  represents  tlie  part  of y^^ — 277i.cos.(7j — '')+7^ which  is  independent

of  2v  ; and  by  multiplying  it  by 2. 0 , it  produces,  for  the  expression  of  [6538],  the
function  [6541]  ;  omitting  the  quantity,
[6540/]  2(1— X)2.^'2. r^ ==  2 (1— X)2. 1^2. fo]  +  4 (1— X)2. ^L.bt-{-hc. [6405] ;

because  the  constant  part  is  neglected,  as  in  [6505]  ; and  the  part  depending  on t, has
already  been  noticed  in  [6529],  wliere  it  was  found  by  a  different  method.

[6540rf]
[6540«]

Vin  y.  ^  13.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e",  e'«,  &c. ; r«,  /«,  &c.  121

<fr  ^  ^1 1 ^+/,.COS.(/^^+A,|— V)4-/3.COS.(p3^+A3— 1^)i

We  shall  now  consider  the  following  terms,  contained  in  [6516]  ;

— 3.(0).j^-f-2*.y,.cos.(i'+i,)+ri'}.  [6542]

The  expression  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  the  plane  of
Jupiter^s  equator,  is*

x.d'.sin.(i?  +  ^')  + 1  sin,{v+ ft  +  a)  +  1 1.  sm,{v -\-p,t  +  aJ

+  ia.sin.(t?  +p^  +  Aa)  +  h'  sin.(r  +p^-\-  A3)  ;

hence  we  easily  find,  that  this  term  of -^ produces  the  following  ;t

*  (3391) The  latitude  of  the  satellite m, if  it  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator,
is — »'.sin.(r-|-i^)  [6392],  above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter. Subtracting  this  from s  [6427], ^ ^
which  denotes  the  actual  latitude  above  the  same  orbit  [6426'J,  we  obtain  the  real  latitude, [65436^
counted  from  the  equator  of  Jupiter,  as  in  [6543].

[6544a]

f  (3392) The  latitude  of  the  satellite m, above  the  fixed plane,  is 7,.sin.(t> — 7,)
[63326]  ;  but  if  it  move  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator,  its  latitude  will  be  — d.sin.(t>-f-*)
[6322]. Subtracting  this  last  expression  from  the  preceding,  we  get  the  latitude  counted [6544i|
from  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator, y^.s\n.{v — l^-\-Lsva.{v-\-^). This  may  be  derived [6544c]
from  the  expression  [65396],  by  changing 7 into — 6, and 1 into — ^ ', and  by
making  the  same  changes  in  [6539f/],  omitting  also  the  terms  depending  on 20, we  get,

{7,.sin.(t>— '?J+d.sin.(tJ+>i')]2  =  i7,2  +  9;.^.cos.(>r  +  7,)+i«2;  [6544d]

which  represents  the  square  of  the  latitude  of  m above  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator [6544e]
[65446,  &c.]. Now  this  latitude may  also  be  found,  as  in  the  last  note,  by  subtracting
— ^.sin.(«-|-'*^)) which represents the  latitude  of the satellite above the orbit  of
Jupiter,  supposing  the  motion  of  the  satellite  to  be  in  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator,  from [6544/]
the  general  expression  of  the  latitude s  [6427],  above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  [6426] ;  the
difference  is  the  function  [6543],  or X.((.s,\n.{v-\-^)-\-l!.l.sm.{v-{-pt-\-\). The  square [6544g]
of  this  expression  being  substituted  in  the  first  member  of  [6544(2],  then  multiplying  by
6(0), and  transposing  all  the  terms  to  the  opposite  members,  we  get  [6544A]. Reducing
the  second  member  of  this  expression,  as  we  have  done  that  in  [65406],  we  obtain  [6544»].
— 3(0){tf«4-24.y,.cos.(>i'+7j-fy.»j  =  '^(0).{-K.(f.^M\.{v-\-V)-\-7!.Um.{v-\-pt-\-A)\^ [6544*]

=  — 6(0).{iX«.a^-f>^.^.2:/.cos.(pr-j-A— i-')}.  [6544»]

The  first  member  of  [6544A]  is  the  same  as  in  [6542]  ;  and  the  terms  under  the  sign  2^,
in  the  second  member,  are  the  same  as  those  in  [6544]. The  other  term, — 3(0).X'.d^, '• ^
may  be  neglected,  as  in  the  calculation  [6540c,/]  ;  observing,  that  after  substituting  the
value  of  fl' [6405], we  may  reject  the  constant  term — 3(0).X«.«I,«, as  in [6505]; [^^^1
and  the  term — 6(0).X'.'Z«.6^, has  already  been  noticed  in  [6528n].

TOL. IV.  31

122  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cii.

[6544]  i^  =  _6.(0).X.«'.  \  '•<=°=-(i'«  +  ^-*')+  h.COS.(p,t  +  M-^')  )  _

dt  ^  ^ (-\-L.cos.  (p^t + A2  — ^')  +  h'  cos .  (pst + A3 — ^')  )

We  may  also  notice  the  term  of -jj—,  contained  in  [6514  line  3],  namely,

[6545]  im'.n.  I  a'a'.B^'^  +  a'a'.(^^  |  .{7i'^-27/.n.cos.(7/— 70+7i^}.

We  shall  observe  that  71'.  cos.  V — 7i.cos.7i,  and  y/.  sin.i/ — 7i.sin.7i,
[6547c,  d],  are  of  the  order  >^,  which  is  a  very  small  fraction  in  the  theory
of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter.  The  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  two  quantities
gives,  *
[6547]  (7i'.cos.  7/— 7i.  COS.  i.f-}-  (7/.  sin.  7/— 7i.sin.  n,f  =  7i"— 27/.  ?;•  cos. (7/— 70+7'  ;
w^hich  is  of  the  order  x^,  we  may  therefore  neglect  it,  without  any  sensible
error.

Lastly,  we  shall  consider  the  term  of -^  ,  contained  in  [6517],  namely,

r^^^.^-.  1 (  fZ.(7..sin.7,)  .  ^.(7,.cos.7i)  )

[6548]  i.  ^  ,,  COS.  n,. ^'^■j, — /!•  Sin.  1. "-''^^ j  .

It  is  easy  to  prove  that,t

*  (3393) Developing  the  first  member  of  [6547],  it  becomes,  without  reduction,
[6547a] 7/2^  ^(,Qg^2  ^^'_|_sin.2  -^/^  —27/.  7;.  {cos.  7/.  cos.  7i+sin.  -7/. sin.  7^ }  +7i^-  {cos.^ ^j+sin.^ 7 J  ;

and  this  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  in  the  second  member  of  [6547],  by  using  [24,  &;c.]
1 J Int. Subtracting  the  expression  [6413]  from  [64136?],  we  get  [6547c]  ;  and  by  subtracting

[6414]  from  [6413e],  we  get  [6547<?].
[6547c]  7/.  sin .  7/— 7^.  sin.  7,  =  (X— X').'i.  ^p^-f  (X'— X)  .at,

[6547d]  7/.COS.  7/— 7i.cos.  \  =  (X'— X).  'L  -f  (X'— X).  bt

The  second  members  of  these  expressions  being  of  the  order X' — X, the  sum  of  their
[6547e] squares  must  be  of  the  order (X' — X)^ ; which  produces,  in  [6545],  only  terms  of  the

order m'.(X' — X)^ ; and  these may be neglected on account of their smallness

[6829,  7206,  &c.].

t  (3394) The  latitude  of  the  satellite m,  above  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  is  given  in

[65396],  and  in  another  form  in  [6540a]. Now  if  we  put  these  two  expressions  equal  to

each  other,  and  transpose 7.sin.(« — 7), we  shall  get,
[6548a]  7i.sin.(t;  — 70  =  2'./.sin.(«-j-p^-f-A)+(X— l).d'.sin.(tJ+Y')-J-7.sin.(t;  — 7).

[65486] But  from  [21]  Int.  we  have sin.(tJ+6)  =  sin.v.cos.6-f-co3.v.sin.6 ; and  if  we develop

the  four  terms  of  the  equation  [6548a],  by  means  of  this  formula,  we shall  obtain  an
[6548c] equation  which  must  be  satisfied for  all  values  of v; so  that  we  may  put  the  terms

depending  on sin.u separately  equal  to  each  other, and  we  shall  get  [6550]  ;  in like

VIII.  V.  '^  la.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON «•,  e^,  &c. ; y«,  /»,  &c.  123

y,. sin. i|  =  — I.  sin,(pt + a) — /,.  sin.(p,t  -f  a,)— &c. — (x — 1 ). tf,  sin-V-j-y.  sin.  i ;  [6549]
y,.cos.i,  =  /.cos.(f?/-fA)-f /i.cos.(p,r-f-A,)+&c.  +  (x — l).^.cos.V4-r.cos.i ;  [^MO]
hence  the  term  [6548]  produces  the  following  expression  ;  *

^  =  —1  CX—1 )  a' f /''•COS-CpZ-f-A— V)+;>,  /,.C08.(p,^+A,— V)  )  1

Now  if  we  add  together  the  terms  [6541,  6544,  6531],  and  integrate  the
sum,  we  shall  ha?e,  for  the  corresponding  part  of  <Jt>,  the  following
expression ;  f

manner  the  terms  depending  on cos.r, give  [6549],  by  changing  the  signs  of  all  the  terms. [6548</]

We  may  also  observe  that  each  of  the  expressions  of  7,.sin.7i, 7, .cos.  7,  [6549,6550],

contain  two  terms,  depending  on ^,  y, which  are  not  inserted  in  the  values  of yj-sin.-?,,

y,xo8.7, ,  [6499,  6500]. The  reason  for  this  omission  is,  that  their  differentials  produce

only  insensible  quantities  in  [6501,  6502],  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  coefficients

of  /, in  the  values d',  y,  y,  7,  [6927—6929,  4246],  in  comparison  with the  values  of ^^^^-^^

p  [6025/?]. In  fact  the  smallness  of  these  coefficients  enables  us  to  consider ^,  xb',  y,  7,

as  constant  quantities,  as  in  [7220]  ;  and  then  their  differentials  vanish  from  [6501,6502]  j

•o  that  we  may  neglect  them  in  using  the  differentials  of  [6499,  6500]. We  shall  then 1"^^*^J

have,  by  using  the  sign 2', in  like  manner  as  in  [6324'], so  as  to include  the  terms

depending  on p,  _p, ,  ;/, ,  ^3  ;

rf.(y,.8in.7i)  . , / ^  , \  «'-(7,«cos.7,)  , 1  . , , v

-^ 1  =  ^l'.plcos.{pt-\-A)  ;  ^^'^ ''  =  —J/.plsin.ipt+A).

[6548%]
[6551a]

•  (3395)  Substituting  the  values  [6549,  6550, 6548A]  in  [6548],  and  neglecting  terms
of  the  order  Pp,  lyp,  &cc.  on  account  of  their  smallness,  we  find  that  it  is  only  necessary
to  retain  the  terms  containing  ^,  in  [6549,  6550] ;  hence  we  obtain,  for  the  value  of  the
function  [6548],  the  first  member  of  the  following  expression  [6551c].  This  is  reduced
to  the  form  in  the  second  member,  by  using  [24]  Int.

-4.(X-l).d^.i'.p/.[cos.i''.cos.(p/+A)-f  sin.V.sin.(p<-j-A)J  =  -}.(X-1).  tf.  2'.j;/.cos.(/)/-f  ^-^0 [6551c]
This  last  expression  agrees  with  that  in  [6551].

t(3396) The  expression  [6552J b  the  sum  of  the  functions  [6541,6544,6551],

multiplied  by dtj and then integrated. For  the  terms multiplied by 0 ,  in

[6552  lines  1,2],  are  derived  from  [6541]  ;  those  multiplied  by  (0),  from  [6544]  ;  and
those  in  [6552  lines  3, 4],  from  [6551].  It  will  be  seen  in  [6944]  that  there  is  but  one
term  of  the  expression  i«,  or  rather  6p'",  [6552],  which  requires  notice  from  its
magnitude,  and  this  produces  only  — 49",51,  in  the  motion  of  the  fourth  satellite  ;  the
Talues  for  the  other  satellites  being  insensible. We  may  remark  that  in  finding  the i"^***l

[6553a]

[65526]

124 MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

c  ■  , , ) (  - . sin.(;7^+A-^')  +  -^ . sin.(;7i^+Ai-^') )  1

\ Pa  Pa  )

I.  sm.{pt  +  A— ^')  +  ^1-  sin.(i?i^  +  Ai— ^')  |  3

4

[6552]
[6553]

This  part  of  5i?  is  hardly  sensible,  and  we  need  not  notice  it,  except  in  the
fourth  satellite  [6944].  it  must  be  modified  relative  to  the  other  satellites,
in  consequence  of  the  terms  which  depend  upon  the  square  of  the  disturbing
force  [6699,  &c.].

[6553'] If  we  apply  this  expression  to  the  moon,* we  shall  have x  =  1 —

[6554] [6534],  and j?  =  I  o  |>  very  nearly  [6553  J]  ;  hence  we  obtain,t

functions  [6538,  6542, 6545],  from  [6515,  6516,  6514]  respectively,  the  terms  depending
[6552a!] on  the  excentricities e^,  e'^,  &cc.  are  neglected ; and  it  is  evident  that this  can  be  safely

done,  because  the  excentricities  [6057e]  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  factor  4 '
[6552e] [7217],  which  occurs  in  the  terms  [6541,  6544,  6551]  ;  and  these  last  terms,  which  have

the  factor ^', are  hardly  sensible,  as  we  have  already  observed  in  [6552c,  6553].

[6553a] *  (3397) The  retrograde motion  of  the moon's  node  is f  wi^.t; nearly  [4800].

M

[65536] Substituting  ot  =  — ,  [6534c],  and t)  =  n^  [6439],  it  becomes,  according  to  the  present

JJJ2  I [

[6553c]  notation,  f.  —  .^=  0  \'t  [6216];  so  that  if  we  wish  to  investigate  the  value  of  5u
[6552],  corresponding  to  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  moon's  node,  supposing  it  to  be
represented  by  yt  [7133c],  we  shall  have  p^= 0 •  <, or  p= 0  L  as  in  [6554].

[6553rf]

[6554a]

t  (3398) Neglecting /j,  l^^  l^, in  [6552],  it  becomes,  for  the  moon,  as  in  [65546].
Substituting  in  this  the  values 1— X  =  _LJ_  ; ;?=  fo  1,  [6553',  6554],  it  becomes  as

in  [6554c] ; observing  that  the  preceding  value  of X for  the  moon,  gives  very  nearly
X  =  1 [6534d],  which  is  used  in  the  first  term  of  [6554c] ;

[65545]  5t!  =  ^  —6  (0).  -  —4  (l—x).!"^.  -i  -}-  j(l_x)  \  .  d'. lsm.{pt-L.A—^')

V  y  L — I  p  J

[6554c]

===  {—6—4+1;.  J2L.fl^Z.sin.(p<4-A---y)  ==-~V-'-^-^'-?-sin.(p^+A--*')-

Li]  H

This  last  expression  is  the  same  as  in  [6555],  using  the  value  of  jp  [6554].

VIII.  V.  ^  13] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON «■,  e^,  &c. ; y«,  7",  &c.  125

This  expression  agrees  with  that  which  we  have  found  in  [5389] ;  supposing, £"!.••
in  this  case,  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  to  be  very  small.*  [655^]

•(3399)  Instead  of  using  ihe  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  X  =  2y  28"  17',  9  [5355],  if  [6555al
we  suppose  it  to  be  small  and  equal  to  ((  [6360],  we  may  change  sin.X.cos.X  into  sio.4'  [65556]
or  d ;  then  the  expression  of ^  [5389]  will  become,

^  =  -1^.  — — - — - .  -—  .  7.^. sin. (long,  of  the  ascending  node).  [6555c]

Now  we  have  D=  1  [5334,  6082'], g — 1  =  Jm^  [5347 9] ; or,  in  the  present  notation,
by  successive  reductions,  using  [6534c,  6216,  6551],

[6555i]

Substituting  these  values  in  [6555r],  and  changing  a 9  into  9,  also  ap  into  p,
[5333, 5333^,  6044,  6044^],  it  becomes  as  in  [6555e]  ;  and  by  using  (0)  [6216],  it
changes  into  [6555/] ;

iv=sJ^. —  .  — .  sin.(long.  of  the  ascending  node)  [6555e]

y.y

=  -^.  (0) .  ^— .  sin. (long,  of  the  ascending  node).  [6555/]

If  we  subtract  the  longitude  of  the  descending  node  of  Jupiter's  equator,  or,  as  we  may  call [655^]

it,  the  longitude  of  the  vernal  equinox  of  Jupiier, — ^'  [6361],  from  the  longitude v of

the  first  satellite  [6023c], both  longitudes  being  counted  from  the  same  axis x; we  shall  ^

get v-}-^' for  the distance  of  the  satellite  from  that  node,  or  equinox,  counted  according r6555tl

to  the  order  of  the  signs. Again v-\-pt-\-A represents,  as  in [6300  line  2,  6298e],  the

distance  of  the  satellite  from  its  ascending  node  on  Jupiter's  orbit. Subtracting  this  last [655541

expression  from  that  in  [6555t],  we  get  the  distance  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  orbit  of

the satellite  from Jupiter's  vernal equinox, (v-{-^') — {v-\-pt-\-A)  =  — {pt-\-A — >*•'); [6555/]

which  is  to  be  substituted,  for  the  longitude  of  the  node,  in  [6555/*],  and  then  it  becomes,

6v^  —  X^.  (0).  ^  . sin.(/)<-f-A— «r').  [6555m]

The  greatest  value  of  t  [6300  line  1  ;  6298</,  &c.]  is /,  which  may  therefore  be  taken  for

the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite,  instead  of 7 [4813]  nearly. Substituting  this *- ^^

value  of  7, in  [6555m],  it  becomes  as  in  [6555].

TOL. IV.  32

126  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6556]

CHAPTER  VJ.

ON  THE  INEaUALITIES DEPENDING ON  THE  SaUARE  OP  THE  DISTCJEBING  FOECE.

14.  We  have  already  considered,  in  [1215 — 1242'],  one  of  the  most
remarkable  of  these  inequalities.  It  depends,  as  we  have  seen,  upon  the
circumstance,  that,  at  the  origin  of  the  motion,  the  m,ean  longitude  of  the
first  satellite,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,
differed  but  very  little  from  the  semi-circumference ;  and  then  the  mutual
attraction  of  these  three  satellites  has  caused  this  difference  to  vanish.  We
shall  now  resume,  by  another  method,  the  abstruse  theory  of  this  inequality,
in  order  to  give  it  a  further  development,  and  to  determine  its  influence
upon  the  various  inequalities  of  these  satellites.

[65571  ff  ^^^  consider  the  orbits  as  variable  ellipses,  ^  representing  the  mean
longitude  of  the  satellite m, we  shall  have,  as  in  [1195,  6110c],

[6558]  dd^  =  Sandt.dR,

We  shall  notice,  in  the  expression  of  the  motion  of  the  satellites,  only  those
terms  which  depend  on  the  angle  nt — 3n't-\-2n"t-\-s — 3s'-{-2s",  and  have
also  the  divisor  (n — 3n'-{-2n"y;  since  these  terms  may  become  sensible,
on  account  of  the  extreme  smallness  of  this  divisor.  It  is  plain  that
Sandt.dR  contains  terms  depending  on  the  proposed  angle,  which  may
acquire  this  divisor  by  the  double  integrations.  Moreover  such  terms  cannot
be  introduced  into  the  value  of  v,  except  through  the  expression  of  ^  ;  for
it  is  evident,  by  the  inspection  of  the  values  of de,  d^^,  ds,  de',  &c.,  given

[6561]  in  [1258,  1258«,  &c.],  that  they  cannot  produce  such  terms  in  v,  at  least
when  we  carry  on  the  approximation  no  further  than  to  include  the  terms
depending  on  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force.* Therefore,  by  noticing

[6559]

[6560]

[6561a]

*  (3400) We  shall  see,  in  [6567—6569],  that R,  R',  R",  dR,  dR',  dR", do  not
contain  terms  depending  on  the  angle v — 3i>'+2y", connected  with  coefficients  having  the

VUI.  vi.  ^  14.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m«,  mm',  m'«,  &c.  127

only  such  of  these  terms  as  can  acquire  this  divisor,  by  integration,  we
shall  have,

ddv  =  3andt.dR,  [6562]

In  like  manner  we  shall  have,

ddi/  =  Sa'n'.dt.d'R ;  [6563]

ddi/'  =  3af'n".dt.d"R' ;  [6564]

R'  and  R"  being  what  R  becomes  relative  to  the  satellites  m'  and  m"  ;  [65G5]
and  the  characteristics  d,  d',  d",  correspond  respectively  to  the  co-ordinates  [6566]
of  the  bodies  m,  m',  m".  We  must  now  determine  the  terms  of  d/2,  d'R,  j'^*^'
d"R', which  depend  on  the  angle nt—Sn't-\-2n"t+e--.3^-{-2^'.  ^'j^'

The  expressions  of R,  /2',  R', do  not  contain  angles  depending on [6567]
V — 3i7'-r2y"; they  give, by  development,  only terms  depending  on  the
radii  vectores,  the  latitudes,  the  elongations, v — i/,  v — t/',  v' — v", and  the
multiples  of  these  elongations.* But  by  the  substitution  of  the  parts  of [6568]
r,  V,  r',  v',  &c.,  which  depend  upon  the  disturbing  forces, there  may  arise,
in dR,  d'R,  d"R", some  terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing
forces,  depending  on  the  angle ni—3n'(  +  2n"t+s — 3s'-|-2£". We  have
determined,  in  [6116,  6119],  the  perturbations  of  r,  v,  /,  r',  r",  v", and
we  have  seen  in  [6131,  6132],  that  the  principal  inequalities  of  r,  v, arising
from  the  disturbing  forces,  depend  upon  the  angle 2nt — 2n't ; that  those  of
r'  and xl [6139,6140,6148,6149],  depend  upon  the  angles nt — n't and

[6569]

[65616]

divisor n — 3n'-|-2nf', or  its  square. For  similar  reasons  it  will  follow, that  the  terms

r.(^), {r^),  dr,  Sr [6094,  6057,  &c. ;  6049A:, /,  &c.],  in Sv [6060], do  not  contain

terms  depending  on  that  angle,  and  having  that divisor,  even  when  we  notice  quantities [6561c]
of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force. Moreover  if  this  angle  be  found  in

r/— j,  it  will  only  produce  in  fndt.r.(~\ which occurs in 6v [6060J, a term [6561cn

having  the  first  power  of  the  divisor n — 3n'-j-2n", noticing  the  same  order  of  terms.
Hence  it  appears  that  the  only  term  of 6v  [6060],  which  can  produce  this  divisor,  is  that
depending  on  Jf3andt.6R, corresponding  to dd^  [6558]  ; or,  as  it  may  be  written, [6561«]
ddv  sss  3andt.dR, corresponding to  [6562], or  to  the  similar  values  of ddi/, ddi/' [6561/]
[6563,  6564].

•  (3401) This is evident by comparing [949  or  951] with its development
[957  or  101 1],  or  with  the  expressions  in  [1226, 1227],  which  produce,  as  in  [1230],  some ^ ^
tmnt  of  d/?, depending  on  the  angle nt — 3n'<-f-2ii"/-}-i— Si'-f  2i".

128  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  C61.

'2,n't — 2n"t ; lastly  that  those  of  r",  v"  [6164,  6165], depend  on  the  angle

'■  ■'  n't — n"t.  These  inequalities  acquire^  by  integration,  very  small  divisors,
which  render  them  much  greater  than  the  other  inequalities,  so  that  we  need
only  notice  them  in  the  present  question.  Some  of  the  arguments  of  these
inequalities,  when  combined  with  the  elongations  of  the  satellites  and  their

[6572]  multiples,  by  addition  or  subtraction,  may  produce  the  angle  nt — 3n't-\-2n"t.
The  first  of  these  arguments  2nt — 2n't,  and  the  last,  n't — n"t,  cannot
form  it*  by  their  combination  with  the  angles  v — v',  v — v",  v' — v",  and
their  multiples,  as  is  evident  by  using  the  following  mean  values  of  v,  v',  v"
[6091,  &c.],  namely,

[6572']  v  =  nt-\-z', v'  =  n't-\-^', v"  =  n"t + s".

Therefore  in  the  expressions  of  dR,  d'R',  d"R",  ive  may  dispense  ivith  the
consideration  of  the  perturbations  of  the  satellites  m,  m" ;  it  will  suffice  to
notice  those  of  the  satellite  m'.  The  inequality  of  the  satellite  m',  relative
to  the  angle  2n't — 2n"t,  being  combined  by  subtraction  with  the  angle
V — v',  and  its  inequality  relative  to  the  angle  nt — n't  being  combined,  in
like  manner,  with  the  angle 2v' — 2v", will  produce  some  terms  depending

[6574'] ontheanglet nt—3n't-\-2n"t^s—o^'-\-2s".

[6572a]

*  (3402)  Thus  the  angle  '2nt — 2n'^,  being  combined  with  a  mnhiple  of
V — v'  =  nt — n't-\-z — /, will  not  contain n"t, and  will  not  therefore  be  of  the  form  [6572].

[6572a']  The  sanne  angle  27?^ — 2/i'^,  when  combined  with  a  multiple  of  v — v"=ni — n"i-\-e — s",
will  form  an  angle  containing — 2n'^, instead  of — dn't  [6572]. Lastly,  if  tlie  angle

[65726]  2nt — 2n'^  be  combined  with  a  multiple  of  v' — v'\  it  will  contain  'Hut  instead  of  nt,  as
is  required  in  [6572].  In  like  manner  n't — n"<,  being  combined  with  a  multiple  of
V — «', contains  — n%  instead  of  -\-'in"t [6572] ; if  it  be  combined  with a  multi|)le  of

[6572c]  V — v",  it  will  contain  n't  instead  of  — Zn'l  ;  and  if  it  be  combined  with  a  multiple  of
v' — v",  it  will  not  contain  nt  [6572].  Hence  it  appears  that  in  noticing  only  the  terms
depending  on  the  angle nt — 3n't-{-2n"t  [6572],  we  may  neglect  the  inequalities  depending

[6572e]  on  the  angles  2nt — 2n't,  n't — n"t  ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  mry  neglect  the  terms  6r,  6v
[6131,6132],  also  Si",  5v"  [6164,  6165],  with  thnr  diffirentials  d5r,  d(h,  dd/',  div" ;
and  notice ^/,  dV,  d5/,  rf(5i;'  [6148,  6149,  61 5S,  6159],  depending  on 2n't-2n"t, nt-n't.

[6572/]

t  (3403)  The  angle  -2{n't-n"t),  which  occurs  in  [6148,  6149],  being  combined  with
[ °J (v — 2j')j or nt — n't, produces the angle nt — 3«'/-f2n"^. In like  manner, if we

combine  the  angle  {nt-n't)  [6158,6159]  witli  -2(i;-i"),  it  produces  {nt-3n't-\-'2n"t).
[65746] The  terra  of  R depending  on v—v', is  noticed  in [6575,  &,c.] ; and  the term  of  R

depending  on (2©' — 2v")  is  noticed  in  [6595,  &;c.].

VHL  vi.  ^  U.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER «•,««',  t^,  &c  129

We  shall now  consider  the  second  term  of R  [6090], which we shall
represent  by iJ  =  m'.A^^Kcos.(v — t/). If  we  notice  only  this  term  we  shall [6575]
hife/

dR  =  — iii'.^(»>.rfr.sin.(t?~i/)+m'/^\(ir.cos.(tJ— v').  ^6576]

If  we  neglect  the  perturbations  of in, and  the  eccentricities  of  the  orbits,
we  shall  have dr  =  0, and dv  ==  ndt  [6572']  ;  therefore,

dR  =  — m'.  A^^K ndLsin.(v—v')  ;  [d578]

which  gives,  in d/?,  the  following  terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the
disturbing  forces  ;  f

dJK  =  m',A^^Kndt.6vf.Q0s.(v-^')'^m'J—j,ndLir'.s\n.(v^}f).  [6579]

We  have,  in  [6148,  6149],  by  noticing  only  the  perturbations  depending  on
the  angle 2n'i— 2n"/,

^  ^ "*"-'*'-^' .  cos.('2n'<— 2n"^4-2s'— 2/')  :  [6580]

^  =  J'li'ZjN'  •  sin.(2n'/-2n"^+2.'-2e").  [«»1]

Substituting these  values  in [6579],  retaining only  the  terms  depending
on nt — Sn't-\-2n"if and  observing  that n is  very  nearly  equal  to  2n' [6151],

•  (3404) We  have  already  remarked,  in  [60896],  that A^^^ is  a  function  of  r,  r^,  and r^cy^  ,
does  not  contain v. Then  taking  the  differential  of  R  [6575],  relative  to  the  characteristic
d,  which  affects  only r,  v, we  get  the  expression  of  dR  [6576]. Substituting  in  it  the [65766]
values  of  dr^  dv  [6577],  we  get  [6578] ; observing  that  the  variations  relative  to  the
characteristic S, of  the  second  terra  of  [6576],  which  contains rfr, produces  nothing  of [6576c]
the  required  form  or  order  in  [6583]  ; dSr,  d6vy  being  neglected,  as  in  [6572/].

[6579a]

t  (3405) Supposing / to  be  increased  by  the  quantity &/  [6148],  and t/ by  ^
[6149], we  shall find, by Taylor's theorem [617,  &ic.], that A^^^ will become

•^ +("1 — j'^^) nearly; and sin.(i>— r') will  become sin.(t> — t/)— V.C08.(i> — i/).

Substituting  these  in  [6578],  we  obtain  the  additional  terms  of dR  [6579],  depending  on
ir'y  6i/, The  value  of h' is  given  in  [6149],  being  the  same  as  in  [6581]  ; that  of

—  is  deduced  from  [6148],  by  putting,  in  the  first  member, ^=1  [6297c]. The  terms [6579e]

of  i/^,  itf  [6139,6140],  are  neglected,  because  they  do  not  produce,  by  combination,  the [6579<n
angle  [6574']  ;  as  we  have  seen  in  [6572a,  &ic.].

TOL. IV.  33

130

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

1:6583]

[6584]

[6584']

[6585]

[6586]
[6587]

we  shall  have,*

Sandt.dR  =  -

.  dt^.sm.{nt-dn:t-^2n"t-{-  s-SZ-f-  Ss") .

S.{2n'—2n"—JV')
We  have  very  nearly,  as  in  [6145],

Moreover  2n' — 2n"  is  equal  to  n — n'  [6154]  ;  or  at  least,  their  difference
is  so  small  that  it  has  hitherto  been  insensible  by  observation.  Therefore  if
we  substitute,  in  [6583],  the  values  [6572'],

which  can  be  done  in  the  present  instance ;  and  also  the  value
ddv  =  Sandt.dR  [6562],  we  shall  obtain,

ddv
'd^

^m'.m".n^.^.F'G

s\n.{v—Sv'-{-2v").

S,(^n—n'—N')

The  part  of R, relative  to  the  action  of m" upon m, contains only
terms  depending  on  the  angle v — v" and  its  multiples  ;  therefore  it  adds  no

term  to  this  value  of -j^  [6572a',  &c.].

[6583a]

[65836]
[6583c]
[6583(Z]
[6583e]

[6583/]

*  (3406) Substituting n' =  ln  [6151] in  the numerators  of the coefficients of
[6580,  6581],  and  then  their  results  in  [6579],  we  get,

^  (  —4A^^).cos.(v—v').s\n.(2n't—2n"t4-2^—2e'')  )

8.(2n'-2n"-JV0 ^  _2a'.(-^Vsin.(«— t)';.cos.(2n'^— 2n"<+2£'— Ss")  (

Putting  now  v — v'  =  nt — n'^-}-£ — s'  [6572'],  and  reducing  the  expressions  by  means  of
[18,  19]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle  [6574'J,  we  get,

IVTuliiplying  this  by Sandi, it produces the  expression  [6583] ; observing, that  by

neglecting  the  excentricity  we  may  change (-77) into i~T~,)) ^s in [62026,  &;c.].

Substituting  in  [6583]  the  values  G  [6584],  2«'— 2n"  [6584'J,  and  ddv  [6562],  also  the
expressions  [6585],  we  obtain  the  equation  [6586].  IVIuhiplying  this  by  dt^,  and
substituting  [6582],  it  becomes,

Sa.ndtAR

dm'.m".n^^.F'G.dt^
a

8.(n— n'— iV')

.sin.(i;— 3w'+2i;").

VUl.  vi.  ^  14.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m«,  mm',  m'*,  &c.  181

We  shall  noxo  consider  the  term /?' =  m.  i4/'\cos.(t? — vf)^ being  a  part  of [C588]
the  expression  of R\ arising  from  the  action  of  m upon m\ as  we  have
seen  in  [6134'].* If  we  notice  onlj  this  term,  we  shall  have,

-^  j  .  COS.(r— t/).  [6589]

This  function,  being  developed,  contains  the  following  terms ;

^  \ .  n'J^<Jr'.sin.(r— i;')+m.  4«'>.rf«5i/.sin.(v— r')  1

—  OT.^/".n'J/.6t/.cos.(i;— v')  +  w.f -T7- j  .  d6r',cos,{v—vy 2

Substituting,  in  [6590],  the  preceding  values  of <5r',  6v'  [6580,  6581] ;  and
observing  that 7i"  =  Jn'  [6151]  nearly, also  that  we  have  very  nearly,  as ^ ^
in  [6137,  6145],

G  =  2a'.  4(')— o'^.f  ^  j  ;  [6592]

we  shall  obtain,  f

3a'. n'rf/. d'/r.  =  ^"!f/'''''T^Jf '  sin.(r— 3i;'+2i/').  [6593]

16.  (n — n — A)  ^

*  (3407) Comparing  [6090,  6134'j  with  the  definition  of R'  [6565],  we  obtain  the
term  of  R'  [6588J. Its  differential  relative  to  the  characteristic d', which  affects  only ["^®^<»]
r',  t/ [6566], gives  [6589]. Supposing  now / to  be  augmented  by 5/, and v' by [65886]
M\  then  developing  the  second  member  of  [6589],  according  to  the  powers  of  ^/,  5r' [65886'j
[617],  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  first  power,  we  shall  get  [6590]. For [6588c]
the  variations  of  the  three  quantities «4^'\ dv\ sin.(« — v'), which  enter  as  factors  into
the  first  term  of  the  second  member  of  [6589],  produce  respectively  the  three  terras  of [6588rf]
[6590],  containing 5/,  dM,  6v'  ; observing  that  we  may  substitute n'dt for dv  [6585].
Moreover  the  variation  of  <//, in  the  last  term  of  [6589],  produces  the  last  term  of  [6590]. [6588e]
The  variations  of  djiy\ cos.(r — v'), in  the  last  term  of  [6589] ,  are  neglected,  because
they  are  multiplied  by rf/, which  is  of  the  order e', and  may  therefore  be  neglected,  as ["^^'^i/J
in  [6577],  since  they  produce  nothing  of  the  required  form  and  order.

t  (3408) Taking  the  differential  of  [6580],  and  comparing  the  result  with  [6581],  after
iubsliluting  in  the  coefficient 2/i' — 2/»"  =  n — n'  =  n'  [6151,  6151],  we  get  the  first  of l**^^^l
the  expressions  [6593c]. Then  taking  the  differential  of  [6581]  and  comparing  it  with [65936]
[6580],  after  making  similar  substitutions,  we  get  the  second  of  the  expressions  [6593r],

^  =  J  n'dtM  ;  d.y  =  — 2n'rf/.  ^ .  [qs93c]

Substituting  these  expressions  in  the  two  lines  of  the  second  member  of  [6590],  they

132  . MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

We  may  here  observe,  that,  by  comparing  the  two  expressions  of  3andt.dRi

Sa'n'dt.d'R'  [6sSS,  6593],  we  shall  obtain,*
[6594]  m.dR  +  m'.d'R'^O;

which  is  conformable  to  what  we  have  found  in  [1202].
[6595]  The  part  of  R'  relative  to  the  action  of  m" upon m',  contains  the  term

R'^m",A'^''Kcos.(2v'—2v")  [6090,6146]. Noticing  only  this  term,  and

[6593rf] produce  the  two  lines  of  the  value  of d'R'  [6593e]  respectively ;  and  by  using  the  value
of G  [6592],  it  becomes  as  in  [6593/].

d'i.  =  -!!!:^/fsin.(.-.').f-a'f^')  +  2«'.^<»|

[6593e]

[6593/]  =—^^.G.y-^.s\a.{v—D')  +  iSt/.cos.{v—<,')'i.

m".  n'.  F'
Now  if  we  put  for  brevity B=  _  , ' ' — rz, and  use  the  values  of  v,  v\  v"  r6572'1,
[6593g]  '^  2n'-2n"—JV  •■  ■"

we  shall  find  that  the  expressions  [6580,  6581]  may  be  put  under  the  following  forms ;

[6593A]  ^=— JJ5.cos.(2t;'— 2u")  ;  8v'  =  B.s\n.{Qv'—2v").

Multiplying  the  first  of  these  equations  by  sin.(« — o'),  and  the  second  by  |cos.(r — r');
then  taking  the  sura  of  the  products,  and  reducing  successively,  by  means  of  [22]  Int.,
we  get,

[6593Jk] — .  sin.  (»-«)') -|-J5t)'.cos.(v-D')  =  -^B.  { sin.  (r-i;')  .cos.  (2r'-2t>")-cos.  (»-©') .  sin.(2» -2»")  }
[6593Z]  =  -^jB.sin.  (w-3i;'+2t;").

Substituting  this  in  [6593/],  and  then  multiplying  by 3a'.n'dt, we  get  the  first  of  the
[6593m] expressions  [6593n]. Re-substituting B  [6593^], n'=^n  [6151],  and 2n-2n"—n-n!
[6593a], we  finally  get [6593o],  which  is  the  same  as  [6593].

[6593n]  Ba'.n'dt.d'R  =  lm.n'KBG.dt^sm.{v—Sv'-i-^v")  =  |"Jj^^^^^^ .  sin. («— 3v'+2t/')
[65930]  =  ie,^^_^._^.^  .  sm.{v-3v'+2v").

[6594al *(3409) Multiplying  [6583/]  by g-^, and  [6593]  by ~t  =  ^t  ""^''^^
[6151] ; we  find  that  the  second  members  of  these  products  are,

[6594^]  T  8.(„-n--;V0.a- "  ^■n-(»-3'^+2«")  5

and  as  they  have  different  signs,  their  sum  vanishes  ;  hence  the  sum  of  the  terms  in  the  first
[6594c] jjjgjjjijgfg  Qf  tjje  game  products,  becomes m.diZ -j- m'.  d'jR' =  0, as  in  [6594].

[65*7]

VIII.  vi.  ^  14.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m«  mm',  m^,  &c.  133

taking  its  differential  relative  to d', which  only  afiectf r',  tf  [6566],  we
shall  have,

d'/r  =  — 2m".^'<^\rfi/.sin.(2r'— 2t?")+i»".<ff^/^jJ^^  .  cos.(2t/— 2»").  [6596]

This  function,  being  developed,  contains  the  following  terms  ;*

d'R'  =  -2m"/ ^^j  .  n'J/.ir'.sin.(2t/— 2i;")— 2m".^'<^<for'.sin.(2t;'— 2»")

—4m". n'di.  A^^'Kn/, cos.(2r'— 2'/)  +  m".(—-j .  (/ar'.cos.(2o'— 2tj").

e  have, by  noticing only  the action of the satellite m upon m',

6139,  6140],  t

a/  m.n'.G  J

7  =  -  2.(n-n-~.JV-)  •  COS.(n^-n^4-e-0  ;  [6598]

_  _/  /J

^  =  n-r^L-N'  •  sin.(n/— n'/+£ — £')•  [6599]

'hen,  by  observing  that n'  =  2n" nearly  [6151],  we  shall  have,  with  a
losiderable  degree  of  accuracy,  by  [6147],

F'  =  -4a'.  J'<=>  —a".  ("^^  ;  [6600]

nee  we  obtain, J

[6597o]

•  (3410) The  expression  [6597]  is  deduced  from  [6596], in  the  same  manner  as
[6590]  is  obtained  from  [6589],  in  [6588a—/];  namely,  by  Bnding  the  increment  of
[6596]  from  the  change  of r^,  tf, into /+^>  v'-\-tv', respectively; neglecting,  as  in [6597i]
[6S88/^,  the  two  terras  having  the  factor dr^.

it
t  (3411) Substituting —  =  1 [6579c]  in  the  first  member  of  [6139],  it  becomes  as

in  [6598]. The  value  of hv'  [6140]  is  the  same  as  in  [6599]. Substituting T<"==Jn'- ^^^^'^
[6151]  in  [6147],  it  becomes  as  in  [6600].

X  (3412) The  computation  of  [6601]  from  [6597],  is  similar  to  that  of  finding  [6593]
firoro  [6590],  as  in  [6593a— o]. In  the  first  place,  the  differentials  of  y,  W  [6598, 6599], t^^^*]
being  compared  with [6599,  6598]  respectively,  give  the  same  results  as  in [6593c].
Substituting  these  values  in  the  two  lines  of  the  second  member  of  [6597],  they  produce [66016]
respectively  the  two  lines  in  the  second  member  of  the  following  expression  ;

d'iJ'  =  m".n'</<.  3.8in.(2i/— 2p").  \  —2a'.('^')-{-4jT'^  I
+m''.nV/.air'.cos.(2r'— 2t;").  \  —4A^^^-^W-C^^)  ]  -
VOL. IT.  34

134

[6601]

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

3a'.n'dt.d'R'  =  -— — — -  .  sm.(v—3v'-\-2v").

32.(71—11— N')  ^  ' '^

[Mec.  Cel.

.(n— n'— iV')

Connecting  these  two  terms  of 3a'.n'dt,d'R'  [6593,  6601],  we  get,  as  in
[6601m],

[6602]

ddv'

9m.m".n\F'G

- .  sm.{v—Sv'-]-2v"),

S2.{n—n'—N')

It  now  remains  to  consider  the  value  of  d"R". The  part  of  R", depending
[6603] on 2i;'— 2i;"  [6574],  is  as  in  [6595,  &c.], R"  =  m',A"^''Kcos,(2v'—2v");
and  by  noticing  only  this  term,  we  shall  have,

[6604]  ^"ji»  ^  2m'.A'^^\ dv'\sm.(2v'—2v'')+m',dr''/~^  .  cos.(2i?'— 2y").  •

This  function  contains  the  following  terms  ;  *

m.  n'.  G

[6601d] If  vve  now  put,  for  brevity, B'= '""''^j^, , and  use  the  values  of v,  v',  v"  [6572'],  we
shall  find  that  the  expressions  [6598,  6599],  may  be  put  under  the  following  forms ;

[6601e]
[6601/]

[6601g]

[66OI/1]
[6601t]
[660U]

[6601Z]
J660lm]

[6605a]
[6605&]

—  =  — iB'.cos.(u— r')  ;  6v' =  B'.sm.{v—v').

Multiplying  these  values  by  sin.(2y' — 2u"),  cos.(2«' — 2v"),  respectively;  reducing  the
products  by  [18, 19]  Int.,  and  retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle  v-Sv'-f-Si;",
■we  get,

^ .  sin .  (2t;'-2i''0  =iB'.  sin .  {v-3v'-\-2v")  ; Sv'.cos.{2i/-2v")  =  |  ^,sin.  (y-3v'-\-2v") .

Substituting  these  last  expressions  in  [6601c],  and  making  successive  reductions,  using  F'
[6600],  we  get,

d'R'=^m\n\dt.'^i.[-2a\(^-^)  +  AA'^^^^^

=:m".n'.dt.  -^  .  B\sm.(v—3v'-}^2v").
4a'  ^  '

Multiplying  this  last  expression  by 3a'n'.dt, and  re-substituting  the  value  of  B'  [660  l^j,

also n'^=  —  .n^ nearly  [6151], we get [6601]. The sum of the two parts of

8

3af.n'dLd'R'  [6593,  6601],  being  taken  and  substituted  in  [6563],  gives,

9m.m".n3.  F'  G.'dt^

ddv'  =  3a'n'.dt.d'R'  =
Dividing  this  by dl'^, we  get  [6602].

32.(n-n'— A*0

.  sin.(i;— 3u'+2«").

*  (3413)  We  have,  in  [6595],  R'  =  m".A'^^\cos.(2v'—2v");  and  as  A'^^>  is  the
same  for  both  satellites  w',  m"  [6466£/],  we  shall  have  R"  =  m'.A"-^\cos.(2v'—2v"),  as
in  [6603], The  differential  of  this  expression,  relative  to  the  characteristic d", which

Vni.  vi.  $  14.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m«,  mm',  m'»,  kc,  136

d"/?"  =  2m'.n'dt.6r'/^\ .  sm,(2v'—2i/')i-4>m\A^'*\n"dt.6v'.cos.(2v'—2i/'), [6605]

Substituting the  parts  of 6v' and i/, depending  on  the  angle nt — n't
[6598,  6599],  observing  also  that  we  have  very  nearly n'  =  ^n, n"  =  ^n  ^

[6151],  we  obtain,

Sa'\n"dtA"R"  =  —  e^^^_^._^.^  •  ^  .  sin.(iJ-3i/4-2t/').  [6606]

Hence  we  easily  find,  that,  by  noticing  only  the  reciprocal  action  of m'
upon m", we  shall  have,*

m'. d'R'  +  m".  d"R"  =  0  ;  [WOT]

which  agrees  with  [1202]. Therefore  we  have,t

rfiT  ^ 64.(n-n--A-)  '  7  '  Sin.(t^-3t/+2.  ).  [6608]

affects  only /',  r", gives  [6604]. Supposing / to  be  increased  by 5/, and p' by [6605c]
V, we  find  that  the  expression  [6604]  will  be  increased,  by  the  terms  in  the  second
member  of  [6605],  as  is  evident  by  proceeding  as  in [6588a,  &tc.], and  neglecting  the '• ^
terms  multiplied  by d/', as  in [6588/]  ; also  those  depending  on d6/', d6v'\ as  in
[6572/J  ; and  finally  putting dv"  =  n"dt  [6572']. Now  if  we  substitute,  in  [6605],  the
values  [660le],  we  shall get [6605/]. Reducing  the  products  by  [18, 19]  Int., and t^^^^l
retaining  only  the  terms  depending  on  the  angle v — 3u'-}-2t;", we  get  [6605^]  j  and  by
using  r,  B'  [6600,  6601J],  we  obtain  [6605A].

d"/r'  =  m'.i^'dt.B.\—a'. (^)  .  cos.(t;-u').sin.(2t?'-2i;")+4^'^».sin.(r-i,').cos.(2t;'-2t/')? [6605/]
=  m'.vl'dt.B.S^l  '^'(^da')'^'^'^'''\  '  sin(^-3'^+2«;")  [6605^]

=  -.m'.n"dt.B.  ^ .  s\n.{v-3v'+2v")  =  -  ;;;';;^X^^!;;^' .  sin.(t;-3«'+2t/').  [6605*]

Multiplying  this  by 3a".WJt, and  substituting,  in  the  second  member  of  the  product,  the

values n'  =  \n, n"  =  in  [6605'],  we  obtain  [6606].  ^^^^^

•  (3414) Muliiplying  [6601]  by ^-^  =  ^-^ ;  and  [6606]  by  ^^r^  =  5^^ ; (ggOT,]
we  find  that  the  second  members  of  the  products  become,

tnd  being  of  different  signs,  their  sum  vanishes  in  the  second  member,  and  the  first  member
of  the  sum  becomes  as  in  [6607].

t  (3415) Substituting  [6606]  in  [6564],  and  dividing  by dfi, we  get  [6608].  [660ea)

136  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cd.

Now  if  we  use  the  following  values  of k,  9,

[6610]  ' <p  =  v—3v'  +  2v";

we  shall  obtain,  by  connecting  together  the  expressions  of  — ~, —,

^^  [6586,  6602,  6608],  the  following  equation  ;  *

[6611]  — ^  =  k.  n^.  sin.  <p .

15. We  may suppose k and n^ to  be constant  in  this  equation,
because  their  variations  are  very  small  ;  then,  by  integration,  we  obtain,t

[««12]  "^^  -  v/c-2k.n^.cos.,  '

[6612'] c being  an arbitrary constant quantity. The  different  values  which c

the  value may  have,  gives  rise  to  the  three  following  cases ;

*  (3416) Multiplying  [6602]  by —3, also  [6608]  by 2, then  adding  the  products

ddv—3ddv'-]-2ddv"

[66II0] to  the  equation  [6586],  we  find  that  the  first  member  of  the  sum  is

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form —  ,  by  using (p  [6610]  ; being  the  same
[66116]

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form — ■ ,  by  using 9  [6610]  ; being  the  same  as  the  first

dt

member  of  [6611]. Moreover  the  second  member  of  this  sum,  by  using  the  value  of k
[6609],  becomes  equal  to k7i^.sin.(i; — 3v'-{-2v")^kn^.sm.(p, as  in  [6611].

t  (3417)  The  equation  [661 1]  is  the  same  as  [1235],  changing  V  into  9,  and  /3
[6612a]  jj^jQ  j^  jjg  integral,  found  as  in  [1236a],  is  the  same  as  in  [6612].  From  this  equation
[66126]  we  may  deduce  the  same  results  as  in  [1236',  &tc.] ;  and  the  three  cases  relative  to  the
value  of  c,  given  in  [6613, 6615, 6617],  correspond  respectively  to  [1236',  1237"",  1237^'].
We  may  observe  that  the  symbols  c,  k,  are  printed  in  the  Roman,  instead  of  the  Italic
type  used  by  the  author,  to  distinguish  them  from  c,  7c  [602U',  x].  For  the  same  reasons
we  have  placed  a  mark  below  his  symbol  tu,  in  [6620,  he],  to  distinguish  it  from  zs
[6024^].  We  may  also  remark  that  the  equation  [661  I]  will  not  be  altered,  if  we  change,
[6612c]  in  [6610],  (pinto  — 9,  putting  9  =  — (v — 3v'-\-'2v")  ;  because  this  will  merely  change
the  signs  of  both  members  of  [6611],  without  altering  the  form  or  value  of  the  equation ;
so  that  instead  of  the  expression  [6610],  we  may  put,  more  generally,

9  =  ±  (v— 3r'-|-2t;")  , or ±  9  =  v—3v'-{-2v".
Hence  we  see  that  the  sign  of  9 is  indeterminate  in  the  differential  equation  [6611],  and
'■ ^ the  same  occurs  in  its  integral  [6612,  Sic]

[6612c]

[6612rf]

[6612c]
[6612/]

[6612g-]

VIII.  vi.  ^  15.]  INEQUAUTIES  OF  THE  ORDER m>,  mm',  m'«,  &c.  137

First, If  the  constant  quantity c, neglecting  its  sign,  exceed 2kn', it [6613]
must  necessarily  be />o*i/ire. Then  the  angle ±9  will  increase  indefinitely, -„,^

[ool3j

and  may  become  equal  to  one,  two,  three,  &c.  semi-circumferences.

Second. If  the  constant  quantity c, neglecting  its  sign, be  less  than [6614]
2kfi', k  being  positive,  the  radical y/c— 2kna.cos.9 will  become  imaginary, 2^
when ±9 is  equal  to  nothing,  or  to  one,  two,  &c.  circumferences. In  this ^■'^oo*
case  the  angle 9 mil  merely  oscillate  about  the  semi-circumference,  which [6615]
will  represent  its  mean  value.

Third. U  the  constant  quantity c, neglecting  its  sign,  be  less  than [66I6]
2kii', k  being  negative,  the  radical /c— ^kn^.cos.? will  become  imaginary, '"»|^«^
when db? is  equal  to  an  uneven  number  of  semi-circumferences. In  this
case  the  angle 9 will  oscillate  about  zero,  so  that  its  mean  value  is  nothing.  ^

The  case  of  c  =  ±  2kn^,  may  be  supposed  to  be  included  in  the
preceding  forms.  We  may,  moreover,  consider  the  probability  of  this  case
as  infinitely  small.  We  shall  now  see  which  of  these  cases  really  obtains,
in  the  system  of  these  satellites.

We  shall  find,  in  [7270,  7272],  that  k  is  positive;  therefore  the  third
ease  [6616]  must  be  excluded;  and  the  angle  9  must  either  increase
indefinitely  [6613'],  or  oscillate  about  the  semi-circumference  [6615]. If

Symbol

we  put,  w

9  =  «'±«;  [6(»0]

t  being  the  semi-circumference  whose  radius  is 1  ; we  shall  have,*

dt-=. ,'^  [6621]

[6618]

[6619]

[GHaUb]
[6633c]

♦  (3418)  The  equation  [6621]  is  easily  deduced  from  [6612],  by  the  substitution  of  [6633o]
[6620].  Now  if  the  angle  -a^  increase  indefinitely,  the  limits  of  c  -f  2k/i'.cos.«^  will  be
c-f-2kn*,  c — 2kn';  and  it  is  evident  that  c -|- 2kn'*.cos.w^ ,  will  sometimes  become
negative,  unless  c  be  positive  and  greater  than  2kn';  but  if  c — 2kn'.cos.ra^  be
negative,  the  denominator  of  the  expression  of  dt  [6621],  will  become  imaginary,  and  w^
will  not  increase  with  t.  Hence  we  evidently  see  that,  if  vt^  increase  indefinitely  with
t,  we  shall  have  c  positive  and  greater  than  2kn^,  as  in  [6621'] ;  consequently  the
radical v^c-f-3kni).co«.f3, , will  exceed v/3kn« or n.^/Sic, while «^ varies  from 0° to [6633</]

KXF; and  within  these  limits  we  shall  always  have,  from  [6621], dt<^—y^, whose

intesnl  gives <<^j;^  [6622]. Putting w,  =  i«', we  get <<^jj^,  asin[6623];
bcoee  we  infer,  as  in  [6624],  that «^  or 9  [6620],  does  not  indefinitely  increase,  so  that
TOL. IT.  35

[6633e]

138

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[6621'1

[6622]

[6623]
[6624]

[6625]

Remarka-
ble proof
of  the
mutual
attraction

of
Jupiter 'a
latellites.

[6626J
[6627]

If  the  angles ±9 and «^ increase  indefinitely, c will  he  positive,  and
greater  than 2kn^ ; hence  we  shall  have,  in  the  interval  comprised  between

7tf^  =  0, and OT  equal  to a  quarter  of  the circumference, dt<i — y^,

consequently  t  <  — ^ . Therefore  the  time t, which  is  required  for  the

angle «^ to  increase  to  a  quarter  of  the  circumference,  will  be  less  than

— y=. We  shall  see,  in  [7274],  that  this  time  is  less  than  two  years.

Now  since  the  discovery  of  the  satellites,  the  angle  zs^  has  always  appeared
to  be  insensible,  or  extremely  small ;  so  that  it  does  not  increase  indefinitely
[6613'].  Therefore  it  must  oscillate  about  zero,  making  its  mean  value  equal
to  nothing  [6622g-].  This  is  confirmed  by  observation,  and  furnishes  a  new
and  remarkable  proof  of  the  mutual  attraction  of  Jupiter^ s  satellites.

Hence  we  may  deduce  several  important  consequences. The  following
equation,  which  is  deduced  from  [6610,  6620],

v—3v'-ir2v"  =  -^ziz^^,
gives,  by  putting  the  quantities,  which  are  not  periodical,  separately  equal
to  nothing,*

nt—3n't-{-2n"t-{-  s_3s'+2s"  =  *.

[6622/] it  does  not  come  under  the  form  in  case  1,  [6613']  ; and  we  have  seen  that  it  does  not
come  under  case  3,  [6619] ;  therefore  we  are  restricted  to  case  2,  [6615],  in  which  the
^ ^■' mean  value  of cp is  equal  to *  ; or,  in  other  words, zi^  [6620] is  equal  to  zero,  as  in
[6622/1] [6624], and c<2kn2  [6614].

[6628a]
[6628&]

[66286']

[6628c]
[6628d]
[6628e]

[6628/]

*  (3419)  The  longitudes  v,  v',  v",  are  composed  of  the  mean  values  [6572'],  the
terms  depending  on  the  libration  [6652 — 6654],  and  the  periodical  terms.  Now  if  we
neglect  these  periodical  terms,  and  substitute  the  others,  in  the  first  member  of  [6626] ;
then  put  the  terms  depending  on  the  libration  in  the  first  member  equal  ±  «^ ,  as  in
[6620],  we  shall  get,  from  the  remaining  terms,  the  equation  [6627].  This  equation  may
be  put  under  the  form  [nt—v^t-^-z — /) — 2.{n't — n"^  +  e' — s")  =  ir,  which  is  used
hereafter.  This  equation  holds  good  for  all  values  of  t ;  and  if  we  put  ^  =  0,  it  becomes
g — 3s'-j-2s"=='r,  as  in  [6639].  Subtracting  this  from  [6627],  we  get,  for  all  values  of
t,  nt — 3n'i-{-'2n"t  =  0;  dividing  this  by  t,  we  obtain  the  equation  [6628].  The
equation  [6628d]  may  be  put  under  the  form  ni-{-'2n"t  =  Sn't,  as  in  [6629] ;  and  the
equation  [6627]  corresponds  to  the  theorem  in  [6630].  The  first  member  of  [6627]  may
be  put  under  the  form  2.{7i"t — n^+s" — s) — 3.{n't — nt-\-^ — s)  ;  and  by  substituting  the
values  [6240/?],  it  becomes 2.(0" — 0) — 3.(0' — 0)  =0— 3e'+20"  ; hence  the  equation

VUI.  vi.  ^  15.]  INEQUAUTIES  OF  THE  ORDER m»,  mm',  m'»,  &c.  139

Hence  we  deduce,

n-^Sn'  4-  2n"  =  0.  [6628]

From  these  equations  we  obtain  the  following  important  results. First. Jj'jr^
The  mean  motion  of  the  first  satellite^  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  exactly
equal  to  three  times  that  of  the  second. Second. The  mean  longitude  of  the
first,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,  is  always ^ ^
exactly  equal  to  two  right  angles. The  same  result  holds  good  relatively  to t^^^^l
the  mean  synodical  longitudes. For  in  the  equation,

nt^Sn't + 2n"t + s  —3/ + 2s"  =  *  [6627] ,  [6631]

we  may  refer  the  angles  to  an  axis  moving  according  to  any  law,  since  the
position  of  that  axis  vanishes  from  this  equation  ; therefore  we  may  suppose  ^

that nt-\-s, n't-\-^, n"t-\-^', denote  the  mean  synodical  longitudes.*

Hence  it  follows  that  the  three  first  satellites  cannot  all  be  eclipsed  at  the The  thm
same  time. For nt-{-s, n't-\-fl, n"t-\-^', being  supposed  to  express  the

fim
MtellitM
cannot  be
eclipted
At  tba

[6627]  may  be  put  under  the  following  form,  which  is  used  hereafter,  in  [7391,  &c.] ;

e— 3e'-f  2e"  =  *  =  200°.  [6628^]

We  may  remark  that,  in  substituting the  numerical  values  of e,  e',  e", in  the  first
member  of  [6628jf],  it  may  be  necessary  to  add  or  subtract  a  circumference  400°,  or  a L"®*^!
multiple  of  400°, to  make  it  equal  to  the  second  member  200°. This  will  be  evident
by  using  the  values  of e,  e,  e", given  in  [7496,  7440,  7386],  which,  by  neglecting  the [6628t]
ninutes  and  seconds,  are  nearly  expressed  by

©  =  16°  +  /.82583°  ;  e'  =  346°  +  ^41141°  ;  e"  =  ll°-f  ^ 20420°  ;  [6628A]

being  the  number  of  Julian  years  elapsed  since  the  epoch  of  1750  [7284]. Now  if
=  0, we  shall  have e=16°, e'  =  346°, e"=ll°; substituting  these  in  the  first [^>®28Z]
mber  of  [6628^],  it  becomes 16°— 1038° +  22°  =  —1000°  ; which,  by  adding  three
circumferences,  or  1200°, becomes  equal  to  the  second  member  of  [6628jgf] . Again,  if
we suppose ^  =  0,002, the preceding values [6628it] become e  =  181°,16; [(jcasml
^  =  28°,28; e"  =  5l°,84; hence e-3e'-f  2e"=  181°,16-84°,84-|-103°,68=200o,
as  io  [6628^]. Lastly,  if  <  =  0,005, the  expressions  [6628A:]  are  very  nearly  represented ^ "^
by e=28S9j e'=151°,7; e"==113°,l  ; consequently,

o— 3e'+  2e"  =  28°,9— 455°,1  -|-  226°,2  =  —200°.  [6628o]

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  second  member  of  [6628^]  may  have  the  sign  dc  ;  or  if  wo
put  t  for  an  integral  number,  positive  or  negative,  including  zero,  the  equation  [662dg']
may  be  more  generally  expressed  in  the  following  manner ;

e— 3e'-l-2e''  =  200°-f  400°.  t .  [6628j]

[6628p]

•(3420) This  is  fully  demonstrated  in  [1240",  1240a,  6],  and  it  is  unnecessary  to r^j^jj^^-i
make  any  further  remarks  on  this  subject.

140  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

[6633] mean  synodical  motions,  we  shall  have,  in  the  simultaneous  eclipses  of  the

first  and  second  satellites, nt  +  s and n't  -f-  s' equal  to *  ; so  that  the

equation  [6631]  becomes,
[6634]  2/1"^  + 2s"  =  3*;

and  then  the  mean  longitude  of  the  third  satellite  will  be  equal  to ^tf.
In  the  simultaneous  eclipses  of  the  first  and  third  satellites, nt  +  s and

n"t-\-z" are  equal  to *; and  [6631]  becomes,
[6635]  3?i'^  +  3£'  =  2* ;

so  that  the  mean  synodical  longitude  of  the  second  satellite  is f  ■«'. Lastly,

in  the  simultaneous  eclipses  of  the  second  and  third  satellites, n't  +  s' and

nl't-^-z" are  equal  to •»• ; hence  [6631]  gives,
[6636]  nt-\-s==2'!f.

The  mean  synodical  longitude  of  the  first  satellite  is  then  nothing, and

[6636'] instead  of  being  eclipsed,  it  may  produce  upon  Jupiter  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.

We  have  seen,  in  [6160,  6161],  that  the  two  principal  inequalities  of  the

second  satellite,  which  are  produced  by  the  action  of  the  first  and third
[6637] satellites,  are,  by  means  of  the  preceding  theorems,  reduced  to  one  single

term,  producing  the  great  inequality,  discovered  by  observation,  in  the  motion
- of  the  second  satellite. Therefore  these  two  inequalities  will  always  be

united,  and  there  is  no  fear  that  they  will  be  separated  after  the  lapse  of

many  ages.

Were  it  not  for  the  mutual  action  of  the satellites, the  tivo equations

[6628,  6628c],
[6638]  n—3n'+2n"  ==  0  ;

[6639]  £  — 3/  +  2s"  =  *  ;

would  have  no  connection  with  each  other.  We  must  therefore  suppose,  at  the
origin  of  the  motion,  that  the  epochs  and  mean  motions  of  the  satellites  have
been  so  arranged  as  to  satisfy  these  equations,  ivhich  is  extremely  improbable  ;
and  even  in  this  case,  the  smallest  force,  such  as  the  attraction  of  the  planets

[6639']  '  .  .

and  comets,  would  finally  produce  a  change  in  these  relations.  But  the
reciprocal  action  of  the  satellites  removes  this  objection,  and  gives  stability  to
the  preceding  relations.  For,  by  what  has  been  said,  we  have,  at  the  origin
of  the  motion,*

[6640a]

*(3421) The  differentials  of [6620,6610] give ±d7S,  =  d(p==  dv-^dv'-\-2dv" ;
and  from  [6621, 6626],  we  have,

VIII.  vi.  ^  15.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER •••,  «»',  «",  iic.  Ul

^  ^^  'iidt'^^'^^^'^V^  -2k.cos.(.-3.'+20 ;  [6640]

c being  less  than 2kn'  [6622A]  ; therefore, to  render  the preceding [6641]
theorems  accurate,  it  is  only  necessary  to  have,  at  the  origin  of  the  motion,

the  function — r r  H t-  » comprised  between  the  limits,*  *- *

ndt ndt ndt  '^

+  2k*.sin.(Ji— |s'+«")  [6649]

— 2k*.sin.(Je— Is'  +  O;  ' [6643]

and  it  will  suffice  to  ensure  the stability of  the  system,  if  the  foreign
attractions  should  always  leave  the  preceding  function  within  these  limits.

We  know,  by  observation,  that  the  angle n is  very  small ;  therefore  we
may  suppose cos.a  =  1 — ^-a^  [44]  Int. We  shall  now  put.

[6644]

p^ being  arbitrary,  because  it  contains  the  arbitrary  constant  quantity c  ; [6645']
then  the  diflferential  equation  [6621]  gives,t

dtrf«,  =  ±</t\/{c-j-2kn».ros.(r— 3»'+2t/'— *)!  =±dt.^{c—2knKcos.{v^3i/-\-2v")\, [66404]
Putting  these  two  expressions  of ±  dra^ equal  to  each  other,  and  then  dividing  by ndt^
we  get,

^-  ^+^='^^U-^^'''^'('-^'-^^'  )  \  '  [6640c]

and  at  the  origin  of  the  motion,  when <  =s  0, we  have c  =  s, t)'  =  /, v"  =  s"  [eSTS'J  ; [6640<f]
hence  it  becomes  as  in  [6640].

•  (3422) Putting,  for  brevity,  the  function  [6641'],  or  the  first  member  of  [6640]
equal  to <ff, we  shall  obtain  [6641c],  by  taking  the  square  of  the  equation  [6640]. Now *■ •'
we  have cos.(s— 3s'4-2«")  =  1 — 2.sin."(Js — Js'-f-s")* f'^^"™ [IJ  ^"'- Substituting  this  in [66416]
[6641c],  we  obtain  [664U].

9"  =  -^  — 2k.cos.(^-3«'4-20  [6641c]

n3
c— 2kna

f  4k.sin.«(Ji— |i'4-i") ;  [6641rf]

and  since c — 2kn*  is  negative  [6641], we  shall  have 9'*<^4k.sin."(Ji — J«'-f-«")» or [6641e]
^'<2k».sin.(Ji  — ^Z+i")* "  »n  [6642,  6643].

t  (3423)  The  equation  [6646]  is  deduced  from  [6621],  in  the  same  manner  as  [1239]  [6646a]
b  derived  from  [1238];  observing,  that  by  changing  ^  into  k,  and  «  into  «^,  in  [66466]
[1838],  it  becomes  as  in  [6621] ; and  by  making  the  same  changes  in  [1239],  we  get

VOL.  IV.  36

142  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Ca.

[6646]  vs^==^^.sm.(nt.^k  +  A);

A being  another  arbitrary  constant  quantity.

The  motions  of  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter  being  determined  by  twelve

[6647]  differential  equations  of  the  second  order,*  their  theory  ought  to  contain
twenty-four  arbitrary  constant  quantities.  Four  of  these  correspond  to  the
mean  motions  of  the  satellites, or,  in  other  words,  to  their  mean  distances ;

[6647'J  four  correspond  to  the  epochs  of  the  mean  longitudes ;  eight  depend  on  the
excentricities  and  the  aphelia  ;  and  eight  others  upon  the  inclinations  and
nodes  of  the  orbits.  The  preceding  theorems  [6638,  6639]  establish  two
relations  between  the  mean  motions  and  the  epochs  of  the  mean  longitudes

[6648]  of  the  three  first  satellites,  which  reduces  these  twenty-four  arbitrary
quantities  to  twenty-two.  To  supply  this  deficiency  the  two  new  arbitrary
quantities |3^, A, are  introduced  into  the  expression  of «^  [6646].

If  we  resume  the  equation [6586] and  substitute in  it  the  following
expression,  which  is  deduced  from  [6610,  6620,  6646],t

[6649]  v—Sv'-{-2v"  =  ^  +  ^^ ,sm.(nt.\/k  +  A)  ;

[6646c]

'a^  =  'k.sm.(nt.\/k-\-y)  }  which  is  of  the  same  form  as  [6646]  ;  the  constant  quantities
X,  7j  being  changed  into  ^^,  A,  respectively.  We  may  incidentally  remark,  that  the
symbols  ^^,  w^,  [6646]  are  not  accented  in  the  original  work  ;  we  have  accented  them  to
distinguish  them  from p,  w  [6023n,  6024g].

*  (3424) Each  of  the four  satellites  furnishes  three  equations  of  the  second  order,
^ "^ similar  to  those  in  [6057,  6060, 6077] ;  making  in  all  twelve  equations  of  the  second  order ;
and  as  the  complete  integral  of  an  equation  of  the  second  order,  introduces  two  arbitrary
constant quantities,  we shall have  in all  twenty-four arbitrary  constant  quantities,  as
in  [6647].

[66476]

t (3425) Substituting  the  computed  vakie  of -a^  [6646], in  the expression  of 9

[6610,  6620],  using  also ^^ for zh^,, we  get,  as  in  [6649],
[6650a]  (p  =  v  — 3t?'-{-  2u"  =  ir  -j-  p^.  sm.{nt.\/k.  +  A) .

The  sine  of  this  expression  gives,
[66506]  sin.(«— 3y'4-2tj")=— sin.{^^.sin.(n^.V/k-|-^)}  =— ^,.sin.(n<.\/k  +  ^)  [43]  Int.,

neglecting  terms  of  the  order ^^, on  account  of  their  smallness [6658]. Substituting

this  in  [6586],  we  get  [6650] ; multiplying  this  by dt, integrating  and  then  adding  a

(6650c] constant quantity n^, we  obtain  the  value  of  — . Again, multiplying by di, and

integrating,  adding  the constant  quantity e^, we  obtain v  =  n^t-\-s^-\-([inciion  [6651].
[6650d] ]>fow  we  may  suppose e^ to  be  included  in  the  epoch ?, and n^t in the  mean  motion

VHI  vl.  ^  15]  mEQUALlTlES  OP  THE  ORDER m»,  mm',  m'»,  &c.  143

we  shaJl  obtain,

^  =  8.(|,^n--.^-)  •  7  •  ft-«»n-KV^  +  ^)-  t6650]

integrating  this  expression,  and  neglecting  the  arbitrary  constant  quantities
which  form  part  of  the  epoch  and  the  mean  longitude,  we  get,

Sm'.m'.n.F'G a ^ - ,  . j-  , ^.
^  =  —  8k.(n-»--A0  *  ?  *  '''•^'"•(''^•V^  +  ^) ;  [6651]

and  by  substituting  the  value  of 1^, we  shall  have,

^  ^  fi^,s\n.(nt^ -{-  A)
"  1  4-  ?flf!  -I-  —:I!L  '  [6658]

In  like  manner  we  shall  find,*

3o  .III  .

^' — ov„ — ^ — ;  [«««)

1 , va.tn . a.m

4a.TO' 4o  .m"
a".m

„ Ba.ni

77.^,.sin.(n^.v/k4-^)

- 9tf'.TO n".in

[6654]

4a.»» 4a.in"

Therefore  the  three  first  satellites  are  subjected  to  an  inequality  depending  on
the  angle  nt.\/v.  +  A,  It  is  by  observation  alone  that  we  can  determine  the
limit  of  the  arbitrary  quantity ^^, and the time  when this inequality

«< ; and  we  may  therefore  neglect  the  constant  quantities n^,  s^, and  we  shall  have

•  =  function  [6651]. Now  from  [6609]  we  have,  ^^^^'^

Bubstituting  this  in  [6651],  we  get  [6652].

•  (3426) Multiplying  the  second  member  of  [6586]  by —  ~-, ,  it  becomes  equal  to

ddi/  3af.m ddv -  [6654a]

the  second  member  of  [6602]  ; hence  we  gel —  =»  —  -z — , .  ^  . Integratmg and

"I'.m  t66546)

neglecting  the  constant  quantities  as  in  [6650e] ,  we  get r'  =  —  t , .  v  ;  and  by  substituting

the value  of  r  [6652], we  obtain [6653]. In  like manner, by multiplying  [6586]

tTj^  ddv" a^.m ddv

by  ui^  ,  it  becomes  equal  to  [6608] ;  hence —  =  ^^, .  —  ; whose  integral  gives [6e54e]

»*-»  r-^,.  V  ;  and  by  substituting  [6652],  we  get  [6654].

[6657]

144  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

vanishes,  which  depends  upon  the  value  of A. This  inequality  deserves  the

particular  attention  of  astronomers. JVe  may  consider  it  as  a  lihration  of

the  mean  motions  of  the  three  first  satellites. By  means  of  this  libration  the

[6656] difference  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  first  and  second  satellites,  minus  twice

Libration ^f^^  diffcrencc  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  second  and  third  satellites,  oscillates

■aumtet. always  about  two  right  angles  [66286']. For  this  reason  we  shall  designate

this  inequality  by  the  name  of  the  libration  of  Jupiter\s  satellites. It  has

considerable  analogy  with  the  libration  of  the  lunar  spheroid,  whose  analysis

we  have  given  in  [3460 — 3470]  ;  and  in  like  manner  as  in  the  lunar  theory

it  replaces  two  arbitrary  constant  terms  of  the  mean  longitudes. Moreover,

[6658] this  libration,  as  in  the  lunar  theory,  is  insensible ; and  this  arises  from

circumstances  depending  upon  the  primitive  motions  of  the  satellites.

The  radii  vectores  of the  three  satellites are subjected to the  same

[6658'] inequality  ;  for  they  produce, in  the  expression  of  the  mean  motion fndt,

the  inequality,

^^.sin.fo/.y/k-F^). r^^K^-,
[6659]  • . 9a'.m . a".m ' L^^^^J

[6659q

I -I-  +

^4a.m'  ^  4a. m"

which  gives  in n, considered  as  variable,  the  following  inequality,  which
we  shall  represent  by 6n  ;*

^^_n.^,.y/k.cos.(nt.j/k±A)  .

[6660]  ^ 9a'.m a".m

Aa.ruk 4a.m'^

__2

[6661] and  since a=  n"^  [6110],  we  shall  have,

[6662c]

*  (3427) Putting nj for  the  mean  value  of  fndt, and v for  the  quantity  [6652],
we  shall  have, for  the  mean  motion [6658'J, including the  libration, the  expression

dv
[66626] fndt^=n,t-\-v. Its  differential  being  divided  by dt, gives n  =: n,-\- —  ; the  quantity

—  [6652],  being  the  same  as  the  second  member  of  [6660],  or  the  value  of  Sn  ; hence
dt

_2  _2  _5

n=n^-|-^»' Substituting  this in [6661], we  get a={n^-{-8n)  ^=n^  ^ — f.w^  ^.8n,

5

neglecting  the  higher  powers  of §n, so  that a contains  the  inequality — f.n  ^.5n,
which  we  shall  represent  by Sa  ; and  we  shall  have  very  nearly,

Sa  =  — f  .n"^.  5n  =  — ^.rT^.  —  =  — f  .a.  —  ,

as  in  [6662]. In  like  manner  we  shall  have,  for  the  satellites mf,  m",

[6662J]
[6662«1

oftlM

rkdioa
vactor.

[6663]

[6665]

VIII.  vi.  ^  16.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m«,  mm\  m'\  &c.  145

to  =  — |.a.-;  [«662]

M  LibfaUon

which  is  the  variation  of  the  radius  vector  r,  depending  on  the  expression
[6659].  We  may  obtain,  in  the  same  way,  the  corresponding  variations  of
f'  and  r"  [6662<f].

16. The  libration  of  the  three  first  satellites  of  Jupiter,  modifies  all  their

inequalities  of  a  long  period. It  gives  to  their  expressions  a  particular  form , ^^^

which  connects  them  together, and  is  a singular  case  of  the analysis  of  1"^^^

perturbations. If  we  suppose  that x^  .sin. (ii -[-<')> is  an  inequality  of  a  long "«'|*»wm.

period  of  the  satellite *w, which  would  take  place  if  it  were  not  modified ^ ^

by  the  action  of  the  two  satellites m\  wi",  &c. ; and  that x'.sin.(i^-f  o)

and x".sin.(i^-f  o)» are  the  corresponding  inequalities  of  the  satellites m'

and m" ; we  shall  have,  by  noticing  only  these  inequalities,*

ddv  .„  • /'rf  t \

-^  =  — r.\.sm.(i^-fo)  ;  [6666]

ddv  -a  %  / • /'4  , \

_  =  —  l".  X  .sin.  (it  +  O)  ;  [6667]

ddv"  'O  ^  // • /'J I \

—  =  —  l^X  .sm.  (1/  -f-  o)  .  [6668]

But  by  noticing  only  the  inequality  of  libration,  we  have  as  in  [6586,  6650/^  ,t

ddv k.n«.sin.(t;— 3t;^-f2i;^0
"dF  ~~ I  .  9a'. m a".m '  [6669]

Connecting  together  the  two  expressions  [6666,  6669],  we  shall  have,
ddv kn«.sin.(»— 3«;'-f2c") ._  , . ,. . v
^  ^  1  ,  9«->» , -"'^ -i'.\.«n.(,l+o).  ^^^j

We  shall  suppose  that

»=  Q.sin.(i/-f  o)  ; t/ =  Q'.sin.(i/+o)  ; v"=  Q".sin.(i/-f-o)  ;  [6671]

represent  the  inequalities  of r,  \/,  v'\ depending  on i/-f  o, and  modified

•  (3428) Taking  the  second  differentials  of  the  assumed  values  of  the  terms  of  r,  t>',  c", r6666ol
[6664,  6665],  and  dividing  them  by rfl*, we  obtain  the  expressions  {^56G& — QG6&\.

t  (3429) Dividing  the  expression  [6586]  by  that  in  [6650/],  and  multiplying  the  result
by k, we  get [6669]. Adding  this  to  [6666],  we  obtain  [6670J.  {(X,7(ki}

▼OL.  IV.  37

146  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

by  the  reciprocal  action  of  the  satellites  ;  then  putting,*

[6672]  ^_3i,'_|_2zj"  =  ^  +  (Q_3g+2Q").sin.(i^-|-o)  ;

we  shall  have,

[6673]  ^ )  1  •^+ ^ 9a-.m a'^nT  \  '  Sm-O^  +  o).

(  4a.m' 4a.»»" )

Substituting,  in  the  first  member,  the  value  of  v  [6671],  we  get,t

'a  4a.m'  ~^  4a.m")

In  like  manner  we  shall  find,t

6675]  q  =  V—

2- ■ »«'•- • «'-"»N '

1

a".7n.

[6676]  Q"  =  X/'  +

(9a'.m  a  .m  \

"^  4a.  w'  "T"  4o.mV

V ~  4a.m' ' 4o.m7

[6672a]

*  (3430)  The  object  of  the  present  calculation  is  to  notice  only  angles  of  the  form
if+o,  where  i  is  very  small,  as  in  [6664,  6672] ;  and  this  expression  [6672]  is  found,
by  substituting  in  v — 3w'-}-2v"  the  values  [6671],  and  adding  to  the  result  the  mean
value  *  of  the  function  v — 3«'+2v"  [6626].  The  sine  of  this  expression  of  v — ^v'-\-2v"
gives,
[66726]  sin.(«— 3i;'+2«'')=— sin.{(Q— 3Q'+2Q").sin.(i<+o)|  =— (Q-3Q'4-2Q^).sin.(i^+o)  ;
neglecting  the  higher  powers  of  (Q — 3Q'-f~'^^')  on  account  of  its  smallness.
Substituting  this  in  [6670],  it  becomes  as  in  [6673].

f  (3431) The  assumed  value  of  v  [6671] gives, by taking  its  second  differential,
-  =  — i^Q.sin.(i^+o)  j substituting
by — i^.sin.(ii-j-o)5 we  get  [6674].

[6674a] -— =  — i^Q.sin.(i^+o)  j substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [6673], then  dividing

[6675a]  X  (3432) We  see  in  [6654a,  c]  that  the  parts  of —  , —^  ,  containing k, are  found

[66756]  by  changing  successively,  in  the  similar  expression  of —  [6669], k  into  — ' '^  ,  and

[6675c]  -^ — TT  • l^o  these  we  must  add  the  corresponding  terms  in  [6667,  6668],  and  we  shall

[6675<ri  obtain  the  expression  of  -^  , —  ,  in  forms  like  that  of —  [6673] ; and  which  may

Vm  vi.  "^  16].  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER in',  mm\  m'«,  &ic.  147

These  three  equations  give,*

i«— kn«

coDsequently,

V  =

(i.-kn.).(.+^^,  +  i^)^
?^,.kn«.(\-3x;  +  2x;) , . ,.

(6877)

[0878]

[6679]

^..kn^(X-3x;  +  2x;)
„"  =:  </x;'-f.  __: ^^  \.  sin.(i/  +  0).  [6680]

It  is  important  here  to  remark^  that  in  the  preceding  analysis  we  have  supposed [668(K]
i to  be  much  less  than n — 2n', or n' — 2n". For  in  changing,  as  we  have
done  in  [6385], nt-{-e, n't-]-^, n"t-\-^' into v,  t/,  r", respectively,  in [6681]
the angle nt-'3n't  +  2n"t  +  s—S/-\'2s'\  [6583],  it is  necessary that the

same changes may be permitted in the values of -r^ and 6v'

[6580,  6581,  6598,  6599],  which  we  have  used  in  computing  [6586,  &c.]  ; [G681']
observing  that  these  expressions  depend  upon  the  angles 2n't-2n"t-{-2^-2s",

and n't — nt-]-e — f. We shall first  consider  the  part  of — - depending

be  derived  from  it,  by  changing,  as  in  [6666 — 6668],  X^  into  X^'  or  \"  respectively,
tnd  k  as  in  [66756,  c]  ;  moreover,  we  must  change,  as  in  [6671],  Q  into  Q',  or  Q",
respectively.  Now  making  these  changes  in  the  values  of  k,  X^,  (^,  we  get  successively,
from q  [6674],  the  expressions  of q,  q'  [6675,  6676].

•  (3433) Multiplying  [6675]  by —3, also  [6676]  by 2, and  adding  the  products

to  [6674],  we  find  that  the  factor I  +  j— -;  4~  7~~;j occurs in the numerator and [6677o]

denominator  of  the  term  of  the  sum  which  is  connected  with k, and  by  rejecting  it,  we  get,

Q-3<^-f2Q"  =  (X,-^x;4-2x;')  +  !^'.  (^-3Q'+2Q").  [66776]

Hence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  Q — 3Q'-|-2Q''  [6677]  ;  and  by  substituting  it,  in  the
▼•lues  of  Q,  ^,  ^'  [6674—6676],  then  these  values  in  the  expressions  of  r,  v\  v"
[6671],  we  get  the  final  results  in  [6678—6680].

148  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6682] upon  the  angle nt — n't-^s — /. We  have  in  ^  3,  by  noticing  only  the  terms
depending  on cos.(2J — v')*

P being  a  constant  coefficient. If  we  substitute  the  values,
[6684]  ^  ==  w<+s+Q.sin.(i^+o)  ;  t/  =  n'/ +  s'  +  Q'. sin. (i^+o),

corresponding  to  [6585,  6671],  we  shall  get,  by  developing cos.(v — v'),  the
following  expression  ;t

[6685]  +P.C0S.(W^— w'/+s— s')  2

-\-lP.(Q'-^Q).cos.(nt—n't-{-s—s'—it—o)  3

— ^P.(Q'— Q).cos.(n^— w7+s— s'+i^+o).  4

Hence  we  deduce  by  integration, observing  that i  [6680^ and n — 2n'
[6686] [6151a]  are  very  small  relative  to n; also N' differs  but  very  little  from
n'  [6025/],t

*(3434) The  terms  of  [61 14  line  4],  depending  on  the  angle n't — nt-^s'—s, are

[6683a] computed  in  [6092  line  1,  6094  line  2],  from  the  expression  of B.  [6090],  and  depend

wholly  on  the  term A''^\cos.{v' — v)  of  [6090]. Hence  it  is  evident  that  it  will  be  more

correct  to  retain v' — v, instead  of  n't — nt-{-^—s; and  then  the  expression  of  [6114],

corresponding  to  this  angle,  will  be  of  the  form,

[66836]  ^  +  ^»  ^'  +  P,cos.(.'-») ;

P^ being  a  constant  quantity  depending  on A^^^ and  on  its  differential  relative  to a.
[bWWcJ Changing  the  elements  of m into  those  of m\  [6024],  and  the  contrary,  also  supposing
P^  to  become P, we  get  the  equation  [6683],  corresponding  to  the  satellite m'.

ffififiSal ^  (3435) The  difference  of  the  values  of «,  v'  [6684]  gives,  by  using  for  brevity  the

symbol T' ^nt—n't-^-s — /,
[66856]  v—v'  =  T'—{  Q'— Q).sin.(i^  +  o).

The  cosine  of  this  expression  being  found, by  means  of  [61]  Int.,  becomes  as  in  [6685c],

and  this  expression  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [6685rf],  by  reducing  the  last  term  of  its

second  member,  by  means  of  [17]  Int.,
[6685<r]  cos.(tJ— -i;')  =cos.T'+(Q'— Q).sin.T'.sin.(ii+o)

[6685rf]  =:cos.T-{-l{q—q).cos.{T'^\t—o)—^q—q).cos.{T-^\t-\-o).

Substituting  this  last  expression  in  [6683],  it  becomes  as  in  [6685].

J  (3436) From  the  equation  [6685] we  obtain,  by  integration,  as  in  [6049A:,  T], the
[6687o]  ^^^

values  of  — . This is  done by dividing the terms in [6685  lines  2,  3,  4], by

VIII.  vi.  «^  16.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^,  mm',  m'%  &c.  149

-^  =  -? T-Ws  *  cos.(w^— n ^+s— 0  1

«'* n.(n — n — N  )

p(a—a\  [6687]

^ 2n.(n— n'— i— JV')  ^  ^

—  ^T^^^^^f^^^  •  cos.(ri^— n7+s— s'+i^+o).  3

2n.(n — n!-\-\ — N')  ^  « • /

If  we  suppose ^7 tv' ^^  ^®  ^^  ^"^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  "^^^  neglect  it  without [6687']

any  sensible  error,  we  shall  have,
^y  P  Ccos.(nt—n't+s^^)  ^ 1

72-  =  n.{n—n'^JV')  *  Wira^O^  S cos.(nt—n't-\-s—.s'^it—o) )  >  ' 2 ^6688]

Substituting  2?  =  n^+s  +  Q.sin.(i^+o)  ;  t?' =  n'/  +  s'+Q'.sin.(ii+o)  [6684],  [6689]
we  obtain,*

/5/  P

>=„.(„-„-_A-0-'=°^-('^''>  f^'"'

It  is  evident  that  the  corresponding  inequality  of (5u' will  be,t

2P

6?;'  = y——  .  sm.(v—v').  [6691]

(n_n')2_JV'2; (n—n'— i)2— JV'2; (n— n'+i)3-riV'2, respectively. These  divisors ^^^^

are  easily  reduced  to  the  forms (n — n'+JV').(n — n' — iV')  ; {^i-'d-\'\-'N').{n-'d-\-'S') ;

(ri-_n'+i  +  A*')-(^— »'+i— ^')- But  we  find  from  [6025/,  6680'],  that —n'+JV',

— n'qFi-|--ZV', are  extremely  small; therefore  these divisors  are  nearly  represented  by \^lc\

n.{n — n' — JV') ; n.{n — n'—i—N'); n.{n — n'+i — JV'). Dividing the terms of [6687rf]

[6685  lines  2,  3,  4],  by  these  divisors  respectively, we  obtain  the  corresponding  terms

[6687]. Again  the  three  divisors  [6687rf]  may  evidently  be  represented  by  the  quantity

i i  .  [6687e]

n.(n — n' — JV"), multiplied  respectively  by 1, 1 ; — -- , l-A ; — —;  and  if  we

suppose =F ; — rz to  be  so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected,  the  three  divisors  will  all [6687/*]

be  equal  to  n.{n — n' — A"')  ; and  then  the  expression  [6687]  becomes  of  the  form  [6688].

*  (3437) The  expression  [6685^],  which  represents  the  development  of cos.(i; — v'),
is  the  same  as  the  terms  between  the  braces,  in  the  second  member  of  [6688],  using T' [6690a]
[6685a]. Substituting  this  in  [6688],  we  get  [6690].

t  (3438) The  terms  of  Sv  [6119  line  3],  which  contain  the  divisor {n-^n'f—N^,

2.rf.(^)  [6691a]

are  introduced  into  [6118J]  by  means  of  the  term ^—^ [61186,  x]  j so that by

ndt

VOL.  IV.  38

150  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

We  may apply the same reasomng to the parts  of — ;- and it/,

a.

[6580,  6581],  depending  on  the  angle 2w'i— 2/i"^+2/— 2a", and  we  shall

find  that  we  may,  in  like  manner,  change  the  angles  w'^-f  /  and  'n!'t-\-i\
[6692]  respectively,  into  xl  and  f";  provided  we  consider  only  the  inequalities
[6692^] of  v' and xl' depending  upon  any  angle i^+o, in  which i is  much  less

than n — Ivl or ?i' — 2w".*

The  inequality  depending  on Mt-\-E — /, which  we  have found in
[6693] [6285  line  2],  is  of  this  kind  ;  its  period  being  about  ten  times  greater  than

that  of  the  angle  ni — 27i7.t  The  expression  of  this  inequality  [6285  line  2],
[6693'] being  compared  with  the  assumed  value ?^^.sin.(i^-j-o)  [6664],  gives,|

[66916]

[6692o]

[6694o]

-•(>).

noticing  only  the  terms  with  this  divisor  we  shall  have hv  = ^ — ^ ;  and  in  like  manner

r^S/

dv'  == ^^ . Substituting  in  this  last  expression the  value  of -^r-  [6690], and

n'dt  "

observing  that  we  have  very  nearly,  by  using  the  values  of  v,  v'  [6572'J,  and  n=2w'  [6151],

[6691c] fZ.cos.(v — v')  =  — [dv — <?«').sin.(i>  — u')  =  — [ndt — 'ddt\sva..{\) — v')  =  — n'dt.s'm.  {v — w'),

we  get  the  expression  of  6v'  [6691],

*  (3439) If  we  change v,  n,  s,  q, into v",  n",  s", Q'', in  [6683,  &;c.],  and  then
write P.cos.(2u" — 2v') instead  of  P.cos.(t? — v'), we  shall  obtain  an  equation  similar  to
[66926] [6683],  but  depending  on  the  angle 2n't — 2n"t-{-2^ — 2a"  ; and  if  we  follow  the  calculation
from  [6683]  to  [6690],  we  shall  obtain  a  similar  result  to  that  in  [6690]  ;  supposing  as  in

[6692c] [6687/]  that  "_\r> °^ _  ;_^/  [6154]  is  a  very  small  quantity,  which  may  be

neglected.

t  (3440)  The  values  of  n,  n\  M  [6025^,^]  give  w—2n' =  3001156",
iH=  337211"  ;  of  which  the  former  is  nearly  ten  times  greater  than  the  latter.  We  may
[66946]  also  observe  that  the  values  of  n  [6025A:],  and  A:  =  0,000000607302  [7272],  give
[6694c]  w-v/k  =  643563",  which  is  about  |  part  of  n — 2/i' [6694a].  Hence  it  is  evident  that
the  angles  Mt,  n,\/^.t,  which  occur  in  ^v  [6285,  6652,  &c.],  may  be  considered  as
coming  under  the  form  of  the  terms  spoken  of  in  [6680',  &ic.].  The  other  terms  of  this
kind  are  those  which  depend  on  the  secular  equations  of  the  motions  of  the  satellites,  and
on  the  motions  of  Jupiter's  equator  and  orbit.

[6694(/]

[6695rt]

t  (3441) Putting  the  term  [6285  line  2] equal  to  the  assumed  value  of h  [6693'],
we  get  the  expression  of  X^  [6694]. If  we  put  the  corresponding  terms  of h',  h'' equal

4

VIII.  vi.  ^  16.] INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^  mm',  m!%  &c.  151

X= 'H\  x;== .£f;  X"  = .jf/.  [;66941

Hence  we  deduce,

9M

x-_-3x;+2x;'  =  — — .£r;  [6695]

therefore,  by  noticing  only  this  inequality,  we  shall  have,*

, 6M C  ^ 9a'.m.kn^  ") ^^ . ^ti^^  ,  t-. r\

6V'  = .  )  1 ; ^— (  .  H.Sm.(Mti-E—I)  ;  [6697]

J  8a.m'.{M^—kn^).[  1+  - — -,  +  - — -„ )  C

a."  =  -  — -  .  S  1  + /  .  ff.s.n.(Ml!+£-7). [6698]

" )  32a.».".(JW=— k«»).(l+,-^  +  f^,U

(_  ^  \ 4a.ni ' Aa.m"/  )

We  have  determined,  in  ^  12,  [6487 — 6552],  the  secular  inequalities  of
the  satellites.  The  most  sensible  parts  of  these  inequalities  are  those  which
depend  on  the  secular  variations  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  and  on  the  position
of  its  equator  [6525]. The  values  of i relative  to  them  are  very  small,! [6699]

3JW  ^M

to  the  similar  values  in  [6665],  we  shall  get X/=: ','H\ X/'  = ^t-.JZ;  which [66956]

are  easily  deduced  from X^ by  accenting  the  letters X^,  n; and  by  using n'  =  |n,
w"==i?i  [6151], they  become  as in [6694]. Substituting the  values  of  \,  X/,  X/ [6695c]
[6694],  in  the  first  member  of  [6695],  it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member.

*  (3442) Substituting the values [6694,6695], and \=  M, o  =  E—l, in
[6678—6680], we  get  the  expressions  [6696—6698] respectively  ; observing  that  the ^^^^^^
expression  of X^ — 3X/-{-2X/'  [6695],  may  be  put  under  either  of  the  three  forms 3X^, [66966]
tV' f  V' ^^  '^  evident  by  substituting  the  values  [6694],  and  comparing  with  [6695].

t  (3443) The  coefficients i corresponding  to  these  secular  variations,  are  of  the  order
bj  c, which  occur  in  the  expression  of 8v  [6530]  ; and  these  quantities  are  very  small, Lo69ya]
being  less  than  a  second  [6937,  6938],  so  that bt or ct does  not  vary  a  second  in  a  year.

Comparing  this  with w.^k  =  643563"  [6694c],  we  find  that the  ratio — -^ is  of  the [669961

1  i2

order ^t^t,  > ^"d  its  square — is  very  small,  so  that i^ is  very  small  in  comparison [6699c]

with kn^, and  may  therefore  be  neglected  ;  and  then  the  formulas  [6678 — 6680]  become

kn2
as  in  [6700— 6702] ;  because  the  factor .^_. ^ becomes  equal  to — 1.  [6699rf]

152  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  C^l.

[6699/j so  that  we  may  neglect P in  comparison with kn^ ; therefore  we  shall
have,  by  noticing  only  these  inequalities,

v  =  2'.  N  X ^ '^ '^ f  .  sm.(i^+o)  ;

[67001

[6703]

[6705']

[6706]

9af.m ^^  a".m
4a.m' Aa.m"

[6701]  V  =  2'.  )  x;  + ^\'^  j.1.  (  .  sm.(i^+o)  ;

V ^  ^fi'^' 4a.  m!')

(.  \ 4a.w 4a. m"/  )

the  characteristic 2' refers,  as  in  [6324'],  to  all  the  inequalities  of  the  form

sin.(ii  +  o). From  these  equations  we  deduce,*
[6704]  tj  —  3ij'  +  2i;"  =  0.

Hence  the  inequalities  with  a  long  period,  in  which i^ is  considerably

less than kw"^, do not trouble the relations  we have established in
[6705] [-6627,  6628,  6631,  6639],  between  the  three  first  satellites,  by  their  mutual

action  ;  these  inequalities  being  so modified  as  to  satisfy  these  relations.

In  this  way  we  have  seen,  in  [3461],  that  the  action  of  the  earth  upon  the

lunar  spheroid,  makes  the  rotatory  motion  of  that  spheroid  participate  in  the

motion  of  revolution, and  by  this  means  it  maintains  the  equality  between

these  mean  motions.

We  shall  represent  by Cf^  C'f,  C"f, the  secular  equations  of  the  three

first  satellites  depending  on  the  secular  variations  of  the  orbit  and  equator

[6703a]

*  (3444)  Multiplying  [6701]  by  —3,  and  [6702]  by  +2,  then  adding  these
products  to  [6700],  we  find  that  the  first  member  of  the  sum  becomes  v — 3v'-|-2»",  as
in  [6704]. Moreover  the  terms  of  the  second  member  of  the  sum,  which  have  explicitly

[67036] the  factor \a:,m 'aFm  ' ^^  ^®  ®^"^^  ^°  ^^^  quantity,  multiplied  by

' 4a.  m' 4a.  wi"

/, , 9a'.«i , a!'.m\

and  by  reduction  it  becomes — (X^ — 3X/-}-2x/'). This  is  destroyed  by  the  other  terms,
X^— 3X/+2X/', in  that  sum ;  so  that  we  shall  have tj— 3u'4-2w"  =  0, as  in  [6704]. In

this  calculation  we  neglect  terms  in  the  second  member  of  the  order —  .X^.sin.(ii-|"o)>

.12

[6703c] which  are  insensible  from  their  smallness ;  but  it  is  evident  that  if r-^ be  large,  as  in
[6696—6698],  the  equation  [6704]  will  not  be  satisfied.

VIII.  vi.  §  17.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m\  mm%  m'^  he.  153

of  Jupiter,  and  also  upon  the  resistance  of  the  ether ;  these  equations  being
independent  of  the  mutual  action  of  these  satellites.  We  shall  obtain  these
secular  equations,  bj  developing  [6664,  &c.],  2'.x^.sin.(ii-fo),  2'.x^'.sin.(i^-|-o),
2'.x".sin.(i^+o),  as  far  as  the  second  power  of  ^;*  observing  that  the
terms  of  the  series  which  are  independent  of  t,  are  confounded  with  the
epochs  of  the  longitudes  ;  and  those  which  depend  on  the  first  power  of  t,
are  confounded  with  the  mean  motions.  The  preceding  expressions  of
V,  v',  v",  will  thus  give,  for  the  secular  equations,  modified  bj  the  reciprocal
action  of  the  satellites,!

V^ )C  —  -^— — ^  {.f;  [6709]

•^  9a'.  m , a".m ^

C"  +

4a.  tn/ Aa.m"

,  /  9a'. m  a".m\

Aa.m .  1  -\- ;  +  - — -^

\  4a.  m' ' w.m"J

<  _ ///, , 9a'- w» , a".m\>'

^  These  values  may  be  used,  without  any  sensible  error,  during  several  centuries,
and  theyivill  suffice  for  a  long  period  for  astronomical  purposes.

17.  The  nearly  commensurable  ratios  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  three
first  satellites  introduce  some  sensible  terms  into  the  equations  which  are  given
in  [6217,  6220,  6221],  for  the  determination  of  the  variations  of  the
exceniricities  and  perijoves  of  the  orbits.  To  prove  this,  we  shall  resume  the
values  of df,  df  [1257]  ; which  give,  by  observing  that f* is  very  nearly

[6708]

[6710]
[6711]

[6711']
[6712]

[6713]

*  (3445)  We  have  from  [21]  Int.  sin.(if-f"<^)  =  sin.i<.cos.o-|-cos.i^.sin.o  ;  and  from
[43,  44]  Int.  we  have  sin.i<  =  i< — &c.  ;  cos.i<=  1— ^i^/S-j-fec.  Substituting  these  [6'^^^«]
and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  t^,  vee  shall  have  v  =  'L\'k^.sm.(\t-\-o)^^A-\-Bt-\-Ct^ ;
A,  B,  C,  being  constant  quantities.  Now  supposing  A  to  be  connected  with  the  epoch,  [67075]
and  Bt  with  the  mean  motion,  as  in  [6708],  it  will  become  r:^  Ct^ ;  and  in  like
manner  we  have,  for  the  second  and  third  satellites,  v'  =  C't^,  v"  =  C"{^,  as  in  [6706] ;
or  as  they  may  be  written,

2'.  \.sin.(i^-[-o)  =  Ci^ ; 2'. x;.sin.(i^-f  o)  t=  C'f- ; 2'.  X/'.sin. (i<+o)  ==  C"t^.  [6707rf]

t6707c]

1(3446) Substituting  the  values  [6707rf] in [6700—6702],  we  get  [6709—6711] ^^^^^^-^
respectively.

VOL.  IV.  39

154  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

equal  to 1 [6110c],*

</.(e.cos.TO)  =  —  7^=1  •  )  2.cos.v+|.6.cos.ia+ic.cos.(2v — w)  ?  •  (-^  ] 1

J.(e.sin.«)  =  —  Jy^2  •  )  2.sin.tJ+|€.sin.«+ie.sin.(22;— w)  I .  (-^j 1

+a^  w^^.  v/r=72.  r^) .  cos.i;.  2

[67161 ^^  ^®  neglect  the  excentricity e, in  the second  member  of  [6714],  and
retain  in R  [6052,  6090],  only  the  terms,!

[6714]

[6715]

[6717]
[6718]

we find, by substituting r^=a^-{-2r8r [60576], and v  =  nt  +  s+6v
[6572',  &c.]  in  [6714],  that  it  will  becomet,

* (3447) Putting |x=l, as  in [6110c], we get, from [1254], /=e.cos.'0,
[6714a] J-'  __  e.sin.ts. Substituting  their  differentials  in  the  first  members  of  the  equations  [1257],
we  obtain  [6714,  6715].

t  (3448) The  first  term  of R  [6052]  is — .f  (p— J9). -— ; and since M  =  l,
[6717a]  '■^

B=l  [6297  c?J,  it  becomes  as  in  the  first  term  of  [6717]. Its  second  term  is  the  same  as

the  third  term  of  [6090]. We  shall  see  that  these  produce,  in <?.(e.cos.w)  [6724],  terms

depending  on  the  angle nt — 2n't-\-s — 2s'; and  when  they  are  combined  with  the  terms

of 8v,  6v'  [6725,  6726] depending  on nt — 2n7-j-s — 2s'-{-gt-\-r, they  produce, as  in

'• •' [6728], terras  depending  on  the  slowly  varying  angle gt-\-T  ;  and  finally  introduce,  in

[6729'],  a  change  in  the  value  of  hg, which  must  be  noticed,  as  in  [6731',  &c.],  although

it  is  of  the  order  of  the  cube  of  the  disturbing  force.

J  (3449) If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order e, in  the  second  member  of  [6714],  we
shall  get,

[6718a]  d.{e.cos.'a)  =  a.ndt.  <  — 2.(  — j. cos.v— a. (  —  j .  sin.v  >  .

Now  taking  the  partial  differentials  of  R  [6717] relative  to v,  r, we  obtain,

[6718*1 (^)  =  -2»'.^«>  sio.(2„-2.') ,  (f )  =<f=ii'  +  .'.(^).cos.(2„_2.').

[6718c] But  from  [6089e,  6091]  we  have  very  nearly (—-j  =  (-t~)' '^^^^  "^^7  ^^  substituted

in  the  last  term  of  [67186],  which  is  not  much  affected  by  the  excentricity on  account  of
its  smallness. Substituting  these  values  in  [6718a],  we  get.

VIII.  vi.  <^  17].  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER «i^  mm',  m'^,  &ic.  165

d.(e.cos.7s)  =  4!m',ndt.aA'^^\sin.(2v — Sv^'COS.v  1

— m'.ndt.a^A—-\.cos.(2v — 2u').sin.i;  2

—ndt.  ^-t-^ .  sin.(n^+  s)  3

+  W(/^.  fc^  .  ^  — <Jy.cos.(n^+s)  +4.  ^ .  sin.(n^+£).  \ 4

We  shall  only  notice,  in  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  the  terms
depending  on  the  angle  nt — 2n'^-j-£ — 2s'  ;  observing  that  we  have  very
nearly,  as  in  [6131,6132],

Tot  Tilt 71 F

1?--  2.(2.-2n'-iV)  •  COS.(2»<-2»-<+2.-20  ;  [6721]

7T^  nF
^^  =  cin-'ii^-N  •  sin.(2n^— 2w'^+2s— 20  ;  [6722]

also  as  in  [6130,6151],

i^=— 4aJ(«)— a^r^y
Then  we  shall  have,*

[6720]

(?.(e.cos.^)  =  —^.m'.F.ndt.  i  1— _o^)__jy.|  •  sin.(w^— 2w'/+£— 2s').

[6723]

[6724]

rf.(e.cos.'5j)  =4m'.nd'<.a.4^\sin.(2« — 2t;').cos.w — m\ndt.a^.(-i — j.cos.(2u — 2v').s\n,v 1

2 jw IN  si'^-v  « [6718rf]

The  first  and  second  terms  of  the  second  member  of  this  expression  are  the  same  as  those
in  [6719  lines  1,  2].  The  last  term  of  [6718rf]  produces  the  terms  in  [6719  lines  3,  4]  ;
as  appears  by  substituting  the  values  of  r*,  v  [6718]  ;  which  give  by  development,  using
[60]  Int.,  the  expressions  [6718/] ;  also  their  product  in  [6718^],  neglecting  terms  of  the
second  order  in 8r,  8v,

r~*  =  a~^.(  1  -4.  —  j  ; sin.r  =  sin. (nt-{-s-\-5v)  =  sin.{nt-\-s)-\-5v.cos.{nt-^e)  [6718/]

^  =  -^ .  ^  sin.(»i<+£)+(Jv.cos.(n^+£)— 4.  ~ .  sin.(n^+£)  I  .  [6718g]

Multiplying  [6718^]  by  — a^.nrf^(p— |(p),  we  get  the  value  of  the  term  [6718c?  line  2],
as  in  [6719  lines  3,4].

TOT

*  (3450) If  we  substitute  the  values —  , 5u  [6721,67221  in  [6719],  and  reduce  the

products  by  means  of  [17,  20]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  angle  v — 2t>',  or  nt — ^n't-{-s — 2s',
we  shall  get  [6724]. For  if  we  retain  only  this  angle  we  have,

156  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

The  mean  longitude  in  the  variable  ellipsis  is  increased,  in  [6261],  by  terms
depending  on  the  angle  ni — 2n't-{-£ — Ss'+^^+r,  which  become  sensible
on  account  of  the  small  divisors  affecting  them. We  shall  put,

[6725]  6v  =  Q.sm.(nt—2n't-{-£ — 2^-\-gt-\-r)  ;

[6726]  6v'  =  Q'.sin.(nt—2n't+s-^2^  -f-^^  +  r) ;

for  the  terms  of  v,  v'  [6261,  6268],  depending  on  this  angle.  We  must
increase  n^ -}- s,  n't-{-s'y  in  the  second  member  of  [6724],  by  the
quantities  6v,  6v'  [6725,  6726],  respectively ;  *  and  we  shall  obtain,  in  the
expression  of  d.(e.cos.is) [6724], the  following  term  ;

[6728] d,(e,cos.z.)  =  |m'. F. ndt.  \  1—  - ^^] ^,,  \  .  (2Q'— Q).sin.(§^^  +  O-

(  »n — 4n — jyi )  )

[67246]  sin.(2t>— 2«').cos.v= i.sin.(»— 2»')  =  i.sin.(nf— Sn'i+s— 2s')  ;

[6724c]  cos.(2u— 2v').sin.«  =— J.sin.(c— 2t;')  =— J.sin.(n<— -2n'<^£— 2g')  ;

[mid]  ^v.cos.int+s) =_.J.^^-^^.sin.(n<-2n'/+a-20;

[6724el  ,  4.  -  .  sin.(nf  +  s)  = J.  ^^^_^^_^^  •  sm.(n<-2r»  <+e-2£ ).

Substituting  the  values  [67246 — c]  in  [6719],  we  obtain,

[6724/]

rf.(e.cos  1^)  =  — im'.nrfi.  \  — 4a^«— o^.^^^  \  .  sin.(nf— 2n'^+£— 2/)

+  W^  '^ .  2n_2,.-_^'  s.n.(r,r-2nH^-20  ;
and  if  we  use  the  value  of  F  [6723J,  and (0)  [6216],  we  get  [6724].

[6728a]

*  (3451) This  process  of  increasing  the  mean  longitudes n^  +  e, vlt-\-s', by  the

inequalities 5«,  h'  [6725,  6726]  of  a  long  period,  is  frequendy  used  in  this  work  ;  as,  for

[67285] example,  in  [1232fl]. Now  if  we  put  for  brevity  q=i{^^-^.sm.{nt-'iln't-\-s-^s-{-gt-\-T),

we  shall  find  that  the  angle nt — 2n'<-f-£ — 2s' will  be  decreased,  by  means  of  [6725, 6726],

■' by  the  quantity q  ; so  that  if  we  neglect  quantities  of  the  order q^, and  find  the  sine  of

the  angle,  in  the  first  member  of  [6728rf],  by  means  of  [60]  Int.,  we  shall  get,

[6728rf]  sin.(nr— 2/i'/-|-£— 2s'— (^)  =  sin.(w<— 2n'^+s— 2s')— 9.cos.(n^— 2n'r-j-s— 2s').

Substituting  this  in  the  second  member  of  [6724],  we  find  that  the  part,  depending  on  q,
produces  in ^.(e.cos.tj), the  following  term  ;

[6728<]  rf.(e.cos.«Bi)  =  J ml.F.ndt.  \  1— 2„_2n^_jvi  *  ?-cos.(nf— 2n'^+s— 2s').

If  we  now  re-substitute  the  value  of q  [67286],  and  reduce  the  product  by  means  of  [18]
[6728/^ Int.,  retaining  only  the  term  depending  on  the  slowly  varying  angle  gt-\-T, it  will  become
as  in  [6728]. The  other  part  is  neglected,  because  it  does  not  increase  so  essentially  by
the  integration.

VIII.  vi.  <§.  17.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER nv",  mm',  m'^,  he.  157

We  have,  in  [6236],  by  retaining  only  the  term  depending  on  the  angle
gt  +  r  [6728],

c.cos.ra  =  —h,cos.(gt  +  r).  [6729]

We  must  therefore  increase the  value of hg, which  is given  by  the [6729']
equation  [6217],  by  the  quantity,*

This  is  equivalent  to  the  subtraction  of  the  expression  [6730],  from  the  second TQy2oi
member  of  the  equation  [6217]. The  term

^'»'-^"-'i;n:^-(2e'-e).  [^^^n

in  [6730],  is  of  the  order  of  the  cube  of  the  disturbing  force  [6731a]  ; but vq'^^i'}
on  account  of  the  great  ellipticity  of  Jupiter  and  the  nearly  commensurable

ratio  of  the  mean  motions  of  the  ttvo  first  satellites^  the  fraction —, — jr. [6732]

15  very  nearly  equal  to | ; so  that  it  becomes  necessary  to  notice  it.f

*  (3452) If  we  retain  in  [6236]  only  the  term  depending  on  the  angle gt-\-r, which
jurs  in [6728], we  shall have,  as in [6729], e.cos.w  =  — A.cos.(;§-^-|-r)  ; whose  "'

'differential  gives  d.(e.cos.'us)  =  hg.dt.s'm.{gt  -\-r).  Now  by  noticing  only  the^r^^  power  [67306]
of  the  disturbing  force,  and  the  first  power  of  the  excentricity,  we  have  obtained  the  [6730c]
equation  [6217],  which  ttiay  be  put  under  the  form  hg=A;  denoting  for  brevity,  by  [6730rf]
— A,  all  the  terms  of  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [6217],  excepting  the  first,  hg.  [6730e]
Substituting  this  in  [6730i],  we  get  d.{e.cos.-a)  =  A.dt.s'm.(gt-{-r).  This  expression  [6730/]
of  d.{e.cos.zi)  is  to  be  increased  by  the  terms  of  a  higher  order,  computed  in  [6728],
which  may  be  represented  by  SA.dt.s\n.(gt-{-T)  ;  supposing  the  function  [6730]  to  be  [6730^-]
represented  by  6A.  Adding  together  the  terms  of  d^e.cos.vs)  [6730^,/],  we  get  for
its  corrected  value,

rf.(e.cos.:s)  =  (A-^8A).dt.sm.{gt  +  r).  [6730A]

Hence  we  see  that  the  efTect  of  these  additional  terms,  depending  on 5A, is  to  change
the coefficient A [6730/] into A-}- 6 A [6730/i]  ; or — A into — A  — 5 A; [6730i]
therefore  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [6217],  which  is  represented  by hg — A
[6730e],  must  be  augmented  by  the  quantity — 8 A  [6730^]  ; or, in  other  words,  the
function  [6730]  must  be  subtracted  from  the  second  member  of  [6217],  according  to  the [6730*]
direction  in  [6730'J.

t  (3453)  The  quantities  m',  (0),  2Q' — Q,  are  each  of  the  same  order  as  the
disturbing  force,  as  is  evident  from  [6216,6261,6268,6725,6726];  hence  the  function
[6731]  is  of  the  order  of  the  cube  of  the  disturbing  force,  as  in  [6731']. The  values  of  "

VOL. IV.  40

158  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

In  like  manner,  by  noticing  in  R'  only  the  terms  which  are  contained  in
the  following  expression  [6733],  we  obtain  in  d.(e'.cos.w'),  the  terms  in
[6734];*

[6733]  72'  =  —  fc^  +  m".  A'^^K cos.(2zj'— 22;")+m.  J/i>.cos.(v— »')  ;

or

^.(e'.cosV)  = — 2m.n'dt.a'J^^^Ks'm.(v — v').cos.i;'  f  1

/dA  (*^\
— m.  n'dt.a'^.i  —^  j  . cos.(i>— z>'). sin.t/  2

+ 4m".  n'dU  a'.A'^^K  sin.(2t?'— 2ij").cos.t/  3

— »i".n'^^.a^r^Ycos.(2!;'— 2i;").sin.t/ .  4

[6734]

+  n'dt,  ^-^-^ .  |— 6i;'.cos.(n'^+0+4.  ^.sin-Cw'^+O^ 6

[67316] w,  7i',  JV  [60256,  e]  give 2n— 2w'— JV==n.0,004323. Dividing  the  value  of  (0)  [6216]
[6731c] by  this  last  expression,  we  get  ^^Jg j/_^  =  o,du43S!a2 ' substituting a  =  5,698491

[6731d] [6797],  and p—i(p  =  0,02 190 13  [7152],  it  becomes  nearly  equal to |, as  in  [6732] ;
so  that,  on  account  of  its  magnitude,  the  author  has  noticed  it.

*  (3454)  The  terms  of  R'  [6733,  6565],  depending  on  the  angles  v—v',  2v'—^v",
'■  ""^  correspond,  according  to  the  notation  in  [6134,  6146],  to  the  terms  of  [6090]  depending
on  the  angles  v—v\  2t? — 2v' ;  and  from  a  little  consideration  it  will  be  evident,  that  it  is
not  necessary  to  notice  any  other  angles,  when  computing  the  terms  corresponding  to  the
angle  mentioned  in  [6724'].  Again,  the  term  of  [6733],  depending  on  the  ellipiicity  of
Jupiter,  is  the  same  as  that  in  [6717],  changing  r  into  /,  to  correspond  to  the  present
case.

[67336]
[6733c]

t  (3455)  The  expression  of  rf.(e.cos.w)  [6718a],  gives  that  of  d.{e'.cos.zi'),  by
changing  the  elements  of  m  into  those  of  m',  and  R  [6717]  into  R'  [6733] ;  hence
we  get,

[67346]  rf.(e'.cos.-n')  =  af.n'dt.  <  — ^'  ("Tt)  •  ^°^-^'  —  "'•(t:^  j'^'"*''''  C  »

and  by  substituting  the  value  of  R'  [6733],  we  obtain  [6734].  This  process  of
substitution  may  be  considerably  shortened,  by  derivation  from  [6719]  ;  observing  that  the
first  and  second  terras  of  R  [6717],  produce  the  first  and  second  terms  of  R'  [6733] ;
by  changing  the  elements  of  m  into  those  of  mf  ;  and  the  elements  of  m'  into  those  of
m".  Now  making  these  changes  in  [6719],  we  get  the  terms  in  [6734  lines  3,4,5,6].
[6734e]  The  remaining  term  of  R'  [6733],  is  m.^;".cos.(v— t;')  ;  and  by  substituting  it  for  R',
in  [67346],  we  get  the  terms  in  [6734  lines  1,  2],

[6734c]

[6734rf]

VIII.  vi.  <§.  17.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^  mid,  m'^,  &c.

159

Now  we  have,  as  in  [6139,  6148 ;  6140,  6149],  *

i^y  ^'-^^^  .cos.(n<-n7+g-0-o  l'"^'  I-^x  •  cos.(2w'^-2/i'7+26'-20  ; [6735]

2.(n-n'-JV')
m.Ti.G

2.{n-n'-JV')

iv'  = •/ .  sm.(nt-n't  +  s-s')  + / .  sin.(2n'^-2n'7  +  2£'-26").

m

n-n'-N'  ^ ' '^ ' n-n'-]S

We  have  in  [6137,  6138],  very  nearly,!

[6736]

hence  we  find,  by  retaining  only  the  terms  which  depend  on  the  angles

*  (3456)  The  sum  of  the  terms  [6139,  6148],  gives  [6735],  by  changing  the  divisor
2n'— 2n"— JV'  into  n— n'— JV'  [6154].  In  like  manner,  the  sum  of  [6140,6149]  gives
[6736].

t  (3457)  Changing  the  divisor  n — n'  into  n'  [6138],  we  find  that  the  expression  of
G  [6137]  becomes  as  in  [6737].

I  (3458)  If  we  retain  only  the  angles  « — 2v',  v' — 2«",  or  the  corresponding  mean
values  nt — 2n't-\-s — 2/,  n't — 2n"t-\-s' — 2s",  we  may  substitute,  in  [6734],  the  following
expressions,  which  are  easily  deduced  from  [18,  19]  Int. ;

sin.(v — v').cos.u' = J.sin.(«  —  2i/)

cos.(« — 'y').sin.u' =  — |.sin.(u  —  2v')

sin.(2i;'— 2u").cos.tj'= i.sin.(t>'— 2t;")

cos.(2w'— 2i;").sin.«'=— |.sin.(«j'— 2i>")-
Substituting  these  values  in [6734  lines  1,  2, 3,4]  respectively, we  obtain  the  following
terms  ;

-Im.n'dt.  $  2a'^/')-a'2/^^)  \  .s\n.{v-2v')-^m''.n'dt^-  4a'  A'^^^-  a'^-(^'')  ]  •sin.(v'-2«") . [6738/]

If  we  substitute  in  this  expression  the  values  of  G,  F'  [6737,  6600],  and  the  mean  values
of  the  angles  [6738a],  we  shall  obtain  respectively  the  terms  in  [6738  lines  1,  2],  which  are
independent of the quantity (1). We shall  now  compute the  remaining terms  of

[6735o]

[6737a]

[6738a]

[67386 ]
[6738c]
[6738rf]
[6738e]

[6734  lines  5, 6],  depending  on (p — Jc?)  ; and  if  we  substitute (1)  =

(p-i9)

i'2

n'  [6217c],

neglecting  — {\).dt.six\.{n't-{-^)  [6734  line  5],  which  produces  no  angle  of  the  form v — 2i>'
or v' — 2<;", we  shall  find  that  the  remaining  terms  [6734  line  6]  become,

i\).dt.  J  — 5i;'.cos.(n'f  +  £')+4.  ^.sin.(n'^  ■\-^')\-

[6738ff]
[6738^]

[6738t]

•'(5/

Substituting  the  values  of 6v', —  [6735,  6736],  we  get  the  following  expression  of  the
terms  of  [6734],  depending  on (1)  ;

[6738]

160  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

d.(e'.cos.vi')  =  ^\m.n'dt.G,  \  1—  ^_^J_^^,  \  .  sin.(n^— 2n'^+s— 20  1

—\m".n'dt.F',  \  1 ^^^^  \  ,  sm.(n't—2n"t+B'—2n. 2

We  shall  put  the  term  of hv'\ which  we  have  found  in  [6269],  under  the
following  form  ;
[6739]  ^y"  =  Q".  sin.(w^— 2w'^+£— 2£'+^^  +r).

Now  we  have,  in  [6627],

[6740]  nt  —2n't  4-  £  —2  s'  =  *  +  ?i7 — 2n"t + s'—2  s" ;

hence  we  obtain,  in ^.(e'.cos.xs'), the  following  terms  ;  *

J.(c'.cos.^')  =  im.n'dt,  |  1—  ^J^^jy.  |  •  G.(2Q'—Q).sm.(gt+T)  1

^lm".n'dU  j  1-  ^JJ^^.  J  .  F'.(2Q"-Q').sin.(g^+r)  ; 2

[6741]

[6738ik] ^ "^•"^^•(1) G.}2.cos.(n'<+e').sin.(n?-w'<+£-s')+4.sin.(n'<+/).cos,(n<-n'<+e-s') }

[6738Z] -"^''•"^^^^•(^)  .  p^ ^ 2.cos.(n'<+£')-sin.(2n'^-2n"^+2£'-2£")+4.sin.(n'^+s').cos.(2n'^-2n''<+2/-2/') }.

Now  if  we  retain  only the  angles  mentioned  in [6738a],  we  shall  have,  by  means  of

[18,  19]  Int.,
[6738m]  2.cos.(»'^4-s').sin.(wi— n'^+s— £')=sin.(«<— 2n7-h£— 2/)  ;

[6738n]  4.sin.(w'^+£').cos.(n^—w'< +£—£')  =— 2.sin.(n^— 2n'^  +  £— 2/) ;

[67380]  2.cos.(n'f+£').  sin.(2w'^— 2n''^4-2£'— 2/')  =  sin.(7i'<— 2n''^+£'— 2s")  ;

[6738p]  4.s\n.{n't-\-  s').cos.(2n'^— 2n"^-|-2/— 2s")  =  — 2.sin.(n'/— 2n"<+/— 2s").

Substituting  [6738ffi — p]  in  [6738^,  I],  and  making  some  slight  reductions,  it  becomes,

which  is  the  same  as  the  part  of  [6738],  depending  on  (1).

[6741a]

*  (3459)  We  shall  suppose,  as  in  [6728a,  &c.],  nt-\-s,  n't-{-^,  n"t-\-f,  to  be
increased  by the  quantities (5»,  h',  Sv"  [6725,  6726,  6739]  respectively  ;  and  shall  use,

[67416]  for  brevity,  the  value  of  q  [67285],  and  the  similar  yalue  of  q'  [6741c],  which  is  easily
reduced  to  the  form  [674I</],  by  the  substitution  of  [6740]  ;

[6741c]  q'^ (2Q"— Q').sin.(n<— 2«'^+£— 2£'^-^^f^)  ;

[674U]  q'  =  —{2q'—q).sm.{n't—2n"t-i-/—2s"-\-gt+T).

[6741e] Then  we  see,  as  in  [6728c],  that  the  angle nt — 2n't-{-s—'ils' is  increased  by  the  quantity

[6741/]  —5- ;  and  its  sine  is  increased  by  the  quantity  — y.cos.(n^~2n'i+s— 2s')  [6128d].  In
like  manner,  the  angle w'i— 2n"^+£'— 2s" is  increased  by  the quantity — q'  [6741c],

[6741g-] and  its  sine  is  increased  by  the  quantity — q\cos.{n't — 2n"t-\-^—  2s"), as  is  evident  by  the

VIII.  vi.  '^  17.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^,  mm',  m'^,  fee.  161

we  must  therefore  add^  to  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [6220],  the [6741']
quantity,*

-im.n'.  \  1 ^,  I  .G.(2Q'-Q)  1

I  n—n—JY  J  [6742]

+  im".n'.  J  1-  ;;ij^  ]  ■  F'-i^Q'-Q).  2

In  like  manner  we  shall  find  that  we  must  add  to  the  second  member  of r6742']
the  equation  [6221],  the  term,t

i^'' ^"'  \  1- n'^^'-N"  ]  '  ^'-(^e-Q').  [6743]

raethodof  reduction  in  [6728^?]. Now  if  we  substitute  the  values  of  q,  q'  [67286,6741c?]
in  the  first  members  of  [674U',  Z:], and  reduce  by [18,  19]  Int.,  retaining  only  the  terms [674IA]
depending  on  the angle gt-^-T, we  shall  get  the  second  members  of  the  expressions
[674 H,  A:],

— y.cos.(n<— 2n'^  +  s— .2s')  =  — J.(2Q'— Q).sin.(^^+r);  [6741t]

— 9'.cos.(n'^— 2n"<-f  s'— 2s")  = i.(2Q"— Q').sin.(^<+r).  [674U]

Substituting  in  [6738  line  I]  the  increment  [6741/,  ij,  and  in  [6738  line  2]  the  increment
[6741^,  Jc],  we  get  the  terms  in  the  second  member  of  [6741  lines  1,  2]  respectively.

*  (3460)  We  have  found  that  the  second  member  of  [6728],  being  divided  by
dt.s\n.(gt-{-r),  gives  the  function  [6730],  which  is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  second  ^  "^
member  of  the  equation  [6217],  as  in  [6730'].  In  like  manner,  if  we  divide  the  second
member  of  [6741]  by  dt. sin. {gi-{-r),  we  shall  get  the  quantity  which  is  to  be  subtracted
from  the  second  member  of  [6220] ;  or,  by  changing  the  signs,  we  get  the  quantities  to  be
added  to  the  second  member  of  [6220],  as  in  [6742].

[67426]

1(3461) We  may  deduce rf.(c".cos.-ci") from d.(e'.cos.ij') [6738],  by  changing  (1)
into  (2), as  in  [6217c],  and  increasing  the  accents  of  the elements  of m,  m',  m", by '■ "1
unity; it  being  evident  that m' is  acted  upon  by  m,  m"  ; as m"  is  by m',  m'" ; and  as [6743i]
the  term  depending  on  the  angle n"t — '2n"'t-\-£" — 2/", is  not  increased  by  integration,  it
may  be  neglected, and  then  we  shall  get  from  [6738] ,

d.{e".cos.m")^—im'.n"dt.G'.  i  I  —  ^,_^^l_j^„  \  -  sm.(n't—2n"t-\-^—2s")  ;  [6743c]

observing that  this  change  makes G  [6137]  become G'  [6163]. Now  by  following

the  calculation  in  [6738—6742],  we  get  the  same  result  as  in  [6743]  ;  but  this  is  more ^ ^

_,/  _//

easily  obtained  by  derivation. For  if  we  put  in  [6738], G  =  0, F'=—^.G',  and

m  .n

(1)  (2)  .  [^^^^^

change — — into ~ — '  ,,- , it  becomes  identical  with  [6743cl ; and  the  same

changes  being  made  in  [6742],  which  is  deduced  from  [6738],  it  becomes  as  in  [6743].
VOL. IV.  41

162

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[6744]

[6745]

[6746]

[6747]

Hence  the  equations  [6217,  6220,6221,6222]  become  respectively,^

-(0,l)-(0,2)-(0,3)  I

0  =  h.^g-(0)-

0  =  A'.  J^-(1)-[T]-(1,0)-(1,2)-(1,3)  I

+  0.^+[IJi].r+[l]3].^'''-im  n'.  j  1-  ^Jl^,  j  . G.(2Q'-Q)

0^h",]g—(2)— 2 -(2,0)-(2,l)-(2,3)

1

2

I

2
(F) 3

1

I

0  =  A'".  ^^-(3)-[T]-(3,0)-(3,l)— (3,2)^

2

1

2

It  may  be  thought  that  the  equations  [6337 — 6341],  which  correspond  to

the  inclinations  and  nodes  of  the  orbits,  can  acquire,  in  like  manner,  some

sensible  terms  depending  on  the  square  of  the  disturbing force  ; but  it  is

[6748] easy to satisfy ourselves that this is  not  the  case, by considering the

differential  equations  of  these  motions,  which  are  given  in  [1331].t

*  (3462)  Subtracting,  from  the  equation  [6217],  the  expression  [6730],  according  to
the  directions  in  [6730'],  it  becomes  as  in  [6744].  Adding,  as  in  [6741'],  the  function
[6742]  to  the  second  member  of  [6220],  gives  [6745].  The  function  [6743]  being  added
to  the  second  member  of  [6221],  as  in  [6742'],  gives  [6746].  Lastly,  [6757]  is  the  same
as  [6222].

t  (3463) If  we  neglect  the  terms  of  the  equations  [1331],  depending  on s^, and
substitute,  as  in  [1, 6,  31]  Int.,
[6748a] Bm.{v—B).co8.{v—6)=h.sm,{2v—2d) ; sin.2(«— d)=i_i.cos.(2r— 2fi); cos.Hv—6)  =  i-^.co8.{2v—26);
we  shall  get,

je,,3,, ..tang.,=^-^|..(f).si„.(..-..)+(^^)+Q.cos.(2«-^)^-f.co3.M).(^^);
[67480 <i...a„s..='^.^r.(f)-n(f).cos.(2^2«)+(^).sb.(2.-2a)]-f.si„.(^).(^|).

VIII.  vi.  ^  18.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m\  mm',  m'^  he.  l63

18. The  square  of  the  principal  inequality  of  the  satellites^  which  we  have
developed  in  [6126 — 6193],  can  produce  a  sensible  term,  which  ive  shall  now [6748']
investigate. This  inequality  may  be  supposed  to  correspond  to  a  variable
ellij  sis,  and  in  this  case  it  affects  the  excentricity  and  the  perijove  of  the  orbit.
Now  since  6v  =  {}).sm.{2nt—2n't-\-2t — 2/)  [6172],  denotes  this  inequality [6749]
in  the  motion  of  the  first  satellite,  and 2e.sin.(n/-f  g — ra)  [6240«],  the  first [6750]
term  of  the  elliptical part  of  t; ; if  we represent  by ^.(e.sin.TO), and
(5.(e.cos.^), the variations  of e.sin.w and e.cos.t:?, depending on the
disturbing  force, we  shall  obtain  in v the  inequality,*

iv  =  2(J.(e.cos.'!3).3in.(n^+£) — 26.{e.s\n.zs).{ios.(nt-{-s).  [6752]

We  shall  put  the  inequality 6v  [6749],  under  the  following  form  ;  ^

6v  =  {\  ).cos.(nt — 2n't-\-s — 2s').  sin.(n^+f)  1

+( I  ).sm.(nt^2n't+^—2s').cos.(nt+s).  2  ^^^^^^

If  we  substitute,  in  these  expressions,  the  values  of i-7~)) (~r') [67186], and  reduce

the  products  by  means  of  the  formulas  [17 — 20]  Int.,  we  shall  find  that  the  resulting  terms

are  connected  with  angles  of  the  form 2« — 2w'±(2w — 2^), or 2i; — 2^, and  that  they  do [6748rf]

not  increase  by  the  integrations  like  those  of  the forms 2« — 2w'rbv, or  rather v — 2v',

which  are  retained  in  [67246 — e]  ;  therefore  we  may  neglect  them  ;  and  for  similar  reaso'ns

we  may  neglect  other  terms  arising  from  the  partial  differentials  of R, relative  to r and

/dR\  [ei7i8e]

V. The  terms  of  [67486,  c],  depending  on (-7-), may  also be neglected; for the

expression  of [~]~)  1 deduced  from  [6297],  is  of  the  small  order s, s' ; and  if  we

substitute  the  values  of 5=tang.{p.sin.(t> — 6), /  =  tang.(p'.sin.(i;' — (f)  [1330"], we  shall  [6748/]
easily  perceive  that  there  are  no  terms  produced,  of  the  proposed  order,  in  [67486,  c],  which

can  become  sensible  by  the  integrations. Similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  ^ ^■'

terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force  for  the  other  satellites m',  m",  rri".  [6748A]

*  (3464) From  [22]  Int.  we  get, sin.(n<-}-s-w)  =cos.zJ.sin.(n^-{-0~*^'°*^'Cos-("^~f~0  5
multiplying  this  by 2e, we  obtain  the  term  of v  [6750],  under  iha  following  form  ;  \plfiia\

2.(e.cos.TO).sin.(7if-|-0 — 2.  (e.sin.w). cos.  (n<-|~0-  [67526]

Substituting  the  parts  of (5.(e. cos.ro), ^.(e.sin.za), depending  on  the  disturbing  force,  it
becomes  as  in  [6752]. Putting  in  the  formula [21]  Int., a  =  «^-j-£, 6  =  n^-2n'<-f-e-2g', ^^'^^^''3
we  get  an  expression  of sin.(2w< — 2n'^-f"^^ — ^0  > ^"^  ^7  multiplying  it  by  (  i  ),  we  get [6752rf]
the  value  of  hv  [6749],  as  in  [6753]. Comparing  together  the  coefficients  of cos.(n^-j-Oj
in  the  equivalent  expressions  [6752,  6753],  we  get  [6754]. In  like  manner  the  coefficients [6752e]
ol  sin.(«<-j-Oj being  put  equal  to  each  other,  give  [6755].

164  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

Comparing  together  the  two  expressions  [6752,  6753],  we  get,
[67541  25.(€.sin.zi)  =  — ( I  ).  sin.(w^ — 2n't  +  s — 2^')  ;

[6755]  2<5.(e.cos.'n)  = ( I  ).cos.(nt—2n't-\-s—2s').

These  values  are  the  same  as  those  which  we  have  obtained  in  the  preceding

article. For  we  have  found  in  [6724],

L6756]  d.Ce.cos.vs)  =  — Jm'.F.  ndt.  \  1—  - — ^, — z^l  .sm.(nt—2n't  +  B—2^).

Hence  we  obtain,  by  integration,  the  corresponding  expression  of 6.(e.cos.^)
[6751],  or,

[6757]  26.(e,cos.^)  =  ^^.h— ^ ^^\ J.cos,(nt—2n't  +  s^2s'),

[6758] If  we  now  observe  that  we  have  very  nearly* N=  n—(0)  [67586],  and
by  [6132,  6172],  we  have,

[67591  r  O  = ^'•^•'^ .

*  (3465) We  may  neglect  the  terms  of N^  [6124] depending  on M, ^^% in

comparison  with  that  depending  on (p — |(p) ; as  is  evident from  the  estimated values

[6758a]  r  I  i(p\  N

[6485a,  Stc]  ;  hence  [6124]  becomes N^=;::n^,  <  1—2.  -^-^'  >  . Its  square  root  gives

[67586] very  nearly,  by  using (0)  [6216], JV=n— ^-^^^^^  =n-(0), as  in  [6758]. IVIoreover

[6758c]  by  comparing  the  expressions  of  Sv  [6132,  6172],  we  obtain  the  value  of  (i)  [6759].
Substituting  this  in  [6755],  we  get  [6758f/]  ;  making  successive  reductions,  by  changing
the  forms  of  the  factors,  and  using  n — JV=(0)  [6758],  we  finally  obtain  [6758/],  which
is  the  same  as  [6757].

[6758rf]  2.5.(c.cos.-ci)  =  g^_g^^;_^-  cos.(n^-2M'^+  s— Ss')

m'.F.n C  ,  (n— A") )  / ^ n  f,  , o  '\

t6758e]  ==  _^, .  ^  1~  2n-2n'-J^  \  '  ^^^'i^'-^^  ^+^"2^ )

rfi7^ftn  =  ^^  .  \  1—  c. L^l ..]  '  cos.(n<— 2nV+s-2/).

[6758/]  n—2n' I  2n— 2n'— A*5  ^

We  may,  in  a  similar  manner, prove  the  identity of  the  expressions  of 2.5.(e.sin.OT),

deduced  from  [6715,  6754]. For  by  inspection  we  see,  that  [6715]  may  be  derived  from

[6758^]  [6714],  by  changing  v,  zi,  into  v — 100°,  zs — 100°,  respectively,  in  the  terms  which
are  independent  of  R;  and  the  same  changes  are  to  be  made  in  [6719],  leaving  the  angle
2v — 2v'  [6719  lines  1,2], or 2nt — 2rt'i+26 — 2/, unaltered,  because  it  is  derived  from

[6758M  ^ »  ^°  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^®  P"^  ^^^  angle  nt — ^n't-^-s — 2/,  which  occurs  in  [6724],  under  the  form
(2n<— 2n7+2s— 2g') — {nt-X-s), we  must  consider {2nt — 2n'i  +  2£— 2e') as  invariable  ;

[6758t] but — (w^-fs) is  to  be  changed  into — {nt-\-s — ]00°)  =  — (n^-|-e)-f  100°  j or,  in  other

[6761]
[6762]

[6763]

VIII.  vi.  §  18.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^,  mm',  iri\  &c.  166

we  shall find that  this second  value  of 2.(J.(e.cos.TO) agrees  with the
preceding. Now  the  elliptical  expression  of  v  [669],  contains  the  following  ^

term ;  *

A€^sin.(2?i/+2s— 2t3)  =  A.(e^cos.^z3— elsin.^  w).sin.(2n^+2s)  1

— |-e^sin.trf.cos.TO.cos.(2w^-|-2s).  2

Changing  e.sin.w  into  e.sin.«4-6.(c.sin.ttf),  and  c.cos.w  into  e.cos.«-|-(5.(€.cos.TO),
we  find  that  the  expression  of  v contains  the  term,

m  =  f .{ [(5.(e.cos.ro)]2 — [5.(e.sin.w)]^}.sin.(2n/4-2s)  1

— |-.5.(e.cos.*).6.(e.sin.-5i).cos.(2n^+2s).  2

Substituting  for (J.(e.cos.ro), 6.(e.sin.TO), their  preceding  values,  there  will
arise  in  'O  the  inequality,t

5v  =  -*g. .(  I  )2. sin.(4n^— 4w'^  +  4s— 4s') ;  [6764]

words,  we  must  increase  the  angle nt — 2n'i-|-e — ^2/  [6724] by  100°  ; or  change sin.
into  COS. Hence  we  get  from  [6724],

(^.(e.sin.'ci)  =— Im'.F.nJi.  \  1—^-^1— ^l  .cos. (ni--2n'/+s— 2s').  [6758A:]

Now  by  comparing  the  second  members  of  [6758rf,/],  we  get 1 —  - — /_j>«=  ^ — ,  ^ ; [6758^  ]

substituting  this  in  [6758Ar],  and  then  taking  the  integral,  we  get,

5.(€.sm.t3)  =  — |.  g^_g^,_^ .  sm.(n<— 2n'<+s— 26^)  [6758ml

=  — i.(i).sin.(n^— 2n'<+s~2s'). [6759]  [6758n]

JMultiplying  this  last  expression  by 2, it  becomes  as  in  [6754].

*  (3466) We  obtain  by  development,  as  in  [22,  32,  31]  Int.,

sin.{(2n^-f  2s) — 2«}  =:  cos.2w.sin.(2n^j-2s) — sin.2«.cos.(2n^+2s)  [6760a]

=  (cos.^ts — sin.^TO).sin.(2n<-f2s) — 2.sin.«.cos.w.cos.(2n<-f-2s).  [67605]

Multiplying  this  by |e^, we  get  [6761]. Substituting  the  augmented  values  of e.sin.w,
c.cos.«  [6762],  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order (e.sin.TO).5.(e.sin.'a), we  get  [6763]. [6760c ]
These  neglected  terms  are  much  smaller  than  those  which  are  retained,  because 2e.sin.OT
is  less  than 2(3.(e.sin.'5j), the  former  being  of  the  order 40"  [6057/],  and  the  latter  of [6760rf]
the  order 5050",  [7513  line  5,  6754,  6172]. Similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to
the  corresponding  terms  in [7467  lines  1,  4], in  the value  of  v\ Those  of v" are '■ *'
neglected  from  their  smallness  in  [6766^].

t  (3467) Putting  for  brevity r=  n<— 2n'^+£— 2s', we  obtain  from [6754,  6755],
by  using  [31,32]  Int.,  ^^ ^^

VOL.  IV.  42

166  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  Cel.

we  shall  find  in  the  same  manner,  in v', the  inequality  [6765i]  ;  *
[6765]  6v'  =  TT •  (  "  )'.sin.(2»^— .2?i'i  +  2s— 2s')  ;

and  in v'\ the  inequality,!
[QiQQ]  6v"  =  t\.(  III  f.  sm.(2n'i^2n"t+2^—2^').

[67646]  [8.{e.cos.-a)f-'[S.{e.s\n.Ts)f  =  i.{  i  y.  {cos.^  T— sin.^  T}  =  i.(  i  f.cos.^T;

[6764c  ]  (5.(e.sin.-5j).  S.(e.cos.'ui)  =  —l.{  i  )2.sin.T.cos.  T=— 1.(  i  )2.sin.2r.

'  Substituting  these  in  [6763] and  reducing  by  means  of  [21]  Int.,  we  get,  by  successive
operations,  the  expression  [6764e],  being  the  same  as  in  [6764]  ;
[6764rf]  5«  =  T5^.(i)2.{cos.2T.sin.(2n^-f-2£)+sin.2r.cos.(2n^-f  2s)}

[6764e  ]  =  TF  •  ( I  )'^-sin-  (2n<+2s4-2  T)  =  iV  •  ( i  T-  sin .  {4nt—4n'i-{-4s—4/).

*  (3468) Using  the  abridged  symbol T  [6764a],  we  get,  from  [6173],  the  6rst  of  the
expressions  of  6v'  [6765a]. Developing  this  by  means  of  [21]  Int.,  we  get  [67656].

[6765a]  5«'  =  — (ii).sin.(T+n'^+£')

[67656]  =— ( ii).sin.T.cos.(n'r+s')— (  ii  ).cos.T.sin.(n'^+g').

[6765c]  Now  the  elliptical  value  of  v',  similar  to  that  of  v  [6750],  is  '2e'.s\n.{7i't-\-/ — u')  ;  and
if  we  develop  it,  as  in  [67526],  it  becomes,

[6765rf]  2.(e'.cos.-5j')-sin.(n'f4-£')— 2.(e'.sin.zi').cos.(n'<-|-£')  ;

and  the  variations  5.(e'.sin.ra'),  ^.(e'.cos.TO),  produce  in  this  term  of  v',  the  following
expression,  which  is  similar  to  [6752]  ;

[6765el  6v'  =  2.5.(e'.cos.TO').sin.  (n'^-j-s') — 2.5.(e'.sin.'c/)  .cos.(n'<-{-fi').

Putting  the  two  expressions  of  R'  [67656,  e]  equal  to  each  other,  and  then  comparing
separately  the  terras  which  are  multiplied  by  sin.(n'^-f-^')j  cos.(n'<-j-£'),  we  obtain  the
two  following  equations  ;

[6765/]  2.5.(e'.cos.-5/)  =  — (ii).cos.T;  2.5.{^'.s\a.i^')  =  (ii).s\n.T.

From  these  values  we  get,  in  like  manner  as  in  [67646,  c],

[67655-]  [8.(e'.cos.zi')f-me'.sm.'us')f=l.{uyxos.2T;  5.(e'.sin.-=/).5.(e'.cos.TO')=-|.(iif.sin.2r.
Now  accenting  the  letters  v,  n,  s,  -a,  in  [6763],  and  then  substituting  their  reduced
values  [6765o"],  we  get  the  expression  [6765A],  which  is  similar  to  [67646/] ;  and  by
successive  reductions,  using  [21]  Int.,  we  get  [6765i],  corresponding  to  [6765].

[6765^1]  y  ==  tV-  (  "  )''.{cos  2T.sin.(27t'<-|-2s')-f  sin.2T.cos.(2n'^4-2s')  \

[6765t  ]  =  ^5^ .  ( II  )2.sin.(2/i'<+2£'+2T)  =  yV  •  (  "  Y- sin.(2ni— 27i'^-f-2£— 2s').

t  (3469) Putting  for  a  moment  for  brevity T  =  n'<— 2w"^4-s'— 2s", we  find  that  the

value  of  5v"  [6174]  becomes,  as  in  [6766a]  ; and  by  developing,  as  in  the  preceding

notes,  it  becomes  as  in  [67666].
[6766a]  5o"  =  — (iii).sin.(T'+n"^-}-s")

[67666]  =  — ( III ).  sin.  T'.  cos.(7i"i+s")— ( i"  )-cos.  T.  sin.(n"<-f  s").

Comparing  this  with  the  expression  [6766c],  which  is  similar  to  [6752],  and  arises  from  the

greatest  of  the  elliptical  terms  of  v",

[6767]
[6767']

VIII.  vi.  <^  19].  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER m^  mm',  m'^,  Sic.  167

These  inequalities  are  very  small;  that  which  corresponds  to  v'  [6765  or  6947],  ^

is  the  only  one  deserving  of  notice.

The  square  of  the  disturbing  force  introduces  also,  into  the  coefficients  of
the  chief  inequality  of  each  of  the  three  first  satellites,  some  quantities,
which  increase  considerably  by  the  divisor  of  the  order  (n — 2n'/,  which
affects  them.  We  have  noticed,  in  §  4,  the  sensible  part  of  those
quantities  which  depend  on  the  product  of  the  masses  of  the  satellites  by  the
ellipticity  of  Jupiter's  spheroid,  in  determining  with  precision  the  values  of
N,  N',  N"  [6128,  &c.].*  The  other  parts  are  so  small,  that  they  may  be
neglected  without  any  sensible  error.

19.  We  have  determined  in  [6530,  &c.]  the  secular  equations  of  the  motions
of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  and  we  have  observed  that  the  only  part  of  these
equations  which  can  finally  become  sensible,  is  that  which  depends  on  the
secular  variations  in  the  elements  of  Jupiter's  orbit,  and  in  the  position  of
its  equator  [6525].  If  the  part  of  dRj  depending  on  the  square  of  the  [6768]
disturbing  force,  contain  any  terms  of  the  form dR=  Q.H^.dt, Q  being [6769]

Sv"  =  2.5.(e".cos.75").sin.(n"<+£")— 2.<5.(e".sin.ro").cos.(n"<+£") ;  [6766c  ]

we  get  the  two  equations  [6766rf],  which  are  similar  to [6765/*];  from  these  we  easily
deduce  the  expressions  [6766e],  corresponding  to  [67650-]  ;

2.5.(c".cos.-n")  =  — ( III  ).cos. T  ;  2.5.(e".sin.z5")  =  ( in  ).sin. T ;  [6766rf]

[S.{e\cos.-s/')]^—[5.{e".sm.m")f  =  i.(  iii  )2  cos.2r' ;
6.{e".sm.^").5.{e".cos.zi")  =  — |.(iii)2.sin.2T'.
Now  putting  two  accents  on v,  n,  e,  -a  [6763],  we  obtain  the  corresponding  term  of Sv";
and  by  substituting  [6766e],  we  get,  by  successive  reductions,  the  expression [6766g-],
which  is  similar  to  that  in  [6765i].

6t,"  =  ^5^.(iii)2.{cos.2T'.sin.(2n'7+2£")-fsin.2T'.cos.(2n'V-f2£")}  [6766/]

=  3-^.(111  )2.sin.(2n"<-f  2/'-f  27")  =  ^^^ .  (iii)^  sin.(2n'<— 2/i"i-|-2s'— 2s").  [6766g]

This  last  expression  corresponds  to  [6766].

[6766e]

[6767o]

*  (3470) The  terms  here  referred  to  are  those  in  [6139, 6140;  6160,6161 ;  6164,6165].

For  we  have  very  nearly,  as  in  [6758,  &c.], y=  n — (0)  ; N'  =  n' — (1),  &c. ; hence

we  get,  by  developing  in  series  the  following  expression  of  the  divisor  in  [6139,  &c.],

1  ^  3  ^  _J _(1) |_  0, .

n-n'-JV' „_2n'-Hl) n-2n' {n-2n'f  "^  '  [6767fc]

and  in  this  way  the  term  depending  on  the  ellipticity (1), is  virtually  introduced  with  the

divisor (n — 2n')^, being  of  the  same  order  as  the  terms  which  are  mentioned  in  [6767] .

Moreover  we  have  seen  in  [6485a — e],  that  the  part  depending  on  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter [^''^'^1

is  greater  than  those  arising  from  the  action  of  the  sun  and  satellites,  as  in  [6767'J.

168  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6770] a  constant  coefficient^  and H  [6527]  the  excentricity  of  Jupiterh  orbits  it  is

[6771] evident  that  the  corresponding  part  of the  double integral J[f3andtAR,
which  enters  into  the  expression  of 5v  [6771c],  will  acquire,  hy  integration,

[6771']  a  divisor  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force,*  which  will
render  it  sensible,  and  it  will  become  of  the  same  order  as  the  quantities  we

[6772]  have  determined  in  [6530,  &c.]  ;  it  is  therefore  important  to  notice  such
terms,  or  to  prove  that  no  such  ones  exist.

In  the  first  place  we  may  observe, that  in  the  function R, the  quantity

[6773]  H^  cannot  be  multiplied  by  the  sin.2/,  or  cos.2/;  /  being  the  longitude
of  the  perihelion  of  Jupiter  [6276] ;  because  the  value  of  R  is  independent
of  the  arbitrary  point,  which  is  taken  for  the  origin  of  the  longitudes
[949 — 950].  The  non-periodical  part  of  R,  depending  on  the  square  of
the  disturbing  force,  and  multiplied  by  H^,  can  be  produced  only  by  the
combination  of  two  angles  which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  under  the  sign

[6774]  of  cosine  ;  for  R  evidently  contains  only  cosines.f  We  shall  put  H^  under
the  following  form  ;  %

( i,{nt^MtJr^-E)^2.{Mt-^E-I)l

f'"'"^  ^  •'^'''- 1  -^i.(nt^Mt+s-E)^2.{Mt+E^J)  \  '

[6771o]
[67716]

*  (3471) The  square  of  the  excentricity e^  [1109],  which  is  named H^ in  [6770],
depends  on  angles  of  the  form gt-\-^  ', g  being  of  the  same  order  as  the  disturbing  forces
[1097c]; so  that  if  we  put H'^  =  's!.N.cos.{gt-\-^), we  shall have, as  in  [6769],
d22=  (^.dt.:^' .JV.cos.{gt-\-^). Now  we  see,  in  [6060  or  6561/],  that v contains  a  term
'■  ■' of  the  form 6v  =  ff^andtAR  [6771]  ; and  by  substituting  the  preceding  value  of  AR

[6771{/]  [677 J c],  it  becomes  of  the  form  6v=z=JJ^an.(^dt^.'L'.N.cos.{gt-\-^)  ;  then  it  is  evident
that  the  double  integration  introduces  the  divisor  ^,  of  the  same  order  as  the  square  of
the  disturbing  force  [6771a]  ; as  is  stated  in  [6771'].

[6774a]

t  (3472)  This  is  evident,  by  comparing  the  expression  of  R  [949]  with  its
developments  [957,  &c.]  ;  and  it  will  also  be  manifest  from  the  development  of  R  in  the
following  note.

J  (3473)  If  we  develop  the  value  of  R  relative  to  the  sun's  action,  as  we  have  done
[6775a]  for  that  of  the  satellite,  in  [6090,  Stc],  without  restricting  it  to  its  first  terms,  as  in
[6100, 6103,  &IC.]  ;  but  carrying  on  the  approximation  so  as  to  contain  multiples  of  the
angle  nt — Mt-\-z — JEJ,  we  shall  find  that  R  will  contain  cosines  of  angles  of  the  form
cos.i.Qxt — Mt-\-s — E)\  i  being  an  integral  number,  including  i=0[954"].  Moreover
the  term  H.cos.{Mt-{-E — /)  is  introduced,  in  [6275],  by  means  of  tire  excentricity  of
'■  ^ Jupiter's  orbit; and  its  square  will produce H^.cos.2.{Mt-\-E — /). Hence  it  follows

VIII.  vi.  <§.  19.]  INEQUALITIES  OF  THE  ORDER n?,  mm',  m'^,  he.  169

[6776]

[6777]

Part  of  the  angle  contained  under  the  sign  of  cosine  may  appertain  to  the
co-ordinates  of  m,  and  this  part  is  the  only  one  which  must  be  varied  in
R  to  obtain  dR  ;  now  whatever  this  part  may  be,  it  is  evident  that  the
differential  of  the  preceding  term  is  nothing ;  therefore  dR  contains  no
term  of  the  form  Q.H^.dt  [6769],  depending  on  the  square  of  the
disturbing  force.  It  is  evident  that  the  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to
the  terms,  depending  on  the  change  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Jupiter.
Thus  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force  does  not  introduce  any  sensible
quantity  in  the  secular  equations  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  or  in  the  secular
equation  of  the  moon.

that  the  angles  connected  with  the  coefficient H^j which  mutually  destroy  each  other,

and  produce H^ independent  of  the  cosines,  must  be  of  the  forms  assumed  in  [6775].

Now  the  diiSerential  of  a  term  of  the  form  [6775],  being  taken  relative  to  the  characteristic [6775d]

d, which  affects  only  the  co-ordinates  of  m, changes  the  cosine  into  sine; and  as  the

angle  under  the  sign  of  cosine  or  sine  is  identically  nothing,  its  sine  must  vanish,  so  that [6775e]

dZ?  =  0, as  in  [6776,  &;c.].

VOL.  IV.  43

170

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

CHAPTER  VII.*

NUMERICAL VALUES  OF THE PRECEDING INEaUALITIES.

Sideral
revolu-
tions.

[6778]
[6779]
[6780]
[6781]

Values  of

n, w',

[6782]
[6783]
[6784]

20.  To  reduce  the  preceding  inequalities  to  numbers,  we  must  know  the
times  of  the  sideral  revolutions  of  the  satellites,  and  their  mean  distances
from  Jupiter's  centre. These  durations  are  by  the  tables.

First  satellite l''^y%7691 37787  ;  log.  =  0,2477617

Second  satellite 3 ,551181017;  log.  =  0,5503728

Third  satellite 7 ,154552808  ;  log.  =  0,8545825

Fourth  satellite  1 6 ,68901 9396  ;  log.  =  1 ,2224308  .

The  values  of n,  n',  w",  n'", are  inversely  proportional  to  these  times ;
hence  we  have,t

n  =  n'".  9,433419 ;  log.  coeff.  =  0,9746691 ;

n'  =  n'".  4,699569  ;  log.  coeff.  =  0,6720580 ;

n"  =  n'",  2,332643  ;  log.  coeff.  =  0,3678483 .

*  (3474) In  tlie  original  work  this  is  erroneously  named  Chapter  VI,  and  a  similar
[6778a] gj.j.or  is  found  in  the  names  of  all  the  succeeding  chapters  of  this  book. We  have  corrected
these  mistakes,  by  increasing  each  of  the  numbers  by  unity.

[6781a]
[67816]

[6781c]
[6781(fl

[6781e]
[6781/]

t  (3475)  Dividing  the  number  of  days  in  [6781]  by  those  in  [6778,  6779,6780],  we
get  the  coefficient  of  n'",  in  the  second  members  of  the  expressions  [6782,  6783, 6784]
respectively.  Instead  of  expressing  these  quantities  in  terms  of  n'",  we  may  denote  them
by  terms  of  n,  v!,  n" ;  and  as  these  values  are  frequently  required  in  this  work,  we  have
inserted  them,  for  convenience,  at  the  beginning  of  this  volume,  in  [6025a — j)\.  These
expressions  are  easily  deduced  from  those  in  [6782—6784].  For  the  same  cause  we  have
also  reduced  the  values  [6835—6838,6840]  to  similar  forms,  as  in  [6025e— i].  The
mean  sideral  motion  of  the  first  satellite,  in  the  time  ld»y,769137787,  [6778],  is  4000000";
hence  its  motion  in  one  Julian  year  is  825826010";  which  represents  the  value  of  n
[6062',  6025A:]. In  like  manner  we  get,  from  [6779,  6780,  6781],  the  values  of  n',  n",  n'",

VIII.  vii.  <§.  20.]

NUMERICAL  ELEMENTS.

171

To  determine  the  mean  distances  «,  a',  a",  a'",  we  shall  observe  that  the
greatest  elongation  of  the  fourth  satellite  from  Jupiter,  in  its  mean  distance,
and  seen  at  the  mean  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun,  has  been  observed
by  Pound,*  to  be 1530",864  =  496'. He  also  observed, at  the same

[6785]

as  in  [6025A:].  Finally,  in  order  to  obtain,  at  one  view,  a  comparison  of  the  different  angles,
we  have  inserted  in  [6025o,p]  the  values  of  g,  gi,  g^,  ga  [7176,7183,7190,7195];
and  those  of  p,  p,,  p,,  p,  [7226,  7233,7238,7245],  M  [7253^*],  n—M,hc.  [6025n].
The  angles  given  in  [6025//1 — p],  according  to  the  theory,  are  used  by  Delambre  in  the
edition  of  his  tables,  printed  at  Paris  in  1817  ;  but  the  values  of  n,  n',  k,c.  are  varied
a  little.  The  times  of  the  synodical  motions,  used  in  the  construction  of  the  tables  of  this
last  edition,  are  as  follows,  using  sexagesimal  hours,  minutes  and  seconds  ;

First  satellite  1^  18"  28"*  35',945374812  =  l'J^y%769860479  ;
Second  satellite  3  13  17  53  ,730106062  =  3  ,554094098  ;
Third  satellite  7  03  59  35,82511281  =  7  ,166386865;
Fourth  satellite  16 18  05 07,0209844 =16 ,753553484.

Supposing,  as  in  Bouvard's  tables  of  Jupiter,  that  the  motion  of  the  planet,  from  the  fixed
equinox  in  a  Julian  year,  is  33^,7212094  or  33°,7366724  from  the  earth's  moveable
equinox,  we  shall  obtain  the  motions  n,  n',  n",  n'",  of  the  satellites,  from  the  same
moveable  equinox,  in  100  Julian  years,  according  to  these  tables  of  Delambre,  namely.

First  satellite 8258261^,65128 ;

Second  satellite  41 14125  ,82948;

Third  satellite 2042057,91292;

Fourth  satellite 875427  ,46850;
agreeing  very  nearly  with  the  values  adopted  by  the  author  [7253 — 7257].

[6781g]

[6781/i]

[678H  ]
[678U]
[6781Z ]
[6781m]

[6781n]

[67810]
[6781p]
[6781?]
[6781  r]
[67815]

*  (3476) Pound's  measure  of  the  elongations 1530",864, being divided  by  the
semi-diameter |Xl20",3704, gives the value of a'", expressed in parts of this [6787a]
semi-diameter,  as  in  [6787]. The  elongations  of  the  fourth  satellite  were  observed  very
carefully  by  Professor  Airy,  in  the  autumn  of  1832,  and  the  results  of  his  observations  are L^'^^^*]
given  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of  London. With
these  new  observations,  he  has  re-computed  the  mass  of  Jupiter,  by  the  method  given  by l^"^^"^^]

La  Place  in  [4065]  ;  and  has  increased  it  from  [406 If?] to j^To-  ; which  agrees [6787rf]

very  nearly  with  Encke's  estimate  , from  the  perturbations  of  Vesta ; and  with

that  of  Nicolai, jq^^ q^.  [4061^],  from  the  perturbations  of  Juno; and  by  this  means  he [6787e]

has  nearly  removed  the  discrepancy  in  the  different  estimates  of  the  mass,  mentioned  in
[4061^— m].

172  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

distance,  the  diameter  of  Jupiter's  equator  to  be  120",3704  =  39'. Taking

this  semi-diameter  for  unity,  we  shall  have,
[6787]  a'"  =  25,43590 ;  log.  a!"  =  1 ,4054471 .

There  may  be some inaccuracy  in  this  value  of  the  ratio  of a'" to  the

semi-diameter  of  Jupiter's  equator, arising from the  uncertainty  in the
[6788] estimate  of  Jupiter's  diameter,  in  consequence  of  the  effect  of  the  irradiation

in  its  measure. This  cannot  produce  any  sensible  error  in  the  following
r6788'i ^^s^^^s  i ^M^  the  unity  we  make  use  of may  not  accurately  represent  the

semi-diameter  of  Jupiter^ s  equator.

With  respect  to  the  distances a,  a',  a", it  is  much more  accurate to

compute  them,  from  the  value  of a'", by  Kepler's  law  [387],  than  to  deduce

them  from  observation. According  to  this  law, the mean  distance a, of

/  ///a
the  first  satellite  from  Jupiter's  centre,  is «  =  «'".  \  3/ __.  * But the

accuracy  of  this  expression  is  a  little  impaired,  by  the  forces  disturbing  the
motions  of  the  satellites,  which,  as  we  have  seen  in  [6079",  6123],  add  to
the  mean  distances  a  and  a'"  the  quantities  6a  and  6a'";  whose
analytical  values  are  given  in  [6123,  6125].  The  only  sensible  term  in  these
quantities  is  that  depending  on  the  oblcUeness  of  Jupiter,  which  we  may

[6790] represent  by 6a  =  a.  ^.rj^  ;  t we  must  therefore  add  this  quantity  to  the

[6789]

[6789^]

[6789a]  *  (3477) We  have,  as  in  [61 10], o^n^^  1  =a'"^n'"^  ;  hence  we  easily  obtain  [6789].

[6790  1 t  (3478) It  is  evident  from  the  calculations  in  [6485a — e,  &cc.],  that  the  terms  of  the
second  member  of  [6123],  depending  on M,  m', are  much  smaller  than  those  depending

[6790&] on p — |(p  ;  and  by  neglecting  them  we  shall  have —=-——, as in [6790]. Now

_2  1 •  f  {?—h^)  -2  (P — h^)

[6790c] from  [6789ff]  we  have a=n  ^  nearly;  and  by  adding  it  to dfl  =  a.— — r-=w  's.  ■  >

we  get  the  expression  [6792]. Putting  three  accents  to  the  letters a,  n, in [6792],

we  get  the  expression  [6793],  corresponding  to  the  fourth  satellite w'". Dividing  [6792]

[6790i] by  [6793],  and  multiplying  the  result  by a'", we  get  [6794]. Substituting  in  [6794]

the  values  of  n,  d"  [6782,  6787],  we  obtain [6797] ; observing that  we  may  use  the

[6790e] value  of  a  [6795]  in  finding  the  divisor ^2  ; h«t  if  we  wish  merely  to  verify  the  value  of

a  [6797],  it  will  be  rather  more  accurate  to  substitute,  at  once,  in  the  term —  [6794], the

[6790/"! ^^^"^  °^  "  [6797]  ; and  we  shall  find  that  the  result  agrees  with  the  calculation  of  the
author. In  like  manner,  by  accenting  successively  the  letters a,  n, [6794],  with  one  or

VIII.  vii.  «^20.]

NUMERICAL  ELEMENTS.

173

value  of a, given  by  the  equation w^=—  [6110c]. Hence  we  shall  have,

a  =  «-».{l+i.f-^)|;

and  for  the  same  reason,

a"'  =  7i"'-i.

1+i.

Therefore  we  shall  have,

in  this  expression  we  may  substitute a'".

\-

],a"':

""' for a [6789], in the

divisor -r . Hence  it  is  easy  to  ascertain  the  values  of a',  a". The  value

of  (p — ^9)  may  be  determined  with  precision,  by  the  motions  of  the  orbits
of  the  satellites.  The  first  approximation  gave  its  value  p — ^?  =  0,021 7794 ;
and  this  is  so  near  to  the  corrected  value  [7152],  that  the  difference  cannot
have  any  sensible  influence  on  the  following  computations.  Hence  we
obtain.

a  =  5,698491
a'  =  9,066548
«"  =  14,461893
a'"  =25,43590.

log.  a  =0,7557599
log.  a'  =0,9574420
log.  a"  =  1,1602252
log.  a'"  =1,4054471.

[6791]
[6792]

[6793]
[6794]

[6795]
[6796]

Mean
distances
of  the
satellites
from
Jupiter
expressed
in  parts  of
its  equato-
rial radios.

[6797]
[6798]
[6799]
[6800]

two  accents,  we  get  the  values  of  a\  a' ;  and  by  reducing  them  to  numbers,  we  find  that
they  agree  with  [6798,6799].  We  have  verified  these  calculations,  and  find  for  the  part
of  [6794],  wliich  is  independent  of  p — Jsp,  the  terms  in  [6790/i]  ;  and  that  depending  on
p— J?),  as  in  [6790i]  ;  the  sums  of  these  give  the  values  of  a,  a',  a",  a'"  [6790A:],
agreeing  with  [6797—6800].

First  term
Second  term

5.697281
1210

Sum  gives a  =  5.698491

9.065849
699

a'=  9.066548

14.461551
340

a"=  14.461891

25.43590
0

a'"=25.43590

VOL. IV.

44

[6790g]

[6790h]
[6790t]
[6790*]

Hence  we  see  that  these  values  of a,  a',  d\  a'", computed  in  this  manner,  contain  the
term depending  on p — |cp  [6792], and  it  is  therefore very  properly  omitted  in  the
constant  terms  of 5r,  ^r',  y\  5/"  [6843,  6845,  6847,  6849] ; so  that  it  is  evident  that [6790i  ]
there  is  no  ground  for  the  objection  to  this  omission,  which  is  made  by  Professor  Airy,  in
his  paper  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London,  Vol.  VI.  p.  88,  98.

174

/

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[M6c.  C6\.

First  and
second  '
satellites.

Combining  these  values  together, two  by  two,  we  have  deduced,  by  means
of  the  formulas  [963'^— 1008'],  the  following  results  ;

I.  AND  II.  Satellites, m,  m'.

[6801]

[6802]

(6803]

a=  4  =  0,62851829;*

[6806]

[6807]

[6808]

[6809]

log.^  =  9,7983179;

hence  we  deduce,

b[ll  =  2,02968796  ; 6!!|  =  —0,5957 19117
Then,

¥^^  =0,7543117;
^(4)  =0,1065115;

6jO)  =  2,2588400 ;
6f  =  0,1923542;
5f  =  0,0349955 ;

6f)  =  0,3632143 ;
b['^  =  0,0605324 ;

da-

=  1,099916;

[6804]

dbf
d^

=  1,084600;

dhf  _
d(X

=  0,366639.

[6805]

=  2,571615.

First  and

third

Batellites.

6f )  =  0,0204800 .
-^=  1,750014;

^  =  0,773248 ;

^  =  1,452760;
^  =  0,537010;

act

1.  AND  III.  Satellites, m,  m".

a  =  -  =  0,394034909  ;

a

log.  -^  =  9,5955347  ;

bill  =  —0,386231350.

hence  we  deduce,

6^^  =  2,078416242;
Then,

&<«)  =  2,0852433 ;  ¥^^  =  0,4194902 ; 6f  =  0,1248495  ;

bf  =  0,041 1410 ;  W^  =  0,01421 10  ; 6f  =  0,0050800 .

dk
da.

db^

da.

t±.  =  0,476087  ;

db'P

-^  =  0,329802 ;

=  1,208235;
=  0,149798.

^  =  0,681369;

aa

1

2
3

1

2
3

1

2

1

2

[6801a]

*(3479) The  value  of  a  [6801],  is  deduced  from a  =  4  [6304]; by  substituting

the  values  of  a,  a!  [6797,  6798]. In  like  manner,  those  in [6806,  6810,  &c.] are  the
[68016] values  of  — , — ,  &c. From  these  we  deduce  the  values  of  6^, 6^; bf\ 6^i\&cc.;

[6801c] -r-5 -j^  >  *^c. ; m the  same manner  as in  the  planetary  calculations  [4086a — e] ;

Vm.  vii.  §  20.]  VALUES  OF 6«^ AND  ITS  DIFFERENTIALS.

I.  AND  IV.  Satellites, m,  m!".

a  =  4,  =  0,224033410;

a

a
a

6^)

hence  we  deduce,

6^)  =2,025175212;
Then,

hf  =  2,025831  ; hf  =  0,228387  ;

hf  =  0,0071873  ; 6^^)  =  0,0014098  ;

log.  5;  =  9,3503128;
0,222618894.

rt.  =  0,237381  ;

aa

^=0,097721;

do.

=  1,059579  ;

6f  =0,0384562;
6^=0,0002846.

":*-  =  0,350827;
aa

^  =  0,025197.
aa

II.  AND  III.  Satellites,  w',  m",

a  =  4  =  0,626926714 ; log.  ^  =  9,7972168  ;

hence  we  deduce,

6^J  =  2,20191 1334  ; b^^  =  —0,594386339.
Then,

6w  =  0,7515340 ;

6i^)  =  0,105293;

6(^)  =  0,020107.

hf  =  2,2570986 ;
6|3)=  0,1906386;
hf^  =  0,034428  ;

6(2)  =0,3609108;
hf  =  0,059691  ;

^=1,093150;

<Za

^=1,076290;
aa

^=0,361124.

aa

^3)  ^  2,531511.

-^=1,743650;

aa

^'  =  0,765517;
aa

^=1,444842;
aa

-^  =  0,530315 ;

aa

II.  AND  IV.  Satellites, m',  m'",

a  =  -4  ==  0,356447000 ;  log.  4  =  9,5519949 ;

a  a

1

2

1

2

1

2
3

3

175

First  and

fourth

satellites.

[6810]

[6811]
[6812]
[6813]

Second
and  third
Mtellites.

[6814]

[6815]

[6816]

2 [6817]

[6818]

Second
and  fourth
satellites.

[6819]

retaining  only  such  terms  as  are  useful  in  the  subsequent  calculations,  on  account  of  their
producing  sensible  inequalities. 1  have  not  verified  these  numbers,  but  by  a  very  rough [6801rf]
calculation  find  that  they  agree  nearly  with  the  results  for  similar  values  of  a, in  the
planetary  calculations  [4085 — 4227].

176

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

[6820]

[6821]

[6822]

hence  we  deduce,

6(^=2,064048552;
Then,

6^  =  2,0685085;

6f  =  0,0300272 ;

6!!i  =  — 0,350692291.

^=0,415141;

da

^  =  0,263317;

oa

6(')  =  0,374917;
6^*)  =  0,0093817;

J^l')

^  =  1,164667;

db[^^

da.

0,108542.

6^  =  0,1008003;
6f  =  0,0030277 .

^  =  0,599392;
aa

1

2
1

2

Third  and

fourth

satellites.

[6823]
[6824]

[6825]

III.  AND  IV.  Satellites, m",  m'".

[6826]

[6827]

Approxi-
mate
values  of
the  masses
of  the
satellites.

[6828]
[68295
[68.30]
[6831]
[6832]

^=^,  =  0,568562391 ;
a

hence  we  deduce,

6i!J  =  2,165200864;

Then,

6[°)  =2,1996536;

6f^=  0,135969;

6f  =  0,018696;

log- ^  =  ^.7547781;

¥21  =  —0,544549802.

"4^  =  0,878931;
aa

^=0,812421;

aa

db'f\

6['>  =  0,6558357;
6J^)  =  0,068124;
6f)=  0,010398.

^=1,545882;

aa

d//^^

<fa

0,526520;

6f  =  0,284370 ;
6^.5)  =0,035180;

-^  =  1,190293;
aa

fjf)(5)

-^  =  0,330751;
aa

dn

0,201993.

1

o

3

1

2
3

21. Usmg  these  values  and  the  formulas  in  §  3  [6078 — 6125],  we  have
deduced  the  following  results  ;  supposing,  as  in  [6796],  that

p_i<P  =^  0,0217794  ;  log.(p— 19)  =  8,3380459.

The  values  of  iV,  N',  N\  N'"  [6833«,  &c.],  depend  considerably  upon
p — J(j3;  and  its  effect  is  most  sensibly  seen  in  the  expression  of  N  [Q^SSd],
These  values  depend  also  upon  the  masses  of  the  satellites  wi,  m',  m",  m'".
By  the  first  approximation  we  have  obtained,

m  =0,0000184113;
m'  =0,0000258325;
m"  =0,0000865185;
m!"  =  0,00005590808  ;
Jupiter's  mass  =  1.

VIII.  vii.  «§>  21].  VALUES  OF 6^ AND  ITS  DIFFERENTIALS.  177

The  smallness  of  the  influence  of  the  masses  of  the  satellites  upon  the  values
of  N,  N'f  &c.,  renders  the  errors  arising  from  any  inaccuracy,  in  the
estimated  values  of  those  masses,  insensible.  The  mass  m'  is  multiplied,
in  the  expression  of N^  [6124],  by  the  function,

«\-^;  +  ^-«{^^)'*  ^6833]

We  have  found,  in  [1075],  that  this  function  can  be  reduced  to  the  form,

""  \-d^)  +  2-«  \-^J  =  2.(l-a2)2  '  [6834]

we  may  therefore  easily  compute  it,  as  well  as  the  analogous  functions,  by
means  of  the  numerical  results  in  [6801 — 6826].  This  being  premised,
we  find,

/

N  =w"'.  9,4269 167
N'  =n'".  4,6979499
N"  =n"'. 2,3323090

log.  9,4269 1 67  =  0,9743697 ;  [6835]

log.  4,6979499  =  0,67 1 9084 ;  [6836]

log.  2,3323090  =  0,3677861 ;  [6837]

N'"  =  n'".  0,9999070. log.  0,9999070  =  9,9999596.  [6838]

Then  by  supposing the  time of  the  sideral  revolution  of  Jupiter  to  be [6839]

4332''^y%602208,  we  shall  have,t

M=  n'".  0,00385 196 ; log.0,00385196  =  7,5856818  ;  [6840]
from  these  we  have  deduced  the  following  formulas,  in  which  the  quantities  %

*  (3480) Substituting  in  [6124]  the  value  of  the  function  [6834],  we  obtain,

JV^  =  nK  I  1-2.  -^  -1.  -  -\-^-m.^^^  j  .  [6833a]

Substituting in  this  expression  the  values  [6782,  6797—6800,  6827—6831],  we  get JV
[6835]  ;  including  in  the  terms  under  the  sign 2 those  which  correspond  to  the  satellites [^8336]
m', to", ni" ; the value of o-, corresponding thereto, being respectively as in
[6801,6806,6810]. Again,  by  changing,  in  [6833a],  the elements  of  m into  those  of
m', and  the  contrary,  we  can  obtain,  by  a  similar  calculation,  the  value  of N'  [6836] ;
the  terms  under  the  sign 2 being,  in  this  case, m,  m",  m'", and  the  values  of  a are [6833rf]
those  in [6801,6814,6819]. In  like manner  we  obtain JV\  N'"  [6837,  6838]. I [6833c]
verified  the  calculation  of JV  [6835],  but  did  not  re-compute  [6836—6838].  [683.3/]

[6833c]

t  (3481) From  [6781,  6839]  we  have,

M :  n!"  : :  16'i^ys6890 19396  :  4332'^«y%602208  : :  0,00385196  : 1,  [6840a]

as  in  [6840].

J  (3482) To  avoid  confusion,  we  have  here  introduced the  Roman  letters m,  m',
m",  m'", instead  of  the  Italic  letters  used  by  the  author,  for  these  augmented  values ;  so '• '*-'
VOL.  IV.  45

178

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C61.

[6841]

Inequali-
ties of  the
longitudes
of  the  first
satellite.

[6842]

in,  m',  m",  m'", denote  respectively  the masses m, m!
satellites,  multiplied  by  10000.*

+ I87",4465.sin. (n't—nt-{-t'—^)

-21736",4863.sin.2.(n'i— w^H-e'— a)

_ __ 70",8315.sin.3.(w'^— w^+s'— 0

6v  —  m.(__ i6/'j926.sin.4.(/i'r— n^+s'— 0

—  5".4039.sin.5.(n'i— Ti^+s'— 0

—  2".  1433.sin.6.(ri'^— wi+  /—  0

m

m"

1

2

3

4

6

6

of  the

that  by  using  the  approximate  values  [6828 — 6831],  we  shall  have,
[68416]  m =10000.m  =0,184113;

[6841c  ]  m'  =  lOOOO.wi'  =  0,258325  ;

[6841rf]  m"  =  lOOOO.m''  =  0,865185  ;

[6841e  ]  n^"=  10000.m"'=  0,5590808.

*  (3483) The  value  of  ^v  [6842],  is  computed  from  the  formula  [6119],  neglecting
the  term  [6119  line  1]  depending  on t, as  in  [6121] ; and  using  the  values  of A^^\

A^^\kjc.', {—r), (-T-)'  ^c.  [996—1001]. Then  substituting  the  values of  the

elements  of  the  satellites,  and  those  of  the  functions  depending  on  b  and  its  differentials
[6782—6840],  we  obtain  [6842].  In  like  manner,  the  values  of  5v\  6v",  6v"'
[6844,6846,6848],  are  computed  by  changing  successively,  in  [6119],  the  elements  of
m  into  those  of  m',  m'',  m'",  and  the  contrary ;  and  then  using  the  numerical  values
contained  in  [6782 — 6840].  I  did  not  examine  these  numerical  calculations,  except  in  a
few  of  the  most  important  terms.  The  values  in  [6842  lines  2,  14],  were  found  to  be
correct.

Again,  if  we  put r=a-\-6r  [6057oJ  in  the  first  member  of  [6116],  and  neglect 6r'^,

[6842d] it  becomes — . Substituting  the value  of A:  [6122], in the constant part of this
[6842e  1

[6842a]

[68426]
[6842c]

[6842/]

[6842g]
[6842/i]
[6842i ]

[6842/r]

expression  [6116  line  1], and  reducing  as  in [6117a,  &c.], it  becomes  as  in  [6123]. If

we  now  substitute,  in  the  periodical  terms  of  [6116],  the  numerical  values  [6782 — 6840],

and  then  multiply  by a, we  shall  obtain  the  corresponding  terms  of 6r  [6843]  nearly.

The  constant  parts  corresponding to  the  function  [6123],  are  particularly  examined  in

[6843a — v],  on  account  of  the error  of  the  author  in the  signs. In  like manner,  by

changing  successively  the  elements  of m into those of mf, m",  mf", in  the  functions

(Jr' 6r" 6r"'
[6116,  6123],  we  obtain  the  values  of — , —  , -^. Multiplying these  by a\ a" or

^t  d  €t

a'",  we  get  5r',  5r",  6r",  respectively.  The  periodical  terms  agree  with  those  in
[6845,6847,6849].  The  constant  terms  are  noticed  in  [6845/,  6847c,  6849c].  The
whole  of  this  calculation  is  similar  to  that  in  [4277a — p],  corresponding  to  the  planetary
orbits,  to  which  we  may  refer  for  the  purpose  of  illustration.  I  examined  the  calculation
of  the  chief  term  of 6r  [6843  line  3],  and  made  it  the  same  as  that  of  the  author.

VIII.  vii.  ^21.] PERTURBATIONS  INDEPENDENT  OF  e,  e',  he. ;  s,  s',  he.

179

-fra".

+  21",9334.sin. (n"t—nt-\-^'—s)
— 18",5197.sin.2.(n"^~-w^+£"— s)

—  r,90n.sm.S.(n"t—nt+B"^i)

—  0",3569.sm.4>.(n"t—nt+s"—s)

+  m'

•+  3",6109.sin. (n"'t—nt+^"sy
— l",5588.sin.2.(n"7— /^^|-e'"— s)
[—0",\01d.s'm.3.(n"'t—nti-s"'—sy

+  0\U60.sm.(2nt—2Mt-{-2s—2E).

—0,000041267,*
+  0,00046652.cos.  (n't—nt  +  ^
— 0,09764199.cos.2.(7i7— n^  4-s'  — s
^r  =  m'.  /  _0,00040917.cos.3.(7i7— n^+a'—s
— 0,00010761.cos.4.(n'^— ni +£'— £
— 0,00003824.cos.5.(n7— w^  +£'—£
— 0,00001642.cos.6.(n7— w^  +s's

7

8

9

10

11
12
13
14

1

2
3
4
6
6
7

[6842]

Inequali-
ties of  the
radios
vector  of
the  first
satellite.

[6843]

*  (3484) The  constant  terms  in  the  values  of 6r,  5/,  Sr",  8r"  [6843  lines  1,  8,  13, 17  ;
6845  lines  1,7,13,  17; 6847  lines  1,5,12,19; 6849  lines  1,  4,  8, 12], are  given  in

conformity  with  the  value  of  —  [6123]  ; from  which  we have  deduced the  expression

[6343i],  by  multiplying  by  a,  and  changing  Sa  into  Sr,  in  conformity  with  the  notation
here  used ;

We  have  neglected  the  part  of  5r,  which  depends  on  p  —  ^cp,  because  it  has  already  been
introduced  into  the  values  of  a,  a',  a'\  a'"  [6790A:,  kc.].  If  we  change  successively,  in
[68436],  the  elements  of  m  into  those  of  m',  m"  or  m'",  and  the  contrary,  we  shall  get
6r,  6r",  y.  It  will  be  seen  in  [7078,  7079,  &z;c.],  that  the  only  parts  of  the  values  of  8r,  Sr',
Sr^'f  6r"',  which  are  required  to  be  noticed  on  account  of  their  magnitudes  in  eclipses,  are
those  depending  on  the  greatest  inequalities  ;  as,  for  example,  that  in  [6843  line  3]  relative
to  the  satellite  m' ;  for,  by  substituting  in  it  the  value  of  m'  [6841c],  it  becomes  nearly
equal  to  — 0,02.cos.2.(n'^ — nt-\-s — s)  ;  and  this  may  become  greater  than  any  other  of
the  variable  terms  of  [6843].  It  is  also  much  greater  than  any  of  the  constant  terms,
contained  in  the  function  [68436,  d]  ;  for  one  of  the  greatest  of  these  terms  is  that  in
[6849  line  8],  which  is  less  than  0,001.  Notwithstanding  these  constant  parts  of  the
radii  vectores  are  so  small  that  they  are  neglected  by  the  author  in  [6789',  he.],  we
shall  compute  them,  by  means  of  [68436,  &:c.],  in  order  to  show  that  the  numerical  values
given  by  the  author  have  wrong  signs  in  the  original  publication. We  have  corrected  these

[6843a]

[68436]

[6843c  1
[6843rf]

[6843cl
[6843/]

[6843^]
[6843/i]

180  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^.  C^l.

—0,00000702,  \ 8

-f  0,00007780.cos.  (n"t^nt-\-s"-.s)  j  9

+  m".  {  — 0,00010631. cos.2.{n"t—nt-{-^'—s)  >  10

— 0,0000]310.cos.3.(?i"^— «^+£"— a)  I  11

— 0,00000269.cos.4.  (n"t—nt+  s"—s)  }  12

[6843]

-0,00000113,  \  13

, +0,00001478.cos. (n"'t^nt-\-s"'--e)  I  14

+  ^  •)— 0,00000968.cos.2.(w'"^— n^-f a'"— 0(  ^^

.— 0,00000078.cos.3.(w'"/— w^+a'"— a)  )  16

—0,000000158,  17

— 0,00000095.cos.(2irif— 2/i^+2i:— 20.  18

signs  in this translation. If  we  substitute in  the formula  [68435] the expression

[6843A]  Sr=  —  I- —^ .  a  — la.  <  w  .a^.  _ i_  +  mf\  a^ .  _J_  -|-  m'".(X?. _i-  }  :

*^ n2  (.  da.  d(x  da. )

[Q8m  ]

d¥^)
using  for a and — i- the  values  [6801,  6804  line  1], in  the  term  depending  on m';
act

also  the  values [6806,  6809  hne  1], in  the  term  depending  on mf' ; and the  values

[6810,  6813  line  1],  in  the  term  depending  on m". Now  if  we  substitute,  in  the  term

—i'-^-a [6843^1, the values of n, a, M [6782,6797,6840], it becomes
[6843/71] ^ n2  L  J

—0,000000158,  as  in  [6843  line  17]. In  the  original  work  it  is +0,00000095, being  six

[6843n] times  its  real  value,  and  with  a  different  sign. It  was  probably  computed  from  the  formula

[61 17],  ivithout  noticing  the  part  arising  from — 2k, which is  introduced  into the

(IbW

[6843o] expression  [6123]. In like  manner  we  find, by substituting the values  of ol.  _i_

corresponding  to  the  different satellites, as  in  [6843/,  &tc.],  that the  terms  of  [6843A;]

depending  on m',  m",  m'", become,
[6843p]  —0,000041267.  m'—  0,00000702.  n/— 0,00000113.  m'".

These  terms  in  the  original  work,  are  represented  by
[6843^]  +0,000084865.  m'+0,00000703.  m"+0,000001 13.  m'"  ;

all  the  signs  being  wrong  ; and  the  first  term  is  about  twice  its  actual  value. We  have
[6843rl iiiserted  in  the  original  work  [6843  lines  1,  8,  13]  the  corrected  values  [6843/>],  annexing

the  letter , to the  numbers  to  denote  that  this  correction  has  been  made,  as  in  [602 li].

If  we  substitute  the  values  of m',  m",  m'"  [6841c,  t?,  e] in  [6843^],  it  becomes  nearly

[6843«] equal  to — 0,000017, or  about _  of  the  radius a  [6797], being  less  than  two

centesimal seconds, supposing  the  circumference  of  the  orbit  of  the  fourth  satellite  to  be

VIII.  vii.  §21.] PERTURBATIONS  INDEPENDENT  OF  e,  e',  he,  s,  s',hc.

181

6v'

m.

+  m".

+  m'

5r'  =  m.

— 6951",4660.sin.  (w^— 7i'^+s— s')

—  52",6315.sm.2.(nt—n't+s^s')

—  10",5253.sin.3.(w^— w'i+s— s')

—  3",34A^.smA.(nt—n'ti-s—/)

—  l",2969.sin,5.(w^— /z'^+s— s')

+ 184",5172.sin.  (n"t—n't-\-s"—B')
— 12108",9920.sin.2.(/j"^— n7+s"— s')

—  68",8828.sin.3.(n"i— w'^+s"— /)

—  15",16m.smA.(n"t^n't+s"-^/)

—  5",2591.sm,5.(7i"t—n't-{-s"—/)
2",0SU.sm.6.(n"t—n't+s"—/)

'+  12",3755.sin.  (n"'t—n't']-s"'—sy
-10",8356.sin.2.(V^— n7+£'"--0  ^

—  l",0646.sin.3.(n'"^— n'^+s'"— s'X

+  0",5881  .sin.(2?i'^— 2Mi(+2/— 2E).

+0,00044579,*

+0,050693 1 8.C0S.  {nt^n't+s^^)
+0,00059197. cos.2.(nt—n't+s—s')
+0,000 1 4002.  cos  .3.  (nt—  n't+s—s')
+0,00004784.cos.4.(w/~?i'/+£— 0
^+0,00001928.cos.5.(w^— w'^+6— s')

1

2
3
4
6

6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15

1
2
3
4
6
6

Inequali-
ties of  the
longitude
of  the
second
satellite.

[6844]

Inequali-
ties of  the
radius
vector  of
the  second
satellite.

[6845]

expressed  by  4000000".  Now  the  arc  q  [6022/i],  described  by  the  satellite  during  its
passage  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  shadow  is  111780"  [7554],  and  this  is
described  in  4945"  of  time  [7558]  ;  hence  an  arc  of  2"  corresponds  to  ^\  of  a  second  of
time  in  the  duration  of  the  eclipse,  and  as  this  is  wholly  insensible,  it  is  neglected  by  the
author.  We  may  also  remark  that  some  terms,  of  exactly  the  same  order,  are  neglected
in  the  calculation  of  the  values  of  a,  a!,  a",  «'"  [6789',  Sic]  ;  and  it  would  not  have
been  of  the  least  importance  if  they  had  been  wholly  omitted  in  the  expressions  of
Sr,  8r',  6r",  h'"  [6843 — 6849]  ;  they  are  probably  inserted  by  the  author  like  many  other
very  small  and  insensible  inequalities,  merely  because  they  had  been  computed  by  the
formulas ;  and  they  serve  to  show,  by  inspection,  that  they  have  no  sensible  value.

[6843<]

[6843u]
[6843v]

(3485) The  value  of  the  constant  part  of  5r', is  easily  deduced  from  [68436],  by

changing  the elements  of  m into those  of
becomes.

m

and the  contrary  ; by  this  means  it

VOL. IV.

46

[6845a]

[68456]

+  m".

[6845]

+  m'

182  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

—0,00006492,  \  7

+  0,00073255.cos. (n"t^n't+s"—s')  j  Q

— 0,08670960.cos.2.(w'7— w7+s"— £')  I  9

-0,0006S39S.cos.3.(n"t—n't+s"—B')  /  10

— 0,00016685.cos.4.(n"^— n'^+s"— 0  \  11

— 0,00006061. cos.5.(n"t—n'i-{-s"-^s')  j  12

—0,00000797,  \  13

+  0,00007146.cos. (n"'t—n't-\-s'"—s')  I  14

— 0,00010133.cos.2.(n'"^— w7+2'"— 0  [  16

— 0,00001189.cos.3.(w'"^— n'^+a'"— 0  J  16

—0,000001015,  17

— 0,00000609.cos.(2M— 2w'^+2E— 20-  1 8

[6845c] For  the  inferior  satellite m, we  must  use  the  value  of ^''[~r7~)  =  — "^^"^ — ^'\~7~)
[1002] ;  and  by  means  of  the  formulas  [996,  999],  it  becomes,

but  for  the  superior  satellite m", we  must  use  the  formula,

and  a  similar  one  for m". Hence  the  expression  [68456]  becomes,

[6845g-] In  the  coefficient  of  m, we  must  use  the  values  of  a, 6jo), -i-  [6801,  6803, 6804] ;  m

that  of m", the  values [6814,  6817]  ; in  that  of m'", the  values [6819,  6822].

Moreover  in  the  term  depending  on ]\P, he, we must  use  the  values  of n',  a',  M
[6845/1] [-6783^6798,6840]. Hence  the  expression  [6845/]  becomes,
[6845i  ]  ^r'  =  +0,00044579.m— 0,00006492.m"— 0,00000797.m'"—  0,00000101 5.

In  the  original  work  the  corresponding  numbers  are,
[6845ifc]  8r'  =  —0,00044608.  m  -f-0,00006497.  m"+0,00000798.  m'"+ 0,000006090  ;

all  of  them  having  wrong  signs  ;  and  the  last  term,  depending  on M^, being  six  times  too
[6845Z] great. I  examined  the  three  largest  terms,  contained  in  [6844  lines  1,7  ;  6845  lines  2,9],

and  found the  two last to agree  very  nearly with  the  values  given  by  the  author ;  the
[6845m] coefficient  in [6844  line  1] was found,  by  a  rough  calculation, to  be — 6942"j5, which

differs  a  few  seconds  from  the  value  given  by  La  Place.

VIII.  vii.  <^  21.] PERTURBATIONS  INDEPENDENT  OF e,  e',  &c.;  s,  s',  Uc.

183

+  m'.

■+24".2648.sin. (nt—n"t+s—s')

6v"  =  m.  {—  0".70U.sm.2.(nt—n"t-\-B—s')

—  0"A2n.sm.3.{nt—n"t+s^s')

— 3478",2675.sin. (n't—n"t-\-s'—s")

—  50",9S99.sm.2.(n't—n"ti-B'—s")

—  10",2071.sin.3.(n7— n"^4-s'— s")

—  S",2305.smA.(n't—n"t-}-B'—^')

—  1",2551  .sm.5.(n'i—n"t+^-^s")

—  0",54>53,sm.e.(n't—n"t-{-e'^s")

+  106",1614.sin. (7i"7— fi"/+s"'— s")\
—362",  1 030.  s'm.2.{n"'t—n"t+s"'—s")

—  25",4655.sin.3.(ii"7— ^''^H-s"'— s")
-- 5",9227.sin,4.(w"7— w"^+£'"— s")

—  l",8800.sin.5.(ri'"^— 7i"^+£"'— s")
^_> 0",6997.sin.6.(?i'"^— ?i"^+£'"— s")

+2"3870.sm.(2/i"^— 2Mif+2a"— 2i:).

+0,00054783,^

+0,00059147.cos.  {nt—n"t-\-s—^')
+0,00001906.cos.2.(/i^— w"^+ £— s")
+0,00000348.cos.3.(n^— 7i"/+  s— /')

+  m"

<5r  =m.

1

2
3

4
5
6

7
8

9

10
11
12
13

14
15

16

1

2
3
4

Inequali-
ties of  the
longitude
of the
third
eatellite.

[6846]

[6847]

*  (3486) The  expression  of  the  constant  term  of 5/', similar  to  [6845/J,  is  evidently-
represented  by

In  the  coefficient  of  m we  must  use  the  values  of  a, h^\

-i-  [6806,6808,6809]

ad.

in

[6847a]

those  of  m!,  the  values  [6814, 6816, 6817]  ;  and  in  those  of  mf", the  values  [6823,  6826].
Moreover,  in  the  term depending  on M^, we  must use  the  values  of n", of', M  ■'

[6784,6799,  6840]. Hence  the  expression  [6847a]  becomes,

(5/  =  0,00054783.  m  +  0,00070922.  m'— 0,00006848.  m'"— 0,00000657.  [6847c  ]

In  the  original  work,  the  corresponding  numbers  are,

<5r"  =  —0,00054798.  m  —  0,00070942.  m'  +  0,00006850. m'''  +  0,00003944  ;  [6847rf]

all  of  them  having  wrong  signs,  and  the  term  depending  on M^ being  six  times  too  great.
By  a  rough  calculation  I  found  the  coefficient  in  [6846  line  4]  to  be — 3476'',6; and  in [6847e]
[6847  line  6], -f  0,041358.., agreeing  nearly  with  the  author.

radius
vector  of
third
satellite.

[6847]

184  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

+0,00070922,  \  6

KSe  I +0,04137743.cos. (n't--n"t-{-^^ff')\  6

H-0,00091726.cos.2.(n'^— w"^+£'— s")  J  7

+  m'.  (  -f  0,0002t712.cos.3.(w'^— n'7+s'— O  \  g

+0,00007409.cos.4.(w'^— n"^+  e'—s")  i  9

+0,00002980.cos.5.(?i'^— n"^+/— s")  I  10

+0,00001318.cos.6.(n'^— n"^-fs'— s")^  11  -

—0,00006848,  X  12

+  0,000751 9 1  .COS. (n"'t—n"t+r—s")  \  \3

—0,0044961.  cos.2.(n'"t—n"t-i-s"'—s")  I  14

-f  m'".  ^  —0,00039801  .cos.3.{n"'t—n"t-{-s"'^/)  \  15

— 0,0001 0474.cos.4.(7i'"^—?j"^+/"_£")  (  16

— 0,00003569.cos.o.(w'''^— 7f^+/''— /')  j  17

— 0,00001379.cos.6.(7i''7— w''/+/''— /')  /  18

—0,00000657,  19

— 0,00003944.cos.(2M— 2/i'"+2£;— 20.  20

fourth
satellite

6v'"  =  m.

+  14^2458.sin. (n(—n"'t-{-B^r) )  1

—  0",0206.sin.2.(/i^— /^"'^+s— O  \  2

+  22",452 1 . sin. (n't—n^'t+s'—s'")  \  3

Inequali-
ties of  the

Kr  -i-m'.  <[—  0",3085.sin.2.(n'^— ?i'"^+/— 0}  ^

-  0",054,0.sm.S.(nt^n"'t+s—B'"))  5

[6848]  ' /  — 32",0439,.sin. (w''^— w'"^ +/'—/')  \  6

1  —15",9570.sin.2.(w'^i—w'"/  +  /'-£"' )  J  7

4-  m".  /  —  3",3293.sin.3.(n"^~w'"^  +  £"— a-  )  i  8

\^  0",S735.sm.5.(n"t—n"t-i-^'—s"')l  10 ^

+  12",9881.sin.(2?n— 2M^  +  2/'— 2i:).  11

r +0,00088138,  ^  1

[6849]  6r"'  =  m.)  +0,0005701 8.C0S. (nt^n"'t+^—^"')  \  2

( +0,000001 13.cos.2.(n^—?i"'^+s—s"'))  *  S

*  (3487) Here  all  the  satellites m,  m',  m", are  inferior  to  rr^" ; and  the  expression
"■ ■' of  5/", similar  to  [6847a],  becomes,

VIII.  vii.  «§21  ] PERTURBATIONS  INDEPENDENT  OF  e,  e',  &;c. ;  s,  s',  &c.

185

+0,00093964
, +0,0009 1758.COS. (n't—n"'t+s'—s"')
+  ^-\  +0,00001095.cos.2.(n'^— ri"7+£'— a'")
+0,00000166.cos.3.(w'^— w"'^+£'— s'")

+  0,00114435,
„  \  +  0,0032607 1  .COS. (n"t—n"'t-\-s"~^")
"^  +  0,00057836.cos.2.(/i"i— w'"i+s"— s'")
0,00013614.cos.3.(w"i— w"'/+8"— s'")

—0,00006290,

—0,00037741.cos.(2Mi(— 2n"'^  +  2^— 25"').

4
5
6
7

8

9

10

11

12

13

[6849]

Inequali-
ties of  the
radius
vecttir  of
the  fourth
satellite.

In  the  coefficient  of  m, we  must  use  the  values  of a, bl^\ — i-  [6810,6812,6313]; in

those  of  mf  the  values  [6819,6821,  6822]  ;  in  those  of  m"  the  values  [6823,6825,  6826] ;
also  those  of  a'",  M  [6800, 6840]. Hence  we  get,

6/"  =  +  0,00088138.  m  +  0,00093964.  m'  +  0,001 14435.  m"  —  0,00006290.
In  the  original  work,  the  corresponding  numbers  are,

8j^"  ==  —0,00088 1 52.  m— 0,00093981 .  m'— 0,001 14443.  m"+0,00037741 ;
all  of  them  having  wrong  signs,  and  the  term  depending  on  M^  being  six  times  too  great.
Professor  Airy  computed  some  of  the  coefficients  of  [6848,  6849],  in  the  sixth  volume  of
the  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society.  He  makes  the  coefficient  in
[6848  line  6]  equal  to  — 32",016 ;  and  those  in  [6848  lines  7,  11 ;  6849  lines  10, 13],  the
same  as  tlie  author.  I  have  re-computed  the  coefficient  in  [6848  line  6],  using  the  data
[6823—6826,6784],  as  given  by  the  author,  and  find  it  to  be  — 32",0439;  which  is
inserted  in  this  translation,  instead  of  — 35",4372  in  the  original  work  ;  the  letter  ,  being
annexed  to  denote  that  it  has  been  so  changed  [6021i].  The  coefficient  of  the  term
[6849  line  9]  is  found  by  Mr.  Airy  to  be  0,00317865.  I  have  not  examined,  with  much
care,  any  of  these  numbers ;  but  appearances  indicate  that  they  have  not  been  computed
with  the  strictest  accuracy,  to  the  full  number  of  places  of  decimals  inserted  in  these  tables,
though  they  are  quite  sufficient  for  all  practical  purposes ;  taking  into  consideration  that  the
whole  radius  vector  r'"  in  seconds  636620",  appears,  when  viewed  from  the  earth,  under
an  angle  of  only  1530"  [6785]  ;  therefore  an  arc  of  1200"  in  Sv'"  [6848],  would  appear
to  us  under  an  angle  of  less  than  three  centesimal  or  one  sexagesimal  second;  and  an  arc  of
1200"  is  described  by  the  first  satellite  in  its  orbit  in  less  than  a  sexagesimal  minute  of  time;
so  that  an  inequality  of  a  few  seconds  in  So'",  is  of  no  consequence  in  a  practical  point  of
view.

[6849a']
[68496]

[6849c 1
[6849rf]

[6849cl
[6849/]

[6849g-]
[6849A]
[6849i]

VOL. IV.

47

186

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[6850]

[6851]
[6852]

[6853]

Values  of

[6854]

[6855]

22.  We  shall  now  consider  the  'perturbations  depending  upon  the
excentricities  of  the  orbits,  and  shall  represent  the  inequalities  of  6v,  6v\  6v",
depending  on  the  angle nt—2n't+s—2s'-}-gt-^r, in  the  following  manner,

as  in  [6725,  6726,  6739]  ;

6v  =Q.sin.(nt—2n'i  +  s—2B'+gt+r);

6v'  ==  Q'.  sm,(nt—2n't+B—2s'+gt+r)  ;

6v"  =  Q".sm.(nt^2n't  +  s—2s'+gt+r).
We  shall  have,  as  in  [6261,  6268,  6269],*

Q'  =

2.(n— 2«'+^)2

3n'2

.-{-m.\-,.Fh  +  Gh'

{n-2n'+gy  'j^j^^m"A  F'h'+  ^ .  G'h"  I  )  '
Q"=-Jt:'?^..A"^'F'h'  +  G'h"]^.

We  have  given,  in  ^  4,  the  analytical  values  of F,  G,  F',  G' ; hence  we
obtain  the  following  numerical  values  ;  f

[6853a]
[68536]

[6856a]

[68566]
[6856c]
[6856rf]

[6856e]

[6856/]
[6856g]
[6856^1]

*  (3488)  Putting  the  values  of  Sv  [6261,  6850]  equal  to  each  other,  we  get  the
expression  of  Q  [6853].  In  like  manner,  by  comparing  [6268,  6851],  we  get  [6854]  ;
and  from  [6269,6852],  we  obtain  [6855],  by  using n'—2n"  =  n—2n'  [6154].

t  (3489) From  [996,  999]  we  get,

* '  \  da J  da.

substituting  these  in  [6130]  it  becomes,

2n  dbm

±  = -, .  a.  or->  4-  (X.^ L_  ;

n—n'  * ^  rfa. '

and  by  using  the  numerical  values  [6783,  6782,6801,  6803  line  1,  6804  line  1],  we  get
[6856].  Substituting  —a'^(^-^\  =^  a' A^'^ -^  aa\(~\  [6212«]  in  the  expression  of
G  [6142],  we  get  [6856/],  which  can  be  reduced  to  the  form  [6856^]  by  the  substitution  of,

and  a  [6304].  The  coefficient  of  a,  in  this  last  expression,  vanishes ;  consequently  it
becomes  as  in  [6856A]  ;

n — n' a2 n—n a' ' n—n'  \  da  /

{Sn'—n)

'  a2

1  2n

n — n

[Sn'—n) 1

n — n' '  a2

n — n'  ' ^

da.

VUI.  vii.  «§.  22.] PERTURBATIONS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES.  1 87

jP= 1,483732; log.  =  0,1713555  ;  [6856]

G  =—0,857159;  [or  —0,856159,] ; log.  =  9,9330614,  or  9,9325544, ;  [6857]

F'= 1,466380; log.  =  0,1662466;  [6858]

G'=— 0,855370. log.  =  9,9321540.  [6859]

[6856i ]

[6856Z ]

[6856n]

Now  if  we  substitute  the  numerical  values  of  n,  n',  &;c.  [6856c],  we  find  that  this  last
expression  of  G  becomes  Q  =  — 0,856159,  instead  of  — 0,857159,  given  by  the
author  in  [6857].  This  causes  a  variation  in  the  value  of  G  of  about  ^-i^  part,  which  [6856A:]
must  produce  a  small  change  in  the  numerical  values  of  Q,  Q'  [6860,6861],  and  in  those
of  (2Q'_Q),  (2Q"-  q)  [6744—6746]  ;  consequently  also  in  the  fundamental
equations  [7170 — 7172].  To  estimate  roughly  the  effect  of  this  error,  we  shall  select  the
equation [6745 J  ; and  if  we  substitute  in  it  the  values of Q, (^  [6860,  6861],  it  will

produce  the  terms  in  [7171]  having  the  divisor (l  +  onKTono)  > ^"^ ^^ ^^'^ divisor is

nearly  equal  to  unity  [6025o],  we  may  neglect  it  in this  rough  estimate,  and  then  the
corresponding  terms  of  [7171]  will  become — 17495",3U— 49185",95A'  +  20804",40/i". [6856m]
Now  though  the  error  in  the  value  of G  [6856Z:]  does  not  affect  all  the  terms  which  are
used  in  computing these  coefficients,  yet  we  can  estimate the  order or  comparative
magnitude  of  this  correction,  by  supposing  all  the  terms  of  [6856m]  to  be  varied  -^  part. [6856o]
This  produces —20".  A — 57".//+24.A" ; and  by substituting tlie values of A, A"
[7184,7185],  it  becomes  nearly  equal  to — 57".//;  corresponding  to  a  change  in  the [6856p]
annual  motion  of  the  perijove  of  the  second  satellite g^  [7183],  by  a  quantity  of  the  same
order  as  the  coefficient  of  A',  namely,  57" ;  and  this  may  be  considered  as  no  importance,
because  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite  is  insensible  [6057^]. Finally,
mistakes  of this  kind  cannot  be  fully rectified  without going over  the  whole  of  the
subsequent  calculations  of  the  theory  of  the  satellites. This  seems  hardly  worth  the  labor, '■ ^^
considering  that  the  result  will  not  be  very  materially  improved  by  repeating  the  calculations  ;
because  the  imperfect  data  we  now  have,  for  ascertaining  the  motions  of  the  satellites,  will [6856'r]
probably  produce  much  greater  variations  in  the  values  of  the  elements  of  the  orbits,  than
those  which  arise  from  this  small  error  in  the  calculation.

If  we  compare  the  values  of  i^,  F'  [6130,6147],  we  find  that  F'  can  be  derived  from
F,  by  changing  the  elements  of  m  into  those  of  m',  and  the  elements  of  m'  into  those
of  m"  ; and  by  making  the  same  changes  in  the  expression  of jP  [68566],  we  get,

F'  =  -^„ .  a.  hf  +a2.  ^  .  [6856f  ]

Substituting, in this expression, the numerical values of n', n", a, hf^, ^-,

[6783, 6784, 6814, 6816,  6817],  we  get  F'  =  1,466380,  as  given  by  the  author  in  [6858].
Again,  by  comparing  the  expressions  of G,  G'  [6137,  6163],  we  find  that G' can  be
derived  from G,  by  changing  the  elements  as  in  [6856«] ;  and  by  making  the  same  changes [6856^]
in  [6856A],  we  get.

[68565]

133  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

By  means  of  these  values,  we  find,*

_  , { 16,850204.^—6, 1  I8214.h'l

[6860]  Q--m.  /  g Y

V  "*"  300i30(y7

_, . {13,307450.A— 4,831 907.A'i
[6861]  ^  =  -4-m — -  ;

V  "I 3001300^7

, „ H,i33080.A'— 1,511467.^"}

\  ~  3001300'7

_„ ,  {3,248934.^'— 1,188133.A"}
[6862]  ^  =— m ^^ ^^ Ti •

V  "^ 300I300'7

We  shall  determine  the  quantities h,  h',  h",  h"\ and g, by  means  of  the

(3n"-nO 1 (n'+n'O  d6;^i) ,

[6856a:]  Substituting  the  values  of  n',  n",  &;c.,  which  are  mentioned  in  [6856u],  we  get
G'  =  — 0,854990,  differing  a  little  from  that  of  the  author  [6859],  namely,
G=:_0,855370.

[68561/]

^ (3490) We  have, in [6694a], n — 2w'  =  3001 156''; therefore the  expression
(fi 2/i'-}-^)^,  which  occurs  in  [6853 — 6855],  may  be  put  under  the  form,

[68596]  (^-^"')'-^+g^5nH^'r'

substituting  this  and »*'=7qqqo  [6841c]  in  [6853],  it  becomes.

[6859c]

[6859d]

^— (  g ■)  2 '  (  20000.(n— 2n')2  * "^  20000.(n— 2n')2  'a'' >

I "f"  3001156"  \

The  coefficients  of  A,  h', may  be  reduced  to  numbers,  by  means  of  the  values  of n,

n', 4» F,  G,  [6025Jt,  6801,  6856,  6857]  ;  and  then  the  expression  of Q  becomes  of
a

the  same  form  as  in  [6860].  In  like  manner,  we  may  reduce  the  values  of  Q',  Q"
[6859c] [6854,  6855],  lo  the  forms  [6861,6862],  by  using  the  values  [6859(7,  he],  together  with

those  in  [6814,  6858,  6859].  There  are  several  small  errors  in  the  numbers  given  by  the
[6859/] ^^^YioY, in  the  expressions [6860—6862]. For  example, the  divisor  of g in the

denominator  is  3001300",  instead  of  3001156"  [6859c]. The  coefficient  of  h,  in  [6860],

is  16,853;  that  of  h'  is  —6,112;  differing  in  the  third  decimal  from  the  values  of  the
^ ^•' author  ;  and  similar  discrepancies  are  found  in  the  coefficients  of h,  h',  h"  [6861,6862];

but,  like  the  terms  mentioned  in  the  last  note  [6856A:,  Sic],  they  do  not  seem  to  be  of
[6859/1] suflicient  importance  to  affect  the  results,  in  any  sensible  manner.

VIII.  vii.  <^  22] . PERTURBATIONS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES. 1 89

equations  [6744—6747].  To  reduce  these  equations  to  numbers,  we  shall
observe  that  the  value  p — ^9=  0,0217794  [6827],  given  bj  the  first
approximation,  being  liable  to  some  degree  of  uncertainty,  we  shall  put,

P—i(p  =  M'.  0,021 7794;  [6863]

,*  being  an  indeterminate  coefficient. We  shall  then  obtain,  from  [6217c,  </],* [6863']

(0)  =  553878",76.M. ;  """' '""'"'

(l)  =  109003",20.fx;
(2)=  21264",89.f*  ;
(3)= 2946",95.M';

(0,1)  =  m'.39826",00
(0,2)  =  m".  5205",05
(0,3)  =  m'". 767",12

0

=  103",27  ;

1

(*

1
2

3

=  207",29 ;
=  417",63;
=  974",  19.

2
3
4

[6864]

Numerical
values  of
the
■jmboU.

0,1]  =m'.  29516"

,02 ;  ^

1

0,2

=:ra".  2511"

,39;

2

[6865]

0,3

=  m'". 213'

,46;

3

*(3491) Substituting  in  [6217c,  tZ],  the  values  of  p— ^9  [6863], n,  n\  n",  n'",  M
[6025^,  wj],  and  a,  a',  a\  d"  [6797—6800],  we  obtain  the  expressions  [6864]. Upon [6864a]
examination,  these  numbers  were  found  to  be  correcdy  computed.

f  (3492) Substituting m'l

m'

10000

[6841c]  in (0,1) [6213],  and  using  the  values

of  n,  a,  6L°], Jii^  [6025A:,  6801,  6802],  we  get (0,1) [6865]. In  like  manner,  from
[6214]  we  get 0,1

[6865a]

[6865]. By  the  same  process,  using  the  values  [6806,  6807],  we
obtain (0,2), 0,2 [6865]  ;  and  with  the  values  [6810,6811],  we  compute  (0,3), [o^l [68656]
[6865]. If  we  use  the  values  [6814,  6815],  we  shall  get (1,2),

1,2

; and  with

[6819,6820],  we  get (1,3), ITsl. Lastly,  by  using  the  values  [6823,6824],  we  get

(2,3), [2^]  [6867].

If  we  divide  the  equations  [1093,  1094] by m'^a'j and  substitute the  value of
—  =a  [6304], we  get  the  expressions  of (1,0), 1,0 [6865f/]. By  changing the  •'

48

VOL. IV.

190

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[6866]

[6867]

(1,0)  =  m.  31573",71 ;

(1.2)  =  m".19566",65;

(1.3)  =  m"'.  1804",18;

(2.0)  =  m. 3267",32;

(2.1)  =  m'.15492",62;
(2,3)  =  m'".  5886",85  ;

[To]  =  m.  23400",04  ;
ra=m".14469",66;
[li]  =  m'". 790",66 ;

[2^0]  =  m.  1576".46;
[^]=m'.11456",90;
[2J]  =  m'".  3995",03.

(3,0)  =  m. 363",10 ;  [3^  =  m. 101",03 ;

[6868]  (3,1)  =  in'. 1077",15;  [30]  =m'. 471",99  ;

(3,2)  =  m".  4438",87  ;  [as]  =  m".3012",37.

Hence  the  equations  [6744 — 6747]  become,*

[M^c.  Cel.

1

2
3

1

2

1

2
3

[6865(2]
[6865e]
[6865/]
[6865g]

elements  of  m' into  those  of  to", we  get  [6865e],  and  so  on  for  other  forms  ;

I-,  ^\ /r^  ■,\ naVa /^  , » ,_ m  | I I I mya I I ,_ m

(2,0)  =  (0,2).=^J;

(3.0)  =  (0,3).^;

(2.1)  =  (1,2).^,;

2.0 =

0.2

my  a

0  =  0-^''  ^-

Hence  we  easily  obtain  the  values  of  the  expressions  [6865 — 6868]. Upon  re-computing
^ J the  first  numbers  in  [6865  line  1,  6866  line  1],  they  were  found  to  agree  nearly  with  the
results  of  the  author ;  the  other  expressions  [6865 — 6868]  were  not  examined.

[6868a]

*  (3493) Substituting  in  the  four  equations  [6744 — 6747]  the  numerical  values  of  the

functions  [6864 — 6868],  we  obtain,  without  any  reduction,  the  corresponding  parts,  in
[68686] lines  1,  2,  of  the  equations  [6869 — 6872]. The  terms  of  the  equations  [6869—6871],

which  contain  the  denominator, ( 1-f-  o/^io  w/J  >  ^^^  produced  by  means  of  the  values  of
[6868c]  ^ 3001300'/

Q,  Q',  Q"  [6860—6862]. Thus  in  the  equation  [6744]  we  have,

VIlI.vii.^22.] PERTURBATIONS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES. 191

0  =  5^-553878",78.  a-.]  03",27-39826",00.m'-5205",05.m"-767",12.m"'}  .^ 1

+29516",02.m'A'-f251  l",39.m"r+213",46.m'"A"'  2 [6869]

—  { 6888U3".  m-f-4.36089".m' \  .m'h-{- \ 250103".m-fl58343".m'— 21393r'.m"} .m'h'-\-78QSi'\mW.h"  .  g

\ ~  3001300'7

0  =  {,^-109003",20.fx-207",29-.31 573",71  .m-l9566",65.m"-1804",l  8.m"'|  .A'  1
+23400",04.m/fc  +  14469",66.m7i"+790",56.m"'A'"  2

, { 226503".  m  + 14320 1",  m'— 196037".  m''|.mA  ^ ^^^^^^

i 7 Ta o L6e70]

V "^  3001300'7

|82242^^m^+52063'^  min^— 140696".  mm"-f-94603".mV^4-60174".m"g} .  h'

V '  3oo]30(r/

|_25726".m-f  34596. rn"-f22.5l8".m"| ,,,„
-f  -^ ^^ Tg .m  /I ;  6

V  ' 3001300'7
0  =  ;g-21264",89.fx-417",63-3267",32.m-15492",62.m'-5886",65.m'"}.A"  1

+1576",46.m/t+11456",90.m7i'+3995",03.m'"A"'  2 [6871]

57703"-mm^;t-|20952".m-28176".m^-n921".m"|.m^A^-|10279^^m^+6554".m"|.m^A" ^

"^  fi+  -^  y  ' ""

V '3001300V

0  =  [^-2946",95.fx-974",19-363",10.m-1077",15.m'-4438",87.in"}.A'" 1

+101",03.mA  +  471",99.m'A'+3012",37.m"r.  2 ^^®^^^

^^'•"-  1  ^-2i^2n'-M]  ^'  {-2Q'+Qi  ;  [6868c']

and  if  we  substitute,  in  this  expression,  the  values  of Q,  Q'  [6860,  6861],  we  shall  obtain,

c  fi- >  2  [6868rf]

for  the  numerator  of  the  terms  which  have  the  divisor ]  l-j-  .^nnfonn//  C > ^^®  following

(^  uOOioOu J

function  ;

f —{26,61490.  m-fl6,8502044.m'J.A  ^

irnl.n.  \  1— ^^Jaj/.jv]  *  ^-  ^  +1 9,663814.m-i-6,118274.m'-8,266160.m"}.A'  >  . t6868e]

(  + 3,022934.m"A"  )

Now  from [6025^,/]  we  have 2n—2n'— iV  =  3570453", also (0)  =  553879"  nearly, [6868/]

[6864]; hence  l-2„_2?---JV-=  1^3  - "^"l^'P^y'^S ^^'^ ^^ n  =  825826010" [6868^]

[6025^], and by im'.F=0,370933.m'  =  0,0000370933.m' [6856,  6841c], we  get [6868A]

I  m'.n.  ]  1— - — [] \  'F=  25880",625.m'. Substituting  this  in  the  function  [6868e], [6868i]

it  becomes,
— \  6888]  0".m-|-436094".m' }  .m'.A+  { 2501 06".m4-l  58345''.m'— 2 1 3933".m" }  .m'.  fe'+78235".m'.m"  Ji". [68d8t]

[6873']

192  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

When  the  masses  m,  m',  m",  wi'",  shall  be  known,  and  also  the
[6873]  indeterminate  quantity  f*  [6863'],  we  shall  have,  by  solving  the  equations
[6869 — 6872],  four  values  of  g,  and  the  corresponding  ratios  of  the
indeterminate  quantities  A,  A',  A",  h'",  to  one  of  them,  which  will  remain
indeterminate.  These  four  systems  of  g,  A,  h',  h",  h'",  will  give  the  same
number  of  values  of  Q,  Q\  Q"  [6860—6862].

Moreover,  the  suii'^s  action  adds  to  the  motion  of  the  satellite  m,  the  two
inequalities,

ic: 71/2  ^

[6874]  «  =  _  3„  (33,^^1„_^) .  s\n.(nt-2Mt+^2E+gt+r)

[6875]  ^t^,H.  sm.(Mt+E--'I).

[6876] We  may  substitute* N  =  n-^gy  in  the  term  [6874],  which  is  only  sensible

[6868/]

[6868n]

These  numerical  coefficients  differ  a  few  seconds  from  those  given  by  the  author  in
[6869  line  3]  ;  but  as  they  are  multiplied  by  the  small  factors  mm' =  0,04,  m'2  =  0,06,
m'm"  =  0,2,  nearly  [68416,  c, «?] ;  and  also  by  h,  h',  or  A",  which  is  of  the  same  order
as  the  excentricities  [6057e,  6235i — m\, the  differences  become  nearly  insensible. In

[6868m]  the  original  work,  the  term  — 213931".  m"  [6869  line  3],  is  printed  with  a  wrong  sign  -\-;
we  have  given  it  correctly  in  [6869]  ;  and  we  may  observe  that  it  is  merely  a  typographical
mistake;  since  the  author  has  used  the  sign  —  in  reducing  it  to  numbers  in  [7170 line  1],
where  it  makes  a  part  of  the  term  — 25371",60;  the  negative  sign  being  derived  from
the  part  now  under  consideration,  since  the  other  two  terms,  of  the  coefficient  of  h'
[6868e  line  2J,  are  positive. In  the  ]VIemoires de  I'Academie Royale  de  Paris, 1788,

[68680]  page  359,  where  the  author  first  published  the  theory  of  Jupiter's  satellites,  he  gives  the
sign  of  this  term  correctly. The  numbers  in  [6868A;]  are  somewhat  affected  by  the  error

[6868p] in  the  value  of G [6856i],  and  by the  small  differences in the  values mentioned in

[68685] [6859/,  &.C.]. The  same  is  to  be  observed  relative  to  the  equations  [6870,  6871],  deduced

[6868r]  from  [6745,  6746],  by  the  same  methods  of  substitution.  Greater  differences  than
those  which  are  mentioned  in  [6868ZJ,  are  found  in  some  of  the  terms  of
[6870  lines  3,  4,  5  ; 6871  line  3] ; and though  these  quantities  are  much  decreased  by

[686Ss]  being  connected  with  very  small  factors  of  the  forms  ni^h,  mm'h,  m'^^h',  &c.,  yet  they
may  not  perhaps  be  considered  as  absolutely  insensible.  We  have  not,  however,  attempted
to  correct  these  small  mistakes,  for  the  reasons  mentioned  in  [6856?] ;  considering  them  as

[6868<]  far  within  the  limits  of  the  errors  of  the  elements  which  are  used  as  the  basis  of  the
calculation.

[6874o]

*  (3494)  This  assumed  value  of  N  gives  JV — n — ^  =  0  ;  consequently  the  divisor
^M-\-N — n—g  [6874]  is  reduced  to  its  first  term  2iVf;  upon  the  supposition  that
JV—n — g is  so  small,  in  comparison  with 2iW,  that  it  may  be  neglected  ;  and  then  the

VIII.  vll.  <^S2.] PERTURBATIONS  DEPENDING  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES. 193
in  the  third and  fourth  satellites  ;  * by  this  means  the  coefficient  of  this [6876]

coefficient  of  the  term  [6874], corresponding to  the first satellite, becomes simply

15M ,  [68746]
j—.h  =  — 0,0015312.A  [6877]. The  similar coefficients relative to the other

satellites  are  easily  deduced from  this  by  accenting  the  letters,  as  in  [6878—6880]. We

shallsee,  in  the  next  note,  that  these  assumed  values  JV — n" — ^g",=0,  and N — n'" — g3  =  0, '• '  ^-'

can  be  used  for  the  third  and  fourth  satellites ; but  we  could  not  use N — n — ^=0,

JV — n'—g^  =  0, for  rtie  first  and  second  satellites,  if  h,  K  were  of  any  sensible  magnitude  ; [6874(/]

because N — n — g, instead  of  vanishing,  is  nearly  equal  to — AM; as  is  evident  from

the  values  of JV,  n,  g  [6025^,  Z,  o]. Now  the  object  of  the  author  being  merely  to  show

that  the  terms  [6874],  relative  to  the  first  and  second  satellites,  are  so  unimportant  that  they [6874e]

maybe  neglected,  taking  into  consideration  the  smallness  of  the  values  of h,  h', it  will  be

sufficiently  accurate,  for  this  purpose,  to suppose  that 2iVI+JV — n — g is  of  the  same [6874/]

order  as 2M; and  this  method  is  adopted  in  [6876,  &ic.],  and  in  the  following  note.

* (3495) Each  of the four values  of g [6025o], has  corresponding values of
A,  h',  h",  h'", as  in  [7176—7179,7183—7186,7190—7193,7195—7198]; making  in [6875a]
all  sixteen  different  values  of h,  h',  Stc, and producing  sixteen  inequalities  of  the  form
[6874]. Most  of  these  inequalities  are  very  small,  as  we  may  easily  perceive  by  noticing [68756]
only  the  largest  term,  corresponding  to  each  angle. Thus  with  the  angle ^=606989",9
[7176],  we  need  only  notice h  [7179^]  ;  and  from  the  values  of  M,  JV,  n,  g  [6025i— o], [6875c]
it  is  evident  that,  by  neglecting the  signs, we  may  consider 2M-f-JV — n — g as  of  the [6875rf]
order 2M,  as  in  [6874/]  ;  so  that  the  coefficient  of  the  term  [6874]  becomes  of  the  same

order  as —  -^ — .h  =  — 0,0015.A  nearly .  [68746]  ; and  as h is  of  the  same  order  as e [6875c]

[6236],  or  of  the  order 20"  [6057e],  this  becomes  of  the  order 0,0015X20"  =  0",03  ;

which  is  insensible. Again,  with  the  angle ^1  =  178l4r',7  [7183],  we  need  only  notice [6875/]

h  [7186'!,  and  then  the  coefficient  of  the  term  [68741  becomes — - — ^  . . ' , — ; r, rfiR7no-i

'■  ■•  ■■  -"  2n'.{2M-{-J\r'—n'—gi)^ L'^o/ogJ

15M

which  may  be  supposed,  as  in  [6875e],  to  be  of  the  order — ~—j-.h'  =  — 0,003. A'  nearly,

[6878]  ;  and  as h' is  of  the  order e' or  183"  [6057e],  this  becomes  of  the  order 0",5, [6875^]
which  is  insensible. The  same  process  with  the  angle g^  [7190] and h"  [7193'],  gives

i5M^^h" 15M.h"
a  coefficient of a sensible magnitude — »  //,->.^ ,  ^>.„ — ;; ;  == TV^ — nearly;

observing  that JV" — n" — ^2  =  — 58272"  [6025^,  Z,  0] is  quite  small in  comparison  with rggyc-n
2Jlf = 674422"  [6025^],  so  that  we  may  change 2M-{-iV"— n"— ^2 into 2M. Finally,
the angle ^3  =  7959",105 [7195] with  the  term W [7198'j,  gives in [6874] the

\x>M^.l\!"  15JVf  ^"'  [6875a:]

coefficient '- = V4^  nearly ;  because JV"-u'"-2-,=-16lOO"

2n'".{2JW4-JV'"-?r— 2-3)  An"'  ^  '  ^'

[6025A:,  Z,  0]  is  so  small  in  comparison  with 2JW  [6875i*],  that  it  may  be  neglected.  '■ ^

VOL.  IV.  49

194  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6876"] inequality  becomes  equal  to j-  .  h. Then  we  have,  by  using  the  values

of  n,  n',  n",  M  [6782,6783,6784,  6840],
[6877]  I. Satellite; i|^  =  0,0015312 ;

[6878]  II. Satellite; ^=0,0030737;

[6879]  III.  Satellite  ; i^  =  0,0061926 ;

[6880]  IV.  Satellite ; ^  =  0,0144449.

We  have  observed,  in  [6696—6698],  relative  to  the  inequality  [6875],  that

it  is  modified  by  the  reciprocal  action  of  the  satellites. We  can  then  take,
[6881] fQj H.sin.(Mt-{-E—I), the  half  of  the  first  term  of  the  equation  of  the

centre  of  Jupiter ;  and  this  term  is  equal  to  the  follow^ing  expression  ;  *
^6882]  61208",23.sin.(M-|-i:— /).

This being  supposed, we shall have, by noticing only the preceding

inequality,

[6883] sv =-  37",49.  ^  1  + /''"'„,^ :ir-r  ?  •  sm.(Mt+E-I)  ;

/Ti«o 1 OX (  . 9a'. m , a".m

(iM=-kn=).^l  +  — +  —

[6884] sif  =—  74",98.  S  1 M.m.W ^  _  sin.(iMi!+£~/) ;

{,  ^  C 4a.in' ' 4a.ra") J

[6885] 6v"  =  - 149",96.  S  1  + ^°"- '"•'"'' I .  sm.(Mt+E—I) ;

)  32a.m".(JM^-kn').$l  +  ?^,  +  ;^i(

C  C 4a.m ' 4a.m  > )

[6886] 6v"'  =  —  353",69, .  sin.(M+£— /).

*  (3496) The  equation  of  the  centre  is 2e.s'm.(7it-{-s — w) [669] ;  and  by  changing

"^ the  notation  so  as  to  correspond  to  [6274 — 6277],  it  becomes  2H. sin. (J)fi;+-E — i). The

[6882&  ] symbol H is  the  same  as e'^  =  0,04807670 [4080]  ; hence 2H, in  seconds,  is

2  X  0,04807670  X  636620"  =  61213",  1  =2H, as in [6882]  nearly. Now  taking H

[6882c] equal  to  half  this  value,  we  get fl"  =  30606".5; and  by  substituting  it  in  [6696 — 6698],

with the values of n,  n',  n",  M [6025A:,  m], they become as in [6883 — 6885],

respectively. Lastly, the term [6875], corresponding to the fourth satellite, is

[6882d]  SM.H

^;— .sin.(M^-J-^^ — I)  f and  by  using  the  preceding  values  of M,  H, it  becomes

— 353",69.sin.(Jlf<-f-£ — /),  which  differs  a  little  from  that  of  the  author,  whose  coefficient
[6882c] jg  — 349" j79. We  have  given  the  corrected  value  in  [6886],  annexing  the  letter ^ as  in
[6021  i]  to  denote  that  it  has  been  changed.

[6888]
[6889]
[6890]

VIII.  vii.  <^  23.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  195

23.  We  shall  now  determine  the  inequalities  of  the  motions  of  the  satellites
in  latitude.  The  equations  between  \  >■',  x",  x'"  [6347 — 6350],  become,*
0=;553878",76.f/.+103",27+39826",00.m'+5205",05.m"+767",12.m'"}.x 1

— 39826",00.m'.  x'— 5205",05.m".  x"— 767",  1 2.m'".  x'"— 1 03",27  ;  2 ^^^^^^

0={109003",20.fA+207",29+31573",71.m-[-19566",65.m"+1804M8.m'"}x'  1

— 31573",71  .m.  X— 1 9566",65.m".  x"^l  804",1 8.  m"'.  x'"_207",29  ;  2

0={21264",89.M.+417",63-j-3267",32.m+15492",62.m'+5886",85,m"'j.x"  1
— 3267",32.m.  x_l  5492",62.m'.  x'_-5886",85.  m'".  x'"— 41 7",63 ;  2

0={2946",95.f^+974",19+363",10.m-fl077",15.m'.+4438",87.m"}.x'" 1
— 363",10.m.x_1077",l5.m'.x'_4438",87.m".x"_974",19.  2

The  equations  [6418—6421],  between /,  /',  /",  /'",  p,  become,

0={^-553878",76.fx-103",27-39826",00.m'-5205",05.m"-767",12.m'"}.Z 1

+39826",00.m'.  /'+5205",05.m".  Z"+767",12.m'".  l'"  ;  2 ^^^^^^

0={j9-109003",20.fj^-207^29-31573",71.m-19566",65.m"-1804'',18.m'"}./'  1

+31573",71.m./+]9566^65.m"./"+1804",18.m'"./'"  ;  2 ^^^^^^

0={j9-21264",89.fx-417",63-3267",32.m-15494",62.m'-5886^85.m'"|.r' 1

+3267",32.m. Z+  15494",62.m'.  r+5886",85.m'". r  ;  2 ^^^^^^

0={^-2946",95.fi^-974",19-363",10.m-1077",I5.m'-4438",87.m"5.r"  1

+363",10.m./  +  1077",15.m'./'+4438",87.m"./".  2

When  M-  [6863']  and  the  masses  m,  m',  m'\  m"\  are  known,  we  can
obtain,  by  means  of  the  four  equations  [6887 — 6890],  the  values  of
X,  X',  X",  x'".  The  four  equations  [6891 — 6894]  give,  by  elimination,  an
equation  of  the  fourth  degree  in  p.  With  these  values  of  jo,  we  may
obtain,  by  means  of  the  equations  [6427 — 6430],  the  latitudes  of  the
satellites  above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter.

We  have  seen,  in  [6362,  or  6427],  that  the  part  of  the  latitude  s,  which
depends  upon  the  inclination ^ of  the  equator  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  is

(X — 1) .  6' .  sin.(t;  +  *').  [6896]

*  (3497) Substituting  in  [6347-6350]  the  values  [6864-6868],  we  get  [6887-6890]  ;
and  the  like  substitutions  being  made  in  [6418—6421],  they  become  as  in  [6891—6894]. I^^^^"^
Remarking,  however, that  the  coefficient 15494",62.7»' [6893  lines  1,  2] should  be [68876]
15492",62, to conform to the value of (2,1) given in [6867], and used in
[6871  line  1,  6889  lines  1,  2] ; the difference  of  these two expressions is, however, r6887cl
insensible, taking  into  consideration  the smallness of m' [7143], as  will appear in
[7133/,  he.].

[6894]

[6895]

196  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6897]  If  we  take,  as  in  [6398],  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  in  1750  for  the  fixed  plane,
and  the  vernal  equinox  of  this  planet,  at  the  same  epoch,  for  the  orgin  of  v
and  V, we  shall  have,  as  in  [6405],

[6899]  ,  6'  =^  ^L  -}-  bt  ;

[6900]  * :^  'pt  —  —  .

We  shall  determine a and  b by  means  of  the  following  equations,  which

depend  on  the  differential  formulas  [1 132,  &c.]  ;  *
[6901]  a  = (4,5) .  /.  cos.  n  +  (4,6).  /'.  cos.  n' ;

[6902]  b  =  —(4,5).  /.  sin.  n  — (4,6)./'.  sin.n' ;

the  values  of  (4,5)  and  (4,6) being  given  in [4235]. We  must  however
[6903] decrease,  in  the  first  of  these  values,  the  mass  of  Saturn,  in  the  ratio  of

[6901a]

*  (3498) If  we  take  the  values  of  -^  , -^  [1132],  we  sha]l  find  that  they  contain

the  quantities (4,0), (4,1), (4,2),  (4,3),  (4,5),  (4,6)  ; and that  all  of  them,  except
(4,5),  (4,6), may  be  neglected  on  account  of  their  smallness  ;  hence  we  get,

[69016]  ^= {^.^rW-ri+i^^^yW^-rv^

[6901c]  ^'  ==_(4,5).jpv_pivj  _  (4^6).  j^vi_pivj,

[6901(f| Now  we  have,  as  in  [1032], p'^  =  tang.(p'\sin.^'^, q'"  =  tang.tp^^cos.d'^  ; (p'"  [1030',  1030"]

being  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  to  the  fixed  plane,  which  is  represented  by  y  in
[6901e] rgg^g/j  .  ^^^  ^iv  [1032'']  is  the  longitude  of  its  ascending  node,  corresponding  to  1  [6314],

in  the  present  notation  ;  hence  we  have  very  nearly,
[6901/]  y^  =  7.sin.'?; 5'^=7.cos.7.

Substituting  these  expressions  in [6400,  6401], we get p^^'^at, q^^  =  lt; whose

differentials  give

[6901^]  -^  =  «' -dr  =  ^'

hence  the  equations  [69016,  c]  become,
[6901/t]  a= (4,5).{<?-— 9-}  +  (4,6). j?-— 5-j ;

[690H]  h==—{A,b).\f—p^''\—{Afi).\f^—p'''\,

[6901A;] -^S^^"'  '^  ^^  increase  the  accents  on p,  p'  [1033],  by  four,  the  quantities 7,  n [1026']

will  change  into /,  n  [6904]  respectively  ;  and  we  shall  get,  from  [1033],
[690in  jp^— p'^  =  /. sin.n  ; 9^— g'^  = /.cos.H.

In  like  manner,  by  increasing  the  accents  on  p^, q"  [6901Z]  by  unity,  the  symbols /,  n

[6904]  will  change  into  T,  n'  [6905]  respectively  ;  and  the  equations  [6901/]  will  become,
[6901n]  ;;^i  — piv  ^  //  g|„  j^/  .  ^vi  _  ^iv  ^  j'  ^os.n'.

Substituting  the  expressions  [6901/,  n]  in [6901A,z],  we  get  [6901,  6902]  respectively.  "

VIII.  vii.  <§.23.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  197

3359,4  to  3515,6  ;  as  we  shall  see  in  [91211.* /  is  the  inclination  of  the

.  [6904]

orbit  of  Saturn  to  that  of  Jupiter  in  1750. n  is,  at  the  same  epoch,  the
longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  Saturn's  orbit  upon  that  of  Jupiter,  and
counted  from  Jupiter's  vernal  equinox. /'  and n' are  the  same  quantities [6905]
relative  to  Uranus. We  have  by  observation,  very  nearly,

^L  =  3^,4444 [6406];  [6906]

hence  we  deduce,  as  in  [6903^],

~  =  9",0529  ;  [6907]

6  =  0",070350.  [6908]

Then  we  have,  as  in  [6366],

'p  =  ^..  (^^— ^--^) .  J M^-\-m.n\ X  +m'M'\ ■^'+m",n"^. x"+m'".n"'^. x'" } .  [6909]

If  we  suppose  Jupiter  to  be  an  ellipsoid,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [6335] ,t

C -  L^n^.R'dR

n^  being  the  density  of  a  stratum  of  the  ellipsoid  whose  radius  is R; R [6911]
being  equal  to  unity  at  the  surface  of  Jupiter. If  we  suppose  the  densities
of  the  strata  of  Jupiter  and  the  Earth, at  distances  proportional  to  the

[6903a]

[69036]
[6903c]

*  (3499) The  value  of  the  mass  of  Saturn,  which  is  used  in  [4061],  is "L  . ; that  in

ooo9j4

[9121]  is  ; differing  a  little  from  ,  which  is  used  in  [6904]. Putting  the

0O045UU  o5 1  UjO

two  first  expressions  equal  to  each  other,  we  get 1 -}- fA^  =  — 1-^ ; substituting this  in

[42351ine5],  we  get  (4,5)  =  r,3597=22",715  ;  and  by  putting (*^*=0,  in  [42351ine6],
we  have (4,6)  =  0%096647  =  0",298294. Again,  by  substituting  the  values  [1032,  Stc]
in  [6901/,  n],  we  get,
/.sin.n  =  tang. (p^.  sin ^"^ — tang.(p'\sinJ'^  ; J.cos.n  =  tang.cp^.cos.^^ — tang.(p'\cos.5'^; [<cQQM\
J'.sin.n'=tang.(p^*.sin.fl^"— tang.9'^.sin.d'^  ; r.cos.n'=  tang.q)^'.cos.a^'— tang.(p'^.cos.a'\ [6903e]
Substituting,  in  these  last  expressions,  the  values  of  (p'%  (f,  f' ; &",  &",  d^S  [4082, 4083],
we  get  the  numerical  values  of /.sin.n,  /.cos.n, /'.sin.n', /'.cos.n'; thence  we  obtain,
from  [6901,  6902],  the  values  of  a,  b. The  former,  being  divided  by ^L  [6906],  gives [6903^]
[6907]  nearly ; the  latter  is as  in [6908] ; the  reduction to  seconds  being  made by
multiplying  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  when  necessary.

t  (3500) The  equation  [6910]  is  the  same  as  [6335]  ;  observing  that  we  have  changed
the  symbol 5, which  represents  the  density  in  the  original  work,  into  n^, to  conform  to '■ ■'
the  notation  in  [6335].

VOL. IV.  60

[6903/]

198  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

[6912]

[6913]

[6914]

diameters  of  these  planets,  to  be  in  a  constant  ratio  to  each  other ;  or,  in
other  words,  if  n  be  represented  by  the  same  function  of  R,  for  both
planets,  then  the  value  of  the  following  function,

expressed  in  parts  of  the  radius  of  the  surface  of  the  planet  taken  as  unity,
[6913']  will  be  the  same  for  these  planets.  In  this  hypothesis,  if  both  planets  he
fluid,  their  ellipticities  will  be,  as  in  [2068A;,  &c.],  proportional  to  the
respective  values  of  (p,  corresponding  to  each  of  them  ;  or  to  their  ellipticities
if  they  be  homogeneous.*  If  we  suppose  the  same  ratio  to  obtain  in  their
actual  state, and  we  have  seen  in  [2069]  that  this  is  nearly  conformable  to

observation,  then  the  values  of will  6e,  for  each  of  these  planets,

respectively  proportional  to  the  ellipticities  corresponding  to  the  case  of
homogeneity.  These  ellipticities,  by  the  same  article  [2068'"],  are  as
0,10967000 to 0,00433441  ; hence  we  have,

2C—A—B /2C—A—B\ 10967000
f^^^^  —C—  =  \—C  —  )  •  -4334r  '

[6916'] the  value  of  [  — ^ — y^ ) , in the second member of this equation,

corresponds  to  the  earth.  This  last  value  is  represented,  in  [3407],  by  the
following  expression  ;

[691 4o]

*  (3501) The  formula  [6910]  relative  to  Jupiter  may  be  made  to  correspond  to  that  of
the  earth,  by  changing  the  ellipticity p into p', the  centrifugal  force <p into 9', and

— into f ~ j ,  as  in  [6916']. Then  we  shall  have  for  the  earth,

[69146 ]  /2C-A-B\  ^  2.(p'-^(p')./^»n..i^rfR .

\ C J  JliHrR'^dR

because  the  value  of  the  function  [6913] is  the  same  for  both  planets  [6913']. Dividing
the  equation  [6910]  by  that  in  [69146],  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  get,

[6914c]  2C-A-B  _  (2C-A-B^ p-^

c  \ c J fz-w

The  theory  adopted  in  [6912] is  the  same  as  in  [2068"]  ;  and  we  have  in  [2068A:,  &c.],

[eQUd] p  :  p' : :  <p  :  9' : :  p— J9  :  p'— J(p' ; so  that  we  may  put ^^^  =  -71°  [6914c], and  it  will

r«Qiii  ^ V  2C—Ji—B /2C~Jl—B\ p

[6914e  ] become =  f — )  •  ~7  • If  we  now  substitute  in  this  expression,  for

p
—  , their  values  corresponding  to  the  case  of  homogeneity,  according  to  the  hypothesis  in

[6915],  we  shall  obtain  the  equation  [6916].

VIII.  vii.  <§,23.]  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  199

/2C—A—B\  0,00519323

( C )==l+g.0,748493-  ^''''^

Moreover  we  have,  in  [3406,  4631c],*

3.(1 +€)  =  2,566; or §  =  —0,144666....  [6918]

By  means  of  these  data  we  find,  for  Jupiter,

=  0,14735.  [6919]

The  time  of  Jupiter's  rotation  is  found,  by  observation, to  be 0"'*y',41377,
and  that  of  its  sideral  revolution  is  equal  to 4332'^*y',6  ; hence  we  deduce,!

M  __  0,41377

7  "~ 4332,6  *
Therefore  we  shall  have,

ip  =  3",5591

+  m.2134",60.x

+  m'.  529",78.x'

+  m".  130",52.x"

+  m"'. 23",99.x'".

We  have  found,  by  a  first  approximation,

[6920]
[6921]

[6922]

[6918a]

*  (3502)  We  have,  in  [3406],  X  =  3.(l+€)  ;  the  letter  p  being  changed  into  €,  so
as  not  to  interfere  with  the  notation  which  is  used  in  [7073].  We  have  also  X  =  2,566
[4631c].  Putting  these  values  of  X  equal  to  each  other,  we  get  [6918]  ;  and  from  this
we  easily  deduce €  =  — 0,14466.... If  we  substitute  this  value  of  § in [6917],  we

_ j  =5  0,00582385  ;  and  by  using  this  value  in  the  second  member  of [69186]

[6916],  we  obtain  the  expression  [6919].

1(3503)  Jupiter's  sideral  motion  is  represented  in  [6101'J  by  Mt',  and  the  rotatory
motion  by it  [6316']. Now  as  these  motions  are  inversely  as  their  times  of  revolution [69310]

4332'i''y%6, 0^»y,41377  [6920],  we  get -^  =  — .  ^^^^  ^  , as  in  [6921]. Substituting

this  value  of — in ^p  [6909] ;  using  also  the values  of w,  w',  n",  n!",  M  [6025fc,  m\,

*  [6921&]

•ilC—A—B

and  those  of m,  vd,  m",  m'", deduced  from  [68416 — e],  with  the  value  of ^

[6919],  we  get  [6922]. Finally,  by  substituting  the  values  [6923 — 6926],  also  those  of [6921c ]
m,  m',  m",  m'"  [68416— e],  in  [6922], we  obtain [6927]. Upon  examination,  it  was
found  that  the  numerical  calculations  in  [6919—6927]  were  very  nearly  correct.

200  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

[6923]  X  =0,00063534;

[6924]  X' =  0,0064232  ;  rcorrected  in"]

[6925]  X"  =  0,0299802 ;  L  'so^^^oo.  J

[6926]  x'"=:  0,134612.

If  we  adopt  the  preceding  values  of  the  masses  of  the  satellites,  we  shall  have,
[6927]  'p  =  9",8788  ;

hence  we  deduce,*
[6928]  fl'  =  iL  +  0",070350. t ;

[6929]  y  =  0",8259.^.

This  last  coefficient 0",8259, is  therefore  very  nearly  the  annual  precession

of  the  equinoxes  of  Jupiter  upon  its  orbit.

To  reduce  to  numbers  the  inequalities  of  the  periodical  motions  of  the

satellites  in  latitude,  computed  in  [6453 — 6482],  we  shall  observe,  that  we

may  suppose,  without  any  sensible  error,!

[6930]  iV+f.  =  l; iV;+P=l; iV,"+|,=  l.

t^  *»  *•

[6929^]

[6929a]

*  (3504) Substituting in  [6899,  6900] the values [6906—6908,  6927], we get

[6928,  6929] ; the  value  of  V being  nothing  at  the  epoch  of  1750 [6897]. If  we

[69296] suppose,  as  in  [7219a],  that  the  value  of  y', at  the  epoch  of  1750,  is  ^'= — 148°,62129,

its  general  value,  for  the  time  1750 +<,  will  be  obtained  by  adding  the  preceding  value  of

[6929c] *'  to  that  in  [6929] ;  hence  we  shall  have V  =  — 148°,62129  +  <.0",8259. Now  if  we

[6929rf] suppose, as  in  [7211], 1=200°-^, we  shall have I  =  348°,62129— i.0",8259;

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

t  (3505) Substituting  in [6485,  6486]  the  values  of a,  of,  a",  a'"  [6797—6800],
and  that  of  p —  ^  tp  [6827],  we  get  nearly,
[6930a]  iV^=;  1,00067; ^\;  =  1,00027; iV;"=  1,00010 ; iV;"  =  1,00003.

Moreover  from  the  values  [6025/?,  Ic,  i],  we  obtain  nearly,

[69305]  ^=0,00069; ^  =  0,00032: ^=0,00014; ^=0,00009;

0,M  Oilf  OIT  OJlf

[6930c]  —=0,00081; ^==0,00164; -^  =  0,00330; —  =  0,00770.

[6930rf]
[69306]

From  the  first  terms  in  [69306,  a],  we  get —  +  JV) —  1  =  0,00136 ; and although tbq

second  member  of  this  expression  is  small,  in  comparison  with  unity,  it  is  larger  than  the

2*W ^M p
other  term —  =  0,00081, with  which  it  is  connected,  in  the  divisor f-  —  +  iV — 1,

of  the  term  of  s  [6460  line  2]  ;  so  that  it  will  not  be  sufficiently  accurate  to  suppose,  with

VIII.  vii.  <§.  23].  INEQUALITIES  IN  THE  LATITUDES.  201

This  being  premised  we  obtain,  [6930']

the  author,  as  in  [6930],  that —-\-N^ — 1  =  0, if  the  term  depending on  this  divisor [6930/"]
were  of  any  sensible  magnitude. Thus  if  we  substitute  the  first  of  the  expressions  [6930] rggoQ  -i

in  the  coefficient  of  the  term  of  s in  [6460  fine  2],  it  becomes,
3JV/2

-  ^" ^^ =  -^ .  {l—L')  =  0,00015.(Z-L')» [6930c],  [6930A]

n

agreeing  with  the  result  of  the  author  in  [6931  line  2]  ;  but  this  numerical  value  will  be

[6930t]
considerably  decreased,  if  we  use  the  actual  value  of [-iV^ — I [6930rf]  ;  therefore  the

expression  [6930A]  can  be  considered  only  as  a  rough  estimate,  serving  to  show  that  the

term  in  question  is,  in  general,  so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected. One  inequality  of  this [6930A;]

kind  is  computed  in  [7521], with  the  coefficient  5",26  ; this  is  retained  by  the  author,

because  it  does  not  require  anew  argument,  but  can,  in  eclipses,  be  combined  with  a  much [6930Z]

larger  term  [7522  line  1]. This  coefficient  is  reduced  to  nearly  3",  for  small  values  of  p,

by  using  the  correct  value  of  the  divisor  [6930e].

The  similar  term  of  s'  [6480  line  2]  has  for  its  coefficient  the  quantity,

^M^.{L'—l')

[6930Z']

2M  . ^,, . p  \  '  [6930m]

^»'H"+-^'+v-0

[6930n]

2JVf

and  we  have,  from  [6930c], --  =  0,00164,  which  is  much  larger  than  N'—\  =  0,00027

[6930fl],  so  that  we  may,  with  a  much  greater  degree  of  accuracy  than  in  the  preceding

P
calculation  [6930/,  &.C.],  neglect iV/ — 1, and  also -j , for  any  small  value  of  jp, like [6930n']

that  in  [7479],  or  like ^  =  0,00032  [6930^*],  corresponding  to  the  very  small  term  of [6930o]

s'  [7480]. Now  if  we  neglect  the  small terras  [6930n'],  we  find  that  the  coefficient

3JVf
[6930OT]  is  reduced  to  the  form —.  (Z'—JL')  =  0,000307.  (Z'—i') [6930c], which is [6930?)]

similar  to  that  of  s  [6930A].  This  expression  is  the  same  as  that  in  [6932  line  2],  and  it
would  be  decreased  about  one  seventh  part,  for  small  values  of  p,  by  using  the  expression
of  JV/ — 1,  [6930n]. In  like  manner  we  may  reduce  the  term  of  s"  [6481  line  2],  with

3JW

a  considerable  degree  of  accuracy, to the form -^r  i^"  —  L')  =  0,Q00Q\9.{1" — L') [6930<j']

[6930c],  as  in  [6933  line  2]. Finally,  the  coefficient  of  the  term  of  /"  [6482]  may,  by  a

3M  [6930r]

similar  process,  be  reduced  to  the  form  —  .  (Z'"— i')  =  0,00144. (Z'"—Zr')  [6930c],  as  in

[6934]  ;  which  is  sufficiently  accurate  for  all  practical  purposes.
The  same  reduction  may  be  made  in  the  terms  in  the  first  lines  of  [6460,  6480,  6481]  ;

VOL. IV.  51

202  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[6931]

[6932]

[6933]

5  =:m'.0,00349437.(/'— /).sin.(3ij— 4i;'— p^— a)  1

-\-0,OOOlliS\2.(l—L').sin.(v—2U—pt—A) ;  2

s'  =  {m.0,00276975.(/-/')  +  m".0,00170910.(Z"-/')l.sin.(22;-3i;'-p^-A) 1
•i-0,000301S6.(r—L').sm.(v'—2U—pt—A) ;  2

s"  =  m'.  0,00135305.(1'— r').sin.{2v'—2v"-^pt— a)  1

+0,00061925.(/"— L').sin.(ij"— 2C7— j9/— a)  ;  2

[6934]  s'"  =  +0,001447815.(/'"— L').  sm.(v"'—2U—pt—A).

24.  We  shall  now  compute  the  inequalities  depending  upon  the  square
of  the  excentricities  and  inclinations  of  the  orbits,  whose  analytical  values  we
have  given  in  [6530,  6552].  Those  which  finally  become  the  most  sensible
are  the  secular  equations  of  the  satellites,  depending  on  the  secular  variations
[6935]  of  the  orbit  and  equator  of  Jupiter.  But  it  is  easy  to  prove  that  they  are
-_,  at  present  insensible,  and  that  they  will  remain  so  for  a  long  time  to  come.
For  the  greatest  is  that  of  the  fourth  satellite,  and  its  expression  is,  as  in
[6530,  &c.],*

[6936]  s^'"  =3  _2. IT] .  ^1. cf  +  2.(1  —■k"y. [V] .  'L. bt'—3.{3),  -K'"".  'L. bt\

[6930«  ] for  we  have,  from  [60256,  6930a,  b],  3—  —  =  1 ,00727, ^  +  JV;  =  1 ,00136  ; so  that

n  '  ' n

the  expression  of  the  divisor 3 — — JV,  [6460], will  not  be  very  much  altered

[6930<]

from  its  true  value,  by  putting JY^-\-—  =1,  as  in  [6930] ;  and  by  making  this  substitution

[6930m] we  find  that  the  expression  [6460  line  1]  becomes — a  v  o  no^or — '^  ^^  substitute  in  it

m'
[6930r] the  values  of a, b'f^  [6801,6805], also m'  =  [6841c],  it  becomes  nearly  as  in

[6931  line  1]. In  like  manner,  the  terra  [6480  line  1] becomes,  by  using the  values

[69301*] [6797—6800,6801,6805,6814,6818],  and m"  = -j-^j^  [6841<?], very  nearly, as  m

[6932  line  1]. A  similar  calculation  being  made  with  the  terms  in  [6481  line  1]  ;  using  the
[6930x] ^^j^^^  [6798,6799,  6818,  Sic],  we  get  the  term  in  [6933  line  1].

|.„»_  ^  *  (3506)  The  expression  [6530]  corresponds  to  the  first  satellite  m,  and  by  changing
reciprocally  the  elements  relative  to  m,  into  those  corresponding  to  m",  we  get  Sv'"
[6936]. Now  it  is  evident  that  the  terms  of Sv'"  [6936]  are  much  larger  than  those  of

[69355] dv  [6530]. For  if  we  compare  the  first  term  of  [6936]  with  that  of  [6530],  we  find  that

VIII.  vli.  <§.24.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e^  e'^,  fee;  y\  j'^,  &c.  203

Now  we  have,  in  [6908,  6906],

6=  0",070350 ; ^L  ==  3°,4444 ;  [6937]

and  we  also  have,*

2c  =1  ",9446; or c  =  0",9723.  [6938]

[6939]

Therefore, by  making  use  of  the values  of x'", 3 and (3),  given  in

[6926, 6864], and supposing m-  =  1 in (3), we find that the secular
equation  of  the  fourth  satellite  is  represented  by

6v"'  =  —0,000135.  t^  ;  [6940]

so  that  it  will  be  for  a  long  time  insensible.  [6940']

We  have  also,  in  [6552],  the  following  inequality  in  the  mean  motion  of
the  fourth  satellite,  referred  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  ;  f

their  ratio  is  as 3 to 0 ; and  from  [6864]  we  have  nearly 3 =9. 0 • [6935c]

The  same  ratio  obtains  very nearly  between  the  second terms  of  [6936] and  [6530],

X,  X',  &c.  being  small  [6923 — 6926]. Again,  the  third  term  of  [6936]  is  to  the  third  term

of  [6530]  as  X'"^  (3)  to  X2  (0) ;  and  by  substituting  the  values  [6926, 6923, 6864  hnes  1,4], [6935rf]

we  find  that  the  first  term  of  this  ratio  is  much  greater  than  the  second. Hence  it  appears

that  this  term  of  Sv'"  [6936]  is  much  greater  than  the  corresponding  terms  of Sv,  5v\  Sv", ["^"^^J

as  is  observed  in  [6935'J .

*  (3507) If  we  compare  the  expression  of  the excentricity  of  Jupiter's  orbit  [6527]
with  that  in  [4407],  we  get c  =  0*,329487,  which  represents  the  value  of  the  coefficient '■ "^
of  t in e*''  [4407]. This  term  "is  produced  chiefly  by  the  action  of  Saturn,  as  is  evident

from [4404c?,  &ic.  4246  line  4,  4403,  4405], using  the  value m^  = ~^  ^ [4061],  and [69386]

oo59,40

putting jxv=0. If  we  use  the  value l-{-^'^  == ' [6903&],  the  preceding  expression r6938c]
of  c will be  decreased in  nearly  the  same  ratio,  making c  =  0',3149  =0",972, or [6938rf]

2c==  1",944,  as  in  [6938]. Now  substituting  in  [6936]  the  values  of  (3), 3 ,  X"',  b, ^qqssc]

^L,  2c,  [6864,6926,6937,6938],  also  that  of  H  or  6*^  =  0,0480767  [4080],  we  get
Sv'"  [6940]  nearly.  This  is  so  very  small  that  it  does  not  amount  to  two  centesimal  seconds
in  a  century  ;  and  it  must  therefore  be  for  a  long  time  insensible,  as  in  [6940'J.

[6938/]

t  (3508) The  formula  [6941]  is  easily  deduced  from  the  terms  of  [6552], depending

on  the  angle  p, by  changing X,  (0), 0 ,  I, into X'",  (3), 3 ,  /'",  respectively;

[6941o]

so  as  to  make  them  conform  to  the  fourth  satellite.

204  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

6.(3).X'"+4.(1— X'").rTl-i.(l-X"0.pl

[6941] ^^>"  =  __  1— _ i .  a'.  V",  sin.(p^+A— ^')-

V

[6941'] The  first  approximation  gives,*

[6942]  ;?^  +  A— ^'  =^.7541"  +  31°,9199,

[6943]  r  =  2112";

hence  the  preceding  inequality  becomes,!

[69426]

[6942d]

*  (3509) The  chief  term  of  s'"  [7329],  depending  on  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the
orbit  of  the  fourth  satellite  to  the  fixed  plane,  may  be  put  under  the  form,

[6942a]  /'  =  2771",6.sin.(t;'"+  283o,29861  +  i.7528",01).

In  this  expression  the  coefficient  of  t  is  relative  to  the  moveable  vernal  equinox  of  the
earth  [7327,  kc]  ;  and  if  we  refer  it  to  the  fixed  equinox  of  1750,  we  must  change  the
coefficient  of  t  from  7528" ,01,  to  7682",64,  as  in  [7327].  IVIaking  this  change,  and
then  putting  the  expression  equal  to  that  of s'"  in  [6300  line  4],  we  get,

l6M2c]  r\sm.{v"'-i-pt-{-A)  =  277r',6.sin.(z;'"+283°,29861  +  <.7682",64).

Comparing  the  coefficient  of  the  first  member  with  that  of  the  second,  we  get  Z'"=2771"6,
as  in  [6943]  nearly. JVIoreover,  by  comparing  the  angles  under  the  sign  sin. ,  we  get,

[6942e]  pt-{-A  =  283^,29861  +  ^.7682",64.

Subtracting,  from  this  last  expression,  the  value  of  *'= — 148°,62129-|-^-0",8259
[6929c],  and  neglecting  the  whole  circumference 400°, we  obtain,

[6942g-]  ^^  +  A— y  =  31^,9199 +  ^.768r,8141.

The  constant  angle  31°,9199  agrees  with  that  which  we  have  given  in  [6942]  ;  observing

[6942A]  that  the  author  has  inserted,  in  the  original  work,  — 52875",  instead  of  4-31°59199,  in
both  the  formulas  [6942,  6944]. This  appears  to  be  merely  a  typographical  mistake;

[6942i]  since  the  true  value  +31°,9199  is  used  in  the  subsequent  parts  of  the  work,  as  in
[7315,  7317,  7318,  &c.].  The  coefficient  of  i,  which  is  used  by  the  author  in
[6942,  6944],  is  7541";  being  the  value  assumed  as  a  first  approximation,  in  [6941',  Stc.];

[6942A:] ^^^  jj(jiffgj.s  ^  little  from  that  in  [6942^],  namely, 768l",8141. Substituting  in  [6941]

[6942^ ]

the  values  of X'",  (3), 3 , pt  +  A-^', l'%  &c. [6926,  6864,  6942^,  6943], also

a'=  30,43519  [7217],  and  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  it  becomes  very  nearly  equal

to  the  following  expression,
[6942m]  5«'"  =  — 49",51.sin.(<.7681",8141+3lO;9199);

being  the  same  as  in  [7318  line  13] ; the  coefficient  of  t being  changed  as  in  [6942^].
[6942n] Remarking,  however,  that,  by  a  rough  calculation,  the  coefficient  of  this  inequality  appeared

to  be  a  fraction  of  a  second  less  than  the  value  given  by  the  author.

f  (3510) We  have  seen  in  the  last  note  how  the  inequality  [6944],  corresponding  to

[6944a] ^j^^  angle,  or  value  of  p  [6942],  is  computed. The  terms  depending  on  the  other  larger

values  of  j?, may  be  neglected,  because  they  are  decreased  by  the  increased  value  of  the

VIII.  vii.  <^  25.] INEQUALITIES  DEPENDING  ON e^,  e'^,  &c.; f,  y'\  kjc.  205

5t,'"  =  _49",51.sin.(^.7541"-f3I°,9199J.  [6944]

The  inequalities  of  this  liind  are  insensible  relative to  the  other  satellites, rQaAA^
[6944^— m].

25.  It  now  remains  to  consider  the  inequalities  depending  upon  the  square
of  the  disturbing  force.  We  have  seen,  in  [6765],  that  the  second  satellite
is  subjected  to  the  inequality,

62;'=:_5g..(ii)2.sin.(2/i^  — 2n'i+2s  — 2s').  [6945]

divisor  p, and  also  by  the  decreased  value  of  the  coefficient V". This  is  evident  by  the  [69446]

inspection  of  the  value  of  /'  [7352]  ;  in  which  the  coefficients  of t, corresponding  to  the  [6944c]

moveable  equinox  [7328],  are  7528",01, 28220^85, 1 337 1 5",77  ;  and  the  corresponding  [6944rf]
coefficients  or  values  of  V", neglecting  the  signs,  are  277I",6, 448",93, 4",80  ; so  that

I'"  2771  6  448  93

the  values  of  — , relative  to  these quantities, will be nearly as  '  ■ ,  ' , [6944e]

—7-^ — — , or  as 1, 0,04, 0,0001  ;  consequently  the  two  last  terms  must  be  so  much  less

lOo/ J  O^/  /

than  the  first  [6944],  that  they  may  be  neglected. The  coefficient 49",51 [6944] is  the

maximum  of  that  inequality, and  this  arc  is  described  by  the  fourth  satellite  in  about 18 [6944/]

sexagesimal seconds  of  time  [6781] ;  and  generally  the  effect  in  eclipses  ivill  he  much  less

than  this  maximum  value, on  account  of  the  multiplication  by  the  sine  of  the  angle  with

which  the  coefficient  is  connected  in  [6944]. If  we  change  the  symbols  in  the  formula r(>qAA  i

[6941],  so  as  to  make it  conform  to the  first  satellite,  and  compute  the  value  of Sv

corresponding  to  the  expression  of I, in  [7522  line  3],  we  find,  that  the  coefficient  of  this

term  of Sv is —  2",7  ;  which  can  be  described  by  this  satellite  in  a  tenth  of  a  sexagesimal

second  of  time, and is  tlierefore  wholly  insensible. In  like  manner,  by changing  the [6944A]

symbols  in  [6941],  so  as  to  correspond  to the  second  satellite,  and  to  the  value  of  I' in

[7482  line  4],  we  find, that  the  coefficient  of  this correction  is — 128",4, which is [6944i]

considerably  greater  than  that  in  [6944],  neglecting  the  consideration  of  the  signs ;  but  as

an  arc  of 128",4 is  described  by  the  second  satellite  in  less  than  10  sexagesimal  seconds

of  time,  it  may,  on  that  account,  be  considered  as  of  less  importance  than  that  of 5v'

[6944/J  ; but  it  seems  to  be  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  be  noticed. Lastly,  by  changing

the  symbols  in  [6941],  so  as  to  correspond  to  the  third  satellite,  and  to  the  value  of  l" in [6944Z]

[7427  line  3],  v^e  find,  that the  coefficient  of  this  correction  is — 37''',7  ; which  can  be

described  by  this  satellite  in  about  6  sexagesimal  seconds  of  time,  being  considerably  less

than  that  for  the  fourth  satellite  [6944/]. The  corrections  for  other  values  of I,  I',  I", [6944m]

are  decreased like  those  for  the  fourth satellite  in [6944e], and  may  be  considered

insensible,  as  in  [6944']. We  have  not,  in this  note,  taken  into  consideration  the  terms rgQ44  -i

depending  on  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force,  mentioned  in  [6553,  &,c.].

VOL.  IV.  52

„, [6944A]

206  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  Cel.

We  have  by  observation,  very  nearly,*
[6946]  (ii)  =  11923";

hence  the  preceding  inequality  becomes,
[6947]  6v'  =  69",78.  sm.(2ni—2n't  +  2s  —  20.

The  inequalities  of  the  same kind are insensible relative to the other

satellites  [694>ld,  &c.].

*  (3511) We  obtain  from  [61726, 6240g'],  by  successive  reductions,
[6947al s\n.{nt—nft-\-s—e')  =  sin.  {2n"i—2n't-}-2^'—^s')  =  sin.2.(0"— e')  =  — sin.2.  (e'— e").
[69476] Substituting  this  last  expression  in  [6173],  we  get fV=  (ii).sin.2.(©' — e"). Comparing
[6947c] this  with  the  corresponding  term  of  [7450  line  2], we  get (ii)  =  1192(y',67, agreeing
nearly  with  [6946]. IMultiplying  the  square  of  this  by  -^^, and  dividing  the  quotient  by
the  radius  in  seconds,  it  becomes  as  in  [6947] nearly. In  lilce  manner,  by  comparing
[7513  line  5]  with  [6172], and [7390  line  2] with [6174],  we  get ( i )  =  5050",59,
(hi)  =  808",20. The  former  being  substituted  in  [6764],  gives  (5«=12",5.sin.4.(0-0')  ;
[6947e] and  the  latter  being  substituted  in  [6766]  gives 5u"  =  0",3.  sin. 2.(0' — 0"). This  term  of
6v"  is  insensible,  but  that  of  Sv  might  be  noticed,  with  the  other  similar  inequalities  in
[6947/*] [7513] ;  though  it  is  hardly  sensible  in  observations  in  eclipses,  on  account  of  the  rapidity
of  the  motions  of  the  first  satellite ;  since  the  angle 12%5 is  described  in  about  half  a
sexagesimal  second  of  time  [6778].

[6947(f]

VIII.  viii.  «§.  26.]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  207

CHAPTER  VIII.

ON THE  DURATION OF AN ECLIPSE OF ANY SATELLITE.

26.  We  do  not  directly  observe  the  motions  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter
about  that  planet.  The  elongation  of  a  satellite  from  Jupiter,  as  seen  from
the  earth,  is  so  small,  that  a  very  slight  error  in  an  observation  can  produce
a  variation  of  several  degrees,  in  the  place  of  the  satellite,  when  referred  to
Jupiter's  centre.  The  eclipses  of  the  satellites  furnish  an  incomparably  [(5948]
better  method  of  determining  their  motions  ;  and  it  is  to  these  observations
we  are  indebted  for  the  knowledge  of  their  perturbations.  The  shadow  of
Jupiter  is  projected  in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  sun;  and  the
satellites  are  immersed  in  this  shadow  when  they  are  nearly  in  opposition
to  the  sun.  The  inclinations  of  the  orbits  of  the  three  inner  satellites,  to  [6948']
the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  and  their  distances  from  that  planet  are  so  adapted  to
each  other,  that  the  satellites  are  eclipsed  at  each  revolution.  But  the
fourth  satellite  passes  often  beyond  the  limits  of  the  shadow,  and  is  not
eclipsed ;  and  for  this  reason  as  well  as  on  account  of  the  longer  duration
of  its  revolution,  the  eclipses  of  this  satellite  happen  less  frequently  than
those  of  the  other  satellites,

A  satellite  disappears  from  our  view  before  it  is  wholly  immersed in
Jupiter's  shadow. Its  light  is  diminished  by  the  penumbra,  and  its  disc,  as [6948"]
it  gradually enters  into  the  shadow  of  the  planet,  becomes  invisible  to  us,
before  it  is  totally  eclipsed. The  limb  of  the  satellite,  at  the  moment  when [69491
we  cease  to  perceive  it,  is  therefore  at  a  small  distance  from  Jupiter's  shadow  ; Exterior
and  if  we  suppose  that  there  is  at  that  distance  an  exterior  surface  similar  to
that  of  the  shadow,  the  immersion  of  the  satellite,  within  this  exterior  surface,
will  be  the  beginning  of  the  eclipse,  as  it  appears  to  us ;  and  its  emersion
from  this  exterior  surface  will  be  the  end  of  the  eclipse.

fictitious
shadow.

[6949']

208  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[6950]

[695rj

[6952]

This  exterior  or  fictitious  shadow  is  not  the  same  for  all  the  satellites.  It
depends  on  their  apparent  distance  from  Jupiter,  whose  brilliancy  weakens
their  light,  and  on  the  greater  or  less  power  of  their  surfaces  in  reflecting
the  light ;  it  also  depends  upon  the  penumbra  ;  and  probably  also  upon  the
refraction,  and  upon  the  extinction  of  the  solar  rays  in  Jupiter's  atmosphere.
The  greatest  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  one  of  the  satellites,  cannot  therefore

[6950']  give,  with  precision,  that  of  the  other  satellites  ;  but  the  comparison  of  these
durations  will  throw  light  on  the  influence  of  the  causes  we  have  just
mentioned. The variation of  the  distance  of Jupiter  from the  sun or

[6951]  from  the  earth,  changes  the  intensity  of  the  light  we  receive  from  the
satellites,  and  this  has  an  influence  upon  the  duration  of  their  eclipses.  The
elevation  of  Jupiter  above  the  horizon,  the  clearness  of  the  earth's
atmosphere,  and  the  power  of  the  instruments  which  are  used  in  the
observation,  have  also  an  influence  upon  this  duration.  All  these  causes
produce  a  degriee  of  uncertainty  in  the  observations  of  the  eclipses  of  the
satellites,  particularly  in  those  of  the  third  and  fourth.  Fortunately,  we  can
observe  quite  often,  with  these  two  satellites,  the  immersion  and  emersion  in
the  same  eclipse ;  which  gives  the  time  of  their  conjunction  with  a
considerable  degree  of  accuracy,  and  independent  of  most  of  the  causes  of
error  above  enumerated.

hi  the  first  place  loe  shall  determine  the  figure  of  Jupiterh  shadoiv.  If
this  planet  and  the  sun  were  spherical,  the  shadow  would  be  a  cone,
touching  the  surfaces  of  the  two  bodies.  But  Jupiter  is  sensibly  elliptical ;
therefore  its  shadow  must  differ  from  that  of  a  cone.

We  shall  consider  generally  the  shadow  of  an  opake  body  illuminated  by  a
luminous  one,  whatever  be  the  figures  of  these  bodies.  If  we  draw  through
any  point  of  the  surface  of  the shadow  a  plane  which  is  a  tangent  to  that

[6954]  surface,  it  will  also  be  a  tangent  to  the  surfaces  of  both  these  bodies.  It  is
evident  that  the  three  points  of  contact  will  be  in  a  right  line,  which  will
also  coincide with the surface  of  the shadow  ; therefore  this  surface is

[6955]  formed  by  the  intersections  of  a  series  of  planes,  which  touch  the  surface  of
the  opake  and  luminous  bodies. We  shall  suppose,  as  in  [19c?],  that

[6956]  x=^y-\-hz-\-c,

touching  is  the  general  equation  of  these  planes,  a,  b,  c,  being  quantities  which  are
variable  from  one  plane  to  another.  We  may  here  apply  the  considerations
used  in  [1167",  &:c.],  relative  to  the  orbits  of  the  planets  considered  as
variable  ellipses. If  we  vary,  by  infinitely  small  quantities,  the  rectangular

[6953]

the
shadow.

VIII.  viii.  §  26.]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  209

co-ordinates a;,  y,  z, they  may  be  considered  as  appertaining  to  the  same [6957]
plane. Hence  we  may  take  the  differential  of  the  equation,

a;  =  ay  +  bz  +  c ;  [6958]

considering a,  b,  c, as  constant  quantities  ;  which  gives,

dx  =  ^dy  +  hdz.  [6959]

Taking  then  its  differential, supposing  all  the  quantities  to  be  variable,  and

subtracting  the  first  differential  from  the  second,  we  obtain,

0  =  y.d^-{-z.dh-\-dc',  [6960]

so  that  if  we  consider  b  and  c  as  functions  of  a,  we  shall  have,  [6961]

I dh dc
"  =  2/  +  ^-^+^-  [6962]

We  shall  now  put,

|x  =  0,  [6963]

for  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  luminous  body ; and X,  Y,  Z,  for  the Equation
three  co-ordinates  of  this  surface,*  at  the  point  where  it  is  touched  by  the tZ  hirai"/
plane. In  order  to  make  this  plane  a  tangent  to  the  surface,  it  is  necessary
not  only  that  the  co-ordinates  should  satisfy  the  equation  of  this  surface,  but
that  they  should  also  appertain  to  its  differential,

°=(S)-''^+(S)-''y+(S)-^^-

Substituting  for dX its  value </Z  =  ac^F-f  6 JZ  [6959],  we  obtain,  [6965]

0  =  .Y.J(S)+a.(£)|+.Z.{(g)  +  b.(S)J.

It  is  evident  that  this  last  equation  ought  to  be  satisfied,  whatever  be  the
values  of dY  and </Z; hence  we  get.

[6962a]

*  (3512) The  equations  of  surfaces  are  treated  of  in [19a—/]. The  differential  of
the  equation  of  the  surface (x=  0  [6963],  is  evidently  as  in  [6964]  ;  and  if  this  differential
surface  coincide  with  the  plane  [6953,  Sec],  it  will  satisfy  the  equation  [6959],  by  changing [6962&]
dx,  dy,  dz, into dX,  dY,  dZ,  respectively,  as  in  [6965]. Substituting  this  in  [6964],
we  get  [6966]  ;  which  cannot  be  satisfied  for  all values  of  dX,  dY, unless  both  their '■ ^-'
coefficients  be  put  equal  to  nothing,  as  in  [6967,6968].

VOL.  IV.  53

210  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  C«.

Combining  these  equations  with  the  following,*

fA  being  a  function  of  X^  F,  Z ;  and  then  eliminating Xt  Y,  Z,  t(7e  o6^om

/Ac  /r*/  Jmdamental  equation  in  a,  b,  c.
}Ve  shall  also  ptU^

[mi]  fi' «  0,

S'ui^ for  the  equation  of  the  opake  body ;  and X\  F,  Z',  for  the  coordinates,

[6970]

Jjj^« corre^qionding  to  the points where  it  is  touched  by  the  plane ; f*'  being
[m%]

considered  as  a  function  of  these  co-ordinates. Then  this  equation  \\'ill  give,
in  like  uuuuier,  tlie  four  following  equations  ;t

mi]  ^==(^)  +  ^-(S')'

[699^5]  fi^'==0; X'  =  ay'+bZ'+c.

Hence  we  get  a  second  Jundamental  eq^tation  between a,  b,  c. By  means
[GD76] of  this,  and  the  first  fundamental  equation  [6970],  we  obtain b and c in
functions of a. Substituting tliese functions in the two equations
[6956,  6962],  nameljr,

we  shall  ha^e  two  equations  between  x^  y,  s,  &c. ;  and  by  eliminating  a,
[6979]  we  shall  finally  obtain  an  equation  between  or,  y,  r,  which  will  be  that  of
8Mk««r  the  surface  of  the  shadow.  Tkis  is  the  general  solution  of  the  problem  for
^^«  the  determination  of  the  shadoio  of  an  opake  body ;  and  the  same  solutifm
gims  also  the  equation  of  the  surface  qf  the  penumbra ;  for  it  is  evident  that
this  surface  is  formed  like  that  of  the  shadow,  by  tlie  successive  intersections

[cseo]

[6Si6dtt]

*  (3513) Tlie  equations  [6969]  ar«  the  same  as  those  in  [6963,  6958],  changing

or,  y,  «, into  X,  Y,  Z^  respectively,  so  as  to  correspond to the point  of  contact.

rfioisai ^""'"**^"5 ^» Y, Z, from the four equations  [6967 — 6969]}  we  obtain  the  first

fundamental  equaticMi  in a,  b,  c ;  corresponding  to  the  plane  which  touches  the  luminous

body.

t  (3514) The  equations  [6973—6975]  are  similar  to  those  in  [6967—6969],  changbg
^ J (i,  X,  Y,  Z, into  |fc*,  X\  Y,  Z\  respectively ;  so  as  to  correspond  to  U^e  sur&ce  of
the  opake  body.

Vni.  viii.  ^26J.  ON  THE  DURATION  OP  AN  ECLIPSE.  211

of  the  planes  which  touch  the  surfaces  of  the  luminous  and  opake  bodies ;
with  this  difference,  that  in  the  case  of  the  shadow^  we  must  consider  the
intersection  of  the  planes  which  touch  these  surfaces^  on  the  same  side ;  whereas [6081]
in  the  penumbra^  we  must  consider  the  intersections  of  the  planes  which  touch r»««mbi«.
these  surfaces  upon  the  opposite  sides* We  shall  now  apply  this  solution  to
the  shadow  of  Jupiter*

In  the  frst  place^  we  shall  suppose  Jupiter  and  the  sun  to  he  spherical ;  »t***k*A

putting  also,  ^"^^^

R  s=  the  sun's  senni-diameter  ;  [6869]

R'  s=  the  semi-diameter  of  Jupiter ;  [6969^

D  e=  the  distance  of  the  centres  of  the  sun  and  Jupiter.  [6989*]

Then  the  orisf^in  of  the  co-ordinates  being  placed  at  the  sun^s  centre^  we  have,  [6069*]
for  the  equation  of  the  sun's  surface,  the  expression,*  X^-^-Y^-^-S^ — R^  =  0 ;  [6983]
so  that  we  shall  get,  from  [6963],

Hence  we  shall  have  the  four  following  equations ;

X«4-y'  +  ^  — ^"-^O;  [6968]

Z-fbX—0;  [69871

JC  — aY-fbZ  +  c,  [<»88]

The  three  first  equations  give,t

^.(l+a»-f  b»)  =  iJ«;  [8989]

and  from  the  three  last  equations,  we  obtain,

X(l-|-a«  +  b^)-c,  [em]

*  (3515) The  equation  [6983]  a  similar  to  that  in  [IIM],  changing /,  «,  y,  », into
Bi  X,  y,  Z,  respectively. Putting  this  equal  to  the  assumed  value f*  =»  0  [6963],  wo i^*^**J
get  f*  =  X""|-r«  +  Z*  — ii"; whence,

Substituting  these  in  [6967,  6968],  we  get  [6986,  6987].  The  equations  [6985, 6988]  [6983e]
are  the  same  as  [6983, 6969]  respectively.

t(3516) From  [6986, 6987]  we  get y  =  --aX, Zat— bX; substituting  these r^^ojj  ,
in  [6985],  we  get  [6989] ;  and  by  substituting  the  same  values  in  [6988]  we  obtain  the
value  of  c  [6990].

212  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Hence  we  deduce,*
[6991]  0^  =  72^.(1 +a2+b').

[6992] The  equation  of  Jupiter's  surface!  is (X'— Z))^+Y'H^''— i^'"  =  0; so

Equation  i  r

jupiL'. "*^t  "O"^  [6971]  we  have,

tSj  fsf  =  (X'—Dy+Y'^+Z''—R'\

From  what  has  been  said,  we  obtain  the  four  following  equations,!
[6994]  (X'—Dy  +  Y'2  +  Z'^—R'^  =  0  ;

[6995]  F  +  a.(X'— Z))  =  0;

[6996]  Z'  +  b.(Z'— Z))  =  0 ;

[6997]  Z'— Z)  =  aF+bZ'+c— Z).

Hence  we  deduce,  §
[6998]  (c—Dy  =  i2".  ( 1  +  a^  +  b^).

[6991a]
[6992a]

*  (3517) Dividing  the  square  of  [6990]  by  [6989],  and  then  multiplying  the  quotient
by R^, we  get  [6991].

f  (3518)  If  X^,  Y'j  Z\  be  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  Jupiter's  surface,  referred
to  the  centre  of  the  planet  as  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,  and R' its  radius,  we  shall

[69926]  have,  for  the  equation  of  its  surface,  as  in  [6985],  Xf  ■\-Y'^ -^  Z'^^R'^^^;  the
axes  of  X^,  Y\  Z' ,  being  parallel  to  those  of  X,  Y,  -ZT,  respectively.  If  we  refer  these
co-ordinates  to  the  centre  of  the  sun,  and  put  X'  for  the  new  co-ordinate,  or  the  line
drawn  from  the  sun's  centre  to  the  centre  of  the  planet,  and  continued  beyond  it  by  the

[6992c]  quantity  X^,  for  positive  values  of  the  co-ordinate  X^,  we  shall  evidently  have
X^=X'  —  D\  the  co-ordinates  Y'  and  Z'  remaining  unaltered.  Substituting  this
value  of  X^  in  the  preceding  equation  [69926],  we  get  [6992],  corresponding  to  |x'  =  0
[6971],  as  in  [6993J.

f  (3519)  The  equation  [6994]  is  the  same  as  [6992] ;  putting  this  equal  to  \ii,  we
get  [6993];  whose  partial  differentials,  relative  to X', Y',  Z', are.

Substituting  these  in  [6973,  6974],  we  get  [6995,  6996]  respectively.  Subtracting  D
from  the  last  of  the  equations  [6975]  we  get  [6997],  being  the  equation  of  the  part  of  the
surface  which  is  touched  by  the  tangent  plane.

rgggg  ,  "^  (3520)  Tho  equation  [6998]  can  be  deduced  from  the  four  equations  [6994 — 6997],
in  the  same  manner  as  [6991]  is  from  the  four  similar  equations  [6985 — 6988].  The  same
may  be  obtained  more  simply  by  derivation  from  [6991]  ; observing  that if  we  change

[699861  '^'  ^'  '^'  ^'  ^'  ^^^^  ^' — ^'  -^'j  ^'^  ^'^  ^ — "^'  I'^spectively ;  the  equations
[6985-6988]  will  change  into  [6994 — 6997]  respectively  ;  and  by  making  the  same
changes  in  [6991],  which  was  deduced  from  [6985—6988],  we  get  [6998].

VIII.  viii.  ^26]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  213

Therefore  bj  putting,

R

c—D

~  =  \, [lOOOi]  .'  [6999]

we  shall  have,*
consequently,

c

=  \  ;  [7000]

C=^.  [7001]

Now  if  we  put,  [7002]

•^=m(l-X.)«-^5  [7003]

the  equation  [6991]  will  give,t

b2=/2_a^;  [7004]

*(3521) Dividing  the  equation  [6998]  by  [6991],  we  get (^-^J  =  f^Y  =z\^ j;70ooa]
[6999]  ; whose  square  root  is =  ±  x^ ; whence c  =  - — r-  . Using  the  u^per [70006]

C  J  -4—  Aj

signs,  we  obtain  the  equations  [7000,  7001]  ;  but  we  may  also  use  the  lower  signs ;  and  it
is  easy  to  prove  that  the  former  correspond  to  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  real  [7000c]
shadow  ;  and  the  latter  to  that  of  the  penumbra  [6981].  For  it  is  evident  that  the  vertex
of  the  cone  of  the  penumbra  falls  between  Jupiter  and  the  sun ;  so  that  its  distance  from
the  sun  must  be  less  than  D  ;  but  the  vertex  of  the  cone  of  the  shadow  falls  beyond
Jupiter,  making  its  distance  from  the  sun's  centre  g-rert^er  than  D.  Now  if  we  suppose,  [7000e].
as  in  [6992c],  that  the  axis  of  X  is  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  sun  to  that  of
Jupiter,  it  is  plain  that  the  vertex  of  the  cone  of  the  shadow,  or  that  of  the  penumbra,  will
be  on  this  line;  and  we  shall  have,  at  the  vertex  Y=0,  Z=0;  whence  X=c
[6988]. Substituting  this  in  the  value  of  c  [70006], we  get, for  the  values  of X, l^^^^fi

D

[7000(f|

corresponding  to  these  vertices, X=  - — — ■. If  we  use  the  upper  sign  of  ^^i,  we  get [7000g']

X^D, corresponding to  the  shadow  [7000e] ; and the lower  sign  gives X <CD, [7000A]

corresponding  to  the  penumbra  \1000d\. We  may  observe  that  the  symbol  Xj  [6999,  &c.]

is  given  without  any  accent  in  the  original  work  ; but  we  have  placed  the  figure  1  below L'OOOt  ]

the  letter,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  symbols  X,  X',  &z,c.  [6343 — 6346]. The  same  change

is  made  in  [7025,  Sic.].

t  (3522) Substituting  the  value  of  c  [7001]  in [6991], and  then  dividing  by B?,

m  .  ....  [^004a]

^^  S^^ 'T^ ;i  =  l~l~^^~hh^* Transposing 1,  and  substituting,  in  its  first  member,

the  value  of  P  [7003],  we  get /2=  a^-f  b^,  as  in [7004]. Substituting  the  values  of
b,  c,  [7004,7001], in a;  — c  =  ay  +  b2;  [6958],  we  get  [7006]  for  the  equation  of  the ^''^^^^^
tangent  plane.
VOL.  IV.  64

214  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7005]  and  the  equation  of  the  tangent  plane  [6958]  will  become,

[7006]  X =  2iy-irz.\/p^^ .

Equation

tlnge^nt  Taking  the  partial  differential  of  this  equation  relative  to a,  we  get,*

plane.

[7007]  0=2/— ^^

hence  we  deduce,
[7008]  a  =

fy .

[7009]  b  =  v/7^irr2=- /-T-r-r,,

consequently,

[7010]

D  r ,

or.

P0"1  (_^_^)-  =  /^(j,^  +  ^^);

Equation  Vl Xi

of  the  ^  '■

[7012] wMch  is  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  a  cone,-\ y and z being  nothing  at
surface its  vertcx. We  shall  have  at  this  point,

of  the
shadow

r7007  1  *  (3523)  The  equation  [7006]  is  equivalent  to  that  in  [6958],  being  the  equation  of
the  tangent  plane  ;  and  in  the  same  manner  as  [6960]  is  deduced  from  [6953],  by  taking

[70076]  the  differential,  considering  a,  b,  c  as  variable,  we  may  find  [7007]  from  [7006]  ;
observing  that  as  b,  c,  have  been  eliminated,  there  will  remain  only  the  variable  quantity
a. Then the differential of [7006], considering a only as variable, gives

[7007c] 0  :=  da.y—da.  [/j^-^^  ? dividing this  by <?a, we  get [7007], or y=— pL=.

[7007(f] Squaring  this  and  then  deducing  the  value  of a^, we  get a  [7008] . Substituting  this  in
r7007 ^004],  we  get b  [7009]. Substituting  the  value  of a  [7008]  in  the  equation  of  the
plane  [7006],  it  becomes  as  in  [7010]  ;  whose  square  gives  [7011].

[7011a]
[70116]

t  (3594) We  shall  suppose,  in  the  annexed  figure,  that CAV  is  the  axis,  and V  the

vertex  of  the  right  cone VDGEF. Through  any  point D of  its  surface  draw  the

plane DGEF, perpendicular  to  the  axis CF, and

intersecting  the  surface  in the  circle DGEF. We

shall  suppose CAV  to  be  the  axis  of  x, CA=x,

CV=.D', and VA=;=D'—x; also AB^y,
[7011c] BD  =  z; these  two  lines  being  drawn  parallel  to  the

axes  of  y,  z, respectively. Then  in  the  rectangular

plane  triangle  ABD we  have,
[701  Id]  AD^  =  AB^-{-Bn^  =  y^-\-z\

VIII.  viil.  <§.26.]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  215

X  = =  distance  from  the  sun  to  the  vertex  of  the  cone  ;  [7013]

1 — x^

and  this  expresses  the  distance  from  the  vertex  of  the  cone to  the  sun's

centre. Subtracting D from  it,  we  obtain  the  distance  from  this  vertex

to  the  centre  of  Jupiter,  which  is  equal  to

- — ~  =  distance  from  Jupiter  to  the  vertex  of  the  cone.  [7014]

1 — Xj

Noio  in  noticing  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter,  we  shall  suppose  that  the  equator

of  this  planet  coincides  with  the  plane  of  its  orbit. The  error  arising  from

this  supposition  would  vanish, if  Jupiter  were  spherical ;  it  must  therefore

be  of  the  order  of  the  product  of  the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter,  by  the  inclination

of  its  equator  ;* therefore  it  must  be  insensible. This  being  premised,  we

shall  have,  as  in  [6991  ],t

C  =  J?.v/l4-a2-}-b2;  [7017]

[7015]

[7015']
[7016]

[7011/]

Now  by  putting tan^.AVD  =  —  , we  have,  in  the  rectangular  plane  triangle VAD, [7011e]

AD  ==  VA.tan^.AVD  =  -r .  {D' — x). Substituting  this  in  the  preceding  expression  of

AD^, and  then  multiplying  by  f^, we  get (U — x)^  =/^«(^^+^^)j which  represents
the  equation  of  a  conical  surface,  whose  vertex  is V, and  agrees  with  that  in  [7011],  by

putting !>'  =  - — — . This  value  of  D' being  the  same as  the  value  of  x, or CV, [7011g]
1— Xi

corresponding  to  the  vertex V, where  y==0, 2;  =  0 ; as  is  evident  by  substituting  these

values  of  y,  z  in  [7011] ;  whence  we  get  the  value  of x as  in  [7013J.

[7015a]

*  (3525)  If  Jupiter  were  spherical,  the  shadow  would  be  of  the  same  conical  form,
whatever  be  the  position  of  the  axis  of  revolution  of  the  planet.  The  greatest  possible
difference,  when  the  form  of  the  planet  is  elliptical,  is  of  the  order  of  the  ellipticity  p.  Now  [70156]
it  is  very  evident  that,  if  we  obtain  the  form  of  the  shadow,  corresponding  to  the  elliptical
form  of  the  planet,  and  to  the  supposition  that  its  axis  of  revolution  is  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  its  orbit,  and  then  vary  the  inclination  of  the  axis  by  a  small  angle ;  this  elliptical
part  of  the  shadow  p,  will  vary  by  a  part  which  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  order
as  the  angle,  or  as  the  sine  or  tangent  of  this  angle ;  so  that  the  whole  effect  will  be  of  the  [7015(i]
order  of  the  product  of  the  ellipticity p by  this  small  angle,  as  in  [7015'j.

t  (3526) The  equations [6985 — 6988]  contain  only  the  co-ordinates of  the  sun's
surface,  and  are  wholly  independent  of  those  of  Jupiter,  which  are  found in  the  equation [7017o]
11=0 [7020,7018]. Therefore  the  equation [6991], which is deduced from  the
equations  [6985 — 6988],  must  also  hold  good  when  Jupiter  is  elliptical ;  and  by  taking  its
square  root,  we  get  [7017].

216  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER. [M6c.  C61.

Ellipsoidal

j5pue?g  and  the  equation  of  Jupiterh  surface  will  be,*

surface.

[7018]  (X'-Df  +Y"  +  (l+p)^(Z'^-i^'=)  =  0 ;

[7019]  R'  being  the  semi-minor  axis  of  Jupiter. If  we  put  the  first  member  of  this

[7020]  equation  equal  to /, we  shall  have,  by  what  has  been  said  in  [701 8/- A],

[7021]  Y'  +  2i.(X'—D)  =  0;

[7022]  (\+py.Z'-{-h,(X'—D)  =  0  ;

[7023]  X'—D  =  2iY'+  hZ'+  c— D.
Hence  we  deduce,t

[7024]

[7018a]

*  (3527) The  general  equation  of  an  ellipsoid,  referred  to  its  centre  as  the  origin  of
the  rectangular  co-ordinates x,  y,  z, is x^ -{-my^ -\- nz^  =  7c'^  [1363]. Its  semi-axes,

k  k  _

[70186] parallel  to x,  y,  z, being Tc, -7=, y= ,  respectively  [1363"]. If  we  put ^^  =  1,

[7018c]  \/n={l-\-p),  Jc  ={!-{- p) . R' ,  these  semi-axes  become  {l-\-p).R'j  {l-\-p).R'  and
R',  respectively; R' being  the  semi-axis  of  revolution  [7019], and (l-f-p)--R' the

L  Olodj gqiidforial  radius. Substituting  the  values  of  m,  n,  Jc  [7018c],  in  the  equation  of  the

r7018  1  ellipsoid  [7018a],  it  becomes,  by  making  a  slight  reduction,  x'^-{-y^-{-{l-{-pY.{z'^-R'^)  =  0;
now  changing  a?,  y,  z,  into  X' — D,  Y',  Z',  to  conform  to  the  present  notation
[6992a — c],  it  becomes  as  in  [7018]. Putting  this  equal  to m-', we  get,

[7018/]  M''  =  (X'-D)2-|-r2+(l-{-p)2.(Z'2-i2'2) ;

[7018,]  (^f,)  =  2.(X'-D); (^,)  =  2r; Q  =  2Z'.(I-fp).

Substituting  these  in  [6973,  6974],  we  get [7021,  7022]  respectively  ;  the  other  equation
[7018A] [^7023]  is  the  same  as  [6997],  being  the  equation  of  the  part  of  the  surface  which  is
touched  by  the  plane.

t (3528) We have r'  =  --a.(X'— D) [7021]; Z' = -h.^-^^ [7022];
t7024a]  ' V  y  V  ; L j»  (,_f_p)2

[70246]
[7024c]

substituting  these  in  [7018,  7023],  we  obtain  the  two  following  equations  respectively;

(X'-D).{l  +  a'+j-j|^|  =  c-D.
Dividing the equation [7024c] by the square root of the equation [70246],
iraUd] (X'-X»).^^l+aS+(j^]=(l+p).iJ',  we  obtain,

VIII.  viii.  «§.26.] ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  217

Now  putting,

il±^  ==  X,  [7000/]  ;  [7025]

we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  the  square  of p,* "  [7027]

Multiplying  this  by {l+?).R, we  get c— D  =  (l+p).ir.ly/^  l+a^+^-^^l  ,  as [7024/]

in  the  first  expression  of  c — D  [7024]. Substituting  in  its  first  member  the  value  of  c [7024g]
[7017],  we  get  the  last  member  of  [7024]. This  equation  corresponds  to  the  shadow
where X'"^  D  [7000A] ;  that  of  the  penumbra  is  easily  derived  fi-om  it  by  changing  the [7024A]
sign  of  the  radicalin  [1024:d]  ; or,  in  other  words,  by  changing X' — D mto D — X' ; rynoA-i
which  requires  that  we  should  change c — D  [7024e]  into  — c-j-D.

*  (3529)  The  notation  used  in  [7025,  7026],  is  similar  to  that  in  [6999,  7003].  Now
if  we  put  for  a  moment,  for  brevity,  s^  =  1 -j-a^-f-h^  and  neglect  the  square  and  higher
powers  of  p, we  shall  have  successively,

1+^''+  (nTf  =  1  +  a2+  b2— 2pb2  =  s^—2ph^ ;  [70286]

substituting  these  in  the  two  last  forms  of  [7024],  we  get,

(l-}-p).2iV«^-2pb2  =  Rs-D; or {1  +  p).rAs—^-^1  =  Rs—D,  [7028c]

Dividing  this  last  equation  by R,  and  substituting  the  value  of  X^  [7025],  we  get,

(  pb2)  D

pb2 D
(1  __x,).5  +  X,.  —  =  ;k  .  [7028d']

Squaring  this  last  equation, and  re-substituting  in  its  first  term  the  value  of  s^  [7028a],
then  dividing  by (1 — Xj,)^,  we  get,

2X  2)2

1+  a"  +  b^4-  ^  ■  pb"  =  ^  (i_^_^ ; or,  pme]

The  square  root  of  this  last  equation  gives b.  <  1  -f-  --^  >  =  \/f^—sfi  ;  dividing  it  by  the
coefficient  of  b,  we  obtain  [7028]. Substituting  this  value  of  b,  in  the  expression  of  c,
[7017],  and  then  making  successive  reductions,  using 1+/^  =  p.^., .  ,o  [7026],  we  get, [7028g]
VOL.  IV.  55

218  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [M^c.  Gel.

[7028]  b  =  (^1—  Y^^  .  v/r=72  ;

[7029]  c  =  -—  —  \p.  — .  (/'— a^)  ;

which  gives,  for  the  equation  of  the  plane  [7028Z],
[7030]  ^  =  ai,  +  (l--^yz.v^r=?+  -^-  ^.(/^-a').

Equation  \  1 \/  A — \  ^

piaSl!" Taking  its  differential  relatively  to a only,  we  get,

Eliminating  a,  by  means  of  these  equations,  we  shall  obtain  the  equation
of  the  surface  of  the  shadow.  But  we  may  simplify  the  computation,  if  we
suppose,

[r032]  a  =  ^+qp.

fv
:  I g  being  the  value  of  a  in  the  spherical  hypothesis  [7008],  we  shall

have,*

q

[7028/1]
[7028t ;

=  fl.^^l+a^+(l-^^)(/»-a^)|=R.^{l+/=-^.(/'-a=)|

[7028^] =11::^^— '"'?•(/''— ^'')' 3"  •

This  last  expression  of  c  agrees  with  that  in  [7029].  Now  substituting  the  values  of  b,  c,
[7028,  7029],  in  the  equation  of  the  tangent  plane  [6958],  it  becomes  as  in  [7030].  This
equation  is  similar  to  that  in  [7006],  corresponding  to  the  spherical  form  of  Jupiter  ;  and  by
[7028ffi]  taking  its  differential  relative  to  a,  then  dividing  by  t?a,  we  get  [7031] ;  in  the  same
manner  as  we  have  deduced  [7007]  from  [7006J.

*  (3530) Substituting  the  value  of  a  [7032],  in \/{^f^ — a^), and  making  successive
developments  and  reductions,  rejecting  terms  of  the  order p^,  we  get  [70336J.

[7033c  ] Multiplying  this  by  1 —  —^  , we  obtain  [7033] ; and  by  again  multiplying  by z, we

1 — Xj

VIII.  viii.  <§>26.] ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  219

Hence  the  equation  of  the  tangent  plane  becomes.

Hence  we  deduce,  S'^he'""

2-  \  [7035]

from  [7026]  we  have  /=  —  \y/  _^ —  1  ; observing that the [7036]

gn  —  ; I
we  shall  have,  very  nearly.

radical  ought  to  have  the  sign  —  ; because x is  less  than .* Thus

1— \

get  [7033/]. Now  multiplying  [7032] by y,  we  get [7033e]. Neglecting  the  part  of
a  [7032]  containing p, we  get  a  value  of a, whence we deduce P—2?= ;

multiplying  this  by ^^— ,  we  get  [7033^]. Now  adding — — to  the  sum  of  the [7033<fl

first  members  of  [7033e,/,^],  we  get  the  second  member  of  [7030],  or  the  value  of  oo  ; [7033rf']
and  the  term  [7033cr]  being  added  to  the  similar  sum  of  the  second  members  of  [7033e,/,^],
becomes  as  in  [7034],  by  making  some  slight  reductions.

A  X,p\  /z2  X,/pz2

\^-  TlJ^y-VP-^^  =  ^^,  -•  qpy  -  (i-xo./y.+  z2  ^'  [7033/].

Transposmg - — —  in  [7034],  and  squaring  the  result,  we  get  [7035] :  wiiich  represents

^—^^  [7Q33/i]

the  equation  of  the  shadow  of  Jupiter,  /ree  from  radicals,  except  in  the  last  small  term  of

its  second  member.

*  (3531) The  extreme  point  of  the  real  shadow  being  at  the  vertex  of  the  cone,  the
greatest  value  of  x must  correspond  to  that  vertex  ; and  if  Jupiter  be  spherical,  this [7036a]

distance  is - — - [7013] ;  therefore,  in  the  case  of p  =  0, the  general  value  of  a?,  within

1— Aj

the  limits  of  the  shadow,  must  be  less  than - — —  ; so  that x  —  - — r- must  be  negative.

l-"— Aj  1 — Aj  "

Now  if  we  put p  =  0  in  [7034],  we  shall  get x —  — —  = /y/pipiS  j  therefore  /  must [70366]

220  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M&.  Cel.

[7038] D  being  much  greater  than R  [6982,  6982"]  ;  therefore  we  shall  have,*
[7039]  B!'.(l-\f f_D_ V_. , ^ „ < R  .  )  .

Jupiter.

which  is  the  equation  of  the  figure  of  the  shadow  of  Jupiter. We  find  by  the
same  analysis,  that  the  equation  of  the  penumbra  is,  as  in  [yOSdg],

be  negative,  supposing  the  radical \/y'i^z^  to  be  positive. Moreover,  it  is  evident  from
[7036c] the  definitions  in [6982,  &c.,  7025],  that — , jr and X,, are  very  small  quantities;

and  if  we  develop  the  expression  of  /  [7036],  according  to  the  powers  of — , we shall

[7036d] ijave  /=  —  — +  —777^ — +  ^-c- ;  which,  by  neglecting  the  small  terms  of  the

it.(i — Xi)  ■iJj

R

order  — , becomes  as  in  [7037]  ; observing  that  the  symbol  \  denotes  the  ratio  of  the

[7036e]  ,  ,  . .

equatorial  diameter  of  Jupiter  to  that  of  the  sun  [7025,  7018a,  6982,  &ic.],  which  is  very

[7036/"] small ;  so  that  the  expression  of  /  [7037] is  of  the  same  order  as —  , which is very

great  in  comparison  with  the  neglected  terms  of  the  expression  [7036cZJ.

[7039a]
[70396]

*  (3532) Dividing  the  equation  [7035]  by  /^  then  substituting  the  value  of  /  [7037],

we  get  [7039],  which  represents  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  real  shadow  of  Jupiter.

The  equation  of  the penumbra is  obtained in a  similar manner ; for  the  equations

[6983 — 6991]  corresponding  to  the  sun's  surface,  and  those  in  [7017 — 7023]  relative  to

the  surface  of  Jupiter,  require  no  alteration. But  the  quantity c — D  [7024]  changes  its

[7039c] signs  in  the  first  and  third  members  of  [7024],  as in [7024A,  i]. This  produces  a

change  in  the  signs  of  the  second  members  of  the  equations  [7028c],  which  were  deduced

from  [7024],  as  well  as  in  the  resulting  equation [7028</]  ;  and  this  change  may  evidently

be  produced,  by  supposing  the  sign  of  X^  to  be  changed  in  [7028^,  he.]. Therefore  the

equations [7028 — 7035] may be made to  correspond to  the  penumbra,  by  changing

the sign  of X  . Moreover,  in  [7036] we must change the sign of  /, and put
[7039rf]  J-

/=  \  /  — — - — -  —  1, because x  >  — — -  [7000^,  &;c.,  70366,  he]  ;  so  that  for
y^ R^.{l-f-\f  -l  +  Xi

[7039e] the  penumbra  we  must  have /=——— — instead  of  [7037]. This  change  in  the  sign

■"•(l+Xi)

of  /,  produces  a  change  in  the  sign  of  the  last  term  of  [7035],  which  contains  the  divisor
^i/2-|-z2  ;  so  that  in  this  term  the  radical  may  be  supposed  to  change  its  sign,  instead  of  f^.
Finally,  by  making  these  changes  in  the  signs  of X^, y/^ipia, in  the  equation  of  the
[7039g-] gi^ajQ^  [7039],  we  get  that  of  the  penumbra  [7040].

VIII.  viii.  ■J  26.]  ON  THE  DURATION' OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  221

We  shall  now  consider  a  section  of  Jupiter^s  shadow,  by  a  plane
perpendicular  to  the  axis,  at  the  distance  r  from  the  centre  of  the  planet.
We  shall  have  in  this  case, x^  D  +  r  [6982"]  ;  therefore,*  [7041]

We  have  at  first,  by  taking  the  square  root  of  [7042],  and  neglecting  terms
of  the  order  p,

v/y"^+?=  §-{D\-r.(l-h)}  =  R.  I  h-"-'^  \ .

Substituting  this  approximate  value  in  the  small  term  of  [7042],  which  is
multiplied  by  p,  we  obtain,  for  the  equation  of  the  shadow,  the  following
expression ;

[7042]

[7043]

[7044]

DXx

i^+i)

This  equation  appertains  to  an  ellipsis, whose ellipticity  is  f — ^^ —^ . [7045]

^ r.{l-\)

P9  ^,

*  (3533) The  first  member  of  [7039]  may  be  put  under  the  form — .  {D—x.(l—\)],

and then  substituting x  =  D-\-r  [7041], it  becomes  as  in  [7042]. Neglecting p  in [7042a]
[7042],  and  extracting  tlie  square  root,  we  get  the  approximate  value  of \/i/2  -\-z^  [7043].

Substituting  this  in  the  small  term  containing p in  [7042],  and  putting  also R  ==  ■ - —

[7025],  we  get,

—^-—.lU\-r.^l \)l —  y  H-^-t-^_^^.pz.)  r.{\-^.,) U;  [70426]

I'D  S

which  is  easily  put  under  the  form  [7044]  ; observing,  that  by  reducing  the  last  factor  of
[70426]  to  a  common  denominator,  we  have,

1  t  (3534) We  have  in  [2088], P  =  a;^-}-X„2y9, for  the  equation  of  an  ellipsis,  whose [7045o]

VOL.  IV.  56

222  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

r

[7046] The  quantity  jr- is  very  small,  even  in  its  greatest  value corresponding

to  the  fourth  satellite ;  hence  we  see  that  this  ellipsis,  or  the  figure  of  the

section  of  the  shadow ,  is  very  similar  to  the  generating  ellipsis  of  Jupiter,

[7045A;]. We  shall  use  the  following  symbols  ;
[7047]  a  ==  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  section  of  the  shadow ;

[7047']  p'  =  the  ellipticity  of  the  section  of  the  shadow  ;

[7047"]  R'  =  the  polar  semi-axis  of  Jupiter's  mass  [6982]  ;

R'.(\-\-f)  =  the  equatorial  semi-diameter  of  Jupiter,  [7018c]  ;  its  ellipticity
being  p;

then  we  shall  have,

[7048]

rectangular  co-ordinates  are x,  y, greatest  semi-axis  Tc,  and  least  semi-axis — [2088a].

If  we  change  x  into  y,  and  y  into  z,  in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation,  this
[70456] equation  will  become T<^  =  y^-\-\^'Z^  =iy^-^z^-\-[\^ — V).z^. Comparing  this  with  the

equation  [7044],  we  find  that  they  become  identical,  by  putting  Tc^  equal  to  the  first
'■ ■' member  of  [7044],  and X^^^ — 1  equal  to  the coefficient  of  z^, in  the  last  term  of  the

second  member  of  [7044]. Hence  we  get,

V.  DXi ^  Z>X,

The  greatest  semi-axis  Ic  is  the  same  as  a  [7048^]. The  ellipticity,  which  is  represented

by  the  difference  of  the  two  semi-axes  Tc, — ,  divided  by  the  first  of  these  quantities,  is

equal  to 1 ^^  ~\ —  =  \i — ^j nearly;  and  by  using X^^  [7045s],  it  becomes  as

[7045^]  ^"

m  [7045  or  7049]. Now  we  have \  =  ijs  nearly  [7547]; substituting this  in  the

[7045/i] ellipticity  of  the  shadow  p'  [7049],  it  becomes  nearly  p'  =  p.  ( ^ )  ^  p.  ( 1  -|-  J  0.  ^ ) ;

and  if  we  take  for r its  greatest  value,  corresponding  to  the  distance  al" of  the  fourth

satellite,  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  from  [6785 1,  r  =  d"  =  D.  sin.  1530",864  ==  xi^.  D ;
[7045t]  y

hence 10.— =  ji2-  nearly; consequently the eUipticity  p' [7045A],  becomes p'=|fp;

[7045*] which differs only jV  part from  the ellipticity p of  Jupiter's surface [7048], as
in  [7046] .

i

VIII.  viii.  <§.26]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  223

.  =  (,+P).ie'.Ji_^i;-=^)J,.

[7048'J

P-(l+^)  [7049]

p'  =  — =  the  ellipticity  of  the  shadow  ;  Eiiipticuy

r  ( 1 \ \  ^  "^  of  the

^'^^ ^^1  shadow

we  shall  also  have,  for  the  equation  of  the  section  of  Jupiter^ s  shadow,*  of  the  see-

shadow.

and  2a  will  be  the  greatest  width  of  this  section.  [70511

If  we  suppose \ to  be  negative,  in  the  values  of «  and  p', the  equation
[7050]  will  become  that  of  the  section  of  the  penumbra. f Now  the  greatest t'^^^^l
width  of  the  penumbra,  at  the  distance  r  from  Jupiter's  centre,  being,  equal
to  the  difference  of  the  two  values  of  «,  relative  to  the  shadow  and  the
penumbra,  it  will  be  given  by  the  following  expression  [7053]  ; R  being [7052']
the  semi-diameter  of  the  sun  [6982]  ;

greatest  penumbra  =  (l-fp)./?'.^  =  ?^  [7052e].  [7053]

*  (3535) Substituting  in  the  first  member  of  [7044] its  abridged value  a^ [7045^7],
and  in  the  last  term  of  its  second  member,  the  symbol  p'  instead  of  its  value  [7049],  we
get a2  =  i^2_|_^2_^2/.za, or a2-2/2  =  ^2  (i_^2/)  =^2.(i^^')2^  nearly,  as  in [7050]. [7050a]
Putting z  =  0, we  get y=a==tlie  semi-major  axis,  as  in  [7051].

t  (3536) Changing  the  signs  of  X,,  R, in  the  equation  of  the  shadow  [7039],  we  get
that  of  the  penumbra  [7040]. The  equation  [7043]  becomes,

V/^^^+r^  =  /?.  X, .  ^  1  +  '-^^^^  I  .  [7052a]

This  change  in  the  signs  of  X^ ,  R,  requires  a  similar  change  in  the  values  in  [7048',  7049]  ;
andwe*shall  put a^, ^/, for  the  vahies  corresponding to a,  /,  respectively; then  we [^^0526]
shall  have,  from  [7048',  7049],  observing  that  the  value  of  R'  [7025]  is  not  altered,

«,  =  (I+,).i?.(l+^^j;  p.=^-^__.

We  shall  also  have,  for  the equation  of the  surface  of  the  penumbra, the  following
expression,  which  is  similar  to  [7050]  ;

Subtracting the value of a [7048'] from that  of a^ [7052c], we get, by using

Xi

a,_a=(14-/.)./2'.-^  =  '^; asin[7053].  [7052e]

[7052c 1

224  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Symbol*.

[7053']
[7054]
[7055]
[7056]

We  shall  now  put,
Z  =  the  height  of  a  satellite, above  the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  at  the  moment  of

its  conjunction  ;
r  =  the  distance  of  the  satellite  from  the  centre  of  Jupiter,  at  the  time  of

the  eclipse  ;
Vi  =  the  angle  described  by  the  satellite,  by  its  synodical  n^otion,  in  the

orbit  of  the  planet,  from  the  time  of  its  conjunction  ;
X, The  axis  of x  is  the  projection  of  the  radius  vector  of  the  satellite,  on

the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  at  the  instant  of  the  conjunction;  or,  in  other

words,  it  is  the  continuation  of  the  radius  vector  of  Jupiter's  orbit,

at  the  same  instant ;
then  we  shall  have,*
[7057]  f  =  (f  —  r^).sinAu,.

Hence  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  shadow  becomes.

We  shall  neglect  the  quantities  of  the  order  2^  and  r^.sin.^t?i,  which  reduces
[7059] this  equation  to  the  following  form  ;

[7060]  r^,  sin.2^,  =  a2_(l_|-p')2..22.

Now  we  have,t

rfZ , ^ . 3 ddZ
- — hi.sm.  .v..  — -

[7058]

Equatiooa
of  the
shadow.

[7061]  z  =  Z  +  sm. Vy.  —  -\-  |.sm A i^i •  x^  +  &c. ;

*  (3537)  The  satellite  being  at  the  distance  r  from  the  centre  of  the  planet,  and  at
the  height  z  above  the  plane  of  a?,  y,  the  projection  of  r  upon  this  plane  will  be
represented  by  r^  =  \/r-i  —  z^  ;  and  as  this  projected  line  r^  forms  the  angle  v^ ,  with  the
axis  of  X  [7055,7056] ;  and  the  angle  100^ — v^,  with  the  axis  of  y;  we  shall  evidently
have  y  =  rj.sin.»j  =  ^r2 — z-^.sin.Uj  ;  whose  square  gives  y^  [7057].  Substituting  this
in  the  second  of  the  equations  [7050],  we  get  [7058]  ;  and  if  we  neglect  the  term
z^.sin.^Vj, on  account  of  its  smallness,  it  becomes  as  in  [7060].

[70576]
[7057c]

t  (3538) Considering  z  Bsa.  function  of  v^ ,  and  developing  it  according  to  the  powers
[7061o]  ^2  djz

of  t>i, by Maclaurin's  theorem [607a],  we get z  =  Z-}-Vi- — \-iv^^.-—  -\-hc.;

substituting Ui  =  sin.'»j-{"i*sin.^Vi -f- &c.  [46  Int.], and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order
[70616]  .  .  .  rfZ rfrfZ

mentioned  in  [7059],  we  get  the  expression  of  z  [7061]  ;  observing  that - — , — —  are  of

the  same  order  as  z,  as  is  evident  from  the  consideration  that  Z  is  of  the  order  as  [7065] ;

and if we notice only its chief term in [7522  line  1], we shall have nearly

[70Glc] Z  =  05  =  fl.3^,43267.sin.(D-f  510,3787)  nearly. Now  dv  is  to  dv,,  as  n  to  n— J/,  as

VIIL  viU.  ^  26]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  226

therefore  we  shall  have,  very  nearly,*

i^.sinAr,  =  «^— (l-j-p^.Z^— 2.(l-}-p7.sm.i?,.Z.  -^  .  [7062]

Hence  we  deduce,

(i+r')'.Z-'#

\/j7  +  ('+e).fS.Jf-(.+P').fS.

If  s he  supposed  to  express  the  tangent  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite,  above [7064]
Jupiter^ s  orbit,  at  the  time  of  the  conjunction  [6033],  we  shall have  very
nearly Z  =zrs\^ and  as r is  nearly  constant, the  preceding equation
becomes.

is  manifest  from  the  definitions  of  »,  u,,  n,  M  [6023c,  </,  6022/,  602 1 z] ;  and  as  ^  is

very  small relative  to  n  [6025/], </»,  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  order  as  dv ; [7061(f|

consequendy — - is  of  the  same  order  as — . Substituting  in  this  last  expression  the

value  of  Z  [7081c],  we  find  that -r- or -j— is  of  the  same  order  as  Z;  and  the  same [7061el

dv  ttv^

holds  eood  relative  to -r-:: ,  &c.

•  (3539) Taking  the  square  of  z  [7061],  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  fourth  order  in

rfZ  [7062a]

Z,  »i,  it  becomes s^=Z^-\-2.sin.v^.Z.  - — [- &c. Substituting  this  in  [7060],  we  get

[7062],  which  is  a  quadratic  equation  in  sin.c, ,  and  its  root  gives sin.©,  [7063] ;  observing

that  if  we  transpose  the  last  term  of  the  second  member  of  [7062]  into  the  first  member,  the

rfZ  [70e2i]

equation  becomes r^.sin.'rj  -|-2.(  1  -f-p')*-  s'm.«,.  Z.  —  =  a' —  ( 1  +  f')'-  2*  5 which may

evidenUy  be  put  under  the  form,

+ ^s-^l  =la+il+,').Z].\a-(l+',-)Z\;  ' '

A-

neglecting  terms  of  the  order  Z'tiZ*. Dividing  this  by  r*,  and  taking  the  square  root,
we  obtain  [7063].

t  (3540) The  expression  of  Z  [7065]  can  be  deduced  from  [6036],  by  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  x^. The  orbit  of  the  satellite  being  nearly  circular,  r  is  nearly  constant ; ['Otwoj

dZ  ds

and  then  the  difierential  of  Z,  relative  to  v^ , gives -r—  =  r.  -— nearly. Substituting

these  values  in  [7063],  we  get  [7066]. The  remarks  in [7067,  7068],  relative  to  the [70656]
agns,  are  evidently  correct ;  taking  into  consideration  that  the  positive  values  of  «,  follow
after  the  conjunction.

VOL.  IV.  67

226  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mic.  Cel.

P0661 sin.«, = -(i+p?.  ^  ±  v/^  5  7 +(i+p')-^  \  ■  \^-(i+n-s  I .

[7067] This  formula,  with  the  sign  +  prefixed  to  the  radical,  denotes  the  sine  of  the
arc  described  by  the  satellite,  by  means  of  its  synodical  motion,  from  the

[7068] conjunction  to  the  emersion. With  the  sign  — ,  it  denotes  the  negative  value
of  the  sine  of  the  similar  arc,  from  the  immersion  to  the  conjunction.
We  shall  put,*

*  (3541) If  we  notice  only  the  chief  inequalities  in — and y, relative  to  the  satellite
m  [6131,6132],  and  also  the  chief  term  of  the  elliptical  values  [669],  we  shall  have,

[7071al  L  ^  i_e.cos.(n<  +  £— Tzr) "^^^^^ .cos.(2nt—2n't-4-2e—2e)  ;

[70716  ]  V  =  nt-\-  s -f-2e.sin. {nt-\-  s—a)  -f ^2,—JV  '  sin-C^^^— 2»'<4-2£— S/)  ;

and  if,  for  brevity,  we  put,
[7071c]  X'  ==  2e.cos.(7i^+  £— -5!)+  . ""'•"'/,,  .cos.(2n<— 2n'<+26— 2^  ;

we  shall  find  that  the  expression  [7071a]  becomes,
[7071rf]  L^i_iX'.

Moreover  if  we  take the  differential  of  [70716],  and  divide  it  by ndt, substituting X'
[7071c],  we  shall  get  [7071e],  observing  that  we  have  very  nearly ndt  =  {'2n — 2n').dt
[6151]  ;
[7071c]  ^==1+X'; or dv  =  ndt+ndt,X'.

[7071/]  Now  if  we  suppose,  as  in  [6l01'J,  that  Mdt  represents  the  sideral  motion  of  Jupiter,
during  the  time  dt,  we  shall  have,  from  [6023c,  <Z],  dv=  dv^-\-Mdt,  nearly.  Substituting
the  value  of  c?t;  [7071e],  we  obtain ndt.X' =  dv^—{n—M).dt. Dividing  by  {n-M).dt,

[7071g-] we  get — - .  X'= — -  —  1  ; so  that  if  we  put -.  X'  =  X,  it  becomes  as  in

n — M  {n—M).dt  ^ n—M

r707Ul ['^0'71]- Lastly,  as n — M  is  nearly  equal  to  n  [6025iJ,  we  shall  have X'  =  X  nearly;

and  it  is  evident,  from  [7071c],  that  X',  or  X,  must  be  a  small  quantity  of  the  order  e,  &c.

From  what  has  been  said  it  appears,  that  if  — contain  a  periodical  term  of  the form
[7071t]  ^^

—  ^X  [7071rf], — -  will  contain  a  term  of  the  form +X  [7071e]. A  similar  result
nat

[7071X;]  holds  good  also  with  the  satellites  w',  m",  rn" .  This  is  evident  as  it  respects  the  elliptical
terms  depending  on  e',  e",  e'",  which  are  of  the  same  form  as  those  in  [7071rt,  6]  depending

on  e. Moreover  by  comparing  the  coefficient  of  — ^  [6160],  with  that  of -^  , deduced

from  [6161],  and  observing  that n — n'  =  n'  nearly [6151],  they  become  of  the  same
[7071  to]  ^/^^/  ^^„

form. Also  —^  [6164],  and -;;-  deduced  from  [6165],  correspond  in  like  manner.

VIII.  viii.  <§>  26.]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  227

Symbols

r=  the  time  employed  by  the  satellite  in  describing ^^the  greatest  width  « T,i,X

of  the  shadow,  by  means  of  the  synodical  motion  ;  UOQd]

t =  the  time  of  describing  the  angle  Vy , by  the  synodical  motion  ;  [7070]

^  =  {v^J\i)At  —  ^'^ovdv,=  (n-M).dL(li-X) ;  [7071]

X  being  a  very  small  quantity, a  is  the  mean  distance  of  the  satellite  from  [7072]

Jupiter  [6079]  ; — is  the sine  of the  angle  under  which  the  radius  «  [7073]

appears  at  the  distance  a. Putting  this  angle  equal  to j3,  or,

sin.^  =  — ,  [7074]

a

we  shall  have,  very  nearly,*

t  =  —^ -'  .  [7075]

If  we  substitute  in  this  expression  for  Vi  its  sine,  which  differs  but  very
little  from  the  arc [70616]; and  for sin.i/i, the  preceding  value [7066]  ;

also  |3  =  —  nearly  [7074]  ;  we  shall  have,

.=  T.(l_X).J_(l+pr.-i.,^±^{f  +  (l+p).i-].^f-(l+p').^^5.

If  we  notice  only  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  satellite,  we  shall  have,
as  in  [7071c,  dy  e,  A],  nearly,

r  =  a.{]  —  iX}; or —=l-{-iX;  [7078]

and  it  also  follows,  from  the  same  articles  [7071c,  d,  c,  A],  that  this  equation

*  (3542) During  the  eclipse  we  may  suppose  the  variation  of  v^  to  be  proportional  to

dv  V  V  [7075a]

t,  so  that  — -i  =:  -^; hence  [70711  becomes  X=  , b 1  J  consequently,

at  t  ■"  (n — M).t  * "*

rp.. I  -I -tri

or  by  multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  by T; <  = ^'  m\t'^  ^"^ since

(n — M).T  represents  the  synodical  arc  described  by  the  satellite  in  the  time  T, which, [7075c]

by  [7069, 7074],  is  equal  to  p,  it  becomes  t  = — '—— ,  as  in  [7075]  ;  or,  as  it  may

p

be  expressed  very  nearly, t  =  T.(l — X).  — '— . Substituting  the  value  of  sin.v,  [7066], [7075rf]
it  becomes  as  in  [7077],  observing  that —  =  a  nearly  [7076].

[7076]

[7077]

228  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M^c.  Gel.

,-^««, holds  good even  when  we  include  the chief  inequalities  of  the  satellite  ;
[7079]  °  1 *

therefore  we  shall  have,  very  nearly.

[7080]

t  =  T.{l-X).UlHr'j'£;±\X\l+'iX-^{lH)-j^^^^

[7081] If  we  put  the  whole  duration  of  the  eclipse  equal  to t\  we  shall  have,t

Symbol

[7^] t'=^2T.(\-X).\/^\+\X+{\+f').~\^.)\+hX-(.'i+t)-j\-
Hence  we  deduce, t

[7083]  S=^^  ^  '

[7084]

This  equation  will  serve  to  determine  the  arbitrary  constant  quantities
which  enter  into  the  expression  of  s,  by  selecting  the  observations  of  the
eclipses  in  which  these  quantities  have  the  most  influence.

The  duration  of  these  eclipses  being  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of
their  theory, we shall examine  particularly the  preceding formulas for

*  (^^'^^) Substituting  in  the  radical expression  of  [7077],  the  value —=l-\-^X
nearly  [7078],  we  get  [7080].

r7081  1  ^  (3544)  We  shall  suppose  the  time  from  the  conjunction  to  the  emersion  to  be  t^ ;  the
time  from  the  immersion  to  the  conjunction,  considered as  negative, is  of  the  form  — ^j,,

[70815]  t^^  being  positive.  These  values  may  be  deduced  from  [7080],  attending  to  the  remarks  in
[7067,  7068] ;  hence  we  have,

[7081c] ,^  ==r.(l-X).^-(l+p')^.i-.^  +  ^Jl+iX+(l+pO.  j  |.|l+iX-(l+p').|(|;

[7081rf] -^„=T.(l~X).^-(l+p02.-i-.£-^|l+iX+(l+pO.^S.|l+iX-(l+^^^^

[7081e]  Subtracting  the  second  of  these  expressions  from  the  first,  and  putting  t^-\-t^^  =t'  [7081],
we  obtain  [7082].

X  [3545] Connecting  the  two  factors  in  the  radical  [7082],  and  neglecting X^,  we  get

^''^^1  <'  =  2T.(1— X).\/l-f  X— (l+p')2.  ■^.

Squaring  this  we  obtain,
[''0835]  <'2^  4T2.(1— X)— 472.  (l_X)2.(l+p')2.  ~  ;

\y^ ] hence —  ==  ^^ -1____^ . Extracting  the  square  root,  and  multiplying  by  ^,  we
obtain  [7083].

VIII.  viii.  ^26].  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  229

computing  them. The  radius  of  the  shadow  a  varies  with  the  distances  of

the satellites from Jupiter, and of Jupiter from the sun. Putting

D  =  D' — 6D for  Jupiter's distance from the sun ; D'  being  the mean [7085]

distance;  and  supposing,  as  in  [7078], r  =  «.(I — \X),  we  shall  find  that

the  variations  of  «  will  be  represented  hy  the  following  expression  ;*

(l+p).i2'.  \  \X—  ^  \  ,  ^-^^^  =  variable  part  of  «.
JX  is  always  very  small  in  comparison  with -jyA and  this  last  quantity  is [7087]

[7085']
[7086]

[7085a]
[70856]

*  (3546) The  values  of  D,  r  [7035,  7085'J,  give,

Substituting  this  in  [7048'],  we  get,

„  =  (.+p).«'.jl-"-^|+(l+p).fi'.|iX-^].'-^.

Of  the  two  terms  contained  in  this  value  of  a,  the  first  is  constant,  and  the  second  variable  j
being  the  same  as  in  [7086].

t  (3547) If  we  put  the  values  of  D  [6275,  7085]  equal  to  each  other,  we  shall  get,
D'—W  =  D'—D'H.cos.{Mt-]-E—I)', whence ~  =  H.cos.{Mt-{-E—I) ;  [7086a]

and  as H=  0,048... [6882i], -— is  of  the  order  0,048. On  the  other  hand,  the  values

[70866]

ly
of  ^X,  corresponding  to  the  satellites  wi,  m',  m",  m'",  are  found  in  [7527,7488,7432,7377]
to  be  respectively  of  the  order  0,0039; 0,0093  ; 0,0013; 0,0072;  which  are  much  less [7086c]

W
than  the  preceding  value  of  — , as  is  observed  in  [7087]  ;  and  the  author  has  therefore

neglected  the  term  of  [7086],  depending  on  ^X. To  estimate  roughly  the  value  of  this rynggji
neglected  term,  we  may  observe,  that  the  chief  term  of  a  [7048^],  namely  (I-f-p)-R',  is

to  the  term  of  [7086]  depending  on  JT,  as  1  to  ^X.-^—^.-^^ and  by  substituting  the [7086c]
values  '  =9  [7045g], —  =  ^1^  [7045i,  &c.],  this  ratio  becomes  nearly  as  1  to

^6,01. X Now  if  we  take  even  the  greatest  of  the  preceding  values  of  ^X=  0,0093 [7086/*]
[7086c],  we  shall  have  0,01. X=  0,000186; and  its  actual  value  is  generally  much  less.
Multiplying  this  by  the semi-durations  of  the  eclipses  [7562 — 7565],  we  get  the  greatest [7086^]
effect  of  this  neglected  term  in  the  times  of  these  eclipses  ;  and  this  correction  very  rarely
amounts  to  a  second  of  time  of  the  centesimal  division. Hence  we  see  that  we  may  safely
neglect  the  term  depending  on  X^  in  [7086]  ;  and  if  we  substitute  for  (l-fp).il'  its  value [7086/i]

a nearly [7048'j, the  remaining term of  [7086] becomes — ^a. ~ .—,.  —  ;  and
VOL.  IV.  68

230  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7087'] equal  to H.cos.(Mt+E—I)  [7086a]  ; therefore  the  variation  of  a  is  very
nearly  represented  by  the  following  expression,

_„.  ilz^.^.  H.cos.{Mt+E—I)  =  variable  part  of  «.

[7088]

\ 1>
Hence  it  follows,  that  in  the  preceding  formulas  we  must  substitute, for

—  ,  the  following  function,

[7089]

-A I—  ^-^"Y^  • ^  •  H.COS.(Mt  +  E—I) ] . fcorrected  valueof  -1

[70901 ^'  *^  ^^^'^  function,  corresponds  to  the  mean  motions  and  mean  distances  of

the  satellite  from  Jupiter,  and  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun.

T  denotes  the  time  that  the  satellite  employs  in  describing  half  the  width
[7090'] ^^  ^^^  shadow  a  [7069]  ;  this  time  increases  in  consequence  of  the  variations

of  «,  by  the  quantity,

[''^^1  —T.  ^^^—Sl  . « .  H.COS.(Mt-tE—I)  ; [nrst  increment  of  r]

A,  J-f

and  it  increases,  because  the  synodical  motion,  in  the  time  dt,  is  very  nearly
equal  to,*
[7092]  (n-M).dt.  ^  l+X—  ^^ .  H.cos.(Mti-E—I)  \  ;

by  substituting  the  value  of  —7  [7086a],  it  becomes  as  in [7088]. So  that  if  we  use  the
[7086t] mean  values  of  a,  p,  we  ought  to  change  a  into a — a. ~ .  -^  .H.cos.{Mt-\-E — /) ;

Aj  U

therefore  — must  be  changed into  the  factor  [7089]. Now  as T  [7069] denotes  the

[7086A;] i\f^Q  of  describing  the  arch  a,  this  lime  will be  increased  in  consequence  of  the  variable
part  [7088],  by  a  quantity  which  is  proportional  to  that  variable  part,  as  in  [7091].

*  (.3548) The  longitude  of  the  sun,  as  seen  from  Jupiter,  is Mi-{-E\-2H.sh.(Mt-\-E-I)

[7091a] |-6ioi,  6102, 6882a]. Its  differential,  divided  by dt, is Mi-2HM.cos.{Mi-\-E—I);

which must be substituted for M, in the expression of the synodical motion

dv^  =  {n — M).dt.{l-}-X) [7071,  7055],  corresponding  to  the  time  dt,  and  by  (his  means

it  becomes,

[7091c] \n-M-2HM.cos.{Mti-E-I)].dt.{l^T)  =  {n-M).dt.  i  l-\-X-^^.H.6os.{Mt-{-E-I)  I

nearly, as  in [7092]  ; which  is to  be  used instead of {n—J\l).dt, in the  preceding
[7091<fl calculations. Now  as  the  time T  [7039]  is  inversely  as the  synodical  motion,  it  will  be

[7091«] represented  by  the  mean  value  of  T,  divided  by ]  1-j-X -.H.cos.{Mi-{-E—I)  i  ,

VIII.  vili.  §  26.]  ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  231

[7093]

which  gives  for  the  increment  of  T,  depending  upon  this  cause,

T. } ^^— ^.iy.COS.(M/+i:  — /)— Z  S ; [709  le]  [second  increment  of r]

Therefore  by  neglecting  Z, »  as  we  have  done  above,  we  shall  find,  that  by  the r^^gg,,
combined  effect  of  both  these  causes,  T  changes  into,

T. < 1  "f  (  jT, •  ^7  ] 'H.  COS. (Mt-\-E /) > . [corrected  value  of  tJ

but  these  two  causes  have  no  sensible  effect,  except  upon  the  eclipses  of  the
fourth  satellite  [709 lo-].

In  the  beginning  and  end  of  these  eclipses,  the  quantities  of  the  order  s'^,
which  we  have  neglected  in  the  radical  part  of  the  expression  of  t,
[7063,7075,  &c.],  may  become  sensible  [7383/,  &:c.] But  the  only  one  which

[7094]

[7094'1

s'h

has  any  influence  is  the  square  of* (1-fp')^  — — , which  must  be  added to [7095]

[7091/]

which  augments  the  value  of T,  by  the  two  terms  given  in  [7093]  nearly. Increasing  T

by  the  terms  in  [7091,  7093], and neglecting  X,  as  in  tlie  last note, it  becomes  as  in

[7094]. The  effect  of  this  correction  is,  in  general,  insensible  ;  and  even  in  the  eclipses  of

the  fourth  satellite it  is hardly  deserving  of  notice,  as is  shown  in [7379], where the [709Jg-]

correction  of  T  is  found  to  be  of  the  order  0,0006101. T,  at  its  maximum;  and  if  we

suppose T  to  be  equal  to  9890",  as  in  [7565],  it  will  never  amount  to  6  seconds  of  the '■ -■

centesimal  division,  and  in  general  will  be  much  less.

*  (3549) In finding sin.v.  [7063],  we  have  neglected  the  term ( ^ ) t7095a]

under the radical, and by substituting — =s  [7065], =—  nearly,  it  becomes

**  '"'^"^ '''>  [7095a']

C,,  , ,,„srfs)2 ,.,.,, T.(\—X)  ,  .  -.

l(l~rp)  •  'j — 1;  • I-'J's  IS  to  be  multiplied  by to  produce  the  correspondmg  part

of  t  [7075i,  7077, or  7080]  ; or, in  other  viords, the  function under  the  radical  in

[7077,  7080],  must  be  multiplied  by  -^  ;  by  this  means  the  neglected  term  in  [7077,7080] [70956]

1 C  sis  )  2

becomes — .  ]  (1-f-p')^-  —  ( ?  as  in  [7095]  neaily  ;  and  for  brevity  we  may  represent  it

by  (5X \(  we  neglect  the  part  depending  on  p',  on  account  of  itssmallness,  we  shall  have [7095c]

s^ds^
&JC=  „ — . Now  the  product  of  the  two  factors of  the  radical  in [7080,  or  7082]  is \70U5d]

nearly l-\-X — (l-j-^jS.  — .  j  and  if  we  increase  this  by  the  neglected terra  6X,  it  will  be

^  [7095c  J

the  same  as  to  change  X  into  X-\-SX,  under  the  radical;  in  [7080,  7082],  as  is  remarked

in  17095,7096].

232  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mcc.  C61.

the quantity contaioed under the radical. We may notice this by
[7096] augmenting  X, by  the  quantity .^ ^ ,  under  the  radical  in  the  expression

of  t'  [7082],  and  decreasing* X  by  the  same  quantity,  under  the  radical  of
'■ ^ the  expression  of  s  [7083].

We  have  confounded  the  arc  v^  with  its  sine  [7076]  ;  now  we  have  very

nearly,  as  in  [70616],  f
[7097]  i;^  =  sin.ri  +  -i.sin.^??i ;

*  (3550) The  author,  in  the  original  work,  says,  that  in  the  expression  of  s  [7083]
*■  ^ vie  mnsi  increase  -^  under  the  radical,  by  the  quantity  ^Jf  [7095c?J  ;  but  this  is  not  accurate,

and  we  have  corrected  the  mistake  in  [7096'].  For  if  we  multiply  together  the  two  factors
under  the  radical  in  [7082],  neglecting  X^^  and  then  increase  X  by  ^X,  under  the
radical,  as  in  [7095e],  we  get  the  expression  of  t'  [7096c].  If  we  now  introduce  the
external  factor  1  — X,  under  the  radical,  it  becomes  as  in  [7096c?j ;  always  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  X"^,  or  X^X.  Squaring  [7096c?],  and  reducing,  we  obtain  the  value
of  s  [7096e]  ;

[70966]

[709ac]
[7096d]
[7096e]

^.s/\AT^.{\  —  X-\-8X)-t'^

2r.(i+p').(i-^

If  we  now  compare  the  values  of  s  [7083,  7096e],  we  see  that  — X  must  be  changed
[7096/"] into  — X-\-bX,  under  the  radical  of  the  expression  of  s  [7083], to  obtain the  corrected

value  [7096e]  ;  or,  in  other  words,  X  must  be  decreased  by  — 6X^  in  that  part  of  the
[7096g-] expression. This  agrees  wiih  the  corrected  translation  given  in  [7096'],  but  differs  from  the

last  paragraph  of  the  original  work.

t  (3551) Tlie  expression  of  t  [7075]  is  proportional  to — ; and  if  we  substitute  in  it

the  value  of  v^  [7097],  and  the  similar  expression  of ^  =sin.^-}-i.sin.^p,  we  get  very
nearly,  by  development,

[709/ i] _L  =  _ — \  \  \  , . ^ =  - — -.n+i.sin.^v^— ^.sin.2^i
3  sin.|3 l-f-^.sin.2^  sin.(3 ' '  **  * "  '^  >

^''^^^  1  =  ^3  ' 5  1+tV.(1-cos.2«J-tV.(1-cos.2p) }  =  "j^- 1  1-^.cos.2^+tVcos.2p j .

.3 t . x^  V  1/ 1^  V  -/, gin_p

sin.tj,

[7097t/]

Now  in  [7076]  we  have  used .  '  ^ for — ,  in  the  chief  term  of  t,  which  does  not  contain

s  ;  and  to  correct  this,  we  must  multiply  it  by  the  factor  1 — T2--cos.2Di-fY2-cos.2p  nearly
[7097e] [7097c],  as  is  observed  in  [7101]  ;  we  must  also  use  the  same  factor  in  the  expression  of

VIII.  viii.  <§>26.]

ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.

233

therefore  the  preceding  value  of  t'  must  be  multiplied  by  1 +i'Sin.^?;j.
Relative  to  the  first  suellite,  Vy  is  about  ten  degrees  [7104,  7554] ;  and  this
renders  the  product  of /',  by  -i.sin.^iJj,  sensible.  But  this  error  is  corrected,
in  a  great  measure,  by  the supposition  we  .have made  in  [7076], that

_  =  ^. For  we  have —  =  sin./3  [7074]  ; we ought therefore to have

supposed —  =  /3 — -i-.|3='  [43]  Int.  ;  which  amounts  to  nearly  the  same  thing

[709,8]

[7099]

as  to  multiply  the  value  of  t'  by  l-|.sin.^/3,  because  the  term  — ^  '^^J  ' ^

contained  under  the  radical  in  the  expression  of  t'  [7096^],  being  a  small
fraction  in  the  theory  of  the  first  satellite,  we  may  neglect  its  product  by
-i.sin.-|3  [7097O-],  The  value  t',  determined  by  the  preceding  formula,  must
therefore  be  multiplied  by  l+-i.sin.^i;i-|.sin.^f3,  or  by  l-y^^.cos.22;i+yi^.cos.2|3
[7097c].  The  arc  Vi  differs  but  little  from  |3  relative  to  the  first  satellite,
so  that  the  product  of  i'  by yi^.(cos.2i;i — cos.2j3)  is  insensible.*  [7102]

[7100]

[7100']
[7101]

t'  [7082].  We  may  finally  observe  that  the  correction  relative  to  /3  [70976],  produces  a
factor  1 — ^  sin.2|3  without  the  radical  in  [7077]  ;  or  very  nearly  1 — ^.sin.'*^,  under  the
radical  ;  but  this  ought  not  to  be  applied  to  the  term  depending  on  5,  mentioned  in
[7097 f/],  because  the  value  of  ^  [7076]  was  not  introduced  into  this  part  of  [7077]  ;  but
as  tliis  term  is  very  small,  we  may  neglect  the  effect  of  the  correction  arising  from  its
multiplication  by  ^.sin.^|3,  as  in  [7100'].

*  (3552)  If  the  satellite  pass  through  the  centre  of  the  shadow,  it  will  describe  the  arch
2^  [7076],  during  its  passage;  but  when  the  latitude  is  large,  the  described  arc,  which  we
may  call  2v^,  must  be  less.  To  estimate  roughly  the  effect  of  X,  ^  [7527,  7529],
corresponding  to  the  first  satellite,  upon  the  time  t',  we  shall  observe,  that  X  [7527]  being
much  smaller  than  (^[7529],  we  may  neglect  it;  and  then  the  expression  of  «' [7531]
becomes  ^'  =  9426"./!=^;  but  when  5  =  0,  the  value  ^  [7528]  vanishes,  and  t'
becomes  9426".  The  arch  described  in  the  first  case  corresponds  to  2v^  nearly ;  and  in
the  second  case,  to  2^  [7102«].  Hence  2^:21?^::  I  :  ^1—t^  nearly;  and  if  we  put  (3
equal  to  q=l  lo,1780  [7104,7554],  we  shall  get  2^  =  22^,3560,  and  2i;,=22°,3560.\/r:>2
nearly.  The  least  value  of  2Uj  corresponds  to  the  greatest  value  of  2,,  and  this  is  nearly
^=7  [7529];  therefore  the  least  value  of  2v^  is  2Uj  =  22^,3560./!  =  21^,0774.
Hence  we  get  cos.2yj  —  cos. 2^  =0,0067  and  t'2.(cos.2w,  —  cos. 2^)=: 0,0005  at  its
maximum.  Multiplying  this  by  9426"  [7102c],  we  get  the  greatest  error  in  the  value  of
i',  corresponding  lo  the  first  satellite,  which  will  not  therefore  exceed  5",  and  is  generally
much  less. For  the  second  satellite  we  have,  in [7558], 2(3  =  2y==  13^,9692,  and

VOL. IV.  59

[7097/]
[7097g]

[7102a]

[71026]

[7102c]
[7102rf]

[7I02e]
[7102/]

234

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  C61.

[7102']

[7103]

[7104]

?
[7105]

[7106]

[7107]
[7108]
[7109]
[7110]

The  value  of  T,  determined  by  a  very  great  number  of  eclipses,  will  give
the  mean  distance  of  the  satellite  from  the  centre  of  Jupiter,  in  parts  of  the
diameter  of  the  equator  of  this  planet,  supposing  the  satellite  to  disappear

at  the  moment  when  its  centre  enters  the  shadow  of  Jupiter. For —  [7073]

is  the  sine  of  the  angle  under  which  the  half  width  of  the  shadi  w  is  seen,  from
Jupiter^s  centre,  when  this  planet  is  at  its  mean  distance  from  the  sun,  and
the  satellite  at  its  mean  distance  from  Jupiter.  Now  if  we  put  this  angle
equal  to  q,  we  shall  have,  from  [7047,  7103,  &c.],*

{1+P).R' C, (l-\)

j  1 0-\) A  I

sin.(

The  observed  value  of  T  ivill  give  that  of  the  angle  q,  which  is  nothing  more
than  the  corresponding  arc  described  by  the  satellite,  by  means  of  its  synodical
motion ;  therefore  ive  shall  have  the  four  following  equations ;

{l±p)^ S  a'" (l-\)

a"' '  I a  \

(l+p).il' (^fl- 0-\)

'I  a'  \ '  D'  S

{1+P).R'

a"  (  a"  \

■[•-

a

w

=  sm.q  ;
sin.q' ;
=  sin. 9" ;
=  sin.a'".

[7102i]

[7102g-]  2v,  =  13°,9692.v/r^;  and  as  the  greatest  value  of  ^  [7491],  is  |,  it  becomes
2v^  =  13°,969I.v/f  =  120,0977. Hence  jV-  (cos.Sy^— cos.9^)  =  0,0005. IVIuhiplying

'■  ■' this  by  11951''  [7493],  we  get  the  greatest  possible  error  in  the  value  of  t',  corresponding

to  the  second  satellite,  which  does  not  exceed  6",  and  in  general  is  much  less.  For  the
third  and  fourth  sateihtes,  v^  is  quite  small  ;  so  that  if  we  put  cos2yj=l,  and  use
^  =  q",  or  q'" [7556,  7557],  we  shall find that the greatest  error in t' will  be,  by

[7102ik]  [7437,7385],  14838".yV.(l— cos.2/)  =  11",  and  19780".tV-(1— cos.2/')==5".  Both
these  expressions  will  be  decreased  by  using  the  actual  values  of  cos.2i;j ;  and  in  general
these  errors  will  be  incomparably  less  than  the  limits  here  computed.

*  (3553)  The  value  of  a  [7048']  being  divided  by  ff,  putting  also  D'  for  D  [7085],
[7107o]  .  „

and  a  for  r,  gives  —  =  sin.g'  [7104],  corresponding  to  the  first  satellite,  as  in  [7105].
[71076]  ^  °

Changing  the  symbols  «,  q,  relative  to  the  first  satellite,  successively  into  a',q'  \  a",  q" ;

a'",  q'",  corresponding  respectively  to  the  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites,  we  obtain
[7107c] the  equations  [7107 — 7110],  the  forms  being  altered  a  httle  by  the  introduction  of  the

[7111']

VIII.  viii.  ^^6.]  ^  ' ON  THE  DURATION  OF  AN  ECLIPSE.  235

a'"
Each  of  these  four  equations  gives  a  value  of  7—- — —-^, ,  that  is,  the  value [7111]

of  a'"  in  parts  of  the  radius  (l-{-f).R'  of  Jupiter's  equator  [7048]  ;  for  there

a'"
is  but  little  uncertainty  in  the  ratio — , given by  Pound's observations,

a'" a'" a'"
which  are  quoted  by  Newton  [71076?];  and  the  ratios — , -— , — - ,  are

a a  a'

well  determined  in [6797 — 6800]. The  differences  of  these  values  of  a'"
will  make  known  the  errors  of  the  supposition  that  the  satellites  are  eclipsed [7112]
at  the  moment  of the entrance of  their  centres  into the  shadow. The
penumbra,  the  magnitude as  well  as  the  brightness  of  the  disc,  and  the
refraction  which  the  sun's  rays may  suffer  in  Jupiter's  atmosphere, are [7112]
sources  of  error  whose  effect  it  will  be  difficult  to  ascertain  with  correctness.

quantities  a,  a',  he.  between  the  braces. Before  closing  this  note  we  may  remark,  that

we  have  already  mentioned,  in  [67876,  &c.],  that  observations  similar  to  those of  Pound ['1"'"]

[7111'J,  have  been  made  with  great  accuracy  by  Professor  Airy.

236  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [M6c.  C61.

CHAPTER IX.

DETERMINATION OF  THE MASSES OF THE SATELLITES AND THE OBLATENESS OF JUPITER.

27.  The  formulas  [6782 — 6947]  contain  a  great  number  of  indeterminate
Data  used  constant  quantities,  whose  values  are  indispensable  in  the  determination  of
jhero"sls  thc  theorj  of  each  satellite.  The  chief  of  these  are  the  masses  of  the  four
Ind'the' satellites  and  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter  :  we  shall  first  attend  to  these  points.

oblateness ^^  .  ,  .  /.  ,  -r-wj

ofjupiier.  Xo  determine  their  values,  we  must  have,  by  observation,  jive  data. We

[7113] shall  take  for  the  first  datum,  the  principal  inequality  of  the  first  satellite,

Stum, whose  greatest  term,  according  to  the  results  of  Delambre's  researches,  is

[7114]  equal  to  223",471,  in  time;  that  is  to  say,  it  retards  or  accelerates  the
eclipses  of  that  satellite,  by  that  quantity,  when  at  its  maximum.  To  reduce
this  to  an  arc  of  the  circle,  we  must  multiply  it  by  the  whole  circumference,
or  400^,  and  divide  it  by  the  time  of  the  synodical  revolution  of  the  first

[7115] satellite,  which  is  l^*y',769861.* Hence  w^e  have,  for  this  term,

[7116]  5050",59.

The  coefficient  of  the  greatest  term  of  this  inequality  is  as  in  [6842  line  2],

[7117]  m'.21736",4863.

Putting  the  expressions  [71 16,  71 17]  equal  to  each  other,  we  get,

[7118]  m'  =  0,232355.

We  shall  take  for  the  second  datum,  the  chief  inequality  of  the  second

Second satellite,  whose  greatest  term, according  to  the  researches  of  Delambre,  is

datum.

* (3554) IVIuhiplying the  time of the  sideral  revolution  [6778],  by  the  value  of
[7115a] ^ [6025^],  we  get  the  time  of  the  synodical  revolution  [7115], as  in  [678h*]  nearly.

The  rest  of  the  calculation  in  [7116 — 71I8J  is  easily  made. In  the  same  manner  we  must

n'
[71156] proceed  with  the  second  satellite,  using  the  value  [6779], and  multiplying  it  by  -; — -

[6025/],  to  obtain  [7120].

VIlI.ix.«§.27.] ON  THE  MASSES m,  id ,  rd' ,  n^" ,  AND  THE  OBLATENESS  p. 237

equal  to  1059",!  8  in  time. To  reduce  it  to  an  arc  of  the  circle,  we  must [7119']
multiply  it  by  400°,  and  divide  it  by  the  time  of  the  synodical  revolution
of  the  second  satellite,  which  is  nearly  equal  to  3'*^y%554095  [6779,  6781A;]  ; [7120]
hence  we  have,  for  this  term,  the  following  expression;

11920",68.  [7121]

The  greatest  coefficients  of  the  terms  of  this  inequality  are  in  [6844  lines  1,7];
and  by  taking  these  terms  at  their  greatest  positive  values,  and  adding  them
together,  we  get,*

m.  6951",466  +  m".  12108",992.  [7122]

Putting  these  two  quantities  [7121,  7122]  equal  to  each  other,  we  obtain,

m  =  1,714843— m".l,74l934. (1)  [7123]

The  third  datum  which  we  shall  use,  is  the  annual  sideral  motion  of  the JJtum.
perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  ; which, according  to  the  computations of
Delambre,  is  equal  to  7959",  105 [7195]. Therefore  we  shall  suppose,  in [7124]
the  equation  [6872],  that

g  =  7959",  105  ;  [7124']

then  it  becomes,  by  dividing  by  h"',

0  =  6984",915— 2946",95.M~363",10.m— 1077",15.m'— 4438",87.m"

h  h'  h"  [7125]

+  101",03.m.  -  +  47r',99.m'.  ^  +3012",37.m".  |,.

To  reduce  this  equation,  so  that  it  may contain  only  the  indeterminate

quantities  m-,  m,  m",  we  must  eliminate  the  fractions -^  ^ -—  , -rjj-.  . The

h  h  h

comparison  of  a  great  number  of  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite  with  the

theory, makes  it  evident, that  the  expression  of  its  motion  contains two

distinct  equations  of  the  centre,! and  that  one  of  them  corresponds  to  the

[7126]

[7123a]

*  (3555)  The  argument  of  the  term  in  [6844  line  7],  may  be  reduced  to  the  same  form
as  that  in  [6844  line  1],  as  is  evident  from  [61726] ;  and  the  maximum  value  corresponds
to  sin.(7i^ — n't-\-s — s')  =  sin.2.(n"^ — n't-{-e" — 0  =  — ^i  which  makes  the  two  terms
become  as  in  [7122]. Putting  this  expression  equal  to  the  value  by  observation  [7121],  ^

and  then  dividing  by  6951",466,  we  get  [7123].

t  (3556) This  has  already  been  observed  in  [6241f,  &tc.]. The  terms  of  W  [624h*],
and  y  [6241  A:],  depending  on the  perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  -u^",  are  respectively [7127a]
represented  by ^«"=:-O,O816578.2/t'".sin.(0"-'5/"), h'" =-\,Q00m00.2h"' .^\x\.{q"'-t^") r^y^y.
[624 U', A:]; and by putting 2/j/"  =  — 9265",56, these coefficients become 756",605,
9265",56,  as  in  [7127]  ;  being  derived  from  observation.

V0L» IV.  60

238  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7127]

Fourth
datum.

perijove of  the fourth  satellite. Delambre  finds that this equation is

7 56", 605  [7389], and  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  fourth  satellite

9265",56  [731 8  line  1]. Therefore  we  have,

h" 756^605 nnQifi^7Q
[7128]  A^  =  9l6^^^=^'^^^^^^^'

and  this  is  the  fourth  datum,  which  we  have  derived  from  observation,  in
order  to  determine  the  masses.  Hence  the  equation  [7125]  becomes,  bj  the
substitution  of  [7128],

0  =  6734",634— 2946",95.M~363",10.m-|-  101",03.m.  -^)

[7129]  >;  (2)

— 4192",89.m"+109",67.  ^  \

n  J

rif

The  equations  [6869 — 6871] become,  by  substituting for  g,  m', — ,  the
preceding  values  [7124',  7118,  7128],  and  then  dividing  by  /i'",*
0  =  -  {24817",58+553878",78.(x-j-159-20r',5.m4-5205",05.m"+767",12.m'"|.  ~  \
[7130]  +1 15361",81+57805",9.m— 49445",3.m"}.-^  1 '  (^)

+  1681",67.m"-[-213",46.m'"  /

datum.

[7133]

0  =  {56497",7.m-f225306",4.m2— 19500  r',4.mm"}.

,  C7751",815— 109003'',2.fjL— 43608",l.m— 414^

"^d— 81807",5.m2+139953".mni"— 59856",l.m"'
+1834",50.m"+790",56.m'"— 2089",63.ram"+1829",06.ra"2

C7751",815— 109003'',2.M— 43608",l.m— 41432",0.  m"— 1804",18.m'">  .  ^  \ ;  (4)
[7131]  "^ ?_81807",5.m2  +139953".mni"— 59856",1  .m"^  5 ^"  i

0  =  14913",3.m.  ~  +  1 4175",23-4842",59.m  +4142",04.n/ 1 .  ^ \ ,^\
[7132]  ' r' ' '  '  ^  "> h!" \\  (5)

+276",79— 1736",44.fx— 266",80.m  — 123",70.n/+3514",34.m"')

Lastly,  the  fifth  datum  which  we  shall  use,  is  the  annual  and  sideral  motion

Km ^^  ^^  node  of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite  upon  the  fixed  plane. This

motion is retrograde, and equal to 133870",4, according to the last

computations  of  Delambre  [7233],  and  it  is  the  value  of  ^.f Substituting

*  (3557) Dividing  the  equations  [6869,  6870,  6871]  by A'", then  substituting  the
[7130a]  h"

values  of  g,  m',  -—  [7124',  7118,  7128],  we  get  the  equations  [7130-7132]  respectively.

[7133o]

f (3558) The expression  of  the  latitude  of the  satellite 5  =  /.sin.(y-f-p^ +''^)
[6300  line  1], is similar  to  that  of the  moon s  =  y.^\n.{v^{g — \)v — &\ [62986-];
[71336] changing y  or  18542^,79  into  I, —6  into  a, and {g — ])v  into  pt ; so  that {g—l)v

VIII.ix.<§.27.]  ON  THE  MASSES  m,  m',  m",  m'", AND  THE  OBLATENESS  p. 239

it  in  the  equation  [6892],  and  then  dividing  bj  /',  we  get,

0  =  133663",ll— 109003",20.f/,— 31573Vl-mYl— y)— igsee^eS.m^Cl-^'))

, I..  ^ ^  ^ ^>. (6) [7134]

— 1804",18.m'".n— -j  i

The  equations [6891,  6893,6894]  become, by  dividing  them  by  /',  and
substituting  for  p  and  m'  their  values  [7133,  7118],

0  =  9253",79-f-  [  124513",3— 553878",76.  m-  — 5205",05.m"— 767",12.  m'" } .  ^)
+5205",05.m".  -  +  767",12.m'".-77  \

0  =  3600",26  +  3267",32.m.  -^  +  { ]29852",5]-21264",89. f*— 3267",32.m— 5886",85.m'"| .  ~ ')

V»  >\  (8) [7136]

+5886",85.m'".y-  \

0  =  250",28  -f  363",10.m.  y  +  4438",87.m".  j  ")

V"\  ' (9)  [7137]

4-{132645",93-2946",95.fx— 363",10.m— 4438",87.m"|.  j\

To  deduce from  these  nine  equations  the  values  of  the  nine  unknown

7  »/  7  ;//  -Jill

quantities  f*,  m,  m",  m'",  j^  ^ — , -7 , — , — , we  shall observe that

the  last  five  of  them being  small,*  we  may,  at  first,  suppose  them  to  be [7138]
nothing  in  the equations [7129,  7132,  7134]. Then  eliminating m  from
these  three  equations, by  means  of  its  value  in  m",  given by  the  equation
[7123],  we  obtain  three  equations  between  m-,  m",  m'"  ; which  may  be  used [7138']

is  equivalent  to  p^  Now  (_g* — \)v  [4817]  represents  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  moon's
nodes ;  therefore  "pt  must  express  the  retrograde  motion  of  the  node  of  this  satellite.
Moreover  as  t  is  expressed  in  Julian  years  [7284],  p  will  represent  the  annual  retrograde
motion  of  the  node,  as  in  [7133].  Substituting  this  value  of  p==133870",4  in  [6892],
and  then  dividing by l', we  get  [7134]. In like  manner,  if  we divide  the  equations *■  ■'

[6891,  6893,  6894]  by  V,  and  then  substitute  the  preceding  values  of  p,  m'  [7133,  7118], [7133el
we  obtain  the  equations [7135,7136,7137]  respectively. If  we  change  the  coefficient
15494",62  [6893]  into  15492",62, as  in [68876,  c], it  would produce,  in  the  second

I"
member  of  [7136],  a  correction that  may  be  represented  by  — 0",46-f0",46. —,  which [7133/]

is  insensible,  and  may  be  neglected,  as  we  have  already  observed  in  [6887c].

*  (3559) The  smallness  of  these  terms  is  evident  from  the  inspection  of  the  values r^iogai
[7145'— 7150].

240  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

in  finding  these  three  unknown  quantities  ;  finally,  m  can  be  determined
by  the  equation  [7123].

Substituting these  first approximate  values  of fx,  m,  m",  m'", in  the
[7139] equations  [7130,  7131], we  obtain  two  equations  for  finding  the  values  of

— , — . Similar  substitutions  in  [7135,  7136,  7137],  give  three  equations

I I" r"
for  the  determination  of  the  values  of —  ,  y ,  —  . Substituting these

[7140] values  of T^»  17^  >  77? 77  »  "77  » ij^  [7129,7132,  7134],  we  obtain,  in  like

manner  as  in  [7138'],  three  equations  containing  the  four  unknown  quantities
fA,  m,  m",  m'".  We  may  eliminate  m  by  means  of  the  equation  [7123]  ;
and  by  resolving  these  equations  we  get  the  values  of  (x,  m",  m'",
consequently  also  that  of  m  ;  these  values  being  more  accurate  than  those
which  were  obtained  by  the  first  process  in  [7138'].

We  must  repeat,  with  these  approximate  values,  the  same  calculations  as
[7140'] before,  and  continue this process,  until the  two  consecutive approximate
values  of  each  unknown  quantity  differ  but  very  little  from  each  other,  which
will  happen  after  a  few  operations.* In  this  manner  wehave  found,

[7140a]

[7140c]

*  (3560)  The  method  of  computing  the  unknown  quantities,  as  it  is  explained  in
[7138 — 7140],  is  quite  simple,  and  has  no  other  difficulty  than  the  tediousness  of  these
repeated  numerical  operations.  We  did  not  go  over  the  calculations  in  this  manner,  but
[71406]  verified  the  results  in  [7141 — 7150],  by  the  following  method.  Substituting  in  the
equation  [7134]  the  values  [7141 — 7150],  excepting  that  of  fjt,  we  obtain  an  equation
for  the  determination  of  ^  ;  and  as  the  coefficient  of  f*  is  quite  large,  we  can  determine
very  nearly  the  value  of  /a;  this  result  agrees  very  nearly  with  [7141].  In  like  manner,
by  the  substitution  of  m"  [7144]  in  [7123],  we  get  m,  as  in  [7142]  ;  m'  is  the  same  as
in  [7118] ;  m"  is  found  from  [7129],  by  substituting  the  values  of  all  the  other  quantities

[7140</] as  above. In  the  same  way  the  quantities m'", — , — , — , y, —3 y? were

computed  from  the  equations  [7132,7130,7131,  7128,7135,7136,7137]  respectively,  by
[7140e]  substituting  successively  all  except  the  required  value  ;  and  the  results  were  found  to
agree  very  nearly  with  those  in  [7141 — 7150].  The  values  of  m'",  h  [7145,  7145'j,  were
decreased  a  little,  and  that  of  f*  [7141]  somewhat  increased,  so  as  to  make  p — |(p  [7152]
become  0,021903.  From  this  verification  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  mistake  of  any
[7140g-]  importance  in  this  part  of  the  calculation.  Finally  we  must  observe  that  we  have
inserted the  logarithms  in  [7 141 — 7  J  50],  which  are  not  in  the  original  work.

Vlll.ix.  <§.27.] ON  THE  MASSES  m,  rd,  m!',  rd" ,  AND  THE  OBLATENESS  p. 241

^ =  1,0055974;
m =  0,173281  =m.lO^
m'  ==  0,232355  =  7/iM0\-
m"=  0,884972  =m".10^
m'"=  0,426591  =  m'",10^

h =  /i'".0,00206221  ;
h'  =  h'". 0,0113350;
h"  =  /i"'.0,08 16578;
/ = /'.0,0207938 ;
/"  =— /'.0,0342530;

Z"'  =  — /'.0,000931164;

The  oblateness  of  Jupiter  can  be  determined  by  means  of  the  quantity  i^.
For  this  purpose  we  shall  observe  that  we  have,  in  [6863],

P— ^<p  =  f..  0,021 7794  ;  log.coeff.  =  8,3380459  ;

substituting  the  value  of  f^  [7141],  we  obtain,

P— 1^  =  0,0219013  ;  log.  =  8,3404699.

To  determine  (p,  we  shall  put  the  time  of  Jupiter's  rotation  equal  to  / ;  and
the  time  of  the  sideral  revolution  of  the  fourth  satellite  equal  to  T  ;  then
we  shall  have  very  nearly,*

log.f*

=  0,0024242 ;

[7141]

log.m

=  9,2387509  ;

[7142]

log.  m'

=  9,3661520 ;

[7143]

log.m"

=  9,9469295 ;

[7144]

log.m'"

=  9,6300117;

[7145]

=  7,3143329;

[7145']

1 ^'
log.,.

=  8,2389238 ;

[7146]

1 ^"
log.  ,.

=  8,9119976;

[7147]

log.y

=  8,3179338  ;

[7148]

I"

loo".  —

=  8,5346986,;

[7149]

V"
log. ,,

=  6,9690262„.

[7150]

[7151]

[7152]
[7153]

[7154]

*  (3561) We  shall  put T'  equal  to  the  time  required  by  a  satellite  to  revolve  about  [7154a]

Jupiter,  in  a  circular  orbit,  at  a  distance  equal  to  the  radius  of  its  equator,  or  unity  [6786] .  [71546]

Then  we  shall  have,  as  in [387], T^:  T'^ :  :  ^"'3 .  1  . or T'^=—. Moreover  the  [7154c]
centrifugal^of  this  satellite  is  to  the  centrifugal  force  of  a  particle,  situated  on  the  surface  of

1  1  T'^

Jupiter's  equator,  as — - to — ;  or  as  1 to  — r-  [54'J ;  and  by  using  the  preceding  value

T2

of  T'2  [7154c],  ii  becomes  as 1  to -;;^' Now  the centrifugal  force  of  the  satellite [7154d]

a'"3i2

being  equal  to  its  gravity,  the  preceding  ratio  will  express  that  of  the  gravity  of  a  particle

of  Jupiter's  equator  to  its  centrifugal  force;  which  is  represented  in  [6044'] by 1  to  9; [7154e]

VOL. IV.

61

242  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

Now  we  have,  in  [6787,  6781],

[7155]  a'"  ==  25,4359  ;  log.a'"  =  1 ,405447 1  ;

[7156]  '  T  =  16''«yS689019 ;  log.T  =  1,2224308 ;

and  according  to  the  observations  of  Cassini,

[7157]  t  =  0^^^413889 ;  log.^  =  9,6168839.

Hence  we  have,

[7158]  <P  =  0,0987990  ;  log.  9  =  8,9947525  ;

and  from  this  we  get,  as  in  [7154/ — ^],

[7159]  P  =  0,0713008.  log.p  =  8,8530944,

The  semi-diameter  of  Jupiter's  equator  being taken  for  unity  [71546],  the
semi-polar  axis  will  be  1 — p  [6044]  ;  therefore  it  will  be  represented  by

[7159']  1 — p  =  0,9286992.  The  ratio  of  the  polar  to  the  equatorial  axis  has  been
several  times  measured. The  mean  between  the  various  measures  is  0,929,

[7160]  which  differs  only  by  an  insensible  quantity  from  the  preceding  calculation.
But  if  we  consider  the  great  influence  of  the  value  of  fx,  upon  the  motions
of  the  nodes and the  apsides  of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites,  we  must  be

[7160']  convinced  that  the  ratio  of  Jupiter's  axes  is  given,  by  observations  of  the
eclipses  of  the  satellites,  with  greater  certainty  than  by  the  most  accurate
direct  measurement. The  agreement  of  these  measures  with  the  result  of  the

[7161]  theory^  proves,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  that  the  gravity  of  Jupiter  is
composed  of  the  combined  attractions  of  all  its  particles ;  since  the  variation
of  the  attractive  force  of  Jupiter,  arising  from  the  observed  oblateness  of  this
planet,  represents  accurately  the  motions  of  the  nodes  and  apsides  of  the  orbits
of  the  satellites.

We  shall  now  collect  together  the  preceding  results.  If  we  divide  the
values  of  m,  m',  m",  m'"  [7142—7145]  by  10000,  we  shall  have,  as  in
[6841],  the  masses  of  the  satellites  ;  that  of  Jupiter  being  taken  for  unity;

T2 .

hence  we  get 9  =  - -,  as  in  [7154]. Substituting  the  values  of  a'",  T,  t  [7155-7157],

we  get  9  [7158]  ;  and  then  from  [7152]  we  obtain  p  [7159]. This  agrees  very  well  with

the  measures  lately  made  by  Struve, with  the  assistance of  Fraunhofer's  great  telescope.

These observations  are given in the fifth volume of Schumacher's Astronomische

JYachrichlen,  page  14 ;  and  vary  from p  =  0,0714  to p  =  0,0742. He  assumed,  as  the
[7154^]  1

most  probable  result, p  :^  0,0728  = .

Jo, 74

[7154/]
[7154g-]

VIII.  is.  ^27]. ON  THE  MASSES  m,  m',  m",  rd\  AND  THE  OBLATENESS  p. 243

Mass  of  the  first  Satellite....m =0,0000173281

«' second  Satellite.. ..m'  =0,0000232355

third  Satellite.. ..m"  =  0,0000884972

" fourth  Satellite. ...m"'  =  0,0000426591

[7167]

m =0,173281; log.m =9,2387509;  [7162]

m'  =0,232355; log.m'  =9,3661520;  [7163]

m"  =0,884972; log.m"  =9,9469295;  [7164]

m"'=0,426591; log.m'"= 9,63001 17;  [7165]

Jupiter's  mass  =  1.  [7165']

Polar  semi-axis  of  Jupiter  =  0,9286992 ; [7159'] log.  =  9,9678750 ;  [7166]

Equatorial  semi-axis  of  Jup.  =1,0000000.  [7166']

If  we  use  the values  of  the  masses of  Jupiter  and  the  earth,  given  in
[4061],  we  find  that  the  mass  of  the  third  satellite  is*  0,027337,  that  of  the

earth  being  taken  for  unity. We  have  found,  in  [4631],  that  the  moon's  [7168]

mass  is  equal  to -— —  =  0,014599  ;  hence  the  mass  of  Jupiter'' s  third  satellite

is  nearly  double  that  of  the  moon ;  and  the  mass  of  the  fourth  satellite  is  nearly  [7169]
equal  to  that  of  the  moon.

*  (3562) The  values  m",  m'"  [4061],  show  that  Jupiter's  mass  is Z' , expressed [7167a]

in  parts  of  the  earth's  mass. Multiplying  this  by 0,0000884972  [7164],  we  obtain  the

mass  of  the  third  satellite,  expressed  in  the  same  parts  =0,027337,  as  in  [7167]. These [71676]

results  would  vary  a  little,  by  using  the  corrected  values  in  [4061c?,  &ic.].

244  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7161K]

CHAPTER  X.

ON THE EXCENTBICITIES AND INCLINATIONS OP  THE ORBITS OF THE SATELLITES.

28.  After  having  determined  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter,  and  the  masses  of
the  satellites,  we  shall  now  determine,  in  numbers,  the  secular  inequidilies  of
the  elements  of  their  orbits.  The  excentricities  and  motions  of  the  apsides
depend  on  the  resolution  of  the  equations  in  g  [6869 — 6872].  If  we
substitute  the  preceding  values  of  f*,  m,  m',  m",  m'"  [7141 — 7145],  they
will  become,*

*  (3563) Substituting  the values  of  the  elements [7141 — 7150],  in  the equations

[6869 — 6872], we obtain the four equations [7170 — 7173]. Upon verifying the

[71706] calculations  of  the  author,  we  have  found  that  the  ternti  276",18.A  [7172  line  1],  should  be

[7170  1 '^'^^'i^'^'^  5 ^"^  the  numerator  of the  last term in [7171 line  1], instead of being

— 49185",95, should  be — 49570",03. The  other  coefficients  are  very  nearly  accurate.

\7\lQd] The  first  of  these  mistakes  is  wholly  unimportant,  taking  into  consideration  the  smallness  of

h  [6241/,  &tc.]  ;  it  may  therefore  be  left  uncorrected. The  second  mistake  augments  the

'^84"  OR  h!

[7170e] second  member  of  the  equation  [7171],  by  the  term —  -. '- — '■ — r^  ,  and  it  is  evident

V ■"3001300"/
that  its  general  effect  is  much  decreased  by  the  smallness  of  h'  [62417,  &-c.] ;  so  that
[7170/] almost  the  whole  change  it  produces  is  in  the  second  value  of  g,  or  g^  [7183]  ;  and  if  we
substitute  this  value  of  ^,  in  the  expression  of  this  error  [7170e],  it  becomes — 342",2.A'.

rynn  ^"^^  '^  '^  P'*^'"  ^^^^^  '^  ^^^  "^'^  ^'^^  method  of  approximating  to  the  value  of  g-, ,  which  is
mentioned  in  [7181],  we  shall  find  that  this  value  of  g^  will  be  augmented,  by  the  quantity

\l\10h  ^^^'^  "^^*^'^'  "^^'^'"S  '^  ^,=  17814l",7-f342",2=178483",2,  instead  of  178141",7,
[7183]. This  correction  has  however  no  sensible  effect  in  the  place  of  the  second  satellite,

[7l70t] because  the  excentricity  of  its  orbit  is  very  small  [6057?] ;  we  have  not  therefore  thought

[7170*1  '^  ^"  ^^  necessary  to  repeat  these  calculations,  in  order  to  obtain  the  value  of  g^  to  the
nearest  second  ;  particularly  as  terms  of  the  same  kind  have  been  neglected  in  [6856^,  &c.].

;  (1) [7170]
2

VIII.x.«§.28.]  ON  THE  EXCENTRICITIES  OF  THE  ORBITS.  245

C r^^c^^r^>,^ 51277'',10 •) . , C  ^r.^r.u  r. 25371",60 ■) ,,  \
0  =  >  5— 571269",6— y  (  .A+  N  6858",2—  j ^ y  f.h'j 1

(  V  "■ 3001300V )  I  V"^  30013007 ) \.fi\

+  ^  2222",5  + 1^Q87^10 ^  .^'^+9i'',o60.A'"
(  V  "^  30013007 S

(  \  "^30013007 }  I  \  "^  3001300";

20804^,40

V ~  30013007

+  5  12805",3  + 20804-40 ^ A"+337",25.//'

n C^^^..,o.  2322^70  ) . , ( ^^^^/ , ,  4362^65  ) \

0=)  276  ,18  + 7 r2(./i  +  )2662',14- T— — raf./t |  1

(  V '30013007 )  (  V '30013007 ) (  • (3)  [7172]

/-  1Q02"fiO  "^  I

(  V  ~  30013007 )  /

0  =  17",506.A+109",67.^'-|-2665",86.A"+(^— 8n9",12).A'". (4)  1 [7173]

These  equations  give  a  final  equation  in  g,  of  a  very  high  degree.  To
each  of  these  values  of  g,  corresponds  a  system  of  constant  quantities
h,  h',  /t",  h"\  in  which  three  of  these  constant  quantities  are  given,  by  means  '■  ^
of  the  fourth,  which  remains  arbitrary ;  and  as  the  nature  of  the  problem
requires  but  four  arbitrary  quantities  [6225],  the  equation  in  g  has  but  four
useful  roots.  The  great  influence  of  the  ohlateness  of  Jupiter  upon  the  motions
of  the  apsides  of  the  satellites,  renders  the  values  of  g  hut  little  different
from  what  they  ivould  be  by  means  of  that  oblateness  alone.  Hence  we  can
obtain  the  first  approximation  to  these  values,  by  putting,  in  each  [7174"]
equation,  the  term  connected  with  g  separately  equal  to  nothing.  This
consideration  facilitates  extremely  the  determination  of  the  values  of  g,
which  we  can  obtain  by  a  rapid  approximation  in  the  following  manner.

We  shall  in  the  first  place  observe,  that  the  greatest  value  of  g  differs
but  little  from 620000" ; therefore  we  shall put g  =  620000" in the [7175]
equations  [7171,7172,7173],  and  after  having  divided  them  by h,  we  can

deduce  the  values  of -— , -7- , ^- . We  must  then  substitute  these  values

h  h h

in the equation [7170], putting also ^  =  620000" in the divisor
VOL*  IV.  62

246

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

[7175']

peculiar
to  the  first
satellite.

[7176]
[7177]
[7178]
[7179]
[7179'J

[7180]

[7181]

5-x,  A',

f>eculiar  to
the  second
satellite.

('+

„  ,  :  and  we  shall  obtain  a  more  accurate  value  of  2" than  that
3001300V  '  ^

which  was  first  assumed. We  must  repeat  this  operation,  with  this  last

value,  and  so  on,  until  the  consecutive  values  of  g  agree  nearly  with  each

other. A  few  essays  will  suffice  for  this  purpose  ;  so  that  we  shall  be  sure

[7175"] that  the  equations  [7170 — 7173]  will  be  satisfied  ;  and  this  calculation  may

g,  h, be  verified  by substituting  for  ^, —  , — , —

their  values. Thus  we

find,*

g  =  606989",9 ;
h'  =  0,0185238.^;
h"  =  —0,0034337.^  ;
h'"=  — 0,00001 735.A.

^+154",63  =  607144",53 ;
log.coeff.  =  8,26773  ;
log.coeff.  =7,53576„;
log.coeff.  =  6,23930„.

The  values  of  h',  h",  h"\  corresponding  to  this  value  of  g,  being  less  than
h,  ive  may  consider  h  as  the  peculiar  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  first
satellite,  whose  apsides  have  an  annual  sideral  motion  of  606989",9.

The  second  value  of  g,  or  gi ,  is  given  by  approximation,  by  putting  the
term  connected  with  g,  in  the  equation  [7171],  equal  to  nothing.  This  value
of  g  is  nearly  equal  to  180000"  ;  therefore  we  shall  put  g  —  180000"  in  the
equations  [7170,  7172,  7173], and  then  dividing  by  h',  we  can  deduce  the

h h" h'"
values  of  the  fractions — , —- , -rj- , We  must  then  substitute  these  values

h h  h

in  the  equation  [7171],  after  dividing  it  by  h',  and  substituting  ^  =  180000"

[7182] in  the  divisor

V ^  3001300V

We  shall  thus  obtain  a  more  accurate  value

3001300",

of  g,  which  is  to  be  used,  like  the  preceding  value  [7181],  in  repeating  the
operation;  and  by  continuing  the  calculation  in  this  manner,  we  shall
finally  get.

[7176al  *  (3564) Instead  of  going  over  the  calculation,  according to the directions here

given,  we  have  verified  the  computation,  by  substituting  successively  the  values
[7176—7179,  7183—7186,  7190—7193,  7195—7198],  in  the  equations  [7170—7173];

[71766]  and  we  have  found  that  these  equations  are  very  nearly  satisfied  by  these  values.  The
values  of  g  correspond  to  the  sideral  motion of  the  perigee,  and  by  adding  the  annual

[7176c]  precession  154",63  [3380],  we  get  the  annual  motion  from  the  moveable  equinox  of  the
earth.  As  this  motion  is  frequently  used,  we  have  inserted  the  values  of  ^-j-154"j63  in
[7176,7183,  &tc.].

VIII.  X.  §  28.]  ON  THE  ECCENTRICITIES  OF  THE  ORBITS.  247

g,  =  178141",7  ;  *  ^,+154",63  =  178296",33  ;  [7183]

h  =  —0,031 5S92.h' ;  log.coeff.  =  8,57449„ ;  [7184]

h"  =  —  0,0436686./i' ;  log.coeff.  =  8,64017, ;  [7185]

h"'=  0,00004,357. h'.  log.coeff.  =  5,63919.  [7186]

The  values  of  h,  h",  h'", being  less  than  h', we  may  consider h! as  the [7186']

peculiar  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite,  whose  apsides  have  an

annual  sideral  motion  of  17814r',7.

The  third  value  of  g,  or  g^,  is  given  by  approximation,  by  putting  the  term
connected  with  g,  in  the  equation  [1112],  equal  to  nothing. This  value  is
very  nearly  equal  to  30000". Therefore  we  shall  suppose g  =  30000",  in [7188]
the  equations  [7170,  7171,  7173]  ;  and,  after  dividing  them  by  h",  we  can

h  h!  h"'

deduce  the  values  of  — , — , — . These must be  substituted in the

tX  it  ili

equation  [7172],  after  dividing  it  by h", and  substituting  ^  =  30000"  in

the  divisor (  1  + ^^ ,, )  . Thus  we  shall  obtain  a  more  correct  value  of [7189]

g,  which  must  be  used,  like  the  preceding  value  [7188],  in  repeating  the  „

operation  ;  and  by  continuing  the  calculation,  in  this  way,  we  shall  finally peculiar  to

the  third
obtain,  satellite.

g^  ==  29009",8  ;  gg-f  154",63  =  29164",43  ;  [7190]

. h =  0,02381 1 1  .h" ;  log.coeff.  =  8,37678  ;  [7i9i]

h'  =  0,2152920./i"  ;  log.coeff.  =  9,33303 ;  [7192]

h'"  =  —0,1291564.^"  ;  log.coeff.  =  9,1 1212,.  [7193]

These  values  of  h,  h',  h!",  being  less  than  h",  we  may  consider  h"  as  being  ^7^941

the  peculiar  excentricity  of  the  third  satellite,  ivhose  apsides  have  an  annual

sideral  motion  of  29009", 8.

*  (3565)  We  have  seen,  in  [7170A],  that  this  value  of  g  ought  to  be  increased  to
17S483",9  nearly.  JVIoreover  the  coefficient  [7196]  is  printed  0,0020622  in  the  original ;  t^^^^**!
we  have  corrected  it  for  an  error  in  the  fifth  decimal  place.  We  may  remark  that  the
comparison  of  the  values  of  g,  g^^,  g^,  g^  [7176,  7183,7190,  7195],  corresponding  to  the  '-  ■•
peculiar  motions  of  the  perijoves  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satelHtes  respectively,
shows  that  they  decrease  rapidly  with  the  mean  distance  of  the  satellite  from  Jupiter.
This  peculiarity  does  not  take  place in  the  planetary  orbits,  as  is  observed  in  [7199'],  and '•  ^

as  we  may  see  by  inspecting  the  first  lines  of  the  formulas  [4242 — 4248].  The  reason  of
this  difference  is,  that  the  motions  of  the  perijoves  of  the  satellites  are  produced  chiefly  by
the  ellipticity  of  Jupiter's  mass  [7174'J.

[7198']

248  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

Lastly,  the  fourth  value  of  g,  or  ^3,  is  that  which  is  given  by  observation

f  cuiiarto in  [7124],  for  the  annual  sideral  motion  of  the  apsides  of  the  fourth  satellite  ;

BStoK and  we  have  found,  in  [7124,  7145' — 7147],  that  in  this  case  we  get,

[7195]  ^3  =  7959",105 ;  ^3+154",63  =  81 13",735  ;

[7196]  h  =  0,0020522f '[7 1 83a]  ; log.coeff.  =  7,31222  ;

[7197]  h'  =  0,0173350./i'"  ;  log.coeff.  =  8,23892  ;

[7198]  j^'^  0,0816578.^'".  log.coeff.  =  8,91200.

These  values  of  h,  h\  h",  being  less  than  h'",  we  may  consider  h!"  as  the
peculiar  excentricity  of  the  fourth  satellite, whose apsides  have  an  annual

[7199] sideral  motion  of  7959",105.

Hence  we  see  that  each  satellite  has  an  excentricity  ivhich  is  particularly

[719^]  adapted  to  it.  This  peculiarity,  which  does  not  take  place  in  the  theory  of
the  planets  [7183c],  depends  on  the  oblateness  of  Jupiter; the  effects  of  this

[7200]  oblateness  on  the  perijoves  of  the  satellites  being  very  great.  It  now  remains
to  find  the  excentricities  which  are  peculiar  to  each  satellite,  and  the  positions
of  their  apsides,  at  a  given  epoch.  We  shall  give,  in  explaining  the  theory  of
each  satellite,  what  has  been  discovered  by  observation  relative  to  this  subject.

We  shall  now  consider  the  inclinations  and  motions  of  the  nodes  of  the  orbits
of  the  satellites. These  elements  depend  upon  the  equations  in >•  and  /,

[7201]  [6887 — 6894],  which  we  shall  here  resume.  The  equations  in  >^
[6887 — 6890]  become,  by  substituting  the  values  of  f*,  m,  m',  m",  m'"
[7141_7145],

[7202] 0=— 103",27+571269",64.x— . 9253",80.x'—  4606",32.V'—  327",25.x"' ;

[7203] 0  =— 207",29— 5471",12.x+133377",33.x'— 173]5",94.x"—  769",65.x'"  ;

[7204] 0  =  — 417",63— 566",l6.x— 3599",79.x'+28478",73.x"_2511",25.x'";

[7205] 0=— 974",19— 62",92.x_- 250",28.x'—  3928",28.x"+8179",ll.x'".

X x'

^],  J„ Resolving  these  equations,  we  find,*

log.(l_x)  =9,9997485;
log.(l— X')  =9,9974480;
log.(l— X")  =9,9880736;
log.(l—x'")  =  9,9383406.

[7200']

X",  X''

[7206]  -^  =0,00057879;  log.x  =6,7625210

[7207]  X'  =  0,00585888 ;  log.x'  =  7,7678146

[7208]  X"  =  0,02708801 ;  log.x"  =  8,4327771

[7209]  x'"=  0,13235804  ;  log.x'"=  9,1217504

[7206a]

*  (3566) For  the  purpose  of  verifying  these  calculations,  the  values  of  X',  X",  X"',

[7207 — 7209],  were  substituted  in [7202], and  the  resulting  value  of  X  was  found  to  be

0,00057  ;  which  differs  from  [7206]  by  an  insensible  quantity. In  a  similar  way  we  have

[72066] jjeduced  X'  =  0,005858,  from  [7203]  ; X"=0,027088,  from  [7204]  ;  and  X'"=0,13230,

from  [7209] ;  which  agree  nearly  with  the  results  of  the  author  in  [7206 — 7209].

VIII.  X.  ^28J.  ON  THE  INCLINATIONS  OF  THE  ORBITS.  249

These  values  of  K  >^',  '^",  '^"\  determine the  parts  of  the  latitudes  of  the

...  .  . r7209'l

satellites,  which  depend  upon  the  inclination  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  to  its

orbit. For  we  have, as  in [6361], 200° — ^y'  equal  to  the  longitude  of  the  t^^^^]
ascending  node  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  upon  the  orbit  of  this  planet,  and  for

brevity  we  shall  represent  it  by 1  =  200° — ^';  moreover,  &'  [6360]  represents  [7211]

the  inclinations  of  these  planes  to  each  other. Then  it  follows,  from  [6362],  I

that the parts  of  the  latitudes  of the satellites above Jupiter's orbit,  [7212]
mentioned  in  [7209'],  will  be  represented  by  the  following  expressions;*

s  =  (1— X). Lsm.{v — 1)  ;  [7213]

s'=={\ — >^').  ^'.sin.(«?' — I);  [7214]

s"  =  (1— X").  ((.  sin.(??"— I)  ;  [7215]

s"'={\—y!").^'.^m,{v"'—{). '  [7216]

The  inclination  &'  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  to  the  orbit  of  this  planet,  and
the  longitude  I  of  the  ascending  node  upon  the  same  orbit,  are  determined
by  observation. Delambre  obtained,  for  the  epoch  of  1750,

a'  =  3°,43519 ;  log.  ^'  =  0,5359507  ;  [7217]

I  ==  348^,62129.  [7218]

These  values  of  ^'  and  I  are  not  rigorously  constant.  We  have  seen,  in
[6928,  6929],  that  the  value  of  &'  increases  annually  by  0",07035,  and  that  [7219]
the  value  of  I  decreases  annually  by  0",8259,  relative  to  the  fixed  equinox.f
These  quantities  are  so  small  that  we  need  not  take  notice  of  them,  during
the  interval  in  which  the  eclipses  of  the  satellites  have  been  observed ;  but  it  is
easy  to  introduce  them  in  the  calculation,  if  it  be  thought  proper.

[7220]

*  (3567) Substituting  in  the  expression  of  the  part  of  the  latitude  of  the  satellite  m
[6362],  the  value  of  ^'  =  200°— I  [7211],  it  becomes,

(X— l).^'.sin.(t>  +  200°— I)  =(1— X).6'.sin.(u— I),  [7212a]

as  in  [7213]; and  by  changing  successively  the  quantities v,  X, corresponding  to  the
satellite  m,  into  v',  X'; v",  X" ;  v'", X'",  corresponding  respectively  to  the  other  satellites, [72126]
we  obtain  the  parts  of  the  values  of  /,  s",  s'"  [7214,  7215,  7216].

t  (3568) The  value  of  I  [7218]  being  substituted  in ^'=200°— I  [7211],  gives  at
the  epoch  of  1750,  *'  =  — 148^,62129  ;  which  is  used  in  [6929i]. Moreover  we  have [^^^^«]
shown,  in  [6929^],  that  the  general expression  of  I  is I  =  348°,62129— 0'',8259.<;  so [72196]
that  its  annual  decrement  is  0",8259,  as  in  [7219].

VOL.  IV.  63

[7225']

250  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.^  [Mec.  Cel.

The  equations  in  /  [6891 — 6894],*  become,  by  substituting  the  values  of
fi.,  m,  m',  m",  m'"  [7141,&c.],
[7221]  0  =  (;?— 571269",64)./+9253",80./'+4606",32i"+327",25./'" ; (5)

[7222]  0  =  5471",12J+(j9— 133377",33)./'+17315",94./"+769",65.Z"' ; (6)

[7223]  0  = 566",16J+3599",79.Z'+(;?— 28478",73)./"+251  i",25./"'; (7)

[7224]  0  = 62",92./+250",28./'+3928",28.Z"+(;7— 8179",11)./'".  (8)

These  four  equations  give  an  equation  in  p,  of  the  fourth  degree. f  To
obtain  the  roots  we  can  use  the  approximate  method,  which  is  employed  in
finding  the  values  of  g  [7175,  &c.].  In  this  manner  we  shall  have  the  first
value  of  p,  relative  to  the  orbit  of  the  first  satellite,  by  putting  the  coefficient
[7225]  of  /,  in  the  equation  [7221],  equal  to  zero;  which  gives  p  =  571269",64.
Substituting  this  in  the  equations  [7222,  7223,7224],  we  may  thence  deduce

v I" r" ,  . .

the  values  of  y ,  y ,  — . Then  substituting  these  values  in  the  equation

[7221],  after  dividing  it  by  /,  we  shall  obtain  a  more  approximate  value  of
p.  This  value  must  then  be  used  instead  of  the  former,  and  the  operation
must  be  repeated,  till  the  two  consecutive  values  of  p  shall  differ  but  very
little  from  each  other.  By  this  means  we  shall  obtain,  after  a  few
operations,  t

*  (3569) The  coefficients  of  the  equations [6891 — 6894],  are  the  same  as  those  in

■* [6887 — 6890],  which  are  computed  in  [7202 — 7204],  and  agree  with  the  numerical  values

in  [7221 — 7224]. We  may  moreover  observe,  that  the  equations  [6891 — 6894]  can  be

[722161 ^^^^^^^  ^^^^  [6887 — 6890],  by  changing the  last  terms  of  these  equations,  namely;

— 103",27; —207^29; —417^63; — 974",I9, into pi,  pV,  pi",  pi'", respectively;

also  X,  X',  X",  X'", into — I, — /', — /", — /'",  respectively. Now  making  the  same

[7221c] changes  in  [7202 — 7205],  which  are  derived  from  [6887 — 6890],  we  get,  without  any

reduction,  the  equations  [7221—7224].

t  (3570)  Finding  I  from  [7221],  and  substituting  it  in  [7222—7224],  we  get  three
'■ *'■' equations  in  l',  I",  I"'. Then  finding  /'  from  the  first  of  these  equations,  and  substituting

it  in  the  others,  we  get  two  equations  in  I",  V".  From  the  first  of  these,  we  get  V ',  then
[72245] substituting  it  in  the  second,  and  dividing  it  by  V",  we  get  an  equation  of  the  fourth  degree

in  p.

X  (3571)  To  verify  the  values  [7226 — 7229],  we  have  reduced  the  equations
[7226a] [7221 — 7224]  by  dividing  them  by  I ;  then  using  these  new  forms,  we  have  substituted  in

I' I" I'"
[7221]  the  expressions  of  y, y, —[7227 — 7229],  and  have  obtained  the  value  of

peculiar
to  the  first
satellite.

[7230]

VIlI.x.«^28.]  ON  THE  INCLINATIONS  OF  THE  ORBITS.  251

;,  =  571389",32 ;  ;?— 154",63  =  571234",69  ;  [7226]

/'  =  —0,0124527. 1 ;  log.coefl.  =  8,09526„ ;  [7227]

/"  =  —0,0009597. 1 ;  log.coeff.  =  6,98214„ ;  [7228]

/'"  =  —0,0000995.  /.  log.coeff.  =  5,99782,.  [7229]

The  values  of  V,  I",  /'",  being  in  this  case  less  than  /, we  may  consider  the ^'.  '

quantity I as  expressing  the  peculiar  inclinations  of  the  orbit  of  the  first

satellite,  upon  a  plane  which  passes  always  through  the  nodes  of  Jupiter'' s

equator,  betiveen  that  equator  and  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  and  inclined  to  the

equator  by  the  angle  >^^'.* If  we  substitute  the  preceding  values  of  >^,  6'

[7206,  7217],  we shall find this  inclination to  be x^' =  19",88. The [7231]

preceding  value  of  p [7226] then  expresses  the  annual  retrograde  motion  of

the  nodes  of  the  orbit  upon this plane ;f consequently this motion is [7232]

571389",32  [7226].

I'
p  [7226]. From  the  equation  [7222],  we  get -r  [7227],  by  the  substitution  of  the  values

I" I'"  I"

of  i?,  T' T  ['^226, 7228,  7229]. In  like  manner,  from  [7223]  we  find  —  [7228],  by [72266]
It  "

I' I"'  I '"

the  substitution  of  the  values  of  p,  y ,  y  [7226,  7227,  7229]. Finally  we obtain y

,, ,.  [7226c]

[7229],  from  [7224],  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  of  jt?, y  ,  y  [7226—7228]. A

similar  process  was  used  in  the  verification  of  the  other  expressions  [7233 — 7248]  ;
observing  that  in  the  verification  of  the  values  [7233 — 7236],  we  have  divided  the  equations  [7226rf]
[7221 — 7224]  by  l';  in  those  of  [7238 — 7241]  we  have  divided  the  equations
[7221 — 7224]  by  /"  ;  and  finally,  in  the  verification  of  the  values  [7245—7248],  we  have
divided  the  equations  [7221 — 7224]  by  l'".  The  results  of  these  verifications  confirm,  to  [7226e]
a  sufficient  degree  of  accuracy,  the  correctness  of  the  numerical  results,  deduced  by  the
author  from  the  proposed  system  of  equations  [7221 — 7224],

[7230a]

[72306]

*  (3572)  This  agrees  with  what  is  said  in  [6357 — 6362]  ;  where  it  is  shown  that  the
proposed  fixed  plane  is  inclined  to  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  by  the  angle  (1 — X).^' ;  subtracting
this  from  6',  the  angle  of  inclination  of  Jupiter's  orbit  and  equator  [6360],  we  obtain  X6f
for  the  inclination  of  this  plane  to  the  plane  of  Jupiter's  equator,  as  in  [7230]  ;  and  by-
substituting  the  values  of  X,  d'  [7206,  7217],  it  becomes  19",88,  as  in  [7231].  The
inclinations  of  the  similar  planes  corresponding  to  the  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites,  are
X'd',  X"6',  X'"^',  respectively,  as  in  [7242,  7249,  Stc]  ;  and  by  using  the  values  [7230c]
[7208,  7209],  we  find  that  the  two  last  of  these  quantities  become  as  in  [7243,  7250].

t  (3573) We  have  seen,  in  [7133c],  that  pt  expresses  the  retrograde  motion  of  the
node  of  the  satellite  upon  the  fixed  plane,  and  from  the  Jixed  equinox  [7328,  &.C.] ;  and  its '■ •'

252  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

// The  second  value  of  p  [7233] corresponds  to  the  orbit  of  the  second
[he"econd Satellite. It  is  given  by  observation [7133]  ; and  we  have seen  in  the
satoihtc. p^(3ceding  article  [7133,  7148—7150],  that  we  have  in  this  case,
[7233]  j9,  =  133870",4 ;  ^j^— 154",63  =  133715",77  ;

[7234]  / =0,0207938./';  log.coeff.  =  8,31793  ;

[7235]  I"  =  —0,0342530.  Z' ;  log.coeff,  =  8,53470,  ;

[7236]  r  ==  —0,000931 2.  /'.  log.coeff.  =  6,96904„.

The  third  value  of  p  [7238]  corresponds  to  the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite;

we  shall  have  the  first  approximation  to  its  value,  by  putting  the  coefficient

of  /"  in  the  equation  [7223] equal  to  nothing,  which  gives  p  =  28478",73.

[7237] Substituting  this  in [7221,  7222,  7224],  we  may  thence  deduce -the  values

/ r v"

of — ,  — ,  — -. These  values  being  substituted  in [7223],  after  dividing

,„  it  by  /",  give  a  second  value  of  p  ;  which  is  to  be  used,  in  repeating  the
peculiar  to  proccss,  in  a  second  operation ;  and  by  proceeding  in  this  manner,  we  finally
satellite, obtain,

[7238]  p^  =  28375",48  ;  p^—l 54",63  =  28220",85 ;

[7239]  / =  0,01 1 1626. 1" ;  log.coeff.  =  8,04777  ;

[7240]  /'  =  0,1640530.  /"  ;  log.coeff.  =  9,21498  ;

[7241]  /'"=  — 0,1965650.Z" ;  log.coeff.  =  9,29351„.

These  values  of  I,  l',  I'",  are  less  than  /",  so  that  this  quantity  may  be
considered  as  expressing  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  third
satellite  upon  a  plaiie,  ivhich  passes  always  through  the  nodes  of  Jupiter^s
equator,  between  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  and  is  inclined  to  the
equator  by  the  quantity  '^'^'  [7230c]. Substituting  for  x"  and  ^  their  values

[7243]  [7208,  7217],  we  find  this  inclination  to  be  930",52.  The  annual  retrograde
motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite  upon  this  plane,  is
28375",48  [7238].

Lastly,  the  fourth  value  of  p  corresponds  to  the  orbit  of  the  fourth  satellite.
We  obtain  a  first  approximation  to  its  value,  by  putting  the  coefficient  of  /'"

[7244]  i'l  the  equation  [7224],  equal  to  nothing,  which  gives  ^=8179",  11.
Substituting this in [7221 — 7223], we get three equations for the

I r I"
determination  of -— , — — . These values being substituted in the

£  t  (/

mean  value  is  the  same  as  that on  the plane  mentioned  in  [7232]  ;  by  subtracting  the
[72316] precession  154",63.^,  we  get  its  value  from  the  variable  vernal  equinox  of  the  earth,  so
that  p — 154",63,  represents  this  annual  retrograde  motion.

[7242]

[7243']

VIII.  X.  §  28.]  ON  THE  INCLINATIONS  OF  THE  ORBITS.  253

equation  [7224],  after  dividing  it  bj  l"\  give  a  second  value  of  p^  which
must  be  used  like  the  first  value  in  repeating  this  process.  In  this  manner
we  finally  obtain,

P3  =  7682",64 ;  pg— 154",63  =  7528",01 ;  [7245]

I  =0,0019856./'
/'  =  0,0234108./'
/"=  0,1248622./'

log.coeff.  =  7,29789  ;  [7246]

log.coeff.  =  8,36942 ;  [7247]
log.coeff.  =  9,09643.  [7248]

These  values  of  /,  /',  /", are  less  than  V" ; therefore  /'"  may  he  supposed  p^,  V",

to  express  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  fourth  satellite,  upon  a  plane  ivhich  Ihrfourth
passes  always  through  the  nodes  of  Jupiter^s  equator,  between  the  equator  and
the  orbit  of  the  planet,  and  inclined  to  the  equator  by  the  angle  x'"^'  [7230c].
Substituting  for  x'"  and  &'  their  values  [7209,  7217],  we  find  this  inclination [7249]

to  be  4546",74. The  annual  retrosrrade  motion  of  the  nodes  of  the  orbit  ,  ^

'  ^  ^  J  [7250]

of  the  fourth  satellite  upon  this  plane,  is  7682",64  [7245].

Hence  loe  see  that  the  orbit  of  each  satellite  has  an  inclination  ivhich  is
peculiarly  adapted  to  it ;  a  circumstance  depending  upon  the  oblateness
of  Jupiter,  whose  influence  upon  the  motions  of  the  nodes  of  the  orbits  of  the
satellites,  is  very  great  [7183c,  (/].  It  now  remains  to  find  the  inclinations
corresponding  to  each  orbit,  and  the  positions  of  the  nodes.  We  shall  soon
see  what  has  been  discovered  by  observation,  relative  to  this  subject.

VOL.  IV.  64

254  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

La  Place's
first  law.

[7252]

CHAPTER  XL

ON THE LIBRATION OF  THE THREE INNER SATELLITES OF  JUPITER.

29. We  have  seen,  in  [6629],  that  the  mean  motions  of  the  three  inner

satellites  of  Jupiter  are  subjected  to  the  following  law,  which  holds  good

relative  to  any  variable  axis,  moving  according  to  any  law  whatever  [6632].

The  mean  motion  of  the  first  satellite^ plus  twice  that  of  the  third, is

exactly  equal  to  three  times  the  mean  motion  of  the  second  satellite.

To  show  how  accurately  this  law  agrees  with  observation,  we  shall  give

the  mean  secular  motions  of  these  three  bodies,  as  Delambre  has  determined

them,  by  the  discussion  of  an  immense  number  of  eclipses. He  has  found

that,  in  one  hundred  Julian  years,  these  motions,  relative  to  the  variable

Sons, equinox,  are,*

[7253]  First Satellite,  8258261°,63313;

[7254]  Second Satellite,  4114125°,81277 ;

[7255] .  Third Satellite,  2042057°,90398  ;

[7255']  ' [Fourth Satellite,  875427o,45956]. [7281]

[7253a]

*  (3574)  The  motions  of  the  satellites  from  the  variable  equinox  in  100  Julian  years,
is  given  in  [7253 — 7255].  Dividing  these  by  100,  we  get  the  motions  in  one  Julian  year,
which  is  taken  for  the  unit  of  time  in  [7283'].  Subtracting  the  annual  precession  154",63
[4357],  we  get  the  motions  from  the  fixed  equinox  825826009",  411412427",
204205635",  87542591",  which  agree  nearly  with  the  values  of  w,  n',  n",  7i"' [6025)t].
With  the  preceding  value  of  n'%  we  obtain,  from  [6840],  the  expression  of  M  =  337211"
[6025m]  ;  agreeing  nearly  with  Bouvard's  tables  337212",094.  These  values  of
n,  n',  w",  n'",  agree  very  nearly  with  those  used  by  Delambre,  in  his  new  tables
[7253c]  [678U,&c.],  as  is  evident  by  subtracting  the  precession  for  100  years  1°,5463  from  the
numbers  in  [6781o— r]  ;  then  dividing  by  100,  and  reducing  to  seconds.

VIII.  xi.  <^  29.]  LIBRATION  OF  THE  SATELLITES.  255

The  mean  motion  of  the  first,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus
twice  that  of  the third,  is  therefore  equal  to  27",8. This  difference  is  so [7256]
small  that  it  excites  surprise,  at  the  very  near  agreement  of  the  theory  with
the  observations ; and as  the  tables  must be  strictly  subjected to  the
preceding  law,  the  results  in [7253 — 7255] have  been  slightly  altered,  by [7257]
Delambre,  to  attain  this  object.

We  have  seen,  in  [6630], that  the  epochs  of  the  mean  motions  of  the
three  satellites  are  subjected  to  the  following  law :  J;^

The  epoch  of  the  first  satellite,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus
twice  that  of  the  third,  is  exactly  equal  to  the  semi-circumference,  or  200"^.

Delambre  has  determined  these  epochs,  by  the  discussion  of  a  very  great
number  of  eclipses,  and  has  obtained  the  following  results,  corresponding  to

La  Place's
sec  on
]aw.

[7258]

t  of  the  f

irst  of  Janua

ry,  1 750,  at  midnight ;

Epochs.

First

Satellite,

16°,69584;

[7259]

Second

Satellite,

346^,0521  ;

[7260]

Third

Satellite,

11°,41354;

[7261]

[Fourth

Satellite,

366^,89437  J. [7282]

[7261']

From  these  results  of  observation  it  appears,  that  the  epoch  of  the  first
satellite,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of  the  third,
is  equal  to  200°,01962,*  which  exceeds  the  semi-circumference  by  196",2. [7262]

*  (3575) The  numbers  [7259—7261]  give,

160,69584+3(400°— 346o,0521)-f2X  11°,4I354  =  201^,36662,  [7259a]

instead  of  200^,01962,  which  is  given  by  the  author  in  [7262]. This  difference  probably
arises  from  a  mistake  in  the  angle [7260],  which  is  too  small  by  about  half  a  degree.
These angles  are afterwards changed by  the  author,  into 16^,68093, 346° ,48931, [72596]
11°,39349,  in  [7495,7439,  7386],  respectively  ;  which  satisfy  the  second  law,  or  theorem,
on  the  epochs  [7258],  within 0°,00002. We  may  observe  that  these angles are  not L'^^^c]
explicitly  given  in  Delamhre^s  tables ; for,  instead  of  them,  he  uses  the  times  of  the  mean
conjunction,  or middle  of  the  eclipse. From  these  times  we  find the  epochs  or  angles [7259rf]
e,  e',  e",  e'",  corresponding  to the  commencement  of  the  year 1750, to be nearly
16° ,67860, 346°,51677, 11°,39696, 366°,89437,  respectively. The  first  three  of [7259e]
these  values  agree  nearly  wiih  those  used  by  the  author  [72596] ;  but  the  last,  or  the  value
©"'=366°, 894.37,  corresponding  to  the  commencement  of  the  year  1750,  exceeds  the
value  800,61249,  given  by the  author  in  [7232,  7281«],  by  the  quantity  286°,28188. [7259/]
This  mistake  of  the  author  has  been  noticed  by Professor  Airy,  in  Vol.  6,  page  98,  of  the
Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society  of  London. It  has  however  no  effect  on  the [72595"]
subsequent  calculations  of  the  coefficients  of  the  inequalities,  but  may  be  considered  as

256  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

Therefore  the  observations  do  not  satisfy,  quite  so  well,  this  second  law

[7262']  relative  to  the  epochs,  as  they  do  the  first  law,  relative  to  the  mean  motions ;
and  it  would  not  have  been  strange  if  there  had  been  found  a  still  greater
difference,  for  the  following  reasons.

We  are  situated  at  so  great  a  distance  from  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,  that
they  disappear  from  our  sight  before  they  are  wholly immersed in the

[7263]  shadow  of  the  planet ;  and  they  do  not  again  become  visible  until  they  have
partly  emerged  from  it.  To  determine  the  time  of  the  conjunction  of  a
satellite,  we  suppose,  that,  at  the  moment  of  the  immersion,  its  centre  is
at  the  same  distance  from  the  conical  shadow  as  at  the  moment  of  the
emersion.  Now  it  may  happen,  that  the  part  of  the  disk  of  the  satellite,
which  first  enters  into  the  shadow,  and  of  course  re-appears  the  first,  may
be  more  or  less  adapted  to  reflect  the  sun's  light,  than  the  part  which  is
eclipsed  the  last.  In  this  case  it  is  evident,  that,  at  the  moment  of  the
immersion,  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  the  satellite  from  the  conical
shadow,  will  be  greater  or  less  than  at  the  time  of  the  emersion  ;  and  the
time  of  conjunction,  deduced  from  these  observations,  will  therefore  be  more

[7264]  or  less  advanced  than  the  true  time.  The  epochs  of  the  mean  longitudes
of  the  three  inner  satellites,  deduced  from  the  observations  of  their  eclipses,
may  differ,  on  this  account,  from  their  real  values,  and  therefore  may  not
satisfy  accurately  the  second  law  above  mentioned  [7258].  It  is  true  that
we  have  here  supposed  that  the  part  of  the  disk,  which  is  first  eclipsed,  is,
in  all  cases,  sensibly  the  same. Now  this  is  really  the  case  ;  for  it  is  well

^  known  that  the  satellites  present  always  the  same  face  towards  Jupiter,  as

the  moon  does  to  the  earth.  The  circumstance  we  have  just  mentioned
does  not  prevent  the  observations  from  satisfying  the  lavi^  of  the  mean  motions
[7252],  For  these  motions  are  determined  by  means  of  the  difference  of
the  epochs  at  very  distant  intervals  of  time,  and  are  therefore  independent  of

[7265]  the  inequalities,  which  might  exist  in  the  light  of  the  different  parts  of  the
disks  of  the  satellites,  particularly  when  we  notice  as  many  immersions  as
emersions.

The  difference  between  the  result  of  the  observations  and  the  law  of  the

[7266] epochs  [7258—7262],  being  very  small,  Delambre  has  thought  it  best  to

[7259/1]

nothing  more  than  an  inaccurate  deduction  from  the  numbers  in  the  tables  ;  and  that  the
mistake  can  be  wholly  corrected,  by  merely  changing  the  angle  into  its  corrected  value,
wherever  it  occurs  in  the  formulas.

I

VIII.  xi.  -^  29.]  . . LIBRATIOJV  OF  JHE  SATELLITES. „  .  257

subject  the  epochs  of  his  tables  strictly  to  this  law  ;  the  corrections  necessary r^o^p/,
to  be  made  in  the  observations  being  within  the  limits  of  the  errors  to  which
they  are  liable.

The  tivo  preceding  theorems  give  rise,  as  ive  have  seen  in  [6657,  &c.],
to a  particular  inequality,  which we  have  denoted  by the name of  the r^n^-,
lihration  of  the  satellites. We  have  given its analytical expression in
[6646,  6652 — 6654,  &c.],  and  to  reduce  it  to  numbers,  we have,  as  in
[6858,  6857],

F'=  1,466380;  log.  =  0,1662466;  1

G  =,  —0,857159, [or  —0,856159,]  ; log.  =  9,9330614,  or  9,9325544,.  2 ^'^^^
Hence  the  expression  k  [6609]  becomes,*

a

k  =  123,855.  I  —.m'm"-{-l,mm"-\-—.mm'

a

[7271]

^  • '"'"'' I  '  [7269]

therefore  the  value  of  k  is  positive,  as  we  have  observed  in  [6619]  ;  where
we  have  shown  that  the  sign  of  k  determines  whether  the  mean  longitude
of  the  first  satellite,  minus  three  times  that  of  the  second,  plus  twice  that  of
the  third,  is  equal  to  nothing,  or  to  the  semi-circumference.  The  negative
sign  corresponds  to  the  first  case  [6616],  and  the  positive  sign  to  the  second
case  [6615].

If we substitute, in [7269], the preceding values of m, m', m", vaiueof
[7162—7164],  we  shall  obtain,  k

k  =  0,000000607302.  [7272]

We  have  observed,  in  [6623],  that  if  the  law  of  the  mean  motions  of  the
three  first  satellites  [7252]  were  not  rigorously  correct,  the  observations
would  vary  from  it,  by 100°,  i?i  an  interval  of  time  which  is  less  than\

*  (3576) Substituting  in k  [6609]  the  values  of F\  G, given  by  the  author  in
[7268],  and  those  of  n',  N',  in  terms  of  n  [60256,/] ; or,  for  greater  accuracy,  those  in ['^o^"]
[6025Z;,  ?]  ;  we  obtain,  very  nearly,  the  expression  of  k  [7269]  ;  and  if  we  use  the  values
of  a,  a',  a"  ; m,  m',  m" [6797—6799,  7162 — 7164],  we  obtain  the  expressions of k
[7269,  7272]. This  will  be  decreased about  ^^, by  correcting the  mistake  in  the [72696]
estimated  value  of G [6857,  or  7268  line  2] ;  and  by  this  means  the  coefficient 123,855
[7269]  is  reduced  to 123,7  nearly  ;  but  this  correction  is  of  no  importance  in  the  remaining r7269cl
part  of  the  calculation,  where  no  great  accuracy  is  required.

t  (3577) Putting  flr  =  200°, in  the expression  of  this interval  of  time [6623],  it
becomes,  by  successive  reductions,  as  in  [7273,  7274],
VOL*  IV.  Q3

258  '  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel,

100°
[72731 • If  we  put T for  the  time  of  the  sideral  revolution  of  the  first

[7273']

satellite,  we  shall  have wT  =  400°; hence  the  preceding  interval  can  be

T

reduced  to  the  form - — -^ : and  by  substituting  the  value  of T  [67781,
[7274]  4.\/2k  J  &  L  J'

r7274'i ^^  becomes  401'''^'',314  ;  therefore  it  is  less  than  two  years,  as  we  have  observed
in  [6623].

The  expressions  of  v,  v',  v'\  depending  upon  the  libration,  which  we  have
Libration fouud iVL [6652 — 6654], become, by the substitution of the values

«tlllites. Qf ^^ ^/^ ^//^*

[7275]  V  = P.sin.{nt.\/k  +  A)

[7276]  v'  =  — P.0,889912.sin.(ni.v/k  +  A)  ;

[7277]  v"  == P.0,062n5.sin.(n/.v/k  +  A)  ;

P  and  A  being  two  arbitrary  quantities,  which  can  be  determined  only  by

.  .  ..... 400^

Sonhl observation. The  duration  of  the  period  of  this  inequality!  is — -^ , or

T

[7279] — ;  vt^hich  is  equal  to  2270^^^%  18,  or  rather  more  than  six  years.

After  having  thus  taken  into  consideration  the  whole  system  of  the  satellites,
we  shall  now  develop  the  'particular  theories  of  each  one  of  them,  beginning
with  the  fourth.

100°  100°.T  100°.  T  T

^'^^^^^  n./2k  ■""  nr.v/2k  ~"  400°./2k  "~  4.v/2k  *

[7273c] Substituting  in  this  last  expression  the  value  of T=  l'i''y,7691...  [6778],  and  that  of  k
[7272],  we  obtain  very  nearly  the  same  expression  as  in  [7274'].

[7275a] *  (3578) If  we  put P  = ^^Tm aFm  '  ^^^  coefficients  of  the  values  of  v,  v',  v",

^ ' 4a.m' •"  Aa.m"
[72756] [6652— 6654],  will  be  represented  by  P; — -^.P; ^^, .  P,  respectively  ; and  by

substituting  the  values  of  a,  of,  a"; m,  m,  m"  [6797 — 6799,7162 — 7164],  they  become
as  in  [7275—7277].

t (3579) Putting T' for the period of this inequality, we shall have

[7278a] T'.n.v/k  =  400°=nT [7273']; or  by  dividing  by Ti.yA, r'  =  --7j ,  as  in  [7279].

Substituting  in  this  expression  the  values  of T,  k  [7273c,  7272],  it  becomes  as  in  [7279].

VIII.  xii.  §  30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  259

CHAPTER XII.

THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTU  SATELLITE.

30.  Delambre  has  found,  by  the  discussion  of  all  the  observed  eclipses
of  the  fourth  satellite,  that  its  mean  motion,  referred  to  the  earth's  vernal
equinox  in  a  hundred  Julian  years,  is,*

875427°,45956.  [7281]
He  has  also  found  that  the  mean  longitude  of  this  satellite,  referred  to  the

same  equinox  at  the  moment of  the  midnight,  commencing  the  first  of  ryng,,,

January,  1750,  which  ive  shall  hereafter  call  the  epoch  of  1750,  is  equal  to,t  Epoch  of

366°,89437,.  '[7282]

Therefore  we  shall  put,  Mean

motion.

0'"  =  366°,89437,+ ^8754^,2745956 ;  [7283]

t  =  the  number  of  Julian  years  elapsed  since  1750  ; and,  [7284]

&'"  =  the  mean  longitude  of  the  fourth  satellite,  viewed  from  the  centre  of  [7285]

*  (3580)  This  motion  of  the  fourth  satellite  is  increased  to  875427^,46850,  in  the
latest  edition  of  Delambre's  tables,  as  we  have  remarked  in  [6781r]  ;  so  that  in  these
tables  the  annual  motion  is  greater  by  about  0",89,  than  that  given  by  the  author  in  [7283].

[7280a]

[7281a]
[72816]

t  (3581)  We  have  already  observed,  in  [7259/],  that  the  epoch  80°,61249,  given  by
the  author  in  the  original  work  in  [7282],  is  too  small  by  286°,28I88;  and  a  similar
mistake  occurs  in  the  angle  303°, 76542  [7336,  7340,  Stc],  which  is  too  great  by
18^,56542,  as  Delambre  has  observed  in  the  last  edition  of  his  tables  [7336a].  These
mistakes  are  corrected  in  this  translation,  by  inserting  the  true  values,  with  the  letter  c  [7281rf]
annexed,  as  in  [6021i],  namely,  by  putting  366^,89437,  for  80^,61249,  in  [7282,  &c.]  ;
and  285o,20c  for  303°,76542,  in  [7336,  &;c.].  This  change  in  the  value  of  the  angle  [7281e]
[7282],  affects  the  angle  [7290,  Sic],  which  is  therefore  corrected.

260

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[7286]

[7287]

Longitude
of  the
perijove.

[7288]
[7289]

[7290]

Mean
anomaly.

[7291]

Jupiter,  and  counted  from  the  earth's  moveable  vernal  equinox.*

Delambre  has  also  found  that  the  perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  has  an
annual  sideral  motion  of  7959",105;  or  a  motion  of  8113",7i35  relative  to
the  vernal  equinox  ;t  and  that  the  mean  longitude  of  this  perijove,  in
1750,  was,

200^,38054.
Therefore  if  we  put,t

^'"  ==  200^,38054  i-i.Sl  13",735.
©'" — to'"  will  be  the  mean  anomaly  of  the  fourth  satellite,  counted  from  the
perijove; and  we  shall  have,  as  in  [7283,  7288],

©"'__^'"  =  166°,51383,  + 1. 8753°,4632221.
We  have  seen,  in  [7127],  that  the  coefficient  of  the  greatest  term  of  the
equation  of  the  centre,  is  equal  to  9265",56. It  is  easy  to  deduce,  from  this,
the  elliptical  part  of  the  longitude  of  the  fourth  satellite,  as  in  the  following
expression ;  §

[7285a]

[7286a]

[7286&]

[7286c]

[7288a]

[7288&]

*  (3582)  In  like  manner,  e,  e',  e"  [7496,  7440,  7301,  &;c.],  represent  the  mean
longitudes  of  the  first,  second  and  third  satellites  respectively,  viewed  from  the  centre  of
Jupiter,  and  referred  to  the  earth's  vernal  equinox.

t  (3583)  The  annual  sideral  motion  of  the  apsides  of  the  fourth  satellite,  is  7959",105
[7195],  from  the  fixed  equinox;  or  7959",105-f-154",63  =  8113^735  from  the  earth's
moveable  equinox  [7176c].  This  agrees  with  [7286].  A  similar  alteration  is  made  in
[7295],  for  reducing  the  sideral  motion  29009",8  to  the  tropical  motion  29164",43;
observing  that  the  longitudes  of  the  perijoves  of  the  first,  second,  third  and  fourth  satellites
are  respectively  represented  by  vi,  -as',  ts",  W  ;  and  that,  in  the  rest  of  this  booJc,  these
longitudes  are  counted  from  the  earth's  moveable  vernal  equinox.

X  (3584)  The  last  tables  of  Delambre  augment  the  angle  [7287]  about  1°,7,  making
the  longitude  of  the  perijove,  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  1750,  nearly  equal  to
202°, 10.  Using  the  epoch  and  annual  motion,  as  given  by  the  author  in  [7287,  7286],  we
get  the  expression  of  zi"  [7288]  ;  subtracting  this  from  &'"  [7283],  we  obtain  [7290]  ;  the
angle  280^,23194,  given  by  the  author,  being  changed  into  166°,51383<.,  inconsequence
of  the  change  in  [7283].

•§.  (3585) We  have,  in  [668,  669],  the following expression  of  the  equation  of  the

centre,  neglecting  e^,
[7292a]  (2«— i.e3).sin.(0'"— -n'")  +  5.e2.sin.2(0'"— to"0  +  \^.t\s\vi.^{Q"'—7z"')  ;

and  by  putting  its  first  term  equal  to  9265"j56,  as  in [7291],  we  get  e  =  4633"  nearly.
[72926] Substituting  this  value  of  e,  in  the  second  and  third  terms  of  [7292a],  it  becomes  as  in  [7292].

Vlll.xii.  *§>30.] THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  261

e'"4-9265",56.sin. (e'"—zs"')

+ 42",U.sin.2.(0'"— .z^'")  [7292]

+ O",27.sin.3.(0"'--^").
The  fourth  satellite  participates  a  little  in  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the
third  satellite. Delambre  has  found  the  coefficient  of  this  equation  of  the [7293]
third  satellite  to  be  1709",03  [7388],  and  the  longitude  of  the  corresponding
perijove,  in  1730,*

343^,82067.  [7294]

The  annual  sideral  motion  of  this  perijove  is  29009",8  [7190]  ;  hence  its [7295]
annual  tropical  motion  is  29164",43  [72866]  ;  so  that  we  shall  have,  thTtMrV^

zs"  =  343°,82067  +  ^.29164",43.  "[7296]

We  shall  put  e"  for  the  mean  tropical  longitude  of  the  third  satellite. Then [7297]
e" — to"  will  be  its  mean  longitude,  counted  from  the  perijove. To  determine [7298]
e",  we  shall  observe,  that  Delambre  has  found  the  annual  motion  of  the
satellite,  in  a  hundred  Julian  years,  to  be,t

2042057^,9040 ;  [7299]

and  its  mean  longitude,  at  the  epoch  of  1730,

1P,39349.  [7300]

Hence  we  have,

e"  =  1  P,39349 + ^.20420°,379040  ;  [7301]

consequently.  Mean

"^  anomaly

e"-— ^"  =  67°,37282  +  ^.  20417<^,662397. [7301,  7296]  [7302]

Thus  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  third  satellite  [7293,  7303],  will  be,
as  in  [7304a],

6v"  =  1 709",05.  sin.(e"— n").  [7303]

We  have,  as  in  [7193],  relatively  to  this  equation  of  the  centre,  t

of  the
second
satellite.

*  (3586) The  longitude  of  the  perijove  of  the  third  satellite  [7294],  is  increased,  in ^7094/11
the  last  tables  of  Delambre,  by  nearly  the  same  quantity  as  that  of  the  fourth  satellite,

[7288a].

t  (3587)  The  annual  motion  [7299]  is  increased  about  89",  in  the  new  tables  of
Delambre  [6781g']  ;  and  the  longitude  of  the  epoch  [7300]  is  increased  about  34".  From
the  values  given  by  the  author  in  [7299,  7300],  we  easily  deduce  the  expression  of  e"
[7301],  and  by  subtracting  the  value  of  to"  [7296],  we  obtain  [7302].

[7300o]

t(3588) Thechief  term  of  <5i?"  [624H]  is  — 2A".sin.(0"--OT"). Putting  this  equal  to rr^^Oia]
the  expression  [7303],  we  6nd  — 2/i"=1709",05. Substituting  this  in  the  term  of  dv'"
VOL. IV.  6Q

n

[7307]

262  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7304]  ^'  =  —0,1291564.^".

Hence  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  fourth  satellite,  which  depends  on
the  perijove  of  the  third  satellite,  is  represented  by  h'd"  [7305]  ;  and  by
reducing  the  coefficient,  it  becomes  of  the  form  [7306] ;

[7305]  5t;"'=:  — 17O9",O5xO,1291564.sin.(0'"— t.")

[7306]  =  — 220",73.sin.(e'"— tji").

Symbol  We  shall  put  n  for  the  mean  longitude  of  Jupiter^  referred  to  the  moveable
vernal  equinox  of  the  earth.  Then  substituting,  in  [6848],  the  value  of  m"
[7144],  and  neglecting  the  terms  depending  upon m,  m', which  may  be

[7307']  done  without  any  sensible  error,*  we  shall  find  that  this  expression  of  6v"'
becomes,

^i/"  =  _28",36,.sin. (e"— e'")  1

— 14",12.sin.2.(e"_0'")  2

[7308]  —  2",95.sin.3.(e"— 0'")  3

—  O",9O.sin.4.(0"— 0'")  4

—  O",33.sin.5.(0"— e'")  5
+  12",99.sin.(20"'— 2n).  6

If  we  then  observe  that  — 2h!"  [6241  A;  line  2]  is  the  coefficient  of  the
greatest  term  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  fourth  satellite,!  we  shall

[7309]

[73046]  [6241  A:],  depending  on  2A",  we  get  the  corresponding  part  of  the  equation  of  the  centre
of  v'"  [7305]. Multiplying  together  the  two  factors  of  the  coefficient  of  [7305],  we  obtain

[7304c]  [7306].  The  terms  of  y",  depending  on  h^h!  [6241  Ar],  are  insensible  [6241 /] ;  that
depending  on  h'"  is  given  in [7310,  or  7318  line  1].

*

(3589) Substituting  the  value  of  m  [7142]  in  [6848  line  1], and ra'  [7143]  in

•' [6848  line  3],  we  obtain  2",4 ; and  5"j2  for  the  greatest  terms  of V, depending  on

[73076] m,  m';  and  these  coefficients  are  so  small  that  they  are  hardly  worth  the  trouble  of  forming

two  new  tables  for  the  sake  of  noticing  them. The  remaining  terms  in  [6848  lines  6 — 11],

produce the expression [7308], by substituting the values of m" [7144],

[7307c] n"^— n'^f+Z'—s"' =  ©"—©"'  [6240^],  and <iip!"t—2Mt-\-2^"—'^E=^Q"'—2Tl  [6240/].

The  coefficient  in  [7308  line  1],  according  to  the  author,  is  31"j36 ; we  have  decreased  it

[7307d] 3",00,  to  correct  for  the  mistake  mentioned  in  [6849e].

[7309a]

t  (3590) We  have  seen,  in  [6240 J,  e],  that  the  greatest  term  of  the  equation  of  the

centre  of  the  first  satellite, 2e.sin.(n^-f-^ — ^)) is  changed  into — 2A.sin.(ni-|-£ — gt — a).

Adding  three  accents  to  these  symbols,  so  as  to  make  them  correspond  to the  fourth

[73096] satellite,  we  find  that  the  greatest  term  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  fourth  satellite

is 2e'".sin.(n'"^-f-^" — '^"')  '■> ^^d that it can, in like manner, be changed into

Vlll.xii.<§>30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  263

have,  by  considering  the  greatest  term  of  the  equation  of  the  centre
[7292  line  1],

— 2/i"' =  9265",56  ; or  A'"  =  — 4632",78  ;  [7310]

we  shall  have,  as  in  [6874  line  1,  6875A:,  &c.],  the  inequality,

6v"'  =  0,0144449.4.9265",56.sin.(e'"+^'"_2n),  [7311]

which  may  be  reduced  to  the  following  form ;

6v"'  =  66",94.  sin.(0'"+x.'"— 2n).  [7312]

Putting,  as  in  [6275e,  &c.],  the  mean  anoinaly  of  Jupiter,  counted  from  the [7313]
perihelion, equal  to Mt-\-E — /=F, we  shall  have, for  the inequality
[6886],  the  following  expression  ;

ai/"  =  — 353",69,.  sin.  r.  [7314]

Lastly  we  have,  as  in  [6944],  the  inequality,*

6t;'"  =  — 49",5Lsin,(^.7541"+3P,9199)  ;  [7315]

7541"  being  the  assumed  annual  sideral  motion  of  the  node  of  the  fourth
satellite  [6942]  ;  but  we  have  found,  in  [7245],  that  this  motion  is  greater,
being  equal  to  7682",64.  We  must  subtract  from  it  the  annual  variation  of
the  longitude  of  the  node  of  Jupiter's  equator,  *',  which  is  equal  to  0",8259
[6929]  ;  hence  the  preceding  inequality  becomes,

jy'"  =  — .49",51.sin.(^.7681",81+3P,9199).  [7317]

Connecting  together  all  these  inequalities,  we  shall  have,  for  the  longitude

— 2^'".sin.(n'"<-|-s'"— ^3^— Fg), using  the  values  of  g,  T  [7286,  &c.],  peculiar  to  the
greatest  term  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  for  this  satellite. Putting  this  last  expression [7309c  ]
equal  to  the  chief  terra  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  fourth  satellite  [7292  line  1],  we
get  — 2^'"  =  9265",56,  as  in  [7310]. Now  the  inequality  in y", corresponding  to  that
in  6v  [6874  line  1],  is  represented,  as  in  [6875A:],  by

5^'"  =  _i±^.sin.(n'"<-2M^+s'"— 2E+^3<+r3) ;  [7309(i]

hence  if  we  change  the  angle into Q"'-\-zi"' — 2  IT, as  in [6240/], and  substitute  the
numerical  value  [6880],  it  becomes 5o'"= -0,0144449.//".  sin.(0'"+w'"-2n). Substituting [7309e]
the  value  of  K"  [7310],  it  becomes  as  in  [7311]  ;  or  by  reduction,  as  in  [7312]  nearly.

*  (3591)  The  argument  of  the  equation  [6944]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [7315] ;  and  by
increasing  the  annual  sideral  motion  of  the  node  from  7541"  to  7682",64  [7316],  then
subtracting  the  precession  0",8259  [6929],  it  changes  into  768r',81 ;  hence  the  expression
of  bvf"  [6944],  becomes  as  in  [6942m,  or  7317]  ;  being  the  same  as  in  [7318  line  13].

[7316a]
[73166]

liongitado
of  the
fourlh
•atellite
from  the
moveable
Ternal
equinox  of
the  earth.

[731S]

264  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[73i7'j ^"'  of  the  fourth  satellite,  counted  upon  its  orbit  from  the  vernal  equinox  of  the
earth,*

25'"==0"'4-9265",56.sin. (e'"— ^'")  1

+ 42",14.sin.2.(0"'— ^3'")  2

+ O",27.sin.3.(0'"— 7^'")  3

—  28",36,.sin. (e"— e'")  4

—  14",12.sm.2.(e"_0"')  5

—  2",95.sin.3.(e"_-0"')  6

—  0",90.sin.4.(e"— ©'")  7
-- 0",33.sin.5.(e"_e'")  8

—  220",73.sin.  (e'"— ^")  9
+  12",99.sin.(2e"'— 2n)  ~  10
+ 66",94.sin.(e'"+:3'"— 2n).  11

—  353",69,.sm.F  12

—  49",51.sin.(^768r',81+3lo,9199).  13
We  shall  noio  consider  the  motion  in  latitude.  This  motion  depends  upon
the  inclination  of  the  equator  of  Jupiter  to  its  orbit,  and  upon  the  longitude
of  the  ascending  node  of  the  equator,  at  a  given  epoch.  Delambre  found,
by  the  discussion  of  a  very  great  number  of  eclipses,  chiefly  of  the  third  and
fourth  satellites,  that  the  inclination  of  Jupiter^s  equator  to  the  orbit  of  this
planet,  was  ef  =  3^,4352  in  1750  [7217]  ;  and  at  the  same  epoch,  the
longitude  of  its  ascending  node  was  348°,6213  [7218].  Moreover  the
annual  precession  of  the  equinoxes  being  154",63  [7176c]  ;  and  the  annual
precession  of  Jupiter's  equinoxes  0",8259  [6929']  ; the  annual  motion  of

[7321] the  last  equinox,  referred  to  the  first,  is  153", 8  ;  so  that  the  longitude  of  the
Jf  the""*^ ascending  node  of  Jupiter^s  equator,  relative  to  the  earthh  vernal  equinox,  is

ascending  .

node  of represented  by

Jupiter's  -t  «'

T^-  348°,62 1 3 + /.  1 53",8.

[7322]  '  '  '

[7322'] The  term  (x'" — l).6'.sm.{v"'-\-ir')  in  the  expression  of  the  latitude  s'" of  the

fourth  satellite  [6430  line  1],  will  therefore  become,t

[7319]
[7320]

*  (3592) Adding  the  mean  longitude  e",  at  the  epoch [7285],  to  the  sum  of  the
inequalities,  which  are  computed  in [7292,  7306,  7308,  7312,  7314,  7317],  we  get  the

[7318o]

[73186] complete  value  of  v'"  [7318].

[7323o] ^  {^^^^) From  [7216',  7322]  we  have  /=348°,6213+^.153",8  ;  substituting  this  in
the  value  of  *'  [721 1],  we  get ^  =  200°—/  =  — l48o,6213— <.153'',8  ;  hence,

[7328]

VIII.xii.<§>30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  265

s'"  =  (l—x"').3°,4352.sin.(i;"'— 3480,6213— ^.153",8).  [7323]

Substituting  the  value  of  x'"  [7209],  we  shall  have,

s'"  =  2°,98051.sin.(t;"'+5P,3787— ^.153",8).  [7324]

The term r".sm.(v"'-{-p^t-^A2), which occurs in the  expression  of s'" [7324]
[6430  line  5,  6298a:],  corresponds  to  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  orbit  of
the  fourth  satellite  to  the  fixed  plane  ;  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  ascertain
the  values  of  V"  and  ^3. Delambre  has  found,

/'"  ==  ~-2771",6  ; [7352  line  2]  [7325]

and  in  1750,

A3  =  83^,2986 1 . [7353  line  2]  [7326]

The  value  of  p^  relative  to  this  term,  is 7682",64  [7245]. To  reduce  it [7327]
to  the  moveable  vernal  equinox  of  the  earth,  ive  must  subtract  the  precession
154",63  [7176c]. Hence  the  term  of  s'"  [7324]  becomes,

s'"  =  — 2771",6.sin.(v'"-f  83o,29861  +  ^.7528",01).  [7329]

Delambre  has  found,  by  comparing  the  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  that
the  value  of  I",  relative  to  the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite,  is  /"  =  — 2283",9  [7330]
[7415]  ;  and  the  value  of  A2,  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  1750,  is
A2  =  208^,32562  [7415].  Moreover,  the  corresponding  value  of  p  is  [7331]
^2  =  28375",48  [7238]  ;  and  by  subtracting  from  it  the  precession  154",63
[7328],  we  obtain  28220",85,  for  the  annual  tropical  motion  of  the  node  of
the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite,  upon  its  fixed  plane.  Therefore  the  part  of  s",
relative  to  this  motion,  is,*

sin.(«'"+V)  =— sin.(v"'+>i''+200O)  =  —sm.(v'"-\-5l°,S181—t.l53",3) ;  [73236]

consequently  the  value  of  /"  [TSi^S']  becomes,

/"=  (X'"— l)/.sin.(r'"-|-^')  =  (1— X'").^.sin.(«'"+51°,3787— M53",8).  [7323c]

Now 510,3787  =  400°— 348^,6213, and ^  =  3^,4352 [7319];  hence  the  last  of  the [7323rf]
expressions  [7323c],  becomes  as  in  [7323]  ;  and  by  substituting the  value  of  X'"  [7209],
it  becomes  as  in  [7324]. We  may  observe  that,  if  we  place  three  accents  on  /,  X,  v,  in
the  value  of  s  [6357/],  we  shall  get  the  corresponding value  of  /'  [7323/]  ;  and  by [7323e]
substituting  its  value  [7323c],  also  6'  [7323rf],  and X'" [7209],  we  get [7323^],  which
will  be  used  in  [7344a,  &;c.]  ;

s"'=i:,{r'-L').sm.{v'''+pt-\-A)={l-\''').l\{L-Lysm.{v'''^^^  [7323/]

;=(l-X"').3°,4352.sin.(t;'"-f51°,3787-^.153",8)=2o,98051.sin.(«'"+51o,3787-<.153",8). [732%]

*  (3594) The  term  of  s",  here  treated  of,  is  that  in  [6429  line  4]  ;  and  by  substituting .-ooq
^/ 1^  =  I" [6422,  &.C.],  it  becomes s"  =  I". sm.{yi"'\-pJt-\-A^). We  must  substitute,  in  this
VOL.  IV.  67

[7332]

266

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[7333]

[7334]

[7335]

[7336]

[7337]

[7338]

s"  =  _2283",9.sin.(t;"+208°,32562  +  ^.28220",85).
To  obtain  the  corresponding  part  of  s'", we  must  multiply  the  coefficient  of

r"

this  term  by  — ,  and  this  fraction  is  — 0,1965650  [7241]  ; hence  we  get

the  following  term  of  s'";*

s'"  =  448",93.sin.(t?'"+208o,32562-}-/.28220",85).
Delambre  found  that  the  value  of  /',  relative  to  the  peculiar  inclination
of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite  to  its  fixed  plane,  is  /' =  — 5152",2
[7471];  and  the  corresponding  value  of  a,  in  1750,  is  Ai  =  285°,20,.t
The  value  of  p  relative  to  this  inclination  is  p^  =  133870",4  [7233].
Subtracting  from  it  the  precession  154",63  [7176c],  ive  obtain  133715",77,
for  the  annual  tropical  motion  of  the  node  of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite
upon  its  fixed  plane. Therefore  the  part  of  5'  relative  to  this  motion  is, .

s'  =  — .5152",2.sin.(i;'4-285°,20,  +  /.133715",77).

expression,  the  value  of  p^t-^-A^^  which  is  computed  in  [7331,  7332],  namely,
^^<-|-A,  =  208°,3'2562-f^.28220",85;  also  for  l"  its  value  — 2283",9  [7330],  then  it
becomes  as  in  [7333].  For  the  sake  of  distinctness,  we  have  placed  the  proper  indices
g,  2)  below  the  quantities  p,  a,  in  [7324',  &;c.,  7331],  though  they  are  not  inserted  in
this  part  of  the  original  work,  notwithstanding  they  are  used  in  [6430,  &c.].

*  (3595)  If  we  suppose  the  term  of  s''  [7333]  to  correspond  to  that  in  [6429  line  4],  we
shall  have  — 2283",9=^/Z,=Z"  [6422,&c.];  and  _p,<-|-A,= 208°, 32562 ■f^.28220",85.
The  corresponding  term  of  s'"  [6430 hne 4],  becomes,  by  the  substitution  of  ^^'h^^l'"
[6422,  &;c.],  s'"  =l"'.sm.{v"'-\-pJ.-\-A^',  using  the  preceding  value  of  jOg^+Aj,  or  that
which  depends  on  p„  [7238].  Now  for  the  angle  p^  we  have  /'"  =  — 0,1965650.Z"
[7241],  as  in  [7334]  ;  and  if  we  substitute  it  in  s'"  [73355],  it  becomes
/'  =  — 0,1965650.Z".sin.(7r+p,<+Aj;  and  by  using  Z"  =  — 2283'',9  [7335«],  it  is
reduced  to  the  form  [7335].  We  must  proceed  in  the  same  manner  in  finding  the  term  of
/"  [7340],  corresponding  to  the  values  p,  [7233]  and  V"  [7236].  We  may  neglect  the
[7335e]  term  depending  on  p,  V"  [7226,  7229],  considering  the  smallness  of  the  coefHcient
— 0,0000995  [7229] ;  and  also  that  the  corresponding  value  of  Z  is  so  small  that  it  is
wholly  neglected  in  the  general  expression  of  the  latitude  s  [7522J.

t  (3596)  This  angle,  in  the  original  work,  is  303^,76542,  being  too  great  by
[7336a] 18^,56542,  as  we  have  already  observed  in  [72816,  Sec.]. This  correction  is  given  in  page

xxii  of  the  last  Tables  of  the  Satellites,  by  Delambre.  We  have  inserted  the  corrected
[73366] value  285'^ ,20c, using  the  letter  ^  as  in [602U']  ; observing  that  this  corrected  angle

occurs  in  several  places,  as  in  [7338, 7340,  7352,  &tc.].

[73326]
[7332c]

[7335a]

[73356]

[7335c]
[7335rf]

VIII.  xii.  §  30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  267

To  obtain  the  corresponding  part  of  5'",  we  must  multiply  the  coefficient  of

;///  [7339]

this  term  by  — ;  and  this  fraction  is  found  in  [7236]  to  be  equal  to
— 0,0009312;  hence  we  get,  in  s'",  the  following  term  ;

s'"  =  4",80.sin.(t;"'+283°,20,  +  r.l33715",77).  ,  [7340]

It  now  remains  to  consider  the  inequality,

/'  =  0,001447815.(/'"— L').sin.(t/"— 2C7— ;7r--A)  ;  [7341]

which  is  given  in  [6934].  If  we  suppose  that  the  value  of  p  corresponds
to  the  motions  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Jupiter,  we  shall  have,  as  in
[6346,  6355J],

L-^l'"  =  x'".(L— L')  ;  [7342]

r—L  =  (1-^V").(X— /.')  ;  [7343]

therefore,*

/'  =  (1  ->!"XL—L).^m.{v"'^pt^A),  [7344]

is  the  latitude  of  the  satellite  above  Jupiter'' s  orbit,  supposing  it  to  be  moved [7344']
upon  its  fixed  plane  [6357 — 6338] ;  and  we  have  found,  in  [7324,  &c.],  that
this  latitude  [7344]  is  represented  by

r  =  2^,98051.sin.(t;'"+51°,3787— tl53",8).  [7345]

Hence  the  preceding  inequality  of  5'"  [7341]  becomes,

5'"  =  2^,98051  x0,001447815.sin.(«"'—2C/—51°,3787+M53",8)  ;  [7346]

or,  by  reduction,

s"'  =  43",15.sin.(i;'"— 2C7— 6lo,3787+/.153",8).  [7347]

Among  the  other  terms  contained  in  the  expression,

s'"  =  0,001447815.(Z'"— L').sin.(i;"'— 2C/— p^— a)  ; [6934]  [7348]

the  only  one  which is  sensible,  is  that  which  corresponds  to  the  peculiar
inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  to  its  fixed  plane. In  this case
L'  =  0  [6415],  since  the  position  of  Jupiter's  orbit  is  not  sensibly  altered  by [7349]
the  action  of  the  satellites. IVIoreover  we  have,  by  what  has  been  said  in
[7324',  7329],

*  (3597) The  expression  of  s"'  [7344]  is  the same  as  that  in [7323/], using  the
symbol  2'  as  in  [6324'J. The  terms  under  this  symbol  in [732.3/],  are  reduced  to  one
term  of  the  form  [7323^],  which  is  the  same  as  that  in  [7345]. Comparing  the  first  of [73445]
the  expressions  [7323/]  with  the  last  of  [7323^],  we  find  tliat  we  may  change  ^.(l"'—L') [7344c]
into  2°,9805l, and yt-^-x into 51°,3787 — ^.153",8. Making the  same  changes in [7344(i]
[7341],  after  having  prefixed  the  symbol  1/  to  the  terms  in  the  second  member,  we  get
[7346]  ;  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7347].

268  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7350]  l"',sin.(v"'-\-p.,t+AO  =  — 2771",6.sin.(i;"'+83°,29861+^.7528",01)  ;

hence  the  preceding  term  [7348]  becomes,*
[7351]  5'"  =  — 4",01.sin.(v"'--2t7— 83°,29861— ^7528",01).

Connecting  together  these  different  terms  of  the  latitude  5"'  of  the  fourth
satellite  above  Jupiter's  orbit,  we  obtain,t

5"'  =  2°,98051  .sin.(y'"H-5P,3787— ^.153",8)  1

— .2771",6  .  sin.(i;"'+83^29861+^.7528",01)  2

+  448",93.sin.(v'"+208°,32562+^.28220",85)  3

t''^^^  ^ 4",80.sin.(2;"'+285°,20,  +  /.133715",77)  4

+ 43",15.sin.(i;"'— 2C7— 5P,3787+M53",8)  5

— 4",01.sin.(?j'"— 2(7— 83^29861— i.7528",01).  6

In  the  eclipses  of  the  fourth  satellite,  and  in  the  eclipses  of  Jupiter  by  the
same  satellite,  these  expressions  of  v'"  and  s'"  become  more  simple  ;  for  we
[7353^ may  supposed 2n  =  2©'", 2U=  2v"' ;  and  then  we  shall  have,  at  the  times
of  these- eclipses,^

r7351al *(3598) We  obtain  from  [7350]  ^^+ a,  or  rather  pJ-{- a ^=83", 29861 +t.l5QS", Oh

and Z'"=— 277l",6, or t—L' =  —211l",6 [7349]; hence,
[73516]  0,001447815.(Z'"— i')=— 4",01.

Substituting  this  in  [7348],  it  becomes  as  in  [7351] ;  using  the  value  o[  pt-^A,  or  rather
[7351c] Pst-^'As  [7351a]. It  is  unnecessary  to  notice  the  other values  of  p, depending  on  the

terms  in  [7352  lines  3,  4,  &z.c.],  as  the  coefBcients  are  too  small  to  be  noticed ;  the  greatest
[7351cr| of  them  is  448",93 [7352  line  3],  being  hardly  a  sixth  part  of  the  preceding  term;  aad,

of  course,  the  coefficients  will  not  be  one  sixth  part  of  that  in  [7351].

f  (3599) The  expression  of  /'  [7352]  is  the  sum  of  the  terms  which  are  contained  in
[7324,  7329,  7335,  7340, 7347, 7351]  respectively.

X  (3600)  It  is  evident  from  the  definitions  in  [6023^?,  6024/],  that,  in  these  eclipses,
'•  "-'  0'",  n  are  equal,  or  differ  by  200°;  so  that  we  may  put  generally  2n  =  20'".  Also
[7353&]  from  [6022y,  6023c],  v'",  [7  are  equal,  or  differ  by  200°  ;  therefore  we  may  put  2 C7=2«'".
[7353c]  In  like  manner,  in  the  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  we  may  put  2 11=20",  2C^=2t?";
[7353cri  in  those  of  the  second  satellite,  2n=  2©',  2C7=  2v' ;  and  in  those  of  the^rs^  satellite,
[7353€] 2n  =  20, 2U—2v.

^(3601)  Substituting  2n==  2©'"  [7353']  in  [7318  line  10],  it  vanishes.  The  same
'■  •' substitution  being  made  in  the  term  [7318  line  11],  it  becomes,

[73546  ]  +66",94.sin.(^"'— 0'")  =  — 66",94.sin. (©'"—• sj'")  ;

connecting  this  with  the  term  in  [7318  line  1],  we  obtain  4-9198",62.sin.(0'"— in"'),  as  in
[7354  line  1]; and  the  whole  expression  of  1/" becomes  as  in [7354J. Again,  if  we

VIlLxii.  ^30.]

THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.

269

-Z3

)

ij'"  =  0'"-|.9198",62.sin.  (e'
+  42",14.sin.2.(0"
+ 0",27.sin.3.(e'"_^'")

—  28",36,.sin. (e"  — e'")

—  14",12.sm.2.(e"— e'")

—  2",95.siii.3.(e"— e'")

—  O",9O.sin.4.(e"_0"')

—  O",33.siri.5.(e"_0'")

—  220",73.sin. (0'"—^")

—  353",69,.sin.F

—  49",51.sin.(i.7681",81+31o,9199).

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Values  of

J" J"
U , S ,

in  eclipses;

the
longitude
being
counted
from  the
moveable
vernal
equinox  of
the  earth.

[7354]

5'"  =  2^,97620  .siii.(2?"'H-51°,3787— M53",8)  1

— 2767",6  .sin.(y"'+83°,29861+/.7528",01)  2

+  448",93.sin.(2;"'+208°,32562+^.28220",85)  3

-f- 4",80.sin.(2;'"+285°,20,  +  ^.133715",77).  4

This  expression  of  s'"  gives  the  explanation  of  a  singular  phenomenon,  which
has  been  observed  in  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  fourth  satellite,  and  in
the  motion  of  its  nodes.  The  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  this  satellite  to  the
orbit  of  Jupiter,  appeared  to  be  nearly  constant,  and  equal  to  2°,7,  from  the

[7355]

[7356]

subsiitute  2C7=  2«'"  [7353'J  in [7352  line  5],  it  becomes,

43",15.sin.(— «"— 51°,3787-f-M53",8)=— 43",15.sin.(i>'"-f-51°,3787— M53",8);  [7354rf]

connecting  this  with  the  term  in  [7352  hne  1],  we  obtain,

2°,976195.sin.(i;'"+5r,3787— <.153",8),  [7354e]

as  in  [7355  line  1],  nearly. Making  the  same  substitution  of 2?7=2v'", in  the  term

[7352  line  6],  it  becomes +4",01.sin.(t;'"-j-83°,29S61+f.7528",01)  ;  and  by  connecting

it  with  the  term  in  [7352  line  2],  we  obtain — 2767",6.sin.(w'"+83°,298614-^.7528",01), [7354/]

nearly,  as  in [7355  line  2J. We  may  observe  that  the  arguments  of  the  inequalities  in

[7355  lines  1,2,3,4],  are  represented  by  Delambre,  for  brevity,  by  H,  /,  K,  L,  at  the [7354g-]

times  of  the  middle  of  the  eclipse  or  opposition. The  same  arguments  occur  in  the  values

of  s",  s,  s  [7427,  7482,  7522,  he]  ;  and  by  using  this  notation,  and  putting  V"  equal  to

the  mean  longitude  of  Jupiter  at  the  conjunction,  corrected  for  the  great  inequality,  we  have,

H=V"'-{-  51°,3787— ^.153",8;  [7354t]

I  =  V"'-\-  83°,29861-f^7528",01 ;  [7354A]

K  ==  F'"4-208°,32562-|-<.28220",85  ;  [7354^  ]

L  =  F'"+285°,20c  +  M337 1 5",77.  [7354m]

VOL.  IV.  68

270  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

year  1680  till  about  1760.  During  this  interval  the  nodes  had  a  direct
motion,  upon  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  of  eight  minutes  in  a  year.  Since
1760,  the  inclination  has  very  sensibly  increased.  We  may  obtain  the
inclination  of  the  orbit,  and  the  position  of  its  nodes,  at  any  given  epoch,  by

[73r)7]  giving  to.t  the  value  which  agrees  with  that  epoch.  We  shall  put  the
preceding  expression  of  5'"  under  the  form,*

[7358]  s'"  =  A.sm.v'" — B.cos.v'".

We  can  determine A and B, by putting  successively! i;'"=  100°, and
[7359]  ^

v'"  =  200^,  in  the  expression  of  s'".  —  will  be  the  tangent  of  the  longitude
of  the  node, and \/A^-{-B^ the inclination of the  orbit,  f This  being

[7357a]

*  (3602)  Any  one  of  the  lines  of  the  second  member  of  [7355],  may  be  put  under  the
form  A'.sin.[v"' — B') ;  A'  being  the  constant  coefficient  of  that  line,  and  — B'  the
constant  angle,  connected  with  v"\ If  we  suppose the  sign 2 of  finite  differences to

[73576]  include  the  terms  in  the  four  lines  of  [7355],  we  shall  have  s'"  =  ^.A'.s'm.{v'" — B').
Developing  this  by  [22]  Int.,  we  obtain,

[7357c  ]  //  ^  sm.v'".  ^.A\cos.B'—cos.v"\  2.  A'.s'm.B'.

[7357d] Now  putting 2.^'. cos.i?'=^, ^.A'.sm.B=B, it  becomes  as  in  [7358].

[7359a]

t  (3603)  Putting  v'"=  100°  in  [7358],  we  get  s"'  =  A;  and  if  we  put  v'"  =  200°,
it  gives  s"'=B.  Hence  it  appears  that  we  can  compute  the  value  of  A,  by  substituting
t;'"=100°  in  [7355];  and  the  value  of  B,  by  substituting  y'"==200°  in  [7355J.

X  (3604) It  appears,  from  [533a],  that  if  7  be  the  inclination  of  the  orbit,  and  6^  the

■' longitude of  the ascending  node,  we  shall have  very nearly,  for  the  expression  of  the

[73626] latitude  /''=7.sin.(t;'" — ^^)=7.cos.^^.sin.t;'" — 7.sin.^^.cos.i;'"  [22]  Int. Comparing  this  last

expression  of  s'"  with  that  in  [7358],  we  get,
[7362c  ]  A  =  7.cos.^^ ;  B  =  y.  sinJ^ .

Dividing  this  value  of  B  by  thai  of  A,  we  get  the  following  expression  of  tang.^^,  and  the
sum  of  their  squares  gives  the  value  of  7^;  hence  we  have,  as  in  [7359,  7360],

B  ,

[7362rf]  tang.^^  =  "TT  5  7  =  V^-^^+B^.

With  these  formulas,  and  those  in  [7359],  we  may  compute  the  values  of  A,  B,  7,  6'
^ ^J [7362]  ; for t  =  — 70, t  =  — 30, and t=lO; which  correspond  respectively  to  the

years  1680,  1720,  1760  ;  the  epoch  being  1750  [7281'j.  The  values  of  A  [7359,  7355],
r7362n ^°''^^sponding  to  these  times,  are  iwsitive  ;  therefore  the  values  of  6^  must be in  the  Jirst

or  fourth quadrant,  as  is  evident  from  the  expression  of  ^4  =  7.cos.^^  [7362c], 7  being

positive  ;  and  to  know  which  of  these  must  be  selected,  we  must  refer  to  the  value  of  B,
[7362g-] which  is  ne^«<?'t;e ;  so  that  7.sinJ^  [7362c] must  be  negative ; consequently/)^  must  be  in

VIII.  xii.'^ao.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  271

L7361]

premised, if we put successively t= — 70, t  =  — 30, ^=10, which
correspond  to  the  years  1680,  1720  and  1760,  we  shall  have,

Inclination.

Longitude  of  the  node.

1680,

2^7515;

346^,0191  ;

1720,

2V210;

348^,1186;

1760,

2^,7123  ;

352^,3238.

[7362]

1

2
3

If  we  represent  the  inclination  by  the  formula  2°,7515-f  M-f  Pf^, ^  being [7363]
the  number  of  Julian  years  elapsed  since  1680,  we  shall  have,  by  comparing
this  formula  with  the  three  preceding  inclinations,*

N  =  — 0°,001035 ;  P  =  0^0000068125.  [7364]

The  minimum  of  the  formula  corresponds tof ^  :=  75'"'"',963, or  to  the [7365]
year  1756. The  mean  of  the  three  preceding  inclinations  is  2*^,7283  ;  the

the  fourth  quadrant  of  the  circle. Tlie  calculations  of  the  author  in [7362] have  been
verified,  and  found  to  be  very  nearly  correct;  though  some  slight  discrepancies  were  found [7362/i]
in  the  fourth  decimal  place  of  the  inclination,  and  in  the  third  decimal  place  of  the  longitude
of  the  node.

*  (3605) We  shall  suppose  the  general  expression  of  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  y,  to ryqf.4  -i
be  represented,  as  in  [7363],  by

7  =  2°,7515+AV  +  Pi2.  [7ZMb]

t  being  the  time  elapsed  since  the  year  1680. Putting  <  =  0,  it  becomes  7  =  2°,7515,

as  in [7362  line  1]; then putting ^  =  40, and 7  =2° ,7210  [7362  line  2], we  get [7364c]

[7364rfJ;  lastly,  putting  ^  =  80 and 7  =  2%7I23 [7362  line  3],  we  get  [73o4e] ;

2°,75154-40.V+1600P  =  2%7210, or 0° , 0305+40 JV-f  1600P  =  0  ;  [7364</]

2°,7515+80iV-|-6400P=2°,7123, or 0°,0392+80iV+6400P  =  0.  [7364c]

Subtracting  a  quarter part  of  the second  of  these  equations  from  the first, we  obtain
0°,0207+20iV=0; whence JV=— 0°,001035, and 40iV=— 0°,0414. Substituting
this in [7364^^], we obtain 1600P  =0°,0414-0°,0305  =0°,0109  j consequently [7364g-]
P  =  0,0000068125. Hence  the  expression  of  7  [7364^*]  becomes,  as  in  [7364,  &c.],

7  =  2°,7515— 0°,001035.<  +  0°,0000068125.f^  [7364A]

I  (3606) The  minimum  value  of  7  [6364A],  is  found  by  putting  its  differential  equal  to
nothing,  which  gives 0  =  — 0°,001035+0°,000013625.^  ; whence f  =  75,963, as in '^''^^^"^
[7365] ;  and  this  value  would  be  somewhat  augmented,  by  correcting  the  calculation  for ^  J

the  small  mistakes  which  are  spoken  of  in  [7362A]. Substituting  this  value  of  t  in  [7364A], [7365c]
we  get  7  =  2°,71  nearly,  for  tlie  minimum  value  of  7.

272  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

r7365'l  ^^'^^  annual  motion  of  the  node,  from  1680  to  1760,  is  7',88.*  These
results  agree  perfectly  with  those  which  have  been found by  astronomers,

[7366]  from  the  observed  eclipses  during  this  interval.  Since  the  year  1760  the
inclination  has  varied  by  a  very  sensible  quantity. The  preceding  value  of

[7367J  s'"  [7355],  makes  the  inclination,  in  1800,  equal  to  2°,8657,t  and  the
longitude  of  the  node  equal  to  355°, 881 7.  Observations,  by  conlirming
these  results,  compel  us  to  give  up  the  hypothesis  of  a  constant  inclination;

[7368]  and  we  should  have  found  it  difficult  to  discover  the  law  of  these  variations,
without  the  assistance  of  the  theory.

To  obtain  the  duration  of  an  eclipse  of  the fourth satellite,  we  shall
resume  the  formula  [7080]  ;

[7369]
[7370]

t=.T.{l-X).^~{li-py,'j/£^±:\^/[i+hX+^^^

in  which  T  represents  the  half  of  the  mean  duration  of  an  eclipse  of  the
satellite  in  its  nodes  [7069].  Delambre  has  found,  by  the  mean  of  all  the
observations  which  he  has  used, that  this  semi-duration  is  equal  to 9942" ;

[7371]  and  since  the  discovery  and  use  of  achromatic  telescopes,  he  finds  this
semi-duration to be  diminished  about 52", by  the  discussion  of  all  the

[7372] eclipses observed since that epoch. Therefore we shall suppose

[7373]  T  =9890"  [=2",22'",25^  sex.],  as  in  [7565].  The  symbol  ^  [7073]
represents  the  mean  synodical  motion  of  the  satellite,  during  the  time  T;

[7374] and  we  havet |3  =  23613". The  value  of  p'  [7049]  is

*  (3607) The  longitudes  of  the  node  in  1680,  1760,  are  346°,0191,  and  352°,3238
[7362  lines  1,  3]  respectively  ;  so  that  the  motion  in  80  years  is
[73666  ]  352°,3-238— 346°,0]  91  =  6°,3047  ;

dividing  this  by  80,  we  get  the  annual  motion  7',88,  as  in  [7365'].

f  (3608) Putting ^=50  in  [7355],  and  then  successively i;'"=100°, v"'  =  200°,

[7367a] ^g  obtain  the  values  of  s"\  which  are denoted respectively  by  A,  B,  in  [7359]. With

[73676] these  values  of  A,  B,  we  compute,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [7362^?],  the  corresponding

inclination  7,  and  the  longitude  of  &^ ;  which  are  found  to  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  those

[7367c] given  by  the  author  in  [7367]. We  may  observe  that  the  formula  [7364/t]  is  not  used  for

this  purpose,  because  the  value  of  <=1800 — 1680  =  120, is  so  great  that  it  becomes

necessary  to  notice  terms  of  the  order  t^,  which  are  neglected  in  that  formula.

X  (3609) Dividing  the  expression  of  T=9890"  [7373],  by  the  number  of  seconds  in
[7374a] ^  j^^.^^  ^^^^^  36525000", we  get T=  0,0002707735,  expressed  in  parts  of  a  Julian

VIII.xii.<^30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  273

P
P'  =  -

[7375]

^_(1-X0 a'

and  we  have  found,  in  [7159], p  =  0,0713008  ; hence  we  deduce,*  [7375']

p'  =  0,0729603.  [7376]

dv'"
The  value  of  X  [7071] is  very  nearly  represented  by  f X=  -jjrr — 1; 17376^]

therefore  if  we  notice  only  the  greatest  term  of  v'",  we  shall  have,

X  =  O,O145543.cos.(0"'— :.'")•  [7377]

We  have  also  seen,  in  [7094], that  the  value  of T  must  be  multiplied  by
the  factor,  J

'  +  1  ^^M  -  ^^  -W]-  ■^•'=°'-  ^  =  *'="=*'"■  °*' ^  l^^^^J '-  '"*''

year;  multiplying  this  by  the  annual  sy nodical  motion  v!" — iW  =  87205380"  [6025n],
we  get  the  synodical  motion  in  the  time  T  equal  to  (n'" — JW).T=  23613"  =:p,  as  in
[7374].

a'"
*(3610) We  have  —  =  sin.  1530",864  [70451]: \  =  0,105469  [7547]. Substituting

2)'  •- ■•  ° [7375a]

these  and p  =  0,0713008  [7375'], in p'  [7375],  it  becomes  as  in  [7376].

dv  '"

t(3611) We  have,  as  in  [7071], X  =  ^-;;;-^^  -  1  ; moreover,  rft;'" is  to <" ^^3^^^^

as  vl"  to  n"'— M,  nearly  [6023c,  of,  73746]; hence  X  becomes  very  nearly  as  in  [7376'J.
Substituting,  in  this  expression  of  X,  the  chief  term  of  v'"  [7318  line  1],  it  produces,  by [73766]
using  [7290],  the  expression,

9265",56.  "■-■'!:--':'  =  9265'',56  X  B^53°,46322Uos.(e--.»0  _
n  at  n

Substituting  n"' =  8754°,2591 [6025^],  and  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  636620",

it  becomes X=  O,O]4553.cos.(0"'— to"'),  as  in  [7377]  nearly.

X  (3612) If  we  change  n  into  w"', artd  a  into  a'",  in  the  expression  [7094],  we  shall
obtain  the  factor  of  T  corresponding  to  the  fourth  satellite,  namely,

and  by  using  the  symbol F=  Mt-^E—I  [60236],  it  becomes  as  in  [7378]. Finally,

a'"  [73786]

substituting  the  values  of  -~ , \  [7375a], M  [6840], and 2fl  =  61213",l  [68826],

or  fl=30606",5,  it  becomes 1— 0,0006087.cos.  F;  being  nearly  the  same  as  in  [7379]. [7378c]
voL»  IV.  69

274  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

H  being  the  excentricity  of  Jupiter's  orbit. Hence  this  factor  becomes,
[7379]  1— 0,0006101. cos.r=  factor  of  T  [7369].

We  shall  put E,  = ^-^■^-  , and  we  shall  have,*

[7381]

[7380]

Symbol  P

^ ^==1,352380  .sin.(i;"'+  5P,3787— M53",8)  1

— 0,125759.sin.(v'"+  83^,29861 +  ^.7528",01)  2

+  0,020399.sin.(i;'"+208°,32562+^.28220",85)  3

+  0,000218.sin.(i;'"+285°,20,  +  ^.133715",77).  ^ 4

This  being  premised,  if  we  neglect  the  square  of  X,  the  quantity  under  the
[7382] radical,  in  the  expression  of  t  [7369],  will  become 1+Z— ^^ ; and  if  we

Time  of a^so  neglect  the  products  of X  and  ^  by yj,  we  shall  obtain,!

the  emer-  (iV

sion  or

j;~ t  =  — 366",832.  p  ±  9890".(1— X— 0,0006101.cos.F).v/T+X-?.

[7381a]

*  (3613) From  the  values  of  ^,  / [7374,  7376], we  obtain ^^  =  ^^^^5
multiplying  this  by  s'"  [7355],  it  becomes  as  in  [7381],  using  the  abridged  symbol  [7380].

[7383a]

t  (3614)  The  factor  T.(l— X)  =  9890".(1— X)  [7373],  which  occurs  in  the
expression  of  t  [7369],  being  multiplied  by  the  factor  of  T  [7379],  neglecting  terms  of  the
order  IfX,  becomes,

[73836]  9890".(1—X— 0,0006101. cos.  F);

and  this  is  to  be  substituted  for T.(l — X) in  [7369]. Now  the  radical  expression  in

[7383c]  [7369]  may  be  put  under  the  form  ±v/l+X— ^2,  as  is  evident  by  multiplying  together
the  factors  composing  this  radical,  neglecting  X'^,  and  substituting  ^  [7380]  ;  hence  we
get  the  term  depending  on  the  radical  in  [7383].  In  the  term  of  [7369]  without  the
radical,  which  is  very  small,  we  may  suppose  the  factor  [7383&]  to  be  simply  equal  to

[7383ci] 9890";  so  that  the  term  itself  becomes — -.  (l+p')^.^ . But  from  [7380]  we

have  (l-|-p')2.r2^^2^2^  whose  differential,  divided  by  2,  is  (l+p')2.s"W'=  p^.^rf^;
[7383e  ]  0,0

hence  the  differential  expression  [7383£ZJ  becomes  — 9890".i3.  ^-|  5  and  by  substituting  the

value  of  ^  [7374],  then  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  it  becomes  as  in  the  first  term  of
[7383/] [7383]. The  whole  duration  of  the  eclipse  t'  [7082],  is  derived  from  that  of  i  [7080],  by

retaining  only  the  radical  part  of  the  expression,  and  multiplying  it  by  ±2. The  same

[7383^] process,  being  performed  in  the expression of  t  [7383],  gives  the  whole  duration  of  the

, eclipse  t  ,  as  in  [7385]. If  we  now  examine  into  some  of  the  largest  terms,  which  have

been  neglected  in  computing  the  value  of  t,  or  t'  [7383,  7385],  we  shall  find  that  they  are

not  in  general  of  any  importance. The  most  noted  term  is  that  spoken  of  in [7096],

[7383i  ] requiring  that  X  should  be  increased  under  the  radical,  by  the  quantity  ± ,  which

VIII.  xii.  §  30.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FOURTH  SATELLITE.  275

It  is  easy  to  deduce,  from  this  expression,  the  times  of  the  immersion  and
emersion  of  the  satellite  ;  observing  that  t  expresses  the  time  elapsed  from  [7384]
the  conjunction  of  the  satellite  [7070,  7055]  ;  the  conjunction  being
estimated  by  means  of  its  projected  place  upon  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  ;  and  the
time  from  the  conjunction  can  be  determined  by  means  of  the  tables  of
Jupiter,  and  the  preceding  expressions  of  v"\  s'"  [7354,  7355].  The  whole
duration  t'  of  the  eclipse  is  represented  by  orthe""

eclipse.

t'  ==  19780".(1  — Z— 0,0006101.cos.F).v/l+X— f  =  duration  of  the  eclipse. [7385]

IS

[7383^]
[7383i ]

[7383m]

nearly  of  the  order  ^'-f^-lj  j  ^s  is  evident  from  [TSSSe] ;  observing  that  p'  [7376]  is  so

small  that  it  may  be  neglected. Now \%-w-)  niay  be  considered  as  of  the  order  l,  at

its  maximum,  and  is  generally  much  less.  For  if  we  notice  only  the  chief  term  of  ^
[7381  line  1],  and  represent  it,  for  brevity,  by ^=A.sm.[v"'-\-B)^ we  shall  have,  very

nearly, — 4:  =  A.cos.{v"'-\-B)  ; whence,

lif  =  AKsm.{v"'^B).cos.{v"'^B)  =  \AKsm.{2v"'-^2B),  [7383^]

dv

which  we  shall  put  equal  to  U,  for  brevity,  so  that h  =  \^A  —  :^^^.sin.^(2«'"-|-2J5) ;

and  this  varies  from  0  to  its  maximum  ^^^  =  i.(l,35)^  which  is  less  than  unity.
Moreover  |3  [7374]  is  about  ^V  of  the  radius  ;  hence  p~  =  (^V)^  =  t?^  nearly  ;  so  that
if  X — ^  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  unity,  the  radical \/\-\-X—^ [7383] will  be [7383n]

varied  by  ^^^6  =  •  nearly, in  consequence  of this variation  in  the value of  X.

Multiplying  this  by  the  factor T=9890"  [7383],  it  becomes lTfb  =  T.h  nearly; [7383o]
which,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  6,  will  not  be  in  general  of  anyjmportance. This
term  however  must  be noticed  when  the  radical y/l-f-X— ^ becomes very small  in
consequence  of  the  great  latitude  of  the  satellite,  as  is  observed  in  [7094' — 7096]. We [7383pJ

may  find,  by  a  similar  process,  that  the  terms  of  the  order sin.^Vi.f  —  j  ?  &^c.,  which  are

neglected  in  [7062,  7059,  Sec],  produce  nothing  of  importance  in  the  values  of t,  i' ;

and  the  same  is  to  be  observed  relative  to  the  other  quantities,  which  are  neglected  in  these l ^J

calculations.

276  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

CHAPTER  XIII.

THEORY OF THE THIRD SATELLITE.

31. We  have  found,  in  the  preceding  chapter  [7301,  7296],  that

[7386]  e"  = 11  °,39349  -f  ^.20420°,579040  ;

[7387]  .."=  343°,82067  +  ^.29164",43.

We  have  also  seen,  in  [7303],  that  the  equation  of  the  centre,  corresponding
to  this  satellite,  is

[7388]  6V"  =  1 709",05.sin.(e"— z.").

This  satellite  has another  equation  of the  centre corresponding to the
perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  [7127],  and  represented  by

[7389]  6v"  ==  756",6]  .sin.(e"— :;;"').

The  expression  of  6v"  [6846] becomes,  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  of
m,  m',  m'"  [7142—7145],*

*  (3615) We  have,  as  in  [6240n,  p,  q,  s%

[7390a]  nt—n"t-\-s—s"  =  e  — e"  ;  n't—ift-{-s'—s"  =  e'— e" ;

[7390i  ]  n'"t—n"ti-s'"—s"  =  e'"— e" ;  2n"t—2Mt-\-2s"—2E  =  2q"—  2n  ;

[7390c ]^  nt—2n't-\-£—2s'-{-g^t-\-r^  =  e— Se'-f^"  j  nt—2n'i-\-s—2/+g,t-\-r^  =  e— Se'-fw " ;

[7390rf] n"t—2Mt-\-s"—2E-\-gj-{-r^=e"-2n-\-i^" ;  7i"t-2Mt+s"-2E-{-g,t-\-r,=e"-2n-j-!;i"'.

Substituting  die  values  [7390cf,  6]  in  [6846],  also  the  valuesof  m,  m',n/'  [7142,7143,7145],
we  get,  by  a  very  easy  numerical  calculation,  the  values  [7390] .

[7392]

Vni.  xiii.  pi.]  THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.  277

6v"= 4",21.sin. (0—0")  1

— 808",20.sin. (0'—©")  2

—  ll",84.sin.2.(0'  — e")  3

—  2",37.sin.3.(0'— 0")  4

—  45",29.sin. (©"—0"')  5  [7390]
+154",47.sin.2.(0"— ©'") 6

+  10",86.sin.3.(©"— ©'")  7

+ 2",53.sin.4.(0"— ©'")  8

+ 2",39.sin.(2©"— 2n).  9

The  theorem  on  the  epochs  of  the  three  inner  satellites  [6628^],  becomes,*

0—0"  =  200°  +  3q'—Sq"  ;  [7391]

therefore  the  two  terms,

4",21.sin. (e— ©"); [7390  line  1]  1

— 2",37.sin.3.(0'— ©")  ; [7390  line  4]  2

lay  be  connected  together  in  one  single  term,  6v"  =  — 6",58.sin.(30' — 3©"). [7393]

Substituting  in  the  expression  of  Q"  [6862],  the  value  of  2-  =  29009",8

^/  [7393']

[7190],  relative  to  the  apsides  of  the  third  satellite,  also —  =  0,2152920

[7192],  corresponding  to  this  value  of  g,  and  —2h"  =  1709",05  [7388],  we  [7394]
shall  find,  that  the  inequality  6v"  =  Q".sm.(nt—2n't-{-s—2s'-]-gt+r)  [6852],  [7394^
becomes,!

*  (3616) Adding  3©' — 3©"  to  both  members  of  the  equation  [6628g-],  we  get  the
expression  of  ©-©"[7391]; whose  sine gives sin.(©-0")  = -sin. 3  (©'-©")  ; substituting
this  in  [7392  line  1],  it  becomes — 4"521.sin.3(0'— 0"). The  sum  of  this,  and  that  in [7.3926]
[7392  line  2],  becomes  as  in  [7393].

t  (3617) The  part  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  third  satellite  6v" [6243],
depending  on  the  angle  g  or  ^2=29009",8 [7393' or  7190],  has  for  its  coefficient  the ['''^^^"l
quantity  — 2^^"  h^,  which  is  represented  by — 2h"  in  [6229c?  line  5];  and  the  coefficient
of this term of Sv" is 1709",5  [7388]; hence we  have — 2A"=  1709",05, or [73946]
h"  ~  — 854",525. Now  for  this  value  of  g  we  have,  in  [7192],

A'  =  0,2152920.A"  =  —0,2 152920  X854",525  =— 183",97.  [7394c]

Substituting  these  values  of  g^,  h',  h",  and  that  of  m'  =  0,232355  [7143],  in Q"  [6862], [7394rf]
we  get Q"  =  — 95",18  ;  hence  the  inequality  [6852  or  7394']  becomes,

(h"=z—95",l8.sm.(nt—2n't-\-s—2e'-\'g^t-{-r^)  ;  [7394c]

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7395],  by  using  the  first  of  the  expressions  [7390c] ;
and  we  finally  obtain  the  form  [7396],  by  substituting  the  value  of © — 20'  [7395'].  '■ •'^

VOL. IV.  70

278  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7395]  hv"  =  — 95",1 8.sin.(0— 20'+^").

[7395'] ^°^  ^®  ^^^®  ®"^®'  =  2OO^+0'-2e"  [7391]  ;  hence  the  preceding  inequality
becomes,

[7396]  ^v"  =  95",1 8.sin.(0'~20"+^")-

Substituting  in  Q"  [6862]  the  value  of  g  or  £-3  =  7959",  105  [7195],  relative
[7396']  ^  ^^ J,,

to  the  apsides  of  the  fourth satellite, and for -— , — -, the  quantities

[7197,  7198],  depending  upon  this  value  of  g, observing  also  that  we  have
as  in  [7127,  71276],
[7397]  — 2/i"'  =  9265",56,

we  find  that  the  same  inequality  [7394']  becomes,  for  this  case,*

[7398]  ^v"  =  43",58.sin.(0'— 20'''+xn'").

The  inequality  [6885],
[7399] 6v"  =  — 149",96.  ^  1+ ^_£^^^^ ^  .sm.(Mt^E—I\

I ='2-""'  •(M=-k'''){i+  4^ + 4^,)  s

becomes,  by  substituting  the  values  of  m,  m',  m",  k,  f
[7400]  ^v"  =  — 147",42.sin.F.

The  inequality  [6874,  6876],  corresponding  to  the  third  satellite,  is,  J

1  ^  M  h"
[7401]  6v"  =  — ; .  sin. (/i"/— 2M+s"— 2i:+^^+r)  ;

g  *(3618) We  get  from  [7397] A'"  =  — 4632",78 ; and  for  the value  of  g or  g^

[7396'J,  we  have,  as  in  [7197,  7193],
[73986]  h!  =  0,0173350.^'  =  — 80",31  j  K'  =  0,08I6578.A'"  =  — 378",30.

Substituting  tliese  values  of  A',  h",  g, also  m'  [7143],  in  [6862],  we  get  Q"  =  — 43",58  ;
[7398c] hence  the inequality  [6852]  beconries 8v"  =  — 43",58.sin.(?if— 2n'/+£ — 2/-|-^3< -f  r^)  ;

and  by  using  the  second  expression  [7390c],  it  becomes  5v"  = — 43"j58.sin.(e — 2e'-fTy").
[7398rf] Now  substituting  the  value  of  © — 2e'  [7395' j,  it  becomes  as  in  [7398].

t  (3619) Substituting V—Mt-^E-I  [7313]  in  [7399],  using  also  the  values  of
[7400a] ^^  jy^ ^^  ^^  ^,^  ^,^  ^^  ^^  ^,  j-g^g^^  gg^^^  ^^^^^^  6797-6799,  7142-7144],  it  becomes

as  in  [7400]  ;  as  we  have  found  by  verifying  the  calculation.

[7401o]  t  (3620)  Substituting  N—n—g=0  [6876]  in  [6874],  it  becomes,  for  the  third
[74016]  satellite,  as  in  [7401]  ;  and  the  coefficient  of  this  inequality  is  reduced  to  the  form
[7401c]  — 0,0061 926.A",  by  using  [6879].  Substituting  A"  =—854",525  [73946],  corresponding
r7401rf]  ^°  ^^^  ^°°^  ^"  ^^  becomes  5",29.s\n.{n"t—2Mi-\-^'—'2E-{-gJ-{-r^);  which  is  easily
reduced  to  the  form  in  [7402  line  1],  by  using  the  first  equation  [7390^]. In  Tke  manner.

[7402]

Longitude

v"

in  eclipses  j

counted

from  the

earth's

moveable

vernal

equinox.

VIII.xiii.«§>31.]  THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.  279

and  on  account  of  the  double  excentricity  of  the  third  satellite,  it  produces
the  two  following  inequalities,

dv"  =  5",29.sin.(0"— 2n  +  ^")  1

+2",34.sin.  (e"— 2  n  +  ^'").  2

It  now  remains  to  consider  the  equation  of  the  libration  of  the  third  satellite  ;
but  it  follows,  from  [7275 — 7277],  that  this  equation  [7277]  is  not  a  tenth
part  of  that  of  the  first  or  second  satellite  [7275,  7276]  ;  and  as  neither  of
these  is  of  sufficient  magnitude  to  become  sensible  by  observation,  it  is  [7403]
evident  that  this  equation  of  the  third  satellite  must  be  wholly  insensible.
Therefore,  by  collecting  together  all  these  inequalities  of  the  third  satellite,
we  obtain  the  following  expression  of  its  longitude  in  eclipses,  where  we  ^7404-1
may  suppose 2n  =  2o"  [7353c]  ;  *

i,"  =  0"  +  17O3",76.sin. (0"  — i.")  1

+  754",27.sin. {&" —v^")  2

—  808",20.sin. (0'  —  ©")  3

—  ll",84.sin.2.(0'  — 0")  4

—  6",58.sin.3.(0'— e")  5

—  45",29.sin. (0"— 0'")  6

+ 154",47.sin.2.(0"— 0'")  7  t^'^^^]

+ lO",86.sin.3.(0"— 0'")  8

+ 2",53.sin.4.(©"— 0'")  9

+ 95",18.sin. (©'^20"+t3")  10

+ 43",58.sin. (0' —20"+:^"')  11

—  147",42.sin.F  12

by  using  — 2/i"==  756",61,  or  /i"  =  —378'V30  [73986],  corresponding  to  the  root  ^^3,  [7401c]
we  find  that  the  coefBcient  — 0,006 1926.A"  [7401  cj,  becomes  equal  to  2",34  ;  hence  we  [7401/]
get  the  expression  in  [7402  line  2],  by  using  the  second  of  the  equations  [7390^/].

*  (3621) Substituting  2n  =  2©"  [7404],  in  the  term  in  [7390  line  9],  we  find  that  it
vanishes. The  term  in  [7402  Hne  1]  becomes 5",29  sin.(-0"+z3")=-5^29.sin.(0"-^3") ;
connecting  this  with  that  in  [7388],  it  becomes  17O3",76.sin.(0" — -n"),  as  in  [7405  line  1]. [74046]
Lastly,  the  term  [7402  line  2] becomes 2",34.sin.(— 0"+^'")  =  — 2",34.sin.(0"— ^3'")  ; [7404c]
and  by  connecting  it  with  that  in  [7389],  we  get 754",27.sin.(0" — ro'"),  as  in  [7405  line  2]. [7404(fl
The  rest  of  the  terms  in [7405] are  the  same  as  those  in [7390,7396,7398,7400]; ^7404^-1
observing  that  the  two  terms  in [7390  lines  1,  4]  are  reduced to  one  in  [7393],  being  the
same  as  that  in  [7405  line  5].

280

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Gel.

[7406]

[7407]

[7408]
[7409]

[7410]
[7410']

[7411]
[7411']

In  the  motions  of  the  third  satellite  there  have  been  discovered  some  singular
variations^  arising  from  the  double  equation  of  the  centre  in  the  theory  of  this
satellite.  To  explain  these  variations,  Wargentin  had  recourse  to  two
particular  equations,  whose  periods  in  eclipses  were  twelve  and  a  half,  and
fourteen  years,  and  which  are,  in  fact,  two  equations  of  the  centre,  referred
to  apsides,  which  move  with  different  velocities  ;  but  having  been  compelled,
by  observation,  to  abandon  this  theory,  he  introduced,  instead  of  it,  the
supposition  of  a  variable  excentricity.  The  first  hypothesis  of  this  learned
astronomer  is,  as  we  have  just  seen,  conformable  to  nature ;  but  he  was
deceived  with  respect  to  the  periods  and  magnitudes  of  these  equations,
because  he  did  not  know  that  one  of  them  must  be  referred  to  the  apsides  of
the  fourth  satellite. We  have,  as  in  [7387,  7288],

73"  =  343^,82067  + ^.291 64",43;

^'"  =  200°,38054+^.  8113",735.
Comparing  these  two  equations  together,  we  find  that  the  perijoves  of  the
third  and  fourth  satellites  coincided  in  1682,*  and  then  the  coefficient  of  the
equation  of  the  centre  was  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  coefficients  of  the  two
partial  equations  [7405  lines  1,2],  that  is,  2458",03.  In  1777  the  perijove
of  the  third  satellite  was  further  advanced  by  200°  than  that  of  the  fourth,t
and  then  the  coefficient  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  was  equal  to  the
difference  of  the  coefficients  of  the  partial  equations  [7405  lines  1,  2],  or
949  ",49. These  results  are  entirely  conformable  to  observation.

[7409a]

[74096]

*  (3622)  Putting  the  expressions  of  to",  to'"  [7408,  7409],  equal  to  each  other,  we  get
t  =  — 68  nearly;  and  as  tiie  epoch  is  1750  [7281'],  this  time  corresponds  to
1750 — 68  =  1682.  In  this  case  the  arguments  of  both  the  inequalities  [7405  lines  1,2],
are  equal  to 0" — to"  ; and  their  sum  is

(17O3",76+754",27).sin.(0"— to")  =  2458",03.sin.(e"— to"),
as  in  [7410].

t  (3623) Putting  the  expression  of  to"  [7408]  equal  to
[7410o]  TO'"-f  200°  =  400°, 38054+^81 13",735 [7409],

we  get  f  =  27, corresponding  to  the  year  1750+27  =  1777,  as  in  [7410'].

this  value  of  to'"  =  to" — 200°,  in  the  term  [7405  line  2],  it  becomes,
[74106]  754",27.sin.(0"— to"+200°)=— 754",27.sin.(0"— to").

Connecting  this  with  the  similar  term  in  [7405  line  1],  it  becomes,
[7410c]  (1703",76-754",27).sin.(e"— to")  =  949",49.sin.(©"— to")  ;

as  in [7411].

Substituting

Vlll.xiii.^Sl.J  THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.  281

We  shall  noiv  consider  the  motion  of  this  satellite  in  latitude. The  term  of
5"  [6429  line  1],  namely,

5"  ==  (X"— l).d'.sin.(i;"+>F'),  [7412]

becomes,  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  of  x",  6',  V,*

s"  =  3°,34213.sin.(v"+5P,3787—^153",8).  [7413]

The  term 5"  = /".sin.(i;"+;?^+A), or sf' =  r.sm.(v"+p.2t+A^), which  is [7414]
included in the  same  expression  of 5" [6429  line  4, 6422,  &c.], and
corresponds  to  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the third  satellite,  is
represented  in  [7333]  in  the  following  manner,

s"  =  — 2283",9.sin.(i;"+208°,32562+^.28220",8o).  [7415]

If  we  substitute,  in  the  term  of  s"  [6429  line  5,  &c.],  the  values  of  ^3,  A3
[7329],  corresponding  to  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  fourth
satellite,  it  becomes,!

s"  =  — 2771",6.  ^ .  sin.(r"+83°,29861+^.7528",01).  [74X6]

Now  we  have  in  this  case,  by  [7248],

^  =  0,1248622  ;  [7417]

hence  the  preceding  term  [7416]  becomes,  I

s"  =  — 346",07.sin.(2;"+83°,29861  +^.7528",01).  [7418]

*  (3624) The  term  of  /  [6429  line  1],  is  the  same  as  in  [7412]. It  is  incorrectly
printed  in  this  part  of  the  original  work ;  its  second  member  being  given  under  the  form
(I — >>."). Sf.sin.{v"-\-pt-{- a). Now  by  proceeding  as  in  [7323a — g],  we  get  the  expressions [74136]
of  s",  similar  to  those  in  [7323/,  g-],  and  which  may  be  derived  from  them,  by  changing
X"'  into  X",  and  v'"  into  v". In  this  way,  the  three  last  of  the  formulas  [7323/,^]  give, '■ ^^
s''==(X''-l>d^sin.(r''+Y0=(l-X'0-3%4352.sin.(r''+51^3787-iJ53^8)=3%34213.sin.(u''4-51°,3787-f.l53'',8). [7413rf]
The  first  of  these  expressions  is  the  same  as  [7412]  ;  the  third  is  deduced  from  the  second,
by  using  X"  [7208],  and  is  the  same  as  that  in  [7413]  representing  the  latitude  of  the [7413c]
satellite,  supposing  it  to  move  in  a  fixed  plane,  similar  to  that  spoken  of  in  [6358],  and
corresponding  to  the  third  satellite.

t  (3625) The  coefficient  of  the  term  of  s"  [6429  line  5],  can  be  deduced  from  that  of
s'"  [6430  line  5],  corresponding to  the same  value  of  p  [7245],  by  multiplying the

r

expression  of  s'"  by -^  =  0,1248622  [7248  or  7417],  and  changing  v'"  into  v"j hence

I"

the  expression  of  $'"  [7329]  gives  that  in  [7416],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form
[7418]  by  substituting  [7417].

VOL. IV.  71

[74146]

282  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

The  term  s"  [6429  line  3]  becomes  also,  by  substituting  the  values  of  ^j,  Ai
[7338,  &c.],  corresponding  to  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite,*

[7419]  s"  =  — 5162",2.  ^^  .sin.(i^"-}-285°,20,+^.133715",77).

We  have  in  this  case,  as  in  [7235],

[7420]  ^=—0,034253;

then  the  preceding  term  becomes,
[7421]  s"  =  176",48.sin.(2j"-[-285°,20,+^.133715",77).

The  only  sensible  term  of  s",  among  those  we  have  given  in  [6933  line  2],

is  the  following  ;
[7422]  s"  =  0,00061 925.(1"— L').sm.(v"—2U—pt— a).

Substituting  for /" — L',  p, a, their values corresponding to Jupiter's

equator,  it  becomes,!
[7423]  s"  =  20",7.sin.(t;"— 2C7— 5P,3787-f  M53",8).

If  we  substitute  also  for I",  p,  a,  their  values  corresponding  to  the  orbit  of
[7424] the  third  satellite  [7415],  and  then  put L'  =  0  [6415],  we  shall  have,!

*  (3626) The  expression  [7419],  corresponding  to  the  second  satellite,  is  similar  to
r7419ol

that  in  [7416], depending upon  the  fourth,  changing  the  symbols  relative  to  the  fourth

[7329  or  7350]  into  those  corresponding  to  the  second  [7338] ;  by  this  means  we  get  the  term

[7419&] s"  [7419]  ; and  by  substituting [7420],  it  becomes  as  in [7421]. It  is  not  necessary  to

notice  the  term  of  s"  [7414],  corresponding  to  the  value  of  jp  [7226]  ;  because,  in  this  case,

I"
[7419c  ] the  factor —  =  —  0,0009597  [7228]  is  very  small,  and  the  term  is  also  insensible  on

account  of  the  smallness  of  I.

[7423ol  t  (3627)  The  expression  of  the  inequality  of  s"  [7422],  corresponding  to  the  third
satellite,  is  similar  to  that  of  s'"  [7341],  relative  to  the  fourth  satellite ;  changing  X'"  into

[74236]  X",  Z'"  into  Z",  «'"  into  v",  and  0,001447815  [6934]  into  0,00061925  [6933  line  2]  ;
observing  also,  that  by  this  means  the  factor  (1-X'").3°,4352==2°,98051  [7323^,  or  7345],
corresponding  to  the  fourth  satellite,  becomes  for  the  third  satellite  (1-X").3°,4352=3°,34213,

[7423(i]  as  in  [7413].  Now  making  the  same  changes  in  the  expression  of  s'"  [7346],  which  is
derived  from  [7341],  we  get  the  corresponding  term  of  s",  namely,

[7423c]  s"  =  3°,34213x0,00061925.sin.(«"— 2U— 51°,3787+  i.l53'\S) ;

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7423].

r7425  1  ^  (3628)  When  we  consider  the  terms  of  s",  spoken  of  in  [6415],  we  may  put
L'=0  [7424] ;  and  then  the  inequality  [6933  line  2,  or  7422]  becomes,

VIII.xiii.<§>31.]

THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.

2583

s"  =  --l",42.sin.(?j"— 2C/— 208°,32562— ^.28220",85).
Connecting  together  all  these  terms  of  the  latitude,  we  shall  have  in
eclipses,  where 2U=2v"  [7353c],  very  nearly,*

s"  =  33400",6.  sin.(«"+51  °,3787— 1 153",8)  1

—  346",07.sin.(?;"4-83°,29861-|-i.7528",01)  2

— 2282",5.  sin.(tj"+208°,32562-f^.28220",85)  3

+ 176",48.sin.(v"+285°,20,+^.133715",77).  4

To  obtain  the  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  we  shall  resume

the  formula  [7080], f

t7425]
[7426]

Latitude
of  the
third  sat-
ellite in
eclipses.

[7427]

5''  =  0,0006I925.Z".sin.(v— 2C7— p^— a).  [7425o']

If  we  use  the  values  of  l",  pt-\-A,  or  rather  pJ-\-A^,  corresponding  to  [7415],  it  becomes,

/'  =  —0,00061925 X 2283",9.sin.(t;"— 2C7— 208°,32562— ^28220",85) ;  [74256]

and  by  reducing  the  coefficient  we  obtain  [7425]. The  other  ternns  of  s"  [7427  lines  2,4],
being  small,  will  not  produce  any  sensible  terms  of  this  form.

[7425c ]

*  (3629)  Putting  2J7=2v"  [7426]  in  [7423],  it  becomes,  by  a  slight  reduction,
— 20",7.sin.(«"+51°,3787— M53",8).  Connecting  this  with  the  similar  term  in  [7413],
we  obtain  the  part  of  s"  which  is  contained  in  [7427  line  1].  The  same  substitution  of
2C/=2u"  being  made  in  [7425],  it  becomes  l",42.sin.(v"+208°,32562+^28220^85)  ;
connecting  this  with  the  term  in  [7415],  depending  on  the  same  argument,  we  obtain  the
part  of  s",  which  is  contained  in  [7427  line  3].  Finally,  the  terms  in  [7418,7421]
correspond  respectively  to  [7427  lines  2,  4].

In  the  above  calculation  [74276,  &;c.],  we  have  neglected  the  terms  in  [7427  lines  2,4],
because  they  are  much  smaller  than  the  term  in  [7425  line  3],  which  we  have  retained  ;
and  this  term  produces  only  a  very  small  quantity  [7425],  which  would  not  be  worth  the
trouble  of  computing,  if  it  depended  on  a  different  argument  from  the  other  inequalities ;
but  as  it  depends,  at  the  time  of  the  conjunction,  on  the  same  argument  with  the  inequality
[7415],  it  is  computed  and  combined  with  it  in  [7427  line  1],  For  similar  reasons  we  may
neglect  the  term  of  s"  in  [6933  line  1],  which,  by  using  the  value  of  m'  [7143],  becomes
nearly  0,0003.(r— /").sin.(2v'— 2i;"— p<— a).  Now  taking  for  /',  /",  any  of  the
coefficients  of  /,  s"  [7482,  7427],  corresponding  to  the  same  angle,  we  see  that  the
resulting  terms  are  quite  small,  and  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  be  introduced  by  a  table
with  a  new  argument,  like  those  mentioned  in  [7427e].

[7427a]
[74276]

[7427c]

[7427(i]

[7427e ]
[7427/]
[7427g]

[7i27h]
[7427i ]

t  (3630) Changing  s  into  /', v^  into  v" in  [7080],  we  get the  expression  of t  [7428a]

[7428],  corresponding  to  the third  satellite  ; being  similar  to  that  for  the  fourth  satellite  [74286]

[7369]. The  expression  of  T  in  [7428]  represents  the  time  of  the  mean  duration  of  the  ry.go  i
eclipses  of  the  third  satellite,  when  in  its  node  ;  in  like  manner  as  for  ihe  fourth  satellite  in

284  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7428]

[7429]

In  this  formula  T  represents  the  half  of  the  mean  duration  of  the  eclipses
of  the  third  satellite  in  its  nodes  [7428c]. This  time  has  been  found by

[7429']  Delambre  to  be  T  =  7419"  [7564],  from  the  observations  made  since  the
invention  of  the  achromatic  telescope  ;  and  we  shall  assume  this  as  the  value
of  T. The  mean  sjnodical  motion  of  the  third  satellite,  during  the  time  T,

^^^^^^  is  represented  by*  |3  [7428flf]  ;  and  we  have  /3  =  41410"  [74306].  The
value  of  p'  in  this  case  is p'  ==  0,072236  ;t the  value  of  X  is,  by  [7376a],

very  nearly  equal  to -^ 1 ; so  that  if  we  notice  only  the  greatest  terms

of  v"f  we  shall  have,t

[7370]. Moreover  ^, instead  of  being,  as  in  [7373],  for  the  fourth  satellite,  represents,
[7428df] in  [7428],  the  mean  synodical  motion  of  the  third  satellite  during  the  time  T,  corresponding
to  the  third  satellite.

r7430  1 *  (8631) In  this  case  we  have,  in  like  manner  as  in  [73745], (n" — M).T=^. Now
from  [6025w]  we  have  n"—iW  =  203868424"  ;  and  the  expression  of  T=7419"  [7429^]

[7430&]

i7431a]

[74316]

being  divided  by  the  number  of  seconds  in  a  Julian  year  36525000,  gives
r=0,000203121.  Substituting  this  last  value  of  T,  and  that  of  n"—M,  in  the
expression  of  p  [7430a],  it  becomes  p  =  41410",  as  in  [7430].

t  (3632) The  value  of  p'  corresponding  to  the  third  satellite,  is  easily  deduced  from

a'"
that  in  [7375],  for  the  fourth,  by  changing  a'"  into  a". By  this  means —  is  changed  into

a"

—  ; and  by  using  [7375a],  it  may  be  put  under  the  form.

a"  a" a'"  a'

^/■7^  =  ::;;7-sin.l530",864;

hence  we  have.

[7431c]

P.^l-fi^.sin.l530",864|
' ^^~^^^ ^.sin.l530",864

[7432a]

X, a!'
Substituting  the  values  of  -;;; , \, p  [6823,  7375a],  it  becomes  as  in  [7431].

f  (3633) Changing  n'"  into  n",  and  w/"  into  v",  in  the  expression  of  X  [7376a],
corresponding  to  the  fourth  satellite,  we  get  the  similar  value  of  X  for  the  third  satellite.

VIII.  xiii.  §31.]  THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.  285

Z=  0,00268457.cos.(e"— :.")  1

+  O,OO118848.cos.(0"— 7^'")  2  [7432]

— O,OO128817,.cos.(0'— e")  3

We  have  seen  also,  in  [7094],  that  the  value  of  T  must  be  multiplied  by
the  factor,*

dv  "

X=— — — 1 [7376']. If  we  retain  only  the  greatest  terms  of xi\ which  are  given  in

[7388, 7389,  7390  line  2],  we  shall  have,

X=^^^.d\ I709",05.sin.(e"— n")+756",61  .sin.(0"— w"')— 8O8",2O.sin.(0'— ©") \  ;  [74326 ]

and  the  three  terms,  of  which  this  expression  is  comprised,  produce  the  three  terms  in
[7432  hnes  1,2,  3]  respectively. For  the  first  term  of  [74326]  is

170r,05 .  ^'^^"~p .zo%.{<^"-^')  ;  [7432c]

and  if  we  substitute  the  values  of e" — zi\ w"  [7302, 6025A:],  it  becomes,

1,^^^//^^ 204176626  ,  ,,

1709",05X  oT^T^K^S^  .cos.(0"— Z3")  j

204205635  ^  '  [7432rf]

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  in  [7432  line  1],  by  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds

636620". Again,  by  subtracting  the  value  of  vi"  [7288] from  that  of  ©"  [7301],  we  get

©"_,3'"  =  211°,0129-f-^204197677"; and  its  differential  being  divided  by  the  value  of

,/  rnr^cr-,  1 •  d.{<s>" -^z^") 204197677  ,  .  , . , . ,

n [6025A:],  gives —^^^ — ~  204205635 ' ™""'Pv»ng this  by  the  second  coefficient [7432e]

756"  61
[74325],  or  ' , we  get  the  coefficient  of the  term  in [7432  line  2]. Lastly,

we have, from [7301, 7440], ©'  — ©"  =  335°,0958  + i.  207206791'' j hence

d.{Q'-Q") 207206791  ,  _ . ,  . ,  808",20 _..o«7i  v  ca  -  c ^^^■^'^

-Im--  ^  20420^  ' multiplying  this  by -  :^^^,  [7432J],  we  get  the  coefficient  of

the  third  term  of  X,  in  [7432  line  3]  ;  which  is —0,00128817;  differing  a  little  from  the

author,  who  makes  it  — 0,00126952;  having  probably  used  the  factor  204197677  [7432e],  [7432^-]

instead  of  207206791  [7432/]. We  have  corrected  this  in  [7432  line  3],  annexing  the

small  letter  c  to  the  number — 0,00128817c, to  denote  that  it  varies  from  the  original

work. We  may  however  remark,  that  this  correction  is  of  very  little  importance,  since  it  ■'

produces  only  a  variation  of  a  small  fraction  of  a  second  of  time  in  the  value  of  t  [7436,  &c.].  [7432i  ]

*  (3634) The  factor  [7433]  is  similar  to  that  in  [7094  or  7378], The  last  of  these
expressions  corresponds  to  the  fourth  satellite  ;  and  by  changing  n'"  into  n", also  d"  into '■ ^

a"
o",  we  get  the  similar  factor  for  the  third  satellite ; then  substituting  the  value  of — ,

[74316],  it  becomes,
voL»  IV.  72

286  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

and  by  reduction  this  factor  becomes  of  the  following  form,
[7434]  1—0,0003987]  .COS.  V.

[7434'] Putting  ^=  ^  ^^^' ,  we  shall  have,*

^  =  0,864850.sin.(tj"+  5P,3787— M53",8)  1

— 0,008961. sin.(tj"+  83°,29861  +  ^.7528",01)  2

f^^^^^  — 0,059101.sin.(?j"+208°,32562-f^.28220",85)  3

+  0,004570.sin.  (?j"+285°,20, + 1. 1 337 1 5",77).  4

This  being  premised,  we  shall  have,t
[7436]  ^  ^  — 482",6,.  P  ±  7419".(1— X-~0,0003987Lcos.r).v/I+X-|"2 ;

hence  we  may  easily  determine  the  times  of  immersion  and  emersion  ;  and

[74336]  i_|-  ^  _|^  _  fL^) .  ^^ .  sin.l530",864  | . H.cos.V.

[7433c] Substituting  the  values — ,  iW,  w",  \,  p,  H  [6823,6025Ic,m,  7375a,  73786],  it  becomes
i7A23d] 1— 0,0003984.cos.F,  being  very  nearly  as  in  [7434].

*  (3635) From  [7430, 7431]  we  have  -^ti.  s= ' ' ;  multiplying  the  expression

of  s"  [7427]  by  this  factor,  we  obtain  the  expression  of  ^  [7434^]  in  the  form  given
in  [7435].

r74^fi  1  ^  (3636)  The  expression  [7436]  for  the  third  satellite  is  easily  deduced  from  the  similar
one  for  the  fourth  satellite  [7383],  observing  that  the  first  coefficient — 366",832 [7383]

[74366]  may  be  put  under  the  form  — T^  =  — 9890".^,  as  in  [7383e].  Then  changing
r=9890",  which  corresponds  to  the  fourth  satellite  [7373],  into  T=7419"  [7429^]
for  the  third,  we  find  that  the  expression  of  t  for  the  third  satellite,  derived  from  [7383],
will  be,

[7436c]  <=— 7419".^.  ^  d=  7419".(1—X— 0,000398171. cos. F).v/i+X-|2;

observing  that  the  coefficient  of  — cos.F,  in  [7379,  7383],  changes  from  0,0006101  to
[7436rf] 0,00039871  in  [7434,  7436]. Substituting  the  value  ^  =  41410"  [7430],  in  the  factor  of

the  first  term  of  [7436c],  namely,  — 7419".^,  and  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  it

becomes  — 482",6,  which  is  inserted,  with  the  usual  mark  e,  in  [7436],  instead  of  the
[7436c] number  given  by  the  author  in  the  original  work,  which  is  — 517",4 ;  being  too  great  by

nearly  a  fourteenth  part.

VIII.xiii.^31.]

THEORY  OF  THE  THIRD  SATELLITE.

287

the  whole  duration  t'  of  the  eclipse  will  be,*

t'  =  14838".(1— Z— 0,00039871.cos.r).v/rfX— f .

[7437]

*  (3637)  The  expression  t'  [7437]  is  deduced  from  [7436],  in  the  same  manner  as
[7385],  is  derived  from  [7383]  in  [7383/]  ;  namely,  ly  retaining  only  the  part  depending
on  the  radical,  and  multiplying  it  ly  ±2;  by  this  means  it  becomes  as  in  [7437].  We
may  make  an  estimate  of  the  value  of  the  neglected  terms,  in  the  same  way  as  we  have
done  for  the  fourth  satellite,  in  [7383c — q\.  The  most  important  of  these  neglected  terms
is  that  which  is  computed  in  [7383z],  producing  in  [7436]  the  terra  ^T^^.h=lAW X\??Ji
[7383o],  supposing  X— ^^  ^^  ^j^  smdXX,  as  in  [7383n].  Now  ^  [7430]  is  about  -^  part
of  the  radius,  or,  more  accurately,  p2=^i^;  hence  7419"X^p^-i:=l6".6  nearly  ;  and
if  we  use  the  value  of  h  [7383m]  corresponding  to  this  case,  namely,  6=i^*.sin.^(2v"+2;B),
it  becomes  4".-4*.sin.2(2«"+25)  ;  A  being,  as  in  [7383?],  the  greatest  coefficient  in  the
value  of  ^  [7435],  or  -4=0,86.. ;  hence  4".^'* =2",  and  the  preceding  correction
becomes  equal  to  2".sin.^(2u"+25)  ;  so  that  at  its  maximum  it  is  only  2",  and  is  generally
less,  except  when  the  latitude  of  the  satellite  is  very  great,  or  X — ^  large;  then  it
requires  some  notice,  as  in  the  similar  case  for  the  fourth  satellite  in  [7383/?].  In  like
manner  we  may  prove  that  the  other  neglected  terms  [7062,  7059,  kc],  are  in  general
unimportant.

[7437a]

[74376]

[7437c]

[7437rf]
[7437e]

[7437/]

288  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7441']

[7439a]
[74396]

CHAPTER  XIV.

THEORy OF THE SECOND SATELLITE.

32. The  discussion  of  the  eclipses  of  the  M'.<r^cL  satellite  gives,  for  its

mean  motion  from  the  earth's  vernal  equinox  in  one  hundred  Julian  years,

the  following  expression,
[7438]  4114125^812765;

and  its  mean  longitude  at  the  epoch  of  1750,  equal  to*
[7439]  346°,48931, ;

we  shall  therefore  put,
[7440]  e'  =  346°,48931,+^.4114P,25812765.

The  different  equations  of  the  centre  are  included  in  the  term,t
[7441]  6v'  =  — 2A'.sin.(n'^+£'— ^^— r).

The  expressions  of  h,  h\ relative  to  the  tivo  first  values  of  g  [7176,  7183],

have  appeared  to  Delambre  to  be  insensible,  notwithstanding  the  attempts  he

*  (3638)  In  the  original  work  the  mean  longitude  is  stated  to  be  146°,48931,  instead
of  346°,48931 ;  we  have  given  the  corrected  value,  with  the  small  letter  «  appended,  to
denote  that  it  has  been  corrected.  The  value  [7439]  differs  a  little  from  that  obtained  in
[7259e],  from  the  last  edition  of  Delambre's  tables  of  the  satellites,  printed  in  1817.

[7441a]
[74416]

t  (3639)  The  expression  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  second  satellite  [7441],
is  similar  to  that  for  the  third,  in  [7394a,  &tc.] ;  and  the  term  which  is  considered  as  peculiar  to
the  second  satellite,  is  easily  deduced  from  the  second  term  of  [6242],  by  substituting
Pi'/ti  =  A'  [6229of  line  4].  We  may  also  observe  that  the  equation  of  the  centre,  which  is
considered  as  peculiar  to  the  Jirst  satellite,  is  given  by  the  first  term  of  [6241],  and  is

[7441c] Sv  =  — 2h.sm.{nt-\-s — gt — r) ; or,  as  it  may  be  written, 5v  =  — 2A.sin.(e — zj)  [62407-].

[7441rf]  These  are  used  hereafter  in  [7457,  7497,  &c.].  Both  these  values  of  A,  A',  are  found  to
be  insensible  by  observation  [744 1'j.

VIII.xiv.«^32.]  THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  289

made  to  discover  them. The  orbits  of  the  first  and  second  satellites  do  not

...  .  [74421

therefore  seem  to  have  any  excentricities  peculiar  to  them  ;  but  they  participate

sensibly  in  the  excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  the  third  and  fourth  satellites ^

[7467  lines  1,2,  &c.]. We  have,  in  [7192  or  624U],  relative  to  the  third

value  of  ^,  or  g^,  the  excentricity  peculiar  to  the  orbit  of  the  third  satellite, ^ ^

/t'  =  0,2152920.r;  [7443]

now  we  have,  as  in  [7394],

— 2r=  1709",05; or A"  =  — 854",525.  [7444]

Hence  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  second  satellite,  relative  to  this  value

^.  [7444']

of  g,  or  g^,  IS*

6v'  =  367",95.sin.(e'— t^j").  [7445]

We  have,  relative  to  the  fourtli  value  of  g,  or  g^  [7195],  [7445^

/i'  =  0,0173350.r'; [7197]  [7446]

but  we  have,  as  in  [7310],

— 2^' =  9265",56  ; or r'  =  — 4632",78;  [7447]

therefore  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  second  satellite,  corresponding  to
this  value  of  g,  is

6v'  =  1 60",62.sin.(e'_:;j"').  [7448]

If  we  substitute  the  values  of  m,  m",  m'"  [7142 — 7145],  in  the  expression
of  6v'  [6844],  observing  also  that  the  law  of  the  epochs  gives,  as  in  [7391],

0—0'  =  200^  +  2e'— 20",  [7449]

we  shall  obtain,t

*  (3640) Substituting h"  [7444]  in [7443],  we  get,

—2h'  =  1 709",05  X  0,2 1 52920  =  367",95.
We  also  have,  in like  manner  as in [6240s], n't-{-^ — gj — r^  =  e' — to"  ; hence  the [7445a]
expression  of  8v'  [7441]  becomes  as  in  [7445J. In like  manner,  from  [7446,7447],  we
obtain  -2A'  =  9265",56X0,0173350=160",62;  substituting  this  and  n'i-{-s'-g^t-r^=Q'-z/'' [74456]
[6240?],  in  [7441],  we  get  5v'  [7448]  ; observing  tliat gJ-j-T^^ [7445a],  corresponds  to
the  third  satellite  [7442'],  whose  perij  .ve  is  in  the  longitude  to"  [60215, 6205h]  ;  and  [74456]
corresponds  to  the  fourth  satellite  [7445'J,  whose  perijove  has  the  longitude  z/"  [6021s].

t  (3641) We  have,  as  in  [6240p,  q,  s',  7449],

nt  —n't-\-s  —  s'  =  0—0'  =  2OO°+20'— 2e" ;  [7450o]

n"t-~n't-\-s"— /  =  —{&'— e");  [74506]

n'"i^n't-\-^"'—s'  =  -(©'—©'") ;  [7450c]

2n't—2Mt-\-2s'—2E  ==  2©'— •2n.  [745  Jrf]

VOL.  IV.  73

290 MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

8v'==— 163",29.sin. (e'  — e")  1

+  1192O",67.sin.2.(0'  — e")  2

-h 60",96.sin.3.(e'_e")  3

[7450] + 4",83.sin.4.(0'— e")  4

+ 4",66.sin.5.(e'  — e")  5

+ 3",66.sin.6.(e'  — e")  6

— 5",28.sin. (e'— e'")  7

+ 4",62.sin.2.(0'— e'")  8

+ 0",59.sin.  (2e'_2n).  9
[7451] We  must  connect  these  terms  with  the  inequality 6v'  =  69",78.sin.2(0 — e')

[6947,7450a],  or
[7452]  sv'  —  69%78.sin.(40'— 4e'0. [7449]

The  values  of  Q'  [6861],  corresponding  to  the  different  values  of  g,  are,*

[7453]  Q'  =  l,634693./t;  [corresponds  to ^]

t^^^^  §'= 2,488106.^';  " gi

[''455]  Q'  =  — 0,66261 5./i";  " g^

[7456]  -  Q' =  — 0,055035.^'.  « g-3

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  excentricity,  appertaining  to  the  first  satellite,  is

Substituting m  =0,173231  [7142]  and  the  expression  [7450a],  in  [6844  lines  1,  2,  3],
we  obtain,
[7450e]  +1204",56.sin.2(e'— e")— 9",ll.sin.4(0'— 0")+l",82.sin.6(e'-e"),

for  the  terras  depending  on m  ; the  expressions [6844  lines  4,  5] being  neglected  on
account of  their  smallness. Again,  by  substituting m"  =  0,884972  [7144], and the
expression  [74506],  in  [6844  lines  6 — 11],  we  get,  for  the  terms  depending  on  m",
— 163",29.sin.(0'— 0")+lO7I6",ll.sin.2(0'— ©")+6O",96.sin.3(0'— e")
+13",94.sin.4(0'— 0")-f-4,66.sin.5(0'— 0")  +  l,84.sin.6(0'— ©").
Adding  together  the  terms  in  [7450e,/], we  get  the  terms  in [7450  lines  1 — 6]. Now
substituting m"'  =  0,426591 [7145] in [6844  lines  12,  13], we  get [7450  lines  7, 8]
respectively. The  term  in [6844  line  14] is  neglected,  on  account  of  its smallness.
Finally,  the  term  in  [6844  hne  15]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [7450  hne  9],  using  [6240/J.

[7450/]

[7450^]

*  (3642) Putting  for  brevity  —  =  ( ^-^  rmmonn")  '  ^®  ^^^  reduce  the  expression  of

Q'  [6861]  to the  form  [74536]. This  may  be  reduced  to  the  forms  [7453c,  d,  e],  by
[7453a]  h h"  h!"

multiplying  successively  the factor jPA, without  the  braces,  by — , T ^^ ~ri ^'^^

dividing  the  factor  within  the  braces  by  the  same  quantity  respectively  j  hence  we  get,

VIII.  xiv.  §32.]  THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  291

more  sensible  in  the  eclipses  of  the  second,  than  in  those  of  the  first. For  the

equation  of  the  centre  of  the  first,  is — 2/i,sin.(e — zi)  [7441c]  ; and  although

the  coefficient  2A  is  greater  than  the  value  of  Q  [7453],  which  corresponds

to  it,  jet  the  motion  of  the  second  satellite  being  less  swift,  by  one  half, SeTsuUs

than  that  of  the  first,  the  inequality  depending  on Q'  [7453,  6850]  produces, tLVxcen-

in  time,  a  greater  variation  in  the  eclipses  of  the  second  satellite  than  the

Q'=  \  13,307450.  m-4  831907.^.m+4,133080.-^.m"— 1,511467. -^.m"  \  .Fh;  [74536]
=  I  13,307450. -^.111—4,831907.  m+4,133080.  m"— 1,51 1467. |^.m"  |  .FA';  [7453c]
=  \  I3,307450.p.m—4,831907.-^,.m+4,133080.^.m"— 1,511467. m"  l.Fh" ; [7i53d]

=  i  13,307450.^.m— 4,831907.^,.m+4,133080.p.ni"— 1,51 1467.^,.m"  I  ,Fh"'. [7453e]

We  must  substitute,  in  all  these  expressions,  the  values  of  m,  m"  [7142,  7144]. Then  in

h'  h"

[74536],  we  must  substitute  the  values  of —==0,0185238, —  =  — Oj0034337, and [7453/]

h  h

g  =  606989",9  [7176—7178],  and  we  shall  obtain  the  expression  of  Q'  [7453]. Again,
substituting  the  values [7183—7185}  in  [7453c],  we  get [7454];  also  substituting  the
values  [7190—7192] in [7453rf],  we  get  [7455]. Lastly,  by  substituting the  values t'^'^^^^
[7195—7198]  in [7453e],  we  get Q' =  — 0,00553.A'" ; which  differs  a  little  from  the
expression  given  by  the  author  in  [7456] ;  however  this  difference  is  hardly  sensible  in  the [7453A]
resulting  inequality  in  [7462  line  2].

We  must  now  substitute, in the expression  of Q'  [7453 — 7456], the values of
h,  h',  h",  h'",  which  are  peculiar  to  the  first,  second,  third  2ind  fourth  ss.ie\\\ies  respectively; [7453i]
but  the  values  of  h,  h'  being  insensible [7441'],  may  be  neglected. The  value  of  A"
[7460]  being  substituted  in [7455],  gives Q' =  566",22 ;  hence  the  inequality  [6851] ^'^^^^'^
becomes,  by  using  the  corresponding  angle ^a^  +  r^  [7442'],

6v'  =  566",22.sin  .(n^— 2n'f-|-s— 2/+^,^+ r,) .  [7453Z  ]

Now  we  have,  in  [6240p,s], 2/i^— 2n'i+2£— 2s'  =  20— 2©', nt-^-s—gJ—T^—o—u/';
and  by  subtracting  the  second  of  these  equations  from  the  first,  we  get,

71^— 2«'<-f-  s— 2s'  -{-gJ+T!,  =  0—20'+^" ;  [7453w]

hence  we  obtain  the  inequality 8v'  [7462  line  1]. In  like  manner  the  value  of  A'"  [7461],

with  the  corresponding  angle gat-^-r^  [7445',  &c.],  being  substituted  in  [7456],  gives [7453n]

Q'  =  254",97  ;  and  for  this  value  of  ^',  the  inequality  [6851]  becomes,

5v'  =  254",97.sin.(n^— 2n'^+s— 2s'+^3<  ^T,).  [7453o]

This  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7462  line  2],  using  the  above  values,  and  observing  that
nt-]-s—g,t—T^=:Q—vi"' [6240s].  ^ ^^

[7459]

292  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7458] equation  of  the  centre  of  the  first  does  in  its  eclipses.* It  is  also  curious  to
observe  that  the  equation  of  (he  centre  of  the  second  satellite  is  more  sensible
by  the  inequality  depending  on Q' than  by  itself; since  its  coefficient  is
—2A' [7441],  whilst  that  which  depends  on Q' is 2,488 lOG./i'  [7454].
We  have,  by  what  has  been  said  in  [7444,  7447],

[7460]  — 2r  =  1709",05; or A"  =  —  854",525  ;

[7461]  —2h"'=926o",56; or /i'"  =  — 4632",78  ;

the  two  inequalities  depending  on Q', relative  to  h",  h'",  will  therefore  be,
as  in  [7453/,  o,&c.],

6v'= 566",22.sin.(e— 2e'+^')  1

t''^^^^  +254",97.sin.(e_20'+z."').  2

The  inequality  in  [6884],

[7463] 6V'  =  — 74",98.  ^  1 9a'm.W ^  .sin.(M+E-/),

) 8ani'.(M«-kn«).ri+^  +  f^)  (
C  ^  "^ \ 4a.m' ' 4a.m7  )

becomes,  by  substituting  the  values  of  m,  m',  m"  [7142 — 7144],t
[7464]  Sv'  =  — 1 1  r',34.sin.F;

[7464']  the  other  inequalities  of  the  same  article  are  insensible.  Lastly,  the
coefficient  of  the  equation  of  libration,  relative  to  the  second  satellite,  is,  as
in  [7276],

[7465]  — 0,889912.P ;

P  being  the  coefficient  of  the  similar  inequality  [7275],  relative  to  the  (irst
satellite. Hence  it  follows,  that  the  inequality  of  libration  must  be  most

[7458o]
[74586]

*  (3643) The  mean  motions  of  the  satellites m,  m',  in  the  time  t,  are  represented  by
nt,  n't,  respectively  [6022/J. Hence  the  time  required  by  the  Jirst  satellite  to  describe

the  arc  2A,  which  is  the  maximum  value  of  its  equation  of  the  centre  [7441c],  is — ;

and  the  time  required  by  the  5econ(/ satellite,  to  describe  the  arc Q'  =  1,634693  A  [7453],

. ],G34693.;i  .  ,  , ^  /  r/.,^,-. I  •  , ,

IS  ', ; now  as  n  is  nearly  equal  to  2n  [6151],  these  times  are  to  each  other  as  1

^ ''■'to  1,634693,  or  as  3  to  5  nearly; so  that  the  time of  describing Q',  is  considerably
greater  than  that  of  describing  2A.

t  (3644) Substituting  in  [7463]  the  expression Mt-{-E—I=V,  and  the  other  values
[7464a] mentioned  in [7400a], we  get  [7464]. The  terms  of  5v' depending  on  [6874]  are
insensible,  as  is  observed  in  [6875e — A]  ;  therefore  they  are  neglected  as  in  [7464'J.

VIlI.xiv'.'§>32.] THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  293

sensible*  in  the  motion  of  the  second  satellite ;  but  it  has  not  however  been ,^,^^,,

•^  [7466]

discovered  by  observation.

Connecting  together  all  these  inequalities,  we  shall  have,  in  the  eclipses  of
t,he  second  satellite,!

v'  =  e'^ 367",95.sin. (e'  — :.")  1

4- 160",62.sin. (e'— ^'")  2

—  163",29.sin.  (e'— e")  3
-f  11920",67.sin.2.(e'—  e")  4
+  6O",96.sin.3.(0'  — e")  6
+  74",61.sin.4.(e'  — e")  6
+  4",66.sin.5.(0'  — 0")  7
+ 3",66.sin.6.(0'  — 0")  8 [7467]

—  5",28.sin.  (0'—©'")  9
+  4",62.sin.2.(0'— 0'")  10
+  566",22.sin.  (0— 20'+«")  11
+  254",97.sin.  (0'_20"+^'")  12
~ lll",34.sin.F;  13

We  shall  now  consider  the  motion  of  the  second  satellite  in  latitude.
The  part,  J

Longitude

of  the

second

gatellite

ia  eclipses,

from  the

earth's

moveable

vernal

equinox.

[7466o]
[74666]

*  (3645) Proceeding  in  the  same  manner  as  in  [7458a — c],  we  find  that  the  time  of
describing  the  arc  P  [7466],  by  the  first  sateliitej  is  to  that  of  describing  the  arc  P.0,889912

P  P

[7465]  by  the  second  satellite,  as — to —  X  0,889912;  and  as  n  =  2n'  nearly  [7458c],

this  ratio  is  represented  by  that  of  ^  to  0,889912;  so  that  the  time  of  the  beginning  or
end  of  an  eclipse  is  affected  nearly  twice  as  much,  by  the  libration  of  the  second  satellite,  as
by  that  of  the  Jirsi  satelhte.

f  (3646)  Connecting  together  the  terms  of  Sv\  which  are  computed  in  this  chapter,
and  adding  to  them  the  value  of  v'  =  e'  at  the  epoch,  we  get  the  expression  [7467],
corresponding  to  the  time  of  an  eclipse  of  the  second  satellite,  where  we  have  2n  =  20'  [74676]
[7353(/].  For  the  terra  [7445]  is  the  same  as  [7467  line  1] ;  [7448]  is  the  same  as
[7467  line  2]  ;  [7450  lines  1,  2, 3]  correspond  respectively  to  [7467  lines  3, 4,  5]  ;  the  sum
of  the  expressions  in  [7450  line  4,  7452]  gives  [7467  line  6] ;  the  terms  in
[7450  lines  5,  6,  7,  8]  correspond  respectively  to  [7467  lines  7,  8,  9,  10] ;  the  term
[7450  line  9]  vanishes,  by  putting  20' =  211  [74676];  lastly,  the  terms  in  [7462, 7464]  [7467rf]
correspond  respectively  to  the  terms  in  [7467  lines  11,  12, 13J.

X  (3647) In  the  original  work,  the  second  member  of  [7468]  is  given  under  the  form r^4gg--j
(1 — >-').6'.s\n.{v'-{-2)t-{-A) ; which  is  changed  in  like  manner  as  in  the  similar  case  for  the
VOL.  IV.  74

[7467c]

294

[7468]

[7469]
[7470]

[7471]
[7472]

IMOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[7473]

of  the  expressioa  of  s'  [6428  line  1],  becomes,  by  the  substitution  of  the
values  of  >-',  6',  *',

s'  =  3°,41507.sin.(t;'+5P,3787— ^.153",8).
Theterm  5'=Z'.sin.(u'+;?i^4-A,),  in  the  expression  of  5' [6428  line  3,  6425,&c.], '
corresponding  to  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  second  satellite,
is  given  in  [7338]  under  the  form,

s'  ==  — 5152V2.sin.(?j'+285°,20,  +  ^.133715",77).
We have, in [7227], relative to the first of the values of p
[6428  line  2,  7226],*

/'  =  _0,0124527i; [7227]
but  as  no  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  first  satellite,  or  value  of  /,  has  been
discovered  by  observation  [7516'],  we  may  neglect  it. Again,  with  the |
third  value  of  p^  or  p^  [6428  line  4,  7238],  we  have,

^=0,1640530; [7240]

and  the  term s' =  r.sm.{v'-\-pJ-{-Ai^ [6428  line  4],  relative  to  the  value  j72»
becomes,  by  means  of  [7415],

[74686]

[7472o]
[74726]

[7472c]
[7472rf]

[7472c]
[7472/]

third  satellite,  in  [7413a].  Now  proceeding  as  in  [7413tZJ,  we  may  change  [7468]  into
s'=(l— X').3°,4352.sin.(v'+51°,3787— ^.153";8)5  and  by  substituting  the  value  of  X'
[7207],  it  becomes  as  in  [7469J.

*  (3648)  The  process  here  used  for  finding  the  terms  of  s'  [7472 — 7477],  is  similar  to
that  for  the  fourth  satellite  [7338—7340,  &«.],  changing  v'",  s'",  I'",  into  v\  s',  V,
respectively,  where  it  may  be  necessary,  and  retaining  the  same  values  of  the  angles
pt-\-A,  i'l^+Ai,  &£C. Thus  the  expression  s'"  [7335f/],  changes  into,

s'  =  0,164053.Z".sin.(r'+^2^  +  a  J  ;
observing  that  the  numerical  coefficient  — 0,1965650./"  [7241],  corresponding  to  the
fourth  satellite,  must  be  changed  into  0,164053.Z"  [7240],  corresponding  to  the  second
satellite.  Substituting  the  value  of  I"  [7335c?]  in  s'  [7472c],  it  becomes  as  in  [7474'J.
In  the  same  way  we  get  the  term  [7477],  corresponding  to  the  angle  p^t  -{-  a^  ;  as  we  have
done  for  the  third  satellite  in  [7416] ;  which,  by  changing  r",  s",  Vy  into  v',  5',  /',
respectively,  becomes,

s'  =  — 2771",6.  ^,  .sin.(i;'+83%29861+<.7528",01)  ;

I'
and  by  substituting  the  value  of  ~  =0,0234108  [7247  or  7476], corresponding to  the

I'
present  case,  which  gives — 277 r',6.  77,  =  — 64",88, it  becomes  as  in  [7477].

VIII.xlv.  ^32.] THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  295

s'  =  — 2283",9.  ~ .  sin.(t?'-f  208°,3256Z -[-^ 2 8220", 85)  [7474]

=  — 2283",9 X 0,1 64053.sin.(i;'+208°,32562 -f  ^.28220", 85)  ;  [7474']

therefore  by  reduction  we  have,  in  5',  the  following  inequality,

s'  =  — 374",68.sin.(i;'+208°,32562  +  /.28220",85).  [7475]

The  value  of — , corresponding to the fourth value of p, or ^3,

[7245,  6428  line  5],  is

P  =  0,0234108; [7247]  [7476]

Therefore  the  term  [6428  line  5]  becomes,  relative  to  this  value  of  p, •

s'  =  — 64",88.sin.(i;'-f-83^29861  +  ^.7528",01). [7472e,/]  [7477]

We  may  neglect,  without any  sensible  error, all  the  terms  of  5'  [6932],
except  the  following,*

s'  =  0,00030736.(r— L').sin.(i;'— 2C/— ;?^— a).  [7478]

This  becomes, relative  to  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  Jupiter  to  that  of
the  satellite,!

[7478a]

*  (3649) If  we  substitute  the  values  of m,  m"  [7142,  7144],  in  the  terms  of  s'
[6932  line  1],  they  become s'=  {0,0005.(7— Z')+0,0015.(/"—O}-sin.(2u—3v'—pf— a)
nearly. Now  if  we  take  any  one  of  the  values  of  p,  as  for  example  the  second  [7233],
we  shall  have  very  nearly Z=  — 105" [7522  line  3], ?'=— 5150"  [7482  line  4], [74786]
/"  =  176"  [7427  line  4]. Substituting  these  in  [7478a],  it  becomes  10".sin.(2w-3i;-p^-A).
The  maximum  of  this  inequality  is  an  arc  of  10",  which  is  described  by  the  second  satellite ^ •'
in  about  one  centesimal  second  of  time,  as  is  evident  from  the  time  of  its  sideral  revolution
[6779]. We  have  selected  this  second  value  of  p  because  it  corresponds  to  some  of  the ['^'°"J
greatest  numerical  values  of I — /', l" — I'  [7478a],  as  appears  by  comparing  the  terms
of  s,  s',  s"  [7522,  7482,  7427],  which  correspond  respectively  to  these  angles. Thus  if [7478c]
we  had  used  the  third  value  of p,  or  p^  [7238],  the  resulting  inequality  [7478a]  would
be  less  than  3"  of  space,  or  0",3  of  time. Hence  we  see  that  this  term  may  be  neglected,
as  in  [7477']  ;  and  then  the  expression  of  /  [6932]  becomes  as  in  [7478].  ^ '  ^^

\  (3650)  The  terms  of  &'  [7478]  are  of  the  same  order  as  those  which  we  have
neglected  in  the  preceding  note  ;  but  the  inequalities  deduced  from  it,  in  [7479,  7480],  can,  '■  °-'
in  eclipses,  be  reduced  to  the  same  arguments  as  the  large  terms  in  [7482  lines  1,4],
without  requiring  any  new  arguments  or  tables  ;  they  are  therefore  taken  into  consideration  [74796]
and  computed  in  the  following  manner.  Proceeding  as  in  [7423a,  &,c.],  vie  find  that  the
expression  of  «'  [7478],  may  be  derived  from  that  of  /'  [7341],  by  changing  V"  into  /',
X"'  into  X', -d"  into  r',  and  the  coefficient  0,001447815  into  0,00030736;  observing  also ^^'^^'^'^

[748]]

29e  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7479]  s'  =  10",49.siii.(u'— 2C7— 5I°,3787-|-^.153",8)  ;

and  relative  to  the  inclination  of  the  second  satellite,

[7480]  y  ==  —  r',58.sin.(v'—2C7—-285°,20— ^.13371 5",77).

Connecting  together  all  these  terms,  we  shall  have,  in  eclipses  of  the  second
satellite,  in  which  we  may  suppose  2U=2v'  [7353c?],*

o'^^f'  s'=  34140",2.  sin.ry'H-  5I°,3787—i.l53",8)  1

second  ^

''''^'"^- — 64",88.sin.(«;'+  83°,29861+^.7528",01)  2

^^^^^^ —  374",68.sin.(2;'+208°,32562+i.28220",85)  3

— 5150",6.  sin.(i;'+285°,20,  +  M33715",77)  4

To  obtain  the  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the  second  satellite,  we  shall

resume  the  formula  [7080],

[748

3] t=^T.{l-X).^-{l+/)K^.^,±\^/^i+^X+{l+/).^^^^

[7485]

[7484]  In  this  formula,  T  is  the  half  of  the  mean  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the
satellite  in  its  nodes  [7069],  where  s'  vanishes.  Delambre  has  found  this
semi-duration  to  be  T  =  5d75"J  [7563],  bj  observations  made  since  the
discovery  of  achromatic  telescopes  ;  and  we  shall  use  this  value  of  T. The

[7486] mean  sjnodical motion  of the second satellite, during the time T,

[7479rf]  that  the  factor  (1— X"').3°,4352  =  2°,98051  [7423c]  becomes  for  the  second  satellite
(1— X').3°.435-2  =  3°,41507,  as  in  [7469].  Now  making  the  same  changes  in  the
expression  of  /"  [7346],  we  get  the  corresponding  inequality  in  /,  namely,

[7479/]  /  =  3°,41507x0,00030736.sin.(tj'— 2C7-5r,3787-f  ^.153",8) ;

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7479]. Again,  in  noticing  the  terms  depending  on  the

[7479g-] mutual  attraction  of  the  satellites,  we  may  put L'  =  0 [6415],  and  then  [7478]  becomes

/=0,00030736.Z'.sin.(u'  — 26^— pi — a). Substituting the value of r=— 5150"

[7482  line  4],  and  the  corresponding  angle  ^^i+A^  =  285°,20<:-J-^-133715",77,  it  becomes,

[7479ft]  /=  — 0,00030736X 5150".sin.(v'— 2C7— 285°,20,— M33715",77)  ;

and  by  reduction  we  get  [7480]. The  other  values  of  Z'  [7482] produce,  in  [7478],  no
terms  of  a  sensible  magnitude.

[7482d]

[74826]

*  (3651)  Substituting  2t7=:2y'  in  [7479],  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  it  becomes
*'  =  — 10",49.sin.(i;'+51°,3787— i.l53",8);  connecting  this  with  the  term  in  [7469],  it
becomes  as  in  [7482  line  1].  Again,  by  making  the  same  substitution  of  2U=2v',  in
[7480],  it  becomes  /  =  l",58.sin.(2;'-f  285°,20,— i.l33715",77)  ;  connecting  this  with  the
term  in  [7471],  we  get  that  in  [7482  line  4].  The  term  [7475]  is  the  same  as
[7482  line  3]  ;  and  the  term  [7477]  is  the  same  as  [7482  line  2].

VIII.  xiv.  §32.]  THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  297

is* (3=67254",2; and  we  have,  in  this  case,t p'=0,0718862. The  value [7486']

of  X  [7376']  becomes  for  this  case X  =  -jj  —  1  ;  so  that  if  we  notice  only [7487]

the  greatest  terms  of  v\ in  which  the  argument  differs  but  little  from  e',
we  shall  have,  t

X=  0,00057797.cos. (e'— ^j")  1

^  ^  [7488]

+0,018861, ,cos.2.(e'— e")  t

*  (3652)  For  the  second  satellite  we  have,  in  like  manner  as  in  [7430a],
(n'— iW).r=p;  substituting  n'—JW=  411075216"  [6025n],  and  r=5975",7  [7485],
or  r=Oy«^^000 1636058,  it  becomes  as  in  [7486'].

•f  (3653) The  formula  similar  to  [7431c],  corresponding  to  the  second  satellite.  Is

[7486a]

P-{l+^,-sin-1530",864|

p'  = S "t . L  .  [7487a]

1— ^-^^4-sin.l530",864

substituting  the  values ^,, \, p  [6819,7375a],  we  get p'  =  0,0718845,  being  nearly [74876]
as  in  [7486'].

X  (3654) If  we  retain  only  the  two  greatest  terms  of  v'  [7467  lines  1,  4],  we  shall  get
from  [7487],

X=  ^7  .</.1367",95.sin.(0'— -n")+1192O",67.sin.2.(0'— e")?  ;  [7488a]

nat  \  /  I  \  /»

and  these  produce  respectively  the  two  terms  of  X  [7488]. For  the  first  term  of  [7488a]

d.{e' ■51")

is 367",95. — -.cos.(0' — to"); and  if  we  subtract  the  value  of  to"  [7408]  from  that [74886]

of  e'  [7440],  we  get  e -to"  =2°,66864+<.41 1383417"  ;  substituting  this  and  n'  [6025^] [7488c]
in  the  preceding  expression,  and  then  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds  636620",  it  becomes

^^'•IIIiiii^-^°'-^®~^''^' °' 0'00057793.cos.(e'-TO"), as  in [7488  line  1] [7488rf]
nearly. Again,  from [7386,  7440],  we obtain 0'—e"  =  335°,O9582-|- ^.207206791";
using  this  and  the  preceding  value  of  n',  we  find  that  the  second  term  of  [7488a]  gives  in '■ ^^
^ ,  11920",67 ^ 207206791"  ^.,  „.  ,  .  , i  , .  ,

^'^^'^'^ ■63^^-^-4lT4l242r'-"°^-^-^^-^)' ^^^^"^' ^^ ^^^""*'°"' ^^"^"^^^ ^7488^^
0,018861.cos.2.(©' — 0"). This  differs  a  little  from  that  given  by  the  author  in  the  original
work, O,O187249.cos.2.(0' — 0") ; we  have  given  the  corrected  value  with  the  letter  e
annexed,  to  denote  that  this  correction has  been  made ;  we  have  also  changed  sin.  into l''*°^^j
COS.  in  the  formula  [7488],  as  it  was  incorrectly  given  in  the  original  work.

VOL.  IV.  75

298  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

(7488n ^"  ^^'^  theory,  and  in  that  of  the  first  satellite,  we  may  neglect,  without  any
sensible  error,  the  factor,*

[7489]

1-  ^  J:^__il=^ ^l HcosV

Q

[74901 which  is  contained  in  the  value  of  T  [7094]. Now  putting  (l+p')*  —  =  ^i

we  shall  have,t

^  =  0,544120,.sin.(i;'+  5P,J3787— ^.153",8)  1

[7491J  — 0,001034,.sin.(i;'+  83°,29861  +  ^.7528",01)  2

— 0,005971, .sin.(2;'+208°,32562+^.28220",85)  3

— 0,082089,.sin.  (i;'4-285°,20, + 1, 1 337 1 5",77).  4
This  being  premised,  we  shall  have,!

*  (3655) The  factor  [7489]  for  the  second  satellite  is  easily  deduced  from  that  for  the
[7489a] third  satellite  [7433],  by  changing  n"  into  n', also  a"  into  a'; and  if  we  make  these

changes  in  the  expression  [74336],  we  shall  find  that  this  factor  will  become,  for  the  second

satellite,
[74896]  1+  ^  -^  —  li=^) .  ^,.sin.l530",864  I  .H.cos.V,

Substituting  the  values  [7433c,  6819],  it  becomes  very  nearly  equal  to  1 — 0,00027. cos.  P^;
[7489c] and  the  part  depending  on  cos.P produces  in  i  [7492],  a  term  of  the  order  l^'-cos.^";

which  is  so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected.  It  is  also  plain  that  the  term  depending  on
[7489£i] cos.?^  may  be neglected  for  the  Jirst  satellite,  because  each  of  the  two  terms  of  the

expression  [74896]  will  be  decreased  nearly  one  half,  by  changing  a'  into  a, and  n'  into

n,  as  is  evident  from  the  values  given  in  [6801,  60256].

f  (3656) The  expression  of  ^  [7490]  is  similar  to  that  which  is  assumed  in  [7434',  &:c.]

'■ ^^ for the other satellites. Substituting in it the values  of p', ^ [7486'], we  get

1  0718862
8,== ^  ./ ; so  that  the  value  of  (^  is  obtained  by  multiplying  the  expression  of  s

[/4JioJ  10718862

[7482],  by  the  factor "^  ;  hence  we  obtain  [7491}. In  computing  these  coefficients

[7491c]  the  author  has  neglected  to  multiply  the  numbers  by  the  factor  l-}-p'=  1,0718862,  so
that the numbers given in the original work, namely 0,507629, — 0,0009214,

[7491^1  — 0,005571,  — 0,076569,  are  too  small.  We  have  given  the  corrected  values  in  [7491],
and  have,  as  usual,  annexed  the  small  letter  c  to  denote  that  they  have  been  corrected.

J  (3657) The  numerical  coefficient  of  the  j^rs^;  term  of  [7492],  is  represented  by  — T^
[749  a\ jj^  [74366],  and  that  of  the  second  by T;  so  that  the  expression  of  t,  which  is  similar  to
[7436],  becomes  for  the  second  satellite,  when  the  terra  depending  on  cos.F"  is  neglected
[7488'J,

VIII.xiv.'^32].  THEORY  OF  THE  SECOND  SATELLITE.  299

t  =  -631",29. ^  ± 5975",7.(1— Z).v/i+X— f.  [7492]

n-i  11  •  I r ^  Duration

The  total  duration  t of  the  echpse  will  be,  °f,F^

t'  =  11951",4.(1— Z).v/rfX— 1^ .  [7493]

^=  — Tis.  ^  i  r.(l— X).v/i+X=|'2.  [74926]

Substituting T=  5975",7 [7485],  also  the  value  of  p,  in  parts  of  the  radius,  namely

(noKA"  2  r7492c  1

p  =  QS662(y'  "^  ^'1^^^^  [7486'],  it  becomes  as  in  [7492]. The  expression  of  f  [7493] ^ ^

is  found  as  in  [74376],  by  multiplying  the  second  term  of  [7492]  by ±2. The  terms

which  are  neglected  in  [7492]  may  be  estimated  as  in  [1431b-f] ;  thus  the  greatest  neglected

term is \T^^.h  [7437c]; and  by  substituting  the  values  of  T,  ^  [7492c],  it  becomes [7492^]

33".^. Now  the  maximum  value  of  h [7383ot],  is ^A"^ ; A  being,  as  in  [7383/],  the

chief  term  of  8^,  or  nearly A  =  ^  [7491  llnel]  ;  hence  this  value  of  b  is  b=:^A'^  =  -^\ [7492e]

nearly,  and  the  preceding  term  33".6  is  less  than  a  second. The  other  terms,  similar  to

r7492/'l
those  in  [7383^,  Sic],  may  evidently  be  neglected  from  what  has  been  said  in  the  notes  on "■ -^  ^

that  article.

300  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

CHAPTER  XV.

THEORy OF THE FIRST SATELLITE.

33. The  discussion  of  the  eclipses  of  this  satellite  has  given  for  its

mean  secular motion,  relative to the  vernal  equinox  of the  earth, the

following  expression,
[7494]  825826 1°,63035;

and  for  its  mean  longitude  at  the  epoch  of  1750,  the  value,
[7495]  16°,68093;

we  shall  therefore  put,
[7496]  0  =  16^,68093  4- ^.82582°,61 63035.

The  different  equations  of  the  centre  of  the  satellite  are  included  in  the  term

[7441c],
[7497]  ^  6v=—2h.sin.(nt-{-B—gt^T);

and  we  have  seen,  in  [7442], that  it  is  only  necessary  to  notice,  in  this
[7497'] tiieory,  the  third  and  fourth  values  of  ^. We  have,  in  [7191],  relative  to

the  third  value  of  g,  or  g^,
[7498]  /i  =  0,02381 11. r.

Now  we  have,  as  in  [7394],
[7499]  — 2r=1709",05; or ^  =  — 854",525  ;

therefore  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  the  first  satellite,  relative  to  the

value  of  g  or  g^,  is*

*(3658)  Substituting  h"  [7499]  in  [7498],  we  get  A=— 20'V347,  or  — 2A  =  40",69
nearly.  Using  the  value  of  g,  namely  g„,  in  [7497],  and  putting,  as  in  [6240*],
w^+e — g^t — ^2  =  ® — ^"j  it  becomes  as  in  [7500].  In  a  similar  manner  by  substituting
h'"  [7502],  corresponding  to  the  fourth  value  of  g  or  ^3,  in  [7501],  we  get  — 2A=19",0L
Hence  the  expression  [7497]  becomes  for  this  value  of  g  as  in  [7503],  by  using  the  same

VIII.xv.<§.33.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FIRST  SATELLITE.  301

6v  =  4O",69.sin.(0— :3").  [7500]

We  have,  relative  to  the  fourth  value  of  g  [7195,  7196],  [7500']

^  =  0,0020522,.;i'";  [7501]

and  in  [7310],

— 2A'"  =  9265",56  ; or A'"  =  —4632", 7 8;  [7502]

therefore  the  equation  of  the  centre,  relative  to  this  value  of  g  or  g^,  is  as
in  [74996],

Sv=  19",Ol,.sin.(0— t^'").  [7503]

If  we  substitute,  in  the  expression  of  6v  [6842],  the  values  of  m',  m",
[7143,  7144],  and  neglect  the  terms  depending  on  m'"*,  using  also  the  law
of  the  epochs  [7391], t

20_2e"  =  200°  +  30— 3e',  [7504]

we  shall  obtain,!

[7502']

[7499c]

reductions as above, and observing, as in [6240s], that for this case we have
nt-{-s — g^t — r3  =  0 — -c/". We  may  remark  that the  correction,  made  in  the  coefficient
0,0020322c  in  [7183a], changes  a  little  the  coefficient  of  the  inequaUty  [7503],  which, [7499rf]
in  the  original  work,  is 19",ll  instead  of  19",01c.

[7503a]

*  (3659)  The  greatest  coefficient  of  the  terms  depending  on  m"',  is  that  in
[6842  hne  11],  namely,  m'".3".6109;  which,  by  using  the  value  of  m'"  [7145],  becomes
I",5  ;  and  as  this  may  be  neglected  on  account  of  its  smallness,  we  may  much  more  safely
neglect  the  smaller  terms,  contained  in  [6842  lines  12, 13].

f  (3660) Changing  the  signs  of  all  the  terms  of  [7504],  and  then  adding  to  both
members  the  expression  30-30',  it  becomes,  by  a  sHght  reduction, © — 30'-|-2©"= — 200°;
differing  in  the  sign  of  the  second  member  from  the  expression  [6628_g-],  which  is  used  for
the  third  and  second  satellites  in  [7391,7449]. These  last  expressions  correspond  to  the [75046]
case  of  i  =  0, in  the equation  [66282'] ;  but  in  the  equation  [7504a  or  7504],  we  have

[7504a]

1(3661) We  have,  in  [6240/?], n't — nt-{-/—s  =  — (0—0'); substituting  this,  and
the  value  of  m'  [7143],  in  [6842  lines  1 — 5],  we  obtain  the  following  terms  of  5v,
5i,  =  — 43",55.sin.(0— ©')+5O5O",59.sin.2.(0— 0')+16",46.sin.3.(0— ©')
+3",76.sin.4.(0— 0')+l",3.sin.5.(0— ©');
the  term  in  [6842  line  6]  being  neglected  on  account  of  its  smallness. In  like  manner,  by
substituting  n"t—ni-{-^  —  s  =  —{e—e'') [6240p],  and m" [7144] in  [6842  lines  7, 8],
we  obtain  the  two  following  terms  of  5v;  the  terms  in  [6842  lines  9, 10] being  neglected
on  account  of  their  smallness ;

VOL.  IV.  76

[7505a]
[75056]

[7505c]

302

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

8v=— 43",56.sin. (e— .0')  1

qp 19",41,.cos.f.(0— e')  2

[7505]  '  +5O5O",59.sin.2.(0  — e')  3

+ O",O7.sin.3.(0  — e')  4

+ 3'',76.sm.4.(©  — 0O  6

+ r',58.sin.5.(e  — e')  6
The  values  of  Q,  corresponding  to  the  different  values  of  gj  are,*

[7505d]

[7505e ]

[7505/]
[7505^]

[7505A]

[7505i]

[7505^]
[7505Z  ]

[7505m]
[7505n]

[7505o]

Sv  =  — I9",41.sin.(0— 0")4-16",39.sin.2.(0— 0").
If  we  change  the  signs  of  all  the  terms  of  the  equation  [6628g'],  and  then  add  3© — 3e'  to
both  members, we  shall get  generally, i  being  an  integral  number, positive,  negative
or  zero,

20_20"  =  (_ooo°+400°.i )  +30—30'.
Taking  the  sine  of  this  expression  and  developing  the  second  member  by  [21]  Int., we  get
[7505/*]  ;  and  in  like  manner  the  sine  of  one  half  of  the  same  expression  gives  [7505o-] ;

sin.(20— 20")=sin.(— 2OO°+4OO°.i).cos.(30— 30')-|-cos.(— 2OO°4-4OO<'i).sin.(3©^30');
sin.(©  —  ©")=sin.(— lOO°-|-2OO°.i).cos.f.(0  — ©')+cos.(— 100°-f  2OO°.2).sin.i.(0— ©')•
Now  i  being  an  integer  or  zero  [6628/?],  we  evidently  have  sin.( — 200°-)-400°.i)  =0,
cos.(— 200°+400°.0  =—1  ;  sin.(— 100°+200°.i)  =  ±  1,  cos.(— 100°+200°.i)=0j
hence  the  expressions  [7505/,  g']  become,

sin.(20— 2©")  =  —sin. (3©— 3©') ;  sin.(0— ©")  =  ±  cos.f  .(©—©')  ;

and  by  substituting  these  values  in  [7505(ZJ,  it  changes  into,

5v  =  =F  19",41  .cos.|.(©— ©')— 16",39.sin.(3©— 3©').
Connecting  together  the  terms  of  6v  [7505&,  ^],  we  get,  very  nearly,  the  same  expression
as  in  [7505].  For  the  first,  second,  fourth  and  fifth  terms  of  [75056],  correspond
respectively  to  tliose  in  [7505  lines  1, 3,  5,  6]  ;  the  third  term  of  [7505&],  being  connected
with  the  second  of  [7505A:],  gives  [7505  line  4] ;  and  the  first  term  of  [7505A:]  is  the  same
as  that  in  [7505  line  2J.  The  coefficient  of  this  term  in  [7505  line  2],  is  given  by  the
author,  in  the  original  work,  in  the  form  — 19''',41,  without  noticing  the  double  sign  ^,
of  which  he  seems  not  to  have  been  aware  ;  we  have  inserted  the  double  sign,  putting  the
usual  mark  c  to  denote  that  the  coefficient  has  been  altered.  If  this  coefficient  were
important,  it  would  be  necessary  to  resort  to  the  usual  methods  of  investigating  it,  as  its  sign
could  not  be  determined  by  means  of  the  argument  © — ©' ;  and  the  method  of  reducing
the  terms  of  Sv  [7505(7]  to  the  same  form  as  those  in  [75056],  would  fail.  Fortunately,
however,  this  correction  is  so  small  that  it  hardly  affects  the  time  of  an  eclipse  f  of  a
second ;  so  that  Delambre  neglects  it  in  his  tables.

*  (3662) Substituting —  =  (l-\ ^ — ^V  [7453a],  in  the  expression  of  Q  [6860],

[7506o] .  ^ ^ 3001300"/

it  becomes  of  the  form  [75066] ;  and  by  proceeding  as  in  [7453a — c],  we  may  deduce
from  it  the  expressions  [7506c,  d,  ej.

VIII.  XV.  §  33.] THEORY  OF  THE  FIRST  SATELLITE.  303

Q  =  — 2,690499./t ;  [7506]

Q= 1,397738.^';  [7507]

Q= 0,208780.r;  [7508]

Q= 0,01 6482.^'".  [7509]

It  is  also  remarkable  that  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  first  satellite  is  rysjQi

more  sensible  in  the  inequality  depending  upon Q,  than  by  its  direct  action*

Substituting  /i"  =  — 854",525  [7499], and ^'"  =  — 4632",78  [7502],  we  [7510']

shall  have  the  two  inequalities.

Q  =  jP.m'.j— 16,850204 +6,118274.— ?  .A  ;  [75066]

=  F.in'.^— 16,850204.^-1-6,118274 l.h';  [7506c]

=  F.m'.^— 16,850204.-^,+6,118274.^|  .A";  [''^^1

=  F.m'.  i  —16,850204.  ^  +6,1 18274.  ^,  I  .  h'".  [7503e  ]

We  must  substitute m'  =  0,232355  [7143]  in  all  these  expressions. Then  in  [75066]  we

h'  [7506/]

must  put g  =  606989",9  and —  =0,0185238  [7176, 7177],  and  we  shall  get  the  value

of  Q,  as  in  [7506]  nearly. Again  substituting  the values  of  g^<, —  [7183,  7184], in

[7506c],  we  get  [7507]  ;  also  substituting  the  values  of  g^, t,, t,  [7190,  7191,  7192] [750%]

in  [7506(7], we  get  [7508]. Las:ly,  substituting  ^3, j^,„  ,  —,  [7195,  7196,  7197] in
[7506e],  we  get  [7509].

*  (3663) The  coefficient  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  is  — 2A  [7497] ;  and  that  of
the  inequality  [6850] is Q  =  — 2,690499.A  [7.506]; and this is greater than  the  ^^

numerical  value  of  the  preceding  expression. The  values  of  A,  A'  being  insensible  [7441'],
we  may  neglect  the  inequalities  depending  on  the  values  of  Q  [7506,  7507],  as  we  have
done  for  the  second  satellite  in  [7453il. The  value  A"  [7510']  being  substituted  in  [7508], r^gj^^,
gives Q= — 178",41  ;  hence  the  expression  [6850]  becomes,

6v  =  — 178",41.sin.(n<-^2n'^+£— 2/+^2^  +r,)  ;  [7510<ri

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7511  line  1],  by  substituting  the  value  [7453ni].
Again,  by  substituting  the^alue  of  A'"  [7510']  in  [7509],  we  get  Q  =  — 76",36;  hence ^''^^^'^
the  expression  [6850]  becomes,

6v  =  — 76",36.sin.(n^— 2n'^+£— 25'+^3^+r3)  ;  [7510/]

and  by  using  the  values  [1453m, jp],  it  is  reduced  to  the  form  [7511  line  2].

[7512^

Longitude
of  the  first
■atellite

304  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Cel.

5i,=:__178",41.sin.(0— 20'+^")  1

t''^"!  —  76",36.sin.(e— 2e'+^"').  2

[75121 As  the  inequality  [6883]  depending  upon  V  is  reduced  to  only  3",  we  may
neglect  it.*

Connecting  together  all  these  inequalities,  we  shall  have  in  eclipses,  in
which  we  may  suppose  2n  ==  2e  [7353e],t

1>  =  0+  40",69.sin. (e— ^")  1

+  19",01,.sin. (e—^)  2

—  43",56.sin. (e— e')  3
^rnaf zf  1 9",41e.C0S.f  .(© — e')  [this  term  is -19",41.8in.(e-e")] 4

+  5050",59.  sin.2.(e_0')  5

+ 16",26,.sin.4.(0— 0')  6

+ 1",58.  sin.  5.(0— ©')  7

—  178",41.sin. (0—20'+^")  8

—  76",36.sin. (e—2e'-i-v/").  9
We  shall  now  consider  the  motion  of the first satellite in latitude.

The  part,  J
[7514]  5=  (X— l).d'.sin.(2;+Y'),

of  the  expression  of  5  [6427  line  1],  becomes,  by  substituting the  values
of  X,  6\  *',

from  the
earth's

equinox.

[7513]

[7512o]

*  (3664)  Substituting  the  values  of  the  quantities  mentioned  in  [7400ff]  in  [6883],
it  becomes  Sv:=S'\sin.V  nearly ;  this  is  so  small  that  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of  a  new
argument  and  another  table  to  notice  it ;  the  author  has  therefore  neglected  it  in  [7512].

t  (3665) The  term  [6842  line  14,  6240/]  is  O",146O.sin.2.(0— n),  which  vanishes  in

•• •' eclipses  where  2n  =  2©  [7512'J  ; we  may  also  observe  that  this  term  is  always  insensible.

Now  connecting  together  the  terms  in [6947e,  7500, 7503, 7505, 7511],  neglecting  the

very  small  term  in  [7505  line  4],  and  adding  to  the  sum  the  longitude  of  the  epoch  e,  we

[75136] get  V  [7513]. We  may  observe  that  the  author  omitted  the  term  in  [6947e],  making  the

coefficient  in  [7513  line  6] 4-3",76,  instead  of  the  corrected  value 16",266.

X  (3666)  In  the  original  work  the  formula  [7514]  is  given  under  the  fonn
(I — '>^).(^.sm.{v-\-pt-{-A)  ;  we  have  altered  it,  so  as  to  make  it  conform  to  [6427  line  1]  j  in

[75146]  the  same  manner  as  we  have  done  for  the  second  and  third  satellites,  in  [7468a,  7413ct,  &c.];
and  by  proceeding  as in  [74686,  7413d], we may change the  formula  [7514]  into

[7514c]  s  =  (l— X).3°,4352.sin.(v+51°,3787— M53",8).  Now  substituting  the  values  of  X
[7206],  it  becomes  as  in  [7515].

VIII.  XV.  ^  33.]

THEORY  OF  THE  FIRST  SATELLITE.

305

5  =  3^43320.sifl.(t;-f51o,3787— ^.I53",8).
The  term s  =  Ls'm.(v-\-pt-{-A),  of  the  same  expression  of  5  [6427  line  2],
which  corresponds  to  the  peculiar  inclination  of  the  Orbit  of  the  first  satellite,
has  hitherto  been  found  to  be  insensible. We have,  relative  to  the  second
and  third  values  of  p  [7233,  7238],

I  =  0,0207938./' ; [7234]
/=  0,0111626./". [7239]
The  term s  =  l.s\n.(v-\-pt-]-A)  [7516],  becomes,  relative  to  these  values,*
s  =  —  25",49  .sin.(i;+208°,32562-f  ^.28220",85)  ;  1

— 107",14,.sin.(v-f-285°,20,  +  ^.133715",77)  ;  2

as  it  regards  the  other  values  of  j?,  this  term  is  insensible  in  eclipses
[751 8^/,  e].  We  might  therefore  neglect,  without  any  sensible  error,  all  the
terms  of  s  which  are  contained  in  [6931  ].t  We  shall  however  retain  the
terrain  [6931  line  2],

s  =  0,00015312.(1— L').sm.(v—2U—pt— a),
which  becomes, relative to  the  inclination  of  the equator  to  the orbit  of
Jupiter,!

[7515]
[7516]

[7516']

[7517]

[7517']

[7518]

[7519]
[7520]

*  (3667)  Substituting  in  [7517]  the  value  of  Z'  =— 5152",2  [7471],  corresponding  to
the  second  value  of  p  [7233],  we  get  /  =  — 107",14,  producing  in  s  [7516],  the  term
s  =  — I07",14.sin.(»-|-285°,20c  +  ^.133715",77),  as  in  [7518  line  2];  observing  that  in  the
original  work  the  coefficient  is  — 105",04,  which  we  have  changed  into  — 107",14c.  In
like  manner,  by  substituting  in  [7517']  ibe  value  of  I"  =  — 2283",9  [7415],  corresponding
to  the  third  value  of  p  [7238],  we  get  /  =  — 25",49,  producing  in  s  [7516]  the  term
[7518  line  1].  We  may  neglect  the  Jirst  value  of  p,  because  the  term  /  [7516']  is
insensible.  We  may  also  neglect  the  term  depending  on  the  fourth  value  of  jp  [7245],
and  Z=0,0019856.r  [7246]  ;  which,  by  using  /'"  =  — 2771",6  [7329],  gives  Z=— 5";
which  is  so  small  that  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of  a  new  argumen-t  and  another  table,  in
order  to  notice  it.

[7518a]
[75186]
[7518c]

[7518(i]
[7518e]

t  (3668)  Substituting  the  value  of  m'  [7143]  in  the  coefficient  of  the  term  of  s
[6931  line  1],  it  becomes  s=:0,0008(Z'  — Z).sin.(3u — 4u' — pt — a);  and  as  the  greatest  value
of  r — I,  corresponding  to  either  of  the  angles  jj,  in  [7482,  7522],  is  about  5000",  this
inequality  will  not  exceed  4",  which  is  too  small  to  be  introduced  by  a  new  argument  and  [75196]
a  new  table  ;  and  by  neglecting  it,  the  expression  is  reduced  to  the  term  in  [6931  line  2],
which  is  the  same  as  [7520].

{  (3669) The  expression  of  s  [7520]  is  similar  to  that  of  a'"  [7341],  and may  be
derived  from  it  by  changing X'"  into  X, v'"  into  v, V"  into  Z, and 0,001447815  into
VOL.  IV.  77

[7521 «]

306

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.

[Mec.  Cel.

[7521]

[7521']

Latitude
of  I  lie  <ii8t
satellite

[7522]

[7523]

[7523']

[7524]
[7525]

s  =  5",26.sin.(r— 2C7— 5I°,3787-f  ^.153",8)  ;
Connecting  together  all  these  terms [7515*  7518,  7521],  we  shall  have  in
eclipses,  in  which  we  may  suppose  2U  =2v  [7353e],

s=  34326',7.sin.(y-f-  51°,3787--^.153",8) [752%]  1

—  25",49.sin.(?J+208°,32562+^.28220",85)  2

— 107",14,.sin.(2;-j-285°,20,H-M33715",77).  3

To  obtain  the  duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the  first  satellite.  We  shall  resume
the  formula  [7080],

In  this  formula,  T  is  the  mean  semi-duration  of  the  eclipses  of  the  satellite
in  its  nodes  [7069].  Delambre  has  found  this  semi-duration  to  be
T=4713"  [7562],  by  means  of  the  observations  which  have  been  made
since  the  use  of  achromatic  telescopes.  Therefore  we  shall  assume  this  value
of  T.  Moreover  |3  is  tbe  mean  synodical  motion  of  the  satellite,  during
the  time  T  [7373];  and  we  have*  |3=  106516"  [7524a];  also  in  this
casef p'  =  0,0716667. The  value  of  X,  as  in  [7376'],  is  represented  very

0,00015312;  observing  also  that  the  factor  (1— V")-3%4352=2°.98051  [7323^  or  7346],
becomes  for  the  first  satellite  (1— X).3°,4352  =  3°,43320,  as  in  [7514c,  7515].  Now
making  the  same  changes  in  the  expression  of  s'"  [7346],  which  is  derived  from  s"  [7341],
we  get  the  corresponding  term  of  s,  namely,

s=z3°,4.3320x0,00015312.sin.(i>— 26^— 5r,37S7+M53",8),
which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7521].  In  eclipses,  where  2C7  =  2u  [73536],  the
expression  [7521]  becomes  s  =  — 5",26.sin.(w+51°,3787 — ^.153",8) ;  and  by  connecting
it  with  the  term  in  [7515],  it  becomes  as  in  [7522  line  1],  We  may  observe  that  the
coefficient  5",26  [7521],  ought  to  be  reduced  to  about  S",  as  we  have  shown  in  [6930/']  ;
and  this  would  increase  the  factor  in  [7522  line  1]  by  the  small  quantity  0,00023  nearly,
making  it  34329",0c.  The  terms  in  [7522  lines  2,  3]  are  the  same  as  those  in
[7518  lines  1,  2]  respectively.  As  it  regards  the  terms  depending  on  the  mutual  action  of
the  satellites,  we  may  put  L'=0  [6415],  and  then  [7520]  becomes,

a'  =0,00015312.Z.sin.(»— 26'— p^— a)  ;
and  by  using  the  values  of  I  [7518,  Sic],  it  becomes  insensible.

*  (3670) We  have,  in  like  manner  as  in [73746], ^=(n — M).T; substituting

471 V
n--iV/  =  825488799" [6025n], and T=^———— ,==^0,0001290349  [752-3'],  in  parts  of
[7524a]  3oo2o000

a  Julian  year,  it  becomes ^  =  106516",  as  in  [7525].

r7526al ^  (3671) Changing  in  [7487rt] a'  into  a,  we  get  the  value  of  p',  corresponding  to  the
first  satellite,

[75211]
[7521c]

[7521  rf]

[7521c]
[7521/]

[7521g]
[7521A]

VIlI.xv.<^33.]  THEORY  OF  THE  FIRST  SATELLITE.  307

dv
nearly  bj X  =  -—  —  1  ;  so  that  bj  noticing  only  the  greatest  term  of  v, [7526]

we  shall  have  very  nearly,*

X  =  O,OO79334.cos.2.(0— 0').  [7527]

Putting  ^  =  (l+p').  — ,  we  shall  have,t  [7528]

^=  0,345364  .sin.(v-l-  6P,3787— ^I53",8)  1

—0,000256  .sin.(?;+208°,32562+^28220",85)  2 [7529]

— 0,001078,.sin.(i;+285°,20,  +  ^.I33715",77).  3
This  being  premised,  we  shall  have,t

t  =«  —  788",55. ^  ±  4713".(1— X).v/i4-X— f  ;  [7530]

p.  jl_j_^.sin.l530",864|

[75266]

a

Substituting  the  values — , \f p  [6810,7375a],  we  get p,  as  in  [7525].

o"

*  (3672) Noticing  only  the  great  inequality  of  v,  contained in [7513  line  5],  namely
«  =  5050",59 .sin. 2.(0 — ©'),  we  get,  by  substituting  it  in the  expression of X  [7526],

[7527a]

X=5O5O",59.?^^^^^^.cos.2.(0— 0'). Now  we  have,  from  [7449,7488c],  '^''^^''^^

d.(e—e')  =  2^.(0'—©'')  =  2  X  207206791".  [7527c  ]

Substituting  this  and  n  [6025^],  we  get,  by  dividing  by  the  radius  in  seconds  636620",

^ 5050",59 4x207206791"  ^  ,  ,, ^  n^-rn^c.o «  /  /x

X= ~  X  -T^TT-x ;r-  .cos.2.(-0 — e')  =  O,OO79622.cos.2.(0— ©')  :  r7527dl

63G620"  825826010  v  /  '  V  y  >  L/o*/aj

which  differs  a  little  from  [7527]  ;  but  this  difference  has  no  sensible  effect  on  the  value  of

t  [7530].

t  (3673) From  [7525]  we  get -±^  = \^^-^^^„  • Multiplying s  [7522] by this

"factor,  we  get  the  expression  of  ^  [7528],  as  in  [7529]. The  coefficient  of  the  third  line
of  the  original  is —0,001037, instead of  — 0,001078,;  the  difference  arises  from  the [75296]
correction  in  the  coefficient  of  s  [7522  line  3],  spoken  of  in  [75186].

X  (3674) The  expression  of  t  is  easily  deduced  from  that  in  [74925],  corresponding
to  the  second  satellite,  by  changing  v'  into  v  ;  hence  we  have,

t=  —  T^.  ^  ±  T.(l— X).v/l+X-^2.  [7530a]

106516 ..^ii._fc..
Substituting T  =  4713"  [752.3'], and in  parts  of the  radius P  =  ^^^  [7525],  or [75306]

308  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  Gel.

Duration

of"!*'"" and  the  whole  duration  of  the  eclipse  will  be,

eclipse.

[7531]  t'  =  9426".(l-Z).v/iTX-::?»^

[7530c ]

T^  =  788",55,  it  becomes  as  in  [7530]. Multiplying  the  term  of  [7530],  connected  with

the  radical,  by  ±2,  we  get,  as  in  [74376],  the  expression  of  t'  [7531].

The  terms  which  are  neglected  in  [7530],  may  be  estimated  as  in  [7492c?,  74376,  Sic] ;

thus  the  chief  term \T^^.h  [7437c],  by  substituting  T=4713"  [7523'],  and  in  parts  of
[7530rf] the  radius  p==^  nearly,  becomes  65".6. The  maximum  value  of  6  being  ^^"^  [7383m];

and  A  is  nearly  equal  to  the  chief  term  of  (^,  which  is  about  equal to  ^  [7529  line  1] ;

hence  this  maximum value  becomes h  =  \.{^Y=:^-^\^; therefore the preceding  term
'■ *■' 65".6  is  less  than  half  a  second  at  its  maximum. The  other  terms  may  be  neglected  as

in  [7383g',  &;c.].

VIII.xvi.<5>34]. DURATION  OF  THE  ECLIPSES  OF  THE  SATELLITES.  309

CHAPTER  XVI.

ON THE DURATION OF THE ECLIPSES OF THE  SATELLITES.

34.  We  have  given,  in  [7107—7110],  the  expression  of  the  sine  of  the
angle  q  [7104],  described  by  each  satellite  in  half  the  time  of  the  duration
of  the  eclipse  ;  supposing  the  planet  to  be  at  its  mean  distance  from  the  sun,
and  the  satellite  in  its  node,  and  at  its  mean  distance  from  Jupiter  ,•  also  that  ^75001
the  satellite  is  eclipsed  at  the  moment  its  centre  enters  into  the  shadow  of
the  planet.  Dividing  this  angle  q  by  the  circumference  400°,  and
multiplying  the  quotient  by  the  time  of  the  synodical  revolution  of  the
satellite,  we  obtain  the  half  time  of  the  duration  of  the  eclipse.  The
difference,  between  this  and  the  observed  time,  represents  the  whole  effect
of  the  error  of  the  preceding  supposition,  and  of  the  errors  of  the  other
elements,  which  enter  into  the  calculation.  We  shall  now  resume  the
expressions  [7107 — 7110]  ;

(l+p).i?' C  a'" (I  — \) a'"  >  .  ,_^^,

a!"

(1  +  P)-

R'

a'"

(1  +  p).

R'

ai"

(1  +  P).

R'

( a"' (1  — X,) a'"  I  . .,

.  5 1 -  (-Ir^  .  g  j  =  sin.?'".  [7536]

[7534]
[7535]

[7537]

{\-{-p).R'  being,  as  in [7018c,  c?],  the  semi-diameter  of  Jupiter's  equator;
we  shall  have,  by  means  of  [6785,  6786],

{1+P).R'  _  ^.120^3704

a^'  ~ 1530",864 '  ^7538]

We  have,  as  in [6787], a'"  =  25,43590. This  value  of a'"  is  deduced
VOL.  IV.  78

310  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C^l.

[7539]

[7541 a]

from  the  preceding  equation,  by  putting  (1-f  p).i2' equal  to  unity  [6786]  ;
therefore  we  shall  have,

[7540]  -,r, .  a =  1  ;

hence  we  obtain,*

(I  +  p).J?' a'"  1

[7541]  -,7, •  V  =  7  '

"■  a  a  a

[7542] ^^®  value  of  a  being  that  which  is  given  in [6797]. Then  we  have,  as
in  [7025],

[7543]  X =  (i±Pll^  .

'  R

R  being  the  sun's  semi-diameter,  when  viewed  from  Jupiter.f Its  diameter,

when  observed  at  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  is
[7544]  ^Q'iR"

5936"  =  32'»,3^264;  therefore,  when  viewed  from  Jupiter,  it  is  2R=  -^j-:
[7545]  ^ '  D' '

D'  being  the  mean  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun  [7085],  that  of  the

earth  from  the  sun  being  taken  for  unity. Now  we  have,  by  means  of

^''^^^^ [6786,7537],  2.(l+p).i2'=  120",3704;  hence  we  get,t

*  (3675) IVIuItiplying  [7540]  by — , we get  the expression  of  the first  term  of

[7533],  equal  to  — ,  as  in  the  second  member  of  [7541]. In  like  manner  the  first  terms

of  [7534,  7535,  7536],  are  represented  by —  , — , —  respectively  ;  using  the  values  of
a,  a',  a'^  a'"  [6797—6800].

f  (3676) In  [6982]  R  is  taken  for  the  sun's  actual  semi-diameter,  and  in  [7018c]  R'
'■ "^ is  the  polar  serai-axis, also  2.(1 -|-p).^' the  equatorial  diameter  of  Jupiter ;  but  as  only

the  ratio  oi  R'  to  R  occurs  in  [7543],  under  the  form  — ,  we  may  substitute  the  apparent

[75446] semi-diameters  of  these  bodies  as  viewed  from  the  same  distance,  as  for  example,  the  mean
distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  sun,  which  is  the  same  as  the  mean  distance  of  that  planet  from

5936"
the  earth;  so  that  we  may  put,  as  in  [7545],  2jR==^— -; this  being the sun's diameter
[7544c ]  ^

as  seen  from  Jupiter;  and  as  in  [6786  or  7546] 2.(l+p').jR'=  120",3704  equal  to  the
[7544rf] equatorial  diameter  of  Jupiter,  as  seen  from  the  sun  or  from  the  earth,  at  the  mean  distance
of  Jupiter  from  either  of  these  bodies.

X (3677) The expression of \ [7543], may be put under the form,
[7547o]  1

X,  =  {2.(l-f  p).ll'}.  — ;  now  substituting  the  values  of  2.(l+p)./2'=120",3704  [7546],

VIII.  xvi.§34.] DURATION  OF  THE  ECLIPSES  OF  THE  SATELLITES. 311

h  = ^^^, =  0,105469.  [7547]

Moreover  we  have,*

^1^-)^ .  ^  =  ^^~^^^-^  =  ^.sin.l20",3704  =  0,0000945387.  [7548]
Hence  we  deduce  from  [7547,  7548],

^^'^l)''^' .  -^ .  ^-^  =  0,000801 823.  [7549]
Therefore  the  four  equations  [7533 — 7536]  become,f

1 0,000801823  ==sin.g;  [7550]

—  —  0,000801 823  =  sin.^' ;  [7551]

L.  __  0,000801823  =  sin.gr"  ;  . [7552j

\  —  0,000801 823  =  sin.^''^  [7553]

1  D'  120"  3704  D '

^  =  593G^  t"^^^^^'  '^^  set  \  = 593q/ ,  as  in  the  first  expression  [7547]  j  and  by ^^^^^^^

using J9'  =  5,20116636 [4079], it  becomes X,  =  0,105469,  as  in  [7547]; whence

(1-Xj  [75476]

^ ^^=8,481427.

>-.

*  (3678) The  factor  in the  first  member  of  [7548] being  muUiplied by -^ — ^,

Xi [7548a]

produces,  in  [7549],  the  numerical  value  of  the  second  term of  each  of  the  equations

[7533—7536];  and  we  have  obtained,  in  [7547 &],  the  value  of  ^^^ ;  also that  of  the [75486]

Xi

factor  [7548]  may  be  reduced  to  its  second  form S:', — ,  by  rejecting  a'",  which  occurs

...  [7548c]

in  its  numerator  and  denominator. Now  (l-f-p).R'  being  Jupiter's  equatorial  semi-diameter

[7544a], and  D'  the  mean  distance  of  Jupiter  from  the  earth,  the  expression — — —

will  express  nearly  the  sine  of  half  the  semi-diameter,  or  very  nearly  half  the  sine  of  the ^ ^

whole  diameter  120",3704  [7544c],  as  in  [7548]. Multiplying  this  by ^— ^  [75476],  we

Xx

get  [7549].

t  (3679) The  first  terms  of  the  equations  [7533 — 7536]  are  given  in  [7541a],  and  the
second  term in [7549] ; substituting  these  in [7533—7536], we get [7550—7553] [7550a]
respectively. Substituting  the  values  of  a,  a',  a",  a'"  [6797 — 6800],  we  get  the  values  of
?'  f^^  i'^  f  [7554—7557].

312  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITFR.  [Mec.  Cel.

Substituting  the  values  of  a,  a\  a"  a'"  [6797 — 6800],  we  obtain,
L7554]  q =  111780";

[7555]  q'  =  69846"  ;

[7556]  q"  =  43344";

[7557]  q'"  =  24524"  ;

which  give  the  following  values  for  the  half  duration  of  the  eclipses  ;*

[7558] L  Satellite,  4945", 87 ;

[7559] II.  Satellite,  6205",93;

[7560] III.  Satellite,  7801",30 ;

[7561] IV.  Satellite,  10271",64.

The  observed  semi-durations  are,

[7562] I.  Satellite,  4713"; [7524]

[7563] II. Satellite,  5976"; [7485]

[7564] III.  Satellite,  7419"; [7429]

[7565] ^ IV.  Satellite,  9890". [7372]

They  are  all  of  them  less  than  the  calculated  semi-durations,  which  ought
to  be  the  case  on  account  of  the  disks  of  the  satellites ;  for  although  these
disks  are  small,  they  are  of  a  sensible  magnitude,  when  viewed  from  Jupiter's
centre.  A  satellite  does  not  therefore  disappear  at  the  moment  of  the
[7566]  entrance  of  the  centre  of  its  disk  into  Jupiter's  shadow,  and  the  semi-duration
of  the  eclipse  is  diminished  by  the  time  which  elapses  between  the  entrance
of  the  centre,  and  the  disappearance  of  the  satellite.  It  may  also  be
decreased  by  the  refraction  of  the  sun's  light,  in  passing  through  Jupiter's
atmosphere  ;  but  it  is  increased  by  the  penumbra.  These  various  causes
are  not  however  sufficient  to  account  for  the  difference  between  the  observed
and  calculated  semi-durations. This  will  appear  by  considering  the  eclipses

|.-_  Q  •  (3680) The  synodical  motion  of  the  first  satellite  is n — M  seconds  [6025n]  in  one

Julian  year,  or  36525000"  ;  hence  the  time  of  describing  a  synodical arc  of  one  second  is

36525000"

— _ . IMultiplying  this  by  the  arc q  [7554],  we  get  the  time [7558J. In  like

[75586  ]

[7558c]

, • ^-,^.r^-,  •  J  1. 36525000" , , . ,-,^^^1  , 36525000" „

manner,  the  time  [7559J  is  represented  by — , — — —  .  q  ;  that  m  [75oOJ  by  — -^ — —- .  q ;

36525000"
lastly,  that  in  [7561]  by — -,,_ .g'". Substituting  the  values  of  n — M,  &c.  [6025n],

we  get  the  values  [7558 — ^7561],  as  given  by  the  author  very  nearly.

VIII.  xvi.  §  34.] DURATION  OF  THE  ECLIPSES  OF  THE  SATELLITES.  313

of  the  first  satellite,  in  which  the  effects  of  the  penumbra,  and  of  the  refracted
light  in  Jupiter's  atmosphere,  are  but  of  small  moment. To  obtain  the
width  of  the  disk,  viewed  from  Jupiter's  centre,  we  shall  suppose  the  density [7567]
of  the  satellite  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  planet ;  then  taking,  for  unity,
the  semi-diameter  of  Jupiter,  we  shall  find  that  the  apparent  semi-diameter

of the satellite, viewed  from  Jupiter's  centre,  will be  equal  to* ^—^

[7568]

Substituting  the  values  of  a,  m  [6797,7162],  we  shall  obtain  2890",93,  for
this  semi-diameter.  This  angle  being  multiplied  by  the  time  of  the  synodical
revolution  of  the  satellite,  and  the  quotient  divided  by  400°,  gives  127",913  r^gggi
for  the  diminution  of  the  semi-duration  of  the  eclipse,  depending  upon  the
magnitude  of  its  disk.  Subtracting  this  quantity  from  4945",870  [7558],  [7570]
we  get  4817",957  for  the  calculated  semi-duration.  This  semi-duration  is
greater  than  the  observed  time  [7562],  and  yet  there  is  reason  to  believe
that  the  satellite  disappears  before  it  is  wholly  immersed  in  the  shadow. [7571]

[7568a]

*  (3681) Jupiter's  mass  being  1,  and  that  of  the  satellite  m,  their  radii  will  be  as

3

1 :  ^m,  supposing  their  densities  to  be  equal ; so  that  Jupiter's  radius  being  1  [6786],

3

that  of  the  satellite  will  be \/m. Dividing  this  by  the  distance  of  the  satellite  from  Jupiter

a,  we  obtain  very  nearly  the  sine  of  the  angle  under  which  that  radius  or  half-diameter

3  [75686]

appears  when  viewed  from  Jupiter's  centre  =  — , as  in  [7568]. Substituting  the  values

of  a,  m  [6797,7162],  we  find  that  it  corresponds  to  sin.2890",93,  as  in  [7568]  ;  observing

that,  in  the  original  work,  this  semi-diameter  is  erroneously  marked 2809",93  j and  the [7568c]

whole  diameter  is  given  in  [7574]  equal  to  5619"'j86,  instead  of  5781"',86. The  time  of

describing  the  arc  2890"j93,  by  the  synodical  motion,  may  be  obtained  by  the  method

36525000"
pointed  out  in  [7569],  or  by  multiplying  it  by  the  factor ^-r—  [75536],  which  gives [7568e]

[7568rf]

[7568/]

127",913  for  the  diminution  of  the  semi-duration  of  the  eclipse,  as  in  [7569]  ;  and  by
doubling  it  we  get  255",826  for  the  time  requisite  for  the  whole  disk  to  enter  into  ihe
shadow,  as  in  [7574]. Proceeding  in  the  same  manner  with  the  other  satellites,  we  have,

/m'  \/m!'  s/in!"  [7568g-]

as  in  [75686],  for  their  diameters,  the  expressions 2.  — p  , 2.  -^  , 2.  -—  ;  and  by

using  the  values  of  a',  a",  d"  [6798—6800],  and  those  of  m',  m",  id"  [7163—7165], [7568A]
they  become  as  in  the  first  column  of  the  table  in [7575 — 7577]. Multiplying  these
expressions,  as  in [7568e],  by  36525000", and  then  dividing  the  products  by  w' — M,
n" — M,  ti" — M.  [6025n]  respectively,  we  get  very  nearly  the  times  in  the  second  column [7568&]
of  the  table  [7575—7577].

VOL.  IV.  79

314  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  JUPITER.  [Mec.  C61.

Hence  it  appears  that  we  must  decrease,  by  at  least  y^th  part,  the  assumed
f''^^^^ diameter  of  Jupiter  120",3704  [6786],  so  as  to  reduce  it  to 118".

If  we  compute,  in  the  same  manner,  the  disks  of  the  satellites  viewed  from
[7573] Jupiter's  centre,  and  the  times  they  require  to  enter  perpendicularly  into  the

shadow,  we  shall  obtain  the  following  results.

Diska  of  the  Satellites,  viewed  from  Jupiter's  centre,  Times  required  for  the  whole  disk

at  their  mean  distances  from  the  planet.  to  enter  into  the  shadow.

[7574]  I.  Satellite,  5781",86, 255", 826 ;

[7575]  . II.  Satellite,  4007",30 356",055 ;

[7.576]  III.  Satellite,  3923",44 702",914;

[7577]  IV.  Satellite,  1749",04 732",567.

Hence  it  is  easy  to  determine  the  times  when  the  satellites,  or  their  shadows,
[7578]  enter  into  or  quit  the  disk  of  Jupiter.  Comparing  these  times  with  those
which  are  observed,  we  shall  obtain  the  densities  of  the  satellites  of  Jupiter,
when  their  masses  shall  be  well  known.  The  observations  of  these  eclipses
of  Jupiter  by  his  satellites,  may  throw  much  light  upon  their  theory.  We
can  almost  always  observe  the  beginning  and  end  of  them  ;  and  these
observations  can  be  made  with  the  satellites  and  with  their  shadows,  so  that
they  are  really  equivalent  to  four  observations  ;  whilst,  in  general,  we  cannot
[7579]  observe  more  than  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  an  eclipse  of  a  satellite.
This  kind  of  observations,  which  has  been  very  much  neglected,  deserves
therefore  the  utmost  attention  of  astronomers.

VIII.xvii.^35.]  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS.  315

CHAPTER  XVII.

ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATUBN.

[7580]

35.  The  theory  of  the  satellites  of  Saturn  is  very  imperfect,  since  we
have  not  a  sufficient  number  of  observations  to  determine  their  elements.
The  impossibility  of  observing  their  eclipses,  and  the  difficulty  of  measuring
their  elongations  from  Saturn,  have  prevented  the  determination,  with  much
accuracy,  of  any  of  the  elements,  except  the  times  of  revolution  and  the
mean  distances ;  and  even  with  respect  to  these  distances  there  is  a  degree
of  uncertainty,  which  leaves  some  doubt  upon  the  value  which  results  for
the  mass  of  this  planet.  Now  as  we  do  not  know  the  values  of  the
excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  these  satellites,  it  is  impossible  to  give  the  [7580']
theory  of  their  perturbations.  But  there  is  one  phenomenon  which  deserves
the  attention  of  mathematicians  and  astronomers,  namely,  the  constant  position  [7581]
of  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  in  the  plane  of  the  ring ;  excepting,  however,  the
plane  of  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite,  ivhich  varies  sensibly  from  the  plane  of
the  ring.  This  phenomenon  is  analogous  to  that  which  we  have  explained,
in  the  last  chapter  of  the  fifth  book  [3689,  &c.],  relative  to  the  permanency
of  Saturn^s  rings  in  the  same  plane.  We  have  already  observed,  in
[3689,  3692,  &c.],  that  both  these  phenomena  depend  on  the  same  cause,
namely,  the  oblateness  of  Saturn;  whose  action  keeps  the  rings  and  the
satellites  in  the  plane  of  its  equator.  We  shall  now  explain  the  reason  why
the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  varies  from  that  plane  in  a  very  sensible
manner.
We  shall  resume  the  equation  [6295],  t

^ dds ,  r2 C  fdR\ ds fdR\  }

If  we  neglect  the  ellipticity  of  the  orbit,  we  shall  have r  =  a, and h^  =  a, [7584]

[7581']

[7582]

316  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  Cel.

[7584'] [6299a]. Moreover,  if  we  take  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  satellite  for  the  fixed
plane,  s  will  be  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces ;  therefore  by  neglecting

the  square  of  these  forces,  ive  may  reject  the  products  of  s  and —  by  these

forces. Hence  the  equation  [7583]  becomes,*

We  shall  suppose  that  this  equation  is  for  the  outer  satellite  of  Saturn,  and
we  shall  proceed  to  ascertain the  corresponding  value  of  R. In  the  first

Part  of  ^  ^ ^  .

R place  we  shall  have,  by  noticing  only  the  sun's  action,t

[7587]  -'«'  D~^  2IP  2D^

We  shall  use  the  following  symbols  :
[7587'j The  axis  of  x  is  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  Saturn  to  the  ascending

node  of  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  satellite  upon  the  orbit  of  Saturn  ;
[7588] X is  the  inclination  of  the  primitive  orbit  of the  satellite  to the orbit

of  Saturn;
[7588'] X',  y,  are  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  sun's  place,  referred  to  the

centre  of  Saturn, and  to  the  relative  orbit  of  the  sun  about  Saturn ;

the  axis  of  X  being  the  same  as  that  of  x ;
[7588"] U  is  the  angle  included  between  the  sun's  radius  vector  D,  and  the  axis  x

or  X.

*  (3682)  In  this  case  R  and  (~)  [6030,6039,  6042,  &c.],  are  each  of  the  order  of
[7586a]  ^^^^ ^^

the disturbing masses  ; hence (~t~)  '~r  }  is  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  these  masses;

and  by  rejecting  it  from  [7533],  we  obtain  [7586].

t  (3683)  The  expression  of  R,  corresponding  to  the  action  of  the  sun  S  upon  the
[7587o] outer  satellite  m  of  Saturn,  as  it  is  given  in  [7587],  is  of  exactly  the  same  form  as  that  in

[6042e],  relative  to  the  sun's  action  upon  Jupiter's  satellite  m ;  the  symbols  being  the  same
[75876] ^^  ^^  [6021 — 6033], merely  changing  what  relates  to  Jupiter  and  its  satellite  into  the

corresponding  quantities  relative  to  Saturn  and  its  satellite  respectively.  Thus  X,  Y,  Z
r7587cl [^^^^1'  i"^  the  present  article,  represent  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  sun,  referred  to

the  centre  of  gravity  of  Saturn  as  their  origin,  supposing  this  centre  to  be  at  rest,  and  the

sun  to  describe  a  relative  orbit  about  Saturn.  In  like  manner,  x,  y,  z  [6022]  represent
[7587rf] t^®  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  outer  satellite  m,  referred  to  the  centre  of  gravity  of

Saturn  as  their  origin,  &c.

VI]I.xvii.<§»35.]
Then  we  have,*

X  =  a.cos.v

TERMS  OF R

Y=Y'.cos.X;

Z  =  — F.sin.x.
X'=D.cos.U;
T=D.sm.U;

y=a.s\n.v; z=as;

317

[7589]
[7590]
[7591]
[7592]
[7593]
[7594]

JFi^.  96.

s'

-^■■:;:^  Sun

^y::^^

Y

/

y

i

*  (3684)  We  shall  suppose  in  ihe  annexed  figure,  that  C  represents  the  place  of  the
centre  of  the  planet  Saturn,  which  is  considered  as  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates.  The
plane  of  the  figure  is  the  primitive
orbit  of  the  outer  satellite,  vvhicli  is
taken  for  the  fixed  plane  of  ory,
[7584']  ;  the  axis  of  x  being  the
line  CJV,  drawn  from  the  centre  of
Saturn  to  the  ascending  node  of  the
primitive orbit above the sun's

relative orbit  about Saturn, being ^  Lineojnodes,  JV or  axis  of  x.

the  same  as the descending  node  Saijirn

'of  the  sun^s  orbit  below  the  fixed  plane  of  ocy  [7587'].  5  is  the  place  of  the  sun,  whose
rectangular  co-ordinates  are  represented,  as  in  [7537cJ,  by

CN=  X, NS'  =  r, .S"*S'=  —Z ;
the  negative  sign  being  prefixed  to  Z,  because  the  line  NS  is  supposed  to  fall  below  the
plane  of  xy  [7589c?]. We  have  also,  as  in  [7588'J,

CjY=X',  JVS=Y',  angle  SiV,S"  =  X.

Now  in  the  rectangular  triangle  J^S'S,  we  have  NS' =  NS.cos.SNS' =^  Y'.cos.'k;
SS'  =  NS.s\n.SjYS'=Y'.s\v..K.  Substituting  these  in  the  values  of  Y,  — Z  [7589f],
we  get  [75£0,  7591]  respectively.  The  equation  [75S9J  is  obtained  by  putting  the  two
expressions  of  CA'  [7589e,  g]  equal  to  each  other.  Again  we  have  CS  =  D
[6027,75875],  angle  SCN=U  [75S8"J  ;  hence  in  the  rectangular  triangle  CJVS,
we  have,

CN=  CS.cos.SCN=  B.cos.U;  JVS=CS.sm.SCJV=  D.s\n.U;

and  by  substituting  the  values  of  CN,  NS  [7589o-],  we  get  [7592,7593]  respectively.
If  we  substitute  the  values  of  X\  Y'  [7592,  7593]  in  [7589—7591],  we  shall  get,

X= jD.cos.C7;

Y  = D.sin.C/.cos.X;

Z  =  — D.sin.  t/.sin.X.
Finally,  the  values  of  x,  y,  z  [7594],  are  easily  deduced  from  [6034 — 6036],  by  rejecting
terms  of  the  order  s^  [7585],  and  substiuuing r=aj r'=a'  [7584  or  6091]  j  neglecting
the  excentriciiies,  which  are  unknown  [7580'].
VOL. IV.  80

[7589a]

[75896]
[7589c]

[7589(fl

[7589e]

[7569/]

[7589^]
[7589A]

[7589t]

[7589ft]

[7589Z ]

[7589m]
[7589n]
[7589o]

[7589J9]

318  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7595]

therefore^  hy  retaining  in a.f-.-J no  other  terms  than  those  depending  on

sin.z; or cos.ij, ivhich  are  the  only  ones  producing  the  secular  motions  of
the  orbit  [6298],* we  shall  have,
ry.Q^  /'dR\ SS.a^ . ^

\as  / Si^"*

To  determine  the  part  of  f'-f-r-)? which depends on the oblateness of

Part  of Saturn,  we  shall  observe  that  this  part  of  R is  found,  in  [6050,  6052],

^  ^^. to  be,t

depending  '

[7597]  R=(p-h)'(y'-i)'

on  the
oblateness
of  tjatuiu.

[7596c]

*  (3685) If  we  substitute  the  values  of  cc,  y,  z,  X, Y,  Z  [7594,  7589/n— o]  in  the
first  member  of  [7596/?], it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member ;  and  its  partial  differential
relative  to  s  being  divided  by ds,  gives  [75966].
[7596a] {a?X+^r4-2:ZP=a2j)2  {cos.t^.cos.t)-|-sin.l7.cos.X.sin.«— s.sin.lZ.sin.xP;

[75966  ] jj — '"•^ ' — L  =  — 2a^.  D^.sin.  C^.sin.X .  Jcos.  i[7.cos.v4-sin.  C7.cos.X .  sin.w  — s.sin.  t^.sin.X? .
as  *

Now  if  we  put  r=a  [7534] in  the  second  term  of  [7587], and  then  substitute  this  value

of  R  in  the  first  member  of  [7596],  we  shall  find  that  the  first  and  second  terms  of  [7587]

produce  nothing,  and  the  third  term  becomes  like  the  first  member  of  [75966],  multiplied

O  c*  ^

by  —  ^-j^  'j  therefore  the  second  member  of  [75966],  being  multiplied  by  the  same  factor,

gives,

[7596rf]  a.( — ]  =  -^V~-sin.t7.sin.X.  Jcos.CT'.cos.u+sin.C/.cos.X.sin.i; — s.sin.L^.sin.xL

\ds  J  D^  *

In  noticing  the  terms  depending  on  the  secular  equations,  it  will  only  he  necessary  to  retain^

[7596e] ds  in  [6298],  the  terms depending on sin.u, cos.u, s. We  may  neglect the term

depending  on  s  [7596c?],  because  it  is  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces  [7585],  and  is

multiplied  by  the  factor - -^ , of  the  same  order. We  may  also  neglect  the  first  term  of
[7596/]  ^

the  second  member  of  [7596^/],  containing  the  factor sin.C7.cos.C/.cos.v  =  |.sin.2?7.cos.»,

producing  angles  of  the form «^2C7, which  differ  from sin.r, cos.v  [7596^]. The

[7596g-] remaining  term  of  [7596(/J  is  the  second, '  -  .sin.X.cos.X.sin.v.sin.^C/;  and  by  substituting

sin.^(7=^ — ^.cos.2C7, and  neglecting  the  term  containing 2 ?7,  it  becomes  as  in  [7596].

t(3686) Substituting 72  = —(5 F  [6052]  in  [6050],  we  get [7597]; M  being  the

[75D7a] mass of  Saturn [6028,75876]; J?=the  radius  of  the equator  of  Saturn [6045];

v  =  the  sine  of  the  decHnation  of  the  outer  satellite  above  Saturn's  equator  [6045',  75876].

VIII.  xvil.  ^  35.]

TERMS  OF R.

319

M  =  the  mass  of  Saturn,  which  is  taken  for  unity,  or M  =  1  ;

B  =  ihe  mean  radius  of  Saturn's  mass,  which  is  taken  for  unity,  or  B  =  \;

7  =  the  inclination  of  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite to the
plane  of  the  ring ;

.  Y  =  the  distance  of  the  descending  node  of  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  outer
satellite,  relative  to  the  plane  of  the  ring,  from  the  ascending  node
of  the  same  primitive  orbit  upon  the  orbit  of  Saturn  ;  the  Jirst  of
these  nodes  being  supposed  more  advanced,  according  to  the  order
of  the  signs,  than  the  second ;

V — Y=  the  distance  of  the  outer  satellite  from  the  descending  node  of  its
orbit  upon  the  ring.

Then  we  easily  find,  by  neglecting  the  square  of 5,*

v^  =  sin.^7.sin.^(«j — ^) — 2s.s\n.'y.cos.y.sin.(y — ^).

[7598]
[7598']

Symbols.

[7599]

[7600]

[7600']

[7601]

[7601a]

*  (3687)  In  the  annexed  figure  97,  C
represents  the  centre  of  Saturn,  about  which  y^
is  drawn  the  spherical  surface  NIHBGPP'.  %,
The  plane  of  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about
Saturn  intersects  this  surface  in  the  arc  JVIN^ ;
the  plane  of  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  outer
satellite  intersects  this  surface  in  the  arc
JSHB ;  and  the  plane  of  the  rings  intersects
it  in  the  arc  IHES ;  P  is  the  pole  of  the
orbit  JVUB ;  and  P'  the  pole  of  the  plane
of  the  rings  IHE.  Then  from  the  above
notation  we  have,  by  supposing G  to  be  the  place  of  the  outer  satellite,

JVB  =  v;  JVH=^;  HB  =  v—^  =  an^\e  BPH, or GPH-,

PP'  =  y  =  2.u^\eEHB',  BG  =  s; PG  =  lOO°—s;

angle  GPP'=  GPH-f-100°  =  v-T+100°; P'G=100°-dec.; cos.FG=v[6045'].

Then  in  the  spherical  triangle  PGP',  we  have,  from  [63]  Int.,  the  formula  [760 1  A] ;
which,  by  using  the  symbols  [7601e — g'\,  become  as  in  [7601t],

cos.P'G  =  cos.PG.cos.PP'-fsin.P(?.sin.PP'.cos.GPP' ;

V  =  sin.  5.  COS. 7 — cos.  s.  sin.7.sin.(« — ^).

Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  s^,  as  in  [7589;?],  we  may  put  sin.s  =  5,  cos.«=l
[43,44]  Int.;  substituting  these  in  [760U*],  then  squaring  the  result,  and  neglecting  s^,
we  get  [7601].

[7601c ]
[7601/]
[7601g]

[760U]
[7601t  ]

320

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.

[Mec.Cel.

[7602]

[7603]

[7604]

[7605]

Hence  we  get,*

/dR\ 2.(p— |<p) .  . , N

fl.f  —  j  = —^ — -  .sm.7.cos.7.sin.(t; — *).

It  noio  remains  to  consider  the  action  of  the  rings  and  the  six  inner  satellites.
If  we  consider  an  inferior  satellite,  whose  radius  is  r'  and  mass  w',  supposing
its  orbit  to  be  in  the  plane  of  the  ring,  or  in  that  of  the  equator  of  Saturn,
we  shall  have,  as  in  [6030  line  1],  relative  to  this  satellite,

m'.  {xx'-\-y]f  -f-  zsf )

R  =

m

If  we  now  take,  for  the  axis  of x, the  intersection  of  the  plane of  the
primitive  orbit  with  that  of  Saturn's  equator  or  ring,  we  shall  have,t

[7602a] *(3688) Putting  r  =  a  [7589p], ]VI  =  1, B=l  [7598,7598'],  in  [7597],  then
taking  its  differential  relative  to  5,  which  is  found  in  v^  [7601],  we  get,

Substituting  the  value  of  v^  [7601],  we  obtain  [7602].

[7606a]

[76066]

[7606c ]

[7606d]
[7606e]

[7606/]
[7606g]

[7606/i]
[7606t ]

t  (3689)  The  change  of  the  axis  of  x  from  the  line  CiV'[7587'],  in  fig.  96,  page  317,
to  the  line  CH,  fig.  97,  page  319  [7605],  has  no  effect  on  the  function  B  [7604]  ;  as
we  have  seen  in  [949^,  &,c.],  where  it  is  proved  that  this  function  R  is  wholly  independent
of  the  planes  of  x,  y,  z;  but  the  values  of  x,  y,  z,  will  differ  from  those  in  [7594].  To
obtain  the  values  corresponding  to  the  present  case,  we  shall  draw  the  lines  CH,  CB,
CG,  and  upon  CG  shall  take  Cg=r.  From  g  let  fall  upon  CB  the  perpendicular
gb',  and  from  b  let  fall  upon  CH  the  perpendicular  bh;  then  we  shall  have  x=Ch,
y=hb,  z=bg.  Now  in  the  triangle  Cgb,  wehave  bg=Cg.sin.GCB=r.s'm.GCB=rs
nearly,  as  in  [7608];  also  Cb  =  Cg.cos.GCB=r.cos.GCB,  or  Cb  =  r,  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  s^  [44]  Int.  Then  in  the  triangle  Chb  we  have  Ch  =  Cb.cos.BCHj
hb=Cb.sm.BCH, or  in  symbols a;  =  r.cos.(v-^), y  =  r.sin.(t;-*^),  as  in  [7606,7607].

We  may  find  the  values  of  x',  y',  z'  [7609—7611],  corresponding  to  the  satellite  m',
in  the  same  manner  as  we  have  found  those  of  X,  Y,  — Z,  for  the  sun  [7589»i — o],
merely  changing  the  sign  of  Z,  because  the  satellite  m'  is  supposed  to  be  at  the  point  5,
on  the  plane  of  the  rings,  above  the  plane  of  the  primitive  orbit  x,  y.  In  this  case  we  have
the  arc  HS  =  v  [7612],  the  angle  SHB  =  '/y  and  the  radius  vector  of  the  satellite
equal  to  r'.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  we  may  derive  the  values  of  x,  y',  z'  [7609-7611],
from  those  of  X,  Y,  — Z  [7539m — o],  by  changing  JD,  Z7,  X,  into  ?',  v\  y,
respectively.

VIII.  xvii.§35.] TERMS  OF R, AND  ITS  DIFFERENTIALS.  321

X  =  r.cos.(i; — y)  ;  [7606]

y  =  r.siii.(v — y)  ;  [7607]

z  =  r.s ;  [7608]

af  =  r'.cos.v' ;  [7609]

y' =  r'.cos.y.s'm.v' ;  [7610]

zf  =  r'.sin.7.sm.v' ;  [7611]
v'  being  the  angular  distance  of  the  satellite m' from  the  descending  node
of  the  primitive  orbit  upon  the  plane  of  the  ring. If  we  change r,  r' into

//77?\

a,  a'  respectively, in O'f-^)?  rejecting  the  terms  which  do  not  depend  [7613]

upon  sin. I?,  cos.y,  or  those  which  are  multiplied  by  5  [7596e],  we  shall  have,*  [7614]

Action

/dR\ m'.a'^a'.sm.y.sm.v'  °^^^^

^- ":r =  ~"  ..,,,20/ 7 ^ . o f ^~^ ^^ — 77^-  t7615]

\ds y [w'-j-a-^ — 2aa  .cos.(r — f).cos.» — 2aa.cos.7.sin.(u-^).s)n.v p  satellites.

If  we  suppose a' to  be  small  in  comparison  with  «,  as  is  the  case  with

respect  to  the  inferior  satellites  and  the  different  points  of  the  ring,  we  shall  [7616]

have,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  orderf — ,

*(3690) If  we  use  for  brevity W=x3f-{-yi/+z;^, also r'^=x^-\-f-{-z^  [60Q3],

/2==a.'2_|_y'2_|_^'2  [6039^],  we  shall  find  that  the  expression  of  R  [7604]  will  become

m'.W  m!

R  =  ~- ■ 2-i-r^—2lvii' Its  differential  relative  to 5, which  is  found  only  in Wj [76156]

S'^^' H^j  =  7r-Vl^;-^r2  4-r'2_2fr|i-WJ- Now  if  we  substitute  the  values [7615c]
[7606 — 7611]  in TV  [761 5fl],  it  becomes  as  in  [7615d]  ;  and  its  partial  differential,  relative
to  s,  gives  [761 5e],

^  =  r/.{cos.(t; — ^).cos.r'-|-co3.7.sia.(t> — ^*-).sin.i>'4-5'Sin.7.sin.i;']  ;  [7615<^]

\ds)-'

— —J  =rr. sin. 7. sin.«  .  [7615e]

Substituting  [7615e]  in [7615c],  and  neglecting  the  first  term  which  does  not  contain v
[7596e],  we  get,

«.(—-)  =  —  7-7- — 77— -— 73.r;-'.sin.7.sin.u'.  [7615/"]

\ds  J  |r2-f-r'2— 2^|5  '

Now putting, as  in [7589p], r  =  a, r'=a\ and  then  substituting  the  value  of W

[7615(/],  we  get  [7615]  ;  observing  that  we  may  neglect  s,  which  occurs  in  the  terra W \- ^^

of  the  denominator,  because  it  produces  only  terms  of  the  same  order  as  those  which  we

have  usually  neglected.

1(3691) If  we  put  for  brevity ?F'  =  cos.(v— >F).cos.u'-f-cos.7.sin.(v — *).sin.»', we ry/^,^  i
shall  find  that  the  expression  [7615]  becomes,  by  development,
VOL. IV.  81

322  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  Cel.

If  we  consider  the  rings  as  a  collection  of  an  infinite  number  of  satellites,
we  shall  have,  in  virtue  of  their  mutual  action,  and  of  that  of  the  satellites
which  are  within  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite,

[7618]

[7619]

^(  —  j  =  — jD.sin.7.cos.7.sm.(iJ — ^)  ;

[7620]  B  being  a  constant  coefficient  depending  upon  the  mass  and  constitution  of
the  rings,  and  also  upon  the  masses  and  mean  distances  of  the  satellites  from
Jupiter. Now  if  we  put,

[7621]  JSr=^'; K'  =  ^-^^+iB;

[76166]  a.(^-^)  =  -  "^•"'"•^''"•^•r"-^\  \  1-  -^^^.W  ]  -i

■•  ■"  \dsj  (a24-a'2)i  (  aS  +  a'S  ^

The  first  term  of  [7616c]  which  does  not  contain  W,  is  independent  of  v,  and
[7616(/] may therefore  be neglected  [7614]. We  may  also  neglect  the term  containing W'^j

because  the  square  of W  [7616a],  when  reduced  by  [1,6, 31]  Int. relative  to sin.^v',

sin.v'.cos.v',  cos.^u',  will  become  of  the  form  A^-{-B^.sm.2v'-\-C^.cos.2v' ;  A^,  B^,  C^,
[7616e] being  independent  of  v'. This  expression  of W'^ is  multiplied  by sin.w',  in  [7616c];

so  that  if  we  reduce  the  product,  by  means  of  [17, 18]  Int.,  it  will produce  terms  of  the

[7616/] forms ^*"*  .v', ^'"'.3y',  &;c.,  and  no  term  independent  of  «' ; therefore  it  cannot  be  of

either  of  the  forms sin.y or cos.v, which  are  retained  in  [7614]. Terms  depending  on

W^f  W*,  &c.  are  neglected, as  in  [7616],  because  they  are  multiplied  by — and  the

a'  . . .

higher  powers  of  — . Hence  it  is  evident,  that  the  only  term  to  be  retained  in  [7616c]  is

the  second,  depending  on  the  first  power  of  W,  which  gives,

[7616g-]

[7616M  «{-)  =  -  ^^^:^. .  W  .s.n.y.sm.» .

Multiplying W [7616a] by sin.y', and  substituting,  in  the  products,  the expressions

[7616t] sin.v'.cos.u'  =  J.sin.2y', s'xn.^v' =  ^ — i.cos.2y'  [31,  1]  Int.,  then  retaining  only  the  terms

which  are  independent  of  r',  we  get sin.'y'./F'  =  ^.cos./ sin.(u — ir). Substituting  this  in

[7616A],  it  becomes  as  in  [7617]. Now  putting  B  equal  to  the  sum  of  all  the  terms,

. .,  3m'.a3a'2  , , .  „•  r v.

similar  to 2-t-fl^j\^ ' corresponding  to  the  rings  and  to  the  mner  satellites,  we  get,  ior  the

[7616fc]  /dR\

complete  expression  of  a-(-T-)  [7617],  a  function  of  the  form  [7619].

VIII.xvn.«§>35.]  COMPUTATION  OF  THE  LATITUDE s.  323

the  differential  equation  in s  will  become,*  uaf  L^ua-

.  J  tions  in  *.

0  =  -r-^  +  5-}-2Z".sin.>^.cos.x.sin.'u— 2^'.sin.7.cos.7.sin.(?J — y).  [7622]

Hence  we  obtain  by  integrating  and  neglecting  the  arbitrary  constant  terms,
as  may  be  done  in  this  case,t

s  =  jfirv.sinA.cos.>^.cos.t> — ^'.y.sin.7.cos.7.cos.('i; — *).  [7623]

Through  the  centre  of  Saturn,  we  shall  suppose  an  intermediate  plane  to
be  drawn,  between  the  orbit  of  this  planet  and  its  equator,  so  as  to  pass
through  the  line  of  intersection  of  these  two  last  planes,  or  the  line  of  nodes;
then  we  shall  put,

*  (3692) Connectins;  toeether  the  parts  of  fl.f-7-), which have  been  computed  in

\ds  J  "^  [7621a]

[7596,7602,7619],  and  substituting  the  abridged  symbols  [7621],  we  obtain  the  following
complete  value  of  the  terms  of  this  form  and  order ;  ^

fl.f  —  j  =  2ir.sin.X.cos.X.sin.v — 2jBr'.sin.7.cos.7.sin.(u — y).  [76216]

Substituting  this  in  [7586],  we  get  the  differential  equation  in  s  [7622].

f  (3693) If  in  the  differential  equation  [6049^]  we  have  m^=a^, or,  in  other  words,
if  we  have  any  term  of  the  form K^.s\Q.{ajt-\-s), the  corresponding  term  of  y  [6049ZJ  will '■ ^^
be  represented,  as  in  [871"J,  by

y=^-cos.(«/+0;  .  [76225]

which  can  be  derived  from  the  term  of  the  differential  equation  [7622a],  by  multiplying
it  by — , and  changing  s^  into  £^-f-100°; observing  that  this  last  process  is  equivalent  to [7622c]
that  of  changing  sin.  into  cos. Now  the  equation  [7622]  is  of  the  same  form  as  [6049yt],

putting  y==  5, <  =  v, a,=  l; hence  the  factor —  [7622c]  becomes ^v; so  that  if [7622rf]

did.

we  multiply  the  terms  of  [7622],  containing  K^  K',  by  ^v,  changing  also  sin.t;  into
cos.r,  and  sin.(i' — ^)  into  cos.(« — *),  we  shall  get  the  corresponding  terms  of  5  [7623].
In  this  value  of  s,  the  symbols  X,  y,  represent  respectively  the  inclinations  of  the  pmniVzue  [7622e]
orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  to  that  of  Saturn,  or  of  that  of  the  ring  [7588,  7599].  Now  as
these  inclinations  vary  only  by  quantities  which  are  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces,  we
may,  without  much  error,  suppose  these  inclinations  to  correspond  to  the  actual  orbit,  by
neglecting  terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces.

324

[7625]  6

[7626]  w

[7627]  r

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.

[M6c.  C61.

[7628]

n  =

the  angle  formed  by  the  intermediate  plane  and  the  plane  of  Saturn's
equator  and  rings ;

the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  variable  orbit  of  the  satellite  to  the
intermediate  plane;

the  arc  of  the  variable  orbit  of  the  satellite,  counted  according  to  the
order  of  the  signs,  from  the  ascending  node  of  the  satellite's  orbit  upon
the  intermediate  plane,  to  the  ascending  node  of  the  same  orbit  upon
the  orbit  of  Saturn,  or  upon  the  sun's  relative  orbit  about  Saturn  ;
the  arc  of  the  intermediate  plane,  counted  according  to  the  order  of  the
signs,  from  the  ascending  node  of  the  variable  orbit  of  the  satellite  upon
the  intermediate  plane,  to  the  ascending  node  of  the  equator  of  Saturn
upon  its  orbit.*

[7628al

[76286]

[76286']

[7628c]
[7628rf]
[7628e]
[7628/1

[7628^1

[7628A]

[7628t]
[7628A;]

*  (3694)  For  illustration  we  have  marl^ed  these  symbols  in  the  annexed  figure  98,
which  is  similar  to  fig.  97,  page  3 19,  with  the  addition  of  the  intermediate  plane  or  arc
KIK',  which  is  drawn,  as  in  [7624],  through  the  node  K  and  the  equinoctial  point  of
Saturn's  orbit  /,  to  the  opposite  node  K' ;  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  KN  being  also
continued  to  the  same  node  K.  IVIoreover  the  arc  N^KN'  is  drawn  through  K,
perpendicular  to  the  arc  JVK  of  the  satellite's  orbit,  and  meeting  JVIJV^,  IHN'j  in
A*^, JV',  respectively. Then  we  have,  in  like  manner  as  in  [7601e — g,  7625 — 7628],

JYB^v,  JVH  =  ^,  HB  =  v—^,  K'I=u,  /^=  200°— n,

KJV==:T,  JVK='200°—T,  K'B=v+r,  K'H=^+T, HK=200°-^-r,

HJVI=\  NHI=^N'HK=^y,  IHK=200°-y,  HK1=BK'L^7S,  IKJV'=\00°+i!i,

HIJV=A,  HIK=6,  KIJV^  =  A—d,  JVIK  =  200°— A+ 6.

Then  if  the  satellite  be

at  B,  its  latitude above

the intermediate plane  jPi^.  90.

will be  represented by

the  arc BL=s,  which

is  let  fall  perpendicularly

upon  this  plane;  and  in  '^'^^^^V!3..V^. Sabn-n.

the  rectangular  spherical

Jiesceniinj  noSt.

triangle  K'LB,  we  shall
have  by  the  usual  rule,
in  like  manner  as  in
[6328(7],

BL=BK'L.^m.K'B,

nearly,  or  5='cy.sin.(u-f  r).

Taking  the  variation  of

this  expression, supposing  v-j-r  to  be  constant,  and  s,  w  variable,  we  get  55  =  fo.sin.(»4-r)»

as  in  [7628']. Again,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  angle  BK'I,  we  have  very  nearly

VIlI,xvii.«^35.] VARIATIONS  OF  THE  NODES  AND  INCLINATIONS.  325

This  being  premised,  if  we  vary w  by S-a,  and  suppose  n  to  be  constant,
we  shall  obtain, in 5, a  term  equal  to 6ro.sin.(t;-f  r). If  zs  be  supposed
constant, and n vary  by (5n, we  shall obtain  in s a term equal  to [7629]
6n.sin.^.cos.(i;-j-r) ; therefore  we  shall  have,  by  making  «,  n,  vary  at  the [7630j
same  time,

5  =  5OT.sin.(i)+r)  -f  5n.sin.ra.cos.(t?+r).  [7631]

If  we  put  this  value  equal  to  that  in  [7623],  we  shall  obtain,

5a.sin.(t?-f-r')+5n.sin.Ttf.cos.(u-}-r)=^v.sin.X.cos.X.cos.'» — K'v.sm.y.cos.'y.cos.(v — ^).  (1)  [7632]
If  we  continue  the  approximation  only  as  far  as  the  first,  power  of  v^  we  [7633]
shall  have,*

6r,==v/-^; 8n  =  v,^;  [7634]

dv  dv

Substituting,  in  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [7632], cos.(i; — r_j-r)
for COS.?;, and cos.(?; — r — ^-fr) for  cos.(i? — ^), and  then  developing  it
relative  to  the  sine  and  cosine  of  tJ+r,  we  find  that  the  comparison  of  the [7636]
coefficients with those of the first member, give the two following
equations ;  f

K'B=K'L; hence [7628^] becomes BL  —  HKls\n.K'L, nearly. Now if  we [76282]
suppose  the  node  K  to  move  towards  /,  upon  the  arc  KI,  by  the  quantity  5  IT,  without
changing  the  inclination  HKI,  the  arc K'1  =  J1  will  increase  by  the  increment  6u,  and
the  corresponding  increment  or  differential of BL  [7628ZJ, will be  represented by
Sn.HKI.cos.K'L,  nearly  ;  and  if  we  change  HKI  into  s'm. HKI,  or  sin.-c;,  on  account  of
its  smallness ;  putting  also  K'L=K'B  =  v-\-T,  as  above;  it  becomes  5n.sin.'n.cos.(v-f-r), [7628n]
as  in  [7630]. Adding  together  the  two  terms  of  h  [7628^,  w], we  get  the  expression [7628o]
[7631]. Putting  this  equal  to  the  terms  of  s  [7623],  which  produce  the  motions  fe,  5n,
we  get  the  equation  [7632].

[7635]

[7629a]

*  (3695)  As  we  neglect  the  excentricities  of  the  orbit  [7584],  v  will  be  nearly
proportional  to  t ;  and  in  considering  the  secular  motions  we  may,  in  the  usual  manner,
suppose  zi  to  be  a  function  of  i  or  v  ;  and  by  developing  it,  according  to  the  powers  of
V,  by  means  of  IVIaclaurin's  theorem  [607a],  we  get,

^  =  «  +  ^.r  +  J.^.t;2  +  &c.;  [76295]

«,  being  the  value  of  to,  when  v  =  0. Neglecting  v^.  v^,  &c.  and  putting  -a — 7tf,=fe,

d^  1- &  /  ^7329^-,

we  get  5ot=  — .«,  as  in  [7634] ;  and  in  like  manner  we  get  5n  [7635].

t  (3696) We  have  identically v  =  {v-\-T)-r; r-^=  («-fr)-(T-|-r)  ;  substituting [7636a]
these  in  the  first  members  of  [76366,  c],  and  then  developing,  by  [24]  Int.,  we  get,
VOL.  IV.  82

326  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.

[7637]  -J- =  ^.sin.x.cos.x.sin.r — J5r'.sin./.cos.7.sin.(i'+r)  ;

Jj-r

[7637']  -J- '  sin.«  =  ^.sin.x.cos.x.cos.r — K'.  sin. /.cos.  y. cos.  (^-f-^).

[76381 ^^  ^®  P"^  ^  ^^^  ^^^  inclination  of  the  equator  of  Saturn  to  its  orbit,  we  shall
have  the  following  trigonometrical  formulas  ;  *

[76366 ]  cos.v  =  COS. (t?-l-r).cos.r-{-sin.  (u-}-r).sIn.r  ;

[7636c]  cos.(« — ^)  =  cos.(v-}-r).cos.(^+r)-|-sin.(v-4-r).sin.(^+r).

Substituting  the  expressions  [7634,  76366,  c]  in  [7632],  and  then  dividing  by  v,  we  obtain,

.sin.(r-f-r)-|-  —  .sin.'W.cos.(v4"r')  =:{-Ksin.X.cos.X.sin.r-£'.sin.7.cos.7.sin.(^4-r)  |.sin.(thfr)

[7636rfJ

dv ^ ' dv

+  {Jir.sin.X.cos.X.cos.r — iir'.sin.7.cos.7'.cos.(Y-}-r')^.cos.(r-]-r).
As  this  equation  must  be  satisfied,  for  all  values  of  v,  we  must  put  the  terms  depending  on
[7636c] sin.(v-f-r), cos.(v-j-r), separately  equal  to  nothing;  and  by  this  means  we  shall  obtain
the  two  equations  [7637,  7637'].

[7639a]

[7639c]

*  (3697)  We  may  demonstrate  the  formulas  [7639 — 7644]  in  the  following  manner,
using  fig.  98,  page  324,  with  the  symbols  [7628c—/]  ;  and  as  [7639 — 7641]  can  be  easily
derived  from  [7642 — 7644],  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  we  shall,  in  the  first  place,
demonstrate  the  formulas [7642 — 7644]. Now  in  the  spherical  triangle  IHK  we  have

[76396]  sm.IHK-.sm.lK:  :sm.HIK:s'm.HK  [1345^^];  and  by  substituting  the  symbols
[7628c—/],  it  becomes  sin.(200°— 7)  :sin.(200°— n)  :  :sin.^  :sin.(200°— y— r),  or
sin.7:  sin.n  : :  sin.5  :sin.(Y-|-r),  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7642].  Again,  ia
referring  to  the  formula  [1345^],  we  shall  suppose  the  angular  points  A,  B,  C,  to
correspond,  in  the  triangle  JV'KI, to  JS\  I,  K,  respectively,  in  fig.  98,  page  324 ; and

[7639rf]  this  formula  will  become  cos.IN'K=:cosJK.sm.JY'IK.s\n.IK]S'—cos.N'IK.cosJKjY.
In  the  first  member  of  this  equation  we  may  change  IN'K  into  HN'Ky  and  then  in  the
rectangular  spherical  triangle  HKN',  we  have,  as  in  [1345^^],

[76396  ]  cos.HN'K  =  sin  .N'HK.cos.  HK.

Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [7639«Z],  and  then  introducing  the  symbols
[7628c — /],  we  get  [7639/*],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7643],  by  changing  the
signs  of  all  the  terms,  and  making  some  slight  reductions,

[7639/]  sin.7.cos.(200°— Y— r)  =  cos.(200°— n).sin.^.sin.(100°+TO)— cos.^.cos.(100°-f-ro).

In  like  manner,  in  the  triangle  lUK  we  have,  as  in  [7639^],

[7639g-]  cosJHK=  cos.IK.sm.UIK.sm.HKl—cos.HIK.cos.HKI;

substituting  the  values  [7628e — /],  it  becomes,

[7639^]  cos.  (200°— 7)  =  cos.(200°— n).sin.d.sin.-cf— cos.^.cos.cj.

Changing  the  signs  and  making  some  slight  reductions,  we  get  [7644].

The  three  formulas [7642 — 7644]  represent  certain  relations  between  the  three  angles

VIlI.xvii.^35.] VARIATIONS  OF  THE  NODES  AND  INCLINATIONS.  327

Formulas
in  spherics.

sinA.sin.r  :=  sm.n.sin.(74 — ^)  ;  [7639]

sin.x.cos.r  =  cos.n.sm.(^ — ^).cos.«+cos.(^ — ^).sm.ra  ;  [7640]

Qos.x  ==  — cos.n.sm.(^ — d).sin.«-f  cos.(.^ — ^).cos.w  ;  [7641]

sm.7.sin.(*+r)  =  sm.n.sin.^ ;  [7642]

sin.7.cos.(^4-r)  =  cos.n.sin.^.cos.^f' — cos.^.sin.w  ;  [7643]

C0S.7  =  cos.n.sin.^.sin.OT-f  cos.^.cos.OT.  [7644]

Therefore  bj  putting,*

K.sm.(A—6').cos.(A^6)  =  K\  sin  J.cos.^  t7645]
which  gives  the  following  equation  to  determine  6,

we  shall  obtain,  f

[7646]

and two of the sides  of the triangle HIK, namely, the sides IK=200° — 11, [7639t]

HK=200°—^—r, and the angles HIK  =6, HKI=zs, IH^=200°— 7;

and  the  same  formulas  hold  good  relative  to  the  triangle JVIK, the  points  IK  remaining [7639A:]

unaltered,  and  H  changing  into  JV. By  this  means  the  side  HK=  200° — ^ — r  changes

into  JVfir=  200°— r  L^628(/]  ; the  angle HIK=d changes  into JVIK=  200°— Ai-6

[7628/]  ;  and  the  angle IHJ^=  200°— 7  changes  into  IJVZ  =  X  [7628e]  ; or,  in  other [7639Z]

words,  we  must  change •¥-\-T into r, 6 into 200° — A-\-6, and 7 into 200° — X.

Now  making  these  changes  in  the  equations  [7642,  7643,  7644],  we  obtain  the  equations

[7639,7640,7641]  respectively; the  signs of  all  the  terms  of  this  last  equation  being [7639n]

changed.

[7639m]

*  (3698) The  reasons  for  assuming  the  equation  [7645]  for  the  determination  of  6,
will  be  seen  hereafter  in [7707 — 7711],  where  we  shall  find  that  the  expression  of  s

[7645a]

[7645c]

[7623  or  7710] is  made  to  vanish  by  means  of  the  equation [7645  or  7711]. Now [76456]

substituting sin.^.cos./3  =  ^.sin.2^, sin.(^ — d).cos.{A — ^)=^.sin.(2^ — 2^), [31] Int.,

in  the  assumed  equation  [7645],  for  the  determination  of  6, we  get,  by  multiplying  by  2,

ir.sin.(2.^— 2^)  =  ^.sin.25. But  from  [22]  Int.  we  have,

sin.(2^— 2^)  =  sin.2^.cos.25— cos.2^.sin.2^  ;  [76i5d]

substituting  this  in  the  equation  [7645c],  and  then  dividing  by  cos. 2^, we  get,

.K;{sin.2^— cos.2w5.tang.2d}  =  ^.tang.2^  ;  [7645e]

whence  we  easily  deduce tang.2d [7646],  which  may  be  put  under  the  form,

s'm.2A
^^"S-2^  =  j^r- --•  [7645/]

h  cos.2.^

*  (3699) Multiplying  the  product  of  the  two  equations  [7639,  7641]  by  K,  and  the
product  of  the  two  equations  [7642,  7644]  by — K,  then  taking  the  sum  of  these  two

328  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  CeL

[7647]  ^  =  — J.{jr.sin.2(^— ^)+jr'.sin.2d}sin.:n.sm.2n;

//it

[7648]  ^"^

— { K.  sin.^  {A—&)  -\-K'.  sin^d}  .cos.-a.cos.^n.

Now  if  we  put,

[7649]  9  =  i- ! K^K'—\/K^Jf.^KK'.cos.^-^K'^]  ;

we  shall  have,*

rJrt

results,  we  find that  the  first  memher  of  the  sum  is  equal  to  the  expression  of  -r  [7637],
[76476]  ^  ^  rfr  •- •»'

and  its  second  member  becomes  as  in  [7647<r},  and  by  reduction  as  in  [7647e].  In  like
manner,  if  we  multiply  the  product  of  the  two  equations  [7640,  7641]  by  K,  and  the
product  of  the  two  equations  [7643,7644]  by  —K',  then  taking  the  sura  of  the  products,

[7647c] we  find  that  the  first  member  of  the  sum  is  equal  to  the  expression  of  —  •sin.«  [7637'],

and  its  second  member  becomes  as  in  [7647/",  ^,  A].

-— =  ^.sin.n.sin.(.4 — (i).\ — cos.n.sin.(v2 — ^.sin.w+cos.C^ — 4).cos.'cj|
[7647rf] ^v  V  /  t  V  y  I \  /  >

— ir'.sin.n.sin.^.[cos.n.sin.lsin.«4"COS.^.cos.«}
[7647e  ]  =-\  Ksin.2  {A-&'Y\-K'.B,\Ti.^&)  I  .sin.n.cos.n.sin.'z;;J-j-sin.n.cos.w.  \  K.sin.{A-6).cos.{A-4y-K'.s\nAcos4  \ .

[7647/] ^  .  sin.^  =  sin.w.cos.OT.}[^.cos.2(^— ^)4-jr.cos.2^]— cos.2n.[7?.sin.2(^— ^)+£:'.sin.2d]}
[7647g-]  -fcos.n.sin.^ztf .  \  —K.sm.{A—^).co^.{A—(i)-\-K'.  sin  J.cos.^}

[7647A]  -fcos.n.cos.2c7.{ -fir.sin.(.^— ^).cos.(^— <!)  — JS:'.sin.d.cos.a}.

Now  the  coefficient  of  sin.II.cos.ztf  [7647e]  vanishes,  by  using  the  equation  [7645]  ;
therefore  if  we  neglect  this  term,  and  substitute  sin.n.cos.n  =  |.sin.2n  [31]  Int.  in  the
[7647t]  other  term  of  [7647e],  it  will  become  as  in  [7647].  Again,  the  terms  in  [7647^,  A]
separately  vanish,  by  using  [7645] ;  therefore  if  we  neglect  these  lines,  and  divide  the
remaining  part  of  the  expression  [7647/J  by sin.iif, we  shall  get  [7648].

[7650o] *  (3700) Putting  for  brevity A:  :=  \/K'^'ilKK'.cos.^A-\-K'^, we  get,  firom  [7646],

[76506  ]  sm.2  d  =  — ;  cos.2  d  = —r ;

because  the  sum  of  their  squares  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form r^  =  I  j ^n^  the  value  of

[7650c]  sin.25,  being  divided  by  that  of  cos.2^,  gives  the  expression  of  tang.2^  [7646].  Again,
from  [1]  Int.  we  have  the  first  development  of  [76506?,  e]  ;  and  from  [22]  Int.  we  get  the
second  form  of  [7650e]. Substituting  in  these  the  values  of sin.2^, cos.2d  [76506],  we

VIII.xvii.«§>35.] VARIATIONS  OF  THE  NODES  AND  INCLINATIONS.  329

—  =  — 5r.sin.'cj.sm.2n  ;  [7651]

dv

dn
dv

/7tt

—  =  (p — 9r.cos.2n).cos.^.  [7652]

get  the  same  expressions  in  terms  of  K^  K'  [7650(Z,/]. Performing  the  multiplications
indicated  in  [7650/],  and  putting cos.22^+sin.22^=  1, we  get  [7650^].

sin.24  =5— ^.cos.24  ==  |.  j  i_  j^  _  _  .cos.2^  \

sm.^{d-0)  =  J— icos.(2./2— 2^)  =  \  — i.cos.2^.cos.2a— |.sin  .S^.sin.S^  [7650c]

» 1 ^  ^  {K'4-K.cos.'M) - . ^  -  ^.sin.2^  r7R^nn

=  I  —  J.COS.2./2.  ■ ^  , —  i  .  sm.2^. [7650/]

[7650rf]

[7650g]

[7650ft]

Multiplying  [7650^]  by  K^  and  [7650rf]  by  K',  then  taking  the  sum  of  the  products,
we  get  [7650A].  Multiplying  together  the  factors  of  [7650A],  we  get  [7650i]  ;  which  is
reduced  to  the  form  [7650A;],  by  using  k^  [7650a].  Substituting  ^q  [7649],  it  becomes
as  in  [7650Z] ;

K.sm.\A--6)-\-K\sm.^6=^.K.h^j^  |-'.cos.2w2?+i.^'.$l- y-f  .cos.2^^

=  l.\K-^K'^Jc\  [7650fc]

K.sm.^{>^-(i)+K'.sm,^6  =  2q.  [76501]

Again,  we  have  identically K.{sm.\A-6)-i-co5.^{A—6)]-JrK'.{sm.^6JrCOS.^^l=K+K';  ^^^^^^
subtracting  from  this  the  equation  [7650Z],  we  obtain  [7650n],

K.cos.\A-6)+K\cos.^d==  K-{-K'^2q.  [7650n]

Now  multiplying  [7649] by 2,  and  adding  the  product  to  [7650],  we  get,  by  a  slight  ^'^q^Qo]
reduction, p-{-Sq  =  K-{-K'  - substituting  this  value  of  K-\-K'  in  the  second  member  of

[7650n],  we  get,

K.co5.\A—(i)-{JC',cos?&=p-\-q.  [7650p]

Substituting  [7650?]  in  [7647],  we  get  [7651]. Again,  substituting  [7650jp,  /]  in  [7648],

we  obtain  [7650r]  ; and  by  using cos.^n  =  J-{-^.cos.2n, it  is  reduced  to  the form [7650<7]

[76505],  being  the  same  as  in  [7652]  ;

—  =(p-j-2')«cos.-n — 2g'.cos.'5J.cos.2n  [7650r]

=jp.cos.i3 — gr.cos.'5J.cos.2n.  [7650*]

We  may  observe  that,  if  we  substitute  the  value  of  5  [7649]  in  [7650],  we  get,  by  a  slight
reduction,

p=l.\  K-\-K'^^.s/K^  4-  2KK'.iios.2A  +X'  2 1 ,  [7650f]

which  is  the  form  of  p  given  by  La  Place,  in  his  paper  on  this  subject  in  the  Connaisance
des  terns  for  1829,  page  247.

VOL.  iv.  83

330  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mte.  Cel.

Hence  we  deduce,*
[7653]  —  ^

sin.ta  p — g'.cos.2n

Integrating  this,  considering p,  q as  constant,  we  obtain,

[7654]  sm.w= ,  =;

VP — 5'.cos.2n

[7655] h  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity. Again,  from  [7652]  we  obtain,t

[7656]  dv= ,  ^^  ;

V  (  P  — 5'.cos.2n)  .(^  — 6^ — g'.cos.Sn)

and  the  integral  of  this  equation  depends  upon  the  rectification  of  the  conic

sections. We  may  put  it  under  a  more  simple  form,  by  supposing,

[7657]

tang.n  =  \/YZl,  tang.n' ;
V p+j

and  then  it  becomes,J

[76536]
[7653  c]

[7653a] *(3701) Dividing  the  equation  [7651]  by [7652],  we  get %,^  F^^^~:^\

multiplying  this  by — \ — ^,  we  obtain  [7653]  ;  which  may  be  put  under  the  form,

rf.(sin.'n)  d.(p — 5.cos.2n)

sin.'zrf  ^ ' p — 5.cos.2n

Integrating,  as  in  [59]  Int.  and  adding  the  arbitrary  constant  quantity log.&, we  obtain,

log.sin.'5y  =  log.&— i.log.(^— g'.cos.2n)  =  log.  ^^_^^^g3„  ;

being  the  same  as  the  logarithm  of  the  expression  in  [7654].

t  (3702) From  [7654]  we  obtain,

[7656a]  cos.w  =  f  1— sin.^w  }*  =  \  1 —  \ =  i^^ — ^ ^ ,J  .

*  ■' (.  f — 5.cos.2n  )  \ip — 5.cos.2n<l

Multiplying  this  by p — g'.cos.2n, we  get,

[76566]  (p — g'.cos.2n).cos.'0  ==  { (;? — g'.cos.2n).(j9 — }? — g'.cos.2n)  |*.

Substituting  this  in  [7652],  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  dv  [7656].

J  (3703) Squaring  [7657],  and  adding  1  to  both  sides  of  the  equation,  we  get  [7657a],
which  is  successively  reduced  by  using  [34',  34",  &c-]  Int.  ;

r.*/scr^  -1 II. o  1  ,1 V—Q sin.2n' p.(cos2n'+sin.2n'Vfo.(cos2n'-sin.2n') p-|-o.cos.2n'

[7657a] l+tans:.'*n= =14-^- — -. =^1- —^ =z^-^ — -•

^  °  cos.sn  '  p-f-g cos.2n'  (p-(-g).cos.2n'  (p+g).cos.3n'

[76576] IMultiplying  this  by £?n,  we  eet = — '^ '^°^' —  . Now the  first  member  of

this  last  expression  is  equal  to  the  differential  of  the  first  member  of  [7657]  ; hence  by
-' substituting  the  differential  of  the  assumed  value  in  the  second  member  of  [7657],  we  get.

VIII.  xvii.  §  35.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  331

dv  =

This  equation  being  integrated,  gives  the  expression  of n'  in  v. We  shall
then  have,  by  §  22,  Book  11,*

\  X-r' ' ^/  = / I ^ o„/ ; consequently, dn  =  dn'. VP^'-'P .  [7657d]

From  the  second  and  last  forms  of  [7657a]  we  evidently  have cos.^n=  lOlill^^^liL. [7657el

p-\-q.coa5ln'

multiplying by 2, and  substituting 2.cos.2n:=l-|-cos.2n, 2.cos.^n'=  l-|-cos.2n',

we  get,

l-fcos.2n  =  '^  '  ^\' ' , : whence cos.2n  =  i-i-i- .  [7657e'l

i>-l-?.cos.2n'  p-|-5.cos.2n'

From  this  value  of  cos.2n,  we  easily  deduce  [7657/] ;  and  by  subtracting  from  it  h^,
we  obtain  [7657^].  Multiplying  the  expressions  [7657/,  g\,  and  extracting  the  square
root  of  the  product,  we  get  [765 7A].

p— ^.cos.2n  = ,^~^^  ^  [7657/1

p-}-2'.cos.2n'

( «2 — q2\  y  r  J2 «  i2  a  ■)

/S(i'-9-cos.2n).(^-i»_y.cos.2n)}  = -^^_li-,^^l_^^__l^.cos.2n'^. [7657*]

Now  dividing  the  value  of  dn  [7657cZ]  by  the  expression  [7657A],  we  obtain  the  value  of
dv  [7656],  in  the  same  form  as  it  is  given  in  [7658].

*  (3704) If  we  substitute  in  [606  line  3] the  values v  =  2n, u  =  2n', e  = , [7659^1

it  will  become,  by  a  slight  reduction,  as  in  [7657].  From  the  formula  we  have  just
mentioned  in  [606  line  3],  or  the  equivalent  expression  [660],  we  have  deduced  the  value
of  V  [665] ;  and  by  making  in  it  the  preceding  changes  [7658a],  we  get,

2n  =  2n'+2X.sin.2n'-l-|.x2.sin.4n'4-|.x3.sin.6n'+f .  X^.sin.Sn'+Sic. ;  [76586]

X  being  a  function  of  e,  which  is  given  in  [662] ;  and  by  substituting  in  it  the  preceding

value  of e= , it  becomes,  by  reduction, X^=== —r— f===  ; or,  by  using  ^  [7660], [7658c]

X= — p.  Substituting  this  value  of  X  in  [76586],  and  then  dividing  by  2,  we  get  [7659].
We  may  observe  that  the  value  of  ^  [7660],  can  be  put  under  a  more  convenient  form  for
computation,  by  putting g'=p.sin.J?; whence,

q sin.fi ^.sm.hB.cos.hB [7658rf]

^~"jp+V/^2lI^  —  1+C0S.5  ~ 2.cos.2iB — tang.^ ,

as  is  evident  from  [6,31]  Int.

332  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [M6c.  Gel.

[7659]  n  =  n'— ^.sin.2ii'+i.|32.sin.4n'~^.|3^siii.6n'-^&c.  ;

|3  being  determined  by  the  equation,

[7660]  ^= , I ^.

SQ. To  apply  these  formulas  to  numbers,  we  must  investigate  the  values
of  K  and  K. That  of  K  [7621]  is  easily  determined  ;  for  the  attraction

[7660'j of  the  sun  on  Saturn  — , is  equal  to  the  centrifugal  force  from  the  motion  of

[7661] Saturn  in  its  orbit,  and  this  force  is  equal  to  the square  of  the  velocity

[7662] divided  by  the  radius  [54']. Therefore  by  putting  T'  for  the  time  of  the

sideral  revolution  of Saturn, and * for the semi-circumference,  whose

[7663] radius  is  unity,  we  shall  have, for  the  centrifugal  force,  the  expression*

[7664] -™^;  and  by  putting  it  equal  to  -=p  [7660'],  we  shall  obtain,

*  (3705) The  radius  of  Saturn's  orbit  being  D  [7589i], its  circumference  is 2*1),

and  the  velocity  of  the  planet  is -^  [7662] ; whose  square,  divided  by  the  radius  D,

43-2.2)
gives  the  centrifugal  force  of  Saturn  in  its  revolution  about  the  sun,  equal  to ^' ,
[76656] »  &  ' ^  y/a '

as  is  evident  from  the  rule  given  in  [54'j  for  estimating  this  force. Putting  this  equal  to  the

[7665c] gravity --  [7660'],  and  then  dividing  by D, we  get  [7665]. The  formula  [7667],

corresponding  to  Saturn  and  its  satellites,  is  similar  to  [7665],  changing  the  sun's  mass  5,
into  Saturn's  mass  1  [7598]  ;  Saturn's  distance  from  the  sun  D  [7589r],  into  the  satellite's
distance  from  Saturn  a; and  the  periodical  time  of  the  planet T' [7662],  into  that  of  the

[7665e]  satellite  T  [7666]. Dividing  [7665]  by  [7667],  we  get -^  = —-,  multiplying  this  by

f ,  we  get  K  [7621],  as  in  [7668]. Lastly,  substituting  the  values  of T, T  [7669,  7670],

we  obtain  K  [7671]. We  may  observe  that  we  can  obtain  the  centrifugal  force  of  the

[7665/*] satellite,  in  its  revolution  about  Saturn,  from that  of  Saturn  [76656],  by  changing  the

elements,  as  in  [7665c,  e],  so  as  to  correspond  to  the  satellite  ;  by  this  means  we  find  that

[7665g-] the  centrifugal  force  of  the  satellite  is -^^ , at  the  distance  a  from  the  satellite  ;  and  if

. we  suppose  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  to  be  circular,  the  centrifugal  force  will  be  equal  to  the
gravity  at  the  same  distance  a  j so  that  the  gravity  of  the  satellite,  at  the  distance  a  from

[7665i  ] the  planet,  will  be  represented  by ■-—- ; multiplying  this by a^, we  get  the  force  of

[7665&] gravity  at  the  surface  of  Saturn,  equal  to '^ , the  radius  of  the  planet  being  taken  for
unity,  as  in  [7598']. This  expression  of  the  gravity  will  be  of  use  in  the  next  note.

VIII.xvii.«§>36.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  333

j^  —  y^  *  [7665]

If  we  put  T  for  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  the  outer  satellite,  we  shall [7666]
have,  in  like  manner,

1 1^  [7667]

Hence  w^e  obtain,  as  in  [7665e],

K=-  f .  ^  =  f .  _  .  [7668]

Now  we  have,  by  observation,

T  =  79'^^y%3296 ;  ' [7669]

T'=10159"''%0S;  [7670]

hence  we  deduce,  vahwof

^=0,0000407739.  [7671]

The  value  of  ^' [7621] is ^' =  fclli^  +  J5  ; the  mean  radius  of  the [7672]

body  of  Saturn  being  taken  for  unity  [7598'].  The  oblateness  of  this  planet  [7673]
P*  [6044]  is  unknown,  as  well  as  the  value  of  the  quantity  B,  depending
upon  the  masses  of  the  rings  and  upon  the  masses  of  the  six  interior  satellites
[7620]  ;  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  determine  accurately  the  value  of  K'.
We  may  however  determine  approximatively  the  part  of  this  value  which
depends  upon  the  oblateness  of  Saturn.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  put  t  j.^^^^^
for  the  time  of  Saturn^ s  rotation  upon  its  axis ; and  we  shall  have,*

We  have,  by  observation,

t  =  0'"ys428 ;  a  =  59, 1 54  ;  [7676]

hence  we  deduce,

9  =  0,165970.  [7677]

We  shall  suppose  that  the  oblateness  of  the  earth  is  to  the  value  of  <p,  which
corresponds  to  it,  as  the  oblateness  of  Saturn  is  to  the  corresponding  value

[7678]

*  (3706) We  may  deduce,  from  [7665^],  the  expression  of  the  centrifugal  force  of  a ry/^-c  ,
particle  on  the  surface  of  the  spheroid  of  Saturn,  by  changing  a  into  1  [7598'],  and  T  into

43r2

t  [7674] ;  by  this  means  it  becomes -— . Dividing  this  by  the  expression  of  the  gravity [76756  ]

of  the  same  particle  towards  Saturn,  [7665Zc], we get the expression of <p

[6044',  75876],  as  in  [7675];  substituting  the  values  [7670,7676],  we  obtain  [7677J.
VOL.  IV.  84

334  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  C^L

of  (p.* This  principle  being  found,  in  [2069],  to  hold  good  very  nearly  for

Jupiter  compared  with  the  earth. Now  for  the earth  we  have (p  =  —

[7679]  ,  1

[1594«] ; and  if  we  suppose  the  oblateness  of  the  earth  to  be — r,  in

conformity  with  experiments  on  the  pendulum  [2048'],  we  shall  have,  as

in  [7674c],

243 T2

[7680]  p  —  l(p  =  — -  .  — —  .

[7680'] Then  by  noticing  only  the  part  of  K'  [7621],  depending  upon  this  quantity,

Assumed  i ii r* l i

value  of we  snail  iind,t

[7681]  K'  =  K.^^.^=0,m9.K.

*  (3707) Using  9=-—, p  =  —-  [7679],  relative  to  the  earth,  we  have,

^ ^^ 335 ^ 289 670x289 670  ^'

243

[76795] and  if  we  suppose,  as  in  [2069],  that  the  same  ratio p — ^9=  — .9, holds  good  for

243 T^

[7679c] Saturn,  we  shall  have,  from  [7675], p — 1?  =  ^i;;;  X  ^5-^ , as  in  [7680]. If  we  suppose

the  oblateness  of  the  earth  to  be  — :,  as  in  [2056^;],  instead  of  —^  [7679],  the  expression

[7679a,  c]  will  become,

._-„„,,  ,  1.1  278  278  278 T^

[7679i]  p — iqj  = i  .  — -  = =  —  .  0  =  —  .  ,

^  •"  '^ '^  ^ 300 2 289 000x289 600 ^ 600 Pm^  '

[7679e]

which  is  about  a  quarter  part  more  than  the  expression  [7680]  ; and  the  value  of  K'
[7681]  will  be  increased  in  the  same  ratio.

f  (3708)  Dividing  [7680]  by  a^,  we  get  the  first  of  the  following  expressions
[7680a],  which,  by  successive  reductions,  and  the  substitution  of  the  second  value  of  K
[7668],  becomes  as  in  [76806]  ;

[7680a]  P:zA:?_243 T^^  _-243 1_ / T^\ / T^^X  _  243 Jl^ A T^X

a2  670  •  f2.a5 670  *  a^  \**  Ty  '  y' t^  J  ^  670  *  a^  ' V*  t^  J

[76806]  =  —  .  J- K  —

335 a5  i3 •

This  last  expression  is  the  same  as  the  first  of  those  in [7681],  and  by  the  substitution  of
[7680c] the  values  of  a,  t,  T  [7676,  7670], it  becomes 0,4219.iSr, as  in  [7681]. This  would

be  increased  about  one  fourth  part  [7679e],  by  using  the  corrected  ellipticity  — -  [7679^?].

0\)\)

VIII.  xvii.  ^36.] THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  335

We  cannot  suppose  K' to  be  less  than  this  value,  because  it  is  increased  r-r/^Q,,,

l_7ool  J

by  the  action  of  the  inner  satellites  and  by  that  of  the  ring.*

We  have  by  observation A  =  SS'^^SSSS  ; hence  this  value  of  K  gives,t  [7682]

d  =  24°,0083; ^— ^  =  9°,3250;  [7683]

9=  0,03926.Z"; p  =  1,30412.Z;  [7684]
The  observations  of  Bernard  in  Marseilles,  in  1787,  give,

X  =  25°,222 ; [7588]  [7685]

7  =  13^,593. [7599]  [7686]

*  (3709) Putting  for  brevity,  for  a  moment, h  =  — 2.sin.7.cos.7.sin.(v — ^),  we  find ry^g,  ,
/fjjj  \  ^ ■'

itiaX  the  part  of «-(-^) [7602], depending on the ellipticity of Saturn's mass, is

— —-hj and  that  depending  on  the  interior  satellite  [7617],  is rr^T^**^* Dividing [76816]

these by A, we get  the corresponding  parts of K' [7621,  76216,  7617], namely,

p ^(p  Sm'.d^a'^

— r~  ^^^ A I  »  , /o^s  > ^^^  as  this  last  term  is  positive,  it  follows  that  the  sum  of  the [7681c  ]

similar  terms,  corresponding  to  the  action  of  all  the  satellites,  or ^B  [7621],  must  be
positive,  or  of  the  same  sign  as  — —  ; so  that IC  ]>•  [7621]. Now  the  expression [7681rf]

of  K'  =  0,4219. K  [7681],  is  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  B  is  nothing  ;  hence
we  have IC^0,i2\9.K,  as  in  [7681'] ;  observing  also  that  this  coefficient 0,4219,  will [7681e]

be  increased  about  a  quarter  part,  by  using  the  corrected  ellipticity —  [7680c].

t  (3710) If  we  put c  =  0,4219, we  shall  have X'  =  c^[7681]; substituting  this [7682a]

in  [7646],  we  get tang.2a= ^"'^1^. The value of A  =  33° i  [1682], gives

c-\-co3.^  [76826]

cos.2.^  =  J, sin.2v2  =  |\/3  ; hence  we  obtain tang.2^=  r— -- ; and  from  this  we  get

6  [7683]. Now if we substitute  the preceding  values K'=cK, cos.2A==^, in [7682c]
[7649,  7650],  we  shall  get,

q  =  1 Z".!  1+c— v/i+c+r2j ; p  =  l  K{  l+c+v/i+H=^|— ? ;  [7682rf]

and  by  using  the  value  of  c  [7682a],  we  obtain  the  expressions  of  p,  q  [7684]. As  the
expression  of  c  ought  to  be  increased  above  a  quarter  part  [7681  e,  7682a],  we  shall  make
a  rough  estimate  of  the  effect  of  this  correction  upon  the  values  of  6,  p,  q, supposing [7682e]
merely  for  an  example  that  c  is  increased  to c  =  0,6. This  gives,

tang.2^=-^  =  0,787  =  tang.42°,46 [76826]; or d  =  21°,23  ;  [7682/]

4,4

and y/i-^c+c2  =  v/T^  =  lj4 ; therefore we have, from [76826?], q:=0,05.K, [7682g-]
^=l,45.ir,  instead  of  the  values  [7684].

336  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  C^l.

Hence  we  deduce,*

[7687]  Y=71°,354

[7688]  ts  =  16°,96l

[7689]  n=:37°,789

consequently,!
[7690]  IP  =  0,00000364437.

We  have  then  very  nearly,  by  the  preceding  formulas,  J

*  (3711)  In  the  triangle  JS'Hl,  fig.  98,  page  324,  we  have,  by  comparing  the  symbols
[7687a]  |-^g28c-/]  with  their  numerical  values  [7682-7686],  the  three  angles  JVf/J=7=13°,593,
[76876  ] HNI=  X  =  25^222, NIH  =  200°— .4  =  166° ,6667  ; to  find,  by  the  common  rules

of  spherical  trigonometry [1345^,  1345^^],  the  sides JVfl  =  *  =71°,354  [7687], and
[7687c  ] JV7'=  24°,926. Then  in  the  spherical  triangle JVIK  we  have  the  preceding  value  of

JV/=24°,926; the  angle J5riV/=X  =  25°,222  [7685] ; and  the  angle,
[7687d]  KIN=200°—{^— 6)  =  190°, 61 50, [7683];

to  find,  by  the  formula  [134539],  the  side Kl=  200°— n  =  162°,211, or n  =  37°,789

[7689]; and  then,  from  [1345^5-|^  the  angle JVJr/=TO  =  16°,961  [7688].

[7687c ]
[7690a]

f  (3712) From  [7654]  we  get b^  =  s\n.^-a.(p — g'.cos.2n) ; and  by  substituting  the
values  of  p,  q,  -us,  n  [7684,  7688,  7689],  it  becomes  as  in  [7690].

X  (3713) If  we  substitute  the  value  of  K  [7671]  in  [76S4],  we  shall  see  that  p  is
[7691a]  2 yip

much  larger  than  q,  or  62  [7690]  ;  so  that  the  fractions ~ , — |- , must  be  quite  small.

Again,  by  multiplying  together  the  two  radical  expressions  in  the  denominator  of  [7658],

and  putting,  for  brevity,  p^ — q^ — h^p  =  m^, we  get dv  =  ■  /  ^  -^ . Developing

[7691c  1 ^1^® radical, and multiplying the whole expression by m, we obtain nearly

mdv  =  dn'A-  ^— -  .  </n'.cos.2n'. Integrating, and adding the constant C, we have
2m"

[7691rf] C-\- mv  =  n'-j-  -7— 2 '  sin.2n' ; or,  by  transposition, n'  =  C-\-mv —  —  .  sin.2n' ; and by

subtracting p.sin.2n' from  both  sides  of  the  equation

(  62(7  ■)

[7691e]  n— 3.sin.2n'  =  C+mu—  )  P+  4  2  (  ' sin.2n'.

]VIoreover  p  [7660]  is  of  the  order —  ; and  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order — ,  we  shall
get,  from  [7659], n  =  n' — ^.sin.2n'; hence  the  equation  [7691e]  becomes,
[7691/-]  n  =  C  +  mv—  ^  |3+  ^J  •  sin.2n'.

If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  ^,  in  the  value  of  n'  [769le],  we  shall  get n'=  C-\-mv ;

VIII.XTO.'§.36.] THEORY  OP  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  337

n  =  C  +v.\/f-f-ty'p  -  J  ^  +  4(^!^lt.^)  \  ■  sin.2.  { C+v.,y^^If^p } ;  [7691]

Reducing  this  expression  to  numbers,  and  determining  the  arbitrary  constant r769i/i
quantity  C, so  that  n  may  be  equal  to 37°,789 in  1787,  we  obtain,*  Motion  of

the  node.

n  =  38°,721+t.944",805— 9937",7.sin.2.(38°,721+t.944",805) ;  [7692]

i  being  the  number  of  Julian  years  elapsed  since  1787.  [7692^

These  results  depend  upon  the  accuracy  of  the  observations  above  quoted,
and  particularly  upon  the  ratio  of  K'  to  K  [7681].  This  last  quantity
depends  upon  so  many  and  such  different  elements,  which  are  so  difficult  to
ascertain,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  determine  it  a  priori.  We  may  find
it  a  posteriori,  after  we  have  determined  exactly,  by  observation,  the  annual  [76931
motion  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  upon  Saturn's  orbit. For  if  we  suppose

and  by  substituting  it  in  the  last  term  of  n  [7691/],  we  obtain,

n=  C+mu—  I  ^  +  ^  ]  .sin.2.(C+nj«)  ;  [7691^]

which  is  reduced  to  the  form  [7691],  by  re-substituting  the  value  of  m  [7691  i].

*  (3714) The  revolution  of  the  outer  satellite  of  Saturn  is  completed  in 79^*y%3296,
[7669] ; therefore the mean value  of the arc v, described in i Julian  years, is

tJ  =  i.-r^^r— -.4000000"  =  18416830".i; moreover,  by using the values  of K,  p, [7692a]

q, h^ [7671, 7684, 7690], we get /^a _  g2  _  52^  ==  0,000051294  ; hence [76926]
i?.y/p2_^2 — b'Hp  =  944",7.i. Again, the same values of p, q, l^, give

— —^^1-—— =  0,000554 ; also, —  =  sin.l°,9168=sin.i?  : whence,  [7692c]

62(7

p  =  tang.J5  =  0,01 5055 [7658c?], and p-f- _-^--i_p— =  0,015609  ;  [7692rf]

multiplying  this  by  the  radius in  seconds, it becomes 9937",7 ; substituting these
numerical  values  in  [7691],  we  obtain,

U  =  C  +944",7.i — 9937",7.sin.2.(  C  +944",7.i).  [7692e  ]

To  find C, we  must  put,  as  in  [7691',  7692^], i  =  0, and n=37°,789; and  then [7692/]
the  equation  [7692e]  becomes,

37%789  =  C— 9937",7.sin.2C  ; or C=  37°,789+9937",7.sin.2C.  [7692^1

From  this  last  expression  we  easily  perceive  that C  must  be  nearly  equal  to 38°, and
9937",7.sin.2C nearly  equal  to 9937",7.sin.76°  =  9240"  ; so  that

C=37°,789  +  0°,924==38°,713 nearly;  [7692^]

and  by  repeating  the  calculation  with  this  new  value,  it  becomes C  =  38°,721. Hence ,^^0^.,
the  expression  [7692e]  becomes  very  nearly  as  in  [7692].
VOL.  IV.  85

338

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.

[Mec.  Cel.

[7693'] that  the  fixed  plane,  to  which  we  have  referred  the  orbit  of  the  satellite,  is
[7694] the  orbit  of  Saturn  itself,  we  shall  have  * zs  =  \ r  =  0 ;  and  the  preceding
analysis  will  give,

*  (3715)  If  we  suppose  the
point  K'  in  fig.  98,  page  324,  to
fall  in  JV,  or  the  point  K  to  be
200°  distant  from  the  point  JV,  the
arc  IK  will  coincide  with  the  sun's
orbit  JVIJV^,  and  we  shall  have  the
angle  flJ?7  =  angle  HJVI,  or
TO  =  X  [7628e].  IVToreover  the
expression  of  r  =  200°  —  NK
[1628d]  becomes  r=200°-200°=0
[7695a],  as  in  [7694],  corresponding
to  the  annexed  fig.  99.  Substituting
«=X,  r  =  0,  in  [7637, 7637'J,
[7695c]  and  dividing  the  last  of  these
expressions by sin.X, we get

[7695a]

[76956]

[7695d]
[7695e]

[7695/ ]

[7695g-]
[7695^]

[7695, 7696]  respectively  ;  which  may  be  put  under  the  following  forms  ;
^  =  —  ;^ .  { A.sm.7.cos.7.sm.T}  ;

dn _

-r-  =  jDl.cos.X-

dv

K (  sin.X  )

IVIultiplving  these  equations  by  dv,  integrating  and  neglecting  the  variations  of  the
coefficients  of  dv,  we  get  the  following  values  of  the  variations  of  X,  n,  which  we  shall
represent  by 6\ Jn, respectively ;

K'

"5^  = —  -^  •  {K.sm.y.cos.y.swx.irl.Vj

in  =  5  ^.cos.X-  ^ .  \k.  '^^!;^^  .cos.^1  I .«.
C  ^ L  sm.X  J  5

Substituting  in  these  expressions  the  values  K,  X,  7,  y,  v  [7671,7685,7686,7687,7692a],

K'

and  retaining  the  factor -— , they  become,

K

[7695t]
[7695fc]
[7695n

K'

5X  =  — 140",03.^.r

-5n  =  ^  — 692",76+175",27.  ^l-i]

K'

as  in  [7697,  7699]; and  by  using  the  value  of —  =  0,4219  [7681], they become

6X=  -59",074.i, — 5n  =  — 618^81.^,  as  in  [7698,  7700].

Some  objection  having  been  made  to  the  accuracy  of  the  equation  [7696],  by  M.  Plana,
in  a  paper  published  in  the  second  volume  of  the^ Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of
London,  page  346,  etc.,  another  demonstration  was  given  by  La  Place,  in  the  Conmisance

VIII.  xvii.  ^  36.] THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  339

— -  =  — ^'.sin.r.cos.y.sin.^ ;  [7695]
av

du -_ ^y., sin.y.cos.r  r'r«ofli

-r-  =  K.cos.  X — K',  — T .  cos.Y.  [7696]

av  sin.X

des  terns  for  the  year  1829,  page  248,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [5786A,  i]  ;  which,  by nQg^jfi]
neglecting  terms  of  the  order  e^,  and  dividing  by  ndt,  become,

ndt sin.y' \dd'/  '  ndt  sin.y \dyj

As  it  will  serve  for  an  example  for  illustrating  the  use  of  these  formulas,  we  shall  here  give

the  substance  of  his  demonstration. In  these  formulas, y represents  the  inclination  of  the

satellite's  disturbed  orbit  to  the  fixed  plane,  and  ^  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of r«^q^  -■

the  same  orbit  upon  the  same  plane,  and  counted  from  a  fixed  point  in  that  plane,  as  the

origin  of  the  longitudes ;  as  is  evident  from  the  definitions  in  [5786c — d]. Now  if  we

neglect  the  secular  motions  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Saturn,  taking  the  sun's  relative  orbit [7695p]

about  Saturn FJVl,  fig.  99,  page  338,  for  the  fixed  plane,  and  F for  the  fixed  point,

from  which  the  longitudes  are  counted,  we  shall  have,  according  to  the  notation  which  is

used  in [7695n], /  =  angle  Ji^Y/, arcFJV=^. But  we  have  supposed,  in  [7628e], [7695g]

that  the  angle HJVI  =  X  ; hence y  =  X. Moreover,  if  we  suppose  the  longitude  of [7  695r]

the  ascending  node  of  the  equator  upon  the  fixed  plane  to  be  represented  by i^/=a, we ryggs-i

shall  have FN  =  FI—JVI=^  a — JVI. Now  in  fig.  99  we  have  supposed  that  the  points

K'j  iV"  coincide, therefore  N1=K'1=ti  [7628c]; and  by  substituting  the  values  of [7695* ]

FN, NI  [1695q,t]  in  [7695^],  we  get ^  =  cl — n, whose  differential  is d6f  =  — dn; [7695m]

a  being  considered  as  a  constant  quantity,  because  the  secular  equations  of  the  orbit  are  not

here  taken  into  consideration  [7695/?]. Substituting the values /=X, d6f  =  — dn, ^ ^J

[7695r,  u]  in [7695n],  we  obtain,

d\_ a_ /dR\  dn a_ /dR\  nm^

ndt  sin.X  *  \dn  J  '  ndt ein.X '  \dX  /  *  ■'

If  we  neglect  the  terms  of  R  depending  on  the  action  of  the  interior  satellites  and  rings,
we  may  put B=:0  [7619]  ;  and  then  we  shall  have,  in  [7621],

^ 3S.a^  ^, p  — i9

•^=4^'  ^=^"^''  ^^^^^^'^

and  the  parts  of  R  which  are  to  be  noticed  are,  that  in  [7587]  depending  on  the  sun's
action,  and  that  in  [7597]  depending  on  the  ellipticity  of  Saturn.  After  substituting  [7596a]  [7695^1
in  [7587],  and  reducing,  we,  must  neglect  all  the  constant  quantities  became  they  produce
nothing  in  [7695mj]  ;  we  must  also  neglect  the  terms  containing  U  or  its  multiples,  because
these  periodical  quantities  are  not  here  noticed  ;  and  if  we  also  neglect  the  terms  of  the
order  s,  we  shall  find  that  the  only  term  of  [7596a],  which  requires  notice,  is  the  square
of  the  second  term  of  the  second  member,  namely,  «^i)^.sin.^C7.cos.^X.sin.^«,  which  [7696al
can  be  reduced  to  the  form  i.a^D^.cos.^X-|-&tc. ,  as  is  evident  by  substituting
s'm.^U=l — i.cos.2C7; sin.^v  =  ^ — ^.cos.2t; ; hence we  get from  the  last  term  of

[76952]

[7696d]

340  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  C61.

K'

[7697] Substituting  the  preceding  values  of  r,  *  and  \  we  find 140",03.  -— ,  for

[7698] the  annual  decrease  of  x  in  1787;  which  becomes — 59",074,  by  adopting

[76966] R [7587], the following  expression, flJR  =  — ^^.cos.2x  =  — Jjf.cos.^x [7695a?],

[7696c ]  depending  upon  the  sun's  action.  Again,  by  substituting  M  =  l,  JB=1,  r  =  a
[7602a],  and  K'  [7695a;]  in  [7597],  and  neglecting,  as  in  [7695y],  the  constant  part,
which  produces  nothing  in  [7695i^>] ,  we  get,  in  aR,  the  term aR  =  K'.v^. Substituting

[7696e]  the  value  of  v^  [7601],  and  neglecting  the  terms  of  the  order  *,  then  putting
sin.2(« — y)  =z^ — J.cos.2.(« — *), we  get,  by  retaining  as  before  only  the  terms  which  are

[7696/]  independent  of  t>— t,  aR  =  ^K'.sm.^'y  =  ^K' — IK'.cos.^y.  Adding  this  to  the  other
term  of  aR  [76966],  and  neglecting  as  above  the  constant  term ^K\ we  finally  obtain,

[7696g']  aJ?  ==  —  I  Jf.cos.2  X— ^  K'.cos.^y.

Substituting  [7696^]  in  the  formulas  [7695ty],  we  get,

not  sm.X V rfn /

[7696i  ]  -  —  =  ^.cos.X — -^  .  (  — -^ ) .

ndt  ein.X \ d\ J

In  the  spherical  triangle NHI, fig.  99,  page  338,  we  have,  by  means  of  the  formula

[1345^],  the  equation  [7696^]  ;  which,  by  using  the  symbols  [7628c—-/],  becomes  as

in  [7696Z];  t

[7696;^]  eos.NHI = s'm.JVIH.sin.HNLcos.Nl—cos.NIH.cos.HNI'j

[7696n  cos.y  =  sin..^.sin.X.cos.n-|-cos..^.cos.X.

Substituting  the  value  of  <?.cos.7  [7696Z]  in  [1696h,  i],  and  putting ndt  =  dv, we  get,

[7696m]  —  =  — J?'.cos.r.sin../2.sin.n  ;

dv

[7696n]  _—  =  A.cos.X —  —. .  Jsm.^.cos. X.cos.n — cos.^.sm.XJ.

dv  sin.X

[7696o]

[7696p]

Now  if  we  suppose  the  perpendicular  arc  JVP  to  be  let  fall  upon  the  arc  HIP,  so  as  to
form  the  two  rectangular  spherical  triangles  JVPI,  NPH,  we  shall  have  in  the  first
triangle  NFI,  sin.iVP  =  sin.A'IP.sin.JVi=  sin..^.sin.n  [1345^^];  and  in  like  manner
in  the  second  triangle  NPH,  sin. NP  =  sin.NH.s]n,NHP  =  sin.^.sin.'y ;  hence  we
have  sin../5.sin.n  =sin.^.sin.7 ;  substituting  this  in  [7696w],  it  becomes  as  in  [7695].
If  we  now  suppose  the  arc  NP  to  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  HN,  so  that  the  angle
PNI=  100° — X,  we  shall  have,  in  the  rectangular  spherical  triangle  HNP,
'■  ^■'  cos.iVP/=sin.iVHP.cos.iVH  =  sin.7.cos.Y  [1345^^]  j  and  in  the  oblique  spherical
triangle  NPI,  we  have  cos.NPl=sm.NIP.sm.PNLcos.NI-cos.NIP.cos.PNI  [134522];
or  in  symbols  cos.iVPJ=  sin.^^.cos.X.cos.n — cos../3.sin.X.  Putting  these  two  expressions
of  cos.iVPJ  equal  to  each  other,  we  obtain  sin*5.cos.X.cos.n — cos..^.sin.X=sin.7.cos.Y;
substituting  this  in [7696n],  it  becomes  as  in  [7696]. Hence  we  see  that  the  formulas

[7696r]

[7700]

VIII.  xvii.  §  36.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  341

the  preceding  ratio  of  K' to  K. Then  we  find,  for  the  annual  motion  of
the  node  upon  the  orbit,

— 692",76+175",27.  ^'; [7695t]  ,^ t7699]

which gives — 6 18",  81 for  this motion in the  same hypothesis. The
observations  we  now  have are  not  sufficiently  accurate  to  determine,  by

K'

means  of  the  preceding  formula,  the  ratio  of — ; they  serve  only  to  show

that  the  motion  of  the  node of  the  orbit, upon  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  is
really  retrograde.

K'
The  ratio -^ , so  far  as  it  depends  upon  the  action  of  the  planet  Saturn,

as  we  have  seen  in  [7681],  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  fifth  power  of  the [7701]
semi-axis  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite,*  or  of  its  mean  distance  from  Saturn.

given  by  La  Place,  in  [7695,  7696],  agree  with  those  which  are  deduced  from  [5786A,  i\  ;

and  it  will  be  found,  upon  examination, that  M.  Plana's  calculations  lead  to  the  same

results,  after  correcting  for  two  small  mistakes  in  his  calculation. Now  without  entering

into  a  minute  discussion  and  explanation  of  the  method  used  by  M.  Plana,  we  shall  merely '■ ■'

observe,  that  he  deduces  his  results  from  the  formulas  [13376],  with  the  value  of  R  [7597],

and  that  of v  or  f*  [12860],  which  is  similar  to  [5344]. But  in  making  the  reductions  in

page  346,  line  7,  of  his  memoir,  I  have  found  that  he  accidentally  omits  a  term,  connected

with  the  factor 1 — f .sin.^t^; ; the  corrected  value  being \-^.sm.^w-l.sm?w.cos.{'il6-\-'2^), [7696m]

according  to  his  notation. This  first  mistake  is  not  particularly  noticed,  either  by  La  Place

or  M.  Poisson,  in  their  remarks  on  this  subject,  in  the  Connaisance  des  terns  for  the  years

1829,  1831. The  second  mistake  of  M.  Plana  was  pointed  out  by  M.  Poisson,  in  the

Connaisance  des  terns  for  the  year  1831,  page  38. It  arises  from  M.  Plana's  having

neglected  the  effect  of  the  reduction  of  the  longitude  of  the  satellite  to  the  plane  of  the  orbit

of  the  planet ;  and  it  is  rather  singular  that  this  second  mistake  produces  a  correction  in  the

same  factor  of  exactly  the  same  form  and  magnitude  as  the  first ;  so  that  the  true  value  of

this  factor  becomes,

1 — l.sin.^z^— J.sin.2zf?.cos.(2^-j-2*), instead  of 1— f.sin.^M;.  [7696x]

Finally  we  may  remark,  that  the  calculations  of  M.  Poisson,  in  the  Connaisance  des  terns
for  1831,  agree  with  those  given  by  La  Place  in  [7695,  7696],  and  also  with  those
corrected  formulas  of  M.  Plana  [7696z^?,  &c.].

[7696j/]

*(3716) We  have,  in  [7681], ^  =  (i|^.  — ).  ^  ; and  as  T',  ^^670,  7676]

K'  1

are  the  same  for  all  the  satellites,  we  shall  have —  proportional  to  — . Now for the

outer  satellite a  =  59,154  [7676],  and  for  the  next  inferior  satellite  a  =  20,295  [7702] ;
VOL.  IV. 86

[7701a]

342  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  Cel.

Therefore,  for  the  sixth  or  the  outer  satellite  except  one,  we  must  multiply
[7702] the  preceding  value  of — by (gQ^)  > to obtain the value of —

corresponding  to  it. Hence  we  have,
[7703]  ^  =  88,754  ;

which  gives,
[7704]  6  =  3088",.

Therefore  the  inclination  of  the  intermediate  plane [7625]  to  the  equator
™q5, of  Saturn,  is  insensible  to  us  ; and  as  the  satellite  will  move  very  nearly

upon  this  plane,  if b be  nothing  or  very  small,* we  see  that  Saturn's

K'

[77016] therefore  the  value  of —  ,  corresponding to this inferior satellite, will be found  by

multiplying  the  value -^  =  0,4219.. [7681], corresponding  to  the  outer  satellite,  by

(59  154  \  ^
^-^—z  )  ; and  by  this  means  it  becomes  as  in  [7703]. Substituting  this  in  [7645/],  also
^ ^ 20,290/  ^

the  values  of cos.2^  =  |, sin.2.4  =  ^.v/3  [76826],  we  get,

[7701d]  tang.24  =  ,,f.^^,  ,  =  0,009703  =  tang.6177" ;

hence 24  =  6177", or 5  =  3088", which differs  a  little  from  the  calculation  of  the
[7701e] author,  who  gives  in  [7704] 5  =  2933",6, which  we  have  altered  to  3088"^ ;  the  mark  c
being  placed  as  usual  to  denote  this  alteration.

*  (3717) The  angle formed  by  the fixed  plane  and  the  orbit  of  the satellite,  is

TS^HKI, fig.  97,  page  324  [7628e], and we  have b  =y^p—q.co3.2n.sm.zi  [7654];

hence  if  6=0,  we  shall  have  «=:0;  and  if  6  be  small,  we  shall  have  zs  small;
[77056] observing  that  for  the  inner  satellites q is  much  smaller  than p, as  is  evident  from

[7649,  7650].  For  in  this  case  K  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  K'  [7703,  &c.] ;
[7705c] therefore  we  have  very  nearly ^{K^-\-'iiKK'.cos.^l+K'^)  =  K'-\-K.cos.2A  =  K'-{-iK

[7701c]; substituting  this  in  [7649,7650],  we  get q  =  iK, p=^K'-{-^K; whence

[7705<f] i_  =  ^,  — -  nearly  ; and  if  we  use  the  value  of -—  for  the  sixth  satellite,  given  in  [7703],

it  becomes  —  =  -—  nearly.  This  must  be  still  further  decreased  for  the  inner  satellites,
[7705c]  ^ 710  >

in  the  ratio  mentioned  in  [7701]  nearly.  Hence  we  see  that  for  these  satellites  if  b  be
small,  «  will  also  be  small  [7654] ;  therefore  they  must  move  very  nearly  upon  their
intermediate  planes  [7624,  7626],  coinciding  almost  with  the  plane  of  the  equator.

If  we  neglect  the  forces  arising  firom  the  action  of  the  satellites  and  from  the  oblateness  of
Saturn,  the  expression  of  K'  [7621, 7620,  7597]  will  vanish,  and  we  shall  get,  from  [7646],

VIII.xvii.<§.36.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  343

[TTOST

[7706]

action  can  retain  this  satellite  in  very  nearly  the  same  plane ;  and  much
more  so  those  satellites  which  are  inferior  to  it,  as  well  as  the  rings  of  Saturn.
This  is  conformable  to  what  we  have  demonstrated  in  [3689].

However,  if  the  mass  of  the  outer  satellite  be  a  two  hundredth  part  of  thai
of  Saturn,  the  fixed  plane,  upon  which  the  orbit  of  the  next  inner  or  sixth
satellite  moves,  will  be  so  much  inclined  to  the  plane  of  the  ring  that  the
satellite  will  vary  from  this  last  plane  by  a  sensible  quantity.  To  prove  this,
we  shall  observe  that  the  fixed  plane,  upon  which  we  suppose  the  orbit  of
the  satellite  to  move,  may  be  determined  by  supposing  the  satellite  to  move
in  that  plane,  and  to  be  retained  in  it,  by  the  mutual  destruction  of  the
forces  which  tend  to  draw  it  from  the  plane.  To  prove  this  we  shall  resume
le  expression  of  s  [7623]  ;

s  =  Kv.sui,\.cos.'>^,cos.v — ^r.sin.7.cos.7.cos.(© — y).  [7707J

'he  fixed  plane,  upon  which  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  moves,  being  [7707']
iclined  to  the  equator  of  Saturn  by  the  angle  6  [7625],  if  we  suppose  the  [7708]
rbit  of  the  satellite  to  coincide  with  this  plane,  we  shall  have,*

y=:6,  X  =  A — &,  ^  =  0  ;  [7709]

K  sin  2j?
ig.2d=  — ^ — ^  =  tang.2^, or ^  =  .4; hence  it  follovro  that  the  fixed  plane  IK, [7705/^

fig.  98,  page  324,  upon  which  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  moves,  will  then  be  the  orbit  of

Saturn; and  it  will  have  an  annual  retrograde  motion  of  — 692";76  [7699],  arising  fit)m

K'  [770%]

sun's  disturbing  force. As -=-  increases,  the  fixed  plane,  which  is  determined  by  the

K'

angle  6  [7646],  approaches  nearer  to  the  equator ;  and  when -— is  very  large,  these  two

.  [7705A]

planes  nearly  coincide. Hence  we  see  that  the  oblateness  of  Saturn,  upon  which  IT

[76*21]  chiefly  depends,  keeps  the  orbits  of  the  inner  satellites  and  tiie  rings  nearly  in  the

plane  of  the  equator.

*  (3718) In  this  case  the  arc NHK,  fig.  98,  page  324,  must  coincide  with  IK,  and
the  points N,  H, will  fall  in /; the  angle  NIII=N'HK=y,  will  become  equal  to '• ^
NIK  =6;  hence  y  =  6, as  in  the  first  of  the  equations  [7709]. Moreover HNI^X [77096]
will  become  equal  to  KIN^  =  A  — A  ;  hence  X  =  A — &,  as  in  the  second  of  the  equations
[7709]. Lastly, NH  =  ^  [7628c]  will  vanish,  as  in  the  third  of  the  equations  [7709] .
Substituiing  these  values  of  7,  X,  ^  [7709],  in  the  expression  of  *  [7707],  it  becomes  as ^ 1
in  [7710]. Putting  this  value  of  5  equal  to  nothing,  and  dividing  by  the  common  factor
r.cos.p,  we  get  the  equation  [7711]  ;  which  is  the  same  as  that  assumed  in  [7645]  for  the L'^"^
determination  of  6.

[7711']

[7712]
[7712^]

344  IVIOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  []VI6c.  Cel.

therefore  by  substituting  these  values  of  7,  \  ^  in  [7707],  we  have,
[7710]  s  =  v.cos.v,{K.sin,(A — 6).cos.(A — 6) — K',smJ.cos.6] ;

5  w^ill  therefore  vanish,  and  the  satellite  will  remain  upon  the  fixed  plane,
if  we  have,
[7711]  K.sin.(A—6),cos.(A—6)  =  JST'.sin.^.cos.^ ;

and  this  is  the  same  as  the  equation  [7645], which  we  have  used  in  the
determination  of  the  inclination 6  of  the  fixed  plane  to  the  equator.

We  shall  now  consider  the  sixth  satellite,  and  shall  suppose  that  a,  v,  s,
6,  K,  K',  correspond  to  it;  and  that  m',  &',  correspond  to  the  seventh  or
outer  satellite.  We  shall  also  put  d  for  the  inclination  of  the  fixed  plane
of  the  seventh  satellite  to  the  equator ;  and  we  shall  suppose  the  two  satellites
[''713]  to  move  in  their  fixed  planes.  It  is  evident,  by  what  has  been  said,  that  the
action  of  the  seventh  satellite  introduces,  into  the  expression  of  5,  the
following  term,*

[^''14]  ^  ^f'.  "',^., . V. sin.(^--5).cos.(0'— fl).cos.i; ;

*  (3719) In  [7680',  7681]  we  have  noticed  only  the  chief  term  of  K',  arising  from
the  oblateness  of  Saturn,  neglecting  those  depending  on  B  [7621] ; and  if  we  compare

[7714a] [7617,7619],  we  get ^=§7^iSli' therefore JST'  [7621]  must  be  increased  by  the

term  ' ^^.  ; and  this  produces  in  s  [7623  or  7707],  the  term,

2m'  a^a'^
[77146]  —  . , ', ,,,5 .  V.  sin.y .C0S.7-C0S.  (r — ^).

4.(a2-}-a2)2

Now  we  may  remark,  that  in  [7603,  &c.]  the  disturbing  satellite  m'  is  supposed  to  move  in

the  plane  of  the  equator,  and  that y  =^  NHI  =  N' HK -, fig. 98, page  324,  represents

^ '^  •' the  angular  inclination  of  the  arc HK  of  the  orbit  of  m, to  the  arc  HN'  of  the  orbit

of  m' ; but  we  have  supposed,  in  [7713],  that  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  m,  m,  coincide

with  their  fixed  planes  respectively  ;  and  that  these  planes  are  inclined  to  the  equator  by

^ ■' the  angles  6',  6,  respectively,  passing  through  the  node  I. The  difference  of  these  angles

[77l4e] ^ — ^5  represents  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  m  relative  to  that  of  m',  so  that  we  shall

have y  =  6 — 6'  [77146 — d]. Substituting  this  in  [77146],  and  putting  also  as  in  [7709]

*■  =  0, it  becomes,

[7714/]  -  ■^^^j^..v.sm.{6—d').cos.{6—^).cos.v,

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7714J.

[7717]

VIII.  xvii.  §  36.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  345

hence  we  shall  have,*

s=v.cos.v.<K.sm.(A — 6).cos.{A — 6) — K'.smJxos.6-\-  ~~-—i  .sin.{if-—6).cos.{^ — 6)  i  ; [7715]

and the fixed plane, relative to  the  sixth  satellite,  will therefore  be
determined  by  the  equation,

3m'  a^a'^
0  =  K.sm.(A—^).cos.(A--^)^K'.sin.d.cos.d-\- ' , .  sm.(^—^).cos.(&'-6). [7715^]

From  this  we  deduce,t

K.sin.2A  +  ■,,  „, ^3 . sin.Sd'

tans.25=  —^ .  [7716]

ir'+ J5r.cos.2./3  4- 1 .  cos.2d'

'  ' 4.(a54-a'2)|

We  have  by  observation,  as  in  [7682,  7702,  7670,  &c.],

A  =  33°,3333  ;  a  ==  20,295  ; a'  =  59,154 ;

T  =  15'^'^y%9453 ; T  =  10759'^»yS08  ;

and  by  putting  as  in  [7683,  7703,  7668],

^  =  24^0083;  ^  =  88,754;  [7718]

f  •  2^  =  ■^;  [7719]

we  shall  have,t

*  (3720)  Connecting  together  the  terms  of  s  [7710,  7714],  we  obtain  the  expression
[7715].  Putting  this  equal  to  nothing,  and  dividing  by  w.cos.v,  we  obtain  the  equation
[7715'J,  which  is  similar  to  [7711]. Substituting  the  values  [76456,  &c.],  namely,

sin.5.cos.d  =  J.sin.2d  ;  sin.(^— d).cos.(.^ — 6)  =  i.sin.(2^ — 2&) ;

sin.(d'— 5).cos.(^— ^)  =  J.sin.(25'— 20  J  ^^^^^^  ^

in  [7715'J,  and  then  multiplying  by  2,  we  get,

0  =  ^.  sin.(2^— 2^— J5:'.sin.24  +  ^^^Jf^L"  •  sin.(2d'— 2^.  [7715c  ]

t  (3721)  Developing  sm.(2A—2d),  sin.(2^— 2^,  as  in  [7645(ZJ ;  substituting  the
results  in  [7715c],  and  arranging  separately  the  terms  depending  on sin.2^, cos.2^,  we  get, '• '*■'

{ K'+K.cos.2A+  ^.2^  .C0S.2*'  ]  .sin.2«  =  [  K.sin.2A+  J^,.sin.2^  ^  .cos.21 [77166  J

Substituting sin.2^  =  cos.2^.tang.2^, then rejecting  the common factor cos.25, and
dividing  by  the  coefficient  of  tang.2^, we  get  [7716].

X  (3722) Multiplying  the  expression  [7719]  by ^ .  •  if^, we  get,  [7720a]

VOL*  IV.  87

346  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [M6c.  C^l.

[7720]  /r;! .^s  =  13921,21.m'J5r.

[7722]

4.(a2-f.o'2)|

[772(y] If  we  suppose m'  =  -^-^ , we  shall  obtain,

[7721]  6  =  10°,622.

[7721']  y%j5  inclination  is  too  great  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  observers,  who  have
not  discovered  any  sensible  deviation  in  the  motion  of  the  sixth  satellite  from
the  plane  of  the  ring.  We  cannot  therefore  suppose  m'  to  have  a  greater
value  than  -^^-^  [7720'],  and  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  even  less.
This  will  appear  very  probable,  when  we  consider  that  the  mass  of  the

[7722]  greatest  of  Jupiter's  satellites  [7162 — 7165],  is  not  a  ten  thousandth  part
of  that  of  the  planet,  and  that  the  outer  satellite  of  Saturn  is  seen,  with
difficulty,  on  account  of  its  smallness.

37.  The  fixed  planes  to  which  we  have  referred  the  orbits  of  the  two  outer
satellites  of  Saturn,  are  analogous  to  those  to  which  we  have  referred  the  orbits
of  the  moon  and  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  in  [5352,  6358].  These  planes  pass
always  through  the  nodes  of  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  between
these  two  last  planes  ;  the  orbits  of  the  satellites  move  upon  them,  retaining
nearly  a  constant  inclination,  and  their  nodes  have  a  retrograde  and  nearly
uniform  motion.  But  these  planes  are  not  rigorously  fixed  ;  their  positions
[7723]  y^^y  -^y  ^jjg  motious  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  Saturn.  We  shall  now
determine  these  motions,  and  their  influence  upon  the  motions  of  the  orbits
of  the  satellites. We  shall  use  the  following  symbols  :

Substituting  the  values [7717]  in  the  coefficient  of m'K, in  the  second  member  of  the
preceding  equation,  we  find  it  equal  to 13921,21 ; hence  this equation becomes  as  in

[7723]

[7720]. This  calculation  may  be  abridged  by  putting,  for  a  moment, —  =  tang.C, or

cl  =  a.tang.  C ; whence .  ^  , ^  .  =  — ^— -  =  tano;.''C.cos.^C. Now  substituting  [7720]

(a2-j-a'2)| sec.5  C  °  o  l j

in  [7716],  and dividing  the  numerator  and denominator  of  the  second  member  by  K,
putting  also sin.2.^  =  /f, cos.2./5=  J [76825],  we  get,
[7720c]  tang.2^= y/f +13921 ,21. m-.sin.2^

:|^ -I- 1^13921 ,21. m'.cos.2a'

K.

Lastly,  putting m'  =  ^  [7720'],  and  using  the  values  of  &', —  [77  IS], we  get 2^,
and  then  b,  as  in  [7721].

VIII.  xvii.  <^  37.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  347

[7724]

[7725]

6i  =  the  inclination  of  the  equator  of  Saturn  to  a  fixed  plane,  which  is  but

very  little  inclined  to  the  orbit  of  the  planet;
^Fj  =  the  distance  of  the  descending  node  of  the  equator  of  Saturn  upon  this

fixed  plane,  from  a  fixed  axis,  drawn  from  the  centre  of  Saturn  in  the

same plane ; the direction of  this  axis X being more advanced,

according  to  the  order  of  the  signs,  than  that  node ;
nt=  the  angular  rotatory  motion  of  the  planet  Saturn  about  its  axis;  [7726]

j4,  B,  C,  are  the  momenta  of  inertia  of  the  mass  of  Saturn,  relative  to  the

three  principal  axes.

Then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [3040,  3041,  &c.],*

^  _  {A+B-2C) .

dt ~ 2n.C -^  '  ^^^^^

d^, . ^ (2C—A—B) „

ir-^^"-'^=— 2;i:c — ^'  ^7728]

P  and  P'  being  determined  by  the  equations  [3016,  3017],

[7726']

[7729]

P  =  ?^.  I  (Y^—Z').smA'COsJ,-\-YZ,(cos.^6,-.sm,'6,)  I  ;

SL

P'  =  -^.{  ZY.sin.^i  +ZZ.cos.^i  { .  [7730]

The  symbols  used  in  these  equations  are,
L  =  the  mass  of  the  attracting  body  [2963]  ;  [7731]

r  =  the  distance  of  the  attracting  body  from  the  centre  of  Saturn  ;  [7732]

Xf  Y,  Z,  represent  the  three  co-ordinates  of  the  attracting  body  [3004,  &c.] ; 1^7700/1
X,  Y,  being  in  the  fixed  plane,  and  the  axis  of  X,  where  the  origin  of
the  angle  ^1  is  placed,  is  drawn  from  the  centre  of  Saturn  towards  the
descending  node  of  the  equator  of  Saturn.

*  (3723) The  notation  which  is  used  in  [7724 — 7726,  Ssc],  is  similar  to  that  in

r7727fll
[3006a — b],  corresponding  to  the  earth. The  inclination  of  the  equator  and  orbit  of  the

earth d  [2907^  or  167''], being changed  into 6^  [7724],  for  the  equator  and  orbit  of [77276]

Saturn  ; and ^ [2907e,  &;c.  or  167''],  for  the  earth,  being  changed  into ^^  [7725]  for

Saturn. Then  we  have,  in  [3038,  3039], ^.k.cos.{it+s)  =  P ; 2.A/.sin.(ii+s)  =P'.

Substituting  these  in  [3040,3041],  after  accenting 6,  ^, as  in  [77276,  c],  we  get  the [7727rf]

expressions [7727,  7728]. The  same  changes  being  made in  the values  of P, P'

[3016,3017],  we  obtain  [7729,7730]  ;  observing  that  r^  [2965]  is  changed  into  r  [7732], ^^^^'^^^

being  the  distance  from  the  attracting to  the  attracted  body. Moreover  the  co-ordinates [7727/ ]

X, F,  Z  [3004 — 3005],  correspond  to  the  similar  symbols  [7732']  ;  observing  that  the ^77270.-]

moveable  vernal  equinox  [3004]  corresponds  to  the  descending  node  of  the  equator  [7732'].

348

MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.

[M6c.  C61.

We  shall  also  put,*
[7733] X  =:  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  attracting  body L  to  the  fixed  plane  ;
[7734] A  =  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  orbit  of  the  attracting  body

L,  upon  the  fixed  plane,  counted  from  the  descending  node  of  Saturn's

equator,  or  axis  of  X;
[7735] V  =  the angular distance  of  the  attracting  body L, from its  ascending

node  [7734];
[7736] X',  y,  Z',  are the  co-ordinates  of  the  attracting  body  L,  referred  to  an

axis  X\ which  is  drawn  from  the  centre  of  Saturn  to  the  ascending

node  of  that  body  [7734],  and  to  two  other  axes  perpendicular  to  it;

the  axis  Y'  being  in  the  fixed  plane,  and  the  axis  Z'  perpendicular  to

the  same  plane. -
Then  we  shall  have,  f
[7737]  X'  =  r.cos.-y ;

[7738]  Y'  =  r.cos.x.sin.'y;

[7739]  Z'  =  r.sin.'^.sin.i'.

*  (3724) For  illustration  we  may  refer  to  the  annexed  figure  100,  where fQN^  is
'■ ■' the  fixed  plane  ; C  the  centre  of  Saturn,  or  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates  ; CT  the  line

drawn  from C  towards  the  descending node  Aids^^'-

\7763b] ^  Saturn^s  equator upon the  fixed plane,

corresponding to  the  vernal equinox  in  the ^q.dDO.

theory  of  the  earth's  motion  ; L  the  place  of

the attracting satellite. Then the angle

1.$^A;=X  [7733]; the  angle TCg^=A
[77a3c] [7734]; the  angle g^  CL  = «  [7735] ; C-f

is  the  axis  of  X ; that  of  Y  is  perpendicular

to it in the fixed plane ; that  of Z  is

perpendicular  to  the  fixed  plane. Cq  is  the
[7733J] axis  of  X',  in  the  fixed  plane ; the  axis  of  Y'  is  in  the  same  plane,  and  perpendicular  to

CQ,  ; the  axis  of  Z'  is  the  same  as  that  of  Z.

r7737  1  ^  (3725)  From  the  place  of  the  attracting  satellite  L,  fig.  100,  draw  LI  perpendicular
to  the  axis  of  X' ,  or  Cg^  ;  then  we  have  CI=CL.cos.LCq,  or  X'^r.cos.w,  as
[77376]  in  [7737]  ;  also  Ll=CL.sin.LCQ  =r.sin.t;.  Now  the  line  LI  is  inclined  to  the  fixed
[7737c]  plane  by  the  angle  X  [7733]  ;  therefore  its  projection  on  the  fixed  plane,  or  Y',  is
r7737(fl  y  =  ^^-cos.X=  r.cos.X.sin.v  [7738]  ;  moreover  the  distance  Z',  of  the  point  L  fi-omthe
fixed  plane,  is Z'  =  iZ.sin.X  =  r.sin.X.sin.«, as  in  [7739].

VIlI.xvii.«§>37.]

THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.

349

Then  we  shall  have,*

Therefore,

X  =  X'.cos.A — Y'.sin.A  ;
Y  =  JL'.sin.A+  Y'.cos.A ;

[7740]
[7741]
[7741']

X  =  r.cos.A.cos.?? — r.cos.x.sin.A.sin.i? ;  [7742]

Y  =  r.sin.A.cos.iJ+r.cos.x.cos.A.sin.v ;  [7743]

Z  =  r.sin.x.sin.tJ.  [7744]
If  we  neglect  the  periodical  terms  depending  on  the  angle  v,  we  shall  have,t

Axis  of  :k

J3  ^

*  (3726)  In  figure  101,  L'  is  the  projection  of  the  place  of  the  attracting  satellite  L,
upon  the  fixed  plane;  so  that  Cl=X'j  IL'=Y';  also  CB==X,  BL'=Y,  and
the  angle  ACl=\.  Now  draw  I A  parallel  to  L'B,  and  ID  parallel  and  equal
to  AB,  then  we  have  CB  =  CA—'Dl^
BL  =M-\-DL'.  But  in  the  rectangular
triangle  CAl,  having  Cl  =  X'j  and  the  angle
JlCl=A, we  get,

C^  =  X'.  COS. A,  Al  —  X'.sin . a  ;
moreover,  in  the  rectangular  triangle  L'Dl,  we
have  L'l  =  Y',  and  the  angle  DL'1  =  a;
therefore  DL'  =  T'.cos.a,  Dl  =  T'.sin.A.
Substituting  these  expressions  in  the  values  of
CBr=X,  BL'  =  Y  [77406],  we  get  [7740,7741];  lastly  we  have,  as  in  [7733£r|,
Z=  Z'  [7741'].  If  we  now  substitute  the  values  of  X\  Y,  Z'  [7737—7739],  in  those
of  X, r,  Z  [7740—7741'],  we  shall  get  [7742—7744].

t  (3727) If  we  retain  only  the terms  which  are  independent  of  v, we  shall  have^
by  [1,6,  31]  Int.,

sin.2u  =  ^, cos.^v=|, sin.i;.cos.«  =  J.sin.2u  =  0.
Substituting  the  values  of  X,  Y,  Z  [7742—7744],  in  the  first  members  of  [77456—/],
and  using  the  expressions  [7745a],  we  get  the  first  forms  of  their  second  members,  which
are  afterwards  reduced  ;

Y^  =  Jr^.fsin.^A-j-cos.^X.cos.^A^  =  Jr24sin.2A-f(l-sin.2x).cos.2A^
=  ^r2.{(sin.2A+cos.2A)— sin.^X.cos.^Al  =ir».{l-sin.2x.cos.2A| ;

Z^  =ir2.sin.2X;

XF=  ^r2.(l— cos.^X).sin.A.cos.A  =  |r2.sin.^X.sin.A.cos.A  ;

XZ=  — I  r^.sin.X.cos.X.sin.A  ;

YZ  =  J  r^.sin.X.cos.X.cos.A.
The  expressions  [llA5d—f]  are  the  same  as  those  in [7746,  7747,  7748]. Subtracting
[7745c]  from  [77456],  and  substituting 1— sin.^Xrracos.^X, we  get  [7745].
VOL.  IV.  88

[7740o]

[77406 ]
[7740c]

[7740rf]
[7740e]
[7740/]

[7745o]

[77456]

[7745c]
[7745rf]
[7745e]
[7745/-]

350  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  C^l.

[7745]  Y^—Z^  =  ir'.{cos.^x--sin.^x.cos.^A}  ;r07iifi

[7746]  XY=  Jr^.sin.^x.sin.A.cos.A ;

[7747]  XZ= — Jr^.sin.x.cos.x.sin.A;

[7748]  YZ=\  r^.sm.x.cos.x.cos.A.

Hence  we  obtain,*

dL M+B—2C) 3 L ,  .  . ^ .  .  . ,

[7749] -—  =  i^ i  .-_._..  JsmJi.sin/x.sm.A.cos.A — cosJi.sin.x.cos.x.sin.A? :

at  C  4n r^ *  *

r'y'TKm ^^^ oj a {^C—A—B) 3 L ( sinJi.cos.^i.fcos.^x — sm.^x.cos.^A] >

L//OUJ — — —  ,  sin. Pi  =■ y^ .  —  •  — r-  .<  o'o  •  r*

«^  C  4n r^ ^-]-[cos.  ^1 — sm.  ^i].sin.x.cos.x.cos.A>

From  these  expressions  it  follows,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  satellites,
whose  orbits  are  situated  in  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  Saturn,  have  not  any

[7751] sensible  influence  upon  the  values  of -r^ , —r^  , because  with  those  bodies

^  at  at

we  havef x  =  ^i, and a  =200^, which  make  these  values  vanish. The

rings  may  be  considered  as  the  aggregate  of  an  infinite  number  of  satellites,

and  being  situated  in  the  plane  of  the  equator,  they  can  have  no  influence  on

[7752] its  motions. The  equator  of  Saturn  cannot  therefore  be  moved,  in  a  sensible

manner,  except  by  the  action  of  the  sun,  and  by  that  of  the  outer  satellite.

Relative  to  this  satellite  we  have  in  1 787,  by  taking  the  orbit  of  Saturn  at

that  epoch  for  the  fixed  plane,  t

* (3728) Substituting the values [7745—7748] in the expressions of F, P'
[7749a] |-^-j2g^  1130],  and  then  the  results  in [7727,  7728],  we  get  [7749,  7750]  respectively,
without  any  reductions.

t  (3729)  If  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  JVHK,  fig.  98,  page  324,  coincide  with  the
*• "'' plane  of  the  equator IHJV', we  shall  have  the  angle JrJVJ=  X,  nearly  equal  to HiJV^

or  ^1  [7724] ;  so  that  in  this  case  we  have  very  nearly  X  =  ^j,  as  in  [7751].  IMoreover
[775]  b  ] the  point  /  of  tliis  figure  is  the  ascending  node  of  Saturn's  equator,  and  the  ascending  node

of  the  satellite's  orbit;  therefore  we  have,  from  [7734], a  =  200°,  as  in  [7751]. Hence

we  have sin.A=0, cos.a  =  — 1, >,=d^; and  by  substituting  them  in  the  expressions

[7749,  7750],  they  become  equal  to  nothing,  as  in  [7751].

[7751c]

t  (3730) The  expression  of  X  [7753]  is  the  same  as  in [7685]. The  symbol  A

L 53a] j-7538] ig  nearly  the  same  as  6^  [7724]  ;  hence  we  have  in  [7682]  the  same  value  of  6^

as  in  [7755]. Lastly,  we  have  in [7687c]  the arc NI—  24°,926, whose  supplement

[775361 ^'^^'^''^^  represents  the  longitude  of  the  point  JV,  or  the  ascending  node  of  the  orbit  of

the  attracting  satellite,  counted  from  the  descending  node  of  the  equator  of  Saturn  in  its

orbit,  being  the  same  as  a  [7734]. This  agrees  nearly  with  [7754].

VIII.xvii.<^37.]  MOTION  OF  THE  EQUATOR  OF  SATURN.  351

X  = 25^,222 ;  [7753]

A  =  175^134;  [7754]

6^^ 330^333 >79  31  919xb bfJB ;H% ,l30r  [-77553

Then  we  have  *  j'ji^  ikiujb;  ms  io  owl  b39DZ3  Jon  esob  3i  ;

5=L.w^  ^'^"^  [7756]

m^  beine,  in  this  case,  the  mean  motion  of  the  satellite, and  L  its  mass,

[7756']

that  of  Saturn  being  taken  for  unity. The  value  of is  unknown ;

L/

we  shall  suppose,  as  in  [6914],  that  it  is,  to  the  corresponding  value  for  the
earth,  as  the  ratio  of  the  centrifugal  force  to  gravity,  at  the  surface  of  the
equator  of  Saturn,  is  to  the  similar  ratio  relative  to  the  earth. f  Then  we
shall  suppose  that  we  have  for  the  earth,  as  in  [6917, 6918,  69186],

3.(1+6)  =  2,566 ; ^O-^  _  iq^SSa  =  0-00582386 ;  P'57]

and  as  we  have  by  what  precedes,  for  Saturn,

9  =  0,16597  ; [7677]  [7758]

and  for  the  earth, ?  =  ^}-^  [7679]  ;  we  shall  have  for  Saturn,  [7759]

2C—A—B  ^  Q^Q0582385 X 289 X 0, 1 6597  =  0,27934.  [7760]
Thus  we  find,  for  the  annual  variation ^^ , the  following  expression ;  J

^*  =  6195".L.  [7761]

at

[7756']

[7756a]

[7757a]

*  (3731) The  equation  [7756],  divided  by  /y,  gives —  =  m^, and  this  is  similar  to

~  =  n2  [6110],  relative  to  Jupiter; a  being  the  mean  value  of  r  [6021c],  corresponding
to  [7732] ; and  n  [6022/]  corresponds  to  m  [7756'].

t  (3732) We  have  for  the  earth,  as  in  [69186], (^^— •^— -^)  ^  0,00582385  ; and  in

[7679]  the  centrifugal  force  of  the  earth 9  =  2^^. Now the centrifugal force of
the  earth -^^-^  is  to  that  of  Saturn  0,16597 [7677],  as  the  preceding  value  0,00582385, ^77^77  •,
relative  to  the  earth,  is  to  the  corresponding  value  relative  to  Saturn  [7760]  ; upon  the
principles  assumed  in  [7756"].

t  (3733) The  time  of  the  revolution  of  the  outer  satellite, r=79d''y%3296  [7669],

365  2500  [7761a]

gives  for  its  annual  motion  [7756'J, m=  yg^g  •  400°  =  184r,68. The symbol n

352  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [M^c.  Cfl.

We  have  seen,  in  [7722],  that  L  is  less  than  ^-^  ;  therefore  -~  is,  at  the
[7762]  "^

most, 31" ; and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  much  less,  and

that  it  does  not  exceed  two  or  three  centesimal  seconds.

The  value  of -t-^,  arising  from  the  sun's  action,  is  very  nearly  equal  to
0",878  ;  * consequently  it  is  insensible.

[77615]

[3015]  represents,  in  the  present  case,  the  annual  angular  rotatory  motion  of  Saturn  about
its  axis;  which,  by  using  the  value <=0"^*y%428  [7676],  becomes,

L7761C  ]  n  =  ^^^ ,  400"  =  341355°.

0,428

Substituting  these  values  and  that  of  —  [7756],  in  the  first  member  of  [7761e?],  and  then

making  successive  reductions,  using  [7760],  we  get,

[7761rf]  (?£=:±^).l.iL==f?^^Z::^).1.2:,.^2  =  20817".  Ir.

C  4n r3  C  An

[7761c] The value of ^i  =  33°,333 [7755], gives sin.di  =  J, cosJi=|.v/3; hence

sin.dj.cos.^i  =|-.^3, cos.^^j — sin.^^i  =  |; substituting these quantities and  the  last

expression  of  [7761<?],  in  [7750],  then  multiplying  the  result  by  2,  we  get  [7761/]. The

three  terms  of  this  formula  are computed  as  in [7761^], using the  values  of X,  a

[7753,  7754]  ;  and  the  final  result  is  as  in  [7761]  ;

[^''61/]  —'  =  20817".i:.  { |./3.[cos.2  X— sin.2x.cos.2A]+sin.X.cos.X.cos.A }

[7761g]  =  L.  { 15343"— 2296"— 6852"}  =  6195".!,.

If  we  put  i  =  2^^  in  [7761],  it  becomes  — ^=30",97;  and  as  we  have  seen,  in  [7722],
[7761^]  ^^

that  L<C^h-(Si  the  expression  of  -~  must  be  less  than  31",  as  in  [7762].

*  (3734)  If  the  attracting  body  be  supposed  to  be  the  sun,  moving  in  its  relative  orbit,
the  angle  of  inclination  KJYI=  X,  fig.  98,  page  324,  will  become  X  =  0.  Substituting
this  in  [7750],  and  then  dividing  by sin.dj,  we  get,

d^i {2C—A—B) 3 L
[?7636]  _=>___'.  _._.CosA.

In  this  case  L  represents  the  sun's  mass,  and  r  the  distance  of  Saturn  fi*om  the  sun  ;  so
{7763c] that  if  we  put  M't  for  the  mean  motion  of  Saturn about  the  sun,  we  shall  have,  in  like

manner  as  in  [6105],  ~  =  M''^.  The  value  of  M'  is  easily  deduced  from  the  expression
[7763d]  of  r  [7670],  which  gives  iW' =  j^^^. 4000000"  =  135792"  ;  hence
[7763c] ^=JH'2  =  (135792")^ Substituting  this,  with  the  values  of  n,  6^  [7761c,  7755],  and

[7763a]

VIII.  xvii.  §  37.]  THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  353

Hence  it  follows  that  the  motion  of  the  equator  of  Saturn  upon  the  orbit ^77^41

of  this  planet,  is  much  slower  than  that  of  the  orbit  of  the  outer  or  seventh

satellite  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  prove,  by  the  formulas  of  the  second  and  seventh [7765J

books,  that  the  motion  of  Saturn's  orbit,  referred  to  the  equator  of  this

planet,  is  also  much  less  than  that  of  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite.* This

being  supposed,  we  shall  resume  the  equation  [7653],

dzj.cos.-a 0(^11.8111.211  rw/'/M

— ; =  —  H .  [7766]

sin.w  p — gf.cos.Sn

This  equation  gives,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  q^j^

the  factor  [77570],  in  [77636],  it  becomes ~==(y'98. which  differs  a  little  from  the

'-■"'■-"  dt  ' '  [7763/]

calculation  of  the  author  in  [7763],  but  is,  like  his  result,  insensible  ;  being  much  less  than
the  quantity  6195".  Z<  [7761],  corresponding  to  the  satellite,  as  is  observed  in  [7764].

*  (3735) The  motion  of  the  node  of  any  satellite,  arising  from  the  sun's  disturbing  force,
is  easily  deduced  from  that  of  the  moon fw^.i?  [4S006],  by  merely  taking  the  symbols  to '■ ■'
correspond  to  the  proposed  planet  and  satellite. In  other  words,  we  must  suppose,  as  in
[5117a],  that  v  represents  the  mean  motion  of  the  satellite,  and  mv  the  mean  motion  of r,y<yf^rii-[
the  planet,  so  that  m  represents  the  ratio  of  the  mean  angular  motion  of  the  satellite,  in
comparison  with  that  of  the  planet. Then  the  motion  of  the  node  of  the  satellite,  arising

T  [7765c]

from  the  sun's  action,  will  be  as  above  ^mr.  v. In  this  case  we  have  m  =  — ,  consequently

rpfi

|m^  =  f.  —  =  jfir [7668]; hence the motion of the node is represented by

^v  =  0,0000407739.«  [7671]. Substituting,  for v, the  annual  motion  of  the  satellite
18416800"  [7761a],  we  find  that  the  annual  motion  of  the  node  becomes 751". This

quantity  is  much  greater  than  the  annual  motion of  the node of Saturn's  orbit — [7765c]

[4518  line  3],  which  is  about — 9*, or  — 27";  agreeing  with  what  is  stated  in  [7765].

What  is  here  said  relative  to  -— ^  is  also  true  for -—• , as  is  evident  from  the  comparison [776.5/*]

of  the formulas [7749,  7750], and the  similar  ones  relative to the other  bodies  in

[4518,  &;c.].

[7765rf]

[77660]

t  (3736)  If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  q^,  we  may  change  the  divisor  p — g'.cos.2n,
in  the  second  member  of  [7766],  into  p;  then  putting  rf^.cos.w  =  (/.sin.w,
rfn.sin.2n  =  — i.rf.cos.2n, we find that [7766] may be put under the form

—. =:  *.  — ,  rf.cos.2n  : and  its  integral  is,

sm.« '^ p  '  o  »

VOL.  IV.  89

354  MOTIONS  OF  THE  SATELLITES  OF  SATURN.  [Mec.  C^l.

[7767]  sin.«  =  6.  \  l  +  ^.cos.2n— jY!cos.2n.cZ.  -^  I  ;

[7768]  b  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity.  Thus,  by  neglecting  the  periodical
quantities  depending  on  the  angle  2n,  we  shall  find  that  the  inclination  -a
of  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite^  upon  the  intermediate  plane  betiveen  the  orbit

[7769]  and  equator  of  Saturn^  remains  ahoays  the  same*  notwithstanding  the
variations  of  this  plane.  This  is  conformable  to  ivhat  ive  have  found  for  the
moon,  in  [4803].  Saturn's  equator  carries  with  it,  m  its  motion,  the
intermediate  plane  and  the  orbit  of  the  satellite,  which  preserves  always,  upon  this
plane,  the  same  mean  inclination;  with  a  retrograde  and  nearly  uniform  motion,^

[7766c]  log.sin.-n — log.6  =  ^  . cos.2n — |./.cos.2n.J.—  ;

as  we  may  easily  perceive  by  taking  its  differential ;  b  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity.
If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  q^,  in  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  it  may  be
reduced  to  the  form  [7766(Z]5  as  is  evident  from  [58]  Int. ;

[7766d]  log.sin.'cJ — lo^.b  =  log.  \l-\-~.  cos.2n — i- A cos.2n.rf.  —  i  .

Reducing  this  equation  to  natural  numbers,  we  get,
[7766e]  ^  =  ^+  2"  •cos.2n— J. /?cos.2n.rf.  -^  ;

and  by  multiplying  by  6,  we  obtain  [7767].

[7769a]

*  (3737)  From  what  is  said  in  [7764—7766],  it  follows  that  the  angle  J^KI,  fig.  98,
page  324,  and  the  point  K,  vary  with  much  greater  rapidity  than  the  angle  HIN^  and
the  point  /;  or,  in  other  words,  the  variation  of  the  angle  zi  is  much  greater  than  that  of
[77696]  A,  and  the  variation  of  the  longitude  n,  is  much  greater  than  that  of  the  equinox  J.
Now  as  the  symbols  K,  K'  [7621]  are  nearly  constant,  the  values  of  q,  p  [7649,7650]
will  vary  only  in  consequence  of  the  slow  variations  of  the  angle  A ;  and  as  the  variations

[7769c] of  the  angle  2n are  much  more  rapid  than  those  of  A,  we  may  consider ^  as  nearly

constant,  during  a  revolution  of  the  angle  2n  ;  and  the  mean  value  of  sin.-cr,  during  this
time,  will  be  nearly  equal  to  £ ;  so  that  the  mean  value  of  zs  will  be  nearly  constant.
Thus,  notwithstanding  the  variations  which  the  changes  in  the  value  of  the  angle  A
produce  in  the  value  of  6,  and  therefore  also  in  the  situation  of  the  plane  IK,  yet  the
r7769c  1  ^°S^®  *  =  NKI,  or  the  inclination  of  the  satellite's  orbit  to  the  intermediate  plane  IK,
will  be  very  nearly  constant ;  but  liable  to  small  periodical  inequahties.

[7770a]

t  (3738)  We  have  seen  in  [7769a,  &c.]  that  the  motion  of  the  node  K,  fig.  98,  page
324,  is  much  more  rapid  than  that  of  the  equinox  /;  and  if  we  neglect  the  motion  of  i,
we  shall  find  that  the  motion  of  K  is  measured  by  the  variations  of IK=  200°— iT

VIII.xvii.'^37.] THEORY  OF  THE  OUTER  SATELLITE.  355

varying  however  a  little  on account of  the  variations  of  the  respective ryy^Q/,
inclinations  of  the  equator  and  the  orbit  of  Saturn.

[7628c],  so  that d.lK= — dn. Substituting  this  in  [7652],  we  get,

-^j—  =  — 'p.cos.'a-\-q.cos.zi.cos.2u ;  [77706]

and  as  q  is  much  smaller  than  p  [7649, 7650,  7684],  we  have  very  nearly,

^  =  — «.cos.73;  [7770c]

so  that the  variation  of  IK  is  very  nearly  proportional  to  — p.cos.zi. Now  as  «  [7769]

is  nearly  constant,  and  p  [7650]  varies  only  in  consequence  of  the  slow  variations  of  A,

the  motion  must  be  very  nearly  uniform ;  and  as  the  sign  is  negative  it  must  be  retrograde, [7770rf]

as  in  [7770]. The  variations  of  this  motion  depend  on  those  of  A,  the  angle  of  inclination

of  the  equator  to  the  orbit  of  Saturn,  as  is  observed  in  [7770'].

366  ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS.  [M6c.  Cel.

CHAPTER  XVIII.

ON  THE  SATELLITES  OP  UEANOS.

38.  With  respect  to  the  satellites  of  Uranus,  we  have  still  less
[77711  iiiforiii'ition  than  on  those  of  Saturn.  Herschel  is  the  only  person  who  has
particularly  observed  them ;  and  it  follows,  from  his  observations,  that  they  all
move  in  nearly  the  same  plane,  which  is  almost  perpendicular  to  that  of  the
orbit  of  the  planet ;  it  is  therefore  the  only  phenomenon  which  we  have  to
explain.

If  we  apply  to  these  bodies  the  formulas  of  the  preceding  chapter,  we

[7772] shall  see  that  the  action  of  the  planet  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  maintain  the

orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  in  the  plane  of  the  other  orbits. We  do  not  know

the  time  of  the  rotation  of  Uranus,  but  it  is  not  probably  much  less  than  that

[7773] of  Jupiter  or  Saturn. If  we  suppose  it  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  Saturn,  we

shall  have,  as  in  [7681],

162 T'2

[7774]  K'  =  K,

[7775]

335 f.a^
We have, in this case, 7"  =  30689'^*y% and according to Herschel,
a  =  91,008  ; hence  we  deduce,*
[7776]  K'  =  0,39824.Z:

The  plane  of  the  equator  of Uranus  is  supposed to  be very nearly

perpendicular  to  its  orbit, and  as  A  denotes  the  inclination  of  these  planes

[7777] to each other [7638], we shall put J'  =  ^* — A; * being the

[7778] semi-circumference,  whose  radius  is  unity ;  so  that  A'  will  be  a  wery  small

[7779] angle. Then  if  we  put ^  =  J* — & in  the  equation  [7646],  namely,

[7776a]

*  (3739) Using  the  values  [7775]  and  that  of  t  [7676],  we  find  that  the  value  of  K'
[7774]  becomes  as  in  [7776] .

VIlI.xvm.<§»38.]  ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS.  357

tang.2^^^,^^^^^^^; '«'^'»  ^  [7780]

we  shall  get,  very  nearly,*

Now  ^ — ^  [7628/*],  or  <)' — A\  being  the  inclination  of  the  plane,  upon
which  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  moves,  to  the  orbit  of  the  planet,  this
inclination  will  be,t

K'A' 0,39824

[7782]

therefore  it  will  be  very  small,  if  we  notice  only  the  action  of  the  sun
and  Uranus.  The  fixed  plane  will  then  coincide  very  nearly  with  the  orbit
of  the  planet,  and  the  outer  satellite  will  finally  cease  to  move  in  the  plane  [7784]
of  the  equator  of  Uranus,  in  which  the  orbits  of  the  other  satellites  are
supposed  to  be  situated.  But  the  outer  satellite  may  be  retained,  in  the
plane  of  the  equator,  by  the  action  of  the  inferior  satellites.  To  prove  this,
we  shall  observe  that,  if  we  put  a  for  the  ratio  of  the  radius  of  the  outermost
satellite  but  one  m',  to  that  of  the  outermost  satellite  wi,  the  value  of  K'
[7621]  will  be  increased,  by  the  action  of  the  inferior  satellite  m',  by  the
quantity im'.a.6^^)  ;t id  being  the  mass  of  the  inferior  satellite,  in  parts  of [7786]

[7785]

[7781a]

*  (3740) Substituting  the  values  [7777,  7779]  in  [7780],  we  get,

Now  as  4',  A\  are  very  small,  we  have  very  nearly,

tang.(*— 2^)=— 2d'; sin.(*— 2.^')  =  2^' ; cos.  (*— 2^/3')  =—1.  [77816]

Substituting  these  expressions  in  [7781a],  we  get — 24'=— — -,; dividing it by  —2, [7781c]

K.  -^  K.

we  obtain  ^  [7781] ;  and  by  subtracting  A\  we  get  (! — A'  [7781].

I  (3741) Subtracting the value of A'  [7777] from that  of ^  [7779], gives
A — fl  =  d' — A'  \  and  by  using  the  value  of  tS — A'  [7781],  we  get  the  first  expression  in [7783a]
[7783]. The  second  and  third  forms  in  [7783],  are  deduced  from  the  first, by  the
substitution  of  the  value  of  K'  [7776] .

[7785a]

X  (3742) The  angle  y  [7599]  represents,  in  the  present  case,  the  inclination  of  the
primitive  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  to  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  Uranus  ;  and  if  we  neglect
7*  on  account  of  its  smallness,  we  may  put 003.7=  1  '■> hence  the  coefficient  of  — 2aa'j [77856]
in  the  denominator  of  [7615],  becomes,

VOL» IV.  90

358  ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS.  [M6c.  Cel.

[7787]

that  of  Uranus,  taken  for  unity ; and b^P  being  determined  by  the  formulas

of  §  49,  Book  IL According  to  HerschePs  observations,  we  have  very
nearly <».= J  ; hence  we  have  nearly,*

31

[7788]  ^f=T2'

[7785c]  cos.(« — Y).cos.t/+sin.(r — ^^).sin.t;'  =  cos.(y — v' — y) [24]  Int.

In  the  present  notation  a  corresponds  to  the  outer  satellite, and  d'  to  the  next  interior

[7785d] satellite,  so  that a  >►  of,  which  is  the  reverse  of  what  is  supposed  in  [6304] ;  so  that  this

of
[7785e] formula  now  becomes a=  — , as  in [7785]. Substituting  the  values [77856,  c]  m

[7615],  then  dividing  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  second  member  by  a^,  using
a  [7785e],  we  get  the  expression  [7785/]  ;  and  by  developing  the  denominator,  as  in
[1005],  it  becomes  as  in  [7785^].

(dR  \  m'.a.sin.y.sin.u'

'ds)  '^""  |1— 2a.cos.(w— v'— *H-a2}i

[7785g']  =  —  »i'.a.sin.  y.  sin.r'.  { i^^  +  6y> .  cos.(»-i;'-^)-f  &;c. } .

2  2

The  only  term  of  this  last  expression,  producing  the  angle v — *, which  is  retained  in
[7785ft] [7619],  is  that  depending  on UP; observing  that  the  factor sin.u'.cos.(v — v' — *),  in  this

2

term,  produces  the  quantity i.sin.(u — *)  ; hence  the  expression  [7785g']  contains  the
following  term ;

[7785i]  «•  (■^)  ^—lrn'.a,.¥^\sm.y.sm.(v-^^).

Putting  this  equal  to  the  assumed  value  in  [7619],  we  obtain,
[7785i]  — 5.sin.7.cos.7.sin.  {v — *)  =  — J.m'.a.  J^^\  sin.7.sin.(t> — -ir).

Dividing  this  equation  by — 2.sin.7.sin.(« — t), and  then  putting  cos.y  =  l  [77856],  we
[7785i] gg|-  ^jjg  value  of  ^B,  which  represents  the  increment  of  K'  [7621],  arising  from  the  action

of  the  inner  satellite m'  upon  the  outer  satellite  m ;  namely,
[7785ni]  ^B  =  :^.m'.a.6^^^  =  increment  of  J5r'.

This  differs  from  the  result  given  by  the  author  in  the  original  work  in  [7786], namely,
increment  of  K'  =  4.m'.a^.6^'\ We  have  given  the  corrected  values  in  [7786,  &c.].

9

*  (3743) Substituting  the  value  of  ¥^^  [989]  in  6^^)  [992],  we  get,

-5  2

[7788«]  *i"  =  (I^-ll-24-"-'-^-l-

If  we  retain  only  the  first two  terms of  the  series, and  put a  =  |  [7787], we  get

31

[77886] ^3"  ^^12' ^^  ^"  [7788]; hence  the  corresponding  increment  of  K'  [7785m]  becomes

VIII.  xviii.  <^38.] ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS.  359

therefore  the  value  of  K'  is  increased  by  the  quantity . If  we  suppose  [7789]

K=^  -^-  J  we  shall  have  K  for  the  increment  of  K' ;  and  by  adding  this  [7789']

to  the  part  in  [7776],  vre  get,

jr'  =  1,39824.  JST;  [7790]
consequently,*

&  == :  [7791]

0,39824  ^ ^

therefore  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  outermost  satellite  to  the  equator

of  Uranus,  will  be  very  small.  [7792]

The  duration  of  the  sideral  revolution  of  this  satellite,  is  107'^*y%6944 ;  [7793]

hence  we  have,  for  Uranus,  f K  ==  0,000009235987  ;  which,  by  supposing  [^794]

^  =  Z,  [7795]

-~- ,  as  in  [7789] ;  observing  that  in  the  original  work  it  is  given -~- , in consequence
^  ^  ^^^  [7788c]

of  the  mistake  mentioned  in  [7785n]. This  quantity —~- being  supposed  equal  to  K,

as  in  [7789'],  we  find,  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the  calculation  [7792],  that  this  renders  the
inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  to  the  equator  of  Saturn  very  small,  and  the
probability  of  this  assumed  value  is  examined  in  [7796,  &c.].

[7788rf]

[7791a]

*(3744)  We  have,  in  [7777],  2^  =  *— 2w5';  whence  sin.2v2  =  sin.2./3'  =  2^'
nearly  ;  also  cos.2.^  =  — 1  nearly.  Substituting  these  values  and  that  of  K'  [7790]  in
[7780],  then  dividing  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  second  member  by  K,  we  get

K.2A'  2A'  [77916]

tang.2^  =  — — -  =  -r^^3^  • Now  as  A'  is  very  small  [7778],  we  can  satisfy  this  equation

2A'

by  supposing  24  to  be  very  small,  and  equal  to onoo^  > whence  we  get  the  value  of  6 [7791c]

[7791],  and  as  this  is  small,  we  may  infer,  as  we  have  done  in  [7705a,  &£c.]  for  Saturn's
satellites,  that  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  outermost  satellite  to  the  equator  of  Uranus,
is  small  [7792] .

[7795a]

t(3745) We  have  in  [7668] ir=|.-^; substituting T=  107'J»ys6944  [7793],

r'  =  30689<'«y«  [7775], we  get ^=0,0000092359..  [7794];  putting  this  equal  to  the

96
assumed  expression  of  K  [7789'],  we  get m'  =  —  X  0,0000092359  =  0,0000286 ;  being [77956]

ox

about  half  the  quantity  given  by  the  author  in  the  original  work  [7796],  where  he  puts

m'  =  0,0000572035 ;  which  we  have  decreased,  by  correcting  for  the  error  mentioned  in [7795*  ]

[7797]

(360  ^ ON  THE  SATELLITES  OF  URANUS.  [Mec.  Cel.

gives,  , .pv:fir  V

[7796]  m'=  0,0000286,.

Now  this  mass  of  the  satellite,  and  even  a  greater  mass,  can  be  supposed
probable  [7795^]  ;  therefore  the  orbit  of  the  outer  satellite  may  be  retained
in  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  the  planet,  by  the  action  of  the  inferior
satellites.  As  to  the  orbits  of  the  other  satellites,  the  action  alone  of  Uranus
suffices  to  maintain  them  in  the  plane  of  the  equator  of  this  planet.  For  the
ratio  of  K'  to  K  varies  reciprocally  as  the  fifth  power  of  the  radius  of  the
orbit  [7701]  ;  and  it  is,  for  the  outermost  satellite  but  one,  thirty-two  times
greater  than  that  relative  to  the  outermost  satellite ;  * so  that  we  then  have,

[7799]  ^'=12,74368.^:;

which  gives,

A'

[7798]

[7799']

11,74368'
thus  6  is  very  small  and  insensible.

[7785w,  &c.]. This  decrease  of  the  mass  serves  to  confirm  the  reasoning  in  [7797,  &c.],
[7795d] namely,  that  the  mass  m'  [7796]  is  not  greater  than  may  be  supposed  probable  ;  observing
that  it  is  nearly  of  the  same  order  relative  to  the  mass  of  Saturn,  as  the  masses  of  Jupiter's
satellites  [7162,  &c.]  are  relative  to  that  of  Jupiter.

[7799a]
[77996 ]

[7799c]

*=  (3746)  The  ratio  of  the  radii  being  ^  [7787],  that  of  the  values  of  K'  [7774]  will
be  inversely  as  (^)^,  or  directly  as  32  to  1,  as  is  shown  in  [7701,7701a].  Therefore  if
we  multiply  the  expression  of  IC  [7776],  corresponding  to  the  outer  satellite,  by  32,  we
shall  get  the value  of K'  [7776], corresponding to the interior satellite, namely,

K2Ji'
£'=32x0,39824.ir=12,74368.Z,  as  in  [7799]. Substituting  this  in tang.2^=  =;-—

2w3'
[77916],  it  becomes tang.24  =  ;  whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  6  [7799].

NINTH BOOK.

THEORY OF COMETS.

•

The  greatness  of  the  excentricities  of  the  orbits  of  the  comets,  and  of  their
inclinations  to  the  ecliptic,  do  not  permit  us  to  apply,  to  the  perturbations
of  these  bodies,  the  formulas  which  are  used  for  the  planets,  in  the  second
and  sixth  books.  It  is  impossible,  in  the  present  state  of  analysis,  to  express
the  perturbations  of  the  comets  by  analytical  formulas,  which  include,  like
those  of  the  planets,  an  indefinite  number  of  revolutions ;  we  can  only
determine  them  by  parts,  and  by  means  of  mechanical  quadratures.  The  [7800]
method  of  Chapter  VII I.  Book  II.  is  peculiarly  appropriate  to  this  object,
because  it  gives,  by  simple  quadratures,  the  variations  in  each  element  of
the  orbit,  supposing  it  to  be  a  variable  ellipsis.  Then  to  obtain,  at  any
instant,  the  situation  of  the  comet,  it  is  only  necessary  to  substitute,  in  the
usual  formulas  of  the  elliptical  motion,  the  elements  augmented  by  these
variations.  We  shall  now  proceed  to  develop  this  method,  so  that  those
who  wish  to  apply  it  to  the  motion  of  a  comet  will  find  no  other  difficulty
than  what  arises  from  the  great  labor  of  the  numerical  process.

CHAPTER  I.

GENERAL  THEORY  OF  THE  PERTURBATIONS  OP  COMETS.

1. We  shall  suppose,  as  in  [916',  &c.],  that
X,  y,  2,  represent  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  comet w, referred  to [7801]

the  sun's  centre  as  their  origin  ;  *

x',  yf,  z',  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  disturbing  planet m', referred [78or]

to  the  same  origin  ;

VOL. IV.  91

362  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Gel.

and  we  shall  have,  as  in  [913,  914,  &c.],*
[7802]  Jl  ^  m'.(xx'-\-yi/+zz')  __  m'

R

Funda-
meatal

[7806]

equations.
First  form

/3  ^(^'_^)2+(y'_y)2^(;j/_;,)2 '

[7803] r,  /,  being  the  radii  vectores  of  ?w,  m'. We  shall  also  suppose  the  sun's
[7804] mass  equal  to  unity,  so  that fj^=  l+m  [914']. We  then  have,  as  in  [915],

_ ddx , fx.a? . fdRK

ddy fx.y /dR\  ^
^-'d^'^~^~^\dyj'

ddz 11..Z /dR\
[7807]  ^  =  ^+ "^+  W*

[7807']  In  the  case  of  R  =  0,  these  equations  correspond  to  an  elliptical  orbit,-f  as  we
[7808]  have  seen  in  the  second  book  [545 — 555',  &c.]  ;  and  as  the  value  of  R  is
Symbols  very  small,  we  may  put  6x,  Sy,  6Zj  for  the  alterations  it  produces  in  the
<5a?,  <5y,  yalues  of  ^,  y,  z,  corresponding  to  the  elliptical  orbit,  neglecting  the  squares
and  products  of  those  quantities.  Then  the  three  equations  [7805 — 7807]
[7809] ^^^  i^g  reduced  to  the  following  forms  ;

*  (3747)  The  expression  of  R  [7802]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [913,  914],  or  in  [949],
[7802a] retaining  only  the  two  bodies  w,  m' ; whose  radii  vectores  are  r,  /,  respectively  [914'].

IVIoreover  we  have,  in  [914'],  ii.=M-{-m  ;  and  by  putting,  as  in  [7803],  the  mass  of  the
[78026] sun  M=l, it  becomes fJi.  =  l-j-OT,  as  in  [7804]. The  equations  [915]  are  the  same  as

in  [7805—7807].

[7810a] t  (3748) If  there  be  no  disturbing  body  we  may  put m'=0  in  [7802]  ;  then  we  shall

_  ddx Uijc

[78106] have R=0, as  in  [7807']; and the  equation [7805] will become 0  =  —  -{-—,

corresponding  to  the  system [545]  and  to  the  elliptical  orbit  [555']. In  the  disturbed
orbit,  X  changes  into x4-5x, r  into r  +  5;-  [7808]; and  then  the  equation [7805]

becomes,

dd.{x-\-6x) . (x.[x-{-6x) , /dR\
[78100]  ^  =— ^T-  +  -^I^  +  \J^)  '

so  that  by  subtracting  the  equation  [78106],  we  get,

dd.6x , ludx ,  CI  1  > , /dR\

[7810c]  Now  by  development  we  have  {r-\-Sr)~^=r~^—Sr~*.6rj  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  5r^.
Substituting  this,  with  fji,=  l-|-m  [7804],  in  [7810(7],  and  neglecting  the  terms  containing
m8x, m6r, which  are  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces,  it  becomes  as  in

[7810/]  |-7QiQj^  jjj  liijg  manner,  from  [7806, 7807],  we  obtain  [7811, 7812]  respectively ;  or  they
may  be  derived  from  [7810],  by  changing  successively  x  into  y  or  z,  and  the  contrary.

IX.i.«^2.]  AT  A  SMALL  DISTANCE  FROM  THE  SUN.  363

Funda-
mental
equations.

_ dd.Sx Sx  Sx.Sr /dR\

^  1^ '^^  ^ +  yl^J  ' I  [7810]

Second
form.

Q^ddJ^ 6j_^_yAr  rdR\,

dfi ^  r3  r4 ^\dy)'l ^^  [7811]

_  __  dd.6z 6z  ^zAr /^\ \  [7812]

~ dt^ ~^  7^  r* +  \d^)'

It  is  only  necessary  to  find  values  of  Sx,  Sy,  6z, which  will  satisfy  the [78131
equations  [7810 — 7812J  ;  for  by  adding  these  values  respectively,  to  those
of X,  y,  z, corresponding  to  the  elliptical  motion,  containing  six  arbitrary [7813']
constant  quantities  [602"],  we  shall  obtain  the  complete  integrals  of  the  three
primitive  differential  equations  of  the  comet's  motion  [7805 — 7807].

2. We  shall  consider  the  value  of  R in  the  two  extreme  limits  of  the

comefs  distance  from  the  sun. When  the  ratio — of  the  radius  vector  of [7814]

r

the  comet  to  that  of  the  planet,  is  a  very  small  fraction,  the  value  of  ( -7-  )
will  be  very  small  in  comparison  with — , and  the  ratio  of  the  first  of  these

Comet  far
within  the
planet'g
orbit.

/  v3

m.r

quantities  to  the  second,  vt^ill  be  of  the  order — ^  .* In  this  case,  we  may [7815]

*  (3749) If  we  suppose,  as  in  [7870fl],  that  /  represents  the  distance  of  the  comet
from  the  planet  m',  or  the  distance  of  the  extremities  of  the  two  radii r,  /  j and  7  the [7815a]
angleincludedby  these  two  radii;  we  shall  have  as  in  [1432a,  A],  by  changing  a,  b,  c,  r,  R,
into  a/,  y'j  s/,  r',  r,  respectively,

/a  =  (a/-—x)^-{-(y'—yy-\'{2/—z)^  =  r'2— 2rr'.cos.  7 + r».  [78156  ]

Now  the  partial  differential  of  R  [7802],  relative  to  x,  gives  the  first  expression  in  [7815c] ;
and  by  substituting  [78156],  then  developing  and  reducing,  we  finally  obtain  [7815<?J  ;

/dR\  m'.x' m'.{x-x') m'.x'  m'.jx-x')

\dx)~~ 'Ts'  * ' \ (x'_a;)2+{y_2/)2+(2'— z)2 1 §  ~  "^  +  { r^_2rr'.cos.y + r^^  L <^ J

m'.x' , m'Jx—3/)  C, 2r  , »-2  >-g m'.x' , m'.{x—x')  ( , , 3r  ,„ >

The  first  and  third  terms  in  this  last  expression  mutually  destroy  each  other,  and  the

remaining  terms  are  evidently  of  the  order  —^  ;  and  this  is  to  the  term —  [7805], as

m'.r^

-j^  to  1  ; (A  being  nearly  equal  to  unity  [7804]. This  agrees  with  [7815] ;  and  as  the

terms  of  R  are  so  very  small,  we  may  neglect  them,  and  then  the  orbit  will  become
elliptical,  as  in  [7815'].

364  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  C61.

[7816]

consider  R  as  being  nearly  equal  to  nothing,  and  the  motion  of  the  comet
as  elliptical.

If  —  be  a  great  number,  or,  in  other  words,  if  the  comet  be  much  farther

off  from  the  sun  than  the  planet  is,  loe  may  develop  R  in  a  series,  according

[7816'] to  the  powers  of  —  ; and  by  neglecting,  in  this  series,  the  terms  of  the  order

Comet  far ~- ,  WO  shall  havc,*

without  r

et'B orbit.  /dR\ m'.(x—x) , m.x , _ ,. ,, ,, ,. a?

[7817]  {j[^)  =  -V~"  +  "7^  +  ^m!.{xx'+y}/-^2zy  ^ ;

then  the  differential  equation  in 6x  [7810]  becomes,  f

[7818]  0-  — +  --?^:!^^^±^^±^^  +  ^^^:^^=^4-  —

The  differential equations  in 6y,  8z [7811,  7812], evidently produce
similar  equations. We  shall  now  suppose.

[7818']

*  (3750) We  have,  in  [914'],  the  values  of  r^  /^  [78176]. Substituting  them  in
the  development  of  the  first  expression  of

[78170]  /2=  (^'24_y'2+;^2^_2.(^^'+yy'^;^;2')^_(^2^3^2^^2) [78156],

and  then  comparing  the  result  with  the  second  expression  of  f^  [78156],  we  get  [7817c];
[78176]  r2  =  a;2-f^2_j_^2  .  /  2  ^  ^_^  y'^+z^ ;

[7817c]  r'/.cos.y=:xx'-{-yi/-}-zsf.

Instead  of  developing  the  radical [r^^ — Sr/.cos.y-j-'^}'^  [7815c],  according  to  the  powers

r  r'

[7817rf] of "Tj we  shall  now  develop  it  according  to  the  powers  of  — ;  by  this  means  we  shall

find,  that  the  last  formula  in  [7815rf]  becomes,  by  changing  the  order  of  the  terms,

Substituting,  in  the  last  term of  this  expression,  the  value  of rr'.cos.y  [7817c],  and
neglecting  the  small  terms  of  the  second  order  in  /,  a?',  y',  «',  it  becomes  as  in  [7817].

[7818a]

t  (3751) The  differential  of  r^  [78176],  relative  to  the  characteristic  5,  being  divided

by  2r,  gives ^r=  ^  ^"'^  ^"^^  ^. Substituting this  in the  third  term  of  [7810],  and

r

using  the  value  of (-t~j  ['7817],  we  obtain  [7818], If  we  change  reciprocally  x  into  y,

we  shall  get  a  similar  equation  in  y,  corresponding  to  [7811];  and  by  changing  reciprocally
X  into  z,  we  get  an  equation  in  z  corresponding  to  [7812].

IX.i.<^2.] AT  A  GREAT  DISTANCE  FROM  THE  SUN.  S65

sx  =  Ax  +  A'3f;  [7819]

Sij^Ay  +  Ay;  [7820]

6z  =  Az-JrA'zf;  [7821]
and  by  observing  that  we  have  very  nearly,  as  in  [78106,  7804],
ddx X ddaf of

dt^  r3  '  df9  r'3 '

we  shall  find,  that  the  differential  equation  in  6x  [7818],  will  give,*

[7822]

*  (3752)  The  object  in  view,  in  [7813],  is  merely  to  satisfy  the  equation  [7818],  and
the  similar  ones  in  y,  z.  For  this  purpose  the  values  [7819 — 7821]  are  assumed,  with
the  arbitrary  constant  quantities  A,  A'  \  and  it  is  finally  shown,  in  [7824],  that  the  constant
values  of  A^  A'  may  be  found,  which  will  satisfy  the  differential  equation  [7S18],  and  the  [7823i]
similar  ones  in  y,  z.  To  prove  this,  we  shall  first  show  that  the  substitution  of
hx==Ax^A'oi!  [7819]  in [7810,  or  7818],  produces  the  equation  [7823]. For  if  we

substitute  this  value  of  5a?  in  the  two  first  terms  of  [7818], —^ — f"73» they  become, [782-^c]

and  by  using  the  values  [7822],  we  find  that  this  expression  is  reduced  to  the  form

J¥  1 —  —  -j-  —V,  being  the  same  as  the  first  and  second  terms  of  [7823  line  1]. Again,

by  substituting  the  values  [7819 — 7821]  in  the  first  member  of  [7823(?],  we  get  the  second
member  of  the  same  expression ;  and  by  using  the  value  of  r*  [78176],  it  becomes  as
in  [7823e];

xhx-\-yhy-^zlz  =  A.{c(^-^y'^-}-z'^)-\-A'.(xjf-\-yi/-\.zz') ;  [7823d]

x8x-\-ySy-\-z6z  =  A.r^-\-A'.{xaf-\-yi/-\-za/).  [7823<  ]

Multiplying  [7823e]  by —  ^,  we  get,  for  the  third  term  of  [7818] —  ^fiif^ii^^jH^)  ^

, . SA.x 3A'.x.{xx'4-yy'-\-zzf)  .,,.,./..

the  expression — -^—^ , as m the third and fourth terms of

[7823  line  1]. Lastly,  the  three  remaining  terms  of  [7818],  are  the  same  as  those  in

[7823  line  2] ;  observing  that  the  first  of  these  terms  of  [7818], —^  , is  placed  the  third

in  order  in  [7823]. Now  substituting ^=^m', w3'  =  w'  [7824], in  [7823  line  1],  we

find  that  the  terras  in  this  line  are  destroyed  respectively  by  the  terms  immediately  below [7823A]

them,  in  [7823  line  2]  ;  therefore  the  equation  [7823]  is  satisfied  by  these  values  of  A,  A' \

and  by  using  them  we  obtain,  from  [7819 — 7821],  the expressions  [7825 — 7827],  which [7823t]

satisfy  the  equation  [7818  or  7810]. The  same  results  will  be  obtained  if  we  use  the

equation  [7811],  changing  reciprocally  the  ordinates .t,  a/, into  y,  y'j or  if  we  use  the

equation  [7812],  changing  reciprocally  a;,  a/, into z,  sf. Hence  it  appears  that  the  values

of  (Sx,  (5y,  fe  [7825—7827],  satisfy  the  system  of  equations  [7810 — 7812],  according  to

the  requirements  in  [7823a].

VOL.  IV.  92

[7823/]

[782%]

[7823*]

366  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [M^c.  Cd.

[7823]

wg^a;^ A'.o^ ZA.x ZA' .x.{xy!-\-y]l^z:i!)

Vfi.od , tn'.af , rnl.x , Sm'.x.(xa/4-yi/4-Z3^)  ^

[7828]

We  may  satisfy  this  equation  by  putting,
[7824]  ^==1^'^  A'=^m';

which  give,
[7825]  6x  =  ^m'.x  +  m'.x' ;

[7826]  iy^im'.y  +  m'.i/;

[7827]  6z  =  ^m'.z  +  m'.z'.

Therefore  these  equations  satisfy  the  differential  equation  in  6x  [7810]  ;  and

it  is  evident  that  they  also  satisfy  the  differential  equations  in  6y  and  62:,

[7811,7812].

The  preceding  result  is  a  very  simple  corollary  to  the  theorem  which  we
have  given  in  [451",  &c.].  For  it  follows^  from  this  theorem,  that  when  the
comet  is  at  a  great  distance  from  the  sun,  it  may  be  considered  as  being
attracted  towards  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  sun  and  planet  by  a
mass  equal  to  the  sum  of  these  three  bodies ;  therefore  it  vi'ill  describe,  very
nearly,  an  ellipsis  about  that  point ;  and  the  attractive  force  which  causes  it

to  be  described,  will  be  /",  ?t^  ;  *  supposing  that  the  radius  vector  of
[7829] ^  _ ^  {r+Sry

this  last  ellipsis  is  r-|-<5r,  and  the  corresponding  rectangular  co-ordinates
[7830] x-\-6x, y-\-^y, z-\-5z. We may suppose  this  ellipsis  to be entirely

similar  to  that  whose  co-ordinates  are  x,  y,  z ;  and  to  be  described  in  the
[7831] same  time. For  this  purpose,  it  is  only  necessary  for  the  attractive  forces  in

*  (3753)  The  comet  is  supposed  to  be  at  a  great  distance  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of
[7829a] ^i^g  gyj^  ^^^  planet ;  so  that  it  will  be  acted  upon  in  nearly  the  same  manner  as  if  the  mass

l-\-m',  of  the  sun  and  planet,  were  placed  in  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  these  two
[78296] bodies. Now  this  mass  1-j-w'  acts  upon  the  mass  m  of  the  comet,  placed  at  the  distance

r-\-6r,  with  a  force  which  is  represented  by  the  sum  of  these  masses l-\-m-\-mf,  divided  by

[7829c] (r4-5r)2,  as  in  [7829] ; that  is,  by  the  force T'^'T^  ? supposing,  as  in  [7829  or  7834'J,

[7829rf] that  r-]-5r  is  the  radius  vector  of  the  comet,  referred  to  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  sun  and
planet. If  we  neglect  the  planet's  mass  m', and  put  r  for  the  radius  vector  referred  to

[7829c]  lA-rn

the  sun's  centre,  the  force  becomes —5-  ,  as  in  [7832].

IX.  i.  §  2.]

AT  A  GREAT  DISTANCE  FROM  THE  SUN.

367

the  corresponding  points  to  be  as  r-^Sr  to  r,* which  gives,

1 4-m4-m' 1  -}-  m
{r-f-ory H
Hence  we  deduce,

sr  =  :^m'.r; [7831/]
consequently  the  co-ordinates  of  this  last  ellipsis  are,t

(l+im').x;  {l+im').y;  (l+im').z.

These  co-ordinates  are  referred  to  the  common  centre  of  gravity  of  the  sun
and  planet.  To  reduce  them  to  the  sun's  centre,  we  must  add  the
co-ordinates  of  this  centre  of  gravity,  referred  to  the  sun's  centre.  Now
these  last  co-ordinates  are  evidently  represented  by  mV,  m'l/,  m'z' ;
therefore  the  co-ordinates  of  the  comet,  referred  to  the  sun's  centre,  will  be,
{\+±m').x-\-m'x' ; (l+±m').y+my ; (l+±m').zi-m'z'  ;

[7831']
[7832]

[7833]

[7834]
[7834']

[7835]
[7836]

*  (3754)  If  two  bodies  revolve  about  an  attracting  point  in  similar  ellipses,  and  in
similar  situations,  with  the  same  periodical  time  of  revolution,  and  corresponding  radii
vectores  r-\-5r  and  r,  it  is  evident  that  their  tangential  velocities  in  their  orbits  will  be
as  the  radii  r-\-5r  and  r ;  and  the  deflections  from  the  tangents,  in  the  direction  of  the
attracting  force,  and  in  a  given  time  dt,  will  be  in  the  same  ratio  r-\-8r  to  r;  because
the  orbits  are  supposed  to  be  similar  in  form  and  position.  Now  these  deflections  are
evidently  proportional  to  the  attractive  forces  ;  therefore  these  forces  must  be  to  each  other
as  r-f-5r  to  r,  as  in  [7831'] ;  and  if  we  take,  for  the  forces,  the  values  given  in  [7829c,  e],
we  shall  obtain  the  analogy  in  [7832], From  this  we  easily  deduce  the  equation,

(r+5r)3:==r3.(^±^')=r3.(l+^-^)  =  ^^^^  nearly.

Extracting  the  cube  root  of  this  last  expression,  we  get,  very  nearly, r-\-Sr=r.{l-\-^m,') ;
whence 6r  =  ^m'.r,  as  in  [7833].

f  (3755)  From  the  similarity  of  the  forms  and  positions  of  the  orbits  [7831c],  it  follows
that  the  co-ordinates  x,  y,  z,  must  have  the  same  relation  to  the  co-ordinates  x-{-Sx,
y-{-6t/,  ^-f"^^:,  respectively,  as  the  radii  r  to  r-\-5r,  or  1  to  1+^w'  [7833];  hence  we
easily  obtain  the  expressions  of  x-\-8x,  y-\-Sy,  z-{-5z  [7834].  To  these  we  must  add  the
parts  m'x',  m'y',  mV  [7835],  respectively  corresponding  to  X,  Y,  Z  [126,  127]  ;  observing

or  m'x'  nearly ;  because  the  value  of

l-f-m''

that A=  ri261,  becomes  m  this  case

x  relative  to  the  sun's  centre  is  0,  and  the  sun's  mass  is  1  [7804].  In  like  manner  we  get
Y-=m'y',  Z=m'z',  from  [127].  These  parts  being  added  respectively  to  those  in
[7834],  we  obtain  the  co-ordinates  x-\-Sx,  y-\-^y,  z-\-^z  [7836],  referred  to  the  sun's
centre.

[783lo]
[78316]

[7831c  ]
[7831rf]

[7831c]
[7831/-]

[7834a]

[78345]

[7834c]
[7834<i]

368  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cil.

which  agree  with  those  in  [7825 — 7827] ;  and  as  these  co-ordinates  contain
six  arbitrary quantities  [7813'], they satisfy  completely the differential
[7836'] equations  of  the  comet's  motion,  when  we  suppose R  to  be  equal  to  the
following  function  R^ ;  *

[7837]  J?^  =  _-  ^  _  m'.(xx'+yy'+zz').(^^  —  ^^ .

This  being  premised  we  shall  suppose,

[7838]  R'^Rj^^^ rn',(x:^+yi/+zz'),(^^  -  i)  ;

[7839]  a  .r  =  -i-  m'.a:  +  m V+  6 x^  ;

[7840]  6y  =  ±m'.y-\-m'y'i-  6y,  ;

[7841]  sz  =  ^m'.z-\-m'z'-{-SZi ;

and  the  differential  equations  in 6Xy  Sy,  6z  [7810 — 7812]  will  give,t

(7837„] *^''''^ From r=4Aq^^  [78176],  we obtain (£)=^^=  =  f;

substituting  this  in  the  partial  differential  of  the  assumed  value  of  R  [7837]  ;  which,  for  the
[7837a'] saJce  of  distinctness,  we  shall  denote  by  R^,  though  it  is  not  so  accented  by  the  author;

we  get,

[78376]  (fr)  =  !^^  _  «V.(i  _  1)  +  3m'.(,xx'+y,y+z^).  ^ ,

(tin  \
—  J, which  is  used  in  [7817,  7818]; producing  the

parts  of  the  co-ordinates  of  the  comet's  orbit  contained  in  [7825 — 7827],  or  those  in  [7836].
[7837c]  The  expression  of  7?^  [7837]  does  not  contain  the  whole  of  the  function  i2  [7802],  on
[7837rf] account  of  the  terms  which  are  neglected  in  [7816']  ; and  if  we  suppose  that  these  small

and  neglected  terms  of  R are  equal  to  R',  we  shall  have,
[7837e]  R  =  R,-{-R', or R'  =  R—R,,

Substituting  R^  [7837]  in  this  value  of  R',  we  get  [7838].  If  we  now  suppose  that  the
[7837/*] quantity R' has the  effect to augment the values of 6x, 8y, Sz, by the terms

6x^, (Jy,, Sz^, respectively,  their  complete  values  will  be  as  in  [7839 — 7841].

t(3757) Substituting R=R,-{-R'  [7837e]  in  [7810],  we  get,

dd.6x Sx Sx.Sr /dR\ /dR\
[78420]  ■  "  =  ~rf^+;5-— -^r'  +  l^-rf^y  +  V-^J-

If  we  substitute  the  values  of  6x,  5y,  5z  [7839-7841],  also  5r-\-5r^  [7818a,  7845]  for  6r,
we  shall  find  that  the  parts  which  are  independent  of Sx^ ,  Sy^ ,  Sz^ , are  destroyed  by  the

[78425] terms  arising  from (■t-')» as  is  evident  from  the  calculations  in  [7818 — 7827J  ;  therefore m
these  terms  may  be  neglected  ;  and  the  remaining  quantities,  depending  on Sx^,  6y^,  8z^,

IX.  i.  ^^3.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING ^  ^ If |?  ^  ^ £f . ggg

du du du du du du du

dd.Sxi Sec  I  Sx.Sr^ , /^dR\

dt^ +  TT  -4-  +  y^J

Funda-
mental

^  ^  u^u^^^ ,^__  uu,.u.^  4.  r!:fL\'  \  [7842]

equations.

Third

form.

0  =  ^-^-,|-^  +  (-),.)(B)

_o  =  '^+$^-^  +  (f>)

In  these  equations  Sti  is  what  6r  [7818a]  becomes,  when  we  change
dx,  6y,  5Zf  into  6X1,  8yi,  6Zi.  These  equations  differ  from  those  in
[7810 — 7812]  only  by  the  change  of  R  into  R'.  They  may  be  used  with
advantage  in  the  calculation  of  the  perturbations  of  the  comet,  in  the  superior
part  of  its  orbit;  because  R'  is  then  very  small  [7816',  7837c?].  variations

[7845]

of  the
elements
of  the

3. We  shall  now  consider  the  variations  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit. We  comet's

•^  *^ ^  ^  orbit.

shall  take  for  the  fixed  plane  the  primitive  orbit  of  the  comet,  ivhich  permits  us  [7846]

to  neglect  the  square  of  z,  being  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  v^q^q^

force. If  we  suppose,  as  in  [1022,  1010'],

h  =  c.sin.TO ;  I  =  ccos-^s ;  [7847]

e  =  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  to  the  semi-major  axis  ;  [7848]

zs  =  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion,  counted  from  the  axis  of  x ;  [7848']

we  shall  have,  as  in  [1176,  &c.],*

dh  =  dx.  \  X. (f  )-2/.(f )  \  +  Qcdy-ydx).(^-^^  ;  [7849]

Sr^,  R', will  produce  the  equation  [7842]. In  like  manner  we  may  deduce  [7843,  7844]

from  [7811,  7812]; or  they  may  be more  easily  derived from  [7842], by changing '■ ^■'

reciprocally  x  into  y, or  x  into  z.

[7849a]

*  (3758) Neglecting  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces,  as  in  [1253'],  we  shall  have,
from  [1254], ^e.smM=f', (xe.cos.z*  =/; substituting the values [7847], we get
^h=f', i^l=f', whose  differentials  are ixdh  =  df', [Ldl=df\ and  since df, df  [78496]
[1257],  or  dh,  dl,  are  of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces  R,  we  may,  by  neglecting  the
square  of  these  forces,  put fji.=  l [7804]; and  then  the  differential  equations  [78496] [73490]
become dh-=df', dl=df. Substituting  now the values  of df, df  [1116], and
neglecting  the  terms  containing z  or  dz, multiplied by  the  partial differentials  of  i?,
because  they  are  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  masses,  they  become  as  in [7849e]
[7849,  7850].

VOL.  IV.  93

370  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Cel.

These  two  equations  give  the  values  of  de,  dis ; for  we  have,*
[7851]  de =  fZ^.sin.«4"^^«cos.w  ;

[7852]  ed^  =  dh.cos.zs — dLsin.'a  ;

and  if,  for  greater  simplicity,  we  take  the  line  of  apsides  for  the  axis  of  x,

[/oS*]

we  shall  obtain,
[7853]  de=  dl;  edzi  =  dh.

The  equations  of  the  elliptical  motion  give,  as  in  [605',  606,  &c.],t

[7854]  fndt-{-  £  — ra  =  u — c.sin.w  ;

[7855]  r  =  a.(l — e.cos.u) ;

Elliptical  y- — j 1

;;-  tang.i.(.-)  =  \/l±|  .tang.it. ; [  (O)

[7857]  ^  =  ^-

Supposing  the  symbols  to  be  represented  by.

*  (3759) The  differentials  of  [7847]  give,
[7851a]  dh  =  <?e.sin.w-|-e«?«.cos.t3  ;  dl  =  de.cos.zi —  edvi.sin.zi.

Multiplying  this  value  of  dh  by  sin.w,  and  that  of  dl  by  cos.'zar,  then  taking  the  sura  of
[78516]  ^jjg  products,  we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,  the  value  of  de  [7851]. Again,  multiplying

dhf  dl  [7851a],  by  cos.w,  — sm.zi,  respectively,  and  taking  the  sum  of  the  products,
[7851c]  we  get  the  expression  of  edixs  [7852]. Now  in  [1188'J  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion  is

-a,  and  the  longitude  of  the  disturbed  body  m  is  v ;  both  being  counted  from  the  same  axis  of
'■  •'  a:,  as  in  [500",  &ic.  7846]  ;  so  that  if  we  suppose  this  axis  to  coincide  with  the  perihelion,
[7851c] as  in  [7852'],  we  shall  have «  =  0;  then  the  expressions  [7851,7852]  become  as  in

[7853];  and  [7847]  changes  into  h=0,  l=e.  Lastly,  the  integrals  of  [7853]  give
^'^^^^•^^ 8e=z6I, e57a=5A;  which  are  used  in  [7978].

[7854a]

t  (3760)  The  equations  [7854 — 7857]  are  the  same  as  in  [605',  606],  changing  v  into
V — rgj  and  nt  into  fndt-{-s — «,  to  conform  to  the  present  notation  ;  as  is  evident  by
comparing  the  notation  in  [602'",  Sic]  with  that  in  [7858,  7859]  ;  observing  that  the

[78546]  suijstitution  of  the  value  of  n  [605']  in  [601],  multiplied  by  n,  gives  ndt=du.{l-e.cos.u),
whose  integral,  considering  n  as  variable,  is  as  in  [7854]  ;  s — w  being  added  to  complete
the  integral,  being  equivalent  to nT  in  the  equation  [602],  where  n  is  considered  as

[7854c]  ^jQjjgtant.  Comparing  the  results  of  the  present  notation  with  those  in  [606,  &c.],  we
perceive  the  correctness  of  the  definitions  [7859,  &c.].

da dn ds de diti dy dd  ^

IX.i.^3.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING -,  -,  ^-,  ^,  ^,  f^,  -. 371

fndt-{-  £  =  the  mean  longitude  of  the  comet ;  [7858]

/wJ^-f s-*  =  the mean anomaly of the comet, counted from the  [7858'j

perihelion  =  V  [7903']  ;

1) — -a  =  the  true  anomaly  of  the  comet,  counted  from  the  perihelion  ;  [7859]

u  =  the  excentric  anomaly  of  the  comet,  counted  from  the  perihelion ;  [7860]

X,  y,  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  comet  x ;  the  axis  of  x  being  the  line  [786(y]

drawn  from  the  focus  to  the  perihelion  ;

then  we  shall  have,*

X  =  r.cos,(v — w) ;  y  =  r.s\n.(v — w).  [7861]

Hence  the  equations  [7855,  7856]  give,t

x=:a.(cos,u — e),  or cos.'W=e-| — ;  ^  [7862]

y  =  ayi—e^.sin.w, or sin.w  =  -7r~~i^'  [7862'(

We  shall  suppose  that,

X  =  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  planet  m',  to  that  of  the  comet ;  [7863]

y  =  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  orbit  of  the  planet  m'  upon [7864]

the  comet's  orbit,  counted  from  the  perihelion  ;
v'  =  the  angle  which  the  radius  vector  r'  of  the  disturbing  planet  makes [7865]

with  the  line  of  nodes  ;
then  we  have,t

*  (3761) The  radius  vector  r  forms  the  angle v — «  with  the  axis  of  a?,  as  is  evident
from  [7859,  7860'] ;  hence  we  easily  deduce  the  values  of  x,  y  [7861].

t  (3762) The  equations  [7855,  7856]  are  equivalent  to  those  of  the  elliptical  motion ryggoai
in  [603, 604,  605]  ;  from  which  we  have  deduced  the  values  of  cos.v, sin.v  [735]  ; and
if  we  change  v  into  v — zs,  to  conform  to  the  present  notation  [7854a],  we  shall  have,  from
[735],  by  multiplying  by  r,

r.cos.(t; — w)  =  a.cos.w — ae ;  r.sin.(i; — «)  =  a.^i— e^.sin.M  ;  [78626]

substituting  these  expressions  in  [7861],  we  get  [7862,  7862'].

X  (3763) The expressions  of  x' i/, s/  [7866—7868],  are found like those in
[7742 — 7744], and they may be derived from these last formulas by changing [7866a]
V,  r,  X,  Y,  Zj  A, into v', r',  a?',  y',  «',  y, respectively; X, X', T', Z', being
unchanged.

372  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Gel.

[7866]  a/  =  /.COS.  ^.cos.z?' — /.cos.x.sin.  y.s'm.i/ ;

[7867]  y'  =  r'.sin.  y.cos.tj'+r'.cos.x.cos.  y.sin,v' ;

[7868]  zf  =  r'.sin.x.sin.v'.

The  value  of  R  [7802]  gives,

[7870] putting,*  /=  {/{x'—xy-{-{i/—y)^-\-{2f—zy. In  like  manner  we  have,

Variations

efeSents. This  beiug  premised,  we  find  that  the  value  of  dl  [7850]  gives,t

^^  de  =  — m'.a.  [/i  —  e^.du.cos.u.{xy' — yoif}.  J  —  —  —  i

[7872]  ^ / (i/—v)'>

— m'.a^\/r=r?.cZw.(l— c.cos.w).  }  ^  —  ^^-^  S  ;

in  like  manner,  the  value  of  dh  [7849]  gives,

ed^  =  — m'Mdu.sm.u.(xy' — yx').l  —  —  —  j

-\-m'.a^^l—e^»du.(l—'€.cos.u).  <  ^  — Z" S  .

We  have  as  in  [1177],  in  the  variable  ellipsis,  observing that  fA  =  l  very
nearly  [7804],
[7875]  d.  —  —  2AR ;

the  differential  characteristic d refers  only  to  the  co-ordinates  of  m  [916'].

*  (3764) It  is  evident,  from  [949',  7801,  7801'],  that  / = ^(:i^—x^^{i/-yf + {zf-zf
expresses  the  distance  of  the  comet  m  from  the  disturbing  planet  m'.

t  (3765) Multiplying  [7869]  by —y,  and  [7871]  by  x,  then  taking  the  sum  of  the
products,  we  get,  by  neglecting  the  terras  which  destroy  each  other,

[7872a]  ^.(^)  -y{^)  =  m'-{^y'-y^'h  l^-jh]-

The  differentials  of  a?,  y  [7862,  7862'J,  give dx= — adu.sm.u; <?y =a.y/i  —e2.du.cosM ;
'• ■' substituting  all  these  values,  we  get,

[7872c  ]  ^^y — y^^  =  a^'\/l—e^.du.{{cos.u — e).cos.M-{-sin.^w|  =  a^.\/l—e^.du.  \  1 — c.cos.w| .

Substituting  [7872a,  6,  c,  7871] in dl=de  [7850,  7853],  gives [7872]  ; and  in  like
[7872i] manner,  by  substituting  [7872a,  6,  c  7869]  in dh^ed-a  [7849,7853],  we  get  [7873].

dxa
[7873]

[7874]

da dn ds de dvs dy d6

IX.  i.  §3.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING T" »  T  »  T  »  3^  »  3^»  X  »  T"  • 373
■*  ^ du du du du du du du  '^

If  we  neglect  the  square  of  z,  we  shall  have,*

consequently,

dR  =  — m'.adu,sm,u,  \—  —  ^ "Z >

^ C  «/ /"i/ y\  -i  [7877]

+w'.a.v/L=:?.c^w.cos.w.  ?  ^  —  ^^ ^^  S .

Hence  we  deduce,  as  in  [78766],

da  =  2m'.a^du.sin.u.  <  -^  —  ' "Z^ [

(  i/ (J y\

— 2m'.a^i/i— e2.<?w.cos.w .  <  -^  —  ^^-r-^

[7878]

Then  we  have,  as  in  [1181],  by  putting m-  =  1  [7874],

dn  =  ^anAR  ,•  [7879]

consequently,t

/n</^  =  ISIt  +3f(ndt.fadR)  ;  [7880]

N  being  a  constant  quantity. Therefore  we  shall  have,  by  the  preceding
formulas  f  the  variations  of  the  excentricity  and  of  the  perihelion  of  the  orbit; [7881]
also  those  of  the  greater  axis,  and  of  the  mean  motion  of  the  comet.

[7876a]

*  (3766) The  differential  of  R  [7802]  relative  to  the  characteristic  d,  neglecting  z^
zdz,  as in  [7846'], gives the  expression  [7876] ;  whence  we  get  [7876'],  by  merely
changing  the  arrangement  of  the  terms. Substituting  in  [7876']  the  values  of  dx,  dy
[78726], we obtain [7877]. Developing the  first  member of [7875] it becomes i-'°'^J
— a~^da  =  2.djR ; multiplying  this  by — a^, and  substituting  the  value  of  dR  [7877]
we  get  the  expression  of  da  [7878].

t  (3767) The  integral of  [7879]  is n  =  JV-\-3fanAR; the  constant  quantity  N
being  added  to  complete  the  integral. Multiplying  this  by dt,  and  again  integrating,  we
get  fndt  =  JVt-\-3fdt.fan.dR. Now  a,  n  differ  from  their  mean  values  by  quantities  of  [78806]
the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces,  and JR  is  of  the  same  order ; so  that  by  neglecting [7880c]
quantities  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  these  forces,  we  may  bring  n  from  under  the  sign j^aaoji
of  integration,  and  put  the  preceding  expression  [78806] under  the  form  [7880]. The
differential  of  this  expression  being  divided  by dt, gives n  =  JV-\-Snfa.dR ; and  by [7880^']
neglecting  terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force,  it  may  be  put  under  the r^ggQ,  i
form n  =  JV.\l-{-3fa.dR}, which  is  used  in  [7901].

VOL.  IV.  94

374  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [M6c.  C61.

To  obtain  the  variation  of  the  epoch  s,  we  shall  observe  that,  if  the  ellipsis
be  invariable,  the  equation  [7854]  will  give,  by  taking  its  differential,

[7882]  ndt  ==  c?w.(l— e.cos.w).

This  equation  holds  good  in  the  variable  ellipsis [1167",  &c.] ;  therefore
we  have,*

[7883]  dz — dTS=zdu.(\ — e.cos.w) — dfe.sin.M;

supposing  u  to  vary  in  this  last  equation  only  by  reason  of  the  variations  of
the  elements  e  and  «  [7885],  whilst  in  the  former  case  [7882]  it  varies
only  with  the  variation  of  the  time  t.  The  equation  [7856]  gives,  by
supposing  £,  xrf,  to  be  the  only  variable  quantities,!

[7883']

[7883a]
[78836]

*  (3768)  It  appears  from  [7856]  that  m  is  a  function  of  «,  c,  zrf ;  and  in  the  invariable
ellipsis  V,  t,  are  considered  as  the  variable  quantities  ;  but  in  the  variable  ellipsis  we  must
also  consider  e,  w,  as  variable;  so  that  u  will  vary  with  e,  «,  as  in  [7883'].  Now  taking
the  differential  of  [7854],  considering  all  as  variable,  and  then  subtracting  from  the  result
the  expression  [7882],  we  get  [7883],  in  which  du  varies  only  with  e,  zs,  as  in
[7883',  7885].

t  (3769) The  equation  [7884]  is  the  double  of  the  differential  of  [7856],  considering
u,  e,  TO,  as  variable. Adding 1  to  the  square  of  [7856],  and  substituting

[r884a]  l+t^„^.^.^,-„)  =  —L__,  i+,a„s.^J„=_i_ [34'"  In..].

we  get,

1  1 , 2e  «,-

[78845]  cosH-{v-^)  =  ^^^^  +  jiTe  -ta^S-'^"'

Substituting  this  in [7884],  then  multiplying  by cos.^^u, and  reducing  by  means  of  the

expressions  [34',  31,  1]  Int.,  namely,
[7884c] cos.2|M.tang.|w  =  cos.|M.sin.^M  =  ^.sin.w ; (cos.^M.tang.|M)2  =  (sin.^M)2=|.(l-cos.M) ;

we  obtain,

J (  1  I «•(! — cos.u) ")  /\A-t I «?c.sin.M

[7884<n  -rf«.  \  1+  -iZT-  \  =  <««■  \/ i±f  +  (i_,).^i^-

[7884e] The  first  member  of  this  equation  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form — d-m.  \ '■ — '—  [ ;

substituting  this,  and  then  multiplying  by \ y^_^i , we  obtain  the  value  of du  [7885].

Finally,  substituting  this  expression  of  du  in  [7883],  we  get,

, , rfw.fl  —  e.cos.M)2 rfe.sin.w.(l  —  c.cos.m) , .
[7884/]  d^^d^  =  — ^^7== 53^^ ^  —  f?e.sm.w ;

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [7886]  ;  and  as  d-a  is  known  firom [7873],  we  shall
get  dz  from  [7886].

, ,  <Z«.ri— e.cos.w)^  de.sm.u.(2 — e^ — e.cos.w)

ds — rfta  =  —  - — . ^ — ^-- ^  ;

V/l— e2  1— e^  '

da dn ds de dm dv d6

IX.i.§3.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING :r»  7" »  3"  '  T  »  7"  »  /»  T  • 375

^ ■•  du du du du du du du

^ du . yi  +  e , ^de.tang.^u  y^  ^c^j^j^.^

cos.^.{v—vs)  —  cos.^u'V r:^e  "^  (l-.e).v/l=^*  !■ ^

Substituting  for cos.^i.(u — «) its  value,  given  by  the  same  equation,  we

shall  have,

, dm. (I — e.cos.7i) de.s'm.u
du  — —?^=-^ :. TT  •  [7885]

^Hence  vre  deduce,  '^^  ^^^  woVl ..^  > .

as

[7886]

this  equation  determines ds — d^, consequently  also  the  value  of  ds,  [7886']

If  we  integrate,  by  quadratures,  the  differentials  of  e,  «,  a,  n,  s,
[7872,  7873,  7878,  7879,  7886],  we  shall  have,  for  any  time  whatever,  all
the  elements  of  the  comet'' s  motion  in  its  orbit ;  whence  we  may  obtain  the  ^'^^'^^"^
position  of  the  comet  in  its  orbit  by  means  of  the  equations  [7854 — 7857],
It  will  then  only  remain  to  determine  the  situation  of  the  plane  of  this  orbit,
relative  to  the  ecliptic. For  this  purpose  we  shall  resume  the  equations  [1 173] ;

do  =  dt.  J  3,.(f )  -a;.(f)  I ;  -  [7887]

dd  =  dt.  J  z.(f.)  _a;.(f )  I ;  p888]

If  vre  put,
(p=  the  inclination  of  the  comet's  orbit  to  the  plane  of  x,  y  [1173']  ;  [7890]

d  =  the  longitude  of  the  ascending  node  of  the  comet's  orbit  upon  the  plane [789(ri
of  a:,  y  [1173'];

we  shall  have,  as  in  [1174,  1175],  by  using m-  =  1  [7874],

tang.<p  =  ^^  J ■  ;  [7891]

tang.  6 = -^ ;  j-yggjy^

a.{l—e^)  =  c'+c'^+c"^.  [7892]

When  we  take,  for  the  fixed  plane  of  xy, the  primitive  orbit  of  the  comet,

d and c", as  well  as z, will  be of  the  order  of  the  disturbing  forces ; '• ^

therefore  by  neglecting  the  square  of  these  forces,  and  substituting  for  R  its

376 T  '  ^v r  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Gel.

value,  we  shall  have,*
^''''^  g=-m'.a.{cos...-e}..'.(l-i);

C7896]  c  =  v/«.(l— ee).

17,'^. Now  we  have,  as  in  [7882,  7857, 7874],

[7897]  ndt  =  du.(l — e.cos.u) ;

[7897']  ^"^  ""  ^  '

therefore  by  substitution  we  get,t

[7894a]

*(3770) The  functions (^\  (^Y  (~\ are  of  the  order  m'  [7802];  hence

d(fj  dd'  [7888,  7889]  are  of  the  order  m' ;  and  their  integrals  d,  d',  must  also  be  of  the
order  id,  as  is  evident  from  the  equation  [7891]  ;  and  taking  into  view  that,  as  the  primitive
[78946]  Qj-ijit  of  the  comet  is  assumed  for  the  plane  of  xy^  the  angle  9  [7890  or  7891]  must  be  of
the  order  m',  as  well  as  the  ordinate  z.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the
order  m'^,  the  equations  [7888,  7889]  will  become,

dd  fdR\  dd'  /dR\

[7894d] Now  from  [7802]  we  have (^)  =  ^— ^^^1^^ using  /  [7870] ;  and  by  neglecting

[7894c] the  terra  m'z, which  is  of the second order, it becomes (  — j  =  m'.«'.f-^  —  -^j ;

substituting  this  in  [7894c],  we  get,
[7894/]  --==_^'.^^.(--__);  _=_^^^___--j5

then  substituting  the  values  of x,  y  [7862,  7862']  in  [7894/],  we  get  [7894,  7895].
[7894g] Lggtiy^  ^g  ^2^  ^/2^  a^Q  Qf  tije  q^^q^  Qf  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force  [7894a],  they  may

be  neglected  in  [7892]  ;  and  then  taking  its  square  root,  we  get  c  [7896].

[7897a]
[78976]
[7897c]

t  (3771)  From  the  equation  [7897']  we  get  w=a  ^  ;  substituting  this  in  [7897],  and
then  multiplying  by  a^,  we  obtain  dt:=c^.du.{\ — e.cos.w);  dividing  this  by  c  [7896],
we  obtam —  = \ — - . Multiplymg  successively  the  equations  [7894, 7895]  by

this  last  expression  of  — , we  get  the  equations  [7898,7899] respectively. Integrating

these  equations,  we  obtain  the  values  of  d,  d'  \ and  by  substitution  in  [7891,  7891'J,  we
get  the  inchnation  9,  and  the  longitude  of  the  node  ^.

IX.i.<^4.]  RETURN  TO  THE  PERIHELION.  377

dd  m'.a^.du

(l-^e.cos.u).(cos.u—e),z'.Qr,  — -^  ;

[7898]
[7898']

[7899]

c  \/T^^

—  =  —  m'.a^,du,(\ — e.cos.w).sin.w.2:'/-;3  —  ^3  )•

integrating  these  two  equations,  we  can  determine,  for  any  instant  of  time
whatever,  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  to  the  fixed  plane,  and  the  position
of  its  nodes,

4. The  most  important  point  in  the  theory  of  the  perturbations  of  the  Retum

motion  of  a  comet,  is  the  difference  in  the  times  of  two  successive  returns  to  the  p^jheuon.

perihelion. We  shall  now  show  hoio  this  can  be  determined,  by  taking  for  [7899']

an  example  the  comet  of  1682,  which  was  at  its  perihelion  in  1759,  and  gy^^^i^

putting,  T,  iV.

T  =  the  interval  between  the  times  of  passing  the  perihelion  in  1682  [7900]
and  1759.
Then  we  may  determine  N  by  putting,

NT  =  2*  =  the  circumference  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is  unity  [7903a]  ;  [7900']
and  we  have,  as  in  [7880e],

n==N.{l-}-3afdR].  '  [790i]

If  we  commence  the  integral  fdR at  the  time  of  passing  the  perihelion  in  [790r]

1682,  which  we  shall  take  for  the  epoch  or  origin  of  the  time t, we  may  epoch  of
suppose,

«=  i\r.{l-|-69  +  3a/o'di2};  [^^1^0%'!"']  [7902]

6q  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity* Now  we  have,  as  in  [7858'],  [7902']

F=/o'ntZ^  +  s— «;  [7903]

V  being  the  cometh  mean  anomaly. Hence  we  obtain,  [7903']

V=Nt.(\-\-^q)  +3a.fo'.(Ndt.fo'dR)  +  b—zs  +  6s—6zs  ;  [7904]

6  s,  5w,  being  the  variations  of  s  and  to,  from  the  time  of  passing  the  perihelion [7905]
in  1682; s,  w,  correspond  to  that  epoch  when  e — «  =  0  ;  since  by  hypothesis [7906]

*  (3772) By  means  of  this  constant  quantity  8q  [7902'],  we  are  enabled  to  satisfy  the
assumed  equation  Ji^T=  2*  [7900'],  as  will  be  seen  in [7908,  &£c.]. Substituting  the [''903a]
value  of  n  [7902]  in V[190S],  it  becomes  as  in  [7904] ; the  terms  SsSzs  being  added [79036]
on  account  of  the  variation  of  s — -cf, since  the  commencement  of  the  epoch. If  we
suppose  that  when t=:T, n  becomes  equal  to N',  as  in  [7910],  the  expression  [7902] [7903c]
will  become,

N'  =  N.{l+Sq-\-Sa.f^AR\  ;  [7903d]

which  is  used  in  [7917/].

VOL.  IV.  95

[7909]

378  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  C61.

we  then  have V=  0  [7901',  7903']. Moreover we have supposed, in
[7907] |.^g^^^  7900'],  that  t  being  equal  to  T, F=  2*,  and iVr=2^;  therefore
we  shall  have,*

[7908]  0  =  NT.&q-}-  3a.fJ'.(Ndt.fJ'dR)  +  6s  — 5w ;

the  variations  6s,  (5w,  as  w^ell  as  the  double  integral,  being  taken  between
the  limits  ^  =  0,  and  t  =  T.  This  equation  gives  the  value  of  the  constant
quantity  6q;  therefore  we  shall  have,  at  any  time  whatever,  the  value  of  n,
[7902]. This  value  will  give  that  of  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  orbit,  by

pm^  1

means  of  the  equation n^  =  -^  [7897'].

jy./  We  shall  now  put,

[7910]  N'= the  value  of  n, at  the  time  of  passing  the  perihelion  in  1759;

[7910']  ^1  =  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  comet's  orbit,  at  the  time  of  the  perihelion

Oi  in  1759  ;

Second  Then  taking  the  time  of  passing  the  perihelion  in  1759  for  the  epoch  or  origin

epoch  of  /• T •

t,  1759. of  the  time  t,  we  shall  have,j

[7911]  F=  N't  +  6sSzi-{.Sa,.f(N'dtfdR)  ;

6s,  aw, as  well  as  the  integrals,  being  supposed  to  commence  at  the  time
[7912] of  passing the  perihelion in  1759. The values  of  e, «, s, will be

determined  by  the  observations  of  the  comet,  made  at  the  same  epoch ;  for
[7912Q ^1  being  known  by  what  precedes,}  the  perihelion  distance  in  1759  will

give  the  corresponding  value  of  e. We  shall  now  put.

[7904a]

*  (3773)  We  have  supposed  in  [7900'],  that  when  t=T  we  shall  have  ]ST=2'r;
and  at  that  time  the  mean  anomaly  becomes  V=2if  [7900,  7903'J  j  hence  V=NT
[7900'j. Substituting  this  and  t=T  in  [7904],  it  becomes,

[79045]  NT=NT.{l-\-6q)-{.Zaf^.{J^dtfJ'm)^s—zs-^6s—6zs.

Rejecting  NT,  which  occurs  in  both  members  of  the  equation,  and  putting  s — w=  0,  as
in  [7906],  it  becomes  as  in  [7908] ;  and  from  this  we  deduce  the  value  of  6q,  which  is  to
be  used  in  [7902]  in  finding  n  ;  and  then  a  is  obtained  from  the  equation  [7909'j.

[7904c]

t  (3774) The  equation  [7911]  is  similar  to  [7904];  changing  N  into  N', a  into  a,,
*■ ■' and  supposing  the  integrals  to  commence  at  the  time  of  the  perihelion  in  1759,  using  also
[79116] for  this  epoch s — •5j=0,  asin [7906]. In  this  case  the  constant  5  g^  is  to  be  neglected,
because  there  is  no  assumed  equation  like  that  in  [7900'J  which  we  must  satisfy.

[7913a]

}  (3775) The  value  of  a,  is  found  for  the  time  T,  or  1759,  by  the  method  pointed
out  in  [7909'  or  7904c,  &c.].

[7917']
[7918]

IX.  i.  ^  4.]  RETURN  TO  THE  PERIHELION.  379

T'  ==  the  unknown  interval  between  the  time  of  passing  the  perihelion  in [7913]

1759,  and  the  next  time  of  passing  it ;  and  at  this  last  time  we  shall  have,
F  =  2*. Substituting  these  in  [7911],  we  get,  [7914]

2*  =  N'T'-\-  6B  —6zs  +  Say.fr  (N'dUjJ'diR).  [7915]

the  values  of  d?, 6w, as  well  as the  integrals,  are  taken  from ^  =  0 to [7916]
t  =  T'. This  equation  will  determine  T',

We  may  avoid  the  double  signs  of  integration,  which  occur  in  these
expressions,  by  observing  that,*

3aJ{N'dt.fdR)  =  SN'tfa,  dR—Sa^./N'tAR ;  [7917]

therefore  by  marking,  loith  a  horizontal  line  placed  above  these  quantities,
whose  limits  are  taken  from  the  perihelion  in  1682  to  that  in  1759,  and  by  a
double  line  those  which  extend  from  the  perihelion  in  1 759  to  the  following
perihelion,  we  shall  find  that  the  preceding  expression  of  n  will  give,  as

in  [7917/],  _ _

N'T  =  2*— <5£  +  6«  +  Saf^NtAR,  [7919]

This  equation  will  determine  N',  and  therefore  «i. Then  we  shall  have,t

*  (3776) Integrating  fdtfdR  by  parts,  as  in  [i716a],  we  get  fdt.fdR^^t.fdR-ft.dR, [7917a]
as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differential  of  both  members,  and  reducing. IMultiplying
this  by  3a^N',  it  becomes  as  in  [7917],  observing  that  JV*',  a,  [7910,791(y]  are  constant, [79176]
therefore  they  may  be  placed  under  the  sign  /. Substituting  this  in  [7915]  it  becomes,  by
supposing  t=0  in  the  perihelion  of  1759, and  t=T'  in  the  next  perihelion  [7913],
and  using  the  notation  in  [7917',  Sic],

2*  =  N'T-\-  fs—  8^+SN'Tf,^\dR-'Sa,JJ'm.dR.  [7917c  ]

Again,  if  we  multiply  [7917a]  by  3fliV,  we  obtain S^dtfdR^SJVt.fa.dR—SafJVt.dR; [79l7d}
substituting  this  and  s — •5:^=0  [7904c]  in  the  second  member  of  [79046],  also  JVT=2tr
[7900'J  in  its  first  member,  we  get,  when  <  =  T,

2ir  =  NT.{l-\-Sq-{-3a.fJ'dR]^-Saf^^NiAR+Ts  —  8^.  [7917c]

Multiplying  [7903^?]  by  T,  and  substituting  the  resulting  product  in  the  second  member  of
the  preceding  equation,  we  get  2'r=:N'T—3afJ'NtAR-^5s — 6cr ;  whence,  by
transposition,  we  deduce  the  value  of  N'T  [7919]. From  [7919]  we  deduce  the  value

of  iV',  and  then  the  value  of  a,  from  the  equation JV'^  =  -3  ,  similar  to  [7909'].

[7917/-]
[7917ff]

t  (3777) From  [7917c]  we  get,

N'T  =  2*— n  +  S— 3iV'T'./7'a,.dJ2  +  ZaJ^NtAR ;  [7920a]

subtracting  from  this  the  value  of  N'T  [7919],  we  get  [7920] ;  the  lines  being  placed
above  the  quantities,  according  to  the  notation  adopted  in  [7917',  &c.]. We  may  observe

380  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Cel.

Anomalia-  _________

Siir  N'.(T-^T)  =  8s^6s  —  6^  +  6^  —  SN'T'J7'avdR

^^^^^  —SaJfNilR  +  Sa,.fJWtM  ;

[79211 ^'^^  ^^*^  equation  will  determine  the  difference  T' —  T,  of  the  two  anomalistical
revolutions  of  the  comet.

5. The  whole  difficulty of  the problem  is  now  reduced  to that  of

determining  numerically  the  changes  in  the  elements  of  the  orbit. We  have

already  observed that  we  can  only  find them  by  means  of mechanical

quadratures,  and  for  this  purpose  we  have  several  methods  furnished  by

r7922] analysis. We  shall  here  explain  the  process  which  appears  to  be  the  most

Principle couvenient  and  simple. For  this  purpose  we  shall  give,  in  a  few  words,

Cctionsf the  principle  of  the  theory  of  generating  functions.

r7923i ^®  ^^^^^  suppose  that  u  is  b.  function  of  t, and  that  by  developing  it
Generating according  to  tho  powers  of  t,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [607a],

function  u.

[7924]  u^y^'^  +  y^'Kt  +  y^^Kt^'  +  y^Kt^+kc.;

[7924'! ^^^^  '^  is  the  generating  function  of  the  different  coefficients  y%  y^^\  y^^\  kc.
It  is  evident  that y^'^  being  the  coefficient  of  t'  in  the  development  of  u,  it

qt

is  also  the  coefficient  independent  of  t, in  the  development  of -r . Now
we  have,  ^

[7925]  ^^u.fl  +  j—lj; or

(i)

[7925']

[7926]

;=..[,+..(i-,)+tfc!).(i_,)V.„.|,

the  coefficient  independent  of  t,  in u.  I 1  j , is  evidently  y

(i)_y(0)^ or

A.y^°'^ ; the characteristic A being  that  of  finite integrals.* It  is  also

that  the  limits  of  the  integrals  0,  T,  and  0,  T',  are  not  inserted  in  the  original  work  in
connection  with  the  sign  /;  and  by  introducing  them  here,  it  becomes  unnecessary  to  place
^  1 these  lines  above  the integrals,  because  their  values  are  sufficiently  designated  by  these

limits ;  but  being  in  the  original  work  we  have  retained  them.

*  (3778) The  expression  of  u  [7924]  being  substituted  in  the  first  member  of  [7926a'],
[7926a] neglecting  the  negative  powers  of  t,  produces  the  second  member  of  that  equation,  which
is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [79266],  by  using  the  characteristic  A  of  finite  difierences  ;

IX.  i.  ^  5.]  INTEGRATING  BY  QUADRATURES.  381

evident,  by  considering u.( 1  j as  a  new  generating  function,  and  then

developing  it ; neglecting the  negative  powers  of  ^ ;  we  shall  have,  as
in  [79266],

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  coefficient  independent  of  t,  in  the  development

of u.fj—l\fj—l\ or u/~l\\ is A.yW— Ay°), or A\y^'\

[1926d]. Following the same  method  of reasoning,  we  see  that the

oefficient  independent  of t,  in  the  development  of  u.( 1), is A^y^%

[7926/*],  and  so  on  for  other  cases. Hence  it  appears  that  the  equation
[7925'] will give, by passing from the generating functions to  the

[7926'J

[7927]
[7928]

[7928' I

u.  (j  —l\  =  (y(J)__yC0))_|_(y(2)_j,(i)^.^_j_(y(3)_y(2)),^2_^Sjc.  [7926a']

w.  (—  —l\  =  A.y(o^+A.y<i\<  +A.y^^\t^-\-hc.  [79266]

Multiplying  this  last  equation  by ( 1  j , we  get  [7926c]  ;  and  by  a  similar  process  it

is  reduced  to  the  form  [7926^],  neglecting  the  negative  powers  of  t ;

u.  (j  -ij  =  (A.y^i^-A.3/«'0+(A.2^2^~A.yi)).^+(A.2^)-A.y«^)<2+&c.  [7926c]

Now  multiplying  [7926<Z]  by (- Ij, reducing,  and  neglecting  the  negative  powers  of

t,  we  get,  in  like  manner,

mY  y  —  1 Y  ==  A3.y(o^+A'.2/^i>.  i  +A3.y®>.i2  -}-&ic.  [7926/]

Proceeding  in  the  same  way  we  finally  obtain,

M.  (—  —lY  =  A\y^'^^-{-A\y^^\t  -{-A\y'^\t^-\-hc.  [792%]

This  agrees  with  the  results  in  [7926 — 7928']. Before  closing  this  note  we  may  observe,
that  the  principles  of  this  calculation  of  generating  functions  were  first  given  by  La  Place  in
the  Memoires  de  V  Academic  Royale  des  Sciences,  for  the  year  1797.
VOL.  IV.  96

382  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Gel.

coefficients,*

[7929]  y{i)  =  yi^)  _|_  i'. A.2/(0)  +  iliizil) .  ^\f)  +  ^'{'^—^'{^—'^)  ^  A3.y(0)_^^^,^

General  *  \  .  Z  .  O

fonnula.

* (3779) Substituting  the  results  [7924',  79266,  </,/,  ^]  in  the  second  member  of

[7925'J,  we  find  that  the  term  independent  of  t  becomes  hke  the  second  member  of  [7929],
[79290]  u

which  represents, as  in  the  first  member  of  [7925'],  the  term  of — -, which  is  independent

of  t',  and  this  in  [7924]  is  represented  by  3/"^;  hence  we  get  [7929].

We  can  arrange  the  formula  [7929]  according  to  the  powers  of  ^,  which  tends  to  simplify
^onj'ement  the  iGsults  when  the  intervals  are  small,  as  we  shall  see  in  [7929z^;,  &c.].  For  this
fonnuias. purpose  we  shall  put,  for  brevity,

[79296  ]  Ay  =  aV^— J. A^.2/^°>+i- A^.yW— ^. A'^.y^^^+fec. ;

[7929c]  Jl^  =  J.A2.1/W— |.A3.yW  +  ^^.A4.yW_&c. ;

[7929.]  ^3=i.A3.r_..^4.,<.  +  s,,..

And  by  substituting  these  expressions  in  [7929],  arranged  according  to  the  powers  of  i,
we  shall  get,
[7929e]  f^  =  y^'^  +  A'i  +  •^2-*^  +  "^a-*^  +  A-***  +  ^•

Multiplying  this  by  di,  and  integrating,  we  obtain,

[7929/]  fy'-^'di  =  y<°)i+i.^ii2_{_^.^g.i3_|_^^^^,^4_|„|.^^,^-5_|_gj^  .{.constant.

Taking  the  constant  quantity,  so  that  the  expression  may vanish when i  =  — J, and
'■ ^J then  putting  i  =  -|- 1, we  get  by  successive  reductions,  and  re-substituting  ,4?2 ,  .^4 ,  &c.

[7929c,  (^,&c.],
[7929^]  Ay^^>.^i  =  y^°^+TV-^2+^V.^4+&^c.  ;

[7929i]  =2/(''^+TV•{i^'•y°^-J•^'Y°^+l^A*.y^''>-■&c.}+^.^V•^'•y^°^+&c•

[7929^]  =y^°^+2-V-A^.2/^°^-2-V-A^.y^°^+A¥iT-A'-2/^°^+&«5-

This  may  be  reduced  to  a  more  simple  form,  by  introducing  the  finite  differences  of  the

terra y^~^\ which  precedes y^°Mn  the  order  of  the  series  of  terms,

[7929/]  ....y^-^ }f--'\ t'\ y''\ y''\ y^> y'\&c.

[7929/'] For  by  the  usual  principle  of  finite  differences,  we  hafve y^°^  =y^~^'>-}-A.y^~^\  &c. If  we

substitute  the  finite  differences  of  this  expression  in  [7929fc],  we  shall  obtain,  by  successive

reductionsj
[7929m] fliy^'ldi===y^'^^~^^t,.{A\y(-^^^A^f-^^--^^.{A\y^-^^4-A^^^^^^^
[7929n]  =  yW+^t^.  A2.yC-i)_  _|7^.A4.y(-i)+&c.

If  we  increase  the  limits  of  the  integral  by  unity,  making  them  -j-i,  -j-f ,  the  effect  will
be  to  increase  the  indices  of  y  in  the  second  member  by  unity  ;  hence  we  obtain  [7929o],
and  by  a  similar  process  we  get  [7929/7,  q,  he] ;

IX.  i.  §  5.]  INTEGRATING  BY  QUADRATURES.  383

Although  this  expression  of  i/*'^ has  been  found  upon  the  supposition  that  i

is  a  positive  integral  number,  yet  it  may  be  extended  to  any  value  of  i. Then ^ ■'

f^f^Ji  =^1^  +  jV.A^.y^"^— ^Itt.A^.3^(°>+&c.  ;  [79290]

X'^yW  cZi=.y^2)  +  ^V.A«.J^"~^|^.A4.ya)+&e. ;  [7929p]

f}y'%di^y^^'>-\-^\.A\y'^^^-^l^.A\y^^^J^Uc.i  [7929g]

The  sum  of  all  the  integrals  [7929n — r]  gives,

/44y«).,?,-  =  y(0)^y(l)+y(2)_^y(3) ^y(0

If  the  interval  of  time,  which  is  taken  for  unity,  is  so  small  that  the  fourth  differences,  and
those  of  a  higher  order,  can  be  neglected,  the  preceding  expression  becomes,

4-J3-.jA2.2/(-i)+A2.2/(°>-f  A^.y") .  .  .  4-A2.y(^i)|.

Now  the  finite  difference  of  /"^  [7929Z']  is  A.y°)  ==  A.y(-^>  +  A^.^c-" ;  whence
A^.y^-*^  =  A.y^°^ — A.y^~^^ ;  and  in  like  manner,  by  merely  increasing  the  indices  on  y,
we  have,

A2.y(°)  =  A.y('^— A.yf") ; A\y^'^  =  A.7j^^-^A.y^^\  &c. ; A^.y^^'^  =  A.y'>— A.y«-i>. [7929m]

Adding  these  expressions  together,  and  neglecting  the  terms  which  mutually  destroy  each
other,  we  obtain,

A2.y  (-')-}- A2.y(°)4-A2.y(i) -j-  A^.y""')  =  A.y «— A.y<-».  [7929t>]

Substituting  this  in  [7929^],  we  finally  get,  S'^^Sia

for  int«-

/Lti.y«\c/i  =  y(°>+y<>>+y^2)^y(3) ^^w  ^,^^^^

+  ^\.{A.y^'-A.y^-''l  ^^i^

=  the  smn  of  all  the  calculated  quantities  y^°\ y^'^  ....  y^^  *"'®^'

-j-  2-V.  i  first  difference  following  the  last  term — first  difference  preceding  the  first  term,  j  .

We may observe that, in calculating the differences of the series of terms
y°^ y^'^ y''^^  •  •  •  •  y^'\  the  first  term  is  A.y^°>, and  the  last A.y<'-^^  j and  by  means  of  the
other  differences  [7941,  Sic],  we  can  estimate  from A.y(°^ the  value  of  A.y^~'^;  also  from [792%]
A.y^'~*>,  the  value  of  A.y<'^ ;  which  are  required  in  the  formula  [7929a;]. We  may  finally

remark  that  the  ordinates y^°>, y^'^, y® y^'^,  which  occur  in  the  formula  [7929z^  or  oc\,

correspond  to  the  middle  of  each  of  the  successive  intervals  of  time,  which  is  taJcen  for  unity ; [79292]
thus  y^°^  corresponds  to  the  middle  lime  between i= — | and i=J  ; y^'^  to  the  middle

[79295]

[79093']
[7929<]

a^  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Cel.

y<»)  is  the  ordinate  of  a  parabolic  curve  whose  absciss  is  i ;  this  curve  being
supposed  to  pass  through  the  extremities  of  the  equidistant  ordinates  2/^°^  y^^^,
if^^  &c. ;  the  interval  ivhich  separates  them  being  taken  for  unity.  Whatever
be  the  nature  of  the  curve  w^hich  is  taken  into  consideration,  we  knovv^  that
each  of  its  very  small  arcs  may  be  taken  for  a  parabolic  arc,  whose  ordinate
y^*^  is  expressed  by  a  series  of  successive  powers  of  the  absciss,  counted
from  the  origin  of  the  arc.  The  coefficients  of  these  powers  must  be
determined,  so  that  the  curve  may  pass  through  the  extremities  of  the
adjacent ordinates y^'^\ y^^\ &c. ; and  then  we  shall  evidently have  the

r7932i  preceding  expressioij  of  y^'^  [7929].  Multiplying  it  by  di,  and  integrating
from i  =  0  to  z=l,  we  obtain,*

[7933] f,^y^^di=y^'^+h^.y^''-TV^''y''+^'i'^^'y'''--^^^^

General

integral.

[7931]

time  between  i  =  |  and  i  =  f;  ^^^  to  the  middle  time  between  i  =  f  and  *  =  f;
and  so  on  to  y^"^,  corresponding  to  the  middle  time  between  i  —  |  and  i  +Sj  t^i^t  is  to
say,  to  i.  In  finding  the  variations  of  any  one  of  the  elements  by  the  method  of
quadratures,  it  is  usual  to  take  for  the  epoch  of  the  time  t,  the  time  of  the  commencement
of  the  integral,  when  i=  — J  [79292^?]  ;  so  that  we  shall  have  generally  t=  i-\-l  ;  and
by  using  the  values  of  i  [7929z,  &,c.],  we  find  that  y^°^  corresponds  to  the  middle  interval
between  t  =  0  and  ^  =  1,  that  is  to  say,  to  t=l  ;  y^^^  corresponds  to  the  middle
[7930i]  interval  between  t  =  l  and  t  =  2,  or  t=§;  y^^^  corresponds  to  the  middle  interval
between  t=2  and  t:=:3,  or  <=f;  and  soon  to  y^'\  which  corresponds  to  the  middle
interval  between  t=i  and  t=i-\-l,  or  to  t=i-\-^,  which  is  used  hereafter  in  finding
the  variation  of  the  epoch  s  [8014/J.

[7930a]

[79305]

[7930c]
[7930cri

[7930e]

*  (3780) Multiplying  [7929]  by  df«,  and  then  integrating,  we  get,
[7933a] fy^^M=y^°\fdi+A.y^^\fdi.i-\-^.A^.y^^\fdiA.{i—l)-j-i.A\y^^\fdiA.{i—l^

If  we  suppose  the  integrals  to  commence  when  t  =  0,  and  then  put  i=  1,  we  shall  get,
[79336] fdi^i^i. fdi.i=:y=l  ; fdi.i.{i—l)=i.i^—hi^  =  '-i}
[7933c] fdi.i.{i—l).(i—2)  =  i.i'—i^-i-i^  =  l;
[7933d] fdi.i.{i—l).{i—2).{i—3)  =  |i5_3.j4_|.Y.i3__3j2^ _-i 9  .

[7933e] fdi.i.{i—l).{i—2).{i—3).{i—4)  =  ^,i^—2i^-}-\Ki*—^^.P+m^  =  ^  ;

[7933/] /rfi\i.(i-l).(i-2).(t-3).(i-4).(i-5)===fi7-fi6^17i5-2pi4_|_274.t3_6oi2=_.^^^^^

Substituting  these  in  [7933a]  we  get  [7933],  which  represents  the  area  of  the  parabolic
[793%] curve  included  between 1/°^ and /'^; and  by  changing  ^^  into  y^'\ we  get  [7934],

representing  the  space  included  between  the  co-ordinates  y^^^  and  y^^^ ;  and  so  on  for
r7933ftl °^^^^^'  ^°  ^^^  ^^^^  y^"^* Adding  all  these  quantities  together,  we  get  the  whole  expression

of  the  area  fy^'Kdij  included  between  the  co-ordinates  y^°^  y^'*^  as  in  [7935].

IX.  i.  <^  5.]  INTEGRATING  BY  QUADRATURES.  385

This  will  he  the  area  of  the  curve  included  between  y^^^  and  y^^K In  like
manner,  the  area  included  between  the  co-ordinates y^^\  y^^\  will  be,

/2/).rf/  =  y')+  iA.y(i)— -l-.A^y(l)  +  &C.  [7934]

and  so  on  for  others. Therefore  if  we  represent,  by  fo^'y^^'di, the  whole
area  included  between  the  ordinates y^%  ^^"\ we  shall  have,  as  in  [7933/i],

rV^^'-y^^'+^'-J^^'^+^'-y'^  •  •  •  +A^y»-i)  I  3  [7935]

+  &c.  5

Now  we  have,*

A.2/(0)+A.y<^)  ....  +A.y('«-')  =  (y(i)_y(0))+(yl2)_j^(i))4.  .  .  .  4.(2,(n)__y(-i))  ; or, [7936]
A.y(°)+A.r/(i)  ....  +A.2/(«-i)  = y(»)— j^(»).  [7936.3

In  like  manner  we  have,

a2.2^(0)_j_^2  yi) ^-A^.y™-'')  =  A.y^") — A.2/W.  [7937]

and  so  on  ;  therefore,

/„''y^^rfi  =  4-y^°^+y^'^+y^'^ y''^''+i'y^' i

—  _i_ .{a.  y">— A.y^")}  2
+ J^ .{A^yf»>— aV^}  3

—  tVV .{A^y(«>-AV^}  4
+ T-fo .lA^y(»)-A^yo)j  5

+  &c.  7

The  values a.?/"), A^y>,  &c.,  depend  on y^"+^>, y^'^^^j  &c. ; and  it  is

*  (3781)  The  second  member  of  [7936]  is  easily  deduced  from  the  first,  by  substituting
A.y'^^y^i^— y^°^  A.y^^)=y2)_y(i)^  A.y^^^  =  y^3>— y®),  &c.  Neglecting  the  terms  which  t^^^Sa]
mutually  destroy  each  other,  it  becomes  simply  y^"^ — 1/°\  as  in  [7936'].  Substituting  this  [79386]
in  [7935  lines  1,  2],  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  get  [7938  line  1].  The  differential
of  [7936'],  relative  to  the  characteristic  A,  gives  [7937]  ;  substituting  this  in  [7935  line  3],
we  get  [7938  line  2].  The  differential  of  [7937]  relative  to  A,  being  substituted  in
[7935  line  4],  gives  [7938  line  3]  ;  and  in  like  manner  we  obtain  the  other  lines  of  [7938]. [''^^Sc]

f  (3782) This  is  evident  from  the  system  of  equations  [755],  changing  the  characteristic
of  finite  differences S  into A, and  putting p  =  y(">, p'  =  y^"+i)^ ^"  =  ^^"+2)^  &;c.,  in
order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation. We  may  incidentally  observe  that  the  formula '■ "-■
[7929]  can  be  easily  deduced  fi-om  that  in  [756].

VOL.  IV.  97

[7938]

386  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  CeL

[79381 supposed  that  we  have  computed  only  the  values  y^°^,  ^^^ .  . .  y^^'K To  avoid
this  difficulty,  we  shall  observe  that  the  coefficient  of ^*,  in  the  development

of  the  function u.i 1  j , is A'".y<»'  [7926g]  ;  now  we  have,*

[7939] w/l-lY=:  u,{\-t)\{\-{Ut)\-^==u,{\-t)\^\^r.{Ut)^'^^^

The  coefficient  of  /%  in  the  development  of  w.(l — /)',  is  generallyf
A9.y(»-9).  Therefore  the  equation  [7939']  gives,  by  passing  from  the
generating  functions  to  the  coefficients,

Putting  successively  r=l,  r  =  2,  r  =  3,  &c.,  we  obtain  the  values  of
A.y">,  A^y'*^  &c.,  which  depend  only  upon  the  co-ordinates  i/^"^  2/'^'^  ^^'
Substituting  them  in  the  expression  of  f^y^^Kdi  [7938],  we  get,  J

[7939^
[7940]

[7941]

[7940a]

*(3783) We  have  identically (j—\\  =  {i-^t),\\~-{\~-t)\--^. Involving  this  to

the  power  r,  then  multiplying  by  m,  and  developing  by  the  binomial  theorem,  we  get
successively  [7939,  7  939^] .

f  (3784) If  we  multiply  [7926g]  by  T, then  change r into q, we  shall  get,  as
in  [7940],

[7941o]  M.(l— 0'  =  A'.^<°\<'  4-  A«y  \i^i  +  A«.y^2),^9+2^ -}-A' Y'*-'\  f  +  &c.

Now  putting  successively  q  =  r,  g'  =  r-|-l,  q  =  r-\-2,  &c.  in  [7941a],  we  shall  get,
from  the  general  term  A'.y"-'>.r,  the  coefficients  of  T  in  w.(l — <)%  m.(1 — 0*^^
w.(l — O*^^'  ^c-  J  ^"d  hy  substituting  them  in  the  second  member  of  [7939'],  we  shall  get
the  second  member  of  [7941]  ;  its  first  member  being  the  corresponding  term  of  [7926g'].

[79415]

t  (3785) Putting  successively  r  =  l, r  =  2, r  =  3,  &c.  in  [7941],  and  substituting
the  resulting  values  in  [7938],  we  get,

—  T2- .{A.y^*-^^+A2.y^«-2)-|-  A^.y^^-s^-f-  A^.y^*^)-}-  A^.y^'^^-^-hc. — A.  y^")|
+ 2-^ .f . .  .  +A2.y^«-2)-|-2A3.y^''-3'+3A^2/("-4)+4A5.y^''-5)-f&ic.— A^.t/^i

[7942a]  __  ^^9^  .j ^  A3.y^"-3^-|-3A4.y"-4)-}-6A5.y(»-s>+&c.— A3.y^°^i

+  tItt .f •  .'."".;'. 4-  A''.y('*-4^+4A5y'-5)+&c.— aV"^!

—  F^fltr-f ..  V  .'..... +  AV-sJ+fec—Asy")!

4"  Sec.

Reducing  this  expression,  it  becomes  as  in  [7942].

IX.  i.  «^  6, 7.]  INTEGRATING  BY  QUADRATURES.  387

_L, .JA.?/(«-l) A.«/W|  I ■  Integnd

-  tIt  .1aV"-^)+aV)|

—  &C.  /

(P)  [7942]

[7943]
[7944]

6.  To  cfpp/y  ^^e  formula  [7942]  to  the  variations  of  the  elements  of  the
orbit  of  the  cornet^  ive  shall  take,  for  the  absciss,  the  exceniric  anomaly  of  the
comet,  which  we  have  denoted  by  u  [7860]  ;  and  we  shall  represent,  by  Qdu,
the  differential  variation  of  one  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit ;  then  taking
u  from  degree  to  degree,  we  must  determine the  corresponding  values  of [7945]

Q. If  we  denote  them  by Q'^'\ Q<^) Q(«>, the  formula  [7942]  will [7945']

give  the  value  of  fQdu, or  the variation  of the  element of  the orbit,
corresponding  to  the  supposed  variation  in  the  arc  of  the  excentric  anomaly.

It  ivill  most  frequently  happen  that  the  first  finite  difference  will  be  the  only

term  necessary  to  be  noticed  in  this  formula  ;  but  near  those  parts  where  the [7946]

planet  is  at  its  minimum  of  distance  from  the  disturbing  planet,  which  renders

the  values  of  — and  of  course  those  of  Q  very  large,*  we  must  notice  the [7947]

other  differences. It  will  then  be  useful  to  decrease  the  interval  between  the
equidistant  co-ordinates,  by  taking  the  excentric  anomaly  for  every  half  degree.

7.  We  have  seen,  in  [7836],  that  the  most  sensible  part  of  the  perturbations

of  a  comet  may  be  expressed  analytically  when  the  comet  is  at  a  considerable  ^f^l^^'"""^
distance  Jrom  the  disturbing  planet,  or  in  the  superior  part  of  its  orbit ;  which  dSndli
gives  an  accurate  and  simple  method  of  computing  these  perturbations. We
shall  develop,  by  this  means,  the  corresponding  variations  of  the  elements
of  the  orbit.

We  shall  resume  the  expression  of  dh  [7849],

*  (3786) The  symbol  /  represents  the  distance  of  the comet  from  the disturbing

1  [7947o]

planet  m'  [7870a] ; and  when  this  is  small,  the  term —  becomes great, and it will

therefore produce, in the expressions of de, ed-a, dR, da, dn, ds  —  dis, [79476]
[7872,  7873,  7877,  7878,  7879,  7883],  some  terms  of  the  form qdu, in  which  Q  is
quite  large.

on  R/.

[7947']

[7949]

[7950]

388  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  C61.

[7948]  dh  =  dx.  \  .:.Q_y.(§)  I  +  (xdy^ydx).(^^) .

Putting  for  jR  its  value  [7838],  namely,

R  =  R'-  li  -m'.{x^+yi/+z!^).(^ -  i)  ;

we  find,  as  ia  [7837^],  that  R'  is  small  in  comparison  with  the  other
part  of  R,  or  R^  [7837],  when  the  radius  vector  of  the  comet  r  is  much
greater  than  that  of  the  disturbing  planet ;  and  in  this  case  the  perturbations
of  the  comet  depending  upon  R^ ,  or  the  greatest  part  of  R,  are  represented^
as  in  [7825 — 7827],  in  the  following  manner;
[7951]  6x  =  m'.(ix+x') ; 6y  =  m'.{iy-\-y')  ; 6z  =  m'.(^z+z').

This  being  premised,  we  have,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  z  in  the  equation
[1171  line  3],*

Taking the variation  of  this equation,  relative to the characteristic <J,
we  get,t

2dx.dSx  > xdx.dSy xdy.dSx dxdy.Sx

[7952]

[7953] 0=5^^2,.  [i-^  I -2^.  J  J

dt^  3 '  <if2  1  ^^2  '  J^2

If  we  substitute  the  preceding  values  of  6x,  Sy,  we  obtain, t

*  (3787) We  have  in  [78496],  f  =  iih, or  by  [7874],  f  =h  nearly. Substituting

this in the fifth of the equations [1171], and neglecting terms  of the order  z*,

xdz dz^

— , -ns> »*'^>  &C'j as  in [7846], it becomes  as  in  [7952]. In like manner, by

substituting  /=?  [78496,7874] in  the  fourth  of  the  equations  [1171],  and  neglecting
similar  quantities,  we  get,

[7952c]  «  =  '+*•  It-^K^'

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

[7952o]
.£79526]

[79530]

t  (3788) The  variation  of  [7952]  being  taken  relative  to  the  characteristic  5,  gives,
without  any  reduction,  the  expression  [7953],  dt  being  constant.

X  (3789)  The  first  expression  of  hr  [79546]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [781 8tf] ;  and  by
substituting  the  approximate  values  of  5a;,  5y,  hz  [7951],  it  becomes  as  in  the  second
form  of  [79546],  which  can  be  reduced  to  the  form  [7954c],  by  using  r^  [78176],  and

m!

neglecting —.zt!^ as  in  [79526]. Moreover  the  differentials  of  &C, hy  [7951],  give
dhx,  doy  [7954rf]  ;

IX.  i.  §7.J  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON  R^.  389

[7954]

[7955]

,  , C dx^ xdxcfy  }  ,  , ( 1 ^«'*  ) . , (xcc/4-vv') , '^rn'y.dxdccf

m'.xdxd'i/ m'.xdydx' m'.cd.dxdy
~~ ~d7^  di^  dt^ *

This  value  of  6h,  being  augmented  by  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity,
expresses  the  alteration  of  h  arising  from  the  part  of  R,  which  is  represented
by  R,  in  [7837]  ;  it  must  therefore  result  from  the  integration  of  the
preceding  expression  of  dh  [7948],  by  substituting  for  R  the  function  R,
[7837],  namely,

which  may  be  confirmed  a  posteriori  by  calculation  [7958<?],  by  observing
that  we  may  here  suppose —  =  — m'.  —  , -j^  =  — m!,  -j^,  &c.  [7822],

If we substitute, in this value of 5h [7954], A  +  — instead of

Sr  =  -^-+y^^+-^  _  ^ .  ^ r.(^9_^y8^^2)^(^^_^3^y4.^^)|  [79546]

[7956]
[7956']

=  7  •  H  ^+{x^+yy') }  =  i  wV  +  - .  {xjif-\-yy')  j  [7954c  ]

dSx  =  w'.  I  ^  dx-{-doi/  \  ; dSy==  w!.  [  ^  dy-\-di/ } .  [7954(q

Substituting the values of Sx, Sy^ Sr, dSx, dSy [7951,  7954c,  d], in [7953],  and
91 transposing  the  terras  so  as  to  get  the  value  of  6h,  we  obtain,  without  any  reduction,

6h

^ ^ I  r rff2  5  ^ t  r dt^  S ^ X^r^ r3 ^  rf<a  ^

m!  .xdx.{\dy-\-dy') m'.xdy.{^dx-\-dxf) m'.dxdy.{^x-{-xf)
rf<2  i«2  rfia  •

This  expression  consists  of  fifteen  terms,  and  if  we  compare  it  with  [7954]  we  shall  find

that  the  third  to  the  tenth  terms  of  [7954]  inclusively  correspond  respectively  to  the  terms

3,  4,  6,  7,  9,  11,  13,  15  of  [7954e]. The  first  and  fifth  terms  of  [7954e]  destroy  each

rfx2  dx^  dx^

other. The  second  and  eighth  are i^^'y*  TJ  +  f '"V*";^  =*^V  3;2» ^^ i"^ the  first  of

[7954]. The  three  remaining  terms  of  [7954e],  namely,  the  tenth,  twelfth  and  fourteenth,

being  added  together,  give — m'.  , as  in  the  second  and  only  remaining  terms  of

[7954] ;  therefore  the  value  of  6h  [7954]  is  equal  to  that  in  [7954e].
voL»  IV.  98

[7954c]

[7954/]

[7954g]

390  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cd.

[7957] y,^--x/-^  [7952],  we  shall  get,* ,

Part  of

6h

6h=^m'/h  +  ^^

, (xt/ — x'y)  ,  Ax! (xdy—  ydx)

[7958]  «..^.. , ^j «**.  ^  ....  ^^,  ^^

Jr""^^  _ ,  dx (xdi/—y'dx+3fdy—ydx')

^r  '  dt'  dt

Hence  it  follows,  that  to  obtain  the  variation  of  h,  from  a  given  point  of  the
orbit  to  another  point,  so  far  as  it  depends  on R^  [7956],  or  on  the  part

••  ^  of  R  which  is  independent  of  R',  it  is  only  necessary  to  subtract  the  value
of  the  second  member  of  the  preceding  equation  [7958],  in  the  first  point,  from
its  value  in  the  second  point.

If  we  change,  in  the  equation  [7958],  h  into  I,  x  into  y,  xf  into  y,  and
the  contrary,  we  shall  obtain  the  variation  of  I  arising  from  R^,  or  from
the  part  of  R  which  is  independent  of  R' ;  hence  we  get,t

[7960]

^"'J**  iT^^>(i  \^\  I  _'..  [^—VA , _,  f'y' [xdy^ydx)

[7961]

depending  ^ Jy (xdy' — 'i/dx -\-x'dy—ydx')

"""jR,.  '  "*  *  li  '  ~~  dt

dt  dt

[7958a]

[79586]

* (3790) Substituting iq [7954] the value of y.~  —  x.'^ [7957], also

X T^ xx-\—yv  2^

—  =  -J  =  — 13— ?  neglecting -^  ,  as  in  [7846],  it  becomes,

m'.xdxdy' m' .xdyix! m'^'.dxdy
rfia  d^  -^ »

which,  by  a  different  arrangement  of  the  terms,  becomes  as  in  [7958].  This  value  of  6h
£7958c]  jg  deduced  from  the  general  expression  of  hh  [7953],  by  substituting  the  values  of  5a?,  8y,
6z  [7951],  which  were  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  jR'  =  0,  or  R=R^  [7837e]5
it  must  therefore  necessarily  follow,  that  if  we  substitute  Rz=R^  m  [7849],  we  shall,  by
integration,  get  the  same  value  of  Sh  as  in  [7958],  as  is  observed  in  [7956'J.  This  is  so
£7958d]  evident  that  we  have  not  thought  it  to  be  necessary  to  repeat  the  calculations,  by  the
«iethod  pointed  out  in  [7956',  &c.].

f  (3791)  If  we  change  a?,  x',  y,  y\  into  y,  tf,  «,  x',  respectively,  we  shall  find  that
17961a]  the  expression  of  dh  [7849]  changes  into  that  of  dl  [7850],  and  h  [7952]  into  I  [7952c]  ;
also  ^x  into  6y,  and  5y  into  ^x  [7951].  Hence  it  is  evident  that  if  we  make  the  same
changes  in  the  expression  of  6h  [7958],  we  shall  get  the  value  of  <5Z,  as  in  [7961]  ;  the
arrangement  of  the  terms  being  varied  a  little  so  as  to  make  the  factors  appear  in  the  same
forms  as  in  [7958].

IX.i.<§>7.J  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON  R^.  391

Subtracting  the  value  of  the  second  member  of  this  equation  in  a  given  point ryngoi
of  the  orbit,  from  its  value  in  another  point,  we  shall  have  in  that  interval  the
variation  of  I  depending  on R^  [7956],  or  on  the  part  of  R  [7949],  which
is  independent  of  R'. The  variations  of  h  and I  give  those  of  e  and  ztf,
observing  that  we  have,*

e6e  =  h^h-\-Ul', e^6iz  =  l6h—h6l.  £7963]

We  have,  in  [1171  line  5], f

1  2  (dx^-\-dy^)

-  =  —  — ^S-^  ;  f^^3

a  r  at*

6a 25r 2dx.dSx-\-'ildi/My

which  gives,

Substituting  the  values  of  ir, ddx, diy, which  are  given  in  [7954c,  d], ryq^tr/i
we  obtain,

^« „ »»' , .^ / i^^'+yy') . o /  (dx^+dy^) , ^ , (dxdx'-{-dydif)  ^„„^^,

If  we  substitute  in  this  equation  for — -rz-^ its  value [79641,

dt^  r  a ^  ■" I'HQQQ-i

and  multiply  by  a^,  we  get,  Pan  of

r  r  "i  depending

on
1  /?

Hence  we  may  find  (J ri,  by  means  of  the  equation n^  =  — [7897'], which '*
gives,  as  in  [6662],  ^ ■'

*  (3792)  The  variations  of  the  expressions  of  A,  /  [7847],  relative  to  the  characteristic
5,  give,  in  like  manner  as  in  [7851,7852],

6e  =  (5A.sin.'3j  -|-  6l.cos.-ui ; e5ttf  =  8h.cos.zi — 5/.sin.w.  [7963a]

Multiplying  these  by e, and  substituting  the  values  of e.sin.'zrf, e.cos.o [7847], we
get  [7963] .

t  (3793)  Putting  fA  =  l  [7874]  in  the  last  of  the  equations  [1171],  and  neglecting
dz^j  as  in  [79526],  we  get  the  expression  [7964].  Its  variation  relative  to  the
characteristic  6,  gives  [7965],  by  changing  its  signs ;  and  we  may  observe  that  terms  of

the  order m'^ are  neglected  in  this  expression  of — . Substituting in [7965] the

<*  [79656]

differentials  of  the  values  of  8x,  Sy  [7954f?],  also Sr  =  ^.m'r-\ -{xxf-^-yy')  [7954c],  we

get  [7966]. Multiplying  this  by a^, and  substituting f  .mV.  ^ — Zl_£_l=:|.  _ fm'a [7965c]

[7966'],  we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,  the  expression  [7967].

392  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

8n  Sa

n  -* a

[7969]

Part  of substituting  [7967]  in  [7969],  and  multiplying  by  n,  we  get,

Sn

[7972]

[«'»]  sn=^-^^^+  m'n-3m:an.  ^-^^±^  -Sm'.an.  ('^-''^ +Jy'^ .

depending  j.  '  ^  ^^2

on

-R/ Subtracting  the  values  of 6a,  6n  [7967,7970],  at  a  given  point  of  the  orbit,
[7971] from  their  values  at  another  point,  we  shall  obtain  the  variations  of  a  and  n
in  that  interval,  arising  from R^, or  the  part  of  R  which  is  independent
of  72'.

To  obtain  the  variation  of  the  mean  anomaly,  depending  upon  the  part  of
/?,  which  we  have  represented  by  R^  [7837],  we  shall  observe  that  this
i?  variation  is  equal  to*  f5n.dt-\-Ss — 6ts,  We  shall  put  6n  for  the  ivhole  value
of  6n,  at  the  point  oj  the  orbit  where  ive  begin  to  consider  separately  this  part
of  R ;  that  is,  the  value  of  6n  which  results  from  the  preceding
perturbations.  We  shall  have,  by  supposing  t  to  commence  at  this  point,
[7974]  f6n.dt-\-5s-^zi  =6n.t+f6'n.dt-]-5s—S,s  ; [7972(^]

^'"  6'n  being  the  variation  of  n,  counted  from  the  point  mentioned  in  [7973'],
and  depending  upon  R^  [7837],  or  upon  the  part  of  R  ivhich  is  independent
of  R'. We  have,  as  in  [7976c],

6'n,dt-\-6t — 5w  =  /  u'n.dt ^ , — ^^^ — ^ \.

«/ I  y/l—t^  l—e"  )

Integrating  by  parts  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  we  obtain,!

[7973']

*  (3794)  The  mean  anomaly  is  expressed  by  V=fndt-\-s — zs  [7858'].  Its  variation
relative  to  the  characteristic  5,  is  5V=f8n.dt-\-Ss — 8tss.  The  variations  being  supposed
to  commence  at  the  time  t=0,  when  8n  is  equal  to  6n  [7973]  ;  and  the  general  value
[7972c]  of  Sn  is  Sn=  8n  -{-  5h  [7973,  7975];  substituting  this  in  fSn.dt,  we  get,
f6n.dt  =  87i.t-\-f6'n.dt;  hence  the  value  of  &V  [79726]  becomes  as  in  [7974];  the
integrals  being  supposed  to  commence  at  the  time  when  Sn  is  equal  to  Sn.

[7972a]
[79726 ]

[7972<1

[7976a]

t  (3795) We  shall  put  for  brevity,

,  ^ (1  — e.cos.«)2  sin.«.f2— c2  —  e.cos.uJ

and  by  substituting  these  symbols  in  [7886],  we  get,
[79766  ]  ds — dia  =  — d-a.  <p(u) — de.'iru.

Adding  S'n.dt  to  both  members  of  this  equation,  then  integrating  and  putting  fds=Ss,
[7976c] fd-a^S-a, fde  =  Se, we  get  [7976], Now  if  we  integrate [79766]  by  parts,  as  in

[1716a],  we  obtain,

IX.i.§7.]  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON  It,.  393

^. -,  ,  . .  ,  5to'.(1 — c.cos.«)2 Se.Bin.u.[2 — c2 — c.cos.m)

Jdn.dt4-Se—S-sj  =  constant .--^— ^ ^ -

•^  '  yl—t^  l_c2

[7977]

[7979]

i

/•f  d'n  \ ,  rk  r «?«-8in.tt.(l-e.cos.«) , 5e.rf«.{l-c.cos.M)  (c+2.cos.m)  ") ^

+y  i--^"'(i-^-^°^-")+2^^^- — Tfc^ — + — ■ — Y^ — v^^

ndt  being,  as  in  [7882],  equal  to  c?w.(l-e.cos.w). We  have,  as  in  [7851e,/],

^  =  0 ; 5h  =  e6vs; 1  =  6; 6l  =  5e,  [7978]

We  shall  put  m'nq  for  the  value  of  the  preceding  expression  of  Sn,  at  the
new  origin  we  have  assigned  to  the  time  t  [7973]  ;  we  shall  then  have  for
the  value  of  6'n  [7975],  the  following  expression,

^n  =  6n — m'nq\  [7980]

and  by  substituting  the  preceding  values  of  &h,  61, we  shall  find,*  [798(r|

6s — S-a  =  constant — Svs.<p(u) — 8e.'Jr{u)-\-J'Sis.(~ — \du-\-f8e.(-^ — -j.du ;  [7976d]

considering  (p{u),  "^(m),  as  functions  of  u  only,  without  noticing  the  variableness  of  e,
because  it introduces  only  terms  of  the  order  m'^,  which  are  neglected ;  moreover  from

/*6'n  p6'n  [7976e]

[7882]  we  have  J 6'n.dt=J  — .ndt=J  — .rfM.(l— e.cos.w)  j adding  this  to  [1916d],

we  get,

f6'n.dt-\-5s — Svi  =  constant — 5ot.9(m) — 5c.t(m)  1

The  first  line  of  this  expression  is  the  same  as  the  first  Une  of  [7977]  ;  and  the  integral  in
the  second  line  of  [7976/]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [7977  line  2]  ;  observing  that,  in  finding
the  differential  of  the  expression  ^(u)  [7976a],  we  get,  by  successive  reductions,
d.  i  sin.u.(2-e2-€.cos.M)  |  =  rfu.  J  cos.M.(2-c2-e.cos.u)  -}-  csin.s  u\=  du.  |  co3.u.{2-e'^.co9M )  -\-  c.(1-cos2m)  \ [7976M
=  du,i2.co3.u-\-e.{l — 2.cos.2m)— eS.cos.u^  =  du.{l — e.cos.u)  .(e-f-2.cos.M).  [7976i  ]

[7976/]
[7976^:];

*  (3796) Substituting fe=  — , Se  =  Sl  [7978],  in  the  terms  in  the  first  line  of  the

[7981a]

[7981&]

second  member  of  [7977],  we  get  the  terms  of  the  second  member  of  [7981  line  1].  Again
if  we  substitute  the  expression  of  6'n  =  — m'nq-\-5n  [7980],  in  the  first  term  of
[7977  line  2],  we  obtain  the  expression  [79816]  ;  and  by  using  the  value  of  ndt  [7882],
in  the  first  terra  of  its  second  member,  it  is  reduced  to  the  form  [7981c]  ;

/ —  .du.{l — ccos.m)  =  —-fm'q.du.{l — e.co3.u)-\- f  —  ,du.(l — e.cos.w)

=  — m'nq.t'j-i  —  .  du.  (1 — c.cos.m).  [7981c  ]

If  we now suppose  the integral expression  in  [7977  line  2]  to  be represented  by

^m'nq.t-\-Vji  we  shall  find,  by  the  substitution  of  [7981c]  in  [7977  line  2],

TT /•? X,  \ ( <5»t 1 c 2.8in.u , - (e4-2.cos.«) )  ,«„«,  «

V,  =y;/M.(l-  e.cos.«).  ^  -  +  e5«.  ^^;^==  -f  k. '  \__^^ ^  ;  [7981rf]

VOL.  IV.  99

394

PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,

[Mec.  C61.

Variation
of  the
mean
anomaly

[7981]

depending
on  Rj.

f6'n.at4-6s — isj  =  constant ^^ — ^^ -—I  i

— mnq.t  + '  . --  •  2

[7981c]
[7981/]

[7981ffl

I7981A]
[7981i ]

[7981i]
[7981Z ]

[7981m]

[7981n]

[7981o]
[7981;»]

[7981 g]
[7981 r]

and  the  autlior  observes  in  [7980']  that  if  we  use  the  values  of  8h,  81,  8n  [7958, 7951, 7970],
this  integral  expression  will  become  of  the  form  in  the  last  terra  of  [7981  line  2],  making

V,=  ^2 /. '3 ; and  it  now  remains  to  be  proved  that  the  differentials  of  these  two

expressions  of  F"^,  are  identical ; or  by  using  the  values e8zi==8h, 8e  =  Sl  [7978],  we

must  prove  that  the  first  member  of  the  following  equation  [7981^]  can  be  reduced  to  the

same  form  as  its  second  member,  by  substituting  the  values  of  8h,  81,  8n  [7958,7961,  7970] ;

, ,,  X (  ^n , M 2.sin.« ,  .,  (e+2.cos.w)  )  wi'  , ,  ,  .  .

The  two  first  terras  of  8h,  81,  8n,  depending  on  the  unaccented  letters  x,  y,  being
substituted  in  the  first  member  of  [7981^],  mutually  destroy  each  other.  For  if  we  retain
only  these  two  terms,  and  use  also  the  values  h=0,  l=e  [7978],  we  shall  have  from
[7970,  7958,  7961],  by  neglecting  for  brevity  the  factor  m',  which  is  common  to  all
the  tenns.

5n  3a

r

81=  e^

and  if  we  substitute  the  values  of  r,  x,  y  [7855,  7862,  7862^],  they  will  become.

6n
n

8h  =

1  —  e.cos.u
^1  —  c^j.sin.M

;  81

( — 2 — e.cos.u)

-c.cos.u
cos.ti — c

_  (1 — e2).C03.M

e-j- =  -— ,

' 1 — e.cos.u  1 — e.cos.u

1 — c.cos.u
Substituting  these  in  the  first  member  of  [7981  o-],  we  get,  without  any  reduction,

du.  I  ( — 2 — e.cos.u) -|-2.sin.^M  -f-cos.M.(e-|-2.cos.w)  |  ;
and  by  putting 2.sin.^M-|-2.cos.^M  =  2, we  find  that  the  terms  mutually  destroy  each
other ;  so  that  we  shall  now  have  to  notice  only  those  terms  of  8n,  8h,  81,  which  contain
the  accented  letters  x,  dx',  y',  dx/,  which  we  shall  successively  compute,  taking  them  in
the  same  order.

First.  Noticing  only  the  terms  which  contain  explicitly  the  finite  quantity  x',  neglecting
for  a  moment,  for  brevity,  the  factor  mfx',  common  to  all  these  terms,  and  which  will  be
re-substituted  in  [79812;],  we  shall  get,  from  [7970,  7958,  7960],  the  following  expressions ;
6n  2ax

n  r3 '

Now  we  have,  in  [7862,  7862'],  the  following  values  of  a?,  y,  whose  differentials  are  as
in  [7981r]  ;

x=  aA  cos.M — e  |  ;  y  =  a.^l  — eS.sin.M  ;

djx  =  — adu.sm.u ;  dy  =  adu.\/l—e'^.cosM ;

xy dx dy

.J  y^ ,dy^

IX.i.'§>7.]  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON  R,,  395

If  we  subtract  the  value  of  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  at  the  new ryqo,,,
origin  of  t  [7973'],  from  its  value  at  another  point  of  the  orbit,  we  shall

and  if  we  substitute 1— e.cos.M=  —  [7855],  in  the  expression  of  nf?^  [7882],  we  shall [7983s]

an.dt  dt «  i • •

get,  by  using  [7897'], rfM=  -y-  =  ^. Substituting  this  value  of  du  in  [79817*],  and [7981*']

dividing  by  dt,  we  obtain,

dx  a* .  dy ai.v/rZTTa

-==  —  -.  sm.M ;  -  == V  ^ .  cos.w.  [7981«  ]

Substituting  the  values  [7981g',  <]  in [7981j?],  we  get,  by  a  very  slight  reduction,  the  first
expressions  in  [7981m,  Uji^^]. The  second  forms  are  deduced  from  the  first,  respectively,

by  substituting  in  the  terms  between  the  braces,  in  [7981u,  v)]^  the  value  of —  [79815]  ;

—  =—.  (e— cos.m)  ;  [7981w]

^j,  ^  «^-vA:^.sin.M^  ^  (cos.2Z-e)+  ~.cos.^  ]  =  aWl==fj^ ,  {2.cos.M~e-e.cos.^M}  [7981r]

SI  =  —^ — ■'.  }  — sin.^w-j .cos.^M  >  =  -^ .  I — sin.^M+cos.^w — c.cos.^mJ.  [7981t*]

Substituting  the  expressions  [7981m,  v,  w]  in  the  first  member  of  [7981^],  it  becomes  as  in
[7981a:] ;  putting sin.%  =  1 — cos.^m,  and  arranging  according  to  the  powers  of  cos.m,  we

get  the  first  form  of  [7981y] ;  and  by  successive  reductions,  using  the  value  of  — [7981s],

and  that  of  </y  [798  Ir],  we  finally  obtain  the  last  expression  in  [798  ly]  ;

2

^i^(l_e.cos.«).  -.|3.(c-cos-«)-j-2.sin.2M.(2.cos.M-c-€.co3.2M)4-(e-j-2.cos.M).(-sui.2w+cos.at4-c.co8.3M)J [7981ar]

=  f?M.(l — e.cos.tt).  — .  {-cos.M.(l-2e.cos.M-f-e^-cos.^M)|  =:-du.{l-e.cos.uf.  —  .cos.w

, /  r\^ a^ , COS.M  dy

=  —  du.[  —  )  .  —  .COS.M  =  — du. =  — o  .  /.-

dy^
e2

[7981t/]

Connecting  this  last  expression  with  the  factor  mW, which  was  neglected  in  [7981  o],  we

dy  [79812]

finally  get —  T/f^^'^'^'t for  the  term  in  the  first  member  of  [7981^],  depending  on

x' ;  being  the  same  as  that  which is  given  by  the  author,  as  in  the  second  member
of  [798  Ig-].

Second. We  shall  now  compute  the  terms  depending  on dx'. If  we  retain  only  these
terms,  and  neglect for  brevity  the  factor m!dx',  which  is  common  to  all  of  them,  taking [7982a]
care  to  re-substitute it  at  the  end  of  the calculation,  in [7982g"],  we  shall  get from
[7970,  7958,  7960],

^ ^aJx^  ,__ {xdy—ydx) ydx  Sl=2—^  [79826]

n  dfi '  dt^ "*"  dt2  »  dt^'

5^6  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

have  the  variation  of  the  mean  anomaly  during  that  interval,  arising  from
R^  [7837],  or  from  the  part  of  R  which  is  independent  of  R\

[7982c]

Now  from  the  values  of  a?,  y,  dx,  dy  [TOSlgf,  r,  <],  we  obtain  by  successive  reductions,
using  [7981s],

xdy — ydx  =  a^,du.\/i  —  e2.  {cos.'u.(cos.w — e)  -j-  sin.^M|

=  a^.du.\/l  —  c2. 1 1 — e.cos.wj  =  ar.du.s/l — e^ ;
1 substituting  this,  and di^  =  at^.du^  [7981s'j,  together  with  the  values  of  dx,  dy  [7981rJ,
we  get,  from  [79826],

[7982rf] ^_3a,sin^ 5A=-. «VlEi!  J  I.  +  sin.^wl ; ^^ _ _ ^f^flflil:!!:!!!:!! .

Substituting  these  last  expressions  in  the  first  member  of  [7981_g-],  it  becomes  as  in  [7982e].
This  is  successively  reduced to  the  form  [7982/*]  by  putting,  in  the  factor  between  the

T

braces, sin.^M-{-cos.^M=  1, and 1 — e.cos.u  =  —  [7981^]  ;  using  also  y  [7981 5]  ;

[7982c] (1-e.cos.u)."'^^"'^  'p^"^*!  a  +sin-^")-cos.M.(e-t-2.cos.M)  ^=(l-e.cos.«).  '  ^°'^.j  l-c.cos.w-2.- >

rmnon^i  r-,  \  a.siii.M C r^  T a.sin.M r  sin.u  y  r-,^^, -,

Umi  =(l-e.cos.»).^^.|--^=--.-^.-=-— =-^5^^, [7981,].

Multiplying  this  last  expression  by  the  factor  mfdx',  which  was  neglected  in  [7982a],  we

[7982g] get — 2  /, g> foJ^  the  part  of  the  first  member  of  [7981^]  depending  on  dx' ;  being

U .r/  JL  —  6'*

the  same  as  that  given  by  the  author  in  the  second  member  of  [7981^].

Third. We  shall  now  take  into  consideration  the  terms  which  contain  y'  explichly.
[7982^ Noticing  only  these  terms, and  omitting,  as above,  the  common  factor m'y',  which  is
re-substituted  in  [7982p],  we  shall  get  from  [7970,  7958,7961],

[7982i]  ^  =  -_?«^;  sh=.--^  +  —;  6Z=^_^.^;

^  ■"  n  r3 »  r3  ~  df2  »  r^ dt dt  *

dx dv

substituting  the  values  of  ^)  Vi  ^i  -ir  [7 931  g-,  <],  they  become  by  successive  reductions,
using ^  [7981s],

[7982.]  ^  =  _WHe!.3in..;

[7982n

dh  =  —  A  -(cos.M-e)^-j — .  sin.^MV  =  -- .  j  -(cos.M-e)2-}-(l-e.cos.M).(l-cos.%)  j

=  ~j.ll — 2.cos.'*M-|-e.cos.w-f-e.cos.^M — e'|  ;

F7Qao«.i  A7 a^Vl-c^.sin.M  C^ . \ 1 *"  ? a^.i/T^.sm.u  <r,  « >

[798^»i]  61  =  — iL — _ .  j  (cos.M-e)  -j .  cos.w  >  =  — ii-J_| 1 2.cos.M-e-e.cos.*M[.

Substituting  the  values  [7982Zc,  ?,  m]  in  the  first  member  of  [7981^],  it  becomes  as  in
[7982n]  ;  and  the  terms  between  the  braces  may  be  reduced  to

— 14-2e.cos.if— e^.cos.^M  =  — (1  — e.cos.w)^ ;

IX.  i.  ^1.]  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON  R^.  397

To  obtain  the  variations  of  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  and  of  the  node,

[7981'"]
depending  upon  the  same  part  of  R,  we  must  observe  that  we  have,  m

[1171  linel],

, xdz — zdx  „ ydz — zdy  [7982]

~ dt '  ~ dt *

hence  we  get  [7982o],  using  the  value  of  —  [79815],  and  that  of  dx  [7981r]

J ,,  V a2sin.M C  —3.(1 — e'^)-\-2.(l — S.cos.^M+e.cos.M+e.cos.^M — e^)  >

du.{\ — e.cos.w).  3-7===  .^ ^  >'  ' V ,  '  '  /  c

v.y \.—e^  ^-j-(e+2.cos.w).(2.cos.i^^ — e — e.cos.^u)  ^

=  J«.(l— e.cos.u).  ^^^Y=r^^ '  {— (i— ^•cos.m)^}  =  —du.{l-^e.cos.uf.  ^-syj^^p

- /  ^  V a^.sin.M  adu.sin.u  dx

[7982nl

[7982o]

Connecting  this  last  expression  with  the  common  factor  m'l/  [7982A],  we  get 3 /- — - ; [7982jp]
as  in  the  third  term  of  the  second  member  of  [7981^].

Fourth. The  terms  of  [7970,7958,7961]  depending  on  di/,  give,  by  neglecting  in  like ri^ggg  •.
manner  as  above,  the  common  factor  m'di/,  and  re-substituting  it  in  [7982i;],

n  dt^ '  di^  '  dl^ ^  dti  l ^j

Substituting  the  values [7981g',  r,  7982c,  (/],  they  become  as  in  [7982r,  s],  by  using

^  [79815]  in  [79825];

^n  3a.\/i  _  eS.cos.M  fr a.sin.M.{cos.tt-cJ

n  =-  r^.du '  ^^= ^du 5  [7982r]

^^==  ^^^^^^'  '[^+  cos.w.(cos.w-0  I  =  '^:^?.|l-2e.cos.w+cos.3u|.  [7982.]

Hence  the  first  member  of  [7981^],  depending  on  these  terms,  becomes  as  in  [7982^] ;
and  by  putting  sin.^M=l — cos.^m,  we  get  the  first  expression  [7982m];  then  by
successive  reductions,  using  a?,  r  [7981g',  s],  we  get  the  last  form  of  [7982m]  ;

, ..  .  a  C — 3.(1 — e2).cos.M-)-2.sin.2M.(cos.M  —  e)>  r-roao*!

rf«.(l-e.cos.»).^52nvr^-^+(e4.2.cos.«Kl-2lcos.«+cos.^«)  \  ' '

=  (l-e.cos.«).,-3;^^=.  j(l-e.cos.«).(cos.«-e)  j  ==(l-c.cos.«)^.  ^^^^-g,  =  ^~=^^. [798a«]

Connecting  this  last  expression  with  the  factor ruldy'  [7982g'],  it  becomes 3  /i .  2' r7982»l

as  in  the  second  member  of  [7981^].  From  what  has  been  said  it  appears  that  the  second
member  of  [7981^]  is  equivalent  to  the  first  member  of  the  same  equation.  Hence  it
follows  that  the  equation  [7981]  is  equivalent  to  that  in  [7977].

VOL. IV.  100

398  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

'Hence  we  get,*

[79831  ' x.d5z-\-Sx.dz — z.d8x—-6z.dx

[7984]  6c" =

[7985]

dt
y.dSz-\-Sy.dz — z.dSy —  Sz.dy

dt
If  we  substitute the  values of  6Xj  5y,  5z, given  in  [7825 — 7827], we
shall  have,t

[7986]  ,c'  =  |mV+m'.(^^fi^^?=^^=^);

dt

^'/  _  2  ^V'O.^'  {yd^+y'dz—zdiZ—z'dy)
[7987]  6c=^mc-^m. — .

dz
We  shall  now  observe  that z, —, d  and  c", either  vanish,  or  are  of  the

[7988] order  of  the  disturbing  forces  [7893]  ;  therefore,  by  neglecting  the  square  of

these  forces,  we  shall  have,t
[7989]  ^'==^'.  (^^^z::?;^;

at
[7990]  ^"  =  ^'.(y^^=f:^).

Variations  "'''

Liination From  these  equations  ive  may  deduce,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [7891,  7891'],^

depending

on  R,.  • ■ ■ '

[7983al *  (3797) The  differentials  of  the  equations  [7982],  taken  relative  to  the  characteristic
8,  give  the  expressions  [7983,  7984].

t  (3798) Substituting  the  values  [7825,  7827]  in  the  numerator  of  [7983], and
reducing  by  means  of  the  value  of  cf  [7982],  it  becomes,
[7986a]  ^  m'.  (xdz-{-xdz  — zdx — zdx)-\-m'.  {xd2^-{-x*dz — zdx' — z^dx)

=  f  m'.  (xdz — zdx)-{-m'.(xd!^-\-afdz — zdx' — sfdx)
=  §m'.c'dt-^m'.{xd2f-\-x'dz — zdx' — sfdx) ;
[79S66] substituting  this  in  [7983] we  get  [7986]. In  like  manner  we  get  from  [7984],  by  using
[7826,  7827],  the  value  of  8d'  [7987]  ; or  it  is  more  easily  derived  from  [7986]  by
[7986c] changing  x  into  y and  y  into  x;  for  by  this  means  Sc'  [7983]  changes  into  5c"  [7984],
and  8c'  [7986]  into  Sc"  [1981].

dz
t  (3799) The  quantities z, —  [7846'J,  are  of  the  order  m' ;  therefore  c',  c"  [7982]

are  of  the  same  order ; and  by  neglecting terms of  the  order m'^, we  may  reject
["98851 '"'^' ^'^'' m'.x'dz, m'.zdx, m'.y'dz, m'.zdy',  from  [7986, 7987] ;  by  this  means  they
will  become  as  in  [7989,  7990]  respectively.

^  (3800) The  values  of  Sd,  Sc"  [7989, 7990],  being  substituted  for  cf,  c",  respectively,
[7990a] in  [7891,7891'],  give  the  corresponding  values  of  9,  ^  ;  referred  to  the  plane  of  the  orbit
at  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  integral.

IX.i.<^8.]  FAR  FROM  THE  SUN,  DEPENDING  ON R\  399

the  variations  of  the  inclinations  of  the  orbit  and  the  node,  arising  from  R^ n^m\
in  the  part  of  the  orbit  now  under  consideration.

8. We  can  obtain  the  variations  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit,  relative  to

the  part R' of R,  by  the formulas  in [7872—7920], by  changing R

1  [7991]

into R' [7838], in the expressions of dh, dl, d.  - , dc', dc",

[7849,  7850,  7875,  7888,  7889],  and  integrating  them  by  means  of
quadratures.  In  the  upper  portion  of  the  orbit,  R'  being  very  small,  the
values  of  these  integrals  vs^ill  also  be  very  small ;  but  in  this  portion,  w^here
it  is  so  advantageous  to  divide  R  into  two  parts,  we  may  determine  without
quadratures,  by  means  of  converging  series,  the  variations  of  the  elements  of
the  orbit  corresponding  to  R'.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  resume  the  [7992]
expression  of  R'  [7838]  ;  and  by  developing  it  in  a  series,  we  shall  have,*

R'  =  -—3 1 m'.  ^ — ^^^  ' ^—^ f  m', L-^^-Lj !_J &c.  [7993]

Now  we  have,t

*  (3801) If  we  put  for  brevity  for  a  moment, to  ^^r/.cos.y-^r'^  =  X!xf-\-yi/-]-zzf-^T^^ [7993a]
[7817c],  we  shall  have,  from  [78155],

/2  =  (x'—xf-\-{y'—yY'}-{s/—zf  =  r^—2w.  [79936  ]

Substituting  this  in  the  second  term  of  R  [7802],  we  obtain  [7993c]  ;  and  by  development
by  the  binomial  theorem,  it  becomes  as  in  [7993£Z]. If  we  substitute  in  the  second  term  of

w
this  development — ,  the  second  expression  of  w  [7993a],  we  shall  get,  by  making  a

slight  reduction,  the  expression  of  R  [7993e]  ;

m'.{x3^-\-yy'+z2f) , „  ,

^= ^ m.(r^— 2u;)-*  ^7993^]

m'.{xx'-{-yy'-\-zz') w' C  , . tc , „  tc2  tc3  ")

=:=_-___;n'.(a:aj'+yy'-l-zz').(^-— -j  +  -^—-'\¥  ^  +^;i-  +^-  \  ' {7993e]
Substituting  this  last  expression  of  R  in  the  value  of  R'  [7838],  we  easily  obtain,

and  by  re-substituting  the  second  value  of  w  [7993a],  it  becomes  as  in  [7993].

t  (3802) If  we  put,  as  in  [7851e],  -orrrO,  the  expression  of  a?,  y  [7861]  will  become
as  in  [7994] ;  we  may  also  put  2;=0,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  z,  as  in  [7846']. The [7995a]

400  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

[7994}  X  =  r.cos.ij ; y  =  r.sin.r ; z  ^  0 ;

l-}-e.cos.(t? — -n)
we  have  also  a/,  y,  /,  in  functions  of  sines  and  cosines  of  t/  and  its
multiples.  We  must  substitute  R'  lor  i?,  in  the  differential  expressions  of
the  elements  of  the  orbit,  and  then  develop  them,  using  the  following  values
of  r^Jy,  r'^dv\  which  are  easily  deduced  from  [1057],  by  putting
fx=l [7874];

[7996]  r'^dv  =  dU\/a.{\ — e^)  ;

[7997]  r'^dx)  =  dt.\/ d .{\—^^)  ;

and  by  this  means  we  shall  find  that  the  part  of  each  of  these  differential
expressions,  corresponding  to  R\  will  be  expressed  by  a  series  of  terms  of
the  form,*

[7998]  HM.cos.{w  +  i'v'  +  a)  ;

z,  i'y  being  integral  numbers,  positive  or  negative;  and  H,  A,  constant
quantities. Integrating  the  term  [7998]  by  parts,  we  obtain,  as  in  [7998^],

[79956] value  of  r  [7995]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [378  or  603]. These  values  are  to  be  substituted

in  [7993] ;  also  the  values  of  x',  tj ,  si  [7866—7868],  and /  =  ^  ,  "/^^~V \  > which
[7995c] «-  J  J  >  ./J L  J'  l-|-€'.cos.(j;'— ■53')

is  similar  to  that  in  [7995].

*  (3803)  If  we  substitute  R'  [7993]  for  R,  in  [7849],  we  shall  get  for  dU  an
expression  of  the  form dh  =  dx.cp(x,  y,  z,  r,  x',  y',  sf,  r')  -\-  dy.^{x,  y,  z,  r,  a/,  y',  si,  r') ;

[7998&  ]  <Pj  ^}  being  symbols  of  functions.  Now  if  we  substitute  in  the  values  of  x,  y  [7994],  the
expression  of  r  [7995],  we  shall  obtain  by  development  a?,  y,  in  functions  of  the  sines  and
cosines  of  the  angle  v  and  its  multiples  ;  so  that  dx,  dy,  will  be  represented  by  dv,
multiplied  by  similar  functions.  In  like  manner  x\  y',  zf,  /,  may  be  expressed  by  means
of  the  sines  and  cosines  of  the  angle  v'  and  its  multiples. Using  these  values  we  find  that

[7998rf]  the  expression  of  dh  [7998a]  becomes  of  the  form  dh  =  rfv.function(c,  v')  ;  or,  by  using
the  value  of dv [8001], </A  =  rfi;'.function(rj «'), corresponding  to  the  form  assumed  in

[7998e]  [7998],  which  is  of  the  usual  form  given  in  [957,  &;c.],  i,  i',  being  integral  numbers,
positive  or  negative,  as  in [957'  or  1011']. Similar  forms  may  be  given  to  the  other

quantities dl, d.  —  , Jc', dc"  [7991]. The  reason  for  using  dv'  instead  of  dv,  will  be

seen  in  [8003,  &£c.],  where  we  shall  find  that  this  enables  us  to  obtain  the  chief  part  of  the
integral,  under  a  finite  form,  in  [8005]  ;  the  other  part  [8002]  being  much  smaller,  is
integrated  by  approximation,  as  in  [8009].  Now  integrating  [7998]  by  parts,  it  becomes
as  in  [8000],  as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differential  of  the  last  expression.

[7998/]

[7998g]

IX.i.<§>8.]  VARIATIONS  DEPENDING  ON 12'.  401

H  i

H.fdv\cos.{iv-{-iW'}-A)  z==  constant-}-  —  . sin.(itj-f  i V-}-a) — H.  —  .fdv.cos.{iv  -j-  i V-f-  a). [8000]

If  in  this  last  term  we  substitute  the  following  value  of dv*

we  shall  get,

—  H.4:  .fdv.cos.(iv+i'^+A)  =  ^H,  ^ .  ^"'^^""'^ .  f"^  .cos.(ivJri'v'+A\ .  [8002]

This  term  is  much  less  than  the  integral,

H.fdv'.cos.(w+  i  V+a), [7998]  [8003]

dv=:'^.^ V^"-^^-^'^  [8001]

r2 *  \/a'.(l— e-S)  '

7"

when  — is  a  small  fraction  ; it  is  also  diminished  considerably  by  the

[8004]

factor  ^ : for a.(l — e) is the perihelion distance of the  comet

V/a'.(l— e'2)  '  ^  ^  ^

:{68r'],  and  this  distance  is  much  less  than  the  values  of  a',  corresponding
rto  the  three  superior  planets.  The  integral  expression  [7998]  is  therefore
reiy  nearly  represented  by,

H

^[  H.fdv'. COS.  (iv-\-  i  V+ A)  :=  constant  +  -ry  .  sin.  (iv  -f  i  V-f-A).  [8005]

To  obtain  a  more  correct  value  of  this  integral,  we  must  add  to  its  first  value [8006]

lion  [8002]. Substituting  in  [8002;
/2  a'2.(l— e'2)'.{l  +  e.cos.(y— 7tf)}2

/S3

the  integral  expression  [8002]. Substituting  in  [8002],  for -^ , its  value, f [8007]

a2.  (1— e^)?!  l-}-e'.cos.{v—i^')l

[8008]

*  (3804) Dividing  the  expression  [7996]  by  that  in  [7997],  and  then  multiplying  the

r^.dv'  . .  . .  LoOOla]

^quotient  by — ^, we  get  [8001]  ;  substituting  this  in  the  last  term  of  [8000],  it  becomes

^  [800U]

as  in  [8002]. This  is  very  small,  because — is  supposed to  be  quite  small. Moreover

the  factor V/^^3  ==  ^^^^^^^  .  \ Z^, is  small,  since e'  is  small, and  e  nearly [8001c]
\/a'.{l—e'2) \/a'.{l-e') V l+«

equal  to  1  ;  so  that  this  factor  becomes  nearly  equal  to v  "•v_~^) .  ^g  • which is very [8001rf]

small,  because  the  perihelion  distance  of  the  comet a.(l — e),  is  supposed  to  be  much  less

than  the  mean  distance  d  of  the  disturbing  planet  from  the  sun. Hence  it  is  evident  that „aai  -.

[8001  e]
if  we  neglect  the  integral  [8002]  we  shall  obtain  the  expression  [8005]  for  an  approximate

value  of  the  integral  of  the  function  [7998].

t  (3805) Dividing  /  [7995c]  by  r  [7995],  and  squaring  the  quotient,  we  get  [8008]. [8008a]
VOL* IV.  101

402  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  C61.

we  can,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  c',  develop  the  integral  expression

[8002]  in  a  series  of  terms  of  the  form,
[8009]  H'.fdv',sm.{sv-{- s'v'-\-^)'^

and  we  may  integrate  each  of  these  terms  by  the  method  we  have  just

explained. Thus  we  shall  have,  in  a  very  converging  manner,  the  value  of
[8010]  H.fdv\sm.{iv-\-i'v'+^) ; [7998]

therefore  %oe  shall  have,  by  analytical  formulas,  the  values  of  the  elements  in

the  superior  part  of  the  orbit.

9. We  can,  by  the  preceding  formulas,  calculate  the  perturbations  which

rsoio'l ^^^  comet  of  1759  suffers  in  its  successive  revolutions,  and  predict  its  next

appearance.* To  do  this,  we  must  proceed  in  the  following  manner. We

*  (3806)  This  was  published  by  the  author  in  1805 ;  and  the  calculations  which  he
has  proposed  were  afterwards  made  by  several  persons;  particularly  by  Damoiseau,
Burckhardtj  Rosenberger,  Pontecoulant  and  Lubbock. The  work  of  Damoiseau  is  given

[8009a]  in  detail,  in  the  Memorie  della  reale  Accademia  delle  Scienze  di  Torino,  Torao  xxiv,
1820 ;  the  co-ordinates  of  the  comet,  and  the  perturbations  relative  to  Jupiter,  being  made
for  every  degree  of  the  value  of  u,  as  in  [7945].  In  calculating  the  action  of  Saturn,  the
intervals  in  the  value  of  u  are  2° ;  in  those  of  Uranus  6°.  The  method  used  by  him
is  similar  to  that  in  <§.  3,  9.  of  this  book. In  the  Connais&ance  des  tans  for  1S32,  page

[80096]  25,  &c.,  he  gives  an  abstract  of  this  method,  with  an  additional  calculation  of  the  action  of
the  earth  upon  the  comet  in  the  year  1759,  when  it  passed  quite  near  to  the  earth,  so  as
to  affect  the  mean  motion  and  the  time  of  its  revolution.  Any  person  engaged  in
calculations  of  this  kind  will  do  well  to  look  over  these  memoirs,  to  see  the  manner  in
which  he  has  arranged  the  numerical  process,  which  may  serve  as  a  model  for  such
computations. Similar  calculations  have  also  been  made  by  Pontecoulant,  who  gained  the

[8009c  1  prize  proposed  by  PAcademie  des  Sciences  of  Paris,  on  this  subject,  in  the  year  1829.
The  results  of  his  labors  are  given,  in  a  very  abridged  form,  in  the  Connaissance  des  terns
for  1833,  page  104,  &c. ;  and  afterwards,  in  the  volume  for  the  year  1837,  page  102.  In
this  last  calculation  he  has  altered  the  mass  of  Jupiter,  to  conform  to  the  late  observations
of  Professor  Airy  and  others  [67876,  &,c.],  and  has  also  computed  the  action  of  the  earth
upon  the  comet,  before  passing  the  perihelion  in  1759.  Rosenberger  has  likewise  calculated
the  elements  of  this  orbit  at  the  time  of  its  former  appearances,  and  has  given  the  results  of
his  calculations  in  vol.  8,  9,  of  Schumacher's  Astronomische  Nachrichten.  Lubbock  has
also  made  some  calculations  on  its  elements,  in  the  Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society
of  London,  vol.  4,  &ic.  These  are  the  most  important  works  upon  this  comet ;  but  the
restricted  limits  of  the  present  commentary  prevent  us  from  inserting  a  minute  account  of
them ;  and  we  shall  merely  give  the  final  results,  or  the  elements  of  the  orbit  of  the  comet
at  the  time  of  the  perihelion  in 1835,  according  to  the  calculations  of  Pontecoulant,

IX.i.<^9.]

ELEMENTS  OF  HALLEY'S  COMET.

403

must  begin  with  a  new  and  very  careful  discussion  of  the  observations  of  the
comet,  at  the  times  of  its  appearance  in  1682  and  1759;  and  must  then [8011]
determine  the  elements  of  the  orbit  at  these  two  epochs,  supposing  it  to

Damoiseau  and Lubbock. The  comparison  of  these  results  will  show  the  degree  of
correctness  which  has  been  obtained  in  the  computation  of  the  elements  of  this  orbit.

Passage  of  the  perihelion  in  1835,  mean  time  at  Paris,

Place  of  the  perihelion  in  the  orbit,

Longitude  of  the  ascending  node,

Inclination  of  the  orbit,

Ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis, . .
Semi-major  axis,

Pontdcoulant.

November  12'^^y,6

304^  SI"*  43*

55 30 00

17 44 24

0,9675212

17,99755

Damoiseau.

November  4'^*y,32

304^^  27"'  24*

55 09 07

17 41 05

0,9673055

17,9852

Lubbock,

Oct'r  30^^y,1993

SOid  23"«  39*

55 03 59

17 42 50

0,967348

17,98355

Since  writing  the  preceding  part  of  this  note,  the  comet  has  again  appeared ;  and,  at  the
time  of  printing  this  page,  is  visible  in  the  heavens,  not  far  distant  from  the  place
corresponding  to  the  elements  of  Mr.  Pontecoulant ;  but  the  time  of  its  appearance  has  not
yet  been  sufficiently  long  to  enable  astronomers  to  estimate  correctly  its  present  path,  so  as
to  compare  it  with  the  preceding  elements.

The  method  of  calculating  the  variations  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit  of  the  disturbed
body,  and  then  using  these  corrected  elements  in  finding,  its  place  at  any  given  time,  has
become  very  important,  within  a  few  years,  on  account  of  its  great  use  in  computing  the
places  of  the  very  small  planets  Ceres,  Juno,  Pallas,  Vesta,  and  the  comets  of  Encke  and
Biela ;  the  inclinations  and  excentricities  of  these  orbits  being  so  great  that  the  development
in  a  series,  according  to  the  powers  and  products  of  these  quantities,  which  is  used  with  the
other  planets,  and  the  tabular  forms  of  the  corrections  of  their  mean  places,  cannot  be
successfully  applied  to  these  small  bodies.  The  methods  of  making  such  calculations  may
be  seen  in  the  works  mentioned  in  the  former  part  of  this  chapter ;  also  in  the  treatise  of
Bessel,  on  the  comet  of  1807  ;  in  that  of  Hansen,  on  the  theory  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  ;  or
in  that  of  Airy,  in  the  Nautical  Almanac  for  1 837,  &:c.  Instead  of  computing  the  variations
of  the  elements  by  means  of  integral  formulas  fQdu  [7945'],  for  every  degree  of  the
excentric  anomaly  u,  as  La  Place  has  directed  in  this  chapter,  it  has  been  found  convenient
to  compute  these  integrals  for  equal  intervals  of  time;  as,  for  example,  10,  20  or  30  days,
he.  Thus,  in  the  abovementioned  work  of  Bessel,  he  uses  the  interval  of  30  days,  which
is  taken  as  the  unit  of  time.  In  this  case  the  formulas  for  the  computation  of  da,  de,  he.
require  different  developments  from  those  which  have  been  given  in  this  chapter  ;  and  on
account  of  the  importance  of  the  subject  we  have  here  given  these  formulas,  with  the
necessary  explanations.

To  avoid  references  to  other  parts  of  the  work  for  a  definition  of  the  symbols,  we  shall
here  observe  that.

Elements

ofHalley's

comet.

[8009e]

[8009c']

Methods

of
computing

the
variations
of  the
elements
of  the
orbit  of
a  comet
or  planet.

[8009/1

[S009g]
[8009A]

[8009t]

404

PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.

[Mec.  Cel.

[8011']

move  in  an  ellipsis,  whose  greater  axis  corresponds  to  the  duration  of  the
revolution  from  1682  to  1759. Then  using  the  elements  of  1682,  we  may

Symbols.

[8009A;]

[8009/]

[8009m]
[8009n]
[8009o]

[8009p]
[8009g]
[8009r]

[8009s]
[8009f ]
[8009u]
[8009u]
[8009«;]

[8009a:]
[80093/]

[80092]

[8010a]
[80106]

X,  y,  Zj  represent  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  disturbed  body  m ;  the  axis  of  x
being  the  line  drawn  in  the  invariable  ecliptic  from  the  sun  towards  the  fixed  first
point  of  Aries ;  the  axis  of  y  is  perpendicular  to  that  of  x,  and  is  drawn  in  the
invariable  ecliptic  towards  the  first  point  of  Cancer.  The  axis  of  z  is  drawn
through  the  sun,  perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic,  and  towards  the  north  pole  of
the  ecliptic  j
x',  ?/,  !sf ;  x",  y",  z",  &c.  represent  respectively  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  disturbing

bodies  m',  m",  &c.  corresponding  to  the  same  fixed  axes  ;
r  /,  r",  &c.  are  the  radii  vectores  of  the  bodies m,  rd^  rd' ,  &z;c.  respectively;
f,f',f",  &;c.  the  distances  of  the  planets  m',  ml',  rd'\  &tc.  respectively  from  m ;

r  =  the  true  longitude  of  the  disturbed  body  m,  which  is  supposed  to  be  measured
from  the  first  point  of  Aries,  along  the  fixed  ecliptic  to  the  node,  by  the  quantity
^,  and  then  along  the  orbit  of  the  planet  m  by  the  quantity  v — & ;

a  =  the  mean  distance  of  the  body  m  from  the  sun  ;

e  =  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  of  the  body  m,  in  terms  of  a  as  the  unit ;

tji  =  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion  of  the  body  m,  counted  from  the  fixed  first  point
of  Aries,  along  the  fixed  ecliptic  to  the  node,  by  the  quantity  &,  and  then  along
the  orbit  of  the  planet  by  the  quantity  ta — & ;

6  =  the  longitude  of  the  node  of  the  body  m,  on  the  fixed  ecliptic  ;

y  =  the  inclination  of  the  orbit  of  the  body  m,  to  the  fixed  ecliptic  ;

n  =  the  mean  sideral  motion  of  the  body  m,  in  a  unit  of  time  ;

s  =  the  longitude  of  the  epoch,  counted  upon  the  fixed  ecliptic ;  hence,
fndt-\-s  corresponds,  in  the  variable  ellipsis,  to  what  is  called  the  mean  longitude  in  the
invariable ellipsis. This  longitude  is  supposed to  be  measured  on  the  ecliptic
from  the  first  point  of  Aries  to  the  node,  and  then  upon  the  plane  of  the  orbit.

Now  if  we  have  computed,  for  any  time,  the  values  of  the  variable  elements  a,  e,  -m,  dj  y,
n,  s,  we  can  find,  by  them,  the  place  of  the  body  w?,  supposing  the  mean  longitude  in  the
variable  ellipsis  to  be  fndt-\-z ;  and  using  the  variable  or  computed  values  of  w,  s,  without
altering  the  time  t.

The  formulas  for  computing  the  variations  of  the  elements  have  already  been  given  in
[5751,  5786,  5787,  57736,  5785A,  «,  7879],  supposing  the  mass  m  of  the  disturbed  planet
to  be  so  very  small,  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  sun  M=\,  that  it  may  be  neglected;
and  then  ^=zM-\-m.  =  l-{-wi  [530'"'],  may  be  put  equal  to  unity  ;  as  can  always  be  done
in  computing  the  place  of  either  of  the  newly  discovered  planets,  or  of  the  periodical
comets.  In  other  words,  we  may  more  accurately  express  the  masses  of  the  disturbing
bodies  m',  m",  kc.  in  parts  of  the  sum  of  the  masses  M-\-m,  taken  as  unity.  For
convenience  of  reference  we  shall  here  give  the  formulas  we  have  just  mentioned,  together

„__ , ^^ da dn ds de dvi dy d&

IX.  i.  §  9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING Tt'  H'  Tt'  Tt^  Tt^  Tt'  di

405

determine,  by  the  preceding  method,  the  alterations  in  the  elements  and  in

.  rsoii"!

the  mean  anomaly,  in  the  three  first  quadrants  of  the  excentric  anomaly,  or

with  the  expressions  of  the  abridged  symbols  .^,  B,  C, A',  B',  C;  which  will  be  used
in  the  course  of  this  note.

K=ni.  —

r3

v^{{^-^n-{y'-yf-H^-^fl '

[7802]

,A  =  na^  =  1 ; whence ^a  =  a^n ; [7857,  SOlOct]

da  =  —2a^.dR  ; [5786]

dn  = SanAR ; [7879]

. _-^^.ji_^/X.r^|.(f)+2„,„,,g); [5787]

fe= 22£:^iE2.(^)-?^.diJ; [5751]

[57736]

(dR\  mV , m\(x— x^)

•^  =  W  ""  "^  ■*" /3 '

m'.(z— 2^)

C^  s=  — sin.y.cos.(«— 5)  ;

/3 '

1^  =  cos.^.sin.  {y — 5)  4-sin.d.cos.y.cos.(tJ — 6) ;
1^  =  sin.fl.sin.(u — 5) — cos.^.cos.y.cos.(tJ — d)  ;
A'=:-Jlx-\'By-\-Cz',
B' = A.\cos.6.sm.{v — fl)+sin.5.cos.7.cos.(i? — 6}
-|-J5.{sinJ.sin.(t; — ^)— cos.^.cos.y.cos.(v — ^|
—  C.sin.y.cos.(« — 6)
=^AA,-\-BB,-\-CC,

^ji,  £^  .sin.(v— ^+*)+B.  — -  .sin.(i;— 5-x)— C^-cos.(t;— ^.sin.y;

COS»T  cos*^

C  =— .^.sin.^.sin.y+S.cos.d.sin.y—  C.cos.y  j
tang.^  =  tang.^.cos.y ;
tang-x  =  cotang.d.cos.y.

VOL. IV.  102

Symbols

and

formulas.

[8010c]

[8010i]
[BOlOe]
[8010/]
[SOlOg-]

[8010A]
[8010i]

[8010A]

[8010/]
[8010OT]

[8010n]
[8OIO0]
[8010^]

[SOlQp']
[8010g]
[801 Or]

[SOlOr^
[8OIO5]

[8010*  ]
[8010m]
[8010u]

406  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  C61.

from w  =  0° to w  =  300°. In  the  last  quadrant  it  is  preferable  to  count
rsoii'"!

backwards,  from  the  epoch  of  1759  to  the  commencement  of  that  quadrant,

[SOlOtr]

The  values  of  x,  y,  z,  which  are  to  be  used  in  the  preceding  formulas,  may  easily  be
deduced  from  those  of  x',  y',  zf  [7866 — 7868],  by  changing  the  elements  X,  y,  v',  i'
[7863 — 7865] of the  planet m', into the corresponding quantities 7, ^, r — d, r,

a?,  y,  z. [8009^,  s,  0,  w]  relative  to  the  planet m  ;  hence  we  have,

[8010x]  a;  =  r.^cos.^.cos.(y — 5) — sin.lcos.7.sin.(w — d);  ;

[8OIO3/]  y  =  r.|sin.^.cos.(v — d)-j-cosAcos.7.sin.(r — ^)]  ;

[8010z]  2;  =  r.sin.7.sin.(v— d).

Taking  the  differentials  of  these  expressions  in  the  invariable  ellipsis,  where  ^,  7,  are
constant,  we  get, by  substituting the  values  of the  coefficients  of  f?r, deduced  from

«^,  Ay, [8010;r,  y,  z],

dz,  X  .  .

[8011a]  ^'^  =  dr. \-  rdv.  { — cos.d.sin.(v — 6) — sin.d.cos.7.cos.(« — d) }  ;

[80116]  dy  =  rfr.  —  -j-  rdv.{ — sin.d.sin.(u — ^)4-cos.d.cos.7.cos.(t? — 6)] ;

[8011c]  dz  =  dr. {-  r£Z«.sin.7.cos.(i; — &),

These  differentials  being  of  the  first  order,  are  also  satisfied  in  the  variable  ellipsis
[1167"].  In  like  manner  the  general  differential  of  R  [8010c],  relative  to  the  co-ordinates
of  the  body  m,  which  is  usually  denoted  by  the  characteristic  d,  is  as  in  [8011/],  and
being  of  the  first  order  of  differentials,  holds  good  in  the  variable  ellipsis  [1167"].
Substituting  in  [8011/]  the  values  [8010n,  o,p],  it  becomes  as  in  [8011^]  ;  and  by  using
the  values  of  da:,  dy,  dz  [8011a,  6,  c],  it  becomes  as  in  [8011^];  the  symbols  A',  B'
[8OIO5',  r],  being  introduced  for  abridgment ',

[8011/]  ^^=(^)-^^  +  (^)-^2^+(S)-^^

[SOllg-]  •  =iJldx-\-Bdy-\'Cdz

dr
[801]fc]  ='^''- ^''  '■^"•

From  [7996]  we  get  dv  [8011  A:],  by  using /«  =a^ft  [8010</]. Taking  the  differential
r801in ^^  log.r  [7995],  we  get  the  first  expression  [801 IZ];  and by  substituting  the  value  of
l-|-e.cos.(i; — «) [7995],  and dv [8011A:], it  becomes  as  in  the  second  form [8011/].
Substituting  the  values  [8011A:,  Z],  containing  dt,  in  [8011  A],  we  get[8011mj;

[8011rf]

[8011i]

t __  dt.\/a.{\  —  e^)  __  a^n.dt.\/ \  -  e^ .

dr  edv.s\n.{v — •n)  anedt.s\nJ{v — "W)  ^

t^^^"  ^  7  =  l-f€.cos.{t;-icT)  ~ r.v/(l-€2) '

[801 1  ffi]  d  jR  = , .  — ^-^ ^ .  A  'dt—  a^n./rZls.  —  ,dt.

Y 1 — t/^  r  r

da dn ds de d-a dy d6
IX.  i.  ^  9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING ^.j^,^,-^,^,^?,-.

which  is  the  same  thing  as  to  fix  the  origin  of  the  angle  u  at  the  perihelion
of  1759,  and  to  count  backwards  towards  1682,  making  u  negative,  and

407

[8011""]

Substituting  this  value  of  dR  in  [8010/,^],  we  finally  obtain,  ^^

<Za  =  —  ^==^ .  — ^ '.A'dt4-2a*n.\/l—e''i.—  .dt:  [801ln]

yl — e2  r  i  v  j.  j

J  Sa^n^e sin.(v— *) ., , _ „  . . B'  ^"

dn  = .J— -g .  —^ ' .  A'dt—  3a%2.^i — e^.  —  .  f?^  [80i  lo]

From  the  general  difTerenlial  of  R,  relative  to  the  co-ordinates  of  the  body  m  [8011^],
we  can  easily  deduce  its  partial  differentials  relative  to  6,  7,  a,  e,  zs,  which  occur  in  the
formulas  [8010A — m],  by  noticing,  in  the  second  member  of  [8011^],  the  parts  of  dx,  dy,
dz,  depending  on  the  quantity  which  is  considered  as  variable.  Thus  if  7  be  the  proposed
variable  quantity,  the  expression  [8011^]  will  give,

■. . (f)=-(l)+-(l)+<|)-

Taking  the  partial  differentials  of  x,  y,  z  [8010a;,  y, «],  relative  to  y,  we  obtain,

(  — j  =  r.sin.^.sin.7.sin.(«-fl) ; f  —  j=-r.cos.fl.sin.7.sin.(i;-5)  ; f  —  j=r.cos.y.sin.(i;-^); [8011r]

substituting  these  in  [SOUS'],  and  using  the  abridged  symbol  C  [8010^],  we  get,

(^)^-^''''^'M^''^)i ^  [8011*1

hence  the  expression  of  dd  [8010m]  becomes,  ,

^^==/r=i^.sin.y  •  CV.sin.(t,-0.  [8011^

If  we  take  the  partial  differential  of  R,  relative  to  v,  we  get,  in  like  manner  as  in  [801  Ig^],

The  partial  differentials  of  the  expressions  [8010a:,  y,z],  relative  to  v,  become,  by  using
the  abridged  symbols  A,,  B,, C,  [8010p'],

(1)=-^'-' (^)=-^--' (1)=-^'-  '"""

Substituting  these  in  [801  Iw],  and  using  the  abridged  value  of  B'  [8010r'J,  we  obtain,

(^A\  ^  ~(^^^-f  55^4-  CCy  =  —B'r.  [8011tr]

If  we  use  the  expressions  [8011  w,  m],  we  find  that  de  [8010*]  becomes  as  in  [8011a:],
and  by  reduction  as  in  [801  ly]  ;

«n^Vl=:ig p.,_«.(l-e^)  5 one^ ^  sin.(.-^)  ^^^t-aHyiZ:^^.  -M  [8011.]

e  c  (v^l— e2  r  ^ ^  de

=-  a^n.v/r^.  !!^fc^ .^'^^+  anVi^^  E .  J a^,^i-e^)^r^].dt.  [SOUy]

Substituting  in  d^  [8010^],  the  values  {—\  =  —B'r  [801  Iw],  and  (—J=:A'.—,
[80 11  A],  we  get,

408  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [M6c.  Cel.

using  the  elements  of  the  orbit  and  epoch  which  were  observed  in  1 759.
In  the  first  and  last  quadrants  of  the  ellipsis,  the  comet  is  nearest  to  the

dzi

ahidt.i/l — c2 cos.(v— cr)  andt

[80112]  <?^  = 7 —^r ••^'+^7i^^-'--sin.(«— «).l2+c.cos.(t;— w)}.B'.

Putting  this  expression  of  cIts  equal  to  that  in  [5783],  namely, dia=-'— — V^—^^  (~J~\
and  then  dividing  by — V —^  ^  ^g  obtain,

[8012a]  (^)  =— a.  ^J!^:tz^  •'^'—  fl^i •  sin.(r— w).  1 2+e.cos.(r-^)  j .B\

The  partial  differential  of  Rj  relative  to  a,  is  easily  deduced  from  [8011  A],  which  gives
(  — J  =  —  '[j-)i because  a  depends  on  r  only  ;  but  from  [7995]  we  have,

[8012c]  I \^ ;  =  — ; hence (—)  =  —  .—  =  —  .

\da/ l-j-€.cos.(t>— to) a  \da/ r a a

Substituting  this  value  and  that  of (-7-)  [8012a], we find  that the  formula  [801 OA]

becomes  as  in  [80 ISC'],  or  by  reduction  as  in  [8012<rj ;

[8012cT ^^= r •  ^  1  Vl=^'}-^«-  —7—  -^  +  lip  •  sin.(«-«).[2+e.cos.(t^w)].5'^

-\-'^andt.A'

[8012<fl

Ca2nrff.(l— e2) /I  A cos.(u— «) ,  _^ ,  ■) ^,

+  T^  •  (7!^  — l).r.sin.(«— to).  J  2+e.cos.(i?-TO)  } .  B',
We  may  deduce  the  expression  of  (y-) from  that  of  \-~\  [8011s]. For  if  we  divide
the  value  of  dy  [8010?]  by  that  of  d^  [8010m],  and  multiply  the  result  by —  ( — \  ,

(dR\

we

shall  get,

fdR\  dy (dR\

Now  without  altering  the  values  of a,  e,  v — to,  r,  x,  y,  5:, we  can  suppose  the  plane  of

the  orbit  of  the  body  m  to  revolve  on  the  radius  vector  r,  as  an  axis,  so  as  to  chanj'e  d
[8012/"! .  .

'• "^  •' into d-j"^^* ^"^d y into y-\-dy; observing  that the  planes of the  two successive

differential  triangles,  described  by  the  radius  vector  in  the  two  equal  and  successive  elements
I- Si of  time  dt,  intersect  each  other  in  the  line  r,  or  radius  vector  corresponding  to  the  middle

of  these  two  times.  Then  the  ratio  of  d&  to  dy  can  be  found,  hy  putting  the  differentials
[8012^] of  any  of  the  co-ordinates  x,  y,  z  [8010a;,  y,  z'\  equal  to  nothing,  considering  6,  y,  v — 6,

as  the  only  variable  quantities. If  we  put  for brevity v —  4  =  v,  we  can  determine  dv

[8012i] ,  .  . ^  /z\

by putting, as m [8012A], <?.f  —  j  =(Z.(sin.7.sin.v)  =  0 [8010;?], which gives

^^^,,»T,  .  o.  ^^^ ^^,,^,-r«,,,,^ da dn ds de d'a dy d6  .^^

IX.  i.  ^  9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING -,_,-,  ^  ,  ^ ,  ^ ,  ^ .  409

[sols']

[8012*]

disturbing  planets,  particularly  Jupiter  the  most  considerable  of  all  of  them.
It  is  farthest  off  in  the  second  and  third  quadrants. Therefore  it  is  important

€?y.cos.7.sin.v+c?v.sin.7.cos.v=:0 ; whence dv  =  — tZy.cotang.y.tang.v. This is  to

X

be  substituted  in  the  differential of  —  =  cos.^.cos.v-sin J.cos.y.sin.v  fSOlOa;!, and  the ,„„,«,,

r  /  u  J'  [8012i]

result  put  equal  to  nothing  [8012A]  ;  hence  we  have,  without  reduction,

0= — £?^.(sin.d.cos.v-j-cos.5.co3.7.sin.v)-f-(Zv.(— cos.^.sin.v — sin.^.cos.y.cos.v)  18012ml

-|-«?y.sin.d.sin.7.sin.v.

Substituting  the  value  of  dv  [801 2A:],  we  find  that  the  term  depending  on  dy  becomes,

(  sin.^  y  "i

<?y.cotang.y.tang.v.  <  cos.^.sin.v  -|-  sin.^.cos.y.cos.v-j-  sin.4.  — '- —  .cos.v >  ;  [8012n]

or  by  reduction,

\  sin  /i.cos»v  ^  t&Dff.v

<fy.cotan2;.y.tang.v.-5COS.^.sin.v  -\ — — ^>=<Zy. -^-=— .Jcos.^.cos.y.sin.v+sinJ.cos.v?. [8012ol

°  ° C  cos.y )  sm.y *  '  j  •-  ••

Substituting  this  in  [8012m],  and  then  dividing  by  the  factor sin.^.cos.v-f-cos.4.cos.y.sin.v,
which  occurs  in  both  terms,  we  get,

0=—dd+dy.-r-^—, or -f-=  —.  [8012ol

sin.y  d& tang.v

Substituting  this  in  [801 2e],  we  finally  obtain,  by  re-substituting v  =  v — d  [8012iJ,  and
using  [8011s],

/^N  _  __  _sin^  fdR^^  CV.sin.y.cos.(t,-^) ;  [8012/]

\dd  J  tang.(t;-^)  \dy  /  ' \ )y

hence  the  expression  of  dy  [8010/J  becomes,

^^  ==  S/\ZZT^  •  ^  '••COS.(r--^) .  [8012p"]

We  can  put  the  mean  longitude  in  the  variable  ellipsis  fndt-\'S  [8009y],  under  a  form
which  is  more  convenient  for  the  present  purpose,  by  substituting s=s^-\-ftdn\ whence
we  have  fndi-\-s=f{ndt-\-tdn)-{-5^=znt-\-s^', and  this  last  expression  is  of  the  same [8012r]
form  as  in  the  fixed  ellipsis,  changing  the  constant  elements n,  s,  of  the  invariable  ellipsis^
into  the  variable  elements n,  s^,  corresponding  respectively  to  the  time  i,  for  which  these
elements  have  been  computed. Taking  the  differential  of  the  expression  of  s=s^-\-ftdn
[80 1 2 j],  and  transposing tdn,  we  get ds^=ds — tdn; and  by  substituting  the  value  of [80l2f]
dn  [801  lo],  we  obtain  the  value  of  ds^  [S012v],  relative  to  the  variable  ellipsis,  to  be  used
with  the  variable  value  of  n, in  forming n^-j-s^, or  the  mean  longitude  in  the  variable [8012u]
ellipsis  ;  hence  we  have,

ds^  —  ds  —  -7== .  sin .  {v—zs) .  — .  A'dt-\-3a^n^.\/lZr^.  — .  B  'dt.  [8012i;  ]

There  is  yet  another  correction  to  be  made  in  the  expression  of ds^ ,  c?zj,  arising  from rgQin  i
the  peculiar  manner  in  which  the  angles  r,  ts,  are  counted ;  the  part 6 of  these  angles
VOL. IV.  103

^^^  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8012"] to  obtain  as  accurately  as  possible,  in  the  first  and  last  quadrants,  the  position

[8012m/]
[8012j:]

r8012y]
[8012z]
[8013a]
[80136]
t8013c]

Oifieren-
tiali  of  the
elements.

[8013rf]
[8013c]

[8013/1

[8013g]
[8013^]

[8013t ]
[8013ife]

being  measured  on  the  fixed  plane,  and  the  remaining  parts  v — 6,  -us — &,  upon  the
plane  of  the  variable  orbit  [8009o,  r] .  To  estimate  this  correction  we  shall  take  the
differential  of  v=^&-\-w  [8012i],  and  by  substituting  successively  the  values  of  dv,  dy,  d6,
[8012A:,p,  801U], 1— cos.y  =  2.sin.2^y, sin.y=2.sin.iy.cos.Jy  [1,  31]  Int.,  we  get,

dv  =  dd  4-dv  =  dd  —  dy.  -r-^  .  tang.v  =  d& — rfd.cos.y  =  2c/^.sin.^  i  y
'  sin.y  °

andt

—  -rr^-—- — .2.sin.2Jy.C'r.siD.(t;— ^)
y/l— e2.sin.y  '^  ^ '

andt

.tang.Jy.CV.sin.(t; — d).

Hence  it  appears  that  the  correction  [8012a;]  must  be  added  to  the  angles  dv,  d-a,  and
as  this  does  not  affect  the  true  anomaly  v — «,  because  in  noticing  this  term  only  we  have
dv — c?«=0,  it  will  not  affect  the  mean  anomaly;  consequently  we  may  apply  the
correction  to  the  epoch  s^,  instead  of  applying  it  to  v.  We  must  therefore  add  together
the  quantities  [8012«,  2;],  to  obtain  the  complete  expression  of  ds/,  and  must  also  add  the
expressions  [80llz,  8012z],  to  get  the  complete  value  of  dtji]  so  that  we  shall  finally  have
the  values  of  ds,  dvs,  contained  in  the  following  table  [8013/,  K],  where  we  have  collected,
for  convenience  of  reference,  the  complete  differentials  of  the  elements  j  and  to  preserve
the  symmetry  in  the  notation,  we  have  omitted  the  mark  placed  below  the  symbol  ds^
[8012r,  &c.],  and  have  given  its  complete  value  in  [8013/*],  without  the  accent.  The
formulas  in  this  table,  taking  them  in  succession  as  they  occur,  correspond  respectively  to
those  in  [8011n,o],  [8012^,  w,  ;s],  [80Ily],  [8011^,8012;r],  [8012/J,  [8011^];

dn  =
d

2a3ne sin.(v — zs)
V/l— c2  r

Sa^^e sin.(i' — "CJ)

.w3'c/<+2a%.v/r

.e2. — .dt  :
r

B'

a%.(l-e2)

.A'dt—Sc^n^.\/T:::r^.  —  .dt;

+  1  7  •  (7=i|---l)-^-si«-(«--^)-P+e.cos.(r--«)]-f  3a3n«.v/l^::i5.  f  \  .B'dt

+

/l  — e2

,tang.Jy.r.sin.(w — 6).C'dt ;

de=  —  a^n.^i  —6

sin.(r — w)

an.

.tang.Jy.r.sin.(» — &).C'dt ;

e  r

dy  = '/rzr^ '  '^'^^^'  (^^ — ^)  •  ^'^^  >
dd  = /T-^:- —  •  '■•sin-  (v—6) .  C'dt

I /I «2.sin.»v  V  '

.  r.sin.('» — to)  .  \  2-j-c.cos.(t> — w) } .  Bdt

da dn de de d-a dy d6  ,.,

IX.  i.  ^  9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING -,-,-,-,^,-^,^. 411

and  distance  of  the  comet  from  those  planets  whose  attractions  mav  produce

*'  [8012"'!

an  alteration  of  several  degrees  in  their  elongations  from  the  comet. To

The  expressions  [801 3rf — k]  are  to  be  integrated  by  the  method  of  quadratures,  which  is

particularly  explained  in [7929a — 7930e]. The  limits  of  these  integrals  are  from  t=0

to  t  =  i. Now  if  we  suppose  that  the elements  a,  n,  s,  e,  -a,  y,  ^,  correspond  to  the [8013m]

time /=0, and the  same  symbols  accented  correspond  to  the  time t  =  t^ we  shall [soiSn]

obtain  the  value  of  any  one  of  the  elements  a',  n',  /,  &c.  ;  as,  for  example, a!  by a

formula  similar  to a'  =  a-\-f^a^dt\ a^  being  used  for  brevity  to  represent  the  coefficient rgoiSol

of  dt  in  the  second  member  of  da  [SOlSf/J.

In  finding  the  integrals  of  the  second  members  of  [8013fZ — ^],  as  in  [80l3n,  Stc],  we

ought  in  strictness  to  use  the  variable  elements a,  e,  k,c.  ;  but  as  the  quantities  da,  dn,

ds,  he.  are  of  the  same  order  as  the  disturbing  forces,  we  can  suppose  the  elements  a,  e,  &,c.

to  be  constant,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  of  the  square  of  the  disturbing  forces,  and

can  then  use  the  values  of  these  elements  corresponding  to t=0. After  having  calculated

the  variations  of  the  elements,  at  the  end  of  any  time i=T, if  there  should  be  found  any

.  .  [8013r]

essential  change  in  their  values,  we  can  use,  for  the  intervals  which  follow  the  epoch T,

the  elements  corresponding to  that  epoch,  instead  of  the  original  elements  corresponding

to  i  =  0.

We  shall,  as  in  [4079],  taJce  the  sun^s  mean  distance  from  the  earth  for  the  unit  of  linear ro/^^o  i
measure,  and  shall  suppose  the  excentricity  e  of  any  body  to  be  expressed  in  parts  of  the
mean  distance  of  that  body  from  the  sun. The  circular  arcs  n,  dn,  ds,  dts,  dy,  d&,  are ro^^q^i
expressed,  in  the  preceding  formulas [8013c^ — o],  in  terms  of  the  radius, as  the  unit  of
measure  ;  but  for  practical  purposes  it  is  more  convenient  to  denote  them  by  seconds. We
shall  therefore  suppose  that  the  arcs  [8013^]  are  expressed  in seconds,  in  the  formulas rgnto  -i
[8013rf — Jc]  ;  and  to  render  the  formulas  homogeneous  we  shall  change n into n.sin.l",
when  necessary,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases  ; n being  the  number  of  seconds  in  the  planet's ,o«,q  i
mean  sideral  motion,  during  one  of  the  intervals  ivhich  is  taJcen  for  unity.

It  will  be  found  convenient  to  use  the  symbol  e  =sin.(p  [5985  line  1],  in  the  numerical
operations ;  and  from  this  we  easily  deduce  the  following  expressions,  which  occur  in
[SOldd—Jc]  ;

e  =  sin.(p;  ^fZIT^  =  cos.<p ;  y=^==  =  tang.cp ;  VliziL  =  cotang.(p ;  [8013tr]

1  1  1— cos.(p 2.sin.2i(p (2.sin.J(p.cos.i9)).sin.i<p sin.(p.sin.i^

^1 — e2  C0S.9  C0S.9  cos.cp  cos.cp.cos.4(p  cos.qj.cos.^ip [8013a:]

=  tang.9.tang.J(p;
(1— €2) /I  \ cos

/I  \  C0S.2(p

•  VTl^H  —^)  =  H^  .tang.<p.tang.^9  =  cos.ip.tang.i?.

We  shall  now  represent  the  coefficients  of di,  in  the  expressions  of  da,  dn,  ds,  de,  dzi,
dy,  d6  [80\3d—Jc],  by 6'a,  b'n,  6's,  6'e,  <5'w,  6'y,  6'd,  respectively  ; and  by  substituting

[8013y]
[8013z]

412  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Cel.

obtain  a  greater  degree  of  accuracy,  we  may  again  calculate the  alterations
of  the  elements  and  of  the  mean  anomaly  from  1 682,  using  the  greater  axis

in  these  formulas  the  symbols  [80iSw,x,  y],  also  ^=z-f-i  [7930c],  they  become  as  in
[8014z— p]  respectively.  Finally,  to  obtain  at  one  view  all  the  formulas  which  are  used
in  these  calculations,  we  have  inserted,  in  [80146 — A],  the  values  of  A,  B,  C,
A\  B'j  C,  •*^,  X  [SOlOn — v\ ;  the  symbols  being  the  same  as  in  [8009)t,  &;c.],  and  the
terms  which  are  between  the  braces  are  considered  as  constant  in  the  numerical
Table  of computations  of  the  formulas  [8014i — •«].

formulas.

[80141] .4  =  m'.  J  -  +  '-j^  ^  +m".  J  —  +  -j^r  \  +«"'•  •
[8014C1 5  =  »'.j^  +  !^j+»''.j|,+'5pj+S.c.;

[8oi«] c = »'.  j  I  +  '^*  I  +«".  I  ^  +  '5^*  j  +&C- ;

[6014c  ]  tang.^  =  tang.^.cos.y  ;  tang-x  =  cotang.^.cos.y ;

[8014/]  '^'  =  Ax-\-By-\-  Cz ;

[8014g-]  B'==A.  ^  .sin.(y— 5+^)+jB.  ^^  .sin.(t;— ^-x)— C.cos.(«>— d).sin.7 ;

[8014^]  C  = — ./^.sin.^.sin.y-fi^.cos.d.sin.y — C.cos.y ;

[8014i  ]  6'a  =  — 5  2a3.iang.(p.  n.  sin.l''}.^  .  A'-\-  {  2a'*.cos.(p.  n.  sin.l"} .  —  ;

[8014A;] ^•n= {SaS.tang.cp.w^.sin.l"!.^^^^^^^^  .^'— {3a3.cos.9.n2.sin.l"l.  ^';

((Sa. '- — .wj.r.sin.(i;-«)-j-(«.tang.(p.tang.5(p.n).r.sin.(v-ro).cos.(«-w)

.r.sm.(v — 6).C  j

[8014m]

[8014n]

CO8.9

oe  =.  — |a^.cos.(p.n.sm.r  |.  — ^^ .A

-f-<  a  . -: .Ji.sm.l >  . [a.cotang.cp.n.sin.r  j.iJ  r;

w  r o  >  cos.fv— 'CJ) -,  , C 2an > . ,  .  „,

a'w=  Ja2.cot.(p.n?. — ^ -.A'-\-  < f  .r.sm.(r— w).J5'

*  '  r  ' (.  sin.(p.cos.(p )  ^  '

+  {~]  .-in.(.-.).cos.(.-  .).^'  +  {  ^J^  I  ....n.(.^a).  C' ;
[80140] <5V  =  ^  c"^  1  .r.cos.(i;-d).  C  ;

6'6=\  — ^^^^—  J  .r.sin.(r— ^.C.
( cos.9.sin.y )  ^ '

[8014p]

IX.  i.  §9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING _,-,-,-,-,  ^,  -.

413

corresponding  to  that  epoch,  which  will  be  known  by  means  of  the  preceding
approximation. We  may  then,  at  25  degrees  of  excentric  anomaly,  use  the

[8012V]

The  values  of  ^a,  /n,  6's,  6'e,  6'ts,  6''y,  ^^,  represent  respectively  the  increments  of
ff,  n,  £,  e,  ra,  7,  d,  in  one  of  the  intervals  of  time  which  is  taken  for  unity,  ^sing,  in
their  computation,  the  values  of  r,  y,  a:,  y,  z,  Sic,  which  correspond  to  the  middle  of  the
proposed  interval,  according  to  the  directions  in  [79292:]  ;  so  that  for  the  first  interval  we
must  put  t  =  l  ;  for  the  second  interval  we  must  put  t=§;  and  generally  for  the  interval
1*4-1,  we  must  put  t  =i-{-l.  As  the  variations  which  are  to  be  computed  are  very  small,
it  will  not  be  necessary  to  find  the  values  of  r,  v,  x,  y,  z,  he.  to  any  great  degree  of
accuracy  ;  the  angles  v,  v',  he.  may  be  taken  to  the  nearest  minute,  and  the  distances  to
four  or  five  places  of  decimals  ;  and  we  may  remark  that  the  epochs  being  supposed  to
commence  at  noon,  at  the  meridians  of  Greenwich,  Berlin,  he,  most  of  these  quantities  can
be  found  by  inspection  in  the  Ephemeris,  computed  for  these  meridians ;  and  this  is  one  of
the  important  advantages  of  this  method  of  computing  the  variations  of  the  elements.  The
increment  6'a  is  expressed  in  parts  of  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  taken
as  unity.  The  increment  6'e  is  expressed  in  parts  of  the  mean  distance  of  the  planet  from
the  sun,  taken  as  unity.  The  other  quantities,  6'n,  6's,  b'-a,  6'y,  6'd,  are  expressed  in
seconds.  When  we  have  calculated  any  one  of  these  increments,  as  6'a,  for  any  number
of  successive  intervals,  the  whole  variation  of  a  through  the  whole  of  these  intervals,
which  we  shall  represent  by  Sa,  can  be  found  by  means  of  the  formula  [7929j:],
which  gives,

6a  =  sum  of  all  the  calculated  quantities  6'a

+  5T-  {first  difference  following  the  last  term — first  difference  preceding  the  first  term} .
We  have  supposed,  in  computing  this  formula,  that  the  interval  or  unit  of  time  is  so  small
that  the  fourth  differences  of  6' a  can  be  neglected  [7929/].  The  selection  of  an
appropriate  value  of  this  unit  or  interval  can  easily  be  made,  in  any  particular  case,  by
estimation,  from  the  results  of  an  actual  calculation.  Thus  if  we  take,  in  the  first  instance,
32  days  for  the  unit  of  time,  we  may  compute  the  variations  of  any  one  of  the  elements;
as,  for  example,  6'a  for  t=W''y%  t—48^''y%  ^=80<*''y%  &c.  ;  then  if  we  find  that
the  fourth  differences  are  too  important  to  be  neglected,  we  may  compute  the  values  of  6'a  for
the  intermediate  times,  f=24''»y%  t  =  40^^y',  &;c.,  also  for  <=8'''*y%-  by  this  means
the  unit  of  the  interval  is  reduced  to  16  days.  In  the  same  way  the  intervals  may
be  reduced  to  8  days,  if  the  fourth  differences,  with  the  interval  of  16  daysf,  are  too  great
to  be  neglected.  The  length  of  these  intervals  must  depend  very  much  upon  the  positions
of  the  large  disturbing  planets,  particularly  Jupiter;  and  when  this  planet  approaches  near
to  the  body  whose  orbit  is  required,  the  intervals  must  be  taken  shorter  than  in  other  parts
of  the  orbit.  Now  as  it  is  convenient  to  retain  the  same  interval  throughout  the  whole
calculation,  we  can  use  the  smallest  of  these  selected intervals  as  the  unit  of  time  ;  and

VOL. IV,  104

[80] 4g]
[8014r]

[80145]

[8014f]

Integrat-
ing by
quadra-
tures.

[8014u]

[8014v]

[8014m;]

Methods
of  com-
puting the
variations
of  the
elements
for  any
interval.

[80l4r]

[SOUy]

414

[8012^^1

PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [M^c.  Cel.

elements  of  the  new  ellipsis  corresponding  to  that  anomaly,  and  by  means  of
it  compute  the  alterations  it  suffers  from  25°  to  50°  of  anomaly. We  must

[80l4z ]

[8015a]
[8015&]

[8015c]

[8015rfj
[8015e]

[8015/]

[8015g-]
[8015/i]

[8015i  ]

when  the  disturbing  planet  is  at  a  great  distance  from  the  body,  we  may  calculate  the  value
of  6'a  for  every  second  or  third  interval,  and  then  compute  the  intermediate  values  by  the
usual  rules  of  interpolation.

As  an  example  we  may  take  the  elements  of  the orbit  of  Vesta  [4079t]  for  the  epoch
1831,  July  23'^^y%0'',  mean  time  at  Berlin. These  give,  at  the  time  of  that  epoch,

a  =  2,361484  ;  e  =  0,0885601  ;  £  =  84''  47"»  03' ;

^=249"  ll"  37';  ^  =  103''  20"'  28';  7= 1^  07"*  57*.

If  we  suppose  the  unit  of  time  to  be  8  days,  the  sideral  motion  of  the  body  during  that
interval  will  be  represented  by  n  =  8X977',7554  [4079i  hne  7].  We  shall  now  suppose
that  it  is  required  to  find  the  variations  of  these  elements,  in  the  48  days  immediately
following  the  epoch  ;  or,  in  other  words,  in  six  of  the  intervals  which  are  taken  for  unity.
In  this  case,  the  times  of  the  commencement  of  the  successive  intervals  are  July  23,  31  ;
August  8,  16,  24 ;  September  1,  9;  corresponding  respectively  to  t=0,  t  =  l,  t  =  2,
tz=3,  <=:4,  t=5,  t  =  6.  The  times  of  the  middle  of  these  intervals  are  July  27 ;
August  4,  12,  20,  28 ;  September  5  ;  corresponding,  in  the  formula  [7929i^],  to  the  values
i=0,  i  =  l,  i=2,  i  =  3,  i  =  4,  ^  =  5,  and  to  the  co-ordinates  y^^\  y^^\  y^^\
ym^  ym^  y^s)^  respectively  ;  then  the  formula  [7929w]  becomes.

By  means  of  this  formula  we  can  compute  the  whole  variation  of  any  one  of  the  elements
[8015a],  as,  for  example,  that  of  «,  which  is  represented  by  Sa,  during  the  proposed
period  of  48  days,  from  July  23  to  September  9.  For  if  we  suppose  that  the  values  of  6'a
in  the  successive  intervals  are  represented  by  (5V°^,  6'a^^\  6'd^\  8'a^^\  8'd^\  6'a^^^,  we
may  substitute  them  in  [8015e],  instead  of  y'-^\  y^^\  he. ;  and  then  that  formula  will
become.

We  here  see  that  the  first  differences  of  (5'a^°\  8'a'^^\  he.,  give  explicitly  the  following
series  of  quantities  ;

A.(5W0>,  A.d'a^^\  A.6'aP\  A.8'a^^\  A.S'a^^K
This  series  does  not  expressly  include  A.d'a'-^\  A.6'a^-^\  which  occur  in  [8015^];  but
they  may  be  obtained,  by  taking  the  second  or  a  higher  order  of  difierences  of  the  series  of
terms  [801 5A],  and  then  continuing  the  series  one  term  further,  at  its  commencement  and
termination,  by  the  usual  methods  of  differences,  as  in  [7938',  &c.].  If  we  change
successively  the  element  a  into  n,  s,  e,  zi,  7,  6,  in  the  formula  [8015^],  we  shall  get
the  whole  variations  of  these  elements,  which  we  shall  represent  by  5n,  <5s,  5e,  6-ss,  Sy,  66,

IX.  i.  <§>  9.] FORMULAS  FOR  COMPUTING

da dn ds de

d-a dy dd

dt'  dt'  di'  dt'

~di'  di'  di'

415

rectify  the  ellipsis  again  at  this  epoch,  and  calculate  in  the  ellipsis,  thus [8012^"]
rectified,  the  perturbations  from  50°  to 100°. In  like  manner  we must

respectively;  hence  the  corrected  elements  at  the  end  of  the  interval  of  f  =  43  days,
uamely  a',  n',  ^,  he,  will  become,

a'  =  a-{-Sa,  n' =  n-{-(^M,  £'=£-j-5s,  e'=e+(5e;

Having  computed,  in  this  manner,  the  corrected  elements  corresponding  to  the  time  t,
if  we  wish  to  find  the  planet's  place  at  that  time,  we  must  calculate  it  as  in  [8009y],  in  the
same  manner  as  if  the  body  were  moving  in  an  undisturbed  elliptical  orbit,  whose  elements
are  d,  n',  i ,  e',  to',  y' ,  b',  with  the  mean  longitude  n'f-|~^'5  ^^^is  last  quantity  being  the  same
as  if,  at  the  beginning  of  the  time,  its  mean  longitude  had  been  s',  and  its  mean  sideral
motion,  from  the  beginning  of  the  time,  h:id  been  n',  in  every  interval.  Finally  we  may
remark  that,  as  these  elements  a,  n',  &tc.  vary  slowly,  we  may  use  them  in  computing
very  nearly  the  place  of  the  body  m,  for  a  limited  period  of  time  t',  before  and  after  the
pme  t ',  taking  care  however  that  the  time  t'  be  not  so  large  as  to  produce  any  essential
change  in  the  values  of  these  elements.  This  is  conformable  to  what  we  have  already
observed  in  [4079^ — h].

In  the  preceding  calculations  the  longitudes  v,  to,  are  referred  to  the  fixed  ecliptic  and
to  the  fixed  equinox.  To  reduce  them  to  the  variable  equinox  we  must,  as  usual,  increase
them  by  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes  since  the  epoch.  The  correction  for  the  decrease
in  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  E,
requires  a  small  calculation,  because
the  part  6  is  counted  on  the  ecliptic,
and  the  remainder,  v — 6  or  to — 6,
upon  the  orbit  of  the  planet,
[8009o,  r].  The  method  of  making
this  reduction  is  easily  obtained  by
referring  to  the  annexed  figure,
where  EJVC  is  the  fixed  ecliptic,
EDV  the  variable  ecliptic,  DNP
the  comet's  orbit,  JCQ  the  equator.  Then  in  the  present  notation  we  have  EJV:=i6,
angle  PNC  =y,  angle  iVEQ  =  E.  If  we  take  the  arc  iVP  =  arc  iVC  =  90°,  and
continue  the  arc  PC  to  V,  drawing  also  DE  perpendicular  to  EIN,  we  shall  have,  by
neglecting  infinitely  small  quantities  of  the  second  order,  arc  PC  =  7,  2iYC  CV=dy.
Now  the  longitude  of  any  point  L  of  the  orbit,  when  the  fixed  ecliptic  is  used,  is
represented  by  the  sum  of  the  arcs  EN-\-JYL ;  but  in  the  variable  ecliptic  it  is  represented
by  ED-\-DL,  or  EF-\-DL,  neglecting  infinitely  small  quantities  of  the  second  order.
Subtracting  the  first  of  these  expressions  from  the  last,  we  get  the  increment  of  the  longitude
dv  or  dvs,  arising  from  the  variation  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  namely,

[8015*]
[8015/ ]

[80  J  5m]
[8015n]
[8015o]

[8015p]
[8015  5]

[801 5r]
[8015«]

[8015f]

[8013]

416  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [M6c.  C^l.

rectify  the  fundamental  ellipsis  from  100^  to  200^,  and  we  must  determine
the  perturbations  as  far  as  300°  of  excentric  anomaly.  Then  using  the
elements  and  epoch  of  1759,  and  rectifying  the  ellipsis  at  — 25°,  — 50°,
— 70°,  and  — 100°,  we  shall  obtain  the  alterations  in  the  last  quadrant  of
the  excentric  anomaly.  Thus  we  shall  obtain  with  much  accuracy,  by  a
second  approximation,  the  perturbations  of  the  comet  from  1582  to  1759.
We  must  make  the  same  calculation  from  1759  to  the  time  of  its  next
passage  through  the  perihelion  ;  but  as  the  time  of  this  passage  is  unknown,
when  we  shall  have  computed  as  far  as  300°,  we  must  rectify  the  ellipsis
for  each  25°  to  400°.  These  calculations  being  carefully  made,  must  give,
within  a  few  days,  the  time  when  the  comet  will  next  pass  its  perihelion.
The  only  point,  on  which  there  remains  any  degree  of  doubt,  is  that  relative
to  the  mass  of  the  planet  Uranus ;  and  the  observations  of  this  passage  will
be  one  of  the  best  methods  to  ascertain  it.

[8015u] dv  =  di^=  (DL—JV^—iEN—EF)  =DN—FN=:FJV.sec.y^FJV=FN.  !i=^^^.

In  the  differential  triangles FED, FND, we  have,
[8015;]  FD  =  angle  FED X s'm.ED  ==  angle  FEDXsmJ  ;

[8015u?]  FN=^  FD X  cotang.7  =  angle  FED  X  sin.^  X  cotang.y  ;

Substituting  this  in  [8015m],  we  get,  by  using  [42']  Int.,

,(1 — C0S.7)

[SOlSx]  dv  =  disz=  angle  Fl  D  X  sin.^  X  cotang.7  X

C0S.7

fl—— cos'y^

[SOlSx']  =  angle  FED  X  sin.^  X — - — —  =  angle  FED  X  sin. 4  X  tang.  J7 ;

so  that  the  increment  of  the  longitude  of  the  planet, or  the  increment  of  the  longitude  of

the  perihelion,  depending  on  the  diminution  of  the  obliquity FED, is  represented  in  the

following  manner ;
[80i5y]  Increment  of  longitude  =  the  diminution  of  the  obliquity  X  sin.^  X  tang.|7.

Again,  in  the  differential  triangle CEF,  we  have EC=  EJV-^-^O'^  =^-\-90'^, and
[80l5z]  CV=  angle  CEVXsm.EC=  CEVXcos.6  =  diminution  of  the  obliquity  Xcos.^,

which  represents  the  increment  of  the  inclination  7.

IX  .ii.  «§.  10.]  APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  417

CHAPTER  II.

ON THE PERTURBATIONS OP  THE MOTION OP A COMET WHEN IT APPROACHES VERY NEAR  TO

A PLANET.

10. JVe  shall  noiv  consider  the  case  in  which  a  comet  approaches  very
near  to  a  disturbing  planet. If  the  planet  he  Jupiter,  its  attraction  upon
the  comet  may  exceed  that  of  the  sun,  and  this  action  can  entirely  change  the [8013']
elements  of  its  orbit. This  singular  case,  lohich  appears  to  have  taken  place
with  the  first  comet  of  the  year  1770,  deserves  particular  attention.

We  have,  by  the  preceding  chapter,  the  six  following  equations ;  *

0  =  f^  +  (y+n).^-+"^  +  '!^;  [8014]

0=f+(l+»»).^  +  ^+^]^7^^  _t8015]

T  T It!/  mental

„  adz , ,1 , ^ « , mZ , rn.iz sf)  dlfferen-

^  =  -^+  (1+^^)-  ;j  +  ^TT  +  -p-'  ;  [8016]

0  =

ddx'

.^  , ,v «', mx m.(x — a?')

dt^ ' ^ ' '/ /3 ' ^3  f

*(3807) Substituting  the  values (^\  (^\  (~) [7869,  7871, 7894c/J, and

lK  =  l-\-m  [7804]  in  the  differential  equations  of  the  comet's  motion  [7805 — 7807],  they
become  as  in [8014 — 8016]  ; and  by  changing m,  r,  x,  y,  z, into m',  /,  x',  y\  s^,
respectively,  and  the  contrary,  we  obtain  the  corresponding  differential  equations  of  the
planet's  motion,  as  in  [8017—8019].
VOL* IV.  105

tial  equa-
tions.

[80171
[8018]

_, ddzf , .- , ,. sr' , mz  m.(z — sf)  r^,^,^,

0  ==  ^  +  (1+^').  73  +  TT jr-^  •  tsoi9]

[8014a]
[8014&]

418  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Ca

Symboli

^1'  yn  If  we  suppose,

[8020]  "^ — ^  "^  "^i ' y — y  =="  yi  i ^  ^  ^^^  ^i  >

Funda-
mental
equations.

[8021]

Second
form.

[8022]
[8023]

we  shall  obtain,  from  [8014 — 8019],  the  three  following  equations;^

[8024] In  these  equations, x^,  ?/i ,  z, ,  are  the  co-ordinates  of  the  cornet,  referred  to
[8025] the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  'planet^  and  f  is  the  distance  of  these  bodies  from

each  other. If  we suppose  f  [7870] to  be so  small  that  exceeds

[8026]

considerably  the  terms  depending  upon  the  sun's  action,  we  may,  at  least  in
a  first  approximation,  neglect  these  last  terms,  and  then  the  three  preceding
equations  will  give  the  elliptical  motion  of  m  about  w'.f The  difference

t  (3808) Subtracting  the  equation  [8017]  from  [8014],  we  get,

dd.(x — x') , ,  ,. (jw-f-m'),  , X  x'

L8021a]  0  =  -^  -f  (x-a:').  '-^  +  ^^r  -  ;^  ;

and  by  substituting x  =  x'-\-x^  [8020],  it  becomes,

eWxi  {m-{-m') x'-\-Xi x!

[802U]  "  =  '^  +  ''«-~7i~  +  "75 :pi^

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8021],  by  merely  altering  the  arrangement  of  the
terms.  In  like  manner,  by  subtracting  [8018]  from  [8015],  we  get  [8022]  ;  and  by
subtracting  [8019]  from  [8016],  we  get  [8023] ; using  the  values  of  y,,  z^  [8020].

f  (3809) When  r'  differs  from  r,  by  a  very  small  quantity  of  the  order  x^ ,  the  factor

[8027fl] 1  1 .„  L  ex  J 1  1  • 1 J  I  r  I  J ^i  ^1

-r will  become  ol  the  order  — muliipliea  by  a  term  ot  the  order —  or — ;  so  that

od A —  ,g  j [8021], may be  considered as  of the order ^\'~^\ ^^^ when — is

[80276] , . . m-^-m'  .  _.

extremely  small,  in  comparison  with , we  may  neglect  the  former  terms,  and  the  mm

equation  [8021]  will  become 0  =  — —  4-cr,. — — — . In like manner the equations

[8027c]  r. ddy , [m-\-m')  ^ ddz^ , {m-\-m') ^,

[8022, 8023] become 0  =  -^  +  y,. ^ ' :  0  =  — -  -\-z^.  ~~~' . These

equations  are  similar  to  those  in  [78106,7805 — 7807],  putting fj.=  m-\-m', r=f, also
[ '^l i?=:0, so  as  to  correspond  to  an  elliptical orbit, as  is observed  in [7807']. The

IX.ii.^10.]  APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  419

of  the  sun's  action  upon  the  comet  and  planet  is  a  force  which  disturbs  that

motion. This  disturbing  force  is  to  the  action  — , of  the  planet  upon  the

comet,  of  the  order -7-5-. Whenever  this  last quantity  is  small,  we  may, [8028]

without  any  sensible  error,  suppose  the  relative motion  of  the  comet  about
the  planet  to  be elliptical. On  the contrary, when this  quantity  is  very

ereat  we  may  neglect -r^ in  comparison  with — ,  and  consider  the  motion

of  the  comet  about  the  sun  as  elliptical.  It  is  only  between  these  two
situations  that  there  can  be  any  degree  of  uncertainty ;  but  on  account  of
the  rapidity  of  the  comet's  motion,  the  interval  of  time  which  separates  these
positions  is  so  small,  that  we  may,  without  any  sensible  error,  suppose  that  [8030]
the  com(  t's  motion  is  either  elliptical  about  the  planet,  or  elliptical  about  the
sun.  Now  to  ascertain,  with  some  degree  of  precision,  this  limit  of  the
distance  of  the  comet  from  the  planet ;  so  that,  when  the  comet  is  at  a  less
distance  than  this  limit,  we  may  consider  its  motion  to  be  elliptical  about  the
planet,  and  when  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  planet  to  be  elliptical  about
I the  sun ; we  shall  suppose  that  the  comet  is  situated  between  the  planet

and  the  sun  :  then  the  sun's  action  upon  the  comet  will  be — ,  and  that  of

[8031]

the  planet  upon  the  comet jj — ^g. Hence  it  is  evident  that  when the

comet  is  beyond  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet,  the  quantity

1  m'  ,

—  must  greatly  exceed -j — r^ . The  difference of  the  action  of  the  sun

\  \  2.(/ r)

upon  the  planet  and  comet,  is — ;^ , or  very  nearly -^— ^ —  ;  * within [8033]

[8032]

quantities  we  have  neglected  are  of  the  order x^.  —  [80276], and those  retained  are  of

'"  [8027e]

the  order 0:^.  — ^^^^ — , or ^i'T^'j ^  being  small  in  comparison  with m'. Dividing  the

first  of  tliese  forces x^.  —  , by  the  second x^.  —  , we  get, as  in [8028], — —  for  the [8027/]

2**>  T  ^  lilt  •f^

ratio  of  the  disturbing  force  of  the  sun,  to  the  absolute  force  of  the  planet  upon  the  comet.

*  (3810) The  quantity ^  "~  ^2  [8033],  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form,

^^-^^ ^  i^'-r) {r'-^r)  ^  ^8033a]

420  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

the  limit  of  the sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet  upon  the  comet,  this  last

[8033'] . . m'  . *

quantity  must  be  very  small  in  comparison  with , .^ . We  may  satisfy

these  two  conditions  by  supposing  ^  to  be  a  mean  proportional  between

[8034] —  and 2.  - — ^ : which  gives,  for  the  radius  r' — r  of  the  sphere  of  activity
of  the  planet,

8

[8035]  / — r  =  r.\/^m'2.

The  error  will  be  so  much  the  less  as  the  planet's  mass  is  decreased.*  The
radius  of  this  sphere  of  activity  may  in  fact  be  increased  without  any  sensible
error. For  if  we  resume  the  equation  [8021  ],t

ddx, . (m-\-m').x, ^ ^  x x'

[8036]  0  =  -rf^  + p +73-;^;

we  shall  see  that  the  term — j-^ adds  to  the  value  of  Xi  only  the  double

[8035']

and  when  /  is  nearly  equal  to  r,  or  nearly  equal  to  2,  it  becomes ' ■  or  — -5 —  ,

[80336]  "*  r  r  ro

as  in  [8033]. The  conditions  required  in  [8032,8033']  are,  that ■:;^^  rjZI^^' ^°^

„,/  S.fr' r\

^— ■' Both  these  conditions  are  satisfied  by  supposing,  as  in  [8034],  that

r8033c  1 -T-  :  7-7-—.^  '■  ■  r-r^—7,  '•  -^i!— — ^^  • because  if  the  first  of  these  terms  is  much  greater  than

Louootj ^2 (/ r)^ (jJ rf  r^

the  second,  the  third  will  be  much  greater  than  the  fourth.  From  this  proportion  we  get
^'rt's'"'  (/ — ry  =  r^.lm'^;  whence  we  easily  deduce  [8035].  We  may  remark,  that  this  method
method. ^j.  df^t^f-jfiijiifig  (fiQ  perturbations  of  the  motions  of  a  comet,  when  approaching  very  near  to

a  planet,  was  first  proposed  by  D^Alembert,  in  his  Opuscules,  Tome  vi,  page  304.

*  (381 1 ) The  disturbing  force  of  the  sun , [8033],  bemg  divided  by  the  absolute
[8035a]  r3  -^

^'  2  ff' ^\3

force  of  the  planet ,- — -  [8032],  gives .  / for  the  ratio  of  this  disturbing  force  to
the  planet's  action;  but  from  [8035]  we  have 2.{r'—r)^  =  2r^.m''.{^y  ==ii^.m'^  nearly;

1

hence  the  preceding  ratio  becomes |m'*, which  is  decreased  by  decreasing  the  mass  m',
as  in  [8035'].

t  (3812) The term  of [8021]  havmg the divisor r3, is ^ii^  =  ^ [8020];
substituting  this  in  [8021],  it  becomes  as  in  [8036].

IX.ii.  <§.ll.]  APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  421

integral* ffdt.l-^^  —  —\ Now  this  double  integral  is  very  small,  when  it [8037]

X  X

is  limited  to  a  small  value  of  t ;  for  the  function -75 ^  is  very  small, x'

and  r'  differing  but  very  little  from  x  and  r  respectively.  Therefore  we
mai/i  in  the  calculation  of  the  perturbations  of  a  comet  lohich  approaches  very
near  to  a  planet,  suppose  the  planet  to  have  a  sphere  of  activity,  in  ivhich  the
relative  motion  of  the  comet  is  affected  only  by  the  planeth  attraction ;  and
that  beyond  this  point  the  absolute  motion  of  the  comet  about  the  sun  is
performed  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  if  the  sun  alone  acted  upon  it.

Formulas

1 1 . We  shall  now  develop  this  hypothesis,  and  determine  the  new  elements wheTthe

comet  IS

the  relative  orbit  of  the  comet  about  the  planet,  while  within  the  sphere  of
that  attraction. We  have,  in  [572],  the  six  following  equations  ;t

of  the  comefs  orbit  at  the  time it  passes  from  the  sphere  of  the  planeVs ^phej"  o^f

attraction. For  this  purpose  we  shall  commence  with  the  investigation  of the'piane*t.

[8039]

[8040]

[8041]
[8042]
[8043]

V / - ..- y~ J  ^3 , ^3 ^3 , ^ L^^^v^j [8037a]

may  be  reduced  to  the  form 0  =  ~+T— T'; T'  being  much  smaller  than  T, and [80376]

both  being  considered  as  functions  of  the  very  small  portion  of  time  t,  and  of  constant
quantities.  IMultiplying  the  preceding  equation  by  dt"^,  we  may  put  it  under  the  following
integral  form,  neglecting  the  constant  quantities  introduced  by  these  integrations ;
«i  =  —ffT.di^-\-ffT'.dt'^  ;  so  that  the  part  of  x^  depending  on  T',  is  proportional  to
the  very  small  quantity  ffT'.dt^,  being  the  same  as  that  in  [8037]  ;  remarking,  however,
that  the  introduction  of  the  small  disturbing  quantity  T',  into  the  equation  [80376],
affects  also  the  terms  composing  the  value  of  T,  by  terms  of  the  same  small  order,  and  [8037e  ]
by  this  means  produces  other  similar  variations  in  the  value  of  x^.

x,.dy,—y,.dx,^ ^, x,.dz—z,
^'~~ dt ' ^1- dt

.dx^  .
1

^  // yrdz,—z,.dy,  ^
""^ - dt

, m'y, {dx,^+dz,^) X,
^' f ^ dt-

Jx,.dy,
dt-

z,.dz,.dy^
dt- '

. m'x, (dy,^-j-dz,^) y,
f ' dt-

.dy,.dx^
dt-

z^.dz^.dx^  ^
dt- '

m' 2m' {dx,--\-dy^--\-dz,-)
a," f dt^

*  ^3813^ If  we  nut  for  hrfivltv (™+"»>i  _  7

. ^

—  —  =  T' thp  Pnnnflnn  FftH.'^fiT

[8037c]
[8037rf]

t  (3814) We  have,  in  [78496], f'  =  ^h,  f==iil', and  in  the present notation
li=zm-{-m'  [530'''],  or  simply (x==m'; because  the mass of the  comet is  small  in

VOL* IV.  106

[8040o]

422  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

[8043'] Ci,  f/,  c/',  hi,  lij  rti,  being  arbitrary  constant  quantities.

[8044] &  =  the longitude of  the  ascending node  of  the relative  orbit  of  the

comet,  counted  from  the  axis  of  Xi  [585'"]  ;
[8045] <p  =  the  inclination  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  comet  upon  the  plane  of

Then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [591],

"2

tangJ  =  -^  ; tang.?  =

^ij  c/)  c/',  being  given,  by  means  of  the  equations  [8040],  in  functions  of
[8047]  J^ jy ^2!

the  values  of  x^,  Vi,  Zy, ~  , ^,  — ^,  at  the  time  of  the  entrance  of  the

at at at

comet  into  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet ;  and  as  these  values  are
supposed  to  be  known,  we  shall  have  also  the  values  of  6  and  ?,  at  that  time.
If  we  put  1  for  the  longitude  of  the  projection  of  the  perihelion  [593'],
we  shall  have,  as  in  [594',  &c.],*

[8049]  tang.i=y.

The  semi-major  axis a^ is  given  by  means  of  [8043]. Then  we  have,  as
in  [714,  &c.].t

m'.a„(l-^e,^)  =  2m'/-  ^'  ---^^f  ;

[8048]

[8050]
[805 J]
[8052]

[8053]

which  gives  the  excentricity  Ci. Thus  we  shall  have  all  the  elements  of  the
relative  orbit.

We  shall  now^  refer  the  co-ordinates  x^  and  yi  to  the  line  of  nodes. If
we  suppose Xi,  yl,  z{,  to  be  these  new  co-ordinates,  we  shall  have,t

[80406]  comparison  with  that  of  the  planet  ;  so  that  we  may  put  /'  =  m'h,  f=  nil ;  or,  for
brevity,  /'=  h^ ,  f=  Zj.  Substituting  these  values  in  the  equations  [572  lines  1, 3,  2, 5],
we  get  those  in  [8040,8041,8042,8043]  respectively.  The  accents  being  placed  below
X,  y,  z,  c,  cf,  c",  a,  e,  in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation  ;  also  changing  r  into
/,  and  making  some  slight  reductions.  In  the  same  manner  the  equations  [591]  change
into  [8046].

[8040c ]
[8040rf]

[8049a] *  (3815) Substituting  the  values  f  =  K,  f=l,  [8040c],  in  [594'],  we  get  [8049].

t  (3816) We  have,  in  [714], {^a.(l—e^)=2iir— -— . Substituting  iJ.^m',

[8051a]  ' L j»  V  y r  „  ^^3

r=f  [804tOa,d],  and  placing  the  accents  below  a,  e,  as  in  [8040c],  we  get  [8051].

f  (3817) The  expressions  of  a?/,  y^'  [8054,  8055],  are  found  in  the  same  manner  as
[8054a] jj^^gg  ^^  ^,^  y  j-^gg-j^ ^^^  multiplying  [8054]  by cosJ, and  [8055]  by — sin.^,  then

IX.ii.^11.] APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  423

[8056]
[8057]

[8060']
[8061]

a;/ =  a^i.cos.^+z/i.sin.^;  [8054]

yl  =  — ari.sin.()+2/i-cos.5 ;  [8055]

zl  =  z^.

We  shall  now  refer  the  co-ordinates  a:/, y{, to  the  plane  of  the  relative

orbit ;  putting  a:/',  yC,  for  these  new  co-ordinates  ;  and  we  shall  have,*

a:/  =  x" ;  [8058]

I// =  y/'.cos.? ;  ^  [8059]

z^  =  yi'.s'm.cp,  [8060]

Lastly,  we  shall  refer  the  co-ordinates a;/',  y" to  the  major  axis,  and

shall  put  "^  for  the  longitude  of  the  perihelion  counted  from  the  line  of  nodes.

We  shall  have,  by  putting  a;/",  y/",  for  these  new  co-ordinates  ;  the  axis

of  x"'  being  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  planet  to  its  perihelion  ;  f

Xi"  ==  a:/'.cos.is-f  i^/'.sin.-ra  ;  [8062]

yr  =  — x/'.sin.«  -I-  y/'.cos.w.  [8063]

These  different  equations  give,  t

taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  we  get  x^  [80546].  In  like  manner,  by  multiplying  [8054]
by  sin.d,  and  [8055]  by  cos.^,  then  taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  we  get  y^  [8054c]  ;
these  values  of  x^,  y^ ,  will  be  of  use  hereafter  ;

ojj  =  x^.cosJ — y/.sm.6  ;  y,  =  aj/.sin.d-f-y/.cos.^.  [80546 ]

*  (3818) Here  the  axis  of  a;/'  or  x{  is  not  changed;  but  the  ordinate  y/'  is  taken  in
the  relative  orbit,  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  nodes,  and  is  then  projected  upon  the  plane [8059a]
of  a?/,  y/, into  the  ordinate y/  =  y/'.cos.<p, as  in  [8059] ; and  the  distance  z^  of  its
extremity, from  the  plane  of  a?/, y/, is evidently  represented  by Zi=y".sin.cp, as [80596]
in  [8060].

t  (3819) The  transformation,  here  treated  of,  consists  in  changing the  rectangular
axes  x",  y", into  the  rectangular  axes a?/",  y/",  in  the  same  plane  ;  so  that  the  angle  ^

formed  by  the  axes x",  x"\ or  by  the  axes y/',  y/",  may  be  represented  by  w. In
this  case  the  reduction  is  made  in  the  same  manner  as  in  [8054,8055],  by  changing  &  into [80626]
zj(j  and  adding  two  accents  to  the  symbols  x^ ,  y^ , a?/,  y/ ;  whence  we  obtain  [8062, 8063].

X  (3820) IVIultiplying  [8062, 8063]  by  cos.?, and  substituting  the  values  [8058, 8059],

we  get,

a?/".cos.(p=a?/.cos.w.cos.(p-f-yi'.sin.'ci ;  [8065a]

y/".cos.<p  ==  — a:/.sin.«.cos.(p-f-y/.cos.-5J.  ["80656  ]

Substituting  the  values  of a;/,  y/ [8054,  8055], in  [8065a,  b], we  get  [8064,  8065]

respectively.

424  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

[8064]
[8065]
[8066]

Xi",cos.cp  =  Xi-l — siti.:3.sinJ+cos.t3.cos.d.cos.(p}

+2/i.  { sin.w.cos.^-j-cos.ro.sin.^.cos.itp  \ ;

y/".cos.(p  =  Xi.\ — cos.OT.sin.^ — sin.Trf.cos.^.cos.tp}

4-3/1.  { cos.TO.cos  J — sin.ts.sin.^.cos.cp} .

Therefore  we  shall  have  the  values  of  x^'",  y/", corresponding  to  the  time

of  the  entrance  of  the  comet  into  the  sphere  of  the  planet's  activity. We

shall  also  have,  by  taking  the  differentials  of  these equations,  the  values  of

dec '" dv '"

--i- , ^v-  J  relative  to  that  point.
dt ^ dt ^  ^

The  preceding  equations  give,*

x^  =  Xi"'.{ cos.w.cos.5 — sin.TO.sin.5.cos.(p|

-\-yi"'{ — sin.:s.cos.5 — cos.«.sinJ.cos.cp} ;
yi  =  Xi".{ cos.TO.sin.^+sin.w.cos.^.cos.fp} )  (*S^)
+  ?//".  { — sin.TO.sin.^-}-cos.'3j.cos.^.cos.(p}  ;
[8069]  z^  =  a*i'".sin.OT.sin.9-l-2//"«cos.w.sin.9.

If  we  denote  by  x^,  y^,  x/",  &c.  the  values  of  Xi,  yi,  x/",  &c.  at  the
time  of  the  entrance  of  the  comet  into  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet,
and  by  the  same  letters,  with  two  lines  at  the  top,  their  values  when  quitting
it,  we  shall  evidently  have,t

[8067]

Co-ordi-
nates.

[8068]

[8070]

[8067a]

*  (3821)  JMultiplying  [8062]  by  cos.-z^r,  and  [8063]  by  — sin.trf,  then  adding  the
products,  we  get,  by  making  sonae  small  reductions,  the  value  of  a?/'  [80676],  or  that  of
a;/  [8058].  In  like  manner,  by  multiplying  [8062]  by  sin.^,  and  [8063]  by  cos.-sr,  then
adding  the  products,  we  get  the  value  of  y/'  [8067c]  ;  multiplying  this  by  cos.(p,  and
substituting  the  result  in  [8059],  we  get  3//  [8067cZ] ;

[80676]  a?/'  =  a;/".cos.-zrf— y/".sin.«=a?/; [8058]

[8067c  ]  y"  =  a?/".sin.w+y/".cos.TO  ;

[8067c;]  y/ =a?/".sin.zj.cos.(p-|-y/".cos.zJ.cos.(p.

IMultiplying  the  value  of  a:/  [8067^]  by  cosJ,  and  that  of  y,'  [8061d]  by  — sin.^,  then
taking  the  sum  of  the  products,  we  get  the  value  of  x^  [80546],  as  in  [8067] .  In  like
manner,  multiplying  a?/  [80676]  by  sin.^,  and  y/  [8067(/J  by  cos.^,  then  taking  the
sum  of  the  products,  we  get y^  [80546],  as  in  [8068]. Finally  multiplying  [8067c]  by

[8067/] gjj^^^^ ^^^  substituting  the  product  in z^  [8060],  we  get  [8069].

[80676]

[8071a]

t  (3822) We  shall  suppose,  in  the  annexed  figure  103,  that  C  is  the  centre  of  gravity

5

of  the  planet; DAA'  a  circle  described  about  the  centre C,  with  the  radius r.\/km,'^

[8035],  and  representing  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet. Within  this

[8071&] limit  the  comet  is  supposed,  as  in  [8038],  to  move  in  an  undisturbed  orbit  ABPA'B',  about

lX.ii.<^ll.]

APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.

425

X^

dx^'

dx,"

yl"

=

-yl"'.

dvi"
dt

=

dyr

dt

dt  dt '

By  means  of  these  equations,  we  can  find,  in  the  first  place,  the  values  of

[8071]
[8072]

the  planet;  and  if  P  be  the  least  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  planet,  we  shall  have
the  line  drawn  through  CP  for  the  axis  of  x"'  [8061] ;  and  the  line  CY,  which  is
perpendicular  to  it,  for  the  axis  of  y/".  The  comet  enters  the  sphere  of  activity  at  A,
and  quits  it  at  A'. For  both  these  points  the  value  of  x"'  is CE', which  is  represented

by  x"' for  the  point A, and  x^"  for  the  point  A') hence  we  have xl"-:=.xl"y  as  in

[8071]. Moreover  for  the  first  of  these  points  we  have AE= — y/";  and  for  the  second

point A'E=Jl"', and  as AE  =  A'E, we  get ^=— ^,  as  in  [8071]. We  shall
now  suppose that the  comet,  upon  entering the  sphere  of
activity,  can  describe  the  arc AB  in  the  time dt ; and  upon -^3-^"^
quitting  the  sphere  of  activity  can  describe  the  equal  arc  A'B',
in  the  same  time  dt. Then  the  co-ordinates  of  the point  B

[8071c]

are CF=x,"'-\-dx;" ; BF  =  ^y;"-\-dy;" ; and  those  of  -»

the  point  S' are CF'  =  x,'"—dx,"' ; B'F' =  y,"' +  dy,'".

Subtracting  respectively  from  these  four  expressions  the  values

^. given  in  [8071(7,  &c.], namely CE=^, AE  =  —'^,

CEz=x"\  A'E  =  y"',  we  get  the  increments  of  these  co-ordinates  respectively  ;  and
ifwe  draw  the  lines  BH,  A'H',  parallel  to  CP,  we  shall  evidently  have,  for  these
increments,  the  following  expressions ;

EF=HB=1^', AH=d^'; £F'  =  ^'1£'==-^'; H'B'  =  ^,
But  by  construction  we  evidently  have  the  triangles AHB, A'H'B', similar  and  equal;

L^  [807W]

[8071c]

[8071/]
[807]g-]
[8071A]

[8071i ]
[807U]

[807K  ]

hence  we  have HB  =  A'H\ AH=H'B'; or  in  symbols  [807 IZ], dx^"  =  —dx^"; [8071m]

dy"'  =idy"''j  dividing  these  by  dt,  we  get  the  equations  [8072] .  Now  if  we  have
■^ij  Vi)  ^1)  ^^^  ^heir  differentials,  at  the  time  the  comet  enters  into  the  sphere  of  activity
of  the  planet, we  may  thence  obtain x^'", y"', and  their  differentials,  by  means  of

[8064,  8065];  and  then  <',  yj^',  and  their  differentials,  from  [8071,  8072],
Substituting  these  last  expressions  in  the  formulas  [8067 — 8069],  and  in  their  differentials,
we  obtain  x^,  y^,  z^,  and  their  differentials,  at  the  time  the  comet  quits  the  sphere  of
activity  of  the  planet  [8074] .  Thence  we  obtain  the  elements  of  the  elliptical  motion
about  the  sun,  after  quitting  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  planet,  as  in  [8074',  &c.].

VOL. IV.  107

[8071n]
[807101

[8071;>]

426  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Gel.

[8074]

[8074'J

[8076]

xl\ yl\ -^, -^,  in  terms  of  the  values  of  x,,  y^,  z^, -^,  -J^, -i-',

at  the  time  of  entrance  of  the  comet  into  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the
planet ;  and  we  may  thence  deduce,  by  means  of  the  equations  [8067-8069],

[8073] and  of  their  differentials,  the  values  of x^^ y^, z^ -t^, -p, ■— ,  upon

quitting  that  sphere,  in  functions  of  their  values  at  the  time  of  the  entrance

into it. Adding to these values those of x', \L z', -— , —^ -7-,

corresponding  to  the  time  w^hen  the  comet  quits the sphere  of  activity,  we

doo fiu dz

shall  have  the  corresponding  values  of  a:,  ^,  2:, — , -^ , — [8020,  &c.]  ;

dZ  CLZ  (tl

consequently,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [572 — 597'],  we  can  obtain  the  new
elements  of  the  comet's  orbit.  To  obtain  the  values  of  a/,  2/',  z',  and  their
differentials,  upon  quitting  the  sphere  of  activity,  we  must  find  the  time
required  to  traverse  that  sphere,  which  may  be  easily  done  by  the  formulas
[8075]  of  the  elliptical  motion,  explained  in  the  third  chapter  of  the  second
book  [606,  &c.].  ~

12.  When  the  variations  5x,  6y,  8z,  are  very  small,  as  is  the  case  relative
to  the  motion  of  the  comet  of  1170,  disturbed  by  the  earth,  it  will  be  much
more  simple  to  calculate  the  alterations  of  the  elements  of  the  orbit,  by  the
formulas  of  the  preceding  chapter.  We  shall  consider  the  most  important  of
these  variations,  namely,  thai  of  the  comefs  mean  motion.  We  have,  by
what  has  been  said,*

[8077] rfn  =3«n.d/i= 3/n  .an. 3m  .an.  i— -rz .

Y  O  TO

*  (3823)  Substituting  in  dn  [7879]  the  value  of  R  [7802],  we  get  [8077],  using/
[7870].  If  we  retain  only  the  term  containing  f^,  and  substitute  the  differentials  of
[8078],  namely dx=^dt, dy  =  ^dt, dz  =  ydt,  we  shall  get,

\(^x'-x).o.Jf-{y'-y).!B-\-{z'-z).yl

[8077a]

[80776]  dn=  —  Sm'.andt.

Now  by  using  the  values [8078,  8079,  7870],  and  the  abridged  symbols  [8081—8085],

we  obtain  successively,
[8077c] [:e~x).^-\iy'-y).^-^z'-z).y=\{A'-A).^-^{B'-B).^-{{C'-C).y\-\-\[^'^^^
[8077rfJ  =F+IR;

[8077e] /2  =  (x'-a:)2+(y-2/)H-(2'-zP={{^'-.^)  +  (a'-a).f5H-i(^--B)+{^'-^)i}M-[(C''-C^
[8077/]  =  JW  -f  2M  +  Lt\

Substituting  [8077c?,/]  in dn  [8077 J],  we  get  [8080]  ;  and  by  integrating,  [8086].

IX.ii.<^12.]  APPROACHIJNG  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  427

In  the  interval  of  time  during  which  the  earth's  action  is  sensible,  we  may
consider  the  motions  of  the  planet  and  comet  as  being  rectilinear.  Therefore
if  we  put,

x=A  +  ^t;  y=B  +  ^t;  z  =  C  +  r^-  [8078]

x'  =  A'-{-^'t;  y'  =  B'+^'t;  2f=C'+ri;  [8079]

we  shall  have,  by  noticing  only  the  terms  divided  by  /^,  which  is  the  only

one  that  can  become  sensible  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  f,

,  Sm'.an.(F-\-Ht).dt

the  following  symbols  being  used  in  this  equation  ;

F  =  (A'—A).^-\-(B'—B).^+(C'—C).y  ;  [808i]

H  =  (a'— a).a+(^'— /3).|3+(/—7).7  ;  [8082]

M  =  (A'—Af-\-(B'—By-\-(C'—Cy ;  [8083]

N  =  (^'_J).(a'_a)+(5'-.B).(f3'-|3)+(C"~C).(/-7)  ;  [8084]

L  =  (a'-a)«+(|3'-^)2+(/— ,)^.  [8085]

Hence  we  shall  have,  by  integrating  [8080],

^"=-^'»'"/(^+S+lV)i-  '«»^^'

The  integral  must  be  taken  during  the  whole  time  in  which  the  action  of

the  planet  upon  the  comet  is  sensible. Before  and  after  this  time  the

distance \/M-\-  2Nt  -\-Lt% of  the  comet  from  the  planet,  is  considerable  ; [8087]

and  then  the  elements  of  the  preceding  integral  become  insensible,  so  that

it  may  be  taken  from t  ==  —  oo to i  =  oo,  which  gives,*  [8087']

*  (3824) We  may  easily  prove  the  correctness  of  the  following  integral  [80886],  by
taking  the  differential  of  its  second  member ;  then  reducing  all  the  terms  to  the  common
denominator {LM — N^).{M-{-2Nt-\-Lf)^ ; since  by  this  means  the  coefficient  of  t^,  in [8O880]
the numerator, will vanish ; and the other terms of the numerator will become
{LM—N^).{F-{-Ht).dt.

f  dt.{F-{-Ht)  {FJV-HM)—{HM^FL).t .

^M+^M-^Lt^)l  =  iLM-J^).iMi.2m+L^f  +constant.  [80886]

Multiplying  [80886] by — Sm'.a7i, we  get  the  expression  of  dn  [8086]  ; and  if  we

FJV—TIM

substitute ^/{M+^Nt-i-Lt^)^/ [8077/]; also for brevity P  =  ^^l-^, [8088c]

^ HJ\r-FL

y  =  vir. — 7^ ; we  shall  get,

6n  =  Sm'.an.  ^—j-\-q.j-{. constant.  I  .  [8088rf]

The  symbol  /  represents  the  distance  of  the  comet  from  the  planet  [8025],  which  is [8088rf']

JiJ\

428  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Gel.

6m'.anAHN—FL\

If  we  put f for  the  shortest  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  comet,  %oe

[8089]  r »/ /  ^  i  /

shall  have*
[8090]  /'2.L  =  LM—N^ ;

therefore,

[8091]  ,^  =  _4_____i,

[8093] we  may  here  observe  that  \/L  represents  the  relative  velocity  of  the  comet.\

always  positive,  while t varies from — oo to  -j-co  ; and  at  each  of  these  limits  the

P

quantity —  — vanishes  from  the  integral  [SOSS^Z]  ;  so  that  it  becomes,

[8088e]  6n=:3m'.an.  \  Q-y  +  constant  >  .

IMow  when  /  is  very  large,  the  terms  depending  on  M,  Nt  [8077/],  become  very  small
FROSSn ^^ comparison with Lt^ ; so that we shall have approximatively f=\/L^, or

/==  =f  t.\/L  [8077/]  ;  the  upper  sign  being  used  when  i  is  negative ;  the  lower  sign
[80885-] y^l^Q^  f  j-g  positive [8088cZ'J  5 so  that  when t  =  — cx) , we  shall  have  /  infinite,  and

[8083^] —  = . Substituting  this  in  ^n [8088e],  and  taking  the  constant  quantity  so  as  to

/  /^

make  the  integral  vanish  at  this  limit  <  =  —  00,  we  shall  have  constant  =  Q.  -— ;
[8088i] whence 5w  =  3m'.an.Q.  5  —  +  —  ?  [8088e]. At  the  other  limit <=:-}- 00, we  have

/=  t.\/L  [8088/], or — •  =  — ; substituting  this  in 5n  [8088^], we finally obtain
5/1  =  6w'.an.  Q.  —  ; which  is  the  same  as  in  [8088],  using  Q  [8088c].

*.(3825) The  least  value  of  /  is  found  by  putting  the  differential  of  p [8077/]

JV*
[8090a] equal  to  nothing,  which  gives 0  =  2?fdt-\-2Lt.dt ; whence t  =  —  — . Substituting  this

in  /^  [8077/],  and  then  multiplying  by  L,  we  get  [8090]. Lastly,  by  substituting  this
value  of LM—JY^ in  the  denominator  of  [8088],  we  get  [8091].

f  (3826) The  velocity  of  the  comet,  reduced  to  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,
[8092a] is —  =  a  [8078];  that  of  the  planet  is -t-=^'  [8079]; their  difference,  a'— a,  is  the

[80926  ]  relative  velocity  of  the  bodies  reduced  to  the  same  direction.  In  like  manner  the  relative
velocity,  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y,  is  ^' — ^  ;  and  in  a  direction  parallel  to
the  axis  of  z, is 7' — y. The  whole  relative  velocity  is  equal  to  the  square  root  of  the

[80d2d]  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  three  expressions  [39'J,  or  /(a' -a)2-j-(|3'— (3)2  +  {y—yf,  which
is  represented  by  \/L  in  [8085].

X  ii.§  13.] APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.  429

13. We  shall  apply  these  methods  to  the  motion  of  the  first  comet  of  1770, Remarka-

-  able  comet

which  2vas  disturbed  by  the  action  of  the  earth  and  Jupiter.  Astronomers  »» i"o.
had  made  many  abortive  attempts  to  reduce  its  observed  motion  to  the  laws
of  the  parabolic  theory.  At  length  Lexell  discovered  that  it  described  an
ellipsis,  in  which  the  duration  of  the  revolution  was  only  5|  years  ;  and  he
found  that  this  orbit  satisfied  all  the  observations  of  the  comet.  So
remarkable  a  result  could  not  be  admitted  but  after  the  most  incontestible
proof;  and  to  obtain  it,  the  subject  was  proposed,  as  a  prize  question,  by  the
National  Institute,  in  order  to  determine  the  theory  of  the  comet  by  a  new
discussion  of  the  observations,  and  an  examination  of  the  positions  of  the
stars  with  which  it  had  been  compared.  This  has  been  done  by  Burckhardt
with  the  greatest  care,  in  his  paper  which  gained  the  prize ;  and  his
researches  have  produced  nearly  the  same  result  as  those  of  Lexell ;  so  that
we  cannot  now  have  any  doubt  relative  to  this  point.  A  comet  whose
revolution  is  so  short,  ought  frequently  to  re-appear  ;  but  it  was  not  seen
before  1770,  and  has  never  been  seen  since.  To  explain  this  phenomenon
Lexell  remaiked,  that  in  1767  and  1779  this  comet  approached  very  near  to
Jupiter,  whose  great  attraction  could  change  the  perihelion  distance  of  the
comet  so  as  to  render  it  visible  in  1770,  instead  of  being  invisible  as  it  was
before,  and  afterwards  render  it  invisible  in  1779.  But  before  we  can
admit  of  this  explanation  we  must  prove  that  the  same  elements  of  the  orbit,
which  satisfy  the  first  condition,  will  also  agree  equally  well  with  the  second  ;
or,  at  least,  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  make  some  very  slight  alterations,
and  such  as  can  be  comprised  within  the  limits  of  those  which  the  attraction
of  the  planets  may  have  produced,  during  the  interval  between  1767  and
1779.  Burckhardt,  at  my  request,  has  willingly  undertaken  to  apply  the
preceding  formulas  to  the  computation  of  Jupiter's  action  upon  the  comet  of
1767  ;  he  supposed  the  elements  of  its  orbit,  at  the  moment  of  quitting  the
sphere  of  activity  of  Jupiter,  to  be  as  follows. [Mem,  Acad.  1806,  page  20].

Time  of passing  the  perihelion  1770,  August  14'"'^0348  ;  the  day  )  .

being  supposed  to  begin  at  midnight.  5  r809f>i

Place  of  the  ascending  node  upon  the  ecliptic  in  1770,  .  .  146^,5327  ;  2  Eiemento

Inclination  of  the  orbit, P,7377  :  3  orwtV

the  comet,

Place  of  the  perihelion  in  1770, 395°, 8525  ; 4 ?i%r'-

Ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis, .... 0,785604  ; 5 ptiyVof

•'  .;  '  'I  Jupiter  m

Duration  of  the  sideral  revolution, 2050^''^%0d5. 6 "^•

VOL. IV.  108

430  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Gel.

r8096'l ^®  ^^^"  ^^^^  "P°"  ^^®  ^^^  ^^  Miy,  1767,  at  mid-day,  for  the  time  when
the  comet  quitted  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  attraction. Using  these  data,  then

[8097] taking  for  the  axis  of  x  the  radius  vector  of  Jupiter  at  that  epoch  ;  the
sun's  mean  distance  from  the  earth  for  the  unity  of  distance,  and  one  day  for
the  element  of  the  time dt ; he  has  found,  for  the  moment  of  the  comet's
quitting  that  sphere  of  activity  [8096'],  the  foUovt'ing  numerical  values;*
x,== 0,086953;  y^  = —0,2144740  ;  z^  = —0,027 1 989  ; 1

dxi  =  —0,001286  ;  dy,  =  0,0036553  ;  dz,  =  —0,00004212.  2
These  results  give  the  follow^ing  elements  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  comet
about  Jupiter,  t

[8097']
[8098]

*  (3827)  Having  the  elements  of  the  comet  [8096],  and  also  those  of  the  planet
Jupiter,  we  may,  from  them,  compute  the  longitudes,  latitudes  and  distances  of  those  bodies
from  the  sun,  on  the  9th  of  May,  1767.  We  may  then  reduce  these  quantities  to
rectangular  co-ordinates  x,  y,  z,  for  the  comet,  and  x',  y',  zf,  for  the  planet ;  and  by  this
means  these  quantities  will  be  obtained  at  that  epoch.  Then  computing  the  values  of  these
co-ordinates  on  the  10th  of  May,  1767,  namely,  x-{-dx,  y-\-dy^  z-\-dz',  x'-\-dx',  y'-{-dy',
sf-\-dz',  we  get  the  values  of  these  quantities  ;  and  by  subtracting  from  them  the
[8098£Z]  corresponding  values  found  for  May  9th,  1767,  we  obtain  tlie  values  of  dx,  dy,  dz,
dx',  dy',  dzf.  With  these  values,  and  the  equations  [8020],  we  get  x^=x  —  x' ;
yi  =  y — y' ',  z^=z — «';  dx^=:dx — dx' \  dy^  =  dy — dy' \  dz^=dz — dz! \  as
in  [8098].

[8098a]

[80986]

[8098c]
[8098^^]
[8098e]

t  (3828) Substituting the  expressions [8020]  in  the  value  of  /^  [7870],  we  get
'•  ■* f^'=x^-\-y^-\-z^, and  its  differential gives fdf=x^dx^-\-y^dy^-\-z^dz^. Substituting

[80996  ] the  numerical  expressions  [8098],  we  get  /^  and  fdf. Using  these,  and  dt  [8097',  5987(8)],

[8099c] we  obtain,  from  [8040 — 8043],  the  values c^,  c/,  c/', \,  l^, — ; and  as  m'  is  known,

we  have  also  the  value  of  a^,  which  is  negative,  and  corresponds  to  a  hyperbolic  orbit
[8099rf]  jj^Q^j  Jupiter.  Then  from  [8046]  we  get  ^  =  313°,6573,  9=77°,71S5;  and  from
[8099e]  [8049]  we  obtain  /=248°,6321  ;  from  [8051]  we  get  ^'.^^.(1- e,^)  ;  and  as  m',  a,,
are  known,  we  may  thence  deduce  the  value  of  e^.  Having  thus  obtained  all  the  elements
[8099/*]  of  the  relative  orbit  [8099  lines  1 — 5],  we  can  then  compute  the  time  when  the  comet
entered  the  sphere  of  activity  of  Jupiter  in  1767,  or  was  at  the  distance  r.^  i^m"^  [8035]
from  that  planet,  as  in  [8099  line  6]  ;  also  the  values  of  x"',  y"',  at  that  time,  and
[8099A]  their  variations  dx"',  dy"',  for  one  day.  Thence  we  deduce  x^,  y^,  z^,  and  their
differentials,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [8067—8069],  as  in  [8100].  From  the  tables  of
Jupiter's  motion  we  obtain,  at  the  same  time,  the  values  of  x',  y,  z',  dx',  dy',  </z' ;  and
then  we  get,  from  [8020],  the  values  of  x,  y,  z,  and  their  differentials,  as  in  [8101] ;  also
[8099&] r==\/.^+2/2-|-29. From  r,  x,  y,  z,  dx,  dy,  dz,  we  deduce  the  corresponding  elements  of

[8099g-]

[8099i ]

IX.  ii.  <^  13.]

APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.

431

Ascending  node  upon  Jupiter's  orbit, 313°,6573;  1

Inclination, 77°,7185;  2

Semi-major  axis, —0,0220462;  3

Ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis,  ..... 1,86220  ;  4

Place  of  the  perijove, 248°,6321  ;  5

Entrance  into  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  attraction  1767,  Jan.  18'^^y,358.  6

Hence  he  deduced  the  values  of  ar. ,  yi,  2,,  x,  y,  2,  and  their  differentials,
at  the  time  of  entering  into  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  attraction,  namely  ;

a:i  =  — 0,106206;  i/i  =  0,101173  ;  z^  = —0,181074; 1

dx,  =.  —0,00169912  ; dy,  =  0,00122295  ; dz^  ==  —0,00326065 ; 2

which  give,  at  the  time  of  entering  into  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  attraction,

x= 5,263124;  y  =  —0,696215;  2  =  —0,181074;  1

dx  =  —0,002949 ; dy  =  —0,008356  ; dz  =  —0,00326065. 2

With  these  values  he  has  determined  the  ellipsis,  which  the  comet  described
before  its  entrance  into  that  sphere  of  attraction,  in  1767,  and  he  has  found
its  semi-major  axis  equal  to  13,293;  and  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the
semi-major  axis  equal  to  0,61772 ;  consequently  the  perihelion  distance  was
5,0826.  At  this  distance  the  comet  would  be  invisible,  and  it  ivould  in  fact
disappear  at  a  much  shorter  distance.

To  obtain  the  effect  of  Jupiter's  action  upon  the  comet  in  1779,
Burckhardt  supposed  the  elements  of  its  orbit,  at  the  time  of  its  entrance
into  the  sphere  of  attraction,  to  be  as  follows ;

Time  of  passing  the  perihelion  in  1770,  August  1 4^*^,0261  ;  1

Place  of  the  ascending  node  upon  the  ecliptic  in  1770, 146°,5722 ;  2

Inclination  to  the  ecliptic, 1°,7503;  3

Place  of  the  perihelion  in  1770, 395^^,8367;  4

Ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis,  .... 0,785474 ;  5

Duration  of  the  sideral  revolution, 2042*^"^% 6 82.  6

These  elements  differ  but  very  little  from  the  preceding  [8096]  ;  the
difference  being  within  the  limits  of  the  variations  arising  from  the  attraction
of  the  planets  ;  since  the  action  of  the  earth  alone  is  sufficient  to  produce  a

Hyperbolic
elements
of  the
oibit  about
Jupiter in
1767.

[8099]

[8100]

[8101 J

Comet
invisible
before
1767.

[8102]

[8103]

[8103']

Eleinentf
of  the
comet
before  en-
tering the
sphere  of
activity  of
Jupiter  in
1779.

[8104]

the  orbit  of  the  comet  about  the  sun,  by  means  of  the  formulas  [572,  591, 594,  Sic.].  The
last  of  the  equations  [572],  gives  the  mean  distance  a  [8102].  With  this,  and  the
formulas  [595,  596,  596'],  we  get  the  excentricity  e  [8102].

[8099Z]

[8105]

432  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET,  [Mec.  Cel.

considerable  part  of  them.  The  time  of  the  comet's  entrance  into  the
sphere  of  activity  of  Jupiter,  is  supposed  to  be  the  20th  of  June,  1779,  at
mid-day ;  and  by  taking,  for  the  axis  of  x,  the  radius  vector  of  Jupiter  at
that  epoch,  he  found  that,*

ari= 0,066007;  y,= 0,227497;  z^  = —0,0095839 ; 1

dx^  =  —0,001319 ; ('yi  =  —0,00375765 ; rfz,  = 0,00004690. 2

These  values  give  the  following  elements  of  the  relative  orbit  of  the  comet
about  Jupiter ;

orbuof"" Ascending  node  upon  the  orbit  of  Jupiter, 76^,9126; 1

about"ju- Inclination, 30°,6056 ; 2

piter  in

"''•  Semi-major  axis, —0,0205086 ;  3

'• -■  Ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis, .  .  .  1,26586;  4

Place  of  the  perijove, 36°,3407 ;  5

Time  of  quitting  Jupiter's  sphere  of  activity  1779,  October  3^^^,9320.  6

Hence  the  following  values  of  x,  y,  z,  and  their  differentials,  at  the  time
of  passing  out  from  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  activity,  are  obtained  ;

a;  =  5,617747;  2/ =  0,729731  ;  2  =  0,1072202;  1

^^^^^^  dx  =  0,00266133  ; dy  =  0,00692084 ; dz  =  0,00177469.  2

Comet From  these  values  the  ellipsis  which  the  comet  described  about  the  sun,  at
!3terthe the  time  of  quitting  the  sphere  of  Jupiter's  activity,  can  be  determined  ;  and

year  1779.

the  semi-major  axis  is  found  equal  to  6,388,  also  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity
'•  •'  to  the  semi-major  axis  0,47797,  which  gives  the  perihelion  distance  equal
to  3,3346.  With  such  a  perihelion  distance  the  comet  ivill  always  be
invisible.  Therefore  we  see  that  Jupiter^s  attraction  could  render  this
planet  visible  in  1770,  instead  of  being  invisible  as  it  was  before,  and  then
[8109]  render  it  invisible  again  after  1779;  and  we  may  conceive  of  an  infinite
number  of  other  variations  in  the  elements^  in  which  the  action  of  the
planets  may  produce  simil  ir  results.  It  appears  to  me,  therefore,  that  we
must  attribute  to  the  attraction  of  Jupiter  the  remarkable  phenomenon  we
have  here  undertaken  to  explain.

Of  all  the  known  comets  this  one  approached  neare  t  to  t' e  earth;  it
must  therefore  have  experienced  a  sensible  action  from  it. We shall now

*(3829) The  values  [8105—8108] are  obtained  from  the elements  [8104],  in  the
[8105a] same  way  as  [8098,  8099,  8101,  8102]  are  deduced  from  [8096]  ;  by  the  process  which  is
explained  in  the  two  preceding  notes.

IX.ii.^13.] APPROACHING  VERY  NEAR  TO  A  PLANET.

433

determine,  by  the  formulas  of  the  preceding  article,  the  alterations  which
this  action  has  produced  in  the  duration  of  its  sideral  revolution.  We  shall
use  the  last  elements  we  have  given  of  this  comet,  and  shall  take  July
2*^"', 0567,  for  the  epoch  or  origin  of  the  time  t\  this  being  about  the  time
of  its  nearest  approach  to  the  earth.  Lastly,  we  shall  take  one  day  for
the  unit  of  time ;  and  the  earth's  radius  vector,  at  the  origin  of  the  time  t,
for  the  axis  of  x  ;  we  shall  then  have,*

A'  =  0',
A  =  0,004890
a' =  0,000150
a  =  0,012153
These  values  give,
F  =  —0,000028325  ; H=-
M= 0,000247121; N  =  -
Hence  we  deduce,  as  in  [8118/],

6n

B'  =  0;

B  =  0,0031249
^'  =  0,0169135
|3  =0,0186114

-0;000214805;
-0,000025265.

C'=0;

C  =0,0146097;

/  =  0;

7  =—0,006110.

L  =  0,0001 84287;

1

2
3
4

1

2

1 04,791. m'.fl.

The  semi-major  axis  of  the  earth's  orbit  a', being  taken  for  unity,  we  have

a  «'^ c?  «'l

—  =  a; moreover, —  =  —  =  a^  [6143]; or a= ; hence [8115]

a,  no,  ij^i

becomes.

J  n

-  =  104,791. m'.:^.

[8111]
[8112]

[8113]

[8114]

[8115]
[8116]

[8116']
[8117]

*  (3830)  Taking  the  plane  of  the  earth's  orbit  for  that  of  x\  i/,  we  shall  have
2'  =  0;  and  then  the  last  of  the  equations  [8079]  gives  C'  =  0,  y=0,  as  in  [8113].
Taking  the  earth's  centre,  at  the  epoch  of  the  time  i  [8111],  for  the  origin  of  the
co-ordinates,  we  shall  get  A'  =  0,  B'  =  0  [8079],  as  in  [8113].  Then  the  formulas
[8078,  8079]  become,

x  =  A-\-a.t; yr=B-\-^t, z  =  C-{-yt; x'=o.% y'=^'t, z=0.
From  the  three  first  of  these  equations  it  appears  that A,  B, C,  represent  the  values  of
X,  y,  z,  respectively,  corresponding  to  the  epoch,  or  t  =  0. IVIoreover,  from  the  equations

ro, ,  o  1  f ^ ^  , ,  i i  f,  dx dv dz dsf dy'

[oil 8cJ,  we  find  that a,  ^,  7,  a,  p,  lepresent  the  values  ol ir  i -77 37  > rr  '  "7"  >  ^'

Uw  CLZ  ttC  ut (it

the  same  epoch ;  so  that  they  may  be  computed  from  the  tables,  as  in  [8113, 8098c,</].  From
these  we  obtain  F,  iif,  &;c.  [81 14],  by  means  of  the  formulas  [8081 — 8085],  and  then  —
from  [8091,  8090].

VOL. IV.  109

[8118a]
[8118&]

[8118c]

[8n8dJ
[8118e]

[8118/]

434  PERTURBATIONS  OF  A  COMET.  [Mec.  Gel.

^Q■,1Q^ If  we  put  T  for  the  time  of  the  revolution  of  the  comet,  and  6T  for  the

[olio J

corresponding  variation  of 6n,  we  shall  have,*
[8119]  nT  =  400°  =  (n  +  5n).{T+6T)  ;

hence  we  deduce,

[8120]  ^  =  _^I.

n  T

[8121] Putting  the  sideral  year  equal  to  T",  we  shall  have,

n T

[8122]  -  =  -  ;

therefore  we  have,  as  in  [8119/"],
[8123]  5r  =  — 104,791. m'/-|^Y.r.

Supposing,  as  in  [4061],
[8124]  ^,  _ A

329630 '

[8124'] and  putting r  =  2042''*ys682  [8104], we  obtain,
[8125]  67"  =  — 2*^^y%046  ;

tion  ofthe  which  is  the  diminution  of  the  duration  of  the  comeVs  revolution  by  means

comet's  ./  ♦^  ,7

revolution ^  ^^g  earth'' s  attraction.

*  (3831)  The  mean  motion  of  the  comet  m,  in  the  time  T,  is  represented  by  nT;
moreover  as T  is  the  time  of  the  sideral  revolution  of  the  comet,  we  shall  have,  as  in

[8119a]  j-7273'j^  ?iT=400°.  If  the  action  ofthe  planet  changes  n  into  w  +  5n,  and  T  into
T-{-STj  we  shall  have,  in  like  manner, (n-{-8n).(T-\-8T)  =  400°. Hence  we  obtain,  as

[8119&]  in  [8119],  nT={ni-Sn).{T-\-5T)  =nT+n.8T-{-T.8ni-Sn.dT',  and  if  we  neglect  the
term  Sn.5T  on  account  of  its  smallness,  rejecting  also  the  term  nT,  which  occurs  in  both
members,  we  get  0  =  n.8T-\-T.Sn',  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8120],  by
dividing  by  nT. Again,  we  obtain,  as  in  [8119a],  the  motion  of  the  earth  in  a  sideral

[8119rf] year  [8121], n'T' =  400°; hence wT=  n'T'  [8119a] ; which  may  be  reduced  to  the

[8119e] form  [8122], or ^  =(— T  j substituting  this  in  [8117],  we  get,

[8119/]  -  =  I04,791.m'.(-J  =  -  ^ [8120] ;

multiplying  this  last  expression  by  — T,  we  obtain  [8123]. Now  substituting  in  [8123]
[8119^] the  values  of  m\  T  [8124,  8124'],  also T' =  one  sideral  year =365'J''y%256384  [4068],
we  get  8T  [8125].

IX  iii.  §  14.]  MASSES  OF  THE  COMETS.  435

CHAPTER  III.

ON THE MASSES OF  THE COMETS, AND THEIR ACTION UPON THE  PLANETS.

14.  The  comets  suffer  great  perturbations  from  the  action  of  the  planets ;
they  must  therefore  re-act  upon  the  planets,  so  as  to  trouble  their  motions ;
and  we  can  determine,  by  the  formulas  of  the  two  preceding  chapters,  the
variations  in  the  elements  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets,  arising  from  the  action
of  the  comets.  Fortunately  this  action  is  insensible,  and  the  mutual
attractions  of  the  planets  upon  each  other  is  sufficient  to  account  for  all  the
known  inequalities  in  the  motions  of  the  planets  and  their  satellites.  In
fact  the  observations  on  the  motions  of  the  planets  are  represented  with  so oHhr'^

[8126]

masses  of
the  com-
ets.

great  a  degree  of  accuracy,  by  merely  taking  into  consideration  their  action
upon  each  other,  that  we  cannot  refuse  our  assent  to  the  supposition,  that
the  masses  of  the  comets  are  excessively  small.  Of  all  the  known  comets,
that  which  appears  to  have  passed  the  nearest  to  the  earth  is  the  first  comet
of  1770.  We  have  seen,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that  the  earth's  action
decreased  the  time  of  the  sideral  revolution  of  the  comet  2''''y%046  [8125]  ;
now  we  have,  as  in  [1208],*

,  m.\/a

6n'  = rV", .  8n  ;  [81271

m.\/a

[8127a]

*  (3832) The  equation [8127]  is  the  same  as  [1208],  changing  ^  into  5n, and  ^'
into  6n,  in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation ; dividing  this  by  n',  we  get  [8128]  ;

and  by  substituting the  value  of —  [8117],  it  becomes —  =  — 104,791. m. —  .  ^  ; [81276]

but  from  [8116'],  we  have -7-,==  —  > substituting  this  in the preceding equation,  it

yd r/i

inf  6T'

becomes  as  in  [8129']. Now  we  find, in  like  manner  as  in  [8120], -7-  =  —  -=^i [8127c]

substituting this  in  [8129'],  and  then  multiplying  by — T',  we  get  [8130]. Finally,

436  ACTION  OF  A  COMET  UPON  A  PLANET.  [Mec.  G^l.

consequently,

[8128]

Snf  m.s/a n Sn

[SISO'J

[8132]

n'  m\\/a' '  n'  '  n  '

[8129] Substituting — for \ /-^  [8116], and  for -  its  value [8117], we

obtain,

[8129']  -^'  =  — 104,791. m;

n

hence  we  deduce,

[8130]  6T'  =  W4>,ldl.mT'.

If  we  suppose  the  mass  of  the  comet  m  to  be  equal  to  the  earth's  mass  w',
[8124],  w^e  shall  find,  for  the  increment  of  the  sideral  year  sT',

[8131]  6T'  =  0^''',U612.

We  are  certain,  from  all  the  observations  that  have  been  made,  particularly
from  the  numerous  comparisons  of  Maskelyne's  observations,  which  were
used  by  Delambre  in  constructing  his  solar  tables,  that  the  comet  of  1770
has  not  altered  the  sideral  year  2",8 ;  thus  we  are  sure  that  the  mass  of  this
comet  is  not  y^^^  P^^^  of  that  of  the  earth.*

[8127rf] putting  m=  ^^  [8130',  8124], T' =  365'i'^y%256384 [8119^], we find that it

becomes  as  in  [813 1  J.

We  may  also  remark,  that  the  expression  of  5n'  [8127],  may  be  computed  by  finding
Sn'  from  a  formula  similar  to  [8091];  that  is,  by  changing  m,  n,  a,  x,  y,  z,  A.  B,  C,
tt,  fi,  7,  into  m',  n',  a',  x',  y',  s/,  A',  B',  C,  a',  p',  /,  respectively,  and  the  contrary.
This  does  not  change  the  vakie  of  /'  [8089,  7870],  or  of  M,  JV,  L  [8083-8085];
but  F,  U,  Sn  [8081,8082,  8091],  become  respectively,

[8127/]  F'=:{A—A').af+{B-B').^'-{-{C—C').y'  =  —F—N', [8081,  8084]

[8127^1  H'=(a  —  a').a'+(^—p').p'+(7  — /)./  =  — H—i.; [8082,  8085]

[8127.]  em.aV.iH'J^-F'L)

[8127i]  Now  from  [8127/, 5-],  we  have  H'JV-F'L={-H-L).N-{-(F-\-JV).L=—{HJV-FL);
substituting  this  in [8127/i], and  then  dividing  it  by  the  expression  of Sn  [8091],  we

[8127A-] get —  = '- —  ; which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8127],  by  means  of  [8116'].

raioo  ^  *  (3833)  If  we  suppose  the  mass  m  to  be  represented  by  m==m'.iJ'',  instead  of
»i=m'  [8130'],  the  expression  [8130],  instead  of  being  of  the  form  [8131],  will  become
5y^_Qdayji612y .  or,  by  using  the  centesimal  division  of  the  day, 6r'==  11612".fi'.

[8127e]

[8135]

IX.iii.  <^14.]  MASSES  OF  THE  COMETS.  437

It  follows,  from  the  calculations  of  the  preceding  chapter,  that  this  comet
passed  directly  through  the  space  where  Jupiter  and  his  satellites  were  then
situated  ;  and  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  the  comet  produced  the  slightest r8i33']
alteration  in  the  motions  of  these  bodies.

It  not  only  happens  that  the  comets  do  not  trouble  the  motions  of  the '^y^  fa"

*'  ■*  '  "^  of  a  comet

planets  and  satellites i  by  their  attractions;  hut  if,  in  the  immensity  of  past  pfa°n"et^
ages,  some  of  the  comets  have  encountered  them,  which  is  very  probable,  it  ^^g'^'j'^Jy^
does  not  seem  that  the  shock  can  have  had  much  influence  on  the  motions  of  {iiepianct.
the  planets  and  satellites.  It  is  difficult  not  to  admit  that  the  orbits  of  the  [8134]
planets  and  satellites  were  nearly  circular  at  their  origin,  and  that  the
smallness  of  their  ellipticity,  as  well  as  their  common  direction  from  west  to
east,  depend  upon  the  primitive  state  of  the  planetary  system.  The  action
of  the  comets,  and  their  impact  upon  those  bodies,  have  not  varied  these
phenomena ;  yet  if  one  of  them,  with  a  mass  equal  to  that  of  the  moon,
should  encounter  the  moon,  or  a  satellite  of  Jupiter,  there  is  not  the  least
doubt  that  it  would  render  the  orbit  of  the  satellite  very  excentric.
Astronomy  also  presents  to  us  two  other  phenomena,  which  seem  to  date
their  origin  from  that  of  the  planetary  system,  and  which  would  have  been
altered  by  a  very  small  shock.  We  here  allude  to  the  equality  in  the  rotatory
motions  of  the  moon,  and  the  librations  of  the  three  inner  satellites  of
Jupiter.  It  is  evident,  from  the  formulas  explained  in  the  fifth  book  and  in
the  preceding  book,  that  the  shock  of  a  comet,  whose  mass  was  only  y^Vt
part  of  that  of  the  moon,  would  be  sufficient  to  give  a  very  sensible  value  to
the  actual  libration  of  the  moon,  and  to  that  of  the  satellites.  We  may
therefore  rest  assured  relative  to  the  influence  of  the  comets,  and  astronomers
have  no  reason  to  fear  that  their  action  can  impair  the  accuracy  of
astronomical  tables.

no  1  ^

Putting  this  equal  to 2",8  [8132],  we  get f*' ==  Yl^  "^  4147 ' consequently  m=^j^; [81326]

hence  it  follows  that,  if  the  sideral  year  is  not  altered  2",8  by  the  comet's  attraction,  its

w!  .  , .  [8132c]

mass  must  he  less  than — -  ; agreeing  nearly  with  the  remark  m  [8132],

VOL. I\.  110

[8136]

TENTH BOOK.

ON  SEVERAL SUBJECTS RELATIVE  TO  THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD.

In  the  preface  to  this  work  we  have  stated,  that  we  should  examine
several  questions  relative  to  the  system  of  the  world,  and  we  shall  devote
this  book  to  that  object.  To  complete  our  plan,  there  will  then  remain
nothing  more  than  to  give  an  historical  account  of  the  discoveries  which
have  elevated  the  science  of  Physical  Astronomy  to  the  rank  it  now  holds.

CHAPTER 1.

ON ASTRONOMICAL REFRACTIONS.

[8137]

1. The  motion of  light, in the mediums through  which  it  passes,
particularly  in  the  atmosphere,*  is  one  of  the  most  important  objects  of

[8137&]

*  (3834) The  author  here  adopts,  as  the  basis  of  his  calculations,  the  Newtonian

^ "■' hypothesis  of  the  emission  of  light ;  and  it  would  seem,  at  first  view,  that  this  computation

of  the  refraction  of  the  heavenly  bodies  depends  wholly  on  that  manner  of  considering  the

subject ;  but  upon  examination  we very  easily  perceive,  that  this  hypothesis  is  introduced

in  *§>1,2,  chiefly  for  the purpose  of  demonstrating, by  means  of  it,  the usual  laws  of

reflexion  and  refraction  of  light  [8205,  8188]. Now  we  can  assume  these  laws  as  being

the  results  of  observation,  and  can  found  on  them  alone  the  theory  of  refraction  of  the

heavenly  bodies. By  this  means we can  obtain, as  in [8262c — 1\,  the  fundamental

[8137c] differential  equation  of  refraction  [8262],  without  bringing  into  view  either  Newton's  theory

of  emission,  or  the wave  theory of Huygens  j neglecting,  however,  some very  small

quantities,  which  are  within  the  limits  of  the  observations,  and  such  as  are  usually  neglected

by  La  Place. We  have  here  introduced  this  subject,  because  many  important  observations

and  discoveries  have  been  made  relative  to  the  properties  of  light,  since  the  publication  of

[8137{/j this  volume,  particularly  that  of  the  'polarization,  by  Malus  ;  the  principle  of  interferences,

X.  i.  '^  1.]  WAVE  THEORY  OF  LIGHT.  439

astronomy  ;  whether  we  consider  it  in  relation  to  the  theory,  or  to  its  eflfect

r8137'l
upon  every  astronomical  observation. We  view  the  heavenly  bodies  through

by  Young ;  and  a  muhitude  of  valuable  results,  by  Fresnel,  Brewster,  Biot, Arago,  &,c.

The  tendency  of  these  observations  has  manifestly  been  to  render  doubtful  the  theory  of roioy

Newton,  and  to  bring  forward,  with  much  approbation,  the  undulatory  or  wave  theory,  as

the  true  system  of  nature. In  this  theory  of  Huygens,  it  is  supposed  that  all  space  is  filled Jl'hTof'^

with  a  subtle  elastic  medium,  or  ether,  which  pervades  all  bodies,  occupying  the  intervals ""y^^"**

between  their  particles. By  the  agitation  of  the  luminous  body,  the  particles  of  the  ether

are  supposed  to  be  put  in  motion,  and  thus  waves  are  formed  in  it,  similar  to  those  which

are  produced  in  the  air,  water,  &c.,  when  disturbed. These  vibrations  of  the  ether  produce,

on  the  eye,  the  sensation  of  light ;  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that  of  the  production  of  sound,

in  the  ear,  by  the  vibrations  of  the  air. This  analogy  may  be  considered  as  a  circumstance

in  favor  of  the  wave  theory  of  light,  since  we  find,  in  the  economy  of  nature,  that  these

., .  r  ,  , . .  o .  .  .  .  ,  [8137A]

vibrations  are  frequently  used  m  air,  water,  &c.  m communicatmg  motion  with great

rapidity,  and  with  but  very  little  actual  displacing  of  the  particles  ;  as,  for  example,  in  the [8137t  ]

case  of  the  motion  of  air,  which  produces  sound,  moving  at  the  rate  of  nearly  800  miles  in

an  hour ;  or  in  that  of  the  motion  of  the  wave  of  the  ocean,  producing  the  tide,  which  is

not  much  less  rapid;  since  Dr.  Whewell  has  lately  shown,  that  the  cotidal  line,  or  wave  of [8137A:]

the  sea,  corresponding  to  the  time  of  high  water,  passes,  in  succession,  through  the  whole

extent  of  the  Atlantic  ocean,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  shores  of  North  America, ro^qy;

a  distance  exceeding  6000  miles,  in  about  10  hours ;  being  at  the  rate  of  above  600  miles

in  an  hour ;  and  this  rapid  velocity  is  attended  with  so  little  displacement  in  the  particles  of

the  fluid,  that  the  motion  of  the  wave  is  hardly  perceived  by  those  who  are  borne  on  it.

In  bodies  having  a  great  refractive  power,  the  ether  is  supposed  to  exist  in  a  state  of  less ^

elasticity  than  in  those  bodies  where  the refractive  power  is  less  ;  and  upon  this  principle ''^''  ^''^

it  must follow that  the  motions  are  propagated  with the least  velocities  in the  most ,g^^j  ^.^_

refrangible  bodies,  which  is  directly  contrary  to the  results  of  the  Newtonian theory, the'rao^t

[8189],  where  the  velocity  of  the  ray  is  supposed  to  increase  in  passing  from  a  vacuum body."

into  a  refracting  medium. Some  experiments  made  on  this  point  seem  to  be  in  favor  of  the ^ '  ^^^

wave  theory. Upon  the  principles  here  mentioned,  it  follows  that  the  velocity  of  light [8137;;]

continues  the  same,  in  the  same  body,  and  under  similar  circumstances ;  that  it  decreases  in [8137^]

passing  into  a  body  of  a  greater  refrangible  power, but  increases  in entering a  less [8137/]

refrangible  body. The  direction  of  the  ray,  as  in  the  case  of  the  motion  of  air  producing

sound,  is  in  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  viave  ;  and  when  the  motion  is [8137*]

propagated  in  an  uniform  ether,  the  wave  is  bounded  by  spherical  surfaces,  and  the  direction rgjqy,  -i

of  the  ray  is  from  the  centre  of  these  spherical  waves;  so  that  in  this  theory  the  rays  of

light  move  in  a  right  line,  in  a  uniform  medium. When  the  medium  through  which  the

vibrations  are  communicated  is  not  uniformly  elastic,  the  wave  will  make  unequal  progress [8137u]

in  different  directions,  according  to  the  law  of  the  elasticity. In  this  case  the  figure  of  the

440

[8137"]

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M^c.  Cel.

a  transparent  medium,  which,  by  inflecting  their  rays,  changes  their  apparent
positions,  and  makes  them  appear  in  different  places  from  those  which  they

[8137c]
[8137w]

[8137a:],

curve  will  not  be  spherical,  and  a  double  refraction  may  be  produced,  as  in  the  case  of
Iceland  crystal.

The  limits  of  the  present  note  will  not  allow  us  to  enter  into  a  full  explanation  of  the
wave  theory,  though  we  may  possibly  do  it  hereafter,  in  an  appendix ;  but  as  the  doctrine
of  the  reflexion  and  refraction  of  light  is  investigated,  in  this  chapter,  by  means  of  the
Newtonian  theory,  it  seems  proper  that  we  should  show  that  the  same  can  be  done  by
means  of  the  wave  theory.  We  shall  therefore  insert,  in  this  place,  the  demonstrations  of
the  laws  of  reflexion  and  refraction,  in  the  elementary  manner  in  which  it  was  first
explained  by  Huygens,  without  attempting  to  enter  into  a  minute  examination  of  the
corpuscular  action  of  the  particles  of  the  ether,  in  producing  these  motions,  according  to  the
methods  of  Polsson,  Cauchy,  Lame,  &,c.

Reflexion
of  light,  in
the  wave
theory.

It  is  supposed  that  every  vibrating
portion  of  the  ether,  however  it  may  have
acquired  its  motion,  whether  by  reflexion
or  refraction,  can  he  regarded  as  a  centre
of  vibration,  from  which  a  system  of
[8137y]  secondary  waves  emanates  in  all  directions,
according  to  the  laus  of  the  propagation
of  waves  in  the  medium.  Upon  this
principle  we  shall  now  demonstrate  the
law  of the reflexion  of light, or the

Fiq.anik

[8137z ]

[8138a]

[81386]

[8133c ]

[8138(/]
[8138c]

[8138/]

equality  of  the  angles  of  incidence  and
reflexion.  We  shall  suppose  CB  to  be
the  plane  of  reflexion  ;  »S'  the  luminous
objects,  from  which  proceed  successively
the  concentric  spherical  waves  C'C,
H'H,  B'B,  &c.  To  simplify  th.^
demonstration  we  shall  only  consider  a  section  of  these  waves,  by  a  plane  passing  through
S,  perpendicular  to  the  reflecting  plane,  and  forming  the  plane  of  the  annexed  figure  ;  the
circular  arc  B'B  being  continued  below  the  plane  or  line  CB,  in  the  part  BE'e'F .
Draw  the  line  5*051'  perpendicular  to  the  line  CjB,  and  make  CS'=CS;  through  any
point  whatever  H  of  the  line  CB,  draw  the  line  SHE' =  SF' =  SB ;  continue  the
line  S'H  to  E,  making  HE=HE',  or  S'E=SE'.  Then  the  point  E,  above  the
reflecting  plane,  is  situated,  relative  to  the  points  B  and  S,  in  an  exactly  similar  position  to
that  of  the  point  E',  below  the  same  plane,  relative  to  the  points  B  and  S' ;  and  from
this  construction  it  will  follow,  that  if  a  circular  arc  BF  be  described  about  the  centre  S  ,
it  will  pass  through  the  point  Ej  in  like  manner  as  the  similarly  situated  arc  BF'  passes

X.i.^1.]

WAVE  THEORY  OF  LIGHT.

441

really  occupy. It  is  therefore  important to  determine  the  law of this
inflexion,  so  as  to  obtain  the  real  situations  of  these  bodies.

[8137'"]

through  E',  making  the  angles  SHC,  S'HC,  BHE,  BHE',  equal  to  each  other.
Moreover  the  circle  EIE'K,  described  about  JEf  as  a  centre,  with  the  radius  HE,  will
touch  the  circular  arcs  BE'F\  BEF,  in  the  points  E',  E,  respectively.  These  results
hold  good,  whatever  be  the  situation  of  the  point  H  upon  the  line  CB.  Thus  if  the
point  H  fall  in  C,  the  hues  SH,  S'H,  will  coincide  with  SCS' ;  so  that  if  a  circle  be
described  about  the  centre  C,  with  the  radius  CF,  it  will  touch  the  arcs  BF,  BF'  in
the  points  -F,  F\  respectively.  Moreover,  if  the  point  h  be  taken  infinitely  near  to  A,
the  point  E'  will  change  into  the  infinitely  near  point  e',  of  the  arc  BE'F' ;  and  the
point  E  will  change  into  the  infinitely  near  point  e  of  the  arc  BEF;  and  it  will  be
evident  that  the  arc  E'e'  is  common  to  the  circles  BE'F',  EIE'K;  therefore  E'e'  is
perpendicular  to  E'H  or  E'S\  in  like  manner  EH,  or  ES',  is  perpendicular  to  Ee.
Now  if  the  direct  motion  of  the  waves  C'C,  H'H,  he.  were  not  interrupted  by  the
plane  CB,  the  particles  of  the  wave  would  arrive  at  the  points  F',  E',  B,  at  the  same
moment  of  time;  but  when  the  particle  C  of  the  wave  C'C,  arrives  at  the  point  C,  it
is  reflected  back  with  the  same  velocity  [8137g'],  and  a  secondary  luave  emanates  from  C
as  a  centre.  This  secondary  wave  arrives  at  the  situation  F,  at  the  same  moment  of  time
in  which  the  direct  wave  would  arrive  at  F',  if  its  motion  had  not  been  intercepted ;
moreover  the  direction  of  the  motion  of  this  secondary  wave,  at  the  point  F,  is  in  the  line
S'F,  as  if  it  proceeded  from  S'.  In  like  manner,  when  the  direct  wave  has  arrived  into
the  situation  H'H,  the  particle  at  H  is  reflected ;  and  a  secondary  wave,  with  the  same
velocity,  is  formed  about  iJ  as  a  centre;  and  as  HE=HE',  the  point  E  of  this
secondary  wave  will  arrive  at  E,  at  the  same  time  that  the  direct  wave  would  be  at  E',
if  it  were  not  interrupted.  Moreover  the  motion  of  this  secondary  wave,  at  the  point  E,
,is  perpendicular  to  the  wave  Ee  [8138Z],  or  in  the  direction  S'E,  as  if  it  proceeded  from
S' ;  and  the  same  is  true  wherever  the  point  H  of  the  plane  CB,  or  the  corresponding
point  E'  of  the  arc  BE'F',  may  be  situated.  Hence  the  effect  of  the  reflected  waves
will  be  to  make  the  object  S  appear  at  S',  when  viewed  by  an  observer  at  E;  and  then
we  shall  have,  as  in  [8138^],  the  angle  )SHC=the  angle  BHE;  consequently  the  angle
of  incidence  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  reflexion  ;  which  is  the  well  known  law  of  the  reflexion
of  light,  apdis  the  same  as  is  deduced  from  the  Newtonian  theory  in  [8205,  fee.].

The  demonstration  of  the  law  of  refraction  is  made  in  a  somewhat  similar  manner,  using
the  figure  105,  page  442,  which  resembles  figure  104,  page  440,  and  is  marked  with  the
same  letters;  CB  being  the  plane  of  refraction;  S  the  luminous  object ;  C'C,  H'H,
B'BE'e'F',  successive  portions  of  the  spherical  waves  emanating  from  S.  Then  when
the  point  H  of  the  wave  H'H,  meets  the  surface  of  CB,  of  a  medium  of  greater
refractive  power,  the  velocity  of  the  wave  is  decreased  [8137w],  in  a  ratio  which  we  shall
represent  by

VOL. IV.  Ill

[8138g-]
[8138/i]

[8138i ]
[8138A]

[8138Z]
[8138m]

[8138n]

[8138o]
[8138p]

[81 38^]
[8138r]
[8138«]

[8138f ]
[8138u]

Refraction
of  liglitjin
the  wave
theory.

[8138r]

442

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  Cel.

DIFFERENTIAL! EQUATION OP THE MOTION OP LIGHT.

J  We  shall  consider  the  trajectory  described  by  a  ray  of  light  which  passes

through  the  atmosphere,  supposing  all  its  strata  to  be  spherical,  and  varying

{8138«;]
[8138t«']

m
n

velocity  of  the  refracted  ray

velocity  of  the  incident  ray  '
n  being  greater  than  m ; so  that  while  the  wave  would  pass  over  the  distance  HE',  with

its  original  velocity,  it  will  describe  only  the  diminished  distance —  X  HE',  which  we

shall  make  equal  to HE,  and  then  we

[8138X] shall  have HE=^X  HE'-,  lastly  we

shall  suppose  that  a  circle  is  described
about  jFf  as  a  centre,  with  this  radius
[81383/]  HE.  In  like  manner,  if  we  take  a  point
h,  in  the  line  CB,  infinitely  near  to  H,
we  may  suppose  another  circle  to  be
drawn  about  A  as  a  centre,  with  a  radius

[8138z] Ae=  —  X  he'. Then  the  infinitely  small

arc  Ee,  which  is  a  common  tangent  to
these  two  small  circles,  will  represent  the
situation  of  the  point  of  the  refracted
wave,  corresponding  to  E'e'.  In  this
case  the  luminous  body  will  be  seen,  in
the  direction  EHS',  by  the  eye  at  E ;

OB^g.  ±05,

[8139a]

[81396]
[8139c ]

[8139rf]
[8139e]
[8139/]

and  in  the  direction  ehS',  by  the  eye  at  e ;  so  that  the  position  of  the  luminous  body  will
be  changed,  by  the  refraction,  from  S  to  S'.  We  may,  in  the  same  way,  find  the  other
parts  of  the  refracted  wave  BEeF.  From  this  construction  we  can  easily  deduce  the  law
of  the  refraction  of  light.  For  if  we  let  fall  from  A,  upon  E'HS,  the  perpendicular  hi,
and  then  upon  EHS'  the  perpendicular  hR,  we  shall  have,  by  using  the  values  of  he ,
HE  [8138^,0;],

HI  =  he'-^HE' ;  HR  =  he^HE  =  -.he'—-.  HE'.

m
n

Multiplying  the  first  of  these  equations  by  — ,  we  find  that  the  second  member  of  the
product  becomes  equal  to  the  second  member  of  the  expression  of  HR  [8139<?]  ;  hence
we  have  —  X  HI=  HR.  Dividme  this  by  Hh,  we  obtain  —  X  -r;r  =  "EJr  5  and  by
referring to the rectangular difl'erential triangles Hlh, HRh, we finally obtain

X.i.  <§,!.]  WAVE  THEORY  OF  LIGHT.  443

[8137^]

in  density  according  to  a  function  of  their  height. If  ive  suppose  the  ray
to  return,  from  the  eye  of  the  observer,  towards  the  heavenly  body,  it  will
evidently  describe  the  same  curve  as  that  which  it  traced  in  coming  from  the
body  to  the  observer.
We  shall  put,

—  X  sm.HhI=  sm.HhR. Now  Hhl  is  evidently  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence  of  the
n

direct  ray SH, upon  the  plane  of  refraction  BC; and HhR is  equal  to  the  angle  of
refraction  ;  hence  we  finally  obtain,

—  X  sine  of  angle  of  incidence  =  sine  of  angle  of  refraction  ;  [8139g-]

being  the  same  as  that  which  is  deduced  from  the  JVewtonian  theory j  in  [8188,  &c.].

[81397i]

[8139i ]

Before  closing  this  article  we  shall  observe,  that  the  method  of  demonstration  of  the  laws

of  reflexion  and  refraction,  depending  on  the  principle  of  the  least  action,  which  is  given  in

Vol.  I,  page  40,  note  (19a),  is  not  applicable  to  the  wave  theory ;  because  the  wave  theory

depends  on  the  oscillations  of  many  particles  of  matter,  instead  of  being  limited,  as  in  the

principle  of  the  least  action  [49^,  &c.]  to  the  motion  of  one  material  part. However,  we

shall  have,  in  both  theories,  by referring  to  figure  105,  supposing n to  m  to  express

the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  refraction,  and  the  points  S,  E,  to  be  given,

mXSR-\-nX  RE  =  a  minimum  ;  [81 39A;]

as  has  been  shown  in  the  note  (19a). Now  if  we  represent  the  velocity  of  the  incident

ray  by  n, that  of  the  refracted  ray,  in  the  wave  theory,  will  be  m,  as  is  evident  from

[8138ii;]. Substituting  these  values  in  [8139A;],  after  dividing  it  by  the  constant  quantity

mn,  we  get,

incident  ray  SR  ,  refracted  ray  RE  .  .

+  „^i..u„.^.u.,.A.„„....„„  =  a  minimum.  [8139m]

[8139/]

velocity  of  incident  ray  velocity  of  the  refracted  ray

The  first  member  of  this  last  equation  evidently  expresses  the  sum  of  the  times  of  describing
the  lines SR, RE, or  the  whole  time  of  describing  the  space  included  between  the  two [8l39n]
given  points  S,  E. Hence  it  appears  that  this  time  is  a  minimum,  in  the  wave  theory ;  and
this  circumstance  is  mentioned  by  Huygens,  in  Vol.  H,  page  34,  of  his  works.

444

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  Cel.

SymboU.

[8138]
[8138']

[8139]

[8139']

[8140]

[8140']
[8140"]

r  =  the  radius  drawn  from  the  earth's  centre  to  any  part  of  that  trajectory ;
a  =  the  vertical  line  drawn  from  the  observer  at  the  surface, towards  the
centre  of  the  earth,  supposing  it  to  be  spherical ;

V  =  the  angle  which  the  radius  r  makes  with  the  vertical  line  a  drawn  from
the  observer  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  supposing  it  to  be
spherical ;

(?  =  the  force  which  attracts  the  ray  of  light  from  its  rectilinear  course.
This  force  evidently  draws  the  ray  towards  the  centre  of  the  stratum,
or  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  since  there  is  no  reason  why  it
should  deviate  on  the  one  side  rather  than  on  the  other.  We  shall
consider  this  force  as  a  function  of  r ;

&  z=  the  angle  which  the  tangent  to  the  curve,  at  any  point,  makes  with  the
vertical  line  a  drawn  through  the  place  of  the  observer ;  or,  in  other
words,  ^  represents  the  apparent  zenith  distance  of  the  extremity  of
that  tangent,  supposing  it  to  be  continued  infinitely  towards  the  heavens ;

0  =  the  value  of  ^,  or  the  apparent  zenith  distance,  at  the  place  of  the
observer ;

v'  =  the  angle  formed  by  the  radius  r  and  the  tangent  of  the  curve.

Then  we  get,  from  the  equation  [376],*

[8141a]

*  (3835)  In  the  annexed  figure  106,  C  is
the  centre  of  the  earth ;  ODD'  its  surface  ;  O
the  place  of  the  observer;  OAA'G  the  path  of
the  ray  of  light,  coming  from  the  body  at  G;
AE  the  tangent  at  the  point  A  ;  AA '  a  small  arc
of  this  trajectory ;  A'F  is  the  perpendicular,  let
fall  upon  CDAF.  Then,  according  to  the
above  notation,  we  have  CA=r\  AF=dr,
OCA^^v,  ACA'=dv',  A'F=rdv;  HEA=6;
EAC=v'.  If  we  suppose  the  constant
quantity  — q^,  to  be  connected  with  the  integral

[8141c]  'Hfcpdr  [375,376],  the  last  of  these  formulas  will
be  as  in  [8141],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the
form [8141']. Again, by [369'] we have

[8141d]  xdy — ydx=cdt;  comparing  this  with  the  second
of  the  equations  [372],  we  obtain  [8143].

[81416]

mg.ioe

X.i.§l.] LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  445

f  Diffeien-

J ^"' tial  equa-

~  r./^V— c2  — 2r2./(prfr  [8141]

tions  of

cdv  ^te  motion

= ^ / ,2 ^ (^^  ' [8141']

^^  being  a  constant  quantity,  which  is  added  to  the  integral  2f(pdr.
]VIoreover,  if  we  put  the  element  of  the  time  equal  to  dt,  we  shall  have,  as
in  [369',  372],

r^dv=cdt.  [8143]
Then  we  have,*

V  +  v'  =  ^  ;  [8144]

tang.i?'  =  ^  [8145]

dr

c

c

^•\X9'-J-2/,rfr

[8146]
[8146']

ehce  we  easily  deduce,t

General
value  of
therefrac-
C  ,  tion

r

•<P^^  d&.

d6  = /  ^a  (2)  [8147]

*  (3836) In  the  triangle  ACE,  we  evidently  have,

angle  A  CE-f  angle  EAC  =  angle  HEA  ;  [8145a]

and  by  using  the  symbols  [81416],  it  becomes  as  in [8144]. In  the  differential  triangle

jj'P  rdv

FAA\ we  have tang.K^.^'  =  -^  =  -^  , as  in  [8145];  and  by  substituting  the  value [81456]

of  dv  [8141  or  8141'],  it  becomes  as  in  [8146  or  8146'].

cdT
t  (3837) Putting for  brevity w  =  q^r^—c^—27^.f(pdr, we  get dv  =  —^  [S141J, [8146a]

tang.v'=cit)-^  [8146]. The  differential  of  this  last  expression  is  dv'.(cos.v')~^=-icw~^dw'f [81465]

and  since (cos.v')-2  =  l+tang.V==l+c2M;-i [34'"]  Int., we  have,

J  ^_— ic«>-|<^M>  __ —^<^d^  [8146c]

l+c2t«-i  wK{c^-w) '

Adding  this  to  the  expression  of  dv  [8146a],  we  get  the  value  of dv-{-dv'  =  dd  [8144] ; [8146c']

hence  we  have,  by  successive  reductions,  and  the  substitution  of

dw  =2q^rdr--Ardr.f<^dr—<il^r'dr  =  ^^^^^ . 2cZr— 2 9 rVr [8146a],  [8146rf]

VOL* IV.  112

446  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

The  angle  6  at  the  origin  of  the  curve  is  the  complement  of  the  apparent
altitude  of  the  body.  At  the  other  extremity  it  denotes  the  complement  of
its  true  altitude.  Strictly  speaking,  the  complement  of  this  last  altitude  is
the  angle  formed  by  the  vertical  line  passing  through  the  observer,  and  by
a  line  drawn  from  the  body  to  the  observer.  But  on  account  of  the  limited
height  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  smallness  of  the  astronomical  refraction,
this  right  line  may  be  supposed  to  coincide  with  the  tangent  drawn  to  the
curve,  described  by  the  ray  of  light,  at  the  point  where  it  enters  into  the
atmosphere ;  the  difference is  insensible,  even for  the  moon.* Hence  it

J cdr  icdw  cdr C(c2-f~^) ■* ^'"'^  cdr C{c^-\-w) (c^m)  „

cr^.  cp  dr
[8146/-] =-— ^.

cr^.  cp  dr

This  last  expression  of  dd  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8147],  by  re-substituting  w
^ ^■' [8146a]. Now  from  the  definitions  of 6, e  [8140,8140'], it is  evident  that 6—e

represents  the  refraction  R  of  the  ray  in  proceeding  from  O  to  .^ ;  so  that  we  have
[el4(iAj ji-—^ — 0^  whose  differential  gives dR=^d6', therefore  d6  represents  the  differential  of

the  refraction.

[814Sa]

*  (3838) If  we  suppose  the  point  A',  in  figure  106,  page  444,  to  be  the  limit  of  the

atmosphere,  and  EAG to  be  a  right  line tangent to  the  point A'; the  true zenith

distance of the body G, when observed at the  point O, is  equal  to  the  angle

[81486] H0G  =  HEG—EG0  =  6—EG0. To  estimate  the  value  of  the  small  angle  EGO,

we  shall  observe  that  it  is  to  the  angle  EAO,  nearly  in  the  ratio  of  the  line  OA  to  OG;  so

O/?  (1/1 DC

[8U8c  1 that  we  shall  have  nearly  EGO  =  EA  Ox  -—  =  EAOx  tt^iX  -7^7,- Now  whatever  be
"■  ■•  •'  OG  OC OG

the  nature  of  the  curve OA,  provided  its  curvature  is  regular,  the  angle  EAO  will  be  of

the  same  order  as  the  refraction  JR,  of  the  body ;  and  by  putting it  equal  to  R,  and  also

OC

[8148rf] observing  that -— is  of  the  order  of  the  parallax P of  the  body,  we  shall  have  EGO

OA.

of  the  order PxR  X  jt^; and  as  each  term  of  this  expression  is  small,  the  angle  EGO

must  be  very  small. Thus  for  the  moon,  which  has  the  greatest  parallax,  we  have  P=-^
^ ^-^ of  the  radius  nearly  at  its  maximum;  and  the  greatest,  or  horizontal  refraction,  is  nearly

60'  [8281]  ;  hence  the  greatest  value  of  EGO  is  of  the  order I'X  777,, and in general

[8148/] this  angle  is  much  less. Now  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  is  not  more  than  yxyu  part  of

the  radius ;  therefore  the  fraction -— , when  OA  is  vertical,  is  y^^ ; and  when  OA  is

[8148g-] .  ^^'

horizontal,  it  is  nearly 1/2 ,  or  | ; hence  we  see  in  general  that  EGO  is  insensible,

and  that  we  may  put HOG  =6, as  in  [8149].

X.i.<^2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  *  447

follows  that  the  integral  of  the  expression  of  d^,  taken  from  the  origin  of
the  curve  to  its  other  extremity,  is  the  refraction  of  the  body.  But  to  obtain
this  integral,  we  must  determine  the  values  of  the  constant  quantities  c  and
q,  and  the  function  9.

The  constant  quantity  c  is  easily  determined  by  observing  that,  if  we  use [8151]
the  radius  a  [8138'],  and  commence  the  integral  fidr at  the  origin  of  the [8152]
curve,  putting 0  for  the value  of  ^  at  that  point ;  or,  in  other  words,  for \q-\ko-\
the  apparent  distance  of  the  body  from  the  zenith  at  that  point ;  we  shall
have,  by  what  precedes,*  vai^of

tans;.©  =

0  at  the  sur-

—  face  of  the

a  earth.

•S-  —  , / ^  ^  [8154]

a2

whence  we  deduce,

c

—  =  cf.sin.©.

a ^

[8155]

2.  The  value  of  q  depends  upon  the  integral  fo^dr,  consequently  upon
the  nature  of  9.  To  determine  this  function,  we  shall  consider  a  ray  of
light  which  penetrates  into  a  transparent  body,  terminated  by  plane  surfaces.
The  particle,  before  its  entrance,  is  drawn  perpendicularly  towards  the  plane  [8156]
surface,  by  which  it  enters  the  body.  For,  the  action  of  bodies  upon  light
being  sensible  only  at  very  small  distances,  the  parts  of  the  body,  which  are
at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  particle  of  light,  will  not  have  any  sensible
action  upon  it ;  and  we  may,  in  the  calculation  of  the  action  of  the  body,  [81571
consider  it  as  a  solid  of  infinite  dimensions,  terminated  by  a  plane  surface,
indefinite  in  every  direction.  In  this  hypothesis,  it  is  evident  that  the  action
of  the  body  upon  the  particle  of  light,  is  perpendicular  to  its  surface.^

[8157']
[8157"]

*  (3839) At  the  point O of  the  curve CA, we  have  f(pdr  =  0, r^^a, v'  =  e [8154a]

[8152,  &1C.]. Substituting  these  in  [8146'J,  we  get  the  expression  [8154]  ;  whose  square

c2  c2  c2 1  [81546]

being  multiplied  by 5^^  —  ^ , gives q^.tan^.^e  =  -.(l+tang.^©)  ==  - .  -— -  ; then

multiplying  by cos.^e, extracting  the  square  root,  and  putting cos.e-tang.e  =  sin.©,  it
becomes  as  in  [8155].

t  (3840) For  the  purpose  of  illustration,  we  have  inserted  the  figure  107,  page  448,
where ID'DCL  represents  the  path  of  the  ray,  which  enters  the  body  ABDE,  at  the

[8158a)

448

[8i5r']

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  CeU,

We  shall  first  consider  the  particle  before  it  enters  the  body,  using  the
following  symbols ;

[81586]

[8158c]
[8158tfl

[8]58e]

[8158/]
[8158g-]

[8158/i]
[8158{]
[8158^]

[8158^]

[8158jn]
[8158n]

[81580 ]
[8158j)]

Tig.  107.

point C  of  its  surface  ;  this  surface  being  considered  as  a  plane,  passing  through  the  lioei

AEj  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure. The  lines  MJ^,  mn,  jRQ,  BD,  Dd,  are!

parallel  to  the  surface AE ; and  the  lines FU, DTK,  D'd, perpendicular  to AE.

Then  taking C  for  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates,  and  D  for  the  situation  of  the  particle

of  light  at  any  time,  we  shall  have,  according  to  the  above  notation, CT=x, TD=s'.

Moreover  if  we  put  DO=Sf OP=ds,  we

shall  have MNnm for  the  section  of the

stratum  treated  of  in  [8158],  which  acts  upon

the  particle of  light  at D, with a force

^.ds.u{s)  [8161],  in  the  direction  BT. The

whole  action  of  the  body  upon  the  particle

will  be  obtained,  by  taking  the  integral  of  the

expression ^.ds.Tl{s), from s  =  DT to

s=DK, taking  for ^  any  point  which is

so  distant  from  D  as  to  be  without  the  sphere

of  the  sensible  action  upon  the  particle  at  D ;

and  it  is  evident  that  we  may  suppose  DK  to  be  infinite,  because  the  action  of  the  points

situated  beyond  K  are  supposed  to  be  insensible  on  the  particle  at  D ;  therefore  the  whole

action  of  the  body,  upon  the  particle  at  D,  will  be  represented  by ff^.ds.Tl{s) in  the

direction  DT', and  if  we  suppose  the  density  p  to  be  constant,  this  force  will  become

p.//^5.n(.)=p.n,(/)  [8I61'J.

Now  if  we  put z=Q, and y=s',  in  the  equations  of  the  motion  of  a  particle  [38],
they  will  become,

ddx jy

dds'

P,  Q  [34"'],  being  the  forces  acting  upon  the  particle  in  the  directions  parallel  to  the
rectangular  co-ordinates  x,  s',  respectively,  and  tending  to  increase  the  co-ordinates  [34""J.
In  the  present  case,  the  only  force  acting  upon  the  particle  is  that  in  [8158A],  which  is
represented  by  p.nj(/),  in  the  direction  of  the  ordinate  DT,  and  tending  to  decrease  it;
this  force  will  therefore  be  neg-a^ive,  and  we  shall  have  Q= — p.U^[s'),  and  P  =  0.
Substituting  these  in  the  equations  [8158Jt],  we  get  [8164,  8165].  From  these  equations
we  easily  deduce  [8167],  by  the  process  of  integration  explained  in  [8166J. The  integral

of  [8 1 64]  gives —  =  constant ; therefore  the  velocity  of  the  ray,  in  a  direction  parallel

to  the  surface,  remains  constant,  and  is  unaltered  by the  action  of  the  refractive  surface.

The  same  result  is  found  in  [8177i],  after  entering  the  surface  of  the  body.

X.i.  <§.2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  449

5  =  the  distance  of  the  particle  of  light  from  an  infinitely  thin  stratum [8158]

of  the  body,  which  is  drawn  parallel  to  its  surface  ;
s'  =  the value  of  s  corresponding  to  the  external  surface  ; or  the [8159]

distance  of  the  particle  of  light  from  the  external  surface  ;
p  ==  the  density  of  the  stratum,  whose  thickness  is  ds  ;  [8160]

p.(?5.n(s)  =  the  action  which  the  stratum,  whose  thickness  is  ds,  exerts  upon [8i6i]
the  particle  ;  and  to  have  the  whole  action  of  the  body  we  must
integrate  this  expression  from  s  =  s'  to 5  =  co, [8158/];
Ui(s')  =f,fds.u(s);  consequently T^iis)  =/,'^ds.n(s), as  in  [8242]  ; [8i6r]

K  =  folds'. u,(s'); or K=  folds'. u,(s'), when  5'  is  of  any  sensible [81G2]

magnitude  ;
n  =  the  velocity  of  the  ray  of  light  when  at  a  sensible  distance  from [8i62'j

the  attracting  body,  and  before  entering  it ;
n  =  the  expression  of  the  variable  velocity  of  the  ray  of  light,  after [8i62"j
it  is  acted  upon  by  the  attracted  body.
Noio  if  loe  put  X  and  s'  for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  particle
of  light; X  being  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  body,  and  in  the  plane
formed  by  the  vertical  line  at  that  surface,  and  the  direction  of  the  luminous Equations
ray;  vje  shall  have,  as  in  {^Ib^k^ni],  raj"ent«s

ddx  surface.

-^  =  0  ;  [8164]

^  =  -p.n.W;  [8165]

dt  being  the  element  of  the  time,  supposing  it  to  be  constant.  Therefore
we  shall  have,  by  multiplying  the  first  of  these  equations  by  2dx,  the
second  by  2^s',  and  integrating  their  sum,

— ^ —  =  constant — 2fQf.ds'Ji^{s')  =  (velocity  of  the  ray)^  [8167]

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  use the abridged  symbols [8168]

[8163]

K,  n  [8162,  8162']  ;  observing  that  when  the  particle  of  light  is  at  a  sensible
distance  from  the  attracting  body,  we  shall  evidently  have  fQds'.ny{s')=  K,
because  the  action  of  the  body  upon  light  is  sensible  only  at  very  small
distances  ;  hence  we  get,*

[8169]
[8170]

*  (3841) To  avoid  the  consideration  of  negative  signs,  in  the  limits  of  the  integrals,  we
shall  adopt  the  method  proposed  in  [8137']  ;  and  instead  of  considering  the  path  of  the  ■'

particle,  in  its  motion  from  I  [fig.  107,  page  448] towards  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates

VOL. IV.  113

460

Velocity
before

[8171]

entering
the  body.

[8172]

[8173]

Velocity
at  the  Bur-
face  of  the
body.

[8174]

[8175]

[81646]

[8164c]

[8164rfJ

[8164e]
[8164/]

consequently,
Hence  we  deduce,

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.
n^  =  constant — 2Kf ;
constant  =  w^-l-2J5rp.

[Mec.  Ck\.

dt"^

=  n'-\-2KP^2p.f,''ds'.u,{s')  =  (velocity  of  the  light)^ ;

so  that  ivhen  the  light  enters  into  the  body,  where  s'  =  0  and  the  integral
commences,  we  shall  have,  for  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  ray,  the
expression n^-{-  2Kp.

To  obtain  the  value  of  the  square  of  the  velocity,  when  the  light  has
penetrated  into  the  body,  by  the  quantity  s',  we  shall  observe  that  s'  being
the  distance  of  the  particle  from  the  surface  of  the  body,  it  is  attracted
towards  that  surface  by  a  stratum  of  the  thickness  s' ;  but  this  attraction  is

C,  at  the  surface  of  the  body,  we  shall  consider  it  in  a  backward  course,  from  C  towards  I.
Then  we  have  CT^x,  TD=s\  Dd=dx,  D'd=ds';  hence  DD'=^dx^-\-ds"^.
Dividing  this  by  the  time  dt,  we  get  the  general  expression  of  the  velocity  of  the  particle
of  light,  which  we  shall  represent,  as  in  [8162"],  by  the  Roman  letter  n,  when  at  the
point  D,  or  after  it  has  entered  within  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  attracting  body ;  the
symbol  n  being  its  value  before  it  is  acted  upon  by  the  body  [8162']. Hence  we  have

generally n  =  -^jj-  =  vdx^-J-^^'^ ;  substituting  this  in  [8167],  we  get,

dt

dt

n^  =  — -^ —  =  constant — 2/^"  p.ds.Il^{s)

=  constant— 2/o=°p.rf/.n,(s')4-2/,,^p.c7/.nX/)  ;
the  last  of  these  expressions  being  easily  derived  from  that  which  precedes  it,  by  merely
changing  the  limits  of  the  integrals. If  we  suppose  p  to  be  constant,  the  expression
[8164/]  becomes  successively,  by  using  K  [8162],

[8164g]
[8164/i]

[8164i]
[8164A:]

[8164i ]

dx^-^ds'^
d^

constant— 2p./o'=°  <?/.n,(/)+  2p./,?'  ds'.n^s)

=  constant  —2Kp  -f.2p./.?°rfs'.n,(s').
When  the  distance  /  is  so  great  that  the  particle  is  without  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the
attracting  body,  the  integral  part  of  tlie  expression  [8164A]  vanishes,  and n  changes  into
n;  then  the  expression  [8164/t]  becomes  as  in  [8171]  ;  hence  we  easily derive  the  value
of  the  constant  quantity,  as  in  [8172]. Substituting  this  in  [8164e],  we  get,  as  in  [8173],

dx^-\-ds'^

rff2

n^-\-2Kp—y^'pM.  n.(s')-

At  the  point  C  of  the  surface  of  the  body,  where  s'=0,  the  integral  part  of  the  second
member  of  [81 64A:]  vanishes,  and  this  expression  of  the  square  of  the  velocity  becomes
n^-f  2irp, as  in  [8174].

X.  i.  «§.  2.]

LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.

451

destroyed  by  that  of  an  inferior  stratum  of  the  same  thickness ;  so  that  the
particle  moves  in  the  same  manner  as  if  it  were  acted  upon  only  by  the
strata  which  are  situated  below  these ;  it  is  therefore  affected  in  the  same
manner  as  lohen  it  is  without  the  body,  at  the  distance  s'  from  its  surface ;
therefore  the  attraction,  which  the  body  exerts  upon  it,  is  equal  to  p.ni(5'),
[8158A].  But  in  this  case  the  attraction  tends  to  increase  s  ;  therefore,  by
putting X  and  s'  for  the  co-ordinates  of  the  particle,  we  shall  have,*

ddx ^

~d^  ^^'

dds'
~d^

=  p.ni(5').

hence  we  deduce.

dx^+ds''

=  constant-|-2p.yj'c?5'.ni(5').

The  constant  quantity  is  evidently  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  the  particle,

*  (3842)  In  computing  the  path  of  the  particle  CGL,  fig.  107,  page  448,  after  it  has
entered  the  body  at  C,  we  shall  put  CF=x,  FG  =  s',  for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates
of  any  point  G  of  this  part  of  the  path.  If  we  continue  the  vertical  ordinate  FG  to  H,
making  FG  ■=  GH,  and  draw  the  plane  RHQ^  parallel  to  the  surface  AE,  it  is  evident
that  the  attraction  of  the  different  parts  of  AEQ^R  upon  G  will  mutually  destroy  each
other;  and  the  particle  will  be  acted  upon  only  by  the  part  RQ^DB,  which  falls  below
the  plane  iJQ;  so  that  the  particle  of  light  will  be  affected  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as
if  it  were  at  the  distance  GH=s',  without  the  surface,  and  acted  upon  by  the  whole  body.
Then  the  force  acting  upon  the  \)2in\c\e,  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  will  be,  as  in  [8158A],
p.nj(s'),  and  nothing  parallel  to  the  surface,  p  being  constant  [8I58A].  These  forces  give
the  expressions  [8177,  8178],  which  are  similar  to  [8164,  8165],  the  sign  of  Il^{s)  being
taken  positive  in  [8178],  because  this  force  tends  to  increase  FG  or  /.  Now  multiplying
[8177,  8178]  by  'Hdx,  'Hds,  respectively,  and  integrating  the  sum  of  these  products,  we
get  [8179] ;  substituting  the  value  of  the  constant  quantity  [8180],  it  becomes.

dt^

^2_{_2Jrp-{-2p.y?'rf«'.n,(s').

When  the  particle  has  penetrated  into  the  body  a  sensible  distance, /,  we  shall  have
f^ds'.uJ^s')=^K  [8162] ; substituting  this  in  [8177^],  it  becomes,

2 rfjs  +  rf^'s

dt^

=  n2-f  4Zp,

as  in  [8182]. Finally  we  may  remark,  as  in  [8158o],  that  the  integral  of  the  equation

dx
[8177]  gives  the  value  of —  =  constant ; so  that  the  velocity,  parallel  to  the  surface,  is

[8175']

[8176]

After  en-
teriDg  the
first  sur-
face at  an
insensible
distance.

[8177]

[8178]

[8179]

[8177a]
[81776]

[8177c]

[8177rf]
[8177c]

[8177/]
[8177^]

[8177;^]
[8177t]

constant.

452  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

rsisoi  ^^  ^^^  point  lohere  it  enters  into  the  body,  and  we  have  just  seen  [8174]  that
this  square  is  equal  to  n^-\-2Kp.  To  determine  the  value  of  .the  integral
Jds'.Ui^s'),  when  the  particle  has  penetrated  sensibly  within  the  body,  we

rsisn ^^^  observe  that  this  is  very  nearly  equal  to  that  value  taken  from s'=  0

After  en- to  s' ==  CO  ,  therefore  it  is  equal  to  K  [8162]; hence  we  have,  when  the

face  at  a particlc  has  sensibly  penetrated  into  the  body,

sensible  ^ 9 i J  '2

distance.  uX -4- (IS  o ■ i  -r^  mt  t^<ti  -t

[8182]  -ii—  =  »H4^P. [8177A]

.g  We  shall  put 6  for  the  angle  of  incidence,  which  the  ray  of  light  makes

with  the  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  before  its  entrance  into  the  body,  and
when  at  a  sensible  distance  from  it ;  and  we  shall  have,*

dx
[8184]  sin.d  =  —  ;

ndt

also  6'  for  the  angle  of  refraction,  which  the  ray  of  light  makes  with  the

perpendicular  to  the  surface,  when  it  has  sensibly  penetrated  into  the  body ;

and  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8184J],

dx  dx

[8185]

[8186]

sm.9  =

\/^i^+d^' ndt.X yVTW

l+-ir-p

* (3843) In the differential triangle DD'd, fig. 107, page 448, we have
[8184a] sm.DD'd=-—-; and  by  substituting Dd=dx, DJ)'  =  ndt  [8l64h,d},  it  becomes

dx
sin.DD'd=  -—. Now  before  the  particle  enters  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  body,  we

have n  =  n  [8164cj«?], and DD'd  =  6  [8183]; then  the  equation  [8184a]  becomes
[81846  ]  jj.

sin.d  =  — ,  as  in  [8184]. After  the  ray  has  penetrated  into  the  surface  of  the  body,  n

[8184c] changes  into \/n'-i-\-iKp  [8182], and DD'd changes into 6'  [8185]; then [8184a]

dx
[8184rf] becomes sin.d'  =  -^T— ;===== , which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8186]. Now  the

differential  expression  [8164  or  8177] is the same  in  all parts  of  the  path, namely

ddx ^  ..... dx  dx  II-  • •

[8184c] ■T7-  =  0;  and  Its  mtegral  IS —=  constant, or —=  constant; so  that  this  quantity  js

[8184/]  <jf  the  same  value  in  [8186]  as  in  [8184].  Finally,  dividing  [8186]  by  [8184],  and  then
multiplying  the  result  by  sin.^,  we  get  [8187] ;  and  from  this  we  obtain  the  following
proportion,

[8184ff] ^^^-^  •  ^^°*^  *  •  \/n^-AKp  :n  : :  the  velocity  after  refraction  :  the  velocity  before  refraction,
as  in  [8188].

X.i.<^2.] LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  453

The  values  of  — are  the  same  in  both  cases  [8184e], since  we have [8186']

ddx  Ratio  of

always — —  =  0;  therefore  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8184/*,^],

dt^

the  sine  of
incidence
to  the  sine
of  refrac-
tion.

sin.a  =  - — 7^—  ;  or>  [8187]

[8188]

square
of  the
velocity.

sine  of  ,he  angle  of  incidence  a _  y/j  ^  4^  ■ ^8191']  ;  [8187']

Sine  of  the  angle  of  relraction  &  V  n'*

tliat  iSf  the  sine  of  incidence  is  to  the  sine  of  refraction  in  a  constant  ratio,
and  this  ratio  [in  the  Newtonian  theory  of  lightl  is  that  of  the  velocity  of
light  after  having  sensibly  penetrated  into  the  body,  to  its  velocity  before  that
time,  and  when  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  body.

The  quantity  4^p  [in  the  Neivtonian  theory^  is  the  increment  of  the  rQigoi
square  of  the  velocity  of  light,  when  it  has  experienced  the  whole  action  of  the  increment
transparent  body.  This  quantity  is  not  the  same  in  different  diaphanous
bodies ;  and  it  is  not  in  the  ratio  of  their  densities.  Possibly  the  function  of
the  distance,  which  expresses  the  action  upon  light,  may  differ  for  every
different  body  ;  or  it  may  be  the  same,  varying  only  in  the  different  bodies
by  the  product  of  the  density  multiplied  by  a  constant  coefficient,  depending
on  the  nature  of  the  bodies.  In  both  these  suppositions,  the  whole  action  of
the  body  upon  light  will  be  the  same  ;  and  since,  in  the  calculation,  we
require  only  the  whole  result  of  the  action,  we  may  use  the  second  hypothesis
as  the  most  simple.  The  constant  coefficient  just  mentioned,  will  represent
the  respective intensity of  the  action  of  the bodies  upon light,  or  their

refrangible  power. This  coefficient  is  proportional  to —^  ; so  that loe  may [8i9i]

represent  the  refrangible  power  of  the  body  by  that  quantity.  If  we  put  i  for  Ratio  t.
the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction,  we  shall  have,  by  ^  ^
what  has  been  said,*

[8190]

[8192a]

y 4K

*  (3844) We  have,  as  in [8191',  8187'], i=  \/  l-f  — .p. Squaring  this  equation

and  reducing,  we  obtain  [8192]. If  we  put  for  brevity,

A:=-;^,  [81926]

the  equation  [8187]  may  be  put  under  the  form,

sin.d  =  v/r+Ip.sin.d'  =  i.  sin.^.  [8192c]

VOL. IV.  114

454

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  Cel.

[8192]

Refrangi-
ble power

AK

n2  •

[8193]

[Bids']

[8194]

When  ap-
proaching
towards
the  second
surface.

[8195]

[8196]

4K

v'—l

=  the  refrangible  power ;

therefore  we  shall  have,  by  this  formula,  the  ratios  of  the  refrangible  powers
of  different  substances.

As  the  rays  of  different  colors  have  different  refrangibility,  it  follows  that
their  velocities  are  not  the  same,  or  that  the  intensity  of  the  action  of  a  body
upon  each  of  them  is  different.  The  difference  of  velocity  alone  will  not
account  for  all  the  phenomena  of  the  refrangibility  of  the  rays ;  for  in  that
case  the  difference  of  the  refractions  of  the  extreme  rays,  or,  in  other  words,
the  dispersion  of  light,  would  be  the  same  for  all  the  bodies  which  refract
equally  the  mean  rays,  which  is  contrary  to  observation.

We  shall  now  consider  the  particle  of  light  while  moving  ivithin  the  body,

and  just  at  the  point  of  quitting  it,  at  a  plane  surface,  which  is  inclined  by

the  angle  s to  the  surface  at  which  the  particle  entered  into  the  body. We

shall  put  s'  for  the  distance  of  this  particle  from  the  second  surface,  and  x

for  its  absciss  parallel  to  that  surface ;  and  we  shall  then  have,*

ddx

=  U  J

dds'

=  p.ni(5').

[81956]

[8195c]

IFiqloa

*  (3845)  We  shall  suppose,  in  the  annexed
figure  108,  that  ACE  is  the  first  surface,  and
[8195a]  BVD  the  second  surface  of  the  body;  ICVL
the  path  of  the  particle  of  light;  B'VD'  parallel
to  ACE]  CC  perpendicular  to  AE;  VS
perpendicular  to  B'VD' ;  W  perpendicular
'  to BVD. Then  we  shall  have,

^n^\eBVD'  =  SVV'  =  s, [8194]  ;

angle  SVC=  &' ;  angle  V'VC=^'-\-s.

Now  when  the  particle  is  approaching  towards  the

point  F",  and  is  at  any  point  P,  its  rectangular  co-ordinates  are  VP'  =  x,  and  PP'=s  ;
this  last  being  perpendicular  to  VP',  or  parallel  to  VV  ;  and  it  is  very  evident  that  the
[8195rf]  particle  will  then  be  acted  upon,  by  the  body,  in  like  manner  as  in  [8176] ;  and  we  shall
get,  for  the  difl^ereniial  equations  of  its  motions,  the  expressions  [8195,  8196],  which  are
similar  to  those  in  [8177,  8178],  using  the  same  method  as  in  [8164rt].  Multiplying
^ *1 [8196]  by 2ds', and integrating the product, we get  [8197], corresponding  to  any

point  within  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  surface  BVD.

X.i.<^2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  455

Hence  we  deduce,

—  =  constant  +  2p./j'J5'.ni(s')  ;  [8l97j

the  integral  being  taken  from  s'=0. When  s'  has  a  sensible  value,  this
integral  is  equal  to 2K?  [8169],  and  we  shall  have,*

|  =  „.\^l  +  ^.p.sin.(«'+0;

[8199]
[8200]

therefore,
which  gives,

constant  =  »=/l  +  ^ .  pVcos.^a'+s)  —2Kf ;  [820i]

When  ap-

/7c'  2 / 4  Jt^ \ ^  proaching

^  =  n\{\  +  ^  .  p) .cos.\^+s)-2Zp+2p^^'c?5'.n,(5').  [8202]

^ '  towards

J„'2  the  second

7%«5  value  of  -— -  t(;i7/  vanish,  before  the  ray  arrives  at  the  second  surface,  ''"'*^''^-

^  [8203]

whenever (\-\ — ^  .  p  ] .  cos.^C^'+O  is  less  than\ -r-  •  P« In  this case  it  is

*  (3846) When  the  particle  is  within  the  body,  at  P, at  a  sensible  distance  from  the

y 4T~  t8199a]

surface  BVD,  its  velocity  in  its  path  is \/n^-4Kp, or n.\X  1-]-— .p  [8182]. This

is  resolved  in  the  directions  parallel  to  the  co-ordinates  x,  s',  or  P'V,  PP',  by
multiplying  it  by  sin.FFP',  cos. VPP'j  respectively;  and  as  we  have  the
angle  FPP'  =  the  angle  V'VC  =  6'-{-s  [81956],  they  become  as  in  the  second  members
of  [8199,  8200],  respectively.  The  first  members  of  these  expressions  being  the  well
known  values  of  the  velocities  in  the  directions  of  the  co-ordinates. Substituting  the  values

[8200,  8162]  in  [8197],  we  get,  by  transposition,  the  value  of  the  constant  quantity

rf«'2  [8199<i]

[8201]  ;  and  by  introducing  it  into  the  general  expression  of —  [8197],  when  within  the

sphere  of  activity  of  the  second  surface  BVD,  it  becomes  as  in  [8202]. This  represents

the  value  of  -—  , in  the space  included  between the  second  surface  BVDy  and  the

^^  [8199c]

point  within  the  body  where  the  particle  is  first  sensibly  affected  by  the  attraction  here

treated  of.

ds'
t  (3847) When --  =  0, the  expression [8202] gives, by dividing by n^, and

transposing  the  two  last  terms,  using  also  for  brevity k=  ~  [81926],

456  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

evident  that  the  value  of  -r- vv^ill  remain  alvi'ays  the  same,  and  the  particle
[8203']  dt  J  ^  r

w^ill  begin  to  recede  from  the  surface,  describing  a  curved  branch,  precisely

similar  to  that  which  it  passed  over  in  approaching  towards  the  surface  ;  *

ds'
[8204] the  vertex  of  the  whole  curve  being  at  the  point  where —  vanishes. The

action  of  a  body  upon  light  being  sensible  only  at  very  small  distances,  the
part  of  the  trajectory,  which  is  sensibly  curved,  may  he  considered  as  a  point.

[8-^036]  (l-i-A:.p),cos.2(^'+8)  =  |A:.P—  %f,' ds' .U,{s')  ;

and  as  the  integral  f^'ds'.U^^s')  commences  when  /=0,  the  second  member  of  [82035]
must  be  less  than  ^kp  when  s'  exceeds  zero,  as  in  [8203].  Dividing  [82036]  by
l-f-^p?  and  substituting  the  result  in sin.^ (^-|-0  ^^  ^ — cos.^{6'-\-e),  we  get,

[82030]  sin.=  (y+o  =  i±^  +  ^^.f;w.nAs') ;

hence  it  is  evident  that  this  limit  of sin.^(^'-}-e) generally exceeds , because

i+«P
[8203i] the  integral f^'ds'.'n.^{s') is either  zero  or positive, while s' varies from 0 to s' ;

this  agrees  with  [8208].

[8204a]
[82046]

*  (3848) The  force  acting  on  the  particle  being  in  the  direction  PF', fig.  108,  page
45i,  perpendicular  to  the  surface  BD,  the  velocity  in  the  direction P'F,  parallel  to  that

ds'  .

surface,  will  always  remain  the  same ;  and —  [8202]  being  a  function  of  /,  its  value  in

the  second  branch  of  the  curve,  in  receding  from  the  surface  BD,  must  be  the  same  as  in
the  Jirst  branch  in  its  approach  towards  BD,  for  equal  values  of  s\  Therefore  the  two
branches  must  be  similar  ;  and  the  vertex  of  the  curve  is  at  the  point  where  the  motion  is

'■ *'■' parallel  to  the  surface  BD,  which  evidently  corresponds  to —  =  0,  as  in  [8204].

The  path  of  the  ray  in  this  case  resembles  the  figure  of  a  hyperbolic  curve,  the  point  of
[8204(/] reflexion  being  in  its  principal  vertex. The incident  and  reflected  ray may  then  be

considered  as  the  asymptotes  of  the  curve,  since  its  curvature  is  confined  to  the  insensible

part  of  the  path,  which  falls  within  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  second  surface.  Similar
'■ *  ' remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  form  of  the  path  of  a  refracted  ray,  which  may,  for  the

same  reasons,  be  considered  as  of  a  hyperbolic  nature.  It  is  also  evident,  in  this  case,  that
[8204/] jjjg  action  of  the  body  on  the  ray  must  be  excessively  great,  in  comparison  with  the  force

of  gravity  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  to  produce  such  an  essential  change  in  the  motion
[8204^] of  a  particle,  in  the  small  part  of  a  second  of  time,  during  which  the  ray  is  within  the  sphere

of  activity  of  the  surface.

X.i.<§>2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  457

and  the  two  branches  of  the  curve  as  tivo  right  lines,  meeting  in  that  point, t^^os]
[8204  J,  &c.]  ; so  that  the  ray  loill  appear  to  be  reflected  from  the  second Angle  of

/•  7/»/»-  ••  ^  ' •  -I  reflexion

surface,  at  an  angle  of  reflexion  which  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence*  thraVte

The  limit  where  this  reflexion  takes  place,  is  when  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  dence?*

incidence  ^+S  upon  the  second  surface,  is  represented  by  the  following  [8C06]

expression  [8207a,  &c.]  ;  Lmu

where  the
reflexion
takes
place.

sin.(d'  +  £).  [8207]

The  reflexion  alioays  takes  place  when  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  incidence

exceeds  this  limit  [8204c] ;  but  when  it  is  less,  the  ray  is  transmitted ;  and  [82C8]

it  is  evident  that  after  the  ray  has  passed  the  second  surface,  and  is  at  a  j^st'after

sensible  distance  from  it,  we  shall  have.f  theBecond

'  surface.

ds'
•  (3849) If  the  velocity  of  the  ray —  vanish,  at  the  moment  the  ray  arrives  at  the

'^^  [8207o]

second  surface,  where  s'=  0,  we  shall  have  f^' ds' .Il^{s')  =  0  ; and  then  the  expression

[8203c]  will  become sin.^(d'-|-£)  =  r^r — ; whence  we get  the value  of  sin.(^-}-£),

[8207] ;  and  when  this  sine  exceeds  that  value,  the  ray  will  be  reflected  at  the  second
surface.

[82076]

[82096]

t  (3850)  The  expression  [8209]  may  be  computed  in  the  same  manner  as  in  finding
[8202] ;  or  we  may  derive  [8209]  from  [8202],  by  the  following  considerations.  While
the  particle  is  approaching  towards  the  second  surface  BD,  fig.  108,  page  454,  the
ordinate  PP'  =  s',  and  the  integral  y^  £?5'.n,(/),  decrease  in  value;  so  that  when  the
particle  arrives  at  the  surface  at V, they  will  both  vanish  together. During  this  time

the  expression  of  the  square  of  the  velocity -- continually  decreases  with  yj'J/.nj(s), [8209c]

ttt'*

until  this  integral  vanishes  at  the  point V. At  this  point  the  particle  passes  without  the
second  surface BVD, and  the  integral ^f^'ds'-TlJ^s') changes  its  sign,  and  becomes
— p.y;''f7/.n^(/)  ; observing  that  the  force p.n,(0 is  equal  to p.n,(— s')  [8176,  &c.]; [8209rf]
and  that  its  direction  always  continues  to  be  parallel  to  VV,  towards  the  inner  part  of  the [8209e]
body. Making  this  change  of  the  sign  in  [8202],  it  becomes  as  in  [8209],  which  will

rfs'2  .  [8209/]

therefore  represent  the  value  of  the  continually  decreasing  quantity — ,  when  the  particle

has  passed  the surface  BD,  and  is  without  the  body ;  considering  s'  as  positive,  in  the
integral  expression  [8209]. When  the  particle  is  at  a  sensible  distance  without  the  body, [8209g-]
we  shall  have  f^'ds'.U^is')=K  [8162]  ;  and  then  [8209]  will  become  as  in  [8211].

VOL. IV. «  115

458  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M^c.  Cel.

[8209]  ^  =  n\(}  +~.  pycos.\6'+s)-2Kp-^2?.f,''ds'.u,(s')  ;

the  integral  beinsr  taken  from  s'=  0. At  a  sensible  distance  5',  we  have
[82101  00

Motion fo  ds',Tii(^s')  =  jST,  as  in  [8162]  ;  and  then  we  have,

when  at  a

sensible  <//2  /  4^ \

[8211]  "^  =  ^'-  V^  +  ^  •  0 '  ^""^''^^  "^  0— 4^p ;

distance  ^  '

without  ^g'  2

sirflw""^ TT  will  therefore  vanish,  whenever  we  have,*
at'*

[8212]  sin.(d'+  s)  >  S  — -

)  1  +  — .p

i ^  n^  ^

In  this  case  the  particle  will  appear  to  be  reflected  from  the  surface,  making
the  angle  of  reflexion  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence. Therefore,  from

[8213] sin.(^'+0=^ ^^^[8212], to sin.(d'+s)=}-_l^( [8207],

C  +  ^-f)  (i  +  ^-p)

Limits  of  ^  ■^

^{ttlfx- the  particle  will  appear  to  be  reflected  from  the  second  surface,  after  it  has

ion.

[8214] passed  through  the  diaphanous  body; and  from sin.(d'-j-0  =

n-^

1 , 4ir ,

[8207], to sin.(^+0  ==  1> ^^^  particle  will  appear  to  be  reflected  from
the  second  surface,  without  ever  arriving  at  that  surface. When sin.(^+£)

*  (3851) The  greatest  limit  of  the  value  of  f^'ds'.Il{s'),  is  K  [8162]  ;  substituting

this  in  the  second member  of  [8209], it  becomes w^.flH — ^.  pj.cos.^(d+0 — ^-^P'

[8212a] hence  it  is  evident  that  if n^.(l-{-~.p).cos.^{&'-{-e)<^4:Kp, the second member of

[82126] [8209]  will  become  negative  for  certain  values  of  s' ;  and  with  these  values -^  will

become  negative,  so  that  its  square  root,  which  represents  the  velocity  of  the  particle,
[8212c 1

resolved  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  the  second  surface,  will  be  impossible. Substituting

cos.2(^-f-0  ==  1 — sin.2(5'-}-0 i"  ^he  preceding  expression  [8212a],  we  get,

[8212d] n2+4Z,>-n2.^1+^.pYsia.2(d'-f£)<4^P, or nK(l-^^ .  pysm.^{^+ e):>n^.
Dividing  this  by n^.(  1  -j — ^  .  p) , and  extracting  the  square  root,  it  becomes  as  in  [8212].

X.i.§2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  459

is  less  than S / [8212], the  particle  will  be  transmitted  through [8215]

the  body  without  reflexion* Then  we  shall  have,  at  a  sensible  distance  from {^^^l^l
the  body,  body  a*

^^^  2  /^1 I 4^ \ • 2/;,/  I A  roiom  quantity.

—  =  71^(^1  +  — .  pj .  sm.^C^  +s) [8199]  ;  ^8216]

which  gives  the  square  of the  velocity of  light  equal  to n^  [8215c]  ;

consequently  it  is  the  same  as  it  was  before  the  particle  entered  into  the

body. Putting  &"  equal  to  the  angle  which  the  direction  of  the  ray  makes [8218]

with  the  perpendicular  to  the  second  surface,  after  it  has  quitted  the  body,  and

is  at  a  sensible  distance  from  it,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8186],

• *//  dx

sm.r  = ,^^  . .., :  [8219]

therefore,

sin.O"  =  \/l  +  if.  p  .sin.(^4-0-

[8220]

S

*  (3852) Putting cos.3(^-}-£)  =  l— .sin.»(^-fs)  in  [8211],  we  get,  by  using  for  brevity
^  =  ';f  [81926],

—  =n2— n''.(l+A:p).sin.2(4'+6),  j-ggiSa]

which  always  has  a  real  value  when sin.(4'-}-0  <!  )  rj^  \ \ so  that  the  ray  will  then

dx  ds"-^

be  transmitted. The  velocity —[8199]  being  squared,  gives  [8216] ; and  that  of  — [82156]

[8211],  is  the  same  as  in  [8217]. The  sum  of  the  two  expressions  [8216,  8217]  gives,
by  making  a  slight  reduction,  and  using  k  [81926],

^-fipf:i=.n^{l+kp)^Kp=n^ ;  [8215o]

rfa;2_i_^'2
and  as  the  first  member  of  this  expression, — — —  ,  represents  the  square  of  the  velocity

[8164£?,  c],  after  quitting  the  body,  this  velocity  will  be  represented  by  n  ; being  the  same [°215rf]

as  in  [81 62^],  before  entering  the  body. Hence  \/dx^-{~ds'^  =  ndt ;  substituting  this  and

^  [8216],  in  [8219],  which  is  similar  to  the  first  formula  in  [8186],  it  becomes  as t^^^^^l

in  [8220].

460  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

If  we  suppose  that  the  second  surface  is  contiguous  to  the  surface  of  a  second
[82211  opake  or  diaphanous  body,  whose  action  upon  light,  at  the  distance  5',  is
Before  represented  by  p'.^i(5'),  p'  being  its  density,  we  shall  have,  while  the  ray
u?e^.econd reuiaius  within  the  first  body,*

[8222'] which  gives,  by  putting K'  ^fo''ds'.^i(s'),

[8223] '!^=:n\(l+^.p\cos.%^+e)—2Kp+2K'p'+2pJ,^^^^^

[8223']  '^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^y  ^^^^  appear  to  be  reflected  from  the  common  surface  of
the  two  bodies,  without  penetrating  into  the  second  body,  whenever  the  sine

[8224]  Qf  incidence,  or  sin. (^'  +  5),  is  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  following
quantity ;  f

*  (3853) The  force p'.^i(/) tends  to  decrease  the  force p-UX^')  [8196],  and  must
r8222al therefore  be  subtracted  from  it,  giving  for  the  result  the  quantity  p.II^^s') — p'.^j(s'),  as  in
the  second  member  of  the  equation  [8222],  which  is  similar  to  [8196,  &c.]. JVIultiplying
[8222]  by  2ds', and  integrating,  we  get,

[82226]  ^  =  constant+2p.yi''(//.n,(/)— 2pVo''c/y.*,(0-

When  the  particle  is  within  the  first  body,  and  at  a  sensible  distance  from  its  surface,
—  will  be  as  in  [8200];  and  the  preceding  expression,  by  using  Jr[8162],  and  IC
[8222^],  will  become,

[8222c  ]  n^/l  +  —  •  p)  •  cos.\6'-\-s)  =  constant+2Zp— 2ir'p'.

Finding  the  value  of  the  constant  quantity  [8222c],  and  substituting  it  in  [82226],  we  get
[8223].

[8225a]

f  (3854) At  the  surface  which  separates  the  two  bodies  we  have  fQ'ds'.Il^{s')  =  0,
fods'.^i{s')  =  0 ; and  if  the  particle  of  light  just  touches  that  surface,  without  passing

ds'
through  it,  we  shall  have —  =  0 ; then  [8223]  becomes,

at

[82256]  0  =  n^.(l  +  ^.  /,).cos.2(d'+s)-2Z/.+2ir>' ;

and  by  substituting cos.^(^ef~{-s)  =  1 — sin.^(^-|"0> ^^  S^*?
[8225c ]  n^.(l-\-~.  f). sin.2(^+s)  =  n^-{-2Kf  +2X'/ ;

whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of sin.(d'-j-s)  [8225].

ds'
[6225rf] If  the  velocity — - be  supposed  to  vanish  before  the  particle  attain  the  surface  which

X.i.  '§>2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  461

- . - \ .  [Limit  of  sin.(d+0].  [^225]

rr  J

If  the  particle  passes  from  the  first  body  into  the  second,  it  is  evident,
from  [8225/i,  &c.],  that  at  the  distance  5'  from  the  surface,  we  shall  have,

Motion
within  the
second

J  =  1l\(  1  +  ^  .  pJ.COS.^(^'+s)— 2Zp+2^V— 2p./<^5'.n,(5')+2p'./(/5'.^,(5'). [8226]

^  '  small dis-

tance from
the  8ur-

[8225g-]

separates  the  two  bodies,  the  integrals  [8225«]  will  not  vanish,  and  we  may  assume  for  the
value  of  sin.2(()'-j-£)  the  following  expression,  which  is  similar  in  form  to  that  in  [8225],
with  tlie  addition  of  a  term  depending  on x;

2^ 2^' , 2x 2^ ?^' '_  ?^
sin.V-}-£)  = 4^ ^, or cos.\^+b)^- ^^ [8225c]

ds'
Substituting  this  value  of  cos.^{6'-{-s) in  [8223],  putting —  =  0, and neglecting  the

terms  which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  then  dividing  by  2,  and  transposing  — x,  we  get,

X  =  p.f^'ds'.U,{s')  —  p'.y^V«'.^.(/).  [8225/]

Substituting  this  value  of  x  in  the  expression  of  sin.^(^-{-s)  [8225e],  we  find  that
whenever  x  is  negative,  the  expression  of  sin.(4'+s)  will  he  less  than  that  in  [8225],
instead  of  being  always  greater  or  equal  to  it,  as  is  asserted  in  [8224].  If  the  particle  of
light  pass  into  the  second  body,  the  value  ds  becomes  negative,  and  for  equal  values  of  s'
we  have,  as  in  [8209d],  n,(— s')  =  n,(/) ;  so  that  the  integrals  f^ds'.U^{s'),  [8225/i]
fo'ds'.'ir^{s'),  change  their  signs  without  altering  their  numerical  values,  as  in  [8209^?] ;  by
this  means  the  expression  [8223]  becomes  as  in  [8226].  At  a  sensible  distance  from  the
surface,  within  the  second  body,  we  have  f^'ds'-U^^s')^  K  [8162],  J^' ds' .-^ ^{s')  =  K' ,
[8222']  ;  substituting  these  in  [8226],  it  becomes  as  in  [8227] ;  and  by  putting  [8225i  ]
cos.2(^'-]-8)  =  l— sin.2(a'-|-s),  it  changes  [8227]  into,

^  =  "'-(l  +  '^'  ?)-n'{^  +  '-§'  p)-sin.^(^+0.  [8225A]

The  value  of  -— remains  always  the  same  as  in  [8199  or  8216];  and  by  adding  it  to  the

"t  ail

dx^-\-ds'^  f ^K' \

expression  [8216],  we  get j^ =  n^.M  -|-  —  .  p' j  :=  n2-]-4-firy, which  represents [8225/  ]

the  square  of  the  whole velocity  of  the  ray  of  light,  after  it  has  penetrated  a  sensible
distance  within  the  second  body,  being  the  same  as  if  the  ray  had  passed  directly  into  the
second  body,  without  passing  through  the  first,  as  is  evident  from  [8182],  changing  p  into r8225ml
p',  and  K  into  K',  so  as  to  make  it  correspond  to  the  second  body. The  same  holds  good
whatever  be  tlie  number  of  intervening  bodies,  as  is  observed  by  the  author  in  [8235].

VOL. IV.  116

462 REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M6c.  Cel.

At  a  sensible  distance  within  the  surface  of  the  second  body,  we  shall  have,
S.a as  in  [8225t],

Sr]  ^  ^  -  n^(\  +  J.  p).cos.^0'+a)-4irp  +4^V.

T%e  particle  imll  therefore  be  reflected  whenever sin.(^-}-£)  is  equal  to  or

[8228] greater  than*  < ^ (  ; ivhich  requires K'p to be  less  than Kp.

[8228'j When sin.(^'-f  s) is included between that limit and  the quantity

[8229] { )> [8225], the ray ivill still be  reflected after

l  +  T^-P

TV"

penetrating  the  second  body. When sin.(d'-|-£) exceeds  this  last  limit,  the
[8230] y.^y  ^^^11  y^^  jg  reflected,  but  ivithout  penetrating  the  second  body. If  this

last  body  naturally  absorbs  the  light,  the  ray  can  be  reflected  only  in  the

second  manner ;  and  then  the  observation  of  the  limit  in  ivhich  it  ceases  to  be

reflected,  ivill  determine  the  value  of  K'p, consequently  that  of  the  refractive
op^ke  °^ power  of  the second body. Thus  we  may,  by  experiment,  determine  the

refractive  power  even  of  opake  bodies.

When  a  ray  of  light  passes  through  several  mediums,  terminated  by  parallel

plane  surfaces,  it  is  evident,  from  the  preceding  anlysis.

First. That  the  square  of  the  velocity,  perpendicular  to  the  surface  in  the

first  medium,  is  increased  by  the  quantity Q depending  upon  the action

of  this  medium  upon  light.

Second.  That  after  passing  from  the  first  medium,  and  penetrating  to  a
"^  '  ^  sensible  distance  into  the  second,  the  square  of  this  velocity  is  increased  by
of  light  in  the  difl'erence  Q^^^ — Q  betiveen  the  action  of  the  second  and  the  first
*• . ■' medium ;  and  so  on  for  others.

passing  '  t/

severfi*  Hcncc  it  follows  that  for  a  number  of  mediums,  terminated  by  parallel

uiediuma.

Refractive
power
opake
bodies

[8230']
[8231]

[8:28o]

d<i'

*  (3855) Putting —  =0 in  [8225A;],  we  get  the  value  of  sin.(d'+s)  [8228]. For

this  to  represent  a  real  angle,  it  must  be  equal  to,  or  less  than  unity,  which  requires  that  the
numerator  should  be  equal  to,  or  less  than  the  denominator,  or K'p'  <^  Kp, as  in  [8228'].
[82286] The  limit  mentioned  in  [8229]  is  the  same  as  in  [8225],  which  may  be  a  little  modified  by
the  term x, as  in  [8225e].

X.  i.  ^  2.]  LAWS  OF  REFLEXION  AND  REFRACTION.  463

surfaces,  and  represented  by i  +  1, the  increment  of  this  square  is Q^'^ ;
therefore  it  is  the  same as  if  the  light  penetrate instantly  iiito  the last [82a3]
medium ;  * and  as  the  square  of  the  horizontal  velocity,  or  that  which  is  in

*  (3856) Before  the  ray  of  light  enters  into  the  first  body,  the  square  of  its  velocity

dx'*  I  ds'^  [8233a]

is  represented  by — — —  =  n^ [8162',  S1646/J. The  direction  of  the  ray  forms  the

angle 6  [8183],  with  the  perpendicular  to  the  surface  ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  its  velocity,

dx
It

dx
parallel  to  the  surface,  is —  =n.sin.^j and its  velocity perpendicular to  the surface [82336]

M

IS -— =  7i.co3.^. Ihe  sum ot  the  squares  of  these  expressions, — ~ ==rr, is [8233c]

changed  into — -^ —  =  n^-j-^-Kp  [8182],  after  entering  the  first  surface  of  the  first  body. [8233J]

dx
Now  as — is  constant  [8158o,8177i,  &;c.],  it  is  evident  that  the  quantity  4Kp,  which  we

ds'^
shall  represent  by Q  =  4Ki>, expresses  the  increment  of —- , arising  from  the  action  of [8233c  ]

the  first  surface  upon  the  ray,  while  passing  completely  through  it,  till  it  gets  at  a  sensible
distance  from  its  surface. Moreover  it  is  plain  that  if  the  first  body  were  taken  away,  and [8233/*]
the  second placed  in its  stead, the  quantities K, p [8162,  8160], will change  into
K', p' [8222', 8221], respectively; and the same formula [8182] will give

— ^^ —  =  n^-\-4K'p' ; so  that  the  increment  of — in  passing  directly  into  the  second [8233g]

hody^  without  passing  through  the  first,  will  be 4K'p', which we  shall  represent  by

4K'p=Q}^\ On  the  other  hand,  if  the  ray  pass  through  ihe  first  body,  and  then  enter l8233a]

ds'^
into  the  second  a  sensible  distance,  the  increment  of — - will  be  had,  by  subtiracting  the [8233t  ]

<«*

rfs'2

value  of  —  =  n'^.cos.^^  [8233c], before  entering  the  first  body,  from the expression [8233Jfc]

[8227],  after  entering  the  second  body  a  sensible  distance,  putting  £'  =  0,  because  all  the
surfaces  are  parallel  [8230'].  Hence  the  increment  of  velocity,  acquired  in  passing  through
the  first  body,  and  then  entering  into  the  second  body  a  sensible  distance,  will  be
expressed  by,

ri^Y  1  -j — -  .  ij.cos.^  ^ —4K  p-]-4Ky — n^.cos.^^  =  increment  of — .  [8233/  ]

Substituting  cos.^d'  =  l — sin.^d'  in  the  first  member  of  this  equation,  and  rejecting  the
terms  which  destroy  each  other,  it  becomes,  by  a  different  arrangement  of  the  terms,

7v'.{l—cos.^&)—n^.fl+  ~  .  pYsin.2d'-f  4X"'p' ;  [8233m]

and  by  substituting  the  value  of sini'  [8187],  it  changes  into,

n2.(l— cos.2^)  — n2,sin.2^  +  4K'  /,  [8233n]

464  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M^c.  C^I.

[8234]

the  direction  of  the  parallel  surfaces,  remains  alwaijs  the  same,  ive  see  that,
in  these  different  mediums,  the  velocity  of  light  is  the  same  as  if  it  enter
immediately  into  each  of  them ;  and  its  direction  is  parallel  to  what  it  would
be  in  this  last  case.

In  general,  whatever  be  the  number  of  mediums  through  which  the  light
[82351 P^^^^^  lo  enter  a  body,  and  whatever  be  the  inclinations  of  the  surfaces  to  each
other,  the  velocity  of  the  light,  in  this  last  body,  will  always  be  the  same  as
if  it  pass  directly  into  it  from  the  first  medium  [8225m].

or  simply  4K'i'', by  rejecting  the  terms  which  mutually  destroy  each  other; being  the

same  as  is  found  in  [8233A],  when  the  ray  enters  directly  into  the  second  body,  uithout

[82330  ]  passing  through  the  first  body. Similar  results  will  be  obtained  with  several  successive

planes,  which  is  conformable  to  the  statement  of  the  author  in  [8232 — 8235]. Hence  it

[6233p] follows,  that  if  the  refrangible  power — r- be  constant,  as  is  the  case  with  strata  of  air  of

different  densities  [8264m], the  refraction of the  ray,  after  passing through several

successive  parallel  plane  strata  of  different  densities,  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  incident
[8233g]  f. , .  , 7  .  ,  .  ,  , , .  7.

ray  pass  directly  into  the  last  stratum,  without  going through  the intermediate ones.

Now  we  have  seen,  in  [8187,  he],  that  if  a  ray  of  light,  with  an  angle  of  incidence  6,  pass

[8233r] into  a  stratum  of  the  density  p,  with  the  angle  of  refraction  ^,  we  shall  have,  by  using  the

[8233*1 abridged  symbol fc= -^ [81926], s'mJ= -^^^  [8187]. If  the density of the

stratum  be  P', and  the  angle of  refraction  6^,  with the  same  angle  of  incidence  6,  the

[8233/] preceding  expression  will  change  into sin.^^=  /rjrr—'' Dividing  this  by  the  expression

[8233u] of sin.d', we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction, s\n.6^=^-—^^=I..sm.6' ; which expresses the

relation  of  6',  6^ ; supposing  &'  to  be  the  angle  of  incidence  of  a  ray  moving  in  a  medium
of  the  density  p, and  refracted  into  the  angle  6^,  upon  passing  into  a  similar  medium  of
the  density p'. If  we  now  suppose  the  density p'  to  differ  from  p by  an  infinitely  small
quantity,  we  shall  have p'  =  p-\-dp, and 6^  =  ^-\-d6' ; or,
[8233tp]  sm.6j=s\n.6'-\-d6'.cos.6'  =  {l-\-d6'.cotan^.e^).s\n.6', [60]  Int.

Substituting  these  values  in  [8233m],  and  dividing  by sin.^', we  get,

[8233z]  l+</d'.cotangJ'  =  ^y\, ,  , =  =  1 -r" ; or, d6'.colangJ'  =  —  — —  .

Multiplying  this  last  expression  by tang.d', we  get,

7a/  hkdp  .

[82333/]  .  cZd  =— — ^.tang.^  ;

which  gives  the  refraction dd', in  passing  from  a  stratum  of  the  density p, with  an
[82332] angle  of  incidence  d',  into  another  similar  stratum  of  the  density p  +  c^p;  this  refraction
being  proportional  to  the  variation  of  density dp, as  in  [8264m].

X.i.^3.] DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATION  OF  THE  REFRACTION.  465

3. We shall noio  represent by p, the density of  a stratum of  the rQ226^
atmosphere  whose  radius  is r. In the  calculation  of  the  action  of  this
stratum  upon  the  light,  we  may  consider  it  as  a  plane, on  account  of  the
small  extent  of  this  action  in  comparison  with  the  radius  of  the  earth.
The  density  of  an  inferior  stratum  at  the  distance  s, is,*

P  —  s.—  A — —  .  -r-?  —  &c.  =  density  at  the  distance  (r — s).  [8237]

The  action  of  this  last  stratum  upon  a  particle  placed  at  the  distance  r  from
the  earth's  centre,  is,

C  dp s^ d^9  )

u(s).  <  p — s.  —  -{ .  -T^  —  &c.  >  =  action  of  the  lower  stratum.  [8238]

(  dr 1.2 dn  )

The  action  of  a  superior  stratum  at  the  distance  s  from  the  same  particle,  is,

C do s^ d^p  )

u(s).  <  p  +  5.  -r  H .  -—  —  &c.  >  =  action  of  the  upper  stratum.  [8239]

The  difference  of  these  two  forces  [8238,  8239],  is,

C  A  3  ^73  "^

— 2n(5).  <  5.  -p  +  — — — -  .  -TT.  4-  &c.  >  =  whole  action  of  the  two  strata.
{_ dr 1 . 2 . 3 aH  )

We  must  multiply  this  difference  by c?5, and  integrate  it  from  5=0 to

5  =  00  , to  obtain  the  whole  force  with  which  the  atmosphere  attracts  the

luminous body towards  the earth's  centre  [8237c?], or the value  of ?

[8139']  f. Now  we  have,  as  in  [8161'],

n,(.9)=//rf5.n(5);  [8242]

*  (3857)  It  is  assumed,  in  the  hypothesis  in  [8137''],  that  the  density  p  is  a  function
of  r;  and  when  r  changes  into  r — 5,  the  density  p  becomes  as  in  [8237],  as  is  evident
from  Taylor's  theorem  [617],  Multiplying  this  by  n(s),  as  in  [8161],  we  obtain  the  rgooyj-i
action  of  this  lower  stratum,  drawing  downwards,  as  in  [8238] ;  and  by  changing  in  it  — s
into  s,  and  putting,  as  in  [8209^/],  n( — s)=n(5),  we  obtain  the  action  of  the  upper  [8237c]
stratum  [8239]  drawing  upwards;  subtracting  this  from  the  former  [8238],  we  get  the
whole  action  [8240],  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  of  the  two  strata,  situated  at  tlie
distance  s  from  the  particle  of  light,  the  one  above,  the  other  below.  From  this  we  obtain
the  whole  atmospherical  action  by  the  process  of  integration  mentioned  in  [8241].

[8240]
[8241]

[8237rf]

t  (3858) IVIultiplying  [8240] by ds, and  integrating  from 5  =  0 to 5  =  co , we
have  the  following  expression  of  the  attractive  force  cp  [8139',  8241]  ;

9  =  -2.  ^^  .fo-sds.U{s)  -f .  ^  .f-s^ds.n{s)-rh-  ~  ./o*5V5.n(5)-&c.  ;  [8241a]

and  we  shall  see,  in  [8246 — 8251],  that  all  the  terms  may  be  neglected  except  the  first, [82416}
on  account  of  their  smallness.

VOL. IV.  117

[6246]

466  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

[82431 ^^^'  integral  being  taken  from  s  =  s to s  =  co  . Therefore  by  taking  the

integral  from  5  =  0 to s  ==  s, we  shall  have,*
[8^J4]  yj'  ds.u  ($)  =  constant — Ui(s).

Hence  we  easily  deduce,
[8245]  f^sds.u.(s)  =  —s.u,{s)  +/o'ds.u,(s).

The  function s.u^(^s) vanishes  when f 5  =  0; it  also  vanishes  when  5  is

infinite ;  for  the  function T^i(s) is  then  infinitely  small,  and  infinitely  less

than —  , since the  action  of  bodies  on light  is  insensible  at  very  small

distances. Therefore  we  have,  by  taking  the  integral  from 5  =  0 to  5=  co,

[8247]  fo''sds.u{s)  =fo^ds.Ui{s)  =  K;

K  being  in  this  case  the  same  as  in  [8162].  The  terms  \.f^s^ds.Ti(js),
-:^-.f^^ds,Ti{s),  &c.,  may  be  neglected  in  comparison  with  f^ sds.^(^s)^  by
reason  of  the  small  extent  of  the  action  of  the  bodies  upon  light. For  an

[8249] example,  we  shall  suppose  that  this  action  is  represented  by n(5)  =  Q.c~^ ;

*  (3859) We  shall  put C=f^ds.Yi[s), C  being  a  constant  quantity. Subtracting

[8245a] from  it  the  expression  [8242], we  get C — U^{s)  =f^'ds.U{s)  ; the  limits  of  tliis  last

integral  being  0  and  s,  as  in [8244J. The  differential  of  this  being  multiplied  by s,

changing  the  order  of  the  terms,  gives sds.H^s)  ■= — s.<Z.n,(s). Integrating  this  last

[8-4o6] expression,  it  becomes  as  in [8245],  as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  its  differential,  and

neglecting  the  terms  which  mutually  destroy  each  other.

[8248]

[8246a]

f  (3860)  It  is  supposed  that  11^(5)  does  not  become  infinite  when  s==0.  This
condition  can  be  satisfied  in  various  manners,  as,  for  example,  by  the  form  of
n(s)=Q.c~", assumed  in  [8249], Q  being  constant. IVIultiplying this  by ds, and

Q  Q _

[82466] integrating,  we  get  f^ ds.'n.{s)  =  -r-  —  -r-.c  **, as  is  evident  by  taking  the  differential  of

its  second  member. This  vanishes when 5  =  0, or c~"=l; and  when s  =  qo it
becomes f^  ds.'n.(s)  =  -r- ; subtracting  the  first  of  these  integrals  from  the  second,  we

Q  Q

obtain  f^ds.U(s)=:  -^  .c"~"  ; comparing  this  with  [8161'J,  we  obtain U^is)  =  —  •  c~^.

Hence 5.11,(5)=  ^,  — =—.-—— : — .  .  .^  „  .  „ — , as  is  evident  by  developing c",  in

a  series,  by  [55]  Int. Now  when 5  =  0, we  evidently  have — — : — ,  ..„„,„ —  ==0:  and

when 5  =  00  , the  denominator  is  infinitely  greater  than  the  numerator,  and  in  this  case  it
also  becomes  0,  as  in  [8246]. Therefore  if  we  take  the  limits  of  the  integrals  in  [8245],
•■ *J from  5=0 to 5=00, we  may  neglect  the  term — 5.111(5), and  it  will  become  as  in
[8247],  /o«'c?5.n,(5) ; this  last  expression  is  equal  to  ^[8162].

[8246c]

[8246d]

X.i.<§>3.]  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATION  OF  THE  REFRACTION.  467

Q  being  a  constant  quantity,  c  the  number  whose  hyperbolic  logarithm  is
1,  and  i  a  very  great  number,  which  renders  c"**  insensible  at  a  very
small distance. The integrals f^sds.c"^, \.f^s^ds.c~^,  &c., become

i, -,  &c.  ;* hence  we  see  that ^.f^sMs.n^s), -Y\-5.f^s^ds.n(^s), are [8251]

insensible  in  comparison  with  f*sds.^{s)  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  same
takes  place  for  every  other  function,  which  renders  the  action  upon  the  light
insensible  at  very  small  distances. Whence  it  follows  that,t

<p  =  —2K.  ^  .  [8252]

dr

Hence  we  have,  as  in  [82526],

f:cpdr  =  2K.{(p)--p];  [8253]

(p)  being  the  density  of  the  stratum  of  the  atmosphere  whose  radius  is  a,  [8254]

*  (3861) We  easily  find,  by  taking  the  differential,  that,

~ .  f^s^'ds.c-^  =  _  1 .  C  +  4 .  f:i'-^ds.c-^.  [8250a]

Now  we  find,  by  developing  in  like  manner  as  in  the  last  note  [8246rf],  that — vanishes
when  5  =  0,  or  when  *  =  co  ; hence  we  have,  between  these  limits,

i . /;«  a~rf«.c-^  =  \- ./»  «"-!  ds.c-^ .  [82506  ]

In  the  case  of n  =  0, we have f*  ds.c~"  = ;— , as appears by putting

Q=l,  in  [82466]  ;  and  when  s  =  oo,  it  becomes  simply  J^ds.c~^=-r. Now  putting [8250c]

n=  1 in  [82506],  and  using  the  expression  [8250c],  we  obtain,
putting  also 7i  =  3, n  =  2,  in  [82506],  we  get,  by  dividing  by  2,

[8250rfJ

if^^dsx-^^  ~  -f.-s^dsx-^  =  ^  ./."sds.c-^  =  i- .  [8250c]

Again,  the  values w  =  5. n  =  4,  give,  in  [82506],  by  dividing  by  24,

xiiT  ./o~  s'ds.c-^  =  -^  .//5V5.C-  =  ^  .f.'s^ds.c-^  =  7^,  ^-  t8250/]

This  agrees  with  [8250,  &c.].

t  (3862)  Substituting  in  the  first  terra  of  9  [8241a]  the  value  of  the  integral  K  [8247],
and  neglecting  the  other  terms  as  in  [82416],  we  get  the  expression  of  cp  [8252].
Muhiplying  it  by  dr,  and  integrating,  we  obtain  fydr  =  — 2JSyHp  =  2^. {constant — p|.
If  we  take  the  constant  so  that  the  integral  may  vanish  when  r^a,  and  p=  (p),  as  in
[8152],  it  becomes  as  in  [8253].

468  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  C^.

[8255] When  r  is  infinite,  p  is  nothing,  and  the  equation  [8141']  gives,*

cdr
[8256]  r^'dv  = , ,,,,  ,  .

r82"7i ^^  ^^^^ r^dv  =  cdt [8143], and when r is infinite we also  havef

dr  =  ndt ; hence  we  obtain,
consequently.

[8258]  ,  ==  1  ;

[8259]  ^  =  n.^l+^.(p).

[8260] Substituting  this  value  of  q  in  [8155],  we  get,
[8261]  7=w-\/l+-;;^.(p).sin.e;

hence  the  expression  of <Z^  [8147]  becomes,  J

[8256a]

* (3863) Multiplying [8141'] by r% then putting 4  =  0, p  =  0 [8255],
f^cr,dr  =  2K(p)  [8253], corresponding  to r=  oo  , it  becomes  as  in  [8256].

t  (3864)  When  r  is  infinite,  the  line  CA  =  r,  fig.  106,  page  444,  becomes  parallel
^  *^^  to  the  extreme  tangent  EAG,  so  that  dr  wiil  represent  the  space  passed  over  by  the
[8257&] particle  of  light  in  the  time dt, and  as  the  velocity  is n [8162^],  this  space  must  be

represented  by  ndt,  as  in  [8257].  Substituting  this  and  r^dv  =  cdt  [8257],  in  [8256],
[8257c] and  then  dividing  by cdt, we  get  [8258]  ; whence  we  deduce  the  value  of  g'  [8259];

and  by  substituting  it  in  [8155],  we  get  [8261].

t  (3865) Subtracting 2fydr  [8253]  from q^ [8259],  we  get,
[8262a]  q^—2fydr  =  n^(l  +  ~.py

IMultiplying  [8261]  by — we  obtain —  •=n.\X  \-\ .  (p).  — .sin.e  ; lastly we

have,  in  [8252],  c^dr  =  — 2K.dp.  Substituting  these  in  [8147],  it  becomes  as  in  [8262] ;
the  numerator  and  denominator  being  divided  by  n^ ;  and  this  is  the  fundamental  equation
for  finding  the  refraction  of  the  heavenly  bodies.

The  expression  of  the  refraction  d6  [8262],  although  it  is  investigated  upon  the  principles

[8262c] of  the  Newtonian  theory  of  emission,  may  be  considered  as  founded  upon  observation  alone,

without  any  necessary  connection  with  that  theory,  or  with  the  theory  of  undulation. For

we  shall  show,  in  [8262f],  that  this  formula  can  be  derived  from  that  in [8187  or  8192c] ;

and  that  this  last  formula  is  nothing  more  than  the  analytical  expression  of  the  well  known

[82626]

X.i.<§>3.]

DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATION  OF  THE  REFRACTION.

469

d(i  =  —

—-.dp.

0+^-p)-v/i+f-0+lf.(p)).|-

(3)

Sin.  0

Funda-
mental
differen-
tial equa-

[8262]

tionof  the
lefraclion
of  light.

results  of  observation,  namely ;  first,  that  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  incidence
to  the  sine  of  the  angle  of  refraction,  in  passing  from  one  homogeneous  medium  into
another  of  a  different  but  given  density,  is  constant ;  second,  that  the  refractive  forces
of  parallel  strata  of  air,  of  different  densities,  are  very  nearly  proportional  to  the
densities  [8264mJ.

We  shall  therefore  proceed  to  the  investigation  of  the  differential  of  the  refraction
db  [8262],  by  means  of  the  formula  sin  J  =  \/l-\-  k(  .sin.6'  [8192c],  considering  it  as  a
result  of  observation  [8262e].  For  this  purpose  we  shall  suppose  the  ray  to  return,  as  in
[8137^],  from  the  eye  of  the  observer  towards  the  heavenly  body,  in  the  direction  OAA' ,
fig.  106,  page  444;  and  that  at  the  point  A  it  quits  a  stratum,  whose  density  is  p,  to
enter  into  a  second  stratum  JAFK,  whose  density  is  p-f-^p*  The  angle  of  incidence  at
the  point  Jl,  which  is  situated  in  the  surface  lA,  separating  the  first  from  the  second
stratum,  is  represented  by  v'  [8140'']  ;  and  this  angle  is  increased,  upon  entering  into  the
^  second  stratum,  by  the  increment  of  the  refraction  d^  [8146A] ;  so  that  the  angle  of
refraction  becomes  FAA' ■=-'v' A^-dL  The  differential  of  «-}~^'  =  ^  [8144]  gives
dv'  =  d& — dv. Multiplying  this  by cotang.w', and  putting,  in  the  last  term  of  the  second

dr

member  of  the  product, cotang.v'=  ~  [8145], we  get,

dw'.cotang.'u'  =  </^.cotang.i;' .

We  have  deduced  the  equation  [8233y]  from  the  assumed  formula  [8262^,  Sec],  and  if  we
change  the  angle  of  incidence  d'  [8233y]  into  v',  and  the  refraction  d^  into  d&,  to
conform  to  the  present  notation,  it  becomes,

hkdf

d6  =  -
andby  substituting  it  in  [8262/],  we  get,

l-{-kp

tang.t)  ;

hkdp

dr

dv' .cota.ns,.v'  =  —  -—

°  l-\-kf  r

Integrating  this  expression  by  [59]  Int.,  and  adding  the  constant  quantity  log.C,  we  obtain,

Q

log.sin.t;'  =  log.C — log.\/l-f-AD/) — log.r;

or.

sin.w  =

r.v/l+A/.'

The  value  of  C  is  easily  found,  by  observing  that  at  the  point  O,  fig.  106,  page  444,
on  the  earth's  surface,  we  have  r=a,  p=(p),  ^'=0  [8138 — 8140"];  substituting
these  values  in  the  second  of  the  equations  [8262o],  we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,
C  =  \/i^jc(i>).a.sin.e  ;  hence  the  expression  of  sin. «' [8262o],  becomes  as  in  [8262r]  ;
whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  tang.v'  [8262s] ;

VOL» IV.  118

[S262e]
[8262/]

[8262g-]

[8262/i]

[8262t]
[8262*]

[8262Z]

[8262m]
[8262n]

[8262o]
[8262;)]

[8262j]

470  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel-

In  this  equation  it  is  supposed  that  the  refractive  forces  of  the  strata  of  the
atmosphere  are  proportional  to  the  densities  of  its  strata^  which  follows  from

[8262r]  sin  v'  =  V/J+^(f)-«-s'"-®  .

r.\/l  -^-kf '

sin.t/  v/T+W)-«-sin.0  s/TWi)--'^^^'^

Substituting  this  last  value  of tang.u' in  the  expression  of  d&  [8262m],  we  obtain,

—  \kd  ^.\/\-\-k  {f)  —  .  sin.e

[8262i]  d&  =

r

(l+^p)-^/^l+A:p-n+A:(p)}.  ^.sin/

0

4jRr
and  by  replacing  the  expression  of  Ar  =  —  [81926],  it  becomes  as  in  [8262],

This  may  be  reduced  to  a  more  simple  form  by  putting,

for  its  differential,  considering u,  p, as  the  variable  quantities,  is,

[8262.]  dn  =

—  hkdi. fl-fA:{p)>i

and  by  substituting  this  in  [8262^],  after  dividing  its  numerator  and  denominator  under  the
radical  by  y/l+A/i,  we  get,  without  any  reduction,  the  formula  [8262iy] ;  and  from  this
we  easily  deduce  the  formula  [8262a;],

d\i.  — .  sin.e

[8262w;]  rf^=  ^

a2 „ , o
1 .u  .sm.^0

[8262j;]  '  a.sin.0.<?u

\/t^ — a^.u2.sin.2  0

which  is  similar  to  the  form  proposed  by  La  Grange,  and  used  by  Plana  and  others. With
a  slight  modification  we  may  deduce  from  it  the  formula  of  Kramp. This  formula  becomes

integrable,  with  circular  arcs,  by  putting —  =  u"-"*, as  La  Grange  observed,  and  as  we

[8262t/] shall  see  in  [8372— 8376]. If  we  suppose -  =^u-^  +  (1— .^).u-2'«-S A being a

r

constant  quantity,  we  can  obtain  the  integral  of  [8262w]  by  means  of  elliptical  functions,

[82622] ^^  Plana  has  shown  in  a  memoir,  given  in  vol.  27  of  the  Memorie  delta  reale  Accademia

delle  Scienze  di  Torino.

ff
[82G22'] The  same  value  of  u  [8262i/]  being  substituted  in  [8262r],  gives sin.i;'=  —  .u.sin.e;

X.i.§3.] DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATION  OF  THE  REFRACTION.  471

the  experiments  of  Hauksbee. However  it  is  possible  that  this  may  not  be roo^o/n
rigorously exact, and  it  will be useful to make a greater  number of

hence,

a

—  .u.sin.0
sin.t)'  r .  [8263a]

•sm.  0

dr

substituting  this  in dv  =  —  .  tang.w'  [8145],  we  get,  [82635]

a.dr

— ^.u.sin.0

dv  =  — —  [8263c]

1 ^'^ 2 • 2
1 .u^sin/o

f2

adr.u.sin.Q

[8263rf]

r.[/r^ — a^.  u^.  sin.^  ©

Dividing  [8262a?]  by  [8263<?],  and  multiplying  the  result  by  dv,  we  get,

TA rfu r ,

dd=  —  .—.dv.  [8263e  ]

dr u

These  formulas  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

Before  closing  this  note  we  may  observe,  that  the  equation  [8233m],  upon  which  the
preceding  demonstration  is  founded,  cannot,  in  the  utmost  strictness,  be  considered  as  a
direct  result  of  observation,  unless  we  neglect  terms  depending  'U])on  the  square  and
higher  powers  of  kp;  because  the  terms  depending  on  these  powers  have  not  in  fact
been  ascertained  by  experiment.  For  the  results  of  different  sets  of  observations  differ  from  rQo«q  i
each  other  ^^^  part  in  [8264/],  and  -^^^  part  in  [8264i].  Now  ^ko  is  less  than
0,0003  [8277],  audits  square  is  less  than  0,0003.|^P,  or  less  than  ^Vtt  part  of  iJcp;  [B263h]
and  as  ^^Vtt  is  much  less  than  y^^  or  ■^^■^,  it  follows  that  the  terms  depending  on  the
square  or  higher  powers  of  ^Arp, are  much  less  than  the  errors  of  observation. Hence  it

follows  that  instead  of  the  fundamental  equation sinJ^==:(-^-~\  .sin.d'  [8233m],  we  may

assume  many  other  forms,  in  which  the  terms  depending  on  the  first  power  of  p,  p', are

the  same  ;  as,  for  example, sin.^^=  (tt^/)  -sin.^', sinJ^=  (j—r^A  ,  &c.;  and  yet [8263Jfc]

satisfy  fully  the  degree  of  accuracy  which  has  been  obtained  in  these  observations  of  the
refraction. We  may  moreover  remark  that  terms  of  the  order  (i^^p)^ are  omitted  by
La  Place  in  several  parts  of  this  chapter, as, for  example,  in  [8287,  8368,  Sec] ;  and [^^^^1
particularly  in [8494],  where  the  corrections  for  the  barometer and  thermometer  are

supposed  to  be  proportional  to a  =  j^ryn  =  ^^ (p) •  { 1  —  K?) H-^c. }  [8277'] ;  now  this [8263ffi]

quantity  is  not  accurately  proportional  to  the  density  (p),  unless  we  reject  the  quantities  of

the  order k^,  P,  he. ;  and  quantities  of  exactly  thp  same  kind  are  such  as  have  been t^^^^"]

neglected  in  the  preceding  demonstration.

[8263i]

472  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M^c.  Cel.

experiments  upon  this  point.* But,  whatever  be  the  result,  we  may  always
use  the  preceding  equation,  supposing  that p  represents  the  refractive  force

[8264a]

*  (3866)  Since  the  publication  of  this  volume,  a  very  important  and  accurate  set  of
experiments  has  been  instituted,  by  Biot  and  Arago,  to  determine  the  refractive  power
of  atmospherical  air  and  of  several  of  the  gases,  for  different  temperatures  and  densities,  by

[82646]  direct  observations  of  the  changes  which  take  place  in  passing  at  a  very  oblique  angle,
through  a  receiver  containing  the  air  or  gas,  of  any  proposed  density,  upon  which  the
experiment  is  to  be  made. The  results  of  these  experiments  have  been  published  by  them

'• •'  in  the  Memoires  de  TInstitut,  1806,  tome  vii.  page  315,  &c. ;  where  they  have  given  the

2jsr

value  of  — — .  (p),  corresponding;  to  each  set  of  observations,  reduced  to  the  temperature  of
[8264rf]  «'

Kesuiuof  melting  ice,  and  to  the  height  of  the  barometer 0'"«*'^%76  [8274]. The  extreme  results

observa-  . .  _

tions  on of  nine  sets  of  observations,  made  on  different  days,  each  set  containmg  from  ten  to  thirty
Brot'and observations,  are,

Arago  J  njr  OIT

[8264e]  -f.(p)=  0,000293904, and —.  (p)  =  0,000296777  ;

the  difference  between  these  extreme  values  is 0,000002873, being  nearly y^^  part  of
'■ •'■'  the  whole  refraction. By  neglecting  two  somewhat  doubtful  sets,  they  obtain,  for  the  mean
of  the  remaining  seven  sets,

[8264g]  —  .  (p)  =  0,0002945856  =  ifc(p) [81926].

by  Deiam-  The  valuc  of  the  same  quantity,  determined  by  Delambre  from  the  mean  of  more  than

[8264/i] 500  observations  of  the  altitudes  of  circurapolar  stars,  is — .  (p)  =  0,0002940470, as  in

[8277] ; and  from this we can deduce  the expression of a [8277',  8285,  8505J.

IVIoreover  the  difference  between  the  results  of  the  astronomical  observations  of  Delambre,

[8264A],  and  the  direct  observations  of  Biot  and  Arago  [8264g],  is  0,0000005386,  being

about  -gl^  part  of  the  whole  value.

In  page  322  of  the  same  volume,  is  given  a  table  of  the  results  of  the  observations  of
'- -■ Biot and  Arago,  on the  refraction of air of different  densities, as  indicated  by the

heights  of  the  barometer  in  the  receiver.  These  heights  in  nine  sets  of  observations,  each
[8264/] set  being  formed  of  from  ten  to twenty  single  observations,  were  respectively  50,  210,

1200,  2425,  2830,  4055,  5260,  6130,  8007,  ten  thousandth  parts  of  a  metre;  and
[8264ffi]  for  eveiy  one  of  these  heights  they  observed  the  refraction  of  air  to  be  proportional  to

the  density;  the  greatest  refraction  in  these  observations  being  5"*  58',  and  the  greatest
r8264nl  variation  from  the  calculation  of  the  refraction,  supposing  it  to  be  in  proportion  to  the
Refraction density,  being  only  2*, I. They have  also  obtained  similar  results  with  several  of  the

in  any  gas  .<  ^  .^

is  strictly  gases,  as  oxygen,  hydrogen,  carbonic  acid,  he,  as  in  page  320  of  the  same  volume ;  and

th'J'dlnsi-  they  finally  conclude,  from all  their  observations, that  in  varying  the  density  from  the

*^"  most  perfect  vacuum,  which  they  could  obtain,  to  that  which  corresponds  to  the  common

•'  pressure of  the atmosphere, the  refraction  produced by  any  particular  gas  is  ahvays

[8265]

X.i.  <§.4.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  DENSITY.  473

of  the  stratum  of  the  atmosphere,  whose  radius  is  r. JVe  shall  hereafter

1' ^  L  •  •  [8264']

suppose  this  force  to  be  proportional  to  the  density  of  the  stratum^  which

cannot  vary  but  very  little  from  the  truth.

INTEGRATION OF THE DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION OF THE MOTION OF LIGHT.

4.  To  integrate  the  equation  [8262]  ive  must  determine  the  expression
of  p  in  a  function  of  r ;  that  is  to  say,  the  law  of  the  decrease  of  the  density
of  the  strata,  corresponding  to  the  elevation  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The
two  limits  of  this  law  are;  first,  a  constant  density;  second,  a  density
decreasing  in  geometrical  progression,  ivhile  the  altitude  increases  in
arithmetical  progression ;  and  we  shall  see,  in  [8283,  8299,  &,c.],  that  this
last  limit  supposes  a  uniform  temperature  throughout  the  whole  atmosphere.

f.  ,  ,  ,  Cassini's

We  shall  therefore  consider  the  refraction  in  these  two  extreme  cases.  hyjl^thesu

The  hypothesis  of  a  constant  density  amounts  to  the  same  thing  as  to  suppose  formde"n'-

P  to  vary  only  when  infinitely  near  the  external  surface  of  the  atmosphere.  *"•

We  shall  suppose  at  the  external  surface, r  =  a-\-l,  putting,  [8265']

and  then  the  equation  [8262]  becomes,*

dd  =

dt

I  +  t^

2  ,  [8267]

rigorously  proportional  to  the  density,  ivithout  requiring  the  least  modification  whatever;
observing,  however, that  different  gases of the  same  density  have  different  refractive '■ ^^
powers.

*  (3867)  The  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  density  is  equivalent  to  that  proposed  by
Cassini,  who  supposes  the  surface  of  the  earth  and  the  summit  of  the  atmosphere  to  be
concentric  spherical  surfaces,  and  that  the  whole  refraction  takes  place  at  the  upper  surface,  .Q_^y  ,
or  upon  the  entering  of  the  ray  into  the  atmosphere.  In  this  case  the  density  changes  from
0  to  (p),  while  the  ray  passes  through  an  insensible  space  near  the  summit  of  the
atmosphere,  and  during  this  small  moment  of  time  r  may  be  considered  as  constant,  and

equal  to a -{-I; then if,  for  brevity,  we  put <  I -{- —^.  (p)  >  .  ^-^T—^.sin.^e  =  A^,

AK  -,  ikdf.Ji  [82676]

also  —  =  k  [81926], the  expression  [8262]  will  become d6=. —  /-i  i  ^  \  /ti  r. jk?

VOL. IV.  119

474  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

which  gives  by  integration,
[8268]  6  6  =  ang.  tang.  T— ang.  tang.  J"  ;

consequently,

[8269]  tan£.<5()  = ^~^

Q'  1 l_  T<rp/  1

l+TT'

and t2=i-^— 1  [B266]. Ttiis last equation gives l-{-l€p  =  ^.{\-\-tt), and  its

[8267c] differential, divided  by — 2, is — i^</p  =  — A^.tdt. The  same  equation also  gives
\/l-\-kp  —Jt^  =Au Substituting  these  in dd  [82676],  it  becomes,

.^3trft rft
[8267d]  d&  = , = ,

^  ^  .43.(1  _^tt).t  1+tt'

as  in  [8267].  Its  integral  is  ^  =  constant— ang.tang.t  [51]  Int.;  and  if  we  take  the
limits  from t=T  to t  =  T', as  in [8271], it  becomes as  in [8268]. If  we  put

[8267e] r  =  tang.«, T'  =tang.6,  we  get tang. (a— 6)  =  ^r^y,  [30]  Int. ;  substituting  this  in  the

tangent  of  the  expression  [8268],  it  becomes  as  in  [8269].  The  value  of  T^  [8272],  is
deduced  from  t^  [8266],  by  putting  P=  (P)  ;  and  the  value  of  T'^  [8272'],  is  deduced
from  the  same  value  of  t^,  by  putting P=0,  as  is  observed  in  [8271].

The expression  of  86  [8269]  may  be  reduced  to  terras  of  0,  a,  I  [8277',  8275],  in
the  following  manner. Putting  for  brevity.

[8267/]

[8267g]  X=-

l  {a+lf  l-[-2X+X2

a

a2.sin.20  sin.2  0

[8267;i] and  using  also ~ =  1— 2a  [8286a], we find  that the  values  of T% T'^,

i  +  ^-w

[8272,  8272'],  become,
[8267i]  T2  =  e— 1  ;  T'2=  c.(l--2a)— 1  ==  (e— 1)— 2ae  =  T2_2ae.

Extracting  the  square  root  of  the  last  expression  of  T'^,  we  get,

[8267A]  T'==  T—  —  —  —  —  &£c.

T  2^3

Hence  we  obtain,  by  successive  reductions,  and  observing  that l-\-T^  =  e  [8267i],

[8267m]  1  +  TT'  =  1+T2— ae-&c.  =  e— ae— &tc.  =  e.(l— a— &c.).

Substituting  these  values  in  [8269],  and  writing  Sd  for  its  tangent,  we  obtain,  by  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  a^,

As  this  expression  of  S6  is  of  the  order  a,  we  may  neglect  terms  of  the  order  X^,  in
finding  the  value  of  T;  and  then  substituting  e  [8267g],  in  T^  [8267 i],  we  obtain,  by
successive  reductions.

X.i.<^4.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  DENSITY.  475

[8270]

[8271]

observing  that  6^  denotes  the  refraction^  or  the  quantity  ivhich  is  to  be  added
to  0,  to  obtain  the  zenith  distance  of  the  body  cleared  from  refraction,
[8150].  We  must  also  observe  that  the  integral  is  taken  from  p  =  (p)  to
P=0.  T  is  the  value  of  t,  at  the  origin  of  the  curve,  tohere  p  =  (p),  and
T'  is  its  value  at  the  other  end,  or  at  the  summit  of  the  atmosphere,  where
p  =  0  ; hence  we  have,

T'  =  -^^i^  —1  ;  [8272]

T'^  = ttD! 1^  ^8272'J

^1  +  ^.(P)  |.a2.sin.2e

To deduce from these  formulas  the horizontal  refraction,  we  must  put
sin.e  =  1, and  ascertain  the  values  of  /  and — ^-.(p). At  the  level  of  the

nr

sea  and  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  the  height  of  the  barometer  being

[8273]

[8274]

T2  =  ^-4 1  =  — ^- —  4-  -^-—  =  cotang.20  +  -r-^  [8267o]

sm.2  0  sin.2  0 ' Bm.2  0  ° ' sin.s©

[8267J9]
[8267g]

[8267r]

T  =cotang.0.[l  +  ^-^];  1  =  tang.0.  |  1- ^-^  | .

This  expression  of  —  is  to  be  substituted  in  [8267n]  ;  and  as  the  term  of  [8267n],
depending  on  e,  is  of  the  order  a^,  we  may,  in  finding  the  value  of  this  term,  neglect  X
in  e  [8267^], and put simply 6= . ^ , also ^  =  tang.^0 [826 7g'] ; whence

-—  = '■ —  =  — —- ; by  this  means  the  expression  r8267nl  becomes,

T2 sin.20  COS.20' ^  V  \.  A  >

6&  =  a.tang.0.  \  1 ^  \  .  \  l  +  a+  -^  \  [8267«]

^  (  COS.205 I '  ' 003.2©)

C^ , ia.(l+2.cos.2©)— X")  reoA7n

=  a.tang.0  Al-\ —^ r- — \  -  [8267f]

°  i  QOS.2  0  )

Re-substituting  the  value  of  X  [8267_g-],  it  becomes  of  exactly  the  same  form  as  the
expression  [8474],  which  La  Place  has  deduced  from  his  assumed  formula  for  the  density  ^  "l
of  the  atmosphere  [8412]  ;  so  that  this  important  and  accurate  formula,  for  computing  the
refraction  for  altitudes  exceeding  ten  degrees,  can  be  deduced  from  the  simple  process  of
Cassini,  as  well  as  from  the  more  complicated  hypothesis  of  La  Place,  as  has  been
remarked  by  Mr.  Ivory.

476  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8274'] 0'",76, we  shall  have,  for  the  height / of  a  homogeneous  atmosphere,*

[8275]  /  =  7974 metres;  [Height  ofa  homogeneous  atmosphere,!

which  is  the  value  deduced  from  a  great  number  of  observations  of  the
height  of  mountains,  determined  by  the  barometer,  and  compared  with  their
heights  measured  trigonometrically.  By  a  great  number  of  observations  of
the  refraction  at  the  same  temperature,  and  at  the  same  height  of  the
barometer  [8274'],  it  has  been  found  that,

[8277]  _ .  (p)  _  0,000294047,  [8264A]  ;  log.  -g  .  (p)  =  6,4684168  ;

[8276]

n"
2K

n^

[8277']  ^ .^ =  0,000293876  =  a,  [8285,  8505] ; log.a=  6,4681641.

Then  we  have,  for  the  radius  of  the  earth,  f
[8278]  a  =  6366 1 98  metres  ; log.a  ==  6,8038801 . [Radius  of  the  eanh.]

Horizon-

tiUihe'  By  hearts  of  these  values  we  find  for  the  horizontal  refraction,  supposing  the
be°ng  uni-  atmosfhere  to  be  of  a  uniform  density,

rQCfvm  Jd  '^IQ^Q" fi  rC>1»nOQsl  r  Horizontal  refraction  in  Cassini's  "l

LO^/yj  00  ==  OiJ  tV ,U, |_/61 Z.£7  J.  L  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  density.  J

Although  astronomers  do  not  ivholly  agree  with  each  other  as  to  the  value
of  the  horizontal  refraction,  yet  they  all  find  it  much  greater  under  this
pressure  and  temperature. The  mean  between  their  results  is.

[8280]

*  (3868)  In  the  state  of  the  atmosphere  mentioned  in  [8274],  the  mercury  is  about
*■ ■' 10467  times  as heavy as  air, according to the  observations of Biot and Arago,

[8264c,  &c.].  Multiplying  10467  by  0™«t'%76  [8274'J,  we  obtain  the  height  of  a
[82776] Jiomogeneous  atmosphere 7955  metres nearly, being  about 19  metres less than  the

estimate  of  La  Place  [8275].

t  (3869)  The  whole  arc  of  the  meridian  is  put  equal  to  40000000  metres  ;  and  if  we
[8278a] tjiyije  this  by  6,28318.., we  shall  get  the  radius  of  the  earth  a  [8278],  supposing  the

2JC

earth  to  be  spherical.  Substituting  this  value  of  a  and  those  of  /,  —r  •  (P)  [8275, 8277],
[82786]  "

in  [8272,  8272'],  we  shall  obtain  the  values  of T,  T  ; and  then  from  [8269]  we  get

Sd,  as  in  [8279].  This  expression  differs  very  much  from  the  result  of  observation
[8278c] Q^QQ,r^  ^g  gj^g^  ^^  L^  pj^^g  jj^  l^gggj-j  .  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  Bradley's  rule,  6418"  [8383w].

The  values  of  I,  a  [8275,  8278],  give,
[8278d]  7  ==  0,00125256 ; f  =  798,37  5 log.  ~  =  7,09779 ;

which  are  used  hereafter.

X-i.-^^S.]

HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.

66  =  6500", [  =  SS'^G^Ji  [8278c]. [observed  horizontal  refraction.]

Hence  it  appears  that  the  supposition  of  a  uniform  density  differs  too  much
from  observation  of  the  refraction  to  be  admitted  as  a  true  hypothesis.

5. We  shall  noiv  consider  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  temperature. If
we  put,

j*^ 1

or.

r — a  =  rs;

do

0,000293876, [8277']; or ^  =  J^.-_,

the  equation  [8262]  will  become,^

dd  =  —

a.-—  .  (1 — sj.sin.G

(P) ^ ^

^  l-2a.(l-  Q  ^ .  ^cos.'-^e-Sa.  (l_  ^^  +  (2.-.2).sin.^

;  W

477

[8281]
[8282]

[8283]

Second
hypothe-
sis, or  that

[8284]

of  a  uni-
form tem-
perature
of  the  air.

[8285]

[8286]

K

*  (3870) From  the  value  of — [8285], we  get,

-, I 4^"  , ,  2(1  P  , , AK , .  1  rr.r.r.^ ,

i  +  -;^-p  =  i  +  izr.-(-7)= i  +  ^-«  =  i32i-  [Si^H

Substituting  these  values  and  that  of —  [8284],  in  [8262],  it  becomes  as  in  [82866]  ;  and

by multiplying the numerator and denominator  by (I — 2a)^, it  is  reduced  to  the
form  [8286c];

-^^.  — .\ /-i (1— s)-sin.0

('  +  iSl  •  (7))-  \/i  +  i^  •  (7)  -  T^-  (i-')^---

d? ft \ •

— a.  — ^  .  (1 — sj.sm.e

(/> )

^.sin.^0

^-^•0-(7))}-\/^-^-(^-i7y)-(i-^)

Now  we  have,  by  development,

1— (1—5)2. sin.2  0  =  (i_sin.20)  -f  {2s—s^),sm.^@=^cos.^Q  +  (2s— 52).sin.20  ;

substituting  this  in  the  radical  of  the  expression  [8286c],  it  becomes  as  in  [8286].  We
may  observe  that  the  symbol  s  [8284],  is  wholly  different  from  that  in  [8158],  which  is
used  in  <§»  1,2,  3.

VOL. IV.  120

[82866 ]

[8286c]

[8286i]
[8286e]

478  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

a being  very  small  [8277'],  we  may  suppose,  without  any  sensible  error,
[8286']  / p  \

that  1 — 2a.  f  1 — -^j is equal  to the mean quantity between  its  two

[8287] extreme  values  1  and 1 — ^2*  ;  therefore  we  shall  suppose  it  equal  to  1 — a.
srmbob. '^^®  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  being  supposed  uniform,  if  we  put,
[8238] p  =  the  pressure  or  the  elastic  force of  the  air  corresponding  to  the

density p ;
[8288^ (p)  =  the  pressure  corresponding  to  the  density (p)  ;
[8289] g  =  the  gravity  corresponding  to  the  radius  r ;
[82891 (g)  =  the  gravity  corresponding  to  the  radius  a ;
[8290] /  =  the  height  of  a  column  of  air  of  the  density (p), which  being  acted

upon  by  the  gravity  (g), will  be  in  equilibrium  with  the  pressure

(p)  ; in  other  words,  /  is  the  height  of  a  homogeneous  atmosphere ;
[829(r| c  =  2,718281828..,  the  number  whose  hyperbolic  logarithm  is  equal  to

unity.
Then  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  as  the  result  of  observation,

[8291]  p  =  (p).  ^  ;

Ab  air

522^ The  decrement  of  the  pressure  p, produced by the  elevation dr, is
mmT^ evidently  equal  to  the  small  column  of  air fdr,  multiplied  by  the  gravity  g;
therefore  we  shall  have.

[8294]  dp  =  —(g).^.pdr

[82941  =(^)-«-P-<^7;

consequently,*

[8295]

(P^'lf)  ={g)'a.p.d,l.

[8295o]  *  (3871)  We  have,  in  [8293],  dp  =  —gpdr;  and  by  substituting  the  value  of  g
[8292],  it  becomes  as  in  [8294].  Now  the  differential  of  [8291]  is  dp=  (p).  -y ;  and
by  substitution  in  [8294],  we  obtain,  as  in  [8295],

[8295c]  {p)'JJ-^=  —  {g)''';^-?dr  =  {gyap.d.  j-.

Dividing  [8295]  by ^-^  , we  get  ^J  =  ^^\'^^'^  .d.  ^  ; and  by  integration,

°  if)  f  (P)  ^

Xi.<^5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  479

Hence  we  deduce  by  integration,

c  being  as  in  [SWOT]  ; and  from  the  definition  of  I  [8290]  we  have,*  [«»7]

hence  we  get,  in  the  case  of  a  uniform  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  [8283],  STSL*

p

perataieu
as  anifonn.

,  =  (p).c ';  or ^-^=c ';  [8299]

therefore  the  equation  [8286]  becomes,  by  reducing  the  radical  to  a  series,
ascending  according  to  the  powers  of  5,t

log.  P  =  ^Ih^  ,  (1  ^  constant).  [8295dJ

"When r=a, and P  =  (p),  this  becomes,

log.(  p)  =  llHl):^  .  j^i  _{_  constant)  ;  [8295e]

ibtracting  this  from  the  preceding  expression  of log.p, we  get,

Iog./-  =  '-^^"/i!-_i).  [8295/]

(f)  (P)  \»-  /

Multiplying the  second  member  of  this  expression  by log.c  =  1 [SSQC], and then
reducing  to  natural  numbers,  it  becomes  as  in  [8296].

*  (3872) The  weight {p) of  the  homogeneous  column  of  air /, is  found  by
multiplying  its  height  / by  the  gravity {g), and  by  the  density  (p); hence  we  get

{P)  =  {g){p)-^}  asm  [8298]. From  this  we  get ^.^lip==--. and  by  multiplying  it

by a.(^-  —  l\=—as  [8284],  we  obtain (^  —ij . a. ^^^^  =  —  7 • Substituting
this  last  expression  in  [8296],  we  get  [8299].

t  (3873) In  order  to  develop  the  radical  in  the  denominator  of  [8286],  we  shall  put

/  _«x  [8300a]

for  brevity D  =  cos.*e  —  2a.\l — c / -\-2s.sm.^ e ; and  we  shall  get  by  development,
using  the  value  of  —-  [8299],

1-^  -  '-' .-Jb! $1  ,i^l^!g:!g, >..? [83006]

V/cos.2  e— 2a.ri—  p-) + {2s—s^).sm.^  e

_ 1 s.jD—js.sm.^e) „ !_ a.jcos-^e  +  f 3.sin.2e— 2cl\1— c V^ ,  - r8300cl

480  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

General
value  of

d6

when  the
tempera-
ture ia
uniform.

[8300]

a.  — -.rfs.c .sin.fc,  _

'^^ ( / -.N T  ' '

(l  —  a).  (  cos.^e— 2a.  \l—c V+Ss.sin.^e  3

' ;  (5)

a.  -—  .  <is.  c ' .  sin.e.  (  cos.^e-j-  ^^.sin.^e — 2a.\l  —  c '  /  )
(1  —a).  I  COS.20— 2a.\.l— c * )  -\-2s.sm.^e  I

—kc.  \  2

rssoo'i  -^^^  ^^^^  ^^'^^  ^f  ^^^^  differential  expression  is  much  greater  than  the  others^
which  are  nearly  insensible  [8368]  ;  we  shall  first  integrate  this  term.  For
this  purpose  we  shall  put,

[8301]  o/ , \\—c~^)

'  sin.^e '

and  we  shall  have,  by  means  of  the  formula  [629,  629a],*

a.  •-— - .  sin.0
Multiplying this expression by — iiJ ; and then substituting

|l-2a.(l-^,)l
[8300<i]  C  \ (fV  >

as

^=:-~~.c~'^ [8299], also 1— a for l_2a/l  — -^^  [8287],  we obtain the

if)  i  \  (/>)/

expression  of  d6  [8286],  under  the  form  which  is  given  in  [8300].

* (3874) Comparing  the  equation x=:cp,{t-\-(Lz) [629a], with [8301], we  get
[8301a]  _as  _ot

x  =  s, 9=1, t==^s', z=-^ ; and  if  we  suppose w  =  4'(^)  =  c [629a],we

as

shall  have w  =  c ; then  [629]  becomes.

«-u+aZ.-  +  — .a +i,2,3-«' 572

[8301&]  u^u+^Z.~-\--^.^^-^-^-r^Ll+-^.^K \„.,'^^+S^.;

u  and  Z  being  the  values  of  w, z, respectively,  when  a,  =  0 ;  so  that  we  have,

[8301c]  u  =  c"^;  Z=t:£-i;  ^,=-T-<^ '•

'  sin.2  0 '  ds'  I

as

Substituting  these  values  in  the  preceding  expression  of  w or c , it  becomes  as  in
[8302].

X.i.  §5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.

481

=  c — — Al — c y.

7  ein 2« \  y

T

Z.sm.2  0

a",  a

1.2. /.sin.'* 0  *

d.\{l-c~~).c ~l

2 [8302]

rfs'

a*,  a

1.2.3...Usin.2'0'
—  &c.

ds'^-'

Therefore the first term  [8300'], which  is now under consideration,

as  03

becomes,*  by  observing  that  -r,ds.c =  —  dx ,

[8303]

as>
"T

^ _d.{{c ''-l).c ^J

sin.^e

ds'

a.—  .sm.Q.ds'

First  term
of

d^.

a»

"  1.2.3...i.sin.2*0
=F  &C.

ds"

*  (3875) Multiplying [8301]  by 2.sin.^©, and  adding cos.^e to  the  product,  we
get,  by  transposing  the  terms  containing a,

cos.^e— 2a.Vl — c V+2s.sin.20  =  cos.2  0-}-25'.sin.2e.
Substituting  this  in  the  denominator  of  [8300  line  1],  and  retaining  only  this  term  of  rfd,
as  in  [8300'],  it  becomes,  by  using  [8303],  ^

[8304a]

J4  =  —

a.sin.e.rf.c

( 1 — a).\/cos.2  0  -|-2s'.sin.2  0

[8304i]

Now  substituting  the  value  of d.c '  , deduced  from  [8302],  considering 5,  «', as  the

VOL. IV.  121

482  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT. [Mec.  Cel.

the  upper  sign  being  used  when i is  even^  and  the  lower  when  i  is  odd.

In  general  we  have,*

Develop-  | — (»+!)•  T"'*' I

ment  of  I /«*  I 1  \t  - • I 1

the  differ-  - I {l-\-\y.C ■

ential  ex-
pression. ^  , _-- ,^ --  , ,  / «, ^^ , '  Z. 1^

[8306] ± ^ ''■•iVc '-i;.c"'^_ r-TJ /  _;.,.., '  '  "

^ '  1.2.3...t.sin.2i  e  rfj-i  1.2.3...i.sin.ae*

+  ^;2--(t-l)'.c

We  must  multiply  each  term  of  this  development  by  the  following  expression,

th*TJiue being  the  factor  without  the  braces  of  the  formula  [8304]  ;

d^,  a .  ,,

a.  —  .sm.0.a5

[8307]  ^  ;

(1 — a.).y/cos.20+2«'.sia.20

variable  quantities,  we  get  [8304] ;  observing  that  in  this  last  formula 1  — c is  changed
[8304c]  . ^

into  — \c '  — 1/  ; and  by  this  means  the  sign  ^  is  introduced.

*  (3876)  Developing  the  first  member  of  [8305a],  it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member.
Its  difierential,  divided  by  ds',  is  as  in  [8305&] ;  its  second  differential,  divided  by  ds'^,
as  in  [8305c]  ;  and  so  on  for  others.

C  — l/.C  =C  — t.C  + 1  o -^  ^^'i

[83056]

Kay  \  as'  )  I

1.2

,.  ,  -.  as'  .as'

:;  — t.t.c

+  ^^'.(i-l).c  -&c.

[8305c] ^.IG ^— l).c ^ \  __  /_« Y  )  ^'

rfs'2  ~  V  W ' )

,.  ,  _.  ay  .as'

_,._, os^
+  -^.(z-l)2.c  -&c.

And  by  continuing  to  take  the  differentials  in  this  manner,  we  easily  obtain  the  general  form
of  the  expression  [8306].  Each  term  of  this  development  is  to  be  multiplied  by  the
general  factor  [8307],  which  occurs  in  [8304].

X.  i.  «^  5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  483

and then take the integrals  from 5'  =  0 to s

,^^ a.(l-c V.

sm.^0

[8308]

US'

But  since  at  this  last  limit c is  extremely  small, because  c  exceeds  2,

[8290'],  and y  is  a  very  great  number,  being  nearly  equal  to  800  [8278^/];

ive  see  that  the  integrals  may,  without  fear  of  any  appreciable  error,  be
taken  from  s'  =  0  to  5'  =  co  .  This  being  premised  we  shall  consider  the
differential,  f

[8309]

*  (3877) In  finding  the  value  6,  or  rather  S6^ we  must  evidently  take  the  integral
of  the  expression  of d6  [8300,  &c.], from r  =  a to r=oo  [8138,  8138'J  ;  or  from

—  =1 to  — ==0; and  this  is  the  same  as  taking  it  from s  =  0 to s=l [8284], [8307a]

respectively. Now  from  [8301]  we  have s'  =  s—a..- — ■, ^; and  if  s  =  0,  it  gives

sin.2©

KssrO; but  if  5  =  1, it  becomes s'=l — a.^ — /; aereeina;  with  the  limits  of  / [83076]

f  sin.20  ° °

in  [8308]. Now  we  have  nearly y=798  [8278d], and c  =  2,718..  [8290']  ; hence

—  J  f \ \798

5 ""^(orift) =10"^'*^  nearly, which  may  be  put  =0, on  account  of  its  excessive [8307c]

smallness; and  then  the  last  limit  of  s'  [83076],  becomes s'=l ^"5— • Near  the [8307(i]

horizon, where the refraction is greatest, sin.^e is nearly equal to unity, and

[8307c]
a  =  0,00029.. [8277'];  therefore  this  last  limit  of  s'  is  nearly  equal  to  unity. While  /

as'

varies  from /  =:  1  to s'  =  00 , the  factor c ' does  not  exceed  the  extremely  small

[8307/*!
quantity  10-^47  [8307c] ;  so  that  this  factor  and  its  powers,  which  occur  in  [8302-8306],

maybe  considered  as  vanishing,  while  s'  varies  from 1  to  00  , or  from 1 — —  to  00  ; [8307g]

we  may  therefore  extend  the  limits  of  5'  [8307^], and  take  the  integrals  firom  s'  =  0  to

s'  =  OD  ,  as  in  [8309]  ;  always  considering  that  the  radical,  in  the  denominator  of  the  factor

[8307],  does  not  vanish,  or  the  factor  itself  become  infinite. We  may  remark  that  the

limit  /=  X  ,  being  substituted  in  [8301],  gives s  =  00  ;  therefore  the  limits  of  5  [8307a]

may  be  extended,  in  these  integrals,  from s  =  0 to 5=00. These  limits  are  used  in  ^

[8416a,  &c.]

t  (3878) When  we  substitute,  in  [8304],  the  developed  expressions  [8306],  it  will [8310a]

484  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

General

form  of  the  Lf w

term  of  <* •  /  i  •

^^.  Y'dS'C  .sin.e

[8310]  / a . o^ •=r'

y  cos/  0  -f-  2s .  sin/  ©

and  shall  put,

[8311]  i.e£!Lf+,'=l.^^; or ^  =  \/:^.e^7lfZ;

^  sin.2e '  ra '  K 2r  sin.^e  ^ Z

then  the  preceding  differential  becomes,

ra COS.20
[8312]  , y^  sT'^i^is^""

,,^,^, The  integral  being  taken  from t  =  \  /^^  .  ^  =  t  [83136],  to  ^  =  co  .*

[8313]  &  b  V/ 2; sin.0  •-  ^

Now  putting  between  those  limits,

a
ct.  —

evidently  produce  terms  of  the  form  [8310],  multiplied  by  powers  of  , and  by  the

sin.20

numerical  coefficients  depending  on a,  z ;  these  quantities,  as  well  as  the  new  numerical

[83106] coefficient r, being  constant  in the integrations  relative  to /. Now  the  first  of  the

expressions  [8311],  being  multiplied  by S.sin.^©, gives,  by  extracting  the  square  root,

[8310c]  /cos.2  0-j-2s'.sin.20  =  Ky/^—.s'm.e.t.

IMoreover  we  get,  from  [8311], /  ==  — .  t^ — J.  .  ' ,  whose  differential  is  ds'  =  —  ,tdi
[8310rf]  6 '  L J,  ,„  2  ,,„,2e  ra

Substituting  these  in  [8310],  it  becomes  as  in  [8312].

*  (3879) The  limits  of  s'  [8309]  are s'=0, s'  =  oo; and  by  substituting  them  in"
[8313a] ^ [8311], we get the limits of t, as in  [8313]. Now if  we put for brevity

[83136] t=\X  W'~^~~'' ^^^^®  ^'™'^^  ^^^^ ^^  represented  by t  =  t, and t  =  co. The

integral  of  the  expression  [8312],  may  evidently  be  put  under  the  form,

ra COS.20

[8313c]  , /2a ^  2i  *  sin.2  0

i/|.c^*^^"-'Vt"^^-^";

so  that  if  we  substitute the  assumed  value  of  the  integral  [8314],  and  then  multiply  the
[8313rf]  a

result  by - —  , we  shall  get,  within  the  proposed  limits,

ra

a.  — .  as  .c  .sm.0

[8313c]  -  '  ^

0  (1 — o-).\/cos.2  0-j-2«'.sin.2  0 1— a y/ I ( /r ^ >

X-i.-^^S.] HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  ' 485

xa COS.20

Jtdt.c-^  =  c .  *(r) ;  s,mb«i

ra COS.2  0  \  /'

2Z  *  sm.2  © „ ,  roqi  4/1

We  shall  have,  by  noticing  only  the  first  term  of  da  [8304],*

[8314a]
[83146]

ay
*  (3880) We  shall  represent  by Ac  any  term  of  the  expression  of  d&  [8304],

between  the  braces,  developed  as  in  [8306] ; and  when  this  is  connected  with  the  factor

without  the  braces  in  [8304],  which  is  given  separately  in  [8307],  it  will  become  equal  to

the  function  [8310],  multiplied  by A.  ; therefore  its  integral  will  be  equal  to  the

expression  [8313e]  multiplied  by  ►^ ;  so  that  it  will  become,

the  factor  — ^  .\ y^  _,  without  the  braces,  being  the  same  as  in  [8315]  ;  therefore  the

part  — •  *^(r) must  represent  the  part  between  the  braces,  in  [8315],  arising  from  the
v/r

[8314fi]

[8314c]

term Ac  [8314a]  in  [8306]. Hence  it  appears,  that  to  deduce  from  the  part  of

dd  [8304]  the  corresponding  part  of  5^, we  must  reduce  the  terms  between  the  braces,  in

ay
[8304],  to  the  form  [8306],  and  then  change c  into — ^  , and  by  this  process  we [8314/]

can  easily  derive  the  terms  of  [8315]  from  those  in  [8304]. Thus  the  term  in  [8304  line  1]

is c ,  corresponding  to r  =  l;  hence — ^=>p(l), as  in  [8315  line  1]. The  term

in  [8304  line  2],  developed  as  in  [8306],  corresponds  to i=l, in  [8306],  and  becomes [8314g']
a  a

s"nr^  •  ^^^ '  ~^ '  >' ^^'^^  produces  ^-^^^  .  |  -^ ^(1)  j  ,  as  in [8315  line  2]. [8314?i]

The  term  in  [8304  hne3],  developed  as  in  [8306],  putting ^=2,  gives,

"'•^ .  5  ?il(i)  _2. ?i!^'  +  ^(1)  I  ,  [8314.-]

1.2.sin.40 ^ ^3  /2 ^ ^  ^  5

as  in  [8315  line  3]. The  next  term  of  [8304], corresponding to i  =  3 in [8306],

produces,  in  Hke  manner,  the  term  in  [8315  line  4]  ;  and  so  on  for  other  terms.

VOL.  IV.  122

486

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.

^P(I)
a

sin.a  0
2  f^

[8315]

4.,^JL^.J3*.t(3)-2.2^.>f(2)+*(1)}
a  /'2a j 1.2.sm.4© '  ^  -'  \  /  i \  j>

Z3

1.2.3.sin.60

.  5  4^.^(4)— 3.3^.t(3)+3.2^.y(2)  — y(  1 )  j

Cel.
1

2
3
4

' 1.2.3.4.sin.8e

+  &C.

f5^.vp(5)-44^.vF(4)+6.3^.^(3)-4.2^.>F(2H-p(l)} I 5

This  expression  may  be  put  under  the  following  form  ;

aa

Part  of

6d

deduced
from  the
first  term
of

dL
[8316]

Z.sin.s©

C  •^(1)

2aa

H

1— a

I , o-a -,1  Z.sin.2  0

— .  / /.sin.^0  ^

I

+

3aa

a^.aa  _,§  Z.sin.20

.  3  .C

1.2i2.sin.%

.^(3)

2

[8316a]

*  (3881) If  we  put  for  a  moment  for  brevity

a
a. —
l_

sin  .2  0

=  <r, and  then  connect  together

[83166]

the  terms  of  [8315]  depending  on ^(1), also  those  depending  on y(2),  &c.,  it  will
become,

+  &c.

a
iZa*

X.  i.  <§.  5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  487

The  only  remaining  difficulty  is  to  ascertain  the  form  of  ^(r) [8314'], or

y  f  OS Ok  L  J

to  take  the  inteo^ral /^  dtx-^\ from ^  =  \  /  £^  .  ^-^-  =  t to ^  =  co  ,
°  '^  *  '  K 2/ sin.0

[8313].  In  the  case  of  the  horizontal  refraction  cos.e=0,  sin.o  =  1  ;  [8318]
and  then  ^(r)  is  independent  of  r,  and  is  represented  hy  ■ir(i)  =^fidt.c~^\  [8319]
[8314'].  To  determine  this  integral,  we  shall  consider  the  double  integral
JJ'ds.dx.c~'-^^'^'^^,  taking  the  integrals  from  5=0  to  5  =  co ,  and  from
x  =  0 to a:  =  CO  . Integrating  in  the  first  place  relative  to  s,  we  obtain

'5

[8320]
[8321]

f^f^ds.dx.c-^^^-^^fl-^ [15346'].

[8322]

\-\-xx
""  =  angle (tang.ar) [51]  Int.;  and  this  integral,  taken [8323]

°°  =  ^  *  ; '»' [8323']

being  the  semi-circumference  whose  radius  is  1 ; hence  we  have,  Definite

integrals.

f^f^  ds.dx.C-'-^'+''^  =  1^ [1534/].  [8324]

We  shall  now  investigate  this  integral  in  another  manner,  supposing  sx^  =  t^,
which  gives  dx  =  dt.  s~^ ;  5  being  supposed  constant  in  the  differentration.
Then  the  double  integral  [8324]  will  become,

/^/o"  ds.s-Kdt.c-'-"  ^f^ds.s-Kc-'fo^dt.c-'',  [8326]

I

Now  from  [56]  Int.  we  have,

c-=l_.:-f^-^-^+&c.;  c-^^=l-_2a.  +  (||-g^+&c.;  [8316c]

c-3«  =  1  -3..  +  ^  -  (^  +  &c.,  &c.  [8316rf]

Substituting  these  in  [83166],  it  becomes,

S&  =  ^.Xy/^  .  ^  c-^^p(l)+2ia;.c-2-.Y(2)+J.3^.a;2.c-3-.*(3)  +  &tc.  ^  ;  [8316e]

and  by  re-substituting  the  value  of  x  [8316a],  it  becomes  as  in  [8316].

[8325a]

*  (3882)  Tlie  computation  in  [8323 — 8331]  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  in  [I534e~/],
changing  the  symbol  v  into  s.  Thus  the  integral  in  [8322]  relative  to  5,  is  the  same  as
that  in  [1534e']  relative  to  v.  That  in  [8324]  is  the  same  as  [1534/].  The  assumed  [83256]
value  of  t^  [8325]  is  the  same  as  in  [1534^].  The  integral  [8326]  is  the  same  as
[1534A].  The  symbol  t'  [8328]  is  equivalent  to  r  [1534i].  The  integral  [8329]  is  the  CS325c]
same  as  [1534iJ,  and  [8330]  is  the  same  as  [1534A:].  Finally,  the  theorem  [8331]  is  the
same  as  in  [1534/].

488  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8327] We  shall  put  f^di.c*^^  =  K^ and  then  the  preceding  double  integral  will
[8328] become Kf^ds,s~^x~', If  we  now  substitute 5  =  f^  in  this  last  integral,

it  becomes,*
[8329] ,  f^^ds,s-Kc-'  =  2f^dt'.c-'''' =  2K [8327];

therefore  we  shall  have,

[8330]  f,^ds.s-Kc-\f^dt.c-''  =  2K^  =f^%^ds.dx.c-'-^'+'"^  =  i* [8324].

Hence  we  have ^=4^*; and  by  re-substituting  the  values  of  K  and
Definite ^ (r)  [8327,  8319],  we  finally  obtain,
mi]  f^dt.c-''  =  I  v/^  =  T(r) [1534Z,  8319]  ;

therefore  the  expression  of  the  horizontal  refraction  is,t

l  +  y.{2^— 1}  \  1

,3332]  ..=  -^.\/-.;+S-i^'-2-^'  +  ^^  .  ^

+  &c.  /

horizontal  '^^^^  cxpressiou  may  be  put  under  the  following  form  [83316]  ;

refraction

g^  C  OM  2tt,o  3oLa

[8333] ^^=T—.'\/Z')^  -{-  —  .T.C  +_^^.3^C  +&C.

from  the
first  term
of

d6.

1— OL V 'ill t  I  1.2. /a

To  obtain  the  value  of  ^(r), when  the  body  is  a  little  elevated  above  the
horizon,  we  shall  put,

ra cos.^0

Symbol  -** Sin.'*0

T.

*  (3883) The  limits  of  s,  x  [8321],  evidently  give  those  of t,  t', wliich  are  inserted

in the formulas  [8322 — 8331]. For  the  first  limit  of  s is s  =  0, and  this  gives  in

[8328a] |-g325-] ^.^q, and  in  [8328] i'  =  0. The  second  limit  of  5  =  00 [8307i'j,  gives  In

[8325],  for  any  value  of  a?, <=:od  ,  and  in  [8328] i'=  00  ;  which  are  the  limits  used  in

this  article.

t  (3884) From  [8331]  it  follows  that ^(1), ^(2), ^(3),  he, are  each  equal  to
r8331al

|/<,  and sin.0=  1  [8318]  ;  substituting  these  in  [8315]  it  becomes  as  in  [8332]. The

^ ^ same  substitutions  being  made  In  [8316],  it  becomes  as  in  [8383].

X-i.-^-S.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  489

and  we  shall  have,  by  developing  and  taking  the integral from ^  =  0 to

and  we  shall  also  have,  by  a  different  development,!  integrals.

These  two  series  cease  to  be  converging,  for  every  value  of  T.  The  first
series  is  alternately  greater  and  less  than  the  integral,  according  as  the  series
is  terminated  by  a  positive  or  negative  term  ;  so  that  if  we  add  to  any
number  of  its  terms  the  half  of  the  following  term,  the  error  will  be  less
than  that  half.  J  This  furnishes  a  simple  method  of  estimating  the  degree
of  approximation.  Then  by  subtracting  the  value  of  the  series  from
f^dtx-^^  =  JvA [8331], we  obtain  the  value  of  the  integral frdt.c-^'.

Definite

ntegrals,

[8336]
[8337]

[8338]

[8a35a]

*  (3885) Developing c""  by  [56]  Int.,  we  get,

which  vanishes  when  t  =  0  ; and  when <  =  T,  it  becomes  as  in  [8335].

f  (3886) It  is  easy  to  prove,  by  taking  the  differential,  that,

/rrf/.c-«  =  ^.<'^i.c-"  +  ^./r+2<?^c-".  [8336a]

Now  putting  successively n  =  0, n  =  2, n  =  4, n  :^  6,  &c., we  get,  by  repeated
substitutions,

fdt.c-'t  =  ^  c-«  +  2ft  2  dt.c-''  =  <  C-"  4- 1 .  ^  3  C-"  +  -  .  /<  4  dtx-"'  [8336b]

o „  22  23

=  ^c-"  +  I .  <3c-«  -|-  — .  ^5c-"  +  —  ./<« dt.c-'',  &c.  ;  [8336c]

and  so  on  ad  infinitum. This  series  vanishes  when  f  =  0';  and  when  t=  T^  it  becomes,
with  some  slight  reductions,  as  in  [8336].

f  (3887) Suppose  the  sum  of  n  terms  of  the series  [8335]  to  be  represented  by
fj'dt.c~^'^ — m,  and  w-j-1  terms  of  the  same  series  by  f^ dt.c~^^-\-'p, their  difference  p-\-m
represents  the  value  of  the  term n-j-1  of  the  series  ;  and  by  adding  its  half  to  the  first  of [83376]
these  expressions,  the  sum  becomes  fJ'dt.cr'^^-\-^.{p — m). This  differs  from  the  real  value
of  the  integral  f^^dtx'^^,  by  the  quantity  ^.{p—m), which  is  less  than  half  the  last  term [8337c]
p-\-m ;  because  m  and  p  have  the  same  signs,  by  hypothesis.

VOL.  IV.  123

[8339]

To  reduce
a  series  to
the  form
of  a

continued
fraction.

490  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  CeL

r8338'i ^^^^  ^  *^  equal  to,  or  exceeds  S,  we  shall  have  the  value  of  the  integral,
hy  means  of  the  series,*

n^f -u  _  c-^^ 5  , 1  1.3  1.3.5  )

This  series  has  also  the  advantage  of  being  alternately  greater  and  less  than
the  integral*

We  may  give  to  this  series  the  form  of  a  continued  fraction,  by  the  following
method,  which  may  he  used  in  other  cases ;  and  by  this  means  the  series  may
be  put  under  an  infinite  number  of  for  m^.

If  we  put,

it  will  be  easj  to  prove,  by  differentration,  that  we  shall  have,t

*  (3888) We  easily  prove,  by  taking  the  differential  and  reducing,  that,

[8339a]  /r"  dU-''  ==  — ^.^-^^fT""— ^.  {n-\- 1 )  ./r"-^  dt.c-'K

Now  putting  successively  n=0,  n  =  2,  n  =  4,  Sic,  and  making  several  substitutions,
we  get,

[83396]  fdt.c-^  =  — i.  t-Kc-''—  \  .fr^  dtx-'"-  =  —^  .t-\  c-"+  ^ .  H.c-«  -f  ^  ./r*  dt.cr^

[8339c}  =  —Ij-K^tt^l .  t-\c-^—  ^ .  i-Kc-'t  _  ^  .ft-^dtx-^  ;

and  so  on  for  higher  values  of  n. Hence  we  shall  have  generally,

The  constant  quantity  is  found  by  making  the  integral  vanish  when  t=T;  hence  we  hai
[8339c] rut.c-^=r.9l^.  5  1-  _L  +  J:? &c.  ?  ~£l!.  h— -  +  — _  — 4-&c  V

L  J JT^  2T I  2T^  ^  22.^4  ^5  2t I  2f2  ^  22.^4 23. /6'^-  5

Now  putting  t  =  <J) ,  the  whole  integral  becomes  as  in  [8339],  representing  the  value
of  f^dt.cr-'K

t  (3889)  The  expression  of  u  [8340]  is  easily  put  under  the  form  [8340a],  and  its
differential,  considering  u,  i,  as  the  variable  quantities,  is  as  in  [83406] ;

t8340a]  „  =  J i_  .  i2:^_I:5:^  .te>.;

1— f  {l_<)3~(l_f)5  (l_f)7 ~"^-'

[83406]  ^^  1  l.S.q l.S.5.q^  _

dt  ' {1—tf  (1— <)4  ■• (l_f)6  '^*

Multiplying [8340a] by l—t, and  [83406] by y, then adding the products, and

and  by  changing  r  into r+1,  we  get,

[8345]

X.  i.  §  5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  491

q,~-i-(l—t),u=l.  [8341]

We  shall  now  consider  u  as  the  generating  function  of  the  series,

u=:y,  +  y,.t+y,.t'  +  y,. t'+hc. ;  [8342]

the  differential  equation  [8341]  gives,  by  noticing  only  the  coefficients  of
the  term V  [8340c],

(r+l).^.y,^,  +  y,^,-2/,=  0;  t8343]

and  when  r  =  0,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8340c^],

which  is  the  same  as  to  put  y^  =zl,  in  [8344].  We  may  here  observe  that
the  generating  function  u  of  y^,  in  every  linear  equation  of  finite
differences^  in  which  the  coefficients  are  rational  and  integral  functions  of  r,
may  he  determined  in  the  foregoing  manner,  by  means  of  a  differential
equation,  relative  to  infinitely  small  quantities,  of  the  same  order  as  the
highest  power  *  of  x in  its  coefficients.

Now  every  linear  equation  of  the  second  order  of  finite  differentials,  may
easily  be  reduced  to  a  continued  fraction,  by  the  method  we  have  used  in r8347i
[2289 — 2292]. We  shall  now  consider  generally  the  equation,  General

equatioo.

y,^a,.  y,  +i  +  6, .  y,^ .  [8348]

Dividing  by y^^n we  obtain,  for  all  values  of  r,

i!-=a,4-6,.^;  [8349]

Vr+X  yr+l

dividing  unity  by  both  sides  of  this  equation,  we  obtain,

Vr+x  1

y.+a '  [8350]

[8340c]

neglecting  the  terms of  the  second  member  which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  we  get
[8341]. Substituting  in  this  the  assumed  value  of  w,  we  find  that  the  coefScient  of  V  is
equal  to  the  first  member  of  [8343] ;  and  by  putting  it  equal  to  nothing,  so  as  to  satisfy  the
equation  [8341],  we  get  [8343]. Finally  the  terms  of  the  resulting  equation,  which  are [8340rf]
independent  of  t,  are  as  in  [8344].

*  (3890) Thus,  for  example,  the  coefficient r  +  lj in the first  term  of  [8343],
contains  the  first  power  of  r,  corresponding  to  the  differential  equation  [8341]  of  the  first '■ 1
order.

492  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

y,+3 1

If  we  continue  this  process  we  shall  finally  obtain,

General

equation  Vr-H  I

reduced  to  Z-ILz

a  series.  «.  A

*

[8352]  '^  ^6,+,

"r+l

[BBSS']

Putting ar  =  l> &r  =  (r+l)«y> iii  [8348],  it  becomes  as  in  the  equation
[8343],  namely,!

and  then  from  [8352]  we  get,

Vr+l  1

1

(r+S).?

14-&C.
If  we  put  r  =  0,  we  shall  have,  by  observing  that  yo  =  l  [8345].

[8355]  ,  , 2y

i+2i

l+4y

1 H-  &c.

yi  is  the  coefficient  independent  of  t, in  the  development  of  the  value  of
u  [8340],  in  a  series  according  to  the  powers  of  t,  as  in  [8342],  namely;

*(3891) Substituting  the  value  of  —  [8351], in  the second  member  of  [8350],

y^+i

we  get,

yr+l  1

[8352a]  y^ =  b.

Or+1  -f-  Oh-1-

Now  increasing  r  by  unity  in  [8351],  we  get  the  expression  of  , to  be  substituted  in

[835261  i^'+s

the  second  member  of  [8352a]  ;  and  by  proceeding  in  this  manner,  we  finally  obtain  [8352 J.

f  (3892) Substituting the  values  of a,, b,  [8352^], in [8348],  it  becomes as  in
[8354a] [8353  or  8343] ;  and  by  the  same  substitutions, [8352]  becomes  as  in  [8354]. When
r  =  0,  we  have yo=l  [8345],  and  then  [8354]  changes  into  [8355].

X.  i.  ^  5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  493

«*  =  l^,.Jl-(7:^.+  (^^  [8356]

hence  we  have,

3^,  =  1— (^  +  1.3.^— 1.3.5.g^  +  &c.  [8357]

Now  if  we  put,

we  shall  have,*

2T2  '

f^dt.C-''  =

1  +  L_  [8359]

1

l+?i

1  +  ^^

[8360]

1  +  &C.

Under  this  form  we  may  employ  it  for  all  values  of  T ;  but  for  facility  in
calculation  it  is  best  to  use  it  only  when  q  does  not  exceed  ^ ;  in  other
cases  the  two  first  series  will  more  easily  give  the  integral.  To  use  the
preceding  continued  fraction,  we  must  reduce  it  to  common  fractions,
alternately  greater  or  less  than  the  integral. The  two  first  fractions  of  this

series  are — and ■—— , as  in  [8362]. The  successive  fractions  of  this [8361]

series  have  such  relation  to  each  other,  that  the  numerator  of  the  i^^
fraction  is  equal  to  the  numerator  of  the  (i — 1)  fraction,  plus  the  numerator
of  the  {i — 2)  fraction,  multiplied  by  (i — l).g.  ,The  denominators  are
found  in  the  same  manner. These  successive  fractions  are  as  follows ;  f

1. _i_. |+2g.  l+5y  l+%+8g^

1+5' 1+3?' r+69-j-3j2' 1+10^+15^2 ; c.  ]

*  (3893) Putting ?=^  in  [8357],  we  get y,==l—^  +  ^-^--i|^^^^ [8359a]

Substituting  this  in  [8339],  we  get  f^dt.c~"  =  .y^ ;  and  by  using  the  value  of  y^j [83596]

[8355],  it  becomes  as  in  [8359].

t  (3894) The  continued  fraction  in  [8359]  may  be  put  under  the  form,

1

0

1 , g [8362fl]

■^1  +  ?^

1+3,

1+&C.

VOL. IV.  124

494  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M^c.  Cel.

[8362']

[8363a]

[83636]

We  shall  now  consider  the  second  term  of  d&,  in  the  formula  [8300],  and
shall  investigate  its  influence  on  the  refraction.  This  term  is  at  its  greatest
value in the horizontal  refraction, and in  this case this  second term

Second becomes,*

term  of  '

86,
[8363]

^.j.ds.c '.U.5— 2a.(l— c 0>

(1— ol).  Jss— 2a.Vl  — c 0>

[Second  term  of  dd  ]

The  most  sensible  part  of  this  integral  corresponds  to  a  very  small  value
of  5,  because  then  the  denominator  is  very  small. f Therefore  we  may.

Comparing this  with [2290^,  n,  o,  p], we obtain the  following  series  of fractions,
approximating  towards  the  true  value  of  the  series ;

Value  of  if
Upper  index, 0

[83626] Fractions, -;

Lower  index, 1

The  series  of  fractions  [83626]  agrees  with  [8362]  ;  and  the  rule  for  finding  the  successive
terms,  given  in  [8361 — 8362],  is  the  same  as  in  [22903-].

1

2

3

4

5 &c.

1

1

1

1

1

1 Uc.

0

1
1'

1

1+3'

l+5g .

i+6g+.'¥'

l+%-l-8,2 -  £^

?

2q

3q

4q

5q

6q &c.

*  (3895)  The  second  term  of  dd  [8300],  which  is  neglected  in  [8300',  fee],  becomes
for  the  horizontal  refraction,  where  cos.e  =  0,  sin.0  =  l  [8318],  the  same  as  in  [8363].
Moreover  it  is  evident  that  this  assumed  value  of  0  =  100°,  must  give  the  greatest  value
to  this  second  term,  because  the  denominator  becomes  small, a  being  only  0,0003  [8277'],

a

[8365a]

[83656]

and  y  ==800,  nearly  [8278 J].

t  (3896)  To  estimate  roughly  the  magnitude  of  the  quantity  [8363],  we  shall  substitute
in  it  the  approximate  values  of  a,  —  [83636],  and  it  becomes  nearly  equal  to  the
following  expression ;

_, sdsx-^'^\\§.s— 0,0006.(1— c-^'')]
** {25— 0,0006.(1— c-«oo')|^

If  we  put  successively  s  =  ^,  5  =  ^^,  s  =  ^^^y,  s  =  -^^jy-^,  the  corresponding  values  of
p-8oo»  ^111  YiQ  represented  by  c""^'"',  c~*°,  c~^  c~Tir ;  and  by  using  the  value  of  c
[8290'],  they  become  nearly  equal  to  (yV)^;  0,00004;  0,4;  0,91,  respectively.
Now  all  the  terms  of  [8365a] are  multiplied  by  this  factor c~^^% which  occurs  in  the

X.  i.  §5.]  HYPOTHESIS  OF  A  UJNIFORM  TEMPERATURE.  495

in  this  denominator  and  in  the  factor f5 — 2a.Yl  —  c y, develop c in [8364]
a  series,  and  notice  only  its  first terms. If  we  retain  only  the  two  first
terms,  and  neglect  the  rest,  which  may  be  done  without  any  sensible  error,
we  shall  have,

[Second  terra  of  d(f]  [8365]

5  /  a\  3

2?.(l_a).n_a.  y  F

If  we  take  the  integral  from s  =  0 to 5=00 [8307z],  we  shall  have,*  [8366]

numerator ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  the  factor  of  ds^  in  [8365a],  must  be  insensible,
except  s  he  extremely  small;  aad  in  this  last  case  the  term  0,0006.(1 — c~^^^^)^
corresponding  to  the  preceding  values  of  s  [86356],  will  be  respectively  0,0006 ;
0,0006  ;  0,0003  ;  0,00006  ;  and  it  vanishes  vehen  s  =  0  ;  so  that  for  very  small  values
of  s.  it  can  be  developed  in  a  converging  series,  ascending  according  to  the  powers  of  s ;
and  we  shall  have,  from  [56]  Int.,

as

Hence  we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  the  square  and  higher  powers  of  5,
|,_2a.(l— r  V  =  is.  ^3— 4a.  y  I  ;

Substituting  the  developments  [8365e,/]  in  [8363],  it  becomes  as  in  [8365].

*  (3897) The  integral  of  the  expression  [8365]  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form,
a.(3-4a.|)

[8365c]

[8365d]

[8365c]
[8365/]

a(l_-a).(l-a.^)l

2.-.f^ds.s^.c

[8367a]

and  we  have —  .fds.s^.c = — s*.c -\-hfs  ^ds.c , as  is  easily  proved  by  taking [8367i]

the  differentials  of  both  members  and  reducing. IVIoreover  we  have  by  development,  as
in  [55]  Int.,

«'•" =  ^r  =  , , <,, , , a2jS [8367c]

,T  l+y+i._+&c.;

and  this  last  expression  evidently  vanishes  at  the  two  limits 5=0, 5  =  00; so  that  it
may  be  neglected  in  [83676],  if  we  take  the  integral  between  these  values  of  s\ and  we

8d

IS  insensi-
ble.

496  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [M6c.  Cel.

a.(3-4a.f).iyg
[8367]  __  __^ J \^ 2a  psecond  term  of  66 1

Second  .  8.(1— a).(l-a.--V

term  of  <  \  *  /

ivhich  never  exceeds  three  or  four  seconds,  and  is  therefore  insensible  near
the horizon, where the refraction suffers great variations. We  may
[8368] therefore, in  all cases,  neglect  the  second  term  of d6, which is given
in  [8300  line  2],  and  retain  only  the  first  term,  contained  in  [8300  line  1].

If  we  use  the  values  of ^.(p), /,  and  a  [8277,  8275,  8278],  we  shall
[8369]  "

find  that  in  this  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,

corresponding  to  the  zero  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  and  to  a  height  of

[8370] the  barometer  of 0'"^*'%76, the  horizontal  refraction  will  be 7390",71.*

This  exceeds  the  observed  value  by 900",  nearly  [8281],  which  shows  the

error  of  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  temperature. Indeed  we  know  that  the

temperature  decreases  as  the  elevation  increases :  now  as  the  air  is  condensed
[8370']  ^  .  .

by  the  cold,  it  follows  that  the  difference  of  density  between  a  stratum  of

the  atmosphere  and  that  immediately  above  it,  is  by  this  means  decreased.

The  limit  of  this  decrease  is  when  the  difference  is  nothing,  or  the  density

[8367rf] shall  have —  ./^""ds.s^.c '  z=^f^s-^ds.c ^; and  by  putting s=— in this second
expression,  it  becomes,

as

[8367c]  ^.f^ds.^.c '  =lA/±.f:ds'.s'-^X-"',

I

the  limits  of / [8367e]  being  evidently  the  same  as  those  of  s. Substituting  in  the  last
[8367/]  gjjpj.gggJQjj  of  |-g367gj  ^jjg integral  f^ds'.s'-Kc-''  =2K  =  \/'r(  [8329,  8331],  we  get,

7-/o-^-*-  ^-H/i'^-=H/'^'

[8367^]

Substituting this  in [8367a],  it  becomes  as  in  [8367]. Now  substituting  in  [8367]  the
[8367A]  ^^lygg  Qf ^^  i^  ^  [Q<iinQ,  8275,  8277'],  and  multiplying  by  the  radius  in  seconds  636620",
it  becomes  as  in  [8368].

* (3898) This value  is computed from  the  formula  [8333],  using  the  values  of
[8370a] o-j  U  Sic.  mentioned  in  [8367A],  and  reducing  it  to  seconds,  by  multiplying  by  the  radius
in  seconds. By  a  rough  calculation  it  was  found  that  the  result  given  in  [8370]  is  nearly
correct.

X.i.  <§>6.] THIRD  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  497

is  constant ;  and  we  have  seen,  in  [8279], that  in  this  case  the  horizontal

refraction  is  too  small. The  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  refractions  r837ii

are  therefore  between  the  tivo  limits  given  by  the  hypothesis  ive  have  just

considered; but  we  may  obtain  more  approximate  limits  in  the  following

manner.  Third  hy-
pothesis,

from

6. The  differential  expression  of  dd  [8262]  can  be  rigorously  integrated  ^^^^

by  supposing,  1,^;^„,

.  -^  Simpson

, I 4a. \m  and  Brad-

" ' ,  [8372]

If  we  then  put,

it  becomes,*

[8373]

dd  =  — , ,  .  [8374]

[8374o]
[83746]

*  (3899) If  we  substitute  the value  of  u  [8262m] in  [8372,  8373], and  use k
[81926],  they  become  respectively,

—  =5-^7^1"*=  u-^""  :  z  =  u^-*".  sin.0.

Substituting  this  second  value  of — in [8262w], and then z, with its differential

dz  =  — (2m — l).u~^.<Zu.sin.0, we  get  successively,

rfu.u"^"*. sin.0  dz  „__,.  ,

rfd=-— ====.  =  — — -^—===..  [8374c]

/I— u"^-^'".sin.^0  (2ffi— l).v/l— zz

This  last  expression  is  of  the  same  form  as  in  [8374],  and  its  integral  is,

anff.(sin.z)  ^  .^^  ^
5a  =  constant 1-^——^  [49]  Int.  [8374rf]

This  integral  is  to  be  taken  from  its  first  limit  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  where  p  becomes

(p)  [8254],  to  its  second  limit  at  the  upper  surface  of  the  atmosphere,  where  p  =  0. At *■ 1

the  first  limit  the  value  of  z  [8373] becomes 5r=sin.0, and  at  the  second  limit  it

C  4Jr  ■)  -'M4

becomes 2r=jl-| — r*(P)( .sin.0, as  in  [8375]. Therefore the  expression  of

0
Sd [8374£?], must vanish when «  =  sin.0; hence we get 0  =  constant — _ ;

VOL*  IV.  125

[8374/]

498  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

sin.®
[8375] Integrating  this  expression,  from 2:=  sin.e to z  =  -r j^ T"i;^'  ^^

Formula  ^  n^ '  ^^  ^  y

B^u5uer°s obtain,  as  in  [8374^,  &c.],

This  expression  may  be  put  under  the  form,*

subtracting  this  from  [8374<^],  we  obtain,
[8374g-]  8d  ==  ^-^^^— ^  .  ]  0— ang.sin.2;  j  ;

now  substituting  the  second  value  or  limit  of  z  [8374/],  it  becomes  as  in  [8376].
[8374/1] If  we  put m  =  3,902..., and ]  1  + -;;i- •  (p)  ( =0,9978668785,  in  [8376],  we

Bouguer'a

formula shall get,

for  the  '-> '

refraction.  Q

f8374i]  ^^  =  13:61  •  {®— ans(s'"-  =  O,9978668785.sin.0) } .

being  the  same  as  the  rule  given  by  Bouguer,  in  the  memoir  which  gained  the  prize  of  the

Academy of  Arts and Sciences of Paris, in 1729. If we put, m  =  3^, and
[8374&] ^  ^^  ^^

1  4-  —  .  ( p)  ^ =  0,9986, we  shall  get.

[8374Z]  ^^  =  ^  • !  0— ang.(sin.O,9986.sin.0)  \ ;

Simpson's  ■'■■»■

for  the which  is  Simpson's  formula,  published  in 1743 ; about  fourteen  years  after  Bouguer's

refraction.

[8374ml  niethod  had  been  made  known.  These  methods  may  be  considered  as  identical,  since  the
only  difference  between  them is  in  the  data,  deduced  from  observations. The  name  of

r8374nl  Simpson  has  been  generally  annexed  to  this  process  of  computing  the  refraction,  though  by
right  it  appertains  to  Bouguer  ;  remarking,  however,  that  their  methods  of  investigation
are  different.

♦(3900) We  shall  put  for  brevity ^  =  ]l+~.(p)[ , 2x={2m—l).Sd.
[8377a]  C  «  )

Substituting  these  in  [8376],  after  multiplying  it  by 2m — 1 , we  get,

^  . sin.0  _  . sin.  0

[83776]  2«  =  0 — ang.sin.  —-r- , or e — 2x  =  ang.sm.  — — - ;

and  by  taking  its  sine,  we  obtain sin.(0 — 2i;)  =  —~ . The  first  member  of  this  expression

^ '^^ being  developed,  is  sin.0.cos.2a? — cos.0.sin.2a;  [22]  Int. Substituting  this,  and  multiplying

, ^ .  f ^ . ^ 1 1 ^.sin.2x
by  ,  we  get ^. |tang.0.cos.2a? — sin.2a; J  =tang.0; whence tang.0=-^ -♦

Now  from  [30]  Int.,  we  have tane-fe — x)  =  -—^ '—  ; and if  we  substitute  the

X.i.<§.6.]  THIRD  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  499

4K  .  r\-^-^

Formula
similar  to
Bradley's.

[8377]

For  the  horizontal  refraction,  we  have e  =  100°  ; consequently,*  [8378]

tang.  \  e_[?^].,»  |  =

Now -^  .(p)  is  a  very  small  fraction ;  and  if  we  neglect  its  square,  we  shall

[8379]

n"

have  by  development,  as  in  [83796],  the  following  approximate  equation ;

r  4  JT  ^  n»-i

preceding  value  of  tang.0,  then  multiply  the  numerator  and  denominator  by  .^.cos.2a? — 1,
we  shall  get  [8377/]  ;  from  this  we  deduce  [8377^],  by  multiplying  the  numerator  and
denominator  by cos.a? ; then  making  successive  reductions,  using  [22, 24]  Int.,  we  obtain

[8377e]

[8377A]

tang.  (0-^)  ==  .,,,,.o.■.inO.■tnn.■r^-^ 18377/]

.^.(cos.  2r +sin.2a:.tang.a;) — 1
^,(sin.2a:.cos.z — cos.2x.sin.a:)-[- sin.j:
j3.(cos.2a:.cos.z-|-sin«2x.sin.r) — cosj;

[8377ff]

=  ~ = ■ =  — —  .  =  (  -T-^-r .tang.a;. [8377A]

^.cos.(2a: — x) — cos.r w2.cos.r — coo-x A — 1 cos.a: \A — 1/ ^^  <■  ^

lilultiplying  this  last  expression  by  , we  get tang.a?=  (  . ,  ■  ).tang.(e  —  a?) ; and

^-t-1  V'^-hV^  [8377t]

by  re-substituting  the  assumed  values  of  At  cc  [8377a],  it  becomes  as  in  [8377],

*  (3901) Putting  0=100% we  have,

as  in  [8379]. IVToreover  if  we  develop ]  1  +  —  •  (p)  ^ according  to  the  powers  of

^  "  ^  4X  [837961

if, neglecting  the  square  and higher  powers, it becomes l-j-(m — i).  — .(p), or

2^

2,K.  •

l_j_(2m— 1),  —  .  (P). Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [8380],  it  becomes  as  m  its

[8379c]

second  member,  always  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  K^.

500  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

therefore  we  shall  have  very  nearly,^

i-l]  ta„g.[?^].»=^[^].5.0);

and  by  taking  the  arc  itself  for  its  tangent,  which  may  be  done  in  this  case
without  any  sensible  error,  we  shall  have,

[8382]  ) n^ ^^^  \

Horizontal  / Q»„ i \

refraction  V^ '*'" '• J

third  hy-  If  we  have  no  other  object  than  to  consider  the  refraction,  we  may  determine
m,  so  that  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [8382]  may  represent  the  observed
refraction,  which  we  have  supposed  to  be  6500"  [8281]. Then  the  general

— - —  \.66  [8377],  will  give  for  all  altitudes  the  value

of  the  refraction  6&. This  method  has  been  followed  by  several  astronomers,^

*  (3902) Substituting  the  values  [8379,  8380]  in  the  second  member  of  [8377],  we  get,

r2m— 1-| ,, r2m— 11 ^K , .  1

[8381a]  tang.  [-^J.  M  =  [-^J  .  -  .  (  p).  j^jj^p^TT^ '

— - —  \.6&, and  extracting  the  square  root,  it  becomes  as  in  [8381].
Loooioj  Q _i  3  _1

Writing  the  arc — r —  .54 for  its tangent, and dividing  by -^— — ,  it  becomes  as  in

[8382].

f  (3903) Bradley  is  one  of  the  astronomers  who  used  this  method ;  for  his  table  of
[8383al refraction,  which  is  given  by  Dr.  Maskelyne,  in  the  "Requisite  Tables,"  to  be  used  with

Bradley's the  Nautical  Almanac,  is  founded  on  the  formula  [8377],  supposing — - — =3,  or  m=l',

rule  for  i.  j  i  i  o  jj

the  refrac-
tion, and  taking  the  constant  coefficient  in  the  second  member,  so  that  the  horizontal  refraction

rooQot-i

may  be  33"',  which  he  supposed  to  be  its  mean  value,  corresponding  to  50°  of
Fahrenheit's  thermometer,  and  29,6  inches  of  the  barometer.  If  we  change,  in  the  first
member  of  [8377],  the  tangent  into  its  arc  on  account  of  its  smallness,  and  then  divide  by

[8383c] — 5 —  =  3,  we  shall  obtain  the  formula  as  it  is  given  by  Bradley, 54  =  57*.tang.(e — 3^^),

which  makes  the  horizontal  refraction  nearly  equal  to  33"*.  The  table  of  refractions
founded  on  this  rule,  and  on  the  horizontal  refraction  33"*,  has  been  much  used  by  the
English  astronomers ;  it  may  be  expressed  in  a  logarithmic  form  in  the  following  manner ;

[8383rf] log.tang.(app.  zenith  dist. — 3.refraction  6&)  —8,2438534  =  log.  of  refract.  54,  in  sexages.  sec.

[8383rf'] If  the  elevation  of  the  barometer  in  English  inches  be  H,  and  the  height  of  Fahrenheit's

X.l^e.]  THIRD  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  501

[8384]

in  constructing  tables  of  refraction,  and  these  tables  agree  very  well  with
observation.  But  in  order  to  correspond  exactly  with  the  real  state  of
nature,  it  is  necessary  that  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,  here  adopted,
should  not  only  agree  with  the  observed  refraction,  hut  also  ivith  the  height
of  the  barometer,  and  with  the  observed  diminution  of  the  heat  as  the  altitude
of  the  observer  increases.  We  shall  therefore  examine  both  of  these
phenomena  in  the  preceding  hypothesis  [8372],
We  shall  resume  the  equation  [8294'],

dp  —  (g).  ap.d.  —  ,  [8385]

/  i  +  lf.p  \"*
If  we  substitute  f — ~ —  j for  —  [8372],  we  shall  have  after  integration,

thermometer  T,  we  shall  have  for  the  actual  refraction,  by  Bradley's  rule,  as  it  is  given  by [8383^1

Dr.  Maskelyne,

, - .  - .  400°  n

actual  refraction  =  mean  refraction  X  oerno  ■  m  ^  ooT;  •  [8383/"]

«j50  — p  x  .4i7,o

[8383g]
[8383A]

The  mean  refraction  being  supposed  to  correspond  to T=  50°, and H=  29,6  inches.
From  this  rule  it  appears that  if  Fahrenheit's  thermometer  vary 1°  from  its  mean  value

T=  50°, the  refraction 54 will  vary  by the  quantity — —  =  0,00250.54 ; and  by

180°
multiplying  it  by — —  , we  get 0,00450.54, for the variation corresponding to one

degree  of the  centigrade thermometer,  instead  of 0,00375.54, given  by  Gay-Lussac,
[8488] ;  so  that  Bradley's  correction  is  too  great  by  one  fifth  part. To  correct  Bradley's

400°  400°

factor  35QO  1  y or -AK^jjTjrz^^y ^^ "^"^t increase the term 400°, in  this  last [8383i]

expression,  by  one  fifth  part,  making  it  ; and the corrected expression

[838:3/']  will  be,

y r .  c '  480°  H

actual  refraction  =  mean  refraction  X  ^^o  .  y  X  296"  *  [8383;fc]

According  to  Bradley  the  mean horizontal  refraction, when T=50° and J/ =  29,6
inches,  is  1980*  =  61 11",!. Now  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  we  have T=32°j [8383/]
and  if  we  suppose  the  height  of  the  barometer  to  be 0'"«*'%76  =  29'°«''^%922, we  shall
get  for  the  refraction  corresponding,  the  following  expression,

611  I'M  X  II  X  ^  =  6418";  [8383m]

which  is  82"  less  than  that  which  is  assumed  by  La  Place,  in  [8281],  as  being  more  in
conformity  with  the  best  observations.  '" "-'

VOL.  IV.  126

502  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[8385'] by  observing  that  p,  p,  become  nothing  at  the  same  point,

[M6c.  Cel.

[8386]

+

p  =  (g)Mf)-

('»+i).^-(p)

-[^+f-T1

n2

[>+?■(')]■

[8386a]
[83866]

[8386c]

[8386rf]
[8386c]

[8386/]

*  (3904) Putting  for  brevity 6=l-f-  — .(p), a;  =  l+— .p, we get, from

[8372],

a x^  , «  mx^~^dx

Substituting  these  values  in  [8385]  we  obtain,
and  by  integration.

4JSr.6«

n^.{x—\)
4X

.  [mx'^dx — mx^-^dx\ ;

(^)^ C
^ 4£6'»  •  X

mx

.iii+i

m-j-1

—  a?"*  4"  constant

]■

[8386g-]
[8386^]
[8386t]

[8386A]

Now  when p  =  0, we have jp=0  [8335']; and in this case the value of x
[8386a] becomes a?  =  l. Substituting these expressions in [8386<i], we get

0  =  — 1+  constant, or constant  =  — rr  ;  hence  [8386frj  becomes  as  in  [8386gf].

m-\-\  '  m-j-1

This  value  of  p  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8386A],  and  by  introducing  the  factor  — ,

within  the  braces,  it  becomes  as  in  [8386i]. Finally,  putting p for  its  value  [83866],  it.

is  reduced  to  the  last  form  in  [8386Ar],  which  is  the  same  as  [8386].

_  {g).a.n^ C  nuxT^^ ^  1 >

P  ~ 4K.b'^ '  I  w+l  ~^ +  m  +  1  >

4Kb'
(5-)-«

^..  ^ICf^l)  + 0

4K

(m+l)

6"

a;'"p

(1-^t^O > (g)Mp)

(™+i)-f

P  , (1— aj^+O

(p)

(-+l).';f.(p)

X.  i.  §  6.]  THIRD  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  503

This  expression  gives  very  nearly,*

P  ==  (g)Mp)'  m-  -^ •  (P)-  ^2  •  [8387]

(p)  [8288',  8288]  being  the  pressure  at  the  surface  of  the  sea,  where  p  =  (p),

[8388]

[8389]

[8390]
This  equation  gives,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,t

m  =  — ^— ;  [8391]

•(P)

and —  =

r

=  1. Now

we  have

J,  in

[8298],

hence  we

obtain.

(P)

=  (^).(P)./

1

P

=  m.

P»

n2

therefore  the  horizontal  refraction 66  becomes.

*  (3905) Using  for  brevity  the  symbol k=  —^  [81926],  we  get,  by  development, [8387a]

(l+kp)^ ^l+mJc?  +&C. ; 1— [1-f Arp]«+i  =  _(m+l).A:P—  (^^d^ . fc2p2_&c. ; [83876]

{l+A:(p)|«  =  I  +  &c.  t8387c]

Substituting  these  in  [8386],  it  becomes,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  Jc^,

P=(5')-«-(p).{(^.(l+»»^P)— ~.(l+J^^P)|===(5')-«-(P)-^^  [8387rf]

being  the  same  as  in  [8387]. Dividing  this  by  (p)  [8389],  we  get  [8390].

t  (3906) At  the  surface  of  the  earth  we  have P  =  (p), p  =  {p)  [8388]  ; and  then

njg-  [839  lo]

[8390]  becomes 1  =7».  —  .  — .  (p)  ; hence  we  get m  [8391]. Substituting  this  in

4K
[8382],  it  becomes,  by  using —  =  A:  [8387a],

Sd  =

n2

^-'X )~-i'w\ \/^-im  '^"'

Re-substituting  the  value  of  k  [83916],  it  becomes  as  in  [8392]  ;  and  by  using  the  values
mentioned  in  [8392'],  and  multiplying  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  it  becomes  as  in  [8393].

504  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel-

[8392]

n

.(P)

[8392']

If  we  substitute  for a,  Z, and  --^.(P),  their  values  [8278,  8275,  8277],  we

shall  have,

[8393]  66  =  5630".

This  is  less  than  the  observed  rejr action  [8281],  hut  greater  than  that  which
results  from  a  constant  density.  Hence  the  actual  constitution  of  the
atmosphere  is  an  intermediate  one  between  the  supposition  of  a  uniform
temperature,  and  that  which  results  from  the  assumed  relation  between  r
and  P  [8372].

In  this  last  hypothesis  the  densities  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  decrease
in  arithmetical  progression^ when those altitudes  increase in a similar

[8395'] progression* For  if  we  put r  =  a.(l-{-s), we  shall  have  very  nearly,

[8396]

as

=4..j.(p).«.;i_^j=2.[i-^j;

as  being  the  height  of  the stratum  of  the  atmosphere. The  limit  of  the
'- ■' atmosphere is at the  point  where p  =  0, and then [8396] becomes
[8397'] 055  =  2/; the  height  of  the  atmosphere  is  in this  case  double  that  of  its
ffifmof- height  in  the  hypothesis  of  a  constant  density  [8290].
thfJ^^rd The  expression  of  p  [8390]  gives,!

sis.  ,  ,

*  (3907) Developing  the  first  expression  of  —  [8374o],  according  to  the  powers  of

kj  and  neglecting  Jc^,  we  get —  =  l-»iA:.{(p)-P}. Putting  this  equal  to  —=—-  =  1-5,

nearly  [8395'J,  we  get s  =  mJc.^{p)—p]  =mJc.{p).  5  1— -^  >  . Multiplying  this  by  a,

and  re-substituting  the  value  of  7c  [8387a],  it  becomes  as  in  the  first  expression  of  as,

[8396]. Substituting 4m.  — .  (P).a  =  2Z [8391], it  becomes  as  in  the last form of

[8396].  Whence  it  evidently  follows  that  when  the  density  P  varies  in  arithmetical
progression,  the  altitude  as  varies  in  a  similar  progression,  as  in  [8395].  Finally  when
p  =  0, we  get,  from  [8396], as  =  21, as  in  [8397'].

[83980] t  (3908) Substituting m.y.— .(p)  =  l  [8391a],  in  [8390],  we  get -^  =  ^-|^;

[8396a]

[83966]
[a396c]

phere.

X.i.^6.]  THIRD  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  505

= = 1 .  rExpiession  of  the  temperature.  |  [8398]

(p).p (P)  21  ^  -■

The  function ' is  important  to  be  considered^  because  it  expresses  the

law of  the heat of  the strata  of  the  atmosphere. For, at the same Tempera-
temperature, it  has  been  found  by  experiment  that  the  pressure  of  the  air atmos"^
is  proportional  to  its  density ;  but  this  ratio  increases  with  the  temperature,
and  may  be  supposed  to  represent  it  ;* since  the  particles  of  air  appear  to  be
subjected  only  to  the  repulsive  force  of  heat,  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that
this  force  increases  in  the  same  ratio  as  the  heat. It  follows  from  the

preceding  expression  of  -^-—~  [8398],  that  the  heat of  the strata of  the

atmosphere  decreases  as  their  density  in  an  arithmetical  progression  £8400e].

A  diminution  of  -^\-^  in  the  value  of pV-  > is  the  same  as to  suppose  a

[8400]

as

[8401]

diminution  of  -jl^  in  the  value  of 1 —  —  ; thus in  setting out  from  the

<*»

surface  of  the  earth, we  must  ascend  to  the  height  of — or 63™^*""*, 8, [8402]

multiplying  it  by —  ,  we  obtain,  as  in  [8398], ^4^  =  "T"  ; but  from  183961  we  have

/> [p)-f (/>)
p as . . V'{?^ CIS  [8398o]

7—  =  1  —  —  : hence  by  substitution  we  have >-— ^  =  1 ,  as  in  [83981.

[8400a]
[84006]

*  (3909)  If  we  suppose  the  pressure  p  to  be  proportional  to  the  density  p,  multiplied
by  the  heat  h,  we  shall  have  p  =  Ch.^;  C  being  a  constant  quantity  ;  and  if  we  suppose
A  to  be  equal  to  unity  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  the  preceding  equation  will  become  at
that  surface (p)  =  C(p). Dividing  the  expression  of  p, by that  of (p), we  get

f-—l-h, or h=P^, as  in [8399,  Sic]  ; hence  we  have,  by  using  [839861, [8400c]
(P) (/>)  {p)'P

h=  I  —  —  =2  - —  ; and  it  follows  from  this  equation  that  if  the  height  as  increases  in [8400rf]
2/ [p)

arithmetical progression, the  heat h and the density p will  decrease in arithmetical [8400c]

progression  nearly,  as  in  [8400]. For  the  sake  of  symmetry,  if  we  put  the  heat  at  the TQAQQfi

surface  of  the  earth  equal to (A), or (A)  =  l, the  preceding  equation  [8400c?J  may  be

put  under  the  form -yr —  =  — . The  first  member  of  this  equation  evidently  represents [8400g']

the  decrement  of  heat; and  if  we  suppose  this  to  be ^-^j^, as  in  [8401],  we  shall  have roAQni-,

as=  —  =0,008.Z  =  63'"«"^%8  [8275],  as  in  [8402].

VOL.  IV,  127

[8403]

506  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  CeL

[8400/i],  to  experience  a  decrease  of  ^}-^  in  the  elastic  force  of  the  air,
[8402']  yyjtfj  the  same  degree  of  density.  This  corresponds  very  nearly  to  a  fall
of  one  degree^  in  the  centigrade  thermometer.  All  the  observations  concur
in  showing  that  this  elevation  is  too  small ^  and  that  the  decrease  of  the  heat
is  less  rapid ;  therefore  this  third  hypothesis,  now  under  consideration,  does
not  represent  either  the  observed  refraction,  or  the  observed  laiv  of  the
diminution  of  heat.

In  the  hypothesis  of  a  constant  density,  we  have,t

p.(p)  as

therefore  we  need  only  to  ascend  to  half  the  height  required  by  the  preceding
hypothesis  to  obtain  a  diminution  of  one  degree  in  the  thermometer;
consequently  this  hypothesis  is  still  farther  than  the  other  from satisfying

[8405]

[8402a]
[84026]

*  (3910)  This  appears  from  the  formula  [8488],  by  putting  aj= — 1,  which  changes
the  value  1,  at  the  surface,  into  1 — 0,00375,  or  1 — si-^  nearly.  Now  it  appears  from
the  experiment  of  Gay  Lussac  [8448],  that  an  elevation  of  6980  metres  produces  a
depression  of  40°^  in  the  centigrade  thermometer,  which  corresponds  to  173  metres  for
one  degree,  instead  of  63™^*''^^8  [8402].  Hence  it  appears  that  the  diminution  of  heat
"  ^  is  much  less  rapid,  by  observation,  than  by  the  third  hypothesis  here  used,  as  is  remarlied
in  [8403].

[8404  1 ^  (3911) In  the  hypothesis  of  a  constant  density,  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  is  ?,

[8275]  ;  and  if  the  height  of  the  observer  be  as  [8395'],  the  height  of  the  superincumbent

atmosphere,  at  that  elevation,  will  be I — as. Now  the  pressure  being  in  proportion  to

Ti as
[84046] the  height  of  the  atmosphere,  we  have {p) :  p  ::  I :  I — as  ; hence - — -  =  1 ; and

since  by  hypothesis —  =  Ij we  have —^ —  =  1 r? as in [8404]. The first

[8404c]  ^ ^^  P  [P)'l>  I  ^  ^

member  of  this  equation  is  represented  by h  [8400c]  ; moreover (A)  =  1 [8400/] ;
[8404c'] hence we have in this hypothesis ; —  =1 r- , or as  =  l.  —4- —  ; whereas  the

•'^  (h)  I  {h)

hypothesis  of  a  density  decreasing  with  the  height,  in  arithmetical  progression,  gives,  as  in
[S404(/]  {h)—h

[8400^], as  =  2l.——-; therefore  the  preceding  value  of  as is  only  half  of  this  last
(ft)

expression,  as  is  observed  in  [8405]. If  we  put  as  in  [8400^,  h]  =  shj »  and  use  ?,

(ft)

[8404c]
[8404/]

[8275],  we  shall  have,  from  [8404c'],  05  =  —=  32"*®*'%  nearly,  which  differs  from
observation,  I73metres  [84026],  much  more  than  that  deduced  from  the  hypothesis  used
in  [8400,  &;c.],  namely  63">«t''«s8  [8402].

X.i.«§»7.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  607

the  observations  upon  the  refraction  and  heat.  At  the  same  time  we  see  that
the  nearer  we  approach  to  the  observed  refraction,  the  nearer  it  will  agree
relative  to  the  heat.

[8406]

[8409]

7.  The  constitution  of  the  atmosphere  being  comprised  between  the  two
limits  of  a  density  decreasing  in  arithmetical  progression,  and  a  density
decreasing  in  geometrical  progression,  an  hypothesis  which  partakes  of
both  these  progressions,  ought,  it  ivould  seem,  to  represent  both  the  refraction
and  the  observed  decrement  of  the  heat  of  the  atmospherical  strata.  The
following  hypothesis  has  both  these  advantages,  and  also  furnishes  a  very
simple  method  of  computation.

We  shall  resume  the  equation  [8262],  substituting  —  =  1  —  s  [8284],
and  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  from  [8286],*

— (X..d.  —  .sin.0

d&  = ^  ;  [8408]

(l_a).\/cos.2  0— 2a.  1  — -^ -|- 2s  — S^.cos.^  e

s  being  a  very small  fraction,  we  may  neglect  the  term — 25.cos.^0, in
comparison  with cos.^e  ;  thus  we  shall  have,

dp
— a.  —  .  sin.0

dd  ==  .  ^  =  .  [8410]

(1— a).\/cos.20— 2a.ri~-^l+25

We  shall  now  put,

*  (3912)  Substituting  sin.20  =  I — cos.^©,  in  the  denominator  of  dd  [8286],  and
using  the  mean  value  of  the  factor  1 — 2a. Tl —  —  j  =  1 — a  [8286',  8287],  it  becomes,
by  neglecting  s^,

a.  —  .(1 — s).sm.0

d^—-^  ^^^  .  [8408a]

(1— a).  W^cos.20—  2a.(l—  --^^-{-2s— 2*.cos.20

We  may  neglect  the  term  containing s, in  the  numerator,  because  this  quantity  is  of  the

same  order,  relative  to  s.  as  the  term  in  [8300  line  21,  which  is  shown  to  be  insensible  in

"■  -■  [8408&]

[8368]  ;  hence  the  expression  of  d^  [8408a]  becomes  as  in  [8408]  ;  and  by  neglecting
the  small  term — 2s.cos.2  0,  in  the  radical,  it  becomes  as  in  [8410].

608  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  fMec.  Gel.

[8411]  u  =  5— a.

Fourth
hypothe-
■is,  pro-

[8413]

or,

[8411']

posed  by
La  Place.

[8412]  „_  ,  s 5  1 . >

or.

[8412']  ^  =  |l+:^|.C

P_  ^  1  .  /«  ?  -  ''
(P)
/  and  /'  being  two  indeterminate  constant  quantities.  This  value  of  p
partakes  both  oj  the  arithmetical  and  geometrical  progressions*  We  must
determine  /  and  I'  so  as  to  represent  the  height  of  the  barometer  and  the
horizontal  refraction ;  and  if  this  value  satisfies  also  the  observed  decrease
of  the  heat  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere,  we  may  consider  it  as
representing  the  true  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,  to  be  used  in  the
construction  of  a  table  of  refraction.  Substituting  the  values  of  5,  p,
[841  r,  8412],  in  [8410],  we  obtain, .

«"77- 1— /+77 -c .sin.0
[8414]  d6  =  1— i= ^  -I  .

We  shall  now  put.

*  (3913) For  extremely  small  values  of  s,  it  is  evident,  by  inspection  of  [8411, 8412],
that  M,  s,  p,  vary  nearly  in  arithmetical  progression ;  observing  that,

u

c"^  =  1-y  +h  $  -&c. [56]  Int.,
and  that — is  very  small  [8436,  8438J. When  s  and  u  become  larger,  the  geometrical

[8413a]

[84135]

[8413c]

function  c begins  more  sensibly  to  operate  in  [8412]  ;  and  the  expression  of  p  [8412]
partakes  sensibly  of  the  nature  of  both  kinds  of  progressions,  as  in  [8413]. Now  from

tt  u

[8412']  we  get — —  =  c *  -|-Tr*^ ^  > whose  differential  is,

[8413rf]  —  =  —  —  A  1—  f  +  -rr>  .C

Substituting  in  [8410]  the  values  [8411',  8413d], it  becomes  as  in [8414]. Lastly,
substituting  M  =  Z'.t»— ^.cos.^e  [8415],  in  [8414],  we  get  [8416].

X.i.^7.]

FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.

509

cos.«0  +  2M=2/'.t^ or t  =  y^^^i:!^+^;
and  we  shall  have,

di

of  this
therefore  if  we  put,

COS.2  0

—  I''

COS.0

The  integral  of  this  expression  is  to  be  taken  from* t  =  — ^ to t

COS.0

we  shall  have,t

(1— a).v/2/'

+

2.(1— a)./'

.sin.0.cos.0.

[841.5]

[841fi]

CO  ; [8417]

[8418]

[8419]
[841 9'J

General
expression

Iof  the
refiaction

[8420]

in  La
2  Place's

hypothe-

*  (3914) The  integral  is  to  be  taken,  as  in  [8307i],  from s=0 to 5=00; and
therefore  as  in  [8271],  from p  =  (p) to p  =  0. At  the  first  of  these  limits,  namely

COS.0

s=0, p=:(p), we  have  m  =  0[8411]; whence t  =  -;=-  [8415]; at the second [84166]
limit, where s  =  00 , p  =  0, we have t/  =  oo [8411]; whence t  =  oo [8415J.
These  limits  of t are  the  same  as  are  given  in  [8417].

[8416c]

t  (3915)  Substituting  T  instead  of  its  value  [8418],  we  can  separate  dd  [8416]  into
two  parts,  depending  on  different  functions  of  t ;  and  its  integral  may  therefore  be  put
under  the  followins;  form  ;

'a
2a.  sin.0

Now  we  have  generally  y*t^rft.<r-"=  constant — ^t.c— "  +|/«:/t.c— ",  as  is  easily  proved
by  taking  the  differential  and  reducing.  If  we  suppose  these  integrals  to  commence  with
t  =  T,  we  must  put  the  constant  quantity  equal  to  ^T.c~'^'^,  so  as  to  make  the  terms
without  the  sign  /,  vanish  when  t  =  T.  Then  at  the  other  limit,  where  t  =  go,  the
integral  [8420c]  becomes  /rt^.c-ff^t  =  ir.(r-^^  + J./rrft.(^".  substituting  this
in  [84206],  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  get,

Substituting *(T) [8419']  instead  of  its  value,  and  in  the  last  term  putting  for  T  its
value  [8418],  we  get  the  expression  of  Sd  [8420].
VOL.  IV.  128

[8420a]

[84206]
[8420c]

[8420</]
[8420c ]

[8420/]

Place's

hypothe-

«is.

510  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

[8421] T  [8418]  vanishes  at  the  horizon  when cos.e  =  0  [8318]  ;  then  we  have,
"°f"aS' fro™ [8419',  8331],* ^(T)  =  jy^  ; therefore  the  horizontal  refraction  is,

iu  La  .

so  that  the  refraction  would  be  nothing  if  f  were  equal  to 2  ; it  would  be
negative  if  />2.

We  shall now determine the  pressure p of the atmosphere,  in this
hypothesis. We  have  very  nearly,  by [8294,  &c.],t
[8424]  dp  =  ~{g).a.pds;

[8425] therefore  by  substituting  for s  its  value  [8411'],  we  get,

[8426]  dp  =  —(g).  a.pdu  +  ^.(g).a.  ^  .

(p)
Substituting  for p  its  value  [8412],  namely,

'"^^  P=(p).(l+f).o"^

(p)
[8428] then  integrating,  and  observing  that (g)  =  ^r-  [8298],  we  obtain,  f

Piessttre  ^'  ■'

[84^]  A=^/l . Mc~V/-.^~'^+*.a-.-^.

*(3916) When cos.©  — 0, we  have T=0[8418];  and  the  expression  of  y(T)
[8422a] [8419'J becomes *(T)  =/„»  (/t.c""  =  i./* [8331]. Substituting these values of
cos.e, T, ^(T),  in  [8420],  it  becomes  as  in  [8422].

t  (3917) The  differential  of  [8284]  is d.  —  =—ds', hence [8294']  becomes  as  in

[8424a]

[8424]. The  differential  of  s  [8411']  is ds  =  du—a..—  ; substituting  this  in  [8424], it

if)
becomes  as  in  [8426].

t  (3918) Substituting  the  value  of p  [8427]  in  the  first  terra  of  the  second  member  of
[8426],  we  get,

[8428al  ^P  =  -(5-)-«-(p){l+]?).c~'rf"+«"(^)-«-'^-

Dividing  this  by  (p),  and  substituting  the  value  of  (g)  [8428],  we  obtain,

u

The  integral  of  this  expression  is  the  same  as  in  [8429],  as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  its
differential,  and  neglecting  the  terms  which  destroy  each  other.

I

X.  i.§7.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  511

At  the  surface  of  the  earth  we  have p  =  (p)  [8254], p  =  {p)  [8288,  8288'], .g^g^
M  =  0  [84166]  ; hence  we  get,*

Z'.(l+/)  =  -  — 4  a.  [8431]

a "

If  we  suppose  the  horizontal  refraction  to  be 6500" [8281],  or  in  parts  of

[84321
the  radius  0,01021018,  we  shall  have,t

0,01021018  =  ,. "^'K" ^-'{.^  —  ify  [843:3]

These  two  equations  give,  Ka""'

(0,0102101 8f  .(1  — a)l8/'='  =  a^*.  I  3/'—  7  +  -|  r*
Substituting  the  preceding  values  of a,  a,  /, we  obtain,  J

*  (3919) Subsiituting  the  values  [8430]  in  [8429],  it  becomes,

[8435]

l=^+/.l'4-ia.f;  [8431a]

multiplying  it  by — , we  get,

i  =  Z'+/Z'+  ia  =  V.{1  +/)  +  ia;  ^843163

whence  by  transposition  we  obtain  [8431].

t  (3920) Tiie  horizontal  refraction 6500"  [8432] being  divided  by  the  radius  in
M seconds 636620",  gives  the  quantity 0,01021018,  which  is  to  be  put  equal  to  5^  [8422]; [8433a]
hence  we  get  [8433]. The  value  of  /  [8434]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [8431]  ;  and  from

this  we  get 1 — i/=  IT77.  ( 3/' ~l"  o" )  5 substituting  this  in  [8433],  we  find,

0,01021018  =  — ^^^^^.$3/'- i-+^l.

(l-a).(2/')^ ^  a ' 2 S  [8433c]

Squaring  this  and  multiplying  by (1 — a)'^.8r^, we  obtain  [8435].

J  (3921) Dividing [8435] by a^*, then substituting the values of a, a, Z,
[8277',  8278,  8275],  it  becomes  very  nearly 3072./'3=  (3Z'— 0,00110563)2. From  this [8435o]
cubic  equation  we  deduce  the  value  of  V  [8436] ;  subsiituting  this  and  the  values  of  a,  a,  /,

above-mentioned,  we  get,  from  [8434], /=  - — '-  —  1  =0,49042,  as  in  [8437]. [84356]

We  may  observe  that  the  cubic  equation  in  V  [8435'7],  has  two  other  roots,  which  are
however  of  no  use  in  the  problem  for  finding  the  refraction,  because  they  lead  to  results

512

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  Gel

[8436]
[8437]

/'  =0,000741816;
/  =  0,49042.

log./'  =  6,87030 ;
log./*  =9,69057.

[8i'.i5d]

[8435e ]
[8435/]
[8435^]
[8435/i]

[8435i]

[8435/c]
[8435/  ]

[8435ot]
[8435n]

[8435o]

[8435p]
[8435^]

[8435r]

which  are  inconsistent  with  the  actual  state  and  limits  of  the  atmosphere.  One  of  these
values  is  T  =0,00028...,  which,  by  the  substitution  in  the  first  expression  of  /  [84356],
gives  /=2,93... ;  and  with  this  value  of  /,  we  find  that  the  expression  of  the  horizontal
refraction  [8422]  becon)es  negative;  therefore  this  value  of  I'  must  be  rejected.  The
other  value  of  l'  is  Z' =0,0019...,  which  gives  /=— 0,42...  [84356],  and  by
substituting  the  values  of  /',  /,  in  [8412],  we  get  p=(p)-{l — 220.M | . c"^^^'*  nearly.
At  the  upper  limit  of  the  atmosphere,  where  p=0,  this  expression  gives  1 — 220.w  =  0,
or  w  =  0,00455...  Substituting  these  values  of  w,  /,  p,  also  a  =  0,00029..  [8277'j,
in  the  expression  of  s  [8411],  we  get  s  =  0,00455+0,00029  =  0,00484  ;  and  as  a  is
less  than  4000  miles,  we  shall  have,  for  the  corresponding  height  as  of  the  atmosphere,
an  altitude  which  is  less  than  20  miles,  being  much  smaller  than  it  is  proved  to  be,  by  the
appearance  of  the  twilight,  and  by  observation  of  the  heights  of  meteors,  that  sometimes
appear  in  the  atmosphere  ;  which  make  it  between  40  and  50  miles  in  height.  The
value  of  r,  which  is  used  by  La  Place  in  [8437,  &;c.],  gives  a  very  accurate  formula  for
the  refraction  at  all  altitudes  [8440] ;  and  a  much  more  simple  formula  in  [8501],  for
altitudes  which  exceed  12° ;  so  that  if  nothing  more  were  required  than  to  find  the
refraction,  we  might  be  content  with  the  formulas  of  La  Place  [8438 — 8440,  8474,  Sic],
which  are  derived  from  this  value  of  V.  But  we  shall  see,  in  [8445o],  that  these  formulas
give  a  too  rapid  decrease  of  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at  high  elevations,  and  that
the  decrement  of  the  heat  is  also  too  rapid,  particularly  in  low  altitudes  [8444/?,  q,  z].
To  obviate  these  defects,  and  yet  preserve  the  same  forms  of  calculation  as  those  which
are  used  by  La  Place,  it  is  proposed  by  Plana,  in  vol.  27,  page  206,  &c.  of  the  Memorie
della  reale  Accademia  delle  Scienze  de  Torino,  to  use  La  Place's  value  of  I'  [8436],  in
computing  the  refraction  ;  but  in  finding  the  temperature  and  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,
to  use  the  value  of  /'  resulting  from  the  observations  of  Gay  Lussac  [8445g"].  This
value  of  V  is  easily  deduced  from  [8441,  8446],  using  the  observations  given  in  [8445o-].
For  we  shall  see  in  [8491jp]  that  the  expression  of  the  heat  h  [8400c],  may  be  reduced
to  the  form,

p.{e) ]  4- 0,0037.5.3:^
l-[-0,00375.(a:)  '

A  =

\P)-P

X, (x),  being  the  heights  of  the  thermometer  in  the  upper  and  lower  stations  respectivelyij
This  formula  is  equivalent to  that in [8446], when (jc)  =  0°. Now  substituting,  if
[8435.V] [8435r],  the  values {x)  =  S0°,15, a?  =  —9° ,7 5, observed by Gay  Lussac  [8445^]
we  obtain,

p.{p) 1-0,00375  X9°,5

[6435/ ]
[84.35u]

^=^11^'  =

:  0,864668;

hence — -  =

(/.) 0,86466tf.(;?)

[p).p l-j-0,00375X:iO°,75
and by using the  values of (p) [8445^], p [8445t],

X.i.  §7.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  513

We  shall  therefore  have,  in  this  constitution  of  the  atmosphere,*  foraulal'

'■  for  the

u  =  s  — 0,000293876.f'l—  -^^  ;  ^8438]

V  (P)J  refraction

^  ^  ''  and  denei-

s  =  u  +  0,000293876/l—  -A:)  ;  Vas']

p  =  (p).{l+M.661,107S.C-"-"^^'°\-  [8439]

5&  =  8611",6.  {0,75479— 0,49042.  r'}.sin.0.  ?4^  +  30930",3.  sin.20. [8440]

We  shall  now  determine  the  corresponding  law  of  the  diminution  of  heat,

p.  ( p^
or,  in  other  words,  the  expression  of  ^ [8399]. Substituting  for p  and

P  their  preceding  values  [8429,  8412],  we  shall  have,  for  the  expression  of
the  temperature,!

s  [8444^],  we  obtain ~t also u from  [8411]. Finally,  substituting A=  0,864668

(^)  ^  [8435i;]

[8435^]  for  the  first  member  of  [8441],  and  putting m, -/- , — , [8435m,  8278t^], in

its  second  member,  we  get  a  quadratic  equation  in I' ; whence  we  may  determine  Z',

also  the  value  of  /  [8434],  and  the  general  expression  of  p  [8412]. But  we  have  not

thought  it  to  be  necessary  to  go  into  any  farther  detail  on  this  method,  as  the  author  uses

a  different  process,  in  [8546,  &ic.],  for  determining  the  decrement  of  the  heat,  in  measuring '■ ^^

altitudes  by  the  barometer.

[8435m.]

*  (3922) Substituting in  [8411] the  value  of  a  [8277'J,  we  get  [8438,  8438'].
Again,  by  using  the values  of l\  f  [8436,  8437], we  obtain  [8439]  from  [8412] ;

[8438a]

/  1

observing  that  the  preceding  values  give —  =661,107, and —  =  1348,04, nearly. [84386]

Lastly,  substituting  the  same  values  of  a,  a,  Z,  Z',  in Sd  [8420],  then  multiplying  by  the

radius  in  seconds  636620",  we  get  [8440]; remarking  that  in  order  to  reduce  it  to  the [8438c]

form  [8440],  we  must  multiply  the  term  [8420  line  1]  by — -, and then connect the [8438rf]

term  of  the  denominator y/*, with 2^(T)  in  [8440],  and  the  term  of  the  numerator

\/v, is  included in the coefficient 8611",6 [8440]. In [8420  line  2] the term [843Se]

sin.e.cos.e is  changed  into ^.sin.20  [31]  Int.

u

t(3923) The  value  of  p  [8412]  gives 1^  =  /'l+^V.c '' . Now multiplying [8441a]

the  expression  of  —  [84291,  bv — > and  usine  the  preceding  value  of  — ~ in  the  first

^  (P)  ^ ^ Mp)  ^ ^  ^  /»_  [84416]

and  second  terms  of  the  second  member  of  the  product,  we  get  [8441]. This  is  reduced

a

to  the  form  [8442],  by  substituting  the  values  of  y  ,  a,  /,  Z'  [8278£Z,  8277',  8437,  8436J.
VOL.  IV.  129  '

514  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  C^l.

[8441]  PAH = :^' + Lr +  la.  -^.  /-;  fExpre-ion  of  the  heat  fc]

formulas  I I  /

for  the

tempera-  ^

tureofthe consequentlv,

?•»«'«•  n  ( o)  0  2Q044R  P

[8442]  p^ = 0,592243  4-  j:p^^^^ +  0,  1  1 7311 .  -^  . [Expression  of  the  he.t  h]

To  compare  this  with  observation,  we  shall  suppose,
[8443]  u  =  0,00092727  ;

and  we  shall  then  have,*

[8444]  ^  =  0,462 14 ;  as  =  6909"'«"«S44.

(P) '  '

*  (3924) Substituting  the  assumed  value  of  u  [8443]  in  [8439],  we  get — [8444]  ;
[8444a]  ^  _  ^  ^  . V.

and  the  same  values  being  substituted  in [8438'],  gives 5  ; then multiplying  it  by  a,

[84446] |-g278],  we  obtain  as  [8444]. Using  these  values,  we  reduce  [8442]  to  the  form  [8445].

Putting  the  expression  [8445] equal  to  its  assumed  value  [8446],  we  get  the  value  of  x,

[8447], This  is  the  computed  depression  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  corresponding  to

the  elevation as  =  6909"^*'®%44  [8444], above  the  surface  of the earth. Now  the
[8444^1 .  .  » L J'

'■  height to which Gay  Lussac ascended, was nearly equal to  this quantity,  namely,

[8444e] 69Son»etres  [8448], and the observed depression of  the thermometer 40°,25 [8449],

differs  but  very  little  from  this  computation. Mr.  Plana,  in  his  remarks  on  this  article,  in

vol.  27,  page  205  of  the  Memorie  della  reale  Accademia  delle  Scienze  de  Torino^  uses  a

[8444c ]

[8444/]  , . ^

value  of  u which  varies  a  little  from  that  in  [8443],  and  gives  a  more  correct  result  in  the

value  of  as  [8444]. He  assumes w  =  0,00093708, and  then  from [8439]  he  gets

[8444g-] p- =0,457903; from  [8438']  he  obtains s  =  0,00109639 ; whence as=6979"'«''«S83,

[8444A] being  very  nearly  the  same  as  by  observation  [8448]. Substituting  these  results  in  [8442],

[8444i] he  obtains  ^^=0,8253,  instead  of  the  value 0,8266 [8445];  and  then  from  [8446]
iPhP
gets 0,8253  =l-f0,00375. a;; consequently a?  =  —46° ,6, being  nearly  as  in  [8447].

[8I44fc] This  result  of  La  Place's  theory  agrees  nearly  with  the  observation  in  [8449],  but  makes

the  decrement  of  heat  somewhat  too  rapid. This  rapidity  is  also  found  to  be  much  too

'■ ^ great  in  the  lower  regions  of  the  atmosphere. For  if  we  suppose m  =  0,0000139,  we

shall  have,  in  [8439], -^  =0,9904553, and  then  from  [8438,  8278], 5  =  0,0000167,
[8444m]  {/>)  L  »  J'

as  =  106™^*'^*.  Substituting  these  values  in  the  expression  of  the  heat  h  [8442],  it
becomes  A  =  0,9962377  =:  1 — 0,00376.  Comparing  this  with  the  general  expression
A  =  l+0,00375.a;  [8446],  we  get  very  nearly  x== — 1°.  Hence  it  appears,  that  from
La  Place's  fora.ula  for  the  decrement  of  heat  [8442],  it  is  only  necessary  to  ascend  to  the

X.i.<§>7.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.

Hence  we  deduce,

P-(p)

=  0,8266.

515

[8445]

height  of  106  metres  [8444m],  to  decrease  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  1°  of  the
centigrade  thermometer.  Now  this  is  much  greater  thaa  it  is  found  to  be  by  observation  ;
since  the  result  of  Ramond's  observations  is  164"®''®»,7  ;  that  of  Humboldt  161™°*'^«%  and
that  of  Gay  Lussac  ITS™^*'^''  [8402^].*

At  the  upper  Hmit  of  the  atmosphere  we  have  p=0,  and  then  La  Place's  formula
[8438]  becomes  u  =  s — 0,000293876.  Now  from  the  observations  of  the  twilight,  &c.
[8435^:],  it  is  found  that  the  atmosphere  is  about  40  or  50  miles  in  height,  or  about  ^V  part
of  the  radius;  making  5  =  0,011..  [8284];  or  for  facility  of  calculation  s  =0,01 1293876.
Substituting  this  in  u  [8444r],  we  get  m  =  0,011  ;  and  then  the  expression  of  the  heat
h,  in  the  second  member  of  [8442],  becomes  A  =  0,6274.  Putting  this  equal  to  its
value,  in  the  second  member  of  [8446],  we  obtain  0,6274  =  1  -j-0, 00375.0?,  which  gives
X  =  — 99°,36 ;  adding  this  to  the  height  of  the  thermometer  at  the  lower  station  30°,75,
[8449],  we  get  — 68°,61,  for  the  height  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  at  the  summit  of
the  atmosphere,  according  to  the  formulas  of  La  Place  [8442],  and  by  reducing  it  to  the

180°

scale  of  Fahrenheit,  it  becomes —68° ,61  X  r^  +  32°  =  — 91°,5.

This  depression  of

the  thermometer  is  considerably  greater  than  the  estimate  of  Fourier,  in  the  Memoires  de
V  Insiitut,  tome  vii,  page  598  ;  since  from  various  considerations  he  assumes,  as  a  probable
result,  that  the  temperature  of  the  space,  in  which  the  earth  moves,  is  not  far  from  — 40°
of  Reaumur's  thermometer,  or  — 58°  of  Fahrenheit's  scale.  From  what  has  been  said
it  is  evident  that  La  Place''s  formulas  [8438 — 8440,  8442],  give  a  too  rapid  decrement
of  the  heat ;  and  that  this  defect  is  most  striking  in  the  lotoer  regions  of  the  atmosphere.
In  like  manner  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  p,  deduced  from  La  Place'^  formula
[8429],  decreases  with  greater  rapidity  than  is  indicated  by  the  observations  of  Gay
Lussac. To  prove  this  we  shall  observe,  that  the  formula  [8429]  is  easily  reduced  to  the

form  [8445rf],  and  by  substituting  the  values ~  =  661,107, 77  =  1348,04,  [8438J] ; [8445c ]

/=  0,49042 [8437]; it becomes as in [8445e]. Finally, substituting the values

w  =  0,00093708, -^.=0,457903, [8444^]; also ~ [8278rfJ, it becomes as in

[8445/].

[8444o]

[84Up]
[8444?]

[8444r ]
[8444s  ]
[8444< ]
[8444m]
[8444 v]
[8444u;]

[8444x]
[8444y]

[8i44y^
[84442]

[8445a]
[84456]

=  J.  J  Z'.(l,49042-f-w.661,107).e-«J348.o4  .j.^^^^.

-^1

=  —.  0,000473349  =  0,37791.

[8445rf]

[8445c]
[8445/]

516  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  C^l.

We  shall see,  in  [8488], that x being the number  of  degrees  of the
centigrade  thermometer,  we  shall  have,  for  the  expression  of  the  temperature,

[8446]  ?i^  ==  l_j_0,00375.ar.  [£xpn«.ion  of  tb,  beat  a!

(p)-p  ■•

Putting  this  equal  to 0,8266  [8445],  we  shall  find,
[8447]  X  =  —46^,24.

The  most  decisive  experiment  of  this  kind  is  that  of  Gay  Lussac,  who
having  ascended  at  Paris  in  a  balloon  to  the  height  of  6980™"''*''  above  the
[8448']  igygj  q£  ^jjg  Seine,  observed  the  thermometer  at  that  height  to  be  — 9°,5,
[8449]  when  it  was  30°,75  at  the  observatory.  The  difference  — 40°,25
corresponds,  as  near  as  can  be  expected,  with  the  preceding  result,
particularly  if  we  take  into  consideration  the  changes  which  the  peculiar
state  of  the  atmosphere  may  produce  in  these  results.  Thus  we  can
determine  by  means  of  observations  of  the  mean  horizontal  refraction  in

The  observations  of  Gay  Lussac,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and  at  bis  greatest  elevation,

were,
[8445g-]  (p)=0"«*-,76568; _p  =  0™«S3288; (:r)=30°,75; a:  =  — 9°,5;

[8445g''] {x)  being  the  height  of  the  centigrade  thermometer  at  the  surface  of  the  earth, and  x  its

height  at  his  greatest  elevation.  Substituting  this  value  of  (p)  in  [8445/J,  we  get
[8445/i]  ^  =  0,37791  X0™«S76568  =  0™«S28936.  In  this  calculation  we  have  used  the  value  of
[84451  ] Z  =  7974™"'-  [8275], instead  of l=1914:'^^':{l-\-0fi0S15.{x) }  =  7974™^*-  X  1,115312,

[8500,  8445^] ; therefore  the  factor j  [8445/],  and  the  value  of  p  [8445/,  h],  must

be  decreased  in  the  ratio  of 1,115312 to 1, so  that  we  shall  have,

[8445.]  p  =  ^^«=  0-2594.

The  actual  value  of  p, by  observation,  was jp  =  0"*S3288  [8445^]; the  temperature

[8445Z  ] of  the  column  of  mercury  being — 9°,5. To  reduce  this  to  the  temperature  of  the  lower

station  30° ,75  [8445^],  which  differs 40° ,25 from  that  of  the  upper,  we  must,  as  in

40  25 5452  25
[8490],  multiply  it  by 1  +  — ^  = ' ; and  by  this  means  the  corrected  observation

[8445ml

'5452  25

becomes  « =  0'»^^,3288 X  ...  '  =0'"^S3312.  TAe  raZwe  »  =0°'«S2594  [8445A:],
[8445n]  ^  5412,00

deduced  from ha  Place's  formula , being less than by observation, by 0'°®*-,0718.

Reducing  these to English inches,  we find the  value of  p, by  observation, to  be

[8455o] nearly 13'"'=''^'',0 ; and by La Place's formula 10»'"=^«%2 ; their difference being

Q  inches  Q

X.  i.§l.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  617

any  climate,  the  mean  diminution  of  the  heat  depending  on  the  elevation tqaaq,-,
above the  surface  of  the  earth  ; or  reciprocally,  the  refraction  may be
determined  from  the  diminution  of  the  heat.*

If  we  wish,  by  means  of  the  preceding  law,  to  determine  the  refraction
upon  a  mountain,  at  the  elevation  h  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  we  must
first  determine  the  values  of  u  and  p  correspondinsr  to  that  height.  We
shall  denote  these  values  by U  and (p') respectively,  and  we  shall  have

the  following  equations  ;  f  Formulas

for  the

U  refraction

(P')=(p).(l  +  f).c"-^  J

^ '  upon  a

- _C7+a.^l--J.  ^ ,g,53^

Thus  by  putting u  =  U-{-  u',  we  shall  have,  J  [8454]

p  =  (p').('l  +  ^\c '';  [8455]

supposing  that,

*  (3925) These  remarks  are  grounded  upon  the  supposition  that  La  Place's  theory  of
the  diminution  of  heat  [8441] is  correct ;  but  we  have  seen  in  [8444Zir,  o,  &c.],  that  the ^ "^
decrement,  as  we  ascend  in  the  atmosphere,  is  too  rapid.

t  (3926) Changing p into (p'), and  u  into [7,  in  [8412],  it  becomes  as  in  [8452].

The  elevation h  [8450]  above  the  horizon,  is  evidently  equal  to r — a  =  rs  [8284], or

h  . .  . .  .  [8452o]

as  nearly;  hence s  =  — ; substituting  this  in  [8411'],  after  changing  p  into  (p'), and  u

into  C7,  we  get  [8453].
J  (3927) Substituting M=C/-fw' in  [8412],  it  becomes.

U v.'

Dividing  this  by  the  expression [8452],  we  get -~-  =  [l-\- ," -Ac '' ; and  by

(/) \ l-\-fUj  ^ [84556]

/  /'

substituting — — —  =  —  [8456],  it  becomes  as  in  [8455].

VOL. IV.  130

518  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

It  is  sufficient  therefore  to  change,*  in  the  preceding  formulas,  ( p)  into  (/),
and  /  into  /'.

*  (3928) All  the  preceding  calculations  may  be  repeated,  supposing  the  observer  to  be
I- "•' elevated  above  the  surface  of  the  earth  by  the  quantity h  [8450]  ; or,  in  other  words,  we
may  suppose  that a becomes a'  =  a-j-h, s  becomes /, a becomes a', and (p)
[84566]  becomes  (p'). Then,  instead  of  the  equations  [8284,  8285],  we  shall  have,

[8456c  ]  —  =  1— « ;  a-  ==  4^

I  -I —
n2

i  +  t:f-(p')

K

Taking into  consideration  the  smallness  of —  .(p') [8277,  8451], we may change

1 -j ^'{p) i"^o 1  "i — i~'(p)' ^°  ^^^  denominator  of  the  expression  of  a'  [8456c],

[8456rf] and  then  it  becomes a'  = -^ , which is equal to the expression [8285],

[8456e] multiplied  by  —  ; hence  we  have  very  nearly a'  =  a. --^. Substituting  in  the  first  of

the  equations  [8456c],  the  value  of  a'  =  a  +  h  [84565],  it  becomes —^  =  1 — /; and
[8456/]  ^  ^

by  subtracting —  =  1 — s  [8284],  we  get —  =s — /. Now  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the

order — ,  we  may  change  the  denominator r into a, and  we  shall  have s'  =  s .

[8456^1  "  ^

Substituting  the  values  of s, —  [8411',  8453], it becomes as  in [8456A],  which is

easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8456i] ;

[8456.-,  =„_I.+  ^_i^).^l_-i-|.

Substituting the value of u [8454], and using a' [8456e], it becomes

:'  =  M'-}-a-'.  ]  1 — TtAi which  is  of  the  same  form  as  that  of s  [8411'],  making  the

accents  on  the  symbols s,  w,  a,  (p),  as  in  [84566,  &,c.]  ; moreover  the  same  changes  in

the  accents  being  made  in  p  [8412],  gives  p  [8455]  ;  therefore  the  same  changes  must  be
[8456Z  ]

made  in  A^  [8414],  or 5^  [8420,  Sec],  to  obtain  the  value  of  the  refraction  corresponding

to  the  proposed  elevation h of  the  observer.

5

[8456ft]

X.i.^7.]  FOURTH  HYPOTHESIS  OF  THE  DENSITY.  619

Hence it  follows  that  the  horizontal  refractions,  at  the  level  of  the  sea
and  at the  height h, are to one another as* (1 — kf)-f' ** io

[8457]

[8458]

(\-^lf)fc

To  obtain  the  refraction  below  the  horizon,  we  shall  observe  that  a
luminous  raj,  which  proceeds  from  a  body  below  the  horizon,  describes  the
first  branch  of  a  curve  which  is  concave  towards  the  earth,  and  approaches
towards  it  till  the  moment  it  becomes  horizontal,  and  then  it  recedes  from  it,
describing  a  second  branch  which  is  similar  to  the  first.  Hence  it  is  evident
that  the  refraction  of  this  body  being  added  to  the  refraction  of  a  second
body,  which  is  seen  as  much  elevated  above  the  horizon  as  the  first  appears  bliowX
below  it,  is  equal  to  double  the  horizontal  refraction,  at  the  point  where  the
direction  of  the  ray  is  horizontal,  which  takes  place  whenf 2w'  =  — cos.^e.

Refraction
of  a  bodj

horizon.

[8459]

[8457a]

*  (3929)  Accenting  the  symbols  as  in  [8456^],  we  find  that  the  expression  of  the
horizontal  refraction  54,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth  [8422],  gives  the  horizontal  refraction
54',  at  the  elevation  h,  as  in  the  first  form  of  [84576].  From  this  we  easily  deduce  the
second  form  [84576],  by  substituting  the  value  of  bd  [8422]. Now a' — cl being  very

small  [8277',  8456e],  we  may  put — — ;  =  1, and  we  shall obtain the first form of

[8457c] ;  and  by  substituting  the  value  of  a'  [8456e],  we  get  the  second  form  of  [8457c].

Ay  o-V^ /, ,  WN a.' l-a (1-^/0 .,

^'==^=;JW^-^^-^f^=-^'T=:^'^[:^)'^'  [84576]

=  ^.\- — ^l.U  —  ^^ i^.5d.  [8457c]

Now  at  the  elevation h, where u=zU, and p  =  (p') [8451], the  expression [8412]
becomes,  as  in  [8452],

_u  _u

(p')  =  (P)-(l+~).c ''=(P).-^,.C '' [8456].  [8457rf]

Substituting  this  last  value  of (p') in  the  last  expression  of  54'  [8457c],  we  get,

u

5a'  =  ^.^-^=^-^c~^.54.  LS457e]

/' (1-i/)

Hence  we  easily  deduce  the  relation  between 54', 54, which  is  given  in  [8457].

t  (3930)  In  the  annexed  figure  109,  we  shall  suppose  ./2Q  to  be  the  surface  of  the
earth  ;  B  the  place  of  the  observer  ;  PEDHI  the  path  of  the  ray  of  light,  which  enters
the  atmosphere  at  E,  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  PEGK,  and  is  bent  into  the
curved  path  EDBH, passing  by  the  observer  at  B,  and  continuing  its  course  until  it

[8459a]
[84596]

520

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT,

[Mec.  Gel.

[845U']

[8460]
L84G1]

[8  461 'J

We  shall  therefore  easily  obtain,  by  this method,  the  refraction  of  a  body
which  is  seen  below  the  horizon.

The  preceding  formulas  contain  the  three  indeterminate  quantities  /',  /,
and  a,  which  we  have  determined  in  [8436,  8437,  8277'],  by  means  of  the
horizontal  refraction,  and  the  observed  heights  of  the  barometer  and
thermometer.  We  may,  instead  of  the  horizontal  refraction,  use  the
observations  upon  the  diminution  of  the  temperature.  To  construct  a  table
of  refraction,  we  must  know  either  the  law  of  this  diminution,  or  the
horizontal  refractions  corresponding  to  those  heights,  which  will  require  a
long  series  of  observations  ;  but  we  can  by  this  means  obtain  a  much  more
accurate  table  than  those  which  are  now  used.  It  will  however  be  liable  to
some  degree  of  uncertainty, because  the  law  of  nature,  relative  to the

[8459c]

[8459i]

[8459c]

[8459/]
[84593-]

[8459;i]

[8459i ]
[8459A]
[8159f  ]

JB'ig.  109

quits  the  atmosphere  at  H,  in  the  direction  HI.  The  right  lines  PEGK,  IHG,  are
tangents  to  the  path  of  the  ray  at  the  points  E,  H,  and  they  form,  by  iheir  intersection
at  Gf  the  external  angle  HGK,  which  is  equal  to  the  whole  refraction  of  the  ray  in
passing  from  E  to  H;  and  this  is  evidently  equal  to  the  double  of  the  horizontal
refraction,  corresponding  to  the  point  D,  which  divides  EDH  into  two  equal  and  similar
parts  or  branches  ED,  DH.  The  same  double  refraction  is  divided  into  two  unequal
parts,  when  observed  at  any  other  point  B ;  thus  the  refraction,  in  proceeding  from  E  to
B,  represents  the  refraction  of  a  depressed  body  situated  at  P ;  and  the  refraction  from
B  to  Jf  is  equal  to  the  refraction  of  an  elevated  body  placed  at  /,  whose  apparent
altitude  is  the  same  as  the  apparent  depression  of  P ;  so
that  the  sum  of  the  refractions  of  the  bodies  P,  /,  is
equal  to  twice  the  horizontal  refraction  at  the  middle
point  D.  At  the  point  D  the  ray  is  perpendicular  to
the  radius  CD;  therefore  we  shall  have  dr  =  0,  or
ds  =  0  [8407]  ;  and  as  p  is  a  function  of  r  or  s,
[8137%  &.C.],  we  shall  also  have  dp  =  0;  substituting
these  values  in  the  differential  of  u  [8411],  we  obtain,
at  the  same  point  D,  du=-0.  The  differential  d6
does  not  however  vanish  at  the  point  D,  because  it  is
proportional  to  dv,  as  we  shall  see  in  [8548  or  8556]  ;  but  if  we  substitute  the  preceding
value  du  =  0,  in  the  expression  of  d6  [8414],  after  accenting  the  letters  a,  u,  he.  as  in
[84566],  we  shall  find  that  its  numerator  will  vanish,  and  we  shall  have  d6  =zO,  unless
the  denominator  vanish  also  ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  we  must  put  this  denominator  equal
to  nothing,  and  as  one  of  its  factors  1 — of  is  nearly  equal  to  unity  [8277',  8456e],  we
must  put  the  other  factor  y/cos.2e-{-2u'  =  0 ;  whence  we  get  2m' =  — cos.^e,  as  in
[8459].

X.i.«^8.] FOR  ALTITUDES  EXCEEDING  TWELVE  DEGREES.  621

density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere,  is  not  exactly  that  which  is  assumed
in  [8439],  but  varies  from  a  thousand  unknown  causes.  For  this  reason
astronomers  place  confidence  only  in such observations as  are  inade  at  an ^

Uncer-

altitude  of  at  least  eleven  or  twelve  degrees. Fortunately,  at  such  altitudes  the ^^^!^^m
refraction  becomes  independent  of  these  causes,  and  we  can  ascertain  its  value aitiludeB

*;  .  below  10°.

with  great  accuracy  by  observations  of  the  barometer  and  thermometer,  at  the rg^go/i
place  of  observation,  as  tve  shall  noiv  proceed  to  show.

THEORY OF ASTRONOMICAI. REFRACTIONS, CORRESPONDING TO APPARENT ALTITUDES EXCEEDING

TWELVE DEGREES.

8. We  shall now resume the  difierential  equation [8286], and  by
reducing  the  radical  to  a  series,  it  becomes,*

*  (3931) Dividing  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  factor

sin.e

[8463o]

[84636]

\/ C0S.2 0  — 2a/ 1— -^^ -}- (2s  —  s2^ .sin.2 0
which  occurs  in  [8286],  by cos.©, we  find  that  it  may  be  put  under  the  form,

{  l-sSi-  (l-  (7,)  +  (2«-»')""S-'«  ]  "*-tang.e.

Developing  this  by  the  binomial  theorem,  and  substituting  the  result  in  [8286],  it  becomes
as  in  [8463].  Now  if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  third  order  in  a,  s,  we  may  reject  those
of  the  second  order  between  the  braces,  in  [8463],  by  this  means  it  becomes,

)  1+  — }^ ^LJ.  — 5.tang.2©  C  •  "• ^

The  factor  of  [8463]  without  the  braces  is,

^-^ — ^  .tano.0  =  —a.  -^  .  ^  l_s-f  2a.(l—  -^\  \  .tang.e,  nearly, [8463rf]

\ {p)J

neglecting  s^,  &;c.  Multiplying  this  last  expression  by  that  in  [8463c],  and  neglecting
a2,  52,  he,  we  get,  from  [8463],

rfd  =  — a.  f^ .  )  1  4-  __V (lL/  _  5.tang.»0— s4-2a.  ( 1  —  -^J  (  .tang.e  ;  [8463e  ]

in  which  the  coefficient  of  — «,  between  the  braces,  is 14-tang.^0= r—  , and  that  of

'  >  I o  C0S.2  0

/ 9  \ ' 1 1+2.CO3.2  0  ,  [8463/]

«..( 1  — -— -  j is — ^ f-  2  =  — — '—^ , as  in  [8464]. This  expression  may  be  put

under  the  form,

VOL. IV.  131

d9
-a.  —

522  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT,  [Mec.  Gel.

-a.  ^.(I-5).tang.e I  1  +  _^_VZZ/--  (5-i.^).tang.^e
[8463] d&  =  ^-^^  '

1  +  __^_(py—  (-5— i5^).tane.^

l_2a.f  1_

tang.^0  (  +&C.

*  ( cos/e  \ ^ y

[8463'] Tjf  2(;g  neglect  the  products  of  three  dimensions  in a,  s,  we  shall  have,
[8464]  <ft  =  -a.  i^  J  1 ^  +./i_  Jl\  .  (H±2£!:!f)  ? .,,

(p) I  cos.^e 'V (p)y  cos.~0 5

[8465] Integrating  from p  =  (p) to p=  0, we  shall  have,  as  in  [8463i],
[6466]  ,,  =  ..\l  +  i--(l+a-c°s--'^)  +_^r.^±]  .tang.e.

[8467]
[8467']

[8468]

The  integral /  — is  equal  to —  — J  —  , as  is  easily  proved  by  taking

the  differentials  and  reducing.  If  we  take  the  limits  of  the  integrals  from
p=(p)  to  p  =  0,  observing  that  at  the  first  of  these  limits  we  have
5  =  0,  and  at  the  second  limit  5=1,  or  r  =  oo  [8284,  8254,  8255],  we
shall  obtain.

y'o  sdf  /*i  pds

(P)  «^"(P)

To  find  this  last  integral,  we  shall  observe  that,  as  p  denotes  the  pressure
of  the  air,  we  shall  have,*

r
a

T

[8469]  dp  =  — g p.dr  =  — g,  ~.pds;

( dp , !^a.(l+2.cos  2e)  / 2rf/) , S^.rfA , 1 sdp}
[84632-]  dd  =  a,.]—-r-,-\ ^—^ '.{—  — {  +  -hr  )  H r-  •  T^  <:  -tang.©.

Its  integral  is,

C p , j|a.(I4-2.cos.2©) / 2/) , /.2\  1  /•sdp ,  >

[8463M M  =«..  I  - ,-;)  +  -^3^:55 -(-,7)  +  ^.)  +  ^^55  y  1^  +constant  |  .tang.e;

the  constant  quantity  being  taken  so  as  to  make  the  terms  without  the  sign  /  vanish  when
p=  (p)  ;  and  then  putting  p  =0,  it  will  become  as  in  [8466].

[8463i]

*(3932) We  have,  in  [8295a], dp  =  —gp.dr, as  in  [8469]. Now  the  differential

of I — s  [8284],  gives -= — rfs, or dr  =  — — ; substituting  this  in  the  preceding

value  of  dp,  we  get  the  second  expression  in  [8469]  ;  and  by  substituting  in  it  the  value
[8469c] of  g  [8470],  we  get dp  =  — {g).a.pds; which  can  also  be  much  more  readily  obtained

X.  i.  §  8.] FOR  ALTITUDES  EXCEEDING  TWELVE  DEGREES. .  523

now  (g)  being  the  gravity at  the  surface  of  the  earth  [8289'],  we  shall

have g  =  (g).  ^  [8292]  ;  therefore,

p  =  constant  —  (g).a.J^pds.  [Si7i]

Thus  the  integral  fpds is  equal  to  the  whole  pressure  (p)  at  the  earth's r8472i
surface,  divided bj (g)-cc [8469/*] ; and  as this  pressure  is equal to

(^)-(p)-^  [8298],  we  shall  have,  orum's

fonnula.

r-=-;  [8473]

•/  0  (p)  a  '  ^ ^

hence  the  expression  of 66  [84661  becomes,  LaPiace-a

*■  L  J  7  formula

/"  f "\  for  the

5^=a.)l  + ^(.tang.e; (A)  /^^'^^

•  •  • exceeding

This  expression*  has  the  advantage  of  being  independent  of  any  hypothesis  ^^°-

by  substituting d.  —  ==—ds [8284], in [8294']. The  integral  of  [8469c] gives  p

^  ^  [8469rf]

[8471]. At  the  commencement  of  the  integral  we  have p  =  (p)  ;  hence  [84711  becomes

[8469c]
p={p)—{g).a.f*pds. At  the  other  limit,  where P  =  0,  p  =  0, s  =  1  [846T,  8284],

(p)
this  equation  becomes 0=(p)^{g).a.f^pds ; whence f^pdsz=j^, as  in  [8472]; [8469/]

substituting  (p)  [8298],  we  get  f^pds  =  — '-, which is  easily  reduced to the form

/* sdo  I  t8469g-]

[8473]. Substituting [8473] in  [8468], we get J^^—^  =  —  j; hence [8466]

becomes  as  in  [8474]. We  may  here  observe  that  the  integral  [8473]  for  the  whole

[8469;i]
height  of  the  atmosphere,  and  for  all  laws of  the decrease  of  the  density,  was  first

discovered  by  Oriani,  in  nearly  the  same  form  as  it  is  here  given.

*  (3933) If  we  substitute -\-  =,  1  +tang.20  [34'"J  Int. in  [8474],  it  becomes  as
in  [84746]. Reducing  and  putting  for  brevity,

^  =  ci..^l  +  |0L  — ■^^; n^2^a. /'i.  — Ja); p  =  l—2nA]  [8474a]

it  becomes  of  the  form  [8474rfJ.  second

formula
.  2  ^  reduced.

5d  =  a.  5  14-Ja.(l-|-tang.20)-f  a—  —  .(l+tang.^e)  i  .tang.e  [84746]

=  a.  jl+fa |.tang.0  —  a.  5 ^aV.tang.^©  [8474c]

=  .^,tang.0— n./22.tang.3e.  [8474rf]

524

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT,

[M^c.  C61

[8474']

on  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere ;  since  it  depends  solely  upon  the  density
and  temperature  of  the  air  at  the  place  of  observation. For  the  values  of

[8474c]

[8474/].
[8474g-]
[8474A]

[8474i ]
[8474;fc]

[8474Z ]

[8474m]
[8474n]

Bradley's
formula

[8474 o]

deduced
from  that
of  La
Place.

[8474;?]
[8474?]

[8474r]

[8474*]

[8474f ]

[8474u]

Simpson's
formula,
deduced
from  that
of  La
Place.

[8474li]

[847410]
[8474a;]

The  numerical  values  of  A,  n,  p,  are  easily  deduced  from  those  of  a,  — ,
[8277',  8218d],  which  give,

A  =  0,0002936375 ;  w.^^^  0,0000003249.. ;  n  =  3,768.. ;  p  =  0,9977871.. .
From  La  Place's  expression  of  the  refraction  [8474],  reduced  to  the  form  [8474J],  we
may  easily  deduce  the  methods  of  computation  proposed  by  Simpson  and  Bradley,
[8374/,  8383c,  </J,  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  tang.^e,  A^j  66\  For  the  expression
[8474fZJ  may  be  put  under  the  form  [8474?],  as  is  evident  by  multiplying  together  the
factors  of  the  second  member,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  just  mentioned.  Moreover
the  expression  [8474/]  may  be  reduced  to  the  form  [8474/n],  by  substituting  w5.tang.e  =  54
[8474(7]  in  the  two  small  terms  between  the  braces,  containing  A.  Finally,  by  using
[34'",  54]  Int.,  we  obtain  successively  the  formulas  [8474n,  o]  ;

56  z=  A.(l-]-nA).{tan^.e — w^.tang.e — w^.tang.^el
=  A.{l-^nA).{tSLn§.& — n5d — ncJ^.tang.^el

=  ^.(l+n^).[tang.e--^]

=  ^.(l+n^).tang.(e— 71(5^).

This  last  expression  is  the  same  as  Bradley's  formula  [8383c],  putting  w  =  3,  instead  of
n = 3,768..  [8474e] ;  also  ^.(I+w.^)=  57%  instead  of  ^.(l-f-n.^)  =  60',634,  which
is  deduced  from  the  values  [8474e] ;  observing  that  the  quantity  57',  used  by  Bradley,
will  be  increased  to  ralher  more  than  60*,  by  reducing  it  to  the  temperature  and  height  of
the  barometer  [8274],  corresponding  to  the  quantities  used  by  La  Place  in  estimating  the
values  of  n,  A,  p  [8474e].

Again,  the  expression  [8474(/]  5&  =A.\.zx\^.& — &z;c.,  being  multiplied  by  — r?*4.tang.*0,
gives  — n55../^.tang.^©  = — w./5^.tang.^0 — &c.  Substituting  this  in  the  last  term  of
[8474c?],  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  A^,  as  in  [8474_g-],  we  get,

56  =^A.\  1 — nr5^. tang.e  j  .tang.e.
Dividing  this  expression  of  56, by  the  coefficient  of  A, we  obtain,

A==56.\\  4-«<5^.tang.e  \  .cotang.©  =  56.  \  cotang.©-j-M5^  | .
Multiplying  this  value  of  A  by 2n.sin.0, and  substituting ^iiA  =  1 — p  [8474a],  we  get,

(1 — p).sm.&  =i'^n56. [cos. ®-\-n56.s\x\.e\.
From  this  we  deduce  the  first  of  the  following  values  of  p.sin.©,  and  by  making  successive
reductions,  using  [44,  43, 22]  Int.,  we  obtain  the  final  result  in  [8474a;]  ;
jp.sin.0  =  (1 — '^n^.56^).sm.Q — 2n(5lcos.e
=  cos.2nfW.sin.0 — sin.2n5^.cos.0
=  sin.(0 — 27t(5d).
This  last  expression  is  the  same  as  Simpson's  formula  [8374?], putting jp  =  0,9986,

X.  i.  §8.] FOR  ALTITUDES  EXCEEDING  TWELVE  DEGREES.  525

(p)  and  /  [8290,8298],  are  given  by  the  observations  made  at  that  place,
by  the  barometer  and  thermometer.  It  is  therefore  important  to  know  to
what  apparent  altitude  of  any  heavenly  body  we  can  use  this  formula.

If  we  examine  the  preceding  development  of  dd  in  a  series  [8463],  it
will  be  evident  that  the  most  considerable  term  which  we  have  neglected
is  the  following ;  *

-|.a. — ^  .5^tang.^0.  [Neglected  term.]  [8476]

V  P  /  Estimate

It  may  become  sensible  in  low  altitudes,  where  tang.e  is  large.  This  term
is  decreased  by  those  of  the  same  order  in  the  formula,!  so  that  in  those

[8477]

of  the
neglected

2n  =  -y-, instead  of  the  values  of  p,  2n, in [8474e]. Hence  we  see  that  the  formula

[8474]  is  equivalent  either  to  Bradley's  formula  [8383c],  or  to  that  of  Simpson  [8374?],  '^^^''^^^

neglecting  terms  of the  order  Sd'^ ; and  v?e  have  seen  in [8267^, «.],  that  La  Place's  [34742]

formula  [8474]  is  identically  the  same  as  that  which  is  deduced from  Cassini's  hypothesis.  [8475a]

Hence  it  appears  that  in  altitudes  exceeding  eleven  or  twelve  degrees,  which  includes  by  far

the  most  important  and  useful  observations,  the  refraction  can  be  obtained  by  either  of  these  r84756 1

methods,  with  almost  the  same  degree  of  accuracy. At  lower  altitudes  the  formula  of  La

Place  [8440]  has  decidedly  the  advantage  over  the  methods  of  Cassini,  Bouguer,  Simpson,  *• ^

or  Bradley  ;  but  is  not,  on  some  accounts,  so  satisfactory  as  the  method  proposed  by  Mr.

Ivory,  of  which  we  shall  hereafter  give  some  account.  [o475rf j

*  (3934) The  value  of  a  =  0,00029...  [8277'],  is  much  smaller  than  the  general

value  of  s ;  therefore  the  terms  between  the  braces,  in  [8463],  depending  on a^,  as, [°476a]

must  generally  be  much  smaller  than  those  which  depend  on s^ ; moreover  when  0  is [84766]

nearly  equal  to  a  right  angle,  and tang.0 very  large,  the  terms  multiplied  by  the  powers

of  tang.e  must  be  much  increased. Now  the  highest  power  of  tang.e,  connected  with  s^, [8476c  ]

between  the  braces,  in  [8463],  and  free  from  a, is tang.^e. If  we  neglect  the  terms

connected  with  the  lower  powers  of  tang.e, we  shall  obtain  for the  greatest  of  these

terms  of  dd  [8463], the expression f  s^.tang.^e within  the  braces,  multiplied  by the [8476rf]

dp
factor  without  the  braces,  or — a.  —  .tang.e, nearly  ;  being  the  same  as  in  [8476].

t  (3935) The  term  between  the  braces  in  [8463],  which  produces  the  quantity  [8476],

appears under  the  form f .  ^ — -^ — ^ ^^  • — s.tang.^el , neglecting smaller terms. [8477a]

Now  the  term  of  this  expression  depending  on  a,  tends  to  decrease  that  which  arises  from
«;  and  this  is  what  the  author  alludes  to  in  [8477],  neglecting  the  consideration  of  some [^^'^''^l
small  terms,  which  serve  to  increase  that  in  [8476] ;  but  not  in  any  important  degree,  in [8477c]
comparison  with  those  which  are  retained,  as  is  evident  from  the  last  note.
VOL.  IV.  132

626  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT,  [M6c.  C61.

[8478]

altitudes  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  which  its  integral  [8476]  is  insensible,
we  may,  without  fear  of  any  important  error,  use  the  formula  [8474].  The
integral  of  this  term  [8476],  taken  from p=(p) to p  =  0, becomes,*

[8479]  3a.tang.^0  Y^'  T^  .  sds.

If  we  suppose  the  temperature  to  be  equal  throughout  the  whole  atmosphere,
we  shall  have,  as  in  [8299],

[8480]

p=(p).C
therefore  the  expression  [8479]  becomes,!

P , . . . /^

[8481]  3a.tang.^©./  ^—  sds  =  Sa.tang.^e.  —  .

The  value  of  this  integral  is  greater  in  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform
temperature,  than  when  the  temperature  is  supposed  to  decrease  as  the
elevation  increases.  For  if  we  imagine  the  temperature  at  first  to  be
uniform,  and  then  to  decrease  as  the  elevation  increases,  it  is  evident  that
the  particle  of  the  atmosphere,  represented  by pds, will  descend,  and  the

[8482]

*  (3936) The  integral  of  [8476]  may  be  put  under  the  form —  ^"^'^^"^'^^  ./M?

but  we  have  fs^dp  =  s^p — 2fPsds,  as  is  easily  proved  by  differentration.  At  the  first
[847861 ^^^^^ P=(p)  ^"^ s=0  [8307fl]  ; therefore  the  term  s^p  vanishes; it  also  vanishes  at

the  second  limit,  where  P  =  0  and  s  =  1  [8307a]  ;  hence  the  preceding  integral
[8478c] becomes  JP.s^dp=. — 2fo^psds. Substituting this in the  term [8478a], it  becomes

—  .fo^Psds, as  m  [8479].

t  (3937) Ifwe  substitute  the  value  of  p  [8480],  in  [8479],  it  becomes,

as

[8481a]  3a.tang.50./„is£?s.c '.

Now  we  have  generally,

as  as  tu

[84816]  f^s,a,^-T^l^(^^_-T^_lj_-T^

as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differential  and  reducing. This  vanishes  when  s  =  0,  so
that  it  is  not  necessary  to add any  constant quantity; and  when s=l, the term

c ' becomes  excessively  small,  and  may  be  put  equal  to  nothing  [8307c] ; then  the

integral  [84
in  [8481].

[8481c]  -^ 12

integral  [84816]  becomes  fo'sds.c '  =  —  . Substituting  this  m  [8481a],  it  becomes  as

X.  i.  «§>  9.] FOR  ALTITUDES  EXCEEDING  TWELVE  DEGREES.  527

product  psds, which  corresponds  to  it,  will  become  less ;  consequently  the

P  SuS

integral f-r~^ will  become  less. Therefore  the  formula  [8474] will be
•^ (p)

exact  for  all  altitudes  in  which Sa.taner.^e.  -— is  insensible. Now  if  we ro.oo,

°  a~  [048.3]

use  the  values  of a,  /,  a  [8277',  8275,  8278],  and  suppose e  =  88°, we

shall  find this  quantity  equal  to* 3",486, which is  hardly  sensible. At [8483']

greater  apparent  altitudes,  the  error  of  the  formula  [8474]  becomes  wholly

insensible  ;  it  is  therefore  important  to  determine accurately  the  elements

of  this  formula.

9.  Its  chief  elements  are.  First.  The  variations  of  the  density  of  the
air,  arising  from  the  variations  in  the  pressure  and  temperature  of  the  ^
atmosphere.  Second.  The  refraction  of  atmospheric  air  at  a  given
temperature  and  pressure.  The  change  in  the  density  of  the  air,  arising
from  the  variations  of  the  pressure  it  suffers,  is  well  known  by  means  of  [8485]
the  laiv,  which  makes  the  density  proportional  to  that  pressure.  The  accuracy
of  this  law  has  been  confirmed  by  a  great  number  of  experiments,  made
within  the  limits  of  the  variations  of  the  barometer,  from  the  level  of  the  sea
to  the  greatest  heights  to  which  we  can  ascend.  The  dilatation  of  air  by
means  of  heat,  has  been  the  object  of  research  of  several  observers,  who
differ  sensibly  from  each  other  in  their  results.  1  requested  Gay  Lussac  to
repeat  these  experiments  with  all  possible  care,  graduating  accurately  the
air  thermometer  and  the  mercurial  thermometer,  and  paying  the  greatest  [848'/]
attention  to  dry  the  air  and  the  tubes  which  he  used  ;  for  it  appears  to  me
that  the  difference  in  the  results  of  various  observers  depends  chiefly  on  the
humidity.  He  found  by  the  mean  of  twenty-five  experiments,  noticing
the  dilation  of  the  glass,  and  the  corrections  for  the  variations  of  the
barometer  during  the  time  of  each  experiment,  that  a  mass  of  air,  expressed
by  unity,  at  the  temperature  of  zero  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  became
1,375  at  the  heat  of  boiling  water,  under  a  pressure  equivalent  to  that  of  a  [8486]
column  of  mercury  of  0™''*'%76  height.  He  also  observed  that  when  the
air  thermometer  was  at  50°,  the  mercurial  thermometer  likewise  stood  at
50^ ;  the  difference  given  by  the  mean  result  of  the  twenty-five  experiments
we have just mentioned, being insensible. Thus  the range  of both

*  (393S) Substituting  the  values of a,  Z,  a,  © [8483],  in  the  second  member  of
[8481],  and  then  multiplying  by  the  radius  in  seconds,  it  becomes  as  in  [8483'].

[8483a]

528

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  C6I.

[8487]

[8488]

[8489]

[848S']

[8490]

thermometers  appears  to  be  the  same  in  the  interval  from  Oo  to  100°.
Therefore  if  we  put  x  for  the  number  of  degrees  of  a  mercurial  centigrade
thermometer^  we  shall  find  that  a  mass  of  air,  which  is  represented  by  unity
at  the  temperature  zero,  becomes,  at  the  temperature  of  x  degrees,
1+0,00375.0;; so  that  we  have,

1 I (\  AAQ'TfC  volume  of  air  at  temperatnre  x  degrees

■*■  "T'^l^'-'*-' ' '-'•  **' —^ volume  of  air  at  temperature  zero.  *

The  density  of  the  air  is  proportional  to  its  pressure.  We  shall  take  for
unity  its  density  at  the  temperature  zero,  and  at  the  height  of  the  barometer
QmettejQ^  1^6  shall  thcu  cxprcss  its  height,  corrected  for  ths  effect  of  the
dilatation  of  mercury,  and  reduced  to  the  zero  of  temperature,  by  0""'",16.(\-\-y),
This  correction  is  easily  made  by  observing  that,  for  each  degree  of  the
thermometer,  the  mercury  expands*  -g^y^^.  The  density  of  the  air  at  the
temperature  of  (x)  degrees,  will  be,t

*  (3939)  Plana,  in  his  remarks  on  the  refraction,  vol.  27,  page  166,  of  the  Memorie
'• ' ■* delta reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino, instead of tst^j "ses ^-^xj, in

conformity  with  the  observations  of  Dulong  and  Petit,  detailed  in  their  memoir,  which
[84906] gained  the  prize  of  the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  of  Paris,  in  1818. This  memoir  is

printed  in Ca'iier  18,  of  the  Journal  de  V  K'cole  Roy  ale  Foly  technique,  in  1820.

[8^91a]
[8491&]

[8491c ]
[8491rf]
[8491s]
[8491  e']

[8491/]
[8491^]

[849U]

t  (3940) If  the  temperature  remain  at  zero,  but  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  as  it

is  indicated  by  the  height  of  the  barometer,  increase  from 0"^*^%76 to 0™^*'%76.(l+y),

the  density  of  the  air  will  increase  from  1  to  1+y  [8489]. Now  if  the  temperature  vary

from  zero  to  {x)  degrees  above  zero, the  density 1+y will  vary  inversely  as 1 to

l-j-0,00375.(a?), as  appears  from  the  experiments  of  Gay  Lussac  [8488] ;  and  the  density

14-V
will  therefore  become  '  ^, , as  in  [8491]; observing  that  in  finding l-\-y,  or

rather  0™®""^,76.(l-{-7/),  we  must  correct  the  observed  height  of  the  barometer  for  the
expansion  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube,  as  in  [8490].  IWultiplying  the  expression  [8491]
by  the  value  of  a  [8277'],  we  get  its  corrected  value  [8494].  For  perspicuity  and
symmetry,  we  have  changed  La  Place's  symbol  x  into  (x),  in  the  formulas  [8491-8535];
and  we  shall  now  suppose,  as  in  [8288,  8487,  &;c.],  that  p,  p,  x,  represent  respectively
the  pressure,  the  density,  and  the  temperature  of  a  stratum  of  air,  at  the  distance  r  from
the  earth's  centre ;  also  {p),  (r),  (x),  the  similar  quantities  for  a  stratum  of  air  at  the
surface  of  the  earth,  or  at  the  distance  a  from  the  centre.  The  values  p,  (p),  will  be
proportional  to  the  observed  heights  of  the  barometer,  corrected,  as  in  [8491  <f J,  for  the
expansion  of  the  mercury  by  the  heat,  so  as  to  reduce  them  to  the  same  temperature.
Now it is evident, from what is said in [84916, he], that the expressions

X.  i.  «§>  9.] FOR  ALTITUDES  EXCEEDING  TWELVE  DEGREES.  629

1+2/

=:  density  of  air.

[Height  of  the  thermometer (x)  degrees."!
Height  of  the  barometer  0'"'*-,76.(14-2/).  J

1-1-0,00375.  (a:)

We  shall  suppose  that  a  [8285]  corresponds  to  the  temperature  zero,  and ^34921

to  the  height  of  the  barometer  0™^^'%76. It  appears  natural  to  suppose  that

the  refractive  force  of  air  is  proportional  to  its  density,  and  this  is,  in  fact,

confirmed  by  the experiments  of  Hauksbee, [Biot  and  Arago, 8264?/i].

The  value  of a,  corresponding  to  the  temperature  of (x)  degrees,  and  to

the  height  of  the  barometer (l+?/).0"'"%76, will  therefore  be,  [8493]

a.(l-}-v)  PHeight  of  the  thermometer  (x)  degrees.  "1 [84041

b '-^ = corrected  value  of a.  V ; S  [fc4J4J

1  +0,0037 5. (a;)  LHeight  of  the  barometer  0™^*-,76.(l+2/)-  J

Moreover  at the  temperature  of  zero, and  at  the  height  of  the  barometer [8495]
0™''%76,  we  have  by  what  precedes  [8275],

/  =  7974  metres.* [Height  of  a  homogeneous  atmosphere  when  (z)=0.] [8496]

The  value  of  I does  not  vary  with  the  height  of  the  barometer,  while  the i^'^^'^]
temperature  remains  unchanged ;  for  the  equation,

(p)  =  l.(g).(e) [8298],  _ [8«8]

proves,  that  as  in  this  case (p) is  proportional  to (p), the  value  of I  will

l+0,00375.r  ' l+0,00375.(x) ' ^'^^  represent  the  values  of  p,  (p),  respectively,  supposing  [8491t]

the  densities  to  remain  the  same  as  before,  but  the  temperatures  to  be  reduced  to  zero  of  [8491it]

the  centigrade  thermometer  ;  and  then  the  pressures,  reduced  as  above,  will  be  proportional  ro^q,.  -,
to  the  densities p,  (p),  by  the  law  of  Mariotte  ;  hence  we  have,

P : ^^ :  ;  p  :  (p).  [8491m]

l+0,00375.a: l-l-0,00375.(x) *^ ^^^

From  this  we  deduce,

p.{f) 1+0,00375.3:

[8491 n]

[p).f 1+0,00375.(3-)

The  first  member  of  this  expression  represents  the  expression  of  the  decrement  of  heat
[8400c],  in  proceeding  from  the  lower  stratum  of  the  temperature (a?), to  the  upper [8491 0]

stratum  of  the  temperature  x  ; hence  we  have,

p.{f)  _  1+0,00375.3:

(7F7  ~"  l+0,00375.(x) '  t8491^]

which  is  used  in  [8435r,  &c.]. We  have  here  followed  the  method  and  notation  of  the
author,  but  it  would  be  more  simple  to  use  the  process  in  [8400a,  &c.].

*  (3941) The observations of Biot and Arago [82776], give more correctly [8496a]
I  =  7955  metres.

VOL.  IV.  133

530  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Gel.

The  height

ioftho i-etnain  always  the  same-* But  if  the  temperature  varies,  then  I  varies  in

the  inverse  ratio  of  ( p),  and  we  shall  have,

[8499]

homoge-
neous at-

[8500]  /  =  7974™'''''^'.  { 1  +0,00375.  {x)\.

mosphero ,_,.  • i •  • i i

does  not 1  his bciDg premised the formula [8474] becomes, by observing that
X^go" a  =  6366198  metres [8278],t

of  temper-
ature.

^^  ^  «-•(!  + y)-tang.e

1  +  0,00375.(a;)
[8501]

,  i«-^-(l+y)^  (l  +  2.cos.^e).tang.0  .

Kht  ■^(l  +  0,00375.(a:))2-  cos.^e  ''^^

refraction,

in  alti-
tudes
above  12°.

[8502]

[8503]

a.(l+w).0,00125254.  !^^

^ 1 c7/ '  one;  2c>

COS.''0

The  only  indeterminate  quantity  which  now  remains  is  a,  and  one  of  the
best  methods  of  finding  its  value  is  by  means  of  observations  of  the  heights
of  circumpolar  stars,  in  their  greatest  and  least  altitudes.  Delambre,  by  the
comparison  of  a  great  number  of  astronomical  observations,  found  the
refraction  to  be  equal  to  186",728,  at  50°  of  apparent  altitude,  the
temperature being zero, and the height of the barometer 0'"^*^®,76.

*  (3942) Supposing  the  temperature to  remain  unchanged,  while  the  pressure  (^),

'■ "'^ the  density  (p),  and  the  altitude  I  vary,  so  as  to  become p^, p^, /^, respectively, 'we

shall  have,  from  [8498],  p,=i,'{s)-P/' Dividing  this  value  of  p^  by  that  of  {p)  [8498],

[84996] we  get  7^  =  -f .  ,-^ , or 1  =  1.^  .— . But the density in this case being
{p) I {?)  {p) h

n ( \

proportional  to  the  pressure [8485],  we  have i^P) '•{?)'''•  Vi'  ?,'■> whence '' =  1.

Substituting  this  in  the  preceding  expression  of  l^,  we  get l,  =  l,  as  in  [8497]. Now  if

we  suppose  p  =  (»),  the  expression  of  I  [84996],  becomes  /  =/.  — ; moreover  if  the
[8499J]  ''/

height  of  the  barometer  be  0™^^'%76,  we  shall  have y=0  [S489'J ;  and  if  the  temperature

[8499fi] be  (x),  the  density  of  the  air  [8491]  becomes p^=  ^^^  . Substituting this  in

I,  [8499i/J,  we  get Z,=  Z.{l-f  0,00375. (a;)},  as  in  [8500,  8496].

t  (3943) Substituting  in d&  [8474]  for  a  its  corrected  value  [8494],  for  /  its  value

[8500], and for a its value [8278], it becomes as in [8501]  ; observing that
[8501 ff] 7974

—^^=0,00125254,  nearly, and  that  these  corrected values of a, /, change a/

into 7974"°'-.a.(14-i/).

[8306]

X.  i.  <§>  10]  EFFECT  OF  HUMIDITY.  531

Hence  we  find,*

0L=187",087;  .  [8504i

.  ^11*  Value  of

or  in  parts  oi  the  radius,  .  a,  byas-

^  tronomical

a  =  0,000293876.  [8505]

observa-

10.  The  humidity  of  the  air  has  not  hitherto  been  noticed  in  computing
the  rfifractioiiy  and  it  is  a  question  whether  it  has  any  sensible  effect.  We
shall  now  take  this  subject  into  consideration  ;  and  for  this  purpose  we  shall
recall  to  mind  several  results  of  observation  relative  to  the  evaporation  of
different  fluids.  It  has  been  found  by  experiment  that  a  mass  of  any  kind
of  gas  whatever,  when  fully  saturated  with  water,  contains  the  same  quantity
of  vapor  as  would  ascend  in  the  same  void  space,  at  the  same  temperature,
supposing  that  there  is  a  sufficient  supply  of  water  for  the  whole  evaporation.

It  has  also  been  observed  that  while  the  pressure  remains  the  same,  every Expan-

■*  "^ sion  of

sort  of  gas  expands  the  same  quantity  by  the  addition  of  a  given  degree  of  f^^"''
heat,  and  every  vapor  expands  the  sarne  quantity  as  a  gas. It  has  also  been
found,  at  the  same  temperature,  that  the  density  of  any  gas,  or  vapor,  is
proportional  to  its  pressure,  or  to  its  elastic  force.

If  we  place,  in  a  vacuum,  a  vessel  filled  with  water,  the  elastic  force  of
the  vapor,  which  ascends  from  it,  increases  with  the  temperature,  according
to  a  law  which  has  been  ascertained  by  experiment.  It  has  been  found  that
this  elastic  force  increases  very  nearly  in  a  geometrical  progression,  while
the  temperature  increases  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  so  that  the
logarithms  of  the  force  increase  very  nearly  in  an  arithmetical  progression.
This  is  not  however  strictly  accurate.  If  we  suppose,  at  the  moment  of
ebullition,  when  the  height  of  the  barometer  is  0'"^''%76,  that  this  height
expresses  the  elastic  force  of  the  aqueous  vapor,  we  shall  find  that  we  can
very  nearly  satisfy  the  experiments  of  Dalton,  upon  such  forces,  by  supposing  J^  ^^^  ^
the elastic force of this vapor, at any temperature whatever, to  be Src"'"

force  of
gas  or
vapor

[8510]

represented  by,  f-p^;

elastic  for.e  of  vapor =  QmeUeJQ^^lQy.0,m5AMr-r-.0,mmi5826  .  ^8512]

*  (3944) Putting,  in  [8501], yz=0,  (x)=0, e  =  50% 5^  =  186",728,  we  obtain, [8504a]
186",728  =  a+2a2_2a  X  0,00125254  =  0,99749492a  +  2a2.  [8504i ]

Dividing  this  by  the  coefficient  of  a, we  get a=  187",197— 2,005.a2  ; g^  ^j^^t a is
nearly 187",197, and 2,005.a2  =  2,005 X(187",197)2.sin.r  =  0",  110, nearly; hence [8504c]
a  =  187",1 97— 0",1 10  =  187",087, as  in  [8504]. Dividing  this  by  the  radius  636620",
it  becomes  as  in  [8505] .

532  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT,  [Mec.  Gel.

I.

[8513]

i  being  the  number  of  degrees  of  the  centigrade  mercurial  thermometer  above
100°,  this  number  being  supposed  negative  for  lower  temperatures.  Therefore
we  shall  have  the  tabular  logarithm  of  this  elastic  force  expressed  in
decimals  of  a  metre,  by  adding  to  the  logarithm  of  0"'^"%76,  the  exponent
force'cSf of  10,  in  the  expression  [8512],  so  that  we  shall  have,

vapor.

[8514]  tab.  log.  of  elastic  force  =  9,8808136+ i.  0,0154547— ^-.0,0000625826 ;

[8514']  % ——100 — I—  height  of  the  centigrade  thermometer  in  degrees.

[8515]  The  formula  [8514]  may  be  used  from  i  =  — co  to  i  =  50°,  or  60°,
and  it  can  be  applied  to  all  fluids ;  observing  to  count  the  quantity  i  for
each  one  of  them,  from  the  term  of  their  ebullition.  For  this  remarkable
[8516]  principle  has  invariably  been  found  to  hold  good,  namely,  that  ifiue  count  from
Rema*a-  ifiQ  point  of  ebulUtiou,  or  in  general  from  any  other  point,  where  the  elastic
eiastidlj^  force  is  the  same,  any  increment  of  temperature will  produce an equal

of  gases.  .  7 • /»

increment  in  the  elastic  force.

In  whatever  manner  the  vapor  exists  in  the  atmosphere,  it  is  evident  that
the  action  of  the  moist  air  upon  light  is  composed  of  the  action  of  the  air^
and  of  that  of  the  vapor. We  shall  suppose  that  with  an  equal  elastic  force,!
and  with  the  same  temperature,  the  actions  of  vapor  and  air,  upon  the  lightJ
p,  q. are  in  the  ratio  of  p to q', so  that  we  shall  have,

[8517]

P  the  action  of  vapor  upon  the  light

the  action  of  air  upon  the  light ?

[8517'] q  being  the  action  of  air  upon  the  light  at  the  temperature  zero,  and  under
pressure  corresponding  to  the  height  of  the  barometer 0""'*'%76. We  shall

*■  ■'  also  put  2.0™^*'%76  for  the  elastic  force  ivhich  the  aqueous  vapor,  suspended
in  a  given  mass  of  air,  at  the  same  temperature  zero  and  under  the  same
pressure,  will  have  if  this  vapor  be  placed  alone  in  the  same  space,
considered  as void. Then  it is  evident  that, at this  temperature,  the

[8519] humidity  of  the  air  will  add,  to  its  action  on  the  light,  the  quantity*  z.{p — q);

*  (3945)  If  we  suppose  tlie  whole  pressure  or  elastic  force  of  tlie  air  and  vapor  to  be
[8519a]  represented  by  0™^''%76,  as  in  [8518],  and  that  the  part  2.0""'^'\16  arises  from  the  vapor,
[8519&]  we  shall  have  0"®*''^,76.(1 — z),  for  the  remaining  part  depending  on  the  air.  Now  the
[8519c]  action  of  the  vapor,  when  the  pressure  is  0'"^"^,76,  is  represented  by  p  [8517,  &;c.] ;
therefore  the  part  corresponding  to  the  pressure  sr. 0"'^*'"°,76  [85190],  is  pz.  In  like
manner  the  action  of  the  air,  under  the  pressure  0"'®*''^,76,  being  represented  by  q,
[8519e]  [8517'J,  the  part  corresponding  to  the  pressure  0™*"",76.(1— z)  [85193],  is  q.{l—z).
[8519/] Adding  this  to  the  part  pz  [85l9d],  we  get q-\-2.{p — q),  for  the  combined  action  of  the

X.  i.  ^  10.]  EFFECT  OF  HUMIDITY.  533

[8520]

[8521]
[8522]

[8523]

and  if  the  temperature  be  x  degrees,  the  density  of  the  vapor  being
decreased  about  0,00375  [8488]  for  each  degree,  the  correction  of  the
refractive  force  of  the  air,  arising  from  its  humidity,  will  be,

^•{p—q)

l+x.  0,00375*
In  order  to  ascertain  the  value  of  p — 9, we  shall  suppose  the  quantity —

[8192,  &c.]  to  be  the  same  in  its  liquid  state  as  in  its  state  of  vapor.  This
is  indeed  the  most  natural  hypothesis  which  can  be  admitted ;  it  is
analogous  to  that  which  is  used  in  the  theory  of  refraction,  by  supposing  that

K

the  density  of  the  air  does  not  vary  the  value  of — . In  passing from a

vacuum  into  water,  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine  of  refraction

529
is,  according  to  Newton, -— . This  gives,  by  means  of  the  formula  [8192],

^•^  =  (396) -J'  f^'^i

P  being  the  density  of  water. It  follows,  from  the  experiments  of  Dalton, [8525]
Saussure  and Watts, that,  with equal elastic forces and temperatures,
we  have,

the  density  of  aqueous  vapor  =  -i^  x  the  density  of  air ;  [8526]

and  according  to  Lavosier,  at  the  temperature  12°,5,  and  at  the  pressure
Qmetre  yg^  thc  dcusity  of  air  is  — —  ;  therefore  we  have,  by  putting  p'  for
the  density  of  the  aqueous  vapor  at  that  temperature*

[8527]

[851%]

air  and  vapor ;  and  as  the  action  of  the  air  alone,  when  free  from  moisture  and  under  the
same  pressure  0""'*'°,76,  is  q  [8517'],  the  increment  from  the  action  of  the  vapor  must
be  z.{p — q),  as  in  [8519].

zp  4fi" , Zf' C  /529\2 ,  7

*(3946) Multiplying  [8524]  by —  , we  get -;;i- '  ^  P  =  7  *  ((,326  j  ~~ >  '  "°^ [^^^^a]

from  [8526,  8527],  we  have p'  =  J^  •  §|^  > substituting  this  in  the  preceding  equation,  it
becomes  as  in  [8528]. Dividing  this  last  expression  by  %  and  then  multiplying  its  second ^^g^
member  by  the  radius  in seconds  636620", it  becomes  very  nearly  as  in  [8529]. This
corresponds  to  the  temperature 12°,5  [8527],  and  to  reduce  it  to  the  temperature 0,  we
must  multiply  it  by 1+0,00375x12,5  [8488] ;  by  this  means  it  becomes  as  in  [8530], j-gggg^j
which  represents  the  value  of  pz.
VOL.  IV.  134

534  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Ck\.

[8528]  4jr.,p^=_J^4f^Y^W.  \  .

n^ ^ 14X842 (  V396y  >

Reducing  the  numerical  coefficient  of  this  expression  to  seconds,  we  get,

[8529]  ?f.p'.Z  =  211",84.Z.

Multiplying  this  quantity  by 1  +  12,5x0,00375, we  shall  have,  at  the
temperature  zero,

[8530)  ?f.p'.z  =  221",77.z.

n'

At  the  temperature  zero,  (p)  being  the  density  of  the  air,  under  a  pressure
equal  to  that  of  a  height  of  O^^^'^TS  in  the  barometer,  we  have  by
observation,*

[8531]  ?f.(p).2  =  187",09.^;

therefore  the  humidity  of  the  air  adds,  to  the  refractive  force,  the  quantity,

[8532]  34^68.  z

, l-|-a?.0,00375*

Multiplying  this  quantity  by  the  tangent  of  the  apparent  zenith  distance  e,
[8533] we  shall  obtain,  as  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said,  the  increment  of  the

refraction  depending  on  the  humidity  of  the  air. Therefore  this  increment  is,t

[o5d4]  , 1 1 .tans'.©.  rincrement  of  lefiaetion  1

14-a:.0,00375 ^  ^  '■'

If  we  suppose  the  air  to  be  saturated  with  water ^  the  tabular  logarithm  of  z

*  (3^47) Multiplying -r.Q>)  [8277],  by  z,  and  by  the  radius  in  seconds  636620",
[853 Id]  n*

it  becomes  as  in  [8531]  nearly. This  represents  the  value  of  qz, which  is  used  above.
[85316] Subtracting  it  from  par  [8530],  we  get z.(p — g-)  =34",68.^; and  by  substituting  it  in
[8521],  we  get  [8532].  ^ -

t  (3948) If  we  suppose  the  height  of  the  barometer  to  be 0™**%76, we  shall  have
y=z=0 [8489']; and by retaining only the chief term of S& [8501], we have

[8533o] 86  = ^QQ^^r ' The  quantity a  =  — g- .  ( p)  nearly  [8277'],  is  increased,  by  the  vapor

in  the  air,  as  in  [8532],  by  the  quantity 34",68.5; ; and  this  produces  in  86  [8533a]  the
[85336]  34",68.z.tang.0

'"™ l+0,00375.x > as 'n  [8534]. -

X.  i.  §  10.]  EFFECT  OF  HUMIDITY.  535

will  be,  by  what  precedes,*

tab.  log.  z  =  — (100— a;).0,0154547— (100— a;)^0,0000625826.  [8535]

Hence  we  have  deduced  the  following  values  of  the  increment  of  refraction,
depending  on  the  humidity  of  the  air,  from  fifteen  to  forty  degrees  of
temperature  of  the  centigrade  thermometer ;

Degrees  of  the  centigrade  thermometer. ,  Increment  of  refraction  for  extreme  humidity.  of  re^m;-*

t  Kr\  r\ii mr*  t'*"*  when

a;  =  1 5° 0  ,5do  .  tang,  e  :  the  air  is

°  saturated

a:=20° OVM.tang.e;  ^^L

x  =  '2b^ O",977.tang.0;  ^8536]

a;==30o l",274.tang.0;

x=Sb'' l",651.tang.0;

a;=40^ 2",  122.  tang.  0.

It  follows,  from  this  table,  that  the  effect  of  the  humidity  of  the  air  upon
the  refraction  is  very  small ;  the  excess  of  the  refractive  power  of  the  aqueous
vapor,  above  that  of  the  air,  being  in  great  measure  compensated  by  its  [8537]
decrease  of  density.  We  may  however  notice  it,  by  means  of  the  preceding
table,  in  case  the  humidity  is  very  great.  For  this  purpose  we  must
determine,  by  hygrometrical  observations,  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of  vapor
contained  in  a  given  mass  of  air,  to  the  quantity  which  would  be  found  in
this  mass,  in  the  case  of  extreme  humidity.  We  must  then  multiply  by  this
ratio  the  increment  of  the  refraction  [8536],  depending  on  this  extreme
humidity.*

[8538]

[8535o]

*  (3949)  The  elastic  force  of  the  vapor  is  represented,  in  [8518],  by  2:.0""'"%76;
putting  this  equal  to  its  value,  given  in  [8512],  then  dividing  by  O^^'^jTG,  and  taking  the
logarithms  of  the  results,  we  get,  in  the  case  of  extreme  humidity,

tab.  log.  z  =  i.0,0154547— i2.0,0000625826.  [85356]

Now  the  values  of  x,  i  [8487,8513],  give  i  =  x—100°  = —{lOO°—x)  ;  substituting
this  in  the  preceding  expression  of  log.z,  we  get  [8535].  Substituting  this  in  [8534],
and  then  putting  successively  x  equal  to  15°,  20°,  25°,  30°,  35°,  40°,  we  get  the
increments  of  refraction  as  in  the  table  [8536],  nearly.

[8535c ]

t  (3950)  Before  closing  this  chapter  we  may  remark,  that  besides  the  methods  of
computing  the  refraction  which  we  have  already  explained,  others  have  been  proposed  by
several  mathematicians  and  astronomers ;  some  by  means  of  new  and  more  accurate
observations,  for  determining  the  constant  coefficients  of  former  methods ;  others  by
combining  these  observations  with  the  various  hypotheses  which  are  assumed,  in  a  somewhat

[8538a]

536

REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.

[Mec.  Gel.

[8538']

If  we  wish  to  notice  the  figure  of  the  earth  in  the  theory  of  refraction,  we
must  observe  that  we  can  always  imagine an  osculatory  circle  to  be  drawn,

[8538c ]

Kramp.

[8538(/]

La  Grange.

[8538e]

[8538/]

arbitrary  manner,  to  express  the  decrement  of  temperature,  in  ascending  in  the  atmosphere;
and  we  may  particularly  mention,  in  addition  to  the  persons  already  spoken  of.  Brook
Taylor,  Euler,  Mayer,  Maskelyne,  Lambert,  Bernoulli,  Young,  Brinkley,  Groombridge,
Oriani,  Bessel,  Ivory,  Plana,  &.c.  Previously  to  the  publications  of  the  Mecanique
Celeste,  the  theory  of  refraction  had  been  treated  of,  in  a  very  elaborate  and  satisfactory
manner,  by  Kramp,  in  his  Analyse  des  Refractions  Astronomiques  et  Terrestres,  published
at  Strasbourg  in  1798,  using  functions  similar  to  those  which  are  employed  by  La  Place,
in  [8316,  &c.].  The  refraction  had  also  been  treated  of  by  La  Grange,  in  the  Berlin
Memoirs  for  1772,  by  the  method  which  is  explained  in  [8262jc,  8374a,  &;c.].  Since  the
publication  of  La  Place's  method  [8411,  &;c.],  a  table  of  refraction  has  been  given  by
Bessel,  founded  on  Bradley's  observations,  and  published  in  the  Fundamenta  Astronomia^
in  1818.  In  calculating  this  table,  Bessel  follows,  in  a  great  measure,  the  methods  given
*in  this  chapter ;  assuming  for  the expression of  the  temperature  h,  of  the  strata  of  the

[8538g-] atmosphere,  the  formula h

{P)-P

i  being  a  small  constant  and  positive  quantity.

[8538/i]

Young.

[8538i ]

[8538fc]

Leslie's
hypothe-
sis.

[8538i ]
[8538m]

Brinkley.

[8538n]

Grdom-
bridge.

[8538o]

Ivory.

[8538;;]

[8538^]
[8538r]

determined  so  as  to  satisfy,  very  nearly,  the  observations  of  Bradley,  in  altitudes  exceeding
four  degrees ;  but  this  formula  makes  the  horizontal  refraction  too  great.  In  the
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  for  1819  and  1824,  are  given  two  memoirs
of  Dr.  Young  on  the  refraction.  The  first  of  them  is  founded  on  Leslie's  hypothesis  of  the
density,

n  being  a  small  constant  quantity,  to  be  determined  by  observation.  In  the  second  of  these
memoirs,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  easy  integration,  he  assumes p  to  be  proportional

3

to  f  p^ — Jp^.  The  result  of  the  observations  and  calculations  of  Brinkley,  are  given  in
the  same  Transactions  for  1810,  using  Bradley's  method  [8383c],  but  changing,  by  means
of  new  observations,  his  coefficients  57*  and  3,  into  56%9  and  3,2  respectively ;  also
the  coefficient  400  [8383i]  into  500.  Groombridge  has  given  two  valuable  papei's  on
the  refraction,  in  the  same  Transactions  for  1810  and  1814,  using  also  Bi'adley's  method  ;
but  in  the  last  of  these  papers  he  changes  Bradley's  coefficients  57*  and  3  [8383c],  into
58%132967  and  3,6342956  respectively,  to  conform  to  the  results  of  his  own  observations.
We  might  mention  several  others,  but  we  shall  restrict  ourselves  to  that  of  Mr.  Ivory,  who
has  made  an  important  improvement  in  the  calculation  of  the  refraction,  in  his  paper,
published  in  the  same  Transactions  for  1823,  pages  409  to  495.  The  limits  of  this  note
prevent  our  giving  a  full  account  of  this  interesting  memoir,  and  we  shall  therefore  only
state  the  general  principles  of  his  method.  He  remarks  that  the  formulas  of  La  Place
[8440,  8501]  give  the  mean  refractions  ivith  greater  accuracy  than  any  other  tables
whatever,  ivhether  founded on theory  or  observation ; and  he  finds  that  the  table  of

X.  i.  <§.  10.]  METHODS  OF  SEVERAL  AUTHORS.  537

touching  the  earth's  surface  at  the  point  where  the  observer  is  situated,  so rQ^oQ>n
that  the  plane  of  the  circle  may  pass  through  the  observed  heavenly  body  ;

refractions,  computed  from  these  formulas,  differ  scarcely  any  from  the  results  of  his  own
calculations;  but  he  objects  to  La  Place's  law  of  the  decrement  of  temperature  and
pressure,  which  we  have  also  shown  to  be  defective,  in  [8444o,  z,  8445a] ;  and  he  states,
as  the  resuhs  of  experience,  that  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  attributing  to  the
gradation  of  heat  in  the  atmosphere,  any  other  law  than  that  of  an  equable  decrease  as  the  [8538s  ]
altitude  increases;  observing  that  this  law  prevails,  very  nearly,  from  the  surface  of  the
earth  to  the  greatest  height  ascended  by  Gay  Lussac  ;  the  decrement  of  heat,  at  any
elevation  in  the  atmosphere,  being  very  nearly  one  degree  of  the  centigrade  thermometer  roroo,  -.
for  an  ascent  of  173  metres,  or  95  English  fathoms.  This  result  differs  considerably  from
La  Place's  hypothesis  in  low  altitudes  [8444o].  To  obtain  a  formula  in  which  the
decrement  of  the  temperature  is  nearly  equable,  Mr.  Ivory  finally  assumes  the  two  following
equations  [8538«,  lo],  for  the  determination  of  the  relation  between  the  altitude  and  density
of  any  stratum  of  the  atmosphere,  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order  s^,  and  changing  the
notation,  so  as  to  conform  to  that  which  is  used  by  La  Place,  in  this  chapter.  of°™oi*'s

method.

-^  ==  C^«  ;  [8538v]

«  =  7  .  S  (1— /)."  -I-  2/.(l— (r-«)  \  ;  [8538t.]

I  =  7974metreB^  J  1-f  0,00375.  (a?)  I [8500].  [8538a:]

This  value  of  I  being  that  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  corrected  for  the  temperature,  as  in rgcog  -,
[8500]. The  differential  of  s  [85381^],  being  multiplied  by  a,  gives,

ads  =  l\  1— /+  2/.C-" }  .du .  [8538z]

Substituting  this  in dp= — {g).p.ads  [8424], and  then  dividing  by (p)  ^=  {g).{p)'l,
[8298],  we  get  [8539a],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [85396],  by  using  [8538»]  ;

^)  =  -(7i-!l-/+2/.C-«l.rfu  [8539a]

=  — (1— /).c-cZm  —  2/c-2«rfM.  [85396]

The  integral  of  this  last  expression  gives  [8539c]  ;  dividing  it  by  [8538i;],  and  substituting
A[8435r],  we  get  [8539«Z].

(f  )  ^  ^^^f^-'~^+'^-'~'^  '  [«^9c]

A  =  ^U  1  -f+fc-^  =  i±?^««3!^  .  [8539c/]

(;')•''  •/ ^-^  *-  1+0,00375.(0:)  ^

From  various  considerations,  Mr.  Ivory  estimates  f  to  be  very  nearly  equal  to { ; and [8539e  ]
by  substituting this value  in [8538y,  w,  8539c,  d"],  he  obtains the  following system
of  equations,  which  he  assumes  as  the  best  adapted  for  defining  the  mean  state  of  the
atmosphere ;

VOL.  IV.  135

538  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  C^l.

[85391 ^^^"  ^^  ^^®  figure  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  is  very  nearly  the  same  as
that  of  the  earth,  it  is  evident  that  the  circles  w^hich  are  concentric  to  this

Irory'g
theory.

[8539/J  _L  =^  C-«  ;

[8539^]  ,  =  l.U"+Mi-0};

[8539/»]  -^  =  ^  C-"  -I-  4-  c-2"

[8539i]  =3._^^  +  ..(_^y;

[8539A:]  h  =  p[^  =  i  +  ^.C^

We  shall  now  examine  these  formulas  in  the  two  extreme  cases.  First,  where  u  is  so
small  that  we  may  neglect  the  square  and  higher  powers  of  u.  Second,  where  u  is  so
[8539/n]  large  as  to  correspond  to  the  observation  of  Gay  Lussac  [8445^].  In  the  first  case,
where  u  is  very  small,  we  have  from  [55]  Int.  c~'*=l — m,  c~^"  =  1 — 2a;  substituting
these  in  [8539,/,^,  h,  Ic],  and  reducing,  we  get,

[853.^]  JL  ==!_„.  5==|M.  1.  J_ i_^u; h  =  l—^u.

[8539o]  If  we  put  this  value  of  h  equal  to  that  in  [8446],  we  get  1  — iM=  1+0,00375.^;;  and
by  supposing x  =  — 1°, we  obtain m=  0,015. Substituting  this  in  5  [8539n],  we  get

[8539p]  as  =  0,01875.Z;  and  by  using  the  value  Z  =  8894™^*'«'  [8445iJ,  corresponding  to  the
temperature  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  in  the  experiment  mentioned  in [8445^], it

[8539^]  becomes  as  =:  166™®*'^®^ ;  which  represents,  according  to  Ivory's  theory,  the  elevation
corresponding  to  a  change  of  temperature  of  1°  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  near  the
surface  of  the  earth  ;  agreeing  very  nearly  with  the  observations  in  [8444p]. In  ascending

[8539r] to  the  very  small  height as,  we  decrease  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  from  I  to / — as;

hence —  =: =  1 -, as in [84046]; and by substituting the value of

[p)  I  I

—  =  f  tt  [8539n],  it  becomes —  =  1 — |-m, as  in [8539n]  ; and  this  last  expression,

' being divided by A=l — ^u [8539u], must evidently give, as in [8539n],

[S539f]  — ^=— -  =  1 — M.  We  shall  now  compare  the  formulas  [8539/— A:]  with  the
\P)'"- KM

[8539u] experiment of Gay Lussac [84450-]. Here we have as  =  6980™^'^^ [8448];

2a
substituting  this,  and  /  [8539p],  in  [8539g"],  after  multiplying  it  by — , we  get,

[8539©]  2.  j  =  f«-f  1— c— =1,56960, or ^ m —c-«  =  0,56960.

X.  i.  §  10.]  METHODS  OF  SEVERAL  AUTHORS.  539

osculatory circle, will also be nearly of the same curvature as the

,.  .  [8539']

corresponding strata of the atmosphere ; and  we may determine the

From  this  last  equation  we  obtain  successively,

M  =  0,70811;  c«  =  2,0301 5;  c"'' =  0,49257.  [8539tr]

Substituting  these  values  in  [8539/,  A,  k],  we  get,

-^  =  0,49257  ; -^,  =  0,43008  ; h  =  0,873 14.  [85:^9x]

(/>)  ip)

Now  from [8445^,  «]  we have,  by observation, (p)  =  0"'«S76568, |)=0«'«t-,3312 ;  [8539i/]

P

consequently —  =  0,4326, being  nearly the same as by Ivory's theory [8539a?].

[85392]

Moreover  the  expression  of  h  [8539a:],  by  the  theory,  agrees  very  well  with  the  result

of  observation  in  [8435^] ;  consequently  the  expression  of — , obtained  in  [8539a?],  must

also  be  very  nearly  conformable  to  the  theory. Hence  we  see  that  this  method  of  Ivory
gives,  with  a  great  degree  of  accuracy,  the  temperature  and  density  of  the  atmosphere  in [°540a]
these  two  extreme  coses ;  and  it  gives  also  very  nearly  the  same  mean  refractions  as  La
Placets  method,  as  we  have  observed  in  [8538r].

At  the  summit  of  the  atmosphere P  vanishes,  and  we  must  then  have €""=0  [8539/]  j

and M  =  GO  . Substituting  this  in [8539cZJ,  we  get 1 — f=  '^  ' ' ; hence  we [85406]

deduce  the  following  expression  of  x ;

x={x)—f.{266°6  +  {x)]i  ■ [8540c]

and  by  putting,  as  in  [8539e], f=\, it  becomes,

X  =  f  .(a;)  —  66°,7.  [8540rf]

If  we  assume,  with  Bradley,  that the mean  refraction  is 50"* of Fahrenheit's  scale,
corresponding  to (a?)  =  10° of  the  centigrade  thermometer  [8383^],  we  shall  find  that [8540c]
this  last  value  of  x  becomes x  =  — 59°,2  of  the  centigrade  thermometer,  or — 74°  of
Fahrenheit's  scale  ; differing  a  few  degrees  from  the  estimate  of  Fourier  [8444y]. If [8540/]
the  temperature  of  the  planetary  space  be  constant, /  must  vary  with  the  climate  of  the

(x) X

place,  and  we  shall  have,  from [8540c], /= ^^ . We  shall here close  our [8540g-]

remarks  on  Ivory's  method,  and  shall  refer  any  one  who  wishes  to  pursue  the  subject  to  his
memoir,  and  to  two  very  interesting  and  important  papers  of  Plana,  given  in  vols.  27,  32,  ^'*"*'
of  the  Memorie  della  reale  Jlccademia  delle  Scienze  di  Torino,  where  the  various  methods
of  computing  the  refraction,  upon  principles  assumed  by  several  astronomers  and
mathematicians,  as  Euler,  Mayer,  La  Grange,  Lambert,  Kramp;  Oriani,  Young,  Bessel,  &c.,  '•  ■'
are  minutely  discussed  ;  pointing  out  the  peculiarities  of  their  methods,  and  showing  that
the  chief  improvement  made  by  La  Place  consists  in  introducing  the  fourth  hypothesis,
[8411,  8412]  J  which  is  not  so  satisfactory  as  that  of Ivory  [8539/— /]. For  greater

[8540A]

540 EFFECT  OF  THE  OBLATENESS  OF  THE  EARTH. [Mec.  Cel.

refraction  of  the  body,  by  supposing  the  earth  to  be  a  sphere,  with  a  radius
equal  to  that  of  the  proposed  osculatory  circle. Hence  we  see,  first,  that

^  ^  the  refraction  always  takes  place  in  the  vertical  'plane ;  second,  that  the
refraction  is  not  the  same  in  every  direction  relative  to  the  horizon,  since  the
osculatory  circles  are  not  the  same  in  every  direction ;  but  it  is  easy  to  prove

r854ii  *^^^  ^^^^^  difference  is  insensible,  when  the  object  is  somewhat  elevated  above
the  horizon. At  the  horizon  there  may  be  a  difference  of  a  few  seconds.*

accuracy,  Plana  reduces  many  of  the  integrals,  which  they  use,  to  the  form  of  elliptical
[8540Z]  functions.  He  particularly  discusses,  with  much  care,  the  hypothesis  in  [85385],  where
the  decrement  of  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere  follows  strictly  the  arithmetical  progression  of
the  altitudes.  But  the  limits  of  this  work  will  not  allow  us  to  go  into  any  detail  on  this
subject ;  we  shall  therefore  close  this  note  with  the  remark,  that  a  very  good  historical
account  of  the  writers  on  the  refraction  is  given  by  Mathieu,  at  the  end  of  the  sixth  volume
L  '^"J  Qf  Delambre's  Histoire  de  V  Astronomie  au  dix-huitieme  siecle,  published  at  Paris,
in  1827.

[8540/n]

Mathieu.

*  (3951) To  compute  this,  we  must  insert  the  value  of  the  radius  a,  corresponding  to

r8541al ^^^  proposed  osculatory  circle,  in  the  expressions  [8434,8435]. This  will  alter  a  little  the

values  of  /,  l'  [8437,  8436], as  well  as  the  expressions  [8438,  8439,  &-c.] ;  and  it  is

evident  that  the  effect  of  this  change  in  the  value  of  a,  which  at  its  maximum  alters  it  only

^i-j^  part,  must  be  very  small  in  86  [8440,  8474,  &;c.].

X.ii.<§>ll.]  TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS,  541

CHAPTER  II.

ON  TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS,

[8542]

11.  The  terrestrial  refraction  is  nothing  more  than  the  part  of  the
astronomical  refraction,  comprised  betiveen  the  origin  of  the  curve  of  the  ray
of  light,  and  the  point  where  this  curve  meets  the  terrestrial  object.  This
part  being  always  small,  in  comparison  with  the  whole  refraction,  we  are
enabled  to  use  several  simplifications,  which  we  shall  now  explain.

When  the  elevation  of  the  object  is  very  small,  in  respect  to  its  distance,
instead  of  giving  the  refraction  in  terms  of  the  elevation  of  the  object  above
the  horizon,  it  is  much  more  accurate  and  simple  to  express  it  in  terms  of
the  angle  v  [8139],  which  is  found  by  the  radii  drawn  from  the  earth's [85431
centre  to  the  observer  and  to  the  object. We  then  have,*  as  in  §1,3,

—  .sin.e.^l  +  -.(p)
dv  =  =^^1==:==;==:

^K do ,
-r- .  — .  rd«

d&  =  —'^ ^'

sin.

20

Differen-
tial formu*
las  for  tho
terrestrial
refraction.

[8544]

4^ •  [8545]

n2

1^  -,2 y

*  (3952) Multiplying  tlie  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  expression  of  dv  [8263c]
by \/\j^kt, then  re-substituting  the  value  of  w  [8262m],  and  that  of  fc  =  —  [81926],
we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,  the  value  of  dv  [8544], Dividing  the  expression  of  d^ [85445]
[8262]  by  that  of  dv  [8544],  and  then  multiplying  the  result  by  dv,  we  get  [8545].

VOL.  IV.  136

542  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  C61.

The  elevation  of  the  object  being  supposed  very  small,  we  shall  have  very
nearly,*

[8546]  p=(p).(^l_il»).

r8547i *  being  a  constant  coefficient,  depending  on  the  diminution  of  the  heat  of  the

strata  of  the  atmosphere,  corresponding  to  their  elevations. This  value  of  p

gives  very  nearly ,t

'UK ,  . ia
[8548]  66=  —,{p),j.v.

[8548'] (j^  is  the  sum  of  the  terrestrial  refractions  at  the  object  and  at  the  observer,

*  (3953) If  we  suppose  the  temperature  to  be  uniform,  we  shall have,  from  [8299],
after  developing  it  by  means  of  [56]  Int.,

[8546o]

as

and  if  we  neglect  s^, it  becomes p  =  (p).  5  1 C, which is of the same form  as!

[85466]  (  * )

[8546],  supposing i  =  l. The  more  complicated  hypothesis  relative  to  the  temperature,

[8546c  1 ^"  [8439],  can  also  be  reduced  to  the  form [8546],  as  we  shall  see  in  [8555] ;  and  this

gives ^  =  0,7159, as  in [8553£Z]. Ivory's  hypothesis  gives, near  the  surface  of  the

CCS

earth, M  =  f.— ,  nearly  [8539w] ;  substituting  this  in  the  value  of  p  [8539nl,  we  get
[8546rf]  *

p  =  (p).  )  1  —  f •  y  ^  ? whence i  =  0,S  [8546]  nearly,  in  this  hypothesis.

(X  dv
t  (3954) Substituting ds  =  -^  [S469a]  in  the  differential  of  [8546],  we  get,

ia ,  ^ ,  ia ,  ^ a.dr  do  ia .  . a

[8547a]  dp=~y.(p).c/5  =  _-.(p).  — ; or ^  =  -  7  •  (P)- ^  ;

hence  [8545]  becomes,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  K^,

^^ ^K .  ^ ia a
[85475]  dd=^—.{?).Y.-,dv,

If  we  also  neglect  terms  of  the  order  sK, we  maty  put —  =  1  [8284],  and  then  we  have

[8547c] dd=~.{p).j.dv; whose  integral  is 5^  =  — .  (p) .  y .  v, as  in [8548]. Hence  we

see  that  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  s^,  we  shall  have  the  ivhole  refraction  66
proportional  to  the  intercepted  arc  x>,  whatever  be  the  altitude  of  the  observer  and  object ;
and  that  a  change  in  either  of  these  altitudes  produces  no  change  in  the  refraction,  always
'•  '  "^  supposing  the  difference  in  the  altitudes  to  be  so  small  that  we  can  neglect  terms  of  the
order  «".

X.ii.  §11.]

TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS.

543

and  this  sum  is  the  double of  the  refraction  at  either  of  these points,
because  the  refraction is  nearly  the same at  both  points;*  therefore  the [8549]
terrestrial  refraction  of  an  object,  which  has  but  a  small  elevation,  is  very
nearly  represented  by  the  folloimng  expression ;

K .  ^ ia

the  terrestrial  refraction.

[8550]

*  (3955)  In  the  annexed  figure  110,  C  represents  the  centre  of  the  earth ;  DO  its
surface ;  H  the  place  of  the  observer ;  A  the  place  of  the  observed  object ;  AMH  the
path  of  the  ray;  ALH  the  chord  or  hne  connecting  the  points  A,H;  AJYP,  HJV,
tangents  to  the  path  at  the  points  A,  H,  intersecting  each  other  in  JV;  lastly,  the  line
CjY  cuts  the  path  of  the  ray  in  M,  and  the  chord  AH  in  L.  Then  it  is  evident  that
the  whole  refraction  of  the  ray,  in  proceeding  from  A  to  H,  in  its  path  AMU,  is  equal
to  the  inclination  of  the  two  tangents  AJV,  HN,  which  is  measured  by  the  external  angle
HNP  of  the  triangle  AJVUj  or  by  the  sum  of  the  two  internal  angles  JVAH,  NBA ;
so  that  we  shall  have  Sd  =  NAH -j- NHA.  If  CH  =  CA,  the  triangle  C/ZJV  will  be
similar  and  equal  to  CAN,  and  we  shall  have  the  angles  NAH,  JYHA,  equal  to  each
other,  whence  JVHA  =  ^56 ;  and  as  JSHA  is  evidently  the
terrestrial  refraction at the point H, we  shall have, for  this

K"  in

refraction,  the  expression ^66  =  —  .  (p).  —  .v  [8548],  agreeing

with  the  formula  [8550].  This  result  is  accurate  when  the  points
A,  H,  are  equally  elevated  above  the  surface,  or  CA  =  CH ;
and  we  have  seen,  in  [8547e],  that  a  small  change  in  either  of
these  altitudes  does  not  materially  affect  the  result ;  always
supposing  that  we  can  neglect  terms  of  the  order  s^,  in  the  value
of  p  [8546,  &.C.]. Finally,  substituting  in [8550]  the  values

4.(p), a, I  [8277,  8278,  8275],  we  get,

— -  terrestrial  refractidh.

8,5194

In  the  case  of  uniform  temperature,  we  have  ^  =  l  [8546S],  and  then  the  expression  of
the  terrestrial  refraction  [8549o-]  becomes  as  in  [8552].  In  La  Place's  theory  of  the
tempei'ature,  we  have i  =  0,7159  [8553c?J  ; and  by substituting this in  [8549^],  it

becomes — , as  in  [8556]. Lastly, if  we  use  Ivory's  Value i=0,8  [8546c?],  the

V

10/i

refraction  [8549_g']  becomes :~. nearly. These  quantities  represent  the  mean  values  of

the  terrestrial  refraction  in  these  different  hypotheses ;  but  it  is  found  by  observation  that
the  terrestrial  refraction  varies  extremely  in  different  states  of  the  atmosphere,  being
sometimes  not  more  than ^\v, and  at  other  times  as  much  as  ^v.

[8549a]

[85496]

[8549c ]
[8549rf]

[8549c]

[8549/]

[8549ff]

[8549A]
[8549t]

[8549Jt]

544  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

in  case  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  is  uniform,  i  =  1  [85466] ;  and
then  we  have,  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice,  and  at  the  height  of  the
barometer  O^^^'^jTG,  the  terrestrial  refraction  equal  to,

Terrestrial
refraction.

roRCQl  = terrestrial  refraction.  T  In  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  T

[OJO^J  Q  c  I Q^  L  temperature.  J

If  we  adopt  the  law  which  is  used  in  §  7,  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  at  low
elevations,*

[8553]  P  =  (p).n— ?/.686,93J.

'  \'  ^ I  ' }  ,  p  La  Place's  hypothesis  of  tho  T

[8554]  ^  ^  5— w.0,201 87 ;  •- »«■"""*'•"«  f8442j. J

which  give,

[8555]  p=(p).jl 5.571,551}.  [La  Place's  value  of p.]

hence  we  deduce  the  terrestrial  refraction,  as  in  the  following  expression ;

[8556]  YT^S  =  *"'"''"'  "'"'"'"■  f '°  "^'^^l^ttiL'^iSY' '''  ]

It  appears  to  me  that  this  value  ought  to  be  adopted,  at  least  until  we  can
obtain,  by  direct  observation,  the  factor  i.  The  value  of  i  is  very  variable ;
it  may  even  happen  that,  from  some  particular  circumstances,  the  density
of  the  atmospherical  strata  will  increase  with  the  elevation  near  the  eartWs
surface,  instead  of  decreasing ;  and  then  the  refraction,  instead  of  elevating
[8557]  objects,  will  depress  them.\  From  such  causes  great  differences  have  been
observed  in  the  terrestrial  refractions  [8549A;].

*  (3956)  If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  s^  or  u^  [8438],  we  shall  have,  by
[8553a]  development,  as  in  [56]  Int.,  c-"-i348.04^  i_„  1343^04  ;  substituting  this  in  [8439],  we
[85536] get p  =  (p).{l+M.[66I,107 — 1348.04]|; which is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8553]  ;

r8553cl whence  we  get 1 — --^=w.686.93. Substituting  this  in  the value  of  u  [8438], we

obtain  [8554],  or m  =  s.  0,832037  ; hence  the  value  of  p  [8553]  becomes,
t8553c']  p=(p).{l— 5.686,93X0,832037}  =(p). {1—5.571,551],

as  in  [8555]. Comparing  this  with the  assumed  value p  =  (p).n — s.  yj  [8546],  we

[8553rf] obtain  -^  =  571,551; and  by  using ~==  798,37  [8278rf],  we  get i  =  0,7159. With
this  value  of  i,  we  find  that  the  terrestrial  refraction  [8549^]  becomes  as  in  [8556].

I  (3957) The  phenomenon  of  miras-e,  which  is  sometimes  observed  on  the  surface  of

Mirage.  i \  /  i  o

the  sea,  and  on  dry  sandy  plains,  as  in  those  of  Egypt,  arises  from  this  source;  as  has  been
shown  by  IVIonge. This  subject  is  fully  discussed  by  Biot,  in  an  excellent paper  sur  les

X.  ii.  «^  11 .]  TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS.  645

fVe  have  no  occasion  to  ascertain  these  refractions,  except  for  correcting  the
observed  altitudes  of  the  object ;  and  ive  can  determine  these  altitudes  directly, [8558]
by  integrating  the  expression  of  dv  [8544]. For,  if  we  use  the  value  of
P  [8546],  and  then  integrate  [8544]  from  5  =  0,  we  shall  obtain,*

\  /  cos/e -4-25.sin.'*e :r.{p).  — .5 — cos.e

[8559]

sin.0  .  Q  'iK  ia

Height

Hence  we  deduce,t  oLSted

as  =  —-.{\ 5" . f  p). ,  . „ >  +  av, cot.0  ;  [8560]

refractions  extraordinnires  qui  s'ohservent  ires-pres  de  Phorizon,  which  is  published  in  the [85566  ]
Memoires  de  VInstiiut  de  France,  for  the  year  1809. This  paper  contains  a  full  theory  of  ^  ^

these  refractions,  together  with  many  observations,  made  by  Biot  near  Dunkirk.

=  (1— sf  [«2a

ds.  sin.0

*(3958) Substituting ^  =  c/s  [8469a],  and ^  =  {l—sf  [8284], in [8263c], [855ya]

[8559c ]

then  dividing  the  numerator  and  denominator  by u, we  get do  =  ->- — - '  — — . [855961

Vu~"'^ — (I — s)  .sin.-*© ^ J

Now  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  Ic^,  we  have u~-=  l-{-Arp — A:(p)  [8262u] ;  and  if
we  use  the  value  of  p  [8546],  it  becomes u"^  =  1 — lc{p).-—. Substituting  this  in  the

V

precedingvalueof  c?«,  putting  also 1 — sin.^0=cos.^©; (1 — s^^l — 2s,  neglecting  s^,
then  dividing  by sin.©, we  get,  [8559tf]

dv  da.

sin.0  /  (  ta  >  *  [8559c  ]

^/  COS.20-J-S.  5  2.sin.20— /t(p).y  I

The  integral  of this  expression  is as  in  [8559], as is easily proved by  taking  its
difFerential ; v, s, being  the variable  quantities ; observing  that  the  term — cos.© is [8559/*]
introduced  into  the  numerator  of  [8559]  as  the  constant  quantity,  so  as  to  make  v  vanish
when  5  =  0; and  that  7c  is  the  same  as  in  [81926J.

t  (3959) Putting  for  brevity,

A=l—lk{f>).i-^^, or ^.sin.20  =  sin.20—|A:(p).y,  [8560a]

we  get,  from  [8559],

f  V/cOS,2©-4-2w3«.sin.20 COS.e  roer/^nr-.

Multiplying  this  by ^.sin.^©, transposing cos.©, and  squaring,  we  get,
VOL.  IV  137

[8562]

646  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8561]  as  being  very  nearly  the  height  of  the  observed  object,  above  the  level  oj  the
observer.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  this  expression  agrees  with  that  which  we
obtain  by  correcting  the  height  by  means  of  the  preceding  expression  of  the
refraction.*

To  determine  as,  whatever  be  the  apparent  angle  e,  we  must  integrate
the  expression  of  dv  [8544]  ;  and  this  integration  requires  that  the  law,
according  to  which  the  density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere  decreases,
should  be  known.  If  we  use  that  which  is  assumed  in  [8412],  we  may
easily  integrate  the  expression  of  dv,  by  the  analysis  explained  in  thai
article  ;  and  from  this  integral  we  may  deduce  the  value  of  s,  in  terms  of
V,  But  when  the  apparent  altitudes  are  rather  large,  we  can  obtain  this
value,  independent  of  any  hypothesis,  relative  to  the  constitution  of  the
atmosphere ;  as  we  have  seen,  in  [8501],  that  the  astronomical  refraction  is
independent  of  it.

[8560c]  {cos.e  -\-  .^v.sin.0}^  =  cos.^e  +  'HAs.s'm.^e.

Developing  the  first  member,  rejecting  cos.^©  from  both  sides,  and  then  dividing  by
A.s'm.^e,  we  get  2v.cotain^.e-\-Av^  =  2s;  multiplying  this  by  ^a,  we  get  as  [S560].
Now  the  height  of  the  object  is  r — a  =  rs  [8284]  ;  and  as  r  is  nearly  equal  to  a,  this
becomes  very  nearly  equal  to  as,  as  in  [8560].

[8563]

[8560rf]

[8561a]
[85616]

*  (3960)  If  there  were  no  refraction,  the  ray  would  proceed  directly  from  the  object
at  A,  to  the  observer  at  O,  in  figure  106,  page  444  ;  and  if  we  put  the  external  angle
AOHj  of  the  triangle  COA,  equal  to  e,  and  the  angle  OCA  =  v,  we  shall  have  the
angle  CAO  =  Q — u;  and  since  sin.  CO.^  :  sin.  C^O  ::  CA  :  CO,  we  have  in  symbols,
by  development,

[8561c] a.sin.0  =  r.sin.(0 — v)=r.sin.©.cos.v  — r.cos.0.sin  t;=r.sin.0. {cos.v — sin.w.cotang.©}.
Neglecting v^ on  account  of  its  smallness,  we  may  put sin.«  =  u, cos.v  =  1 — ^v%
[43,  44]  Int.; substituting  these  in  [8561c],  then  dividing  by sin.0,  and  reducing,  we  get,

[8561rf]  r — a  =  r.  { ^v^  -j-  v.cotang.e }  =  ^  av^  -\-  au.cotang.©, nearly.

This  represents  the  altitude  r — a  very  nearly, when  there  is  no  refraction. If  we  now
suppose  the zenith dist^ance © to  be  decreased by  the  refraction ^66  [8549e], the

is6d

expression cotang.© will  become coian^.G)-\~ -7—— [54.^lnt.;  v  being  unaltered  [8570] ;

[®5^1''l  ''''  avM

consequently  the  height r — a  [856ld],  will  be  increased  by  the  term |. . ^ ; and  by

using  the  value  of  i6d  r8549el,  it  becomes —r.  (0). .  . „ . Hence the corrected

[8561/] value  of  the  height  is r — a  =  Ja«^.  <1 -.(p).  r-r— ^  > -|-at?.cotang.e;  being the

same  as  in  [8560].

X.ii.'^ll.]  TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS.  647

If  we  suppose -=1—5  [8284],  we  shall  have,*  [85641

dv

r

ds. sin.®

.tang.e  ;

[8566]

[8567]

fpds)

[8568]

\/  cos.20  +  2s.(I— .is).sm.20--2a/l  — -^^
By  reducing  it  to  a  series,  we  shall  have,

dv  =  ds.  ^  1—5.(1— 1 5). taiig.^0+|.5^tang.'^0  4-  ^l^'^  +  kc.

which  gives  by  integration,  commencing  the  integral  from  5  =  0,

(- , o .  s^.fl+S.sin.^e) „ } , OL.tansr  © (
tj  =  5.  <  1  — i5.tanff .''0-^ .  taner.^  0  >  .tang .©H ^ .  <  „

(  ^  ^  '  e.COS.^Q  ^  )  COS.20 (  (p) J

Let  as'  be  the  height  calculated  without  taking  notice  of  the  refraction,  so
that  5  =  5' —  55.  The  refraction  does  not  alter  the  value  of  v,  because  it
elevates  the  objects  in  a  vertical  plane,  and  a  point  viewed  from  the  two
extremities  of  a  base  is  seen  in  the  common  intersection  of  two  vertical
planes  which  pass  through  these  extremities  and  the  observed  object ;  now
this  common  intersection  is  a  radius  of  the  earth ;  therefore  the  value  of  v
remains  the  same  as  it  is  when  we  neglect  the  refraction. Thus  by  substituting

[8565]

[8569]

[8569^]
[8570]

*  (3961) From  [8262u]  we  get,  by  successive  reductions,

substituting  this  and  1— sin.^©  =  cos.20  in  dv  [8559 J],  it  becomes  as  in  [8565].  If  we
divide  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  dv  [8565],  by  cos.0,  we  may  put  it  under  the
following  form  ;

dv  ==  ds.  i  l-f-2s.(l— ^5).tang.20—  ^^  . ^1—  -^)  \  ~*.tang.©.  [85656]

Developing  this  expression,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  s^,  o-^,  it  becomes  as  in
[8566]. The  coefficient  of  s^,  in  the  terms  between  the  braces  in  [8566],  is.

.tang.20-f  f.tang.40  =  ^.tang.2e.  [  1+3.  ^  |  =.|^.{cos.20+3.sin.30}

(l  +  2.sin.2©) ^^_^2

[8565c ]
tang."*© ;

2.COS.2^

and  by  substituting  it  in  [8566],  we  obtain,

I  °  '  2.COS.20  °  )  COS.20 ^  (^)^

Integrating  this  expression,  we  get  v  [8568].

648  .<:::/.  REFRACTION  OF  LIGHT.  [Mec.  Cel.

s' —  6s  for  Sj  and  neglecting  the  products  s5s  and  a^s,  we  shall  have,*
[8571]  0  =  -^..tang.e  +  ^l^^/s'-MY

^ ^ COS.^0 V  (P) J

Hence  we  deduce,

cos/e (  (p) )

[85731 (s)'(i'/opds  [8469e],  is  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  at  the  place  of  the

ro^««« observer,  minus  its  pressure  at  the  observed  object.f Let  s  be  the  difference
[8573']  .  .

of  the  heights  of  the  barometer  at  these  points,  the  mercury  being  in  both

places reduced to the temperature  zero ; and  if  w^e  suppose that (p)

*  (3962) If  we  suppose  the  coefficient  of  a,  in  [8568],  to  be  represented  by  B,  and

^ the  remaining  terms  of  v by  A,  we  shall  have v  =A-\-q^B  ', A  and  B  being  functions

of  s. Now  if  we  put  A  and  B  for  the  values  of  A,  B,  respectively,  when  there  is  no

refraction,  or a'=0,  we  shall  have  generally,  by  Taylor's  theorem,  when  s  changes  into

[85716] «'_5s[8569], A  =  A—(^\6s-]-hc.; B  =  B  —  (^\Ss-{-hc. Substituting  thea^,

in  the  expression  of  v  [8571a],  we  get,

[8571c]  tr=A— (^Y^s  +  fcc+a^B— (^Y^^  +  fec.  |.  *'

Now  when  there  is  no  refraction  we  have  a=0,  and  then  the  expression  of  v  [8571a]
becomes  v  =  A;  and  as  v  does  not  alter  by  the  refraction  [8570],  we  may  substitute  this
value  of  V  in  [8571c],  and  then  by  neglecting  A,  which  occurs  in  both  members,  we  shall
[8571i]  liave  0  =  — (  —  j.Ss-{-o..B,  neglecting  the  other  terms  depending  on  Ss^j  (x.Ss,  on
account  of  their  smallness.  If  we  retain  only  the  chief  term  of  A  [8571a,  8568],  we  shall
have .4!  =  s.tang.e ; whence (— j  =  tang.0; we  also  have,  from  [8571a,  8568],

—. tang.0 (  fids  >  _, tanff.0 ( , fpds  >

[8571c]  B=-^.]s—^i, or B  == -^ .]  s'—-^  [;

•■  ■'  C0S.2© (  (/>) >  COS.20 (  {e) J

a
substituting  these  values  in  [851ld],  we  get  [8571]. IVIultiplying  this  by ,  aad

transposing  ads,  we  get  [8572].

[8573o]
[85736]

t  (3963) We  have,  in  [8469e], {g)-a.f^ ?^s  =  {p)—p, as  in  [8573]. Dividing
this  by (^).(p)i=(p)  [8298],  we  get fi^^^^l^j now ^^^"^ is  evidently

equal  to  the  ratio q^^^t^  [8573]  ; and  by  substituting  it  in  the  preceding  equation,  then
multiplying  by  I,  we  get  [8575].

X.  ii.  '^  1 1 .]  TERRESTRIAL  REFRACTIONS.  549

corresponds to that  temperature, and  to the height  of the  barometer
Qmetre jg^  we  shall  havB,

a.f^^pds  si

[8574]
or  [8575]

-^-,a.f,',ds  =  ^-

,76

.£.  [8575']

[8576]

We  must  vary  this  value  in  the  proportion  of  the  supposed  density  (p)  to
the  true  density ; but  as  the  value  of  a  varies  in  the  inverse  ratio,*  it

follows  that, s  remaining  the  same,  the  value  of  --p: —  will  always  remain

the  same. By  substituting  for  a  its  value  [8277'],  we  get,  from  [8575'],

___  ^^  a.fl^  ^  —3,08338.  s .  [8577]

(P)
To  obtain  the  inclination  of  the  visible  horizon  to  the  true  horizon,  when  we

are  at  any  elevation  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  we  must  ascertain  the  values

dv

of — in  the several  parts  of  the  trajectory  of  the  luminous  ray,  which [8578]

touches  the  surface  of  the  sea. The  preceding  expression  of  dv gives,
when 0  =  lOO°,t

2Jr

*  (3964) We  have  very  nearly,  from  [8277'], a=  —  .(p) ; so  that  if  (p) varies,

the  value  of  a  will  vary  in  the  same  ratio;  and  as  a,  (p),  have  an  inverse  operation  upon
each  other  in  the  first  member  of  the  formula  [8575'],  the  value,  in  its  second  member,
will  remain  unaltered  by  any  variation  of  the  density  (p)  ;  as  is  observed  in  [8576].  Now
substituting,  in  the  second  member  of  [8575'],  the  values  of  a,  I  [8277',  8275],  we
get  [8577].

t  (3965) The  symbol  v'  [8140"]  represents  the  angle  formed  by  the  radius  r,  and  the rgsygo]

tangent  or  path  of  the  ray,  at  the  point  A^  in  the  figure  106,  page  444  ;  and  its  complement

expresses  the  angle  of  depression  of  this  tangent below  the true  horizon,  which  will

therefore  be  represented  by 100° — v' ;  so  that  if  the  path  AO  of  the  ray  touch  the  earth rgcyoj-i

at  the  point  O,  making  there  the  angle 0  =  100°, we  shall  have 100° — v'  =  D,  for

the  depression  of  the  visible  horizon  below  the  true  horizon. Hence  we  obtain,  from

.  dr  . t8579c]

[8145], tang.jD  =  cotang.u'  =  — ; or,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  depression,

dr
D=~—', now  we have, by putting sin.0  =  l in [8263(^], and multiplying  by r,

rdv  =  -y—-=^ ; substituting  this  in  the  preceding  value  of  D,  we  obtain,
VOL.  IV.  138

550  DEPRESSION  OF  THE  HORIZON.  [M^c.  C61.

[8579J
[8579']

or  very  nearly

[8580]

=  v^5-^-^^-5-0-(^))'

dr
rdv

= \ >/  25 2cl..( 1 V  TDepieMion  of  the  horison.1

di*

We  must  observe  that ~j- is  the  tangent  of  the  angle  of  depression  of  the

^ ^ visible  horizon,  at  the  height  as ; and  this  tangent  may  be  taken  for  the
angle  itself  [8579c].

If  the  height  is  rather  small,  we  shall  have,  for  the  angle  of  depression,*

\ /  c\ 11  4fl\  r  Depression  of  the  horizon  1

\/ ZS.\\. ^' "T I*  L when  «  i»  small. J

au  \/ a2

[8582]

[8579c]

and  by  using  the  value  of u"^  [8565a],  it  is  reduced  to  the  form  [8579^]. Finally,  by
[8579/] neglecting  terms  of  the  order  s^,  we  have —  =  1+25  [8284]  ;  substituting  this  in  [8579^],

and  neglecting  as,  vie  get  [8580].

P  ids

*  (3966) When  s  is  very  small,  we  have 1 —  -— -  =  — [8546]  ;  substituting  this  in

[8582a]  ^^)  *

[8580],  we  get  [8582].

X.  iii.  §  12.]  EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT  IN  THE  ATMOSPHERE.  651

[8583]

CHAPTER  III.

ON  THE  EXTINCTION  OF  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  PLANETS  IN  THE  ATMOSPHERE,  AND  ON  THE  SUN'S

ATMOSPHERE.

12.  The  extinction  of  the  light  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  in  passing  through
the  atmosphere,  has  so  near  a  relation  to  the  theory  of  refraction,  that  we  shall
here  take  notice  of  it ; and  shall  put,

£  =  the  intensity  of  the  light  of  a  body,  when  it  has  arrived  at  a  stratum  of [8584]
the  atmosphere  whose  radius  is  r,  and  density  p ; its  intensity,  at  the
time  of  its  entrance  into  the  atmosphere,  being  taken  for  unity ;

we  shall  then  have,*

ds=:—Q.  p.  sydr^-\-r^dv^  ;  [8586]

*  (3967) In  figure  106,  page  444,  we  have AF=  dr, A'F=  rdv  ; whence  we  get
A  A'  =  \/dr^-{-r^dv^, representing the arc described by the ray in the time dt.
Multiplying this  by the intensity of the ray s, and by the density p, we get
p.s.y^dr^-\-r^dv^; which  is  proportional  to  the  decrement  of  density  ds  [8587] ;  so  that  by [85866]
taking  Q  for  the  constant  ratio  of  these  quantities,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8586J,

»T  ,  . r/^^/.«  71 ^^v  au.sin.0  , ,  ....  . ,

Now  we  have,  in  [8263aj, —  = . 222 » ^°^  °y  substitutmg  its  square  in  the

first  member  of  the  following  equation,  we  get,

r^dv^  _  r  __  u-i  ^  r85S6</l

' dr2  \/r2— a2.u2sin2  0 , / „ a2 . „ »  L ^ J

^u-2--.sm.20

substituting  this  in ds  [8586c],  and  then  dividing  by  s,  we  get,

-  =  -Q.  p.  dr,  ^^  .  [8586e  ]

\/ u-2— -.sm.s©

Multiplying  the  numerator and denominator  of the  last  factor  of this  expression by

'552  EXTINCTION  OF  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  [M^c.C6I.

[85871  ^  being  a  constant  coefficient.  For  it  is  evident  that  the  differential  ds  of
the  intensity  of  light  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  its  intensity  £,  by  the
density  of  the  stratum  p,  and  by  the  arc  described  by  the  ray  of  light.
Substituting  the  value  of  rdv,  given  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we  shall  have,

[8588]

ds

-Q.Mr.^l  +  ^.(p)

\/l  +  ^-('  +  ^-(P))-^--«"-=«'

[8589]

In  this  expression  of  — we  may  suppose  the  factor \/ 1  _j_  _ .  p to  be

equal  to  unity. If  the  body  is  sensibly  elevated  above  the  horizon,  the
denominator will be reduced to cos.© nearly. Then by integration,
[8590] observing  that*  fpdr=  (p)./, we  shall  have,  as  in  [8590f/],

V/l+ik(^)} and  then  substituting u~^\/l-f-A:(/))  =\/i-\-kp  [8262m],  we  obtain,
^  =  _  Q.  p.  dr. "-^'VATM7)

^u-^[l  +fc(p)]-[l+A:(p)].|.sin.^e

[8586/]

=  __  q.p.dr V^^+^

^l+^p-[l+A:(p)].J.sin.2e

AK
which  is  the  same  as  in  [8588],  using Ar  =  — p  [81926]. If  we  divide  the  numerator  and

denominator  of  this  last  expression  by  \/l-\-kp, the  new  denominator  will  be.

V/lKl?7')-^-=-^^l

and  as  k  is  of  the  order  0,0006  [8277,  81926], -  =  1  nearly,  this  denominator  becomes

r

very  nearly  equal  to \/l— sin.20  =  cos.0  ;  ^  therefore  the  expression  [8586/] is  very
[8586A] nearly  represented  by —  =  — Q.  p.  <Zr. = —  .p.dr;  which  may  be  used  when

[8586i] the  object  is  somewhat  elevated  above  the  horizon,  so  that cos.© may  have  a  sensible
value.

*(3968) Putting —  =  1 nearly, in [8294], we  get dp  =  ^{g).p.dr; whose
[8590a]  »•

integral  is p=(p) — (g).fP'dr'f (/?)  being  the  constant  quantity  added  to  the  integral,

so  as  to  make  p  equal  to (p) at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  where  fp.dr=0. At  the

'• J entrance  of  the  light  into  the  atmosphere,  p  becomes  0,  and  we  shall  suppose  that  r  then

X.  iii.  <^  12]  HEAVENLY  BODIES,  IN  THE  ATMOSPHERE.  553

l0g.s  =  -SlPL^  [8591]

^  COS.©

If  we  put  E  for  the  value  of  s,  or  the  intensity  of  the  light  at  the  zenith, [85921
where cos.©  =  1, we  shall  have,*

log.i:  =  — Q.(p)./;  [8592']

log.s =^-2^-;  [8593]

°  COS.©

becomes r; hence  we  have 0  =  {p)—{g).f^^.dr, or (^).//p.<Zr=(p)  ==  (^).(p).Z, ^g^g^^^
[8298];  dividing  this  by  {g), we  get fjp.dr=  {f).l, as  in  [8590]. Substituting  this
in  the  integral  of  the  equation  [8586^],  we  get,

log.e  = SL^.fJp.dr= ^.(p)i,  [8590rf]

°  COS.0 '"'  ^  COS.© ^f^' '

as  in  [8591].

* (3969) At the zenith, where cos.0  =  l, and s=E, the equation [8591]
becomes log.E= — Q-(p)-^j as  in  [8592']; substituting  this in  the  second  member  of

[8591],  we  obtain  [8593]. Moreover  we  have,  in  [8298], (P)./=  — ; and  as  {g)  is

given, (p).Z  must  be  proportional  to  (p),  or  to  the  height  of  the  barometer,  as  in  [8594]. [8593&]
Now  if  we  put,  as  in  [8290'], c  equal  to  the  number  whose  hyperbohc  logarithm  is  unity,
and  take  the  constant  quantity  /,  so  that E=c~^, or hyp.log.-E  =  — -/, the  equation [8593c]
[8593]  will  give,

l_  jL

f  ,  ,  COS.©  COS.©  rRTO^/TI

hyp.log.s  =  — ^^^^  =  hyp.  log.  c  ; or, s=c  .  lODvoa]

Effect  of
the  earth's

[8593a]

COS.©  __ . .

Effect  of

Hence  it  appears  that  if  a  heavenly  body  be  observed,  whose  zenith  distance  is  ©,  the  rgrgo  i

intensity  of  its light,  which  is  represented by  unity  upon entering into the earth^s  atmos-

f  phere  on

i__  the  inten-

COS.0  sity  of

atmosphere  [8585],  will  be  reduced  to c  , at  the  eye  of  the  observer. The  same  "s''t-

process  will  answer  in  finding  the  decrement  of  the  intensity  of  a  ray  of  light,  in  passing  '- ■'  ^
from  the  surface  of  the  earth  to  the  summit  of  the  atmosphere,  by  taking  the  integral  of

—  =  —  -^ —  [8586A],  in  an  inverse  order ; or  from the surface  of  the  earth  to  the  [8593^]

summit  of the  atmosphere. In  this  case we  shall have  the  same equations as in

[8590 — 8593],  supposing the  intensity  of  the  ray,  at  the  surface  of  the  earth,  to  be  [8593A,]

represented  by  unity;  then  its  intensity,  upon  quitting  the  atmosphere  at  the  zenith,  will  fh'I^gun's

/almos-
phere  on

COS.©  ^^^  iiiten-

be  E==c~-^  [8593c]; or £  =  c  , if  the  zenith  distance  be  ©  [8593/]. In  like  [8593t]

manner,  if  the  intensity  of  a  ray  of  light,  proceeding  from  a  luminous  place  upon  the  sun^s  ll^lif

body,  be  represented  by  unity,  it  will  be  reduced  to E=  c~^, upon  quitting  the  sun's  [8593A]
VOL.  IV. 139

564  EXTINCTION  OF  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  [Mec.  Cel.

[8594] (p)'^  being  proportional  to  the  observed  height  of  the  barometer  [85936] ;  it

r8594'i  "^^  P^^^^  ^^^^  Iog.£,  and  generally  the  logarithm  of  the  intensity  of  the  light
of  any  heavenly  body,  is  proportional  to  that  height  of  the  barometer.  It  is
also  evident  that  the  two  preceding  logarithms  may  be  considered  as  tabular
ones  in  the  equation  [8593],  as  in  [8593w,  o].

Intensity We  maj  easily  obtain  the  value  of  E  by  comparing  the  intensities  of  the

hlayoni*y°  light  of  tho  samc  heavenly  body,  as  for  example,  that  of  the  moon,  at  two
different  heights.*  In  this  way,  Bouguer  found  that  the  light  of  a  body,  seen
in  the  zenith,,  is  reduced, after  having  passed  through  the  atmosphere,  to

[8596] 0,8123. The  tabular  logarithm  of  this  number  is log.^  == —0,0902835  ;

for'tho'''  therefore,  by  dividing  this  logarithm  by  the  sine  of  the  apparent  altitude  of  the
heavenly  body,  we  shall  obtain  the  logarithm,  of  the  intensity  of  the  light  at
that  altitude.

Very  near  the  horizon,  the  diminution  of  light  depends,  like  the  refraction,
upon  the  constitution  of  the  atmosphere.  If  we  adopt  the  hypothesis  which
we  have  given  in  [8411,  8412],  we  shall  easily  obtain,  by  the  analysis  of
that  article,  the  corresponding  value  of  the  intensity  of  the  light.  But  we
may,  without  fear  of  any  sensible  error,  use  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform

[8598] temperati^re. In  this  hypothesis,  we  havef pdr  =  — Idp; therefore,  by

of  the
light  o
beavei
bodies

[8595]

intensity.

[8597]

COS.©

[8593i ] atmosphere  at  the  zenith  of  that  place,  or  to s=  c  , if  the distance  from the

zenith  of  that  place  of  the  sun's  body,  or  the  inclination  to  the  vertical,  be  represented  hy
0. We may  finally remark,  that  we  may  use  either  tabular  or  hyperbolic  logarithms

[8593n]  jp,  [8593],  because  they  are  proportional  to  each  other,  and  occur  in  both  members  of  the
equation  ;  and  the  same  may  be  done  in the  expression  of  log.E  [8592'] ;  taking  care,

[8593o]  liowever,  to  adapt  the  constant  quantity  Q  to  the  kind  of  logarithms  which  are  used;
being  the  tabular  logarithms  in  [8596,  &;c.].

*  (3970) At  the  zenith,  where cos.0=l, the  observed  intensity  of  the  light  is  E,
r8595al

[8585,  8592]  ; the general  value, corresponding to  any zenith distance ©, being s,

[8585,8584]. Now  if  the  ratio  of  tliese  intensities  is  observed,  and  found  to  be  as  1-to

[8595&] j^ ^,g  gj^^ii  Y\^\Q s=bE, or log.s  =  log.6-f  log.i^; substituting  this  in  [8593],  we

■^ loCT.JS , , _, COS.0 , 7 ,  -1 1 J

[8595c] get log.6-j-log.£= ; whence log.jE= .  Iog.6;  whence  we  easjiy  deduce

the  value  of  E,  as  in  [8596].

t  (3971) The  differential  i
[8559a];  multiplying  this  by — Zp, we  get — ldp  =  p.dr, as  in  [8598].

t  (3971) The  differential  of  the  logarithm  of  [8299],  is -l  =  _  ^  = f  nearly,

[6598a] '  V  ^  ^  ^ ■'  p  I  I

X,  iii.  §  12.] HEAVENLY  BODIES  IN  THE  ATMOSPHERE.  555

putting  the  element  of  the  refraction  equal  to d^, we shall  have  very
nearly,*

[8599]

S  sin.©  Expres-

Bion  of  the

H  being  a constant  quantity. Therefore  the logarithm  of  the intensity '"tensity,
of  light,  of  any  heavenly  body,  is  proportional  to  its  refraction,  divided  by  the

m  terms
of  tho

[8601]

cosine  of  its  apparent  altitude  [8599^].  refraction.

We  have  seen  in  [8503],  that,  at  the  apparent  altitude  of  50°,  the
refraction  is  186",728;  and  in  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform  temperature,
the  refraction  in  the  horizon  is 7390",71  [8370]  ;  hence  we  easily  find  that

the  light  at  the  horizon  isf  . We  may,  by  these  formulas,  determine, [8602]

in  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  the  quantity  of  light  which  falls  upon  the  moon's

*  (3972) If  we  neglect — -/pjf, '^•(0' in  comparison with 1, and  put -  =;=  1, [8599a]

as  we  have  done  in  the  preceding  notes,  we  shall  find  that  the  radical,  in  the  denominator

of  the  value  dd  [8262],  becomes y/l— sin.9  e  =  cos.©  ; consequently  this  expression  of rgKogi-i

dd 3  reduced  to <?a  =  —  — - .  dp.  — -  =  —- .  5-^ . [8598] ;  but  from  [8586A],  we

n2 ' CO3.0  n2 I COS.0  *-  -"  "■  -^  f  8599c  1

pdr  ds 1 ,  ,  ...  ,.  ^K 1 ds .  . .

have ■ —  =  —  •  TT  ; hence by  substitution dd  =  —  — r  •  tt,  •  —  .sin.e  : and by

COS.© £ Q  n^ Ql s

putting -  • ;  ==  — , it  becomes dd  =  —  77.— .sin.e: multiplying  this  by -: — .  we
^ ° n^.Ql H  He  '  JT  ./ o  J sin.©'

get  [8599]. Its  integral  is log.s  =  — H.- — ; 55  being  the  whole  astronomical  refraction. [8599rf]

This  result  is  the  same  as  in  [8600].

I  (3973) If  we  put / for  the  value  of  e,  when  the  zenith  distance  is ©  =  50°, and

186" 728  [8602a]

the  refraction 53  ==  186",728  [8601],  we  shall  have log.s'  =  — if.  — -^  [8599^].  At

the  horizon,  where 0  =  100°,  and  the  refraction 5^  =7390",71  [8601],  we  shall  suppose
that  s  becomes  s", and  we  shall  have log.s"=— jff.7390",71 [8599(^J. Dividing  the [^6026]
expression  of  log.s", by  that  of  log.s', we  get,
log.g" 7390",71.v/ii

log.s'  186,728

=  39,5801./!; or log.s"=:  39,5801. v/l-log./.  [8602c]

\og.E
Now  when ©  =  50°, we  have,  from  [8593], log.s'= — — -; hence,

log.s"  =  39,5801  X  log.i:  =  — 3,57343,  [8602rf]

using  the  value  of  log.-E  [8596]. The  natural  number  corresponding  to  this  logarithm
is ^j-j  ; hence  we  have s"  =  ^j^, which  differs  a  little  from  the  result  in  [8602J.

556

EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT

[Mec.  C6I.

[8602'1

[8603]
[8604]

Sun's  light
most  in-
tense near
the  centre
of  its  disk.

[8605]

[8605']
[8606]

[8606']

disk,  in  consequence  of  the  refraction  of  the  sun's  rays  in  passing  through
the  earth's  atmosphere,  taking  also  into  consideration  the  extinction  of  the
light  during  that  passage.

13.  According  to  the  experiments  of  Bouguer,  the  light  of  the  sun'^s  disk
is  less  intense,  near  its  limb,  than  at  its  centre.  At  a  distance  from  the  limb
equal  to  a  quarter  of  the  semi-diameter,  he  found  the  intensity  of  light  to
be  less  than  at  its  centre  in  the  ratio  of  35  to  48.  Now  any  portion  of  the
sun's  disk,  when  it  is  transported  by  the  sun's  rotatory  motion  from  the
centre  towards  the  limb  of  its  disk,  ought  to  appear  with  a  more  brilliant
light,  since  it  is  viewed  under  a  less  angle ;  and  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that
each  point  of  the  sun^s  surface  emits  an  equal  quantity  of  light  in  every
direction.  We  shall  put  e  for  the  arc  of  a  great  circle  of  the  sun^s  surface,
included  between  the  luminous  point  and  the  centre  of  the  sun^s  disk,  the
sunh  radius  being  taken  for  unity ;  a  very  small  portion  a  of  the  surface,
being  transported  to  the  distance  o  from  the  centre  of  the  disk,  will  appear
to  be  reduced  to  the  space*  a.cos.e  ;  the  intensity  of  its  light  must  therefore
be  increased,  in  the  ratio  of  unity  to  cos.o.  But  on  the  contrary  it  appears
to  be  diminished.  This  difference  is  easily  accounted  for,  by  means  of  the
atmosphere surrounding  the  sun. We  have  seen  in the  preceding  article

[86O60]
[86066]

[8606c]
[8606rf]

[8606e]
[8606/]

[8606^]

*  (3974)  We  shall  suppose,  in  the  annexed  figure  111,  that  F  is
the  sun's  centre  ;  FAB  the  line  drawn  towards  the  observer  on  the
earth;  AC  the  sun's  surface;  BDE  the  surface  of  the  sun's
atmosphere;  AA'  =  CC  an  infinitely  small  arc  of  the  sun's  surface  ;
the  line  1/C7  is  perpendicular  to  FAB;  and  the  lines  A'B',  CD,
C'W,  parallel  to  AB ;  lastly,  the  angle  CFA  =  0.  Then  if  a  part
of  the  sun's  disk,  whose  base  is  AA',  height  above  the  plane  of  the
figure  A,  and  area  hxAA'  =  (i,  be  transferred,  by  the  sun's  rotatory
motion  about  its  axis,  which  is  supposed  to  be  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  present  figure,  until  the  arc  AA'  arrive  to  the  situation  CC,  the  base  CC ,
when  viewed  from  the  earth,  will  appear  under  a  less  angle  than  when  in  the  situation  AA
in  the  ratio  of  cos.e  to  1 ;  so  that  the  apparent  magnitude  of  the  base  CC  is  reduced  to
CI=AA'.cos.Q.  IVTultiplying  this  by  the  height  A,  which  is  not  altered  by  the  rotatory
motion,  we  get  A  X«^«^'Xcos.0  =  a.cos.e  [8606c],  for  the  reduced  value  of  the  part  a.
Now  the  part  CC  sends  forth  as  many  rays  in  a  direction  CD,  parallel  to  AB,  as  the
part  AA'  does  in  the  direction  parallel  to  AB.  Therefore  the  intensity  of  the  light  at  C,
to  that  at  A,  must  be  as  AA'  to  CI,  or  as  CC  to  CI;  that  is,  as  1  to  cos.e,  as
in  [8606'J.

X.  iii.  <§.  13.J  IN  THE  SUN'S  ATMOSPHERE.  557

/_

COS.0

that  the  intensity  of  light  which  results  from  it  is  equal  to* c  , c  being [8607]

the  number  whose  hyperbolic  logarithm  is  unity. Now  the  intensity  of

light  is c~^  at  the  centre  of  the  disk  ;  therefore  at  a  point  which  is  distant [S<^08]

f_

1  COS.©

from  the  limb  by  a  quarter  of  the  semi-diameter,  it  will  be .c

COS.0

[8607/]  ; sin.©  being  equal  to | ; therefore  we  shall  have,!

I6 -^-V/^

35 -/

—  .0

—  — c

7

48

[8609]

[8510]

This  equation  gives  the  following  value  of  f;

/=  1,42459;  [86ii]

*  (3975) We  have  seen  in  [859Sk,  I],  that  a  ray  of  light,  whose  intensity  is  represented
by  unity  at  the  surface  of  the  sun's  body,  will  be  decreased  to c""-^, in  passing  vertically
through  the  sun's  atmosphere, in  the  direction  AB  or CE,  in  fig.  Ill  of  the  preceding [8607i]
note. Moreover,  if  the  ray  pass  through  the  sun's  atmosphere  in  the  oblique  direction CD,
forming  the  angle  ECD  =  ©, with  the  vertical  FCE, its  intensity,  upon  quitting  the

/

[8607c ]

COS.©  _-—

sun's  atmosphere  at  Z>,  will  be  represented  by c  [8593Z]. This  intensity  at  the [8607rf]

point  D  is  to  be  increased  in  the  ratio  of  1  to  cos.©,  as  in  [8606'],  because  it  is
supposed  that  as  many  particles  of  light  proceed  from  the  surface  CC,  between  the
parallel  lines CD, CD', as  in  a  vertical  direction,  or  parallel to CE. Hence  the

f_

X  COS  f^

intensity  at  the  point  D  becomes .c  , as  in  [8609].

[8607e]
[8607/]

[8609a]

f  (3976)  If  the  point  C  of  the  sun's  disc,  figure  111,  page  556,  be  supposed  to  be
distant  from  the  sun's  limb  by  ^  of  the  semi-diameter,  we  shall  evidently  have
sin.CjFl4  =  sin.©  =  1; whence cos.©=y//^. Substituting  these  in  the  expression  of [86095]

_ — /V¥
the  intensity  at  the  point  I>  [8607/j,  it  becomes \/y^-.c  ', while  at  the  centre  of [8609c]

the  disk,  at  B,  it  is  represented  by c"^  [8593A:]. Now,  according  to  the  observations  of

Bouguer,  these  quantities  are  to  each  other  as  35  to  48  [8604] ;  hence  we  easily  obtain

the  equation  [8610] ;  or,  as  it  may  be  written,

[8609rf]

•^•(^"77) 35 v/7 hyp- log.  J. -^
c  =  —  .  — ; whence /= 5 =  1,42459.. ;  [8609e]

^""77

as  in  [8611]. This  value  of  /  represents  the  hyperbolic  logarithm  of  c^; whence  we rQp^n-,
get c-f  [8612],  nearly.

VOL. IV.  140

568  EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT  [Mec.  Cel.

whence  we  obtain,
[8612]  c-f  ==  0,240686  =  E, [8693c]

From  this  it  follows  that  the  intensity,  at  the  centre  of  the  sun'^s  disk,  is
^®^^^^ reduced,  by  the  extinction  of  the  light  in  the  sunh  atmosphere,  from  1  to

0,240686. A  column  of  air  at  the  temperature  zero,  and  under  a  pressure
[8614] corresponding  to  the  height  of  the  barometer  0'"'*'%76, must  have  a  height

of* 54622'"'*'"', to  decrease  the  light  in  this  manner. This  will  therefore

be  the  height  of  the  sun's  atmosphere,  reduced  to  the  preceding  density,  if,
^^^^^  ^  with  the  same  density,  it  extinguishes  the  light  as  in  our  atmosphere.
Thebrii-  Hence  ice  see  that  the  sun  would  appear  much  more  luminous,  if  the
IhTsunIs  atmosphere  which  surrounds  it  were  taken  away.  To  determine  how  much
no8?her;.  its  light  is  weakened,  we  shall  observe  that,  by  supposing  the  sunh
[8615] semi-diameter  equal  to  unity,  and  putting cos.e  =  x, the  whole  light  will

[8616] bet ^'^f^dx.c ^. It  is  true  that  the  intensity  of  the  light  is  sensibly

*  (3977) Substituting  the  value  of  log.J5:  [8596],  and  that  of I  [8275],  in  [8592'J,
[8614a] after  dividing  it  by  —I,  we  get Q.(p)= '074"! ==  ^^^^^  • Now  upon  the  hypothesis

[86146]

7974™  88322"

assumed  in  [8614'],  Q.(p)  is  the  same  for  the  sun  as  for  the  earth ;  therefore  this
value  of  Q.(p)  will  correspond  to  the  sun's  atmosphere  ;  and  by  substituting  it  in  the
equation  [8593a],  we  get  Z=— 88322«'^"«Mog.£;  and  since  log. ^  =  —0,6185492,
[8614c]  [8612],  we  get  Z=88322"«t^«»  X  0,6185492;  being  nearly  the  same  as  in  [8614],
which  represents  the  height  of  the  sun's  homogeneous  atmosphere,  supposing  it  to  be  of  a
uniform  density,  as  in  [8614].

t  (3978) We  shall  suppose  the  arc  CC,  figure  111,  page  556,  to  revolve  about  the

[bblbaj Yyi^Q  FAB,  as  an  axis,  so  as  to  describe,  by  its  revolution,  an  annulus,  whose  surface  is

[86166] 2*. CjH. CC; 2ff being  the  circumference  of the  circle  AC, whose  radius  is  unity,

[8605']. Now AC  =  e [8605]; hence CH  —  s'm.e, CC'  =  de; therefore  the

expression  of  the  surface  of  this  annulus  is,

[8616cri  2*.  CH.  CC  =  2<ff.sin.0.<Z0  = — 2*.6^.cos.e  =  — ^tt.dx, [8615]

To  obtain  the  intensity  of  the  rays  which  proceed from  this  annulus,  in  the  direction
parallel  to  FAB,  we  must  multiply  the  surface  of  the  annulus  — ^if.dx  [8616cZ],  by  the

f_  _/

[8616e] expression of  the  intensity [8593Z], c '^°^'^, or c "^  [8615]; and  it  becomes
_  /
— 2ir.cZa;. c ""  . Its  integral  between  the  limits x  =  \ and cc  =0, gives the  whole
•■ •'  ■' intensity  of  the  sun,  supposing  it  to  be  covered  with  an  atmosphere  ;  hence  this  intensity

X.iii.<§>13.]  IN  THE  SUN'S  ATMOSPHERE.  559

proportional  to c , only  between  the  limits 0  =  0 and 0  =  88°  ; and rggj^n

beyond  this  last  limit  the  intensity  follows  another  law  [8616n,  0,  j?]. But

the  sine  of  88°  differs  so  little  from  unity,  that  we  may  neglect  the  portion [8617']

of  the  solar  disk  which  corresponds  to  this  difference,  or  else  assume,  as  in

^  '  [8618]

the  other  parts  of  the  disk,  that  the intensity  of  light  is  proportional  to

_/

c . Therefore if  we suppose that  the  intensity  of  the  sun*s light  is [8619]
represented  by  unity,  when its  atmosphere  is  taken  away,  or  f  equal to

nothing [8616A], we shall have f^dx.c '' for  the  expression of  the [86i9'j
intensity,  in  its  decreased  state,  by  the  action  of  the  sun's  atmosphere.

To  obtain  this  integral,  we  shall  put —  =  o, and z  =  —  ;  and  then  it [8620]

.J  9^

—  L  _I

is  expressed  by — '^it.f^dx.c *; or,  as  it  may  be  written, ^it.f^dx.c "^  , by  merely [8616^-]

changing  the  order  of  the  limits  of  the  integral. If  we  suppose  /=0, as  in  [8619'],  the

/  [8616A]

intensity  of  any  ray c ' [8616e],  becomes  equal  to  unity,  being  the  same  as  when

[8616i ]
the  atmosphere  is  taken  away  [8593Z:] ;  and  in  this  case  the  expression  [8616^]  is  reduced

to  the  form 2it.f^dx  =  '^. Hence  it  appears,  that  if  the  sun's  atmosphere  be  taken [8616&]

away,  the  whole  intensity  of  the  light,  proceeding  from  the  sun's  body,  will  be  represented

by  2w;  but  if  it  have  an  atmosphere,  the  whole  intensity  will  be ^'^.f^^d^.c "^ [8616g-]; [8616/]

so  that  if  the  whole  intensity  of  the  sun's  light,  undiminished  by  the  atmosphere,  be

[8616m]
represented  by  unity,  its  actual  intensity,  when  diminished  by  the  action  of  its  atmosphere,

_/

will  be  represented  by f^dx.c *  ,  as  in  [SGIO'J. These  results  require  some  modification, [8616n]

in  consequence  of  the  terms  which  are  neglected  in  [8589,  &lc.]  ;  since  these  terms  impair

[86160]

the  accuracy  of  the  formula  [8609],  when  ©  becomes  large; in  the  same  manner  as  we

have  seen,  in  [8483],  that  the  formula  for  the  refraction  [8474]  cannot  be  used  when  0 rgeieni

exceeds  88°,  on  account  of  the  neglect  of  similar  quantities  in  computing  that  formula.

The  effect  of  these  neglected  terms,  in  computing  the  intensity  of  the  sun's  light,  are  not rggjg  •,

however  of  much  importance,  because sin.© is  nearly  equal  to  unity,  as  is  observed  in

[8617'J.

560  EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT  [Mec.  Cel.

— g-  ; the  limits  of  the  integral  being  from 2;  =  co to

'^V

[8622]

/dz,c-^ c"" (  1 1-2 , 1.2.3 1.2.3.4 , „ > ,

ro^ooi The  integral  must  be  taken  from 2:=co to 2  =  —  =  /'; so that the

constant  quantity  is  nothing  ;  consequently  the  integral  becomes,

_  /
5--^==^.c--^.|l-1.2.^+1.2.3./-1.2.3.4.93+&c.}=/o'£/a;.c .  [86i9>c]

We  can  reduce  this  series  to  a  continued  fraction,  by  the  method  explained
in  [8340,  &c.]. For  this  purpose  we  shall  put,
[8625]  u  =  1  —2q.{\—t)  +  1.2.3.9^.(1— 0'—&C.  ;

and  we  shall  have,t

*  (3979) If  we  change,  as  in  [8620], the  constant  quantity  /  into — , and  the
[8620a]  9

variable  quantity  x  into — , we  shall  get — =z] substituting these in [8619'],  it

[86206]

becomes  as  in  [8621]. The  limits  x=0, x  =  l  [8619'],  being  substituted  in  z  [8620a],
give  the  corresponding  limits  of  2,  as  in  [8621]. Now  we  have  generally,

as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differential  and  reducing  ;  therefore  if  we  put  successively
'■ ■' m  =  2, m  =  3, m  =  4,  &,c.,  we  shall  get,  by  repeated  substitutions,

*dz.cr'
IT

-f'-^  =  ^.  +2./-^  =  ^  -2.  ^  -2.3. f

t/ qz^  qz'^  O qz^  qz'^  qz^  */ qz

=  — ,  -2.  —3  +  2. 3. '—  +  2.3.4.  n^  ;  &c.

qz^  qz^  qz^  v qz^

This  last  expression  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8622] ; which  vanishes  at  the  first

[8620/]  1

limit 2^  =  00  [8623] ;  and  at  the  second  limit «  =  —  [8623],  it  becomes  as  in  [8624].

t  (3980) IVIultiplying  [8625]  by (1— 0^ we  get,
[8626a]  u.{\—tf  =  (l_^)2_2^.(l—<)3  +  2.3.^2,(1— O^—^c.

Its  differential,  being  multiplied  by ~ , considering  w,  t,  as  the  variable  quantities,  gives,

[8628]

X.iii.<^13.]  IN  THE  SUN'S  ATMOSPHERE.  561

nil

q.  ^  ,(l—ty—2qu.(]  —t)—u  +  1=0.  [8626]

We  shall  consider  u  as  the  generating  function  of  i/^,  so  that  we  shall  have,

u  =  yi  +  y2't  +  ys.t^ +2/,^i.r  +  &c.  [8627]

Substituting  this  value  of  u  in  [8626],  and  then  putting  the  coefficient  of
r~^  equal  to  nothing,  we  get  the  following  equation  of  finite  differences  ;*

qr, y^+,  — (2gr+ 1 ).  y.  +  gr.  y,_,  =  0  ;  [8629]

in  the  case  of  r  =  1, this  coefficient  will  give,

0=:qy,-{2q  +  l).y,  +  l;  [8630]

which  may  be  included  in  the  preceding  equation,  by  supposing yQ=z  — . [8631]

Now  the  equation  of  finite  differences  in  y^  [8629],  gives,!

f-' 2yr+ 1 y,+i

f  qr  }f

[8632]

q.  ^  .  {i—tf—^qu.{\—t)  =  —2^.(1— 0+2.3.92.(1—^)2— 2.3.4.^3.(1— 0^+&c.  [86266]

Adding  1  to  both  members  of  this  equation,  and  then  substituting  for  the  second  member

its  value  M  [8625],  we  get q.^.{\—{f—'ilqu.{\—t)-\-\  =  u, as  in  [8626]. This  is

'^^  [8626c  ]

easily reduced to the form [8626</], by observing that ~77~  =^  "^I  •  ^  "l~ "' ^"'^

dt  dt

du ^ d.{ut) , d.{ut^)

*  (3981)  Substituting  the  value  of  u  [8627]  in  the  first  four  terms  of  the  equation
[8626<Z],  and  retaining  only  the  quantities  depending  on  i^~^,  we  get  the  four  following
terms  respectively ;

{qr.yr+i—'iqr.yr-\-qr.yr-i  —  yr]'i''~^'  [8629a]

Now  to  satisfy  the  equation  [8626]  for  all  values  of  t,  the  coefficient  of  t*'~^  must  be  put
equal  to  nothing ; hence  we  get [8629],  by a  slight  transposition  of  the  terms. The rggggj-i
coefficient  which  is  independent  of  /,  being  also  put  equal  to  nothing,  gives  [8630].

t  (3982)  Dividing  [8629]  by  or.y^,  and  transposing  the  two  first  terms,  it  becomes
as in [8632]. Now if we multiply the assumed equation [8633], by

{\-\-q.\r — 1]+2:,.).  ?zzJ  , it  becomes l+g'-[r — 1] +Zr=  g-r.  i^  ; and by  substituting

y^  V'-  [8632b]

the  value  of  ?^ [8632],  we  get l+a.(r— 1)+^;  =2g'r+l — or.  ?^;  or  by  reduction

yr  ^ '  ^ yr  '

VOL. IV.  ^  141

562  EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT  [M^c.  Cel.

We  shall  now  suppose,
[8633J  y*- —  ?'*

and  we  shall  have,

q^.r.(r-{-l) ^

z.

[8634,  ,,  =  g.(.+l)_Xl_i_J_,

[8635]  z,  =

'r+l

q-{r-\-\)

1-1-

qr

Hence  we  deduce.

1  +  ^^

[8636]  ' , 2y

1  -f-

1  +

4g

1  +

3?

therefore,*

1+&£C.

[8637]

y. 9

?

yo i+^x

1-

,3,

^ Stq

[8632c] Zr=^  q.{r-\-\\ — qrJj^. If  we substitute, in this, the value ^!:±1  =  — g-(^+l) ^

yr  yr  l+^r+2r^i

[8632(fl deduced  from  [8633],  by  writing  r+l  for  r,  it  will  become g^==g.(r-f  !)■— ^  ^-(^+1)

l+^r+

-«,

[8632e] ^,  =  c.(r+l).  \  1— ^I \  =  g.(r-}-l). ,^+^'-+^ =  ?.(r-|-l) L

-  r+l

as  in  [8634]. This  may  also  be  put  under  the  form,

1+

as  in  [8635]. From  this  we  get,  by  putting  successively r=l, r==2, r  =  3,  &c.,

[8632/1 ^-= %  ' ^~rrir' ^^ttw: '

■^1+^  "^1+^3  "^1+^.

and  by  successive  substitutions  we  obtain  z^,  as  in  [8636].

*  (3983) Putting  r=  1  in  [8633],  we  get ^^  =  — i— ; and by  substituting  ar,,
[8637a]  yo 1+^1

[8636],  it  becomes  as  in  [8637].

X.  iii.  §  13.]  IN  THE  SUN'S  ATMOSPHERE.  663

Putting  the  two  expressions  of  u  [8625,  8627]  equal  to  each  other,  we  get,*

y,  =  1—1.2.^+  1.2.3.9^—1.2.3.4.9-^  +  &c.  t8638]

Moreover  we  have  y^  =  —  [8631]  ;  hence  we  obtain,!

*  (3984) The  part  of  u  [8625],  which  is  independent  of t, is  evidently equal  to
l—Qq-^-l.^.S.q^—hc; and  the  corresponding  part  of  u  [8627],  is y,. Putting  these [8638a]
two  expressions  equal  to  each  other,  we  get  [8638].

1 . _ q

t  (3985) Substituting y^  =  -  [8631],  in  [8637],  we  get qy^  =

^  1  _|_  % [8639o]

1  +  i .

1+&C.  5

multiplying  this  by cr^, and  then  substituting  the  value  of  y^  [8638],  we  obtain  [8639].

_  /

The  first  member  of  this  expression  is  the  same  as  the  value  of  f^^dx.c ' [8624]  ; and

by  using  the  symbols  [8641],  supposing  also  the  fraction [8645]  to  be  represented  for

brevity  by  F,  we  shall  have,

f^'dx.c '  =q.c-f.F=  s^i)

1  +  ^  V  [86396]

]  +  !

1  +

1+&C.

The  continued  fraction  F,  arranged  as  in  the  second  member  of  [8645],  is  similar  to  that
in  [8362a];  changing  the  numerators  q,  'Hq,  Sq,  &c.  into  e^^ s^^\ s^  \  &c.  respectively ; [8639c]
also  i  into r. Hence  we obtain, as  in  [86326], the  following  series  of  fractions  for
determining  the  value  of  F;

5  &c. [8639d]

I  &c. [8639e  ]

i+icT^i^r^;  «"=• [8639/]

Value  of  r+1.

0

1

2

3

4

Upper  index.

0

1

1

1

1

1

0'

0

1 '

1
1  '

1

1+SV2)

l+£(^)'

(l-|_£Cl))_|_sC2)  '

Abridged  forms
of  the  fractions.

1

0  '

0

1 '

J)  (.3)  '

Lower  index.

1

s(0.

s^2)5

gw.

8<«;

Hence iV^

1^  =  1

J

JVC2)  =

1;

iV(3)==:l+s(2)  =

&c. [8639g-]
s^« ;  &c. [8639^]

as  in  the  general  formula  [8643]. In  like  manner,

jD")  =  1 ;  D^^^  =  1+s^" ;  D(3)  =  (i_|_s(i))-|-s(2)  =  D(2)-|-s(2\D

X>(4) ^  (l-j-sCi)+s«>)-|-e(3\(l+£f")  =  D^^+P\D^^, &c. ;
as  in  [8644].

(1)

[8639i ]

[8639*]

564  EXTINCTION  OF  LIGHT  [Mec.Ca

[8642]

[8643]

if  ita  at
mosphi
were  r
moved

[8646a]
[86466 ]

9.c-/(l~1.2.g+1.2.3.^-&c.)  ==  -^  ^f.'dxx

f

[8639]  1  -f-  ?^

1  +

1  +  ?^

1+'^

l+Sic.

[8640] We  shall  put,

[8641] s(^)=:2^; E(2>  =  g; s(3)  =  3g; s(4)  =  2^; s(«)  =  4^; s<«)  =  3y; 6('>  =  5g,  &c.;

and  shall  then  form  a  series  of  fractions,  beginning  with — and .

^  ^  1  l-|-2gr

This  series  is  to  be  continued,  by  putting  N'^''  for  the  numerator,  and
D^""^  for  the  denominator,  of  the  r^^  fraction;  and  then  computing  their
values,  by  means  of  the  following  formulas  ;

[8644]  J){r)  _ £)(r-l)  _|_  5  (r-1)^  />(r-2)  .

Then  the  values  of  the  following  fraction,

=  0-f--

[8645]  J, 25^ l-L.'—

1+^  ^ • ''"'

which  occurs  in [8639],  will be included between  the two fractions

[8646]  ■—  and _^^^ , Hence  we  find  that  f^dx-c is  nearly  equal  to* y'^;

wouiTbe  and  it  follows,  from  [8619],  that  if  the  sun's  atmosphere  were  taken  away,  it

bruik"  would  appear  twelve  times  as  luminous. This  result  depends  however  on

[8647]  the  experiment  of  Bouguer,  which  ought  to  be  repeated  several  times  with

mospheie  much  carc,  upon  several  points  of  the  sun's  disk.

were  re-  ■*• •*■

*  (3986) We  have,  in  [8611,  8620], ?=  7  =  =0,7,  nearly. Substituting

this  in  [8641],  we  get  s^^^,  s^^^,  s^^\  &c. ;  hence  we  can  form  the  series  of  fractions
[8639/].  The  fifth  of  these  fractions  is  0,50,  and  the  sixth  0,48  nearly.  Their  mean
gives  nearly  F=0,49.  Multiplying  it  by  5  =0,7,  and  by  c--^  =  0,24  [8612],  we
obtain f  . ^.c"-'' =  0^08,  or yV  nearly,  as  in  [8646].

X.  iv.  ^  14.] ON  THE  MEASURE  OF  HEIGHTS  BY  A  BAROMETER.  565

CHAPTER  IV.

ON THE MEASURE OP HEIGHTS BY A BAROMETER.

Symbols.

[8648]
[8648']

14.  The  measure  of  heights  by  a  barometer  depends,  like  the  theory  of
refraction,  upon  the  law  by  which  the  density  of  the  strata  of  the  atmosphere
decreases. We  shall  iise  the  following  symbols  ;

a  =  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth  to  the  lower  station  of
the  observer;  ■■'>:^"i<i'u

a-\-r  =  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  earth  to  the  upper  station  of

the  observer ;

(^)  =  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  lower  station ;  [8648"]

g  =  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  place  of  the  particle  of  air ;  [8648'"]

(p)  =  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at  the  lower  station ;  [8649]

p  =  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  at  the  place  of  the  particle  of  air  ; [8649']

P  =  the  density  of  the  air  at  the  distance  a-{-r  from  the  earth's  centre ; [8649"]

z  =  the  heat  of  a  particle  of  air  at  the  distance  a-{-r  from  the  earth's

centre  ; and  when  r  =  0, z  becomes  equal  to  q  [8657,  8661],

Then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8469,  8653</],

dp^—g?.dr.  [8650]

The  pressure p is  proportional to  the  product  of  the  density p  of  the
particle  [8649"],  by  its  heat  z  [8649'"]  ;  therefore  we  shall  have  lS653c},

p  =  K^.z  ;  [8652]

K  being  a  constant  coefficient. Hence  we  obtain,*  ^*

*(3987) Dividing  [8650] by  [8652],  we  get  [8653]; or ^  =  — JT.^;  whose [8653a]

Z  JJ

integral  is /  —  =  constant — KAo^.p ;  and  as  this  integral  begins  when  p  =  [p)  [8662a],

we  get, constant  =ir.log.(p); consequently /^=ir.log.  — , as in [8654], We [86536]
VOL.  IV.  142

[8649'"]

[8651]

666  .  ON  THE  MEASURE  OF  HEIGHTS  [Mec.  Gel.

[8653]

dp  gdr

7"  ""  "~  ^ '
which  gives  by  integration,  and  using  (p)  [8649],

y^  =  jr.iog.(-^.

[8654]

[8655] The  relation  between  g  and  (g),  gives  very  nearly,*
[8656]  ^  =  (^)._|_=(^).(^l_Er);

[8657] therefore,  by  putting i^  =r.(\ ^j, we  shall  have,

[B658]  /4^  =  (^)/^^  =  r.Iog.^) [8654].

To  integrate  these  functions,  it  is  necessary  to  find  z  in  terms  of  r' ;  but
as  the  integral  extends  only  through  a  small  interval,  in  comparison  with  the
whole  height  of  the  atmosphere,  it  is  evident  that  every  function  which
represents  the  temperatures  of  the  upper  and  the  lower  stations,  and  makes
the  temperature  decrease  nearly  in  an  arithmetical  progression,  from  the  one
to  the  other,  is  admissible ;  and  we  may  select  that  form  which  most
simplifies  the  calculations. Therefore  we  shall  suppose,

[8660]  z  =  t/o2 — j/,  [uxpreBBion  of  the  heat  z]

[8661] q  =  the  temperature  of  the  air  at  the  lower  station  ;

i  =  an  indeterminate  constant  quantity,  which  is  to  be  taken  so  that  the
[8^61']  expression  of  z  [8660]  may  represent  the  temperature  of  the  air  at  the

upper  station. We  shall  then  have,  as  in  [8662e],

[8653c  1  ™^y  remark  that  the  equation  [8652]  is  like  that  in  [8400a],  changing  C  into  K,  and  h
into z. Moreover, the symbols used in this chapter are similar to those in

r8653<n  [8288-8289',  &;c.],  the  radius  r  [8138]  being  changed  into  a-\-r  [8648'];  hit  the
differential  of  the  radius dr is  unaltered^  as  in  [8650,  &,c.].

[8655a]

[86556]

[8655c]

*  (3988)  Ghanging,  in  [8292],  r  into  a  +  r,  to  conform  to  the  present  notation,
[8653d],  we  get  the  first  expression  in  [8656].  The  second  form  is  deduced  from  the
first,  by  observing  that  „  "^^  (  ^H ) *v^  '  —  ~  '  "^arly. Substituting  this  in  the

first  member  of  [8658],  it  becomes (^)./  ■"  •(  1 )> which  is  easily  reduced  to  the

form  in  the  second  member  of  [8658],  by  observing  that  the  differential  of  r'  [8657],  is
rfr'  =  (Zr.(l— -^"Y  ,  _,.,^ .

X.  iv.  §  14.]  <  BY  A  BAROMETER.  667

r

hence  we  find,  as  in  [8662g],*

form  by  substituting  z  instead  of  its  value  [8660].  Multiplying  the  numerator  and
denominator  of  this  last  expression  by  q-\-z^  and  substituting  g-^ — z^  =  zV  [8660],  we
get,  by  successive  operations,  the  final  expression  in  [8662e],  being  the  same  as  in  [8662]  ;

[8662]

r'=(l±i) ^ loe ^-Pl.  [8663]
2 (g)  ' ^*  jp '

we  shall  use,  in  this  equation,  the  tabular  logarithms  instead  of  hyperbolic

logarithms,  which  only  affects  the  constant  quantity  K. We  shall  put  I  for  [8664]

the  temperature  corresponding  to  that  of  melting  ice  ;  and  shall  suppose,!  l-

q  =  l^t; z  =  l+t';  [8665]

*  (3989) Substituting  the  value  of  z  [8660]  in  the  first  member  of  [8662c],  and  then

integrating,  we  obtain  the  third  expression  in  [8662c],  as  is  easily  proved  by  differentration.

As  the  integral  commences  when r  =  0, it  is  evident  that  the  constant  quantity  must  be [8662a]

2a

-r  ; hence  we  obtain  the  first  expression  in  [8662c?],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  its  second

[86626]

^^IZip- — 7•vr-^r'  [8662c]

2  2.(9-2)

=  7  •{?-/92_ir'}  =  —7—^  ^  [8662rf]

2.{q^—z^)  2ty  2/

= .,  _,, =  rj—r-,  =  — r-  •  '  [86626  ]

1.(3+2)  t.(54.z) g+2  ■■  J

Substituting  this  last  value  in  [8658],  we  get,

rgdr 2.{g)y  {p)

yT=l+r  =  ^-^^S.-.  [8662/]

Dividing  the  two  last  expressions  in  [8662/]  by  the  coefficient  of  /,  we  obtain  r'  [8663]. [8662g]
It  is  proper  to  state  that  the  hypothesis  for  the  temperature  z,  assumed  by  La  Place  in
[8660],  is substantially  the same  as  the  ancient  hypothesis  of  De  Luc, modified  by
La  Grange ;  as  has  been  shown  by  Plana,  in  vol.  27,  page  194,  of  the  work  mentioned [8662^]
in  [8540A].

t  (3990)  The  heat  is  supposed  to  be  expressed  in  degrees  of  the  centigrade
thermometer,  supposing  Z  to  be  its  measure  when  the  temperature  is  equal  to  that  of  l8665a]
melting  ice.  Then  the  temperature  at  the  lower  station  being  t  [8668],  the  corresponding
heat  will  be  expressed  by  q==l-\-t  [8661,  8665] ;  and  at  the  upper  station,  where  the
temperature  is  i' [8668],  the  heat  becomes  z=Z-f"^'>  as  in  [8649'",  8665].  Substituting
the  values  of  q^z  [8665],  in  [8663],  we  get  [8666].  ]  s''''*"'?)f:t:-

[8668]

568  ON  THE  MEASURE  OF  HEIGHTS  [Mec.  Cel.

then  we  shall  have,

[8666]  /  _  .  ;  1  _!.  ^ ' ^  ^  .  log.  ^i-^  .

The  comparison  of  a  great  number  of  measures  of  the  heights  of  mountains,
by  the  barometer,  with  their  trigonometrical  measures,  has  been  made  by
Ramond ;  who  found,  in  the  parallel  of  50°,  that  the  coefficient,

[8667]  _  =18336"^*^^^

(g)

To  determine  the  coefficient  /, we  shall remark  that  t  and  t'  denote  the

degrees  of  the  centigrade  mercurial  thermometer,  counted  from  zero. If  we

consider  an  invariable  mass  of  air  at  the  temperature  zero,  each  degree  of

increment  in  its  temperature  increases  equally  its  elastic  force  or  pressure,

the  increment  of  pressure,  corresponding  to  a  degree  of  the  thermometer,  is

very  nearly  0,00375  [8488] ;  so  that  if  we  put (p)  for  the  pressure,  or  the

[8670] elastic  force  of  a  mass  of  air  at  the  temperature  zero,  we  may  suppose  that

[8670'] for  each  degree  of  the  thermometer  the  pressure  increases  by (j?).0,00375  ;

but  this  pressure  is,  by  what  precedes,  equal  to* Kp.(l-\-t); hence  we

[8671] have (p)  =  KpL The  increment  of  one  degree  in  the  temperature  gives

an  increment  in  the  pressure  equal  to  Kp,  or  to  KpL—;  or  lastly  to
[8672]  (p),  — ;  putting  this  quantity  equal  to  ('p).0,00375  [8670],  we  obtain
[8673] I  ;=;  =  266,6.. . Therefore  we  shall  have,  upon  the  parallel  of  50°,

[8674]  /  =  1 8336•»«"■''^  fl  +  ^^±^ .  0,00375\  log.  -^-^  ;

the  pressures (p) and  p are  determined  by  the  heights  of  the  barometer ;

[8669]

[8671o]

*  (3991) Substituting  in  [8652] the  value  of  q  [8665],  we  get,  at  the  lower  station,

{p)—Kp.{l-\-t);  and  when  <=0,  (p)  becomes  (p)  [8649,8670]; hence (yj=Kpl,

[86716] as  in  [8671]. JMoreover  when i  =  1, the  preceding value  of (jp)  [8671fl] becomes

r^)

(p)  —  Kpl-\-Kp  =  (v)-{-Kp;theTe(oie(p) — (p)=Kp  =  ~- [8671al, represents the
[8671c]  ^

increment  of  (p), arising  from  a  variation  of 1°, in  the  centigrade  thermometer;  being
the  same  as  in  [8672]. Putting  this  quantity  equal  to fp) .0,00375 [8670'J,  and  then
[8671rf] dividing by (jp), we get I  [8673]. Substituting this value of /, and that of
—  =  18336°'«tres  [8667],  in  [8666],  it  becomes  as  in  [8674].

X.  iv.  «§>  14.]  BY  A  BAROMETER.  569

but  we  must  reduce  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  to  the  same  temperature.  It
has  been  found,  by  an  accurate  experiment,  that  mercury  increases  in  bulk  rggyci
TTTa'''  part,*  for  each  degree  of  the  centigrade  thermometer ;  therefore,  in
the  station  corresponding  to  the  lower  temperature,  we  must  increase  the
observed  height  of  the  barometer,  by  as  many  times  its  -J4Y2*''  part,  as
there  are  degrees  of  difference  in  the  temperatures  of  the  mercury  in  the
barometer  at  the  two  stations.  Moreover,  the  temperature  of  the  mercury  [8676]
in  the  barometer  is  not  always  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  the  surrounding
air ;  therefore  we  must  use  a  thermometer  attached  to  the  barometer.
Besides  this  correction  for  the  temperature,  there  is  also  another  which  is
required,  in  order  to  reduce  the  observed  heights  of  the  barometer  to  the
gravity (g), corresponding to  the lower station. The gravity at the

of  the  mercury,  become (/t) and ^ ; hence  we  have,t

[8677]
[8678]

[8679]
[8680]

superior  station  is (g),  .  [8656]  ; therefore, by  putting (h) and h

for  the  observed  heights  of  the  barometer  at  the  two  stations,  reduced  to  the
same  temperature,  we  find  that  these  heights,  reduced  to  the  same  gravity

.og.(j)=log4)+2.Iog.(,  +  0.

—  being  a  very  small  fraction,  the  hyperbolic  logarithm  of l-\ — is  very

nearly  equal  to — ; consequently  its  tabular  logarithm  is —.0,4342945;

therefore  we  shall  have,

log.  ^  =  log.  ^^  +  -  .0,868589.

The  coefficient  1 8336'°^*'^'  is  exact  only  upon  the  'parallel  of  50°  ; it  varies [868I']
iviththe  latitude f  and  is  inversely  as  the  gravity  (g)  [8667]. If  we  put  [J] [8682]

*  (3992) The  late  experiments  of  Dulong  and  Petit [8490a],  make  this  increment j-g^--
Wbtyj instead  of  -^■^.

f  (3993) The  pressures (p)f  p, are  as  the  corrected  heights  of  the  barometer  (A)
and A.  ( 1  -j — ) ; hence  we  have —  =  -7-.n-|-  —  j ; whose logarithm is as in [8679o]
[8679]. This  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8681].

VOL*  IV.  143

[8681]

670  ON  THE  MEASURE  OF  HEIGHTS  [Mec.  Cel.

for  the  gravity  at  the  equator,  and ^ for  the  latitude  corresponding  to  (g),
we  shall  have,  as  in  [2054,  1770a],*

From  this  we  readily  see  that  the  coefficient 1 8336"*®*''®% corresponding  to
50°  of  latitude,  is  for  any  other  latitude  y,  equal  to,t
[8684']  18336'"^*'^\{  l-}-0,002845.cos.2^5. ^

This  being  supposed  we  shall  have,  to  determine  the  heights  by  a  barometer,
the  following  formula  ;  J

*  (3994) In  [2054]  we  have,  for  the  length  of  a  pendulum  vibrating  in  one  second,
[8683a]  0-'-,739502.  ^  I  +  ^^  .  sin.^*  ^  ,

[86836] in  the  latitude  y. At  the equator,  vfheie ^  =  0, it  becomes O'"«*'%739502. These

r8683cl lengths  are  proportional  to  the  gravities (g) and [J] [8682],  respectively ;  as  we  have

seen  in  [1769"] ;  hence  we  get  the  expression  of  (g)  [8683]. For  greater  correctness,  we

[8683i] may  change  the  coefficient  of  sin.**- into '  =0,005333  [2056q,j?],  corresponding

to  the  best  observations  of  the  pendulum.

/

t  (3995) Putting  for  brevity 2&  = '^,,^^  =  0,005690, we  find  that  the  factor  of
[8684a]  ' ^  ^  &  J'  0,739502  '  '

[8684&]

[^]'  ^"  ^^^  second  member  of  [8683],  becomes 1-f  26.sin.^^=l-[-& — 6.cos.2^  [1]  Int.;
hence  the  expression  of (g) [8683],  is (g")  =  [2i]*{l+^ — 6.cos.2*j. Substituting

Kl

this  in  the  factor  — [8666], we  get,

raraA ^  Kl  Kl  (  ,  6  ^ )  "^  Kl  C  , , 6  ^ >

^"^'^  (F)=(Tw[i]-r-i+^""-''^l  -iH^m-v^^^-"^-^^r^''-

Kl

When  ^  =  50°,  it  becomes , ^ -, ; and  if  we  put  this  factor  equal  to  18336"*®*'"",

(1+6).[1.]  ^  ^

as  in  [8667,8681'],  we  get,  for  the  general  expression  of  this  coefficient  in  any  latitude,

the  same  value  as  in  [8684']. For  greater  correctness,  we  may  use,

[8684rf]  5  =  i  X  0,005333  =  0,002666 [868Sd],

for  the  coefficient  of  cos.2^.

t  (3996) Substituting  in [8666]  the  value  of p^  [8667,8684'];  also  for  ^-^  its
[8685a]  ^  (^)  ^

value  deduced  from  [8673],  namely ^-?±1^ 0,00375; and  for  log.— its value [8681],

2  p

it  becomes,

X.iv.<§.14.]  BY  A  BAROMETER.  671

Formula
to  find  the

Dividing  the  first  member  of  this  expression  by 1 , it  becomes  equal  to r  [8657J.

a

In  like  manner  we  must  divide the  second  member  of  [86856] by  the same  divisor

1  —  — , which  is  very  nearly  the  same  as  to  multiply  it  by  \-\ ; then  connecting  this

factor  with  the  last  factor  of  [86856],  we  get,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  r^,  the
expression  [8685].

[8686]

[8687]

r===18336^J14^,002845.cos.2T|.$l+^^lo,00375^.$^l+^Ylog.^~^  [86851

^  •' V.  \  /  -'  height  by

It  is  sufficiently  exact  to  substitute,  in  the  second  member  of  this  equation,  terf'""*^"
the  value  of  r,  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  r  =  0,  in  the  second
member.  We  may  also  suppose,  without  any  sensible  error,  that
a  =  63661 98™"''"'  [8278].  The  corrections  depending  upon  the  latitude  and
upon  the  variation  of  gravity,  are  very  small ;  but  as  they  really  exist,  it  is
best  to  notice  them,  so  as  to  leave  in  the  calculation  no  other  imperfections
than  those  which  arise  from  the  inevitable  errors  of  observation  ;  or  from
the  effect  of  the  unknown  attractions  of  the  mountains ;  or  from  the
hygrometrical  state  of  the  air,  which  ought  to  be  noticed  ;  or  finally  from
the  error  arising  from  the  use  of  the  hypothesis  [8660],  relative  to  the  law
of  the  diminution  of  the  heat.  We  may  satisfy  in  part  for  the  state  of  the
hygrometer,  by  increasing  a  little  the  coefficient  0,00375  in  the  term
J.(^  +  i'). 0,00375,  in  the  formula  [8685].  For  the  aqueous  vapor  is  lighter
than  the  air  [8526],  and  the  increase  of  temperature  increases  the  quantity
of  vapor,  all  other  things  being  equal ;  so  that  we  can  very  nearly  satisfy  the
observations which have been made by the barometer, by changing

^^±^.0,00375  into ^^^^\  in  the  formula  [8685] ;  *  and  by  this  means [8689]

it  becomes,

/=  18336"».{l+0,002845.cos.2*|.  J  1+  ^i±^^ 0,00375  \  .  \  log.  ^^  +  ^  .0,868589  | . [86856]

[8688]

[8685c ]
[8685rf]

[8690o]

*  (3997) The  quantity  of  vapor,  in  the  column  of  air  of  the  height  r,  increases  with
the  mean  temperature  of  the  air ^.(^-j-^) [8508] ;  producing  a  corresponding  increment
in  the  pressure,  and  in  the  term  depending  on  \'{t-\-t')  in  the  formula  [8685]; so  that
the  numerical  coefficient ^X  0,00375 [8685],  is  found  by  observation  to  become  nearly [86906]
equal  to  0,002,  as  in  [8690].

The  formula  [8690]  may  be  reduced  to  English  fathoms  and  to  Fahrenheit's  scale  in  the
following manner. If t, t', be expressed in degrees of Fahrenheit's scale, the

[8690c]

572  ON  THE  MEASURE  OF  HEIGHTS  BY  A  BAROMETER. [Mec.  Gel.

The  same

[8690] ^^  i8336-«'-.|  l+0,002845.cos.2^}.  ^  1+^3^^  1  •  [  (^^)-l^S- ^  "^  7-0,868589 1.

corrected
for  the
humidity.

corresponding  degrees  of  the  centigrade  thermometer  will  be  {t — 32°).  |^, (<'— 32°).  jfg,

respectively. These  are  to  be  used  instead  of  t,  t', in [8690] ; so  that t-\-t' will
[8690rf]  ^,^.^,.

become (<+<'— 64°). |§^  ; and  the  factor 1-f-  -\^ will  change  into,

[8690e]  1  +  ^-^^^^^^  X  4t^  =  ^^.f836°+^  +  ^'} ;

moreover,  as  a  metre  is  equal  to 0f^^°'",54681..  [2017p],  the  factor,
[8690e']  18336'»«»'«^  ^  1  +  ?^^^^^  \  ,

changes  into,
[8690c"J  18336"' X 0,54681  ^  |836°+ ^+<'|  =  ll*tS1404.|836°+<  +  <'|,

and  the  expression  [8690]  becomes,  by  using  the  corrected  factor  relative  to  S'F  [8690e],

[8690/] r=  1  lf»t'>-,1404. \  1-}-0,002845.cos.2y \ . {836°+  t-\-l!\.\  (l+-^).log.  j  +  f  •  0,868589! .

Finally, the correction ajx^j which is used in [8675], must be reduced to
[8690g]  =  wh^i to correspond to Fahrenheit's  scale; if  we use -^^  [8675a],

[8690A] instead  of  -^-^^^ ,  the  correction  becomes -^-^  X  j|^  =  ^^Vtt  5 instead  of  ^^^ .

X.  V.  «^  15.]  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  673

Deviation
til  tlie  east
of  the
vertical.

[8691]

equator
there  is  no
deviation.

CHAPTER  V.

ON  THE  DESCENT  OP  BODIES  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.

15.  A  BODY,  beginning  to  fall  from  a  state  of  rest  at  a  point  considerably
elevated  above  the  surface  of  the  earth,  will  deviate  sensibly  from  the  vertical
line,  on  account  of  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth ;  an  accurate  observation
of  this  deviation  vi^ill  therefore  be  useful  in  rendering  this  motion  manifest ;
and  although  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is  now  established,  with  all  the
certainty  which  comports  with  the  state  of  the  physical  sciences,  yet  a
direct  proof  of  this  phenomenon  must  be  interesting  to  mathematicians
and  astronomers.  For  the  purpose  of  comparing  the  theory  with  such
observations,  we  shall  here  give  the  expression  of  the  deviation  of  the  body,  m  the
to  the  east  of  the  vertical,  ivhatever  be  the  figure  of  the  earth,  or  the  resistance
of  the  air.  We  shall  also  show  that  the  deviation  is  greatest  at  the  equator,
[8736',  8760,  8769]. The  following  symbols  will  be  used  :  g^^,^,^

X,  Y,  Z, are  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  point,  from  which  the  body rgeosi
begins  to  fall,  at  the  commencement  of  the  time  t ;

X,  y,  z,  are  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  body,  after  falling  from  rest,
during  the  time  t.  The  fixed  axis  of  a:  or  X  is  the  same  as
the  axis  of  rotation  of  the  earth.  The  fixed  axis  of  y  or  Y  is
in  the  plane  of  the  equator,  and  coincides  with  one  of  the
principal  axes  of  the  earth,  at  the  commencement  of  the  time  t ;

r  =  the  primitive  radius,  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  earth  to  the rgggoi
point  where  the  motion  commences  ;

r  —  as  =  the  variable  radius,  drawn  from  the  centre of  the  earth  to  the r8694i
place  of  the  body,  at  the  end  of  the  time  t ;

6  =  the  angle  formed  by  the  radius  r  and  the  axis  of  rotation  x ;  [8695]

VOL.  IV.  144

574  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [Mec.  Gel.

[8696]

[8697]

d-\-o.u  =  the  angle  formed  by  the  radius  r — as  and  the  axis  of  rotation
X,  at  the  end  of  the  time t ;

z3  =  the  angle  formed  by  the  two  planes  xr,  xy^  intersecting  each
other  in  the  earth's  axis  of  rotation  x.  One  of  these  planes  xr
passes  through  the  axis  of  rotation  x  and  the  radius  r  at  the
commencement  of  the  motion  ;  the  other  plane  is  the  fixed
plane  oi  xy\

[8698]  nt  =  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth  during  the  time  t ;

nt-}-'^  =  the  angle  formed  by  the  fixed  plane  xy,  and  the  revolving
plane  xr  ;  this  last  plane  being  that  which  passes  through  the
revolving  radius  r  and  the  fixed  axis  x,  at  the  end  of  the  time  t ;

nt-\-'Ci-\-o.v  =  the  similar  angle,  formed  by  the  plane  xy,  with  the  plane
passing  through  the  fixed  axis  x,  and  the  variable  radius  r — ol5,
at  the  end  of  the  time  t ;

V  =  the  sum  of  all  the  particles  of  the  earth,  divided  by  their
distances  from  the  falling  body  ;

f-^j, (-7-)j {'l~p  represent  the  forces  acting  upon  the  body  in  the

directions parallel to  the  co-ordinates Xj  y,  z, respectively,
and  tending  to  increase  them  [455'"].

From  this  notation  it  follows,  that  after  the  body  has  been  falling  during
the  time  t,  the  radius  r  changes  into  r — ^s ;  the  angle  ^  changes  into
d-j-aw  ; and  the  angle  ts  changes  into zs-\-^v. Then  vre  shall  have,*

[8703]  Z=r.cos.d;

[8703']  y=  r.sin.^.cos.(7J^4-«) ;

[8703'']  Z=r.sin.^.sin.(7t^  +  ^).  r  coordinates.]

[8704]  X  =  (r —  a  5) .COS. (^ -f- a m)  ;

[8704']  y  =  (^ — a,5).sin.(^  +  0L|^).cos.(n^-f-^-}-av);

[8704"]  z  =  (r — a5).sin.(5-j-az<).sin.(ni4-OT4-av).

[8703al  *  (3998)  The  notation  [8692—8700],  is  precisely  lilce  that  in  [323^—324],  except  in
the  sign  of  s  [8694] ;  r — as  being  used  instead  of  r-f-as  [323''],  because  the  radius
decreases  as  the  body  falls. This  change  being  made  in  a?,  y,  z  [324],  they  become  as

[87036]  ^^  [8'704 — 8704"];  and  at  the  commencement  of  the  motion,  when  s,  m,  v,  vanish,  these
values  change  into  those  of  X,  Y,  Z  [8703—8703"].

[8699]

[8700]

[8701]

[8702]

[8702']

X.  V.  §  15.] FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  575

We  shall  notice  the  resistance  of  the  air,  supposing  it  to  be  represented  hy*  j^g^^g,

<p.(  fl.5,  ^'4-\ (^nd  that  the  body  falls  from  a  state  of  rest. For  the  relative  ^""«^^°°

, . »  expressing

velocity of the  body  through  the  air, considering  the  air  as  at  rest,  is  ti^je-^

1 • I  supposing

evidently much greater in the direction  of the radius r, than  in the  l^^^^^^y

. /. J  .  ff  om  a

direction  perpendicular  to  r  ;  hence  it  will  follow  that  the  expression  ot  this  *tateof

ds

relative  velocity  is  very nearly represented by <*-•  x  • ^^5 ^^^ greater  [8706]

simplicity,  we  put r  =  1 ,  the  relative  velocity  of  the  body,  in  the  direction

du

6,  will  be cL.  —  [22096]  ;  and  the  relative  velocity  in  the  direction  ro,  will  ^^^^

dv
Jt

dv
be  equal  to a.  —  .sin.^ [2209c]  ;  therefore,  if  we  put  for  brevity ,t

ds\

/  ds

5f.

S  =  -:^ ^^  [8707]

^•dT

[8705a]

*  (3999) The  body  falls  from  rest  very  nearly  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  r,  through
the  space  as, in  the  time t; therefore  its  velocity,  at  the  end  of  the  time  tj will  be

ds
nearly  represented  by a.  —  [8706J. Now  the  resistance  must  be  as  a  function  of  this [87056]

velocity  and  of  the  density  of  the  medium ;  moreover  the  density  of  the  medium  depends
on  the  radius r — as, or as; therefore  the  resistance  must  be  a  function  of as and

a.—;  which  is  represented  by 9. fas, t*--;^),  in  [8705].

f  (4000) The  radius  r — as [8694],  at  the  end  of  the  time  t,  will  be  varied  by  the
quantity  — ac?s, in  the  element  of  time  dt ;  making  the  velocity,  in  the  direction  of  this

[8705c]

ds

[8707a]

radius,  equal  to — a.  — ,  or  «-.  — , towards  the  centre  of  the  earth. The  velocity,  i

dt  '  dt

m

[87076]

the  direction  of  the  meridian  aw,  is a.  —  [22096] ;  and  in  the  direction  a«,  perpendicular

to  the  meridian a.  — .sin.^  [2209c]. The  sum of the  squares  of  these  three partial
rectangular  velocities  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the  whole velocity  ;  and  as  the  parts

depending  on du^,  dv^f are  extremely  small  in  comparison  with  that  depending  on  ds'^, r8707cl

ds
we  may  consider  the  whole  velocity  to  be  very  nearly  equal  to  the  part a.  —  [8707a],  as

in  [8706]. Now if we divide the  whole  resistance  [8705]  by  the  whole velocity [8707rf]

676

ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES

[M6c.  C^l.

Jholifin we shall have,  for the  resistance of  the  air m the directions r,  6,  «,

the  direc-

tiona

r,  6 J  «.

[8708]
[8709]
[8710]

respectively,

5'.  a.

ds
dt'

— o.  a.  —  ,
dt  '

— o.  a.  — .  sin.^
at

[ResiBtancn  in  the  direction  of  the  *!
raditu  r.  J

[Resistance  in  the  direction  of  the  1
arc  of  the  meridian dg. J

[Rnsistance  in  the  direction  of  the  "I
parallel  of  latitude <Xv,»iaQ. J

[8711] Then  we  shall  have,  by  the  principle  of  virtual  velocities,

ds

tt.  — , we  shall  obtain  tlie  quantity  5  [8707] ;  and multiplying  it  by  the  three partial

ffo  tjhti  /^i^

velocities  a.  —  , o-. -r  > a.  —  .sin.4  [8707a,  6],  we  shall  evidently obtain the three
dt  at  at

relative  resisting  forces  [8708,8709,8710],  which  tend  to  decrease  s,  &,  zs; or,  in  other

words,  the  forces  tend  to  increase  the  radius  r,  and  to  decrease  6,  -a ;  agreeably  to  the

signs  which  are  used  in  [8708 — 8710]. For  convenience  of  reference  we  have  inserted

[87075"] the  symbol  S,  in  the  expressions  [8708 — 8710],  instead  of  its  value  [8707],  which  is  used

in  the  original  work  ;  having  transposed  the  definition  of  S  from  [8711]  to  [8707].

[8707e ]
[8707/]

[8712a]

[8712&]

[8712c]
[8712i]

[8712e]
[8712/]

[8712^]

*  (4001) The  principle  of  virtual  velocities  is  expressed  in  the  equation  [37],  which
may  be  put  under  the  following  form  ;

»=^-f+^^-^f+^-

ddz

1

The  first  line  of  this  expression  is  the  same  as  in  [8712  line  1] ;  the  second  line  produces
that  in  [8712  line  2],  depending  on  the  attractions  of  the  earth ;  also  that  in  [8712  line  3],
depending  on  the  resistance  of  the  air.  For  we  have  seen,  in  [41],  that  the  function
P.^x-\-^.^y-\-R.^z  can  be  reduced  to  the  form  2.S.<5s,  representing  the  sum  of  the
products,  formed  by  multiplying  each  force  S,  by  the  element  of  its  direction  5  s. Now  the

attraction  of  the  earth  produces  the  forces  i-j-p (aT)' \d~)  t^^^^]'  '"  ^^®  directions

X,  y,  z,  respectively;  and  by  multiplying  these  forces  by  the  elements  Sx,  Sy,  Sz,  then  taking
the  sum  of  the  products,  they  produce,  in  [87120^,  line 2],  the  same  terms  as  in  [87121ine2].
In  like  manner,  if  we  multiply  the  forces  [8708,  8709,  8710],  depending  on  the  resistance
of  the  air,  by  the  elements  of  their  directions  Sr,  66,  d-ss.s'mJ,  and  take  the  sum  of  these
products,  they  produce,  in  [87 12^,  line  2],  the  same  terms  as  in  [8712  line  3J;  therefore
the  equation  [8712]  expresses  truly  the  fundamental  equation  of  the  motion  of  the  falling
body,  arising  from  the  principle  of  virtual  velocities.

[8713]

X.  V.  <§.  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  577

-'<S)-»(f)-'<f)

dt  dt ^  dd

The  differential  symbol  6,  refers  to  the  co-ordinates  r,  ^,  ^ ;  and  x,  y,  z,
are  functions  of  these  quantities.  If  we  substitute,  in  [8712],  the  values
of  X,  y,  z  [8704,  &c.],  we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  a^*,

^ (  dds  r.  • o  ^ <^^  O <^* )  \  ,

+,2.5^.^a/^-2an.sinAcosA^-faS.^l  f 2

i dt^  dt '  dt  !^  \^^^ ^8714]

. „  ^ ( . „.  ddv , ^ . , ,  du 2an.sin.24 ds , ct • q^  ''^  > I
'  (  dt^  dt  r  dt '  dt  ) I

*  (4002)  The  complete  variation  of  — F",  considered  as  a  function  of  a?,  y,  z,  is  the
same  as  the  expression  in  [8712  line  2],  which  must  therefore  be  equal  to  — 8V.
Substituting  this  in  [8712],  it  becomes,

This  may  be  reduced  to  the  form  [8714],  in  the  same  manner  as  [325]  is  deduced  from
[296]. For  the  equation  [296]  may  be  put  under  the  form,

. ddx , . ddy , . ddz r-rr  t ^P
0=.5,,.~+Sy.J  +  Sz.--SV+f;  [871«]

which  becomes  identically  the  same  as  [8714a],  by  putting,

^  =  as.  [  -8r.  ~-\-Sd.^£  +  5«.sin.«4. 1 1  .  [8714c ]

Now  the  equation [325]  is  deduced  from  [296],  by  substituting  the  values  [324],  which

are  the  same  as  those  in  [8704,  8704',  8704"],  changing  the  sign  of  s  [8703a]  ;  therefore t^^^^^^]

Sp
if  we  change  the  sign  of  s,  in  [325],  and  then  substitute  the  value  of  —  [8714c],  it  will

give  the  reduced  value  of  [8712],  arising  from  the  substitution  of  the  values  of  x,  y,  z,

du  dv  t8714c]

[8704,  Stc] ;  observing  that  in  the  terms ^'-iii ^•'J[> ^^  ^^7  re-substitute r^==  1 ;

making  them r^.S.—, r^.S.  —  , respectively,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  jS,  t?u,  (?«;.
By  this  means  the  equation  [325] becomes  as  in  [8714].
VOL.  IV.  145

678  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [M6c.  Gel.

[8714'! '^^^  equilibrium  of  the  stratum  of  air,  in  which  the  body  is  situated,  gives

as  in  [326],*
[8715]  0  ==  5F+  Jw^5.{(r— a5)^.sin.^(d  +  aw)}  ;  (2)

.__. provided  the  value  of 6r  is  made  to  correspond  to  the  surface  of  the  level

Stratum,  m  which  the  pressure  is  constant  [1616',  &c.]. We  shall  suppose

that  at  this  surface  we  have,
[8717]  r  =  a+2/;

[8718] y  being  a  function  of  6,  zs,  a, and  a  being  constant  for  the  same  stratum.

Now  if  we  put,
[871^3  Q  =  V+  Jw^{(r— a5/-sin.^(4  +  aM},

the  equation  [8715]  will  become,!

o=©-K2)-+(|)-S+(f>"+(S--

Adding  together  the  equations  [8714,  8720],  we  obtain,!

rfl7T»  *  (4^^^) ^^^  equation  of  equilibrium  [326]  becomes  as  in  [8715],  by  changing  the

sign  of  5,  as  in  [8703a],  which  corresponds  to  a  level  surface  ;  and  Sr  must  be  taken  to
conform  to  it,  as  is  observed  in  [8716],

t  (4004) The  complete  variation  of Q,  considered  as  a  function of r, 6j  ro,  b

Now  if  we  suppose 5r  to  correspond  to  the  level  stratum,  as  in  [8716],  we  shall  have,
[87206] from  [8717], Srz=Sy, because a is  constant  for  this  stratum  [8718]  ; and  as y is  a
function  of  6,  to,  and  the  constant  quantity a, we  shall  have,  at  this  surface,

substituting  this  for  8r  in  [8720a],  we  get  [8720]  ;  which  represents  the  complete  variation
[8720rf]  of  Q  [8719],  corresponding  to  the  surface  of  equilibrium,  or  to  the  value  of  the  function
[8715].  We  may  also  remark  that,  if  the  surface  of  level  on  the  earth  be  considered  as
elliptical,  the  radius  r,  or  the  quantity  y  [8717],  will  vary  only  by  quantities  of  the  same
order  as  this  ellipticity,  or  ^^^  part,  in  proceeding  from  the  equator  to  the  pole ;  and  this
variation  must  be  wholly  insensible,  within  the  limits  of  the  space  a.u  or  a«,  passed  over

[8720g-] by  the  falling  body  ;  so  that  within  these  limits  we  may  consider  (  ^  jj (t^Jj  as  constant;

and  the same  holds  good  relative to  the values  of v, in  any  one of the strata  of
r8720Al  ij '  J

■■ ■' equilibrium  [8714'],  through  which  the  body  falls. This  principle  is  adopted  in  [8734J.

r8721al ^  (4005) The  lower  line  of  [8714]  is  evidently  equal  to  the  general  value  of  — iJQ,
[8719]  J  and  we  have  shown,  in  [8720fl],  that  this  is  equal  to,

X.  V.  §  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  579

0  =  (5r.  ^  —a.  ■—  — 2anr.sm.^^.  -; ^S.  —  )  1

(  df  dt  dt  5

1 Q  ,. ^ ddu ^ .  dv , cy  du  }  ^

+r.86.  <  a.  -—  — 2an.sin.^.cos.^.  —  +^S,-r  >  2

^n  ( df  dt  dt  >  ^g72j-j

, o  , • . ( • ,  ddv , -,  du 2an.s\n.d ds , bi . dv  ) ^

I  dt^ ^  dt  r  dt^  dt  )

-(T?>i--(i)-"-e>H-

We  must  now  put  the  coefficients  of  the  variations (5r, 66^ 6:^, equal  to [8722]
nothing,  observing  that — \-j^) expresses, as in [1815,  &c.],  the  force

of  gravity^  which  we  shall  denote  by g* Then  putting  the  radius  r  equal [8723]

This  may  be  reduced,  by  adding  to  it  the  second  member  of  [8720],  which  is  equal  to
nothing  ;  by  this  means  it  becomes,

This  is  the  same  as  the  lower  line  of  [8721].  The  other  lines  of  [8714],  namely
lines  1,  2,  3,  correspond  respectively  to  the  same  lines  in  [8721]  ;  so  that  [8721]
represents  the  sum  of  [8714,  8720].

*  (4006) In  the  case  of  nature,  where n  =  — 2  [1812"'],  the  expression  of  ;>  [1815]

/dV\  ^  [8722a]

becomes  p  =  — (-p  ) — ',§'''•(1 — M*  )  ; t  being  the  radius  of  the  spheroid,  and g  the

[87226]

centrifugal  force  [1814'],  at  the  distance  1  from  the  axis  of  rotation.  Now  in  [8698]  the
actual  velocity  of  rotation  of  a  particle  of  the  earth,  at  the  distance  1  from  the  axis,  is  n,
its  centrifugal  force  r?  [54']  ;  and  as  1 — fii.2==sin.^4  [1616"'],  the  preceding  expression
of  p  becomes p  =  — (  — ] — n^r.sin.^d. The  partial  differential  of  Q  [8719],  relative [8722c]

to  r,  gives —(-^^  =—(—]— n2.(r-as).sin.^(d+aM), or  — r— j-n^r.sin.^d,  nearly; [8722(;]

being  the  same  as  the  value  of  p  [8722c]  ;  hence  p  =  — {—  j  ; and  if  we  change  the
gravity 'p [1814"], into g, to conform to the notation [8723], we  shall have
—\rr\  =5"> 3S  in  [8723]. Substituting  this  in  [8721],  and  then  putting  the  coefficients [8722c]
of  — 5r, r^^^, r'fe.sin.d, separately  equal  to  nothing,  we  obtain  the  three  equations
[8724—8724"]  ; r  being  put  equal  to  unity,  as  in  [8706].

#80  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [M^c.C^l.

mental' to  1,  whicH  caii  be  done  without  any  sensible  error,  we  shall  obtain  the

differea-  ,  /» ii  •

tiai  e(,ua- thrce  followine:  equations :
dds , ^ . n dv

-^  +  2an.sin.^^.  — - ,  — .  ,

dt^  dt ^  dt

Funda-
mental
differen-
tial e(]u
tions  in

S,  U,  V.

[8724] 0  =  a.^'  +  2an.sin.2^.-^+a5'.~^;

[-..1 0==a.gi_2...sin..cos.4;  +  .^4^--^.(|);  [(A)

[87241 0  =  a.sinA  ^  +2^n.cosJ.  ^  -2an.sin.^.  ^'  +a5.sin.^.  ^  ^^/±)
dt^ '  dt  dt ^  dt sin.4  \dzij

The  inspection  of  these  equations  shows,  that  the  ratio  of  a5  to  olw,  or

of  0-5  to  az; is  of  the  same  order  as  the  ratio  of  unity  to  (-r  ), or [-t-\

Moreover, a.  — is of the same order as* S^'il^  )  ' consequently

[8726] 2a-w.sin.^^.  y is  of  the  order gnt.(-^\ We  shall use the following

symbols  ;
[8727] The  unit  of  time  is  one  centesimal  second,  or  the  huijdred  thousandth  part

of  a  mean  day  ;
[8727'] n  =  the  small  angle  described,  by  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth,  in  one

centesimal  second  of  time  ;
[8728] nt  =  the  product  of  the  small  angle n, by  the  number  of  centesimal

seconds  t,  during  the  fall  of  the  body.

*  (4007) The  centrifugal  force  depending  on  n  [87226],  and  the  resistance  of  the

r8725al air  depending  on  S  [8707 — 8710],  being  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  gravity  ^,

[8723],  it  follows  that n and  tS  must be  very  small in  comparison with g ; and  by

neglecting  these  small  quantities  in  the  three  equations  [8724 — 8724"],  they  become,

,-„„p,  ,  dds  ddu  / dy\  ddv  g /'dy\ , „

[87256]  a.  —  =2-; a. —  =£-.(-^)! a.  —  =: -r^  . ( —  )  4- &c.

If  we  suppose,  as  in  [8734] ,  that  g, [—},  and  also (7-)) are  constant,  we  shall  get

[8725c]  ^^  ^ ''^

the  expressions  [8725<^],  by  integrating  [87256]  and  taking  the  arbitrary  constant  quantities,

so  that  the  integrals  may  vanish  when  ^  =  0  ;

dt ^'  dt ^\ddj'  dt sixiM \dvij^

[  Again  integrating  with  the  same  condition,  we  get,

[8725.]  <^=igfi; a«=4g<^(|);  a.  =  1^^ .  (|)  +  &c.

From  these  last  values  we  easily  perceive  the  correctness  of  the  remarks  in  [8725,  &c.].

X.  V.  <^  15.]

FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.

This  number  of  seconds  is  always  very  small,  so  that  the  product nt  is  a
fraction,  which  may  be neglected  in comparison with unity ; we may

dv

therefore  neglect  the  term 2an.sin.^^.  — , in  the  equation  [8724], also  the

dt

dv

term — 2an.sin.^.cos.^.  — ,  in  [8724']  ;  and  in  like  manner  we  may  neglect

dt

du

the  term 2aw.cos.^.  — , in [8724"]. By this means the equations

[8724 — 8724"]  are  reduced  to  the  following  forms  ;

dds  -,  ds

^-  +  ''^'di

0  =  <^'^.  +  ^S.-—g;

ddu  ^  du  fdy\

0  =  0-. \-^S. ^.  I  —  1 :

dt^^ dt ^  \d&J '

_  . ddv ^ . ds , ^ . dv

dl^  dt '  dt

ds

sin.d  '\d'uij'

S  being  a  function  of  as and a.  —  [8707]  ; the  first  of  these  equations

dp

gives  0.S in  a  function  of  the  time ^,  as  we  shall  see  in  [8751,  8784], If
we  put,*

aw  =  ous.

\d6

681

[8728']

[8729]

Approxi-
mate
values.

[8730]
[8731]
[8732]

[8732']
[8733]

*  (4008) From  the  remarks  in  [8732']  it  is  evident,  that  the  equation  [8730]  gives  as
in  a  function  of  t ; and by  substituting  this  value  of  as  in  the  expression  of  *S  [8707],

v?e  get  S,  expressed  in  terms  of  t. With  this  value  of  S, and  considering f-^j as

constant  [8734],  we  find  that  the  equation  [8731]  may  be  reduced  to  a  differential
equation  of  the  second  order  in  u,  containing  only  tj  dt,  and  knov^rn  quantities.  We  shall
suppose  its  integral  to  give  aw  in  a  series  [8733<^],  vs'hose  first  term  is  the  same  as  that
retained  by  the  author  in  [8733],  and  the  remaining  terms  are  quantities  ascending
according  to  the  powers  of  t,  connected  with  constant  coefficients  a,  b,  c,  &c. ;  which
are  to  be  determined  so  as  to  satisfy  the  equation  [8731]  for  all  values  of  t.  The  first  and
second  difierentials  of  [8733^]  give  [8733e,  /]  ;

[8733a]

[87336]
[8733c]

a.

du

'It

ddu
d^

a.

V0L» IV.

dt  '\dd  )

^•(1)  + +2.1e+3.2/^+4.3g^«+&c.

146

[8733rf]
[8733e]
[8733/]

682  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [Mec.  C^l.

[8734]

tve  can  satisfy  the  second  of  these  equations,  because g and  i-j-\maybe

supposed  to  he  constant  [8720g-,  K]  during  the  motion,  on  account  of  the
smallness  of  the  height  from  which  the  body  falls,  in  comparison  with the

earih^s  radius. This  manner  of  satisfying  the  second  equation  is  the  only

du

~di

du
one  which  accords  with  the  present  question,  in  which u and — - vanish,

[8735]

ds
as  well  as s and — , at  the  origin  of  the  motion. Now  if  we  suppose  a

dt
plumb  line  of  the  length  cus  to  be  suspended  from  the  point  where  the  body

begins  to  fall,  it  will  deviate  from  the  radius  r  towards  the  south,  by  the
[8736] quantity* ^^-f-^j* which  is  equal  to  the  quantity  aw  [8733J. Therefore

Substituting  these  in  [8731],  it  becomes  as  in  the  following  expression,  which  ought  to  be
satisfied  for  all  values  of  t;

[8733-]

+  ac.S-f2ae.{l+^S'f}+3a/if.{2+5f<}-f4a^i9.{3+S^}-f&c.

Now  when t=0, we  have  by  hypothesis  [8735], s=0, u  =  0; and  then  [87336?]
[8733/i] gives 6  =  0. We  also  have,  when ^  =  0, ;i7  =  ^j dt^^^ [8735] ; substituting

these  in  [8733e],  we  get c  =  0. The  coefficient  of (-7~)j in [873J^],  vanishes  by

means  of  the  equation  [8730]  ; and  since c  =  0, the  equation [8733g] becomes,  by
dividing  by  a,
[8733x]  0=2e.{l-{-St\+3fL{2-{-St]+4gA\3-{-St]-{-hc.

When  i  =  0,  this  becomes 0  =  2e, or e  =  0. Substituting  this  in  [8733 J],  and  then

[87ooaJ ,. .  ,.  ,

dividing  by  t,  we  get,
[8733^  0  =  3f{2+St]i-4gt.{S+St\-\-hc.

„  Again,  using  t  =  0,  we  get  f=0.  Substituting  this  in  [8733/],  and  then  dividing  by
t,  we  get  0  =  4e-.^3-|-»S'^}-|-&c. ;  which  gives,  in  like  manner,  ^==0,  &c.  Hence  it
appears  that  all  the  coefficients  6,  c,  e,  /,  g,  he.  of  the  expression  of  u  [8733<Z],  vanish,
and  it  is  reduced  to  its  first  term,  being  the  same  as  that  given  by  the  author,  in  [8733].

*  (4009) The  direction  of  a  plumb  line  is  perpendicular  to  the surface  of  equilibrium,

[8736a] and  the  equation  of  this  surface  is  represented  by r  =  a-fy  [8717], a being  constant,

[8718] ;  so  that  in  proceeding  along  this  surface,  through  an  arc  of  the  meridian  dd,  the

[87366] increment  of  r will  be (-^ydd^zf^YdL Dividing  this  by  the  arc  d&,  we  find  that

X.  V.  ^  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  583

[8736']

the  falling  body  is  always  upon  the  parallels  of  the  points  of  the  vertical  ichich
are  at  the  same  height  as  the  body ;  so  that  it  does  not  suffer  any  sensible
deviation  to  the  south  of  that  line.

To  integrate  tlie  equation  [8732],  we  sliall  put,

aij.sin  J  = -^  .  f  T^^  +  azj' ;  [8737]

sin.d \d-si  /

and  we  shall  have,*

0  =  a.  — — -  +  O.S. 2aw.Sin.^.  —  .  [87381

dt^ ^  dt  dt  •■ ■"

The  body  deviates  to  the  east  of  the  radius  r  by  the  quantity aij.sinJ  [8737],

or •  (  "7^  )  +  ^v' ; hut  the  plumb  line  varies  to  the  east  of  this  radius [8739]

sin.^ \dvs  J

hy  the  quantity  f - — •(  7^  )  ,* ^v'  is  therefore  the  deviation  of  the  body  to [8740]

Sin.^ \dvsj  Deviation

the  eastward  of  the  vertical.  body  ^

the  east-
ward of
the  verti-
cal.

(  — )  represents the  tangent  of  the angle  which this  surface,  in  the direction  of  the

meridian,  forms  with  a  line  drawn  perpendicular  to r; or,  in  other  words,  the  tangent  of [8736c]
the  angle  formed  by  the  radius r and  the  vertical  line. Multiplying  this  by  the  whole
length  of  the  plumb  line cw, we  obtain  the  deviation  of  this  line  in  the  direction  of  the

meridian,  towards  the  equator  =a5.(—j  ; being  the same  as the expression of clm,

[8733,  8736].

[8736i]

*  (4010) Substituting  the  assumed  value  of a«.sin.^  [8737],  in  [8732],  we  get,

1 fdy\i dds , ^  ds  > , ddv' , „  dv' ^ • ^ ds  .„„„„

0  =  -^—  .( -r-  ).  ^  cL.  -—  +  a5. ^e-  f  +  0-.  -— ■  4-  a/S.  —  — San.sm.^.  —  :  [8738a]

sin.a Vrf^/ I di^ ^  dt ^  S  dt^  ^  dt  dt  *  ^  ^

and  as  the  coefficient  of  (-r-) vanishes by  using [8730], the equation  becomes as
in  [8738].

t  (4011) Instead  of  proceeding,  as  in  [8736a,  6],  through  the  arc  of  the  meridian  d&,
if  we  proceed  through  the  arc dts.s'mJ of  the  parallel  of  latitude,  the  increment  of  r  or  "^

y  will  be  represented  by ( —j.dvi  =  (—-]. dzs. Dividing  this,  as  in  [87366],  by  the [87406]

described  arc  or  base dvi.s'm.Q, we  obtain — — .(  — -  )  for  the  tangent  of  the  angle,  formed

'  sin.^  yd-sij  °  ° '

by  that  surface  and  the  perpendicular  to  r,  drawn  in  an  east  direction  ;  or,  in  other  words,

it  represents  the  tangent  of  the  angle  of  deviation  of  the  plumb  line  towards  the  east. [8740c  ]

Multiplying  this  by  the  length  of  the  vertical  line  as,  we  get  the  whole  deviation  of  this

684  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [M^c.  C61.

Resist-

^Srtionai ^^  shall  now  suppose  that  the  resistance  of  the  air  is  proportional  to  the
TJ^ie square  of  the  velocity*  so  that,

of  the

velocity.  rf«

[8740']  '^"^^'•^•rfi'

[8740"j  m  being  a  coefficient  depending  upon  the  figure  of  the  body  and  the  density
of  the  air.  This  density  varies  with  the  height,  but  may  in  the  present  case
be  supposed  constant,  without  any  sensible  error ;  we  shall  then  have,  as
in  [8741a],

[8741]  0  =  a/^^  +  a^,„.g_^.

To  integrate  this  equation  we  shall  put,

[8742]  a5  =  -.log.5';

m

and  we  shall  have,!

_. dds'  ,

[8743]  0  =  — —  m^5;

[8740i]

[8741a]

line,  equal  to -: \1]' Subtracting  this  from  the  whole  deviation  of  the  falling  body,

[8739],  we  find  that  the  deviation  of  the  falling  body  to  the  eastward  of  the  vertical  line
is  represented  by aw',  as  in  [8740].

*  (4012)  The  resistance  being  as  the  square  of  the  velocity,  the  function  [8705]  is
expressed  by  <p.  fas,  a--;^^)  ='^-(^*^)  >  hence  jS  [8707]  becomes  S  =  f^.m.~,  as  in
[8740']. Substituting  this  in  [8730],  it  changes  into  [8741].

t  (4013) The  first  and  second  differentials  of  [8742]  give,

[8743a]  tt.  —  = ;

■■  ■•  dt ms'.dt'

dds  dds'  ds!^

[8743a']  a.

dt^ tns'.dt^ ms'^.dt^

Substituting  these  in  [8741],  and  neglecting  the  terms  which  mutually  destroy  each  other,

we  get,

^ dds'  dds'  , _

187m  0=—--g, or —-mgs^O;

as  in  [8743].  This  linear  equation  of  the  second  order  in  s,  is  solved  in  the  usual
[8743c] manner,  by  putting /  =  Ad"' ; A,  b,  being  constant  quantities. For  by  substituting  this

assumed  value  of  s'  in  [8743],  and  dividing  by  the  common  factor  w3c*',  we  get
[8743rf]  b^ — mg  =  0;  whence  6  =  ±v/j^.  Supposing  A  to  correspond  to  the  positive  root
[8743e] &  =  +V^wJii and  taking  another  constant  quantity  B,  to  be  used  with  the  negative  root

X.  V.  <§.  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  585

which  gives  by  integration,

c  being  the  number  whose  hyperbolic  logarithm  is  unity  [8290'],  and  A,  B, [8744'1

two  arbitrary  constant  quantities. To  determine  them  we shall  observe,

that  we  have  5  =  0 when ^  =  0  [8735], and  then  we  also  have 5'  =  1, [8745]

[8742]. Substituting  these  values  in  [8744],  we  obtain,

A  +  B=^\.  [8746]

ds  ds'

Moreover a.  —  [8735],  must  vanish  when ^  =  0; therefore — [8743a] [8747]

Cvb  ai

must  also  vanish. Hence  we  obtain,

^  —  5  =  0;  [8748]

therefore  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8745A], _4  =  ^B  =  J  ; consequently,  [8749]

1  C  Wr,ig  —t.\/mg  )

-.log.|i.c  +i.c  j.

as  =  - .  log.  U-C  +hc  }.  18750]

m

Vertical
descent.

Developing  this  equation  in  a  series,  according  to  the  powers  of t, we
obtain,*

05  =  i-gf—  -rh-'^g''  ^'  +  TT-'^Y'^^  — ^c.  [8751]

b  = — ^mg, we  shall  obtain  the  two  terms  of  s'  [8744]  ;  which  can  be  added  together,

as  the  equation  is  linear ; and  then  the  sum  is  the  complete  integral,  since  it  has  two [8743/]

arbitrary  constant  quantities  A,  B. These  quantities  are  determined,  as  in  [8745,  he],

from  the  consideration  that  the  body  commences  its  motion  when  i  =  0. Then t  =  0

and  /=  1  [8745],  being  substituted  in  [8744],  give  [8746]; also  ^==0 and —  =0, [8743g-]

ds'
[8747],  being  substituted  in  —  [8744],  give  [8748]. The  half  sum,  and  the  half  difference

of  the  two  expressions [8746,  8748],  give A=^, B  =  ^; and  by  substitution in

[8744],  we  obtain /  =^.c  * '"°  ^-^.c""  ' '"°  ; hence  the  value  of  as  [8742]  becomes  as [8743/i]

in  [8750]. Finally,  if  we  multiply the  equation  [8743a]  by m,  we  find  that  its  first [8743i]

ds'  ^ , ds'

-rr  i or bs  =-r
s'dt '  dt

ds'  ds'

member  becomes  equal  to  S  [8740'] ;  hence  we  have S  =  —r, or Ss'  =  —; which [8743i]

will  be  used  hereafter.

*  (4014) We  shall  use  for  a  moment  the  symbols,

z=2t. /^,  x  =  ^.z^-{-^.z^-{-  y^x7- 2®  +  &c.  ;  [8751a]

then  developing  the  quantities  in  the  first  members  of  [87516,  c], by  means  of  [55, 56]
Int.,  we  get  for  their  sum  the  expression  [8751  d].

VOL.  IV.  147

586  ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  [Mec.  Cel.

To  determine  av',  we  shall  observe  that  we  have,

[8752]  a.  ^  =  -  .  ^ [8743al  ;

dt m s'dt L  -^  '

therefore  the  differential  equation  in cu^  [8738],  becomes,*
, ddv' , ds dv' 2n ds' .

Hence  we  get,  by  integration,

,  dv' ^^ t ' ,  ^ ri
ro-y^^i  a5 .  — -  =  —  'S\  sm.5  +  C  ;

[8754]  dt  m  ' '

C  being  a  constant  quantity. To  determine  it,  we  shall  observe  that  when

[8755]  dv'

^  =  0, we  havef -3-  =  0  ; and  then s'  =  \. Hence  we  obtain,
at

2n
[8756]  C  = .  sin.^  ;

[87516]  ^/^^  =  J.c*  =.\.{\-\-z-\-hz^+h^^^''^-\-^^'\  ;

[8751c]  ^.c-*-^^  =  i.c-^  =  ^.{  l-^+i.z^-i.z^+^V^'-S^c.!  ;

[8751rf]  i.c'-^^  .f|.c-''^^=l+J.z2  +  2.V.;2^+&tc.  =  l+:c.

Substituting  this  last  expression  in [8750],  then  developing  by [58]  Int.  and  making
successive  reductions,  we  finally  get  the  value  of  cw  [8751^], as  in  [8751]  ;

[8751c]  ^:=-.\ozn-[-x)=^-.\x—hx''-rh^—^o-\

[8751/-]  =  :^ .{  a.^2+2V.^^+ri;x-^'+&^cO-|.(|.^^+5V.^'+&^cO^+i.a.;2^+&c.)3-&c.  j

[8751ff]  =  i.  J^.;j2_^i^.^4^^i_  ^_&,c.S  =  hgt^—i\mf.t^^i^.mY't^—hc.

*  (4015) Multiplying  [8738]  by  /,  we  get,

^  ,  ddv' . c^  I  dv' _ ,  ds . ,

[8753a]  0  =  a«'.  —  +  a.Ss'.  —  —  S/t.os'.  —  .sin.d.

Substituting  in  the  second  term  the  value  of  Ss'  [8743fc],  and  in  the  third  term  the  value

[87536] of  a.^  [8752],  it  becomes  as  in  [8753]. The  integral  of  [8753] is  as  in [8754];  as

we  may  easily  prove  by  differentration,  after  transposing  the  last  term.

t  (4016) As  the  body  begins  to  fall  from  a  state  of  rest,  we  shall  have,  when  ^  =  0,

[8756o] s  =  0, v  =  0, T-=0, T^==0,  &c.,  as  in  [8735,  Stc.]. Substituting  these  in  the

dv'
[87566] differential  of  [8737],  we  get,  at  the  same  time, —  =  0. This  value  and  that  of  s'=  1,

X.  v.§  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  587

therefore,

0-.  -r  =  — .Sin. 5. 1 7  1  =  — .sin.^.  <  1 —  /  / — _/  / —  >  .

dt  m  \ s' J m  I  ^t-^rng_^-t.ymg^

Again  integrating  and  taking  the  arbitrary  constant  quantity,  so  that  v'  may

vanish  when ^  =  0, we  shall  have,*

[8757]
[8758]

[8756c]

2n
[8745],  being  substituted  in  [8754],  we  get 0  =  —  .sin.^-j-C,  as  in  [8756]. Substituting

this  value  of  C  in  [8754],  then dividing  by s', we  get  the  first  expression  in  [8757]  ;
and  by  using  the  value  of  /  [8743A],  we  obtain  the  second  of  the  expressions  [8757].

*  (4017) Multiplying  the  last  form  of  [8757]  by  dt,  and  integrating,  we  get,

aw  =  —  .  t.sm.o  — y=:  .  / *i — 2 .

m  mymgj t.y/mg , —t.yn^  [8759a]

c  -f-  c

In  finding  the  integral  of  the  term  in  the  second  member,  under  the  sign  /,  we  shall  use

for  brevity  the  symbols,

T  =  - _"~^ ^  =  ^ =—  ;  [87596]

F  =  arc. (tang.  T)  ;  [8759c ]

[8759<f|

the  second  form  of T  being  deduced from  the  first,  by  multiplying  the  numerator  and
denominator  by c ' '"^. From  this  last  form  of  T  we  easily  get,

l+TT=5l^f ±}1, and dT  =  HV»»l^5:E__ ;

whence,

dT __  j/^^.dt.c*'"^"^"  __  \/^g.dt

i-\-TT  ''it.s/l^g  ~ WlTg . —WllTg'  [8759e]

C  ~j-  1  C  ~]—  c

dT
Now the differential of r=arc.(tang.T) [8759c], is </r=  [51]  Int.;

substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  the  preceding  equation,  and  again  integrating,  we

get V=  I  — — Ji  "^^' — ; hence  the  equation  [8759a]  changes  into,

%/ t.^mg , — I'sJ  mg

C  -\-c

, 2n  4n.sin.4 ^r  \w1K(^f^

m  tn.ymg

and  by  putting  instead  of F,  its  value  [8759c],  it  becomes  as  in  [8759],  using  for  T  the [8759g]
first  expression  [87596]. It  is  not  necessary  to  add  any  constant  quantity  to  the  integral
[8759],  because  it  makes  ai>'  vanish  when  t  =  0,  as  in  [8756a,  8737].  '■ ■'

588

ON  THE  DESCENT  OF  BODIES

[M^c.Ca

Deviation
on  the
parallel  of
latitude.

[8759]

[8760]

1  y/mg

, 2n . 4n.sm.6  ^ )  c

a»'  =s  — .  t,  sm.^ —  .  ansf.  tanff.<  -  ,  .

m

and  by  reducing  to  a  series,*

+  c

at>

ngi^.s'mJ

.  ^  l^img.t'+^^i^.mY't'-^o.  I .

[8760a]
[87606 ]

[87606']
[8760c]

[8760rf]
[8760c]

[8760/]
[87605"]
[8760^1]
[8760t]
[8760A;]
[8760i ]

[8760m]

*  (4018) Putting it.\/^  =  b.\/-i, we  get,  from  [11,  12]  Int.,

h^'w  tng  — ht's/ mg

C

hW^

— h*'y/mg

b.y/—i  —h.^—i  . ,

c  — c  =  2.^_i.sin.6 ;

6.v/^  , — fc-v/m  ,

c  -f~  ^  =  2.C0S.0.

Dividing  the  first  of  tliese  expressions  by  the  second,  we  obtain.

hW-.

■iW;

hW,

+  c

■iW,

, sin.6  , ,

=  v/— 1 .  — 7  ==  \/-i.tang.6.
^  C0S.6 ^  °

Substituting,  in  the  first  member  of  this  expression,  its  value  T  [87595],  and  developing
tang. 6  in  its  last  member  by  means  of  [45]  Int.,  we  obtain  the  expression  of  T  [8760/] ;
we  have  also,  from  [8759c,  48  Int.],

F'=arc.(tang.T)  =  T—\  T^+iT^— jT^+fec.

Now  by  neglecting  the  powers  of  h  which  exceed  the  seventh,  we  get,  from  [8760/*],  the
other  terms  of  this  value  of  F, as  in  [8760/,  ^,  h\  ; their  sum  gives  V  [8760^,  T\.

v/-

F=6.v/-

1  T7

•1 +T\^'+m&'+&c.

Now  from  [8760a]  we  have  h.\/~i=^t.\/mg,  and  h^:^ — i^^-^g  j  substituting
these  in  V  [8760/],  and  then  inserting  the  resulting  value  in  the  expression  of  a©',
[8759/],  we  get,

2w  4m  sin  A

[8760n] =

m

2n.sin.^
m

m.y/mg

■t''{Hi^g)-i-{img)M^  +  m'Umgf.t'-hc,];

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8760].

X.  V.  <§>  15.]  FALLING  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT.  589

The  symbols  which  are  used  in  the  expressions  of  a.?,  a,v'  [8751,  8760,  8766],

are  collected  in  the  following  table  ;  symbols.

t  =  the  number  of  centesimal  seconds  of  time  from  the  commencement  of rsyei]

the  fall  of  the  body  [8728]  ;
g  =  double  the  space  which  a  falling  body  describes  in  the  first  second  of [8761']

time,  by  the  force  of  gravity  [8723]  ;
nt=  the  angle  of  rotation  of  the  earth,  during t  centesimal  seconds  of [8762]
time  [8728]  ;
mg  =  a  number  depending  on  the  resistance  which  the  air  produces  in  the [8762']
motion  of  the  body  [8740']  ;
h  =  the  height  fallen  through  in  the  time  t.  [8763]

To  obtain  the  time t of  the  fall  of  the  body,  and  its  deviation  towards roy^^o/i
the  east,  in  terms  of  the  height  fallen  through  h,  we  have  from  [8750],*

2c'"*  =  c'*^"^-fC~'*^^.  .  [6764]

Hence  we  deduce.  Time  of

descent.

t=  — -.log.J.[^c"'*+l  +v/c'"*— IjS*  [8765]

and  then,t

*  (4019) Substituting cu  =  A  [8763,  8694],  in  the  first  member  of  [8750],  then
multiplying  by  m,  and  by log.c=l, we  get,

mA.log.c  =  log.c-'^=log.i.^*-^^+c"'-^^S, or c-*  =  J.^'"^"  +  c"''^, ^87646]

as  in  [8764]. IV
product,  we  get,

as  in  [8764]. Multiplying  [8764]  by _c''^™°, and  adding c^^''^'"""  +  c2"«a to the

The  square  root  of  [8764c]  is  c '"°-c »"* = /c2'"*-l; whence  c "^  =  c *"* + v/c^"**-!. [8764rf]
The  second  member  of  this  last  expression  is  equal  to ^.\\/c'^''-\-l  +  y/C"* — 1\^,  as  is
easily  proved  by  developing  and  reducing ; hence  we  have,

c'-^^  =  i.{v/"^^^l  +  v/^^5^^r=i  p.  [8764e]

Taking  the  logarithms  of  both  sides  of  this  equation,  and  dividing  by  \/tng,  we  get  t  [8765].

t  (4020) Adding  ±2  to  both  members  of  [8764],  and extracting  the  square  root, iqjqq  ^
we  get,

voL»  IV.  148

590  DESCENT  OF  BODIES  FROM  A  GREAT  HEIGHT. [Mec.  Cel.

[8766]

at?  =

The  height  h  being  given,  and  the  time  t  determined  by  observation,  we
may,  from  [8765],  deduce  the  value  of  m.  Then  from-  [8766]  we  can
ascertain  the  value  of  a.v',  or  the  deviation  of  the  body  to  the  east  of  the
vertical.  We  can  also  determine  m,  by  the  figure  and  density  of  the  body,
with  the  experiments  already  made  on  the  resistance  of  the  air.

[8768] In  a  vacuum,  or,  in  other  words,  when  m  [8740"]  is  infinitely  small,  we
shall  have,*

[8769]  aij'  =  -— ■  .  \  /  -  .  smJ.

S V g

There  have  been  made,  in  Italy  and  Germany,  several  experiments  upon

[8769] the  fall  of bodies,  which  agree  with the  preceding  results. But  these

experiments,  which  require  very  great  care,  ought  to  be  repeated  with  still

greater  accuracy.

[8766a'] v/2.v/^^^n^  ^^hWu,  _^  ^  -hWm,  ^  ^2.^^inc::r  =  c  ^^'^"^  -  ^-hW^g^

Dividing  the  second  of  these  formulas  by  the  first,  we  obtain,

[8766&]

c

[8768a]

c  -\-C  "I

Substituting  this  in  the  last  terra  of  [8759],  and  the  value  of  i  [8765]  in  the  first  term  of
its  second  member,  we  get  [8766J.

*  (4021) We  have,  by  developing  as  in  [55,  56]  Int.,

substituting  these  in  [8764],  and  rejecting  2  fi-om  each  member  of  the  equation,  we  get

2mh-}-hc.  =  t^.mg-{-hc. Dividing  by m,  we  get 2A  =  <2^  +  ^^rms  multiplied  by  7».
[87686]  y-oT  . .

Now  putting m  =  0, we  shall  have 2h=:t^g, or t=\X _; substitutmg  this  in

[8760],  after  putting m  =  0, we  get  the  expression  of,

[8768c ]  aw'  =  i ngA  sin.^  =  ~  .  \/  -  .  sin.d,

as  in  [8769].

X.v.'^^ie.] ON  THE  MOTION  OF  A  BODY  PROJECTED  UPWARDS.  591

Case

16. We  shall  noiv  consider  the  case  in  ivhich  the  body  has  a  projectile  ^^d'V^^

motion  in  space;  and  we  shall  resume  the  equations  [8724,  &c.],  supposing,  C^^'O]

,  , .  projected

/  "V  \ I /  upwards.

"■"  =  '^\m)  +  """  '  [8771]

a..sin.«  =  £i.(|)  +  a„' [8737];  [8772]

50  that  a-u'  and  au'  will  he  the  deviations  of  the  body,  from  the  vertical  line
passing  through  the  point  ivhere  the  motion  commences.  The  deviation  o^u'
being  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian ;  and  the  deviation  a^v'  being  in  the
direction  of  the  parallel  of  latitude.* Then  neglecting  the  resistance  of  the

air,  we  find  that  the  equations  [8724 — 8724"]  will  become  of  the  following  [8773']

forms ;  f  ^^1

differen-

Fun  da-
mental
differen-
tial eqaa-

^  dds , _ . dv' ^ ds /'dy\  tions.

_  dds f  dy\ , ddvl ^ cos.d ds /dy\ _  di/  /diA

0  =  a.  -—  . -f-  )  -f  a.  — -  _2aw.  -T— -.  v  •(  /  )— 2aw.cos.^.  —  —g.(  -/  ]  ; [87751
dl^ \dd  J ^ dt^  sin.d dt \dvij  dt °  \dsj'  ■'

a dds /du\ , ddv'  ,  ^  ds /dy\ , _,  du'

0  =  -r— .Ti.~)+cL.  -—  +2«.W.C0S.^.  T-  (  -77  )  +2an.cos.^.  —

sm.6 dt^ \dTsJ ' dt^  dt \d6 J '  dt

2<x.n.sm.&.  4 ~  .  ( ^

Multiplying  [8774]  by  — (  "tt  ) » and  adding  the  product  to  [8775],  we  get

[8776]

dt sin.d  '  \dvi

dy_
dd  ^

Ino- frnm  thft  nrndiipt  nf ci.n. , ^,,.

dt  '  dt

-J-j  or  (j-)' In  like  manner,  multiplying  [8774]  by ^•(^)» ^"^ [8777]

adding  the  product  to  [8776],  we  get  [8779],  neglecting  terms  arising  from

[8778],  neglecting  terms  arising  from  the  product  of aw.  j  , aw.  —  , by

[8773a]

fr:

*  (4022) The  deviation,  in  the  direction  of  the  parallel  of  latitude,  is  au'  [8740,8739]  ;

and  it  is  shown,  in  [8736,  8736'],  that  if  aw  =  as.fj-j , the  deviation  of  the  body  from

the  parallel  of  latitude,  or  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian,  v?ill  vanish. The  difference
between  this  and  the  real  value  of  azt  [8771],  is  aw',  which  represents  the  actual  deviation 1.87736]
in  the  direction  of  the  meridian,  as  in  [8773].

t  (4023) Neglecting  the  resistance  of  the  air,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8705,  8707],
S=:0. Substituting  this  value  of  S,  and  those  of  aw,  av  [8771,  8772],  we  find  that  the [8774a]
equations  [8724,  8724',  8724"]  become  respectively  as  in  [8774,  8775,  8776].

592  ON  THE  MOTION  OF  A  BODY  [Mec.  Cel.

the  products of an.|, an.  J, by (|) or (g). Finally,  by

Approxi
mate

Ta'ptT neglecting  similar  terms  in  [8774],  it  changes  into  [8780].

jectile.

[8778]  0  ==  a.  ^  — 2ayi.cos.^.  ^  ;

dt^  dt  '

[8779]  0  =  a.  ^'  +  2a7i.cos.^.  ^-f  — 2aw.sin.^.  ^ ;

dt^  dt  dt'

[8780]  0  =  a.  ^  +  2aw.  sin.^.  ^  -g.

dt^ ^  dt ^

Now  integrating  these  equations,  and  fixing  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates
[8781] a5,  aw',  at?',  at  the  point  where  the  motion  commences,  and  the  origin  of  the
time  t  at  the  commencement  of  the  motion,  we  shall  have,*

*  (4024) If  we  take  the  diiFerential  of  [8779],  and  substitute  in  it  the  values  of
idu'  dds

a.-—  , a.—  , deduced  from  [8778,  8780],  we  get,  after  dividing  by  dt,

[8781a]  0=  a.  ^'  -f  4a7i2.(cos.24-f  sin.^d).  -^  — S^n.sinA

Substituting cos.^^-{-sin.^^=  1, multiplying  by  dt, integrating  and  adding  the  constant
quantity — 4C'n^, we  obtain,

[8781&]  0  ==  a.  -I  4- 4a.n^.v'—2gnt.s\n.6—4C'n^.

This  linear  equation  of  the  second  degree,  is  the same as that  which  is  solved  in
[8781c] [865a,  Sic],  putting y  =  a.v', a=2n, a.Q^  =  —2gnt.sm.6—4Cn^, b=C, (p=s,

in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation  ;  and  the  integrations  being  performed  in  the

manner  pointed  out  in  [8656],  we  get,  by  reduction,
[8781rf]  av'  =  -— C.sin.(2n^+s)  +  ^^^  .  f  +  C'.

Without  going  through  the  labor  of  these  reductions,  we  may  more  easily  verify  this  value

of  au',  by  substituting  it  in  the  differential  equation [87816],  which  will  vanish  by  this

[8781e] substitution. This  value  of  at>'  contains  the  three  arbitrary  constant  quantities C, C,  s,

but  C,  C,  depend  on  each  other. For  av'  vanishes  when ^  =  0  [8781],  and  then  the

value  of au'  [8781^] becomes 0  =  —  C.sin.s  +  C, or C'  =  C.sin.£. Substituting
[8781/]

this  in  au'  [8781<Z],  it  becomes  as  in  [8783],  with  the  two  arbitrary  constant  quantities

C,  e,  which  are  required  for  the  complete  integral. IVIultiplying  [8778]  by  dt,  integrating,

[8781/']  adding  the  constant  quantity B.s'm.d — SCn.cos.^.sin.s, and  using a.v'  [8783],  we get

successively.

X.  V.  ^  16.]  PROJECTED  VERTICALLY.  593

Devia-
tions,

[8782]

olm'  =  Bt.smJ-{-  Igt^.smJ.cosJ -{- C.cosJ.lcos.(2nt-\- s) — cos.s}  ;

ci-i?'  = "^ '  .t — C.{sm.(2nt-{-  s)— sin.s}  ;  [8783]

a5  =  BUosJ  +  ^gt\cos.^&—C.sinJ.{cos.(2nt-^s)—cos.s],  [8784]

J5,  C,  £, being  three  arbitrary  quantities, which  depend on the initial
velocity  of  the  body  in  the  direction  of  the  three  co-ordinates.

Suppose^  for  example,  that  the  body  is  projected  vertically  upwards,  with  a
velocity equal to K. The positive values of s being  here  counted \.^^^^'\

ds
downwards,  we  shall  have,  at  the  origin  of  the  time  t,* a.  —  =  — K. We [8787]

[8785]

Vertical
projec-

[8781/1]

du'
a.—-  =2n.cosJ.(iv'4-B.sm.6 — 2Cn.cos.6.sin.s  [8781g-]

at

=  2n.cos.5.  }  ^' '  .t — C.sin.{2ni-{-s)-{-C.sm.s  ^  -\-B.smJ—2Cn.cos.6.s\n.s

=  ^.sin.^  4~^^-s'n'^«cos.4 — 2Cn.co5.6.sin.{2nt-\-s).

IVIultiplying  this  last  expression  by  dt,  and  integrating,  we  get  aw'  [8782] ;  the  constant
quantity — C.cos.lcos.s  being  added,  so  as  to  make  aw'  vanish  when  i=0,  as  in  [8781].

The  second  differential  of  [8783],  divided  by  dt^,  gives a.  —  =4Cn^.sin.(2n<+ s) ; [878H]

substituting  this  in  [8779],  and  then  dividing  by  27i,  we  get  [8781/]. Substituting  in  its
second  member  the  expression [8781A], connecting the terras  multiplied  by C, and
reducing  by  putting 1 — cos.^^  =  sin.^4, we  get  [8781w]. Dividing  this  by sin.^, we
obtain  [8781o], whose  integral  gives  as  [8784];  the  constant  quantity -{-^'Sin.^.cos.s •■ ■'
being  added  to  the  integral,  so  as  to  make  as  vanish  when  <s=sO,  as  in  [8781].

a.sin.^.  ^  =2Cn.sin.(2n^  +  £)+a.cos.^.  ^  [8^8"]

==2Cn.sm.{2nt-\-s)-{-cos.L\B.sinJ-{'gt.sin.LcosJ — 2Cn.cos.^.sin.(2n^-|-£)| [8781m]

=  2Cn.smJ^6.sin.{2nt-]-s)-\-B.sinJ.cos.6-}-gt.sinJ.cos.^6 ;  [878]»]

ds
a.  —  z=2Cn.sm.6.s\n.(2ni-\-s)-\-B.cos.6-\-gt.cos.^6.  [8781o]

*  (4025)  If  the  body  be  projected  upwards,  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  r,  or  r — as,
with  the  velocity  K,  it  will  pass  over  the  space  — arfs  =  Kdt,  in  the  first  moment  of
time dt, as  in [8787], without altering  the values  of aw' or av'; so  that  at  the

du  dv

commencement  of  the  motion  we  shall  have —  =  0 ; —  =  0, as  in [8787']. Now

dt  dt  [87876]

taking  the  differentials  of  aw',  au',  as  [8782,  8783,  8784],  dividing  them  by  dt,  and
then  substituting  <  =  0,  and  the  values  [8787,  8787'],  we  obtain  the  equations
[8788,  8789,  8790]  respectively.

VOL.  IV.  149

594  ON  THE  MOTION  OF  A  BODY  [Mec.  Gel.

dii  dr/

[8787'] shall  also  have  at  that  origin, — -  =  0  ; —  =  0 ; therefore,

[8788]

0  =  ij.sin.fl — zCw.cos.^.sin.s;

[8789]

0  =  ;^.sinJ— 2Cw.cos.£;
2n

[8790]

Hence  we  deduce,*

— K=  B.C0S.6  +2Cn.sin.(5.sin.s.

[8791]

^ . K.sm.6
C.sm..= ^^ ;

[8792]
[8793]

B  =  — JT.cosJ.

Devia- which  give,!

tions  with  "

a  vertical  ^ Jf^  p.  %

[8794] aw'  ==  —sin.^.cos.^.  }  --  .(2nt—sm.2nt)  +  ^  .{l—2n^t^-^cos,2nt)  i ;

projec-  ^  J

tion.

[8795]  ^v'  ==  ^-^ .  ^  -^.(2nt—sin.2nt)—K.(l—cos.2nt)  \  ;

[8796] a5  =  ^Kt+igf-\-  ^^^ .  { l^2nH''—cos.2nt]  +  ^^^ .  (2nt^sm,2nt).

*  (4026) Dividing  [8789]  by 2n, we  get  [8792]. IVIultiplying  [8788]  by sin  J,

and  [8790]  by cos.^, then  adding  the  two  productsj  we  get,
[8791a]  — Z.cos.^  =  B.{sm,^6  +^03.^^}  =:  B,

as  in  [8793]. Substituting  this  value  of  B  in  [8788],  we  get,
[879161  ^  "^ — ir.sin.^.cos.5 — 2Cw.cos.^.sin.s.

Dividing  this  by — 2?i.cos.5, we  obtain  [8791].

t  (4027) Substituting,
sm.{2nt-\-s)  =  sin.27i^cos.s-f  cos.2n^.sin.s ; cos.(2»^4~^)  ^^  cos.2n^cos.s — sin.2n^.sin.s,
[22,  24]  Int.,  in  [8782,  8783,  8784],  together  with  the  values  [8791—8793],  we  obtain,

/ Tr . - -  ■  1 o . « .1 . ^  e-.sin.^ _, , X'.sin.^ . _ ^ fi-.sin.^ )
[8794a] OLti'  =  — X^.sin.^.cos.d+i^r.sni.^.cos.d-fcos.5.  <  .cos.2wH 5 — •sin.2n^ — ^"i"  C  '*

[87946  ] av'  =  ^— —  .  <  +  ^  —  ^—:r  •  sm.2nt  +  — — . cos.2n< —  [  ;

2n  ' ( 4n^  ' 2n  2n )

[8794c] cw  =  —Kt.cos.^6-{-igt^.cos.^6-\-sin.6.  j  —  ^^^  .cos.2n^ '^'^^^'^^^"^^^^  \  '

By  a  different  arrangement  of  the  terms,  we  may  change [8794a]  into  [8794]  ;  [87946]
[8794rf]  into  [8795] ;  and  [8794c]  into  [8796]  ;  observing  that  in  [8794c]  we  must  change cos.^d
into  1 — sin.^i).

X.  V.  §  16.]  PROJECTED  VERTICALLY.  595

Reducing  these  expressions  to  series,  and  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order rg^ggq

n^  we  obtain,*

aw'  ==  0 ;  [8797]

av'  =  ^ntK(gt^3ir).sin.d ;  [8798]

a5 =—Kt-\-igt\  [8799]

These  expressions  show  that  the  deviation  of  the  body,  in  the  direction  of  the

meridian aw', is  very  small; and  that  it  is  only  sensible  in  the  direction

of  the  parallel  of  latitude a^v'. If  we  suppose ^=0,  in  [8798],  we  shall

have  the  same  expression  of  the  deviation  as  in [8768c]. If  we  suppose

K  to  be  given,  and  we  wish  to  find  the  point  where  the  body  will  strike  the t^^^^]

earth,  we  must  put as  =  0, whence  we  get gt  =  2K;  consequently, f  [8801']

, 4n.^^.sin.^
^^  = 3^ •  [8802]

To  reduce  this  formula  to  numbers,  we  shall  observe  that  n  is  the  angle ""^^"j^

[6800]

•arallel  of
atitude.

described  by  the  rotation  of  the  earth  in  a  centesimal  second  of  time  [8727'],

40"
and  this  anele  is  equal  to -r-z-——, ; because  the  duration  of  the  sideral  day [8803]
°  ^  0,99727  -^

is  99727" ; we  must  reduce  it  to  parts  of  the  radius,  or,  in  other  words,

divide  it  by  the  radius  in  seconds  636620". g  is  double  the space  which [8804]

gravity  causes  a  heavy  body  to  describe  in  the  first  centesimal  second  of  its

*  (4028) We  have,  by  developing  as  in  [43,  44]  Int.,

sin .2ni  =  2«<— | n^ 1 3  +&c. ;  cos.2n^  =  l—2n^ t^-{-^nU ^—hc. ;  [8796a]

hence  we  deduce,  ^

-1 .  i2ni—sm.2nt\  =  %n^t^^kc. ; -^.n—2Tv^t^^cos.2nt)  ==  ^^n^t^-i-hc. ;  [87966]

SO  that  if  we  neglect  terras  of  the  order  n^,  as  in  [8796'],  we  shall  find  that  both
expressions  in  [8796i]  will  vanish  ;  and  then  the  equations  [8794,  8796]  will  become
as  in  [8797,  8799]  respectively; moreover  [8795]  changes  into  [8798].

t  (4029) Putting as  =  0  in [8799],  we  get gt  ==  2K; substituting  this  in  [8798]

we  obtain a.v'=—-^nt^.K.s'm.6;  and  by  using  i=  —  [8801'],  it  becomes  as  in  [8802]. [8802a]

Now  the  earth,  by  its  diurnal  motion,  describes  4000000"  in  one  sideral  day  of  99727"  of
the  centesimal  division ; hence the  arc n, corresponding to one  second  [8727'],  is

40"  40"

0//^99727  ' ^^ ^"=0^^,99727x636620' i"  parts  of  the  radius. Substituting  this  in  [8802], [88026]

together  with  the  values  of  g,  K,  6  [8804 — 8308],  we  get  the  expression  of  au'  [8807], j-gg^g  ,
or  by  reduction  as  in  [8808].

596  ON  THE  MOTION  OF  A  BODY  PROJECTED  VERTICALLY. [M6c.  C61.

fall  [8761']  ;  and  this  space,  in  the  latitude  of  Paris,  is  equal  to  T^^^'%32214i,
[8805] If  we  suppose,  for  an  example, that  the  velocity K  is 500  metres  per

second,  we  shall  have  for  Paris,  whose  latitude  is  54° ,2636,  d  equal  to  the
[8806] complement  of  this  latitude,  or 6  =  45^,7364. Hence  we  get,

[8807]  (x.v'  =  — 4..500'"'*'''.  ( ) .  .  sm.45°,7364 :

^  \  7- ,32214  y 0,99727X636620" "*^"''' '

whence  we  deduce,

[8808]  ^v'  =  — 128"'''^*S9.

Deviation  TMs  exprcsscs  the  distance  of  the  place,  where  the  body  falls  upon  the  earth,
piSectL.  ^0  ^^^  ^^^^  of  ^he  place  of  projection.  For  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  earth,
being  from  the  west  towards  the  east,  the  negative  values  of  ^v'  are  to  be
taken  in  the  opposite  direction,  or  from  the  east  towards  the  west.

[8809]

X.  vi.  <^  17.]  MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES.  597

CHAPTER  VI.

ON  SOME  CASES WHERE  WE  CAN  RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAIN  THE MOTIONS OF SEVERAL BODIES WHICH

MUTUALLY  ATTRACT  EACH OTHER.

17.  The  problem  of  the  motions  of  two  bodies,  mutually  attracting
each  other,  can  be  accurately  solved,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  second  book,
[531 — 534]  ;  but  when  the  system  is  composed  of  three  or  a  greater
number  of  bodies,  the  problem,  in  the  present  state  of  analysis,  can  be
solved  only  by  approximation.  The  following  cases  are  however  susceptible
of  a  rigorous  solution.

If  we  suppose  the  different  bodies  to  be  situated  in  the  same  plane,  so  that
the  resultant  of  the  forces,  acting  upon  each  one  of  them,  may  pass  through
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  and  that  the  different  resultants  may  be theorem
proportional  to  the  respective  distances  of  the  bodies  from  this  centre,  then  it [881 1]
is  evident  that  ifive  impress  upon  the  system  an  angular  rotatory  motion  about
its  centre  of  gravity,  so  that  the  centrifugal  force  of  each  body  may  be  equal
to  the  force  ivhich  attracts  it  towards  that  centre,*  all  the  bodies  will  continue [88ir]
to  move  in  circles  about  that  point,  retaining,  in  relation  to  each  other,  the
same  relative  positions,  so  that  they  will  appear  to  describe circles about
each  other.

[8810]

[881 0'l

First

[8812]

*  (4030)  If  we  suppose  all  the  bodies  to  have  the  same  angular  rotatory  motion  about  j-gg-,  .
the  common  centre  of  gravity,  the  centrifugal  force  of  any  one  of  them  will  be  proportional
to  its  distance  from  that  centre,  as  in  [54']  ;  and  by  hypothesis  [8810',  &c.]  the  whole
action  of  the  bodies,  upon  any  one  of  them,  is  reduced  to  a  simple  attraction  towards  the
centre  of  gravity,  with  a  force  which  is  also  proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  body  from
that  centre.  Now  as  both  these  forces  are  proportional  to  the  distance  from  the  centre  of
gravity,  it  is  evident  that  we  can  adjust  the  rotatory  motion,  so  that  they  may  exactly  pgg..  .
balance  each  other,  as  in  [8811'].

VOL. IV.  150

theorem

[8814J

[8814"]

MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES  [Mec.  Cel.

The  bodies  being  in  the  preceding  position,  if  we  suppose  that  the  polygon,

[8813] at  ivhose  angles  the  bodies  may  be  imagined  to  be  placed,  varies  in  any

Second manner,  but  always  retaining  a  similar  figure,  it  is  evident  that  the  laiv  of

attraction,  being  supposed  to  be  proportional  to  any  power  whatever  of  the

distance,  the  resultants  of  the  forces  which  act  upon  the  bodies  will  be  to  each

[8814] other,  at  all  times,  as  the  distances  of  the  bodies  from  the  centre  of  gravity

of  the  system.* This  being  premised, we  shall  now  suppose that  all  the

bodies,  when  in  a  state  of  rest,  are  innpressed  at  the  same  instant  with

velocities  proportional  to  their  distances  from  this  centre,  and  in  directions

equally  inclined  to  the  radii  drawn  from  this  point  to  each  of  the  bodies ;

*  (4031) For  the  purpose  of  illustrallon.  we  shall  suppose  the  attraction  of  the  bodies

r8fti4  1  "P°"  G^c\i  other  to  be  as  the  power  n  of  the  distance;  so  that  if,  at  the  commencement
of  the  time  t,  we  represent  the  distances  of  the  bodies  w',  m",  &;c.  from  m,  by s,  s',  &c.,

[88146] the  action  of  the  bodies  m',  m",  &,c.  upon  m,  will  be  expressed  by w'.s", tw^.s'",  &c.,

[8814c]  in  the  direction  of  the  lines  s,  s',  Stc.  respectively.  IMoreover  if  we  represent  by  r,  r',  f,
&;c.  the  radii,  drawn  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  to  the  bodies  w,  m',  m",  he.
respectively, we shall have, according to the hypothesis assumed in [8814,  Stc],

[8814rf]  Kr,  Kr',  Kr",  &;c.  for  the  resultants  of  all  the  forces  of  attraction  acting  upon  these  bodies
respectively  ; K  being  of  the  same  magnitude  for  all  the  bodies  at  any  one moment

[8814e]  of  time  whatever.  In  the  hypothesis  [8811,  8812],  where  the  polygon  does  not  vary,  the
value  of  K  is  also,  at  all  times,  invariable ;  but  when  the  polygon  varies  in  magnitude,
but  not  in  its  figure,  as  in  [8813,  Stc],  the  value  of  K  may  also  vary  in  successive
moments  of  time,  but  at  any  particular  instant  it  must,  by  hypothesis,  have  the  same  value
for  all  the  bodies  m,  w',  w".  Sec.  Now  if  we  suppose  the  figure  of  the  polygon  to  vary  as
in  [8813],  so  that  every  linear  measure  s,  s',  s",  &tc.,  r,  r',  r",  &;c.,  corresponding  to
the  time  ^  =  0,  may  be  increased  in  the  ratio  of  a  to  1  ;  and  we  then  represent  the  new
values,  corresponding  to  the  time  t,  by  the  Italic  letters  s,  s',  s",  Stc,  r,  r',  r" ,  &c.
respectively ;  we  shall  have,

[8814^]  s  =  as, /=as', /^ffs",  &tc. ;  r=«r, '/  =  ax' r^' =  av'\  &c.

In  this  case  the  action  of  the  bodies  m',  ml' ,  hjc.  upon  m  [88146],  will  be  changed  into
m'.s%  m"./'*,  &c. ;  or  into  the  equivalent  values  m'.a^.s",  m".a".  s'",  &,c. ;  each  of  them
having  increased  from  its  original  value  [88146]  in  the  ratio  of  a"  to  1 ;  and  as  the
resultants  [8814c?]  must  also  increase  in  the  same  ratio,  they  will  become  Ka^-r,
Ka~.r', Ka".r",  Sec.  respectively  ;  so  that  if  we  put  for  symmetry K=.  Ka"~^, and  use

[8814Z]  the  values  of  r,  /,  r",  Sic.  [8814A],  these  resultants  will  become  Kr,  Z/,  Kr" ,  &c.
respectively  ; or, in  other  words, they  will  be  prop-rtional to  the  augmented  or  new

[8814m]  distances  r,  r',  r" ,  Stc.  of  the  bodies  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system ;  it  being
evident  that the position  of  this  centre  does  not  vary  in  consequence  of  these  changes.

'- "^ These  results  are  in  conformity  with  the  remarks  of  the  author  in  [8814',  &;c.].

[8814/]
[8814^]

X.  vi.  <§.  17.]

RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAINED.

599

then  the  polygons,  formed  at  each  moment  by  the  right  lines  which  connect
these  bodies,  will  be  similar ;  the  bodies  will  describe  similar  curves,*  both
about  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  and  about  each  other,  and  these
curves  will  be  of  the  same  nature  as  that  which  a  body  attracted  towards  a
fixed  point  would  describe.

To  apply  these  theorems  to  an  example,  we  shall  consider  three  bodies,
whose masses  are m,  m',  m",  which  attract  each  other,  according  to  the

[8815]

[3815']

[8816]

"^  (4032)  The  velocity  of  projection  of  any  one  of  the  bodies,  as  for  example  that  of
the  body  m,  is  by  hypothesis  proportional  to  its  distance  r,  from  the  common  centre  of
gravity  of  the  system,  at  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  the  motion  ;  and  as  the  angle  of
inclination  of  the  line  of  projection  with  the  radius,  is  the  same  for  each  of  the  bodies,  it  is
evident  that  the  area  described  in  the  first  instant  of  time  dt^  will  be  proportional  to  r^ ;
so  that  we  may  represent  the  double  of  this  area  by  cr^.dt ;  c  being  the  same  for  all  the
bodies  m,  m',  rrl\  &;c.  Comparing  this  with  the  expression  of  the  same  area  cdt  [366],
we  get  c  =  cr^.  Moreover  the  force  9  [373],  acting  on  the  body  m  at  the  time  i^  is
represented  by  Kr  [8814/].  Substituting  these  values  of  c,  9,  in  the  expression  of  dv
[376],  we  get  the  value  of  dv  [8815e] ;  and  by  accenting  the  letters  we  get  the  similar
expression  of  dv\  corresponding  to  the  motion  of  the  body  m' ;  observing  that  K  is  the
same  for  both  bodies  [8814Z]  ;

cr2.t/r  ,  .  cr'S.rfr'

dv  =

dv'  ==

We  shall  now  suppose  that  at  the  commencement  of  the  motion,  when  <  =  0,  we  have
if=br,  and  that  the  angles  v,  v',  commence  at  that  time,  so  that  their  places  of  origin
must  be  on  the  lines  r,  r',  respectively ;  and  we  shall  then  compute,  by  means  of  the
formulas  [8815e],  the  relation  of  the  arcs  v,  v\  when  the  general  value  of  r'  is  expressed
by  /  =  br.  In  this  case  we  find,  by  substituting  1/  =  5r,  /  =  br,  in  the  expression
of  dv'  [8815c],  that  the  numerator  and  denominator  can  be  divided  by  the  constant
quantity  b^;  so  that  this  value  of  dv'  will  become  identically  the  same  as  that  of  c?y,
[881 5e],  and  we  shall  then  have  dv  =  dv'-f  or  by  integration  v==v;  supposing,  as  in
[8815e'],  that  both  angles  commence  at  the  origin  of  the  time  t.  Hence  we  see  that  when
/  =  br,  we  shall  have  v'  =  v',  therefore  the  figures  described  by  the  bodies  m,  mf,  will
be  similar;  consequently  the  areas  described  by  the  radii  vectores  will  be  as  r^  to  r'^,  or
as  I  to  Z»2  ;  and  as  the  areas  described  in  the  time  dt,  at  the  origin  of  the  motion,  are  in
the  same  ratio,  the  times  of  describing  the  equal  angles  v,  v',  by  the  bodies  m,  mf,  must
be  equal.  This  is  conformable  to  the  remarks  in  [8815,  &;c.].  What  we  have  here  stated
relative  to  the  paths  of  the  bodies  about  the  common  centre  of  gravity  being  similar  to
each  other,  may  evidently  be  applied  to  the  relative  motions  of  the  bodies  about  any  one
of  them,  considered  as  at  rest,  since  they  must  also  be  similar.

[8815a]

[88156]
[8815c]

[8815<?]

[8815e ]
[8815e']

[8815/]
[8815g-]

[8815/i]

[8815i ]

[8815A]

[8815/ ]
[8815ni]

[8819]

600  MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES  [M^c.C^l.

[8816']  function  (^{r)  of  the  distance  r.  We  shall  put  ar,  y,  for  the  co-ordinates  of
m,  referred  to  the  plane  which  connects  these  bodies,  and  to  the  centre  of  gravity

[8817]  of  the  system ;  also  ar',  y',  for  the  co-ordinates  of  m\  and  x'\  y,  for  those
of  m".  Then  the  force  acting  upon  m,  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  and
drawing  towards  the  centre  of  gravity,  is,*

[8818]  m'.  ^  .  (x-x')  +  m".  ^ .  (x-x") ;  [^;'a7a.?efto^:!  '^  ]

s  being  the  distance  of  m  from m', and s'  that  of  m  from m". The
force  acting  upon  m  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y,  is,

[8820]  m'.  ^  .  (2/-2/)+^"-  ^  •  {y—lf')'  [^pafa.r?o^;? "  ]

S  S

Likewise  the  force  acting  upon  m'  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  is,

[8821]  m.  ^-^ .  (a/— a;)+m".  ^^ .  (x'—x")  ;  CTrlA'^l

s  s

s"  being  the  distance  of  m'  from  m". The  force  acting  upon  m'  parallel  to

the  axis  of  y,  is,

[88231  m.  ^\  (y'^y)+m".  ^-^ .  (y'-f).  [^TaraniiToT.  "1

O  0

Lastly,  the  forces  acting  upon m", parallel  to  the  axes  of  xf',  if, are
respectively,

[8824]  m.  ^ .  (a:"-a:) +m'.  ^^ .  (a/'— a/)  ;  [^%'a^.£r..'""]

Now,  in  order  that  the  resultant  of  the  two  forces  which  act  upon  m.

[8822]

*  (4033)  The  action  of  m'  upon  m,  in  the  direction  s,  is  m'.9(s)  [8816'].  Resolving
it,  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  a?,  it  becomes  rd, —  .{od — x)  in  a  direction
opposite  to  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates  [393'],  or  to  conform  to  the  present  hypothesis
[8833], ni.—  .{x — a/),  towards  the  origin. In  like  manner  the  force  of  m"  upon  m,

is m". —-. (a; — x")  ;  the  sum  is  as  in  [8818],  which  represents  the  whole  force  of  m'
and  m"  upon  m,  resolved  in  a  direction  parallel  to  x. The  other  forces  [8820 — 8825]
[8818c] are  found  in  a  similar  manner  ;  all  these  forces  being  supposed  to  tend  towards  the  origin
of  the  co-ordinates,  as  in  [8833].

[8818a]

[88186]

X.  vi.  -^  17.]  RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAINED.  601

parallel  to  the  axes  of  x  and  y,  may  pass  through  the  centre  of  gravity  of rggoei
the  system,  it  is  necessary  that  these  forces  should  be  in  the  ratio  of  x to
y;*  therefore  we  shall  have,

m',  ^^ .  fx—x')-{-m".  "^-^  . (x—x")  =  Kx ;  [8827]

s  s

m'.  ^ .  (y-i/)+m".  ^ .  (y-f)  =  Ky;  [8828]

K  being  any  quantity  whatever.  The  force  which  attracts  m  towards  the  [8829]
centre  of  gravity,  will  be  K.^x--{-y^.  We  shall  likewise  have,  by  r883oi
considering  the  forces  which  act  upon  m',

m,  ^  .  h^—x)^m".  "^-^ .  (x'—x")  =  K'x' ;  [8831]

m.  ?f^ .  (2/-2/)+  m".  ^ .  {yf-f)  =  ^Y ;  [8832]

s  s

*  (4034)  This  is  proved  in  [367a,  Sic.].  Now  the  two  forces  [8818, 8820],  being  to
each  other  in  the  ratio  of  x  to  y,  we  may  evidently  represent  them  by  Kx,  Ky,
respectively,  as  in  [8827,  8828].  The  resultant  of  these  two  forces  is  K.^x^-\-y^  [3],
as  in  [8830].  In  like  manner  the  forces  acting  on  m'  [8821,  8823],  may  be  represented
by  K'x', K'y',  as  in  [8831,  8832] ;  and  their  resultant  is  jT.v/^sIfya,  as  in  [8833].

t  (4035)  The  distances  of  the  bodies  m,  m',  m",  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the
system  r,  r,  r"  [8844],  are  evidently  represented  in  the  notation  [8816',  8817],  by
r  =  ^x2-}-7/2,  7-'  =  \/a:'2-j-y2,  r"  =  \/x"2-|-y'2.  Hence  the  force  acting  upon  m
[8830],  is  Kr',  and  that  acting  upon  m!  [8833],  is  K'r' ;  and  by  hypothesis  these  must
be  to  each  other  as  r  to  /  [8814'] ;  therefore  we  have  Kr  :  K'l-^  ::  r  :  r' ;  consequently
K=K',  as  in  [8835]  ;  hence  [8831]  becomes  as  in  [8836'J  ;  moreover  [8827]  is  the
same  as  [8836].  In  the  same  manner  we  may  prove  that  the  forces  acting  on  m",  give
the  similar  equation  [8836"j.  The  equations  [8828,  8832],  and  the  similar  one  for  m",
give  the  equations  in y,  i/,  y",  mentioned  in  [8837].

V0L» IV.  151

[8833]
[8834]

which  gives  ir'.\/a;'^-j-j/'2  for  the  force  which  attracts  m'  towards  the  centre
of  gravity  of  the  system.  In  order  that  this  force  may  be  to  that  which  acts
upon  the  body  m,  in  the  ratio  of  the  distances  of  the  two  bodies  from  that
centre,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  havef  K=  K',  ;  and  as  we  must  [8835]
apply  the  same  result  to  the  forces  which  act  on  m",  we  shall  have  the
three  following  equations ;

[8827a]
[88276]

[8836a]
[88366]

[8836c ]

602  MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES  [Mec.  Gel.

[8836]  wi'.  ^  .  (x— .r')+m".  ^-^^  .  (x—x")  =  Kx  ;

[8836']  m.  ^^ .  (x'—  x)-{-m",  ^ .  (x'—x")  =  Kx' ; }  .  (a)

S  S

[8836"]  ^-  ^-  •  (^"— ^)+  ^'  •  ^  •  (a;"— a^O  =  Kx" ;

If  we  change  in  these  equations  x,  x\  a/', into y,  y,  ^", we  shall  obtain
L J the  three  equations  corresponding  to  the  ordinates  y,  y,  y".

Multiplying [8836]  hy m, [8836']  by  m', and  [8836"]  by m", then
taking  the  sum  of  these  products,  we  get,*
[8838]  0  =  mx-\-  m'x'  +  m"x".

This  equation  depends  on  the nature  of  the  centre  of  gravity  [124]  ;  and
by  combining  it  with  [8836],  we  get,t

•■[8840]  X.  \  m'.  *«  +  (m+m").  *^  \  +  m'x'.  ^  ^  _  ?iiU  =  Kx.

(  5  '^ S )  ( S  S )

[8841] Therefore  by  supposing s  =  s',  we  shall  have,

[8842]  jS:=rm+m'+m'0.  — .

^  s

Moreover if we suppose s  =  s", we shall find that the equations
[8836',  8836"]  give  the same  expression  of  K. Hence  it  follows  that  in
[8843] ^jjg  supposition  of 5  =  5'==  s", this  expression  will  satisfy  the equations
[8836—8836"],  and  the  similar  equations  in y,  y',  y"  [8837].

This  being  supposed,  if  we  put  r,  /,  r",  for  the  respective  distances
^  ^  of  the  bodies  m,  m',  m",  from  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system,  the
three"  forccs  wMch  attract  these  bodies  towards  that  centre  will  be  Kr,  Kr',  Kr",
[8845] [88366]  ;  so  that  by  impressing  upon  these  bodies  velocities  proportional  to

bodies  are
at  equal

distances  ■ ■ — — ■

from  each
other.

*  (4036) The  terms  of  the  first  member  of  this  sum  mutually  destroy  each  other  ;  and
those  of  the  second  member,  beina;  divided  by  the  common  factor K^  become  as in
"■' [8838]. This  equation is  the  same  as 0  =  ^.mx  [124],  corresponding  to  the  centre  of
gravity.

t  (4037) JVIultiplying  [8838]  by ^V  > and  adding  the  product  to  the  first  member  of
[8840a] [8836],  we  get  [8840]. If  we  put s  =  /,  we  shall  have ^^  =  '^;  and  then  [8840]
becomes x\m-\-rfi-\-'ai'\.  —  ^=Kx. Dividing  by  a?,  we  get £[8842].

X.vi.<§.n.J  RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAINED.  603

r,  r',  r",  and  with  directions  equally  inclined  to  those  radii,  we  shall  have
during  the  motion 5  =  5'  =  5" ;  * or, in  other  words,  the  three  bodies  will [8846]
always  form  an  equilateral  triangle, by  the  lines  which  connect  them  with
each  other ;  and  they  will  describe  about  each  other,  as  ivell  as  about  their
common  centre  of  gravity,  perfectly  similar  curves  [8815m].

We  shall  now  put,

X,  Y,  for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  centre  of  gravity,  referred  to

any  point  whatever  as  the  origin  ;
X,  y, for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  body  m,  referred  to  the  same [8848']

[8847]

[8848]

origm  ;

x',  y',  for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  body  m',  referred  to  the  same [8848"]
origin  ;

and  so  on  for  others ; then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [129], f

[8849]

taking  therefore  the  centre  of  the  body  m  for  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates, rgssoi
which  makes x  =  0, y  =  0,  we  shall  have,

*  (4038)  What  we  have  stated  in  the  notes  [8814a,  Stc,  8815«,  &:c.],  will  serve  to
explain  the  remarks  of  the  author  in  [8844 — 8847]  ;  observing  that  in  this  case  we  have,
according  to  the  notation  in  [8814a,  Sic],  s=s'  =  3"j  substituting  these  in  [8814A],
we  get s  =  s'  =:s"  =  as.

[8846a]
[88466]

[8849a]
[88496 ]

f  (4039)  The  bodies  are  supposed  to  move  in  the  plane  of  xy  [8810',  8816']  ;
therefore  we  shall  have  Z  =  0,  z=0,  2r'  =  0,  &c.  in  the  formula  [129];  and  by
neglecting  these  quantities,  it  becomes  as  in  [8849].  Now  it  is  evident,  from  the  notation
[8848],  that  \/X^-\-  Y^  represents  the  distance  of  the  centre  of  gravity  from  the  origin  of
the  co-ordinates,  or  from  the  body  m  [8850]  ;  and  this  is  represented  by  r  in  [8844]  ;  [8849c]
hence  we  have  r  =  v/jp"ipp,  as  in  [8851].  The  values  s,  s'  [8852,  8853]
correspond  with  those  in  [949'],  using  z  =  0,  sf  =0,  &c.  [8849a]  ;  and  by  putting,  as
in  [88501, a?=0, y  =  0, and s  =  /  =  s"  [8843],  we  get  successively,  '■ ■'

x^-{.y^  =  0; (a/-a?)2-f(y'-y)8=a?'2+2/'2=59. {x"-^y+{y"-yf=:x"^-\-y"^==s'^=s^i [8849e]
^,m.{x^-{-y^)  =  m.{x^-{-y'^)-\-m:.{x'^-\-y^)+m".{a/'^-\-y"^)  =  (m'-f  m").s2  ;  [8849/]

:s.mm'.  { {x—afy-\-(y—yy]  =  s^:s.mm'  =  sK  \  mm'+mm"-{-m'm"] .  [88495-]

Substituting  [8851,  8849/,  g]  in  [8849],  it  becomes  as  in  [8854];  whence  we  easily rgg^g^n
deduce  s  [8855],

604  MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES  [Mec.  C61.

[8851]  X2+Y2  =  r2;

[6852]  {x'-^xf-\-  (y'—  yf  =  s" ;  [8849e]

[8853]  (a:"-~a:)H&"— y)'  =  s"  =  5^&c.;  [8849e]

m-\-m-\-m  {rn-\-m -f-mf  ^  ■'

Hence  we  deduce,

[8855]  j^ (m+r./+m-0.r

Substituting  this  value  of  5 in  the  expression  of  the  gravity (p (5)  [8816'],
w^e  obtain  the  law  of  gravitation  of  the  body  m, towards  the  centre  of  j
gravity  of  the  system. The  force  which  draws m  towards  that  point,  isj

[8857] represented  by  Kr  [8845],  and  we  have K=  (m^m'-^m"),  '^  [8842]  ;

hence  this  force  will  be,*

[8858]  . /m'2_J_Vm"-4-m"2 .  c  ( -  (^+^4-^_)jiL__\  r  Force  drawing  the  body,  m T

••  J  V  '^ i^'"  m  -f-m .  (p.  1 .  /^/  2  _l_^^'^"_i_„^"  2  y  L  towards  the  centre  of  gravity.  J

We  shall  have,  by  means  of  the  formula  [376],  the  equation  of  the  curve
described  by  the  body  m  about  the  same  point ;  consequently  those  of  the
curves  described  by  the  bodies  m!  and  m" ;  since  these  three  curves  are
similar  to  each  other,  with  dimensions  respectively  proportional  to
r,  /,  r"  [8847].

In  the  case  of  nature 9  (5)  =  —  ; the  force  ichich  draws m  towards  the-

centre  of  gravity  of  the  system^  loill  therefore  be,

[8861]  (m -\-mm  -f-m )^  ^  p^^.^^  ^^^^-^n^  j^e  bndy  m  towards  the  T

/ I / I //  \2 ^.2 *  L  centre  of  gravity,  in  the  law  of  nature.  J

Therefore  the  three  bodies  will  describe  similar  conic  sections  about  the  centre
of  gravity  of  the  system  [8857<i] ;  forming  alivays  bettveen  each  other  an

[8857o] *  (4040) Multiplying  [8842]  by  r, and  substituting ^ ^ ^ '' =^m'^.m'm"+m"^
[8855],  it  becomes Kr  =  \/m' ^-\-m'm"-^in" ^.cp(s), which  is  reduced  to  the  form  [8858],

[8859]

[8860]

by  the  substitution  of  the  value  of  s  [8855]. If  we  now  suppose,  as  in  [8860],  that

9(5)  =  — , the  expression  of  the  force  acting  on  m  [8858] becomes  as  in  [8861],  being
s

inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  r;  and  as  this  is  the  case  of  nature  [380,  &c.],  the

[8B57d]

described  curves  will  be  conic  sections  [534',  &,c.],  as  is  stated  in  [8862].

X.  vi.  «^  17.]

RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAINED.

605

equilateral  triangle,  ivhose  sides  vary  incessantly ;  and  they  may  even  become
infinite,  if  the  section  be  a  parabola,  or  a  hyperbola.

We  shall  now  consider  the  case  where  the  three  quantities  s,  s',  s",  are
not  all  equal  to  each  other,  supposing,  for  an  example,  that  s,  s',  are
unequal ;  we  shall  also  resume  the  equation  [8840]  ;

:,.  \n'M  +  (»«+ m").  ^  U  mV J  *ip  -  *W  U  Kx.

i  9  S )  ( S  S )

We  shall  have,  between  y  and  y',  an  equation  similar  to  that  in [8864]
between  x  and  a/ ; from  these  two  equations  we  deduce,*

x:x'  ::  y:i/;
therefore  the  bodies  m,  m',  must  be  on  a  right  line  with  the  centre  of
gravity  of  the  system,  so  that  the  three  bodies  m,  m',  m",  must  be  situated
on  the  same  right  line.  We  shall  now  take,  at  any  moment  whatever,  this
right  line  for  the  axis  of  the  abscisses,  and  we  shall  suppose  the  bodies  to
be  arranged  in  the  order  m,  m',  m",  so  that  their  common  centre  of  gravity
may  fall  between  m  and  m'. We  shall  then  put,

x' =  — fjia; ;  a:"  = — Vx\

Case

where  the
distances
of  the
three
bodies  are
unequal.

[8863]

[8864]

[8865]

[8866]

[8867]

*  (4041) The  equation  [8864]  may  be  put  under  the  form  [8864a]  ;  and  the  similar
one  in  y,  under  the  form  [88646] ;

% . (- \m-\-m  ).  — ; A  >  =  X .m.  <

s  ^  J  \» ^

x.}^m.—  -{-{m-^m  ).  —  -K\^=^x.m.  ^  —  -  —  ^  ,

y.^m.~  +(m4-m  ).  — K'^^y.m.-^- ^J.

whence  we easily

Dividing  the  second  of  these  equations  by  the  first,  we  get —  =  —

[8864a]
[88646]

[8864c]

[8864(fl

deduce  [8865]. Now — evidently  represents  the  tangent  of  the  angle  formed  by  the

radius  r  and  the  axis  of  x ; and  in  like  manner — ' represents  the  angle  formed  by  the

radius  r'  and  the  same  axis  of  a?'  or  a; ;  therefore  these  tangents  and  the  corresponding
angles  must  be  equal,  so  that  the  radii  r,  /,  must  fall  on  the  same  right  line,  passing
through  their  origin  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system.  Hence  it  must  necessarily
follow  that  the  three  bodies  are  situated  in  that  right  line,  as  in  [8866].  We  may  remark
that  in  [8880]  the  author  supposes  m  to  be  the  sun,  m'  the  earth,  and  m"  the  moon  ;
so  that  if  we  take  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system  for  the  origin,  and  count  the  distance
X  of  the  sun  from  the  origin  as  positive,  we  must  take  those  of  the  earth  x'  and  moon  x"  [^o^^c  ]
negative,  as  in  [8867].

VOL.  IV.  152

606

MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES

[M6c.Cel.

g and  we  shall  also  suppose  that  the  law  of  attraction  is  as  the  power  n  of
the  distance,  so  that 9(5)  =  5". Then  the  equations [8836 — 8836"]  will

[8868'] give,  by  observing  that 5  =  a;.(l  +  i*)> s'=x.(\-{-V)^*

[8869]  K=.  a:"-^{m'.(l+fx)«  +  m".(l+F)"}  ;

[8870]  f^.{m'.(l+,x)«+m".(l+F)»}  =m.(l+f^)"— w".(F— f*)\

We  shall  now  put,

[8871]  F— f^=(l+fx).z;

and  from  this  we  get,t

[8872]  1  +  F=(1  +  M-).(1+Z);

consequently,

[8873]  iu^.{m'+  m".(I  +  zy\  =  m—m"z'* ;

but  the  equation  [8838],

[8874]  o  =  mx  +  m'af  +  m"x%

*  (4042) In  the  hypothesis  that  the  bodies  are  situated  in  a  right  Une,  as  in [8866],

we  have,
[8868a]  s  =  x—c(f',  s'  =  x—x"',  s"=x'—x".

Substituting  these  values  in  [8836,  8836',  8836"],  we  obtain,
[88686] m'.(p(s)+?r/'.(p(/)  =  Kx ; — m.9(s)-{-m".(p(/)  =  Kx' ; _m.(p(/)— m'.(p(/)  ==  K(^'.

If  we  now  substitute  the  values  of  x\  x"  [8867],  in  the  expressions  of  s,  s',  s"  [8868a],

we  shall  get,  as  in  [8868'],
[8868c]  s=a:.(l-fM-);  s' =  x.{\-\-V) -,  s"  =  x.{V—ii^).

[8868c?] Substituting  these  in 9(5)  =  s", (p(s')  =  /», 9 (/)  =  s'"*  [8868],  we  get,
[8868e]  9(5)=a:^(l  +  M')^  <^{s')=x-.{\-{-VY -,  <p{s")  =x\{V-f,)\

Now  substituting  the  values  of cp{s), cp{s')  [8868e],  in  the  first  of  the  equations  [88686],

and  then  dividing  by  x,  we  get  the  value  of  K  [8869] ; multiplying  this  by x' =  — it.x,

[8867],  we  get  the  value  of  Kx',  under  the  form,
[8868/]  -Sra?'=— f;-a;".5m'.(l-f  f;u)«4-m".(l  +  F)"}.

Substituting  the  values  of Kx', 9(5), 9(5") [8868/,  e] ,  in  the  second  of  the  equations

[88686],  and  then  dividing  by —a;'*, we  get  [8870].

[8873a]
[88736]

[8873c]

t  (4043)  Adding  1  +  f/-  to  both  members  of  [8871],  we  get  [8872].  Substituting  this
in  the  first  member  of  [8870],  and  F— f*  [8871]  in  its  second  member,  then  dividing  by
(l+M-)",  we  get  [8873]. Substituting  the  values  of  x',  x"  [8867] in [8874],  and  then

dividing  by  x,  we  get  [8875] ;  from  this  we  deduce F=  "^~"^'^  ; and  by  substitution

m  ''

in  [8871],  we  obtain ^~^''*  —.^^=^{\J^^^,z\ which  gives  m-  [8876].

X.  vi.  <^  17.]  RIGOROUSLY  ASCERTAINED.  607

gives,

Hence  we  deduce,

0  =  m  —  mV  — -  m"V.  [8875]

m — m  z

^  = >^ ^wi  . ^  5  S876]

m  +w  .(14-2^)

therefore  we  shall  have,*

(m— w"2r).{m'+m".(l+2)"}  =  {m'+m".(l+2)}.{m— m".z»}.  [8877]

In  the  case  of  nature  in  which n  =  — 2,  this  equation  becomes,

0  ==  mz'.\{\J^zf-^\  \—w!,{\-\-zf.{\—z^)—w!',{{\-\-zy^^\ ;  [8878]

an  equation  of  the  fifth  degree,  which  must  therefore  have  one  real  root.
Now  the  supposition  of  z  =  0,  renders  the  second  member  negative,  and
on  the  contrary  it  becomes  positive  if  2:  =  co  [8877e]  ;  therefore  z  must
necessarily  have  a  real  positive  value.

If  we  suppose m to  he  the  sun, m' the  earth,  and ml' the  moon,  we
shall  have  very  nearly,!

V 3m

+m".

[8879]

[8880]
[8881]

[8877a]

*  (4044)  Substituting  fx  [8876]  in  [8873],  and  multiplying  by  m'-}-m".(l-}-z),  we
get  [8877].  In  the  case  of  nature,  where  n= — 2,  the  equation  [8877]  becomes,  by
multiplying  by {\-\-zf.z^,

{m—rd'z).z''.\'fd.i\-^zf^id'\  =  {id  .{\^zY-\-ir{' .{\-\rzf\.\mz''-'(d'\.  [88776]

Transposing all the terms  to  the  second  member, developing, neglecting the  terms
±mm'.2;^.(l-l-z)^, which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  dividing  by m",  and  putting  in [8877c]
separate  parts  the  terms  multiplied  by m,  rd ^  m!',  it  becomes  as  in  [8878]. If  we  arrange
the  terms  of  this  equation  according  to  the  powers  of  z,  it  becomes,

0  =  2;5.(m-j-?»')4-2^.(3m-{-2/»')+z3.(3m+m')  —z^.{^m!'-{-m')—z.{^w:'-\-<ilm')—rd—rd'. [8877rf]

The  second  member  of  this  expression  is  evidently  negative  when z  =  0,  and  positive rg877e-i
when  2;  =  00,  as  is  observed  in  [8879].

[88816]

1  m'  1

t(4045) We  have,  in  [4061],  m=l, rd  =  ^. also m!'^_^___^^ ^ggg^^^

[4631]. After  substituting  these  values  in  [8877c?],  we  shall  see,  by  inspection,  that  this

equation  can  be  satisfied  by  supposing  z  to  have  a  very  small  value. In  this  case  we  may

neglect  z^,  z^,  in  comparison  with  z^ ; and  if  we  also  neglect  mf  in  comparison  with  m,

m"  ill  comparison  with  mf,  we  shall  find  that  this  equation  will  be very  nearly  represented

by z^.dm — z^.m' — z.2mf — m' — m"  =  0. The  second and  third  terms  of  this  equation [8881c]

being  very  small,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  coefficient  m', we  shall  have  very

608  MOTIONS  OF  ATTRACTING  BODIES.  [Mec.C^I.

which  gives  z  =  -^\-^  nearly.  Hence  it  follows  that  if,  at  the  origin  of  the
world,  the  earth  and  moon  were  situated  on  a  right  line  passing  through  the
[8882']  sun,  at  distances  from  it  proportional  to  1  and  l  +  y^^,  and  at  the  same
time  were  impressed  with  velocities  proportional  to  their  distances  from  the
sun,  and  in  parallel  directions,  the  moon  in  her  course  would  always  continue
in  opposition  to  the  sun  ;  consequently  one  of  these  luminaries  would  be
rising  above the horizon,  at the same moment  the  other was  setting.

[88831  o  '  o

Moreover,  at  this  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth,  she  could  not  be
[8883'] eclipsed  ;  * so  that  during  the  night  we  should  always  have  the  benefit  of
the  light  of  a  full  moon.

[8882c]

[8881rf]  nearly,  by  neglecting  them,  z^.3/n — m' — m"  =  0 ;  whence  we  get  the  expression  of  z,
[8881] ;  and  by  substituting  in  it  the  values  of  w,  m',  m"  [8881a], we  get  very  nearly

[8881e]  z  =  Y^^;  so  that  the  neglected  terms  are  only  of  the  order  y^^,  in  comparison  with
those  which  are  retained. The  expressions  of  5,  d  [8868c],  give s  :  /  : :  l-f-M-  '■  I-|"^5

'■  * ^  and  by  means  of  the  value  of  \-\-V  [8872],  it  becomes  s  :  s'  ::  1  :  \-\-z\  or  by  using
the  value  of  z  [888 le], s  :  s' : :  1  :  l-f-y^^,  as  in  [8882'J.

* (4046) The  moon's  real  distance  from  the  earth  is -^^-^  part  of  that  of  the  sun,

[8882a]  j-55g5-]^  being  only  one  fourth  part  of  the  distance  -^  computed  in  [8882^  or  8882]  ;  and
if  the  moon  were  placed  at  this  last  distance  from  the  earth,  her  horizontal  parallax  would

[88826]  be  reduced  to  one  quarter  part  of  its  present  value,  or  |  X  3442^4  =  860*j6  =  1 4"»  20',6,
nearly  [5605  line  1]  ;  and  as  this  is  less  than  the  sun's  apparent  semi-diameter,  when
viewed from  the  moon,  which  is  nearly  16"*, it  will  follow  that  the  moon  cannot  be

[8882<i]  eclipsed  at  the  distance  y^^,  corresponding  to  the  value  of  z,  and  to  the  relative  situations
of  the  bodies  which  are  assumed  in  [8882,  &X3.].

Some  calculations  of  a  similar  kind  to  those  which  have  been  treated  of  in  this  chapter,

[8882e]  concerning  the  motion  of  a  body  which  is  drawn  towards  two  jixtd  centres,  have  been
given  by''Euler,  in  the  Berlin  Memoirs  for  1760;  also  by  La  Grange,  in  his  Mecanique

[8882/*]  Analyiique ;  but  much  more  fully  by  Legendre,  in  his  Exercices  de  Calcul  Integral,  Paris,
1817;  and  in  his  Traite  des  Fonctions  Elliptiques,  Paris,  1825.  Several  of  these  results
are  very  curious,  and  they  afford  a  very  good  specimen  of  the  uses  of  the  calculation  of

[8882g-]  elliptical  functions;  but  as  the  hypothesis  oi fixed  points  of  attraction  is  not  the  case  of
nature,  where  every  thing  appears  to  be  in  motion,  we  have  not  thought  it  to  be  necessary
to  enter  into  any  discussion  of  these  methods ;  but  refer  the  reader  particularly  to  either
of  the  above  works  of  Legendre,  for  their  full  development ;  as  also  for  some  cases  of
attraction  of  two  bodies,  where  the  forces  differ  from  that  of  the  law  of  nature.

[8882/i]

X.  vii.  «§.  18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  609

CHAPTER  VII.

ON THE  ALTERATIONS WHICH  THE MOTIONS OF THE PLANETS AND COMETS MAY  SUFFER  BY  THE

RESISTANCE  OF THE MEDIUMS THEY PASS THROUGH, OR BY THE  SUCCESSIVE

TRANSMISSION OF  GRAVITY.

1 8.  We  shall  suppose  that  the  sun  is  surrounded  by  a  fluid,  and  that  its
resistance  upon  the  motions  of  the  planets  and  comets  is  required  to  be
ascertained.  We  have  already  paid  some  attention  to  the  subject,  in  Chap.
VI,  Book  VII  ;  but  we  shall  here  examine  it  more  attentively,  and  shall
determine  the  variations  in  the  orbits  for  any  time  w^hatever. We  shall  put,

(p(—j  for  the  density  of  the  fluid  at  the  distance  r  from  the  sun's  centre ;

K.(pl  —  ).  — for  the  expression  of  the  resistance  which  the  planet  suffers,

in  the  direction  of  its  motion;*
^  is  a  constant  coefficient  depending  on  the  figure  of  the  planet  and  on

its  density  ;
rr,  y,  are  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  planet,  taken  in  the  plane  of  its

orbit ;  their  origin  being  the  sun's  centre.

[8884]

Symbols.

[8885]

ds for  the  element  of  the  curve  described  by  the  planet  in  the  time  dt ;  [8885']

[8886]

[8886']
[8887]

[8886a]

*  (4047) The  resistance  is  supposed  to  be  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  density

(1  \  . ds^

—  j, by the square  of the velocity — , and may therefore  be represented  by

-  )  .  —  , as  in  [8886],  in  the  direction  of  its  motion. This  can  evidently  be  resolved [88866]

,  dx dy  . ,

in  directions  parallel  to  the  axes  a?,  y,  by  multiplying  it  by t"  j 7-> respectively, as  in

[8888]. Putting  these  quantities  negative,  supposing  them  to  decrease  x,  y, and  then

[8886c ]
making  them  equal  to  the  expressions  [8889],  we  get  the  values  [8890, 8891]. In  a

similar  manner  we  may find  the  values  of (-^j) (t")j corresponding  to  the  polar [8886cr]
VOL.  IV.  153

610  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.Cel.

, Then  the  resistance,  resolved  in  directions  parallel  to  the  co-ordinates  x,  y,
and  tending  to  decrease  them,  are  respectively,

[8889] Now  we  have  represented in  [1172',  &c.],  by — (^) and -^f~\  the

[8889^1 fi^^^^^  which  act  upon  the  planet  in  the  directions x,  y, and  tending  to
increase  them ;  we  shall  therefore  have,

Loo9UJ  I —  J ___  ^^  ^  f — I  ^  •  ["Resistance  tending  to  decrease  z.l

V  (tOS  J  \  ^  / ^'

{dB\ „ /IN dsdy

[8891]  (  — — - I  =  A.(p(  — )•  — To"  \  I  Resistance  tending  to  decrease  V'l

\dy  J  \r  y dr  ^  -^

If  we  put  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  sun  and  planet  equal  to  unity*  or
[8892] ^  ^  ^  19W},  we  shall  have,  from  [1 177,  &c.],

[8893]  ^.i=2.di2  =  2.(f)../.+2.(|).^,;

co-ordinates  r,  v;  which  are  used  in  the  formulas  [SOlOi,  &,c.].  In  this  case  we  see  that
[8886e]  the  increments  dx,  dy,  which  form  the  sides  of  the  right  angle  whose  hypotenuse  is  ds,
must  be  changed  into  two  other  rectangular  increments  dr  and  rdv  ;  dr  being  in  the
direction  of  the  radius,  and  rdv  perpendicular  to  the  radius  ;  so  that  we  shall  have,  as  in
[8903],  ds  =  \/rfr2  -}- r2  dv^  ;  and  then  to  obtain  the  partial  differentials  of /2  relative  to
dr  or  rdv,  we  have  only  to  change  dx  into  dr  in  [8890],  and  dy  into  rdv  in  [8891] ;
then  multiplying  this  last  equation  by  r,  we  finally  obtain  the  following  expressions,  which
will  be  used  hereafter  ;

The  resistance  of  the  ether  acts  in  the  plane  of  the  orbit ;  therefore  it  cannot  alter  the
[8886A] position  of  this  plane,  as  the  author  has  observed  in  [8900'],  so  that  the  variations  c?y,  dd
[8010/,  m]  will  vanish;  and  the  second  members  of  these  equations  will  give,

/dR\  /dR\

[8886.-]  (-)=0;  (-)=0;

neglecting  the  very  small  terms  of  a  higher  order,  depending  on  the  product  of  K,  by  the
'■ ■'  masses  of  the  disturbing  planets.

*  (4048)  Substituting  in  [1177]  the  value  fj<-=l  [8892],  we  get,  as  in  [8893],
d.  —  =z2.dR;  now  using  the  development  of  djR  [916a],  and  neglecting  the  term
multiplied  by  dz,  because  z  and  its  differential  vanish  by  taking  the  orbit  of  the  plane  for

[88936 ,

the  plane  of  xy  [8887],  we  obtain  the  last  expression  in  [8893]

X.  vii.  §  18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  ^U

therefore  we  have,*

Now  e  being  the  ratio  of  the  excentricity  to  the  semi-major  axis  a,  and  w

[88951
the  longitude  of  the  perihelion,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [1176,  &c.],t

d.(e.sm.zs)  =  dx.  I  X,  (^)— y-  (^)  I  +  {xdy--ydx),(^  ;  [8896]

^.(e.cos.^)  =  dy,  I  y.  (^)-^-  (^)  |  —(xdy^ydx).  (^^^  ;  [8897]

therefore,

rf. ( e.sin.ro)  = 2Z".  <?(—)•  -^^  •  (xdy—ydx)  ;  [8898]

<?.(6.cos.-a)  =  — 2K, <?(—)'  Aj- ' (xdy—ydx).  [8899]

Lastly  we  have,  as  in  [1181],  J

(1  \ ds^

*  (4049) Substituting  the  values  [8890,  8891],  in  the  last  expression  of  [8893],  and
then  reducing  by  putting do[^-{-dy^  =  ds^, we  get,  as  in  [8894],  "

rf.i=2ir.,(i).|.(<i^+rfj»)  =  2iir.,(l).|\  [88946]

t  (4050) Substituting  the differentials of A, I  [7847], in the first members of
[7849,  7850],  we  get  [8896,  8897]  respectively. Now  the  values  [8890,  8891]  give,  ^^^^"^

^{t)-^{^)  =^-^{7)'^^'^^^y-y^y^  t88966]

substituting  this,  together  with  the  values  [8890,  8891],  in  [8896,  8897],  they  become
respectively  as  in  [8898,  8899].

t  (4051)  Putting  fx==l  [8893«]  in  [1181],  we  get  dn  =  SanAR,  as  in  [8900].
Now  from  [8894]  we  have  dR==^d. —  ==K.(f>(  —  j.  -r^;  hence  dn=^San.K.(p(-j.-—,
as  in  [8900].  Substituting  fA=l  in  U^  =  ii  [711'],  we  get  U=l  for  the
velocity  of  a  body  revolving  about  the  sun  in  a  circular  orbit,  at  the  mean  distance  of  the
earth  from  the  sun,  taken  as  the  unit  of  distance  [711']. Substituting  this  in  [712],  we  get

V=  \/ for  the  velocity F^  of  a  body  revolving  about  the  sun  in  an  elliptical

orbit,  whose  serai-major  Blxis  is  a,  and  the  radius  vector  r. These  will  be  used  hereafter.

[8899a]

[88996]
[8899c]

[8899rf]
[8899e]

612  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.C^L

[890(rj

fVith  the  expressions  [8894,  8898,  8899]  we  can  obtain  the  variations  of  the
elements  of  the  orbit,  depending  on  the  resistance  of  the  medium ;  since  this
resistance  does  not  alter  the  position  of  the  plane  of  the  orbit  [8886A.,  i].
We  have,  by  means  of  [372,  1147,  378],*
[8901]  xdy — ydx  =r^dv  =  dt.\/a,{l—e^) ;

[8902]  r  =  ,  ^ , ^ . .

Moreover  we  have,  as  in  [89026],

[8903]  .  ds  =  i/dr'+r^dv^  =  r'dv,  \ /(^  AV  +  1  ;

r \TrdvJ r*

hence  we  deduce,!

[8904]  j_  _  r^dv.\\-\-2e.cos.{v—Ts)-\-e^\^  ^

^^~  «.(i-e2)  '

d^  _  r^dv.{l-\-^e.cos.{v—zi)  +  e^}t .
dT^  ~  a^l—e^f

[8905]

therefore,

[8906]

2K.(p(y\  r2  dv.  \  l+2e.cos.(tJ— «)+e2  J

*(4052) Comparing  [372,  1057],  and  putting  f/-  =  l [8892],  we  get  [8901]. The

[8902a]  ^ „^

value  of  r  [8902]  is  the  same  as  that  in  [378]. We  have  in  [8894a] ds  =  \/rfxa  -j-df ;

and  by  substituting  its  value,  deduced  from  the  first  equation  [372], we  get  the  first

expression  in  [8903] ;  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  second  form  in  [8903].

t  (4053) The  expression  of  r  [8902]  gives,  as  in  [1256],

r8904al  JL.  =  e.sm.jv  —  'us)  ^  J_  _  l+c.cos.(t?— w)

r^dv  a.(l— c2) '  r  a.(l— eS)

Substituting  these  in  the  last  value  of  ds  [8903],  we  get  [8904] ;  observing  that  the

numerator  of  this  expression  may  be  reduced,  by  putting,

[89046]  €2.sin.2(i;— "5^)+ {14-c.cos.(v— ro)}2  =  l+2e.cos.(u— w)4-c2.

T^dv
The  cube  of  ds  [8904],  being  divided  by  the  square  of dt  =  y====.  [8901],  gives

[8905]  ;  and  by  substituting  this  last  value  in  [8894],  we  get  [8306].

X.  vii.  <§.  18,]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  613

We  shall  suppose  that  the  function,*  [8906']

[8908a]

[8908/]

*  (4054) When the form  of  the  function (?(—) is known, we may make the

developments  of  the  first  member  of  [8908],  by  processes  similar  to  those  which  are
employed  in  [964,  &c.]  ;  and  by  this  means  we  can  ascertain  the  values  of  A,  B, C,  &c.
We  may  also  use  the  method  of  definite  integrals,  in  the  following  manner. Putting  for
brevity  V  equal  to  the  first  member  of  [8908], also v — '5J  =  v; and,  for  the  sake  of t^^^^^]
symmetry, j1  =  A^; Be  =  jl^; Ce^  =  A^,  he, we  obtain  the  following  expression [89G8c]
of  the  function  V  ;

V  =  K.J-\  r2.  J  l+Se.cos.v+e^Ji  =  ^„  -f  ^..cos.v  +A^.co%SIy^A^.cos.Zv-{-Uc. [8908rf]

Multiplying  this  hy  dv  and  integrating,  we  get,

fydw  =  A^.v  -f  ^,.sin.  v-f  I  ^j.sin.Sv  +&c.  [8908e  ]

This  vanishes  when  v^O,  and  when  v  =  '?r  it  becomes  /^Vrfv  =  .^o.*;  dividing  this
by  *,  we  get  A^  [8908A:J.  Multiplying  [8908rf]  by  Jv.cos.v,  and  reducing  the  second
member  by  means  of  [20]  Int.,  we  obtain  by  integration,

/V.cos.v.Jv=/|.^o.cos.v+^.^i.(l-|-cos.2v)-f-|.^2-(cos.v-f-cos.3v)-|-&;c.}.£Zv  [8908g-]

=  .^o.sin.v+|^i.(v-j-^.sin.2v)+J^2.(sin.v  +  |.sin.3v)-{-&tc.  [8908A]

The  second  member  vanishes  when v  =  0, and  when v  =  * it  becomes  ^A^.'K',  hence
we  have /^V.cos.v.<Zv=  J^^.* ; which  gives A^^ as  in [8908/]. In  like  manner, [8908i]
multiplying  [8908c?]  by cos.nv, n  being  a  whole  number,  we get by  integration  the
expression  of |.^„.tf; whence  we  deduce  .^„  [8908m].

A,=  ^.f-Ydv;  [8908A:]

A  =  7  -/r  V.cos.v.c?  V ;  [8908Z  ]

An  =  —  ./*  V.cos.n  v.d  v.  [8908m]

If  the  integrals  of  the  second  members  of  these  equations  can  be  obtained  in  finite  terms,

or  with  the  assistance  of  circular  arcs, logarithms, elliptical  functions, or  converging

series,  we  shall  have  the  values  of  A„, A^, A^,  &;c. If  neither  of  these  methods  can [8908n]

be  advantageously  employed,  we  must  ascertain  the  integrals  by  means  of  quadratures,  as

in  [7929a;,  &;c.] ; supposing di to  be  changed  into dv, and y'-^ into V.cos.nv, in [8908o]

finding  the  general  value  of  A„  [8908m].

As  an  example  of  this  method,  we  shall  put ?(~)  =  "^; this being the  hypothesis [8908p]

used  by  Encke  [56676],  in  calculating  the  perturbations  of  the  comet  which  bears  his
name,  in  vol.  9,  page  333,  of  the  Astronomische  Nachrichten.  We  shall  investigate  the
formulas  for  the  determination  of  the  values  of A^, A^, or A,  B; these  being  the  ^^

VOL.  IV.  154

614  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8907]  K,Jj\r\{l+2e.cos.{v'-vs)+e'\^,

[8908r]

only  coefficients  of  the  series  [8908c?]  which  are  required,  when  we  restrict  ourselves  to
the  computalion  of  the  secular  inequalities,  as  in  [8909',  8915,  &,c.] ;  and  these  secular
inequalities  are  all  which  deserve  attention,  in  the  present  imperfect  state  of  our  knowledge
[89085]  relative  to  the  nature  and  density  of  the  resisting  medium;  the  periodical  inequalities
depending on this cause being comparatively unimportant. Now substituting

<p(r)  =  —  [8908^]  in  [89086/],  we  get  the  following  general  expression  of  V;

[8908u]  V  =  K.\i-{-2e.cos.v-\-e^i  =  ,5„-f-^^.cos.v+^2-cos.2v+&c.

This  last  development  may  be  obtained  by  the  formulas  [975",  976,  Sec],  putting a  =  v,
a  =  — e, s= — i; hence  we  get,

[8908u;]  X  =l4-2e.cos.v+c2; [975"J

[8908x]  X*  =  1 14-2e.cos.v-f  e2 ji  =  ^(^J  +  6y.cos.v-f-6i!j.cos.2v-|-&c. ;  [976]

[8908y]  V  =  K.\l'\-2e.cos.v+e^^  =  K.^  b^  +  A:.&ilJ.cos.v  -f  &c. [8908w,  a;]

Comparing  together  the  two  last  of  the  developments  of  V  in  [8908mj  y],  and  resuming
the  values  of  A^,  B^  [8908c],  we  easily  deduce,
[89082]  .2  =  ^0  ==  JT.  1 6^5  ;  5e  =  ^,  ==  ^.6^ .

The  values  of  ^6^, 615 , ^"^^  S^^^"  ^"  [989]  ; and  by  putting  a  =  —  c,  as  in  [8908t>],
we  obtain,

„ .  „,,,,,  C  . 1.1 - 1 1.1.3 , 1.3 1.1.3.5 . . >

If  we  neglect  the  square  of  e, as  in  [8921],  these  expressions  will  become A:=K,
[8909c] B  =  K; being  the  same  as  those  which  are  deduced  from [8922,8923],  by  putting

When  e  is  large,  the  values  of  A,  B,  can  be  more  easily  obtained  by  the  method  of

elHptical  functions,  with  the  tables  published  by  Legendre,  which  give,  by  mere  inspection,

I  oyuy  w  I  ,  .111

the  values  of  .^,  B  ;  and  as  this  example  shows  the  importance  of  these  functions,  we  shall

compute  the  formulas  which  are  necessary  in  this  calculation. For  this  purpose  we  shall
[8909e] put c=  fj;-} and  shall  use  the  symbols  given  in  [82a,  b],  being  the  same  as  the  values

[8909/]  of  A(c,  (p),  F(c,  (p),  E(c,  (p),  F\c)y  E^c)  [8910t— A].  Substituting  the  first  value
of  V  [8908w]  in  [8908^],  we  get  the  first  form  of  A„  [8909A]  ; its  second  form  is

^  ^■'  obtained  by  putting  v  =  2(p  ;  its  third  by  making  cos.2(p=l — 2.sin.'^(p  ;  then  substituting
c,  E^  [8909e,/],  we  successively  obtain,

X.vii.«^18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  615

is  developed  in  a  series,  arranged  according  to  the  cosines  of  (v — w)  and [8907']

^0  =  -  'f^l  l+2e.cos.v+e2  j^.rfv  =  ^  .f^^\  l+2e.cos.2(p+e2}i.2rf(p  [890%]

tytr  Qir

=  — .(l+e)./i'^\/l_c2.8in2cp.(^=  — .(l+e).Ei(c)=^. [8908c].  [8909ft]

X—l €2

Putting for a moment X=  l-j-2e.cos.v -f- ^^j we get cos.v  =  — ^ , and [8909f]

V  =  KX^  [8908m]. Then  from  [8909A,  1c]  we  have,

yj^{l4-2e.cos.v+e2}i.f/v=y;^Xi.e/v==2.(l-|-e).Ei(c);  [8909Z']

and  [8908/]  gives,  by  successive  reductions,

^^=^'fo''iX-l-e^)'XUv==f^  .f,^X^.dv^~.{l+e^).frXUy  [8909m]

=  fe  'fr^'^'dv-  ~  .  (l+e).(l+e«).EXc).  [8909n]

The  term  in  [8909w],  under  the  sign  /,  may  be  simplified  by  substituting,  as  in  [8909g-],
v  =  2(p;  whence  we  have,  .

X^=5l+2e.cos.29+e2p  =  ^l4-e)»— 4c.sin.2(p}i  =  (l+e).v/l-c2.sin.2(p  =  (l+e).A ; [8909p]

writing  for  brevity A,  instead  of A(c,  cp)  =  y/l— c2.sin.29  [8910i]. Substituting  this, [8909^']
and  dv  =  ^d(p  [8909o],  in  [8909n],  we  get,

A  =  —  - {l+e)\fl^AU<p^  ^ . (1+c). (l+e2).EXc).  [8909g]

Now  it  is  easy  to  prove,  by  differentiation,  that  we  have  generally,  for  any  value  of  cp,

/A3.£?9  =  ^c2.sin.(p.cos.9.A-{-i(l— Jc2).E(c,(p)— i.(l— c2).F(c,(p).  [8909r]

For  by  taking  its  differential,  dividing  by  d(pj  and  using  the  values  E(c,  (p),  F(c,  (p),
[8909/ J,  then  writing  the  terms  down  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur,  without  any
reduction,  we  obtain,

a3  =  ^c2.(cos.2  9— sin.2cp).A — Jc^sin.^ip.cos.^ip.A-* +f.(l— |c2).A — ^.(1— c2).A-».  [8909^]

Multiplying  this  by  3A,  and  substituting  cos.2(p  =  l — sin.^9,  it  becomes  as  in  [8909^].
Connecting  together  the  terms  depending  on  A^,  we  get  [8909m]  ;  substituting
A^=  1 — c^.sm.^cp,  we  obtain  [8909v]  ;  and  by  successive  reductions,  it  changes  into  SA"*,
[8909ifj],  as  in  the  first  member  of  [8909^] ;  therefore  the  diflferentials  of  both  members  of
[8909r],  are  equal  to  each  other;
3A4  =  c2.(l— 2.sin.2(p).A24-c4.(_siu.2<p-fsin.4(p)+(4— 2c2).a2— (1— c2)  [8909/]

=  (4_c2_2c2.sin.2(p)  .A^Jr{(^—[—c^.sm.\-{-c*.sm*(p)  [8909u]

=  (4_c2— 2c2.sin.2(p)4-c2.sin.2(p.(— 4+c2+2c2.sin.2(p)+(c2— 1— c*.sin.2(p4-c^sin.V) [8909u]
=  3— 6c2.sin.2(p-f  3c'».sin.V  =  3.(1— c^.sin.^fp)^  =  3A4  ;  [8909m>]

616  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.Ca

[8907''] its  multiples,  in  the  following  form  ;

observing  that  the  expressions ±c^, ±c^.sin.^(p, in [8909w], mutually  destroy  each
[8909a:] other. The  first  term  of  the  second  member  of  the  integral  [8909r],  vanishes  at  the  two
limits 9  =  0, <p  =  |ff, and  the  general  integrals E(c,  9), F(c,  9), become E^(c),
F^(c)  [89]0m,n],  respectively;  therefore  we  have,

t^^^^^  ft^''df>  =  H^-ic^) '  E^(c)-i.(l-c2).Fi  (c).

Substituting  this  in  [89095-],  ^"^  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  obtain,

01?"  Ql(^

[8909Z] ^^=  -^.5(l-|-e)3.4(l_|,2)_(i_^,).(l_^,2;)|.E^(,)__^^.(l+,)3.(i_c2).p(,)  .

[8910a] and  since c2  =  -ii- [8909e], gives 1— ic2  =  [^±^, l-c2  =  5-J^,  it  becomes,

[89106]  A  =  £.(l+6).|(l+e2).EXc)-(l-e)^Fi(c)l ;

substituting  this  in B  =  A^.e~^  [89095],  we  obtain,
[8910c]  5  =  £^^.(l+e).{(l+e^).E'(c)-(l-e)2.F(c)S.

The process  we  have  here  used in finding A,^  or  A^ by  a  series [8909fl,  h],  or  by
[8910</] elliptical  functions  [8909Z(r,  89106],  may  be  used  when 9(— ) is  supposed  to be of a

different  form  from  that  which  is  assumed  in  [8908p] ;  as,  for  example,  we  may  suppose,
[8910e]  ,(i)=£,  +  ^.+^.  +  5  +  . ...  +  «»;

and  by  re-substituting  the  value  of  r  [8902],  we  can  reduce  the  expression  of  V  to  the
last  form  in  [8908(/J,  and  then  Ji^,  A.^,  may  evidently  be  obtained  by  means  of  elliptical
functions.  This  calculation  has  been  made  by  Plana,  in  a  valuable  memoir  on  the
resistance  of  the  ethereal  medium,  published  in  Zach's  Correspond ance  Astronomique,
he,  vol.  13,  page  341,  &,c.  Instead  of  finding  the  values  of  the  differentials  de,  da,  dn,
in  terms  of  the  differential  of  the  true  anomaly  dv,  as  La  Place  has  done  in
[8909^,8915,  &c.].  Plana  gives  them  in  terms  of  the  differential  of  the  excentric  anomaly
[8910/"]  iJ,u,  according  to  the  method  which  is  used  by  La  Place,  in  computing  the  perturbations  of
a  comet,  in  [7872,  &;c.].  We  may  remark  that  the  values  of  A^,  A^,  &c.  [8908rf],  may
be  derived  from  Aq,  A^,  by  a  similar  method  to  that  which  is  used  in  [966,  &c.].

The  expressions  of  .^,  B  [8909A:,  8910c],  contain  the  elliptical  functions  F\c), E^c),

18910^]  .  .  2t/c

which  require  the  computation  of  c=— j—  [8909e],  from  the  given  value  of  e. This

may  be  avoided  by  reducing  these  functions  to  others,  depending  on F^(e), E^(e). In
^ ^J making  these  reductions  we  shall  use  the  method  and  notation  of  Legendre,  putting  as  in
[82a,  5,  &c.].

[8910e'J

X.  vii.  ^  18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  45 J  7

K.U^\r\{\+2e.cos.(v-7;s)+e'li^A-^Be.cos,(v--^)+Ce\^^^

[8908]

(^=^~;  sin.(29'-(p)  =c.sin.<p;  [8910/^]

l-\-c

A  (c,  (p)  =  v/l— c2.sin.2(p  ;  A  (c',  <p')  =  v/1— c'2.sin.2(p' ;  [8910i  ]

F(c,  9)  =  r-^=J^=== ;  F(c',  (?')  =  /*, ^"^  ;  [8910A]

E(c,  (p)  =yH(p.v/l— c2.sin.2(p ;  E  (  c',  9')  =/<:i(p'y  1— c'^-sin.s  <?/ ;  •  [8910/  ]

^ J •/  0 /i_c2.sin.2ip'  ^ -' -^  0 y/i_c'2.sin.2(|/'  *•  -"

Ei(c)  =yj'^  «?9.v/l— c2.sin.2(p  ; E^(c')  =y|'^  <^(p'.v/l-c'2.sin.2  cf/.  [8910n]

Having  found  c',  9',  from  c,  9,  by  means  of  the  assumed  equations  [8910A],  we  shall
have  the  following  integral  formulas ;

F (c',  <pO  =  i  (IH-c).F(c,  9)  ;  [89100]

^^"^'^P')  =  j:^.E(c,9)-|(l~c).F(c,9)+j^^.sin.9;  [89iqp]

Fi(c') ==(l+c).Fi(c);  '  [8910g]

^'(^) =i:^-EXO-(l-0-FX^)-  t8910r]

For  by  using  the  symbol A for v/1— c2.sin.29, as  in  [8909/],  we  shall  have,  from  the [sgiOr^
second  equation  [89I0A],  and  [23]  Int.,

A  =  v/l— {c-sin.9)2  =  v/l-sin.2(29'— 9)  =  COS. (89' —  9)  ;  [89105  ]

COS.29'  =  COS.  { (29' — 9)4-9}  =cos.(29' — 9).cos.9 — sin. (29' — 9).sin.9  =  COS.9.A — c.sin.^9. [8910<  ]

Substituting  this  last  value  of  cos.29',  in  2.cos.^9'=:l-|-cos.29V  2.sin.^9'=l— cos.29',
[1,6]  Int.,  we  obtain,

2.cos.^9'  =  1 — c.sin.^9  -|-  COS.9.A ;  [8910m]

2.sin.^9'  ^l-f-c.sin.^9  —  C0S.9.A.  [8910i>]

We  have,  by  developing  as  in  [21,  31]  Int.,  and  using  the  values  [8910A,  s],

sin.29'  =sin.(29' — 9-I-9)  =sin.(29' — 9)  .cos.9-f  003,(29' — 9).sin.9; or,
2.sin.9'.cos.9'  =  c.sin.9.cos.9-}-A.sin.9  =  sin.9.(c.cos.94-A).  [8910m)]

Substituting  the  value  of  c'  [8910A],  and  that  of  2.sin.29'  [8910y],  in  the  first  member  of
[8910a?],  altering  the  arrangement  of  the  terras  and  making  successive  reductions,  it
becomes  as  in  [8910y]  ;

(l-f-c)./!— c'2.sin.2  9'  =  ^(l_l-c)2_4c.sin.2  9'  =  \/{\-\-cf  — 2c.(l-|-c.sin.29— COS.9.A)  [8910a;]

=  v/^(l — c2.sin.29)+2c.cos.9.A-|-c^.(l — sin.29)  \

=  \/{a2-]-2c.cos.9.A-j-c2.cos.^9|  =A4-c.cos.9.  '• ^-'

VOL.  IV.  155

618  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8908'] A, B, C, being functions of e^, we shall have, by neglecting the

*d(p

The  differential  of  sin.(2^' — ^)=c.sin.^  [8910A],  gives,  by  using  [89105],

dcp
[8910z]  (^dp' — d<p).A=zcd<p.cos.<p;  hence df>'  ==—-  .{A-{-c.cos.<p).

Substituting  [89i0y,  z]  in  the  expression  of  F{c',<p')  [8910A:],  we  get,
[89U.]  F(</,  /)  =/-^j=^  =  J.(l+c)/^  =  i.(l+c).  F(c,  ^).  .

If  we  substitute  the  same  expressions  [89I0y,  z] in E(c',  cp') [89 lOZ],  and  multiply  it  by
2(I4-c),  using c2.cos.2^  =  c2— c2.sin.2^  =  c2— 1+A2  [8910/],  we  get,

[89116  ]  2.(l+c).E(c',  <p')  =  {2+2c).fd<p'.  v/l-c'2.8in.2(p'  =/'-^ .  (A-j-c.cos.'p)^

[8911c]  = /"-^  .{  a2+2c.cos.^.a+(c2— 1+A2)  J

[8911rf]  =  /*^  .  5  2a2+2c.cos.?).A+c2— 1 }

=  2j'd<p.A-\-2cJcl<p.cos.<p — {l—(?).r-

[8911c]  =2E(c,^)+2c.sin.<p— (1— c2).F(c,  <f>).

Dividing  this  by ^.(l+c)} we  get,
[8911/j  E(c',^')  =  ji-^  .E(c,^)-i.(l-c).F(c,  ^)+  j-^^  .sin.^.

,^^,, If  we  put sin.5  =  c.sin.'?, we  shall  have generally sin. 5, independent  of  its  sifijn,  less
[8911g"]  .

than  c; and  as c<^l, 5  must  be  less  than  a  right  angle ; and  we  shall  have  generally

2^' — ^  =  5, as  is  evident  from  [8910A]  ; hence  we  get 2ip'  =  ^-j-5. Now  when

[89llfc]  ^  =  0,  or <z>  =  180^^, 5  vanishes  [8911^],  and  we  have ^  =  2^'; so  that  if  we  take  the

integrals  relative to <|>', from <p'  =  0 to <p'  =  90'^, we  must  take  those  relative  to  <p

from  9=0 to (PsztISO"*; or  what  is  equivalent,  we  must  take  them  from <p  =  0  to

<p  =  90**,  and  double  the  results  ;  since  it  is  evident,  from  a  mere  inspection  of  the  formulas

[8911i'] [8910fc— n],  that  when  q>  =  ISO'', we  have ¥{c,  9)  =  2Y^{c) and E(c,  <p)  =  2Ei(c)  ;

observing  that  the  expression  of A,  and  the  elements  of  the  integrals,  are  the  same  for

[89n)fc] 9=:  90*^ — <pi, or 9  =  90'^+<p, ; <Pi  being  any  angle  less  than  90'^. Putting  therefore  at

first  9  =  0, 9'  =  0,  in  [8911a,/],  and  then 9=180'', 9'  =  90^  we  get,

[891.in  Y^{d)^{l-\-c),¥\c)',

[8911m]  W{d)  =  -^  .E^(c)— (1— c).F(4

rftQii  1  If  we  now  change  c  into  e,  the  expression  of  d  [8910A]  becomes  equal  to  that  of  c,
[8909e],  in  the  notation  used  by  La  Place  in  this  chapter.  Making  these  changes  in
[891lZ,m],  we  get.

X.  vii.  §  18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  619

periodical  functions  *  [8908"]

Fi(c)=(l+e).Fi(e);

[891 In]

Ei(c)  =  -^  .Ei(e)— (l-e).Fi(e).  [8911o]

l-\-e

Substituting  the  expressions  {891ln,  o] in  [8909A:,  8910c],  we  obtain,  after  making  some

slight  reductions,

2/r

^  =  _.{2Ei(c)— (1— e=).Fi(e)i  ;  C^^"?!

sJ£.^?^.Wie)-'i^.FHe)].  [8911,]

If  we  take  for an example  the  value  of e  =  0,8446862  =  sin.57''38'«  18* [4079»t], [8911r]
corresponding  to  Encke's  comet,  we  shall  have,  from  Legendre's  tables,

Fi(e)  =2,09575;  Ei(e)  =  1,23357.  [8911a]

Substituting  these  in  [8911^,9-],  we  get,

^  =  ^Xl,18838;  5  =  ^X0,90015;  [891K]

which  will  be  used  hereafter,  together  with  the  value  of  a  =  2,224346  [4079ffi],  and [8911m]
e  [891  Ir].

Finally,  if  we  substitute  the  values  of  A,  B  [891  Ip,  q\ in  [89082:],  we  get,  by  rejecting
the  common  factor  jBT,

U^  =  ^ .|2Ei(e)— (1— e2).FXe)  | ;  [8911«]

*iii  =  i.^<i±^.EV)-'i^.FHe)|,  [S91H

SO  that  we  shall  have 6i?^, 6i!|, by  means  of  elliptical  functions; and  by  a  similar [^39113.1
process  we  may  obtain  the  general  value  of  the  coefficient 6^'\  by  means  of  such  functions.
The  values  of  ¥J^ may  also  be  derived  from  those  in  [8911y,  ii?], using  the  formulas
[966, 975,  &c.],  and  putting a  =  — e  [890Sw]. Thus  from  [992]  we  obtain,

f  ==  ;7I3^-^2E^(^)-(l-^')-FHe)}  ;  [89112/]

^f  =  ;;7:(^.-  {(i+^^)-EKe)-(i-e^)-FK«)l-  [8911/]

In  like  manner  the  formulas  [990,  991]  give,  by  substituting  the  values  [891  lu,  w]^

6(o)=i.Fi(e);  [89112]

6y  =  — .  |Ei(e)— Fi(e) } ;  [89112^]

and  so  on  for  other  cases.

*  (4055) Substituting v— z3  =  v [89086], in [8908], and then multiplying by
2rfu.(l+2e.cos.v+e2)  • r  u  j  v r  r  [8912a]

a2.{l— e2)8

we  get  the  expression  of  the  second  member  of  [8906] ;  hence  we  have,

620  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.Cel.

r89091 rf  i  - l2A.{l+e^+^Be-ldv^
[8909]  rf.-_ a^l-e^)^  ' ""'

[8909Q  <fo=-  (l-e^^ ^•

Then  we  have,  as  in  [371  or  927],
[8910]  X  =  r.cos.t?  J  y  =  r.sin.t> ;

hence  we  get,*

[89126 ]  <?•  7  =  a^a-e^)ii '  I (^  +e^)'{'^-hBe.cos.y-\-hc.)+2e,co5.y.{Jl+Be.cos.y-\-hc.)  ] .

If  we  neglect  the  periodical  functions,  as  in  [8908^],  and  put  2e.cos.vXBe.cos.v= B^-l-kc,
[8912c]

[6]  Int.,  we  get  [8909];  developing  the  differential,  we  obtain  [8909^]. From  [8919]

[8912c?] we have log.n  = — |.log.a, whose differential  is —  =  —  §.  — ; substituting  da

[8909'],  and  multiplying  by  n,  we  obtain,

[8912c  ]  ^^  ^  n.\3A.{lJre^)  +  SBe^.dv  ^

a.(l —  e^)  2  '

which  will  be  used  hereafter.

*  (4056)  The  differential  of  x  [8910]  is  as  in  the  first  of  the  expressions  [8912/],
which  is  easily  reduced  to  its  second  form ;  then  substituting  the  values  [8904a],  we
get  [8912^, A];

[8912/*]  dx  ^ dr. cos.v — rdv. sm.v  =  —  T^dv.  }  —  —r- .  cos.i;  -] .  sin.t;  i

T^dv
[8912g]  = .  I — e.sin.(v — •cj).cos.r-j-[l+e.cos.(« — w)].sin.v?

[8912^]  = 71 .  ^sin.iJ-j-e.[sin.v.cos.(t> — ©) — cos.'i>.sin.(v — w)] }•

The  coefficient  of  e  between  the  parenthesis  in  this  last  expression,  being  reduced  by
[22]  Int.,  becomes  sin.fu — [v — to) |  =  sin.-ci ;  hence  this  value  of  dx  becomes  as  in
[J  [8911].  We  may  find  in  a  similar  manner  the  differential  of  y  [8910],  which  gives
successively  [8912^,  Z,  m\.  The  last  of  these  values  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8912],
by  using  [24]  Int. ;

c dr .  1  ')

[8912A;]  ciy  =  dr.sin.v -\- rdv.cos.v  =  r^dv.  <  -^-r  •  sin.i;-| — . cos.v  i

T^dv
[8912Z]  ^  "Ti i"  *  l^'Si"*(^' — TO).sin.i'-{-[l+e.cos.(i; — c:f)].cos.«|

[8912m]  =  — .  I  cos.i--{-e.[cos.r.cos.(i? — w)+sin.v.sin.(r — w)J  \ .

This  value  of  dy might  also  have  been  easily  derived  from  that  of  dx, by  decreasing

'1

X.vii.<§>18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  621

[8911]

dx  = r, .  Csin.v  +  e.sin.ttf)  ;

«.(1 — e-*) ^

T  dv
dy  = — - — ^fT.fcos.i^+c.cos.w).  [8912]

^  a.(l — e-^) ^  ^

From  these  we  easily  deduce,*

[8912n]

the  angles  v,  ■a,  by  a  right  angle  ;  for  this  does  not  alter  the  angle  v — ■&,  or  the  value  in
i  [8904a] ;  but  it  changes  the  first  expression  of  dx  [8912/],  into  the  first  expression  of  dy,
[89I2A:]  ;  therefore  by  making  the  same  changes  in  the  values  of  v,  «,  in  dx  [8911],  we
shall  get  dy  [8912].

*  (4057) Multiplying  [8904]  by 2K.(p(-\ and substituting the  developed  value
[8908],  we  get,

2KJ^\ds  =  ^^^. .  {A-{-Be.cos.{v—'a)-\-  Ce^cos,{<iiv—2zs)-\-hc.  ] .  [8913a]

Multiplying  this  by xdy — ydx  =  r^dv, and  by t^  = ' ,  ^ [8901],  we  obtain,

2K.<p(^\  ^.(xdy—ydx)==^ .  {Ai-Be.cos.{v—vi)+Ce^.cos.{2v—2':,)-\-hc.].  [89136]

Theproduct  of  [89136]  by  dx  [891 1],  being  substituted  in  [8898],  gives  [8913c];  and
in  like  manner  the  product  of  [89135]  by  — dy  [8912],  being  substituted  in  [8899],
gives  [8913J] ;

d.(e.sin.zi )  = — -  . {sin.u  ~\- g.sin.w} . \jl-\-Be.cos.{v — w)-|- Ce^.cos.(2u — 2w)-}-&£C. } ; [8913c ]

^.(e.cos.'cj)  = — ^  .|cos.t;-j-c.cos.w|.{.^-^-J5e.cos.(« — ts)-\-Ce^.cos.(2v—2'&)-{-hc.}. [8913cri

Multiplying  together  the  factors  in  the  second  member  of  each  of  these  expressions,
substituting  sin.«.cos.(« — 'K)=^.sin.'5j+&;c. ;  cos.t>.cos.(t; — •s3)=J.cos.w-|-Sic.  [18,20]
Int.,  and  retaining  only  the  terms  which  are  independent  of  v,  we  obtain,  from  [8913c],
the  expression  [8913];  also  from  [8913d!],  the  expression  [8914].  If  we  develop  the
differentials  in  the  first  members  of  [8913,  8914],  they  will  become  of  the  following  forms

respectively,  usmg  for  brevity  the  symbol C  =  — - — ^— ;  [8913/^]

de.shiM  -{-edzs.cos.'a  =  —  C.sin.xif ;  [8913g']

fZe.cos.-ss — ed-a.s'm.vs=^  — C.cos.-a.  [8913A]

Multiplying  [8913^] by sin.w, and [8913^]  by cos.w, then  adding  the  products,  and
using sin.^5i-|-cos.^'5i=  1, we  get de  =  — C,  as  in  [8915, 8913/]. Again  multiplying [8913t]
[8913^]  by cos.trf,  and  [8913A]  by — sin.zs, adding  the  products  and  making  the  same rsgisji
reduction,  we  get dzi  =  0, as  in  [8916]. Finally  as dy, d6, vanish [8886A],  the
secular  variations  are  reduced to  the  finding of  those  of  a, e  [8909^,  8915], as  in ^ -■
[8916'];  those  of  n  being  derived  from a  [8912d].

VOL.  IV.  156

[8913c]

622  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Gel.

,^^,„, ,  . . . ( 2 A 4- B).edv. sin. -a
8913]  d,(e.sm.^)  =  —  ^ — ^,/ 3, ;

^  '^  a.(l — e-*)

[8914]  c?.(e.COS.-ra)  =  —  ^ -I— ^ — .

0.(1 — e'*)

Hence  we  obtain,  as  in  [8913i,  A;],

[8915]  de  =  —  - — J- — ^  ;

^ ■•  a.(l — e^)

[8916]  d^  =  0.

Therefore  the  perihelion  is  immovable,  and  there  is  no  variation  except  in
the  greater  axis,  and  in  the  excentricity  of  the  orbit  [8913/J.

v?[j^ations Dividing the  expression  of de  [8915] by that of da  [8909'], and
multiplying  the  quotient  by da,  we  get,

, _ {2A-i-B).e.{l—ee).da
~  'a.Y2A.{l+ee)-}-2Be^l  '

If  we  integrate*  this  differential  equation,  we  shall  obtain  e  in  terms  of  a ;

*  (4058)  Instead  of  proceeding  in  this  general  manner,  it  will  be  found  sufficient,  for
[8917a]  all  practical  purposes,  to  integrate  the  expressions  of  da,  de,  dn  [8909',  8915, 891 2e],
for  one  complete  revolution  of  the  comet,  or  from  v=0  to  v  =  2'f;  supposing  the
elements  of  the  orbit  in  the  second  members  of  these  equations  to  be  constant  during  this
period,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  their  variations.  By  this  means  we  shall  have,  for
the  corresponding  variations  6a,  Se,  Sn,  respectively,  the  following  expressions ;

{2^.(1 +e2)  +  2Be2}.2*^

of  the
elements

[8917]

[89176]

[8917c]  Sa  =  —

[8917rf]  ^e  =  —

{l-er
{2A-{-Bl.e.2ir  ^

a.(l— e2) '

[8917e  ]  Sn  = n.f3^.(l+e^)+3ge^j.2.  -

a.(l— e2)2

Substituting  in  these formulas  the  values  of  A,  B,  a,  e  [8911^,  M,r],  corresponding  to
Encke's  comet,  and  to  the  hypothesis  which  he  has  assumed  for  the  resistance,  we  obtain,

[8917g]  5a  =  — 4 1 0,057 .  ^ ;

[89m]  5e=—  27,290.  iBT;

[8917i]  6n=  1,434.^.

r8917t'l ^^^^  substitute  the  values  of  A,  B  [Q9\\p,q\  in  [8917c,  fi?,e],  and  then  put  t^  =  l—h^,
we  shall  obtain,  by  some  slight  reductions.

X.  vli.  <§>  18.]

EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.

623

and  by  substituting  this  value  of  e  in  the  expression  of  da  [8909'],  we  shall [8918]
have,  by  integration, 'o in  terms  of  a ; or a  in  terms  of  v.  [8918']

I*.'

fe  =  -4.  ^  .if.(2-3-|).F'  (e)  +  -3/ .  ^ .  Ji:.(i  -  |).E>(e)  ;

being  the  same  as  were  found  by  Plana,  in  vol.  13,  page  352,  of  Zach's  Journal  [8910e'],
and  used  in  Pontecoulant's  Theorie  Anahjtique,  he,  vol.  3,  page  288.

Plana,  in  the  memoir  we  have  just  referred  to,  makes  the  numerical  calculations  of  the
values  of  Sa,  de,  in  two  particular  cases.  First;  where  the  density  is  constant,  or  all  the
terms  of  the  series  [8910e]  vanish  except  B^.  Second ;  where  all  the  terms  of  the  same
series  vanish  except  B^ ,  which  is  the  same  as  Encke's  hypothesis  [8908/?] ;  the  numerical
results  of  Plana,  in  this  last  case,  agree  very  nearly  with  those  in  [8917^ — i].  Encke
uses  the  common  method  of  quadratures  [7929a?,  Sic],  in  finding  the  values  of  Sa,  8e,
considering  t  as  the  independent  variable  quantity,  and  computing  the  co-ordinates  at
equal  intervals  of  time.  He  found  this  method  to  be  convenient,  because  these  co-ordinates
had  been  previously  ascertained  by  him,  in  making  the  calculations  of  the  perturbations  of
the  comet  by  the  action  of  the  planets.  The  intervals  he  used  were  4  days,  when  the
comet  was  near  its  perihelion,  and  within  the  sphere  of  the  attraction  of  Mercury;
afterwards  12  days  were  taken,  until  the  comet  had  passed  the  sphere  of  attraction  of  the
Earth  and  Venus,  when  the  intervals  were  augmented  to  36  days.  Encke  remarks  that
the  periodical  inequalities  arising  from  the  resistance  can  be  neglected,  on  account  of  their
smallness  [8908^] ;  that  the  secular  inequalities  of  6,  y,  -m,  vanish  [8913/],  and  da
depends  on  dn  [8912c?J ;  so  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  use  the  method  of  quadratures  in
computing  the  two  elements  n,  e ;  observing  that  the  perturbations  of  the  epoch  s  may  be
included  in  the  double  integration  which  is  required  in  computing  fndt.  We  shall  give
the  formulas  used  by  Encke,  and  shall  retain  his  notation,  as  it  is  often  referred  to  in
speaking  of  this  comet. The  symbols  he  uses  are  the  following ;

The  sun's  mean  distance  from  the  earth  is  the  unit  of  distance ;

The  unit  of  time  is  a  mean  solar  day  ;

The  unit  of  velocity  is  that  by  which  a  body  describes  the  space  1  in  the  time 1  ;

A;  =  0,017202...  [5988(9)]  represents  in  these  measures  the  velocity  which  the  earth

would  have,  if  it  described  a  circle  about  the  sun,  at  the  distance  1 ;  being  the  same

as C7[711'];  so  that  we  have,  as  in  [711'], fji.  =  A;^;

ds
V=  —  =  the velocity  of  the comet in  its  orbit,  as  in [709"J ;  so  that  we  have

^'  =  ^  =  ^'•17-7!  [^">S9"»J5

[8917A;]
[8917^']
[8917Z ]

[8917/']
[8917m]

[8917nj']
[8917w]

[8917o]

[8917p]
[8917q]

[8917r]
[89175 ]
[8917f  ]

[8917«]
[8917t;]
[8917tr]
[8917m/]

624  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

rooiQi To  obtain  the  value  of  v  in  terms  of  t,  we  shall  observe  that,  if  we  reject
loyiyj

the  periodical quantities,  we shall have dv  =  ndt [1038]; moreover

[89172/]

[8917r]  U  represents  the  resistance  which  the  comet  would  suffer  in  moving  in  the  resisting
medium,  supposing  the  density  of  the  medium  to  be  uniformly  the  same  as  that  at
the  distance  1  from  the  sun,  and  the  velocity  of  the  comet  to  be  1.

[8917z] Now  the  resistance  being  supposed  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  square  of  the  velocity

[8918a] by  the  density <p(-7)> its general expression will  be represented  by U.(pf-j.?^^,
which  is  similar  to  the  expression  of  La  Place, K.c^ii—  j.  —  [8886], or  as  it  may  be

[89186] written, K.cpi  —  \.V^  [8917w]  ;  and  by  comparing  them  together,  it  would  seem,  at  first

view,  that  we  should  have  K  equal  to  U. But  this  is  not  the  case,  as  will  be  evident  by

comparing  the two  expressions  together, in  the  case  where  the  velocity  of  the  comet  is

- equal  to  that  of  a  body  revolving  about  the  sun  in  a  circular  orbit, at  a  distance  equal  to

that  of  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  where r  =  a=l. In  this  case  we

rftQlR/*!

have  in  Encke's notation V=k  [8917i^'], and  in  La  Place's  notation y=  U=l,
[8899c] ;  substituting  these  values  respectively  in  [8918a5  b],  and  putting  the  two  results

equal  to  each  other,  we  get U.(p  (  — ).  Zc^  =  K.cp  (  —  ) ;  dividing  this  by (p  ( —  ) ,  we  obtain
[8918rf]  \^/  \^/  V'"/

jK'=U.A:2  =  Um'  [8917t;],  which  will  be  used  hereafter.

Instead  of  computing  the  quantity  de  directly,  Encke  puts e  =  sin.cp, p  =  a.{l — e^),
[8918c] also  u  equal  to  the  excentric  anomaly,  as  in [5985(1,5,9)];  and  he  then  assumes  the
following  values  for  the  determination  of dn, dcp  ;

dn  nTT  7  4 1 /  2 1  \  3

at  r3.cos.<p \r  a  /

The  expression  [8918/]  is  easily  deduced  from  that  of  dn  [1181]  ;  for  by  dividing  it  by  dt,

[8918g-'] we  get  —  =  —  .  —  ; substitutmg 37  =  -^-  ■;^  •  (  37  ) [8899a,  8908^], it becomes

dtt  Jv ctjt /  ds  \

[8918/1,] _=  3.  —  .  —  .(—  j  . Now  we  have  in  [5987(12)],  by  neglecting  the  mass  m  of  the

_3  Jc

comet  in  comparison  with  that  of  the  sun, n  =  ka  ^, whence an  =  -—', moreover
[8918t]  va

—  =U  [89l8tZ]. Substituting  these  and  the  value  of — [8917?^;'], in the preceding

A*  L  J — to  — -  dt

dn

expression  of  — [8918A],  it  becomes  as  in  [8918/*]. The  equation  [8918^]  is  easily

[8918&] deduced  from  [1262];  for  by  dividing  it  by edt, and  using  the  values  of (^)j ^-^j

X.  vii.  <§>  18.]  EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  625

we  have,  as  in  [1044"],  w=a  ^;  hence  we  deduce,

[8919']

dt  =  a^M.  t8920]

[8918i ]

[8886^,8918^'], also (pT- J  =  —,  we  get  [8918n] ;  substituting r^dv  =  a^ndt.\/l-t^i

tr

[1260],  and —  =  U  [8918<Z],  it  changes  into  [8918o]. This  is  reduced to the form
[8918p],  by putting aV=fc^ p=a.(l— e^) [8918i,  e],  and using the  value  of

—  [8917if>']. Dividing  the  expression  of  r  [7855]  by  \ra^  we  get = .cos.w; [8918m]

substituting  this  in  [8918p],  we  get  the  first  expression  of  [89I85']. Lastly,  substituting
the  value  of —  [8917if/],  we  get  the  second  expression  in  [8918^]  ;

—  _  «W-v/i^^ ^ ds.r^dv  _  a.(l— e2) j^ ^  [8918nl

dt  H-e *  r2  • dt^  M-e '  r^  '  dt^  ■'

U ds a.(l-c9)

r2 dt

V ds p (  fc2

C „ „ ds^} U ds p (  a3n2 ds"^  >

1^'dt'e'la  '\r  aj$ r^  '  dt  '  e  ' '{a r>

72 2U ,3 /2 1\J
.^A:-*.cos.M  =  —  —  .Ar^jp.cos.M.f j'*.

2U ds_
r3  '  dt

[8918iJ]
[8918?]

[8918r]
[89185]

Now  the  differential  of  e  =  sin.(p  [8918e],  is  de=dcp.cos.<p;  substituting  this  in  [89182^],
and  then  dividing  by  cos.<p,  we  get  [8918^].  The  two  formulas  of  Encke  [8918/,^],
are  equivalent  to  those  of  La  Place  in [8909^,  8915] ; dcp taking  the place of  de,

[8915,8918e,^],  and dn  taking  the  place  of <?.—  [8909,  8918/,  891 2rf]. We  may

incidentally  remark  that  if  we wish  to  compute  the  perturbations by^  the method  of
La  Place  [7872,7873,  &;c.],  by  expressing  dn,  dcp,  he.  in  terms  of  u  and  du,  we  may
easily  obtain  the  formulas  which  are  to  be  used,  by  substituting  r  =  a.(l — e.cos.w)  [7855], [8918f]
and ndt  =  du.(l — e.cos.w) [7882], in  the expressions of the differentials given in
[8918/,^,  &c.].

Encke  computed  the  places  of  the  comet  in  the  observations  in  its  several  appearances,
from  1786  to  1819,  and  compared  the  calculated  with  the  observed  places,  so  as  to
determine  the  corresponding  differences,  after  allowing  for  the  action  of  all  the  planets.
He  also  estimated  the  effect  of  a  resisting  medium,  and  that  of  a  change  in  Jupiter's  mass,
and  then  combined  these  results  of  the  observations  by  the  method  of  the  least  squares,
[849/i:],so  as  to  obtain  the  most  probable  estimate  of  the  actual  effect  of  this  resisting
medium,  and  the  most  probable  correction  to  be  applied  to  the  value  of  Jupiter's  mass,  as
we  have  already  observed  in  [5980ot]. The  final  results  given  by  him,  in vol.  9, page

342,  oiihe  Astronomische  NachrichteUj  IS  for  Jupiter's  mass,  and  U=  r———; [8918«]

VOL.  IV.  157

[8918w]

626

MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.

[Mec.  Gel.

Substituting  for  a,  its  value  in  terms  of  v  [8918'],  and  then  integrating,  we

r8920'l  o  '  1.  -I  o  o'

shall  have  t,  in  terms  of  v ;  and  reciprocally  v  in  terms  of  t.

[8918r'J whence  we  have K  =  \J.Jc^=^

(0,017202)2

[8918rf]. This value  of  K

[BDlBw;]

[8918x]

[89183/]

[8918z]

[8919a]
[89196]
[8919c]

[89l9d]

[8919e]

[8919/]
[S9l9g]

[8919;i]

V^=-—-=§ [8899^] nearly,

890,852  3010529

about ^ part  of  the earth's mass, or ^m" [4061]; therefore when r=l, and

the expression of the resistance

[89186,  8908p],  becomes  nearly  equal  to  WxiXf,  or  ^m".  Hence  it  follows  that
when  the  comet  is  at  the  same  distance  from  the  sun  and  earth,  so  that  the  three  bodies
are  situated  in  the  angular  parts  of  an  equilateral  triangle,  whose  side  is  equal  to  unity,  or
to  the  mean  distance  of  the  earth  from  the  sun,  the  action  of  the  resisting  medium  upon  the
comet  will  retard  its  progress  in  the  direction  of  the  tangent  of  its  path,  with  a  force  which
is  about  one  sixth  part  of  the  attraction  of  the  earth  upon  the  comet,  drawing  it  towards
the  earth's  centre.  We  must  not  however  consider  these  results  as  having  much  claim  to
accuracy,  since  they  are  grounded  wholly  upon  the  arbitrarily  assumed  law  of  the  density

of  the  medium <p^— j=—  [8908^];  and  the  slightest  attention  will  make  it  apparent,

that,  with  a  different  law  of  the  density,  we  might  obtain  a  very  different  result ;  moreover
the  imperfections  of  the  observations  have  a  very  important  bearing  on  the  whole
calculation.  However  as  this  assumed  law  is  a  very  natural  one,  and  many  observations
have  been  combined,  we  may  consider  the  result  in  [89l8u']  as  the  nearest  approach  to  the
true  value  of  the  resistance  K,  which  can  be  obtained,  with  our  present  knowledge  of  the
path  of  the  comet,  and  of  the  law  of  the  density  of  the  ethereal  fluid.

If  we  substitute  the  value  of  K[89i8v']  in  [8917^,  A,  i],  we  shall  get,

5a  =—0,0001362;

(5e  =—0,0000091;

<5n  = 0',0983 ;

observing  that  we  have  multiplied  the  expression  of  5n  by  206265%  to  reduce  it  to
sexagesimal  seconds.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  elaily  motion  n  of  the  comet,  which  is
about  1070%  is  increased  about  a  tenth  of  a  second  in  one  revolution  of  the  comet;
therefore  the  time  of  its  periodical  revolution,  which  is  a  little  over  1200  days  [4079/»J,
will  be  decreased  about  one  tenth  of  a  day  in  each  revolution ;  and  the  mean  distance  a
will  be  decreased  about  x^^tnr  o^  its  value  a  [891  Iw],  in  the  same  time.  We  may
observe  that  the  values  of  5a,  8e,  dn,  given  by  Pontecoulant  in  vol.  3,  page  297,  of  his
Theorie  Analytique  du  Systeme  du  Monde,  are  much  too  great,  and  must  be  multiplied  by
fc2=^^^  nearly,  to  obtain  the  values  given-in  [8919a,  b,c].  This  difference  arises  from
his  having  used  the  value  ^=U,  instead  of  K=\Jk^  [89186^],  in  making  the
reductions  from  [8917^,  h,  t].

t

X.  vii.  §  18.] EFFECTS  OF  A  RESISTING  MEDIUM.  r#27

When  the  orbits  have  but  little  excentricity,  ive  shall  have^  by  neglecting
the  square  of  e,*

J= Ka\J^',  [8922]

B  =  — Za^cp (-i)  +  Ka,^ (i)  ;  [8923]

<f)'  f  —  j  6em^  the  differential  of  9  ( —  ) divided  by  the  differential  of  —  .  [8924]

*

(4059) Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  e^,  we  get,  from  [8902],

T  =  T  +  T  •  cos.(tJ— «)  ;  [8921a]

a

[89216]

hence  we  have,

Developing  this  according  to  the  powers  of  e,  by  Taylor's  theorem  [617],  retaining  only
its  first  power,  and  using  the  same  notation  as  in  [8924],  we  get.

The  expression  of  r  [8902]  gives r^=^a^.\\ — 2e.cos.(v — '^)\', the  product  of  this,  by
the  factor ^l-|-2e.cos.(u — ■ui)-\-c^\^ or l-|-e.cos.(u — «)-|-&Z'C., gives,  ■'

r2.{  l+2e.cos.(t;— 7n)+e2Ji=  a^.  \  l_e.cos.(v— t3)-|-&c. } .  [8921c  ]

Multiplying  together  the  two  expressions  [8921c,  e],  and  then  their  product  by  K,  we  get,
by  neglecting  e^,

X".9  Q-\r^-  { l+2e.cos.(t;— w)+e2|i  =  JSTa^.^  C^^K. )  -«^-'p(^)+«-<P'(^)  \  •  c.cos.(i;-z5). [8921/]

The  first  member  of  this  expression  is  the  same  as  that  of  [8908] ;  and  its  second  member
being  compared  with  that  in  [8908],  namely A-\-B.e.cos.{v — ts), gives  the  values  of [8921g']
A,  B ; the  terms  independent  of  cos.(v — to), give  the  expression  of  A  [8922], and
those  containing cos.(v — to) give  the  value  of  B  [8923].

If  we suppose, as in [8908p], cpf  — j  =  — , we shall have, as in [8909c], [8921^]

<p^i^  =  i, (p'^l\  =  l [8924]; and then [8922,8923] give A=K, [8921i]

B  =  — K-\-'^K=iK. Hence  the  expressions  of  da,  de  [8925,  8926],  in  the  case  of

de 3K  [892U]

a  nearly  circular  orbit,  become da  =  — 2K.dvj —  = .dv} lastly  the  expression

of  e  [8929]  gives e  =  qa^.

628  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.Cel.

Then  we  shall  have,*

(p  f  —  j is  always  positive,!  and f'  (  —  )  is  also  positive,  if,  as  is  natural  to

bIS suppose, <p(— )  increases  when  the  distance r from  the  sun  decreases ;

£Tm h''  ^^^''^''^  ^^  ^^^  same  time  that  the  planet  approaches  towards  the  surtj  by  the
Sm'*""'  effect  of  the  resistance  of  the  medium,  the  orbit  will  become  more  circular.
[8928] The  equations  [8925,  8926]  give,  J

[8929]  e  =  g.

[8927]

The  orbit
decreases
and
comes

e.

'G)

r  Excentricity  of  the  planet's  orbit.  |

*  (4060) Neglecting the square of e, as in [8921], we get, from [8909^],
[o9«5(l]

da  =  — 2Adv ; substituting the value of A [8922], it becomes as in [8925J.
[89256] Dividing the  expression  of de  [8915]  by e, we  get —  =  —  ^ — ^^^  .dv\ and  by-
using  the  values  of  A,  B  [8922, 8923],  it  becomes  as  in  [8926].

[8927a]

f  (4061) The  density  corresponding  to  the  distance  a is <p(  — )  [8885],  which  must

evidently  be  positive. Now  if  the  distance  a decreases,  so  that  —  increases  and  becomes

as

[89276]

[8927c]
[8927rf]

—  +  ^> ^  being  positive,  the  resistance  will  become  <pf  —  -|-  M  ;  and  by  developing  it

in  [8921c,  &X5.],  neglecting  5^  it  becomes <pf-)+5.(p'(-)  ;  therefore  upon  the  hypothesis

assumed  in  [8927],  this  must  exceed  the  resistance  corresponding  to  a;  consequently

5.(j)'(— ) must  be  positive;  and  as 5 is  jpostiive,  we  must  have ¥{~] positive, as in

de
[8927]. Hence  the  values  of  da, — [8925,8926],  are  both  negative; so  that  while

the  mean  distance a decreases,  the  excentricity  e  also  decreases ;  or,  in  other  words,  the
orbit  becomes  more  circular  by  means  of  the  resistance,  as  in  [8928].

J  (4062) Multiplying  the  equation [8926] by ^da, and  dividing  the  product  by

[8929a] ro^^r-i  •  u  •  1 .

[8925],  we  get,  with  successive  reductions.

X.  vii.  <§.  19.]

EFFECTS  OF  THE  RESISTANCE  OF  LIGHT.

629

q  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity. Hence  we  easily  perceive  that,  while

a decreases,  and ?  ( —  ) increases, the  value  of  the  excentricity e will

incessantly  decrease.

19.  If  light  consist  in  the  vibrations  of  an  elastic  fluid,  the  preceding
analysis  ivill  give  the  effect  of  its  resistance  upon  the  motion  of  the  planets
and  comets.  If  it  be  an  emanation  from  the  sun,  the  same  analysis  ivill  also
give,  with  some  slight  modification,  the  effect  of  its  resistance.  For  we  may
transfer  to  the  light,  and  in  a  contrary  direction,  the  real  motion  of  the
planet,  and  then  consider  the  planet  as  being  at  rest,  which  will  not  affect
their  mutual  action.  Then  the  light  will  act  upon  the  planet,  according  to
a  direction  a  little  inclined  to  its  primitive  path ;  and  it  will  communicate  to
the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  planet,  according  to  this  last  direction,  a  force
which  may  be  reduced  to  two  others ;  the  one  in  the  direction  of  the  radius
vector  of  the  planet,  the  other  in  a  direction  contrary  to  that  of  the  element
of  the  path  which  it  describes. We  shall  put,

4  =  the  velocity  of  light ;

ds  .

—  =  the velocity  of  the  planet  in  the  direction  of  the  arc ds of  its

orbit  [8885']  ;

(p)  =  the  density  of  the  sun's  light  at  the  distance  from  the  sun  which  is
taken  for  the  unit  of  measure  ;

P  =  the  density  of  the  sun's  light  at  the  distance  r  from  the  sun.

[8930]

[8931]

Resistance
of  light
considered
as  an
emanation
from  the
sun.

[8932]

[8933]
[8934]

Symbols.

[8935]
[8935']

[8936]
[8936']

„ rfe da , da

2.  —  =  —  +  -Y
e  a  a'^

da ,1

a  '  a

da
a

<7)

The  integral  of  this  last  expression  is  log.e2=lo°.fl! — log.cpf  —  j+log.j^;  q^  being  an
arbitrary  constant  quantity  [8930].  Reducing  this  to  natural  numbers  it  becomes
whence  we  get  e  [8929].

acf^

Ki)'

[8929a']

[89296]

[8929c]

VOL. IV.

158

630  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

[8937]
[8937']

[8938]

Then  as  the  intensity  of  the  sun's  light  decreases  as  the  square  of  the
distance  increases,  we  shall  evidently  have p  =  ^- . From  this  notation  it

follows,  that  the  two  forces  spoken  of  in [8934] are  to  each  other  as  the

ds  H  d

velocities 6 and -r  , and  they  can  therefore  be  represented  by* ~ and

at  r

H fl<t

—  .  —  . The  first  of  these  forces  is  in  a  direction  contrary  to  the  gravitation

towards  the  sun,  and  follows  the  same  law ;  it  must  therefore  be  confounded
with  the  force  of  gravity  towards  the  sun,  and  decreases it  a  little. The

[8938'] second  force -j  •  y is  in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  planet's  motion,

and  produces  a  resistance  to  that  motion. Putting  it  equal  to  the  expression

d^

ds^
of  the  resistance  [8886],  and  dividing  by -jg, we  get.

[8939]  jr.,(i)=-^.

^  '  dt

Substituting this  in [8894,  8898,  8899], we get the three following
equations  respectively  ;

[8940]  ^.i^fe.^;

a  r^ dt

2fl dx

[8941]  d.{e.sin.'a)  =  — ^  .  —  .  (xdy — ydx)  ;

2H dv
[8942]  d.(e,cos.^)  = ^  •  -T  •  i^dy—ydx).

*  (4063) The  forces  in  question  are  to  each  other  as  the  velocity  of  light  5  [8935]  to

ds
the  velocity  of  the  planet  in  its  orbit —  [8935'],  as  is  evident  from  what  is  said  in  [8934].

Moreover  these  forces  must  increase  with  the  density p='-j [8937], and they  will

therefore  be  proportional  to 6.  -^ and  .^  •  "^  5 ^"^^  hy  multiplying  them  by  a  constant

H  . ,  ,  H.&  H ds  . ro„oQi

[8938c] quantity —  , they  will  become  respectively  equal  to — and "^  •  "^  j ^s  in  Lb7d«j;

H  being  a  constant  quantity  depending  on  the  figure  of  the  planet,  its  density,  &c.

[8938a]

[89386]

X.  vii.<§>19.]

EFFECTS  OF  THE  RESISTANCE  OF  LIGHT.

631

These  three  equations  become,  by  neglecting  periodical  quantities,^

, 1 _  2H.dv.{l-\-e^)

'^  a^.(l— e^)^

,  , . ^  2J]fe.<7«.sin.'zrf

a.(e.sin.«)  =  —

,  ,  .  2He.dv.cos.'a

rf.(e.cos.ra)  = / ,, ..,  .

Hence  we  deduce,!

d^=0;

de  =

2He.dv _ eda.(l—e^)  ^

,3\ '

[8943]

[8944]

[8945]

dm.
[8946]
de.
[8947]

*  (4064) Substituting in [8940] the  values  of ds, dt  [8904,  8904c], we get

, 1 2F.rfv.{l+2e.cos.(r>— OT)+e2}  ,  ,  , . ,  • ,- ,  • .

a.  —  = 5 5 ; and  by  neglecting  the  periodical  terms,  it  becomes [8943a]

"  a^.(l-e2)2-

as in  [8940]. Dividing the first and third expressions  of  [8901] by dt, we  get

xdy—ydx  , ,  ,  ,  .  ,  . , 2H  , .  '

=  \/a.(l  — e2); and  by  multiplying  by — , we  obtain,

dt

^^.^.(xrf,-y..)  =  ?«V|TH3.

[89436]

Multiplying  this  successively  by dx, — dy  [8911,  8912],  we  get  the  second  members  of
[8941,  8942],  under  the  following  forms ;

sarfw

«?.(e.sin.7r( )  = —  -r — '- — ^.{sin.v+e.sin.w}  ;

J  t \ ^H.dv J  ,

a.(e.cos.is)  =  —  --, jj-.jcos.y-f-^.cos.'ztfj ;

and  if  we  neglect  the  periodical  terms sin.v, cos.v, they  become  as  in  [8944,  8945].

[8943c]
[8943c^

2He.dv
f (4065) If  we  put Cs=  — r— ^--=  in  the  second  members  of  [8944,  8945],  and

develop  the  differentials  in  the  first  members,  they  will  become  respectively  as  in
[8913^,  h] ;  and  from  them  we  may  deduce,  as  in  [8913^,  i],  dm  =  0,  de  = — C,  as  in
[8946,  8947J. But  from  [8943]  we  have,

, _  «^.(1— eS)^ J_ (t-e2)l.<?g ^

"  ~  2H.(l+e2)  a ~  ""  2HaK{l-\-e^) '

[8946fl]

[89466]

substituting  this  in  the  first  expression  of  de  [8947],  we  get  its  second  form. Lastly,

14^2  [8946c]

multiplying  the  first  and  third  forms  of  [8947J  by 7^ ^  , we  get  [8948].

c.(l— c  )

632  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Gel.

therefore  we  have,  as  in  [8946c],

da  {\-\-ee).de

[8948]  —  =  ^ TT \ .

a  e.(l — ee)

Integrating  [8948]  we  obtain,*

[8949]  1=?  =  "?; °f «  =  y-:(ir^;

q  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity. Substituting  this  value  of  a in  the

[8950]

first  formula  of  [8947],  we  get,t
[8951]  </e  =  —  2H.dv.^Je ;

e, which  gives,  by  integration,
[8952]  e  =  (  h—Hv,\/~q  f ;

[8933] h  being  an  arbitrary  quantity,  representing  the  square  root  of  e  ivhen  v=:0.
Substituting  in  [8920]  the  values  of a, dv  [8949,  8951],  we  get,  J

[8954]  dt  = r ;

and  then  by  integration,
[8955]  t  =  £

[8955^ s  being  an  arbitrary  constant  quantity. Substituting  for  e  its  value  [8952],
we  obtain.

*  (4066) The second member of [8948] may be reduced,  so  as  to become
[8949a] —  = \- ^ . Taking  the  integral, and  adding log.g' for  the  arbitrary  constant

as  in  [8949] .

t  (4067) Substituting a.(l— e^)  =  -  [8949],  in  the  first  expression  of  de  [8947],  it
[8953(z]  Q

j^  becomes  as  in  [8951]. Multiplying this  by Je"*, we  get |e~*<?e  =  — H.dv.^~q;

whose  integral  is e*  =  A — H.v.\/~q, as  in  [8952].

de

J  (4068) From  [8951]  we  obtain dv  =  — ^yj ._  ; substituting  this  value  of  dv
[8954a]  ^nyge

C e ^  ^ de  .

and  that  of a  [8949],  in dt  [8920], we  get ^^=— ^  TJZ^S *  25V^' ^^^'^^  '^

easily  reduced  to  the  form  [8954].  Its  integral  is  given  in  [8955],  as  is  easily  proved  by
taking  it?  differential.  Finally,  substituting  the  value  of  e^  [8952]  in  [8955],  we
get  [8956].

X.  vii.  *§>  19.] EFFECTS  OF  THE  IMPULSE  OF  THE  SUN'S  LIGHT.  633

t  =  s ^ .  [8956]

Reducing  this  to  a  series,  and  determining  s  so  that  v  may  commence  with  [8957]
tf  we  shall  have  very  nearly,*

*  (4069) Putting  ^  =  0  and  v  =  0  in  [8956],  according  to  the  hypothesis  in  [8957],

1  _ [89c8a]

we  obtain s  =  ^^j  2  /^_ui substituting  this  in  [8956],  and  developing {h — Hv.\/ qY,

we  obtain,  by  successive  reductions,  the  following  expressions  of  t)

/l3  3H.(/l3  +  /l6)

.«?

3..  — ^ — i.v^-\-hc.  [8958rf]

Taking  the  differential  of  [8958c?],  and  then  putting  v  =  0,  we  get,  at  the  commencement

h^.dv  .  dv  .  [8958e]

of  the  time  i  [8957], dt=—^ — '- -,;  but  we  have  in  this  case dt=  —  [8919], hence

1  T 3  1

—  =  1: 7 . Substituting  this  value  of  — in  the  first  terra  of  the  second  member raofCQ^  n

of  [8958c?J,  and v=nt in  its  second  term,  we  get,  very  nearly,

^  =  -  —  1  •  ^^ 5  [8958g]

multiplying  by n, and  transposing  the  last  term,  we  obtain,

At  the  commencement  of  the  time  t,  when  v  =  0,  the  expression  of  e  [8952]  becomes
f e  =  A^; and  we  may  substitute  this  value  of h^ in  the  small  secular  term  of  v  [8958A], [8958i]

§ depending  on n^t^) and  by  this  means  it  becomes '■ — .  ■  .iv^t^',  and  by  using  the [895841
2^.(1— e2)t  ■•  J

1 value  of  q  [8949],  it  is  reduced  to  —  3 .r?t^. Lastly,  putting  na^ra"^  [8919']

f  2-(l-^')^  [8958n

m  the  numerator,  It  changes  mto 5 —  .n^i-^; and by  this  means  the  precedmg

2.(l_e2)?Va
expression  of  v becomes  as  in [8958]. The  term  depending  on H is  the  secular
equation  [8959] ;  and  by  rejecting  terms  of  the  order  e^,  it  becomes,

SH.n  t  r  Secular  equation  of  a  planet  from  the  T  ronRQ n

2  ^„ '  L  impulse  of  the  sun's  light.  J  LoyOOntJ

VOL.  IV.  159

634  MOTION  OF  THE  MOON.  [Mec.  C^I.

[8958]  t,  =  w^  + ^^'^^t''^ .  nH^  ;
SrJn  2.(l-ce)^.v/«

of  a

depends" w,  c,  fl,  correspoTid  to  the  origin  of  the  time  t. The  second  term  of  the

un  H.

[8960]

[8959]  expression  of  v  is  the  secular  equation  of  the  planet,  depending  on  the
impulse  of  the  light,

20.  We  shall  now  determine  the  corresponding  secular  inequality  of  the
moon.  We  shall  mark  loith  one  accent,  for  this  satellite,  the  quantities  we
have  denoted  by  H,  a,  n,  for  the  planet,  which  we  shall  suppose  to  he  the
earth ;  and  we  shall  put a/,  if,  z!,  for  the  moon's  co-ordinates  referred  to

[8961]  the  earthh centre;  or  x-\-y^,  y-\-'i/i  z-\-z',  referred  to  the  sun^s  centre;  so
that  by  putting  the  sun's  distance  from  the  moon  equal  to  f, we  shall  have,*

[8962]  p  _  ^^j^^Y  _|_  (y+y).  j^  ^^^^y^

It  is  evident,  from  the  preceding  article,  that  the  action  of  the  sun's  light
produces  upon  the  moon's  centre,  and  in  directions  towards  the  origin
of  its  co-ordinates,  the  forces,

H' {dx-\-da!)^  H' {dy  +  dy')  H' {dz^-d^)

[8963]

P  dt '  f^  dt '  /2  dt

* (4070) Proceeding  in  the  same  manner  as  in  [8937'],  we  evidently  see  that  the

expression  of  the  resistance  to  the  earth's  motion,  in  the  directions  parallel  to  the  axes
[8962a]  jy

a?,  y,  z,  are  represented  by  the  product  of —  , by  the  velocity  of  the  earth,  resolved  in

dx dy dz
[89626] the  directions of  those axes,  namely, •— , — , — , respectively. Moreover the

uX  (tv  OfZ

rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  moon [8961], referred to  the sun's  centre, give  her
distance  from  the  sun  /, as  in  [8962],  by  the  usual  principles  of  orthographic  projections;

[8962c]

H  H'

[8962rf] so  that  the  quantity  which  corresponds  to — for  the  earth,  will  be — for the moon ;

and  as the velocity of the moon, resolved  in  directions  parallel to  these  axes, are

[8962c] -^ — , ^  ,, ,  ,,  ^  , respectively  [8961],  their  products  by  the  factor -— ,

at  at  at  j  ^

[8962/]

will  give,  as  in  [8962a,  h\  for  the  earth,  the  resistances  corresponding  to  the  moon's
motion,  as  in  [8963].  To  obtain  the  effect  on  the  moon's  motion,  in  her  relative  orbit
about  the  earth,  we  must  subtract  the  expressions  [8965]  from  the  corresponding  ones  in
[8962g-]  [8963],  and  we  shall  obtain  the  second  members  of  the  expressions  [8966,8967,8968],
representing  the  relative  forces  acting  on  the  moon  in  the  directions  of  the  co-ordinates,
and  tending  to  decrease  them. Now  these  forces  are  represented,  as  in  [8889,  &-c.],  by

\l^r (rf^)' (t^)' hence  we  obtain  the  expressions  [8966 — 8968].

[8962A]

X.vii.^20.] EFFECTS  OF  THE  IMPULSE  OF  THE  BUN'S  LIGHT.  635

We  must  subtract  from  these  expressions  the  forces  acting;  upon  the  earth's

.  [8964]

centre,  and  arising  from  the  same  cause,  if  we  wish  to  obtain  the  relative

motion  of  the  moon  about  the  earth's  centre. Now  these  forces  acting  on

the  earth's  centre,  are  represented,  as  in  [8962a,  6],  by,

II dx  E.  ^. I£  ^

therefore  we  shall  have  in  the  present  case,  as  in  [8962^,  ^],

dx' fU' H\ dx

/dR\  __  E _ ,

rdli\  jH' dl/  /-H'  ^\ ^y  rResittancesin  the  directions"!

1j] = -^'-77-r[-7^  —  -j]'-J7''» \-:^ V^-',--^  tending  to  [8967]

dt ' \P  r"  J dt'

\dy') p'  dt '^\p  r^J'  dt

d^J  ~  P'  dt "^  \P  ~~ r^)'~dt

Hence  we  get,^

the  characteristic d refers  only  to  the  co-ordinates  of  the  moon's  relative
orbit. The  secular  equation  of  this  satellite  is  as  in  [l]95],t

3aV

In  this  case n*  is  (he  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  earth  and  moon. If  we
neglect  periodical  quantities,  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  t

[8965]

[8966]

L  decrease  these  co-ordinal es  .J

dR\ H' dsf , /H' H\ dz

+  (^  — -v).^-  [8968]

B; {dcd^  +  dy'^+dz!^) fW H\ {dx.dx'-^dy.d^/^dz.d:e)  ^
r'  dt  \P r^J'  dt

[8970]

.rCdt.fd.K)  .  [  Secular  equation  of  the  moon.]  [8971  ]

[8972]

*  (4071) The  symbol  d  affects  only  the  co-ordinates  of  the  disturbed  orbit  [916',  &cc.],
so  that  in  this  case it  operates  only  on a/,  y',  z' ; therefore  the  complete  differential  of '• *■'
/?,  relative  to  the  characteristic  d,  is  represented  by,

and  by  substituting  the  values  [8966 — 8968],  it  becomes  as  in  [8969].

t  (4072) Neglecting  the  square  of  the  disturbing  force,  we  may  consider  an  constant

in  the  value  of  ^  [1195],  and we shall  have i^  =  ~  ./{dt.fdR)  ; then  accenting

the  letters  as  in  [8960],  so  as  to  correspond  to  the  present  case,  it  becomes  as  in  [8971]  ; [89716]
fx  being  the  sum  of  the  masses  of  the  earth  and  moon,  as  in  [530'''].

%  (4073) The  square  of  the  moon's  relative  velocity  about  the  earth,  is  represented,

djc'^-l-di/^A-dz'^ ^T ,  ,/,.,,,,  -1  1 • [8973a]

as  in  [39  ],  by —j — ■ . Now  the  arc  dv  j  described  by  the  moon  m  her  relative

636  MOTION  OF  THE  MOON.  [Mec.  C61.

[8973]  E  .  (d^!±dy:!±d^)\  _  H^  ^  ^>.^^^

P\  dt  J  a^ '

Moreover  we  have  very  nearly,*

[8974]  ^  E.^E  ^  1 ^W-^yy'+^^') }

[89751 ^^^^  ^y  if^king  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  for  the  fixed  plane,  we  shall  have

very  nearly,t
[8976]  X  =  a.cos.nt ;  y  =  a.^'m.nt ;  z  =  0 ;

[8977]  x'  =  a'.cos.n't ;  y'  =  a'.sin.n't.

[8977'] Therefore  by  neglecting  the  periodical  terms,  we  shall  .have,  t

^QQ  orbit about the earth in the time dt, is dv'  =  n'dt [8919,  8960], neglecting  the

excentricity ;  multiplying  this  by  the  mean  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  a',  and

dividing  by  the  time dt, we  get  the  mean velocity  of  the  moon  in  her  relative  orbit

rfiQT*^  1 ^^^"^ ^^^ earth equal to aV; hence we have, by using the mean values,
*■  •* ^x'^  +  dy'  z-\-dz'^

' =  a'^n'^. Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [8973],  and  putting

r8Q73rfl ^°^  "^  ^^^  mean value,  which  is  nearly  equal  to  the  distance of  the  earth from the
sun  a,  it  becomes  as  in  the  second  member  of  [8973].

*  (4074) Developing  the  terms  in  the  second  member  of  [8962],  neglecting  x'^,  y'^,  sf^,
on  account  of  their  smallness,  and  putting  as  in  [914'], x^-\-y^-{-z^  =  r^, we  get,

[8974a]  r=r^  +  2.{xx'+yy'-^z2^)=:r^,  ^  1+  ^  .{xx'+yy'+zz')  |  .

Substituting  this  in  the  first  member  of  [8974], it  becomes  as  in  the  second  member,
neglecting  x'^,  &c.

t  (4075) The  values  [8976,  8977]  are  similar  to  those  in  [8910],  as  appears  by
[8976a] substituting  for  r,  /, v,  v',  their  mean  values  a,  d, nt,  n'i ; and  putting  also ^  =  0,
because  the  ecliptic  is  taken  for  the  fixed  plane  [89751.

[8978a] t  (4076) Putting ^H==^H'  +(H'— fl),  in  the  last  term  of  d/2  [8969],  we  get,
^jl_H^ [dx'^  +  dy'^  +  dz'^) (  H'  _ H'\ [dx.dx'']-dy.d.i/-\-dz.dz')
P '  dt  "^  \P  r^  )'  dt

t®^^^^^  {H'—H) {dx.dx'-{-dy.dy'-\-dz.dzf)

+ r2 •  dt

Now  the  diflierentials  of  [8976,  8977]  give,

[8978c] dx=z — andt.s'm.nt; dy  =:andt. cos. ni ; daf  = —a'n' .dt.sin.n't ', di/=a'n'.dt.cos.n't;
hence  we  get,  by  using  [24]  Int.  and  putting dz  =  0.

X.  vii.  ^  20.] EFFECTS  OF  THE  IMPULSE  OF  THE  SUN'S  LIGHT.  637

J2  ,2  J  dt

Hence  we  deduce,  as  in  [8978i],

m  =  ^^.n'dUn'-n\  [8979]

or  ^  ^

Thus  the  moon's secular  equation,  depending  on  the  action  of  the  light,

will  be,*

^^•^  -^  .(n'^n).t\  [8980]

But  we  have /i"  =  -^, and n"  ==  \ [605',  89716,  8919']  ; hence  this [8981]
secular  equation  becomes,

2.v/«

[Moon's  secular  equation  from  the  T  TfiOfiOl

impulse  of  light.  j  L«ye^j

dxJx'-\-dy.dy'-\-dz.ds!^==aa\nr^.dt^.{sm.nt.sm.'i^t-\-cos.nt.cos.n't\  =  aa' .nr^ .dt^.cos.{n't-nt). [89780?]
Moreover  the  same  values  [8976,  8977]  give,

xx'-\-yy'-\-zs^  =  aa' .\cos.nt.cos.n't-\-s\n.nt.sm.'i^t\  =aa\cos.(n't — nt)  ;  [8978e]

substituting  this  in  [8974],  we  obtain  by  transposition,

—  —  —=  —  —  .  {xx'^yy'-^z7!)=. ^^  .cos.(n'^-nO.  [8978/]

Multiplying  together  the  expressions  [8978f/,/],  then  dividing  the  product  by  dt^  and
putting cos.^(n'^ — n<)  =  ^ -}-i.cos.(2/i'i — 2n<), we  get,

(t^  —  Ti")  • dt = ^ •  '^^'  ^  l+cos.(2n'^-2nO  }  ;  [8978g-]

moreover  if  we  neglect  the  periodical  terms,  we  may  put r  =  a in  the  second  member  of
this  expression,  and  then  it  becomes  as  in  [8978]. Finally,  the  substitution  of  [8978rf]  in rsgys^i
the  term  [89786,  line  2],  shows  that  it  is  a  periodical  quantity  j  and  by  neglecting  it,  the
expression  of  djR is  reduced  to  the  terms  in  the  second  member  of  [89786,  line  1]  ;  and ronyo-i
by  substituting  their  values  [8973,8978],  it  becomes  as  in  [8979].

H'.a'^
*  (4077) The  integral  of  [8979]  gives  /diJ  =  — r— .n'.(n' — n).t'j hence  we  have, [8980a]

fdtJdR  =  ^.n\{n'^n).ftdt  =  ^^^.{n'--n).i^;  [89806]

substituting  this  in  the  moon's  secular  equation  [8971],  it  becomes  as  in [8980]. Now

multiplying  the  expression  of n'^  [8981] by l=na'^  [8981],  we  get n'2__»^^. j-gggOc]

substituting  this  in [8980],  it  becomes  as  in  [8982], Comparing  this  with  the  secular
equation  of  the  earth  [8983],  we  obtain  their  ratio,  as  in  [8984].

VOL. IV.  160

638  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  C^l.

Secular
equations

[8984]

ejuajons rpj^^  scculaF  cquatioii  of  the  earth  becomes,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  the

from'the cxcentrlcity,  as  in  [8958m],

of  light.  SH.rrt^  ^o , .- r.i. .ur ^

.  r  Secnlar  equation  of  the  earth  from  T

[8933]  2  ,/f^ "  '  L  the  impulse  of  light.  J

therefore  the  secular  equation  of  the  earth  is  to  that  of  the  moon  as  unity  to
(n'—n) IT
n '  H  '

H'

To  obtain  the  ratio -=- , we  shall  suppose  that  the  action  of  the  sun's

light  upon  the  earth  or  moon  is  proportional  to  the  surface  of  the  body,
which  is  the  most  natural  hypothesis  that  can  be  made.  We  shall  then
have  the  forces  which  act  upon  the  centres  of  these  two  last  bodies,  by
dividing  these  actions  respectively  by  the  masses  of  the  earth  and  moon ;
so  that  we  shall  have  very  nearly,*

J£' earth's  mass  X  moon's  surface  earth's  mass  X  square  of  moon's  app.  semi-diameter

H.  moon's  mass  X  earth's  surface  moon's  mass  X  square  of  moon's  horizontal  parallax

We  have  seen  in  [8986a,  5739]  that  this  quantity  is  represented  by,

[8986']  ~  = ^~ =  5,10715  :

^  H 0,195804  '  '

[8985]

[8986]

[8987]

and  we  also  have —  =  0,0748013 [5117] ; hence  it  folloivs  that  the  part

IV

of  the  secular  equation  of  the  earth  arising  from  the  impulse  of  the  sun^s
[8987'] light, is to the  corresponding part  of  the  moonh  secular  equation  as  1
to  63,169.

Effect  of

creastof  ^^* Thcsc  sccular  equations depend upon the  impulse of  the  sun's

mlss"by* light;  hut  if  this  light  he  an  emanation  from  the  sun,  its  mass  ivill  incessantly

the  emis-  -i  •!» »  •

ii°ht.°'^ decrease; and  there  will  be  found  in  the  earth's  mean  motion  a  secular

[8988] equation,  which  must  he  incomparably  greater  and  have  a  contrary  sign  to

that  arising  from  the  impulse  of  the  sun's  light. It  is  easy  to  determine

this  new  secular  equation  by the  following  considerations. If  we  notice

[8986a]

*  (4078) The  expression  [8986] is the  same  as [5736],  observing that  in this
chapter H, JH', correspond  respectively  to H.\ H, in  [5736]. IVIoreover we  have
[89866] n  =  n'.0, 07480 13,  the  coefficient  of  n'  being  the  same  as  the  value  of  m  [5117] ;  from

[8986c] this  we  get  ^==^-:^^^^=  12,3687;  multiplying  it  by |^'  =  5,10715 [8986'],

n'-n H' ^
we  get  —^  .  —  =  63,169,  as  in  [8987'J.

X.vil.§2h] EFFECTS  OF  A  DECREASE  OF  THE  SUN'S  MASS.  639

only  the  diminution  of  the  sun's  mass,  the  earth  will  be  constantly  attracted
towards  its  centre ;  therefore  the  principal  of  areas  will  give,  as  in
[372,  S66],

r^dv  =  cdt ;  [8989]

c  being  ahoays  the  same. Now  if  we  neglect  the  square  of  the  excentricity, [8990]
we  shall  have r^dv  =  a^ndt;* therefore  a^n  will  be  constant,  although  the
sun's  mass  decreases  incessantly  ;  so  that  if  we  put  a^ and  n^  for  the  values rsgrni
of  a,  n, at  the  origin  of  the  time t, we  shall  have,

d'n=^a,^n^.  '  [8992]

We  shall  then  observe  that  the  centrifugal  force  is  equal  to  the  square  of  the
velocity,  divided  by  the  radius  [54']  ;  therefore  by  neglecting  the  excentricity  rgogoi
of  the  orbit,  this  force  will  be  an^ ;  but  it  is  equal  and  contrary  to  the  sun's
attractive  force.  Now  this  last  force  is  equal  to  the  sun's  mass  divided  by
the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  planet  from  the  sun ;  and  if  the  sun's  mass
be  1  at  the  origin  of  the  time  t,  and  1 — ^t  at  the  end  of  the  time  t,
a  being  a  very  small  constant  coefficient,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8990c?],

This  equation,  being  combined  with  that  in  [8992], gives, by  observing
thatf a^ni  =1,

[8994]

art'  =  L_^ ; or a^n^  =  1— a^.  [8995]

[8996]

[89906]

*  (4079) We  have  in  [1057] r^dv  =  d^ndt.\/l  — c2  ;  and  by  neglecting  e^,  it  becomes [8990a]
as  in [8S90], r^dv  =  a^ndt  =  cdt  [8989]; hence a^n  =  c, which  is  constant,  as  in
[8990]. JNIoreover  if  we  neglect  the  excentricity,  as  in  [8993],  the  velocity  of  the  body
will  be  an,  as  in  [8973c,  &.C.] ;  hence  the  centrifugal  force  [54'J  will  be proportional  to [8990c]

— -  or aw^,  as  in  [8993] ;  and  in  the  present  hypothesis  of  a  circular  orbit,  this  must  be
a

equal  to  the  force  of  gravity — ^, as  in  [8995].

[8990rf]

[8996a]

t (4080) When t  =  0, we  have a  =  a^, n  =  n^  [8991]; substituting  these  in
(j?n^=z\—^t  [8995],  we get a^n^  =  \ [8996]. Dividing  the  square  of  [8992]  by

the  second  equation  in  [8995],  we  get a  =  —-i—  .a^n^=^ ' ; this  value  of  a  is  the [89966]

same  as  in [8997]. Again  dividing  [8992] by  the  square  of  [8997],  we  get  [8998].
IVIultiplying  [8998]  by dt,  neglecting  a^, and  integrating,  we  get,  '•

fndt  =  nJdt—2o.nJtdt  =  nJ^«.n,i^,  [8996d]

as  in  [8999J  ;  hence  the  secular  equation  depending  on  t^,  is — ^nj^,  as  in  [9000J.

640  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Gel.

[8997]  a  =  -^:

1— ar'

[8998]  n  =  n,.(li  —  <x.t)\

The  earth's  mean  longitude  being  fndt, we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  the

square  of  a,

Secular ^^^  ^^^  valuo. Therefore  the  secular  equation  of  the  mean  motion,  depending
equation, ^^  ^^^  dimiuution  of  the  sunh  mass,  is,

[9000]  ■  rt«« f2  r  Secular  equation  of  the  earth  from  1

'*1  *" *  L the  decrease  of  the  sun's  mass. J

We  shall  now  compare  this  expression  with  the  value  of  the  secular
equation  depending  upon  the  impulse  of  the  light  [8983].  If  we  put  i
for  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  light  to  that  of  the  earth  in  its  orbit,  we  shall

[9001]  have  ian  for  the  velocity  of  light  [8990c].  The  density  of  the  light  at
the  point  of  space  occupied  by  the  earth  being  p,  the  loss  of  the  sun's  light,
in  the  time  dt,  will  be  ian.p.dt,  multiplied  by  the  surface  4*«^  of  the
sphere  whose  radius  is  a;  therefore  it  will  be  A'^^.ip.a^n.dt;  -n-  being  the
semi-circumference  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is  unity. Hence  we  shall  have,*

[9004]  a  =  4'^.2p.a^n;

consequently  the  secular  equation  depending  upon  the  diminution  of  the
sun's  mass,  will  be,

[90051  A  -. y. ^2  r  Secular  equation  of  the  earth  from  the  1

LJ  'i.tp.  fc.  1^  decrease  of  the  sun's  mass.  J

If  We  put  s  for  the  sun's  parallax,  expressed  in  parts  of  the  radius,  the
surface  of  a  great  circle  of  the  earth  will  bef nr.s^a^. The  light  received

[9001]

[9002]
[9003]

[9006]

[9004a]

[9007a]
[90076]
[9007c]

*  (40S1)  The  decrement  of  the  sun's  mass,  in  the  time  dt,  is  represented  by  a.dt,
[8994] ;  putting  this  equal  to  the  expression  which  we  have  found  in  [9003],  namely

[90046]  ^-jr.ip.a^ndt,  and  then  dividing  by  dt,  we  get  a  [9004].  Substituting  this  value  of  a
in  the  earth's  secular  equation  [9000],  it  becomes — 4if.ip.t^.(a^nn^)  ; and  as  a^nUj,  is

[9004c]  nearly  equal  to  a^n^,  or  1  [8996],  it  may  be  represented  very  nearly  by  — ^'rt.ip.t'^,
as  in  [9005].

t  (4082)  The  sun's  horizontal  parallax  being  s,  and  its  distance  from  the  earth  a,  we
shall  have  sa  for  the  earth's  semi-diameter,  nearly;  consequently  a  great  circle  of  the
earth  will  be  represented  by  'K.isaY,  or  it.z'^a^,  as  in  [9006].  IVIultiplying  this  by
the  factor  ian.p.dt  [9002],  we  get  the  quantity  of  light  falling  on  this  great  circle  in  the
time  dt,  iiz^.ip.o?n.dt  [9007];  multiplying  this  by  the  velocity  ian  [9001'],  we  obtain
its  impulse  [9008]. Dividing  this by  the  earth's  mass T  [9010],  and  by  dt,  we  obtain

&

X.vii.'^21.] EFFECTS  OF  A  DECREASE  OF  THE  SUN'S  MASS.  641

by  this  great  circle  in  the  time  dt,  will  be if£^,ip.a^n,dt; and  as  this  light mQnyi
moves  with  the  velocity ian  [9001'], its impulse, supposing it to  be
absorbed  by  the  earth,  will  be,

'!rsM^p,a'n\dt;  [9008]

which  produces  in  the  centre  of  the  earth  the  force,

I  ' .  r  Accelerative  force  acting  upon  the  earth's  "1 [90091

rp  ^  L  centre,  by  the  impulse  of  light.  J  '-  -I

T  being  the  earth? s  mass. This  force  is  found,  in  [8938,  9007^?],  to  be
equal  to — .  ian  ; hence  we  shall  have,

[9010]

•'■■*■ "^  rp  •

Therefore  the  earth's  secular  equation  [8983] becomes,  by  observing  that [9012]
rt3„2  =  l [8919',  9007/],

o_,g2  •'

• I ^2  r  Secular  equation  of  the  earth  arising  from  "1  [90131

Qf^ '  L  '■'i*'  impulie  of  the  suu's  light.  J  *■  ■*

I The  two  secular  equations  [9005,  9013] arising  from  the  diminution  of  the
sun^s  mass,  and  from  the  impulse  of  its  light,  are  therefore  to  each  other  in

the  ratio  of  — 4 ^^ oT ' ^^ —  8T  '

If  we  suppose  the  sun's  parallax  to  be  26",4205  [=  8%56  sex.  5589],
and  the  earth's  mass  equal  to  -a^TT-a-o  [4061],  we  shall  find  that  these  two
secular  equations are  to  each  other  in  the  ratio  of* — 1 to 0,0002129. [9015]

the accelerative force acting upon the  earth's  centre,  as  in r90091. This  force  is

Hd m  .  t^oorrf]

represented  in  [8938]  by -y , or — nearly  ; d  being the  velocity  of  light  [8935]

which  is  represented  ly ian  [9001'];  so  that  this  force  is —.ian, as  in  [9010]. Putting [9007e]

this  equal  to  the  expression  [9009],  and  then  multiplying  by  — ,  we  get  H  [9011].
Substituting  this  in  [8983],  we  get  the  earth's  secular  equation  from  the  impulse  of  the
sun's  light, '-^^~-'t^-(,a^n^)^; and  as (a3n2}^=  1  [9012],  it  becomes  as  in  [9013].

*  (4083) If  we  suppose  that  the  secular  equation  of the  earth,  arising  from  the
diminution  of  the  sun's  mass,  is  represented  by — 1, that  of  the  earth,  depending  upon '■ ■'

3g2

the  impulse  of  the  sun's  light,  will  be -—  [9014], or,

VOL. IV.  161

642  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [M6c.  Cel.

[9016]
[9017]

[9018]

[9020]

The  earth's  secular  equation,  depending  on  the  diminution  of  the  sun's
mass,  is  to  the  moon's  secular  equation,  depending  upon  the  impulse  of
its  light,  as  — 1  to  0,01345.  Therefore  a  secular  equation  of  the  moon,
of  — 1",  depending  upon  this  cause,  will  correspond  to  74",35  in  the
earth's  secular  equation ;  and  as  we  are  sure,  by  observation,  that  the
earth's  secular  equation  is  not  18",  it  follows  that  the  impulse  of  the  sunh
light  upon  the  moon,  does  not  produce  a  secular  equation  of  a  quarter  of  a
centesimal  second.

It  follows,  from  the  preceding  analysis,  that  for  the  last  two  thousand
[9019]  years  the  sun^s  mass  has  not  varied  a  two-millionth  part;  for  — ^txnj
being  the  earth's  secular  equation  [9000]  depending  on  this  cause,  if  we
suppose  that  t  represents  a  number  of  sideral  years,  n^  will  be  equal  to
400°,  and  — a^  [8994]  will  be  the  diminution  of  the  sun's  mass.  Putting
therefore  t  =  2000,  and  supposing  that  q  represents,  in  degrees,  the
^ secular  equation  of  the  earth  corresponding  to  2000  years,  we  shall  have,*

rnrtfion  n  / — r  Decrease  of  the  sun's  mass  "I

\}f04^\  O-t 800000'  ^  in  2000  years.  J

decrease  From  observatiou  we  cannot  suppose  q  to  be  equal  or  greater  than  0°,4;
mil  therefore  the  decrease  of  the  sun'^s  mass  ai  is  less  than  a^-o-oio^-oT  ^^
[9023] 2000  years,

fZ^fac-  22'  V  gravitation  be  produced  by  the  impulse  of  a  fluid  directed  towards
wan'smis- thc  ccutrc  of  thc  attracting  body, the  preceding analysis,  relative  to  the

sion  of

gravity,  impulsc  of  thc  solar  light,  will  give  the  secular  equation  depending  on  the
successive  transmission  of  the  attractive  force.  For  it  follows,  from  what  has
been  said, that  if  we  put  g for  the  action  of  the  attracting  body,  as  for

[90156]  |.(sin.26",4205)2x329630  =  0,0002129,

as  in  [9015]. IVIultiplying  this  by 63,169  [8987'],  we  get  the  secular  equation  of  the
moon,  depending  on  the  impulse  of  the  sun's  light,  equal  to 0,01345,  as  in  [9016] ;  so

that  if  this  part  of  the  secular  equation  of  the  moon  be  — 1",  the  corresponding  part  of  the

V
[9015rf] secular  equation  of  the  earth  will  be  =74",35,  as  in  [9017].

*  (4084) Putting  the  secular  equation  [9019]  equal  to —q,  we  get  — ix.tXn^t=—q,
[9022a] or a,<=-^; substituting n,<  =  400°  X  2000  =  800000°, and 9  =0°,4  [9021,  9023],
we  get  a<  [9023].

[9015c]

'i

X.vii.<§>22.]  SUCCESSIVE  TRANSMISSION  OF  GRAVITY.  643

example  that  of  the  sun,  the  secular  equation  of  the  attracted  body,  which
we  may  suppose  to  be  the  earth,  will  be,*

&  r  Secular  equation  of  the  attracted  body  from  "1 [90251

2* • •  L the  successive  transmission  of  gravity. J L  >

H  6 H.in
For  then  we  have,  in  [8938], g  =  —^  =  — ^— , which  changes  the  secular

equation ——-^ —  [8983],  into  the  preceding  value ; but  g  is  equal  to  the

centrifugal force,  and this  force  is  equal  to an^  [8993] ; therefore  the rQQog/i
secular  equation  of  the  attracted  body  is,

3 n^i^

.  r  Secular  equation  of  the  attracted  body  from  "I [90271

Q * • 1  L the  successive  transmission  of  gravity. J I-  ■'

i  beins^  in  this  case  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  the  fluid  which  causes  the *'

i7 /  ./  [9027'!

gravitation  to  that  of  the  attracted  body.

If  we  apply  this  result  to  the  moon,  and  put Nt  for  the  earthh  mean '  ^'
sideral  motion  about  the  sun, t  denoting  a  number  of  Julian  years,  we  shall [9028]
have  the  moon's  secular  equation  equal  to,t

*  (4085)  The  velocity  of  light  is  &  [8935],  and  its  force  of  impulse  ~  [8938],
or  —r  nearly  ;  we  have  also  found  in  [8983]  that  the  corresponding  secular  equation  of  the
earth,  arising  from  this  impulse,  is — ^r— —  , as  in [9026]. The  same  expression  will

[9025a]
[90256 ]

[9025c ]

answer  for  estimating  the  effect  of  the  fluid  producing  gravitation,  supposing  &  to  be  its

%, velocity,  and  putting  as  in  [9007e], &z=i.an  ; changing  the  definition  of  i  from  that  in

[9001]  to  that  in  [9027' J,  corresponding  to  the  case  now  under  consideration  ;  the  velocity

of  the  earth  being  represented,  as  in  [8990c],  by an. Hence  the  force  of  impulse  of  the

H  {\  H  X  (17%  H  XTL

fluid  [9025a] ~ becomes — — , or -^— ; putting  this  equal  to g, as  in  [9026], [9025d]

we  get jH=#-. Substituting  this  in the  secular  equation  [90256],  depending  on  the [9025e]

[9025/]

impulse  of  the  sun's  rays,  it  becomes -q~^'("<^^)5 ^°d  since n«^  =  I  [9012],  it

3 n2f2
becomes  as  in  [9025]. Substituting gz=an^  [9026],  in  [9025],  it  becomes —  .— ^,

as  in  [9027].

t  (4086)  If  we  wish  to  apply  the  formula  [9027]  to  the  moon's  motion  about  the
earth,  we  must  put  n  for  the  angular  velocity  of  the  moon  about  the  earth,  supposing  it
to  be  at  rest;  the  absolute  velocity  of  the  moon,  in  her  relative  orbit  about  the  earth,  equal

[9028o]

644  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [M6c.  Gel.

3 /  n  \^

[90291  I I IN^^t^  r  Secular  equation  of  the  moon,  arising  from  "1

L  J  Q,i'\^j'  L the  successive  transmission  of  gravity, J

[9029'] Putting  a'  =  the  mean  distance  of  the  sun  from  the  earth  ;
[9030]  a  =  the  mean  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  ;

[9030^]  i'  _=  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of  the  fluid,  producing  gravitation,  to

that  of  light ;

then  the  aberration  being  supposed  equal to 62",5,  the  secular  equation  of

the  moon  w^ill  become,*

[9031]  _ fL f  ~\  ^ .Sin.b'Z  ,5 r  secular  equation  of  the  monn  arising  from -l

Q * /»' *  \ \r } *  «'  * L the  successive  transmission  of  gravity, J

[90321  ^®  have  seen,  in  [5543],  that  the  moon's  secular  equation  is
31",424757  [  =  10^181621],  when  ^=100  [5543'];  therefore  if  we
attribute  it  to  the  preceding  cause,  we  shall  have,

[9033]  .,_la_^^ny^^,10000.s,..6T,5

2  '  a' \JVJ  31",424757 *

Reducing  this  expression  of  i' to  numbers,  we  shall  find  that  the  velocity

to  unity  ;  and  the  velocity  of  the  fluid producing  gravitation  equal  to  i  [9027'j ;  then  the

3

moon's  secular  equation, with these  symbols, will be as in [9027], —.-n^t^, or

—  Y-^j.iV^^^ as  in [9029]. Now  if  we suppose,  as  in [9030],  that  the  moon's

[9028c  ]  distance  from  the  earth  is  a,  and  her  mean  angular  velocity  about  the  earth  n,  as  in
[9028a],  the  moon's  relative  velocity  about  the  earth  will  be  an.  In  like  manner,  the
earth's  distance  from  the  sun  being  a'  [9029'],  and  the  earth's  angular  velocity  about  the

[9028rf]  sun  JV*[9028],  the  velocity  of  the  earth,  in  its  orbit  about  the  sun,  will  be  a'JY  [9028].
These  values  are  used  in  the  next  note.

[90286  ]

[9031a]

[90316]

* (4087) The  aberration  is  62",5,  and  its  sine  expresses  the  ratio  of  the  velocity  of

the  earth  in  its  orbit  a'N  [9028f^]  to  that  of  light ;  therefore  the  velocity  of  light  is  equal

a'JV
to .  . IVIultiplying  this  by i', we  get,  according  to  the  definition  in  [9030'J,  the

t'.  a'JV
velocity  of  the  fluid  producing  gravitation  equal  to .  '  q,^-  ; and  this  is  to  the  velocity

t'.a'JV

of  the  moon  an  [9028c],  as '.  to  1  ; but  this  ratio  is  expressed  by i  to  1,  in

[9031c  1  an.Bm.b2.  ,5

i'.a'J\r

[9027'J  :  hence  we  have i  = ^— ;r;r7.  • Substituting this  value  of  i in  [9029], it

on.sin.62',5

becomes  as  in [9031]; putting this equal  to 31",424757 [9032], corresponding  to
t  =  100,  we  get  r  [9033].

X.  vii.  <^  22.] EFFECT  OF  THE  IMPULSE  OF  A  GRAVITATING  FLUID.  645

of  the  fluid  producing  gravitation  will  be  about  seven  millions  of  times
greater  than  that  of  light ;  *  and  as  it  is  certain  that  the  moon's  secular
equation  depends  almost  wholly  upon  the  cause  we  have  assigned  in  the
sixth  book,  ive  must  suppose  that  the  gravitating  fluid  has  a  velocity  which  is
at  least  a  hundred  millions  of  times  greater  than  that  of  light ;  or  at  least
we  must  suppose,  in  its  action  on  the  moon,  that  it  has  at  least  that  velocity
to  counteract  her  gravity  towards  the  earth.  Therefore  mathematicians  may
suppose,  as  they  have  heretofore  done,  that  the  velocity  of  the  gravitating  fluid
is  infinite.

It  is  evident  that  the  earth's  secular  equation,  depending  on  the  successive
transmission  of  gravity,  is  only  one  sixth  part  of  the  corresponding  equation
of  the  moon;\ therefore  it  must  vanish,  or  he  insensible.

[9034]
[9035]

[9036]

* (4088) We have nearly ^  =  — [5221]; ^  =  0,0748  [5117  line  1] ; f9032fl]

^•=400% or  in  parts  of  the  radius iV  =  6,28...; lastly,  putting sin.62",5  =  62",5,
we  find  that  the  expression  of  i'  [9033],  becomes  nearly,

^'  =  2  X  400  X  (oiOTis) X  (6.28)^  X  10000  X  3-p^, ;  [90326]

which  exceeds  seven  millions.

f  (4089) Using  the  symbol  N,  as  in  [9028],  we  find  that  the  secular  equation  of  the

^ ?\/*2/2  „  ..  [9036al

earlh  [9027]  becomes |.:?^i, and i  =  =^|^i^S=!-«Si  [9027']. Now the ^^^^

i'  a'J^
velocity  of  the  gravitating  fluid  is .  '  [90316],  and  that  of  the  earth  a  iV  [9031a]  ;

t'
hence  the  preceding  expression  of  i becomes i  = .  ; and  by  substituting  it  in  the [9036c  ]

o _7V/*2  f  2  sin  62"  5

secular  equation  [9036a],  it  becomes -^ V" — ^  5 ^°^  ^his  is  to  the  moon's  secular [9036d]

equation  [9031]  as  1  to "7  •  ("^ )  > or  as 1  to 400  ^  (oOTis) [9032a] ;  being  nearly [9036c]
as  1  to  6,  as  in  [9036].

VOL.  IV.  162

646  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE [M^c.  Cel.

[9037]

[9038]

[9039]

CHAPTER  VIII.

«
SUPPLEMENT TO  THE THEORIES OF THE  PLANETS AND SATELLITES,

23.  We  have  given,  in  the  sixth  book,  the  numerical  expressions  of  the
inequalities  of  the  planets.  The  care  which  had  been  taken  not  to  omit
any  sensible  inequality,  authorized  the  belief  that  the  tables  of  the  planets'
motions  would  be  improved  by  the  use  of  these  formulas ;  and  it  became
an  object  of  interest  with  astronomers  to  apply  them  to  this  purpose.
These  hopes  have  been  realized  by  the  labors  of  Delambre,  Bouvard,
Lefrancais  Lalande  and  Burckhardt,  who  have  compared  the  theory  with
a  very  great  number  of  observations,  in  order  to  deduce  from  them  the
elliptical  elements  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets ;  and  I  have  also  reviewed,
with  great  care,  the  theory  of  their  perturbations ;  so  that  by  these  united
efforts  we  have  obtained  very  accurate  tables  of  the  motions  of  the  planets.
This  new  examination  of  the  theoretical  results,  has  not  indicated  any
sensible  inequalities  to  be  added  to  those  which  had  been  before
determined,  except  in  the  motions  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  The  nearly
commensurable  ratio  of  their  mean  motions  gives  rise,  as  we  have  seen  in
the  second  and  sixth  books,  to  some  very  great  variations  in  the  elements
of  the  orbits  of  these  two  planets,  depending  on  inequalities  whose  periods
exceed  nine  centuries.  The  variations  of  the  excentricity  and  perihelion
of  Jupiter's  orbit,  depending  on  this  cause,  produce  in  the  motion  of  Jupiter
a  very  sensible  inequality  [4394],  whose  argument  is  three  times  the  mean
motion  of  Jupiter  minus  five  times  that  of  Saturn.  The  similar  variations
in  the  excentricity  and  perihelion  of  Saturn,  produce  in  the  motion  of
Saturn  a  great  inequality  [4468],  whose  argument  is  twice  the  mean  motion
of  Jupiter  minus  four  times  that  of  Saturn.  These  two  inequalities  may
in  fact  be  considered  as  real  equations  of  the  centre,  whose  excentricity  and
perihelion  vary  with  extreme  slowness. Now  the  two  great  equations  of

[9040]

X.viii.»§.23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  647

the  centre  of  these  two  planets  give  rise  to  some  very  sensible  inequalities  ;
therefore,  by  substituting  in  the  expressions  of  these  inequalities,  instead
of  these  great  equations  of  the  centre,  those  which  we  have  just  mentioned,
there  will  be  produced  some  small  similar  inequalities,  which  may  be  of
sufficient  importance  to  be  noticed ;  we  shall  therefore  consider,  in  this
point  of  view,  the  chief  inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  depending  on
the  excentricities.

We  have  seen,  in  [4392], that the  expression  of &v'^ contains  the
following  inequalities ;

. — 138^373.sin.(2w"^—  w'"^  +  2£^— s'^— t^'')  \  [904i]

+ 56%6S^.sm.(2n''t—  n'U-{-2B'^— s'^— ^M  f  [9042]

—  44^461. sin.(3?i"/—2«'"^  + 3a'— 2s'^—t3"^)  ['  ^^^ [9043]

+ 84%942.sin.(3n"^— 2/i^'^4-3s"— 2a''— ^')  I  [9044]

they  are  the  most important ones  arising from  the  first  power  of  the
excentricities. The  first  and  third  depend  on  the  equation  of  the  centre  of
Jupiter, +2e''.sin.(?r^  +  s''— ta'')  [3834,  4390^,  &;c.]. We  have seen,  in [9045]
[4394],  that  Jupiter's  motion  is  subjected  to  the  following  inequality;

169*,266.sin.(w''^  +  a''  -f  55'  40""  49*— Sn'i  +  2/r  i— 5a'  +  2a'').  [9046]

This  inequality  may  be  considered  as  a  second  equation  of  the  centre  of
Jupiterh  orbit ;  whose  excentricity  and  perihelion  vary  with  extreme
slowness,  their  variations  depending  upon  those  of  the  angle  on^t — 2w''^.
This  being  premised,  we  shall  put  the  inequality  [9041  ]  under  the  following  ^

form ;

1 38  *  373

— ^J.^  '  .  2e".sin.(w''^  +  a"-- n''  +  2n''t—2n'U  +  2s'— 2a'').  [9048]

If  we  substitute  in  it,  instead  of  *  2e''.sin.(n'''^  +  s'"' — w"),  the  expression
[9046],

[9046']

[9049a]

*  (4090)  The  term  2e''.sin.(n''i-}-s'' — -sj'')  is  the  most  important  part  of  the
equation  of  the  centre  [3834] ;  and  if  we  substitute  instead  of  it  the  term  [9046  or  9049],
it  will  be  equivalent  to  changing 2e'' into 169',266, and — xs*' into,

55" 40'"  49^—571'^  -f  27i''<— 5£'+  2s'' ;  [90496]

and  by  this  means  [9048]  changes  into  [9050]. In  like  manner  we  obtain  [9053].

This  short  but  indirect  method  of  computing  the  small  inequalities
[9050,  9053,  9058,  9060  or  9061,  Sec], of  the  order  of the  square  of  the  disturbing '^^^^^''^

648  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  [Mec.  Cel.

[9049]  1 69%266.sm.(3n}U—5nU  +  Ss''^— 5e"  +  65''  40«  49^,

we  shall  obtain  the  inequality,

[9050]  __  i^^^  .  l69%266.sm.(n}U—3nU  +  £-— 3 £^+  55'* 40'" 49^.

[9051]  Putting  in  like  manner  the  inequality  of  the  expression  [9043]  under

the  form,

[9052]  __  l^^l  ,2e^sin.(w''^  +  £-_^-  +  3»-f— 3w'^^  +  3s'— 3s'''),

we  shall  obtain, by  substituting the same term  [9046], the  following
inequality ;

[9053]  _  44%461

[9054]

[904Grf]

^  . .  169^266.sin.(— 27i'i— 2s''  +  55HO"'490.

The  terms  [9042,  9044]  depend  on  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  Saturn,
2e\sin.(»''^+  s'— Z3''), and  we  shall  put  [9042]  under  the  form,

[9055]  ^^^. 2e\(n'^^ +  £'—«''  +  n''i—n'^^  +  s'^—s").

We  find,  in  [4468],  that  Saturn's  motion  is  subjected  to  the  inequality,

[9056]  — 669^682.sin.(n'^  +  s''-{-56^  10"*  bT—brCt  +  2n}''t—5s''  +  2s-).

This  may  be  considered  as  a  second  equation  of  the  centre  of  Saturn,  whose
[9056']  .  .  . .  .  *'  ,  . .

excentricity  and  perihelion  vary  with  extreme  slowness,  these  variations

being dependent upon that of the angle Sn^t — 2/1'"^. Therefore by

[9057] substituting  it  for* 2e\sin.(n'^+ s'^ — to')^ in  [9055],  we  shall  obtain  the

following  inequality ;

masses,  must  be  considered  as  nothing  more  than  a  tolerably  near  approximation  for
obtaining  their  values,  since  several  of  the  small  parts  of  the  general  expressions  of  these
terms  are  neglected ;  those  parts  only  being  retained  which  are  derived  from  the  variation
of  the  first  term  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  Jupiter,  2e*''.sin.(n'''-{-  ^''^ — '^^^)  [9045],
or  that  of  Saturn, '2e^ .sm.{Tf  t-\-s'' — -sj") [9054]. We have already mentioned a

[9049e]  somewhat  similar  defect  in  the  abridged  method  of  computing  the  small  inequality  in  the
motion  of  Mercury  [3872,  &tc.].  Plana  has  noticed  this  imperfection  in  vol.  2,  page
406,  Sic.  of  the  Memoirs  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of  London,  to  which  we  may  refer ;

._  since  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  into  any  particular  detail  on  the  subject,  taking  into  view  the

smallness  of  these  inequalities  [9061,  &;c.],  and  that  the  corrections  to  be  made  in  them

rr.r..r.  , ^^^  ^f  '^^^Y  h^tlc  importauce. Similar  remarks may be made relative  to  the  other
[90492'] ....

mequalities,  computed  in  this  section  of  the  work.

*  (4091) If  we  proceed  in  this  case  as  in  [9049a,  6],  we  shall  find,  by  comparing  the
expressions [9056,  9057J, that  we must change 26^^ into — 669*,682, and — w'

[9061]

X.  viii.  §  23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  649

—  ^-i^ ' 669%682.sin.(n''i— 3/1^^  +  a-— 3s-  -f  56'  10™  570-  ^9058]

In  like  manner,  bj  putting  [9044]  under  the  form,

84*  942

-^^ .  2e\sin.(n''t  +  s^— t^i^  +  2n''t—2n}''t  +  2s-— 2s'-),  [9059]

we  shall  obtain,  by  the  same  substitution,  the  following  inequality ;

—  —7^  •  669^682.sin.(— 2/1-/— 2s-  +  56''  10"  570-  [9060]

Jubstituting  in  [9050,  9053,  9058,  9060]  the  values  of  e'\  e'  [4080],
we  find  that  the  four  expressions  [9041 — 9044]  produce  the  following
inequalities  ;  *

P,1809.sin.(3w"/— 71'-/  +  3s-— s»-— 55HO'"490  ;  1

+  0%3794.sin.(2ri-/ +  2s-— 55'^  40"* 490  ;  2

+  r,6352.sin.(3ri"/— w'"/-f-3s-— s'-— 56''  10^570  ;  3

+  2%4525.sin.(27i-/  +  2s-— 56"  10™  57*).  4

These  inequalities  are  very  small ;  but  as  they  may  be  connected  with  others
of  similar  forms,  they  will  not  render  the  tables  more  complicated,  and  will
make  them  more  accurate.

We  have  seen,  in  [3916,  &c.],  that  the  inequality  of  Jupiter  [4394],

169%266.sin.(3/i'-/— 5w"/  +3s'-— 5s-  +  55''  40^490,  [9062]

is  the result of the variations  in the  equation of the  centre and the
^ perihelion, depending  upon  the  angle 5iVt — 2n'^t. If  we  represent  these
variations  by 6s'- and 6^'-, the  preceding  inequality  may  be  put,  as  in .
[3916],  under  the  form,

'2.6e\sm.{n'''t  +  s'-—- n'-)— 2c'-.<57:3'-.cos.(yi'-/  +  s'-— ^•-).  [9064]

The  expression  of  Jupiter's  true  longitude  in  terms  of  its  mean  longitude,t
[668],  contains  the  two  terms,

A.e'-2.sin.(2w'^/  +  2s'-— 2:.'-)  +  J-|.e'-^(37i'-/  +  3s'-— 3..'-),  [9065]

[9063]

into 56'^10"'57'  — 5n-<  +  2n'-^  — 56-4-2gi-; substituting these in [9055], we 1-90576]
get  [9058].

*  (4092) After  making  the  substitution  of e'-,  e-  [4080],  we  must divide  by  the
radius  in  seconds  206265%  and  we  shall  obtain  the  numerical  values  [9061].

t  (4093) Changing e into c'-, and nt into 7i'-<4"^'''— '^'^ to  conform  to  the
notation  here  used.

VOL.  ir.  163

[9061o]
[9064a]

650  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  [Mec.  Gel.

which  gives  the  following  expression  ;  *

[9066]  ^  ^  ^  )'  (Q)

. . ( 5e'\sin.r3w'^^  +  3s'-— 3tji'0>  i ^ '  3

The  two  first  of these terms give the inequality depending  uponf

4/1^^^— 5ri^^  +  4s'"— 5£"  +  45''21'"44% which we have determined in
[9068] [4440]. If  we represent  by p.s\n.(n}H -{- s''' — tn'^-f/), the  inequality  of
Jupiter  [9046],  depending  upon Sn'^'t — 5rft, we  shall  have,

[9069]  f  ==  .2re^  _5^v^  _l_  2  3iv_5  ^v  j^  ^.  _j_  ^^d  49™  49. .

[9070]  266'"  ==  p.cos.f; — 2e'\(Jt3'^  =^.sin/; p  =  169*,226.

Hence  the  terms  [9066  lines  3,  4]  become,!
[907]]  i_3 .e\e\p.sm.(Sn'''t  +  3£'"--373'^  +/) ;

therefore  by  substituting  /,  p  [9069,  9070],  we  get,
[9072]  L3.e'^e'M69^266.sin.(5n'7— 5w"^  +  5  s'"— 5-="— 2z3''  +  55^  40"*  49^.

Reducing the coefficient  of this  expression to  numbers,  we  obtain  the

[9065al *  (4094) Taking  the  variation  of  [9065],  considering e'^, zs^",  as  variable,  it  becomes
as  in  [90661.

[9067al ^  (4095) If  we  put  p  =  169%266, and  use  the  value  of  /  [9069],  the  term  [9046]
will  become  p.sin.{n}''t  -\-  s'"" — to'^-j-/),  as  in  [9068]. Developing  it  by  [21]  Int.  we  get,

[90676]  p.cos./.sin.(?i'^<-|-  £>^ — w^^)  +p.sin./.cos.(n'^^+£'^-— cj'^).

rQOfir Putting  this  equal  to  the  expression  [9064],  we  obtain  25e^''=  p.cos.f; -2e^'^.5'!s^''=p.sin.f,
as  in  [9070]. Substituting  these  values  in  [9066  lines  1,2],  they  become,

|^.e'^|cos./.sin.(2n'^<  +  2£>"— 2^^^)  +  sin/.cos.(2ni^^  +  2s'"— 2zn'^)}
=  fj9.e>\sin.(2w'^^  +  2£'"— 2to»^+/), [21]  Int.
Re-substituting  the  value  of  /  [9069],  it  becomes,

[9067e  ]  ||).e'\sin. (4ni^ t  — 5n^  ^+4si^— 5s^  — xs'^-f-  55"*  40"*  49'),

being  of  the  same  form  as  that  in [9067], which  is  computed  in [4440  or  4439]  by  a
similar  process,  changing  K  [3827]  into  — p  [9068],  and  using  -ra'^  [4081]  nearly.

f  (4096) Substituting  the  values  [9070]  in  the  two  terms  [9066  lines  3, 4],  we  obtain,
[9072a]  -V-e'".e'\;?.{cos./.sin.(3n''^  t  +  3£'^— 3i!j'^)  +  sin./.cos.(3»'^i  +  3s'"— 3z3'^)},

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [9071],  by  using  [21]  Int.

[9075]

X.  viii.  -^  23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  651

following  inequality  ;  *

0%6358.sin.(5w'"^  — 5w^^  +  5^''—5s''  +  34'^  58"*  4P).  [9073]

The  following  inequality  is  given  in  [4438,  90736],

— 4^0247.sin.(5?i'7  — lOri  +  5s-— lOs^  +  51''21'^550.  [9074]

We  have  seen,  in  [4006',  &c.],  that  in  all  the  arguments  of  Jupiter  and
Saturn,  where  the  coefficient  of  t  is  neither  5rf — 27i'%  nor  differs  from  it
by  n'""  for  Jupiter,  or  n''  for  Saturn,  we  must  increase  the  mean  longitudes
w'7 +  =''',  ^"^  +  5%  counted  from  the  fixed  equinox  of  1750,  by  their  great
inequalities  depending  upon  5rft — 2w"'/.  If  we  wish  to  use  the  mean
longitudes  thus  increased  in  the  inequality  of  Jupiter  [9062],

1 69^266.sin.(3w'7  — 5/i^^  +  3  s''— 5  s'  +  55*^  40™  49^,  [9076]

we  may  put q'\ q\  for  these  longitudes  thus  augmented,  and  then  put  this [9076']
inequality  under  the  following  form  ;

169^266.sin.;37^'— 5g^— (3p^'^+  5p')  -f55H0'"  49^}  ;  [9077]

p"  being  the  great  inequality  of  Jupiter,  and  — p^  that  of  Saturn. If  we [9078]
develop  the  preceding  function,  we  shall  get,t

169',266.sin.(3g'^— 59'  +  55*^  40'"  49^  1

—(Sf  +  5/).I69s266.cos.(3^''— 59^  +  55'^  40™  49*).  2

Now  we  have  very  nearly,  J

[9079]

.|  *  (4097) Substituting  the  values  of  e'^  [4080], also ^'^==  10''2I'"04*  [4081],  in rgQ^g^-.

'^  [9072],  it  becomes  as  in  [9073]. The  inequality [9074]  is  the  same  as [4438];  it  is

';^  printed  with  a  different  sign  in  the  original  work,  but  it  is  corrected  in  [4438]. This  is [90736]

"i  hereafter  combined  with  the  term  which  is  computed  in  [9083].

f  (4098) This  development  is  made  as  in  [60]  Int.,  by  putting,

z  =  3^'^— 5^^-1-55'' 40"' 49%  a  =  — (.3^«^+5p^),  [9076o]

neglecting  the  square  and higher  powers  of a ; then multiplying by the  coefficient
169^,266,  we  reduce  the  expression  [9077]  to  the  form  [9079].

J (4099) If  we  put  for  brevity T=  5n^^—2nW +  55^—28^^-1-4"  2 1"*  20% and  use
the  symbols  p'", p"  [9078],  we  shall  have  very  nearly,

p'^=1265%3.sin.T [4434]  ;  p^  =  2939%6.sin.T [4492];  [9080a]

hence 3p'^-}-5p^=  18493',9.sin.T, as  in [9080]; the  argument  being  taken  the  same
as  for  Saturn  in  [4492],  because  this  produces  by  far  the  greatest  part  of  the  coefficient  in
[9080]. IMoreover  the  difference  of the  arguments  in [4492,  4434],  is  not  of  much [^ J
importance  in  the  small  inequalities  which  are  computed in  [9085,  &z;c.]. Dividing  the
coefficient  18493%9 by  the  radius  in  seconds 206265% and  multiplying  the  result  by [9080c]

[9086]

652  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  [Mec.  Cel.

[9080]  3pi^4-5/?"=  18493%834.sin.(6w^^— 2n'"^  +  5s^— 2s''+4''21"'2(y)  ;

which  gives,

—(Sp''  +  5p'')A69%266.cos.(Sf^5q''  +  55'  40'"  49^  1

[9081]  C sin.(Sq''—5q''  +5n''t—'2rVH  ^5 s''— 2 ^'4-60'  02«  09^  ) 2

'  I  _sin.(39'^— 5q^— 5n7H-2n'^^— 5s'  +  2a^^+61'^  19™  29')  ) 3

We  may  substitute  in  these  two  last  terms,  without  any  sensible  error,  5'^
[9082] and  (/%  for n'H  -\-  s'"" and rft  -\-  s^. The  first  term  will  then  be  confounded

with  Jupiter's  equation  of  the  centre. The  second  becomes  very  nearly

equal  to,
[9083]  7%5882.sin.(59^^— 10^^  +  51",  19"*  29^)  ;

and  by  connecting  it  with  that  in  [9074],  namely,
[9084]  — 4^0247.sin.(59'^— 10^^  +  51^9^290,

we  obtain  the  following  result,
[9085]  3^5635.sin.(55>^— 10^^  +  51'^  19"*  29^.

Thus  we  may  use q'" and 5% instead  of n'^'t  +  s''' and nH-{-s'', in  all

Jupiter's  inequalities  except  the  great  inequality.

We  shall  now  consider  the  analogous  inequalities  in  the  motion  of  Saturn,
which  are  much  more  sensible  than  those  of  Jupiter.  To  determine  them
we  shall  observe  that  we  have  found,  in  [4466],  that  the  motion  of  Saturn
contains  the  two  following  large  inequalities,  depending  on  the  first  power
of  the  excentricities  ;
^9087]  — 182%069.sin.(2?i7— «+2a-— a''^— ^'))  1

+  4>n%05S.sm.(2n''t—n'H+2s''—s'^—i^'')\'  ^ ^  2

The  first  of  these inequalities  depends  on  the  equation  of  the  centre  of

169%266,  it  becomes  15*,1765; lience  the  first  member  of  [9081]  is,

[9080rf] — 15%1765.sin.(5n^^— 2n'^^-}-5s^— 2ai^+4''21"»  20*)Xcos.(3^>^— 5^'+55M0'"49*) ;

reducing  this  by  means  of  [19]  Int.,  we  get  the  second  member  of  [9081];  observing
that  the  author  has  given  the  angle  51'^19'"29*  [9081  line  3]  equal  to
[9080e]  57°,0725=51''21'"55%  being  too  great  by  2^26%  from  the  data  he  has  used.  This
is  corrected  in  the  formulas  [9083 — 9085].  Now  substituting  §-'%  y%  according  to  the
directions  in  [9082],  we  find  that  the  second  member  of  [9081]  becomes,

[9080/]  —  7^5882.sin.(j'^-f  60"  O2'"O90+7',5882.sin.(5^'^— 10^^-f  Sl'^  19"*  29*)  ;

of  which  the  first  may  be  combined  with  the  equation  of  the  centre,  and  the  second  is  as
in  [9083].

X.viii.«§>23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  653

[9088]

Saturn +2e\sin.(n''/-j-£'' — zi"), and  it  may  be  put under  the following
form ;  *

182 ',069

The  inequality  in  the  motion  of  Saturn  [9056],

— 669',682.sin.(2/i^"i  — 4/i"^  4-2s>^— 4a^+56'^  1 0™  57*),  [9090]

which,  as  we have  observed in [9056'], may  be considered  as  a  second
equation  of  the  centre,  will  therefore  produce,  by  its  substitution  in  [9089],
the  following  term ;
182*  069

\ . 669^682.sin.(n'7  —Sn^'t  +  s-^^'^Ss"  +56''  lO*"  570-  [9091]

The  equation  [9087  line  2]  arises  from  the  equation  of  the  centre  of  Jupiter,
and  it  may  be  put  under  the  following  form ;

417*  0*58

-— ^ —  . 2e'\sin.rn'"^  -{-  s'^— :.''  +  2nrt—2n''t  4-  2s'— 2a'0-  ^9092]

The  inequality  of  Jupiter,

-fl69^266.sin.(3ri''^— 5w7+3£"'— 5s'-f  55'^  40"*  49^, [9046]  [9093]

which,  as  we  have  seen  in  [9046'],  is  a  second  equation  of  the  centre  of
Jupiter,  will  therefore  produce,  by  its  substitution  in  [9092],  the  following
term ;

417*  0'i8

^Vl .  169%266.sin.(w''^^— 3n'i  +  s''—3e'  +  55'  40™  49^.  [9094]

p Therefore  the  expressions  [9087]  produce, as  in [9089c],  the  following

inequalities  ;

— 5*,2568.sin.(3w7— w'7+3£'— s»^— 56'^  lO*"  57*)  [9095]

— 3*,5594.sin.(3n"^— n'^^+Ss'— s^''— 55M0'"  49*).  [9096]

The  expression  of  Saturn's  true  longitude  in  terms  of  the  mean  longitude,

contains  the  inequality,!

[90S9a]

*  (4100) The calculation is here made in the same manner as for Jupiter,
[9049a,  6,  he],  by  putting  the  inequality  [9090]  under  the  form,

— 669%682.sin.(7i'^+£^-f-56''  10"*  57^4-2n''^— 5n^^  -|_2£i^— Ss'),  [90896]

which  is  similar  to  [9046]  ;  and  changing,  as  in  [9049a,  6], 2e'' into — 669*,6S2j also
— ^^ into 56-^  10*"  57*+2n''  <— 5n^^+2£>''— 5£' ; and  then  [9089]  becomes  as  in  [9091].
In  like  manner  we  get  [9094]  from  [9092]. Reducing  the  expressions  [9091 ,  9094]  to [9089c]
numbers,  they  become  as  in  [9095, 9096]  respectively.

f  (4101) This  calculation  is  made  in  the  same  manner  as  for  Jupiter,  in  [9065,  &ic.].
The  second  term  of  [9065]  is  similar  to  that  in [9097] ; those  in  [9066  lines  3, 4]  are
VOL. IV.  164

654  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE  [M6c.  C61.

[9097]  ^.(ey.(3nH  +  3s^— 3^").

Therefore  by  putting ie""  and 6-^^ for  the  variations  of  the  excentricity  and
perihelion,  depending  upon Bti^t — 2n'''t, we  shall  have  the  function,

[9098]  y.e\c\{(J€\sin.(3w"^+3£"— 3sj^)— c\(J^\cos.(3n7+3£^— 3ra'')j  ; (0)

To  obtain  Se""  and  <5to%  we  shall  consider  this  inequality  of  Saturn,

[9099]  --669%682.sin.(2?i"7— 4w7  +2£'^— 4s^  -^56'  10"  570, [9090]

and  we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  produced  by  the  variation  of  the  equation  of
[9100] the  centre  and  perihelion,  in  the  term 2e''.sin.(?i7  -j-  s" — to")  ; and  we  shall
then  have  for  the  expression  of  this  inequality,

[9101]  2(5e\sin.(w"^  +  £'— ^0— 2e\(5TO\cos.(?i"i  +  £"— TO^.

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  function  [9098]  will  become,
[9102]  —  y  .e\e\669%682.sin.(2/i'"— 2/1^^  +  2£'^— 2£"— 2^-+  56''  10™  570-

This  inequality,  reduced  to  numbers,  is  equal  to,
[9103]  — 3^4402.sin.(2?i'7— 2w^^  +  2£''— 2s"— 120''  7'"  1 7").

[9104] We  have  in  [4496]  the  following  inequality,  corrected  as  in  [4495a — d]  ;
[9105]  8s2645.sin.(4/i^"^  — 9n7  +4£'"— 9  £"  +  51''  49™  37').

We  have  seen,  as  in  [9075,  9076'], that  we must  change, in  all  the
inequalities  of  Saturn, /i'7  +  £'" into g% and n't-\-s'' into ^% excepting
in  the  great  inequality,  and  in  the  following  ;
[9107]  — 699^682.sin.(2w'7— 4717  -f  2s'"— 4£"  +  56"  1 0"  57'). [9099]

similar  to  [9098]  j the  term  [9057]  is  the  same  as  [9100] ; the  term  [9062]  is  similar  to
[9099]  ;  the  terms  [9064]  are  similar  to  [9101]. Now  if  we  put,

[90976  ]  /  =  2n'"^  —bri't  +  2£«"  —  5s"  +  to"  +  56"^  1 0"»  57%

the  expression  [9090]  will  become,  by  using  [21]  Int.,
'^  — 669',682.sin.(n"^+£v— ro"-f/)  =  — 669%682.cos/sin.(n"<  -]-£v_^v)

i^^'^<^'^  — 669%682.sin/.cos.(w"i+£"— TO").

rnnn^^. CompaHng  tliis  with  [9101],  we  get 25e"=— 669%82.cos/; 2e"(5«"=669',82.sin./.

[90'J7o]  ....

Substituting  these  in  [9098],  it  becomes,

[9097c]  — i/e".e".669%682. {sin.(3w"i+3£"— 3TO").cos./+cos.(3n"<+3s"— 3£").sin./} ;

and  by  means  of  [21]  Int.  it  is  reduced  to,
[9097e']  —  J/e".e".669%682.sin.(3n"<-f3£"— 3ttf"+/).

Now  re-substituting  the value  of  /  [90976],  it  becomes  as  in  [9102]  ;  and  by  using  the
[9097 /l value  of  e"  [4080],  it  changes  into  [9103];  observing  that  the  value  of cj"  =  88^  9"*  07',

[4081],  gives — 2ts"+56''10"*57*  =  :— 120''7"' 17^

[9109]

X.  viii.<^23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  655

If  we  wish  to  use  (f"  and  ([  [9076']  in  this  last  inequality,  we  must  put  it
under  the  form,

— 669^682.sin.(29'^— 4(/^— 2/^— V  +  ^^'  10™  57^  ;  [^1^8]

f^^  and  — p'  [9078]  being  the  two  great  inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.
The  inequality  [9108]  becomes  by  development,*

— 669^682.sin.(29'''— 4^"  +  m^  lO"*  57^  1

+  669*,682.(2/'^+4p^).cos.(29''^— 4^^  +  56"  lO"  570;  2!

and  we  have  very  nearly,

669',682.(2y^+4j90-cos.(29'^— 2^^+56'^  10™  57^  1

_  i sin.(29'^— 4g^+5/i7— 2ri'7+5£^— 2£'^+60''32'»170) 2 t^"^^

~ ' '\  — sin.(25'^— 47^— 5w^^+2w'7— 5£^+2£'^+51H9'^  37^  j  * 3

We  may,  in  these  two  last  inequalities,  change  7i'7-f-s'''  and  w7+s'  into
(f"  and  (i' ;  then  the  first  will  be  confounded  with  the  equation  of  the
centre  of  Saturn,  and  the  second  becomes,

— 23^1960.sin.(4g'^— 9^^  +51"^  49""  37^.  [9"2]

Connecting  it  with  that  in  [9105],  namely,

8%2645.sin.(49'"— 9^"  +51"^  49"  37"),  [9ii3]

we  obtain  the  following  inequality,

—14',9315.sin.(49'^— 99^  +  51"  49"  37^.  [9n4]

We  may  thus  use  (^^  and  7%  instead  of  ti'V+s""  and  717  + £%  in  all  the
inequalities  of  Saturn,  except  in  its  great  inequality.

[9111]

[9115]

*  (4102) This  development  is  made  as  in  [9076a], by  using [60] Int., putting

2;  =  2^i^— 45'^-f56'',  10'"57% and a  =  — (2j9'^+4p0  ; then  multiplying  the  developed t^^^^^l

value  of  sin.(2r-}-a), by — 669S682  [9108]  ; hence  we  get  [9109]. Now  the  values

of  ^'%  _p^  [9080a], give 2p'^+4p^=  14289*. sin. T; substituting it in the term rgj^^jj-,

[9109 line 2], and dividing by the radius in seconds, which gives

669',682  X  14289* ,^,  „^^^ . ,

-^j^^^, =46*,3920, It  becomes,

46%3920.sin.  r.cos.(2j'^— 4^^+56'^  10"*  57^
=  23%1960.sin.(25«^-4^^+56''10'»57*+T)— 23%1960.sin.(29'^-4^^+56''10'»57'-T). '■ '^^
Re-substituting  the  value  of  T  [9080a],  it  takes  the  same  form  as  in  [9110  lines  2, 3] ;
and  by  using  the  values  of §-•%  (f  [9111],  it  becomes,

23',1960.sin.((?^4-60''32"'  17*)— 23%1960.sin.(42'^— 9^^+51*  49"*37').  [Qinrf]

The  first  of  these  terms  can  be  connected  with  the  equation  of  the  centre,  and  the  second
is  as  in  [9112].

656  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE [M^c.  Cel.

[9116]  We  must,  for  greater  accuracy,  increase  q^  by  the  inequality  [4468  line 6],

namely,
[9117]  S\%02b.sm.{SrfH  —  rCt  +  Ss^'  ^£^—85''  34"'  12*),

[91181  arising  from  the  action  of  Uranus,  and  which  must  be  applied  to  Saturn's
mean  motion,  as  we  have  seen  in  [4472,  Sic.].

If  we  connect  the  preceding  inequalities  with  those  which  have  been
determined  in  the  sixth  book,  we  shall  obtain  the  formulas  of  the  true
longitudes  of  Jupiter  and Saturn. Bouvard  has  compared  these  formulas

[91191  ^^^'-^  observation,  by  means  of  the  oppositions  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  which
he  has  collected  chiefly  from  those  of  Bradley  and  Maskelyne  at  Greenwich,
and  those  made  at  the  observatory  in  Paris,  in  late  years.  These
observations  were  made  with  excellent  transit  instruments,  and  with  the
best  mural  quadrants,  during  an  interval  of  more  than  fifty  years.  They
furnish,  by  their  accuracy,  as  well  as  by  the  greatness  of  the  number  of
observations,  the  most  accurate  method  of  correcting  the  elements  of  the
elliptical  motion. From these  sources  were  obtained,  from  1747  to  1804

191201  inclusively,  fifty  oppositions  of  Jupiter  and  fifty-four  oppositions  of  Saturn,
[9122c].  These  have  given  one  hundred  and  four  equations  of  condition,
between  the  corrections  of  the  elliptical  elements  of  the  motions  of  the  two
planets ;  and  as  the  value  of  Saturn's  mass  is  somewhat  uncertain,  the
correction  depending  upon  it  was  introduced  into  these  equations.  It  was
soon  discovered  that the  value  of  this  mass,  given  in [4061], must  be

[9121] decreased  by  , which  reduces  it  to ^rrj-r^ , that  of  the  sun  being

taken  for  unity  [9122^,  4061c].  This  important  correction,  which  is
evidently  indicated  by  the  preceding  observations,  and  by  those  of
Flamsteed,  is  one  of  the  principal  results  of  this  improved  theory.  The
accuracy  of  these  formulas,  and  the  great  correctness  of  this  set  of
observations,  must  give  to  this  result  a  preference  over  those  which  are
deduced  from  the  elongations  of  the  outer  satellite,  taking  into  consideration
the  extreme  difficulty  of  observing  these  elongations,  and  the  uncertainty  of  the
estimated  value  of  the  ellipticity  of  the  orbit  of  the  satellite.  The  comparison
of  the  formulas  given  by  the  theory,  with  the  observed  oppositions  of
Jupiter,  has  not  indicated  any  correction  in  the  value  of  its  mass  [4061].
In  fact,  if  we  consider  Pound's  observations,  as  given  by  Newton  in  his
Principia,  we  shall  see  that  they  must  give  accurately  the  mass  of  Jupiter,
whilst  they  will  leave a  little  uncertainty  in  that  of  Saturn. Therefore

[9122]

X.  viii.  §  23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.  657

these  formulas  produce  the  same  value  of  the  mass  of  Jupiter,  as  those
which  are  deduced  from  the  observed  elongations  of  the  satellites ;  and  it  is
curious  to  see  the  same  result  deduced  from  two  methods  so  entirely
different  from  each  other.*  I  have  endeavored  to  determine,  in  the  same  rmooi
*  manner,  the  correction  of  the  mass  of  Uranus,  in  which  there  is  a  greater
degree  of  uncertainty  than  in  the  mass  of  Saturn.  The  observations  have
not  indicated  any  sensible  correction  in  the  value  of  that  mass ;  but  its
influence  upon  Saturn's  motion  is  too  small  to  trust  wholly  to  this  result.
The  oppositions  1  have  just  mentioned  are  very  proper  to  determine  the
mean  motions  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn ;  because  the  two  great  inequalities
were  at  their  maximum  during  the  interval  included  by  these  observations,!

[91241

and  they  must  therefore  have  varied  but  little  during  that  interval ;  so  that
the  uncertainty  which  may  still  remain,  as  to  the  magnitude  of  these
inequalities,  could  not  have  any  sensible  influence  upon  the  mean  motions
deduced  from  these  observations ;  and  I  have  had  the  satisfaction  of  finding
that  the  formulas  represent,  as  well  as  could  be  expected,  the  ancient
observations  mentioned  by  Ptolemy,  and  also  the  Arabian  observations.
We  shall  now  give  those  formulas  in  which  we  have  introduced  the
corrections  of  the  elliptical  elements  of  both  planets,  and  the  mass  of  Saturn,

[9125]

[9122a]

*  (4103) Notwithstanding  the  confidence  the  author  expresses  relative  to  his  estimate

of  the  value  of  the  mass  of  Jupiter  [4061], it  has  been  found  necessary  to  Increase  it

about  a  seventieth  part,  in  order  to  satisfy  the  corrected  measures  of  the  elongations  of  the

satellites  by  Airy,  and  the  perturbations  of  the  planets  Juno,  Vesta,  &;c.,  as  we  have

^ already  observed In [5980i,  &;c.] ; where it  Is shown that both these methods of

5  •'  , ,  [912261

I ascertaining  the  mass  of  the  planet,  indicate  an  augmentation  in  the  estimated  value  in

/ [4061]. We  may  also  observe  that  Bouvard,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  tables,  published

>l In  1821,  uses  126  observations  of  Jupiter, and 129  observations  of  Saturn,  taken  in  the

oppositions  to  the  sun,  and In  the  quadratures  from  1747  to  1814;  and  that  the  result  of

' these  observations gives the  masses  of  Jupiter  and Saturn, which  we have inserted [9122rf]

i in  [4061d].

[9122c]

f  (4104) Substituting the values [9128,  9129] in the argument  of the great
inequality  [9134],  it  becomes  nearly,

5n^^— 2n'^<+5£'— 2e'^4-4''30*"30'— f.78*  =  73*48«24*+^.23"»  14*.  [9124a]

Substituting i  =  — 3 and f  =  54, we  find  the  arguments  corresponding  to  1747,  1804,
are  nearly  73**  and  94* ;  and  the  sine  of  this  argument  passes  the  maximum  during  this [91246  ]
Interval,  as  In  [9124].

VOL.  IV.  165

658

SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE

[Mec.  Cel.

[9126]
[9127]

Epoch  of
1750.

Mean  lon-
gitudes.

[9128]
[9129]
[9130]

deduced  from  the  equations  of  condition.  In  these  formulas  t  represents
any  number  of  Julian  years  of  365^  days,  elapsed  from  the  midnight  at  the
commencement  of  the  first  of  January,  1 750.

FORMULAS FOR THE HELIOCENTRIC MOTION OF JUPITER.

We  have,*

[Mean  longitudes  in  the  year  1750 -f-(.]

Jupiter,  w'^^+s'"  =  S^ 45™  47%5  +  ^.30^348999  ;
Saturn,  w'i+s'^  =  231'^  21'"  53^9 +  ^.12^221421 ;
Uranus, n'H-^-^'"  ==  318'^  34"*  14*,8  -f  t.  4^284639 .

Coefficients,  January  I,  1800.

d m s
81  52  19,3

123  05  29,4

173  30  16,4

d
30,349084

12,221148
4,384890

[9128tt]

[91286]
[9128c]

[9128rf]
[9128c ]
[9128/]

[9128gr]

[9128/i]
[9I28t ]

[9128&]

*  (4105)  The  coefficients  of  t  [9128,  9129,9130]  agree  nearly  with  those  in  [4077].
The  values  in  [9132—9138']  agree  nearly  with  those  in  [4407,  4408',  &;c.],  or  may  be
easily  deduced  from  them.  The  expressions  of  g-'",  q''  [9137,  9138,  &.C.],  correspond
nearly  with  [4434,  4436,  4491,4494],  changing  the  mass  of  Saturn,  or  the  value  of  l-|-|*^
as  in  [9121,  &;c.].  The  corrections  in  this  theory,  on  account  of  the  error  in  the  signs  of
some  of  the  terms,  were  made  by  the  author  after  he  had  published  the  fourth  volume,
and  were  in  fact  subsequently  printed,  as  an  appendix  to  the  Jhird  volume  [5974,  he.].
In  consequence  of  this  error  of  the  signs,  it  becomes  necessary  to  apply  the  corrections
C*%  C'',  &c.  [4434,4492],  to  the  great  inequalities  given  by  the  author  in  this  chapter;
it  is  also  necessary  to  augment  the  perturbations  of  Jupiter,  arising  from  the  action  of
Saturn,  on  account  of  the  increased  value  of  Jupiter's  mass  [5980ot,  &c.].  This  process,
of  correcting  the  elements  of  the  orbits,  may  be  considered  as  constantly  in  operation,  on
account  of  the  additional  observations  which  are  daily  obtained.  For  by  combining  these
new  observations  with  those  previously  known,  we  obtain  more  accurate  means  of
ascertaining  the  correct  values  of  the  masses  of  the  planets  and  the  elements  of  their  orbits.
Pontecoulant,  in  his  Theorie  Anali/iique  du  Systeme  du  Monde,  vol.  3,  page  511,  &c.,
has  given  the  elements  of  the  motions  of  Jupiter,  Saturn  and  Uranus,  in  the  same  form  as
in  this  chapter;  making  the  corrections  and  alterations  indicated  in  [9128c,  rfj,  and
putting  the  epoch  [9127]  fifty  years  in  advance,  as  in  Bouvard's  new  tables,  so  as  to  make
it  correspond  to  the  midnight  which  separates  December  31,  1799,  from  January  1, 1800.
In  making  these  calculations  he  uses  the  same  values  of  a,  a',  a",  a'",  a'^,  a^,  a*' ;
n,  n',  n",  n"\  w'^,  re,  n^^  as  are  given  by  ha  Place  in  [4079,  4077] ;  also  those  of
b'-p  and  its  differenlials  [4085 — 4227].  As  it  will  be  more  easy  for  reference  to  have
the  perturbations  free  from  the  corrections  fxi^,  C'',  C  [9128c,  rf],  we  have  inserted  the
coefficients  for  the  epoch  of  1800,  as  given  by  Pontecoulant,  in  the  same  lines  with  those
given  by  La  Place,  in  [9128 — 9149]  ;  and  it  will  be  found  upon  comparison  that  they
differ  but  very  little  from  each  other,  except  from  the  changes  produced  by  |x^,  C'%  C\
For  convenience  in  making  these  insertions,  we  have  introduced,  in  [9133" — 9135'J,  the

X.  viii.  <§>  23.]

PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.

659

These  three quantities  are the mean longitudes  of  Jupiter, Saturn  and
Uranus,  counted  from  the  fixed  equinox  of  1750  [9127],  and  reduced  to  the
midnight  at  the  beginning  of  January  1 ,  1 750.
We  also  have,

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  1750 +  t.]

73''= \0^20'^2S%\+t.  6^618603+^2  0',0002001;

^^  = 88''09'"55^9-f-^.19^354599+i2.0^0001608;

&=  97'^56'"25^4-^^34^324429;

r  =lll'^29'»42%2+i.30%675510;

T  =5w7— 2n'7+5£''— 2a*^;

P-=  7'+4''30'"30^— .^.78%49+^^0*,01228 ;

P-=  r+4'' 32-45'— 177^06+^^0^01 178  ;

J'''  =  (1205%40-^.0%03618-fil0%0000349).sin.P'^

--13Sl7.sin.2P'^
A'  =  (-2952^10-h^0^0887-^2.0^0000821).siIl.P'

+(30^69— i.0',0017).sin.2P''

+3P,03.sin.(3«-w7+3£"'-s'-85''34'"12*).

Ts",  -a",  being  the  longitudes  of  the  perihelion,  and  6''',  G"',  the  longitudes
of  the  ascending  nodes,  counted  from  the  same  equinox  [9131],  and  at  the
same  epoch ;  we  shall  then  have,

^f^'  =w7+s^+ J';

The  annual  precession  of  the  equinoxes  being  supposed  equal  to  50*,  1,
[3380a]  ;  the  true  longitude  of  Jupiter  v'",  reckoned  upon  its  orbit  and
counted  from  the  mean  equinox,  will  be,

[9131]

Coefficie

nts,  January

1,  1800.

d m s
11 7  36

6,683122

—0,000235

89 8  20

19,055044

0,000162

98  25  45

36,582830

111  56  07

31,32131

3  40  59

—76,2770

—0,0012620

3  38  32

—76,598
—0,04845

-0,001164
0,00000226

1187,247

—12,21854

—2906,661

0,11411

-0,00000052

29,76156

30,894

d  m

—87  28

[9132]

[9132^]

[9133]

[9133']
[9133"]

[9134]
[9134^]
[9135]

[9135T

[9136]

[9137]
[9138]
[9138^

[9139]

additional  symbols  T,  P'',  P",  A'^",  Jt',  which  are  not  in  the  original  work ;  by  this  means
the  formulas  [9137,  9138]  are  given  in  an  abridged  form,  instead  of  inserting  in  them  the
complete  values  of  w5'',  A^,

[9128Z]

660

SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE

[M^c.Cel.

Longitude
of  Jupiter.

[9140]

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  !750-|-t>]

v^"  =  ^^  +  t.oO%\

+(19833^75+^0^6269).sin. (f—^'
-\-( 695s69+^.0%0376).sin.2.(9'^— :«•

4-  ^  +(  24S81+/.0S0023).sin.3.(9'^— T^j'
+(  P,18+/.0%0002).sin.4.(9'''— tn'
+( 0^06 ).sin.5.((/''— Z3'

—  80^14.sm.(  9'"—  q"^  F09'")
+  198^81.sin.(2g'^— 29"—  IMO")
+ 16%23.sin.(39'''— 3^^)

+  (  +  3^73.sin.(4g'"— 4g")

+  P,68.sm.(55'^—59^+ 11^57'")

+  0',41.sin.(69'"— 6r/)

+  0^17.sin.(75''— 7^0

4- 3%39.sin.(52'^— 10^^-1-51'' 22"*)
+(82s86-<.0%0045).sin.(29'^-3^^-61'^56'"+/.26',32)

—  P,57.sin.(45'^— 65"+54''26"*)

+  ( 160%93— ^.0S0042)  .s\n.{Sq'''—5q''-^55'' 4r-{-  ^50',51 )
— 15^1 8.sm.(3^^^— 49^— 62H9'»)
^-12^18.sin.(35'^— 2^^—  8H9™)
+ 9%42.sin.(39^—  f+GS"  12'")

Confficienta,  January  1,  1800.

+

+

+  10%95.sin.(  9^4-44'^  57")
—  5^15.sin.(29"+45''42

+  10',94.sin.(49'^— o^H^S'^ 1'")

—  5%10.sin.(25'"—  9^+15'' 25'")
+ l%21.sin.(49'"— 3^^—  2H1'»)

—  0%87.sin.(59'^— 65^+66'' 9™)
4- P,OO.sin.(  9'" 4-  9"4-45''29"*)

r— l%05.sin.(  9''-—  q"')

4-^4-  0',43.sin.(29>'— 29"')

(4-0',05.sin.(39'^— 39^')

50,2235

19862,80

3
0,63242

597,55

0,03807

24,92

0,00240

1,19
0,06

0,00016

d m

—84,63

—1 6

209,10

—1  10

16,32

3,75

1,69

12  11

0,41

0,16

132,39

s
0,067

d r>
— 12  2t

s
15,7

17,29

57  12

3,29

54  30

83,45

—0,005

—60  54

27,1

—1,58

54  26

161,15

0,0014

58  11

45,31

—15,28

—61  i6

12,27

—9  35

9.50

69  45

11,05

43  56

—5,44

43  55

11,12

59  23

—5,13

—17 5

+  1,21

—3  28

—0,88

—65 7

+0,74

+67 4

-1,14

+  0,59

+0,05

X.  viii.  §  23.]

PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.

661

\ +

q^  being  equal  to  n"' -{- s^K^  In  the  preceding  formula,  we  have  included
between  a  parenthesis  all  the  arguments  which  can  be  reduced  to  the  same
table.  The  reduction  to  the  true  ecliptic  is  made  by  the  usual  methods,
[675  or  3800]  ;  it  is  here  equal  to,

— 27sl5.sin.(2tJ'^— 2a'^).  [__27^15]

The  radius  vector  of  Jupiter r'" is  given  by  the  following  formula  ;

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  1750 -ft.]  Coefficients,  Jan.  1,  1800.

r  '^  =  5,208735  + 1. 0,00000037 1 8  5,20876o o,oooo384]  j

+  (—0,249994—^.0,00000789 ).cos. (^■'^-^")  \  -0.250358  -o,ooo7964  2

_j_(_0,006004~i.0,0000003718).cos.2.(9'"-^'")  -0.006022  -o,oooo384  3

+  (—0,000217— ^0,0000000206).cos.3.(7'"-:5''')  -"'Ooo^^^  -0.0000021  4

0,0000 10.COS.4.(9''' to'^)  /  -0,000093 -0,0000000  5

+  0,000652.COS.( 9''— g^— 1'^21'") \  "'°<"'647 angles  Q

I  1  21

— 0,002783.cos.(29'"— 2^^— 1'^02'") I  -0.002771 ^ji.02^ 7

— 0,000287.cos.(3g'''— 3g^)  f  -0,000239  3

0,000074.COS.(4q''' 4>q'')  [  ^These  three  terms N  9

^ ^  ■' '  I  '  V  are  omitted ; also  I

— 0,000026.cos.(5(?^^-5^')  \  <;t:h":ttum:ni> lO

^ ^.^  ^^-^x  I  /of  the  rest  of  the  \

— 0,0000  lO.COS.  (69'"— e^r-)  /  ^terms.  ) \\

— 0,000264.cos.(  9'^- 29^— 22''24'"+^.18S8))  -0,000272 -3^4'9 12

^—0,000096.cos.(29'^— 47^+51'*  04™)  \  omitted.  13

— 0,000879.cos.(29'^— 3^'- 62'^  50"*  +  U  26',2)  -".ooo^^^ -6'  55 14

—(0,002008— <.0,0000000502).cos.  5  ^9.'^—^^^  \

+

+

+  0,000236.cos.(3^''— 49^— 62'^  09'")
— 0,000126.cos.(39'^— 2^^-  7'^35'»)
— 0,000068.cos.(  9^  +  29M3'"))
+  O,000077.cos.(29^  +10'^  55"*)  \
4-  0,000095.cos.(49''— 59^  —14"  23™)
— 0,000264.cos.(59^  —2f—\2'  09™)

+

5,208760

0,0000384

—0,250358

—0,0007964

—0,006022

—0,0000384

—0,000218

—0,0000021

—0,000093

—0,0000000

0,000647
—0,002771

angles
d  m
1  21
1  02
omitted.

—0,000289

•■These  three  terms N

I  are  omitted ; also  1

)the  coefficients  off

\  t  in  the  arguments  f
/  of  the  rest  of  the  \

V  terms.

J

—0,000272

d  m
—35  49

omitted.

—0,000919

—67  55

—0,002020

58 7

0,000238

—61  13

—0,000129

—12 4

—0,000065

29  13

+0,000074

11 1

+0,000091

—14  23

—0,000292

—15  33

15

16
17
18
19
20
21

[9141]

[9142]

[9143]

Radius
vector  of
Jupiter,  .

*  (4106) This  value  of v'^^ is  easily  deduced  from  the  formulas [4388 — 4446],
corrected  for  the  change  in  Saturn's  mass  [9121,  Sic],  and  using  the  corrected  values  of ^
e''',  similar  to [4407]. The  elliptical  values  depending  on q^" — w'% and  its  multiples,

VOL.  IV.  166

662

SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE

[Mec.  Gel.

[9144]

Latitude
of  Jupiter.

Lastly,  the  heliocentric  latitude  of  Jupiter,  above  the  true  ecliptic,  is  given
by  the  formula,

[Values  corresponding  to  tbe  year  1750  -f '•]

s''  =  (4742^8— ^0%22606).sin.(»''—d''')
+0',63.sin.(  ^•'— .2/~54n6'")
+  l',06.sin.(29'^  _3^^— 54*  1 6"")
+  3^75.sin.(3g''^— 59"+59'^30'")
— 0',53.sin.(g^  +  54n6'").

CoeflScients,

Jan.  1,  1800.

4742,7

-0,22606

1

0,6351

d m
—53  54

2

1,0711

—53  54

3

11,5986

+  50  26

4

—0,9978

+  53  54

5

FORMULAS OF THE HELIOCENTRIC MOTION OF SATURN.

The  longitude  of  Saturn  in  its  orbit v"", counted  from  the  mean  equinox,
is  given  by  the  following  formula  ;*

[91436]

[9143c]

[9143rf]

being  found  as  in  formula  [668].  This  has  no  difficulty  except  the  length  of  the
calculation,  so  that  we  shall  not  enter  into  any  particular  detail  on  the  subject.  The  same
may  be  observed  relative  to  the  radius  vector  [9143]  ;  the  chief  term  of  its  constant  part,
5,208735,  is  given  in  [4451] ;  other  terms  of  r  are  in  [4389, 4393,  4448, 4450].  The
elliptical  terms  depending  on  g'"" — •a''',  and  its  multiples,  are  found  from  [659],  which,
by  means  of  the  term  ie^,  and  its  value,  similar  to  that  in  [4407],  increases  the  constant
part  before  mentioned,  and  produces  also  the  term  ^0,00000037 18.  Lastly,  we  get  the
heliocentric  latitude  [9144]  by  connecting  the  inequalities  [4457 — 4458]  with  the  chief
term  (p.sin.(i;''' — 6^""),  of  its  elliptical  motion,  (p  being  given  in  [4082] ;  observing  that  we
may,  when  necessary,  use  reductions  similar  to  those  in  [4017 — 4021].

[9145o]

*  (4107)  The  formulas  for  the  motion  of  Saturn  [9145 — 9148],  are  found  as  in  the
last  note  for  Jupiter ;  using  the  perturbations  in  longitude  [4463 — 4505].  Those  of  the
radius  vector  are  given  in  [4464,4467,4470,4471,  4507 — 4510];  and  those  of  the
latitude,  in  [4511 — 4518];  the  elliptical  parts  being  found  by  the  same  formulas  as  for
Jupiter.

X.  viii.  <^  23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  1750+t.]  Coefficients,  January  1, 1800.

+(23219%52— ^.P,2854).sin. (q"—^")
+( 816^49— ^.0^0905).sin.2.(9^— .3^)

-f  I  +(  39\8I— ^0%0066).sin.3.(9^— ^0
+(  2*,22— /.0^0005).sin.4.(9^--7;J")
+( 0',13 ).sin.5.(//'— :;j^)

4-  28%97.sin.(  9'^—  5"+78''03'«)

—  29^91. sin.(29''^—29"—  5H2'")

—  6%57.sin.(39'^— 3f)
^  /  __ l%97.sin.(4g'^— 4^^)

—  0^27.sin.(69'^— 6^0

—  0^12.sin.(79'^— 7^0
-f  (— 418',33— ^.0',0221).sin.(  ^'^  — 2^'— 14''49'"+M3%50)
-|-  (— 669%68+ t0',0155).sin.(29'^— 4^'  +56'^  ll"*+^49',50)
+  (—  48%294-^.0',0004).sin.(3^^—  g'^-f-77''5(r— <.34%55)
-j-(—  24%57+^0',0044).sin.(2^'^— Sgr'^-f  14M8'»+M2%39)
+  ir,28.sin.(  9'^-f85'^36"')
— 14^93.sin.(4^'^— 9g^+  51'^  50™)
+ 4^90.sin.(39'"— 4g^— 62H7"»)
+ 3*,01.sin.(2^"—  9" +31'*  42™)
+  2%d4^.sm.(3q'''—5q'-i-5V 9'»)
+ l%42.sin.(4g'"— 59"-— 62'*  56™)
[omitted] sin.(59'"— 69'— 61'*  53™)

—  9',25.sin.(  9^—  q"')
+  14%45.sin.(29"— 29"')

+  ^  +  P,91.sin.(35^— 3^^'— 68'*  27™)
+  0',31.sin.(4/— 4^"')
+  0',09.sin.(59^— 59^0

+  27s37.sin.(29^— 3^^'+  23'*  56"^)
+  9^86.sin.(  9--_29''+72'*12™)
+  l%52.sin.(39^— 29''— 88'*09™)
+  l*,36.sin.(9^'— 41'*38™)

663

60,2235

23154,40

—1,2783

811,96

-0,0901

39,48

—0,0066

2,19

—0,0005

29,40

d m

77^45

—31,89

—6,65

—1,99

—0,71

—0,27

—0,12

-424,83

s

-0,0277

d m
-13  57

13,89

—652,59

0,03817

59  34

-60,76

—48,89

0,000366

78 4

-34,55

—94,37

d  m
20  45

11,44

84  36

—13,12

55  55

4-4,966

—61  45

+3,06

+30  45

+2.97

59  12

+1,44

—61  57

0,53

—61  53

—10,07

+  15,73

2,06

'

—69 6

0,34

omitted

29,63

24  31

10,71

73  11

1,65

—89 8

1,48

-42  36

1

2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

30
31

32
33

Longitude
of  Saturn.

[9145]

664

SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  THEORY  OF  THE

[Mec.  Cel.

[9146]

[9147]

Radius
vector  of
Saturn.

The  reduction  to  the  ecliptic  is,

— 97',83.sin.(2?;^— 2^0-  [— 97',83]

The  radius  vector  of  Saturn r" is  given  by  the  following  formula ;

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  1750 +  f.]

r'  =  9,557833—^.0,00000167

+  (— 0,536467+^.0,00002963).cos.(  5"—  ^0

+  (— 0,015090+^.0,00000167).cos.(29"—  ^^
-j-  [  +  (— 0,000639+^.0,0000001  l).cos.(32"— 3^^)

— 0,000032.cos.(49^— 4^^)

— 0,000340.cos.(9^— 1 0-^  21'")

-1-0,0081  l.cos.(  2'^—  9^+3''58'")^

+0,00138.cos.(29'"— 2^^)
+  (  +0,00032.cos.(3^'^— 3^^)

+0,00010.cos.(49''— 4g^)

+0,00004.cos.(59^"— 5g^)

Coefficients,  January  1,  1800.

+  (0,00535  -{-^0,00000027).cos.

+  (0,01520— ^.0,00000034).cos.

9''— 2g'

— ll'^58'"+^.14^7

2^>' — 4/

0'"+^.49%l^

+  0,001 17.cos.(37^—  9-— 90M2'")
—0,00138.cos.(39^— 25*^+23'^  19'")
— 0,00022.cos.  (4g^— 3^^^  +  6 1  '^  21'")
+  0,00352.cos.(59'— 2^'^+ 13*^  02")

r  + 0,0001 5.cos.(  9^—  q"')
4-  )^0,00040.cos.(29^— 2^^')

(— 0,00005.cos.(3«?^— 3g^')
—0,00061  .cos.(29^— 36?''+23'*  44™).

9,557777

0,0000J67

—0,534988

0,00002966

—0,015005

0,00000167

—0,000634

0,00000011

—0,000032

—0,000339

d  m
—10  21

0,00763

415

0,00140

0,00034

omitted

I  0,00542

I

) dm.
(  -11  10

...A

(  0,01479

—0,000000734  \

] d m
( 59  28

—63,24 )

-0,00119

d  m
—90  12

—0,00155

38  55

—0,00021

61  23

0,00095

32  32

0,00016

—0,00043

omitted

—0,00066

+23  44

1

2
3
4
5
6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15
16
17
18
19
20
21

The  heliocentric  latitude  of  Saturn,  above  the  true  ecliptic,  is.

X.viii.<^23.]  PERTURBATIONS  OF  JUPITER  AND  SATURN.

CoefBcients,  Jan.  1,  1800.

665

+

[Values  corresponding  to  the  year  1750 +  t.]

(— 0^71.sin.(3^;"— 3^")
|— 3%14.sin.(  9'''— 2^^— 54M6'")|
( — 9^  1 6.sin.(29'^--49^+  59''  30")  j
+  0^52.sin.(29'^— 3^^— 54-^  16"*)
+  P,79.sin.(  9''  +  54M6™)
— 0*,66.sin.(2g'^— 3^^^— 54'^  9").

!

8990,3

—0,155137

omitted

—3,18

d  m
—53  54

—9,31

60  24

0,53

—53  54

1,81

53  54

—0,67

—54 8

1

2
3
4
5
6
7

The  104  oppositions  before  mentioned,  are  represented  by  these  formulas
with  a  remarkable  degree  of  accuracy.* The  greatest  error  does  not  amount

[9148]

Latitude
of  Saturn.

[9146a]

*  (4108)  Tlie  metliod  of  quadratures  by  single  integrals,  which  is  found  so  useful  in
computing  the  perturbations  of  the  orbits  of  the  small  planets  and  comets  [7929],  and  in
the  development  of  the  function  [8908(/J,  may  also  be  applied  to  many  similar  objects ;  as,
for  example,  to  that  of  the  development  of  u,  r,  v,  in  terms  of  nt,  as  in  [657,  659,  668],
and  to  other  functions  of  the  like  nature.  The  same  process,  by  means  of  a  double
integration  relative  to  two  unknown  quantities,  may  be  extended  to  cases  of  a  much  more
complicated  form  ;  as,  for  example,  to  that  of  the  development  of  the  function  R  [957],
in  terms  depending  on  the  angle  i'n't — ini-\-A  [957^"'],  or  to  the  expressions  of  Sv,  Sr,  [91466]
&c.,  like  those  in  [3809,  3821,  Stc],  depending  on  the  same  angle,  and  to  others  of  a  like
form.  This  method  of  double  integration  by  quadratures,  which  has  the  important
advantage  of  including  all  the  powers  and  products  of  the  excentricities  in  the  values  of
the  terms  which  occur  under  the  signs  of  integration,  has  been  used  by  Hansen  in  the
computation  of  the  perturbations  of  the  planets  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  as  we  may  see  in  his
treatise  on  the  subject,  entitled  Uniersuchung  iieber  die  gegenseiiigen  Storungen  des
Jupiters  und  Saturns,  which  gained  the  prize  of  the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  of
Berlin,  in  1830.  The  manner  of  making  such  calculations  has  since  been  treated  of  by
Poisson,  in  the  Connaissance  des  terns  for  1836,  and  also  by  Pontecoulant,  in  the  work
mentioned  in  [8919o-].  This  way  of  computing  the  inequalities  of  the  motions  of  Jupiter
and  Saturn,  is  so  entirely  different  from  that  of  La  Place,  that  it  becomes  a  very  important
means  of  verification,  not  only  of  the  great  inequalities,  but  also  of  such  others  as  require
considerable  care  and  attention  in  making  the  developments,  when  we  wish  to  include
every  sensible  quantity.  We  shall  therefore  explain  tlie  principles  of  this  calculation,
without  entering  into  any  numerical  details,  which  have  no  other  difficulty  than  their  great
labor.  We  shall  also  give,  as  examples  of  the  process  of  single  integration,  the
developments  of  u,  r,  v,  mentioned  in  [9146fl]  ;  observing  that  a  similar  method  was  [9146/"]
used  by  the  early  geometricians,  in  treating  of  the  problem  of  the  three  bodies,  in  the
middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.

VOL.  IV.  167

[9146c ]

[9U6d]

[9146e]

666  MOTIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9148] to  twelve  sexagesimal  seconds ;  and  it  is  not  twenty  years  since  the  errors  of

[9146g-]

If  we  put  for  abridgment  n<  =  t,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [605',  606],  for  the  elements  of
the  elliptical  motion,  the  following  formulas,  the  longitudes  being  counted  from  the
perihelion,  by  supposing s  =  0, ^  =  0, fA=l;

[9UQh]  na^  =  1  ;

[9146i  ]  nt  =  u  — e.sin.M  =  t ;

[9146A;]  r  =  a.(l — e.cos.w)  ;

[9U61  ]  tang.  J  V  =  \y/i±l .  tang.^  u.

These  elements  are  developed,  in  [657,659,  668],  into  series  of  the  following  forms;
[9l46ni]  u—i= +.^j.sin.t+.^2-sin-2t+^3.sin.3t  .  .  .  .  4-*^i-sin.U -f  &c. ;

[9146n]  r  =  B^-{-B^.cos.t^B2.cos.2t-{-ByCos.St  ,  .  .  . +J5,..cosit+&c.  ;

[9146o]  v—t= +Cj.sin.t-1-C2.sin.2t+C3.sin.3t  .  .  .  . -fQ-sin-it  4-&c.

Multiplying  the second of  these  equations  by cos.it, and  the  two others by sin.it,
then  integrating  from t  =  0 to t  =  -r, we  get,  as  in  [8908m,  k].

[9146p]

2 ^
^i  =  -  .J^  (u—t).s\n.it.dt ;

2 ^

[9146g]  Bi=-J^r,cos,h.di',

[9146*]  J5,=  ^  ./^^  rfZt.

These  last  expressions  contain  the  three  variable  quantities  t,  m,  v,  and  they  may  be
easily  reduced,  so  as  to  have  only  the  excentric  anomaly  u,  and  its  differential,  with  the
constant  elements  a,  e. For  we  have  generally,

[9UQt]  f(u — t).sin.U.dt  = :  .{u — t).cos.U+  --/{du — 6;t).cos.it ;

as  is  easily  proved  by  taking its  differential  and  reducing. Now  u — t  vanishes  when

t  =  0, or t='ff, as  is  evident  from  f9146m] ; therefore  if  we  take  the  integral  [9146^]

[9146i;] between  these  limits,  the term  without  the  sign  /  will vanish. Moreover  the term

r./cos.it.c?t  =  —  —  .sin.i^, vanishes  at  the same  limits, observing  that  the least

[9146u;]  t  i2

value  of  i,  in  [9146m],  is i=l ;  hence  the  integral  [9146?]  becomes,
[9146^:1  Jl'^{u—t).s\n.it.dt==-'Jl'^(-^\cos.it.dt;

[9HQy] and  by  substituting  it  in  [9146^],  we  get  [9147a]. In  like  manner  we  get  [91476]  from

V.

X.  viii.  -^  23.]  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  667

the  best  tables  of  Saturn  sometimes  exceeded  thirteen  hundred  sexagesimal [9148"]

[9146/-],  or  we  may  obtain  it  more  simply  by  derivation  from  [9147a] ;  remarking  that  if
we  change  u  into  v,  in  the  value  of  Ai  [9146p],  it  will  become  equal  to  that  of  Q,
[9146r]  ;  and  by  making  the  same  changes  in Ai  [9147a],  we  shall  get  C^  [91476] ;

The  differential  of  the  equations  [9146*,  I],  give,

dt  =  {l — e.cos.u).du  ;  or du

rft

1 — e.cos.u

.dt;

1 — e.cos.w  (1

observing  that  the  first  expression  of  dv  [9147rf],  is  easily  deduced  from  the  differential  of
the  equation  [7856],  which  is  computed  in  [7884,  &;c.],  and  given  in  [7885],  supposing
u,  e,  zi,  to  be  the  variable  quantities,  and  d.{v — w)  =  — dzs ;  but  to  conform  to  the  present
question,  we  must  put  de  =  0,  and  d.(v — ts)=dv,  which  changes  — dzs  into  dv;
by  this  means  [7885]  gives  dv  [9l41d].  The  second  form  of  dv  is  easily  deduced  from
the  first,  by  using  the  value  of  du  [9147c]. From  [9147c,  d]  we  obtain,

1

/du\

\dtj 1 — e.cos.u'

/dv\  _ y/r:
\dtj (1  —  e.c

■  eS

.C0S.W)2

Substituting the values [9147^], also t=u — e.sin.M,  r=a.(l — e.cos.w),

rft  =  (l — e.cos.w). <Zm  [9146i,  A;,  9147c],  in  the  expressions  [9147a,  6,  91465-, «],  we
obtain  the  following  formulas,  which  contain  no  other  variable  quantity  than  the  excentric
anomaly  m  ;

2

Ai  =  —  '  rj^.cos.ifu — e.sin.u).du  ;

Bi  =  ~  'Jq^O- — e.cos.M)^.cos.i(M — e.sm.u).du  ;

c..=

/*<x  cos.Uu — e.sin.u) ,

•/o i '•«">

,/  " 1 — e.cos.u

5,=  -./'/(l— e.co3.M)2.</M  =  a.(l+Je2)  ;

the  limits  of  these  integrals  relative  to  u,  being  the  same  as  those  for  t;  because  when
t  =  0  we  have  u=0,  and  when  t=ir  we  have  M  =  ir,  as  is  evident  from  the  expression
of  t  [9147A],  or  from  that  of  u — t  [9146w].  The  second  form  of  B^  [9147m]  is  easily
deduced  from  the  first,  by  putting cos.''m  =  ^-|"2-cos.2m, then  developing  and  performing

[91462]

[9147o]
[91476]

[9147c]
[9147^3

[9147e ]
[9147/]

[9147g]

[9147^1]

[9147i ]

[9147ft]

[9147?]

[9147m]

[9147n]
[9147o]

668  PERTURBATIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES. [Mec.  Cel.

[9148'"] seconds. These  formulas  represent  also,  with  as  great  a  degree  of  accuracy

[9U7p]
[91475]
[9147r]

[91475  ]

[9147f ]

[9147«]
[9147i?]

[9147m;]
[9147x1

[9147y]

[9147z]

[9148a]
[91486]
[9148c ]

[9148rf]
[9148e]
[91-18/]
[914%]

the  integrations. The  general  integral of  the  term  under  the sign  /, in  the second
member  of  [9147A:],  is,

—  .  (1 — c.cos.w).sin.i(M — c.sin.w) r  ./sin.w.sin.i  (w — e.s]n.u).du  ;

as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  its  differential.  Now  at  the  limits  m  =  0,  m  =  *,  the  term
without  the  sign  f,  in  [9147 g^],  vanishes;  hence  we  find  by  substitution,  that  the  integral
[9147 fc],  becomes,

B:= :—  .  /y  sin.M.sin.i(w — e.sm.u).du.

The  differential  of  [9147i]  relative  to  e,  gives,

f  -^  j  =  —  .f^  sin.w.sin.i  (m — e.%\x\.u).du  ;

comparing  this  with  the  value  of  i?j  [9147s],  we  obtain,  for  all  values  of  i  except  i  =  0,
the  following  formula,  as  it  is  given  by  Poisson  ;

whence  we  may  very  easily  deduce  the  coefficient  of  cos.int,  in  the  expression  of  r,
[659J,  from  that  of  sin.in^  in  u  [657].  We  may  also,  by  developing  the  integrals
[9l47i,  ^,  Z],  obtain  the  expressions  of  u,  r,  v  [657,  659,  668],  arranged  according  to  the
powers  of  e,  as  we  may  see  in  the  paper  of  Poisson,  mentioned  above ;  or  we  may  find
the  corresponding  numerical  results  by  quadratures  [7929a7],  when  e  is  so  large  that  the
terms  of  the  series  do  not  approximate  with  sufficient  rapidity  to  render  the  calculation  easy.

We  shall  now  show  how  a  formula,  adapted  to  double  integrations,  may  be  investigated,
similar  to  that  in  [7929a;]  for  single  integrations.  This  is  done  by  an  extension  of  the
method  given  in  [7929/,  Stc],  for  computing  the  area  of  a  plane  parabolic  surface  ;  to  that
of  finding,  by  quadratures,  the  solid  contents  of  a  body  whose  upper  surface  is  of  a  parabolic
nature,  its  base  a  rectangular  parallelogram,  and  its  sides  plane  surfaces  perpendicular  to
the  base.  We  shall  put  as  usual  x,  y,  z,  for  the  rectangular  co-ordinates  of  the  parabolic
surface,  the  axes  of  x,  y,  being  parallel  to  the  sides  of  the  base,  and  the  axis  of  z
perpendicular  to  the  base,  the  origin  of  the  co-ordinates  being  at  one  of  the  lower  corners
of  the  base.  The  ordinate  z  of  the  parabolic  surface,  is  a  function  of  x,  y,  which  we
may  represent  generally  by  z=f{x,y),  and  we  shall  suppose  the  greatest  values  of  x
and  y  to  be  respectively  x  =  a,  y=b.  Then  we  have  by  the  usual  formulas,
fo"'fQdx.dy.f{x,y),  .for  the  solid  contents  of  the  parabolic  body  ;  the  integrals  relative  to
X  being  taken  from  x  =  0  to  x  =  a,  and  those  relative  to  y,  from  y  =  0  to  y  =-b.
To  obtain  this  integral  by  quadratures,  we  shall  suppose  the  side  a  to  be  divided  into  m
equal  parts,  each  of  them  being  represented  by  w,  so  that  we  shall  have  mw=.a.  In
like  manner,  we  shall  suppose  the  side h to  be  divided  into n equal  parts  w,  making

X.  viii.  <§.  23.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  669

as  that  of  the  observations  themselves,  the  observations  of  Flamsteed,  those [QU9]

[9148i ]

nv/ =  b.  Through  these  points  planes  are  to  be  drawn,  perpendicular  to  the  base,  ^01407-,
intersecting  each  other  at  right  angles,  and  dividing  the  solid  into  mn  parallelopipedons,
each  of  them  standing  upon  an  equal  base,  whose  area  is  represented  by  wio'  -,  but  with
variable  heights  corresponding  to  the  ordinate  z,  which  is  a  function  of  x,y ;  so  that  if  we
represent  by  z^^i-  the  value  of  z=f(x,y)j  corresponding  to  the  ordinates  x  =  iw,  r9i48jfc-|
y  =  i'ii/,  we  shall  have  the  following  table  of  the  expressions  of  Zj  corresponding  to  the
different  values  of  i,  i' ;  '• •'

TABLE OP THE EXPRESSIONS OP Z.

t  =  0

t  =  l

t  =  w— 1

i  =  m

Val-
ues
ofi'

Zo,o =/(0,0)

Zi,o =/K0)

Zm-1,0 =f{m—l.w,0)

Zm,o =f{mw,0)

0

20.1 =/{0,u/)

2 1.1 =/K«'')

Zm-i.i =f{m—l.W,w')

Zma =f{mw,w')

1

zo.. =/(0>')

Zl.2 =/(«'>')

Zn.-i.3  =f{m—l.w,2w')

Zm,2 =/(mtf>,2«;')

2

zo.n.i=/(0,n-l.«/)

Zi,n.i=f{w,n-i.tv')

^-i.n-i  =/(»l- 1  .W,n-1.M/)

Zn,n.i=f{mw,n-\.w')

n-1

Zo.n =/(0,nu>')

Zi.n =f{w,nu/)

z„_,,„  =f{m—l.w,nv/)

Zm,n =f[mw,nw')

n

[9148m]

n
n+1

Each  of  the  n-f-1  horizontal  lines  of  this  table  contains  m-j-1  values  of  z,  corresponding
to  m  parallelopipedons,  each  of  them  standing  upon  a  base  which  is  equal  to  ww'.  Thus
if  we  take  into  consideration  only  the  terms  in  the  line  marked  1,  in  the  margin  of
[9148ff?],  the  co-ordinates  will  be  2:0,0)  Zi^  .  . . .  Zmji'-,  and  if  we  suppose  these  to  be
an  increasing  series,  the  sum  iS  of  the  m  corresponding  parts  or  divisions  of  the  parabolic
solid,  will  evidently  exceed  the  expression  in  [9148p],  and  will  be  less  than  that  in  [QHSg'] ;
because  the  first  series  contains  the  least  values  of  z,  corresponding  to  an  inscribed  series
of  parallelopipedons,  and  the  second  series  the  greatest  values  of  z,  relative  to  a  series  of
circumscribed  parallelopipedons.

(2^0,0  +  2:1,0  +  ^2,0 .... +2:«_2,0  +  2;«_i,o).«'W;'; [inscribed  parallelopipedons.]
(2:1,0  +  2^2,0  +  2:3,0 .... +2:„_i,o  + 2:^,0 ).WM;'; [circumscribed  parallelopipedons. ]

and  it  is  evident,  from  the  slightest  consideration,  that  we  shall  obtain  a  more  correct  value
of  S  by  taking  the  mean  of  these  two  expressions,  which  gives  very  nearly,  for  *S,  the
expression  in  [9148s,  line  1].  In  like  manner,  the  expression  in  [9148m,  line  2]  produces
[9148s,  line  2] ;  that  in  [9148m,  line  3]  produces  [9148s,  line  3] ;  and  so  on  to  the  line
marked  n ;  the  whole  sum  being  an  approximate  value  of  the  sohdity  of  the  parabolic
body ;

VOL.  IV.  168

[9148n]
[9 148/1']

[9148o]

[9148p]
[9148?]

[9148r]

670  PERTURBATIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [M^c.  Cel.

[9149'] of  the  Arabs,  and  those  which  are  mentioned  by  Ptolemy. This  agreement

(1^0,0 +^1,0 +2^2,0 .... -\-Zm-2,0 +«m-l,0 +i«m,0 ).'U}w' ]  1

+  (^2^0,1 +^1,1 +^2,l . • • • +5r^_2,l +2m-l,l +i«m.l )''Wu/ ',  2

+(i  2^0,2 +2:1,2 +2:2,2  ..••+2:^2,2 +2:^-1,2 +i^mfi )'WU/;  3

[9148* ]

+(i2:o,„_2+ 2:i.„_2  +  2:2,n-2  .... +2:m_2,„_2  +  2:«_i,„_2+^2:m,»-2).«'«^; w-1
+(|2:o,„_i  + 2:  i,„_i+ 2:2,^1  ....  +2:^2,u-i+2:«_i,„_i  +  |2:«,n-i).WM^.  n

Instead  of  commencing  the  calculation  as  in  [9148n],  at  the  top  line  of  the  table  [9148m],
and  terminating  in  the  line  marked  n,  we  may  begin  at  the  second  line,  marked  2,  and
terminate  at  the  lower  line,  marked  n+1.  The  effect  of  this  change  will  be  to  form  a
second  series  of  terms,  similar  to  the  first  [9148s],  and  which  can  be  deduced  from  it,  by
taking  away  from  the  first  series  its  upper  line,

[9148u]  (^2:0,0  + 2:1,0 +  2:2,0  ....  +2:^2,0  +  2:^-1,0  + J  2?«,o).W'«^,

and  inserting,  as  a  substitute,  the  w+l line  of  the  same  table,  namely,

[9148v]  {h'^'0,n  +  Zi,n-\-Z2,n .... +  2:^-2,™  +  ^m-l,n  +  |2:;;t,„).W;«/.

This  second  series  of  terms  may  be  considered  as  appertaining  to  a  circumscribed  series,
and  the  first  series  [9148s]  to  an  inscribed  series  of  parallelopipedons ;  and  if  we  take  the
[9148  1  ^^^^  of  '^he  two  series,  we  shall  obtain  the  following  approximate  value  of  the  double
integral  Jfzdx.dy;  supposing  the  limits  of  the  integrals,  relative  to  x,  to  be  from  a?  =  0
to x=:  a  =  mw', and  those  relative  to  y,  to  be  from  y  =  0 to y==ih=inv/  ',

fo^fo^d'^'dy^l'i^ZQfi +2:1,0 +2:2,0 ... +2:^-2,0 +2:^1,0 +^2:^,0 )'V}W'
+  (^2:0.1 +2:1,1 +2:2,1 ...+ 2:^-2,1 +2:„_i,i +^2:^,1 ).wv/

+ (^2:0,2 +2:1,2 +2:2,2 . f-^«t-2,2 +2^»»-],2 +^2:^,2 ).WW>'

[9i48x]  :  : :  :  :  :

+  (2  2:o,«-2+ 2:  i,n— 2+2:2,71-2  .  .  .  +  2:^-2,71-2+ 2:m_i,«_2+ 1 2fTO,n_2).«'t<^
+  (i2:o^„_i+2ri,„_i+2;2,n_i  .  .  .  +2:,^2,»i-l+  Zmr-\,n-l-\-iZm,n—\)''^^
-\-l{\'^Q,n +2:1,™ +2:2,^ ...+2:;„-2,n +  2'm_i,„ ■{■  \Zm,n )'Wv/ .

This  integral  will  be  so  much  the  more  accurate  as  the  number  of  parts  into  which  a,  b,
are  divided  is  augmented ;  as  is  evident  from  the  consideration  that,  by  increasing  the
number  of  these  elementary  parallelopipedons,  their  sum  will  approximate  more  closely  to
the  true  form  of  the  proposed  parabolic  solid.  We  must  also  take  care  to  have  the  number
of  these  sub-divisions  great  enough  to  enable  us  to  dispense  entirely  with  the  consideration
of  the  differences  of  every  order ;  otherwise  the  calculation  becomes  very  complicated.
[9148z] These  principles  are  the  same  as  those  in  single  integrals  by  quadratures  [8014u,&;c.],  and

X.vlii.^23.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  671

proves  the  stability  of  the  solar system,  since Saturn, whose  attraction [9149"]

are  so  very  obvious that it is  unnecessary to  enter  into  any  further illustration  or
explanation  of  this  part  of  the  process.

As  an  example  of  this  method,  we  shall  now  apply  it  to  the  development  of  the  function
R  [957],  upon  which  the  perturbations  of  the  planets  depend. The  general  term  of  the ^ J
development  of  R is  given  in [961], where  the  mean  anomalies  are  represented  by
nt-\-z — -a, n't-\-s' — -j/, instead  of  being  counted  from  the  perihelion,  as  in  [9146i,  Sic]  ;
so  that  if  we  put  for  brevity,

v  =  n^+5— w ; v'==  n'^+Z— ^  ; /=  (^-f-z).«+(^_i').^'-|-/.d-|-g'".d' ;  [9149&]

Ki^  i>  —H,e  K  e'^.(tang.^  (p)« ".  (tang.^  (?')'f".cos./;  [9149c  ]

K'i^i.  =  Jf.  e«.  e'»'.(tang.|  cp)«".(tang.|  (p')C  sin./; '  [9149rf]

we  shall  find  that  this  general  term  of  [961]  may  be  put  under  the  form,

R  =  H.e^.e'<(tang.|(p)^".(tang.^(p')f"'.cos.(i'v'— iv— /)  ;  [9149e]

and  if  we  substitute,

cos.(i v' — i  V — -f)  =  cos/.cos. (i V — i v)-|-sln./sin.(j V — i  v), [24]  Int.

and  use  the  symbols  [9149cj  <ZJ,  it  will  become,

iR  =  ^,,i,.cos.(tV-iv)+^i,i,.sin.(i'v'— iv).  [9149/J

We  shall  now  proceed  to  show  how  the  expressions  of  Ki^ii, K'i^i', can  be  obtained,
by  quadratures,  for  any  integral  values  of  i,  i',  positive  or  negative,  including  zero  [954"]. ^ ^^
Multiplying the  expression  of R  [9149/] by dv'.cos.{iV —  iv), and reducing the
products  by  [6,31]  Int.,  we  obtain,
-RJv'.cos.(iV— i\)  =  JX'i,i,.«?v'+J^i,i'.rfv'.cos.2(iV— iv)+iir'i,i/.(?v'.sin.2(iV— iv). [9149A]

If  we  integrate  this  from v'  =  0 to v'=2'^, the  terms  depending  on cos.2(iV — iv),

or sin.2(t'v' — iv), will  be  the  same  at  both  limits; they  will  therefore  vanish. The

same  must  also  occur  with  all  the  other  terms  of  the  development  of  R,  which  will  produce

only  quantities  depending  on  sines  and  cosines  of  similar  angles, and  having  the  same

values  at  the  limits  of  the  integral. Therefore  the  expression  [9149A,  &;c.]  will  be  reduced  to

its  first  term, J^^ Rdv'. cos. {i'v' — iv)  =  ^Ki^i,.'ii'K  =  if.Ki^i>. Multiplying  this  by dv, [9l49i]

and  integrating  from v  =  0 to v  =  2'?r, it  becomes  equal  to ^it^.Ki^i'] then  dividing

by  2*2,  we  get  the  value  of  Ki^i'  [9149A:]. In  like  manner,  by  multiplying  the  value  of

U  [9149/]  by £Zv.c?v'.sin.(iv' — iv), and  making  the  integrations  in  the  same  order  as

before,  we  obtain  the  value  of  ICi^i>  [9149/]  ;

*'.'■  =  5^  ■J7-J?'R'l..dv'.cos.(iW^v) ;  f9,49„

X',_i.=  —^.J^J^"  Bdv.dv'.sm.{{'v'—iv).  [9I49i]

672  PERTURBATIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Gel.

[9149'"] towards  the  sun  is  about  one hundred  times  less  than  that  of  the  earth

When  i'  =  0,  i==0,  the  expression  of  R  [9149/]  is  reduced  to  its  first  term  /J  =  ^o,o ;
multiplying  this  by  dv.(Jv\  and  integrating  between  the  same  limits,  we  evidently  get,  by
dividing  by  4*^,

which  is  just  half  the  value  which  would  be  obtained,  from  the  general  expression  of  ^i,,7,
^^ [9I49fc],  or  from  that  of  A  [9149o],  by  putting z  =  0, i'  =  0.

In  order  to  make  the  calculations  relative  to v,  v', more  independent  of  each  other,
and  in  a  convenient  manner,  we  shall  put,

[9149o]  ^  ==  A  •  f^'^f^''  -R dyM.cos.iv.cos.iW  ;

[9149p]  B  =  ~.  r?''^^''  Rdv.dv\sin.iv.s\n.i'v' ;

[9149g]  ^  ==  2^  ./^''f^'^Rdw.dy'.cos.iv.sm.iW ;

[9149r  ]  D  =  —  'f^'^f^'^  R  dv.dv\sin.iv.cos.i\'.

Substituting,
[9149s  ] cos.(i'v'-i  v)  =  cosi  v.cosi  V-J-sin.i  v.sin.i  v' ; sin.(i'v -i  v)  =cos.i  v.sin.iV-sin.iv.cosiV,

in  [9149A:,  ?],  and  using  the  values  [9149o — r],  we  obtain,
[9149f]  Ki,i,=:A+B;

[9H9u]  K\i.=  C—D;

so  that  the  problem  is  finally  reduced  to  the  computation,  by  quadratures,  of  the  four
functions  Ji,  B, C,  D;  which  can  be  done  in  the  following  manner ;
r9149»l Taking  in  the  first  place  the  value  of  A  [9149o],  and  comparing  it  with  that  of  the
general  integral  [9148a;],  we  find  that  we  shall  have,

[9149u>]  a;  =  v;  y  =  v'; z=  F{x,y)  =  — .  R.cos.i  v.cos.i'v'.

Now  if  we  put  for  brevity,

2;r  2t  . Sir .  , .,  ^-Jf .,

[9149z]  m=— ;  n=  — :  cl  =  j. —  =im;  a=i.— =zn.

we  must  suppose,  in  the integrations  relative  to v, that  the  whole  circumference  2*  is
'■ ^■' divided  into  m  equal  parts,  each  of  the  value  m,  corresponding  to  the  m-j-l  values  of  v,

[9150a] ;  and,  in  the  integration  relative  to v', that  the whole  circumference  is  divided
•■ ^1 into  n  equal  parts,  each  of  the  value  n,  corresponding  to  the  n-\-l  values  of  v'  [91505];

so  that  we  shall  have  successively,
[9150a] v=0; v=m; v=2m;....v  =  Xm;....v  ={m — l).m; v  =mm;
[91506] v'=0; v'  =  n; V==2n;  ....  V^X'n;  ....  v'  =  (m— l).n; v'  =  nn;

X.  viii.  §  23.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  673

towards  the  sun,  has  not  however  suffered,  from  the  time  of  Hipparchus  to [9150]

supposing  X  to  be  any  integral  number  whatever,  of  the  series  0,1,2  .  .  .  m; and  X'  any rgisoci
integral  number  whatever  of  the  series  0,1,2,3  .  .  .  n.

We  shall  represent  by  jR^.x'  the  value  of  the  function  R,  when  we  substitute  in  it,  for
V,  v', their  values  [9150a,  h],  corresponding  to X, X', respectively,  namely, v  =  Xm,
v'=X'n; which give iv=X.im  =  Xa, ^V=X'.^'n  =  XV  [9149a;]. Then the [9150rf]
corresponding  value  of  z  [9149w;]  will  be  represented  by,

Zx,\'  =  2^ .  i?x,x'.COS.Xa.cos.XV ;  [9150c  ]

and  by  putting w=  —  , w'  =  — , which  give tt-^  =  — , we  find  that  the  formula [9150/1
[914Sa;]  will  give  the  following  value  of  ^ ;

^  =  —  .cos.O. {iJ?(,,o.cos.O-l--Ri,o.cos.a-[-l?2,o-cos.2a  . . .  4--R»n-i,o-cos.(ni— l).a-f-i^m,o-cos.maj 1

2

■i .  cos.a'.  5  1^Rq,i,cos.O  -}-JJ,,i.cos.a  +lf2,i.cos.2a. . . .  -^R„^i^Q.coa.{m — l).a-|-iU„,i.cos.ma  | 2

2

-j .cos.2a'.{il?o,2'Cos.0-{--Ri,2'Cos.ci-j-i22,2-cos.2a  . . .  -j-J?^_i,2.cos.(m— l).a-j-ii?OT,2'Cos.nia^ 3

[9150^]

mn

■j-  —  .cos.7ia'.^iBo,«'Cos.O-|-i2i,n.cos.a4-jR2.n'Cos.2a  . . .  +jR;;,_j,„.cos.(m — l).a-|-4i2m,n'Cos.ma|.  n+i

This  may  be  piit  under  a  more  abridged  form,  by  computing  n-j-1  quantities,
Co,  Cj,  Cj  . . .  C/, .  .  .  Cft',  like  those  whose  general  expression  is  given  in  [9150A],  ^  ^
corresponding  to  any  integral  number  X,  included  in  the  series  0,1,2,3  ...  n.  Substituting
these  in  [9150^],  we  get  the  value  of  A  [9150m].  In  like  manner,  by  using  the  symbols
S^,  S^i  S^.  . .  S)^ .  .  Sn,  corresponding  to  the  form  [9150Z],  we  obtain  the  value  of  ^,
[9150/i],  resulting  from  the  expression  [9149/?].  In  the  same  way  we  deduce  the  values
of  C,  D  [91500,  jp],  from  those  in  [91495^,  r]  respectively  5  and  then,  by  substitution  in
[9150y],  we  get Ki,i>, K'i,i. ;

Cx=  |jRo,x.cos.O-f-i?i,x.cos.a-|-/22,x.cos.2a  • . .  +/2m-i,x-cos.(m-l).a-|-J-Rm,?..cos.7Ma  ; [9150A;]

Sx  =  ^jRo,\.sin.O-|-i2i,x.sin.a-f-i?2,x.sin.2a. . .  .  +jRm_i,x.sin.(m-l).a-f-|i2;„,K.sin.ma  ; [9150/]

A  =— .(JCo.cos.O-f  C,.cos.a-'-{-C2.cos.2a'  ..  .+C^i.cos.(n— l).a'+JC„.cos.na'); [9150m]

B  =  —  .(i^o.sin.O  ~\-S,.  sin.a'  +S2.sin.2ci.'  . .  .  +S«_i.sin.(n— l).a'+^^„.sin.na')  5 [9150n]

C  =  —  .(I  Co-sin.O  +  Ci.sin.a'+  C2.sin.2a'  . .  .  +  C„_i.sin.(n— l).a'-f  ^  On.  sin.na')  ; [9150o]

2

D  =  —  .(|;S'o.cos.O+5i.cos.a'-f-  iS'2.cos.2a'  . .  .  +*,S'^i.cos.(n— l).a'4-JC„.cos.na') . [9150p]

Ki,i,==A-\-B;  K'i^i.^C—D. [9149^,  w]  [9150?]

VOL.  IV.  169

674  PERTURBATIONS  OF THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9150'] the  present  day,  any  sensible  alteration  from  the  action  of  bodies  which

The  first  term  of  the  development  of  ^R, namely  Kq^,  is  obtained  as  in  [9149n'J,  by
[9l50r] putting i  =  0, i'=0, in the  value  of ^A,  deduced  from  [9150m]. In  this  case  we
have «.  =  0, a'  =  0  [9149a?];  and  the  general  expression  [9150A:]  becomes,

[9150^]  C,  =  Ji?o.x  +  /2i,x  +  i22,x....+i2.-i,x  +  |i2»..x;

and  the  value  of  ^A,  deduced  from  [9150m],  gives,

This  quantity  produces  a  terra  in  the  secular  inequalities.

In  applying  these  formulas  to numbers,  Hansen  recommends  the  us*e  of  some  power  of
2,  for  the  value  of  m  or  7t ; as  it  tends  to  make  the  sines  and  cosines  of  several  terms  of

'■  ■'  the  series  [9150a,  b]  equal  to  each  other,  and  affords  several  very  peculiar  and  convenient
methods  of  computation  and  verification.  Thus,  if  we  put  m  =  8,  we  shall  have
m=45'*;  and  the  sines  of  the  nine  terms  of  the  series  [9150a],  will  be  reduced  to  the
three quantities 0, dbv/ij ±1* He finds it to be sufiiciently accurate to assume

[9150u'j  m  =  32,  n=  16,  in  the  very  important  and  delicate  computation  of  the  great  inequalities
of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  In  making  these  calculations  relative  to  jR  [9149a],  it  is
convenient  to  take  separately  into  consideration  the  two  terms  of  which  it  is  composed,
namely,

[9150i;]  R  = ^7^, J  ; [5755]

m' 1
because  the  part , or  rather , is  the  same  for  both  planets ;  and  we  have

seen,  in  [3832],  that  in  calculating  those  great  inequalities,  the  values  of  P,  P'  [3810],

'■  ■' which  take  the  place  of  -Ki.f, K'i^v,  in  the  expression  of  R  [9149/*], will  be  the  same

whether  we  consider  the  action  of  m  on  mf,  or  that  of  m'  on  m.  Instead  of  the  rectangular
co-ordinates  x,  y,  z,  x',  i/,  z',  which  occur  in  [9150u],  we  may  use  the  polar  co-ordinates
r,  V,  r',  v',  and  put,  as  in  [5849],  y  for  the  mutual  inclination  of  the  two  orbits;  taking
the  orbit  of  m  for  the  plane  of  the  co-ordinates,  and  the  line  of  nodes  of  the  orbit  for  the

'-  ^■'  axis  of  X,  or  the  origin  of  the  angles  v,  v.  Then  we  have,  in  [5852],  ^  =  2.sin.^|7;
consequently,

[91502]  p.sin.r.sin.u'  =  2.sin.^|y.sin.'».sin.«'  =  sin.^^ 7.cos.(c' — v) — sin.^^y.cos. (©'-}-»)  J

substituting  this  in  [5853d,  f],  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  get,

[9151a]  xx'-\-y}/-\-zzf  =  rr'.cos.^^7.cos.(v' — v)-\-rr' .sin.^  ^  y .cos.  (v'-\-v)  ;

[91516]  P^  =  r^-\-r^^—2r/.cos.^^'y.cos.{v' — v) — 2r/.sm.^^y.cos.{v'-]-v)  ;

hence  the  expression  of  jR  [9150v]  becomes,  by  still  retaining  for  brevity  the  symbol  p,
[91516],

[9151c]  ^  =  3F  .{cos.^y.cos.{v'—v)+s\n.^y.cos.{v'-\-v) |  —  -7  •

r  ^  P

X.  viii.  <§»  23.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  675

are  foreign  from  our  system.  [9150"]

The  angles  v,  v',  are  here  counted  from  the  line  of  nodes  [9150y],  which  is  equivalent  to
the  supposition  that  the  longitude  of  the  node  is  nothing  ;  but  if  we  suppose  this  longitude
to  be  represented,  as  in  [8009s],  by  6,  each  of  the  angles  v,  v',  must  be  decreased  by  6.
This  will  not  alter  the  angle  v' — v,  but  will  change  cos.(u'-}-v)  into  cos.(«'-|-« — 2^),
and  its  differential  relative  to  &  will  be  2dLs\n.{v'-{-v — 26).  Hence  it  is  evident  that  in
finding  the  differential  of  either  of  the  quantities  [9151a,  6,  c],  relative  to  6,  we  may
consider  cos.(«'-}-t?)  as  the  only  variable  quantity,  and  put  its  differential  equal  to
2dd.sin.(y'-\-v)  ;  so  that  we  shall  have,  from  [9151c],  the  expression  [9151^].  Moreover
the  partial  differential  of  B.  [9151c],  relative  to  y,  gives  [9151^'J,  observing  that  if  we
consider  7  as  the  only  variable  quantity  in  the  first  member  of  [9151/],  we  shall  have,

J.{cos.^^y.cos.(v' — v)-\-s'm.^y.cos.{v'-\~v)\

=  — dy.(2.s'\n.^y.cos.^'y).{i.cos.{v' — v) — ^.cos.(u'-|-y)}  =  — dy. sin. y.\sm. v. sin. 1/ 1 .
The  partial  differential  of  R  [9151c],  relative  to  r,  gives  [9151A],  by  using  [6089e].  In
like  manner  we  may  obtain  other  similar  differentials,  relative  to  r,  v',  v,  &c. ;

/dR\ m'.r „ . 01 • /  /  i \ ^"'■'-"^ • 21 • /  /  , \
\dd)  =  7i--2.sin.2|y.sin.(t;  +v) ^3-  .sin.^^y.sm.{v  -\~v)  ;

/dR\  ( m'.r , m'.rr'  ) .  .  . ,

r.f  — j  ==a.(—j  =^.{cos.^^7.cos.(v' — v)-\-sin.^iy.cos.{v'-]-v)]

-\ J .  {r — r'.cos.^|7.cos.(t)' — v) — /.sin.^  Jy.cos.(«'+i?) \ .

It  is  unnecessary  to  point  out  all  the  peculiarities  of  these  calculations,  with  the  methods
of  abridgment,  and  the  checks  to  prove  the  accuracy  of  the  numerical  process,  as  they  will
occur  very  readily  to  an  experienced  computer ;  we  shall  therefore  merely  give  a  rapid
sketch  of  the  manner  of  proceeding,  in  computing  the  part  of  R  depending  upon  P,  P',
[3810,  &c.],  corresponding  to  the  angle  5nt — 2nt,  or  5v' — 2v,  upon  which  the  great
inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  chiefly  depend.  In  this  case  we  have  i  =  2,  i'=5,
[9149/],  and  we  must  substitute  these  values  in  the  expressions  of  A,  B,  C,  D,
[9149o — r],  or  in  the  equivalent  formulas  [9150A; — q].

Supposing  now,  as  in  [9150w'],  that m=32, n  =  16, we  shall  have,  as  in  [9149a?],

360"^  360"^

m=  "22-=  11"  15™; n  =  -jg-=22''30'"; a  =  2m=22''30™; a'=5n==112'^30"';

and  the  series  of  angles  v,  v'  [9150a,  6],  will  become,

v=0; v  =  llM5"'; v  =22*30"* ;....  v  =348"  45"; v  =360*;

v'=0; v'  =  22*30"*;

45*^

v'  =  337*  30"» ; v'  =  360*.

[915l<i]

[9151c]
[9151c']

[9151/]

[9151g]
[915^]

[9151/i]

[915 It]

[9151A;]
[9151Z  ]
[9151m]

[9151  n]
[91510 ]

Each  one  of  these  values  of v must  be  separately  combined  with  each  of  the  values  of

676  PERTURBATIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES.  [M^c.  Cel.

[9i5(y"] 24. The  principle  which has  conducted  us,  in  the  preceding  article,  to

[9151p]

/,  making  in  all 33x17  =  561 combinations;  and  for  every  one  of  these  combinations

we  must  compute  the  corresponding  value  of  jR,  which  we  may  represent,  as  in
[9151q] [QlSOf/,  &z,c.],  by Ro,o, Ri,o, R^fi,  &c. ; i2o,i, i2],i, i?2,i,  &«. ; using for this

purpose  the  most  correct  tables  of  the  motions  of  these  planets,  in  finding  the  values  of
[9151r] r,  /,  &c. Then  the  values  of  C^,  C,  . .  .  C,g ; S^,  S^  . .  .  iS,g, must  be  calculated  by

means  of  the  formulas  [9150A:, ZJ,  which  become,  in  this  case,  of  the  following  forms;

[9151s] Cx=^/?o,x.cos.O-{-i2],x.cos.a+/?2,x.cos.2a  ....  -f-^3i,x.cos.31a-j-ii232,\.cos.32a;

[915U] Ss  =  ijRo,x.sin.O+iRi,x.sin.a  +l?2,^.co3.2a +J23],K-sin.31a  +^/?3i,x.sin.32ou

With  these  values  we  have,  as  in  [9150m — q],

[9151u]  ^= -^.f^6Vcos.0+C,.cos.a'+C,.cos.2a' +Q,.cos.l5a'-{-^C,e.cos.l6a'|

[9151r]  5  =  ^^~[^-U*^o.sin.O+5,.sin.a'+53.sin.2a' -f  S„.sin.l5a' +^5,s.sin.l6a'}

[9151U.]  C==3^.{^C„.sin.0+C,.sin.a'+O,.sin.2a'  ....  +C,,.sin.l5a'4-iC.,.sin.l6a'|

[9151a:]  D=  -^  .{^So.cos.O+iS',.cos.a'+S5.cos.2a'  ....  +S,,.cos.l5a'-|-^5,,.cos.l6a'|

[91513/] £-2,5=^4-^5  K',,,=  C—D',

and  by  substituting  the  values  a  =  22'^30"',  a'  =  112'*30"*  [9151m],  we  easily  deduce
[91ol2] the  values  of  S'2^5, £'2,5, which  we  shall hereafter  represent  simply  by  K,  K',  for  the

sake  of  brevity. These  values  being  substituted  in  [9149/J,  give,
[9152a]  jR  =^.cos.(5v'— 2v)+^'.sin.(5v'— 2v).

This  may  be  reduced  to  a  form  which  is  similar  to  that  in  [3810],  namely,
[91526]  R  =  mf.P.cos.T+m'.P'.s'm.T.

[9152c]  For  if  we  put  T=5n'i— 2n^+5£'— 2s,  and  w  =  5x^'—2uj,  the  values  of  v,  v' [91496],
[9l52rf]  will  give  i'v'—iv=(5nft — 2n^-|-55' — 2s) — (5ot' — 2«)=T— w;  whence  we  shall  have,
[9152rf'] cos.(5v' — 2v)  =cos.w.cos.T4-sin.w.sin.T; sin.(5v' — 2v)  =cos.w.sin.r— sin.w.cos.T.

Substituting  these  in  [9152a],  we  get,
[9152e  ]  R  —  (^.cos.w— ^'.sin.  w).cos.  r+(J^.sin.w-j-^'.cos.w).sin.  T;

comparing  together  the  two  expressions  of  R  [9152&,  e],  we  obtain,
[9152/]  raT  =  Z^.cos.w— Z'.sin.w ;  m'P'=  ^.sin.w+JT.cos.w.

It  is  evident  that  we may  apply  the  same  method  of  integration,  by  quadratures,  to  any

function  which  is  derived  from  R,  like  those  in  [9151^,^',  h,  &;c.],  by  computing  these
[9i52g] quantities  for  the  different  values  of  v,  v'  [9150a,  6],  and  using  them  for  Ro,oi Rifi,  &c.,

in  the  formulas  [9150k— q]. Then  having,  as  in  [962,  1002,  954, 951,  &c.],

[9152ft]

[91524']

X.viii.«^24.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  677

several sensible inequalities  in  the  motions of  Jupiter  and Saturn,  gives [9l50iv]

we  shall  get  the  values  of  a.f  — j,  "'•(t~/)>  ^-c.  ;  or,  in  other  words,  we  shall  have
the  values  of,

-'•(fO- '"■■(^:). -(^. -(^').^c.;

and  from  these  we  may  deduce  the  values  of f;!"!;), i'T^v) [4422,  4475,  Sic], by  a

process  similar  to  that  in  [91526,/*].  In  this  way  we  may  compute  the  values  of  the  parts
of  6v,  5r,  &.C.  depending  upon  particular  angles,  like  those  in  [3809,  3821,  &,c.],  which
include  the  most  important  parts  of  the  great  inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  We  may
also  apply  this  method  to  any  of  the  integrals  in  [8010/ — m] ;  as,  for  example,  to  those  in
[8010Z,  m],  which  can  be  obtained  by  the  substitution  of  the  values  [9151^, ^j;  and  so
on  for  others.

To  show  the  accuracy  of  this  method  of  quadratures,  with  the  values m  =32, n=  16,
[9151/],  applied  to  the  computation  of  a  few  of  the  most  important  terms  of  the  great '■  J

inequalities  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  we  have  inserted,  in  the  table  [9152p — s],  the  results
of  several  calculations  of  Pontecoulant,  of  the  same  terms,  by  quadratures,  and  by  the
methods  of  approximation  given  by  La  Place,  in  the  third  volume  of  this  work. The  terms '■  J

in  [9152j?]  represent  the  part  of  the  inequality  of  Jupiter  dv'"'  [4417],  depending  on  P,  P',
but  neglecting  their  first  and  second  differentials  dP,  ddP,  dP\  ddP'.  The  terms  in
[9152r]  represent  the  similar  part  of  the  inequality  of  Saturn  h"  [4483],  depending  on
P^,  P/j  but  neglecting  their  differentials.  The  terms  in  [91525-]  represent  the  inequality
6«i^  [4422]  relative  to  Jupiter;  and  that  in  [9152s]  the  similar  expression  of  5v^  [4475],  [9152o]
relative  to  Saturn;  the  fractions  of  a  second,  beyond  the  first  decimal  place^  being
neglected  ;

By  quadratures.  By  La  Place's  formulas.

5«i^= 1084%0.sin.T—  64',9.cos.T;  5yi^= 1089^8.sin.T—  55%2.cos.T;  [9152p]

5tjiv  =  _ 16%3.sin.r+ 5%8.cos.T;  5i;i^  =  — 16%3.sin.T+ 6S0.cos.T;  [9152g]

6w^=— 2685',4.sin.T+160%9.cos.r;  h''  =— 2678%5.sin.r+156%4.cos.r;  [9152r]

h^  = 52^1.sin.T—  13%6.cos.T;  h"  = 49*,4.sin.T—  13S5.cos.r.  [9152»]

The  near  agreement  of  these  results,  obtained  from  such  entirely  different  methods,  is  very

satisfactory  ;  not  only  from  its  indicating  that  the  usual  methods  of  development,  by  series,

•  f9152fl

are  sufficiently  accurate  for  all  the  purposes  of  astronomy  to  which  they  have  been  usually '• ^

applied,  but  from  its  affording  an  independent  method  of  verifying  all  these  results  ;  and  it

is  to  be  hoped  that  this  process  will  be  extensively  employed.

Instead  of  taking the  mean  anomalies  v,  V  [91496],  for  the  variable  angles  in  the

expression  of  R  [9149/,  &ic.],  we  may  use  any  other  quantities  j  as,  for  example,  the

VOL. IV.  170

678  PERTURBATIONS  OF  THE  HEAVENLY  BODIES. [Mec.  Cel.

also,  in  the  moon's  motion,  a  small  equation  which  we  shall  now  investigate,
[9150^1 using  the same symbols  as  in  the  seventh  book,  where  we  have  computed
the  following  inequality  in  the  moon's  mean  longitude nl-\-e^ in  terms  of
the  true  longitude  v  ;  *

excentric  anomalies  u,  u',  which  are  found  so  useful  in  reducing  the  formulas  [9147i — m]

to  functions  of  only  one  unknown  quantity  u. In  this  case  we  shall  have,  in  like  manner

asin  [9146i,91495],
[9 152i>]  V  =  u — e.sin  .m  ;  v'  =  u' — e'.sin.w' ;

[9152m>]  dv  =  (l—e.cosM).du  =  ndt ;  d\'  =  {\—-e'.co%.v!).du'  =  n'dt.

Substituting  these  values  of  v,  v',  <7v,  dw\  in  terms  of  u,  u',  du,  di/,  in  [9149A:,?,n],  we  get,

[9i52y] K'i^i'=~  'f^'^f^^  jR.sin.|i'(M-e'.sin.M')-i(M-e.sin.M)|.(l-e.cos.M) .(l-e'.cos.M').</M.du' ;
[91522] ^0,0  =r^.yi2^2*i?.(l— e.cos.M).(l— e'.cos.«/).(/M.rfM'.

[9153a]

[9153c  j

Developing these  functions  of  u according  to the powers  and products  of e,  e', then
performing  the  integrations  relative  to m,  m', we  shall  obtain  the  values  of jfiTi^j/, K'i^^.,
Kofi. Now  it  is  evident  that  R  can  be  expressed  in  a  function  of  the  sines  and  cosines
of  angles  of  the  form iV — iw,  so  that  we  shall  have,
[91536 ]  R  —  2.^.^ ., .cos.(i V— m)+2.J?i,i. .sin.(* V— tu)  ;

and  by  multiplying  this  by  du.du'.cos.{i'v' — iv),  or  du.du'.sm.{i'v' — iv),  and  integrating,
we  get  the  values  of  Ai^i',  Bi^i,  in  formulas  similar  to  [91 49A:,  Z,  n].  The  function  R,
when  developed  in  this  way,  has  a  peculiar  and  very  remarkable  property,  that  we  can
deduce  from  it  directly  the  values  of  fdR,  fdt.fdR,  and  other  partial  differentials  of
the  function  fRdt,  which  enter  into  the  expressions  of  the  variations  of  the  elements  of
the  orbit,  in  [5873— 5S79,  &;c.],  without  being  obliged  to  substitute  the  values  of  m,  w',
in  functions  of  the  time  before  the  integrations  ;  but  this  advantage  is  counterbalanced  by
the  trouble  of  reducing  the  expressions  of  the  elements  which  result  from  this  process,  in
terms  of  the  excentric  anomaly,  to  those  of  the  mean  anomaly,  which  leads  to  very
complicated  calculations ;  for  this  reason  we  shall  not  enter  into  any  further  discussion  of
this  method,  which  is  in  reality  not  so  simple  as  the  process  already  explained,  in
[9149a— n,&Lc.].

*  (4109) We  see  in  [4817,  4831,4834],  that mv—c'mv  represents  the  motion  of  the

'■ "•' sun's  perigee,  so  that  mv — c'mv-\-zs represents  the  real  place  of  the  sun's  perigee  ;  and  by

subtracting  it  from  the  moon's  longitude v, we  get  the  moon's  distance  from  the  sun's

perigee  equal  to v — mv-\-c'mv — to',  being  the  argument  of  the  inequality  [9151]  ;  moreover

X.viii.«^24.]  DOUBLE  INTEGRATION  BY  QUADRATURES.  679

— 18^809.sin.(^J— wzj+c'wiv— ^).  [5220  line  22]  [9151]

This  inequality  may  be  considered  as  a  true  equation  of  the  moon's  centre,

referred  to  the  sun's  perigee ;  and  it  is  analogous  to  the  equation  of  the

centre  of  the  third  satellite  of  Jupiter  [7405  line  2],  which  corresponds  to

the  perijove  of  the  fourth  satellite  [7409]  ;  it  must  therefore  produce  in  the [91531

moon's  motion  an  inequality  similar  to  the  evection,  which  will  therefore  be

of  the  form,

^.sin.  { 2v—2mv—  (v—mv-{-c'mv—vi')  ];  [91 5M] [9153]

or,

^.sin.(y — mv — c'mv-{-rs').  [9154]

To  determine  K,  we  shall  observe that  the  coefficient  — 18%809,  of  the

[9155]

small  equation  of  the  centre,  is  to  K,  as  — 22677%  the  coefficient  of  the
great  equation  of  the  centre,  is  to  — 4681",  the  coefficient  of  the  evection  ;
which  gives,

^=_3^,88.  [9156]

According  to  Burg,  this  coefficient  is — 2%9  [5578  line  12],  which  differs
but  little from  the  preceding  result. If  we  adopt  Burg's  value  of  the ^ ^
coefficient  of  this  small  equation  of  the  centre, — 13',5  [5576  line  15],  this
difference  will  be  decreased,  and  we  shall  have,

A"  =  —2^78.  [9158]

cv — «  represents  the  moon's  distance  from  her  perigee. Now  the  chief  term  of  the  moon's

equation of the centre, is — 2-2677',5.sin.(cw  —  ct) [5574], and the evection is [9154c]

— 4681%5.sin.{2u — 2m« — {cv — •cj)| [5575  line  3]; so  that  the  argument  of  the  evection

is  found,  by  subtracting  the  argument  of  the  equation  of  the  centre  cv — -as  from  2i' — 2mv.

Therefore  if  we  consider  the  inequality  [9551] as  an equation of the centre, whose

argument  is v — mv'-{-c'mv — ts', the  argument  of  the  corresponding  evection  will  be,

2v — 2mv — {v — mv-\-c'mv — 13'}  =  v  — mv — c'ma;-|-'5j' ;  [9154(/]

consequently  this  evection  can  be  put  under  the  same  form  as  that  given  by  the  author  in

[9154J. If  we  suppose,  as  in  [9155],  that  the  coefficients  of  the  inequalities  [9551,  9554] [91546]

have  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  the  numbers 22677% 4681*  [9155],  we  shall  get  the

same  value  of K as in [9156]  ;  and  by  using  Burg's  coefficient  [9157],  we  shall  obtain rgi^^f-i

the  reduced  value  of  K  [9158]. This  does  not  however  express  the  complete  value  of  K,

but  only  that  part  of  it  which has  the  relation  to  the  coefficient 18'',809  [9151], which  is

assumed by  the  author  in  [9155]  ;  and  the  effect  of  the  neglected  terms  might  alter  the rgis^o-i

value  esseniially ; as  Plana  has  remarked  in vol.  2, page  412,  of  the  IMemoirs  of  the

Astronomical  Society  of  London,  where  he  reduces  the  value  of  K  to O^IS. We  have ^^  ^^, ,
...  •  .  J [9157A]

not  made  any  numerical  calculations  for  finding  the  complete  value  of  this  coefficient,  and

we  shall  merely  observe  that  it  is  found  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  that  in  [5220  line  22], [9154;  -i

depending  on sin.(t) — mv-\-c'mv — -a).

680  VALUES  OF  THE  MASSES  [Mec.Cel.

[9159]

CHAPTER IX.

ON  THE  MASSES  OP  THE  PLANETS  AND  SATELLITES.

25.  In  the  present  state  of  astronomy,  where  both  observation  and
theory  have  been  carried  to  a  great  degree  of  perfection,  one  of  the  best
methods  of  ascertaining  the  masses  of  the  planets  is  to  compare,  with  the
analytical  formulas  of  the  perturbations,  a  very  great  number  of  observations,
selected  for  that  purpose  in  the  most  advantageous  manner.  In  this  way,
the  masses  of  Venus,  Mars,  Saturn,  the  moon,  and  the  four  satellites  of
Jupiter,  have  been  determined.  We  may  even  add  thereto  the  mass  of
Jupiter ;  for  by  comparing  the  best  observations  of  that  planet,  with  the
great  inequalities  his  action*  produces  on  the  motion  of  Saturn,  no  sensible
correction  has  been  found  in  the  value  of  the  mass  which  is  given  by  the
elongations  of  the  satellites.  It  is  evident  that  these  masses  will  be  known
more  accurately,  in  proportion  as  their  effects  are  greater.  We  shall  now
collect  together,  so  as  to  have  at  one  view  the  values  of  these  masses,
determined  by  the  methods  we  have  just  mentioned.

*  (4110) The  mass  of  Jupiter  now  most  generally  used,  is  that  found  by  Nicolai,  from
the perturbations of Juno ; namely, m'"  =  [4061^] ; that of Mars is

»»'"  =  ^^o.^o»■,  ) given  by  Bessel,  from  a  new  discussion  of  the  observations  of  Delambre.
2680337 °  •'  '

These  are  used  by  Pontecoulant,  in  the  third  volume  of  his TMorie  Analytique,  &c.,
[91596]  11

together  with  the  values  of  m^,  m"  [406 Irf]  ;  he  also  puts m= _ , mf  =  ^qiqqq  >

m"  =  — — —  ; which are very nearly the same  as  in  [4061  f?]. In calculating the

[9160]

[9159c]

perturbations  of  all  the  planets,  he  uses  La  Place's  values  of  a,  a',  a'\  a'",  a''',  a'',  a"" ;
w,  n\  n",  n"'j  w'^,  vT,  n"'  [4079,  4077]  ;  but  in  an  appendix  to  the  third  volume  of  the
same  work,  he  has  applied  some  slight  corrections  to  these  quantities,  to  make  them  conform

X.  ix.  <§.  25.]

OF  THE  PLANETS  AND  SATELLITES.

681

VALUES  OF  THE  MASSES  OF  VENUS,  MARS,  JUPITER  AND  SATURN,  THAT  OF
THE  SUN  BEING  TAKEN  FOR  UNITY.

1

Venus  .
Mars  .
Jupiter
Saturn  .

356632 '

m"'  =

1

2546320 '

/vriir

1

1067,09 '

n-nV

1

[4605]
[4608]

t These  values  were  altered j
by  La  Place,  as  in  [4061d]. I

[9121]

4

3534,08

Dividing  these values  respectively  by  those  of  the  masses  of  Venus,  Mars,
Jupiter  and  Saturn,  given  in  [4061],  we  obtain  the  values  of  the  coefficients

[9161]

[9162]

to  the  latest  and  most  accurate  astronomical  tables. We  have  inserted  these  values  in  the

[9159rf]
following  table,  together  with  his  latest  computations  of  the  other  elements,  adapted  to  the

epoch  corresponding  to  the  midnight  which  separates  December  31,  1799,  from  January [9159e]

1,  1800.

TABLE  OP  THE  VALUES  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  ORBITS  OF  THE  PLANETS.

Names  of  the
planets.

Masses  of the phnets, the
sun'i  mass  being  1.

Mean  sideral  motions  in
365^  days.

Me.in  distances  of  the
planets  from  the  sun.

Ratios  of  the  ezcentricities

to  the  mean  distances,

January  1,  1800.

Mercury

Venus

Earth

Mars

Jupiter

Saturn

Uranus

r»liv  _ 1

n =5381016V53
n' =  210664 1%42
n"  =1295977',37
»'"= 689051%08
n'^  = 109256^59
nv  = 43996^00
n^i  = 1.5425',49

a = 0,38709888
a'  = 0,72333228
a"  = 1,00000000
a"'= 1,52369210
ai^= 5,20115524
a^  = 9,53797320
a^i  =  19,18251740

e =0,2055149
e'  =0,0068531
e"  =  0,01685359
e'"  =  0,0933061
ei^=  0,0481621
c^  =  0,0561505
e-i  =  0,0466108

Names  of  the
planets.

Longitudes  of  the  opochs,
January  J,  1800.

Longitudes  of  the  perihelia,

Jan.  1,  1800; counted

as  in  [t«009r].

Inclinations  of  the  orbits  to

the  ecliptic,

January  J,  IfcOO.

Longitudes  of  the  ascend-
ing nodes  on  the  ecliptic,
January  1,  1800.

Mercury

Venus

Earth

Mars

Jupiter

Saturn

Uranus

£ =110'^13"'17%9
s'  =  145  56 52,1
s"  =  100  23 32  ,6
s'"  =  232  49 50  ,5
£iv_ SI  52 10,3
£v  =  123  05 29  ,4
£vi=  173  30 16,6

ZT = 74*^21"' 41*
zr'  =  128  43 06
zr"  = 99  29 53
,ir'"=332  23 40
zr^-= 11 07 36
^v  == 89  08 20
^vi  =-  167  30 24

^ =  7"*  00"*  09»
^'  =  3  23 29
?>"  =  0  00 00
^'"=  1 50 06
9'^=  1 18  52
^^  =  2  29 38
<p^i  =  0 46 26

6 = 45'^57'»39*
6'  = 74  52 39
6"  = 00  00 00
r'= 48  00 26
0'v= 98  25  45
6^  =111 56 07
<|vi= 72  59 51

[9159/]

[9159g-]

VOL. IV.

171

682  VALUES  OF  THE  MASSES  [Mec.  Cel.

[9162']

[9164]

[9166]

[9167]

[9168]

1_}_^' 1  +  M^'", l  +  M-^ l  +  M-"  [4230'], which  occur in  the  formulas  of  the
sixth  book.

[7162]

1

[7163]

2

[7164]

3

[7165]

4

6

VALUE  OF  THE  MOON's  MASS,  THAT  OF  THE  EARTH  BEING  TAKEN  FOR  UNITY.

[9163]  Moon's  mass  = -i- . [4631]

68,5 '-

VALUES OF THE MASSES OF JUPITEr's SATELLITES,  THAT OF JUPITER BEING

TAKEN FOR UNITY.

Mass  of  the  First  Satellite  =  0,0000173281
" Second  Satellite  =  0,0000232355

Third  Satellite  =  0,0000884972
" Fourth  Satellite  =  0,0000426591

Jupiter's  mass =  1.

All  these  values,  which  may  be  considered  as  very  nearly  exact,  can  be
[9165]  corrected,  when,  in  the  course  of  time,  we  shall  have  ascertained  the  secular
variations  of  the  orbits  of  the  planets  and  satellites.

We  have  determined,  in  [4072],  the  earth's  mass  by  means  of  the  sun's
parallax,  and  we  have  there  remarked  that  the  value  of  that  mass  must  vary
as  the  cube  of  the  parallax,  compared  with  the  cube  of  the  supposed  parallax
8%8.  Hence  it  follows,  that  a  small  error  in  the  solar  parallax  is  increased
threefold  in  its  influence  upon  the  value  of  the  earthh  mass.*  It  is  therefore
advantageous  to  determine  this  mass  by  the  effects  of  its  action  on  other
bodies ;  and  this  action  on  the  motions  of  Venus  and  Mars  is  sufficient  to
enable  us  to  ascertain  this  mass,  by  means  of  a  great  number  of  observations,
selected  under  the  most  favorable  circumstances.  Then  we  shall  have  the
sun's  parallax  so  much  the  more  accurately,  as  an  error  in  the  whole  mass
produces  only  a  third  part  as  much  error  in  the  parallax.

*  (4111) We  shall  represent  the  sun's horizontal  parallax  by 8',8.{l-\-Sp), and  the
[9167a] earth's  mass  by  J"  ; the mass  corresponding  to  the  parallax 8',8, being ^^^q,

[4072]. Then  we  shall  have,  by  the  rule  given  in  [4073],

whence  we  easily deduce {l-{-5py=l-\-Smj or  by  developing, and  neglecting  the
second  and  higher  powers  of  5p, l-\-3.8p  =  l-\-8m; whence  Sm  =  S.Sp,  as  in  [9167J.

X.  ix.  <§.  26.]  OF  THE  PLANETS  AND  SATELLITES.  683

ON ASTRONOMICAL TABLES.

26.  Each  observation  of  a  planet  determines  its  geocentric  longitude  and
latitude  ;  the  differences  between  the  observed  longitudes  and  latitudes,  and  rqifioi
those  calculated  by  the  preceding  formulas,  will  give  two  equations  of
condition  between  the  corrections  of  the  elements  of  the  elliptical  motion,
and  the  disturbing  masses.  We  may  form  in  this  manner  a  great  number
of  equations  of  condition,  and  from  them  we  can  deduce  the  values  of  these
corrections ;  then  using  these  corrected  formulas,  we  can  construct  more
accurate  tables  of  the  planet's  motion.  Subsequent  observations  being
compared  with  the  primitive  formulas,  will  furnish  new  equations  of
condition,  which  we  must  connect  with  the  preceding,  and  after  a  sufficiently
long  interval  of  lime  we  can  obtain  a  large  number  of  additional  equations ;
then  we  may  again  determine,  by  the  whole  body  of  these  equations,  both
old  and  new,  the  corrections  of  the  elliptical  elements  and  of  the  masses ;
and  we  can  by  this  means  form  a  more  accurate  set  of  tables  than  those
which  we  first  used.  Continuing  this  process,  we  may  successively  render
these  tables  more  and  more  complete.  The  same  method  can  be  used  in
improving  the  tables  of  the  satellites.  Thus  the  labors  of  present
astronomers,  being  constantly  added  to  those  which  precede  them,  will
finally  give  a  great  degree  of  accuracy  to  astronomical  tables,  and  to  the
values  of  the  elements  upon  which  they  are  founded.

SUPPLEMENT

TO THE

TENTH  BOOK  OF  THE  MECANIQUE  CELESTE.

ON CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

We  have  considered,  in  the  tenth  book,  the  phenomena  arising  from  the
refractive  power  exerted  by  bodies  upon  light.  This  force  is  the  result  of  the
attraction  of  their  particles ;  but  the  law  of  this  attraction  cannot  be  determined
by  the  phenomena,  because  the  only  condition  required  is  that  it  must  be
insensible  at  sensible  distances.  All  the  laws  of  attraction,  where  this  [9171]
condition  is  fulfilled,  will  satisfy  equally  well  the  various  phenomena  of
refraction  derived  from  observation.  The  most  important  of  these  observations
is  that  of  the  constant  ratio  of  the  sine  of  refraction  to  the  sine  of  incidence,
in  the  passage  of  light  through  diaphanous  bodies.  It  is  in  this  case  only  that
corpuscular  attraction  has  been  submitted  to  an  accurate  analysis.  I  shall  now
proceed  to  lay  before  mathematicians  another  case,  which  is  still  more
remarkable,  from  the  variety  and  singularity  of  the  phenomena  depending
upon  it,  and  from  its  being  susceptible  of  an  equally  accurate  analysis  ;  the  [9172]
case  alluded  to  is  that  of  capillary  attraction.* The  effects  of  the  refractive

*  (4112)  This  theory  of  capillary  attraction  was  first  published  by  La  Place  in  1806  ;
and  in  1 807  he  gave  a  supplement  [9757 — 10520).  In  neither  of  these  works  is  the  repulsive  [91730]
force  of  the  heat  of  the  fluid  taken  into  consideration,  because  he  supposed  it  to  be
unnecessary  [10508].  But  in  1819  he  observed,  that  this  action  could  be  taken  into  [91736]
account,  by  supposing  the  force  9  (/)  [9229]  to  represent  the  difference  between  the  attractive  [9173c]
force  of  the  particles  of  the  fluid  ^{f),  and  the  repulsive  force  of  the  heat  B.{f)',  [9173rf]
so  that  the  combined  action  would  be  expressed  by,

<P(/)=^(/)-^(/);  [9173e]

VOL.  IV.  172

686

[9173]

CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec  Cel.

power  correspond  to  dynamics  and to  the  theory  of  projectiles  ; those  of
capiUary  attraction  correspond  to  hydrostatics  and  to  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,

[9173/]

[9173/]
[9173g-]

[9173/1]

[9173i ]

[9173i']

[9173k]
[9173Z]

[9173ni]

[9173n]

[9173o]
[9173j9]

[9173?]
[9173r]

[9173s]

.^  (/)  and  i?  (/)  being  functions  of/,  which  may  be  extremely  great  in  comparison  with
their  difference  cp  (/) ;  and  it  is  evident  that  9  (/)  maij  become  negative,  if  the  repulsive
force  R  (/)  exceed  the  attractive.  In  this  case,  if  the  density  is  uniform,  the  calculation
will  not  be  in  any. wise  altered,  supposing  the  attractive  force  to  decrease  less  rapidly  than  the
repulsive,  and  to  become  the  greatest  of  the  two  before  it  ceases  to  be  a  sensible  magnitude.
In  1830,  Gauss  published  a  work  on  capillary  attraction  entitled  "  Principia  generalia  iheorioi
JigurcB  fluidorum  in  statu  cequilihrii,  etc., "  where,  by  means  of  the  principle  of  virtual  velocities,
he  obtains  the  figure  of  the  capillary  surface,  and  other  theorems  as  they  are  given  by  La
Place  in  this  volume,  and  he  also  gives  a  more  complete  demonstration  of  the  constancy  of
the  angle  of  contact  of  the  fluid  with  the  sides  of  the  tube.  Finally,  M.  Poisson,  in  1831,
published  his  "JVouvelle  Theorie  de  Taction  capillaire,  etc.p  where  he  expressly  introduces  into
the  formulas  the  consideration  of  the  change  of  density  of  the  fluid  at  its  surface  and  near  the
sides  of  the  tube  in  consequence  of  the  corpuscular  attraction.  This  circumstance  had  not  been
taken  into  account  by  La  Place,  in  making  his  calculations,  though  he  expressly  mentions
the  subject  in  [10502',  &z;c.].  This  change  of  density  at  an  insensible  distance  from  the  surface
and  from  the  sides  of  the  tube,  arises  from  the  great  inequality  in  the  corpuscular  action
on  opposite  sides  of  any  particle,  in  consequence  of  the  very  rapid  change  in  the  valiie  of  the
function  (p  (/),  which  expresses  the  corpuscular  force ;  and  in  making  the  calculations  of
the  effect  of  such  a  force,  M.  Poisson  proceeds  upon  the  principle  that,  in  the  state  of
equilibrium,  each  infinitely  small  stratum  of  the  fluid  is  pressed  equally,  on  its  opposite  sides,  by
a  force  which  is  equal  to  the  repulsive  force  of  the  heat  of  the  neighboring  particles,  decreased
by  their  corpuscular  attraction.  In  other  words,  any  infinitely  thin  stratum  may  be
considered  as  being  supported  by  the  part  of  the  fluid  on  the  one  side,  and  compressed  by  the
part  situated  on  the  opposite  side ;  and  the  degree  of  condensation  will  depend  upon  the
magnitude  of  the  compressing  force.  At  a  sensible  distance  from  the  surface  of  the  fluid,
this  compressing  force  arises  from  a  stratum  of  the  fluid  adjacent  to  the  infinitely  thin
stratum,  and  which  is  of  the  same  thickness  in  every  direction  ;.  the  thickness  being  equal  to
the  distance  X  to  which  the  corpuscular  attraction  extends ;  and  for  this  reason  the  interior
density  of  the  fluid  is  constant,  neglecting  the  very  small  condensation  arising  from  the  action
of  gravity,  which  varies  with  the  distance  from  the  upper  surface.  But  when  this  distance
from  the  upper  surface  is  less  than  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  corpuscular
attraction,  the  thickness  of  the  stratum,  situated  above  that  wliich  we  have  under  consideration,
will  be  less  than  this  radius,  and  then  the  compressing  force,  arising  from  the  superior  stratum,
decreases  very  rapidly  with  the  distance  from  the  surface,  and  vanishes  entirely  at  the
surface  itself  [10502' — 10507],  where  this  infinitely  thin  stratum  suffers  no  other  pressure
than  that  of  the  atmosphere.  Hence  it  follows,  that  the  condensation  of  the  fluid  decreases
according  to  some  unknown  law,  as  we  approach  towards  the  upper  surface,  and  its  density
is  very  different  at  that  surface  from  what  it  is  at  an  extremely  small  distance  X'  below  it.

X.  Suppl.  1.]  INTRODUCTION.  687

which  are  elevated  or  depressed  according  to  laws  that  we  shall  now  attempt
to  explain.

Clairaut  is  the  first,  and  indeed  the  only  person,  who  has  hitherto  reduced [9174]
to  a  rigorous  calculation,  the  phenomena  of  capillary  tubes,  in  his  treatise  on
the  figure  of  the  earth. After  having  shown,  by  reasons  which  apply  equally
well  to  all  known  systems,  the  vagueness  and  insufficiency  of  that  of  Jurin, [9175]
he  analyses  accurately  all  the  forces  which  may  concur  in  elevating  the  water
in  a  glass  tube. But  his  theory, explained  with all the  elegance  which
characterizes  his  beautiful  work,  leaves  yet  without  explanation  the  law  of
that  ascension,  which,  by  experiment,  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter
of  the  tube. This  great  mathematician  contents  himself  with  observing  that [917G]
there  must  be  an  infinite  number  of  laws  of  attraction,  which,  by  substitution
in  these  formulas,  will  give  that  result. The  knowledge  of  these laws  is
however  the  most  delicate  and  important  part  of  this  theory :  it  is  indispensably
necessary  to  connect  together  the  different  phenomena  of  capillary  attraction, [9177]
and  Clairaut  himself  would  have  seen  the  necessity  of  it,  if  he  had  attempted,
for  example,  to  extend  his  investigations  from  tubes  to  the  capillary  spaces

where  it  becomes  very  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  fluid  in  the  interior  of  its  mass  ;  observing

that,  though  the  distance  X' is  insensible,  it  may  be  supposed  much  greater  than  the  distance [9173f]

to  which  the  corpuscular  action  of  any  one  particle  of  the  fluid  upon  any  other  particle  of  its [9173u]

mass  extends. Similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  change  of  density  in  the  fluid

near  the  sides  of  the  tube. We  shall  see  in  [9260/,  &,c.  9841c,  Stc],  that  this  change  of  density [9173r]

produces  a  corresponding  change  in  the  value  of  the  capillary  intensity  H  [9262c]  ;  but  as

this  quantity  can  be  found  only  from  actual  experiments,  and  not  from  the  analytical  expression [9173m>]

[9253',  &ic.],  it  leaves  the  results  of La  Place's  theory  unimpaired  in  all  the  formulas

depending  on  this  quantity ;  and  the  calculation  of  the  effects  of  the  capillary  attraction  is  in [9173x]

almost  every  case  the  same  as  if  the  change  of  density  had  been  noticed  ;  the  slight  differences

which  occur  will  be  pointed  out,  wherever  they  happen  to  be  found,  with  the  methods  of [9173?/]

correction  as  in  [95805']  ;  and  we  may  in  this  connection  observe,  that  the  first  or  greatest  force

spoken  of  by  the  author  in  [9184]  is  that  which  corresponds  to  the  interior  of  the  fluid,  as

computed  by  him  upon  the  supposition  that  the  corpuscular  action  (p  (/)  is  always  positive

and  the  density  uniform;  it  is  also  evident  that  this  result  might  be  very  much  modified  near [9l73r]

the  surface  of  the  fluid,  by  taking  into  view  the  repulsive  force  of  the  heat,  and  the  change

of  density  near  that  surface. For,  in  a  stratum  of  variable  density,  at  an  insensible  distance

from  the  surface,  we  may  conceive  of  such  an  arrangement  of  the  particles  of  the  fluid,  as

will  render  this  action  very  different  from  that  which  the  author  supposes ;  making  it  there

either  large  or  small,  positive  or  negative,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  functions  which  are [9174oJ

assumed,  to  express  the  corpuscular  action  [9l73ej  and  the  density  in  that  part  of  the  fluid.

688  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

included  between  parallel  planes,  in  order  to  deduce  from  analysis,  the  ratio

[9178]  q£  equality,  indicated  by  experiment,  between  the  ascent  of  the  fluid  in  a
cylindrical  tube,  and  its  ascension  between  two  parallel  planes,  whose  distance
from  each  other  is  equal  to  the  semi-diameter  of  the  tube ;  which  no  person
has  yet  attempted  to  explain.  A  long  while  ago,  I  endeavored  in  vain  to
determine  the  laws  of  attraction  which  would  represent  these  phenomena ;
but  some  late  researches  have rendered it  evident  that  the  whole  may  be

[9179J  represented  by  the  same  laws,  which  satisfy  the  phenomena  of  refraction  ;  that
is,  by  laws  in  which  the  attraction  is  sensible  only  at  insensible  distances  ;  and
from  this  principle  we  can  deduce  a  complete  theory  of  capillary  attraction.

[9180]  Clairaut  supposes  that  the  action  of  a  capillary  tube  may  be  sensible  upon

the  infinitely  thin  column,  which  passes  through  the  axis  of  the  tube.  Upon
this  point  I  differ  wholly  from  him,  and  think,  with  Hawksbee  and  other
philosophers,  that  the  capillary  attraction  is,  like  the  force  producing  refraction,

[9181]  and  all  the  chemical  affinities,  sensible  only  at  insensible  distances.  Hawksbee
observed  that  in  glass  tubes,  whether  the  glass  is  very  thick,  or  very  thin,  the
water  rises  to  the  same  height,  if  the  interior  diameters  are  the  same.  Hence
it  follows  that  the  cylindrical  strata  of  glass,  which  are  at  a  sensible  distance
from  the  interior  surface,  do  not  aid  in  raising  the  water,  though  in  each
one  of  these  strata,  taken  separately,  the  fluid  ought  to  rise  above  the  level.
It  is  not  the  interposition  of  the  strata,  which  they  include  between  them,

[9182]  which  prevents  their  action  upon  the  water ;  for  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that
the  capillary  attraction,  like  the  force  of  gravity,  is  transmitted  through  other
bodies;  this  attraction  must  therefore  disappear  solely  by  reason  of  the  distance
of  the  fluid  from  these  strata ;  whence  it  follows  that  the  attraction  of  the
glass  upon  the  water  is  sensible  only  at  insensible  distances.

Making  use  of  this  principle,  1  have  determined  the  action  of  a  fluid  mass,
terminated  by  a  portion of  a spherical  concave  or convex  surface,  upon  a

[9183]  column  situated  within  it,  contained  in  an  infinitely  narrow  canal,  and  directed
towards  the  centre  of  that  surface.  By  this  action,  I  mean  the  pressure  which
the  fluid,  contained  in  the  canal,  would  exert,  by  means  of  the  attraction  of
the  whole  mass,  upon  a  plane  base  situated  within  the  canal,  perpendicular  to
its  sides,  and  at  any  sensible  distance  from  the  surface :  this  base  being  taken
for  unity,  I  shall  show  that  this  action  is  less  or  greater  than  if  the  surface
were  plane ;  less  if  the  surface  be  concave  [9275] ;  greater  if  the  surface  he  convex

[9184]  [9276].  Its  analytical  expression  is  composed  of  two  terms:  the  ^r5^,  which
is  much  greater  than  the  second  [9262a,c],  denotes  the  action  of  a  mass
terminated  by  a  plane  surface ;  and  /  think  that  upon  this  term  depends  the

[9187]

X.  Suppl.  1.]  INTRODUCTION.  689

suspension  of  the  mercury,  in  a  barometrical  tube,  at  a  height  two  or  three  times
greater  than  that  which  is  produced  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere ;  also  the [9185]
refractive  poiver  of  diaphanous  bodies,  cohesion,  and  in  general  the  chemical
affinities. The  second  term  denotes  the  part  of  the  action,  depending  on  the
spherical  form  of  the  surface ;  or  in  other  words,  the  action  of  the  meniscus,
included  betioeen  that  surface  and  the  plane  which  touches  it. This  action  is  to [9186]
be  added  to,  or  subtracted  from,  the  preceding  one,  according  as  the surface
is  convex  or  concave. It  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  radius  of  the  spherical
surface ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  less  this  radius  is,  the  greater  will  be  the
meniscus,  near  the  point  of  contact. This  second  term  produces  the  capillary [9188]
action,  which  differs  therefore  from  the  chemical  affinities  corresponding  to  the
first  term.  -^

From  these  results,  relative  to  bodies  terminated  by  sensible  segments  of  a [9189]
spherical  surface,  I  have  deduced  this  general  theorem [93021. "7w  all  the General

^  '  f5  L  J  theorem.

laws  which  render  the  attraction  insensible  at  sensible  distances,  the  action  of  a
body  terminated  by  a  curve  surface,  upon  an  infinitely  narrow  interior  canal, '■ ■'
which  is  perpendicular  to  that  surface,  at  any  point  whatever,  is  equal  to  the  half
sum  of  the  actions  upon  the  same  canal,  of  two  spheres  which  have  the  same
radii  as  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  at  that [9191]
point.^^ By  means  of  this  theorem,  and  of  the  laws  of  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,
we  can  determine  the  figure  which  a  fluid  mass  must  have,  when  it  is  included
within  a  vessel  of  a  given  figure,  and  acted  upon  by  gravity. It  depends  upon
an  equation  of  partial  differentials  of  the  second  order  [9318],  whose  integral
cannot  be  obtained  by  any  known  methods. If  the  figure  be  of  revolution, [9192]
this  equation  is  reduced  to  common  differentials  [9324],  and  may  be  integrated
by  a  very  approximate method,  when the surface  is  very  small. By this
means  I  shall  prove  that,  in  tubes  of  a  very  small  diameter,  the  surface  of  the
fluid  will  approximate  the  more  towards  the  form  of  a  spherical  segment,  as
the  diameter  of  the  tube  shall  be  decreased  [9342,  &c.]. If  these  segments  be [9193]
similar  in  different  tubes  of  the  same  matter,  the  radii  of  their surfaces  will
be  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  diameters  of  the tubes. Now  this similarity  of
the  spherical  segments  will  appear  evident  by  considering  that  the  distance,  at
which  the  action  of  the  tube  ceases  to  be  sensible,  is  imperceptible ;  so  that  if,
by  means  oj  a  very  powerful  microscope,  we  should  be  able  to  make  it  appear
equal  to  a  millimetre,  it  is  probable  that  the  same  magnifying  poiver  would  give ^ "^^
to  the  diameter  of  the  tube  an  apparent  length  of  several  metres. The  surface
of  the  tube  may  therefore  be  considered  as  very  nearly  a  plane  surface,  for  an [9195']
VOL.  IV.  173

690  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

■  extent  which  is  equal  to  that  of  the  sphere  of  its  sensible  activity  ;  the  fluid  loill
therefore  be  elevated  or  depressed  near  that  surface,  in  almost  the  same  manner
as  if  it  were  a  plane. Beyond  this  point,  the  fluid  ivill  be  subjected  ordy  to  the

[919GJ  force  of  gravity  and  its  oivn  action  on  its  particles;  its  surface  will  be  very
nearly  that  of  a  spherical  segment,  of  which  the  extreme  tangent  planes,  being
those  of  the  fluid  surface  at  the  limits  of  the  sensible  sphere  of  activity  of  the
tube,  will  he  very  nearly,  in  the  different  tubes,  equally  inclined  to  their  sides ;

[9197] whence  it  follows  that  all  these  segments  will  be  similar.

The  comparison  of  these  results  gives  the  true  cause  of  the  elevation,
or  depression,  of  fluids,  in  capillary  tubes,  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their
diameters.  If,  in  the  axis  of  a  glass  tube,  we  imagine  an  infinitely  narrovjr
canal  to  be  placed,  which,  after  being  continued downwards,  in  a  vertical

[9198]  direction,  a  little  below  the  bottom  of  the  tube,  is  then  turned  in  a  horizontal
direction  below  the  tube,  and  afterwards  in  a  vertical  direction  upwards,  until
it  meets  the  horizontal  surface  of  the  water  in  the  vessel,  where  the  lower
extremity  of  the  tube  is  immersed ;  the  action  of  the  water  in  the  tube,  upon
this  canal,  will  be  less  on  account  of  the  concavity  of  its  surface,  than  the
action  of  the  water  in  the  vessel  upon  the  same  canal ;  therefore  the  fluid  must

[9199]  rise  in  the  tube  to  compensate  for  this  difference  ;  and  as  it  is,  by  what  has
been  said,  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube,  the  elevation  of
the  fluid  above  its  level  must  follow  the  same  law.

If  the  interior  surface  of  the  fluid  be  convex,  which  is  the  case  with
mercury  in  a  glass  tube,  the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  the  canal  will  be  greater

[9200]  than  that  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel ;  the  fluid  must  therefore  sink  in  the  tube,
in  proportion  to  this  difference,  and  the  depression  will  therefore  be  in  the
inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube.

Therefore  the  attraction  of  a  capillary  tube  has  no  other  influence  upon  the
elevation  or  depression  of  the  fluid  which  it  contains,  than  that  of  determining

[9201]  the  inclination  of  the  first  tangent  planes  of  the  interior  fluid  surface,  situated
very  near  to  the  sides  of  the  tube ;  and  it  is  upon  this  inclination  that  the
concavity  or  convexity  of  the  surface  depends,  as  loell  as  the  magnitude  of  its
radius.  The  friction  of  the  fluid  against  these  sides,  may  increase  or  diminish,
a  little,  the  curvature  of  its  surface,  as  we  see  daily  in  the  barometer ;  and  then

[9202]  the  capillary  effects  increase  or  diminish  in  the  same  ratio.  These  effects
increase  in  a  very  sensible  manner,  by  the  combined  forces  arising  from  the
concavity  of  one  surface  and  the  convexity  of  the  other  surface.  We  shall
see  hereafter  [97l7,&c.],  that  we  may  thus  raise  the  water  in  capillary  tubes  to  a

X.  Suppl.  1.]  INTRODUCTION.  691

greater  height  above  its  level,  than  when  they  are  dipped  into  a  vessel  filled
with  that  fluid.

The  differential  equation  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  included  within  capillary
tubes  of  revolution  [9383],  leads  to  this  general  result,  namely;  that  if,  in  a
cylindrical  tube,  we  introduce  a  cylinder,  having  the  same  axis  as  the  tube,  [9203]
and  with  such  a  diameter  that  the  interval  or  space  between  its  surface
and  the  interior  surface  of  the  tube  may  be  very  small,  the  fluid  will  ascend,
in  the  space  between  these  tubes,  to  the  same  height  as  in  a  tube  whose  radius
is  equal  to  the  interval  between  them  [9410].  If  we  suppose  the  radii  of  the
tube  and  cylinder  to  be  infinite,  it  will  correspond  to  the  case  of  a  fluid,
included  between  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes  which  are  very  near  to  each
other.  The  preceding  result  is  verified  at  that  limit,  by  experiments  [9204]
[9658,  &c.]  formerly  made  in  presence  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,
and  under  the  inspection  of  Newton,  who  has  quoted  them  in  his  Optics,  an
admirable  work,  where  that  profound  genius  has  put  forth  many  original  ideas,
elevated  far  above  the  science  of  his  time,  and  which  have  been  confirmed  by
modern  chemistry.  M.  Hauy  has  consented,  at  my  request,  to  make  some
experiments  near  the  other  limit,  with  tubes  and  cylinders  of  very  small  [9205]
diameters,  and  he  has  found  the  preceding  result  to  be  equally  correct  at  this
limit,  as  at  the  first.

The  phenomena  observed  in  a  drop  of  fluid,  in  motion,  or  suspended  in
equilibrium,  either  in  a  conical  capillary  tube,  or  between  two  planes  a  little
inclined  to  each  other,  are  very  proper  for  verifying  this  theory.  A  small  [9206]
column  of  water  in  a  conical  tube,  open  at  both  ends,  and  supported
horizontally,  flows  towards  the  vertex  of  the  tube  :  and  we  easily  perceive  that
this  ought  to  take  place.  For  the  surface  of  the  fluid  column  is  concave  at
both  its  extremities  ;  but  the  radius  of  the  surface  which  is  nearest  the  vertex,
is  less  than  the  radius  of  the  other  surface  nearest  to  the  base ;  therefore  the
action  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  is  the  least  on  the  side  nearest  the
vertex,  consequently  the  column  must  tend  towards  that  part.  If  the  fluid  be  [9207]
mercury,  then  its  surface  will  be  convex,  and  its  radius  will,  in  like  manner,
be  less  near  the  vertex  than  near  the  base ;  but,  on  account  of  its  convexity,
the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  its  particles  will  be  greatest  towards  the  summit,
and  the  column  must  therefore  tend  towards  the  base  of  the  tube.

We  may  balance  this  action,  by  the  weight  of  the  column  itself,  and  keep
it  suspended  in  equilibrium,  by  inclining  the  axis  of  the  tube  to  the  horizon.
A  very  simple  calculation  shows,  that,  if  the  length  of  the  column  be  small, [9208]

692  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

the  sine  of  the  inclination  of  the  axis  is  then,  very  nearly,  in  the  inverse  ratio
of  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  middle  of  the  column  to  the  vertex  of
the  cone  [9475].  A  similar  result  takes  place,  if  we  put  a  drop  of  fluid
between  two  planes,  which  are  inclined  to  each  other  by  a  very  small  angle,

[9209]  and  are  in  contact  at  their  horizontal  borders  [9550].  These  results  are
entirely  conformable  to  experiment,  as  we  may  see  in  Newton's  Optics
(question  31).  This  great  mathematician  endeavored  to  explain  them  ;  but
his  explanation,  when  compared  with  that  which  is  here  given,  shows  the
advantages  of  an  accurate  mathematical  theory.

By  calculation  we  also  find,  that  the  sine  of  the  inclination  of  the  axis  of

[9210]  the  cone  to  the  horizon,  is  then  very  nearly  equal  to  a  fraction,  having  for  its
denominator  the  distance  from  the  middle  of  the  drop  to  the  vertex  of  the
cone,  and  for  its  numerator  the  height  to  which  the  fluid  will  rise  in  a
cylindrical  tube  whose  diameter  is  equal  to  that  of  the  cone  in  the  middle  of  the
column  [9474].  If  the  two  planes,  enclosing  a  drop  of  the  same  fluid,  are  inclined
to  each  other  by  an  angle,  which  is  equal  to  the  angle  formed  by  the  axis  of

[9211]  the  cone  and  one  of  its  sides,  the  plane  which  bisects  the  angle  formed  by  the
two  preceding  planes,  must  have  the  same  inclination  to  the  horizon,  as  the
axis  of  the  cone,  for  the  drop  to  remain  in  equilibrium.  Hawksbee  made
very  carefully  an  experiment  of  this  kind  [9709],  which  we  shall  hereafter
compare  with  the  preceding  theorem  ;  the  very  little  difference  which  is
found,  between  this  experiment  and  the  theorem,  is  an  incontestible  proof
of  its  accuracy.

The  theory  furnishes  an  explanation,  and  the  measure,  of  a  singular
phenomenon  noticed  in  experiments ;  namely,  that,  whether  the  fluid  be
elevated  or  depressed,  between  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes,  dipped  into  the
fluid  by  their  lower  extremities,  these  planes  have  a  tendency  to  approach  towards
each  other. It  is  shown  by  analysis  [9580,  Stc],  that,  if  the  fluid  be  elevated

[9213]  between  them,  each  plane  suffers  a  pressure,  tending  inwardly,  and  equal  to
that  of  a  column  of  the  same  fluid,  having  for  its  height  the  half  sum  of  the
elevations  of  the  fluid  above  the  level,  at  the  points  of  contact  of  the  interior
and  exterior  surfaces  of  the  fluid  with  the  plane,  and  for  its  base  the  part  of
the  plane  which  is  included  between  the  two  horizontal  lines  drawn  through
these  points.  If  the  fluid  is  depressed  between  these  planes,  each  of  them,  in
like  manner,  will  suffer  a  pressure  tending  inwards,  and  equal  to  a  column  of  the

[9214]  same  fluid,  having  for  its  height  the  half  sum  of  the  depressions  below  the
level  of  the  points  of  contact  of the  interior  and exterior surfaces  of  the

[9212]

X.  Suppl.  1.]  INTRODUCTION.  693

fluid  with  the  plane,  and  for  its  base  the  part  of  the  plane  included  between
the  two  horizontal  lines  drawn  through  those  points*  [9586].

The  concavity  or  convexity  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid,  included  within  capillary
spaces,  has  heretofore  been  considered  as  nothing  more  than  a  secondary  effect
of  the  capillary  action,  and  not  as  the  principal  cause  of  such  phenomena ;  so  [9215]
that  but  little  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  curvature  of  these  surfaces ;  but  as
the  preceding  theory  makes  the  phenomena  depend  chiefly  on  the  curvature,  it
becomes  interesting  to  determine  it.  Several  experiments  made  very  carefully^  by
M.  Hauy,  indicate  that,  in  glass  capillary  tubes  of  a  very  small  diameter,  the  [92161
concave  surface  of  water  and  oil,  and  the  convex  surface  of  mercury,  differ  but
very  little  from  that  of  a  hemisphere.

Clairaut  made  this  singular  remark ;  namely,  that,  if  the  law  of  the  attraction
of  the  matter  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid,  differs  only  by  its  intensity  from  the
law  of  the  attraction  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  the  fluid  will  rise  above [9217]
the  level,  so  long  as  the  intensity  of  the  first  of  these  attractions  shall  exceed  the
half  of  the  intensity  of  the  second. If  the  intensity  of  the  first  of  these  attractions [9217']
be  exactly  equal  to  half\  of  the  intensity  of  the  second,  it  will  be  easy  to  show  that
the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the tube  will  be  horizontal,  and  that  it  will  not
rise above  the  level. If  these two  intensities  be  equal, the  surface  of  the
fluid  in  the  tube  will  be  concave, and of  a  hemispherical  form; then  the [9218]
fluid  will  be  elevated  in  the tube. If  the intensity  of  the  attraction  of  the

*  (4113)  We  shall  see  in  [9580^,  &£c.]  that  the  values  of  the  pressures  here  given  require
some  modification,  when  the  angles  formed  by  the  vertical  planes  and  the  tangents  of  the
surfaces  of  the  fluid  near  to  them  are  different,  on  different  sides  of  the  same  plane ;  as
sometimes  happens  on  account  of  the  planes  being  more  or  less  moistened  on  the  one  side
than  on  the  other.

[9214a]

f  (41 14) This  ratio  of  the  intensities  of  the  attraction  of  the  tube  and  fluid,  when  the [9218a]
surface  is  horizontal,  is  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  the  density  of  the  fluid  is  uniform,
and  that  it  does  not  vary  near  the  surface  of  this  fluid  or  near  the  sides  of  the  tube. Now [92186]
this  is  not  the  case,  as  the  author  himself  has  remarked  in  [10502']  ;  therefore  this  demonstration
is  defective,  as  will  more  fully  be  seen  in  [9596/]  ;  but  it  is  probable,  however,  that  this  ratio [9218c]
is  nearly  correct. We  shall  also  see  in  [9626n,  &.c.  9655«,  he],  that  the  remarks  made  in
[9218],  for  a  concave  hemisphere,  and  in  [9219],  for  a  convex  hemisphere,  are  very  nearly
correct. Lastly,  what  is  stated  in  [9219'],  for  concave  or  convex  segments,  may  be  considered L^'^^""]
as  very  nearly  correct,  except  that  in  [9219']  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  ratio  of  the
intensities  at  the  hmit  of  the  surfaces,  is  strictly  equal to  one  half,  as  the  author  asserts, [9218e]
though  it  is  probably  very  nearly  equal  to  it  [9596A:,  &:c.]

VOL.  IV.  174

694  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

tube  be  nothim,  or  insensible,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  will  be  convex
[92191  . .

and  hemispherical ;  and  then  the  fluid  will  be  depressed. Between  these  two

limits,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  will  be  that  of  a  spherical  segment ;  and  it  will  be

concave  or  convex,  according  as  the  intensity  of  the  attraction  of  the  matter  of

[9219']  the  tube  upon  the  fluid  shall  be  greater  or  less  than  the  half  of  the  attraction
of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles  [9587—9655,  921 8e].

If  the  intensity  of  the  attraction  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid  exceeds  that  of
the  attraction  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  it  appears  to  me  probable  that

[9220]  tken  the  fluids  by  attaching  itself  to  the  tube,  forms  an  interior  tube,  ivhich  produces
alone  the  elevation  of  the  fluid,  whose  surface  is  concave  and  hemispherical.  We
have  reason  to  suppose,  that  this  is  the  case  with  water,  and  some  kinds  of  oil,
in  a  glass  tube.

The  case  of  a  fluid  which  rises  up  between  vertical  planes,  forming  with  each
other  a  very  small  angle,  or  that  where  a  fluid  flows  out  from  a  capillary
siphon,  aflbrds  several  phenomena  which  are  merely  corollaries  of  this  theory.
In  general,  if  we  take  the  trouble  to  compare  the numerous  experiments  of

[9221]  observers  upon  capillary  action,  we  shall  find  that  the  results,  obtained  in  these
experiments,  when  they  have  been  made  with  the  proper  precautions,  may  be
deduced  from  the  theory ;  not  by  vague,  and  always  uncertam  considerations,
but  by  a  series  of  geometrical  reasoning,  which  seems  to  leave  no  doubt  about
the  truth  of  the  theory.  I  hope  that  this  application  of  analysis  to  one  of  the
most  curious  objects  of  physics,  may  interest  mathematicians,  and  excite  them
to  increase  more  and  more  these  applications,  which  unite  the  advantage  of
confirming  physical  theories  and  improving  analysis  itself,  by  requiring  new
processes  of  calculation.

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§>  1.] THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

695

SECTION I.

THEORY OF CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.

1.  We  shall  suppose  a  vase  ABC D  (fig.  112,)  to  be  filled  with  water,  as
high  as  AB,  and  that  a  glass  capillary  tube,  NMEF,  open  at  both  ends,  has  its
lower  end  immersed  in  the  water,  which  will
rise  up  into  the  tube  to  O,  and  the  surface
will  form  a  concave  figure  M  ON;  O  being
the  lowest  point  of  this  surface.  We  shall
also  suppose  that  an  infinitely  narrow  canal
O ZRV,  composed  of  a  single  filament  of
water,  passes  through  the  point  O  and  the
axis  of  the  tube ;  then  it  is  evident,  from  jd
the  principles  of  capillary  attraction,  which  we  have  just  explained,  that  the
action  of  the  water  below  the  horizontal  line  I  OK,  will  be  the  same  upon
the  column  0  Z,  as  the  action  of  the  water  in  the  vase  upon  the  column  VR.
But  the  meniscus  MIOKN  will  act  upon  the  column  O  Z  upwards,  and  will
therefore  tend  to  raise  the  fluid.  Hence  it  follows,  that,  in  the  state  of  equilibrium,
the  water  in  the  canal  O  ZRV  must  be  elevated  higher  in  the  tube  than  in  the
vase,  so  that  it  may  compensate,  by  its  weight,  for  the  action  of  the  meniscus.

The  law  of  this  ascent,  in  tubes  of  different  diameters,  depends  upon  the
attraction  of  the  meniscus ;  and  in  this  case,  as  in  the  theory  of  the  figure  of  the
planets,  there  is  a  mutual  relation  between  the  figure  and  the  attraction  of  the
body,  which  renders  the  calculation  difficult.  In  the  investigation  of  this  subject,
we  shall  consider  the  action  of  a  body  of  any  figure,  upon  a  column  of  fluid,
contained  in  an  infinitely  narrow  canal,  drawn  perpendicularly  to  its  surface,  and
whose  base  we  shall  take  for  unity.

We  shall  suppose,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  body  is  a  sphere,  and  we  shall
ascertain  its  action  upon  a  fluid,  contained  in  a  canal,  situated  without  the  sphere,
and  perpendicular  to  its  surface. For  this  purpose  we  shall  resume  the  analysis

[9222]

[9223]

[9223')

[9224|

[9227]

696  -  CAPILLARV  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9225]  given  in  [470^',  &c.]  ;  putting  r  for  the  distance  of  the  attracted  point,  from  the
centre  of  a  spherical  stratum,  whose  radius  is  m,  and  thickness  du ;  also  d  for  the

[9226]  angle  which  the  radius  u  forms  with  the  right  line  r,  and  rs  for  the  angle  which  the
plane  passing  through  the  lines  u^  r,  makes  with  a  fixed  plane  passing  through  the
right  line  r ;  then  the  element  of  the  spherical  stratum  will  be  u^du  ,dzs.di.  sin.d
[470""'].  Now  if  we  put /for  the  distance  of  this  element  from  the  attracted
point,  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  situated  without  the  stratum,  we  shall  have,
as  in  [471],

[9228]  f2  =  r^  —  2ru .  cos.^  -\-u^  =  (r  —  u.  cos.^)2  -j-  (u .  sin.^)^,  or

^^^^'^  r==u.  cos.^  +  v//=2_M2.sin.2^.

We  shall  represent  the  law  of  attraction  by

[9229]  <p(jO  =  the  attraction  of  a  particle  at  the  distance/;  this  attraction  being

insensible  when  /  has  a  sensible  value.*
The  action  of  the  element  of  the  stratum  u^du  .d^,d&.  sin.^  [9227],  upon
the attracted  point,  being  resolved  in  a  direction  parallel  to  r,  and  tending
towards  the  centre  of  the  stratum,  will  be  represented  as  in  [472],  by

[9230]  ^  2*2j^.6?t..J^.sin.^.fc?^l?^^

We  have,  as  in  [473],

r — M.cosJ fdf

[9229']

substituting  this  in  [9230],  we  get  the  following  expression,  being  the  same
as  in  [474]  ;

[9232]  U^du  .d^.dS,  sin  J  •  (  -r-  )  •  9  CO  5 i^-)  [AttracUon  in  the  direction  r.]

We  shall  now  put,
[92321  c=fyf.<p(f);

[9233]  ^{f)^rfdf.^{f)

[9233'J  ^ =C-f^df.^(f);

[9233"] ^(f) b^^^g  ^  positive  quantity ,  which  decreases  ivith  extreme  rapidity ,  as  f

increases,^  so  as  to  become  insensible,  when  f  has  a  sensible  value  \the  density

*  (4115) When  the  repulsive  force  of  the  heat  of  the  particles  is  taken  into  consideration,
'■ "l the  function  (p  (/)  will  represent  the  excess  of  the  attractive  forces  over  the  repulsive  forces  ;
and  if  the  repulsive  forces  are  the  greatest,  the  function  (p  (/)  will  become  negative.

[9233a] t  (4116) The  value  of  n  (/)  [9233'],  and  that  of  +  (/)  [9241],  may  be  much  affected  by
[923361 *^^^  change  in  the  value  of  9  (/)  [9173e],  arising  from  the  consideration  of  the  repulsive

force  of  heat;  and  we  must  always  keep  in  mind,  that  the  author,  in  all  his  calculations,

supposes  the  density  of  the  fluid  to  be  constant.

[9235"]
[9236]

X.  Suppl.  1.  «§>  1.]  ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERE.  697

being  supposed  constant]. Then  the  expression  of  the  attraction [9232]  is
evidently  equal  to  the  coefificient  of  dr,  in  the  differential  of  the  following [9234]
function,  taken  relative  to  r  ;

u''du.d^.ds.sinJ,{c  —  n(f)l.  '  [9234^

Now  as  c [9232'] is  a  constant  quantity,  wholly  independent  of  the  variable
distance  /,  which  occurs  in r  [9228'], we  may neglect  it,  in finding the
differential  of  [9234'],  relative  to  r,  and  then  this  differential  becomes  equal  to
the coefficient of  dr,  in the  differential  of  the  following expression,  taken [9235]
relative  to  r ;

—  u^du  .d^.d^.  sin.^ .  n  (/).  [9235^
To  extend  this  function  to  the  whole stratum,  we must first integrate it
relative  to  w,  from  «  =:  0  to  «*  =  2* ;  ir  being  the  ratio  of  the  semi-circumference
of  a  circle  to  its  radius ;  and  then  the  integral  becomes

—  2*.Ww.</^.sinJ.n(/).  [9237]

We  must  now  integrate  this  expression,  from  d  =  0  to  5  ==  if. For  this  purpose

we  shall  take  the  differential  of/^  [9228],  relative  to  5,  and  divide  it  by  2ru\ L^^^S]

hence  we  shall  obtain  as  in  [476],

d^ .  sin.^  =  ^  ;  [9239]

rv.

substituting  this  in  [9237],  and  integrating,  we  get,

Unit

—  2* .  u^'du  .fdd .  sin.6 .  n  (/)  =  — 2*  '-^'ffdf.Ti(f).  [9240]

We  shall  now  put,  in  like  manner  as  in*  [9232',  9233,  9233'],

C^=f:fdf-n(f);  [9240']

^(f)=f7M'U(f)  L9241]

=  C—fJclf.n(f):  [92411

* (4117) If  we  represent  by  X  the limit  of  the distance  at  which  the corpuscular
attraction  ceases  to  be  sensible^  we  shall  have 9  (X)  =  0,  and  the  elements  of  the  integral [9240a]
expression c  =f^df.  (p  {f) [9232']  will  vanish when  f  exceeds  X,  so  that  we  may  put
c=fldf.cp{f), instead  of  c=/oc(/*. 9 (/). In  like  manner  the  elements  of  the  integral
n(/)  vanish  when  /  exceeds  X;  and  similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  integrals [92406]
[9240' — 9241']. Hence  it  is  evident  that,  in  all  these  integrals,  it  is  only  necessary  to  take
the  second  limit  at  the  point  where  /=  X,  instead  of /=oo  . It  is  important  to  notice  this [9240c]
circumstance,  otherwise  we  could  not  suppose  that  n  (/),  +  (/),  vanish  when /exceeds  X,
since  there  are  innumerable  forms  of  the  function  ip(/)  which  would  not  satisfy  this  condition. [9240d]

Thus  if  the  complete  value  of  (p{f)  contain  the  term  — ,  depending  on  the  common  action

VOL.  IV.  175

698  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  Cel.

[9241"] *  (J)  being  a  positive  quantity^  which  decreases  with  extreme  rapidity  [9240a — /]
[the  density  being  supposed  constant}. We  shall  have,  by  observing  that  the
[9242] integral  must be taken  from  ^  =  0  to  ^  =  *  [476"],  and  that  at these  two
[9243] points,  f=r  —  u,  and  f=ri-u  [476"],

[9244]  —2^.2i^du.fd^.sm.6.ii(f)= ^^:^.  {*(r  — w)  — ^(r  +  w)}.

Taking  the  differential  of  this  function  relative  to  r,  we  get  the  coefficient  of
[9244'] ^^^  wliich  represents,  as  in [9234],  the  action  of  the  stratum  upon  the  attracted

point. But  if  we  wish  to  obtain  the  action  of  the  stratum  upon  a  fluid  column

situated  upon  the  line  r,  supposing  the  end  nearest  the  centre  of  the  stratum
[9245] ^Q  |jg  ^^  ^Yie  distance  b  from  that  centre,  we  must  multiply  this  coefficient  by  dr,

and  take  the  integral  of  the  product ;  which  reproduces  the  preceding  function ;

to  this  we  must  add  a  constant  quantity,  which  must  be  determined  so  that  the
[9246] integral  may  commence  with  r  =  b. Hence  we  obtain,  for  this  integral,  the

following  expression ;  *

[9240e] of  gravity,  it  will  produce  in /c?/.  9  (/)  the  term 7 +  "17'  S"PP°s*"S  ^^^^  ^^^'^  ^^  vanish

when/ is  equal  to  the  constant  quantity  6;  then,putting/=ao,  we  get  'infbdf.q>(f)  the  term

[9240/]  ~;  and  by  changing  the  first  limit  b  into/,  we  get  in  JJdf.(f)(f),  or  in  n(/)  [9233],  the
term — . This  term  of  n(/) produces  in  ffdf  .Tl(f),  the  part  Jfdf.  y=fadf=af,

[9240g]  which  vanishes  when /=0,  and  when  jr=oo  it  becomes  infinite,  making  the  quantity  c'
[9240'j  infinite,  at  the  limit/=a),  instead  of  adding  to  c',  the  insensible  quantity  aX,
corresponding  to  the  insensible  limit  of/*  in  Jlyf).

[9240fe]  To  give  some  idea  of  functions  which  have  properties  like  those  of  <p  (/),  n(/),  without
attempting  to  ascertain  their  actual  forms,  and  merely  for  the  purpose  of  illustration,  the
author,  in  [9790],  puts  9(/)  =  ac~'^;  where  a  is  a  constant  factor,  i  a.  very  great  positive
number,  and  hyp.  log.  c=l.  In  this  case,  /=0  gives  (p{f)=a,  and  when  /=oo
we  have  (p(/)  =  0;  moreover  the  function  af\~if  which  may  be  put  under  the  form

[9240fc]  «/'c-^=  — =^  _^^^_^^^2^_^^^ +^iy~  +  At"+y"t'  +  &'c.

[55]  Int.,  always  vanishes  when  y*=oo,  whatever  be  the  positive  integral  exponent  n,  as  is
r9240fl ^^^y  evident  from  the  last  developed  expression,  where  g,  h,  &;c.,  are  used,  for  brevity,
for  the  numerical  coefEcients  of  the  terms  of  the  developed  function  c-^  [55]  Int.

*  (4118) For  brevity  we  shall  put  r(r)  equal  to  the  second  member  of  [9244],  also
[9247a] /l:^\_,jv(^^.  then  we  shall  have  as in [9244']  r'(r),  for  the  action  of  a  spherical

[9240t]

X.  Suppl.l.  ^l.]

ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERE.

699

2* .  udu

—  S'TT .  udu

.  {■i'(b  —  u)  —  i'(b-\-u)]
•  { *  (^  —  ^)  —  *  (^  +  w) }  •

nAction  of  the  stratum  upon  part  j
I  of  the  external  fluid  column,  I
I  supposing  the  density  =  1.  I

Now  ■ir(b-{-u)  is  always  an  insensible  quantity,  when  b  has  a  sensible  value ;
and  if,  as  we  shall  suppose  to  be  the  case,  r  at  the  extremity  of  the  column  the
most  distant  from  the  stratum,  exceeds  6,  by  a  sensible  quantity,  ^(r  —  u)  will
be  insensible,  and  much  more  so  ■i'(r-\-u);  the  preceding  function  [9247]  will
therefore  be  reduced  to  the  single  term,

2^ . uJu

■^(b  —  u),

[Action  of  the  stratum  upon
the  external  fluid  column,  sup
posing  the  density  =  1.

]

which  ivill  therefore  express  the  action  of  the  stratum  upon  the  fluid  contained  in
an  infinitely  narrow  canal,  situated  upon  the  line  r,  so  that  its  nearest  extremity
is  at  the  distance  b  from  the  centre  of  the  stratum.  This  action  is  evidently
equal  to  the  pressure  which  the  fluid  produces,  in  consequence  of  the  attraction
of  the  stratum,  upon  a  plane  base  situated  at  that  extremity,  within  the  canal,
and  perpendicular  to  its  direction,  this  base  being  taken  for  unity  [9223'].

To  obtain  the  action  of  the  whole  sphere  whose  radius  is  6,  we  shall  suppose
b  —  u  =  z\  and  then  this  action  will  be  equal  to  the  integral*

[9247]

[9247^]

[9248]
[9248']

[9249]
[9250]

[925(r|
[9251]

z  :ej

stratum  B  T  U,  fig. 113,  whose  centre  is C,  interior  radius CB  =  u,  exterior radius

C D=iU-\-du, and  density  =  1,  upon  the  fluid  of  the  same density, situated in  the

horizontal  circular  section  of  the  infinitely  narrow  cylindrical  tube  at  R,

at  the  distance CR  =  r  from  the  centre  C;  the  axis  of  this  tube  O  Z

being  on  the  continuation  of  the  radius C  O;  the  area  of  the  circular

section  of  the  base  being  supposed  equal  to  unity  [9223'J. Multiplying

this  base  by  the  altitude  RS  =  dr,  of  an  infinitely  small part  of  the

tube,  we  obtain  the  quantity  of  fluid  it  contains,  which  will  therefore  be

represented  by  dr. Multiplying  this  by  the  action  of  the  stratum  r'(r)

[9247a],  upon  a  particle  of  its  mass,  we  get  dr .  r'^r)  for  the  action  of

the  stratum  upon  the  part  RS  o(  the  fluid  in  the  tube. Integrating

this,  we  get/Jr.r'(r)  =  r(r)  —  r(^»)  [9247a]  ;  the  constant  quantity

—  r(6)  being  added  to  make it  vanish  when r=s  CO  =  b  [9246].

This  integral  r(r) — r(6)  expresses the whole  action  of  the  stratum

BTU, upon  the  fluid  in  the  column OR;  and  it  agrees  with the

expression  [9247] ;  the  lower  line  being  the  same  as  r(r)  [9247a,  9244] ;  and  the  upper

line  the  same  as  — T{b),  which  is  deduced  from  r(r),  by  changing  its  sign,  and  putting  r  =  b.

[92476]
[9247c]

[9247rf]

[9247c]
[9247/]

[9247/]

[9247^]

[9247A]

*  (4119)  To  obtain  the  action  of  the  whole  sphere,  we  must  evidently  integrate  the . „_-
expression  [9249]  from  m  =  0  to  u  =  6,  and  if  we  change  m  into  b  —  s:,  as  in  [9251],  the

700  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

[9252]

2../;(^.  ,,.,(,);

and  if  we  put

[^^^]  K  =  2''e  .  f^  dz  .  ■*■  (2),  rvalues  of  K,  H,  supposingthe"!

rnocon  I density  of  the  fluid  to  he  uni-  I

[9253  J  H=2'K,f^zdz,-*(z),  Lform,  and  equal  to  unity. J

the  preceding  action  will  become

[9254]  r^ £2  rAetion  of  a  sphere  on  an"!

-'*■  7  •  L  external  column. J

[9255]  We  must  observe  that  K  and  H  may  he  considered  as  independent  of  b ;  for,  +  (2)
being  only  sensible  at  insensible  distances,  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether
we  take  the  integrals  [9253,  9253']  from  z  =  0  to  z=b,  or  from  z  =  0  to
2:  =co  ;  so  that  we  may  here  suppose  K and  H  to  correspond  to  these  last  limits*

[9251&] corresponding  limits,  relative  to  z,  will  he  z  =  h,  s  =  0;  so  that  the  integral  of  [9249]  will

[9251c] become  — 2*  .f^ j^ —  .  •*•  (z),  or  2*  .J*^ j-^—  •  *  (2;)  ;  and,  by  separating  the  terms,

it  becomes  2*  .yj dz.ir{z)  —  y  *  ^* -fo^dz  .*(«);  then,  substituting  the integrals  K,  H,

[925M]

[9253,  9253'],  it  becomes  K—j,  as  in  [9254].

*  (4120)  In  speaking  of  the  second  limit  of  z  in  these  integrals,  we  must  always  keep  in

view  the  remark  in  [9240a — g],  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  make  2:  =  00  ;  but  that,  instead  of
[9253a]  itj  vve  may  put  2;  =  X ;  X  being  of  the  same  order  as  the  radius  of  activity  of  the  corpuscular
[9253o'] fiction; so that,  instead  of  the  expressions K=2^ ,f^dz .ir{z)y H==2'jf  .f^zdz .ir(z),

[9253—9256],  we  may  substitute
[92536]  K=2':f.f^dz.1r(z),

[9253c]  H=2'rr.f^^zdz.*{z).

We  shall  hereafter  want  these  integrals  between  the  limits  2f  =  0,  and  z  =  Z'y  and  if  we
[9253^?] denote  the  corresponding  values  by  the  same  letters  K,  H,  with  the  index  z  below  them,

we  shall  have
[9253c]  K,  =  2ir.f^dz.*{z),

[9253/]  H^  =  2if.f^zdz.-1r{z).

The  author  enters into  a  discussion  of  the  relative  values  of  K,  — ,  in  [10488 — 10499],

0

always  supposing  the  density  of  the  fluid  to  be  uniform ;  and  by  putting

[9253g]  T"""^^'

he  obtains  a  result,  in  [10496t],  which  may  be  expressed  in  the  following  manner ;
[9253A]  6=  J  X  by  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  whose  radius  is  6;

the  value  of  s  is  supposed  by  him  to  be  very  great,  and  by  an  estimate  founded  on  the
[9253t  1 Newtonian  theory  of  the  emission  of  light,  he  makes  it  more  than  ten  millions  of  times  the

X.  Suppll.  §1.] ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERICAL  SEGMENT.  701

W^e  may  also  observe  that  [in  a  fluid  of  uniform  density]  —  is  considerably  [9257]
less  than  K,  because  the  differential  of  the  expression  of  —  [9253']  is  equal  to  the  ||£'^f  j?'"
differential  of  the  expression  of  K  [9253] multiplied  by  —  ;  and  as  the  factor

♦  (2),  in  these  differentials,  is  sensible  only  when  the  value  of—  is  insensible,

H

the  integral  —  must  be  considerably  less  than  the  integral  ^[9253^ — m].

The  action  of  the  whole  sphere  upon  the  fluid  column  which  touches  it,  being

XT

K 7-  [9254],  this  quantity  will  also  express  the  action  of  a  sensible  spherical [9257']

^  Action  of

segment,  formed  from  the  section  of  a  sphere  by  a  plane  drawn  perpendicular  to cai  seg-
the  direction  of  the  column  ;*  for  the  part  of  the  sphere  situated  beyond  this  plane,
being  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  column,  its  action  upon  this  column  will

be  insensible ;  therefore  K 7-  [9254]  will,  for  this  reason,  denote  the  action [9258]

of  any  body  terminated by  the  convex  surface  of  a  spherical  segment  whose
radius  is  6,  upon  an  external  fluid  column  perpendicular  to  that  surface.

TT

In  the  expression K 7-, K  represents  the  action  of  a  body  terminated  by [9259]

distance  of  ike  sun  from  the  earth  [10498'] ;  and  though  he  considers  such  a  large  value

as  highly  improbable,  yet  he  infers,  from  this  calculation,  that  s  must  be  extremely  great

[10500] ;  and  as  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  by  the  capillary  action  is  small,  it  would  follow [9353^]

that  the  value  of  e  must  be  an  extremely  minute  quantity. But  we  may  observe,  that,  as  the

formula  [9253^]  is  founded  upon  the  hypothesis  that  the  fluid,  throughout  its  whole  mass,

is  of  the  uniform  density  unity,  it  must,  on  this  account,  as  well  as  on  that  of  the  uncertainty [9353/1

of  the  theory  of  the  emission  of  light,  upon  which  it  depends,  be  considered  as  essentially

defective  and  unsatisfactory ;  though  it  may  serve  the  purpose  of  giving  some  idea of  the

vast  difference  there  may  be  between  the  whole  corpuscular  attraction  and  that  part  of  it [9253ni]

which  produces  the  capillary  phenomena.

* (4121) If this plane is represented  in fig. 113, page 699, by nam, drawn
perpendicular  to  the  axis  CcO Z,  so  that  the  part  c  is  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  nearest [9257o]
point  O  of  the  tube,  the  action  of  the  spherical  segment  n  O  m,  upon  the  external  column

OZ^willbe  represented  by  JT 7- [9254] ;  because  the  remaining  part  of  the  spherical [92576]

mass  nJVji  Mm  is  beyond  the  limits  of  any  corpuscular  action  on  the  mass  OZ  of  the  fluid
in  the  tube.

VOL.  IV.  176

702

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

H

[9259'] a  plane  surface  ;*  for  then,  b  being  infinite,  the  term  —  will  disappear ;  therefore

[9258rt]
[92586]

[9258c]

[9258</]

[9258e]
[9258/]

[9258^]
[9258/i]

[9258i ]

[9258A]
[9258Z  ]

[9258OT]
[9258m']

[9258n]
[9258o]

*  (4122)  The  action  of  a  spherical  mass  NOM,  fig.  114,  of  a  fluid  o^  uniform  density,
upon  an  external  cylindrical  column  00'  of  the  same  fluid,  whose  axis  00'  is  on  the
continuation of the radius CO=b, and  whose base O  is taken  for  unity, has been

computed  in  [9254  or  9258],  and  found  to  be  equal  to  K -. We  may,  in  this  hypothesis

of  a  uniform  density,  suppose  the  height  of  the  column  00'  to  be  represented  by  the
extremely  small  insensible  quantity  X,  which  expresses  the  greatest  distance  or  limit  to  which
the  corpuscular  action  extends,  because  then  the  particles  of  the  fluid,  situated  above  the
point  O' will  be  beyond  the  limits  of  the  corpuscular  action  of  the  spherical  fluid  JVOM,  and
we  shall  have  CO'  =  b  -\-\.  When  b  is  infinite,  the  surface  iV  O M  coincides  with  the
horizontal  plane  KOI,  and  the  pressure  of  the  column  OO',  on  the  base  O,  arising
from  the  action  of  the  fluid  below  the  plane KOI,  becomes  equal  to  K  [9258c]. The

difference between the two expressions K — — [9258c]  and  K  [9258^],  which  is — ,

evidently  denotes,  as  in  [9260],  the  action  of  the  meniscus  KOIMN,  on  the  same
external  column  O  O',  in  the  direction  O'O.  Now  if  we  draw  through  (7  the  horizontal
plane  K O' T,  parallel  to  KOI,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9258^,  or  9268],  K  for  the  action  of
an  indefinite  mass  of  the  same  fluid,  situated  above  the  plane  K'OT,  upon  the  external
column  O'O,  drawing  iipwards  m  the  direction  C  O' ;  and  this  quantity  K  also  expresses
the  opposite  or  downward  action  of  an  indefinite  mass  of  the  fluid  situated  below  the  same
vlane  KOI',  upon  the  same  column,  because  any  point  r  of  this  column  is  attracted  equally
by  the  two  masses  in  opposite  directions,  as  the  author  observes  in  [9267],  and  which  may  be
illustrated  and  rendered  evident  in  tiie same  manner  as  in [9258/ — s'\. IVIoreover  by

changing  the  radius  CO^=^b  into CO' =  6 -f->^,  we  get  from  [9258A]  — -  for  the action

of  the  meniscus  K'OTM'N'  upon  the  external  column  CO,  drawing  upwards;  and  as
\  is  an  insensible quantity,  relative to  b  [9195],  we  may

H

T'ijJlA.

:k!

0'

i!

r-

■zf

z

X

p

"^^

^^

'  0

■"^

X^^

/"

^

{

c

\

[9258p]

neglect  X,  and  denote  this  action  by  -r  drawing  uptoards,  or

IT

—  —  drawing  downwards. Now  the  action  of  the  whole  mass

below  the  plane  K'OI',  upon  the  column  OO',  is  K  [9258^]
drawing  downwards,  and  if  we  take  away  from  this  the  action
of  the  meniscus,  we  shall  obtain  the  action  of  the  spherical
mass  of  fluid  WOM'  upon  the  internal  column  OO ;
therefore  this  action  will  be  found  by  subtracting  from  K  the

expression  —  — ;  whence  we  get  K-{-t  f^^  '^^  action  of  the

spherical  mass  N'O'M  upon  the  column OO,  as  in  [9273]. Again,  the  action  of  the  mass

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§>!.]  ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERE.  703

H

this  last  term  —  denotes  the  action  of  the  meniscus  K  O I M N,  fig.  112,  page  695, L9260]

far

NOM  upon  tlie  same  column  is  K — — [9258c]; subtracting  this  from the  expression

2H
[9258/?],  we  get  — for  the difference  between  the  actions  of  the  two  spherical  masses [92583]

Off

I^OM,  N'CyM',  upon  the  column 0(7 ;  or  in  other  words — expresses  the  action  of

&  [9258r]

the  concentrical  spherical  stratum  included  between  the  surfaces  N'OM\  iVOM,  upon  the

internal  column  OO. This  expression  —- vanishes when h is  infinite, or when the

concentrical  surfaces  change  into  the  parallel  planes  KOI,  K'OT;  whence  it  follows  that

the  action  of  the  fluid  of  unform  density  included  between  the  two  parallel  planes  KOI,

K'O I',  upon  the  column  0(7,  situated  between  them,  is  equal  to  nothing ;  which  is  also  easily [9258r^

proved  by  a  geometrical  method. For  if,  on  the  parallel  and  equal  lines 00',  KK, we

take  the  four  points  Z,  Y,  Z',  Y',  so  that  OZ=KZ',  OY=KY',  and  place  two  equal

parts  of  the  fluid  at  Z,  Z,  and  two  other  equal  parts  at  Y,  Y' ;  it  will  be  evident  that  the

upward  action  of  the  particle  Z  upon  Y,  will  exactly  balance  the downward  action  of  Y

upon  Z]  and  this  will  happen  throughout  the  whole  space  between  the  two  parallel  planes; [9258s]

therefore  the  action  of  the  fluid  between  these  planes  upon  the  fluid  in  the  column  OO  must

be  equal  to  nothing  ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  the  downward  pressure  of  the  fluid  in  the  column

OO,  at  the  base  O,  when  the  surface  is  the  horizontal  plane  K'O T,  must  arise  from  the

action  of  the  fluid  which  is  situated  below  the  plane  KI\  and  this  action  is  represented  by [9258«']

^[9259].

In  the  preceding  calculations,  when  referring  to  fig.  114,  we  have  supposed  the  surface
of  the  fluid  N'OM'  to  be  convex ;  but  if  it  be  concave,  as  in  fig.  112,  we  shall  have,  as  in

TT  XT

[9258rt])  T"  for  the  action  of  the  meniscus  drawing  upwards,  or  — -r-  for  the  action  of  the [9258f]

same  meniscus  drawing  downwards,  and,  by  adding  this  last  expression  to  the  quantity  K

[9258/],  which  denotes  the  downward  action  of  all the  mass  which  falls  below  K'O  I', [9258*']

jf
we  shall  get  K -,  for  the  downward  action  of  the  fluid,  terminated  by  a  concave  spherical [9258u]

surface,  upon  the  internal  column  O  O ,  at  its  base  O.  We  may  here  remark  that  the
expression  [9258«]  may  be  derived  from  [9258p],  by  merely  changing  the  sign  of  b,  which
represents  the  distance  of  the  centre  C  of  the  spherical  surface  NOM  from  the  point  O;  [9258v]
this  centre  being  below  the  line  KOI,  in  the  case  of  a  convex  surface,  corresponding  to
fig.  114,  where  we  may  consider  the  value  of  b  as  positive;  but  this  centre  falls  above  the
line  KOI,  and  on  the  side  of  the  negative  values  of  b,  when  the  surface  is  concave;  so
that  the  sign  of  b  must  be  different  in  the  two  cases.

In  the  second  supplement  to  this  work  [9812 — 9845],  the  author  gives  another  method mgssx]
of  computing  the  formula  [9294,  or  9301],  being  essentially  the  same  as  that  which  is  used
by  M.  Poisson  in  pages  9 — 15  of  his  JVouvelle  Theorie,  he.  [9173iJ,  where  he  obtains, L9258t/]

[9258m;]

704  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.C^I.

formed  by  the  spherical  segment  and  the  tangent  of  the  surface,  to  raise  the
r^^,, column  0  Z:  therefore  this  action  is  inversely  as  the  radius  b  of  the  surface

[9261]  ,

31  ON,  supposing  it  to  be  spherical.*

[92582]  in  page  14  of  his  work,  the  same  formula  for  a  convex  surface  as  that  in  [9301,  or  9845].
The  values  of  K,  H,  given  by  IVI.  Poisson  in  pages  12,  14,  in  the  hypothesis  of  a  uniform
density,  and  marked  (1),  (2),  are

[9259a
[92596

[9259c
[9^59d

[9259e

[9259/
[9259^
[9259/1
[9259i

[9259yfe
[9259/

[9259m
[9259n

[9260a
[9260&

[9260c
[9260rf

[9260c
[9260/

ain
as

These  expressions  of  K,  H,  appear  to  be  different  from  those  given  by  La  Place  in
[9253,  9253'],  but  they  are  easily  reduced  to  the  same  form,  by  putting  the  density
p=l,  and  integrating  by  parts relative  to z. For by  this process [9253] becomes

Z=  2*  ./o*  dz .  *  (2)  =  2*6 .  *  (6)  —  2*  ./(f  zdz .  (^— )  ;  and  as  the  limit  b  may  be  extended

/d  ♦(2)\
to  6=00,  the  term  2'^i!>.'l'(6)  will  vanish  [9240^];  so  that  we  shall  have  K= — ^jr.fi^zdz.i ' ]»

But  from  [9241']  we  have  (^^)  =  —  z.n{z)',  hence  K=  2* -fo^z^dz . Ti (z). Agai

integrating  by  parts,  we  get  K=  f^J^ .  *  (6)  —  f*  ./q  z^dz .  (  -^ — ~  j ; and,  by  rejecting,

before,  the  term  depending  on P.-ir(b),  it  becomes  K=  —  i^ 'fo  z^dz .  (-^ — ^j. Now

substituting  (  '  ^^^'j=  —  9  (^)  [9233'],  we  finally  obtain  K^^^tf  .f^x^dz  .(p{z);  being  the

same  as  in  [9259a],  changing  the  symbol  z  into  r,  and  the  limit  b  into  oo.  By  a  similar
process  with  the  quantity  H  [9253'],  and  making  the  same  substitutions  as  in  [9259e,  h],
we  get  successively,

=  i^.fo'z'dz.^{z).
Now  putting 6=00,  and z  =  r, in [9259w],  we  get  the  same  value  of  H,  as  that  in
[92596],  given  by  M.  Poisson.

*  (4123)  In  all  the  preceding  calculations,  the  density  of  the  fluid  in  the  sphere  N'OM',
fig.  114,  page  705,  is  supposed  to  be  uniform,  and  it  has  been  proved,  in  [9258p],  that,  in
this  case,  the  action  of  the  sphere  upon  the  internal  column  of  the  fluid OO,  at  its  base

O,  is  represented  by  K-\-—,  and  by  using  e=  —  [9253^],  it  becomes

jj

K-\ =  ^-}-  jRl6  5  [The  density  being  supposed  uniform.J

6

and  this  represents  the  downward  pressure  at  O,  in  the  column  O'O;  e  being  considered  by
La  Place  as  a  very  small  quantity  [9253Ar].

We  shall  now  examine,  in  a  brief  manner,  the  effects  of  the  variations  of  density  [9173i,  &c.],

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§.  1.]

ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERE.

705

We  may  here  observe  that  the  function  K  is  analogous  to that  which is [9262]

Ti0JlA,

whlcli  occur  in  the  surface  of  the  fluid  j  that  is,  where  the  fluid  is  in  contact  with  the  air,  or

IS  wholly  free  from  any  pressure  at  its  surface,  as  in  a  vacuum ;  and  we  shall  again  resume

the  subject  in  [9841c,  &,c.  9977r,  Stc],  after  we  have  discussed  the  second  method  which  the

author  has  used  in  estimating  the  effects  of  the  capillary  action  ;

and  we  shall  then  give  a  more  detailed  computation  of  the

effects  of  the  change  of  the  density  in  the  fluid,  near  its  surface

and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube. We  have  not  here  attempted

to  do  it,  in  so  full  a  manner,  because  it  requires  the  use  of

formulas,  like  those  which  are  investigated  in  [9937,  Sic],  and

which  are  too  long  to  be  repeated  here,  out  of  the  regular

course  in  which  they  have  been  given  by  the  author.

The  stratum  of  fluid  near  the  surface,  which  is  of  a  variable
density,  is  of  an  insensible  thickness,  and  if  we  suppose  the
point  O  to  be  situated  beneath  the  lower  surface  of  this
stratum,  and  distant  from  it  h\j  the  insensible  quantify  X,  which  expresses  the  limit  of  the
distance  to  which  the  corpuscular  action  is  sensible  [9258c?J,  the  whole  length  of  the  column
OCy  =  >^',  will  yet  be  of  an  insensible  length.  We  may  consider  the  stratum  of  the  fluid,
contained  between  the  two  hmiting  spherical  surfaces  N'O'M',  NOM,  to  increase  in
density,  from  the  point  O',  where  it  is  nearly  equal  to  nothing  [lOSOS',  Sic],  to  the  lowest  point
O,  where  it  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  internal  density  of  the  fluid,  which  we  shall  represent
by  unity;  then,  taking  any  point  Z  of  the  column  OO,  and  putting  OZ=z,  we  may
suppose  (he  density  D  of  the  spherical  stratum,  of  the  thicTcness  dz,  included  between  the
surfaces  which  correspond  to  z  and  z-^-dz,  to  be  a  function  of  z;  and  the  mass  of  the  fluid
contained  in  the  part  dz  of  the  colunm  OO ^  will  be  represented  by  the  product  of  the  two
quantities  D  and  dz,  which  is  Ddz,  and  this  also  will  be  a  function  of  z.  Moreover  the
action  of  the  whole  spherical  mass  of  the  fluid  N'O'M',  upon  a  particle  at  z,  may  be
represented  by  a  function  of  z,  which  we  shall  denote  by  T{z).  Multiplying  this  by  the
mass  Ddz  of  the  column  [9260/n],  we  get  Ddz .  T{z),  for  the  action  of  the  whole  sphere
N'O'M'  upon  the  part  dz  of  the  column  (JO;  and  its  integral  f^'Ddz  .T[z),  or,  as  it  may
be  xvv\iien,f^Ddz.T[z)  [9240a],  represents  the  whole  action  of  the  sphere  N'O'M'  upon
the  fluid  of  a  variable  density  in  the  column  O'O.  When  6==co,  or  e  =  0  [9260c],  the
spherical  surfaces  N'O'M',  NOM,  change  into  the  horizontal  planes  K'OT,  KOI,  and
the  pressure  at  the  point  O,  in  the  case  of  the  uniform  density  1 [9260<?J,  becomes  equal

to  K,  which  is  independent  of  —  or  e  [9260c]  ;  and  the  slightest  consideration  will  make

it  manifest,  that,  when  the  density  varies,  in  these  horizontal  strata,  from  the  upper  surface  at
O  towards  the  lower  surface  at  O,  the  pressure  at  this  last  point,  which  we  shall  represent
by  K,  will  also  be  independent  of  e.  Now  in  order  to  compare  together  the  pressures  at  the
base  O  of  the  column  OO,  in  the  case  of  a  variable  density  D,  with  that  which  corresponds
VOL.  IV.  177

[9260g-]

[9260g^

[9260A]
[92607i']

[9260t ]

[9260&]
[9260^']

[9260Z  ]
[9260m]

[9260n]

[9260o]

[926q;>]
[9260?]

[9260r]

[9260*]

706  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9262^ denoted  by  the  same  letter,  in  the  theory  of  astronomical  refraction  explained

[9260f]

[9260m]
[9260p]

[9260w;]
[9260x]

[9260t/]

[9260z]

[9261a]
[92616]

[9261c]
[9261rf]

[9261c]

[9261/]

[9261g]
[9261fe]
[9261i]

[When  the  fluid  in  the  column  O'O  is  of  the  variable  densitj"!
D,  and  is  terminated  by  the  plane  surface K'<y  I .  J

[When  the  fluid  in  the  column O'O  is  of  the  uniform  deaiit;*!
1 ,  and  is  terminated  by  the  plane  surface  K'Qfl',  J

to  a  constant  density  Ij  the  surfaces  in  both  cases  being  supposed  to  be  the  horizontal
planes  K' O I\  KOI,  we  shall  suppose,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  density  D  [9260//],  and  the
attraction  r  (z)  [9!260n]  correspond  to  the  fluid  of  a  variable  density  between  these  two
parallel  planes,  and  that  r  (^r)  changes  into  r^(«)>  when  the  fluid  is  of  the  uniform  density  1,
Then  we  shall  have,  from  [9260p,  r,  5],

J^Ddz.T{z)  =  K,

r,dz.TXz)=K.

In  the  case  of  uniform  density,  the  integral  function  f^dz.T^^z)  is  expressed  by  the  symbol
K  [9260u],  if  6=00,  or  if  the  terminating  surfaces  be  the  planes  K'OI\  KOI;  but  the
same  integral  function  f^dz.vX^)  is  expressed  by  K-\-Ke  [9260cZ],  when  6  is  of  a  finite
magnitude,  or,  in  other  words,  when  the  limiting  planes  K'OI\  KOI,  change  into  the
limiting  spherical  surfaces  N'OM',  NOM,  respectively.  Hence  it  appears  that,  when  the
density  of  the  fluid  is  constant,  the  effect  of  changing  the  infinite  number  of  horizontal  strata,
parallel  to  K'OT,  and  of  the  thickness  dz,  into  the  same  number  of  infinitely  near
concentrical  spherical  strata,  of  the  thickness  dz,  and  described  about  the  centre  C,  is  merely
to  add  a  term  of  the  order  e  [9253A:],  to  the  function  /^tZz-r^s;);  or,  in  other  words,  the
function  r  (2;)  may  be  supposed  to  be  increased  by  a  term  of  the  order  e.  A  similar  change
must  evidently  obtain  in  the  expression  with  a  variable  density  [9260m],  when  the
horizontal  strata  are  changed  into  a  spherical  form.  For,  as  in  the  preceding  case,  T'^{z)  must
be  increased  by  a  term  of  the  order  e  ;  and  the  density  D,  which  depends  on  the  variations  of
the  compressing  force  [9n3m],  will  also  vary  in  consequence  of  the  change  of  pressure,  in
taking  the  spherical  form,  as  has  been  already  shown,  when  the  density  is  uniform  [9260rf],
where  K  changes  into  K-{-  Ke,  in  consequence  of  this  change  of  form  ;  so  that,  by  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  c^,  which,  according  to  observation,  are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  be
retained,  we  may  consider  the  function  D  X  r(z)  [9260m]  as  being  augmented  by  a  term
of  the  order  e,  and  this  will  increase  the  value  of  K,  by  a  term  of  the  same  order  as  c,  which
we  shall  represent  by  Ke.  Therefore  the  expressions  of  the  pressure  on  the  point  O  of  the
column  00,  will  be  finally  reduced  to  the  following  forms,  in  the  case  of  the  spherical
surfaces  N'OM',  NOM;

fadz  .  r  (z)  ^  K.  (1  -{-  e)  ;  [in  the  case  of  uniform  density  1.]

f^Ddz  .  r  (z)  =  K  .  (  1  -f-  e) .  [In  the  case  of  a  variable  density  D.J

Hence  it  appears  that  the  only  effect  of  the  variableness  of  the  density  of  the  fluid  is  an

alteration  in  the  value  of  the  symbols  -BTand  l=Ke  [9260c],  which  express  the  effect  of

the  corpuscular  and  the  capillary  attraction,  changing  them  respectively  into  K  and  -  =  Ke.

This  produces,  however,  no  alteration  in  the  calculations  of  the  effects  of  the  capillary  attraction,
because  K,  H,  can  be  determined  by  observation  alone,  and  not  by  analytical  deductions,  the
law  of  attraction  being  unknown.  Similar  remarks  may  be  made  in  case  the  surface  is
concave,  and  the  effect  will  be  as  in  [9258s — w],  merely  to  change  the  signs  of  c,  e.

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^  2.]  ATTRACTION  OF  A  SPHERE.  707

in  the  tenth  book  *  [8168].  [9262"]

2.  It  is  easy  to  deduce  from  what  has  been  said,  the  action  of  a  sphere  [of
uniform  density]  upon  an  infinitely  narrow  column  of  fluid,  situated  within  the
sphere,  and  perpe7idicular  to  its  surface.  Suppose  two  equal  spheres  MON,
POQ,  fig.  115,  to  be  in  contact  at  the  point  O;  that  ^ — ^  ^9263]

10  K  is  a  plane  touching  both  spheres  in  that  point,  and
that  0«S  is  the  fluid  column.  The  particle  q  of  the
lower  meniscus  lOQPK  will  act  upon  the  column  OS,
to elevate  it. For if  we draw  the  isosceles triangle  ^

Oqr,  it  is  evident  that  the  attractions  of  the  particle  q (  \  [9264]

upon  the  part  Or  of  the  column  mutually  destroy  each
other;  but the action  of  q  upon  rS  tends  to  elevate
the  fluid,  in  the  same  manner  as  a  point  ^  similarly  situated  in  the  upper
meniscus  lOMNK, The  two  meniscuses  act,  therefore,  with  the  same  force  to [9265]
elevate  the  column  of  fluid ;  and  we  have  seen,  in  the  preceding  article,  that  the

IT

action  of  the  upper  meniscus,  in  producing  this  elevation,  is  — [9260]  ; there- [^^^]

fore  this  quantity  also  expresses  the  action  of  the  lower  meniscus.

Now  the  action  of  an  indefinite  mass  above  OS,  and  terminated  by  the  plane
I  OK,  is  the  same  upon  the  column  O  S  sts  that  of  a  mass  situated  below,  and [9267]
terminated  by  the  same  plane;  for  any  point  r  of  this  column  is  equally  attracted
by  both  masses,  but  in  opposite  directions,  since  it  is  in  equilibrium  in  virtue  of
these  attractions  [9258/,  &c.]. And  as  K denotes,  by  the  preceding  article  [9259], [9268]

[92671

Finally  we  may  remark,  that,  in  almost  all  the  formulas  of  the  author,  where  he  uses  the
symbols  K,  H,  as appertaining to  the  calculation  of  a  fluid  of  uniform  density,  we  can [9261A:]
use  the  same  formulas,  supposing  the  fluid  to  vary  in  density  near  its  surface,  considering  his
values  of  Kj  H,  to  be  the  same  as  those  we  have  named  K,  H,  in  the  present  article. For [9261i  ]
example,  the  general  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  [9318],  corresponds  to  the  case  of
a  variable  density,  by  using  for  H  the  value  resulting  from  actual  observation,  which  must [9261m]
necessarily  be  the  same  as  H  of  the  present  article ;  and  we  shall  use  the  author's  formulas [9261n]
in  this  way  throughout  these  notes.

*  (4124) The  quantity  K,  in  the  interior  of  the  fluid  mass,  where  the  density  is  equal  to

unity,  is  supposed  by  La  Place  to  be  much  greater  than  —  [9253A:,  g],  and he seems  to [9262a]

consider  this  value  of  jRTas  a  representation  of  the  corpuscular  intensity  in  the  interior  of  the  [92626]

fluid  mass; while  H  is  proportional  to  that  part  of  it  upon  which  the  capillary  intensity  [9262c]

depends  [9360,  &.c.]. At  an  insensible  distance  from  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  the  quantity  [9262rf]
K  may  be  extremely  small,  or  negative,  as  has  been  observed  in  [9174aJ.

[9270]

708  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

the  action  of  the  superior  mass  upon  the  column  OS,  it  will  also  denote  the
[9269]  action  of  the  inferior  mass  upon  that  column,  drawing  doivnwards;  now  this
action  is  composed  of  two  parts,  namely,  that  of  the  sphere  POQ,  and  the
action  of  the  meniscus  lOQFK;  therefore,  by  putting  S  for  the  action  of  the
sphere,  and  observing  that  the  meniscus  attracts  the  column  upwards  [9258w],

[927J] and  that  its  action  upon  it  is  — ,  we  shall  have,

rQ9701  H  rTTiis  is  conect  even  when  we~|

L^^'^J  O  ___ J^  m  I notice  the  change  in  the  den-  I

- *^  1 ■**■  J  I »ity of  the  fluid near its  I

^  l_8uiface.  J

or,  by  transposition,

rnoiyoi  C«  C I -"^  I  This  is  correct  even  when  we |

[y/«7u]  O  ^=^  jCL  ~f~  —  •  I notice  the  change of  density I

f)  I in  the  fluid  near  its  surface. I

Hence  it  follows,  that  the  action  of  a  body  terminated  by  a  sensible  portion  of  a
convex  spherical  surface,  upon  a  fluid  column  placed  within  it,  and  perpendicular

[9274] to  the  middle  of  that  surface,  is  represented  by  K-\-  -r-,  drawing  downwards

from  O  to  S.

If  the  surface  of  the  body,  instead  of  being  convex,  is  concave  (as  in  fig.  112,
page  695),  then  the  action  of  the  mass  ME  FN  upon  the  canal  OZ  will  be,

[9274'] CIS  we  have  just  seen,  equal  to  K —  —  [9258w]  ;  therefore  the  action  of  a  body

^sphTricai terminated  by  a  sensible  portion  of  a  spherical  surface  [9274',  9274],  loill  be

segment.

TT

[9275] K —  —  ==  the  internal  action  of  a  concave  spherical  segment ;

6
H

These  expressions  are
correct  even  when  we
notice  the  change  of
density  near  the  surface
of  the fluid,  as  is  seen

[9276]  K-\-  —  =:  the  internal  action  of  a  convex  spherical  segment, in  [oaeie,  &c.],  or  in

3.  We  may  noiv  determine  generally  the  action  of  a  body  terminated  by  any
[9277]  curve  surface,  upon  a  column  situated  within  it,  and  contained  in  an  infinitely
narrow  canal  drawn  perpendicular  to  any  point  of  that  surface.  If  we  suppose
an  ellipsoid  to  be  drawn  through  this  point,  so  as  to  touch  the  surface,  its
action  will  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  solid,  since,  this  action  being
supposed  to  extend  only  to  insensible  distances,  the  meniscus  which  represents
'•  ■'  the  difference  between  the  solid  and  the  ellipsoid,  will  have  no  sensible  action
upon  the  column,  at  the  points  where  these  two  bodies  differ  sensibly  from  each
other. We  have seen  in  [9260],  that  the  action  of  the  meniscus  which  is

[9279]  formed  between  the  sphere  and  its  tangent  plane,  is  — ,  and  that,  [in  the  case
of  a  fluid  of  uniform  density,]  it  is  of  the  order  -  [9257],  relative  to  the
action  jfiTof  this  solid,  z  being  equal  to,  or  less  than,  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§.  3.]  ATTRACTION  OF  AN  ELLIPSOID.  ^09

[9280]

sensible  activity  of  the  body. It  is  evident,  for the  same  reason,  that  the

action  of  the  meniscus  which  is  the  difference  between  the  ellipsoid  and  the  body,

H  z

will  be  relative  to  the  action  —  of  the  order  *  -,  therefore  it  may  be  neglected

JT

in  comparison  with — ;  we  shall  therefore  determine  the  action  of  this  ellipsoid

upon  the  column. One  of  the  axes  of  this  ellipsoid  is  in  the  direction  of  the

column,  and  this  axis  we  shall  put  equal  to  2a. If  we  suppose  two  planes  to  be

drawn  through  this  axis  and  the  other  two  axes  of  the  ellipsoid,  their  sections

will  be  two  ellipses,  each  of  which  will  have  2a  for  an  axis,  and  we  shall

represent  the  other  two  axes  by  2a'  and  2a". The  radius  of  curvature  of  the [9282]

first  ellipsis,  at  the  point  of  contact  of  the  body  with  the  ellipsoid,  will  be  f

«^  '  . .  a"^

— ,  and  that  of  the  second  at  the  same  point  will  be — ;  and  by  putting  these

radii  equal  to  6,  6',  respectively,  we  shall  have  6  =  — , b'  =  — . Through  the

same point  of  contact  and  the  axis  2a,  if  we  draw  a  plane,  which  is  inclined

by  the  angle  d  to  the  plane  passing  through  the  two  axes  2a  and  2a',  the  section [9284]

*  (4125) If  we  refer  to  the  general  expression  of  the  value  of  z  (9769),  corresponding

to  the  meniscus,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9770],  z  =  A .  x^  -\-  "K .  xy  -\-  B .  y^^  for  the  part  of  z [9280a]

comprised  in  the  ellipsoidal  or  parabolical  part  of  the  meniscus ;  and  the  remaining  terms  of

z,  namely, C.a?-{-D.x^y-{-  Sic.  [9769],  for  the  part  of  z  corresponding  to  the  difference [92806]

between  the  meniscus  and  ellipsoid ;  and  this  last  part  may  be  considered  as  of  the  order

X  X

—  relative  to  the  first  part,  or  of  the  order  -  [9240a]  ;  therefore  this  part  must  be  so  very [9280c]

small,  that  it  may  be  neglected  in  comparison  with  the  other  part.

t  (4126) In  the  ellipsis  whose  axes  are  2a,  2a',  if  we  take  a  very  small  absciss  sr,  counted
from  the  vertex,  corresponding  to  the  coordinate  y,  we  shall  have,  when  z,y,  are  infinitely

1/3  a"^

small,  by  the  nature  of  the  ellipsis  [379c,  378s],  |-  =  p  =  —  ;  and  if  we  suppose  r  to  be  the [9283a]

radius  of  curvature  corresponding  to  this  absciss  and  ordinate,  we  shall  evidently  have,  from

the  properties  of  the  circle,  'Hrz  —  z^  =  y^,  or,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  z,  5-  =r ;  hence [92836]

we  haver= — ,  as  in  [9283].  In  like  manner,  we  get  —  for  the  radius  of  curvature  at  the [9283c]

vertex,  in  the  ellipsis  whose  axes  are  2a,  2a". These  axes  are  represented  in  [9283] by

h,h',  respectively;  so  that  we  shall  have  6  =  — ,  6'  =  — ,  which  are  evidently  the  greatest [9283(f]

and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  of  all  the  ellipses  formed  by  the  sections  of  the  ellipsoid  by
a  plane  passing  through  the  axis  a.

VOL.  IV.  178

710  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9285]  of  the  ellipsoid,  by  this  last  drawn  plane,  will  be  an  ellipsis,  having  2a  for  one
of  the  axes  ;*  and  the  other  semi-axis,  which  we  shall  denote  by  A,  will  be
given  by  the  following  formula ;

a'^a"^  11  1

The radius of curvature of this ellipsis at the point of contact, being

A'^  I  1

[9287] represented by B, we have B  :=  — ,  or  —  =  ct .  — [9284e]  ; and,  by

substituting  [9286,  9283],  we  successively  obtain,

[9288]  i  =  a . )  i- sin.254-4  -cos.^n  =  ]-, .  sm.^6  +  - .  cos.^^.

The  action  of  an  infinitely  small  portion  of  the  ellipsoid  formed  by  the  plane

[9289] which passes through  the  axes  2a  and  2A,  and  by  another  plane  which  is

inclined  to  this  by  the  angle  di,  and  passes  through  the  axis  2a,  will  be  very

nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  like  portion  of  a  sphere  whose  radius  is  B ;  and

H

[9290] as  the  action  of  this  sphere  is,  by  what  has  been  said  [9273],  equal  to  K-\-—,

1  r  TT  J

[9291] that  of  the  infinitely  small  portion  in  question  will  be  f ^  »  ds  .<  K-{-  —  >  ;

^iir  \,  Jo 1

therefore  the  whole  action  of  the  ellipsoid  upon  the  canal  will  he

*  (4127) Changing  o,  p,  y,  into  a,  a',  a",  to  conform  to  the  piesent  notation,  we  get

x2  w2  22

[9284o] the equation  of  an  ellipsoid  [142S6J,  under  the fonn  — -|-^+-^=l; »>  y,  ^j  being

the  rectangular  coordinates  of  the  surface  of  the  ellipsoid,  whose  semi-axes,  parallel  to  those
coordinates,  are  «,  a',  a",  respectively ;  the  centre  of  the  ellipsoid  being  the  origin  of  the
coordinates.  If  we  now  suppose  a  plane  to  be  drawn  through  the  axis  2a,  so  as  to  form  the
angle  ^,  with  the  axis  of  y,  the  section  of  the  ellipsoid  will  be  an  ellipsis  whose  axes  are
2a,  2.4  [9285] ;  and  the  coordinates  of  the  extremities  of  the  semi-axis  A  will  evidently  bie
[9284&] a?  =  0, y==,A.cos.&, z  =  A  .sm.L Substituting  these  in  the  equation  of  the  ellipsoid

[9284c] [9284a],  we  get  — ^^—  -\-  --^^  =  1 ; which  bemg  multiplied  by  ^^,3i„2^^«^^.co8.2fl

gives  [9286]. The  radius  of  curvature,  corresponding  to  this  ellipsis,  at  the  point  of  contact,

[9284fr| is  found,  as  in  [9283],  by  changing,  in  the  expression  of  6, a'  into  A ;  by  this  means  it

w32  1  1

becomes,  as  in  [9287],  5  =  — , or  ^==a.  — . Substituting  the expression [9286],  we

[9284c]

get  the  first  value  of  - [9288]. The  second  of  those  expressions  is  deduced  from  the
first,  by  using  the  values  of  5,  V  [9283].

■a

[9292a] f  (4128) The  whole  action  of  a  sphere  of  the  radius  B  being  JT-f-  -  [9290],  that  of

X.  Suppl.  1.  §3.]  ATTRACTION  OF  AN  ELLIPSOID.  711

the  integral  being  taken  from  6  =  0  to  ^  =  2*,  which  gives  for  that  action  the
following  expression ;  [9293]

C\ 1'\  r* Action  of  an  ellipsoid,  which  is~|

K^_4_  4- FJ J I K  I correct  even  when  the  density I rnfttt*i

u\.-j-  2  J-t  .\  T-f-  ,,>,  of  the  fluid  is  variable  near  its I ly^iiii]

C ^  J  l_8urface. J

If  the  surface  be  concave,  we  must  suppose  b  and  b'  negative. If  it  be  in  part [9294']
concave,  and  in  part  convex,  like  the  circumference  of  a  pulley,  ice  must  suppose
the  radius  of  curvature  corresponding  to  the  convex  part  to  be  positive,  and  that '■^^^^
corresponding  to  the  concave  part  to  be  negative.

Putting  B,  B',  for  the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  sections  of  the  surface  of  the r^'
body  by  two  planes  inclined  to  each  other  by  a  right  angle,  we  shall  have,  by  what
has  been  said  [9288],

•4  =  ^.sin.2^  +  ^•cos.^^•  t^^^

Jf  Q  Q

hence  we  find,  by  changing  6  into  |  +  ^  which  changes  B  into  B,  1^^298]

|j  =  ^,.cos.24  4-^.sin.2^;  [9299]

consequently

s+i=\+F  t^J

Therefore  the  preceding  action  [9294]  may  also  be  put  under  the  following
form;

TT  IT  ["Action  of  any  body  upon  an  internal  column,"!

V" \_  I  , •  I the  rectangular  radii  of  curvature  being  B,B'. I  [93011

•**■ 1 Q  Tj  I  '  Q  TV  7  I This  is  correct  even  when  we  notice  the  change |

'^■O  i6£i  Lof  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid.  J

General
theorem.

[9302]

that  is,  the  action  of  a  body,  of  any  convex  form,  upon  a  fluid  contained  in
an  infinitely  narrow  canal,  perpendicular  to  any  point  whatever  of  its  surface,  is
equal  to  the  half  sum  of  the  actions  of  tivo  spheres  whose  radii  are  respectively
equal  to  the  following  ones,  namely,  the  radius  of  curvature  of  any  section  of  the

a  section  of  the  sphere  corresponding  to  the  angle  d6,  will  be  found  by  multiplying  it  by

— ,  as  in  [9291]. Substituting  the  variable  value  of  - [9288],  and  prefixing  the  sign  of [92926]

tiv  Jo  ■

integration,  we  obtain  the  whole  action  of  the  ellipsoid  as  in  [9292]. This  is  reduced  to  the

form  [9294],  by  observing  that  we  have,  as  in  [1544a],  J^'^dd .  cos.^a  =  «- ;  /^"dd  .  sin.^^  =  if  j [9292cl

also/o2''rf4  =  2T.  ^

*  (4129)  Adding  together  the  expressions  [9297, 9299],  and  putting  sin  *4  -f  cos.*4  =  1, [9300a]
we  get  [9300]  ;  substituting  this  in  [9294],  we  get  [9301].

712  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

surface  by  a  plane  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  surface  through  that  pointy  and
the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  section  formed  by  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the
[9303] preceding  plane*

4.  We  shall  nmv  determine  the  form  of  the  surface  of  water  included  within

[9304] a  tube  of  any  form. We  may,  in  this  investigation,  as  is  well  known,  use  either

. the  principle  of  a  curvilinear  canal  terminated  at  two  points  of  this  surface,  or

the  principle  of  the  perpendicularity  of  the  force  at  the  surface. In  the  present

question,  the  first  of  these  principles  has  a  great  advantage  over  the  second,

[9305] because  it  requires  only  the  determination  of  the  two  actions  JTand  — .  (  7  +  t;  )

[9294],  and  in  fact  only  the  last  of  these  two  forces,  since  the  first  ^disappears
from  the  equation  of  the  surface  [9318],  as  we  shall  soon  see. Although  the

force  which  produces  this  second  action,  is,  at  the  surface,  incomparably  greater
[9306] than  gravity ;  yet,  as  it  acts  only  upon  an  insensible  interval,  its  action  upon  a

fluid  column  of  a  sensible  length,  may  be  compared  with  the  force  of  gravity
upon  the  column.  But  if  we  wish  to  make  use  of  the  principle  of  the
perpendicularity  of  the  resultant  of  all  the  forces,  at  the  surface,  we  must  consider

[9307] not  only  the  action  which  produces  the  forces  K  and  ~^'\T'^t\ which are

perpendicular  to  the  surface,  but  also  the  force  of  gravity,  and  the  force  which

arises from the  attraction  of  the  meniscus corresponding to the difference
[9308]  . .  .

between  the  ellipsoid  and  the  body ;  for,  although  the  action  of  this  part  upon

a  fluid  column  is  insensible,  because  it acts sensibly  only  at an  insensible

[9308'] distance,  yet  it  is  of  the  same  order  as  gravity. On  account  of  the  difficulties

in  estimating  all  these  forces  and  their  directions,  it  is  much  more  convenient  to

use  the  principle  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  canals. f

*  (4130) The  actions  of  the  two  spheres  whose  radii  are  B,  "B,  are  respectively,  as  in
[9301a] [9273], ^-f -,  JT-f-  -,  whose  half  sum  is K -\- ---{---,  \ being the same as the

JS  B  ^tt tin

action  of  the  ellipsoid  of  curvature  [9301],  as  in  [9302 — 9303]. If  the  surface  be  concave,
we must  put  6,  b',  negative,  as  in  [9294'J ;  consequently  B,  B, [9297,  9299],  will  be

[93016] negative,  and  then  the  action  [9301]  will  become  K — ^^']~B  +  '^\'

f  (4131) La  Place has  used  this  second  method  in his supplement  to this  theory
[9309o] [9812 — 9845],  and  it  serves  to  prove,  a  posteriori,  the  identity  of  the  two  results.

I

X.Supp!.!.  §4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 713

We  shall  suppose  O,  fig.  116,  to  be  the  lowest  wigMG,  [9308"]

point  of  the  surface  AOB  oi  the  water  contained  in
the  tube,  and  we  shall  use  the  following  symbols ;

z,  the  vertical  coordinate  OM;  \^  ^" — f)^--^^  [9309]

a:,  y,  the  horizontal  rectangular  coordinates  of  any

point  N  of  the  surface  ;  '■ ■'

jR  the greatest,  and  R  the  least,  radius  of  curvature  of  the  surface,  at  the [9310]
point  Nf  then R,  R,  will  be  the roots  of  the following  quadratic
equation ;

*  (4132) We  have  a?,  y,  sr,  for  the  rectangular  coordinates  of  the  point  iVTof  the  surface
for  which the radius of  curvature  is to  be computed ; and  we shall  suppose  that,  for ^  •^JUaj
another extremely near point of the surface,  these coordinates become respectively
x-\-}ij y-\-lc,  z-\-l; then,  from  Taylor's  theorem  [610],  we  shall  obtain  the  value of
z-\-l [9310e],  neglecting  terms  of  (He  third  order,  which  are  not  wanted  in  the  present [93106]
computation. We shall now suppose that the same symbols, accented, namely,
x'ji/fZ', p',  q',  r', s',  t', /',  correspond to  the osculatory  sphere  at  the  point  iV,  without [9310c]
altering  the  increments  A,  k;  hence  we  shall  have  the  expression  of  z'-f-?'  [9310/"],  which
is  similar  to  that  of  5;  -j-  ^' Lastly,  by  putting  a,  ^,  7,  for  the  coordinates  of  the  centre  of mojo/ii
the  osculatory  sphere,  parallel  respectively  to  the  axes  of  x,  y,  z,  also  R  for  the  radius  of
the  sphere,  we  shall  have  the  equation  of  this  osculatory  spherical  surface  at  iV,  as  in  [9310^],
being  conformable  to  [19e]  ;

z-\-l=:z-j-(ph-{-qk)-[-i  (rA^  -f  ^skk  +  tk"^)  ;  [9310e  ]

sf-\-r  =  sf-\-  (p'A  +  c{k)  +  ^  (r'A^  -|-  2s'hk  +  I'kr^)  ;  [9310/]

i22  =  (a,'  _  a)2  -I-  (y'  —  p)8  +  (;?'  —  7)2.  [9310g]

Taking  the  differentials  of  the  equation  [9310o-],  considering  jR,  cl,  (3,  7,  as  constant,  we
get,  by  successive  reductions,  the  following  values  of  p',  q',  /,  s',  t',  relative  to  the  spherical
surface ;

^'-m

(x'— a)  , /rfA  (y-f3)

z'-y  '  ^ W.

q  =  U;  =—

[9310A]

, /ddz'\  1  {x'  —  a)^ -(l  +  p'2)

, /ddz'\ (x'~a).q' (/— 3)Y_  pV .

, /ddz^  1 {y'-^f —  n+q"^)

'=V^V=~^W""F^=^3="^'=7"-  t9310Z]

Now  if  we  compare  the  expressions  [9310e,/],  we  shall  find  that,  when  A  =  0,  A;  =  0,  we

must  put  z'  =  z,  to  make  the  spherical  surface  pass  through  the  point  N,  whose  coordinates

are  x,  y,  z. Moreover  if  we  put p'  =  p,  q'  =  q,  we  shall  find  that  the  terms  pA  +  q^j

VOL.  IV.  179

714  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

[9311] i22.(rt— s^)— i?.v/I+?+?-{(l+q')r— 2pqs+(14-p^).t}4-(l+p'+q^^
in  which  the  symbols  are,

/ddz\  /Mz\  /ddz\

[9313]  '=(,5?;= '^KAdiJ'' *=lw

p'A  +  q'^  [9310e,/],  depending  on  the  first  power  of  A,  fc,  become  equal  to  each  other;
FQ'iirwi ^^°^®  ^^®  values  [93iOA]  become,  for  this  point  N  of  the  curve  surface,  where  zf-=iZf

[93I0n]  p'  =  p  =  -^;  q'  =  q  =  _(?^;

and  it  is  very  evident  that  these  equations  express  the  condition  that  the  spherical  surface  is
tangent  to  the  proposed  surface  at  the  point  iST,  whose  coordinates  are  a?,  y,  z. Substituting
[9310o] the  values  [9310Z'— n]  in  [9310/],  and  subtracting  the  result  from  [9310e],  we  get  [9310p],
which  is  reduced  to  the  form  [93IO5],  by  putting  A:  =  mA  j

[9310,]  ,_r=j.^(,  +  l±f).A,  +  2(.  +  ^-B-).*fc  +  (,+l±f).fc«^

Now  if  we  put  the  coefficient  of  ^A^  equal  to  nothing,  we  shall  have  the  equations  [9310r],
and  then  I  —  T  =  0  j  so  that  the  osculatory  sphere  at  N  will  coincide  with  the  proposed
surface,  as  far  as  terms  of  the  second  order  in  A,  7c,  inclusively ;

^"^y— I  r+2sm4-tm9  y

For  brevity  we  shall  put  this  value  of z  —  y equal  to  3f,  and  then  we  shall  have,  from

[9310n,g],

[93105]  «  — 7  =  itf; y  — p  =  — Mq; a;  — a  =  —  Mp; 7J  =  itf/i-j-p2_|_q2.

If  we  give  to  m  various  values,  there  will  arise  an  infinite  number  of  values  of  R ;  and  the
maximum  or  minimum  of  these  values  will  be  found  by  putting  f  —  j  =  0,  or  i~r-)  =  ^  J
because  the  factor  ^i-|-p2_|_q2,  which  occurs  in  the  value  of  R  [9310s],  does  not  contain
m.  Now  the  expression  of  z  —  y  or  M  [9310r],  being  multiplied  by  r -f- 2sm -f  tm'
[9310r ]  gives  (r  +  2sto  +  tm^)  M  =  —  { 1  -f  p^  +  2pqni  +  ( 1  +  q^)  w^ h  and  by  putting  for  brevity
[9310tr]  i^p3^ji^^2.,  pq  +  iM&  =  P,  1 -f  q*  +  iWt  =  iV,  it  becomes  L  +  ^Dm  +  Nm^^O.
Then  taking  its  differential  relative  to  w,  dividing  by  2£?ot,  and  putting (t"  )=^^» ^^

[9310r]

[931W  ]
[9310u]

X.  Suppl.l.  «§>4.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 715

Therefore  we  shall  have*

1 .  l_0+q^).r-2pqs  +  (I+g)j

This  being  premised,  if  we  imagine  any  infinitely  narrow  canal  NSO  (fig.  116,
page  713),  to  be  formed,  we  must  have,  by  the  law  of  equilibrium  of  the  fluid
contained  in  this  canal,!

get D-\-Nm  =  0, or m  =  —  — ; substituting  this  in  the  last  equation  in  [931  Oif;],  we

get  I, — — +  — =  0, or NL—JD^  =  0- resubstituting the values of  JV,  i,  D [9310z]

[9310m;],  weobtain (1  +  p2  +  M)  .  (1 +q2  +  M)  —  (pq  +  7lfe)2  =  o. Developing  this,
and  arranging  according  to  the  powers  of  M,  we  finally  obtain

iW>-s«)-|-{(l+q3)r-~2pqs  +  (l+p«)tl.M+l+p«  +  q2  =  o.  [ggipj,^

Multiplying  this  by 1  +  p^ -f- q^, and  substituting M. /i-|-p2_j_q2  =  R [93105],  we  get
[9311].

*  (4133) Dividing  the  equation  [931 1]  by Ji^ .  (I  +  p2  +  q2)2, we  get

1  f(I+q2)r-2pqs  +  (l+pg)t| 1  rt-s2

•R2  (l  +  p2+q2)3  •i2"^(l  +  p2-|-q2)2  — "•  i^Xiiiai

Putting  for  brevity  n  equal  to  the  coefficient  of  —  — , and  n' for  the term  which  is
independent  of  22,  we  get —  —  n.--{-n'  =  0, which  is a  quadratic equation  in — , [93145]

whose two roots are -  =  ^ n -j- \/i n^—n', "^==iw  —  \/in^—n', and  their  sum  is

■"  ^  [9314c]

—  -\~—=:n; n  being  the coefficient  of  — — in [9314a]; and  by  substituting  it,  we
R R  R

get  [9314].

t  (4134) The  point  JV,  fig.  116,  is  situated  above  the  level  of  the  point  O  by  the
quantity OM  =  z, and  the  gravity  of  the  particles  contained  in  this  column  is  equal  to [9315o]

g  X  z,  or  gz. This  being  added  to  the  corpuscular  action  at  N,  namely K — "^  (  p-f""^/)

H/1 IN  [93156]

[9317],  ought  to  balance  the  corpuscular  action  at  O,  or K —  o  (  F  +  77 ) [9301  J,  9300]  ;

this  agrees  with  [9315]. Rejecting  the  terms  K,  which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  in

2  . .

each  member  of  the  equation,  then  multiplying  by — — , and  substituting the  value  of [9315c]

--L-—  [9314],  it  becomes  as  in  [9318]. We  have  already  remarked,  in  [9261m],  that
XI R'

this  equation  is  the  same  whether  we  consider  the  fluid  as  variable  in  density  near  its  surface, [9315</]
or  homogeneous,  using  the  value  of  H  depending  on  observation,  when  applying  it  to  the
case  of  nature.

716  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

[931*6] b and h' being  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  [9283J]  of  the

s- surface  at  the  point  O,  and  g  the  force  of  gravity. For  the action of  the

fluid upon the canal,  at  the  point  iV,  is,  by  what  has  been said  [93016],

[9317] J5:__:?.5l.4-2.?;  moreover  the  height  of  the  point  N  above  0  is  2  [9309].
The  preceding  equation  gives,  by  substituting  the  value  of  ■d+ «/  [9314],

[93181  pGeneral  differential  equation  of  the"!

General  (1  +  q^)  •  T  —  2pqS  +  (1  +  p^)  t  _  1 , 1 , %^  f S  '^^'-'^^' ''^^^-  1"'"  '"--^  I

equation  /i i 2 i o\

oFthesur-  (l+p2_^q2j

face  of  the
fluid.

capillary  tube.  This  is  correct  I
even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  |
density  of  the  fluid  near  the  surface  I
.and  sides  of  the  tube.  J

This  equation  is  of  the  second  order  of  partial  differentials ;  and,  by  integrating
it,  WQ  shall  have  two  arbitrary  functions,  which  we  must  determine  by  the
equation  of  the  surface  of  the  sides  of  the  tube  in  which  the  fluid  is  contained,

[9319]  and  by  the  inclination  of  the  extreme  planes  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid ;  this
inclination,  as  we  have  seen,  being  the  same  for  all  the  planes  [9197].

[9319']  Wlien  the  surface  is  formed  by  the  revolution  of  a  curve  about  the  axis  z,  the
preceding  equation  can  be  reduced  to  common  differentials ;  for  z  then  becomes
a  function  of ^/^aTfT^ ; and  if  we  put

[9320]  w  =  ^a;2_j_y2^

we  shall  have*  :

[9321al

* (4135) z  being  a  function  of  m,  and u  =  \/x^-{^y% we  have dz  =  (-^j.duj

and ddz==(—\.du^-\-(—\.ddu. From  these  general  values  of  dz,  ddz,  we  easily

obtain  the  partial  differentials  relative  to  a?,  y,  as  follows  J

/dz\ /dz\ fdu\  fdz\ /dz\ /du\  /ddz\ /ddz\ /du\^  , /dz\ /ddu\

[93215]  y=(^j-i,7j'  y =y -w^  Uj=U";:i;-y  +w-fe>)'

f9321M f.^\—f—\ f—\ f—\4.f^ /rfrfuN  /ddz\ /ddz\ fduy./dz\ /ddu\

[9321c] Now having «  =  /^+F, we get (g)=^^  =  £; (l")  =  j^=|;

substituting these in (~r)i  (;r) [93216],  they  become  as  in  [9321]. Again from

[9321i] y  =  -, we  get (^_j=:__- .  (^_j  =  -__  ^^^ ; and m like manner by

[9321e] changing  .:  into  y,  and  the contrary, (^)=^^;also, (^)  =  -|-(^)  = -S'

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 717

\dxj  ~^u'  du'  \dy)  '^u'Ju''

fddz\

fddz\
\dxdy)

/ddz\  _f ddz x^ dz
W/ M^'^ M^*^*

x^

ddz y^
'  du^'^u^'

dz  ^
du'

xy

m2

ddz xy
du^ v?

dz  ^
'  du'

Therefore  the  preceding  equation  [9318]  becomes*

ddz \_ dz / dz-
du^ u'  du'  \ du'

(

1  +  -7

2 2?2:

(4)

—General  differential  equation  oP"
tije  concave  surface  of  a  fluid
in  a  capillary  tube,  formed  by  the
revolution  of  a  curve  about  the
axis  of  z;  whicli  is  correct  even
when  we  notice  the  change  of
density  near  the surface and

—sides  of  the  tube.

[9321]
[9321']

[9322]
[9323]

[9324]

Substituting  these  in  the  preceding  values  of (t|), (i^\  (t^) [93216,  b'], they
become  as  in  [9321'— 9323].

*  (4136) We shall put  for  brevity —-=zPj —  =  Q; then,  by  comparing  the
expressions  of p,  q,  r,  s,  t [9312,  9313],  with  their  values  in  [9321 — 9323],  we  get

X

p  =  -.P;

«— ^ p.

r^-t^+tP:

s  — ^ O  —  ^  P'

^=U  +  >-

Substituting  these  in  the  first  member  of  [9323e],  we  get  its  second  member;  and  as  the
terms  depending  on  P^Q  mutually  destroy  each  other,  it  may  be  put  under  the  form
[9323/];  and  as  y"^ -{- x^  =^  u^ ,  y'*  +  2a^y2  _^  ^  _  j^4  [9320],  this  may  be  successively
reduced  to  the  forms  [9323^,  A] ;

(l  +  ,=)r-2p,s  +  (l+p»).t=(,+g.P»).(^.Q+|.p)-|^.P^(|.Q-i.p)

+0+S-^)-(S-«+5-^)

m3

m5

=  «  +  C  +  T  =  «  +  S-^-('+^)

ddz ,\ dz_ f ,d^

VOL. IV.

rfz2\

180

[9321/]

[9323o]

[93236]
[9323c]

[9323i]

[9323e]

[9323/]
[9323g-]
[9323A7

718  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

for,  at  the  point  O,  b  is  equal  to  b\  when  the  surface  is  of  revolution. In  ease

2

[9325] the  surface  is  a  circular  crown,  b  and  b'  being  unequal,  - will  then  denote  the

sum  of  the two  fractions  which have unity  for  their  numerators,  and  for

[9325'] denominators  respectively  the  greatest  and  the  least  of  the  radii  of  curvature,  at

the  lowest  point  of  the surface. We  may  also  observe,  that,  in  the  equation

The  second  member  of  this  last  equation  is  the  same  as  the  numerator  of  the  first  member  of
[9324],  and  its  first  member  is  the  same  as  the  numerator  of  the  first  member  of  [9318].
The  values  of  p,  q,  &c.  [93236,  </,  a],  give

[9323t]  l  +  p9  +  q2_i+^.(^.  +  y2)_i+p2_i4.^^. .

hence  the  denominator (1+P^"1"^^)' °f  ^he  first  member  of  [9318]  is  represented  by
1  -{- —  r, as  in  [9324]. Again,  as  the  surface  is  supposed,  in  [9319^,  to  be  formed  by
[9323i  ] the  revolution  of a  curve  about  the  axis  of  z,  we  shall have 6  =  6'; hence t  4"  r^
[9318]  becomes ^, as  in  [9324].

The  form  of  the  equation  [9324]  may  be  simplified,  as  the  author  has  shown,  in
[10164,  10264,  &c.],  by  changing  the  origin  of  the  ordinate  z,  from  the  lowest  point  of  the
surface  O,  to  the  level  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase ;  and  as  the  difference  of  these

Ft

[9323m] levels  is  g'  [9353],  we  may  put 2!  =  z  —  q  =  z  —  — [9354],  the  new  coordinate  being

2 2<r /  H\

represented  by  z.  In  this  case, the  second  member  of  [9324]  becomes  r  +  J'fz  —  t"),
or  simply —  ; and  the  whole  equation  is  reduced  to  the  form

*• 1

[9323o] Instead  of  using  the  symbol  a  [9328],  we  may  put,  as  M,  Poisson  has  done, j-:=  —  ; and

we  shall  have
[9mp]  |  =  a  =  ^, or aa9=l;

and  then  the  equation  [9323n]  becomes

t*3^i  — TTT^i — =;5'

f9323rl ^^'^^  '^  ^^^  same  form  as  is  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  108  of  his  Nouvelh  Theorie,  SfC*,
changing  u  into  t,  z  into  2, and a  into a, to  conform  to  his  notation.

X.  Suppl.  1.  §4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 719

[9324],  we  shall  have

ddz

(

^  du^J

1 dz
u'dii

\/

1  +  ^^

[R,  R,  are  the  greatest  and  least'
radii  of  curvature  of  the  point
of  the  surface  whose  coordi-
nates are  x,y,i.

]

[9326]

Radii  of
curvature

[9326'J

R  =  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  surface,  at  a  point  whose  coordinates  are  [9327]
w,  2,  and  in  a  plane  passing  through  the  axis  of  revolution ;

R  =  the  radius  of  curvature  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  at  the  same  [9327']
point,  and  continued  till  it  meets  the  axis  of  revolution.!

*  (4137) It  is  shown  in  [1584c],  that,  if  a,  6,  are  rectangular  coordinates  of  a  plane

curve,  whose  arc  is  s,  and  radius of  curvature  r,  we  shall  have -  = ■  , ds being [9327a]

constant  [1584c — d\. To  conform  to  the  present  notation,  we  must  put a  =  «, 6  =  m,

r  =  /2; and  then ;^  =  ^^. This  may be put  under  the  form ^  =  ^-^-(^)» [93276]

without  considering  any  differential  as  constant. If  we  now  suppose  du  to  be  constant, [9327c]
and  substitute  for  ds  its  value ±  \/dz'^-\-dijfi, we  shall  get

-  =  rb  — .</.

dz
du

Developing  this  differential,  it  becomes

l/^+S-

i

R

ddz

du^

■^2\f'

^gdlT.

as  in  [9326], neglecting  the  double  sign,  which  may  be

1  -I ) .

t  (4138)  In  the  annexed  figure  117,  which  is  similar  to
fig.  116,  we  have  OM  =  z,  MN=u  [9320] ;  we  shall
also  put  the  arc  ON==s,  and  the  differentials  of  these
quantities  are  NL=^dz,  KL  =  du,  J^K=ds.  Now
if  we  draw  ND  perpendicular  to  the  arc  NK,  and  continue
it,  to  meet  the  axis  OM,  in  D,  the  line  ND  will
represent  the  radius  R  [9327'],  and  we  shall  have,  in  the
similar  triangles  JSILK,  NMD, NL{=dz)  :  NK{=ds)  :;  NM{==u)  :  ND{~R)\

[9327d]

720  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

We  shall  now  put
[9328]  ^  ^  =  a, or g  =  iJa ;

and  then  we  shall  have  by  integration,*

dz
r9329j  " =  —  -f  2a  ,fzudu  +  constant.

du^

[9330] The integral fzudu being  supposed to  commence  with  w,  the constant
quantity  will  be  nothing. If  we  now  put

[9331]  u'=u-\ .fzudu,

the  preceding  equation  will  give  t

fig

hence R  =  u,—\ and  by  substituting ds^=^\/dz^-\-du^ [9327c,]  we  get

[9328d]

dz  dz Y  ^du2'

which  gives — , as  in  [9327'].

*  (4139) IVIuItiplying  [9324]  by  udu,  and  using  a  [9328],  it  becomes

uMz  , ' /, , dz^'
—^dz.{\^~^

[9329a]  - J!!!— ; , "-/ ^^^  ^  2a.  g«eZ«.

'--'  \ Integrating  this,  we  get  [9329],  as  is  easily  proved  by  differentiation.

t (4140) Putting  in  [9329] the  constant  quantity =0, and  muUiplying  by -,
we  get

h  —
[9332a]  /" ^u-\-'^— .fzudu,

Y ^.du^

j_2

which,  in  [9331],  is  put  =i/. Squaring  this  expression,  and  multiplying  by 1  +  tt  j  ^e  get

roooon 7.2 '^^  /Q /t i ^^^\  i  ,  , . dt^  «'^

L9di«6] 6  .-^^■=,u^.\\-\-—^y or bdz  =  u\/du^-\-dz^\ whence  we  obtain —  =  ^^_^,g
whose  square  root,  being  raultiph'ed  by  du,  gives  [9332].

X.  Suppl.  1.  -^4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 721

^  u'  .du

In the  case  of a  =  0, we shall have u'  =  u [9331], and then  from [9333]
[9332]  we  get*

2  h  —~.  I  /P Tfi  •  rApproxJmate  equation  or  equationT  rnoo  n

-^  "  yO U ,  Lofthe  spherical  surface  of  the  fluid.  J  [9334]

consequently,

The  differential  of  the  second  member  of  this  equation  is,  as  in  [93366,  c],
easily  reduced  to  the  form

d,)^—Jzudu\^^ 3^.  ^ §;^-v/6«-«^-(«''  +  2t*^)-  [9336]

*  (4141) Putting a  =  0 in [9331], we get m'  =  m; then [9332] becomes
^2;=-==, whose  integral  is  as  in  [9334]. Substituting  this  value  of  z  in —  .fzudu, rggog -i

it  becomes —  .f\2hudu  —  2udu.\/bi—u^, whose integral is as in [9335], always

completing  the  integrals  so  that  they  may  vanish  when z  =  0 and m  =  0  [9330]. By
altering  the  arrangement  of  the  terms  in  [9335],  we  have

and  its  differential  gives  [9336] ;  observing  that  the  two  portions  into  which the second
member  of  [93366]  is  divided  produce  respectively  the  two  portions  of  the  second  member [9336c]
of  [9336].

We  may  here  observe,  that  the  numerical  value  of  the  quantity a  =  -s^ [9328],  which

is  neglected  in  [9333],  is  given  in  [10308,  &:c.],  and  from  this  we  obtain -=15™' for

water;  the  radius  of  the  tube,  used  in  making  the  experiments,  being  rather  less than 1""- [9336e]
[10305,  10309]  ;  and  in  such  experiments,  we  may  consider  z,  u,  h,  as  being  less  than  a
millimetre,  which  we  shall  take  for  the  unit  of  measure. In  this  case,  a  quantity  of  the  order
oJ)zu^ or a^M^j will  be  less  than  -^-^ ;  hence  we  perceive  that  the  equation  [9334]  must [9336/*]
differ  but  very  little  from  the  truth  ;  and  this  equation  is  evidently  that  of  a  circle  whose
radius  is  h,  sine  u,  and  versed  sine  z.

If  we  suppose,  in  fig. 117,  page  719,  a  tangent OlC'  to  be  drawn  through  the  point
O,  parallel  and equal to MN, also the  line NK' parallel  and  equal to MO, so  as [9336A]
to make it similar to  fig. 112, page 695,  it will be evident that  the  volume  of  the
annulus described by  the revolution of  the  figure OK'N about  the  axis OM  will  be
represented by 'Ht  .fzudu. For the circumference described by the line NK', in [9336i]

VOL. IV.  181

[9336g]

722  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C6I.

If  we  neglect  quantities  of the  order  a^,  we  may  change  v!  [9331] into  w,
[9337] jjj  ^^  function  [9336]  ;  and  then  we  shall  have,  by  taking  the  differential  of  the
value  of  w'  [9331],*

[9338]  du  =  dv! .  (1  —  0.62)  -{-?^^.  Jt^'.  j(62-|_2w'2)  .  ^^511^2^63;,

which  gives
19839)  i^  ^  ^i^-i^^")  +  ^-^  J  5-  +  2»'^-  _JL.?  •

[9340] Now  putting u'  =  h ,  sin.^, we  shall  have  f

its  revolution  about  the  axis MO, is 2tm  ; multiplying  this  by NK'==z, and  by

r<K)3fii:l LK=du, we  get ^^c.zudu for  the  element  of  the  volume,  whose  integral  is  as  in

[9336i]. If we  suppose OiV  to  be  a  circular  arc  described  with  the  radius  b  and  the

centre  D,  the  integral 2t  .fzudu will  be  of  the  same  form  as  that  in  [9335],  and  may

be  derived  from  it,  by  merely  multiplying  [9335]  by '^  •  ~7  j which  gives

If  we  suppose the  angle  formed  by  the  vertical  line  NK',  and  the  tangent  to  the  curve
M^Wfi  1 ^^*  ^^  ^^^  point  iV,  to  be  represented  by  m,  we  shall  have  the  angle DNM=vi, and
iVM=  DN .  cos.X> A'^M; or  in  symbols u  =  b  .  cos.-bs, whence b^  —  u^=b^.  sin.^'w.
Substituting  these  values  in  [9336ZJ,  we  get

[9336«]  2^./o«^urfu  =  *.6'.|cos.2^  +  f.sin.3«-f|  ^„,_„,^

,,3  L*pl>erical  annuliu.j

[9336o]  s:e*.-^.|cos.a«4-f.sin.3«  — f|.

This  expression  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

♦  (4142) Transposing  the  last  term  of  [9331],  and  then  taking  its  differential,  we  get
[9338a] du  =  di/  —  dA^. fzudu  >. Substituting  the  differential  [9336],  and  changing  in  it  u
into  i/,  as  in  [9337],  it  becomes

19838*]  .;»  =  d^-'^°''"'f":+^^°'+?^Vpr^..(i'  +  2./'),

3u  *  ou  ^

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [9338]. Multiplying  this  by rr^^^i it  gives  the
value  of -7^=, or  dz  [9332],  as  in  [9339].

f  (4143) This  value  of  u'  gives
[9341a]  y^62  — «'3s=6.cos.d,  du' =  bdd  .cos.A,  r/^^yf^  ~  °^  •  ^'"'^  >

z.

[9343]
[9343']

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 723

-  =  rfJ.sin.5.(l— a62)  +  — -.^4.  5sin.2d ^<,  [9341]

o  3  (  C0S4  ay  L J

which  gives  by  integration,  TOiuHr

z.

7  =  (1  —  0-^^)  .  (1  —  cos.a)  +  V .  (1  —  COS.20  4-  -^  .  log.cos4  6.  [9342]

Putting  the  semi-diameter  of  the  tube  equal  to  I,  and  observing  that  this
semi-diameter  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  extreme  value  of  u,  because  the
extreme  planes  of  the  surface  of  the  segment  under  consideration  are,  as  we
have  before  shown  [9196,  &c.],  at  an  insensible  distance  from  the  tube,  we
shall  have  for  the  extreme  value*  of  u'  L  , 1

Value  of

W'  =  /  +  a  .  6^/  — I  a  .  ^  +  |a  .  ^  .  cos,^^',  [9^5^

in  which  we  have  put

$'z=the  extreme  value  0/6  near  the  side  of  the  tube;  and  this  value  is  the ra^g-i
complement of  the  angle which the  extreme  parts  of  the  curve  AOB
(fig.  116,  page  713)  make  with  the  vertical  sides  of  the  tube;\  [being
the  same  as  the  angle  90''  —  to,  in  the  notation  [9892].  [9M&]

substituting  these  in  [9339],  it  becomes

dz^bd6.s\nJ.{l-^^b^)+^f/-^.^i^  +  ^bKs\n,^d-^-^y,  [93416]

or,  by  reduction  and  dividing  by  6,

$  =  (ia.sin.d.(l-a62)-|.?^\rfa.$2sin.d.cos.d-^^^-=^|,  [9341c]

which,  by  using  [31,42',  34'],  Int.,  becomes  as  in  [9341].  Its  integral,  taken  so  as  to  vanish
when  z  =  0,  or  «  =  0,  becomes  as  in  [9342];  observing  that  w==0  gives  vf  =  Q
[9331,9330],  and  then  also 4  =  0 [9340].

*  (4144) Substituting  in  [9331]  the  value  of  the  integral  [9335],  we  get

m'  =  m  +  ^*.  |6M24-|.(62_M2)i  — |63|.  [9345a]

Now  r/  differs  from  u  [9345a]  only  by  quantities  of  the  order  a,  and  if  we  neglect  a^  we
may  put M  =  6.sin.d [9340], or {b^  —  u^y=^b.cos.d, in  the  terms  multiplied  by  a, [93455]
in the preceding value of t/; and  as  the extreme  values  of u,  6j are u==lj 6=s-6
[9343,  9346],  we  shall  have,  for  the  extreme  value  of  u,  the  expression  [9345].

t  (4145) Using  fig.  117,  page  719,  where  the  line  NDC  is  drawn  perpendicular  to
KN,  so  as to  make  NC=^b;  also CM'  and 1^'^F  perpendicular  to  the  horizontal [9346a]

724  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [MJc.  Cel.

We  then  have  for  the  extreme  value  of  u\
[9347]  u'  =  b .  sin  J'.

By  comparing  these  two  values  of  u',  we  shall  obtain,

'■ '  " sln.a' ^  5in.«' ' l.s\a.i'^' l.s\a.i' '

Value  of

b. or,  very  nearly,*

Value  of  /.I  1  r i

2; which  gives  for  the  extreme  value  ot  2;,t

near  the

[9350] z  =  Z.tang.i.^'.Jl-|«-. sin.-'a-  \  +  sT^i^  +  371^7?  '  ^^g-^^^'i^  ,

Ime  NMM';  we  shall  have,  as  in  [93326],
[93466] u!  =  b.-T^=  =  b-T^=^'Cos,KNL=b.cos.CNM'=b.sm.NCM'=h.sm.6  [9340].

[9346<;]  Hence  we  have  NCM'  =  6f  or  NKL  =  6;  so  that  6  represents  the  complement  of  the  angle
NKV,  which  the  vertical  line  KV  makes  with  the  arc  KN;  and  at  the  side  of  the  tube
where  6  becomes  6'  [9346],  this  angle  will  be  the  complement  of  the  angle  which  the  arc  KN

[93i6d]  makes  with  the  side  of  the  tube,  supposing  it  to  be  vertical ;  and  then  the  general  value  of  1/
[93465]  becomes M'  =  6.sin.d', as  in  [9347]. Putting  this  equal  to  the  value  of  1/

[9346e]  [9345],  and  then  dividing  by  sin.fl'  we  get  b  [9348].  In  the  second  supplement  [9892],
the  author  uses  the  angle  -a  instead  of  6',  supposing  -a  to  be  the  angle  formed  by  the  extreme

[9346/*]  side  of  the  curve  at  A,  with  the  line  drawn  parallel  to  J)0,  in  a  downward  direction ;  so  that
we  shall  have ^^  =  90'' — 6'.

*  (4146) Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  a,  we  get b  =  - — ^ [9348]  ;  and  if  we  neglect

terms  of  the  order  a^,  we  may  substitute  this  value  of  6  in  the  terms  of  [9348]  containing
the  factor  a;  hence  we  get  [9349].

[9350a]
[93500^

[93506]

f  (4147) We  have  in  [9342],  for  the  extreme  value  of  z,  corresponding  to  6  =  6',
2  =  6.(1— cos.^')  —  a63.(l—cos.^')+^*^-(l  —  cos.2d')+^aiMog.cos.j  a'.
Substituting,  in  the  first  term  of  this  expression,  the  value  of  b  [9349],  and  in  the  rest  of  the
terms b  =  — ; — ^ , we  get,  by  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order  a^,
—  5-L-L-^ 2 olZ3  0.13. cos  3d'-^

~  a  .  (1  -  cos.a')  £j,+i-  .(1  -  cos.2^')  .  £-,  +  Ja  .  ^  .  log.cos.^'.

X.  Suppl.  1.  -^4.] EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 725

and

/  (l-COS.3aO\>

V '* sin.sa' Jy

a.p

sin.fl'

=  tang4r,

1— co9.2^' g.sin.g^' ^

sin.26' ~ sin-V "~ '

and  by  substitution  in  [9350c],  we  get  [9350].

[9351]

Value  of
1

It  is  evident  that  these  expressions  of  z  and  t  hold  good  when  the  surface  of

the  fluid  is  convex ;  only  z  must  then  be  counted  downwards,  from  the  most [9352]

elevated  point  of  the  surface. f  _y

The  second  and  fifth terms of  these  terms,  having  the  factor ~:~J~,  > mutually  destroy

each  other ;  the  rest  may  be  arranged  in  the  following  order ;

(l-cos.^') 2iZ3.(l  — C03.3J-) (1— co8.^0 o-.P (1  — cos.2^0 JaP

Z  =  l . — ^ : •  ■  + .  ■  + •  loe.cos.ifl  . r9350c  ]

sin.^'  3.sin.V  ain-d' ' 3.sin.d' sin.8a' ^  3.sin.34' 6 ?  "■  j

Now  we  have,  as  in  [42',  1],  Int.,
1 — cos.d'

[935(W]

*  (4148) The  expression  of  b  [9349]  may  be  put  under  the  form

sin.d' I ' sin.aa \  sin.2^' /  >

Dividing  unity  by  this,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  order a^, we  get  [9351].

t  (4149) If  we  examine  the  calculation  [9328—9351],  we  shall  find  that  it  will  not  be
altered  if  we  suppose  the  surface  to  be  convex,  as  in  fig.  118,
instead  of  concave,  as  in  fig.  117,  page  719. We  may  also ^Big.llS.
consider  the  subject  in  the  following  manner : Suppose  the ^y
curvature  in  fig.  117  to  decrease  gradually  till  the  point  O
falls  in  P,  and  then  to  become  convex  as  in  fig.  118. In
this  case,  the  positive  value  of  2:  will  decrease  to  nothing,  and
then  become  negative;  the  angle NCM'  =  6 will also
decrease  to  0,  and  then  become  negative ;  and  in  the  same

— will decrease to  0,  and then
b

manner  the  quantity

become  negative. Hence  we  see  that,  when  the  surface

changes  from  concave  to  convex,  the  signs  of  the  quantities  z,6^  6',  —  or  6,  will  change;  and

by  this  means  the signs of  every  one  of  the terms,  in  both  members  of  the  equations
[9350,  9351],  will  be  changed  ;  and,  as  this  does  not  alter  the  values  of  the  equations,  we

may  suppose  the  expressions  of  z,  —  [9350,  9351],  to  conform  either  to  a  concave  or  to  a

convex  surface.  .

VOL.  IV.  182

[9351o]

[9352a]
[93526]

[9352c]
[9352c^

[9352d]
[9352*3

726  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

5.  fVe  shall  now  consider  the  capillary  tube  MNFE,  fig.  112,  page  695.
The  action  of  the  meniscus  MIOKN  to  elevate  the  fluid  of  the  canal  OZ,  is,  bj

[9353J [9260],  equal  to  -j-. If  we  put  q  for  the  elevation  of  the  point  O  above  the
level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel  ABCD,  we  shall  have,  bj  the  preceding  articles,*
[9354]  f=^9, or 9  =  J=i [9328].

Therefore,  by  substituting  for ^ its  value,  found  in  [9351],  we  shall  have
very  nearly,

EkrUioB  0  =  —  . .  <  1 .  ( 1 4  .  ^ ]  >  .

tnbo

JS^  l' To  determine  a,  we  shall  observe  that *  =  "«^ [9328],  and  we have  very
[9356] nearly, q  =  — ' ;  hence  we  get  f

[9355a]

*  (4150) The  capillary  action  at  O  is  K —  - [9254] ;  and  if  we  add  to  this  the

gravity  of  the  column  OZ,  fig.  112,  page  695,  which  is  equal  to ^  X  OZ^  we  get  the

whole  action  at  Z,  in  the  columo  OZ^  equal  to  K —  —  -\-gxOZ. In  like  manner,  from

[93556] [9259],  we  have  for  the  action  at  R  in  the  column  VR,  the  expression  K-\-gX  VR. Putting

these  two  expressions  equal  to  each  other,  because  the  columns  ought  to  balance  each  other,

[9855c] also  observing  that  OZ=Fl?  +  5, we  get K—j-\-gx{F^R-{-q)=^K-{'gXVR;

whence  we  easily  deduce —=gqj or q=—.- [9354]. Now  substituting  the  value

[9355(1] of —  [9351],  we  get  [9355]. If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  cl,  it  becomes  as  in  [9360];

[9355e] and,  by  putting 6' =90^  —  w, as  in  [9346'],  we  get  very  nearly 5=  —  .—^,  which
will  be  of  use  hereafter.

[9357a]

t  (4151) Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  a,  we  get  from  [9355] 9= — ^-^ —  ,  as  m

[9356]; hence  we  deduce a.  =  ^=— — [9357];  and if  we neglect  a*, we  may

substitute  this  value  of  a,  in  [9355],  and  then  it  will  become  as  in  [9358]. K  we  suppose

[93576] - to  be  very  small,  we  need  retain  only  the  first  term  of  q  [9358],  and  then  it  will  become

rnntrr  t  ^H.sm.fy' 1  1

L*»7c] q=^ .  — , and  by  [9359]  the  coefficient  of  -  b  constant,  so  that  q  becomes,  as  m

[9357rf]  [9360],  inversely  as  the  diameter  2/  of  the  tube.  If  we  substitute  a  =  a-*  [9323/?],  b
[9357e]  [9357],  we  get  Iq  =  a^ .  sio. 6' ;  substituting  «'  =  ^,  corresponding  to  a  glass  tube  with
[9357/] water,  or  alcohol  [9362'],  it  becomes lq  =  o^, which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

X.  Suppl.  I.  ^  5.J EQUATION  OF  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE. 727

sin.^'

iH

[93S7]

[9358]

consequently,

H  sin.*' C,  / /, . (1 — cos.'0\> rae'*»i«*  f  "rf »  *^n

— is  a  constant  quantity  [9253',  9255],  whatever  be  the  diameter  2/  of  the

^  [9359]

tube ;  and  «'  b,  as  we  have  seen  [9346,  9197],  a  quantity  independent  of  that

/  [9359q

diameter;*  moreover  if  /  is  very  small,  the  fraction - may  be  neglected  in

comparison  with  unity ;  therefore  we  shall  have  very  nearly,

H sin^'  constant  FAnroxiaule  elermtMa /l

that  is,  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  is  very  nearly  in  the  inverse  proportion  of  the
diameter  of  the  tube,  which  is  conformable  to  experiment.

[9961]

♦  (4152) We  hare  seen  in  [9346<r],  that « =  an5leiV«'jL  =  90*  — angle  J^JfF,  6g. [9359a]
117,  page  719,  suppo^ng  IT  F  to  be  a  rertical  line  drawn  parallel  to  the  inner  surface  of  the
cylindrical  tube,  and  NKza  infinitely  small  arc  uf  the  curve  sur&ce  AKNO. The  extreme
value  of  the  angle  ^  at  the  border  A  of  the  vertical  tube,  is  represented  by  6'  in  [9346],  and [9359&]
by  9(H — -e  in  [9346'J  ;  and  as  it  has  been  shown,  in  [9197],  that  this  angle c  =  90' — 6' [a359e]
b  very  nearly  coretant,  it  must  be  independent  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube,  as  in  [9359].
We  may  remark  that  the  analysis  in  ^  4,  5,  is  not  restricted  to  the  case  of  a  cylindrical  tube,
but  may  be  extended  to  any  tube  whose  inner  surface  is  a  6gure  of  revolution  about  the [9339d]
vertical  axis  z. For  example,  if  we  suppose that  the  figure  is  a  frustum  of  an  inverted
come,  whose  side  b  inclined  by  the  very  small  angle  i  to  the  vertical  axis  z;  the  angle  xs, [3359c]
which  is  fixmed  near  A,  by  the  tide  of  the  tube  and  the  tangent  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid, [935^]
will  remain  unaltered  ;  but  the  angle  which  is  included  between  the  vertical  line  and  this
tangent  will  be  augmented  by  the  angle  t,  and  will  become  t-j-"?  so  that,  instead  of  having
tj=90'— *', as  in  [9359c],  we  shall  have «-f»  =  90'— «', or S'  =  9(f—-a—i, [9559g]
always  supposing  that  S'  represents  the  extreme  value  of  the  angle  NKL  at  the  point
A. Substituting  this  value  of  6* in  the  (brtnulas  [9345,  kc.], we  shall get  the  values
cocrespoodiog  to  a  tube  of  the  form  of  an  inverted  frustum  of  a  cone,  and  by  changing  the
«gn  of  »,  we  get  the  corresponding  values  for  the  irxtsium  of  a  direct  cone. These  results [9858ifc]
may  be  extended  lo  a  capillary  tube  (brmed  by  any  figure  of  revolution  about  the  vertical
axis  Zfhy  referring  the  case  to  that  of  the  osculatory  cone  having  the  same  vertical  axis  r, [9359*  ]
and  touching  the  surface  of  the  tube  at  the  point  A^  supposing  the  side  of  this  osculatory  cone
to  form  the  angle  »  with  the  vertical  axis  z. Now  it  is  fcxiod  by  experiment,  that,  if  water, [93591:]
tieabcA,  lie.,  be  derated  b  a  gla»  capillary  tube,  we  shall  have w:=0 [9631,  9743,  Sic.],
and  tbeo the  general  value  of «'=.90'  — xs  —  i [9359^],  will become 6'=^90*^i, [«K9*1

T28^  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

To  estimate the degree of  approximation  which we  obtain by putting

[9362] q  =  —  ,  — — [9360], we  shall  suppose 6'  to  be  equal  to  a  quarter  of  the

[9362'] circumference,  lohich  appears  to  be  the  case  with  water  or  alcohol  in  a  glass

[9.363] capillary  tube ;  the  term  which  we  then  neglect  is* ^q» ^^ — ^'Y' ^^

we  suppose  /  to  be  equal  to  a  millimetre,  or  the  diameter  of  the  tube  equal  to

two  millimetres,  we  shall  have  by  observation,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter  [9675],

[9364] relative to  water  in  a  glass tube, q  =  6"'',784 ; consequently  the  fraction

[9365] — then  becomes  ; therefore  it  may  be  neglected  in  comparison  with

unity. In  a  tube  of  less  diameter,  this  fraction  decreases  in  proportion  to  the
[9366] square  off  /,  because  q  varies  inversely  as  /. Hence  we  see  that,  in  a  capillary

[9359Z] Substituting  this  in  [9351],  and  neglecting  the  very  small  terms  depending  on  a,  we  get

1  COSal

[9359»»] -  =  — -^ ,  or b  =  l.  secant  *,  nearly ;  so  that,  if  we  suppose  /  to  be  given,  we  shall  find  that,

as  i  increases,  the  radius  of  curvature b of  the  surface  will increase ; consequently the

[9359n] curvature  of  the  surface  will  decrease. When i=0, the  formula  [9359»i]  gives b  =  l,

and  the  surface  is  nearly  of  the  form  of  a  concave  hemisphere. When i  =  90^f we  shall

[93590] have 4'  =  0 [9359A/] ;  then z  =  0 [9350], ~0 [9351],  and  the  surface ON  A

will  be  nearly  horizontal. If  i exceed 90"^,  the  expression  of  b [9359m]  will  become

^^ negative,  and  the  surface  convex;  moreover  as  i  increases,  the  convexity  will  increase,  till

[9359^] ^^==180'*, and  then b  =  —  / nearly  [9359/n],  so  that  the  surface  becomes a  convex

hemisphere  nearly.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  treat  of  a  case  of  this  kind  in  [10012a,  &c.],
l^  ^^J where  the  fluid  is  supposed  to  flow  over  the  top  of  a  capillary  tube.

[9363a]

*  (4153) The  part  of  q  [9358],  neglected  in  [9360],  is

_H.8m.d' C_J_ /j__2 (1— co3.3dO\  >
gl 'tq-sin.d'\ ^' Bin.2^' />'

and,  by  putting for  the factor -  ' ' its  approximate value q  [9360],  it becomes

[93636] _-i^,.('i_j.(!r:£^);  and  since  «'  =  90< [9362] makes  l_J.(l=^)  =  i,
sm.6 \  sin.24' / '  I-  ■■  •* sin.^a'

[9363c] this  part  becomes  simply — -=  —  9 -IT [9363];  and,  by  using  q  [9364], it  changes

q

OQ  oro  > SO  that  the  part  of  q,  neglected  in  [9360],  is  about  one  twentieth  part.

9
mto —

f  (4154) The  chief  term  of  5'  [9360]  is  the  same  as  the  first  term,  or  first  factor,  of  the
f9366a1 S^"^'"^^  value  of  5  [9355];  and  the  remaining  terms  of  q  [9355],  which  are  neglected  in
[9360],  have  the  factor  1%  contained  in  the  part  between  the  braces,  as  in  [9365].

X.  Suppl.l.  <§,5.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  CAPILLARY  TUBE.  729

tube,  we  may  suppose,  without  any  sensible  error,  as  in  [9360],

constant  | Approximate  value  of  the  ele- |

n  = — ;  yation of  a  fluid in  a  capil-  [93671

4ii  I lary  tube  whose  radius  is  t. I  •■  -■

that  is,  the  height  of  the  fluid  above  the  level  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter  \-^^^^^

of  the  tube. - .  S^

If  the  surface  of  the  fluid  within  the  tube  be  convex^  we  may  suppose,  as  Ammeter

before,  that  an  infinitely  narrow  canal  is  drawn  through  the  axis  of  the  tube,  ^"''^*
then  bent  under  it,  and  finally  turned  upwards,  till  it  comes  to  the  surface  of  the
fluid  contained  in  the  vessel. In  this  case,  the  action  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube

upon  the  included  canal  will  be,  by  [9276],  equal  to K-{-~. The  action [9370]

of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel  upon  the  outer  branch  of  the  canal,  will  be  equal  to
K  [9259]. But  if  we  put  q  for  the  elevation  of  the  exterior  fluid  above  the [9371]
fluid  in  the  interior  branch  of  the  canal,  we  must  add  to  the  action  K  the
weighty  9;*  therefore  we  shall  have,  by  the  condition  of  the  equilibrium  of  the [9371']

*  (4155) Proceeding  as  in  [9355ct,  Sic]  for  a  concave  surface,  we  must add  to  the

quantities ^4-^, and  ^  [9370,  9371],  the  values  ^X  OZ, 5- X  FJR, fig.  112,  page t9372a]

695,  representing  respectively  the  gravities  of  the  columns  O  Z,  VR\  and  as  these  sums

must  be  equal  to  each  other,  we  shall  have ■K'+ -  -\- gX  OZ^K-\-gX  VR. Now  in [93726]

this  case,  the  fluid  in  the  tube  is  depressed  by  the  quantity  q  [9371],  so  that  VR=q  -j-  OZ;
and  by  substituting  it  in  the  preceding  expression,  we  get

K+"  +  gXOZ  =  K-i-gq-i-gXOZ.  [9372c]

If  we  reject gX  OZ  from  both  members,  it  becomes  as  in  [9372] ;  and  if  we  also  reject

K,  and  divide  by  g^  we  shall  obtain  q  [9373],  which  is  of  the  same  form  as [9354]. Now [9372rf]

substituting  - [9351],  it  becomes  as  in  [9355],  which  may  be  easily  reduced  to  the  fprm

[9358],  agreeing  with  that  in  [9374] :  finally,  an  approximate  expression  of  this  equation  maybe
obtained,  by  retaining  only  the  first  or  most  important  terni  of  its  second  member,  as  in  [9379]. [9372c]
We  have  supposed,  in [9372a],  that  the  density  of  the  fluid  is  1;  but  if  its  density  be  D,  we
must  change  g  into  gD,  in  [9372«],  to  get  the  gravities  of  the  columns  OZ,  VR,  and  the [9372e']
same  change  must  be  made  in  the  rest  of  the  calculations.

When  the  fluid  is  water  or  alcohol,  which completely wets  the  tube,  the  surface  of  the
water  in  the  tube  becomes  hemispherical  [9216,  &.c.]  ;  and  then  we  have ^'  =  90''  [9346], [9372/]
consequently cosJ'  =  0, sin.d'=l. Substituting  these  in  the  expression  of  the  elevation

or  depression  q  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  [9358  or  9374],  it  becomes 9  =  ~,-  )^  —  ^'qy ^ ^^

VOL.  IV.  183

730

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9372J

[9373]

[9374]

Depres-
■ion  9  in  a
tube

whose  ra-
dios is  I.

fluid  contained  in  the  canal,

which  gives

consequently

K+gq  =  K+^,
H

H sirU' C Z_ /  (l-cos.3^0\

[9372g']
[9372A]

[9372t ]

[9372jfc]
[93721]

H

If  we  put,  as  in  [9323o], -

we  shall get 9'  =  7  —  T"  >

I

or q

2

?=-3'

[9372n]
[9372o]

[9372p]

[9372^]

[9372r]
[9372*]

whence q:=—.jl-\-  \  y^  1  —  ^  ,  _.  C  j and,  by  developing  it  according  to  the  powers  of
—  , neglecting  terras  of  the  order —  , on  account  of  their  smallness,  we  shall  obtain

9  =  T-il-

L  11

9  *a2'

M.  Poisson  has  computed  from  the  fundamental  equation  [9324],  or  rather  from  the
equivalent  equation  [93235'],  a  formula  similar  to  [9372i]  ;  and  if  we  change  his  symbol  h
into  q,  and  a  into  I,  substituting  also  ^(hyp.log.4 — 1)  =  0,129,  to  conform  to  the
present  notation,  the  formula  given  in  page  112  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  8fC.,  will  become

q=j—^i+o,

129.

^3

Comparing  the  formulas  [9372?*,  Z],  we  find  that  the  two  first  terras  agree,  but  the  third  term,

P

[9372jn] which  is  of  the  order  —  ,  differs,  as  might  be  expected,  because  La  Place  avowedly  neglects

terms  of  that  order,  which  are  extremely  small ;  as  appears  from  the  experiments  of  Gay-
Lussac,  quoted  by  M.  Poisson  in  his  work,  and  also  by  La  Place  in  [10303 — 1031 1].  For
we  have  in  the  first  experiment  [10305,  &z.c.],  9  =  23™-,1634,  Z^O^-,6472;  and  from  this
]VI.  Poisson  deduces  the  value  of  a^=  15,1299  square  millimetres,  or  a  =  3™',88972.  In
a  second  experiment  of  Gay-Lussac,  the  radius  of  the  tube  was  Z=0™,9519  [10309];
with  this  and  the  preceding  value  of  a,  M.  Poisson  computes  from  the  formula  [9372ZJ
q  =  15™-,5829.  A  similar  process  with  the  formula  of  La  Place  [9372A],  gives  ^=  15™-,5729
nearly.  The  actual  elevation  found  by  Gay-Lussac  was  15™-,5861  [10310],  agreeing
remarkably  well  with  these  calculations.  The  difference  between  the  observation  and  either
of  the  calculations  is  far  within  the  limits  of  the  errors  to  which  such  observations  are  liable;
because  they  sometimes  differ  very  much  from  each  other,  as  is  shown  in  [10322a — g,  he.].
If  we  use  the  preceding  values /=  0'"'-,6472, a  =  3™, 88972, we  shall  get,  for  the  third

term  of  M.  Poisson's  formula  [9372Z],  the  expression 0,129 .  —  =  0'"'-,0023  ;  and  for  that

of  La  Place's  formula  [9372^], —  - .  —  =

0'"',00]9; now  terms  of  this  order  may  be

X.  Suppl.l.  '^S.] ELEVATION  OF, A  FLUID  IN  A  CAPILLARY  TUBE.  731

Hence  it  follows,  that,  in  verj  slender  tubes,  the  depression  q  of  the  fluid  ivithin

the  tube  below  the  level  of  the  exterior  fluid,  is  inversely  proportional  to  the [^^^^1

diameter  of  the  tube 21, which  is  confirmed  by  experiment.

If  the  tube  be  inclined  to  the  horizon,  the  surface  of  the  included  fluid  ivill  be

very  nearly  the  same  as  if  the  tube  were  vertical ;  it  will  be,  in  both  cases,  very '■ ^

nearly  that  of  a  spherical  segment  whose  axis  is  that  of  the  tube ;  because  the

action  of  gravity  only  introduces  into  the  result  of  the  calculation  some  terms

.  [93771

multiplied  by  *  a ;  and  we  have  just  seen,  that,  with  very  slender  tubes,  these

considered  as  wholly  undeserving  of  notice  in  experiments  of  this  nature,  where  the  errors  of
the  observation  may  amount  to  several  millimetres.  Hence  we  may  conclude  that  it  is
wholly  unnecessary  to  carry  on  the  development  farther  than  La  Place  has  done,  and  we
may  therefore  restrict  ourselves  to  the  deg,ree  of  accuracy  he  has  attained  in  the  formulas
[9358,  9374] ;  and  instead  of  the  formula  [9372i'],  we  may  write  simply,

q=^J  —  ih  [93721,]

for  the  elevation  of  a  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  whose  radius  is  I. If  we  correct  the  observed
elevation  q,  by  adding  to  it  one  third  of  the  radius  of  the  tube  /,  and  call  the  corrected  value '• •'
q^,  we  shall  have,  from  [9372»],  ?/

q^z:sq-{-}l=-  .  [93721]

Multiplying  this  by  21,  and  resubstituting a^=sar^  [9323p],  we  get  [9372ar^

2

-  =  2a^  =  2Zg'^=  (the  diameter  of  the  tube)  X  (by  the  corrected  elevation  q^).  [937%]

H  H

If  we  substitute o?=i— [9372o-'] in [93720?],  it  becomes gf-f-^/=-^, the  density

being  1;  but  if  we  suppose,  the  density  to  be  D,  we  must  change  g  into  gD^  as  in  [9372e'],

IT

and  we  shall  have o  +  ^Z  =s  — —  , or
■*  gDl

-D.(?4-iO=^;  [9372Z]

the  same  change  of  g  into  g  D  being  made  in  [9323p],  we  shall  get

H=—=gDa^.  [9372zf]

These  formulas  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

*  (4156) If  the  tube  be  inclined  to  the horizon  by  the  angle V,  as  in  [9467],  the [9379a]
effect  will  be  to  resolve  the  vertical  gravity gz [93156],  into gz. sin.V, in  the  direction
of  the axis of  the tube z; and  this  will  change g into ^g-.sin.F, in the equations ^ J

[9315,  9318,  he.];  so  that  the  term -^ , in  the  second  member  of  [9318],  will  be  changed

732

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Ctl.

[9378]

[9379]

[9380]

Elevation
between
two  cylin-
drical sur-
faces.

[9381]

[9382]

terms  may  be  neglected.  Therefore,  putting  q  for  the  vertical  height  of  the
fluid  above  the  level,  or  its  depression  below  the  level,  we  shall  always  have,  from
[9360,  9374,  9375],

H  sinJ'
g

I

[Approximate  elevation  |
or  depression  9,  in  a  I
tube  wliose  radiua  is  /. I

which  agrees  with  observation.

6.  We  may  extend  the  preceding  analysis  to  the  case  in  which  a  cylindrical  tube
has  a  cylinder  of  the  same  matter  inserted  within  it,  both  having  the  same  axis.
The  fluid  will  rise  in  the  space  included  between  the  inner  sides  of  the  tube  and
the  outer  surface  of  the  cylinder;  and,  if  this  space  is  capillary,  we  may  determine
the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  included  fluid  in  the  following  manner.

2

We shall  resume  the  differential  equation [9324]. The term - of  its

second  member  here  denotes  the  sum  of  two  fractions  [9325'],  which  have  each
unity  for  a  numerator,  and  for  a  denominator  the  greatest  or  the  least  of  the
radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  at  the  lowest  point,  which  is  the
origin  of*  2;  this  equation  gives  by  integration,  as  in  [9329],

[9379c]
[9379rf]

into -— .sm.  K,

n

or ~  —  -^.(1  —  sin.F').2;; consequently  that  second  member  will  be
H H

2g

decreased  by  the  term -^.(1 — s\n.V).z,

or

2a. (1  — sin. r). 2?  [932S],  of  the  order

a,  as  in  [9377] ;  and  we  have  seen,  in  [9365,  9336^/,  &.c.],  that  terras  of  this  kind  are  so
small,  that  they  have  but  very  little  effect  on  the  result.

[9383a]

[93836]
[9383c]

[9383rf]

[9383d']

*  (4157)  Let  PqRG,  fig.  119,  be  the  tube,  LMNE  the
cylinder,  KD  their  common  axis,  N'N^OM'  the  surface  of  the
fluid  between  tlie  tube  and  cylinder,  O  its  lowest  point,  and  N^
any  other  point  corresponding  to  the  coordinates  z,  u.  These
coordinates  are  found  in  the  figure  by  drawing  O  C,  J^,B,
perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  the  tube  KD;  and  then  we  have
CB  =  z,  BN=u,  BE=I,  DG  =  r  [9385,  9388.]
Through  J\^  draw  the  radius  JVC,  perpendicular  to  the  surface
at  the  point  N^,  and  continue  it  till  it  meet,  in  C,  the  line  FOC,
drawn  through  O  parallel  to  the  axis  DK.  Then  the  angle  N^C'0  =  d  represents  the
acute  angle  which  the  small  arc  N^K'  makes  with  either  of  the  horizontal  lines  jBiV,  K'L' ;
the  similar  angle  at  ihe  side  of  the  lube  at  N\  or  at  the  cylinder  M',  being  denoted  by  6',
in  conformity  with  the  symbols  adopted  in  [9346,  932Sa,  6]. Now  if  we  take  the  infinitely

X.  Suppl.l.  ^6.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  TUBES.  733

dz

dU  fT% r 1  "^ I  I  Equation  of  the  surface I

%iO.  . ZUaU  =  —  +  constant.  of  a  fluid  between  two  [93831

rfz2  '^  b '  I cylinders.  >■  ^

~rfu2

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  observe  that,  at  the  point  where

the  fluid  touches  the  surface  of  the  cylinder,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9383^],  ^ ^

small  arc  N^K\ and  draw  N^U,  UK',  respectively  parallel  to  OC,  OCjWe  shall  have [9383e]
the angle NK'L'=:JS.C'0=:6, and  its  sine  is  represented  by , ."^' ==; but

JVi'  dz  [9383/]

tang.d  =  -r/^, JSL'=:dz, LK'==  —  du; hence tang.d  =  —  —  ; consequently
IjJL  du

dz

_  sin.d  = ,^" ■ ,  [9383g]

y ^T rf«2

[9383A]

and  at  the  point  N',  where  6  changes  into  6',  this  becomes  as  in  [9384].

We  shall  now  suppose  that  b  represents  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  arc  M'ON'  at  its
lowest  point  O ;  and  b'  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  arc  drawn  through  O,  perpendicular
to  the  plane  of  the  figure ;  then  we  shall  have  for  the  terms  depending  on  b,  b',  in  the  second

member  of  the  differential  equation  of  the  surface  [9318],  the quantity T  +  r;* If  we [9383t]

suppose  these  radii  to  be  equal  to  each  other,  and  to  a  quantity  which,  for  distinction,  we  shall

112

denote by b,  we shall have, 6  =  6'=b, and --|--  =  -, as  in  [9325];  and  this [9383ft]

2

expression - is  used  in  the  reduced  form  of  the  differential  equation  of  the  surface  [9324] . [9383Z]

Therefore,  if  we  wish  to  apply  the  equation  [9324]  to  the  present  problem,  where  b,  b',  have [9383m]

2  1]

different  values,  we  must  change - into 7  +  7;  5 observing  that,  to  avoid  confusion  in  the

^  *  .  [9383n]

symbols,  we  have  inserted  the  symbol b in  [9381 — 9404],  instead  of  6,  which  is  used  by

the  author. Now  the  surface  of  the  fluid  being  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the  curve

M'ON'  about  the  axis  DZ,  the  point  O  must  describe  a  horizontal  circle;  hence  it  is

1 2

evident  that  the  radius b'=  oo  ; substituting  this  in  the  equation  [9383Z^],  we  get ^  =  gj [9383o]

or b  =  26  ; which  expresses  the  value  of  b, to  be  used  in  all  the  formulas  where  it  occurs [9383p]
in  [9381 — 9404]. If  we  now  substitute  the  expression  of  the  first  member  of  [9384] in [9383^]

[9383],  we  shall  get — w.sin.^' — 2a .y^M^^M  =— -|- constant, the  integral  being  supposed  to [9383r]

commence,  as  in  [9385,  9383'j,  at  the  point  where  the  fluid  touches  the  tube ;  then,  putting,
as  in  [9385], u  =  l, we  get  the  value  of  the  constant  quantity  [9386],  and  by  substituting [9383*]
it  in  the  formula  [9383],  we  finally  obtain  [9387].
VOL.  IV.  184

[9389]

[9391]

734  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

dz

du  . .,

[9384]  • / ^2  =  "  S*"-^  '

. dz .
the  negative  sign  being  prefixed  to sin.^', because at that point — is  a

[9385] negative  quantity. If  we  commence  the  integral  fzudu  at  that  point,  and  put

I- I  for  the  radius  of  the  cylinder,  or  the  value  of  u  at  that point, vv^e  shall

have

/a

[9386]  constant  =  —  Z .  sin.^ ' —  t-  ,

b

which  gives

dz

[9387]  •  —  20.  .fzudu  =  — / .  sin.d '.

[9388] We  shall  at  first  suppose  that a  =  0 ; and  we  shall  put  V  for  the  radius  of
I'' the  inner  surface  of  the  tube ;  V  will  be  the  value  of  u  at  the  point  where  the
fluid  touches  the  side  of  the  tube. At  this  point  we  have  *

dz

du  . .

^du^

=  sm.«

therefore,  at  this  point,  we  shall  have
which  gives

^9390]  i'^  sin.^'  =  ^—^  —  I .  sin.^' ,

b

1  _  sin. a'
This  being  premised,  we  shall  have  f

*  (4158) This  is  the  same  as  [9384],  except  in  its  sign,  which  is  taken  positive,  because

[9389a] dz,  du,  are  both  positive  on  the  arc  OM',  or  near  the  point  M'. Multiplying  this  by  the

value  of  u  near  the  point  M,  namely  /', and  substituting  the  result  in [9387],  we  get

[9390],  by  neglecting  a,  as  in  [9388]. Transposing the  last  term  of  [9390],  we  get

[93896] (r+?).sin.d'=^^^^;  dividing  by I'^—P, or (^  +  Z).(/'  — Z), we  get  [9391].

t  (4159) Neglecting  the  term  of  [9387]  depending  on  a,  substituting - [9391],  and

/ rfzsx
[9392a] reducing,  it  becomes  as  in  [9392]. Squaring  this,  and  multiplying  by {V — O^-^  +  rfi^a)'

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§>6.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  TUBES.  735

dz

'^'dii  (u'—lV) . ,
—  ^  ^ .  sin.^

d^ I'—l

whence  we  deduce

V/(r— /)-.  w^— K— Z/')^-  sin.^^  '
an  equation  whose  integral  depends  on  the  rectification  of  a  conic  section.
If  we  do  not  suppose  a  =  0,  we  shall  have  *

1 sin.d'  2a  _ ,

[9392]

dz—  {u^~U').du.s\n.d'  ^9393^

[9394]

the  integral  fzudu being  taken  from u  =  l  to w  =  /';  we  also  have  f  [^395]

fzudu  =  \u^z  —  i  .fuHz.  [9396]

If  we  neglect  quantities  of  the  order  a,  we  may  substitute  the  value  of  dz
[9393]  in  the  second  member  of  [9396],  and  we  shall  get

we  easily  get  dz^,  whose  square  root  gives  dz  [9393],  which  is  of  the  form

V/a'4-/«2-j-£'tt4>

treated  of  by  Le  Gendre  in  Vol.  I.,  page  3  or  4,  of  his  Fonctions  EUiptiques,  where  it  is  shown
to  be  dependent  on  the  rectification  of  the  conic  sections ;  but  as  this  integral  is  not  required  in
the  course  of  the  work,  it  was  thought  to  be  unnecessary  to  enter  into  the  details  of  the
reductions,  which  have  no  other  difficulty  than  the  mere  labor  of  the  computations.

[93926]

[9392c]

*  (4160) By  neglecting  a,  as  in  [9388],  we  have  reduced  the  first  member  of  [9390]
to  the  form r.s'm.6' [9390] ;  if  we  now  retain  the  term — 2a..fzudu [9387],  the  equation

I'z—l^  .  ... [9394a]

[9390] becomes Z'.sin.^' — 2o/zudu  =  — Z.sin.^'. Transposing  Z.sin.^',  and  dividing

by Z'2 — p^ QY Q'^i'^^Q' — I'j^ it  becomes  as  in  [9394],  or,  as  it  may  be  written,

1 sin.d' C,  2a  - -  >

I  (4161) Integrating  zudu  by  parts,  we  obtain  [9396],  as  is  easily  seen  by  differentiation;
substituting  in  this  equation  the  value  of  dz [9393],  we  get  [9397]  ;  multiplying  this  by

2a  .  [9398o]

and  substituting  the  product  in  [9394], it  becomes  as  m [9398],  the

constant  quantity sin.^', in  the  numerator,  being  brought  from  under  the  sign  of  integration.

This  expression  of  - [9398]  is  evidently  correct  in  terms  of  the  order  a;  and  by  neglecting ^9398^-1

terms  of  that  order,  it  becomes  as  in  [9401].

[9399]

736  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Ctl.

. , _  1 2 f  {u^—ll').du.smy  J ^ {u^—n').u'^du.sm.6'

[9397] JZU  u  —  ^U  J ^^^,_^^2j^2_(^2_;/')2.sin.2^' ""  ^  '7  v/(/'— /j^.u^— (m^— tt')2.sin.2a'  *

Therefore  we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order  o.^,

[93981 -  =  — '  5l__^ fi'  [v^-mdu  g ^i>  {u'i-a').uMu

h I'—l'l [I'J^l)  'J  I-  \/{l'—lf.vSi—{vfi—ll'f.sm.^&'  "^  (Z'4-/)  '-'^  v/(r— i)2.u2— {u2_tt'p.flin  2^'  *

These  integrals  can  be  determined  by  approximation  only ;  but  it  will  suffice
here  to  observe  that,  a  being  very  small,  when  the  distance  between  the  tube
and  cylinder  is  very  small,  we  may,  without  any  sensible  error,  neglect  the
[9400]  terms  multiplied  by  a,  as  we  have  seen  in  [9359',  9366,  &c.],  that  it  may  be
done  in  a  very  narrow  tube. Then  we  shall  have  very  nearly,

7.  We  shall  now  suppose  that  cui  infinitely  narrow  canal  is  drawn  through
the  lowest  point  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  included  within  the  capillary  space,
parallel  to  the  axis  of  the  tube,  and  passing  below  it,  and  then  is  bent  upwards  till
it  meets  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  which  the  tube  is  dipped. The  action  of  the

H  2

[9403] included  fluid  upon  the  canal,  will  be  * K —  — ; because - being,  by  what

has  been  said  in  [9381],  the  sum  of  the  two  fractions  which  have  unity  for  a
numerator,  and  for  denominators  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature

of  the  surface  at  its  lowest  point,  the  action  of  the  included  fluid  will  be,  by

2

[94041 the  theorem  [9294,  9294'], K — i^-r- Therefore  this  action  will  be,  by

the  preceding  article  [9401],

[9405]  K- -^•^^"•^'

[9402]

I'— I

2  11

*  (4162) The  term ■- [9324,  9325], is  equivalent  to,  and  used  instead of, T  +  r;

[9383n] ;  b  and  h'  being,  as  in  [9383A] ,  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  ;  so  that

the  action  of  the  fluid  between  the  tube  and  cylinder  is,  as  in  [9315&], K —  ^^'iz  "f" z) >
or,  according  to  the  present  notation  [9381],

[94036 J  K  —  ^H.-, or -K"— -,

[9403c] as  in  [9403,9404]. Substituting  the  value  of  ^ [9401],  it  becomes  as  in  [9405]. We

may  remark  that  the  canal  spoken  of  in  [9402,  &c.]  is  similar  to  that  which  is  explained  by
fig.  112,  page  695,  to  which  we  may  refer  for  illustration.

X.  Suppl.  1.  «§.7.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  TUBES.

737

If  we  put  q'  for  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  interior  branch  of  the  canal,
above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel,  and  add  gq'  to  the  preceding  action,
the  sum  will  be  in  equilibrium  with  the  action  K  oi  the  fluid  in  the  vessel  upon
the  canal ;  therefore  we  shall  have  *

which  gives

JH"  sinJ'
J'l^l'

[Elevation  q'  of  a  fluid  between
two  cylindrical  surfaces,  whose
radii  are  I',  L

]

We  have  found,  in  [9379],  that  the  elevation  of  a  fluid  above  its  level,  in  a
tube  whose  radius  is  l' — /,  is  equal  to  this  value  of  q' ;  therefore  the  fluid
ascends  in  the  capillary  space  to  the  same  height  as  in  a  tube  whose  radius  is
equal  to  the  width  of  that  space.

If  the  surface  of  the  fluid  be  convex,  the  preceding  expression  of  q'  [9409]
will  denote  the  depression  of  the  fluid  below  the  level,  and  the  fluid  will  then  sink
in  the  capillary  space,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  a  tube  whose  radius  is  equal  to
the  width  of  that  space.-f

[9406]
[9407]

[9408]

[9409]

Elevation
of  a  fluid
between
two  cylin-
drical sur-
faces.

[9410]

[9411]

* (4163) The  calculation  in  [9408]  is  made  in  the  same  manner  as  for  a  tube  in
[9355a,  &.C.],  and  requires  no  particular  explanation. From  this  we  easily  deduce  the  value [9408a]
of  q'  [9409].

t  (4164)  This  will  be  evident  by  making  the  calculation  in  like  manner  as  in  [9372 — 9409J,
the  effect  being  merely  to  change  the  signs  of  q',6',  as  in  [9352d,  he],  which  does  not  alter
the  value  of  q'  [9409].  Therefore  the  elevation  q'  of  the  fluid  when  the  surface  is  concave,
or  its  depression  when  the  surface  is  convex,  is  given  very  nearly  by  the  formula  [9409],
being,  as  in  [9410],  the  same  as  the  elevation  or  depression  in  a  tube  ivhose  radius  is  equal  to
the  width  of  the  capillary  space  M'N',  fig.  119,  page  732.  In  all  the  calculations  of  <§>  6,  7
[9380 — 9412],  it  is  supposed  that  the  tube  and  cylinder  are  of  the  same  substance,  or  that
the  angle  6'  [9346]  is  the  same  for  both  of  them  ;  so  that  the  fluid  is  either  elevated  by  the
combined  action  of  the  tube  and  cylinder,  or  is  depressed  by  the  combined  action  of  both  of
them.  In  this  case,  if  the  distance  M'JS'  or  EG  be  small  in  comparison  with  a,  the  section
of  the  surface  M'ON'  may  be  supposed  to  coincide  very  nearly  with  the  circle  of  curvature
at  the  point  O,  whose  radius  is  b,  as  in  the  similar  case  [9336^]  relative  to  the  surface  in
a  capillary  tube,  as  is  evident  from  the  equation  [9401].  For  if  we  put  for  brevity
V — Z=2X,  and  substitute  b  =  26  [9383/?]  in  [9401],  we  shall  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,
6.sin.^'=X;  which  gives  the  same  expression  of  X  as  would  be  found  if  we  were  to
suppose  M'ON'  to  be  a  circular  arc,  described  with  the  radius  C'0  =  b,  making  the
angle OC'JS'=  OC'M'=6', and  its  sine EF=FG  =  -k.

Instead  of  supposing  the  angle  6'  to  be  the  same  at  the  points  JS'  and  M',  we  shall  now

VOL.  IV.  185

[9410a]
[94106]

[9410c]

[9410rf]
[9410e]

[9410/]
[9410g-]

[9il0h]
[94l0t"]

738  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

If  we  suppose  the  radii  of  the  tube  and  cylinder  to  he  infinite,  ice  shall  obtain

the  result  of  the  capillary  action  upon  a  fluid  between  two  vertical  and  parallel

[9412] planes  situated  very  near  to  each  other;  therefore  the  preceding  theorem  holds

good  in  this  case. We  shall,  however,  investigate  this  theorem,  in  the  following

article,  by  a  particular  analysis.

8.  We  shall  suppose,  in  fig.  116,  page  713,  that  AOB  is  the  section  of  the
surface  of  the  fluid  included  between  the  two  planes,  by  a  vertical  plane  drawn

[9410A] take  6'  for  its  value  at  the  point  N',  and  ^^  for  the  corresponding  angle  at  the  point  M';

putting  also  EF=u',  FG  =  u^,  m'-}-w^=2X,  and  considering  M'ON'  as  a  circular  arc

whose  radius  is  h,  as  in  [941  Og-]. Then  we  shall  have,  in  the  same  hypothesis  relative  to

the  nature  of  the  fluids,  as  in  [9410e],
19410m]  u'=h.s\n.&',  M^=6.sin.5^,  m'  +  m^=2X;

so  that,  if  2X,  5',  &^,  are  given,  we  may  determine  the  values  of  h,  u',  u^. If  we  suppose
[9410n] ^'=^^=90"^, the  equations  [941  Om]  will  give u'=.u^=b=\, which  correspond  to  the

actual  form  of  the  figure 1 1 9,  where  the  extreme  points  M',  N',  appear  to  be  upon  the
[9410o] horizontal line  M'C N', passing through  the  centre C  of  the  circular  arc. We  may,

finally,  remark  that  the  equations  [9410m]  are  similar  to  those  which  are  given  by  M.  Poisson,

in  page  114  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  S^c.
rQiiOiT  These calculations are limited to the case  where  the  fluid is acted upon by both

surfaces in the same manner; but  it  may  happen,  when the  tube  and cylinder are of
[9410^] different  substances,  that  the  fluid  may  be  elevated  near  one  of  the  surfaces,  and  depressed

near  the  other,  so  that  there  may  be  a  point  of  inflexion  of  the  surface,  as  is  observed  between

two  parallel  planes  in  [10158,  &c.]. In the case of  two parallel planes, the surface
[9410*] may  be  concave  in  one  part  NQO,  fig.  112,  page  695,  and  convex  in  the  other  part  OM',

the  point  of  inflexion  being O,  which,  we  shall  soon  see,  is  on  a  level  with  the  fluid  in  the

vessel  AVB\  the  point  O  falling  in  H',  the  fluid  being  elevated  above  this  level  in  the
[9410*  ] part  ON,  and  depressed  below  the  level in  the  part  OM'. For  the  capillary  action,  at

any  point  O  of  the  concave  surface  NOO,  will  be  represented,  as  in  [9294,  9294'J,  by

[9410u] K  —  ^H.i-  +  - ) ; y  and  h  being  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  corresponding

to  that  point;  and  we  shall  evidently  have,  as  in  [9383o],  &'=od  ;  so  that  this  force  becomes

H  ff

K — — •, instead  of  K —  7, which  is  used  in  [9355a]  ;  and  if  we  make  the  calculation  as
[9410i>] , ^  *

in  [9355a — c],  we  must  change  h  into  26,  to  conform  to  this  alteration  in  the  expression  of

the  capillary  action. By  this  means  the  expression  of  q [9354],  or 5^'  in  the  present

HI  H

[9410t«] notation, becomes §-'=—.  —  ; and  by  putting,  as  in  [9323o], -—:=a^,  we shall get

[9410z] j'==— ■. This  value  of  q'  expresses  the  elevation QO^  of  the  fluid  in  the  concave  part
iVO  of  the  capillary  surface,  above  the  level  A  VB  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel;  it  becomes

X.  Suppl.  1.  ^8.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.

739

perpendicular  to  these  two  planes ;  if  we  put  OM==z,  NM=y,  z  will  be
a  function  of  y  only.  Moreover,  h  and  h'  being  the  greatest  and  the  least
radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  at  the  lowest  point  O  [9316],
h  will  he  infinite^  and  h'  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve  AOB,  at  the
point  O.  Hence  we  shall  have,  in  the  equations  of  partial  differentials  *
[9312,  9313],

dz\  „  _  /ddz\  1

P  =  (l)  =  o.

q  =

dy.

r  =  0, s  =  0,

t  =

dy-

[9413']

Elevation
of  a  fluid
between
two  paral-
lel planes.

[9414]

=  0; [9415]

negative  in  the  convex  part  OM'  [9411,  &c.] ;  and  we  may  in  both  cases  use  the  same
expression  of q'=— [9410a;] ;  considering  the  radius  of  curvature  b  to  be  positive  in  the

[94%]

[9410z]

concave  part  of  the  surface  NO,  and  negative  in  the  convex  part  OM'. If  we  suppose  the
radius  of  curvature  b,  corresponding  to  the  point  O,  to  become  infinite,  we  shall' have  from
[9410x'] q'=0, or HO  =  0; so  that  the  point  O  will  then  fall  to  the  level  AVB  of [9411a]
the  fluid  in  the  vessel;  and O  will  be  a  point  of  inflexion,  because  it  is  the  part  which [94116]
separates  the  positive  from  the  negative  values  of  the  radii  of  curvature;  or,  in  other  words,  it
is  the  part  which  separates  the  concave  part  NO  from  the  convex  part  OM'  \  this  agrees [9411c]
with  what  we  have  stated  above  in  [9410s,  &c.].

*  (4165) As  z  does  not  contain  x  [9413'],  the  values  of  p,  r,  s  [9312,  9313],  must
vanish,  and  those  of  q,  t  [9312,  9313], become q  =  (f). ^=(^2)* Substituting [9415o]

these  and 4  =  0, also §==«• [9328],  in  [9318],  we  get  [9416]. Multiplying  this  by

-_-, ^

dz,  and  taking  its  integral,  we  obtain  [9417]. At  the  point  O,  where  z  =  0,  we  also  have

—  =  0, because  the  tangent  at O  is  parallel  to  the  horizon;  substituting  these  in  [9417],

we  get — 1  =  constant; and  by  substituting  this  last  expression  in  [9417],  we  obtain

1

1/

■OU'

r-1'

[94156]

[9415c;

which,  by  changing  the  signs  of  the  terms,  and  making  a  slight  reduction,  becomes  as  in  [9419].

We  may  here  remark,  that  the  author  supposes,  in  this  article,  that  the  angle  6'  is  the  same

for  both  planes,  so  that  the  fluid  is  either  elevated  near  both  planes  or  depressed  near  both. [9415i]

The  case  where  the  fluid  is  elevated  near  one  of  the  planes,  and  depressed  near  the  other,  is

treatedof  in  [10158— 10257].

The  author  simplifies  the  equation  [9416],  by  taking,  as  in  [9323m],  the  origin  of  ar  at
the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  instead  of  at  the  point O,  fig.  116,  page  713 ;  or.

in  other  words,  by  changing  z  into «  — ^/j ^or  ^7  ^^^^ means  the  differential  equation
[9416]  changes  into  the  following,  which  is  the  same  as  [10164] ;

[9415e]

740  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9415'] hence  the  equation  [9318]  becomes

ddz

Multiplying  this  by  o?,  and  putting aa2=l, as  in  [9323/?],  it  becomes

„ ddz

[9415£-]  . ^^^ =  2;r,

being the  same  as  is  used  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page 174 of  his Nouvelle Theories ^c.
[9415A] Multiplying  [9415^]  by  — dz,  integrating,  and  adding  the  constant  quantity b, we  get

[9415t]

^ ^  df

2

b  — z2.

Putting  h  for  the  elevation  of  the  point  O  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  we  shall

have,  at  this  point,  whei
this  in  [9415i],  we  get

[9415&1  dz

have,  at  this  point,  where 7'  =  0, o?=h  —  W [9415i], or h  =  0L^-\-h^\ substituting

«2  4-  A2 22

[94i5n  \/'r7^^~

Deducing  the  value  of  dy  from  this  equation,  we  obtain

[9415m]  ^i/  =  /(22_;,2).(fc2_|_2a2_22)'

which  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  equation  [10172],  and  is  easily  integrated  by  means  of
esiiptical  functions.  It  is  rather  remarkable  that  these  functions  are  not  mentioned  by  La  Place
throughout  his  whole  work,  which  can  be  accounted  for  upon  no  other  principle  than  his
dislike  to  Le  Gendre,  the  great  promoter  and  improver  of  this  calculus ;  since  there  are  many
parts  of  the  Mecanique  Celeste  where  it  would  have  been  very  advantageous  to  have  used
this  method  of  integration.  The  process  of  reduction  to  elliptical  integrals,  in  the  present
case,  is  easily  obtained  from  what  Le  Gendre  has  published  on  the  subject,  and  we  shall  here
give  the  calculation,  with  all  the  necessary  details.

We shall assume for  z^  an expression  of  the form [94l5p],  which,  by  dividing  the
[9415o] numerator  and  denominator  by  cos.^9, or  multiplying  by 1 -f- tang.^ 9, gives  [9415^];
whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of tang.^cp [9415r].

-  (/i2-|-2a2)./i2

[9415n]

[9415n']

/i2-|-2a2.cos.2(p

( A2  J^  2a2) .  ^2 .  ( 1  _j_  tang.2^)

[94]5/,l  i

[9415ol

^  (;i2-]-2«9)  +  /i2.tang2(p

VQAyK  ^  '  o  (/i2  +  2a2).{z9  — ;i2)

[9415r  ]  tang.2  m  =  ^—^ '-^ ' .

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^8.J ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.

741

ddz
If

(

^'-v

[9416]

The  limits  of  the  value  of  the  first  member  of  [9415?]  being  a^  and  0,  it  follows  from  the
second  member  of  the  same  equation,  that  the  limits  of  z^  must  be  h^  and  o?-\-h^)  so  that
the  limits  of  z^  —  h^  must  be  0  and  a^ ;  therefore  the  value  of  tang.2(p  [94l5r]  must
be  always  positive,  and  <p  a  real  angle.  Now  substituting  the  value  of  z"^  [9415p],  in  the
first  member  of  [9415m],  we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,  its  second  member;  and  by  using
this  in  [9415v],  it  is  reduced  to  the  form  [94151^)].  The  square  root  of  the  product  of  the  two
expressions  [9415m,  z^]  gives  [9415a:],  using  for  brevity  the  symbol  w  =  \/h^-\-2a^ . cos.2(p.

2a2A2  _  2a2A2 .  cos?q) 2tt^h^ .  sin  2  (p

h^  =

A2  4-  2ofi  —  z^=:  2a2  —  (z2  —  h^)  =  2a2

«;2

2a2;i2 .  ain.2  (p 2a2 .  (^2  _}_  2a2 .  cos.2  (p) — 2a^h^ .  sin.a  cp

v^

2a2A2 .  (1  --  sin.2  (p)  -|-  jgi .  co3.2  cp 2a2.(fe2-|-2a2).cos.8(p^

m;2  «,2  '

, 2a2A.(A2_|_2a2)i.sin.(p.cos.(p

^(z2_/,2).(/i24.2a2_z2)= J -^•

Substituting  w  [9415f]  in  [94l5p],  and  taking  the  square  root,  we  get  -,

whose  differential  is

and  as  the  differential  of

U)2  =  ^2  _j_  2a2  .  cos.^  (p

[9415^]  is

2wdw  =  —  4a2.d(p.sio.<p.cos.(p,

we  shall  have

dz  =  (A^  +  2a2)* .  w~^ .  2a2A .  dcp .  sin.(p .  cos.(p.

Dividing  this  by  [9415a?],  we  obtain

dz «^ df

y/(2a_;i2) .  (/i2-j_2a2— 22) w v/^2_[_2a2.  cos.2  (p  »

multiplying  this  by a2  +  A2  _  ^2 ^  „2  ^  ^2  _  LJL_:i^ [941  Sp,  ^],  we  get  the  value  of

dy  [9415?n],  under  the  following  form  ;

{a^-\-lfi).d(p

^y=]

(fc2_|_2a2).fe2.rf,p

■(/l2-[-2a2.C09.2(p)i  (A2_|_2a2.COS.2g.)2  *

To reduce the  radical v/A^4-2a2. cos.2 cp to the usual  form  of  the elliptical functions

2a2

[9415«]

[9415f  ]
[9415u]

[9415u]

[9415to]

[9415a:]

[94%]

[94152]

[9416a]

V/l— c2.sin.2(p' [891  Oi,  fee],  we may  put cos.2(p  =  l  — sin.^cp, and (^==j^T^sl then [94166]
from  this  value  of  c^,  we  easily  deduce

1  — c^  =

s

h"^

/i2  +  2a2

VOL. IV.

2— C2:

186

2.(a2+ft2)
^2_^2a2 '

A2=

2a2.(l— c2)

[9416c]

742  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9416'] Multipljing  this  by  dzy  and  integrating,  we  shall  get

[9416.]  „,4.i.  =  fJ?=3;  A»  +  2a»  =  ?|\

Now  substituting cos.2(p  =  l  —  sin.^cp in  [9416a],  and  using  the  values  [9il6b,  c,d],  we

erQt

'■  ^  ^  C.v/2 Vl— c2.sin.2(p  c.\/2 *(1  — c2.8in.29)i"

Bin-(p .  co9.(p

[9416/'] If  we  put  for  a  moment,  for  brevity, A=^i_c2.sin.2(p, and X= , we  shall

have,  by  taking  the  differential  of  X,  and  dividing  by  dcpy  then  putting cos.2(p=:l— sin.2(p,
/dX\ cos.2<p — sin.2(p c'^.sin.^tp.cos.^cp 1 — 2a'm.^q) c2.8in.2<p — c^.einAq)

mm  (f)='

A3  A  '  A3

[9416fc]

1 c2

adding  to  both  sides  of  this  equation,  and  making  successive  reductions,  we  get

'rfX\ 1— c2 1— 2sin.2g) (1  — c4.sin.4<p)— c2(l— c2.sin.2<p)

rfy/ ' c2.A3  A  '  c2.A3

1— Ssin.gy (1  — c2.8in.2(p).(l-|-c2.8in2y  — c2)
A  '  c2,A3

1— 2sin.2(p (14-c2.sin.2<p— c2) c2.(l— 2sin2(p)-f-(l-|-c2.sin.29— c^)
+

A  '  c2.A  c2.A

1— c2.sin.2<p A2  A

[9416»]  c2.A "~c2.A 7^'

Multiplying  this  by —  — -jr—  , and  transposing  the  first  term,  we  obtain

roiiMi  2(1— c2).a.rfqp  2a , . ,  /^ j^

[9416*1  - CV2-A3 =-'^^'d<P'^  +  '^cV2.dX;

substituting  this  in  [9416fi],  it  becomes,  by  resubstituting  the  values  of  A,  X  [9416/*],

roiiiftn  J (2 — c^)-a  dcp  2a , . ,  /- -,  f  sin.cp .  cos.<p \

^  C.v/2 V^l— c2.Bin.(p c-v/a ^ ^  ^ ' *^  Vv/l— c^-sm-W

Integrating  this  expression,  and  using  the  elliptical  symbols  [8910A:,  ?],  we  get

[9416m]

^°'^"-'-(->^)-?^-^(-^)+";f-tr;^

no  constant  quantity  is  added,  because  we have y  =  0, at  the  point  O,  where 2r  =  A
[9415fc],  which  corresponds  to <p  =  0 in  [9415r]  ;  multiplying  the  value  of  y  by i— ,
and  making  a  slight  reduction,  we  finally  obtain
[9416.,  .  ?^  =  2^).F(c„)-?.E(..)+?^^^^.

which  is  the  same  as  the  equation  (3)  of  M.  Poisson  in  page  177  of  his  Nouvelle Theorie^
fyc,  changing  x  into  y,  to  conform  to  his  notation.

X.  Suppl.  1.  §8.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.  743

I

^z^  =  r,-\-  constant.  [^^17]

Substituting cos.2(p  =  l  —  sin.2(p in [9415p], then dividing the numerator and
denominator  by As  _j_  2„2^ ^^  get,  by  using c2,  h^,  h^  +  Sa^ [94166,  c],

2a2.(l_c2)

[94160 J

c2.(l  — c2.sin.2<p)'

which  is  the  same  as  the  equation  (4)  page  177  of  M.  Poisson's  work.  Hence  we  see  that
the  values  of  the  coordinates  y,  z,  may  be  ascertained  in  functions  of  the  angle  9,  by  means
of  the  formulas  [9416m,  0].  From  these  expressions  we  may  trace  the  form  of  the  curve
surface,  and  the  relation  of  the  coordinates.  If  we  suppose,  as  in  [9346/],  that  zs  is  the  [9416p]
acute  angle  formed  by  the  lower  part  of  the  plane  and  a  tangent  to  a  point  of  the  section
placed  at  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  first  plane,  we  shall  have,  by  the
usual  differential  formulas,

dy  1

sm.w  =

[94%]

and  if  we  suppose  the  value  of  z  near  the  fixed  plane  to  be z  =  q, we  shall  have,  by
substitution  in  [9415/], a^.s\nM  =  a^ -\- h^  —  q^; hence  we  easily  deduce  the  expression [9416r]
of  q^  [9416«],  and  by  substituting  the  value  of  h^  [9416c],  we  get  [9416<]

q^=:h^ -\-a^. {I  — sin.zi);  [9416«]

92  =  ^.(2  — c2  —  c2.  sin.-n),  ^  [9416i]

The  first  of  these  values  of  q^  gives

^2  — Aa  =  a«.(l  — sin.-n); h^-{-2a.^  —  q^  —  a^.{l-\-s\n.'a).  [9416f]

Now  if  we  suppose  0  to  be  the  value  of  9,  corresponding  to z  =  q, we  shall  have,  by
substituting  these  values  in  [9415r],  and  reducing  by  means  of — — — = „ [9416c,  rf], [9416u]

. Q^ (;i2_|.2a2).a2.{l  — sin.-»)  „ ., .  _

tanK.2  0= — — -^ [9416v]

1  —  8m.-si

_  „  . .  [9416wl

(1— c2).(l+8ill.TO)  "^  ^

•If  we  suppose  that y==^,  corresponds  to z==q, and  to <p  =  0, near  the  first  plane, [94l6x]
we  shall  have,  by  substitution  in  [941 6n],

a  .t/2 2 c2  _, , . 2  _  , . , 2c.8in.0.cos.0

If  we denote by o- and -a' the distance and angle relative to the second plane,
corresponding  respectively  to  a,  -a,  for  the  first  plane;  we  shall  get  the  following  equation^ [9416z]
which  is  similar  to  [9416y],  and  may  be  deduced  from  it^  by  changing  a^  into  a^,  e  into  e\
and  w  into  w'j  -

744  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mcc  Cel.

dz
[9418] At  the  point  O, —  =  0 ; therefore constant  =  —  1 ; consequently

[9419]  7=^^  +  ^^  =  -6^*

[94176]

[9417/]

[9417t ]

[9417f  ]

a'v/2 2 — c2  -r,  / ,^ 2  _. ...  2c.sin.0'.cos.0'
'■■'  a  c  \»/cV'>'' ^1— c2.sm20'

Adding  these  two  equations,  and  putting o-^-\-^^-='2l for  the  distance  of  the  two  planes,  as
in  [9443e,  10236],  we  get

?iV?=:?Ill'.|F(c,©)  +  F(c,©')^-?.{E(c,0)  +  E(c,0')|

+

c
2c.sin.0.cos.0 . 2 c. sin. 0'. cos.©'

\/l  — c2.sin.20  ^  v/l— c^-sin.20'  *

Hence  it  appears  that,  if  c,  is,  w',  are  given,  we  may  deduce  ©,  ©',  from  the  value  of  tang.^©
[94l6tr], and  the  similar  value  of  tang.20' [9416z] ; substituting these  in [94176],  we

'•  ^  obtain  the  distance  of  the  two  planes,  2Z.  If  this  distance  be  given  instead  of  c,  we  may
deduce,  by  an  inverse  process,  the  value  of  c  from  the  same  three  equations ;  but  this  is

[9417c]  a  much  more  laborious  process  than  the  preceding  one,  where  c  is  given;  and  it  will  be
necessary  to  form  a  little  table,  giving  the  expressions  of  2Z  for  values  of  c,  increasing  by
small  differences,  which  is  easily  done  by  means  of  Le  Gendre's  elliptical  tables ;  and  by
entering  this  table,  we  may  find  by  inspection  the  value  of  c,  corresponding  to  any  proposed

[9417g-]  value  of  2/}  a  being  considered  as  a  given  quantity.  We  may  remark  that  the  equations
[9416/,  w,  y,  94176],  are  equivalent  to  the  equations  (5),  (6),  (7),  (8),  in  pages  177,  178,

r9417W  °^  ^'  Po'sso'^'s  Nouvelh  Theorie,  Sfc.  The  equation  [9416w]  being  subtracted  from
[9416y],  gives,  by  putting a^—  y  =  y.

y^  =  i=±'.{F(c,©)-F(c,<p)}-^.{E(c,0)-E(c,9)|

2  c .  sin.0 .  COS.0 2c.sin.()D.cos.(jo

~V/l— c^-sin.2©  \/l— c2.sin.29)'
y  being  the  distance  from  the  first  plane  to  the  point  of  the  surface  corresponding  to  the
[9417A:]  angle  9,  and  0  being  the  value  of  9  at  the  first  plane.  In  like  manner,  if  y'  be  the  distance
from  the  second  plane  to  the  point  of  the  surface  corresponding  to  the  angle  9,  and  ©'  be
the  value  of  <p,  at  the  second  plane,  we  shall  have,  from  [9417i],  by  changing  y  into  /,
©  into  ©',  and  considering  the  angles  <p,  &',  as  positive,

[9417m]  y^  =  ^'.|F(c,0')-F(c,<p)}-f.|E(c,©')-E(c,<?)l .

2  c .  sin.©' .  COS.©' 2  c .  8in.<3D .  co3.q)
"^  v/l  — c2sin.^ v/^— c2.sin.2g)  *

When  the  second  plane  is  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  first,  the  equation  of  the  surface
rQ41'~  1 [9'^^^*]  comes  under  the  case  which  is  treated  of  in  [9435],  and  integrated  by  means  of
logarithms  in  [10208];  the  elliptical  functions  which  occur  in  [9417iJ  being,  in  this  case,
reduced  to  common  logarithms,  as  is  seen  in  [10208].

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§>8.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.  745

Now  putting

Z=  —r, az^,  [9420]

we  shall  have  *

,  Zdz

^y  =  ^i^rZ2'  [9421]

and  this  is  the  equation  of  the  elastic  curve,  as  ought  to  be  the  case,  since,  as  in

the  elastic curve,  the  force  which depends upon  the  curvature  is  inversely [9422]

proportional  to  the  radius  of  curvature.f At  A^  fig.  116,  page  713,  the  most

dz
elevated  point  of  the  curve  ANO,  we  havet j-  =  tang.^', 6'  being,  as  in [9423]

ay

*  (4166) Transposing  the  term  ouz^  [9419],  and  substituting  [9420],  we  get

squaring  and  reducing,  we  get  the  value  of  dij  [9421].

f  (4167) Substituting  [9326]  in  [9416],  after  changing  m  into  y,  we  get -  —  2(\.z==-;
and  if  we  put  for  brevity ^  =  ^~T/} it  "^^y  b^  put  successively  under  the  forms  [9423a]

and,  as  the  curvature  at  any  point  is  inversely  as  the  radius  of  curvature,  it  is  evident  that
the  curvature  at  any  point  iV,  fig.  116,  page  713,  will  be  directly  as  the  quantity  e-\-z,  that
is,  directly  as  the  absciss  z,  augmented  by  the  constant  quantity  e,  being  the  principle  upon
which  the  properties  of  the  elastic  curve  are  founded  in  [9422].

[9423i]

%  (4168) This  is  similar  to  [9383/],  changing  u  into  y,  and  taking  rfy  positive,  because
y  and  2;  increase  together. Substituting  this  value  of dz  =  dy.  tBng.6' in  [9421],  dividing
by  (?y,  and  reducing,  we  get 1  — Z2  =  Z2.tang.2^', or Z2.(l-|-tang.2d')  =1; whence ^^^^^"^
Z=cos.d', as  in  [9425]. Substituting  this  in  [9420],  we  get  [9426],  and  then  dividing [94256]

11  2

by — a, we obtain z^-{-—,.z  =  - .{I  —  cos.d')  =:-.sin.2^a'. From this quadratic [9425c]

equation  we  get  z  [9427],  and  when  6'=  00,  it  becomes  as  in  [9429]. Now  from  [9430] [9425rf]

we  have a  =  fr= = = :, ; hence  we  get  i/2a=-7^  .  ,. [94^5e  j

we  nave ^ h iq  iq  Iq.t^ng.h^'  ^ ^  ^lq.tang.hd'

Substituting this  in [9429],  it  becomes  as  in  [9431]; and  if  in this  we put Z=1""S

5  =  6'"S784, d'=90^ or tang.J^'=l, we  obtain ^r  = /6^V84  =  2""-,6046, as [9425g-]

in  [9433].

Substituting 0.  =  — [9323p]  in  [9429],  it  becomes  «  =  a. v/2. sin. Jd',  which  is  the  same [9425^]

ft
VOL.  IV.  187

746  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9346],  the  complement  of  the  angle  ivhich  the  extreme  side  of  the  curve  makes
tvith  the  plane ;  therefore  we  shall  have,  at  this  point,
[9425]  Z=cos.^' [94256],

which  gives,  to  determine  the  extreme  value  of  z  [9420,  9425],

[9426]  —Y-, a.z^=COS.d\ or

0

[9429]

from  each

[9434]

1  >/2sin  2  14'  1

[9427]  z  =  -^,  +  ^_-^  +  ^-^.  [B«..«™,«..r.,

[9428] If  the  two  planes  are  at  an  infinite  distance  from  each  other, b'  will  be  infinite,
and  we  shall  have

2  sin.  A  5'

When  the ^  '2"  rExtreme  value  of  z,  when  the"l

parallel  ' ^ /^  * Ldistance  of  the  planes  is  infinite.  J

planes  are  V  '*'*

at  a  very  „

groat  dis-  -y^g  \idi\Q "5  =  ^L [9328]  ;  moreover,  in  a  capillary  tube  whose  semi-diameter

H

other.  0.  sin. 4'

[9430] is  /, we  have ■^=— — [9379], q being  the height  to  lohich  the  fluid  in
the  tube  rises  above  the  level  [9378]  ;  therefore  we  have

rntnii  -T  1  /«7 .„„„ 1  a'  T Extreme  value  of  i,  when  the  T

[9431]  -^  Y  qi.iang.^O .  L«listanceoftheplanes  is  infinite.  J

If  we  suppose  6'  to  be  equal  to  a  right  angle,  which  appears  to  be  the  case  for  ivater
[9432]  ^and  alcohol]  relative  to  glass,  I  being  a  millimetre,  we  shall  have  q  =  6'"',784
[9364],  which  gives  for  the  height  to  which  the  water  is  elevated,  by  a  glass  plane
dipped  vertically  into  a  vessel  filled  with  that  fluid,  2^,6046  [9425^].  This
ought  to  be  rather  less  by  experiment,  because  the  point  which  we  take  for  the
[9433]  origin  of  the  curve  can  become  sensible  only  by  being  at  a  distance  from  the
sides  of  the  tube ;  it  must  therefore  be  a  little  below  the  point  A,  fig.  116,  page
713.  We  may  observe  that,  by  the  extreme  point  A,  we  always  mean  the  point
nearest  to  the  tube,  but  situated  without  its  sphere  of  sensible  activity;  and  as  this
point  is  at  an  insensible  distance  from  the  tube,  it  may  be  supposed  to  touch  the
tube.

In  case  the  two  planes  are  at  an  infinite  distance,  the  differential  equation  of
the  curve  becomes  *

[9425»  ]

as  is  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  184  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  8fc.,  changing  z  into  I,
and  6'  into  f*,  to  conform  to  his  notation.  When  the  fluid  wholly  moistens  the  plate,  as  is
[9425Jfc]  the  case  with  water,  we  shall  have  ^'=90^  [9362],  and  \/2.sin.^d':=l ;  whence  «  =  «,
which  represents  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  near  the  sides  of  a  plate  which  is  perfectly
moistened  by  it. The  same  is  found  in  another  way  in  [I0281fl].

* (4169) When the  planes  are  at  an infinite distance,  and b'==co [9428],  the
[9435o] expression  [9420]  becomes Z=l  —  az^; whence

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^8.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.

747

dy  =

t Equation  of  the  surfkce,  when  the"!
planes  are  at  an  infinite  distance.  J

Thus  in  fig.  120,  PQ  being  the  line  of  level  of  the  fluid,  we  have  PV  =  z,
and  by  making  VN=y\  we  shall  have  dy' =  —  dy\  the  differential  equation
of  the  curve  ANQ^  which  the  fluid  forms  near  the  plane  AP,  will  therefore
be

7 /  (I O-^r^)  •  dz  FEquation  of  the"]

dy =:=  — rm: ,  I surface  near  one I

^  -r .  /o^ .  /I i«  «Q  »  I  single  plane. J

Z  .  \/2a  .  \/l  —  i0l28  *  [_sinj

which  is  easily  integrated  [10208].

If  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  from  each
other  is  very  small,  the  equation

^^  —  a22  =  Z , [9420], or

Fig.  120,

j-,  =  I-Z

6'3

[9435]

Two

planes  at
an  infinite
distance
from  each
other.

[9436]

[9437]

Elevation
of  a  fluid
between
two  very
near  par-t
allel
planes.

[9438]

[9439]

gives,  by  using  the  formula*  [629],
^,  =  1  — Z— a6'^(l^Z)^  +  2a2,6"«.(l  — Z)3_5a3.6'6.(l  — Z)^+&e.; [9440]

y/l  _  Z2  =  ^2022— tt.224  =  2f  .^/2a .  \/l  — d  az2 ;

hence  [9421]  becomes  as  in  [9435].  Moreover,  by  continuing  the  line  iWiV=y,  fig.  116,
page  713,  to  meet  the  vertical  line  AV'in  F,  we  have  VN  =  AP — NM,  or  y'=AP — y
[9413',  9436] ;  and  as  AP  is  constant,  while  the  point  N  varies,  the  differential  will  be
dy'  =  —  dy,  as  in  [9436J.  Substituting  this  in  [9435],  we  get  [9437],  which  is  here  left
by  the  author  without  integration,  but  it  is  done  in  [10181a — v],  by  means  of  logarithmic
functions,  and  also  in  [10208].

[94356]
[9435c]

[9435rf]

*  (4170) If  we  put 7;="'  in  [9439],  it  becomes m'=1  —  Z — a&'V^,  which  may [9440a]

be  solved  by  means  of  the  formula  [629rt,  629];  but  to  avoid  any  confusion  in  the  symbols,  we
shall  suppose  the  letters  u,  x,  t,  z,  a,  Z,  to  be  accented  in  [629a,  629]  ;  then,  comparing  the
expression  of  u' [9440a],  with  the  general  form x'=s(f){i'-{-o^z')  [629a],  we  get  x'=u', [94406]
<p  =  l,  t'==l  —  Z,  a!=^  —  a.b'^,  z'=u'^;  and  the  expression  u'=4'{x')=4^\(p{t'-\-(i.'z')l [9440c]
[629a],  becomes  simply  u'=i'-\-afz',  or  4'(p  =  l;  moreover,  u  being  the  value  oft*',  when

a'=0, we have \i  =  t'^l  —  Z; hence ^-^^  =  1. Substituting  this  in  [629],  we  get [9440rf]

«'--+^'^'-l+^-'-^+-«-="+-^'+.-.-^-f-^

&c.

[9440e]

Now  substituting a'=  —  o.b'^, Z'=\i^ [9440c],  we  get

748  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Ctl.

whence  we  deduce

[9441]  (?2  =  —  h'dZ.  \  1  —  2a6'« .  (1  —  Z)  +  &c.  I  ;

consequently

dy ZdZ.n— 2a6'2.(i_>Z)  +  &c.|
t^^^^i  y  = ■ VT^- '

[9443] Putting  Z  =  cos.^,  we  shall  have*

[9444]  ^==^^.cosJ.!l~2a6'^(l  — cos.5)-f  &c.i  ;

whence,  by  integration,
[9445]  I  =  sin.d — a6'  2 .  (2  sin  J  —  ^  —  \.  ^m.%)  ;

in  which  we  must  put u  =  ^' [9440rf],  and  we  shall  get

Lastly,  substituting  w'=- [9440a],  and <'=!  —  Z [9440c],  it  becomes  as  in  [9440];
[9440g] multiplying  this  by  6',  and  taking  its  differential,  we  obtain  [9441]. Multiplying  [9441]  by

^  rill

jj  y  _ -g , we  get  the  expression  of  -^ [9421],  as  in  [9442].

*  (4171) The  assumed  value  of  Z  [9443]  gives y^i— Z2  =  sin.d, whose  differential

ZdZ  ,  ^

[9443a] is — /  —  fl^.cos.^; also 1  — Z=l  —  cos.5; substituting  these  in  [9442],  we  get

[9444],  and  by  using 2cos.2d  =  l-|-cos.24  [6]  Int.,  it  becomes
[9443i  ] ■S=dd.  cos.fl— a6'2 .  (grf^ .  cos.^ — 2d6 .  cos.^  6)^dd.  cos.6 — a6'2 .  (2dd .  cos.5 — d6  —  dd.  cos.24) .
Its  integral  gives  [9445];  and  by  substituting ^sin.25  =  sin.4.cos.d [31]  Int.,  it  becomes

[944361  |,  =  sin.d.^l-2a6'2.(l-^^_^cosj)^.

Now  substituting y  =  Z, 6  =  6' [9446], and  dividing  by  I,  we  get

[9443c]  \=^^.h  —  2ajb'^.(l--^,^icos.6')l.

h'  I i  \ 2sin.d'  />

If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  a,  we  get  very nearly -=— -^; using  this  and  a

[9446],  we  get a.b'^=—-^.(- — 7)= — —,; substituting  this  in [9443c],  we  obtain

[9443«  1 [9447] ;  observing  that  /  is  the  distance  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  surface  from  either  of  the
planes,  so  that  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  21.

[9448]

[9449]

X.  Suppl.  1.  <^8.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  BETWEEN  TWO  PLANES.  749

therefore,  by  supposing  the  extreme  value  of  y  to  be  I,  that  of  6  to  be  &\  and

sin  d'  t^^^^]

using  the  value  of ^=  -f- [9425e],  wq  shall  have

1 sin.4' ^1  2Z A  fl'  \>

Tf  "^  — r~*  i  ^ ^~7, •  I  I  —  r.  . w  —  4- .  COSJ'  )  >  ;  [94471

0  f C  g'.sin.d' \ 2sin.d' ^  y3  l  •»-«'j

and  as  /  is  very  small  relative  to  q,  when  the  planes  are  very  nigh  to  each
other,  we  shall  have  nearly

1  _  sin  J^

In  the  case  of  &'  equal  to  a  right  angle,  the  fraction

— "—.'  •  ( 1  —  K-^i:>  —  icos.5' ) [94471

q.smJ' \ 2sin.d' ^  /

becomes

-.(1  — H-  [9450]

If I  =  1™-, we  shall  have  for  water q  =  6™-,784  [9432],  and  this  fraction

2  1

will become ^-;^.(l--.|cr), or j^; it may therefore be neglected  in [9451]

comparison  with  unity.

The  preceding  value  of - [9447]  gives,  for  the  elevation  q'  [9406]  of  a

fluid  between  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes,  distant  from  each  other  by  2Z,
the  following  expression,*

,  H sin.d' C  2?  /  6'  \  )  pEIevation  9' of  a  fluid"! between

^  ==  J-  ^-  r"r^i;r?-(  ^~2ii;7?--^^^'-^')( ' ^'^^'^^^ t^^^j

6  '*' V.  y.Sin.O \  ^Sm.fl  /)  Lwhose  distance  is  2«.  J two  verti-

which  is  also  the  expression  of  the depression  of  the  fluid  below  its  level

[9452]

Elevation

cal  planes.

* (4172) Putting b=co [9414], in  the expression of  the  capillary  action  on  a
concave  surface  [93156],  it  becomes K — — - ; adding  this  to  go',  the  sum  must  be  equal  to [9452a]

K,  as  is  evident  from  the  reasoning  in  [9355a,  &c.] ;  hence  we  have K  —  ~-^gq'=K,

HI  1

or 9'='^'^,i and  by  substituting - [9447], it  becomes  as  in  [9453] ;  which  is  nearly [94526]

equal  to — -~ [9454],  when  I  is  very  small. Moreover  it  is  evident,  from  the  reasoning

in  [9369,  Sec],  that  this  same  expression  [9453]  will  also  denote  the  depression  of  the  fluid
below  its  level,  when  the  surface  of  the  fluid  is  concave ;  the  effect  ))eing  merely  to  change
the  signs  of  q,  d\  q'  [9353,  9424,  9452],  as  in  [9352rf,  &;c.],  which  does  not  alter  the [9452c]
value  of  q'  [9453],  as  is  evident  by  inspection.
VOL.  IV.  188

750  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  C61.

between  the  same  planes,  when  the  interior  surface  of  the  fluid,  instead  of  being
concave,  is  convex ;  and  when  the  distance  of  tlie  planes  21  is  very  small,  it

[9454] becomes  very  nearly q'==  —  .—^, being  inversely  as  that  distance  21.

If  the  tivo  parallel  planes,  instead  of  being  vertical,  are  inclined  to  the  horizon,

the  surface  of  the  interior  fluid,  and  its  position  relative  to  the  planes  which

[9455] include  it,  are  very  nearly  the  same  as  if  the  planes  were  vertical,  as  we  have

seen  in  [9376]  relative  to  inclined  tubes. The  vertical  height q' of  the  fluid

above  the  level  is  therefore  the  same,  whatever  be  the  inclination  of  the  planes.

9. We  shall  now  consider  a  small  column  of  fluid,  contained  within  a  conical
capillary  tube, open at both ends.

We  shall  suppose  ABCD,  fig.  121, ^^'''^'^^^^^^^:^:^~^^..___^^^
to  be the  tube, and MM'N'N  the  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^S^^^^^^^^^HZ^^

JV — -i,,.^^ ——.21

column  of  fluid  ;  and  we  shall  at  first  -^'^^^~~— — ii

suppose  the  axis  OE  of  the  tube  to
[9456]  be  horizontal,  O  being  the  summit  of  the  cone,  or  the  intersection  of  the  lines
CA,  DB,  if  the  J  were  continued  to  O;  we  shall  also  suppose  that  the
surfaces  of  the  fluid  MpN,  M'p'N',  are  concave.  It  is  evident  that,  the  tube
being  narrower  at^  than  at  p',  the  radius  of  curvature  of  its  surface  will  be
less  in  the  first  point,  than  in  the  second.  Representing  these  radii  by  b,  hj
respectively,  we  shall  have  for  the  action  of  the  fluid  at  p,  upon  an  infinitely

[9457] narrow  canal  ^1?',  in  the  directional?',  the  expression K — — [9254];  and

H

[9458] in  p' this action will be K —  — , in  the  opposite  direction  ^'p;  and  as

b'  is  greater  than  b,  this  action  will  be  greater  in  p'  than  in  p;  consequently
the  fluid,  contained  in  the  canal,  will  tend  to  move  towards  the  summit  O  of
the  cone. The  contrary  will  take  place,  if  the  surface  of  the  fluid  be  convex;

[9459] for  then  these  forces  will  be  respectively K-\-—, and -^+T7 [9276];

consequently  the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  the  canal  will  be  greater  at  p  than  at
[9460] i?';  therefore  the  fluid  tends  to  move  from  p  towards  p'.
To  determine  the  radii  of  curvature  b,  b',  we  shall  put
[9461]  a  =  the  line  Oq,  or  the  distance  from  the  vertex  O  of  the  cone  to  the

middle  point  p  of  the  drop,  or  to  the  middle  of  the  line  pp' ;
[9461']  a  =  the  half-width  of  the  drop  pq  or  qp';

[9462]  w  =  the  very  small  angle  MOp,  being  the  angle  formed  by  the  side  of

the  cone  and  its  axis ;
[9463]  6'  =  the  complement  of  the  inclination  of  the  extreme  side  of  the  arc  pM

to  the  side  of  the  cone  OM  [9346].

X.  Suppl.  1.  §9.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  CAPILLARY  CONE.

761

Then,  if  we  suppose  the  curves  MpN,  M'p'N\  to  be  circular,  it  will  be  easy
to  prove  that  we  shall  have  *

6  =

(a —  a)  .sin.OT
sin.d'+  sin.TO  '

6'  =

(a-}-a).sin.'a
sin.d' —  sin.w

[9464]

J^^.12a

*  (4173)  We  have  changed  tang.«  into  sin.«  in  all  the  formulas  [9464—9482],  to
correct  a  mistake  of  the  author,  in  the  original
work,  in  the  values  of  b,  U  [9464].  The
correctness  of  this  change  is  easily  perceived
by  referring  to  fig.  122,  which  is  similar  to
fig.  121,  the  angle  at  O  being  enlarged  so  as
to  make  the  lines  more  distinct.  In  this  figure,
C  is  the  centre  of  the  surface  MpN;  31  A  is
perpendicular  to  CM,  MB  perpendicular  to
Op, Then  OMC  =  &\  MOC  =  zs,  MCJ5  =  5'  +  w; and  as  MC=b,  we  shall  have

MB  =  MC.sm.MCB  =  b.sm.{d'-\-'a)', CB  =  b.cos.{d'-{-zs);

Bp^Cp—CB^b  —  b,cos.{d'-\-zs).

Now  OB=Oq — pq  —  Bp=za — a— \b  —  b. cos.{6' -{-zs)] ;  multiplying  it  by  tang.MOS,

or tang.OT, we  get MB  =  {a  —  a).tang.^j  —  6.tang.'5i-}-^-tang.7tf.cos.(4'+ -cr). Putting

[9463a]

(a  —  a).tang.'5J

this  equal  to  the  value  of  MB r9463cl,  we  get b=  -,.,,,

•■  ■■  °  sin-l^+ra)  — tang.'5r.cos.(a'-|-'5J)-|-tang.'!J

Multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  by cos.w, and  substituting  in  the  denominator

cos.w.sin.(^'-}- •5i) — sin.'5j.cos.(^'-|~^)  =sin.  ^^'-f-'^) — ■5f^=sin.dV it becomes,  as in
(a  —  a^.sin.tS

[94636]
[9463c]

[9463rf]
[9463c]

[9464], b

but  differs  from  the  original  value  of  b  [9464] by  changing [9i&3f]

sin.^'-j-sin.'SJ
tang.Tif  into  sin. to.

We  may  find  in  the  same  manner  the  value  of  b'=  CM',  fig.  122,  corresponding  to  the
surface  M'p'N',  the  tangent  being  M'A',  and  the  perpendicular  M'B'.  In  this  case,  we
have  C'M'm  =  &',  C'OM'=:^zi,  M'C'B'=d'—'Zi;  hence  M'jB'  =  6'.sin.(d'— ^),
C'B'=5'.cos.(4'— w),  p'B'=b'—b'.cos.(d'-vs)',  adding  this  to  Op'=Oq+gp'=a-\-a,
we  get  OB'=n-\-a.-{-  b' — b'.cos.{d' — to).  IVIulii plying  this  by  tang. to,  we  get  a  second
expression  of iV/'J5'=5  (« -f- a).tang.TO-f'i'.tang.«<  —  &'.tang.:rf.cos.(^' — to). From  these

(a-j-a).tang.'5J

[9463|ff]

two  expressions  of  M'B',  we  eet 6'=  —  ,  , ,  ,  ,., . ^

^  '  °  sin.{d'  — •trf)-|-tang.ii.cos.(a'— to)  —  tang.TS

the  numerator  and  denominator  by cos.to, and  substituting  in  the  denominator

sin. (4' —  to)  .COS.TO  +  cos. (4' —  to)  .  sin.TO=sin.|(^' —  to)  +  ro^=;=  sin.d' ,
(a-|-a).sin.TO

Multiplying [9463il]

we  get,  as  in  [94641, 6'=  . . . ,
by  having  in  it sin, to, instead  of  tang.w.

differing  from  that  in  the  original  work,  in  [9464], [9463»]

76^

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9465]

[9466]

V.

[9467]

which  gives  *

H

h  '

H

h'

H.sinJ'

sin-trt

;2a  ,  2a3  , „ ? ,  2H

I  a2  ^  o^  ^ S ' a

2H.a2

+  &C.

If  we  now  elevate  the  point  A,  so  as  to  incline  the  axis  OE  to  the  horizon  by
an  angle  V,  the  weight  of  the  column  pp'  will  bef  2^a.sin.F,  g  being,  as
in  [9316],  the  force  of  gravity;  and  when  the  column  remains  suspended  in

[94650]
[94656]
[9465c]

*  (4174) Dividing  H  by  the  value  of  b  [9464],  we  get -^  =  ^^_^^^.^^  +  ^III>
which  can  be  developed  according  to  the  powers  of  -,  as  in  [9465a]  ;  in  like  manner,  by

dividing  H  by the  value of  b' [9464], and developing, we get [94656], and their
difference  is  as  in  [9465c] ;

H . H.a.

H

b

H

h  ''

H

b''

H
b''

sin.7r

H.  sin.d^
sin.'CJ

siiLts

o3

!l_A,=?_8^.?
> o2~a3  S

:2a , 2a3  ;> 2H  , 2g.a2

-f-Scc;
4-&C.;

This  last  expression  agrees  with  that  in  [9465],  where,  for  greater  accuracy,  we  have  changed
[9465rf] jj^jjg  ^  j-„^j, gjjj  ,jj^  ^^  j-^  [9463/,  i] ;  and  we  have  also  changed  La  Place's  symbol  a  into  a,
to  avoid  confusion,  as  a  is  used  in  another  sense  in  [9328,  &ic.].

[9467a]
[94676]

[9467c]

X'ig.123,

f  (4175)  We  shall  suppose  the  axis  of  the
tube  OB,  fig.  123,  to  be  inclined  to  the
horizontal  plane  OJf,  by  the  angle  HOE=:V,
instead  of  being  exactly  horizontal,  as  in  [9456] ;
and  shall  then  take  into  consideration  the  fluid
in  a  cylindrical  canal,  formed  about  the  axis
pp'=2a.,  its  base  being  extremely  small,  and
represented  by  unity.  In  this  case,  the  volume
of  the  cylinder  is  represented  by  2  a,  its  gravity  2o-a  [9316],  and  its  pressure  in  the  direction
[9467rf] pp'  equal  to 2^a.sin.F. This  is  to  be  added  to  the  capillary  action  in  p,  in  the  same

direction  pp',  namely K —  - [9457];  so  that  the  whole  column  presses  in  that  direction

H

[9467e] with  a  force  which is represented  by K —  —  -\-2gdL.sm.V; and  when  the  fluid  is  in

equilibrium,  this  force  must  be  equal,  and  contrary  to  the capillary  action at  p',  namely

[9467/] Jf— f  [9458];  hence Z— |+2^a.sin.F=^— ^;  consequently  2ga.s\n.V="—^.

Substituting  the  value  of  the  second  member  of  this  expression  [9465],  and  neglecting  terms
of  the  order a^, we  get  [9469].

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§,  9.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  CAPILLARY  CONE.  753

equilibrium,  by  means  of  this  action,  this  weight  must  balance  the  force -  —  p, [9468]

by  which  it  is  urged  towards  the  point  O  in  consequence  of  the  attraction  of
the  fluid ;  we  shall  therefore  have,  by  neglecting  the  insensible  terms,

2^a.sm.F=— ^ .  —  -\ , or sm.F=-.^ — .-+-.—  .  [9469]

sin.xs a^ a  g sin.« a^ g aa

We shall put  /  for  the  height  to  which  the  fluid  is  elevated,  in  a  cylindrical [9470]
tube,  whose  interior  semi-diameter  or  radius  is a .  sin.w, which  is  equal  to  the [9470']
nearest  distance  of  the  side  of  the  tube  from  the  centre  of  the  drop  q ;  we  shall
have,  by  using  [9360],*

gl= : , or /= : ;  [9471]

^  a.sm.-m  ga. sm.ss

therefore  we  shall  have

'  ' jr  ' , '.sin.©  Psine  of  the  inclination  r  of  the"!

Sin.  y  = J : >  .  I axis  of  tlie  cone  to  the  horizon,  I  [9472]

CL a.sin.d  I  when  in  equilibrium.  I

The  term .  '  , may  be  put  under  the  form - .  -^^!^  : it  will  be  very

a.sin.r  J r  a a.sin.d'  -^

I  [9473]

small,  relative  to  the  term  -  ,  if a. sin.© [9470']  be  very  small  relative  to a

[9461'],  or  if  the  length  of  the  little  column  he  much  greater  than  the  width  of
the  cone  at  the  point  q ;  in  this  case,  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  by  neglecting
that  term  in  [9472],

[9473']

> rr-  I  |Approximate  value  of  the  sine j

Sm.r =  -  .  1 of  the  inclination  F of  the  axis I  [9474]

a  I of  the  cone  to  the  horizon.  I

*  (4176) If  we  draw  qq'  perpendicular  to  OM',  fig.  123,  it  will  represent  the  radius
of  the  tube  [9470']; which  will  therefore  be  expressed  by Oq.sm.vs, or a.sm.zs. If [9471a]
we  put  this  for  Z  in  [9360],  we  shall  obtain  q,  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  a  cylindrical
tube  whose  radius  is  a. sin.©;  and  the  value  of  q,  which  is  the  same  as  I,  in  the  present

notation  [94701,  will  be 1= '^!"' ; hence  we  obtain  g-Z  [9471], or H=^".'^\"' . [94716]
■-  -"  g-a.sm.©  ^  sm.^'  *■  ■■

Substituting  this  in  sm.V  [9469],  we  get  [9472]. We  may  remarlc  that  we  have  supposed

the  line  qq' to  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  side  of  the  cone OC, instead  of  being [947ic]

perpendicular  to OE,  as  in  the  original  work;  this  is  done  to  avoid  the  use  of  tang.©,  which

is  changed  into  sin.©,  in  [9463/J ;  terms  of  the  order  of  the  difference  of  these  quantities [9471^]

being  omitted  in  [9469,  Stc]  ;  so  that  this  cannot  be  considered  as  making  any  essential

alteration.

VOL.  IV.  189

[9475'J

754  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9475] -^s  I [9471]  is  inversely  as  a, - will  be  in  the  inverse  ratio  of* a^; and

as  V  is  a  small  angle,  it  follows  that  this  angle  is  then  very  nearly  in  the  inverse
ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distance  of  the  middle  of  the  drop  from  the  summit  of
the  cone.

The  term '  .  '  ,  [9472]  depends  upon  the  difference  in  the  number  of  degrees

[9476]  contained  in  the  arcsf  MpN,  M'p'N' ;  and  this  difference  arises  from  the
circumstance  that  the  concavity  of  one  of  the  arcs  is  turned  towards  the  summit
of  the  cone  O,  and  the  convexity  of  the  other.  The  term  depending  upon  this
difference  may  therefore  be  neglected  without  any  sensible  error,  when  the

[9477]  length  of  the  column  is  much  greater  than  its  thickness,  or  the  diameter  of  the
cone  at  the  point  q ;  and  then  we  may  suppose  that  the  two  curves  MpN  and
M'p' N'  are  similar.

We  have  supposed  the  two  surfaces  of  the  fluid  column  to  be  spherical ;  but

[9477^ this  supposition  is  not  accurate,  and  we  see  in  [9351,  &c.],  that,  on  account  of

the  action  of  gravity,  the  value  of  - will  be  decreased  by  a  small  term  of  the

[9475a] *  (4177) Dividing  the  value  of  ?  [9471]  by  a,  we  get  -  =  — ^-: — .-,  being  inversely

as  a%  as  in  [9475];  substituting  this  in  [9474],  we  get sva.V= — ^-t— — .  — ; and  when
[94756]  jy  g.„^, J  ^-^'"'^  °^

F^  is  sqiall,  it  becomes  very  nearly V= '. ' .— , as  in  [9475'].

t  (4178) We  have  in  fig.  122,  page  751,  the  angle  MCjB  =  d'  +  w  [94636],  the  angle
M'C'B'=6'  —  -a  [9463^];  hence MCB  —  M'C'B'=2zs;  and  as  the  quantity  «  occurs

/.sin.'BJ
[9476o] in  the  term — —7, it  would  seem,  at  the  first  view,  that,  when  «  is  small,  this  term  must

be  nearly  proportional  to  the  difference  2-ci  of  the  angles MCB,  M'C'B';  but  we  ought

to  observe  that,  if  we  multiply  the  value  I  [9471]  by — 7—, ,  we  shall  get

[94766]  li^!!^_:?.l.l

a.sin.d' g a a'

H

[9476c] which  depends  on  the constant  factor — , and  on  the lines Oq  =  a [9461],  pq  =  3L

[9461'],  without containing  -a  explicitly,  which  seems  to  be  contrary  to  what  the  author
supposes  in  [9476] .

X.  SuppM.  §9.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  CAPILLARY  CONE.  755

form* j.Q.j^.b^; Q  being  a  coefficient  independent  of  6. Likewise -,

b

[9478]

will  be decreased by  the term -.Q.^.6'^; the  difference -, — will [9479]

0  JjL  0 0

therefore  be  increased  by Qg'(b' — 6), or  very  nearly ^^'  '^^"'^  . The

sin.^'

[9480]

value  of sin.F will  therefore  be  increased  by  the  term —. — '—  . Without

determining  Q,  we  see  that  it  must  be  a  small  number,  and  there  is  reason  to

believe  that  it  is  less  than  unity,  as  in  the  expression  of  - [94786],  where  it  is

only  I,  when  ^'  is  a  right  angle.f The  value  of  V  will  therefore  be  increased

from  this  cause  by  a  very  small  angle  which  is  much  less  than  ts ;  so  that  we [9482]

may,  without  any  sensible  error,  neglect  this  increment.

[9481]

[9478a]

1 sin. 4'

*  (4179)  Neglecting  terms  of  the  order  a,  we  get  from  [9351]  —  =— — ,  or
/=5.sin.d';  substituting  this  in  the  part  of  [9351]  containing  a,  and  putting  for  brevity
Q  =  l  — |.^ — ^ , we get T  =  -] 7■•Q.o•&^ as in  [9478],  observing that [9478&]

a=- [9328]. In  lilce  manner -  =  — f- — -.  Q.aS'^. Hence  the  terms  depending  on [9478c]

Q  will produce  in y  —  ^  the  quantity  H.  $^.  Q.a6'2—^.  Q.a62J=fla.  Q. (6'— &); [9478rfJ

and  by  substituting  Ifvt=3^  [9478c],  it  becomes  Qg.{b' — b), as  in  [9480]. But,  sin.'sr

sin,'5i
being  small  in  comparison  with sin.^', we  have  nearly,  from  [9464], o=(a — ^)'^i^/'

[9478*]

6'=(a-|-a).^r^  ,  b' — b==  2a.-:-^; consequently  the  preceding  expression  Q^.  (b' — 6)

becomes  very  nearly ^.^'^l"'^, as  in  [9480]. This  increment  of y  — "^ ought to

be  added  to  the  second  members  of  [9465,  9469] ;  and  as  the  last  of  these  expressions

SQg-a.sin.irf  ...

represents  the  value  of  2g^.sin.F [9467/],  its  increment  will  be —~J, —  ; dividmg [9478/]

this  by  2«-a,  we  get  the  increment  of  sin.  F, equal  to ^r^,  as  in  [9480]. We  may [9478g-]

finally  observe,  that,  when  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  a  tube  is  spherical,  we  have m  =  S.sin.d .g^^g^,
[93456]  ;  and  at  the  side  of  the  tube  where m  =  Z, ^  =  ^', it  becomes Z=6.sin.d', or

1  _  !l!!:i'  ^ vvhich  differs  from  the  general  value  of - [9478i]  by  the  terms  depending  on

hi

Q ;  therefore  the  terms  depending  on  Q  arise  from  the  variation  of  the  figure  of  the  surface [9478i  ]

from  a  spherical  form.

1(4180) When ^'=90^ the  value  of  Q  [94786]  evidently  becomes Q  =  ^, and ^g^gj^^
then  the  increment  of  sin.F  [9478^]  is  ^sin.«,  or  ^ts  nearly.

756

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  C61.

[9483]

Figure  of  a
dropofflu-
id  between
two  paral-
lel planes.

[9483']

[9484]
[9485]

[9486]

10.  We  shall  now  consider,  in  the  same  manner,  a  drop  of  fluid  between  two
planes,  which  meet  each  other  at  their  border,  or  line  of  intersection,  supposing
this  line  to  be  in  a  horizontal  position.  The  drop  will  assume,  between  these
planes,  a  form  nearly  circular,  and  similar  to  a  pulley.  fVe  shall  first  determine
the  figure  it  would  have  between  two  horizontal  planes  which  are  very  near  to
each  other.  The  surface  of  the  drop  will  be  that  of  a  solid  of  revolution  about
a  vertical  axis  passing  through  its  centre  of  gravity.  Therefore,  by  taking  this
point  for  the  origin  of  the  vertical  ordinates  z,  and  of  the  horizontal  ordinates
w,  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9315,  &c.],*

ddz I dz /"^ dz^\

dz^\^  ~^  H

(

'+*r.)

1

b'

1

6'

rEquation  of  the  figure  of  a  drop"!
L  between  two  parallel  plane*. J

[9485a]
[94856]

[9485c]

[9485rf]
[9485c]

[9485/]
[9485g]
[9485g']
[9485ft]

V

\

^

■  /

i_

\>  "  >.

C JP  MIO

G (n

:b'

*  (4181)  Let  AA'O'B'BOA,  fig.  124,
be  a  section  of  the  drop,  by  a  vertical  plane
passing  through  its  centre  of  gravity  G;  AOB,
A'O'B',  the  surface  of  the  drop;  AA',  BE',
the  planes.  The  coordinates  of  any  point  N  of
the  surface  being  denoted  by  QD=^z,  DN=u,
C  is  the  centre  of  curvature  of  the  point  O  of
the  surface ;  so  that  CO  =  b  [9488] ,  and  it  is
evident  that  GO  =  b'  [9487].  The  radius  of  curvature  of  the  arc  ANO,  at  the  point
N,  IS  R;  the  other  radius  of  curvature  of  the  arc  passing  through  the  same  point  iV,
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  is  R'.  In  the  calculation  of  the  equation  [9315],
the  external  surface  is  supposed  to  be  concave;  and  to  conform  to  the  present  case,  we  must
change  the  signs  of  R',  6',  as  in  [9301a,  b],  and  then  [9315]  becomes

2

Rejecting  Kfvom  both  sides  of  the  equation,  and  then  multiplying  by  7^>  we  get

H

»'  »  ~t" H  1./'

R' R

H

Now  we  have
R'

1  dz
u'du

l/l+^

^  ^  rf«2

[9326'];  also,  in  [9327e], -  =

1 ,  dz
—  .a.  —

du du

observing  that  the  sign  of  this  expression  is  negative,  being  different  from  that  in  [9326].
The  reason  of  this  diiSerence  in  the  signs  is,  that,  in  computing  —  [9326],  the  curve  OlS

R

[9488']

X.Suppl.l.«§>10.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES. 757

6'=  the  radius  of  the  circumference  formed  by  the  section  of  the  drop  with [9487]

a  horizontal  plane  drawn  through  its  centre  of  gravity ;
b  =  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  drop  by  a [9488]

vertical  plane  passing  through  the  centre  of  gravity,  at  a  point  where

z  is  nothing.

We  have  given  to  the  fractions r?  r,?  contrary  signs  in  [9486],  because  the

surface  is  concave  towards  the  centre  of  gravity  in  a  horizontal  direction,  and
convex  towards  the  centre  of  gravity  in  a  vertical  direction.

If  we  neglect  the  action  of  gravity  g,  as  we  have  done  in  [9333,  9334],
the  equation  [9486]  will  give,  by  multiplying  by  udu,  and  then  integrating,*

fig.  116,  page  713,  is  supposed  to  pass  through  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  O,  with  its
concavity  upwards,  or  in  the  direction  of  the  positive  values  of  z ; being  the  same  as  if  a
curve  was  to  pass  from  G  to  iV  in  fig.  124,  with  its  concavity  upwards;  but  in  the  present [9485t]
case,  the  curve ON  A  has  its  convexity  upwards ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  the  differential

dz
of "Tj  on  which  the  curvature  depends,  must  have  a  different  sign  in  fig.  124  from  that  in [9485*]

fig.  116. Substituting  the  values  [9485^'],  in  L9485g-],  and  reducing  the  two  first  terms  to

the  same  denominator,  we  get  the  differential  equation  of  the  surface  [9486],  being  under

the  same  form  as  it  is  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  202,  &c.  of  his  Nouvelle TJieorie,  8fC. [9iS5l  ]

When  the  point  N  falls  below  the  plane  OGO',  as  at  N',  z  will  become  negative,  and

equal  to  — z^,  z^  being  considered  as  positive,  and  the  equation  [9485^]  becomes

1  1  2fif2,  1  1  tnAO^ 1

—  — -2-'  =: .  [9485ml

R' R H b' b'

and as  the  signs  of  R',  R,  remain  the  same  at  N',  N,  the  arc  AOB  being  supposed

concave  to C,  it  follows  that  the  radical \/  i  i  ^, in  the  values  of  — ,  —  [9485fi-], [9485n]

I rfu2  R R

must  also  change  its  sign,  when  we  change  z  into  — z^;  hence  it  will  follow  that  the  only [9485o]

difference  in  the  equation  [9485^,  or  9486],  when  applied  to  the  lower  part  of  the  curve  at

22'Z  2)2^

N'f  will  be  to  change  the  sign  of  the  term -\--77  [9486],  so  as  to  make  it rr-,  and [9485p]

then  read  z^  for  z.

or

*  (4182) Neglecting  the  term  depending  on  jl  in  [9486],  multiplying  the  rest  of  the

expression  by  udu,  and  then  integrating,  we  obtain  the  equation  [9489],  the  process being
similar  to  that  in  [9329]. Its  first  member  may  be  put  under  the  form

[9489a]

'd^ '  [94896]

VOL. IV.  190

V"]

750  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

dz
[9489]  constant- ^  +  ^,.

V'  +  du^

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  observe  that,  when  2  =  0,  we

dz
shall  have —  =  od, and u  =  b' [9487]  ;  hence  we  deduce

[9490]  constant  =  ^  +  ^/ ;

consequently

[9491]  "-rfi:  b"-u'  ^ b'^+^

[9493^

v/i+

dz^  26 ' 26'

di?

We  shall  now  put

h'9 ,.2 A'2_L,,2

[9492]  TT _  ^  ^ I ^ +" .

^~ 26 + 26' '

and  then  we  shall  have  *

^^.^ , U.du  dz  U

[9493]  dz  = .- -^ , or —  =

The  integral  of  this  differential  equation  depends  on  the  rectification  of  the
conic  sections ;  and,  by  taking  the  integral,  we  get  z  in  terms  of  u.  We
shall  put

and  at  the  point  O,  fig.  124,  page  756,  where u=sb'f  and y=0, it  becomes  equal  to

6'2 6'2

[9489c] h';  and  then  the  equation  [9489]  changes  into 6'=:  constant  —  ^4~w»  which  gives  the
constant  quantity  as  in  [9490] ;  substituting  this  in  [9489],  we  get  [9491],

*  (4183) Substituting  [9492]  in  [9491],  we  get

[9493a]  '^" =  Tf;

squaring,  and  multiplying  by  du^-\-d2r^,  we  easily  obtain  dz  [9493],  which  is  similar  to  that
in  [9393],  and  like  it  can  be  integrated  by  means  of  elliptical  functions,  or  by  the
rectification  of  the  conic  sections  [9392c].

X.  Suppl.l.  -^10]  FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES.  759

2h  =  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  between  which  the  drop  is  included,  so [9494]

that  h  is  the  extreme  value  of  z ;
/=  the  extreme  value  of  the  horizontal  radius  u ;  then  the  integral  of  the [9495]

equation  [9493]  will  give  h^  in  terms  of  f,b,b';
6'z=the  complement  of  the  angle  which  the  extreme  side  of  the  vertical [9496]

section  of  the  surface  makes  with  the  horizontal  plane ;  this  notation

being  similar  to  that  in  [9346]  ;  then  we  shall  have,  at  this  point,*

dz cos  J'

du^'smJ''  '  [9496']

therefore

cos.d'  U  dz cos  J'

sinJ'  ~~  [/u^—  U^  '  dii  ~  sin.a'

U

u

V  m2

[9497]

Substituting  y  for  w,  in  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [9492],  we  obtain, [9497']
as  in  [9496c],

6'2  /  f  J'2

If  we  substitute  in  the  expression  of  A  in  terms  of/,  6,  h'  [9495],  the  value  of/
deduced  from  the  equation  [9498],  we  shall  have  an  equation  between  ^,  6,
and  6',  from  which  we  may  deduce  6  in  terms  of  h  and  h'.

If  we  suppose  6'  to  be  considerably  greater  than  ^,  or,  in  other  words,  if  the
thickness  of  the  drop  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  its  width,  as  is  supposed •• ^

*  (4184) This  is  similar  to  [9383/],  changing  the  sign  o{  L'K'  from  negative  to  positive, [9495^1
to  conform  to  fig.  124,  page  756,  and  observing  that,  in  this  case,  6'  represents  the  angle
PAa,  formed  at  A  by  the  line  AP  and  the  tangent  ^a  of  the  arc  at  A. Substituting
this  in  the  second  equation  [9493],  we  get  [9497] ; and  from  the  second  form  of  this

equation  we  easily  deduce cos.a'=  — , sinJ'=\/  1 —  . This  value  of  cos.d'  gives [94966]

C7=M.cos.a', which  is  to  be  substituted  in  the  first  member  of  [9492] ;  then,  putting  u=f [9496c]
[9497'],  and  dividing  by  /,  we  get  [9498]. We  ought  to  remark,  that  the  author  supposes,
throughout  this  calculation,  that  the  two  planes  are  of  the  same  nature,  or  have  the  same  action [9495^]
on  the  fluid  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  extreme  angle  of  inclination  of  the  fluid  to  the  plane
6'  is  the  same  for  both  planes;  it  is,  however,  very  easy  to  modify  his  calculation  so  as  to r9496ei
take  up  the  case  where  these  angles  differ  from  each  other,  as  we  shall  show  hereafter,  in
[9514e,  &c.].

760  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

in  the  preceding  article  [9473'],  we  can  determine  2;  by  a  converging  process.
For  this  purpose  we  shall  put

111

[9500]  ---=_,

[9501]  W=6'+W',

[9502] u'  being  very  small  in  comparison  with  6';  and  we  shall  then  have*

19503]  U=.'y,{h"-U')-^,.

We  shall  now  put
[9504]  u'=u"—-^,

[9505] and  we  shall  have,  by  neglecting  quantities  of  the  order  t tt  >

*  (4185) Substituting  the  value  of  u  [9501]  in [9492],  we  obtain successively,  by
using  [9500],  the  same  value  of  U  as  in  [9503] ;

[9503.] t,=_P^:!^+«i2+(|iM:^

[95036] =^,.(6"_„.)_|?.  .

t  (4186) Substituting  u'  [9504]  in  [9503],  we  get  successively

^  ^ h"  \  ^267 26"  V  26'  ^46'2/ 6" '^  ^  ^  26" V  26' 46'2y

Now  as  6'  is  much  greater  than  h,  the  quantity  —  [9500]  must  be  of  the  same  order  as  -;

[95056] that  is,  h,  b",  must  be  of  the  same  order;  consequently  b"  must  be  small  in  comparison  with
b'. Again,  it  follows  from  [9504],  that  u"  is  of  the  same  order  as  u'  or  b  [9501,  &c.].
1 2tt"3  1 263 62

[9505c] Hence  the  term -^rl^ i^  of  the  order i^r-^^T/jOr  —  , which is to the first  term

b'  62  r ^ •

of  C7[9503],  namely jj-b"  or  b',  as r— to  1,  and,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  — ,  it

u" .
[9505rf] i^^y  be  neglected. IMoreover  the  last  term  of  [9505a]  is  of  the  order  — ,  m  comparison

with  that  just  considered,  and  it  must  therefore  be  smaller,  and,  like  it,  maybe  neglected ;  and

then  the  last  value  of  U  [9505a]  will  become  as  in  [9506].  We  may  observe  that,  when
r9505cl z  =  0, u  becomes  equal  to  b'  [9487],  and  u'  [9501] becomes  m'=0;  moreover,  at  this

point,  the  value  of  u"  deduced  from  [9504],  is  u"=0,  and  then  we  find  the  assumed
r9505/*l *'*'^^^  ^f  ^»  ^^  ^^^  ^^'"^^  pointy  to  be 6  =  0, as  is  evident  from  the  equation  [9508'] ;  these

values  are  used  in  [9510].

X.  Suppl.  l.<§>10.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES. 761

C7=^.(6"-W"),  [9506]

which  gives  *

U^^U'=^^A2b\(l+^-^\u''--'U''^l.  [9507]

We  shall  now  put

B=b".(l  +  ^^y  [9508]

w"  =  5.(l— cos-O,  [^sosT

and  we  shall  have  very  nearly  f

*  (4187)  Substituting  the  values  of  u,  U  [9501,  9506],  in  u^—  U%  we  get  [9507a],  or,
by  reduction,  [9507&]  ;  and  by  using  the  value  of  u'  [9504],  it  becomes  as  in  [9507c].
Neglecting  the  terms  containing  u"^,  m"^,  on  account  of  their  smallness,  we  obtain  the  first
form  of  [9507f?J,  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  second  form,  as  in  [9507] ;

u^—V^={b'^-\-2h'u'+u'^)—^.{b"^—2b"u"-j-u"^)  [9507O]

=  2i'«'+«'2+^.u"— ~  w"2  [95076]

(m"3 «"4\  Qjk'2  6'2

^^'u''+^-^.u''^^^.u''^^l^^.^2b\(^^^^  [9507rf]

t  (4168)  Substituting  the  expressions  [9508,  9508'J,  in  the  equation  [9507],  it  becomes,
by  successive  reductions,

m9— t72=:^.^2^2.(l_cos.^)_^2.(l_cosJ)2j=^.S2.{l— C0S.2d}=^.52.sin.2d; [9509al
y  u"2

whence ^u^—m=—;.B.sm.6. From [9501,  9504],  we  obtain u=b'-^u" —  — , [9509&]
whose  differential  is du==du" .(l — ~^;  multiplying  this  by  U  [9506],  we  get

Udu  =  du".^^.fl  —  y\{b"-^u"),  [9509c]

Substituting <?«"=  5. <Z^.sin.^  [9508'],  and  dividing  by \/u^—  m, we  get  the  expression
of  dz  [9493],  under  the  following  form;

Now  the  value  of  u"  [9508']  gives

u"^=:B^.{l—2cos.6-\-cos.^6)  =  B^.{i  —  2cos.d  +  ^os.26) [6],  Int.j  [9509c]

VOL. IV.  191

762  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^l.

C  h" h"  >

[9509]  dz==h  "d&  •  ^  cos.d — ^,  +  ^, .  COS.25  ^ .

Integrating  this  expression,  and  observing  that  z  vanishes  at  the  same  point  as
t^^^^3 m",  and  therefore  also  with  5  [9505/],  we  get

[9511]  z=^h".  ^sin.d— ^,  J  +  ^.sin.2^^ .  (a)

[9512] Putting  h  for  the  extreme  value  of  z,  and  d"  for  the  corresponding  value  of  ^
we  shall  have

^"'  A=6^sin.fl^h--l^'•■-^+^/•cos.^''^

[9513]  C 26'  sm.d" 26'  ^

whence  we  deduce  very  nearly  *

substituting  these  in  [9509c?J,  we  obtain
[9509/]  rf^=6"^.^l-J5.(I— cos.<l).(^-,  +  ^)  +  ^.(J— 2cos.<l  +  ^cos.20)^

If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  6"^,  in  this  value  of  dzj  we  may  neglect  those  of  the  order
6  "2,  in  the  terms  between  the  braces  in  [9509^] ;  and  in  this  case,  the  value  of  B  [9508]

B  h" B h" B^ h"

[9509^1] will  give -  =1  -f  -  , ^,=j, , ^/  =  ^  • Substituting  these  in  [9509^],  and  neglecting

[9509t] the  terms  which  destroy  each  other,  we  get dz  =  b"d6.j — ^,-h<^os.6-{-~.cos.26^f  asm

[9509fc]  [9509],  whose  integral  is  given  in  [9511]  ;  and  by  substituting  sin.24=2smJ.cosJ  [31],
Int.,  and  then  changing  6  into  d",  and  z  into  A,  we  get  [9513],  corresponding  to  the
extreme  point  of  the  curve.

[9514a] *  (4189) As  —  is  small  [95056],  the  expression  [9513]  gives  very  nearly  A=6".sin.^',

[95146]  and  the  value  of  z  [9511]  will  be  nearly  z=^b" .sinJ,  corresponding  to  a  circular  arc
whose  radius  is  6",  and  sine  z',  therefore  the  surface  AOB,  fig.  124,  page  756,  must  be

[9514c] nearly  circular. The  value  of  h  [9514a]  gives b"=—r^„; substituting  this,  in  the  terras

Detween  the  braces  in  [9513],  we  get  very  nearly

dividing  this  by  hh'\  we  obtain  [9514].
[9514e]  AH the calculations which have been made in this article are founded upon

the supposition  that  the  two  planes  are  of  the same materials, and that the  angles  6
•' •' corresponding to  them are equal to  each  other. We shall now  point out briefly  the

modifications  which  must  be  made  when  these  angles  are  difierent. We  shall  still  refer  to

X.  Suppl.  1.  <§.  10.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES. 763

_h ^ , ^.cos.5"  i  I

26' * sin.2 6"  +  2b'.sm.6"\  '  ^^^^^^

I sm.6" C h 6" . h.cosJ"

fig.  124,  page  756,  supposing  the  horizontal  line  OGO'  to  be  drawn  through the  points

O,  O',  where  the  tangents  to  the  curves  AOB,  A'O'B',  are  vertical;  and  taking,  as  before, [9514g-]

the  middle  point  G  as  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  z,  u ;  the  positive  values  of  z  being  taken

above  the  line  OGO',  and  the  negative  values  below  that  line. Then,  instead  of  the  notation

in  [9494 — 9496],  we  shall  suppose  that  the  symbols  h,f,  6',  correspond  to  the  upper  plane [9514fc]

AHA',  and  that  the  same  letters,  with  a  mark  below  them,  h,^,/^,  5',  represent  respectively

the similar quantities for the lower plane BIB' ; h, being considered  as a positive

quantity;  so  that HI=h-\-h^ represents the distance  of  the  two  planes;  and  we  have  ■'

GO=GO'=b', HA=f, IB=f^, angle  lf^a  =  90'*— 5', angle  IB 6  =  90"— &'/, [9514ft]

lastly  we  shall  suppose,  as  in  [9488],  that  b  is  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve  AOB  at [9514f  ]

O,  or  of  the  curve  A'O' B'  at  O'. Then  the  whole  calculation  in  this  article,  from  [9486]

to  [9525],  may  be  considered  as  appertaining  to  the  part  of  the  drop  which  is  situated  above [9514ni]

the  plane  OGO';  and  the  calculation  relative  to  the  lower  part  of  the  drop  is  perfectly

similar. For  we  have  merely  to  repeat  the  calculation,  altering  the  sign  of  the  term — in [9514n]

[9486],  and  then  writing  z^  for  z,  as  in  [9485p],  z^  being  considered as  positive  [9485/] ;
changing  also,  as  above,  h  into  h^,  f  into  f^,  6'  into  ^',  without  altering  the  symbols  b,  b',  b" [9514o]
[9514Z,  Ic,  9500],  or  B,  6  [9508,  9508^]. Then  we  shall  get,  as  in  [9511],

:z,=  b" .Um.d  —  ^,.d-}-^,.s\n.^6l  .  [9514p]

Taking,  in  like  manner  as  in  [9512],  h^  for  the  extreme  value  of  z,,  and  &','  for  the  extreme
value  of  6,  we  shall  find,  as  in  [9513],

h,^b''.^n.K.ll-~.£^,  +  ~.cos.iM;'l.  [9514,]

The  same  changes  may  be  made  in  the  symbols  in  the  formulas  [9516 — 9524] ;  but,  for  the

sake  of  brevity,  we  shall  not  repeat  these  formulas  with  their  additional  accents. If  b  or  b" [9514r]

b"
be  so  small,  in  comparison  with  b',  that  the  terms  of  the  order — may  be  neglected,  we

shall  have,  from  [9513,  9514^],

A=^6".sin.d",  h^^b"  .sm.6'; ;  [9514a]

b"
and,  by  continuing  to  neglect  quantities  of  the  same  order -  , we  may  also  put  b"=b

[9500], 4"= 4'  [9521],  and  in  like  manner 6"^=6'^; hence  [9514s]  become

h  =  b.sm.6',  h=b.sm.6',,  [9514u]

whose  sum  gives  the  thickness  of  the  drop h-{-h,=b.\sm.d'-\-sm.6',\ ;  and  from  this  we [9514«]

get b  = ^-  '— ,, which  is  similar  to  the  expression  given  by  M.  Poisson  in  page  206 [9514u>]

°  sin.3'-(-8in.^;'  r  o  y

of  his  Nouvelle  Tlieoriey  Sfc,  changing  A-f  A<  into  k,  kc,  so  as  to  conform  to  his  notation, [951 4x]

764  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

We  may  determine  ^"  by  means  of  the  angle  ^',  the  complement  of  the  inclination
[9515] of  the  extreme  sides  of  the  curve  to  the  two  planes  [9496]. At  the  extreme
points  of  the  curve,  we  have,  as  in  [9497],

dz cos.d'  u

[9516]

du sin.r . /-, f^^'

[9517] —  being,  in  this  case,  its  extreme  value,  which  is  therefore —  =  cos.^', as  in

[94966]. Then we have,  at  these  extreme points, as in [9508',  9512,
9506,  9501,  9504],

[9518]  W"  =  5.(l  — COS.5"),

[9519]  f7=^^.(6'/__^'')  =  6'__^,

[9520]  M  =  6'  +  i*'  =  6'  +  Z^"— ^.

Hence  we  easily  deduce  *  •

[9521]  d"  =  d'— |-'.sin.^';

*

(4190) Dividing  the  value  of  U  [9519]  by  that  of  u  [9520],  and  substituting  for

h'

U .  u''

— its  value  cos.tf'  [9517],  we  get  [9521a];  if  we  neglect  the  square  of — , on  account

of  its  smallness,  it  will  become  successively,  as  in  the  last  form  of  [9521a],

b'u"  ii"

h'——  1  — -

[9521a] cos.5'= ns-= r, -n^^i  1 ).(  1  —  —  1  =  1 .( 1— —  I.

h'-Uu"^— 14.^  —  ^ ^ ^") ^ ^')  ^" ^' ^ ^"/

"^  26'  '^  h' 26'2

Now  from  [9518,  9508],  we  have

[95216]  w"=6".(l  +  ^\(l— cos.d"), or ^=(1  — cos.d")+^-(l  — cos.^")  5

whence

[95216']  1— ~cos.d"— ^.(1— cos.^");

6"
substituting  this  in  [9521a],  and  neglecting  the  square  of — , we  get

[9521c]  cos.fl'=cos.d"— ^.(1— cos.^")  — ^'.cos.^';

and  in  this  last  term,  we  may  put  simply  b".  (1 — cos.d")  for  u"  [95216],  and  it  will  become,
by  successive  reductions.

X.  Suppl.l.  ^10.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES. 765
therefore  we  shall  have  *  ,  -  .  ^  [9521']

cos.tf'=cos.fl"— -.(1— cos.O")— -.(1  — cos.fl").cos.O"=cos.fl"— ^.(l-cos.^o")

'  ■ [9521rf]

'  v

=  cos.fl" —  —  .sin.Stf".

Now  if  we put  tf'=:fl"-f-5, we shall have,  as  in [61],  Int., cos.fl'=cos.fl" — (J.sin.fl";
Putting  this  equal  to  the  last  expression  in  [9521</],  neglecting  the  terms cos.O", which [952ic]

6"
mutually destroy each other, and then dividing  by — sin.fl", we get 5  =— .sin.fl"j

consequently  -

h"  h"  h"

fl'=3fl"-j-5=fl"-f--.sin.fl"; whence «"=«'— -.sin.fl", or 6"=6'—-.s\n.6'  [9521/]

very  nearly,  as  in  [9521].  ^

(4191) Taking  the  sine  of  the  value  of  &"  [9521],  we  get

6
h

sin.fl"=sin.d'— ^'.sm.fl'.cos.d'  [9522o]

nearly;  and  as  we  have  very  nearly 6"=-—-, [9514c], or b"=- — ; nearly, the [9522o']
preceding  expression  becomes  very  nearly,  by  successive  operations,

C  &"  ">  C  K  COS  A'")

sin.r=sin.(J'.^l-— 77.cos.0'S=sin.<l'.^l— ?^^,f  .  [95226]

Dividing  this  by  A,  we  get  the  factor,  without  the  braces,  in  the  second  member  of  [9514] ;
substituting  this,  and  changing  6"  into  6',  in  the  small  terms  of  [9514]  depending  on  h
between  the  braces,  it  becomes

1^ sin.d' C h.cos.^") C h_ 6' ■ h.CQB.6'  }  r9522c]

6"~~ h '  i b' .sm.d'S  '  t 26'*sm.2a'~'"26'.sin.d'5  '
Multiplying  together  the  two  factors  of  the  second  member,  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  h%
we  get  [9522],  or,  as  it  may  be  written,

agreeing  with  [9523].

In  all  these calculations,  ¥  is  supposed  to  be  much  larger  than  h [9499] ;  and  if  we

b"  ,
suppose  it  to  be  so  large  that  we  may  neglect  terms  of  the  order - in [9511],  it  will

become z  =  b",sm.6; moreover [9508]  will  give B=h", and  from  [9508'J,  we  have [9522^]
b" — M"=6".cos.fl; and  then,  from  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  two  equations,  we  get
z^-\-{b" — u"f=h"^,  which  is  the  equation  of  a  circle  whose  radius  is  b" ;  therefore  the  arc '■ '^  ^
A  OB,  fig.  124,  page  756,  will  be  nearly  circular  when  the  height  of  the  drop  is  extremely  small
relative  to  its  width ;  agreeing  with  M.  Poisson,  in  page  205  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  8fC.
VOL.  IV.  192

766

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9522]
[9523]

[9524]
[9525]

or

putting

I sm.d' C. h_ 6'

h.cos.6'

2b'.sm.6'

sin  J'

e  =  ^-r7.  +  icosy-

Ssin.d

When  5'  is  equal  to  a  right  angle,  or  i'f,  Q  will  become  equal  to  i*.

We  shall  now  consider  a  drop  qfjluid,  suspended  in  equilibrium  between  two
[9525'] planes,  which  touch  each  other  in  a  horizontal  line  at  their  two  edges ;  and  we
shall  put*

*  (4192) To  illustrate  this  description,  we  have  given

[9526a] the adjoined figures 125, 126. The first is on the

intermediate  plane  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  drop

C ;  the  second  figure  is  drawn  through  the  same  centre,

[95266] perpendicular  to  the  intermediate  plane,  and  this  we  shall

call  the  second  plane. The  corresponding  points  in  these

two  figures  are  marked  with  the  same  letters. MM'  is

the intersection of  the  two glass  planes, CM  the  line

drawn  perpendicular  to  that  intersection. In  fig.  125,  the

[9526c] curve  GLHl  represents  the  curve  formed  by  the  drop,

where  it  is  intersected  by  the  intermediate  plane ;  and  the

curve  KIkF  represents  the  curve  formed  from  that  of

the outer  surface of  the  drop, where  it intersects  the

glass  plane by projecting it perpendicularly  upon the

intermediate  plane. CLK is  drawn perpendicular to

■k

Wig.USS. j^

M "^Jlafl

<!!a

//

Jidf \s

^y

JT

JPiff.iJSS

[9526rf]
[9526c]

[9526/]
[952%]

[9526A]
[9526*  ]

[9526Jfe]

CM.  Then  CM  is  the  axis  of  x,  CK  the  axis  of  y,  the  axis  of  z  being  perpendicular  to
the  intermediate  plane ;  and  if  through  any  point  B  of  the  curve  GLHl,  we  draw  BA
perpendicular  to  CM,  we  shall  have  CA  =  x,  CM=a,  MA=:=a  —  x,  AB=y,  also
lZ'G  =  2a.  These  same  values  correspond  to  fig.  126,  in  which  F',D',A',1',  &ic.,  represent
respectively  the  points  whose  projections  in  both  figures  are  F,  D,  A,  I,  &c.  Moreover
F'GF",  THI",  represent  the  sections  of  the  surface  by  the  second  plane;  these  sections  are
almost  circular,  and  the  radii  nearly  equal  to  6",  when  the  planes  are  but  little  inclined  to
each  other,  as  is  shown  in  [9514&]  ;  and  if  we  draw  F'f  tangent  to  the  curve  at  F\  also  F'c
perpendicular  to  Vf,  to  meet  MC  in  c,  we  shall  have  nearly  F'c==b"  [95146],  also  the
angle  A'Fy^dO^—d'  [9496,  &;c.] ;  and  as  cF'f  =90",  we  shall  have  MF'c  =  6',
also  F'Mc=:zF"Mc^zi  [9526].  Hence  F'cF^F'Mc-\'MF'c  =  6'-i-'us.  Lastly, /i,  as
in  [9494],  represents  the  distance  of  the  point  E  from  the  glass  plane,  measured  on  a  line
EE'  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  intermediate  plane,  and  this  line  is  evidently  equal  and
parallel  to  DD',  so  that  we  have h==aDD'=EE\

X.  Suppl.l.  §10.]  FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  INCLINED  PLANES. 767

in  a  hori-
zontal
line.

[9528]
[9528']

[9559]
[9530]

25J  =  the  angle which  these  two  planes form  with each other. Then, [9526]
having  drawn  an  intermediate  plane,  which  divides  this  ande  into Tropof

1  ,1,  fluid  be-

two  equal  parts,  we  shall  put  iSed^"

F=the  inclination  of  the  intermediate  plane  to  the  horizon.  [^^^7]

.  /.  planes  in-

1  he  section  of  the  surface  of  the  drop  by  the  intermediate  plane,  will  be  very  [9527']
nearly  a  circle,  supposing,  as  we  have  just  done,  that  tlie  width  of  the  drop  is  elch  othfr
considerable  in  comparison  with  its  thickness.  We  shall  also  suppose  that,  from
the  middle  of  this  drop,  through  any  part  of  the  section,  a  plane  is  drawn,
perpendicular  to  the  intermediate  plane ;  then  the  section  of  the  fluid  surface
by  this  plane  will  be  very  nearly  expressed  by  the  equation  [951 1].  In  defining
the  curve  which  is  formed  by  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  drop  by  the
intermediate  plane,  we  shall  use  the  rectangular  coordinates  x,  y,  whose  origin
is  in  the  centre  of  this  curve,  or  centre  of  the  drop,  putting.

For  the  axis  of  x,  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  drop  perpendicular

to  the  line  of  intersection  of  the  two  planes ;
For  the  axis  of  y,  the  line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  drop  parallel  to

the  line  of  intersection  of  the  two  planes ;
a  =  the  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  drop  to  the  line  of  intersection  of [9531]
the  two  planes ;
2a  =  the  width  of  the  drop,  measured  in  the  direction  of  the  line  a,  or  in  a [95321
direction  perpendicular  to  the  line  of  intersection  of  the  two  planes ;
a — a:=the  distance  from  the  line  of  intersection  of  the  two  planes  to  the [95331
point  of  the  curve  whose  coordinates  are  x,  y.
Then  it  is  evident  that  we  shall  have  very  nearly*

*  (4193) The  glass  planes  being  nearly  parallel,  the  curves  GLHl,  FKIJc,  fig.  125,
will  be  nearly  circular,  having  the  common  centre C. Through  this  centre C  suppose  a [9534o]
plane  to  be  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  intermediate  plane,  and  cutting  it  in  the  line CBE;
this  plane  will  cut  the  extreme  part  of  the  drop  in  the  point  E',  situated  perpendicularly  over [95346]
the  point  E,  so  that  the  coordinate  z  will  be  represented  by EE'=J)D'=h  [9526Z:],  or
[9494], Moreover CB(=a)  nearly  [9532],  and  in  the  similar  triangles CAB,  CDE,

we  shall  have  CB{=3i):  CA{=x)::BE{=FG):AD=FGxl.  Now  the  arc  F'GF",

fig.  126,  being  nearly  circular,  we  have

FG=Gc  —  Fc^Gc^F'c.cos.F'cF==b"—b".cos.{6'-\-,;s)

nearly [9526i]; hence AD=-.b".\l — cos.{6'-\--a)l; if  in  this  we  neglect trf, on [-9534^1

account  of  its  smallness,  and  substitute  for 1  —  cos.tf' its  value 'Hsm.'^^e'  [1],  Int.,  we  shall

[9534c]

[9534rf]

X «-. • 1 1 Bm.6' 2sin.4^'.cos.4^'
get ^D  =  -.6".2sin.2^0'; but  from  [9523],  we  have  nearly —=—^  = [9534/]

768  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9534]  ^=(«— a:— -.tariff.!.^' ].tanff.«, or h== («— ^)-tang.^ ^

[9535]

l+^.tang.ld'.tang.w
which  gives*

l-j-^.tang.^fl'.tang.w

I l4--.tang.^0'.tang.«  ^  x  / a  \

r=  — ; = + .(  1  -f -.tanff.i^'.tane.'cj  )  -}-&c.

h  (a  —  a;).tang.'ztf  a.tang.-sj a^^tang.sj \ a °  ^  /

[953-%] [31],  Int.;  hence  we  get  b''.2s'm.^6's=h. — ^z=A. tanged',  and  by  substituting  it,  in  the

COS  .go

hx
preceding  value  of -4  D,  we  get ^Z)=— .tang.^4'. Subtracting  this  from MA=a  —  x

llX

[9534A] [9526e],  we  get  MD==a—x — —.tanged',  and  by  multiplying  it  by  tang.D'MD,  or  tang.-cr

[9526], we  obtain  for  DD'  or  h [9534c] the  expression
[9534t]  h:==(a — x  —  -^.tang.^^M.tang.-cj.

[9534A]  The  value  given  by  the  author  is  h  =  (a — x — — j.tang.'cj,  the  factor  tang.^^'  being
[9534i  ]  omitted  by  mistake.  To  remedy  this  defect,  we  have  altered  the  original  work,  by  changing
[9534»i] a into — ^, in  the  formulas  [9534,  9535,  9540,  9542,  9547],  where  a  occurs.  This

correction  is  of  no  importance  with  fluids  which,  like  water,  alcohol,  he.,  completely  moisten
[9534n] the  planes,  and  make 6'=90^, because  in  this  case  tang.^^'=L To  preserve  a  symmetry

with  the  formulas  for  a  cone  [9469,  9472,  &ic.],  we  may  suppose,  in  like  manner  as  in
[9534o] [9471c,  d],  that  the  lines  EE',  DD',  &;c.,  fig.  125,  page  766,  are  drawn  perpendicular  to

the  upper  plane,  instead  of  being  perpendicular  to  the  intermediate  plane. In  this  case,  we

must  multiply  MD  [9534A]  by  sin.-cs  instead  of  tang.^;^  [9534i],  to  obtain  h  [9534t],  which

will  become

[9534;,]  A==fa-^--.tang.i4J.sm.^, or A=

'a
instead  of  the  value  in  [9534]. The  effect  of  this  modification will  be  to  change tang.w
into sin.w, in  all  the formulas  where it  occurs  from [9534] to [9549], as  well as  in
the  corresponding  notes.

[9534g]

[9535a] *  (4194) The  expression  of  h  [9534]  gives  -,  as  in  the  first  formula  in  [9535],  or,  as

it  may  be  written.

[95356]

1  I y  +  -.tang.^fl'.tang.w

h a.tang.tsi  , x

a

Developing  this,  according  to  the  powers  of  x,  and  neglecting  a?^,  &ic.,  it  becomes  of  the
same  form  as  the  second  expression  in  [9535].

X.  Suppl.l.  <^  10.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  BETWEEN  TWO  INCLINED  PLANES. 769

We  shall  suppose  a  canal  to  be  so  situated  in  the  intermediate  plane,  that  one
of  its  extremities  is  at  the  point  of  the  section  whose  coordinates  are  a;,  ?/,  the [9536]
other  at the point  of  the section  through  which  the  axis  of  y  passes;  the
equilibrium  of  the  fluid  in  this  canal  will  give  the  equation  *

K-^,-{-gx.sm.V=^K-^^,  '  [9537]

placing  one  accent  below  the  letters  relative  to  this  last  point. But  we  have,  by [9537']
what  precedes!  [9523],

1 sin.d' Q  1 sin.^' Q

b" h  b"  b"~ h, 6;'

h'  being,  in  this  case,  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  curve formed by the
intersection  of  the  intermediate  plane  with  the  surface  of  the  drop. Moreover,!
1  1

[9538]
[9539]

A a.tang.-sf o^.tang
1  1 ,

A^ a.tang.-za'

-.n+^.tang.i^'.tang.w  j  ,  [9540]

[9541]

*  (4195) We  shall  suppose,  in  fig.  125,  page  766,  that  BaLt  is  an  extremely  narrow [9537o]
canal,  of  uniform  diameter,  passing  along  the  intermediate  plane,  and  terminated  at  the  points
B,L;  and  that  the  radii  of  curvature  at  B  are  b'  for  the  arc  GBL,  and  b  for  the  arc
passing  through  B,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure;  also  b',,  6^,  for  the  radii  of  the [95376]
similar  arcs  at  the  point  L. Then  the  capillary  action  at  B  upon  the  canal  BaL,  is  as  in

[9485/J,  equal  to ^-|-f.Q,  — ^); and  at  L,  this  action  is K^^.Q—^Y Now [9537c]

the  point  B  is  elevated  above  L  by  the  quantity C^Xsin.F [9527], or oj.sin.F. [9537rfJ
Multiplying  this  by  g,  we  get  the  pressure  of  the  column  of  fluid,  to  be  added  to  the  action
at B, to  obtain  that at  L,  when in equilibrium,  as in [9485e,  he.]. Hence we get

^+f.(f-J)+^^-sin.F=^+f.(^,--^). Substituting ^— ^=^ [9500],  and [9537e]

the  similar  expression -  —  -=-, it  becomes  as  in  [9537].  [9537/]

t  (4196) The  first  equation  [9538]  corresponding  to  the  point  E,  fig.  125,  page  766,
is  the  same  as  [9523],  which  is  found  by  a  calculation  similar  to  that  in  [9486—9523], [9538o]
using, instead  of/,  h  [9495,  9494],  the  values  CE,  EE'  [9526i— A:]. When  the  point  E  falls

in  Kj  the  quantity  h  changes  into  A,  [9537'J,  and  the  value  of — [9538] changes  into [95386]
that  of  ^,  [9538].

X  (4197) The  equation  [9540]  is  the  same  as  [9535],  and  at  the  point  L,  fig.  125,
page  766,  where a?  =  0, and h  =  h, [9537'],  it  becomes  as  in  [9541].
VOL.  IV.  193

770  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

f9542]

[9546]

therefore  we  shall  have*

Hx.s'mJ'

£ .  (^1  +  ^.  tang.i^'.  tang.:.)  +  iQ^.  (^1,— i) +^a:.  sm.F==  0.

2fl^.tang.

As  the  section  differs  but  little  from  a  circle,  b'  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  half
width  of  the  drop  a;  b"  is,  by  what  has  been  said  [9522,  9514c],  very  nearly

[9543] equal  to - — ;, and  h  is  half  the  thickness  of  the  drop;  b'  is  therefore  very

sinJ  ^  "^

large  in  comparison  with  6";  consequently  —  is  very  small  in  comparison  with
[9544] _; therefore  the  difference - — - may  be  neglected  in comparison with

Tj,  —  77;. This may be  done  with  more propriety,  since,  b\  being  a mean

[9545]  ' •  .11

between  the  extreme  values  of  6',  the  greatest  value  of  the  difference  t,  —  r,

is  only  about  half  of  the  difference  of  the  extreme  values  of  -, .  Moreover,
the  figure  of  the  drop  being  very  nearly  circular,  as  is  found  by  experiment,  the
difference 77  —  7-^ is nearly  insensible. We may  also,  in  the preceding

[9547] equation,  neglect  the  fraction -.tang.i^'.tang.^, in  comparison  with  unity;

a

because, 2a.tang.^ being  the  thickness  of  the  drop  whose  width  is  2a,  this
[9548] fraction  does  not  exceed  the  ratio  of  the  thickness  of  the  drop  to  its  width,
which  ratio,  by  hypothesis,  is  very  small. This  being  premised,  the  preceding
equation  will  give  f

*  (4198) Transposing  all  the  terms  of  [9537]  to  the  first  member,  we  get
[9542a]  lU.  ^,—\i\  +^a?.sm.l^=0;

and  by  substituting  the  values  [9538],  it  becomes
[95426]  ^H.sm.4'.^l_l^-|-^QH.^~i^+^^.sin.F=0.

Now  if  we  subtract  [9540]  from  [9541],  we  get

and  by  substituting  it  in  [9542&],  we  obtain  [9542].

t  (4199) Neglecting  the  second  and  third  terms  of  [9542],  on  account  of  their  smallness
l- ** "■• [9546,  Sic], it becomes —  ^  ^'^'°' 1- sfj? . sin. F=  0 : dividing this by  s:x.  and

X.  Suppl.  1.^11.] ATTRACTION  BETWEEN  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.  771

sm.F=-- .  [9549]

2a2  .g .  tang.OT

[9550]

[9551]

Thus  the  angle  Fis  very  nearly  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  «,  as  in  a
drop  suspended  in  equilibrium  in  a  cone  [94756].  Comparing  this  expression
of  sin.F  with  that  of  the  preceding  article,  w^e  see  that,  the  angle  formed  by
the  two  planes  [9526]  being  supposed  equal  to  the  angle  formed  by  the  axis  [S^SO']
of  the  cone  and  its  side  [9462],  the  sine  of  the  angle  V  relative  to  the
intermediate  plane,  is  equal  to  the  sine  of  the  angle  relative  to  the  axis  of  the
cone.*  We  ought  not,  however,  to  forget,  in  comparing  the  results  of  this
analj^sis  with  experiments,  that  the  expressions  of  sin.F  are  only  approximate
values.

1 1 .  The  preceding  analysis  furnishes  an  explanation  and  the  measure  of  a
singular  phenomenon  discovered  by  experiment ;  namely,  that,  ivhether  the  fluid  he
elevated  or  depressed  between  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes,  dipped  into  a  fluid  [9552]
at  their  lower  extremities,  the  planes  ivill  tend  towards  each  other ;  so  that,  if  two
small  glass  vases,  in  the  form  of  a  parallelepiped,  floating  upon  water  or  mercury,
happen  to  approach  near  to  each  other,  they  will  immediately  unite  together.
To  prove  that  this  must  take  place,  we  shall  consider  the  two planes MB

[9552']

transposing  the  first  term,  we  get  [9549]. Poisson,  in  computing  this  problem  in  his  Nouvelle
Theorie,  &/'C.,  uses  the  same  fundamental  equation  as  in  [9318],  carrying  on  the  approximation [95496]
so  as  to  include  some  terms  which  are  neglected  by  La  Place,  as  being  within  the  limits  of
the  errors  of  the  observations. These  terms  are,  however,  omitted  by  M.  Poisson,  in  his  final raxAQc-]
expression  of sin.F, which  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  given  in  [9549],  as  may  be  seen  by

changing,  in  his formula (10),  page 258 of  that  work,  the  symbols a^,  c,  i,  6,  -a, into

If

—  ,  a,zs,  V,  ^'-|-90'*,  respectively,  in  order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation ;  putting  also,  as

^  [9549c]

in  [95345-],  si"-*  ^o'"  tang.tj,  in  [9534,  &z;c.]  ;  this  last  change  being  within  the  limits  of  the

degree  of  accuracy  aimed  at  by  La  Place,  throughout  his  whole  calculation  ;  so  that,  instead

of  [9549],  we  may  put  very  nearly s'm.V=r-Y- — r—\'  r  "  [9549/"]

[9549rf]

Sa^.g'.sin.'ztf

*  (4200) If  we  suppose  that  the  angle  formed  by  the  axis  of  the  cone  and  its  sides
is 2t3, instead  of  « [9462], we shall find that the expression [9475a]  will  become

[9550o]

2 H.  sin.,

nearly,  because,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  vi,  we  have  sin.2«  =  2sin.OT [95506]

a 2a2.g'.sin.'5J

nearly. This  being  equal  to  the  expression  [9549/],  proves  the  correctness  of  the  remarks

in  [9551].

772

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9553]

[9554]

[9554']
[9555]

[9556]

[9557]

[9558]

[9558']
[9559]

2r
JL

^-f-^y

T'i^.lZT. JB'

^^

H

G-

Qi

and iV/?,  fig.  127,  and  shall  suppose,  in  the

first  place,  that  the  fluid  is  elevated  between

them. The  infinitely  small external  part  of

the  plane  NR,  situated  at  i2,  below  the  level

VP^  will  be  pressed  by  a  force  which  may  be

thus  estimated: Imagine a  canal  VSR,  of

which  the  branch  VS  is  vertical,  and  the  branch

SR  horizontal ;  then  the  force  acting  upon  the

fluid in the canal VS  is equal to  g.  VS,  ^

augmented  by  the  force  acting  in  V,  either  by

the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  the  canal,  or  by  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere.

The  first  of  these  two  forces  is  represented  by  K  [9259],  and  we  shall  suppose

that  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  is  P ;  then  the  whole  force  of  the  column

VSWiWhQ P  +  K+g.VS. The  action,  with  which  the  fluid  in  the  canal

RS  IS  urged,  is  composed  of  two  parts. First,  the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  the

canal,  which  is  equal  to  K  [9259]. Second,  the  action  of  the  plane  upon  the

same  canal ;  but  this  action  is  destroyed  by  the  attraction  of  the  fluid  upon  the

plane,  and  there  cannot  arise  from  this  source  any  tendency  in  the  plane  to

move. For,  by  considering  only  these  reciprocal  attractions,  the  fluid  and  the

plane  will  be  at  rest,  the  action  being  equal  and  contrary  to  the  reaction ;  these

attractions  can  produce  only  an  adhesion  of  the  plane  to  the  fluid,  which  need

not  be  noticed. Hence  it  follows  that  the  fluid  presses  the  point  R  with  a

force  equal  to P-\-K-\-g.VS—'K, or  simply P-\-g.VS.

We  shall  now  determine  the  corresponding  internal  pressure.  For  this
purpose,  we  shall  suppose  the  canal  OQR  to  have  a  vertical  branch  OQ,
terminated  at  the  surface  O,  and  a  horizontal  branch  QR.  The  force  with
which  the  fluid  is  urged  in  the  branch  O  Q,  is  equal  to  g.OQ,  increased  by
the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  P,  also  by  the  force  with  which  the  fluid  acts

upon  the  column  O  Q ;  and  this  is,  by  what  has  been  said,*  equal  to K —  ^ ,

b being  the  radius  of  curvature  at  O. Therefore the  force  with  which  the

M H

[9558a] * (4201) This  force  is  represented  in [93156] by K —  —  —  —  ; and  as  h'=cr,

[95585] for  reasons  similar  to  that  of  putting  h  infinite  in  [9414],  it  becomes K —  — ,  as  in  [9452fl].
[9558c]

In  the  original  work,  it  is  erroneously  printed K — -r  ; to  correct this mistake we have
changed  h  into  26,  in  all  the  formulas  [9559—9578],  h  being  the  radius  of  curvature  at  O.

[9562]

[9563]

[9564]

X.Suppl.l.'^.ll.] ATTRACTION  BETWEEN  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.  773

T7

fluid OQ  is  urged,  is P-\-K — -7-\-g.0Q. Now,  by  what  has  been  said,* [9559/]

S=g,OP.  [9560]

Therefore  the  force  of  the  canal  OQ  is  P  +  K+g.PQ.  The  force  of  the  [9561]
canal  QR  is  equal  to  K  [9259] ;  the  point  R  will  therefore  be  pressed  on
the  inner  surface  by  the  difference  of  these  forces,  which  is  P-\-g.PQ,  or
P-\-g.  VS.  Thus  the  plane  is  pressed  with  equal  forces  [9557,  9562]  on  the
outer  and  inner  surfaces,  and  it  will  therefore  be  in  equilibrium  in  virtue  of
these  pressures.

The  exterior  fluid  rises  as  high  as  Z,  forming  a  curve  VZ'  Z\  and  between
the  planes,  it  rises  as  high  as  A",  forming  the  curve  ON'N.  The  parts  of  the
plane  extremely  near  to  Z  and  N,  and  similarly  placed  at  a  distance  from  Z  and
N  equal  to  or  less  than  the  sensible  sphere  of  activity  of  the  plane,  are  equally
pressed  within  and  without  ;t  because  the  surfaces  of  the  fluid,  comprised
within  this  sphere,  and  near  the  points  Z,  N,  are  very  nearly  of  the  same  form.
Besides,  the  extremely  small  difference,  which  may  exist  between  the  internal
and  external  pressures  of  the  fluid,  being  limited  to  an  insensible  extent,  we
may  neglect  it,  and  notice  only  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  fluid  at  the  points
where  the  action  of  the  plane  upon  the  surface  ceases  to  be  sensible.  Therefore
let  Z'  be  one  of  the  points  of  this  surface,  and  suppose  the  horizontal  canal  Z'q

IT

to  be  formed. The  force  in  Z'  will  bet P  +  K — ^, R  being  the  radius [9566]

*  (4202) The  expression [94526] gives —=g.q'; and  in  like manner,  in the

JJ  ^*  [9559o]

present  case,  we  get,  as  in  [9560], —=g.OPj by  changing  6' into  b,  and  q'  into  OP,

to  conform  to  the  present  notation. Substituting  this  in  [9559'],  it  becomes

P  +  K-^g.{Oq-OP)  =  P  +  K-\-g.Pq,  [95596]

as  in  [9561].

t  (4203) If  the  angle  6'  [9346]  is  the  same  on  both  sides  of  the  plane,  as  the  author
supposes  in  this  article,  the  part  of  the  pressure  here  spoken  of  will  be  the  same  on  both [9565a]
sides  of  that  plane ;  but  if  there  is  a  difference  in  the  value  of  this  angle,  on  account  of  the
plane  being  more  or  less  wet  on  the  one  side  than  on  the  other,  or  being  made  of  a  different [95656]
substance  on  opposite  sides,  the  pressures  may  be  unequal,  as  we  shall  see  when  treating  of  this
subject  in  the  second  supplement  [9983m?,  &.c.].

J  (4204) The  capillary  action,  which  in  [9558']  is  called K—-, here becomes

[9565]

VOL. IV.

194

774  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9567] of  curvature  in  Z'. If  we  put  TZ'  =  x, the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid  in  the
canal Z'LFV will  give,  by  using  [9416],*

[9568]  g=^^.

The  point  V  being  placed  at  a  distance  from  the  plane,  such  that  the  radius  of
[9568'] curvature  of  the surface in  V  may  be considered as infinite,  the external

pressure  in  q  will  be
[9569]  P-^K—gX.

The  corresponding  internal  pressure  will  be  f

[95701  P  +  K—^+g.{OP  —  x),

or P  +  K — gx ; therefore  the  internal  and  external  pressures  are  equal  through
the  whole  extent  of  ZG.

We  shall  now  consider  the  pressure  above  the  point  Z, The  external  pressure

[9572] is  reduced  to  P  [9554']. The  internal  pressure  upon  a  point  R'  is  determined

by  considering  a  canal  OQ'R',  Q'R'  being  horizontal. The  pressure  of  the

[9566a] K — r-, because  the  radius  of  curvature  b  changes  into  R  at  the  point  Z'. Adding  to
this  the  atmospherical  pressure  P  [9558],  and  we  get  the  whole  external  action  at  g',  equal  to
[95666] p^K-^^, as  in  [9566],

[9568a] *  (4205) Substituting  —  [9326]  in  [9416],  we  get  -— 2a2;  =  -;  but  at  the  point  V,

we  have  6'=oo,  or  |,=0  [9558a, 9568'],  also  ^=^  [9328];  hence  -^  — 2.|.5r=0,
[95685]  jf  H  H

or —=gz] and  by  changing  z  [9309]  into  x  [9567],  to  conform  to  the  present  notation,

it  becomes  as  in  [9568]. Substituting  this  in  [9566],  it  becomes  as  in  [9569].

[9570o]  t  (4206)  This  is  found  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  in  [9559'],  supposing  the  line
Z'q  to  be  continued  till  it  meets  O  Q  in  Q".  For  then  the  action  at  q,  on  the  canal  ^''g^,
is  found  by  adding  together  the  atmospherical  pressure  P  [9554'] ;  the  gravity  of  the  column

[95706] OQ",  which is  equal to ^.OQ"; and  the  capillary  action  at O, which is equal  to

JT— I [9558']. The  sum  is  P  +  X— ^  +  ^.OQ"; and  as

[9570c]  Oq;'=OP  —  Pq"=OP'-TZ'=OP  —  x [9567],

it  becomes  as  in  [9570];  and  by  using  —-=g.OP [9560],  it  becomes P-\^K — gx,  as
in  [9571].

[9575]

X.Suppl.l.<^ll.] ATTRACTION BETWEEN  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.  775

column Oq' is* P  +  ^— ^-f  ^.OQ', or P  J^  K^g .OP+g.OQ',  or, [9573]

lastly,  P  +  K—g.P  Q'. The  contrary  pressure  of  the  canal  R'Q'  is  K  [9259], [9574]
so  that  the  point  R'  is  pressed  at  its  inner  surface  by  the  force P — g.PQ';
therefore  the  plane  is  pressed  inwards ,  at  that  point,  by  the  force  \ g.PQ'.

XT

In  the  part NN'O, the pressure at  N'  is  J P-\-K — — ,, h'  being  the [9576]
radius  of  curvature  in  N';  and  by  supposing  the  horizontal  canal  N'p'  to  be
formed,  the  interior  pressure  in  p'  will  be P — -jj. Now  putting  x'  for  the [9577]
height  of  the  point  N'  above  IK,  we  shall  have,  from  [9416],^

*  (4207) This  is  the  same  as  [95706],  changing  OQ"  into  OQ',  and  then  substituting
jy  [9573a]

—=g.OP [9560];  for by  this  means  it  becomes P  -\'K—g,OP  -{■g.0(^', as  in

[9573].

t  (4208) The  difference between  the  internal  pressure  P — g-PQ,^  [9575],  and  the
external  pressure  P  [9572],  is  g.PQ^',  as  in  [9575],  in  the  direction  -R'Q'.

[9575a]

t  (4209) This  is  similar  to  the  force  at  Z'  [9566],  changing  the  radius  JR,  relative  to mg^g^i

ing  to  the  point  N'. The  force  of  the  canal N'p' ,

the  point  Z',  into  b'  [9576],  corresponding  to  the  point  N'. The  force  of  the  canal N'p
at  p'  is  K  [9259], and  by  subtracting  it  from  the preceding  value [9576],  we  get  the

pressure  in  p',  in  the  direction  N'p'  equal  to P  —  ^,) as  in  [9577].

[95766]

§  (4210) The  equation  [9416]  is,  in  [9568a], put under the form -  — 2az  =  - ; [9577a]

R,  b',  being  the  radii  of  curvature  corresponding,  in  the  present  case,  to  the  points  N%  O,
respectively  [9326,  9413'] ;  and  to  conform  to  the  notation  here  used,  we  must  change  them
into  b',b  [9576,  9559]; also  z  [9309]  must be changed into  x'  [9577],  and  then the

preceding  equation  will  become -  — 2(u;'=7-. Substituting a-==g [95686],  multiplying [95776]

Tf H

by ^H, and transposing the second term, we  get 2b''^Qb'^^^'' ^^  '°  [9578].

H  H

Substituting  the  value  of - [9560],  it  becomes ^,=g-{OP -\-x')=g.  Gp', as  in  the

jj

second  form  of  [9578]. Substituting  this  in  the  function P —^, [9577], denoting  the

internal  pressure  at  p',  it  becomes  P — g.  Op';  taking  the  difference  between  this  and  the  [9577rf]
external  pressure  at  jo',  namely  P  [9572],  we  obtain  the  whole  inward  pressure  g-Gp'  [9577c]
[9579],  in  the  direction  p'Ni

776  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^I.

therefore  the  plane  at  the  point  p'  will  be  pressed  inwards,  in  the  direction  p'N\
by  the  force  g.  Gp'.

Hence  we  easily  perceive  that  the  force  which  presses  the  plane  NR  inwards.
[9580] is  equal  to  the  pressure  of  a  column  of  fluid  ivhose  height  is  ^.(GiV-f  GZ),
and  ivhose  base  is  the  part  of  the  plane  included  between  Z  and  *  N.

r9580al  *  i^'^^^)  From  what  has  been  proved  in  [9575,  9579],  it  follows  that,  at  any  part  of  the
line  ZN,  as  at  R\  the  pressure  will  be  as  g.GR' ;  and  by  putting  GR'=w,  it  becomes
g.w;  therefore  the  whole  pressure  on  the  part  dw  of  lo,  will  be  givdw,  whose integral,

[95806]  supposing  it  to  commence  at  the  point  Z,  will  be  ^^.(t^^ —  GZ^)  ;  and  the  whole  pressure
upon  ZN  is  found  by  putting  w=  GN;  hence  it  becomes

[9580c]  ^g.{GN^—GZ^)^^g.{GN+GZ).{GN—GZ)=ig.{GN-i-GZ).NZ,

which is evidently  equal to  the pressure of  a column  whose base  is  NZ,  and  height
[9580rf] ^i^Qjsf_^QZ)^  asm  [9580].

In  all  these  calculations,  it  is  supposed,  as  in  [9434,  Sic.],  that  the  point  iV,  which  is  taken
[9580e  ] as  the  extreme  point  of  elevation  of  the  fluid  near  the  plane,  is  not  in  fact  the  actual  point  of

contact  with  the  plane,  or  with  the  upper  surface  of  the  fluid,  but  is  distant  from  it  by  an
[9580/*] insensible  quantity  of  the  order  X,  corresponding  to  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of

the  corpuscular  attraction,  or  to  the  distance  between  the  upper  surface  nom  of  the  fluid,  and
[9580g] the assumed surface  NOM;  the  fluid  varying in  density,  from  the  upper  surface  nom,

where  the  density  is  very  small  or  nothing,  to  the  lower  surface  NOM,  where  the  density
[9580ft] is  the  same  as  that  of  the  internal  fluid  mass,  which  is  represented  by  unity. We  may  also

remark,  relative  to  the  actual  measures  of  the  elevation  of  the  point  N  above  the  horizontal
[9580t] level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  which  we  shall  represent  by GN='k, that  it  is  a  matter  of

perfect  indifl^erence  whether  we  consider  that  point  as  being  situated  in  the  surface  nom,  or
[9580A:] in  the  surface  NOM,  the  interval  between  these  surfaces  being  wholly  insensible  to  our

senses,  on  account  of  its  smallness,  so  that  the  one  may  be  used  for  the  other  without  any
[9580Z  ] appreciable  error. Similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  on  the

outside  of  the  plane  at  Z,  supposing  its  elevation  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  to
[9580m] be  represented  hy  GZ=1c,.

The  values  of  k,  Tc,  [9580i,  m\,  being  substituted  in  the  difference  of  the  pressures  on  the

opposite  sides  of  the  plane  [9580c],  it  becomes
[9580n]  hg-{^^ — ^^/^)  =the  difference  of  the  pressures  computed  in  [9580].

We  shall  see,  in  the  second  supplement  to  this  book  [9983w,  &c.],  that  this  expression  of  the
[9580o] pressure  requires  some  modification  when  the  planes  are  of  a  different  nature,  or,  in  other

words,  when  the  angle  -a  [9346']  corresponding  to  the  inner  side  of  the  plane  at  N,  differs

from  the  similar  angle  w^  relative  to  the  outer  side  of  the  plane  at  Z ;  the  correction  of  this
[9580p] pressure  being ^g,o?.{s\n,-a — sin.w^); so  that  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9983u>],
[9580y]  hg'Q^^-  ^.')  +^5-«'.(sin.«~sin.^,)  =  {Ti^^corr^^^^^^^^

This expression  is  the  same  as that  given  by IVI.  Poisson,  in  page 172  of  his  Nouvelle
Theorie,  ^c,  and  it  is  reduced  to  a  much  more  simple  form  in  [9984/*].

X.  Suppl.  1.^11.] ATTRACTION  BETWEEN  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.

777

A  similar  result  holds  good  for  the  plane  MB ;  thus  we  have  the  force  with
which  the  two  planes  tend  towards  each  other,  and  we  see  that  this  force  increases
in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their  distance  from  each  other*

In  a  vacuum,  the  two  planes  will  also  tend  towards  each  other ;  the  adhesion
of  the  plane  to  the  fluid  produces  then  the  same  effect  as  the  pressure  of  the
atmosphere.

We  may  prove  in  the  same  manner,  that  when  the  fluid  is  depressed  between
two  planes,  the  pressure  which  each  plane  suffers  in  an  inward  direction,  is  equal
to  the  pressure  of  a  column  of  the  fluid  whose  height  is  the  half  sum  of  the
depressions  below  the  level,  at  the  points  of  contact  of  the  internal  and  external
surfaces  of  the  fluid  with  the  plane,  and  whose  base  is  the  part  of  the  plane
included  between  the  two  horizontal  lines  drawn  through  those  points.^

[9581]

Pressure
on  two
planes  dip-

[9582]

ped  in  a
fluid.

[9583]

[9584]

[9585]
[9586]

*  (4212)  When  the  planes  are  very  near  to  each  other,  we  shall  have  GZ^  very  small
in  comparison  with  GN^;  and  then  the  whole  pressure  [9580c],  ^g.(GN^ — CrZ^),  is
nearly  equal  to  ^g.GN^;  and  as  GN  is  nearly  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  GX  [9454],  the
whole  pressure  will  be  very  nearly  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  GX.  Moreover,  if
we  divide  the  whole  pressure  ^g.GN^  [95826],  by  the  height  GN,  we  shall  get  ^g.GN,
for  the  mean  pressure  on  any  given  point  of  the  column  ZN,  which  will  therefore  be
inversely  as  the  distance  of  the  planes  G  X.

t  (4213)  The  annexed  figure  128  is  similar  to  fig.  127,
but  is  adapted  to  a  convex  surface  NOM,  depressed  below
the  level  VX  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel;  in  this  case,  the
demonstration  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  [9552 — 9578],  merely
changing  the  signs  of  the  terms.  Thus  upon  the  principles
mentioned  in  [9276,  9294'],  we  must  change  the  sign  of  b,
in  [9559'],  and  by  this  means  it  becomes

Also,  in  [9560],  we  must  change  the  signs  of  6,  OP;  and  we

H

get,  as  in  that formula, —=g.OP. Substituting  this  in  the  preceding  expression,  it

becomes  P  +  K-{-g.{OP-{- OQ)=zP  +  K-{-g.P  q,  asm  [9561];  and  the  rest  of  the
calculation  [9561,9562]  isnotahered;  so  thatwe  find,  as  in  [9562],  that  the  opposite  actions  at
JR,  and  of  course  upon  any  point  of  the  plane  NR  below  N,  mutually  balance  each  other.  The
same  takes  place  on  the  part  GZ,  the  pressures  of  the  atmosphere  on  opposite  sides  mutually
destroying  each  other.  It  now  remains  to  examine  the  action  upon  the  part  N Z.  To  determine
this,  we  shall  draw  through  any  point  -R',  a  narrow  horizontal  canal  jR'jP,  which  is  bent  upwards
in  jPF^  to  meet  the  level  surface  of  the  water  in  V.  Then  the  pressure  at  V  is  P-\-  K;  and  at
JR'  this  will  produce  a  force  similar  to  that  computed  in  [9557],  namely,  P-\-K-\-g.  VF — K,
VOL.  IV.  195

XT T

Mff.128.
G- F

X-

!Z"\

1
z

^'  a

I

IK

T'

Jsr

-7^
R

[9582a]
[95826]

[9582c]

[9586a]
[95866]

[9586c]

[9586rf]
[9586c ]

[9586/]

[9586g-]
[9586^]

778  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

12.  It  now  remains,  in  order  to  complete  this  theory  of  capillary  attraction,  to
inquire  into  what  produces  the  concavity  or  convexity  of  the  fluid  contained  in  the
tube  or  between  two  planes.  The  principal  cause  is  the  reciprocal  attraction  of
the  tube  and  fluid,  compared  with  the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles.
We  shall  here  suppose  that  these  attractions  follow  the  same  law,  tvith  respect  to

[9587'] the  distance,  both  for  the  particles  of  the  tube  and  for  those  of  the  fluid,  and  that
they  differ  only  by  their  intensities  at  the  same  distance  ;  moreover  we  shall  put

[9588]  p  =  the  intensity  of  the  action  of  the  particles  of  the  tube  upon  those  of

the  fluid;  '  k

[9588'J  p'=  the  intensity  of  the  particles  of  the  fluid  upon  each  other.

This  being  premised,  we  shall  suppose,  in  fig.  131,  that
the  lower  part  of  the  vertical  tube  ABCD  is  dipped  into
the  fluid  contained  in  the  vessel,  and  that  MN  is  the  line
of  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel.  We  shall  also
suppose  that  the  whole  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  is
plane,  and  at  the  same  level. The  point  O  of  this  surface

[9589]  included  within  the  sphere  of  the  sensible  activity  of  the
tube,  will  be  attracted  both  by  the  tube  and  by  the  fluid
contained  within  it.  The  attraction  upon  this  point,
produced  by  the  part  of  the  tube  below  MN,  may  be
resolved  into  two  forces,  namely,

[9590]  A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  and  represented  by  pa:;

[9591]  A  horizontal  force,  in  the  direction  Op,  and  represented  by  py.

The  attraction  of  the  upper  part  of  the  tube  upon  the  same  point  O,  may,  in

like  manner,  be  resolved  into  the  following  forces ;
[9592]  ^  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  and  represented  by  — pa:;

[9593]  A  horizontal  force,  in  the  direction  Op,  and  represented  by  py.

We  have  prefixed  the  sign  —  to  this last  vertical  force  [9592],  because  its

direction  is  opposite  to  that  of  the  force  [9590],  produced  by  the  attraction  of

0

B

\

p/ y

2£
C

or  simply  f*+g.  VF,  pressing  in  the  direction  FR'\  this  is  partly  balanced  by  the  pressure
of  the  atmosphere  P,  which  acts  between  the  planes,  and  reduces  it  to  ^g-.  VF,  or  g.GR',
in  the  direction  FR';  this  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  pressure  mentioned  in  [9580a]  ;  and  by
following  the  same  method  as  in  [9580a— c],  we  obtain  the  whole  pressure  on  ZN,  namely,
[9586i]  ig.{GN+GZ).(^GN-GZ)=r^g.{GN-{-GZ).NZ,

[958641 ^'^'^^  ^S*^^^  ^'^'^  ^^^^  '^  ^^'^  '" [9585,  9586]. This  is  to  be  corrected  for  the  terms
depending  on ^^a^.(sin.«  —  sin.ra,),  as  in  [9580g',  Sic.].

X.  Suppl.  1.  §12.]  ON  THE  COxNCAVlTY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE.  779

the  lower  part  of  the  tube.  To  determine  the  action  of  the  fluid  upon  the
point  O,  we  shall  take  Op'  equal  to*  Op;  then  it  is  evident  that  the  attraction
of  the  part  pp'rD  of  the  fluid  will  be

A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  which  we  shall  represent  by  p'2. [9595]

The  attraction  of  the  part  rp  'q  C  of  the  fluid  differs  from  the  attraction  of  the
lower  part  of  the  tube  by  its  intensity  only  ;t  it  may  therefore  be  resolved  into
the  two  following  forces ;

A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  and  represented  by  p'a:;  [9596]

A  horizontal  force,  considered  as  in  the  direction  Op^  and  represented  by  —  p'y. [9597]

*  (4214) In  takins; Op'=Op, the  author  supposes  the  fluid  to  be  homogeneous,  and

• •  .  . r9595al

neglects  the  consideration  of  the  change  of  density,  Sec,  near  the  surface pOp'  of  the  fluid, "■  •'

and  near  the  side  ApD  of  the  tube. If  we  notice  this  circumstance,  we  may  suppose  that

Op'  is  taken  of  such  a  magnitude,  in  comparison  with Op,  that  the  horizontal  action  of  the [95956]

fluid OjpD*  upon the  point  O  may  just  balance  the  horizontal  action  of  the  fluid  sOp'r

upon  this  same  point,  and  by  this  means  the  whole  action  of  the  fiu'id  pp'rD  is  reduced  to  one

vertical  force  pz'  [9595].  [9595c]

f  (4215)  The  author,  in  supposing  that  the  action  of  the  tube  and  that  of  the  fluid  differ
only  by  their  intensities,  neglects  wholly  the  consideration  of  the  variations  of  the  density,  as  [9596a]
well  as  the  corresponding  variations  in  the  action  of  the  fluid  near  its  surface  and  near  the
side  of  the  tube-;  and  upon  this  principle  he  deduces  the  vertical  force  of  the  fluid  [9596]
from  that  of  the  tube  [9590],  by  supposing  them  to  be  in  the  ratio  of  the  intensities  p,  p'
[9588,  9588'].  In  a  similar  way  he  obtains  the  horizontal  force  [9597]  from  that  in  [9591].  rgggg^.
The  forces  p'x,  — p'y  [9596,  9597],  will  be  changed  when  we  suppose  the  density  to  be
variable ;  and  then  we  shall  represent  them  by

A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  and  represented  by  p'^x;  [9596<f]

A  horizontal  force,  in  the  direction  Op,  and  represented  by  — p'^y,  [9596c]

p',  p'g,  being  functions  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  fluid,  on  that  of  the  tube,  on the
laws  of  their  corpuscular  attraction,  and  on  the  action  of  heat  [9173e]. These  are  to  be
used  instead  of  p'x,  —  p'y, in [9598—9600];  and  we  shall  obtain,  instead  of  the  whole [9596/]
resulting  forces  [9599,  9600],  the  following  expressions ;  ' .

The  whole  vertical  force  =p'x-{-p'z;  [9596g-]

The  whole  horizontal  force  ={2p  —  p'z).'!/.  [9596A]

To  make  the  horizontal  force  vanish,  we  must  have P2  =  2p, instead  of p'=2p, which  is
given  by  the  author  in  [9601];  and as  pg  diflfers from  p',  it  is  incorrect  to  state,  as  the
author  has  done  in  [9601,  &.C.],  that,  when p'  =  2p,  or  the  intensity  of  the  action  of  the [9596&]
tube  is  half  of  that  of  the  fluid,  the  surface  will  be  horizontal;  for  this  is  true  only  when  the
density  of  the  fluid  is  considered  as  uniform,  or p'=p'v

[9596&]

[9596i]

[9596^ ]

780  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

Hence  the  point  O  will  be  acted  upon  by  the  following  forces,  namely,

[9598]  The  vertical  forces  pa:,  —par,  p'z,  p'a:  [9590,  9592,  9595,  9596];

[9598']  The  horizontal  forces  py,  ?y,  —?'y  [9591,  9593,  9597].

Connecting  together  the  expressions  [9598],  we  get  the  whole  vertical  force
[9599] ;  and  in  like  manner  the  sum  of  these  in  [9598']  gives  the  horizontal
force  [9600],  namely,

[9599]  ^\iQ  whole  vertical  ioYce  =p'a:-fp'2;

[9600]  -  The  whole  horizontal  force  =  (2p  —  pO'^*

[9601] This  horizontal  force  will  vanish  if  p'=^2p, or  if  the  intensity  of  the  attractive

force  of  the  matter  of  the  tube  is  the  half  of  that  of  the  fluid  [of  uniform  density]

[9596/]. Then  the  point  O  will  be  subjected  only  to  the  vertical  force;  and  as

[9601']  this  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  it  will  maintain  it  in  equilibrium.
We  shall  now  consider  a  vertical  plane  CAB,  fig.  132,
whose  lower  extremity  is  dipped  into  the  fluid  contained  in
the  vessel  MNB,  supposing  AR  to  be  the  section  of
the  surface  of  this  fluid,  by  a  vertical  plane  drawn
perpendicular  to  the  first  plane  CAB,  and  the  line  AD
to  be  a  tangent  to  the  curve  AR  dX  the  point  A\  putting

[9601"]  ^=  angle  BAD  [^  being  the  angle  which  is  called  ©  in
9346',  &c.].  Then  the  lower  part  AB  of  the  plane
CAB  exerts  upon  a  particle  of  the  fluid  which  touches
it  at  A,  a  force  which  can  be  resolved  into  the  two  following  forces,  namely,*

[9602]  A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  AB,  and  represented  by  pjfiT;

[9603]  A  horizontal  force, in the direction AM, perpendicular to AB, and

represented  also  by  pjST.

In  like  manner  the  upper  part  AC  of  the  plane  exerts  upon  the  same  particle
of  the  fluid  at  A,  a  force  which  can  be  resolved  into  the  two  following  forces,
namely.

C

Vi^J.32,

M Ji

jr

^'■'■y/

^

^^

jt

v/

\v»

x^

^4

B

h

y

u

[9602o]

*  (4216)  On  account  of  the  excessive  smallness  of  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of  activity
of  the  corpuscular  action,  we  may  suppose  the  lower  part  of  the  plane  to  be  a  prism,  formed
by  planes  drawn  through  AM,  AB,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  extending
infinitely  above  and  below  it.  Then,  as  the  angle  MAB  is  a  right  angle,  it  is  evident  that
[96025]  the  action  of  this  prism  in  the  direction  AMh  the  same  as  that  in  the  direction  AB,  both
r9602cl  being  represented  by  pjfiT,  as  in  [9602,9603]:  changing  p  [9588]  into  p'  [9588'],  we  get,
upon  the  supposition  that  the  Jluid  is  of  the  uniform  density  unity,  p'K  for  the  vertical  action
of  the  fluid  in  the  rectangular  space  BAN,  which  agrees  with  [9605'].

[9602d]

X.  Suppl.l.  «^12.]  ON  THE  CONCAVITY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE.  781

A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  AB,  and  represented  by  — p^;  [9604]

A  horizontal  force,  in  the  direction  AM,  perpendicular  to  AB,  and  represented [9605]
by  ^K.

The  particle  A  will also be  attracted  by  the  fluid  BAD,  and  it  is  evident
that  as  ^'K  represents  the  vertical  action  of  the  fluid  [of  uniform  density],  if  the .^^^
angle  BAD  be  a  right  angle  [9602</],  we  shall  have,  when  this  angle  is  5,  a
force  which  may  be  resolved  into  the  two  following  forces,  namely,  *

A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  AB,  and  represented  by  p'^.sin.^;  [9606]

A horizontal force, in the direction AN, perpendicular to AB, and [9607]
represented  by  ?'K.(\ — cosJ).

For  f'K.d&^.cos.d^,  and  ?'K.d&^.^\x\J,,  will  be  the  elementary  attractions  of  the
infinitely  small  part  pAp',  in  which  £?^^=  the  angle  pAp', 6^=  angle BAp; [9607']
and  by  integrating  them  from  ^^=0,  to  6^=  6  =  BAD,  we  shall  obtain the
preceding  expressions  [9606,  9607].

*  (4217) We shall suppose the lines Ap,  Ay', to  be drawn infinitely near  to
each other,  and  shall  put the angle BAp=&^, the angle BAD  =  6, and the angle [9606o]
pAp'=dd/, observing  that,  to  avoid  confusion,  we  have  inserted  the  symbol  6^  in  [9607'],
instead  of  6,  which  is  used  by  the author. We  shall  also  suppose  that  planes  are  drawn
through  the  lines  Ap,  Ap',  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  continued  indefinitely [96066]
above  and  below  it,  so  as  to  include  a  portion  of  the  fluid,  corresponding  to  the  angle  dd^,
whose  action  on  the  point  A,  in  the  direction  of  Ap  or  Ap'  is  M.dd^,  M  being  a  quantity [9606c]
depending  on  the  nature  of  the  fluid ;  and  if  we  suppose,  with  the  author,  that  the  fluid  is  of
uniform  density,  this  quantity  Mwill  evidently  be  wholly  independent  of  6^. Multiplying  this
force  by  cos.BAp,  or  cos.^^,  we  get Md d^.cosJ^, for  the  vertical  action  of  this  wedge; [9606d]
and  its integral  M.sin.^^,  represents the  action  of  the  whole  wedge  BAp,  in  a  vertical [9606c]
direction. In like  manner,  the  force  Md&^  [9606c],  resolved  in  a  horizontal  direction,  is
Md6^ .  s\nJj ;  its  integral,  supposing  it  to  commence  with  &^ ,  is  M.  ( 1  —  cos.^^) ,  and  this  represents [9606/*]
the  whole  horizontal  action  of  the  wedge  BAp. When  6^  becomes  equal  to  90'^,  both  these
forces,  iVf.sin.^^,  M.{1 — cos.^J,  become  equal  to  M,  and  as  they  are  represented  by  p'K  in [9606g']
[9602c,  d,  he], we shall  have  M=p'K; substituting  this,  in  the  preceding expressions [9606A,]
of  the  horizontal  and  vertical  forces,  they  become  respectively  p'K.sm.6^,  p'K.{l  —  cos.dj ; [9606^1
and  when 6^  becomes 6 [9606a],  they  change  into p'^.sin.^,  and  p'K.{l — cos.^),  as  in [9606*  ]
[9606,  9607],  which  correspond  to  a  fluid  of  uniform  density. When  the  fluid  varies  in
density  near  its  surface,  and  near  the  side  of  the  plane,  we  may  suppose  the  vertical  force
[9606] to change into p^.Z'.sin.^, and the horizontal force [9607] to change into [9606*]
p\.K.{l  —  cos.^)  ; p3,  p4, being  functions  of p',6, depending  on  the  nature  of  the  fluid [9606/]
and plane. The same change of p' into pg, must be made in the vertical forces
[9610,  9614];  and  p'  must  be  changed  into  p'^,  in  the  horizontal  forces  [9611,  9615].

VOL.  IV.  196

782  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

The  part  of  the  fluid  [of  uniform  density]  intercepted  between  the  tangent

AD  and  the  curve  AR,  will  act  upon  the  particle  A  with  a  force  which  we

[9608] shall  denote  by  Q,  whose  direction  we  shall  suppose  to  be  A  Q. Now  if  we

put  the  angle QAB  =  t3,  we  shall  have  for  the  action  of  the  fluid  DAR,  the

two  following  forces ;

[9609]  A  vertical  force,  in  the  direction  AB,  and  represented  by  Q.cos.ta;  '

[9609'] A  horizontal  force,  in  a  direction  AN,  perpendicular  to  AB,  and  represented
by  Q. COS. TO.

Then  the  particle  at  A  will  be  acted  upon  by  the  following  forces,  namely,

[9610] The  ijer^ica/ forces  p^, —P^, p'Z.sin.5,  Q.cos.t^  [9602,9604,9606,9609].
[9611]  The  Aomo/i^a/ forces  pZ,  pJT,  —  p'Z.(1  — cos.^,  — Q.sin.«  [9603,9605,]

[9607,  9609'].

The  sign  —  is  prefixed  to  the  two  last,  because  they  act  from  A  towards  iV,  or
[9612] in  a  contrary  direction  to  the  two  first  horizontal forces,  which  act  from  N

towards  A.

Combining  together  all  these  forces,  we  obtain  a  single  force  AV,  which  must
'■ ^ be  perpendicular  to  AD '^  and  we  shall  put  this  resultant  equal  to  R. If  we  resolve

it  into  two  others,  the  one  vertical,  the  other  horizontal,  we  shall  have,*

[9614]  i2.sin.5  =  p'Z'.sin.fl+Q.cos.^;  rrr„r.':p"'l''u?f^^^^^^^^^^

[9615]  R .  C0S.5  =  2  ^K—  ?'K-\-  p'JT.  C0S.5  —  Q .  sin.«.  U^ii']':  Is  iL^'^r"*  "'*  "J

Hence  we  deduce  [for  a  fluid  of  uniform  density]  f
[9616]  Q.cos.(to_^)  =  (2p— p').^.sin.d ;  [^'^''"^%aA£ft?^'"T

[9614a]

*  (4218)  We  have  the  angle  VAB  =  90'^  —  6,  and  the  force  in  the  direction  AV  \s
represented  by  R.  We  may  resolve  this  force  into  a  vertical  force  il.sin.5,  in  the  direction
AB^  and  a  horizontal  force  H.cos.fl  in  the  direction  AM.  Putting  the  first  of  these  forces
equal  to  the  sum  of  those  in  [9610],  we  get  [9614];  putting  also  the  second  of  these  forces
equal  to  the  sum  of  those  in  [9611],  we  get  [9615].

t  (4219) Multiplying  [9614]  by cos.^, and  [9615]  by  — sin.6, then  taking  the  sum
of  the  products,  we  get
[9615a] 0  =  —  2pfi'.sin.fl4-p'ir,(sin.5.cos.d  — sin.d.cos.d-fsin.d)  +  Q.(cos.-5J.cos.d-}-sin.TO.sin.d).

Rejecting  the  terms  which  destroy  each  other,  and  putting  for  the  coefficient  of  Q  its  value

[96156] cos.(cr  — d), [24],  Int., it becomes 0  =  — 2pX.sin.d-}-p'-K'.sin.fl+ Q.cos.(w  — ^)=0,

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form [9616],  corresponding  to  a  fluid  of  uniform  density.

[9618]

X.  Suppl.l.  §12.J  ON  THE  CONCAVITY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE.  783

Q.cos.(ot  —  ^)  and  sin  J  being  positive  when  the  curve  is  concave,  we  see  that

2p — p'  mast  be  positive,  and  p  will  then  exceed  ip',  [supposing  the  density  of i^^"^]

the  fluid  to  be  uniform,  9618a,  &c.].

If  the  factor  2p  —  p'  vanishes,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  [of  uniform  density]
will  be  horizontal,  as  we  have  seen  in  [9601,  9601'].  This  value  of  2p  —  p'
satisfies  .the  preceding  equation,  because  Q  is  then  equal  to  nothing.*

The  curves  AR  relative  to  the  diflerent  fluids,  which  are  successively  used
to  fill  the  same  tube,  differ  from  each  other. To  prove  this,  we  shall  consider  a [9619]
point /,  placed  in  all  these  curves  at  the  same  distance  from  the  tube,  and
within  its  sphere  of  sensible  activity ;  the  action  of  the  tube  upon  this  point  will
be  the  same  and  horizontal. If  all  these  curves  coincide,  the  action  of  the [9620]
fluids  upon  the  point  /  will  have  the  same  direction,  but  will  vary  from  one

When  the  fluid  varies  in  density,  we  must  change,  as  in  [9606/»],  p'  into  pg  in  [9614],  and rgeiSc]
p'  into  p4 in  [9615]; by  this means the  quantity  depending  on  p',  in  [9615a],  becomes
equal  to

^.  (pg.sin.d.cos.d  —  p4.sin.d.cos.fl-}-P4'Sin.5);  [9615d]

and  if  we  put p5  =  p3.cos.d  —  p4.cos.d-f-p4, it  becomes  p'^.K.sin.6;  and  then  the  equation [9615c]
[96156]  becomes 0=s  —  2pK.sinJ-]-f>'^.K.sm.d-{-Q^.cos.(T;s  —  6); whence

Q.cos.(to— ^)=^(2p  — p'5).ir.sin.d,  [9615/]

which  is  to  be  used  instead  of  [9616] ;  so  that,  to  make  the  equation  [9616]  correspond  to  a

fluid  of  variable  density  near  its  surface  and  near  the  side  of  the  tube,  we  must  change  p'  into [9615g-]

p^,  ps  being  a  function  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  fluid,  on  that  of  the  tube,  on  the

law  of  the  capillary  attraction,  and  on  that  of  the  repulsion  of  heat ;  and  it  will  follow  from

[9615/],  that  2p  —  pj  must  generally  be  of  the  same  order  as  Q;  observing  that  Q  must  be

much  smaller  than  2pK,  because  Q  [9608]  depends  on  the  action  of  the  very  small  meniscus

RAD,  fig.  132,  whereas  f)K  or  psjBT  depends  on  the  action  of  the  matter  in  the  whole  quadrantal '■ *  ■'

space  MAB  or  NAB. This  change  of  p'  into  Ps  in  the  equation  [9616]  obviates  the

objection  made  to  it  by  Dr.  Young;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  takes  away  its  important  character rqcjc*.-!

in  determining  the  relation  between  the  quantities  p,  p',  and  the  angle  &,  which  will  hereafter

be  illustrated  in  a  different  manner.

*  (4220) In  this  case,  the  curve  AR  coincides  with  the  horizontal  line  AN,  so  that  the
attracting fluid, included in  the  space  NAR  vanishes; consequently Q  [9608]  becomes [9618o]
nothing;  and  as  we  then  have -51  =  ^  =  90'*,  the  equation  [9616]  becomes  0  =  (2p — p')-K,
or  p'  =  2p,  for  a  fluid  of  uniform  density,  as  in  [9601]. When  the  fluid  varies  in  density '■ -'
near the surface and near the side of the tube, the preceding equation becomes
0=5B(2p— p^).J5r [9615/]; but when 0  =  90", we have p5=pi [9615e]; hence [9618c]
0=s(2p— pi).^=;=0, or P4  =  2p, which  is  similar  to  [9596i].

[9622]

[9623]
[9624]

[9625]

784  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

fluid  to  another,  in  proportion  to  the  respective  intensity  of  the  action  of  these
fluids.  This  action,  being  combined  with  the  horizontal  action  of  the  tube,  will
therefore  produce  a  resultant  whose  direction  will  differ  in  the  different  fluids.
This  resultant  ought  to  be,  by  the  condition  of  the  equilibrium,  perpendicular
to  the  surface ;  therefore  the  inclination  of  the  planes  of  that  surface  will  not  be
the  same  for  the  different  fluids,  which  is  contrary  to  the  hypothesis.  Thus  the
curves  AR  differ  according  to  the  ratio  of  the  respective  intensities  p  and  p'.
Their  extreme  sides,  at  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  tube,
have  different  inclinations  relative  to  the  sides  of  the  tubes.  This  inclination
determines,  as  we  have  seen,  the  magnitude  of  the  segment  of  the  spherical
surface,  which  the  surface  of  the  fluid  included  in  a  very  narrow  tube  assumes,
beyond  the  sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  tube;  and  this  magnitude
determines  the  radius  of  that  surface,  the  inverse  ratio  of  which  determines  the
ascent  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  [9368,  &c.].

In  proportion  as  the  ratio  p  to  p'  increases,  the  curve  AR  becomes  more
and  more  concave;  and  when  p  is  equal  to  p',  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the
tube  is  a  concave  hemisphere. To  prove  this,  we  shall  suppose,  in  fig.  133,  that
the  tube  is  of  the  same  matter  as  the  fluid,  and  that  its  surface
ABC  is  a  hemisphere; we  shall  also  suppose  that  the  whole Js *^ t

[9626]  spherical  surface  ARCS  is  completed,  and  that  the  fluid  fills  the
upper  part  of  the  tube*  RASC.  Neglecting  the  force  of
gravity,  as  we  may  do  in  very  narrow  tubes,  it  is  evident  that,  by
reason  of  the  homogeneousness  of  the  matter  of  the  tube  and  of
the  fluid,  all  the  points  of  the  concave  surface  ARC  will  be
affected,  in  consequence  of  the  attractions  of  the  tube  and  of  the

[9627'] fluid,  by  equal  forces  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  which  suffices

*  (4221) The  tube  being  filled  with  a  fluid  of  uniform  density,  having  the  same  intensity
[9e26a] of  action  as  that  of  the  tube,  and  the  effect  of  gravity  being  insensible  [9627],  it  is  evident

that,  in noticing  the  conditions of  the  equihbrlum  of  the  spherical  surface ARCS,  we
[96266] "^^y  neglect  the consideration of  the  action of  the fluid contained  within that surface,

because  this  action  is  perpendicular  to  that  surface. Then  the  equilibrium  of  the  surface  AB  CS
[96260 ] will  be  sustained  by  the  combined  action  of  the  tube,  of  the  upper  part  RASCT,  and  of  the

lower  part  MABCN,  of  the  fluid; and  it  is  in  this  way  that the  author  considers  the

subject  in  [9625—9629],  and  finally  demonstrates  that,  in  this  case  of  ^=:?',  with  a  fluid  of
I-  -I uniform  density,  the  surface  ABC  in  a  capillary  tube  is  a  concave  hemisphere,  making  the

[9626/] angle «=0;  -a  [9601"]  being  the  angle  formed  by  the  line  AM  and  the  tangent  of  the

surface  drawn  through  ^  in  a  downward  direction.

A  little  consideration  will  make  it  evident,  that  the  same  result  must  very  nearly  obtain,

[9627]

[9628]

The  sur-
face of  the
fluid  is  a

X.  Suppl.l.  <^  12.]  ON  THE  CONCAVITY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE. 785

for  the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid.  Now  if  we  take  away  the  upper  fluid  RASC)
there  can  be  produced  only  insensible  changes  in  the  magnitudes  of  the  forces
which  act  upon  the  different  points  of  the  surface  ABC,  and  in  the  directions  of
these  forces.  For,  AR  being  a  tangent  to  the  spherical  surface,  it  is  evident
that  the  action  of  the  part  RAS  of  the  fluid  upon  the  point  A,  is  incomparably
less  than  the  action  of  the  tube  upon  that  point,  since  the  attraction  becomes
insensible  at  any  sensible  distance;*  therefore  the  equilibrium  of  the  lower  H^^''^
fluid ABCNM, will  not  be  affected  by  the suppression  of  the  upper  part wh!np,p;

1  J.  X  j^jg  equal.

RASC;  2vhence  it  follows  that  the  surface  of  the  fluid  is  a  concave  hemisphere [9629]
when  p  is  equal  to  p'.

If  the  intensity  of  the  attraction  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid  exceeds  that  of  the
attraction  of  the  fluid  towards  its  own  particles,  it  appears  to  me  probable  that, [9630]
in  that  case,  the  fluid,  by  attaching  itself  to  the  tube,  forms  an  interior  tube,  which
alone  produces  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube,  whose

surface  thus becomes  concave  and  hemispherical [9629].  V*  :EigjL3Ju \^^

I  suspect  this  to  be  the  case  with  water  [alcoho^  or  oil  in
a  glass  tube.

We  shall  now  consider  the  case,  in  which  the  surface
of  the  fluid,  instead  of  being  concave,  is  convex;  and  we
shall  suppose  BAC,  fig.  134,  to  be  a  vertical  plane,  whose
lower  extremity  is  dipped  into  a  fluid  contained  in  the  vessel
MNC;  AR  di  section  of  the  surface of  the  fluid,  by  a  '  [9632]

when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  of  the  fluid,  arising  from  the  corpuscular  action. For [9626g-]

when p=p', the  action  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid  is  the  same  as  the  action  of  the  fluid [9626A]

upon  its  own  particles;  therefore  the  fluid  will  not  vary  in  density  near  the  sides  AM,  CN,

of  the  tube ;  so  that  the  particles  of  the  fluid  near  the  points  A,  C,  must  be  very  nearly  in

the  same  state  as  if  the  density  of  the  whole  fluid  was  equal  to  unity. For  the  action  of  the  part

of  the  surface  of  variable  density  near  B,  where  this  variation  of  density  is  the  greatest,  is [9626fc]

insensible  at  A,  on  account  of  its  distance  ;  and  the  same  is  very  nearly  true  for  the  other

parts  of  the  surface  BA,  until  we  approach  quite  near  to  A;  so  that  we  may  suppose  the [9626/]

fluid on  the  surface  between  B  and  A,  to  have  the same  uniform  density  unity  without

altering sensibly the action  near  A,  or  changing  the  corresponding angle of  inclination, [9626m]

which  must  therefore  be  very  nearly  represented,  as  in  [9626/],  by bs  =  0,  if  p  =  p',  even

when  we  take  into  consideration  the  change  of  density  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid  from  the [9626n]

corpuscular  action,  &;c.

[9626t]

*  (4222) Observing  that  the  angle  of  contact  between  the  curve  A  S  and  the  tangent
^jR  is  infinitely  small.

VOL.  IV.  197

[9628a]

786  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

plane  perpendicular  to  the  first  plane;  AD  a.  tangent  to  the  curve  AR;  and  we
[9633] shall  put  the  angle  BAD  =  6. Then  the  vertical  attraction  of  the  fluid  DAN

[of  uniform  density]  upon  the  point  A,  will  be,  by  what  has  been  said,*
[9634]  — p'K.(l — sin.^),  downwards,  or  in  the  direction  AC;  and  the  horizontal
[9635] attraction  will  be  f'K.cosJ,  from  A  towards  N. To  obtain  the  attraction  of  the

fluid  RAN,  we  must  subtract  from  the  preceding  attractions  those  of  the
[9636] segment  DAR. We  shall  put  Q  for  the  action  of  this  segment  DAR  upon

the  point  A,  and  AQ  for  its  direction,  and  we  shall  also  put  the  angle
[9637] BAQ  =  vs. Then  the  ^er^ica/ attraction  of  the  segment  DAR  is  — Q.cos.w,

in  the  direction  AC;  and  its  horizontal  attraction,  in  the  direction  AN,  is
[9637'] Q.sin.«. Hence  the  vertical  attraction  of  RAN  becomes f

[9638]  Q ,  COS.tS p'K^.  (1 Sin.^),  [vertical  force  in  the  direction  jScI

and  its  horizontal  attraction  will  be

[9639]  Q  .  sin.W  -f-  p  'K.  C0S.5.  [Horizontal  force  in  the  direction  jJJV.l

The  vertical  attraction  of  the  fluid  NAC  is  p'K,  and  its  horizontal  attraction
'• ^ is  the  same.t Lastly,  the  vertical  attraction  of  the  plane  B AC  is  nothing,  and

*  (4223)  It  is  shown  in  [9606,  9607],  that  the  action  of  the  fluid,  of  uniform  density,
contained  between  the  planes  BA,  DA,  fig.  132,  are  p'K.sm.BAD,  in  the  direction  AB,
and  p'^.(l  — cos.BAD),  in  the  direction  AN. In  like  manner,  in  fig.  134,  the  action  of

[96346]  the  fluid,  corresponding  to  the  space  DAN,  is  p'K.sm.DAN,  in  the  direction  AN,  and
p'K.(l  —  cos.DAN),  in  the  direction  AB;  and  by  putting,  as  in  [9633],  jD^iV"=90'*  —  6,

[9634c] these  forces  become  respectively  p'K.cos.d,  in  the  horizontal  direction  AN,  as  in  [9635],  and

[9634rf]  p'K.  (1  —  sin.^),  in  the  direction  AB,  or  —  p'K.  (1  —  sin.5),  in  the  direction  AC,  as  in  [9634];
the  vertical  action  being  always  reckoned  downwards,  or  in  the  direction  A  C. Moreover

[9634e]  the  force  Q,  in  the  direction  AQ^,  produces  the  force  —  Q.cos.ts,  in  the  direction  A  C,  and
the  force  Q-sin.*,  in  the  direction  AN,  as  in  [9637].  If  we  wish  to  notice  the  change  of
density of  the fluid, we must, in like manner  as in [96061,  w], change the  forces

[9634/]  — p'^.  (1  —  sin.^),  p'K.sm.6,  into  — p6^-(l  —  sin.a),  p'^K.sm.6,  respectively,  pe,  pr,
being  functions  similar  to  p-j,  p'^,

r9637al  "t"  (4224)  Subtracting  the  vertical  action  of  the  part  DAR  [9637]  from  that  of  DAN
[9634],  we  obtain  the  action  of  the  part  RAN,  as  in  [9638]. In  like  manner,  by  subtracting

[96376]  ji^g  horizontal  action  Q.sin.^a  [9637'],  corresponding  to  the  part  DAR,  from  that  of  DAN
[9635],  we  obtain  that  corresponding  to  RAN,  as  in  [9639].

t  (4225)  This  is  proved  in  [9606A] ;  it  may  also  be  deduced  from  [9638,  9639] ;  for,
[9638o]  by  putting  ^  =  o,  5  =  0,  Q  =  0,  the  space  NAR  becomes  NAB,  and  the  expressions
[96386] [9638,  9639]  become  respectively  —  p'JST,  p'K,  representing  the  whole  action  of  NAB  in

X.  Suppl.l.  <§.12.]  ON  THE  CONCAVITY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE.  787

its  horizontal  attraction  is* — 2p^; therefore  the  fluid  will  be  acted  upon [9641]
by  the  vertical  force

Q.cos.^  — pX.(l— sin-O  +  p'^, or Q.cos.i^  +  p'^.sin.^ f^Sfr^j?/''^] [9642]
and  by  the  horizontal  force

—  Q .  sin.^  +  P  K.  cosJ  +  p  'K—  2  pK  V^ZllU^Jj^"] [9643]

VV^e  shall  suppose  A  V=  R  to  be  the  resultant  of  these  forces,  which  we  shall xqq^/^
suppose  to  be  perpendicular  to  ^  Z) ;  then  we  shall  have  f

R .  sin.^  =  Q.  cos.^  +  ^'K.  sin  J ,  [9645]

R .  cos.^  =  —  Q .  sin.-n  +  p'JST.  cos.^  +  (p' — 2  p) .  K.,  [9646]

whence  we  deduce  [for  fluids  of  a  uniform  density]

q .  cos.(^ _ ^) = (p' — 2  p) .  ^.  sin.a ;  [If  -te^i^Vctrgf ;T„r/;r''^'] [9647]

sinJ,  Q,  and  cos.(^s — ^),  being  positive,  when  the  curve  AR  is  convex ; the

a  vertical  or  horizontal  direction  respectively. That  of  NA  C  will  evidently  be  the  same,

except  in  the  sign  of  the  vertical  force  —  p'^,  which  must  evidently  be  changed  into  +  p'K, [9638c  ]

as  in  [9640].

*  (4226) The  vertical  forces  of  the  two  parts  of  the  plane  AB,  AC  [9602,  9604],

represented  by  pK,  — pjRT,  mutually  destroy  each  other. The  horizontal  forces  of  each  of  ^ '*■'

these  parts  is  also  equal  to  p^  [9603,  9605],  in  the  direction  AM}  or  —  pK,  in  the  direction  [96396]

ANj  in  which  the  horizontal  force  is  reckoned  in  [9634c,  9639]. Connecting  together  the  rngogg-i
vertical forces  of  the  fluid  and  plane  [9638,  9640],  it becomes  as  in [9642] ; also  the

horizontal  forces  [9639,  9640,  9641],  being  connected  together,  give  the  whole  force  [9643].  [9639rf]

t  (4227) The  force  R,  in  the  direction  AVj  produces  the  vertical  force jR. cos. C^F",
and  the  horizontal  force  R.sm.CAV;  and  as  BAD  =6,  DAV=90\ CAV=90''  —  d, [9645a]
these  forces  become JR.sin.^, and i2.cos.^; so  that,  by  putting  them  respectively  equal  to
the  forces  [9642,9643],  we  obtain  the  equations  [9645,9646]. Now  multiplying [9645] [96456]
by eos.^,  also  [9646]  by — s'm.6, and  adding  together  the  products,  we  get,  by  neglecting
the  terms  which  destroy  each  other,  0=  Q.(cos.'5j.cos.fl4-^i"-®-sin-^)—  (p'—'2p).K.sin,6; [9645c]
and  as  the  coefficient  of  Q  is  cos.(«  —  6),  it  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [9647],  which [9645rf]
corresponds  to  a  fluid  of  uniform  density. The  case  of  a  variable  density  may  be  considered
as  in  [9606Z,  m,  9615<Z,  &ic.,  9618c];  and  the  final  result  will  be,  that  we  must  change,  in
[9647],  p' into  a  function  of  p',  p,  6,  which  we  shall  denote  by  p'g;  so  that [9647]  will [9645e]
become Q.cos.(trf  —  e)  =  (2p  —  p'g) . Z". sin.fl ;  observing,  as  in  [9615A— A:],  that  2p^,  p'sKy [9645/]
are  much  greater  than  Q,  and (2p— -pg)  .^  is  generally  of  the  same  order  as  Q.  [9645g]

[9650]

[9652']

788  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.C^I.

[9648]  factor  p' — 2p  will  be  positive ,  or  the  intensity  p  will  be  less  than  ip'  [the  density
of  the  fluid  being  supposed  uniform].

If  we  compare  this  result  with  the  preceding  [9G17],  we  shall  see  that  the

[9649]  surface  of  the  fluid  in  a  tube  will  be  concave  or  convex,  according  as  p  is  greater
or  less  than  ^p'  [the  fluid  being  supposed  of  a  uniform  density'].

The  tube  being  capillary,  the  surface  will  approach  so  much  the  more  towards
the  form  of  a  convex  hemisphere,  as  p  shall  be  diminished ;  and  if  p  be  nothing,
or  insensible,  this  surface  will  be  a  convex  hemisphere.  To  prove  this,  we  shall
suppose,  that  this  surface  ASC,  fig.  133,  page  784,  is  a hemisphere,  and  we

[96511  ^^^^^  continue  it  below  A,  so  as  to  complete  the  whole  sphere  ASCB.  Then,
if  we  suppose  the  fluid  ABCNM  to  be  suppressed,  and  neglect  the  force  of
gravity,  it  is  evident  that  all  the  points  of  the  surface  ASC,  will  be  urged  by
equal forces perpendicular  to  that surface; therefore the fluid  will be  in

[9652]  equilibrium.  If  we  now  replace  the  suppressed  fluid,  it  is  evident  that,  AM
being  a  tangent  to  the  sphere,  the  action  of  the  fluid  MAB  upon  the  point  A
will  be  incomparably  less  than  the  action  of  the  sphere  upon  this  point;  we
may  therefore  neglect  it,  and  with  much  greater  reason  we  may  neglect  the

[9653] action  of  the  same  fluid  upon  the  other  points  of  the  surface  ASC ;  therefore

[96541  ^^^  equilibrium  takes  place  when  the  convex  surface  of  the  fluid  is  hemispherical.*
Between the  limits  p  =  0  and p  =  ^p', the surface becomes less and less

[9655] convex  [9649]. It  is  horizontal  when  p  =  ^p'  [9618]; when  it  exceeds  ip',

*  (4228) The  surface  will  be  very  nearly  that  of  a  convex  hemisphere,  if  the  action  of
{96540] ^Yie  tube  on  the  fluid  is  nothing,  or  p  =  0,  even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  of  the

fluid  near  its  surface  and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube. For  as  the  tube  has  no  action  on  the
[96546] fluid,  the  part  of  the  fluid  which  is  situated  about  the  point  A,  fig.  133,  page  784,  must  by

very  nearly  in  a  similar  situation  to  that  which  is  in  contact  with  the  atmosphere  at  the  surface
[9654c] ASC', because  the  atmosphere  has  been  found,  by  observation,  to  have  no  sensible  effect

on the capillary phenomena; therefore we may  suppose the thin stratum of  variable

density  at  A  and  C  to  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  at  S;  and  we  may  suppose  that  this
[9654  1 stratum  is  continued  round  the  lower  part  of  the  spherical  surface  ABC,  without  producing

any  sensible  effect  on  the  fluid  in  the  upper  surface  ASC,  on  account  of  its  great  distance,

in  comparison  with  the  radius  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  corpuscular  attraction,  as  is
[9654/] supposed in [9652']. Now with a spherical mass ABCS, whose exterior part is

formed  of  concentrical  strata,  varying  in  density  from  one  stratum  to  another,  the  equilibrium
[9654gf] ^ii[  hold  good  as  in  the  case  of  uniform  density,  as  is  evident  firom the  process  of  reasoning

which  is  used  in  [9650 — 9654]  for  a  sphere  of  uniform  density. We  shall  also  prove  by
[9654ft] another  method,  in  [9980j?],  that,  when  p=0,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  is  that  of  a  concave

hemisphere.

[9654rf]

[9655rf]
[9655e]

X.  Suppl.  l.<§,12.]  ON  THE  CONCAVITY  OR  CONVEXITY  OF  THE  SURFACE.  789

the  surface  becomes  more  and  more  concave  [9617]  ;  and  lastly  it  is  that  of  a [9655']
concave  hemisphere  when  p  =  p'  [9625].*

*  (42^9) We  have  seen  that,  in  all  the  calculations  of  this  article  [9587 — 9655],  the
author  supposes  the  whole  mass  of  the  fluid  to  be  of  the  same  uniform  density,  and  neglects [9655a]
wholly  the  consideration  of  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid  and  near  the
sides  of  the  tube. The  subject  is  resumed  by  him,  in  a  different  manner,  but  upon  the  same [95555 1
principles,  in  his  second  supplement;  and  he  finally  obtains  the  formula  p  =  p'.cos.^^CT  [9935], r9655cl
for  the  relation  between  the  intensities p  and  p';  supposing  «==  the  angle  B-4D,  fig.  132,
page  780,  to  represent  the  angle  contained  between  the  vertical  line  AB,  and  the  tangent
AD  to  the  curve  AR,  at  the  point  A. When w  =  0,  this  formula  gives p  =  p',  as  in
[9625];  when ro<[90'^, it becomes p^ip', or 2p  —  p' positive, as  in  [9617];  when
■a  =  90'*, It  becomes p=Jp', or 2p — p'  =  0, as  in  [9618] ; when ■53^90'*, it  becomes
p<|p',  as  in  [9648];  lastly,  when zn=180O, it  becomes p  =  0, as  in  [9650].  [9655/]

These  results  require  some  modification  when  loe  notice  the  change  of  density  in  the  fluid.
For  we  have  seen,  in  [9654a — ;§•],  that,  when  p=0,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  a  capillary [9655ff]
tube  is  a  convex  hemisphere,  and  the  angle •ct=180''. This  is  the  situation  of  water  in  a
capillary  tube  whose  internal  surface  has  been  well  covered  with  an  oily  substance. We  have
also  found,  in  [9626n],  that,  when  p=  p',  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  will  be  very *■ ^
nearly  that  of  a  concave  hemisphere  corresponding  to  73  =  0. Hence  it  appears  that,  while r9655t]
p  varies  from p=0 to p=p'5 the  angle  w  varies  from  180"*  to  0"*. The  mean between
these extreme  values  would  give p  =  ^p', corresponding  to  •n'=90'*,  or  to  a  horizontal rggssj^i
surface ;  which  is  found  to  be  true  in  [9601],  when  the  fluid  is  supposed  to  be  of  uniform
density;  but  we  cannot  infer  that,  when  «=90'*, we  shall  have p  =  ^p',  if  we  notice  the [965M  ]
change  of  density  of  the  fluid  as  we  have  already  observed  in  [9596/] ;  though  it  may  be
considered  as  an  approximation  towards  the  true  value  of  p,  which  cannot be accurately
determined  till  the  law  of  the  corpuscular  attraction  is  known. Finally,  when  p  exceeds  p', r9655n]
the  fluid  attaches  itself  to  the  side  of  the  tube,  as  in  [9630,  9631],  and  forms  an  interior
tube,  of  the  same  matter  as  the  fluid  itself,  and  which  will  correspond  to  the  case  of  p=p' [9655o]
[9655A] ;  then  the  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube  will  have  very  nearly,  for  its  surface,  that  of  a
concave  hemisphere  [9655i].

VOL.  IV.  198

[9655m]

790  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

[9659]

[9660]

SECTION II.

COMPARISON OF THE PRECEDING THEORY WITH OBSERVATION.

13.  We  have  seen,  [in  9379,9409—9411,9454],  that,  by  the  theory,  a  fluid
[9656]  is  elevated  or  depressed  in  capillary  tubes,  of  the  same  kind,  in  the  inverse  ratio
of  their  diameters ;  that,  between  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes,  which  are
very  near  to  each  other,  the  fluid  is  elevated  or  depressed  in  the  inverse  ratio  of
their  distance ;  lastly,  that  the  elevation  or  depression  of  the  fluid  between  these
[9657]  planes,  is  the  same  as  in  a  tube  whose  interior  semi-diameter  is  equal  to  the
distance  of  the  planes  [9410].  All  these  phenomena  have  been  observed  for  a
long  time  by  philosophers,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  following  passage  in  Newton's
Optics,  question  31,  vol.  4,  page  253,  of  Horsley's  edition  of  Newton's  works.
"  If  two  plane  polished  plates  of  glass  (suppose  two  pieces  of  a  polished
looking-glass)  be  laid  together  so  that  their  sides  be  parallel,  and  at  a  very
small  distance  from  one  another,  and  then  their  lower  edges  be  dipped  into
water,  the  water  will  rise  up  between  them.  And  the  less  the  distance  of  the
glass  is,  the  greater  will  be  the  height  to  which  the  water  will  rise.  If  the
[9658]  distance  be  about  the  hundredth  part  of  an  inch,  the  water  will  rise  to  the
height  of  about  an  inch ;  and  if  the  distance  be  greater  or  less  in  any  proportion,
the  height  will  be  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  distance  very  nearly.  For
the  attractive  force  of  the  glasses  is  the  same,  whether  the  distance  between
them  be  greater  or  less ;  and  the  weight  of  the  water  drawn  up  is  the  same,  if
the  height  of  it  be  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  glasses.  And
in  like  manner,  water  ascends  between  two  marbles,  polished  plane,  when
their  polished  sides  are  parallel,  and  at  a  very  small  distance  from  one  another.
And  if  slender  pipes  of  glass  be  dipped  at  one  end  into  stagnating  water,  the
water  will  rise  up  within  the  pipe ;  and  the  height  to  which  it  rises  will  be
reciprocally  proportional  to  the  diameter  of  the  cavity  of  the  pipe,  and  will
equal  the  height  to  which  it  arises  between  two  planes  of  glass,  if  the
semi-diameter  of  the  cavity  of  the  pipe  be  equal  to  the  distance  between  the

X.Suppl.l.«^I3.] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  VERTICAL  TUBES  AND  PLANES. 791

}»lanes,  or  thereabouts. And  these  experiments  succeed  after  the  same  manner [9661]
in  vacuo  as  in  the  open  air  (as  hath  been  tried  before  the  Royal  Society),  and
therefore  are  not  influenced  by  the  weight  or  pressure  of  the  atmosphere."

Messrs.  Haiiy  and  Tremery  have  been  wilHng  to  make,  at  my  request,  some
experiments  of  the  same  kind. In  a  glass  tube  whose  internal  diameter  is  two
millimetres,  they  have  found  the  elevation  of  the  water,  above  the  level,  to  be [9662]
6™'  ,75, and  that  of  oil  of  orange,  3'"S4.

In  a  second  glass  tube,  |^  of  a  millimetre  in  diameter,  the  elevation  of  the [9663]
water  was  10  millimetres,  and  that  of  oil  of  orange  5  millimetres.

In  a  third  glass  tube,  f  of  a  millimetre  in  diameter,  the  elevation  of  the  water [9664]
was  18™'-,5,  and  that  of  oil  of  orange,  9  millimetres.

If  the  elevation  of  any  fluid  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  the
tube  [9379],  the  product  of  this  elevation  by  the  corresponding  diameter  of  the
tube,  must  be  the  same  for  all  the  tubes ;  and  this  product  reduced  to  square
millimetres,  and  divided  by  one  millimetre,  will  give  the  ascent  of  the  fluid  in  a  [9666]
tube  whose  diameter  is  one  millimetre.  Thus,  by  multiplying  each  of  the
preceding  elevations  by  the  corresponding  diameter  of  the  tube,  we  shall  have
the  three  following  results  for  the  ascension  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is  [9666']
1  millimetre  ;*

Water.  Oil  of  Orange.

First  tube,  IS'"', 50;  G'^SS.

Second  tube, 13™S333;  6'"S667.

Third  tube,  13™-,875;  6"'S75.

Elevations  reduced  to
that  of  a  tube  whose
diameter  is  !"''•,  being
the  same  as  the  values

of  -,  or  2a*.
0-

[9665]

[9667]
[9668]
[9669]

The  near  agreement  of  these  results,  both  as  it  respects  water  and  oil  of
oranges,  proves  the  accuracy  of  the  law  of  ascension  of  these  fluids,  in  the [9669^
inverse ratio of  the diameter of the  tube. The  mean  of  the results in
[9667,  9668,  9669], gives for  the  elevation of  these fluids, the following
quantities ;

♦  (4230) The quantities [9667] are deduced from the numbers (9662), thus,
2x6™S75=13™-,50, 2x3™,4  =  6'"S8. In like manner  [9668,  9669], are deduced  "^

respectively  from  the  numbers  [9663,  9664],  respectively.  The  results  of  a  much  more  accurate
set  of  experiments  on  the  ascent  of  water,  alcohol,  and  oil  of  turpentine,  by  Gay-Lussac,  who
took great care in previously  wetting  the tubes,  are  given in [10304 — 10348]. The

2
expressions  [9670,9670'],  represent,  as  in  [9372y],  the  values  of  -, corresponding  to water .ggg^^,

and  alcohol,  as  deduced  from  these  experiments  of  Haiiy,  who  was  not  careful  in  wetting  the
tubes.  The  results  of  Gay-Lussac's  experiments  [10308,  9702^],  are  nearly  twice  as  great
as  those  in  [9670,  9670'].

792  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9670] Elevation  of  water, 13™'- ,569,  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is  l""'- lor  -  =  2a2  =  13™-,569l ;
[9670'] Elevation  of  oil  of  oranges,  6'^-,7389,  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is  I"'-  for  ^  =  2a2  =  6"''-,7389l  .

The two  fiist tubes of  which we have spoken, whose diameters are

[9671]  2  millimetres,  and  |^  of  a  millimetre,  were  made  use  of  to  determine  the
depression  of  mercury  below  the  level.  For  this  purpose  they  were  placed  in
a  basin  of  mercury,  at  a  depth  which  was  accurately  measured.  Then,  a  very
smooth  plane,  which  prevented  the  fluid  from  running  out,  having  been  slid  under
the  bottom  of  the  tubes,  they  were  taken  out  from  the  basin,  and  the  heights  of
the  columns  of  mercury  above  the  plane  were  measured.  The  differences  between
these  heights  and  the  lengths  of  the  immersed  part  of  the  tube,  give  the
depressions  of  the  mercury  below  its  level. In  this  way  was  found  3""-  f  for

[9672]  the  depression,  in  the  tube  whose  diameter  is  2  millimetres,  and  B'^'-jd  for  the
depression  in  the  tube  whose  diameter  is  |^  of  a  millimetre. Each  of  these

[9673]  experiments  gives  T'^'jSSS  for  the  depression  of  the  mercury  in  a  tube  whose
diameter  is  a  millimetre  ;*  therefore  we  see,  in  this  case,  the  accuracy  of  the
law  of  the  depression  of  the  fluids,  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  diameter  of
the  tubes.

Messrs.  Haiiy  and  Tremery  have  also  observed  the  elevation  of  water  between

[9674]  two  vertical  and  parallel  plates  of  glass,  distant  from  each  other  by  1  millimetre.
They  have  found  it  to  be  6"'^-,5f  which  differs  but  very  little  from  the  elevation

^ ^ of  water  in  a  tube  whose  radius  is  a  millimetre ;  for  this  last  elevation  ought  to

[9675]  be,  by  the  preceding  experiments,  equal  to  the  half  of  13™,569,  or  6'"'',784.t
Thus  the  result  of  the  theory  by  which  water  ought  to  ascend  between  these

[9676]  planes  as  much  as  it  would  in  a  tube  whose  radius  is  equal  to  that  distance
[9410],  is  conformable  to  this  experiment.  We  have  seen,  in  the  passage
quoted  from  Newton's  Optics  [9658],  that,  when  the  two  planes  of  glass  are
at  the  distance  of  a hundredth  part  of  an English  inch,  the  corresponding

[9677] elevation  of  the  water  is  one inch. The product of  these  two quantities

• !"■  A T- 1-  1. • u • ^r„i  omo u  (1")^ (25--,3918)2

[9678] is — -. An English mch is  25'™-,3918 : hence \~-  =  - — — - — -, or
•^ ^  100  ^  '  '  100  100 '

[9679] 6'°'-,4474. Dividing  it  by  l"^,  we  obtain  6™-,4474,  for  the  ascent  of  the  water

[9673a] *  (4231) Thus  3f  X 2 = 7"'-,333,  and  5,5Xf =7'"S333,  as  in  [9673].

f  (4232) From  [9670],  the  elevation  of  water  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is  one  millimetre,
[9675a] is  13'°'-,569 ;  and  if  its  radins  be  1™-,  or  diameter  2™-,  the  elevation  will  be,  from  [9361],

i^-^  =  6-,784, as  in  [9675].

[9680]

X.Suppl.l.<§,14.] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  INCLINED  PLANES.  793

between  two  parallel  planes,  distant  one  millimetre  from  each  other,  which  differs
but  little  from  the  preceding  result  [9674'].

We  have  seen,  in  [9410],  that,  if  we  introduce  into  a  cylindric  tube  a  cylinder
having  the  same  axis  as  the  tube,  the  elevation  of  the  water,  in  the  circular  space
included  between  the  interior  surface  of  the  tube  and  the  surface  of  the  cylinder,
is  equal  to  the  elevation  of  the  water  in  a  tube  which  has  for  its  radius  the
width  of  this  circular  space.  One  of  the  limits  of  this  general  case  is  the  [9681]
particular  case,  where  the  radii  of  the  tube  and  cylinder  are  both  infinite ;  this
corresponds  to  the  case  of  two  parallel  planes  which  are  very  near  to  each  other.
We  have  just  seen,  in  [9674 — 9677],  that  the  general  result  at  this  limit  is
verified  by  experiment.  The  other  limit  is  that  where  the  radii  of  the  tube  and
cylinder  are  very  small.  To  verify,  in  this  case,  the  result  of  analysis,  [9682]
M.  Haiiy  took  a  glass  tube,  of  uniform  caliber,  whose  interior  diameter  was  five
millimetres,  and  placed  within  it  a  glass  cylinder,  whose  diameter  was  three
millimetres,  with  all  the  necessary  precautions  to  make  the  axis  of  the  tube
coincide  with  that  of  the  cylinder.  Then,  dipping  into  the  water  the  tube  [9683]
and  cylinder  thus  prepared,  he  observed  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  within
the  circular  space  to  be  very  nearly  seven  millimetres,  but  rather  below  it.  The
width  of  the  circular  space  being  in  this  case  one  millimetre,  the  water  ought,
by  the  theory,*  to  rise  as  it  does  between  two  parallel  planes  at  the  distance  of
one  millimetre;  therefore  this  elevation  ought  to  be  6™'-,784  [9675],  which  [9684]
agrees  perfectly  with  experiment.  Thus  the  general  result  of  the  theory  upon
the  elevation  of  water  between  the  circular  space  included  between  a  tube
and  an  included  cylinder,  is  verified  at  both  its  limits.

The  result  of  any  experiment  will  vary  a  little  with  the  temperature,  and  we
may  consider  the  preceding  observations  as  being  made  when  the  temperature
was  at  ten  degrees  of  the  centigrade  thermometer.  All  these  experiments
require  particular  attention  relative  to  the  caliber  of  the  tube  and  the  exact
measure  of  its  diameter;  care  must  also  be  taken  to  prevent  the  surface  from
being  either  too  dry  or  too  wet.  In  measuring  the  elevation  of  the  fluid,  we  [9686]
must  keep  the  tube  dipped  into  the  fluid ;  for,  by  taking  it  out,  the  drop  which
is  formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube  will  rise  the  fluid  in  the  tube  [9717,  &c.].
We  must  also  measure  these  elevations  from  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel
to  the  lowest  point  of  its  surface  in  the  tube,  if  the  fluid  be  elevated ;  or  to  its  [9687]
highest  point,  if  the  fluid  be  depressed.

14.  One  of  the  most  interesting  of  the  capillary  phenomena,  and  the  most

[9685]

*  (4233) This  appears  by  comparing  formula  (9409)  with  the  remarks  in  (9412).  [9683a]

VOL.  IV.  199

794  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^I.

proper  to  verify  the  preceding  theory,  is  that  of  the  suspension  of  a  drop  of  fluid
in  a  conical  capillary  tube,  or  between  two  planes  which  form  a  very  small  angle

[9688]  with  each  other.  We  have  given  the  analysis  of  it  in  [9472,  9549],  and  we
shall  now  proceed  to  compare  it  with  observation.  Hauksbee  very  carefully
made  an  experiment  of  this  kind  with  a  drop  of  oil  of  oranges  suspended
between  two  glass  planes ;  his  account  is  nearly  as  follows :

[9G89]  « I  took  two  rectangular  glass  planes,  each  twenty  inches  long  and  three  inches

wide ;  that  which  I  used  for  the  lower  plane  had  its  surface  parallel  to  the
horizon.  These  planes  touched  at  two  of  their  narrow  borders,  and  the  axis  from
which  the  distances  of  the  drop  were  counted,  was  on  the  opposite narrow

[9689']  border  of  the  lower  plane.  The*  planes  being  very  clean,  they  were  rubbed
with  a  linen  cloth  dipped  in  oil  of  oranges :  then,  a  drop  or  two  of  the  same  oil
being  let  fall  upon  the  lower  plane,  near  the  axis,  the  other  plane  was  laid  upon
it;  and  as  soon  as  it  touched  the  oil,  the  drop  spread  itself  considerably  between
both  their  surfaces.  Then,  the  upper  plane  being  raised  a  little  at  the  same  end
by  a  screw,  the  oil  immediately  attracted  itself  into  a  body,  forming  a  globule
contiguous  to  both  surfaces,  and  began  to  move  towards  the  touching  ends.
When  it  was  2  inches  from  the  axis,  an  elevation  of  15  minutes  [sexagesimal]
at  the  touching  ends  stopped  its  progress,  and  it  remained  there  without  motion
any  way.  The  planes  being  let  fall  again,  the  drop  moved  forward  till  it  was
four  inches  from  the  axis ;  then  an  elevation  of  25"-  was  required  to  give  it  a
fixed  station.  At  6  inches,  it  required  an  angle  of  35'"" ;  at  8,  of  45'°-;  at  10,  a
degree.  At  12  inches  from  the  axis,  the  elevation  was  l*^-  45™-,  and  so  on,  at
the  several  stations,  as  they  stand  in  the  annexed  table.  This,  after  numerous
trials,  I  take  to  be  the  most  correct,  though  the  others  succeeded  very  nearly  the
same.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  when  the  globule,  or  drop,  had  arrived  to  near
17  inches  on  the  planes  from  their  axis,  it  would  become  of  an  oval  form ;  and
as  it  ascended  higher,  so  would  its  figure  become  more  and  more  oblong ;  and
unless  the  drop  was  small,  on  such  an  elevation  of  planes  as  was  required  at
such  a  progress  of  the  drop,  it  would  be  parted,  some  of  it  descending,  and  the
rest  of  it  running  up  to  the  top  at  once ;  but  on  a  drop  that  separated  there,  I
found  the  remaining  part  of  it,  at  18  inches,  would  bear  an  angle  of  elevation
equal  to  22''-  to  balance  its  weight. Higher  than  that  I  could  not  observe.

[9691] The  planes  were  separated  at  their  axis  about  -y\  of  an  inch. I  found  but

*  (4234) The  rest  of  this  paragraph  [9689 — 9691']  is  copied  from  the  account  given  by
[9689a] Hauksbee  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  1712,  and  differs  a  little  from  that  given  by
La  Place.

[9690]

[9690']

X.  Suppl.  1.  ^  14] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  INCLINED  PLANES.  795

little  difference  between  small  and  large  drops  of  oil,  in  regard  to  the  experiment.

The  angles  were  measured  by  a  quadrant  marked  on  paper,  of  near  20  inches [96911

radius,  divided  into  degrees  and  quarters.

DisUnce  from  the  axis  in  inchea.  '  Angles  of  elevation  in  sexagesimal  degrees  and  minatet.

2'"- IS'"-

4 25™-

6 SS""-

8 45'»-

10 Id. 0™

12 I''-  45"'-  [9692]

14 2'^-  45--

16 4'''

16 6"-

17 lO"*

18 22-^

Hauksbee  does  not say  that the  distances  were  counted  from  the  middle
of  the drop;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe that  this  was the  case,  from  a
passage  in  Newton's  Optics  which  we  shall  soon  quote ;  we  shall  suppose  this ^ ^
to be the  case in the following  calculations,  since any  inaccuracy  in the
supposition  will  have  but  very  little  influence  upon  the  result.
We  shall  put

V=  the inclination to the horizon of  an  intermediate  plane,  having  a [9694]
common  intersection  with  the  two  planes  which  were used  in  the
preceding  experiments,  and  bisecting  the  angle  which  they  form  with
each  other ;
h  =  the  height  to  which  the  fluid  would  rise  between  two  vertical  and [9695]
^  parallel planes,  whose distance  is  equal  to  that  of  the  two  planes

which were used in the preceding experiments, at  the distance
b  from  the  common  intersection ;  [9696]

a  =  the  distance  from  the  middle  of  the  drop  to  the  line  of  intersection  of [9697]
the  two  planes;
then  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  from  [9549,  9454,  &c.],^

*

♦  (4235) The  value  of  A  [9695]  is  given  in  [9454]  under  the form h= '"^°!^  ; [9698a]
8/  being  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  [9452]. Now  by  [9526],  the  inclination  of  the  two

796  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  Cel.

In  the  preceding  experiment,  the  planes  were  distant  from  each  other  -j\  of  an
English  inch,  at  20  inches  distance  from  their  line  of  intersection  [9691,  9689],
or  at  their  axis  situated  at  the  extremity  of  these  planes. Therefore  their  distance

[9699'] from  each  other  was  only  -^^^  of  an  inch,  at  the  distance  of  10  inches;  and  we

[9700]  shall  suppose  6  [9696]  to  be  equal  to  ten  English  inches.  As  a  half  millimetre
of  distance between two vertical and parallel planes, corresponds,  by  the

[9701]  preceding  article,  to  an  elevation  of  the  oil  of  orange  of  6'°'-,7389,*  we  shall
have

[^02]  (0,5x6,7389)  square  millimetres  =(-gLx  A)  square  inches.

[96986] planes  is  2o;  therefore  the  distance  of  these  planes  from  each  other,  at  a  point  whose  distance
from  their  common  section  is  b,  will  be  nearly  2Z=26.tang.ra,  on  account  of  the  smallness

H'  sin.rt'
of  the  angle  ra. Substituting  this  in  the  preceding  value  of  h,  it  becomes h  =

[9698c]

g.2b.  tang.'O
[9698rf] IMultiplying  this by — , we  get —  =— — ^ — '- ;  hence,  by  [9549], g=sin.F', or,

as  it  may  be  written, sin.F^=-.— [9698]. In  this  demonstration,  we  might  have  used

[9698c]  sin.«  instead  of  tang.-s,  by  measuring  the  half  interval  of  the  planes,  from  the  centre  of  the
drop  to  either  of  the  planes  which  are  used  in  the  experiment ;  then  the  formula  [9549/J
would  agree  with  [9698].

[9702a]

*  (4236) The  elevation  of  any  fluid  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is  I"'",  or  radius  0"^,5,  is

the  same  as  between  two  parallel  planes  whose  distance  is  0™-,5  [9410]. Now  by  [9670'],

[97026] the  elevation  of  oil  of  oranges  in  a  tube  of  the  diameter  1™,  is  6™,7389;  therefore,  by  the

[9702c] principle  used  in  [9665,  &;c.],  we  must  have O'^jS X 6""-,7389,  for  the  constant quantity

[9702rf] representing  the  product  of  the  distance  of  two  parallel  planes,  by  the  elevation  h  of  the  oil

of  oranges  between  the  two  planes. To  reduce  the  constant  quantity  [9702c]  from  square

millimetres to square inches of English measure,  we must divide  it  by  the  square of

[9702e] 25""-,3918,  and  then  the  constant  quantity  becomes  as  in  the  first  member  of  [9704],  which

is  to  be  put  equal  to the  product of  the  distance  of  the  planes,  ^'j  of  an  English  inch

[9699'],  by  the  corresponding  elevation  of  the  fluid  h',  hence  we  get  the  equation [9704],

from  which  we  deduce  the  value  of  h  [9705]. Substituting  this  value  of  h,  and  that  of

[9705^] 5  =  10-  [9700],  in  [9698],  we  get  [9706].

The  quantity 6™-,7389 [9702c],  deduced  from  the experiments  of  Haiiy,  is  much  too
small,  from  his  not  having  well  moistened  the  tubes. In  an  experiment  made  by  Gay-Lussac,
the temperature  was 15°,5 of the centigrade  thermometer, the diameter  of  the tube
[9702t] 1^.^296  =  2/  [9343],  and  the  elevation  of  the  fluid 9=  10™, 4  [9353]. From  these  we

[9702A] get 5,=  9  +  iZ=10™-,616 [9372a:],  and ^  =  2a2  =  2/^,  =  1 3'^-,758  [9372y],  instead  of

6'"',7389  found  by  Haiiy  [9670'] ;  and  if  we  use  this  result  in  [9706],  we  shall  have

[9702A]

X.  Suppl.  1.  -^  14.] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  INCLINED  PLANES.  797

h being  estimated  in  English  inches. We  have  seen,  in  the  preceding  article,
that  the  English  inch  contains  25'"S3918  [9678];  therefore  we  shall  have  ^^^^^

0,5x6,7389 1

(25  3918'\2 "^  32 '  [Expressed  in  square  inches.]  [9704]

which  gives

, 16X6,7389

^=(25,3918)^- '  [munearinohes.]  [9705]

Hence  the  formula  [9698]  becomes

. j^ 16x6,7389 100 1,6723

sm.F  = -. =:—

10  X  (25,3918)2 a2  ^2

[9706]

a  being  estimated  in  English  inches.

The  angle  formed  by  the  two  glass  planes,  in  the  experiment,  having  for  its
sme jgTT^j this  angle  is  10™-  44'-. The  lower  plane  having  been  placed [9707]

horizontally  at  the  commencement  of  the  experiment,  it  is  evident  that,  to
obtain  the  inclination  V  of  the  intermediate  plane,  we  must  decrease  by  5'"'  22'-
all  the  inclinations  of  Hauksbee's  table.  We  must  then  subtract  all  the
numbers  of  that  table  from  20'"-,  to  obtain  the  successive  values  of  a.  This
being  premised,  we  shall  have  the  following  table  :

[9708]

. „ 16X13,758 100 3,4142

This  formula  makes  the  sines  of  F^more  than  double  of  those  which  are  deduced  from  the  third

column  of  the  table  [9709] from the  formula [9706],  the ratio  of  their  sines  being  as [9702m]

1,6723  to  3,4142,  or  as  1  to  2,041 ;  and  as  the  computed  angles  in  the  table  are  generally

too  large,  it  must  follow  that  the  results  of  Hauksbee's  experiments  must  differ  very  much [9702n]

from  those  derived  from  Gay-Lussac's  experiment  in  [9702?]. These  differences  arise  chiefly

from  the  difBculty  of  making  accurate  observations  of  this  kind,  and  in  part  from  the  terras [97020]

neglected  in  the  expression  of  sin.  F  [9549,  &c.] ;  and  we  may  add,  that  we  have  supposed,  in

the  theory,  that  the  drop  is  nearly  circular,  whereas  by  observation  it  is  found  to  be  oblong  when

a  is  small. We  may  finally  observe  that,  instead  of  [9702Z],  Poisson  uses,  in  page  260  of

his  work, sin.F= '  „ ,  as  the  result  of  Gay-Lussac's  experiment ;  the  difference  between [9702p]

these  formulas  arises  chiefly  from  his  deducing  the  value  of  the  numerator  3,4117  from  the rg^Qgoi
formula  [9372/J,  instead  of  using  that  in  [9372y];  but  the  difference  is  of  no  importance  in
comparison  with  the  much  greater  errors  of  the  observation.
VOL.  IV.  200

798

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[9709]

[9710]

[9711]

[9712]

[9713]

Distances  a,  in  inches,  from  the
middle  of  the  drop  to  the  in-
tersection of  the  planes.

18"

16

14

12

10
8
6
5
4
3
2

Observed values of F,  in
sexagesimals.

g-"-  38'

. . . 19  38

. . .  29  38 ,

...39  38,

...54  38

1^-  39  38,

2  39  38 ,

3  54  38,
54  38,
54  38

.5
.9
21  54  38

Values  of  V,  calculated  by  the
formula  [9706].

17™-  44'

....22  27,

....29  20.

....39  55.

....57  29,

.  1^-  29  50 ,

.2  39  45,

.3  50  8

.  5  59  58

10  42  31

24  42  49,

Difference  between  the  calcula-
ted and  the  observed  angles,
expressed  in  aliquot  parts  of
the  observed  values.

1

•  1,2*

1

•  T*

_1_

•99*

_  1_
1  To

1

1

•T"o*

1

1  3  6  {

_1_
•52'

1

•  TT*
.  -J-.

'12'

The  calculated  values  of  V  agree  with  the  observed  values,  as  well  as  could
be  expected  in  a  formula  which  is  only  approximative,  and  in  observations  in
which  the  fractions  of  a  quarter  of  a  degree  were  found  by  mere  estimation.
Towards  the  limits  of  the  least  and  greatest  distances  of  the  drop  from  the  line
of  intersection  of  the  planes,  the  difference  is  the  greatest,  and  it  is  evident,  from
^  10,  that  this  ought  to  be  the  case ;  because,  in  the  greatest  distances,  the  drop
has  not  sufficient  width  in  comparison  with  its  thickness;  and  in  the  least
distance,  its  width  bears  too  great  a  ratio  to  its  distance  from  the  line  of
intersection.

It  is  this  experiment  of  Hauksbee  which  Newton  refers  to  in  his  Optics,
question  31.  *'  If  two  plane  polished  plates  of  glass,  3  or  4  inches  broad,  and  20
or  25  long,  be  laid,  one  of  them  parallel  to  the  horizon,  the  other  upon  the  first,
so  as  at  one  of  their  ends  to  touch  one  another,  and  contain  an  angle  of  about
10  or  15  minutes;  and  the  same  be  first  moistened  on  their  inward  sides  with
a  clean  cloth  dipped  into  oil  of  oranges  or  spirit  of  turpentine ;  and  a  drop  or
two  of  the  oil  or  spirit  be  let  fall  upon  the  lower  glass  at  the  other  end ;  so  soon
as  the  upper  glass  is  laid  down  upon  the  lower,  so  as  to  touch  it  at  one  end,  as
above,  and  to  touch  the  drop  at  the  other  end,  making  with  the  lower  glass  an
angle  of  about  10  or  15  minutes;  the  drop  will  begin  to  move  towards  the
concourse  of  the  glasses,  and  will  continue  to  move  with  an  accelerated  motion
till  it  arrives  at  that  concourse  of  the  glasses.  For  the  two  glasses  attract  the
drop,  and  make  it  run  that  way  towards  which  the  attractions  incline.  And  if,
when  the  drop  is  in  motion,  you  lift  up  that  end  of  the  glasses  where  they  meet,

X.  Suppl.  1.  «^  15.] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  BENT  TUBES.  799

and  towards  which  the  drop  moves,  the  drop  will  ascend  between  the  glasses,
and  therefore  is  attracted.  And  as  you  lift  up  the  glasses  more  and  more,  the
drop  will  ascend  slower  and  slower ;  and  at  length  rest,  being  then  carried
downward  by  its  weight,  as  much  as  upwards  by  the  attraction.  And  by  this
means  you  may  know  the  force  by  which  the  drop  is  attracted  at  all  distances
from  the  concourse  of  the  glasses."

"Now  by  some  experiments  of  this  kind  (made  by  the  late  Mr.  Hauksbee),
it  has  been  found  that  the  attraction  is  almost  reciprocally  in  a  duplicate
proportion  of  the  distance  of  the  middle  of  the  drop  from  the  concourse  [97141
of  the  glasses,  viz.  reciprocally  in  a  simple  proportion,  by  reason  of  the
spreading  of  a  drop,  and  its  touching  each  glass  in  a  larger  surface;  and
again  reciprocally  in  a  single  proportion,  by  reason  of  the  attractions  growing
stronger  within  the  same  quantity  of  attracting  surface.  The  attraction,
therefore,  within  the  same  quantity  of  attracting  surface,  is  reciprocally  as  the
distance  between  the  glasses.  And  therefore,  where  the  distance  is  exceeding
small,  the  attraction  must  be  exceeding  great."

The  explanation  which  Newton  gives  of  the  capillary  phenomena,  in  this [97151
extract  and  in  that  we  have  before  given,  is  very  proper  to  show  the  advantages
of  the  mathematical  and  precise  theory  explained  in  the  first  section.

15.  We  have  seen  that  the  water  rises  in  a  capillary  tube  by  the  effect  of  the r97iQi
concavity  of  its  interior  surface. The  effect  of  the  convexity  of  the  surfaces
becomes  sensible  in  the  following  experiments :

If  we  dip  a  capillary  tube  into  water  to  a  small  depth,  and  close  the  lower
part  of  the  tube  with  the  finger,  then  draw  it  from  the  water,  we  shall  find  that,
by  taking  away  the  finger,  the  fluid  will  descend  in  the  tube,  and  form  a  drop  of  t^'^^'^l
water  at  its  lower  extremity.  But  when  it  has  ceased  to  descend,  the  height
of  the  column  will  still  remain  greater  than  the  elevation  of  the  water  in  the
tube  above  the  level,  when  it  was  dipped  into  that  fluid.  This  excess  arises
from  the  action  of  the  drop  of  water  upon  the  column ;  for  it  is  evident  that,  in
this  experiment,  the  concavity  of  the  interior  surface  of  the  column,  and  the
convexity  of  the  external  surface,  or  that  of  the  drop  itself,
contribute  to  raise  the  water  in  the  tube.  g.

ABC,  fig.  135,  is  a  curved  capillary  tube,  whose  branches
are  of  unequal  lengths. By  dipping  it  vertically  into  the  water,  so
that  its  shortest  branch  AB  may  be  wholly  immersed,  the  water ^cp=i
will  rise  in  the  branch  B  C  above  the  level  to  a  height  which  we \S--iX^
shall  represent  by  FG. Then  drawing  the  tube  from  the  water,  -^

there  will  be  formed  at  the  extremity  J,  a  drop  ANO;  and  when  the  fluid  is [9719]

5-

jsr

[9718]

[9721]

800  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

stationary  in  the  tube,  we  shall  find  that,  by  drawing  through  the  summit  TV  of

[9719']  the  drop,  the  horizontal  line  iV/',  the  height  I'C  of  the  water,  in  the  longest
branch,  will  exceed  FG.  If  with  the  finger  we  wipe  away  successively  the
drops  which  are  formed  in  A^  this  height  will  gradually  decrease ;  and  when  we
have  rendered  the  surface  of  the  water  at  this  point  plane  and  horizontal,  the
elevation  of  the  water  in  the  branch  BC,  above  the  horizontal  line  A  I,  will  be

[9720]  equal  to  FG.  Lastly,  if  we  successively  apply  drops  of  water  at  the  extremity
A,  the  surface  of  the  water  at  this  extremity  will  again  become  convex,  and
the  fluid  will  rise  more  and  more  in  the  branch  BC,  so  that  the  preceding
phenomena  will  be  produced  again  in  an  inverted  order.  The  excess  of  the
height  of  the  column  in  the  branch  B  C,  above  the  height  FG,  appears  in  these
experiments  to  correspond  to  the  convexity  of  the  surface  ANO;  we  must,  to
ascertain  the  exact  correspondence,  measure  the  width  and  the  chord  of  that

[9721']  surface.  But  the  great  difficulty  in  taking  these  measures  has  prevented  its
being  done.

The  effect  of  a  greater  or  less  convexity  in  the  surface,  is  also  sensible  in  the
following  experiment: ABC, fig.  136,  is  a  capillary  siphon
which contains a  column of  mercury  ABC. By  inclining
the  tube  on  the  side  A,  the  mercury  moves  to  the  height  ^'  in

[9722]  the  branch  AB,  and  to  the  point  C  in  the  branch  BC.  By
raising  up  the  tube  slowly,  the  mercury  of  the  branch  AB  will
return  towards  A,  whilst  that  of  the  branch  BC  will  return
towards  C.  Then  we  find  that  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in
the  branch  AB  is  less  convex  than  that  of  the  mercury  in  the  branch  BC;  and

[9723]  if^  through  the  summit  of  the  first  of  these  surfaces,  we  suppose  a  horizontal
plane  to  be  drawn,  the  summit  of  the  second  surface  will  be  below  this  plane.
This  difference  in  the  convexity  of  the  two  surfaces,  arises  from  the  friction  of
the  mercury  against  the  sides  of  the  tube ;  the  parts  of  the  surface  in  the  branch
AB,  which  return  towards  A,  and  which  touch  the  tube,  are  retarded  a  little
by  the  friction,  whilst  the  parts  in  the  middle  of  this  surface,  do  not  experience

[9724]  the  same  obstacle ;  whence  it  follows  that  the  surface  must  be  less  convex ;  on
the  other  hand,  the  friction  must  produce  a  contrary  effect  upon  the  surface  of
the  mercury  in  the  branch  BC.  Now  as  soon  as  the  first  of  these  surfaces  is
less  convex  than  the  second,  it  will  follow  that  the  mercury  will  suffer,
by  its  action  upon  its  own  particles,  a  less  pressure  in  the  branch  BA
than  in  the  branch  BC,  and  therefore  its  height  in  the  first  of  these  two
branches  must  exceed  a  little  its  height  in  the  second,  which  is  conformable  to
experiment;  a  similar  effect  is  observed  in  a  barometer,  when  it  is  rising  or
falling.

[9725]

[9727]

[9728]
[9729]

[9730]

X.  Suppl.  1.  §  15.] EXPERIMENTS  WITH  BENT  TUBES.  801

Capillary  siphons  also  furnish  some  phenomena  which  are  a  consequence  of
the  theory.  They  may  be  reduced  to  this  general  phenomenon  deduced  from
experiment:  If  we  dip  into  a  vessel  of  water  any  siphon  ABC,  fig.  137,
whose  two  branches are  of  equal  or  unequal  widths,  and  then  [9726]

draw  it  forth,  the  water  will  not  run  out  from  the  longest  branch ^-^^-^
BC,  if  the  difference  of  the  two  branches  of  the  siphon  be  less kf  y

than  the  height  FG,  to  which  the  fluid  would  rise  in  a  tube  of  the -^- a-
same  width  as  the  branch  AB. To  prove  that  this  result  is  a  ^

consequence  of  the  theory,  we  shall  suppose  that  the  fluid,  whilst ^iff'^7.
running  from  the  branch  C,  has  assumed  the  position  oiaBC,  the
point  a  being  very  near  the  end  A. Let  q  be  the  height  of  B
above  the  surface  aio;  the  pressure  which  the  fluid  suffers  at  i,
the  middle  point  of  the  surface  aio,  will  be  equal,  Jlrst,  to  the
pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  which  we  shall  denote  by  P;  second,  to  the  action
of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  which  is  equal  to  K — g.FG,*  g  being  the
force  of  gravity; third, to the pressure of  the column q, taken  with  the
sign  — ,  or  to  — gq. Thus  an  infinitely  narrow  canal,  passing  from  i  through
the  axis  of  the  siphon,  will  be  pressed  upwards  by  the  force

P-\-K—g.FG-^gq,  [9731]

q'  being  the  height  of  the  point  B  above  the  point  C,  the  fluid  at  the  point  C
will  likewise  be  pressed  upwards,  by  the  force  P-{-K — gq',  if  the  surface  of
the  fluid  be  plane  in  C,  or  by  a  greater  force  if  that  surface  be  convex  [9276]  ;
and  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  cases  must  take  place,  when  the  fluid [^733]
runs  from  C,  or  has  a  tendency  to  run  from  it. In  this  hypothesis,  this  second
force  must  be  less  than  the  preceding;  their  difference

g.(q'^q^FG) .  [9734]

must  therefore  be  a  positive  quantity;  consequently  the  excess  q' — q  of  the
longer  over  the  shorter  branch,  must  he  equal  to  or  exceed  FG,  which  is  found
to  he  the  case  hy  experiment.

H  H

*  (4237) This  action  is,  by  [9258],  equal  to  ^—-,  but  by  [9354], J=g'q, 5  being, [9728a]

in  this  formula,  the  quantity  denoted  by  FG,  so  that  the  capillary  action  at  i  is  K — g'FG
pressing  upwards;  from  this  we  must  subtract  the  gravity  of  the  column  iB=g.q  [9727],  and
add  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  P,  and  it  gives  the  whole  action  upwards  as  in  [9731].

In the supplement  to this  theory  [10005—10023,  he],  several additional cases  are
mentioned  of  the  effects  of  the  capillary  action  depending  on  the  drop  which  forms  at  the [9728c]
extremity  of  a  tube as  in  [9717,  &tc  ],  and  in  other  similar  phenomena.  >,

VOL. IV.  201

[9732]

[9735]

[97285]

[9739]

[9740]

802  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [IVIec.  Cel.

In  general,  if  we  compare  with  tliis  theory  the  diflferent  phenomena  which
[9736] have  been  carefully  noticed  by  philosophers,  we  shall  find  that  they  appear  like
corollaries  deduced  from  the  theory.

16.  It  now  remains  to  give  the  experiments  which  have  been  made  to  determine

the  concavity  or convexity  of  the surfaces  of  the  fluids  in capillary  tubes.

Philosophers  having  heretofore  considered  the  curvature  of  the  surfaces  only  as

[9737] a  secondary  effect,  and  not  as  the  principal  cause  of  capillary  attraction,  they

have  taken  but  little  pains  to  determine the curvature. Messrs.  Haiiy  and

Tremery  have  endeavored,  at  my  request,  to determine that  of  the  surface

[9738] of  water. They  introduced into a tube AB,  fig.  138,  whose j^.  ^^g

interior  diameter  is  two  millimetres,  a  column  of  water  MmnN;

and,  after  having closed the  tube at both ends, they held  it  j»r

vertically, and then carefully measured  the two lengths Mm

and  li;  I  and  i  being  the  nearest  points of  the two surfaces

MIN,  min. The  difference Mm  —  li, is  equal  to  the  sum of

the  two  lines  IP,  ip ;  and  they  found  this  sum  equal  to  ^ .  MN.

According  to  the  analysis  in  [9350,  &c.],  this  sum  must  be  equal ""35"

to  MN,  if  the  angle  which  we  have  denoted  by  6',  in  [9346],  be  a  right  angle,

or  if  the  surface  of  the  water  be  a  tangent  to  the  sides  of  the  tube.* But  we

must  observe,  that,  if  we  suppose  them  to  be  tangents,  we  cannot  accurately

observe  the  points  of  contact. That  which  has  been  taken  for  the  point  M,  is  a

point  where  the  surface  of  the  water  begins  sensibly  to  quit  the  sides  of  the  tube;

[974(ri and  it  is  easy  to  prove  that,  to  make  IP  +  ip  =  |^| .  MN,  it  is  only  necessary  to

[^41] take,  instead  of  M,  m,  the  points  which  aref  0"'-,0226  distant  from  the  tube,

which  is  not  an  improbable  error. The  preceding  experiment  seems,  therefore,

[9742] to  indicate  that  the  angle  ^'  is  a  right  angle,  for  water  in  a  glass  vessel. A

similar  experiment  made  with  oil  of  oranges  produces  the  same  result. Thus

*  (4238) If  we  neglect  the  small  quantity  a  in  [9350],  we  shall  have  z=Ltang.ld'',  and
[9739a] when ^'=90"-, it  becomes z  =  l, or IP  =  MP, fig.  138. In  like  manner  we  have
ip=pn=zPNi hence IP -\-ip==,MP -\-PN=:MN, as  in  [9739].

[9741a] t  (4239) Having  IP  =  ip,  MN==2MP,  the  equation  [9740']  gives  /P  =  |^.MP.

Now  the  surface  MIN  being  supposed  spherical,  with  the  radius  l"^-,  and  arc  MI=6',
[97416] we have IP={l  —  cos.^')=^2s\n.^^', MP  =  sinJ'=2sin.i^'.cos.|^' [31,  1],  Int.

Substituting  these  in  the  last  expression  of  IP  [9741a],  and  dividing  by  2sIn4d'.cos.J^',  we
[9741c] g^' tang.i(J'=t|  =  tang.40''-30"-; hence ^4'=40''-30'"-, or 6'—8V-; consequently

MP  =  sin.81'' =0,9877  =  1—0.0123;  which  is  less  than  the  radius  by  0™,0123,  instead

of  0™S0226  [9741].

u.—

[9744]

X.Suppl.  l.<^16.] CAPILLARY  ACTION  IN  A  BAROMETER.  803

ive  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  surfaces  of  tvater,  oil,  and  generally  of  the [9743]

fluids  which  moisten  glass,  are  very  nearly  hemispherical  in  capillary  tubes.  llriTL

Determining,  in  the  same  manner,  the  convex  surface  of  mercury  in  a  very lie'con-^'

cave  and

narrow  glass  tube,  we  have  found  that  it  is  very  nearly  a  hemisphere.  If  we  gp^'fj^a,
compare  this  result  with  that  which  we  have  given  in  [9673],  upon  the  depression
of  mercury  below  its  level,  in  very  narrow  glass  tubes,  we  may  correct  the  effect
of  capillary  action  in  the  heights  of  the  barometer.  This  effect  is  nothing  in
barometers  with  branches  of  equal  diameters ;  but  in  a  barometer  formed  by
a  tube  dipped  into  a  large  cistern,  the  capillary  effect  becomes  so  much  the  more
sensible  as  the  diameter  of  the  tube  is  decreased.  The  barometrical  height,
counted  from  the  summit  of  the  column,  is  always  less  than  that  which  depends
upon  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere ;  thus  we  see  how  inaccurate  the  method
of  those  observers  is,  who  measure  the  height  of  the  barometer  from  the  level  [9746]
to  the  points  where  the  upper  surface  of  the  column  touches  the  tube.  To
reduce  the  heights  of  the  barometer  to  those  which  depend  upon  the  pressure  of
the  atmosphere,  and  thus  to  render  different  barometers  comparable  with  each
other,  we  must  correct  these  heights  for  the  capillary  effect ;  and  we  can  do  [9747]
this  by  the  approximate  integration  of  the  differential  equation  [9324].
Integrating  this  equation,  we  get*

dz

H H  du  ^S /* ,

7-=- .  %,rzudu;  '  [9748]

the  ordinate  z  being  counted  downwards,  from  the  summit  of  the  surface  of [9749]

Ti-
the column. The  quantity -r is  the  capillary  effect,\  or  what  we  must  add  to [9750]

*  (4240) This  integral  is  given  in  [9329]  ;  and  by  substituting  a  [9328],  and  supposing
the  integrals  to  commence  with m=0,  we  get

v/

iL^ ^.fzudu  =  t.  r. ■  [9748.)

multiplying  this  by — , we  obtain  —  [9748].

f  (4241) The  effect  of  the  capillary  action  is  to  alter  the  level  by  the  quantity  q  [9353],

H  1

id  this  is  equal  to ~7  >  or —  [9354],  which  is  to  be  added  totl

to  obtain  its  height  corrected  for  the  capillary  action,  as  in  [9750],

XT  J

and  this  is  equal  to -;>  or —  [9354],  which  is  to  be  added  to  the  height  of  the  barometer, [9750o]

804  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

the  height  of  the  barometer^  to  obtain  the  height  depending  upon  the  pressure  of
the  atmosphere. Now  we  have,  bj  what  has  been  said,*

[9751]  ?^^'=^.7».i.333.

Let  /  be  the  semi-diameter  of  the  tube,  estimated  in  millimetres. At  the  point

where  u  =  l,  we  have

dz

\P"^^  ^=  =  sin.«' [9389];

\/'  +  %

the  value  of ^ [9748,  9750]  will  therefore  be  f

[9753]  —  __  1 ^  /  ^ZUdu,  rCapillary  effect  in  a  barometer.!

gb  21  P^^  •-  -'

To  obtain  this  integral,  we  must  find  z  in  terms  of  u. We  may  determine

[97541 ^^  ^y  ^^P^riment,  observing  that  2'^.fozudu  is  the  volume  included  between  the

surface  of  the  mercury  at  the  upper  extremity  of  the  column,!  the  surface  of

H.s'm.d'
[9751o1 *  (^^^^) ^^  ^®  multiply  the  first  expression  of  q  [9360]  by  g,  we  get — - — =gq,

where  I  represents the radius  of  the  tube  [9343],  and  q  the  corresponding  elevation  or

[97516] depression  [9353]. Now  by  [9673],  we  find,  for  mercury,  that  when  Z=  0™-,5,  q  =  7'^-,333 ;

substituting  these  in  [9751a],  we  get  [9751].

[9753a] t (4243) Substituting sin.d' [9752],  in [9748],  we  get -  =— .sin.d' — ^Jzudu,

H H.Bm.d' 2 /» , ,
Dividing  this  by  g,  and  putting  m  =  Z  [9752], it  becomes -7  = ', ji-J^udu;  but

[97536]
[9753c]

r««^,-.  , . H.8m.6' 1"5X7'°',333  ,, , • • • • u  j-  1

fi-om  [9751],  we  obtam = ;  and  by  substitutmg  it  m  the  preceding  value

gl  21

of  the  capillary  action  upon  a  barometer  —  [97536,  9750],  it  becomes  as  in  [9753].

X  (4244) Let  MIISI,  fig.  139,  be  the  surface  of  the  mercury, A.IB i mgjL39.
[9754a] meeting  the  sides  of  the  tube  in  M,N\  Jits  vertex;  IBbA,  the /jC  ^^^\

horizontal  tangent  drawn  from  the  point  /. Upon  this  tangent  let ^  -^  ^

fall,  fi-om  the  points  C,  c,  M,  of  the  curve  /iV/,  the  perpendiculars  CJ?,  c6,  MA.  Then,
[97546]  if  ^e  put  IB=Uf  Bh  =  du,  BC  =  z,  we  shall  have  the  space  BbcC=zdu;  the
[9754c] volume  formed  by  the  revolution  of  this  space  about  the  axis  IP  will  be  equal  to  the  quantity

zdUy  multiplied  by  the  arc  2*m,  which  it  describes;  so  that  the  volume  will  be  ^ir.zudu,
[9754rfl whose  integral 2'^.flzudu  evidently  represents  the  whole  volume  described  by  the  space

lAMCI,  in  revolving  about  the  axis  IP. This  agrees  with  [9754].

The subject  of  the  capillary  action  in a barometrical tube is  again  resumed  by  the

[9755]

X.Suppl.  1.  <^  16.] CAPILLARY  ACTION  IN  A  BAROMETER.  805

the  tube,  and  a  horizontal  plane  drawn  through  the  top  of  the  column.  This  volume
may  be  accurately  measured  by  the  weight  of  the  mercury  necessary  to  fill  it.
We  may  therefore  form,  either  by  analysis  or  by  experiment,  a  table  of  the
correction  for  the  capillary  effect  in  a  barometer,  relative  to  the  different
diameters  of  the  tube  [as  in  10443z].  In  this  calculation,  it  is  supposed  that  the
tubes  are  of  the  same  nature ;  but  there  may  be  a  slight  difference  in  them ;  [9756]
moreover  the  action  of  the  tubes  upon  the  mercury  must  be  very  small,  to  render
the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  very  narrow  tubes  nearly  hemispherical  [9650].  This
difference  cannot,  therefore,  have  any  sensible  influence  upon  the  heights  of  the
barometer.

author  in  [10454,  Stc.]. It  is  also  treated  of  in  the  notes  [10442a — 10444a,  10456a— fc] ; [9754c]
and  a  table  [10443z]  is  given,  showing  the  depressions  of  the  mercury  for  tubes  of  various [9754/]
diameters  from  SI""'*  to  2™'. This  table  is  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  the  angle  of
contact  of  the  mercury  with  the  upper  side  of  the  tube  is  48°  =  43^'  IS"';  and  the  numbers [9754g-]
would  vary  if  this  angle  were  increased  or  decreased  by  its  friction  against  the  sides  of  the
tube  in  its  ascent  or  descent,  or  from  any  other  cause. It  was  observed  many  years  since  by
M.  Casbois,  professor  of  medicine  at  Metz,  that,  by  boiling  the  mercury  in  a  barometrical [9754^]
tube,  the  convexity  of  its  surface  will  be  gradually  diminished,  and  that,  by  continuing  the
boiling  a  sufficient  length  of  time,  the  surface  will  become  plane,  and  finally  concave ;  and  he
suggested  that  this  process  might  be  used  in  obtaining  a  barometer  with  a  plane  surface. This
experiment  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  La  Place  and  Lavoisier,  who  succeeded  in  constructing [9754^  ]
a  barometer  with  a  plane  surface ;  and  they  adopted  the  opinion  of  M.  Casbois,  that  this  change
in  the  convexity  of  the  surface  was  produced  by  the  expulsion of  the  moisture  from  the [9754A]
mercury  by  the  continued  process  of  boiling. But  M.  Dulong  has  lately  given  a  much  more [97541  ]
satisfactory  explanation  of  this  phenomenon,  by  observing  that,  in  the  operation  of  boiling,  the
mercury  in  contact  with  the  air  becomes  oxydized,  and  that  this  part,  by  adhering  to  the  sides
of  the  tube,  or  by  mixing  with  the  other  parts  of  the  fluid,  produces  the  change  in  the  capillary
action  which  had  been  discovered  by  M.  Casbois. The  correctness  of  this  explanation  has
been  verified  in  several  ways,  namely,  by  viewing  with  a  microscope  the  sides  of  the  tube [9754n]
where  the  particles  of  the  oxyde  were  visible  and  of  a  reddish  hue ;  by  agitating  the  barometer
in  an  acid  which  decomposes  the  oxyde,  since  it  was  found  that  the  surface  of  the  mercury
then  resumed  its  convex  form ;  finally  by  boiling  the  mercury  in  an  atmosphere  of  hydrogen
gas,  which  does  not  oxydize  the  mercury;  for  it  was  then  found  that  no  change  whatever  was
produced  in  the  surface  of  the  mercury,  however  long  the  boiling  was  continued.
VOL.  IV.  202

[9754m]

[9754o]

806  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

SUPPLEMENT

TO THE

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

The  objects  of  this  supplement  are,  to  complete  the  theory  which  I  have  given
of  the  capillary  phenomena ;  to  extend  its  application ;  to  confirm  its  results  by  a
comparison  w^ith  experiment;  and  to  present,  in  a  new  point  of  view,  the  effects
of  the  capillary  action,  so  as  to  render  more  evident  the  identity  of^  the
attractive  forces,  upon  which  this  action  depends,  with  those  which  produce  the
affinities  of  bodies.

ON THE FUNDAMENTAL EaUATION OP THE THEORY OF CAPILLARF ACTION.

The  equation  of  partial  differentials,  in  this  theory  of  capillary  attraction,
[9318,  or  9324],  is  deduced  from  the  principle  of  the  equilibrium  of  canals.

[9757]  This  principle  consists  in  the  supposition,  that  a  homogeneous  fluid  mass,  when
acted  upon  by  attractive  forces,  will  be  in  equilibrium,  if  the  equilibrium  takes  place
in  any  canal  whatever,  whose  extremities  are  situated  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid.
We  may  prove  it  easily  in  this  manner :  Suppose,  in  the  interior  of  the  fluid,  a
re-entering  canal,  of  uniform  width,  but  infinitely  small.  If,  from  an  attracting
point,*  taken  as  a  centre,  with  any  radius,  we  describe  a  spherical  surface  cutting
this  canal ;  and  upon  the  same  centre,  with  a  radius  which  differs  but  infinitely

[9758]  little  from  the  first,  we  describe  a  second  surface ;  each  of  these  surfaces  will
cut  the  canal  at  least  in  two  points,  and  will  intercept  at  least  two  infinitely

*  (4245) This  attraction  may  arise  from  any  particle  of  the  fluid,  or  from  any  other  body ;
[9757a] thus  the  earth's  centre,  or  rather  the  point  to  which  bodies  upon  the  earth's  surface  lend,  by
means  of  the  force  of  gravity,  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  points  here  spoken  of.

X.  Suppl.2.]

EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

807

small  portions  of  this  canal.  It  is  evident  that  the  two  columns  of  the  fluid
included  in  these  portions,  will  be  acted  upon  by  equal  attractive  forces,  and  as
thej  have  the  same  height  in  the  direction  of  these  forces,  they  will  be  in
equilibrium  with  each  other.*  Hence  we  see  that  the  whole  canal  will  be  in
equilibrium  by  the  action  of  the  attracting  body;  therefore  it  follows  that  the
equilibrium  will  hold  good,  whatever  be  the  number  of  these  points. Suppose

[9758']

[9759]

*  (4246)  To  illustrate  what  is  here  said,  let  FLKI,  fig.  140,  be  the  tube  or  vessel
containing  the  fluid  of  uniform  density  [9757],  whose  surface  is
FGBHI.  The  proposed  canal  is  represented  by  GAHB,
whose  interior  part  is  GAH,  and  the  part  which  is  bent  upon
the  surface  of  the  fluid  is  GBH.  Then,  if  C  be  the  attracting
point;  MIS  OP,  mnop,  ihe  spherical  surfaces  drawn  about  C
as  a  centre,  cutting  off  the  parts  of  the  canal  in  the  places
represented  by  MNnm,  OopP;  the  action  of  the  point  C
upon  the  matter  contained  in  these  two  parts  of  the  canal  will
be  equal,  and  will  balance  each  other.  For  if  we  suppose  the
uniform  area  of  the  base  of  the  canal,  measured  perpendicularly  to  its  sides,  to  be  A,  and  that
the  line CM  forms  the  angle  6  with  that  base,  the  area  corresponding  to  the  spherical  surface

A

MN,  or  mn,  will  evidently  be -r— ; and  this,  being  multiplied  by  the  difference  of  the  radii

Cm,  CM,  represented  by  dr,  will  be  the  volume  contained  in  the  part  corresponding  to
MNn  m,  which  will  therefore  be  — — .  Now  the  force  at  C,  which  we  shall  represent  by
F,  draws  in  the  direction  MC,.  and  when  resolved  in  the  direction  Mm,  it  will  evidently  be
F.sinJ;  multiplying  this  by  the  volume -— ,  we  obtain  the  whole  action  upon  the  particles

MNnm,  in  the  direction  of  the  canal  Mm,  equal  to - — xF.sinJ  =  AFdr; and  as  the

quantities  A,  F,  dr,  are  the  same  at  the  point  P  as  at  M,  the  action  upon  the  particles
OopP  will  in  like  manner  be  represented  by  AFdr,  the  variable  angle  6  having  vanished
from  both  these  expressions ;  hence  the  action  at  these  two  points  must  be  equal,  and  opposite
to  each  other,  and  they  must  therefore  balance  each  other.  The  same  may  be  proved  in
other  parts  of  the  canal ;  so  that  the  action  of  the  force  C  upon  the  canal  produces  an
equilibrium.  In  like  manner  we  may  prove,  if  the  attracting  point  be  at  c',  and  the  spherical
surfaces  cut  the  canal  at  the  four  points  near  Q,  R,  S,  T,  that  the  forces  acting  on  the  canal
near  Q,  R,  will  balance  each  other,  and  in  like  manner  those  near  S,  T;  whence  we  may
conclude  that  the  canal  will  be  in  equilibrium  by  means  of  the  force  c'.  Lastly,  if  we  suppose
the  force  to  be  that  of  gravity,  acting  at  c,  we  may  draw  about  c,  as  a  centre,  the  arcs
MP',  m'p',  and  then  proceed  as  we  have  done  with  the  force  at  C,  and  thus  prove  that  the
action  of  gravity  alone  produces  also  an  equilibrium  in  the  canal.

[9759a]

[97596]

[9759c]

[9759rf]
[9759c]

[9759/]

[9759g-]
[9759A]

[9759i  ]
[9759A]
[9759/ ]

[9760"J

[9761]

[9762]

808  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

now  that  a  portion  of  this  canal  is  situated  in  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  that
it  is  there  bent  down  in  the  direction  of  that  surface ;  the  equilibrium  in  the
canal  will  still  continue.  Therefore,  if  we  suppose  that  the  equilibrium  exists
separately  in  the  interior  part  of  the  canal,  it  will  also  take  place  separately  in

[9760]  the  portion  which  is  situated  at  the  surface.  This  last  equilibrium  can  be
maintained  in  only  two  ways;  either  because,  at  each  point  of  the  canal,  the
force  by  which  the  fluid  is  urged,  is  perpendicular  to  its  sides ;  or  because  that,

[9760']  while  the  fluid  is  pressing  in  one  direction  at  one  end  of  the  canal,  this  pressure
is  destroyed  by  a  contrary  one  at  the  other  end.  But  in  this  last  case,  there  will
not  be  an  equilibrium  in  the  part  of  the  canal  which  is  situated  upon  the  surface,
if  the  two  ends  of  this  canal  are  terminated  in  that  part  of  the  surface  of  the
fluid  which  presses  in  the  same  direction.  Therefore,  upon  the  principle  that
there  is  generally  an  equilibrium  in  an  internal  canal  whose  extremities  are  at
the  surface  of  the  fluid,  if  we  suppose  a  re-entering  canal  to  be  formed,  of  which
a  portion  is  situated  upon  the  surfa^ce  of  the  fluid,  the  resultant  of  the  forces
which  act  upon  the  fluid  in  this  portion,  must  be  perpendicular  to  the  sides  of
the  canal.  Now  this  cannot  take  place,  for  every  direction  of  the  canal,  unless
this  resultant  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid;  for,  by  reducing  it  to
two  forces,  the  one  perpendicular,  and  the  other  parallel  to  the  surface,  this  last
force  will  not  be  destroyed  by  the  sides  of  a  canal  which  are  situated  in  the
direction  of that  force. The  equilibrium  in  any  internal  canal  is,  therefore,

[9763]  necessarily  connected  with  the  condition  of  the  perpendicularity  of  the  force  to
the  surface ;  and  this  condition,  if  it  be  satisfied,  assures  the  equilibrium  of  the
whole  fluid  mass  as  we  have  seen  in  [138'''].  The  equations  deduced  either
from  the  equilibrium  of  the  canals,  or  from  the  perpendicularity  of  the  force  to

[9764]  the  surface,  must  therefore  be  identical,  or,  at  least,  the  one  must  be  the
differential  of  the  other ;  and  it  is  evident  that  the  second  is  the  differential  of
the  first.  For  the  equation  given  by  the  equilibrium  of  the  canals  [9318,  9324]
contains  only  differentials  of  the  second  order;  instead  of  which  the  tangential
force,  at  a  capillary  surface  [9308,  &c.],  arises  from  two  causes,  namely,  the

[9765]  action  of  gravity,  resolved  in  a  direction  parallel  to  that  surface,  and  the
attraction  of  the  mass  corresponding  to  the  difference  between  the  whole  mass
of  the  fluid  and  that  of  the  osculatory  ellipsoid ;  and  it  is  evident  that  this  last
^  action  depends  upon  differentials  of  the  third  order  [9308] ;  therefore  the
equation  resulting  from  the  condition  that  the  tangential  force  is  nothing,  or,  in
other  words,  that the force is perpendicular  to the surface, must contain

[9766]  differentials  of  the  third  order  [9810]  ;  consequently  it  must  be  the  differential  of
the  equation  given  by  the  equilibrium  of  the  canals  [9810/t]. But  it  is  interesting

[9767]

[9768]

X.  Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  809

to  prove  this  a  posteriori.  It  is  what  we  shall  now  do,  and  the  result  will  be  a
confirmation  of  the  fundamental  equation  of  this  theory  [9318],  and  will  also
be  a  simple  method  of  obtaining  that  equation.

We  shall  take  for  the  origin  of  the  rectangular  coordinates  x,  y,  2,  any  point
of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  which  we  shall  denote  by  O ;  and  we  shall  define  the
axes  of  X,  y,  z,  in  the  following  manner :

For  the  axis  of  z,  we  shall  take  the  line  drawn  through  O,  perpendicular

to  the  surface  of  the  fluid ;
For  the  axes  of  x,  y,  we  shall  take  two  rectangular  lines,  drawn  through  the rg^^n

point  O,  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  z ;

Then  the  value  of  z,  considered  as  a  function  of  x,  y,  will represent  the
equation  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  and  this  value  can  be  developed  in  a  series [9768"]
ascending  according  to  the  powers  and  products  of  x,  y,  and  of  the  following
form  :*

+  C:t^-\'D3fy  +  Exf  +  Ff  P^ofThefl^l."""*""''] [9769]

+  &c.

The  three  first  terms  of  this  expression  of  2,  namely,  Ax^-j-'>^xy-\-Bif,
correspond  to  the  ellipsoid  which  touches  the  surface,  or,  to  speak  more  strictly,  it

[9770]

*  (4247) If  we  put  z^  for  the  terms  in  the  second  member  of  [9769],  it  is  evident  that rgygg^-i
the  general  value  of  z,  developed  as  in  [610,  611],  in  a  series  ascending  according  to  the
powers  and  products  o(  x,  y,  will  be  fully  expressed  by z=a-\-bx-\-cy-\-z^. But  the [97696]
supposition  that  the  ordinates  a?,  y,  z,  commence  together  at  the  point  O,  will  give,  at  that
point, a?  =  0, y  =  0, z  =  0; consequently z^  —  0 [9769a,  9769], and  then [97696]
becomes 0  =  a; hence  the general  value  of z becomes z=:hx-{-cy-\-z^. Now  the [9769c]
differentials  of  z,  z^,  give

(£)  =  ^+(S)'  (l)=^  +  (|')'  ^g,,g,3

(|)  =  2^a;-fXy+&c.;  (^)=Xy  +  25y  +  &c.;

and  at  the  point  O,  where x=0, y  =  0,  these  partial  differentials  of  z^  vanish;  therefore
we  have,  at  that  point,  (^^^  =  b, f^^\=zc; but  as  the  tangent  of  the  surface  at  the  point [9769e  ]
O,  is  taken  for  the  plane  of  x,  y,  we  must  evidently  have,  at  that  point,  f^J  =  0,  ^- j  =  0; [9769/]

hence  we  get 0  =  &,  0  =  c; substituting  these  in  the  value  of  z  [9769c],  we  finally  obtain
z=z^,  as  in  [9769].

VOL.  IV.  203

810  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.C^I.

corresponds  to  the  osculatory  paraboloid.  Now  the  attraction  of  this  paraboloid
upon  the  point  O,  is  evidently  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  z,  since  the  solid

[9771]  is  symmetrical  on  the  opposite  sides  of  this  axis ;  therefore  the  tangential  force
at  the  point  0,  arising  from  the  action  of  the  whole  mass,  must  depend  wholly
upon  the  attraction  of  the  solid,  whose  surface  is  defined  by  the  following
equation  :*

z  =  Cs^  +  Dx^y  +  Exf  +  Ff

^^^^^  -|.&C.

This  solid  is  the  same  as  the  diflference  between  the  whole  mass  arid  the
osculatory  paraboloid.  To  determine  the  tangential  force,  depending  upon  this
solid,  upon  the  point  O,  we  shall  put  /  for  the  distance  of  one  of  the  elements

[9773]  of  the  solid  from  that  point ;  also  6  for  the  angle  which  this  right  line  makes
with  the  axis  of  x.  The  attractions  upon  the  point  O  being  sensible  only  in  a
very  small  space,  we  may  here  consider  the  three  right  lines  x,  y,.f,  as  being  all
in  the  plane  which  is  a  tangent  to  the  surface  in  the  point  O,  and  we  may  neglect

[9774]  the  powers  and  products  of  x  and  «/,  superior  to  the  third  order.  Thus  we
shall  have,  for  an  element  or  differential  of  this  solid,!

*  (4248)  If  the  body  attracting  the  point  O  is  symmetrical  about  the  axis  z,  that  is,
if  the  points  are  so  situated  that  the  value  of  z  remains  unaltered  when  x,  y,  are  changed  into

[9772a] — X,  — y,  respectively,  it  will  evidently  produce  no  tangential  force,  because  the  particles

[97726]  similarly  situated  on  opposite  sides  of  the  axis  z,  act  with  equal  forces  in  opposite  tangential
directions,  and  thus  mutually  balance  each  other.  Now  if  we  change  x  into  — x,  and  y
into  — y,  in  [9769],  the  powers  and  products  of  x,  y,  of  the  even  dimensions  2,  4,  6,  &xj.,
will  remain  unaltered,  and  will  therefore  be  symmetrical,  and  may  be  neglected  in  computing
the  tangential  force;  and  it  will  be  only  necessary  to  retain  the  uneven  dimensions  3,5,7,  he.

[9772rf]  [9772].  Indeed,  we  may  neglect  the  5th,  7th,  he.,  dimensions,  since,  by  a  calculation  similar
to  that  in  [9783,  &Lc.],  they  will  produce  terms  depending  on  ff^df.cp(f),  ff^df.cp{f),  &£C.,
which  must  be  incomparably  smaller  than  the  terms  depending  on  ff^df.(p(f)  [9780,  &c.],
depending  on  the  third  dimension  of  x,  y, on  account  of  the  extreme  smallness  of  the  limit

[9772/*]  of/  at  which  the  attraction  is  sensible;  so  that  we  may  put  z=  Cx^  -{-  Dx^y  -\-  Exy^  -^  Fy^,
as  in  [9774,  Sic],  in  computing  the  tangential  attraction.

t  (4249) Let AOD, fig.  141, be the  tangent plane;
OA,  OD,  the  axes  of  x,y,  respectively;

[9775a] AOB  =  6, BOC^d&, OB=f, Bb  =  df, BC=^fd6,

[9775o'] and  the  area BCcb=fdf.dd, representing  the  base  of  the

attracting  particle,  whose  height  is  z  [9772]. The  product  of
[97756] this height  by  the  base,  gives the  whole  mass  as  in  [9775];

multiplying  this  by  <?(/),  we  get  its  attraction,  in  the  direction

[9772c]

[9772e ]

X.  Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  811

fdf.d&,\Ca?-\-Dx'y^Exy^-{-Ff],  [9775]

If  we  denote  the  law  of  attraction  by  (p(/),  the  attraction  of  this  element  upon
the  point  O,  resolved  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  will  be  i^T^Q]

fdf'<p(f).d6,cosJ.{Cx'  +  D:i^y-}-Exf  +  Ffl;  [9777]

and  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y,  it  will  be

fdf.(p(f).dd,sm.6.lC3^-{-Dx^y  +  Exf  +  Ffl,  [9778]

Moreover  we  shall  have  *

a;=/.cos.^,  y=/.sin.^;  [9779]

the  tangential  force  of  the  point  O,  depending  upon  the  attraction  of  the  fluid
mass,  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  will  be

fffW''P(f)-dd'{^-co^'^^  +  D'Cos.^6.sm.6  +  E.cos,^6.sin.^d+F.cos.d.sm.^6l, [978O]

and  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y,  it  will  be

yX/"'^-'?(/)-^^-!C'.cos.3a.sin.d4-Z).cos.2^.sin.25  +  E.cosJ.sin.3^  +  i^.sin.^5|. [9781]

The  integrations  of  [9780,9781],  relative  to  5,  must  be  taken  from  ^  =  0  to
d  =  2*,  *  being  the  semi-circumference  whose  radius  is  unity;  hence  these
expressions  become  respectively  f

^* .  {  3  C  -{-  £|  'ff^df.  9  (/)  ,  [TangenUal  force  in  the  direction  *.] [9783]

;|-* .  \  3F  -{-  jD  I  'jy^df.  <p  (f) .  [Tangential  force  in  the  direction  y.] [9784]

O B,  equal  to fdf. (p(/)  .d6.\Cx^-{- Dxy^ -}- Exy^  +  Fy% To  resolve  this  in  the  directions [9775c ]
OA,  OD,  we  must  multiply  it  respectively  by  cos.^,  and  sin.^;  and  then  it  becomes  as  in
[9777,  9778]. We  may  here  remark,  that  the  principle  adopted  in  [9774]  is  equivalent  to [9775rfJ
the  supposition  that  all  the  particles  of  fluid,  situated  on  the  ordinate  z,  are  projected  on  the
tangent  plane  ccy,  in  a  single  point,  corresponding  to  the  coordinates  x,  y.

*  (4250) In  the  triangle  OBA,  fig.  141,  page  810,  we  have  OA—OB.cos.AOB,
AB=OB.sm.AOB; and  by  substituting  the  symbols  [9775a,  &;c.],  we  get  the  values  of [9779a]
x,y  [9779]. Substituting  these  in  [9777],  we  obtain  [9780],  and  by  the  same  means  [9778J
changes  into  [9781].

t  (4251) From  [8],  Int.,  we  have

fd6. cos  *6.=zfd6.{i-{-icos.2d-{-^cosA6]=  ^6 -\-is\n.2d-{-^\smAd.  [9783a]

This  vanishes  when ^  =  0; and  when d  =  25r, it  becomes f^''d6.cos.*6==^.'2T=^-if; [97836]
and  by  changing  6  into  6  —  90%  we  get f^'dd. sin.* 6  =  ^1:. Again,  by  using  [31,  1],  Int.
we  have
fdd ,  cos.2 6 .  sin,2  6  =fdd .  {cos.6 .  sin,fl)2  z=fdd .  Q sin.2^)2  z=fd6 .  (i — i cos.4^)  =  ^5  —  ^ .  sin.4^, [9783c  ]

812  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

The  integral  relative  to  /  may  be  taken  from  /=  0  to  /=  co,  so  that  it  is
[9785]  independent  of  the  dimensions  of  the  attracting  mass  [9240a — /].  This  is  what
characterizes  this  kind  of  attractions,  which,  being  sensible  only  at  insensible
distances,  allows  us  to  notice  or  neglect,  at  pleasure,  the  attractions  of  bodies
situated  beyond  their  sphere  of  sensible  activity. We  shall  put,  as  in  [9233'],

[9786]  ^(f)=C—fidf.cp(f),

the  integral  fdf.<?(f) being  taken  from f==0, and  c  being  its  value  when
[9787] f  is  infinite  [9232']. n(/)  will  be  a  positive  quantity,  decreasing  with  extreme
rapidity  [9233"]  ;  and  we  shall  have,  by  taking  the  integrals  from  *  f=  0 ;

[W88]  frdf.f(f)  =  -f'n(f)  +  y_pd/.n(f).

— f^ .  n  (/)  is  nothing  when  f=  co  ;  for  although  f^  then  becomes  infinite,
[9789] ^jjg extreme rapidity  with  which n(y*) is  supposed to decrease, renders

f^.n(f)  nothing  [9240A;].  The  functions  (f)(f)  and  ^(f)  may  be  very  ivell
'■ ^ compared  with exponentials  like c~^- [9240A,  &c.] ; c being the  number

whose  hyperbolic  logarithm  is  unity,  and  i  being  a  very  great  positive  and
[9791] integral  number. For c~'^  is  finite  when  f=  0, and  becomes  nothing  when

y*is  infinite;  moreover  it  decreases  with  extreme  rapidity,  and  in  such  a  manner
[9792]  that  the  product /".  c"*''  always  vanishes  when  /  is  infinite  [9240A:],  whatever
[9793] be  the  value  of  the  exponent  n. We  shall  now  put,  as  in  [9241'],

[9794]  fif4f.Tl(f)  =  c'--^(f),

c'  being  the  value  of  that  integral  when  f  is  infinite  [9240']. "^(f)  will  also
[9795] ^g  ^  positive  quantity  decreasing  with  extreme  rapidity  [9241"] ;  and  we  shall
have  t

[9783rf]
[9783e]

which  vanishes  when  5  =  0;  and  when  5  =  2*,  it  becomes  J^''dd.cos.^d.s\n.^&  =  ^.2if=lT.
IVIoreover,  we  have  fdd.cos.^6.smJ= — fcos.^d.d.{cos.6)=^ — icos^6,  which  vanishes
when  6=0,  and  also  when  5  =  2*;  so  that  we  have  f^''dd.cos.^6.sm.6=:0;  and  if  we
change  6  into  6  —  90''-,  we  get  f^''d6.sm.^&.cosJ—0.  Substituting  these  integrals  in
[9780],  it  becomes  as  in  [9783],  and  [9781]  becomes  as  in  [9784].

[9788a] *  (4252) The  differential  of [9786] is d.Tl{f)  =  —  df.(p{f); substituting  this  in
[9788J»] the  first  member  of  [9788],  we  get ffW'^{f)=—ff^-d'^{f)- Integrating  by  parts,  it
becomes  as, in  the  second  member  of  [9788],  as  is  easily  proved  by  differentiation  ;  and  by
[9788c] neglecting  the  term — /^n(/) [9789],  it  becomes /oTV/. (p(/)  =  4 ./o7^^/. n(/).

t  (4253) The  differential  of  [9794]  is fdf.Tl{f)=z  —  d.*(f)'y substituting  this  in
[9796a] ^jjg  |j^g^  ^gj.|^  qJ*  [9788],  and  then  integrating  by  parts,  we  get  successively

X.  Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

813

When /is  infinite,  /^.y(/) becomes  nothing;  therefore  we shall  have,  by
taking  the  integral  from  /=  0  to  /=  od,  [9797]

V:pdf,Tl{J)  =  ^SJdf.^{f).  [9798]

Lastly,  if  we  put,  as  in  [9253a'],

§=/oy^/.^(/),  [9799]

we  shall  have,

f:rdf'^(f)=-^foydM{f)=^'^^,  [98oo]

Thus  the  two  preceding  tangential  forces  [9783,  9784],  parallel  to  the  axes  of
X  and  y,  will  become

CuCy -\~  £jj  ,  II  J  [Tangential  force  parallel  to  the  axis  of  K.] [9801]

,  (•JT -\-  U)  ,  jti  «  [Tangential  force  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y.] [9801'!

Now,  by  observing  that  the  axis  of  z  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid
[9768],  we  shall  have  at  the  point  O,  as  in  [9769/],

(©=»' (?)=«'

the  expression  of  z  being  developed  in  a  series,  according  to  the  powers  and
products  of  a:,  y,  by  means  of  the  theorem  [610,  611],  becomes*

y.

._fddz\ ^^ fddz\  ,fddz\ ;

'^\dx')'  Q'^KdxHy)'  2  '^\dxdyy'  2  '^\dy^)'Q'

+  &C.;

[9802]
[9803]

[9804]

^frdf.n(f)=.-4fp.d,^f)  =  -^4p.^f)+8ffdf.^(J'),  [97966]

as in [9796]. The part — 4f^.^(f), vanishes  at  the limits of the  integral,  as in [9796c]
[9240i,  k,  he],  and  by  neglecting  it  in  the  equation  [9796&],  we  get  [9798] ;  substituting  it

in  [9788c],  we  obtain,  by  using ~ [9199],  f^f^,df.(p{f)=8foydf ,-*{/)  =  ^ , as in [9796rf]

[9800]. Lastly,  by  substituting  this  integral  in  [9783,  9784],  we  obtain  the  tangential  forces
[9801,9801'].

*  (4254) The  general  development  of  z  [610,  611],  contains  the  terms  in  [9804] ;  the
three  first  terms  of  the  form a-{-bx-\-cy being  neglected,  as  in  [9769a — f]. Comparing [9804a]
the expression  of  z [9804] with the assumed  form [9769], we obtain the  values  of
C,  D,  E,  F  [9805,  9806]; hence the tangential forces [9801,  9801'],  become as in [98045]
[9807,  9807'],  respectively.

VOL.  IV.  204

814  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^l.

which  gives

[9806]  ^=i-(£ji^'  -^^-^-CJ)-

Consequently  the  preceding  tangential  forces  [9801,  9801'],  will  become,  as  in
[98046J,

[98071  hH-  ^  I  I  "4"  I )  r  »  fTangential  force  parallel  to  the  axil  x.l

^ ( \<ix^J \dxdy^J )
C  /  dH  \ f  dPz  \  }

[9807*]  h-H»  \  (  ——^ )  ~\~  {  3 )  C  '  [Tangential  force  parallel  to  the  axis  y.l

We  shall  put  g  for  the  force  of  gravity,  and  — du  for  the  element  of  its
[9807"]  direction.  Then  the  condition  that  the  whole  force  acting  at  the  surface  must
be  perpendicular  to  it,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  resultant  of  the  tangential
forces  is  nothing,  is  reduced,  as  we  have  seen  in  [138,  138'],  to  the  following
formula,  namely,  that  the  sum  of  the  products  of  each  force,  by  the  element  of  its
direction,  is  7iothing.  Multiplying,  therefore,  by  dx  the  force  parallel  to  the  axis
of  X ;  by  dy  the  force  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y ;  and  the  gravity  g  by  —  dw^
then  taking  the  sum  of  these  products,  and  putting  it  equal  to  nothing,  we  shall
obtain  the  following  equation :

[9809]  \H.  ^(^^.dx  +  (^^^.dy  +  {£l^^.dx+(^^.dy\-gdu  =  0.

[9809^ From  the  formula  [9314],  we  have  at  the  point  O,  where* p  =  r-^j  =  0,

[9809"] q  =  ('^^=0 [9312,9803],

[9810a] *  (4255) Substituiing  p  =  0,  q  =  0  [9809',  9809"],  in  [9314],  we  get  \-\-~  =  t^t\

R R

[98106] and  by  substituting  the  values  of  r,  t,  [9313],  we  obtain (  7^)  +  ( 7^)  =  d +■«;• The

differential  of  this  equation  is  the  same  as  in  [9310],  observing  that  z  being  a  function  of

[9810c] x,y, we  have,  by  the  usual  rules  of differentiation, ^*  (ti)  ='(77)-^'^+ (j^  j-^y?

[9810^] ^•(^2)  =  (^o)-^^+(j3)-^y- Substituting [9810] in [9809], we get [9811];

2

multiplying  this  by  — ,  we  get  [9811']. Now  the  quantities K,  h,  b',  which  occur  in  the

2

fundamental  equation  [9315],  are  constant;  so  that  if  we  multiply  this  equation  by — •— ,

H

[9810e] it  may  be  put  under  the  form (  d  +  ^/) ^.^  =  constant ; or  hy  changing  gz  [9309]

\R R  / H

(1 1  \ 2ff
—  -}-  —  ]  —  —  .w=constant, whose

X.  Suppl.2.]

EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

815

{i?)-'^^+{^^-^y

''•'i+s

R  and  R'  being  the  greatest,  and  the  least,  radii  of  curvature  at  that  point.
Substituting  this  in  [9809],  we  get  the  following  expression:

^H.d.\^+U-gdu  =  0,

d.

R  '  K
R-^R'l-H''^''

or

0;

an  equation  which  is  evidently  the  differential  of  the  fundamental  equation  of  the
theory  of  capillary  attraction  [9315,  9842p].

We  may  in  the  same  manner  determine  the  action  perpendicular  to  the  surface.
This  action  depends  upon  the  part*  Ax^-{-'kxy-\-By^,  of  the  value  of  2  [9769].
We  shall  putf

[9810]

[9811]

[9811']

[9812]

differential  is  as  in  [9811']. Hence  it  appears  that  the  fundamental  equation  [9811'],  deduced [9810^^]
from  this  second  method  of  investigation,  is  the  same  as  the  differential  of  that  which  is
obtained  by  the  first  method  in  [9315],  agreeing  with  what  is  stated  in  [9766] .

t  (4257)  To  illustrate  these  definitions,  we  shall  refer  to
the  annexed  figure  142,  in  which  Z  is  the  attracted  point;
P  the  attracting  point,  whose  coordinates  are

OA  =  x,AB  =  y,BP  =  Z',  we  have  also  ZP=f,

OZ=r,dLng\eAOB=iL  Then,  if  we  draw  Z^  perpendicular
to  BP,  we  shall  have  ZK=OB=\/^^':f^  [9814],
PK=z  —  r.  Substituting  these  values  in  the  equation
ZP»=  ZK^-\-PK\  we  get  [98i6J.

[9810A]

*  (4256) The  chief  part  of  the  value  of  z  [9769],  corresponding  to  the  surface  of  the
fluid  and  to  small  values  of  a?,  y,  is  evidently  that  containing  the  terms  of  the  second  power  of
iT,  y;  so  that  if  we  represent  this  by  2;', as  in  [9813",  9823],  we  shall  have  very  nearly
z'  =  Ax^ -\-\xy -^-By'^, as  in  [9812] ;  and  if  we  change,  as  in  [9772c],  x  into  —a;,  y  into [9812o]
— y,  the  action  corresponding  to  the  attracting  point  in  this  second  position  will  conspire  with
that  in  the  first  position,  in  producing  a  force  perpendicular  to  the  surface. On  the  contrary,
those  depending  on  the  third  and  other  uneven  poivers  of  x,  y,  will  have  different  signs,  and [98126]
their  effects  will  generally  have  a  tevdency  to  counteract  and  balance  each  other;  so  that,  on
that  account,  as  well  as  because  of  their  comparative  smallness  relative  to  the  retained  terras
of  the  second  order,  they  may  be  neglected. Lastly,  the  terms  of  the  fourth  and  higher  orders [9812«]
of  terms  in  a?,  y,  may  be  neglected  on  account  of  their  smallness,  and  thus  we  shall have
the  same  value  of  z  or  «'  as  in  [9812a,  or  9824].

[9814a]

[98146]

[9814c]

816  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9813]  r  =  the  distance  OZ  from  the origin  O  of  the  coordinates  to  any

point  Z  of  the  fluid  situated  in  the  axis  of  z,  which  is  perpendicular
to  the  surface  at  the  point  O  [9768] ;

[9813Q  y=the  distance  ZP  from  the  point  Z  to  a  particle  P  of  the  fluid

whose  coordinates  are  x,  y,  z;  using  for  i:.  the  ordinate
corresponding  to  any  point  whatever  of  the  fluid ;

[9813"]  /'  =  the  distance  ZM  from the  point Z  to  a  particle  of  the  fluid

situated  at  the  point  M  of  the  surface  whose  coordinates  are
x,y,z';  using  for  z'  the  ordinate  BM,  corresponding  to  the
point  M  of  the  surface ;

[9814] 5  =  v/a;2-J-y^  =  the  hypotenuse  05  of  a  right-angled  triangle  whose  sides  are

X,  y,  situated  in  the  plane  of  x  y;

[9814']  4  =  the  angle  AOB  which  the  line  s  forms  with  the  axis  of  x;

[9815]  (p(y)  represents,  as  in  [9776],  the  law  of  the  corpuscular  attraction  at

the  distance  f.

Then  we  shall  have

[9816]  P  =  r^  +  f  +  (z—ry,

[9816']  sds . d& . dz  =  the  element  of  the  mass  of  the  fluid*  at  the  point  P;

and  the  action  of  this  element,  situated  at  P,  upon  the  point  Z  of  the  axis  of
Zf  resolved  in  a  direction  parallel  to  that  axis,  will  be

[9818]  sds,dLdzS^y^,<p(/),  [^^^'rnSn^^^^.°"^]

If  we  use  the  function n(/)  =  c — fo-df-^if) [9786], we may  put  the
expression  [9818]  under  the  following  form  if

*  (4258) If  we  change  /  [9775a]  into  s  [9814&],  the  expression  of  BCcb,  fig.  141,

[9818a] 1^2,  pages  810,815,  will  be sds.dd  [9775a']. IMultiplying  this  by  the  height Pp=:dz

of  the  attracting  particle,  we  get  its  mass  sds.dd.dz  [9816']. Now  the  attractive  force,  in

{z—r)
[98185] the  direction  ZP,  is  ?(/),  and  this  force  resolved  in  the  direction  ZG  is <p(/)X — z — •

Multiplying  this  by  the  preceding  expression  of  the  mass  [9818a],  we  get  the  same  expression
[9818c] ^  in  [9818],  for  the  whole  attraction  of  the  particle  situated  at  P,  resolved  in  a  direction
parallel  to  the  axis  of  z.

t  (4259) From /=v/x2+t/2+(z-r)3 [9816],  we  get
[9820a]  /#\  z-r z-r

X.  Suppl.2.] EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  817

rj^o f1& fir, f  (-^A  rAction  of  the  particle  at  P-]  [98201

Atti  .m.aZA -  I  .  I^on  z,  in  the  direction  Z  G.  J  •■  ^

Therefore  the  attraction  of  the  whole  solid  upon  the  point  under  consideration,
resolved  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  2,  will  be

-  ^fffsds.d&.dZ,(^^^y  [o^ntiattiJcSia  [9821]

Hence  we  find  that  this  attraction,  taken  from  z  =  z'  to  z=  00,  which  renders
n  (f)  nothing,  is  [as  in  9820/^

ffsds.dd.n(f);  ri'?S£Stirz"r]  [9822]

f  being  the  value  of  f,  corresponding  to  the  points  of  the  surface,  and  z'  the [9823]
value  of  z  relative  to  these  points. Now  we  have,  in  [9812a],

z'  =  A3?  +  xjcy-\-By''\  [9824]

moreover  we  have  very  nearly  *  ^

/2  =  a:2_f_2^2_|_y5__2rz'  =  52+r2— 2rz'; ^  [9825]

consequently

But  from  [9819],  we  have
whence

hence

'-^'.K/)=9(/).(f).  ^"^'^

fifl-V d.n{f);

and  by  substituting  it  in  [9818],  it  becomes  as  in  [9820].  Its  triple  integral  gives  the  whole
attraction,  as  in  [9S21]. Taking  the  integral,  in  the  first  place,  relative  to  sr,  we  get

-fd,.(i^)=-nif)  +  nif),  [9820.]

the  constant  n(/')  being  added  to  make  the  integral  vanish,  at  the  first  limit  or  point  ilf,
where  /=/'.  At  the  other  limit,  where  /=oo,  we  have  n(/)=:0,  and  then  the
preceding  expression  becomes

-/&.(^^J)=n(/).  19880/]

and  by  substituting  it  in  [9821],  we  get  [9822].

*  (4260) Changing  /  into  /',  and  z  into  z\  in  [9816],  and  then  neglecting  «'*,  we
get  the  first  expression  in  [9825],  and  by  substituting s'^=^x^-\-y^  [98146],  we  get the [9825a]
second  form  of  [9825]. Half  its  differential,  considering  r  as  constant,  gives  [9827].

VOL,  IV.  205

818  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

[9826] therefore,  by  neglecting  the  square  of  2',  in  comparison  with ar^  +  y'-f-r*, we

shall  have
[9827]  f'df  =  sds  —  rdz',

[9828] If  we  substitute  for  z'  its  value,  and  observe  that* a:  =  5.cos.d, y  =  s.s\xi.t

[9779],  the  equation  of  the  surface  will  give,  by  considering  &  as  constant.!

[9829]  dz'  =  2sds  .{A.cos.^:i-\--K.smJ  .cosJ  +  B  .siii,^&\,

[9829'] Thus,  r  being  extremely  small ^  while  '^(f)  has  a  sensible  value,  we  may  suppose

very  nearly
[9830]  sds=fdf.{l+2Ar.cos.''d-\-2x.r,sm.6,cosJ  +  2Br.sin.'^6\.

By  this  means  the integral  ffsds.dhTi(f') [9822]  is  transformed into  the
following  expression :

[9831]  fffdf\dK\l+2Ar,cos.^^-{-2xr.smJ.cos.6+2Br.sm.^6\,u(f').  [^rJrdSaroi°^S?'T
From  the  well-known  principles  of  the  transformation  of  double  integrals,  we
may  here  integrate  in  the  first  place  relative  to  6,  and  then  relative  to  f. The

[9832]  integral  relative  to  6  extends  from  the  limits  6^0  to  6^=2-^;  and,  after  making
the  integration  relative  to  this  quantity,  we  find  that  the  double  integral  [9831]
can  be  reduced  to  the  following  form :  f

[9833]  2*  'ff'df'  {1+(A+B).r\.n(f'),  [Attraction  in  the  direcUon  ZO.J

We  shall  now  put,  as  in  [9794],
[9834]  fi'fdf'.n{f)=.c'-Y{f),

[9828a]

*  (4261) These  values  of  a?,  y, are deduced from  those in [9779], by  changing  /
[9773,  9774,  9775a],  into  s  [981 4J,  to  conform  to  the  present  notation.

t  (4262) Substituting  the  values  of  x,  y  [9328],  in  [9324],  we  get
[9829a]  z'=s^.\A.cos.^d-{-\.^\n.&.COS.&-\-B.sm?ei\.

In  taking  the  differential  relative  to  s,  we  must  consider  the  independent  variable  quantity
[98295] 6 as constant, and then the differential of this  expression of z' gives dz' [9829].

Substituting  this  in  [9827],  it  becomes

[9829c]  f'df'=:sds.\l  —  {'^Ar.cos.^6-{-2\r.sm.6.cos.6-\-2Br.sin.^6)\.

Dividing  this  by  the  coefficient  of  sds,  and  neglecting  terms  of  the  second  and  higher  powers
[9829rf] and  products  of  the  quantities  Ar,  Xr,  Br,  which  are  of  the  very  small  order  r^  [9829*],  we
get  the  value  of  sds  [9830],  and  by  substituting  it  in  [9822],  we  obtain  [9831].

X  (4263) We  have,  as  in  [1548a],
[9833a]  f^'dd.cos.^S=^'^, ^f^^dd.s\n.^d  =  ^, j;^d$,cos.6.sm.6=^0, also J^d3=^2f;

substituting  these  in  [9831],  we  get  [9833J.

X.Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  819

c'  being the  value  of that  integral  when  f  is  infinite [9795] ; hence the [9835J
expression  [9833]  becomes*

^t  A\  J^  fjji  -J-  j5)  .  r  I  .  Y  (r).  [Attraction  in  the  direction  ZO.]  [9836]

Now  if  we  put  R  for  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  section  of  the  surface,  by  a [9837]
plane  passing  through  the  axes  of  x^  z,  we  shall  have  f

A  =  l.  [9838]

If  we  also  put  R'  for  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  section  of  the  surface  by [9839]
a  plane  passing  through  the  axes  of  y,  z,  we  shall  have  '

. J5  =  — ,  •  [9840]

Therefore  we  shall  have,  for  the  attraction  of  the  body,  upon  a  point  placed

within  it,  in  the  direction  of  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  surface,  and  at  the
distance  r  from  that  surface, J

[9841]

C r /I 1  \ )

2*.<l-f--.( 1 ,)?«^  (/)'  [Attraction  in  the  direction  ZG.] [9842]

*  (4264)  If  we  change  the  limit  of  the  integral  /'  [9834]  into  r,  we  shall  have
M'df'.J\(f')  =  c'—i'{r).  Subtracting  this  fiom  /oT^/'.n(/)  =  c'  [9835],  we  get  [9834o]
/.°yd/''.n(/')  =  +(r).  Now  in  the  integral  [9833],  the  least  value  of/'  is  evidently  [98346]
ZO  =  r,  fig.  142,  page  815,  and  its  greatest  value  extends  beyond  the  limits  of  the  sphere
of  activity  of  the  attracting  fluid,  and  it  may  therefore  be  considered  as  infinite  ;  so  that  we
must  substitute  the  integral  [98346]  in  [9833J,  and  it  will  become  as  in  [9836],  r  being
constant  in  the  integrations  relative  to  f.

[9834c]

t  (4265) The  curve  formed  by  the  section  of  a  plane  passing  through  the  axes  of  x,  z,
is  evidently  obtained  by  putting y=0, in  the  equation  of  the  surface  [9824],  which  gives [9837o]
z'=Ax^. Now  if  we  suppose  z',  x,  to  be  infinitely  small,  and  R  to  be  the  radius  of  the i^q^^i-x
circle  of  curvature  corresponding  to  the  point  O,  fig.  142,  page  815,  we  shall  have,  by  a  well-
known  property  of  small  circular  arcs, 2Rz'=r^. Dividing  the  preceding value of  z' [9837c]

[9837a]  by  this  expression,  we  get  ^  =  ^  [9838]. In  like  manner,  by  puuing  a?  =  0,  in [9837rf]

[9824],  we  get  the  curve  formed  by  the  plane  of  z',  y,  represented  by  the  equation
z'=Bi/',  comparing  this  with  the  equation  2R'z'=y'^,  of  a  small  circular  arc,  whose
radius  is  R',  we  get  the  expression  of  B  [9840].

t  (4266) Substituting  the  values  of  A,  B  [9838,  9840],  in  [9836],  it  becomes  as  in ^^^
[9842]. Multiplying  this  by  dr,  and  integrating,  as  in  [9843],  it  becomes

2*./rfr,^(r)-f^(^  +  ^,).2*./rc?r.+(r)j  ,  [98416]

[9837c;

820

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9842']

To  obtain  the  whole  action  of  the  body,  upon  a  fluid  contained  in  an  iiifinitelj
narrow  canal  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  whose  base  is  taken  for  unity,  we

[9841c]
[9841rf]

[9841e]

[9841/]

[9841g]

[9841A]

and  by  using  the  values  [9844,  9844'],  we  get  [9845],  which  corresponds  with  [9301].  Tlie
remarks  in  [9846]  are  conformable  to  those  in  [930 li].

In  all  the  calculations  of  this  article,  the  author  considers the  fluid  as  being perfectly
homogeneous,  and  wholly  neglects  the  consideration  of  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface
of  the  fluid. To  notice  this  circumstance,  we  shall  refer  to  fig.  143,  which  is  marked  with  the
same  letters  as  fig.  142,  page  815 ;  and  we  shall,  in  the  first
place, for  greater simplicity,  suppose that the  external
surface  N'O'M'  is  spherical,  and  the  density  of  the  fluid,
at  that  surface,  nearly  equal  to  nothing;  moreover  nom,
n'o'm',  are  infinitely  near  concentrical  spherical  surfaces,
including a  stratum  of  fluid of  the  uniform density  D ;
lastly, NOM is  another  concentrical spherical surface,
where  the  density  is  equal  to  unity,  as  in  the  interior  of
the  fluid;  the  distance  of  the  surfaces  NOM,  N'O'M' j

being  the  insensible  quantity  00'=^  [9580/  g];  so  that,  if  we  suppose  the  radius  of  the
surface  NOM  to  be  R,  that  of  the  surface  N'O'M'  will  be  R-\-\.  The  line  O'OC  is
supposed  to  be  perpendicular  to  these  surfaces,  at  the  points  O',  O;  and  this  line  is  taken  for
the  axis  of  z,  as  in  [9768,  &c.].  Then  the  action  of  the  stratum  included  between  the
surfaces  nom,  n'o'm',  upon  the  point  ^,  situated  a  little  below  the  surface  NOM,  may  be
determined  from  the  expression  [9342].  For  if  we  put,  for  a  moment,  Zo=r,  and  suppose
nom  to  be  the  external  surface  of  a  spherical  mass  of  fluid  RGnom,  of  the  uniform  density
unity,  its  action  on  the  point  Z  of  the  axis  OZ,  in  the  interior  of  the  fluid,  will  be  given
by  the  formula  [9842],  supposing  R=R'  to  be  the  radius  of  this  external  surface;  so  that
we  shall  have  for  this  action  the  following  expression :

2*-^l+^r^.*(r).

Now  without  altering  the  position  of  the  point  Z,  we  shall  suppose  the  mass  of  the  fluid  to
be  increased  by  the  addition  of  an  infinitely  small  stratum  of  the  fluid,  of  the  same  density
unity,  included  between  the  concentrical  surfaces  nom,  n'o'm',  whose  distance  oo'  may
[9841* ]  be  represented  by  dr.  Then  it  is  evident  that  the  action  of  this  additional  stratum  upon  the
point  Z  will  be  obtained,  by  taking  the  differential  of  the  expression  [9841  A],  supposing
Zo=ir  to  be  augmented  by  the  quantity  oo'=dr;  and  by  putting,  for  brevity,

it  becomes

neglecting  the  term  arising  from  the  variation  of  the  radius  of  curvature  R,  in  passing  from

[984U]
[984U]

X  Suppl.  2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  821

must  multiply  the  preceding  expression  by  dr,  and  integrate  it  from  r  =  0  to

r  =  OD. Then  putting,  as  in  [9253a'],  ^^^^^

one  surface  to  another,  on  account  of  its  smallness. For  in  this  case  we  have  dR=^dr\  and [9841m]
the  part  of  the  differential  of  [9841  A]  depending  on  it  is

—  2'r.^^.rcZr.*(r)=~.2:r^r.^-.-^..F(r)?,  ^  [9841n]

r
which  is  of  the  order  —  in  comparison  with  the  term  depending  on  -^{r)  in  [9841?] ;  and  as

r  is  supposed  to  be  very  small  relative  to  i?,  and  may  be  considered  as  of  the  order  X,  this
term  may  be  neglected. Now  multiplying  [9841/J  by  the  density  D,  considered  as  a  function [9841o]
of  r,  we  get  for  the  action  of  the  stratum  included  between  the  surfaces  n'o'm',  noniy  the
following  expression :  ^

2if.D.dr.-*'(r)-\-^.2T.D.dr.\t{r)  +  r.^'(r)]:  ■  .  [9841;>]

To  obtain  the  whole  action  of  the  fluid  RG n'o'm'  upon  the  particle  at  Z,  we  must  integrate

[984Ip],  from  the  limit  r  =  —  X,  corresponding  to  a  particle  situated  between  the  points  Z

and  C,  where  the  function  i'(r)  becomes  insensible,  to  the  point  o,  where  r  =  r;  and  it  is [9841^]

evident  that  the  first  of  these  limits  r=  —  X, may  be  changed  into  r  =  — go;  because  the

functions "^(r),  "^'(r),  8ic,  are  supposed  to  be  insensible  between  the  hmits  r= — X, and

r  =  — GO. Then,  using  for  brevity  the  following  symbols,

^ ^^{r)=fj:^D.dr.^'{r),  [9841r]

r.^^{r)=:fJj).dr.\^{r)  +  r.^'{r)\,  [9841«]

we  shall  evidently  have,  for  the  integral  of  [9841j?],  the  following  expression :

Sw .^^(r)-\--. 'Zirr . ^pj(r)  =  the  action  of  the  fluid  RGn'om upon  the  particle  at  Z.  [9841« ]

Now  supposing  the  stratum  n'o'm'  to  coincide  with  the  external  surface  of  the  fluid  N'O'M',

and  O'  to  be  the  origin  of  the  line  r,  we  shall  have  the  same  expression  [9841  <]  for  the  acticm

of  the  whole  fluid  RGN'O'M',  upon  any  point  whatever  of  the  axis  O'Z,  situated  within  the [9841u]

fluid,  at  the  distance  r  below  the  surface  at  O';  so  that,  if  we  suppose  a  cylindrical  column

OO'  to  be  formed,  whose  base  at  O  is  equal  to  unity,  as  in  [9258a,  b],  and  the  attracted

point  to  be  at  o,  or  O'o  =  r,  the  formula  [984U]  will  express  the downward action of

the  whole  fluid  RGN'O'M',  upon  a  particle  of  the  fluid  at  o. Multiplying  this  by  Ddr, l^^^^]

which expresses the quantity of  fluid  contained in the  part oo'=dr  of the column,

we  get  ~  ^

2T.D.dr.^^{r)-{-^.2^.D.rdr.^^{r),  [9841*]

for  the  action  of  the  whole  fluid  RGN'O'M'  upon  the  infinitely  small  column  oo'=dr.
Integrating  this,  so  as  to  include  the  action  upon  the  whole  column  00',  from  r  =  0  to
ri='K,  we  get,  for  the  whole  downward  pressure  of  the  column  O'O  at  O,

[9841y]

2*./o^2> .  dr .  ^XO  +  4  •  2t  ./o^JD  .  rdr .  ^^{r)  =  pressure  at  O.  [98412  ]

R

VOL.  IV.  206

822

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  C61.

[9844]
[9844']

[9842a]

[98426]
[9842c]

[9842rf]
[9842c]

[9842e']

[9842/]

[984^]

[9842fc]
[9842i ]

As  the  functions  ^/r),  'J'2(r),  are  supposed  to  become  insensible  at  any  sensible  distances
[9255,  &.C.],  we  may  extend  the  second  limit  r=A  to  r=cD  [9256] ;  so  that,  if  we  put  for
brevity,  in  like  manner  as  we  have  done  in  [92536,  c],

H  =  2^./o'"l>.r(ir.vp,(r),
we  shall  have,  for  the  pressure  [984 iz],  the  following  value:

K  +  H.-

the  pressure  at  the  base  O  of  the  column O'O  of  a  variable  density.

1

Comparing  this  with  the  expression K-\-H.- [9845]  corresponding  to  a  spherical  surface

where  R'=:R,  which  is  computed  by  the  author  upon  the  supposition  that  the  density  of
the  fluid  is  equal  to  unity,  we  find  that  there  is  no  difference  whatever  in  the  forms  of  these
functions  [9842df,  e],  but  merely  a  change  of  the  constant  quantities  Jf,  K,  which  become
H,  K,  respectively.  The  same  method  of  calculation  may  be  used  when  we  suppose  the
surfaces  N'O'M',  n'o'm',  nom,  NOM,  to  be  concentrical  ellipsoids,  or  surfaces  which,  in  the
case  of  uniform  density,  produce  the  expression  [9342],

^'•^+i(5+i')^•'«'

instead  of  that  depending  on  spherical  surfaces,

^^Al  +  ^-rl.^^r) [9841A];

the  only  change  it  produces  is  the  substitution  of  i(~H- w)  for  — ;  and  by  making  this

\R R  /  Ji

change  in  [98426?],  we  get

K  -f-  —  .(—-}-  ^,)  =  the  pressure  at  the  base  O  of  the  column O'O  of  a  variable  density.
2 \R R  /

This  expression,  corresponding  to  an  ellipsoid,  includes  terms  of  the  second  order  in  x,  y
[9770,  or  9812a],  and  may  also  be  supposed  to  include  those  of  the  third  order,  as  in
[981 2&] ;  so  that,  by  neglecting  terms  of  a  higher  order  in  x,  y,  we  may  suppose  the  function
[9842^]  to  express  the  whole  downward  pressure  at  the  base  O  of  the  tube  O'O,  whatever
be  the  form  of  the  limiting  surface  N'O'M'.  Hence  we  may  generally  conclude,  that  the
whole  effect  of  the  variation  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  is  merely  to  change,  as  in
[9845,  9842jg-],  H  into  H,  and  K  into  K.  This  change  in  the  values  of  fl,  K,  is,  however,  of
no  importance  whatever,  in  a  practical  point  of  view,  since  these  quantities  must  necessarily
be  determined  by  observation,  the  law  of  the  variation  of  the  corpuscular  action  being
unknown,  as  has  been  already  observed  in  the  note  on  this  fundamental  theorem  in
[926ld-^g], We  have,  therefore,  used,  in  conformity  with  the  remarks  in  [9261n,  &c.],  the

X.  Suppl.  2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION*

823

we  shall  have,  for  the  action  of  the  body  upon  the  canal,

r  Pressure  at  the  point  0.1 [9845]

formulas  of  the  author,  wiih  his  values  of  H,  K,  supposing  them  always  to  be  those  which  are [9842*]
obtained  from  observation,  and  therefore  such  as  would  arise  from  the  action  of  a  fluid  of  a
variable  density.

We  shall  suppose,  in  fig.  143,  page  820,  that  the  line  OT  is  drawn  tangent  to  the  surface
NOM,  in  the  point  O,  and  from  any  point  5  of  the  surface  there  is  let  fall  upon  this  tangent  [9842Z  ]
the  perpendicular  ST=z.  We  shall  also  suppose  that  the  cylindrical  column  O'O  is
continued  below  the  surface  NOM,  so  as  to  form  the  canal  O'OVSU,  which,  in  its  upward
direction  S  U,  meets  the  surface  NOM  at  S,  in  a  perpendicular  direction,  and  passes  on,  in
the  same  direction,  to  the  external  surface  in  U,  Putting  jR^  and  jR',  respectively,  for  the
greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  NOM  at  the  point  iS,  we  shall  have,
in  like  manner  as  in  [9842^],

K-|-JH.f„  -|-— j  =  the  pressure  on  the  base  S  of  the  column US  of  a  variable  density. [9842n]

If  the  line  ST=z  be  vertical,  it  will  express  the  elevation  of  the  point  O  above  the  point
S;  and  the  pressure  of  a  column  of  fluid  of  that  height  will  be  gz. If  this  line  be  inclined

to  the  horizon  by  an  angle  whose  cosine  is  represented  by  - ,  the  vertical  pressure  will
become gzx-, or  simply  gw;  u  being  the  vertical  elevation  of  the  point  O  above  the

point  S.  Adding  this  quantity  gu  to  the  pressure  at  O  [9842^],  we  get  the  whole  pressure  at
S,  which  ought  to  balance  the  pressure  in  the  canal  US,  given  in  [9842n],  upon  the
principle  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  canals,  which  is  so  frequently  used  in  this  work ;  hence
we  have

If  we  suppose  the  situation  of  the  point  S  to  be  successively  varied,  by  infinitely  small
intervals,  along  the  surface  NOSM,  while  the  point  O  remains  the  same,  we  shall  have
K,  H,  R,  R',g,  constant;  and  u,  R^,  R'^,  variable;  and  then  the  diflferential  of  [9842p]
will  become,  by  transposing  the  term  gdu,  . : .

[9843at]

[9842o]

i«-<'(i+5;)-^'"*=<''

[9842p]

[9842y]
[9842r]

which  is  of  the  same  form  as  [9811],  changing  H  into  H,  as  in  [9842c'],  and  placing  an
additional  accent  on  R,  R',  as  in  [9842m],  to  conform  to  the  notation  which  we  have  here
used.  This  equation  may  also  be  deduced  from  the  same  principle  which  is  employed  in
[9808] ;  for  the  quantity  g  being  multiplied  by  the  element  — du,  is  the  same  as  in  [9807"],

[9842a]

824  THEORY  OF  CAI*ILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  C^l.

which  agrees  with  what  we have  before  found  in  [9301]. This  expression

corresponds  to  a  body  which  is  terminated  by  a  convex  surface.  When  the
[9846] surface  is  wholly  concave,  or  convex  in  one  direction,  and  concave  in  the  other,  we

must  suppose  the  radius  of  curvature  negative  luhich  corresponds  to  the  concavity.

We  shall  now  consider  a  fluid  contained  in  a  capillary  and  prismatic  tube  *

[9846'] dipped  vertically  by  its  lower  end  into  a  vessel  of  an  indefinite  extent,  supposing

the  surface  of  the  fluid  to  be  concave,  and  we  shall  define  this  surface  by  means

of  the  following  symbols:

producing  the  second  term  of  [9842r] ;  and  we  shall  now  show  that  the  tangential  forces
[9842<]  produce  the  first  term  of  that  equation.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  suppose  that  the  part  of
the  canal  OVS  is  bent  along  the  surface  OS,  as  in  [9759,  Sic] ;  then  the  pressure  on  the  canal
at  the  point  O  will  be  represented  by  the  function  [9842g-],  in  the  direction  from  O  to  S,
because  fluids  press  in  every  direction ;  and  the  contrary  pressure  at  the  opposite  end  /S  will
be  represented  by  the  function  [9842n]. The  difference  of  these  two  pressures  is

l^m  .- ,  JH.(i  +  i)-5H.(i  +  i-,);

and  when  the  points  O,  S,  are  infinitely  near  to  each  other,  this  difference  becomes  equal  to
the  difierential  of  the  pressure,  or

t»««"]  ■  ~.  : -  JH.<i.(i+|,).

Now  this  is  true  for  every  part  of  the  surface  NOM,  taking  for  R,  R',  the  radii  of  curvature
corresponding  to  the  proposed  part ;  so  that,  if  we  take,  on  the  arc  SM,  a  point  s  infinitely
near  to  S,  we  shall  have,  by  using  the  values  R,,  R',  [9842m],

[9842x]  |ji  g^^^^ j__^jjg  increment  of  the  pressure  in  the  direction  of  the  infinitely

^ small  arc  Ss,  in  proceeding  from  S  to  s.

This  expression  of  the  tangential  force  depends  chiefly  on  terms  of  the  third  order  in  x,  y,
treated  of  [9771,  &;c.,  9772a,  &,c.] ;  and  as  it  comprises  the  increment  of  pressure in  the

r9842Ml  '"fi'^i^^'y  small  arc  Ss,  it  may  be  considered  as  representing  the  product  of  the  tangential
force  by  the  element  of  its  direction,  being  of  exactly  the  same  form  as  the  first  term  of
[9811],  where  the  density  is  supposed  to  be  constant.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  equation
[9811],  which  is  computed  by  the  author  on  the  supposition  that  the  density  is  invariable,  is

[98422]  also  true  when  we  notice  the  variation  of  density  near  the  upper  surface  of  the  fluid  N'O'M' ,
changing  the  constant  coefficient  H  into  H  when  the  density  is  variable.

*  (4267) The  horizontal  section  of  this  prism  may be  considered  as  a  curve  of  any
[9846a] form  whatever,  without  any  abrupt  angular  points  which  might  cause  an  irregularity  in  its
attraction.

X.  Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  825

Xf  y,  2,  are  the  three  rectangular coordinates  of  any  point  of  this  concave [9847]
surface  of  the  fluid ;  x,  y,  being  horizontal,  and  z  a  vertical  line ;  the
origin  of  these  coordinates  being  at  the  lowest  point  of  the  concave
surface  of  the  fluid ;
h  =  the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  concave  surface  of  the  fluid, [9848]

above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase ;  and  from  [9847]  we  have
z  =  the  elevation  of  any  other  point  whatever  of  the  concave  surface  of [9849]
the  fluid  above  the  level  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  same  surface;
so  that  h-{-z  represents  the  elevation  of  the  same  point  above  the [9849'j
level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel ;
D  =  the  density  of  the  fluid.  [9850]

We  shall  suppose  that  a  vertical  canal*  commences  at  the  point  of  the  surface
corresponding  to  z,  and  continues  downward  below  the  tube,  is  there  bent
under  it,  and  continues  till  it  meets  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel ;  this  [9850']
tube  being  infinitely  small  in  its  diameter,  and  of  the  same  dimensions
throughout.  Then  the  condition  of  the  equilibrium  of  this  canal  will  give  the
equation

/I  1 \  pChanging/TintoH,  as  in  [9849/1,-1

iH.(-  +  -^A=^gD,(h  +  zy l^Z^^^^^  l°f [9851]

\ll It  J  Lthe  fluid  and  tube.  J

[9849o]

*  (4268) The  canal  is  represented  by VRZ'qPO',  in  fig.  112,  page  695,  O'  being
the  point  of  the  concave  surface  which  is  under  consideration,  P  the  point  at  the  same  level
with  O,  and  Q  the  point  at  the  same  level  with  V;  and  we  have,  in  the  notation  here  used,
qP  =  h,  PO'=z, qO'=h-\-z  [9848,9849];  so  that,  if  we  put VR  =  Z'q  =  k,  we [98496]
shall  have  Z'0'=lc-\-h-{-z. Then  the  capillary  action  at  F,  namely,  X,  is  to  be  added [9849c]
to  the  gravity  of  the  column VB,  which  is  gD.Tc,  to  get  the  pressure  K-\-gD.7c  on  the [9849c']
column VR  at  R. In like manner,  the  capillary  action at O' for  a concave surface
[9845,  9846],  being  added  to  the  gravity  of  the  column  Z'O',  namely,  gD.{7c-}-h-{-z)i
gives  the  pressure  on  the  column O'Z',  equal  to

K'-m-{^-h^)+gD.ik  +  h  +  z).  [9849rf]

These  two  columns  ought  to  balance  each  other,  as  in  [93156] ;  hence  we  have

K-\-gDk  =  K-hH.(^^-{.^^-i-gD.{]c-\-h  +  z).  [9849e]

Rejecting  the  terms  K,  gDJc,  which  destroy  each  other  in  both  members,  and  transposing
the  term  depending  on  H,  we  get  [9851] ;  changing  jH"  into  H,  as  in [9842^;],  the  equation [9849/*]
[9851]  will  correspond  to  the  case  where  the  density  is  supposed  to  be  variable  near the
surfaces  of  the  fluid  and  tube.

VOL.  IV.  207

826  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  j.  [M^c.  Cel.

[9852] Now  if  we  put p  =  (j-\ q  =  (/ ) [9312],  we  shall  have,  by  the  theory
of  curve  surfaces,*

[9853]  R^R—  (I_|_p2_|_q2)i

therefore  we  shall  have

Differen-
tial equa-
tion of  the
concave

surface  in  /  CI  4- D^-l- Q^^i  S

a  capillary  V  V^T^F T^4  T  J

[9854'] which  is  evidently  the  same  as  the  equation  [9318],  as  in  [9852c].

Multiplying  this  equation  by  dxdy,  then  taking  its  integral  relative  to  dx  and
[9855] dy,  observing  also  that  the  function  multiplied  by  \H  may  be  put  under  the
form  t

[98526]

[9852c]
[9852rf]

V/l  +  p2  +  q2 j4-f  /l  +  p2  +  q2 ),

d.

M>=^^..

v/i+p2+q2  j-f-( /i4-p24-q2  ])=:gD.jr/{h+z),dx.dy.

dx / \  dy J

*  (4269) Taking  the  partial  differentials  of  p,  q [9852],  relative  to  a?,  y,  and  using  the
symbols  [9312,  9313],  we  evidently  have

^--' '=(S)=(£)' ^=(^)=(|)=(l)> '=(S)=(^)-

Putting  these  values  of  r,  s,  t,  in  [9314],  we  get  [9853],  by  observing  that
2s==r^J  +  r^j;  substituting  [9853]  in  [9851],  we  obtain  [9854];  multiplying  this  by
— , it  becomes  of  the  same  form  as  [9318],  gJ)  being  used  for  ^,  and  the  constant  terms

H

j+j-, taking  the  place  of — ^, agreeing  with  the  remarks  in  [9854']. We  may  observe

that  the  length  of  the  vertical  column  of  air,  of  the  density  D',  which  presses  on  the  point
F,  fig.  112,  page  695,  exceeds  that  at  O'  by  Q0'  =  A  +  2r,  and  its  weight  gB'^h-^z)
is  to  be  added  to  that  in  [9849c'],  or  to  the  first  member  of  [9849e].  The  effect  of  this
r9852  1  correction  is  to  decrease  the  second  member  of  [9851]  by  ^D'.  (A-f-s;),  or  to  change  B
into  Z) — D',  as  ]VI.  Poisson  has  donej  but  the  density  of  the  air  B'  being  very  small
relative  to  Z),  this  correction  may  be  neglected.

t  (4270) Developing  the  differentials  in  [9856],  it  becomes  equal  to  the  factor  of  \B.
[9856a] in [9854]; substituting it  in [9854],  multiplying  by  dxd]j,  and  prefixing  the  sign  j(/', it
becomes  as  in  [9857].

X.  Suppl.2.J EQUATIOxN  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  827

These  double  integrals  must  be  taken  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  interior

horizontal section  of  the  prism. The  double  integral* gD .ff(h -\- z) . dx , dy  [9358]

is  therefore  the  weight  of  the  fluid  elevated  by  the  capillary  action  above  the  V.

level. Thus,  by  putting  V  for  the  volume  of  this  fluid,  we  shall  have  ^^^^^^

gD.ff{h-{-z).dx.dy=^gD.V,  [9860]
The  double  integral

, \H. I  I  dx.dy.f^'\/i+^+q^j ...  [9861]
becomes  by  integration,  relative  to  x,  of  the  following  form,

lH,rdy,(—^=:-  , ^P^ A  [9862]

(p)  and  (q)  being  what  p  and  q  become  at  the  origin  of  the  integral. In  like  [9863J
manner,  the  double  integral

dy
becomes  by  integration,  relative  to  y,

To  obtain  a  precise  idea  of  these  integrals  and  their  limits,  we  shall  observe
that  these  limits  are  the  horizontal  section  of  the  interior  surface  of  the  tube,  [9866]
and  that  this  section  is  a  re-entering  curve.  We  shall  take  the  origin  of  a:,  y,
outside  of  this  curve,  so  that  it  may  be  wholly  included  in  the  right  angle
formed  by  the  axes  of  x  and  y.  In  this  case,  the  values  of  dx  and  dy  are
evidently  positive  in  the  preceding  double  integrals,  when gD.ff(h-^z).dx.dy [9867]

*  (4271) If  we  suppose  the  whole  volume  of  the  prism  to  be  divided  into  an  infinite [9858o]
number  of  rectangular  prisms,  we  shall  have  dx,  dy,  for  the  horizontal  sides  of  the  base  of  one
of  these  prisms,  and  h-\-  z  for  its  height ;  therefore  its  volame  dV  will  he  dx.dy  .(h-\-z)=:  d  V, rqgrgi  -i
its  mass D.dx.dy.{h-{-z)=^D.dV, and its gravity gD,dx.dy.{h-\-z)=gD.dV,
whose  integral  is  as  in  [9860]. If  the  surface  of  the  fluid  be  supposed,  as  in  [9319'],  to [9858c]
be  formed  by  the  revolution  of  a  curve  about  the  axis  of  z,  and  u  be  taken  for  the  distance
of  a  particle  of  the  fluid  from  the  axis  of  z,  the  volume  dVof  the  fluid,  contained  between .__^  „

[_9o5oaJ
the two  concentrical  cylindrical surfaces  whose radii are m, m  +  ^^j will be found  by

multiplying  the  height  A-|-^  by  the  area  of  the  annulus  '27rudu,  which  forms  its  base;  hence

dV=2'!f.{h-\-z).udu. Multiplying  this  by  the  density  D,  and  the  gravity  g,  and then [9858el

integrating,  we  get gD  .V=^2'^gD  .f{h  -^  z)  .vdu, which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

828  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

denotes  the  weight  of  the  elevated  fluid  [9858],  as  ive  have  here  supposed;  these
differentials  must  therefore  be  considered  as  positive  in  the  simple  integrals.  This
being  premised,  we  may  remark  that  the  element

[yooyj  •  /  =  Pdy,  corresponds  to  the  branch  [GH]  of  the  section  which  is  concarx  *  towards  the  axis  of  y  5

V/l-f-p^-|-q2

hH.(p).dy
[9870] — — / .  ..J  I ,  "g  =  "^  (^)-<'yj  corresponds  to  the  branch  [EF]  of  the  section  which  is  convex  towards  the  axis  of  y;

[9871]

iH.(idx

/i+p2+q2

^=  Qdx,  corresponds  to  the  branch  [fG]  of  the  section  which  is  concave  towards  the  axis  of  x;

iH.{q).dx
[9872] — /'lit 9  I I \o  ^^^^ ( Q).dx,  corresponds  to  the  branch  \_EH]  of  the  section  which  is  convex  towards  the  axis  of  « j

[98690]

[98696]

[9869c]
[9869rf]

[9869c]

[9869/]

[9869g]
[9869&]

*  (4272) We shall use for brevity the following symbols,  which are inserted in
[9869 — 9872],  though  they  are  not  in  the  original  work;

P  =

Q

hH.q

_  hH.jq)

yi_|_p2^q2'  \^^ ^l  +  (p)2^(q)2'

and  for  illustration  we  shall  suppose,  in  the  annexed  figure  144,
that  CBX  is  the  axis  of  x,  CAY  that  of  y;  EFGH  a
section  of  the  tube,  by  a  plane  parallel  to  the  plane  of  xy,
and  intersecting  the  axis  of  z  in  the  point  C  Then,  in  taking
the  integral  of  [9861]  relative  to  a?,  to  obtain  [9862],  we  must,
as  usual,  consider  y  as  constant,  and  take  the  integral  in  the
direction  EH  parallel  to  the  axis  of  x,  from  any  point  E
corresponding  to  the  element  (P),  to  the  point  Jf  corresponding
to  the  element  P;  and  we  shall  have  for  the  integral  formula
[9861],  the  same  expression  as  in  [9862],  namely,

P

T

Jff^.I4tA.

s^

^

(

■x

CpTM

E

^"^^

^

^

JH

r

J:

i

X

'■fS^-'y{.

V/l  +  p-^+q^  ]=fPdy-fiP).dy.
dx  J

In  like  manner  the  integral  relative  to  y  of  the  expression  [9864],  is  taken  in  the  direction

BEF  parallel  to  the  axis  of  y,  from  any  point  E  to  the  point  -F,  making

q \

^H.fTdx.dy.r-

V/l+p2H-qa  ]=fQ,dx—f{q).dx,
dy J
as  in  [9865]. Substituting  the  values  [9869e,/,  9860]  in  [9857],  we  get

SPdy-S{F).dy-\-jqdx-f{q).d^=gB.V.
Now  of  the  four  elements  of  which  the  first  member  of  this  integral  is  composed,  it  is  evident
that,  in  the  expression  [9869e],  the  integral  fPdy  corresponds  to  the  part  (rif,  which  is
concave  towards  the  axis  of  y,  as  in  [9869],  and  f{P) .  dy corresponds  to  EF,  which  is

[9869jfc]

X.  Suppl.2.] EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  829

therefore,  bj  supposing  that  the  elements  [9873]

correspond  to  the  same  point  [E]  of  the  section,  this  point  will  appertain  to

the  part  of  the  section*  which  is  convex  both  towards  the  axis  of  a;  [9870],  and

the  axis  of  y  [9872]. In  this  part,  the  values  of  dx  and  dy,  referred  to  the [9876]

curve,  have  contrary  signs ;  therefore,  by  supposing  dx  to be  always  positive,

dy  will  be  negative,  and  the  sum  of  the  two  preceding  elements  will  be  [9877]

^ V^^ y VM^ $  rpoint£.l  [98781

the  differentials  dx,  dy,  being  in  this  case  those  of  the  section.

convex  towards  the  axis  of  y,  as  in  [9870]. In  like  manner,  in  the  expression  [9869/],  the
integral  fQ^dcc  corresponds  to the  part  FG  which  is  concave  towards  the  axis  of  x,  as  in r9869i  ]
[9871],  and  f{Q).dx  corresponds  to  the  part  £iJ which  is  convex  towards  the  axis  of  x,  as
in  [9869].

The  integral  expression  in  the  first  member  of  [9869^],  contains  both  the  differentials
dx,  dy,  corresponding  to  all  points  of  the  circumference  EFGH.  Tliis  circumference  may
be  considered  as  being  divided  into  four  distinct  portions,  corresponding  to  the  parts  near  to
E,  F,  G,  H,  respectively,  where  the  elements  dx,  dy,  can  have  different  signs,  when
compared  with  each  other.  Now  in  proceeding  along  the  curve  EFGH,  each  element  of  [9869^
the  integral  must  contain  both  the  differentials  dx,  dy ;  hence  it  is  evident  that  there  can
be  four  distinct  combinations  of  the  four  elements  Pdy,  — (P).dy,  Qdx,  — (Q).rfa?,
[9869^,  or  9869—9872],  namely,

-\-Pdy of  the  branch  GH  [9869],  with  -{-Qdx of  the  branch  FG  [9871],  at  the  point  G,  as  in  [9879] ;  [9869m]

•\-Pdy of  the  branch  GH  [9869],  with  — ( Q) .  dx  of  the  branch  EH  [9872],  at  the  point  H,  as  in  [9883] ;  [98697i]

—{P).dy  of  the  branch  EF  [9870],  with  +Qrfj: of  the  branch  FG  [9871],  at  the  point  F,  as  in  [9885] ;  [9869o]

—{P) .  dy  of  the  branch  EF  [9870],  with  — ( Q) .  rfa:  of  the  branch  EH  [9872],  at  the  point  E,  as  in  [9874] ;  [9869/?]

as  will  be  evident  by  remarking  that  the  point  G  is  common  to  the  two  branches  GH,  FG
[9869m]  ;  the  point  His  common  to  the  two  branches  GH,  EH  [9869n] ;  the  point  F  is [9869g]
common  to  the  two  branches  EF,  FG  [9869o] ;  and  the  point  E  is  common  to  the  two
branches  EF,  EH  [9869p].  .

*  (4273) This  point  corresponds  to  the  point  E  [9869/?],  in  fig.  144,  page  828,  where [9876a]
the  curve  is  convex  towards  the  axes  of  x,  y;  and  it  is  evident  that,  in  proceeding  along  the
curve  EH,  while  x  increases  by  the  quantity  dx,  y  will  decrease;  so  that  dy  will  be  negative, [98766]
as  in  [9876] ;  and  by  supposing  the  two  elements  [9874]  to  correspond  to  the  point  E,  and
taking dx positive,  we  must  change  the  sign  of  dy,  as  in  [9877],  and  then  the  sum  of  the
two  elements  [9874]  will  become  as  in  [9878].

VOL.  IV  208

830  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.  [Meo.C^l.

[9879] In  like  manner,  if  the  elements  ^/_^^^^,^y,  [9871]  and  ^g^, [9869]

refer  to  the  same  point  [G]  of  the  section,  this  point  will  be  in  a  part  of  the
curve  which is concave  *  to  both  the axes  of  x  and  y. In this part,  the
differentials  dx,  dy^  referred  to  the  curye,  have  contrary  signs ;  therefoie  the  sum
[9881] of  the  preceding  elements  will  be,  by  supposing  dx  to  be  positive,

[9880]

[9882]

[9883]

the  differentials  dx  and  dy  being  in  this  case  those  of  the  section.

If  the  elements  _^^;(q);^ [9872]  and }^'l^l^ [9869] appertain  to

the  same  point  [jET],  they  will  correspond  to  the  part  of  the  curve  which  is
convex  t  towards  the  axis  of  x,  and  concave  towards  the  axis  of  y;  and  then
[9884] ^x,  dy^  have  the  same  sign.

[9885]  Lastly, if  the elements -^^^  [9870] and  ^^^ [9871]

correspond  to  the  same  point  [.F],  they  will  appertain  to  the  part  of  the  curve
which  is  convex  %  towards  the  axis  of  y^  and  concave  towards  the  axis  of  x ;
[9886] then  dx,  dy,  will  have  the  same  sign..

Thus  we  see  that,  by  expressing  these  elements  generally  by  and

[9887]  V/1+^I^+q

; '  ^ ,  whether  they  refer  to  the  commencement or termination  of  the
[9888] integrals  relative  to  x,  y,  they  will  have  a  contrary  sign  in  the  same  points  of  the

[9880o]  *  (4274)  This  corresponds  to  the  point  G  [9869m],  in  fig.  144,  page  828,  where  the
curve  is  concave  towards  the  axis  of  «,  y  j  and  it  is  evident  that,  in  proceeding  along  the
curve  GH,  while  x  increases  by  the  quantity  dx,  y  will  decrease,  so  that  dy  will  be  negative  ;

[98806]  and  we  must  change  the  sign  of  dy,  as  in  the  last  note;  and  then  the  sum  of  the  two
elements  [9879]  becomes  as  in  [9882].

[9883a]  t  (4275)  This  corresponds  to  the  point  H  [9869n],  in  fig.  144,  page  828,  where  the
curve  is  convex  towards  the axis  of  x,  and  concave towards the axis of  y;  so that  x

[98836]  and  y  increase  together  along  the  curve  HG\  consequently  dx,  dy,  have  the  same  signs  as
in  [9884],  ' . -

[9885o]  t  (4276)  This  corresponds  to  the  point  F  [9869»],  in  fig.  144,  page  828,  where  the
curve  is  convex  towards  the  axis  of  y,  and  concave  towards  the  axis  of  a? ; so  that  x,  y,

[98856]  increase  together  along  the  curve  FG',  consequently  dx,  dy,  have  the  same  sign  as
in  [9886],

[9890]

X.  Suppl.2.J  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  631

curve,  when  the  differentials  dx,  dy,  are  those  of  the  curve  itself;  therefore  their [9888']
sum  will  be,  supposing  always  dx  to  be  positive,*

hH,\pdy--qdx\^  [9889]

the  sign  -f-  taking  place  in  the  part  of  the  curve  which  is  convex  *  towards  the
axis  of  X,  and  the  sign  —  taking  place  in  the  concave  part.

Now  it  is  easy  to  prove,  by  the  theory  of  curve  surfaces,  that,  if  we  suppose [9891]
the  tube  to  be  placed  in  a  vertical  direction,  and  then  put

TO  ==  the  angle  which  the  tangent  plane  of  the  fluid,  at  the  surface  of  the [9892]
tube  near  the  point  of  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  tube,
forms  with  the  vertical  side  of  the  tube,  the  origin  of  the  angle  th
being  on  the  lower  part  of  the  tube,  or  that  which  is  in  the  direction
of  gravity  [this  angle  «  being  the  same  as  that  which  is  named  6  in [9892^
9601"],  we  shall  have  t

*  (4277) The  positive  factor -{-^H,(pdy — qdx) [9889]  corresponds to  the  terms r9889a]
[9878,  9883],  or  to the  points E,H  [9876a,  9883a], where the  curve  EH  is  convex
towards  the  axis  of  a;,  as  in  [9890]. In  like  manner  the  negative  factor  — JH.  {\)dy  —  qdx) [98896]
[9889] corresponds  to  the  terms  [9882,  9885],  or  to  the points  G,  F  [9880a,  9885a],
where  the  curve  Gi^  is  concave  towards  the  axis  of  a?,  as  in  [9890], Prefixing  the  sign  /
to  [9889],  we  get  the  expression  [9869g'],  under  the  form

g^-^°^/v/l+p^+V'  [9889c]

where  the  elements  cifcc,  dy,  correspond  to  the  curve  itself,

t  (4278) We have  seen,  in note  (15«),  vol.  1,  pages  15,  16,  that  if  du=iQ  be the
differential  element  of  the  equation  of  a  curve  surface,  whose  rectangular  coordinates  are
X,  y,  z, and  (Zr  =  0 the  differential  of  the  equation  of  a  right  line  drawn  perpendicular  to [9892a]
this  element,  wq  shall  have

IVIoreover,  if  we  denote  the  cosines  of  the  angles  which  the  line  r  makes  with  the  axes  of
X,  y,  z,  by  cos.(r,a;),  cos.(r,y),  cos.(r,z),  respectively,  we  shall  have,  as  in  the  notes  (15a),
(55a),  vol.  1,  pages  15,  85,

(l)=— =-(^'^)' (|)=^=--(^'^)'  ^(l)=^=-(''^)-

Now  z  being  a  function  of  x,  y,  we  have  dz=(^).dx-{- (—j .dy  =  pda)-\- qdy  [9852] ,
Of dz  —  p<ic  —  qrfy  =  0; putting  this  for  the  assumed  differential  equation  of  the  surface

[98926]
[9892c]

[9892rf]

832  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  C61.

(pdy  —  qdx)

ds  being  the  element  of  the  section ;  therefore  we  shall  have,  by  observing  that
the  angle  w  is  constant ,  as  we  have  seen  m  [9197],

[9892/]

of  the  fluid du=0, we  get du  =  dz  —  ipdx — qdy=sO; whence
/du\ ,  /du\  /du\

[9892/'] substituting  these in  [98926], we  get dr=-y=. ^ ^\ and,  if  we  put for  brevity

i/l_|-p2_|_q2==p,  we  shall  have,  from  this  general  differential  dr,  the  following  partial
differential  coefficients,  namely,

/dr\ 1  /dr\  a  /dr\  p

[989%]  y  =  f.  {jy)=-}'  u)=-p'

substituting  these  in  [9892^],  we  obtain

[9892ft]  cos.(r,«)=— ^,  cos.(r,y)=— ^,  cos.(r,2;)  =  p.

Now  in  fig.  144,  page  828,  we  shall  suppose  the  line  HR=:r'  to  be  drawn  in  the  plane  of
this  figure,  perpendicular  to  the  arc  HM=ds,  to  which  correspond  the  differentials  of  the
coordinates  HL=dy, LM=dx'f then  we  evidently  have

[9893i]  cosXHM=£,  cos.LMH=^.

Moreover  the  angles  which  the  line  r'  makes  with  the  lines  HK,  HL,  drawn  parallel  to  the
axes  of  X,  y,  and  in  their  positive  directions,  are  KHR,  LHR;  and  by  using  a  notation
similar  to  that  in  [9892c],  we  have

[9892Jfc]

cos.(r',x)=cos.KHR=—cos.RHE==  —  cos.LHM=—^,
^ '  ds

dx
cos.{r',y)  =  cos.RHL—cos.LMH—-, cos.(r',2;)=cos.90'*-  =  0.

observing  that  the  axis  of  z,  being  vertical,  is  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure. From
[9892Z] the  formula  [172A]  we  get  cos.(r,r'),  or  the  cosine  of  the  angle  which  the  hues  r,  r',  form

with  each  other,  as  in  [9892m] ;  substituting  in  it  the  values  [9892A,  Z:],  it  becomes,  as  in

[9892n],
[9892m]  cos.(r,  r')  =cos.(r,  x) .  cos.(r',  x)  -\-  cos.(r,  y)  .cos.(r',  y)  -f-  cos.(r,  z) .  cos.(r',  z)  ;

\ ?)'\ ds)^\ ~?)\ds)  pds  rf5./l-fp2_^q2*

Now  the  line  r  being  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  [9892a],  and  the  line  r'

[9892n'] perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  tube,  it  is  evident  that  the  inclination  of  the  lines  r,  r',  is
equal  to  the  angle  •n  [9892],  which  the  tangent  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  makes  with  the

[9892o] side  of  the  tube ;  therefore  cos.(r,  r')=cos.T3;  and,  by  substituting  it  in  [9892/i],  it  becomes
as  in  [9893],  the  double  sign  ±  being  prefixed  on  account  of  the  radical  ^i-|-p'2-[-q9  .-

X.  Supp].2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  833

^^(^^-q^)_^  '.  [9895]

c heing  the  whole  circumference  of  the  section  ;*  therefore  [9896]

[9896o]

[9896d']

[9896/]
[9896g]

*  (4279)  IVIultiplying  [9893]  by  ds,  and  integrating  through  the  whole  extent  of  the
circumference  of  the  tube,  we  find  that  the  first  men\ber  becomes  like  that  of  [9895],  and
the  second  member  of  the  integral  is  cos.«./<Zs;  but  fds=c  [9896],  hence  this  becomes
c.cos.TO,  as  in  the  second  member  of  [9895].  Now rauhiplying  [9895]  by  ^jff,  we  find  that  [98966]
its  first  member  becomes  like  the  integral  of  [9889],  which  is  shown,  in  [9861 — 9889],  to  be
equivalent  to  the  integral  expression  in  the  first  member  of  [9857];  hence  we  get  [9897],  [9896c]
being  equal  to  ^l>.r[9857,  9860];  therefore  we  have  gD.V=^Hc.cosM,  as  in  [9898].  [9896rf]
This  equation,  which  is  computed  upon  the  supposition  of  a  fluid  of  uniform  density,  will  also
correspond  to  a  fluid  of  variable  density  near  its  surface,  by  changing  Jfinto  H,  as  in  [9261m],
or  taking  for  JEfthe  value  deduced  from  actual  observation  of  the  effect  of  the  capillary  action  [9896e]
on  the  fluid,  and  substituting  it  in  [9851]  and  in  the  resulting  equation  [9898].

For  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the  preceding  calculation,  we  may  observe  that  the  process
which  is  explained  in  [9855—9898]  becomes  much  more  simple  when  we  restrict  ourselves
to  the  case  where  the  tube  is  supposed  to  be  a  vertical  cylinder  of  revolution.  For  then  the
equation  [9854]  becomes  integrable,  its  first  member  being  equal  to  the  first  member  of
[9318  or  9324]  multiplied  by  ^H;  and,  by  substituting  it  in  [9854],  we  get

XH  \  — "'^""'^ ^  i  =:sD.(h4-z).  [9896^]

i V  +  d^j )

Multiplying  this  by  2* .  udu,  and  integrating,  we  obtain

29rM.—
^H ^=^L=^  =  2^.^D./(A  +  z).MrfM,  '  [9896i]

which  is  easily  proved  by  differentiation,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  [9329a,  9329].
Multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  first  member  by  du,  and  substituting,  in
the  second  member,  its  value  ^D.F^  [9858e],  we  get

i^-^"'-^7^m=SD.r.  '  .'  [9896*]

dz
Now  when  u  becomes  equal  to  the  radius  of  the  tube,  we  evidently  have , „, ^= cos.ro,

vs  being  the  angle  formed  by  the  arc  y/du^-{-dz^  and  the  vertical  dz ;  moreover  the  whole
circumference  c  of  the  tube  becomes  c  =  2nru;  hence  the  equation  [9896Ar]  becomes

^Hc.cos.zi^gD.V,  ^  [^^^"*]

as  m  [9898].

For  greater  simplicity  it  is  supposed,  in  the  calculations  of  this  article,  that  the  ordinate
VOL.  IV.  209

[9896/ }

834  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^l.

[9897]  IH. \ I dz.dy.U Vl  +  p2+q2 )-{-( yi.^-p2.|-q2 ))>=^//c.cos.«,

which  gives

[This  equation  can  be  used  when  the  fluid  variei~1
in  density  near  the  surface,  taking  for  H  its  I
value  H  deduced  from  observation,  as  U  ob-  I
served  in  [9896e].  _|

Thus  the  mass  of  the  fluid  elevated  above  the  level  by  the  capillary  action,  is
proportional  to  the  circumference  of  the  section  of  the  inner  surface  of  the  tube.
We  may  obtain  this  remarkable  equation,  by  considering  the  effects  of  the  capillary
action  under  the  following  point  of  view.

NEW  MANNER  OF  CONSIDERING  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

The  manner  in  which  we  have  heretofore  considered  the  capillary  phenomena,
is  founded  upon  the  consideration  of  the  surface  of  a  fluid  contained  in  a
capillary  space,  and  upon  the  conditions  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid,  in  an
infinitely  narrow  canal,  terminating  at  one  end  in  that  surface,  and  at  the  other

[9900]  end  in  the  level  surface  of  the  indefinite  fluid  in  which  the  sides  of  the
capillary  tube  are  dipped.  We  shall  now  consider  directly  the  forces  which
elevate  or  depress  the  fluid  in  that  space.  This  process  will  lead  to  several
general  results,  which  could  not  be  obtained  without  some  difficulty  by  the

[9900'] preceding  method ;  and  the  comparison  of  these  two  methods  will  furnish  us
with  the  means  of  comparing  exactly  the  affinities  of  several  bodies  for  fluids.
We  shall  suppose  that  there  is  a  prismatic  tube  whose  sides  are  perpendicular

[9901]  to  the  base,  [without  having  any  angular  points,  9846a].  Then,  if  it  be
dipped  vertically,  by  its  lower  end,  into  a  fluid  [like  water,  alcohol,  &c.],  the
fluid  will  rise  in  the  tube  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel,  and  it  is

AEHKy  fig.  144,  page  828,  intersects  the  curve  in  no  more  than  two  points  E,  H;  so  that,
in  finding  the  integral  relative  to  x  in  [9869e],  we  obtain  fPdy — f(F).dy^  consisting  of
only  the  two  portions  depending  on  P  and  (P). But  if  the  curve  be  of  a  serpentine  form,

[9896o]  there  may  be  supposed,  between  H  and  K,  other  branches,  as  E'H',  similar  to  EH,  and
falling,  like  it,  partly  below  the  line  AK.  Now,  if  we  suppose  P'dy,  [P').dy,  to  be  the
elements  corresponding  to  the  points  E',  H',  and  respectively  similar  to  Pdy,  {P_).dy,
the  integral  [9869e]  will  be  increased  by  the  two  additional  terms  fP'dy  —  {P').dy;
but  it  is  evident  that  this  will  produce  no  difference  in  the  resulting  equation  [9898],  because
we  may  proceed  with  these  new  terms  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  we  have  done  with  the

L  "^J  former  ones.  Similar  remarks  may  be  made  relative  to  the  integration  corresponding  to  y  in
[9869/],

[9896n]

[9896p]

X.Suppl.2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

835

evident  that  this  must  arise  from  the  combined  action  of  the  sides  of  the  tube

upon  the  fluid,  with  that  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles. The  first  lamina

of  the  fi,uidj  contiguous  to the  sides,  is  elevated  by  this  action ;  this  raises  a [9902]

second,  that  a  third,  and  so  on,  until  the  weight  of  the  elevated  fluid  balances

the attractive  forces which tend to  raise it  still  higher. To  determine  this

quantity  in  the  state  of  equilibrium,  we  shall  suppose  that,  at  the  lower  end  of

this  tube,  a  second  imaginary  tube  is  placed,  whose  infinitely  thin  surface  is

formed  by  the  continuation  of  the  sides  of  the  interior  part  oi  \he  first  tube,  and

that  this  surface  has  no  action  upon  the  fluid,  and  does  not  impede  the  reciprocal

action  of  the  particles  of  the  first  tube  and  of  the  fluid. We  shall  suppose  that

this  second  tube  is  vertical  in  its  first  branch,  that  then  it  is  bent  horizontally,

and  at  last  resumes  its  vertical  direction  in  a  second  branch,  retaining,  throughout

its  whole  extent,  the  same  figure  and  the  same  width. It  is  evident  that,  in  the

state  of  equilibrium  of  the  fluid,  the  pressure  must  be  the  same  in  the  two

vertical  branches  of  the  canal,  composed  of  the  first  and  second  tube. But  as

there  is  more  fluid  in  the  first  vertical  branch,  composed  of  the  first  tube  and

a  part  of  the  second,  than  in  the  second  vertical  branch,  it  is  necessary  that

the  excess  of  pressure  resulting  from it  should be balanced  by  the  vertical [9906]

attractions  of  the  prism  and  fluid  upon  the  fluid  contained  in  this  first  branch.

We  shall  analyze  with  care  these  different  attractions,  and  shall  consider,  in  the

first  place,  those  which  take  place  near  the  lower  part  of  the  first  tube*  —:

[9903]

[9904]

[9905]

3

<^

s.

1-

X)

:f

UL

AT

J» ft

n

2

3 I

T

*  (4280)  To  illustrate  this,  we  have  drawn  the  annexed  figure  145,
in  which  MANO  is  the  vertical  or  Jirst  tube,  whose  inner  surface
is  supposed  to  be  continued  so  as  to  form  a  second  or  bent  tube
ABCGHQ^PN,  of  uniform  diameter,  having  a  horizontal  branch
BCQ^P,  and  a  second  vertical  branch  or  tube  CH,  terminated  at
the  level  surface  of  the  homogeneous  fluid  KHG;  lastly,  through  the
lower  part  ^iV  of  the  first  tube  is  drawn  the  horizontal  plane  AND
parallel  to  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  KHG.  Then  it  is  evident
that  the  fluid  in  the  second  tube  ABCD,  and  that  which  is  contiguous  to  it  below  the  level
surface  AD,  balance  each  other  by  their  mutual  attractions.  The  fluid  situated  above
the  plane  AD,  and  surrounding  the  first  tube  at  E  and  F,  is  without  the  sphere  of  attraction
of  the  fluid  in  the  first  tube  MANO,  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  glass,  so  that  this
action  may  be  neglected.  The  matter  of  the  first  tube,  at  its  lower  part  AN,  draws  the  fluid
of  the  second  tube  upwards  with  a  force  Q  [9911]  ;  moreover  ihe  first  tube,  at  its  upper  part
MO,  draws  the  fluid  of  the  first  tube  upwards  with  the  same  force  Q,  as  will  be  seen  in  the
next  note  [9920^"]  ;  the  sum  of  these  two  forces  is  2^. Lastly,  the  fluid  surrounding  the

[9907a]

[99076]

[9907c]

[9907(f|

[9907c]

[9907/]
[9907g-]
[9907A]

836  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9907]

[9908]

[9912]

The  prism  being  supposed  to  be  a  right  one,  and  in  a  vertical  position,  its
base  will  be  horizontal.  The  fluid  contained  in  the  second  tube  is  drawn
downwards  vertically,  first,  by  its  own  particles;  second,  by  the  fluid
surrounding  this  tube.  But  these  two  attractions  are  destroyed  by  the  similar
attractions  which  the  fluid  contained  in  the  second  vertical  branch  of  the  canal
suffers,  near  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid ;  we  may  therefore,  in  this  case,  neglect
them. The  fluid in  the  first  vertical  branch of  the  second tube  is  drawn

[9909]  vertically  upwards  by  the  fluid  of  the  first  tube ;  but  this  attraction  is  destroyed  by
the  attraction  which  it  exerts  upon  this  last  fluid ;  we  may  therefore  neglect  these

roQim ^^^ reciprocal attractions. Lastly,  the  fluid in  the second  tube  is drawn
Q vertically  upwards  by  the  first  tube,  thus  producing  an  action  upon  this  fluid

[9911]  which  we  shall  denote  by  Q,  contributing  in  part  to  balance  the  excess  of  pressure
arising  from  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  first  tube.

We  shall  now  examine  the  forces  by  which  the  fluid  of  the  first  tube  is  urged.
It  suffers  in  its  lower  part  the  following  attractions:  First:  It  is  attracted  by
its  own  particles ;  but  the  reciprocal  attractions  of  a  body  do  not  give  it  any
motion  if  it  is  solid,  and  we  may,  without  disturbing  the  equilibrium,  conceive
the  fluid  in  the  first  tube  to  become  solid.  Second :  This  fluid  is  attracted  by
the  fluid  within  the  second  tube ;  but  we  have  just  seen  that  the  reciprocal
attractions  of  these  two  fluids  destroy  each  other,  and  that  it  is  not  necessary
to  take  any  notice  of  them.  Third:  It  is  attracted  by  the  external  fluid  which
Q' surrounds  the  second  tube,  and  from  this  attraction  a  vertical  force  is  produced,

[9915]  which  draws  downwards,  and  which  we  shall  denote  by  — Q'.  We  have
prefixed  to  it  the  sign  — ,  to  denote  that  its  direction  is  contrary  to  that  of  the
force  Q.  We  shall  now  observe  that,  if  the  laws  of  attraction,  relative  to  the
distance,  are  the  same  for  the  particles  of  the  first  tube  and  for  those  of  the
fluid,  so  that  they  only  differ  with  respect  to  their  intensities,  and  if  we  put
p  and  p'  for  these  intensities  corresponding  to  an  equal  volume  [the  density  of
the  fluid  being  considered  as  uniform],  the  forces  Q  and  Q'  will  be  in  the  same

[9917]  proportion  to  each  other  as  p  to  p'.  For  the  inner  surface  of  the  fluid  which
surrounds  the  second  tube,  is  the  same  as  the  inner  surface  of  the  first  tube ;
therefore  the  two  masses  differ  only  by  their  thickness ;  but  the  attraction  of

r9907tl  second  tube  near  AN,  and  below  the  level  surface  AD,  draws  the  fluid  of  the  first  tube
downwards  with the  force  Q',  or  upwards  with  the force —  Q' [9915]. Adding  this  to

r9907Jfcl  ^^^®  ^^"^^^  ^^  [9907i^],  we  obtain  the  whole  force  acting  on  the  homogeneous  fluid  in  the
first  tube  2Q— Q'  r9923],  drawing  upwards.

[9913]

[9916]

X.  Suppl.  2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.

837

the  masses  becomes  insensible  at  sensible  distances ;  therefore  the  difference  in
their  thickness  produces  no  difference  in  their  attractions,  provided  these
thicknesses  are  sensible.  Fourth:  The  fluid  in  the  first  tube  is  attracted
vertically  upwards  by  the  tube.  For,  if  we  suppose  this  fluid  to  be  divided  into
an  infinite  number  of  small  vertical  columns,  and  through  the  upper  end  of  one
of  them  we  draw  a  horizontal  plane,  the  part  of  the  tube  below  this  plane
will  not  produce  any  vertical  force  in  the  column;*  therefore  there  will  not  be

[9918]

[9919]

[9920]

M

"^

*  (4281)  In  the  annexed  figure  146,  MANO  represents  the  first  tube,
as  in  fig.  145;  AN  is  a  horizontal  plane,  representing  the  bottom  part  of  the
tube;  abg  another  horizontal  plane  drawn  through  any  point  b  of  the  surface  ;
and  6c  a  vertical  canal  passing  through  that  point.  Now  if  we  take  any  two
points  d,  e,  of  the  tube,  situated  vertically  over  each  other,  so  that  e  may  be  as
much  above  the  plane  AN  2i5  d  is  below  the  plane  abg,  it  will  be  evident
that  the  particle  at  e  will  draw  the  column  be  downwards  with  the  same  force
that  the  particles  at  d  will  draw  the  same  column  upwards,  so  that  these  forces
will  destroy  each  other ;  and  the  same  may  be  proved  of  all  such  similarly
situated  particles  in  the  part  Aa  of  the  tube;  therefore  the  action  of  this  part  of  the  tube
upon  the  column  be  is  destroyed;  but  the  other  part  of  the  tube  aM  draws  the  column  be
with  the  same  force  that  the  whole  tube  MA  draws  upwards  a  similarly  placed  column  in  the
second  tube.  Hence  we  easily  perceive  that  the  whole  action  of  the  matter  of  the  first  tube,
upon  the  fluid  contained  within  it,  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  same  tube  upon  the  fluid
contained  in  the  second  tube,  and  this  is  equal  to  Q  [9911],  agreeing  with  [9922] ;  and  this
principle  is  used  in  the  preceding  note,  the  fluid  being  always  considered  as  homogeneous.

If  we  take  into  consideration  the  change  of  density  of  the  fluid*  near  its  surface,  and  near
the  sides  of  the  tube,  we  may  suppose  the  three  forces  treated  of  in  [9911,  9915,  9922],  to
become  respectively  Q^,  — ^^,  Qj.  We  have  not  put  Qo=Q2>  ^s  is  done  by  the  author  in
[9922],  because  the  density  of  the  fluid,  near  the  surface  of  the  second  tube,  is  the  same  as
that  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid,  except  in  the  very  small  portion  in  the  immediate
vicinity  of  the  lower  part  of  the  tube  A ;  whereas,  near  the  surface  of  the  first  tube,  the
density  may  be  very  different  from  that  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid,  on  account  of  the  action
of  the  solid  tube  ;  we  cannot,  therefore,  consider  the  action  Q^  [9911]  of  the  first  tube  upon
the  fluid  in  the  second  tube,  as  being  exactly  equal  to  the  force  Q^  [9922]  of  the  top  part  of
the  first  tube  upon  ^he  fluid  in  the  first  tube.  Now  taking  the  sum  of  the  three  forces  [9920i],
and  putting  them  equal  to  gD.V,as  in  [9924],  we  get  gD-V={Qo-\- %)  —  Q; ;  so
that,  if  we  put,  for  the  sake  of  symmetry,  Q,o-{- Q,2  =  ^Q,i> it  becomes

gD.v=2%-q[.

This  is  to  be  used  instead  of  [9925] ;  and  if  we  put,  in  like  manner  as  in  [9927',  9929],
Qj  ==  p^ .  c, Q'l  =  p'. c, we  shall  get,  as  in  [9930],

^D.F=(2p-p;).c;
VOL. IV.  210

[9920o]
[99206]

[9920c]

[9920^1
[9920e]

[9920/]
[9920ff]

[9920;i]
[9920t]

[9920ft]

[9920/]

[9920m]
[9920n]

[9920o]
[9920^1
[9920g]

838  . THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^l.

any  vertical  force  produced,  but  that  which  depends  upon  the  part  of  the  tube
above the plane; and  it  is  evident  that  the  vertical  attraction of  this part

[9921]  of  the  tube  upon  the  column,  will  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  whole  tube  upon
an  equal  and  similar  column  placed  in  the  second  tube  [neglecting  the  variation
of  density  of  the  fluid  near  its  surface  and  near  the  tube].  Therefore  the
whole  vertical  force  produced  by  the  attraction  of  the  first  tube  upon  the  fluid
contained  in  it,  will  be  equal  to  that  produced  by  the  attraction  of  this  tube  upon

[99221  ^^^  fluid  contained  in  the  second  tube ;  consequently  this  force  will  be,  as  in
[9911],  equal  to  Q  [the  fluid  being  homogeneous].

Connecting  together  all  the  vertical  attractions  which  the  fluid  contained  in  the
first  vertical  branch  of  the  canal  suffers,  we  shall  have  a  vertical  force,  drawing

[9923]  upwards,  and  equal  to  2Q — Q'  [the  fluid  being  homogeneous].  This  force
ought  to  balance  the  excess  of  the  pressure  arising  from  the  weight  of  the  fluid
which  is  elevated  above  its  level. Then  putting,  as  above,  V  for  its  volume

[9924]  [9859],  D  its  density  [9850],  and  g  the  force  of  gravity,  gD.V  will  be  its
weight;  therefore  we  shall  have

t^^^l  gZ) .  K  =  2  Q Q '.  [The  fluid  being  supposed  homogeneous.  1

ofuil'tube Now,  the  action  being  sensible  only  at  insensible  distances,  the  first  tube  acts

may  be

M°befng^'^ sensibly  only  upon  some  columns  extremely  near  to  its  sides ;  we  may  therefore

tlTp^lne. neglect  the  consideration  of  the  curvature  of  these  sides,  and  consider  them  as

[9926] being  developed  upon  a  plane. The  force  Q  will  be  proportional  to  the  width

of  this  plane,  or,  in  other  words,  to  the  circumference  of  the  interior  base  of

remarking,  however, that  the  quantities  p^,  p',  in  this formula,  may  have  different  values
[9920r] from  p,  p'  in  [9930, 9927',  9929],  where  the  fluid  is  supposed  to  be  homogeneous. Putting
the  expressions  of  gD.V  [9898,  9920^],  equal  to  each  other,  we  gel

[9920»]  g-D.F=iHc.cos.w=(2ft  — p;).c;

dividing  the  two  last  forms  of  this  ea nation  by  c,  we  obtain
[9920f  ]  2p^  —  p;=  IH.  C0S.-5J ;

[9920u] H  being  deduced  from  observation,  or  it  is  thai  value  which  corresponds  to  the  case  of  nature,

as  in  [9896e],  where  it  is  named  H;  and  we  may  here  incidentally  observe,  that  this  value  of
[9920»]  His  denoted  in  [9354,9261m]  by  Il==igbq,  for  a  concave  surface  whose  radius  is  b,  and  as
r9920i/>l *^^^  capillary  elevation  q  is  found  by  observation  [9364]  to  be  positive,  the  value  ofH  resulting

from  observation  must  therefore  be  positive.  The  same  result  may  be  deduced  from  the
[9920x] expressions  of  a  convex  surface,  considering,  in  the  preceding  value  of  H  =gbq,  the  quantities

b  and  q  as  being  negative,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  result  of  the  separate  calculation  for

a  convex  surface  in  [9369 — 9375].

X.Suppl.  2.]  EQUATION  OF  THE  CAPILLARY  ACTION.  859

the prism;  so  that  if  we put this circumference equal  to  c,  we  shall  have [9927]

c.
Q  ^  p.c. p  is  a  constant  quantity,  which  may  represent  the intensity  of  the [9927']

attraction  of  the  matter  of  the  first  tube  upon  the  fluid,  in  the  case  where  the P-

attractions  of  the  different  bodies  are  expressed  by  the  same  function  of  the

distance, but which,  in ail cases, expresses a quantity  depending  on the [9928]

attraction  of  the  matter  of  the  tube,  independent  of  its  figure  and  magnitude. „'.

We  shall  likewise  have  Q'  =  p'.  c,  p'  being,  as  it  respects  the  attraction  of  the  fluid [9929]

upon  its  own  particles,  ivhat  we  have  denoted  by  p,  relative  to  the  attraction  of  the

tube  upon  the  fluid;  therefore  we  shall  have,  from  [9925,  9927',  9929],

gD.V=(2p—p').C,  (p)  rhro?ene"o'r£dr]  [9930]

All  these

which  becomes  the  same  as  [9898],  by  putting  *  cwre-'""*

spend  to  a
2p— p'=  ^H.COS.^.  [tSneouVflLid']  [9931]

We  have  seen,  in  [9626m,  n],  that  ro==0  when  p=p';  therefore  the  preceding [9932]
equation  will  give  Suid,"

/ IfT.  rCorrect  only  with  al  [9933]

r  2 '  L  homogeneous  fluid.  J  ■■  '

neglecting

hence,  in  the  general  case,  where  p  differs  from  p',  we  shall  have  variation

°  '  of  density

2p  —  p'  =  p'.  cos.« ,  [^h^i^SnTo'rSd!^]  [9934]

at  the
or  surfaces.

„  ' Pn<?2l^.  rCorrect  only  with  a-]  [99351

P p '^^o, 5"",  |_  homogeneous  fluid.  J  •>  ■».

therefore,  if  we  know  the  angle  ra,  it  will  give  the  ratio  of  p  to  p',  and  the
contrary.  We  may  demonstrate  directly  that  [in  the  case  of  a  homogeneous
fluid] p'=^H  [9933],  in  the  following  manner:

We  shall  suppose  that  there  is  a  solid  vertical  plane,  of  a  sensible  thickness,
whose  base  is  horizontal,  and  that  there  is,  at  the  distance  a  from  this  plane,  a

[9936]

[9937]

*  (4282) Putting the  expressions  of  gD.V  [9898,  9930] equal  to each  other,  and
dividing  by  c,  we  get  [9931]. Now  if  we  suppose  the  matter  of  the  tube  to  vary,  while  the
homogeneous  fluid  remains  the  same,  the  quantities  p,  ot,  will  vary,  but  Jff  [9844']  and p'
[9929]  will  be  unaltered ;  then  the  equation  [9931]  will  give  the  relation  between  the  variable roooiii
quantities  p,  w. Now  we have seen in [9626/,  m,  &c.],  that, when p  =  p', the curve
surface  will  be  a  concave  hemisphere;  and  as  to  [9892]  represents  the  angle  which  this  surface [9931c]
forms  with  the  lower  side  of  the  tube,  we  shall  have,  in  this  case,  w=0. Substituting  the [9931rf]
values  p=p',  zsr^O,  in  [9931],  it  becomes  2p' — p'=iH,  or,  p'  =  lH,  as  in  [9933];  and
by  substituting  this  value  of  ^JEfin  [9931],  it  becomes  as  in  [9934];  or,  as  it  may  be  written,

2p==p'.(l+cos.«)  =  2p'.cos.2^TO [6],  Int.;  [9931eJ

hence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  p  [9935]  j  all  these  equations  being  grounded  on  the
supposition  that  the  fluid  has  the  same  density  at  the  surface  as  in  the  interior  of  the  mass,  '■ ^  *

840

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Ctl.

[9937']
[9938]
[9938^

[9939]
[9940]

[994(ri

[9941]

vertical  line,  infinite  in  length,  parallel  to  the  plane,  and  attracted  by  it ;  this
vertical  line  being  terminated,  at  the  top,  by  a  second  plane,  which  is  drawn
horizontally  through  the  base  of  the  solid  vertical  plane.  We  shall  take  this
termination  of  the  line  for  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  x,  y,  z,  of  any  point  of
the  solid  plane ;  supposing  the  axis  of  x  to  be  situated  upon  the  line  a,  which
represents  the  least  distance  from  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  to  the  solid  plane ;
and  the  axis  of  y  to  be  horizontal  and  perpendicular  to  the  axis  of  x.  Lastly,
we  shall  represent  by  z',  the  depression  of  any  attracted  point  of  the  vertical
line  below  the  origin  of  the  coordinates.  Then  tlie  vertical  attraction  of  the
solid  plane  upon  that  point  ivill  be* .

CrCA'T fill /7'y \ ~<~ ) _/'o^•  rAttraction  on  the  point  P  inT

JJJ  (AJ^'Uy.aZ.  -^KS)  1  L  the  verticaJ  direction  PZ. J

[9942] 9(5)  being  the  law  of  the  attraction  at  the  distance  s, and  s  being  the  distance

*  (4283) In  the  annexed  figure  147,  C  is  the  origin  of  the

[9941a] coordinates ; C  Z  the  axis  of  Z]  CB  the  axis  of  cc ; the  axis

of  y  being perpendicular to the plane  of  the  figure. The

TigJAl

attracted  line  is  CD,  in  which  is  placed  the  attracted  point  P,
[99416] so  that  CP  =  z'. J5  J* jE  represents  a  section  of  the  solid  plane

by  the  plane  of  xz,  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface  FE
[9941c] of  the  solid. If  we  now  suppose that any  point  *S",  situated

above  the  plane  of  the  figure,  at  the  distance  y,  be  projected

perpendicularly  upon  the  plane  of  xz,  in  the  point  S,  and  then,

from  the  point  S,  we  let  fall  upon CZ  the  perpendicular  SZ,
[9941rf] we  shall  have  SZ=x,  CZ=z,  S'S=y,  CP  —  z',  lastly  the  distance S'P=s. The
[9941e] particle  of  matter  placed  at  S' is  represented  by dx.dy.dz; this  attracts  the  point  P,  in

the  direction  PS'ors,  with  the  force  9(5)  [9942], multiplied  by  the  particle  dx.dy.dz;
[9941/] so  that  this  force  is  represented  by  dx.dy.dz.(p{s). Now  as  the  line PZ=z-\-z'  is  the

projection  of  the  line  S'P  =  s,  upon  the  vertical  axis  z,  we  shall  have  for  this  force,  when

resolved  in  the  direction  PZ,  or  parallel  to  the  axis  of  z,  the  expression  [9941/]  multiplied

[9941^] by  — or  -^^  ,  so  that  it  becomes  equal  to  dx.dy.dz 9(5); and  by  prefixing  the

sign  of  integration  fff,  so  as  to  include  all  the  particles  of  the  solid  plane,  it  becomes  as  in

[99ilh] [9941]. The  value  of  s^  or  S'P^  is  evidently  represented  by  S'P^=zSZ^-}-  S'S'^  +  PZ^;

[9941t] and  by  substituting  SZ=:X,  S'S^y,  PZ=z-\-z',  it  will  give  s^,  as  in  [9943],  which  is

to  be  substituted  in  [9941];  then,  multiplying  it  by  PP'  =  dz',  and  integrating  relative  to  z',

from  z'=0  to  z'^cd,  we  obtain  the  whole  attraction  of  the  solid  upon  the  line  CD,  which

[9941ifc] will  be

fffdx.dy.dz.fdz'}-^±^.<r>(s),

as  in  [9941,  9944].

X.  Suppl.2.] ACTION  OF  A  PARALLELOPIPED  ON  A  LINE.  841

from  an  attracting  point  in  the  plane^  to  the  attracted  point  of  the  line ;  so  that
we  shall  have,  as  in  [994U"],

^^x''-{-f-\-(z  +  z'f,  [9943]

To  obtain  the  vertical  attraction  of  the  solid  plane  upon  the  vrhole  line,  we

must  multiply  the  preceding  triple  integral  by  dz\  and  integrate  it  relatively  to [9944]

z'  from  z'  =  0  to  2'=  03. Putting,  therefore,  as  in  [9232'— 9233'],

C=f;ds,<p(s),  [9945]

Tl(s)=f'^ds.<p(s)  [9946]

=:C—f^ds.<p(s),  [9946^]

we  shall  have  *

*  (4284) From  [9943]  we  have s=^3^-\-y^-{'(z-\-z'f', whence

z-{-z'  2+2'

\dz') \/x^

+2/^  +  (2+zT'

[9947a]

2+2'
Substituting  this  value  of  ——  in  the  first  member  of  [9947],  it  becomes

/b'.!!±!:Uw=/dz'.(|,).K»);  t^'H

but  from  [9946']  we  get  <Zs.9(s)=— d.n(s);  and  if  we  consider  z'  as  the  only  variable
quantity  in  the  value  of  s,  this  will  become

hence  the  expression  [99476]  becomes

/c?;2'.(f±^).,p(s)=— /^^:0^\(Zz'=constant  — n(s).  [9947rf]

At  the  origin C  of  the  integral,  where s^s,  [9948],  or s^^ci^  +  y^-\-z^ [9943], it [9947d']
becomes 0= constant — n(s^),  or constant  =  n(sj. Substituting  this  in  the  general
equation,  we  get

/d;2'.^^i^U(5)  =  n(0--n(5).  [9947(i"]

When  s=oo,  we  have  n(s)=0  [9233"];  hence  [9947cZ"]  becomes

X>'.(!±L\^C0=n(O,  [9947e]

as  in  [9947] ;  substituting  this  in  [9941^],  it  becomes  as  in  [9949]. We  may  here  remark,
that,  to  avoid  confusion  in  the  use  of  the  same  symbol  for  different  expressions,  we  have,  m ^^^'jj-^
[9948,  Sic.],  changed  the  author's  symbol  s  into  5/,  also  in [9956]  we  have  changed  his
s  into  s,,;  we  have  also  written  -a,,  ^^,  for  xs,  &,  in  [9949',  &,c.].
VOL. IV.  211

842  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C^I.

s^  being y  in  the  second  member  of  this  equation  ^  what  s  [9942]  becomes  at  the
origin  of  the  coordinates,  or  luhen  z'  is  nothing.  Therefore  the  attraction  of
the  solid  plane  upon  the  whole  line  will  be

rOQdQI  r CrAf rill fi'r TT  /o  ^  TAUraction  of  tho  solid  piano  upon  theT

L^'^^'i  jyy  ^•*  *ay.aZ.ll  {^SJ.  yiao  CD,  in  the  vertical  direction  CZ.  J

We  shall  now  put

[9949^]  TO  =  the  angle  which  the  line  s^  forms  with  the  horizontal  plane  drawn

through  the  origin  of  the  coordinates ;
[9950]  6^  =  the  angle  which  the  projection  of  s^  upon  the  horizontal  plane  of  the

coordinates,  makes  with  the  axis  of  y.

Then  we  shall  have*  ..

[99501  :E  =  5^.sin.^,.cos.«^,

[9951 1  y  =  s^.  cos.6^ .  cos.«^ .

We may, instead of  the rectangular element dx.dy.dz, substitute the
[ggsi^ corresponding  polar  element f s^ds^.d6^.d^^.cos,-a/, and  then  the preceding
triple  integral  becomes

[9952]  fffsfds,.d\.d^,.COS.^,,Tl{s). [r  lirCAfaX:SSreS"cTl

It  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  in  this  kind  of  attraction,  whether  we  suppose  the

thickness of  the solid  plane to be finite  or  infinite,  when  the  thickness  is

sensible;  therefore  we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  infinite. Then  putting,  as  in

[9241'],
[9953]  f:'s,ds,,n(s)  =  c'-^-^(is),

*  (4285)  The  line  s,  [9948]  represents  the  distance  of  the  point  <S'  from  C;  and  if
[9950a]  ^g  p^j^  ^g  jj^  [9949'],  -a,  for  the  angle  which  this  line  s^  n>akes  with  the  horizontal  plane  a?y,
[99506]  its  projection  upon  this  plane  will  evidently  be  represented  by  s^.cos.zj,,  which,  for  brevity,  we
shall  denote  by  s^;  so  that  we  shall  have  s^=5^.cos.«^.  Then  the  line  s^  forms  the  angle
^,  [9950]  with  the  axis  of  y,  or  90'*-  —  6,  with  the  axis  of  a?;  therefore  the  projection  of
this  line  s^  upon  these  axes,  will  give  y  =  s^.cosJ^,  aj  =  s^.sin.^,;  and  by  substituting  the
preceding  value  of  s^==5^.cos.'5*^, they  become  as  in  [9951,  9950'J.

[9950c]
[9950rf]

[9951a]

t  (4286) If  we  change,  in  the  notation [9226,  9227], u  into  s^y  r  into z,  6  into

90^-  — 5J^,  and  -a  into  6^,  it  will  conform  to  the  notation  which  is  used  in  [9949',  &;c.],  as  is

._g_„  - evident by  considering  that  ss^  [9949']  is  the  complement  of  the  angle  which  the  line  s^

forms  with  the  axis  z,  and  d^  is  as  in  [9950]. IVIaking  the  same  changes  in  the  element

[9951c] u^du.dzi.dd.sm.d [9227], it becomes,  by  neglecting  the  sign,  sJ^ds^.d6^.dis^.cos.zs^y as  in

[995lrfl [9951']. Substituting  this  for dx.dy.dz, in  [9949],  it  becomes  as  in  [9952].

X.  Suppl.2.] ACTION  OF  A  PARALLELOPIPED  ON  A  LINE.  843

c'  being  the  value  of  the  integral  when  s^=  co  [9240'],  we  shall  have*  [9954]

fs^ds^ .  n  (5,)  = — 5, .  Y  (s)  +fds^ .  y  (s)  +  constant.  ^  [9955]

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  observe  that  the  two  integrals
of  this  last  equation  are  taken  from  s^  =  5^^  to  5^  =  00  [s^,  being  the  least  value [9956]
of  s^ ,  or  the  distance  from  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  to  the  point  where  th^
line  5,  first  meets  the  solid  plane]  ;  hence  we  get

constant  =  5^^.  Y  (5 J.  [9957]

Now  as  5^.y(s^)  vanishes  when  5,=  co,  we  shall  have

fsXds^'H^)  =  «,;.  Y(5j  +/„>,. >F(5j.  [9958]

We  shall  put

£"=fo°'ds^.^(s;)y  [9959]

^(0=y^r^*/-^W.  [9960]

=  C"— /o'A-^ft);  '  [9960']

and  then  we  shall  have  f

/,>;£?5,.n(5,)=5^^.Y(5j-i-r(5j.  [9961]

*  (4287) The  differential  of  [9953]  being  multiplied  by  s^  gives

s/^ds, .  Tl{s^)  =  —  s^d.  ^(sj.  [9954a]

Integrating  this  by  parts,  it  becomes  as  in  [9955],  as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  its  differential.
This  integral  commences  with  the  least  value  of  «^,  corresponding  to  the  surface  FE  of
the  solid  plane  which  is  nearest  to  the  origin  C,  fig.  147,  page  840 ;  putting  this  equal  to  s,^
[9956],  and  the  terms  under  the  sign  f  equal  to  nothing  at  that  point,  we  find  that  the
expression  [9955]  becomes  0= — 5^^. *(s J -[-constant,  as  in  [9957].  Substituting  this  in
[9955],  it  becomes

f;:sj^ds^.n{s;)=.  —  s,.-*{s,)  +y:y*,.*W  +*..-*(0  J  [9954c]

and  when  «^=a), — «/-+(0 becomes nothing  [9240A:,  &c.];  so  that  when  «^  =  oo,  the
preceding  expression  becomes

/:5;rf5,.n(.,)=/,>,.i'(0+*,..*(*J>  [9954rf]

as  in  [9958].

t  (4288) From  [9960]  we  have fys,,-¥(s^)==r(sj-y substituting  this  in  [9954d],  we
obtain  [9960a]

/.»,.n(5j=r(5,) -f  5,.i'(0 ;

and  by  introducing  this  into  the  integral  expression  [9952],  it  becomes

ffdd,.d^,.cos.^An^„)  +  s,,.^(s^)l  [99606]

agreeing  wiih  [9962|.  '

844

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M€c.  Cel.

Hence the triple  integral [9952] can be  reduced to  the  following  double
integral ;

rCMVtOI  /♦rJA J  (  / \ I !■>/ \)  pAttraction  of  the  panillelopiped-i

[9962]  rfdi  .  Cf«^  .  C0S.1SI  . 5,  .  Y  (SJ  +  ^  (SJ  \, \ BFE  upon  the  line CD,  in  the

^J I  I  I I II \ 11/ t \ 11/ >  Lvertical  direction  FE.  J

We  shall  now  suppose  that  an  indefinite  vertical  plane  surface  passes  through

the  attracted  line,  and  falls  perpendicularly  upon  the  solid  attracting  plane ;  and

we  shall  compute  the  vertical  attraction  of  this  solid  upon  that  surface. It  is

evident that  we must multiply  the  preceding function  by da [9937], and

[9963] integrate  it  relative  to  a,  from  a  =  0,  to  a  =  co ;  now  we  have  *

[9964]  a  =  5^^.sinJ,.cos.w ,  ,

[9964'] which  gives,  by  supposing  6^  and  w^  constant,

[9965]  da  =  ds^^ .  sin.^^ .  cos.w  ;

[9965'] the  preceding  double  integral,  being  multiplied  by  this  expression  of  da,  and
then  integrated  relatively  to  s^^ ,  will  therefore  become

/./•/•I  I ■,  .  n ,  /\i /\i  fAttraclion  of  the  parallelopiped*!

[9966]  flfdS,, .  d^,  .  d^,  .  sin  J,  .  cos.  CJ,  As,.  "i'CSJ  4-  T(sJ . I BFE  upon  the  plane  QFC  in  the

*■  ••  *'*'•' "  '  '  '  I ( II \  11/ t \ 11/  )  Lvertical  direction  FE.  J

[9964a]
[99646]

[9964c]
[9964rf]

[9964c]
[9964/]

[9964g-]

II X^t^.:tJA

*  (42S9)  Having  found,  in  [9962],  the  expression  of  the  attraction  of  the  solid  plane
J5F^  upon  the  vertical  line  CD  of  an  infinite  length,  we  shall  now  suppose  that,  on  the
continuation  of  the  line  FC,  fig.  148,  we  have  Cc  =  da,  and  that
the  infinite  line  cd  is  drawn  parallel  to  CD.  Then  it  is  evident
that  the  attraction  of  the  solid  plane  BFE  upon  the  plane  surface
DCcd,  will  be  found  by  multiplying  the  function  [99606]  by  da;
and  if  we  integrate  this,  relative  to  a,  from  a  =  0  to  a  =  a,  we
shall  evidently  get  for  the  whole  action  of  the  solid  BFE  upon
the  plane  QFCD,  the  following  expression;

fffda.dd^.dvs^.cos.zj,.{s,^.1r(s,^)-j-r{s^^)l ;

s,,  being  the  distance  from  the  point  C  to  the  point  S',  where  the  line  CS'  first  meets  the
nearest  surface  of  the  solid  plane  [9956] ;  and  since  the  differentiation  or  integration  relative
to  a  is  considered  as  independent  of  the  quantities  ^^,  «  ,  so  that  they  are  considered  as
constant  [9964'],  we  must  find  ds^^  upon  the  same  principle.  Now  this  is  done  by  supposing
the  line  cs'  to  be  drawn  parallel  to  CS',  to  meet  the  nearest  surface  of  the  solid  plane  in  «';
since,  by  [9950,  9949'],  6,,  zr^,  will  be  the  same  for  the  lines  CS',cs';  and  if  we  put
CS'=s^^,  we  shall  have  cs'=is^^-{-ds^^.  Moreover  it  is  evident,  as  C F,  FS,  SS\  are  the
rectangular  coordinates  of  the  point  S',  corresponding  to  x,  z,  y  [9938',  &£c.],  the  value  FC=a
will  be  found  by  writing  s^^  for  s^  in  the  expression  of  x  [9950^,  so  that  by  this  means  it
becomes  as  in  [9964].  Its  differential,  supposing  a,  5^,  to  be  the  only  variable  quantities,  is
<ia  =  <Z«,,.sin.d,.cos.-«,  [9965];  hence  [99646]  becomes  as  In  [9966].

X.  Suppl.  2.] ACTION  OF  A  PARALLELOPIPED  ON  A  PLANE.  845

The  integral  must  here  be  taken  from  s^,  =  0^^  to  5^^  =  co. Now  in  this  case  * [9967]
fo\ds^r^(sJ==^s,,,r(s^^)+f-ds,^.T(s,;)==f-ds,.r(sJ,  [9968]

because,  5^^  being  infinite,  s^^.rfsj  is  nothing  [9240A;,  &c.]  ;  moreover  we  have,

as  in  [9253a'], 2f,\ds^,.Y(sJ==?; hence  [^68']

It

therefore  the  preceding  triple  integral  [9966],  will  become

H /v* »  7  •  o  ^Attraction  of  the  parallelopiped-i

—  ./fd^  .  ad  .  Sm.^  .cos. «,.  BFE  upon  the  plane QFC  in  [9970]

?r *'*' III  L.the  vertical  direction  FIE..  J

The  integral  relative  to  w^  must  be  taken  from  w^  =  0  to  w  =  to  a  right
angle ;  the  integral  relative  to  ^^  must  be  taken  from  5^  =  0  to  5,  =  to  two
right  angles,  which  gives  f

*  (4290) From  [9960'] we have 7^' <^«//. *(«,,)  =  c"—r(*^,), whose differential  is
ds^^.ir(Sff)  =  —  d.r(s^^). Multiplying  this  by  s^,  and  integrating,  we  get

as  is, easily  proved  by  differentiation.  This  agrees  with  [9968],  the  limits  of  the  integrals
being  from  s^^s=0  to  s^,=  oo  [9967];  and  at  both  these  limits  we  have  s^,.r{s^)=iO
[9240A:,  &c.] ;  hence  /o%«?«/,.*(5j==/o'"<?s,,.r(sJ  [9968].  Substituting  this  value  of
f^dsj^.r(s^^), in  the  first  member  of  [9969],  we  get

but  by  [9253a'],  we  have 2/o"5^^(Zs^^.*(5j=- , as in [9968']; hence the  preceding [9967(fl
integral  [9967c]  becomes  as  in  [9969],  and  by  substituting  it  in  [9966],  we  get  [9970],

f  (4291) We  have fd6^.sm.6^=l  —  cos.iJ,, which  vanishes  when ^^  =  0; and  at  the

second  limit,  where fl^=180''=«- [9971],  it  becomes  f^d6^.sm.6^==:i2; hence  the  first

member  of [9972] becomes /cZ«^.2cos.2^^=/«Zzrf,.(l  +  cos.2s<,)  =  w,4- Jsin.2itf^. This [99726]

vanishes  when ot^  =  0; and  at  the  second  limit,  where w^  =  ^t, it  becomes  equal  to  ^t,

as  in  the  second  member  of  [9972]. Substituting  this  in  [9970],  it  becomes  |fl, as  in [9972c]

[9973]. In  this  calculation  the  attracting  body  and  the  attracting  plane  are  considered  as

being  of  the  uniform  density  unity ;  and  as  the  symbol  H  is  sometimes  used  instead  of  H' [9972rf]

[10032,  &c.],  we  shall,  to  avoid  confusion,  suppose  that,  when  the  fluid  is  homogeneous,  we

shall  have

hH=:q, or H=2q;  '  [9972e]

and  in  this  case,  we  get

The  vertical  action  of  the  homogeneous  rectangular  solid  BFE  upon  the  rectangular  plane  QFCD=q. [9972/*]

VOL.  IV.  212

[99676]

^46  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

[9972]  f^ft^^, '  d^,  •  sin.4, .  cos.^x^,  =  ^* ;

therefore  we  shall  have
[9973]  ^jff=the  whole  vertical  attraction  of  a  solid  parallelopiped  upon  a  plane  surface.

This  attraction  is  what  we  have  before  called  p,  or  p',  if  the  plane  is  of  the
^ ^ same  nature  as  the  [homogeneous]  fluid ;  therefore  we  shall  have  *

[9973a]

[9973/]

*  (4292)  The  expression  ^H=q  [997 2e,/],  represents  the  action  of  the  rectangular  solid
BFE,  fig.  148,  page  844,  upon  the  rectangular  plane  QFCD,  extended  infinitely  in  the
directions  FC,  FQ;  and  if  we  suppose  its  thickness,  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the

r9973  1  P'^"^  Q,Fd^)  to  be  dc,  the  whole  action  of  the  solid  upon  the  plane  will  be  ^H.dc;  and  its
integral  ^H.  c  represents  the  whole  action  of  the  solid  upon  the  plane  whose  thickness  is  c,

r997S//l  *^'"  action  being  in  the  vertical  direction  FE  [9940'J.  This  is  the  quantity  which  is  called
Q'  or  p'.c  [9915,  9929];  hence  we  have  p'.c  =  JjH'.c.  Dividing  bye,  we  get  p'=|fl,
as  in  [9974].

Pggy„  ,  Wc  havc  supposcd,  in  the  formula  [9973],  that  the  dimensions  of  the  attracting  solid,  in  the
directions  FB,  FE,  fig.  148,  page  844,  are  infinite ;  and  in  like  manner  that  the  dimensions
of  the  attracted  plane,  in  the  directions  FQ^,  FC,  are  infinite ;  but  it  is  evident  that  we  may
decrease  these  quantities  very  much,  without  affecting  that  formula,  and  that  we  can  suppose

[9973/"]  tiie  limits,  in  the  directions  FB,  FC,  to  be  equal  to  the  insensible  quantity  X  [9173n],
which  expresses  the  distance  to  which  the  corpuscular  action  extends ;  so  that,  in  the  formula
[9973],  we  may  suppose  BF=FC  =  \;  FC  being  on  the  continuation  of  BF,  and  the
angle  BFE=  QFC=:90''-.  What  we  have  said  relative  to  the  limits  of  the  attracting  solid,
in  the  direction  FB,  holds  good  relative  to  the  direction  FE,  and  also  in  the  direction
perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  either  above  or  below  it ;  so  that  we  may  consider

[997%]  i\^Q  attracting  solid  as  being  composed  of  two  cubes,  whose  sides  are  represented  by  X,
supposing  the  base  to  be  included  in  the  angle  BFE;  one  of  the  cubes  being  above  the  plane
of  the  figure,  the  other  below  it.  We  shall  hereafter  have  occasion  to  ascertain  the  action  of
an  attracting  solid  in  the  form  of  a  wedge  upon  a  plane,  or  triangle,  &c, ;  we  shall,  therefore,
in  this  note,  investigate  several  formulas  of  this  kind.

Instead  of  supposing  the  line  FC  to  be  on  the  continuation  of  the  line  BF,  as  in  the
preceding  calculation,  fig.  148,  page  844, we  shall now suppose these

[9973fc]  lines  to  coincide,  as  in  fig.  149 ;  then,  taking  in  the  plane  of  the  figure  the
horizontal  line  BF^:^^,  we  shall  consider  the  vertical  lines  EFQ,  GB H,
as  being  drawn  in  that  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line  BF,  and  continued
infinitely,  on  both  sides  of  it.  We  shall  also  suppose  that  the  attracting
solid  is  bounded  by  planes  drawn  through  BF,  BG,  FE,  perpendicular  to
the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  continued  infinitely  above  and  below  it;  the

[9973*]  attracted  plane  being  the  rectangular  parallelogram  HBFQ^,  situated  in
the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  having  the  infinite  sides  BH,  FQ.  We  shall
suppose,  as  in  tlie  preceding  calculation [9941(^J,  that  the  rectangular

[9973»  ]

X.  Suppl.  2.] ACTION  OF  A  PARALLELOPIPED  ON  A  PLANE.  847

f^i  T^  J-f  r Vertical  action  of  a parallelopipedT  \nc\fA-\

r  5 '  '  Lupon  a  homogeneous  plane  surface.  J  (_yy/4J

coordinates  of  any  point  S'  of  the  attracting  solid,  are  CZz=z,  SZ=x,  SS'  =  y:
CP  =  z',  P S'  =  s',  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  x,y,z,  being  the  point  C,  corresponding  to
FC=a.  The  calculation  of  the  action  of  the  solid  upon  the  plane  differs  but  very  little  from
that  in  [9941—9973].  In  the  first  place,  the  vertical  action  of  a  particle,  dx.dy.dz,
situated  at  the  point  S\  upon  a  particle  at  the  point  P,  is  represented  in  like  manner  as  in

[9941^],  by dx.dy.dzS—^^.c^{s)y  whose  triple  integral  gives  the  whole  action  of  the  solid [9973m]

upon  the  point  P,  as  in  [9941]. In  the  next  place,  integrating,  relative  to  z',  it  becomes,  as [9973n]
in  [9949],

fffdx.dy.dz.n{s)',  .  [ggrsni

$1  being  the  value  of  «,  when  the  point  P  falls  in  C,  making  CS'==s/,  and  putting,  in  like  [9973o]
manner  as  in  [9946'],  n{s^)  =  c^—fQ'ds^.cp(s^).  Then  supposing,  as  in  [9949'],  that  w^  [9973p]
represents  the  angle  which  the  line  s^  forms  with  the  horizontal  plane  drawn  through  the
origin  of  the  coordinates  C,  and  d^  the  angle  which  the  projection  of  s^  upon  the  horizontal
plane,  makes  with  the  axis  of  y,  as  in  [9950],  we  shall  have  the  same  values  of  x,  y,  as  in
[9950',  9951].  Substituting  them  and  the  expression  of  dx.dy.dz  [9951'],  in  [9973n'],  we
get,  as  in  [9952],  for  the  action  of  the  solid  upon  the  fluid  situated  upon  the  line  CP,

fffsfds^ .  dd^ .  dvs, .  cos.zs^.  n(s,).  [99739]

Assuming  the  expression  of  the  function  'sr(s^)  =  c' — y^*5^ds^.n(sj,  as  in  [9953],  and  then
integrating  [9973g'],  relative  to  s^,  we  get,  as  in  [9955],

/o  */'^. • " W  =  —  »r *(«/)  +fo'^, •  ^(«/) ;  [9973r ]

the  constant  quantity  in  its  second  member  being  neglected,  because  «^.y(5J  vanishes  at
the  commencement  of  the  integral  where  «^  =  0. Substituting  the  value  of

f^AM';)  =  c"-r(s,) [9960'],  [9973.]

and  putting  s^,  for  the  value  of  s^  at  the  second  limit  of  the  integral,  corresponding  to  pohits
of  the  solid  which  are  situated  on  the  vertical  side  of  it  whose  section  is  EF,  we  get

J^"s;'ds,.Tl{s;)=^s^,.^{sJ  —  T{sJ+c".  [997dt]

Hence  the  expression  [9973^]  becomes

ffdd^.d^,.cosM,.\-s^^.^(s,)-T(s^,)-{-c"\.  [9973U]

The  part  of  this  expression  depending  on  c"  may  be cleared  from  the  signs  of  integration,
because J^d^^^-r, /<Zcy^.cos,«,=sm.«^, and f^'d-si^.cos.zs^=l; hence  the  expression [9973t>]
[9973u]  becomes

c"*— j7aa,.rftrf,.cos.«,.|5,,.*(«,,)-|-r(0|.  [9973H

Multiplying  this  by  da,  and  integrating  from  a  =  0,  at  the  point  P,  to  a=X,  at  the  point  B, [9973r]
we  get  the  action  of  that  part  of  the  solid  corresponding  to  values  of  s^^,  which  terminate  at
the  surface  EF;  and  as  the  values  of  5^^,  terminating  at  the  surface  GB,  must  produce  a
similar  expression,  their  sum  will  be  doubled,  and  by  this  means  the  whole  action  becomes '• ^^

848

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9974'] as we have found, in [9936], by the comparison of the results of

t9973z]  ^\'^Jda  —  2fffda.d6,.d^^.co3M,.{s^,.^{sJ  +  r(s,)l.

Substituting  in  the  first  term f^da  =  \ and  in  the  second da  =  ds^^.sm.6^.cos.-a^ [9965],
it  becomes

[9974a]  2cVX  — 2/7/rf^^.<?w^.sinJ,.cos.2a^.(^*^,.|5^,.>F(*J  +  ^(5J^

We  may  here  observe,  that,  while  the  angles  6^,  w  ,  remain  unaltered,  we  can  suppose  the
origin  C  to  move  from  the  point  F,  where  a  =  0,  and  «,,=0,  to  the  point  B,  or  to  the

[99746]  second  limit  of  s^^,  where  a=X,  and  s,^  is  equal  to,  or  exceeds  X.  Now  as  the  corpuscular
action  vanishes  at  the  distances  which  are  equal  to  X,  or  exceed  X,  we  may  extend  the  second
limit  of  s^^  to  s^^=z=oo ;  and  by  substituting  H=2q  [9972e]  in  [9969],  we  get

hence  the  expression  [9974a]  becomes
[99746"]  2cVX— l?.j7a5,.e?«^.sm.d^.cos.2«^;

and,  by  using  the  integral  [9972],  we  finally  get,  for  the  whole  action  of  the  solid  upon  the
plane,  the  expression

t9974<;]  2c"«X — 2g'  =  the  action  of  the  solid  EFBG  upon  the  plane  QFBH.

Now  by  [9973s],  we  have c''==f^ds,.^{s)==f^dz,^{z)  =^ [9253a']  j  whence  we  get
^''ir=K', substituting  this  in  [9974c],  we  obtain  .  "

[9974rf] "KK — 2g=tlie  action  of  the  parallelopiped  EFBG  upon  the  plaine  QFBH,  in  a  vertical  direction  parallel  to  FE  or  BG.

In  the  preceding  calculations  [9937 — 9973],  the  author  supposes  the  upper  line  FC  of

the  plane  Q^FCD,  fig.  148,  page  844,  to  be  horizontal,  and  the  surface  EF  of  the  attracting
[9974c] body  BFE  to  be  situated  in  a  vertical  plane  perpendicular  to  the  line  FC. We  shall  now

suppose  that  the  attracting  body  is  in  the  form  of  a  wedge  AFBj  fig.  150,  limited  by
[9974/*] two  infinite plane surfaces drawn through  the  lines

FA,  FB,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and

continued  infinitely  above  and  below  it ;  the  attracted

plane  being the  surface Q^FCD, which is  limited
[9974^'] ^y  ^^^  vertical line  jFQ,  and the  line FC  on the

continuation  of  BF. We  shall  also  suppose  that  the

vertical lines QF, DC, are continued upwards

towards  E  and  Z;  that  the  lines  FC,  CGF'H,  are

horizontal,  and that the line AF,  being continued,

meets  CH  in  G. We  shall  take  C,  for  the  origin  of

the  rectangular  coordinates;  the  vertical  line CZ,  for
[9974g'] the  axis  of  z ;  the  horizontal  line  CH,  for  the  axis  of

x;  and  for  the  axis  of  y,  the  horizontal  line  drawn  through  C,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of

X.Suppl.2.]

ACTION  OF  A  WEDGE  ON  A  PLANE.

849

the two methods. We see evidently by both, not  only  the identity  of [9974']

the  figure,  and  in  an  upward  direction  ;  so  that  if  an  attracting  Tpa.TUc[e  be  at  S',  we  shall  have
for  its  rectangular  coordinates  the  vertical  line  CZ=z,  and  the  horizontal  lines  Z  S=x,
SS'=y.  We  shall  also  put  CP  =  z',  P  being  the  place  of  an  attracted  point  as  in
[9941e];  the  angle  FCH=90^'—w,  the  angle  FCZ=w,  the  angle  EFA=ix,
CF'  =  a,  and  PS'-=s.  Then  the  vertical  zcuon  of  the  attracting  particle  at  iS'  upon  the
attracted  particle  at  P,  is  the  same  as  in  [9941] ;  the  value  of  s^  is  as  in  [9943] ;  and  the
integration  of  this  attraction  relative  to  z',  being  taken  as  in  [9944-— 9947],  produces  the
expression  [9947] ;  so  that  the  whole  of  this  attraction  finally  becomes,  as  in  [9949],  equal
to  fffdx.dy.dz.Jl{sy,  s^  being,  as  in  [9948],  the  value  of  CS\  corresponding  to  the
origin  C. Substituting  in  this  the  values  of  x,  y  [9950',  9951],  it  becomes,  as  in  [9952],

f/A^ds, .  dd, .  dzr^ .  cos.zi^ .  n(5^) ,

OT^,  6^,  being  defined  as  in  [9949',  9950] ;  considering  C  as  the  origin  of  the  line  s,,  and  the
horizontal  plane  to  which  6^,  zs^,  are  referred,  as  that  drawn  through  CH,  perpendicular  to  the
plane  of  the  figure.  Integrating  this  relative  to  s^,  as  in  [9953 — 9962],  we  finally  get,  as  in
[9962],  by  putting  s^^  equal  to  that  part  of  the  line  CS'=:s^,  which  is  contained  between
the  point  C  and  the  surface  FA,

ffd6, .  dw,  .cos.^^  .{s„.  ^-(5^  +  r{s,,)  I .

By  continuing  the  same  process  of  calculation  as  in  [9963,  he.],  it  becomes  necessary  to  find
the  value  of  a  in  terms  of  s^^,  6^,  zi^.  Now  in  the  rectangular  triangle  CF'F,  we  have,  by
using  the  notation  [9974^],  Fl«"=C-F'.tang.F'CF=a.cot.t^;  and  in  the  rectangular
triangle  FF'G  we  have  F'G  =  FF'.tSing.F'FG==FF'.tang.a.=a.cot.w.tang.^.  We
shall  now  suppose  that  the  extreme  point  of  the  line  s^^,  wliere  it  meets  the  surface  of  the  wedge
whose  section  is  FA,  is  projected  perpendicularly  upon  the  line  FA  in  the  point  A,  and  upon
the  line  CH'm  the  point  H;  then  we  shall  have,  by  using  the  notation  [9914m',  m",  9949',  9950],

CH=  Si,  .  sinJ, .  cos.-s^ , A  H=  s^i .  sin.-ss, , HG  =  AH.  tang.a = s,, .  sin.«^ .  tang.a ;

and  since  a  or  CF'  is  represented  by CF'=:CH — HG-}-F"G, we  shall  have

0=8^,.  sin.^^ .  cos.isj^ —  s^i .  sin.w^ .  tang.a  -j-  a .  coUw .  tang.a.

Transposing  the  last  term  of  this  expression,  and  then  dividing  by  the  coefficient  of  a,  we  get
the  value  of  a  [991 4t],  using  for  brevity  the  expression  of  m  [9974s],

sin.^^ .  cos.trf^ —  sin.cr^ .  tang.a

OT:

a=.m.s

1 — cot.io .  tang.a

[9974A]

[9974t ]
[9974;k]

[9974/ ]

[9974m]
[9974m']
[9974m"]

[9974n]

[9974o]
[9974p]

[9974?]
[9974r]

[9974«]
[9974f  ]

The differential  of  this  expression  of  a,  considering  a,  s^,,  as  the  only  variable  quantities,

is da  =  m.ds^,,  which  is  to  be  used  instead  of  [9965],  when  multiplying  [9974nl,  to  obtain [9974u]

the  expression  of  the  attraction  similar  to  that  in  [9966],  which  we  shall  represent  by  JZ";  so

that  we  shall  have

Z=fffds,,.dd,.d^,.m.cos.r,,.\s,.*{Sii)  +  r(Si)]. '  [9974.]

VOL.  IV.  213

850  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9975] the forces p' and ^H, upon which the capillary phenomena [of a

[9974tf>] The integration  of  this expression relative to  s^^  is  made  as  in  [9966 — 9969] ;  and  by
substituting  the  result  of  this  integration  [9969]  in  [9974t'],  we  get

[9974r]  Z=  —  'ffd^i  .d-si^.m.  cos.ra^ .

Resubstituting  the  value  of  m  [9974s],  it  becomes  '^

i9974«l  Z= — -; ■•  rrd&,.d^.jsmJ,.cos.^zs, — sin.'ztf,.cos.'zs,.tanff.a?.

Substituting cos.^ot^=^-j-^<^os.2zj,, sin.'S^.cos.'5J^=|sin.2t!*/, then  integrating  relative  to
■cj^ from  its  least  value  -a^ssx-a^ to  its  greatest  value  ■5*^=7^3; we  get

r9975al  Z=  g  ^  +M .  sin.^, .  (-f  ^vs,  -f-  i sm.^zi^)  +  i  tang.a  .fd&^ . cos.2«3 )  ^

2 ■'  ^.(l—cot.ti*. tang.a) '  ^ -\-fdd^.smJ^ . ( — ^zs^  — l^sin.Sxrfj)  — :|- tang.a ./^^^ . cos.2w2 5

The  value  of  -m^  evidently  corresponds  to  the  angular  edge  of  the  wedge,  or  the  line  fFc ,
[99756] drawn through  jP  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure;  and  if  we  draw  the  line//'
parallel  and  equal  to  FF',  we  shall  have  the  angle /C/'='cf2, the  angle  Cf'F'=d^i

[9974z]

[9975c]

ff  =  FF'=:a.cot.w [99740],  C/'=-7-^^-— =  -^  ,

ff  sin  /I

tanff.«, = r^,  r=:  a .  QX3li.w  X  — — = sm.5. .  cot.t(> :

whence  we  get,  by  using  [30"],  Int., "
[9975rf]  "  «2  =  arc .  (tang.  =  sin.d^ .  coX.w) ,

r«««,-  n • Ow Stang.-sJa 2sin.^,.cot.«?
[9975c]  ^ sm.2trfa=  ^  / = ^ ^ -^-,

[9975/]

[9975g]

r»  J^ ■■ — st: 1— sin.2^,.COt.2tO

C0S.2^2  =  V/l-«^"-^2t.2  =i.,;„2,...nt.Q,.'

l-j-sin.2d^.cot2u>

a

The  greatest  value  of  ■z^^,  represented  by  -2^(3,  is  evidently  found  by  putting  —=00,  or  — =0,

which gives  m  =  0 [9974^];  and by substituting  the value of  m [9974*],  we  obtain

[9975g^]  Oassin.^^.cos.tzfg  —  sin-i^Tg .  tang.a.

Dividing  by  cos.'sJg . tang.a, we  get tang.'zrf3==sin.5^.cot.a, or

[9975A]  *3  =  arc.  (tang.  =  sin.^^.cot.a}.

r9975^'l  ^o'^paJ'ing  this  with  [9975t?],  we  find  that  -m^  can  be  derived  from  zi^,  h'^  merely  changing
w  into  a;  and  the  same  substitutions  can  be  made  in  [9975e,/].  From  the  expression
of  ?*a [9975(ZJ,  we  easily  perceive,  that,  at  the  upper  extremity  /  of  the  line  cFf  where

[9975t]  Ff=i  00,  ^,==0,  we  have  zi^^s=0',  and  at  the  point  jP,  where  ^/^  J*,  we  have  -ui^^=9Qi^- — w.
At  the  lower  extremity  c  of  the  line  cFfy  where  Fc= — go,  and  d^*,  we  have
1^2=0. Hence  we  see  that,  after  substituting  the  values  [9975d!,  e,/]  in  [9975a,  line  2],

[9975A;]  and  taking  the  integral  relative  to  &,  from  ^^  =  0  to  ^  =  'n',  we  shall  have,  at  both  these
limits,  Wj=sO. Now  substituting  the  values  [9975dlj  e],  in  the  first  member  of  [9975/],  we

X.  Suppl.2.]  ACTION  OF  A  WEDGE  ON  A  PLANE.  851

homogeneous fluid] depend, but  also their derivation from the attractive [9975']

get  its  second  member;  and  its  integral  is  expressed  by  the  function [9975m],  as  we  shall
soon  show ;

fdd, .  sm.&, .  (—  htz^—ym.'H'ui,)  ^fdd^ .  sin.^, .  $  — ^arc .  (tang.=^sin.d^ .  cot.w)^  ^^^^^^^  I [9975/ ,]

a=^cos.^/ .  arc .  (tang. =sin.^^ .  cot.t^)  -f-  2<jos.i(;  .  arc .  (tang.  =:cot.^^ .  sin.t^^) — - .  cos.tv. [9975wi]

That  the  expression  [9975»i]  is  the  integral  of  [9975?],  is  easily  perceived  by  observing,

that,  if  we  consider  cos.^^  as  the  only  variable  quantity  in the  first  term  of  [9975m],  its

differential  will be  the  same  as  the  first  term  of  the  second  member  of  [9975/],  so  that

it only remains to show  that the differentials of the two arcs in [9975m], namely,

arc. (tang.  =  sin. ^^.cot.ttf), and arc.  (tang.  =  cot.5^. sin. w), considering  6,  as  the  variable [9975n]

quantity,  produce  the  second  term  of  the  second  member  of  [9975/]. Now  the  differentials

of  these  two  arcs  produce  in  the  differential  of  [9975m]  the  following  terms,  using  [54],  Int.,

and  the  similar  expression d . coU&^  =s  —  dd  .{l-\-cot.^d^),

-  , 5 cos.^S,-cot.tv  (1  -{- cot.^^J . BJn.to . cos.u> }  rQQ7tAl

2^"/'^l+sin.2^^.cot.2u>  l  +  cot.2^,.sin.2u> 5*  ••  ^

Multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  the  second  of  these  two  terms  between  the
braces  by ^.^gj, or sin.^d^.(l-j-cot.^i^'), it  becomes

[9975p]

(sin.2^^-|-co8.2^^).cot.tg  {sin,2^^-f-cos.a^^).cot.tc .

8in.2^^.(l-|-cot.2tf))-}-cos.2^^^^  l-{-sin.2d^.cot.2u> '

substituting this in [9975o], and then reducing, it beconries — ^dd^.^^.' ' — -rg-j

being  the  same  as  the  second  term  of  J9975/].  The  integral  [9975m]  vanishes  at  the  first
limit  ^^=0,  where  arc. (tang. =  sin.^^. cot.t^)  =0;  and  arc.(tang.=3C0t.^/.sin.w)=^'jf.  [9975</]
Then,  while  the  arc  ^^  increases  from  ^^  =  0  to  6,=^'^,  the  arc. (tang. E=cot.fl^. sin. w)
decreases  from  A*  to  0,  and  then  becomes  negative,  so  that,  at  the  second  limit  of  ^^  =  *,  it
becomes  equal  to  — i-jr;  moreover  as  w^  =  arc. (tang.  =  sin.4^.cot.i/;)=0,  at  this  second  [9975r]
limit  of  6^,  the  first  term  of  [9975m]  will  vanish,  and  the  complete  integral  [9975m],
depending  on  the  two  remaining  terms,  will  become -  - ,  .

•J

COS.tf'.

2

7t

j.cos.wssz  —  ^le.cos^my  [9975rQ

hence  the  expression  [9975m]  gives

/;(i(),.sin.d,.(— ^«,  — isin.2ts,)=«  — ^*.cos.ty.  [9975,3

Again,  if  we  substitute  the  value  of  cos.S^tf^ [9975/"],  in  the  first  member  of  [9975^],  and

then  integrate  it,  we  shall  get  ^

y, M sin  ^/1 cot  ^w^

/c^,  .cos.2z.,=/rf^,  .\^3.„'2^;;^^t.2u;  =— ^/  +  asin.tg.  arc .  (tang.  =:  tang.  Vcosec.to),  [997ai

9»  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differential  of  its  laist  member^  relative  to  6^;  for  it  becomes,

852

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9975"] forces of  the  particles  of  the  bodies which produce their affinities. The  *

by  successive  reductions,  and  putting  sin.tf?.cosec.u?=l,  cosecfiw  =  \-\-cot,.^w ,  &ic.

.d&

'/  "T  1-|-  tang  .2^^ .  ( l-j-  cot.2M>)

[9975m]

=  ~da,-f.

2rf^,

=  c?4,.

(1  —  sin.2^^.cot2«j)

l-}-sin.2()^.cot%  '•  l-|-8in.2^^.cot2tc  '

which  is  the  same  as  the  proposed  differential  in  [9975^].  At  the  first  limit  ^^=  0  of  the  integral
[9975f],  it  vanishes.  Moreover,  as  6^  increases  from  0  to  <r,  the  arc.  (tang.  =  tang.^^.cosec.M>)
also  increases  from  0  to  *;  so  that,  at  the  second  limit  of  the  integral,  we  shall  have  ^^^flf,
and arc .  (tang.  =  tang.fl^ . cosec.zij)  =  *. Substituting  these  values  in  [9975^],  we  get

[9975»1  /o''(Zd^.cos.2t32  =  3-.(— l  +  2sin.«;).

Multiplying  this  by  — l^tang.a,  and  adding  the  product  to  the  integral  [9975s],  we  obtain

[9975w] f^d^^.s\n.di.{ — Ins^ — Jsin.22OT2)— :|-tang.a.y^''<Z^^.cos.2OT2=^ff.(— cos.'W-f-^tang.a— tang.a.sin.iij).

If  we  change  -a^  into  zs^  in  the  integrals  [9975s,  v],  the  effect  will  be  to  change  w  into  a
in  the  second  members  of  these  expressions,  as  we  have  seen  in  [9975A']. Making  these
changes,  and  multiplying  the  integral  derived from [9975u]  by — ^tang.a, we get for
the  sum
[9975x] f^d&,.svc\.&,.{—^TSs — |sin.22trf3)— itang.a./o''t?^,.cos.2^3=^'r.( — cos.a+^tang.a — tang.a.sin.a).

Subtracting  [9975a?]  from  [99752^;],  and  multiplying  the  remainder  by
we  get  the  expression  of  Z^  [9975a],  which  becomes

H

7r.{l — cot.u> .  tang.a)

[9975y]

[9975z]
[9976a]

z==

!i/f.|(cos.a — cos.w)  -f-  (tang.g .  sin.cn.  —  tang.ct .  sm.w)  \

1 — cotto .  tang.a

Multiplying  the  numerator  and  denominator  of  this  expression  by  sin.t^ .  cos.a,  and  reducing
by  means  of  [24,  22,  1,  31,  34'J,  Int.,  we  get,  by  successive  operations,

y j.H".sin.io.|(co8.2a-|-Bin.2a) — (co5.to.cos.a-f~s^"-"'-^^"-'^)^ ^Jf.  sin.w  .\\ — cos.(tt>  —  g)  ^

sin.to .  cos.a  —  cos.to .  sm.a

sin.(w — a)

[99766]

[9976c]

2sin.a(u;— aj-coMtttf— a) ^  s  2\  j

This  expresses  the  upward  vertical  action  of  the  wedge  AFB,  included  by  the  angle  w — a,
upon  the  plane  Q-FC,  corresponding  to  the  angle  w.

If  we  change  a  into  a',  in  the  expression  of  Z  [9976a],  it  will  become

Z^=|fl'.sin.w.tang.i(zy  —  a')  ;

subtracting  this  from  the  expression  [9976a],  we  get  the  value  of  Z,  corresponding  to  the
action  of  a  wedge  included  by  the  angle  a'  —  a;  the  vertex  of  the  wedge  being  the  line
drawn  through  F,  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  continued  infinitely  above  and
below  it;  this  value  is

Z^^lI.sin.«;.{tang.Ku'-ct)  - tang.Kw' -«.')} . [^''^Tpof  aV^^n!"^]

X.  Suppl.  2.]  ACTION  OF  A  WEDGE  ON  A  TRIANGLE.  853

capillary  forces  are only  modifications  of  these attractive  forces, depending [9976]

Changing  w  into  w',  we  get  the  corresponding  value  of  Z  relative  to  the  angle  ti>',
namely,

Z=  Jif .  sm.w'. \ tang4 {w'  —  a)  —  tang.^  {w'  —  a')  \ . TAction  of^e.  ^^^^^,_^'-^'\

Subtracting  the  expression  [9976c]  from  [9976cZ],  we  get,  for  the  action  of  the  wedge  a'  —  a
upon  the  part  of  the  plane  included  by  the  angle  w' — w,  the  following  expression,

Z  =  AH  5  +  ^^"•^'- ^  +  tang4(«;'  —  a)  —  tang.i(w' —  a')  ) pAction  of  a  wedge  a'-an
^ '^-j-sin.u;.!  — tang.Kw;  — a)-ftang4(w;— a')5' L "?<>" -^  pi^^^^ -'-«'• J

this  action  ieing  upwards  in  a  vertical  direction.  The  angles  w'  —  w,  a!  —  a,  are  here
considered  as  positive  quantities.  The  positive  values  of  the  angles  w,  w',  relative  to  the
attracted  plane,  are  counted  from  the  line  FQ^  towards  the  right,  and  the  positive  values  of
the  angles  a,  a',  relative  to  the  attracting  wedge,  are  counted  from  the  line  FE  towards
the  left.  If  we  wish  to  count  the  angles  a,  a',  from  the  line  FE  towards  the  right,  we
must  change  the  signs,  putting  a  =  —  b',  a'  =  — a',  considering  a',  b',  as  positive  quantities.
If  we  also,  for  the  sake  of  symmetry,  put  w  =  a,  w'=  h,  and  then  substitute  ^-ff=  q  [9972e],
we  shall  find  that  the  expression  [9976e]  will  become

; -f  sin.b .  1  + tang.^(b  +  b')  —  tang-Kb  +  a')
'  -\-  sin.a .  \  —  tang.  J  (a  -J"  b')  -f-  tang.  J(a  -{-  a')

Z=q.

[

Action  of  a  wedge  b' — a''
upon  a  plane  b — a.

^

representing the action  of  a  wedge  A'FB',  fig.  151,  included  by  the xfigJ^L

angle b' — a' upon a triangular  part  of  the  plane  AFB  included  by ^

the angle b  —  a ; the angles a,  b,  a',  b', being considered  as  positive

when falling to  the  right  of  the  line EFQ^,  otherwise negative; the

origin  of  the  angles a',  b', being  the  upward  vertical  line  FE,  and  the

origin  of  the  angles a,  b, being  the  line  .FQ  on  the  continuation  of  EF,

or  in  the  direction  of  gravity. If  we  use,  for  abridgment,  the  values  of

A,  B,  A',  B'  [9976A:],  and  make  a  slight  change  in  the  arrangement  of

the  terms  of  the  expression  [9976^],  we  shall  find  that  it  will  become  of

the form [9976/], from which  we may easily  derive  the equivalent

expression  [9976»i],  as  we  shall  soon  show.

' Z=^^sin.a.(tang.^-tang.B')  +  sln.b.(tang.5-tang.^')h ^^^,,  ,,  ,  ^,,„,  ,,

, . . ,  ^  ^i> . . I  / /  -Tk .  ■m\-i  L upon  a  plane  b — a.

Z=  ^.f sin.a'.  (tang.^  —  tang.^') -f  sm.b'.(tang.J5  — tang.5')^ ;

The  identity  of  the  two  expressions  [9976Z,  m],  is  easily  proved  ;  for  if  we  change  6  into
—  a',  in  [38],  Int.,  we  can  easily  deduce  cos.a'  — cos.a  =  tang.^(a'+a) .  (sin.a  — sin.a'),
which,  by  using  the  notation  [9976A:],  becomes  as  in  [9976o] ;  and  in  like  manner  we  get
[9976p,  y,  r].  The  sum  of  these  four  equations  gives  [9976.?];  observing  that  the  first
member  of  this  sum  vanishes.  Multiplying  this  last  expression  by  — q,  and  adding  the
product  to  [9976Z],  we  get  [9976ml.  '

VOL.  IV.  214

[9976J]

[9976e ]
[9976c']

[9976/]

] [9976^]

T

[9976ft]
[9976Z ]
[9976m]

[9976n]

854  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  C6I.

[9976'] upon the curvature of  the  jiuid  surface in the  first method, and upon

[9976o]
[9976/7]
[9976?]
[9976r]

[9976*]
[9976* ]

[9976u]

[9976v]

[9976w]

[9976x]
[9976x']

[9976y]

-tang.J5')
■tang.^').

[9976z]

cos  .a' — cos.a = tang.-4 .  (sin. a  —  sin. a')  ;
cos.b' —  cos.b  =  tang.S .  (sin.b  —  sin.b')  ;
cos.b — cos.a'=tang.^'.  (sin.a' — sin.b)  ;
cos.a  —  cos.b'=tang.J5'.  (sin.b' — sin.a) ;
0  =  —  sin.a'.  (tang.^  —  tang.^')  —  sin.b'.  (tang.B  —
-\-  sin.a .  (tang.-4  —  tang.B  )  -j-  sin.b .  (tang.  J?  —

We  may  also  deduce  the  equation  [9976/n]  from  [9976?],  by  observing  that  the  action  of  a
solid  wedge,  included  between  the  angular  space  b  —  a,  upon  a  triangular  plane  included  Id
the  angular  space  b'  —  a',  is  equal  and  contrary  to  the  reaction  of  the  plane  upon  the  wedge  ;
we  may  therefore  change  the  symbols  a,  b,  into  a',  b',  reciprocally,  without  altering  the
value  of  Z.  This  change  does  not  alter  the  values  of  A,  B  [9976A:],  but  changes  A'  into
B'f  and  B'  into  A';  and  by  making  the  same  changes  in  [9976/],  we  get  [9976w].  These
two  values  of  Z  are  equivalent  to  those  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  89  of  his  Nouvelle
Theorie,  ^c,  where  they  are  marked  (5)  and  (4); a',  b',  he,  being  changed  into  a,  b,  &c.

We  may  in  this  connection  remark  that  whenever  any  one  of  the  angles
A,  B,  A',  B',  becomes  equal  to  a  right  angle,  which  can  happen  when  either  of  the  lines
FA,  FB,  fig.  151,  is  in  the  same  direction  as  one  of  the  lines  A'F,  or  B'F,  so  that  the  plane
and  solid  can  be  in  contact  with  each  other  upon  an  infinitely  long  line,  the  expression  of  Z
may  become  infinite  by  means  of  the  tangent  of  this  angle ;  but  when  this  tangent  is  multiplied
by  the  sine  of  an  angle  a,  b,  a',  or  b',  which  then  becomes  equal  to  nothing,  the  value  of  Z

may  be  finite,  though  it  may  appear  under  the  illusory  form  of  Z:

kind  occurs  when  we  suppose  the  lines  FA,  FA',  FQ,  to  coalesce,  as  in  fig.  152,  and  the
line  FB  to  be  on  the  continuation  of  BF'. In  this  case,  a*,  b',
will  be  negative,  and  we  shall  have

a'  =  — .180%  a=^0,  b':

hence  we  get  from  [99762:]

A  =  —  90\  B=0,  A'  =  —  90^-^ih,
Here  tang.-4  becomes  negative  and  infinite,  but  being  multiplied  by
sin.a,  or  sin.a',  in  the  expressions  of  Z  [9976/,  m],  it  becomes
illusory.  To  ascertain  its  true  value,  we  shall,  in  the  first  place,
suppose  b  =  J*,  making  the  line  B'FB  coincide  with  the  horizontal
line  MFM'.  In  this  case,  the  vertical  action  of  the  body
MFQ^  upon  the  plane  M'FQ  vanishes,  as  we  may  prove  in
the  following  manner:  Suppose  the  vertical  Wnes  M'N'P',  MNP,  to  be  drawn  parallel  to
FQ,  the  line  M'N'P'  being  in  the  attracted  plane,  and  the  line  MNP  in  the  attracting
body ;  this  last  line  being  situated  either  in  the  plane  of  the  figure,  or  at  any  distance  above
or  below  it. Then,  through  any  points  N,  P,  of  the  line  MNP,  draw  the  hnes  NN',  PP',

;-. An  example  of  this

:-b;

jB'=_^b.

parallel  to  the  horizontal  plane,  passing  through  the  line  MM' ;  and  if  we  consider  the  action

X.  Suppl.2.]

ACTION  OF  A  WEDGE  ON  A  TRIANGLE.

855

the  position of  the  attracting  planes in the second method; whereas the [9976"]

of  two  equal  particles  of  the  attracting  body  situated  at  the  points  N,  P,  upon  the  two  equal
particles  of  the  attracted  plane  at  the  points  N',  P',  we  shall  evidently  perceive  that  the  upward  or
vertical  action  of  the  particle  N  upon  P'  is  balanced  by  the  downward  action  of  the  particle
P  upon  N' ;  and  as  the  same  result  holds  good  for  all  the  particles,  the  vertical  action  of
MF(^  upon  M'FQ  must  vanish. Now

The  triangle  QFJ5  =  plane  M'F  Q  —  triangle  M'FB.

And  as  the  vertical  action  of  the  body  MFQ^  upon  the  plane  M'FQ^  vanishes,  it  is  evident
that  we  shall  have

The  action  of  MFQ^  upon  the  triangle  QFB  =  —  the  action  of  MFQ^  upon  the  triangle  M'FB.

Adding  to  this  the  action  of  the  part  B'FM  upon  the  triangle  Q^FB,  we  get  for  the  whole
vertical  action  of  the  body  B'F^  upon  the  triangle  Q^FB,  the  following  expression,  namely,

The  action  of  B'Fq  upon  QjP£=the  action  of  B'FM  upon  QJf 5  — action  of  MFQ  upon  M'FB.
We  shall  now  compute  the  values  of  these  two  portions.  .  In  the  first  place,  ki  finding  the
action  of  B'FM  upon  Q,FB,  we  have

a  =  Q,  a'=;— 90',  b'=^  — b;

and  then,  from  [99T6/(:],  we  get

u4  =  — 45% B  =  0, ^'  =  — (45"'— ^b), J5'==  — ib.
Substituting  these  in  [9976/J,  we  get

The  action  of  B'FM  upon  QFB  =  g'.sin.b.tang.(45*'— ^b).
Id  computing  the  action  of  MFQ^  upon  M'FB,  we  have

a'=— 180%  b'=— 90''-,  b  =  90%

and a  must  be  changed  into  b ; hence,  from  [9976A:],  we  have

^  =  —  90" -fib, S=0, ^'=-45% B'^  —  (45''  —  ih).
Substituting  these  in  [9976»i],  we  get

The  action  of  MFQ  upon  iW'FJ5=  — ^.tang.(45'*-  — ^b).
Substituting  [9977/,  h],  in  [9977<;j,  and  using  [6,  34',  31],  Int.,  we  get  successively

The  action  o^B'Fq  upon  qFB=^q.  tang.(45''-  —  ^b) .  ^  I  +  sin.b \

=^9.tang.(45''— ib).|2cos.2(45''— ib)|

=^2^  .sin.(45<'- —  ^b)  .cos.(45''— ib)  =^  5.sin.(90*'-^b)

==5^.cos.b.
We  may  apply  this  formula  to  the  calculation  of  the  action  of  the  successive
concentrical  lamina  of  a  homogeneous  fluid,  elevated  in  a  cylindrical  capillary
tube,  treated  of  by  the  author  in  [9902,  &-c.}.  For  this  purpose  we  shall
suppose  BADM)  fig.  153,  to  be  the  tube,  whose  vertical  axis  is  OZ;
AZD  the  level  of  the  suface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  in  which  the  tube  is
dipped; ZA=;^ZD  the inner  radius  of  the  tube;  ZQ^  =  ZC  the inner

Mff.IS3,

JM

[9977a]

[99776]

[9977c]

[9977rf]

[9977c]
[9977e1
[9977/]

[9977/"]
[9977g]

[9977A]

[9977t ]

[9977*]

^eu Si CJQ

856  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9976'"] affinities  seem  to me to be the attractive  forces themselves, acting with

[9977A;']

[9977Z]
[9977m]

[9977n]

[9977o]
[9977p]
[9977?]

[9977r]

[9977«]
[9977* ]

[9977u]

[9977t>]

[9977t)']
[9977«']

radius  of  the  concentrical  stratum,  whose  section  by  the  plane  of  the  figure  is  represented  by
the  parts  ABFQ^  and  DMEC.  If  we  draw  a  tangent  G'FG  to  the  point  F,  and  neglect,
as  in  [9926],  the  curvature  of  the  sides  of  the  tube,  we  may  consider  the  fluid  contained  in
the  part  ABFQ^  as  being  limited  by  two  planes,  drawn  through  QF,  FB,  perpendicular
to  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  continued  infinitely  above  and  below  it ;  and  if  we  put  the
angle  QFG=&,  we  shall  have,  from  [9977i],

The  vertical  action  of  the  external  mass  Q,FB  upon  the  internal  plane  GFQ^C=sq.cos.b;

so  that,  if  we  suppose  the  thickness  of  this  attracted  plane  to  be  dc,  the  action  upon  it  will  be
q.cos.b.dc.  Integrating  this  relative  to  the  whole  circumference  c  of  the  stratum  whose
radius  is  ZQ^,  we  get

The  whole  action  of  the  external  stratum  upon  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid  FQ^CE  0=qc.cos.b.

At  the  side  of  the  tube,  or  rather  at  an  insensible  distance  from  it,  where  b  =  zs  [9892],  this
action  becomes  qc. cos.-a;  and  by  resubstituting  q  =  ^H  [9972e],  it  is  reduced  to  the
following  expression;

Vertical  action  of  the  annulus=^flc.cos.w,

being  the  same  as  the  weight  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  homogeneous  fluid  FQ^CE,
as  in  [9898].

It  is  easy  to  extend  this  demonstration  to  the  case  of  nature,  where  the  fluid,  near  its
surface,  is  covered  with  an  excessively  thin  pellicle  of  variable  density,  whose  upper  surface
B'F'O'M',  fig.  154,  is  so  rare  that  its  density  may  be  considered
as  nearly  equal  to  nothing.  Through  all  the  points  of  this  surface,
we  shall  suppose  perpendiculars  O'oO,  F'fF,  &ic.  to  be  erected.
Then,  taking,  on  any  one  of  these  perpendiculars,  as,  for  example,  on
the  vertical  axis  O'oOZ,  a  point  o,  at  an  insensible  distance  below
the  surface,  but  sufficiently  far  from  it  to  have  the  density  equal  to
that  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid,  which  is  represented  by
unity ;  we  shall  draw  through  o  the  surface  bfom,  cutting  all  the
perpendiculars  O'oO,  FfF,  Sic,  at  right  angles  in  o,f,  &,c.  In
Hke  manner,  we  shall  draw  the  surface  BFOM,  cutting  the  same  perpendiculars  at  right
angles  in  O,  F,  he;  this  surface  being  at  an  insensible  distance  below  bfom,  but  sufficiently
far  from  it  to  render  the  corpuscular  actions  of  the  fluid,  which  are  actually  situated  in  the
surfaces  BFOM,  bfom,  wholly  insensible  upon  each  other.  Taking  any  point  F  of  the
surface  BFOEM,  and  drawing  through  it  the  vertical  line  FQ  parallel  to  the  axis  OZ,  we
shall  suppose  the  line  i^Q  to  be  at  svch  a  distance  from  the  side  AB  of  the  tube,  that  the
fluid  near  the  tube,  whose  density  is  variable,  can  have  no  corpuscular  action  upon  the  fluid
which  is  situated  beyond  FQ^,  or  in  the  plane  QFEC.  Then  the  figure  AB'F'FQ^,  being
supposed  to  revolve  about  the  axis  O'Z,  will  form  a  figure,  somewhat  like  an  annulus,  whose
action  on  the  fluid  contained  within  it  will  be  exactly  equal  to  tl)e  weight  of  the  internal  mass

jPiy.lSA,

Mf

M

^ a

c JJ

X.  Suppl.2.]  ACTION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE.  857

all  their energy,  [9976""}

of  the  fluid Q^FF'O'E'EC,  which  is  elevated  above  the  level  AD  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase .^^
where  the  tube  is  dipped. To  prove  this,  we  shall,  for  the  sake  of  distinctness,  denote  the
different  portions  of  the  fluid,  and  of  the  plane,  in  the  following  manner :

iS^=the  portion  of  the  fluid  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the  figure  ABFQ^  about  the [9977y]
axis  O'Z;

S'=zthe  portion  of  the  fluid  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the  figure  BB'F'F  about  the [9977z]

axis  O'Z',
P=the  portion  Q^FOEC  of  the  attracted  plane,  whose thickness  is  supposed  to  be [9978a]

extremely  small,  and  represented  by  unity ;
P'  =  the  portion  FF'O'E'EOF  of  the  same  attracted  plane;  [99786]

6  =  the  angle  Q^FG,  formed  at  the  point  F  by  the  vertical  line  FQ,  and  the  tangent [9978c]

FG  to  the  section  of  the  surface  FOE.

In calculating  the  action  of  the  annulus S-\-S'  upon  the  attracted  plane  P-j-P',  it  is
convenient  to  take  separately  into  consideration  the  four  distinct  portions. First,  the  action [9978d]
of  S  upon  P;  second,  the  action  of  S  upon  P';  third,  the  action  of  »S^'  upon  P;  fourth,
the  action  of  S'  upon  P'. In  computing  these  attractions,  we  shall  neglect,  as  in  [9926],  the [9978c]
curvature  of  the  side  of  the  tube,  and  consider  it  as  being  developed  in  a  plane  passing
through  AB',  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure. Moreover  we  may  consider  the [9978/]
mass  S,  in  its  action  upon  P,  as  being  of  the  uniform  density  unity,  because  the  part  of  the
plane  P  which  is  nearest  to  the  side  of  the  tube  AB,  or  nearest  to  the  surface  bfoc,  Is
beyond  the  sphere  of  any  sensible  action  upon  Pj  therefore  we  shall  have  the  action  of  S
upon  P  by  the  same  process  as  in  [9977i],  which  gives

The  vertical  action  of  S  upon  P =3'. C0S.5.  [9978A]

In  calculating  the  action  of  6"  on  P',  we  may,  as  in  [9978/],  consider  the  masses  S  and  P' TaaJQ.'^
as  being  of  the  uniform  density  unity,  because  the  part  of  (S  near  the  side  of  the  tube  is
beyond  the  sphere  of  any  sensible  corpuscular  action  upon  P';  and  the  same  holds  good
relative  to  the  upper  part  of  P',  which  is  beyond  the  sphere  of  any  corpuscular  action  of  S. [9978i]
We  may  therefore  calculate  the  action  of  S  upon  P'  by  either  of  the  formulas  [9976?,  m].
Then,  according  to  the  notation  in  [9976i,  Zc] ,  we  have

a=&, b  =  90''+J, a'=— 130% b'=:— &;  ^^^^^^

A=^—W'-{-^b, P  =  45% ^'=  —  (45''—^), P'  =  0.

Substituting  these  in  the  value  of  Z  [9976»i],  it  becomes — q.sm.b-,  so that  we shall
have

The  vertical  action  of  »S  upon  P'  =  — g'.sin.S.  [9978m]

In  like  manner,  in  calculating  the  action  of  S'  upon  P,  we  may  consider  the  masses  S'  and

P  as  being  of  the  uniform  density  unity,  because  the  part  S'  near  the  side  of  the  tube,  and [9978n]

VOL.  IV.  215

858

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[9977]  We shall now resume the equation [9930], observing that, if, tvilh

[99780]

[9978o']

[9d78p]
[9978gl

[9978r]
[9978* ]

[9978* 1

[9978«]

[9978u]

[9978u>]

[9978x]

near  its  upper  surface,  is  beyond  the  sphere  of  any  sensible  action  upon  F.  Tlien,  according
to  the  notation  in  [9976 J,  Ar],  we  have

a=0, h  =  b, a'  =  — 6, h'=90'-  —  b;
A=  —  ib, B  =  45% A'  =  0, JB'  =  45''— i6.

Substituting  these  in  [9976/],  we  get

2r=  g- .  sin.6 .  tang.jB = g- .  sin.6 ;
so  that  we  shall  have

The  vertical  action  of  S'  upon  P=g'.sin.6.

Lastly,  if  we  represent  the  direct  action  of  S'  upon  P'  by  q^ ,  this  direction  being  inclined  to
the  vertical  by  the  angle  b,  we  shall  have,  by  resolving  it  in  a  vertical  direction,  the  following
expression :

The  vertical  action  of  S'  upon  P'=  q^.cos.b.

Adding  together  the  four  parts  of  this  action  [9978^,  m,  p,  r],  and  neglecting  the  terms  which
destroy  each  other,  we  finally  get,  for  the  vertical  action  of  S-j-S'  upon  P-\-P'f  the
following  expression :

The  vertical  action  of  the  external  mass  B'F'FQ^A  upon  the  internal  plane  QFF'CyE'E  C=(q-\-q,) -coaA

In  computing  that  part  of  the  mass  of  the  fluid  which  is  elevated  by  the  capillary  action,

and  surrounded  by  the  mass  )S-}-5';  and  whose  section  is  represented  by  P-{-P',  or,  in  the

figure  154,  page  856,  by  Q^FF'O'E'EC;  we  may,  on  account  of  the  insensible  thickness  of  P'j

neglect  wholly  the  consideration  of  this  pellicle  or  mass  of  fluid  of  variable  density  near  the

surface;  and  then,  taking  FOE  for  the  limiting  surface  where  the  density  becomes  equal  to

unity,  we  may  consider  the  internal  elevated  mass  to  be  limited  by  the  space  whose  section  is

FQ^CEO,  being  the  same  as  in  fig.  153,  page  855  [9977o,  &c.]. Now  if  we  put,  in  like

manner  as  in  [9977p],

?==|ff,  q  +  q,  =  m>

and  then  compare  together  the  expressions  [9977m,  9918t],  we  shall  find  that  the  effect  of

noticing  the  variation  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  in  computing  the  vertical  action

of  the  mass  S-\-S'  upon  the  internal  mass  whose  section  isP-|-P',  is  merely  to  change

q  into  q-\-q^,  or  H into  H  [9978y],  as  in  [9261e,/J ;  and  by  making  this  change  in  [9977g],

we  get

The  vertical  action  of  the  annulus  =  ^Hc.cos.w,

being  the  same  as  the  weight  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  elevated  fluid  FQ^CEO  [9898],
changing  H  into  H,  as  above.

By  the  same  process  which  we  have  used  in  computing  the  action  of  the  external  annulus
B'F'FqA,  fig.  154,  p.  856,  upon  the  internal  plane  qPFO'E'EC  [9918t],  we  may  find  the
action  of  the  internal  mass  of  fluid  whose  section  is  QFF'O'E'EC  upon  the  external  plane,
or  upon  the  section  of  the  annulus  B'F'FQA. The  only  change  will  be  to  insert  in  the

X.  Suppl.2.]  ACTION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  TUBE.  859

a cylindrical  tube  whose  internal radius  is /, we  put q for  the  mean [9977']

^KK" Q,

formula  [9978^]  the  angle  Q^FG'  =  w,  instead  of  its  supplement  QFG^=5  =  180''-  —  w
hence  we  get

The  vertical  action  of  the  internal  mass  Q^FFO'E'EC  upon  the  external  plane  B'F'FQ^A={q-{-q,).coa.w

In these expressions of  the  vertical  action,  we  have

supposed the line AQ^CD [9977a:] to be on the

horizontal  level  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid in  the  vase

in  which  the  tube  is  dipped; but  the  same  formulas

hold  good  when  we  suppose  the  masses  5*  and  P  to  be

limited by  any  horizontal plane A'Q^'C, fig. 155,

parallel  to  -4Q,  but  much  nearer  to  the  surface  of  the

fluid,  taking  care,  however,  to  have  it  sufficiently  distant,

so  that  the corpuscular action of  the  surface BFO

shall  not  extend  to  the  plane  A'(^'. In  this  case,  the

formula  [99782;]  will  give

The  vertical  action  of  tlie  internal  mass  C'Q'FFO'E'E  upon  the  external  plane  B'FF^A' ={q-\-q^) .  coa.w.

We  may  here  remark  that  the  whole  mass  of  the  fluid  B'ADM'  which  is  situated
above  the  level  AD  of  the  mass  of  fluid  in  the  vase  in  which  the  tube  is  dipped,  is  in
equilibrium  by  the  mutual  action  and  reaction  of  the  fluid  and  the  tube ;  and  we  shall  now
proceed  to  show  how  we  may  make  use  of  this  circumstance  to  investigate  the  relation
between  the  angle  w  and  the  forces  which  act  on  the  fluid  in  the  plane  B'A'Q'FF',  which,
for  brevity,  we  shall  represent  by  N;  supposing  the  thickness  of  this  plane  to  be  infinitely
small)  and  represented  by  unity.  The  forces  acting  on  the  plane  N,  supposing  them  all  to  be
resolved  in  a  vertical  or  upward  direction^  are  the  following :

First.  The  upward  action  of  the  part  of  the  tube  near  B'A\  which  is  within  the  sphere
of  the  corpuscular  action  on  the  plane  N, This  force  we  shall  represent  by  T.
Second.  The  upward  action  of  the  mass  S-\-S'  contained  in  the  space  which  is  formed  by
the  revolution  of  the  plane  N,  or  B'A'^'FF',  about  the  axis  O'Z. This  force
we  shall  represent  by  S.
Third.  The  upward  action' of  the  mass  S^,  which  is  included  in  the  space  formed  by  the
revolution  of  the  plane  AA'^^'  about  the axis  O'Z. This  force  we  shall
represent  by  -cj^.
Fourth.  The upward action  of  the  mass  P^,  formed  by  the revolution of  the plane
C'Q'Q  Z  about  the  axis  O'Z. This  force  we  shall  denote  by  P^.
Fifth.  The  upward  action  of  the  internal  mass  P-f-P',  formed  by  the  revolution  of  the
plane C'Q^'FF'O' about the  axis  O'Z. The  value  of  this  action has  been
computed  in  [99796],  and  found  to  be  equal  to {q -{-q^). cos. lo, or  ^H.cos.m;.

The  sum  of  these  five  forces  must  be  put  equal  to  nothing,  upon  the  principle  adopted  ia

[9978y]
[9978z  I

[9979a]

[99796]

[9979c]

[9979rf]
[9979«]

[9979/]

[9979g-]

[9979A]

[9979i )
[9979ft]

[9979/)]

860  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  Cel.

[9977"] height to which the fluid rises above the level, the volume of the

[9979c],  namely,  that  there  is  an  equilibrium  in  the  actions  of  the  fluid  and  tube  upon  any
portion  S-{-S'  of  the  mass  of  the  fluid;  hence  we  have

[9979^]  0  =  T-j-S-f  c<^  +  P,  +  (5'  +  ^J.cos.M?;

and  it  now  remains  to  compute  the  values  of  T,  S,  P,  observing  that  zs^  cannot  be  determined,
because  the  law  of  the  corpuscular  action  on  the  part  of  the  fluid  of  variable  density  near
the  side  of  the  tube  is  unknown.

[9979m]  If  we  suppose  the  plane  N  to  be  divided  into  filaments  parallel  to  -4' Q',  or  perpendicular
to  the  side  of  the  tube,  the  vertical  action  of  the  part  of  the  tube  which  is  situated  above
any  filament,  will  evidently  be  balanced  by  the  contrary  action  of  the  part  of  the  tube  situated
below  the  same  filament;  therefore  the  sum  of  all  these  actions  will  give

[9979n]  T=0.

In  computing  the  force  S,  we  shall  suppose  the  plane  N  to  be  divided  into  vertical  filaments
Jcl,  JcT,  &c.,  and  which,  at  the  points  /,  /',  &c.,  are  bent,  in  the  plane  of  the  figure,  into

[9979o]  the  directions  IH,  TH',  Uc,  perpendicular  to  the  curve  BIFF,  at  the  points  /,  /',  &c.,
respectively.  If  this  vertical  plane,  with  its  filaments,  revolve  about  the  axis  O'Z,  it  will
divide  the  whole  space  S-\-S'  [9979^]  into  similar  and  equal  filaments.  To  distinguish  the
plane  and  filaments  in  their  new  positions,  we  shall  suppose  that,  after  the  plane  iV  has
revolved  about  the  axis  O'Z,  by  any  given  angle  a,  it  is  denoted  by  {N)  in  its  new  position;
and  in  like  manner  the  filament  klH  changes  into  (klH),  h'TH'  into  {Jc'I'H'),  &c.
Then  it  is  evident  that,  as  the  filaments  JcIH,  {1c TH),  are  at  the  same  distance  from  the  side
of  the  tube,  they  must  have  the  same  density,  and  be  similar  and  equal  to  each  other;  and

[9979^]  tj^jg  jjolds  good  even  for  the  filaments  which  are  extremely  near  to  the  tube,  supposing
always  that  their  bases  are  infinitely  small  and  equal  to  each  other ;  similar  remarks  may  be
made  relative  to  any  other  corresponding  filaments,  as  Jc'I'H',  {Tc'I'H'),  &,c.  As  the  action
of  the  plane  (iV)  upon  the  plane  iV  must  be  insensible  when  their  distance  is  of  any  sensible

•■  ^l  magnitude,  the  angle  a  may  be  considered  as  excessively  small ;  so  that,  without  any  sensible
error,  we  may  consider  the  planes  iV,  (-/V),  as  parallel,  and  the  side  of  the  lube  corresponding
to  A'B'  as  a  plane,  as  is  supposed  by  the  author  in  [9926,  &tc.].  Then,  on  account  of  the
symmetry  of  the  situation  of  the  four  filaments  TcIH  (JcIH),  Jc'I'H  {Jc'I'H),  and  having,
moreover,  the  mass  JcIH=maiSS  {JcIH),  the  mass  Jc' TH=\.\\e  mass  {Jc'I'H),  we  shall
have,  by  considering  only  their  vertical  actions  upon  each  other,

[9979r  ]  Action  of  {JcIH)  upon  fc '/'!?'= action  of  JcIH  upon  {Jc'FH),

[9979*  ]  =  — action  of  {JcTH)  upon  JcIH;

observing  that  the  equation  [9979r]  can  be  demonstrated  by  a  method  similar  to  that  which  is
used  in  [9976y,  z,  he],  and  that  the  expression  [9979;?]  can be  derived  from  the  second

[9979<  ]  member  of  [9979r],  by  considering  that  the  action  of  JcIH  upon  (JcTH)  is  equal  and
contrary  to  the  action  of  {Jc'I'H')  upon  JcIH.  Transposing  the  expression  [99795]  to  its
first  member,  we  get

[9979U]  ^^jiQ^  of  {JcIH)  upon  Ar'J'H' -faction  of  {Jc'I'H)  upon  JcIH=0.

X,  Sappl.  2.] ANGLE  OF  CONTACT  «  NEAR  THE  SIDE  OF  A  TUBE.  861

elevated mass will be iiFq [as in  9985a], and the circumference c of [9978]

COS.t^  =  — ; —  =  77 .
9  +  ?/ ' H

[9979»]

[99791/]

From  this  equation  it  follows,  that  the  vertical  action  of  the  two  filaments  {klH),  (JcTH'),
of  the  plane  (iV),  upon  the  two  corresponding  filaments  klH,  k'l'H',  of  the  plane  N,
mutually  destroy  each  other;  and,  as  this  must  hold  good  for  the  filaments  into  which  the
plane  N  or  (iV)  can  be  divided,  the  whole  sum  of  these  actions  will  give

The  vertical  action  of  the  plane  (N)  upon  the  plane  iNr=0.  [9979tc]

Now  this  equation  takes  place  for  every  one  of  the  planes  {N)  in  its  action  upon  the  plane

J\^;  hence  it  follows  that  the  sum  of  all  these  actions  is  equal  to  nothing; consequently

we  have

S  =  0.  [9979x]

In  computing  the  force  P,  [9979?],  or  the  action  of  the  mass  P^  upon  the  plane  N,  we
may  remark  that  the  corpuscular  action  of  P^  does  not  extend  to  the  surface  BO,  nor  does
it  approach  so  near  to  the  side  of  the  tube  as  to  act  on  the  part  of  the  fluid  whose  density
differs  from  unity;  we  may  therefore  compute  the  action  by  means  of  the  formula  [9973a],
supposing  the  mass  P,  and  the  fluid  in  the  plane  N  to  be  of  the  uniform  density  unity ;
observing  that  the  angles  QQ'C  and  A'(^'F  are  right  angles;  therefore  the  action  P^  is
equal  to  \H  [9973a],  and  by  substituting  its  value  q  [9978yJ,  we  get  P,-=q-  This  action  [9979z]
of  the  mass  P,  is  in  the  direction  of  gravity,  and  to  reduce  it  to  a  vertical  or  upward  direction
[9979e],  we  must  change  its  sign ;  hence  we  finally  obtain

V^=—q.  [9980a]

Substituting  the  values  of  T,  S,  P^[9979n,  x,  9930a],  in  [9979Z],  we  get

0==i-a^—q-{-{q-\-q^.COS.w.  [9980&]

Now  putting,  as  in  [9978i!],

q^q^  =  l\{, also g^  — w^  =  |F,  [9980c]

it  becomes

0  =  — |F  +  iH.cos.M>;  [9980(f|

whence  we  get

[9980e]

[9980/]

This  formula  is  the  same  as  the  formula  (3),  page  99  of  M.  Poisson's  Nouvelle  Theorie,  8fC.,
and  the  equation  [99806]  is  equivalent  to  the  equation  (8),  page  93  of  the  same  work.  We
may  here  remark  that,  in  the  equation  [9930(Z],  the  term  ^H .  cos.mj  =  (5- +  g-,) . cos.w;
[9980c]  represents  the  upward  vertical  action  of  the  mass  P-\-P'  upon  the  plane  N,  as
appears  from  [997 9A:].  ISIoreover  the  term  —  ^F  of  the  same  equation  [9980c?],  or  the
equivalent  expression  ^,  — ?  [9980c],  which  is  equal  to  ^,  +  P/  [9980«]>  represents,  as  in  [9980g]
[9979/i,  i],  the  upward  action  of  the  mass  S^-\-Pj  upon  the  same  plane  N.

In  this  calculation,  we  have  supposed  the  tube  to  be  of  a  cylindrical  form,  with  a  circular
base;  but  as  the  corpuscular  action  extends  only  to  an  insensible  distance,  it  is  easy  to  apply [9980A]
this  demonstration  to  the  case  where  the  base  is  any  regular  curve  whatever,  without  abrupt

VOL.  IV.  216

862  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

[9978'] the base will be 2t/; therefore the equation [9930] will give, in this

[9980i]  flexures,  using,  instead  of  the  axis  O'Z,  the  vertical  line  drawn  through  the  point  Z  of  the
base,  which  is  the  centre  of  curvature  of  that  part  of  the  base  or  circumference  A  particularly
under  consideration;  so  that  the  vertical  plane  AZO'B'  may  contain  the  plane  iV,  which  is
supposed  to  be  in  equilibrium  in  this  calculation. In  like  manner,  instead  of  supposing  the

[9980A:]  tube  to  be  limited  by  a  vertical  line  B'A,  we  may  sup[>ose  that,  below  the  point  A\  it  is  any
regular  curve  whatever,  whose  tangent  is  on  the  continuation  of  the  line  BA'.  For,  the
distance  to  which  the  corpuscular  action  extends  being  wholly  insensible,  this  curvature  of  the
tube  will  have  no  effect  whatever  on  the  values  of  q,  ?'/»  ro,;  so  that  the  equation  [9980e]
holds  good  for  all  cases.

[9980m] The angle w  =  \QO^-  —  b [9978y], which is used by M.  Poisson,  is  the  same as

[&980m']  180''-  —  OT  of  La  Place's  notation  [9892];  so  that  we  have  w=180''-  —  ts\  substituting  this
in  [9980£Z,  e],  we  get

[9980n]  0  =  |F4-^H.cos.w;

[t)930o]  cos.w:

TSS^  —  q  F

zi  being,  as  in  [9892],  the  angle  contained  between  the  lower  side  of  the  tube  and  the  surface

[9980p]  of  tije  fluids  or  rather  the  angle  contained  by  that  side  of  the  tube  and  the  tangent  to  the
surface of  the  fluid,  at  a  sensible  distance  from  it. Finally,  it  follows  from  the  equation

[9980p']  [9980o],  that,  as  the  forces  q,  9,)  H>  ^'"^  independent  of  the  curvature  of  the  tube  [9980/],
the  angle  of  inclination  zs  of  the  fluid  to  the  side  of  the  tube  must  also  be  independent  of
thai  curvature^  as  in  [9197].

If  the  matter  of  the  tube  has  no  action  on  the  strata  of  the  fluid  S^,  S,  S',  adjacent  to  the  side

[9980r]  of  the  tube  [9979A],  the  stratum  S^  will  be  in  a  similar  situation  to  the  stratum  at  the  surface
of  the  fluid  S'  [99782-]  '"  contact  with  the  atmosphere. These  two  strata,  of  an  insensible

[99805]  thickness,  transmit  the  internal  pressure,  the  one  to  the  surface  of  the  air  B'F\  and  the  other
to  the  surface  of  the  tube  AA' ;  and  these  pressures  are  destroyed  by  the  actions,  in  contrary
directions,  upon  these  strata,  from  the  action  of  the  caloric  in  the  particles  of  the  tube,  fluid,

[99304  ]  and  air.  In  this  case,  if  we  suppose  that  the  thicknesses  of  the  two  strata  F'F,  A'Q^',  are  equal
to  each  other,  the  densities  at  the  corresponding  points  of  the  lines  F'F,A'(^',  must  be  very
nearly  equal,  and  then  it  is  evident  that  the  action  of  S'  upon  P',  which  we  have  represented
by  q,  [99785-],  in  the  direction  towards  the  interior  of  the  mass  S',  must  be  equal  to  that  of  S^
upon  the  plane  iV,  which,  in  [9979/t],  is  represented  by  w,  in  a  vertical  direction  [9979e],  or

[9980u]  —  -us^  in  a  downward  direction  towards  the  interior  of  the  mass  S^ ;  so  that,  in  this  case,  we
shall  have

[9980P]  ,rf^  =  — g-^, or 5  — -5f^==gr-|-g,^;

[9980r'] whence  F  =  H  [99806-]. Substituting  this  in  [9980o],  we  obtain

r9980u']  cos.zi=^^, — -'  =  —  1, or ^tf=180%

[9980tc'] K;Jiich  corresponds  to  the  surface  of  a  convex hemisphere,  and  agrees  with  what  we  have

X,  Suppl.2.] ANGLE  OF  CONTACT  «  NEAR  THE  SIDE  OF  A  TUBE.  863

particular  case  [as  in  99856],  [9979]

[9980x"

already  found  in  [9654a,  b].  From  this  it  appears  that,  when  the  tube  has  no  action  on  the
Jluid,  the  angle  -m  will  attain  its  maximum  value  180''".

If  the  matter  of  the  tube  has  the  same  action  on  the  particles  of  the  fluid  as  the  fluid  has
on  its  own  particles,  the  density  of  the  mass  S^  will  be  nearly  equal  to  unity,  and  its  action  on [OOSOt/^
the  plane  N  will  be  represented  by  the  function  XK  —  2q  [9974c?],  in  the  direction  of  gravity  ;
and  by  changing  its  sign,  we  get  its  value  in  a  vertical  direction 'a,  =  2q  —  X^  [9979A] ; [QOSOz^

substituting  this  in  [9980o],  we  get cos.'tf=ilIl^-  =  l — (^^+?/V and  by  neglecting r9981al

the  quantity  'kK-{-g^,  supposing  it  to  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  q,  we  get
cos.'cj=l,  or  Z5  =  0'^:  Hence  it  follows  that,  when  the  particles  of  the  tube  and  of  the  fluid
act  upon  each  other  with  equal  forces,  we  shall  have  very  nearly  -1^  =  0,  which  corresponds
to  a  concave  spherical  surface,  as  we  have  already  seen  in  [9625,  &ic.]  When  we  have
accurately  ■cj=0''-,  the  equation  [9980o]  gives

^  —  9  =  9  +  9.y or ^.=2(9  +  ?,)  — ?,=H  — g, [9978i'].  [99816;

Hence  it  appears  that,  while  the  angle  -a  varies  from  •5i  =  180''-  to  '5i  =  0''-,  the  force  w,
increases  from  W/  =  — q^  [9980r]  to  zj^=H — q^  [99816],  the  increment  being  H.  Now  [9981c;
it  is  found  by  experiment,  that  H  is  a  positive  quantity  [9920z^] ;  therefore,  while  the  density
of  the  fluid  near  the  sides  of  the  tube  increases  from  nothing  till  it  is  equal  to,  or  exceeds  [9981crj
that  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid,  the  upward  action  of  the  mass  S^  will  increase  by  the
positive  quantity  H,  which  indicates  that  the  repulsive  force  of  the  caloric  in  the  successive
increments  of  the  mass  S^  exceeds  that  of  the  attractive  force  of  the  corpuscular  action.

We  may  finally  observe,  that,  in  changing  successively  the  matter  of  which  the  tube  is [9981/]
composed,  so  that  its  action  upon  the  fluid  may  always  increase,  it  will  finally  become  greater
than  that  of  the  fluid  on  its  own  panicles,  and  then  the  part  of  the  fluid  which  is  almost  in [9981g-]
contact  with  the  sides  of  the  tube,  may,  in  consequence  of  this  strong  action  of  the  tube,
become more dense  than  the  fluid  in  the  interior of  its  mass. In  this  case,  a  very  thin [9981^]
stratum  of  the  fluid  will  be  gathered  round  the  sides  of  the  tube,  in  the  manner  mentioned  by
the  author  in  (;9220],  so  as  to  form  an  internal  tube,  whose  inner  surface  has  the  same  density [9981i
as  that  of  the  internal  mass  of  the  fluid ;  and  it  is  found  by  experiment  that,  when  this  happens,
the  angle  -a  is  nearly  equal  to  nothing. If  a  fluid  forms  in  this  way  a  stratum  about  the  sides [9981*1
of  a  tube,  the  action  of  the  part  which  is  gathered  round  the  tube  above  the  capillary  surface,
may  have  some  action  upon  the  plane  N;  but  this  action  may  be  considered  as  constituting  a [9981/
part  of  the  force  zs^,  without  altering  any  of  the  preceding  formulas,  or  affecting  the  results
which  have  been  obtained  from  ihem.

The  formulas  [99167c,  I,  m]  may  be  used  in  finding  the  correction  of  the  computed  pressures [9981n]
on  opposite  sides  of  either  one  of  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes  dipped  into  a  fluid,  of  which
we  have  already  spoken  in  [9580o,  &;c.] For  this  purpose  we  shall  refer  to  the  annexed [998lo'

864

[9980]

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

^^  .  1 r\ 1  p^hi*  II  correct  even  ftr  a  fluid  whose  deMitjr^

2;  p  —  p z=ip'J_J,lQl I vaiiea  near  the  surface,  using  the  approximate I

'  '  .iO  a  ' Lvalues  of  p,  (,>  [9920rJ,  namely  p„  p/.  J

[9981;?]

[9981?:

[9981r:

[99815

[9981f

[9981«]

[9981v:

[9981m>]

[9981a:]
[998Ji/]

[9981z;
[9982a]

[99826;
[9982c;

[998200

figure  154',  which  is  the  same  as  fig.  154,  page  856,  with  the
addition  of  the  horizontal  line  E^FQ^^,  and  the  vertical  line  QjPJT,
drawn  through  the  point  F,  meeting  respectively  the  suiface  of  the
plane  AB'  in  Q^,  and  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  H;  the  line
FF'  being  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid  at  F'.  We
shall  suppose,  as  in  [9977^ — m],  that  the  surface  BOM  is  at  an
insensible  distance  from  the  surface  B/O'M',  but  so  great,  however,
as  not  to  have  the  action  of  the  fluid  on  the  surface  BOM
extend  to  the  fluid  of  variable  density  near  the  surface  B'O'M';
so  that  thejluid  above  the  surface  BOM,  at  an  insensible  distance,
may  have  the  same  density  unity  as  in  the  interior  mass  of  the  fluid.

c  J>

In  like  manner,  FQ^  is

at  an  insensible  distance  from  AB',  but  the  part  of  the  fluid  FQ^AB'  which  is  near  to
FQ^f  and  at  an  insensible  distance  from  it,  has  the  same  density  unity  as  in  the  interior  of
the  fluid  mass,  so  that  the  action  of  the  fluid  situated  on  the  line  i^Q  does  not  extend  to  the
fluid  of  variable  density  near  AB'.  For  abridgment  we  shall  denote  the  difierent  sections
of  the  fluid  plane  or  base  ADM'B'  by  the  following  symbols,  which  are  similar  to  those
in  [9977y,  &.c.] ;

S=^qFB,  S'=FF'B'B,  P=MOFqD,  P'=MOFF'0'M,

p=^HFF',  s=BFq,,  S—s=AqFq,, S'-{-s=FF'B'q,.

We  may  suppose  that  the  whole  mass  of  the  fluid  is  contained  within  the  space  which  is
included  by  surfaces  drawn  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  base  MO'B'AD,  and
continued  infinitely  above  and  below  it;  and  this  mass  may  be  separated  into  portions
corresponding  to  the  parts  of  the  base  S,  S',  &.C.,  by  similar  perpendicular  surfaces  drawn
through  the  borders  of  these  portions,  and  continued  infinitely  above  and  below  the  plane  of  the
figure.  We  shall  denote  any  one  of  these  portions  of  the  fluid  by  enclosing  in  a  parenthesis
the  symbol  which  represents  that  part  of  the  base ;  so  that,  for  example,  (tS)  represents  the
part  of  the  whole  mass  {M)  which  corresponds  to  the  portion  of  the  base  *S'=  qFB.  Then,
as  the  whole  base  M'O'B'AD  can  be  separated  into  the  four  portions  P,  P',  S' -\-s,  S — s,
we  shall  have

(M)  =  (P)  +  (P')+(>S"  +  .)  +  (^-0.

And  we  shall  also  for  abridgment  use  the  following  symbols ;

F=.  the  whole  horizontal  action  of  the  mass  {M)  upon  the  fluid  which  is  contained
in  the  portion  of  the  plane  or  base  AB'F'Fq=S-\- S' \  the  thickness  of
this  plane  being  considered  as  extremely  small,  and  represented  by  unity ;

(-4).[P]  =  the  horizontal  action  of  any  portion  {A)  of  the  mass  (M)  upon  any  portion
B  of  the  plane  tS'-}-*S'';  the  attracting  mass  being  included  in  the
parentheses  (  ),  and  the  attracted  part  of  the  plane  in  the  brackets  [  ] ;

X.  Suppl.2.J  PRESSURES  ON  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.  865

hence  the  equation  [9930]  becomes  generally  [as  in  9985c],  [9980']

^^==(P).[S']  =  the  action  of (MOFqD) u^on  FrB'B;  [9982i]

T^=(P'). [S']  =  the  action  of  {MOFF'O'M)  upon  FF'B'B;  [9982c]

Q,  =  (P+P'-f  p).[5]=;^theactionof {M'O'HqD) upon  BFq^-,  [9982/]

R==  (p) .  [s]  =  the  action  of {HFF') upon  qFB,  [9982g-]

The  horizontal  action  F  of  the  whole  mass  {M)  upon  the  plane  S  -\-  S'  may  be  separated

into  two  portions, (iV/).[5i— «]  and  (iV/).[S'  +  s];  hence  we  have  [9982/j]

F==^  (M) .  [S— s]  +  (M) .  [S'  -f  si  [9982^1

The  first  term  of  the  second  member  of  this  expression  {M).[S — s],  represents  the
horizontal  action  of  the  whole  mass  {M)  upon  the  plane  5 — 5,  or  A^Fq^,  and  this  must
evidenlly  be  equal  to  the  horizontal  pressure  on  the  plane  Aq,.  Now  we  have  already  [9982i]
computed  this  pressure,  in  [9580a — n],  by  means  of  the  first  method  of  considering  the
capillary  action,  founded  on  the  equilibrium  of  the  fliuid  in  a  canal ;  and  we  have  found  it  to
be  equal  to  ^gli^  [9580n],  neglecting  the  pressure  on  the  outside  of  the  plane,  which  [9982i']
depends  on  Ic^  [9580m],  which  is  noticed  afterwards  in  [9983^,  Sic.].  Substituting  this  value
of  (M).[S— s]=?i^A:2,  in  [9982A'],  we  get

F=iglc^-{-{M).[S'-\rs];  ,  E9982A]

and  by  substituting  the  value  of  {M)  [99826],  we  get

l-=^J^.A:2  +  (P).[>S"  +  .]  +  (P')-[S'-f5]  +  (S'-f-0.['S"  +  ^]  +  (5f-.).[S'-l-4 [9982n
Now  we have, by  separating [tS'  +  s] into  its parts [»S"]4-[5]> and  using S^,  T^,
(9982.<?,  e],

(P).[^'4-^]=-(^).m4-(^)-M=^'S;+(P).[&],  [9982m]

(P') .  [S'-i-s]  =  (P')  .  [S']  +  (P') .  [.]  =  T,+  {P') .  [.].  [9982n]

The  expression  (*S''-f-«)'[*S"+5]  [9981y,  9982/],  may  be  computed  in  the  same  manner  as
we  have  ascertained  the  value  of  S  in  [9979o — x],  and  we  shall  obtain  a  similar  result  to  that
in  [9979a;],  namely,

(6^'4-0.[>S"+5]  =  0;  ^-99820]

substituting  this,  and  the  values  [9982m,  n],  in  [9982Z],  we  get

The  action  (S—s)  upon  [p],  being  equal  and  contrary  to  that  of  (jp)  upon  [*S^ — 5],  gives

0==;(S—s).[p]-{.(p).[S-.r.s]',  [9982g]

subtracting  this  from  the  last  term  of  the  equation  [9982p],  we  get

(S-s).  [S'+s]=.{S-s),[S'-{^s-p]^{p).[S-s-]=={S-s).[S'+s-p-]-{p) .  [.S^+(i>).  [5] [9982r  ]
^(^S-s).[S'+s-p]-RMv)'b] [9982^];  [9982,]

substituting  this  in  [9982p],  and  putting

(P  +  P').[«]-^(P).[^]  =  Q, [9982/],
VOL.  IV.  217

866 THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION. [Mec.  Cel.

rOQfln r/ ^1  [~This  equation  i»  correct  whether  we  consider"!

L«7y01j y  sr::z  ilo ,  Ct  I the  fluid  as  homogenoous,  or  variable  in  den- |

•* ■*  Lsity  near  its  surface. J

we  get
[9982^3  F=^^g.Jc^+S,+  T-R,+  q,-{-{S-s).[S'  +  s-p].

Now the horizontal action of  the mass (S — 5) upon the plane [»S^'  +  « — p], or  of
[9982tt] (^AQFQ^) upon  [B'HFQ^],  vanishes,  as  is  evident  from  the  consideration  that  the  distance

to  which  the  corpuscular  action  extends  is  insensible,  and  that  the  density  of  the  fluid  is
[9982i;] equal  at  an  insensible  distance  above  and  below  -FQ,  in  any  vertical  column ;  so  that  the

action  of  the  mass  is  in  a  vertical  direction,  and  the  horizontal  action  vanishes,  as  we  may

easily  perceive  by  proceeding  in  the  same  manner  as  in  [9976y,  z,  he] ;  hence  we  shall  have

very  nearly
[9982t;']  (iS— 5).[^'+5— jp]=±0;

consequently  the  expression  [9982^]  becomes
[9982i.]  F=hg.Jc^-{-S,+  T-R,+  q,,

[9982ar] which  may  be  much  simplified  by  computing  the  values  of  *S),  T^,  i2^,  Q,,  by  means  of  the
formulas  [9976/:,  I,  m].

In  computing  the  value  of  Q^,  or  the  action  of  {M'O'HQ^D)  upon  BFQ,  [9982/],  we
^■' have,  by referring the angles to the horizontal  axis Q^^FE^, and using the symbols
[9976A,i],
[9982z3 a'=JE,FQ  =  — 90% h'  =  EFH=90\ a=Q,FQ,=0, h=q,FB=90'—^;

substituting  these  in  [9976Z£r],  we  get
[9983a3  A=—45\ J?=90<i— ^w, A'=^  —  ^-a, B'=45^-;

and,  with  these  values,  the  expression  of  Z  [9976/] gives the  value of  Q,  under the
following  form ;
[99836  ]  Q=  gr .  cos.xjj .  ^cot.|w-j-  tang.^w| .

This  may  be  reduced,  by  observing  that  the  sum  of  the  two  formulas  [41',  42'],  Int.,  gives

2

[9983c  ]  cot.iijj  4-  tang.^tjj = - —  :

hence  [99836]  becomes

2

[9983rf]  (^^  =  5'.cos.cS.-r-^  =  25'.cot,'jrf.

To  determine R^,  or the action of  {HFF') upon Q,FB [9982o-], we  have, as in
[9916h—Jc],

[9983c] a'  =  i:,Fii^  =  «, b'==E,FiI=90% a=QFQ^=— 90", b  =  2?FQ,=90''— «,
[9983/]  A  =  —  {A5'—izs), B  =  90'—^% ^'  =  45% J5'=0;

substituting  these  in  [9976Z],  we  get  the  value  of  R^,  namely,
[9983g']  /?^=j.{tang.(45''-  —  jTO)+cos.-5J.(cot.|w  —  1)}.

X.Suppl.2.]  PRESSURES  ON  TWO  VERTICAL  PLANES.  867

From this it follows, that, in all prismatic tubes which have the [9982]

In  finding  the  value  of  *S;,  or  the  action  of  {MOFqB)  upon  FF'B'B  [99d2d],  we
have,  as  in  [991 6h — 7c],

a!  =  E^Fq=  — 90"',  h' =  E^FO=:— 90"-^  is,  [998'3h]

a=:BFq^=90''—vi,  b=Q,FjP'=180'^— d,  [9983h]

A  =  —^m,  j?  =  45''-,  A'  =  Ab''—\zi,  jB'  =  0.  [9983i]

Substituting  these  in  [9976jn],  we  get  the  corresponding  value  of  »S',  under  the  form

S^=q.\  tang.  J«  -f  tang.(45''-  —  ^w)  —  cos.-5j| .  [9983J]

Substituting  the  values  of  Q,,  R„  S,  [9983<i,  g,  Z;],  in  the  first  member  of  [9983Z],  and
making  successive  reductions,  using  also  [9983c]  with  [41],  Int.,  we  get

Q—R4-S  =  Q  J  +  2cot.7;r— tang.(45'>-  — J«)— cos.7tf.(cot.^w— l)i

^' ' ' ^7+tang.^Tis4.tang.(45"— ira)  — C0S.-5J  J  *• ^

=  g'.{2cot.-zrf — cos.irf.cot.Jtrf4"  tang.^trf}

=  a .  <  cos.-nr . ^ cot.+  'ci +tang.4trf>

=  q.\  COS.-!* .  tang.  J«  -\-  tang.  Jts  |  =  g'  •  tang.^trf .  1 1  +  cos.-bj  }

=  ^.sin.'!rf.  [9983m]

The  direct  action  of  P'  upon  S'  being  represented  by  q^  [99789^],  its  horizontal  action  may-
be obtained  in  like  manner  as  in  [9978r],  and  will  be  represented,  as  in  [9982e],  by

T,  =  y^.sin.«.  [9983n]

Adding  this  to  the  expression  [9983m],  and  using  the  value  of  H  [9978«],  we  get

q^  —  R^J^S^+T,^{q-\-q),sm.'Gi  =  ^Yi..sm.T!S',  [99830]

substituting  this  in  [99S2tf'],  we  finally  obtain

F=J^.A:2  +  ^H.sin.^.  [9983p]

If  we  use  the  value  of Yi=g.o?  [9323^],  this  expression  of  F  will  become  [9983g]

F=^g.'k^  +  ^g.o?.s\nM,  [9983r]

which  represents  the  horizontal  action  of  the  whole  mass  {M)  of  the  fluid  upon  that  in  the
plane  F'B'AQ^,  which  is  equal  to  the  pressure  of  the  internal  fluid  upon  the  inner  side  of [9983*]
the  plane  AB', In  like  manner  we  may  represent  the  action  of  the  external  fluid  upon  the
opposite  side  of  the  same  plane  by

^g.-k^^-i-ig.a^.sm.vi,,  '  [9983f]

Jc  and  ^i being;,  for  the  external  fluid,  the  quantities  corresponding  respectively  to  Zc,  zi,  for

the  internal  fluid. The  difference  of  the  two  expressions  [9983r,  ^J  represents  the  difterence

of  the  pressures  on the opposite  sides  of  the  solid plane  AB',  which  will  therefore be [9983i;]

represented,  as  in  [95805-],  by

i o- .  (^2 1c^)-\-ig'a^'  (sin.*  —  sin .-cf^)  =  [difference  of  the  pressures  on  opposite  sides  of  a  plane  AB'] , [9983u>]

868  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

[9982'] same internal base, the hollow cylinder is that in which the mms

[9983tc^  instead  of  being  equal  to  ig'^k:^  —  JcJ^),  as  is  supposed  by  La  Place  in  [9580,  9580c,  &;c.];
so  that  the  correction  of  his  computed  value  is

rOQSQvl  Xrr /v2 /cin  .TY cin  -rt  \  rCorrection  of  La  Place's  Computation  of  the  differenceT

LyyCiXj  ^g.a .(Sm.-a Sin.«J.  |_  of  pressures  on  opposite  siUos  of  a  plane.  J

[9983t/]  The  extreme  value  of  z  is  put  equal  to  q  in  [9416r],  and  this  is  changed  into  7c  in  [9580i] ;

[99832]  now  if  we  make  the  same  change  of  q  into  A:,  in  the  formula  [9416s],  we  shall  get  the

[9984a]  following  expression  of  Z:^ ;

[99846 ]  7c^==:h^-\-a^.{l  —  sin.ro) ;

where  Ic^GN,  fig.  127,  page  772,  h  =  PO,  and  w  is  equal  to  the  angle  formed  at  N  by
[9984c]  the  curve  NO,  and  the  vertical  line  NG.  In  like  manner,  by  putting  a  mark  below  the
letters  h,  Jc,  zi,  to  obtain  the  similar  quantities  for  the  external  curve  ZZ'V,  we  have  ^^  =  0,
Jc^=GZ,  and  w^  equal  to  the  angle  formed  at  Z  by  the  curve  ZZ'  and  the  vertical  line
ZG ;  and  in  this  case  the  equation  corresponding  to  [99846]  becomes

[9984rf]  A;^2  =  a2.(l  — sin.-cij.

Subtracting  [9984d]  from  [99846],  we  get

[9984e ]  F  —  k,^  =  h^  —  a^ .  (sin.-zrf  —  sln.^tf^) ;

and  by  substituting  this  in  the  expression  [9983t«],  and  neglecting  the  quantities  which  destroy
each  other,  it  is  reduced  to  the  following  simple  form ;

[9984/1  ^g.h^=the  difference  of  pressures  on  opposite  sides  of  a  solid  plane  AB'',

roQR4  1  ^^^^^^  ^  represents  the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  between  the
planes  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  into  which  the  planes  are  dipped.

When  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  infinite,  this  elevation  A  will  vanish,  and  then  the  difference

[9984^]  of  pressures  on  opposite  sides  of  the  plane  AB'  [9984/]  will  become  equal  to  nothing,
whatever  difference  there  may  be  in  the  values  of  the  angles  -cj,  zi^.  This  will  not,
however,  be  the  case  if  we  suppose  the  difference  of  the  pressures  to  be  the  same  as
La  Place  estimated  it. For  if  we  put  A=0  in  [9984e],  we  shall  get

[9984i  ]  y^  —  Icf  =  (J? .  (sin.-cy,  —  sin  .ts) ;

and  by  substituting  this  value  of  W'  —  "kf  in  La  Place's  estimate  of  the  difference  of  the
pressures \g'{k^  —  kf) [9983m''],  it  becomes

[9984A:]  ^^.a2.(sin.OT^~-sin.w),

which  does  not  vanish  except  •cJ^  =  t3'.  This  circumstance  was  brought  forward  by
Dr.  Young,  as  an  important  and  almost  fatal  objection  to  the  theory  of  La  Place ;  because

[9984Z  ]  this  difference  in  the  pressures  would  produce  a  perpetual  horizontal  motion  in  a  broad
parallelopipedon  floating  on  the  surface  of  a  fluid  of  infinite  extent,  supposing  the  opposite

r9984  1  P^*"^^^^^  surfaces  of  the  floating  plane  to  be  more  or  less  moistened,  or  to  be  of  different
substances,  so  that  the  angles  ot,,  trf,  corresponding  to  these  opposite  surfaces,  may  differ  from
each  other. This  objection  fails  when  we  apply  the  correction  [9983a;],  because  we  have

X.  Suppl.2.] ELEVATION  OF  A  FLUID  IN  A  PRISMATIC  TUBE.  869

of elevated fluid is the least possible j since it has the least [9982"]
circumference*

seen  in  [9984/],  that  the  corrected  differences  of  the  pressures  on  the  opposite  sides  of  the [9984n]
floating  soHd  vanish  when  A  =  0,  whatever  be  the  values  of  the  angles  •cr,  trf^.

After tliis  long  digression  on the  subject  of the capillary  action,  we  shall  resume  the
general  commentary,  by  the  insertion  of  the  following  note,  which  is  referred  to  in  [9978,  he.].

[9985a]

4293.  The  radius  of  the  base  of  the  cylinder  of  the  fluid  being  I  [9977'],  its  circumference
will  be  c  =  2-rl  [9978'],  and  the  area  of  the  base  irl^. Multiplying  this  by  the  height  of  the
cylinder  q,  we  get  its  volume  J^=7r]^q  [9924,  9978]. Substituting  these  values  of  c,V,
in  [9930],  we  get  gD.ifPq=(2f,—  p').2'!fl; then,  dividing  by  2^Z,  we  get  [9980],  which [99855]
is  correct  even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid;  observing,
however,  to  change  the  values  of  p,  p',  into  P/,p',,  respectively,  as  in  [9920p — r]. Again,
substituting  the  value  of  2p  —  p'  [9980]  in  [9930],  we  get gDV=igD.lqc; dividing  this
by  gD,  we  obtain V^=^lqc [9981],  corresponding  to  prisms  whose  bases  are  of  any  form; '■ ^
so  that,  if  we  determine  the  values  of  /,  q,  corresponding to a  cylindrical tube,  we may
ascertain  the  volume  V  of  the  elevated  fluid  in  a  prism  of  the  same  matter  and  of  any  form,
by  multiplying  the  given  factor  ^Jq  by  the  circumference  c  of  the  proposed  prism ;  or,  in [9985(/]
other  words,  the  elevated  mass  gDV is  proportional  to  the  circumference  of  the  base  c. We [9985c]
may  remark,  as  in  [9846a],  that  these  prisms  ought  not  to  have  any  abrupt  angular  corners,
which might produce  some irregularity in the  attraction. We  may  also  deduce  [9981]
directly  from  [9898],  by  substituting  in  this  last  expression,  divided  by  V,  c  =  2irl, V:=itl^q [9985/]

[9985a],  corresponding  to  a  cylindrical  tube,  which  gives  generally gD=—^ — — , and  by [9985g-]

Iq

substituting  this  value  of  s:D  in  [9898],  and  then  multiplying  by -—^ — , we get for  a

*=  6  L  j»  fji:>j H.COS.ZS  °  [9985/i]

prism  of  any  form V=zilq.c, as  in  [9981]. This,  being  deduced  from  [9898],  which  is rggg^^.,

correct  when  the  density  near  the  surfaces  is  variable,  must  also  be  true  when  the  fluid  is

variable  near  its  surface  and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube.

*  (4294) The  elevated  mass  of  the  fluid  is  proportional  to  the  circumference  of  the  base
c  [9985e],  and  if  the  area  of  the  base  be  a  given  quantity,  it  will  follow  that  the  elevated [9986a]
mass  is  the  least  when  this  circumference  is  a  minimum,  and  this  corresponds  to  a  circular
base,  or  to  a  hollow  cylinder,  as  in  [9982'] ;  it  being  a  well  known  theorem,  that  a  circle
encloses  a  greater  area  than  any  other  figure  of  equal  circumference. This  theorem  may  be
demonstrated  by  the  method  in  [36A;],  observing  that,  i(  x,  y,  be  the  rectangular  coordinates  of
a  plane  curve,  whose  arc  is  s,  we  shall  have ds  =  \/dx'^-\-dy^  > ^°^  ^^^  differential  of  the [9986d]
arc,  and  ydx  for  the  difl'erential  of  the  area; therefore  the  whole  circumference  c  of  the
curve  will  be  represented  by  fds  =  c, and  its  whole  area  by  fydx. The  variation  of  the [9986c]
first  of  these  expressions  is  evidently S.fds^O, and  that  of  the  second,  when  a  maximum, [9986/]

VOL.  IV.  218

[99866]
[9986c]

870  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9983]

If  h  be  the  base  of  a  prismatic  tube^  and  h  the  mean  height  of  all  the  parts
of  the  fluid  included  within  it  above  the  level  surface,  we  shall  have  V=  hb  ;*
therefore

[9984]

J  lOC  r~Thig  is  correct  even  when  the~l

it  =^  -—z  m  I density  is  supposed  to  be  vari- I

26  Lable  near  tlie  surfaces.  J

[9985] We  may  here  observe  that,  when  the  fluid  is  depressed  instead  of  being  elevated,
of  fl^tds" q,  V,  and h,  will be negative  ;t [which is  also  correct  when the fluid is

inprismat-  ^  ^  ^

ic tubes, considered  as  variable  at  an  insensible  distance  from  the  surface].

The  preceding  formulas  will  generally  hold  good  even  when  the  curvature  of

[99B6]  the  circumference  of  the  interior  part  of  the  base  is  discontinuous;  as,  for  example,
in  the  case  where  this  circumference  is  a  rectilinear  polygon.  For  there  could
be  no  error  except  near  the  angles  of  these  polygons,  and  within  the  limit  of  the
sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  particles  of  the  tube;  but,  this  extent  being
supposed  to  be  imperceptible,  the  whole  error  must  be  entirely  insensible. t  We
may  therefore  apply  these  formulas  to  bases  of  any  figure  whatever.

[9986/"'] is S.fydx  =  0, as  in  [36^] ;  and  by  supposing d6x  =  0, as  in  [36g-],  it  gives f5y.dx  =  0.

Multiplying  this  last  variation  by  the  indeterminate  constant  quantity  a,  and  adding  it  to  the

[9986g-] first,  we  get,  in  the  case  of  a  maximum, S.fds -\-a.f6y.dx  =  0. Now  as  we  have dSx  =  0,

[9986^] we shall get 8 .fds  =  5 .f^dx^ -f  dy^  =y  ,^ —^ ; so that if we put, for brevity,
[9986t] p= /j-g, /  i  =  j^? ^e shall have S.fds=fp.d5y. Integrating this by parts,

we  get  8.fds=p5y — f5y.dp,  as  in  [36A] ;  hence  the  equation  [9986^]  becomes
[9986A:] p6y -\-f6y  .[adx  —  dp)  =  0. The  part  j?5y  without  the sign/,  may  be  neglected,  because

the  beginning  and  end  of  the  re-entering  curve  which  encloses  this  base,  is  at  the  same  point,
[9986i  ] which  may  be  considered  as  a  given  point,  and  then  we  shall  have  f8y.(adx —  dp)=0,  which

must  hold  good  whatever  be  the  value  of  6y;  therefore  we  must  have  adx  —  dp=:0  for
[9986m] the  equation  of  the  required  curve. Its  integral  is  ax — Jo  =  ^, J  being  a  constant  quantity  ;

[9986n] and  by  substituting  p  [9986i],  we  get ax  —  j-=^i or ^ =  -•/> which  is,  as  in

[49, &;c.] Int., the equation of a circular arc, whose radius is -, sine=y,

[99860 ]  J  "

and cosine  =  a; .  ,

a

*  (4295) The  area  of  the  base  being  6,  and  the  height  h,  the  volume  V  must  evidently
[9987a] be V=hb, as  in  [9983] ; substituting this  in [9931],  and  then  dividing  by  b,  we  get
[9984].

[9988a] t  (4296) This  is  evident  by  reasoning  as  in  [9369,  Sic— 9379].

:|: (4297) The circumstance of  the irregular  variations in the density near  these

X.  Suppl.2.]  ACTION  IN  PRISMATIC  TUBES.  871

When  the  bases  are  similar,  they  are proportional  to  the  squares  of  their
homologous  sides;  and  as  their  circumferences  c  are  proportional  to  their  sides, ^^^'^^
the  mean  heights h  ivill  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  homologous  sides*

If  the  circumferences  of  the  bases  are  polygons  circumscribing  a  circle,  they
will  be  equal  to  the  product  of  the  circumference,  by  half  the  radius  of  the [9988]
inscribed  circle ;  therefore  the  heights  will  be  inversely  as  the  radius ;  and  by
putting  the  radius  equal  to  r,  we  shall  have  f

7  l(j[  r"This  is  true  even  when  the  den-"~I

.  .  ll  ^=  —  J  I sity  of  the  fluid  is  considered  as I  [99891

7*  L- variable  near  its  surface.  J  ^  ^

whence  it  follows  that,  in  all  right  prismatic  tubes  whose  bases  are  polygons
circumscribed  about  the  same  circle,  the  fluid  will  rise  to  the  same  mean  height.

Supposing  two  bases  to  be  equal,  but  that  one  of  them  is  a  square,  and  the  other [9991]

3

an  equilateral  triangle,  the  values  of  h  will  be  to  each  other  as  2  to  3^,  or  very [9992]
nearly  as  7  to  8.  J

Gellert  has  made  some  experiments  upon  the  elevation  of  water  in  glass
tubes,  of  prismatic  forms,  with  rectangular  or  triangular  bases  (Commentarii
Acad.  Petrop.  Tom.  xii.). They  confirm the law  that  the  elevations are

angular  points  is  not  here  expressly  noticed  by  the  author;  but  it  is  probable  that
this  would  not  produce  any  sensible  effect,  except  the  angular  points  were  quite  abrupt
and  very  near  to  each  other.

[99886]

*  (4298) If  we  put  s  for  one  of  these  homologous  sides,  we  shall  have  cccs, bccs^;

c 1  ,1 [9989a]

hence ^oc-;  and  as  Iq  is  a  given  quantity  [9985<Z],  we  shall  have,  from  [9984],  hcc-.

t  (4299) In.  the  case  here  treated  of,  we  have 2J=rc; substituting  this  in  [9984],

we  gel  the  same  value  of  h  as  in  [9989]. All  the  quantities  /,  q,  r  [9977',  9988],  are [9990a]

constant  in  the  hypothesis  mentioned  in  [9990] ;  therefore  h  must  also  be  of  the  same  value
for  all  the  polygons.

J  (4300) The  area  of  a  square  whose  side  is  x,  is  x%  and  its  circumference  4x. An [9991a]
equilateral  triangle  whose  side  is  y,  will  have  for  the  perpendicular  let  fall  from  the  vertex  to
the  base,  yv/| ;  therefore  the  area  will  be ^yXy^h or iy^^s. If  we  suppose  this  to  be [99915]

equal  to  the  area  of  the  square  a;2  [9991a],  we  shall  have x^  =  iy^.\/3, or y  =  2aj.3  *, [9991c]

and the circumference of the triangle 3y becomes 3y=2a?.3*. Therefore the

3  3

circumference  of  the  square  4x  is  to  that  of  the  triangle  as  4a?  to  2a:. 3^,  or  as  2  to  3^,  as [999i(fj

in  [9992] ;  and  as  the  bases  are  equal,  this  will  represent  the  ratio  of  the  values  of  h.

872  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

r9993l  iii^^^sely  proportional  to  the  homologous  sides  of  the  similar  bases.  He  also
concluded  from  these  experiments,  that,  in  rectangular  and  triangular  prisms
whose  bases  are  equal,  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  are  the  same.  But  he  admits
that  he  is  not  so  sure  of  this  last  law,  as  he  is  of  that  of  the  heights  being  inversely
proportional  to  the  homologous  lines  of  the  similar  bases.  In  fact,  we  see  that
there  is  a  difference  of  an  eighth  part  between  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  in  a

[9D94]  rectangular  and  a  triangular  prism,  whose  bases  are  equal,  the  one  being  a  square,
the  other  an  equilateral  triangle.  The  experiments  given  by  Gellert  do  not
furnish  sufficient  data  for  an  accurate  comparison  of  the  results  with  the
preceding  formulas.

If  the  base  of  the  prism  be  a  rectangular  parallelogram,  whose  greatest  side

[9995] is «, and  least  side  /,  we  shall  have 6  =  a/,  c  =  2a-{-2l;  therefore  *

,  ( '2a  4- 21)  .  In  /^ . A  pThis  U  accurate  even  when-l

rQOQfil  h  ^  I  / J  / 1  J_ \ /Y  I we  suppose  the  density  to I

L^"^^"]  ''' ^7  V ^ I 7 /  •  7*  I be  variable  near  the  surfaces I

2ai  \  «y  Lof  the  fluid.  J

If  a be very  large in comparison  with  /,  we shall  have h  =  q; now  this
corresponds  very  nearly  with  the  case  of  two  parallel  planes  which  are  distant

[9997]  from  each  other  by  the  quantity  f  l.  Therefore  the  mean  height  of  the  fluid
elevated  between  these  planes,  is  very  nearly  the  same  as  in  a  cylindrical  tube
whose  radius  is  I.  This  agrees  with  the  result  of  the  former  method  in
[9410—9412].

The  height  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  which  rises  in  a
vertical,  cylindrical,  and  very  narrow  tube,  is  not  exactly  in  the  inverse  ratio  of
the  diameter  of  the  tube. If  the  fluid  completely  moisten  the  sides  of  the  tube,

[9999]  ^^  alcohol  and  water  do  glass,  we  must  add  a  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  to  that
height,  to  obtain  a  quantity  which  is  inversely  as  that  diameter. For  if  we  put

[10000]  this  height  equal  to  q,  and  I  for  the  semi-diameter  of  the  tube,  the  volume  of
the  elevated  fluid  which  is  situated  below  the  lowest  point  of  its  surface,  will  be

[10001] 1(1^.  q  [9985a]. To  obtain  the  whole  volume  of  the  column,  we  must  add  to  the

[9996a] *  (4301) Substituting  the  values  of  h,  c  [9995],  in  [9984],  we  get  [9996].

t  (4302)  In  a  cylindric  tube  whose  radius  is  Z,  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  by  the  capillary
[9998a] action  is  supposed  to  be  q  [9977']. In  the  rectangular  prism,  the  sides  of  whose  base  are

a,  I  [9995],  the  mean  height  is  h  [9983] ;  and  when  a  very  much  exceeds  I,  we  shall  have,  from
[9998i  ] [9996],  h  =  q  nearly  ;  now  this  case  corresponds  very  nearly  with  that  of  two  indefinite  parallel

planes  whose  distance  is  Z;  hence  we  find  that  the  mean  ascent  h  of  a  fluid  between  two  parallel
[9998c  ] planes  whose  distance  is  Z,  is  equal  to  the  ascent  5'  in  a  capillary  tube  whose  radius  is  I,

being  the  same  result  as  is  found  in  [9410]  by  the  former  method.

[9998]

[9998']

X.  Suppl.2.]

ACTION  IN  PRISMATIC  TUBES.

873

preceding  quantity  the  meniscus  which  is  cut  off  by  the  horizontal  plane  drawn
through  the  lowest  point  of  the  surface;  now  this  surface  is  very  nearly
hemispherical,  as  in  [9631];  therefore  the  volume  of  the  meniscus  is*  ^-gP;
consequently  the  whole  volume  of  the  column  is  J\(q-{-il),  But  we  have
already  shown  that  this  volume  must  be  proportional  to  the  circumference  24
of  the  base;  therefore  l'(q  +  il)  is  a  constant  quantity  in  the  different
capillary  tubes ;  so  that,  to  obtain  the  quantities  which  are  inversely  proportional
to  the  diameters  of  the  capillary  tubes,  tve  must  add  to  the  height  of  the  lowest
point  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  the  third  part  of  the  radius  of  the  tube,  or  the
sixth  part  of  the  diameter.

Suppose  now  that  we  have  a  curved  glass  tube,  in  which  the  shortest  branch  is
of  a  capillary  form,  but  the  longest  branch  very  large,  and  forming  a  vase  of
great  capacity.  If  we  pour  alcohol  into  the  vase,  the  fluid  will  rise  in  the
capillary  branch  above  its  level  in  the  vase,  and,  by  continuing  to  pour  in  the
alcohol,  it  will  rise  more  and  more  in  the  capillary  branch  ;t  but  in  the  state  of
equilibrium  of  the  fluid,  the  difference  between  its  level  in  the  two  branches  will
be  always  the  same,  until  the  fluid  has  risen  to  the  top  of  the  capillary  branch.
If  we  still  continue  to  pour  more  alcohol  into  the  vase,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in
the  capillary  branch  will  become  less  and  less  concave  [10012o",  &c.],  and  ivhen
the  surface  in  the  vase  is  upon  a  level  ivith  the  top  of  the  capillary  branch,  the
surface  in  that  branch  ivill  become  horizontal  [10012/i].

[10002]
[10003]

[10004]

[10005]

[10006]
[10006']

[10007]

[10002a]

*  (4303) If  we  put  -^  =  0,  in  the  equation  m=6.cos.to  [9336m],  it  becomes  u=b;
hence  the  expression  of  the hemispherical  annulus  [9336o]  becomes  equal  to iitb^; and
by  changing  the  radius  b  [9336Z:]  into  I  [10000],  it  becomes  i'jrP,  as  in  [10002]  j  whence  we
get the  correction  of  q [10003,  &z.c.],  agreeing  with  [9372a;,  &c.]. The  same  result is [100026]
obtained  in  another  way,  in  [10296i].

Vf^.ise.

I  (4304)  We  have  drawn  figure  156  to  represent  this
case,  where  tlie  fluid  is  alcohol,  water,  or  any  other  liquid
which  completely  moistens  the  tube.  Then  the  surface  of
the  capillary  part  DP  is  concave,  and  it  is  elevated  by  the
quantity  CD  above  the  level  ABC  of  the  fluid  in  the
vase  ABE.  This  figure  does  not  require  any  particular
explanation ;  we  may,  however,  observe  that  the  author
supposes,  in  [10006],  that  the  capillary  part  of  the  tube  FG
has  the  same  diameter  throughout  that  part  of  it  where  the
fluid  rises  as  it  is  poured  into  the  vase.  In  the  case  of  mercury,  the  surface  DF  Is  convex,
and  it  falls  below  the  level  AB.

VOL.  IV.  219

[10005a]

[100056]

[10005c ]

[10005rf]

874

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10008]

[10009]

[10010]

riooii]

Inaccurate
remarks  of
the  author
relative  to

[10012]

a  fluid  at  the
top  of  a
tube.

We  have  observed,  in  [9630 — 9631],  that,  if  the  action  of  the  glass  upon  a
fluid  exceeds  that  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  a  stratum  of  the  fluid  will
adhere  to  the  sides  of  the  glass,  and  thus  form  with  those  sides  another  body,
whose  action  upon  the  fluid  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own
particles ;  we  may  therefore,  as  it  regards  those  fluids  which  exactly  moisten  the
glass,  suppose  the  action  of  the  glass  upon  the  fluid  to  be  equal  to  the  action  of
the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles.  Thus,  in  the  preceding  case  [10007],  the
alcohol  is  in  the  same  state  as  it  would  be  in,  upon  the  supposition  that  an
indefinite  mass  of  this  fluid,  in  equilibrium  in  a  vessel,  were  in  part  congealed,
so  as  to  form  a  capillary  tube,  having  a  communication  with  the  other  part,
which  still  remains  in  its  fluid  state.  It  is  evident  that  this  supposition  does  not
aflect  the  equilibrium ;  and  therefore  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  capillary  tube
will  remain  horizontal,  as  it  was  before.  It  is  not,  therefore,  accurate  to  say,
generally,  that  the  surface  of  a  fluid  cuts  always  under  the  same  angle  the  sides
of  the  vessel  which  contains  it ;  this  is  not  true  when  the  fluid  has  risen  to  the
extremities  of  these  sides ;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  action  of  the  sides  of  the
tube  upon  the  fluid  is  not  then  the  same.*

[10012a]

[100126 ]

[10012c  ]

[10012(f]

[10012e ]
[10012c']

*  (4305)  The  remarks  of  La  Place  relative  to  the  action  of  a  tube  upon  a  fluid  at  its
upper  extremity  require  some  modification,  as  has  been  well  observed  by  M.  Poisson,  in  his
NouvelleTheorie,  &fc.,  and  we  shall  here  give  the  substance  of  his  method  of  considering  the
action  at  these  points.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  suppose  the  tube,  fig.  157,  to  be  of  a
cylindrical  form,  and  generated  by  the  revolution  of  the  figure
D'DPLL'P'  about  the  axis  FCH,  so  that  a  section  of  the
tube,  by  a  plane  passing  through  the  axis  FCH,  may  form
the  two  equal  and  similar  figures  D'DPLL'P',  d'dpU'p',
composed  of  the  lines  LL',  DD',  dd',  W,  parallel  to  CH,
and  of  the  regular  curves  LPD,  L'P'D',  Ipd,  I'p'd'.
Moreover  OCA  is  a  section  of  the  concave  surface  of  the
fluid,  whose  lowest  point  C  is  elevated,  by  the  quantity  CH,
above  the  level  GHg  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase.  The  line
Of  is  the  tangent  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  at  the  point  O,
this  point  being  just  beyond  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  tube
upon  the  fluid ;  OjV  is  perpendicular  to  Of,  and  is  drawn
outside  of  the  fluid  ;  O^  is  perpendicular  to  the  inner  line  or  surface  OD'  of  the  tube,  and
is  drawn  in  an  outward  direction,  or  towards  the  external  surface  of  the  tube.  Then,
according  to  the  notation  in  [9892],  we  have  the  angle  D'0/==w;  and  as  N0f=90^-j
we  get  Z) OiV=  90"— irf,  KON=180'^-  —  vi  =  DOf;  so  that  if,  for  brevity,  we  put
^=180'*-  —  w,  we  shall  have  the  angle  KON=zs^=:l80'^-  —  -a;  and  this  angle  is  constant
for  tubes  of  the  same  matter,  acting  upon  the  same  fluid,  as  is  observed  in  [9894, 9980o — q] ;

X.  Suppl.  2.]

ACTION  IN  PRISMATIC  TUBES.

875

If  we  continue  still  to  pour  water  into  the  before-mentioned  tube,  this  fluid  will
form,  at  the  extremity  of  the  capillary  branch,  an  external  drop,  which  will  become
more  and  more  convex,  until  it  is  hemispherical  [10012/]. At  this  limit,  the

and  we  may  here  incidentally  remark,  that  this  angle  «,  is  denoted  by  M.  Poisson  by  w,  in
the  work  above  mentioned.  Now  if  we  continue  to  immerse  the  tube,  more  and  more,  in
the  fluid,  the  point  O  will  approach  towards  D;  and  until  it  has  attained  the  point  D,  the
figure  of  the  surface  OCA  of  the  fluid  will  not  change,  nor  the  length  of  the  ordinate  CH
vary.  After  passing  the  point  D,  the  normal  OK  will  cease  to  be  horizontal,  and  will
become  inclined  to  the  horizon  by  an  angle  i  [9359e].  Then  the  concavity  of  the  surface
OCA  will  decrease,  as  the  angle  i  increases,  and  the  point  O  ascends  towards  the  summit
P  of  the  tube,  or  to  the  point  where  the  tangent  to  the  surface  DPL  becomes  horizontal.
If  the  fluid  be  water  or  alcohol,  and  the  tube  of  glass,  we  shall  have  ttf=0  [9359it],  or
w^=lSO''-  [100I2e'j  ;  and  then  the  line  ON  will  be  on  the  continuation  of  the  line  KO.
In  this  case,  when  the  point  O  has  ascended  to  the  summit  P  of  the  tube,  the  angle  i  will
become  equal  to  90''-,  the  line  KON  will  be  vertical,  and  the  surface  OCA  will  become
horizontal  [9359o] ;  as  the  point  O  proceeds  from  P  towards  L,  and  the  angle  i  still  increases,
the  surface  of  the  fluid  will  become  convex,  and  finally  hemispherical  at  L  [9359g'] ;  and  if
we  still  continue  to  imn)erse  the  tube  into  the  vase,  the  fluid  will  run  over  at  the  top  of  the
lube.  What  we  have  here  stated  as  occurring  when  the  top  of  the  tube  DPL  is  a
regular  curve,  must  take  place,  though  in  a  somewhat  irregular  manner,  when  the  top  of  the
tube  is  terminated  by  the  horizontal  line  DL,  having  a  sharp  angular  point  at  D.  For,  in
fact,  this  point  is  somewhat  rounded,  and  though  it  may  be  for  a  very  small  extent,  yet  this
small  distance  is  extremely  great  in  comparison  with  the  radius  of  activity  of  the  corpuscular
attraction,  which  is  wholly  insensible ;  so  that  even  this  small  curvature  is  quite  sufficient  to
render  the  preceding  results  applicable  to  the  case  of  a  tube  which  is  terminated  at  the  top
by  the  plane  surface  DL.  For  when  the  point  O  has  arrived  at  the  upper  part  D  of  the
cylindrical  surface  of  the  tube,  the  line  KON  will  turn  about  the  corner  at  D;  the  normal
OK  to  the  surface  of  the  tube  will  pass  gradually  from  a  horizontal  to  a  vertical  direction,
while  the  angle  KON  remains  invariable.  During  this  change,  the  point  O  will  move  very
little,  but  the  point  C  will  alter  considerably  ;  and  the  elevation  Cif  above  the  external  level,
as  well  as  the  form  of  the  surface  OCA,  will  depend,  at  any  moment,  on  the  direction  of  the
line  OK  While  these  variations  are  experienced  in  the  value  of  i,  the  point  O  will  vary
so  little  that  we  cannot  determine  the  value  of  this  angle  at  any  moment  by  actual
measurement,  but  it  may  be  deduced  from  the  formula  [9350].  For  the  extreme  value  of  z,
which  oeeui-s  in  that  formula,  represents  the  difference  in  the  elevations  of  the  points  D,  C,
above  the  horizontal  line,  which  can  be  measured ;  we  can  also  measure  the  radius  of  the  tube  /
from  the  axis  FH  to  the  extreme  point  O  where  the  water  has  arrived.  With  these  values
ofz,Z,  we  can  obtain  from  [9350]  the  corresponding  value  of  d',  and  then  from  [9359^]  we  have
i=:9(f-  —  vs—  6'. If  we  suppose,  as  in  [100I2i],  that  x3;=0,  this  will  become  t  =  90'*-— fl'.

With  these  values  of  6',  I,  we  may  obtain  from  [9351]  the  value  of  ^  j and  finally,  from

[10013]

[10012/]

[10012^]
[10012A]

[lOOlSi  ]
[10012A]
[10012f ]

[10012m]

[10012n]

[10012o ]
[10012p]

[10012g]
[10012r]
[10012* ]

[10012f ]
[10012u]

876

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10014]

[10015]

[10016]

fluid  will  be  as  much  elevated  in  the  vase,  above  the  top  of  the  capillar)'  branch,
as  it  was  depressed  below  its  level  in  that  branch,  before  it  had  arrived  at  the
top.  For  the  pressure  depending  upon  the  convexity  of  the  drop  in  the  first
case,  is  equal  to  the  suction  arising  from  the  concavity  of  the  surface  in  the
second  case.  Lastly,  a  little  more  alcohol  being  added  to  that  in  tlie  vase  will
cause  the  drop  to  disappear,  since,  by  lengthening  it,  it  must  burst  in  those  points
of  the  surface  where  the  radius  of  curvature  increases  by  this  extension.

Similar  results  are  obtained  when  we  hold  a  column  of  alcohol  vertically
suspended  in  a  glass  capillary  tube.  This  fluid  forms,  at  the  lower  end  of  the
tube,  a  drop  which  becomes  more- and  more  convex,  as  the  length  of  the  column  is
increased ;  and  when  the  drop  is  of  a  hemispherical  form,  the  length  of  the  column
is  equal  to  double  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube,  when  its  lower  end  is

[10012«]

[9358  or  9360],  we  can  obtain  ihe  value  of  q,  or  the  elevation  of  the  point  C  of  the  curve
above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  GHg.

The  influence  of  the  angle  i  upon  the  elevation  of  the  centre  of  the  capillary  surface,
furnishes also the explanation of  the  different values of  such  elevations deduced from

[10012u>]  experiments  with  the  same  fluid  and  the  same  vertical  cylindric  tube,  when  it  has  not  been
completely  moistened  by  the  fluid.  For,  whatever  be  the  degree  of  polish  of  the  interior
surface  of  the  tube,  there  will  be  some  sinuosities  whose  elevations  are  always  incomparably
greater  than  the  radius  of  activity  of  the  corpuscular  attraction,  and  whose  normals,  instead  of
being  horizontal,  are  inclined  to  the  horizon  by  an  angle  which  is  denoted  by  i  in  [9359/",  &c.].
Then  the  angle  6',  which  the  tangent  to  the  extreme  side  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  forms
with  the  horizon,  is  represented  by  d'=90'*-  —  -a  —  i  [9359o-],  instead  of  ^'  =  90''-  —  zs,
which  would  be  its  value  if  there  were  no  sinuosities,  or  i=0.  Therefore,  instead  of  putting
6'  equal  to  the  constant  angle 90'''  —  w [9359c],  in  the  expression  of  the  elevation  q  of  the

[100122]  fluid  [9358  or  9360],  we  must  put  6'  equal  to  the  angle  90''-  —  w  —  i,  which  varies  with
the  angle  i;  and  this  variation  produces  a  corresponding  change  in  the  elevation  q  of  the
fluid  in  the  tube,  which,  instead  of  being  represented,  as  in  [9360],  by

[10012r]
[10012t/]

[100122^]
[10013a]

[100136]
[10013c ]

must  be  expressed  by

o  =  — .sm.r  =  — .cos.Trf,
gi  gl

rr

5  =  -  sin.(90''

•  •5J  —  »)==  —  .cos.  fin  4- 1) ;
gl

and  from  this  we  evidently  see  the  great  changes  which  must  arise  in  the  elevation  of  the
fluid  in  consequence  of  the  sinuosities  depending  on  the  angle  *.

The  remarks  we  have  here  made  relative  to  the  curvature  of  a  fluid  at  the  top  of  a  tube,
may  be  applied,  without  any  modification,  to  the  case  treated  of  in  [10017,  &.C.],  where  a
column  of  water  is  suspended  in  a  capillary  tube,  and  the  weight  of  the  column  is  so  great
that  the  water  spreads  over  the  angular  point  D'  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube  D'P'L'.

X.SuppI.2.]  FLUID  SUSPENDED  IN  A  TUBE.  877

dipped  into  a  vessel  filled  with  the  same  fluid* If  we  increase  the  length  of  the [iooi7]

*  (4306) To  obtain the differential equations of  the  upper  ^ JB'iy.J.58.

and  lower  surfaces  of  a  fluid  in  a  capillary  tube,  we  shall  refer
to  the  annexed  figure  158;  supposing  (he  tube  to  be  a  cylinder
R'ABU',  whose  vertical  axis  is  Tc,  sides  AR',  BU',  upper
surface  of  the  fluid  aob^  lower  surface  of  the  fluid  AOB.  Then,
taking  any  point  T  of  the  axis  for  the  origin  of  the  coordinates,  and
drawing  the  horizontal  line  Tt  W  for  the  axis  of  m,  and  the  vertical
line  Tc  for  the  axis  of  2;  also  the  line  tJSn,  parallel  to  the  axis  of
z,  cutting  the  surfaces  in  N,  n,  we  shall  put

TO^h, Oo  =  s, To==h  +  s, Tt  =  u, tn  =  z,
tN=z, mo=.z  —  h  —  s, MO=z  —  A;

R,  R',  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  at  the  point  n;
b  =  b',  the  corresponding  radii  of  curvature  at  the  lowest  point  0

of  the  surface  aob]
R,  R',  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  at  the  point  N;
bi^b',  the  corresponding  radii  of  curvature  at  the  lowest  point  O
of  the  surface  AOB.

Then,  if  we  suppose  a  canal  nso  to  be  drawn,  similar  to  NSO,  in  fig.  116,  page  713,  we
may  find  the  equation  of  the  upper  surface  aob  in  the  same  manner  as  in  [9309,  he],  the
resulting  equation  in  [9315]  being

K ^H.  (-^-\-^/\-\-gXmO=:K ^H.(~-\--j. [upper  concave  surface.]

Substituting  mo=^z—h—s  [XQOlQd'],  g  =  Ha.  [9328],  dividing  by  — iH,  and
reducing,  we  get

vw\

and  if,  for  brevity,  we  put

the  preceding  equation  will  become

l  +  l  =  ^-{''  +  '-<:)'

i+l  =  2<..(.-c).

[10016a]

[100166  ]
[10016c]

[lOOlGd]
[10016^']

[10016e ]
[10016/]

[10016^:]
[10016/1]

[10016i ]

[10016^ ]
[10016Z  ]

[10016Z']
[10016m]
[10016n]

we get

Substituting  the  values  of  -, -  [9326,  9326'],  then  multiplying  by {^+-^J

the  following  differential  equation  of  the  upper  surface  of  the  fluid  aob;  ^

^4-1.^ ^_^_^^  =  2a.(^  — c)/l  +  — Y; [Upper  concave  surface.] [IOOI60  ]
rftt2 ' „  du'\ ^  duy  ^  ^ \  dv^/  L  -■

2

being  the  same  as  in  [9324],  changmg  z  mto s  — c— —  .

In  like  manner  we  may  obtain  the  equation  of  the  convex  surface  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube,
VOL.  IV.  220

878  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10017'] column^  the  drop  will  burst,  and  spread  over  the  lower  base  of  the  tube,  where  it

[10016^]
[10016^]

[lOOlGr  ]

[10016s  I
[10016f  ]

[10016u]

[10016V ]

[10016m>]
[10016m/]

[10016x]

[1001 6r']
[10016y]

which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  represented  by  AOB,  in  figure  158,  considering  the  points
A,  B,  as  the  lowest  parts  of  the  tube,  and  supposing  the  inner  lines  of  the  tube  R'A,  U'B,
to  be  continued  so  as  to  meet  the  line  WTV  in  the  points  ^and  V,  In  this  case,  the  fluid
being  situated  above  the  surface  AOB,  the  corpuscular  action  at  any  point  N  of  the  surface

[93156],  will  change  from K — ^H.i-  +  -  j to K-\-^H.(—  +  —  j ,  as  we  have  seen

in  [9301a,  6]  ;  and  the  corpuscular  action  at O  will  be K-\-^HA--\-r)\. Then,  if  an

infinitely  small  canal  NMO,  similar  to  nsoj  be  drawn,  with  a  vertical  branch  MO,  and  a

horizontal  branch  NM,  the  capillary  action  at  N  will  be K-\-^H.(  —  -\-~j, and this

is  continued  along  the  horizontal  branch  of  the  canal  NM  to  M;  and  in  descending  in  the
branch  MO,  the  pressure  is  increased  at  O  by  the  weight  of  the  column  MO,  which  is
gXMO=g.{z  —  h) [10016J'];  so  that  the  action  at  O  will  be

and  this  must  be  equal  to  the  expression  of  that  action  in  [10016g'] ;  hence  we  have

so  that,  if  we  substitute  g=^Ha,  [10016Z],  and  then  divide  by  ^H,  we  shall  get  the
following  equation  of  the  surface  AOB;

We  may  elimmate  r  +  r;  from  this  equation,  by  observing  that  the  corpuscular  action  at  o,
at  the  summit  of  the  vertical  canal  Oo,  is  K — iH.f— +  T7);  and  by  adding  to  this  the
weight  of  the  column  Oo,  which  is  represented  by  gXOo=*>g.s  [I00l6d],  we  get  the
pressure at O,  equal to K — ^H.(--{--rA-{-g.s. Now  this  must  be equal  to the

corpuscular  action  at  O,  which  is K-{-^H.(--\'r^ [10016^]^  hence  we  have

Rejecting  K  from  both members  of  this equation,  and  then  dividing by  ^H,  or  ig^~^
[10016Z],  we  get

and  by  substituting  [I0016»i],  we  obtain

^+b..=  2a.(c.

■A)>

X.  Suppl.  2.]

FLUID  SUSPENDED  IN  A  TUBE.

879

wUl  form  a  new  drop^  which  will  become  more  and  more  convex,  until  it
forms  a  hemisphere  whose  diameter  is  equal  to  the  exterior  diameter  of  the
tube. Then,  if  the  column  be  in  equilibrium,  its  length  will  be  equal  to  tlie

substituting  lliis  in  [10016m],  it  becomes

R+R'  =  — 2^•(^•

■c)',

and  by  using  the  values  of  -,  — [9326,  9326'],  we  finally  obtain  the  following  differential
equation  of  the  lower  convex  surface  of  the  fluid  AOB;

— -1-1  ^  /i  J_'^^^^  /"  / dz^\l

du^~^u'Tu'\ '^d^y=^~^'^'^-^~^^'\}'^^^)  ' l^"'' """"'^ '"''■"''•]

which  differs  from  the  equation  of  the  upper  surface  aob  [IOOI60],  only  in  the  sign  of  a

so  that  the  integrals  of  the  equations  of  both  these  surfaces  may  be  obtained  by  the  methods

pointed  out  by  the  author  in  [9328—9379],  and  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  further

explanation  of  them. We  may  remark  that  similar  results  are  obtained  when  we  suppose  the

upper  surface  to  be  convex,  or  the  lower  surface  concave.

The  volume  aohVW, included  between  the  upper  surface  aoh  and  the  base WTF,  is

evidently  represented  by '2'jf .fzudu ;  and  tlie  similar  volume  AOBVW,  included  between

the  lower surface  AOB and  the same  base,  is 2'jr.fzudu; the  difference  of  these  two

integrals  is  equal  to  the  volume  V  of  the  fluid  aob  BOA;  hence  we  have

V=  25r  .fzudu  —  2'ff  .fzudu.

The  integrals  of  these  expressions  may  be  obtained  by  approximation,  In  a  series  arranged

according  to  the  powers  of  a,  by  methods  similar  to  those  which  are  used  in  [9328 — 9379],

restricting  the  calculation  to  terms  of  the  first  order  in  a,  in  the  value  of  V. We  have  not

thought  it  expedient  to  insert  these  general  calculations,  which  are  of  no  practical  use  in

comparing  with  experiments  ;  we  shall  therefore  restrict  our  remarks  to  the  notice  of  two  of

the  most  simple  and  remarkable  cases. First,  when  the  elevation  of  water  in  a  tube  Po,  is

exactly  equal  to  that  arising  from  the  capillary  action  of  the  same  tube,  when  well  wet  and

dipped  by  its  lower  end  AB  into  a  vessel  of  water. In  this  case,  it  is  evident  that  the  figure

of  the  lower  surface  AOB  will  coincide  very  nearly  with  that  of  the  plane  APB. If  some

of  the  water  is  taken  from  the  tube,  so  as  to  decrease  the  altitude  Po,  the  point  O  will

ascend  above  P,  and  the  lower  external  surface  will  become  concave. On  the  contrary,  if

more  water  is  inserted  in  the  tube,  so  as  to  increase  the  altitude  Po,  the  lower  surface  will

become  convex;  and  this  convexity  will  increase  by  the  addition  of  more  fluid,  until  the  surface

AOB becomes  nearly  hemispherical,  like the  upper surface aob. If  we  suppose the

upper  and  lower  surfaces  to  be  hemispheres  whose  radius  is  Z,  the  elevation  Po,  produced  by

[10017"]

77

the  capillary  action  at  the  upper  surface,  will  be Q^=~j [9360],  and  the  similar  action  of

It

the  lower  surface  ABO  will  likewise  be 0-  =  —  ; hence  their  combined  action  will  produce

gl

the  double  elevation  2q,  spoken  of  in  [10016,  Sic.].

[10016z ]

[10017a]
[100176]

[10017c ]

[10017rf]
[10017e ]

[10017/]
[10017ff]

[10017AJ

[10017i]
[100174]

880

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Ccl.

sum  of  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  in  two  other  glass  tubes  dipped  into  the  vessel

L10018] hy  their  lower  ends,  their  diameters  being  respectively  equal  to  the  internal  and

external  diameters  of  the  first  tube. Lastly,  if  Hie  column  be  of  a greater

[10017/

[10017m]

[10017n]

[10017o;
[lOOlTp;

[10017^

[10017r
[10017s

[10017f

[10017tt]

[1001 7r
[10017w]

[10017a:
[100171/

[100172

In  like  manner  the  volume  V  of  a  drop  of  the  fluid,  formed  at  tlie  bottom  of  the  tube
-4 J?,  is  represented  by  V  =  tc .Jv?dz^  taken  between  the  limits  z=.TO  and  z=TP.
This  may  likewise  be  reduced  to  a  series  of  terms  in  a,  as  in  [1001 7e,  &.c.].  If  the  figure
AOB  be  a  hemisphere,  we  shall  have  V'=^%'k.P,  which  is  the  value  of  the  actual  volume,
if  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  a;  but  if  we  retain  terms  of  the  order  a,  the  volume  of  the
drop  will  become  ^^^^^^.(l-f-^aZ^),  as  we  may  easily  prove  by  means  of  the  formula
[10017/],  using  values  of  dz,  u,  he,  similar  to  those  in  [9339 — 9350],  and  differing  only
by  writing  — a  for  a;  but  we  have  not  thought  it  worth  the  trouble  to  insert  this  calculation,
as  it  is  of  no  importance,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  mass  of  a  drop  with
any  great  degree  of  accuracy  [lOOlTr].  If  the  density  of  the  drop  be  D,  its  gravity^,  its
mass  m,  supposing  it  to  be  a  hemisphere,  we  shall  have

m  =  ^'!r.gD.P.
According  to  this  theory,  the  mass  of  the  drop  m  must  be  proportional  to  the  density  of  the
fluid ;  but  this  does  not  agree  with  the  observations  of  Gay-Lussac.  For,  by  some
experiments  made  with  the  same  tube,  and  in  similar  circumstances,  he  found  that  100  drops
of  water,  whose  density  was  1,0000,  weighed  8^'*™",9875;  and  100  drops  of  alcohol,  whose
density  was  0,8453,  weighed  only  3'"'°",0375 ;  so  that  the  drop  of  alcohol  was  about  one
third  of  that  of  water,  while  their  densities  differed  only  one  fifth  part.  The  radius  of  the
tube  used  in  these  experiments  was  t==3'"'\09;  hence  V  =  62  cubic  millimetres  nearly
[10017m],  or  F^'  =  0,062  cubic  centimetres.  Multiplying  this  successively  by  the  densities
1,0000,  0,8453,  we  get  for  the  mass  of  the  drop  of  water  m=;0""""-,06,  nearly  ;  and  for  that
of  alcohol,  m  =  0''*'"-505  nearly.  These  differ  very  much  from  the  experiments  [10017r,  s] ;
and  the  differences  will  not  be  avoided  by  introducing  the  lemi  of  the  order  a  [10017n];
for,  though  it  will  decrease  the  error  of  the  mass  of  the  drop  of  water,  it  will  increase  that
of  the  drop  of  alcohol ;  hence  we  see  that  the  uncertainty  of  the  observations  makes  it
unnecessary  to  notice  the  terms  of  the  order  a.  We  may  finally  remark,  that  the  figure  of
the  drop  is  calculated  when  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  but  the  drop  separates  from  the  tube
only  when  the  equilibrium  is  destroyed ;  and  it  is  probable  that  from  this  source  arises  the
great  difference  between  the  calculated  and  observed  mass  in  a  drop.  i.  ,  a

In  the  preceding  calculations,  it  is  supposed  that  the  water  is  poured  into  the  top  of  the  tube ;
but  we  may  suppose  the  tube  to  be  inserted  in  the  bottom  of  a  large  vessel  of  water.  Then
the  fluid  will  not  run  out  from  the  bottom  of  the  tube,  if  the  distance  fi-om  the  level  of  the
fluid  in  the  vessel  to  the  bottom  of  the  tube  be  less  than  the  quantity  q  [I0017i],
corresponding  to  the  elevation  in  a  capillary  tube;  but  a  drop  will  begin  to  form  at  the  bottom
of  the  tube  when  that  distance  exceeds  q;  finally,  when  the  distance  exceeds  2q  [10017Z:],
the  water  may  flow  out  fi-ora  the  tube,  neglecting  in  these  estimates  terms  of  the  order  a,  as
in  [10017OT,  &;c.].  . '  „•  y^,  nirrfofp

X.  Suppl.  2.]

SEVERAL  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

881

length,  part  of  the  fluid  ivill  fall  from  the  tube. All  these  remits  of  the  theory
are  confirmed  hy  experiment.

We  shall  noio  consider  an  indefinite  vase  filled  with  any  number  of  fluids,  placed
horizontally,  the  one  above  the  other.  ''If  we  dip  vertically  into  the  vase  the  lower
end  of  a  right  prismatic  tube,  the  excess  of  the  weight  of  the  fluids  contained  in
the  tube,  above  the  weight  of  the  fluids  ivhich  it  would  have  contained  independent
of  the  capillary  action,  is  the  same  as  the  weight  of  the  fluid  ivhich  ivould  rise
above  the  level,  in  case  there  ivas  in  the  vessel  only  that  fluid  in  which  the  lowest
part  of  the  tube  is  dipped.^''*  In  fact,  the  action  of  the  prism,  and  of  this  fluid,
upon  the  same  fluid  contained  in  the  tube,  is  evidently  the  same  as  in  this  last
case.  The  other  fluids  contained  in  the  prism  being  sensibly  elevated  above  its
lower  base,  the  action  of  the  prism  upon  each  of  them  can  neither  elevate  nor
depress them. As to  the  reciprocal  action  of  these  fluids  upon  each  other,

*  (4307)  For  the  purpose  of  illustration,  we  may  take  the  case  in  which  there  are  only
two  fluids  included  in  the  vertical  cylindrical  tube  RR'U'U,  fig.  158,  page  877,  where  aol  is
the  upper  surface;  AOB,  tlie  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids;  WtTV,  a  horizontal  plane,
drawn  within  the  tube,  and  at  a  sensible  distance  above  its  lower  extremities  R,  U,  and  at  a
finite  distance  below  the  surface  AOB.  To  estimate  the  upward  pressure  upon  any  point
t  of  this  plane,  arising  from  the  action  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  and  in  the  lower  part  of  the
tube  RWVU,  we  shall  suppose  a  slender  filament  or  canal  nNtzrv  to  be  drawn,  having
two  vertical  branches  rv,  zn,  connected  by  the  horizontal  branch  rzy  the  termination  v
being  at  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase.  Then  the  pressure  at  the  bottom  of  the
canal  v?-,  upon  a  unit  of  surface,  will  be  represented,  as  in  [9555],  by  P-{-K-\^gXvr.
This  same  pressure  is  continued  in  the  horizontal  direction  of  the  canal  rz;  and  in  ascending
in  the  vertical  branch  zt,  it  is  decreased  by  taking  away  the  pressure  of  the  fluid  in  that
branch,  corresponding  to  the  ascent;  so  that,  at  the  point  t,  we  have  for  the  expression  of  the
vpward pressure,  the  function  F -\-K-{-g.(vr  —  zt).  Now  this  quantity  remains  the  same
whatever  changes  may  be  mad€  in  the  number  or  nature  of  the  fluids  in  the  tube  above  the
surface  AOB;  always  supposing  the  fluid  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tube  and  in  the  vase  to
remain  unaltered,  as  well  as  its  point  of  level  v.  For,  in  these  changes,  no  alteration  is  made
in  the  process  for  finding  the  expression  of  the  pressure  [10020e],  which  depends  wholly  on
the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  and  on  that  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  below  the  plane
WJ^'^  so  that  its  action  upon  the  fluid  situated  immediately  above  fVV,  and  within  its  sphere
of  action,  must  remain  the  same;  and  the  action  of  the  tube  upon  the  same  part  of  the  fluid
must  also  remain  unaltered.  Hence  it  follows  that,  whatever  be  the  number  of  fluids  in  the
tube,  the  mass  in  the  branch  nt  must  remain  unaltered;  and  as  this  is  true  for  every  canal
passing  through  the  surface  WF^,  the  whole  mass  above  the  plane  fVV  must  remain
invariable,  whatever  changes  may  take  place  in  the  number  of  the  fluids;  therefore  this  mass
must  remain  the  same  as  if  there  were  only  one  fluid  in  the  tube  and  in  the  vase,  as  in  [10024J.

VOL.  IV.  221

[10019]

[10020]

Action  of
several
fluids  in  a
tube  in  the
same  as  if
only  the
lower  fluid
were  con-
tained in  it.

[10021]

[10022]

[10020ffl]
[10020&]

[10020c ]
[10020^/]

[10020e  ]
[10020/]

[10020g-]
[10020A]

[10020i ]

882

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

(Mec.  Cel.

[10023] they  will  evidently  destroy  each  other,  if  they  form  together  a  solid mass,
which  may  be  supposed  without  affecting  the  equilibrium.

Hence  it  follows  that,  if  we  dip  into  a  jluid  the  lower  end  of  a  prismatic  tube,
[10024] and  then  pour  into  the  tube  another  fluid  which  remains  above  the  first*  the  weight

*  (4308) If  the  volume  of  the  upper  fluid  be  given,  as  well  as  the  densities  of  the  two

[10024a] fluids,  we  may  thence  deduce  the  increment  of  the  altitude  of  the  central  point  of  the  upper

surface,  in  consequence  of  the  introduction  of  the  upper  fluid  into  the  tube. For  this  purpose

we  shall  suppose  the  surfaces  of  the  two  fluids  to  be  spherical,  as  in  [10027,  10027ff,  jp',  &c.],

and  we  shall  use  the  following  symbols,  referring  to  fig.  158,  page  877 ;

[100246]  w,  «',  ^,  are  the  same  angles  as  those  which  are  defined  in  [10028 — 10030] ;

[10024c]  7=  the  internal  radius  of  the  tube,  as  in  [10035'j;  its  circumference  being  2^/;

[10024c']  ^  =  rO=the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  O  of  the  lower  spherical surface  AOB

above  the  horizontal  plane TV  TV;
[lOQQid] h-\-£'=To  =  the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  o  of  the  upper  spherical surface  aob

above  the  horizontal  plane ^TF;  hence Oo  =  To  —  TO=s';
[10024e]  Z)  =  the  density  of  the  lower  fluid,  or  the  fluid  in  the  vase;

[10024/]  D'=the  density  of  the  upper  fluid;  and  for  brevity  we  shall  put

[10024^]  f(.)=?2!^?±^^^Ill;  f.(,)^cos.^^+Nn.3.-|.

[10024A.]  -Kps^ihe volume of  the upper  fluid  included  between  the  spherical  surfaces

aob,  AOB,  this  quantity  being  supposed  to  be  given.
Now it is evident that this  volume of  fluid, contained between the spherical surfaces
aob,  AOB,  is  composed  of  the  three  following  parts,  namely,

[10024i  ]  The  cylinder  IkKL  +  the  annulus  Ikhoa  —  the  annulus  LKBOA ;

ri0024A:l and  we  have  the  cylinder  ?fcJCZ#  =  ^Z^£', the  annulas  lkboa  =  vP.F{z3)  [93360,10024^^];

and  in  like  manner,  the  annulus  LKBOA  =  'xP.F{f). Substituting  these  values in the

expression  [10024i],  and  putting  the  resulting  quantity  equal  to irZ^s  [10024A],  we  get
[10024Z]  'KT^s  =  'Klh'^'sl^.F{vi)  —  ^P.F{&).

Dividing  by  the  common  factor  vP,  we  obtain
[10024m]  s  =  £'+Z.F(7;i)  — Z.F(^).

Again,  since  the  volume WAOBV  is  equal  to  the  sum  of the  volumes  of  the  cylinder
[10024n] WLKV,  and  of  the  annulus  LKBOA,  we  shall  have,  by  substituting  the  values  of  these

quantities,  in  symbols,
[100240]  The  volume WA0BF=''rP.h-{-vP.F(6).

Multiplying the  volume  of the  upper  fluid irPs [10024A] by  its  density D', and the
volume  of  the  lower  fluid  [10024o]  by  its  density  D,  then  taking  the  sum  of  the  two  products,
we  obtain  the  expression  of  the  whole  mass  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube,  above  the plane  WTV,
namely,
[•100242,]  ^^^^^  WaobV=D'.-KT^s^D.icP.\h-\-l.F{d)\.

l-:^  ./I .Mil

X.  Supp].2.]

HEIGHT  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

883

of  the  two  fluids  cantained  in  the  tube  will  be  the  same  as  thai  of  the  fluid  which  it
contained  before  [10020e].  It  is  evident,  by  the  first  method,  that  the  surface  of
the  upper  fluid  will  be  the  same  as  in  the  case  where  the  lower  end  of  the
tube  is  dipped  into  that  fluid. At  the  points  of  contact  of  the  two  fluids,  they  will

[10025]

The  value  of  this  mass  must  remain  the  same  as  when  there  is  only  one  fluid  in  the  tube

[10020i];  and  if  we  suppose,  in  this  case,  that  the  elevation  of  the  point  o  above  the  plane

WV  is  H,  and  the  angle  formed  by  the  fluid  at  the  surface  and  near  the  side  of  the  tube  is

«',  as  in  [10029],  the  volume WaobV  will  become  -KT^H-{-ml^.F{'a'), as  is  evident  from [10024?]

[10024o] ;  multiplying  this  by  the  density  D,  we  get  another  expression  of  the  same  mass,

namely,

The  mass  of  the  fluid  WaohV=D.'Kl^.\H-{-LF(vi')].  [10024r  ]

Putting this equal  to  the  expression  [10024jo],  and  then dividing  by  D.'!d%  we  get  by
successive  reductions,  and  using  [10024/w],

H:i-LF{-:,')~.s+h-{-LF{6)

[D-D')

:s'+Z.jP(^)

[D-D')

D

.e  +  Aj

whence  we  obtain

(A+s')-iJ=^-^-^.s-z.iF(^)-FMI;

and  by  putting,  for  brevity,  x  equal  to  the  increment  of  the  elevation  of  the  point  o,  in
consequence  of  pouring  into  the  tube  the  column  of  the  upper  fluid,  whose  volume  is  *Pfe,
and  density  D\  over  the  mass  of  the  lower  fluid,  we  shall  have  x={h-\-s'^ — H,  and
the  expression  [10024mJ  will  give

D

'.s—L\F{zs)  —  F(zs')\.

If  w  =  '5j',  this  value  of  x  will  become

x=

(D-D')

D

.s:

[10024a  ]
[10024f  ]

[10024u]

[10024V  ]
[10024u>]

[10024a:]

and  as  D'^D',  the  expression  of  a?  will  be  positive;  so  that,  in  this  case,  the  elevation  of  the

point  0 of  the upper surface,  will be increased by  pouring  into the  tube  the  upper

fluid,  whose  density  is  D'. If  we  put zs=0,  zi'=60\  we  shall have, from [10024^], [10024y]

F('us)  =.0,Sd3f F{6)  =0,131; substituting these in [10024ti;], we  shall get very

nearly,

{D—D'

D

.e-

•i?.

[100242 ]

The expressions  of  x  [10024w,  z]  agree  with  those  which  are  given by  M.  Poisson,  in
pages 140,  141,  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  changing D  into  p,  D'  into  p',  /  into  a.

884

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[MecCel.

[1002G] hate  a  common  surface;  hut  this  surface  will  he  different  from  that  which  the

two  fluids  would  ham  separately^  and  it  is  interesting  to  determine  tlie  nature  of  it.

For  this  purpose,  we  shall  suppose  the  interior  surface  of  the  prism  to  be  a

right  cylinder,  of  a  very  small  diameter,  and  placed  vertically. In  this  case,  it  is

evident,  by  what  has  been  said  in  the  preceding  theory,  that  the  common  surface

[10027]  of  the  two  fluids,  and  those  which  they  would  separately  have  in  this  tuhe,  will  he
spherical  surfaces  of  different  radii* We  shall  put

[10025o] and  putting cos.'n'=  —  —  , cos.-s

H'

El

to  conform  to  his  notation;  and  if  we  suppose

[100255 ]
[10025c  ]

[10025</]

[10025e  ]
[10025/]

[10025^]

[10027a ]
[100276  ]

[10027c  ]
[10027(1]
[10027e ]

[10027c']

D'=^jjD,  we  shall  have,  from  [10024z],  a;  =  J(j8  —  ^I,  which  may  become  negativei{
£<:^2Z;  and  M.  Poisson  remarks,  that  this  result  may  serve  to  explain  the  phenomenon
observed  by  Dr.  Young,  who  dipped  a  capillary  tube  into  a  vessel  containing  water,  and
suffered  the  fluid  to  ascend  in  it;  he  afterwards  poured  into  the  top  of  the  tube  a  small  drop  of
oil,  and  found  that  the  upper  surface  of  the  oil  finally  settled  at  a  less  elevation  above  the  level
of  the  water  in  the  vessel,  than  that  which  the  water  in  the  tube  had  before  the  addition  of
the  oil.  M.  Poisson  supposes,  in  this  experiment,  that  the  tube  had  not  been  previously
moistened  by  the  vpater  in  its  upper  part;  and  upon  pouring  in  the  oil,  it  became  moistened
by  the  oil,  and  by  this  means  the  upper  angle,  or  that  formed  by  the  lower  side  of  the  tube
and  the  tangent  to  the  surface  of  the  oil,  became  -^  =  0.  On  the  contrary,  as  the  tube  had
not  been  previously  moistened  by  the  water,  he  supposes  that  the  surface  of  this  fluid  was  not
a  tangent  to  the  side  of  the  tube,  so  that  -a'  might  have  a  finite  value;  and  in  this  case,  x  could
become  negative,  as  in  the  experiment  of  Dr.  Young.  M.  Poisson  finally  observes,  that  this
experiment  was  brought  by  Dr.  Young  as  an  objection  to  La  Place's  theory  of  the  capillary
action,  supposing  it  to  be  incompatible  with  this  theory;  instead  of  which  it  serves  to  furnish
an  interesting  verification  of  its  accuracy.

*  (4309)  When  there  is  only  one  fluid  in  a  cylindrical  tube  RR'U'U^  fig.  158,
page  877,  the  surface  will  be  nearly  spherical,  as  is  proved  in  [9336o-,  Sic],  from  the  general
equation  [9342],  or  rather  from  [9334] ;  so  that  the  surface  corresponding  to  the  angles  ts,  to',
in  the  hypothesis  [10027,  &;c.],  must  be  nearly  spherical.  The  same  may  be  proved  relative
to  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  AOB,  fig.  158,  by  pursuing  the  same  method  as  in
[9309 — 9342],  and  using  the  figure  in  like  manner  as  we  have  used  fig.  116,  page  713,  or
fig.  112,  page  695;  that  is,  by  drawing  an  infinitely  slender  and  uniform  canal  nI^tT03Io,
with  the  vertical  branches  tNn,  TO  Mo,  and  the  horizontal  branches  tT,  NM;  the  area  of
a  section  of  this  canal  perpendicular  to  its  length,  being  taken  for  unity.  Then  it  is  evident
that  the  fluid  in  the  canal  nNMo  must  be  in  equilibrium ;  so  that  the  vertical  pressure  of  the
fluid  in  the  branch  niV,  at  the  point  iV,  must  be  the  same  as  at  the  point  M,  in  the  branch
oM,  being  equal  to  that  in  the  horizontal  branch  NM;  and  in  like  manner,  from  the
equilibrium  of  the  fluid  in  the  canal  nl^i  TO  Mo,  the  vertical  pressure  at  t  must  be  the
same  as  at  T.  Hence  it  follows  that  the  part  of  the  pressure  at  the  point  t,  arising  from  the
capillary  action  at  iV,  and  the  weight  of  the  column  Nt,  must  be  equal  to  the  part  of  the

X,  Suppl.2.] COMMON  SURFACE  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.  885

•a  =  the  angle  which  the  surface  of  the  upper  fluid  forms  with  the  lower  [10028]

surface  of  the  tube,  supposing  no  other  fluid  to  be  used ;

to'  =  the  similar  angle  when  the  lower  fluid  only  is  used;  [10029]

6  ==  the  angle  which  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  forms  with  the  [10030]

lower  surface  of  the  tube.

pressure  at  T  arising  from  the  capillary  action  at  O,  and  the  weight  of  the  column  MT;  and
from  this  principle  we  shall  deduce  the  equation  of  the  surface  AOB  in  the  following
manner:

Putting,  as  in  [9310],  R,  R',  for  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  at  the  point [10027/"]
N  of  the  common  surface  ANOB  of  the  two  fluids;  and,  as in  [9316],  b,  h',  for  the
greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  at  the  point  O ;  also

tN=TM  =  z, tn  =  z% MN=Tt  =  Uy TO  =  h,hc.',  [I0027g]

we  shall  have,  as  in  [10032,9275], K'—iH'.(~^^\ for the downward  action of [10027/i]

\R R  J

the  fluid  below  the  surface  AOB,  upon  a  portion  of  the same  fluid  in  the  canal  at  iV;

and  the upper  fluid  will attract  the external lower  fluid at  N  with  the upward force

K,—iH,.(^^^)  [10033,9254].  The  difference  of  these  two  forces  gives  the  whole  [10027f]
downward  force  at  iV" equal  to  K^^ —  ^^'V  »  ^"  »') »  ^  being  the  measure  of  the  capillary  [10027t]
intensity;  and  at  the  point  O,  the  preceding  expression  will  become K^^  —  ^^'\b~^b')' ^^^^^H

Then,  the  density  of  the  lower  fluid  being  represented  by  D,  and  that  of  the  upper  by  D',
we  shall  have  DgXtN=Dgz  for  the  mass  of  the  fluid  in  the  part  tN  of  the  canal
in. Adding  to  this  the  capillary  action  at  iV  [10027A:],  it  becomes

K-iG-{i+^)+J^g^'  [10027m]

Again,  the  mass  of  the  column MO  is  represented  by D'gXMO=D'g.{z—h), and [10027n]
that  of  the  column TO  by  Dgh;  their  sum  being  added  to the  capillary  action  at  O
[10027/],  gives

K^-^.G.(^-  +  l)j  +  D'g.{z-h)  +  Dgh,  [10027O]

for  the  action  in  the  column  MT,  which,  as  in  [10027e'J,  is  to  be  put  equal  to  the  action  in
the  column  tN  [10027m]. Hence  we  have

K^_^G.(^^  +  '-}l  +  Dgz=K,^iG.Q  +  l^  +  D'g.{z-h)  +  Dgh;  [10027o']

and  if  we  put,  for  abridgment,  c  =  iG.(j^  +  l^  —  (D-D').gh, we  shall  get  [10027o"]

^GJ —-{-—,)=■  {D D')  .gZ  -\-  C. [Equation  of  the  common  surface  AOB.'j [10027p  ]

\R R'/

From  this  equation  we  may  deduce  others,  like  those  in  [9318,  9334,  9442,  Sic.];  whence
VOL.  IV.  222

886

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  C6I.

We  may  here  observe,  that  these  angles  are  not  those  which  the  surfaces  form  at
[10030] their  points  of  contact  with  the  tube ;  but  they  are  formed  by  the  planes  which  are
tangents  to  those  surfaces  at  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  tube,
as  we  have  said  several  times. We  shall  suppose  that

[I0027p']

[10027?]
[10027?']

[10027r]

[10027* ]
[10027* ]

[10027u]

[10027u']
[10027D  ]

[10027t>']
[10027u>]

[10027X  ]
[10027yl
[10027Z  ]

we  may  conclude,  as  in  [9336^],  that  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids,  or  that  which
corresponds  to  the  angle  6  [10030],  will  also  be  very  nearly  spherical.

The  whole  mass  of  fluid  contained  in  the  vertical  branch  nNt  is  evidently  represented  by
D'gXnN-{-DgxNt,  or,  in  symbols,  D'g.{z'  —  z)-{-Dgz={D—D').gz-}-D'gz';
and  as  the  ordinates  z,  z',  are  measured  from  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel,
this  mass will  be elevated by means of  the two capillary actions at N, n, namely,

^gY— +--) [10027A:],  and ^II.(--\ — -V f*,  f*', being  the  greatest and the least

radii  of  curvature  at  the  point  n ;  hence  we  have

Subtracting  the  equation  [10027/?]  from  [10027 r],  we  obtain  the  following  equation  of  the
upper  surface ;

A  JEl .  (  -  -j—  ~  )  =^  D  gZ  —  C.  [Upper  concaye  surface.  J

We  have  supposed,  in  this  figure,  that  both  the  surfaces  AOB,  aob,  are  concave;  but  it  is
evident  that,  if  the  upper  surface  be  convex,  we  must  change  the  sign  of  the  term  depending
on  H,  in  [10027g''— 5],  as  is  done  in  [9275,  9276],  and  then  the  equation  of  the  upper
surface  [10027s]  will  become

-—  ^H.  f  -  -| ,  }  =  X/  gZ C.  fUpper  convex  sarrace.J

The  equations  [10027^,  s],  are  of  the  same  forms  as  the  equations  (a),  which  are  given  by
JNL  Poisson,  in  page  136  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  fyc,  for  the  solution  of  this  problem;  the
symbols  D,D\  R,R',  being  changed  respectively  into  p, p',  X,  X',  to  conform  to  his  notation;
and  from  these  equations  he  deduces  results  which  are  similar  to  those  given  by  La  Place  in
this  part  of  the  work.

In  the  preceding  calculations,  the  origin  of  z  is  supposed  to  be  on  a  level  with  the  surface
of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel  [IOO275'].  If  this  origin  be  taken  at  the  distance  n  below  that
level, z  will  be  changed  into  z,  and  z'  into  z'j  and  we  shall  have

z  =  z  —  n,  z'=z' — n;

substituting  these  in  [10027^,^5,  «],  they  become  respectively

iG.(—-{-  —  )  =  (D D')  .gZ (-D D')  .gn  -f-  C,  [Lower  concare  iurfece.]

r  Upper  Btuface,  if  concave.  |
[^ Upper  Burface,  if  convex.  J

X.  Suppl.  2.] COMMON  SURFACE  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

887

jfiT,  Hy  represent,  for  the  upper  fluid,  the  same  quantities  as  in  [9253, 9253']  ;

K\  H\  are  the  similar  quantities  for  the  lower  fluid  ;

Ki,  Hi,  represent  the  values  which  K,  H,  respectively  become,  when,  instead
'of  considering  the  action  of  the  upper  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,
we  consider  the  action  of  the  upper  fluid  upon  the  loiver  fluid.
Moreover,  as  the  action  is  always  equal  and  contrary  to  the  reaction,
Ki  and  H^  will  also  represent  what  K\  H\  become  when  we
consider  the  action  of  the  lower  fluid  upon  the  upper  fluid.  [When
we  take  into  consideration  the  change  of  density  near  the  surfaces
of  the  fluid,  we  must  use  the  values  of  K,  H,  K\  H',  K^,  H^  as
they  are  deduced  from  experiment.]

This  being  premised,  we  shall  suppose  that  an  infinitely  narrow  canal  is  drawn
through  the  axis  of  the  tube,  till  it  gets  below  it,  where  it  is  bent  in  a  horizontal
direction,  and  then  continued  upwards  till  it  meets  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid
in the vessel. The upper fluid contained in this canal, will be drawn

downwards,  near  its  upper  surface,  by  the  force* K r — , I being the

radius  of  the  hollow  part  of  the  tube.

[10031]
[10032]

[10033]

[10034]

[10035]

[lOOSST

*  (4310)  In  the  cylindrical  tube  RR'U'U,  fig.  158,  page  877,  we  shall  suppose  aob
to  be  the  surface  of  the  upper  fluid;  AOB,  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids;  ag,  AG,
tangents  to  these  surfaces,  in  the  points  a,  A ;  these  points  being  just  beyond  the  sphere  of
activity  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid ;  c,  C,  the  centres  of  these  surfaces,  supposing  them  to  be
spherical,  as  in  [10027J;  then  the  angle ^a^  =  the  angle pac  =  -5^; the  angle  RAG  =  &;

ca  =  b; ap  =  l; and ca  =  ^^^^, which  in  symbols  is b  =  ;^^^. We  shall now

compute  according  to  the  method  of  the  author,  the  action  of  both  fluids  upon  the  part  oO
of  the  infinitely  narrow  canal  oOT\  and,  in  the  first  place,  we  have  for  the  action  of  the

upper  fluid  upon  this  canal  near  o, K—- [9275],  drawing  downwards;  and  if  we  substitute

the  preceding  value  of  b,  it  becomes K— — ^ — , as  m  [1003d  J. In  like  manner,  we

have CA= '^^ = ; substituting  this  for  b,  in  the  expression K-\--  [9276],

cos.PAC cos.^  ''

which  represents  the  action  of  the  upper  fluid  upon  the  same  canal  Oo,  near  the  point  O,
but  sufficiently  above  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  to  be  clear  of  the  variable  density

of  the  upper  fluid,  near  its  junction  with  the  lower  fluid,  it  becomes ^4-

H.coa.d

T

drawing

H.  cos.d

upwards,  as  in  [10036],  or,  by  changing  the  signs,  —K—'^^, drawing downwards.
Now  if  the  upper  fluid  were  to  become  of  the  same  nature  as  the  lower,  K,  H  [10031],

[10035a]

[100356]
[10035c ]

[10a35rf]
[10035e ]
[10035/]

[10035g]
[10035A]

888  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

At  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids,  the  fluid  in  the  canal  will  be  drawn

JJ  .cos, d
[10036] upwards  by  the  force K-\ ^y-^ , in  virtue  of  the  action  of  the  fluid  in  the

upper  part  of  the  tube  upon  its  own  particles;  it  will  be  drawn  downwards  by

[10036'] the  force Ki  -| — — '- , in  virtue  of  the  fluid  in  the  lower  part  of  the  tube  ;

the  upper  fluid  of  the  canal  will  therefore  be  urged  downwards  by  the  force

nnn'^71  I^ i (-"l  -rlj-COS.^  H.COS.Zi  rDownward  pressure  of  theT

Liuuo/J  J\.j-j  -  -  .  L upper  fluid  in  the  canal.  J

The  lower  fluid  in  the  canal  will  be  urged  downwards,  in  virtue  of  the  action

H'.cos.d
[10038] of  the  lower  fluid  in  the  tube,  by  the  force* K' — '-; and  by  the  action

would  change  into  K',  H'  [10032],  respectively;  and  then  the  action  of  the  upper  fluid  upon

H'.  cos.^
[10035i] the  part  of  the  canal  Oo,  near  O,  would  be K'-\ — — , dramn^  upwards ; and  as  the

whole  fluid  is  supposed  to  be  homogeneous,  this  action  must  be  balanced  by  the  equal  and
opposite  or  downward  action  of  the  lower  fluid  upon  the  same  canal.  Therefore  the
downward  action  of  the  lower  fluid  upon  the  part Oo  of  the  upper  fluid  in  the  canal,  near

[10035fc] O,  will  be  represented  by K'  -}- — - —  , supposing  the  upper  fluid  to  be  tlie  same  as  the

lower. But,  the  upper  fluid  being  different  from  the  lower,  we  must,  as  in  [10034],  change
[10035i  ] K'  into  K^,  and  H'  into  H^,  to  obtain  the  real  action  of  the  lower  fluid  upon  the  upper

[10035m] fluid in the canal Oo  near O, which will therefore be  represented by Ki  +  —^ — -,

as  in  [10036']. Adding  this  to  the  parts  computed  in  [I0035e,  A],  we  get  the  whole  force
[10035n] acting  on  the  canal  Oo,  and  drawing  it  downwards,  as  in  [10037]. The  action  on  the  lower
part  OT  of  the  canal  remains  yet  to  be  computed,  as  in  [10038 — 10040].

*  (4311) This  is  found  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  the  expression  [10035'],  changing
zs  into  6,  jBT  into  K',  and  H  into  H',  so  as  to  correspond  with  the  notation  in  [10032];

H'.  cos.^
[10038a] hence  we  get K' — — - — - for  the action  of the  lower  fluid upon the column OT,

fig.  158,  page  877,  near  O. Again,  it  follows  from  [92576],  that,  by  conforming  to  the

[100386] notation  in  [10033],  we  shall  have  K^ — ^, for  the  action  of  the  upper  fluid  upon the

canal  OT  near  O,  drawing  it  upwards;  substituting  the  value  of  CA  [10035/^,  it  becomes
H]»  COS  ,4

[10033c] 1^1 -J — - , as  in  [10039]. Subtracting  this  from  the  force  [10038a],  we  get  the  whole

action  on  the  tube  OT,  drawing  downwards,  as  in  [10039']. Adding  tliis  to  the  action  of  the
[10038rf] part  o  O  of  the  tube  [10037],  we  get  the  whole  action  on  the  canal,  as  in [10040],  drawing
downwards.

X.  Suppl.  2.] COMMON  SURFACE  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

889

of  the upper fluid in the tube, it will  be drawn upwards by the force

H^.cosJ
J —  ; therefore  it  will  be  drawn  downwards  by  the  force

j^/ j^ I  jH^  —  H').  cos  J

L

[Downward  pressure  of  the"!
lower  fluid  in  the  canal.  J

Thus  the  whole  force  of  the  fluids  in  the  canal,  depending  upon  the  reciprocal
actions  of  the  fluids  in  the  tube,  and  in  a  downward  direction,  will  be
represented  by

"^  ^^'^  ' "cos.-s*

K  + ^

[Downward  pressure"]
of  the  whole  canal.J

If  the tube contain no other fluid  except  the lower one, this force  will
become  *

H'.cos.-a'

K'—

I

and  as  we  have  seen  in  [10024],  that  the  weights  of  the  fluid  contained  in  the
canal,  must  be  the  same  in  both  cases,  these  two  forces  must  be  equal  to  each
other;  therefore  we  shall  have

H.cos.TH ,0  0" rr tj/\ cos.^ H'.cos.zs'

which  gives

cos  J  =

H'.cos.Ts' — H.cos.si

["Correct  value  of  cos.9,  even'
I  when  we  notice  the  change  in
I  the  densities  neat  the  surfaces
Lof  the  fluids.

0

We  may  eliminate  the  angles  to,  to',  from  this  expression  of  cosJ,  by  using  the
following  equations,  which  can  be  easily  deduced  from  what  has  been  said ;  f

[10039]
[lOOSQ'J

[10040]

[10041]

[10042]

[10043]
[10044]

*  (4312)  This  is  of  the  same  form  as  the  expression  [10035'],  corresponding  to  the
upper  fluid,  changing  vi,  K,  H,  into  ■«',  K',  H',  respectively,  to  conform  to  the  notation  in
[10028 — 10033].  Now  it  has  been  shown  in  [10024],  that  the  expression  must  be  equal
to  that  in  [10040].  Putting  them,  therefore,  equal  to  each  other,  rejecting  the  terms  K',  K',  [100416]
which  mutually  destroy  each  other,  and  changing  the  signs  of  all  the  other  terms,  we  get  r^^rt^,
[10042];  whence  we  easily  deduce  [10043].  This  value  of  cos.^,  being  deduced  from  the
equilibrium  of  the  pressures  in  the  canal [10024],  is  true,  even  when  we  notice  the  change '•  l

of  density  near  the  surfaces  of  the  fluid.

f  (4313)  In  [9936],  we  have  p'=JH,  neglecting  the  consideration  of  the  change  of
density  of  the  fluid  near  its  surface;  and  in  like  manner  from  [9927 — 9929,  10047],  p  =  ^H.
Substituting  these  in  [9931],  we  get  211 — H  =  H. cos.zs;  and  if  we  change  to,  H,  H,  into
•a',  ir,  H',  so  as  to  conform  to  the  action  of  the  lower  fluid,  and  to  the  notation  in
[10029,  10032,  10047'],  we  shall  get 2H' —  H—H'.cos.^'. These  values  of  H.cos.zi,

VOL.  IV.  223

[10045a ]
[100456 ]

890

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

tMec.  Cel.

[10045]
[10046J
[10047]

[10047^

[10048]

21

w:

H=H,{\-\-  ^cos.:.)  =  H.  COS.

[—These  expressions  mast  be  considered  a«~i
I  definitions  of  the  values  of  /?,  ^',  to  be  I
I  used  instead  of  those  given  by  the  uuthor  I
Lin  [10047,  10047].  J

H  being  what  H  becomes,  when  we consider  the  action  of  the  upper

fluid  upon  the  matter  of  the  tube ; [or,  more  correctly,  H  is  given  in

terms  of  //,  w,  as  in  [10045] ;
H'  being  what  H'  becomes,  when  we  consider  the  action  of  the  lower  fluid

upon  the  matter  of  the  tube ;  [or,  more  correctly,  H'  is  given  in  terms  of

H',  X.',  as  in  [10046].
Hence  we  shall  have

COS.5  =

2H'  —  '2H+H—H'

the  values
and  deduce

']

[10045c ]

[10045rf]
[10045e ]

[10045/]
[10045g-]
[10045A]
[10045t  ]

[10045Jt]
[10045/  ]

[10045m]

JEf'.cos.ra',  are  given  in  the  original  work  instead  of  the  equivalent  values  of  H,  H',  which
we  have  inserted  in  [10045,  10046].  The  author  supposes  that  these  values  satisfy  the
definitions  of  the  values  of  H,  H'  [10047,  10047'];  but  as  he  has  neglected  the
consideration  of  the  change  of  the  density  of  the  fluid  near  its  surface,  we  have  thought  it
would  be  more  accurate  to  define  the  values  of  H,  H',  in  terms  of  H,  H',  by  means  of  the
formulas  [10045,  10046],  or  by  those  in  [10045a,  6].  Finally,  if  we  substitute  those  values
in  [10043],  we  shall  obtain  [10048];  which  is  correct  if  we  use  the  values  of  fl,  H',  given
by  the  formulas  [10045,  10046],  after  substituting  in  them  the  values  of  If,  H',  as  ascertained
by  observation.

The  expression  [10043]  is  equivalent  to  those  given  by  M.  Poisson  in  page  137,  Sic,  of
his  Nouvelfe  Theorie,  &/-C.  For  by  putting,  as  in  [9980ffi,  &.C.],  in  order  to  conform  to  his
notation.

l=180''-— (

'a=l80''—w, ^'=130''

w

the  expression  [10043]  will  become,  by  multiplying  by — {H-{-H'  —  2fl,),

{H-\-H'  —  2H^).cos.(p=H'.cos.w'  —  H.cos.w;
we  must  also  change  reciprocally  jFf  into  H',  because  La  Place  supposes,  in  [10031,  10032],
that  the  accented  letter  H'  corresponds  to  the  lower  fluid,  but  Poisson  uses  the  unaccented
H,  in  page  136  of  his  work. Making  these  changes  in  [10045g"],  it  becomes

{H-\-  H'  —  2flj) .  cos.(p  =  H.  cos.w'  —  H'.  cos.w ;

so  that,  if  we  put  for  brevity

H4-H'—'2H^  =  G, H'.cos.w=F', jff.cos.w'=F,
it  becomes

G.cos.(p=F— jP';

and  as  Poisson  supposes F — F'=iK, in  page  136  of  his  work,  we  finally  obtain

^=G.cos.9,  F'=H'.  cos.w,

which  are  the  same  as  his  equations  (6),  page  137  of  his  work.

X.  Suppl.  2.] COMMON  SURFACE  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

891

The  angle  &  being  considered  as  a  known  quantity,  we  shall  easily  obtain,  by
means  of  the  theory  of  capillary  attraction,  the  differential  equation  of  the
common  surface  of  the  two  fluids,  whatever  be  the  width  of  the  tube  or  its
figure  [10027a:,  &c.].  We  must  observe  that  this  angle  is  that  which  the  tangent
plane  of  the  surface,  at  the  limits  of  sensible  activity  of  the  sides  of  the  tube,  forms
with  those  sides  [10030'].

In  the  preceding  formulas,  it  is  supposed  that  the  fluids  do  not  perfectly
moisten  the  sides  of  the  tube.  We  have  observed,  in  [9630,  &c.],  that,  if  the
action  of  the  tube  upon  the  fluid  exceed  that  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,
an  extremely  thin  lamina  of  the  fluid  will  cover  the  sides  of  the  tube,  and  form
a  new  lube,  in  which  the  fluids  will  rise  or  fall.  Thus,  in  case  the  tube  contains
several  fluids  which  exactly  moisten  the  tube,  they  will  form,  within  it,  a  series
of  different  tubes,  to  which  we  cannot  therefore  apply  the  preceding  formulas.
We  shall  here  consider  only  two  fluids,  water  and  mercury ;  supposing  the  tube
to  be  of  glass  which  has  been  well  moistened,  so  that  its  inner  surface  is
covered  with  a  very  thin  pellicle  of  water  adhering  to  the  glass.  In  this  case,
we  must  consider  the  tube  as  an  aqueous  one,  and  we  shall  have*

ffy  =  H\  M  =  H.\  [correct  values.]

therefore  we  shall  have  cos.^  =  — 1,  consequently  &==-'g.  Then  the  surface
of  the  mercury  is  convex,  and  very  nearly  hemispherical,  if  the  tube  is  very
slender. We  may  otherwise  prove,  by  applying  to  this  case  the  reasoning  in

[10049]
[10050]

[10051]
[i005Q]
[10053]

[10054]

[10055]
[10056]

*  (4314)  When  the  tube  is  moistened  with  water,  or,  in  other  words,  when  the  tube  is  an
aqueous  one,  and  the  upper  fluid  is  water,  we  shall  have  «=0  [9655?*,  9931a',  &c.] ;  and
by  substituting  it  in  [10045],  we  get  H=H,  as  in  [10055].  The  same  holds  good  when
we  define  fl  as  the  author  has  done  in  [10047],  where  it  represents  the  action  of  water  upon
its  own  particles;  observing  also  that,  in  [10031],  it  is  represented  by  H;  so  that  we  have  also,
in  this  way  of  considering  the  subject,  H=H.  Moreover,  since  the  surface  of  mercury  in
a  glass  tube,  moistened  with  water,  is  very  nearly  a  convex  hemisphere  [9744],  we  shall
hare  to'=180''-  [10029];  substituting  this  in  [10046],  we  get  H'  =  0.  The  surface  being
a  convex  hemisphere,  tfie  action  of  the  aqueous  tube  on  the  mercury  will  be  very  nearly
equal  to  nothing  [9654r;] ;  hence  we  have  iT,  =  0  [10034];  consequently  H'  =  H^,  as  in
[10055].  The  same  result  holds  good  when  we  define  H'  as  the  author  has  done  in
[10047'],  supposing  it  to  correspond  to  the  action  of  mercury  on  water;  for  this  same  quantity
is  represented  by  H,  in  [10034] ;  hence  H'  =  H\, as  in  [10055e]. Substituting  the  values

[10055]  in  [10048],  we  get  cosJ=  '  ^,_^^  =•— 1,  as  in  [10056];  whence  we
evidently  have  6='^,  and  the  common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  corresponds  nearly  to  that
of  a  convex  hemisphere.

[10055a]

[10055i ]
[10055c ]
[10055d]

[10055e ]

[10055/]
[10055g-]
[10055A]

892  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[9654],  that  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  in  a  verj  slender  tube  whose  action  is
** insensible,  is  convex  and  hemispherical.

The  depression  of  mercury is,  by  what  has been  said,* ' ' , or

— -, neglecting  the  little  column  of  water  which  rests  upon  its  surface;

so  that,  if  we  put  ^

[10059]  b  =  the  height  of  this  column  of  water,  and

[10059']  —  =  the  density  of  water,  that  of  mercury  being  taken  for  unity,

it  is  evident  that  the  depression  of  the  mercury  will  be  represented  by  f

*

(4315) If  we  compare  the  definition  of  ^'  [9346]  with  that  of  w'  [10029],  we  shall  get

^  :^ 6'=90^- — ©', whence sin.^'=cos.«'; substituting  this  in  [9379],  we  get '  for

[1005oO  J  gl

the  elevation  of  the  mercury;  and  by  changing  its  sign,  we  get  its  depression,  as  in  [10058].

[10058c] Now  from  [100456],  we  have —H'.cos.^'=H'—QH'=H'—2H,  [10055]; substituting

XT' Off

[10058rf] this  in  the  first  expression  [10058],  it  becomes — ■', as  in  [10058],  which  is  accurate,

if  we  use  the  value  of  H' — 2Hj  deduced  from  experiment.

t  (4316) The annexed  figure  159 is  similar  to  fig.  112,

page  695. The  vase  AB  CD  is  filled  with  mercury,  which  ^^f'^^''^^^'

ascends  in  the  capillary  tube  to  the  height O ;  and upon it
[10060a] rests  the  small  column  of  water  OQ;  AVPB  being  the  level

of  the  mercury  in  the  vase. Then  the pressure  at  the  point
[10060&] R  of  the column VR,  is K+gVR [93556]; K  being

changed  into  K',  as  in  [10032]. In  like  manner,  the  pressure  at

Z,  in  the  column  Q^,  is  equal  to  the  gravity  of  the  column  QZ^  added  to  the  capillary  action
[10060c] of  that  column  [10040]. Now  the  gravity  of  the  column  (^Z  is  composed  of  the  column  of

mercury  OZ,  whose  mass  is  nearly  equal  iog.OZ,  and  of  the  column  of  water  OQ,  whose  mass

or  ,

is  ^.OQ,  nearly;  the  sum  of  these  two  expressions  is
[lOOeOt/]  g.OZ-i-^.Oq=g.OZ-Jf-^ [10059,  10059'].

Now  substituting ^  =  ir  [10055A],  and  ■sj  =  0  [10055o],  in  the  expression  of  the  capillary
[10060e] action  [10040],  it  becomes -^'-f" -' Adding this to the  gravity  of  the  column

QZ  [10060d],  we  get  the  whole  action  at  Z  in  the  canal  Q^Z,  namely,
[10060/]  K'-{-^'~'^"'-}-g.OZ+^.

Putting this equal  to  the  action  at  R  in  the  canal VR,  namely, K'-\-g.VR  [100606],

X.  Suppl.2.] COxMMON  SURFACE  OF  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

893

H'—2H,

gl

r  7-j*  will

^  Lthei

Depression  of  the  mercury  in  a  tube  moistened  with  water.~J

"■  we  determine H' — ^H^ by  experiment,  this  depression I

't  be  correct,  even  when  wo  consider the  density  near I

surfaces  as  variable.  _]

We shall now suppose the same tube to be moistened by alcohol, and
shall  put

'H  for  the  action  of  alcohol  upon  mercury ;

'h  for  the  height  of  the  column  of  alcohol  above  the  surface  of  the  mercury;

—  for  the  density  of  alcohol,  that  of  mercury  being  taken  for  unity.
Then  the  depression  of  the  mercury  will  become

H'—2'H

gi

'f)  ^Depression  of  mercury  in  a  tube  moistened  with  alcohol.'

I This depression is correct even when we notice the

IT\  '  I change of  density  near the  surfaces,  provided  /T — 2'i/

■^^  Lis  determined  by  experiment.

]

The  action  of  water  upon  its  own  particles  being  much  greater  than
that  of  the  mutual  action  of  the  particles  of  alcohol,  as  we  shall  see  in
[10322,  10333],  it  is  very  probable  that  the  action  of  water  upon  mercury
exceeds  that  of  alcohol  upon  the  same  liquor,  so  that  'H  is  less  than  *  H^ .  This
difference  ought,  therefore,  to  be  sensible  by  experiment.

M.  Gay-Lussac  was  willing  to  undertake  the  examination  of  this  point.
After  having  well  moistened  a  glass  tube,  whose  internal  diameter,  measured
with  great  accuracy  by  means  of  the  weight  of  a  column  of  mercury  which  filled
up  the  tube,  was  equal  to  l'"'-,29441,  he  dipped  the  lower  end  of  it  into  a
vessel  filled  with  mercury ;  and  found,  by  the  mean  of  ten  experiments,  which
differed  but  little  from  each  other,  that  the  depression  of  the  mercury  was  equal
to  7'"',4148.  The  mercury,  rising  in  the  tube,  had  raised  above  its  surface  part
of  the  water  which  had  adhered  to  the  sides  of  the  tube  in  moistening  it,  and
the  length  of  the  column  of  water  formed  in  this  way,  was  7'"'-,730.  The
temperature  was  17°,5  during  the  experiments.  The  depression  of  the
mercury,  decreased  by  the  weight  of  this  column  of  water,  is  therefore  equal  to
6'"'-,8464 ;  f  hence  we  have

[10060]
[10060']

[10061]
[10062]

[10063]
[10064]

[10065]

[10066]

[10067]
[10068]

[10069]

and making  a  slight reduction, we get g.{VR—OZ), or g.OP= — p-'  +  ^- t^^^^^]

Dividing  this  by  g,  we  get  the  depression  of  the  mercury  OP,  as  in  [10060].  The  formula
[10064]  is  similar  to  [10060],  changing  H^^  b,  D,  into  'H,  'b,  'D,  respectively,  to  conform
to  the  case  mentioned  in  [10061 — 10064].  . "

*  (4317) Observing  that  'H  [10065,  10061],  refers  to  alcohol,  and  H,  [10060,  10034], [I0065a]
to  water,  as  found  by  actual  experiment.  - .

t  (4318) The  density  of  water  -  [10059'J  being  put  equal  to  — ,  we  shall  find  that [10069a]
VOL.  IV.  224

894

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10070]

[10071]

[10072]
(10073]

[10074]
[10075]

H'—^H.

[10076]

[10077]

[10078]

gl

-'  =  6'"S8464.

H'—QH^

gl

[10070],  as

Then,  moistening  the  same  tube  with  alcohol  whose  specific  gravity,  compared
with  that  of  water,  was  0,81971,  he  found,  by  the  mean  of  ten  experiments,
differing  but  little  from  each  other,  that  the  depression  of  the  mercury  was
8™'*,0261,  and  the  length  of  the  column  of  alcohol,  which  rested  above  the
surface  of  the  mercury,  was  equal  to  7"''',4735.  The  temperature  was  also
17°,5,  during  these  experiments. Whence  we  conclude  *

—  ==  7""-,5757.

^- .  gt

Therefore  this  value is  sensibly  greater  than  that  of

is  supposed  in  [10065,  100746].

M.  Gay-Lussac  observed  the  versed  sine  of  the  convexity  of  the  mercury
in  the  tube  before  mentioned,  and  found  it  to  be  the  same  as  the  concavity  of
the  upper  surface  of  the  column  of  water  or  alcohol;  all  these  surfaces  are
therefore  equal  to  each  other,  and  they  have  the  form  of  a  hemisphere  whose
diameter  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  tube,  conformably  to  the  preceding  theory.

We  shall  suppose  that  there  is  an  indefinite  vase,  containing  only  two
[homogeneous]  fluids,  in  which  a  right  prism  or  tube  is  wholly  immersed  in  a
vertical  position,  with  its  lower  end  in  the  lower  fluid,  and  its  upper  end  in  the
upper  fluid.  Then  the  weight  of  the  lower  fluid,  which  is  raised  above  its  level
by  means  of  the  capillary  action,  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  like  volume  of  the
upper  fluid,  increased  by  the  weight  of  the  lower  fluid,  which  could  be  raised  in

[100696]

the  column  of  water  6  =  7"', 730  [10068]  is  equivalent  in  weight  to  a  column  of  mercury
of  the  height  — ^=0'"SS684=— ;  and  as  the  value  of  the  expression  [10060]  was
found  in  this  experiment  to  be  equal  to 7™*",4148  [10067],  we  shall  have

as  in  [10070].

^l

:  7-^,4 1 48 — 0'"S5684  =;  6"^  ,8464,

[10074a]

*  (4319) Proceeding  as  in  the  last  note,  we  get

=  8-^,026 1 — 7""-,4735  X  ^^^^  =  8^-,026 1 — 0*S4504  =«  7™-,5757,

gl

13,6

as  in  [10074],  which  is  sensibly  greater  than  the  expression — -' [10070]; hence  we

[100746] have H'-^2'H^H—2H„  or — .2'H>  — Sfl^, and  by  transposition H.^'H, as
in  [10065J.

X.  Suppl.  2.]

TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

896

the  same  prism,  if  there  were  onlj  that  one  fluid  in  the  vessel,  and  decreased  by
the  weight  of  the  upper  fluid,  which  would  rise  in  the  same  prism  above  the
level,  if  this  fluid  only  were  in  the  vase,  and  the  prism  were  dipped  into  this
fluid  by  its  lower  end.*

[10078^

*  (4320)  In  the  case  which  is  taken  into  consideration  in  [10077 — 10084],  it  is  supposed
by  the  author  that  the  fluids  are  perfectly  homogeneous,  and  that  their  actions  and  that  of  the
prism  are  expressed  as  in  [10079 — 10083'].  The  results  of  these  forces  are  equivalent  to
the  theorem  in  [10078,  Stc],  as  is  easily  proved  in  the  following  manner:  We  shall  take  the
common  surface  of  the  two  fluids  in  the  vase  for  the  horizontal  fixed  plane  from  which  the  [10078a]
elevations  of  tlie  common  surface  of  the  fluids  in  the  tube  are  counted,  supposing  the  positive
values  to  fall  above  this  plane,  and  the  negative  ones  below  it,  so  that,  when  this  common
surface  of  the  two  fluids  is  depressed  below  this  plane,  we  may  consider  its  elevation  and  the
corresponding  volume  as  negative- We  shall  also  put

X*  =  the  volume  of  the  lower  flaid  in  the  tube  above  the  horizontal  fixed  plane,  this [I0078o']

value  being  negative  when  it  falls  below  this  plane ;
t7=the  volume  of  the  tipper  fluid  in  the  tube  above  the  mass  L\  [100784]

i,'=the  volume  of  the  lower  fluid  v;\{\c\).  would  be  raised  in  the  same  tube  by  the [10078c]

capillary  action,  supposing  the  tube  to  be  dipped  vertically  into  a  vase  containing.

only  the  lower  fluid ;
£7'  =  the  volume  of  the  upper  fluid  which  would  be  raised  in  the  same  tube  by  the [10078</]

capillary  action,  supposing  the  tube  to  be  dipped  vertically  into  a  vase  containing

only  the  upper  fluid ;
Z=  the  density  of  the /jwer  fluid;  '  [10078e]

tt  =  the  density  of  the  upper  fluid.  [10078/"]

We  shall  now  substitute  this  notation  in  the  expressions  of  the  four  different  pressures  which

are  computed  in  [10079 — 10083];  considering  the  downward  pressures  as  positive,  and  the [1007%]

upward  pressures  as  negative ;  and  they  will  become  respectively

First, The action of  the tube  and  lower fluid is  represented,  as  in

[10080],  by  — -i'Z;  [10078^]

Second,  The action of  the  tube  and  upper  fluid  is  represented,  as in

[100S-2J,  by  +U'u;  [I0078t  ]

Third, The pressure  of  the column of  the two fluids in the tube

mentioned  in  [10033],  is  equal  to  +L'l-\-  Uu; [10078*]

Fourth,  The  pressure  of  the  external  column  of  the  upper  fluid,  whose

mass  is  L-{-U,  mentioned  in  [10083'j,  is  equal  to  — Lu  —  Uu. [10078Z  ]

The  sum  of  these  four  pressures  being  put  equal  to  notliing,  because  they  are  in  equilibrium  \

[10084],  gives —L'l-^U'u-{-Ll—Lu  =  0', whence Ll=Lu-\-L'l—U'u; which  [10078m]

is  the  same  theorem  as  in  [10078],  the  expressions  LI,  Lu,  LI,  Uu,  being  respectively  the  [10078n3
gravities  of  the  four  columns  of  the  homogeneous  fluids  mentioned  in  that  theorem.

896

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  C61.

[10079]
[10080]

[10081]

[10082]

[10033]
[10083']

[10084]

[10085]

[10086]

[10087]

[10088]

To  demonstrate  it,  we  shall  observe,  First,  that  the  action  of  the  prism  and
the  lower  fluid  upon  the  part  of  the  lower  fluid  contained  in  it,  is  the  same  as
if  the  fluid  existed  alone  in  the  vessel ;  therefore  this  fluid  is,  in  both  these  two
cases,  urged  vertically  upwards  in  the  same  manner;  and  it  is  evident  that  the
force  which  urges  it  in  this  last  case,  is  equivalent  to  the  weight  of  the  mass  of
this  fluid  which  is  then  elevated  above  its  level.  Second:  In  like  manner  the
upper  fluid,  contained  in  the  upper  part  of  the  prism,  is  urged  vertically
downwards  by  the  action  of  the  prism  and  of  the  fluid  which  surrounds  this
part,  as  it  would  be  urged  upwards  by  the  same  action,  if  the  vessel  contained
only  the  upper  fluid,  and  the  prism  were  moistened  at  its  lower  end  by  that
fluid ;  and  in  this  case  the  combined  force  of  these  actions  is  equivalent  to  the
weight  of  the  upper  fluid,  which  ivoiild  rise  in  the  prism  above  its  level  in  the
vessel.  Third:  The  column  of  the  fluids  within  the  prism,  which  is  above  the
level  of  the  lowest  fluid  in  the  vessel,  is  urged  vertically  downwards  by  its  own
weight.  Fourth:  This  last  column  is  also  urged  upwards  by  the  weight  of  an
equal  column  of  the  upper  external  fluid.  By  uniting  all  these  forces,  which
must  be  in  equilibrium  with  each  other,  we  shall  obtain  the  theorem  just
mentioned  [10078,  &:c.].  We  may  determine  by  the  same  principles  what  must
take  place  when  a  hollow  prism  is  wholly  immersed  in  a  vessel  containing  any
number  of  [homogeneous]  fluids.

In  all  that  precedes,  we  have  supposed  the  lower  base  of  the  prism  to  be
horizontal.  But,  whatever  be  its  inclination  and  the  figure  of  the  lower  extremity
of  the  tube,  the  vertical  attraction  of  the  tube,  and  that  of  the  external  fluid  upon
the  fluid  contained  ivithin  it,  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  base  were  horizontal;
consequently  the  volume  of  the  fluid  which  is  raised  above  the  level,  will  be
the  same  in  both  cases.  To  prove  this,  we  shall  suppose,  as  in  [9903],  that  the
interior  surface  of  the  prismatic  tube  is  prolonged  into  the  fluid,  so  as  to  form  an
additional  or  second  tube,  whose  sides,  being  infinitely  thin,  do  not  affect  the
action  of  the  surrounding  fluid  upon  the  fluid  in  the  tube.  It  is  evident  that,
if  we  decompose  the  first  tube  into  vertical  and  infinitely  narrow  columns,  the
action  of  each  of  these  columns,  to  raise  the  fluid  within  the  two  prisms,  will
be  the  same  as  if  the  base  were  horizontal ;  therefore  the  sum  of  these  actions
will  be  equal  to* 2pc.

*  (4321) The  forces  depending  on  the  action  of  the  tube  are Q,  computed  in  [9911],
[10088a] and the same  quantity Q,  computed in  [9922]; their  sum  is 2Q  =  2pc [9927],  as  in
[10088] ;  always  supposing  the  density  of  the  fluid  to  be  uniform,  in  making  these  estimates,
in  conformity  with  the  hypothesis  of  the  author.

X.  Suppl.  2.]

TWO  FLUIDS  L\  A  TUBE.

897

"  If  the  prism,  which  bj  its  lower  end  is  dipped  into  a  fluid  contained  in  an
indefinite  vessel,  is  inclined  to  the  horizon,  the  volume  of  the  fluid  which  is
raised  in  the  prism  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel,  being  multiplied  by
the  sine  of  the  inclination  of  the  sides  of  the  prism  to  the  horizon,  is  always  the
same,  whatever  this  inclination  may  6e."*

For  this  product  expresses  the  weight  of  the  column  of  the  fluid  raised  above
the  level,  and  resolved  in  the  direction  parallel  to  the  sides  of  the  prism.  The
weight  thus  resolved  must  balance  the  action  of  the  prism  and  the  external
fluid  upon  the  fluid  contained  in  it;  and  this  action  is  evidently  the  same,
whatever  be  the  inclination  of  the  prism ;  therefore  the  mean  vertical  height
above  the  level  is  always  the  same  [10089o-,  A],

"  If  we  place  a  prism  vertically  within  another  hollow  vertical  prism  of  the
same  substance,  and  then  dip  their  lower  ends  into  a  fluid,  we  shall  have  for
the  volume  V  of  the  fluid,  elevated  above  its  level  in  the  space  included  between
these  two  prisms,  the  following  expression ;  f

[10089]

[10090]

[10091]
[10092]

[10093]

*  (4322)  Supposing  the  density  of  the  fluid  to  be  uniform,  and  referring  to  fig.  145,
page  835,  we  have,  for  the  actions  of  the  first  and  second  tubes,  and  of  the  fluid  within  and
about  them,  2Q  —  Q'  [9901k,  or  9923] ;  and  when  the  tube  Is  vertical,  this  is  put  equal  to
the  gravity  of  the  elevated  coluuin  gDV,  as  in  [9925].  But  when  the  tube  is  inchned  to
the  horizon  by  the  angle  A,  the  capillary  action  2Q  —  Q',  in  a  direction  parallel  to  the  axis
of  the  tube,  must  be  put  equal  to  the  gravity  gDV,  resolved  in  the  same  direction,  which  is
gDV.sm.A;  hence  we  get  gDy.sin.A=!:2^  —  Q'.  Dividing  this  by  gD,  and
substituting Q,='pc  [9927], Q'=p'c,  we  obtain

F".sin.^=

gD

[10089a]
[100896  ]
[10089c  ]

[10089rf]
[10089e  ]

As  all  the  terms  of  the  second  member  of  this  expression  are  constant,  whatever  be  the  angle

A,  it follows  that V.sin.A must  be a constant  quantity,  as in [10089], Substituting [10089/]

V=hb  [9983],  in  [10089e],  and  dividing  by  the  constant  quantity  b,  we  get  A.sin.^,  equal [10089g-]

to  a  constant  quantity;  and  as  A.sin.^  represents  the  mean  vertical  height  above  the  level,

this  height  must  be  constant,  as  in  [10092].

The  same  result  holds  good  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the
fluid  and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube,  using  the  expression  of  gDV  [9920o,  or  9920^],  from [10089A]
which  we  can  deduce  similar  expressions  to  those  in  [10089e,  ^],^  p  being  changed  into  p^,
and  p'  into  p',  as  in  [9920^7,  kcj.  , ,

t  (432^) The  capillary  action  of  the  outer  tube  is  represented  by  2Q —  Q'  [10089«],
or (2p — p')  .e  [10089c?],  supposing  the  fluid  to  be  of  uniform  density. In  like  manner  the '• '*■'
VOL.  IV.  225

898

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[10094]

[10094'J
[10095]

[10096]

[10097]
[10097']

[10098]
[10099]

[10100]
[10101]

(2p-p')

•(C  +  C')

"This  i^  correct  even when  wo'
notice the change of deniit;
near  the  lurtaces,  uiing  p

_ag  in  [9920r].

I  wo"!

MltT I

[10102]

=  yq.(c  +  c');

c  being  the  circumference  of  the  inner  base  of  the  great  prism,  and  c'  that  of
the  outer  base  of  the  least  prismJ^^

This  theorem  may  be  easily  demonstrated  by  means  of  the  principles
explained  above.  If  the  bases  of  the  two  prisms  are  similar  polygons,  whose
homologous  sides  are  parallel,  and  placed  at  the  same  distance  /  from  each  other,
we  shall  have  \l.(^c-\-c')  for  the  area  of  the  base  of  the  space  included
between  the  two  prisms ;  and  as  A  is  the  mean  height  of  the  elevated  fluid
[9983],  we  shall  also  have

jy 1  17 /■ I f\  f~Thi»  is  correct  even  when the"!

y  ■==■  hill  t  (C  -J-  C )  I  I density  is  supposed  to  be  varia- I

■*  ^  ^  L-ble  near  the  surfaces.  J

consequently*

h  =  q;

that  is,  the  mean  height  h  of  the  elevated  fluid  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  fluid
which  is  elevated  in  a  cylindrical  tube  ivhose  radius  I  [9977']  is  equal  to  the
interval  of  the  two  prisms  [10097].  If  we  suppose  the  prisms  to  be  cylinders,
we  shall  obtain  the  theorem  in  [9410].  We  may  also  determine,  by  the  same
principles,  what  must  take  place  in  case  the  tubes  are  dipped  wholly  or  in  part
into  a  vessel  filled  with  any  number  of  fluids,  and  we  may  also  suppose  that
these  prisms  are  inclined  to  the  horizon.

The  same  things  being  supposed  as  in  the  preceding  theorem,  if  the  two
prisms  are  of  different  substances,  we  shall  put  p  for  the greatest  tube,  and

[100946]
[10094c ]

[10094<;]

[10094c ]

[10099a]
[10099&]

capillary  action  of  the  inner  tube,  whose  circumference  is  c'  [10095],  is  (2p  —  p')'C'.  The
sum  of  these  two  capillary  forces  (2p  —  p')  .  (c-f-c'),  is  balanced  by  the  gravity  gDV o(  ihe
vertical  column  of  the  fluid  whose  volume  is  V;  hence  we  have  gDF'={2p  —  p').(c-j-c').
Dividing  this  by  gD,  we  get  the  value  of  V  [10094];  and  by  substituting  the  value  of
2p  —  p'  [9980],  it  becomes  as  in  [10094'].  Now  changing,  as  in  [I0089A,  Stc],  p  into  p^,
and  p'  into  p',,  we  get  an  expression  of  V  similar  to  [10094],  corresponding  to  the  case
of  nature  where  the  fluid  varies  in  density  near  its  surface  and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube  j
and  this  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [10094'],  supposing  q  to  be  determined  by  actual
experiments.

*  (4324)  The  expressions  of  the  value  of  the  base  [10097],  and  that  of  V  [10098],
correspond  with  the  usual  rules  of  mensuration.  Puuing  this  value  of  V  equal  to  that  in
[10094'J,  we  get  ^hl.{c-\-c')  =  ilq.{c-{-c').  Dividing  this  by  ^l.{c~[-c'),  we  get
h  =  q,  as  in  [10099].  -

X.  Suppl.  2.]

TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

899

Pj  for  the  least tube, what we have before  denoted by p; and then  we
shall  have  *

V=

(2P-P')  c  +  ^^^lc

gD

gD

r"This  is  correct  even  when  we  notice  the'

L change  of  density  near  the  surfaces
fluid,  using  appropriate  values
OS  in  [9920r,  &c.].

5  notice  tlie~|
faces  of  the  I
of  P,  p',Pi< I

so  that,  if  we  put  q  and  q^  for  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  in  two  very  slender
cylindrical  tubes,  having  the  same  interior  radius  /,  and  made  respectively  out
of  these  substances,  we  shall  have  , ,  - .

!/___  1  7 /'/7/» [ ry f,'^  . rThis  may  he  used  when  the  density  is  supposed"!
'  ^'"W ' Vl /' L  to  be  variable  near  the  surfaces.  J

consequently  t

' '"  it  rThis  may  he  used  when  the  density  is  supposed

h  =

c  +  c'

V

to  be  variable  near  the  surfaces.

This  theorem  is  also  easily  demonstrated  by  the  preceding  principles.  We
ought  to  make  q,  q^,  negative,  if  the  substances  to  which  they  correspond
depress,  instead  of  elevating,  the  fluid.  We  may  obtain,  by  the  same  principles,
the  volume  of  the  fluid  which  is  elevated  above  the  level,  in  a  space  included
by  any  number  of  vertical  planes  of  different  substances.

It  follows from the preceding theorem, that the  volume V  of  a  fluid

[10103]

[10104]

[10105]

] [10105']

[10106]

*  (4325)  IMaking  the  calculation  as  in  [10094a — e],  we  find  as  in  [10094a],  that  the
force  2Q  —  Q',  corresponding  to  the  outer  tube,  is  (2p  —  p')-c,  and  the  similar  force  for
the  inner  tube  evidently  becomes  (2pj  —  p')-c',  using  the  notation  [10102].  The  sum  of
these  two  expressions  being  put  equal  to  gDV,  as  in  [10094c],  gives

^DF=(2p-p').c  +  (2p,_p').c'.

Dividing  this  by  gB,  we  get  V  [10103]. Now  by  [9980],  we  have

2p-p';=*5-i>./y,
corresponding  to  the  outer  tube ;  and  in  like  manner  for  the  inner  tube,  we  have

^?—?'  =  igD.lq,,

using  the  notation  in  [10102,  10104].  Substituting  these  values  in  [10103],  we  get
[10105].  These  formulas  are  correct  even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  near  the
surface  of  the  fluid  and  near  the  sides  of  the  tube,  using  in  this  case  the  corresponding
numerical  values  of  p,  p',  Pi,  spoken  of  in  [9920r,  Sec],  or  the  values  of  q,  q^,  deduced
from  actual  observation.

f  (4326) The  mean  height  of  the  elevated  fluid  being  represented  by  h  [10097'],  its

volume  will  be  as  in  [10098];  and by  putting  this  equal  to  the  expression  [10105],  we

get

ihL{c  +  c')  =  iL(qc  +  q,c')',  .

dividing  this  by il.{c-\-c'), we  get  the  value  of  ^  [10105'],

[10103a]
[101036]

[10103c  ]
[10103c']
[lOlOSrf]

[10103e  ]

[lOlOSo]

900

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10107]

[10107']
[10108]

[10109]

[10110]

[10111]

elevated  by  the  capillary  action^  about  a  solid  prism  which  is  dipped,  by  its  lower
end,  into  the  fluid,  is*  - '  '

=  llq.c;

This  may  be  nsed  when  the  denaity  is  supposed
to  be  variable  near  the  suri'acea.

]

c  being  the  horizontal  circumference  of  the  prism.  This  volume  expresses  the
augmentation  of  the  weight  of  the  prism  depending  upon  the  capillary  action.
In  general,  the  augmentation  of  the  weight  of  a  body  of  any  fio;ure  depending
on  that  action,  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  mass  of  fluid  which  is  raised
by  that  action  above  the  level ;  and  if  the  fluid  is  depressed  below,  the
augmentation  will  be  changed  into  a  diminution  of  the  weight;  and  the  whole
diminution  of  the  weight  of  the  body  is  represented  by  the  weight  of  a  mass  of
the  fluid  which  is  equal  to  that  displaced  by  the  body,  whether  by  the  space  it
occupies  below  the  level,  or  by  the  void  space  produced  by  the  capillary
action.

This  principle  includes  the  known  principle  of  hydrostatics  relative  to  the
diminution  of  the  weight  of  a  body  immersed  in  a  fluid ;  it  is  only  necessary  to
suppress  what  relates  to  the  capillary  action,  which  wholly  disappears  when  the
body  is  entirely  immersed  in  the  fluid.

To  demonstrate  the  principle  we  have  just  mentioned,  we  shall  consider  a
vertical  canal,  sufficiently  wide  to  include  the  body  and  all  the  mass  of  fluid

[10107a]
[101076]

f 10107c]

[10107^]
[10107c ]
[10107/]

[10107/']
[10107g]
[101074]

[10107t ]

*  (4327)  If  we  suppose  the  fluid  to  be  homogeneous,  and  the  matter  of  which  the  outer
tube  is  composed  to  be  such  that  the  surface  of  the  fluid  near  it  is  horizontal,  we  shall  have,
as  in  [9618],  2p  —  p'  =  0; which  also  follows  from  [9931];  because,  in  this  hypothesis,  w

[9892] becomes 90*^, whose  cosine is  0. This value  of  2p  —  p' being  substituted in

(2p p')

[10103],  we  get V^^ — —-.c'; and  if  we  suppose  the  outer  tube  to  be  at  an  infinite

distance  from  the  inner  tube,  this  value  of  F"  will  represent  the  effect  of  the  inner  prism.  If
we  now  suppose  that  p^  is  changed  into  p,  and  c'  into  c, or,  in other  words,  that  p,  c,

(2p  — p')
correspond to the  inner prism,  the expression [10107c] will become V=: — .c.

Substituting  in  this  the  value  of  2p  —  p'  [9980],  it  beoomes  as  in  [10107'J;  which  may  be
used  even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid  and  near  the
sides  of  the  tube,  as  in  [10089A,  10094e,  he],  changing  p  into  pj,  and  p'  into  p',  [9920p,  &c.].
In  the  case  of  water  or  alcohol  elevated  by  a  glass  tube,  we  have  very  nearly  lg=a^
[9372/,  he] ;  substituting  this  in  [10107'],  we  get  V=^a^c;  and  if  the  prism  is  a  cylinder
whose  radius  is  /,  the  circumference  will  be  c  =  '2irl,  and  by  substituting  it,  the  preceding
expression  becomes  V=  it .  lo?, which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

X.  Suppl.  2.]

FLOATING  PRISMS.

901

which  is  sensibly  elevated  by  it,  or  the  void  space  produced  by  the  capillary
action,  and  shall  suppose  that  this  canal,  after  having  penetrated  into  the  fluid,
is  bent  horizontally,  and  then  vertically  upwards,  retaining  the  same  width
throughout  its  whole  extent.  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  state  of  equilibrium,  the
weights  contained  in  the  two  vertical  branches  of  this  canal  must  be  equal  to
each  other ;  consequently,  the  body,  by  its  weight,  must  compensate  for  the  void
space  produced  by  the  capillary  action;  or,  if  it  raises  the  fluid  by  this  action,
it  must  compensate  by  the  decrease  of  specific  gravity,  for  the  weight  of  the
elevated  fluid.  In  the  first  case,  this  action  raises  the  body,  which  might,  by
that  means,  be  supported  upon  the  surface,  although  specifically  heavier  than
the  fluid. In  the  second  case,  it  tends  to  draw  the  body  down  into  the  fluid.

We  shall  now  consider  a  solid,  rectangular,  and  very  thin  prism,  whose  width
is  /,  height  A,  and  length  a,  placed  horizontally  upon  a  fluid,  so  that  its
greatest  side  a  may  be  horizontal.  We  shall  suppose  that  it  depresses  the
fluid  about  it,  and  we  shall  put

q  =  the mean capillary depression  of the  fluid below  the level,  in a
cylindrical  tube  of  the  same  matter  as  the prism,  the  radius  of  the
tube  being  equal  to  /;
D  =  the  density  of  the  fluid ;
iD  =  the  density  of  the  prism ;
X  =  the  depth  of  the  lower  surface  or  base  of  the  prism  below  the  level  of
the  surface  of  the  fluid.
Then,  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  we  shall  have,  by  the  preceding  theorem,*

[10112]

[10113]
[10114]
[10115]

[10116]
[10117]

[10117']

[10118]
[10118']

•  (4328)  We  shall,  as  an  example,  suppose  the  prism  to  be  of  glass,  floating  upon  a
surface  of  mercury  contained  in  a  vase ;  then  it  is  evident  that  the  weight  of  the  glass  is  equal
to  the  weight  of  the  mercury  displaced  by  the  prism  [10114,  &,c.].  Now  the  area  of  the
base  of  the  prism  being  aZ,  and  its  height  h  [10116],  its  volume  must  be  ahl.  Multiplying
this  by  the  density  iD  [10118],  and  the  gravity  g,  we  get  the  vyhole  weight  or  pressure  of
the  prism,  equal  to  igD.ahl.  Again,  as  the  base  of  the  prism  is  depressed  below  the  level
surface  of  the  mercury  by  the  quantity  x,  it  displaces  a  volume  of  this  fluid  which  is
represented  by  alXx.  Multiplying  this  by  the  density  D  [10117'j,  and  the  gravity  g,  we
get  gD.alx,  for  the  weight  of  this  quantity  of  mercury.  To  this  we  must  add  the
weight  of  the  volume  V=^lq.c  [10107'],  depressed  around  the  prism  by  the  capillary
action;  and  as  the  circumference  c  =  2(a-f-/)  [10108,  10116],  this  weight  becomes
V.gD=gDJq.{a-\-l);  adding  this  to  the  other  part  gD.alx  [10119cZ],  we  get  the
whole  weight  of  the  displaced  mercury,  equal  to  gD.alx-{-gD.lq.{a-\-l).  Putting  this
equal  to  the  weight of  the prism  igD.ahl  [10119c],  we obtain the equation [10119].

VOL.  IV.  226

[10119a]

[101196 ]
[10119c]

[10119  J]

[101 19e]
[10119/]

[10119g-]

902

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10119]

[10120]
[10121]

[10122]
[10123]

[10124]

which  gives

gD .  alx  -{-gD  .lq.(a-\-l)  =  igD .  ahl,

„  =  ih-q.(l+l^  =  h  +  ii-^).\h-^^.(l  +  l

r~Thi»  is  correct  even'
I whoii  the  density  i
I variable near the
Lsurfacea.

0

Therefore,  by  supposing  h  to  he  less  than

1  +

the  prism  will  not

-1 \ •  a^

he  ivholly  immersed  in  the  fluid,  although  i  exceed  1 ;  that  is,  although  the  prism
is  denser  than  the  fluid.  It  is  in  this  way  that  a  very  slender  steel  cylinder,  whose
contact  with  the  water  is  prevented,  either  hy  a  varnish,  or  by  a  small  stratum  of  air
which  surrounds  it,  is  supported  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid.  If  we  place  in  this
manner,  horizontally  upon  the  surface  of  the  water,  two  equal  and  parallel
cylinders,  which  touch  so  that  their  ends  project  beyond  each  other,  it  is  found  that
they  will  instantly  slide  upon  each  other,  so  as  to  bring  their  ends  together.  The
fluid  being  more  depressed  by  the  capillary  action,  at  the  end  of  each  of  them
which  is  in  contact  with  the  other  cylinder,  than  at  the  opposite  end,*  the  base
of  this  last  part  is  more  pressed  than  the  other  base ;  consequently  each  cylinder
has  a  tendency  to  unite  more  closely  with  the  other;  and  since  accelerative
forces,  acting  upon  a  system  of  bodies,  which  is  displaced  a  little  from  the
situation  of  equilibrium,  always  carry  them  beyond  that  situation,  the  two
cylinders must slide backwards and forwards upon each other, making

Dividing  this  by  gDal,  we  obtain  the  first  value  of  x  [10120]. The  second  value  is  easily
deduced  from  the  first,  by  a  slight  reduction;  this  is  not  inserted  in  the  original  work. From

[10119A] this  last  expression  we  see  that,  if  i^l, and A<C: — 1*(^~^ — )' ^®  ^^^^^  ^^^^®  x<^h,  as
in  [10121,  &c.].

*  (4329) Supposing  the  cylinders  ^BCD,  aZ>c</,

fig.  160,  to  be  floating on  the suiface  of  the  fluid,

[10123a] which  is  repelled  from  them  to  the  distance  represented

by  the  dotted  lines encompassing ihem,  it  wilt be

evident,  from  the  figure,  that  the  cylinder  abed  is  not

so  much  pressed  by  the  fluid  near  the  corner  a,  as  it  is  at  the  opposite  end  d,  because  the
part  of  the  cylinder  ABCD  between  a D  repels  the  fluid  from  the  corner  a,  and  this
does  not  take  place  at  the  opposite  corner  d.  A  similar  effect  is  produced  at  the  corner  A
of  the  cylinder  ABDC.  Therefore  the  cylinder  abed  is  pressed  at  the  end  cd  towards
a  more  than  it  is  pressed  at  the  end  ab  towards  d  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  resultant
of  these  pressures  is  therefore  equivalent  to  a  pressure  of  the  cylinder  abed,  from  A  towards
a;  and  in  like  manner  the  cylinder^ J5 CD  will  be  pressed  from  D  towards  a;  agreeing
with  the  remarks  in  [10123,  Sic]

[101236  ]
[10123c ]

[10123^1
[10123c ]

X.  Suppl.2.]  FLUID  IN  A  CURVED  CAPILLARY  TUBE.

903

oscillations  which  incessantly  decrease,  by  the  resistance  they  suffer,  until  they
entirely  cease.  These  cylinders,  having  then  attained  their  state  of  equilibrium,
will  touch  each  other  at  their  ends.

We  see,  by  what  has  been  said,  that  the  manner  in  which  we  have  just
considered  the  capillary  action,  leads,  in  a  very  simple  manner,  to  the  principal
results  of  the  theory  of  that  action  [9171 — 9756].  But  the  method  employed
in  that  theory  has  some  advantages  peculiar  to  itself.  It  makes  known  the
nature  of  the  surfaces  of  the  fluids  contained  within  the  capillary  spaces,  and
evidently  proves  that,  in  a  slender  cylindrical  tube,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  is
very  nearly  spherical  [9336^]  ;  and  therefore  the  heights  of  its  different  points
above  the  level  differ  but  very  little  from  each  other.  Moreover,  we  may  thence
conclude  that  in  several  tubes,  formed  of  the  same  substance,  dipped  by  their
lower  ends  into  the  same  fluid,  if  their  figure,  at  the  upper  surface  to  which  the
fluid  is  elevated,  is  the  same,  the  fluid  will  rise  in  all  of  them  to  the  same  height,
whatever  may  be  the  figure  of  the  lower  parts  of  the  tubes.  This  evidently
follows  from  the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid  in  an  infinitely  narrow  canal  passing
through  the  axis  of  each  tube,  below  which  it  is  bent,  in  order  to  pass  upwards
towards  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid.  For  it  is  plain  that,  if  the  figure  of  the
tubes  be  the  same,  in  the  parts  where  the  fluid  is  raised,  the  surface  of  the  fluid
will  there  be  the  same;  consequently,  also,  the  action  of  the  fluid  in  the  tube  upon
that  of  the  canal,  will  be  the  same  in  these  tubes ;  the  one  of  the  canals  being
supposed  to  be  in  equilibrium,  the  others  will  of  course  be  so.

We  shall  here  observe  that  there  are  several  states  of  equilibrium  in  the  same
tube,  if  its  diameter  is  not  uniform.  Thus,  by  supposing  two  capillary  tubes  to
communicate  with  each  other,*  so  that  the  tube  which  has  the  least  diameter
may  be  placed  vertically  over  that  which  has  the  greatest,  we  may  conceive

[10125]

[10120]

[10127]

[10128]

[10129]

[10130]

[10131]
[10132]

•  (4330)  To  illustrate  the  remarks  of  the  author  relative
to  the  successive  states  of  stability,  we  have  drawn  the  annexed
figure  161,  where  AB  is  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in
a  vase  into  which  the  curved  tube  CD  is  dipped ;  the  lines
Si,  SS,  &.C.,  represent  the  places  in  the  tube  where  the  fluid
will  rest  in  a  stable  equilibrium ;  and  C72,  C74,  &;c.,  the  lines  of
unstable  equilibrium.  The  diameters  of  the  tube  at  the  points
Si,  U2,  S3,  U4,  he,  form  a  decreasing  series;  these  quantities
are  reciprocally  proportional  to  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  at  those
points  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  into  which  the  tube
is  dipped.

[10132a]
[101326  ]

[10132c ]
[10132d]

904

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10133]

[10134]

[10135]

[10136]

[10137]

[10138]

[10139]

their  diameters  and  lengths  to  be  such  that  the  fluid  may  be  at  first  in  equilibrium
above  the  level  in  the  greatest,  and  that,  by  pouring  in  more  of  the  fluid,  until
it  reaches  the  second  tube,  and  fills  up  a  part  of  it,  the  fluid  will  still  maintain
its  equilibrium  at  this  greater  elevation.  When  the  figure  of  a  capillary  tube
decreases  by  moderate  degrees,  the  several  states  of  equilibrium  will  be  alternately
stable  and  unstable.  At  first  the  fluid  tends  to  rise  in  the  tube,  and  this
tendency  decreases,  and  finally  becomes  nothing,  in  the  state  of  equilibrium;
beyond  this  point,  this  tendency  becomes  negative,  and  of  course  the  fluid  will
descend;  therefore  this  first  state  is  stable,  because  the  fluid,  when  a  little
disturbed  from  it,  tends  to  return  to  the  same  state.  If  we  continue  to  elevate  the
fluid,  its  tendency  to  descend  diminishes,  and  becomes  nothing,  in  the  second
state  of  equilibrium ;  beyond  that,  it  becomes  positive,  and  the  fluid  tends  to  rise,
consequently  to  move  from  that  state  which  is  not  stable.  By  continuing  in
this  manner,  we  find  that  the  third  state  will  be  stable,  the  fourth  unstable,
and  so  on.

Lastly,  the  comparison  of  the  two  methods  [supposing  the  fluid  to  be
homogeneous]  makes  known  the  ratio  of  the  quantities*  p  and  p',  or,  in  other
words,  the  ratio  of  the  quantities  ^H,  \H\  by  means  of  the  angle  to,  which
the  side  of  the  tube  forms  with  the  tangent  plane  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,
at  the  limits  of  the  sphere  of  the  sensible  activity  of  the  tube.  These  quantities
represent  the  forces  upon  which  the  capillary  action  depends ;  they  arise  from
the  attractive  forces  of  the  particles  of  bodies,  of  which  they  are  but  modifications;
but  they  are  incomparably  less  than  these  attractive  forces,  which,  when  they  act
with  all  their  energy,  are  the  chemical  affinities  themselves.^  If  the  law  of  the
attraction,  relatively  to  the  distance,  were  the  same  for  different  bodies  [and  for

[10137a] *  (4331) The  formula  [9935]  gives ^-=cos.^lzs, supposing  the  fluid  to  be  of  uniform

[101376] density. Now  we  have  in  [9933],  p'=  JH,  supposing  If  to  correspond  to  the  action  of  the

fluid,  or  to  the  quantity  p';  so  that,  for  the  sake  of  symmetry,  we  may  accent  H,  and  put

[10137c] p'^^H'  for the fluid,  and,  by  a  similar  notation, p  =  ^H  for the matter  of  the  tube;

[10137</] substituting  these  In  [10137a],  we  get —  =^  =  cos.2Jw [10137].

t  (4332) This  is  in  conformity  with  what  has  already  been stated by  the author  in

[10139a] [9257],  relative  to  the  comparative  values  of  K,  H,  using  for  K  its  value  corresponding  to

the  interior  of  the  fluid  mass ;  observing,  however,  that  the  whole  corpuscular  action  near

the  surface  may  be  very  small,  or  even  negative,  in  the  case  of  a  fluid  of  variable  density,  as

in  [9174a].

X.  SuppL2.}  TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.  905

a  fluid  of  uniform density],  the values  of  p  and  p'  would be,  as  we have
already  observed  [9927',  9929],  proportional  to  the  respective  intensities  of  their
attractions ;  that  is,  p  and  p'  would  be  proportional  to  the  constant  coefficients [10140]
by which  we must multiply  the common function  of  the distance, which
represents  the  law  of  these  attractions;  and  then  the  values  of  p  and  p'  ivould rjoun
correspond  to  equal  volumes,  and  not  to  equal  masses. To  prove  this,  we  shall
suppose  that  there  are  two  capillary  tubes of  the same  diameter,  made of
different  substances,  but  in  which  a  fluid  rises  to  the  same  height. It  is  evident,
from  what  has  been said,  that,  if  we  take,  in these tubes, two  equal and
infinitely  small  volumes,  similarly  situated  relative to  the  interior  fluid,  their [10141']
action  upon  the  fluid  will  be  the  same,  and  we  may  substitute  the  one  for  the
other;  therefore  we  must,  to  obtain  the  ratio  of  their  attractions  with  equal
masses, divide the  values  of  p  by  the respective densities of  the different [10142]
bodies.

Hence it follows that the values of  p,  p', and w, must vary with the
temperature ;  and  for  an  example  we  shall  consider  the  case  of  a  fluid  which
exactly  moistens  the  glass,  like  alcohol;  supposing  the  lower  end  of  a  glass [10143]
capillary  tube  to  be  dipped  into  that  fluid,  and  that,  at  the  temperature  zero,  the
fluid  rises  to  the  height  q  above  the  level. We  shall  also  suppose  that,  as  the
temperature  increases,  the  density  of  the  fluid  decreases  in  the  ratio  of  1 — a [10144]
to  1;  and,  as  in  [9222],  we  shall  take  into  consideration  an  infinitely  narrow
canal,  which  passes  through  the  axis  of  the  tube. Then  the  action  of  the  fluid nous]
meniscus  formed  by  a  horizontal  plane  passing  through  the  lowest  point  of  the
surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  tul>e,  will  be  decreased  by  the  two  following  causes.
First :  Its  density  being  less,  its  attraction  will  be  decreased  in  the  same  ratio.
For  it  is  reasonable to  suppose  that  this  corpuscular  attraction,  in  the  same
substance,  is  in  proportion  to  its  density;  and  it  has  been  proved  to  be  so,
relative  to  the  action  of  gas  upon  light ;  since  this  action  has  been  found,  by
very  accurate  experiments  upon  the  same  gas,  to  be  strictly  proportional  to  the
density  of  the  gas. Second:  The  action  of  the  fluid  meniscus  upon  the  canal,
decreases  also  with  the  density  of  the  fluid  in  the  canal,  as  is  very  evident.
The  combined  effect  of  these  two  causes  decreases  the  value  of  H  in  the  same
proportion  as  the  square  of  the  density  of  the  fluid  is  decreased,  that  is,  in  the
ratio  of  (l—^f  to  1. But  the  value  of  H,  divided by  the radius of  the fioi47]
tube  /,  which  expresses  the action  of the meniscus upon  the canal, must [10148]
balance the weight of  the  fluid  which  is  drawn  up  into  the canal by  the
capillary  action ;  and  this  weight  is  equal to  the  product  of  the  elevation  of
the  fluid  by  its  density  and  its  gravity. If  we  represent  this  elevation  by  q', [10148^

VOL.  IV.  227

[10146]

[101461

906

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

the  density  of  the  fluid  at  the temperature  zero  by  unity,  and  the  force  of
gravity  by  g^  we  shall  have  the  two  equations,*

[10150a]

[101506]
[10150c  ]

[10150rf]

[10150c ]

[10150/]
[10150^]

[10150/1  ]

[10150i  ]

[10150Jk]

[10150Z ]
[10150m]

[lOlSOn]
[lOlSOo]

[lOloOo']

1 sin  /}'
* (4333) We  have very nearly 7  =  -Y" [9351]; and as d'=90''- for alcohol

[936'2'J,  we  get  &=Z,  nearly.  The  effect  of  the  variation  of  the  measure  of  the  diameter
of  the  tube  by  the  temperature,  is  noticed  in  [10153]. Now  the  action  of  the  meniscus  is

represented  in  [9260,  or  9354],  by  -  =^gq'y  which,  by  substituting  the  preceding  value  of
b,  becomes 7=5*9', as  in  [10150]. Again,  when  the  temperature  increases,  H  becomes

iT.  (l^a)*,  and  the  product  of  the  altitude  q  by  the  density  1,  changes  into  9'.  (1  —  a.)

[10148,  &c.];  making  these  alterations  in  [10150],  it  becomes  as  in  [10151]. Substituting

la-
the value  of  - [10150]  in  [10151],  and  then  dividing  by  ^.(1  — a),  we  get  the  expression

of  q'  [10152],  which  must  evidently  hold  good  even  when  we  notice  the  change  of  density
of  the  fluid  near  its  surface,  q  and  q'  being  the  values  corresponding  to  the  case  of  nature.

The  principle  made  use  of  in  [10147,  &z;c.],  relative  to  a  fluid  whose  density  varies  in
consequence  of  a  change  of  temperature,  may  be  applied  to  a  mixture  of  two  fluids,  as
water  and  alcohol.  For  this  purpose  we  shall  suppose  that  two  infinitely  small  and  equal
volumes  F",  V,  are  taken  in  a  fluid,  so  near  to  each  other  as  to  be  within  the  limits  of  their
mutual  corpuscular  attraction.  If  these  spaces  V^,  V,  be  filled  with  water,  we  shall  suppose
the  capillary  action  or  intensity  Jf  [9262c]  to  be  represented  by  -H„,„;  if  they  be  both  filled
with  alcohol,  we  shall  represent  it  by  -Ha,  „;  and  if  one  be  filled  with  water,  and  the  other
with  alcohol,  we  shall  represent  it  by  -Ha,  „.  If  we  now  denote  by  w,  a,  two  positive
fractions,  whose  sum  is  equal  to  unity,  and  suppose  the  two  fluids  to  be  mixed  together  in  the
proportion  of  a  volume  w  of  water  to  that  of  a  volume  a  of  alcohol,  the  mutual  action  or
intensity  of  the  water  contained  in  the  spaces  V,  V,  will  be  represented  by  w^.  JZ„,„,  that
of  the  alcohol  by  a^.H^,  a*?  the  mutual  action  of  the  water  in  the  space  F'upon  the  alcohol
in  the  space  V\  will  be  represented  by  aw.iTa,^,  and  in  like  manner  that  of  the  alcohol  in
the  space  V  upon  the  water  in  the  space  F"',  by  aw.H^, „.  The  sum  of  these  four  quantities
gives  the  whole  mutual  action  or  intensity  of  the  mixed  mass  of  water  and  alcohol  in  the
spaces  F,  V'j  namely,

w2.fl-„,„  +  2wa.H,„  +  a2.JZ:„;

supposing  always  that  the  temperatures  of  the  two  fluids  are  equal  to  each  other,  and  that
they  are  the  same  before  and  afier  the  mixture ;  neglecting  always  the  change  of  intensity  of
the  repulsive  forces  which  may  result  from  the  absorption  of  the  heat  which  accompanies  the
mixture  of  the  two  fluids,  and  observing  that  -H„,„,  -H„^„,  H^,ai  are  independent  of  w,  a.
Substituting  the  expression  of  the  capillary  intensity  [lOlSOn],  instead  of  jH,  in  the  formula
[9372^],  and  putting  for  brevity

[lOlSOp]

.  -tiu,  y)  — y ,

gl  '  -"«.  M //  »

gl'^'''—f'>

X.  3uppl.  2.]

TWO  FLUIDS  IN  A  TUBE.

907

H
H

-.(l-a)^=gg'.(l_a);

[Correct  even  when  we  notice  the"
variable  density  of  the  :"
its surfaces,  using
given  by  observation.

ive  notice  the~l
he  fluid  near  I
/f  aa  it  is  I
I.  J

[10150]

[10151]

it  becomes

^•(?-|-^0=^^'-/+wa./  +  a8./',  [10150g]

fifi->f'-> being independent of w,  a; and if  we put successively w  =  l, a  =  0, and

w  =  0, a  =  l, we  shall  evidently  see  that  /  is  the  value  of  D.{(i-\-\V)^ corresponding  to [lOlSOr  ]

water,  and  /' the  value  of  D  .{qAr\V)-> corresponding  to  alcohol.

The  formula  [101505-]  is  founded  upon  the  supposition  that  the  loss  of  heat  which  takes
place  during  the  mixture  of  the  two  fluids,  when  the  temperature  has  become  the  same  as [10]50«  ]
before,  has  no  influence  on  the  integral  value  of  H  [9253',  Sec],  relative  to  the  corpuscular
attraction  upon  which  the  capillary  phenomena  depend. This  agrees  with  the  experiment
which  makes  the  variation  of  the  height  q proportional  to  the  increment  of  density,  in  the [1015W  ]
case  of  the  same  fluid  at  different  temperatures;  and  it  is  interesting  to  ascertain  whether  this
hypothesis  agrees  equally  well  in  the  mixture  of  two  fluids. For  this  purpose  we  shall  apply
the  formula  [lOlSO^']  to  some  experiments  of  M.  Gay-Lussac,  published  by  M.  Poisson,  and [10150«]
computed  by  him  in  page  294  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c.

The  first  set  of  these  experiments  were  made  with  mixtures  of  water  and  alcohol,  the
temperature  being  between  8  and  9  degrees,  and  the  radius  of  the  tube Z=0"''-,648. The [10150»]
results  of  the  experiments  are  given  in  a  tabular  form  in  [101 50y]. The  first  column  of  the
table  contains  the  volume  of  water w, the  second  the  volume  of  alcohol a, making  the
whole  volume w-j-a:=l; the  third  column  contains  the  density  J)  of  the  mixture,  as  found [10150u>]
by  observation;  the  fourth  column,  the  observed  elevation  q  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  capillary
surface;  the  fifth  and  sixth  columns  are  the  results  of  calculations  of  the  values  of  q made
in  [10151cZ];  the  density  of  water  being  taken  for  unity,  and  a  miUimetre  for  the  unit  of [lOlSOx]
measure.

1
2

3

4 [lOlSOy]

5
6

7

Volume  of
the  water

W.

Voluitie  of
the  alcohol

a.

Observed  density  of
the  mixture

D.

Observed  elevation

Computed elevation

9-

Differences  of  the  observed
and  computed  values  of

9-

1

0

1,0000

23'"',16

f

i

0,9779

13 ,77

16'"'-,608

-f2""-,838

f

i

0,9657

11 ,31

13 ,131

+  1 ,821

i

i

0,9415

10 ,00

i

f

0,9068

9 ,56

8 ,235

—  1 ,325

i

*

0.8726

9 ,40

7 ,861

—  1 ,539

0

1

0,8196

9 ,182

The  observations  in  line  1  of  this  table,  namely,  w:=l,  a  =  0,  I>=1,  5'  =  23'"'-,16,
being  substituted  in  [10150*7],  together  with  ^?=0"'S216  [10150w],  give  /=  23""-,376.
The  observations  in  line  7,  namely,  w  =0, a  =  l,  i>  =  0,8l96,  q  =  9^\l82y  ^?==0™-,216,

[lOlSOz  ]
[10151a]

908

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10152]

whence  we  deduce

,'=9.(1 -a).

[Correct  oven  when  we  notice  the  change *!
of  density  near  the  surfaces.  J

Thus  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  same  tube,  at  different  temperatures,  is  in

[101516  ]
[101516']

[10151c ]
[10151(/]

[10151c ]

[10151/]

being  substituted  in  the  same  formula  [lOlSOg-],  give  /'=7™-,T03.  To  find /,  we  shall
take  the  observations  in  line  4,  namely,  w  =  ^,  a  =  |^,  D  =0,9415,  q  =  10"'' ,00,  and
:^1=0'^^,216;  substituting  these,  together  with  the  preceding  values  of /,/',  in  [lOlSOy],
we  get  /=7'^-,395.  With  these  values  of/,/',/,  we  deduce  from  [lOlSO^]  the
following  equation  for  all  values  of  w,  a ;

J).{q^y)  =  23™-,376 .  w^  +  T-^^SQS .  wa  +  I^'^IOS .  a^.

Substituting  in  this  equation  the  values  of  w,  a,  given  in  [I0150y,  lines  2,  3,  5,6],  we  get
successively  the  corresponding  values  of  q  in  the  fifth  column  of  the  table ;  the  differences
between  these  and  the  numbers  in  column  4  represent  the  errors  of  the  values  of  q  deduced
from  the  formula  [IOI5O5'],  and  they  show  that  the  hypothesis  upon  which  it  is  founded  does
not  agree  well  with  mixtures  of  water  and  alcohol.  Now  this  is  so  much  the  more  singular,
because  the  formula  agrees  perfectly  well  with  mixtures  of  water  and  nitric  acid,  as  we  shall
see  in  [10151^,  m],  and  there  is  in  both  cases  a  similar  loss  of  heat  and  a  concentration  of  the
fluids.

The  second  set  of  experiments  were  made  with  mixtures  of  water  and  nitric  acid,  the
temperature  being  between  10  and  12  degrees,  and  the  radius  of  the  tube  Z^0™-,6565.
The  results  of  the  experiments  are  given  in  the  table  [10151^],  which  is  similar  to  that  in
[10150y]  ;  the  fifth  and  sixth  columns  of  the  table  [10151^]  are  the  results  of  the  calculations
made  in  [10151m].

The  values  of/,/',  are  found  as  in  [10150z,  Stc.]  ;  first  by  putting  w  =  l,  a  =  0,  D  =  l,
^=22™-,68  [10151^, line  1],  and  4/=0™',219  [10151/],  in  the  equation  [I0150j],  whence
we  get  /=22™'',899;  then,  substituting  in  the  same  equation  the  values  w  =  0,  a  =  l,
D  =  I,3691,  ^  =  14'"'-,08  [10151O-,  line  6],  and  ^Z=0™-,2I9,  we  get /'= 19™, 576.  The
value  of/  may  be  found  by  combining  the  four  observations  in  [10151^,  Unes  2,  3,  4,  5],
[10151A;]  each  of  which  gives  an  equation  like  [IOI5O5'],  containing/ /,/'.  Taking  the  sum  of  these
four  equations,  and  substituting  in  this  sum  the  preceding  values  of/,/',  we  finally  obtain

[lOlSlg]

Volume  of
water

W.

Volume  of
nitric  acid.

a.

Observed  density  of
the  mixture

D.

Observed  elevation

9'

Computed  elevation

9'

Differences  of  the  observed
aod  computed  values  of

9'

1

0

1,0000

22'"'-,68

f

i

1,0391

20 ,52

20'"S495

—  0"',025

2

IS

i

1,1474

19 ,17

19 ,167

—0 ,003

i

i

1,2151

17 ,66

17 ,677

+  0 ,017

1

f

1,2751

16 ,35

16 ,357

+  0 ,007

0

1

1,3691

14 ,08

[1015U]

[10151t  ]

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

909

the  ratio  of  its  density.  We  have  not  here  noticed  the  dilation  of  the  tube,
which,  by  increasing  its  interior  diameter,  decreases  its  elevation.  By  noticing
it,  we  shall  have  the  following  theorem,  which  must  hold  good  with  all  fluids
which,  like  alcohol,  appear  to  possess  a  perfect  fluidity:  "T%e  elevation  of  a
fluid  ivhich  perfectly  moistens  the  sides  of  a  capillary  tube,  is,  at  different
temperatures,  in  the  direct  ratio  of  the  density  of  the  fluid,  and  in  the  inverse
ratio  of  the  interior  diameter  of  the  tube,^^

[10153]

Effect  of  a
change  of
tempera-
ture.

[10154]

ON THE APPARENT ATTRACTION AND REPULSION OP SMALL BODIES WHICH FLOAT UPON  THE

SURFACE OF A FLUID.

We  have  reduced  to  analytical  expressions,  in  [9552 — 9586],  the  apparent
mutual  attraction  of  two  homogeneous,  vertical,  and  parallel  planes  of  a  sensible
thickness,  dipped  by  their  lower  ends  into  a  fluid ;  and  we  have  shown  that  this  [10155]
capillary  action  tends  to  bring  them  together,  whether  the  fluid  be  elevated
or  depressed  in  the  interval  between  them.  Each  plane  then  experiences  a
pressure  *  towards  the  other,  which  is  represented  by  the  weight  of  a  prism  of
the  same  fluid,  whose  height  is  equal  to  the  half  sum  of  the  elevations  of  the
fluid  above  the  level,  or  the  depressions  below  it,  of  the  extreme  parts  of  contact [10156]

[10151/  ]
[10151m]

y]  =  44"''-,510.  Now  substituting  these  values  of /,/,/',  in  [lOlSOg^],  we  get  the  following
expression  for  all  values  of  w,  a ;

D.{q  +  il)  =  22'"'-,899 .  w2  +  44""-510 .  wa  + 19™-,576 .  a^.

Substituting  in  this  equation  the  values  of  w,  a,  given  in  [10151^,  lines  2,  3,  4,  5],  we  get
successively  the  values  of  q  contained  in  the  fifth  column  of  the  table ;  the  difFererces
between  these  and  the  corresponding  numbers  in  column  4,  are  given  in  column  6,  as  the
errors  of  the  formula,  which,  in  this  case,  are  extremely  small.

If  we  compare  the  densities  of  these  mixtures,  we  shall  find  that  those  of  water  and  alcohol  rjoisini
suff(?r  nearly  the  same  condensation  as  those  of  the  acid  and  water.  Thus  the  mean  of  the
densities  1,0000  and  0,8196  of  water  and  alcohol  [lOlSOy,  lines  1,  7]  is  0,9098,  that  of  the
mixture  of  equal  parts  of  the  fluids  being  0,9415  [10150^,  line  4],  which  is  greater  by
0,0317.  In  like  manner,  the  mean  of  the  densities  1,0000  and  1,3691  [10151^,  lines  1,  6]
is  1,1845;  the  difference  between  this  and  1,2151  [10151^,  line  4]  is  0,0306,  which  is  the
excess  of  the  density  of  the  mixture  of  the  two  fluids.

[10151o]

*  (4334) This  supposes  that  both  sides  of  the  planes  have  the  same  action  on  the  fluid,
or  that  the  angles  of  contact  «,  ra',  of  the. planes  with  the  fluid  are  the  same  on  opposite [10156tt]
sides  of  the  planes  respectively. If  this  be  not  the  case,  it  will  be  necessary  to apply  a
correction  to  the  expression  of  the  pressure  given  in  [10156],  as  in  [9580^,  he.].

VOL.  IV.  228

910

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[10157]

[10158]

The  surface
has  a  point
of  contrary
flexure.

[10158']

[10159]

[10160]
[10161]

of  the  inner  and  outer  surfaces  of  the  fluid  with  the  plane,  and  whose  base  is
the  part  of  the  plane  included  between  the  two  horizontal  lines  drawn  through
those  points  [9580, 9585].  This  theorem  contains  the  true  cause  of  the  apparent
attraction  of  bodies  which  swim  upon  a  fluid,  when  it  is  elevated  or  depressed
near  them.  But  it  is  found  by  experiment  that  the  bodies  repel  each  other
when  the  fluid  is  elevated  near  to  one  of  the  planes,  and  is  depressed  near  to
the  other.  To  account  for  this  phenomena,  we  shall  here  consider  generally  the
apparent  repulsion  of  two  vertical  and  parallel  planes  of  different  substances,
dipped  at  their  lower  ends  into  the  same  fluid.

We  shall  suppose  the  fluid  to  be  depressed  near  the  first  plane,  and  elevated
near  the  second ;  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  included  between  them
will  have  at  first  a  point  of  contrary  flexure,  if  the  two  planes  are  very
distant  from  each  other ;  this  point  is  upon  a  level  with  the  indefinite  surface  of
the  fluid  in  which  we  suppose  the  planes  to  be  dipped;  for,  if  we  suppose  an
infinitely  narrow  canal  to  pass  through  this  point,  and  then  to  be  bent  so  as  to
pass  below  one  of  the  planes,  and  to  terminate  far  from  them,  at  the  surface
of  the  exterior  fluid,  the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  being
infinite  at  both  extremities  of  this  canal,  it  must  be  upon  a  level  in  both
branches. This  being  premised,  we  shall  put*

[10161a]

[101616]

[10161c]
[10161rf]

[10161e ]
[10161/]
[10161^?]

*  (4335)  To  illustrate  this,  we  have  given  the
annexed  figure  162,  in  which  IK  is  the  first  plane,
L3I  the  second  plane ;  and  the  surface  of  the  fluid
is  limited  by  the  level  parts  G'G,  PP',  and  the
curved  parts  HV,  UAT,  OP.  C  is  the  point
of  the  surface  corresponding  to  the  rectangular
coordinates  y=RN,  z  =  NC  [10162,  10163];
A  is  the  point  of  inflexion  [10158].  AEFG  is
an  extremely  slender  cylindrical  canal,  the  area  of
whose  base  is  equal  to  unity,  having  two  vertical  branches  EA,  FG,  and  a  horizontal  branch
EF;  ABDC,  a  similar  canal,  with  the  two  vertical  branches  BA,  DC,  and  a  horizontal
branch  BD;  lastly,  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  is  represented  by  the  horizontal  line
GHWRASXPP'.  If  the  planes  are  at  a  great  distance  from  each  other,  the  curvature  of
the  surface,  near  the  planes  at  V,  T,  will  extend  only  to  a  small  distance ;  and  at  some
intermediate  point,  as  at  A,  the  surface  will  have  a  point  of  inflexion,  as  is  evident  from  the
consideration  that  the  concavity  turns  upwards  near  T,  and  downwards  near  U.  This  also
follows  from  the  principle,  that,  at  a  point  of  inflexion,  the  radius  of  curvature  must  be  injinite,
as  at  the  point  G  of  the  level  surface  without  the  planes ;  therefore,  the  capillary  action  at
both  these  points  must  be  equal;  and  then,  from  the  equilibrium  of  the  canal  AEFG,  we

X.Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

911

z  =  the  elevation  of  any  point  of  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  interior
fluid,  above  the  level  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid;  considering  z  as
negative  when  the  elevation  changes  into  a  depression  ;

y  =  the  horizontal  distance  of  the  same  point  from  the  first  plane.

Then  we  shall  have  *

ddz

(

2az,

DifTerential  equation  of  the  curve
surface  between  two  planes.

]

[10162]

[10163]

Differential
equation  ol
the  surface
between
two  planes.

[10164]

shall  have  FG=:EA',  consequently  the  point  of  inflexion  A  must  be  upon  the  level  of  the [1016U]
fluid  in  the  vase,  as  is  observed  in  [10158'];  so  that  the  value  of  z  corresponding  to  this
point  of  inflexion  will  be

z  =  0.  [lOieit]

We  may  finally  remark  that,  when  z  =  0,  the equation  [10164]  gives -—=0, which [10161ft]

is also a  well known condition appertaining to points of  inflexion  j  and  this  value  of  z
corresponds  to  ils=QO,  in  the  equation  [10164c],  given  in  the  next  note.

*  (4336) To  conform  to  the  notation  which  is  used  In  [10162,  10163,  10168,  10175],
and  in  [10184',  10188],  we  shall  have  In  fig.  162,  page  910,

NC  =  z,  RN=y,  RU=q,  ST=q',  WV=q„  OX=^q',.

If  we  suppose  the  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface  at  C  to  be  R,  R' ;  and  at  A,  to  be  b,  b' ;
the  equation  [9315]  will  give

2 \R~R' b h'J ^
Now  we  have  seen,  in  [10161/,  Sec],  that  b,  b',  are  infinite. Moreover,  R'  [9327',  Sec],
which  corresponds  to  the  plane  drawn  through C,  perpendicular  to  Cc  or  to the  plane  of
the  figure,  Is  Infinite;  hence  the  preceding  equation  becomes  simply

2'R

■.gz, or —  =  2^.z^2a,z [9328].

[10164a]

[101646 ]

Substituting  the  value  of  -  [9326],  it  becomes  as  in  [10164];  observing  that,  in  the  present

notation, y takes  the place  of  m;  du  or  dy  being  supposed  constant,  as  in  [9327c]. If
we multiply the equation [10164] by a^,  and  then put,  as In [9323p], aa2  =  l, we

shall  get

ddz

(

[10164c  ]
[10164rf]
[10164c]

[10164/]

which  Is  the  same  as  given  by  M.  Poisson,  In  page  174  of  his  NouveUe  Theorie,  &fc.,  for  the
solution  of  this  problem,  changing  y  into  x,  and  a  into  a,  to  conform  to  his  notation.

912  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

This  equation  being  multiplied  by — dz, and  then  integrated,  gives
[10165]  ^  =  constant — ac^.

^  To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  put  ra  equal  to  the  acute  angle

[10166] formed  by  a  tangent  to  the  part  of  the  section,  placed  at  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of

sensible  activity  of  the  first  plane,  and  a  vertical  plane. Then  we  shall  have

at  that  point  *  -
[10167]  .  }  =  sin.T..

q Putting  q  for  the  depression  of  this  point  below  the  level,  we  shall  have  at  this
'■ ■' point, a2:^  =  ag^; therefore  f

[10167a] *  (4337) The  angle  -a  [10166] is  the  same  as  the  complement  of  a'  [9346];  and  u
being  changed  into  y,  as  in  [10164e],  the  expression  [9389]  will  give

[101676]  cos.tf  = -$=

l/i+*"

whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  sin.w  [10167]. This  is  also  more  easily  obtained
by  the  usual  well  known  rule,

differential  of  the  absciss dy  dy 1

t^"^^'^*^!  sm.ra=  differential  of  the  curve ~'^^\/dz^-\~dyi~  \  / ^*

V^ 1  +  ^2

t  (4338) At  the  point  C7,  fig.  162,  page  910,  where  y=30,  and  z-=.  —  q,  the  equation
[10168a] [10165] becomes sin.-c:f= constant  —  aj^^ as  is  evident  from  [10167]. This  gives  for
the  constant  quantity,  the  value  [10169] ;  and,  by  substituting  it  in  [10165],  we  get  [10170]  ;
which,  by  using  the  abridged  symbol  Z  [10171],  becomes

[101686  ]

\7=»=^' or ,l=Z^.(l+|>

whence  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  d\j  [10172]. Again,  the  preceding  value  of  Z  may

[10168c  ] be  put  under  the  form Z= .J^ ,  „ ; and  if  we  put

Udz^-Ydy^  ^

[10168rf]  «^=the  angle  formed  at  C  by  the  infinitely  small  part  Cc  of  the  arc  CA  and  the  ordinate  Ci),

we  shall  have,  as  in  [10167c],

dy

and  then,  from  [10168c,  c],  we  obtain  .  ,.

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

913

consequently

constant  =  sin.w  -}-  agr^ ;

[10169J

Z=sm.

/»

which will be of  use hereafter,
we  get

sin.w,

Now  substituting this last value  of Z  in  [10171],

•OLZ"

or

[Equation  of  the  curve  gurface~l
between  two  planes. J

sin.'cJ^  -|-  ^^^  =  sin.w  -)-  a*^^  ^

which  expresses  the  equation  of  the  curve  surface  of  the  fluid,  in  terms  of  vi^,  z,  to  which  we
may  have  occasion  to  refer  in  the  course  of  these  notes.

The  equation  [10172]  is  similar  to  [9421],  and  like  it  may  be  integrated  by  means  of
elliptical  functions,  as  in  [9415m — 9416n] ;  a  somewhat  different  process  must,  however,  be
used,  where  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  fig.  162,  page  910  j  and  we  shall  now  proceed  to
give  in  detail  the  process  of  integration  corresponding  to  this  case.  For  greater  simplicity,
we  shall  change  the  origin  of  y,  and  instead  of  supposing  it  to  be  at  the  point  R,  near  the
first  plane,  we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  at  the  point  of  inflexion  A,  and  we  shall  consider
separately  each  of  the  two  parts  of  the  curve  which  terminate  at  this  point,  supposing  the
radical  in  [10168y,  Sic]  to  have  the  same  sign  as  dz.  We  shall  also  use  the  following
additional  symbols,  referring  to  fig.  162  ;

a/  =  i?^  =  the  distance  of  the  point  of  inflexion  from  the  first  plane;
a'  =  ^^=the  distance  of  the  point  of  inflexion  from  the  second  plane;
y=y  —  a^=:lhe  new  absciss  AN,  corresponding  to  the  ordinate  N C  =  z;

i  =  the  angle  SAa,  formed  by  the  horizontal  line  AS,  and  the  surface  Aa,
at  A,  supposing  tlie  point  a  to  fall  above  the  horizontal  line  AS.
The  differential  of  [IOI680]  gives dy  =  dy; substituting  this  in  [10165],  multiplying  by
a^,  and  substituting aa2  =  l  [9323p],  we  get

\/

= constant-

The  constant  quantity  in the  second member of  this equation  may be determined  by

observing  that,  at  the  point  A,  we have  z  =  0  [IOI6I1],  and  tz^^dO^'  —  i  [I0l68d,;p].

Substituting  this  value  of  w^  in  [10168e],  we  get,  at  the  point  A,

1

=cos.i;

1/

1  +  '-^

[10168/]

[10168g]

[10168A]
[10168t  ]

[10168A]

Investiga-
tion of  the
surface  of
tlie  fluid,
when  there

[10168i ]

is  a  point  Oi
inflexion.

[10168m]
[10168n]
[IOI680  ]
[10168^]

[10168g]

[10168r  ]

[IOI685  ]
[10168»']

multiplying  this  by  a%  we  find  that  the  first  member  of  the  product  is  the  same  as  the  first
member  of  [10168r] ;  so  that,  by  putting  2r=0,  as  in  [IOI685],  we  get  a2.cos.i  =  constant;
hence  the  general  expression  of  the  equation  [10168r]  becomes

"^  _-  „2 pns  i Z^  rEquation  of  the  cunre  .urAce-j M  0168*  ]

:_.« .CUS.Cr  — -*  .  1^ between  two  planes. J i-  ••

v/

VOL. IV.

1  +

229

flfe2
^2

914  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.Cel.

,  =  Sin.w-t-o^  —  az-;
df

[10170]  / '^  ==  sin.«  +  o^  — *2';

[10168u]

Squaring  this  equation,  multiplying  also  by dy^  -j-  dz"^, we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,

(aS .  cos.i —z^Y.  dz^  =  ^  a*  —  (a2 .  cos.i  —  z^f  \.dy^

=  j  a2  __  („2  ^  cos.i—  2^2)  ( .  I  a2  +  (a2 .  COS.;  —  z^)  ^  dy2 ;
whence  we  obtain

[10168«  ]

[10168u;]

-  (a2.co8.t' — z^).dz

^~V/R+«^-(l— cos.t.)Ma2.(l+cos.i)  — z2^*

To  reduce  this  to  elliptical  functions,  we  shall  put  c=cos4«j  and  then,  from  [1,  &ic.].  Int.,
we  obtain

cos.|i=c, cos.t=2c2  — 1  =  1  —  262, sin.2Jt  =  l  —  c^=b^,
1  — cos.t=2— 2c3=262, 14-cos.t=2c2,  b^-{-c^=zl.

We  shall  then  suppose  that  the  relation  between  z  and  <p  is  expressed  by  means  of  the  first
form  of  the  equation  [10168x],  which,  by  dividing  the  numerator  and  denominator  by
cos.2(p  =  (l  4- tang.2;p)-',  becomes  of  the  form  [10168y];  from  which  we  easily  deduce  the
expression  of  tang.^ip  [IOI682;] ;

*■  ■'  ^  1 — c2.sin.2qD  1— c2.sin.2^

[101%]

(l-f-  tang.Sip)  —  c2 .  tdLiigJ^q) l-j- 62 .  tang.29)  J
22  22

[10168Z  ]  tang.2<p  =  ^^^2^2_^2^^^  =  ^2a2c2_22).(l_c2)  •

In  considering  separately  the  two  branches  -4T,  AU,  of  the  curve,  fig.  162,  page  910,  and
supposing  the  radical  in  [lOlGBv]  to  have  the  same  sign  as  dz,  we  shall  have,  in [10168y],
[10169a] 2;2<^a2.cos.t, and in [10168m;], cos.i<2c2, or a2.cos.i<2a2c2; hence z2<2a2c2;
therefore  the  expression  of  tang.2<p  [IOI682;]  must  be  positive,  and  9  a  real  quantity.

[101696] We shall  use  for  brevity  the symbols A=v/i_c2.sin.2^, X=^^"''^^^"^'^ [9416/];

then, substituting the values of  l=pcos.i [10168u?], and the  second expression of  z^
[10168a;],  in  the  first  members  of  [10169e, ^],  we  obtain  their  reduced  values  [10169/,  A];
[101696'] observing  that c2.sin.2(p-|-A2=l  [101696],  and

[10169c]  A2_62,sin.2;p  =  l  —  (62-f-c2).sin.2(p=l— sin.2(p=cos.2<p.

[I0169rf] JVfultlplying  the  two expressions [10169/,  h] together, and taking  their  square  root,  we
get  [10169i] ;

2a262c2 .  sin  2p  2a262

[10169c]  «2^a2.(l_cos.i)=z2  +  2a262=::^ ^2— ^-f2a262  =  ^.(c2.sin.29-|-A2)

2a262
[10169/]  =— ;

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.  915

and  if  we  put  [ioi70']

a«.  (1  -1-COS.z)  —  «2^2a2c2  — z2=^2a2c2 ^ ^^A^  .{A^  —  b^.sm.^((>)  [1016%]

2a2c2

=  -^.008.^9;  [10169A]

^^22+a2.(l-cos.t)|.^a^.(l+cos.t)-z2^=^^^^^^^^.  [10169i  ]
Taking  the  differential  of  the  second  expression  of  z^  [10168a;],  and  dividing  it  by  2,  we  get,

by  successive  reductions,  its  value  [10169m];  dividing  this  by g:=^ ^"^^'""''^  [10168a:],  [l0169Jfc]
we  obtain  dz  [10169?w] ;  dividing  this  by  the  expression  [10169t],  we  get  [10169o],

7 ,.7  0  7 / c2.sin.2a) \ /2c^dq).sin.q>.cos.q)\  ^^.  ,

^dz^^^b^'^\l-c^.s-Zc^)==^'^'\il%Z.^f)  [10169i  ]

_2«W.rfcp^sin.>,.cos..p  [10169m]

^^^\/2.abc.d^.co3.<p  [10169«]

[10169o]

dz 1 d(p

\/\z^  -{-a:^.(l—cos.i)\.\a^.{l-\-cos.i)-^f^  ^2.cl''A'

Substituting  cosi=l— 26^  [10163m;],  and  z^  [10168a;],  in  the  first  member  of  [10169/?],
and  making  successive  reductions,  we  get  [101699-] ;  multiplying  this  by  [10169o],  we  get
the  expression  of  dy  [10168r],  under  the  form  [10169r];

a«.cos.i-z==«».(l-26^)-?^^^^^=<.^-2«^6^(l+'-^)  [10169,]

=  a2— aaW.ijS  [10169j]

dX  , b^ A  ,  .  , . ,,  . ,

Now  we  have,  in [94l6i],  the identical equation — -f -— =-; multiplymg  this  by

^V "^^ '^  [10169*]

— \/2.ac^'d(p, and  transposing  the  first  term,  we  obtain

ZZyll^^^^=—\/2-cc.d(p.A  +  i/2.ac^.dX;  [10169f  ]

substituting  this  in  [10169r],  we  get,  by  reinstating  the  value  of  X  [101696],

Imegraiing  this  expression,  and  using  llie  elliptical  symbols  [8910fc,  I],  we  finally  obtain

^  , „  sin.<)() .  cos.flp  r7A7/^  1

y  =  -^.F(c,9)-/2-«.E(c,9)+/2.ac2.-^^,  [10169r]

V/2

no  constant  quantity  being  added,  because,  at  the  point  of  inflexion  A,  we  have y==0, [10169t.]
z=0,  (p==;0  [10168;^];  finally,  if  we  multiply  [10169i;]  by ^, we  shall  get

916

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

Z

[10171]

Z  =  sin.ra  -f  ^(f — 0-2^ ,

[10169z]

v\/2 T-i  / \ ^  T^  / \ 1  2c2 .  sin.ffi .  cos.<p
a  ^ '  ^ ' s/\ — c2.8in.29

This  is  the  same  as  the  equation  (11),  in  page  186  of  M.  Poisson's  Nouvelle  Theorie,  &cc. ;
and  from  it  we  may  deduce  the  same  relations  which  he  has  obtained  between  the  values  of
[10169y]  the  quantities  i,  q,  q,,  to,  «',  he,  and  the  angles  cp  corresponding  to  the  surface  of  the  fluid
near  the  two  planes.  Thus,  by  substituting  the  expression  [10174],  and  z=^q'  [10175],
corresponding  to  the  second  plane,  in  the  equation  [10168/J,  we  get  successively,  by  using
cos.t=2c2  — 1 [10168m'],

q"^z=^a^.{Q,o's,.i  —  sin-Ttf')
=  a2.(2c2  — 1— -sin.-o').

In  like  manner  we  have  at  the  first  plane (^z=a?.{c,Q&.i — sin.w). Substituting  the  value

of  z^=iq"^  [101706],  in  the  last  expression  of  [10168z],  and  putting  0'  for  the  value  of  9,

corresponding  to  this  point,  we  shall  get,  by  using Sc^ — l  =  cos./, and 1  —  c^  =  sin.^Jt

[10168w],

2c2 — 1 — sin.tff'  cos.t  —  sin.'sj'

[10169Z  ]
[10170a  ]
[101706  ]
[1017051

[10170c  ]

[10170c']

[10170d]
[10170rf']

[10170c ]

tan2.2  0'=,

(1— c2).(14-8in.a') sin.2^i.(l-fsin.-n')'

and  the  equation  [10169a;]  will  then  become,  by  putting  y  =  a.',  [10168n,  0],  which  is  its
value  near  the  second  plane,

a  ^  ' ^  V  ' y  T-  v/l  — c2sin.2  0'

If  we  put  a,  •51,0,  for  what  a',  to',  0',  become  relative  to  the  other  extremity,  we  shall
obtain  another  equation,  which  can  be  derived  from  [10170c?],  by  changing  a'  into  a^,  and
©'  into  ©,  namely.

^  =  F(c,0)-2E(c,0)

2c2 .  sin.0 .  cos.e

[10170/]

\/l— c2.sin.2  0

Taking  the  sum  of  these  two  equations,  and  putting  2?  [10210],  for  the  distance  of  the  two
planes,  we  shall  get

?^  =  F(c,0)  +  F(c,©')— 2E(c,©)-2E(c,0')

2c2.sin.0'.cos.0'

2  c2 .  sin.0 .  COS.0
' v/r-^2~.sin.20

v/r

[10170^]

[10170/1]

-c2.sin.2e'

The  equations  [10170a,  cZ,/j  are  equivalent  to  the  equations  (12),  (13),  (14),  given  by
M.  Poisson,  in  pages  186,  187,  of  his  work.  They  serve  to  determine  the  form  of  the
surface,  supposing  some  of  the  quantities  to  be  given.  Thus,  if  we  know  the  values  of
c,  a,  TO,  to',  we  shall  have,  from  [10170c'],  the  value  of©';  and  from  [10170c',  rf'],  the  value  of
0;  then,  from  [10170/],  we  get  the  value  of  2/;  finally,  for  any  proposed  angle  9,  we  get
the  absciss  y  [10169x],  and  the  ordinate  z  [10168a;].  This  process  requires  the  use  of
Le  Gendre's  tables  of  elliptical  functions;  but,  the  calculation  being  very  simple,  we  shall  not
give  any  examples. If  2Z  is  given  instead  of  c,  and  it  is  required  to  find  the  value  of  c  from

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID,
we  shall  have

21,  a,  -a,  zs',  we  must  proceed  as  in  [Mlld—g'],  and  compute  for  values  of  c,  from  c  =  0  to
c  =  l,  with  small  intervals,  the  corresponding  values  of  0',  0  [lOllOc',  d'],  and  those  of
21  [10170/] ;  then,  by  inspection  in  this  table,  we  may  find  the  value  of  c,  corresponding
to  any  proposed  value  of  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  2?.

We  may  change  the  origin  of  the  coordinates,  from  the  point  of  inflexion  A,  fig.  162,
page  910,  to  the  point  S,  near  the  second  plane,  by  subtracting  the  expression  [10169a;]  from
that  in  [iOllOd],  and  then  putting,  in  like  manner  as  in  [9417A],  y'  =  ^, — y;  hence
we  get

yV2^F(c,©')-F(c,9)-2E(c,0')+2E(c,(p)

, 2c^.Bin.e^cos.e^ Sc^.sin.cp.cos.qp
"T"  \/l—  c2 .  eni:^  ~  \/t—  e2 .  sin  2g) '

y'  being  the  absciss  SN,  counted  from  the  point  *S  in  the  second  plane ;  and  by  changing
©'  into  0,  &c.,  we  get  a  similar  equation,  where  the  origin  of  the  abscisses  is  at  the  point  R
of  the  first  plane.  The  formula  [10170m]  is  the  complete  integral  of  the  proposed  differential
equation  [10164],  and  it  can  be  used  even  in  cases  where  methods  of  approximation  would
wholly  fail.  In  the  extreme  cases,  when  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  either  very  great  or
very  small,  we  may  develop  the  formula  in  a  series  of  terms  of  an  approximative  form.  The
first  of  these  cases  has  already  been  treated  of  in  another  way  in  [9435,  Sec] ;  and  we  shall
now  take  into  consideration  the  other  case,  where  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  very  small.

When  zs=:ts',  the  point  of  inflexion  A,  fig.  162,  page  910,  will  be  in  the  middle  of
the  line  RS  [10195,  &,c.];  consequently  0,^=0-^'  [10168/n,n] ;  and  the  branch  AT,  above  the
horizontal  plane  RS,  will  be  exactly  similar  and  equal  to  the  branch  A  U,  which  falls  below
that  plane ;  and  this  holds  good  however  near  the  planes  may  be  brought  to  each  other.  In
the  investigation  of  the  figure  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  corresponding  to  the  case  where
•a,  Tn',  are  either  equal,  or  differ  but  very  little  from  each  other,  it  will  be  convenient  to  have
the  second  member  of  the  expression  [10170^?]  developed  in  a  series,  according  to  the
powers  of  e',  supposing  ©'  to  be  small.  This  development  we  shall  now  make,  neglecting
terms  of  the  order  0'^.

In  this  case,  we  easily  deduce  from  [43,  44,  Stc],  Int.,  the  following  expressions,  using  for
abridgment  the  symbol A  =  ^l — c^.sin.^e'j

-'3- cos.e'  =  l  —  2-e'^;

sm.e  =0  — 1@

1-2 '2.

sin.e'.  cos.0'=  e'  —  ^e'^ ;

sin.e'.cos.e'

A  =  \/\ —  c9.  e'2  =  1  —  ^c^e

=  0'— §©"-!- ^C20'3.

Substituting  these  values  in  the  first  members  of  [10170u,  v,  w\,  and  making  the  necessary
developments  and  integrations,  we  obtain  respectively  the  second  members  of  these  three
expressions.  The  sum  of  them  being  substituted  in  the  second  member  of  [lOHOrf],  gives
[lOnOa;],

VOL. IV.  230

917

[10171]

[loiroi ]

[10170Jfc]

[10170Z  ]

[10170TO]

[10170n]

[10170O  ]

Surface  of
the  fluid
where  the

[10170p]

two  branch-
es are  equal
and  similHr,
with  a  point
of  inflexion
between
them.

[10170g]

[10170g']

[10170r]
[101705  ]
[10170<  ]

918

[10172]

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

dy-=

Zdz

v/i=^'

0.

[10170ti]
[10170i;  ]
[10170u>]

[10170x]

[101701/]
[10170Z  ]

[10171a]
[101716]
[10171c ]

[10171rf]

[10171c  ]

[10171/]
[10171g]

[1017U]

2c2.sin.e'.cos.0' ^  „ , „  „ ,-  . . ,-

-^ =  2c2©'— |CV^  +  C40'3J

.^Vl  =  (2c2  —  1 )  .  ©'— .|c V3  +  C40'»

We  may  develop  in  the  same  manner  the  second  member  of  [10169j;]  ;  for  the  equation
[10169a;]  can  be  derived  from  [10170tZj,  by  changing  a'  into  y,  and  0'  into  9;  and  by
making  the  same  changes  in  [10170a;],  we  get

3H/2  ^  (2^2  __  1) ,  (p  _  |cV  +  cV.

If  we  put -a'^^^it — 'M.', l-jr-sin.'5i'=:l-}-cos.|x'=2cos.2^(i.', in  the  second  expression
of  tang.^©'  [10170c'],  we  shall  get,  by  neglecting  ©'*,

,„ cos.t — COS.M.'
0'2 !

2sin.2ii.cos.2i(x'

As  ©'  is  supposed  to  be  very  small  [10170g'J,  the  numerator  of  this  last  expression  must  also
be  very  small,  which  requires  that  i  should  be  nearly  equal  to  m-';  therefore,  2sin.^i.cos.|i*'
is  very  nearly  equal  to  2sin4M''.cos.JfJi.'=sin.jx';  so  that,  if  we  multiply  [10171a]  by  the
square  of  this  expression  of  sin.|x',  we  shall  get  very  nearly  0'2.sin.2fi,'  =  2.(cos.t  —  cos.f*'),
or  cos.i  =  cos.|x'-{- J0'2  sin.2|j,,'j  and  as  the  second  member  of  this  expression  is  nearly
equal  to cos.(fJi.'  —  ^©'^.sin.f**),  [61],  Int.,  we  shall  have  very  nearly

i=/ji.' — ^0'2»sin.fjt.'.

The  angle  9,  which  enters  into  the  equation  [10168a?,  10169a;],  being  always  less  than  ©',
we  may  neglect  the  cube  of  <p;  and  then  the  second  expression  in  [10168a;]  gives,  by  taking
its  square  root, 2r=5y/2.a6c.(p,  and  [10170y]  becomes ?^^_  =  (2c2 — ^l).(p. Eliminating

<p  from  these  two  expressions,  we  get  by  successive  reductions,  and  using  the  values
[10168w],

2&e

=7'

2sin.it.  cos.i^i

sm.i
T-7;^=y-tang.t;

•^ 2c2-^l •'  ' cos.i  •' cos.t

and  by  substituting  the  value  of  i  [10171fZ],  and  neglecting  0'"^,  we  get  very  nearly

5f=«y.tang.fA'j

so  that  the  curve,  in  this  case,  will  be  very  nearly  a  right  line.  This  equation  becomes,
however,  inaccurate  when  the  divisor  2c^  —  1,  or  cos.t  [10168?^?],  is  small;  then  we  must
retain  the  third  power  of  9  and  0\  as  in  [10170a;,  y]^ In  taking  this  case  into  consideration,

X.  Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLAxNES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.  919

Putting  w'  for  the  acute  angle  formed  by  a  vertical  plane  and  the  tangent  to  a «'

point  of  the  section  placed  at  the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  sensible  activity  of  the  ^^^^^^^
second  plane,  we  shall  have  *

we  shall  suppose,  for  greater  simplicity,  that «  =  t3'=0, or fJt'=i5r  [10170z] ;  and  then
[10171</J  becomes

t  =  ^*  — ^0'2;  [10171t]

hence cos.i  =  sm.(^0'2)  =  ^©'2^  3^2  _  1  [10168m;]  ;  therefore  we  have

c'  =  i  +  -i0'S  62  =  l_c2  =  ^_i0'2.  ~  [1017U]

Substituting  this  value  of  c^  in  [10170a?],  we  get  '

?zV:3  =  ^0'3j  [1017U']

consequently  -

*e''=^\X ^=(2c2  — 1) [lOnifc];  [10171/]

using  this  value  of  Sc^  —  1 in  the  first  term  of  [10170y],  and  putting  c2=:^  in  the  second
and  third  terms,  we  get

v\/2 , \  -J  yi8a'2
, ^-~=^^'\y -^ i?';  [10171m]

observing  that  the  coefficient  of  ^(p,  in  the  first  term  of  the  second  member,  is  of  the  order

0'^  [10171/J,  so  that  this  term  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  order  <p^  as  the  second  term [10171m']

of  the second member  of  the  same  equation. Substituting bc  =  ^ nearly  [10171^],  in

z  [lOnie],  we  get

substituting  this  value  of  cp,  in  [10171/»],  and  multiplying  by -;^, we  obtain  the  following
equation  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid ;

1  , /1flti'2  23

y  =  ^2r.  \3 /i^^_±_.  [IOI7I0]

V^ a2  3a2'  ■■

which  corresponds  to  a  cubic  parabola,  both  terms  being  of  the  same  order  [1017  Iw'J. This [10171p)
equation  is  the  same  as  is  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  8fc.,  page  192,  for
the  case  of  TO  =  ts', where  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  fig.  162,  page  910,  between  the [IOI7I5]
two  equal  and  similar  branches  AT,  AU;  changing  y,  aj,  a,  into  a?,  a,  a,  respectively,  to
conform  to  his  notation.

*  (4339) At  the  point  T,  fig.  162,  page  910,  where  z  =  *S:r=  2' [10175],  the  expression  of

• y.  [101 67c],  [10174a]

becomes  sin.w',  as  in  [10174],  which  is  exactly  similar  to  [10167];  and  the  expression
[10170]  becomes  as  in  [10176];  then,  changing  the  signs,  and  transposing  sin.«,  we
get  [10177].

920

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10174]

9

01

[10176]
[10177]

1  +  —

=  Sin.ra  .

r  101751 Putting  q'  for  the  value  of  z  corresponding  to  that  pointy  we  shall  have

therefore

sin.* — sin.*'  =  dL^'^ — a^^;

(»•)•

[10178] Z  cannot  exceed  unity;*  and  if  the section  has  a  point  of  inflexion,  z  will
vanish  t at that point,  and then Z  will be equal to sin.w-f-o-^^  [10171].

[10179] Therefore sin.*  4-0-9^ is  equal  to  or  less  than  unity;  and  if  it  be  equal  to  unity,
we  shall  have,  from  [10171],

[10180]  Z=l — az^; .

consequently  t  ,

*  (4340) If  Z  be  greater  than  unity,  the  expression  of  — ,  deduced  from  [10172],  will
[10177a] become imaginary. The  same  also follows from the expression Z=s\n.vi^  [10168/*],
which  gives  an  imaginary  value  of  zs^,  or  «'  [10173],  when  Z^\.

f  (4341) This  is  proved  in  [10161i],  where  it  is  shown  that,  at  the  point  A,  fig.  162,

page  910,  EA  =  FG,  or,  in  other  words,  z  =  0. Substituting  this  in  [10171],  it  becomes,

for  that  point,  Z^s'm.'7S-\-a.q^;  and  as  Z  is  equal  to  or  less  than  1  [10178],  it  follows  that

[101785] sin.w  4- a^^ is  equal  to  or  less  than  1,  as  in  [10179]. If  sin.^s -f- a2^=l, the  equation

[10171]  will  become  as  in  [10180].

%  (4342)  Substituting  the  value  of  Z  [10180]  in  [10172],  it  becomes  by  reduction  as
in  [10181],  observing  that  the  radicals  are  considered  as  positive;  and  we  have  inserted  the
sign  —  in  the  second  member  in  order  to  conform  to  the  supposition  in  [10158] ;  from  which
it  appears  that  near  the  first  plane  the  value  of  z  is  negative;  that  dy,  dz,  have  the  same
signs,  and  that  Z  [10177a,  &ic.]  is  positive.  Now  putting,  for  brevity,  t>s=r^i — iaz^,
we  shall  find  that  the  integral  of  [10181]  is

1 , /l+«\ 2w ,
y  =  r. /^-.log.l , )  —  -7^  +  constant :

as  we  can  easily  prove  by  taking  its  differential,  which  gives
Now  the  differential  of  v  [10181a']  gives

[10181a]
[lOlSloH

[101816  ]

[10181c]

[lOlSlrf]
[10181^']

and  as 1  —  v^  =  Ja^Q, we  have

rfo= —

— dv

V/l— ^022

dz

l_t,2 z/l— ioua'

X.Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

921

dy  =

— {l—o.z'^).dz

The  integral  of  this  equation  being  taken  so  that  z  may  vanish  between  the
limits  of  y,  gives  for  y,  and  of  course  for  the  mutual  distance  of  the  two  planes,
an  infinite  value,  [1018h*] ;  therefore,  when  this  distance  is  finite,  and  there  is  a
point  of  inflexion  in  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  interior  fluid,  sin.tn  -f  a^^
will  be  less  than  unity  [10181/] ;  consequently  sin.ro'-f-a^'s  will  likewise  be
less  than  unity  [10181m],  in  virtue  of  the  equation  [10177],

[10181]

[10182]

[10183]

multiplying  this  by 1 — 2v^= — (1  —  az^),

we  get
.(1-

az9).rfz

•icu2

Dividing this last expression by  \/2^, we get the  last  value  of  dy [10181c], under
the  form

y <  /o^

—  dv

-.(l_2u2);

—  (1— C)L22).rfz

being  the  same  as  in  [10181] ;  therefore  the  expression  [101816]  is  the  integral  of  [10181],
If  we  take  the  constant  quantity,  so  that,  when  y  =  0,  we  shall  have  z  =  —  q  [10168],
V  =  \/\—  ictga  [10181«'];  and  then  we  shall  get  for  the  complete  value  of  y  [101816],  the
following  expression ;

y

2/2^"

lo

&•

l  +  \/l— ia22

yi

=|^A log  /^i  +  y/i-aagA:

2v/l— d-122 2v/l— ia92

V/^

"^' \/^

At  the  first  plane,  where  z  =  —  g-,  this  gives  y  =  0;  and  when  z=0,  the  logarithmic
part  of  this  expression  becomes  infinite,  and  we  have  j^  =  oo.  Hence  it  appears  that  wt
cannot  obtain  a  value  2;  =  0,  corresponding  to  a  point  of  contrary  fiexure  [10178],  and
to  the  assumed  value  sm.vi.-\-o.q^  =  l  [10179],  without  supposing  the  planes  to  be  at  an
infinite  distance  from  each  other.  Therefore,  if  there  is  a  point  of  contrary  flexure,  and  the
planes  are  at  a  finite  distance  from  each  other,  we  must  have  sin.w-|-^2'^<Cl  [10179];
and  as  smM -{■  o,q^  =  s'm.-a'-{-(x.q'^  [10177],  we  shall  also  have,  as  in  [10183],
siD.«'-f-a5''2<:^  I.

The  logarithmic  part  of  the  expressions [101816,  A]  may  be  changed  by  observing  that
*+£=3izi!!l=i^:^ [10181a'l;  and  if  we  put  v  for  the  value  of  v,  when  z  =  —  q,

i-v (i-r)2 [i-vf  ;; 2

we  shall,  in  like  manner,  obtain  ^^=--^-,  The  difference  of  the  logarithms  of  these
two  quantities  is

]_LV , 14-V , (1— V)2.22 ,  /(V  — 1).2\2  (v  — 1).Z

log  ii-„-iog.i::rv==^«g-{Ti^^)2:f2=iog.(^pLir,775^  =^^H-iTz::^q  5

observing that  we have  changed (1  —  v)2 into (v  — 1)2, so  as to render the number
VOL.  IV,  231

[10181c  ]

[10181/]
[lOlSlg]

[10181A]

[101811  ]
[1018U]

[10181/  ]
[10181m]

[10181n]
[IOI8I0  ]

[10181;?]

922

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[10184]

9,

[10184']

[10185]
[10186]

When  the  planes  are  at  an  infinite  distance  from  each  other,  y  must  be  infinite,
which  requires  that  Z  should  be  equal  to  1,  when*  2==:0;  ihexQ^oxe,  jmtting  q^
for  the  depression  of  the  fluid  in  this  case,  or,  in  other  words,  the  depression  of
the  fluid  outside  of  the  first  plane,  we  shall  have

(y^qf  +  sin.w  =  1 , or o.qf  =  1  —  sin.ro ;

q  is  therefore  less  than  q^. Now  if  we  apply  the  method  of  computation  which
is  used  in  [9580a — d'],  we  shall  find  that  the  first  plane  is  pressed  outwards  by

[10181^]

[10181r ]

[101815 ]
[10181f ]

[lOlSlu]
[10181v]

whose  logarithm  is  to  be  found,  positive  when  z  is  negative,  which  corresponds  with  one  of  the
forms  of  the  equation  where  we  have  used  the  integral  [lOlSiw].  Substituting  [1018Ip]
in  [I0181A],  and  then  replacing  the  values  of  v,  v,  we  get

2\/l— ^az^ 2v/r

^ 2/2^7 ^  (1-/1=1^).?:

■iag2

constant  r,

V/2a  ^2a

for  the  integral  of  [10181];  the  constant  r  being  added  upon  the  supposition  that  y=sr,
when  2r  =  —  q,  instead  of  supposing  y  =  0,  when  z  =  —  g-,  as  in  [10181^].  Substituting
(y^^=cr^  [9328],  and  making  a  few  slight  reductions,  we  find  that  the  differential  equation
[10181]  becomes  as  in  [10181m],  and  its  integral  [10181r]  can  be  put  under  the  form
[10181v],  by  altering  the  arrangement  of  the  terms;

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

[10184a]
[101846  ]

[10184c  ]
[10184££]
[10184e  ]

[10184/]
[10184g]

*  (4343)  The  value  of  y,  corresponding  to  the  distance  of  the  second  plane  from
the  first,  becomes  infinite,  when  the  distance  of  tlie  planes  is  infinite,  which  happens
when  the  denominator  1  —  \/l  —  )iOjz^  of  the  first  term  of  [10181A]  vanishes;  and
then  we  evidently  have  z  =  Q.  This  value  z  =  0  corresponds  to  the  point  of  inflexion
[10178],  which  is  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  planes,  where  the  fluid  must
evidently  be  horizontal,  or  ^^  =  90''-  [10168(Z] ;  consequently  Z^sin.zi^=\  [10168/];
substituting  these  values  in  [10171],  we  get  l  =  sin.'cr-|-a.?^  for  the  relation  between
■m  and  q,  when  the  second  plane  is  at  an  infinite  distance  from  the  first.  Now  this  may
be  considered  as  the  actual  situation  of  the  fluid  outside  of  the  first  plane,  because  we  may
suppose  a  plane  parallel  to  IK,  fig.  16*2,  page  910,  to  be  situated  at  an  infinite  distance  in
the  direction  WG',  without  altering  the  curvature  of  the  surface  G'HF'  near  the  first  plane,
and  the  equation  [10184c]  will  correspond  to  this  surface  by  merely  changing  q  into  q^,  as
in  [10184'],  which  makes  it  become  l=ss\n.-a-\-a.q^,  as  in  [10185],  or,  as  it  may  be
written,  ^q/^=l  —  sin.trf.  But  from  [10183],  we  have  sm.-ui-j-a.q^<:^l,  oroLg'*^<;i  —  sin.ij;
hence o.q'^<Ci^2!^> ^r q<iQt) as  in  [10186].

X.  Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID

923

a  force  which  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  fluid  prism,  whose  height  is  i .  (9,  +  q),
depth {q^ — q\ and  width  the  same  as  that  of  the  plane.*

The  equation  [10177]  gives,  generally,  sin.^a'-fag'^  j^gg  ^^^^  ^^^^^  [IOISItw]  ;
but  when  the  planes  are  at  an  infinite  distance,  it  gives  this  function  equal  to
unity  [101 8h', A:,/].  Let  ^J  he  what  q'  then  becomes;  or,  in  other  words,  let  q',
he  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  outside  of  the  second  plane^  q will  he  greater

[10187]
L10188]

[10188'j

q'

[10189]

*  (4344)  If  we  continue  the  horizontal  canal  DB,  fig.  162,  page  910,  to  meet  the
first  plane  at  B\  below  the  point  U,  and  above  the  point  V,  VV  being  horizontal,  it  is
evident  that,  if  we  neglect  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  which  acts  equally  on  opposite
sides  of  the  first  plane,  we  shall  have  for  the  capillary  action  of  the  fluid  at  A,  the  expression
ir[9259] ;  therefore  the  pressure  at  B^  and  in  the  canal  BB',  is  equal  to  K-\-gDxAB,
g  being  the  gravity,  and  D  the  density  of  the  fluid.  Subtracting  from  this  the  capillary
action  of  the  fluid  at  the  first  plane  at  B\  namely  ^[9259],  we  obtain  gDxAB,  for  the
pressure  at  the  point  B',  in  the  direction  BB';  and  by  putting  AB=RB'  =  w,  this
pressure  becomes  gDw;  which  is  similar  to  the  expression  gw  [95806],  changing^  into  ^D.
Hence  we  find,  by  the  method  used  in  [9580a — d],  that  the  whole  pressure  on  the  part  UB',
will  be,  as  in  [95806], equal  to  ^gD.(w^  —  RU^),  and  in  the  whole  space  UV  will  be
isgD.{RV'^  —  RU^)  =  lgD.{g,^  —  q^)  =  ^gD.{q^-\-q).{q,-^q),  which  is  evidently
equal  to  the  expression  [10187],  Moreover,  this  pressure  is  outwards,  or  in  the  repulsive
direction  BB'.  The  pressures  below  T^V,  on  opposite  sides  of  this  plane,  are  equal  and
opposite,  and  therefore  destroy  each  other.  IVIultiplying  [10185]  by  a^,  and  using  aa^=5;l
[9323p],  we  get  q^  =  ofi.(l  —  sin.ro);  substituting  this  in  [10187^],  we  get  the  expression
of  the  repulsive  force  at  the  first  plane  [10187Jt].  In  like  manner  we  obtain  from
[10190«,  101896,  he]  the  similar  expression  [10187ZJ,  representing  the  repulsive  force  at
the  second  plane ;

^gD. \a^.{l  —  sin.w)  —  5-^1  =  repulsive  force  at  the  first  plane;
^gD.\a^.(l — sin.'c/) — g''2|= repulsive  force  at  the  second  plane.

If  we  substitute  q^  =  a^ .  (cos.i  —  sin.ra)  [101706']  and  q'^  =  a^.{cos.i — sin.'u')  [10170fir]
in  the  expressions  of  the  repulsive  forces  [10187^,  ZJ,  they  will  become  equal  to  each  other,
and  will  be  expressed  by

^gD. a^.ll  —  cos.i^  =  repulsive  force  at  the  first  or  second  plane.
IVIoreover,  if  the  curve  is  symmetrical  above  and  below  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,  or
«  =  «'  [lOnOp],  and  the  distance  of  the  planes  21  is  small  in  comparison  with  a,  we  may  put,
as  in  [lOnic/],  i:^/  nearly,  and  then  [10187n]  becomes,  by  using  (x'  =  ^?r  — ro'  [10l70z].

^gD .  a^ .  (1  —  cos.M-O  =  igD .  a^ .  (1  —  sin.ro')  =  the  repulsive  force  of  the  planes ;
which  is  independent  of  the  distance  of  the  two  planes,  and  if  we  suppose  ■5?=^'=  0,  the
repulsive  force  becomes  ^gD.a^. In  all  these  calculations,  we  have  supposed  the  angle  ct
to  be  the  same  on  both  sides  of  the  first  plane,  and  «'  to  be  the  same  on  both  sides  of  the
second  plane,  so  that  the  correction  [9983a;]  vanishes.

[10187a ]
[101876  ]

[10187c  ]
[10187c']

[10187rf]

[10187e  ]

[10187/]
[10187^]

[10187/1]

[10187i ]

[10187A;]
[10187/  ]
[10187m]

[10187n]
[101870]

[10187p]

[10187^]
[10187r ]

924

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10190]
[10190']

than*  q' ;  and  it  follows  also  from  the  above  theory  [9580a,  &c.],  that  the
second  plane  will  be  pressed  outwards  by  a  force  which  is  equal  to  the  weight
of  a  fluid  prism  whose  height  is  h(^,-{-g')i  depth  ((/^  —  q'),  and  width  that  of
the  second  plane,t  which  we  shall  here  suppose  to  be  the  same  as  that  of  the

* (4345) When the two planes are at an infinite distance from each other,  q
will  change  into q, [10184'],  also q' into  q];  and the equation [10181/J will become
sin.'«-f  a^^s^sin.TO'-l-ay'^s  —  i [10185]; or a.q,-^  =  l  —  sin.is'. But by [lOlSlmJ,
[101896] o^^/2<^i_sin.^'; therefore ^q'/^>^q% or ^,>q', as  in  [10189].

[10190a]

[101906 ]
[10190c ]
[10190rf]

[10190/]
[10190^]

[10190^
[10190A]

[10190i ]
[10190A]

Fig.163.

t  (4346)  To  find  the  pressure  on  the  second  plane  LM,  we  shall  refer  to  fig.  163,  which
is  similar  to  fig.  162,  but  drawn  upon  a  larger  scale,  for  the
sake  of  distinctness.  Through  any  point  r  of  the  surface  of
the  fluid,  a  canal  rsiu  is  drawn,  whose  branches  sr,  tu^  are
vertical,  and  st  horizontal;  moreover  the  line  rx  is  drawn
perpendicular  to  the  plane  OX  Then  it  is  evident  that  the
equal  and  opposite  pressures  on  the  parts  of  this  plane  below
the  horizontal  line  TT'  mutually  destroy  each  other;  so
that  it  is  only  necessary  to  notice  the  pressure  in  the  part  ^
corresponding  to  T' 0\  therefore,  if  we  put  Xa:  =  tf>,  its
extreme  values  will  be  XT'  =  ST=q',  and  XO  =  q[.
Now  neglecting  the  atmospherical  pressure,  as  in  [101876],
we  shall  have,  for  the  capillary  action  at  r,  the  expression K — rr [95586]. Adding this

to  the  gravity  of  the  column  rs,  which  is  equal  to  gDXrs,  we  get  the  pressure  in  the  canal

[10190e] at  5,  equal  to K — —-{-gDXrs. In  like  manner  the  capillary  action  at  w  is  K  [9259];

adding  this  to  the  gravity  of  the  column  iu,  namely  gDxtu,  we  get  the  pressure  at  t,  in  the
canal  tu  equal  to K-\-gDxtu', and  this  must  be  equal  to  the  pressure  at  s;  hence

i»f

H

K—f^+gDxrs=KJrgDxtu',

consequently

H

—  =gD.{rs  —  tu)=gD.Xx=gD.w [10190c].

Substituting  this  in  the  expression  of  the  capillary  action  [10190tZ],  it  becomes  K — gD.w,
This  being  the  action  at  any  sensible  distance  from  the  surface,  it  must,  from  the  nature  of
fluids,  act  in  every  direction,  consequently  in  the  direction  rx.  But  the  action  of  the  fluid  at
X,  in  the  direction  xr,  being  K  [9259],  there  must  be  an  excess  of  pressure  in  the  direction
xr,  equal  to  gD.w;  that  is,  the  pressure  at  x  is  outtvards,  and  equal  to  gD.w.  This  is  of
the  same  form  as  that  for  the  first  plane  in  [10187c] ;  and  by  making  the  calculation  as  in
[101876? — A],  we  shall find  that  the  whole  pressure  on the  part T'O, in the  repulsive

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

925

first. We  may  thence  conclude  that  the  pressures  suffered  by  the  planes,  and
tending  to  repel  them  from  each  other,  are  equal. For  the  products

m  +  q')'{^-q')  =  Wf-q"). and h{q,  +  q).{%-q)==l{qf-<f),
are  respectively  equal  to  the  following  expressions,*

-.(l-sin..'-a5-),

2a

-.(1-— sin.«  — ag2);

2a

and  these  two  last  quantities  are  equal,  in  virtue  of  the  equation  [101896].

There  will  always  be  an  inflexion  in  the  middle  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid
included  between  the  planes,  if  we  have  •55  =  ^3',  however  near  these  planes
may  be  to  each  other ;  therefore  the  planes  will  repel  each  other  at  all  distances.f

[10191]
[10192]

[10193]
[10194]

[10195]

direction  RS,  is,  as  in  [10187^],  equal  to  *

\gB.{XO^-XT^)  =  lgB.{^,^-q'^)=.^gB.{q:,^q').{<^,-^q'),  [10190^

which  is  evidently  the  same  as  in  [10190],  and  in  the  repulsive  direction  RS. If  we  change  [10190»i]

the  signs  of  these  expressions,  we  shall  get  igD.{q''^  —  q'^^) for  the  pressure  of  the  planes  [10190n]
towards  each  other.

*  (4347) We  have,  in  [10189&], q[^=^

1 — sin.TS'

?.^=

1 — sin.w

substituting these [10193a]

values  in  the  second  members  of  the  expressions  [10192],  they  become  respectively  as  in

[10193];  and  they  are  evidently  equal  to  each  other,  as  in  [10181m]. Now  the  pressure

on the first plane is hgD.{q^  —  q'^) [10187^], and that on the second plane is [101936]

hS^'{97  —  9^)  [10190/],  neglecting  the  consideration  of  the  widths  of  the  planes,  which  are

equal  to  each  other  [10190'] ;  and  as  the  factors  qf  —  f,  4^  —  f^  ai'e  equal  [10192, 10194], [10193c  ]

these  pressures  must  be  equal,  as  in  [10191]. This  is  also  proved  in  another  way  in  [10187n].

t  (4348)  When  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  fig.  164,  we
shall  have  at  that  point  z  =  0  [101 61i] ;  or,  in  other  words,  this
point  must  fall  on  the  horizontal  line  RS^  on  the  level  of  the
surface  of  the  external  fluid;  hence  it  is  evident  that,  if  the
curved  surface  of  the  fluid  TJ A  T  falls  wholly  above  this
horizontal line  RS,  there  will  be no inflexion. This  is  also  ?

evident  from  the  equation -=2ol2 [10164c],  which  makes  R

finite  when  z  has  a  positive  value,  and  this  is  incompatible  with  a  point  of  inflexion.  We
shall  now  suppose  that  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  which  may  be  considered  as  the  origin
of  the  coordinates ;  we  shall  have  for  the  general  equation  of  the  surface,  the  same  expression
as  in  [10168^],  which,  by  putting,  for  brevity,  a  equal  to  the  constant  quantity  sia.-a -{- (y.q%

becomes

sin.TS,=a  —  a^;^;

VOL.  IV.  232

[10195a]

[101956]

[10195c ]
[10195rf]

926

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10195']
[10196]

[10197]

[10198]

But  if  w  differ  from  to',  the  line  of  inflexion  of  the  surface  will  approach
nearer  to  the  first  plane*  if  zs^-a';  but  the  point  of  inflexion  will  approach
nearer  to  the  second  plane  if  to<;to'.  If  we  now  suppose  that  w^to',
we  shall  have  q^  less  thanf  q'^;  or,  in  other  words,  the  fluid  will  be  less
depressed  without  the  first  plane,  than  it  will  be  elevated  without  the  second.
If  we  bring  the  planes  gradually  nearer  to  each  other,  the  line  of  inflexion  of
the  surface  will  finally  coincide  with  the  first  plane.  For  the  equation
[10177],

sin.w-

sin.t:^

o.q'^  —  a^^,

[10195c  ]

[10195/]

[10195^]

[10195/1  ]
[10195i  ]

[10196a]

[101966  ]
[10196c ]
[10196rf]
[10196e ]
110196/]
[10196g]
[10196A]

[101961 ]

OT  being  the  acute  angle  which  the  arc  Cc  of  the  curve  makes  with  the  ordinate  NC=iZ
[I0l68d].  Hence  it  appears  that,  if  we  take,  on  opposite  sides  of  the  point  -4,  two  points
of  the  curve  C,  C,  so  situated  that  their  corresponding  ordinates  CN,  C'N',  may  be  equal,
we  shall  have,  from  [10195c?],  the  values  of  sin.w^  equal  to  each  other,  at  the  points  C,  C \
therefore  the  values  of  vs^  will  also  be  equal.  Hence  we  easily  perceive  that  the  curves.
AC,  AC,  are  perfectly  similar;  so  that,  if  we  put  AN==ix,  NC=ssz,  we  shall  have
AN'  =  —  X,  N'C'= — z,  angle  iVCc  =  angle  iVC'c'.  From  this  it  evidently  follows  that
if  the  point  A  is  situated  in  the  middle  of  the  line  RS,  we  shall  have  AS=ARy
RU==ST,  and  the  angle  «=the  angle  -us',  whatever  be  the  distance  RS  of  the  planes,
which  will  then  always  repel  each  other,  as  in  [10191].  Ttiis  agrees  with  what  is  stated  in
[10195].

*  (4349)  If  the  point  A,  fig.  164,  page  925,  be  nearer  to  the  first  plane  IK  than  to  the
second  plane  LM,  and  we  make  AR'  =  AR,  then  draw  the  ordinate  R'U\  we  shall  have,
as  in  [10195A],  the  angle  CT  =  the  angle  -rrf^;  zi^  being  the  acute  angle  formed  by  the  ordinate
R'U'  and  the  curve  at  U'.  Now  by  putting  successively  in  [10195J]  z=^R'U',  z=:ST,
we  easily  perceive  that  the  acute  angle  -us^  is  less  at  the  point  T  than  at  the  point  U' ;  but  the
angle  at  the  point  Tis  represented  by  «'  [10173],  and  at  U'  it  is  equal  to  ra  [101966].
Hence  we  have  zs'^'us',  when  the  point -4  falls  nearest  to  the  first  plane,  as  in  [10195'].
By  a  similar  process  we  can  easily  prove  that,  when  the  point  A  falls  nearer  to  the  second
plane  LM  than  to  the  first  plane  IK,  we  shall  have  ■5j<^ro',  as  in  [10196] ;  the  only  change
required  in  the  demonstration  and  in  the  figure,  is  that  the  ordinate  R'U'  should  be  drawn  on
the  other  side  of  the  point  A,  between  A  and  R,  at  a  point  iV'  where  AN'='AS,  AS
being  supposed  less  than  AR.

t  (4350) We  have,  in  [101896],

[10197a]  sin.'5i  +  ay^2^sin.'5j'  +  a^/;

hence
[101976]  a.(y;2  — ^;)=sin.«  — sin.is',

■m,  to',  being  acute  [10166,  10173];  hence  it  is  evident  that,  when  «]>xcf',  we  shall,  have

[10197c]  ^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^,^ ^^.^ ^jQjgg^^

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

927

shows  that  ag'^  always  exceeds  sin.ra — sin.w';  and  yet  it  is  evident  by  the
equation  [10172],  that,  if  there  be  an  inflexion  in  the  surface  of  the  interior
fluid,  q'  will  be  of  the  same  order  as  the  distance  of  the  planes  from  each
other,*  which,  by  approaching  towards  each  other,  may  become  less  than  any
assignable  magnitude.  There  is,  therefore,  a  limit  of  approximation,  where
this  inflexion  ceases,  and  where,  of  consequence,  the  line  of  inflexion  must
coincide  with  this  first  plane.f Beyond  this  limits  while  we  gradually  draw  the

[10199]

[10200]

[10201]

*  (4351) If  we  put,  as  in  [10168c?],  «^  equal  to  the  acute  angle  which  is  formed  by  the
vertical  ordinate  z,  and  the  corresponding  part  of  the  curve  surface,  we  shall  have  Z^=sin.w

[10168/];  consequently  "/ y 2  =  ^~Tis  ^^  ^^"g'''^/  • Substituting this in the equation

[10172],  we  get  dyzs^dzAzn^.vs^^  whose  integral  is  y  —  constant  =yc?2:.tang.'5y^.  Now
each  of  the  elements  dz  AKng.-ui ^  ^  in  proceeding  from  the  point  A  to  T,  fig.  164,
page  925,  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  order  as  dz ;  and  if  we  commence  the  integration
at  the  point -4,  where  y  =  RA  [10163],  we  shall  have  y  —  RAz=fdz.tdXig.vs^\  therefore
y  —  RA  may  be  considered  as  of  the  same  order  as  Z)  or,  in  other  words,  -^^S  is  of  the
same  order  as  q'.  In  like  manner,  AR  is  of  the  same  order  as  q.  Hence  AS-\-AR
or  RS  '\s  of  the  same  order  as  q-\-q'\  so  that  we  may  consider  q-\-q'  as  being  of  the
same  order  as  the  distance  of  the  planes  R  S,  which  corresponds  with  the  remarks  of  the
author  in  [10200].  All  that  we  have  here  stated  is  founded  upon  the  supposition  that  there
is  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  where  z  =  0.  For  if  the  point  A  fall  above  the  line  RS,  by  a
quantity  c,  the  integral  y  —  RA=fdz.t2ing.'a^  [10199e]  will  not  prove  that -4 »S^  is  of  the
same  order  as  q'  [10199/],  but  that  AS  is  of  the  same  order  as  q'  —  c;  therefore  q',
instead  of  being  of  the  order  AS  [10199/],  will  be  of  the  order  AS-\-c.

t  (4352)  In  the  case  treated  of  in  [10196,  &;c.],  where  zi,  is',  are  supposed  to  be  given,
and  -a^-a',  we  shall  have  sin.-cJ  —  sin.w'  equal  to  a  given  finite  and  positive  quantity,
which  we  shall  represent  by  C;  substituting  this  in  [10198],  we  shall  get  o..{q'^  —  9^)=  C.
Now  we  have  seen,  in  [10199/ Sic],  that  q,  q',  are  of  the  order  JR»S^;  therefore  a.  (^'2  —  q^),
or  its  equal  C,  must  not  exceed  a  certain  given  quantity  of  the  order  a..RS^,  which  cannot
be  the  case  when  jR  »S^  is  infinitely  small ;  hence  it  follows  that  j-  j^

the  supposition  of  there  being  a  point  of  inflexion  must  be  X'ijdssr.
restricted  to  greater  values  of  R  S.  We  shall  now  suppose
that  the  planes  are  placed,  in  the  first  instance,  at  a  sufficient
distance  from  each  other  to  have  a  point  of  inflexion  in  the
surface  of  the  fluid  between  them,  as  at  A,  in  fig.  164,  page
925.  Then,  moving  the  planes  gradually  towards  each  other,
the  point  of  inflexion  A  will  approach  towards  the  first  plane,
till  it  coincides  with  it  at  /?  ;  and  the  fluid  will  continue  to  rise
between  the  planes  as  the  distance  is  decreased,  so  that  the
surface  will  finally  be  wholly  above  the  horizontal  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  R  S,  as  in  fig.  165, [10199m]

[10199a]

[101996 ]
[10199c]

[10199^1

[10199c ]

[10199/]
[10199/']

[10199^]

[10199A]
[IOI99/1']

[10199t]
[10199ft]

[10199ft']

[10199/  ]

928  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Gel.

[10201'] planes towards  each other, they  will continue to repel each other until

where  the  surface  is  represented  by  UC  T. Through  any  point  C  of  this  surface  suppose
the infinitely  slender and uniform  canal CDFG to be drawn,  with the  vertical  legs

[10199n] J)  C,  FG,  and  the  horizontal  leg  BF)  then  the  capillary  action  at  C  is ^—^ [95586],

h  being  the  radius  of  curvature  at  C)  and  the  pressure  at  the  botton>  of  the  canal,  being

found,  as  in  [10187c],  is K — —-\-gDxCD, and  at  the  bottom  of  the  canal  FG,  is

K-\-gDxFG. Putting  these  expressions  equal  to  each  other,  on  account  of  the  equilibrium

rr

[10199o] in  the  canal  FD,  we  get —=gD.{CD — FG)=gDxNC; consequently  the  capillary

26

[10199/>]

[10199g]

E10199r]

[101995  ]

[10199«  ]
[10199m]

[10199W ]
[10199«;]

[10199a;  ]
[10199?/  ]
[10199Z  ]

[10200a]

action  at  C  [10199rt] becomes K — ^,=K — gDxNC. Through  any  point  /  of  the

canal  CD,  above  the  horizontal  line  RS,  draw  the  horizontal  canal  fa;  then  the  pressure  at
/,  in  the  canal  Cf,  will  be  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  column  C/,  namely,  gDxCfy
increased  by  the  capillary  action  at  C,  which  we  have  just  found  to  be  equal  ta
K — gDxJ^C. Hence  the  pressure  at/,  in  the  direction  fa,  is  equal  to

K -gDxNC+gD X  Cf==K-gD .  (NC—Cf)  =  K-^gDxNf

Now  the  capillary  action  of  the  fluid  at  a,  in  the  opposite  direction  af,  being  equal  to  K
[9259],  the  whole  pressure  at  a  is  equivalent  to  th&  difference  of  these  quantities,  namely,
gDxNf,  in  the  duection  af  or  — gDxJ^f  m  \he  outward  ov  repulsive  direction  jTa.
Putting  now  Nf=:Ra  =  w,  we  find  that  this  repulsive  action  upon  the  space  dw  is
-^gD.wdw;  and  its  integral,  commencing  at  the  point  R,  where  w  =  0,  is  —  IgD.w^;  so
that  the  whole  repulsive  action  upon  the  part  RU'is  equal  to  — ^gD.RU^.

Instead  of  supposing  the  point  /  to  be  above  the  line  RS^,  we  shall  now  suppose  it  to  fall
below  the  line  RS,  as  at  f ;  and  we  shall  draw  the  horizontal  canal  fa';  then  we  shall
have,  as  in  [10199?],  K—gD.{NC^Cf),  or  K-\-gD.Nf\  for  the  pressure  in  the
point  a',  in  the  direction  fa'.  Subtracting  from  this  the  capillary  action  in  a',  namely,  K
[92591,  we  get  the  whole  action  at  a',  equal  to  gD  X  ^f,  in  the  repulsive  direction  fa'.
Putting  now,  as  above,  Nf=.Ra'==w,  we  find  that  the  force  on  the  space  dw  is  equal  to
gD.wdw,  and  its  integral,  taken  from  w  =  0  to  w  =  RV,  is  ^gD.RV^,  which  represents
the  action  on  the  part  RV,  in  the  repulsive  direction  fa'.  The  sum  of  the  two  forces
[  1 01 99r,  m],  gives  the  whole  force  acting  upon  the  plane  UV,  in  the  repulsive  direction
SR,  equal  to  ^gD.\RV'^-^RW\.  From  this  it  follows  that,  when  RU<^RV',  the
factor  RV'^  —  RU^  is  positive,,  andi  this  force  will  be  repulsive.  When  RU=RV',  this
factor  vanishes,  and  the  capillary  action  becomes  equal  to  nothing.  Lastly,  when
RU^R  V,  this  factor  becomes  negative,  and  the  capillary  action  becomes  attractive,  as  is
stated  in  [10205,  Sic.].  We  shall  conclude  with  the  remark  that  the  computation  of  these
forces,  and  the  form  of  the  curve  UCT,  will  be  treated  of  more  fully  in  the  remaining  part
of  this  note,  by  a  somewhat  different  method,  depending  on  elliptical  functions.

As  it  is  an  object  of  considerable  interest  to  ascertain  the  form  of  the  surface  of  the  fl.uid,

X.  Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLAxNES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

929

the fluid is as much elevated above the level  ivithin the first  plane [10201"]

and  the  other  phenomena,  when  the  distance  of  the  planes  is  very  small,  we  shall  here  enter

into  a  particular  examination  of  the  subject,  using  elliptical  functions  in  iSnding  the  integrals,  in

nearly  the  same  manner  as  is  done  by  M.  Poisson. In  the  annexed  figures  166,  167,  IK,  LM,

represent  the  two  vertical  planes;  UuPptT,  the  surface  of  the  fluid

between  them. The  surface,  in  fi-g.  166, is  supposed  to  be  concave  ;

and  in  fig.  167,  the  first  branch  UA  is  convex,  the  second  branch

^Tis  concave,  and  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion  A. Taking  now,

in  the  plane  of  each  figure,  the  points  u,  t,  of  the  surface,  infinitely

near  to  U,T,  respectively,  we  shall  put  the  angle  IUu=w\  the

angle  LTt  =  w' \  the  lines C7/,  TL,  being  always  drawn  in  a

vertical  direction  towards  the  upper  part  of  the  planes ;  so that

when  the  surface  is  concave  in  both  branches,  as  in  fig.  166,  the

angles  w,  tv',  will  be  obtuse;  and  by  comparing  these  values  with

those of  -a,  zs' [10166,  10173], we shall  have, in  this case,

«r=35r  —  -a, w''z=if — •cj'. In fig.  167,  where the surface is

convex  in  the  first  branch  UA,  and  concave  in  the  second  branch

AT,  we shall  have w  =  -a, w'=^7r — zi'. Lastly, when the

surface  is  convex  in  both  branches,  as  in  fig.  128,  page  777,  we

shall  have  w=:zi,  10  =  -^'. This  last  case  can  be  treated  of  in  the

same  manner  as  the  first; we shall not,  therefore,  notice  it  separately,  as  the  calculation

is  not  attended  with  any  difficulty.

We  shall  first  take  into  consideration  the  case  corresponding  to  fig.  166,  where  the  surface
is  concave,  and  the  angles  w,  w\  obtuse ;  and  shall  suppose  HS  to  be  the  axis  of  y ;  HO,
the  axis  o{  z',  H,  the  origin  of  these  coordinates ;  we  shall  then  have,  for  the  differential
ec^uation  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  as  in  [941&/J  or  10164],

ddz

^ -^2az.

[102005 ]

[10200c ]
[10200rf]

[10200e ]
[10200/]
[10200g]

[10200A]

[10200t  ]
[10200A]

[10200/  ]

Case  of  a

concave

surface.

[10200m]

(

fDifferential  equation  oi  the  surfaco.  j [10200n  J

The  form  of  this  differential  equation  will  not  be  altered,  if  we  change  the  origin,  from
the  point  H  to  any  point  C  of  the  line  HS,  near  the  second  plane  LM;  since  the  only
effect  will  be  to  change  y  into  y  —  HC,  which  does  not  alter  the  differential  dy  in  [IO20O0]
[10200n].  Therefore,  if  we  suppose  a  vertical  line  NFN'  to  be  drawn  parallel  to  the
second  plane  LM,  and  take  the  point  C,  situated  between  N  and  M,  for  the  new  origin  of
the  rectangular  coordinates  y,  z,  the  differential  equation  of  the  surface  PptT,  included
between  the  planes  ISN',  LM,  will  be  represented  by  the  equation  [10200n];  the  positive
values  of y  being on the line CS, and tli€  negative  values  on  the  line QN. Then

VOL.  IV.  233

[10200p]

930  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

[10201'"] as  it is  depressed without it, as we can easily satisfy ourselves by

[loaoop']

[10200? ]

[10200r  ]

[10200* ]

[10200f ]
[10200f']

[10200U ]

[10200u']
[10200t)]

[1020Ou»]
[10200x]

the obtuse angle LTt  =  w',  being  equal to  *  —  -a' [I0200i], we  shall have, as in

[10174,  &c.],

dz

dy

V

1+

dz2

•%\n.V}

V

1+

rfza

= COS.W)  ,

considering  the  radical  as  a  positive  quantity.  Taking  now  any  part  of  the  surface  TF^
corresponding  to  positive  values  of  y,  and  putting  (p  for  the  obtuse  angle  formed  by  the  vertical
ordinate  z  and  the  curve,  we  shall  evidently  have  the  same  differential  expression  of  —  cos.(p,
as  that  of  — cos.w'  [10200^] ;  so  that,  for  any  point  of  the  surface  PT,  corresponding  to  a
positive  value  of  y,  we  shall  have

dy

V

1  +

rfz2

= COS.(p,

JEquation  of  the  surface.  J

using  the  values  of  y,  «,  corresponding  to  that  point. If  the  point  of  the  surface  correspond
to  negative  values  of  y,  we  may  put  y  = — y'  \  and  then  [10200s]  will  become

dz
_ ^'

V

1+

rfz2
^2

•COS.(p.

If  we  put 9=*  —  w^^ so  that  w^  may  represent  the  acute  angle  formed  by  the  vertical

ordinate  z  and  the  curve,  we  shall  have,  by  substitution,  and  changing  the  signs  of  all  the

terras,

dz

dy

\/

dz^

= (LO%.W.

TEquation  of  the  surface.!

If  this  expression  be  now  supposed  to  correspond  to  the  point  P,  where  we  shall  put  the  acute
angle  N'Pp  =  w,,  we  shall  have

dz

dy

V ^dy'^

= COS.W  I,

supposing  y'  =  CN  in  the  resulting  expression.  We  shall  now  suppose  that  there  is  placed
in  the  fluid  a  vertical  plane  NPN',  parallel  to  LM,  so  that  the  surface  which  faces  the
plane  LM  may  pass  through  the  point  P.  We  shall  also  suppose  that  the  plane  NPN'
is  of  such  a  nature  that  w^  may  be  the  angle  which  specially  agrees  with  the  matter  of  the
plane  and  of  the  fluid.  Then  it  is  evident  that  the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid  will  not  be
troubled between NN',  LM;  for  the curve PT  satisfies,  by hypothesis, the general

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

931

the theory explained in [10199i — x]. In this case, q being the [10202]

equation  of  the  capillary  surface  [I0200n];  moreover  the  equations  [lOSOOg'jv],  which
correspond  to  the  extreme  points  T,  P,  are  also  satisfied,  when  we  consider  the  equilibrium
of  the  fluid  between  the  two  planes  JSN',  LM;  w^,  w',  being  given  angles.  Thus  we  see
that  there  is  a  state  of  equihbrium,  in  which  the  fluid  is  elevated  along  the  sides  of  two
parallel  planes  NN',.  LM,  although  the  cosines  of  the  angles  w^,  w',  corresponding  to  them,
have  contrary  signs.  The  fluid  in  the  case  we  have  considered  is  elevated  above  the  level
in  the  vase,  and  its  upper  surface  is  concave,  because  we  have  supposed  that  the  obtuse  angle
w'=^LTtj  corresponding  to  the  second  plane  LM,  is  greater  than  the  supplement  of  the
acute  angle  N'Pp  =  w^,  corresponding  to  the  plane  NN'.  On  the  contrary,  the  fl^uid  will
be  depressed,  and  the  surface  convex,  if  the  obtuse  angle  is  less  than  the  supplement  of  the
acute  angle..

The  curve  surface  FT  can  be  obtained  by  means  of  the  equation  [9417m] ;  and  if  we
change  cp  into  0,  so  that  it  may  refer  to  the  plane  NN,  the  corresponding  absciss  y'  will
represent  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  SN=2l  [9417a — 6],  for  the  case  relative  to
fig.  166,  page  929;  and  we  shall  have,  by  putting y'=2/, and (p=0,  in  [9417ot],

^2?V2_2^,^P(,^^,)__F(c,®)]-?.[E(c,0')-E(c,0)]

a  c  c

. 2c.sin.e'.cos.e' 2c . sin.e . cos.g

^  \/l—c^.sm.^'e' \/l— cs.sin.se'

the  double  sign  being  prefixed  on  account  of  the  radical  ±1/2;  the  upper  sign  is  to  be  used
when  the  second  member  of  [10201c]  is  positive  ;  the  lower  sign,  when  it  is  negative.  The
angles  0,  0',  which  correspond  to  the  planes  NN,  LM,  respectively,  may  be  obtained
from  [9416w],  which  gives,  by  using  1  —  c^ss-h^  [10168u'],

tanfr.^© ;

1 — sin.uj.

1 — sin.rw.

tang.20'  =

(1— c2).(l-f-sin.«>,)
1 — sin.ti)'

1 — sin.tp''

PTo  find  0  at  the  plane  JVJr.l
TTo  find  ©'  at  the  plane  ZJIf.']

[102001/]
[10200Z  ]

[10201a]

[102016  ]

To  find  I  In
terms  of
0,0'.

[10201c ]

[10201d]

[10201d']

[10201e  ]

[10201/]
[10201g]

(1— c2).(l  +  sin.M;') b2./i  +  sin.tt;')

The  elevations  q,  q',  of  the  fluid,  near  the  points  P,  T,  above  the  level  of  the  fl;uid  in  the
vase,  are  given  by  the  formula  [9416s] ;  from  which  we  get,  in  the  present  notation,

q =  n -f-  a .  ^  1 Sin.W^)  ,  rlntemal  elevations  near"]

/o IQ r 9 /I  •  '\  L  the  planes.  J

q^  =1=  h^ -f- a^ .  {^1  —  sm.w)'i

h  being  the  elevation  of  the  point  O,  situated  on  the  prolongation  of  TP,  where  the  tangent [10201A;]
to  the  surface  would be  parallel to the horizon [9415A:], its  value being given,  as in
[9416c],  namely,

[1020U]
[10201{  ]

av/2

./izi;

.  _  ah  v/2

r

Elevation  of  the  lowest

point  of  the  surface

These  ordinates  have  the  same  signs,  which  are  positive  when «>,  +  «? ']>'»■, and  negative

[10201Z ]
[IO2OIW1]

932  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10202] elevation of the fluid between the two planes, and near the first

[lOSOlm']

Case  where
there  is  a
point  of
inflexion.

[lOSOln]
[10201n']

[IO2OI0  ]

[10201|?]
[10201;?']

[10201g]
[10201r  ]

Equations
of  the sur-
face when
there  is  a
point  of  in-
flexion.

[102015  ]

[10201^  1
[10201jt  1

Elevations
f,  g',  near
the  planes
JVJV',  LM,

[10201U  ]
[10201u;]

and  be-
tween them.

[IO2OI1  ]

when  w^-\-w'<^i(. In  both  cases,  the  planes  are  pressed  towards  each  other,  as  we  have
seen  in  [9580,  9584].

We  may  proceed  in  the  same  manner  when  the  surface  has  a  point  of  inflexion  A,  as  in
fig.  167,  page  929;  and  we  may  take  a  portion,  situated  between  the  two  parallel  planes
-ZViV',  LM,  on  the  same  side  of  the  point  A,  for  a  position  of  equilibrium ;  the  cosines  of  the
special  angles  w?^,  w',  corresponding  to  these  two  planes,  having  contrary  signs.  In  this  new
state  of  equilibrium,  as  in  that  we  have  already  treated  of,  the  fluid  will  be  elevated  on  both
planes,  or  depressed  on  both  planes ;  but  the  figure  of  the  included  surface  P  T  will  be
different  in  the  two  cases.  In  the  present  case,  where  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion,  we  may
determine  the  angles  0,  ©',  corresponding  to  the  planes  NN',  LM,  respectively,  by  means
of  the  equations  [I0201j7,|?'],  derived  from  [10170c'];  the  vertical  coordinate  z,  by  means
of  the  equation  [10168a;],  which  is  the  same  as  [10201  g'] ;  the  ordinate  y',  whose  origin  is  at
the  point  S,  by  means  of  the  equation  [10170w],  which  is  repeated  in  [10201r] ;  lastly,  the
modulus  c  may  be  derived  from  the  equation  [10201s],  which  is  derived  from  [10201r],  by
putting  9  =  0,  and y'=2l=zSNf prefixing  the  sign  db  on  account  of  the  radical  y/2.

tang.20r=:

2c2 — 1 — sin.to.

cos.t  —  smw.

tano:.20'=

(1— c2).(l-[-sin.M)^)
2c2 — 1 — sin.w'

sin.Hi.{l-{-8in.w^)
cos.i — sin.w'

[To  find  ©,  0',  near  thel
planes  J^JV',  LM. J

(1— c2).(l-|-sin.M)')  —  sin2-Ji.(l-f  sin.t^')'

g 2a2c2.(l— cS).sin.V  ^

*  1 — c2.sin.2qo >

y;^  =  F(c,©')~F(c,<p)— 2E(c,0')  +  2E(c,(p)

. 2c2.sin.0'.cos.0'  2c^.sir\.q).cos.<p

' \/ 1 —  c2 , sin.e' . cos.e' v^l— c^.sin^^ '

±?^  =  F(c,0')-F(c,©)-2E(c,©')  +  2E(c,0)

2c2 .  sin.e'.  cos.e' 2c2 .  sin.0 .  cos.e

+

V/l— c2.sin.2  0' \/l  —  c^.sin.^Q  '

This  last  equation  is  similar  to  [10201c],  and  the  double  sign  ±  is  to  be  used  in  the  same
manner  as  in  [10201fZ];  that  is,  the  upper  sign  is  to  be  used,  if  the  second  member  of
[10201s]  is  positive,  otherwise  the  lower  sign.  The  elevation  of  the  fluid,  near  the  second
plane,  is  ST=q';  and  this  is  given  by  the  equation  [10170a],  which  is  the  same  as
[10201w] ;  and  by  changing  in  it  w'  into  w^,  and  q'  into  q=:NP,  we  get  the  value  of  q^
[10201t;];  observing  that  i  is  determined  by  the  equation cos.Ji=c  [10168iy] ;

^^=ici?.  (cos.i — sin  .w^  ;
g''*  =  a2.(cos.t — sin.t:?').

The  values  of  q,  q\ must  have  the  same  signs,  and  we  must  observe  the  same  rules  as  in

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

933

plane, we shall have, from [10202,  10185],

[10202"]

[10201OT,  m'J,  namely^  that  q,  q',  must  be  positive  when  w^-^w''^'n',  and  negative
when  w^-\-v)'<!^v.  In  both  cases,  the  planes  will  be  pressed  towards  each  other,  as  in
[9580,  9584].

Hence  it  appears  that,  if  there  be  two  planes,  of  such  a  nature  that,  when  dipped  separately
into  the  same  fluid,  it  will  rise  near  one  of  them,  and  sink  near  the  other,  we  can  have  three
different  situations  of  equilibrium  of  the  fluid  included  between  these  two  planes,  supposing
them  to  be  dipped  vertically  into  the  same  fluid  in  parallel  positions  to  each  other.  The
first  of  these  cases  corresponds  to  fig.  167,  page  929,  where  the  fluid  is  elevated  near  the
second  plane  LM,  at  T,  and  depressed  near  the  first  plane  IK,  at  U,  with  a  point  of
inflexion  at -4;  then,  if  we  suppose  the  angles  IUu=w,  LTt=w',  to  be  given,  together
with  the  distance  RS=2l  of  the  two  planes,  we  can  determine  c  by  the  formula  [10170/] ;
and  the  coordinates  z,y,  as  in  [10168>r,  10169uc].  The  second  case  corresponds  to  fig.  166,
page  929,  supposing  the  planes  to  be  NN',  LM,  and  that  we  have  given  the  angle
N'Pp  =  w^,  the  angle  LTt  =  w',  Siud  the  distance  of  the  two  planes  NS=2l.  In  this
case,  the  modulus  c  is  found  by  the  formula  [10201c] ;  the  absciss  y',  by  the  formula
[9417ffi] ;  and  the  ordinate  z,  as  in  [9416o] ;  then  it  is  evident  that  if  we  continue  the  curve
TP  towards  U,  with  coordinates  having  these  relations,  we  can  obtain  a  point  O,  where  the
tangent  to  the  surface  is  parallel  to  the  horizon.  The  third  case  corresponds  to  fig.  167,
page  929,  where  the  planes  are  NN',  LM,  and,  as  in  [10201n],  the  angle  N'Pp  =  w^,
the  angle  LTt=w',  NS=s2l.  Here  the  modulus  is  found  by  the  formula  [10201s];
the  absciss  y',  by  the  formula  [10201r];  the  ordinate  z,  by  the  formula  [10201g'];  and  by
continuing  the  curve  TP  towards  U,  with  coordinates  having  these  relations,  we  can  easily
obtain  a  point  A,  where  the  surface  passes  through  a  point  of  inflexion.

We  shall  now  illustrate  the  two  last  of  these  three  cases  by  examples,  corresponding  to  the
planes  NN',  LM,  fig.  166, 167,  page  929 ;  and  for  greater  simplicity  we  shall  suppose  the  angle
LTt  =  w'=i<r( ,  and  the  angle  N'Pp  =  ^v,  2y  being  a  very  small  quantity.  We  shall,  in
the  first  place,  notice  the  case  which  corresponds  to  fig.  166,  where  the  continuation  of  the
curve  TP  gives  a  point  O,  with  a  tangent  parallel  to  the  horizon. Substituting  the  value  of

w'  =  'r,  in  the  second  value  of  tang.^©'  [10201/],  we  get  tang.20'  =  -;  whence  we  easily
deduce

tanor.0'=-

sin.0  =

cos.0'=-

c^.  sin.©',  cos.®' =

6c2

6' -yr+P'  ""•^•^— /1+62'  — ' — i_|_62

In  like  manner,  by  substituting w^=:'2v, in  the  second  value  of  tang.2©  [I0201e],  and
neglecting  the  second  and  higlier  powers  of  v,  we  get

_  1 1— 2t> 1 ,, .  .

tang.«0  =  -.^:p^  =  -.(l-4t;)j

whence

tang.©  =  -.(  1  — 2t')  =  (l—2»). tang. 0', or tang.©'  — tang.0  =  2v. tang.©';

VOL.  IV.  234

[102011/]

[10201z]

[10202o]

[102026  ]
[10202c  ]
[10202i]

[10202e  ]

[10202/]
[1020%]
[10202^1]

[10202t  ]

[10202A:]

[10202Z  ]
[10202/']

934  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

ri  AOAo-i  rt  rr^ nn  ^ 1  —  cl  n  t<  rCa»o  when  the  elevation  VR=q,  is  equalT

[10203]  "-y ^, A MIl.W. J_ to  the  depression  >rK=j,,  fig.] 66. J

[10202m]  and  as  the  first  member  of  this  expression  is  equal  to  tang.(0'  —  0).(l-|-tang.0.tang.0'},
by  [30],  Int.,  we  shall  have  very  nearly,  hy  putting  for  brevity  ©'  —  0=a;,  x  being  a  very
small  quantity,

[10202m']  a;.(l-f-tang.2  0')=:2v.tang.©', or a;Yl+-j=2i;.-;

whence  we  finally  obtain

26r  '

[10203m'']  '^^f+S-

If  we  now,  for  abridgment,  put  the  second  number  of  [10202n]  equal  to  G(0'),  G  being  the
symbol  of  a  function,  we  shall  have  [10202o],  by  changing  ©'  into  0,

[lo««n]  G(e')=a=f.F(.e')-?.E(.e')+^j^^;.

„, . ^, , s 2 — c2  _, . 2  _, , . , 2c.sin.e.cos.0
[102020]  G(0)  =  G(0'-a;)  =  -^.F(c,©)--.E(c,0)+^7===.

Substituting  these  in  [10201c],  we  get [10202p],  which,  being developed,  by  Taylor's
theorem,  according  to  the  powers  of  a?,  neglecting  oc^^  oo^,  &c.,  becomes,  as  in  [102022'],

[10202p].  i:?^=G(©')  — G(©'— «)

/d.G{Q')\ , „ /rf2.G(0')\

If  we  put,  for  brevity,  in  like  manner  as  in  [9416/],

, ,^ sin.0'  ^cos.e'

[10202r]  A=:\/l— c2.sin.20',  X= >

we  shall  get,  as  in  [941 6i],

,  /  J  sin.0'.cos.0'

[10202.],  Q

I c2  c2a3  c2 c2a3'

Substituting  this,  and  the  values  of  the  elliptical  symbols  [8910A:,  Z],  in  the  differential  of
[10202*] [10202n],  divided  by  de',  we  get  the  first  of  the  expressions  in  [10202^] ;  reducing  this,  and
substituting 2 — c^,z=z\-\-¥  [10168m;],  we  finally  obtain  the  last  of  the  forms  [10202^].
The  difierential  of  this  last  form  being  divided  by  de',  gives [102021*]^

/(/.G(Q')\ 2  — c2  1 2  C^ 52  ^ 2  — c2  1 262

\ dQf J~ C 'a 'c +'^^*jc2 c2a35 C 'A CA*

ri0202n

Now,  from  [10202A:],  we  get

„ . « .  C2  (l_c2)-(-62  262

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.  935

The equation [10177], which always holds good, then gives, [10203']

whence

^==1  +  62, or -^=3(1  +  62);  [10202r]

and  the  differential  of  the  first  of  these  expressions  of  A^  [10202u'J,  being  divided  by  StZ©',
gives

aY^^=— c2.sin.0'.cos.©'=— Y^ [10202Ar].  [lOSOSu;]

Dividing  this  by A= — V-J-  [10202m'J,  we  get  [10202a;]

/dA\  bd^ \/rf62  c^

Substituting  the  values  [10202tJ,  y],  in  the  last  expressions  of  [10202^,  u],  we  obtain

&2c 'Vrfe/y  62/2 '

Substituting  the  values  [102022;,  10203a],  in  [10202g'],  then  dividing  by  \/2,  and  neglecting
the  double  sign  ^,  we  get

finally,  substituting  the  value  of  x  [10202m"],  and  putting  c=/l— 62, we  get

8-^_„2 t yi  —  b^  [10203c]

1+62
From  this  we  easily  deduce  the  following  value  of  b,  and  then c=/l— 62;

6=\/^5!E??.  r-- W^  [10203J]

V  a2r4  4-4i2'  /^2^4  +  4/2

Hence  it  appears  that  nothing  more  is  necessary,  to  obtain  real  values  of  b,  c,  less  than  unity,
than  to  have  the  distance  of  the  planes  21=  NS,  fig.  166,  page  929,  very  small,  and  less  than [10203c]
ai>2. When  this  condition is  satisfied,  we shall  have,  by  substituting  the  values  of  b,  c,
[10203(Z]  in  the  second  value  of  h  [10201?],

h~^.\/a^v^-Al^.  [10203/]

Substituting  this  value  of  h,  and sm.w'=^0  [10202i]  in  [1020 U*],  we  get

and  as  the  elevation  of  the  fluid,  on  the  outer  side  of  the  plane,  is cf=a.  [9425A;, 10188'],

we  shall  have,  for  the  pressure  of  the  planes  towards  each  other,  as  in  [10190»],  [10203A]

936  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10203"] [as in 10205«,  &c.],

Attractive
force  where
there  is  not

mere  is  noi  /«4l)4  \  «2

inflexion.

therefore,  for  the  same  value  of  v,  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  q'  [10203^]  will  be  inversely
[10203A  ] ag  ijjQ  distance  21  of  the  two  planes  from  each  other ;  and  if  this  distance  is  very  small  in
ri020*iZ  1 comparison  with  av^,  the  force  [10203i],  which  presses  the  planes  towards  each  other,  toiU
be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  21  of  the  planes.

We  shall  now  taJce  into  consideration  the  case  which  corresponds  to  fig.  167,  page  929,
where  the  continuation  of  the  curve  TP  gives  a  point  of  inflexion  A;  and  we  shall  use  the
[10203m'] same  values  of  w,  w',  as  in  the  preceding  example,  namely, 2y^=2w, w>'=5* [10202t]..
Substituting  these  in  the  second  forms  of  [1020 Ij?,  p'],  we  get

cos.i  —  sin.2u

[10203n]  tang.2©  =

sin3;ii.(l-|-sin.2v)'

[10203O]  tang.2e'==-^, or tang.0'=l:^'..

[10203p]  If  we  neglect  the  square  and  higher  powers  of  v,  we  may  put  sin.2t;=3  2w;  and  if  we
suppose  cos.i  to  be  much  greater  than  2«,  we  may  develop  the  expression  [10203/1]  in  the
following  manner;

[10203,1  ttns.%=^-|?^-=^.('l-2».<i±^)  =  4^-.Cl_4»."-^'),

°  sm.^^.{l-\~2v) sin.sit  \  cos.i / siiL^it \  cos.t  /

whose  square  root  gives

[10203r]  t e==k55.('l-^2t,.'-^')==:=l^'-.2t,.-4?^

°  sin.ii \  cos.i  y sin.it  sin.it  ^cos.t

[10203*]  Subtracting  this  value  of  tang.©  from  that  of  tang.©'  [10203o],  and  putting  ©' — ©  =  (r,  wo
get,  as  in  [10202ffi],

[10203f  ] 2v . -—77-7=.=; tang.©' — -tang.©  =;tang.(0'  —  0) ..(l-j*. tang.©. tang.©') s=5:a;. (1  -j-tang.V) ,
sin«2i  L/cos;i

nearly. Now,  by substituting coSit=l  — .2sin.^^t [1], Int., ia tang.V [10203o],

we  get

rt/xnn«  n " ■,,.»,■,. 1— 2sin.2it 1  — -sin.sit cos.sit
[10203u]  14-tan2:.20'  =  l+ ^=» -= —r

and  if  we  divide  [10203^]  by  this  value,  we  shall  get

[102031;]  ai=2«.,-^...

^cos.t

Instead  of  the  functions  G(©'),  G (©)  [10202n,  o],  we  shall-  now  assume  the  following
values;

riAOno 1  f->f t\ nf f\ r.T^  / n i 2c2 . sin*©' ,  COS.©'

[10203u>]  G  (©') = F  (c,  ©')  —  2E  (c,  ©')  + . 0 0^ ;

[10303X]  G(e)  =  G(e'-^)  =  F(.,e)-2E(c,e)+^^^^. ■

X.  Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

937

rt /y'2 ^jy'Z 1  ,,:„  _'  . rCase  where  the  elevation  ST==q',  fig,  162,-| rinon>n

0.(J oy^ 1 blU.W , L  page  910,  is  equal  to  the  elevation  XO=q,'.J [10204]

by  substituting  them  in  [lOSOls],  and  then  developing  the  resulting  expression,  we  get,  as  in
[10202p,  ql,  neglecting  a^,  a;^,  he.

^2Zv/2^

,G(0')  — G(0"— 0?)

\, de' J ^ '\ rf0'2 J'

Substituting  the  values  of  the  elliptical  functions  [8910Z:,  I],  and  using  the  abridged  symbols
X,  A  [10202r],  we  get  the  following  differential  of  G(0')  [10203m;]  divided  by  <?©',  which

is  reduced by substituting the  value  of (^/.)  [10202/];

\ de> J  —  ^  —  'i^-r^C^  \c2  ^c2A3y  =  A  ~  A3  •

;his  last  ei

Taking  the  differential  of  this  last  expression,  dividing  it  by  dQ',  and  using.

c^.sin.e'.cos.e'

we  get

662\  c^.sin.e'.cos.e'

\^ d&^ /"~"\  a2+ A4y-\^rf©'^— IaS""  A4y-'

We  have,  in  [10168w],

i=:sin.|«,  c=scos.|i,  cos.i=l— '266>.

hence  the  expression  of  tang.0'  [10203o]  becomes

consequently

tang.e'

l-f-tang.^e'i

,__\/l— 262

1— &2 c2

L :=s. — ,

62  62

Dividing  1  by  the  square  root  of  this  expression,  we  get  cos.0'=:-;  and  then;

ah.e'  ==  cos»©' .  tang.e' = 5^:-— ..

The  square  of  this  value  of  sin.©',  being  multiplied  by  c^,  gives

c^sin.20'=l— 25^;
whence

A2=al  — c2.sin.20'==262, or A  =  6/2*

Substituting  this  value  of  A  in  [102046,  c],  we  get

/d.G[e')\ fd^.G{Q')\_ ca.siii.e'.cos.6^
Vd^J '  \~d^^) v/2.63 .

Substituting  the  values  [10204/J  in  [10203z],.and  putting,  as  in  [10204^?',  d"],

c^ .  sin.  0' .  cos.0'  =*»  b\/l— 262,

VOL.  IV.  235

[lOSOarQ
[10203y]
[10203z ]

[10204a  I
[102046]

[102046']
[10204c ]
[10204c']

[10204c"]

[KfiOid]
[10204rf']
[10204rf"]

[10204e ]
[10204c']

[10204/]
[10204/"]

938  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10204'] and it follows also, from [10205a — e], that the second plane then

[10204^]

[10204/1]

[10204t  ]

[10204i']

[10204A;]
[10204f ]

[10204r  J
[10204m]

ri0204n]

Repulsive
force  where
there  is  a

[10204O  ]

point  of  in-
flexion.

[10204/?  ]

[10204p']
[10204 g]

we  get,  by  using  [10204c'],,

2Zt/2 c^.8in.e'.cosj

-.aj-'sr::

V/1-2/.2

.X'

:.a;2.

■2/2.6^'  2v/2.sin.2ii'

Substituting  the  value  of  x  [10203t;],  dividing  by  \/2,  and  neglecting  the  double  sign,  we
finally  get

9/  1

„2

—  =r

and  from  this  we  obtain

COS.t!

*\/cos.i

■472"'

[10204r  ]
[102041^]

[10204*  ]

In  order  that  i  may  he  a  real  angle,  we  must  therefore  have  2Z,  or  NS,  fig.  167,  page  929,
greater  than  av^. We  have  also  supposed  that  x  or  0'  —  0  is  small,  which  requires  that

V  V  21  21

■  / — -■■ [10203r] should  be  small;  and  as — F=r=— [10204A],  it  is  necessary  that —

should  be  small.  If  we  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  distance  21  exceeds  av^,  and  also  that  it
is  very  small  relative  to  av,  the  equilibrium  here  treated  of  can  talce  place.  In  this  case,  the
expression  of  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  q'  near  the  plane  LM,  can  be  obtained  from
[1020111^],  by  substituting  the  value  of  «;'=*  [10203m'J,  and  that  of  cos.i  [10204i] ;  hence
we  get

With  this  value  of  q',  and  that  of  g''  =  a  [10203^],  we  get  the  repulsive  force  of  the  planes
from  each  other,  in  the  case  of  fig.  167,  page  929,  as  in  [10190/],

When  21=  av^,  this  repulsive  force  [10204o]  vanishes,  and  the  same  is  to  be  observed
relative  to  the  attractive  force,  in  the  case  of  fig.  166,  page  929,  computed  in  [10203ij.
Multiplying  this  value  of  21  by  a,  we  get  a^v^==2la;  substituting  this  in  [10204»i],  we  get
q':=a',  and  the  same  result  is  obtained  with  the  value  of  q'  corresponding  to  the  case  of
fig.  166,  page  929  [10203^].  If  the  distance  21  be  supposed,  in  the  first  place,  to  exceed
av^,  the  form  of  equilibrium  corresponding  to  fig.  167,  page  929,  will  be  established,  as  in

[10204ZJ,  with  a  repulsive  force  of  the  planes  [10204o].  By  bringing  the  planes  nearer
together,  we  find  that  this  force  vanishes,  when  21=  av^;  and  by  still  decreasing  the
distance  21,  so  that  21  may  be  less  than  av^  [10203e],  we  fall  on  the  case  first  treated  of,
corresponding  to  fig.  166,  page  929,  where  the  force  becomes  attractive  [10203/],  and  is
expressed  by  the  function  [10203i].

By  comparing  together  what  we  have  found  in  the  case  where  there  is  a  point  of  inflexion

between  two  planes,  we  see  that  the  fluid  can  have  two  different  figures  of  equilibrium  for

[10204<  ] the  same  distance  21  of  the  planes,  supposing  this  distance  to  be  very  small  in  comparison

whh  a. One  of  these  figures  is  very  nearly  represented  by  a  cubic  parabola  [10171o]  ;  and

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

939

ceases  to he repelled by  the firsts so that the repulsion changes into
attraction at the same instant in both the planes.*

It  is  easy  to  determine  the  distance  of  the  planes  from  each  other  when  this
change  takes  place.  For  a^^  being  then  equal  to  1  —  sin.w  [10203],  we  shall
have,  from  [10171],

Z=l— az^;

and  the  differential  equation  [10172]  becomes  t

(1— a22).rfz

dy

s^/a./a— cu2'

[10205]

[10206]

[10206']

[10207]

[10204m]

in  the  case  of  ot=w'  =  0, the  repulsive  force  of  the  planes  is  equal  to  the  constant  quantity

^gD.o?  [10187 g'],  which  is  wholly  independent  of  the  distance  2Z  of  the  two  planes,  and

this  distance  may  be  extremely  small. In  the  other  case,  the  curve  will  be  of  two  different

natures,  according  as  we  shall  have  NS  or  2/^ai;2, or 2l<^a.v^', and  the  surface  of  the [10204d]

fluid  between  the  planes  will  be  wholly  above  the  level  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase,

and  there  will  be  neither  an  inflexion,  nor  a  point  where  the  surface  is  horizontal,  between  the

planes. When  NS  or  2Z>au2,  the  surface  will  correspond  to  fig.  167,  page  929  [10204Z], [10204«<;]

and  will  be part  of a  cubic parabola [10171p];  and when 2/<^ai;2, the surface will

correspond to  fig.  166,  page  929  [10203e],  which is  nearly  that  of  an  arc of  a  circle

[9336^,  Stc.]. In  this  change  of  curvature,  the  repulsive  force  [10204o]  changes  into  an [10204x]

attractive  force  [10203iJ.

(4353)  This  note  is  referred  to  in  [10203"]  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  equation
[10204].  The  equation  [10177]  gives  fx.q^==:^q"i  —  sin.-a-f-sin.w';  putting  this  equal  to
the  expression  of  aj^  [10203],  we  get  agr'2  —  sin.w -f-sin.«'=sl  —  sin.w;  whence  we
have  agr'2  =  l  —  sm.Tn' ^=<xq'/^  [101896],  agreeing  with  [10204].  From  this  we  get
q'=zq'-^  or,  in  other  words,  ST=:XO=XT',  fig.  165,  page  927  j  hence  the  pressure  on
the  second  plane  ^gD.{XO^  —  XT'^)  [10190?]  vanishes,  as  is  remarked  in  [10205].  We
may  also  observe,  that  this  general  expression  of  the  pressure  igD.{XO^ — XT'^),  is
supposed  to  be  in  the  direction  iJ^S'  [10190Z,  m],  or  repulsive,  the  factor  XO  —  XT'^  being
positive,  or  XO^XT';  and  it  changes  into  an  attractive  force  when  XO<:^XT\
agreeing  with  [10205].

[10205o]

[102056  ]
[10205c  ]
[10205d]

[10205e  ]

*  (4354)  When  we  have  q'^z=sqf,  as  in  [10203],  we  also  have  simultaneously  y'=g''  [10206a]
[10204];  hence  we  get  q^  —  g'^  =  0,  q',^  —  q"^==^Q;  and  by  substituting  these  values  [102066]
in  the  pressures  on  the  first  and  second  planes  [10187^,  19190/J,  we  find  that  both  of  them
become  equal  to  nothing,  as  in  [10205].

[10206c ]

t  (4355) Substituting  the  value  of  Z  [10206']  in  [10172],  it  becomes  as  in  [10207],
which  is  of  the  same  form  as  [10181],  and  differs  only  in  the  sign  of  the  second member; [10208a]

940

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10208]

[10208']

[10209]

2/
[10210]
[10211]

[10212]

[10213]

[10214]

[10215]

whence  we  obtain  by  integration,

y

^•log.

l  —  \/U^^}^'^\/\—h^z^

constant.

[Equation  of  the  »ur-
face  when  the  repul-
sion changes  into
attraction.

]

2/2^""*'^l+v/I+Iai2  5 ' /2a

To determine the constant  quantity,  we shall observe that, when y  =  0

[10163], we have z'^q' [10162,  10168], and then,  from [10203],  we

obtain

a2;^  =  1  —  sin.OT.

Now^  if  we  put  21  for  the  distance  of  the  planes  from  each  other,  we  shall  have
22  =  g'2  [10162,  10175]  when  y  =  2l  [10163];  therefore  we  shall  then  have,
from  [10210,  10204],

ojz^  =  l  —  sin.w'.

We  shall  now  put

7*  =  ^*  —  6j  ©' =1=^*  —  6';

and  then  6,  &',  will  denote  the  inclinations  of  the  two  extreme  sides  of  the
section  to  the  horizon  [10166,  10173]  ;  therefore  we  shall  have  for  the  distance
of  the  two  planes,  when  the  repulsive  force  changes  into  an  attractive  force,*

2/  =  -;^.  log.

[  tang.i^  [

V/2a*

jcos.^5 — cos.J^'j; (t)

pDistance  21  of  the'
I  planes  when  the
I  repulsion  changes
L_into  attraction.

]

observing  that,  in  this  case,  the  quantities  dy,  dz,  have  the  same  signs  [10181a] ;  but  that
[102086] the  quantity  z,  which  occurs  in  the  denominator  of  the  expression  of  dy,  has  a  positive  value

when  y==0,  in  the  present  example  [10201,  &,c.],  instead  of  the  negative  value  used  in

[10181a].  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  integral  of  [10207]  can  be  deduced  from  that  of
[10208c  ] [10181],  which  is  given  in  [101816],  by  merely  changing  the  signs  of  the  terms  in  the  second

member  of  [101816] ;  therefore  we  get  for  the  integral  of  [10207]  the  following  expression ;

[10208rf]

2^  =  27I^-l°g-(l+;j+V^  +  ^°"^^^"^'

[10208e] and  by  substituting v  =  ^l  —  i(xz^  [10181a'],  it  becomes  as  in  [10208].

[10214a]  *  (4356)  Substituting  y  —  0  [10208'],  and  a2;2  =  l  — sin.OT=l— cos.^  [10209, 10213],
in  the  equation  [10208],  and  then  subtracting  the  resulting  expression  from  [10208],  we
obtain  the  general  value  of  y, under  the  following  form ;

1 (- /I— v/r

[102146 ] y

log.

^cu2\_l /I— y/^+dcosjX) 2vA

l  +  V/l— iioLzay  Vl+\/i+icos.9y>  \/2^

a2;2  =  1 — sin.w'zzs  1  — cosJ'

2/2^*

Substituting the  values y=2l  [10211]
we  get

ha^ ^/d+jcos.9

[10212,  10213],

[10214c] '^^-2v/2a  ^'°--VhY^^P^; '""^'Vl +/h=I^^ >  + ^f^  ~~^

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

941

ive  must  here  observe  that  the  logarithm  is  hyperbolic.  If  6  be  infinitely  small,
the  fluid  will  descend  but  an  infinitely  small  quantity  without  the  first  plane ;
and  in  this  case  the  preceding  expression  of  21  becomes  infinite  ;*  consequently
the  two  planes  attract  each  other  at  all  distances  [10216a].  Thus  the
supposition  of  6  equal  to  nothing,  is  the  limit  in  which  the  two  planes  begin  to
have  power  to  repel  each  other.  When  ^  increases,  and  becomes  equal  to  ^',
21  becomes  nothing ;  and  in  this  case,  the  two  planes  repel  each  other  at  all
distances.  Between  these  two  limits,  the  planes,  after  being  repelled,  attract
each  other  when  the  preceding  expression  is  less  than  21  [10214m]. We  may

[10216]

[10216']

[10217]

[10218]

This  may  be  much  reduced  by  means  of  [6],  Int.,  which  gives

\/h-\-hcos.Q  =  ^/coPp  =  cos^Q ;
and  then

l_^/ffl^_l-cosj9_  [40],  Int.

Substituting  these  and  the  similar  reductions  in  the  terms  depending  on  6',  we  get

1 , ,  , ^,  ,> ,  2cos.!i9' 2cos49

^'=2^-S21og.cang.i«'-21og.ta„g.i.5  +-^7^-  ^^,

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [10215].

We  may  here  remark  that  we  have  seen,  in  [10195],  that,  when  ■5J  =  zj',  there  is  a  point
of  inflexion  A,  fig.  152,  page  910,  midway  between  the  two  planes;  and  then  these  two
planes  repel  each  other.  If  ■sj^to',  as  in  [10196],  and  we  begin  to  draw  the  planes  nearer
to  each  other,  we  shall  find,  as  in  [10195'],  that  this  point  of  inflexion  will  approach  nearer  and
nearer  to  the  first  plane,  and  will  finally  touch  it,  as  in  [10197].  If  we  continue  still  to  draw
the  planes  nearer  to  each  other,  the  fluid  will  continue  to  rise  between  the  planes  until  it  shall
attain  to  the  height  q,  near  the  first  plane,  the  repulsion  of  the  planes  continuing  during  all  this
time.  When  the  fluid  has  arrived  at  the  height  q,  and  near  to  the  first  plane,  the  repulsion
will  cease,  as  in  [10205] ;  and  by  continuing  to  bring  the  planes  still  nearer  to  each  other,  the
repulsion  will  change  into  attraction,  as  in  [10205];  and  the  distance  of  the  planes  where
this  change  takes  place  being  represented  by  2Z,  its  value  is  given  by  the  formula  [10215] ;
so  that,  if  the  planes  are  at  a  less  distance  from  each  other  than  the  value  of  21  [10215],  they
will  attract  each  other,  and  if  they  are  at  a  greater  distance  than  that  value  of  2l,  they  will
repel  each  other.

*  (4357)  When  ^  =  0,  we  evidently  have  2?=oo  [10215];  and  then,  from  [10214m],
it  follows  that,  whatever  be  the  distance  of  the  planes,  they  will  attract  each  other;  and  this
infinite  distance  is  evidently  the  extreme  limit  at  which  the  attraction  can  commence,  as  in

[10216']. On  the  other  hand,  when S  =  6',  and log.-^:;;J^=log.l  =  0, the  expression

u  iijo  uiuc. i.m.M,  >.w^w ,  ....V. *"b-tang49 »

of  2?  is  equal  to  nothing;  and  this  may  be  considered  as  the  other  limit,  or  point  where  the
planes  begin  to  repel  each  other,  as  in  [10214;n,  10217].
VOL.  IV.  236

[10214c']
[10214^;]

[10214e  ]
[10214/]

[10214g-]

[10214A]

[102141 ]
[10214ik]
[10214/ ]
[10214/n]

[10216a]

[1021G6]
[10216c ]

942

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

fM6c.  C^I.

[10219]

Theorem
relative  to
the  attrac-
tive or  re-
pulsive
forces  of
planes.

[10220]

[10221]

[10222]
[10223]

[10224]
[10225]
[10226]

The  action
and  reaction

[10227]

of  the  planes
are  equal.

[10228]

determine  their  attraction  or  repulsion,  by  means  of  the  following  theorem,  which
may  be  easily  deduced  from  the  preceding  theory  [9552—9586].

"  Whatever  be  the  substances  of  which  the  planes  are  formed,  the  tendency  of
each  of  them  towards  the  other,  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  a  fluid  prism,  whose
height  is  the  elevation  above  the  level,  of  the  extreme  points  of  contact  of  the
interior  fluid  with  the  plane,  minus  that  elevation  without  the  plane ;  whose
length  is  the  half  sum  of  these  elevations,  and  whose  width  is  that  of  the  planes
in  a  horizontal  direction.  We  must  suppose  the  elevation  to  he  negative,  when  it
changes  into  a  depression  below  the  level.  If  the  product  of  these  three
dimensions  is  negative,  the  tendency  becomes  repulsive."*

We  shall  here  observe  that  the  tendency  is  the  same,  and  has  the  same  sign
for  both  planes.  For  the  two  first  factors  being  q  —  q^,  and  \{q-\-q}i  for  the
first  plane;  their  product  is  ^(^^  —  qf)  [10220a].  The  analogous  product  for
the  second  plane  is  \{q'^  —  q'^)  [10190»i,  &c.];  thus,  the  width  of  the  two
planes  being  supposed  to  be  the  same,  the  two  fluid  prisms  whose  weights  are
equal  to  the  tendencies  of  the  one  towards  the  other,  are  equal,  provided
q'^  —  qf  is  equal  to  q'^ — C[^',  now  this  equality  takes  place  in  virtue  of  the
equation  [10176],  which,  by  substituting  for  sin.w,  sin.^',  their  values  1  —  ^f,
l__a9;2  [10203,10204],  becomes

Thus,  although  the  two  planes  act  upon  each  other  by  the  capillary  force  qf  an
intermediate  fluid,  yet  this  reciprocal  action  is  such  that  the  action  and  the
reaction  are  equal  to  each  other.

When  the  two  planes  are  very  near  to  each  other,  z  will  differ  but  very  little
from  q;  so  that,  if  we  putf

z — q  =  z', or z  =  q-{-z',

[10220a]

[102206  ]
[10220c  ]

*  (4358)  Considering  q,  q^  [10168,  10184'],  as  positive  quantities,  the  height  of  the
prism  [102J9]  will  be  q  —  q^,  its  length  ^{q-{-q)  [10220];  and  if  we  put  its  width  equal
to  unity  [10220],  its  volume  will  be  \{q^  —  qj^),  and  its  mass  hgD.iq^  —  qJ^).  This
represents  the  ar/raca'ye  force  [10219];  and  by  changing  its  sign,  we  may  consider  it  as  a
repelling  force  represented  by  lgT)'{q^  —  q^)^  being  the  same  as  that  in  [10187^].
Moreover  the  pressures  on  the  two  planes  are  equal,  as  is  seen  in  [10191,  Sic,  10222,  Sic] ;
hence  we  easily  perceive  the  correctness  of  the  theorem  in  [10219 — 10221].

I  (4359) Through  the  point  U,  fig.  165,  page  927,  draw  the  horizontal  line  Uct,  cutting

[10228rt] the  ordinate  NC  in  c;  then  RN=:y  [10163],  NC=2  [10162],  and  RU=Nc  =  St is

equal  to  q  [10202];  so  that,  if  we  put «  =  iVC=/2C/'-fCc  =  j  +  z', as  in  [10228],  we

X.Suppl.2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.  943

z'  will  be  a  very  small  quantity,  whose  square  may  be  neglected. Then  we [10229]

shall  have

Z=sin.'5j  —  %^q7!\  ,  [10230]

consequently  *

j2;=</2:'  =  — ^;  [10231]

hence  the  equation  [10172]  will  become

and  by  integration,

y=  constant +  ^  2a<y '

To determine the constant quantity, we shall observe that,  when y  =  0,
we  also  have  z'  =  0  [10228a],  and  thenf  Z=sin.tjj;  therefore  we  shall  have

[10233]
[10234]

shall  have  Cc  of  the  order  z';  and  its  greatest  value z'=  Tt  may  be  considered  as  of  the

same  order  as  the  distance  of  the  planes Ut=^'^l; and  when  2/  is  very  small,  this  quantity [102286]

z'  will  be  very  small  in  comparison  with  q,  as  in  [10229]. Now,  substituting  the  value  of

z  =  q-\-z'  [10228],  in  [10171],  we  get  [10230],  neglecting  the  second  and  higher  powers [10228c  ]

of  z'.

*  (4360) The  difTerential  of  [10228]  gives dz=-dz';  substituting  this  in  the  differential
of  [10230],  and  then  dividing  by — 2(i.q, we  get  [10231]. Substituting  this  value  of  dz '■ "^
in  [10172],  we  obtain  [10232],  whose  integral  gives  [10233].

f  (4361) We have  generally,  as  in [10168/J,  Z=iSm.-a/,  -m^  being  the  acute  angle [10235a]
formed  by  the  ordinate  Cc,  fig.  165,  page  927,  and  the  arc  of  the  curve  at  C. At  the  point
U,  where y==0, we  have to^  =  zj  [10166],  and  then  the  preceding  value  of  Z  becomes [10235a']
Z  =  Bm.vs, as  in  [10234]  ;  which  is  the  same  as  is  given  by  the  equation  [10230],  putting
z'  =  0. This  last  value  of  Z  gives ^i  —  z^  =  cos.-i^ ; and  by  substituting  it  in  [10233], [102356]

we  get  at  the  point  t7, 0  =  constant  +  ^^  , as  in  [10235]. Substituting  this  in  [10233], [10235c]

i/i ygi COS.tU

we  obtain,  for  the  general  value  ofy, y  =  y~— — — — ; and  at  the  point  T,  where [10235i]

Ts^=:vi'  [10173],  Z  =  sin.w' [10235a],  y/i_Z2=cos.-5j',  and  y  =  2l  [10210],  it  becomes [10235e]
as  in  [10238],  from  which  we  easily  deduce  the  value  of  q  [10239]. If  we  put  ^'  =  0,

1  I Cos  2m
and TO  =  2y, as  in  [10202i,  Stc],  the  value of  q [10239] will  become q  =

[10235/]

4aZ

Substituting -^a^  [9323p], cos.2y  =  l  —  2y2  [44],  Int., neglecting  higher  powers  of  v^^

it  becomes q  = , agreeing  with  the  elevation  q'  computed  in  [10203^,  10204m],  by

means  of  elliptical  functions.

[10235g]

944  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

cos.w
[10235]  constant  =  —  - —  ;

[1023G] moreover, 21  being  the  distance  of  the planes from each other [10210],
[10237] we shall have, when 2/ =  2/, z  =  q' [10175], and Z=sm.-a' [10235e]  •,
consequently

_,  COS.ts' COS.-!*

[10238]  21  = ^ ;

hence  we  get

n  09*^01  /7 1_  rEIevation  9  of  a  fluid  between  two  very"!

[lU,«oJj  Y  A J  ' '  L near  planes  whose  distance  is  2i. J

The  height  of  the  fluid  between  the  planes  is  then  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their
[10240] distance  from  each  other. We  may  therefore,  from  this  analysis,  deduce  the
following  theorem.

"When  the  planes  are  very  near  to  each  other,  the  elevation  of  the  fluid
[10241]  between  them  is  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  their  distance.  This  elevation  is  equal
to  the  half  sum  of  the  elevations  which  will  occur  if  we  suppose,  in  the  first
place,  that  the  first  plane  is  of  the  same  substance  as  the  second,  and,  in  the
next  place,  that  the  second  plane  is  of  the  same  substance  as  the  first ;  observing
to  prefix  the  negative  sign  to  the  elevation,  when  it  changes  into  a  depression."*
This  theorem  is  a  corollary  to  that  which  we  have  before  given  upon  the
elevation  of  a  fluid  between  two  prismatic  surfaces  of  different  substances,
[10242^ of  which  the  one  is  included  within  the  other.f

*  (4362) It  appears,  from  [9453,9454],  that  the  elevation  of  a  fluid  between  two  parallel
planes,  made  of  the  same  substance  as  the  second  plane,  and  whose  distance  from  each  other

[10241O] is  27,  is  very  nearly  equal  to "  •^=^'  [9328];  and  since  &'=l'g-^'  [9346,10213],
[102416  ] it  becomes -~- . The  depression  of  the  fluid  between two  similar  planes  of  the  same

COS.tJ

[10241c] nature  as  that  of  the  first  plane,  would  in  like  manner  be  represented  by — -, as  is

evident  from  [9454,  10166],  its  sign  being  changed  as  in  [10242]. The  half  sum  of  these

[10a41rf] two  expressions  is  "" — -~j which  is  equal to  the  expression  of  q [10239],  as  in

[10241,  Sic.].  This  expression  of  q  [10239]  agrees  with  that  given  by  M.  Poisson  in
page  182  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  changing  ^  into  a^,  27  into  5,  q  into  h,  cos.'sr'  into
sin.fA,  and  — cos.-n  into  sin./*',  to  conform  to  his  notation.

t  (4363) If  we suppose the  prisms  treated  of  in [10102—10105] to  be  cylinders
[10242a] whose  radii  are  infinite,  we  shall  have -=1  [10095] ;  and  since the expression  [10105'j

X.  Suppl.  2.] TWO  PARALLEL  PLANES  DIPPED  INTO  A  FLUID.

945

We  see  by  this  theorem,  and  by  that  we  have  mentioned  before
[10219 — 10221],  that  the  repulsive  force  of  the  planes  is  much  weaker  than  the
attractive  force,*  which  commences  when  the  planes  are  very  near  to  each  [10243]
other,  and  draws  them  towards  each  other  with  an  accelerated  motion.  In  this
case,  the  interior  elevation  of  the  fluid,  or  that  between  the  planes,  is  very
great  in  comparison  with  the  exterior  elevation  near  the  same  planes.  Therefore,
by  neglecting  the  square  of  this  last  elevation  in  comparison  with  the  square  of
the  first,  we  shall  find  that  the  fluid  prism  whose  weight  expresses  the  tendency  [10244]
of  one  of  the  planes  towards  the  other,  in  virtue  of  the  first  of  the  two  preceding
theorems  [10219 — 10221],  will  be  equal  to  the  product  of  the  square  of  the
elevation  of  the  interior  fluid  by  half  the  width  of  the  planes  in  a  horizontal
direction.! This elevation being, by the second of these theorems [10245]

may  be  put  under  the  form

it  becomes h  -.

9+?/

1  +  7
in  which  q,  q,  [10104],  represent  the  elevations  of  the  fluid  in  cylinders  having  the  same
radius  I,  but  composed  successively  of  the  two  different  substances.  These  quantities  q,  q^j
also  represent  the  similar  elevations  between  parallel  planes  of  the  like  substances,  whose
distance  is  I,  as  appears  from  [9998c].  Lastly,  h  represents,  as  in  [10097'],  the  elevation
of  the  fluid  between  two  of  these  planes  of  different  substances,  whose  distance  is  I.  These
values  agree  with  [10241].

•  (4364)  It  follows  from  [10220a],  that  the  attractive  force  of  two  planes  is
^gD.{q^  —  ?/^)>  and  that  it  becomes  repM?stve  when  the  factor  q^  —  q^^  is  negative;  so
that  its  greatest  repulsive  force  corresponds  to  5'==0,  and  it  then  becomes,  by  neglecting  its
sign,  igD.q/^.  Therefore  the  attractive  force  is  to  the  greatest  repulsive  force  as  q^  —  q/^
to  q/^.  Now  q^,  which  represents  the  exterior  elevation  or  depression  of  the  fluid  near  the
planes  [10184'],  must  always  be  very  small ;  but  q  [10239]  may  become  very  large,  when
I  is  small ;  therefore  tlie  repulsive  force  is  much  smaller  than  the  attractive  force,  and  the
ratio  of  these  forces  is  nearly  as  qj^  to  q^.

[102426  ]

[10242c ]

[10242rf]

[10243a]
[102435]
[10243c  ]
[10243rf]

t  (4.365) The attractive  force ^gD.{q^  —  q^) [10243a],  when  the  planes  are  very [I0245a]
near to each other,  and q^  is much  smaller  than  q,  becomes  nearly  equal to ^gD.q^
[10243c] ;  and  if  we  substitute  the  value  of  q  [10239],  it  will  become

, Tj  /cos.ot' — cos-tsV

2  /l\a

[102456]

which  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  distance  2^  of  the  two  planes  from  each
other,  as  in  [10246J.

VOL. IV.  237

[10249]

946  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10241,  10242],  inversely  proportional  to  their  distance  from  each  other,  the
prism  will  be  proportional  to  their  horizontal  width,  divided  by  the  square  of
that  distance ;  the  tendency  of  the  two  planes  towards  each  other  will  therefore  be

[10246] in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the  square  of  their  distance  [102456] ;  consequently  it  will
follow  the  law  of  universal  attraction,  a  law  which  seems  to  he  followed  by  all

[10247]  attractions  and  repulsions  exerted  at  sensible  distances,  like  electricity  and
magnetism.

Wishing  to  determine  by  experiment  the  singular  phenomenon  of  the
repulsion  of  planes,  which  changes  into  attraction  by  drawing  the  planes  nearer

[10248]  together,  I  requested  M.  Haiiy  to  make  some  experiments  relative  to  this
curious  result  of  the  theory  of  capillary  action.  For  this  purpose  he  made  some
experiments  with  planes  of  ivory,  which,  as  is  well  known,  may  be  moistened
by  water,  and  with  some  talc  laminae,  having  to  the  touch  a  sort  of  greasiness,
which  prevents  them  from  being  moistened.  These  experiments  have  fully
confirmed  the  results  of  the  theory,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  following  account
which  he  communicated.

"  There  was  suspended,  by  a  very  delicate  thread,  a  small  square  leaf  of  a
talc  lamina,  so  that  its  lower  end  was  dipped  into  the  water.  There  was  also
dipped  into  the  same  water,  at  the  distance  of  a  few  centimetres,  the  lower
part  of  a  parallelepiped  or  plate  of  ivory,  so  that  one  of  its  faces  was  parallel
to  the  leaf  of  talc ;  and  it  was  always  kept  in  this  parallel  position,  stopping  the
plate  of  ivory  occasionally,  in  order  to  be  sure  that  the  effect  of  the  motion,

[10251]  which  it  might  impress  upon  the  fluid,  was  insensible  in  the  experiment ;  then
the  leaf  of  talc  was  repelled  by  the  ivory.*  Afterwards  the  ivory  was  moved
in  a  very  slow  manner  towards  the  talc,  until  the  distance  between  them  was
very  small,  when  suddenly  the  talc  approached  towards  the  ivory,  and  came  in

[10252]  contact  with  it.  Upon  separating  the  two  bodies,  it  was  found  that  the  ivory
plate  was  moistened  to  a  certain  height  above  the  level  of  the  water ;  and  by

••  ^  ^  repeating  the  experiment  before  it  was  wiped,  the  attraction  commenced  sooner,
and  sometimes  it  took  place  at  the  first  moment,  without  being  preceded  by
any  sensible  repulsion.  These  experiments,  repeated  several  times  with  care,
have  always  furnished  the  same  results."

When  the  ivory  plane  is  very  moist,  the  water  covers  its  surface,  and  forms

*  (4366) In  this  experiment,  the  talc  is  what  we  have  heretofore  called  the  first  plane
[10251a] [10158],  to  which  the  quantities  q,  q^,  -a,  &,  correspond;  and  the  ivory  is  the  second  plane,

[10250]

to  which  the  quantities  q',  5',  to',  6',  correspond.

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

947

a  new  plane,  which  attracts  the  lamina  of  talc;  and  in  this  case,  the  corresponding
angle  6'  of  the  formula  [10215]  is  the  greatest  possible,  being  by  the  theory
equal  to  a  right  angle  [9312/].  The  value  of  2/,  given  by  the  formula  [10215],
which  expresses  the  distance  of  the  planes  where  the  attraction  begins,  then
becomes  greater*  than  when  the  ivory  was  not  moistened,  agreeing  with  the
experiment.  Moreover,  it  may  happen,  by  the  effect  of  the  friction  of  the  fluid
against  the  talc  lamina,  when  it  sinks  down,  after  it  has  been  raised  up  between
the  planes,  that  the  angle  ^  near  the  place  of  contact  of  the  fluid  with  the  talc
may  become  nothing  or  insensible,  in  the  same  manner  as  is  observed  relative  to
the  similar  angle  with  mercury  in  a  barometer,  which  decreases  when  the  fluid
sinks ;  then  the  preceding  expression  of  2/  becomes  infinite,!  and  the  attraction
is  not  preceded  by  any  sensible  repulsion.

[10254]

[10255]

[10256]

[10257]

ON  THE  ADHESION  OP  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

When  we  lay  a  plate  or  disk  upon  the  surface  of  a  stagnant  fluid,  in  a  vessel
of  great  extent,  we  find  that,  to  detach  it,  even  in  a  vacuum,  we  experience  a [io258]
resistance  which  increases  with  the  size  of  the  disk. The  disk,  as  it  rises,  lifts
up  with  it  a  column  of  the  fluid,  which  follows  it  till  it  gets  to  a  certain  limit.

*  (4367) The  expression  of  the  distance  2Z  between  the  planes,  where  the  attraction
changes  into  repulsion,  is  given  in  [10215] ;  and  it  may  be  put  under  the  form

from  which  it  is  easy  to  show,  that,  while  6'  increases,  this  value  of  2/  will  also  increase;
for,  by  taking  its  differential,  considering  /,  6',  only  to  vary,  we  get  the  first  expression  in
[10255<Z] ;  and  by  making  successive  reductions,  using  [34',  31,  1],  Int.,  which  give

cos.^d'  Aang.i6' =cos.ld'  .sm.l&'=^sin.^6'y  1  — 2sin?^a'=cos.d',

we  finally  obtain  the  expression  of  '2dl  [10255e],

2dl=

^2x (cos.2ie'.tang49
rffl' CI— 2sin2i5

-_sin.5«|

'^2a'(isin.i6'

■sin.J^'^

rf9'

cos.S'

and  as  the  factor

V/2x

C0S.9'

2sin.i9'

/2a'2sin.i9'*

sin.i6'

is  always  positive,  when  6'  increases  from  0  to  a  right  angle,  it

follows  that  2Z  will  increase  with  d\  while  it  passes  through  those  limits,  agreeably  to  what
is  stated  in  [10255].

f  (4368) When  ^  =  0,  the  expressron  — log.tang.^4  becomes  infinite;  and  the  value  of
2/  [10255fl]  then  becomes  infinite,  as  in  [10257].

[10255a]

[102556 ]
[10255c ]

[10255rf]
[10255e ]
[10255/]

[10257a]

948

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

when  it  falls  back  again  into  the  vessel.  At  this  limit,  the  column  will  be
sustained  in  equilibrium,  if  the  force  which  raises  the  disk  be  exactly  that  which
corresponds  to  the  state  of  equilibrium ;  and  it  is  evident  that,  for  this  to  take
place,  the  force  ought  to  be  equal  to  the  weight  of  the  disk  and that  of  the

[10259]  column  which  is  raised  up.  Thus  the  adhesion  of  the  disk  to  the  fluid  is  a
capillary  phenomenon ;  but  to  prove  it  incontestably,  we  shall  compute  this  force
by  analysis,  and  shall  compare  the  results  with  experiments.

We  shall  consider  a  section  of  the  surface  of  the  column,  by  a  vertical  plane

[10260]  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  disk,  supposing  it  to  be  circular.  This  section
will  be  the  generating  curve,  which,  by  its  revolution  about  the  vertical  line  or
axis  passing  through  the  centre  of  the  disk,  generates  the  external  surface  of  the
column. Then  we  shall  put

[10261]  /  =  the  radius  of  the  disk ;

[10262] l'\-y  =  the  distance  from  the  vertical  axis  to  any  point  of  the  generating  curve  ;

[10263]  z  =  the  height  of  the  same  point  above  the  level  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel.

The equilibrium of the columns will give, as in [9324], by observing
[10263'] that*  7  =  0,

[10264]

ddz

i+y'

dz

dz^
^dy'^

'i^z.

"Differential  equation"
of  the  surface.

Tfi^.168.

* (4369) In the annexed

figures 168,  169, LECMH is

the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in
[10264a] the  vessel;  FAR  the  diameter  of

the  disk,  which  is  supposed  to  be

parallel  to  HL;  AE  the  vertical

line  or  axis  perpendicular  to  HL;
[102646]  MmKkfF  the  curve  whose  revo-
lution about  the  axis  AE  generates

the  external surface  of  the  fluid ;

K,  7c,  are  two  points  of  this  curve

which are  infinitely  near  to  each

other;  KD,  kd,  the  corresponding
[10264c  ] ordinates parallel to AF; and

the point m  is infinitely near to

M, the point  /' infinitely near  to  F;  moreover  the  line  Ff  is  on the continuatiort of

f'F. Then,  in  the  present  notation,  we  shall  have

X.  Suppl.2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

949

To  integrate  this  equation,  we  shall  put

[10264']

AF=:l, ED^z, DK=l-\-y, angle  DKJc=z'a [10265].
At  the  point  Mwe  have  the  angle  «==0;  and  at  the  point  F,  it  becomes

AFf=^^  —  AFf'='K—zi'  [10279].
When  the  fluid  is  mercury,  and  the  disk  of  glass,  we  shall  have  the  angle  AFf=^S°
[10353],  and  the  surface  of  the  fluid  will  have  a  gradual  slope  from  F  to  M,  as  in
fig.  168.  But  if  the  fluid  be  water,  and  the  disk  of  glass,  well  moistened  with  water,  we
shall  have  the  angle  AFf'  =  0^  [9359Z:],  as  in  fig.  169;  and  the  angle  zi  will  gradually
increase  from  the  point  M,  where  «  =  0,  to  the  point  /,  where  vs  =  ^7r,  and  the
surface  of  the  fluid  is  vertical,  as  is  evident  from  the  equation  [10266];  lastly,  from  /  to  JP,
the  angle  zs  will  continue  to  increase  till  it  becomes  73  =  1^,  at  the  point  F;  and  then  the
curve  Ff  will  be  horizontal,  as  appears  from  the  same  equation  [10266].  Hence  it  is  evident
that  the  surface  which  is  formed  by  the  revolution  of  this  curve  about  its  axis  will  be  grooved
like  a  pulley.  To  find  the  equation  of  this  surface,  we  shall  suppose  a  canal  KCBGH  to
be  drawn,  with  the  vertical  branches  BCK,  GH,  and  the  horizontal  branch  BG^  the  point
H  being  situated  upon  the  level  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  vessel.  Then  putting,  as  in
[9310],  R,  R'y  for  the  greatest  and  the  least  radii  of  curvature  at  the  point  K,  the  capillary

action  at  ^  will  be  equal  to K — ^^•(r  +  ^/) [9315&] ; to  which  we must  add  the

pressure  of  the  atmosphere  P,  and  the  weight  of  the  column  BK,  namely  gDxBK
[10187c], to obtain the pressure at the point B, in the canal BK, equal to

K-}-P  —  }Il.(-r-{-—j-\-gD.BK. Again,  the  capillary  action  at  the  point  H,  which

is  represented  by  J5r[9259],  being  added  to  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  P,  and  to  the
weight  gDxGH  of  the  column  GH,  gives  the  pressure  at  G,  at  the  bottom  of  the  canal
HG,  equal  to  K-{-P  -\-gXGH.  Putting  the  expressions  [10264m,  0]  equal  to  each
other,  on  account  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  canal  B  G,  and  neglecting  K-\-P,  which  occurs
in  both  members  of  the  equation,  we  get

iH.(^  +  -^)^gD.{BK-GH)=gD.CK=gDz  [102631

1 1

Substituting  gB—H.^  [93722r'],  and  dividing  by ^H", we  get  ;^+^.=2^^5

using  the  values  of  R,  R',  [9326,  9326'],  it  becomes

rf^2  ~^  u'  du'\ ' du^J  ,

and  by

:2a2:;

observing  that  the  quantity  m  [9320]  represents  the  ordinate  BK—l-\-y  [10264c?],  so  that
du  =  dy.  Substituting  these  values  of  m,  du,  in  the  preceding  equation  [102649-],  it  becomes
as  in  [10264],  where  du  or  dy  is  considered  as  constant  [9327c].  The  equation  [102645-]  is
equivalent  to  the  equation  (2),  in  page  228  of  M.  Poisson's  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c.,  changing
u  into  t,  and  a  into  a'^  [9323p],  to  conform  to  his  notation.
VOL.  IV.  238

[1026id]

[10264e  ]
[10264/]

[10264^]
[1026ih]

[10264i  ]
[10264J]

[10264/ ]

[10264m]
[10264n]

[102640 ]

[10264p]
[10264p']

[10264? ]

[10264r  ]
[10264*  ]

950  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10265]  «  =  the  angle  which  an  infinitely  small  arc  of  the  generating  section  makes

with  the  horizontal  line  drawn  from  the  lower  end  of  this  small  arc
to  the  vertical  line  which  passes  through  the  centre  of  the  disk. We

shall  have  *

dz
[10266]  -=  — tang.«;

and  then  the  preceding  equation  will  become  f

dvi  sin.OT -.  ,  .

[10267]  — --.COS.tn  — —  =2a2;  (5)

Multiplying  this  by J?/. tang.*, or  — dz  [10266],  we  get,  by  integration,

[10268]  cos.*+ /  -y— —  =  constant — 0.2;.

We  shall  suppose  that  the  integral  commences  ivith  z;  observing  that, when

2  =  0,  the  arc  of  the  surface  will  coincide  with  the  level  surface,  which  renders

[10270] w nothing; consequently cos.w  =  l, and  we shall have, constant=l;

therefore

9 1  /^ ''dz. sin.-a  .

O^Z =  1 COS.W  —  /  — ; • (t) \  Equation  of  the  surface.

J  0 l  +  y w L

[10269]

[10271]

*  (4370) Draw  Jcl,  fig.  168,  169,  page  948,  parallel  and  equal  to  dD;  then  it  is  evident

kl  dz

[10266a] that —  =  tang.ytX/, or  by  [I0264td\, — 7-=tang.trf, whence  we  easily  deduce  [10266],

,  dz

[102666] or dy=—:^^^^,

t  (4371) The  equation  [10266]  gives

[10268a]  \/ ^  +  J'  =  V/l+tang.2^  =  ^;

moreover,  the  differential  of  [10266]  gives,  by  observing  that  dy  is  constant  [10264r],

ddz  dvs

substituting  these  in  [10264],  we  get  [10267].  Multiplying  the  first  term  of  [10267]  by
dy.tang.w,  and  the  other  terms  of  that  equation  by  the  equivalent  expression  — dz  [10266],
we  get

[10268c]  — <?«.sin.«  +  %4^  =  --2az£Zz,

i-\-y

whose  integral  gives  [10268].  When  z  =  0,  the  angle  to  corresponding  to  the  point  iW,
fig.  168,  169,  page  948,  will be «=0, and the integral f ' ' then commences

[10268e] [10269];  so  that  the  equation  [10268]  becomes,  at  that  point, l  =  constant. Substituting
this  in  [10268],  we  easily  obtain  the  value  of  az^  [10271].

[10268rf]

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

951

When  the  disk  is  very  large,  /  will  be  great  in  comparison  with*  -j=\  thus  we [10272]
shall have a first approximate value of z, by neglecting the integral
—  / -YT — ' ^^  ^^®  equation  [10271],  which  gives

rApproximate  valueof  I.  I  [10^73]

V/2 . ,

V/a

dz.s'm.zi

Then  we  may  substitute  this  value  of  z,  in  the  integral — /
by  this  means  becomes  f

l+y  V o-i/o  l-\-y

this  integral  is  easily  reduced  to  the  following  form,

—  / —Tx =  — .,;,  , ,  .?! — cos/^w] — 2 « Xf /

J  0 l-\-y  3(/4-y) ^  ^ ^ ^ V ^J  ^

, which [10273']

[10274]

[10275]

[10272a]

*  (4372)  While  zs  varies  from  0^  to  48^  [10264/],  if  the  fluid  be  mercury ;  or  from
Trf  =  0°  to  w=200°  [10264A],  if  the  fl.uid  be  water;  the  ordinate  z  will  vary  from  z=0,
to z  =  EA, its greatest value;  and  if  Z  be  very large,  we may  consider the integral

/dz.sin.zi  . r i  , AE  AE .  .  .  ., ,

—T- , as  not  exceeding  a  quantity  of  the  order — -,  or  -—=, which  must  evidently [102726]
i-\-y  I  AF

be  much  less  than  unity,  from  the  nature  of  the  capillary  action ;  so  that  this  term  must,  in

general,  be  much  less  than  either  of  the  terms  1,cos.ot,  which  occur  in  [10271] ;  and  if  we  retain

only  these  two  terms,  we  shall  have  nearly a2;2  =  l  —  cos.zs  =  '2,s\xi.^^zs  [1],  Int. Dividing

this by a,  and extracting the square  root,  we  get z [10273], which is of  the order

1

y- ,  mentioned  in  [10272],  and  is  much  less  than  I,  as  is  observed  in  [10272],  and  is  also

[10272c ]
[10272c']

evident  from  the  experiments  which  are  mentioned  in  [10317,10333,  &;c.]. If  we  substitute
a-4=a  [9323^]  in  [10273],  it  will  become

2;  =  l/2.a.sin.jCT.  ' [Approximate  value  of  z.]  [10272i]

t  (4373) The  differential  of  [10273]  gives dz^^^.^disi.cos.^vs', substituting  this  in [10274a]

^/a

[10273'], and then putting sin.'ztf=2sin.jCT.cos4zs [31], Int., we  get  [10274]. The [102746]

integral  of  [10274]  can  easily  be  reduced  to  the  form  [10275] ;  their  differentials  being  equal

to  each  other,  as  is  easily  perceived  by  observing  that  the  differential  of  the  last  term  of [10274c  ]

[10275]  is  destroyed  by  the  part  of  the  differential  of  the first  term depending on the

differential  of  l-\-y,  as  is  evident  by  inspection ;  lastly,  the  differential  of  the first term [10274rf]

depending  on cos.^^w, produces  the  differential  of  [10274].

952

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10276]
[10277]

[10278]
[10278']

The  element  of  this  last  integral  is  never  infinite ;  for,  although ^ becomes

U'SJ

infinite,  when  «  is  nothing,  because  we  have*

dy  dz. cos.-a  1 cos.-a

d^a  dTS.sin.zi  2^/2a*sin.^'5j'

yet,  as  it  is  multiplied,  in  the  preceding  integral  [10275],  by  — d^.(l — cos.^^w),  the
coefficient  of  d^s  in  this  product  is  never  infinite.  If  we  neglect  the  term  divided
by  (l-{-yy,  in  comparison  with  that  which  is  divided  by  l-^-y^  we  shall  have

''dz.s'm.zi  2^2.(1  —  cos.^'a)

-/:

The  integral  must  be  taken  from  73  =  0  to  vs  =  nf — w',  supposing  thatf

[10276a]
[10276o']

[102766]

[10276c ]
[10276c']

[10276i]

[10276e ]
[10276/]

*  (4374) We  have,  in  [10266],
1

^y=-^'-vi^ ''^•i5:5=-(^-J''«-o<»-i«)-iSS [10274a];

now,  substituting s\n.zs=2s\n.\-ui .cos.^iHi and  dividing  by  d-a,  we  get

dy  1 cos.zs

d-a  2^2a*8in.iCT'

as  in  [10276], The  value  of  dy,  deduced  from this expression,  being  substituted  in  the
part  of  the  second  member  of  [10275],  under  the  sign/,  gives

/dy.[\  —  cos.s^ra) 1  /•rfra.cos.'5i.{l — cos.3^'5J)

[l+yf "^"~V^*J  [l^y)^.Bm.hzi *

Now  the  factor (1  —  cos.^Jts) is  equal  to

(1 — cos.Jzs) .  (1  -|-  cos.Jot-}-cos.2J73)  =  2sin.2J-cy.(l+cos.|'ztf+cos.2J'5j),
and

sin.i^'5y=2sin.^«.cos.:j7rf [1,31],  Int.;

hence,  by  substitution  in  [102766],  it  becomes

2^2a;/(Z

d-m

; .  cos.w .  ( 1 -}- cos  .^•sj -f- cos.^^ct)  .  tang-ij-cr ;

and  as  zi  never  exceeds  200°  [10272a],  the  coefficient  of  dvi  must  always  be  finite.
IVIoreover,  as  the  elements  of  this  integral  are  divided  by  the  great  quantity  il-\-yY,  it  is
evident  that  the  whole  integral  is  very  small;  and  by  neglecting  it,  we  obtain  [10278].

t  (4375)  Substituting  [10278]  in  [10271],  then  changing  z  into  z'  [10279']  and
[10280o] zi  into * — vi' [10278'],  so  as to correspond to the upper point F of the curve,

fig.  168,  169,  page  948,  where  we  have  the  angle  AFf'^=-ts',  it  becomes  as  in
[102806] [10280];  observing that,  at this point,  the ordinate l-\-y becomes  simply  equal to /,

because  the  fluid  is  supposed  to  terminate  at  the  circular  border  of  the  lower  surface  of
[102806'] the  disk. Now,  dividing [10280] by  a,  substituting l4-cos.'5*'=2cos.2i'5j' [6], Int.,

X.Suppl.2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

953

•a'  =  the  angle  which  is  formed,  in  the  plane  of  the  generating  section  of  the
fluid,  by  two  lines  drawn  through  the  upper  point  of  contact  of  the  fluid
with  the  plane,  in  directions  respectively  parallel  to  the  tangents  of  the
surface  of  the  fluid,  and  of  the  surface  of  the  attracting  solid,  at  an
insensible  distance  from  that  point  of  contact;  both  these  tangents
being  drawn  in  a  downward  direction,  or  towards  the  interior  part  ot
the  fluid;

z'=z  the  extreme  value  of  z,  or  the  whole  height  of  the  column  EA,  which
is  raised  by  the  disk.

[10279]

[10279']

[10280d]

[10280rf']

and  then  extracting  the  square  root,  we  get  z',  as  in  [10281],  neglecting  the  third  and
higher  powers  of  a~^

We  must  not  use  the  value zi='r(  —  zs'  [10280a],  for  the  upper  limit  of  the  surface,  if [10280c]
the  fluid  rises  ever  so  little  on  the  outer  rim  FOP<^  of  the  disk,  fig.  170,  171. This  will
be  evident  hy  considering  the  simple  case^

where  a  glass  disk,  whose  figure  is  that  of  a  '-

right  cylinder  with  a  circular  base,  is  dipped
into  a  vessel  of  water,  to  a  considerable
depihj  and  then  gradually  raised  up  in  a
vertical  direction;  taking  care  that  the  opera-
tion is  performed  with  sufficient  steadiness  to
enable  the  fluid  on  the  surface  to  adjust  itself
to  its  successive  states  of  equilibrium.  In
order  to  form  a  more  distinct  idea  of  the  figure
of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  in  the  difierent
situations  of  the  cylinder,  we  shall  suppose,
as  in  [10012m — a],  that  the  rim  or  intersec-
tion of  the  base  of  the  cylinder  with  its
curved  surface,  is  rounded  off  in  the  form  of
a  quadrant  of  a  circle  FOP,  whose  radius
is  extremely  small. The  cylinder  being  well

moistened,  the  fluid  will  ascend  on  the  vertical  sides  PQ,  TU,  of  the  cylinder,  fig.  170,  and
will  adhere,  so  as  to  form  with  them,  at  the  upper  part  of  the  fluid,  the  angle  zs'.  In  this
case,  the  general  value  of  the  angle  DKlc^-a  will  become,  at  the  side  of  the  cylinder,
zs  =  ^'r;  and  it  will  retain  the  same  value,  while  the  cylinder  is  gradually  raised  up  in  a
vertical  direction,  until  the  upper  part  of  the  fluid  has  descended  along  the  side  QP  to  the
point  P.  When  the  fluid  has  attained  to  the  point  P,  the  angle  zi,  corresponding  to  its
summit,  will  increase  by  passing  over  the  curved  surface  POF,  as  the  cylinder  is  slowly
elevated;  so  that,  when  this  summit  is  at  the  point  F,  fig.  171,  where  the  angle  AFf'==-a':=:0
[10279,  lO^SOd,  9359k],  we  shall  have  ■a=iAFf=.-r.  Hence  it  appears  that,  while  the
summit  of  the  fluid  descends  through  the  quadrantal  arc  POF,  the  angle  zi  increases  firom

VOL.  IV.  239

[10280c  ]

[10280/]

[10280g-]
[10280g^]

[10280A]
[10280i  ]

954

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M^c.  Cel.

Then  the  equation  [10271]  will  give

[10280]  0.Z

' II  COG.- 2/2.n-sin.VL

[10280A]

[102804']
[10280?  ]

[10280Z']
[10280m]

[10280n]

[10280o  ]

[10280;)]
[10280pq
[10280g ]

[10280g']

[10280r ]
[10280/]

[10280* ]
[10280f ]

[10280u]
[10280t)  ]

TO  =  ^*  to  zi  =  TT,  the  whole  increment  being  ^*,  or  a  quadrantal  arc.  During  the  whole
of  this  descent  along  the  arc  POF,  the  angle  -us',  which  is  fornned  by  the  upper  part  of  the
section  of  the  fluid  and  the  section  of  the  cylinder  at  the  same  point,  remains  invariable,  and,
in  the  present  hypothesis,  is  w'  =  0  [10280i];  so  that,  if  we  put  i  for  the  acute  angle  which
a  vertical  line,  drawn  through  any  point  O  of  the  quadrantal  arc  POF,  forms  with  the  arc
at  O,  we  may  put  generally  ■^s  =  ^*-|-^,  for  the  value  of  trf,  corresponding  to  the  upper
limit  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  when  it  is  at  the  point  O.  The  values  of  the  angle  cr,
corresponding  to  the  points  P,  O,  F,  which  we  have  found  to  be  ^tt,  J-*-(-i,  t  [I0280Ar,  Z'],
respectively,  have  been  computed  upon  the  supposition  that  the  angle  zs'  =  0  [10280^] ;  but
if  this  angle  has  a  finite  value,  the  preceding  expressions  of  to  [10280wi]  must  be  decreased
by  to',  and  then  they  will  become  respectively  ^t  —  to',  5-*-|-*  —  w',  ir — th' ;  so  that  we
shall  have  for  the  extreme  limit  of  ■ttf  [10280/'],  corresponding  to  any  point  O  of  the  arc
POF,  the  following  expression;

•c:r  =  ^*-|-i  —  to';

in  which  i  represents  the  angle  corresponding  to  the  circular  arc  PO,  its  least  value  being
i  =  0,  its  greatest  value  *=|7r  [10280»i].  This  extreme  limit  of  the  value  to  is  to  be
used  instead  of  7s:^=7r  —  to',  given  by  the  author  in  [10278'] ;  and  the  effect  of  making  this
alteration  is  equivalent  to  that  of  changing  his  value  of  to',  in  [10280p'],  into  to'-j-|«  —  i;
since,  by  this  means,  the  expression TO  =  5r  —  to'  [10280^']  changes  into

^=a* (to'-}-!* *)=|T-{-i to',

as  in  [10280o].  Making  the  same  change  in  the  value  of  to;'  in  the  formulas  [10280,  10281],
they  become  respectively

az^  =  l-^-sin.(^-TO')-V^•^l-^^°f(^^^+^— ^^)^

s'  =  \  /^.cos.(Jto'  +  |*  — Ji)

0^  3/a.cos.(^TO'-[-43-  —  lii)

These  expressions  may  be  simplified  by  putting

i  =  TO'  —  ^'T!'-\-'2v, or v  =  ^ir-{-^i — ^to',

from  which  we  get  i  —  to'  =  —  (|ir  —  2v),  ^to'-j-:|*  —  ii  =  ^'!r  —  v.  Substituting  these  in
[10280r],  and  then  multiplying  by  (xr^  =  a^  [9323j3],  we  get,  by  observing  that
l-f-sin.(i  —  to') becomes 1  —  sin.(^'ff  —  2u)  =  l — cos.2u  =  2sin.%  [1],  Int.,

z '  2=  2a2 .  sin.2  V  —  ?V:^1^\  ( I  _  cos.3y) .

This  expression  is  the  same  as  the  equation  (6)  in  page  232  of  M.  Poisson's  Nouvelle
Theorie,  ^c,  neglecting  terms  of  the  order  a^.  If  we  neglect  terms  of  the  order  a^,  in
[10280m],  and  extract  the  square  root,  we  shall  get  very  nearly

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

955

whence  we  obtain  very  nearly

2  , (1 — sin.^^d')

-.cos.A^ — -hrj 7-r

a  3/oL.cos.Jra

jHeight  of  the  elevated  column.  |  [10281]

z'=/2.a.sin.'U  =  ^2.a.sin.(Jir  +  |j:  — |z3') [10280s].

From  this  last  expression  of  z',  it  is  evident  that,  while  *  increases,  from  i  =  0  to  its  greatest
value  «  =  2^  [10280p],  the  value  of  2;'  will  increase,  and  that  z'  will  attain  its  maximum
when  i  =  ^'T(,  and  then  «'=  ^2.a.sin.(J'jr — J'5j')=\/2.a.cos.J'3i';  which  is  the  case
treated  of  by  La  Place  in  [10280,  &z,c].  This  maximum  value  corresponds  to  the  state
where  the  summit  of  the  fluid  is  situated  on  the  lowest  point  J?"  of  the  arc  POF,  as  in  fig.  171,
page  953.  If  we  put  ■5j'  =  0j  as  in  the  case  of  water  with  a  glass  disk  [10280iJ,  this
maximum  value  of  z'  will  become  z'=^2-a'  In  the  same  case  of  w'=0,  if  we  put
t  =  0,  we  shall  have,  from  [10280^],  v=^^if,  whence  sin.v=^^,  and  then  the  expression
of  z'  [10280zi;]  becomes  z'  =  a;  this  corresponds  to  the  case  where  the  summit  of  the
fluid  ascends  to  the  point  P,  and  agrees  with  the  calculation  in  [9425^].  Hence  it  appears,
that,  when  zi'=0,  the  value  of  z'  increases  with  the  angle  i,  from  the  upper  point  P,
where  i  =  0,  and  z'  =  a  [10281a],  to  the  lower  point  F,  where  i  =  ^*,  and  z'  =  ^.a
[IO28O2;],  being  its  greatest  value.  This  maximum  value  of  z'  must  correspond  very  nearly
to  the  situation  of  the  disk  when  the  greatest  quantity  of  fluid  is  elevated,  the  radius  of  the
disk  being  supposed  much  greater  than  z'  or  a;  and  it  being  evident  that  this  volume  would
be  decreased,  if  the  outer  limit  of  the  fluid  were  removed  from  F  towards  A,  on  the  lower
surface  of  the  disk.

In  the  case  we  have  just  considered,  where  water  is  elevated  by  a  glass  disk  or  cylinder,
the  external  surface  of  the  fluid  MKP,  fig.  170,  171,  page  953,  is  always  concave,  and  the
lower  part  of  the  surface,  near  Mor  L,  has  the  level  line  of  the  fluid  in  the  vase  MEL  for
Its  asymptote.  As  the  summit  of  the  fluid  descends  along  the  arc  POF,  in  consequence  of  the
gradual  elevation  of  the  disk,  the  external  surface  of  the  fluid  becomes  grooved  in  fig.  171,
at  the  point  V,  where  the  ordinate  YV,  or  .the  distance  of  the  surface  from  the  axis  AE,  is  a
minimum,  and  the  tangent  to  the  curve  is  vertical,  or  is  =  ^'K.  The  figure  of  the  surface
FVM  may  be  very  easily  investigated  by  means  of  the  equations  [10271,  10266];  and  if
we  neglect  the last  term  of  [10271],  on  account  of  its  smallness,  we  shall have, as in

[10272f^J,

2:  =  ^2.a.sin.J'S3'.

At  the  point  F,  where  «^*  —  ot'=w;  [10280c,  9980/ft'j,  it  becomes  E A^=\/^ . a.sm.^w,
and  at  the  point  F,  where  -a^^ir  [10281^],  or  ^2'Sin.^-a==l,  we  get  EY=a  [10281i].
The  difference  of  these  two  expressions  is  the  depression  of  the  point  V  below  the  lower
surface  of  the  disk,  namely,

v4  r=a.|\/2.sin.iOT  — 1^.

We  have,  from  [34,  31,  1],  Int., =-: — =^r^—. r") substituting  this,  and  the

•• '  •"  tang.OT sm.'rt 2sin,^w.cos.it3  °

differential  of  [10281iJ,  dz=  -y^.d-a.cos.^zi,  in  [102666],  we  get

[10280«;]

[10280a;  ]
[102801/  ]
[IO28O3/']

[102802  ]
[10281a]

[102816]

[10281c  ]
[10281rf]

[]0281e]

[10281/]
[1028]g-]

[10281/1  ]

[10281i  ]
[10281ft  ]
[10281/  ]

[10281m]
[1028 In]

956  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

To  obtain  the  volume  of  the  whole  column  raised  up,  we  must  first  multiply
[10282] this  value  of  2'  by  the  lower  surface  of  the  disk,  or  by  */^,  and  then  add  to

,  dz  /«•.  1 \ / 1 — 2sin.2^isr \  a lidtir , a , . ,

[IO28I0] dy  =  — =  — [ -r- '  dzF.  COS. izs- ].[-——, — == 7^'~^~r  4-—7='dzT.SlQ.izr,

■■  ■■ ^  tang.ar  \^2  ) \2sm.!|o'.cos.iar/  ^2  sin.iw  ' /2

whose  integral  is
[10281;? ] y=— r^  •/ ^iii  + 1^ '-^^"^ •  sin.Jar=— -^ . hyp.log.tang.Jzr-y2 • « •  cos. Jar-fconstant j
observing  that,  from  [59,  54,  31],  Int.,  we  have

, ,,  y  1 N  rf.  tariff.^  or i(/tir.{C0S4ra-)~^  ^rfo"  ic?o>'

[10281g]  f^.(hyp.log.tang.i^)=  ^^^^^^^ = ^^^^^^^ ==2sin4^.cos.i..  =  sna^-

The  constant  quantity  in  [10281^]  must  be  so  taken  that,  at  the  point  JP,  fig.  171,  page  953,
where  w  =  t^  [10281A:],  we  may  have  y=0;  hence  we  get

[10281r]  constant  =  -^.hyp.log.tang.|tf>-|-^.a.cos.^t^;

substituting  this  in  [10281p],  we  obtain  the  general  value  of  y,  in  the  following  form ;

a , , tang.4t«  , ._ , ,  , .

[10281s  ]  y^'U^'  ^^'P-'°S-toi^  +  v/2 .  a .  (cos.iw;  —  cos.^^r) .

At  the point F, where ^■sr  =  ^'n', we have sin.^z3-  =  cos.jOT-  =  i/^; consequently
[102810 tang.i>='  =  f:p^^  [41],  Int.,  becomes tang.^^  =  -^_=  ^_^  Substituting  these

in  [10281s],  we  get  the  value  of  y  corresponding  to  the  point  P,  namely,
[10281U]  y=-^.hyp.log.|(l-f  ^2).tang.^w;^+a.f/2.cos.^w;  — Ij.

In  the  case  of  water  with  a  glass  cylinder,  we  have ot'=  0  [10280i],  and  z^  =  *  [10281Z;] ;
[10281j;] hence sin.^w  =  l, cos.^tf?  =  0, tang.|t(;  =  l; substituting  these  in  [10281»i,  m],  we  get

very  nearly
[1028111^]  ^Y=a.(/2  — l)  =  aX0,4142.

[10281X]  y  =  ^.hyp.log.(l  +  ^/^)  — a  =  ~aX0,3768.

If  we  suppose,  as  in  [9372o],  that  a  =  3'"S88972,  we  shall  get  AY=l"'\6ll;
y  =  —  1""  ,466 ;  which  correspond  to  the  case  where  the  radius  of  the  disk  or  cylinder  is
excessively  large  in  comparison  with  a.  The  expressions  [1028b',  m,  s,  u,  w,  x]  agree  with
those  of  M.  Poisson,  in  page  230  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  Sfc,  by  making  some  slight
reductions.

The  supposition  that  the  lower  edge  of  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  is  terminated  by  the

small  circular  arc  POF,  may  be  applied  when  the  external  surface  of  the  fluid  is  convex,  as

in  the  case  of  mercury  with  a  wet  glass  cylinder. In  this  case,  we  shall  suppose  that  the

'■ *-' mercury  forms  the  acute  angle  w  with  the  vertical  side  PQ  of  the  cylinder,  when  the  upper

surface  of  the  fluid  rests  against  the  point  P ;  and  if  we  slowly  raise  up  the  cylinder  in  a

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

957

this  product  the  volume  which  surrounds  the  fluid  cylinder  whose  base  is  the
lower  surface  of  the  disk.  This  last  volume  is  equal  to  the  integral*
— 2'^f(l-{-y).zdy^  taken  from  ct  =  0  to  TO  =  'jr  —  w';  thus  we  shall  have,  for
the  expression  of  the  whole  volume  V  of  the  elevated  column,

r=w^\/ f.cos.i^'-

Sa.cos.i^ra'

'^^J(l^y)>zdy,

[Volume  of  the"]
elevated  fluid.J

We  may  rigorously  determine  this  last  integral  in  the  following  manner.

The equation [10267], being multiplied by — (^  +  2/) '^2/5 gives, by
integration, t

— 2a ./(/  +  y) .  zdy  =  (/  -f  y) .  sin.w  +  constant.

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  observe  that  the  integral  must  be
taken  between  the  limits  w  =  0  and  w  =  «' — w'  [10283];  and  we  shall  now
show  that  (/  +  7/).sin.ra  is  nothing  when  i3  =  0.  For  l-\-y  becomes  infinite
when  OT  is  nothing;  therefore,  by  reducing  its  expression  into  a  series  ascending
according  to  the  powers  of  to,  the  first  term  of  this  series  will  be  of  the  form
A.Ts~^.  Moreover,  z  being  nothing  when  ^  =  0,  if  we  also  reduce  its  value
into  a  series  ascending  according  to  the  powers  of  zs,  the  first  term  of  it  will  be
of  the  form  ^'.ra'',  r  and  r'  being  positive. Then  the  equation

[10283]
[10284]

[10285]

[10286]
[10287]

[10288]

vertical  direction,  so  as  to  bring  the  point  O,  which  corresponds  to  the  angle  i,  against  the

upper  surface  of  the  fluid,  its  inclination  with  the  vertical  will  be  i-\-  w ;  and  when  this  is

equal  to  J-ir,  the  fluid  will  become  horizontal,  and  upon  a  level  with  the  surface  of  the  fluid [10282c  ]

in  the  vessel. Continuing  still  to  elevate  the  cylinder,  so  that  the  upper  part  of  the  fluid  may

fall  upon  a  point  between  O  and  JP,  the  angle  i-\-w  will  exceed  ^it,  and  the  surface  of  the [l0282rf]

fluid  near  that  point  will  become  concave.

*  (4376) Continue  the  line  kl,  fig.  168  or  169,  page  948,  to  meet  ME  in  c;  then  the

area CKkc=CKxKl==  —  zdy; multiplying  this  by  the  circumference  described  by  the  [10283a]

point K, in its revolution  about the axis AE, it  becomes — 2'jr.{l-{-y).zdy, which  [102836]

represents  the  element  of  the  volume  of  the  fluid  in  question. Its  integral  is  as  in  [10283]  ;  [10283c]

its  limits  being  from  the  point  M,  where  «==0,  to  the  point  F,  where  •«  =  *  —  -a'  [10280a].  [10283rf]

Adding  this  to  the  quantity  ifPsf  [10282],  we  get  the  whole  volume  V o(  the  fluid,  namely,  [10283e]

V=^Pz'  —  2'jr.f{l-\-y).zdy; and  by  substituting  the  value  of  «'  [10281],  it  becomes  as  in  [10283/]

[10284]. We  may  remark  that,  for  convenience,  we  have  inserted  the  symbol  V  in  [10284],  [10283g]
but  it  is  not  in  the  original  work.

t  (4377) This  product is
integral  gives  [10285].
VOL. IV.

d-a. cos.-a. {I -\- y) -\- dy. s'm. -a =— 2a.. {I -\-y). zdy, whose [10285a]

240

958

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10289]
[10290]
[10291]

[10292]
[10293]

dz

dy

=  — tang.w [10266]

will  give,  by  noticing  only  these  first  terms,  and  observing  that  tang.w  becomes
nearly  equal  to  «  when  it  is  very  small,*

r'.A'.

r.A.-a-

-a:

whence  we  deduce,  by  the  comparison  of  the  exponents  of  -a,

1  —  r  =  r';

(Z+2/).sin.'«  will therefore become f A.x/, by  substituting A.-ss"^  for  l-{-y,
and  -a  for  sin.«;  so  that  (l+y^.sm.-a  is  nothing  when «  =  0;  consequently

[10291a]
[102916]

[10291c ]

* (4378) We  have,  in [10287,  10288], /+y  =  ^.-a-'4-&c.; z  =  A'.'sf'-\-hc.i
— tang.'5j== — -a  —  he.  [45],  Int. Substituting  these  in  [10289],  it  becomes

r'.  ^'.  «'•'-' rft3-f&z;c.  „
! = — -Ef  —  &c. ;

—  r.A.  vs~^~^d-a  -f-  &.C.

and,  as  the  first  term  of  this  equation  must  be  the  same  in  both  members  of  the  equation,  we
shall  have

r'.A'

'd-a

•vi\

r'.A'

—  r.A.T;i~''~^dvs

whence  we  easily  deduce  [10291]. This  may  also  be  put  under  the  form  '— ^.'bj'''+''=zj;

[10291<i] and,  to make the  exponents  of  -a  equal  to each  other,  we  must  put r'+r  =  l, as  in
[10292].

f  (4379) The  first  term  of  Z-j-y  [10291a]  is  A.vs-%  and  the  first  term  of  sin.-rtf  is  zt

[10293a] [43],  Int. ; therefore the first term  of  their  product (Z-j-y).sin.'5j is A.T!i^~''=A.'Bf'

[10292];  and  as  r'  is positive [10288],  this will  vanish  when t3=:0;  consequently the

second  member  of  the  expression  [10285]  must  give  the  constant  quantity  equal  to  nothing,

[102936] and  we  shall  have  — 2<3..f[l-\-y).zdy=(l-{-y).s\v\.vs. At  the  second  limit,  where  «=* — -a'

[10286],  and  /+y  =  Z [102806],  corresponding  to  the  point F, fig.  168,  169,  page  948,

[10293c] the  integral  becomes  — 2o.f{l-\-y).zdy  =  l.s\n.'si'. IVIultiplying  this  by  - ,  we  get  [10294],
[10293c'] and  by  putting sin.w'=2sin.^Bj'.cos.^'5i'  [31],  Int.,  it  becomes

[10293<f]  --2*./(Z  +  T/).;?(Zy  =  -£.Z.sln.^H-'.cos.^z5'.

Instead  of  restricting  the  calculation  to  the  particular  value  of  «!  =  «'  —  w',  which  is  used  by
[i0293e] \^^  Place  in  [10278',  &,c.],  we may  use  the more general expression ■5J  =  ^ii'-}~* — "^
[I0280o], which requires that we should change w' into -5^'  +  ^*  —  * [10280^], in
La  Place's  formulas;  and  by  this  means  the  expression  [10294]  becomes

X.  Suppl.2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

959

the  constant  term  of  the  preceding  integral  is  nothing.  We  shall  therefore
have,  by  observing  that,  at  the  other  limit  of  the  integral,  w  becomes  * — w',  and
y  =  0  [102806],

_2^.y;--'(Z  +  3/).zJy  =  ^./.sin.^';  [10294]

consequently  the  whole  volume  of  the  elevated  column  will  be  *

Substituting  this  in  the  expression  of  the  volume  F"  [10283/],  it  becomes

F==*Z^«'  +  ^.Z.COS.(t— isr').

Multiplying  this  by  the  gravity  g,  and  the  density  D,  we  get  the  following  expression  of  the
mass  M  of  the  fluid,  which  is  elevated  by  the  disk  ;

M=ffgD.l^z'-]-l.gD.Lcos.{i—z>r').

This  may  be  reduced  to  the  same  form  as  the  equation  (1)  in  page  226  of  M.  Polsson's
Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  by  changing  M,  I,  z',  D,  ■&',  a,  into  A,  r,  Jc,  p,  v — w,  a~^,
respectively,  to  conform  to  his  notation.  In  the  case  treated  of  by  La  Place,  where  i  =  ^t
[10280y'],  the  value  of  V  [10293^]  becomes

V=^Pz'-Jrl.Ls\n.vr',

which,  by  substituting  the  values  of  z',  sin.*'  [10281,  10293c'],  becomes  as  in  [10295a];  or,
by  reduction,  as  in  [10295],  corresponding  to  the  case  where  the  summit  of  the  fluid  is
situated  at  F,  fig.  171,  page  953,  on  the  lowest  point  of  the  quadrantal  arc  POF. If  i=0,

and  cr'=0,  the  expression  [10293^']  becomes  V^Trf^z' -\--A\ and  in  this  case,  we  have

z'  =  a.  [10281a],  also  a=a~2  [10280^];  therefore  this  value  of  F  becomes

The  first  term  of  the  second  member  of  this  expression  vPa.  is  equal  to  the  volume  of  the
fluid  immediately  under  the  disk,  which  is  in  the  form  of  a  cylinder  whose  altitude  Is  z'=a,
and  the  radius  of  Its  base  equal  to  Z;  the  second  term  ttIo?  Is  equal  to  the  volume  of  the
elevated  fluid  which  Is  situated  without  this  cylinder,  being  the  same  as  that  we  have  already
computed  in  [lOlOTi] ;  and  these  two  expressions  ought  evidently  to  be  equal  to  each  other,
because  the  action  of  the  fluid  cylinder  [10293^]  upon  the  external  mass  [10293r],  is  exactly
the  same  as  that  of  a  glass  tube  of  the  same  dimensions  well  moistened  [9220] .

[10293/]

[10293g]
[10293A]
[10293i  ]

[10293ft]
[10293i ]

[10293m]
[10293n]

[10293o]
[10293p]
[10293?]
[10293r  ]
[10293* ]

*  (4380) Substituting  [10293c?]  in  [10284],  it  becomes

jjt^'jtI?. s/ 2.  cos.W .

\\  —  sin.^^:a' — Gsin.^-a'.cos.s^-s'j ;

^/g^  3a .  cos.i'zs'

and,  by  putting cos.^J«'=l  —  sln.^^a', in  the  last  term,  it  becomes  as  in  [10295].

[10295a]

960  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Ca

[10295]  ^="^'^/r'^"'~3a.clK-^^^^'^"-^^'  +  5sill.='i:.'i . ri^^^L^'T

We  shall  have  the  value  of  -  by  means  of  the  following  equation,  given  in
[9358],*

SCOS.W V^  h  .  ISO /"t , rt •  is") PElevation  ?  in  the"!

[102961  9=  1 'i^ ^ T~r{^  Sm.ra  /.(  1 -f  2sin.ra  )>  ;  axisofatubewhow

•■  J  a.n  (_  O2'.C0S."*5; ^  / \ •  y^^ l diameter  is  a.  I

[10297] h being  the  interior  diameter  of  the  tube,  q  the  height  to  which  the  lowest  point
of  the  included  fluid  is  elevated  above  the  level  [9998',  10000]. Incase  the

*  (4381) In  the  calculation  [10296,  &c.],  the  author  supposes that  the  tube  whose

[10296a] diameter  \s  h^=2l  [10297,  9359],  is  formed  of  the  same  substance  as  the  disk;  and  if  this

[102960^ tube  is  dipped  into  the  same  fluid  as  that  which  is  used  with  the  disk,  the  elevation  of  the

fluid,  in the  axis  of  the  tube,  will  be  represented  by  q  [10297,  &z,c.],  in  conformity  with

the  notation  in  [9353,  &;c.]. Then,  if  we  compare  [9346]  with  [10279,  or  10280a],  we  gel

[102966] fl'=^ir  —  ©'; also —  =  - [9328]  ;  hence  [9358]  becomes,  by  successive  reductions.

[10296c]

COS.w' C,  I  /,  „ (1  —  8in.3nr')N

5  =

o-i c 5.CO8.W

/  (l-8in.3^0Y

''\  *• C0S.2»' )\

COS.w'

C0S.1

1  — - — '---.(3cos.2^'— 2-|-2sin.'«-')?
1— „ — ^.(1  — 3sin.«tr'+2sin.3tr')?

al i 3q
iim6d]  ^2^Si^  — ^,.(1— sin.»')2.(I4.2sin.»')?;

and,  as Z=^A [10296a],  it may be  changed  into [10296]. Now,  putting  for  brevity
[10296e]  J^

w=r ~'{^ — sin.'or'')^. (l-j-2sin.ar'), we  find  that  the  preceding  expression  [10296]

[10296/] becomes 5^= — r~'(l  —  ^)' Dividing  this  by  the  coefficient  of — ,  and neglecting w^,

[10296g] we  obtain -  =  r ^,-C7  +  Vw), as  in  [10298];  so  that  the  correction  of  the  altitude  a  is

[10296A] qw;  and  if  we  put  the  corrected  altitude q-{-qw=q'i we  shall  have -  =  ^ i-hq''r

hence,  as  a,  •«»■',  are  given,  we  shall  have  q'  inversely  as  h,  as  in  [10299]. When  «r'  =  0,

[10296i] qw  =  ^h  =  ^l  [10296e,  a],  as  in  [10299];  hence  it  appears  that,  when  the  fluid perfectly

moistens  the  sides  of  the  tube,  and  we  have  w=0,  we must  increase  the  observed  height

of  the  lowest  point  of  the  elevated  fluid  q,  by  one  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube,  to
[102964]  ,  ^ 2

obtain  the  corrected  height q'=q-\-^h]  and  then  we  shall  have,  from  [1029oA], ^=hq'

This  agrees  with  what  we  have  already  found  in  [9372>r,  10003].

X.  Suppl.2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.  961

fluid  is  depressed  below  the  levels  q  becomes  negative^  and  denotes  the  depression [10297']
of  the most  elevated  point  of  the  interior  fluid. This  equation  gives,  very
nearly,

-  =  o— ^^  '\9  +  ^-V/  •  (1  —  sin.w  ')'•  (1  +  2  sin.:.')  I .  [102981

Thus,  to  obtain  the  elevations  inversely  proportional  to  the  interior  diameters  of
the  tubes,  ive  must  add  to  the  observed  elevation  9,  the  sixth  part  of  the  diameter
multiplied  by  the  factor

(1— sin.2^^).(l-f-2sin.zs^)^
cos.^w'  '

[10300J
[10301]

and  this  factor  is  reduced  to  unity  when  zs'  is  nothing.  This  correction  is
necessary  in  experiments  made  with  great  care,  like  those  we  shall  now
give  an  account  of.  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  undertaken  them,  at  my  request,  and
has  contrived  a  method  of  measuring  the  elevations  and  depressions  of  the  fluids
in  transparent  capillary  tubes,  by  a  process  which  gives  to  his  experiments  the
correctness  of  astronomical  observations ;  so  that  we  may  with  confidence  adopt  [10302]
his  results.  Tubes  were  selected  of  a  uniform  calibre,  and  their  interior
diameters  were  ascertained  by  means  of  the  weights  of  the  columns  of  mercury
which  filled  them;  this  being  the  most  accurate  method  of  determining  the
diameters.

Observers  do  not  agree  in  their  experiments  on  the  ascent  of  water  in  a ^eStJon
glass  capillary  tube  of  a  given  diameter ;  their  results  differ  from  each  other  at
least  one  half  [10322a — g"]. These  differences  depend,  in  a  great  measure, [10303]
upon  the  greater  or  less  degree  of  moisture  on  the  sides  of  the  tube. When
the  tubes  are  very  wet,  as  they  were  in  the  following  experiments,  the  water
always  rises  very  nearly  to  the  same  height,  in  the  same  tube. The  flrst  tube [10304]
used  by  M.  Gay-Lussac  was  of  white glass,  and its interior diameter  was
I'^'^SOMl. He  measured  the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  inner  surface [10305]
of  the  water  above  the  level  of  this  fluid,  in  a  very  large  vessel,  into  which  this
tube  was  dipped  at  its  lower  end ;  and  found,  by  several  experiments,  which
agree  with  each  other,  that  it  was  equal  to  23™,  1634,  the  temperature  being [10306]
about  8°,5  of  the centigrade  thermometer. Here  the  angle  -a'  was  nothing [10306']
[10280A:'],  as  the  ivater  perfectly  moistened  the  sides  of  the  tube. Augmenting
this  elevation  by  a  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube  [10296A;],  we  get
23™'-,3791 ;  multiplying  this  quantity  by  the  diameter  of  the  tube,  we  obtain, [10307]

by  what  has  been  said  in  [10296A;],  the  value  of  -  ;  hence  we  deduce
VOL.  IV.  241

962

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[10308]
[10309]

[10310]

[10310']

[10311]
[10312]

-  =  2a2  =  30'"''"S2621 , or

a

•,131, a  =  3™-890.

[Valuoiof  01,  a,"l
for  water. J

[10313]
[10314]

In  a  second  glass  tube,  whose  interior  diameter  was  l'"'-,90381,  M.  Gaj-Lussac
observed,  at  the  same  temperature,  the  elevation  of  the  lowest  point  of  the
interior  surface  above  the  level  to  be  15™,5861,  which  gives  15'"'-,9034,  by
adding  to  it  the  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube  [10296/c].  The
elevation  of  the  fluid  in  the  first  tube,  being  augmented  in  like  manner,  gives,
by  the  formula  [10296A:],  the  corrected  elevation  of  the  second  tube,*  15'"'-,896,
which  differs  but  very  little  from  the  result  of  observation ;  and  this  proves,
Firsts  that  the  corrected  elevations  are  very  nearly  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the
diameters  of  the  tubes ;  Second,  that,  in  very  accurate  experiments,  the  correction
made by  the addition of  the  sixth  part of the diameter of  the tubes  is

indispensable.

2

We  may  also  determine  the  value  of  - , by  means  of  the  elevation  of  the

lowest  point  of  the  surface  of  the  water  which  rises  between  two  glass  plates,
placed  very  near  to  each  other,  in  vertical  and  parallel  positions,  and  dipped  into
a  vessel  filled  with  that  fluid.  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  found,  by  the  mean  of  five
experiments  which  differ  but  little  from  each  other,  that  this  elevation  is
equal  to  13'"'-,574,  the  distance  of  the  plates  from  each  other  being  l™'-,069.
This  distance  is  exactly  equal  to  the  diameter  of  a  cylinder  of  iron  wire ;  and  to
measure  this  diameter,  several  pieces  of  the  same  wire  were  placed  at  the  side

*  (4382) This  quantity  15™-,896  is  equal  to  30™-,2621 [10308]  divided  by P',90381
2
[10309]. The  value  of  -  ,  deduced  from  this  experiment,  is

[10310a]  I'SQOSSI  X  15™-,9034  =  30™''"S277,

which  differs  from  the  value  [10308],  namely, 30™'"',262,  by  the  quantity  0'"''"S015. If
[10310o']  2

we  had  not  corrected  the  altitudes  for  the  sixth  part  of  the  diameter,  the  value  of  -,  deduced

from  the  first  experiment  [10305,  10306],  would  be
[103106  ]  1  ■"'•,29441  X  23™  ,1634  =  29™^"^,983 ;

and  that  deduced  from  the  second  [10309,  10310],  would  be
[10310c]  l""-,9038lXl5'"',586l  =  29™'-"",673,

which  differs  from  the  preceding  value 29™-"",983 by  the  quantity 0™^'"'-,310,  mstead  of
[10310^] 0'"'-'"S015  ;  so  that  the  error  0,310  is  reduced to  0,015,  or  ffths  of  it  is  taken  away,  by

correcting  the  altitudes  for  the  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube. This  agrees  with

[10312].

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.  963

of  each  other,  which,  by  the  sum  of  their  diameters,  formed  a  considerable  width ;

this  was  carefully  measured,  and  then  divided  by  the  number  of  these  diameters.  "•

The  plates  were  perfectly  plane,  and  had  been  well  moistened ;  the  temperature

during  the  experiments  was  about  IG*^. If  we  add  to  the  observed  elevation

the  product of  the half distance of the plates by 1  —  i^ * being the [10315]

semi-circumference  whose radius is unity, and then multiply  the sum by

the distance  l™-,069,  we  shall  obtain  the  value  of  -,  as  in  [10317^]. Hence [10316]
we  find  ^

-=14'"S524.  [10317]

This  result  must  be  increased  a  little,  to  reduce  it  to  the  temperature  of  8o,5;  for [10318]

we  have  seen  before  that  the  attraction  increases  with  the  density  of  the  fluid.

It  differs  but  little  from  the  result  15"";131  [10308],  given  by  the  elevation  of [10319]

water  in  a  glass  tube,  and  this furnishes  a  new  confirmation  of  the  theory ;

according  to  which,  the  elevation  between  parallel  planes  must  be  about  half

the  elevation  in  capillary  tubes  of  a  diameter  equal to  the distance  of  the

2
planes. We  shall  here  adopt,  in  preference,  the  value  of  -  ,  deduced from the [10320]

*  (4383) The  plates  being  perfectly  moistened,  we  have,  as  in  [10306'],  -ss' =  0, and

H 1  [10317a]

then 6'  —  ^t  [102966] ;  substituting  this  in  [9453],  also -  =  -  [9328],  it  becomes

in  which  q'  [9452]  represents  the  elevation  of  the  fluid  between  two  vertical  and  parallel

planes  whose  distance  is  21,  and  q [9430] the elevation  of  the  fluid  in  a  vertical  tube [10317c  ]

whose radius is I; so  that Iq is  nearly  equal  to  the  elevation of  the  fluid in a tube

whose radius  is  2?;  therefore,  by  [9410],  ^q  is  nearly  equal  to  the  elevation  of  the  fluid [10317rf]

between  two  vertical,  parallel  planes,  whose  distance  is  21;  consequently  ^q  is  nearly equal

to  q',  or  q=^2q'  nearly. Substituting  this  in  [103175],  it  becomes  [10317e  ]

then  dividing  by  the  coefficient  of  - and  neglecting  the  square  and  higher  powers  of  the

small  fraction  -„  we  get ^==2l.\q'-{-L{l  —  i'!f)\. Now,  substituting  the  values [10314], [10317^]

1
namely, 2?=l™-,069, ^'=13'"S574, cr  =  3,1416, we  get -=14""-,633,  which  differs [10317A]

a  little  from  the  value  in  [10317]. The  value  of  - [10303]  is 15'"S131,  which  differs  hut [I0317i  ]
little  from  the  preceding  value  14"", 633  [10317A].

964  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M6c.  C^l.

experiment  upon  the  narrowest  tube  [10305],  and  we  shall  therefore  suppose,
[10321] as  in  [10308],  at  the  tejnperaturc  of  8^,5,*

[10322]  ?=30"'"'%2621, or 1=  15"''™-,131  =  a^ [Valuo«,ofa,a.forwater.]

This  being  premised,  we  find,  by  using  both  terms  of  the  formula  [10295],
ri0323i which  expresses  the  volume  of  the  elevated  fluid,  and  taking  for  unity  the  cubic

centimetre,  that  the  volume  of  the  fluid  elevated  by  a  circular  disk  of  white
[10324] glass,  whose  diameter  is  118™'-,366,  will  be  expressed  by  f

[10325]  F=  60,5327  —  0,9378.

The  weight  of  a  cubic  centimetre  of  water,  at  its  maximum  of  density,  is  a

gramme. But,  the  preceding  experiments  having  been  made  at  the  temperature

ri0327i ^^  about  eight  degrees  and  a  half,  the  cubic  centimetre  of  water  will  weigh

ri0328i ^^ther  less  than  a  gramme. Noticing  this  correction,  we  find  that  the  weight  of

the  elevated  column  of  water,  at  the  moment  when  it  is  ready  to  detach  itself,

[10329] is  59^'''"-,5873. M.  Gay-Lussac  found  by  several  experiments,  which  differ  but

[10326]

[10322a;

2

*  (4384) The  value  of  -  adopted  in  [10322],  differs  considerably  from  that  in  [9670],

namely,  13™',569,  agreeably  to  the  remark  in  [10303]. A  paper,  by  Dr.  Young,  in  the
[103226] Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  for  1805,  page  71,  contains  the  product  of  the  distance
of  two  planes,  by  the  height  of  the  water  elevated  by  the  capillary  action,  which represents

[10322c] nearly  the  value  of  -  [10317^],  as  given  by  several  authors  in square  inches of  English

1  (25™- 3918)2

[10322i] measure. That  of  Newton  is  the  same  as  in  [9678],  -  =  0'S01=^ — ^^^ '  =6""'"S45,

[10322e

which  is  much  too  small. Musschenbroek  makes  it  0'S196,  or  nearly  IS™''"'-;  Weitbrecht,
with considerable accuracy, 0''-,0214  =  14"'""- nearly; Monge, 13™""- nearly;

[10322/] Atwood,  0'S265  =  17'"''"'- nearly. Doctor Young  finally  assumes -  =  0'S2  =  12"""^-,9j
[10322g-] or -=25™""-,8,  instead  of  30'^'"%261,  which  is  used  by  La  Place  in  [10322].

t  (4385) When  the  fluid  is  water  or  alcohol,  we  have,  as  in  [10306'],  ot'=0,  and  then
[10325a] the  expression  of  the elevated  volume  of  the  fluid  [10295]  becomes  'kI^.\/ - — -•-.

2
Now,  by  making  the  calculation in  centimetres,  we  have,  in [10322], -  =  0", 302621,

[103256
[10325c

Z=iXll8'"S366=:5%9183 [10324], ^=3,1416. Hence Ws.  ^/|  =  60,533, and

nl 2

-X- =0,9378, as  in  [10325]; their difference  [10325a]  is  the  volume  of  the  elevated
[10325(i] fluid,  59,595,  which  is  to  be  corrected  for  the  temperature,  as  in  [10327J.

X.Suppl.2.] ADHESIOxN  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

965

,40,  agreeing,  as  well  as  could [10330]

little  from  each  other,  that  this  weight  was  59=
be  expected,  with  the  result  of  analysis.

Some  alcohc^,  whose  specific  gravity  at  the  temperature  of  eight  degrees,
compared  with  that  of  water  at  the  same  temperature,  was  0,81961,  ascended
in  the  first  tube  to  the  height  of  9'"'-,  18235,  the  temperature  being  always
eight  degrees.  The  alcohol  moistened  the  glass  perfectly,  so  that  we  must  add
to  this  height  the  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube  [10296A:,  10305],  and

it  then  becomes  equal  to  9'°'-,39808. Multiplying  this  by  the  diameter  of  the

2
tube  [10305],  we  get,  as  in  [10307,  &c.],  the  value  of  - , relative to  this

alcohol,  namely,

?  =  12™'-"S1649, ^  =  «^  =  6'"'-™S0824, «  =  2™-,4662. [Valaesof  a,a,foralcohol.]

With  this  value  we  can  compute  the  elevation  of  the  alcohol  in  the  second

tube  [10309],  corrected  by  the  addition  of  the  sixth  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube,

2
by  dividing  -  by  the  diameter  of  that  tube  [10309]. This  gives  6™-,38976,

for  the  elevation  which  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  found  by  experiment  to  be
6™-,40127.  As  these  values  differ  so  very  little,  it  proves  that  the  corrected
elevations  of  the  alcohol  in  different  narrow  capillary  tubes,  are  inversely  as  the

2

diameters  of  these  tubes. If  we  use  the  preceding  value  of  - [10333],  we

find  that  the  volume  of  the  alcohol,  elevated  by  the  glass  disk,  which  is  used  in
the  first  experiment  [10324],  is  equal  to*

F=  38,3792 -0,3770  ;

the  cubic  centimetre  being  taken  for  unity.  Multiplying  this  by  the  specific
gravity  of  the  alcohol,  0,81961  [10331],  gives  the  weight  of  this  mass  of
alcohol,  equal  to  31,1469  cubic  centimetres  of  water,  at  the  temperature  of
eight  degrees;  and  this  last  weight  is  equal  to  31  ^'"'""•,1435;  which  is  therefore
the  weight  necessary  to  detach  the  disk  [10324]  from  the  alcohol,  when
the  temperature  is  eight  degrees. M.  Gay-Lussac  found  by  experiment  this

Experi-
ments with
alcohol.

[10331]

[10332]

[10333]

[10334]
[10335]

[10336]

[10337]
[10338]

*  (4386) We  have  -=0", 121649  [10333],  also  Z=5%9183  [10324],  *=3,14I6; [10336a]

ttI  2

.-  =  0,377; and by substituting them in  the

hence ^P.  \/?  =  38,379, and

expression  of  the  elevated  fluid  [10325a],  it  becomes as in [10336]. This requires a
reduction  for  the  temperature,  as  in  the  case  [10327 — 10329].
VOL.  IV.  242

966

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10339]

[10340]
[10341]

[10342]

[10343]

[10314]

[10345]

Experi-
ments with
oil  of  tur-
pentine.

[10346]

weight  to  be  equal  to  31s"""-,08,  at  the  same  temperature,  which  differs  but  very
little  from  the  result  of  the  analysis.

Some  alcohol,  whose  specific  gravity  at  the  temperature  of  ten  degrees,
compared  with  that  of  water  at  the  same  temperature,  was  0,8595,  was
elevated  in  the  first  tube  [10304], 9'"S30079,  which  gives  9'"S51649*  for  its

2

corrected  elevation. Whence  we  find,  relative  to  this  alcohol,  -  =  12'"''"'-,31905.

a

2

This  value  of  -  gives  the  weight  necessary  to  detach  the  preceding  disk  from

the  surface  of  the  alcohol,  equal  to  32'"'™-,86 ;  and  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  found
by  experiment  32'''"",87,  agreeing  exactly  with  the  calculation.

Lastly,  some  alcohol,  whose  density  was  0,94153,  at  the  temperature  of  eight
degrees, was elevated in the first tube [10304],  9™' 99727, which  gives  f

2  . . „

-  =  13'"''"'-,2198;  consequently  the  adhesion  of  the  preceding  disk  was  equal

to  37^'"°-,283. M.  Gay-Lussac  found  by  experiment,  at  the  same  temperature,
this  adhesion  equal  to  37^"^%  152.  l V-

Some  oil  of  turpentine,  whose  specific  gravity,  at  the  temperature  of  eight
degrees,  compared  with  that  of  water  at  the  same  temperature,  was  0,869458,
ascended  in  the first  tube [10304]  to  the height 9'"'-,95159,  which  gives  J

[10341a]
[103416]
[10341c ]

[10344a]
[103446  ]

*  (4387) One  sixth  part  of  the  diameter  of  the  tube  [10305]  is  0™'-,21573 ;  adding  this

to  9™'-,30079  [10341],  gives  9"^-,51652,  being  nearly  as  in  [10341]. Multiplying  this  by

2

the  diameter  l'^-,29441 [10305],  we  get  -  =12™'^-,318, agreeing nearly  with  [10342].

2

Reducing  this  to  centimetres,  it  becomes  -  =0'''-,  12318; using  this  and  Z,  5r  [10336rt],  we

find  that  the  expression  [10325a]  becomes 38,621—0,382  =  38,239;  multiplying  this  by
the  density  0,8595,  we  obtain  the  weight  32^'"-,86,  as  in  [10343J.

t  (4388) Correcting  the  elevation  9™-,99727 [10344],  by  adding  0™-,21573  [10341a],
it  becomes  10'"'-,213;  multiplying  this  by  the  diameter  of  the  tube  1™-,29441 [10305],  we

get,  as  in  [103416], =13'^-,2198. Using  this  with  the  values  of  I,  if  [10336a],  we  find

that  the  expression  [10325a]  becomes 40,0039  —  0,4097=39,5992;  multiplying  this  by
the  density 0,94153  [10344],  it  becomes 37s'"'"-,283  nearly,  as  in  [10345],

t  (4389) The  corrected  altitude  is  9™'-,95159 -f-0'"S21573=5l0'"S16732, as  is  evident
from  [10346,  10341a],  agreeing  nearly  with  [10347]. This  gives,  by  proceeding  as  in  the

[10346a]

[103466] last  note,  =  =10™'-,l6732x  1™,29441  =  13'°*'"S1606, as  in  [10347]. Using  this  and  I

X.  Suppl.2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

967

10'"S16729  for its  corrected  elevation,  and  -,  equal  to  IS™™,  1606. Hence

we  conclude  that  the  adhesion  of  the  preceding  disk  to  the  surface  of  this  fluid
is  equal  to  34«''''"-,35.  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  found,  at  the  same  temperature  of
eight  degrees,  this  adhesion  equal  to  34"''""-,104,  which  differs  but  very  little
from  the  preceding  result

M.  Gay-Lussac  has  made  several  experiments  upon  the  adhesion  of  the
preceding  disk  to  mercury.  But  to  compare  them  with  the  theory,  we  must
know,  first,  the  elevation  of  the  mercury  in  a  glass  tube  of  a  given  diameter ;
second,  the  angle  which  the  surface  of  the  mercury  forms  with  the  glass,  at  the
point  of  contact;  and  it  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  these  two  points  by
experiment,  on  account  of  the  friction  of  the  mercury  against  the  sides  of  the
glass.  This  cause  operates  as  an  obstacle  to  the  elevation  or  to  the  depression
of  the  mercury  in  capillary  tubes,  and  it  has  the  effect  to  change  considerably
the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  to  that  of  the  glass.  The
comparison  of  several  observed  capillary  phenomena  with  the  theory,  has  given

2

for  the  mean  value  of  - ,  relative  to  mercury,  at  the  temperature  of  ten  degrees,

the  values*

=  2a2=13"

-  =  a2  =  6™'-"'S5, «  =  2™S5495 ;

[Values  of  OL,  a,"1
for  mercury. J

and  the  acute  angle  formed  by  the  sides  of  the  glass,  and  by  a  plane  ivhich  is  a
tangent  to  the  surface  of  the  mercury,  at  the  extremity  of  the  sensible  sphere
of  activity  of  its  sides,  equal  toj  48°;  we  shall  therefore  make  use  of
these  data,  which  may  be  rectified  by  further  experiments.  They  make
■a'  =  132°,  and  iz3'  =  76o.  We  may  then  find,  by  the  preceding  formula,  that
the  weight  of  the  column  of  mercury  raised  up  by  the  above-mentioned  glass

[10347]

[10348]

Experi-
ments with
mercury.

[10349]

[10350]

[10351]

[10351']

[10352]
[10353]

[10354]

[10336a], we find  that  the expression  of  the  volume of  the fluid [10325a] becomes

39,919 —  0,408  =  39,511; multiplying it  by  the  density  0,869458  [10346],  we get  the [10346c]

weight  34'"""-,35,  as  in  [10348].

*  (4390) Dr.  Young,  in  the  paper  mentioned  in  [103226],  supposes  that  the  experiments

2  .

on  the  depression  of  mercury  in  a  tube,  give  for  the  value  of  - in  English  inches  0'',015 ;

which  in  French  measure  is -  =10™™-  nearly,  which  differs  3™-  from  that  in  [10351'].

[10352o]

t (4391) This angle is  represented in  fig.  168,  page  948,  by AFf  =48^;  hence

AFf''-=200° 48°  =  152°  =  t;j'  [10264/]. Dr.  Young,  in the paper mentioned in [10353a]

[103226],  makes ■cj'=140''=155°,5, which  differs  a  little  from  the  preceding  estimate.

968

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10355]

[10356]

[10356']

[10357]
[10358]

[10359]

disk,  is*  207»"""-,0.  M.  Gaj-Lussac  has  found  very  great  differences  in  the
results  of  his  experiments  upon  this  subject.  In  his  observations  upon  the
adhesion  of  a  glass  disk  to  the  surface  of  a  fluid,  he  suspended  the  disk  from
the  end  of  the  arm  of  a  very  accurate  balance,  w^hich  lifted  it  up  vertically,  by
means  of  very  small  weights  successively  and  slowly  added  to  the  scale  at  the
end  of  the  other  arm.  The  sum  of  these  small  weights,  at  the  moment  when
the  disk  was  separated  from  the  fluid,  indicated  the  weight  of  the  whole
elevated  column.  Using  this  method  with  mercury,  he  found  that  the  sum  was
greater  or  less,  according  to  the  intervals  of  time  in  which  he  added  the
successive  weights ;  and  by  adding  them  at  very  great  intervals,  he  was  enabled
to  increase  the  sum  from  ISS'""*™-,  to  296='^™-.  It  depends,  as  we  see  by  the
preceding  formula,  upon  the  acute  angle  which  the  surface  of  the  mercury
forms  with  that  of  the  glass,  and  it  is  very  nearly  proportional  to  the  sine  of  the
half  of  that  angle  ;t  now  we  know,  by  daily  experience  with  a  barometer,
that  this  angle  may  be  considerably  increased  when  the  mercury  descends  very
slowly;  the  friction  of  the  fluid  against  the  sides  of  the  tube  impedes  the
descent  of  the  particles  of  the  fluid  contiguous  to  those  sides.  The  friction
also  prevents  the  mercurial  column  from  separating  from  the  disk.  When  it  is
separating,  it  begins  to  quit  the  borders  of  the  disk;  then  it  contracts  more  and
more  near  the  disk,  until  it  wholly  separates. The  friction  of  the mercury

*  (4392) Substituting  ittf'=76o  [10354],  and  -=0"%13  [10351'],  in  the  expression

of the elevated volume [10295], it becomes '!el^.\/^^^.cos.l6° -^^^1. 0,19168;

substituting  the  values  of  *,  I  [10325c],  and  then  multiplying  by  the  density  of mercury

[103555] 13,6,  it becomes 198^^'''"-,6-f-8'"'"-,3  =  206^^'"-,9, as in [10355],  nearly. This will be

2

[10355c] mcreased  to  about SIS^""-, if  we suppose  ^w'=67''-,]5'"-,  and  -  =  6"''-,5262,  which  are

the  values  assumed  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  235  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c. ;  the  result  of
[10355i] his  calculation,  given  in  page  236  of  the  same  work,  is  222'"™',464,  differing  a  little  from
the  above.

t  (4393)  We  see,  as  in  the  last  note,  that  the  first  term  of  [10295]  is  by  far  the  greatest
part  of  that  expression  of  the  volume  of  the  elevated  fluid ;  so  that  the  whole  expression  is
very  nearly  equal  to  that  term,

[10357a]  flr/2.\/?.Cos.J«',  -

which  is  proportional  to

cos.i«'=sin.J('r  —  la')  s=sm.^  A  Ff,

fig.  168,  page  948,  as  in  [10357].

X.  Suppl.  2.] ADHESION  OF  A  PLATE  TO  THE  SURFACE  OF  A  FLUID.

969

against  the  lower  surface  of  the  disk  ought  therefore  to  prevent  this  effect,  and
to  diminish,  as  in  the  descent  of  the  barometer,  the  acute  angle  of  contact  of
the  surface  of  the  disk  with  that  of  the  mercury ;  and  if  all  the  particles  of  the
fluid  column  have  the  time  necessary  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  new
state  of  equilibrium  which  results  from  it,  we  may  easily  conceive  that  we
may  increase  considerably  the  whole  weight  necessary  to  detach  the  disk  from
the  surface  of  the  mercury.  This  weight  would  increase  to  nearly  four  hundred
grammes,  if  the  angle  of  contact  was  a  right  angle.*

Disks  of  different  substances,  which  are  perfectly  moistened  by  a  fluid,  ought
to  produce  the  same  resistance  to  their  separation  from  the  fluid,  if  their
diameters  are  equal ;  for  then  this  resistance  is  produced  by  the  adhesion  of  the
fluid  to  its  own  particles,  or  to  the  stratum  of  the  fluid  which  covers  the  lower
surface  of  the  disk.  To  verify  this  result,  M.  Gay-Lussac  has  placed  in  contact
with  water,  a  copper  disk  whose  diameter  was  116""-,604;  and  he  found,  at  the
temperature of 18°,5,  the  weight  necessary  to  detach it  from  the  fluid  was

57°"™-,945. If  we suppose that the value of  -  relative  to  copper,  is  the

2

same  as  for  glass,  which  is -  =  30"''"'-,2621 [10322],  we shall  find  by  the

preceding  formula  [10325«],  that  the  weight  of  the  water  which  is  raised  up
by  the  disk  is  f  57""""-,757 ;  differing  but  very  little  from  the  results  of  the
experiment.

Experiments  upon  the  adhesion  of  disks  of  different  substances,  at  the
surface  of  the  same  fluid,  may  serve  to  determine  the  ratios  of  their  attractive
forces  upon  this  fluid  [or  rather  the  values  of  the  angles  w']. For,  if  we  use

[10360]

[10361]

[10362]

[10363]

[10364]

[10365]

[10366]

* (4394) If we put w'=100°, we  shall have cos.J«  =sin.iis'=/|; hence
1  — 6sin.*ui'  +  5sin.3^a'=s>l  — J./^; dividing  this  quantity  by  cos.i«'  =  v/i,  it  becomes [10361a]

^2  — 3,5  =  — 2,086; and  the  function  [10295],  by  putting  -=:0"%13,  is  reduced  to  the

form <ffZ2.j/o^:^.y/i-|-^*ZX 0,13x2,086, which  expresses  the  volume  of  the  elevated

fluid. Muhiplying  this  by  the  density  of  the  mercury  13,6,  and  then  substituting  the  values

of  ^,  I  [10325c],  we  get  the  weight  of  the  elevated  column 382^'^"'+ll'"'"=»393-'"'"', [10361c]

being  nearly  equal  to  400''^'"",  the  quantity  mentioned  in  [10361],

t  (4395) Substituting  in  [10325fl]  the  value  of  - [10322],  and  that  of  2?=:?  116™' ,604
[10363],  it  becomes  57*™"',82  nearly,  as  in  [10365].  ;

VOL. IV.

243

970

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10367]

[10368]

[10369]
[10370]

[10371]

[10372]

[10373]

circular  disks  of  a  very  large  diameter,  this  adhesion,  as  we  have  already  seen,
will  be  very  nearly  equal  to  *

[Approximate  value  of  "1
the  elevated  mass  p.  J

D'  being  the  density  of  the  fiuid;  therefore  by  putting  p  for  the  weight
necessary  to  separate  the  disk  from  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  the  preceding
quantity  will  be  equal  to  p.  The  quantities  D'  and  a  [9328]  depend  only
upon  the  fluid;  the  values  of  cos.^tn',  relative  to  disks  of  the  same  diameter
and  of  different  substances,  are  therefore  proportional  to  the  weight  p;
consequently  cos-^^w'  is  proportional  to  j?^;  but  we  have  shown  in  [9935]
that,  [in  the  hypothesis  of  a  perfectly  homogeneous  fluid,  we  shall  have] .
P  =  p'.cos.^§to';  and  as  p'  is  relative  to  the  fluid,  the  values  of  p  corresponding
to  the  different  disks  [in  this  hypothesis],  will  be  proportional  to  the  squares  of
the  corresponding  weights  p.  These  values  of  p,  as  we  have  seen  in  [10141],
correspond  to  equal  volumes;  to  obtain  the  values  corresponding  to  equal
masses,  we  must  divide  them  by  the  respective  densities  of  the  substances.
They  would  be  proportional  to  the  attractive  forces,  if  the  law  of  attraction
were  the  same  for  different  substances.  In  this  case,  the  respective  attractions
of  these  substances  upon  the  fluid,  are,  with  equal  volumes,  as  the  squares  of
the  weights  necessary  to  detach  the  disk  from  the  surface  of  this  [homogeneous]
fluid.

When  a  fluid  perfectly  moistens  the  disk,  the  experiments  upon  the  adhesion
of  its  surface  indicate  only  the  attraction  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles.
But  when  it  does  not  perfectly  moisten  the  disk,  its  friction  against  the  lower
surface  of  the  disk  produces  great  varieties  in  the  results  of  the  experiments
upon  adhesion,  as  we  have  seen  relative  to  glass  disks,  applied  to  the  surface
of  mercury  [10350,  &;c.].  It  then  becomes  difficult  to  distinguish  the  result
which  would  take  place  independent  of  this  cause  of  anomaly,  or  to  obtain
correctly  the  attraction  of  the  disk  upon  the  fluid.

We  have  seen,  in  [10056],  that  the  angle  of  contact  of  mercury  with  glass
vanishes  in  ivater;  so  that  a  surface  of  mercury,  covered  with  water,  in  a  glass
capillary  tube,  would  form  a  convex  hemisphere. Hence  it  follows  that,  if  we

*  (4396) This  is  the  same  as  the  first  and  most  important  of  the  terms  of  the  expression
[10367a] of  the elevated  volume  of  the  fluid  [10295],  multiplied  by  the density  Z>';  which must
therefore  represent  very  nearly  the  mass  of  that  fluid

X.  Suppl.  2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 971

apply  a  glass  disk  to  the  surface  of  mercury,  and  then  cover  both  the  disk  and
the  mercury  in  the  vessel  with  a  stratum  of  water,  we  shall  have*  ^'='7r;
which  renders  the  preceding  expression  of  the  column  of  mercury  elevated  by
the  disk  equal  to  nothing ;  therefore  it  ought  not  to  oppose  any  resistance  to  its
separation  from  the  mercury,  which  has  in  fact  been  found  to  be  the  case  by  the
experiments  of  M.  Gay-Lussac.

[10374]

[10375]

ON  THE  FIGURE  OF  A  LARGE  DROP  OP  MERCURY,  AND  ON  THE  DEPRESSION  OF  MERCURY  IN  A

GLASS  TUBE  OF  A  GREAT  DIAMETER.

We  shall  suppose  that  a  large  circular  drop  of  mercury  is  placed  upon  a
glass  horizontal  plane;  then  the  section  of  its  surface,  by  a  vertical  plane
passing  through  its  centre,  will  be  very  little  curved  at  its  summit;  but  in
proceeding  from  that  point  towards  the  borders  of  the  drop,  the  curvature
will  increase  more  and  more,  until  the  tangent  of  the  curve  is  vertical.  At  this
point,  the  curvature  and  the  width  of  the  section  will  be  at  their  maximum.
Below  this  point,  the  curve  will  approach  towards  the  axis,  and  will  finally
terminate  at  the  glass  plane,  forming  with  it  an  acute  angle.  We  shall  now
determine  the  equation  of  this  curve,  putting  f

[10376]

[10376']

*  (4397)  We  have  the  angle  AFf=if — -a^  [10264e],  and  this  vanishes  in  the  case
treated  of  in  [10373];  hence  we  have  -a'^ir;  therefore  sin.^-a'=zl,  cos.Jw'=0;
substituting  these  in  the  expression  of  the  volume  of  the  elevated  mass  [10295],  we  find  that

its  first  term  vanishes,  and  that  the  factor

1— 6sin.iTO'-}-5sin.3itrf'

[10374a]
of  the  second  term  becomes [103746  ]

of  the  form  ^;  so  that,  to  obtain  its  value,  we  must,  according  to  the  usual  rule,  take  the
differential  of  the  numerator,  and  divide  it  by  the  differential  of  the  denominator,  and  it  then

becomes

—  3cos.iw'-f-f  cos4'ra''-3in.^^CT'

—  I  sin 4^'
which  vanishes,  because  it  contains  the  factor  cos.J:3'=0;  therefore  the  whole  expression  of
the  elevated  column  must  vanish,  as  in  [10375J.

f  (4398)  Substituting  g==Ho.  [9328],  in  [9324],  it  becomes  as  in  [10380].  This
represents  the  equation  of  the  section  of  the
drop  DdCBbAHF,  fig.  172,  resting  upon
the  horizontal  plane  D'DEFF';  AE  is  the
vertical  axis  passing  through  the  centre  of  its
base  E.  Then  the  rectangular  coordinates  of
any  point  B  of  the  surface  are  AG=sZ,
BG  =  u  [10378,  10379];  also  EG  =  z'
[10378^],  AE  =  q  [10403];  the  angle  GJ56  =  -o,  EDd=Ts'  [10264e] ;  and  it  is  evident

[10374c  ]

[10380a]

[103806  ]
[10380c  ]

972

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M^c.  Cel.

Symbol!.

[10377]

[10377'1
[10378]

[10378']
[10379]

[10379']
[10379" ]

[10380]

b  =  the radius of  curvature at the summit or vertex A  of the

drop,  fig.  172;
q  =  the  greatest  height  of  the  drop  AE  [10403]  ;
z  =  the  vertical  ordinate  AG  of  any  point  B  of  the  surface  of  the  drop,

the  origin  of  z  being  at  the  vertex  of  the  drop  A ;  and  the  axis

of  z  the  vertical  line  AE  drawn  through  this  vertex  A,  in  the

direction  of  gravity;
z'  =  q  —  2;  =  the  vertical  ordinate  EG,  or  height  above  the  glass  plane  [10403]  ;
u  =  the  horizontal  distance  BG  of  the  same  point  B  of  the  surface

from  the  axis  of  2 ;
•cj=the  angle  GBb,  which  the  tangent  of  the  curve  Bb  makes  with

the  ordinate  BG  [10405]  ;
zs'=  the  angle  EDd,  which  the  tangent  of  the  curve  Dd  makes  with

the  ordinate  DE  [10408'].

Then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [9324],

ddz  1 dz

du^  , u'  du

(:^^

.2a2:  =  Y,
0

(r)

[General  equation*]
of  the  surface.  J

[10380<i]
[10380e  ]

[10380/]

[10380^]
[10380/1  ]

[10380t  ]
[10380ft  ]

that  the  top  part  of  the  curve  must  be  very  nearly  horizontal,  so  that  —  will  be  very  small.

Thus,  in  the  experiments  mentioned  in  [10446],  we  have  DF=100™-,  and  jE^=3'"''
nearly  [10447] ;  hence  it  will  evidently  follow,  that  the  part  AB  must  be  nearly  level ;  so  that,

if  we  neglect ^3, T^X-r^,  in  [10380],  and  multiply  the  expression  by  n,  it  will  become

as  in  [10382]  ;  which  will  represent  very  nearly  the  equation  of  the  curve,  in  all  parts  of  it,
excepting  near  the  extremities  X)C,  FH.  For  convenience  in  referring  to  the  symbols,  we
have  collected  them  together  in  the  table  [10377 — 10379"] ;  observing,  however,  that
q,  z',  "CJ,  •cr',  in  the  original  work,  were  defined  in  [10403,  10405,  10408'];  we  have  also,  in
these  definitions,  made  reference  to  fig.  172,  which  is  not  used  by  La  Place.  The  equation  of
the  surface  [10380],  changing  its  signs,  is  equivalent  to  that  marked  (6)  in  page  202  of
M.  Poisson's  Nouvelle Theorie,  &fc.,  changing  z  into  q  —  z'  [10378'],  which  reduces  the

2

equation  [10380]  to  the  form  [10404];  then,  putting  2a5'-f--  =  2^, o,=  a~^,  and u  =  t;

remarking  that  M.  Poisson  omits  the  accent  on  z,  so  that  his  z,  in  the  equation  (6),  is
equivalent  to  z'  m  [10404].  The  process  of  integration  to  obtain  z  [10384]  is  used  by
M.  Poisson,  and  he  gives  an  equivalent  equation  (I),  in  page  213  of  his  work.  The  equation
[10402],  neglecting  the  small  term  with  the  divisor  8m ^20.,  is  equivalent  to  his  equation  (m)  ^
page  214. Lastly,  the  equation  [104-26],  is  the  same  as  his  equation  (0),  page  217.

X.Suppl.2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 973

When  the  drop  is  very  large,  we  can,  in  a  great  part  of  its  surface,  neglect  the

dz

third  power  of  — ,  and  then  the  preceding  equation  is  reduced  to

ddz  ,  dz _  2?f

U.y-^-\-- 2a.M2 7-  =  0.

au"* du  0

(n\  rEquation  of  the  upper"!

''/  L part  of  the  drop. J

Although  this  differential  equation  is  much  more  simple  than  the  equation
[10380],  yet  it  does  not  appear  to  be  integrable  by  known  methods;  but  we
can  satisfy  it,  by  putting

1
1

./;^9.{c

M>y2a.cos.p

1}

u  y/2a .  cos.p

the  integral  being  taken  from  g)  =  0  to  (p  =  «;  for  then  we  have  *

[Value  of  1  on  the  upper*"!
surface  of  the  drop,  from  I
the  vertex  towards  the  I
borders.  _J

[10381]
[10382]

[10383]

[10384]

[10384']
[10385]

*  (4399) Taking the partial differential  of z [10384], relative to u, we get
[10386,  10387] ; substituting them in [10382],  we obtain [10388],  observing that  the

last  term  of  z  [10384]  is  easily  reduced  to

""o^ft;--^"''^^  = -^-"^-aft '

2u

which  is

as  in  [10384'];  and  this  produces  in  the  term  — 2a. U2  [10382]  the  quantity  +

destroyed  by  the  last  term  in  [10382].  The  general  integral  of  [10388]  is  given  in
[10389],  as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  its  differential  relative  to  cp,  and  substituting
—  sin.^(p  =  cos.^9— 1.  This  integral  vanishes  when  <p  =  0,  and  when  cp  =  ^,  which  are
the  two  assumed  Hmits  [10385] ;  therefore  the  proposed  value  of  z  [10384]  will  satisfy  the
differential  equation  [10382];  though  it  must  not  be  considered  as  its  general  integral,  with
two  perfectly  arbitrary  constant  quantities.  It  is,  however,  sufficient  for  the  present  problem,
because  at  the  vertex  of  the  drop,  where  m  =  0,  z=zO,  the  tangent  of  the  curve  is  horizontal,

which  gives —  =0, and  the  radius  of  curvature  is  equal  to  b  [10377] ;  and  we  shall  soon
du

show  that  these  two  conditions,  which  may  be  used  for  finding  the  values  of  the  two
arbitrary  constant  quantities  in  the  present  problem,  are  satisfied  by  the  expression  of  z
[10384].  For,  in  the  first  place,  by  putting  m=0,  in  [10384],  it  becomes  z  —  0.
Moreover,  by  putting  m=0,  in  [10386],  we  get

and since fd^.cos.(p  =  s'm.(? vanishes at the limits <?  =  0, ?  =  *, it  becomes, as  in

dz

[\0384d'],  T-  =  0. Lastly,  putting  u  =  0,  in  [10387],  we  obtain

du
^J  =  l/„'^2d?.cos.29  =  -./o'^(i?.(l+cos.29)

Now  /t/(p.cos.2(p  =  |sin.29 vanishes at  the  limits 9=0, 9=^; and  as  /o''cZ9  =  ir,  the
VOL.  IV.  244

[10384a]
[103846]

[10384c  ]

[10384rf]
[10384<£q

[10384e  ]
[10384/]

[10384g-]
[10384^]

974

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10386]
[10387]

''=.-X7-/o''^9'V2a.COS.9).C

u^2a.cos.9

ddz 1

u  \/2a, .  cos.^

[I0384t  ]
[1G384A]

[10384^ ]
[10384m]

[10384n]

[X0384O ]

expression [10384g] becomes — g  =  -; but  from [9326] we  have,  by  putting  —  =  0,
—— =  — ,  jR  being  the  radius  of  curvature,  which  is  here  represented  by  h  [10377]. This

agrees  with  [10384(Z'],  and  proves  the  correctness  of  the  assumed  value  of  z.

We  may  remark  that  the  particular  form  assumed  by  the  author  in  [10384],  for  the  value
of  Zj  may  be  derived  from  a  more  general  expression  containing  arbitrary  constant  coefficients.

1

Thus,  if  we put z=z  —

afe'

,  ddz dz

in  [103821,  It  becomes u.-—i4-- 2aMz  =  0:  and  if  we

•-  •*  du^ du

assume  for  z  the  following  expression,  (for  remarks  upon  which  see  note  in  page  1018.)

y'TTj mu. C0S.9  \ ru

which  contains  the  arbitrary  constant  quantities  c,  m,  f,  (z"  being  a  particular  value  of  z  not

[10384p] yet  obtained,)  we  may  dispose  of  these  quantities  so  as  to  satisfy  the  differential  equation  in  z.

For  if  we  substitute  this  assumed  value  of  z  [10384o],  in  the  differential  equation  [10384m],

we shall  get an equation which  is equivalent  to  [10388]. This  may  be  put  equal  to

[10384g]
[10384r  ]

[103845 ]
[10384« ]

me.sm.cp.c

mu .  cos.p

and  if  we  compare  its  differential  with  that  of  the  preceding  equation,
we  shall  find  that  they  may  be  rendered  identical  by  putting,  as  in  [10384],  m=^2a,
leaving e,  f, indeterminate; finally, these two quantities may  be used so as  to  make

dz
z=0,  and  —  =  0,  when w=0, as  in  [10384cZ']; so that we shall finally obtain, after

making  some  reductions,  the  precise  form  assumed  by  the  author  in  [10384] ;  but  we  have
not  thought  it  to  be  necessary  to  insert  the  detail  of  these  calculations.

We  shall  put,  for  brevity,  wy/2a  =  u,  and  shall  then  develop  the  value  of  z  [10384],
in  a  series  ascending  according  to  the  powers  of  u.cos.9,  by  means  of  the  formula  [55],
Int.,  which  gives

;  .fo^dip .  cos.'  (p  +  S^C.  > .

1 C  u2

^  =  ^-^u./o''<Z9.cos.(p4-  — ./o"'<Z?>.cos.2(p-,  ^^  ^

Now  if  n  be  a  positive  integer,  we  shall  have y<:Z(p.cos.»<p=-.sin.n(p, which  vanishes  when

[lG384u]  (p=;0,  and  when  (p  =  ?r;  hence  we  have  y^''(?(j) . cos.n^  =  0.  From  this  it  appears
that,  if  we  substitute,  in  [10384^],  the  values  of  cos.^ip,  cos.^cp,  &c.  [6,  7,  &;c.],  Int.,  all  the
terms depending on the uneven  powers of  cos.qj, or  on  the  uneven  powers  of  u, will

[10384w]  vanish ;  and  with  the  even  powers  of  cos.(?,  it  is  only  necessary  to  retain  the  constant  part,  or
that  which  is  independent  of  9 ;  so  that  we  may  substitute  the  following  parts,  deduced  from
[6—10,  &;c.],  Int.,

[I0384u>]

C0S.2(p:

1 ?.

22'i'

1 4.3

1 6.5.4

"°'-'^=2"4-i^' ^°^-'^=^-i:^3'  ^*^-

X.  Suppl.  2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 975

hence  the  first  member  of  the  equation  [10382]  becomes

~  .f;d(p .  j  2aw .  cos.^(p  -f  ^2^ .  cos.y  —  2aw  } .  c  "  ^'"-  '°'-* ;  [10388]

These  are  to  be  multiplied  by  d(p,  and  then  integrated  from  (p  =  0  to  9=*,  which  is  the
same  as  to  multiply  them  directly  by  *;  hence  the  expression  [10384^]  becomes,  by
successive  reductions,  and  using u  =  «i/2a  [103845],

1 C  u2 1 2 , u4  1 4.3  u6  1 6.5.4  ")

^==^-^-:i^^><i+i:^:^><ii><i:^+r:^:^xi:i><^><i:^+^^-(  [io384x]

1 Cu2 , U4  u6  , „ )

~"^7 22 ~*"~22T42~"^  22.42.62+^- 5 •  [103842]

If  we  suppose  z,  m,  to  be  so  small  that  we  may  neglect  terms  of  the  order  u*,  the  expression

m2

[103842:]  will  give ^=57;  which  is  evidently  the  equation  of  a  small  osculatory  arc,  whose [10385o]

sine  is  u,  versed  sine  z,  radius  b;  agreeing  with  the  notation  in  [10377—10379].

The  angle  «  [10379'],  which  the  tangent  to  the  curve  makes  with  the  radius  u,  may  be

found  by  substituting  the  value  z  [10384z]  in  the  equation tang.zi  =  ^ [10406a],  from [103856]
which  we  get

tang.«=i.^2a.|+(2<.)^^+(2a)3.^  +  te|  [lOSSSc]

If  we  substitute -  =6™-,5  [10351'],  in  the  expressions  of  z  and  tang.-o  [103842-,  10385c],

they will become as  in [10385e,/], respectively; the members included between the

brackets  being  the  logarithms  of  the  coejjicients,  the  index  being  as  usual  increased  by  10, I-  ^

and  in  the  last  term  of  [10385/]  by  20,  because  these  numbers  are  less  than  unity;

z  =  ^. ([8. 8860566]. m2-|- [7. 1700532]. M4-f  [5. 1018673]. m6  )

^  4- [2. 7838040]. w8  + [0-27 19206]. Ml" +&c.^  [10385e  ]

tang.w  =  -^.([9. 1870866].  M  + [7. 7721 132].  m3  4- [5. 8800186].  m5  )

^  +[7.6868940].m7  +  [9.2719206].m9  4-&ic.^'  [^03  5/]

These  formulas  were  given  by  La  Place  in  the  Connai^ance  des  Terns,  for  the  year  1812,
several  years  after  the  publication  of  the  Second  Supplement  to  this  book,  and  were  applied [10385g-]
by  him  to  the  determination  of  the  capillary  action  on  the  mercury  in  a  barometer,  as  we  shall
see  in  [10443f].

If  we  put  z  =  z  — — , as  in  [10384w],  the  equation  [10380]  multiplied  by  f  1  +^)  ? [10385/i]

may  be  reduced  to  the  form  -  ,

ddz  . \ dz /^ , rfz2\  / rfz2\|

976  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Gel.

and  its  general  integral  is  expressed  by

[10^^]  -y.  ^2a.  sin. 9).  c" °^'*4- constant.

The first  limit  of  this  integral  being cp  =  0  [10385],  the  constant  quantity

[10390] must  be  equal  to  nothing;  and  at  the  second  limit,  where  (p=zif  [10385],  it

again  vanishes;  therefore  the  equation  [10382]  is  satisfied. The  preceding

value  of  z  is  not  the  complete  integral  of  the  equation;  but  it  suffices  for  the

dz
[10391] present  case,  in  which  2;  and  — vanish  when  u^=0,

[10392]  Putting cos.cp  =  l  —  2sin.^^9,  in  the  preceding  expression  of  2:  [10384'],

we  obtain

U\/2(X  ■  .  1  ["Value  of  z  on  the  upper"!

C  /._  7  ^  2w  v/2a .  sin.^i^  1  \ surface  of  the  drop,  from I

[103931  Z=  ; JJ'aW.C ■  -,  the  vertex  towards  the

••  •• .  ai* ♦^O -^  oJ)  Lborders.  J

When  2w  \/2a  is  a  large  quantity,  which  is  the  case  near  the  borders  of  a  great
[10394] drop,  the  value  of  c " "^-sm-  p  becomes  very  small,  and  almost  insensible,  in

[10395] case  9  has  a  sensible  value. Therefore,  if  we  put  the  integraiyi/^.c
under  the  following  form,*

and  the  assumed  expression  [10384']  will  give  the  following  approximate  value  of  z,  as  the
integral  of  [I0385iJ ;

[10385*]  z  =— ./o'^^^.C

[10385Z] If  we  put,  as  in  [9323p],  a  =  a-2,  the  equation  [10385i]  will  become  as  in  [10385m],  and
its  integral  [10385A;],  as  in  [10385n],  which  will  be  of  use  hereafter ;

ddz , 1  dz /, , rfz2\ 2z / , rfz9

rfz9\b

„2  — ^^  .cos.p

[10385n]  ,  2=,^.y;.^^.C  «

[10385o] If  we  make  the  same  substitutions  of  z  =  z r, ci,=a~^, in [10402],  and  neglect  the

term  of  the  order  u—i ,  we  shall  get  for  the  approximate  value  of  z,

c ^-  «^ \/«  /•  " •

*  (4400) The  coefficient  of  (^?.c-^"'^^•*'°•'^^  neglecting  the sign  /, in  the  second
member  of  [10396],  is
[10396a]  cos.|(p.(l  +  ^sin.2^(p)-f-2sin.4^(p.(l-|-2cos.2^9);

X  Suppl.  2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 977

fdcp.c-'"'^-'-''^  =/#.<.os.i9.{l-f  ^sin.%J.c-^"^^"^-^-'^^  [10396]

we  may,  without  any  sensible  error,  neglect  this  last  term  ;*  then,  putting  [10397]

but  from  [l,  6],  Int.,  we  have

2  sin.'»i?5  =  2  (sin.2i(p)2  =  2  (A  —  |cos4q))2 = ^  _  003.^9  4.  ^os.2^9,
and

1  +  2  cos.2^<p  =  2  +  cos.;^ ;
the  product  of  these  two  expressions  is  .'^

2sin.''|9.(14-2cos.^|.9)  =  l— |cos.i(p4-icos.3^(p;  [103966]

substituting  this  and 1  +  ^sin.2^9  =  J  —  ^cos,2j.(p, in  the  factor  [10396a],  it  becomes

cos.^9 .  (f  ■—  ^os.2^(p)  +  ( 1  —  |cos.(p  -|-  lcos.3^9) ,
which,  by  neglecting  the  terms  destroying  each  other,  becomes  1 ;  so  that  the  first  member

of  [10396]  is  reduced  to  the  integral  of  the  expression df.c~  "v  a-sm.  i> multiplied by [10396c]
the  factor  [10396a],  as  in  [10396].

*  (4401) The  limits  of  <p  [10385]  being  (p  =  0  and  (p  =  *,  we  have

14-Kin.2i<p>l<f, and l  +  2cos.2i(p>2<3;  [10397a]

therefore the second of these factors is  nearly double  that of the first; hence the
element  of  the expression in [10396,  line  1],  is to that in [10396,  line  2], nearly as

cos.|(p.c ^  ^ to  4sm.'*^(p.c ^  ^. Now,  if  we  substitute -==13""""- [10351'],

and  suppose  the  greatest  value  of  2m  to  be  100"^-  [10446],  we,  shall  have  [10397a']

2M/2^=200/S=lil  [103975]

nearly;  therefore  the  two  terms  of  [10396],  when  near  the  borders  of  the  drop  at  C  and  H,

fig.  172,  page  971,  will  be  to  each  other  nearly  as  cos.|(p.c *  ' to  4sm^^(p.c ' ' ,
or  as  cos.^(p  to  4sin.^^9;  so  that  when  9  is  small,  this  last  term  must  be  much  less  than  the

first,  and  may  then  be  neglected. Again,  when  9  is  very  small,  the  factor  c ' ' is

nearly  equal  to  1 ;  but  as  9  increases,  it  becomes  quite  small. For,  if  we  put  successively [l0397rf]

sin.|9 equal to 0,1; 0,2; 0,3; 0,4,  he; corresponding  respectively  to 9 equal to

130,  26°,  39°,  52°,  &c.,  nearly ; the factor c-"^-''"'^^ will become c'~^'^\ c^"^'^,

9  99 17  75  '  [10397c]

c ' , c ' ,  and  as c=2.71, nearly; these terms will be nearly represented by

8'  85' 20000' 50000000'  ^^''  ^^^P^^^'^^b'- In  consequence  of  the  smallness  of  this  factor, [10397/]
when  9  is  of  a  rather  large  magnitude,  the  elements  of  the  integral  in  the  second  member  of
[10393]  are  nearly  insensible,  and  may  be  neglected  in  comparison  with  those  depending  on [10397g;]
VOL.  IV.  245

978

[10398]
[10398']

[10399]

[10400]
[10401]

[10402]

or

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

2u^2^.sin.%(p  =  t^y

[Mec.  Cel.

we  shall  have  *

c"^^ /5,^  ^«(^, it I I

^^'T — /^ ,—  ■  /2dt.c .<l+i r=> r.

The  integral  relative  to  t  must  be  taken  from  t^=0  to  ^^  =  2w  /2^  [10399c] ;

but,  c~  " ""  being  by  supposition an  insensible quantity, we may take  this
integral  from  ^=^0  to  ^  =  infinite;  and  then  we  shall  have,  as  in  [8331],

therefore,t

M^^

Z  =

=•?!  +

0L5\/2;r.M/2a C  8wy/^

[Value  of  1  on  the  upper"
surface  of  the  drop,  from
the  vertex  towards  the
borders.

0

the  smaller  values  of  9;  and  as  we  have  just  shown  that,  for  these  smaller  values  of  9,  the
terms  in  [10396,  line  2]  are  nearly  insensible,  we  may  neglect  it  wholly,  and  retain  only
the  upper  line,  or  that  in  [10396,  line  1];  and  by  substituting  it  in  [10393],  we  get

[10397;^]  z=^^.M9.cos.J<p.{l  +  ^sin.2i9Lc-2"^/^"^-^'"-'^*--,.

*  (4402) The  differential  of  [10398']  gives,  by  considering  cp,  t,  as  the  variable  quantities,

2dt
[10399a] d(p.cos.ic(>=z , ^; substituting  this  and  [10398']  in  [10397A],  we  get

M\/2a

[103996  ]

tt6'

[10399c ]

which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form  [10399].  The  limits  of  this  integral  are  easily  obtained
from  those  in  [10385];  since  (p  =  0,  gives,  in  [10398],  ^^=0,  for  the  first  limit;  and
(p  =  *  [10385]  gives,  in  [10398],  i^=2u\/2^,  for  the  second  limit,  as  in  [10400];  and  as
this last  quantity,  in the experiment  mentioned  in  the  last  note,  is  nearly  equal  to 111

[10399i] [103976],  it  will  give  c'~ *=c~ ,  an  insensible  quantity;  whence  it  is  evident  that  we
may  extend  this  last  limit  of  i,  to  ^=  00,  as  in  [10400J.

— «

t  (4403) From [1534o,  p], we  get /oVd^c""=J/o''<i^c~"", observing that  the
»•  ■' elements  of  these integrals  have the  same  values for  4"^  ^s  for  — 1\  substituting  in  the

[104026] preceding  integral  the  value  [10401],  we  get  f^tHt.c =i^«-. Introducing  both  these
integrals  into  [10399],  we  obtain  [10402].

X.Suppl.2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 979

We  shall  now  resume  the  differential  equation  [10380],  which,  by  using  the [10403]
values  of  z',  q  [10378',  10377'],  becomes  *

ddsf  1 d^

du^  , u'du .  2a9-2a^'  =  -?. [««"ro?rSr-] [10404]

0+S'  0+-^*

We  shall  now  put,  as  in  [10265,  or  10379'],  ^  for  the  angle  which  the  tangent «
of  the  curve  makes  with  the  radius  u ;  and  we  shall  have  t  [10405]

dz'

-J-  =  —  tang.w, or dz'  =  — du .  tang.^ ;  [10406]

thus  the  preceding  equation  becomes

j^.cos.iJJ  +  --sin.TO  =  2ag  +  ^ — 2o,2:';  [10406']

multiplying  the  first  term  of  this  equation  by —  du. tang.ts, and  the  others  by
the  equal  quantity  dz'  [10406],  we  obtain

dz'  2

—  dni,sm.is  -\ .  sin.«  =  ^^q  .dz'-{--,  dz' — ^o^z'dz';  [10407]

hence,  by  integration,  we  get

cos-'sj+Z  =  f2a5  4-vj.2' — as:' 2 -f- constant.  [10408]

To  determine  the  constant  quantity,  we  shall  put  «'  [10379"],  for  the  value  of [10408']
w  [10379'],  when  z'  is  nothing;  -m'  will  be  the  obtuse  angle  formed  by  the  surface
of  the drop  with  the  plane. Commencing the  integral  of the preceding

* (4404) Substituting z  —  q—z' [10378'], and its difFerentials dz=—dz',
ddz= — ddz',  in  [10380],  and  then  changing  the  signs  of  all  the  terms,  we  get  [10404].

t  (4405) The  angle  GBb,  fig.  172,  page  971,  being  represented  by  «  [10379'],  we
evidently  have tang.trf=^  =  --^ [10404a], as in [10406]; its differential gives [10406a]

^=_  — .-^; moreover (l-h^)^=(l  +  t.angMi=:-^ ; substituting  these  in [104066]
du^  du C0S.2CT  \ du^/ ^  o / cos.«

[10404],  we  get [10406'], by  changing the  signs of  all the terms. The expression

dz
tang.xrf=— gives  ^

• _  du

sm.zi=:  ^,  f  10406c]

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.

980  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

« equation  with  z',  we  shall  have  constant  =  cos.-a'. We  shall  at  first  neelect

[10409']  ^

[10410] the  part  under  the  sign  of  integration,  also  the  term*  -j'Z', and then  we  shall

have  nearly
[10411]  cos.vi  =  2(yqz'  —  a2:'^-f  cos.-si'.

We may, for a first  approximation, suppose z'  =  q, when the tangent  is
horizontal,  or  when cos.xs  =  1 ; thus  we  shall  have  f

[10413]  1  — cos.^'  =  a6^2,

or

[10414]  q=\ /  ? . sin.it.' ,  [^r^K^hfd^ojVl

2

*  (4406) The term -.z'  is much smaller  than  the term 2a-g'z',  with  which it  is

[10411a] connected. For  the  ratio  of  the  first  of  these  terms  to  the  second  is — - ; and  by [104141,
ag'=y/2a.sin.jTO'  nearly,  may  be  considered  as  of  the  order ^2a  =^Y^=srT;urQ  [10351'];

■I  mi.  Q

[104116] hence  this  ratio  is  of  the  order ' ;  and  as  6  [10377]  represents  the  radius  of  curvature  of

the  surface  of  the  drop  at  the  vertex  A,  fig.  172,  page  971,  where the curve  is  nearly

[10411c] horizontal,  it  must  evidently  be  much  greater  than  l"^-,8,  when  the  radius Z=Ei)  =  50™'-

2
nearly [10397a']; therefore  the  term  in question —.z'  may be neglected in the first

4 . , . , f*dz'.sm.vs ,  .  , .  , .

[10411d] approximation. Again,  the  mtegral / , whose  approximate  value  is  computed  m

[10420],  is  to  the  first  terra  of  the  expression  [10408],  namely,  cos.^,  as

[10411e]  ^^/^  (cos?h-^-cosHu'\ ^

[10411/]  and  we  may  consider  the  factor  y^'  ^^~^°^-  ^"^  \  as  being  in  general  of  the  order  1;  so
[10411g']  that  the  integral  expression  [1041 1<Z]  may  be  considered  as  of  the  order  ^•\/  -•  Now,
[1041U] putting Z=50"''-  [10411c],  and  -==:13'^"'-  [10351'],  it  becomes ^i^/i3  =  2T  nearly;  and

as  this  is  so  small,  we  may  also  neglect  it,  in  a  first  approximation ;  and  then  the  expression
[10408]  becomes  as  in  [10411],  using  the  constant  quantity  [10409'].

t  (4407)  As  the  point  B,  fig.  172,  page  971,  passes  from  C  towards  A,  the  angle  «
[10413a] [10379'] decreases, and becomes w=0, at the vertex  A,  where z'=^q [10377'J.

Substituting  these  values  in  [10411],  we  get  at  the  vertex  l=a5^4-cos.'5j',  as  in  [10413];
[104136] from which we get a5'2  =  l — cos.'zs'=2sin.^|TO' [1], Int. Dividing  this by a, and

extracting  the  square  root,  we  get  the  approximate  value  of  g'  [10414].

X.  Suppl.  2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 981
therefore*

q — z

which  gives

hence  we  get  the  following  integral,

\sm.\-a  =  z,

-  .6?OT.cos.|^;

r-^—\/i-f

dz; .  sin.|*.  cos.^^zs

u

and  even  nothing,  yet  the  expression  itself  is  very  small,  and  much  less  than
when  the  angle  «  is  larger,  as  we  may  easily  prove.f In  this  last  case,  the

[10415]
[10416]

[10417]

The preceding integral  is  insensible when the angle w is  very  small;  for,
although  the  denominator  of  the  differential  — '■ — — may  be  then  very  small, [io418]

*  (4408) Substituting  cos.-n'=l  — a^s  [10413]  in  [10411],  we  get

cos.'a  =  2a.qz'  —  a'z'2-j-l  —  aj^j
hence,  by  transposition,

(i.{q^  —  2qz' -{- z'^)  =  l  —  cos.zi  =  2sm.^vi  [1],  Int.

Dividing  by  a,  and  extracting  the  square  root,  we  get  [10415],  which  is  the  same  as  the
value  of  z  [10378'].  The  difFerentlal  of  [10415]  gives  dz'  [10416];  and  by  substituting  it
in  the  first  member  of  [10417],  it  becomes  as  in  its  second  member,  observing  that
sin.w  =  2sin.^w.cos.^5i  [31]>  Int.

[10417o]

[104176]

[10417c ]

f  (4409)  We  shall  suppose  the  point  ^5,  fig.  172,  page  971,  to  be  very  near  to  the
vertex  A;  then,  drawing  the  tangent  Bb  and  the  ordinate  BG,  we  shall  have  the  angle
GBb  =  Tz  [10379'],  and  BG  =  u  [10379].  Now  the  arc  AB,  for  a  very  small  distance  [10418o]
about  the  vertex  A,  being  supposed  to  be  circular,  with  the  radius  b;  we  shall  have  -us  equal
to  the  angle  formed  at  the  centre  of  this  circle,  by  the  radii  drawn  through  the  points  A,B;
and  from  the  nature  of  the  circle,  we  shall  have  u  =  B G  =  b .sin.zi==2b .sm-lzi .cos.^zi  [104186]
[31],  Int.  Substituting  this  in  the  second  member  of  [10417],  we  get,  when  -a,  u,  are
very  small,

Now,  the  upper  part  of  a  large  drop  being  very  little  curved  near  the  vertex,  we  shall  have
b  quite  large,  and  zi  small,  even  when  u  is  of  a  considerable  magnitude;  hence  it  is  evident  [I0418rf]
that  the  integral  expression  [10417]  must  be  very  small  when  the  angle  -a  is  small;  agreeing
with  the  remarks  in  [10418,  Sic.].  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  we  may  [I0418e  ]
neglect  all  the  parts  of  the  integral  [10417],  except  where  u  is  very  large,  and  nearly  equal  to
DE=l;  and  if  we  put  u  =  l,  and  substitute  also  for  dvs.sm.^-a  its  value  — 2d .cos.im,
VOL.  IV.  245

982  :  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

value  of  u  is  very  nearly  equal  to  the  semi-diameter  of  the  circular  section  of
the  contact  of  the  mercury  with  the  plane. We  shall  put  this  semi-diameter  equal
I to  I;  and  we  may,  without  any  sensible  error,  suppose  u  =  l  in  the preceding
^ ^ integral;  and  then,  by  supposing  the  integral  to  commence  with  ro  =  ci',  we  shall
obtain,  as  in  [10418^],

0 -^^  =  -^.^^.{cos.V-cos.>'];

therefore  we  shall  have*
[10431]  cos.^  +  — .\ /^^.{cos.^Jra  —  cos.^Jw'}=(2a^-}-- j.2' — cLz'^  +  cos.'ci';

substituting  z'  =  q — z  [10378'],  it  becomes
[10422]  C0S.-5J  +  - \/ ^.{cos.^^ts  —  cos.^ln'}  =a^2_|_ /^  —  2;)  —  a^^  +  cos.:^'.

Now,  z being  nothing  whenf ^  =  0, we shall have  «^ equal to a series
ascending  according  to  the  powers  of  z;  by  substituting  it  in  the  preceding

[10418/]

the  expression  of  the  second  member  of  [10417]  will  become \y'^ z.j.fcos.^TH.d.cos.i-a,
whose  integral  is  —.  ^/Jl.fcos.^l^ -{-constant}; and  if  we  commence the  integral  at  the

31

[10418g-] point  D,  where  'cj  =  '53',  the  constant  quantity  will  be  — cos.^^-stf',  and  the  integral  [10417]
will  become  as  in  [10420].

*  (4410) Substituting the constant  quantity  cos.'s' [10409'],  and the value of  the
[10422a] integral  [10420],  in  [10408],  it  becomes  as  in  [10421] ;  and  by  using  z'  =  q  —  z  [10378'J,
we  get  [10422].

I  (4411) At  the  vertex  A,  fig.  172,  page  971,  where the  tangent  to  the surface is
[10421a] horizontal,  we have z  =  0 [10378], and «  =  0 [10413a];  substituting these  values  in
[10422],  we  get

[104246]  l-l--.\/?.|l— cos.3|OT'|  =  cL22+-.<7-f-cos.'ci'j

transposing cos.:;j', we  get  [10424]. Moreover,  if  we  substitute,  in  the  first  member  of
[10424c] [10422],  the  expression cos.ot  =  1  —  1ot2_j_^i^^4_  ^c^  [44],  Int., and  then  subtract  from
the  resulting  equation  that  in  [10424],  it  will  become

[10424rf]  _^«2  +  2V^4__&,c.+|.\/?.|— Ki^')4-&ic.}=— ^.5r  — az2;

whence  we  can  deduce  to^,  in  a  series  arranged  according  to  the  powers  of  z^  as  is  stated
in  [10423].

X.  Suppl.  2] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 983

equation, and comparing together the coefficients of these powers, the
coefficient  independent  of  z  will  give,  as  in  [104246],

l--cos.'5i'  +  -.\/?.(l_cos.^|«')  =  «-9^  +  7-9;  [10424]

^  is  a  very  small  fraction,  whose  square  may  be  neglected  when  the  drop  has  a
great  width;  and  in  this  case,  the  preceding  equation  gives  very  nearly*  [10425]

^  +  a6-l/ a-'"^-^"  + 3a/.sin.K  •  ^10426]

We  shall  now  determine  the  constant  quantity-. For  this  purpose  we  shall
resume  the  equation  f  [10406,  10416],

(?2;'  =  — c?w.tang.^  =  — |^?.f?z..cos.it^;  ^^^^^^

whence  we  deduce

'^''  =  2^•^^•lsh^~^^^°•^^^  [10428]

*  (4412) Dividing [10424] by a,  then substituting 1  — cos.'o'=2sin.2^ra', also

/ IV  2^  ,

( 17  +  ^  ]  > for 2^  +  "T  > which may be  done by neglecting the very small quantity

-.sm.^^^+2\/-.^ ^ -(g  +  ^0-  [10426a]

Extracting  the  square  root  of  this  expression,  we  get

Developing  the  second  member  in  a  series,  and  retaining  only  the  two  first  terms,  it  becomes

as  in  [10426]. The  neglected  terms  must  be  small,  because  they  depend  on  the  square  and

2
higher  powers  of  the  factor /. [104266],  which,  in  the  example  [10411^],  is  of  the [10426c]

1

order  of  the  square  and  higher  powers  of  ^^j,  as  is  evident  from  the  values  of  \/2a  =  pSrQ [10426rf]

and  /=50™-  [104116,  c].

f  (4413) Equating  the  two  expressions  of  dz'  [10406,  10416],  we  get  [10427] ;  now
we have  identically,  as m [10281n], tang.'sj=  T__28in2.W  ^ d'viding  the two  last [10427a]
expressions  of  [10427] by  these  expressions  of  tang.TS,  and  then  changing  the  signs,  we
get rfu==^\/?.cZ^.G-=5^ij:!il), which is easily  reduced to  the form [10428],  or [104276]

'01  li  sin.ij  or

riw\/2a= j^r  — (^zrf.sin.^^, whose integral  is  as  in [10429],  as  is evident  from the [10427c]
formula  [10281^].

984

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10429]
[10430]
[10431]

[10432]
[10433]

[10434]
[10435]

which  gives,  by  integration  [10427c],

u  ^/2a  =  log.tang^^  +  2  cos.  J^  +  constant.
To determine the constant quantity,  we  shall observe that, when vt^-a'
[10408'],  we  have  u  =  l  [10419];  and  then  [10429]  gives

. constant  =  7^/20^ — log.tang.^w'  —  2cos.i«';
therefore  we  shall  have  *

tang.|ra  =  tang.^w'.c' '^  ,

c  being the number  whose hyperbolic  logarithm  is  1. This  equation  gives
very  nearly,  when  the  angle  «  is  very  small,

tang.'a  =  4tang.;^ra'.c  .

Now,  if  we  take  the  differential  of  the  expression  of  z  [10402],  in  which  «  is
supposed  to  be  small,  we  shall  have  f

*  (4414) Substituting the value of  the constant quantity  [10431] in  [10429], we

[10432a] obtain M\/2l  =  log.tang.^OT-f-2co34^ +^V/'2a  —  log.tang.J's*'  —  2cos.^«', whence we

[104326] deduce  log.tang.|TO  =  log.tang.:^z3'-[~  K"  —  ?)^2a — 2cos4'Cj-j-2cos.^w'^. IVIultiplying  the

terms  between  the  braces  in  the  second  member  by  log.c  =  l,  and  then  reducing  to natural

numbers,  we  get tang4w  [10432]. When  -a  is  very  small,  we shall have  very  nearly

[10432c] tang.:|^t3  =  ^tang.'5J,  also  2cos.^ttf=2  nearly;  and  then  we  have

[10432^] ->2cos.^^  +  2cos4«'  =  — 2  +  2cos.^ra'  =  — 2(1— cos.^to')=  — 4sin.2^7s' [1],  Int.
Substituting  these  in  [10432],  and  then  multiplying  by  4,  we  get  [10434].

f  (4415)  We  have  supposed,  in  [10381,  &c.],  that  the  top  part  of  the  drop,  for  a
[10436a] considerable  distance  from  the  vertex  A,  fig.  172,  page  971,  is  nearly  horizontal;  so  that

u  may  become  quite  large,  and  almost  equal  to  /  [10419],  while  zi  [10379']  is  quite  small;
[104366] and  it  is  for  such  small  values  of  ct,  and  large  values  of  u,  that  the  expression  of  z  [10402]

is  supposed  to  correspond.  Now,  taking  the  differential  of  this  expression  of  z,  relative  to  u,
[10436c  ] and  dividing  it  by  du,  we  get  [10436] ;  in  which  we  may  neglect  the  two  last  terms  of  the

second  member  containing  the  divisor 8m  ^2a,  and  its  square,  because  these  divisors  are

quite  large;  since  we  have  seen,  in  [103976],  that,  in  the  experiment  there  mentioned,
[10436c?] 2u^2a=lll, near  the  border  of  the  drop. In  this  case,  the  expression  [10436]  will  be

dz \/5~  c"**/^**"  dz  dzf

[10436el reduced  to  its  first  term,  —-==*; ";!_ ^; and  since —  == — — =stang.w [  10406a],  we

[10436/-] get tang.'cj

_  j/2a.

du

du

du,

:= , for  the  value  of  tang.^s^  near  the  borders  of  the  drop ;  and  if

we  then  suppose,  as  in  [10419,  10430], u=l, in  the  denominator  of  thb  expression  of
tang.-n,  it  becomes  as  in  [10439].

X.Suppl.2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 985

[10436]

dz  v/2^.c"^^ h— — ? ^^ ^

when  I  is  very  large,  we  may  neglect,  in  this  expression,  the  terms — ^ — ~

12  .  ...  .  «\/  * [\Qi2i7]

and  —  — — — — , in  comparison  with  unity,  and  suppose,  in  the  denominator,

/ y^

u  =  lj  which  is  the  same  thing  as  to  neglect  the  powers  of  — y— ,  as  we  have

dz  t^^^^l

done  in  the  preceding  expression  of  tang.«,  or  —  ;  and  then  we  shall  have

tang.^= [/! ,_.  [10439]

If  we  compare  this expression of tang.« with that  in [10434],  we shall
obtain  *

*  (4416) Putting  the  two  expressions  of  tang.-w  [10434,  10439]  equal  to  each  other,
and  multiplying  by  ' — =r,  we  get  [10440];  and  if  we  substitute  the  values  '5j'=152°

[10450],  a  =  T^^  [10351'J,  it  becomes

1  I —Zx  0,5547  ,4 — ZX0,2409

— =2. 5854. r.c  =2. 5854. Z  .10  ,  [104395]

. .  0,43429

the second  of  these  expressions  being  deduced  from  the  first,  by  substitutmg c=10  . [10439c]

Multiplying  [10439&]  by  0'=ts,  we  obtain

i=0,3977.Z^10-^x«'^^,  [10439rf]

6=2,514.Z-^10^^'''^l  [10439^1

If  I  is  large,  as  for  example  25™',  or  more,  the  factor  lo-^x^'^"^  becomes  less  than  10-^ [10439c  ]
and  this  renders  the  expression  [104396]  so  small,  that  it  may  be  neglected,  as  in  [10450'].
If  we  substitute  the  same  values  of  «',  a  [10439a],  in  [10426],  we  shall  get

9  +  l=3-S3524  +  ?^^^^4^-  [10439/1

Subtracting  from  this  the  expression  [104396],  we  obtain

j=3-,3524  +  ?!::?lil-2,5854..zll0-^X^'^«l  [10439g]

V

When  I  is  infinite,  this  expression  of  q  becomes

y=3'^-,3524,  [10439A]

which  may  be  considered  as  the  limit  of  the  height  of  a  drop  when  its  diameter  is  very  large.
If  Z=50™S the  last  term  of  [10439^]  is  insensible,  and  the  expression  o(  q  becomes [10439t]
VOL.  IV.  247

986

[10440]

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M ec.  Cel.

Z6  =  i^-vW^-t='"S-i°'-

_  Z  ^2a — 4sm.2|i»-' r Depression  of  the  mercury  1
^  • L  in  a  large  tube.  J

g'=3'^-,3524  +  0'"'-,0442  =  3'"S3966,  as  in  [10451];  hence  it  appears  that  q  increases
while  I  decreases,  always  supposing  Z  to  be  a  large  quantity.  There  is,  however,  a  limit  to
this  increase,  in  the  height  of  the  drop,  because,  when  the  quantity  of  mercury  decreases  so  as

[10439ft]  to  make  the  drop  become  very  small,  all  its  dimensions,  and  therefore  its  height,  must  be
very  small.

In  the  preceding  formulas,  I  is  supposed  to  be  given  to  find  q ;  but,  instead  of  this,  we  may

[10439f  ]  suppose  the  volume  F'of  the  fluid  to  be  given,  which  is  easily  obtained  by  dividing  the  mass
of  the  fluid  by  its  density  Z),  to'  and  ol  being  considered  as  known  quantities.  In  finding
q  from  Vj  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  an  analytical  expression  of  V  from  the  integral  of  the

[10439m]  equation  [10380] ;  this  is  obtained  in  the  following  manner.  Multiplying  the  equation
[10380] by  uduj  and  transposing  the  last  term,  we  get  ^

[10439n]

[10439O  ]

[10439p]

[104395 ]

[10439r  ]
[104395 ]

[10439f  ]

ddz

U.  —

du

0+

duy

+

dz

fiudu

whose  integral  is

du

('+:^y

m9

—  2(u:m(?m==0^

dz^\

'+'£)'

-  _  a^M2  _|_  a  ./(f  u^dz = 0,

as  is  easily  proved  by  differentiation ;  no  constant  quantity  being  added,  because  the  integral
vanishes  when  m=0,  and  z=iO.  Multiplying  this  by  -,  and  transposing  the  three  first
terms,  we  get

it.foU^dz  =  'K.\

Q I  «  u

dz
du

)

Now  the  first  member  of  this  expression  evidently  represents  the  volume  V  of  the  mercury
in  the  upper  part  of  the  drop,  and  limited  in  the  lower  part  by  the  horizontal  circle  passing
through  the  ordinate  y,  at  the  distance  z  from  the  vertex.  Substituting  this  symbol  V'm  the
first  member,  also  sin.w  [10406c]  in  the  second  member,  it  becomes

V=^u^.(z-i-^—~.s\n.i^.

To  obtain  the  whole  volume  V  of  the  drop,  we  must  substitute,  in  this  expression,  the  values
of  z,  u,  vSy  corresponding  to  the  point  where  the  extreme  limit  of  the  drop  touches  the
horizontal  plane  upon  which  it  rests ;  hence  we  get  for  the  whole  volume  of  the  drop  the
following  expression ;

X.  Suppl.2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 987

This  value  of  —  gives,  as in [9750a],  the depression  depending  upon the [10440']
capillary  action,  in  a  barometer  tube  of  a  large  diameter. For  it  is  evident  that

Substituting  the  value  of  g'-j — - [10426],  it  becomes

17-  73 \ /^ ' \ t "-M •  / (1  — 3c09.3i«')^

V=^Z^  \/' -  .sin.^,;y'-_.^sin.^  — ^(^i^i;^^r-^^  ;

whicii  is  the  same  as  the  expression  (;?)  in  page  218  of  the  NouvelU Theorie,  SfC,  of  M.
Poisson,  changing  V,  I,  a,  -a',  into  v,  r',  a~^,  tt  —  w',  respectively,  to  conform  to  his  notation.
If  we  substitute,  in  [10439w],  the  values  of  zs',  a  [10439a],  it  will  become

V=  10,5317.72—7,0230.?.

As  an  example  of  the  use  of  this  formula,  we  shall  take  an  observation  of  Gay-Lussac,  given
by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  219  of  his  Nouvelle  Thhrie,  &fc. ;  where  the  weight  of  the  drop  of
mercury  was  6°"""-,013,  its  height  g'  =  3™,34,  at  a  mean  temperature  when  the  density  was
■^f^^,  that  of  water  being  unity.  Dividing  the  weight  in  milligrammes  6013,  by  this  density,
we  get  the  volume  of  the  drop  in  cubic  millimetres  equal  to  x^fI^^tX  6013  =  443,7  =  F'.
Substituting  this  in  [10439t^>],  we  get  443,7  =  10,5317.72 --,7,0230.?;  and  from  this
quadratic  equation  we  easily  deduce

Z=6""-,833.

M.  Poisson  makes  Z=6™-,8687,  in  page  220  of  his  work,  where  he  uses  the  symbol  r'
instead  of  I;  the  difference  of  the  two  results  arises  from  his  using  the  values  of  «',  a
[10355c],  which  differ  a  little  from  those  which  are  used  by  La  Place  [10439a].  The  value
of  I  [104392r]  being  substituted  in  [10439g-],  gives  for  the  height  q  of  the  drop  the  value
g,  _.  gmi.^gg,  instead  of  3™" ,34,  as  found  by  observation  [10439a;];  the  difference  arises  chiefly
from  the  terms  omitted  in  the  approximate  formula  [10439o'],  which  is  designed  only  for
larger  values  of/  than  that  in  the  present  example.  M.  Poisson,  by  a  somewhat  different,  but
equally  imperfect  approximation,  makes  5'  =  3™-,1996,  in  page  221  of  his  work,  where  it  is
denoted  by  the  symbol  k.  . ■ '

The  points  C,  If,  fig.  172,  page  971,  where  •!S  =  ^ir,  correspond  to  the  greatest  value  of
M,  which  we  shall  represent  by  u;  substituting  these  values  of  vi,  u,  in  [10432J,  and  then
putting 2cos.|w  =  /2, 2cos.^^' ==2  —  4s'm.^^s'J we  get

tang.|3-=tang.|-z3'.r /v v  -r  4 ^

Multiplying  this  by c"-"^^^-^"^  ^^(tang.4^'^^ we  get

—  ^v/2a— 4sin.4-g>-'_.  tang.|fr ^— uVSa— 2  +  s/2
tang.^w' "

Substituting  this  in  [10440],  and  multiplying  by  a,  we  obtain

^  =  4  /a .  \/H  .  v/2tt .  tang.^* .  c

.uv/2a— 2  +  ^/2

[10439«]

[10439i;  ]
[10439m>]

[10439r]

[10439y]
[10439Z  ]

[10440a]

[104406]
[10440c]

[10440rf]
[10440c ]

[10440/1

[10440^]
[10440fc]

988

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[M6c.  Cel.

[10441] the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  drop  which
we  have  just  considered;  but  at  the  point  where  this  surface  is  terminated,  it
[10441Q makes  with  the  sides  of  the  tube,  an  angle  whose  complement  is*  ra'.

[10440t ]
[10440t']

[10440ifc]
[10440/  ]

[10440»i]

Now  from  [1028K],  we  have tang4'^=  7^.1,1  > and  if  we  put,  for  brevity,

we  shall  get,  from  [10440A],  the  value  of  b  [10440Jt],  which  is  easily  reduced  to  the  form
[10440Z],  by  putting,  as  in  [9323p],  a=a-2,

1

_«»(v/2  +  l) I  /« ."^

=  — ' .  — •  \x 7  •  t*  •

4/a-V2 ^ *

When  Z  is  very  large,  the  factor  V/ ^differs  but  very  little  from  ^Z^*^-,;  and  if  we  make  this

substitution  in  [10440?],  and  then  change  b,  a,  u',  into  f*,  a,  Z',  respectively,  to  conform  to
M.  Poisson's  notation,  we  shall  obtain  the  value  of  /x,  in  page  216  of  his  work;  observing  that

he,  like  La  Place,  neglects  terms  of  the  order  — r— ,  in  these  calculations.

If  we  resubstitute,  in  [10440/],  the value 2cos.Jot'  [10440e], and then reduce it to
[10440rt] logarithms,  we  get,  by  a  slight  reduction,  the  formula  [10440o]  ;  and  by  putting  a=a~2,  it
becomes  as  in  [10440p],  using  tang.J^r  [10440i],

[IO44O0 ]
[10440p]

u  =  Z-[-"7= — ^^^.cos.^xtf'  —  "/^•hyP'log*

tscng.^Ts'

=  Z+a  — \/2.a.cos.^^'— -^.hyp.log.|(l-f-/2).tang.itrf'^.

This  expression  is  the  same  as  that  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  218  of  his  work,  for  finding
[10440^] the  value  of  r',  changing  u,  /,  a,  «',  into  I,  r',  a,  t  — 10',  to  conform  to  his  notation.

*  (4417) In  the  annexed  figure  173,  FAbBdD  represents  the  convex  surface  of  the

mercury  in  a  large  barometer  or  cylindrical  tube

D  D'F'F. This  surface  touches  the  sides  of  the
[10442a] tube  in  the  points  D,  F,  situated  on  the  horizontal

line DEF, which  is  bisected,  in  the  point E, ^^
[104426] by  the  vertical  axis  EGA,  passing  through  the

vertex  of  the  surface. Then,  drawing  through  any  point  B  the  horizontal  ordinate  BG,  and
[10442c] using a  notation similar  to that  in  [10377—10379"];  observing  also that  the  letters of

reference  in  fig.  173  are  exactly  the  same  as  those  in  fig.  172,  page  971,  corresponding  to  a

large  drop;  we  shall  have

X.  Suppl.  2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 989
With respect to a fluid, which, like water and alcohol, completely [10442]

AE=q, EDz=l, AG  =  z, EG=z', GB^u,

angle  G56=z3,  angle  £Dc?= to ',  &lc.,
h  being  equal  to  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  surface  at  the  point  A.  Then  by  a  slight  attention
to  the  method  of  calculation  in  the  article  [10377, 10440],  we  shall  readily  perceive,  that  what
has  been  proved  relative  to  the  surface  of  the  drop,  is  also  true  relative  to  the  surface  of  the
fluid  in  the  tube;  remarking,  however,  that  the  mercury  forms  the  acute  angle  D'Dd=48^
[10353],  with  the  horizontal  plane  D'D,  fig.  172,  p.  971,  or  with  the  vertical  side  of  the  tube
DD',  fig.  173 ;  so  that,  in  the  case  of  the  drop,  we  shall  have,  in  fig.  172,  Tn'^EDd  [10409],
or  ot'  =  *  — D'i>c?  =  200°  — 48°  =  152o,  as  in  [10450];  but  in  the  case  of  the  tube,
fig.  173,  to'=EDc?  becomes  «  =100°-~48°  =  52'^,  as  in  [10441',  or  10453].  The
remarks  we  have  here  made  relative  to  the  convex  surface  of  mercury,  fig.  173,  apply  with
hardly  any  variation  to  the  concave  surface  of  water,  alcohol,  8ic.  in  a  large  tube,  as  in
fig.  174.

If  we  substitute -  =  \  [9328]  in  [9355],  we  ^m^l7A.

shall  get

1 2

(1— COS.3^')-

the  angle  6'  [9346]  being  the  same  as  w'  [10442i];  so  that  if  we  substitute,  in  [10442ZJ,
the  values  ^'=^'  =  52° [10442i],  ^=6'"'-,5  [10351'],  we  shall  get

^  =  ^-0,2029.?,

for  the  depression  q  arising  from  the  capillary  action  in  a  barometrical  tube  whose  radius  is  I,
the  unit  of  measure  being  a  millimetre;  observing,  however,  that,  in  computing  this  formula,
it  is  supposed  that  Z^a  is  a  small  fraction,  whose  higher  powers  are  neglected  in  the
computation  of  the  formula  [9355]. JVI.  Poisson,  in  page  287  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,

supposes  to'=45''-30'"=50O33'^,  and  l  =  a2_6'^-,5262;  and  by  substituting  these
values  in  [10442Z],  it  becomes

?=■

4,5743

I

0,1931.?,

which  agrees  very  nearly  with  the  formula  (1)  in  page  287  of  his  work,  namely,

^^!!^_0,i932.?+0,0559.Z3;

observing that  his  symbols  S,  a,  correspond  respectively  to  q,  I,  in  La  Place's  notation.
IMoreover,  M.  Poisson  has  used  a  somewhat  different  method  in  developing  the  series  [9355],
and  has  retained  the  small  term  depending  on  P  which  is  neglected  by  La  Place,  on  account
VOL.  IV.  243

[10442i]

[10442c ]
[10442/]
[10442g]

[10442A]
[10442i  ]

[10442Jfc]

[10442i ]
[10442m]

[10442n]

[10442o  ]
[10442;?  ]
[10442g]

[10442r  ]
[10442* ]

990  THEORY  OV  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c  C61.

[10442'] wets the sides of a glass tube, — , will express, in such a tube,

<xb

[10442/
[10442f

[10442u
[10442i;

[104421C
[10442j:

[10U2y

[10442Z

[10443a

[104436
[10443c

[10443d
[10443e

[10443/
[1044%

of  its  smallness.  The  formula  [10442g',  or  I0442r]  must  not  be  used  except  for  very  small
values  of  I,  and  we  shall  hereafter  give  some  examples  of  its  use.  If  we  suppose  the
diameter  of  the  tube  2/  to  be  equal  to  a  ten  thousandth  part  of  a  millimetre,  or  Z  =  0™'-,0005,
the  expression  of  q  [10442n]  will  give  5-=  94766™'",  being  the  same  as  is  used  by  La  Place
in  page  316  of  the  Connaissance  des  Terns  for  the  year  1812,  in  a  paper  entitled
Sur  la  Depression  du  Mercure  dans  un  Tube  de  Barometre,  due  a  sa  Capillarite.  When
the  radius  of  the  tube  is  veiij  great,  we  can  determine  the  depression  by  means  of  the
formula  [104401,  as  is  shown  in  [10455,  he,  10456a — /].  For  intermediate  values  of  I,
we  may  use  a  process  of  quadratures  like  that  proposed  by  La  Place  in  the  paper  just
mentioned,  for  computing  the  table  of  depressions  [104432;]  of  the  upper  point  of  the  surface
of  the  mercury  arising  from  the  capillary  action.  This  table  was  first  computed  by  M.
Bouvard,  by  the  formulas  [10443^ — q],  and  was  afterwards  corrected  and  augmented  by  him,
in  a  paper  inserted  in  the  Connaissance  des  Terns  for  the  year  1829,  as  in  [10443z].  We
shall  now  explain  this  method  of  quadratures  as  it  is  given  by  La  Place  in  the
above-mentioned  paper.

If  we  substitute  the  value  of  — [9326],  and  that  of  sin.w  [10406c],  in  [10380],  we  shall

get  the  following  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid.

-  +  - .  sm.zi  —  2az

2

6'

1 2 ,  ^  1 .

or —  =  --+-20.2 — — .sm.zs'.
iJ 6 '  u

which  gives  a  very  simple  expression  of  the  radius  of  curvature  R  of  the  generating  curve,
or  curve  formed  by  the  section  of  the  surface  by  a  vertical  plane  passing  through  the  axis  of
the  tube.  Therefore,  if  we  consider  this  curve  as  being  formed  by  a  series  of  small  arcs  of  a
circle,  described  with  different  radii,  and  touching  each  other  at  their  extremities,  we  can
obtain  the  coordinates  of  the  curve  with  so  much  greater  degree  of  accuracy  as  the  number
of  divisions  of  the  amplitude  shall  be  increased.  The  whole  amplitude  z*  =  52°  [10453]  is
divided  by  La  Place  into  12  equal  parts ;  and  the  depression  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  is
assumed  successively,  by  Bouvard,  at  5™'-,0,  4"S5,  4'"'-,0,  3"'S5,  3™-,0,  2™-,5,  2'"'-,0,  l™'-,5,  l'"S2,
1™0.  Below  P^SO,  the  variations  of  the  assumed  values  are  0™-,  1  to  0'"'-,4;  below  0'"'-,4,  the
variations  are  0™',05 ;  finally,  in  the  two  last  expressions,  the  depressions  are  supposed  to  be
0'°',06,  0'"'',03. Taking  successively  these  depressions  for  the  values  of  5',  and  using  a=^

[10442m],  and  Q  =  ~i [9354],  we  get  the  following  expression  of  the  radius  of  curvature  b

at  the  summit  of  the  surface ;

5  =  -.
05

We  shall  now  put

X.  Suppl.2.] FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 991

the elevation of the lowest point of the surface above the level [io442"]

F"r  =  the  inclination  of  the  side  of  the  curve  to  the  horizon,  or  vakie  of  vs  [10379'],  at

the  lower  extremity  of  the  division  r  of  the  arc;
2;^  =  the  vertical  ordinate,  or  value  of  z  [10378],  corresponding  to  that  extremity;
w,.  =  the  horizontal  ordinate,  or  value  of  u  [10379],  corresponding  to  that  extremity ;
6^  =  the  radius  of  curvature  R  [10442y],  at  the  same  point;  b  being  its  value  at  the

vertex  [10442e] ;

With  this  notation,  the  second  of  the  equations  [104422;]  becomes

The  limits  of  the  division  r  of  the  arc  being  F,.,  Vr+i,  and  the  corresponding  radius  of  the
circle  being  br,  the  difference  of  their  sines  to  that  radius  will  give  the  difference  of  the
values  of  w^^i  and  m^;  and  the  difference  of  their  cosines  will  give  the  difference  of  the
values  of  ^,._^i  and  Zy',  hence  we  easily  deduce  the  following  expressions,  by  using  the
formulas  [19,  17],  Int.;

Zy+,=Zy+2K.s\nA{Vr+i—Vr).sm.i{Vy+,+  Vr).

At  the  first  division,  where  r=0,  Fo=0,  these  expressions  become,  by  a  slight
reduction,

Instead  of  dividing  the  amplitude  ■ct'  =  52^=46'''  48""-,  into  twelve  equal  parts,  according
to  the  directions  of  La  Place,  M.  Bouvard  takes  ten  arcs,  of  4''"  each,  from  4'^-  to  40^- ;  and
the  remaining  part  of  the  amplitude  he  divides  into  two  equal  parts,  of  3^^"  24'""  each.  These
values  are  used  when  the  depression  of  the  mercury  exceeds  1™''.  When  the  depressions  are
less  than  l""'",  he  uses  the  two  formulas  [10385e, /],  selecting  in  the  first  place  for  u  a  value
which  will  give,  in  the  formula  [10385/"],  the  angle  ts  or  V  equal  to  4'^\  Then  this  angle
is  successively  augmented  by  2''',  till  F^12''';  from  12''"  to  40''',  the  intervals  were  4*^-;
from  40''-  to  46''  48"-,  the  intervals  were  S"  24'"'.

The  values  of  u  corresponding  to  the  greatest  amplitude  46^'  48™',  being  found  for  all  the
depressions  [10443rf,  e],  will  represent  the  radii  of  the  tubes,  in  which  these  depressions
respectively  occur.  Upon  examining  this  table.  La  Place  found  that  the  difference  of  the
logarithms  of  the  depressions,  divided  by  the  difference  of  the  diameters  of  the  tubes,  forms  a
series  of  quotients  which  vary  with  extreme  slowness ;  and  he  makes  use  of  this  property  to
simplify  the  table  by  adjusting  it  to  equal  decrements  of  the  diameters  of  the  tubes.  Thus,  if
a,  a',  are  the  depressions  corresponding  to  the  diameters  d,  d',  we  shall  have

,_  ,,°'  =C==  constant; or log. a' — \o^.a  =  C.{d  —  d').

Then,  if  x  be  the  depression  which  is  required  to  be  found  for  the  diameter  d^,  which  occurs
in  the  table,  we  shall  have,  in  like  manner, log.a?  —  \o^.a  =  C.{d  —  ^,) ; whence  we  get

[10443/1]

[10443t ]
[10443Jfc]
[10443Z ]

[10443m]
[10443n]

[10443O  ]
[10443p]

[10443?]
[10443r  ]

[10443*  ]

[10443f  ]
[10443u]

[10443W  ]
[I0443u>]

[10443x]

992  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

[10443] [10443/"],  and  we  shall  have  ct'  =  ^*;*  which  gives  for  this  elevation,

[10443y  ]

[10443z]

log.a?  =  log. a  -\-C.{d  —  d^);

and,  by  means  of  this  formula,  the  diameters  of  the  tubes  were  arranged,  as  in  the  following
table,  so  as  to  have  a  regular  decrement  of  0'"'-,5,  from  21"'-  to  2™-,  in  the  first  column  ;  the
second  column  contains  the  corresponding  depressions,  and  the  third  column  the  differences
of  these  quantities.

Internal  diameters
of  the  tubes.

Dei

ressions.

Differences.

[nternal  diameters
of  the  tubes.

Depressions.

Differenceg.

2Jmi.o

0"

'•,028

11™S5

0™

',293

Qm

',004

7

0"'-.037 1

20 ,5

0

,032

11 ,0

0

,330

0

,004

7  ^

7 ^^  ^

0

,042

20 ,0

0

,036

10 ,5

0

,372

7

? ^

0

,005

?

0

,047

19 ,5

0

,041

10 ,0

0

,419

7

^ J

7

0

,006

7

7 *^

0

,054

19 ,0

0

,047

9 ,5

0

,473

7

J

7

0

,006

V JV

7  *  •  ^^

0

,061

18 ,5

0

,053

0

,007

9 ,0

0

,534

0

,070

18 ,0

0

,060

8 ,5

0

,604

7 ^

7

0

,008

V.^ JT^

5  w  *

0

,080

17 ,5

0

,068

0

,009

8 ,0

0

,684

0

,091

17 ,0

0

,077

7 ,5

0

,775

7

7

7

0

,010

• }^

J  • •  i^

0

,102

16  ,5

0

,087

7 ,0

0

,877

7

7^

7^

0

,012

• J"

0

,118

16  ,0

0

,099

7

6 ,5

0

,995

7

7

J

0

,013

7

0

,141

15  ,5

0

,112

6 ,0

1

,136

7

0

,015

7^

7 -^^^

0

,170

15  ,0

0

,127

0

,016

5 ,5

1

,306

0

7 "

,201

14  ,5

0

,143

5 ,0

I

,507

7

0

,018

7^

jw  V m

0

,245

14  ,0

0

,161

4 ,5

1

,752

7

0

,0-20

— . j'^

0

,301

13  ,5

0

,181

0

,023

4 ,0

2

,053

0

,362

13  ,0

0

,204

3 ,5

2

,415

?

7 *

0

,026

^-^ 5

0

,487

12  ,5

0

,230

3 ,0

2

,902

7  *^^  "

/

7

0

,030

^^ j-v-'

3*^^^

0

,692

12  ,0

0

,260

2 ,5

3

,594

7

7

0

,033

«r 3^^

0

,985

11 ,5

0

,293

2 ,0

4

,579

7

This  table  is  calculated  upon  the  supposition  that  the  angle •sj'=52^  =  46''' 48'"-  [10442i],
and  that,  if  the  diameter  of  the  tube  be  0™'-,001,  the  depression  S  of  the  mercury  will  be
[10444a] 5  =  94776'"'" [10442^];  some  small  variations  will  be  found  if  we  use  the  values  adopted
y  M.  Poisson,  namely, zj'  =  45'- SO"-  [10442p],  and 5  =  J574|=91492™'-  [10442r].

[10444a'] *  (4418) With  water  or  alcohol,  we  have  the  angle  D'Dd=0,  fig.  174,  page  989;  and
then  zs'zzz^lOO^  —  D'Dd  [10442A]  becomes  ^'  =  100°  =  ^^ [10443]. Hence  we  have

[104446] tang.ira'=-^q3Y  [10440i], and —  4sin.2^ttf'  =  — 2-f-2cos.|ra'=  — 2  +  ^2 [10440e];

substituting  these  in  [10440],  it  becomes  as  in  [10444],  or,  as  it  may  be  written.

X.  Suppl.  2.J FIGURE  OF  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY  RESTING  ON  A  PLANE. 993

1^

1,63476

\A7^72a-C

2a— 2+v/3

^/a

'\/l\/2^.C

— /s/2a

[Elevation  of  wator,"!
&c.,  in  a  large  tube.  J

We  shall  now  compare  these  results  with  experiments.

M.  Gay-Lussac  has  observed,  at  the  temperature  of  12°,8,  the  thickness  of
a  large  drop  of  mercury,  which  was  circular,  and  a  decimetre,  or  100™-,  in
diameter,  resting  upon  a  plane  of  white  glass,  perfectly  horizontal.  He  found,
by  means  of  a  very  accurate  micrometer,  that  the  thickness  was  3™'-,378.  This
value  differs  but  very  little  from  that  which  Segner  found  by  a  similar  method,
and  which,  being  reduced  to  millimetres,  is  equal  to  3™'-,40674. This  thickness

may  be  calculated  from  the  preceding  expression  of*  5'  + -7  [10426], putting,

[10444]

[10445]

[10446]

[10447]

[10448]
[10449]

Now,  substituting  the  values  of  c  =  2,7 1828,  5r= 3,141592,  we  find  that  the  factor  between
the  braces  becomes  equal  to  1,63476,  and  then  the  expression  [10444]  becomes  as  in  [10445].
We  may  remark  that,  in  the  original  work,  by  an  error  of  the  press,  this  factor  1,63476,  is
printed  3,63476.

*  (4419) When Z=50'°'-,  the  expression  of  — r  [104396]  becomes  insensible ;  and  by

neglecting  it  in  [10439/j,  we  get  ^  =  3™-,3966,  as  in  [10439i,  or  10451].  This  observation
is  discussed  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  218  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  Sfc,  by  a  method  which  is
the  inverse  of  that  in  [10451,  &ic.].  For,  instead  of  finding  q  from  the  assumed  values  of
a,  Ts',  or  a,  w',  he  determines  the  angle  w'  or  -a',  by  the  condition  that  it  shall  give,  in  the
formula  [10426],  a  value  of  q  which  is  equal  to  3™,378,  as  in  the  observation  of  M.
Gay-Lussac  [10447].  With  this,  and  an  experiment  on  the  depression  of  mercury  in  a  glass
tube,  which  gives  a2.cos.ti)'=4™"S5746,  M.  Poisson  finds  a2=6"^'^-,5262,  instead  of
a2  =  6""™-,5  [10351'],  and  ^'=45"- 30™-,  instead  of ^_ra'  =  48°  =  43''- 12'"-,  which  are

used by  La  Place, in [10450,  he.]. If  we  neglect  the  term  — ,  and  the  last  term  of

[10426],  which  are  quite  small,  in  a  large  barometer,  we  get  very  nearly  q=y/ -.sin.^Tsi';

substituting  -  =  13™™-  [10449'],  and  w'  =  52°  [10453],  it  becomes

^ = ^ignunsi: .  sin.26°  =  l'"S432,
for  the  difference  of  elevations  of  the  mercury  at  the  sides  of  the  tube  and  at  its  vertex,  as
in  [10453'].

In  all  the  calculations  of  this  article,  the  drop  of  mercury  is  supposed  to  rest  on  a  horizontal

VOL.  IV.  249

[10444c ]
[10444<f]

[10444c ]

[IO45O0]
[104506]

[10450c ]
[10450d]

[10450c  ]
[10450/]

[10450/]
[10450g-]

994

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Ca

2

[10449'] as in [10351'], -  =  13'^'"'-,  and  supposing  the  acute  angle,  formed  by  the

[10450g']  plane  of  gl-ass;  and  we  may  apply  the  same  principles  to  other  similar  problems;  as,  for
example,  where  the  glass,  upon  which  the  drop  rests,  is  in  the  form  of  a  concave  spherical

[10450A]  surface  of  a  great  radius.  We  may  also  suppose  the  drop  to  rest  on  another  fluid,  as  in  a
case  treated  of  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  241  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  where  a  large  drop
of  water  or  other  fluid  is  supposed  to  be  placed  upon  a  surface  of  mercury  contained  in  a

[10450t  ]  vessel  of  great  extent.  We  shall  now  give  the  methods  of  investigating  the  figures  of  the
surfaces  of  the  two  fluids,  supposing  them  to  be  mercury  and  water;  it  being  very  evident
that  the formulas  which are used in this case  may  be  applied  to  any  other  fluids,  by

[10450A;]  merely  varying  the  constant  quantities,  so  as  to  adapt  them  to  the  case  actually  under
consideration.

[10450Z  ]  When  a  drop  of  water  rests  upon  a  surface  of  mercury,  there  are  three  distinct
parts  of  these  surfaces  which  are  subjected  to  different  conditions,  and  of  course  require
different equations to express them. This is manifest in the annexed figure 175, in

I'lg.175.

which  Go  is  a vertical  axis  passing

through the centre of the drop ;
[10450m] On^Na'A'AA"a"CnoHb"B"BB'b',

a  section of  the drop by a plane

passing through this axis; and
[10450n  ] WvGNa,A^AAa'Nnph'BBB,h^FV,

a section of the surface of the

mercury by  the  same  plane. Then

the three surfaces we  have  alluded

to are. First, the upyer  surface of
[10450o] the  drop  A"oB",  which  we  shall,  for  brevity,  denote  by  *S";  this  part  is  not  in  contact  with

the  mercury,  and  its  greatest  horizontal  diameter  is  the  line  CDH,  the  highest  part  of  the

drop  being  at  the  point  o,  in  the  axis  Oo;  Second,  the  lower  part  of  the  drop  A'OB',  in
[10450p] contact  with  the  mercury,  and  which  we  shall  denote  by  .S'^, O  being  its  lowest  point,  and

AEB  the  line  of  division  between  the  upper  and  lower  part  of  the  section  of  the  drop;

Third,  the  section  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  WvGN'a^A^A,  or  VFh^B^B,  wholly  free

from  the  drop,  which  we  shall  denote  by  S. The  distances  of  the  points  A^,  A',  A",  from

A,  are  supposed  to  be  insensible,  but  greater  than  the  quantity  X  [9240a],  which  expresses

the  limit  of  the  corpuscular  action;  moreover,  the  distances  of  the  points  B^,  B  ,  B  ,  from
[10450r] jB  are  supposed  to  be  insensible,  but  greater  than X; and  all the  arcs  A^a^,  A'a',  A"a",

Bh^,  B'h',  B"b",  Nn„  are  supposed  to  be  infinitely  small. The  points  F,  G,  are  taken  so

far  from  the  drop,  that  the  parts  FJ^,  GW,  may  be  considered  as  in  the  horizontal  plane  or
[10450* ] level  of  the  mercury WvGt'tTFV. Finally,  we  shall  suppose  that  a  canal  ntNzrv  is

drawn,  as  in  [10020c],  with  two  vertical  branches  rv,  zn,  meeting  the  surfaces  in  v,  n,  iV);

[10450/]
[IO45O3]

X.  Suppl.2.]  A  DROP  OF  WATER  RESTING  ON  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY.

995

surface  of  the  mercury  and  by  that  of  the  glass,  at  the  contact  to  be  equal  to' [10449"]

the  lower  points  r,  z,  being  connected  by  a  horizontal  branch  rz;  also  another  canal  vrz'N',

whose  vertical  branches  rv,  z'N',  are  terminated  at  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  v,  N',  and [10450f  ]

their  lower  points  r,  z',  are  connected  by  the  horizontal  branch  rz'.

We  shall  take  O  for  the  origin  of  the  rectangular  coordinates  u,  z  ;  the axis  of  u  being
the  horizontal  line  Or, and  the  axis  of  z  the  vertical  line Oo;  these coordinates being [10450ul
supposed to  correspond  to  the  surface *S'; we shall also suppose that  the rectangular
coordinates  u,  z',  correspond  to  the  upper  surface  *S",  and  the  coordinates  u,  z^,  to  the  lower [10450r]
surface  S/,  hence

Oz'  =  u,  z'J^'  =  z, are  the  coordinates  of  the  point  JV*'  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  S',
Oz  =14, zn  =  z',  are  the  coordinates  of  the  point n of  the  upper  surface  of  the  drop  S' ;
Oz  =u, 2jV*=z^,  are  the  coordinates  of  the  point  JV  of  the  lower  surface  of  the  drop  S,.

We  shall  also  use  the  following  symbols ;

OE=f, ET=q, TD=Tc, Do  =  e, TO=q-\-f, To  =  Jc  +  ey
Oo=/+^  +  A;4-e  =  s,  AE  =  r,  CD  =  l;

D  =  the  density  of  the  mercury;
X)'=the  density  of  the  water;
^  =  the  force  of  gravity.

The  principle  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  fluid  in  the  canal  vrz'N'  will  give  the  differential
equation  of  the  surface  S,  in  like  manner  as  in  [9315].  For  if  we  put  B  for  the  radius  of
curvature  at  the  point  N'  of  the  section  GN'A,  in  the  plane  of  the  figure,  and  B'  for  the
radius  of  curvature  at  the  same  point  N',  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  plane  of  the  figure,
the corpuscular action at  N',  in the canal N'z',  in the direction of gravity,  will be

K4-^H.( A  [9301];  the  sign  of  jB'  being  made  negative,  as  in  [9294'J,  because  it

corresponds  to  a  concave  arc  whose  centre  is  situated  on  the  axis  of  revolution  of  the  drop
Oo.  Adding  this  expression  to  the  action  of  gravity  in  the  canal  z'N',  which  is  represented
by g.DXz'N'j we  get  the  whole  pressure  at  the  point  z',  at  the  bottom  of  the  canal

K-\-^H.(— ;)  -{-g.DXz'N'. In  like  manner,  the  corpuscular  action  at  v  being  equal

to  K,  the  pressure  at  r  will  be  K-}-g.DXrv.  Putting  these  two  expressions  equal  to  each,
and  neglecting  the  quantities  which  destroy  each  other,  we  get,  by  observing  that
ru=rO  =  !?+/, and z'N'=rz,

The value of - is  the same as  that of  — [9326'],  changing z into z, the  radical
B'  ^

A^—Y  being  supposed  positive;  and  as  z  increases  with  m,  dz  has  the  same  sign  as  the
constant  differential  du;  hence  we  have

[10450u>]
[10450a:  ]
[104501/]

[104502 ]

[10451a]
[104516,
[10451c ]

[10451rf]
[10451e  ]

[10451/]

[10451ff]
[10451A]

[10451t  ]

996  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Gel.

[10450] 48° [10353], which gives, in the expression just mentioned, ^'  =  152°

[10451A:]

1  rfz
1  u'du

B' / ._£U

[I

In  like  manner,  the  value  of  —  is  the  same  as  that  of  —  [9326],  changing  the  sign  of  ddzj

because  the  surface  A^N'G  is  convex,  so  that  ddz  must  be  negative;  and  we  shall  therefore

have

ddz

\}'T~duy

Substituting  these  values  [10451Z:,  I],  in  [10451z],  and  then  multiplying  by — (^"l~T2r»

we  get,  for  the  equation  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  S,  not  in  contact  with  the  drop,  the
following  differential  expression ;

[104^1^  "-H^^-^uduV+^^n-S'^-^'-^-f^v+i^d'

The  differential  equations  of  the  surfaces  ^S*^,  S',  are  found  by  means  of  the  equilibrium  of
the  canal  vrzNn,  in  the  same  manner  as  we  have  already  explained  in  treating  of  two  fluids

[10451n] in  a  tube  [10027a — z]. If  we  substitute  the  values  of  — , —  [9326,  9326'],  in  the  equation

/  dz^  \  i

[10027a3],  and  ihen  multiply  by  (l  +  T^j  >  changing  z into  z^,  to  conform  to  the  present

notation,  we  shall  get  the  following  equation  of  the  lower  surface  of  the  drop  S^,  in  contact
with  the  mercury ;

[10451o]  ^ ldu^~u  du \ ^du^JS '^  ^S/ V  J  6 T i  \^ ~  difij '

G being  a constant  quantity  depending on  the  capillary  action of  the two  fluids near

[10451p] the  lower  surface  S,  [10027fc],  and  c  a  constant  quantity  [I0027o"]  to  be  determined  by
observation.

In  like  manner,  the  equation  of  the  upper  convex  surface  of  the  drop  *S"  [10027^]  is  of  the
following  form,  H  being  changed  into  H',  to  conform  to  the  notation  of  M.  Poisson ;

[10451?]  -iH'.(j^  +  l^=:{D'g2'^D'gn^c)

The  values  of  -,  -,,  n
into  fif',  whence  we  get

The  values  of  -,  -„  may  be  deduced  from  [9326,  9326'J,  by  changing  R  into  f*,  and  R

get

ddz  1 dz

Ttn^Ki 1  ^  du^ ^  1  u'du ^

X.  Suppl.  2.] A  DROP  OF  WATER  RESTING  ON  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY.  997

[10439a];  and  if  we  neglect  the  term  — ,  which  becomes  insensible  relative [104501

observing  that,  in  fig.  117,  page  719,  the  lowest  point  O  of  the  concave  surface  ON  A  is  the
origin  of  the  rectangular  coordinates  OM=z,  MN=u;  the  ordinate  MiV  being  horizontal,
and  the  ordinate  OJ\I  vertical,  or  in  a  direction  from  the  origin  O  contrary  to  that  of
gravity;  but  in  fig.  118,  page  725,  the  highest  point  O  of  the  convex  surface  ONA
is  the  origin  of  the  rectangular  coordinates  OM=z,  MN=u',  the  ordinate  OM
being  in  the  direction  of  gravity  from  the  origin  O.  Hence  it  follows  that,  if  we  refer
the  formulas  [10451r]  to  the  upper  part  of  the  convex  surface  of  the  drop  onC,
we  must  take  o  for  the  origin  of  the  rectangular  coordinates  om  =  z,  mn  =  u,  of  any
point  n.  This  value  of  om  =  z,  being  subtracted  from  Oo  =  s  [10450-r],  gives
Orn  =  zn  =  s — z\  and  as  this  is  represented  by  z'  [10450a;],  we  get  e  —  z=zz',  whose
differential  gives dz^  —  dz\ ddz  =  — ddz'. Substituting  these  in  [10451r],  we  get  the

values  of  -, — ,  to  be  used  in  [10451g^],  which,  by  this  means,  becomes

This  represents  the  equation  of  the  upper  or  convex  surface  onC  of  the  drop;  H'  being  a
constant  quantity,  depending  on  the  capillary  action  of  the  fluid  which  forms  the  drop,  and  c
being  of  the  same  value,  as  in  [10451jp].

Having  thus  obtained  the  differential  equations  of  the  three  surfaces  S,  S^,  S'
[10451m,  0,  tt'],  we  shall  now  reduce  them  to  more  symmetrical  forms,  by  putting  the
arbitrary  constant  quantity  n  [10027i;']  equal  to  TO  or  q-\-f,  which  is  the  same  as  to
change  the  origin  of  the  coordinates  z,  z^,  z',  from  the  point  O  to  T,  using  also  the  following
additional  symbols;

H=g.D.a\ G  =  {B  —  D').g.a^, H'  =  B'.g.u'\

n==q-\-f,

:  —  z-{-n,

s=z,  +  n-— -^

{D-D').g'

z'  =  -z'  +  n+-.

[10451*  3
[1045U  ]

[10451tt]
[10451t;]

Surface

S'.
[10451tr]

[10451x]

[104511,]
[10451Z  ]

Now,  substhuting  the  values  of  H,  z,  in  [10451m],  multiplied  by — -,  we get [10452J].

The  values  of  G,  z,,  being substituted in [10451o], multiplied by -, give [10452c]; [10452a]

2

and  the  values  of  H',  z', being substituted in [10451w], multiplied by — -, give

[10452fZ]; by this means the differential equations of  the surfaces S,  S^,  S',  become,
respectively,

^'4.^  ^'  f^  4. ^\  =  ?^'  fi4-^\^
du^~^u'du'\ ~^  duy a,2 •  V "^ rfuV '

250

[Surface  S  of  the mercury  not"!
touching  the  drop.  J

rSurface  S,  where  the  drop  is  in"!

ddz' 1 dz'
du^ u'  du

[

Surface  S'  of  the  drop  not  in
contact  with  the  mercury.

[104526]
[10452c ]

[10i52d  I

VOL.  IV.

908  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10450"] to a drop whose diameter is a decimetre or 100™- [10450a], the

The  equations  we  have  here  computed  are  equivalent  to  those  given  by  M.  Poisson  in  his

[10452e] Nouvelh Theorie,  fyc. For  the  equations  [I0i5im,  o,  w]  are  the  same  as  his  system  of

equations  {a),  page  242,  changing  the  origin  of  z  from  the  point  O  to  the  point  T,  or  in

rin4«;2/'l ^^'^^^  words  by  decreasing  the  values  of  z,  z^,  z',  by  the  quantity  g'+/,  to  conform  to  his

notation,  and  putting  u  =  t,  a=a, X)  =  p, D'^^p'. Moreover,  the  first  of  his  equations

(a),  page  242,  is  easily  reduced  to the form  [104525]; the  first  of  his  equations (/),

[10452^] page  246,  is  reduced  to  the form  [10452c];  lastly,  the  second  of  these  equations  (/)  is

reduced to  the  form  [10452d]. We  may here remark, that the expressions of  z^,  z'

[10452^] [10451^],  may  be  put  under  other  forms,  by  the  substitution  of  the  value  of  c. For,  the

[I0452t  ] figure  of  the  drop  being  that  of  a  surface  of  revolution,  if  we  put  X  for  its  radius  of  curvature

at  its  lowest point O, where z^  =  0, we shall have R  =  R'  =  'X; substituting this in

[10027a;],  after  changing  z  into  z^,  to  conform  to  the  notation  of  the  surface  S^,  we  get

[10452A;] c  =  ~-\-(D  —  D').gn; and  by  substituting  it  in  the  general  expression  of  z^  [104512:],

A

[10452/ 1 it  becomes z,  =  z, '  ^  '  ■ . In  like  manner,  at  the  upper  point  o  of  the  surface  of  the

' ' {D—D').g-K  ^' "^  ^^

[10452m] drop,  where z'  =  £  [10450z],  and \t.=^[i!, we  get,  from  [100272;], c  =  — +  I>'^.  (s— n)  ;

[10452n] and  since  s  —  w=^-fe  [104502r,  10451z],  we  finally  get c-=  — -|--D'^.(A: -fe)  ; hence

/*
the  general  expression  of  z'  [104512;]  becomes

[104520]  z'  =  — 2r'  +  n  +  A:+e-f -^==  — 2'  +  £-f  ;^ [104502r,  104512].

D  gfA  Dgfx

Substituting  in  z^,  z'  [10452Z,  o],  the  values  of  G,  H,  n  [10451y,  2],  we  get
[10452;)]  ^'~'^'~~K'  ^^  ^/  =  Z/  +  ^;

[IO4523]  ^'  =  —  z'^s-\.~, or 2r'=£  +  ^^-z';

which  are  equivalent  to  the  two  equations  given  by  M.  Poisson  in  the  lower  part  of
page  245  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  &fc.  The  origin  of  z,  z^,  z',  is  at  the  same  point  O,
fig.  175,  page  994  [10450m,  &;c.],  and  as  z^  —  z-\-n  [1045l2r],  also  n~TO  [10451a?],

it  follows  that  the  origin  of  2  must  be  at  the  point  T. IMoreover,  as  2:^  =  z^  +  T* [10452p],
[10452r]  .

the  origin  of  2,  must  be  on  the  continuation  of  the  axis  oO  below  O,  and  at  a  distance  from

O  which  is  equal  to — ; the  positive  values  of  z  being  counted  from  their  origin T  in  the

A

direction  of  gravity  TQ,  and  the  positive  values  of  z^  in  the  opposite  or  vertical direction

[10452/] from  their  origin  below  O. Lastly,  it  follows  from  the  expression  of  z'  [104525^], that  the

«'^
origin  of  «'  is  on  the  continuation  of  the  line  Oo,  at  the  distance e  +  — f^O"^ O, or at

the  distance  —  above  0,  and  that  the  positive  values  of  z'  are  in  the  downward  direction
oO,  from  its  origin  situated  above  0.

X.  Suppl.  2.] A  DROP  OF  WATER  RESTING  ON  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY.  999

expression [10426,  or  10439^], will give, for the thickness of the [10450'^

G.^--H'.-^=D'g.{k  +  e)-{D-D').gn:

If  we  put  the  expressions  of  c  [10452^,  n]  equal  to  each  other,  we  shall  get

■.D'g.{Tc  +  e  +  n)-Dgn
=  D'g.s^Dg.{q+f) [10451Z],

which  is  the same  as  the equation (e) in  page  245  of  the Nouvelle Theorie,  fyc,  of
M.  Poisson.

The  equations  [10452&,  c,  d],  are  integrated  by  approximation,  in  M.  Poisson 's
Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  by  methods  which  are  substantially  the  same  as  those  which  are  used
by  La  Place  in  calculating  the  figure  of  a  large  drop  of  mercury  resting  upon  a  plane  surface
[10380 — 10445J.  It  is  not  therefore  absolutely  necessary  to  go  into  a  minute  detail  of  these
integrations,  and  the  determination  of  the  constant  quantities;  because  the  reader  can  easily
apply  the  methods  of  La  Place  to  these  objects,  in  case  the  dimensions  and  figure  of  a  drop,
in  any  experiment,  should  be  proposed  for  examination.  There  are,  however,  some  objects
which  require  particular  attention,  and  we  shall  therefore  point  out  the  general  methods  of
solution,  with  such  additional  remarks  as  may  be  thought  necessary  for  the  elucidation  of
the  subject.

We  have  seen,  in  [10450,  &ic.],  that  when  a  drop  of  mercury,  fig.  172,  page  971,  rests
on  a  glass  plane  DE,  the  curvature  of  the  surface  suddenly  varies  near  the  point  D,  so  that
the  tangent  changes  from  the  direction  ED,  to  another  which  is  inclined  to  it  by  the  angle
48°  [10450],  while  passing  over  a  distance  Dd  which  is  insensible,  but  greater  than  the
limits  to  which  the  corpuscular  action  is  sensible.  The  same  thing  occurs  on  the  surface  of
the  mercury  in  passing  over  the  space  A'AA^,  fig.  175,  page  994,  the  drop  of  water  acting
in  the  same  manner  as  a  wet  pane  of  glass  or  wet  tube;  so  that  the  angle  of  inclination  of
the  two  infinitely  small  arcs  A'a',  Aa^,  or  of  the  tangents  drawn  through  them,  may  be
represented  by  w  =  4S°.  In  like  manner  there  is  a  rapid  change  of  the  curvature  of  the
drop  in  passing  over  the  space  A^AA";  so  that  the  angle  of  inclination  of  the  two  infinitely
small  arcs  A'a',  A"a",  may  be  represented  by  w' ;  this  angle  being  the  same  as  that  which
would  be  observed  if  the  drop  were  placed  on  a  solid  horizontal  plane  of  mercury,  supposing
its  action  not  to  be  in  any  manner  affected  by  its  becoming  solid.  If  we  now  suppose  that
the  lines  A^a^,  A'a',  A" a",  form  with  the  horizon,  angles  which  are  represented  by
■ztf,  OT^,  cj',  respectively,  we  shall  evidently  have

t^>  =  w^  —  zi,  w'  =  'a'  —  w^;

and  from  [22,  34'],  Int.,  we  have

sin.tf  =  sin.('5J^  —  zs)  =  sm.-si^.cos.-a  —  cos.-5J^.sln.'5J  =  cos.'0.cos.i;y^.(tang.OT^  —  tang.w).
We  find  also,  in  like  manner  as  in  [10406&,  a],

A . dz^\-i  /, .  dz,^\-h  dz  ,„„„^_dz,

cos.

dz
tang.«  =  -.

tang.«,  =  — .

° > du

Dividing  the  last  expression  of  sin.w  [10453e]  by  cos.w.cos.w,,  and  then  substituting  the

[10452r"]

[10452*  ]
[10452t ]
[10452u]

[10452v ]
[10452w]

[10452jJ
[10452?/  ]

[10452Z ]

[10453a]

[104536]

[10453c]
[10453rf]

[10453e  ]
[10453/]

1000  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[10450""] drop 9, the following value,

[M6c.  Cel.

[1045%]
[10453A]

[10453i  ]

[1045ak]
[10453/ ]

[10453w]

[10453»]

[10453©  ]

values  [10453/],  we  get  [10453A].  In  the  same  manner,  we  may  find  [10453i],  or  more
simply  by  derivation,  by  changing  -a^  into  ts',  and  «  into  w^,  which  requires  that  we  should
change  z^  into  z%  and  z  into  z/,  consequently,  also,  w  into  w'  [10453a];

r  =  sm.t^ .  I  1 H r  1  .(14-  — ^  )  ;

du du  \ ~duy \ ~  duy  ^

T"  —  —=sm.w'.i  l  +  T-r . 14--rT)  ;
du du  V du^J \ ' du^J  '

and  it  is  evident,  from  [10451z],  that  we  may  substitute  in  these  equations  e?z  =  —  dz,
dz^=idz,  dz'=:  —  dz',  also  u  =  r  [104502;]. These  equations  will  serve  to  determine  two

of  the  constant  quantities  which  occur  in  [10450-r],  after  we  have  determined —  , — ' ,  — ,

du du du

by  means  of  the  integrals  of  the  equations  of  the  surfaces  [104526,  c,  d] ;  and  we  shall  now

make  some  remarks  relative  to  these  integrals.

IVIultiplying  the  equation  [104526]  by — dz.fl-{-^-^\~^,
it  may  vanish  when  u^co  and  z=zO,  we  get

rfz2

and  taking  the  integral  so  that

\/i+.^

1  —

J 0 «

rfu2

du

1/

1  +

rfz2
dlfi

as  is  easily  proved  by  taking  the  differentials,  and  making  some  slight  reductions.  In  this
equation  of  the  surface  GN'A,,  fig.  175,  page  994,  the  ordinate  u  is  never  less  than  AE
or  r  [10450z];  we  may  therefore  neglect  the  term  under  the  sign  /  [10453ot],  on  account
of  its  smallness,  and  then  we  shall  have

1

\/

1  +

dz3
rftl2

1  — -.
a9

Now,  squaring  and  reducing  this  equation,  we  obtain

(22  — a2).rfz

du.

Z^2«2  — z2'

When  2;=0,  M  becomes  infinite,  the  origin  oi  z  and  u  being  at  the  point  T,  and  the
positive  values  of  z  being  taken  in  the  direction  of  gravity  TO  [10452r].  As  z  increases,
u  decreases,  so  that  dz,  du,  must  have  contrary  signs ;  and  the  radical  in  the  denominator  of
[1045.3o]  must  therefore  be  considered  as  positive.  The  integral  of  this  equation  is  found  as
[10453o']  in  [10181m,  v\,  by  taking  the  constant  quantity  so  that  M=sr,  when  z=^q  or  z=/
[10451Z,  10450z];  hence  we  get

remarking that we have here changed the sign of the arbitrary constant factor
^2a2— 52  —  0^2  introduced  into  the  logarithmic  part  of  the  expression  [lOlSlu],  so  as  to

Surfae*!

[I0453p]

X.Suppl.2.] A  DROP  OF  WATER  RESTING  ON  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY. 1001

9  =  3'"S39664 [10439i],

[10451]

make  the  logarithm  vanish  when  z-=q  [10453p],  instead  of  making  it  vanish  when  z= — g',
as  in  [IOI8I5,  u]  ;  it  being  evident  that  this  does  not  alter  the  form  of  du  deduced  from [10453^3
[IO4535']  5  so  that  it  will  correspond to [10453o],  in the same manner as  y [lOlSlv]
corresponds  to  dy  [10183u].

If  we  put  M  =  — u,  r  =  — r,  and  g'  =  q,  in  [10453o],  and  then  change  the  signs  of  all
the  terms,  we  shall  get,  by  some  slight  reductions,  the  following  values  of  du,  and  of  its
integral  u,  r  being  the  value  of  u  when  « =  q ;

[10453?]

du  =

Z\/'Za^~~z^  '

y  ^ y  /2 ° (a^2  — /2a2_q2).r

which  will  be  of  use  hereafter.  If  we  wish  to  obtain  a  more  correct  value  of  the  integral  of
the  equation  [104526],  we  may  substitute  this  value  of  u  in  the  part  of  [10453/ra]  which  is
under  the  sign  f,  and  neglected  in  the  preceding  calculation ;  thus,  by  successive  operations,
we  may  obtain  corrected  expressions  of  u,  arranged  according  to  the  powers  of  r,  its  first
term  being  the  value  of  the  second  member  of  the  equation  [10453^].  This  term  is,
however,  sufficiently  accurate  for  practical  purposes,  and  it  is  the  same  as  that  marked  (d)  in
page  245  of  the  Nouvelh  Theorie,  &fc.,  of  M.  Poisson ;  representing  very  nearly  the
equation  of  the  surface  of  the  mercury  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  drop.

In  those  parts  of  the  surface  of  the  drop  which  are  but  httle  inclined  to  the  horizon,  we
may  reduce  the  differential  equations  [10452c,  d],  to  linear  forms,  as  in  [10382],  and  their
integrals  may  be  found  as  in  [10384],  or  rather  as  in  [10385m,  n].  For,  by  putting,  in
[10385w],  z  =  z^,  a^  —  a^,  &  =  >,  it  becomes  as  in  [10452c],  and  its  integral  [10385n]
gives  the  value  of  2f,  [10453tf>].  In  like  manner,  by  putting  z  =  z',  a2=a'2,  i  =  fA,  the
equation [10385ni]  changes  into  [10452<ZJ,  and  its  integral  [10385n] gives the  value  of

z'  [10453x],

„a  !i^.cos.p

'2

X  being  the  radius  of  curvature  of  the  drop  at  its  lowest  point  O,  and f*  the radius  of
curvature  at  the  upper  point  0,  as  in  [10452«,  fc].

If  we  use  the  approximate  value  of  the  integral  [10385p],  these  expressions  of  ^,,  z\
will  become  as  in  [10454a,  h\  which  can  be  used  when  m  is  supposed  to  be  considerably
greater  than  a^  or  a';

.\/5.c'«'";
y u

'x^2*t/2"

»'2

VOL. IV.

251

[104535']

[10453r ]
[10453r']

[10453* ]
[10453i]

[10453u  ]
[10453V ]

[10453m>]

[104531]
[10453^1

[10453Z  ]
[10454c]

[10454i ]

1002  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

[10451'] which  diflfers  but  little  from  the  experiments  [10447,  10448].

We  may  also  find  the  integrals  of  the  equations  [10452c,  d],  by  a  process  like  that  in

[10454c] [10404,  &,c.]  ;  or  in  the  following  manner. Multiplying  [10452c]  by —dz,.fl^~X^,

integrating  and  transposing  the  second  and  third  terms,  we  get  [10454e]. In  like  manner,

l-\-~] , integrating and transposing, we get
[10454jr]  J  the  integrals  being  supposed  to  vanish  when  m=0,

[10454/]  ^77^^-1+72-  (^"-^0

dzp

[10454^]

observing  that,  when w=0, we  have z^=0, z'=£ [10450a;,  y,  z], also — '  =  — '=0,

dzf  dzf

— = 7=0, because the tangents at the points o,  O, are  horizontal; and  if we

du  du

substitute  these  values  of  z^,  z',  in  the  expressions  of  z^,  z'  [10452/?,  q],  we  shall  get,  when

a  2  a'2

[10454fc] M  =  0, z^=— , z'^ — . If  the  arc  ON:=s be  very  small,  we  may  consider  it  as  a

circular  arc  whose  radius  is  X;  and  then  we  shall  have,  from  the  usual  rules  for  the
differentials  of  circular  arcs,  &ic.  [9328c,  d], dz^  :  ds  ::  u  :  X; and  as ds is,  in  this  case,

[10454t]  rf2  2 m2

very  nearly  equal  to  du,  we  shall  have  very  nearly  'T^  =  r^j  which  is  a  very  small
quantity  when  the  point  N  falls  near  the  point  O,  where  X  is  much  greater  than  u. In

^2*2 m2

like  manner,  —  =  —  is  a  very  small  quantity  when  the  point  n  falls  near  to  o. We  may

therefore  neglect  the  second  members  of  the  integrals  [10454e,y*],  when  u  is  very  small.
These  quantities  may  also  be  neglected  when  we  increase  the  values  of  u  so  as  to  correspond
to the approximate values of z^,  z' [10453i^, x], because these values produce in

[10454)k]

rf2  2 £f2'2

— ^,  -z-^,  terms  which  have  the  great  divisor  X2,  or  f*^. Finally,  as  we  approach  towards  the

borders  of  the  drop,  the  value  of  u  is  so  much  increased,  that  we  may  even  then  neglect  the
[104542  ] second  members  of  [10454e, /],  on  account  of  the  divisor  u;  so  that  in  all  cases  we  may
neglect  these  integral  expressions. If  we  also  neglect  the  terms  of  the  first  members  divided
by  X^  or  fA®,  we  shall  get,  by  some  slight  reductions,

"/^  3 -2  "'^  '2 •'a.

[10454.]  \ZtT^^  V77T^

or,  by  squaring  and  reducing,

X.  Suppl.2.] A  DROP  OF  WATER  RESTING  ON  A  DROP  OF  MERCURY. 1003

M.  Gay-Lussac  has  also  observed,  in  a  very  large  glass  vessel  whose  sides
were  vertical,  the  distance  from  the  point  of  contact  of  the  surface  of  the
mercury  with  the  sides,  to  the  highest  point  of  that  surface ;  and  he  found  it

to  be  l™'-,455. This  distance  is,  by  what  has  been  said,  equal  to  \/-.sin.|TO'

a.

[10450/''];  and  in  this  case  we  have  cj'  =  52°  [10442z];  hence  we  find  that

[10452]

[10453]

du  =

{ul-zl).dz,

du  =

[10454n]
[10454o]

observing  that  when  m,  z,  are  small,  du,  dz^,  have  the  same  signs;  and  the  same  remark  may-
be made  relative  to  du,  dz' ;  so  that  we  may  consider  the  radicals  as  positive  in  the
denominators  of  the  expressions  of  du  [10454n,  o].

The  differential  equations  [10454n,  o],  are  of  the  same  form  as  [10453^'],  and  their
integrals  may  be  derived  from  that  in  [10453r].  Thus,  if  we  change  u,  a,  r,  q  [10453y',  r],
into  w,  a  ,  r,/,  respectively,  the  expression  of  da  [10453^']  will  become  like  that  of  du
[10454n];  and  its  integral  u  [10453r]  will  become  as  in  [10454s],  which  represents  the
integral  of  [10454n].  In  like  manner,  by  changing  u,  a,  r,  q  [104535',  r],  into  m,  a',  /, /',
respectively,  the  expression  of  du  [10453|7']  ^^'^  become  like  that  of  du  [10454o],  and
the  value  of  u  [10453r]  will  become  as  in  [10454<],  which  represents  the  integral  [10454r  ]
of  [10454o] ;

[10454p]
[10454g]

V , J, -TV , ' ' \/2 ^(ay2  — \/2a,2_/2).z/

M  =  /  —  y/2a'2  _/'2 -f  ^2«'2 _ 2'2 -j_

V2«'2_2'2)./\

■\/2«'2-/'2).2

r  being  the  value  of  m  [10454s]  when  z^=f^,  and  I  the  value  of  u  [10454^]  when  z'=:f\
If  we  suppose  f,  to  correspond  to  the  point  A,  or  the  greatest  value  of  z^,  we  shall  have
z^=OE=f [10450z] ; substituting this in the value of z^ [10452jp], we get

z  =/-}-"  ==jC' ^^^  ^'^^  ^'"^  value  of  z^,  the  expression  of  u  [10454s]  becomes  M  =  r.

A

Again,  if  we  suppose  /'  to  correspond  to  the  point  C,  or  the  greatest  value  of  the  ordinate
u [10454^], we shall have x' =OD=f-{-q-^k  =  s  —  e [10450^;]; substituting this

«'2  a'2

in  the  value  of  z' [I0io2q],  we  get z'  =  -'{s-~e)-{-s-{- -=e-{-y=f.

When  accurate  experiments  on  the  figure  of  a  drop  of  water,  or  of  any  other  fluid,  resting
upon  a  surface  of  mercury,  shall  be  made,  we  may  compare  the  results  of  the  observations
with  the  integral  expressions  given  in  this  note,  and,  after  determining  the  constant  quantities
which  enter  into  the  integrals,  we  shall  have  the  formulas  which  give  the  figure  and  dimensions
of  the  drop,  and  the  figure  of  the  surface  of  mercury;  but  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  enter
into  any  discussion  relative  to  this  subject,  because  the  whole  calculation  is  similar  to  that
which  has  been  used  in  other  cases  of  capillary  attraction  treated  of  in  this  work^

[10454*  ]

Surfaces

[10454* ]

[10454u]

[10454t>  ]
[I0454tr]

[10454x]

[10454y]
[10454z]

1004

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10453']

[10454]

[10455]

[10455']

[10456]

this  distance  is  equal  to  l"''-,432,  which  differs  but  little  from  the  result  of
the  experiment.

To  compare  the  analysis  of  the  depression  of  mercury  in  very  large  tubes
with  the  result  of  observations,  we  have  selected  the  experiments  made  by
Mr.  Charles  Cavendish,  reported  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions  for  the
year  1776.  They  give,  in  English  inches,  this  depression  equal  to
0'"-,005[=0'"S1270],  in  a  glass  tube  whose  diameter  is  0'"-,6[=  15'"',24] ;
and  a  depression  of  0'"-,007  [=0'"'-,1778],  in  a  tube  whose  diameter  is
0'%5[=12'"S70]  ;  also  a  depression  of  0'"-,015  [=  0™-,3810],  in  a  tube  whose

diameter  is 0'"-,4[=  lO^jlG]. The  preceding  expression  of  — [10440],  by

substituting  z3'  =  52^  [10453],  and  reducing  the  results  into  English  inches,*
makes  the  depression  0,0038  in  the  first  tube ;  0,0069  in  the  second  tube ;
and  0,0126  in  the  third  tube ;  which  agree  with  the  experiments  as  well  as
can  be  expected  in  these  observations,  where  such  small  quantities  are
estimated.

[10456a]
[104566]

[10456c]

[10456^]
[10456e ]

[10456/-]
[1045%]

[10456/1]

[10456t  ]
[10456ft]

*  (4420)  An  English  inch  is  equal  to  25'^-,3918  [9678] ;  multiplying  this  by  the  diameters  y»^,
tV>  tV  [10455],  and  taking  half  the  corresponding  products,  we  shall  get  the  corresponding  values
of  the  radii  of  the  tube  in  millimetres,  7'^,62, 6™',35,  5'"'',03,  nearly.  Substituting  these  succes-
sively for  /,  in  [10440],  and  putting  to'=52^  [10455'],  -=13""'^-  [10449'],  we  obtain  the
corresponding  values  of  -  in  millimetres,  0"''-,0954,  0™-,1762,  0™-,3187,  which,  being  divided
by  25,3918,  give  the  values  of  -  in  English  inches,  namely,  0'",0038,  0'°-,0069,  0-'',0126,

respectively,  as  in  [10456].  These  differ  but  very  little  from  the  results  of  the  experiments  in
[10455],  namely, 0"",005,  0'"',007,  0'°',015,  respectively. JVI.  Poisson  computes  the  values

of  —, or 5 in his  notation,  and  finds,  in the  three  preceding  examples, (5  =  0™', 0945,

a  =  0™-,l747,  5  =  0"'-,3175,  in  page  290  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  ^c,  by  a  method  which
is  ver}'  nearly  the  same  as  that  in  [10440],  though  varying  a  little  in  its  form,  and  including
some  very  small  quantities  which  were  neglected  by  La  Place,  as  in  [104425,  t].  These
three  examples  include  the  three  greatest  diameters  in  the  table  of  ]\Ir.  Cavendish ;  his
two  smallest  diameters  are  0'", 10  =  2^,54,  and  0'"-,15  =  3™-,8I,  and  the  observed
depressions  i5=0  •,140  =  3™,556,  and  5  =  0"-,092  =  2™-,336,  respectively.  These
depressions  are  computed  by  M.  Poisson  by  the  rule  given  by  him  in  [10442r],  and  found  to  be
5=3'"S4712,  and  5=2™-,4199.  La  Place's  rule  [10442^]  gives  6=3^,4733,  5=2'^-,1008,
respectively;  which  agree  very  nearly  with  the  observations;  the  result  of  IVI.  Poisson's
calculation  for  the  larger  tube  being  rather  more  accurate  than  the  other,  on  account  of  his
carrying  on  the  series  to  terms  of  the  order  P  in  [10442r].  Similar  results  would  be  obtained
by  comparing  the  depressions  computed  by  the  formulas  [10440,  10442^^],  with  those  given  in
the  table  [104432;],  for  the  greatest  and  least  diameters.

X.  Suppl.2.]

GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.

1005

M.  Gaj-Lussac  found,  by  the  mean  of  five  experiments,  the  elevation  of  the
lowest  point  of  the  surface  of  alcohol,  in  a  glass  tube  vt^hose  diameter  was
lO^^SOS,  equal  to  O'^SSSSS.  The  temperature  was  16°  during  these
experiments,  and  the  specific  gravity  of  the  alcohol  'was  0,813467,  at  this
temperature.  The  lowest  point  of  the  same  fluid  rose,  at  the  same  temperature,
to  the  height  of*  9™'-,07850,  in  a  glass  tube  whose  diameter  was  l"''-,2944;
whence  we  deduce

?=12'"'-,0306.

The  formula  [10445]  gives  0"''',3374  for  the  elevation  of  the  alcohol  in  a  large
tube,  in  which,  by  experiment,  this  elevation  was  0'"'-,3835.  The  difference
0™'-,0461  is  within  the  limits  of  the  errors  of  the  experiment  and  of  the
formula,  which  is  only  an  approximation.

[10457]

[10458]

[10459J

[10460]
[10460']

GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.

From  what  has  been  said,  we  perceive  the  agreement  which  is  found  between
the  capillary  phenomena  and  the  results  of  the  law  of  attraction  of  the  particles
of  the  bodies,  decreasing  with  extreme  rapidity,  so  as  to  become  insensible  at
the  least  distances  perceptible  to  our  senses.  This  law  of  nature  is  the  source
of  chemical  affinities ;  like  gravity,  it  is  not  arrested  at  the  surfaces  of  bodies,
but  penetrates  them,  acting  beyond  the  point  of  contact,  hut  at  imperceptible
distances.  Upon  this  depends  the  influence  of  the  masses  in  chemical
phenomena,  or  the  capacity  for  saturation,  whose  effects  have  been  so  beautifully
developed  by  M.  Berthollet.  Thus  two  acids,  acting  upon  the  same  base,  are
divided  in  proportion  to  their  affinities  with  it ;  which  would  not  take  place,
if  this  affinity  acted  only  when  in  contact;  for  then  the  most  powerful acid

[10461]

*  (4421)  We  have  changed  the  value  7™'',07850,  given  in  the  original  work,  into
9™*,07850,  to  correct  a  supposed  typographical  mistake,  and  to  make  the  observation  agree
with  the  calculated  result  in  [10459] ;  and  we  may  remark  that  this  con-ected  value  agrees
very  nearly  with  an  observation  of  M.  Gay-Lussac  given  by  M.  Poisson,  in  page  225  of  his

2

Nouvelle Theorie,  ^c. To  find  - ,  from  the  observation  [10458],  we  must  proceed  as  in

[10296A],  and add one  sixth part of  the diameter  of the  tube  l'^-,2944 [10458], or

0'°S2159 to  the  height 9'"S0785, and  then  multiply  the  sum  9'^-,2944 by  the  diameter

2
r"-,2964;  the  product  12'"S0306  gives  the  value  of  -  ,  as  in  [10459]. Using  this  value  of

2  1

-, and that  of 2Z=10"S508 [10457], we find  that the expression  of  — [10445],

becomes  0™-,3374,  as  in  [10460].
VOL.  IV.  252

[10460a]

[104606]
[10460c]
[10460d]

[10460c  ]

[10461']

1006  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  C61.

would  retain  the  whole  base.  The  figure  of  the  elementary  particles,  the  heat,
and  other  causes,  being  combined  with  this  law,  modify  the  effects  of  it.  The
discussion  of  these  causes,  and  of  the  circumstances  which  develop  them,  is  the
most  delicate  part  of  chemistry,  and  constitutes  the  philosophy  of  that  science,
making  known  to  us,  as  much  as  possible,  the  intimate  nature  of  the  bodies,  the
law  of  the  attractions  of  their  particles,  and  that  of  the  foreign  attractions  which
operate  upon  them.

The  particles  of  a  solid  body  have  that  position  in  which  their  resistance  to  a
change  of  situation  is  the  greatest  possible.  Each  particle,  when  it  is  removed
from  that  situation  an  infinitely  small  space,  tends  to  return  to  it  by  means  of
the  forces  which  act  upon  it.  It  is  this  which  constitutes  the  elasticity  with
which  we  may  suppose  all  bodies  to  be  endowed,  when  the  figure  of  the  bodies
is  but  very  little  changed.  But  when  the  relative  situations  of  the  particles
suffer  considerable  changes,  these  particles  will  form  new  states  of  stable
equilibrium,  as  happens  with  hardened  metals,  and  generally  with  bodies  which,
by  their  softness,  are  susceptible  of  retaining  all  the  forms  which  may  be  given
to  them  by  pressure.  The  hardness  of  bodies,  and  their  viscosity,  appear  to  me
to  be  only  the  resistance  of  the  particles  to  these  changes  in  the  state  of
equilibrium. The  expansive  force  of  heat  being  opposed  to  the  attractive  force

[10462]  of  the  particles,  it  decreases  little  by  little  their  tenacity  or  mutual  adhesion
by  successive  increments;  and  when  the  particles  of  a  body  oppose  only  a
very  slight  resistance  to  a  change  of  relative  situation,  within  its  surface,  it
becomes  a  liquid.  But  its  viscosity,  although  very  much  weakened,  still  exists,
until,  by  an  increase  of  temperature,  it  becomes  nothing,  or  insensible. Then

[10463]  each  particle,  in  all  positions,  suffers  the  same  attractive  force  and  the  same
repulsive  force  of  heat;  it  yields  to  the  slightest  pressure,  and  the  liquid  enjoys
a  perfect  fluidity.  We  may  with  probability  conjecture  that  this  takes  place
with  those  liquids  which,  like  alcohol,  have  a  temperature  far  above  that  in
which  they  begin  to  congeal. This  influence  of  the  figure  of  the  particles  is

[10464]  very  sensible  in  the  phenomena  of  congelation  and  crystallization,  which
become  much  more  rapid  by  immersing  in  the  liquid  a  piece  of  ice,  or  a  crystal
formed  from  the  same  liquid;  the  particles  of  the  surface  of  this  solid,  are
presented  to  the  liquid  particles  which  touch  them,  in  the  situation  the  most
favorable  to  their  union  with  them. We  can  easily  conceive  that  the  influence

[10465]  of  the  figure,  when  the  distance  increases,  must  decrease  much  more  rapidly
than  the  attraction  itself.  It  is  so  with  the  astronomical  phenomena  depending
upon  the  figure  of  the  planets,  as  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes ;  for  this
influence  decreases  as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  whilst  the  attraction  decreases
only  in  the  ratio  of  the  square  of  the  distance.

X.  Suppl.  2.]

GENERAL  OBSER STATIONS.

1007

Therefore  it  appears  that  the  state  of  solidity  depends  upon  the  attraction
of  the  particles,  combined  with  their  figure ;  so  that  an  acid,  although  it  may
exert  upon  a  base  a  less  attraction  at  a  distance  than  upon  another  base,  yet
it  will  combine  and  will  crystallize  in  preference  with  the  former,  if  the  figure
of  its  particles  is  such  as  to  render  its  contact  with  that  base  more  intimate.
The  influence  of  the  figure,  although  it  may  continue  sensible  in  viscous  fluids,
is  nothing  in  those  which  enjoy  a  perfect  fluidity.  Lastly,  every  thing  leads  us
to  believe  that,  in  a  gaseous  state,  not  only  the  influence  of  the  figure  of  the
particles,  but  also  that  of  their  attractive  forces,  is  insensible  in  comparison  with
the  repulsive  force  of  heat.  These  particles  appear  to  be  only  an  obstacle  to
the  expansion  of  that  force ;  for  we  may,  without  changing  the  tension  of  any
given  magnitude  of  gas,  substitute  for  several  of  the  particles  disseminated
through  this  mass,  a  like  number  of  particles  of  another  gas.  This  is  the
reason  why  several  gases  placed  in  contact  are  finally  mixed  together  in  a
uniform  manner;  for  it  is  only  in  this  case  that  they  are  in  a  stable  state
of  equilibrium.  If  one  of  these  gases  is  vapor,  the  equilibrium  is  not  stable
except  when  the  vapor  is  equal  or  less  in  quantity  than  that  of  the  same  vapor
which  would  be  diffused  at  the  same  temperature  in  a  void  space  equal  to  that
occupied  by  the  mixture.  If  the  vapor  is  in  greater  quantity,  the  excess  must,
for  the  stability  of  the  equilibrium,  be  condensed  under  a  liquid  form.*

[10466]

[10467]

[10468]

[10469]

*  (4422)  We  may,  in  this  connexion,  mention  the  subject  of  a  newly-discovered  capillary
phenomenon,  first  observed  by  M.  Dutrochet,  and  named  endosmose,  which  is  treated  of  by
IVI.  Poisson  in  page  296,  he,  of  his  Nouvelle  Theorie,  fyc,  and  explained  in  nearly  the
following  manner.

When  two  different  liquids  A  and  A'  are  separated  by  a  membrane  BCC'B',  which,  for
greater  simplicity,  we  shall  suppose  to  be  limited  by  the  horizontal  surfaces  BC,  B'C,  fig.  176,
one  of  these  liquids,  as,  for  example,  the  lower  one  A,  will
penetrate  the  membrane,  and,  if  it  be  very  thin,  will  pass
through  it,  and  mix  with  the  upper  liquid  A',  till  it  is
raised  up  considerably  above  its  natural  level,  and  this  is
what  constitutes  the  phenomenon  of  endosmose.  M.
Dutrochet  found  that  it  occurs  when  certain  inorganic
substances  are  used  instead  of  a  membrane,  as  for
example  when  a  thin  lamina  of  slate  is  employed.

In  considering  the  nature  of  this  phenomenon,  we  shall
suppose  a  canal  00',  of  a  very  small  diameter,  to  pass
through the  whole  thickness  of  the membrane, and  we ^
shall suppose at  first that neither  of the liquids  has
penetrated  into  it. Then,  if  the  two  liquids  are  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  rise  up  in  a  tube  of

[10469a]
[104696]

[10469c  ]
[10469rf]

[10469e  j

1008  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [M^c.  Cel.

[10469']  The  consideration  of  the  stability  of  the  equilibrium  of  a  system  of  particles

[10469/
[10469g-

[10469A

[10469*

[10469;k
[10469/

[10469m
[10469n

[10469o
[10469p

[10469?
[10469/-

[10469a

[10469f

[10469u
[10469V

the  same  matter  as  this  canal,  they  will  not  penetrate  into  the  interior  of  the  canal,  but  will  form
the  convex  surfaces  DEF,  D'E'F',  at  the  two  extremities,  like  mercury  at  the  side  of  a
portable  barometer,  in  which  a  very  small  capillary  aperture  has  been  made.  If,  on  the
contrary,  the  two  liquids  are  susceptible  of  wetting  the  membrane,  or  of  rising  in  a  tube  of  the
same  matter  as  this  membrane,  they  will  penetrate  into  the  interior  of  the  canal  00'.  At  the
beginning,  both  surfaces  will  be  concave,  as  GHI,  G'HT;  but  when  they  meet  each  other,
they  will  have  a  common  surface  KLM,  so  that  one  of  them  will  be  more  or  less  concave,
and  the  other  convex.  Then  the  motion  will  continue  from  O  towards  O',  if  the  surface  of
the  fluid  H  be  concave,  as  is  the  case  in  the  present  figure;  but  from  O'  towards  O,  if  the
surface  of  the  fluid  A'  be  concave ;  so  that  in  the  first  case,  for  example,  some  of  the  fluid  jfi
will  pass  wholly  through  the  membrane,  and  begin  to  mingle  with  the  fluid  A',  and  thus
produce  a  mixed  fluid  whose  density  will  depend  on  the  portions  of  the  two  liquids  of  which  it
is  composed ;  and  with  this  change  in  the  density,  there  very  naturally  follows  a  corresponding
change  in  the  capillary  action  between  the  mixed  fluid  and  the  membrane.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  manifest  that,  if  the  membrane  is  traversed  by  an  extremely
great  number  of  canals  similar  to  00',  we  may  extend  to  all  of  them  the  remarks  we  have
applied  to  one,  and  the  liquid  A  will  ascend  in  all  the  canals  which  satisfy  the  conditions
mentioned  in  [10469A:].  Although  the  membrane  is  supposed  to  be  homogeneous,  it  will  not,
however,  be  impossible  that,  on  account  of  the  different  disposition  of  the  particles  along  the
different  canals,  or  from  some  other  cause,  there  may  be  a  disposition  to  descend  along  some
of  the  canals,  instead  of  ascending  as  is  supposed  in  [10469i,  Sic]  ;  then  there  will  be
simultaneously,  through  these  canals,  a  chief  motion  of  the  fluid  A  towards  A',  and  a  much  less
motion  of  the  fluid  A'  towards  A,  as  appears  to  be  indicated  by  experiments.  From  the  law
of  the  ascent  of  fluids  in  capillary  tubes  [9361,  Sic],  it  will  follow,  that,  when  other
circumstances  are  alike,  the  difference  of  the  level  of  the  mixed  fluid  on  both  sides  of  the
membrane,  will  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  diameters  of  these  canals ;  so  that  the  intensity
of  the  phenomenon  will  decrease  with  the  increased  diameter  of  these  canals,  and  the
endosmose  will  be  insensible  when  the  tissue  of  the  membrane  becomes  quite  open.  The
principal  and  essential  condition  of  the  phenomenon  is  the  difference  of  the  two  liquids  ;  it  will
never  be  produced  if  they  are  both  of  the  same  nature,  or  have  the  same  properties  relative  to
capillary  action.  In  order  that  the  membrane  may  not  be  unfit  for  the  purpose  of  the
production  of  the  phenomenon  of  endosmose,  it  is  necessary  that  its  contexture  should  be
such  that  it  can  be  traversed  by  very  slender  canals  through  its  whole  thickness,  which  is
most  commonly  the  case  with  any  organic  membrane.  On  the  other  hand,  the  liquids  suffer
a  considerable  friction  along  the  sides  of  these  canals,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  their
diameters ;  this  friction  may  balance  the  capillary  action,  and  prevent  the  two  liquids  fixjm
penetrating  sufficiently  deep  into  the  membrane  to  meet  each  other  and  form  a  common
surface,  so  as  to  change  the  concavity  of  the  surface  of  one  of  them  into  a  convexity,  as  in
[10469A] ;  on  this  account,  a  too  great  thickness  of  the  membrane  may  be  an  obstacle  to  the
production  of  endosmose.

X.  Suppl.2.]  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.  1009

reacting  upon  each  other,  is  very  useful  in  the  explanation  of  many  phenomena.
In  like  manner  as  in  a  system  of  solid  and  fluid  bodies,  affected  by  gra\dty,  the [10470]
principles  of  mechanics  make  known  several  states  of  stable  equilibrium ;  and
chemistry  affords,  by  a  combination  of  the  same  principles,  several  permanent
states of  equilibrium. Sometimes two  principles unite together,  and the
particles  formed  by  their  union  unite  to  those  of  a  third  principle. Such,  in  all
probability,  is  the  combination  of  the  constituent  principles  of  an  acid  with  a [10471]
base. In other  cases,  the  principles  of  a  substance,  without being united
together,  as  they  are  in  the  substance  itself,  are  united  to  other  principles,  and
form  with  them  some  triple  or  quadruple  combination ;  so  that  this  substance,
extracted by  a chemical process,  is  then  a  product  of  this  operation. The
component  particles  may  also  be  united  by  different  faces,  and  thus  produce [10472]
some  crystals,  differing  in  form,  hardness,  specific  gravity,  and  in  their  action
upon  light. Lastly,  the  condition  of  a  stable  equilibrium  appears  to  me  to  be
what  determines  the  fixed  proportions  according  to  which  different  principles
are  combined  in  a  great  number  of  circumstances. All  these  phenomena  depend
upon the  form  of  the  elementary  particles,  upon  the  laws  of  their  attractive [10473]
force,  upon the  repulsive  force  of  heat,  and  perhaps  upon other  forces  yet
unknown. Our  ignorance  of  these  data,  and  their  extreme  complication,  do
not  permit  us  to  reduce  the  results  to  mathematical  analysis. To  compensate
for  this,  we  can  compare  together  those  facts  which  have  been  well  ascertained,
and deduce from their comparison certain general relations, which, by
connecting together  a  great number  of  phenomena,  form the basis of the [10474]
chemical theories, whose applications to the  arts are thus  rendered  more
extensive  and  perfect.

At  the  surface  of  a  fluid,  the  attraction  of  the  particles,  modified  by  the
curvature  of  the  surface  and  of  the  sides  of  the vessel  which contains it,
produces  the  capillary  attraction. Therefore  these  phenomena,  and  all  those
which  chemistry  presents,  correspond  to  one  and  the  same  law,  of  which  now [10475]
there can  be no doubt. Some philosophers have attributed the capillary
phenomena to the adhesion  of  the  fluid  particles,  either to  each other,  or
to  the  sides  of  the  vessels  which  contain  them ;  but  this  cause  is  not  sufficient
to  produce  the  effect. For,  if  we  suppose  the  surface  of  water,  contained  in  a
glass  tube,  to  be  horizontal,  and  upon  a  level  with  that  of  the  water  in  the [10476]
vessel  into  which  the  tube  is  dipped  by  its  lower  end ;  the  tenacity  of  the  fluid,
and  its  adhesion  to  the  tube,  would  not  curve  this  surface  and  render  it  concave.
To  produce  that,  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  there  is  an  attraction  in  the [10477]
upper  part  of  the  tube,  which  is  not  immediately  in  contact  with  the  fluid.

VOL.  IV.  253

1010  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

Besides,  the  surface  of  the  fluid  contained  in  the  tube,  if  it  were  concave,  would
be  drawn  vertically  downwards  by  the  vertical  columns  of  the  fluid  adhering  to

[10478]  it;  and  when  the  surface  is  convex,  as  is  the  case  with  mercury  in  a  glass  tube,
or  with  water  in  a  tube  having  a  convex  drop  at  its  lowest  end  [10016],  this
convex  surface  will  be  pressed  perpendicularly  in  each  of  its  points  by  the
weight  of  the  superior  columns  of  the  fluid.  This  surface  would  not,  therefore,
be  the  same  in  these  two  cases,  and  the  capillary  phenomena  would  not  follow
the  same  laws;  which  is  contrary  to  experience. We  must,  therefore,  admit

[10479]  that  the  phenomena  do  not  depend  wholly  upon  the  action  at  the  point
of  contact,  but  upon  an  attraction  which  extends  beyond  it;  decreasing  with
extreme  rapidity.

The viscosity  of fluids  is  so  far from being the cause of  the capillary
phenomena,  that  it  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  cause  of  disturbance. The  phenomena

[10480]  do  not  rigorously  conform  to  the  theory,  except  when  the  fluid  enjoys  a  perfect
mobility;  for  the  forces  upon  which  the  phenomena  depend  are  so  small,  that
the  slightest  obstacle  may  modify  the  effects  of  them  in  a  sensible  manner.  It
is  to  the  tenacity  of  water  that  we  must  attribute  the  considerable  differences
which  have  been  observed  by  philosophers,  in  the  elevations  of  this  fluid  in
glass  capillary  tubes  of  the  same  diameter. The  second  manner  in  which  we

[10481]  have  considered  the  capillary  action,  shows  us  that  the  interior  surface  of  a
tube  raises  at  first  a  lamina  of  water ;  this  raises  a  second,  which  draws  up  a
third  ;  and  so  on  towards  the  axes  of  the  tube.  The  existence  of  these  laminae
may  be  rendered  sensible,  by  means  of  some  grains  of  dust  adhering  to  the

[10482]  sides  of  the  glass;  we  see  these  little  bodies  agitated  by  the  impulsion  of  these
laminae,  before  the  surface  of  the  liquor  has  risen  up  to  them.  The  attraction
of  these  laminae  upon  each  other  is  in  an  oblique  direction  to  the  surface  of  the
sides,  and  tends  to  make  the  particles  of  the  second  lamina  penetrate  within
the  first ;  which  cannot  be  done  without  raising  it  up  or  breaking  it. When

[10483]  the  tube  is  but  very  little  moistened,  this  first  lamina,  which  is  then  very  small,
resists  these  efforts,  by  its  adhesion  to  the  glass  and  the  viscosity  of  its  particles.
And,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  this  is  the  reason  why  Newton  and  M.  Haiiy  have
found  the  ascent  of  water  in  a  glass  tube  of  a  millimetre  in  diameter  to  be  only

[10484]  about  thirteen  millimetres  [9670],  whilst,  in  a  similar,  well-moistened  tube,  the
water  has  risen  to  the  height  of  above  thirty  millimetres  [10322].

At  the  top  of  a  glass  tube,  the  first  laminae  of  water  cannot  ascend  any  higher
without  altering  the  figure  of  their  upper  surface ;  and  at  the  moment  when  this

[10485]  surface  becomes  convex,  it  tends  to  depress  the  fluid  below  it,  and  thus  presents
an  obstacle  to  its  ascent. This  cause,  together  with  the  viscosity  of  the  fluid,

X.  Suppl.  2.]

GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.

1011

[10486]

[10487]

and  its  adhesion  to  the  glass,  accounts  for  the  small  resistance  which  the
water  meets  in  its  elevation,  when  it  comes  near  the  extremity  of  the  tube  ;
a  resistance  which  ought  to  be  nothing,  and  is  so  in  fact,  in  fluids  which,  like
alcohol,  have  a  perfect  mobility.

The  friction  of  the  fluid  against  the  surface  of  the  sides,  and  the  adhesion
of  the  air  at  the  surface  of  the  bodies,  are  also  causes  of  anomaly  in  capillarj'^
attractions.  It  is  necessary  to  notice  them  in  the  comparison  of  any  experiment
with  the  theory,  and  the  agreement  will  be  found  more  complete  as  these
causes  have  less  influence.

It  is  almost  impossible  to  determine,  by  experiment,  the  iiitensity  of  the
attractive  force  of  the  particles  of  bodies ;  we  only  know  that  it  is  incomparably  [10488]
greater  than  the  capillary  action.  We  have  seen  already,  that  water  supports
itself  above  the  level  in  the  axis  of  a  capillary  tube,  by  the  difference  of  the
actions  of  the  fluid  upon  its  own  particles,  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid  in  the  [10488']
vessel  in  which  the  tube  is  dipped,  and  at  the  surface  of  the  fluid  within  the
tube.  This  difference  is  the  action  of  the  liquid  meniscus  cut  off"  by  a
horizontal  plane  drawn  through  the  lowest  point  of  this  last  surface ;  and  this
action  is  measured  by  the  height  of  the  elevated  column.  To  obtain  the  action
of  the  whole  mass  of  the  fluid,  we  shall  suppose,  in  an  indefinite  mass  of
stagnant  water,  an  infinitely  narrow  vertical  canal  to  be  placed,  having  its  sides  [10489]
infinitely  thin,  so  as  not  to  prevent  the  action  of  the  particles  without  the  canal
upon  the  column  of  water  contained  within  it;  and  we  shall  determine  the
pressure  of  this  column  upon  a  base  perpendicular  to  the  sides  of  the  canal,
and  placed  at  a  sensible  distance  below  the  surface  of  the  fluid ;  this  base  being
taken  for  unity.  It  is  easy  to  show  that,  if  we  have  several  similar  canals,  of  the
same  width,  but  of  different  lengths,  in  each  of  which  the  water  may  be  urged  [10490]
by  different  forces,  varying  according  to  any  laws  whatever,  the  pressures  of
this  fluid  upon  the  bases  of  the  canals,  will  be  to  each  other  as  the  squares  of  the
velocities  acquired  by  bodies  setting  out  from  a  state  of  rest,  and  moving  in  a
vacuum  through  the  whole  length  of  these  canals,  supposing  that  they  are  acted
upon  at  each  point  by  the  same  forces  as  those  which  act  upon  the  corresponding
particles  of  ivater,  included  in  the  canal* If  the  action  of  water  upon its

[10491]

*  (4423) The  calculations  we  have  made  in  [8158a—;?]  may  be  used  in  illustrating  the
remarks  of  the  author  on  this  subject,  by  varying  a  little  his  hypothesis,  and  supposing  the
infinitely narrow  canal  [10489]  to  be  external relative to  the attracting  fluid,  instead  of [10491a]
internal In  this  case,  by  referring  to  fig.'107,  page  448,  we  may  suppose  that  the  upper  part
of  the  attracting  fluid  is  limited  by  the  horizontal  surface  AE,  and  that  its  lowest  surface  BD [104916]

1012

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATl'RACTION.

[M6c.  Gel.

[10491']

[10492]

own  particles  be  equal  to  its  action  upon  light,  it  would  follow,  from  [8174,  &c.],
that  the  square  of  the  velocity  acquired  in  the  canal  of  which  we  have  spoken,
would  be  equal  to*  2^,  the  density  of  ivater  being  taken  for  unity.  In  a
canal  whose  height  is  5,  and  in  which  the  constant  force  is  equal  to  gravity,
the  square  of  the  acquired  velocity  is  ^5,  g  being  the  force  of  gravity,  or
twice  the  space  which  gravity  causes  the  body  to  describe  in  the  first  unit  of

is  at  a  great distance  from AB. The attracted canal  is represented by TD, drawn

[10491c  ] perpendicular  to  the  surface  AE,  and  continued  upwards  far  beyond  the  limits  of  the  capillary

attraction  of  the  fluid  AEDB. Then,  using  the  same  notation  as  in  [8158 — 8162"j,  namely,

[10491rf] TD  =  s'  [8159],  and  p  equal  to  the  density  of  the  fluid,  supposing  it  to  be  constant  [8158AJ,

[10491e] we  shall  have p.n^(5')  [8158A],  for  the  attraction  of  the  fluid  AEDB  upon  a  mass  of  the

[10491/] fluid  represented  by  unity,  situated  at  D. IVIultiplying  this  by  ds',  we  get  p.ds'.Jl^(s'),  for

the  attraction  of  the  mass  AEDB  upon  the  portion  of  the  canal  ds'. Integrating  this  from

^'^0  to  s'=  00,  we  get  the  whole  action  or  pressure  p  at  the  base  T  of  the  canal ;  so  that

we  shall  have  p  =  p.f^ds',JT^(s')j and  if  we  use  the  abridged  symbol K=^f^ds'.Tl^(s')

[8162],  we  shall  have
[1049U]  P  =  Kp',

and  if  we  put  p=l,  as  in  [10491'],  it  becomes  p=K,  agreeing  with the  calculation in

[9254],  where  the  radius  b  of  the  external  surface  of  the  fluid  AE  Is  infinite,  as  in  the  case
[10491i]  treated  of  in  fig.  107,  page  448.  We  have,  in  [8162',  8162"],  n  for  the  velocity  of  a
[10491jfc] ray  of  light  when  at  a  sensible  distance  from  the  attracting  mass  AEDB,  and  n  for  its

velocity  at  any  point  D  after  the  attraction  has  had  a  sensible  operation ;  then  we  have

generally,  as  in  [8164^],
[10491Z  ]  n2  —  n^ = 2^p  —  2/^'p .  ds\  Tl,  (s ') .

At  the  point  T  of  the  surface  of  the  fluid  where  s'  =  0,  the  integral  part  of  the  expression
[10491m] [10491ZJ  vanishes;  and  if  we  suppose  n  to  be  the  velocity  of  the  light  at  that  point  T,  we

shall  have

[10491n]  n^  —  n^  =  2Kp,

or,  by  substituting  [1049 1  A],

[10491o]  n^  —  n^  —  ^p.

[10491p] If  we  suppose  the  initial  velocity  of  the  ray  to  be  nothing,  or  n  =  0,  the  expression  [10491o]

will  become  '

[10491g]  n2  =  2p;

[10491r]  and,  in  this  case,  the  pressure  p  will  be  as  the  square  of  the  acquired  velocity  n;  as  in
[10491].

ri0492  1  *  (4424)  Putting  p  =  l,  as  in  [10491'],  we  find  that  the  increment  of  the  square  of  the
velocity  of  the  ray 2Kp  [8174]  becomes  2K,  as  in  [10491'J. IMoreover  we  have,  as  in

[104926]  [67c],  2^*  for  the  square  of  the  velocity  acquired  by  falling  from  rest,  by  the  force  of  gravity,
through  the  space  «;  as  in  [10492J.

X.  Suppl.2.]

GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.

1013

time,  which  we  shall  suppose  to  be  a  decimal  second.  The  pressure  of  the
columns  of  water  upon  the  bases  of  the  two  canals  will  therefore  be  to  each
other  as  ^K  is  to  2gs ;  therefore,  if  they  are  equal,  we  shall  have

K

s  =  —.
g

In  the  present  hypothesis,  this  value  of  5  represents  the  height  of  a  second

canal,  in  which  the  water  is  supposed  to  be  acted  upon  only  by  gravity,  and

always  with  the  same  force  as  it  has  at  the  surface of  the earth,  so  as  to

produce  a  pressure  of  this  fluid  on the  base  of  this  second  canal,  which  is

equal  to  the  whole  action  of  the  indefinite  mass  of  water upon  the  water  in

the  first  canal.

We  have,  by  means  of  the  formula  [8192],*

n

where  n  is  the  space  described  by  light  in  a  unit  of  time  [8162'],  or  in  one

second  [10493],  and  R  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  sine  of  incidence  to  the  sine

of  refraction,  in the passage of  a  luminous ray  from  vacuum into  water;

therefore  we  shall  have

(Jg2  — i).na

Using  the  most  exact  values  of  the  sun's  parallax  and  the  velocity  of  light,  we
find that  s  exceeds ten  thousand^ times  the  sun's  distance  from  the  earth.

[10493]
[10494]

[10495]

[10496]
[10497]

[10498]
[10498']

*  (4425) Putting  p=l  [10492a],  in  [8192],  and  changing  i  [8191']  into  R  [10497],  in
order  to  conform  to  the  present  notation,  we  get  —  =jR2  —  1,  as  in  [10496] ; which  gives

K.

(JJ2— l).n2

n2

; hence  s  [10494]  beconnes  as  in  [10498].

[10495a]

t  (4426) We  have,in  [8523—8524],  R  =  m,  or  R==^  nearly;  hence  R'—l^l',

„2  [10496a]
and,  by  substitution  in  [10493],  we  get  s  =  /^.-. Now,  by  taking  a  sexagesimal  second  for

the  unit  of  time,  and  using  English  measures,  we  have  ^ = 32  feet  =xf5  mile  nearly; hence  [104966]

5  =  ^7^X  165n2  =  32n2  nearly  ; and  as  the  velocity  of  light  per  second  is  n^l95000  miles,  [10496c  ]

it  becomes 5  =  32.(195000)^=12.10"  miles  nearly ; and  as  the  sun's  distance  from  the  [10496rf]

earth  is 95.10^  miles, the  value  of*,  expressed in parts  of  the  sun's  distance,  will  be  [10496c]

j=—— =12000  nearly,  which  exceeds  10000,  as  is  observed  in  [10498']. Therefore,  if  we  [10496/"]
95.106 •"

VOL. IV.

254

1014

THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.

[Mec.  Cel.

[10499]
[10500]

[10501]

[10502]
[10502']
[10503]

[10504]
[10505]

Such  a  prodigious  value  of  the  action  of  water  upon  its  own  particles,  cannot
be  admitted  with  any  probability;  therefore  it  appears  that  this  action  is  much
less  than  the  action  of  water  upon  light,  but  it  is  extremely  great  relative  to  the
capillary  action,  and  from  this  arises  a  very  great  compression  in  the  strata  ol
liquids.  For  if,  within  an  indefinite  mass  of  stagnant  water,  we  suppose  an
infinitely  narrow  canal  to  be  placed,  whose  sides  are  infinitely  thin,  and  whose
ends  terminate  at  the  surface  of  the  water;  the  fluid  strata  of  the  canal,  placed
at  a  sensible  distance  below  that  surface,  will  suffer  by  the  action  of  the  water
near  one  of  its  extremities  a  pressure  ^[9259,  9262],  which  will  be  balanced
by  an  equal  and  opposite  pressure,  produced  by  the  action  of  the  water  towards
the  other  extremity;  each  stratum  of  the  comprised  liquid  is  therefore
compressed  by  these  two  opposite  forces.  At  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  this
pressure  is  evidently  nothing ;  it  increases  with  extreme  rapidity  from  this  surface,
and  becomes  constant  at  the  least  sensible  distance  below  it.

These  great  variations  in  the  compression  may  sensibly  vary  the  densities  of
the  strata  of  a  fluid  very  near  to  its  surface ;  and  in  the  mixture  of  two  fluids,
as  alcohol  and  water,  they  may  produce  variations  not  only  in  the  densities  of  the
fluid  strata  extremely  near  to  the  surface,  but  also  in  the  proportion  of  the  two
fluids,  included  by  these  strata  and  the  fluid  lamina  adhering  to  the  sides  of  the
tube.  These  variations  have  no  influence  upon  the  refraction  which,  when  the
luminous  ray  has  arrived  at  a  sensible  distance  below  the  surface,  is  the  same
as  if  the  nature  and  density  of  the  liquid  did  not  suffer  any  change
[8231,  8235] ;  but  they  can  have  upon  the  capillary  phenomena  a  very  sensible
influence,  which  seems  to  be  indicated  by  several  experiments  of  M.  Gay-Lussac,

admit  the  Newtonian  theory  of  the  emission  of  the  particles  of  light,  it  will  follow,  as  in

[10499],  that  the  action  of  water  upon  its  own  particles  is  much  less  than  its action  upon

[10496g'] light;  but  we  cannot  make  this  inference  if  we  adopt  the  wave  theory  [8137e,  &c.]. Upon

[10496/1]

[10496i ]

[10496*]

H

the  same  principles,  we  may  find  the  ratio  of  the  capillary  action  -7-  to  the  corpuscular  action

1 H

K. This  ratio  is  expressed  by  e  in  [9253^] ;  so  that  we  have  c  =  — .-7-  J  and,  by  substituting

K==:sg  [10494],  it  becomes 6  =  -.-^;  or,  since  g'  =  -^ [9354],  we finally  get c  =  -, q

being,  as  In  [9353],  the  elevation  of  water  in  a  capillary  tube  whose  radius  is  b,  which  is  only
a  few  millimetres,  and  s  being  the  immense  distance  spoken  of  in  [10498'];  so  that,  upon  these
principles,  e  may  be  considered  as  an  excessively  small  quantity,  as  we  have  already  stated  in
[9253^].

X.  Suppl.  2.]

GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.

1015

upon the elevation of  different mixtures  of  alcohol  and  water in capillary
tubes.

A  lamina  of  insulated  water,  whose  thickness  is  less  than  the  radius  of  the
sensible  sphere  of  activity  of  the  particles,  suffers,  then,  a  much  less  compression  than
a  similar  lamina  placed  within  a  considerable  mass  of  that  fluid;  it  is  natural  from
thence  to  conclude  that  its  density  is  much  less  than  the  density  of  that  mass.  Is
it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  this  is  the  case  with  the  aqueous  envelop  of
vesicular  vapor,  which  by  this  means  becomes  lighter,  and  in  an  intermediate  state
between  that  of  liquid  and  vapor  f

We  have  not  noticed,  in  this  theory,  either  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  or
the  repulsive  force  of  heat.  The  consideration  of  these  forces  is  unnecessary,
because  they  are  the  same  upon  the  w^hole  surface  of  the  fluid,^  and  they  are
independent  of  its  curvature.  Therefore  heat  has  no  influence  upon  capillary
phenomena,  except  by  decreasing  the  density  of  fluids ;  and  experience  shows
that,  in  fluids  having  a  perfect  mobility,  the  variations  of  these  phenomena,
produced  by  the  increment  of  temperature,  are  exactly  such  as  are  given  by
the  theory.

The  effects  of  the  capillary  action  being  reduced  to  a  mathematical  theory,
there  is  only  wanting,  in  this  interesting  branch  of  physical  science,  a  series  of
very  accurate  experiments,  by  means  of  which  we  may  compare  the  results  of
the  theory  with  nature.  The  necessity  of  such  experiments  is  felt  in  proportion
as  physical  science  becomes  more  perfect,  and  falls  within  the  domain  of
analysis.  We  may  then  obtain  with  great  precision  the  results  of  the  theories;
and,  by  comparison  with  very  accurate  experiments,  we  may  elevate  these
theories  to  the  greatest  degree  of  certainty  that  natural  science  is  susceptible
of.  Fortunately,  the  experiments  which  Rumford  and  Gay-Lussac  have  made
upon  the  capillary  phenomena,  have  left  but  little  to  be  done  relative  to  this
subject;  and  we  have  seen  the  agreement  of  this  theory  with  the  results  of
Gay-Lussac,  who  has  introduced  into  this  kind  of  experiments  the  accuracy  of
astronomical  observations.

When  we  have  at  length  ascertained  the  true  cause  of  any  phenomenon,  it  is

[10506]
[10507]

[10508]

[10508']
[10509]

(10510]

[10511]

*  (4427)  If  there  be  any  difference  of  the  heat,  in  consequence  of  the  great  difference
of  the  pressures  near  the  surface  of  the  fluid,  or  from  any  other  cause,  it  has  no  other  effect
than  to  alter  the  function  <p(/)  [9173e],  which  represents  the  capillary  action;  but  this  does
not  alter  the  form  of  the  resulting  force  [9254],  but  merely  the  values  of  the  constant
quantities  K,H,  which  occur  in  it;  as  in  [9173/,  &,c.].

[10508o]
[10508ft]

1016  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATl'RACTlON.  [Mec.  Cd.

an  object  of  curiosity  to  look  back,  and  see  how  near  the  hypotheses  that  have
been  framed  to  explain  it  approach  towards  the  truth.  One  of  the  oldest  and
most  commonly  received  opinions  relative  to  the  capillary  action  is  that  of  Jurin.
This  author  attributes  the  elevation  of  the  water  in  a  glass  capillary  tube,  to
the  attraction  of  the  annular  part  of  the  tube,  to  which  the  surface  of  the  water

[10512]  is  contiguous  and  adheres;  "for,"  he  says,  "this  is  the  only  part  of  the  tube
from  which  the  water  must  recede  on  its  subsiding,  and  consequently  the  only
one  which,  by  the  force  of  its  cohesion  or  attraction,  opposes  the  descent  of  the
water.  This  is  also  a  cause  proportional  to  the  effect  which  it  produces,  since
that  periphery  and  the  column  suspended  are  both  in  the  same  proportion
as  the  diameter  of  the  tube."  (Philosophical  Transactions,  No.  S55,  1718;
Hutton's,  &c.,  Abridgment,  vol.  6,  page  333.) Clairaut,  in  his  Treatise  on  the

[10512']  Figure  of  the  Earth,  objects  to  this  method  of  using  the  principle,  that  the
effects  are  proportional  to  the  cause,  except  we  ascend  to  a  first  cause ;  and
that  we  ought  not  to  do  it  when  we  examine  an  effect  arising  from  the
combination  of  several  particular  causes,  unless  we  estimate  each  one
separately.  Therefore,  although  we  should  admit  that  the  glass  ring  alone,
which  adheres  to  the  surface  of  the  water,  is  the  cause  of  the  elevation  of  this

[10513]  fluid,  we  must  not  thence  conclude  that  the  weight  of  the  elevated  fluid  is
proportional  to  its  diameter ;  because  we  cannot  ascertain  the  force  of  that  ring,
except  by  summing  up  the  attractions  of  all  its  parts.  Clairaut,  therefore,
substituted,  instead  of  Jurin's  hypothesis,  an  accurate  analysis  of  all  the  forces
which  keep  a  column  of  water  suspended  in  equilibrium  in  an  infinitely  narrow
canal  passing  through  the  axis  of  the  tube.  But  this  great  mathematician  has
not  explained  the  most  noted  capillary  phenomenon,  namely,  that  of  the  ascent

[10514]  or  descent  of  a  fluid,  in  a  very  slender  tube,  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  the
diameter  of  the  tube ;  he  merely  observes,  without  any  proof,  that  an  infinite
number  of  laws  of  attraction  would  produce  this  phenomenon.  The  supposition
which  he  makes,  that  the  action  of  the  glass  is  sensible,  even  upon  the  particles
situated  in  the  axis  of  the  tube,  must  have  led  him  astray  from  the  true
explanation  of  the  phenomenon;  but  it  is  remarkable  that,  if  he  had  used  the
hypothesis  of  an  attraction  insensible  at  sensible  distances,  and  had  applied  to
the  particles  situated  within  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  sides  of  the  tube,  the
analysis  of  the  forces  which  he  used  for  the  particles  situated  in  the  axis,  he
would  have  been  led  not  only  to  Jurin's  result,  but  also  to  those  which  we  have
obtained  by  the  second  method  we  have  used  in  computing  the  capillary  action.

[10515] We  see  by  this  method,  that,  if  the  fluid  perfectly  wets  the  sides  of  the  tube,

X.  Suppl.  2.]  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS.  1017

we  may  imagine  that  the  part  of  the  tube  which  is  immediately  above  the
surface  of  the  fluid,  and  at  an  insensible  distance,  is  the  only  part  which  tends
to  elevate  it,  and  keep  it  suspended  in  equilibrium,  when  the  weight  of  the
elevated  column  exactly  balances  the  attraction  of  this  annulus  of  the  tube.
This  approaches  very  near  to  Jurin's  theory,  and  leads  to  his  result,  namely,
that  the  weight  of  the  column  is  proportional  to  the  circumference  of  the
interior  base  of  the  tube ;  and  this  result  may  be  extended  generally  to  any
prismatic  tube,  whatever  be  its  interior  form  [9986',  99886],  and  the  ratio  of  [10516]
the  attraction  of  its  particles  upon  the  fluid  to  the  attraction  ol  I  he  particles  of
the  fluid  upon  each  other.

The  resemblance  between  the  surface  of  a  fluid  drop,  or  the  suiface  of  a  fluid
contained  within  a  capillary  space,  and  the  surface  with  which  geometricians
were  occupied  at  the  time  of  the  origin  of  the  diflerential  calculus,  under
the  name  of  the  catenarian  curve,  or  the  elastic  curve,  &c.,  naturally  led
several  philosophers  to  consider  fluids  as  being  enveloped  by  similar  surfaces,
which,  by  their  tension  and  elasticity,  impressed  upon  the  fluids  the  forms
indicated  by  experiment.  Segner,  who  was  one  of  the  first  that  formed  this  [10517]
idea,  was  very  sensible  that  it  was  only  a  fiction,  which  might  be  useful  to
represent  the  phenomena,  but  that  it  ought  not  to  be  admitted  except  it
corresponded  to  the  law  of  an  attraction  insensible  at  sensible  distances.
(Tom.  1.  of  the  early  Memoirs  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Gottingen.)
Therefore  he  endeavored  to  establish  this  dependence;  but,  by  the  examination
of  his  reasoning,  it  is  easy  to  discover  the  inaccuracy  of  it,  and  the  results  which
he  has  obtained  are  a  suflicient  proof  of  it.  For  example,  he  finds,  that  it  is
only  necessary  to  notice  the  curvature  of  the  vertical  section  of  a  drop,  and  not
that  of  the  horizontal  section,  which  is  not  correct.  Besides,  he  has  not
perceived  that  the  tension  of  the  surface  is  the  same,  whatever  be  the  [10518]
magnitude  of  the  drop;  which  a  correct  reasoning  would  have  made  known
to  him.  Moreover,  we  see,  by  the  note  which  terminates  his  researches,
that  he  was  not  well  satisfied  with  them  himself.  When  I  was  occupied
upon  this  subject,  Mr.  Thomas  Young  was  likewise  making  upon  it  the
ingenious  researches  which  he  has  inserted  in  the  Philosophical  Transactions
for  the  year  1805.  In  comparing,  as  Segner  had  done,  the  capillary  action  to
the  tension  of  a  surface  which  would  envelop  the  fluids,  and  applying  to  this
force  the  known  results  of  the  tension  of  surfaces,  he  has  discovered  that  it  is  [10519]
necessary  to  notice  the  curvature  of  the  fluid  surfaces  in  two  directions
perpendicular  to  each  other;  he  has  also  supposed  that  these  surfaces,  with  the

VOL.  IV.  255

1018  THEORY  OF  CAPILLARY  ATTRACTION.  [Mec.  Cel.

same  fluid,  form  with  the  sides  of  the  tube  the  same  angle,  when  they  are  made
of  the  same  substance,  whatever  may  be  their  figure ;  which,  as  we  have  seen,
is  not  correct  at  the  extremities  of  these  sides.*  But  he  has  not  attempted,
like  Segner,  to  derive  this  hypothesis  from  the  law  of  the  attraction  of  the
particles,  decreasing  with  extreme  rapidity,  which  is  indispensable  for
confirming  it.  This  cannot  be  done  but  by  a  rigorous  demonstration,  like  that
[10520]  we  have  given  in  the  first  method,  to  which  the  explanations  of  Segner  and
Mr.  Thomas  Young  correspond,  as  that  of  Jurin  does  to  the  second  method.

[10519a]

*  (4428) This remark  of  La  Place is  not  correct, as we have already  stated in
[10012a,  &c.].

Note. — The  equation  [10384o],  of  page  974,  appears  not  to  have  received  the  final
revision  of  the  author,  and  to  have  been  left  in  an  imperfect  state  by  the  omission,  at  the  end,
of  z",  which  has  been  subsequently  inserted,  together  with  the  parentheses  contained  in  the
succeeding  line,  in  which  the  signification  of  z"  is  defined.
